Bibliotheca Chemica, Vol. 1 (James Young Collection) (John Ferguson (comp.), 1906)
==================================================================================
Ferguson's Bibliotheca Chemica, Vol. 1: catalogue of alchemical, chemical and pharmaceutical books A-K. Completes the 2-volume set. Public domain. Internet Archive.

Google 

This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at|http: //books .google .com/I 

"^ 

1 

^ 

^ 

-das 

B 

1 

— . 

• I 

i- i 

5 i 

• •• I 

• j 

:■■■•■'- 1 

.i 

BIBLIOTHECA CHEMICA 

'IV 

t 

BIBLIOTHECA CHEMICA 

. • 

THIS CATALOGUE OF CHEMICAL BOOKS HAS BEEN PRINTED TOR 

PRIVATE DISTRIBUTION BY HIS KAMILN , IN ACCORDANCE 

WITH THE INSTRUCTIONS OF THE LATE 

JAMES YOUNG, Esq. 

w • ■ " .' 

j ACT-*, I - 

t 

JSibliotbcca Cbcinica : 

A CATALOGUE OF THE ALCHEMICAL, CHEMICAL AND 

PHARMACEUTICAL BOOKS IN THE COLLECTION OF 

THE LATE JAMES YOUNG OF KELLY AND 

DURRIS, ESQ., LL.D., F.R.S., F.R.S.E. 

BV 

JOHN FERGUSON 

M.A., UUDb, HONOKAIIV UBMBBK OT THE IMnSIAI. MILITARV ACADBMV OF MBUICIMK, ST. KETBRSHL'RC 
MBMSBK OF THE GERMAN SOCIBTV FOR THE HIiVTORV OF MEDICINE AND THE NATUKAI. SCIENCES 
FOREIGN MBMRER OF THE SOClixf FRAN^ISE U*ARCH<l)LOCIE 
REGIUS rROmSOE OF CHEMISTRY IN THE UNIVURSITT OF GLASGOW 

VOLUME I 

JAMES MACLEHOSE AND SONS 

PUBLISHERS TO THE UNIVERSITY 

1906 

•) 

GLASGOW : PRINtBD AT THE UNIVEMSITY PKSSS 
BY ROBERT MACLEHOSE AND CO. LTD. 

• • 

tre 

tbc iBcmort of 

to wbom alone (• owiiid 

whatever merit ft nwg poMCfo 

tbi0 aataloane I0 

beMcate^ bv 

5 9 

'To the man who aspires to know, no man who has been 
the meanest student of knowledge should be unknown.' 

Zanoni, Book 111., Chapter iv. 

Introduftion 

Dr. James Young,^ under whose directions the present collection 
of books was made, was a native of Glasgow. In his youth he was 
set to learn a trade, but having entered Anderson's College when 
Thomas Graham, afterwards Master of the Mint, was professor there, 
and was commencing those researches which have put him in the first 
rank of experimental chemists, he studied chemistry under Graham, and 
by a succession of events came to be the originator of the paraffin oil 
industry in Scotland. In after years, when he had retired from active 
participation in business, not unmindful of his own early drawbacks 
and difficulties, he established a Chair of technical chemistry in 
Anderson's College, which has been incorporated with the recently 
created institution called the Glasgow and West of Scotland Technical 
College. Furthermore, he erected a statue in Glasgow to the memory of 
his teacher, Graham, and he gathered the present library, which he 
bequeathed to the Chair which he had endowed. 

The collection was begun by himself about the middle of last 
century, and it is plain that he took much interest in the history 
of chemistry and must have discussed the study of it with his friend, 
the late Dr. Angus Smith of Manchester, who also was a collector 
and was desirous of seeing more attention devoted to it. Dr. Smith's 
idea of reprinting epoch-making books and papers was long after carried 
out in part by the Alembic Club in Edinburgh, and on a more general 
plan by Ostwald, in his series of chemical and physical classics. 

^Dr. Young was bom on July 13, 181 1, and died May 13, 1883. For details about his life 
and career there may be consulted the article by P. T. Hartog in the Dictionary of National 
Biogra^y, 1900, bdii, p. 376, with the references there given, the obituary notices of him in 
the Proceedings of the Societies with which he was connected, and a brief estimate of him by 
myself, with a portrait, in Memoirs and Portraits of One Hundred Glasgow Men, Glasgow, 1886, 
iL pu 341, No. 100, 

viii BIBLIOTHECA CHE MICA 

Of more living importance, however, is the recent movement, in 
Germany especially, which has led to the formation of the Society 
for the History of Medicine and the Natural Sciences, to the estab- 
lishment of courses of lectures on that subject and to the recc^^ition 
of it as an important branch of knowledge by both the International 
Historical and the Medical Congresses. As yet no action in this 
direction has been taken in Britain ; the histor\' and evolution of 
chemical, natural, and physical science are ignored by the British 
Association, of medicine by the Medical Association, and the Anti- 
quarian Societies have their attention otherwise occupied. Still there 
is not wanting proof that even in this country there is interest in this 
section of history and that there are some who pursue it^ Perhaps if 
the few who do this could combine their efforts, a stimulus might be 
given to a systematic cultivation of the subject. Dr. Young's pre- 
science was exhibited in various w^ays, but in none was his breadth of 
view and foresight more conspicuously displayed than when, long before 
this movement had begun, he was making provision for the study 
and teaching of the history of the science, which he had cultivated 
practically and technically with such success. The founder of a great 
industry, which has added so much to the comfort, and even luxury of 
life, immersed as he was in the mechanical and chemical details of the 
process, engrossed in business transactions, distracted by the worries of 
competition, and by attempts to minimize the merit of his invention, 
was hardly the person whom one would have expected to undertake 
the formation of a library of old, neglected, and out of the way 
books on the practically extinct topic of alchemy ; yet Dr. Young 
did this because he perceived that as alchemy happens to be 
one of the phases which chemistry formerly presented, a survey 
of it is indispensable for completing the history of the whole science. 
He did not collect for one of the bibliophile s reasons : because 
the books were rare and curious, but for the student's reason : 
because they were needed for research, and because no collection of 
them was accessible to the student here in connection with his 
Chair. 

'In England the only original contribution which has been made in recent years to the 
history of any part of physical science is the edition of Gilbert's book on the Magnet, with the 
accompanying notes and various biographical papers and essays by Professor Sylvanus Thompson, 
This is as fine a piece of work as could be desired. 

INTRODUCTION ix 

The collection thus made by him consists of about 1 300 pamphlets 
and volumes, but, as a good many volumes contain several tracts bound 
together, the actual number of separate items may reach 1350 or 1400. 
This number, however, includes only the works printed separately 
and does not represent the whole contents of the library. There are, 
besides, writings which do not seem ever to have been printed by 
themselves, but only in the collected editions which form a characteristic 
feature of alchemical literature. If these be included the number of 
distinct and independent articles will be increased by a considerable 
amount 

One, indeed, could have wished that the lines upon which the 
library was begun, had not been departed from quite so much, and 
that the attention originally given to English works had been main- 
tained. That desire is intensified by knowing that when the collection 
was making, these books could still be purchased, whereas now they 
have disappeared altogether ; and it may be said, without much 
fear of contradiction, that they will hardly be seen again. An odd 
specimen may make its appearance from time to time, but the books 
as a class are no longer to be had. It is fortunate that some of 
these exceedingly rare treatises in English were secured before it was 
too late ; they are so much gain to the library. 

Considering what influence the great idea of supplying material 
for the study of the history of chemistry exercised upon Dr. Young, 
one can imagine how much more he would have done for his 
litMury had he lived longer. Having made so full a gathering of 
the alchemical writing^, he might have got together even more of the 
works by the chemists in the latter half of the eighteenth century than 
has been done. They would have been invaluable to those interested 
in the origins of modem chemistry. This period has not been foi^otten 
by any means, but it has not been so elaborately worked out as some 
of those before it 

It may afford a more exact view of the extent of the library, if 
the chief authors in the different periods, whose works have been here 
brought together, be enumerated. When one considers that speculations 
and operations relative to the chemical properties of matter have been 
in vogue certainly from the second or third century of our era, and 
that the alchemists and chemists were diligent composers of books, it 

BIBUOTHECA CHE MICA 

will be easily understood that the literature is extensive, as well as 
rare, and much beyond the power of anyone, however eager and 
persistent, to amass in his life-time. In fact even the largest libraries 
exhibit deficiencies. Now Dr. Young's collection is noteworthy in 
being so comprehensive as it is, and containing so many of the 
writings especially of the German alchemists of the seventeenth and 
eighteenth centuries. The student will not find everything, and still 
less every edition — for that he will get nowhere — but he will have 
ample material for acquiring a knowledge of the earlier phases of the 
science. 

The history of chemistry presents various aspects for treatment, 
but, for our present purpose, it may be arranged broadly in three 
periods : 

1. The period of belief in transmutation — the alchemical period — 
which begins at the earliest date of which there is a record and 
stretches down to the commencement of the nineteenth century, with 
sporadic survival to the present time. 

Al#ng with the notion of transmutation there existed the prepara- 
tion and * employment of various kinds of bodies in pharmacy and 
medicine, and practical applications of substances in the technical arts. 
These were empirical, but from both a considerable body of experi- 
mental facts of important practical use was brought tc^ether, though 
still without an)rthing of a guiding principle. 

2. The iatro-chemical period, which b^^n in the sixteenth century, 
and died out about the close of the seventeenth century. 

3. The period of scientific chemistry, which began in the seventeenth 
century shortly before or about Boyle's time, and continues to the 
present moment 

These aims of chemistry, therefore, for a time ran parallel with each 
other and materially influenced each other. The iatro-chemists trans- 
planted alchemical ideas into medicine and pharmacy, and on the 
other hand one of the most important of Boyle's labours was his 
criticism of the then current doctrines of elements and theory of 
composition. 

It belongs to history to trace and explain the processes by which 
each period was modified, absorbed, and at last replaced by another, 
to allot to the various labourers their due praise for what they 

INTRODUCTION » 

accomplished, and to record the acquisitions of fact which remain 
established to this day. 

As it is solely from the literature which has descended to us, that 
insight into the state of the science during these periods is obtained, 
an ideal historical library should represent all periods and all as(>ects, 
and should contain the works of all authors. I am not aware that 
such a library exists. It is only an approximation to this ideal that 
any collection can offer. We may now see what the present one 
embraces. 

I. As the alchemical books in the library are much the most abundant, 
they may be taken first, and roughly in chronological order. 

The earliest portion is that of the Greeks, beginning with Democritus 
in the second or third century A.D. Apart from the Greek MSS. them- 
selves, which are attainable only in certain European libraries, the first 
access to their contents was through the translation of a portion of them 
by Pizimenti. There is a copy of the rare reprint of 1 7 1 7 in the library, 
so that the student can thus start from the very oldest records. Next 
comes the Arabic epoch represented by the works of Geber, Kalid, 
Rhazes, Avicenna. 

This is followed by the productions ascribed to Morienus, Hortulanus, 
Arisleus, Artephius, Ferrarius, Petrus v. Zalento, Haimo and the pseudo- 
Merlin. 

Most of these personages are more or less shadowy, but writings 
in their names are extant, and it rests with the historian to appraise 
their claims to acceptance as genuine. 

The authors of the thirteenth century are better known than the 
preceding, but there are doubts as to some of the alchemical writings 
which pass for their composition. Such as they are these are said to 
be by Albertus Magnus, Thomas Aquinas, Michael Scotus, Christophorus 
of Paris, Roger Bacon, Amaldus de Villa Nova, Richardus Anglicus, 
Guido de Montanor. 

The next century furnishes a list of notable people : Pope John 
XXII., Jean de Meun, Raymund LuUy, Cremer of Westminster, Pietro 
Bono, Antonio de Abbatia, Odomar, Rupescissa, Ortolanus, Flamel. 

As time goes on more writers on the subject appear. In the first 
half of the fifteenth century there are the reputed Basilius Valentinus, 
Joannes of Tetzen, Isaac Hollandus, Lasnioro, Lambspringk, and, in 

xis BIBUOTHRCA CHEM/CA 

the second half; Bernard of Trevisan, Fidnus, Trithemius, Poyselius^ 
Vincent Koffsky, George Ripley, Thomas Norton, Trissmosinas. 

In the early part of the sixteenth century one meets with Augurello, 
Pictis de Mirandula, Pantheus, Lacinius, Bracesco, Grewer, Paracelsus, 
Agricola, Denis Zachaire, Petrus Arlensis, Robertus Vallensis, Alexander 
von Suchten, Phaedro, Wenceslaus Lavinius. 

In the latter part flourished Thumeysser, Nazari, Carerius, Quad- 
rammi da Gubbio, Blaise de Vigen^re, Penotus, Bamaud, BalUan, 
Edward Kelley, Dr. Dee, Francis Antony, Robert Fludd, Beuther, 
Sebald Schwertzer, Wittestein, and the two Khunraths. 

The seventeenth century is perhaps the most prolific of all in 
alchemical writers, and richest in narratives of transmutations accom- 
plished, in books written in explanation and defence of the art, as well 
as in those by others who doubted it. It opens with the adventures 
of Alexander Seton the Cosmopolite, followed by the romantic episode 
of the Rosicrucian Society, and among the crowd of alchemists and 
diemists may be mentioned Libavius, Figulus, Crollius, Pontanus, 
Grasshof, Schaubert, Rhenanus, Gerhard, Michael Maier, Birelli, Billich, 
Johannes de Padua, Angelo Sala, Guibertus, d'Espagnet, Nuysement, 
Potier, Castaigne, L'Agneau, Palmarius, Drebbel, Hc^helande, Samuel 
Northon ; though some of these are also to be found among the 
iatro-chemists. 

The second quarter of the century includes Sendivc^us, Ambrosius 
Miiller, Grosschedel ab Aicha, Batsdorf, Rist, Johannes Agricola, Kessler, 
Liberius Benedictus, Conringius, Peter Faber, Philaletha, Starkey, 
Zwelfier, Zwinger. 

Between i6so and 1675 fall the names of Richthausen, Monte 
Snyder, Glauber, Harprecht, Kircher, Blauenstein, Clauder, Otto 
Tachenius, Becher, Lowenheim, Drechssler, Albineus, Morhof, Borrichius, 
Helvetius, Kerkring, Vreeswyk, Johnson, Borel, Germain, Atremont, 
Du Clos, de Comitibus, Ashmole, Borri. 

In the last quarter are W. v. Schroder, Seyler, Krohnemann, Canlilucius, 
Balduinus, Kunckel, Wedel, v. Helbig, Orschall, Weidenfeld, Grummet, 
Kirchmayer, Hannemann, Boyle, Dickinson, Mundanus, Colson, Headrich, 
ToUius, Salmon, Gualdo, Lancilotti. 

The eighteenth century also furnishes an abundance of names, but 
there is a marked change in the character of the writings. There may 

INTRODUCTION nii 

be enumerated the following : Botticber, Caetano, Delisle, Paykul, Stahl, 
Dippcl, Ettner von Eiteritz, Barchusen, Manget, Soldner, Kellner, 
Axtelmayer, Faustius, Muller, Horlacher, S. Richter, Klettenberg, Roth- 
Scholtz, Chymiphilus, Siebenstem, Hensing. There were also Plusius, 
Keil, Creiling, Fictuld, Rtcheboui^, Lenglet Dufresnoy, Tharsander, 
Jugcl, J. F. Meyer, Wenzel, Schroder; and from 1775 to 1800, Semler, 
Wi^leb, ab Indagine, Adamah Booz, Herverdt, Giildenfalk, Kortum, 
Henckel, von Murr. 

All these and many more less prominent are in the library, and 
it may be said with some confidence that little of importance relating 
to alchemy, in the seventeenth century especially, is wanting. Not 
only so, but certain books which are very scarce indeed, and are not 
alluded to in some of the fullest lists, are here present 

The best running commentary on this division of the library is 
Kopp's last work. Die Alchemie^ and one might almost imagine that in 
writing the bibliographical appendix he had had access, if not to this 
collection, to one similarly furnished. But here again there are items 
which have escaped Kopp's observation. 

The only other books to be considered are the collected editions of 
alchemical tracts, which, as I have already said, are characteristic of the 
literature, even from the earliest times. The Greek MSS. always contain 
treatises by different writers, ranging from four to as many as fifty- 
three ; and in Pizimenti's translation, the tracts of Democritus, Synesius, 
Pelagius, Stephanus and Psellus are printed together. Later MSS. in 
Latin, of which various specimens have passed through my hands, are 
similarly made up, and when they were printed, what they contained 
was simply reproduced. So it must have been in the Vatican MS. of 
Geber ; for, not only his works, but tracts by Kalid, Avicenna, and others 
are included in Silber's edition, printed at Rome before 1520, and in 
several of those which followed. But from the sixteenth to the end of 
the eighteenth century the practice of printing collected editions became 
common, and quite a number appeared. The most comprehensive in 
the library may be mentioned: De Alchemia Volumen^ Petreius, 1541 ; 
Lacinius' Pretiosa Margarita Novella^ 1546; De Akhimia Opuscula, 
1550; Gratarolo's Vera Alchemia Doctrina, 1561 ; Eroffnete Geheimnisse 
des Steins der Weisen; Vellus Aureum; Ars Aurifera; Theatrum Chemi- 
cum; Manget's Bibliotheca; Museum Hermeticum; Ginceceum Chemtcum^ 

xiv BIBLIOTHECA CHEMICA 

1673 ; Albtneus' Bibliotheca Chemica Contnuta, and a swarm of others 
under fanciful titles, which have been amusingly classified by Kopp. 

Some of the smaller ones may contain three or four tracts only, 
while the Theatrum Chemicum^ and Manget's Bibliotheca^ which are the 
lai^est, contain about two hundred and a hundred and forty respectively, 
some of considerable leng^th. 

In French there is the Bibliotheque Chimique of Me Sieur S.' 
enlarged by Richebourg. 

In German there is the Vellus Aureum^ Tancke's Promptuarium^ the 
translation of the Pretiosa Margarita of Lacinius, Moi^enstem's transla- 
tion of the Ars Aurifera, Roth-Scholtz's Deutsches Theatrum Chemicunt 
the body of extracts called Hermetisches A, B. C, and Schroder's 
Alchymistische Bibliothek, 

In English there are Salmon's translation of Hermes, Geber, Kalid, 
Bacon, and Flamel, appended to his Medidna Practicd^ the Collectanea 
Chymica, and the Aurifontina Chymica, 

These collected editions have impressed a distinctive feature on 
the catalogue, for, in drawing it up, the contents have been duly 
recorded under their respective titles, while each item has been 
entered under its authors name, or its own title, or, maybe, under 
both. This was a necessity, in order that no document bearing on the 
subject should be by any chance overlooked. 

2. But besides these authors who were concerned solely or mainly 
with alchemy, there were others who, without questioning the reality 
of it, employed its principles merely as a guide, and instead of 
attempting to effect practically the change of metals into gold and 
silver, used, partly for medicine, partly for the practical arts, the know- 
ledge of substances accumulated by the alchemists and others. 

This epoch was inaugurated by Paracelsus in the sixteenth century 
by his asserting that alchemy was one of the pillars of medicine, and 
that alchemy was not confined to transmutation of metals, but was the 
art of preparing substances for medical use ; that, in fact, it was the 
art of the transmutation of every kind of matter. Paracelsus started 
the iatro-chemical school, and he had many followers, as well as 
many opponents. His theories belong to the history of medicine 
rather than of chemistry ; still, his adherents were chemists, and wrote 
books on chemistry for physicians, while his opponents, in order to 

tNTRODUCTIOli xv 

controvert his doctrines, had themselves to acquire some familiarity 
with the new science. 

Of the iatro-chemical school, some supporting Paracelsus' views, 
others accepting them with reservation and criticism, and still others 
breaking away from them, may be mentioned Quercetanus, Thumeysser, 
Dom, Rhenanus, Libavius, Beguinus, Crollius, Sala, Polemann, Potier, 
Joannes Agricola, Pierre Faber, v. Helmont, Glauber, Lefevre, Glaser, 
Lemery, Rolfinck, Tachenius, Barchusen, Guibertus, Ludolf, Morley, 
Sennertus, Rivinus, Bolnest, Brendelius, Charas, Elsholtz, Jungken, 
Poppius, Hoffmann, Wedel, Mynsicht. 

3. The epoch of scientific chemistry began with two controversies. 
The first was that between Conring and Borrichius as to the 
antiquity of Hermes, the reality of the Hermetic medicine and the 
soundness of Paracelsus' innovations ; the second was the discussion 
by Boyle of the elements or principles of the chemists and of the 
Aristotelians. This was the first systematic criticism of chemical 
theory from a purely scientific or philosophical standpoint, and it 
gradually led to an observation of phenomena apart from applications 
to medicine, or arts, or alchemy. Those who pursued this course and, 
so to speak inaugurated scientific chemistry, were Becher and Stahl, 
Lemery, Boerhaave, Weigel, Rothe, Marggraf, Priestley, Lavoisier, 
Scheele, Sage, Baum6, Bergman, Scopoli, Achard, Crell, Dandolo, 
d'Arcet, Demachy, Trommsdorff, Spielmann, Teichmayer, Wiegleb, 
Jacquin, Scherer, Fourcroy, Macquer, Claude de la Metherie, Morveau. 

Without belonging to any of these periods, as has been said above, 
there are works in the library which, while involving a certain amount of 
chemistry, are concerned not with transmutation, or medicine, or theories 
and speculations, but with the needs of ordinary life, or with the positive 
and technical side of the science. 

Among these are the miners and metallurgists; Ercker, Entzel or 
Encelius, George Agricola, Alonso Barba, Sir John Pettus, Webster, 
Gabriel Plattes, Lohnayss ; assayers : as Schreitmann, Zimmermann, and 
the anonymous author of the Probier BuchUin ; the mineralogists : 
Marbodaeus, Nicols, Henckel ; technologists : as Neri, Merrett and 
Haudicquer de Blancourt, who all wrote about glass ; Axt, who pub- 
lished a little treatise on the making of rosin, wood tar and charcoal ; 
Caneparius, the author of the treatise de Atramentis: the compilers of 

xvi BIBLIOTHECA CHEMJCA 

books of practical receipts and secrets, as they were called, such as the 
author of the Rechter Gebrauch d'Alchimei^ Andriessen, Fioravand, Alessio, 
Lemntus, Wecker, Hugh Plat, Kertzenmacher, Cortese, Schmuck. In 
some respects, as in giving insight into everyday practical working, 
these books are as interesting and important as any. 

The books on pharmacy also constitute a series by themselves, but 
as they are, — with one or two exceptions, such as the Dispensarium of 
Propositus, Luminare Majus of Manlius de Boscho, Lumen Apoihe- 
cariorum of Quiricus, Thesaurus of Gesner, — comparatively recent, they 
do not require special notice. 

It is an illustration of the persistence of an idea that all through 
the eighteenth century to its very close, when most important dis- 
coveries were making and entirely new theories were advanced, the 
controversy as to the reality of transmutation — as a fact and as a 
theory — was still sustained. At the opening of it, in 1702, came 
the attack by Soldner — ^as it is said — in the Teutsches Fegfeuer der 
Scheide-Kunst, replied to in the Erlosung der PhUosophen aus dent 
Fegfeuer der Chytnisten ; Creiling's vindication of alchemy in Die 
Edelgebome Jungfer AUhymia^ 1730, Lenglet Dufresnoy's Histoire, 
1742, which must be regarded as unfavourable; Fictuld's Prabier- 
Stein, 1753, a sort of biographical dictionary of genuine and 
false alchemists, more remarkable for the author's judgments than 
for the information supplied ; the curious dictionary of Pemcty, 
I753i ^^ which as in his other work he strives to interpret the 
myths of antiquity as Hermetic ; Wiegleb's onslaught on the truth 
of alchemy, 1777, with Kortum's learned and rather dexterous 
^ply> 1 7891 ^^^ the collection of narratives about transmutation 
by Giildenfalk, 1784. Then at the close of the century, 1797 
to 1799, appeared Gmelin's Geschichte, in which for the first time 
the subject was treated as a whole, and as an independent branch of 
history, without bias, and apart from controversy as to the truth or 
reality of any section of it, but merely as a record of events, persons 
and books. All these, with others of less note, are in the library. 

In endeavouring to construct the catalogue of such a library 
as this, which labour I undertook at Dr. Young's request, I considered 
who were likely to consult it and how best it could be made serviceable 
for the study of the history of chemistry. The persons who may 

INTRODUCTION xvii 

possibly refer to it — besides those who actually use the library itself — 
are, in the first place, librarians, biblic^aphers, booksellers, and 
collectors of this branch of literature, if there be any such, and, in 
the second, students. 

For the convenience of the first group, the catalogue has been 
constructed on a more liberal and elaborate scale than would have 
been necessary, had the object been merely to make a list of short titles 
sufficient to serve as a register for the library. Instead of that the 
titles are reproduced in full, the particular copy is described, and any 
peculiarities it may possess are noted, other editions are enumerated, 
and, when practicable, an account of them, too, is added, which in 
many cases has been possible by inspection of the books themselves. 
To the different classes of bookmen these details may be convenient 
for reference, and for comparison with other copies. The literature 
is scarce, obscure and almost unknown, and, so far as my experience 
goes, while there are lists and enumerations of alchemical books, there 
is no bibliography of any part of it 

More particularly intended for the student, who is concerned with 
the contents rather than with the externals of the books, are the notes 
which contain biographical and descriptive details and discuss doubtful 
or disputed points of chronology, authorship, and other matters. The 
authors of most of these books are strangers in this country and are 
but little remembered, or thought of, in their own. Some of them, 
however, were amongst the foremost men of their day, conspicuous by 
their lives, learning, discoveries and writings. It seemed desirable 
therefore, in carrying out the plan I had drawn up, to give the student 
some notion of the position and authority of the different writers so 
far as lay in my power, to refer to the questions which have arisen 
about them or their writings, and to the criticisms and judgments 
which have been passed upon them. 

As it was impossible to accomplish this in full within the limits 
of a catalogue, I have endeavoured by lists of authorities, whom I 
have been able to consult, to assist the student further in surveying 
the field for himself. In the authorities quoted others will be founds 
and in these again others, and so the student can continue his research 
till he has exhausted the literature, and possessed himself of all avail- 
able information at first hand. 

xviii BJBUOTHECA C HEMIC A 

The authorities are not all of equal value ; for while some supply 
much sound information, others furnish an irreducible minimum. Nor 
do they always agree as to dates and other matters of fact, which is 
a defect, and their criticisms and decisions also are sometimes at 
variance, which is of very little importance ; but this uncertainty 
adds to the liveliness and zest of the inquiry, and stimulates origin- 
ality and independence of judgment on the student's part, for he must 
lay his account for long and sometimes baffling investigation if he 
want to arrive at the truth. 

I have also endeavoured to give him some hold upon the authorities 
by arranging them as far as may be chronologically. An advantage 
is that if they be examined in this sequence, the statements made, 
whether accurate or inaccurate, can be traced to their sources, and thus 
by careful examination and comparison it can be decided who are 
original authorities and who are compilers and copyists. Another 
advantage of the lists is that from their extent and the status of the 
persons composing them, an inference can be drawn as to the import- 
ance and interest surrounding any particular writer, from his own time 
to the present. 

All the rest is for the student of history himself to do; it 
is his affair to examine the facts, the doubts, the difficulties, the 
errors ; to confirm what is correct, to correct what is faulty and 
wrong, to throw light if possible on confused and debateable problems, 
and to confess his inability to reconcile contradictory averments and 
opinions, when the means for doing so have failed him. In the present 
work he will find plenty of ojpportunities for expending labour and 
exercising his critical faculties. 

Nor do I presume to think that what I have said is in every case 
correct and final. There is too great a want of agreement amongst 
the authorities for any one, at this time of day, to do more than get 
as near the truth as possible through the mists of defective records 
and discordant results. The brief abstracts and accounts which I 
have given are therefore liable to such modification, or correction, as 
further examination of the existing authorities, or new discoveries, may 
necessitate. There is no weed which spreads so quickly as error; I 
can only hope that I have introduced as little as may be in my state- 
ments. One, however, cannot escape the common lot, but one can 

INTRODUCTION xix 

perhaps plead, with Lactantius, the common imperfection : *' est enim 
aliquid medium quod sit hominis, scilicet scientia cum ignorantia con- 
juncta et temperata." What success this work may achieve will depend 
on the proportion of those constituents, and how they are combined. 

The inducement which I have had to go into the matter in detail, 
is simply the want of a book of any kind whatever on the subject in 
English, while those which exist in other languages, in German for 
instance, do not cover this ground. With the exception of Ladrague, 
whose work, printed at Moscow in 75 copies, is about as rare as a 
manuscript, no one supplies even the pagination, and no one at all 
reproduces the titles in full. The compilation of the present work, 
therefore, afforded an opportunity, which it behoved me not to neglect, not 
merely of making a catalogue, but of attempting to begin a bibliography, 
at all events within the limits which the collection allowed, and of thus 
filling a gap in the literature of the history of chemistry, while the 
addition of the biographical notes and the references to the authorities 
constituted a guide to the relative literature. In no better way, it 
seemed to me, could the purpose of the founder be attained. 

If, for such flaws in the plan and its execution as use may reveal, 
an apology be necessary, I can use the words of Pliny, without, I hope, 
being charged with presumption : " nee dubitamus, multa esse, quae et nos 
praeterierint. Homines enim sumus, et occupati officiis : subcisivisque 
temporibus ista curamus, id est, noctumis, ne quis vestrum putet his 
cessatum horis." 

At the conclusion of a work like the present, one can hardly refrain 
from contemplating the theme of it. It deals with phases of a science 
which is of active interest and influence just now certainly, but is as 
different from its former condition as to views, aims, methods, and 
results, as if there never had been any connection between them. Yet 
the chemistry of the moment is also merely a phase, and by its more 
rapid development is so much less stable than that of three hundred 
years ago, when discovery made slower advance. Still the books 
enumerated here, unattractive as they are — even unintelligible, maybe-— 
record the thought and experience of many men, some of them among 
the most skilful and far-seeing of their time. But their labours have 
disappeared as if they had never been, their controversies are forgotten, 
their discoveries have long ago been assimilated into common 

M BIBUOTHECA CHEMJCA 

knowledge ; what was right in their work has, as far as they are con- 
cerned, shared the fate of what was wrong : it is not even known that it 
was theirs. " The chiefs of other times are departed ; they have gone 
without their fame. The sons of future years shall pass away ; and 
another race arise." 

Let not the modern student of science imagine that he and his 
work will escape the universal doom. His discoveries, his theories, the 
most recent, the most comprehensive and progressive, sooner or later 
will become mere archaeological data, to be included, or, just as likely, 
omitted, in a historical review of this time. Such, at least, has been 
the rule in chemistry for the last eighteen hundred years, and there 
is no sign of its being suspended in favour of any chemist of 

to-day. 

** Thus times do shift ; each thing his turne do's hold ; 
New things succeed as former things grow old." 

It is this phenomenon which stimulates to the writing of history 
and to the antiquarian research on which it rests, the passing, namely, 
of the generations with their ideas and pursuits. But change itself is 
inevitable, and as the past conditions cannot be recalled or reproduced, 
either in the individual or the race, the most that can be done is to 
record something of them. 

The history of chemistry, as indeed of all science, is but a succession 
of epitaphs upon forgotten men and forgotten discovery. What then 
do these men not owe to him who gathers up their works, and in so 
doing recalls their achievements, and thus labours to lift that icy pall of 
oblivion which descends on everything human, just because it is human, 
imperfect, temporary, and has to be forgotten to make way for something 
else ? It was to mitigate that fate as far as human effort can, when it 
has to strive with the eternal law and necessity of change, that this 
gathering of the writings of bye-gone thinkers and workers was made. 
That they were struggling with error-obscured vision towards the light 
of reality should cause not neglect of them and contempt for their 
shortcomings and failures, but should arouse the fellow-feeling and 
interest of those who at the present moment are engaged in the same 
struggle, and whose turn for neglect and contempt is coming. Dr. 
Young realized this, and the library is his effort to awaken and foster 
such sympathy and remembrance. 

INTRODUCTION xxi 

Whether or not I have succeeded by the present catalogue in 
carrying out his wish to make it as instructive for the purpose he 
contemplated as may be, it is impossible for me to say. The decision 
of Dr. Young himself is what I should have pre-eminently desired ; 
and I should have prized the judgment of one other, whose interest 
in the catalogue wsts to me its inspiration, and whose verdict at its 
close would have been my reward. But these voices are now still. 

To friends who have assisted me in various ways, by loans of books, 
by references to authorities to which access for me was difficult, by 
revision with me of certain portions of the work, I desire to tender my 
warmest thanks. 

First and last I have read the proofs, and am alone responsible 
for whatever errors and misprints exist. May I ask those who may 
have to consult this book not to overlook the additions and corrections 
at the end of the second volume ? 

So, in the old-fashioned words of old Jean Rey : " Le trauail a est6 
mien, le profit en soit au lecteur, et k Dieu seul la gloire." 

JOHN FERGUSON. 

Glasgow, 13 Nkwton Place, 
%yd January^ 1906. 

CATALOGUE 

CATALOGUE 

A. (A). Naturalium Cultor. 

Gliicks-Ruthe zu Paracelsi Chymischem Schatz. 
See MERCURll Zwey£Eu:her Schlangen-sub, 1679. 

A. (J.). M.D. 

See DARIOT (claudbX 

AALBERT. 

De wonderbare Geheymen, van den Groote en Klyne Aalbert, in 3 Deden. 
Gedrukt te Parys, In't Jaar 100,000. 

SmaU 8". Title leaf; Put I., sigs. A, to C in eights, or pp. 3.48 ; Put IL. sigs. A, 
to C in eights [pp. 3-48] ; Put III., sigs. A, to C n dgfats, or pp, 3-44 ; the last two 
leaves are blank. 

7*his chap-book contains three tracts with separate 
signatures and pagination. Each tract seems to 
have had originairy a title-page, but these have 
been canodled and the above general dtle sub- 
stituted. The book is one whidi, from its figJse 
date and almost certainly Cilse place, and from its 
having been sewn up at the top and outer roaigin, 
has beien sold under some kind of restriction. 

The first tract is taken mainly from the Physio- 
Momia of Miduel Soocns. The second is called 
Net Pnfit dor Vrmtwen^ and contains remedies 
for femmine complaints. The third is a nuooel- 
laneous collection of receipts^ medical, culinary, 
phjrsiological, etc. The book is not a reprodnction 
of either Albertus Magnus or Parvus. The 
receipts contain nothing distinctivdy chemical or 
alchemicaL 

ABBATIA (Antonius de). 

Send'Brieflf von Verwandelung der Metallen. 

See DREY vortreffliche . . . Chymische Biicher, 1670^ p. 85. 
See TETZEN OOHANN VON) . . . Chymische Biicher, 1691, p. 85. 

Bericht von Verwandelung der Metallen. 

See ZWEY vortrefSiche . . . Chymische Biicher, 1759, p. 5. 
This is the same tract as the preceding, under a different name. 

Epistoke Duae Scrutatoribus Artis Chymicae mandatae. 
See MAGNI Philosophorum Arcani Revelator, 1688, p. 421. 

To the Epistles are appended explanatory Annth second Efisioia ; but of the first Efistaia and the 
tatidmes. The Semd-Bruf corresponds to the Annotatioius there seems to be no German version. 

Send-Schreiben von dem Stein der Weisen und von Verwandlung der Metallen. 

A 

ABBA TIA—ABRAHAM 

ABBATIA (Antonius de). Continued. 
Epistolae Duae Scrutatoribus Artis chemicae mandatae. 

See ROTH-SCHOLTZ (friederichX Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum, 1732, iii. p. 651. 

Roth-Scholtz has reprinted both the German For an extract from the BerUht aee herme- 
and Latin versions, with the Latin Annotaiunus TISCMES A. B.C., 1778, I. No. zvi. 
already mentioned. 

[Ein Send-BriefT, Antonii de Abbada, des Priesters, von Verwandelung der Metallen.] 

No place, date, or printer. Small 8". pp. 85-1 is. 
Fragment of a copy of von Tetzen's Chymiscki Bilcher, 1691, mentioned above. 

The author is said to have been a monk of Pavia, 
who lived about 1350, shortly after Ravmund 
LuUy. But this cannot be correct, for, in the first 
Efistola ^if it be bv him), he quotes Augurello, 
who flourished at the beginning of the sixteenth 
century. Baumer {Bibl. Cfum., p. 81) calls him 
Tkolusanus Archipresbyter^ and says he lived at 
the close of the sixteenth century. In this, how- 
ever, Baumer has confused him with a De Abatia, 
a phjrsician at the end of the sixteenth century, 
who was bom at Toulouse. On the other hand, 
Gmelin {GeschichU^ ii. ai), hesitating about both 
his nationality and date, places him among the 
Italian alchemists contemporary with Boyle. Be- 

Nazari, Delia Tramutatione metallica Sogni ire^ 

»599. p. 135. 
Borel. Bibliotheca Chemica, 1654, p. 35. 

Roth-Scholtz, Bibliotheca Chemica, 1727, p. 3. 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Hist, de la Philosapkte Her- 

m^tique, 1742, iii. 79. 

Fictuld, Probier-Stein, 1753, Pt. I. p. 10. 

sides the editions of his Epistles above mentioned, 
there was another which appeared at Hamburg, 
167a, 13**, and Baumer mentions an edition of the 
Latin, Norimbergae, 1631, and of the German, 
Mannheim, 1759, 8**. I suspect that 1631 is a mis- 
print for 1731, and that he means Roth-Scholtz's 
reprint, and that Mannheim is a mistake for 
MUnchen. 

He is said to have devoted himself with great 
success to the art, and wrote these Epistles to 
explain his methods. The author of thk prefisux 
to the Drey . . . ChymiuAe Bllckir awards him 
the highest praise as an expounder of the mysteries 
of the art. 

Weigel, Grundriss der . . . Ckemie, 1777, 
§ 1102, c, 4. 
Baumer, Bibliotheca Chemica^ 178a, p. 81. 
Gmelin, GeschichtederChemie, 1798, ii. pp. ai, 30a 
Schmieder, Geschichte der Alchemie, 183a, p. 184. 
Gr&sse, Literdrpeuhichte, 1843, iiL p. 640. 
Kopp, Die AlcMemie, 1886, ii. p. 33I6U 

ABBREVIATIO de secretis secretorum Joannis pauperum. 

See JOANNES PAUPERUM. 

A, B. C. vom Stein der Weisen. 

See HERMETISCHES A B. C. 

ABRACADABRA oder Sammlung unbegreiflicher und aufserordentlicher Geheim- 
nisse aus alterer Zeit Fiir Freunde geheimer Wissenschaften und der uralten 
Goldmacherkunst aus seltenen Handschriften und kostbaren Druckschriften 
gesammelt. Coin, Bei Peter Hammer's Erben. 

34**, pp. 160. No date. (18—?). 

This contains only two or three paragraphs virtues of some common plants, and is nothing 

relating to gold-making. It is chiefly taken up more than a collection of so-called secrets, dther a 

with cures for ills produced by magic, sympathy reprint of an old work, or a modem compiUitiOD 

and antipathy, magnetic cures, and the medical from the old secret-mongers. 

ABRAHAM. 

Pr^ceptes et Instructions du P^re Abraham k son fils, contenant la vraie 
sagesse herm^tique, traduits de TArabe. 

See RICHEBOURG (j. M. D.), Biblioth^ue des Philosophes Chimiques, (1754}, 
iv. p. 552. 

ABRAHAM ELEAZAR. 

R. Abraham! Eleazaris Uraltes Chymisches Werk, welches ehedessen von dem 
Autore theils in Lateinischer und Arabischer, theils auch in Chaldaischer 
und Syrischer Sprache geschrieben, nachmals von einem Anonymo in 

ABRAHAM 

ABRAHAM ELEAZAR. ConHnued. 

iinsere deutsche Muttersprache iibersetzet, nun aber nebst zugehorigen 
Kupfem, Figuren, Gefaisen, Oefen, einer kurzen Vorrede, nothigen 
R^istem, wie auch beygefiigtem Schliissel derer in selbigem vorkom- 
menden fremden Worter, ingleichen einigen philosophischen R^eln von 
dem Steine der Weisen zu Nutz und Gebrauch aller Liebhaber der edlen 
Hermedschen Philosophie, in II. Theilen zum offentlichen Druck befbrdert 
worden durch lulium Gervasium Schwartzburgicum, P. M. & I. P. E. 
Zweyte Auflage. Leipzig, in Lankischens Buchhandlung, 1760. 

8*. Title, Prefieux, Letter signed L. N. Dobdius. Jan. 18, 1735. Verses, Abraham's 
address to the Jews, qtiotation fitmi Lib. iv. Esrm^ in all pp. ^8] ; Text, pp. 122 ; 
Register, pp. {14]. Frontispiece and 7 En^vings. Woodcuts in the text of apparatus 
and cabbahstic figures, expressing Hermetic secrets. 

The second part has the following title-page : 

Donum Dei Samuelis Baruch, Des Juden Rabbi, Astrologi und Philosophi, 
gebohren aus dem Stamm Abrahams, Isaacs, Jacobs und Juda, welcher 
erlemet das grofse Geheimniis des grofsen Meisters Tubalkains aus dessen 
Tabell, gefunden von Abrahamo Eleazare, dem Juden. I. N. U. CXI. 

8°. Title, Short vocabulary of chemical words, with title and prefeice, pp. [14I. 
Text. pp. 104. Register, pp. [la]. 8 plates containing 15 symbolicail designs ; wood- 
cuts Of chemical apparatus in the text This, though it has separate title, pagination 
and signatures, is printed uniformly with the preceding part, and is an int^jal portion 
of Abraham Eleazar's work, being referred to by Gervasius in the prefiaoe to Part I. 

Of Abraham Eleaxar, Samuel Baruch, and even 
Gttvasius himself^ nothing seems to be known. 
The main cpestion is as to the authenticity of the 
book, and it has to be proved that it is identical 
with that described by Flamel, and not a later 
production written to suit Flamel's description. 
There is acertain similarity, especially in the symbolic 

K'ctures, which can be accounted for in either way. 
It when it is remembered how much doubt hangs 
round the whole Flamel legend, the second explan- 
ation is the more probable. Dr. Kopp {JHe 
Akkemie, 1886, iL pp. 314-317) has given the work 
careftU consideration, and firom internal evidence 
has drawn the conclusion that the book is spurious, 
that Abraham Eleazar and Samuel Baruch are 
supposititious personages, that Gervasius is the 
pseudonym of the real author, and that the work 
IS later than Flamel, and not earlier than the 
seventeenth century. While this is most likdy the 
correct conclusion as to the book in its present 
form, Gervasius may, however, have based his 
adaptation 00 some old Mss., if he did not actually 
reprint one, as he professes to have done. There 
is a drawing of the massacre of the innocents, 
evidently sjrmbolical, from the "book of Abraham 
the Jew" in the Library of the Arsenal, Paris, 
given by Lacroix in Le MoyenAge ei la Renaissance^ 
Paris, 1848, i. Art. vii., and again by Lacroix in 
Moeurs, Usages et Costumes au Moyen Age, Paris, 
1871, p. 465. This drawing is a more elaborate 
version of the same scene which is given both in 
Abraham Eleazar's and in Flamel's works {g.v,). 
Without an examination, therefore, of such MSS. as 
may exist, I should not like to assert unhesitatingly 
that Gervasius was the author, and did not actually 
reprint a MS. in whole or in part. Such mss. were 
known to Lenglet Dufresnoy {Hist, de la Philo- 
sophie HemUtique, 1742, iii. p. 7^), and probably 
some are still to be found both in public and in 
private libraries. 

An edition, most probablv the first, was published 
by Augustinus Crusius at Eriiirt, in 17^5. It con- 
tains in Part L : pp. No], dictionary [laT text, 122, 
index [14]; and m Part H. : title [af text, 87; 
index, etc [15}. The title is printed in red and 
black, and the impressions of the plates engraved 
by J. C. Boeck of Weimar are better than those in 
the 1760 issue. In one copy which I have seen, 
the dictionary is put after the preliminary matter 
in Part I., but in another copy it is placed at the 
very end of Part II. Among the preliminary 
matter the first edition has one leaf containing a 
list of IX MSS. which Crusius had it in his mind to 
publish. Of these No. 6 is the tract of a certain 
LU[X>vicus ORvius (^.v.), to which Gervasius 
refers in his pre&oe as alluding to Abraham 
Ekaxar. This leaf is omitted in the second edition. 
The second edition, however, contains at the end 
of the second part, pp. 87-104, a series of 156 
philosophical rules or canons respecting the philo- 
sopher's stone. This series is not m the first 
edition. (See philosophische Regeln.) 

In the preface Gervasius gives an account of the 
book which he says existed in MSS. only, eagerly 
sought after, but difficult to see and costly to 
copy, and he therefore had it printed. It was from 
the book of Abraham the Jew that Flamel gained his 
skill, and the work was used also by Onnus, above 
mentioned, and by the author of the curieuse 
UNTERSUCHUNG etlicher Mineralien {q.vX He 
tries to ascertain the date at which Atxaham 
Eleazar may have flourished, and the probable 
truth of the statement that he drew the ' principia ' 
of the art from the copper tables of Tubal-Cain, 
who transmitted his secrets to posterity both by 
writing and bv symbolic pictures as well. Ger- 
vasius, naturally, supports the truth of this state- 
ment, and proves, as he thinks, that Tubal-Cain was 
the first engraver, metallurgist, and chemist. In 
the second part there are several references to these 
copper tables. 

ABRAffAM-^ADEL UNG 

ABRAHAM ELEAZAR. 

See HERMETISCHSS A B. C, 1778, 1. No. ill. 

ABYSSUS ALCHYMIiE EXPLORATUS. 

See PHILALBTHA (EIRENiEUS). 

ACHARD (Franz Carl). 
Franz Carl Achards, Mitglieds der KonigL PreuCsischen Academie der 
Wissenschaften, der Romisch-Kaiserlichen Academie der Naturforscher, der 
Churfiirstlich Mainzischen und Churfiirstlich Bayerischen Academien, wie 
auch der Schlesisch patriotisch-oeconomischen Societat, und der gelehrten 
Gesellschaften zu Harlem, Danzig und Berlin. Chymisch-physische Schriften. 
Berlin, bey Arnold Wever, 1780. 

8", pp. 367, 10 Tables. 

Achard was born at Berlin, April 28, 1753, and 
died at Kiinem, near Breslau, April ao, i9^i. He 
prosecuted researches on electricity, adhesion, cold 
produced by evaporation, on fixed air and its 
solvent action, the action of nitric acid upon oils 
and inflammable substances, and other topics, 
accounts of which are contained in the present 
volume. Another volume of papers appeared in 
1784, and lectures on experimental phjrsics in 

1791-92, in 4 volumes. He is best known ibr 
baving introduced and perfected, after several years* 
labour, the manufacture of sugar from beetroot. 
He wrote several treatises on this industty; in 
particular : Die Europ&ische ZuckerfahrihatUm aus 
RunkelrUben^ Leipzig, 181a. 

Meusel, DajgeUiuie Teutxhland, Lemgo, 1796, 
i. pp. 8-14; 1801, ix. p. 5. AUgemeUu Deutsche 
Biographie, 1875, i. p. 97. (Article by Oppenbeim.) 

ACXTELMEIER (Stanislaus Reinhard). 

Idsea Harmonicse Correspondentise Superiorum Cum Inferioribus. Das ist: 
Fiirbild der gleichfbrmigen Ubereinstimmung der obem Krafften mit denen 
untern, defs Firmamentischen Himmels mit der Bin- und Audsstrahlung der 
Gewachsen, Thieren und Mineralen : Wie das obere Gestirn dels Macro- 
cosmi, das ist, der grossen Welt sich verstehet mit der Irradiation defs 
Gestirns in der kleinen Welt, defs Menchen, &c. Durch die Menge der 
Exemplen, und derer in der Vemunfft gegriindeten Ursachen entworflfen. 
Von Stanislaus Reinhard Acxtelmeier. Augspurg, druckts Abraham Gugger. 
Zu bekommen, bey Daniel Walder, Buchhandlern, 1706. 

8vo, pp. [8] 224. Register [x6]. 
Fictuld {Prohier-Stein, 1753, ii. 26) spells his wissenheits Finstemiss erretteten Naturlickts, iter 

name Aextelmeyer or Extelmeyer {Ibid, p. 62) and 
sa3rs that all his labour is nothing but "scribble- 
ment, sophistical freaks and gnat-catching, with 
which he bad better have staved at home." But in 
Die Edelgebome Junker Alchymia, 1730, p. 278, 
in the Btytrag tur Geschichte der kdhern Chemie^ 
1785, ^ 650, by Gmelin {Geschichte der Chemie, 

Theil, Augsburg, 1615 (?), 2ter bis 5ter Th., 170a 
Haller calls him Axtelmeyer, and quotes {Bih/. 
Botanica, 1772, ii. p. 47) EbenHld der Natur in 
dem Entwurfe der Gewdchse^ Ungesi^er und 
anderen Thiere, Au^purg, 16^ 8*^ ; Schwabacfa, 
1706, 4**. In his Bibl, Medictnce pracHca, 1788, 
iv. p. 273. he repeats this title, but gives editions of 

1798, li. p. 321), by Schmieder {Geschichte der Augsp. 1700, 4 or 8*; 1715, 4'; and terms him 

Alchemic, 1832, p. 51^), and by Kopp {Die incorrectly Richard. 

Alchemic, x886, ii. 362) his name is written Axtel- The present work does not treat of alchemy, but 

maver, whereas Fuchs {Repertarium, 1806, p. no) of the sympathy and antipathy supposed to exist 
calls him Reinhold Axtelmeier. 

between the different sections of the universe, the 
Other books by Acxtelmeier quoted are : Des connection of the microcosm with the macrocosm 

and the radiation of influences from one to the 
other. 

Naturlichis writ erffjketer Pa/ast, Schwabach, 
1706, 4**, Augsburg, 1716, 4** ; Des aus der Un 

ADELUNG (JOHANN Christoph). 

Geschichte der menschlichen Narrheit, oder Lebensbeschreibungen beriihrnter 
Schwarzkiinstler, Goldmacher, Teufelsbanner, Zeichen- und Liniendeuter 
Schwarmer, Wahrsager, und anderer philosophischer Unholden. Erster Theil 

ADELUNG—ADMONITIO 

5 

ADELUNG (JoHANN Christoph). CtrnHnued. 

[ — Siebenter Theil]. Leipzig, in der Weygandschen Buchhandlung, 1785- 
1789. 

Small 8*. 1785, I. pp. [8] 347 \\\ 1786, II. pp. Tal 440 [a]. 1787, III. pp. A13 
[1 blank, a]. 1787. IV. pp. 423 \\\ 1787, V. pp. 391 [i J 1788, VI. pp. [2] 457 \\\ 
1789, VII. pp. [8] 408. 

This work was published anonjrmously. The 
first three volumes have a vignette on the title- 
pace, the remaining volumes have none. An eighth 
votame was published in 1799, but — as in the 
present instance — it is frequently awanting. In 
the prefiaoe to the seventh volume Adelnni; declines 
to reveal his name, and defends his treatment of the 
whole subject against the author of a review which 
had appeared a little earlier. 

Graesse (7V)6or de Uvres Rarts, 1859. i. ao) calls 
the work curious and rarely found complete. There 
was another work, Beytrdgt sur CtsckichU dir 
menschlUkem Narrkeii^ Wien, 1778, but it does not 
bdon^ to Addung^Sb 

This work is useful for the history of alchemy, 
as it contains notices of the following personages, 
of the most of whom the names occur in the 
present catalogue : Vol. I. Nicolas Bamaud ; 
Giovanni Francesco Bono ; Giovanni Aurelio Augu- 
rello; Johann Joachim Becher; lohann Conrad 
DippeL II. Cornelius van DrebbeL III. Nicolas 
Flamd. rv. Johann Rudcdph Glauber ; Johannes 
Baptista von Helmont; David Beuther. V. Hein- 
rico Khunrath. VL Delisle and Aluys ; Michael 

Sendivoffius; Johann Hdnrich von MOhlenfels. 
VII. John Dee; Arthur Dee; Paracelsus. 

These lives are written with considerable fulness, 
Adelunff having neglected none of the available 
material He gives besides very good lists of the 
writings of the different persons. For authorities, 
therefore, and matters of foct Adelung's collections 
are valuable, but upon his estimates of the individuals 
and upon the interpretation and criticism of their 
ideas and aims no reliance can be placed. Adelung 
could perceive no merit whatever in any of the 
men whose lives he described, and he puts 
invariably the worst possible construction upon the 
events of their lives, actions, writings and ideas. 

Adelung was born at Spantekow in Pomerania, 
1734 (or 173a), was a distinguished philologist, and 
teadier at Erfiirt, and librarian at Dresden* He 
died there in Sept. 1806. He was author of a 
work on Mineralogy in six volumes. Leiprig & 
Kopenhagen, 1768-71. 

Weiz, uas geUhrtt Sacksen, 1780, p. 2. 

Meusel, Das GtUkrte TcMisckland, 1796, i. pp. 
a3-28. AU^emeifu Deutsche Biograpkie^ 1875, L 
p. 81. (Article by Scherer.) 

ADEPTS. 

See LIVES (the) of the adepts in Alchemystical Philosophy. 

ADEPTUS. 

Eines wahren Adepd besondere Geheimnisse von der Alchymie, 1757. 
Set H. (a g.)l 

ADEPTUS FATALIS, Das ist : Geld, spricht die Welt ! Freyburg gedruckt 
An. 1721. 

See SPECTRUM SPAGIRICUM, 1 72 1. 

ADEPTUS INEPTUS. 

See THARSANDER, 1 744. 

ADEPTUS REALIS. 

See KASTELL (c V. v.), 1716. 

ADEPTUS scientiae & ards Henneticae. 
See FREUNDLICHES Send-Schreibcn. 

ADMONITIO, Instructio & Probatio contra omnes eos qui Aurum potabile 
extra processum & tincturam Lapidis Philosophic! universalis brevi temporis 
spatio praeparare sibi & aliis falso persuadent & sibi proponunt 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1661, vi. p. 382. 

See WARNUNG, Instruction und Beweifs. 

ADkOP—jENJGMA 

ADROP. 

See EXPOsmo el Pnctka Lapidis Adiop. 

See MONTE (GUIDO MAGNUS DE), Tractatulus seu Descripcio PhUosophid Adrop. 
See a note OQ 'Adrop' bjr Kopp^ Die Akkewue^ 1886^ u. 11^382. 

AECHTER (von) hermedschen ArzeneL 

See SEMLER OOHANN SALOMON). 

iCGIDIUS DE VADIS. 

Dnlogus int^ Naturam et filitim Philosophic Tabula diversorain metaUonim 
▼ocabula . . . ex{^cans. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, ii. p. 85. 

See MANGET (j* J*)« Bibliotheca Chemica Coriosa, 1702, ii. p. 326^ 

ex bibliotheca ttm Ricbemenun. 17. Idus lulij 
Anno 1531." but whether that be conect or not, or 

Sdunieder (P- 398) misnames the author, Aegi^lius 
de Voodisi. This dialogue, together with tracts 
Riplej, Hollaadus and othm was edited bj 
^CDOCiisimh ao introduction, and first (?) published 
" Franoofiorti, Apud lo. SauHum,** 1595, snaU Sva 
The epistle of .£gidius to his friend "N" is dated: 

% 

whether iEgidius be a real personage, or merdy a 
pseudonym of PeooCns'. I do not know. The form 
Egidiusalso 

iELIA UElAh CRISPIS. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, iv. p. 805. 

This is an epitaph cut on a block of white and 
red marble, which existed at Bologna. As it is a 
oompiele enigma, it has exercised tlie wits of many 
persons for three hundred years to find out its 
meaning and application. Marius L. Michael 
Angdos published a 4to pamphlet 00 it at Venice, 
in 1548 ; Sir W. Scott alludes to it as a perennial 
antiquarian problem (The Antiquary, ch. xiv.). 
In 1664 Caesar Malvasia in his pamphlet enumerates 
forty-three attempted solutions of it. It has been 
thoofffat to denote rain, the soul, Niobe, Lot's wife, 
a cfaud promised in marriage that died before its 
birth, and so on. .See the notices in Acta Erudi- 
torum, i66a, p. 263; 1706, p. 88; i/ao, p, 6; 
in Christopb. August Hermann's PoeciU, Halae, 
1796, iL p. 366. 

Here of course it is appUed to the philosopher's 
stone, for which interpretation we are indebted to 

Xioolaus Hamaud, who wrote a cofnmentary on 
the inscription in this sen5e, reprinted in Tkeatrum 
Chemicum, iiL p. 744 {q,v. ), and in Manget, BiMia- 
theca Chemica Curi^sa, iL p. 713 (^. v.). Tne epitaph 
^ith its puzzling antitheses was too choice a morsd 
to escai^e the sdchemists, who were fasrinated by 
obscurities like those of the Tabula Swuuragdina 
and delighted in ascribing to the great Aromum 
the most contradictory properties, so as to display 
its infinite perfections, and at the same time to baffle 
the uninitiated. 

Bord (BibL Chem,, 1654. p %) must have 
considered the inscription to be alchemical: be 
quotes the explanation of it by Richardus Basin- 
stockius, Dordrecht, 1618. 

In verses prefixed to the MaUeotechnia Medicirue 
Praxeos of Noah Biggs, Lond. 1651, " Blia Lilians 
Art** is referred to. 

iELIA L.ELIA CRISPIS. 

See BORRiCHius (OLAUs), De Ortu et Progressu Chemiae DisserUtio, in manget 
0* J-)> Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, i. p. 26. 

iENIGMA 

See albineus (n.), Bibliotheca, 1673, P^ut I., p. 78. 

See ARISLEUS. 

See TETZEN OOHANN VON), 169I, p. 7a 

See ZWEY vortreffliche . . . Chymische Bucher, 1759, p. 59. 
See also parabola. 

See also PHILOSOPHISCHES RATZEL. 

See also PHILOSOPHICAL riddle. 
See also ratzel. 

ifilNIGMA CABALISTICUM. 

See MONTE HERMETis (jOHANN de), Explicatio Centri in Trigone Centri, 1680, 
sig. C3. 

jENJGMA—AGNEA u 

iENIGMA MAIERIANUM. 

See BOREL (PIERRE), Bibliothcca Chemica, 1654, p. 275. 

ifiNIGMA Philosophicum ad filios veritads. 

See SENDIVOGIUS (MICHAEL). 

See also ENIGME philosophique. 

This is diffierent from the ParaMa seu jSmigwta PkUosopkomm. 

i£NIGMA Philosophicum de Secrete Physicorum. 

See BENEDICTUS (LiBERius), Nudeus Sophicus, 1623, p. 74- 

^NIGMA Philosophorum sive Symbolum Satumi, per parabolas Azoth dilucidb 
ostendens. 

Su THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, iv. p. 457. 

See MANGET 0- J-X Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, ii. p. 198. 

This is identical with the Parabola seu jCn^gwta pare the note on AURELMS Occultse Philoso- 
Pkilatapkaruim, See SENDivoGius (M.) ; but com- phorum Partes duo. 

iENIGMA, in wdchem der Procefs angedeutet wird. 
See THEOPHiLUS, Mineralogia, 1703, 1706, p. 457. 

iENIGMATA. 

See FIGULUS (BENEDICTUS), Rosarium Novtmi Olympicum, pars prima, 1608 
p. 71. 

iENIGMATA DE TINCTURA. 

See STERNHALS OOHANN^ Ritter Kreig, 1595, sig. G iiij; 1680, p. 75. 

iENIGMATA DE TINCTURA. 

See FIGULUS (BENEDICTUS), Pandora, 1608, p. 268. 

iCNIGMATICUM EPITAPHIUM. 

See AlAK LiEUA CRISPIS. 

AGGRAVI (GiovAN Francesco). 

Protolume Chimico ech^giante di condupplicati paraphrasi, la Natura non 
diuersare nella simmetria delle connaturali operationi, entniso V epilogati 
termini spargirici redundanti balsamici remedij, & arcanizzati magisteri 
nuouamente indagati, & theoricamente esplorati da Giovan Francesco 
Aggravi Senese. In Parma, M.DC.LXXVIII. Per Galeazzo Rosati, Con 

Licenza de' Superiori. 

8^ pp. [16] 347 [4 

The first part of this work is devoted to a Haller {Bibl. Medicime PracL, 1779, iii. p. 151), 

description of processes and operations, and a copied by Gmelin {Geschichie, 1798, ii. 367), quotes 

discussion upon general principles and definitions. Antilucema Jisica, Padova, 1664, 4**, and Trattato 

The second contains pharmaceutical receipts, delta sovrana medicina, Venezia, 1682, 12*, both by 

arranged in alphabetical order. Aggravi. 

AGNEAU (David U). 

Su l'agneau (david). 

8 

A GNOS TUS—A G RICO LA 

AGNOSTUS (iRENiEus). 

See FORTALITIUM Scientiae, 1617, 161S. 

This author was possibly Gotthard Arthusius, Kopp, Die Alckemu^ 1886, ii. p. 7; but see also 
Conrector of the Gymnasium at Frankfurt am M., 'Aynxpiotf, 1618. 
who wrote some other Rosicrucian tracts; see 

AGRICOLA (Daniel), Philopistius. 
Galerazeya. Siue Revelator Secretorum. I. De Lapide Philosophorum. II. 
De Arabico Elyzir. III. De Auro potabili, & Pomis Paradisi. Authore 
Agricola Philopistio Germano. Colonise. Apud Petrvm Mettemich, pn^ 
Augustinianos Anno M.DC.XXXI. 

24^. pp. 102. 173 [8, I blank]. This volume contains : Title, pp. 2 ; Printer to 
the rouler (explaining the deceptive title), pp. 3.8 ; origin and occasion olf the book, 

f>p. 9-14. Part I. consisting of the contents, op. 15-17 ; first dialogue of Daniel and 
oachimus, pp. 18-92 ; Contents, pp. 93-102 ; nrst part of the Galeraseya, called L 
^hilosophorum, subdivided into seven sections, pp. 1-173 ; Index and Errata, pp. 
The remaining two parts (with their introductory dialcMrues) are not oontmiDed m 
volume. Were they ever printed ? In the first edition of the first part the iotroductoty 
dialogue was somehow left out ; but now in the second edition it has been put in its 
right place (p. 16). 

This is considered an alchemical book, and is 
ascribed to **G. Agricola Philopistius" by Borel 
iBibl, CAemica, 1654, p. 4), who gives "Lapis 
Philosophorum" as an alternative title and the 
date, Colonise, 1^31, 24^ Borel is copied by 
Dufresnoy [Hist, at la Phil, Hermitique, 1742, iii. 
p. 82), who identifies the author writh G. Agricola the 
metallurgist, adding the date 1534. Schmieder 
\Gtsch, a. Alchemie, 1832, p. 269) copies from these 
writers, but makes additional difficulty by ascribing 
the Rechier Gebrauck d Alchimei, K(iln, 1531 
(^.v.), also to Agricola the metallurgist. None of 
these writers mentions the 1631 edition, and if it 
were not that reference is made in itself (p. x6) to a 
mevious edition, I should incline to the belief that 
Borel had made a mistake in the date, which 
was copied by subsequent writers. The ascription 
of the Dook to George Agricola. and the statement 
\jy Schmieder that Areola had pursued Alchemy 
in his youth, but tluit his books though printed 
then did not attract notice till after he had become 
otherwise distinguished, will not stand investigation. 
X. The Rechier Gebrauch d' Alchimei is a book of 
miscellaneous receipts and treats very slightly of 
transmutation, and, althoiigh its date be 1531, the 
place of printing is not given ; most likely it was 
printed by Egenolph at Frankfurt 2. The 
Galeraxeya does not treat of Alchemy at all, but 
i.«$ a book of Roman Catholic controversy and 
beliefs, and it was recommended to be used for 
converting heretics. The Lapis Philosophorum 
spoken of is entirely symbolical, and ngnines fiuth 
in the Roman Catholic church. 3. The nominal 
author is Daniel — not G. or Georg— Agricola ; 
PhUo^Hus, 'lover of the faith,'— not Philopeustts, 
* lover of enquiry or research ,' as Schmieder gives it. 
4. The author or editor confesses firankly that the 
title is an ingenious one, a bait to catch readers, 
"esca in hamo, quo pisces capiuntur," as he says, 
so that those who buy or read the book in the hope 
that they will learn how to make irold, the ^old 
that poisheth, will find that they nave acquired 
instead a pearl of priceless value. 5. The origin 
of the book is described in the introduction and 
first dialogue. The author (Daniel Agricola), who 
was living in Germany some 50 years before the 
date of the book, after long study and making 
great acquirements, at the age of 30 travelled over 
all the world and learned all he could. After an 
absence of 60 years, he returned to Germany. A 

young man, called Joachimus, who had wasted his 
substance in searching for the philosopher's stone, 
and was forsaken of his kinsfolk and acquaintance, 
came to the town where Daniel was, and as luck 
would have it met him and told him his sorrows. 
Daniel consoled him and promised that he would 
reveal to him the true stone After Daniel and 
Joachimus had lived together for 90 vears, Daniel 
died calmly at the not immature age 01 one hundred 
and ten years. Joachimus then committed his 
teaching to writing, both for the guidance of others, 
and in memory of Daniel himsdf. This work 
came into the hands of the writer of the preface, 
whoever be was, who had it printed. 6w The dates 
now given will not suit George Agricola under any 
drcumstanoes. If Daniel flourished 50 years prior 
to 163X, say in 1580, then he was alive twenty- five 
years after George Agricola was dead. If the book 
was published in 1531 and Daniel was alive 50 
years bdore that time, say in 1480, he must have 
been ten jrears old at least, possibly fourteen, before 
George ^^cola was bom. 

The whole story seems to be fictitious. The 
book is not by Gfeoige Agricola, it is not about 
Alchemy, so that Schmieder's derivation of the 
name from y<^p^ and <^« meaning the ' * fortunate " 
or "joyful blackness," and referring to that product 
of "putrefaction" which the iwrhemists called 
' ' caput corvi,*' is mere nonsense. If the GaUrauna 
be the result of a hundred and ten jrears' study, 
travel, meditation, instruction, it is very small for 
its age. If Schmieder's statements about Agrioola's 
youthful alchemical studies and publications were 
correct, and the GaUrateya were one of these 
printed in i^i, Agricola at that time was thirty- 
seven (possibly forty-one) years of age ; not a youth, 
therefore, and he had already published the Bet' 
maHMuj, was settled at Chenmitx, and was a man 
of distinction for scholarship. 

The book hardly merits so mudi notice, but it 
has been so persistently ascribed to G. Agricola that 
it is as well that the account it gives of itself should 
be known, and the current errors rectified. Kopp, 
however, says (Die AkhemU, 1886, i. p. 41) that 
these works are erroneously ascribed to him, though 
he is not correct in saying that the GaUroMya is by 
a G. Agricola ; but he quotes Schmieder as to the 
meaning of the word {Ind, ii. p. 339), and does not 
seem to have been aware that the book does not 
deal with Alchemy at alL 

AGRICOLA. 

AGRICOLA (Georc). 
Geoigii Agricolae De ortu & causis subtenraneonim, Lib. V. De natura eonim 
quae effluunt ex terra. Lib. IIII. De natura fossilium. Lib. X. De ueteribus 
& nouis metallis, Lib. IL Bermannus, siue De re maetallica Dialc^us. Inter- 
pretatio Germanica uocum rei metallicae, addito Indice foecundissiino. 
[Froben's device.] fiasileae, MDXLVL Cum priuilegio Imp. Maiestatis ad 
quinquennium. 

Folio. Pp. 487 [i blank]. Index [51]. Device [1]. Colopkom: Basikae per 
Hiefooymum Probenhim et Nic. Episoophim Mense SepCembri, M.D.XLVI. 

This copy belonged to Lehmann, whose trans- 
lation of the tracts is refeii^ to below. It coo- 
tains munerous MS. notes by him and leaves of 
MS. inserted. It is a very wcu printed book. 

Of these treatises the Bermamnus was published 
at Basel by Froben. iu8 (?). 1530. 8" ; at Paris, 
1541, 8*; in German, oy J. G. St6r, Rotenburg, 
1778, 8*; and by Fr. Aug. Schmid, Freiberg, 
1806.8*. 

The dedicatonr epistle to the ZV Ortu . . . Sub- 
temuuorum is dated 1544 ; that to the De Natura 
eontm qtue ^fbnmt ex terra, 1545 ; that to the />; 
Natura /osstHum, 1546, and that to the ZV veteri- 
bus ei novis wutallis, 1546. I have found no 
iodicatioo of these wfitings having been published 

separately, and I conclude that they made their 
fiist appearance in the present volume. These 
four tracts were translated into German by Ernst 
Lehmann : G, Agricola's Mimeralogiseke Sckrifien 
Mbersetti, Freyberg, x8o6-xa, four parts, of which 
part III. is in two volumes. 

Othereditioosof the collection are: BasiL, 1^5, 
fol. ; Basil.. ic^S, fol; Witteberg., 1612, 8"; Italian 
translation : Vineg., 1550, 8" ; 1559, 8". 

Agricola wrote an<^her little tract : De Ant- 
mantihu Subterraneis, Froben, Basil., I54S^ 8*; 
Witteberg., 16x4, 8". This was reprinted along 
with the 2v ^^ Metallica, and in the Italian trans- 
lation of the same. 

Geoigii Agricolae De Re Metallica Libri XIL Quibus Officia, Instrumenta, 
Machinae, Ac Omnia Denique ad Metallicam spectantia, non modb luculen- 
tissime describuntur, sed & per effigieSi suis lods insertas, adiuncds Ladnis, 
Germanidsq'; appellationibus ita ob oculos ponuntur, \\, clarius tradi non 
possint Eiusdem De Animantibus Subterraneis liber, ab autore recognitus : 
cum Indicibus diuersis, quicquid in opere tractatum est, pulchre demon- 
strantibus, atq; omnibus nunc iterum ad archetypum diligenter restitutis 
& castigEtis. [Froben's device.] Basileae M.D.LXI. Cum Priuilegio Im- 
peiatoris in annos v. & Galliarum Regis ad sexennium. 

Folia Pp. [10] Qos. Indkxs [7a, al On the last leaf Bb^ recto is the Colophon : 
Basileae in officma Frobeniana, per Hier. Frobenium et Nic Episcopium, Mense 
Martio^ Aimo Domini M.D.LXI. On the verso is Froben's device. 

The fint editioD (oontaining a reprint of die 
De AmiimaMiibms) appeared at Basel. 1556, folia 
The woodcnu according to Gfbcsw {Trdsor Art. 
AGBICOLA (a)) were by Hans Rodolphe Manod ; 
aeoording to GAmbd {A fig. Demtscke Biegr., Art. 
AGBIOOLA <a)) hf Basilins Wehring of Joachims- 
thaL Graeise and Poggendorff [Biogr, liter. 
Ndm. S.V.) mention editioos of 15^ and 1546, but 
tey have obviously confused tms work with the 
Other editioos: BasiL, i6ai, folio. 

containing the De AmimamiibMs, is a shabby book 
BasiL, 165^, foUa To it are appended, in smaller 
type and m double columns, reprints of all the 
other tracts, so that this is the collected edition of 
Agricola's works on raines» metallurgy, mineralogy 
and geology. As a book, however, it is mu^ 
inferior to the original issues. An Italian transla- 
tion oi tht De He MelaUica by Michael Angdo 
Florio and of the ZV AniwuuUtbus was printed by 
Froben, Basil, 1563, folio. 

Bergwerck Buch : Darinnen nicht allein alle Empter, Instrument, Gezeug, vnd 
aUes, so zu disem Handel gehorig, mit Figuren vorgebildet, vnd klarlich 
beschrieben: Sondem aucb, wie ein rechtverstandiger Bergmann seyn soil, 
vnd die Gang auiszurichten seyen. Item, von allerley Gangen, Kliifften vnd 
absetzen defs Gesteins. Von den Massen, vom Marscheyden. DeDsgleichen 
wie ein Gang zu hawen, wie alle Schacbt zu sencken vnd auffzurichten seyen. 
Von den StoUen, Fellorten, Radstuben, vnnd andem Gebawen. Von allerley 
Trogen, Wasseigehausen, Wasserkunst, Pompen vnd Rinnen, &c. Vom bosen 

lO 

AGRICOLA 

AGRICOLA (Georg). Continued. 

Wetter, vnd andem sorglichen mfallen, so den Berghawem widerfahrt Vom 
probieren, vnd was sonst darzu vonnothen. Wie man das Ertz bereiten, 
klauben, pauchen, rosten, quatschen, radem, waschen, im Rostofen brennen, 
vnd allerley Ertz mit nutz fchmeltzen soil, &c. Item, wie das Gold vom 
Silber, vnd das Silber vom Gold : Item das Kupffer vom Gold, vnd das Bley 
vom Gold vnd Silber zuscheiden sey, vnd wie die zwey kostlichen Metall mit 
nutz soUen gebrandt werden. Auch wie das Silber vom Kupffer vnnd vom 
Eysen zu seygem sey. Letstlich von allerley harten Safllen, die aufe Wassem 
vnd fliissigen Safilen, oder vermischten Steinen gemacht werden. Vnd wie 
endtlich das Saltz zu sieden, vnd Glafs zu machen sey. Durch den Hoch- 
gelehrten vnd weitberiihmbten Herm Georgium Agricolam, der Artzney 
Doctom, vnd Burgermeister der Churfiirstlichen Statt Kemnitz, Erstlich mit 
grossem fleiis, miihe vnd arbeit, in Latein beschrieben, vnd in zwolff Bucher 
abgetheilt: Nachmals aber durch den Achtbam, vnd auch Hochgelehrten 
Philippum Bechium, Philosophen, Artzt, ynd in der loblichen Vniversitet zu 
Basel Profeflbm, mit sonderm fleifs Teutscher Nation zu gut verteutscht vnd 
an Tag geben, vnd nun zum andem mal getruckt Allen Bergherm, 
Gewercken, Bergmeistem, Geschwomen, Schichtmeistem, Steigem, Berg- 
hawem, Waschem vnnd Schmeltzem, nicht allein nutzlich vnd dienstlich, 
sondem auch zu wissen hochnohtwendig. [Vignette.] (jetruckt zu Basel, in 
verlegung Ludwig Kdnigs. Jm Jahr M.DCXXI. 

Folia I^[7* I blank] coocxq* [x blank]. Vocabulary [5, i blank]. Title red 
and black. The vignette represents an assayor at a mufile fiimace. Numerous 
woodcuts and two folding plates. Contemporary interleaved copy for MS. Notes. 

Other editions: Vom Bergwtrck^ Basel, i*^ 
folio ; Btrgwerkhuk^ Franck. a. M. , 1580, foUb ; 
Basel, 1657, folio ; Schweinfurt, 1687, 8^. 

The x6ai edition does not contain a translation 
of the Dt AmimamtUms, 

George Bauer, latinixed Agricola. was bom at 
Glauchau in Saxony, March 24, 1490 (or 1494?). 
In his youth be was distinguished as a scholar and 
philologer, and retained his liking for classical 
learning to the end. as his works testify. At 
Leiptig he began the study of medicine, physics, 
and chemistry; visited Ital^, where he took the 
dogree of Doctor of Medicine, and settled at 
Joachimsthal as physician among the miners. He 
thus had his attention directed to- minerals and 
mhiing, and what he had learned he embodied in 
hU treatise Bimummms. In 1530 he removed to 
C'heniniti, where he became town physician, and 
rentuined till his death, Nov. ai, 1555. Residence 
here gave him (Urther ooportunities for extending 
his knowledge of mineralogy, metallurgy, geology 
and mining, which he systeroatiied ana published 
in the other treatises above mentioned.. The last 
of these, Ih AV MittUiica^ was finished in 15CQ, 
but it was not printed till 1556. subsequent to tne 
author*s sudden death. 

All of them made an epoch in the historv of the 
retpective sul^fectt. The Bfrwrnmrnm for toe first 
time gathered together the unsystematic knowledge 
of the minert. The Dt..,Ortm smHirrmmeormm 
treats for the first tint of gvology ; the Di JViUmm 
iormm f idt tiffttttmi #jr Itrrw, 01 WAtw in all its 

aspects, of gases and volcanic eruptions and ex- 
halations ; we De Natura fossilium is the first 
modem text-book of mineralopy and petrology; 
the De veterihu et novis metaUu is the m^t histoij 
of the metals ; the De Aniwtamtihus suiterrameis is 
a curious collection upon subterranean and hyber- 
nating animals, and contains a section upon 
kobolds. the demons of the miners. The De Re 
Metailica was for long the standard ¥rork on min- 
ing and metallurgy, and it was followed by most 
of the writers who succeeded Agricola. Not one 
of thdr works, however, was on the same scale, 
was so systematically arranged, so well and classi- 
cally wntten. so entirdy based on personal and 
practical experience. Elesides. Agrioola's treatise 
abounds witn woodcuts which are vigorous and 
artistic, and give a picturesque and vivid ddine- 
ation of the processes and machinery. The works 
are also furnished with vocabularies of Ifrhniral 
terms and indices. 

For chemistry the De Re ktetalUca is of much 
interest, for, boides tlw general metaOurgical pro- 
cesses described, which are of course chemical, 
there are sections upon assaying, cupeOatioD, pre- 
paration of salts, such as common salt and nit- 
petre, the distillation of nitric add, and so on. 

Agricola was the pioneer of mineralogical science 
in modem Europe. 

There have been errooeoody ascribed to Agricola 
the works Ge^hreaity^ by Darnel Agricola, and 
ReckUr Geh^mek 

AGRICOLA 

II 

AGRICOLA (Gedrg). 

For detaik of his liie and 

oHijbe 

PuitaJeoo, Prutftfrafkia^ }^\ ^ P- ^^ 
Very poor notice ana * portrut wludi does dn^ 
for other medical nien ! 

MekfaiorAdaim. ViUg 
i6ao, pL 77. 

Van der Undes, De 
i6p,p. 1701 

Mcrdclin. JJmdemimi rauvaiMs, i686^ pi 321. 

Conrii^. /« Umivtrsam Ariem Mtduam imtn- 
imcHo, 16B7, pp. a79, a8i, 387. 

10 

. i7S^ >- P^ 75- 

"feiJr 

1753.0- P-75«>. 

BJUufkn-j liedicimm PwmeHat^ ^77^ >- 

1668, p. 1337. Portrait, plate 55. 

Mv; 1 

p. ^ 

Rcnmnaiiii, EuddimMtg im du NuUri^m LUtr- 
ariam inner TemUckeM, 1709, Th. iii. 531. 

Pope-Blomit, Couarro, 1710. pL 585. 

Morfaof, PafykisUr, 1714. i. pL a6i ; ii aBo, 510, 

T^eissaer, La Ehges da Hotmma Sarams, Leyde, 
1715, i. 217. 

Bayle, Dutiamaire, Amst.. 1750. i. p. 99^ 

Mangety BUUotkeca ScrifUntm Medicormm^ 
173X, L I p. sex 

StoQe. AmUitmmg mr HtsUrU der mtedUimixkem, 
Gtlakrkeii^ 1731. pp. 59^594- 

Zedkr, Universal Ltxic^m., 1732. l coL 819^ 

Jacob Leopolds Prodrowuu BiUiatkec^ Metal- 
lica^ ed. Bmrkmann, 1732. p. 11. 

Kestner, SfedicimixMaGaekrtem-Lex, 17^. p. 31. 

r. 1797. >- P- 
PuuET. Ammala TjfegrafJtieM, 179B. tl pi 275. 

No. 773. 
F. L.. Becber, Die iiimewmUgem G. Agricelm mmd 

U'ermer, Frdbcrg, 181^ 

1819, ii. 211. 
Biegrmpkie ididiemU^ P^ris. PmcfcoociBe. i. pu 64, 
DeaeinMris. DicL HisL de la MSdeeime, iSat. 

Sdimieder. Cesckickte der AlcJkemie, 1832, pi 369. 
Atkinsoo, Medical BikHeigrepky, 1834. p. iool 
Bi^grupkie UmiveneUe (1843). i. p. 242. 
Hoeler. Histairede la Ckimue, 1843 iL 42 ; 1869, 

Bai^et ThUbiv, Bi^grapUe Medicate, 18^ 
i. 189. 

Notndle Biempkie Gimirale (1857), i. coL 410. 

Allgemeime Demtscke Biegrmpkie (1875). i. p. 143. 
Artide by GambeL 

Kopp^ Die Alckeatie, 1886. i. 40. 

AGRICOLA (Johann). 
Erster Theil Joannis Agricolx P. & M.D. Commentarioram, Kotanim, 
Observadonum & Animadversionuiii in Johannis PopfMi Chymische Median, 
darinnen alle Procds mit fldis ezaminirt, von den Imingen corrigirt, vnd 
mit etlich hundert newen Processen, geheimen Handgrifien, aus eigener 
Eif&hning vermehrt vnd iUustrirt, Auch der rechte vnd warhafftige Gebrauch 
der Artzeneyen, mit etlich hundert Historien verifidrt, Darneben was in 
Chiruigii vnd Alchimii oder transmutatione metaUomm damit zu verrichten 
griindlichen offenbahret alien Standes-Personen, Medids, Chirurgis, Chymids, 
Balbirem, Feld-Scherern, Rols-artzten, Goldschmieden, vnd alien Haus- 
M%then hochniitzlidi zu lesen vnd zu getouidien. 

Hipp, de Eleganiid, Oportet sapientiam transferre ad medidnam, & 
medidnam ad sapientiam. Medicus enim Philosophus est Deo 
a&qualis. 

Mit Rdm. KayserL Majest vnd Churf. Sadis. Privflegiis 
Leipzig, In verlegung Thomae Schiirers S. Erben, vnd Matthiae Gotzen. Ged- 
ruckt bey Gregorio Ritzsdien, Im Jahr 1638. 

4*. Pp. [18, indnding the portrait and engraved title ; 8] 6zo. Index [67, i blank]. 

Printed title red and black. 

The engraved title in the first part is as follows : 

loannis AgricoUe Palatini P. & M. D. Commentaria Et observationes. In die 
Chymische Artzeney Johannis Poppii In welchen viel gewaltige gdieime handgriffe, 
auch etlich hundert gantz newe Procefs beides in Medidna vnd Chinirgia so wohl 
auch Alchymia oder transmutatione metallorum gefimden werden. Alien Standes 
Personen hochnutzlich su lesen. In veric^gung Thomas Scborers Erben vnd Matthiae 
Gdtzen. Cum Privilegijs H. Jac Gabler sculp. 

12 

A GRICOLA—A GRIP PA 

AGRICOLA (Johann). Continued. 

This is surrounded Yxy symbols. Sitting on the 
top with legs wide apart is a sooty, wia^ed, homed, 
two-visaged demon, holding an axe m hb right 
hand, and a tordi in his left. In the background 
is a hilly country and a town. At mid-distanoe is 
a column, on the top of vrhich is the Earth-ball, 
with a salamander or lizard creeping round it; 
below is a negro's head, and a shield with an 
inscription is hung to the pillar. In front of this is 
a river with a shuulop drawn by two swans, and iu 

the foreground is an aged man, from whom springs 
a tree, and from his toes, fingers, nostrils, mouth, 
and hair, issue smoke and flames. At the tc^ of 
the tree is Mercuiy holding the caduoeus. 

This engraved title is cartcaturod in Kjraten's 
Adversaria, but not cleverly. 

Prefixed is a portrait of the author, by Joannes 
Michael, PhiL & Med., D. Phys. Prof. Publ 

MS. notes. 

Ander Theil 

1639. 

4^ pp. [15, I blank] 999. [i blank.] 

John Agricola, born in the Palatinate, travelled 
much, was a distinguished surgeon and physician, 
had a great practice at Leipzig, and was a strong 
supporter of Paracelsus, and of chemical remedies. 
He wrote some chirurgical works. According to 
the portrait in the first voltmie he was in his 
fort^-ninth year in 1638; and according to that 
prenxed to the Chirurgia Parva, Ndmbo-g, 1674, 
ne wa.s aged fifty-four in 1643. '^^ present work 
contains long dissertations on gold, silver, mercury, 
lead, and their compounds, on vitriol, antimony, 
sulphur, arsenic, tartar, acetic acid, salt, nitre, sal 
ammoniac, and a number of other substances. 
The book is interesting as having been written at a 

transition time, when alchemy, pharmacy, and 
chemistry had all been attracted bv a community 
of methods and aims, just before thev started on 
their subsequently dififerent courses. Agrioola con- 
fined himself chiefly to the medkal side of the 
subject, but he is the authori^ for certain reported 
cases of transmutation quoted in Die Edeigeionu 
Jungfer Alchymia, 1730, pp. 241, 258, 259. 

For his medical writings see HaUer, BiiL 
Ckirurgica^ 1T7A, i* P* 335; Bibl. MedicintB 
fractiae, 1779. iii. p. 4. In the same, ii. p. 448, 
ne quotes other works by a J. Agricola, but 
hesitates about the identity of the two writers. 
Probably they were the same. 

See DETHARDING (GEORG), Chymischer Probir-Ofen, 1648. 

See DETHARDING (georg), Scriptum illusivum, 1647. 

See KIRSTEN (georg), Adversaria, 1648. 

These are attacks upon Agricola's CommeniaHa, 

AGRICOLA (Johann Wilhelm). 
Geschichte des Feuer-Wassers. 

See MAGAZIN fiir die hohere . . . chemie, 1784, i. p. 217 

This is an account of a menstruum which acted 
on the metals and their compounds, and on gems, 
tbe diamond, ruby, sapphire, and so on, "when 
prepared in a certain way," and on animal and 

vegetable bodies. The experiments were conducted 
in glass vessels, but the source of the substance 

and mode of preparation are not mentioned. A 
solvent which would attack those substances would 
be interesting. 

This author appears to be of later date than the 
J. W. Agricola referred to by HaUer, BihL Med, 
Pract, 1777, ii. p. 718. 

AGRICOLA RHOMi*:US. See RnoMiEUS (Agricola). 

AGRIPPA (Heinrich Cornelius) von Nettesheym. 

Henrici Cornelii Agrippae ab Nettesheym a Consiliis et Archiuis Inditiarij 
sacrae Caesareae Maiestatis : De Occulta Philosophia Libri Tres. Henricus 
Cornelius Agrippa. [Portrait.] 
Nihil est opertum quod non reueletur, & occultum quod non sciatur. 

Matthsei X. 
Cum gratia & priuilegio Csesareae Maiestatis ad triennium. 

Small folio. Pp. fxii.] ccchdi. [2 blank]. Woodcuts in the text. MS. notes. 
Cohpkon: Occvltae Fhilosophiae Hennd Comelij Agrippae, Finis. Anno M.D.XXXIII. 
M«mse lulio. 

Th« Ariit tMok was flr»t printed liy itself at Antwerp, 
\m I, fkaphMis, in 1531, 4*, and simultaneously by 
(jnrldiiiinM* W«9ch<;lus, at Pari*. Ik>th editions are 
«M(MidlttKly r%tr, 'V\m xYvrrft lx>oks were first 
IhIMI iM (>Ao%nm \ty Jf^nnes .Soter, in 1533, 
I Mr* imtf w Ave itMies of this date, dis- 
ultMl fif typographical diflerencet. In 1565, 
MMf» Mf Acrippa's dMth, itppeared a 
\ \mkt Wtikh u ftpuriouf. It is Included, 

however, in the edition of his collected works 
mentioned below. A French translation of the 
three books was made by A. Levasseur, and 
published at La Haye, 1727, 2 vols., 8". 

The portrait of the author on the title-page of 
the present volume is not the eariiest, but it is 
doubtless an authentic likeness of him at the time. 
Several other portmiu of him exist, however, differ* 
ing from this one in certain respects. 

AGRIPPA^ALAMANUS 13 

AGRIPPA (Heikrich Cornkuus) von Nettesheym. OmHnmed. 
Three Books of Occult Philosc^y, Written by Henry Comdhis Agrippt, of 
Nettesheim, Counseller to Charles the Fifth, Emperor of Germany : and lodge 
of the Prerogative Court Translated out of the Latin into the English 
Tongue, by J. F. London, Printed by R. W. for Gregory Moule, and are 
to be sold at the Sign <A the three Bibles neer the West-end of Pftuls. r65i. 

Small 4*. Pp. [4. 24] 583. ibbmk. Index fial Woodcuts in the text of linres, 
letters, diaerams, symbols, etc. i folding table of cfaancten. Preoeding the titk b a 
portrait 01 Agripoa. and an Encomium on the Work by Eugniius fhilalefhes (t.c 
Thomas Vaugfaan) in Verse. J. F. is J. FVeake, according to Loimdes. 

The fourth book of the Occult Philosophy was There is a imthcr ramshackle editioo of the 

translated by Robert Turner, and was pubiisbed at Oocnh PhikMopby edited by Willis F. Whitehead, 

London. 1655, in snail 4*. This, though not by ChicagD, 1898. It contains Book L only, and the 

Agrippa. is much sought after on account of its vohmie is made up with extracts from Morlcy^s 

extreme raritjr. It was re-published at London in Life ef Agripfa, and other matter. The other 

1665, 4*, and in 1783^ 8". books are promised, but I have not seen then. 

Henrid Comelii Agrippae ab Nettesheym, Armatae Militiae Equitis Aurati, et luris 
vtriusque ac Medicime Doctoris, Opera. In Duos Tomos condnne digesta» 
& nunc denub, sublatis omnibus mendis, in ^iXo/iowrwy gratiam accuratissim& 
recusa. Quibus post omnium editiones de nouo aocessit Ars Notma, vt satis 
indicat Catalogus post praefationem positus. Lugduni, Per Berii^;o8 Fratres. 

No date. 

8". Pp. [33. X blank] 694. i leaf blank, xo fokiing tables of Hebrew letters. 
Vol. II. Pp. 7x6] 663. Index [17], There is a bad portrait of Agrippa on the terso 
of the title of volume I. Woodcuts, diagrams, symbols, etc. in the text It is printed 
in Roman character. To complete this copy there is wanted a continuation of V^ II.. 
pp. 681-X156. containing the Lpistles and the ten dedamatkins, as mentioned in the 
Cfootents. 

Agrippa has left no writing upon Alchemy or of an oath which prevented him revealing all he 
Chemistry, but he tells in the Occult Philosophy could, and in another of his letters (lib. L Tiii 

(Lab. I. c xiv.) that he had tried transmutation, p. 7) refers to a society, the members of which 

but had found that tb make gold, gold was needed, scattered in various places, and for admbsion to 

and that with the extracted essence or spirit of which a vow or oath had to be registered. This 

gold he never could make more gold than tluu from society may have bem for the prosecution of 

which the spirit had been goL In one letter <Lih. alchemical or other secret investigation. See the 

IV. Epist. 56. p. ao4) he narrates with a spice of section on Agrippa as an alchemist in Schelhom's 

mockenr that he had got some *' seeds of gold" AmoeniiaUs IMerariae, 1730^ it. pp. 563-567. 

which had been plant«l and fostered, and that he For the various editions of Agrippa's writings 

was expecting evory day the fruit of the dear metal, see the Appendices in the work of Auguste Prost, 

and signs himself Auratisnmus. It does not Comeille Agrifpa^ Sa Vie et ses Oeuvres, Paris, 

seem to have been gathered, for he was always 1881-83, and a paper l^ me on the editions of 

poor, and in his declamation Alchen&y also is Agrippa's two cnief works, read to the Biblio- 

shown to be vanity {De IncerHtrndime, 1530. sig. graphical Society of Edinburgh, November, 1898. 

m 4). In what he says, however, there is a hint of It also contains a list of authorities, 
some mystery which he must not disclose, speaks 

AICHA (JoHANN Baptist Grosschedel ab). 

See GROSSCHEDEL AB AICHA (j. B.). 

ALAMANUS, DE BONONIA. 
Vollkommen Werck. 

See HELLWiG (CHRISTOPH VON), Fasciculus, 17 19, p. 64. 

Sendschreiben von Erklarung der Geheimnisse der alten Weltweisen. 
Ibid. p. 82. 

Nazari, DeUa TrawmtoHont AfetalHca S^jgnifre, {g.v,). As the first of the above tracts opens with 

t599. P- 136 i^'"^') quotes : ' Alemanij de Bohemia an address to Bonifoce VIII., I have no doubt that 

tract, de Lapide philosophico ad Bonifacium these entries refer to the same writer. Whether he 

octauum pontiBcem. whidi is quoted again from bdonged to Bologna or to Bohemia I -am not 

Nazari by Bord, BiHuilkea Ckimica, 1654, p. 8 certain. 

14 

ALANUS^ALBERTI 

ALANUS DE INSULIS. 
Dicta. 

See APPENDIX ad faciliorem Radicis Chymiae intellectuin, p. 84. 
See BERNHARDUS TRBVISANUS, Von der Hennetischenn Philosophia, 1582. 
See BENHARDUS TREVISANUS, Chymischc Schrifftcn, 1746 and 1747, p. Jo?- 
See ELUCIDATIO Secretorum, 1602, p. 335. 

See HERMETISCHE (DER) PHILOSOPHUS, 1709, p. 304. 
See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, iii. p. 721. 

See CHYMISCH«-UNTERIRDISCHER Sonnen-Glantz, 1728, p. 152. 

Prefixed to the last reprint is a note dated Gouda, April x, 1598, by Justus a 
Balbian, who edited a volume of alchemical tracts, Leyden, 1509, pp. 86, which 
contains the Dicta Alani, The copy he saw was in German, and he translated it into 
Latin. With the exception of the Latin reprint in the Theatrum Cketmicum^ all the 
preceding are in German. 

Alanus de Insulis is Alain de Lille, surnamed 
Doctor Universalis^ for his universal knowledge. 
The only thing- known about him with some 
approach to certainty is that he lived between iiaS 
and laoa or xao3, that he entered the Cistercian 
order at Clairvaux, taught in Paris, and became 
Bishop of Auxerre. Several works by him, all in 
verse, have been printed, a list of which is given by 
Brial in the article on Alain in Histoire Littiraire ae 
la France^ Paris, 1824, t xvi.. pp. 396-42^, where also 
will be foimd a list of authorities. Brial doubts the 
authenticity of the Dicta^ and thinks that as they 
seem to have been written originally in German, 
they must have had some other Alanus than the 

universal doctor for their author. Fictuld (/VwM^r- 
Stein, i. 6) sajrs that the author was Albertns 
Cranzius. who wrote in 1430, and that the printing 
of them was promoted in 15x3 by Johann Gier of 
Rothenber||^. Because he is one of the clearest 
writers Fictuld "recommends him for begin- 
ners," whereas Borrichius {(Conspectus Scriptorum 
Ckemicorum^ X697, p. 25) sajrs: * Dicta Alani 
nubila sunt, & provectum requirunt lectorem ' 1 See 
Schmieder, Geschichie der Alchemie^ i83|2, p. laS ; 
Hoefer, Histoire de la Ckimie, X842, i. p. 348 ; 
x866, i. p. 368. For the philosophy of ^Jain de 
Lille, see Stdckl, Gesckickte der Pkilosopkie des 
AfHtelalters, Mfinz, X864, i. p. 411. 

ALBERT (U) MODERNE, Ou Nouveaux Secrets ^prouv^ et Hcites, recueillis 
d'apr^s les d^couvertes les plus r^centes. Les uns ayant pour objet de 
rem^ier k un grand nombre d'accidens qui int^ressent la sant^: Les 
autres, quantity de choses utiles k S9avoir pour les diff<^rens besoins de la 
vie : D'autres, enfin tout ce qui conceme le pur agr^ment, tant aux Champs 
qu*k la Ville. Le tout divis^ en trots parties, & rang^ par ordre alpha- 
b^tique. A Paris, Chez la Veuve Duchesne, Libraire, rue St. Jacques, 
au Temple du GoOt. M.DCCLXVIIL Avec Approbation & Privil^e 
du Roi. 

Pp. xxiv. 430 [2], 

12 

Second edition, Paris, X769; reprinted, Basle, 
X770. Third edition, Paris, 1770. New edition, 
F^ris, 1790, 2 vols. Fourth edition, Paris, X793, 
3 vols. All these are m X2^ 

This is a collection of useful and curious receipts, 
and the author is careful to point out that it has 

ALBERTI (Michael). 

See BEHR (GEORG HEINRICH), I738. 

Alberti wrote a preface to Behr's Dictionary. 
He lived from 1628 to 1757, was one of the most 
distinguished physicians of his time in Germany, 
and was a member of the Leopoldine and Berlm 
Societies. His most notable works are those on 

StoUe, Anleitung Mur Hist, der medicinischen 
Gelahrheit; 17^1 , p. 375. 

Manget, Bthl. Scriptor. Medicorum^ X731, I. i. 
p. 57, with some reviews. 

Bftchner, Academite . . . Natura Curiosorum 
Historia, 1755. P- 489. No. 297. 

nothing in common with the secrets of the great or 
little Abert, of which, indeed, he confesses he is 
ashamed, both for their freedom and their follv. 

5«" Notes on . . . Booksof Secrets, Part IV.," 
Trans, Archaol. Soc. Glasgow, x888, N.S. I. 
p. 329 ; "Supplement III." Ibid. 1898, iii. p. 420. 

Systematic Medicine, Halle, 1718, and on Medi- 
cal Jurisprudence, Halle, X725, edited by Chr. 
Thomasius. He was author also of a host of 
academical dissertations on Medicine and related 
topics, of which a list is given by Haller. 

Haller, Bibl, Medicine Pract.^ 1788, iv. pp. 386- 
404. He also refers for his life to 

Brucker, Ekrentempel dentsclur Gelehrsamkeit, 
iv. Nr. 180. 

Gmelin, Geschichie der Chemit^ 1798, ii. p. 362 etc. 

Reuss, Repertorium CommentaHonum^ 'Cnemia, 
X803, p. 71. (Papers about salts.) 

ALBERT!— ALBERTUS 

15 

ALBERTI (Michasl). Continued. 

BiografkU MidicaU^ Paris, Panckoucke, I pp. 
9$-i09, with a long list of his dissertations. 

Deaeimeris, DUtiannairekisiifrifiudelaMidieitu, 
i8a8. u p. 67. 

James Atkinson, Medical Biblutgraphy^ 1834, 

p. ^S^ 

Bayle et Thillaye, BiographU MidicaU, 1855, ii. 
P ao4. 

AUgtmeimi Diuiscki Bkgrafkie, 1875, ^ P* >i4> 
article by Hirsch. 

Haeser, Lekrbuck der GtxhickU dtr Mediciu, 
1881, ii. p. 1083. 

Hirsch, BiografkiscMes Lexicon der kervorra- 
genden Aernte alter Zeitem und Vdlker^ 1884, i., 
p. 85, article by Magnus. 

ALBERTUS MAGNUS. 
Albertus Magnus de Secretis MuUerum Item De Virtudbus Herbarum Lapidum 
et Animalium. Amstelodami, Apud Henricum et Theod. Boom. A^ 1669. 

24*. Pp. 329. Index [6, i blank]. EMjaved title-page. There is a Prooemium ; 
then the De S^Kretis from p. 10 to p. 118. Liher Aggregatumis from p. 118 to p. 158 ; 
De miraHlibus Mundi from p. 158 to p. 303. Michael Scotus, De Secretis IVdturte^ 
frt>m p. 904 to 339. There are two issues of this date — one is distinguished by having 
the following errata in the pagination : 56 for 65 ; 130 for 330 ; 135 for 335 ; 139 for 
339 ; 151 for 351. 

No tracts used to be more popular than those of 
Albertus Magnus and Michael Scotus. They began 
to be printed in the fifteenth century, and passed 
through a very great number of editions both 
separately and conjoined (as here). For notices of 
some fifty editions of Albertus; see "Notes on . . . 
Books of Secrets" in the Trans. Arcketol. Socy, 
Glasgow, 1883 to 18^, for the editions printed by 
Mai^linia, a paper in the Archaologia, London, 
x886^ voL xlix. ; and for Michael Scotus, a paper 
read to the Archaeological Societv of Glasgow, 
April 15, 1886. Whether or not these tracts are 
to be ascribed to Henry of Saxony, a scholar of 
Albertus', as is done by some, it is almost certain 

that they are not by Albertus. There is in actual 
circulation at the present time a chap-book in 
three parts containing charms, receipts, sym- 
pathetical and magical cures for man and 
animals, all the superstition of a few centuries 
back, which panes under the name of Albertus, but 
has no connection with the present book or with 
Albertus Parvus. The title is: Albertus Magnus : 
being the approved . . . Egyptian Secrets; or, 
IVMite and Black Art for Man asid Beast.—TruO' 
lated from the German. It is without place or 
date, and each bookseller stamps his name on the 
copies he sells. It is in small square 8*, pp. 160. 

[Alberti Magni Compendium, oder Kurtzer Begriffvom Ursprung und Materia 
der Metallen, worauff ein Spagyrus seine griindliche Principia fest setzen 
konne. 

Den Frommen ist die Kunst kurtz, und leicht zu verstehen, 
Die Bosen immerdar darinnen irre gehen.] 
s. 1. & a. 

Small 8*. Pp. 909-3x7. This is a fragment from the Alchymistisch Sieben- 
Gestim, 1675 (y.v.). 

De Alchymia liber. 

See GRATAROLO (g.^ Verse alchemise . . . doctrina, 1561, ii. p. 78. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1 659, ii. p. 423. 

Collectanea ex Alberto. 

See LACINIUS (JANUSX Pretiosa Margarita Novella, 1546, f. 180. 
See LACINIUS Oanus), Pretiosa Margarita, 1714, p. 420. 

Compendium vom Ursprung und Materia der Metallen. 
See ALCHYMISTISCH Siebexi-Gestim, 1675, p. 209. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, ii. p. 1 23. 

Compositum de Compositis. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, iv. p. 825. 

De Concordantia Philosophorum. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, l6^9, iv. p. 809. 

i6 

ALBERTUS 

ALBERTUS MAGNUS. Continued. 
Lapis Albert! Magni Rebis. 

See KIBSSR (franzX Cabala Chymica, 1606^ p. 273. 
See REBIS. 

Liber Octo Capitulorum. 

See THBATRUM CHBMICUM, l6S9, iv. p. 841. 

Scriptum super arborem Aristotelis. 

See GRATAROLO (g.^ Verx alchemise . . . doctrina, 1561, ii. p. 102. 

See THBATRUM CHBMICUM, 1659, ii. p. 456. 

Secretorum Tractatus. 

See ARTis AURlFERiE . . . Yolumen tertiuin, 1610, p. 121. 

Semita Semitse. 

See SEMITA SEMITiE. 

Though Albertus Magnus believed in transmuta- 
tion in a certain sense and may have experimented 
in it, he was not a professed alchemist, or one of 
marked authority, and most if not all of the pre- 
ceding writings are probably spurious. 

Altxrtus c^ed Groot or Grotus as his &mily 
name according to some, Magnus on account of his 
acquirements according to others, was bom in 
1192, or 1x9^. or i9o6--there seems to be some 
doubt about it, though 1x94 is usually preferred — 
in Swabia, of the family of Bolstadt, went to Pavia, 
became a Dominican in laaa, taught Philosophy 
and Theology with great renown in Germany and 
finally at Pans, and became Provincial of his Order 
at Cologne in 1254. In ia6o he was made bishop 
of Regenspurg ; resigned after three years, and re- 
Paolo Giovio, Le Inscrittumi paste sotto le vere 
Imagini dt gli Huomini famosi in Lettere, Venetia, 

1558, P- ". 
Paolo Giovio, Elogia virorum Uteris illustrium, 

1577, p. 5 (with a portrait). 

The vet, Les Vrais Pourt raits et Vies des Hommes 
illustres, X584, f. i2x (with a portrait). 

J. F. Picus Mirandulanus, De Auro lihri tres, 
Venetiis, xs86, pp. 33. 34, 6x, etc. 

•Nicolaus Reusner, Icones , . . virorum Uteris 
itittstrittm, 15871 sig. Aj. 

Jan. Jac. Boissardus, /cones Quinquaginta Vir- 
orum, X5^, i. 66 ; X5p8, iii. p. 2. 

N. Gmbertus, AUkymia . , . impugnata et ex- 
pugnata. Argent, 1603. Lib. II. c vii. (on the 
supposititious works of Thomas and Albertus), 
p. 05. 

Tobias Magirus, Eponymologium Criticum, 16x4, 
p. 9. 

Naud^, Apologie pour tous les grands Personna^s 
. . . soupfonnet de Magie, X625, P* 5^^ English 
translation, X657, p. 24a. 

G. J. Vossius, De Universe Matkesios Natura 
et Constitutiont Liber^ x66o, p. 362. (Third part of 
De Quatuor Artibus Popularibus . . , LiM^ tres, 
Amst., x66o.) 

Thevet, Histoires des plus illustres et sfavans 
Hommes de leurs Siicles, X670, ii. p. 85 (with a 
portrait). 

Freher, Theatrum virorum eruditione clarorum, 
1688, p. X220 (with a portrait, plate 65). 

Wm. Cave, Scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum His- 
toria literaria, 1688, i. p. 73X. 

Trithemius, Annates j/irsaugienses, X690, i. 
pp. 592-4 (the magic banquet); 603, 6x0 (at 

sumed teaching; preached a crusade in Germany 
and Bohemia, was at the Council of Lyons in 1974, 
and died at Cologne in 128a He had fiune as a 
man of universal teaming, skilled in Mathematics, 
Chemistry, and Medianics, and enjo^red the renown 
of a wizard, firom which aspersion it is quite un- 
necessary to vindicate him. 

His works were printed in the fifteenth centory, 
and afterwards in various editions. Naod^ stated 
that if they were all collected thev would be loiiDd 
to be neariy as voluminous as those of his pupil 
Thomas Aquinas. They were ultimately collected 
by Peter lanuny, and published at Leyden, 1651, 
in twenty-one volumes, folio. There are multitu- 
dinous notices of Albert from every point of view. 
The following are a few of these : 

Ratisbon) ; il 39 (his death) ; 40 (writings ; not a 
magician; his works on magic and aldbemy are 
spurious). 

Hendreich, Pandecta Brandenhurgiae, x699> 
p. 85. 

Dupin, Nouvelle BihliotlUqne des A uteurs EccUsi- 
astiques, Paris (X700), T. X. p. 72. 

I^schius, De novis inventis . . . tractatus, 1700, 
p. 580 (the magic banquet) ; p^ 694 (the brasen h«d). 

Reimmann, Einlettung tn die Historiam Hter- 
ariam derer Teutschen (X709), ii. X26. x6o, 162, 
207, 242, 261, 297, 302, 308, 3x6, 329. 332^ 47a 

Pope- Blount, Censura Celebrium AutAarum, 
X7X0, p. 4x6. 

Qu^tif & Echard. Scriptores Ordinis PreedUa- 
torum, X7X9, i. pp. 162-X83. 

Bayle, Dictionaire kistorique, X730, l p. 129. 

Jacob Leupolds Prodromus B^licikecee metaUicet^ 
ed. Franc Ernest. Bruckmann, X732, p. 13 (List of 
editions of the ' E>e Secretis Mulierum,' and ' Liber 
Aggregationis.') 

Morhof, Polykistor^ Lubecae, vjyi, passim, 

Heumann, Via ad Historiam liUrariam^ Hano- 
verae, x^32, Ed. tert C. IV. § xxxviiL p. 108; 
and § xlii. p. 1x5. 

Zedler, universal Lexicon (X732), i. coL 999. 

Steele, Anleitung gur Historie der Getakrkeit, 

1736, pp. 397. 5^- 
Lenelet 

;nglet Dufresnoy, Histoire de la PkiUuophie 
kermitique, X742, i. XX9, 466, iii. 35, 38. 50, 55. 

83.84. 

J5cher, Allgemeines Gelehrten-Lexicon, X750, i. 
coL 203. 

Moreri, Le Grand Dictionnaire kistarique, 1759^ 
t969b 

ALBERTUS^ALBINEUS 

17 

ALBERTUS MAGNUS. ConHnued. 

Bnicker, Historia Critica PkUosopkia^ 1766, iii. 
pp. 788-798. and vL 593-4- 
Haller, Bibliotktca Botamica, Z77X| i* P* 993, ii. 

Haller. BUliotkeca Ckirur;fua, 1774, L p. 153. 
Haller, Bihliotheca Medicine Practical 1770, i. 

P- 433- 
Bahle in Ersch & Gniber's Allgemmne Ency- 

clopddie, 1819. ii. p. 364 (with references). 

Biograpkie MidicaU^ Paris, Panckoiicke, n.d. 
(I830-35). irp. 91. 

Sprengid, GtsckichU der ArMmeykumU, 1833, i. 

pp. 535. 541. 
Dezetmeris, DictiomfuUre historique dt la Midi- 

dtu, 1838, i. p. 66. 

Schmieder, GtsckichU der Alckemie, 1833, p. 133. 

Atkinson, Medical Bihlingrapky^ 1804, pp. 68-7^ 

Ernst H. F. Meyer. "Albertus Magnus; ein 
Bdtrag xur Geschichte der Botanik im dreizehnten 
Jahrimndert" Linnaea^ x8^. x. pp. 641-741; 
Zwdter Beitrag. Ibid. 1837, xi. pp. 545-S9S- 

Emil Isensee. Die Geschichte der Medicin^ 1840, 

p. "5- 
Hoefer, Histoire de la Chimie, 1843, i. p. 358 ; 

1866, L p. 379. 

Bicgraphie Universelle, 1843. L p. 333. 

L. Choulant in Henschel's Janus, 1845, PP* 
127- i6a 

F. A. Pouchet, Histoire des Sciences Naturtlles 
ttu Mofen Age ou Albert le Grand et son Bpoque^ 
Paris, 1853, V, 

Bayle & Thillaye, Biographic Midicale, 1855, u 
p. iia 

Joachim Sigfaart. Albertus Magnus^ seim Leben 
und seine Wissenschaft, Regensburg, 1857, 8*, 
with a portrait and otner two illustratioas. (He 
takes no notice of his chemistry or alchemy and 
mentions the present tracts only to say that they 
are spurious.) 

Hoefer, Nouvelle Bicgraphie GiniraU, 1857, i. 
col. 588 (writh references). 

Ernst H. F. Meyer. GeschichU der Botanik, 
K5nigsberg, 1857. iv. pp. 9-84. (Though bearing 
spedallv on Albertus as a botanist this article treats 
aJso of his science generally.) 

Fabricius, Bihliotheca Latina media et injlmee 
Aetatis, 1858, I p. 43 (enumerates the treatises in 
the collected works). 

Graesse, Trisor, 1859, i. p. 56. 

Stdckl, Gesckickte der PkUosopkie des MitUlalters, 
1865. ii. p. 3^3. 

Kopp, BettrSge tur Gesckickte der Ckemie, 1869, 
i. p. 80, note 61. 

Octave d'Assailly, Albert Le Grand, fancien 
Monde devant le nouveau, Paris, 1870, vol. i.. 8**. 

L0BjdrtLgue,Bibliotk^ue Ouvaroff, Sciences Secrites, 
1870, Nos. 701-704. 

V. Herding, article in Allgemeine Deutscke Bio- 
grapkie, 1875, i. p. 186 (with references). 

J. Bach, Des Alberti Magni Verkdltniss mu der 
Erkenntnisslekre der Griecken, Lateiner, Araber 
und Juden, Wien, 1881, 8*. 

Kopp, Die Alckemie, 1886, i. pp. 16, 141, 157. 
XS9, 196, 248 ; il 305, 326, 340, 378, 383, 393. 

ALBERTUS PARVUS 
Secrets Merveilleux de la Magie Naturelle & Cabalistique du Petit Albert, 
traduits exactement sur Toriginal Latin, intitule Alberti Parvi Lucii Libellus 
de mirabilibus naturae arcanis. Enrichi de figures mist^rieuses, & de la 
maniire de les faire. Nouvelle edition corrig^ & augment^e. A Lion. 
Chez les H^ritiers de Beringos Fratres, k TEnseigne d'Agrippa. M.DCCXLIIL 

12*. Title, Avertissement, Table, Pp. [13]. Text, 353. Title red and black. 
4 Woodcuts in the text. 10 Engraved plates. 

There are numerous reprints of this well-known an Alchemical book. For other editions see my 

collection of magical absurdities and impossibilities. " Bibliographical Notes on . . . Books of Secrets, 

One of the best things it contains is the receipt to Part IV." Trans. Arckaeol, Soc, Glasgow, N.S. 

make the " hand of glory," with a drawing ot the 1888, vol. i. p. 333. 
hand holding the necromantic candle. It is not 

Nisard, Histoire des Uvres p<^laires, 1854, i. p. 309. 

ALBINEUS (Nathan). 

Bibliotheca Chemica Contracta ex delectu & emendatione Nathanis Albinei 
D. M. In gratiam & commodum artis Chemicae studiosorum. Genevae, 
Sumpt. loannis Ant & Samuelis de Toumes. M.DC.LIII. 

8*. Pp. [16] 8 [3] 179 [i blank] : [11, i blank] 83 [i blank] : 11 [3] 175 [i blank] : 
77 [i blankj. Goienu title red and black. 

The treatises contained in this collection are : \ 

I. Hermes, Tabula Smaragdina. 

3. Espagnet, Enchiridion rkysiae restitute, 

3. Espagnet, Arcanum Hermeiiae Pkilosopkice 
Opus, 

4. Sendivogius, Novum Lumen Ckemicum, 

5. Sendivogius, De Sulpkure Tractatus, 

6. Augurelhis, Ckrysopctia et Vellus Aureum, 

7. Albineus, Carmen Aureum, 
Of these, numbers 3, 3, 4 have separate titles, 

signatures, and pagination. No. i is in the intro- 

duction ; 5 and 6 have bastard titles, 6 and 7 have 
signatures and pagination together by themselves. 
According to the table of contents Augurello's 
poems should come first and Espagnet's tracts last, 
but they have been transposed in binding. Albin- 
eus' *• Enigma Hexastickum " is contained in the 
•*Praefatio.' See further under the respective 
authors. Schmieder (Die Alchemic, 1833, p. 418) 
mentions an edition or 1663. 

B 

i8 

ALBINE US-'ALCHEMIA 

ALBINEUS (Nathan). ConHnued. 

Bibliotheca Chemica Contracta ex delectu & emendatione Nathanis Albinei 
Doctoris MedicL In gradam & commodum Ards Chemicse studiosorum. 
Coloniae AUobrogum, Sumpt I. Ant. & Samuelis de Toumes. M.DC.LXXIII. 

8". Pp. [14] ; 78 ; II [2, I blank] ; 175 [i blank]. General title red and black. 

The tracts in this edition are : Hermes, Tabula 
Smaragdina^ at the end of the preface ; Augurellus, 
Chrys^oeia and Vellus Aureum ; Albineus, Carmen 
Aureum and Enigma ; Sendivogius, Novum 
Lumtn Chemicum and Tractatus de Sulphurt. 
There is a bastard title to Augurello's proems; 
and a separate title, preface and pagination to 
Sendivogius* tracts. According to tne table this 
edition should also contain E^pagnet's two tracts, 
Enchiridion and Arcanum Opus, but these do 
not appear to have been included in this copy. 
This is a reprint of the other edition, with the 
ARnigma verbally altered and eight lines added. 

There was an edition of Sendivogius' two tracts 
and of Augurello's poems printed at Geneva by 
Jean de Toumes in 1639. This was edited by 
Albineus, but Kspagnet's tracts are not contained 
in the volume. ^ sendivogius (Michael). 

Gmelin {Gesch. der Cktmie, 1797, i. p. 690) calls 
him 'Matth.,' and in the index 'Aloinus.' He 
quotes the editions of Geneva 165^, 1663, 1673. and 
Cologne, 1673. 8^. Schmieder also spoiks oif this 
Cologne edition. I have not seen any such, and it 
is possible that Colonia AUobrogum, Geneva, has 
been mistaken for Colonia Agrippina, Cologne. 

Liber I. 
Libri II. 

Carmen Aureum et ^nig^pia. 

See MANGET (j. J.), Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, ii. p. 387. 

ALCHALI. 

Caput de Sale Alchali. 

See GRATAROLO (g.), Vera; Alchcmiae . . . doctrina, 1561, ii. p. 258. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, iii. p. 180. 

ALCHEMIA. 

In Hoc Volumine De Alchemia continentur haec. 
Gebri Arabis, Philosophi solertissimi, rerumq'; naturalium, 
praecipue metallicarum peritissimi, 
De inuestigatioe /^rfectionis metallorum, 
Summae perfectionis metallorum, siue perfect! magisterij. 
Qua seqnuntur^ omnia nunc primu excusa sunt, 
Eiusdem De inuentione ueritatis seu perfectionis metallorum. Liber I. 
De Fornacibus construendis. Liber I. 

Item. 
Speculu Alchemiae, doctissimi uiri Rogerij Bachonis. 
Correctoriu Alchemiae doctiss. uiri Richardi Anglici. 
Rosarius minor, de Alchemia, Incerti authoris. 
Liber Secretoru Alchemiae Calidis filij lazichi ludaei. 
Tabula Smaragdina de Alchemia, Hermetis Trismeg. 

Hortulani philosophi, super Tabulam Smaragdinam Hermetis Commentarius. 
Omnia collatis exemplaribus, emedatissima, nouoq'; modo ad m^ta authoru 
distincta, & argumetis atq; picturis necessarijs illustrata, ita ut merito ia 
renata uideri queat. Norimbergae apud loh. Petreium, Anno M.D.XLI. 

4*. Pp. [ao] 373. [2, I blank ; i, i blank]. 16 woodcuts. 

ALCHEMIA (De) Dialogi Duo. 

See BRACESCHl (GIOVANNI). 

ALCHEMIA (De) Incerti Authoris. 

See GRATAROLO (g.), Verae alchemiae . . . doctrina, 1561, ii. p. i. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, iii. p. 5. 

This is also entitled liber de Magni lapidis Compositione et Operatione, q.v. 

ALCHEMIA—ALCHIMIA 

19 

ALCHEMIA VERA. 

See GRATAROLO (GUGLIELMO). 

Another coUection with the same title : Alckimia 
vera, bat in German, was printed at Frankfurt, 
1604. according to the Beytrag %ur GtsckickU der 
kdktrm Cktmu, 1785, p. 587. The editor's 
initials (?) are I. P. S. M. S. A copy of this book, 

apparently, is contained in the BiiUothiqui Ouvar' 
o^, 1870. No. 607. but the initials there are 
J. P. S. H. M. S., and the book is said to be without 
place, date (but 1604), and printer's name. It 
contains 15 tracts of whch a list is given. 

ALCHEMISCHER WEGWEISSER. 

See MAGAZIN fur die h6here Nattirwissenschaft tind Cheroie, 1787, ii. p. 177. 

ALCHIMEY^PIEGEL. 

See CiGSAR (THEOPHILUS). 

ALCHIMIA, Das ist Alle Farben, Wasser, Olea, Salia, vnd Alumina, damit 
man alle Corpora, Spiritus vnd (Calces Praeparirt, Sublimirt vnd Fixirt, 
zuberejTten. Vnd wie man diese ding nutze, auff das Sol und Luna werden 
moge. Auch von Solviren vnd Scheidung aller Metall, Polierung allerhand 
Edelgestein, fiirtrefflichen Wassem zum Etzen, Scheiden vnd Solviren: Vnd 
zuletzt wie die gifitige Dampff zuverhiiten, ein kurtzer Bericht, &c. Cum 
Gratia & Priuilegio Imp. Franckfiirt am Mayn, in verlegung Vincentii 
Steinmeyers, Jm Jahr MDCXIII. 

8^. Pp. 13a Index [3] ; colophon [x]; 2 blank. Title red and black. Pp. 7-15 
contain woodcuts of different kinds of furnaces. The colophon runs thus : Gedruckt 
zu Darmbstatt, bey Balthasar Hofmannp in verlegung Vincentii Steinmeyers : Im lahr 
MDCXIII. Hofmann printed the Alcktmey-Spiegel \g,v.) in the same year. 

The first edition I know of was printed at Stras- 
bui^ bv Cammerlander in 1539. The book has no 
author s name, but it may have been compiled by a 
certain Petrus Kertzenmacher, who wrote a preface 
which appears in the 1570 and subsequent issues. 
The compiler has taken not only a number of the 
receipts tTUt the title as well from the RectUer 
G^rauck d' Alchimei, 1531 (^.t^.). The second 
part deals with what was thought to be transmuta- 

tion and with the separation of gold and silver, 
and appended is the treatise of Gilbertus Cardinal 
(^.v.) upon solution of metals, polishing of ^ms, 
and similar practical applications of chemistry. 
For the different editions see my paper on "Some 
Early Treatises on Technological Chemistr]r," 
Proceedings Phil, Soc,, Glasgow, 1887-88, vol xix. 
pp. 126-159, and "Supplement," Ibid. 1893-94, vol. 
XXV. pp. 224-235. 

ALCHIMIA. 
De Alchimia Opuscula complura veterum philosophorum, quorum catalogum 
sequens pagella indicabit Cum gratia & Priuilegio Caesareo. 

s.1. a. & typ. n. 

4^. Ff. [^ I blank] x68. Vignette on the title. On f. 168 verso the printer's device. 

Rosarium Philosophorum. Secunda Pars Alchimiae de Lapide Philosophico vero 
modo prseparando, continens exactam eius scientise progressionem. Cum Figuris rei 
perfectionem ostendentibus. 

Sigs. A to Z, a, in fours; or ft [96]. Vignette, and 20 symbolic wood-cuts, 
coloured by hand. Numerous MS. notes. 

Colpokon : Francoforti ex Officina Cjrriaci Jacobi, Mense Junio Anno 1550. 

T^ first part contains a dedication to Otto 
Heinrich, Count Palatine, by the printer Cvriacus 
Jacobus, dated April i, L15J50, and the foUowing 
nine tracts : 

1. Correctio Fatuorum, f. i. 

2. Clan^ Buccifut, f. 19. 

3. Semtta SemiUe, f. 69. 

4. Avicenna : De tiHctura metallorum, f. 75. 

5. Raimundus (Lullius): Compendium animte 
iransmuioHonis, f. 92. 

61 Scala Philosophorum, f. loi. 
7. OpusmuUerum, Tractatulus, sive ludus puer^ 
orum, t 135. 

8. Raimundus Lullius: De Tincturis compen- 
dium, seu Fade Mecum, f. 153. 

9. Aristoteles: Tractaiulus de Practica lapidis 
Philosophici, f. 162. 

Some of these tracts were frequently printed; 
see under each. The second part consists entirely 
of the Rosarium, with all its curious symbolic^ 
illustrations. It was one of the most popular of 
the Alchemical treatises, and it is to be found 
in numerous MSS. and printed editions. See 

ROSARIUM. 

ao ALCHIMIA^ALCHYMISTISCH 

ALCHIMIA DENUDATA. 

Sit NAXAOORAS (EHRD VON). 

ALCHIMIST. 

Sii HBUTIGE (Der) Alchimist, 1756. 

This is identical with the SfUgti of kdward plusius (f.v.). 

ALCHYMIA. 
Alchymise Cultor sub spe Benedictionis Divinse viuens. 
See PHILOSOPHISCHE Schau-Biihne, 1706. 

Alchymia Denudata. 

See NAXAGORAS (EHRD VON). 

Alchymise Tractatus. 

See HELLWIG (CHRISTOPH VON), Fasciculus, 1 7 19, p. lOI. 

Alchymia vera lapidis philosophorum. 

See VIER aufserlesene Teutsche Chemische Buchlein, 1697, p. 212. 
^SV^ VIER unterschiedene Chymische Tractatlein, 1772, p. 5. 

Alchymise veteris medulla ex Gebri . . . libris extracta. 
See HORN (georg). 

Definitio Alchymiae. 

See HERMBTISCHE (Der) Philosophus, 1709, p. 54. 

Phoenix Alchymise. 

See HBRMETISCHE (Der) Philosophus, 1709, p. 75. 

ALCHYMIE. 

See GANTZB (Der) Kern der Alchymie, 1748. 

See H. (c. G.), Eines wahren Adepti besondere Geheimnisse von der Alchymie, 1757 

See REFORMIERTE (Die) Alchymie, under correctio fatuorum. 

ALCHYMISCHE FRAGEN von dem Universali und den Particularibus. 

See WELLING (GEORG VON^ Opus Mago-Cabbalisticum et Theosophicum, 1735, 
P-532. 

ALCHYMIST. 

Der von Mose . . . iibel urtheilende Alchymist 
See SCHMID (JOHANN gborgX 1706. 

ALCHYMISTENGESELLSCHAFFT. 
See K. (J. aX 1709. 

ALCHYMISTISCH Sieben-Gestim, Das ist, Sieben schdne und aulseriesene 
Tractatlein, vom Stem der Weisen, Darinn der richtige Weg zu sc^chem 
allerhochsten Geheimniifs zu kommen hell und klar gezeiget wird. Allen 
IJebhabem der Hoch*Edlen Wissenschafit zu Gefiedlen und nutzlichem 
Unterricht, aus dem Latein ins Hochdeutsche treulich iib^gesetzet, und in 
Druck gcfertiget 

ALCHYMISTISCH'-'ALEM ANNUS 

21 

ALCHYMISTISCH Sieben-Gestirn. ConHnued. 

Was Hermes und der Lullius weitlaufitig habn geschrieben, 
Das lais allhier in einer Summ zu lesen dir belieben. 

Wirst du dasselb' gebrauchen recht mit weifslichem Verstand, 
So sey versichert, daiis dein Geld sehr niitzlich angewandt 
Hamburg, In Verl^ung Johann Naumanns, und Georgen Wolffs. Im Jahr 
Christi, 1675. 

8". Pp. [81 931, [i]. Title red and black. The contents begin on the verso of 
the title, and then fouow a scheme of the operations for the Stone, and the editor's 
address to the reader. Each tract has a tiUe-page included in the pagination. 

The tracts in this collection are : 

1. Hermes, GiUden. Tractdtlein, p. i. 

2. R. Lullius, Apertorium^ p. 95. 

3. R. Lullius, Elucidarium, jp. 57. 

4. Aristoteles, Tractat an AUxandrum Magnum 
voM Stein der IVeisen, p. 69. 

5. Johannes Dausten, Rosarium^ p. 99. 

6. Albertus Magnus, Comfendittm, p. 909. 

7. Johannes Pontanus, £tn Sendbnef, p. 219. 
The editor has not given his name. The title of 

the book, he says, &notes that as the Pleiades 
^de the mariner to his haven, so this constella- 
tion of writers will enable the lover of Alchemy to 

attain his end. He himself was neither a ' practi- 
cus ' nor an adept, but he had studied the theory 
and ventured to say that in this book would be 
found in brief all that was necessary for the work 
contained, though more diffusely, in the six volumes 
of the Theatrum Chemicum, 

Besides this, which seems to be the first edition, 
Schmieder {Gesch. der AlchemU^ 1832, p. 166) 
quotes another of date 1679, and the Beytrag Mur 
Geschichte der hohem Ckemte, 1785, p. ^6, one of 
1756, Frankfurt, 8'. 

ALCHYMISTISCH Sieben-Gestirn, Das ist: Sieben schone und auserlesene 
Tractatiein, vom Stein der Weisen, Darinn der richtige Weg zu solchem 
allerhochsten Geheimniifs zu kommen, hell und klar gezeiget wird. Allen 
Liebhabem der Hoch-£dlen Wissenschaft zu Gefallen und niitzlichem 
Unterricht, aus dem Latein im Hoch-deutsche treulich iibergesetzet, und in 
Druck gefertiget 

Was Hermes und der Lullius weitlauftig haben geschrieben, 
Das lafs allhier in einer Summ zu lesen dir belieben. 
Wirst du dasselb' gebrauchen recht mit weifslichem Verstand 
So sey versichert, dafs dein Geld sehr niitzlich angewandt 
Frankfurt und Leipzig, zu finden im Krauisischen Buchladen. 1772. 

8". Imperfect; wanting all after p. 240, including the Tracts by Albertus 
Magnus and Pontanus. New title pasted over a previous one. As in the other edition 
each tract has a title-page : Hermes, p. 9 ; Lullius, p. 35. and p. 71 ; Aristotle, p. 85 ; 
Dausten, p. 119. 

ALCHYMISTISCHE (Neue) Bibliothek fiir den Naturkundiger. ^ 

See SCHRODER (FRIEDRICH JOSEPH WILHELM). 

ALCHYMISTISCHE BRIEFE. 

See MEYER OOHANN FRIEDRICH). 

ALCHYMISTISCHE Nachrichtungs Regulen. 
See LOWE (Der) defs Rothen Creutzes. 

ALCHYMY. 

See TRUE (a) Light of Alchymy. 

ALEMANNUS DE BONONIA. 
See ALAMANUS de Bononia. 

12 ALBSSIO 

ALESSIO. 

Alexii Pedemontani de Secreds Libri, mint quadam rerum varietate vdlitateq'; 
referti, longe castigatiores & ampliores qu^ priore editione. Nam sex 
prioribus, Septimus accessit ex eiusdem authoris appendice factus : omnes ex 
Italico sermone in Ladnum conuersi. lo. lacobo weckero Basiliensi Medico 
interprete. Basileae, Apud Petrum Pemam. M.D.LX. 

8^ Pp. [14, a blank] 354 [29, z blank]. 

The first edition of this translation was printed six books. The third was printed by Pema in 
at Basel, by Pema in 1559, 8vo. It contains only 1563. It contains an eighth book. 

De* Secred del Reverendo Donno Alessio Piemontese, Prima Parte. Con la 
sua tavola per trouar le ricette con ogni commodity. In Veneda, Presso 
Giorgio de' Caualli. MDLXVIII. 

8". Ff. 11^5. Tavola. &c [iil 2 blank. Seconda Parte, fL 76. Tavola [8.] 
Parte Terza, n, 48. Tavola [4.] The vignette is an elephant carrying a tower with 
armed soldiers, and the motto underneath: 'Tarde sed tuto,' the whole wiUiin an 
ornamental border. 

The first part in six books of Alexis' work was Graesse, Trisar, 1859, L p. 68) as a pseudonym for 

originally published in Italian, at Venice, in 1556 Girolamo Ruscelli, called by Graesse an Aldiemist 

(or 1555?). The second revised edition appeared This is queried in the British Museum Catalogue, 

in 1557. It is one of the most famous of the and Beckmann, who made enquiry into the subject, 

receipt-books and its popularity is shown by the was unable to come to any definite conclusion, 

number of editions in various languages through At least he admits the difficulty of determining 

which it has passed. There are on record some which of the noble Florentine family of Rusodli or 

twenty editions in Italian ; it was translated into Ruscellai might be concealed under the name. He 

French, about twenty editions ; Latin, nine editions ; also saw the difficulties involved in calling the 

English, seven or eight editions; Dutch, half-a- edition of 1557 the first, and concluded mat it 

dozen editions ; German, a dozen editions ; Polish, must have been published eailier. Brunet and 

Danish and Spanish. Graesse both speak of an edition of 1555. Venice, 

The receipts are for the most part medical and by Sigism. Bordo^a, but there are difficulties 

pharmaceutical, and there is very little which bears respecting that edition also. See Beckmann, Bef* 

direct on Alchemy or on Chemistry. tr&ge tur Geschichie dtr Erfindungen^ Z793. iii. p. 

For the origin of the work as told by Alexis 198, and i. 340, for the Ruscellai. 
himself, for the doubts connected with the date The fact is, however, as I have shown in the 

and language of the first edition, for an enumer- paper above mentioned, the ascription of the 

ation of editions in Italian and English and for work to Ruscelli, will not bear examination, for it 

an accoimt of the first three editions of Wecker's leads to two quite incompatiUe narratives of 

translation and their importance for the history of the origin of the book, and as they both neces- 

the work, see my " Notes on Books of Secrets," sarily emanate from him, if he be the author, 

in the Transactions of the Archaological Society of he must, in one or other, if not in both, have 

Glcugow, 1883, vol. 11., and 1885-80 (N.S.) vol. i., been strictly inaccurate. For my own part I have 

and paper on "The Secrets of Alexis," read to seen no evidence that Ruscelli was the author, 

the Society of Antiquaries, London. but only the assertion of Muzio, which has ben 

The name Alessio is regarded by some {je.gr, followed by later writers. 

Kunstbuch des wolerfarnen Herren Alexij Pedemontani vd mancherley 
nutzlichen vnnd bewerten Secreten oder Kiinsten, jetz neuwlich auis 
Welscher vnnd Lateinischer sprach inn Teutsch gebracht, durch Doctor 
Hanfs Jacob Wecker, Statt Artzet zu Colmar. Mit Keys. Majest gnad 
vnnd freyheit, inn sechs jaren nicht nachzutrucken. M.D.LXXiij. 

d!^, pp. [48] 463. Title red and black. 

Der Ander Theil 

8®. Pp. [7, I blank] 274 [ai, i blank]. 

An earlier edition of the German translation was published by Pema at Basel, in 157a It contains 
only the first part in six books. 

Les Secrets Du Seigneur Alexis Piemontois. Reueu, & augmente d' vne infinite 
de rares Secrets. A Rouen, Chez lean Berthelb, dans la Cour du Palais. 
M.DC.XXXVII. 

8*. Pp. 675. Table, [70, 1 blank]. Imperfect 

ALBSSIO—ALEXANDER 2% 

ALESSIO. Continued. 

Though without Christofle Landry's name, this and numerous other secrets, all these editions 

is a reprint of his translation, printed at Paris in include a translation of the Kunstboeck of Andries- 

1573. 15^; Rouen, 1614 (without Landry's name), sen {q.v\ It will be found in pp. 564-631 of the 

and again in 1691. B»ides the secrets of Alexis present edition. 

ALETHOPHILUS. 
Gliickliche Erober- und Demolirung des durch den Schall einer thonernen 
Elias-Posaune, auf Befehl eines Chymischen Pabsts angekiindigten F^efeuers 
der Scheidekunst, sampt den iibrigen auf der Insul Schmaheland aufgerichteten 
Schantzen. Oder kurtze Wiederl^ung des von einem Anonymo ohne 
sattsamen Grund und Raison herausg^ebenen schmahsiichtigen Teutschen 
F^efeuers der Scheidekunst, aufgesetzet durch Alethophilum. Leipzig, 
Bey Carl Christian Neuenhahn, Buchh. in Nordhausen. 1705. 

8®. Pp. 14a. Title red and black. Frontispiece. 

This is a reply, or a pretended reply, in the form nor convicted the Fegfeiur of untruth. Fictuld 

of a spun-out allegory, to Dr. Sbldner's Keren evidently did not like any doubt or hesitation, 

Hap^h . . . Oder Teutsckes Fegfetur der Scheide- either on the part of the Iriends or foes of the secret 

Kumst, 1702, q.v. The author's name is not given, philosophy. The book is interesting as containing 

Fictuld {Pro&ier-Siein, ii. pp. 98-29) strongly an enumeration of alchemical authors. Compare 

suspects the author's straightforwardness and Erldsung der Pkilosopkin aus dem F^g/euer der 

Uames him for having neither overturned Alchemy CAymis^en, 1701. 

[Another Copy.] Leipzig, . . . 1705. 

8**. Pp. 143. Title red and black. Wants the frontispiece. 

ALETHOPHILUS. 
Philosophische Betrachtung von Verwandlung der Metallen. 

See ROTH-SCHOLTZ (friederich), Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum, 1732, iii. 
p. 537. 

This is the seventh chslpter of " Aletophili Medi- the nature of the metals. According to Fictuld 

tationes aliquot Sacne atque Philosophicae in 8vo, (Probier-Stein, ii. p. 38) the paper is ruined by 

Francoftirtias, cIoIdCCXXVIII. A. S. R." It having them printed on it ! 
consists of 143 short dicta or propositions about 

ALETHOPHILUS. 

See HERMES, Erkantniifs der Natur, 1706. 

See HERMES, Einleitung in's hdchste Wissen : von Erkenntnifs der Natiu*, 1855. 

ALETOPHILUS (Sincerus). 
Leben des Paracelsus. 

See hbrmetisches Museum, 1782, i. p. in. 

ALEXANDER. 

Cuiusdam Epistolse, quae Aiexandri Macedonum Regis nomine circumfertur, 
interpretatio, abditam Philosophici Lapidis compositionem sapientibus 
acutissimi declarans. 

See artis auriferwE . . . Volumina, 16 10, i. p. 245. 
See geber, Summa Perfectionis, 1682, p. 254. 
See GiNiECEUM Chimicum, 1679, P* S^i* 

EpisteL 

See morgenstern (philip), Turba Philosophorum, 1613, i. p. 331 ; 1750, i. p. 402. 
See ROTH-SCHOLTZ (friederichX Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum, 1732, iii. 
p. 227. ' 

ALEXANDER^AU PUU 

ALEXANDER. ConHnued. 

Sendschieiben von der geheimen Composition des Steines der Weisen. 

See GKRSR, Chymische Schrifiten, 1751, p. 257. 

See GEBBR, Commentaria iiber Gebers Werke, 1792, p. 294. 

To Alexander the Great is ascribed the discovery 
of the tomb of Hermes and the Tabula Smaragdina 
which it contained. Aristotle is credited with 
having written an epistle to him on Alchemy {see 
ARiSTOTKLXS). Compare, Kopp, Die AUlUmie^ 

ALEXIS. 

See ALBSSio. 

ALFONSO. 

Clavis Sapientiae. 

See FiGULUS (benedictusX ThcsaurincUa, 1682, p. 322. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1660, V. p. 766. 

Alphonso or Alfonso X., El Sabio, King of 
Castile and Leon {1221-1284) "caused this book 
to be translated from the Arabic into his own 
Castilian tongue." It would appear therefore that 
Alfonso was not himself the author. The Arabic 
book is supposed to be the Clavis majoris Safien- 
tut ascribed to Artephius (^.t/.), of which there 
were numerous editions. Comparison of the two 
tracts shows that they are identical (though not 

Hendrdch, Pandtcia BroHdenburgicm, 1699, 
p. 123. 

Nicolas Antonio, Bibliotkeca Hispana Vetus, 
1788, iL p. 78. 

Gmelin, GescMuAU der Chemief 1797, i. 64. 

Schmieder, Gtxkickte der Alckemie^ 1833, p. 

141. 

ALI PILL 

See ALI PUU. 

1886, il pp. 359. 371. The Efistel was publislied 
by Joachim Tancke in his translatioo of K. Bacon's 
Medulla Alckimut, Eisleben, 1608. Kopp. /Hd. 
i>. 347. 

verbally so), however the identit)r is to be explained. 
This tract treats i*. of the Aristotelian dements 
or qualities ; 3*, of the generation of minerals, and 
3*. of the generation of plants from minerals, and 
of animals from plants. It is a short treatise on 
cosmogony, and not on transmutation. It is not 
the same as that attributed to " Alphonso, King of 
Portugall." included in /'"hfe Trtaiises tf ike 
Philosopker's Stotu^ London, 1653. 

Hoefer, Histoiredela Chimie, 1843, i. 383 ; 1866, 
i. p. 407. 

Fabricius, Bibliotkeca Latina media et injlmm 
ASlalis, 1858. i. p. 68. 

Lucien Leclerc, Histoire de la Midecine Arabe, 
1876, ii. p. 441. 

Kopp, Die Alckemie^ 1886, I p. loi. 

ALI PULL 

Centrum Naturae Concentratum. Oder : ein Tractat von dem Wiedergebohmen 
Saltz. Insgemein und eigendlich genandt : Der Weben Stein, in Arabischen 
geschrieben von Ali Puli, einem Asiatischen Mohren, darnach in Portiigisische 
Sprache durch H. L. V. A. H. Und ins Hochteutsche versetzt, und heraus- 
gegeben von Johann Otto Helbig Rittem, Chur-Fiirstl. Pfaltzischen Rath, 
Leib-Medico, und bey der Heidelbergischen Universitat Professore Publico. 
Gedruckt im Jahr 1682. 

!P' X?1 ^* '^^ ^^ P?^^ ^'^ ^^ ^^' '^^ signatures are : 4 leaves without 
E-H6 in eights, i p. in MS. This tract has been cut out of a copy of the 

8*. P 
signature, 
Quadralum Alchymisticmm^ 1705 (^.v.), and bound separately. 

U U wlmmendcd bv Fictuld {Probitr-S/ein, i. 
\i, f^t), nnd l« quoted by Gmelin {GescAickle, ii. p. 
f 4), iVfftUIrs Allpuli'ii tract, pp. 1-38, this fragment 
MfMlfiifi* ntiio Martinus de Delle, Dixatrsus de Uni- 
V0Htili (p. .iv). Discunuj Philosophicus (p. 49), an 
K«lfN4*l Irom liMi l)Ook AmorProximi (p. 58), and a 

story of a cure worked by Sebastian Siebenfineund 
(p. 61) with the narrative of his murder, in which 
Thumeysser (^.v.) is said to have had a hand. 
Ladrague, Bibliothiqme Ouvaroff, 1870, Nos. 

"93-95- 

Ofsiitrum Naturse Concentratum: or the Salt of Nature R^enerated. For the 
fiHiNt part improperly called the Philosopher's Stone. Written in Arabick 
by Alipili ft Mauritanian, born of Asiatick Parents ; Published in Low Dutch, 

AIJ PVU^ALLEGORIA 25 

AU PUU. CanHnued. 

1694, and now done into English, 1696. By a Lover of the Hermetick 
Science. 
That which hath been is named aheady, and it is known that it is Man. 

Eccles. 6. 10. 
London, Printed for J. Harris at the Harrow in Little Britain, 1696. 

12*. Pp. 90. List of books, 91-4. 

The usual form of the name is Alipuli, not AlipilL The address by the English translator to 
the reader is signed £. Brioe, not Price. 

Centrum Naturae Concentratum. Oder : ein Tractat, von dem Wiedergebohmen 
Saltz. Insgemein und eigentlich genandt: der Weisen Stein, in Arabischen 
geschrieben von Ali Puli, einem Asiatischen Mohren, damach in Portugisische 
Sprache durch H. L. V. A. H. und ins Hochteutsche iibersetzt, und hera^s- 
g^eben von Johann Otto Helbig Bittern, Churfurstl. Pfalzischen Rath, 
Leib-Medico, und bey der Heidelbergischen Universitat Professore Publico. 
Franckfiirt, bey Johann Friedrich Fleischer, 1756. 

8*. Pp. 40. 

Centrum Naturae Concentratum. * 
See QUADRATUM Alchymisticum, 1705. 

ALKUMISTICA. 

See CLAIUS (JOHANN), i594(?). 

ALLEB£ (Gerrit Arnout Nicolaas). 
Gerardi Amoldi Nicolai Alleb^ Amstelodamensis, Medicinae in Athenaeo lUustri 
Amstelodamensi Studiosi, Commentatio qua respondetur ad Quaestionem 
Chemicam, a nobilissima Facultate Disciplinarum Mathematicarum et 
Physicarum, in Academia Lugduno-Batava, A. MDCCCXXIX. Propositam : 
Instituatur aquae marinae analysis accurata, et inquiratur quaenam sint ejus 
principia perpetua, quae contra accessoria et minus constantia; tum quibus 
utrorumque lodium et Bromium sint accensenda: exponatur denique, qua 
ratione singula ilia principia separentur et depurentur. Quae Praemium 
reportavit D. viii Mensis Februarii A. MDCCCXXX. 

No place, date, printer or publisher. 
4*. Pp. 4a Folding table. Reprinted from the Anmaies of the Leyden Academy, vol. xv. 

ALLEGORIA. 

See MERLINUS. 

iUl^oriae Sapientum et Distinctiones xxix supra librum Turbae. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1660, V. p. 57. 

See MANGET (j. J.), Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, i. p. 467. 

Allegorise super librum Turbae. 

See ARTis AURiFERiE . . . Volumina, 1610, i. p. 89. 

See MORGENSTERN (PHILIP), Turba Philosophorum, 1613, i. p. loi ; 1750, i. p. 125. 

See MANGET (J. J.), Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, i. p. 494. 

^ 

26 

ALLERLE Y-^ALLGEMEINE 

ALLERLEY Particularia. 

AUerley Particularia die handtgriff zu elehmen. 

See TRISSMOSINUS (salomonX Aureum Vellus, Tractatus iii. (1598), p. 97. 

See TANCK£ OoachimX Prompttiariuin Alchymiae, 16 10, Appendix Tomi Primi, 

P- 145- 
See KROFFNETE Geheimnisse des Steins der Weisen (1708), p. 237. 

See [SCHATZ und Kunstkammer], p. 145. 

ALLGEMEIN niitzliches chemisch-physikalisches Mancherlei. Erster TheiL 
Mit Kupfern. Berlin, bei Siegismund Friedrich Hesse, in der breiten 

Strasse. 1781. 

8'. Pp. viiL 244 [for 344]. Two copper pUtes. 

Zweiter Theil, 1782. 

8®. Pp. [4] 372. Two copper plates. 

On account of the general utility of a knowledge 
of the sciences, the translator (who has conceded 
his name) thought it desirable that what had 
already been written in Latin should be rendered 
accessible to more readers by being turned into 

Part I. contains the following dissertations : 

1. Jacob Reinbold Spielmann and Johann 
Friedrich Corvinus, Geschichte der kUnsiiichen 
Luftt^, I. 

2. Torbem Bergniann, Kalte Gesundbrunnen 
durch Kunst au bereiten, p. 98. 

3. Torbem Bergmann, Warme Gesundbrunnen 
oder Bdder durch Kunst zu bereUen, p. 153. 

4. Carl Wilhelm Scheele, Widerlegung der 
Mcinung, dass das reine Wasser in Erde verwan- 
delt werden kdnne, p. 181. 

5. die Gebriider Gravenhorst, A us dem Glau- 
berschen Wundersalte wahren Schwefel hervorsu- 
bringen, ohne BeihiUfe des Feuers, p. 185. 

6. Georg Christian Ittershagen, Arsenik durch 
Kunst xu eruu^en, p. 188. 

7. Vogel, Dte Bestuschefsfhf oder Le Mottische 
Stahiiinktur zu verfertigen, p. ifj/i. 

8. Balthasar George Sage, Von verschiedenen 
Arien die metaliischen K9rper nt verkatken, von 

The contents of part II. are the following : 

1. Johann Friedrich Corvinus, Geschichte der 
hUnstlidun ^<^A xwdter Theil, p i. 

2. Torbem Bergmann, Von der Lufts&ure^ p. 6a 

3. Torbem Bergmann, Ueber die Zerlegung der 
Wdsser^ p. 157. 

4. Torbem Bergmann, Ueber die Gestalten der 
Krystallen, vonwimlich derjenigen die aus dem 
SpcLth erzeugt sind, p. 278. 

German, and he points out that his work serves as 
a contribution or supplement to the Journal of 
Crell. who had not dealt with chemical disserta- 
tions in Latin. I do not know if any more than 
the above was published. 

den Farben ihrer Closer, und von denjenigen, die 
man durch metailische Kalke im weissen durch- 
sichtigen Glase hervorbringen hann, p. 195. 

9. Wilh. Heinr. Sebastian Bucholz, ueber die 
Essignaphthe, p. 20^. 

la Carl Gottfried Hagen, Vom Braunstein, und 
desun erdigt alhalischen Theile, p. 217. 

11. Johann Christian Wiegleb, Chemische Unter- 
suchung aber den Kiesei, p. 251. 

12. Johann Beckmann, Versuche den Gebrauch 
der Fdrberrdthe beim Farben zu verbessern, p. 271. 

13. Johann Anton Scopoli, Vom Sckwefel und 
dessen Verhalten gegen die Metalle, p. ^db, 

14. Christoph Andreas Mangold. Versuche mit 
Farben, p. 319. 

15. Fnedlrich August Cartheuser. Chemische 
BeMochhtng von der Reinigung aes JliichHgen 
BentsteinsatzeSf p. 324. 

5. Johann Anton Scopoli, Metallurgische Beo- 
bachtungen, p. 310. 

6. Carl Friedrich Wenzel, Chemische Versuche^ 
die Metalle vermiitelef der Reverberaxion in ihre 
Bestandtheiie zu zerlegen, p. 321. 

7. Johann Gottlieb Georgi, Umstdndliche Nach- 
richt von den berUhmten Bestuschewschen Nerven- 
tinkturen, oder so genannten Lamottischen Tropfen^ 

p. 343* 

ALLGEMEINE (Ueber) Arzneien. 

See MAGAZIN fur die bdhere Naturwissenschaft und Chemie, 1784, i. p. 291. 

The author's initials are E. C. D.(octor ?) M.(edi- Society. The universal medicines are to be under- 
cinae?), and the tract was originally written in stood in an alchemical sense, apparently. 
Latin and addressed to a Fellow of the Rojral 

ALLGEMEINE und General Reformation der gantzen weiten Welt Beneben 
der Fama Fraternitatis, defs Loblichen Ordens des Rosencreutzes, an alle 
Gelehrte vnd Haupter Europa geschrieben. Jetzo offentlich in Druck 
verfertiget, vnd alien trewen Hertzen communiciret worden. Gedruckt zuerst 

ALLGEMEINE—ALPINUS 

37 

ALLGEMEINE und General Reformation. Continued. 

zu Cassel, durch Wilhelm Wessell, Anno M.DC.XIV. Der audsersten 
Seltenheit w^en wieder aufgelegt, und mit einem Anhange verschiedener 
dahin gehorigen Schrifften vermehret Regenspurg, Anno MDCLXXXI. 
(sic for MDCCLXXXL). 

r. Pp. [4] 19a. 

According to Kloss {BUlio^aphie der Prtimaur' 
erei, Fnmkf. 1844, p. 176) this was edited by Fri. 
Nicolai, and was printed at Berlin, 1781. The 
RtfomuUion goes from p. i to p. 68; the Fama 
from p. 69 to p. 98. The volume contains also Adam 
Haseuneyer's Ant%oort an die LobwUrdige Briider- 

ichafft der Tkeosofhen vom Rosenkreutx^ pp. 99-114 ; 
Wolgemeyntes Aufssckreiben, pp. 115-122; and 
Geistiicher Discurs und Betracktung by Doctor 
Gratianus Aroandus de Stellis. pp. 123-192, with 
the following title-pages respectively : 

Antwort: An die Lobwiirdige Brttderschafit der Theosophen vom Rosenkreutx 
N. N. von Adam Haselm^er, Archiducalem Alumnuro Notarium seu Judicem 
ordinarium CaesLreura, der 2!eiten mm Hevli|;en Creutz Ddrflein bey Hall in Tyroll 
wohnende : Ad Faniam Fratemitatis einfaltigst geantwortet. Gedruckt znerst m 
Kassel, MDCXIV. und der iiufsersten Seltenheit wegen wieder aufgelegt. Regenspurg, 
MDCLXXXI. (for MDCCLXXXL). 

Wolffeme3mtes Aufsschreiben, an die Hochwiirdigste Fralernitat des Roscncreulxes. 
Zweyer Vnbenannten Biederleuth, darinnen sie ihre Gedancken, so sie von der hbchldb- 
lichen FratemitUt haben, eroffenen, vnd um femere Communication bitten thun. 
Gedruckt nierst £U Oppenheim b^ Hartmanno Palthenio, MDCXVII. und der 
ilufsersten Seltenheit w^en wieder aufgeleget. Regenspurg, MDCCLXXXL 

Geistiicher Discurs und Betrachtun^ was flir eine Gottseligkeit vnd Art der Liebe 
erfordert wirt Das ist, wie dieselbe eigentlich beschaffen s/eyn wil, wann man die 
in aller Welt verachte, Aber von Gott werth vnd thewer gehaltene Gemdnschafft, 
Wissenschafit, Weifisheit vnd Fratemitet der rechten Rosen Creutz Brttder auff besteste 
Theil zuerreicben beeehret. Von newem ans Tagliecht ^eruckt durch Doctorem Grati- 
anum Amandum de Stellis C. & £. Archipal. ^ Pradto Domus Dei. 

I. Timoth. 4. Die Gottseligkeit ist zu alien Dingen Nutz. 

I. Johan. 3. Lasset vns nicht lieben mit Worten, noch mit der Zungen, Sondem 
mit der That und mit der Wahrheit 

Gedruckt zuerst zu Oppenheim bey Hieronymo Gallem MDCXVIII. vnd der 
ilufsersten Seltenheit wegen wieder gedruckt zu Regenspurg, MDCCLXXXL 

These are tracts belonging to the subject of 
Rosicrucianism. The ** Ai/gemeine . . . Refor- 
smaiion" was printed at Cassel, by Wilhelm 
Wessell, 1612, together with the Fama FraUr- 
nitatis, and Haselmeyer*s ResponHon in small 8vo, 
pp. 147. Another edition was printed in 1614, 
with an Epistola added, small 8vo, pp. 152. In 
1616 these were included with some other tracts 
in a small volume pp. [11] 304 \\\ The Fama 

Fratemitatis in Enelish, by Eugenius Philalethes, 
was published at London in 1652, i6mo. See 
Misstv an die Hocherlettcktete arUderschaft des 
Ordens des Goldenen und Rosenkreutus^ Leipz. 

1783. pp. 44-45- 
The ' ' Allgemeine . . . Reformation %iras 

printed in the Archiv fUr Freimdurer und Rosen- 

Areutxer, Berlin, 1783, i. p. 257, and the Fama 

Fratemitatis in the same, i. p. 308. 

ALPHIDIUS. 

Kurtz^r Bericht und parabolisch Tractatlein. 

See FiGULUS (benedictus), Thcsaurinella, 1682, p. 66. 

This author is supposed to have lived in the and another entitled Claves quinque et alia frag- 

I2th century, but nothing is known about him. menia de lapide philosophico componendo is said to 

The tract is printed along with Koffsky and R. exist in manuscript. See Kopp, Die Alchemie, 

Lully in the Trinum CAymicumt Strasburg, 1699^ 1886, ii. pp. 339, 363. 

ALPHONSUS. 

See ALFONSO. 

ALPINUS (Prosper). 

Prosperi Alpini Marosticensis Philosophi & Medici, in Gymnasio Patavino 
Medicamentorum simplicium Professoris ordinarii, Medicina -^gyptiorum. 
Accedunt huic editioni ejusdem Auctoris Libri de Balsamo & Rhapontico. 

28 ALPINUS—ALTE 

ALPINUS (Prosper). Continued. 

Ut et Jacob! Bondi Medicina Indorum. Editio nova. Lugduni Bata- 
vorum, Ex Officina Boutesteiniana, 1719. 

4®. Pp. [93, I blank] 325. Index [47]. Title red and black. 6 engravings and 
vignette. 

Prosperi Alpini De Balsamo Dialogus. In quo verissima Balsami Plantae, 
Opobalsami, Carpobalsami, & Xylobalsami cognitio, plerisque antiquorum 
atque juniorum Medicorum occulta, nunc elucescit. Lugduni Batavorum, 
Apud Vid. et FiL Com. Boutesteyn. MDCCXVIII. 

4°. Pp. [4] 3-44. Index [4]. I plate. 
De Rhapontico Disputatio . . . 171S. 

4^ Pp.2s[i]. 

Jacobi Bontii in Indiis Archiatri de Medicina Indorum Libri iv. . . . 171S. 

4*. Pp. 109 [2]. [i blank]. ^ 

This work does not refer to Chemistry, but to a section of the history of medicine. 

Prosper Alpinus was born at Marostica near became Professor of Botany and superintendent of 

Vicenza in i|53. studied medicine and graduated the Garden at Padua, wrote a nimiber of books on 

as Phil, and M. D. at Padua, 1578, went to E^gypt botany and medicine, and died at Padua, Nov. 23, 

in 1580 and remained there for three years. C5n in 1616 or 1617, after becoming quite deaf, 
his return he practised in Genoa, and in 1593 

Mercklin, Lindenius removatuSt 1686, p. 925. Kestner, Medicinisches Gr/eArten-Lexicon, 1740, 

Tomasini, Elogia virorum Uteris et sapientia p« 30* 

illustrium, 1644, p. 301. CMment, Bibliotktque Curieuse^ 1750, i. pp. 

Tomasini, Gymnast mm Patavinum, 1654, pp.97, 211-213. 

98, 139, 30^ 441. Tbcher, AllgemetMes Gelehrten -Lexicon, 1750^ i. 

Freher, Theairum virorum eruditions clarorum, col. 300. 

1688, p. 1337. Mazzuchelli, Gli Scrittori d Italia, 1753» i* i* 

Conring, In universam artem medicam intra- p. 518. 

ductio, 1687, ii. 8, p. 43; vi. 11, p. 222; x. 24, Stoever, Life of Sir C, Unnteus, 1794, p. 57. 

p. 31^ Hutchinson, oiagraphia Medica, London, 1799, 

Witte, Diarium Biographicum, 1688, Nov. 23, i. pp. 10-13. 

1616 ; Sig. N2 verso. Dezdmeris, Dictionnaire kistorique de la Midi- 

Giomale de* Letterati d Italia, 171 1, v. p. cine, 1828, i. p. 99. 

387 (short note on his life); 171 1, vi. pp. Biographic MidicaUtV^nStV^jickoMcke,!,^!^ 

262-281 (life and notice of his art of foretelling the Emil Isensee, Gesckichte der Medicin^ 1840, 

life or death of the sick) ; 1714, xvii. p. 269 (notice p. 33a 

of the plants of Egypt). Pbillippe imd Ludwig, Gesckichte der Apotheker^ 

Nicolaus Comnenus Papadopolus, Historia 1855, p. 42a 

Gymnasii Patavini, Venetiis, 1720, i. p. 13, No. i, Bayle & Thillaye, Biographic MidicaU, 1855, L 

and p. 345, No. 108. p. 318. 

Niceron, Mimoires, 1730, xi. p. 176 ; 1732, xx. Dictionnaire Encyclopidiquc des Sciences Midi- 

p. 29. cales, 1865, iii. p. 391. 

Stolle, Anleitung in die Historic der medicin- Haeser, Lehrbuch der Geschichte der Aledicin, 

ischen Gelahrheit, 1731, pp. 97, 198, 206, 207, 1881, ii. pp. 8, 135 ; 1882, iii. p. 430 (diphtheria 

579. ' in Egypt). 

ALTE TEUTSCHE Reimen von der philosophischen Materie. 

See viER AUSSERLESENE Teutsche Cbemische Biichlein, 1697, p. 209. 
Preceded by a note to the reader and Protestaiio autcris. 

There are four short poems called : I. Alchymia verses of date 1697 {ProHer-Stein, 1753, Th. ii. 

vera lapidis philosophorum ; 1 1. Eine feine Be- P* 39) is as follows : " The author is not mentioned. 

schrdbung der philosophischen Materie und ihrer The work, like its title, is pure twaddle, by 

Bereitung, ab tncerto autore; III. Tractatulus which time is recklessly wasted. They deserve to 

rhytmicus vom Stein der Weisen \ IV. has no special be burned to prevent any one doing himself farther 

titlcy but begins : Philosophia die edle Kunst, mischief by them **(!). 

Fictuld's observation on these old German 

See VIER unterschiedene Chymische Tractaticin, 1772. 

Reprint of the preceding four tracts in verse. 

See RYTHMI GermanicL 

This set of verses is a reprint of No. il of the preceding tracts. It is contained in figulus (b.) 
Pandora, 1608, p. 263. 

ALTE—ALTUS 

^9 

ALTE TEXJTSCHE Reimen. Continued. 

Alte deotsche Reimen, de prima Materia des Steins der Weisen. 

See SUCHTSN (a. vonX " Concordantia Chymica," Chymische Schriiflen, i6So^ 

p. 95. 
See KIESER (franzX Cabala Chymica, 1606, p. 192. 

This is an edition of ▼. Sochten's tract 
See HYDROPHILUS (siNCERUS), Der Chymischen iind heutigen Welt, nutzbahre 

Schatzkammer, 1756, p. 313. 
See PALSCHER und wahrer Lapis Philosophorum, 1752, p. 313. 
See GANTZE (Der) Kern der Al-Chymie, 1748. 
This is a reprint of No. iii. : ** Eine tretie Lehr will ich dir geben," of the preceding set of tracts. 

ALTE TEUTSCHE Reimen von der weissen Materia, und ihrer Zubereitung, 
zur Medicin auf Menschen und Metalle. 

See HYDROPHILUS (siNCERUS), Der Chymischen und heutigen Welt, nutzbahre 

Schatzkammer, 1736, p. 269. 
See FALSCHER und wahrer Lapis Philosophorum, 1752, p. 269. 

This is a different poem from any of the preceding. 

ALTE TEUTSCHE Reimen de Sale Centrali. 

See RUNCREL VON LOWENSTERN Qohann), V. CuHose Chymische Tractatlein, 
I72i,p. 511. 

ALTE VERSE, worinne die Bereitung des Philosophischen Steines Ratzel-weifs 
beschrieben. 
See HEUTIGE (Der) Alchimist, 1756, p. 77. 

ALTENBERG. 

Su LEONHARD von Altenberg. 

ALTERSBERGER (Primislaus), Respondens. 
See UBAVius (andreas). Prases^ 161 5. 

ALTKUMISTICA. 

See CLAius OohannX i594(?). 

ALTUS. 

Mutus Liber, in quo tamen tota Philosophia hermetica, figuris hieroglyphicis 
depingitur, ter optimo maximo Deo misericordi consecratus, solisque filiis 
artis dedicatus, authore cuius nomen est Altus. 

21. iL 82. N^: 
93. 82. 72. Neg: 
82. 81. 33. Tued. 
See MANGET (j* JOi Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, i. p. 938. 

This is a series of fifteen engraved plates, without a 
word of explanation, portrai^g the preparation of 
the philosopher's stone. The plates are partly 
srmbolical, partly pictorial, representing an 
alchemist and his wife engaged in chemical opera- 
tions» such as suUimation, distillation, the hermetic 
sealing of flasks, and the old chemical apparatus is 
voy wdl displayed. There is hardly, a due, how- 

ever, to the substances symbolized, and none 
whatever to those obtained by the processes. 

The first edition of this work appeared at La 
Rochelle in 1677, in folio. Barbier {Dictionnaire 
des Anonymes, 1824, iii. No. 20997) has Uie follow- 
ing note upon it: L'auteur anonyme, dit Arcere 
dsais son Jlistoire dt la ville de la Rochelle, 1757, 
in-^ t. 2, p. 384, pouirait 6tre Jacob Saulat, 

AL TUS—AMEL UNG 

ALTUS. Continued, 

DBS Marbz, lequel demanda un privilege 
poor oe manuscrit. 1e crois que le vrai auteur est 
ToLxl mMedn de la Rochdle, grand chimiste ; 
le Dom empnint^ Altm le dfeigne assez. Qu^rard 
\Lt$ Supaxkeries Litiirairts Divoiliex^ 1869, i. 
283^ enters this book under Altus and agrees 
with Barbier in ascribing; it to TolM. Bninet 
(i. 303) also enters it under Altus, but prefers 

ascribing it to Saulat May Altus not be meant for 
a kind ch anagram of Saulat ? 

Vogt {Catalogus . . . Ubrorum Rarioruwi^ 1747* 
p. 481). says merely that Saulat was the editor, 
kopp [DU AlckemU^ 1886, ii. 318) mentions the 
book, but says nothing about the author, and 
Lenglet-Dufresnoy before him is equally sUent (Hist, 
de la Phil. Hermitique^ 1743, iii. ppi 08, 91, 24a). 

ALVETANUS ARNSRODIUS (Corneuus). 

Epistola de conficiendo divino Elixire sive Lapide Philosophico. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1660, V. p. 815 ; reprinted in 1661, vi. p. 501. 
See SENDivoGiUS (michaelX Lumen Chymicnm Novum. Epilogus Orthelii, 
1624, p. 187. 

In the Fegfeuer der Scheide-Kunst, Amsterdam, 
1703, this writer is placed among the sophistical 
writers under the heading " Ertz-LUgen." The 
tract is dedicated to Queen Elizabeth, and is dated 
London, July 14, 1565. It appeared also in 
'* Secreta Secretorvm Raymvndi Lvllii et Hermetis 
Philosophorvm in Libros Tres divisa. Cvm Opvs- 

cvlo D. Thomse Aquinatis, de Esse ft Essentia 
mineralium, ft Comelij Aluetani Amsrodij, de 
conficiendo diuino Eludre libellus, Elicabethae 
Reginae Anglise, ftc. dicatus . . . Colonise, Apud 
G<»uinum Qiolinum. Anno M.D.LXXXXII. . . ." 
8". 

ALZE. 

De Lapide Philosophico Perbreve Opusculum, quod ab ignoto aliquo Germanico 
Philosopho, pene ante ducentos annos, conscriptum & Liber Alze nuncupatum 
fuit, nunc vero in lucem editum. 
See MUSiEUM hermeticum, 1749, P* 323- 

This book is commended by S5ldner in the Teutschts Fegfeuer der Scheide-Kunst, 1703, p. 115. 

AMANDUS DE STELLIS (Gratianus). 
Geistlicher Discurs und Betrachtung. 

See allgemeine und General Reformation, 1781, p. 123. 

AMATEUR de la Science. 

See dictionaire hermetique, 1695. 

AMATOR Viae Regiae. 

See ERORTERUNG dreyer Chymischen Fragen, 1745. 

AMELUNG (Heinrich Christian). 

Heinrich Christian Amelungs von Tannenbaum Chymische Untersuchung, von 
dem Unterscheid des Philosoph. und Mineralischen Antimonii, wie auch 
des Mercurii Philosophorum & Vulgaris. 

Aut. Nov. Lum. Chem. 
Scito pro certo, qvod haec scientia non in fortuna 
nee casuali inventione, sed in reali scientia locata est. 

D. M. k C. B. P. L. C. 
Qvse sunt in superis, haec inferioribus insunt : 

Qvod monstrat coelum, id terra freqventer habet 
Ignis, Aqva & fluitans duo sunt contraria: felix 
Talia si jungis: sit tibi scire fatis! 
Dresden, In Verlag Michael Giinthers, druckts Johann Riedel, 1690. 

84*. Pp. [19] 107 [x blank]. 

AMELUNG yi 

AMELUNG (Hkinrich Christian). Contimud. 

After a dedication and introdiiciorf diapler OSenbafamof Gdubcfaer Maiotat ; J. W. 

{sU) ; Eugenhis Philalethes -. Cjrenaeus 
from the following weU-known alchemical books Philaletha ; Thomas Kortoo : Jonann Amd ; 

there follows a series of thirtj-six short extnurts heim {sU) ; Eugenins Philalethes -. Cyrenaeus (mt) 

ind writers : Novum Lumen Chimicum ; Michad Unirersalis Sapientia ; Riplej ; Gloria Mundi. 
Maier ; Bemazdus Trerisanns ; Flamel ; Basfl There is no notice of the compiler. 
Valentin; D'Espagnet; P. J. Faber; Morienus; 

AMELUNG (Peter). 
Tractatus nobilis primus, in quo Alchimue seu Chemicae, artis andquissimae 
nobilissimae & iucundissimae, cum inventio et progressio, obscurado & 
instauratk), turn dignitas, necessitas & utilitas, demonstratur ; et simul con- 
vincitur, res naturales, ex quibus morborum remedia desumuntur, impura & 
maligna qualitate non carere, addita dictae labis rerum naturalium origine 
& causa verissima, in reverentiam, honorem & dignitatem Medidnae 
Henneticae ; omnibus studiosis, dun Ph3rsicae, ad exactam rerum cognidonem, 
tiim Medidnae, ad perfectam & tutam medicadonem udlissimus, opera, studio 
& vigilijs Petri Amdungii, StendaL March. Brandeb. Med. Facult D. I. P. 
editus. Ab uno in uno, et ad unum omnia. Lipsiae Michael Lantzenberger 
ezcudebat Anno M.D.CVII. Sumdbus lacobi Apelij Bibli<^x>lae. 

8*. Pp. aso. 

Tractatus Nobilis Secundus, omnibus Medicinae studiosis udlissimus, continens 
Apologiam, quae maculam i D. Guilhelmo Bokelio Cellensi, Stendaliae Medico, 
andquae nobili & praestand Hermedcae seu Chemicae Medicinae, temeri 
aspersam abstergit, diluit, atq; repurgat; atq; simul arguit, Qubd, dim jam 
died Bokelii, non tantiim medendi Methodus sit irradonalis atque plani 
Empirica, veriim etiam cum purganda, tiim alterantia Remedia, quibus udtur, 
sint venenata, deleteria, corrosiva, impura, &c sint maxima ex parte peregrina, 
nostris naturis adversa, corrupta, varie inter se confiisa, omittantur in illis 
Lapides, Mineralia, & Metalla, neque legidma, quae Chemica est, arte 
praeparata, nee justa, quae tamen omnium debebat esse exacdssima, observetur 
doseos rado, id4ue contra Radonem, Experientiam, atque clarissimorum 
Medicorum medendi Leges, nee possit, nee debeat ud illis ampliiis. Cum 
adnexione Responsionis specialioris; i Petro Amelungio Stendal. March. 
Brand. Med. D. I. p. In Reverendam, Honorem & Dignitatem andquae 
nobilis & praestantis Medicinae Hermedcae conscriptus. Lipsiae Abraham 

Lamberg excudebat, cum Privilegio Sacrae Cass. Majest 

Pp. [47, X blank] 356. [357 has the printer's device of Pegasus, and colophon: 
Lipsiae Abrahamus Lamberg excudebat. Sumptibus JacoM Apelii. Anno M.DC.VIIL] 

Amelung, a pb^'sician at Stendal, the inventor of medicines obtained from Vitriol, with a long title : 

certain pilh, earned back the history of Alchen^ in " Ein edler vnd nOtzlicher Hermetischer, oder 

this book to the very earUest times, it having Chymischer Discurs. In welchem zum Ersten mit 

formed part of Adam*s learning which he handed festen . . . Grdnden der warhdt erwiesen H-ird : 

on to his posterity. Williamn Bokel, another Das so wol der Spiritus als andere . . . Arcana 

Stendal physician, confuted these views, and in reply Medicinalia. die aus . . . dem Vitriol, nach Lehr 

Amelung wrote his "Apologia" and " Responsio der vralten . . . Kunst Chemiae, anbereitet, . . . 

Specialior" against Bbkel, which form the second santz heilsam, . . . zu gebrauchen sey : . . . 

Iractatuhis. The first part was printed again in Magdeburg, . . . 16x7." Small 8**. 
1618. Amelung wrote a tract on the excellence of 

Mercklin, Lindenius renavatus, 1686, p. 876. Haller, Bibliotheca Meduina Practktr, 1777, ii. 

Kestner (Medicin. GtUhrten- Lexicon^ 1740, p. p. 397. (Quotes an edition of Lips. 1618. Query. 

34) says that he studied Medicine for ten years m misprint for 1608 ?) 

German and foreign universities, graduated M. D. Beylrag zur Geschichte der kdhtm Chemie^ 1785, 

at Jena. 1604, and was an advocate of Chemistry p. 548. 

and chonical remedies. Umelin. GtxhUkU der CkemU, 1797, i. 514. 

Jdcfaer, Allgem. GeUkrten'Lex., 1750, L col. 339. 

32 

A MEL UNG'-ANCIENT 

AMELUNG (Peter). Continued. 
[Another copy of the Tractatus Primus only.] Lipsiae, M.D.CyiI. 

8*. Pp. asa 

AMOR PROXIMI, geflossen aus dem Od der gottlichen Bannherzigketty 
gescharft mit dem Wein der Weisheit, bekraftiget mit dem Salz der gottlich- 
und naturlichen Wahrheit : dem armen zwischen Jericho und Jerusalem 
verwundeten Nachsten, zum besten ans Licht gegeben. Haag Ao. 1686. 
5^ HERMETISCHES A. B. C, 1 779, "• P- 72- 

This is an excerpt only. 

See QUADRATUM Alchymisticum, 1705; alipuli, Centrum Naturae Concentratum, 
p. 58. 

An excerpt only. 

Another edition. Franckfort und Leipng, 1746, 
8*. pp. 159. The first edition mentioned is that of 
the Hague, 1678. Kopp (Die Alckemie^ 1886, iL 
^H) *<^ys the author is not named, but according to 
Ttuisckes Ftgftmr der Sckeide-Kunst, 170a, p. lao^ 
it was compiled by Georg Emestus Aurelius Reger 
von Ehrenhart out of the MS. of £. P. J. H., ue, 
fclricus Pfeffer, Itxehoensis Holsatus, who Wved. in 
Amsterdam and wrote many books which never 
were printed, but were utiliied by Reger, who alio 
complied from them ** Nosce teipum. ' 

Gottfried Arnold, however, has been credited 
with saying that the real author was Peter Moriu 

of Halle, who called himself "Christiaii Amour- 
eus " or *• Amoureux," and *' Myttkal Saltworker " 
(Saloperarius). In Arnold's account of Morits 
{/Circhen und Ketter Gesckichie^ 1741 • Tom. ii. 
pp. 434-<p7). though these names are alluded to, 
and he is said to have incorporated *'principia 
chymica" in his writings, I find no reference to 
the present work, nor is it mentioned in what he 
sa^ about Reger. {IHd. p. 428.) 

The tract is commended with the asual phrase- 
ology by Fictuld (ProHer-Steim, 1753, Th. i., p. 8), 
and with the double>edged criticism of the Beytrag, 
1785, p. 670. 

ANATOMIA et Physiognomia Simplidum, Das ist: Zween Tractat von der 
Signatura aller Erdgewachsen, was man nemh'ch aufis jhrem Geruch, Geschmack 
vnd anderer jhrer Form vnd Gestalt, vnd jhnen judidren soil Niimberg, 
Jn Verlegung Wolffgang Endters. M.DC.XLVII. 

8*. Pp. 15a [ai, I blank]. 

ANCIENNE (L*) Guerre des Chevaliers, ou Entretien de la Pierre des Philosophes 
avec rOr et le Mercure, touchant la veritable mati^e, dont ceux qui sont 
savans dans les Secrets de la Nature, peuvent faire la Pierre Philosophale, 
suivant les r^les d*une pratique convenable, & par le secours de Vulcain 
Lunatique. Compost originairement en Alleman par un tres-habile Philo- 
sophe, & traduit nouvellement du Latin en Francois 

See TRIOMPHB (Le) Hermetique, 1689, p. i. 
Set TRIOMPHB (Le) Hermetique, 1699, p^ i. 
See HKRMKTISCHK (Der) Triumph, 1707, p^ 15. 
See HRRMRTISCHB ^Der) Triumph, 1765, p. 15. 

tn th« two last the French translation and the German text are on opporile ^m^jBL. 

See RICHKUOVRO (j. M. ixX Biblioth^ue des Plulosc^ilies Chimiqucs, 1740^ iiL 
p. 181. 

This It A different translation hrom that pub. Chevaliers," in ditsks TmAmz de la PWIoaophir 
Ush«Hl uiulrr the title **Le Ttres^Ancien duel des NatureUe. 1679 (^.r.). 

ANcnKNT CrHK) War of the Knights , • , now from the Frendi rendered into 
Ki\glislu 
vNV IIKKMKTICAI. (The) Triumph, I7a> p. 1. 

ANDREAE—ANDRIESSEN 33 

ANDREAE (Johann Valbntin). 

See ROSSNCRSUTZ (christian), 1 78 1. 

ANDREAS (Hermann), Respondens. 
De Sttlphure. 

See ROLFINCR (GUERNBR), Prases. 

ANDRIESSEN (Symon). 
Een schoon Tractaet van sommighe werckingen der Alchemistische dinghen« 
om Gout, siluer te maken, ende oock van alle calcioneringhe der Planeten, 
ende andere Materien waeteren ende olyen der seluer te maeken, om wonder- 
licken daer mede te wercken. Noch een Schoon Tractaet Boecxken, In- 
holdende van alderley verwen te maecken, ende 00c hoemen alderleye Verwen 
wrijuen ende l^ghen sal, Ende is seer goedt ende profijtelijcken, voor alien 
Schrijuers Schilders, Conterfeyters, en andere Stoffierders, Oock alien anderen 
Liefhebbers der Consten. Inholdende. xxxiiij. Capittelen. Ghecopuleert 
ende toesamen ghebracht dorch Symon Andriessen, van Aemstelredam. 
Gedruckt toe Reefs, By my Derick Wijlicx van Santen. Anno 1581. 

8*. Ff. xzviij. Tafeln, ftc. ff. [4]. Black letter. 
The part correspondiog to the second in the following edition of 1600, is wanting in this copy. 

Een schoon Tractaet van sommighe werckinghen der Alchimistische dingen, 
om Gout, Silver ende oock van alle calcioneringe der Planeten, ende andere 
Materien, Waters ende Olyen der selver te maken. Item noch een Tractaet 
boecxken, inhoudende van alderley Verwen te maecken, ende oock hoemen 
alderleye Verwen wryven en leggen sal. Ende is seer goet ende profytelijcken 
voor alien Schryvers, Schilders, Conterfeyters eii andere Stoffierders. Oock 
alien Liefhebbers der Consten. 

Noch een schoon Konst-boec, seer nutUck voor alien Werclieden, als Munt- 
meesteren, Goudtwerckers, Scheyderen, Goudtsmeden, Schilderen ende 
alien Wercklieden, werckende in Stael, Yser, Koper ende alle ander Metalen. 
Item om alderhande plecken wt te doen. Om alderhande coleuren te 
verwen. Van verguldinghe ende versilveringhe. Ende van werckinge der 
Alchimistisschen dinghen, etc. Ghecopuleert ende te samen ghebracht door 
Symon Andriessen van Amstelredam. Ghedruckt t* Amstelredam, by 
Comelis Claessz. opt Water int Schrijf-boeck. Anno 1600. 

8*. First book, ff. xxvj ; Second book, ff. xxyj. Tafel, ff. [4]. Black letter. Cut 
very dose, especially at the bottom— the signatures and catchwords being almost cut 
off. 

The second book has a separate title-page, as follows : 

Const-Boeck : Nieulijck wt den Alchimistischen gront vergadert Tracterende van 
alle grontlijdcen f^fcoruyddnghe der Consten. Nutlijck voor alien Wercklieden, als 
Muntmeesteren, Goudtwerckers, Scheyderen, Goudtsmeden, SchilderC ende alien 
Wercklieden, vrerckende in Stael, Yser, Koper ende alle ander Metalen. Item om 
alderhande plecken wt te doen. Om alderhande colueren te verwen. Van vei^dinge 
ende venilveringfae. Ende van werckinghe der Alchemistisschen dingen, etc. 

GhecoUigeert ende eensdeels ghetranslateert, door Sjrmonem Andree van 
Amsterdam. 

Niemandt en haet die Konst, dan die onwetende. Ghedruckt, Anno i6oa 

These form two of a series of reodpt-books ings Phil, Soc. Glaseow, 1887-88, xix. pp. 126-159^ 

intimatdy connected with one another, of which* I and ''Supplement. 1893-94, xxv. pp. 334-330. 

have given an account in a paper entitled : " Earlv They contain very little about transmutation. The 

Treatises 00 Technological Qiemistry " {Proceed- oldest is dated 1531 and is entitled Reckier GehvttcJk 

34 

ANDRIESSEN-^ANGELUS 

ANDRIESSEN (Symon). Continued. 

d* Akhim€ii^q.v.Y An enlaived edition appeared 
in iS37f wfaicb «iras repubUibed in 1687 with the 
title KuHst'BUchUin {q,v,\. Portions were incor- 
poraiod in the work, compiled or edited by Petrus 
iCertflefimacher in 1539 : Alckitma, Wie man alle 
farhen , , . maeJun sol. See the reprint of 1613 
imder alchucia. The Dutch translation, divided 
uao six tracts, was first published, so fiar as I know, 
lo 1549. It afrees cloielj with the German of 
1537 or 1687, certain sections being omitted and 
some new matter being added. The 1581 edition 
is in two puts ; one entitled Coiisi-Boeck contains 
tJbe first nve tracts, the other contains the sixth 

ANEAU (Barth^lemy). 

tract of the 1549 edition, and a new set of reoeipu 
about colours, etc, and is called Bern Sckitm 
Tractaei. The 1600 editkm is merdy a reprint of 
that of 1581. Practkally, therefore, the Datch 
version of 1581 and 1600 agrees with the Gcmuui 
of 1537 (or 1687), but has a tract bo odours, etc., 
besides. A French translation of AndiiefKn^ 
work is contained in Landry's edition of Afaiiio's 
Secrets. See ALKSSIO. 

In the 1549 edition, as also in the i^i and 1600 
editions, the author, translator or compiler b called 
S^mon Andree, not Andriessen. I have not met 
with any notice of him. 

See GESNER (CONRAD), Tr6sor des remedes secretz, 1559. 

Aneau «iras bom at Bourges early in the sixteenth 
oentury. He acquired such a reputation as a pro- 
ficient in Latin and Greek and in Poetry, that the 
Chair of Rhetoric in the newly-founded College at 
Lyons was offered to him. tie accepted it, and 
far upwards of thirty years— to the end of his life— 
actea as professor. In 154a he was made Principal, 
but he was accused of taking advantage of the 
position to prof)agate among the students heretical 
opinion! which it is said he acquired from his first 
schoolmaster. It led to much dissatisfaction, and 
was ultimately the occasion of his death. On the 
festival of the Holy Sacrament, ai June, 1565, 

Ui BibliotMgues Franarises de La Croix du 
Maine et de Du Verdier, ed. Juvigny : 177a. T. i. p. 
78, La Croix's notice : he odls him Botnelemy ; 

while the processk>n was passing the College^ a 
stone was thrown from one of its windows at the 
priest who carried the emblems. The people 
thereupon broke into the College and murdered 
Aneau, who was looked upon as the instigator, if not 
the actual perpetrator of the assault. 

Aneau wrote a number of books on poetnr, and 
some translations : More's " Utopia," Aldat's 
"Emblems,*' etc., besides the present work of 
Gesner's. It is difficult to see what induced him 
to translate it, as he had not apparently any 
chemical, botanical or medical training, and no 
practical acquaintance with pharmacy. 

177a, iii. pp. ao8-aia, Du Verdiei's notice : be caUs 
him Barthelemi. 
Niceron, Mimoires^ '733* xxii. pp, 170-177. 

ANFANG. 

See WESENTLICHBN (Von den) Anfangen der Natur. 

ANFANG der Werck der Philosophen. 

See NEANDER (theophilus), Heptas Alchymica, 1621, p. 366. 

ANGELICO (Michelangelo). 

Elogia in Theriacam et Mithridaticam Antidotum a Michaele Angelo Angelico 
Pharmacopaeo Vicentino ad Diui Michaelis Symbolum pristino candori 
reititutam. Vicentise, apud Dominicum Amadeum. MDCXVIII. 

Superiorum permissu. 

4*. Pp. 32. 

complimentary verses to Angelico by a number discovered and compounded. This is printed 
of physicians for the successful medicines he had along with his translation of Galen's *' Antidotary." 

See GALENUS (CLAUDIUS), 1613. 

ANGELU8 (Daniel). 

1), O. M. A. Catalogus Medicamentorum Spagyricorum Pharmacopoea 
SpagyricflB, Illuitrifsimi Domini, Domini Comids Odoardi De Pepulis, in 
({uo de eorum Virtute, Usii & Dosi agitur, cui adjuncta est Appendix de 
( *onipofltione Medicamentorum generis cujuscunq'; ad morbos diversos Authore 
Daniele Angelo, Medicin: D. Dantisci, Typis Simonis Reinigeri. Sumptibus 
CatiNiriH Wiechtlcri Bibliopote Francofurt M.DCLXVII. 

6*. Pp. [10] 189 ; Index [7] ; Appendix, 65 ; Index and ErraU [5]. 

For otiiar writings by this physician, see Merck- lac; Haller. BMiotkeca Baiastica, 1771, i. 5^; 
lin, /.indenittt renmmiui, 1686. p. 150; Manget. BUi, Ckirurgica, 1774. i. 4^5; BihL Medictma 
Bikli0ike(a MfH/iantm Midieerum^ 1731, Lip. Pnutiem, 1779, iii. aax. 

ANGELUS-^ ANONYM us 35 

ANGELUS Doce Mihi lus. 

See SENDIVOGIUS (michael). 

ANGLICUS (RiCHARDUs). 

See RICHARDUS ANGLICUS. 

ANIMADVERSIONES Chemicae quatuor, quibus ars ircpi x^^uwi universa tam 
practice quto theories enudatur. Incerto Authore. 

See THEATRUM CHBMICUM, 1660, V. p. 82 1. 

As Augurello and Paraodsus are both quoted and reference is made to Ficinus, this tract cannot 
be earlier than the sixteenth century. 

ANIMAX,! (De) rationali; vom vemiinfitigen Thiere und seiner herrlichen Artzney. 
See YIER Chymische Tractatlein, 1677, p. 52. 

ANNOTATIONES ex variis auctoribus. 

See DORN (gerardX Trevisanus de Chyinico Miraculo, 1600, p. 127. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, L p. 776. 

See MANGET 0* J'X Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, ii. p. 352. 

ANNOTATIONS upon the most material passages where the French Translation 
of the Ancient War of the Knights, differs from the German Original. 
See HERMETICAL (Thc) Triumph, 1723, p. 21 {fns\ 

ANNULUS PLATONIS oder physikalisch-chymische Erklarung der Natur nach 
ihrer Enstehung, Erhaltung und Zerstohrung von einer Gesellschaft achter 
Naturforscher aufs neue verbessert und mit vielen wichtigen Anmerkungen 
herausg^eben. Berlin und Leipzig, bei George Jacob Decker, 1781. 

8*. Pp. xxxii. 551. Woodcut of the A urea CaUna, Engraved folding plate of 
symbols. 

This is an edition of the A urea Catena Hameri In the preface of the present work the authorship 

revised bjr a Rosicrucian Society who claimed to be is ascribed to Herwerd von Forchenbrunn, teacher 

the true brethren of the author and the only Ipgal of medicine at Cromau and ' Landphysicus ' in 

heirs of the book. The revision was required on Moravia, and a member of the secret society, in 

account of a spurious third part which had been which he was called Homerus. See Kopp, Die 

tacked to the work. See Aurea Catena Homeri Alchemie, 1886, ii. pp. 36, 208 (on the Aurea 

under kirchwegek (Anton Joseph). Catena Homeri), 250, 252 ff, 277. 

ANOMOEUS (Johannes Joachimus). Respondent, 

See HORST (gregorius), Problematum Medicorum . . . decades priores quinque, 
1608. 

ANONYMUS EREMITA. 

See SPLENDOR Balis & Solis, 1677. 

ANONYMUS VON FELDTAW. 
See CROLLius (oswaldus). 

ANONYMUS CALLUS. 

See ESPAGNET Oean d'). 

ANONYMUS PHILALETHA. 
Commentarius in Epistolam Georgii Riplasi. 

See STARKEY (georgeX Kern der Alchymie, 1685. 

36 ANONYMUS—ANTIDOTARIUM 

ANONYMUS VON SCHWARTZFUS. 
See SCHWARTZFUS (Anonymus von). 

ANSPRACHE an die wahren WeisheitsKinder. 
See V. (j, R.X M.D., Giildene Rose, No. i. 

ANTHONY (Francis). 

Francisci Antonii Philosophi et Medici Londinensis Panacea Aurea sive 
Tractatus duo de ipsius Auro Potabili, nunc primum in Germania ex 
Londinensi exemplari excusi, Opeii M. B. F. B. 

Jacobus Sereniss. Rex Angl. 
Numquid ^o Antonium puniam, quia Deus illi benedixit 

Henr. Nollius. 
Medicinam Universalem negant multi, sed ij plerumq; id faciunt, qui 

ipsam assequi non valent 
Hamburgi Ex Bibliopolio Frobeniano. Anno cIdIdCXIIX. 

8*. Pp. [i6] aos [3 blank], 

Francis Anthony, or Anthonie, i550-i6a3,practised lished in i6ix. Thomas Rawlin wrote an Admomiiio 

mediciDe without alicense, advocated chemical medi* de Pstudockymicis, seu Alphaietarium Pkihsopki- 

cines, and sold his Panacea Aurea. He got into cum in quo refuiatur aurum potaHJe Antomij, x6ii, 

trouble with the College of Physicians, and wrote 8^; and John Cotta wrote another: Coita contra An- 

Medicinct Ckymicct et veri fotabilis Auri assertio, ionium: or An A nt- Antony: or An Ant-Apolm^ 

Cambridge, 1610. In x6i6 ne wrote The Apologie, . . . Oxford, 1623, small 4**. Schmieder (GecrAinliSe 

or Drfenee o/a Verity heretofore jbvblisked concern- der Aichemie, 1832, p. 309) quotes another tract l^ 

ing a Medicine ccdled Aurum Potabile, 4**, and in him : De Lapide Philosophorum et Lapide Rekts 

Latin as well. These are the two tracts whi<± are contained in Joh. Rhenanus' Harmania imper- 

contained in the present reprint. A criticism by scrutahilis, Frankfurt, 1625, 8^, Dec. ii. No. 3. 
Matthew Cjwynne, Aurum non Aurum, was pub- 

Borel, Bibliotheca Chimica, 1654, pp. 25, 195. Dezeimeris, Dictionnaire Historique de la Mide- 

Die Edelfi^bome Junker Alchymia, 1730, p. 376. cine, 1828, i^. 141. 

Biomfhta Britanntca, 1747, i. pp. 169-172, or Bayle ft Tnillaye, Biographic Midtcak, 1855, i. 

In Kippfs* edition, 1778, i. pp. 221-225. p. ^11. 
Hutcninson. Biof^raphia Xfedica, 1799, i* P- ^3- Dictionary 0/ National Biography, 1885, ii. p. 47. 

Biographic Midicale, Panckoucke(i820-25), p. 264. 

Aurum-Potabile, or his receit, showing his way and method how he made and 
prepared that most excellent medicine for the body of man. 

See COLLRCTANBA CHYMICA, 1684, P- 71* 

ANTIDOTARIO Romano Latino, et Volgare Tradotto da Hippolito Cesarelli 
Romano. Con Taggionta dell' elettione de semplici, e prattica delle Com- 
position!. £ di due Trattati, vno della Teriaca Romana, e ragione de suoi 
ingredienti : \ altro della Teriaca Egittia. Aggiontoui in questa vltima 
impressionc le Auertenze, & Osseruationi appartenenti alia Compositione de 
Medicam6ti del Sig. Lodovico Settala Medico Coll^. Protofisico Gener. dello 
Stato di Milano, e publ profess, della Scienza Morale, e Polit nelle Scuole 
Canob. In Milano, Per Gio. Battista Biddli, M.DC.XXXV- Con lie de Sup. 

4*. Pp. [19, I blank] 939. Woodcut border round the title. 

ANTIDOTARIVM Bononiense Novissimum Sapiendssimis, ac lUustrissimis DD. 
Felsinete Patrice Patribus a latrophysico Eiusdem Collegio Dicatum. 
Bononiie Ex Typographia Manolessia. M.DC.LXXIV. Cum Privil^js, & 
Superiorum permissu. 

4"*. Pp. [8] 408. \\h\ Vignette of the Arms of Bologna. 

The Antidotario IMt^exe, 1574, was due to Stona delta Letteratura Italiana, 1810, T. vii. 
the care and energy of Aldrovnndl. IHrabotchi, l^rt ii. p. 619. 

AtiTtE^T—AIfZBlGENDB 37 

ANTIENT (The) War of the Knights. . . . Translated from the German Original 
Ste HERMETICAL (The) Triumph, 1723, p. i {fits), 

'ANTIKPESIZ ad Responsum Florentini de Valentia: Das ist: Kurtze Duplic 
vnnd Defension, auff die Widerantwort, Replic, oder Confutation der Missiven 
von F. G. Menapio, vnlangst an die Rosencreutzer abgangen: Gestellt ru 
seiner verwarung von gedachtem F. G. wider besagten Florentinum, vnd 
guter meynung ans Liecht gebeiL 

Felix ille animi, divisq; simillimus ipsis, 

Quern non mendaci resplendens gloria fuco 

SolUcitaty non fastosi mala gaudia luxus: 

Sed tacitos sinit ire dies, & paupere cultu 

Exigit innocuae tranquilla silentia vitae. 

MDCXIIX. 

8°. Pp. [31, 1 blank]. 

F. G. Menapitis is said to be a pseudonym of Florentinus de Valentia seems to have been 

Franc. Gentdorp, or Gomez, who called himself Valentin .A.ndreae himself, but accordinsr to other 

also Joh. Procopius, Georg Odaxus, and possibly authorities his real name was Daniel M5gling, of 

Irenicus Agnostus. These are items in the Tubingen. 
Rosicrudao mystification which is very subtle. 

ANTIMONIO (Von dem) Philosophorum, non Vulgi. 

See DARIOT (CLAUDE), Die gulden Arch, Schatz vnd Kunstkammer, 1614, P^ut iL 
p. 279. 

Set EROFFNETE GEHEIMNISSE dcs Steins der Weisen (1708), p. 570. 
ANTONIE (Francis). 

See ANTHONY (FRANCIS). 

ANTONIUS DE ABBATIA. 

See ABBATIA (ANTONIUS DE). 

ANWEISUNG eines Adepti hermetische Schriften niitzlich zu lesen. Mit 
Anmerkungen begleitet und zum Druck befbrdert von einem wahren 
Freymaurer. Leipzig, bey Christian Gottlob Hilscher, 1782. 

8®. Pp. [i-ii] la-iao. 

This book seems to be written for giving sound advice, but it might possibly be read as a covert 
satire on alchemical literature. 

ANZEIGENDE und warhafftig bezeugende Ampel oder Lampe des Lebens und 
Todes, auch aller schweren Zufalle im Menschlichen Leibe, Das ist : Lebens- 
Ampel, oder Leuchte, welche, so lange deijenige Mensch, vor den sie 
zubereitet, und auff eine gar sonderbare geheime Weise angeziindet worden, 
stetig ohn Unterlafs fortbrennet ; und wann derselbe Mensch stirbt, zugleich 
mit ihme auslischt, und gantzlich verlischt, inzwischen aber auch zugleich 
alle schwere Affecten und gefahrliche Zufalle (im Menschen) gantz richtig 
anzeigt und zuerkennen giebet. Auff Verlag Veit Jacob Treschers, Buch- 
handL in Breislau. Jena, druckts Joh. Nisius, 1682. 

8<^. Pp. 94. 

38 ANZEIGENDE—AQUILA 

ANZEIGENDE und warhafitig bezeugende Ampel. Continued, 

This professes to be an account of a lamp fed with See my "Notes on . . . Books of Secrets," Part 
a liquor made from human blood, which bums as IV.^ iS^Sf Trans. Arcfueol. Sac. Glasgow, New 
long as the person lives from whom the blood is Series, 1890, L p. 352. It may be doubted, how- 
taken, and goes out at his death, besides indicating ever, if the wnter here meant his words to be 
all the important events of his life. References to taken in the literal sense, 
such a contrivance are met with more than once. 

APELLES post tabulam observans maculas in Sole Sine Veste : ob J. C. O. die 
wahre AufTschliessung dels Goldes und dem Rubinfluis gnugsam erwiesen? 
Gedruckt zu Colin, Anno 1684. 

16*. Pp. [a] 8a. 

J. C. O. is Johann Christian Orschall (^.v.) who tract worthy of a place in his collection of treatises 

wrote Soi situ Veste, in which he describes the on Glass-making, as it is a piece of mere vitupera- 

preparation of ruby glass. This is an anonymous tion (VArt de Verrerie^ Pans, 1753. 4**, p. 529). 
criticism of his views. Holbach did not think this 

APERTA Area Arcani Artificiosissimi. 
See GRASSHOFF Qohann). 

APHORISMES Chymiques. 

See CLiii [Cent cinquante trois] aphorismes chymiques, 1692. 

APHORISMI Basiliani. 

See HAPELIUS (n. n.), Cheiragogia Heliana, 1612, p. 213. 

APOCALYPSE Philosophique et Hermetique. 
See D * * *, Le Grand Livre de la Nature. 

APOLLINARIS (Quintus). 

Kurtzes Hand-Biichlein, vnd Experiment, vieler Artzneyen, durch den gantzen 
Corper defs Menschens, von dem Haupt bifs auff die Fiifs. Sampt lebendiger 
Abcontrafactur etlicher der fiimembsten vnd gebrauchlichsten Krautter, vnd 
daraufs gebrandten vnd distillierten Wassern, Krafft vnd Tugend. Durch 
den hochgelehrten Q. ApoUinarem selbs erfahren vnd bewehrt. Jetzund von 
newem mit vielen Krauttern vnd Experimenten gemehret vnd gebessert 
Sampt dem Experimentbiichlein von Zwantzig Pestilentz Wurtzlen defe 
Hochgelehrten Tarquinii Ocyori. Cum gratid & privil^o Imperiali. 
Strafeburg, Verlegt vnd gedruckt bey Josias Stadel. Anno M.DC.LIX. 

8^. Ff. [a] ccxij [xvii, i blank]. Title red and black. Numerous woodcuts of 
plants. 

There is a Latin version, "now first translated Mercklin, Lindtnius Renavatus, 1686, p. 928. 
from the German," by R. Godenius, Francof. 1610^ Hendreich, Pandecta BrandenburgUee^ 1699^ p. 
8^. 224. 

APPENDIX ad Faciliorem Radicis Chymiae intellectum. 

See RADIX CHIMIiE, 1680. 

AQUARIUM Sapientum. 

See SIEBMACHER (jO^ANN AMBROSIUS)^ 

AQUILA (H.), Thuringus. 

Doctrina elegans de opere philosophico, ex libro ms. 
See TRACTATUS duo Chemici, 1^47, p. 28. 

See GINiECEUM CHIMICUM^ 1679, P* S^O- 

AQUtLA— ARCANUM 5^ 

AQUILA (H.)> Thurii^s. Continued. 
fine sonderbare Lehre aus einem geschriebenen Buch. 
Su TAEDA Trifida Chimica, 1674, p. 297. 

AQUINAS (Thomas). 

Su THOMAS AQUINAS. 

ARBORE (De) Sokri instructio. 

See INSTRUCTIO de Arbore solari. 

For bods entitled * Arbor/ see Kopp, Dit Akkemit, 1886, ii. p. 378. 

ARCA Arcanorum arcani. 

See APERTA ARCA, 

ARCANI Revelator. 

See MAGNI PHILOSOPHORUM Arcani Revelator. 

ARCANUM Hermedcse Philosophiae Opus. 

See ESPAGNET (JEAN D*). 

ARCANUM de multiplicatione philosophica in qualitate. 

See JOANNES DE PADUA. 

ARCANUM Philosophise Hermeticae Anonymi Galli (i.e. Jean d'Espagnet). 
See HANNEMANN (jOHANN ludwig), Pharus ad Ophir Auriferum, 1714. 

This is a commentary upon Espagnet's work. 

ARCANUM Philosophicum. 
Tractatus de Secretissimo Antiquorum Philosophorum Arcano. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, iv. p. 554. 

This contains extracts from : i. Rogerius Baco ; Richardus .\ng1icus ; 7. Calid Rex ; 8. Avicenna ; 
2. Rajmundus Lullius ; 3. Rosarius Amoldi ; 4. 9. Bemhardus Comes ; 10. Turba Philosophorum. 
Clamor {sic) Buccinae; 5. Rosarius Minor; 6. 

ARCANUM a quodam Philosopho Anonymo deductum. 

See MAGNI PHILOSOPHORUM Arcani Revelator, 1688, p. 483. 
See ROTH-SCHOLTZ (f.), Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum, 1732, iii. p. 728. 
This is included in the Atuiotationes appended to Antonius de Abbatia's EpisioUt. 

ARCANUM Philosophorum. 

See MAGNI PHILOSOPHORUM Arcani Revelator. 

ARCANUM Philosophorum, ut ex Satumo facias aurum perfectum. 
See GRATAROLO (g.), Verae alchemiae . . . doctrina, 1561, ii. p. 25a 

ARCANUM Philosophorum, per virum doctissimum olim versu hexametro 
conscriptum. 
See BARNAUD (NICOLAS), Triga Chemica, 1599, p. [5]. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, "i- P» 783. 

This is followed by a commentary on it by Nicolas Bamaud. 

40 ARCET—ARIA 

ARCET (Jean d'). 
M^moire sur Taction d'un Feu egal, violent, et continue pendant plusieurs jours 
sur un grand nombre de Terres, de Pierres & de Chaux M^talliques essay^ 
pour la plupart telles qu'elles sortent du sein de la Terre. Lu k rAcad^mie 
Royale des Sciences les i6 & 28 Mai 1766. Par M. D'Arcet, Docteur R^^t 
de la Faculty de M^decine de Paris. A Paris, Chez P. G. Cavdier, 
Libraire, rue Saint Jacques, au Lys d'or. M.DCC.LXVI. Avec Approbation 
& permission. 

8*. Pp. 123. 

Second M^moire sur Taction d'un Feu dgal, ... Lu ... les 7 & 11 Mai 1768. 
A Paris, . . . M.DCC.LXXI. . . . 

8*. Pp. yj, 17a 

Discours en forme de dissertation sur Tetat actuel des Montagnes des Pyrenees, 
et sur les causes de leur d^adation : Prononc^ par M. D'Arcet, Docteur- 
R^ent de la Faculty de M^decine de Paris, Lecteur & Professeur Royal, pour 
son Installation & TInauguration de la Chaire de Chiroie au College de France, 
le II D^cembre 1775. On y a joint des Experiences & des Observations sur 
les variations du Barometre, sur le Thermometre, & autres morceaux de 
Physique, d'Histoire naturelle & de Chimie, avec une note de M. le Mounier, 
sur TAiguille aimant^e. A Paris, Chez P. G. Cavelier, Libraire, rue Saint- 
Jacques, au Lys d*or. M.DCC.LXXVL Avec Approbation & Privil^e 
du RoL 

8*. Pp. [4] 3-134 [i. I blank]. 

Jean Darcet or d'Aroet (1735-1801) was professor France. He was Inspector of the Nfint and of the 

at the College of France, Recent of the Faculty of Gobelins, and was a distinguished technical 

Medicine, and afterwards director at the Sivres chemist, 
works. He was the first who made porcelain in 

Gmelin, GtschickU der Cktmie, 1798-99. ii. 528 ; edition, but Darcet in the second, and gives his 

iii. passim. birth-year as 1727. 

M. J. J. Dic^, PrMs historique sur la vie et les BiographU Universelle 185a, x. p. 199^ 

iravaux de /. dArcet, 180a. Hoefer, Nouvelle Biographie GitUrale 1855, 

Hoefer, Histoirt de la Chimie, 1843, "• P* 4^ ! ^' i<^ 

1869, ii. p. 53a He calls him d'Arcet in the first Cuvier, Recueil des iloges historiqueSt z86i, tome 

i. p. 99. 

ARDUINO (Giovanni). 

Saromlung einiger mineralogisch- chymisch- metallurgisch- und oryktographischer 
Abhandlungen, des Herm Johann Arduino, und einiger Freunde desselbea 
Aus dem Italianischen iibersetzt, durch A. C. v. F. C. S. B. C R. Dresden, 
1778. In der Waltherischen Hofbuchhandlung. 

8^. Pp. [11] 6-369. Vignette and a folding plates. 

Arduino (1714-1795) was professor of Mineralogy of him in Emilio de Tipaldo's Bicgrafia degli 
and MetallurgioU Chemistry at Venice, and wrote Italiani illustri melle sdenae, UUere ed arti del 
aeverml books on these subjects. There is a notice secolo, xviil, Vinegia, voL viL (1840), pp. 72-86. 

AREND (Johann). 

See ARNDT (johann). 

ARGENTO (Dk) in aurum verso Historiola antiqua. 

Set THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, iii. p. 170. 

ARIA von der Weisen Stein. 

See HKRMKTISCHKS A B. C, 1779, p. 217. 

ARIADNE^ARISTOTELES 

41 

ARIADNB. 

.S^ riLKT (Le) d'Ariadne. 

See Kopp, DU Akhemie^ 1886. ii. p. 369- 

ARIOPONUS CEPHALUS. 

5^ CEPHALUS (ARIOPONUS). 

ARIOSTUS (Franciscus). 
Francisci Ariosd de Oleo Montis Zibinii seu Petroleo Agri Mutinensis Libellus 
e Manuscriptis membranis editus ab Olig. Jacobaeo. Hafniae, Literis Reg. 
Maj. & Univ. Typogr. Joh. Phil. Bockenhoffer, 1690. 

8^. Pp. 79 [i blank]. Index [2] [a blank]. 

Fnmciian Ariostus was a phjsician and professor 
of Civfl Law at Fenam. He died in 149a. Oligerus 
JaoobBBUS. the editor, addmses his work to the 
amoQS Ma^;liabecchi, in a dedication (pp. 3-8) full 
of admiration for his vast erudition and for his 
kindness to himself personally. Then follows 
(ppi 9-ia) a pre£Aoe to the r»der giving some 
acoooot of this mineral oil, or naphtha, found at 
Mens Zibius, G^bius, or Zilius, in the Modenese 
territoij, comparing it with naphtha from India and 
iodicBting certain ^lalo^^es with amber. There is 
next a short biographical sketch— in Italian — of 
Ariostos, written bv Antonio Libanori and communi- 
cated by Magliabecchi (pp. 13-17). The tract 
itsdf (pp. 18-318) gives an account of the oil, and 

then (pp. ^76) a description of cures effected bv 
the use of it. The work concludes (pp. 77-79) with 
a presentation letter from Ariostus to Duke Borsius 
dated December, 146a, and the Duke's reply, after 
which is the Index. This is an interesting tract 

Hendreich's entry {Pandecta Brandtnburgictt^ 
1699, p. 269) is curious : Ariostus Francisc. 
Peregnnus, Medicus Italus. De Petrelaeo vel 
Petraeoleo tract, quem inter rariora Musasi sui 
servasse Joan: RkodiuMy 8c luci destinAsse, nisi 
mors intemipisset, testatur Velxhius de vend 
Medinensiy p. 323. Apparently he did not know 
that the book had been printed. In the British 
Museum Catalogue other editions are mentioned. 

ARISLEUS. 
iEnigmata ex Visione Arislei. 

See ARTis AURiFERiE . . . Volumina, 1610, i. p. 94. 
See MORGENSTERN (PHILIP), Turba Philosophorum, 161 3, i. p. 107. 
See MORGENSTERN (PHILIP), Turba Philosophorum, 1750, i. p. 133. 
See MANGET 0* J*)* Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, i. p. 495. 

See TURBA PHILOSOPHORUM. 

Arisleus or Arislaeus is known in connection with the "Turba Philosophorum," of which he has been 
called the author. 

Heodreich, Pandecia Brandenburgica, 1699, Ladrague, Bibliothique Ouvaroff, 1870, Nos. 

p. 370. 710-715. This author seems to identify Arisleus 

Schmieder, Gtschickttder AlchemUt 1833, p. 124. and Aristeus. 

Hoefier, Histoirt de la Chimie^ 1842, 1. p. 291 ; Kopp, Die Alckemie, 1886, i. 96 ; ii. 323, 351. 
1866, U p. 311, on the Turba. 

ARISTEUS. 
Verba Aristei Patris ad Filium. 

See LIMOJON DE SAINT DISDIER (ALEXANDRE TOUSSAINT DE). 

Kopp {Die AUhemie, 1886, i. p. 96) says that he whose name is erroneously written sometimes (as 
has been unable to find any particulars about this by Manget) Aristeus. 
aothor, but that he is different from Arisleus {q,v. ) 

ARISTOBULUS. 

See TRAUME des griechischen Philosophen Aristobiilus, 1762. 

ARISTOTELES. 
Tractatulus de Practica lapidis Philosophici. 
See ALCHiMiA (de) opuscula, 1550, i. f. 162. 
See ARTIS AURiFERiG . . . Volumina, 1610, i. p. 232. 
See MANGET (j. },)y Bibliotheca Chemica Ciiriosa, 1702, i. p. 659. 

42 

ARISTOTELES—ARLOMVS 

ARISTOTELES. Continued. 

Bin Tractatlein von der Practica des Philosophischen Steins. 

See MORGENSTERN (PHILIP), Turba Philosophorum, 1613, i. p. 31a 
See MORGENSTERN (philipX Turba Philosophorum^ 1750, L p. 377. 
See ARNALDUS de Villa Nova, Chymische Schriflten, 1748, p. 337. 

This is a Uanslation of the preceding. 

De Perfecto Magisterio. 

See GRATAROLO (g.X Verx alchemias . . . doctrina^ 1561, ii. p. 188. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, iii. p. 76.. 

See MANGET ( J. J-X Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, i. p. 638. 

Tractatus ad Alexandrum Magnum, de Lapide philosophico olim conscriptus 
et k quodam Christiano Philosopho collectus. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1660, V. p. 787. 

See FIGULUS (benedictusX Thesaurinella, 1682, p. 356. 

Tractat an Alexandrum Magnum vom Stein der Weisen vor Zeiten geschrieben, 
und von einem Christlichen philosopho zusammen gelesen. 
See ALCHVMISTISCHES Sieben-Gcstim, 1675, P* ^ \ ^ITh P* ^5- 
This is a translation of the preceding. See Alexander. 

Aus Aristotelis Schreiben an Alexandrum. 
See HERMETISCHES A. B. C, 1778, i. p. 316. 

Schmieder [Gtschichte der Alckemit, 1882, p. 
120) has confused these writings. Under the title, 
Tractatus de l^ide philosophico^ he has put the 
" Tractatus or Tractatulus de practica lapidis," in 
ih^Artis Aurifene . , . vol. i., and the'* Tractatus 
ad Alexandrum Magnum de lapide" in the Theat- 
rum Chemicum, vol. v., as if they were the same. 
If he had compared them he would have seen that 
they are quite different. As a consequence of this 
mistake he makes another, by omitting the reprint 
in the Artis Auri/era . . . voL L. of the tract 
which he calls: "Practica lapidis philosophici," 
and quoting only the De Alchimia Opuscula^ and 
Manget's Bibliotheca, 

The author of these writings was posterior to the 
Greek philosopher, and is now spoken of as the 
pseudo-Aristotle. Whether one parson wrote them 
all, whether his name may have been really Aristotle 
(as Schmieder thinks is possible), or whether he 
asstmied the name to ^ive his works more weight, 
it is not easy to decide. Borrichius [Conspectus 
Scriptorum Chemicorum, 1697, p. 14) says that he 
was not the Stagirite, but one who learned from 
the Arabic philosophers and who calls himself a 

pupil of Avicenna, and adds that if the name of 
Alexander the Great is mentioned in his writings, 
it must be ascribed to those who copied his vroiks, 
or to the want of accuracy of the time. He 
certainly quotes Calid, Rasis, and the Turb€L, 

Fabricius {Bibliotheca GrigCA, Hambinsi, 1724, 
voU xii. p. 709) follows up Borrichius and gives a 
list of bis works similar to the above, but containing 
references to other editions of the Ars amrifera and 
The€Ltrum, 

Schmieder, founding upon Borrichius, gives a 
plausible hypothesis of the writer's origin. He 
quotes no authority, however, and after the inac- 
curacy he has displayed in so definite a matter as 
the arranging of the reprints of the works, one 
would certainly not accept any view advanced on 
Schmieder's bare statemenL 

See, for a discussion on the pseudo-Aristotle, 
Kopp's Beitrdge tur Geschichte der Chemie (1869), 
P* 358, note 45, and Hoefer (Histoire de la Ckimie, 
1866. I. p. 547) who, however, advances a diffnent 
explanauon of the allusions to Alexander. See 
alio Kopp, Die Alchemie^ 1886^ ii. p. 219, etc 

ARLENSIS DE SCUDALUPIS. 

See PETRUS Arlensis de Scudalupis. 

ARLOMUS. 
Liber Arlomi. 

See KiESER (FRANZ), Cabala Chymica, 1606, p. 206. 

See SUCHTEN (a. vonX " Concordantia Chymica," Chymische Schrifften, 1680, 
p. 106. 

Kieiei's U an editioa of v. Sucbtm*! tncu 

ARNALDUS 43 

ARNALDUS DE VILLANOVA. 

Amaldi de Villanova, Philosophi, Medici et Chyroici Excellentissimi, omnia, 
quae exstant, Opera Chymica : videlicet, Thesaurus Thesaurorum : seu 
Rosarius Philosophorum : ac omnium secretorum maximum secretum. Lumen 
Nouum. Flos Florum, & Speculum Alchimiae. Quibus nimirum artis huius 
mysteria etiam secretissima, luculenter enodantur, & qu^m maxima licet, & 
potest fieri perspicuitate explicantur. Nunc primum ita coniunctim edita, 
opera & impensis, Hieronymi Megiseri, Co. P. Caesarei, & Archidd. Austrise 
Historiographa Francofurti, Typis loachimi Bratheringij. Anno 1603. 

8°. Pp. 12a 

T\\Q Speculum has a separate title-page and pagination as follows : 

Amaldi de Villanoua, Medici et Philosophi Eccellentissimi, Speculum 
Alchimiae: quo videlicet Artis Chimicae Mysteria et iam secretissima, 
luculenter enodantur, &, quim maxima licet & potest fieri, perspicuitate 
e3cplicantur : Liber, nunc primum in lucem editus, opera & impensis 
Hieronymi Megiseri, Co. P. Caesarij, & Archidd. Austriae Historiographi. 
Francofurti, £x Officina Typographica Matthiae Beckeri. M.DCIIL 

8*. Pp. So. 

There is an edition qH the Speculum Alchimia, 1603 is an entirely new edition, not the 1602 
Francoforti, ex officina Typographica h%redum edition with a new title-page. 
Romani Beati, i6oa, 8'', pp. 76 [4 blank]. The 

[Another copy of the Speculum only.] Francofurti, M.DCIIL 

8*. Pp. 80. 

Des Weltberiihmten und hocherfahrnen Philosophi und Medici Amaldi de 
Villa Nova Chymische SchrifTten, Darinnen begriffen 
I. Rosarius Philosophorum. 
11. Novum Lumen. 

III. Flos Florum. 

IV. Spiegel der Alchimie. 

V. Eine Epistel an den Neapolitanischen Konig. 

Worbey zugleich mit angefiiget. 
VI. Der Prophetin Marien, Moysis Sch wester Practica. 
VII. Ein Buch von der Alchimie Geheimnissen, durch Calid den Sohn 

Jazichii zusammen getragen. 
VIII. Ein Buch des Philosophi Kallid Rachaidibi, von den dreyen Worten. 
IX. Ein Tractatlein Aristotelis von der Practica des Philosophischen 

Steins. 
X, Der Tractat, so der Weiber-Arbeit und der Kinder Spiel genennet 
wird. 
Allen Liebhabem der wahren Alchimie zu Gefallen aus dem Latein mit 
hochstem Fleifs in Teutscher Sprache iibersetzet, Durch lohannem Hoppo- 
damum. Verl^ts, Johann Paul Kraufs, Kayser- und Konigl. Privilegirter 
Niederlags-Verwandter, Buchhandler in Wienn. 1748. 

8^. Pp. [16] 411. [5 pp. of advertisements]. Tide red and black. 

44 ARNALDUS 

ARNALDUS DE VILLANOVA. Continued. 
Ars Major. 

See HBLLWiG (CHRISTOPH vonX Fasciculus, 1719, p. 254. 

Carmen. 

See THEATRtTM CHEMICUM, 1659, iv. p. 542. 

See MANGET 0* J-X Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, i. p. 698. 

Collectanea. 

See LACINIUS OanusX Pretiosa Margarita Novella, 1546, f. 136. 

See LACINIUS (jANUS), Pretiosa Margarita, oder Neuerfiindene k6stliche Perle, 

1714, p. 331- 

Taken chiefly from the Rosarius. 

De Decoctione Lapidis Philosophorum, et de r^mine ignis in diversis gradibus 
decoctionum ad coagulationem lapidis. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, iii. p. 1 37. 

[Eine Epistel Arnaldi de Villa Nova wegen der Alchimie, an den Neapolitanischen 
Konig geschrieben.] s. L & a. 

8*. Pp. 353-960. 

A fragment frxHn an edition of Amaldus' works. It agrees with the corresponding pages in the 
edition of 1748. 

Epistola Nova super Alchymiam, ad Regem Neapolitanum. 

See GRATAROLO (g.X Verse Alchemiae . . . Doctrina, 1561, ii. p. 6$. 
See ARTis AURlFERiE . . . Volumina, 16 10, ii. p. 323. 
See ULSTADIUS (PHILIPPUSX Coelum Philosophorum, 1630, p. 339. 
See MANGET (j. J.X Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, L p. 683. 

Epistola al Re di NapolL 

See NAZAR! (GIO. battista), Delia Tramutatione Metallica Sogni tre, 1599^ 
p. 229. 

Epistel iiber die Alchimiam geschrieben an den Newstetter Konig. 
See MORGENSTERN (philipX Turba Philosophorum, 1613, \L p. 422. 
See MORGENSTERN (philipX Turba Philosophorum, 1750, ii. p. 511. 

Erklarung Qber den Commentarium HortulanL 

See HERMETISCHER ROSENKRANTZ, l6$9, p. 81. 
See HERMETISCHER ROSENILRANTZ, 1682, p. 81. 

See ROTH-SCHOLTZ (FRIEDRICH), Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum, 173^ ii- p. 535- 

Flos florum. 

See GRATAROLO (cX Vcrae Alchemist . . . Doctrina, 1561, ii. p. 67. 

See ARTIS AURIFER^ . . . Volumina, 1610, ii. p. 311. 

See ULSTADIUS (PHiUPPUsX Coelum Philosophorum, 1630, p. 31 1. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, iii. p. 1 28. 

See MANGET (J. J.X Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, i. p. 679. 

This tmct goes by several other names. Grata- Thesaurus omnium incomparabflis et Margarita : in 

rtjk> and the Tkemtrum stvie it : Liber P^erfecti quo reperiiur \w composatio Ehxir. tAm ad albnm 

Magislerii. ' • ^ " ^ " :..-u^ --. ca^ 

the others 

Magistcrii. qui Lumen Lununum nuncupatur. In quAm ad rubeum componendum ndelkxt ad Solem 

the others the title is elaborated : Indpit PeHectum et Lunam sub compoidio dedaratum. All agree 

Magisterium. el Gaudium magistri Aniakti de in calling it Flos flomm. Tlie two fiolkming are 

Villa nova, transmissum per eum ad in^rtum translatwMW : 
Regem Aragonum. quod quidem ml Flos flcirun. 

ARNALDUS 45 

ARNALDUS DE VILLANOVA. ConHnued. 
Libro chiamato Magisterio et Allegrezza, alP Inclito Re d' Aragona. II quale 
e il Fiore de Fiori, & Tesoro piii di tutti incomparabile, & Margarita. . . . 
See NAZARI (gio. batt.X Delia Tramiitatione Metallica Sogni tre, 1 599, p. 220. 

Das vollkommene Meisterstuck vnnd Frewde . . . welches zwar ein Blum aller 
Blumen, ein vnvergleichlicher Schatz vnnd Berle. . . . 
See MORGENSTERN (PHILIP), Turba Philosophorum, 1613, ii. p. 407. 
See MORGENSTERN (PHILIP), Turba Philosophorum, 1750, ii. p. 493. 

Lapide (De) Philosophorum. 

See ULSTADIUS (PHiLiPPUsX Coclum Philosophorum, 1630, p. 327. 

Novum Lumen. 

See GRATAROLO (g.), Verae Alchemiae . . . Doctrina, 1561, ii. p. 60. 
See ARTIS AURiFERiE . . . Volumina, 16 10, ii. p. 298. 
See ULSTADIUS (PHILIPPUS), Coelum Philosophorum, 1630, p. 296. 
See MANGET (j. J.), Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, i. p. 676. 

Newes Liecht 

See MORGENSTERN (PHlLiP), Turba Philosophorum, 161 3, ii. p. 393. 
See MORGENSTERN (PHILIP), Turba Philosophorum, 1750, ii. p. 476. 

Novo Lume. 

See NAZARI (gio. batt.X Delia Tramutatione Metallica Sogni tre, 1599, p. 211. 

Practica ad quendam Papam, ex Libro dicto, Breuiarius Librorum Alchymise. 
See GRATAROLO (g.), Verae Alchymiae . . . Doctrina, 1561, ii. p. 73. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, iii. p. 1 37. 

See MANGET (j. J.), Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, i. p. 684. 

Qusestiones de Arte Transmutationis. 

See ARTIS AURIFERiE . . . Volumina, 1610, iii. p. 151. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, iv. p. 544. 

See MANGET 0- J*)> Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, i. p. 698. 

Rosarius Philosophorum. 

See GRATAROLO (G.), Verae Alchymiae . . . Doctrina, 1561, ii. p. 35. 
See ARTIS AURlFERiE . . . Volumina, 1610, ii. p. 253. 
See ULSTADIUS (PHILIPPUS), Coelum Philosophorum, 1630, p. 231. 
See MANGET 0- J-)> Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, i. p. 662. 

Rosario de Filosofi. 

See NAZARI (gio. batt.), Delia Tramutatione Metallica Sogni tre, 1599, p. 169. 

Rosarium der Philosophorum. 

See MORGENSTERN (PHILIP), Turba Philosophorum, 1613, ii. p. 369. 
See MORGENSTERN (PHILIP), Turba Philosophorum, 1750, ii. p. 447. 

This treatise is also caUed : Thesaurus Thesaur- of the second book is omitted except the last 

onim, omnium secretorum maximum Secretum, de chapter. He gives the contents of the other 

verissima compositione naturalis Philosophise, qua chapters and explains in a note that as these had 

omne diminutum reducetur ad Solificum et Luni- been already translated and published separately 

ficum venun. he might be spared the trouble of translating them 

In Morgenstem's German translation the whole again. 

46 

ARN ALDUS 

ARNALDUS DE VILLANOVA. ConHnued. 
Seroita Semitse. 

See SEMITA SEMITiC 

This has been ascribed to Amaldus, but is by Manget, Biblioiheca Ckemua Curiosa, 1702, i. 
doubtful. It is included among Amaldus' works pp. 702-704. 

Speculum Alchymise. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, iv. p. 515. 

See MANGET (j* JOi Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, i. p. 687. 
Testamentum. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, i. p. 28 ; 1660, V. p. 803. 

Testamentum. 

See DORN (gerhardX Trevisanus de Chymico Miraculo, 1600, p. 126. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, i. p. 753. 

See MANGET (j. J.), Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1 702, i. p. 389 ; ii. p. 352. 

This is a different ^-ersion firom the preceding, ing to Manget. In his reprint, L p. 389^ however, 
made by Andreas Ortelius from the French, accord- the second paragraph is omitted. 

Testamentum Novissimum. 

See GKRHARDUS (jOANNEsX Commentatio perbrevis et conspicua in Apertorium 
Raimundi LuIIii, . . . 164 1, p. 81. 
This is a third \*crsion different from both the preceding, valYi a Commentary. 

Testamentum Novum. 

See ARTlS AURlFER.E . . . Voltmiina, i6iOi, iii. p. 175. 

See MANGET (J. J.), Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, i. p. 704. 

This is a different tract from the preceding. 

Amaldus hdng one of the great authorities 
among the alchemists, his name is mentioned in all 
the histories. Special reference, ho^-ever, may be 
made to the monograph on him by Haunfau in 
Hishnrt Liuemirt J4 )a Fmnce, 1881, T. xx%-iii. 
ppk a6-ia6k Besides the editions and reprints 
enumerated in the present Catalogue, the Alchemi- 
cal tmcts are contained also in .^naldus' collected 
works along xnith his medical writings, as in the 
edition of Lyons, 153a. fbliov to which is prefixed 
the account of his lih^ br Symphorianus Campi^us. 
By some writers .Amaldus is called Bachuone. ^ 

'There is some doubt as to which of the \*illa 
Nova's he bekxiged to, but the balance of e%idence 
is in fa>i>Mir of his having been a Spanianl He 
tix'ed in the thirteenth century, devoted himself to 
Vlieniistiy and Medicine, and afterwards to Fliysks ; 

CasittUanus, VUm Uimsirimm MMK*ttnam^ Ant> 
wwp., 1*1^, pk 1«L 

Imperiahs^ Jmurum kish^-mm et fAtsu-vm^ 
Venec, p^ 8s with a nortrait 

Ksievmn de ViUa« Im $*tMs Jt Jjmt/nmci/es Je 
tmNtHtmiM^ Rurp^M« i^. 

IVfl Ki\\ /^uyikmfKwirM at^jOkvirwai Uhri S€x^ 
iMf^l iMa, (v ^ <« A ; 3{< A. K 

\ an der UndttL /V ^«>l/<«:j mmA^y; !$hi Jm^ 

Riwi, i«ixv<«f^ii rAMM.>ff. 1654, p. fta. 

Cktmiit. i«c4s p|x i«tk t^^. 
Xkffvlditt^ iJmdmimt rrv^miW. it^JtK p|x oo-^ik 
CVmruye, /« » « . Aftrm UttiMtm imt^wtm^fw^ 

l«i;^ Ilk acv |w MA ; and A«t iii Mk JU |v t<^ 
FWIier« tkMirmm i'ifw^m ^^rmdiwimtk\^r^ir%m^ 

iciML yv i*»^ l\vtniitl« pi 54. 

then took up the study of Arabic philosophy, went 
to Italy and returned to Spain, anid was in fiivour 
with James II., King of Arragon. Ultimately he 
went to Paris and acquired a great reputatioQ by 
his attainments. He fell kuterfy into disrepute 
by his astrological predictioos, provoked the eooesi- 
astics and the Uni^i-ersity, and departed from Paris 
and went under the piotectioo of Frederick of 
Sicily. Summoned to attend Pope dement V., 
>hiK>'was ill, he embarked to ^ to Avignoo, hot he 
died in the ship, and was buned at Genoa, in 1313. 

llie Inqxiisitxxi in 1317 condemned fifteen errors 
of which he was galtw. 

His collected works were published at Lyons, 
1504. 1^33 ; Basel. 1585 ; Lyons, 1686, all in foha 
.A list o2^ them is given by h^ceroo. 

Borrkhios^ i 

Paschius, Ar AVcrr /mv^aUit . • 
1700. pc ^aS — refers to wliat he did for . 

Trmiss^j fk^ftmardtr SckaJe-MCmmst, rjot^ p. 56k. 

fN>pe>Bloont. Cemsmn aithvrwam mmtkirmm, 
Cieneva. 1710. p. xa7. 

1. de Haitae. Biigrmpki* dTArmmmd St FUU- 
Mnr, Aii» 1719. i^— OBder the pseodonym Pierre 
Icoeph. 

VL MX ax|, 25i>2. 356^. 

babrKnB^^AiMwiAav LsHmm sMfitf tt tm^wur 
^fiJths^ t$^ i. p^ ra^. 

/ V BM^:friiii^ /«)«ef8v' AlckwwaU^ 1730^ pi «S3. 

*73»» Pl^ »*3ft. 117. lia. !«. 

SioiK msmuJirT (mA^iX i7a6bP^5fis 

ARNALDUS—ARNAULD 47 

ARNALDUS DE VILLANOVA. Continued. 

Manget, BibHoikeca Scriftorum Mtdicomm^ Decdmeris, DicHonnairt HisUmqut de la 

mij II. iu p. 531. MideciTU^ 1838, L p. 178. 

NioeroD, Mimoires^ "^7^* T. xxxiv. pp. 8a-io6. Schmieder, GesckickU der AlckemU, 1832, p. 146. 

Kestner, Afedicinisckis GeleMfien-Lexican, 1740, Gr&sse, Ltferdr^escAicA/e, Dresden, 1843, iL a, 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Nist. de la PhilosophU Hoefer, Histoire de la Ckimie, 1842, i. pp. 384- 

Herm/ti^Me, 1742, i. p. 138 ; ill pp. 322-326, etc 394 ; 1866, L 40^418. 

Vogt, Catalcgus . . . Ubrorum Hariamm, Kopp, Geschickte der Ckemit, 1843, i. p. 65. el 

1747, p. 711. passim. 

Freytag, Analecta Utteraria, 1750^ p. 1054. Bayle & Thillaye, BiographU Midicale^ 1855, 

Cbau£fepi^, Nouveau Dictionnatre kistorique^ {. p. 12^. 

AmsL 1750^ i. p. 480 (letter A). Uicttonnaire Encychfidi^ue des ScitHces Midi- 

Fictuld, ProHer-Slein, 1753, L p. 159. cales, 1867, vi. p. 146, with a long list of his 

Eloy, Did, Nisi, de la Midecine, iJSS* ^* P* 9^ works. 

Astruc, Mhnoires pour servir d fkisloire ae la Figuier, Vie des Savanis illustres du Moyen Age^ 

FaculU de Midedne de Monlpelier^ 1767. 1867, pp. 237-254. 

Portal, Hisl, de rAnatomie el de la Ckirurgie, Henschel, Janus, ii. pp. 526-546. 

1770^ i. p. ao6. Ladrague, Bibl. Chevaroff; Sciences SecrileSt 

Wiegira^ Hislorisch^kritiscke Untemuhung der Moscou, 1870^ No. 762. 

Akkemie, 1777, p. 222. He says he did nothing Haeser, Geschickte der Medicin^ 1875, i. p. 718. 

great and wrote only one book on Alchemy. This Kopp, Beilrage *ur Geschickte der Ckemte, 1875, 

is not qtiite accurate. iii. p. loa 

Beytrag %ur Geschickte der kdkem Ckemie, 1785, Lucien Leclerc, Hisioire de la Midedne Arahe^ 

pp. X09-119, 586, 1594. Paris, 1876, ii. p. 468. 

Nicolas Antonio, Bibliotkeca Hispana Vefus, Billings, Index-Catalcgue^ 1880, i. p. 560; 2nd 

Matriti, 1788, ii. p. 112, No. 31. Series, 1896, i. p. 666. 

Kartum verteidigel die Alckemie, 1789, p. loi. Histoire LitUraire de la France, i88z, t. xxviii. 

Hutchinson, Biograpkia Afedica, 1799, i. p. 27. pp. 26-126. Elaborate article by Haurteu. 

Miirr, LitterarisckeNackrichiennu der Geschickte Kopp, Die AUkemiCj 1886, i. 19, el passim, 

des so genannten Goldmackens, 1805, p. x6. Marc Haven, La vie el les amvres de Maitre 

Barrett, Uves of Ike Adepts, 1815, p. 23. Amaud de Villeneuve, Paris, 1896, 4°. 

Sprengel, Gesckickte der Artneykunde, 1823, ii. Emmanuel Lalande, Amaud de Villeneuve, sa 

pp. 618-625. vie el ses ceuvres, Paris, 1896, 4^. These two 

Biograpkie Midicale, Paris, Panckoucke, i. pp. works are identical I 

3Sa-353- 

ARNAUD (E. R.). 
Introduction a la Chymie, ou a la vraye Physique. Ou le Lecteur trewera la 
definition de toutes les Operations de la Chymie; la fa^on de les faire, 
& des Exemples en suitte tres-rares sur chaque Operation; & le tout dans 
vn tres-bel ordre. Par E. R. Amaud, Docteur en Medecine. A Lyon, 
Chez Claude Prost, en rue Merciere, i TOccasion. M.DC.L. Avec 
Permission. 

8*. Pp. [40] 112. 

ARNAULD (Pierre). 

Trois Traictez de la Philosophie Naturelle, non encore imprimez. Scavoir, le 
secret livre du tres-ancien philosophe Artephius, tralctant de I'art occulte & 
transmutation metallique, Latin Fran9ois. Plus les Figures Hierogliphiques 
de Nicolas Flamel, ainsi qu'il les a mises en la quatriesme arche qu'il a bastie 
au Cimetiere des Innocens It Paris, entrant par la grande porte de la rue 
S. Denys, & prenant la main droite, auec I'explication d'icelles par iceluy 
Flamel. Ensemble le vray liure du docte S3mesius AbM Grec, tird de la 
Bibliotheque de I'Empereur sur le mesme sujet, le tout traduict par P. Arnauld, 
sieur de la Cheuallerie Poicteuin. 

Si te fata vocant, alias non viribus vllis, 
Neque etiam duro poteris conuellere ferro. — Virgil. 
A Paris, Chez la vefue M. Guillemot & S. Thiboust, au Palais, en la galerie 
des prisonniers^ M.DCXn. Auec Priuilege du Roy. 

48 

ARNA ULD^ARNOLPHINUS 

ARNAULD (P.). ConHnued. 

A°. Pp. 98 (wanting 87-8). One larse woodcut on a folding sheet Seven wood- 
cuts in the text ; there ought to be eight, out one is on p. 87, which is wanting. 

As I have pointed out elsewhere (" On the First 
Editions of the Chemical Writings of Democritus 
and Synesius," in Procetdings Phil. Soc. Glasgcw^ 
1885, vol. xvi. p. 45), there are at least two issues of 
this book dated 161 2, printed by the same people, 
but differing typographically throughout The 
present copy contains title, privilege, prefiace, 
pp. 1-5 ; the secret book of Artephius, pp. 6-43, 
44 blank ; fly-title to Flamel, address to the reader, 
and text of Flamel, pp. 45-88 (wanting 87-88) ; fly- 
title and text of Syxiesius, pp. 89-98. At the foot 
of p. 98 is the colophon : Acheu^ d'imprimer aux 
friais & despens du Sieur | Traducteur, ce 6. Auril, 

1612. I 

The other issue is as follows: Title, privilege, 
pre&ce, pp. 1-5; Artephius, pp. 6-45, 46 blank; 
fly-title, to the reader, and text of Flamel, pp. 47- 

ce6. Auril, x6i2. | 

In x6^9 the surplus copies of the 98-pagie editiOQ 
were reissued, with the date, 1612, changed in the 
colophon to 16C9. This is not a neirratioii, but 
the old one witn an altered date. 

In 1683 the surplus copies of the 1659 altered 
edition were issued with an entirdy new prefiice 
and with a supplement, pp. 99-xoiS, oootaining 
Ripley's **Tlrait^ du Mercure . . .** The 1659 
co^hon is at the foot of p. 98 unaltered. 

This book is printed on ii^erior paper and most 
of the copies I have examined have oeen imperfect, 
damaged, stained or dirty. The lai^ge folding plate 
of Flamel's hierogljrphics is usually awanting. 

ARNDT (JOHANN). 

Judicium uber die vier Figuren des grossen Amphitheatri Henrici Khunraths. 
See CHYMISCHES Lust-Gaitlein, 1747, p. 87. 

This author's name is spelt in various ways: 
Amd. Amdt, Arend. Gmelin {fieschickU der 
Ckemie, 1797. i. p. $55) »y» ^^^^ 1^« Boehme, he 
was not an alchemist but only used the lan^^uage 
and imagery of the alchemists for his m^ticism. 
He is warmly praised fay Fictuld {Proher-Stein, 
1753, u p. 14) for his piety. fix)m which one gathers 
that Fictuld attached a religious meaning to trans- 
mutation and the philosopher's stone. 

He was bom at Ballenstiidt in 1555, and died at 

Johann Valentin Andreae, Mytkohgia Christiana^ 

1619, p. 5. 
Fjiefaer, Theatrum Virorum eruditione clarorum, 

1688. p. 409, pL aa 

Witte, Diarium Bicgrapkicum^ 1688, May 11, 
i6ai ; Sg. K 1 redo. 

H. C. Amdung, Chymische Untersuckung^ 1690 
{a.v.), has some extracts from Amdt 

Hendreidi. Paiuiecta BrandenburgioB, 1699, p. 

288. 

Temtsckes Fegfemer der Scheide-Kunst, 170a, 

p. 95. 
Niceron, M^wunres^ 1745, xliii. p. 239. 
jttcher, Allgewuimes Gelekrten-Lextcon^ 1750^ i. 

cot 552. 
Fictuld, ProHer-Stein, 1753, 1. p. 13. 

Zelle in 1621. He was a distinguished theologian 
and preacher, and wrote a number of wofka, com- 
mentaries, sermons, etc. As to whether he was a 
Rosicmcian or not, and stUfUed Aldiemy and 
Magic, see Gottfried Arnold's Kirtken. tmd Ketwer 
Historie, Schauffhausen, 1742, passim; Buddeus, 
Qtutstio an Akhemista tint in RepubHca toUr- 
andi^ 1702, p. 44 ; and in Roth-Scfaoltz, Deutsckes 
Theatrum Chemicum, 1728, i. p. 70. 

Beytrag %ur Geschichte der hdhem Ckewde^ 1765, 
pp. 296, 496. 

Andreas Gottfried Schmidt. AnkalfsckisSckrift' 
steller Lexicon, Berabuig, 1830, pp. 9-11. At the 
end he gives a list of authorities. 

F. Amdt, Johan Amdi^ tin Hograpkiscker Ver- 
suck, Berlin, 1838, 8"*, writh a portrait 

Knight, The English CyclopekUa, 1856, i. col. 

349« 

"Ladrague, Biblioihique Ouvanff^ 1870, Na 977, 

quotes a reprint along with Khunrath's De igne 

Magorum . . . secreto externa et visiHli, Ldpng, 

1783, 8*. 

Kopp. Die Alckemie, 1886, il 375. 

UonXiCBiner^Diepkilosofkiscke JVeitansckam- 
ung der Rrformatiomteit^ and ed. 1887, i. p. 999. 

ARNOLD (GuiDO Ferdinand). 
Guidon. Ferdinand. Arnolds, M.D. & Ph.Pr. Kurtzer Bericht und Versichening 
von des Herrn Ignatii von Orthomont, NobiL & Chym. celeb. Suev. neu- 
erfundenen Astro Solis und Junonischen Saltz. Als einer wohl-meridrten 
Universal-Artzney, zur Erhaltung der Gesundheit und Verlangerung des 
Menschlichen I^bens. Sammt dem vollkommenen Procds und deren 
Prjcparation. Dresden, Bey Gottfried Leschen, 17 19. Andere Auflage. 

8'. Pp. 39 [x blank]. 

OmHin {Gffichichtf der Ckemie, 1798, ii. p. saa). •^'^^''^'^'f/^^^'^ltL^/^^ 
f|iM« thr flril rdilioii, 1718, and iinother work : auf AfeialUscke und FegetoMhscke Art, 1723, 8". 

fffr f/ff/(f/fhrt-gf/fhrte AUhymist, darinnen vorge- 

AKNOIJ'MINUS (Francihcus), Lucensis. 
'I'w'tMtug do lAt)ido Dhviico. scu Summa Rosarii Philos<q)horum. 

ARNOLP MINUS— ARTE 49 

ARNOLPHINUS (Franciscus), Lucensis. Continued. 

See HELLWIG (CHRISTOPH VON), Fasciculus, 1719, p. 195. 

This person is quoted by Nazari {Delia TramU' the author of an Epitome^ probably the same work 
taiioMe Metatlica Sogni tre, 1599, p. 136), (q,v.) as as the Summa, 

ARNSRODIUS. 

See ALVETANUS ARNSRODIUS (CORNELIUS). 

AROMATICUM Philosophonim Thesaurus. 
See EXPOSITIO . . . Lapidis Adrop. 

AROS. 

See MARIA. 

ARS AURIFERA. 

See ARTis Auriferae, quam Chemiam vocant, Volumina duo, 16 10. 

ARS CHEMICA, quod sit licita recte exercentibus, probationes doctissimonim 
lurisconsultorum. Septem Tractatus seu Capitula Hermetis Trismegisti, 
aurei. Eiusdem Tabula Smaragdina, in ipsius sepulchro inuenta, cum coro- 
mento Hortulani Philosophi. Studium Consilii Coniugij de massa Solis & 
Lunse. Opvscula, studiosis ards secretissimas, ut summ^ necessaria, ita lectu 
iucundissima. Antehac typis non excusa. 

8*. Pp. 263. Alter the title comes a vindication of Alchemy, pp. 3-6 ; Hermes, 

gp. 7-31 ; Tabula Smaragdina, pp. 32-3 ; Hortulanus. pp. 33-47 ; Studium Consilii 
onjugii ... pp. 48-263. Colophon: Argentorati excudebat Samuel Emmel. Anno 
M.D.LXVI. 

See ARTE (De) Chemica Libri. 
ARSENICO (De) Tractatus. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, iii. p. 1 77. 

ARSONCINUS (Thomas). 
De Jure Alchimiae responsum. 

See DiSQUisiTio de Helia Artium, 1606, sig. H7 recto. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, iv. p. 248. 

This tract seems to have escaped the notice of Kopp, when he discussed the legality of Alchemy 
{,Die Alckemie^ 1886, i. pp. 147-156). 

ARTE (De) Chemica Libri Duo, quibus omnia, quse ad lapidis siue pulueris 
philosophici compositionem usumque spectant, breuiter & aperte traduntur. 
Quorum prior De veritate & antiquitate artis Chemicae & pulueris siue 
medicinse Philosophorum vel auri potabilis Testimonia & Theoremata ex 
varijs autoribus per Robertum Vallensem selecta. Posterior. loan. Chrysippi 
Faniani de arte metallicae metamorphoseos liber singularis. Item de lure 
Artis Alchemise veterum auctorum & praesertim lurisconsulctorum iudicia 
& responsa ad quaestionem An Alchemia sit ars legitima. Ob argumenti, 
tractationis methodiq'; similitudinem coniunctim in gratiam Philochemistarum 
editi. Montisbeligardi, Apud lacobiim Foillet, M.DC.IL 

8°. Pp. 51 [i blank]; [6] 67 [i blank], but as 40-41 are duplicated in the second 
tract the numb>er of pages is actually 69. 

Vallensis* history occupies the first 51 {Dages, in 1601 ; there is no difference between them but 
Fanianus' treatise the following part. the date. Scf vallensis and fanianus. 

An edition of this book was published by Foillet 

D 

50 ARTE-^ARTEPHIUS 

ARTE (De) Chymica Liber incerti autoris. 

See ARTis AURIFER^ . . . Volumina, 1610, i. p. 369. 
The lamc title appears in the contents of the second volume, but there is no corresponding treatise. 

See MORGKNSTERN (PHILIP), Turba Philosophorum, 161 3, i. p. 504. 
See MORGKNSTERN (PHILIP), Turba Philosophorum, 1750, i. p. 612. 

Volume ii. has the title in the contents, but wants the treatise. 

ARTEPHIUS. 

[Artephii geheimer Haupt-Schliissel, oder Artephii des uhralten Philosophi von 
der gehcimen Kunst und Stein der Weisen Geheimes Buch.] 

No place, date, or printer. 

8^ Pp. 107-151, wanting pp. 149-50. Title in MS. 

This is Artephius* tract taken out of the edition jamin Roth-Scholtz. and printed by Joh. Paul 
of Ripley's Cneniical Works, translated by Ren- Krauss, Vienna, 1756 (^.r.). 

Clavis Sapientiae, das ist: ein edles und kostliches Biichlein vom Stein der 
Weisen, welcher genannt wird : der Schlussel der Grofsem Weisheit ; Vor 
etlichen hundert Jahren in Lateinischer Sprache von dem uralten Mago und 
Philosopho Artephio beschrieben, ietzt ins Deutsche versetzt. Leipzig 

und Hof, Verlegts Johann (Jottlieb Vierling, 1736. 

8*. Ppw 45 [i blank J. The last blank leaf is wanting. 

[Another copy.] Leipzig und Hof, 1736. 

8*. Pp. 45 [3 blank]. 

Clavis Sapiential das ist: ein edles und kostliches Biichlein vom Stein der 
Weisen, welcher genannt wird : der Schliissel der Grossem Weisheit ; vor 
etlichen hundert Jahren in lateinischer Sprache von dem uralten Mago und 
Philosopho Artephio beschrieben, jetzt ins Teutsche versetzt Leipzig 

und Hof, Verlegts Johann Gottlieb Vierling, 1748. 

8^. Pp^ 44 [4 blank]. 
This is a simple reprint in the same style as the 1736 editioii. 

(tehein)es Huch von der geheimen Kunst und Stein der Weisen. 

.SVy IIKKMRTISCHRR ROSKNKRANTZ, 1659, p. 7 ; 1682, p, 7. 
.SVy HKRMKTISCHK (Der) PHlU>SOPHl-S, 1709. p. 122. 

U> Secrt»t U\Tc. 

Stt AKNAIM.I) O'A Tn>is Traictez, 1612, p. 6. 

l.ilH»r Sci^rrtuH, the Si^n^t Hook. 

.V#v SALMON vNvniiAM\ MciHcina Practica, 1691, p. 453 Aw. 
\#v KUMlKlun'Ri; vl. M. i\\ l^ihlioth^quc des Philosophes Chimiques, 1740, ii. 
\\ 11 J. 

(Iavih Maiorisi SapicntiK". 

.NVv rUKATKVM CMKMK VM« 165^ iv, ^V 19S, 

aVv MANiiKr vJ> tA Uihliothe\A Chemica Curiosa, i?oa, i. p^ 503. 

ARTEPHIUS—ARTIS 

5' 

ARTEPHIUS. CanHnued. 
Geheimer Haupt-Schliissel. 

See RIPLEY (GEORGE), Chymische Schriflftcn, 1756, p. 105. 

Artq;>hius has been always regarded by the 
aldiemists as one of the masters. By virtue of the 
eludr he is reputed to have lived a thousand and 
twenty-five jrears, a story which has been com- 
mented <m by Cohausen {Tentaminum . . . Decas 
di Vita . . . froUmganda . . . 1669, p. 46) (£*v.). 
Padce {Afedela Ckymica, 1708, p. 155) thinks Time 
may have "thrown in a cypher too much to the 
number." Special attention has been given to him 
and to the Clavis in a series of articles by Chev- 
reul, and Gildemeister identifies him with the 
Arabic poet and alchemist, Al ToghrAi, who 

Borel, BiblufUuca Chimica, 1654, p* ss* 

Borrichius, Conspectus Scriptorum Ckemicorum^ 
1607, p. la, No. xvi. 

Hendreich, Pandecta Brandenhur^m^ 1699. p. 
298. 

Fictuld, ProHer-Sttin, 1753, Th. i. p. 16. 

Beytrag %ur Geschichte der hdkem CAemt'e, ^7^S» 
pp. 485, 638. 

Gmdln, Gesckickte der CAemt'e, 1797, i. p. 22; 
17^. u. pp. 3, 398. 

Schmieder, Geschichte der Alchemie, 1832, p. 

Wfistenfeld, Geschichte der AraHschen Aertte 
und Naturfarscher, 1840, p. 87, No. 151. (Wttsten- 
feld thinks that the l^ends told about Al Toghr&i's 
alchemical experiences are late inventions.) 

was put to death about 1119-ao or iiai-2, accord- 
ing to Itm Khallikan. 

The Clavis Majoris Sapientice was first printed 
at Paris in 1609 in a small 8*, and at Strasburg 
in 1699 in Ia^ This work is identical with that 
ascribed to Alfonso of Castile {3. v. ), who was not 
the author, however, but simply caused a transla- 
tion into Spanish to be made of an Arabic book. 

The Liber Secretus was printed at Amsterdam in 
1678, 16** ; at Frankfurt, 1685, 12", and was trans- 
lated into English by "Eiroiaeus Orandus," and 
printed along with Flamel, London, 1624, 18**. 

Hadji Khalfa, Lexicon Bibliographicum^ 1852, 
vi. p. 4, No. 12 510. (Alchemical work by Al 
Toghr&i.) 

Chevreul, Comptes rendus, 1867, Ixiv. pp. 64, 679 ; 
Journal des Savants, 1867, p. 767 ; 1868, pp. 45, 

153. »9. 644- 
Ladrague, Bibliothique Ouvaroff^ 1870^ Nos. 

692-704. 

Gildemeister, Zeitschrift der morgenldndischen 
Gesellschaft, 1876, xxx. p. 538 (in an article on 
"Alchemy"). Gildemeister thinks the work of 
Artephius is probably identical with an Arabic 
original in the Biblioth^ue Nationale. 

Kopp, Die Alchemic, 1886, i. pp. 100, 223, 252 ; 
iL 342, 363. 

ARTIS AVRIFERAE, quam chemiam vocant, volumina duo, quae continent 
Turbam Philosophorum, aliosqf ; antiquiss. auctores, quae versa pagina indicat 
Accessit nouiter volumen tertium, continens: 

1. Lullij ultimum Testamentum. 

2. Elucidationem Testam. totius ad R. Odoardum. 

3. Potestatem diuitiarum, cum optima expositione Testamenti Hermetis. 

4. Compendium Artis Magicae, quoad compositionem Lapidis. 

5. De Lapide & oleo Philosophorum. 

6. Modum accipiendi aurum potabile. 

7. Compendia Alchimiae & naturalis Philosophiae. 

8. Lapidarium. ^ 
Item Alberti Magni secretorum Tractatus. 

Abbreviationes quasdam de Secretis Secretorum loannis pauperum. 

Amaldi Quaest de Arte Transmut Metall. eiusqf; Testamentum. 
Omnia hactenus nunquam visa nee edita, Cum Indicibus rerum et verborum 
locupletiss. Basileae, Typis Conradi Waldkirch. clo.lo.cx. 

8*. Vol. i. pp. [16], 40s ; Index 
Index [16] [2 blank]; 20 woodcuts. Vo 

[2^] [4 blank]; one woodcut VoL ii. 346; 
1. 111. [2] 185; Index [5]; 

The following are the contents of this collection : 
VoL i. After the title comes the address by Peter 
Pema, the Basel printer, to the reader. Then 

1. Propositiones, seu maximae artis Chymicae. 

2. Turoa Philosophorum, p. i. 

3. Turbee Philosophorum alterum Exemplar, 

p. 43- 

4. Allegorise super librum Turbse, p. 89. 

5. Aenigniata ex Visione Arislei, p. 94. 

6. Exercitationes in Turbam. p. 99. 

7. Aurora Consurgens, p. iiq. 

one woodcut. 

8. Rosinus ad Euthiciam, p. 158. 

9. Idem ad Saratantam Episcoptmi, p. 178. 

10. Liber Definitionum eiusdem, p. 203. 

11. Mariae Prophetissae Practica, p. 205. 

12. Liber Secretorum Calidis filij fazichi, p. 208. 

13. Liber Triimi Verborum Kallid, p. 226. 

14. Aristoteles de lapide Philosophorum, p. 232. 

15. Avicennade Conglutinatione lapidis, p. 240. 

16. Expositio Epistolae Alexandri Regis, p. 245. 

17. Ignotus Autor de Secretis lapidis, p. 249. ^ 

18. Merlini allegoria de Arcano lapidis, p. 252. 

'? 

52 

ARTIS—ASHMOLE 

ARTIS AVRIFfeRAE. Continued. 

191 Racbaidibi . . . de Materia lapidis, p. 2^. 

90. Airicennae Tractatulus de Alchimia, p. 2to. 

31. Semita Semitae. p. 280. 

33. Clangor Buccinae, p. 388. 

33, Correctio fatuorura, p. 340. 

Inceitus Autor de Arte Cnymica, p. 369. 

34. Inceitus Autor de Afte^ymica, p. 369. 

VoL ii. Liber de compositione Alchemise, quern 
edidhMorienus RomanuSj Calid Regi Ac^ptiorum: 
qnem Robertus Castrensis de Arabico in Latinum 
transtulit, p. 3. 

Bemardi Treuirensis responsio ad Thomam de 
BoDOoia de Mineralibus, a Elixiris compositione, 
Roberti Vallensis Tabulis illustrata, p. 38. 

Liber de Arte Cbimia incerti Autboris nun- 
quam hactenus in Lucem editus. 

\Noit. — A tract of similar name is in vol. i. 
There is no such tract in the present volume.] 

Scala philosophorum. p. 71. 

Ludus puerorum (et Opus mulienim), p.'iii. 

Ilosarium philosophorum (cum figuns), p. 133. 
^r I Rosarium, p. 253. 

^ Nouum lumen, p. 398. 

Amaldi * Flos florum ad Regem Aragonum. p. 311. 
Epistola super Alchimia ad Regem 
V. Neapolitanum. p. 333. 

Rogerius Bacno Anglus de mirabili Potestate 
artis et natune, p. 337. 

The contents of vol iii. are given on the title- 
page. 

This is one of the chief collections of standard 
alchemical authors. A certain number of the tracts 
and the Rosarium had been already printed in the 
De Alc^mia Q^jgy/g. Francoforti, 1550 (f.v*)* 
and lAllH^ m CfalSKRo's collection, Basel, nstms 
Pema, 1561. in folio {q.v,). The latter was again 
printed at Basel by Pema in 1572, in 8^, and 
immediately thereafter Pfcma printed in 15^ Avri' 
fera Artis ^yam Chemiam vacant, anUqvisHmi 
Avthores, stue Tvrba Pkihsopkorvwi, in two 
volumes, small 8**, with an address to the reader by 
himself. Of the tracts in the first volume he says 
that the first ten and the last were from mannscripts. 
In 1593, Conrad Waldkirch at Basel reprinted both 
volumes in a somewhat handsomer ionn. Then 
came this reprint of 1610. to which was added the 
third volmne. A German translation of the Tmria 
and of a tract by Roger Bacon, edited by Pitiilus 
Hildenbrandt von Hildenbrandseck appeared at 
Franckfort am Ma3m in 1597 and in 1008 (^.v.). 
7*he first two volumes were translated into German 
by Philip Morgenstem ig.v.), and publidied at 
msel. 1613, reprinted i7Sa 

In the Beytrag xur Geschichte der hokem Ckume^ 
1785, p. 578. it is called a "collection full of hid 
heavenly wisdom." This critic's sincerity maybe 
doubted. 

ARZNEIEN. 

See ALLGEMEINE (Ueber) Arzneien. 

ASHMOLE (Elias). 
The Way to Bliss. In three books. Made publick, by Elias Ashmole, Esquire 
Qui est Mercuriophilus Anglicus. 

— Deus nobis haec Otia fedt. 
Ix)ndon, Printed by John Grismond for Nath. Brook, at the Angel on 
Corn-hill, 1658. 

8". Pp. [8] saa 

Home copies are on large and thick paper and 
have a portrait of Ashmole prefixed. Ashmole 
rAuresenU himself in the preface as being the 
editor onlv. 

According to Niceron the present work is by an 
urtknr/wn writer of the time of Queen Elisabeth, 
MUt was given to Ashmole by William Backhouse, 
Un pulillcatlon. This, however, does not tally 
with Ihu acnotmt given by Ashmole himself in the 
l/rnfai^ (dated April 16, 1658), to wit, that it was 
" w»)ll«fi aUiut thr Iwginning of the last (or end of 
Om fitrmtrr) (rwitury," and that an imperfect ^-ersion 
tA it had Wfi got ready for printing which " the 
wiftU nUtntUl lakr f<ir the child of one Eugenius 
ThtudtHtulm, »n»ltig (by Re-baptization) called the 
Wlit mafi*t CrpWft or /fosie-CntdoM Pkvsici,'* 
This \nMik U fiwniMl liy Kloss (Bibliograf^e der 
f^rtimttttrtrti. Kmnkfurt n, M. 1844. Na 3630b), who 
iu\t\%, "Will. Ilaiikhmiwi's Way to Bliss, publidrt von 
hAmuh Hn^dmi, I/mdon, 1051," Now Eugenius 
'riujululiMiluii was iwrliy certainly John Heydon, 
Dim M</4»irfiirlMii ; h»r thn edition of The Wise 
muti't t'tifWH! or tkt Ohry of the Rtme-Cm/s^ 
\4H\^H\f tfi^t, whiiili 1 have, bears Heydon's 
MMiiMi im iUn gMiiaml lltlf* Mnd on that to the second 
inMik, Imh (HI Mm tilin U» thn thinl l>ook the author 
is tflVKfi M KutftstiitiN TliotHlldactus. There is no 
liMllcMiliiii III Ikiibhcmikfi having anything to do 

with it, and there is no resemblance between it and 
the book ' ' made publick " by Ashmole. The article 
in the BiqgrafJua Britannica also, which quotes 
from Aslmiole's pre£Eu:e about this book, makes no 
allusion to Backhouse — and on the other hand it is 
\err contemptuous about John He3rdon. 

Ashmole (1617-16^) is famous for his keen 
delight in the acquisition of knowledge and for his 
business capacity. He was an antiquary, herald, 
astrolo^, alchemist, collector of all sorts of 
curiosities and rarities: a remarkable mixture of 
shrewdness and what would now be termed 
superstition. 

under the anagram James Hasolle, he also 
edited a small volume called Fasciatlus Cktmicus: 
or Chrmicall CoUectimu, London, 1650^ I2^ 
containing prolegomena, Arthur Dee's collec- 
tions, and a translation of Espagnet's Arcamim, 
His chief alchemical work is the Theatrum CJUmt- 
mm Briiannicum, London. 165a. 4', with several 
engravings. It contains a series of old English 
poems on Alchemy, with notes by Ashmole. It is 
called Part i., and in the prefisce to the present 
work Ashmole regrets that he had been prevented 
carrying it any further. No more was publisbed, 
and the first part is now very rare, and diflScult to 

SK complete. The contents are reprinted by 
meUn. Gesckukit der Ckemie (1797). i. p. 6aa 

ASHMOLE--ATREMONT 53 
ASHMOLE (EuAs). Continued. 

Hendrdch, Pandecta Brandenburgica, 1699^ p. Chalmers, The Gtneral Bicgraphical Dictionary^ 

308. 181a, iii. p. 4a. 

Wood, AthentB Oxtmienses^ 1731, i. passim ; The Btographical Dictionary (Society for the 

iL ooL 659, 886 ; Pasti^ ii p. 180 ; and ed. Bliss, Diffusion of useful Knowledge), 1844, in. ii. p. 775. 

1817. iii. coL 354-64 ; 1890, iv. p. 354, et passim. Graesse, Trisor de Livrts Parts, 1859, Drode, 

i. p. 238. 
AlliSone, A Critical Dictionary of English 
coL ^i. ' Literature, 1859, i, p. 74. 

Kippis, Bioprafkia Britannica, and ed. 1778, i. Dictionary of National Biography, 1885, iL p. 

pp. ^ejf^jarj. This is a full account with a long note 172 (article by Dr. R. Gamett). 
OD the present book. 

See BURMAN (CHARLES), The Lives of . . . Ellas Ashmole, . . and . . William Lilly, 
1774. 

ASTREA (U) Chimica. 

See PUSTENINEC (lUSTIN). 

[ASTRONOMIA inferior das ist Erzehlung und Erwehlung der sieben Irdischen 
Planetten als da sind Bley, Zin &c. durch Marcum Friderikum Rosenkreutzer 
Astronomum Chymicum im Jahr 1646 getruckt zu Numberg.] 

8®. Pp. 23 (?), 442 [32]. MS. title. Wants printed title, Aa and A8. Seven 
woodcuts. 

ASTRONOMIA Inferior seu Planetanim terrestrium motus & variatio. 

See SENDIVOGIUS (MICHAEL), Lumen Chymicum Novum. Epilogus Orthelii, 
1624, p. 199. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1661, vi. p. 507. 

See THEORETISCH und praktischer Wegweiser zur h5hem Chemie, 1773, P* >33« 

ASTRONOMIC Medicae Theologico-Philosophica Delineatio. 

See MONTE HERMETIS QOHANN de), Explicatio Centri in Trigono Centri, i68a 

The names of stars, planets, and constellations Compare Kopp, Die Alchemie, 1886, ii. pp. 340, 
occur in connection with alchemical treatises. 364. 

ATREMONT (H. d^. 

Le Tombeau de la Pauvret^. Dans lequel il est traict^ clairement de la trans- 
mutation des metaux, & du moyen qu'on doit tenir pour y parvenir. Par 
un Philosophe Incognu; En faveur de ses Amys particuliers. 
Hie liber est parvus, sed maxima continet in se, 

m 

Qui capiet, Croeso ditior esse potest. 
Imprim^ k Franc-fort, Chez Jean George Droullmann, aux d^pens de 
FAutheur. M.DC.LXXII. 

ia°. Pp. [lol 167 [i]. 

Erofifnetes Grab der Armuth, darinnen klarlich von der Veranderung der 
Metallen, und dem Wege darzu zu gelangen, gehandelt wird. Durch einen 
unbekanten Philosophum, far seine sonderbare Freund geschrieben. Aus 
dem Frantzosischen ubersetzet durch einen Liebhaber der Weifsheit. 
Hie liber est parvus, sed maxima continet in se, 
Qui capiet, Crceso ditior esse potest. 
Cum privilegio Sac. Caes. Majestatis. Frankfurt am Mayn, Jn VerlegOg Joh. 
Melchior Bencard. Jm Jahr 1702 

la**. Pp. [10]. Imperfect, wanting all after p. 94. 

54 

A TREMONT^A UFFRICHTIG 

ATREMONT (H. d*). Continued. 
Le Tombeau de la Pauvret^. 

A Trill '\r\ riT^l VA^ mmm A V*%A wA^VWs 

See MINERALOGIA, oder der Philosophen deutliche Erklarung und wohl- 

gegriindetes Urtheil iiber das erdffiiete Grab der Armuth, 1703. 
See MINERALOGIA, oder Chyroischer Schliissel, 1706.' 

Atremont, the reputed author, was a French 
knifffat or nobleman, who, after travelling a great 
deal in the East, spent some days with Olaus 
Borrichius at Copenhagen, and told him his pro- 
cesses. It consisted in converting gold into a 
spongy, light, infusible, lustreless substance by 
reiterated amsdgamation, and expelling the mercury 
by heat, and then digesting the gold with the best 
"acetum stillatititmi by cohobation, until it be- 

Borrichius, Consfectus Scripiorum Ckemicorum, 
1697, p. 37, No. Ivii. ; or in Manget, BH/. Ck, Cur., 
1702, 1. p. 50, No. Iviii. 

I.«nglet Dufresnoy, Hhtoirt de la Pkilosophie 
lierwutique, 174a, iii. pp. 311, 31a. 

came ** fusible, penetrating, and tinging." Borri- 
chius thought this process so very labonous and so 
different from those of the older chemists, that be 
willingly handed it over to any one kecm enough to 
try it. 

The book went through several editions. The 
following are mentioned m addition to those above: 
French, Paris, 1673; Lyons, 1684; Paris, 1681; 
German, Frankfurt, 1672, 1706. 

Gmelin, Gtschuhie dtr Chtmie, 1708, iL p. 6l 
Schmieder, Gexkickte derAlckemu, 1832, p. 43a. 
Ladrague, BibUothiqui Ouvarof^ Sciences Secrkes, 
1870, No. i2a6 (ed. of Paris, 1681). 
kopp. Die Alckemie^ 1886, it p. 36a 

AUBERT (Jacques). 

lacobi Auberti Vindonis de metallorum ortu & causis contra Chemistas breuis 
& dilucida explicatio. Lugduni. Apud lohannem Berion. 1575. 

8*. Pp. 69 [i]. a criticism of this was written by Josephus Quercetanus, and 
printed at Lyons by Jean Lertot, in 1575. An Elnglish translation of the reply was 
printed at London in 1591. 

Croix du Maine has not enabled me to confirm 
this. For at T. i. p. 389 of Juvigny's edition, only 
the native of Vendome is spoken of, and only the 
work on the * Complexions of man,' Paris, 157a, is 
referred to. Similarly in Du Verdier's account 
(Tuvigny, iv. p. 263) only Aubert of Venddme and 
the same work are mentioned, with the addition 
that it is in twenty-four chapters, and was published 
at Lausanne, 1571, 8^ ; Paris, i^, i6ma I do 
not know the ongin of Deseimens' statement, but 
it is made writh perfect confidence and may be 
correct 

Most authorities state that Aubert was a native 
of Vend6me, who went to Lausanne, wrote several 
works on medicine and one or two others against 
Paracelsus and the Chemists, and died at Lau- 
Mnne in 1586. 

Dexdnieris, however, asserts, on the authonty of 
La Croix du Maine, that there were two phjrsicuus 
of this name, who have been confused with each 
other. One, who was born in Venddme, continued 
to live there. The other was a native of Laval, in 
Mnynnnc, and |)ractised medicine at Lausanne. 

Keference to the Bibliothique Franfoiu of La 

Van der Linden, De Scriptis medicis lUri duo, 

16371 P* ^'''3' 
Horol, HWiotkeea Ckimica, 1654, p. 35. 
Mttrrklii), Undenius renavahu, 1686, p. 474. 
Ilmidrolvh, Pandectw Brandenhtrgicte, 1699, 

Miiii|r<i IHbliotkeca Scripiorum Medicorum, 

ftwitni*!, Aitdifinisches GeUkrien-Lexkom, 1740, 

I^vmIpI Dufmsnoy, Histoire de la Pkilosopkie 

J(U«hw. Al^meinrs iklehrUft'Lextcom^ 1750, 1. 

Les BibliotJUques Franfoises de La Croix du 
Maine et de Du Ferdier, ed. Juvigny, 177a, T. i. 
P- 389; 1773. iv. p. 363. 

Haller, BiMioikeca Medicinm pracOcee, 1777, ii. 

P- 199. 

Beytrag tur Gexkickte der kdkem Ckemie, 1785, 
p. ^61. 

Gmehn, Gexkickte der Ckemie, 1797, l. p, a57. 

Biograpkie htidicaley Paris, Panckoucke (i8ao- 

25)1 »• P- 407. 
Deseimens, Dtciionnaxre biograpkique de la 

Midecine, i8a8, I. L pu 905. 
Biograpkie Oniverselle, 1843, ^ P* 37^ 
NouveUe Biograpkie GAUrale, 1861, iii col 56a. 

AUKKKl(*irrH» (I>ik) entdeckte Probier- und Scheide-Kunst derer Venetianer, 
wriclwr ncK^h beygefuget wird 

I, Kin Probier-Buchlein von iiblichen Berg- und Miintz-Proben. 
U, llenonderc Particular- Arbeiten, bestehend in Einbringen und Figirungen; 
(lU Klnigo xur Verbesserung derer Metallen dienende Universal-Processe ; 
ivi Kino ( filiation der Schrifften Fr. Basil Valentini Bened. Ordin. 
%^^u^<»n tlip Zubereitung des so genandten Vitrioli Philosophid erklaret 
.^t .^MMi IJobhabern solcher edlen Kunst zu femerer Ubertegung com- 

AUFFRICHTIG—AUGURELLO 55 

AUFFRICHTIG (Die). ConHnued. 

miiniciret wird. Saalfeld, im Verlag Johann Michael KaufTmanns. Anno 
1717. 

8^. Pp. ia6 [a blank]. Title red and black, printed on two leaves, and folded. 
Marks and MS. notes. 

AUFRICHTIGE Beantwortung drey wichtiger Fragen von der Materie und 
Vorarbeit des eigentlichen Steins der Weisen. 1761. 

No place, no printer. 
8". Pp. 16. 

See AUFRICHTIGES ECHO. 

AUFRICHTIGES Echo, oder eine verlangende Antwort auf den 1761 gedruckten 
und hier auch beygefligten Bogen ; Betittelt : Aufrichtige Beantwortung drey 
wichtiger Fragen von der Materie und Vorarbeit des eigentlichen Steins der 
Weisen. 1762. 

No place, no printer. 
8°. Pp. 64. This contains (p. 55) a reprint of the Au/rUkiige Beantwortung (^.v.). 

AUFRICHTIG^TEUTSCHER Wegweiser zum Licht der Natur, oder ad 
Tincturam Physicam Paracelsi, und Lapidem Philosophorum. 

See z>N¥,Y VORTREFFLICHE . . . Chymische Biicher, 1759, p. 33. 
For extracts see hermetisches A. B. C, 1778, i. pp. 263-267. 

This tract appeared at Nttmbei^, 1756. 

AUFSTEIGUNG der Morgenrothe. 

See MORGENSTERN (PHILIP), Turba Philosophorum, 1613, i. p. 141. 
See MORGENSTERN (PHILIP), Turba Philosophorum, 1750, i. p. 173. 

See AURORA CONSURGENS. 

In the text it is called " Auffstehende Morgenrdthe." 

AUGE. 

See G. (f. a.), Das philosophische Auge in der Chymie, 1751. 

Kopp {Die Alchtmie, 1886, ii. p. 385) gives a list of Alchemical books, the titles of which allude 
to the ejre, to spectacles and to light 

AUGURELLO (Giovanni Aurelio). 

loannis Aurelii Augurelli P. Ariminensis Chrysopoeiae Libri III. Et Geronticon 
Liber Primus. Apud Inclytam Basileam. 

4**. Pp. III. [112] contains Frobeh's device with motto in Latin, Greek, and 
Hebrew, and the Colophon : Basileae Apud loannem Frobenium Mmse Augusto, 
iLD.xviii. The title is enclosed in an elaborate wood-cut border. 

Vellus Aureum, et Chrysopoeia, seu Chrysopoeia Major et Minor, Das ist 
Giilden-Vliefe, und Gold-erzielungs-Kunst, oder grosse und kleine Gold- 
erzielungs-Kunst, Johannis Augurelli, Gecronten Poeten von Romulen geburtig, 
An Ihre Pabstliche Heiligkeit Leonem den Zehenden. Aus dem Lateinischen 
ins Teutsche iibersetzet von M. Valentino Weigelio, Weyland gewesenen 
Pfarr-Herrn zu Zschopau in Meissen. Hamburg, zu finden bey Samuel 
Heyl, 1 7 16. 

8^. Pp. [16, including frontispiece, title, dedication, and two blank] iia. 

56 

A UGURELLO^A UREjE 

AUGURELLO (Giovanni Aurelio). Continued, 
Chrysopoeia et Geronticon Liber. 

See GRATAROLO (c), Verse Alchemiae . . . Doctrina, 1561, ii. p. 269. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, ill. p. 1 97. 

Chrysopoeia et Vellus aureum. 

Su SENDIVOGIUS (MICHAEL), Novum Lumen Chymicum, 1639. 

See ALBINEUS (NATHAN), Bibliotheca, 1653. 

See MANGET (J. J.)> Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, ii. p. 371. 

Guldnes Vliess und Golderzielungskunst . . . ubersetzt von M. Valentin Weigd. 

See HERMETISCHES MUSEUM, 1 782, ii. p. 3. 

into French, and appeared both in a prose venioo 
1 541, 1548, and in verse 1549-50^ i6a& It may be 
pointed out that neither the Chrysopoeia nor the 
GeroiUUoH Liber is included in the 1491 and Z505 
editions of his Carwuna. 

A depreciatory account of him is given by 
Adelung. but a much more considerate 'and coo- 
scientious view is taken of him by several Itidian 
writers. 

Augurello, a native of Rimini, bom about 1454, 
died about 1537, (others 1441-1534,) was one of the 
distinguished classicists of his time. He wrote odes 
and epistles^ after the manner of Horace, which 
appeared in a thin 4** at Verooa in 1491 ; enlarged, 
and reprinted by Aldus, Venice, 1505. in a very 
pretty volume, which is not uncommon. He is best 
Imown by the poem on gold-making, which was 
first printed at Venice in 151 1 in 4*, then at Basel 
1518, and thereafter repeated^. It was translated 

Paolo Giovio, Le Imscrittumi fosto soiU U vtrt 
imagini degU kmawdmi fawuai in Lettert^ Venetia, 

IS^ P- Ma- 
Paolo 

10 Giorio, Elogia. virormm UUris illustrium^ 

^577* P- 83 (°° portrait). 
Joan. Matthaeos Toscanns, Ptf/tu lialue, Paris, 

'S78»-P» 40. No. bnr. 

). C Scaliger, Paetices Ukri tefietm^ 1594, p. 785- 

Borel, Bibtiotkica Ckiwuta, 1654. p. 36. 

Morhoi^ De MetaJlorum TroMsmutatiofU . . . 
Bpistola, 1673. p. 138. 

Borrichius, Dissertatimus Acadewdcm de Poetis^ 

tikirricDuis, Conspectus Scripiorum Ckewacorum, 

1697, p. a8, Na xzxzi 

endreich, Pandectm Bramdenhirgiat^ 1699. p. 

33« 

Teutsckes Fegfemer der ScMeide-kunst, 170a. p. 122. 

Roth-Scholtx, Bibliotheca Chemica, 1737, p. 14. 

Lenfflet Dufresnoy, Histoire de la Philosophie 
Hermltiaue, 174a, i. p. 272. 

Flotuld, Probier-Sleim, 1753, i- P- 16. 

Masfuchelli, Gli Scrittori «f Italia, 1753. vol. i. 
parte Ii. p. 851. 

AUGUSTA. 

See PHARMACOPOEIA AUGUSTANA. 

Calogiera. Nwva Raccolta d'OpuscoU, Veneaa, 
1760. tom. vi. pp. 159-2C4. 

Wiegleb, Htstorisch-Kritiuhe Untersuchumg der 
Alchemic^ 1777, p. 297. 

Baumer, Bibliotheca Chewnca, 1782, p. 87. 

Adelung, Geschichte der Memschlichen NarrhtU, 

1785. i- p. "3- 
Beyirag xur GeschichU der hdhem Chemie, 1785. 

pp. »37. 490^ 57^ 657. 

Kortum vertadigtt die Alchemie^ 1769, p. 177. 

Fuchs, Repertarium der chewdschen, Litieraiur^ 
1806-08, p. 86. 

Tiraboschi, Steria delta Letieralura Italiama, 
1809. VI. iii. p. 03^ 

Biographic Miduak, Paris, Pandcoudce (1820-251, 
i. p. 416. 

Schmieder, Geschichte der Alchemie^ 1832, p. 258. 

Biographie Umiverselle^ 1843, iL p. 432. 

NoKvelU Biographic GiniraU^ 1861, liL coL 640. 

Ladrague, BUHathiqwe Ouvarvg^Sciences SecrHu^ 
1870^ Nos. 883-887. 

Kopp, Die Alchewue^ 1886, i. p. 243— calls the 
1518 eoition the first, but the book came out three 
years earlier at Venice. 

AU(JUSTIS DE DERTONA (Quiricus de). 
Ltimcn Apothecariorum. 

See MANI.IUS DE BOSCHO (JOANNES JACOBUSX Luminare Majus. 

AULA LUCIS. 

Sff VAUdHAN (THOMAS). 

AUHICA CATENA HOMERI. 

Sf0 KIH(:HWK(iKR (ANTON JOSKPH). 

S\]\iV.A\ CRIJCIS LEO RUHER. 

.SV** l.riWK (Drr) clrfs Rothrn Creuties. 

AUREUjE^AURIFONTINA 57 

AUR£LIi£ Occultae Philosophoram partes Dua Georgio Beato Interprete. 

See THEATRUM CHKMICUM, 1 659, iv. p. 457. 

See MAMGET 0- J-X Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, ii. p. 198. 

See OCCULTA PHILOSOPHIA, 1613, p. 47. 

This is ascribed by some to Basilius Valentinus der heimlicben Goldblumen, . . . Fianddiirt, 

(^.v.). It is a dialogue between an old man, called Johann Bringer, 1613" (^. v. )\ ' * Les Douse Cle& . . . 

Senior, and a pupil or student, Adolphus. The de . . . Basile Valentm . . . Plus I'Azoth . . . Paris, 

first part is in prose, the second is an interpretation 1624, and Paris, 1659." In certain editions this 

of some s^bolic drawings, and in the German tract is preceded by the yBnig^ PkiUuophoruwiy 

Tosion is m ▼erse. Other editions: " Azoth, sive which is also insoted sometimes among Sendi- 

Anrdiae Occultae Philosophoram, . . . Fhino^Eurti, vogius' writings. It does not seem, however, to 

Joannes Bringer, 1613 " ; " Occulta Philosophia von bdong strictly to either, 
den verborgenen Phflosophischen Geheimnussen 

Borridiius, Conspectus Scriptorum Ckewncorum, BeyirctgturGesch^dtrkdkemChtmie^X'fi^^^xffj, 

1697, p. 34. Schmieder, Gcsckukte derAlckemit, 183a, p. 907. 

AUREUM Seculum Patefactum. 

See CHRYSANDER (ALITOPHILUSX 1706. 

AUREUM Seculum Redivivum. 

Su MADATHANUS (HENRICUS). 

AUREUM VeUus. 

See AUGURELLO (GIOVANNI AURELIO). 
See EROFFNETE GEHEIMNISSE. 
See FICTULD (HERMANN). 

See gCldene (Das) Vliefs. 
See mennens (guilielmus). 
Su mogun Oohann ludwig). 

See NAXAGORAS (ERHD von). 
See TRISMOSIN (SALOMON). 

AUREUS Liber de prindpiis Naturae et Artis, woraufs die Wissenschafit der 
Primas Materiae erkennet, und das Universale Generalissimum Philosophorum 
erlanget werden moge. 
See HERMETisCHE (Der) philosophus, 1709, p. I. 

See GINiECEUM CHIMICUM, 1679, p. 517. 

See HERMETISCHES MUSEUM, 1785, iii. p. !$!. 

AUREUS Tractatus de Pbilosophorum Lapide. 

See TRACTATUS AUREUS de lapide philosophico. 

AURIFERiE Artis, Das ist, der (k>ldkunsty . . . Authores vnd Anfanger. Oder : 
Turba Philosophorum. 

See HILDENBRANDT (PAUL^ 1608. 

See ARTIS AURiFERiE . . . volumina duo, 16 10. 

AURIFONTINA Ch3rmica: or, a Collection of fourteen small Treatises con- 
cerning the First Matter of Philosophers, for the discovery of their (hitherto 
so much concealed) Mercury. Which many have studiously endeavoured to 
hide, but these to make manifest, for the benefit of Mankind in general. 
London, Printed for William Cooper, at the Pelican in Little-Britain. 1680. 

Small narrow 24^ Pp. [23] containing title, John Frederick Houprtt;ht's dedi- 
cation of the Hydropyrografkum to Chartes II., Contents, To the Reader. Text, 
pp. 37a. Advertisement of Chemical books [4]. 

58 

A URIFONTINA—A USERLESENER 

AURIFONTINA Chymica. Continued. 

This curious and very rare little volume was pro- 
bably compiled and edited by William Cooper, a 
wdl-known vendor of Alchemical books, and the 
author of the first catalogue of such books in 
England. The treatises contained are the follow- 
ing: 

I. Hydropyrographum Hermeticum, or the 
Metallick water-rire, translated by J. F. Houpreght, 
p. I. 

a. The Privy Seal of Secrets, plainly discovering 
the first Matter of the Philosophers, p. 41. 

3. A strange letter concerning an Adept, his 
curious Learning and vaster Treasure, from Freder- 
ick, Duke of PIdsatia and Sleswick, p. 53. 

4. Sir George Ripley's Treatise of Morury, and 
the Philosophers stone, p. 69. 

5. Colours to be observed in the operation of the 
Great Work of Philosophers, p. 93. 

6. A plain and true Description of the Treasure 
of Treasures, or the Golden Medicine, p. 97. 

7. A Treatise of the Philosophers Stone, the 
Blessed Manna, &c., ^ith its wondrous Virtues and 
Use, both for the curing the Body of Man, and 
the makingof precious Stones^ p. 107. 

8. Nic. Flammell, his Summary of Philosophy, 
or Short Treatise of the Philosophers Stone, p. 145. 

9. Rajrm. Lullie's Clavicula, Apertorium, or 
little Key explaining all the rest of his Works, 
p. 163. 

la Secrets disdos'd of the PhikMophers Stone, 
p. i8a 

II. A Philosophical Riddle of Gold, in Verse, 
p. 185. 

la. Bern. Trevisan's Epistle to Thomas of Bon- 
onia, concerning the secret workings of Nature in 
the product of things, p. 187. 

13 Bern. Trevisan, his short EfHstle Dedicatory 
before his Works, to the same man, p. 9691 

14. A brief Fh^paration of the Philosophers Stone, 
for the conclusion of this Book, p. 271. 

AURIOA Chemicus sive Theosophiae Palmarium, a Philosopho antiquo anonymo, 
in chemids versatissimo compositum. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, ill. p. 834. 

For remarks on books entitled 'Auriga,* see Kopp, DU AlckewUe^ 1886, ii. p. 34a 

AURORA Consurgens quae dicitur aurea hora. 

See ARTis AURlFERit . . . Volumina, 1610^ i. p. 118. 
See AUFSTEIGUNG dcr Morgenrdthe. 

See Kopp, DU Alckemit^ 1886, ii. p. 389, for books entitled ' Aurora.' 

AURO (De) Potabili Theophrasti Paracelsi. 

See FiGULUS (benedictusX Pandora, 1608, pp. 275, 279. 

AURUM Auwe. 

See BALDUINUS (CHRISTIANUS ADOLPHUS). 

See Kopp, Die Aicketmie^ 1886, ii. p. 373, for books entitled ' Aunim.' 

AURUM Potabile. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1660, vi. p. 382. 
See ANTHONY (KRANCIS). 

AURUM Vit« Oder Ciold des Lebens. 

See VIER Chymischc Tractallcin, 1677, p. 64. 

AUSERLESENE Chymische Universal und Particular Processe. 

.SV^ RUESENSTEIN (ALEXIUS .VON), 1754- 

AUSERLESENER (Ein) herrlicher Tractat \-on dem philosophischen Wasser. 
Incerti Authoris. 
See VIER Aufserlesene Teutsche Cheinische Biichlein, 1697, p. 71. 

AUSERLESENER (Ein) herrlicher Tractat von dem philosc^hischen Wasser. 
Incerti Authoris, Frankfurt und Leipzig, bey Johann Paul Kraufs. 1772. 

s*. Pp. 3a. 

This is a reprint of the i6«>7 etUtioo. It is just quoted by Kop|\ DU AU'ktmif, 1886) vl pp. 319, 391. 
He doe* nol mention the enrUer edition. 

A USFDHRUCHE—A VICENNA 59 

AUSFUHRLICHE Beschreibung der unweit Zwickau in Meiisen, . . . und anderer 
umliegenden Orten gefundene Goldischen Sande. . . . 
Sm naxagoras (ehro von). 

AUSFUHRLICHER (Ein) Tractat von philosophischen Werck des Steins der 
Weisen. 
See H. (£.). 

AUSSLEGUNG vnd erkl^irung des Gemahls oder Figur (a symbolical picture). 

See TRISSMOSINUS (SALOMON), Aurcum Vellus, Tractatus iii., 1598, p. 239. 

See EROFFNETE Geheimnisse des Steins der Weisen, 1708, p. 337. 

See [SCHATZ und Kunstkammer], p. (4i5)-4i6. 

See TANCKE (joachimX Promptuarium Alchemias, Ander Buch, i6i4,p. 415. 

AUSSLEGUNG Rhythmorum BasiUi. 
See schOler (conradX 1608. 

AUSTRIA. 

See pharmacopcea. 

See DISPENSATORIUM Pharmaceuticum Austriaco-Viennense, 1729. 

AUTHORITATES Philosophonim. Das ist unterschiedliche Zeugnussen, Bericht, 
und Erklarung etlicher alten beriihmpten Philosophen, von Zubereitung deis 
Lapidis Philosophorum, vnd seiner Wiirckung. 
See BENEDICTUS (liberius), Liber Aureus, 1630, p. 115. 

AUT hie, aut nusquam. 

See LEONHARD von Altenberg, Delarvatio Tincturae Philosophorum, 1769. 
This same phrase occurs in connection with the Elucidarius Major, See brotoffer (Radtichs). 

AVICENNA. 
Aquae rubeae ad tingendum quatuor spiritus sublimatos albos. 
See GRATAROLO (g.^ Verae alchemiae . . . doctrina, 1561, ii. p. 211. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, iiL p. I07. 

De Congelatione et Conglutinatione Lapidum. 

See ARTis AURlFERiE . . . volumina, 1610, i. p. 240. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1 659, iv. p. 883. 
See GIN.ACEUM CHIMICUM, 1679, P* 554* 

See GEBER, Summa Perfectionis, 1682, p. 245. 

See MANGET (j. j.\ Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, L p. 636. 

Von der Congelation und Conglutination der Steine. 

See GEBER, Chymische Schriften, 175 1, p. 319. 

See GEBER, Commentaria iiber Gebers Werke, 1792, p. 353. 

Von der Congelierung und Zusammenfugung. 

See MORGENSTERN (PHiLip), Turba Philosophorum, 1613, i. p. 322. 

See MORGENSTERN (PHILIP^ Turba Philosophorum, 1750, i. p. 391. 

This is the same tract as the preceding, with a Steins." It treats of stones—not of the philoso- 
dififerent version of the name. In the table of con- pher's stone, 
tents it is called ' von der Zusammenleimung des 

fwi A VICENNA 

AVICENNA. Continued. 

Dcrlaratio Lapidis Physici Avicennae Filio suo AboalL 

Sii THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, iv. p. 875. 

See MANOKT 0* J*X Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, i. p. 635. 

Anhang der Erlauterung des fysischen Steins vom Avicenna an seinen Sohn 
Abo AH. 
See SCHRODER (r. j. w.X Neuc Alchymistische Bibliotheck, 1774, ll. ii. p. 239. 

This is R translation of the preceding. 

Epistola ad Hasen Regem de Re Recta. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, iv. p. 863. 

Tractatulus de tinctura metallorum. 

See ALCHEMIA (De) Opuscula, 1550, i. f. 75. 
See ARTis AURiFERiE . . . volumina, 1610, i. p. 260. 
^>^ MANGET (j. J.X Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, i. p. 626. 

This is also called * Tractatus de Alchimia.' 

Septem regulse ex quibus componitur lapis Philosophorum. 

See TRISSMOSINUS (salomonX Aureum Vellus, Tractatus iiL 1598, p. 213. 

See EROFFNETE Geheimnisse des Steins der Weisen, 1708, p. 320. 

See TANCKB (joachimX Promptuarium Alchemise, 1610 ; Appendix Tomi Primi, 

P-374. 
See [scHATZ und Kunstkammer], p. 374. 

IVactatulus von der Alchimia. 

Sh moroenstern (philipX Turba Philosophorum, 1613, i. p. 351. 
See MOROENSTERN (philipX Turba Philosophorum, 1750, i. p. 426. 

This is a translation of the preceding. 

Klcincfi BUchclchcn vom mineralischen Steine. 

See SCHRODER (K. J. w.X Neue alchymistische Bibliotheck, 1774, 11. ii. p. 193. 

This is a different translation. 

Avic«tma was a iiatlv« of llokhara where he ^-as work and hr pleasure, and was fanned at Hamadan. 
boni in glkv At a wry oarly a||t» he had ntastered Against Avicenna% medical system it was Paracel- 

tha KMirniivg ttf hU t(iur« and dovoled himself to sus who began the struggle which ended in its 

IMS of 
tha MIddW A|r^ 11 0 wa« a vtUuminous writer* a >»Titings which pass onder ATiooma^ name are 

mediciiHV of whicit \\p IwH^am* ime of the oracles of overthrow. Possibly a nmnber of the rhemioil 

man ttf atldirs, know thr h<»(ghl and depth of not reallr by him, and some writers pot his date a 

WKveti and ^lunlly, and a(W thi» mutt Iwilliant century later, 
and vivid U(^, di^d «t thf» af» kJI 57, exhausted by 

ThawM. /#x V¥^iA i\mH9Mift H l»jtir^ M^/mmts (the biographical notice is bun owed finom Castei- 

^/l»i#HM. iVrUi 1 1^, fly fWKw^ft««#\ and a portrait* lanusV 

t>islalian\l«, iW f/Awmnw M>iWww«Pi, .Ant- Conring* /• Arirm MmScam /mirodmcii^, 1687, 

Wi^i inif» IV 1.^ cap. Ul», fiQ. pk 9S. and AddiL as, p. taj. 

Van M l,imlai\, /V S^ti^ M^dnis /iM> Wb^« (^^hoit, but pithy.) 

UU^ u iii^, HonrichiuSk CmsfKims Serifinmm C 

n\MMni^M, M'4^f«i /f«%fV«iUji#iN^« i«5i« l>ikrs i^gp, p. aa» Ka xxriii. 

i\s IV 4M, Hcrbetot A^MCMfwr CkritmfjJt, Buis, 1697, p. 

UahMlv l^\tv IV A4» Hendrekiv /IwArtr i^itmJimhargkm, 1699^ p. 

N\vMlu*« /V fkif'Aw^^ 44 /u»iM»^»»%>wai ji^^ 4^6 (and tbe wfcrenceaK 

i^ it, ifVM» i>aiv 14, u u%v I^B|WsBI«ln^. iVawm C4rJWrMm 

V^^wMu«, /V ^k^M*^i^ . , , i0h /A» t«i5*. iwwwnr^ trwv p. ly. 
v«IVXl^^ jMUMMa Lto AlhoHMSs *'DeVvis 

l>•v«^, M^AHH ^\ ^Vi •X\^¥^ 44 j^^k^m* aKmnbns apnd Arabes IsbdEkiE^* ^npi 

i^n■^■^»^ 4^ M»«^ «*A^^ I4^\ >uv |v ««^ ami l>'tiUtrK<nik MmncAww (>«». i7>^ xaL P> a6iL 
f*HilMV L» Owt; Mj<w>t Jr Js MUKimu 179% ppi 771. 

Maiv)(lt«^ i^i¥4(mf^\ f¥iM«^*#i>\ i«liN |v ntk r^ 

A VICENNA^AXT 

6i 

AVICENNA. ConHnued. 

Manget, BMiotkeca Scriftontm Medicorum^ 
1731, 1. i.P. 187. 
Stolle, GeschtcMit der Mtdiciniscken Gtlahrhtit^ 

1731. P- 767. 
Zedler, 

Universal Ltxictm^ ^72f^* u> coL 2197. 
Kestner, Medicinischis GtleMrten-Lexicon, 1740, 

Petrus a Castro, Bibliotheca Medici Erudiii, ed. 
Andreas Pasta, Beii^omi, 1743, p. 39. 

Chaufepid, Nouveau DicHonnaire Histariqu€t 
AmsL 1750, i. p. 565. 

I6dbar, Al/gemeitus GeieArten-LexicoMt 17^ i. 
ooL 6^7. 

Casiri. Biilioiheca Arabico-Hispana Exurial' 
eusis, Matriti, 1760, i. p. s68 & passim. 

Haller, BibHoikeca aoUtnica^ '^Tl}-* i- 187; ii. 645. 

Haller, BihL Chirutvica, 1774, i. p. 133. 

Haller, Bibl. Med. Pract., 1776, i. 383. 

Beytrag sur GesckichU der h6hem Chemie, 1785, 

P- 573. 
Nicolas Antonio, Bibliotheca Hispana Vetus, 

Matriti, 1788, ii. p. 6, No. 16. 

Gmdin, GexhtchU der Chemie (gives a wrong 
reference, and I cannot find the name at all). 

Hutchinson, Biographia Medica, 1799, i. pp. 

29-^ 

Fuchs, Repertorium der Chemischen Litteraiur, 
1806-08, p. 14. 

Ersch a Gruber, Allgemeine Encyclopddiet 182 1, 
▼i. p. 50a. 

Sprengel, Geschichte der ArMneyhunde, 1823, ii. 
p. 418. 

Dezdmeris, DicHonneUre historique de la Mide- 
cine^ 1828, i. p. 214. 

BiegraphU MAUcale^ Paris, Panckoucke, I p. 

439. 
Schmieder, Geschichte der Alchemic, 1832, p. 97. 

Haji Khal&, Lexicon Bibliographtcum, ed. 
Fluegiel, Leipxig, 1835-38, fassim^ see the index 
under Abu 'Ali Hosein Ben Abdallah Ibn S(n4. 

Emil XiXiDsat^ Geschichte der Medicin^ 1840, p. 
19a 

Wlistenfeld, Geschichte der AraHscken Aende und 
Natwfdrscher, G<Htingen, 1840, No. 128, p. 64. 
Hoefer, Histoire de la Chimie, 1842, i. p. 327; 

1866, i. p. 345. 

Ibn Khallikan, Biographical Dictionary^ faj 
M'Guckin de Slane, Pans, 1843, i. p. 440. 

Kopp, Geschichte der Chemie^ 1843, *• P* 57 & 
passim. 

Haur^u, De la Philosophie ScholasHqme, 1850, L 
p. 366. 

Hammer - Purgstall, Uteralur- Geschichte der 
Araber, Wien, 1854, v. pp. 368-396. 

Bayle & Thillaye, Btcgraphie MidicaU^ 1855, 1 

p. lOI. 

Phillippe & Ludwig, GeschichU der Apotheher, 
i8|^, p. 384 Si passim. 

Meyer, Geschichte der Botamih, Ktelgsberg, 
1856, iii. p. 184 & passim. 

Munk, Milanges de Philosophie Juive et Arabe, 
Paris, 1859, p. 3SX 

St&ckl. GescktchU der Philosophie des Mitielalters^ 
1865, it p. 2^ 

DicHonnaire encyclopidique des Sciences midi- 
cales, Paris, 1867, vii. p. 517. 

Figuier, Vies des Savans illustres du Moyen Age^ 

1867, p. 55. 

LaaizgVie,Bibliothiftie Ouvart^tSciencesSecrites, 
1870, Nos. 671-675. 
Haeser, Geschichte der Medicin^ Jena, 1875, i. 

P.S84. 

opp, Beitrdge sur Geschichte der Chewtie, 1875, 
Luaen Lederc. Histoire de la Midecime A robe , 

iiu p. ^ 

Luaen Liecierc, 
Paris, 1876, L 460. 

Hirsch, Biograpkisches Lexicon der hervorragen- 
den Aerste, IW4, L p. 172. 

Kopp, Die Alchemie^ iBSS, passim. 

Like Schmieder, Kopp distinguishes the Arabian 
physician from the author of the alchemical tracts 
whom be calls Pseudo-Avicenna. 

Billings, index- Catalogue . . . 1880, i. p. 712; 
Second Series, 1896, i. p. 819. 

AXT (JOHANN Conrad). 
Tractatus de Arboribus Coniferis et Pice Conficienda, bisque ex illis Arboribus 
provenientibus, in lucem editus k Johanne Conrado Axtio, Medicin. Licentiato. 
Jenae, Impensis Johannis Bielkii, Bibliop. Typis Samuelis Krebsii, 
M.DC.LXXIX. 

12**. Pp. 131 [3 blank]. Engraved title and 5 engraved plates. 

A very good little book in which, besides an 
account of the common conifers, are contained the 
methods for making resin, pitch, chanx>al, soot or 
lamp-black, etc., and the plates exhibit the appar- 
atus employed in Thuringia. A work going over 
the same subject was written by Pierre Belon : De 
Arboribus Coniferis^ Resiniferis . . . item de 
melle cedrino . . . resinis, 6* iis quce ex coniferis 
proficiscuntur, Paris, 1553, 4to. There are draw- 
ing in it of the trees, but none of the charcoal 
furnaces and distilling apparatus. 

To the present work is appended the letter on 
Antimony, in which he accuses Gui Fatin of trying 
to poison his son (who was ill) by means of it, 
instead of which he cured him. This accusation 
the Jena feunilty compelled him to withdraw — to 
canc^ the letter and write an apology. Gmelin 
also quotes the epistle, but without alluding to the 
accusation. 

Axt was a native of Amstadt, studied medicine 
at HelmstHdt under Conring and Meibomius, was 
licensed in 1670, and returned to his native place 
where he was made burgomaster and engaged in 
practice. He was author of a dissertation : ** Abor- 
tus in morbis acutis lethalis . . . Jena, 1681," lamo ; 
and one "Dialogus de partu septimestri, Jena, 
1697," la*. 

The work on Coniferi is dedicated to his two 
teachers in the most grateful terms, fen- he says 
that he not only had learned from them all tne 
medicine he knew, but that he had been treated by 
them as a son, and Meibomius in particular had 
acted most generously towards him, assisting him 
for two years with the necessaries of life. The 
book was dedicated to them as an expression of 
his gratitude for their kindness and help, and he 
adds that, though it itself is small, it will be made 
great by bearing their names. 

( 

62 

AXT^AZOTH 

AXT (JOHANN Conrad). Continued, 

Ch. Patio, Lyceum Patavinum^ i68a, p. los. 

Kettnar, Medicinisches Gelehrten-Lextcon, 1740. 
p. 67. 

jOdier, Allgewteines Gtlihrteti'Lexicon, 1750^ u 
col. 673. 

Hailer, Bibliotheca Botanica, 1771, i. p. 603. 

Haller, BUHoikeea hiedicinm FracHae, 1779, ^i. 

P-445- 
Gmelin, GtschichU der CkewUe. 1798, ii. p. 302. 

J. H. Reveill6-Panse, Letirts de Gut PaHn^ 1846, 

i. p. xliii. 

AXTELMAYER (Stanislaus Reinhard). 

See ACXTELMEIER (STANISLAUS REINHARD). 

Acxtelmeier is described as a curious personage, works enumerated above he was the author also of 
skilled in physics and occonomics, who had travelled one entitled: "Hokus Pokeria, oder die VerfKU 
much and wrote a good deal In addition to the schung der Waaren." 

J5cher, Allgemeines GtUhrten-Lexicon^ 1750, i. col. 673. 

AZOT. 

Von der Natur vnd EigenschaUt defs Azot (d. h. defs Philosophischen Steins). 
See DARiOT (CLAUDE), Die Gulden Arch, Schatz und Kunstkammer, 16 14, Part ii. 
p. 282. 

AZOTH. 

See iENlGMA Philosophorum. 

See AURELiiC Occultse Philosophorum Partes duo. 

See CLETTUS (georgius). 

Su FICTULD (HERMANN). 

See BASiLius valentinus. 

On the interroetation of this word 'Azoth/ 
see De Planis Campy, Bouquet compose des plus 
belles PUurs Ckimtques^ 1639, p. ;^; Pemety, 
DicHonnairt Mytho-HermiHqtu^ 1758, p. 52 ; 
Schmieder, GesckUhie der Alchemie^ 1832, p. 207 ; 
Kopp, Die Alchemic, 1886, i. p. 30. f r^^t to 

say that I mistrust Schmieder's explanations of 
words and names, for I have found several of them 
incorrect. 

For a recent exposition of the word see Stanis- 
las de Guaita, Essais de Sciences MaudiUs, I. Au 
Seuil du Mysthr, Paris, 189a 

B-^BACON 63 

B. (A. C). 

See BENTZ (adolph christoph). 

B. (A. Gottlob). 

See BERLICH (ADAM GOTTLOB). 

B. (D. J.). 
De Spiritu Mundi Positiones aliquot. 

See MANGET (j. J.), Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, iL p. 876. 

B. (J. E.), ue, BURGGRAV (JOHANN ErNST). 
See CLODIUS (balduinus). 

B. (R.), i.e. Boyle (Robert). 
Specimina Historiae naturalis et experimentalis aquarum xnineralium. 
See VALLERius (nicolaus), Tentamina Physico-Chcmica, 1699, p. 58. 

BACHON (Roger). 

See bacon (roger). 

BACHUONE (Arnald). 

See ARNALDUS DE VILLANOVA. 

BACON (Roger). 

Sanioris Medicinse Magistri D. Rogeri Baconis Angli, de Arte Chymise scripta. 
Cui accesserunt opuscula alia eiusdem Authoris. Francofurti, Typis 

loannis Saurij, sumptibus loannis Theobaldi Schonwetteri. Anno M.DCIII. 

24'. Pp. 408. 

In the reissue of this book at Frankfurt in i6ao, Anima I, de maiori Aicimiat p, 17; Breviarimm 

the title-page and rest of sheet A {i.e. the first 24 iU dono Dei^y, 95 ; Verhum aobreviaium de leone 

pages) were set up afresh. There is no other viridi, p. 904 ; Secretum SecretomM, p. 985 ; 

dinerence between the two editions. Tractatus trium verbarum, p. 29a ; Speculum 

The tracts are : Excerpta ex Libro sexio Scien- Secretorum, p. ^87. 

fiarum, p. 7 ; Excerpta de Libra Avicenrue de Baumer mentions an edition : Franoof. 1612. 

Roger Bachon de TAdmirable Pouvoir et Puissance de I'Art & de Nature, ou 
est traicte de la pierre Philosophale. Traduit en Francois par lacques 
Girard de Toumus. A Paris, Chez Pierre Billaine, rue S. lacques, k 
la Bonne Foy, deuant S. Yues. M.DC.XXVIIII. Auec priuil^e du Roy. 

8*>. Pp. 63 ; 39 [i blank]. 

64 

BACON 

BACON (Roger). Continued. 

This is a reprint of the Lyons edition of 1557, 
with Girard's letter to Charles Fontaine and one 
bjr Jean Brunet to the reader. Appended — ^with 
separate signatures and pagination — is the tract : 
LArt irammutatoire du Pape lean XXII, de ce 
nam, which also appeared in 1557. 

Though it is quite distinct, this book seems to 
have bran issued simultaneously with the tracts 
ascribed to the 'Cosmopolite.' See sendivogius 

(MICHAEL). 

Chymisch- und Philosophische Schrifflen, . . . Nebst einer Vorrede, darinnen 
von dem Leben und Schrifften Rogerii Baconis Nachricht gegeben wird, ans 
Licht gestellet durch Friederich Roth-Scholtzen, Herrenstadio-Silesium. 

See ROTH-SCHOLTZ (friederich), Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum, 1732, iii. p. i, 
and p. 245. 

The works included in Roth-Scholtz's translation Schreiben von Geheimen WUrckungen dtr Kunst 

are : Radix Mundi oder Wurttel der Welt, taken und der Natur und von der Nichtigkeit der fal- 

fircnn William Salmon's version, p. 23 ; Medulla schen Magiae, p. 245 ; and the I^tin version : 

AUkemia, with preface by Joachim Tanckius, p. Efistola m Secretis Operibus Artis tt Naturae et de 

73, containing Spiegel der AlcAemie, p. 105 ; Nullitate Magiae^ as edited by John Dee, p. 287, 

Tractai vom Golde, p. 130 ; Tractat von der and to this are added a few notes. 

Tinctur und Oel des Vitrols, p. 179 ; Tractat von An edition of the Medulla Alchemi<B, edited by 

der Tinctur und Oel des Antimonii, p. 205 ; Send- Tancke, was published at Eisleben in 1608. 

Alchimeyspiegel. 

See below Speculum Alchemiae. 

De mirabili potestate Artis et naturae, libellus. 

Su ARTIS AURlFERiC . . . volumina, 1610, ii. p. 327. 

Von der wunderbarlichen Gewalt der Kunst und Natur. 

See MORGENSTERN (PHILIP), Turba Philosophorum, 1613, ii. p. 426. 
See MORGENSTERN (PHILIP), Turba Philosophorum, 1750, ii. p. 517. 

This is the same tract as the De Secretis Operibus 
Artis . . . mentioned below. It was first published 
by Oronce Fin^ in 1542, then at Oxford in 1594 : 
it was revised by Dr. Dee, and an edition contain- 
ing his corrections and notes appeared at Hamburg, 
1 618, small 8vo, pp. 80. An English translation 

was published in 1597 along with the Mirror of 
Alchimy, and another from the Hamburg edition, 
by T. M., London, 1659, x2mo. There is a French 
translation by A. Poisson : Lettre sur les Prodiges 
de la Nature et de I' Art, Paris, 1893, small 8*. pp. 
70 [2], with a portrait of Bacon. 

Oleum Vitrioli. 

See EROFFNETE GEHEIMNISSE des Stcins der Weisen (1708), p. 651. 

Oehl des Vitriols.'* Roth-Scholtz's is a revised and 

Though included in this collection without the 
Author's name, it is the same tract as that given 
bdow under the title: "Von der Tinctur und 

modernized version of this translation. 
K.'s is a new translation. 

E. L. D. 

See DARIOT (CLAUDE), Die gulden Arch, Schatz und Kunstkammer, 16 14, Part iii. 

p. 73. 

(Wanting in this copy). 

See VIER Chymische TractJitlein, 1677, p. 22. 

Die Practick oder Procefs Rogeri Bachonis de Sole. 

See [sCHATZ imd Kunstkammer], p. 566. 

See TANCKE (JOACHIM), Promptuarium Alchemire, Ander Buch, 1614, p. 566 

Radix Mundi. 

See SALMON (WILLIAM), Medicina Practica, i69i,p. 585. 

De Secretis Operibus artis et naturae, et nullitate Magiae, cum notis. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1660, V. p. 834. 

See MANGET (j. J.), Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, i. p. 616. 
See above De mirabili potestate Artis et naturae, libellus. 

BACON 65 

BACON. Continued. 

Specnlum Alchemis. 

5^ ALCHKMiA, IS4I) p. 357. 

Su GRATAROLO (c.^ Verac alchemiae . . . doctrina, 1561, i. p. 201. 

Su THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1 659, ii. p. 377. 

Su MANGET (j- JO9 Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, i. p. 613. 
See SALMON (WILLIAM), Medicina Practica, 169 1, p. 621. 

Though the Latin title is retained by Salmon the ef Alckimy, London, Richard Olive, 1597, small 

tract is m Encguh. It is an amplified Tersion of 4**. The French translation : Le Miroir ^Al- 

the original. ' There is an earlier translation into quimit^ was published at Lyons in 1557, with the 

Engliafa, which has now become rare : Tlu Mirror other tracts mentioned above. 

Alchimeyspiegel. 

See SCHRODER (fr. J. w.), Neue Alchymistische Bibliothek, 1774, n. ii. p. 167. 

Speculum Alchymis; The true glass of Alchemy. 

See COLLECTANEA CHYMICA, 1684, p. 123. 

This is a different tract from the preceding. 

Von der Tinctur oder oleo Stibii. 

Su BASILIUS VALENTINUS, Triumph wagen Antimonii, 1624, p. 264. 
Ballmer quotes : Tractatus de tinctura Antimonii, Hamb., 1676. 

V<m der Tinctur und Oehl des Vitriols. 

Su K. (E. L. D.), Triumpfwagen des Vitriols, 1770, p. 49. 

This is a different translation firom that under OUum VUrioH. 

Vortreffiicher Tractat von der wahrhafftigen Composition des Lapidis Philoso- 
phorum. De Sole. 

See [SCHATZ und Kunstkammer], p. 546. 

See hildenbrandt (paulusX Auriferae Artis . . . Uhralteste Authores, i6o8| 

p. 109. 

This is identical with the Ttaetat vom Gdde in Roth>Scholts*s Theatrum^ 1732, iil p. 130, mentioped 
above. 

See TANCKB (joachimX Promptuariuni Alchemiae, Ander Buch, 1614, p. 546. 

Roger Bacon was bom at Ilchester about 1214, His skill in mathematics, experimental science 

studied at Oxford, lived there, and then passed and mechanical invention was so remarkable for 

over to Paris. He returned to England and settled his time that, like his contemporaries Michael 

mbably at Oxford. In 1257 he was sent back to Scotus and Albertus Magnus, ne acquired the 

nuris by the superiors of the Franciscan order, reputation amongst the common people of being a 

vrhich Bacon had entered, and he ¥ras kept in close magician, for whom no feat or wonder was impot- 

confinement there for ten years. Towards the sible. In fact the same l^ends, probably of much 

close of thU period Pope Clement IV. requested earlier origin than the thirteenth century, are told 

him to write a treatise on the sciences, and this of him as of Albertus, like that of the bnuen head 

resulted in the Oftu Afajus (ed. Jebb, Lond., 1733, ^^'^ ^^ ^^ magic banquet It is by these stories as 

folio), one of the most important and significant dramatised in Greenes play, and repeated in the 

works of the time. Others followed, some of which chapbooks of the seventeenth and eighteenth 

have been edited by Brewer, and printed in the centuries, that he has come down to us less as a 

Rolls Series, London, 1859, 8*. A number, how- philosopher than as "a brave necromancer, that 

ever, are still in manuscript, and for the Alchemical can make women of devils and juggle cats into 

writings there must have been a demand, as MSS. costermongers." Such performances are described 

both on vellum and on paper are not uncommon. in the following: 

Subsequent to 1257 he enjoyed more freedom, Robert Greene, The Honorable HistorU of Frur 

which he used, as Cornelius Agrippa did some two Bacon and Frier Bon^^av, London, printed by 

and a half centuries later, to make an attack on the Elizabeth Allde, 1630. with a vignette of the Brasen 

monks for their opposition to true learning, and Head scene, 4". A-H in fours. The finst edition 

being condemned for innovations in 1278 was again appeared in 15^, 4**. See Greene's Works, edited 

imprisoned. On his release he may have returned by Dyce. 1831, 1. p. 141. 

to Oxford, for the tradition is that he died there The Famous Hxstory of Frier BcLcon . . . with the 

about 1294, though Pits says 1284. Lives emd Deaths of, , , Bungey and Vtmdermast, 

E 

66 

BACON-^BALBIAN 

BACON, Continued. 

London, printed for W. Thackcry, with a repro- 
duction of the vignette, no date, ^*. A-F in 
fours. Black letter. This is contained in the 
collection of separately printed stories called TaUs 
worth Telling : or Ckanmimg Cmrusities, London, 
T. Roe. No date. 8*. ppi 36. with a cokmred 
Illustration of the 6dl of the bcaaen head, whKh 
is dated 1809. 

Bale, /llustrimm Ma/oris Britammug Scrifiontm 
. . . Smwummriwam, Gippeswki. 1548. t 114. (List 
of Bacon's works.) 

Maier, SytmMm Amrfim Maum^ 1617, pi 45a 

Pitsanxs, Jfelatiomes Hisitrum de fthu Amf^icis^ 
ParisiiSt 1619, Tom. L ppi 566-69 (ann. 1984). 

Nandd, Afolagk fomr tomiUs grmmds fersmmagu 
A Mmgk^ t6as, p. 488 ; EngL 

VoasiaSk Dt Hisiaricis fmtimit Ukri III,, 1651, 

Bord. BOtiofkotm CUauem. Pteis. 1654. p. 38. 

Vosans, De fmeOmmr ArtOms Fofnlmkms Ukri 
Tim, De i/mtwtrm Maikesim Nmtmrm 6* Com- 
jfitmtieme Uktr^ 1660^ p. iio» catpi zzvi. § 10; ppi 
179-180^ capi xxxT. §31 ; pt 351, capt dz. § 13 ; p. 
41a, cap. ho. $7: p. 4S1. cap. Ixzi §8. 

BonichiiB, De Ortm ei PirigromCkBmim Disser- 
irnHo^ i668» p. 1*3. 

MorboC De UeimUmrmm Timmsmmimimme . . . 
EfiMm^ HambL, 1673. n. 131. 

Webster. Tke DufUj^u^ efmppmei Wiickcrmfi, 

Maciras, E^emjmtlegium CriiUmem^ 1687. p. 98^ 
Borrichias* Com^tcims SsripimMm Cktmitm'uwt^ 
i6q9. p. xa, Na xvi 
Hendreich, Aiadhrftr Brmmekmhugiae, 1699, p^ 

"The Famous Historie of Frier Baooo," taken 
from an undated edition printed at London by 
E. A. [probably Eliabeth AUde] for Francis Grove, 
is contained m Thorns' Early English Prose 
RomoMcts^ and edition, 1858. L ol x^ 

Bacon's portrait forms the mmnspieoe to the 
second vohmie of Roch-Scfaolts's Denisckes Tkoa- 

17301 

Montoda, Hisimre des Matkimatiqnes^ ifSBi i. 
pp.4a1-.fa9. 
Mor^. Le Grtmd Dtciumnaire 

'759. »^ p. 
Bnidcer, Uistoria Criiica Pkiiuo/kite, 1766, iii. 

pp. 817-22 ; App. vi. pp. 5967. 

Biograpkia BrUammtca, ed. Kippis (1778)^ i pp. 
416-440 (a fun artide). 

Banmer. Bihhoikocm Ckeneifm, 1782, p. 76. 

Beytrag smr Gttckickie dor kdkem CkemU, 

PP- 99. 573t ^*^ 
Gmdm, Gttckickie der Ckemde^ 1797, L ppi 9a- 

lOI. 

Lucas Wadding, ScrjMmrts Ordsmis Mimormm^ 
Rome. 1806, p. axa (SKxt nodoe and VaX of his 
work&) 

X7»5. 

i8ia. liL p. 

Wood. FmsH Oxomunats^ ed. B&ss, x8aa Part 
ii ooL aB6. 3x9 (appended to the Atkem^ 

BiogmpkU Midumk, Paris. Panckoncfte (x8ao. 
asL L pu 473 (artide by JoordanL 

Ersdi k Grvber. Alkpemmn 
i8ai. vii. p. 45X"tide by t^oann), 

Schraieder, Gtschwekie dor Alckenteo^ 1832, p. 

% « 

RemuMum, Eimleitm^g im die Nisktriam liter' 
1709. iii. PL 497 ; X7XO. iv. pw 

de S 
r. X7aa. m. p. 190^ 

ius» BiUiotketm Grmtm^ 1796, xiii. p. 384. 
L vv^ c ix. 
Roih-SchoKti, BihEotketm Ckeauem, 17*7. p. i6l 
Baylc; Dicfimuiro Historifme, 1730. u p. 416^ 
Morhof, AMuAir. X73a. i p^ 15 ft immm, 
Lnoas W«Mm«« AmmtJes Ordimis kiimormn, 
t7ja« iT« pw ai4 (ann. n66, Nos^ 13. 14) ; 
▼. Pk u (ana. xa|8» Na ay). 
r, CMimrsmi-IjtMieoe^ 17^ iii. ooL 73. 

Sldk^ AmkSi^ Mmr Niskioie der Geinkrkeit. 

^'iMiSErt^^moy, Nisimse de in Pkilotifkie 
JRrraMfvr, 174a, i. pp^ xon^ii8 ; iii. p. 100. 
Oavew Srr^^mm Betmmtikormm Niskioim 

p.6n. ( 

Hisioire LiUirmire de in E^wmce, 1848, zz. pp. 
aar-asa (artide by Viotar Le Qerc). 

Hoefcr. Hisieire de in CiMnc. 1842, L ppi 368- 
379 ; 1866. i. pp. ^90^08. 

Biegmfkie Ihuverselie, 1843. >>- P- 575 (artide 
bySiard). 

Kopp. Gesckickie der Ckeatie, 1843-47. i. pp. 63- 
6sei/nssim, 

Powhet Hisioire des Seiemewt Nnimrelies nm 
Jdooem Agt, Paris. 1853. 

Knight, Tke Ei^iisk Cycltfrndie, 1856. L ooL 

AVm^ BiigrnMie Gtm&mie^ 1859^ iv. coL 
8»53 (artkle by F. Hoefcii. 

£Bile Qiarles. E^or Bnenm, on Fit, j 
n^ges^ ses Dectrimes, Hm&inimi, x86x, 8*. 

:>l5ckl. Gesekickie der /^ifiin/iii des 
nUers, 1865, ii. pL 915. 

W. Oncken. EesgnrBncom (GotM. x866l 

Loos FIguier, yies des . 
lAgpn Age, i8fe, p^ X73 (& P^fminr 

a; 

rtKJfiOtraira, 1748^ 
or MS& of Bacoa^ft works.) 

175QW i. kttcr B; pp. ^lu (^ipplanent to 
AmW's wtkkw) 
SocrtMUivew A AWr Mtikod < Ckewmby. by 
Sknw. 175^ i p. a8L 

•Simftte, 1870^ Nq&. 782-739. 

Hanrtea* Bisimrwde in 
itJi 8u^ a^ I^Knie. T. i. pp^ 

Ropp. Bmr^ge 

374 (artkle liy the 
Kopp, /Mir 

■• Pl^ MT. 3r«. 359- 

n. p. 

BALBIAN a^TSXVS U 
Dicta AknL 

BALBIAN-^BALDUINUS 

67 

BALBIAN (Justus a). Continued. 
Tiactatus septem de Lapide Philosophico. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, iii. p. 649. 

The titles of the tracts are as follow : 
Tractatus primus Rosarii AbhreviatL 
Tractatus secundus de Lapide Philosophico. 
Tractatus tertius de Minera Philosophica. 
Tractatus quartus qui dicitur Compendium utile 

ad credendum Meditationum Experimentum. 
Tkuctatus quintus qui dicitur Rosarium Philo- 

sophonim ex Compilatione omnium Philosophi- 

Joost van Balbian, of Alost, was bom about 
1560, studied in Italy, graduated as doctor, 
possibly at Padua, returned to Holland about 
IJ97, practised in Gouda and died there in 1616. 
He is best known by the translation of the * Dicta 
Alani,' and by his collection of chemical tracts. 

The latter were published at Leyden, 1599, 8**, 

Hendreich, Pant^taBrandenburpoB^ 1699, p. 39a 

Roth-Scholtc, Biblioikeca Ckenuca, lyay, p. 16. 

Leoglet Dufresno^, Histoire de la PhimophU 
Hermdtique, 1743, iu. p. iia 

Hailer, Bibliatktca MedicintB Practice, 1777, il 
p. 338 (mentions only the Nova raHoy 

SeytragMurGesch, derkdhem Chemu, 1785, p. 583. 

coram Librorum, per Toletanum Philosophum 
Maximum. 

Tractatus sextus cui titulus Parvus Tractatus de 
Mercurio Philosophico. 

Tractatus Septimus brevis sed non levis de 
Lapide Philosophico. 

With the exception of the fifth they are all 
anonymous. 

but an edition of 1597 is also mentioned. Len^let 
Dufresnoy, followed by Gmelin, quotes an Italian 
translation: 'Specchio chimico,* Roma, 1634, to 
which Gmelin adds one of 1629, 8**. 

In the BiopTLphie Midicale, mention is made of 
another work, which I have not seen : Nova ratio 
praxeos mediae^ Venice, 1600, 8**. 

Gmelin, GeschichU dtr Chemie^ "^777* i* P« 308. 
BiograpkU MidicaU, Paris, Panckoucke (i8ao- 

25). »• p. 573- 
Schmieder, GeschichU der Akhemie, 1832, p. 

Van der Aa, Biographixh Woordenboeek der 
Nederlanden, 1853, ii. i. p. 69. 

BALDEWEIN (Christian Adolph). 

See BALDUINUS (CHRISTIANUS ADOLPHUS). 

BALDINGER (Ernst Gottfried). 

See WIEGLEB (JOHANN CHRISTIAN), Kleinc Chymische Abhandlungcn, 1771J 

See BIARHERR (PHILIPP AMBROSIUS). 

Baldinger is the editor of these tracts. He was 
Professor of Medicine at Jena, and was a medical 
jonmalisL A list of his journals will be found in 
Gmelin's GeschichU, and he himself sketches some 
of his literary designs in the " Nachricht" prefixed 
to Marherr's dissertation. 

He was bom at Vargula, near Erfurt, in 1738, 
studied medicine at Eniirt in 1754, then at Hiule 

Johann Stephan Piitter, Versuch einer academ- 
ischen GeUhrUn-Geschichtevon der Georg- Augustus- 
Universitdtau Gottingen, 1765-1838, ii. (1788). p. 76. 

Meu.^. Das GeUhrte Teutschland, oder Lexikon 
der ietMt Ubenden Teutschen SchriftsUller^ 1796, i. 
pp. X27-131. (List of his works. ^ 

Gmelin, GeschichU der Chemte, 1799, iii. p. 637 
Sl passim. 

Fuchs, Refertorium, 1806-08, p. 370. 

Biographu Midica.le^ Paris, Pancko 

25). »• PP- 5i7-S2a- 

ickoucke (1820- 

and Jena, and g^^uated at Erfurt in 176a After- 
wards he became Phil. D. of Wittemberg. In 1768 
he was Professor at Jena, in 1773 Ptt>fessor of 
Medicine at Gdttingen, removed to Cas.%1 in 178a, 
and finally to Marburg in 178^ where he died in 
1804. He was a voluminous writer, author of many 
academic dissertations, and compiled a Catalogue 
of those on the history and use ot drags. 

Strieder, Grundlagexu einer Hessischen Gelehrten' 
und SchriftsUller-GuchichU, 1819, xviii. pp. i-ai. 

Doeimeris, Dictionnaire histori^ue de la Mkde- 
cinej 1828, L pp. 356-359. 

Pierer, Universal-lJtxihon, Altenburg, 1835, ii. 
617. 

Bayle & Thillave, Biographu M/dicaU, 18^5, 
ii. pp. 631-634 (reprintra from the BiograpTue 
MiduaU), 

Joh. Gdnther, Lebenskisun der Professoren der 
Universitdt Jena, 1858, p. 139. 

BALDUINUS (Christianus Adolphus). 

Aurum Aurae, Vi Magnedsmi universalis attractum, per Inventorem anagram- 
matizomenum : Sic (infra, supra) Sol Duplus Abundat in Auris. Colonia 
ad Spream Impensis Ruperti Volckers, Bibliop. cIdIocLXXIV. 

8". Pp. S3W 

out the name of the place ; and as it was not to be 
had at the booksellers he took the liberty of re- 
printing it, hoping that the author, whoever he was, 
would not be offended. It was somewhat enlarged 
in the edition of the following year. 

'*Sic Sol Duplus Abundat in Auris" is an 
anagram for Christianus Adolphus Balduinus, 

omitting the letter h. 
This tract (accord! 
Elsholz) was publisbedfthe previous year, but wit 

This tract (according to the epilogue by Jo. Sig. 

68 

BALDUINUS 

BALDUINUS (Christianus Adolphus). ConHmttd, 
Aurum Superius & Inferius Aurae Superioris & Inferioris Hermedcum CSuristiam 
Adolphi Balduini, S. R. J. Academ. Nat Curiosor. Colleg. cognom. Hermeds. 
Francofurti & Lipsiae, Sumpt Georg. Heinr. FrommannL MDCLXXV. 

za*. Pp. rsal Z73 [i\ Folding engraved symbolical title, not induded in the 
pagination ; a foloing plates. 

Prefixed to this is the ' Phosphorus Hermetictxs,' with the following title : 

Phosphorus Hermeticos. sive Magnes Luminaris Christiani Adolphi Balduini, 
S. R. J. Academ. Nat Curiosor. Colleg. cognom. Hermetis. Francofurti k Lipsiae, 
Sumpt Georg. Heinr. FrommannL M DC LXXV. 

No pagination. [Pp. aa] 

19 

Aurum Superius & Inferius Aurae Superioris & Inferioris Hermeticum, 
Christiani Adolphi Balduini, S. R. I. Acadenu Nat CoUeg. Cognom. Hermetis. 
Amstelodami Apud Joannem Jansonium K Waesberge. MDCLXXV. 

Pp. [ao] 96 [13, 3 blank]. Engraved title on two leaves, a folding plates. 

19 

The Appendix unpaged, contains the Pkospkarms 
Hirwuticus, sivi Mapus Luminaris, 

This tract was also printed in the Miscellanea 
Academic Natmrm Cttriosoruwt^ 1676, Appendix 
ad Annum quartum k quintum, pp. 105-166. 
followed by the * Phosphorus Hermeticus.' pp. 167. 
179, and an ' Bpistola * by Fried. Hoffmann, pp. 

i73-i79> Of the ' Phosphorus Hermeticiis' Fbdis 
<|uotes an edition Lipue, 1674, la*. In anoclier 
issue of the MiscelUmea^ 1676, these three tracts 
will be found on pp. 9X-XS7. Besides the above 
edition, Fuchs quo^ another: Colonise ad ^raarn 
et Lipsiae. 

Hermes Curiosus, sive Inventa et Experimenta PhysicoChymica Nova Christiani 
Adolphi Balduini, S. R. I. Academ. Nat Curios. & Sodet Reg. Anglic. 
Collegse, d. Hermetis. Lipsise, Sumptibus Georgii Heinria Frommanni, 
Anno I 68a 

Pp. 58 [a blank? wanting]. 

is an edhioQ : Haynae, T>pis Antoris, 

la^ 

Heindrddi quotes an edition of Leipsig, 1667. za*. 
Anno 1679 ; small 8*. pp. [56]. 

Hermes Curiosus, sive Inventa et Experimenta Physico-Chymica Nova Christiani 
Adolphi Balduini, S. R. I. Academ. Nat Curios. & Sodet Reg. Anglic 
Collegse, d. Harmetis. M.DC.LXXX. 

la*. PpL [58, a blank]. 

Aurum Superius & Inferius aurse superioris et inferioris hermeticum. 
Sit MANGET 0* J*X Bihliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, iL p. 856. 

Phosphorus Hermeticus. 

Sii MSNTZSL (CHRISTIANX Lapis Bononiensis, 1675. 

By some writers Baldewein, Balduin or Balduinus, 
is styled Christoph, and Adam, althouffh in his 
writing* he calls himself Christian Adolph. He 
was lK)rn at DooMn, near Meissen (Saxony) in 
t03t. lie first took up law, w^t to Ratisbon 
where ho lived for a little time, returned in 1654 to 
Naxony, and was appointed * Amtmann * at Gross- 
or (iMNienlmin. lie devoted himself to the study 

Heniiit^ltu* WittQ, rHarittm Bii^gra^icum, 1688. 
Siff. Ttttaiyrjt). Aim. t6at. 
( -hristimh. I lendroich. l^mkche Brumdtmimrxicet^ 

Htfoi.. t«99. !>. 394* 

Kftmmann, KMHhtnx in dii Nisi^am Htir^ 
aHam, itoq. iii. p, $•?. 

Roth-Seholts, iHNi$ikH^ Ckmkn, 1717. p. 
«7. 

of alchemy, and discovered the flaocesceut sub- 
stance, cakaum nitrate^ which is still known as 
Balduin*s ^Mspborus. He was a member of the 
Academia Naturae Curiosonmi in 1673, under the 
name of Hcnnes. in the Froceedimgs of which his 
papers appear, and he was also a Idlow of the 
Royal Society, 1676. He died in Dec. 31, x68a. 

/oca Umpelis Pn/Jhrwrnms BUHeiktem MetmUiat, 
Feiykisier^ 173% it p. 

Nf orhof. Foiyttistor, vnsk, 
Lenglet Dufresao^, UiA 

Hermitifm^ 1748. iii. p^ xil 

isteift me la FkiUaefkie 

iQdber^ Al^gameimes Gtkkrtem-Laneam^ ij$^ i. 

735* ,, 

mJ¥9MI» GMMfWa ^'1 

X7S4»P*XS» 

BALDUINUS—BAPST 69 

BALDUINUS (Christianus Adolphus). Continued. 

BQdiner, Acadnmm . . . Naturm Curiosamm Scfamieder, GtschichU der AUkewtU^ 1832,0.448. 

Historia^ 1755* p. 466, Na yx NouvelU Bu»raMt GiniraU^ 1859^ iv. ooL 972. 

Btytrag mr GesckUkU itr kSkem CJUmie, 1785, Kopp, Du AUkemie, 1886. i. 219 ; iL 3166. 

p. 625. See also elsmolz (johann Sigismund) for an 

Ginelui, GeschichU der CAemie, 1798, ii pp. 24, account of the different kinds of phosphorus. 

115, 137, 2x9. For some historical notes on the phosphori of 

ruchs, Reperioriuwi^ 1806-08, pp. 178, 182, 183, Balduinus. Licetus, Kunckel, ftc, see Borrichius' 

187. "Dissertatio de variis exdtandi ignis modis, et 

Thomson, History of the Royal Society, 1812, Phosphoro." in his DissertaHofUs Acadewuca, 

Appendix IV. p. xxm. Hauniae, 171 5, i. p. 489 sqg. 

BANG (Thomas). 

Cnpn 137 Caelum Orientis et prisd mnndi triade exercitadonum literariarum 
reprsesentatum, curisque Thomae BangI D. et Pr. Regii Hauniensis inves- 
tigatum. Cum S. R. M. Friderid III. special! privil^o. Hauniae, Typis 
Petri MorsingI, Reg. & Acad. Typogr. Sumptibus vero Petri Hauboldi 
Bibliop. M.DC.LVII. 

4*. Pp. [8] 224. Title red and black. Curious engraved symbolical title. 

The front margins up to p. 24 have been damaged and repaired, but this has 
entailed the loss of a part of the engraved title. 

Reimmann sajrs the book was rare in his time, studied there and at Rostock and Wittemberg. 

It does not treat of diemistry, but of the origin In 1630 he vras appointed Professor of Hebrew at 

and eurly use of written characters and their signi- Copenhagen, 1652, Professor of Theology, Doctor 

ficance. In so far as it refers to the Cabala it may in 1653. Librarian of the University in 16^, died 

be of use in elucidating some of the alchemical 27th October, 1661. His works rdate to Oriental 

ideao. There was an edition, Krakau, 1691, 4*. scholarship. 

Bong was bom at Copenhagen in 1600. He 

Albertus Bartholinus. De Scriptis Danorum liber 
postkMmus^i666^ p. 13S. 

Witte, Diarittm Bitgrapkicum, 1688, Sig. Qqq 2 1736, p. 77. 
verso, Ann. 27 Oct., mi. Vogit, Catalogus historico-criHcus Librorum 

Hendrdch, PandecUe Brandenburgicti^ i699i P* rariorum, 1747, p. 72. 
404. Clement, Btbltoihbqve Curieuse, 1751, ii. p. 403. 

Reimmann, AnUHung in die Historiam lOer- Bricka, Dansk BiqgraJlsM Lexikom, 1890^ L p. 50Z. 
ariam Antediluvianam, 1709, p. 235. 

Bayle, DicHonaire HUiori^ue, 1730, Up. 439. 
Stolle, AnUituHg zur Hutorie dor Gelakrkoit, 

BAPST (Michael). 
Michaelis Bapsts von Rochlitz luniperetum oder Wacholder-Garten, dariimen 
zu befinden : Wie man aus diesem edlen Gewechse, Wasser, Extracten, Oehl 
vnd Salien, durch die Spargierische vnd Chymistische Kunst ti^reiten vnd 
zurichten solL Sampt griindlichem vnd niitzlichem vnterricht, wie die bereite 
Artzneyen, inn vnd ausserhalb des Menschlichen Corpen^ zu allerley 
Gebrechen vnd Kranckheiten wol vnd erspriefslichen gebraucht werden 
mogen. Aus vieler hochgelehrter Ertzte, vnd vomehmer Artisten Biicher, 
auch Experientz zusammen getragen, Jetzo aber na^h des Autoris (seligen) 
Tod vb^rsehen vnnd in Druck verfertiget, durch loachimum Tanckium, D. 
Eifsleben Gedruckt, In voriegung Henningi Grossen, Buchhandlers in Leipzig, 
Jm M.DCV. Jahr. 

4*. Pp. [8] 268. Register [11] [i Wank]. 

Colophon :— Typis Grofsianis. Gedruckt zu Eifsleben, durch Jacobum Haubisch, in 
voriegung Henningi Grossen. Buchhfindlers in Leipzig. Anno M. D.C. V. 

Michael Bapst was bom in 1540 at Rochlitz, monlv reported to be a Paracelsist, but Schubert 

studied at Leipzig, and in 1571 became Pastor at and Sudhoff have shown that he was not a medical 

Mohom in Saxony. For the support of his large man at all, but merely a compiler of popular books, 

fiunily he opoied a school, and bnides found time having medicine for their subject, and was in no 

to write numerous workis, both of a religious sense either a Paracelsist or a Galenist. The 

character and also on popular medicine and luniperetum was his last publication. 
sdeoee. He died at Mohom in 1603. He is com- 

70 

BAPST-'BARBA 

BAPST (Michael). Continued. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Anatomica^ 1774, I p. a68. 

Haller, Bibiiotheca Chirurpca^ 1774^ >• p* 354. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Medictna Pnuttctt, 1777. ii. 
p. 99a. 

Gmelin, Gesckichie dir Ckemie, 1797, L 288, 
quotes some of his medical compilations. Of these 
one of the most noteworthy is his Wttttderbarliches 
Ltib' und IVundarMneybuchy Eisleben, 1596. a\ 

Biographie MidicaU, Paris, Panckoiicke (1890- 

25). »• P- 537. 
Sprengel. Gesckickte der ArMneykunde, 1827, ill 

P- 5*4. 

AllgemHne Deutsche Biographie, 1875, ^ 44* 
Article by Scherer and Hinich. Scherer describes 
him as a poet. Hirsch speaks of him as without 
positive knowledj^e in medicine, and as being 
involved in mysticism. 

Schubert und Sudhoff: "Die Schriften des 
Michael Bapst von Rochliu (1540-1603)** in the 
CerUralblatt fUr BibUothehswesen, No. la, Dec. 
1889. voL vi. p. 537. 

"Michael Bapst von Rochliu, Pfarrer su Mo- 
horn," in Neves Archiv fUr Sdchsische GesckUkie 
und AUerthumskunde^ Bd. xi. Hft x ft a. 

BARBA (Albaro Alonso). 
Albaro Alonso Barba, eines Spanischen Priesters und hocherfahrnen Naturkiin- 
digers Berg-Biichlein, Darinnen von der Metallen und Mineralien Generalia 
und Ursprung, wie auch von derselben Natur und Eigenschafift, Mannig£Edtig- 
keit, Scheidung und Fein-machung, imgleichen allerhand Edelgesteinen, ihre 
Generation etc. aufsfiihrlich und nutzbarlich gehandelt wird. Anfangs in 
Spanischer Sprache beschrieben, und in zwey Theile getheilet Nun aber 
alien Bergwercks-Zugethanen und Bedienten, imgleichen auch andem Ertz- 
und Natur-Kiindigem, und der Alchimie Befiissenen zu Dienst und Gefallen 
in Teutsch iibersetzet von I. L. M. C. Mit Chur Sachsischer Freyheit nicht 
nach zudrucken. Hamburg, auf Gottfried Schultzens Kosten. 1676. 

8". Pp. [4] I-I38. 

Das Andere Buch von der Kunst der Metallen, worinnen der gemeine Weg das 
Silber durch Qvecksilber fein tu machen gelehret wird, nebst etlichen neuen Rc^en 
solches desto besser ins Werck cu setzen. Anfangs im Jahr 1640, in Spanischer 
Sprach beschrieben von Albaro Alonso Barba, Kunstmeistern. Priestem der Gemeine 
in der St. Bemhards Kirchen in der K5nigl Stadt Potosi in dem K5nigreich Peru in 
West-Indien ; Nunmehro aber den Liebhabem zu gefallen ins Teutsch Oberbiacht von 
I. L. M. C. Hamburg, auff Gottfried Schultzens Kosten. gedruckt im Jahr 1676. 

Title [a] ia9-204. Register [4]. Plate of Apparatus. 

Though the proent copy belonged to Jo. Wilh. 
Baumer. yet in his Bibliotheai Chemica {q.v.) he 
quotes the Franckfurt editions of I7a6 and 1759 
only. He may have got this copy after the 
BiSliciheca was printed. 

Presumably it was translated by Johann Lange, 
the indefatigable editor and transuitor of so mudi 
chemical literature ; but be does not say from what 
language he took it 

See COLLECTION (A) of scarce and valtiable treatises upon Metals . . . London, 
1740. 

Barba was a native of the village of Lepe in 
Andalusia. He entered the church and became 
pastor of St Bernards at Potosi. in South America, 
while there he had the opportunity of studying 
minerals and mining, extraction of silver and 
assaying, and became very skilful in these branches 
of science. He embodied his knowledge and ex* 
pvience in the treatise El arte de los wtetallas^ 
published at Madrid in 1640 in 4*, with illustrations. 
It was kept as secret as possible by the Spaniards, 
but when Edw. Montagu. Earl of Sandwich, was 
ambassador extraordinary to Spain, he obtained a 
copy and translated two out of the five books into 
English in 1669. The first book appeared at 
London in 1670, and the two together in 1674. 
Two German translations followed, one from tbe 
English, and. long after, another from the French ; 
and two in Frencn from the Spanish. The work 
still retains its interest and throws much light on 
the practical and theoretical views of the time. 

The following editions are mentioned : 
Spanish : Madrid, 1640^ 4* ; 1799. 8* ; Corduba, 
167s ; Lima, 1817. 4*. 
&iglish : London. 1670. 8* ; 1674, 8* ; 1738^ 

German : Hambure. 1676, 1696^ 8^ ; Franckfurt, 
1736, 8* ; 1759, 8* ; Wien, 1749. by Godar. from 
the French (pp. [aa] 364 [34]. with 8 plates) ; Wien. 
1767. 8*. 

French : Paris, 1730^ Ia^ by Hautin de ViUars. 
**an abridgement made bv one who knew Spanish 
well '* : 1751, a vols. la . translated frxym the 
Spanish by Lenglet Dufiresnoy, (the epistle b 
signed Grasfart^ a pseudonym which he bad 
assumed) ; La Haye. 175a. la . 

Gobet asserts that Barba claimed the disooveiy 
of the amalgamation process. Beckmann shows 
that Barba does not make this claim, and that 
Gobet is misfakm. 

Nothing b recorded as to tbe dates of Barba's 

BARBA'-BARCHUSEN 71 

> 

BARBA (Albaro Alonso). Continued. 

biith and death, but he must have been born in the Hendreich quotes an English edition of 1669. I 

latter part of the sixteenth century and lived on to have not seen one of that year, and he may have 

the middle of the seventeenth. Qu6rard says that possibly taken the date of translation as that of 

he was of the eighteenth century, which is obviously publication, 

a mistake. * 

Cooring, In C/ttiversam Aritm Afedicam . . . Baumer, BiMo/JUca Chemica, 178a. p. 66. 

Inirodmctio, 1687 (addit. ) p. aSo. Nicolas Antonio. Bibliotkeca Hispana Nova^ 

HendreiGfa, Pandtctm Brandenburgicm^ 1^991 P* Matriti, 1783, i. p. 57. 

409. Beckmann, Beytrdge mr GexkUkU der Br^ 

Jac ToUius, i^^ul!aA9//fWfurur, ed. Henninius, findungen^ 1786, i. p. 51. English translation. 

I. laS. London, 1814, i. p. 28. 

i-Scholtz, BiblioiMeca Ckemica, 1727, p. 17. Gmelin, Gesckichte der Ckemie, 1797, L pp. 

I LtufoUts Prodromus Bihliothectg metallicm^ 7AT7S7* 

Wcdffienbattel, 1733, p. zo. with Lessing's note. Fuchs. Reptrtorium der CkemiscMen Litteratur^ 

/a£0# LeufMs Prodromus Biblioihecte metdliiae, JAT-IS?' 

' " _ p. xo, vrith Lessing's note. Fi 

Lenglet Dufresno^, Histoire de la PhilosofkfU i8o6k)8, pp. '177. 245. 353. 

HerwiMque» 1743, ui. p. iis (Spanish, Maorid, Biographie Mddicale^ Paris, Panckoucke (i890> 

16419. 17^; French, 1^30— abridgment). 35), i. p. 538. 

La Prance IMtiratre, Pkuis, 1769. iL p. 410 J. M. Qu^rard, La Prance LiiUrairt, Paris, 

fsays that the second volume was by Lenglet Du- 1837. L p. 171. 

nesnoy). Hoefer, Histoire de la Ckimiet 1843, "• P* 3'3 * 

Wei^, Grundriss der reinen und angewandlen 1869, ii. p. 305. 

Ckemie, 1777, iL p|X 439, 467. Ladrague, BiSliothique Ouvart^, Sciences 

Gobei, Les Anciens MirUralogisies de France^ Secrites^ 1870, No. X183. 
1779b i- P- 382. note. 

BARCHUSEN (Johann Conrad). 
Joannis Conradi Barchusen Acroamata, in quibus complura ad latro- Chemiam 
atque Physicam spectantia, iocunda rerum varietate, explicantur. Trajecti 
Batavorum, Impensis Joannis Vischii. 1703. 

8*. Pp. [34] 376. Index [si] [i errata] [s blank]. Title red and black. Portrait 
sfridi Jac. FiL ThomasI rhilosophi et Medici ' 

of ' Godefridi Jac. FiL ThomasI Philosophi et Medici ' on the reverse of the title. 

This is an interesting series of papers u|x>n acids, and Use of Chemistry ; Defence of Chemical 

salts^ precipitation, fire, water, eartn. fermentation, Principles against the Peripatetics ; the Vindication 

and other chemical subjects, but of special note are of Chemical Principles against the Mathematical ; 

the address he gave on his appointment to the the Explanation of certain Chemical Fables, and 

Chair of Chemistry in Utrecht : on the Antiquity on the Mutability of Medicine. 

Johannis Conradi Barchusen Compendium Ratiocinii Chemici More Geometra- 
rum Condnnatum. Lugduni Batavorum, Impensis Theodori Haakii. 

Bibliop. MDCCXII. 

8^. Pp. [8] 70 [i errata, i blank]. 

This is not a practical treatise on chemical pre- follow fifty-two ' Propositiones ' each with a ' De- 

parations, but an exposition of chemical principles monstratio' appended. It is quite an exceptional 

and theoiy. It consists of nineteen ' Dennitiones,' book in the literature of the time; but compare the 

seven ' Postulata,' and six ' Pronunciata,' each of work of j. j. rosenstbngbl. 
which have a short ' Explanatio ' added, and then 

Joannis Conradi Barchusen Pyrosophia, succincte atque breviter latro-Chemiam, 
Rem Metallicam et Chrysopoeiam pervestigans. Opus Medicis, Physicis, 
Chemicis, Pharmacopoeis, Metallicis, &c. non inutile. [Vignette.] 
Lugduni Batavorum, Impensis Comelii Boutestein. M.DC.XCVIII. 

4*. Pp. [16] 469 [1]. 5 engraved plates of apparatus, etc. Title red and black. 

Johannis Conradi Barchusen Elementa Chemiae, quibus subjuncta est Con- 
fectura Lapidis Philosophici Imaginibus Repraesentata. Lugduni Bata- 

vorum, Apud Theodorum Haak, 17 18. 

4*. Pp. [la] 532 [19, I blank]. Title red and black, with a vignette of a gardener, 
apparently grafting a tree ; Motto : Lahore et Coeli Favore. Five plates of apparatus 
and nineteen of alchemical operations. 

BARCHUSEN-^BARLET 

BARCHUSEN (Johahm Conrad). C^miumed. 

\ a remed editioa of die PpwMfkim. It 
oaly with Onnitiiy but the last dii 

f^Mt svnbolical pictnres ii iotcnded to be a 
umoductioo to Akfaemj. He admits 
sever actnaDj witnessed a case of tnuismii- 
bat be bad heard of such and bad seen the 
and the gold described by HelvetiiB. See 
169! edition, pL 424, and compare the abore,pL 

(Darrbaiisfn, DardLbansrn, Daick- 

an of wUcfa fonm oocor) 
was bora at Hon, in Lippe, 1666. He 
stadied |iiwmiTy, timvclled, and accompanied the 
Venetian expedition to the Mocea, as physician ; 
was Lector m Medicine at Utrecht, 1698, Eictim- 
ProfesBor of Chemistiy, 1703 • vote several wofks, 
one of the OMSt notable being the Hisioria 
Medicine, Amst.. 1710, 8*, afterwards poblislied 

Utitcht, iTas 4* (an intef^Tooae^Tof 
essays), and died at Utrecht, 1793. 

RoCh-Scholts, BiUi^iktca Ckemucm^ vjvj, p. 17. 

Manget, BiSHoikfca Scrificrum Jitdicarmm^ 
Tm^ L ii. 9X1-6 (oontains loiews of his books). 

Kestner. iiedicimixkes GtUkrtem-Lexiam, 1740. 
pi 81. 

Caspar Burmann, Trmfedwm Ermditmtm, ^75P^ 
pi 14 (gives a list of his works)L 

Baamer, BatiotJkeca CMemuca, 178a, pi aS. 

Bntrmg Mmr GtackidOt dgr kikerm Cktmit^ 178^ 
PP-^659. 

690^ 7»«. 7»5- 

Fochs. Rtfertmriutm^ t8o6-ofl^ ppi aox, aia 
Srhmiwtrr, GwrdtfAtr Ser AUktwue, 1838, pp. 

Biagrapktt UniwnuUt, 1843, iii p. 71. 

Kopp. Geackickii der Cktmif^ 1844, it pu tB6 ft 

Van der Aa. Bisgrt^JUack 
N^derimmdem, i8sx 11. L £^IM> 
Kopp, Du AUmrwHf, 1886, i. pi 161. 

BARCIUS (M.X 

Si€ HERMETISCHKS A. B. C, 177S, i. p. 95. 

See GLORIA MUNDL 

See STKRXBKEG OOHAKN VON). 

BARICELU (Giuuo Cesau). 
lulii Caesaris Barioelli, i Sancto Marco, Doctoris Medici, & Philosc^phi, Hortulus 
Genialis sioe Aicanoniin valde Admirabilium tam in arte Medica quim 
reiiqaa Philosophia, Compendium, Curiosis Naturae Scmtatoribos lectn tam 
utile quiun iucunduoL Ex ipsius Auctoris prsdpue Observationibas con- 
cinnatiim. Coloniae, Excudebat Matthgus Smitx. Anno M.DCXX. 

la*. Pp. 355. Index pp. [19]. 

A book of receipts, secrets, and cariosities of 
natnral history, collected from a nnmhrr of authors^ 
It does not roer spedaOy to chemistry. 

a Neapolitan physician, of San Nfarco, 
f ftcnefer 

in the dtorfjw of 

rvento, floorished at the end 

of the MTtimfh and beginning of the aciumteenth 
oentmy, and besides the H^rtulms, wrote a book on 

Van der Linden, Dt ScripHs MOicis Uhidw^ 

Toppi, BikliaUca Nap^lftmmm it Apparato a </t 
Mmpmimi Ulmstri im kttert di A'apoii. 1676. p. 165. 

Mercklin, Lindfmimt renocaims^ 1686. pi 718. 

Cooring. In Umivtrsam ArUm Meidu»m . . . 
tnindmctio, 16^, pp. aio, ajoi 

Hcndrach, Pandtttm BrmMdemkmrgicm, 1699^ 

^417. 
liai^et, BiUiotktca Scrip^rmm Meduorum, 

SuoXit, TmjSamg MKT Hisiaru dtr ItidicimisckeH 
GelakHUU, 1731, pi 578. 

the uto|jeities and ose of milk, whey and batter: 
Dt UtOts, stri 6* kmtjri fmadiatikms, 6* msu pfms- 
cmla^ Neap, apod Laannn Scoiigium, 1693. 4*t 
and <»e Dt Smdam Huwumi Cmftru^ in faor 
books, Naples, 1614, 4*. It is commended by 
Schelhammer in Coiunmg*s 

Kestner, Mtduimisekts GtUkrtm-Ltxictm, 1740^ 
pi 8a. 

Idcher, AUgnmeimts Gtiekrim'Lttu9m, 1750^ i. 
ooL 787. 

Haller. Bikiitikeca Mtdicintt frmctum^ vrn^ *>• 
p. 367. (The present work is rather roo^^Uy 
handled— bat Haller forgets that it was then 150 
years okL) 

Gmehn, Getcktckit der Ckewue, 1797, L p. 594. 

BitgrmpkieMMcmU, Fvis, PuiclDoaciBe( 1890-95), 
i. pi 55& 

Nouveik BUgrapkU GimdrmU, 1859, vt. coL 504. 

BARLET (Annibal). 

Le yray et methodique Cours de la Physique resolutive, vulgairement dite 
Chymie. Represent^ par Figures generales & particulieres. Pour conncMstre 
La Theotechnie Ergocosmique, c'est a dire, L'Art de Dieu, en TouYrage de 
runivers. Par Aimibal Barlet, D. Med. & Demonstrateur dlodle. A Paris, 

BARLET-'BARNA UD 

n 

BARL£T (Annibal). Continued. 

chez N. Charles, proche sainct Hilaire, & se distribue par TAutheur, au 
CoU^e des trois Euesques. M.DCLIII. Avec Privilege du Roy. 

4*. Ppi [lo, indnding woodcut title]. 696 [zol ; 36 full-ptge woodcuts in the text, 
and X foldmg plate separate. It wants toe table ot chemical signs and leaf of explana- 
tions, and a folding printed table, separate. 

Borel and, after him, Lenglet Dufresnoy quote 
Bariees book under the title : Ars Dei, vtl Theo- 
UeMnia Ergocomtica, Paris, 16^, 4*, which looks 
as if there were a Latin traiulation. They mention 
an Akregi des choses nScessaires au cours de la 
CMimie . . . extraii de la Tkeotecknie Ergocos- 
ms^tie . . . Paris. la*, also by Barlet. and Lenglet 
Dufir^hqy adds maliciously: *Cest un fort petit 
Livre de peu de consequence.' Of the other he 
says that it is larger, but not in request All the 
same the illustrations that it contains of the interior 
of a seventeenth century laboratory are interesting 

Borel, BibUoikeca CJkimiea, 1654, p. 41. 
Lens^ Dufresnoy, Hisioire de la PHUnphie 
HermHijue, 1743, iiL p. xza. 
Gmelin, Gexkiekie aer CMemie, 1797, i. p. 744. 

at the present day. Barlet was the instructor 
in Chemistry of Dr. Matthew Macksule. the Aber- 
deen physician, who is known by his book 00 
Mo&t-welL 

In the Biogrupkie Midicale it is said that the 
titles alone indicate that the books are devoted to 
alchemical reveries, but whatever the titles ma^ do 
the present work treats of the preparation of various 
sub^ances mainly for medical purposes, and not for 
alchemical The books are also quoted by Gmelin. 

Ladnigue calls it : " Ouvrage de peu de valeur, 
chimie non d^gagte de I'Alchimie." 

Biogrmpkie Midicale, Paris, Panckoucke (itao- 

5). >. p. 558- 
Ladrague, 

^BibHotkiqiu Qyvarof, Sciences SecHia, 
1870^ No. 1x36. 

BARMA. 

See HUGINUS A BAHMA. 

BARNAUD (Nicolas). 

Quadriga Aurifera, ntinc primiim k Nicolao Bamaudo k Crista-amaudi Delphinate 
Gallo philosopho & medico in lucem edita. 

Nihil sine Numine. 
Ex Offidna Plantiniana, Apud Christophorum Raphelengium, Academiae 
Logduno-Bat Typographum. cl3.l3.ic 

8*. Pp. 95 Fx blank]. Plantin's device of a pair of compasses without the hand, 
and the motto : LAbore et Constantia, on the title-page. 

The vfdume contains a dedication to Count 

Heinrich-Friedrich of Nassau, and a preface re- 
ferring to the TVs/u. The four Tracu, called ^0/<r, 
or Wbeeb, are : 

Trmdahu de Pkilasepkia MeiaHormm, p. xi. 

George Ripley, Liier duadecim portantm, p. 23. 

George Ripley, Liber de Mercurio et Lapide, 
p. 7x. 

Scripium . . . Elixir Solis Tkeophrasti Para- 
celsi tractans, p. 89. 

Dedications are prefixed to the last three. 

Triga Chemica: de Lapide Philosophico tractatus tres, editore & commen- 
tatore Nicolao Barnaudo Delphinate Gallo, Philosopho & Medico. 

Nihil sine Numine. 
Ex Officina Plantiniana, Apud Christophorum Raphelengium, Academiae 
Lugduno-Bat Typographum. clalaic. 

8®. Pp. 40 [x 5, X blank]. Plantin's device of a hand drawing a circle with a pair 
of compasses, enclosed in a wreath, with the motto : Lahore et Constantia. 

Arcanum PMiloscpAarum, and a Brevis elucidoHo 
of it by Bamaud, and a dedication to Nicolas 
Wolski by Bamaud, p. 4X. 

is a dedication to Princess Anna of 
Sweden, by Bamaud, and the three tracts are : 

Lambspringk, De Lapide Philosophico, p. xi. 

PhikMophus Gallus Anonjrmus, Liber secreti 
wutxiwti Mius mundana gloria, p. 25. 

In aenigmaticum quoddam Epitaphium 
mentariolum. 

Aelia Laelia Crispis, . . . Com- 

Sii THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, iii. p. 744. 

See MANGET (J. J.), Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, ii. p. 713* 

74 

BARN A UD— EARNER 

BARNAUD (Nicolas). Continued. 

Aooordm^ to Hendreich, bis commentary on 
Mlia Lmlta Crisfis appeared Lugd. Bat 1597. 
8*, and UrselL looa, 8r. The latter may refer to 
the Tksairum Ckemicum of that date, where it 
appears in voL iii. p. 856, though there may have 
been a separate edition alsa 

Borrichius who prints the iEoigma and dis( 
the interpretations proposed decides in fistvoor of 
its mraning either rain water according to Midbad 
Angelus or the phiksopher^ stone aocordiQg to 
Barnaud. Set MLLK ukua ciispxs and the nole 
upon it. 

Quadriga Aurifera. 

5// THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, iii. p. 79a 

Triga Chemica. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, iii. p. 765. 

Oidy the tracts bv Lambspringk, etc.. are reprinted, and Bamand's name and 
dedication are oroitteo. 

Barnaud was a native of Crest in Dauphin^. He 
was a physician and alchemist, and wrote a few 
books. These however have been entered under 
erroneous headings, such as Bemaudus, Bam- 

Maier, SymMa Aurea Afinsm, 1617, p. 168 
(discusses the Epitafhium Bononiat). 
Van der Linden, De Serif Hs Mtdicis, libri duo. 

•te.^^ 

Bibliotheca Chimicat 1654, p. 41. 

Borrichius, De Ortu et Progressu Ckemue 
DissertatiOt 1668, p. 106. 

Mercklin, Idndenius rencvahu, 1686, p. 830 
(under N. Bamhardus). 

Hendreich, Pandectm Brandenburgica^ 1699, 
p. lai. 

Tocher, Allgtmeints GeUkrten'Lexieoft, 1750^ i. 

Cuiment, Biblioihiaue Curieuse, 1751, il 438 
(quotes Bpttaphium Btmanunse^ Lugo. Bat. 1^97, 
8* and and edit UrselL z6oa, from Hendreich, 
presumably). 

Prosper Marchand, Dictionaire kisiari^ue. La 

hardus, Bemardns, by some writers. He visited 
Spain m 1559, he was at Bale in 1575 ; Lqrden, 
1599; Tergou, 1601. 
The dates of his birth and death are unknown. 

Have, 1758. i. pp. 82-87 (the most detailed account 
of Barnaud). 

Adelung, GesckUkte der MenschlickeK Narrkeii, 
178^. i. p. 71 (taken from Marchand). 

Kortum verUidiget die Alchemiet 1789, p. 54 
(the Commentariolttm). 

Gmelin, GtschickU der Chemie, 1797, i. pp. 305, 
306, 556, 557. 

Schmieder, Gesckickie der Akkemiet 183a, p. 
298. 

NovveUe Bicgrapku GimiraU^ 1859^ iv. ool« 596. 

Kopp, BeUrdM, 1869. I p. 23. 

Ladrague. BtbUoOUjue Omtareg, Science 
Secriies, 1870, Nos. 604, 605. 

Pisanus Frazi, Cenhtria Ubrorum AbscotuU- 
tormm, 1879, pp. I77i x8z. 

Sudhoff, mbliegraplda ParaceUiea, 1894, pp^ 
438, 499> 538. 60a 

EARNER (Jacob). 
Chymia Philosophica perfecte delineata, docte enucleata & feliciter demonstrata 
ii multis hactenus desiderata nunc vero omnibus Philatris conseaata cum 
brevi sed accurata & fundamentali salium doctrina. Medicamends edam 
sine igne culinari facile parabilibus, nee non exercitio Chymise appendicis 
loco locupletata, Autore Jacobo Bamero Phil. & Med. D. Cum Indice rerum 
consummatisfimo publici nunc juris facta. Noriberge, Sumtibus Andreae 
Ottonis. M.DC.LXXXIX. 

3* 
in the 

, Pp. [141 s6a Frontispiece and 8 engraved plates of apparatus, 
text. Title red and black. Wants the index, pp. 56. 

Woodcuts 

Barner was born at Elbingen in 1641. "A 
scholar of Meimert's, and adherent of v. Helmont's." 
Hi wai Profeiior of Medicine and Chemistry at 
Padua, then at Leipsig. and Anally physician at 
Elbingtii, where ho died in x686. He wrote 
■•veriu works : IVodromus vindiciarum . . . Aug. 

M«rckliii, lAndeniui remnHttus, 1686, p. 475. 

CoiiritiK, In Univermm Artem Mtdicam . . . 
IntrfklHflt0^ 1687, u. 38 (. 

Roth*Molioltii, lublloiheea Chemica, 1727, p. x8. 

HtolU, AftUituftjf tur iiistoire der Medici miscken 
Oe/nMrMeit, 1731, p. 794. 

Kstttnctr, Medieln. ueUMrten'/^xicott, 1710, p. 8a. 

UiiMlot Diifrasnoy, Hijtfoirt de la PkiiMfkie 
HermOi^He^ i74t, iii. X14. 

Vind. 1667; Kxerdtium chymicum, Fatav. 1670, 
4*; Spiritus vini sine acido . . . Lips. 1675, 8*. 
Of the present work there was also an edition 
with ElshoU, and Rolfinck. edited by Roth&holtx, 
Nftmberg. 

Eloy, Dictumnaire Hiztoriqm de la htidtcitu^ 

1778, L p. a6a 
Baumer. Bibliotkeca Ckemica, 1782, p. 23. 
Beytrag tur GesckickU der kdkem CkewUe, 1785. 

p. 640. 
Gmelin. GesckickU der Ckewue, 1798. ii* PP. 13^ 

Biogra^ UmiverseUe, 1845, iii. p. Z18. 

BARON— BARRETT 75 

BARON (Hyacinthe Theodore), Senr. 

See CODEX Medicamentarius, 1732. 

Baroo, the dder, was bora at Paris, April. 1686, Paris, July 28, 1758. Gmelin quotes an editiou, 

naduated M.D. in 1710, was Professor of Surgery. Paris, 1749, besides the above ; Baumer one at 

Materia Medica and Pharmacy, and in 1730 was Lausanne, 1737 ; and editions of Paris, 1758, 4% 

dected Dean of the Faculty there. He wrote and Frankfurt. 1760. 4^, are mentioned, 
some papers on medical subjects. He died at 

Eloy, Dictionnaire Histori^ue^ 1778, i. p. 261. Biographic MddicaU, Paris, Panckoucke (i8ao- 

Batuner. Bibliotheca Ckemua, 178a, p. iii. 25). i. p. 563. 

Gmelin, Gesckichte der Chtmie^ 1798. ii. pp. 378, Qu6rard, La Prance IMUraire, 1827, i. p. 185. 

419. 754. 

BARRETT (Francis). 
The Magus, or Celestial Intelligencer; being a complete System of Occult 
Philosophy. In Three Books : Containing the Antient and Modem Practice 
of the Cabalistic Art, Natural and Celestial Magic, &c. ; shewing the wonderful 
Effects that may be performed by a Knowledge of the Celestial Influences, 
the occult Properties of Metals, Herbs, and Stones, and the Application of 
Active to Passive Principles. Exhibiting the Sciences of Natural Magic; 
Alchymy, or Hermetic Philosophy; also the Nature, Creation, and Fall 
of Man; his natural and supernatural Gifts; the magical Power inherent 
in the Soul, &c. ; with a great Variety of rare Experiments in Natural Magic : 
the Constellatory Practice, or Talismanic Magic; the Nature of the 
Elements, Stars, Planets, Signs, &c. ; the Construction and Composition of 
all sorts of Magic Seals, Images, Rings, Glasses, &c. ; the Virtue and 
Efficacy of Numbers, Characters, and Figures, of good and evil Spirits. 
Magnetism, and Cabalistical or Ceremonial Magic ; in which the secret 
Mj^teries of the Cabala are explained; the Operations of good and evil 
Spirits ; all kinds of Cabalistic Figures, Tables, Seals, and Names, with their 
Use, &C. The Times, Bonds, Offices, and Conjuration of Spirits. To which 
b added Biographia Antiqua, or the Lives of the most eminent Philosophers, 
Magi, &c. The whole illustrated with a great variety of Curious Engravings, 
Magical and Cabalistical Figures, &c. By Francis Barrett, F.R.C. Professor 
of Chemistry, natural and occult Philosophy, the Cabala, &c, &c. London : 
Printed for Lackington, Allen, and Co., Temple of the Muses, Finsbury 
Square. 1801. 

4^. Pp. XV. [i] 175 [t blank]. Book ii. 198 [a of book advertisements]. Portrait 
and 6 plates in Book i. 16 plates (of which 5 are coloured) in Book ii. Book ii. 
containing Magnetism has a fly-title. 

There was an undated reprint of this book, with complete system of occult philosophy . . . , 1896, W. 
the coloured portraits of demons, issued about 1875. W. Harmon, printer and publisher, Boston, Mass. , 
Besides a section on Alchemy, there are short U.S.A." It is in large 8**; the portraits of the 
biographies of Hermes, Agrippa, Albertus, Roger ■ "vessels of iniquity," etc., are uncoloured, and the 
Baa>n. LuUy, Ripley, Hollandus, Paracelsus, other illustrations are woodcut or similar repro- 
Glauber, Dee and Kelly. The coloured portraits ductions of the handsome engravings of the 
of demons by Barrett — christened ''Vessels of original. Under his portrait the author is called 
Wrath," " Fallen Ansels," '* Powers of Evil," etc., F.R.S. ; that is an error, for on the original title- 
may be compared wim those in the Sammlung der page (not on the portrait) he styles himself not 
grpfsten Gtheimnisse, and some by Eliphaz Levi. F.R.S. but F.R.C., brother of the Rosy Cross. 
Thei 

title is a fiill enough description of the contents. The publisher calls the first edition ' ' an almost 
bis niafical 'en-tout-cas' has been again re- 
printed as follows : " The Book of the Magi , , . A 

This magical 'en-tout-cas' has been again re- extinct print." It is not quite that yet. 
IS for - - 

See LIVES (the) of the ADEPTS in Alchcmystical Philosophy. 

76 

BARTH—BARTHOLOMjEUS 

BARTH (Jeremias). 

See BEGUIN (jean). 

Barth was the pupil at whose instigatioa Be- BiographU MidUalt^ Pftris, Panckoucke (iteo- 
ffuinm wrote the Tyrocinium, He vras a native of 25), i. p. 571. 
Sprottau, in Silesia. 

BARTHOLINUS (Thomas). 
De Transplantatione Morborum. 

See THEATRUM SYMPATHETICUM, 1662, p. 528. 

Bartholinus was one of the most accomplished 
men of his time in Europe. He was born at 
Copenhagen, Oct. ao. 1616 ; studied languages 
and philosophy there, and then theology and 
medicine, went to Leyden in 1637, and devoted 
himself to literature and Arabic under Salmasius 
and Golius. The next couple of jrears he spent 
in Paris and Montpelier, passed into Italy and 
staged three years in Padua. He afterwards 
▼isited Rome and other places, and proceeded to 
Naples and Sicily. In Messina the Qiair of Phil- 
osophy was offered to him, but he declined it and 
travelled back to Basel in 1645 ^^'^ ^^ created 
Doctor of Medicine by Joh. Caspar Bauhinus, and 
a member of the Collegium Medicum. He con- 
tinued hii journey through France, the Netherlands, 
and Germany, and arrived home in 1646. In 1647 
he took the post of Professor of Mathematics, in 
1648 of Anatomy and Medicine, and in 165^ was 
made perpetual dean of the Coll^um Medicum. 
After a brilliant career the kii^ nominated him 
honorary professor, to allow him time to pursue 
his own work, and he retired to an estate which he 

Erasmus P. F. Vindingius, Rtgia Academia 
Haunienris in Regibus . . . Professoribus suis 
rtprauentaia, 166^, pp. 378-38^. 

Albert. Barthounus, St &:npHs Danorum Liber 
PosihumuMy 1666, pp. 138-143. 

K5nig, Bibliotkeca Vitus ei Nova, 1678, p. 88. 

Mercklin, Liitdeniiu renavatus, 1686, p. 1003- 
zotz. 

Conrin^, /« Universam ArUm Medicam . . . 
IntroducHo, 1687. p. 170; addit. pp. i^. 174. 184, 205. 

Freber, Theairmm VirommErudttiomeclarorum, 
1668, p. 1398 : plate 64. 

Witte. Diarium Biographicum^ 1688. sig. Rrrr i 
ftctOt Ann. Dec. 4, z6&. 

Crenius, Animadversioius PkiloU^tB^ 1695- 

1790, Pt. xvi., p. 391. 

Hendreich, PandecUt BrandenhurgMt^ 1699, p. 

rabricius, Historia BibliothtctK Fabriciana, 
1724. vi. pp. a84-<, 409. 

Roth-Scnolts, Bibliotheca Ckemica, 1727. p. 18. 

Niceron, Aiemairts (1728), vi. p. 131 ; (i73i)» >• 
p. 101. 

Manget, Biblioiheca Scriptorum Aledicorum, 

1791, I. 1. p. a^. 

BtoUe, AHiettung »ur HistorU der AfedicinischeH 

OiltihrheU, 1731, pp. as7.a59, 4S5-46a. 485-489. $39- 

Jacob Ltupolds Prodromus Bunioihtcm Mtiallua, 
i7ta, p. aa. 

Morhof. Polyhistor^ 1732, i. pp. 17a, ago, 879, 
976- 1070 ; II. pp. 153, 343. 383. 384f ,609. 

Kestner, Midicimschis GtUhrten-LMxtcon, 1740, 
p. 86. 

JOoher, Allgtmtints GeUhrten- lexicon, 1750, 
1. ool. Sao. 

BAR'rHOLOM/^:US A CLIVOLO. 
See viOTTUs (bartholomwVUS). 

had acquired. But here the greatest mtsfbrtone of 
all for a scholar befel him, for during his afaaenoe 
a fire broke out in his house whidi destroyed his 
library and his writings. He bore Chli afoversity 
with heroic courage, even vrriting a book about it, 
and the king out of consideration allowed Yam. hh 
property finee from taxes. In i67abe was appointed 
Director of the University LibnurT. and in 1675 ^ 
was made a judge of the highest Danish tribunal 
He died after a painful illness od Dec. 4, z68o^ 
during his fourth Kectorate. 

His works are almost entirely devoted to ana- 
tomy and medicine. His AtuUomia was translated 
into Italian, German, French, F.nglish and Dutch, 
and, by command of the Great Mogul, into 
« Indian.' 

Apart from his medicine he was a scholar, a 
poet in Latin and Danish, an orator, antiquary 
and polyhistor of the most persevering and laoon- 
ous character. But he was not a chemist and 
hardly a pharmacist. 

His name occurs in all the histories of medicine. 

Elo^, Dictumnaire kistorique de la Mddteitte^ 
1755, 1, p. 136; 1778, L p. 27a 
Moren, Z« Grand DictummUrt Hisiorique^ 

1759. "• p. 147. 
Portal, HisUnre de VAnatowue tide la Ckirurgie^ 

1770^ ii. pp. 571-608, k passim, 

Haller, Btb/ioikeca BoiaHica, 1771, i. pp. 506, 

507- 
Haller, BiblioiAeca Amaiomica^ 1774, i. pp. 400- 

408. 

Haller, Biiliotkeca CJkirkrgiea, 1774, t pp. 337. 

340- 
HaUer, Bibliotheca Medicitue Praciicm^ 1777, ii. 

pp. 653-666. 
Hutchinson, ^Mfm/ilM Medica^ 1799^ ii* P* 535- 
Chalmers, The General Bicgra^ucalDicWmary^ 

18 12. iv. p. 79. 
BiograpkU Midicale^ Paris, P&nckoucke (1890- 

a5)f »• PP- 592-603. 

Sprengel, Geschichie der Arxnefkunde, 1827, iv. 
pp. 161-171 Sc passim, 

Dexeimeris, Dictionnaire historique de la 
Midecine^ i8a8, I. i. p. 288. 

Hoefer, Histoire de la Chimie, 1843^ ii. p. 250; 
1869, ii. p. 941. 

Kopp, Geschichie der Chemie, 1843, I p. 133 ft 
ptusim, 

Bayle ft Thillaye, Biegraphie Midicale, 1855. 1 

p. 436. 
PhUlippe ft Ludwig, Geschichie der Apoiheher, 

1855, p. 5I4- 
Haeser, Geschichie der Aiedicin^ 1881, il pp. 

Bidira, Dansh Bicgrafish Lexihon^ 1890, l pp. 
564-573- 

BARUCH—BASIUUS VALENTINUS 77 

BARUCH (Samuel). 

Donum Dei. 

See ABRAHAM ELEAZAR, Uialtes Chymisches Werk, 1760, Part ii. 

Die Gabe Gottes. 

See HERMBTISCHES A. B. C, 177S, i. p. 61. 

BASILIUS VALENTINUS. 
Fr. Basilii Valentini, Ordin. Benedict. Chymische Schriften, aus einigen 
alten MSten aufs iSeiisigste verbessert, mit vielen Tractaten, auch edichen 
Figuien vermehret, und nebst einem vollstandigen Raster in Drey Theile 
vei&sset; samt einer neuen Vorrede, von Beurtheilung der Alchymistischen 
Schriften und dem Leben des Basilii, begleitet von Bened. Nic Petraeo, 
Med. D. Sechste Edition. Leipzig, Verlegts Job. Paul Krauis, Buch- 
handler in \^en, 1769. 

8*. Pp. [z6o, frontispiece included] x-464. 18 plates. Title red and black. NfS. 
notes. The frontispiece consists of Baisilius* portrait, and underneath is a view of a 
mhie. 

II. pp. 465-990. a plates. 

in. pp. 993-II33 [155]. 

The third volmne contains : Handgriffe Basilii Valentini. p. Z057. 

Heinrich Escheoreuters FUnf Kleine TractHtlein, Basilii Schriften. p. 10^. 

p. 905. Todod von Rehe Particular und Universal-Pro- 

Clavis Oder SchlOssel der in vorherhgehenden cefs, p. 11 16. 
fltaiif TVactiUlein enthalten Characteren, p. 1049. 

Fr. Barilii Valentini, Benedictiner-Ordens, Chymischer Schrifften Anderer 
TheiL Oder Die fiinff letzte Biicher Basilii, betituliret: Sein letztes 
Testament, und Aufflegung aller seiner vorigen Schrifiten, und mit seiner 
eigenen Hand auf Pergament aufgezeichnet Sind zu Erffurt in seinem 
Qoster in einem hohen Altar vermauret gefunden worden. Zu Trost und 
Guten all<^ Liebhabem der himmlischen Weifsheit und Filiis Doctrinae 
Hermetico-Spagirica& mit sondem Fleifs abgeschrieben, doch als ein edler 
Treuer Scbatz in Gebeim zu balten. 

S. L a. ft typ. n. 

8*. Pp. 465-778. Interleaved, and with MS. notes. 

PcriiBCt so £ur as it goes, but it is only a portion Ttsiament, with a fly tiUe and no publisher, place, 
of an edition of the complete works. or date. 

It contains three of the five books of the Lefties 

Les Douze Qefs de Pbilosophie de Frere Basile Valentin, Religieux de I'Ordre 
Sainct Benoist Traictant de la vraye Medecine Metalique. Plus TAzoth, ou 
le moyen de &ire I'Or cach^ des Philosophes. Traduction Francoise. A 
Paris, Cbez Pierre Moet, Libraire lure, proche le Pont S. Michel, ^ Tlmage 
S. Alexis. M.DCLIX. 

8*. Pp. 1-14, I5;j6 wanting 17-176, misnumbered 167. One woodcut ft wants 
leaf viij, pp. 15-16. The tract Atoth has a separate title as follows : 

Axoth, CXi le moyen de faire I'Or cach6 des Philosophes. De Frere Basile Valentin. 
Reuea. corrig6 ft augment^ par M'- L'agneau Medecin. A Paris, Chez Pierre Moet, 
Libraire Iur6, proche le Pont S. Michel M'Image S. Alexis. M.DCLIX. 

8^. Pp. 196. Vignette and 14 woodcuts. 

To this is appended the Traictide tOeufdes Philosophes with separate tide and 
pagination. See bkrnardus, and see azoth. The vignette represents Senior and 
Adolphus with the tree of the metals between them. 

78 BASIUUS VALENTINUS 

BASILIUS VALENTINUS. Continued. 
Triumph Wagen Antimonii, Fratris Basilii Valentini, Benedicter Ordens, alien, 
so den Grund suchen der vhralten Median, auch zu der Hermedschen 
Philosophy beliebnis tragen, zu gut publicirt, vnd an Tag geben, duich 
Johann Tholden, Hessum. Mit einer Vorrede, D. Joachimi Tanckii, 
Anatomes & Cheirurgiae Professoris in der Vniversitet Leipzig. Leipzig, in 
Vorlegung Bartholomaei Voigts. Gedruckt bey Friederich Lanckisch. Im 
Jahr 1624. 

8*. Pp. [3a] 598. Register [29, z, printer^s mark of the flenr de lys, and odo^on : 
Leipcig. dedrudct b^ FViederich Lanckisch. Im Jahr M. DC XXIV; 3 blank]. Title 
red and black. 

This volume contains the following : 4. Vom Stein der Weisen. Theorica nnd Practica 

Epistle dedicatory of Th5Ide. Gcorgii Phsedronis Rodocheri, p. 393. 

Pre&ce of Tancke. Commendatory Verses. 5. Der vhralte Ritterkri^, p. 442. 

I. Triumphwagen. p. 3. a Opus Sattimi Isaad liolundi, p. 465. 

a. Von der linctur oder Oleo Stibii, Rogeri 7. Philosophische Betrachtong von der materia 

Baronii AngU, p. 964. Lapidis, wid seiner Bereitung. p. 513. 

3. Von doi iWticular mid Universal Tincturen, 8. Von der occulta Chemioorum Philosophia. 

p. 994. ein kurtser Thu:tat, p. 561 (in verse). 

Theodori Kerckringii Doctoris Medici Commentarius in Cumim Triumphalem 
Antimonii Basilii Valentini K se latinitate donatum. Amstelaedami, Apud 
Henricum Wetstenium. do loc Lxxxv. 

19*. Pp. [90] 349. [17, z blank]. The engraved title is by Romyn de Hooglie^ 
1674. Five engravings in the text 

[Another Copy.] 

An edition of the Currus THutmpkalis in Latin was published : Tolosacs, Apod 
Petnim Boac, M.DCXLVI, translated by P. J. Fabre. 

Theodori Kerckringii Doctoris Medici Anmerckungen iiber Basilii Valentini 
Triumph-Wagen des Antimonii. Nebst einem Vorbericht, worinnen ein und 
anders, was in Basilii und andem dergleichen spagyrischen Schri£ften, zu 
beobachten, dienlich sejrn mochte, angezeiget, zu End aber Kerckrings 
lateinische Vorrede verteutscht, beygefuget wird. Niimberg, bey Adam 
Jonathan Felfeecker, 1724. 

8*. PpL [38, including the engraved title by F. G. Beck after Romyn de Hooghe] 
35CX Five separate engravings. 

Von den Natiirlichen, vnd vbematiirlichen Dingen. Audi yon der ersten 
Tinctur, Wurtzel vnd Geiste der Metallen vnd Mineralien, wie dieselbe 
entpfangen, aufsgekochet, gebom, verendert vnd vennehret werden. Trewlich 
erofihet durch Fratrem BasiUum Valentinum, Benedicter-Ordens. Vnd 
nunmehr aus seiner eigenen Handschrifift in Druck publidret Durch 
Johann Tholden Hessum. Leipzig, In vorl^ung Bartholomsei Voigts. 
Anno M.DC.XXIV. 

8*. Pp. [9] 1-93. 93>ii9. r3. contains verses, the device, a larse 6eur de tys in 
a border, and the colophon : Lapaig. Gedruckt bey FHederich Landd^. 1624.] 
Title red and black. 

Basilii Valentini Philosophi & Chjrmid Experientis^mi Tractatus Chymico- 
Philosophicus de Rebus Naturalibus & Supematuralibus. MetaDorum & 
Mineralium. Francofurti ad Moenum Sumptibus Jacobi Gothofredi Seyler. 
M.DCLXXVI. 

8*. Ppi 64. Symbolic vignette. See the 

BASIUUS VALENTINUS 

79 

BASILIUS VALENTINUS. Continued. 
BasQii Valentini Philosophi & Chymici Experientissimi Tractatus Chymico- 
Philosophicus de Rebus Naturalibus et Supematuralibus. Metallorum & 
Mineralimn. Francofurti ad Moenum Sumptibus Jacobi Gothofredi 

Seyler. M.DCLXXIX. 

8**. Pp. 64. 

On the title is a vi^poette representing the sun 
with the aldiemical sign of copper on the nose, 
emergiDg from a deep circular msel. Round the 
rim are the words : r ons Benedictus Aquae \^vse. 
In front of the vessel is a series of concentric 
circular spaces, the centre one containing the 
signs of the 4 elements and in the space rotmd 
it the words Natura, Ars, Semen; the next con- 
taining the words: Solutio corporis, et coaffulatio 
Spirit^ solo tSm fit medio ; and the next : Miracu- 
hun naturae in subtili perficitur Medium <jui 
innenit totum perfidet Auerte ftlum k combustibihb^ 

et faetentiby. The outer circular space is blank, 
and it is cut at equal distances on its margin by 3 
small circles containing respectively the words 
Homo Animale, Aurum Minerale, Vmum Vegeta- 
bile. From the centre space proceed three radial 
spaces to the inner margin of the outer circular 
space, and situated between the smaller circles 
above mentioned. The upper radial space contains 
the word Spiritus and tne symbol for Mercuiy, 
that to the left hand the word Anima and the 
svmbol for Tartarus, that to the right the word 
Corpus, and the symbol for Sulphur. 

De Occulta PhUosophia. Oder von der heimlichen Wundergeburt der sieben 
Planeten vnd Metallen, Fratris Basilij Valentini, Benedicter Ordens, neben 
einer Tafifel der gantzen Philosophischen Weifsheit Jetzo zum andem mal 
in Druck verfertiget, Durch Johan. Tholden Hessum. Im verlag Jacob 
Apels, im Jahr 161 1. 

8^ Ppi 64. 
The Tajil is wanting. 

Fr. Basilii Valentini Ordin. Benedict Via Veritatis oder: Der einige Weg 
zur Wahrheit, wie er solchen ehemals beschrieben hinterlassen ; Nun 
aber um dessen Fiirtrefflichkeit willen denen Liebhabem der Wahren 
Weifsheit zu Dienste den Sendivogianischen Schrifften mit beygefiiget durch 
Friederich Roth-Scholtzen Siles. Niimberg, bey }oh. Dan. Taubers seel. 
Erben. 1718. 

8^. Pp. 233-950. MS. notes. 
Extracted from Roth-Scholtz's edition of Sendivogius' works. 

Aphorismi Basiliani. 

See HAPELIUS (N. N.), Cheiragogia Heliana, 16 12, p. 213. 

Aureliae occultae philosophorum partes duo, Georgio Beato interprete. 
See AURELLfi occultae. . . . 

L'Azothy ou le moyen de faire Tor cach^ des philosophes. 

See RICHEBOURG 0- M. D.X Biblioth^quc des Philosophes Chimiques, 1741, iii. 
p. 84. 

Brevis appendix & perspicua repetitio aut iteratio in librum suum de magno 
lapide Antiquissimorum. 
See MANGBT (j. J.), Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, ii. p. 422. 

Claves duodecim. 

See below Summarischer Bericht. 

Les Douze Clefs de Philosophic. 

See RICHEBOURG (j. M. D.), Biblioth^ue des Philosophes Chimiques, 1741, iii. 
p. I. 

to BASIUUS VALENTINUS 

BASILIUS VALENTINUS. ConHnued. 
Liber duodedm ClaTnim. 

Su MANGBT (J. J.X Bibliotfaeca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, iL p. 413. 

ZwolfT SchusseU dadurch die Thuren zu dem Vndtesten Stein vnser Vor&hren 

eroffnet, vnd der vnerforschliche Brunnen aller Gesundheit gefiinden wird. 

Sit below Smmnarisdier Bericht 

See [SCHATZ mid Knnstkammerl p. 641. 

5^ TANClcs OoachimX Promptuarium Alchemiae, Ander Bach, 1614, p. 641. 

Von dem grossen Stein der Uralten. 

Sflf [sCHATZ mid Kmistkammerl p. 6ia 

Si* TANCKK (joachimX Promptuanum Alchemiae, Ander Buch, 1614 p. 6ia 

Liber de BCagno Lapide Antiquorum Sapientum. 

Si€ MANGET 0* J-X Bibliodieca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, iL p. 409. 

Von naturlidien nnd ubematurlichen Dingen. 

Set GHTMISCH-UNTE&IRDISCHKR Sonnen-Glantz, 1728, p. 43. 

Pnctica, una cum xn clavibus et Appendice. 
Set ICAIKR (icl)y Tripos aureus, 1618. 
Set MXJSAUM HBRMsncuic, 1749, P- 376. 

De prima Materia Li^idis Phflosc^hicL 

Set MANGET (j* J*X BiUiotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, iL p. 421. 

RythmL 

Set SCH0LSR (CONRAD), Grundtliche Aufslegung ond warhafte ErUanmg der 

Rhythmonun, 1606. 
Set MSISNER (lorentzX Gemma Gemmarum Alchimistarum, 1608. 

Mdsner^s is a reprint of ScfaOkr^s work. 

Summarischer Bericht von dem Lapide Philosophorum. 

See KLuaDATiO Secretorum, 1602, p. 359. 

Tbb indudes the tracts : Vamgrmaem Stein der imodedm and Depritmn MmieriM LepUis PkiUsih 
UwrnUem Weism. DU twSlf SdUMssei or Cloves fUci. 

Ein kurz Summarischer Tractat 

See [SCHATZ tmd Kunstkammer], p. 6ia 

See TANCKE OoachimX Promptuarium Alchemiae, Ander Bach, 1614, p. 6ia 

Indudes the tracts : Fm dem grmsem Sttim der UralUn Sinm mmaer Verfekm er§fiut^ und der 
UrmUem p. 6ia mmufmKMiUkt Brmmmen oiler Genmdhai gifmmdem, 

Dm em^ SeUMssel^ dadmrck dk TkMrm MM dem ««r< p. 641. 

Symbolum. 

See GLAUBER (JOHANN rudolphX Teutschlands W<dil£ihrt, Funffter Theil— 

Amsterdam, i66o» p. 20 ; or, /it, Prag, 1704, p. 649 (in P*rt ▼.). 
See OCCULTA philosophia, 1613, p. 52. 

Testamentum (3iymicum. 

See TiROA Trifida. 

Ascribed by Kopp to BuiUas Valentmoi. 

Triumph-Wagen des Antimonii, nebst Theodori Kerdmngii . . . gelehrten 
Anmerckungen. 
See R0TK-9CH0LTI (rRlSDlRlCHX Dtutsdies Tbeatram Cbemicam, 1728) L 

RASIUUS VALENTINUS 

8i 

BASILIUS VALENTINUS. Continued. 

T 

Via Veritads oder: der einige Weg zur Warheit 

See SENDIVOGIUS (michaelX Chymische Schrifilen, 1 718, p. 223 {bis). 

Von der Wurtzel des Steins der Weisen (in verse). 
See V. (j. R.), M.D. Giildene Rose, No. vi. 

Guldenes Kleinod, iibersetzt von Basilio Valentino. 

See TRITHEMIUS (JOANNES), 1 782. 

Nutzliche Anweisung und Explication uber Basilii Valentini Chymische 
Schrifilen. 
See CLiNGius (franciscus). 

Basilius Valentinus Redivivus. 

See KNOR (LOUIS gilhomme de), 1716. 

Redivivus Fr. Basilius Valentinus. 

See WEITBRETT (jOHANN JOACHIMX 1723- 

Aufsl^ung Rythmorum Basilij . . . gefertiget durch Conrad Schiilern. 
See MEISNER (lorentz), Gemma Gemmarum Alchimistarum, 1608. 

Eriauterungen einiger Verse welche in des Basilius Valentinus Schriften 
vorkommen. 

See TEICHMEIER (HERMANN FRIEDRICH), 1788. 

See MEISNER (lorentz), Gemma Gemmarum Alchimistarum, oder Erleutenmg 
der Parabolischen und Philosophischen Schriften Fratris Basilij, 1608. 

Philosophischer Haupt-Schliissel iiber . . . seine xii Chymische Schliissel. 
See PHILOSOPHISCHES Licht und Schatten . . ., 1738. 

Das Valete: uber den Tractat der Arcanorum Basilij Valentini. 

See RHEINHART (HANS CHRISTOFF), l6o8. 

Nachricht und Recommendation in einem Programmate anno 1704 vom 
Basilio Valentino. 

See WEDEL (georg wolffgang). 

Whether Basilius Valentinus was a real person 
or not, whether he was a Benedictine monk at 
Erfurt or at Walkenried or not, whether he was a 
Benedictine monk at all or not, whether he was a 
native of Alsace or not, whether he flourished 
in 1413 or 1493. or ^" both, or neither, whether 
his works had been hidden and were afterwards 
discovered by a flash of lightning or not, whether 
they were by him or by his «iitor Tholde or 
Tholden, whether they are all genuine or some 
are by other writers, whether Paracelsus copied 
him or he Paracelsus, whether the works are not 
really by Paracelsus, whether the name Basilius 
Valentinus is not made up and may even denote 
the Alchemical mjrstery itself — are questions which 
have been debated and some of which have been 
provisionally answered, but all of which are still 
open to discussion, if only fresh data would come to 
light. Even a partial answer to any one of 
them could not be despised ; becau% since the 
writings contain apparently first notices of a good 
many chemical reactions and products, it would be 
satisfactory to have the date of these settled once 
for all and assigned to the proper authority. 

As to his being a monk at Erfurt the words 
of Gudenus are quite precise : ' E&dem setate 
[Mccccxni.] Basilius Valentinus in Divi Petri 
Monasterio vixit, arte medicft. & naturalium 
indagine mirabilis. Insuper ijs accensetur, quos in 
augmentum spei nominant anrum confecisse, sic 
aliend, dementia post saecula fallit, ide6 minus 
culpabilis, quod non nisi decipi amantes faculta- 
tibus exuantur ' ; and in the mdex the reference 
runs: 'Basilius Valentinus ordinis S. Benedicti in 
Monte S. Petri clarus.' 

If, however, he were at Walkenried, he could 
have been venerated now as one of the "ancient 
wise men," had he only left some of the "great 
stone" to keep the stones of his monastery in good 
repair, for they are tumbling to the ground to-day. 

The English editions are the following ; the 
earlier ones have become rare : 

Last will and testament ; la keys ; The Stone of 
the Ancient wise men ; A short way and repeti- 
tion of former writings ; Conclusions and experi- 
ments ; Supernatural medicine ; Treatise concern- 
ing the Microcosme, [with separate title-pages]. 
London, 1658, 1656. Small 8^. 

82 

BASIL/US VALENT/NUS—BATT 

BASILIUS VALENTINUS. Continued. 

Last will and testament . . . with woodcuts. 
Lond., 1670, 8*. 

The same. Lond., 1671-70, 8*. 

Of natural and supernatural things ; translated 
by Daniel Cable. Lond,, 1671, iS**. 

The Triumphant chariot of Antimony, with notes 
by Kerckringius [translated by Richard Russell]. 
London, 1678, 8**. 

The Triumphant chariot of Antimony by J. H. 
London, 1661, 8®. 

The following may be consulted for the many 
difficulties, obscurities, and contradictions, con- 
nected with this author : 

Maier, Symbola Aurea Menue, 1617. p. 257. 

Borel, Bibliotheca Chimica^ 1654, p. 223. 

D. J. Morhof, Epistola ad Langeloltum^ Hamb. 

1673. p. 133- 
Gudenus, Historia Erfurtensis, 1675, Lib. 2, 

Cap. 21, p. 129. 

Mercklm, Lindenius renavatus, Norimb. 1686, 
p. lao. (Merely a list of his books.) 

Leibniz, Epistola data Hannov. 27 Jun., 1690. 

Reyher, DisseriaUo de Nummis^ Kiliae, 1692, 

p. 136. 

Borrichius, Computus Scriptorum ckemicorum 
Hauniae. 1697, p. ^, No. xxxxiv. 

ToUius, Epistout IHneraria^ ed. Henninius, 
1700, pp. 178, 187, 212 & passim, 

Teutsches Fegfeuer der Scheide-fCunsi^ 1702, 
p. 60. 

G. W. Wedel, Programma-Propempticon in- 
auniraU de Basilio VaUentino, Jena, 1704. 

Placcius, Theatrum^ ed. J. A. Fabricius. Hamb. 
1708. Section : De Scriptoribus Pseudonymis, p. 
III. 

Kunckel. Laboratarium ChymicutHf 1716. p. 454 
& passim (Criticism of many of Basilius' state- 
ments). 

Roth-Scholtz. Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum, 
1727, i. p. 665. (Lists of Basil Valentin's works. 
Wedel 's notice of him. ) 

Motschmann, Erfordia literata (1729-33), Ille 
Sammlung, pp. 390-399. 

Die Edelgebome fungfer Alchymia, 1730, pp. 

296,309. 

Manget, Bibliotheca Scriptorum Medicorum^ 

1 73 1, II. ii. p. 423. 
Stolle, AnUitung xur Historie der Medicinischen 

Gelahrheit^ 1731. p. 59©. (Questions his existence.) 
Ja£ob IjeupokTs Prodromus Bibliothecce metallic^, 

1732, p. 145. 
Morhof, Polyhistor, 1732, 1. pp. 84, 85. 
Kestner, Medicinishis Gelehrten- Lexicon^ 1740, 

p. 875. (Doubtful as to his existence. ) 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire de la Philosopkie 
Herm^tique, 1742, i. p. 228, iii. pp. 316-319 &^jxtm. 

Jttcher, Allgemeines Gelehrten- Lex icon, 1751, iv. 
col. 1406. 

BATSDORFF (Heinrich von). 

See REIBEHAND (CHRISTOPH). 

BATT (Antonius). 
Thesaurus Absconditus, in Agro Dominico inventus: Duas complectens 
Partes. Quarum vna est deuotarum Precationum, & gratiarum Actionum. 
Altera piarum Meditationum, & Exhortationum : sacrae Scripturae verbis 
totaliter contextarum. Eruebat eum R. P. Antonius Batt, Benedictinus 
Anglus, Congregat. Anglicanae Monaclius. 

The Triumphant Chanot of Antimony with the 
Commentary of Theod(Mre Kerckringius. Being 
the Latin version published at Amsterdam in the 
year 1685, translated into English, with a Bio- 
graphical Preface (by Arthur Edward Waite). 
London. 1893, 8**, pp. [i.-viii.]. ix.-xxxiii. [i blank] 

204 U]. 

" Practica with twelve keys and an Appendix," 
in "The Hermetic Museum," translated pyA. E. 
Waite. London, 1893, 4°. i. p. 311. 

Boerhaave, A New Method of Chemistry^ by 
Peter Shaw, 1753, i. p. 35. 

Fictuld, Probier Stein, 1753, Easter Theil, p. 49. 
(praised in Fictuld's manner. List of hb * genuioe* 
works. The spurious are given in part ii. p. 35). 

Wiegleb, Htstorisch-Kritische Untersuckung der 
Alchemie,!Wevm9X, iT77* P* ^df^ 

Eloy, Dictionnaire Historiqve de la Midecine, 
1778, I. p. 278. 

Baumer, Bibliotheca Chemica^ 178a, p. 4. 

Beytrag xur Geschichie der hdhem Chemie, 1785, 
pp. 126 (doubts his existence), 505, 585, 587, 590, 
592, 608-9, 629. 667. 

Kortum verteidiget die Alchemic^ Duisbui^, 
1789, p. III. (Believes in him.) 

Gmelin, Geschichie der Chemie, 1797, i. pp. 136, 
157 & passim, 

Exsch & Gruber, Allgemeine Encyclopddie der 
Wissenscha/ten, 1819, ii. p. 416 (artkle by 
Sprengel) ; 1822, viii. p. 40 (by Erhard). 

Sprengel, Geschichie der Artneyitumde, 1827, 
iii. p. 425. 

Biographic Medicate, Paris. Panckoucke (i8ao- 
25), ii. p. 15. (Excellent article and list by Jourdan.) 

Dezeimeris, Dictionnaire Hiitonqme de la 
Midecine, Paris, 1828, I. i. p. 301. 

Schmieder, Geschichie der Alchemte, 183a, p. 

197- 
Hoefer, Histoire de la Chimie, 184a, i. p. 453 ; 

1866, i. p. 478. 

Kopp, Geschichie der Chemie, 1843, ^ P* 74 & 
passim. 

Phillippe & Ludwig. Geschichie der Apotkeker, 
Jena, 1855, p. 411. 

Ladrague, Bibliolhique Ouvarp^, Sciences 
Secretes, 1870, Nos. 841-859. 

Kopp, Beitrdge zur Geschichie der Chemie, 1875, 
iii. pp. 110-129. 

Hildebrand, "Der Alchemist Basilius Valen- 
tinus." In Einladungsschrift des Herxogl. Fran- 
cisceums in Zerbst." Zerbst, 1876. (Kopp sap 
correctly that the answering of the question is not 
advanced by this dissertation.) 

Kopp, Die Alchemic, 1886, i. p. 29 ft passim, 

Losswitz, Geschichie der Atomistik, 1890, i. p. 

295. 
SudhofT, Bibltographia Paracelsica, 1894, p. 71 

(doubts his existence), & passim. 

BATT—BAUM^ 83 

BATT (Antonius). ConHnued. 

Lsetabor ^o super eloquia tua, sicut qui inuenit spolia multa. PsaL 118. 
ParisiiSy Apud Petrum Rocolet, Bibliopolam Regium, in Pakdo. 
M.DC.XLI. Cum PriuUegio Regis, & permissu Superiorum. 

la". Pp. [la] a3i. Index [7]. 
A book of devotion and religious meditation, and not about Chemistry or Alchemy at all. 

BAUER. 

See GRASSHOFF Oohann). 

BAUHINUS (Caspar). 
Caspari Bauhini Basil. D. eiusdemq. Academ. Anatom. et Botanic. Professor. 
Ordin. De Lapidis Bezaar Orient, et Occident Cervini item et Germanic! 
ortu, natura, differentijs, vero^ue usu ex veterum & recentiorum pladtis 
Liber hactenus non editus. Basileas Apud Conr. Waldkirch. Anno 

MDCXIII. 

8^. Pp. [34] a88. Index, etc. [10]. 3 separate plates. 

Hendrdcfa mentions an edition, Bas., 1635, 8^. WOrtemberg. He died Dec. 5th, 1634. He 

Bauhinos, son of Johannes Bauhinus, a famous wrote works on anatomy and especially on botany, 

surgeon, was bom at Basel in 1550 [others 1560], and was a translator and editor. He published an 

studied at Padua and Montpellier, and was succes- edition of the Sscre/a of Varignana. His son, 

sividy Professor of Greek, of Anatomy and Botany, Johannes Caspar, was no less distinguished than 

and finally of Medicine in his native place, town his father and grandfeuher. For a note on the 

physician, and private physician to the Duke of besoar stone see under wittich (johann). 

Witte, Diarium Bicgraphicum, 1683, Sig. U3 Partad^ Nistoiredei'Anatomieet deiaCkirur^fie, 

recto. Ann. q Dec., 1634. 1770, il p. loa, eta 

Mercklin, Lindenius renavatus, 1686, p. 15a Haller, BibHoiheca Botanica, 1771, i. p. 38^ ■ 

Hendreich, Pandecta Brandendurgica, 1699, p. Haller, Bibliotkeca AmUomica, 1774, 1. p. 

457. 36a. 

Joh. Jac Scheuchxer, A^ova Literaria Helvetica Haller, Bibliotkeca Medicina pracHc€e^ I777> ii< 

pro Anno MDCCIV., Tiguri, 1705, pp. 48-Q5. p. 332. 

Manget, Bibliotkeca Scriptorum Medicorum^ Herzog, Atkerue RaurioB^ 1778, pp. 183, 334, 

1731, I. i. p. 346. 363. 

Stolle, AnUitung tur Historie der Medicinischefi Gmelin, Gesckickie der Ckemie, 1797, i. p. 334. 
Geldkrkeit, 1731, p. 363, etc. Hutchinson, ^taFr<i/A«a Medico, 1799, ii. p. 537. 

Niceron, Afemotres, 1733, xviL, p. 339. Chalmers, Tke General Biograpkical Dictionary ^ 

Kestner, Medicinisckes Gelekr ten- Lexicon, 1740, 181 3, iv. p. 180. 
P92. Biopupkie MidicaU, Paris, Panckoucke (i8ao- 

Chaufepi^, Nouveau Dictionnaire kistorique, 35), ii. pp. 47-53- 
1750. i« P* *2i, (letter B). Sprengel, Gesckickie der Arxneykunde, 1837, 

Jttchcr, Allgemeines Gelekrten-Lexicony 1750, i. p. 63. 
col. 863. Dezeimeris, Dictionnaire Historique de la 

Eloy, Dictionnaire Historique de la Midecine, Midecine, 1838, i. p. 313. 
175^ i. p. 143 ; 1778, i. p. 387. Bayle et Thillaye, Biograpkie Medicate, 1855, 

Mor^n, Le Grand Dictionnaire kistorique, 1759, i. p. 308. 
iL p. 191. Haeser, Gesckickie der Medicin, 1881, ii. p. 57. 

BAUM. 

See THEORIE (Die) und Praktik des Gold- und Silber-Baums, 1787. 

See METALLISCHER BAUMGARTEN, 1 74 1. 

For the occurrence of the word ' Arbor,* ' Baum,' and ' Baumgarten * in the titles of alchemical books, 
see Kopp, Die Alckemie, 1886, ii. pp. 375, 378. ^ 

BAUMANN (Albrecht Christoph). 

See creiling (johann conrad), 1739. 

BAUME (Antoine). 

Chymie Exp^rimentale et Raisonn^e, Par M. Baum^, Maftre Apothicaire 
de Paris, D^monstrateur en Chymie, & de VAcaddmie Royale des Sciences. 

BA UME~BA UMER 

BAUME (Antoine). Continued. 

Tome Premier. A Paris. Chez P. Fnui;. Didot le jeune, Iil»aiTe 
de U Faculty de M^decine, quai des Augusdns. M.DCC.LXXIII. Avec 
Approbation, et Privilege du RoL 

B*. Pp. {4]cli., 481. Portniiuid 8 ploiEs of appaistm. 
T. II. [4] 671 [i blank]. 9 plates. 
T. III. |4]968{[or6Q8). 9 plates. 

There are two inue* of Ibis book by tbe m 
with Ibe Hune Dumher of pages in each volume. 
of Baum^ ii ligQed by him and is turned to the 
by Mottsu le Jeune. In the other both portrait 
signed, and are inferior in execution. In Ihe best usue ine 1 
does not occur, and the same volume conUins Ibe prinlege, 
catalogue of book* on Chemistry. 

9 printer! with the suae dale, and 
In the best issue Cochin's portiait 
ighl. and the vignettes art signed 
nd vignettes are reversed, an not 
iptint 068 in T. IIL 
list of errata, and a 

Baumt, DIM of the most distinguished cbemisls 
of France during the dghteenlti century, was bom 
M Senlls, February >8, 173B, and aRer some school- 
ing mi apprenticed 10 an apothecary. At Ibe end 
ofa couple of yean he went lo Paris and became a 
pupil of Oeollroy, and In 175a passed Ihe eiamina- 
tlon of the College of Pharmacy with great distinc- 
llm. Soon after he wa* appointed lo Ihe Chair of 
ChomUtry in the College. In 1773 hii reseiirches 
ed to bii election 10 the Academy of Sciences. In 
lyBo. having acquired ■ moderate fortune in the 
business which he had cooducled, be retired from 
ll la devote himself lo chemical research. When 
Ihe revolution broke out, however, be was deprived 

of bis means and was cc '— ' "— *- ■- 

chemical manufaclurea. 
Institute In 1796, and I 
t7gt. Ha died Oct i. 

Wdgel. Cimndrin dtr rtiiUH wnd amgewaniiin 
Cttmit. 1777. ' «>■'■ . fi"""- 

llaumsr, iMlioltifca CAtmUa. 1783, p. ^ 
(imalln, (inekUkH drr CAtmit. 179*. "• P- 3S9. 

u coDitrained to re-embark ii 

His researdtes cover almost the wbole Sdd o( 
chemistry, and they were not confined to the 
science itself, but extended 10 chemical lechiioloRy 
and to the application of the science to nuuiu- 
faciures. Baum^'s name is familiar it 

Among hii works may be mentioned a DisKrta- 
lion on Ether, Paris, 1757, 12'. Conn A CJtimit, 
Paris, 1767, 13° ; Manml otr CJUmi^. Paris, 1763, 
1766, la*, translated into English, Goman, and 
llaljan. 

EUmtni dt Pharmacit lUm^tit It frtifnt. 
Paris, 176a, i7«9. 1773, 1818, 8*. 

OfUKuUi it Ckimu, Pari^ 179a, 8*. 

He wrole also a great number of papen publiibed 
in the Joumali and Proceedings oC Societies. 

Degimeris, DieHtmnairt HUtoriqiu db la 
MHUciiu. iSaS, i. p. 300. 

BiegrafhU UntotntlU, 1843, iii. p. 308, article 
by Cadel Gassicourt. 

Kopp, GtakickU dtr CMrmit, 1843-47, ii. p. iij 

Bayle & Thillaye, Bu^rafkU MtdicaU, 1B55, 
ii. p. 5>B. 

NoMvtllt BiogmpkU Ginh-alt. 1859, iv. coL Sia, 
article by Hoefer. 

PogeendCH^, Biograpkisck-liitraraclia Hand- 
wtrui^ck, 1863, i, coL 116. 

ItAUMK'K OOHANN WiLHKLM). 

|lll)llolhcM Chemica, adornata a Joan. Wilhelmo Baumer, in Academia 
(ttm»ona Medicinic Professore Primario. Giessae Apud Joan. Justum 
I'rlod. Kricgor, Acad. Bibliopolam MDCCLXXXII. 

8*. Pp.[ii]ti& A brief but useful bibliography. 

KiMita, Ktftrtprium. iSofroS, pp. 327, 339. «=.. 
mtratkk MMitaIr, Pacia, Panckoucke (iSao- 
•0, 11: V-6. 
Ou«rv(l, l-t Franct LilUtatn, i6>7, 1. p. 904. 

19th Sej 

KHii al Krhwpiler. 
isor (if Medicine i 
1 Krfurl ; then in 1765 Professor 

icTof 

1,1 imfiwandtfH 

mkv 

id hydrography. 
*«ts. 
medicine, aaatomy, surgery, literatofe, «..., ...._ 
was nuthor of Elements of Chemistry, Giessen, 
1783. 8°. 

Fuchs, Rtftrltrium dtr CkemUchen LiOtrattir, 
1S06.08. pp. 384, 549, 537- 
Bii^pMfXit M/dicale, Paris, Paockoucke (1810- 

Uneimens, Dicliamnaire milmfia dt U 
lUyle i ThiUaye, S^gr^Ue MiduaU, 1855, ii. 
p. 436- 

BA USCH—BA YEN 

85 

BAUSCH (JOHANN LORENZ). 

Job. Laurentii Bauschi Med D. & Physici Reip. Suinfiirtensis Ordinarii 
Schediasmata Bina Curiosa de Lapide Haematite et iEtite, ad mentem 
Academiae Naturae Curiosonim congesta. Lipsiae, Impensis Viti Jacobi 
Trescheri, Bibliopolae Uratislaviensis. Typis Johannis-Erici Hahnii. Anno 
MDCLXV. 

8<>. Pp. [4] 164 ; [8] 79 [i blank]. Tide red and black. 7 plates. 

Bausch was born at Schweinfurt^ Sept. 50, 1605, 
his father, Leonhard Bausch, being a physician 
there. After the usual schooling, he also took to 
medicine, and after attending several German Uni- 
versties, spent two years in Italy and graduated at 
Altorf with the highest distinction, June 39, 1630. 
He then practised in his native place, devoting his 
leisure to Botany and Chemistxy, to the enlarge- 
ment of his library and museum, and to conducting 
a learned correspondence. In 1651 he issued an 
address containing a scheme for the founding of 
a society or academy for the encouragement of 
physical research, which led to the formation of the 
"Academia Leopoldino-Carollna Naturae Curio- 
sorum.** The persons immediately concerned with 

Frdier, Theatrum virorum eruditione clarorum^ 
1688, p. 1401, portrait, plate 64. 

Witte, Diartum Biographicum^ 1688, Sig. Vuu4 
verso. 

Hendrdch, PandtcUB Brandenburgicte, 1699, p. 
46a 

Manget, Bibliotkeca Scriptarum Afedicorunty 
mi, I. i. p. a49. 

StoUe, Anleiiumg sur HistarU der GeiaArArit, 
1736, p. 575 (founc&tion of the 'Academia'). 

ICestner, AfedicinischesGelehrten-Lex. 1740, p. 94. 

Jbcher, Allgemeines GeUhrten- Lexicon , 1750. i^ 
col. 869. 

Bflchner, AcademuB , . . NeUurm Curiosorum. 
Historia^ 1755, p. 463, No. i. 

Bausch*s scheme were johann Michael fbrk 
{q.v.\ Georg Balthasar Metzger, and Georg Bal- 
thasarWohlfarth. Bausch was elected the first presi- 
dent on January ist, 1652, and was called Jason I. 

In 1661 he was attacked by severe pain in his 
right jaw, but it ceased and recurred only at 
intervals till 1664 ; he then suffered so severely that 
he was unable to speak or to swallow. He ultimately 
was seixed with paralysis of the left side, and died 
17th November, 1665. 

Besides the above work he wrote also De Uni- 
comu fossilij Lips. 1666 ; and De atruleo et chry- 
socolla, Jenae, 1668 ; VratisL 1668. Of the tract 
Dt Lafide htematiU, Hendreich quotes an edition : 
Vratisf. 1664. 

Haller, Bibliotkeca Anatomical 1774, i. p. 537. 
Haller, Bibliotkeca Medicina practica, 1777, ii. 
p. 588. 
Gmelin. Gtsckickte der Ckemie, 1798* ii* PP* 305, 

207, 213. 

Fischer, Gesckickte der Pkysik, 1801, i. p. 26a. 

Fuchs, Repertorium, 1806^, pp. 161, 165. 

Chalmers, Tke General Biograpkical Dictionary, 
1812, iv. p. 186. 

Bioprapkie Midicale, Paris, Panckoucke (i8ao- 
25), ii. p. 68. 

Bayle & Thillaye, Biograpkie MidicaU, 1855, L 

p. 407- 
Allgemeine Deutscke Biograpkie , 1875, i^ P* ^^^ 

BAYEN (Pierre). 
Herrn Bayen konigl. franzosischen Staabs- und Ober-Feldapothekers 
Chymische Untersuchungen iiber das Zinn, und Beantwortung der Frage: 
Ob man sich ohne Gefahr zu okonomischen Gebrauche der zinnemen 
Gefafse bedienen konne ? Auf Befehl der Franzosischen Regierung bekannt 
gemacht Aus dem Franzosischen iibersetzt; herausgegeben und mit 
Anmerkungen begleitet von D. Johann Gottfried Leonhardi, ofTentlichem 
ordentlichen Lehrer der Pathologic und Chirurgie zu Wittenberg und der 
Chursachfsl. okonomischen Gesellschaft. Mitgliede. Leipzig, bey Siegfried 
Lebrecht Crusius. 1784. 

8". Pp. xil, 212. 

Bayen (1725-1^98) was a chemist of great in- 
genuity, originality, and diligence. It is claimed 
for him that he was the first to observe the increase 
of weight due to calcination, though he did Jean 
Rey full justice ; he made investigations on rocks 
and minerals, and mineral waters, mercury, nitric 

Gmelin, Gesckickte der Ckemie, 1799, iii. p. 797. 

Mimoires de rinstitut (Sciences Math^matiques 
et Ph3rsiques), An. vii. (1799), ii* P* i44* 

Reuss, Repertorium Commentationum : Ckemia, 
1803, pp. 2. 126. 

Fuchs, Repertorium, 1806-08, pp. 405, 417, 430, 

435f 449- 

acid, etc, etc. His Opuscules Ckimiques, edited 
by Parmentier and Malatret, were published at 
Paris in 1798, 2 vols., 8®. 

The original of the above appeared at Paris in 
1781. 

He was a member of the French Institute. 

Qu^rard, La France LitUraire^ 1828, i. p. 229. 

Biograpkie Universelle^ 1843, "'• P- 337- 

Nowvelle Biograpkie GifUrale, 1859, iv. col. 
865. 

Poggendorff. Biograpkisck-literarisckes Hand- 
worterbuck, 1863, i. col. 119. 

86 BA YRS—BECHER 

BAYRS (Albertus). 
Colloquium Spiritus Mercurii cum fratre Alberto Bayrs. 
See FIGULUS (benedictusX Thesaurindla, 1682, p. no. 

BEATUS (Georgius). 

See theatrum chemicum, 1659, iv. p. 457. 

See BASILIUS VALENTINUS, Aurcliae occultae . . . 

BECHER (JoHANN Joachim). 
Johann Joachim Bechers, Med. Doct und Rom. Kays. Maj. Cammer- und 
Commercien-Raths, Chymischer GlUcks-Hafen, oder Grosse Chymische 
Concordantz imd Collection, von funfiiEehn hundert Chymischen Processen, 
durch viele Muhe und Kosten aus den besten Manuscriptis und Laboratoriis 
in diese Ordnung zusammen getragen, wie folgendes Verzeichnifs ausweiset, 
Nebst einer neuen Vorrede, oder Bedenken von der Gold-Macherey, 
Herm Georg Ernst Stahls, Konigl. Preufs. Hof-Raths, und ersten 
wiircklichen Leib-Medici, wie auch Praesid. des Ober-CoU^ii MedicL 
Neue und viel verbesserte Edition. Mit Konigl. Pohln. und Cburfiirstl. 
Sachs. Privilegio. Halle, 1726. Verlegts Ernst Gottlieb Krug, privile- 
girter Buchhandler. 

4^ Pp. [30] 8ia Register [28] 2 blank. Title red and black. Portrait. 

The first edition appeared at Franckfurt, 1682, Becher's Commentarius fiber des Monte Snyders 
The preface is dated London, 24 March, Schrifften, p. 108. 
1682. Spiefs, Concordantx fiber des Nuysements Sal 

4**. The preface is dated London, 24 March, Schrifften, p. 108. 

"Jpiefs, Coi 
Part L : Coeleste, p. 126. 

Kin Tractat, ist gleichsam ein Commentarius Radtichs Brotofer Eladdarii Majoris Appendix, 

fiber den Bemardum, p. i. p. 175. 

Becher's Philosophisches Gutachten fiber die Part XX., Appendix: 

Philosophische Tinctur im trucknen Weg, p. 25. Becher's Ch3rmischer Rosen-Garten, p. 79a 

D. Joh. Joachim Bechers, Romis. Kayserl. Maj. Rath &c., Chymischer 
Rosen-Garten, Samt einer Vorrede und kurtz gefassten Lebens-Beschreibung 
Herm D. Bechers, zum Druck befbrdert von Friedrich Roth-Scholtzen. 
Niimberg, bey Johann Daniel Taubers seeL Erben, Anno 17 17. 

8^ Pp. 96. Title red and black with a vignette : a hand out of a cloud squeezing a 
bunch of grapes over a goblet. 

There was an edition in 1712, 8vo. 

Natur-Kiindigung der Metallen. Mit vielen curiosen Beweifsthiimen, natiir- 
lichen Griinden, Gleichnissen, Erfahrenheiten, und bifshero ungemeinen 
Auffmerckungen vor Augen gestellet. Zu Erhaltung der Wahrheit, 
Erlauterung der Spagirischen Philosophi, und Gefallen der Liebhabem. 
Verfertiget durch Johannem Joachimum Bechem, von Speyer, Mathematicum, 
Medicum. Lege totum & Relege. 

Esdrse iv. c 8. v. 2. 
Edisseram autem tibi similitudinem Esdra. Enimvero, sicut scisdtanti 
Terra dicat tibi, se gignere perqukm copiosam quidem humum fingendis 
fictilibus; Parvum autem Pulverem unde Aurum Fit, ita se habet praesentis 
sevi Negotium. [Something cut out] Franckfurt am Mayn, In Veriegung 
Martin Hermsdorffs. An. 1705. 

8®. Pp. [14] 347. Register [37]. Frontispiece. 

BECHER 87 

BECHER (JoHANN Joachim). Continued, 
Institutiones Chimicse Prodromae, id est, Joannis Joachimi Becheri Spirensis 
Mathem. & Med. Doct Oedipus Chimicus Obscurionim Terminoram & 
Principionim Chimicorum, Mysteria aperiens & resolvens. Opusculum, 
omnibus Medicinae & Chimise Studiosis, lectu perquam utile & necessarium. 
Amstelodami, Apud Elizeum Weyerstraten, Anno 1664. 

la^ Pp. [16] ao2, [7, I blank]. Engraved title, and plate of the Prague Medal 
included in the pagination. On the title-page a vignette of the Sphere. 

The Prague Medal is reproduced by Tollius in his Epistolet Itineraria, 1700, p. 138. 

Institutiones Chimicae Prodromae i.e. loannis loachimi Becheri Spirensis 
Mathematici Et Medicinae Doctoris. Oedipus Chimicus Obscurionim 
Terminorum & Principiorum Chimicorum Mysteria Aperiens & resolvens. 
Opusculum, omnibus Medicinae & Chimiae Studiosis, lectu perquam utile & 
necessarium. Francofurti, Apud Hermannum a Sande. M.DC.LXIV. 

12®. Pp. [16, including two engravings] 192 [7, i blank]. Engravings of 
Oedipus and the Sphynx and the Prague Medal. 

A German translation was published at Franckfurt, 1680, 8^. 

Intsitutiones (sic) Chimicae Prodromae, i.e. Joannis Joachimi Becheri Spirensis 
Mathematicae Et Medicinae Doctoris. Oedipus Chimicus Obscurionim 
Terminorum & Principorum (sic) Chimicorum, Mysteria aperiens & resolvens. 
Opusculum, omnibus Medicinae & Chimiae Studiosis, lectu perquim utile 
& necessarium. Francofurti, Apud Joh. Maximilian, k Sande. Anno 

M.DCC.V. 

12**. Pp. [16] 192 [7, I blank]. Engraving of the Prague Medal and of 
Oedipus and the Sphinx, included in tlie pagination. These are reproduced from 
the 1664 edition of Sande. The first word is misprinted in this edition. 

[Another Copy.] 

Joh. Joachimi Beccheri Spirensis Mathematicae et Medicinae Doctoris, Oedipus 
Chymicus. Seu Institutiones Chymicae Opusculum omnibus Medicinae & 
Chymiae Studiosis lectu perquam utile & necessarium. Editio Novissima. 
Cui Praefationem praemisit, Synopsin Titulorum, notas marginales, sensuum 
& rerum distinctiones, nee non notas, & animadversiones indicemque adjecit, 
& ab infinitis mendis liberatae. Supplementa Beccheriana, Elementa Chymiae 
Methodo Mathematica conscripta exhibentia subjunxit Joh. Jacobus Rosen- 
stengelius Medicinae Doctor. Francofurti ad Moenum, Apud Joh. 

Maximilianum van Sande, Anno MDCCXVI. 

8^. Pp. [22] 228. Index [11] [i blank]. Engraved title with picture of Oedipus 
and the Sphinx, and plate of the Prague Medal. This last is not included in the 
pagination. Supplementa Beccheriana: — [6] 156. Index [6]. This tract has a 
separate title-page, signatures, and pagination. See rosenstengel (j. J.). 

Joh. Joach. Becheri, D. Spirensis Germani Sacrae Caesar. Majest. Consil. & 
Med. Elect. Bav. Opuscula Chymica Rariora, Addita nova Praefatione ac 
Indice locupletissimo multisque Figuris aeneis iUustrata a Friderico Roth- 
Scholtzio. Siles. Norimbergae & Altorfii, Apud Haeredes Joh. Dan. 
Tauberi. Anno MDCCXIX. 

8**. Pp. [12], 50, 31a Title red and black. 

88 BECHER 

BECHER (JoHANN Joachim). Continued. 

This volume contains : VII. Besckriibung des . . . Univ€rs€U-Cfens, 

Biographical introduction by Koth-Scholtz. with 2 pUites, p. 202. 

Becher^ Trifus Hermtticus Fatidicus . . . with VIII. Bericktvon Tiegeln^ p. 206. 

frontispiece, vignette, and plate of the Prague IX. Chymiscker Rosen-Garten , p. 207. 

Medal, including: X. Berickt von dem Sande^ p. 257. 

I. Lahoraiorium PortatiU, with 11 plates, p. 31. XI. Pantaleon dtlarvatus, p. 29^ 

II. Centrum Mundi Coni:atenatum.Seu Duum- Of the preceding tracts the Trtpus retains the 
viratus Hermeticus, Sive Magnorum Duorum Pro- title given above, and Nos. ii., iii., vi., ix., x., and 
ductorum Nitri 6* Satis Textura 6* Anatomia^ xi. have long title-pages, which however are in- 
with 2 plates, p. 63. eluded in the pagination. Of the Trifus there 

III. Alphabetum Mint-rale^ p. 97. was an earlier edition, Franckfurt, 1689, 8". 

IV. ConcorJantia Mercuriorum Luna, p. 150. No. ix., " Chjrmischer Rosen-Garten " is contained 

V. Concordttntia Atenstruoruin, p. 18^. in the Grosu Chymische Concordants, 1726 iff.v) ; 

VI. Berickt von Erfind- und /.uherettung eincs No. x., " Bericht von dem Sande^" was induded 
compendieusen Cfens, p. 195. in the Trifolium Becherianum Hotlandicum in 

1679 (^. v.). 

Actorum Laboratorii Chymici Monacensis, seu Physicae Subterraneae Libri 
Duo, Quorum Prior profundam subterraneorum genesin, nee non admirandam 
Globi terr-aque-aerei super & subterranei fabricam, Posterior spedalem subter- 
raneorum Naturam, resolutionem in partes pardumq'; proprietates exponit, 
accesserunt sub finem Mille hypotheses seu mixtiones Chymicse, ante hie 
nunquam visoe, omnia, plus quam mille experimentis stabilita, sumptibus 
& permissu Serenissimi Eleetoris Bavarise &c. Domini sui elementissimi 
elaboravit & publieavit Joannes Joaehimus Beeherus, Spirensis, Med. D. 
Sacne Ctesar. Majestatis Consiliarius, nee non Serenissimi Bavariae Eleetoris 
Aulne Medicus. Franeofurti, Imp. Job. Davidis ZunnerL Anno 

M.DCLXIX. 

8^ Pp. [38] 633 [7, 2 blank]. Folding frontispiece not included. 

This is the first edition. K German translation vras published at Franckfurt, 1680. 
8", and 1690. 8*. 

Actorum laboratorii Chymiei Monacensis, seu Physicae Subterranean Libri 
Duo, Quorum Prior Profundam subterraneorum genesin, nee non admir- 
andam Globi terr-aque-aerei super & subterranei fabrieam; Posterior 
specialem subterraneorum Naturam, resolutionem in partes partiumque 
proprietates exponit Aeeesserunt sub finem mille hypotheses seu mixtiones 
Chymiea^ antehac nunquam visae: omnia, plus quam mille experimentis 
stabilita, sumptibus & permissu Serenissimi Eleetoris Bavariae &e. Domini 
sui elementissimi elaboravit & publieavit Joh. Joaehimus Beeherus, Spirensis, 
Med. D. Sacne Ctes, Majestatis Consiliarius, nee non Serenissimi Bavariae 
Eleetoris Aulce Medicus. Franeofurti, Impi Mauritii Georgii Weidmanni. 
Anno MIK LXXXl. 

8^ r^K ^^, including the frontispiecej 8ia Index \\o^ Title red and black. 
A'ct^i 500-^01 is inserted the title-pa)se of the first Supplement ; between 678-679 Uie 
titltspa^^' of the second Supplement. At the end is the third Supplement, with separate 

title ami ixxj^ination. p|x ijiS. Index [11 1 Then : Theoria et expehentia de nova temporis 
dinietiomii Ratione & nccurata HortMogiorum Constniciione, ad societatem R^;iam - 
AtigUciuiam in CoUc^io Gn»hamensi Ixmdini Jan. i6Sa Pp. ^.29]. Catalogus 
LilMTv^runi Jv>h. JoAch. TWcheri. [7] i blank. 

J oh. Joachimi Hcccheri« D. Spirensis G^mani Saer. Caes. Majest ConsiL & 
Med. Elect. IVav. Physica Subterranea lV>fundam Subterraneorum Genesin, 
0 principiis hucusquc ignotis, ostendens. Opus sine pari, Primum hactenus 
vS: Prinix'ivis Mditio No\*issima. lY^iatione utili pnemissa, Indiee loeuple- 
lissiiuo adoriuu<.v, scnsuumquo & renun distinetionibus, Libro tersius & 

BECHER 89 

BECHER (JoHANN Joachim). Continued, 

curatius edendo operam navavit & Specimen Beccherianum, Fundamentonim, 
Documentorum, Expenmentorum subjunxit Georg. Emestixs Stahl, D. Prof. 
Publ. Ordin. Hall. Lipsiae, Apud Job. Ludov. Gleditschium, Anno 

MDCCIII. 

8". Frontispiece and title, 2 leaves ; Introduction, preface, and contents, pp. [28]; 
Text, pp. 560; Title to the first Suf 
omitted in numbering) ; Title to second 
832 omitted] ; Title to third Supplement, 
pp. [36]. 

The Specimen Beccherianum has a separate title-page and pagination : 

Specimen Beccherianum sistens Fundamenta, Documenta, Experimenta, quibus 
Priacipia Mixtionis Subterraneae, & Instrumenta Naturalia atque Artificialia demon- 
strantur. Ex Autoris Scriptis, colligendo, corrigendo, connectendo, supplendo, 
concinnatmn, exhibet Georg. Emestus Stahl, D. Prof. Publ. Hall. & Acad. Nat. Cur. 
CoUeg. Lipsiae, apud Jon. Ludov. Gleditschium, Anno MDCCIII. 

Pp* [8] 304* Index, pp. [16]. The general title is in red and black. 

Another edition was published at Leipzig in 1738, 4**. 

Trifolium Becherianum HoUandicum oder Der Romisch-Kayserlichen Mayestat 
Kamer- und Commercien-Raths Dr. Job. Joacbim Becbers Drey Neue 
Erfindungen, Bestebende in einer Seiden-Wasser-Miible und Scbmeltz-Wercke, 
In Holland vorgescblagen und werckstellig gemacbt: Mit griindlicher 
Anweisung, wie es mit denselbigen Sacben bescbaffen ist Aufe der 
Niederlandiscben in die Hocbteutscbe Spracbe iibersetzet Amsterdam, 
Bey Jobann Tbiem. 1679. 

8°. Pp. [2] 62. 
Part II., " Bericht von dem Sand," was reprinted in the Opuscula*Chymica Rari&ra^ 1719 {q,v.). 

Job. Joa. Becberi Spirensis Medicinae Doctoris, Tripus Hermeticus Fatidicus, 
Pandens Oracula Cbymica, seu : I. Laboratorium Portatile cum Metbodo 
vere spagyrici, sc. juxta exigentiam Naturae, laborandi. Accessit pro Praxi 
& Exemplo. II. Magnorum Duorum Productorum Nitri & Salis Textura 
& Anatomia, atque in omnium praecedentium confirmationem adjunctum est 
III. Alpbabetum Minerale, seu viginti quatuor Tbeses de subterraneorum 
& mineralium Genesi, Textura & Analysi. His accessit Concordantia 
Mercurii Lunse. Omnia juxta Autboris Doctrinam & Principia in Pbysica 
sua subterranea ejusque supplementis conscripta, adeo ut bic Tripus 
Hermeticus Commentarius Practicus super prsefatam Pbysicam subterraneam 
ver^ dici queat, utpote scriptum raris Experimentis, multis Figuris & profundis 
Speculationibus innixum, ut Lectori per se patebit Exaratum in Comubia 
ad extrema Angliae ora inter ipsa mineralia experimenta & autopsiam, cura 
Friderici Rotb-Scbolzii, Siles. Norimbergae & Altorfii, Apud Haeredes 
Jobann. Danielis Tauberi. MDCCXIX. 

8*. Pp.310. Frontispiece, Prague Medal, Plate in 64 compartments of Apparatus. 
Furnace 9 plates. Symbols i plate. 2 Symbolic plates. Furnace 2 plates. 

This is identical with the Opuscula Chymica Rariora (see above), wanting Roth-Scholtz's Life of 
liecher, and other preliminary matter. 

Oedipus Cbymicus. 

See ROTH-SCHOLTZ (friederich), Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum, 1730, ii. 

p. 619. 
See MANGET (j- J-)> Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, i. p. 306. 

90 

BECHER-^BECKER 

BECHER (JoHANN Joachim). Continued. 
Pantaleon Delarvatus. 

Su FAUST (JOHANN MICHAEL^ Philaletha Illustratus, 1706, p. 106. 

This is an exposure of pantaleon \^,v.). 

Becber (born 1635 at Speyer, died 1682 at London) 
is not only fiAmous in the history of Chemistry for 
his theory of combustion, but is notable as a tech- 
nologist, miner and metallurgist, and projector of 
various economical schemes. He travelled much 
and was the author of a number of works besides 
those in the present collection. In addition to the 
notices of him in the histories of Chemistry and in 
the encyclopaedias and bi(^raphical dictionaries, 
there may be consulted the depreciatory article on 
him hy Adelung (GeschicA/e der wunschlulun. Xarr- 
heiif i.) (q.v?^ \ on the opposite side Urban 
Gottfried Hucher's work : Das MusUr eines NUtt- 
lich'GeUhrten in der Person Herm Doctor Jokann 
Joiukim Beckers^ Nttmberg, 172a ; and Job. Fried. 
Reimmann, * Vorbericht * to Becher's Ndrrische 
Weifshtit, 1707^ and Reimmann's Einleitung in 
die Mistoriam hterariam^ 17x0, iii. pp. 536, 537. 

The • Vorbericht * was reprinted by Roth-Scholtz 

Hendreich, Pandecta Brandenburgica, 1699, p. 
470. 

^^schhiii^ De Novis Inventis , . . Tractatus, 1700, 
pp. 117, 638, 698, 78a 

Paschius, Schediasma de curiosis . . . inventis, 
vii. §8, p. ao6; §10, p. 233 ; §20, p. 301. 

ToUius, Efistola Itinerarite^ ed. Henninius, 
1700, p. 138. 

Roth-Scholtz, Bibludheca Chemica, 1727, pp. 19. 
291, 213 [his), 215 (Wf), 227 {Hs), 

Manget, Bibliothtca Scriphrum Medicorum, 
1731, I. i. p. 255. 

jexob Leupolds Prodromus BUliotAeca Meiallica^ 
17^, p. 23. 

Morhof, Polyhistor, 1732, i. pp. 234, § 17 ; 149, 
§46; 819, §6; 347, §^2; 729; ii. p. 404. §a, etc. 

Zedler, Universal Lexicon, 1733, iii. coL 863. 

Kestner, Medicin, Gelekrten-Lexicon, 1740, p. 96. 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire de la Philosophie 
Hermitique, 1742, L p. 411 ; iii. p. 116. 

Tdcher, Allgemeines Gelekrten-Lexicon^ 1751, i. 
col. 889. 

as preliminary to his edition of Becher's Chymiscker 
Rosengarten^ 1717 (^.v.). There is also a notice 
in Roth-Scholtz's edition of Becher*s Opuscula 
Ckvmica Rariora^ 1719 {q.v.). 

Lists of his works are given by Addung {q.v.), 
by Bucher (see above), Reimmann (in Beoier's 
Ndrrische Weifsheit), by Roth-Scholtz (see above), 
in his Bibliotkeca Chemica (^.v.) and Deutsckes 
Theatrum Chemicum (1730). il. p. 6ao, as a preface 
to the Oedipus chemicus, and in Becher's Pkysica 
Sudlerranea, 168 1 (q.v.). Mercklin, Undenius 
Renovaius, 1686, p. 619. 

His portrait is prefixed to the Chymucker GlMcks- 
Hafen, 1706 {q.v\ One is contamed in Bucfaer's 
Life, taken from a painting which belonged to 
RothScholU {Deuisches Tfuairum Chemicum, 
1730, ii. p. 621), and it is also in Roth-Scholtz's 
PhOosoph. Bilder-Saal, t p. 33. 

Eloy, Dictionnaire historique de la Midecine^ 

I7S5. »• P- 144. 
Baumer, Biblioiheca Chemica^ 1783, p. 52. 

Beytrag sur Geschichie der hdhem dkemie, 1785, 

pp. 531, 623-4, 626, 633-4, 640. 

Hutchinson, Biographia Medica, 1799, ii. p. 

541. 
Fuchs, Reperiorium, 1806-08, pp. 144-146, 150,236. 

Biographie Midicale^ Paris, Panckoucke (1820- 
1825), ii. 87 (article by A. J. L. Jourdan). 

Sichmieder, Geschichte der Alchemie, 1832, p 417. 

Hoefer, Histoire de la Chimie, 1843, ii. pp. 213- 
ai6, and 1869, ii. pp 206-208. 

Kopp, Geschichte der Chemie, 1843, i. pp. 177- 
180 & passim, 

PoggendorflE^ Biographisch-literarisches Hand- 
worterouch, 1863, i* <^^ ^^ 

Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie, 1875, iL p. 201 
(article by Oppenheim). 

Kopp, Bettrage sur Geschichie der Chemie, 1875, 
iii. p. 201. 

Kopp, Die Alchemie, 1886, i. pp. 65*69 & passim. 

BECHIUS (Philippus). 

See AGRICOLA (georg), Bergwcrck Buch, 162 1. 

Philip Bech, or Bechius, a native of Basel, be- 
came professor there and taught Latin and Logic. 
He vrrote a commentary on Virgil and a book on 

Mercklin, Lindenius renovatus, 1686, p. 911. 

Freher, Theatrum Virorum Erudittone Clar- 
orum, 1688, p. 1248. 

Hendreich, Pandecta Brandenhurgica, 1699, P* 
472. 

Morhof, Polyhistor, 1732, ii. p. 51, § 9. 

mining, and edited works on philosophy and 
medicme. He died Sept. , 1560. 

Kestner, A/edicinisches Gelehrten- Lexicon, 1740, 
p. 98. 

Tdcher, Allgemeines Gelehrten-Ijexicon, 1750^ i. 
col. 888. 

Herzog, Athena Raurias, 1778, p. 262. 

BECKER (D. D.). 

Der Chymische Wahrsager oder Beschreibung eines Rubinrothen, fixen und 
durchdringenden Oels, so ohne alles Feuer und Zusatz freroder Dinge aus 
dem Thau bereitet und denen Chymicis und Alchymicis zur femem 
Erforschung aufrichtig mittheilet D. D. Becker der Medicin Doctor. 
Langensaltza, 1755. bey Johann Christian Martini. 

BECKER'-BECKHER 

91 

BECKER (D. D.). Continued. 

8*. Pp. [i*o] IO-78 [a blank]. At the end is a method for making crucibles to 
hold melted Ifcao-glass. 

The present tract was followed in 1757 by Gmelin, GtschickU der Chemie 1798, ii. p. 328 ; 
Dts cJ^^HisckeH IVoMrsagirs Vertkeidigut^^. See Kopp, Die Alcktmtu, 1886, ii. p. 349. 

BECKER (Daniel). 
De Unguento Annario. 

See THEATRUM SYMPATHETICUM, 1662, p. 514. 

Daniel Becker, the vounger, has his name spelled 
iBuallr in this way. Witte is not consistent, for the 
6dMr 8 name he has spelled Beckenis, while the 
son's be spells Beckherus — which is the converse 
of the common practice. 

He was bom at K5nigsberg, January 5, 1627. 
His father, Moshing him to have a liberal education, 
sent him to travd in 1646. He visited various 
Universities in Germany, Wittemberg, Leipzig, 
Jena, Altdorf, Ingolstadt, Tubingen, went to 
Pramce and Italy, and graduated at Strasburg 
in 1653. He next visited Holland, and when he 
arrived at Konigsberg was made extraordinary 
professor in the Medical Faculty in 1653, and 
ordinary professor in 1655. The Elector of Bran- 
denburg appointed him to be his physician in 
1663. He died Januair 6 (others Feb. 7), 1670, while 
be was rector of the University for the second time. 

Mercklin, Lindenius renovatus, 1686, p. 230. 

Freher, Theatrum Virorum eruditione clararum^ 
1688, p. 1407. 

Manget, Bibliotkeca Scriptorum Medicorum^ 
vjxi, I. i. p. 257. 

Kestner, Medicinisches Gelehrten-Lex. , 1740, p. 99. 

Jdcher, Allgemeines GeUhrten- Lexicon, 1750, 
u coL 901. 

He wrote a few medical dissertations, and is 
generally regarded as the author of the tract on 
Uie Weapon Salve, though it has been assigned by 
some to his father. 

Mercklin gives a short biographical notice with 
the date of his birth 1627, and yet he puts in the 
list of his works, the '*Medicus Microcosmus" 
which was published at Rostock in 1622, and the 
"De Cultrivoro Pmssiaco Observatio" which 
appeared at Kdnigsberg in 1636, without being 
struck by the incompatibility of the dates. These 
mistakes are copied without correction by Manget 
and bv Mor6ri. 

Freher has in his notice given Becker venr great 
praise. His list contains the writings of ooth 
father and son, but with no attempt at discrimina- 
tion. 

Mor^ri, Le Grand Dictionnaire Historiqve, 1759, 

P- 293- 

Haller, Hibliotkeca Medicints pracHciB, 1779, 

.p. 28. 

Fuchs, Refertorium, 1806-08, p. 141. 

Biographte Midicale^ Paris, Panckoucke (i8ao- 

25). "• P- 99- 

BECKER (JoHANN Philipp). 

Chemische Anekdoten oder Versuche, iiber einige zweifelhafte und noch keine 
authentike Giiltigkeit erlangte Satze. Von J. P. Becker, Senator, und des 
Collegii. Med. Prov. Assessor zu Magdeburg. Leipzig, bey Christian 
Gottlieb Hertel, 1788. 

8°. Pp. [10] 253 [i blank]. 

Becker (1711-1790, who is not to be confused 
with J. Ph. Becheri was bom Feb. 7, 171 1, at 
Borcken, near Fritzlar, in Hesse, became in 1735 

Meusel, Das GeUhrte Teutschland, oder Lexikon 
der iettt lebenden Teutscken SchriftsUlUr^ 1796, 
L pp. aoo-i. 

an apothecary and medical assessor at Magdebuig. 
He IS the author of researches on nitric acid, r^ 
arsenic, etc., in Crdl's Annalen, 

Biomphie M^dicale^ Paris, Panckoucke (1820- 
2^), n. p. 96 (complains of his uninteresting 
biographical sketch in EUwert's Repertorium fUr 
Chemie und Pharmacie). 

BECKHER (Daniel). 

Historische Beschreibung des Preussischen Messerschluckers, wie Er nicht 
allein durch einen Schnitt des Messers befreyet, gliicklich geheilet, sondem 
nunmehr ein Weib gefreyet, vnd zu Landsberg in Preussen seine Wohnung 
genommen, sich auch bifs anhero frisch vnd gesund befindet 

Nebenst seinem Natiirlichem Contrafayt vnd des verschluckten Messers 
eigendlicher Gestalt vnd Lange. wie auch Erorterung Funffzehen 
Medicinalischer Fragen. verfertiget durch Daniel Beckhem D. vnd 

92 

BECKHER-^BEEG 

BECKHER (Daniel). Continued, 

Professor. Konigl. auch ChurfiirstL Brandenb. Preussischen bestalten 
Hoff-Medicum, vnd der stadt KneiphofT Physicum ordinarium. Konigsberg, 
In Verlegung Peter Hendels Buchf : vnd Gedruckt durch Johann Reusnem 
Im Jahr 1643. 

4*. No pagination. 2 leaves ; A«, B-Q, Rj, in fours (=pp. 140). Drawing of the 
knife and portrait. Followed by a MS. : "Der HtUlische Messer-Sdilucker," bgr 
Wolffgang Christoph Wesener, Halle, n.d., pp. 14. 

Daniel Beckher, the elder, was bom at Danzig, 
December 13, 15^. After eight years* study in 
German Universities and in Denmark, he obtained 
a chair of Chemistry and Phjrsics at Konij^sberg in 
1623, and there becaune licentiate in Medicine. In 
1635 he was chosen town phvsician of KneiphofT, 
and the Elector of Brandenburg appointed faini 
court physician in 1639. He received the degree 
of Doctor of Medicine in 164a His death took 
place October 18, 1653, according to Witte, in 1655 

Van der Linden, De Scriptis Medicis Liiri Duo, 
1637. p. 129. 

Witte, Diarium Biographicum, 1688, Sig. Eee 
3 verso \ Ann. 18 Oct., 1653. 

Witte, Memori€B Medicorum nostri seculi Claris- 
stwtontM, 1070. 

Hendrdch, Pandectte BrandenburgioB^ i699i 

p. 474- 

Kestner, MediciHisches GtUhrtai-Ltxicon^ X740| 
p. 98. 

according to Jiicher. and on October 14, 1659, 
according to the Biograpkie MidicaU, 

He wrote a number of works on Medicine, but 
no very great opinion of him is expressed by the 
last-named authority. 

He has been confused by Mercklin, Maaget, and 
Mor^ri, with his son. 

Editions in Latin of the present ivork are 
mentioned : Regiomont 1636, 1643, 4* ; Lugd. 
Bat. 1638, 1640, 8*. 

Jdcher, Allgewuitus GtUhrteH' Lexicon, 1750, 
i. col. 901. 

Haller, BibOotheca Botanica, 1771, i. p. 466. 

Haller, Bibliotkeca Chirurpca, 1774, u p. 397. 

Haller, Bibliotkeca Medicinm practicee^ 1777, it 
p. 509. 

Biop-aphii Midicale, Paris, Panckoucke (iSao- 
as), ii. p. 98. 

BECKMANN (Johann). 
Versuche den Gebrauch der Farberrothe beim Farben zu verbessem. 

See ALLGEMEIN niitzlichcs chemisch-physikalisches Mancherlei, 1781, i. p. 271. 

Bedencken iiber die Frage,- ob die Transmutatio Metallorum moglich sey? 
Su ROTH-SCHOLTZ (friederich), Deutschcs TheatTum Chemicum, 1730, ii. p. 87. 

Beckmann was bom at Hojra, June 4th, 1739. 
He went to Gottingen to study theology, but took 
to mathematics, natural science, economics, and 
modem languages, of which he could read ten. 
He visited the Netherlands in 1762, and in 1763 
went to St Petersburg as a teacher of mathematics 
and physics. This post he resigned in 1765, 
stopped in Sweden and Denmark for a year, 
became professor of philosophy at Gottingen, and 
in 1770 professor of economics. In his teaching 
he embraced the whole field, and technology may 
be said to have b^[un with him, as it was he who 
gave it its name. In 1777 he wrote the first text book 
on the subject, and was the author of numerous 
elaborate works on technology and economics. 
He died at Gottingen, 3 Feb., 181 1. 

Joh. Steph. Putter, Versucheiner . , . Gelehrten- 
Geschickte von der . . . Universitdt su Gottingen, 
1788, ii. p. 171, 337 ; 1820, iii. p. 102. 

Meusei, Das geUhrte Teutscnland, oder Lexikon 
der iettt Ubenden Teutschen Schriftsteller^ 1796, i. 
pp. 206-209 (Li»t of his works and portraits). 

One of the books by which he is best known, 
which shows his wide reading and exceptional 
knowledge and retains its value to the present 
time, is his * Beytrlige zur Geschichte der Erfin* 
dungen.' It came out in separate parts at Leipzig 
between the years 1783 and 1805, afterwards in 
five volumes, 1786-1805. There was an English 
translation made by William Johnston, of which 
the second edition was published at London,"i8i4, 
4 vols., 8^, a condensed edition at London in 
1823, 2 vols., 8^, and a reprint of the larger work 
(but with certain omissions) by Bohn, 1846, in 
2 vols., 8°. It is a mine of information direct and 
incidental, and although it is of a technical 
character it is written in so pleasant a style that 
it reads almost like a romance. 

Biographic Midicale, Paris. Panckoucke (i8ao- 
25), II. p. 100 (article by Jourdan, with list of 
works). 

Karmarsch, Geschichte der Technologic, 187a, 
p. 864, etc. 

Allgemcinc Deutsche Biographic, 1875, ii. p. 238 
(article by Karmarsch). 

BEEG (J. C VANDER). 

See VANDERBKKG (j. C. VON). 

BEGUIN 93 

BBGUIN (JKAN). 
Tyrodnium Chymicum e Naturse Fonte et Manual! Experientia Depromptum. 
Autore loanne Beguino, Regis Eleemosynaria Hac Secunda Editione ab 
ipsomet autore quam diligendssime recognitum & auctum. Colonise 
Apud Antonium Boetzerum, M.DC.XII. Cum Priuilegio. 

24^. Pp. [14, 2 blank] 195. [5 blank.] 

Tyrodnium Chymicum e Naturae Fonte et Manuali Experientia Depromptum. 
Autore loanne Beguino, Christianiss. Regis Franc. Eleemosynario. Hac 
postrema editione ab ipsomet autore quam diligentissime recognitum & 
auctum. Coloniae, Apud Antonium Boetzerum, M.DCXV. Cum 
Priuil^o. 

24*. Pp. [14, 2 blank], 195. [5 blank.] [Vignette of the Phoenix.] 

This edition and the Novum Lumen Chymicum brought out an edition of the Novum Lumen 

of Sendivoffius {q, v.) were issued jointly with a Chymicum at Paris in 1608. On this account it is 

Seneral title page, dated : Coloniae. Apud An- sometimes said that the Tyrocinium was first 

tooium Boetzerum, . . . M. DC. XVII. Beg^inus published in 1608. 

Tjrrocinium Chymicum }ohannis Beguini, Regis Galliae Eleemosynarii, Antehac 
\ Viris Clariss. Dn. Christophoro Gliickradt, Et Dn. Jeremia Barthio, Philos. 
& Medic. DD. &c. Notis elegantibus illustratum, formulisq'; medicamen- 
torum optimis & secretis locupletatum : Nunc verb ^ Johanne-Georgio 
Pelshofero, Medic. D. & in Acad. Wittenb. Professore, Utriusq; Notis & 
medicamentorum formulis in unum systema redactis, Denuo, amicorum 
rogatu, in publicum emissum, ac triplici Indice ornatum. cum Privilegio. 
Wittenbergae, Typis viduae Georgii Mulleri ; Impensis haeredum dementis 
Bergen. Anno M DC XXXIV. 

8'. Pp. [80] 480. [45, 3 blank], i Folding Table. 

Tyrocinium Chymicum Johannis Beguini, Regis Galliae Eleemosynarij, Antehac 
k Viris Clariss. Dn. Christophoro Gliickradt, & Dn. Jeremia Barthio, Philos. 
& Medic. DD. &c. Notis elegantibus illustratum, formulisq'; medica- 
mentorum optimis & secretis locupletatum : Nunc vero k Joh.-Georgio 
Pelshofero, Medic. D. & in Acad. Wittenb. Professore. Utriusqf; notis & 
medicamentorum formulis in unum systema ' redactis, Denuo, amicorum 
rogatu, in publicum emissum, ac triplici Indice ornatum. cum Privilegio. 
Wittebergae Impensis Andreae Hartmanni, Bibliop. Exscribebat Mechael 
Wendt, Anno do Id CLXVI. 

8". Pp. [80], 480. [43, 5 blank.] Folding table. There is an engraved title by 
A. Aubry, as well as the printed one, included in the signature a. It depicts Cupid 
with a pair of bellows, blowing a fire and watching a distillation. 

Pelshofer was born at Gratx in Styria in 15^. Gliickradt is a pseudonym of Johann Hartmann 

He graduated M.D. at Basel, practised medicine [q, vj). 

at Hayna in Silesia till 1627, when he went to The notes were reprinted in his Opera omnia 

Wittemberg and became Professor of Medicine. Medico- Chymica^ Francof. 1684. 
He died there in 1637. 

Les Elemens de Chymie, de M. lean Beguin Aumosnier du Roy. Reueuz, 
notez, expliquez, & augmentez, Par I.L.D.R.B.IC.E.M. En ceste derniere 
Edition ont est^ adioustdes plusieurs explications obmises aux precedentes 
Impressions, & plusieurs preparations de remedes tirds de la derniere Edition 

94 

BEGUIN—BEHR 

BEGUIN (Jean). Continued. 

Ladne. A Lyon, Chez Pierre Rigaud & Estienne Michalet, rue Merdere, 
k la Fortune. M. DCLVIIL 

8". Pp. [i6] 984, Table [47, i blank]. Wcxxlcutt of Apparatus in the texL The 
initials stand for Jean Lucas du Roi, BaccaL Juris C. et Med. The vignette shows 
three fljring Cupids holding a sheet on which is a picture of Fortune; motto: 
Invidiam Fortuna domat. 

Les Elemens de Chymie, de M. lean Beguin Aumosnier du Roy. Reueuz, 
notez, expliquez, & augmentez, Par I.L..D.R.B.IC.E.M. En ceste demiere 
Edition ont est^ adioust^ plusieurs explications obmises aux jHecedentes 
Impressions, & plusieurs preparations de remedes tir^ de la demiere Edition 
Latine. A Lyon, Chez Claude La Rivier, e (w)rue Merciere. M.DC.LXV. 

8". Pp. [16] 384. [47, I blank]. 3 woodcuts in the text This is a reprint of 
the edition of 1658. " Kivier,e " is a misprint for '* Riviere,". 

Tyrodnium Chymicum : Or, Ch]nnical Essays, acquired from the Fountain of 
Nature and Manual Experience. By John Beguinus Almoner to the most 
Christian King of France. London : Printed for Thomas Passenger, at 
the three Bibles upon London-bridge, 1669. 

8**. Pp. [12] ij6 [4]. There is an engraved as well as a printed title-page included in A. 

Tyrocinium Chymicum. 

See Mt)LLER (PHILIP), 1623, p. 151 (Sig. I). 

See SENDIVOGIUS (michaelX Novum Lumen Chymicum, 1617. 

Beguinus was a native of Lorraine, and flourished 
at the beginning of the seventeenth century. After 
studying chemistry and pharmacnr at Sedan (?) he 
came to Paris, where he made chemical prepara- 
tions, and opened a school fcMr instruction in 
chemistry, pharmacy, and metallurgy. He also 
visited foreign countries to see the mines and study 
mineralogy. His first publication was an edition 
of the Novum Luwun Ckywnatm of Sendivogius 
with a preface, 1608. He had great reputation as 
a teacher, and was among the first to give practical 
instruction. At the instigation of a pupil, Jeremias 
Barth, he drew up a small manual entitled Tyro- 
cimhtm Ck^rmicum, printed in i6ia It was meant 
for his own students ** to save him the trouble of 
dictating and them of writing" the methods he 
demons&mted, and it was not regulariy published. 
A copy having got to Cologne the tract was at 

once reprinted in 161 1, in a tiny i6% much to his 
disgust, and he was thereby compdled to bring 
out a revised edition, which was published in 1612. 
A French translation by the author appeared in 
the same jrear. The' TyrvcimtuM afterwards became 
the most popular text book of its time, for between 
1611 and 1669 it passed through some fifty editions. 
There is a list of these in my memoir of Beguinus, 
read to the Philosophical iSociety of Glas^gow (not 
3^ published). Tboe are two translations into 
German. The Elnglish translation was made by 
Richard RusselL 

The book is merely an outline of certain phar- 
maceutical preparations, but incidentally there is 
some < general chemistiy, and it contains the 
description for the first time of certain substances, 
with the discovery of which the author is credited. 

BEHR (Georg Heinrich). 
Georgii Henrid Behrii, Medicinse Doctoris atque Practid Argentinensis, nee 
non Acad. Imperialis Naturae Curiosorum, ut &. Commercii Litterarii 
Physico-Technico- Medici, Sodalis, Lexicon Physico-Chymico-Medicum Reale ; 
lis praeprimis utile, qui de hac vel ilia Materia aliorum edam doctcmim 
Virorum Sufiragia & Observationes scire, Sicque de suis simul Opinionibus 
certiores fieri cupiunt Cum Praefotione D.D. Michaelis Alberti, Potentiss. 
Reg. Boruss. Aulici & Consistor. Magdeb. Consiliarii, Universitat Frideridan. 
Med. & Phil. Nat Prof. PubL Ord. & reliqua. [Vignette with the motto: 
Muti Doctores Optimi.] Argentorati Sumptibus Johannis BeckiL Ann. 

1738- 

4^. Pp. [98] 480, Pt 9, pp. 481-876. Title red and bladL Engraved plate. 

BEHR—BENEDICTUS 95 

BEHR (Gex)RG Heinrich). Continued. 

Behr was bom at Strasburg, October 16, 1708, subjects which gives brief summaries and references 

and died there May 9, 1761. He was a Phil. Dr. , to the authorities who treat of them. He was the 

physician at the hospital, Hofrath, and physician author also of some papers. *' A man not to be 

to Prince von Hohenlohe-Waldenburg, and became lightly esteemed, if he bad not disgraced himself 

a member of the Leopoldine Academy, April 2, by his low com[>anions," says Haller ! 
1738. The above book is a vocabulary of medical 

A. E. Bftchner, Academus . . . NaturtB Curio- Gmelin, Gtschkhie der Chemii, 1798, ii. p. 386. 
sorum Hisioria^ Halae, 1755, p. 506, No. 482. Fuchs, Refertorium der ckemiscAtH Utteratur, 

Hidler, BiilioiMeca Boiatucat 1773, ii. 301. 1806-8. p. 26^ 

Haller, BUliotkeca Chirurgica^ i775i ii* P* 162. Poggendorff, BiograpkixhMtterarisches Hand- 

Hallei; Biiludkeca Anatomica^ \JTJ^ ii. p. 194. wOrUrdmcA, 1863. i. col. 135. 

BELLUM Equestre. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM (1661), vi. p. 519. 

This is not the same as the Uralter Riiierkrieg. 

BELYE (John), Anglus. 
Tractatus. 

See TRACTATUS DUO CHEMICI, 1647, p. 3. 
See GINiECEUM CHIMICUM, 1679, p. 495. 

Of this person nothing seems to be recorded, doing. By Schmieder he is called Belias, but 
Schmieder puts him in the i2-i3th century, but Borel and Borrichius style him Belye. 
without giving any reason or authority tor so 

Borel, Bibliotheca Chimica, 1654, p. 44. Schmieder, Geschickte der AlchemU, 1832, p. 

Borrichius, Conspectus Scriptorum Chemicorum, 130. 
1697, p. 37, No. xxxviii. 

BEN-ADAMS. 
Traum-Gesichte. 

See FLORETUS A BETHABOR. 

BENCI (ToMMASo). 

Su HERMES TRISMEGISTUS, 1549. 

BENEDICTUS (Liberius). 

Liber Aureus de principiis Naturae & Artis : Das ist : Ein Giildenes Biichlein, 
so da beschreibet wie die Metallen in den Kliifften der Erden, durch die 
Natur in jren Mineren geboren, vnnd daraufs die Wissenschafft der Primae 
Materise, oder Lapidis Philosophorum erlemet, vnd durch Kunst moge 
guberniret werden. Mit Anhang folgender Tractatlein : I . Definition 
Alchymise. II. Der Phcaenix. III. Ein Tractatlein, aufs Frantzosischem 
ins Teutsche vbersetzt, das gantz deutlich lehret, die M. L. zu erkennen, 
vnd zur Perfection zu bringen. Avthore Liberio Benedicto. Franckfurt 
am Mayn, In Verlegung Lvcae Jennisii. Im Jahr M. DC. XXX. 

8". Pp. [1-7] 8-160. 

Nvclevs Sophicvs, oder Aufslegung in Tincturam Physicorum Theophrasti 
Paracelsi. Darinnen die rechte wahre Materia oder subiectum Philosophorum 
Catholicum, auch defs gantzen Wercks, so wol der alten Philosophen, als 
defs Theophrasti newe corrigirte, rechte vnd eigentliche Praeparation gezeiget 
wird. Sampt einem andem vnd sehr niitzlichen Tractatlein Cabalistischer 
Weise vom lapide Philosophorum beschrieben, vnd den Veris Chymiae 

96 BENEDICTUS—BENTZ 

BENEDICTUS (Liberius). CatUinued, 

studiosis zu gutem herfiir geben durch Liberium Benedictum. Franck- 
furt am Mayn, bey Lucas Jennis zu finden. Im Jahr M.DCXXIII. 

8*. Pp. 116. MS. notes. 

The first tract (pp. 3-73) has no separate title. Hendreidi besides the preceding ascribes also 

It is followed by '* Enigma Philosophicum de to this author: 

Secreto Physicorum," wiUi a diagram entitled Gloria Mtmdi, sonsten Paradeifs-Taffd genannt. 

** Character Cabalisticus," pp. 74-78. The second in S*. 

tract is entitled '* De I^ide Philosophico," pp. Wasserstein der Weisen, seu indicatio materiae, 

70Hend. with a section " Theorica Lapidis Philoso- ex qua Lapis Philosophonim paratur ; modus 

pnici de praeparatione corporis nostri, ' p. 104. praeparandi Universalon Tincturam, in German. 

Sudhoff gives a notice of this book. I think Hendrdch is not correct in this ascription. 

Hendreich, Pandecta Brandenburgicm^ 1699, Gmelin, GtichichU der Ckeimii, 1797, i. p. 506. 

p. 507. Schmieder, Geschukte der Akkemie^ 183^ PP* 

Koth-Scholtz, Bibliotkeca Chemica^ ^7^» P> 24. 378^ 

Jacob Leupold'sProdromusBibliotkecteMetallua^ Ladrague, BUHotkique Ouvaroff» Sciences 

17x1, p. 25. Secrites^ 1870, No. i<^ 

Lenglet Dufresno^, Histoire de la Philosophie Kopp, Die Aickemie, 1886, ii. pp. 347, 382. 

HemUtique^ 1743, ill p. 118. (He says that its Sudhoff, ^f^/iV7^a/Aia /'arofe/n^a, 1894, pp. 533- 

style is so allegorical that it might have been 534. 
better if it had not been written at all. ) 

BENTZ (Adolph Christoph). 

Das in der tieffesten KrufTl vergrabene und nunmehro entdeckte Kleinod, 
welches ist der alleredelste Schatz der Philosophorum, nemlichen Lapis 
Philosophorum seu Medicina Universalis. Wie und auf was Weise zu 
derselbigen zu gelangen, gantz deutlich und ohnverdeckt beschrieben. 
Nebst einem Anhang einer Warnungs-Schrifft der falschen Gold- und Silber- 
Tincturen, Pulver vnd Pillen. Ab Autore A.C.B. M.D. Stadt-Physico zu 
Uffenheim in Francken. Erffurth, in Verlegung des Autoris 17 14. 

8'. Pp. [30] 112. 

Das in der tieffesten Krufft vergrabene und nunmehro entdeckte Kleinod, 
welches ist der alleredelste Schatz der Philosophorum, nemlichen Lapis 
Philosophorum seu Medicina Universalis. Wie und auf was Weise zu 
derselbigen zu gelangen, gantz deutlich und ohnverdeckt beschrieben. 
Nebst einem Anhang einer Warnungs-Schrifft der falschen Gold- und 
Silber-Tmcturen, Pulver und Pillen. Ab Autore A.C.B. M.D. Stadt- 
Physico zu Uffenheim in Francken. Franckfurt zu finden bey Johann 
Adolph. 1 7 14. 

8°. Pp. [30] 112. 
This is identical with the preceding except in the imprint. 

Philosophische Schau-Biihne, bestehend aus mehrentheils lauter eigenen und 
wahrhaflften Experimentis, Sowohln auf vielerley Processus, welche unter 
denen Secretis behalten werden, als auch iiber die effectus Corporum, so 
in der Vermischung zu entstehen pflegen. Nebst einem Anhang der 
Chymischen Charactern, und einem voUstandigen Register, der heutigen 
Kunst-begierigen Welt vorgestellt von einem Alchymiae Cultore sub spe 
Benedictionis Divinae vivente. Niirnberg, In Verlegung Wolffgang 

Michahelles, und Johann Adolph. An. 1706. 

8®. Pp. [16] 134. Index [loj. The first two leaves contain a frontispiece and 
symbolical engraved title, included m the pagination. The Dedication is signed A. C. B. 

The first edition of this work is said to have appeared at Hamburg, 1690. The title is given by 
Gmelin. There was also an edition. Niirnberg, 17 10. 

BENTZ^BERGEN 97 

BENTZ (Adolph Christoph). Continued, 
[Another Copy]. 

8**. Pp. [16] 134 [10]. The first two leaves contain frontispiece and symbolical title. 

Thesaurus Processuum Chimiconim. Oder : Schatz Chimischer Processen, 
welcher von denen vomehmsten und gelehrtesten Medicis je und allezdt 
secretirt, dem Autori aber schrifftlich communicirt worden, fast in alien 
Kranckheiten dienlich und nutzlich zugebrauchen, Worinnen auch noch 
andere curieuse Medicinische HeylMittel und Kunst StUcklein begrifTen, 
Nicht sowohlen denen hohen Liebhabem der Edlen Chimie, als auch 
andem nothleidenden Krancken zum Besten vorstellig gemacht wird, von 
Adolph Christoph Benz, M.D. Niirnberg, Verlegts Johann Adolph und 
Johann Wilhelm Rennagel. Druckts Johann Ernst Adelbulner. An. 1715. 

4'. Pp. [8] 178. [25, I Wank.] 

Bens was phvsician of Uffenheim in Franconia versali, Niirnberg, 1709, 8**. Fictuld does not 
and is said to have collected medical rather than know who he is, but condemns him as an arch- 
chemical secrets. Very little seems known about sophist whose works. ' Sudel-Schrifften ' he calls 
him. In addition to the above works Gmelin them, should be burnt, etc., etc 
mentions as by him : Tractatus de mensiruo Uni- 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, HUtoire de la Phiiosophit 1690, 4**, apparently his academic dissertation under 

Hertnitique, 1742, iii. p. 119. Stahl). 

Fictuld, ProHer-Stein^ I753« P^^rt ii. p. 40. Gmelin, Geschichte der Ckewtie, 1798, it p. 29. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Anaiomica, 1774. i. p. 745. Ladrague, Bibliothkque Ouvaroff^ Sciencts 

HaUer, BibliotJuca Medicina Praciica^ 1788, Secrites, 1870, Nos. 1308, 1633-34. 

iv. p. 84 (quotes De 'pituita vitrea, Altdorf. Kopp. Die Akfumie^ 1886, ii. pp. 341, 357. 

BERG (LuDwiG Conrad v.). 

Su ORVIUS (LUDWIG CONRAD). 

BERGEN (Carl August von), PrtBses. 
Disputatio Inauguralis Medico-Pharmaceutica sistens lapidem Lydium medica- 
mentorum bonae notae regni mineralis quam auctoritate et consensu 
gratiosissimae facultatis medicae praeside Carol. Augusto k Bergen, med. 
doct. et prof. pubL ord. eiusd. fac. h.t. decano promotore ad cineres colendo 
pro gradu doctoris legitimo modo obtinendo D. xxi. Decemb. MDCCXLII. 
H.L.Q.S. publico eruditorum examini subiicit auctor et respondens Carol. 
Christian. Brumbey, Anhaltino-Bemburgensis. Francofurti ad Viadrum, 
Litteris Philippi Schwartzii, Acad. Reg. Typ. 

4«. Pp. 18] 32. 

Carl August von Bergen, son of the Professor J. Anatomy, Botany, Therapeutics, and Pathology in 

GeorgvonBergen.wasbcmatFrankfurtontheOder, the University there. He wrote works on specific 

Augustii(others. 14), 1704. He attended school and gravity, thermometry, optics, meteorology, elec- 

the University in his native place, and then travelled: tricity, and other phvsical phenomena, as well as 

spent a couple of years at Leyden under Boer- on anatomical and botanical subjects. He was 

^haave and Albinus, went to Paris and Strasburg, elected a member of the Leopoldine Academy in 

and in 1730 returned to Frankfurt, visited Berlin, 17^, and was a member also of the Academy of 

and took his degree at Frankfurt in 1731. In 1732 Sciences at Berlin. He died at Frankfurt o. 0.,C>ct.7, 

he was appointed Extraordinary Professor of 1759. Haller calls him *'nosterolim amicus." 
Anatomy, and ultimately became Professor of 

BQchner, Academue . . . Natura Curiosorum Meusel, Ijexicon der von 1750 bis 1800 verstor- 

Hisioria^ 1735. P- S'Si ^•o- 575- benen teuischen SchriftsielUr {i§02-i6). 

Haller, Bibliotheca Botanica, 177a, ii. p. 298. Fuchs, Repertorium der Chemixhen Utteratur, 

Haller, Bibliotheca Chirurgica^ ^77$, "• P* i89« i8o6-o8. pp. 275, 281, 284, 289. 

Haller. Bibliotheca Anatomica, 1777, ii. p. 243. Biografhie Midicale, Paris. Panckoucke (1820- 

Eloy. Dictionnaire Historique de la Midecine^ 2^). ii. p 158 (article by Jourdan. with a list of his 

1778. i. p. 319. dissertations). - 

Gmelin. Geschichte der Chemie, 1798, ii. p. 620 ; Dezeimeris, Dictionnaire Historique de la Midi- 

799, iii. p. 36. cine, 1828, i. p. 353. 

96 BERGEN^BERGMAN 

BERGEN (Carl August von), Prases, Continued, 

Janus, Breslau, 1848, iii. p. 424 (article by J. S. DiciioHnaire Emcychpidique des Sciences Midi- 

Ldwwistdn). caUs, 1868. ix., p. 125. 

Bayle & Thillayc, BiografhU Midicak, 1855, Alhtmeine Deutsche Biographie, 1875, "• P- 3^7 

ii. p. 407. (article by Hirsch). 

Fbggendorff, Biograpkisck^Httmrisckes Hand- Hirsch. Bicgrafkisches Lexicon der kervorra- 

wSfSriuck, 1863, i. col. 147. genden Aerzte alter Zeiten und Vbltter, 1884. »• P. 

405. 

BERGMAN (Torbern Olof). 
Torbemi Bergman Chemiae Professoris et Equitis Aurati R^ Ordinis de Wasa ; 
Acad. Imp. N. C, Regiarumque Academiarum et Sodetatmn^ UpsaL, Stockh. 
utriusque, Londin., Goetting., Berol., Gothob. et Lund. Sodalis, Parisins 
Correspondentis, Opuscula Physica et Chemica, pleraque antea seorsim 
edita, jam ab Auctore collecta, revisa et aucta. Vol. i. Cum tabulis 
aenaeis. Cum Privilegio S. Elect Saxoniae. Holmiae, Upsaliae & Aboae, 
In Officinis Librariis Magni Swederi, Regg. Acadd. Bibliop. MDCCLXXIX. 

8*. Pp. [6] xvi. 411 [i\ 2 plates. 

Vol. II. Upsaliae, MDCCLXXX. Litteris Direct. Johan. Edman. 

8*. Pp. [6] sia a plates. 

According to Poggendorff this edition should contain 6 vols., 1779-84. A collected 
edition by Hebenstreit was published at Leipzig in 1788. 

Torbern Bergmann Professor der Chymie und Ritter des Koniglichen Ordens 
von Wasa, Mitglied der Kaiserl. Academic der Naturforscher, der Koniglichen 
Academien und Gesellschaften zu Upsal, Stockholm, der beiden Londoner, 
Gottinger, Berliner, Gotheburger und Lundener, Correspondent der Pariser, 
Kleine Physische und Chymische Werke. Ersten Bandes erste Abtheilung. 
Mit einigen Kuj^em aus dem Lateinischen iibersetzt von Heinrich Tabor 
Med. Doct. Frankfurt am Mayn bey Johann Gottlieb Garbe 1782. 

8*. Pp. [aj 1-270. Ersten Bandes Zweite Abtheilung; Title [2]. Text, pp. 
275-548. 2 plates. 

These two parts contain a translation of the first 1782 to 1790. The English translation was made 
volume of the Latin edition of 1779. .\ccording to by Dr. Edmund Cullen. 
Poggendorff, Tabor's translation extended ^m 

Trait^ des Afiinit^s Chymiques, ou Attractions Electives ; Traduit du Latin, sur 
la demiere Edition de Bergman. Augment^ d'un Supplement & de Notes. 
Avec des Planches. A Paris, Chez Buisson, Libraire, Hdtel de Mesgrigny, 
rue des Poitevins, No. 13. 1788. Avec Approbation & Permission. 

8*. Pp. [8] 444 [2. 2 blank]. 3 tables. 4 engraved plates. 

Kalte Gesundbrunnen durch Kunst zu bereiten. 

See ALLGEMEiN niitzliches chemisch-physikalisches Mancherlei, 1781, i. p. 98. 

Warme Gesundbrunnen oder Bader durch Kunst zu bereiten. 

See ALLGEMEIN niitzliches chemisch-physikalisches Mancherlei, 1781, up. 153. 

Von der Luftsaure. 

See ALLGEMEIN niitzliches chemisch-physikalisches Mancherlei, 1782, ii. p. 6a 

Ueber die Zerlegung der Wasser. 

See ALLGEMEIN niitzliches chemisch-physikalisches Mancherlei, 1782, ii. p. 157. 

BERGMAN-^BERGSMA 

99 

BERGMAN (Torbbrn Olof). Continued. 

Ueber die Gestalten der Krystallen, vomehmlich derjenigen die aus dem Spath 
erzeugt sind. 
See ALLGEMEIN niitzliches chemisch-physikalisches Mancherlei, 1782, ii. p. 278. 
Torbera Olof BernnaD was born in 1735 at 

Katharinberg, West Gothland, entered Upsala 
University in 175a, studied mathematics, astronomy, 
phjTsics, and natoral history, especially entomoloey 
and parts of botany— on all which subjects he 
subsequently published researches. He graduated 
master in 1758, became a doctns, and in 1761 an 
extra professor in Mathematics. In 1765 he was 
elected to the Royal Society, and in 1767 he suc- 
ceeded Wallerius m the Cbuiir of Chemistry, and 
thereafter devoted himself to that department In 
1776 he declined an invitation to Berlin, preferring 
to remain at Upsala. After a long period of failing 
health he died in 1784 at the baths of Medevi, in 
his forty-ninth 3rear. 

His papers were collected partly by himself in 
three volumes : i. Upsalse, etc., 1779 \ ^i- Upsalse, 
1780 ; iii. Upsalse, 1783 ; continued after his death 
by Hebenstreit in an additional three : iv. Lipsiae, 

Wdgel, Grundriss der reitun und an^wandten 
Ciemie, 1777, a vols., passim, 

Crdl, AnnaUn^ 1787, I. St. i. pp. 74^96. 

Hisioirt de PAcadimie rqyaie des Sciencts (for 
X784), Paris, 1787, pp. 31-47 (by Condcoret). 

Stockholm Academy, 1785. Notice by Hjdm. 

6^. Hutchinson, Biographia Medica, 1799, i. 
pp. SM4. 

Gmelin, GescJdckU der CMemie, 1799, iii. pp. 
961-70 8c passim. 

Reuss, Repertorium CommentaHonum ; Chemia^ 
xScn. Several references. 

Vicq d'Azyr, Ehges Histariques, Paris, 1805, i. 
pp. aio-a48. 

Fuchs, Repertorium^ 1806-08, p. 333 8t passim. 

Thomas Thomson, History of the Royal Society, 
i8za. Appendix, p. li. 

See SCHEELE (KARL wiLHELM^ Chemical Observations ... on Air and Fire, 178a 
See SCOPOLI (GIOVANNI ANTONloX Element! di Chimica, 179a 

BERGOMO. 
La Farmacopea o' Antidotario dell' eccellentissimo CoUegio de' Signori Medici 
di Bergomo, nel quale si contiene il modo di comporre i Medicamenti 
hoggidi piu vsitati nelle Spetiarie. Tradotto dalla Latina nella volgar lingua 
Per D. Tito Sanpellegrino Cittadino di essa, e Spetiale. Con tr^ vtilissime 
Tauole, vna delle Compositioni ; V altra de' Semplici, & V vltima de i Pesi, 
& Misure perdnenti all' Arte. In questa vltima imprelisione assai migliorata, 
& con ogni diligenza corretta, & emendata. In Brescia, Appresso Bartho- 
lomeo Fontana. 1628. Con licenza de' Superiori. 

4*. Pp. [48] 351 [3]. A few leaves damaged. Vignette of a fountain. 

BERGSMA (CoRNEUUS Adrian). 

Cornelii Adriani Bergsma, Leovardia-Frisii Math. Phil. Nat Candidati et 
Medicinae Studiosi in Athenaeo Franequerensi Responsio ad Quaestionem 
e Chemia Applicata ab Ordine Disciplinarum Mathematicarum et Physicarum 
in Academia Groningana, Propositam Anno ciciDCCCXix: ''Quae sint 
cespitum nostrorum bituminosorum (turfarum) principia, quam mutationem 

1787 ; V. 1788 ; vi. 1790. The treatise on Elective 
Affinities first appeared in 177S. and then in vol ui. 
of his works. 

French translation by de Morveau : Dijon, 1780, 
T. I, 8<». 

German by Hdnrich Tabor : Franckfiirt a. M., 
178^, etc., see above. 

The historical dissertations first published in 1779 
and 178a were translated by Wiegleb into German 
and published in 1708 as an appendix to his 
Gesckukte des Wackstkuwu , . , in der Ckemie. 

English translations : 

CXiUines of Mineralogy, by Dr. Withering, Bir* 
minghani, 1783, 8*. 

Elective Attractions, by Dr. Beddoes, London. 
178c, 8*. 

Physical and Chemical Elssays, by Ed. CuUen, 
a vols., 8*. London, 1784 ; 3 vols., London, 1788- 
91. 

Nova Acta Regiee SocietaHs Scientiarttm Up- 
saliensis (1815), vu. pp. 360-39JL 

Thomas Thomson, Life of Bergman, AnnaU of 
Philosophy^ 1818, zii. pp. 3ai-336. 

Thomas Thomson, History of Chemistry, 1831, 
U. pp. 27-53. 

Btographisht Lexicon {p*^ namnhunnige 
Svensha mdn, Upsala, 1836, 11. pp. 191-003. 

Hoefer, Histotrg de la Chimie, 1843, ii. 439-457 ; 
1869, ii. 432-450. 

Kopp, Geschichte der Chemie, 1843, L pp. 945- 
956 & passim. 

Poggendortl^ Biographisc^literarisches Hand- 
wdrtemch, 1863, i. coL X5a 

Kopp, Die Entunchelung der Chemie in der 
neueren Zeit, 1873, P' ^^t & passim. 

3i / : H>v> 

loo BERGSMA-^BERNHARDUS TRE VIS ANUS 

BERGSMA (Cornelius Adrian). Continued. 

ilia sub combustione patiantur, qui fit cinerum et fuliginis usus in ardbus et 
agricultura ? '' Quae Praemio omata est. Groningae, apud I. Oomkens, 
Academiae Typographum, 182 1. 

Bergsma vras bom at Leeuwarden io 1798, was in 18^9. He uTote two or three other papers on 

extraordinary professor of Mathematics and Ph^cs chemiod subjects. 

at Ghent in x8i6, afterwards in 1835 ordinary Poggendom, Biqgrapkisck-Hterarisches Hand' 

professor of the same at Utrecht He died there w&rU^ck^ Leipzig, 18^, iii. coL xi2. 

BERGWERCK vnd Probirbttchlin, fiir die Bergk vnd Feuerwercker, Goltschmid, 
Alchimisten lind KQnstner. 
Gilbertus Cardinal vonn Soluiren vnnd scheydungen aller Metal. 
Polirung allerhand Edelgesteyn. 

Fiirtrefiiche Wasser zum Etzen, Scheyden vnd Soluiren. 
Verhutung vnd rath fUr gifftige dampffe der Metal. 

Small 8*. Ff. 39. i blank. Vignette and x6 woodcuts. 

Colophon : Zu Franckfurt am Me]m, bei Christian {sic) E^genolph. Jm Herbstmon, 
desJahrsM.D. XXXIII. 

This appears to be the earliest of a series of books on mining, metals, and assaying, which 
were printed by Egenolph. See the title ProbierbUchlbin. 

BERICHT von Eigenschaffl, Art, Qualiteten, und Gebrauch der vier Elementen 
in der Spiritualischen, oder Geistlichen Welt, wie dieselbigen in dero wircken, 
vnd in dem Opere Philosophico befunden, und gebrauchet werden. 
See BENEDICTUS (LIBERIUS), Liber Aureus, 1630, p. 153. 

BERICHT von der Generation . . . der Metallen. 

See WAHRHAFFTBR und in der Natur gegriindeter Bericht. 

BERICHT. 

See TINCTURA Physica. 

BERLICH (Adam Gottlob). 

Spagyrische Grund-Regeln. 

See MONTE-SNYDERS (jOHANN de), Tractatus de Medicina Universali, 1678. 

By some his name is written Berlich, by others Berlig. He was the author of a dissertation, De 
Medicina Universalis Jena, 1679, 4^ 

Fuchs, Repertorium der CkMmischen Litteratur^ Ladrague, Bibliothique Ouvarqf, Sciences 
x8o6k>8, p. 186. Secrites, 1870, Nos. xiio-i7, 1x76, i6n-24. 

BERNARDON (Pontio). 

See MEURDRAC (marie), La Chimica caritatevole e facile, 1683. 

This is the name at the end of the dedication. 

BERNAUD (Nicolas). 

See barnaud (nicolas). 

BERNHARDUS TREVISANUS. 
Von der Hermetischenn Philosophia, das ist, vom Gebenedeiten Stain der 
weisen, der hocherfamen vnd furtrefflichen Philosophen, Herren Bemhardi, 
Grauen von der Marck, vnd Teruis ein Buch. Itemi Dicta Alani, Darinn 

BERNHARDVS TRE VIS ANUS lot 

BERNHARDUS TREVISANUS. ConHnued. 

alles hell vnd klar an tag geben wirdt Ex libris Doctoris Henrid Vuolffij. 
Jetz von newem widerumb mit fleiis corrigirt, vnd vbersehen. Getruckt 
zu Straisbuig bey Christian Mullers Erben, 1582. 

8*. Sigs. A— M|, in eights, or pp. [191, i blank]. Title red and black. 

Tabula Smaragdina, C v, veno. 

This edition is not mentioned by Schmieder. MiiDer, 1574, small 8*", title in black, and no 
The book, edited with a preface by Michael pagination. Elditions of 1586 and 1597, 8*, are 
Toxites, was first printed at Strasburg by Christian quoted. 

Des Hn. Berahardi, Grafen von der Marck und Tends Chymische Schrifiten, 
von dem gebenedeyten Stein der Weisen. Aus dem Lateinischen ins 
Teutsche iibersetzet, ingleichen mit des Herm D. Joachim Tanckens und 
anderer Gelehrten Anmerckungen ans Liecht gestellet durch Caspar Horn, 
Phil & Med. Doctor. Niimberg, Verlegts, Johann Paul ELrauis, Buch- 
handler in Wienn nachst der Kayserl. Burg. 1746. 

8*. Pp. [loa, including the frontispiece which is in four compartments], 390 [4]. 
Title red and black. 

Besides Caspar Horn's introduction and Bern- Von den xweyen Blilmlein daraus der Stein der 

hardus' works this contains also : Weisen wjichset, p. 286. 

Tabula Smaragdina, p. 6. Etschenreuters Send-Brief an Gratarolum, p. 298. 

Ein Dialogus vom Stein der Weisen Praeceptoris Dicta Alani, p. 307. 

Georgii und Alberti Disdpuli, darinnen der vierdte Metallurgia, das ist : von der Generation und 

Theil des Grafen Bemhardi . . .ausgelegt und Geburt der Metallen, . . . publidret durch Joachi- 

erUiret wird, p. 213. mum Tanckium, p. 325. 

Kurtze Auslegung des Fontinleins oder vierdten 
Tbdls BemhardQ von Alberto Beyer, p. 273. 

Des Hn. Bernhardi, Grafen von der Marck und Tervis Chymische Schrifften, 
von dem gebenedeyten Stein der Weisen. . . . NQmberg . . . 1747. 

8*. Pp. [102, including the frontispiece which is in four compartments] 390 [4]. 
Title red and black. MS. note. 

The difference between this and the other copy is the date. 

Of Bemhardus' collected works several editions 1597, 8^. Tanckius' fuller edition in four parts 
are enumerated by Schmieder : in French. Anvers, appeared at Leipzig, 1605, 8". Caspar Horn's 
1565, 8*"; in German, Strasburg, 1574, 8*; 1586, edition, Ntimberg, 1643, 8^; 17x7, 8*, and the above. 

Traicte de La Nature de TOeuf des Philosophes. Compost par Bernard, Comte 
de Treues, Allemand A Paris, M.DC.LIX. 

B*. Pp.64. 

This was issued along with Basilius Valentinus' " Les douze Clefs " and " Asoth,** and was printed fay 
Pierre Mo^t 

Des Herrn Bemhards, Grafens von der Mark und Tervis, Abhandlung von der 
Natur des (philosophischen) Eyes. Ein hermetisches Sendschreiben. Aus 
emem uralten und hochst seltenen, noch nie gedruckten lateinischen 
Manuscript, den Ehrwiirdigen Weisen zu Gefallen, und andem Liebhabera 
der achten alchymischen Biicher und besonders der Bemhardischen, mit 
moglichstem Fleisse ins Deutsche iibersetzt, und mit einem Vorbericht und 
Anhang von des Verfassers Schriften und deren verschiedenen Lesarten 
begleitet. Hildesheim, im Verlage der Schroderschen Buchhandlung. 
1780. 

8^. Pp. 1 12. There is a good account of Trevisan in the introduction and notes. 

[Another Copy.] 

I02 BERNHARDUS TRE VIS ANUS 

BERNHARDUS TREVISANUS. CofUinued. 

De Chymico Miraculo, quod Lapidem Philosophise appellant 
See DORN (gerardX Trevisanus de Chyinico Miraculo, 1600. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, i. p. 683. 

Of this work there was, according to the Beyirag, an edition of 1583. 

Bericht von der hermetischen Philosophia. 
Sa BLUCIDATIO Secretonim, 1602, p. 193. 

Tabula Smaragdina, p. 900. 
This is a reprint of Toxites* edition. 

Drey Bucher von der Hermetischen Philosophie. 
See HBRMETISCHE (Der) Philosophus, 1709, p. 193. 

Tabula Smaragdina, p. 9x3. 

Commentarius tiber den Bernhardum. 

See BECHER (JOHANN JOACHIM), Chymischer Gliicks-Hafen, 1726, p. i. 

Fontina Bemhardi Revelata. 

See GRAVEL (carl HERMANN). 

Le Livre de la Philosophie Naturelle des Metaux. 

See ZACHAIRE (denis), Opuscule tres-excellent de la vraye Philosophie naturelle 

des Metaux, 1612, p. 170. 
See RICHEBOURG (j. M. D.), Biblioth^ue des Philosophes Chimiques, 1740^ ii. 

p. 325. 

La parole ddaiss^ 

See DIVERS TRAITEZ de la Philosophie Naturelle, 1672, p. 97. 
See RICHEBOURG (j. M. D.), Biblioth^ue des Philosophes Chimiques, 1740, il 
p. 40a 

Of this tract Schmieder quotes an edition, Paris, 1618, 8^. For a German translaUon see below, 
Vet^um dimissum. 

wtpl x^fMi'as Opus Historicum & dogmaticum ex Gallico in Latinum simplidter 
versum, & nunc primiun in lucem editum. 
See Picus mirandulanus (j. franciscusX Libri iii. de Auro, 1598, p. 139. 

This is also called : De Transmutatione Metal- have had some doubt about Etschenreuter^ name, 

lorum Liber. It is accompanied by short letters for on page 139 it runs thus : ' Doctori Gallo & 

to and from Gratarolus and Etschenreuter and a Schenreutero ' ; and on p. 141 : ' Callus et Schen- 

noCe to Thomas de Bononia. The editor seems to reuterus Medicus ' 1 

Liber de Secretissimo Philosophorum opere Chemico. 

See MANGET 0* J*X Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, ii. p. 388. 

Processus Lapidis Philosophorum ex Mercurio Corporis. 
See RADIX CHiMiiC, 1680, p. 123. 

La Response k Thomas de Boulongne (jfV),.Medecin du Roy Charles huictiesme. 
See lOLV (GABRIEL), Trois Anciens Traictez, 1626, p. 27. 

Retponsio ad Thomam de Bononia de Mineralibus, et Elixiris compositione, 
Robert! Vallensis Tabulis illustrata. 
See ARTIS AURIFERA . . . Volumina, 1610^ ii. p. 38. 

Ftrtt pubUalMd in MofiaDUs' tittct, Dt Re Meimiiicm, Puis, 1^ 

BERNHARDUS TREVISANUS 103 

BERNHARDUS TREVISANUS. ConHnued. 

Responsio ad Thomam de Bononia super libro de Secredssimo Philosophorum 
opere Chimico. 
Su MANGET (j. J.), Bibliothcca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, ii. p. 399. 

Ein Antwort an Thomam de Bononia von den Mineralen, vnnd Zusammen- 
setzung Oder Zurichtung dels Eb'xirs, erklaret vnnd aufsgelegt mit den Tafeln 
Roberti Vallensis. 

See MORGENSTERN (PHILIP), Turba Philosophorum, 161 3, ii. p. 46. 
See MORGENSTERN (PHILIP), Turba Philosophorum, 1750, ii. p. 68. 

Episde to Thomas of Bononia, concerning the secret workings of Nature in 
the product of things. 

See AURIFONTINA CHVMICA, 1680, p. 187. 

A short Epistle dedicatory before his Works, to the same Man. 

See AURIFONTINA CHYMICA, 1680, p. 269. 

This is a translation of the letter in the edition of Picus {q. v.). 

Tractat von der Nachahmung oder Nachfolgung der Natur. 
See HELLWIG (CHRISTOPH von), Fasciculus, 1719, p. 164. 

Symbolum Apostolicum. 

See KIESER ( FRANZ), Cabala Chymica, 1606, p. 177. 
See FIGULUS (benedictus), Thesaurinella, 1682, p. 42. 

Tractatus de lapide Philosophorum. 

See TRACTATUS duo Chemici, 1647, p. 16. 

See GINiECEUM CHIMICUM, 1 679, p. 503. 

Treatise of the PhilosopherVStone. 

See COLLECTANEA CHYMICA, 1 684, p. 83. 

Tractat vom Stein der Weisen. 

See HERMETISCHER ROSEN KRANTZ, 1 659, p. 98. 
See HERMETISCHER ROSEN KRANTZ, 1 682, p. 98. 

De Transmutatione Metallorum Liber. 

See Picus MIRANDULANUS (j. FRANCiscusX Libri III. dc Auro, 1598, p. 139. 
This is the same as " Tep2 y^iudxa opus historicum et dogmaticum." 

Verbum Dimissum. 

See TAEDA Trifida Chimica, 1674, P* 97- 

This is a German translation of ' La parole delaiss^' 

This Bernhardus. Count of Trevigo, Trevisanus, statements of dififerent writers, and after two 

or Graf von der Marck und Tervis, was bom at years' labour "his eyes were opened," and in 

Padua in 1406, and from the age of fourteen till 1481 he not only succeeded in making the stone, 

the end of his life was ^ven over entirely to the but in making it with all its virtues m the most 

studv of alchemy. At nrst he worked according exalted condition. He died in X49a 

to the directions of one authority and then of He tells the story of his adventures in his book, 

another until he spent nearly all his fortune, De Chemia, opus historicum et dopma4icum, 

quarrdled in consequence with his family, and was Schmieder, I know not why, is of opinion, that 

no nearer his aim than before. In 1452, when he he wrote originally in French, and that his works 

was 46, he began to travel in hopes to find some were translated into Latin and German. His work 

adept who would instruct hiin. He went every- *De chemia,' is. however, extant only in Latin, 

where, but though he found enthusiasts and cheats and of it he quotes several editions, which, how- 

plentiful, he found no philosopher and no philo- ever, I have not checked, viz. : Strasburg, 1567 ; 

sopher's stone. In 147a, after twenty years' wander- Basel, 1^83; Ursellae, 1598; Frankfurt a. M. 1625, 

ing, he returned in poverty to Rhodes, and once Combach's edition, Geismar, 1647, etc ' 

more he tried a new plan. He compared the Lists also are given by Gm^io. 

104 

BERNHARDVS TRE VIS ANUS 

BERNHARDUS TREVISANUS. ConHnued, 

Tbefe is some difficulty in dedding whether 
the name Bemhardus denotes one person or two; 
whether Bemhardus Trevisanus and Bemhardus 
Trevirensis are identical or not The problem is 
not a new one, for it occurs in the earliest editions 
of the works passing under Bemhardus' name, 
and in the above edition of Caspar Horn's he 
points out the concision about the author. In 
the work xtpL XTr/uiciar, printed alone with that of 
Picus Mirandulanus in 1598, the conmcting names 
occur. Thus, on pp. 139 and 1^2, he is called ' * Comes 
Trevirensis & Naygensis in dermania." On p. 148 
the name given is ' ' Comes de Tresne in Germania, " 
and the letter addressed to Thomas de Bononia is 
dated from Tresne, is May. 1453. But in what 
follows mention is made of * ' Comes de Trevisis" and 
•• Veridicus Tarvisinus " and *' Comes Tarvisinus.** 
In the sub-title of the book, however, he is once 
more designated "Trevirensis & Naygensis in 
Germania. ' In the German edition of Toxites, 
x^8a (q, vX he is called '* Graf von der Mark und 
Tervis," whereas in the French translatbns of the 
Traictidela Nature de VOeuf ... he is " Comte 
de Treves, Allemand." 

By Hellwig (Fasciculus, 1719, p. 164) he i3 
called Bemhardus of Trier, and Canonicus at 
Reienspurg. 

Caspar Horn (see his Voriede, D 8 recto, 
Schriffttn, 1746, 1747), fiilly realized the conflicting 
titles, and though he put on his tide page ''Gnd* 
von der Mark und Tervis " did not attempt to solve 
the problem. In 1780, in the German translation : 
" Abhandlung von der Natur des (philosophischen) 
Ejres" (A3, recto), the two statements are set 
more positively against one another : ' ' Dieses uralte 
und hdchstseltene noch nie im Druck erschienene 
lateinische Manuscript unter dem Titel : Tractatus 
Generosissimi Domini Bemardi, Comitis, Marchiae 
Trevisanae, de Natura ovata, das ist, des Harm 
Bemhards, Grafens von der Mark und Tervis 
(which the editor adopts), oder wie Hermann. 
Condeesyanus will, Grafen von Tresne und NMy- 
gens (welches sein Vaterland eewesen seyn soil 
und nicht MarchiaTrevisana)." &c., &c. 

The question therefore is whether the author is a 
German, Berahard of Treves or Trier, or Tresne 
and NMygens, or whether he is an Italian, of the 
Marchia Trevisana or Tarvisana, and the confusion 
and difficulty culminate in the French edition of 
Denis Zachaire's Opuscule, Lyon, 1574. '*Avec le 
traict^ de veneratue Docteur Allemant Messire 
Bernard Comte de la Marche Treuisane " where he 
seems to be both. But in the concluding para- 
graph of the aforesaid work Tept x^/M<ar (p. 322). 
quite another complexion is given to the whole 

Horn's 'Vorrede,' 1646. 1647. 

Borel, Bibliaikeca Ckemica^ 1654, p. 45. 

Hendreich, Pandectm Brakdemburgiae, 1699, p. 
534 (he too notices the confusion about Bemhardus' 
personality). 

TeutschesFegfiuerdtrSeheidt-Kunst^ 1702, p. 58. 

Roth-Scholts, BibUatheca Ckemica, 1737, pp. 25, 
96. 

Nioeron, Atimoira^ 1730, xiii. p. 40a 

Jacob Leupolds Prodromus Bibltotluccg Metallicm^ 
iwa, p. a8. 

Lenglet Dofresnoy, Histcire de la PkihsophU 
Hermitifue, 1743, L p. 333, iii. passim, 

Abkandlmtg von der Natur des . . , Byes, 
• Vorrede,' 178a 

Beytrag sntr Gesckickii der JkSMem Ckemis^ 1785, 
pp^ 134. 488. 5S9* 5M> 658, 670^ 67a 

subject bv what is there said, that the book was 
composed by " Bernardo sapientissimo Philosc^Ao 
& Comite Tarvisino aut Treverensi, qui acqoisivit 
et subjugavit Comitatum Negensem in Germania 
per banc artem predosam et nobilem." It would 
almost require Bemhardus' own perseverance to 
arrive at the truth of that statement 

The simplest solution of the puszle, apparently, is 
to assume that there are two penons, oneGerman the 
other Italian. Hoefer, without any circumlocution, 
says that all previous writers have confounded Ber- 
nard de Treves and Bernard de Trevise, and his 
evidence for asserting this is that in a MS. in the Bib- 
Uoth6que Nationale there is a copy of the ' Response' 
to Thomas de Bononia, signed Bemardus Gives 
Trevirensis, 1385. It was first printed by Robertus 
Vallensis in the second edition of Morienus 
Romanus' tract De Re Metallica, Paris, 15^ with 
the brief title. " Bemardi Trevirensis ad Thomam 
de Bononia medicum Regis Caroli Octaui Res- 
ponsio." This would seem to confirm what Hoefer 
quotes, but it does not at all agree with the date 
1385. For Charles VIII. of France only came to 
the throne in 1483, and if Thomas de Bononia 
were his physician, then he and his friend 
Bemhardus Trevirensis must have been wdl over a 
himdred vears of age when the letter was written, 
so that they must have possessed the stone in its 
perfection, not only for transmuting the metals but 
for conferring long life. The likelihood, however, 
is that CliarTes VIII. is here an error or misprint 
for Charles V. 

Bernard de Trevise, on the other hand, was bom 
in Z406, and his works as ^ven by Hoefer are: 
De Chemia ; De chemico miraculo ; Traict^ de la 
nature de I'oeuf des philosophes; La parole 
delaiss^; and De la philosophic naturelle des 
m^taux. Here Hoefer, however, has fallen into 
the very mistake he blames in others, for he 
ascribes to Bemard of Trevise the tract of the 
Philosophic e^, which is according to him assigned 
to Bemard ot Treves, who lived half a century 
or more earlier. 

Hoeftr's solution has been accepted as conclusive 
by Ladrague, and Kopp has also referred to it, 
but without expressing his agreement. 

The conclusion of the whole matter seems to be 
that with the data at present at the historian's 
command a definite settlement of the question has 
not been arrived at Whether we accept Hoefer' s 
explanation or some other, difficulties still remain, 
so that it is perhaps best to put all the works under 
Bemhardus, and specify in each case whether it 
rax)fesses to be t^ Bemhard of Treves or of 
Trevise. 

Gmelin, Ceschickte der ChewUe, 1797, i. p. 159. 
(Lenglet Dufresnoy and Gmelin know of only 
one Bemhardus.) 
Fuchs, Repertorium, 1806-06, pp. ^37. 
Biopraphie Midicale, Paris, Panckoucke (1830- 

aS). "• P- 179- 
Schmieder, Gesckichte der Alchemie, I83a^ p. 330. 

Hoefer, Histoire de la Ckimie, 1843, i. p. 431, 

438 ; and 1866, i. 445. 

Kopp, Gesckichte der CMemie, Braunschweig, 

1843, >• P- 73- 

Kopp, Beitr&ge Mur Gesckichte der Chemie, 
Braunschweig, 1869, i. p. 131. 

Ladrague, Bibliothique Ouvarqf, Sciemces 

Secrites, 1870, Nos. 806-40, I349< 

Kopp, Die Alchemic^ Heic^berg, 
and ^passim. 

X886, i. p. 383 

BERNOUILU-^BBUTHBR loj 

BERNOUILLI (Johann), Prases. 

See NEBEL (wiLHELM bernhard), respondens, 

Johann BemouiUi, the elder (x667«i748), was Lexicon, 1750, i. col. 1035. Henog, Athene 
professor of Mathematics at Groningen, and RaurioBt ^77^$ P* 373* 
afterwards at Basel. ]ikher, Ailge/tuines GeieArUn' 

BESCHREIBUNG des grossen Geheimnisses des Steins der Weisen. 
See V. 0. R-)- 

BESCHREIBUNG (Eine) von der wahren Tinctura Philosophonim, eines 
autoris Anonymi. 
Se£ moller (friedrich), Temio Reliquiarum Alchymias, 161 8, Sig. Dvij. 

BESONDERE Curieuse Entrevue in dem Reiche der Todten zwischen den Welt- 
bekannten Gold-Machem, dem Grafen Cajetani und dem behihmten Baron 
von Klettenberg, von welchen der erste in Custrin an einem mit goldenen 
Lahn beschlagenen Balcken des ordinairen Diebes-Galgens, in einem von 
dergleichen Stoff gemachten Romanischen Habit gehangen, der letzte aber 
anf der bekanten Berg-Vestung Konigstein enthauptet worden. 

In dieser erzehlen sie einander alle ihre sonderbare Lebens-Begebenheiten 
gantz aufrichtig und machen allerhand Reflexions iiber die Alchymie und 
ihre Wiirckungen. Zu haben in Hamburg, Hall, Leipzig und Niimberg, 
Anno 1721. 

4^. Pp. 64 including the frontispiece. It depicts the two men conversing in a 
garden, with statues of Apollo and Minerva, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, and 
Mercury flying overhead, to symbolize the seven metals, tn the middle between the 
statues is a fmuace with a crucible, and another with a retort and receiver. In the 
background in one comer is a gallows showing the fate of Caetano, in the other is a 
decapitation showing that of Klettenberg. 

Kopp {Dig Alchemii, 1886) has given an accoimt of Johann Hector von Klettenberg and of Caetano. 
se also under these names respectively. 

BESTUSCHEFSCHE (Die) . . . Stahltinktur. 

See VOGEL (RUDOLPH AUGUSTIN). 
See GEORGI (JOHANN GOTTLIEB). 

According to Gmelin {GtschicfUe der Chemie, vicino. Hermbstadt, Liphardt, Wmterberger, and 
X799, iii. p. 790) several persons investigated this Fr. Bucholz. 
preparation beudes the above: Klaproth, Buon- 

BETHABOR. 

See FLORETUS A BETHABOR. 

BEUTHER (David). 

David Beuthers, Gewesenen Churfiirstl. Sachsischen Probation-Meisters zu 
Drefsden, und Philosophi Adepti, Zwey rare Chymisclie Tractate, darinnen 
nicht nur alle Geheimnisse der Probier-Kunst, derer Ertze und Schmeltzung 
derselben, sondem auch die Mogligkeit der Verwandelung, der geringen 
Metallen in bessere, gar deutlich gezeiget werden. Aus einem alten raren, 
von Anno 15 14, bids 1582, geschriebenen Buche zum ersten mahl in Druck 
gegeben. Deme beygefiiget dieses Autoris Universal, oder Vollkommener 
Bericht von der wahren Alchymie. Mit allergnadigstem Privilegio. 
Leipzig, Verlegts Johann Christian Martini. Anno 17 17. 

io6 

BEUTHERSICKER 

BEUTHER (David). Continued, 

8". Pp. [i6] 2I& Register [is]. VoUkommoicr Bericht, pp. 58. Title red and 
black. 

Meotioo is made of an edition of T^ptig, 1714, 8*, and the author is erroneoosly called " Dan Deuther.' 

[Another Copy.] 
[Another Copy.] 

)(8 wanting. 

Beuther's Universal und Vollkommener Btricki 
. . . first appeared at Frankfurt, 1631, in 4®, and 
again with the title Universal und Particularia 
worinnen die Verwandiung geringer MeialUn 
in Gold und Silber dtutlich gelehret wird, Ham- 
burg, 17x8. V*', but the Beytrag (p. 613) says 

The ProHer-KunsL it b said by the editor, was 
copied by a pupil ot Beuther's out of his private 
books and was never published before. It has 
been accordingly doubted whether or not it is by 
Benther, and Kopp only goes the length of sajring 
that the book app»red under his name. 

David Beuther lived in the sixteenth century and 
was an assayer at the mint at St Annaberg. 
Having obtained some transmuting powders, he 

Teutsches Fegfeuer der Scheide-Kunst, 1703, p. 
loa 

Curieuse Untersuchun^ etlicker Mineralien . . . 
1703, c. I. |ia In this account Beuther is said 
to have got his ' Tincture ' from a cardinal, 
whereas, according to Ktmckel, he found it con- 
cealed in a wall. 

Roth-Scholtz, Bibliotheea Chemica, 1737, p. a8. 

Die Edelgebome Jungfer AUhymia^ 1730, p. 55, 

Jacob Leupolds Prodromus Bibliotheea Metallica^ 

Thanander, Adeptus Ineptus, 1744, p. 309. 

Baumer, Bibliotheea Chemiea, 178a, p. 90. 

Beytrag tur Geschichie der hUhem Chemie, 178^ 
pp. 347, 493, 613. Adelung com^ains that this 
account is so ironical that he does not know 

used them recklessly, neglected his duties, and was 
ultimately arrested, tried, and condemned to the 
loss of two fingers and perpetual imprisonment if 
he did not disclose the process for making gokL 
On promising to do so be was allowed to work in 
the laboratonr once more, but having on one 
occasion sent his assistant on a mesage, be took 
poison, was found unconsdons on the assstant's 
return, and died almost immediately. 

The story was told by Kunckel in his post- 
humously publi^ed Laboraiorium Chyuuemwi, 
Hamburg, 17 16 (and 1733!, chap. zlL p. q68, 
and Hamb. 1767. chap. zli. p. 535 (f.v.K after- 
wards repeated both by the supporters and 
opponents of idchemy, and judged severely by 
both. ' 

what is jest and what is earnest. But did he ever 
know? 

Adelung, Gesehichie der wunsehUchen Narrheii 
1787, iv. p. 407. 

Kortum verteidiget die Alchimii, 1789, p. 135. 

Wiegld), Historiseh-Kritisehe Uniersuehung der 
Alehemie, Weimar, 1793, p. 33b. 

Gmdin, Gesehichte der Chemie (1797). i. pp> 

963, 

' ~. ' " ' ^. pp. _ _ 

Schmieder, Geschiehte der Alchemie, 1833, p. 

'.204-5. 
^udis, I 

Repertorium^ 1806-08, pp. 156-158, 333. 

LadmgOftfBibliothifue Ouvarpf ^Sciences Secrites, 
1870, Nos. 958-59. 

Kopp, Die Alehemie, 1886, i. pp. 149, 195, 919 ; 
ii. 336. 

BEYER (Albertus). 

Kurtze Auslegung des Fontinleins oder vierdten Theils Bemhardi. 

See BERNHARDUS TREVISANUS, Chymische Schriflten, i746(i747X p. 273. 

BIBLIOTHEK (neue Alchymistische). 

See SCHRODER (FRIEDRICH JOSEPH wilhelm). 

BIBLIOTHEQUE des Philosophes Chimiques. 
S^e richebourg (j. m. d.X 1740. 

BICKER (Johann). 
Johannis Bickeri Dreisani, Catti, Medicj Ossatiensis in Misnia ordinarii, Hermes 
Redivivus, declarans Hygieinam, de sanitate vel bona valetudine hominis 
conservanda, In qua omnia ex antiquae sapientiae fontibus, Hippocrate, 
Galeno, aliisq; Graecis & Arabibus atque Latinis deducuntur, cum Chymia- 
trorum principiis & Paracelsi dogmatibus veris conjunguntur & methodice 
describuntur. Giessae, Impensis Casparis Chemlini & Antonii Humm. 
Anno M.DC.XII. 

8*. Pp. [39, I blank] 480 [misnunibered for 483]. The title is enclosed in a 
woodcut border. 

BICKER^BIRELLI 

107 

BICKER (Johann). Continued. 

This woik is not about Alchemy, but about 
Sanitation. Kopp {DieAUhewUef \u p. 366) mentious 
an edition, Hanau, z6ao, but seems to think from 
its somewhat misleading name that it is an 
alchemical book. Bora {Bibliotheca Chimica, 

BIFOLIUM Metallicum. 

See PANTALEON. 

1654, p. 47) quotes the same edition : Hanoviae 
apud Conradum Eifridum, xbao. Bicker also wrote 
Ckirurvia Vulnerum HemuHca^ Witteben^, 
1647. nendreich {PantUcttB Brandenburgicat io99» 
p. 569) spells his name Bikerus. 

BILLICH (Anton Gonther). 

D. O. M. A. Anton. Gtinther. Billickfs De Natura et Constitutione Spagyrices 

emendatas. Exercitatio. HelmaestadI, Typis heredum Jacobi LucI, 

Impensis Zacharise Raben. do Id cXXIII. 

4^ No pagination. Sigs. )( 2, A-G in fours ; [=pp. 60]. 

AntonI Gantheri Billichl FrisI Archiatri Oldenburgensis Observationum ac 
Paradoxorum chymiatriconim Libri Duo: Quorum Unus medicamentonim 
Chymicorum praeparatione : Alter eorundem usum succinate perspicueq; 
explicat Lugduni Batauorum. Ex officina loannis Maire. clolocxxxi. 

4*. Pp. [i-io] 11-173 [i]* T^c title-page is entirely engraved. 

Thessalus in Chymicis Redivivus : Id est, de Vanitate Medicinae Chymicae, 
Hermeticae, seu Spagiricae Dissertatio Fundamentalis : ex ipsismet Artis 
Chymicse proceribus Quercetani, Beguini, Crollii, &c, deducta, abs 
Antonio Giinthero Billichio, Illustrissimi Principis Oldenburgensis Archiatro, 
accessit Anatomia Fermentationis Platonicae Apodictica & Paradoxologa 
dusdem Authoris. Francofurti ad Moenum, Impensis Johannis Beyeri, 
Typis Casparis Rotelii. M.DC.XL. 

8**. Pp. [16] 318. 

Anton GQnther Billichius was a native of East 
Friesland, bom in the latter half of the sixteenth 
century. He studied medicine under Henning 

Amisseus, professor at Hdmstadt, practised at 
Jevem. and was private physician of the Count of 
Oldenburg. He was son-in-law of Angelus Sala, 
whom he defended from some attacks made upon 
him, and had a controversy with Peter Lauremberg. 
He was a good chemist and a clear expounder of 
facts andprinciples for which he is commended. 
Of the ' Thessalus ' editions of 1639 and 1643 are 
mentioned. 

Borel, BUliotkica Chimicat 1654, p. 47. 
Mercklin, Ltmdenius rencvatus^ 1686, p. 72. 
Conring, In Universam Artent Medicam . . . 
IniroductiOt 1687 (Schelhammer*s Addit. ), p. 135. 
Hendreich, Pandectm Brandenburgica, 1699, p. 

575. 

Stahl, Zuf&llige Gtdanken . . . fiber den Streit 

von dem scgenannfen Sulphure^ 1718, pp. 13-15. 

Roth-Scholtz, Bibliotheca Chemica, 1727, p. 29. 

Manget, Bibliotheca Scriptorum Medicorum, 
1731, I. i. p. 31a 

StoUe, AnUitung tur Historic der Medicinischen 
GclaArheit, 1731, p. 783. 

He wrote the following in addition to the above 
works: 

De tribus chimicorum principiis et quinta 
essentia, Bremen, 1621, 8vo. 

Responsio in animadversiones quas anonymus 

Cidam in An^li Sake aphorismos conscripsit, 
yden, 1622, 8 . 

Assertionum chimicarum sylloge opposita latratui 
et venenatis morsibus Petri Laurembergii, Olden- 
burg, 1624, 4'. 

Petri Laurembergii deliria chytnica^ Bremen, 
1625, 4'. 

Kestner, Medicinisches Gelehrien-Lexicon, 1740, 
p. 113. 
Baumer, Bibliotheca Chemica, 1782, p. 13. 
Beyirag tur Geschichte der hbhem Chemie, 1785, 

Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemie^ 1797, i. pp. 585, 

595- 
Puchs, Repertorium der Chemischen Litteratur^ 

1806-08, p. iQO & passim. 

Phillippe & Ludwig, Geschichte der Apotheker^ 
18^5, p. 482. 

Kopp, Die Alchemic, 1886, ii. 334 (for the con- 
troversy with Lauremberg). 

BIRELLI (GlAMBATnSTA). 

Alchimia Nova, Das ist, Die Giildene Kunst, Oder Aller Kiinsten Gebarerin, 
Sampt dero heimlichen Secreten, vnzehlichen verborgenen Kindem vnd 
Friichten. Von allerley Alchimistischen vnnd Metallischen Geschafilen, 

lod BIRELU—BJRKHOLZ 

BIRELLI (Giambattista). Continued. 

Wass^m vnnd Oelen, Bereytungen der Kalck, der Kunst zu figim, Silber 
vnnd Gold zumachen, Edelgesteinen, Leymen, Mixtum, vnd SfMegeliiy den 
Saltzen, der Farb vnd Mahl Kunst, auch sonst vielen lustigen kurtzweiligen 
Kiinsten. Allen liebhabem der Kunst, Edlen vnd Vnedlen, Aertzten, 
Alchimisten, Apoteckern, Mahlem, Goldschmieden, Jubilierem, Eyssen- 
schmieden, Schreinern, &c., zu trewhertzigem Gefallen. Aufs dem Italianischen 
defs Edlen vnd Vesten, Hanfs Baptiste Birelli von Senis, auff das fleissigst 
verteutscht, durch Petrum Vffenbachium der Artzney D. vnd bestalten 
Medicum in Franckfurt. Mit schonen vnd nohtwendigen Figuren, vnd einem 
vollkommenen Register aller Gebiihr nach versehen. M.DC.III. Mit 
Rom. Keyserl Mayest. Priuilegio. Getruckt zu Franckfurt am Mayn, bey 
Niclas Hoffman. 

4*. Pp. [16] 724 (for 728), [22]. Title red and black. 17 woodcuts. 

Colophon : Getruckt m Franckfurt am Mayn, bey Niclas Hoffman, In verlegung 
der Paltbenionim in Franckfurt. MDCIII. 

The life of Hermes with his portrait b^ins on translation was reissued at Franckfurt, 16C4, 4*. 

p. 725. with a modified title-page wanting the translator's 

Birelli was a native of Sienna. The Italian name, and there is mentioned also a Latin transla- 

original was published in his Opere^ Fiorenza. 1601, tion, Copenhagen, 1654, 4**. 
4**, and also in 1602, 1661. 4^ Ufienbach's 

Hendreich, Pandectae Brandenburj^ica:^ i699i Beytrag xur Geschichie der hohtrn (^hemU, 1785, 

P 583 (mentions editions : Bonon. 1600 ; Plorent. p. 586. 

1602, 4**. He also quotes bv Birelli : "De Vita Gmelin, Gtschickte der CkemU, 1797, i. pp. 299, 

Hermetis Trismegisti Italic^ ' ). 502. 

Roth-Scholt£, Bibiiotheca Chemica, 1727, p. 27. Biop^afhic Mid'uaU^ Paris, Panckoucke (1820- 

Jacob Leu folds Prodromus Bibiiotheca Metallica, 25), ii. p. 266. 

1732, p. 30 (only the above edition is given). Schmicder, Geschichte der Alchemie^ 1832, p. 355. 

BIRKHOLZ (Adam Melchior). 

Die ganze hohere Chemie und Naturwissenschaft in allgemeinen Grundsatzen, 
nach den drei Uranfangen und Grundkraften der ganzen Natur. Aus dem 
Lateinischen iibersetzt, mit beigefiigten Anmerkungen von AdaMah Booz. 
Leipzig, bei Johann Friedrich Junius, 1787, 

8». Pp. [16] 366. 

This volume contains : Am^e an die Sohne der Wahrheit ttber das 

Nuysement^ Abhandlung vom wahren geheimen Philosophische Rathsel, p. 335. 
Salze der Weisen und vom allgemeinen \A^tgeiste, Gldchnifs oder Philosophisches K^tbsel, p. 938. 
p. X. GesprUch, rvosdien dem Merkur, einem Alchem- 

Sendivogius, .Abhandlung vom Schwefel, p. 203. isten und der Natur, p. 346. 

Sendivogius, Abhandlimg vom Mercur, p. 283. 

Auszug aus . . . Werken . . . des . . . adepten Hermann Fictulds. 

See H. (J. c), Von der Natur und Kunst, 1781. 

Birkholz, who under the contracted (?) pseudo- translations of medical works from English, French, 

iiym of AdaMah Booz wrote or edited several and Latin. He also published an edition of 

works, is called by some Adam Melchior and by Wienner's Splendor Lucis, 1785 {q.v,). He died 

others Adam Michael. If these persons are at Leipzig, ist July, 1818, though \ht' Biographie 

identical, then Birkholz was a physician, bom Nov. Midicale says at Prettin. 

23, 1746, at Prettin, practised at Leipzig, wrote I am not quite convinced, however, that BiriL- 

some books and dissertations on phvsico-medical holz bore indifferently the name Michael or 

subjects, a guide from Cicero for the better writing Melchior as Kopp impues. 
Latin in connection with medicine, and made 

F. A. Weiz, Das gelehrte Sachsen, 1780, p. 2a Poggendorff, Biographisch-litterarisches Hand-^ 

Meusel, Das gelehrte Teutsrhland, 1796, i. worterbuch, 1863, i. col. 201. 

Fuchs, Repertorium der Chemischen IJtieratur^ Ladrague, Bibliothique Ouvaroff, Sciences 

1806-08, p. 513. Secrites, 1870, Noi. 125, 1124, 1465, 1511, 1518-19. 

Biographic AUdicale, Paris, Panckoucke (1890- Kopp, Die Alchemie, 1886, i. p. 209; iL p. 209; 
ii. p. 266. ii. p. 222, etc. 

hmiader, GeschuhU der Akhemie, 1832, p. 595. 

BIRRIUS-^BLANKAART 109 

BIRRIUS (Martin). 
Tres Tractatus de Metallcmim Transmutadone. Quid singulis contineatur, 
sequens pagina indicat Incognito Auctore. Adjuncta est Appendix 
Medicamentorum Antipodagricorum & Calculifragi. Quae omnia ad bonum 
publicum promovendum nunc primum in lucem edi curavit Martinus 
Birrius, Philosophiae & Medicinae Doctor, Practicus Amstelodamensis, apud 
quem Medicamenta ista reperiuntur. Amstelodami Apud Johannem 

Janssonium li Waesberge & Viduam Elizei Weyerstraet cIdIdclxiix. 

8*. Pp. [15, X blank] iia 2 blank. 

This volume contains tracts ascribed to Phila- ManuducHo ad Rubinum Coelesitm^ p. 51 ; and 
lethes : Dt MetaUorum metamorphosis p. i ; Brtvis Fons Chemiccp Philosophia^ p. 88. 

[Another Copy.] 

Birrius was a physician in Amsterdam, who experimented in Chemistry and exhibited certain 
substances to Morhof vrfao describes them. 

Morhof, De Metallorum TransmtUatione . . . JaciA l.eupolds Podromus BibHoihecee MeiaUicee^ 

Bpistola, 1673, p. aa 1733, p. yx 

Borrichitts. Conspedui Scriptormm Ckemicorum, Gmelin, GeschickU der Chemie, 1798, ii. pp. 12- 

1697, p. 40, No. buii. 18. 

BLAINVILLE. 

See DUCROTAY DB BLAINVILLE. 

rBLANCOURT. 

See HAUDICQUER DE BLANCOURT. 

BLANKAART (Steven). 
Die neue Heutiges Tages gebrauchliche Scheide-Kunst, oder Chimia nach den 
Griinden des fUrtreflichen Cartesii und des Alcali und Acidi eingerichtet 
Durch Steph. Blancart Ph. & Med. Doct. und weltberiihmter Pract. in 
Amsterdam. 

Hippocrates de Veteri Medicina xxiv. 
In des Menschen Leibe sind bitter, salzige, siisse, sauere, herbe, fliessende 

und andere unendliche Dinge. 
Hannover und Wolffenbuttel, Verlegts Gottfried Freytag, Buchhandl. Im 
Jahr 1697. 

8*". Pp. 179 [ix]. Title black and red. 3 woodcuts. 

Other editions, Hannover, 1708, Wolffenbttttelf 1718. This is a book of Practical Chemistry, 
published in Flemish, 1678, 8^. 

Neuscheinende Praxis der Medicinse, worinn angewiesen wird, dafs alle 
Krankheiten eine Verdikkung des Bluts und der Saffte sind, und blofs 
von Sauer und Schleim entstehen: Ein Werk von grosser Curiositat und 
Nutzbarkeit, dergleichen niemahlen, so lange die Welt gestanden, an das 
Tage-Licht gekommen ist ; Anitzo aber wegen grossen Abgang der Exemplarien, 
wieder auffs neu gedrukkt und abgetheilet in Drey Theile, herausgegeben 
durch Steph. Blankard, Med. Doct. und Pract. in Amsterdam. Aus der 
Holland, in unsere MutterSprache Qbersetzet von G. H, W. Med. Doct. 
Hannover und VVolffenbiittel, Verlegts Gottfried Freytag, Buchhandler. 
1700. 

8^. Pp. 766. Frontispiece not included. . Title red and black. 

This is not a book about Chemistry, but about Practical Medicine. It appeared in Latin, Amstel, 
1685, 8**, and in German, Hannov. 1689, 8^. 

no 

BLANKAART-^BLA WEN 

BLANKAART (Stevkn). Continued, 

D. Stephan Blancards Theatrum Chimicum, oder Eroffneter Schau-Platz und 
Thiir su den Heimligkeiten in der Scheide-Kunst, nebenst einer 
Vermehning wie die geringen Metallen und gemeinen Steine zu verbessern 
sind, duich Kenelm. Digby. Leipzig, bey Thomas Fritsch, 1700. 

flT. Pp. [6] 47a [48]. Frontispiece and 9 plates. Title red and black. 

nigby's treatise has a half-title and separate signatures and pagination : 

Vermehning des Theatri Chimici, oder der er5ffueten ThUr zum Heimligkeiten in 
der Scheide-Kunst. Sonderlich wie die geringen Metallen und Steine in bessere 
Materien tu verwandeln sind. Durch Kenelnius Digby, Rittem. 

Pp. ^SS- [s\ 

Other editions are of 1693, 1708 ; and an edition : 
.\nmerdam. 1680, 8', and one : Leipzig, 1694, are 
mentioned. 

Steven Rlankaart, son of Nikolaas Blankaart, 
WAS born at Middelburg, 24th Oct., 1650. After 
attending school he was put under an apothecary 
to learn Botany and Chemistry. He passed to the 
Uni\'ersity, where he became Dr. Phil, and Med., 
iSth Dec., 1674. He settled as physician in 

Hendreich, Pandecia Brandenburgica:, 1699, p. 

^93, 

' Roth«Scholt«. Biblioiheca Chemica, 1727, p. 29. 
Manget, Biiliothrca Scriptorum Medicorum, 

1731. I. *• P« 3>4- 
Stolle, AftUitumg tur Histoire der Medicinischen 

GtUhrkfit, vjxi, p. 333 &/««;«: ^ 
/«i^ Ijtupolds Prodromus Btbhotfuca T/utalitca, 

Kestner, Medicinisches GeUhrten-Lexicon, 1740, 

Halier, Biblioiheca Botanica, 1771, i. p. 636. 
Haller, BibHoiheca Anaiomica, 1774, 1. p. 630. 
Halier, Biblioiheca Chirurgica^ 1774, i. p. 441. 
Kloy, Dictionnaire historique de la M^decine, 

1778, i. p. 3$a. 
llaller, Biblioiheca Medicina Practice, 1779, iii. 

Kaumer, Biblioiheca Chemica, 1782, p. 110. 

Amsterdam, married, and had two sons, V^i^em, 
who became a lawyer, and Steven, who was a poet. 
Blankaart was the author of several treatises on 
Medicine, Surgery, and Pharmacy, and his collected 
works appeared at Leyden in 1701. His Lexicon 
Medicum Graco lalinum, Arast. 1679, 8^, passed 
through a number of editions. Notes also 00 
Lancilotti's Brandende Salamander are said to be 
written by him. 

Beytrag tur Geschichte der hShem Chemie, 1785, 

p. 645. 
Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemie, 1798, ii p. 231. 

Fuchs, Reperiorium^ i8o6-o8, pp. 209, 213, 231. 

Biop^aphie M^dicale^ Paris, Ptuickoucke (1820- 
25). ii. p. 280. 

Dezeimeris, Dictionnaire historique de la Mide- 
cine, 1824, i. p. 414. 

Sprengel, Gesckuhte der ArMneykunde, 1827, iv. 
pp. 107, 390, 461, 566. 

Schmieder, Geschichte der A khemie, 1832, p. 462. 

Van der Aa, Biografhisch Woordenboeck der 
Nederlanden^ 1854, II. li. p. 586. 

Bayle & Thillaye, Biographie Midicale^ '^^h^* i>- 
p. 271. 

Poggendorff. Biographisch-literarisches Hand' 
worterbuch^ 1863, i. col. 209. 

Kopp, Die Alchemic^ x886, ii. p. 341. 

BLAUENSTEIN (Salomon de). 

Interpellatio brevis ad Philosophos pro Lapide Philosophonim. 

See MANGET (j. J.), Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, i. p. 113. 

This, which is a reply to the attack up>on 
.Alchemy by Athanasius Kircher {q, f.), was 

Morhof, De Metallorum Transmutatione . . . 
apistola, 1673, pp. 3^, 87 (regards the name as 
fictitious). 

Mercklin, Lindenius renovatus, 1686, p. 954. 

Manget, Bibliotheca Scriptorum Medicorum, 
1731, I. i. p. 329. 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire de la Philosophic 

originally published : Bienn» apud Bemates, 
typis Desiderii Suizii, 1667, in small 4**. 

Hermitique^ 1742, iii. p. 123 (says it is a 'Thut^ 
curieux '). 

Beytrag tur Geschichte der hShem Chemie, 1785, 

p. 572- 
Fuchs, Repertorium^ 1806^, p. 163. 
Schmieder, Geschichte der Alchemie, 183a, p. 

413- 

BLAWEN (Andreas de). 

Epistola scripta ad Petrum Andream Matthiolum de auro potabili. 

See SENDIVOGIUS (MICHAEL), Lumexi Chymicum Novum ; Epilogus, 1624, p. 76. 
See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1661, vi. p. 458. 

Andreas de Blawen is mentioned as a skilful p. 226. Borel (Bibliotheca Chemica, 1654, p. 48), 
experimenter by Borricbius, Dissertationes (Diss, calls the author Blaum or de Blauen. 
^ lienftniiB Cbemioonim), Hafniae, 1714, ii. Ladrague, BibliotMque Ouvarof, Sciences 

Secrites, 1870, No. 1002. 

BLUMLEJN—BOHME 

III 

BLUMLEIN daraus der Stein der Weisen wachset. 
Su ZWEYEN (Von den) Bliimlein. . . . 

BLUT (Das) der Natur. 

See SCHWARTZFUS (Anonymus von). 

See BRUMMET (CHRISTOPH). 

Ladrague, Biblioth^que Ouvaroff^ Sciences Secrites, 1870, Nos. T379-81. 

BOHME (Jacob). 

^ Idea Chemiae Bohmianae Adeptae, das ist : ein kurtzer Abrifs der Bereitung 
deOs Steins der Weisen, nach Anleitung defs Jacobi Bohm. Wie auch eine 
Schutz-Schrifft w^en Bohm, und seiner SchrifTlen. Amsterdam, Anno 
M DC XC 

12^ Pp. X2a 

The present work is described as an extract Kopp speaks of an edition at Amsterdam, 1680, 
from the writing of the 'Teatonic philosopher' and of several others subsequently, 
in which is 'bnefly described the preparation of 
the great wonder stone of the wise men.' 

Jacob Bdhms kurtze imd deutliche Beschreibung des Steins der Weisen, nach 
seiner Materia, aus welcher er gemachet, nach seinen Zeichen und Farbe, 
welche im Werck erscheinen, nach seiner Kraft und Wiirckung, und wie 
lange Zeit darzu erfordert wird, und was insgemein bey dem Werck in 
acht zu nehmen, deme noch beygeftigt eine Schutz-Schrift seiner Schriften. 
Amsterdam, 1747. 

8*. Pp. 91 [5, list of chemical works]. 

A new edition of the preceding work. Schroieder 
io referring to this edition calls the author Johann. 

Jacob Bdhm or B6hme (1575-1624), the shoe- 
maker of G^rlitx, *Teutonicus Philosophus,' was 
the author of a number of works on mystical 
theology. He was not an alchemist, but he 
employed alchemical phraseology and imagery to 
illustrate bis religious views. 

The author of the Beytrag quotes the 1690 and 

Witte, Diarium Bicgrapkioim, 1688, Sig. U3 
redo ; i8th Nov., 1624. 
Borrichius, Con^ectus Scriptorum Chemicontm^ 

1697. P 34. 
Paschius, De Novis Inventis . . . Tractatus, 

1700, p. 361. 

Reimmann, Einleitung in die Historiam liter- 
ariam derer Teuischen^ 1709, iii. pp. 418-430. 

Roth-Scholtz, Bibliotheca Chemua^ 1727, p. 30. 

Morfaof^ Polykistar, Lubecae, 1732, i. p. 92 ; ii. 
p. 166 ; ui. pp. 554. 555. 

Zedler, Universal'Lexikon^ i733» 'v. col. 356. 

Arnold. Kirchert' und Ketxer-Historie, Schaff- 
bausen, 1741, Tom. II. pp. 258-282, etc., etc. ; 
Tom. III. ii. pp. 77-89. 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire de la Philosophic 
Hermitique, Paris, 1742, iii. p. 124. 

Brucker. Hisioria Critica Philosophic, Lips. 
1743, IV. i. pp. 695-706 and vi. p. 788. 

jfbcher, Aligemeines Gelehrtcn" Lexicon, Leipzig 
17M), i. col. X170. 

Beytrag Mur Gtschichie der h&hem Chemie, 1785, 
pp. 522, 642, 670. 

1747 editions only, and adds : * it cannot have been 
with Mr. Bbhm's will that he has been transformed 
into a gold spyer. He was a dreamer and a spirit 
seer, but a gold maker — certainly not His dark 
writings, like those of the cabalbts and theosophists, 
turned the heads of the Alchemists, so that they 
dreamed their system into it.' 

The chief book on the connection of Bdhme with 
the Alchemists is that by G. C. Adolf von Harless. 

Adelung, Geschichte der Menschlichen Narrheit^ 
Leipzig, 1786, ii. pp. 220-25^. 

Ersch u. Gruber, Allgemeine Encyclopddie, 1823, 
xi. pp. 170-176. 

Schmieder, Geschichle der Alchemic, 1832, p. 
546. 

Vaughan, Hours with the Mystics, 1856, ii. pp. 

54-97. 339-350- 
Stockl, Geschichte der Philosophic des Mittelalters^ 

1866, iii. pp. ^69-608. 

G. C. Adolf von Harless, Jakob Bbhme und die 
Alchemisten, Berlin, 1870, 8°. 

Ladrague, Bibliothique Ouvarojf, Sciences 
Secrites^ 1870, Nos. 2-40, 41-56, 1216-19. 

Pttnjer, Geschichte der Christlichen Religions- 
philosophic seit der Reformation, 1880, i. pp. 180- 
193 ; English translation, 1887, p. 243. 

Classen, Jakob Bdhme, 
iheosophischen Werke, 1885. 

Kopp, Die Alchemic, x886, i. p. 21a; ii. p. 181, sq^, 

Moriz Carrie, Die Philosophische Weltan- 
schauung der Reformationsteit, 1887, 2nd Ed., i. 
pp. 310.419. 

Classen, Jakob Bdhme, Sein Leben und seine 

243. 
jcben 

113 

BOERHAA VE 

BOERHAAVE (Hermann). 

Elementa Chemiae, quae anniversario labore docuit in publids, priTatisque, 
scholis, Hermannus Boerhaave. Tomus Primus. Qui continet Historiam 
et Artis Theoriam. Cum Tabulis Aeneis. [Vignette.] Lugduni Bata- 
vonim, Apud Isaacum Severinum. M.D.CCXXXII. 

4^ Pp. [la] 896 (433-4 wanting). Index [40]. 17 plates and explanations. Plate 6 wanting. 

Tomus Secundus. Qui continet Operationes Chemicas. 
Pp- [8] 538- Index [46]. 

This edition is authenticated by Boerhaa\'e's signature on the verso of the title page 
of vol. I. There is said to have been an 8** edition of the same date. 

Hermanni Boerhaave, Philos. et Med Doct in Academia Lugduno-Batava 
Medicinae Professoris Celeberrimi, Academ. Reg. Scientiar. Parisiensis et 
Societ. R^. Londinensis Socii, Opuscula Omnia, quae hactenus in lucem 
prodierunt. Ea quidem prius sparsim edita, nunc vero in unum coUecta 
atque digesta. Horum Catalogus sequente pagin4 exhibetur. Hagse- 
Comitis, Apud Johannem Neaulme, M.DCC.XXXVIII. 

4'. Pp. [4] 139 [i bUink], 

No. V. in this collection is the address : ' De 
ChemiA su<» errores expurgante,' which he de- 
livered when he became professor of chemistry at 
Leyden, ai Septr.. 17 18, and in which he shows 
that the vagaries of the alchemists, the theories of 
fermentation and effervescence, the fixing and 
weighing of fire, the add and alkali theory in 
physiology and medicine— all the errors that the 
chemists of one period fell into — have been corrected 
by the subsequent investigations of chemists them- 
selves. 

Boerhaave (1668-1738) was professor of medicine 
and botany from 1709, and of chemistry firom 1718, 
at the university of Le3rden. He was the most 
distinguished teacher of his time, and a man of 
immense and \'aried learning in languages, philo- 
sophy, theology, mathematics, botany, chemist r\% 

StoUe, Anleitung mr Hutorie der Meditinixken 
Gelahrkeit^ i72^^ fassim. 

Kestner, Aledicinisches Gelekrten- Lexicon^ 1740. 
p. laa. 

W. Burton: An account of the Life and Writ- 
ings cf H. Boerhaave, London, 1743 ; and edition, 
17^. 

Chaufepid, Nouvelie Dictionnaire historiqme, 

175?. ". (fetter B), pp. 337-35^ 
Eloy, DicHonnatre Hisiorique de la Afedecine, 

»755. pp. iS9-»75: ^77^* »• P- 370. 
A new and general Biographical Dictionary, 

1761, ii. p. a57. 

Haller, fithliotheca Botanica, 177^, ii. 96. 

Haller. Bibliotheca Anatomica, 1774, u p. 756. 

Haller. Bibliotheca Chimrgica, 1774, i. 583. 

Bftumer, Bibliotheca Chemica^ 1783, p. ^ 

HaHer. Bibl. Medicinee practicet, 1788, iv. p. 142 
& sqq. The whole of Lib. xii. has Boerhaave*s 
name. 

Weigel, Einleitung tur allgtmeinen Scheidekunst, 
1788, i. p. 9oa 

De Chahnot, Biographixh Woordenboech der 
Sederlanden^ 1798-1800; iii, pp. ao5-3a 

Hutchinson, Biographia Medica, 1799, i. pp. 
8a-xoi. 

Jon. Wilhclm Te Water : Narratio de rebus 

anatomy, and medicine. One of his most im- 
portant works is the treatise 00 chemistnr, irliich 
was based on notes of his lectures, but was 
afterwards revised by himsdC 

The earliest form of the work has the title: 
Institutiones et ExWrimunta Chewiim^ Farisiii^ 
1734, a vols., small ff*. 

In English there followed a translatioii : A New 
Method of Chemistry, by Peter Shaw and E. 
Chambers, London, 1727, 4** ; ad editkMi, Loodoa, 
X741, 2 vols. 4^ ; 3d edition, London, 1753. 

The Elements of Chemistry appeared at London, 
1732, 8^ ; and another translation by Tim. DaUowe, 
I..ondon. 1735, 2 vols. 4®. 

A German translation, ^ AnfanpgrUnde der 
Chymie, 3 Th. was published at Berhn. 1760, 8*. 

Academia! Lugduno-Batava, seculo octavo et dtamo^ 
frosperiset adversis, Lugd. Bat, i8oa, pp. 06-39. 
Fuchs, Repertorium, 1806-06, p. aia^ 
Biographic midicale. Pans F^ckoudce (i8ao- 

25). ». PP- 323:33S- 

Chalmers, The General Biographical Dictionary , 
1812, V. p. 495. 

Krsch und Gruber, Allgemeime Emcyehpddie 
1823, xi. 271. 

Sprengel, Geschichte der Arxneykunde, 1896, ▼. 
p. 222 & passim. 

Dezeimcris, Dictionnaire hisiorique de la Mide- 
cine^ 1828, i. p. 425. 

Matthijs Siegenbeck, Gesckiedenis der Lei^sche 
Hoogeschool van hare oprigting in 1575 tat 1825, 
Leiden, 1832. 

Hoefer, Histoire de la Chimie, 1843, iL p, 376 ; 
1869. ii. p. 368. 

Kopp, Geschichte der Chemie, 1843, i. p. 197 ft 
passim. 

Van der Aa. Bio^raphisck Woardenboech der 
Xfderlanden, 1854, 1 1, ii. p. 706 (and reliereiioes)^ 

Bayle ft Thillaye, Biographie Midicak^ 165$, ii. 

P- 139- 

Dictionnaire Encychpidique des Sciences Midi- 
cales, 1869, X. p. 15. 

Ladrague, Bibliothbque Ouvarog^ Sciences 
Secrite^, 1870, Nos. 596, 1215. 

BOERHAA VE— BO LUNGER 

"3 

BOERHAAVS (HmiAinf). CmUmmed, 

fSgjt wL pfk 5x1-13 <^iid the rderenoes). r^gtmdem A«rtie aiier Zeiirm mmj tVAtr^ i8ft4, i. 
SodUciir Jer MnHrim, xMx, a. pi 49s, pp. 504-9 (aitide bf Max Salomon). 
t/UMk (Seetejmhuiaieiw) Kopp. /)m ^/cAranr, 1886. i. 75. 8o» a49 ; tl 31 1. 

BOHN Qohaxk). 

D. Job. Bohiiy Professoris in Academia Lipsiensi Public!, Dissertationes 
Chymioo-Physicae, quibas accedimt ejusdem Tractatus, de Aeris in Sub- 
famaria Infloxo, et De Akali et Addi Insufl&dentia. LipsiKi Apud J. 
Tbomam Fritscb. 1696. 

8-. Ilk [1^554. liKtex[a9). 

Appendix Processoum Cbymicorum in Jo. Franc Vigani Medullam Cbemi«. 
See VIGANI OOH. FRANCX Medulla Cbymiae, 17 18. 

opposed to the latrochemical school, and he laid 
the foundatioD of a scientific treatment of forensic 
medicine. Every one speaks of Bohn in the 
highest terms. 

Besides the DissertoHcmes he wrote Efistoia ad 
D, /oiiem IxMgiioitum d4 AkmU 6* AcuU insttf- 
cientia fro princi^orum sm eUwumiorum corftn^m 
uaturalium wnmert gertndo^ Lipsiae, 167^ 8^. 

Meditatumes Pkvsuo-Ckjtmica d4 Airu im Sm^ 
lunaria imjiux4, Lipsise, 1678, 8*, both included 
afterwards in the DisstrtaHomes, 

Of the DissertaticHts there was an edition, Lips. 
1685, 4*. 

Bohn, or Bofane, was bom at Ldpng in 1640^ 
sliidied there and at Jena, travelled widdj, gradua- 
ted at Leipdg in 1665. became professor of 
anatomy and then of therapeutics. nUed several 
ararirmw and profcssioiial posts, was the senior 
proliesor. carried on a learned correspondence, 
and published a number of works on medicine and 
surgery and 00 chemistry. But the course of 
chemistry delivered in 1679 was not published, 
much to StahTs regret, as he considered it superior 
to Roifinck's. He ceMirated his golden wedding 
on ao Jany.. 1718. and died Dec 19 of that year. 
Of seventeen children but two survived him. 

He was a distinguished physiologist, and was 

Merddin, Lindenims rencvatus, 1686, p. 544. 

Hendreidi, PeLndecUt BrcMdenhurgiat^ 1699, 
p. 625. 

Stahl. ZttfdUige Gtdanken . . . Ilher den Streit^ 
van dem sogatanmten Sulfhurt^ 1718, p. 15 (French 
translation, 1766, p. 6). 

Roth-Schohz, Biblieihua Ckemica, 17217^ p. 3a 

Manget, Bibliotktca Scriftorum Afedtcorum^ 
1731, I. L p. 34^ who calls hun ' Decus Academiae 
Upsiensis eximium.' 

StoUe, AnUitumg mr HisiorU der Medicinischen 
Gelakrkeit, 1731, p. sog 8c passim, 

Kestner, Medictnisckes GeUhrten-Lexiam^ X740» 
p. xa4. 

Jttcher, Allgemiines GtUhrten- Lexicon » 1750, 
I. coL 1x90. 

Boerhaave, Methodus Studii Medici^ 1751, i. 

Haller, BUlictkeca CMintrgiea^ 1774, i. pp. 

Haller, BihHoikeca Anatomica, 1774, i. p. ^97. 
Eloy, Dictiannaire Hisioriqwe de la MMtcinit 

1778. >. p. 389. 
Haller, Bibliotkeca Afedicina Practicte, 1779, iii. 

pp. 87-91 (contains a list of his academic dlisserta- 

tions and laudatory notices of certain of his works). 

Baumer, Bibliotkeca Ckemica^ 1789, p. 24. 

Fuchs, Repertorium der ckemiscken Litteratur^ 
1806-08. p. x68. 

Sprengd, GesckichU der Medicin^ 1837, iv. p. 
xxa 8i passim, 

Bayle & Thillaye, Biographie Midicale^ 1855, i. 

Haeser, GtsckicJUe der Medicin, x88i, ii. p. 303 
& passim. 

BOLLINGER (Ulrich). 

Elegia De Vera Antiqua Philosophica Medicina, Scripta k M. Ubico BoUingero 
ad Dn. Osvaldum CroUium, Medico-chymicum felidssimum, && 

Pp. X.8. 

Encomium Wetterae Athenarum Hassiae Scriptum ab M. Ulrico BoUingero P. L, 

Pp. [9]*9o, [i]. The verso of 9, which is blank, is not counted at all. 

Colophon : Lipsise, Sumtibus Gotofredi Grossi BibliopoUe. Exprimebat Joannes 
Albertus MinzeUus, Anno MDCXXXIV. 

Bollinger was Poet Laureate of Wirtembere (?), Borel, Bibliotheca CAimica^ i6<4, p. 4^. 
and wrote several poems. The first of the above Hendreich, Pandects BrandenhtrguM^ 1699^ 
enumerates the chemists firom Hermes to CroUhis. p. 633. 

H 

1 14 BOLNEST'-BONTIUS 

BOLNEST (Edward). 

Medicina Instaurata, or: A Brief Account of the true Grounds and Principles 
of the Art of Physick. With the Insufficiency of the Vulgar way of Preparing 
Medicines, and the Excellency of such as are made by Chymical OperatioiL 
Whereto is added, a short, but plain Discourse, as a Light to the true 
Preparation of Animal and V^etable Arcana's. Together with a Discoverjr 
of the true Subject of the Philosophick Mineral Mercury, and that from the 
Authorities of the most Famous of Philosophers. As also some small lig^t 
to the Preparation and use of the said Mercury, in the dissolution of Minerals 
and Metals, for a Physical Use. By Edward Bolnest, Med. Lond. Also 
an Epistolary Discourse upon the whole, by the author of Medela Medians. 
London, printed for John Starkey at the Mitre within Temple-Barr. 1665. 

^' ^I>* [Sif I blank]. 151 [x blank]. 

• Haller has a slight variation on the title : his title, but in completing the imperfect date, 

Chemia medicina illustrata, or the true grounds calls it 1605, instead of 166^. The author of the 

and principles of the art of physick, I..ondon, 1665, " Epistolary Discourse" was Marchamont Needham 

8*. The date is imperfectly printed, the 6 being or Nedham. Haller also mentions a Latin versioii, 

all but omitted. Gmelin, following Haller, repeats without date. 

Aurora Chymica. Sive Rationalis Methodus Praeparandi Animalia, V^etabilia, 
& Mineralia Ad usum Medicum. Quarum Praeparationum benefido ex 
illis fiunt efficacissima, tutissima & gratissima medicamenta ad Prseserva- 
tionem & Restaurationem Vitae humanae. Authore Eduardo Bolnesta 
Med. Reg. Brit. Ord. Hamburgii, Impensis Johannis Naumanni & 
Georgii Woffii. 1675. 

8^ Pp. [10] 134. Title red and black. 

The English edition was published at London, By Hendreich he is called Bomestxis, and only 

1673, 8°, pp. [x6] 146 [a]. the above edition is mentioned. 

Beyond the enumeration of his books, nothing Haller quotes, besides the above, an edition in 

seems to have been recorded about Bolnest. The Latin of 1672. as well as that in English, but is of 

English preface is dated from Queen-street, near opinion that the work is a good deal earlier. 
Guild-hall, London, March 26, 1672. 

Hendreich, Pandecta BrandenburgioE, 1699, p. Gmelin, Geschichie der ChemU, 1797, i. p. 510. 
664. Allibone, Dictionary of English Literature^ 1859^ 

Roth-Scholtz, Bibliotheca Chemica^ ^l^t P- 3i* 1* P* 216 (merely says *' Professional works," 

Jacob Leupold 5 Prodromus BibliotheciB Metallicct^ Lond. 1665-72). 
17^2, p. 31, mentions the 1675 edition only. Dictionary of National Biography ^ i894t ^d. pp. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Botanica, ^77^* i- P- 565. 159-164 (article on Marchamont Needham, by 

Haller. Bibliotheca Medicinte Practicte, 1777. ii. C N. Firth). 

P. 377; 1779, i"- p. 329. 

BOLOGNA. 

See ANTIDOTARIUM Bononicnse. 

BONONIA. 

See ANTIDOTARIUBi. 

BONTIUS (Jacobus). 
Medicina Indorum. 

See ALPiNUS (prosper), 1719. 

Jacob Bontius, son of Gerard Bontius, professor also to botany and natural history, and wrote 

of medicine at Leyden, was bom there, and not at several works on these subjects, all of which are 

Rotterdam, as is said. In 1627, he went to the still considered of value. The species Bontia was 

East and travelled in Persia, India and Java, where named after him. His death has been placed in 

he lived for some years acting as chief phjrsician to 1631, but he seems to have been alive as late as 

the Government. He studied the diseases of the 2642. 
country and their treatment, but devoted himself 

BONTIUS—BONUS 

"5 

BONTIUS (Jacobus). Continued, 

lin, Undimms rtmcvahu^ 1686, p. 476. 
Hendreich, Pandectae Brandenhtrjpcae, 1699^ 

luuBget, BUliotheca Scripiorum Medicorum, 
VfXL, I. i. p. 366. 
Rcstner, AfedUinxkes GeUhrUn-Lixicon, 1740^ p. 

131. 

I6dbtar, AUgewuines GtUkrUn-LeMtcom, 1730, i. 
coil 1243. 

Halkr, BihHotAeca Botanica, 1771, i. p. 464. 

Haller. BiiHdkeca Ckirurpca, 1^4, u p. 336. 

Haller, BUlioiheca Medtctttm Practua^ 1777. it 
P.6B3. 

Elo^, DictioHnaire Historiqu* de la Midtcimt^ 
1778, I. p. 405. 

BiografkU MidUaU, Paris, PBDckoucke (x8ao- 
35); u* P* 379 (laudatory notice). 

Sprengd. GeschichU der Ameykunde, 1827, !▼. 
pp. sia, 588. 

Dexeimens. Diet, kiitoriquede la Mideeine, 1831, 
L ii. p. 4C4. 

Bayle & Thillaye. Bi<^apkU MidicaU, 1855. I 

Van der Aa, Bimafhisch Woordenbotk dtr 
Nederlanden, 1854, if. ii. p. 836. 

BONUS (PrrRus). 
M. Petri Boni Lombardi Ferrariensis Physici & Chemici excellendss. Intro- 
ductio in Artem Chemiae integra, ab ipso authore inscripta Margarita Preciosa 
Novella. Composita ante annos plus minus ducentos septuaginta. Nunc, 
multis mendis sublatis, cOmodiore, quam antehic, forma edita, & indice 
rerum ad calcem adomata. Montisbeligardi. Apud lacobum Foillet. 

M.DC.II. 

8«. Pp. [20] 398. Index [la]. 

The work professes to have been written in 
X330-39 at Pola in Istria. The author was a 
Master of Arts, was convinced of the truth of 
Atefaemj which he defended from the attacks made 
io his time, and maintained that the real way had 
been shown by Geber. Gesner, followed by Morhof , 
makes him ooseval with Lully. Nazari calls him 
in one place Fertarien : {sic), but in another 
Florenstj, which presumably is a slip. 

Mazzuchelli, however, drawing from apparently 
Bood sources, calls him Pietro Antonio Boni, ssiys 
Ee lived in 1494, was a physician who was skilled 
in philosophy and took delight in Alchemy and 
wrote Rahones pro AUhimia et contra^ which was 
included in Lacinius' collection of x^6, and has 
been criticised by Hoefer, because in the first 
chapter he proves that alchemy is not true, and in 
the second that it is. He is identical with Pietro 

Nazari, Delia Tramutatione Sogni tre, 1599, pp. 
X36. 143. 

Borel, Bibliotheca Chimiea, 1654, p. 50. 

Morhof, De Aietallorum TrarumutaHone . . . 
Efistola, 1673, p. \xi, 

Hendreich, Pandectce Brandenhurgicct, 1699, p. 

Koth-Scholts, Bibliotheca Chemica, 1727, p. 31. 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire de la Pkilosophie 
Hermitique^ Z74SL i. p. 220 ; iii. p. 125. 

Mazzuchelli, Gli Scrittorid Italia, 1762, II. parte 
iii. p. Z637. 

Baumer, Bibliotheca Chemiea, 1782, p. zi6. 

Boni Lombardo Ferrarese of the present work. 
These accounts, however, obviously do not tally. 
In the British Museum Catalogue this work is 
ascribed to Pietro Buono Avogario. See the note 

on LACINIUS. 

The first edition of the Margarita was edited by 
Lacinius, Venice, Aldus, 1546. 8^ ; thereafter, 
Nttmberg, 1554, 8*; Basel. 1572, 4?; Strasburg, 
1608, 8<». 

The De Secreto omnium secntorum Dei dono is 
contained in Lacinius' collection, Basel, 1572, as 
well as his Epistola. An English translation firom 
the edition of 1546, with a prefatory notice, was 
made by Arthur E. Waite : The New Pearl of 
Great Price, A treatise concerning the treasure and 
most precious Stone of the Philosophers^ London, 
1894, 8*. pp. xi. [i Wank] 441 [3]. 

Beytrag xur Geschichte der hdhem Chemie, 1785, 
76. 
melin. Geschichte der Chemie, 1797, i. pp. 55, 

p. 576. 
G 

56. 
Tiraboschi, Storia delta Lettp^atura Italiana^ 

1807, V. parte i. p 221. 

Schmieder, GeschichU der Alchemie, 183a, p. 
183. 

Hoefer, Histoire de la Chemie^ 1842, L p. 4x2 ; 
1866, i. p. 436.' 

\jk6xi:gii%BibliothiqueOuvarcff^ Sciences Secrttm^ 
1870, No. xooi. 

Kopp, Die Alchemie, x886, ii. pp. 350, 374. 

Epistola. 

See LACINIUS O^NUS), Pretiosa Margarita Novella, 1546, fol. 132. 

Brief. 

See LACINIUS (jANUS), Pretiosa Margarita, 1714, p. 323. 

Margarita pretiosa novella, quae est investigatio artis alchemiae. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1660, V. p. 507. 

See MANGET (j. J.), Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, ii. p. i. 

ii6 

BONUSSOREL 

BONUS (Petrus). Continued, 

Pretiosa Margarita Novella ex concordantiis Sapientum coUecta, de thesauro 
& Lapide philosophorum. 
See LACINIUS OanusX Pretiosa Margarita Novella, 1546, foL i. 

Neu-erfundene kostbare Perle aus denen Schrifften der Weisen zusammen 

getragen von dem Schatz und Steine der Weisen. 

See LACINIUS Oanus), Pretiosa Margarita, 1714, p. 4'- 

This is different from the preceding. 

BONVOISIN. 

See BUONVICINO (BENEDETTO). 

BOOZ (AdaMah). 

See BIRKHOLZ (ADAM MELCHIOR). 

BORCH (Ole). 

See BORRICHIUS (OLAUS). 

BOREL (Pierre). 

Bibliotheca Chimica. Seu C^talogus Librorum Philosophicorum Henneticorum 
in quo quatuor millia circiter, Authorum Chimicorum, vel de transmutatione 
Metallorum, re Minerali, & Arcanis, tarn manuscriptorum, quam in lucem 
editorum, cum eonim editionibus, vsque ad annum 1653. continentur. Cum 
eiusdem Bibliothecae Appendice, & Corollario. Authore Petro Borellio 
Castrensi, Medico Doctore, Parisiis, Apud (Darolum Du Mesnil, via 
lacobea, ad Insigne Samaritanae iuxta Sanctum luonem. £t Thomam lolly, 
via Veteris Enodationis juxta terminum Pontis D. Michaelis, sub Scuto 
Hollandico. M.DCLIV. Cum Priuilegio Regis. 

24*. Pp. [ia]276, 

De Curationibus Sympatheticis. 

See THEATRUM SYMPATHETICUM, 1662, p. 526. 

Borel was born at Castres about 1620, studied 
medicine at Montpellier, and began practice at 
Castres in 1641. In 1653 he went to Paris, and 
about x6^ was appointed physician to the king. 
During his whole lite he had ardently pursued the 
study of natural history, chemistry, optics, astro- 
nomy, antiquities, philology, bibliography ; he col- 
lected a museum, and wrote several books of which 
the most important are : 

Trdsor de Recherches et Antiquity Gauloises et 
Fran9oises. Paris, 1655, 4*1 reprint, Niort, 1882, 
2 vols., 8*». 

Antiquity de Castres, Castres, 1649, ^* 

Observationes Medico-physicae. Castres, 1653, 
Paris, 1656, 8<». 

Hortus seu armamentarium simplicium, . . . 
Castres, 1666, 8^ 

Discours prouvant la Plurality des Mondes, 
Gen^e, 1657, 8** ; in English, London, 1658, 1660, 
la*. ^ 

Tractatus de vero telescopii inventore . . . His- 
toria, Hagae-Com., 1655, 4 . 

ObservatioDum microscopicarum Centuria, Hagse- 
Com., Z656, 4*. 

A\x€^€ de la Vie de Descartes, Paris, 1656, 8* ; 
in English, London, 1670, x6*. 

Besides these he left a considerable number in 
manuscript which were never published, not to 
speak of those which he had planned, but had only 
partially executed. Among them were some on 
the history of Chemistry, and one cannot but 
regret that the author was unable to complete and 
publish them. They would have contributed to 
our knowledge of the subject. 

There is some doubt as to the date of Borel's 
death ; some place it in 1671, but others in 1669. 

Borel was a man of comprehensive knowledge, 
unwearied energy, and remarkable insight into 5ie 
subjects he discussed. His Bibliotheca Chimica 
was the first of its kind, and though it labours 
under considerable defects, and is imperfect in 
execution, it is not without its use even now for the 
older literature, and is familiar to those concerned 
with it. There was a reprint of it in the same sice 
and style, Heidelberg, 1056. 

I discussed Borel's life and works in a monograph 
read to the Philosophical Society of Glasgow in 
1897. It is not yet published. 

BORELSORRI 

"7 

BOREL (Pierre). Continued, 

Horricfaios, Dt Ortu ei Progmsu Ckemia Dis- 
sertatio, 1668, p. 143. 

Morbo^ De Metalhrum TramsmtUatiotu . . . 
Rpistola^ 1673, p. X15. 

Kdnig, BihliiOtkua Veins ei Novoy 1678, p. 195. 

Mercklin, Limdemius rtmavaius^ x686i» p. 881. 

Hendrekh, PeLndecUe BrandenburgictB^ 1699^ 
p. 660. 

Paschius, De Nevis Invemtis . . . Traciatus^ 

"TOO. p. 433. 

J. M. Faustius, Pkilaietka Illustraims^ 1706, c8 
recto (PraefiEOio Wedelii). 

Roth-Scboltz, BibUoUuca Chemica^ 1727, p. qx. 

StoUe, AnUitung Mur HisiorU der GeioMrneit, 
17*7. p. 109 ; p. 4C^ 

/acoS Leufolds Prodromus Bibliothecm wuial- 
liae, 17^ p. 33 (gives a list of the Chemical 
sections in Borel s OdservetHones). 

Niceron, Mimoires^ 1736, xxxvi. p. 218. 

Kestner, Medicinisches Gelehrten-Lexiamf 1740^ 

p. 134. 

Chaufepi^, Nauveau Dictionnaire Historique et 
Critique^ 1750, ii. p. 403 (letter B). 

Astmc, TraiU des Maladies dts Femwus, 1761, 
ii. p. 183. 

Haller, Bihliotkeca Anatomica, 1774. i. p. 449. 

Eloy, Dictiamnaire Historique de la Aiddecine^ 
1778, i. p. 412, 

Beytrag tur Gesckickte der hbhem Ckemie, 1785, 

p. 549- 

Gmelin, Geschichie der Ckewue^ i797f i* P* ^5 ; 
1798, ii. p. 204. 

Condorcet, Eloges des Acad/tmciems . . . m4>rt 
de^is I'au 1666 puqu'en \7fjiQ^ i799i i* ]>• x8a 

Fischer, Gesckuhie der Pkysik^ ifik>x, L pp. 182, 
199 ; 1802, ii. p. 93. 

Fuchs, Hepertonum^ 1806-08, p. 158. 

Chalmers, The General Bicgraphical Dictionary^ 
181a, vi. p. 106. 

Bicgrapkie Universelle, 1843, v* P> 7^ 

Nouvelle Biografkie GdniraU^ \^ib2y vL coL 697. 

Les Antiquitis ae Castres i/e . . . Borel pmiUSes 
par Ck, Pradely Paris, 1868 (introductory notice of 
Borel). 

Dictionnaire Encyclofidique des Sciences Midi- 
cales, 1869, X. p. 93. 

BORMES. 
Epitre a Messieurs Les Savans et Amateurs en Chymie. Pour servir de 
R^ponse k un article des El^mens d'Histoire-Naturelle & de Chymie de 
M. de Fourcroy ; suivie de plusieurs M^moires, sur des operations nouvelles 
& curieuses en Chymie. Par M. le Baron de Bormes. A Bruxelles, et 
se trouve k Paris, Chez Hardouin & Gattey, Libraire de S. A. S. Madame la 
Duchesse d'Orl^ans, au Palais-Royal, num^ros 13 & 14. M.DCC.LXXXVII. 

8°. Pp. [4, frontispiece included]. 145 [i blank], 2 folding plates. 

Bormes wrote ' * Decouvertes sur I'ether marin, Metallica^ p. 53. Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemity 
fait^ par I'intermede du zinc." Reuss, Reper- 1799, "*• P* 454- 
torium Commentationum, 1803, Chemia, et Res 

BORNETTUS (Duncanus). 

See BURNET (DUNCAN). 

BORRI (GiosEPPE Francesco). 
La Chiave del Gabinetto del Cavagliere Gioseppe Francesco Borri Milanese. 
Col favor della quale si vedono varie Lettere scientifiche, chimiche, e 
curiosissime con varie Istruzioni Politiche, ed altre cose degne di curiositk, 
e molti segreti bellissimi. Agguintavi una Relazione esatta della sua vita. 
In Colonia, Appo Pietro del Martello. M.DC.LXXXI. 

24°. Pp. [22] 382 [i, & I blank]. 

Thoogfa ostensibly published at Cologne, the true 
^Ace was Geneva. Haller quotes an edition of 
Uolon., x68z, 2 vols.. 4^ 

Bayle (Art. borri, note H) points out that the 
first two dialogues are similar m substance to the 
*'Comte de Gabalis" of the Abb^ de Villars, 
published in 1670, and he leaves those interested to 
settle which is the original. 

Hendreich is of opinion that this book wras 
written by some anonymous person, "at Burrho 
minus favens." 

The life of Borri was full of adventure. He was 
bom at Milan, some say in 16x6, others on Mav 
4th, 1625. Oettinger in 1627, of a ffamily for which 
be claimed descent from Burrhus who is spoken of 

by Tacitus. In the Jesuit seminary he was viewed 
with admiration for his talents and memory. 
After a period of loose living, he, like some others, 
turned rotmd, gave up these habits and became 
very religious, even claiming that revelations were 
accorded him. Having spent some time in Rome, he 
returned to Milan and formed a sect or secret 
societjr, of which he was the head, and the members 
of which were bound by certain vows. It appears, 
however, that he had certain political plans in view, 
for when some of his followers had been put in 
prison, his schemes were upset and he departed 
suddenly from Milan. He was thereupon con- 
demned by the Inquisition for a heretic, and he 
was burnt— in effigy— along with his writings, at 

i 

li8 

BORRI^BORRICHIUS 

BORRI (GiosEPPE Francesco). ContinuetL 

Rome. 3 January, 1661. He went to Strasburg, 
and studied chemistry and medicine, next to Am- 
sterdam, where he seems to have lived in great 
magnificence — upon his wits; when these were 
exhausted he departed to Hamburg, and persuaded 
Queen Christina to expend money upon the great 
work of the philosophers, and finally reached 
Copenhagen, wnere similarl)r the king was induced 
to follow her example and with like success. 

Borri thought he would now go to Turkey, but 
on arriving at the frontier of Austria, he vras sus- 
pected of having a share in the Frangipani con- 
spiracy; and though he was shown to have nothing 
to do with it, he was not allowed to go without 
permission from the emperor. It so happened that 
when his name was mentioned, the Papal Nuncio 
happened to be present, and claimed Borri as a 
prisoner of the Inquisition. Borri was accordingly 
summoned to Vienna, and was delivered to Uie 
Pope on condition that his life was spared. He 
was condemned to imprisonment for life, and was 
immured in the prison of the Inquisition ; but 
having cured the Ehike d'Etr^, after he had been 
given up by the physicians, he was transferred to 
the Castle of St. Angelo, where he was allowed 
more freedom, and pursued his studies in chemistry. 
He died in the casUe, ao August, 1695. 

Borrichius, De Ortu et Progrtssu Ckemia Disser- 
tation x668. p. X44. 

Kdnig, Bibliotheca vetus et nova, 1678, p. 144. 

Acta Eruditarum^lApsAdR, Feb. z68a, p. 40. 

Mercklin. Lindenius renavatus^ x686, p. 989. 

Hendrdch, Pandecta Brandenburgiae, 1699, p. 
802. 

Paschius, De Nevis Inventis . . . Tractatus, 
1700, p. 487. 

Borrichius, Dissertatianes^ 17x4, ii. p. 72 (Diss, 
de Natura dulcedinis). 

Mena/^ana^ 171$, lii. p. 18&. 

Schelhom, Amanitates Literaria, 1726, v. pp. 
141-163 ; 1728, viii. p. 493 (interesting notice with 
references). 

Bayle, Diciionaire, 1730, i. p. 6x15. 

Die Edtlgebome Jungfer Akhymia, X730, p. 265. 

Manget, Bibliotheca Scriptontm Medicorum^ 
17^1, I. u p. 544. 

Morhof, Polyhistor, 173a, i. p. 706; ii. pp. 306, 
442, 444. 

Kestno*, Medicinisches GeUhrten-Lexicom^ 1740, 

p. 135. 
Lenglet Dufresn^^, Histoire de la Philosophie 

Hermitique, 1742, in. p. 126. 

Brucker. Historia Critica PhihsopkuE^ X743, ^v* 
p. 676. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Anatomica^ x774i i* P* 5^- 

If the stories told about him be true, be was a 
notably successful surgeon; and as for his 
chemistry Borrichius odls him " celeberrimus 
experimentis cbemids " in his Dissertatioma. Bat 
elsewhere he goes far beyond that, and sajrs that if 
he was later in time than Caneparius and Sala 
and other Italians, he was far before them *' in the 
exhaustless capacity of his great genius, the Phoenix 
of Nature, and the glory not onlv of bis own Italy 
but of Europe.** Of which, if only a percentage be 
correct, he must have displayed qualities to Borri- 
chius which do not appear in his writings or in the 
biography which has reached us. 

Besides the Chiave be wrote a paper De vimi 
generatume in acetum, dectsio exieriwuntaNSt 
m GaUeria di Minerva^ ii. p. 25 ; EpistoUe dmm 
ad Tkomam Bartholinum de ortu cerebri et usu 
medico; nection de artificio oculorum kmmorts 
restituendi^ Copenhagen, X669, 4**, on the latter of 
which see Paschius. 

And there is another, Gentis Burrorum noHtia, 
Strasburg, 1660, 4**, which, however, may not be by 
him. By Bruun another work, which I have not 
seen, is mentioned, Hifpocrates ch^micus sen 
chimue Hippocratica spectmina j a F, J, Burrko 
recognita et , . , Olao Borrichio dedicata, . . . 
Cologne, 1690, 8°. 

Jocher, Allgemeines Gelehrten-LexicoH^ i7SPt 
i. col. 1259. 

Mauucchelli, Gli Scrittori tP ItaHa, 176a, II. iiu 
p. X790 (and references). 

Portal, Histoire de fAmatomie eidela Chintrgie, 
1770, iii. p. 400. • 

Elov, DictioHHaire Historique de la Midecine^ 
1778, i. p. 417. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Afedicinee Practice, 1779, iii 
p. SOI. 

Adelung, Geschiehte der menschlicken Narrkeii^ 

1785. ». P- 77. 
Beytrag mr Geschickte der hdhem Chemie^ 1785, 

P- 37a. 

Hutchinson. Biographia Medtca, 1799, i* PP* 
XX4-XX9, 

Fuchs. Repertoriutn der Chetnischen Littetntur^ 
1806-08, p. 191. 

Biographic Medicate, Paris, Panckoucke (x890- 
25), ii. p. 417. 

Schmieder, Geschichte der Alchemie, 2832, p. 463. 

Hoefer, Histoire de la Chimie, 1843, li. p. 330 ; 
1869, ii. p. 322. 

Oettinger, Afoniteur des DateSy Leipzig, 1869, 

p. IXI. 

Kopp, Die Alchemie, 1886, ii. pp. 335, 364. 
C. F. Bricka, Dastsh Biograjisk Lexikon, x888, 
ii. p. 543 (article by Chr. Bruun). 

BORRICHIUS (Olaus). 
Hermetis, iEgyptionim, et Chemiconim Sapienda ab Hermanni Conringii 
animadversionibus vindicata per Olaum Borrichium. 

Devteronom. xxiii. v, vii. Noli abominari iEgyptium. 
Hafniae, Sumptibus Petri Hauboldi, Reg. Acad. Bibl. Anno M.DC.LXXIV. 

4<». Pp. [xa] 448. Index [8]. 
Folding plate of retorts from a Gredc alchemical MS. , p. X56. 

[Another Copy.] 

Wants the folding-plate at p. 156, and the dedication. 

There were apparently two issues of this book, for I have seen other copies without 
the dedication and the plate 

BORRICHIUS 

119 

BORRICHIUS (Olaus). ConHnued. 
OUd Borrichii Metallische Probier-Kunst deutlich und kurtz beschrieben. 
Verteutscht durch Geoigium Kus. Kopenhaven, bey Daniel Paulli, Kon. 
BuchhandL Anno 1680. 

8*. 74 (misnumbered for 7a). 

Olai Bofrichii Conspectus Scriptorum Chemicorum lUustriorum, Libellus 
Posthumus cui pnefixa Historia Vitae Ipsius ab Ipso Conscripta. Havnise, 
Sumptibus Samuelis Gannanni Bibliop: Anno MDCXCVII. 

4*. Pp.[ia]48. 

(Muf or Ole Borch, better known as Olaus Borri- 
duos, was born at Borch, Ripen or Rjrpa, in 
Jutland, in 1696 ; went to school at Rjrpa, and in 
1644 to the University at Copenhagen. He tra- 
velled for six years, and was appointed to 
the professorship of Botany and Oiemistry at 
Copenhagen in 1666. He was a man of great 
acqoirenients and learning, a poet, critic, philo- 
sopher, chemist, botanist, physician— a polyhistor. 

Erasmns Pauli f. Vindingius, Regia Academia 
Hauniemsis in Reg^bus . . . Pr^euorihus suis 
reprcuemtaia, Haunise, 1665, p. 431 ^merely a note). 

Albertos Bartholinus, De Scriptis Danorum liber 
^ostkumuSf 1666, p. III. 

Thomas Bartholinus, De Medicina Danorum 
Ikmestica DissertaHames X, Hafniae, 1666; Dis- 
sert H. p. 40. 

Merckiin, Lindenius rencvatus, 1686, p. 848. 

Conring, Im UniversaUm Artem Medicam . . . 
Introduction 1687, cap. iii. §ii. S* *f P* "6. 

Acta Eruditarum, Lips., 1697, xvi. p. 179. (A 
DOCioe of the Conspectus.) 

Hendreich, Pandecta Brandenburgica^ x699» P* 

Vit^ stUcUg quorundam eruditissimorum ac 
Ulustrium Virorum, Vratislaviae, 171 1, pp. 276-94 
(autobiographical sketch edited by Frederic Rost- 
gaaid). 

Panlus Vindingius, '*Oratio Funebris in exces- 
sum . . . Olai Borrichii . . . publici dicta d. in. 
Novemb. an. MDCXC." Prefixed to Oiai Borri- 
ekii Dissertationes seu orationes Academica, ed. 
Severinus Lintrupius, Havniae, 1715. 

Roth-Scholtz, Bibliotkeca Chemica, 1727, p. 32. 

Bayle, Dictionaire historique, 1730, i. 618. 

Manget, Bibliotkeca Scriptorum Afedicorum, 
1731, T. i. pp. 371-439 (reviews of his works). 

StoUe, AuUUung tur Historie der Medicinischen 
Gelakrkeit, 1731, pp. 259, 26cy 390, 603, 894. 

Niceron, Mimotres^ 1732, xix. pp. 44-58. 

Stolle, AnUitung tur Historic der Gelahrheitf 
»736, pp. 88, 89, 173, 361, ^. 

Rcstner, Medicinisches Gelekrten-Lexicon, 1740, 

p. 135. 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire de la Philosophie 
Hermitique^ 1742, iii. p. 127. 

MoUer, Cimbria literata, 1744, i. p. 60; iii. 
pp. 56-72. 

He had controversies with Deusing and others, 
and especially with Conring as to the age of the 
Hermetic art and the science of the ^^tians. 
His death occurred at Copenhagen, in 1690^ after 
great suffering. His works on the history of 
chemistry are still of use. He contributed various 
articles to the *Acta Hafniensia.' His portrait 
is prefixed to the fifth part of Roth-Scholtz's 
Bibliotkeca CAemica, 1727-29. 

I5cher, AUgemeines Gelehrten-Lexicon^ 1750^ i. 
col. 1260. 

Haller. Bibliotkeca Botanica, 1771, i. p. 533. 

Haller, Bibliotkeca Ckirurgica, 1774, 1. p. 377. 

Haller, Bibliotkeca Anatomica, 1774. i. p. 49^ 

Eloy, Dictionnaire Historique de la Midectne^ 
1778. 1. p. 417. 

Haller, Bibliotkeca Medicina practtca, 1779, ni. 
p. 1 14 (an account of the controversy with Conring). 

Baumer, Bibliotkeca Ckemica, 1782. pp. i, 67. 

Beytrag xur Gesckickte der kokem Ckemie, 1785, 
pp. 550-1. 

Gmelin, Gesckickte der Ckemie, 1798, ii. pp. x6 ; 
119 (list of papers) ; pp. 246, 249, 271 ; 275 (" £>oci- 
mastice metallica," Hafn., 1677, 4% and the above 
translation). 

Hutchinson, Biograpkia Medica^ ^799> ^ PP* 
z 19- 12 1. 

Fischer, Gesckickte der Pkysii, 1802, ii. pp. 166, 
201 ; 1804. v. pp. 2^1, 261, 264. 

Fuchs, Pepertortum, 1806, pp. 151 (Disserta- 
tions), 166, 168, 178, 182, 204. 

Biograpkie Midicale, Paris, Panckoucke (x8ao- 
25), ii. p. 381 (article by Jourdan). 

Dezeimeris, Dictionnaire Historique de la 
Midecine^ 1831, I. ii. p. 455. 

Schmieder, Gesckickie der Alckemie, 1832, p. 420. 

Bayle & Thillaye, Biograpkie Afidicale, 1855, i. 

p. 477. 
Dictionnaire Encyclopidique des Sciences Midi- 

caleSf 1869, X. p. 104. 

Kopp, Beitrdge sur Gesckickte der Ckemie^ 1869, 
i. p. 94, 8c passim, 

Ladrague, Bibliotkique Ouvarof^ Sciences 
Secrites^ 1870, Nos. 1231-32. 

C. F. Bricka, Dansk Biograjisk-Lexikon, 1888, 
ii. pp. 500-508 (the chemical section by S. M. 
J6rgensen). 

De ortu et progressu Chemise Dissertatio. 

See MANGET (j« JO) Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, i. p. i. 

The first edition was published : Hafniae, 1668, 4*, pp. [12] 150 [2]. 

Conspectus scriptorum chemicorum celebriorum. 

See MANGET (j. j.X Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, i. p. 38. 

tio BOSNA y-'BO YLE 

BOSNAY. 

) Set COSMOPOLITE, 1629. 

BOULTON (Samuel). 

Medicina Magica Tamen Physica: Magical, but Natural Physick. Or a 
Methodical Tractate of Diastatical Physick. Containing the general Cures 
of all infirmities: And of the most radical, fixed, and malignant Diseases 
belonging, not only to the Body of Man, but to all other Animal and 
Domestick creatures whatsoever, and that by way of Transplantation. With 
a Description of a most excellent Cordial out of Gold much to be estimated. 
Published by Samuel Boulton, Salop. 

Ars non habet inimicum nisi ignorantem. 
London, Printed by T. C. for N. Brook, at the Angel in Comhil, 1656. 

8^. Pp. [8] 195. [3 pp. advertisements.] Cut in a litUe and wants pp. 187-88. 

[Another edition], London, 1665. 

/ Title-page imperfect This is identical with the preceding, except in the date. 

Besides the two English editions there is one in Morhof {Polfhisi. 1732, i. p. 712) hints that 
Latin, 1665, 8* (Watt, Bibliothtca Briiannica, Maxwell's book on Sympathy has been taken in 
1824, 159^). part from Boolton's. See also iL pp. 213, 305. 

BOYLE (Robert). 

The Philosophical Works of the Honourable Robert Boyle Esq; Abridged, 
methodized, and disposed under the General Heads of 

' Natural-History 
Chymistry, and 
Medicine. 

Physics 

Statics 

Pneumatics 

The whole illustrated with Notes, containing the Improvements made in 
the several Parts of natural and experimental Knowledge, since his Time. 
In Three Volumes. By Peter Shaw, M.D. The Second Edition, Corrected. 
London : Printed for W. Innys and R. Manby, at the West-End of St. Paul's ; 
and T. Longman, in Pater-noster-Row. M DCC XXXVIII. 

4*. Vol. i. [a] xliii. [i blank] 730 [2]. Fine portrait engraved by Vertue, 17^, after 
Kerseboom — z plate. Vol ii., xx. 72iS. 11 plates. Vol. iii. [4J xv. [x blank] i.-iv., 
5-249 [2C0-352I ccliiL-cclx., 261-756. I plate. 

Michael Faraday's copy with his book plate and passages marked by him. 

Experiments, Notes, &c. about the Mechanical Origine or Production of divers 
particular Qualities : Among which is inserted a Discourse of the Imperfection 
of the Chymist's Doctrine of Qualities, Together with some Reflections upon 
the Hypothesis of Alcali and Acidum. By the Honourable Robert Boyle, 
Esq; Fellow of the R. Society. London, Printed by E. Flesher, for 
R. Davis Bookseller in Oxford. 1675. 

8^ This volume is not paged continuously, but the different tracts have each a 
separate title-i>age and pagination, as follows : 

General title and preface, pp. [61. [These two tracts were translated into French. 

Advertisements relating to the following Treatise, See rkcueil d'experiences]. 

pp. 31 [i blank]. Advertisements about the experiments and notes 

Of the Mechanical Origine of Heat and Cold, relating to Ch3rmical Qualities, pp. 7 [i blank], 

pp. [2] 105 [i blank]. Of the Imperfection of the Chymist's doctrine of 

Experiments about the Mechanical Production of qualities, pp. 50 [2 blank! 

Tasts. pp. 35 [i blank]. Reflections upon the Hypothesis of Alcali and 

Odours, pp. 31 [i blank]. Acidum, pp. 38 [a blank]. 

BOYLE 121 

BOYLE (Robert). Continued. 

EiperimenU and Notes, about the Mechanical Of the Mechanical Causes of Chymical Precipita- 

Ongine and I^x>duction of Volatility, pp. ^6. tion, pp. [5, i blank] 46. 

uperimental Notes of the Mecnianicar Origine Experiments and Notes about the Mechanical 

or Production of Fixtness, pp. 34 [s blank]. Production of Magnetism (dated 1676), pp. [4] ao. 

Experiments and Notes about the Mechanical Experiments and Notes about the Mechianical 

Oi»iie €x Production of Corrosiveness and Cor- Origine or Production of Electricity, pp. [2] 38. 
roBbili^, I>P> [3] 69 [x blank]. 

Nova Experimenta Pneumatica Respirationem Spectantia. Authore Roberto 
Boyle Nobili Anglo, h Societate Regia. Bononiae, M.DC.LXXV. Sumptibus 
Petronij de Ruinettis. Superiorum permissu. 

I2^ Pp. 91 [i blank, 4]. 

Observationes de Salsedine Maris. . . . Bononise, M.DC.LXXV. . . . 

Pp. 46 [i, X blank]. 

Experimenta Nova: Quibus ostenditur, Posse partes Ignis, et Flammae Reddi 
Stabiles Ponderabilesque. Vna cum detecta penetrabilitate Vitri. . . . 
Bononiae, M.DC.LXXV. . . . 

Pp. [i-8]9.74 [4 

Exercitationes de Atmosphaeris Corporum Consistentium ; deque mira Subtili- 
tate, determinata natura, et Insigni Vi Effluviorum. . . . Bononiae, 
M.DC.LXXV. . . . 

*^ Pp. [4] 155 [I]. 

h these tracts have separate title-pages, signatures and pagination, they are quite uniform, and 
form one volume. 

Thoogl] 
obvious^ 

Noctiluca Aeria, sive nova quaedam Phaenomena in Substantias Factitiae sive 
Artificialis, Sponte Lucidae, productione, observata. Unk cum adnexo 
Ejusdem Substantias Processu. Amico cuidam, rure agenti, epistolice com- 
municata. Authore Roberto Boyleo, Nobili Anglo, Regiae Societatis Socio. 
Ex Anglico in Latinum Sermonem, Traduxit J. W. Londini, Typis R. E. 
pro B. Tooke Bibliopola, in Coemeterio Paulino. 1682. 

la'. Pp. [a] 69 [x blank], 59-69 bis [i blank]. 

Experimenta Nova atque observata in Glacialem Noctilucam facta. Epistolice 
amico rure degenti communicata. Quibus adnectitur Paradoxon Chymicum. . . . 

Pp. [la] 78. 

f^iradoxon chymicum, novis experimentis innixum. Unde probabile fit, Principia 
Ch3rmica Transmutari posse ; adeo ut ea eonim Uno, Alia etiam produci queant. . . . 

Pp. [5, I blank] 39 [i blank, 3, i blank, Errata i, i blank]. 

These tracts have separate title-pages and pagination, but the signatures of the 
volume run continuously, A to S, in sixes. 

The original English was printed at London in 1680. Reviews in the Acta Eruditorum^ Lips. 1683, 
»• pp. S4» 394. 

The Sceptical Chymist: or Chymico-Physical Doubts & Paradoxes, touching 

the Experiments whereby Vulgar Spagirists are wont to Endeavour to Evince 

their Salt, Sulphur and Mercury, to be the True Principles of Things. To 

which in this Edition are subjoyn'd divers Experiments and Notes about 

the Producibleness of Chymical Principles. Oxford, Printed by Henry 

Hall for Ric. Davis, and B. Took at the Ship in St. Pauls Church-Yard. 

1680. 

^ 8*. Pp. [ao] 440, [98] 368. 

122 

BO YLE'-BRACESCO 

BOYLE (Robert). Continued. 

Chymista Scepdcus vel Dubia et Paradoxa Chymico-Physica drca Spag^nioonim 
Principia, vulgb dicta Hypostatica, prout proponi & propugnari solent i 
Turba Alchymistarum. Cui Pftrs pnemittitur alterius cujusdam Dissertationis 
ad idem Aigumentum spectans. A Roberto Boyle, Nobili Anglo. Editio 
secunda priori emendatior. Roterodami, ex Officini Amoldi Leers. 

M.DCLXIIX. 

12*. Pp. [28] 592. Engraved title, included. 

Experiences curieuses sur les Saveurs et sur les Odeurs. 
Ste RKCUKIL d'experiences, 1679, p. 125. 

Specimina Historic naturalis & experimentalis aquarum mineralium. 

Set VALERIUS (nicolaus), Tentamina Physico-Chymica, 1699, p. 58. 

The English edition was published at London in i685« 8*^, *' Short Memoirs for the 
Nattiral Eiperimental History of Mineral Waters," and in Latin, London. 1686. 12*. 
It is re\'ie>iii-ed in the Ada Ermditorum, Lips, 1685, iv. p. 587. 

reflections. Lists of his writings are given by 
Hendreich, Watt. Poggendorff, and others. For 
estimates of his work see J. K. Fischer, Pogges- 
dorfif. George Wilson, Ersch u. Gniber, Allibooe, 
Kopp. Ho»er, Thorpe, and other writers 00 the 
history of Chemistry and Physics. One of Boyle's 
most curious works connected with the present 
subject is the tract: "Historical aoooont of a 
Degradation of Gold made by an anti-dizir, a 
strange chemical narrative," as he correctly terms 
it It was published at London in 1678, in 1689, 
and 1759, and was translated into German. 

Royle (1627-1691) has had his life and works 
discussed from various points of view. See the 
life by Rirch, prefixed to his collected works; 
that in the Btomfkia Briiammica and that in the 
Dkii^mmry ^A/tfttmai Bu^rm^, 

His collected >»t>rks ^-ere published at London, 
174^ in fiv« \t>ls. fol., and in 1772. six vols. 4*. An 
edition in Latin in a series of unnumbered volumes 
in 4* appeared at Geneva without date, but during 
the latter part of the seventeenth century. The 
most interesting books however are the separate 
volumes in 4* or 8* in which he published originally 
his discoveries^ discussions, speculations, and 

Tobias Magirus, E^^xm^i^gimm 
i68t, p. 146. 
Hendreich, PamAicUr BmmdemhirxMi', 1699. 

Off Kjeqpf^^m^ /mi^r AkArmui, 17*0, p. 275. 
Mangrt, Bi^uj^ktca Scriftirmm MrJwMitm, 
173M. i, pp. 445^157. 
Stolle, AmMtmmf tmr NistKsrr der (Jlr/aArAri/. 

173?. pp. 5««. 505. 

Kestner. MtaiutmiMk^s CTtkkrtem'LtxMM, 1740, 
p» Ma 

/«ifvru/*«4i Bntamn$*ki, 1748. li. p. 913 ; and ed. 
Kinpis 17*0^ ii, p. 493. 

JC^chcr, JUjCtm^imes ik'Mrftn'Ijext\\^m, 1750, 
i, ctJ, 1317, 

IktrrHaaxY, .1 AVtr .l/<rM,xi ./ Cktmittiy^ by 
IVterShaw, 1*53, i. p. 55. 

Haller, WMW4a^j /WtfartVa, 1771. i. |x 517, 

Haller, BiM9*>ik^\» . I«m#4i«h«v, 1774. t- p^ 501. 

llalKcr. BfKtf*ytk<\\i Ckinargi*-^^ 177^^ i, p. 36^ 

»rr*» V p< <N«* 

MAlkr« ^^^K-H^wi )M/#.V«Nr AVvn^rtW. itt^jw i. 
|v <M ; irpi. iii. loo. 

jv R V. OArr^re, i.\it^\y%f . » . «<rj cVcr.;^«i 
. * , fm- it^ A>«k%' anm^^Jf\ 17^ p. t6^ Nos. 99^ 
>v 

Kiw.'^lw* <Mr>A>l#i'4jlr Jrr i^ktstk^, 1801 ^ot^ 8 \>oh» 

\V*tt» MA.Vv«Aii\>« i^nfytmnu^ 1819. .Kuihors, 
i4aA 

CriHcmm^ Bufgrmfkie MidkaU, Psaris, Pinckoucfce (i8ao- 

25). ii. p. 489 (excellent article by Jourdan). 

Wood. FasU^ ed. Bliss, iSao. Part iL coL 986. 

Ersch a Gruber. AUgtwuimt EncyclopddU^ 1824, 
xii. p. 169 (article by W. Mfllkry. 

Thomson, History tf Chemdstry^ 1859^ i. p. 903. 

Deseimeris. Dictwmnatre Hisioriqwte de la 
MMscime, 1831. L ii. p. 50X 

Hoe^. Hutmrt de la Ckimit, 1843. iL pp. 153- 
i8j : X869, iL pp, 14^x77. 

Kopp, GesckukU der Chemie, 1843, L pp. 163- 
179 & tesstM^ 

Rayle & ThiOaye, BixigrapkU MidicaU, 1855. 

Cap. Etmdes BMfra/JU^ties ^mr semr i THis- 
tcirt des S>:i€mca^ Vtcaokr^ S^ne, 1857. pp. 131-179. 

.\lliboDe, DUthmary^ 1859. L pi 23a. 

George ^Xllson. ReHgia Ckewaei, 186a, p. 165. 

IVjggendoffff. Buy^rmpkisck-Jiterarisckes Hemd' 
s^vrft^ra^i, 18^ L ooL 967. 

Hoefer. La Otimie emsetgmSc par la Bugrapkie 
Jt s^/^'itdaiemrs^ 186%, pp. 59-68. 

Kopp, Die Em/wmckena^ der Ckeaue im der 
wmerrm Zeii. 1873. PP- 35-40 &/«»«. 

Kopp« BetJrrj^ xMr Gesckickie der Ckemue, 1875, 
iiu pp. ii3>i8a^ 

FVDgi^endorf^ G€sckurJkie der PkysiJt^ '^T^L^ 4*^ 

Dittt^anerr ^ SeEhammt Bi^grmfky^ 1886, vL 
p. 118 laitkie b^ Miss A. M. Oshe}. 

Thorpe, Essays im SiiJtrifal Cktmitttj, 1894, 
pp^ t'^T • ^"t^ ^^ 'T^ P^ ^ 

BRACKSIX) (GiOY.KKNiV 
IV AlcKcmia I>iaK^ IL Quonim pnor, Gcnuiiiam libronk Gebci smtmriam, 
ik" iivdu^tria ab Auihoiv cektun^ & l^uimto sennonc inuohitaai n$e^ & 

BRACESCO 1^3 

BRACESCO (Giovanni). Continued, 

certis aigumentis probat Alter Raimundi Lullij Maioricani, Mysteria in 
lucem producit Quibus praemittuntur, proposiriones centum uiginti nouem, 
idem argumentum compendiosa breuitate complectentes. Norimberg^e 
apud lohan. Petreium, Anno M.D.XLVIII. 

4^. Signatures A-Q in fours [=ff 64]. 

This work appeared originally in Italian, under have been published at Rome, in 154a, 8^. Of the 

the title: La EsposiHone di G^er Pkilosopko, Espositione editions of Venice, 1551, x^sa, are 

Venetia, 1544 ; i^, in the small square 8" sixe. mentioned. Misled, apparently, by the Hamburg 

then in vogue in Italy. The second dialo£|ue is edition of 1673, K&nig says that the dialogues were 

entitled : * 11 L^no deUa vita,' and it is said to written in that yeur. 

De Alchemia Dialogi Duo. Quorum prior, genuinam librorum Gebri senten- 
tiam, de industria ab autore celatam, & figurato sermone inuolutam ret^t, 
& certis argumentis probat Alter, Raimundi Lullij Maioricani, mysteria in 
lucem producit Quibus praemittuntur propositiones centum uiginti nouem, 
idem argumentum compendiosa brevitate complectentes, ex Tuscanico idiomate 
traductx. Lugduni excudebant Godefridus, & Marcellus Beringi fratres, 

1548. 

Schmieder speaks of an edition : Leydeu, 1548, 8^. This is probably a mistake. 

Joannis Braceschi Brixiani De Alchemia, Dialogi Duo nunquam ante hac 

conjunctim sic editi, correcti, & emaculati, praemittuntur Propositiones centum 

viginti novem idem argumentum compendiosi brevitate complectentes. 

Ne dubites pro me pretium persolvere dignum 

Namq; ad Thesauros ostia pando tibi. 

Hamburgi, apud Johannem Naumannum, & GeorgiumWolffium. Anno 1673. 

8®. Pp. [16] 272. Title red and black. 

[Another Copy.] 

Dialogus cui titulus est Lignum vitae in quo etiam Geberi Philosophi expositio 
succincta continetur. 
See GRATAROLO (guglielmo), Vcrse alchemiae . . . doctrina, 1561, i. p. 3. 

Dialogus Primus, veram et genuinam librorum Gebri Sententiam explicans. 

See GINvECEUM CHIMICUM, 1679, P* 222. 

See MANGET (J. J.), Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, i. p. 565. 
Lignum Vitae, Dialogus Secundus. 

See GlNvECEUM CHIMICUM, 1679, p. 332. 

See MANGET (j. J.), Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, i. p. 91 1. 

Gesprach vom Holtz des Lebens. 

See KIESEK (FRANZ), Cabala Chemica, 1606, p. 293. 

Loci aliquot practicse ex Gebero declarati. 

See GRATAROLO (guglielmo). Vera; alchemiae . . . doctrina, 1561, i. p. 242. 

CXXX. Grund Satze des Gieberim Eben Haen, oder Gebers und Raymundi 
Lullii zweyer beriihmten Philosophorum Schriiften desto besser zu verstehen. 
See DREY Curieuse . . . Chymische Schriiften, 1723, p. 28. 
See DREY Curieuse . . . Chymische Schriflften, 1733, P- 28. 

In loannem Braceschum . . . Animadversio. 

See TAULADANUS (ROBERTUS). 

124 

BRACESCO - BRENDEL 

BRACESCO (Giovanni). Continued, 

In the tract Ugnum VUm the author has tried to 
discover the substance by which the patriarchs 
prolong their lives. Kopp says ' Braceschi was 
a physician from Ord nuovi in the Brescian dis- 
trict, towards Crema, which is more probable than 
that he was Prior of the *' regulirten Chorherren of 
St Segoud."* Cozzando calls him a man of 

Van der Linden. De ScHptis Mtdicis libri duo, 

Borel. Btbliotktca Chimica, 1654, p. 51. 
Konig, Bibliotkeca vetus et nova, 1678, p. X3a 
Mercklin. LittJtmitts remov<ihts, 1686. p. 546. 
Cozzando, Librtria Bresciana, 1694, ftirte ii. p. 

Hendreich, Pandects Brandenhurgictt^ 1699. p. 
697. 

Mangel. Bihlwtkeca Scriptormm Mtdicorum, 
1731, I. i. p. 457. 

curious and varied knowledge, but *' huomo vago,** 
by which, judging from his further remarks^ he 
probably means a person brilliant but without 
steady application. No detaib are given of his 
life. He nourished in the middle of the sixteenth 
century. 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histtfire de la PkHosopkii 
HtrwUtique^ 1742, iiu p. 128. 

Mazzuchelli, GH Scritiari <r Italia, 1763, voL 
iu, parte iv. p. 1966. 

Btytrag tur GexhUkU der kdkem. CJkemie, 1785, 
p. 624. 

Weigel, EiMleitung tur Al^etmeitum Sckfide- 
kunst, 1788. i. p. 124. 

Ftichs, Repertorium, 1806-06, p. 64. 

Schmieder. Gesckichie der AUhemUt 1832, p. a6a 

Kopp. Die Alckemie, 1886, it p. 3aa 

BRANDAU. 

See ERRINAUS VON BRANDAU (MATTHXuS). 

BREBISS (JoHANN Friedrich). 
See MEDICES (christian de). 

Ladrague, BMiatkijue Ouvaraf, Sciences SecrHes, 1870, Na 1332. 

BREMEN. 
Phannacopoea Bremensis. 

See VOLPI (THOMASV 

BRENDEL (Zacharias). 
Zacharise Brendelii Med. Doct & Prof. Public! Chimia in Artis formam redacta, 
Ubi praeter Methodum addiscendi cyx<^p*f^^^ Chimicas fodlimam, disquisitio 
curata de (ainosissima praeparatione Auri Potabilis insdtuitor. Edido secunda 
correctior, & aucdor, post obitum Autoris, Consilio Weraeri Rolfinck Ham- 
burgiensis Phil & Med Doct Pracdcs & Chimix Professoris itenim lad 
tradita, cum ejusdem prse^oione. Jense. Sumdbus Johannis Reiffenbergeri. 
Anno M.1X:,XLI. 

8*. Pp. [16] 175 .1 blank. i6j. 

First edition, jena, i6xx Therr u-ere others: 
Amstel. i659« ic^; Lucduni Hat«, 1671. 18^. 

The pnment edition of 1641 ^-as also issued with 
the same title but difierentlr arranjped, and in- 
chidinc besiiies the name of the printer : ' Jeose. 
TVpisRlasii Lobensteins^mtibus johannis Reiffen- 
bcr|:eri. .Vnno M.IKVXLI/ 

Van der Linden« /V X.'ri/^> MtJi^-is !i}^ri J$u\ 
16 ^« (\ 4(^ (edition of lO^^ioV. 

Boc^U M>/r\v**A*a ('AiWImu, 1654, p. 5a. 

Men'klin. limJemim nnt^t>i/M; i68ix p^ 1053 
(Coitions of I^J|o, l^4I« l^7I, ami with BcsuiniUs 

Wittt; Ih^riikm lii.igraMi,^mm^ 1688^ Si^. Mnu 
4 wrw» Ann, I A IuIt» 10 A 
llendrrioh. Atrnd^f^ S»\:md^9hrrp*^* 1^9^ p. 

/eunwT. IV/-*" P'\'/*ssi!>nkm . , , *•« i • . . . 
^,,»4tm9A ,\-%enst , , . ri.«vr'»«/ . . . \ ,K'i)a. 171 1, 
v'U^sis iii, lM«d.I i\ jiev 

K\>lh-8chollt« mXtV^^WM^^^ <*in»j>«;x« 1707^ ^v itiu 

The anther was Z. Brenddios the foun^. 
bom at Jena, 159a, M.D. there in 1617, uractiaed 
at Weimar and other places, and was tutunatefy 
professor of medknie at Jena, wbere be died io 
1038, 13th June (J^» ^Vitte). 

Manjcet, Bih'i^keta ScriptA^rmm Medicomm, 
1711, 1. L p. 470 (copied from Mercklin). 

Kestner. MeJuiniscka GeUhrten- 1 eriam, 1740^ 

jocher. A.^'^grmeimej iHuJkrtem'Ltjncufm, 1750^ 
i. coL 1360. 

Haller^ Bi.^2ixkA'^ Amct^mnca, 1774. i. p. 343. 

Halkr. BirSiiekem Medicim^ fracftcm, 1777, ii. 
p. 318^ tHaller has cocfased the ittber and son). 

Got; Du:i.^%j:irr HisHwifm de la Mddecitu, 
17-*. T. p. 44^ 

IvAumcr, /^>.f,v4a-^ CkemicA, 1782, p. 13. 

Gmelin. i;<fc-A».*r der Ckrmie, 1797, i. pp. 344, 
604 (adds AwBL 169a; 8* ; FkaaoaC itiftS^ 4^ 

BRENDEL^BRETON 

125 

BRENDEL (Zacharias). Continued. 

Fochs, Rtfertoriumi^ z8o6-o8,p. xai. 

Bi^aphie MidieaU, Paris, Pandcoucke (z8ao- 
25), ii. p. 520. 

JohaDnes Giintber, LeUnskitten der Prufessortn 
der Unwersit&t Jena sett 1558 Hs 1858, Jena, 1858, 

Nouvelle Bicgrafkie GiniraUt 1863, vii. col. 390 
(and the references). 

Poggendorflf, Biographisch-literariiches Hand- 
wortentuch^ 1863, i. coL 39a. 

BRENTIUS (Andreas). 
Variae Philosophorum Sententiae perveniendi ad Lapidem Benedictum 
Collectanea. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, iv. p. 330. 

The authors cited are : Albertus Magnus, Raj- 
mundus Lullius, Geber, Thomas Aquinas, Para- 
odsus. 

The present tract was originally published with 
the foUowingtitle : 

* Farrago Philosophorum : hoc est, Varii Modi, 
Processus & Sententiae Philosophorum, perveniendi 
ad Lapidem Philosophicum, seu Benedictum. . . . 
Per Andneam Brentzium, D. Rdpub. Chambensis 
PalaU pro tempore Medicum ordinarium. 
fAmbergae, Typis Michaelis Forsteri.] Anno. 
MOCVL' There was another edition: Aroberg, 
i6xx. 

There are three, if not four persons, whom, 
under the name of Andreas Brentius or Brenzius, 
there is a possibility of confusing with one another. 

Of the most notable of them, a sketch is given by 
Mazruchelli, who styles him 'Andrea Brenta, 
Padovano,' though he mentions also the forms 
Brentius and Brenzius. He warns his readers, 
however, against identifying him with 'Andrea 
Althamer nrenzio, eretico oltramontano,' who is 
known by some theological writings, and is certainly 
quite diroerent Brenta flourished in the middle 
of the fifteenth century, studied the Humanities and 
philosophy, and made translations from Hippo- 
crates, pnnted in the fifteenth, and early years of 
the sixteenth centuries, for which see Hendreich, 
Haller, and Hain. Mazziichelli enumerates these 
translations, and says that the ' Farrago phil- 
osophorum,' printed m the Thectrum Chemicum, 
is ascribed to nim by Man^et, but adds, ' we have 
not found any other writer who calls him the 
author of the said work.' 

Manget, however, has here only followed his 
custom of copying what had been printed fifty 
years earlier by Mercklin, who had found it already 

Van der Linden, De ScripHs Medicis libri duo, 
1637, p. 22. 

Borel, Bibliotheca CAimica, 1654, p. 52, 93. 

Mercklin, Lindenius Renavatus, 1086, p. 4a 

Hendreich, PandecUe Brandenburg,^ i699i P* 7a3- 

Roth-Scholtz, Bibliotheca Chemica, 1727, p. 33. 

Manget, Biiliotheca Scriptorum Medtcorum, 
1731, L i. p. 471. 

Lenglet Dufresno^, Histoire de la Philosophie 
Hermetique^ 1742, iii. p. 129. 

MazzucheUi, Gli Scrittori tTItalia, 1763, vol. ii. 
parte iv. p. 2050. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Afedecina Practica^ ^77^% 
i. pp. 63, 65. 66, 81, 82, 95, 389. 

BRESCIA. 

See MEMORIA, 1794. 

BRETON. 

See LE BRETON (CHARLES). 

stated by Van der Linden, so that the identification 
of the two authors had taken place a hundred years 
before Manget 

Subsequent writers are not very dear on the 
subject. Fuchs ascribes the 'Farrago philoso- 
phorum' to 'Andreas Brentzus, aus Padua.' so 
Uiat he may have identified the two, but on the 
other hand he passes over the translations in 
silence., 

Gmeliu gives a somewhat different complexion 
to the subject by calling him ' Andreas Brentz, an 
Italian by birth, who promul^ted his opinions 
chiefly in Germany,' and, followmg Roth-Scooltz — 
who, however, designates him Andreas Brentius — 
assigns to him another alchemical book : ' Hand- 
grifif Raymimdi Lullii . . . samt einem . . . 
GesprtLch vom Stein der Weisen . . . ,' 1606, 
x6ii, 16x6. 8**, which I have not met with. Here 
there is no suggestion of any connection with 
Brenta or Brentius, the scholar. Colour is lent to 
Gmelin's form by the Latin Brenrius, which might 
point to the name being Brenzi cm* Brenzio, and 
oelonging to a different person altogether from 
Brenta. 

The ascription of the ' Farrago philosophorum ' 
to Brenta seems to be a mistake, but there is no 
satisfactory evidence bearing on the question one 
way or another. 

A book on precautions to be observed during the 
plague by Andreas Brentius, was printed at 
Amberg in x6o6. Whether or not it was bv the 
author of the ' Farrago philosophorum ' I am 
unable to decide, but considering the date and 
place of publication, the {urobability is that it 
emanated from him. 

In the British Museum Catalogue all these 
authors are kept distinct. 

Beytrag tur Geschichte der hdhem Chenite, X785, 

P- 595- 

Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemic, '^797* *• p» 513- 

Fuchs, Repertorium der Chemischen Lttteratur^ 
X806-08, p. lOI. 

Hain, Repertorium Bibliographic um, X826, X83X, 
Nos. 3778, ^3779» 8671. 

Schmieder, Geschichte der Alchemie, 1832, , p. 

355- 
Ladrague, Bibliothkque Ouvaroff^ Sciences 

Secrites, 1870, No. 1003. 

Sudhoff', Bibliographia Paracelsica, X894, p. 472, 

and 499, 600, for reprints. 

126 BREVIS^BROTOFFERR 

BREVIS Eloddatio Aicani Philosophorum. 

See BARNAUD (XIOOLAUS), Triga Chemica, 1599, p. 41. 

Tliis tract is by Ramand. 
See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, ill p. 7S4. 

BREVIS Libdlus Minera philosophorum dictus. 

See GINiCCEUM CHIMICUM, 1679, p. 349. 

BREVIS Manuductio ad Rubinum Coelestem. 

Su BIRRJUS (martin), 1668. 

See MANGET 0< 1-X Bibiiotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, ii. p. 686. 

BREVIS Tiactado de andquissimo atque certissimo illo Particulari quod per 
Exaltadonem seo Gradadonem Solis S. Auri parari solet Oder koitie^ 
iedoch ausfuhiiidie und richdge, Handlung von dem uhralten und bewahr- 
testen Pardcular welches durch Erhoh- und Vermehrung des Goldes-Farbe 
veriicfatet zu werden pfleget. Bestehende in einer zwart kurtzen, dodi 
deutlichen Beschreibung, was die Exaltatio s. Gradado solis und deradben 
Nutzen sey, auch wie dieselbe verrichtet werden solle, welches letztere in 
3a davon handdnden auserlesenen theils selbst probirten Prooessen accarat 
gelehret und gezeiget wird. Denen iiberdiefs noch, zum Dienst der Kunst- 
liebenden, ein ander schon und bewahrtes Pardculare de Extracdone Animse 
Solis beygefiiget ist, Woraus dieselbe, wenn sie darzu nothige operadones 
und Hand>Arbeit recht verstehen und gebrauchen, ohnfehlbar Goldmachen 
lemen konnen werden. Auf freundlich ersuchen guter Freunde also verfasset 
und zum Druck befbrdert. Durch einen Freund der edlen Ch3niiie und 
Metallurgie am griinen Hartze. Leipzig, bey Johann Herbord Klofsen, 

1715- 

8**. Pp. [8] 76. 

This is another copy of the second tract in the FamigeraHssimo Rustici Minoris ParHoilari, 
work entiUed Con- ei Dissensus Ckymicorum de {g.v,), 

Ladrague, Bibli4)ikique Ouvarof, Sciences Secrites, 1870, No. 1457* 

BRIEF (A) Preparation of the Philosophers Stone. 

See AURIFONTINA CHEMICA, 1680, p. 27 1. 

BRIEFF-TASCHE. 

See UNVORSICHTIG (Die) verlohme . . . Philosophischc Brieff-Tasche, 1728. 

BRIXIA. 

See CATALOGUS Medicamentorum. 

BROSSE (La). 

See LA BROSSE. 

HROTOFFERR (Radtichs). 
fiAut h!c aut nusquam.§ Elucidarius Major. Oder Erleuchterunge vber die 
Reformation der gantzen weiten Welt, F.C.R. aufs ihrer Chymischen Hochzeit, 
vnd sonst mit viel andem tesdmoniis Philosophorum, sonderlich in qipendice, 

BROTOFFERR—BROUCHUISIUS 127 

BROTOFFERR (Radtichs). Continued. 

dennassen verbessert, dads beydes materia & praeparatio lapidis aurei, deutlich 
genug darinn angezeigt werden. Durch Radtichs Brotofferr, Luxeme. 

Raphael. 
Omnia sunt abscondita, in abstruse mundi. 
Exacts (autem) via honesta est 
O wie gliickselig das Creutz ich acht, 
Das vntr der Rosen bliiht mit macht 

Adest 
Liineburgy bey den Stemen Buchf. Im Jahr 161 7. 

8«. Pp. [1-3] 4.234. [3, I blank]. 

Anochor edition was published at Vienna, 1751. The phrase Aut Mc aut nusauam appears also in 
There is another work bj the same author : the Dtlarvatio Tincturm Philosapkorum, See 
"Elucidarius chymicus, oder, Krleuchtenmg und leonhard von Altenberg. The word 'Luxeme' 

deutlicbe Erklerung was die Fama Fratemitatis may be a transposition for ' exulem. ' 

lapide Philoso- A third work is 
phoram, in ihrer Reformation der Welt, mit ver* Afissiv; "Theophrastus non Theophrastus, oder 

▼cm R.C. fttrChymischeSecretade lapide Philoso- A third work is ascribed to Brotofferr in the 

blftmten Worten versteckt haben," Gofslar, x6i6, deutliche Entdeckung was von Theophrasto Para- 

1617, 8". Kopp feems to be of opinion that these celso zu halten sey." Gofslar, 16x7, 8**. 

two titles indicate merely two different editions of All these works are mentioned by Kloss. 
the same tract 

MisHv an die . . , BrUderxhaft des Ordens des Kloss. Biiliograpkie der Freimaurerei^ 1844, 

Goldenen und Nosenkreuttes, 1783, pp. 48-4^ ; 61. Nos. 2486-2488. 

B^^irag sur GescMckte der Jkdhem Chemu, 1785, VAdn^jgai^BihliotkiqueOuvaroff, Sciences Secrites, 

pp. &>i. 602. 1870, Nos. 1538-30. 

GmeUn, GescAicAle der Ckemie, 1797, i. p. 561. '^opp, Die AUkewUe, 1886, ii. p. 387. 

Elucidarius maior, oder Erleuchtung iiber die Reformation der ganzen Welt, 
F.R.C. aus ihrer chem. Hochzeit: cum Appendice meliorato. 
See HERMETISCHES A. B. C, 1778, i. p. 176. 

Eluddarii majoris Appendix. Griindliche Nachricht von der Materia Lapidis 

aurei, & modo praeparandi. 
See BECHER (JOHANN JOACHIM), Chymischer Gliicks-Hafen, 1726, p. 175. 

BROUCHUISIUS (Daniel). 
Secreta Alchimiae Magnalia D. Thomae Aquinatis, de Corporibus superccelestibus, 
& qu6d in rebus inferioribus inveniantur, quoque modo extrahantur: De 
Lapide minerali, animali, & plantalL Item Thesaurus Alchimiae secretissimus; 
quem dedit fratri suo Reinaldo. 

Accessit et loannis De Rupecissa Liber lucis, ac Raymundi Lullij opus 
pulcherrimum, quod inscnbitur Clavicula & Apertorium in quo omnia quse 
in opere Alchimise requiruntur, vemust^ declarantur, & sine quo, ut ipse 
testatur Lullius, alij sui Libri intelligi nequeunt. 

Opuscula studiosis artis secretissimae, ut summi necessaria, ita lectu 
iucundissima. 

Opera Danielis Brouchuisii artium & Medicinae Doctoris. 

Cum Praefatione D. loannis Heumij. 

Editio Tertia. 
Lugduni Batavorum, Ex Officini Thomae Basson. cId.Id.cxii. 

8®. Pp. 71 [i blank]. Folding plate of a furnace. 

An edition. Coloniae, 1579, 4to, is mentioned by Daniel van Broekhuizen, is spoken of as a re- 

Schmieder {Geschichte der Alchemie, 1832, p. 139), nowned physician of the sixteenth century, and 

and by Kopp (Die Alchemie, 1886, ii. 357) from Nfan- that is all that is said of him by Van der Aa, Bio- 

^et, Bibliotheca Scriptorum Medicorum^ 1731, I. ^aphisch Woordendaeck der Neder/anden, iSS$, 11. 

1. p. 479. lii. p. 1366. 

128 

BRi/CKMANN-^BRUGNA TELLE 

BRUCKMANN (Franz Ernst). 
Francisci Em. Bruckmanni Med. Doct. &c. Epistola Itineraria xiii. De 
Lapidibus Odoratis ad Virum Excellendssimum, Consultissimum atque Doo- 
tissimum Dominum, Dominum Andrea. El. Buchnerum, Med. Doct et Plot 
Ord. celeberrimum et practicum Erfordiensem felicissimum, amicum omni 
honoris et amoris genere prosequendum. WolfTenbuttelae, Anno Christ! 
MDCCXXIX. 

4^ Sig. A [=pp. 8]. 

Francis! Emesti Bruckmanni, D. Epistola Itineraria xlv. Sistens Concreta 
Salina et Sulphurea Musei Metallic! Autoris ad Virum Nobilissimum atque 
Doctissimum Dominum Dominum Johann. Heinr. Hampe, Medicum 
Londinensium Celeberrimum. Cum Fig. ^neis. WolffenbutteUe. 

MDCCXXXV. 

4^. Sigs. A-B in fours [=pp. i6]. 2 folding plates. 

Frandsci Emesti Bmckmanni, D. Epistola Itineraria ucxxiii. Museum 
Metallicum Autoris exhibens, ad Vimm Praenobilissimum, Eximium atque 
Doctissimum, Dominum Dominum loh. Henric. Hampe, Med. Doct 
Expertissimum, Regis Majest. Principis de Galles Personae Medicum 
Ordinar. Soc. Reg. Anglic. Lond. Colleg. Celeberr. Magnum Londini 
iEsculapium, Ingensque Magnse Britannise Literatae Decus, Maecenatem 
summum, fautorem atque amicum perpetuo Honoris cultu prosequendum. 
Cum Fig. ^neis. Wolffenbuttelae, MDCCXXXIX. 

4**. Pp. I a. I engraved plate. 

Brtickmann, bom 27 Sept., 1697, at Marienthal 
near Hdmstftdt, was physician at Brunswick and 
Wolfenbttttel, assessor of the Collegrium Medicum 
Brunsv., and Member of the Berlin Academy. He 
was received into the Leopoldine Academy, 8 
May, 1725, and published numerous works on 
mineralogy, etc. Among these was a revised 
edition of Leupold's Prodromus Bibliothtca Meial- 
licat^ Wolflfenbttttel, 1732, 8®, which is 'a good 

Gtlehrt, Zeitungen, 1729, p. 757 (notice of the 
Bibliotheca Metallica), 

BUchner, Historia Academia Natura Curio- 
sorum, 1755, P- 497» No. 378. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Botanica, 1772, ii. p. 162. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Chirurgica, 1775, ii. p. 122. 

guide to the literature at that time, and an editioo 
of Marbodaeus' De Lapidibus Pnetiosis Btukiridiom, 
WolffenbQttel, 1740, 4"*. {See M akbodakus). 

The Epistola Itineraria in three hundred num- 
bers appeared between 1728-1753. T*^ '"«* 
afterwards collected in six volumes, with title- 
pages. A list of those referring to mineralogy, etc., 
is contained in Leupold's Prodromus above men- 
tioned, p. 37. He died 25 March, 1753. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Anaiomica^ i777> ii< P^ s^x* 
Eloy, Dictionnaire Historique de la Midecine^ 

1778, i. p. 460. 
Hirsch, Biographisches Lexicon der kervorragem' 

den Aertte alJer Zeiten und VSlker^ 1884, i. p. 594 

(article by Max Salomon). 

BRUGNATELLI (LuiGi Vicenzo). 

Elementi di Chimica appogiati alle piu' recenti scoperte chimiche e fiEuma 
ceutiche di L. Brugnatelli M. D. Sostituito alle Cattedre di Chimica e 
Mat. Med. nella R. I. Universita* di Pavia. Membro deir Ace. Elet d 
Magonza in Erfurt, Delia R. Accad. delle Sc. di Gottinga, Dei Curiosi della 
Nat. di Berlino, Della Leopoldino-Carolina, De' Curiosi della Nat di 
Germania, Dell* Accad. d' Agricoltura di Udine, Delia Societa' Medico- 
Chirurgica di Bruxelles, Dell* Accad. delle Sc. e di Quella d' Agricolt. di 
Torino, di Mantova, di Fossano, Dei Georgofili di Firenze, Della Soc. Patriot 
di Milano ec. Tom. i. 1795- P^tvia p^esso Baldassare Comina Con 

Privilegio. 

8**. Tomo i. Pp. [xix. i] 356. Vocabolario 108. 7 engraved plates. Wants 
pp. ix.-xii. Tomo ii., 1796. Pp. 255 [i blank]. 

BRUGNA TELLI^BUCHOLZ 

129 

BRUGNATELLI (LuiGi Vincenzo). Continued, 

This work paaaed through several editions. 
Luigi Vincenzo Bnignatelli, who has been con- 
fosed with his son Gaspard (compare the notice in 
the NoMvelle Bie^grapkU GhUraU and Oettin^^er), 
was bom at Pavia in 1761. He studied Medicine 
and graduated in 1784, but took greatest interest in 
Chemistry, was assistant to Scopoli and Brusati at 
Fsvia, and became professor in 1796. He was a 
laborious chemist and mdeavoured to extend the 

Gmelin, Gesckichte der Chemie, 179^, iii. p. 309 ; 

E. 467-8 (papers); p. 628 ('Annah di chimia,' 
▼ia, 1790, etc) ; p. 666 (new nomenclature 
and synonyms). 

The Philosophical Magaxine, ed. Tilloch, 1819, 
liil, pp. 521-396. 
QuArard, La France Littiraire^ 1838, i. p. 534. 

study of the science in Italy. He inaugurated a 
number of journals, and tned to make a special 
nomenclature pass into use in the science He 
wrote numerous papers, and was the discoverer of 
suberic acid and alloxan. His treatise on urinary 
calculi was edited by his son Gaspard, Pavia, 181^, 
who also wrote a notice of his life and a list of his 
papers in the GiomaU de Fissca, ad. decade, 1818, 
1. p. 405. He died in August, 1818. 

Dezeimeris, DicHonnaire Historique de la Mide- 
cine^ 1831, I. ii. p. 54a 

Phillippe ft Ludwig, GeschichU der Apoiheker, 

1855. PP- 712. 879. 

Nouvellt Biographic Ginirale, 1863, viL col. ^8a. 

Poggendorff, Biographisch-literarisches Hand* 
wdrterouch^ 1863, i. coL 316. 

Oettinger, Moniteur des dates, 1869, p. 131. 

BRUMBEY (Carl Christian), Respandens. 
Disputatio. ^ 

See BERGEN (carl august VON), 1 742. 

BRUMMET (Christoph). 
Tractatlein vom Blut der Natur. 

See KUNCKEL VON lowenstern 0<>h^^^)> V* Curiose Chymische Tractatlein, 
1721, p. 489. 

This is quite diflferent from a tract of the same p. 34) refers to an edition, Wittenberg, 1678, 8". 
name entered under schwartzfus (anonymus 5^^ grummet (christoph). 
VON). Roth-Sdioltz {Biblicthtca ChenUca, 1727. 

BRUNNEN DER WEISHEIT. 

See SCHWARTZFUS (ANONYMUS VON). 

BUCH (Das) Amor Proximi, 

See AMOR Proximi. 

In ihft Beylrag xur Geschichte der hdhem Chemie, edition" of that of 1746. Ladrague quotes the 
17^5* P: 6^* ^Q edition of Frankfurt, 1783, 8**, latter only, Bibliothique Ouvarqf, Sciences Secrites, 
is mentioned, " no new work, but an improved 1870, No. 1463. 

BUCH (Das) von den Anfangen der Natur und Chymischen Kunst. 

See SCHRODER (f. j. w.X Neue Alchymistische Bibliothek, 1772, I. ii. p. 237. 

Schrbder sajrs this anonymous work comes from aliquot chemici singmlares^ Geismariae, 1647. It is 
the same collection as that from which the tract mentioned by Ladrague, Bibliothique (htvarvft 
by Ferrarius is taken, namely Combach's Tractatus Sciences Secrites, 1870, No. 1506. 

BUCK (Das) Chymia, welches beschreibt den Tractat des hochsten weges der 
Philosophise. 
See TANCRE (JOACHIM), Promptuarium Alchymiae, Ander Buch, 1614, p. 69. 

BUCH (Das) der drei Worter. 
See KALID. 

BUCH (Das) von der Kunst Chymia eines ungewissen Autors. 
See ARTE (De) Chyinica Liber incerti autoris. 

BUCHOLZ (WiLHELM Heinrich Sebastian). 
Ueber die Essignaphthe. 

See ALLCEMEIN nutzliches chemisch-physikalisches Mancherlei, 1781, i. p. 205. 

ijo 

BUCHOLZ'-BUDDEUS 

BUCHOLZ (WiLHELM HuNRicH Sebastian). CmUimud. 

of the Academia Natone Cnrioioniiii. 

Rocfaoh was bom at Bcmburf . 23 Dec. 1734, 
studied pliaraiacy at Mafpteborg. practmd as a 
pharmacist in vanons places, and nnally at Weimar, 
wbere be lived for seven yeors^ During that time 
he komcd chemistrx. and having resolved to 
become a physician, went in 1761 to Jena, vkhere 
be won his degree in twx> years. He returned to 
Weimar, opened a dispensary, practised medicine, 
and became the physician of the reigning prince 
and * Bergrath.* In 1769 be was elected a member 

HaOer. BiMioiktca BoiamUa, 177a. iL p. 604. 
HaUer. BMutiktca Ckirmrgica, 1775. ''^ PP^ 5^ 

He died 
at Weimar. 16 Dec. 1798. 

Buchols was a kamed. diligent, and energetic 
man, and made many cootributioos to the men- 
ture of medicine, chemistry, and phamuM^. He 
translated works from luiglish, French, and 
Italian, and published numerous papers on 
chemistry, mineralogy, pharmacy, mineral watrrs, 
etc. in' the journals and the proceedings of 

^ 

[eusel. Das GtUkrU Temtxklamd^ oJer Uxihm 
dtrkizt Uitmdtm T^txkem Sckri/isieUer^ Lemgo. 
1796. i. ppi 478^1. 

Gmdin. GtxkickU der CkemtU^ 1799, ">• /xn'fli. 

Fuchs. Rtferlorimm, i8ofro6, pL 353 ft pmsdwt, 

Biiij^/JkU M/Juale, I'arts. Fan^ooclDe (i8ao- 
25). iiu PL 33. 

PoggendodT. Biagrapkuck-iiterarisckes Htmi- 
w^rtaiauJk, 1863. i. coL 328. 

BUDDEUS ( JoHANN FranzX J^us. 
Q.D.B.V. Quaestionem Politicam an Alchimistae sint in Republica tolerandi? 
Rectore Magnificentissimo^ Screnissimo Prindpe ac Domino, Dn. Friderico 
Wilhelmo Regni Borussici, Electoratusque Brandenburgid Herede^ et Rdi- 
qua. Praeside la Francisco Buddeo, P.P.h.t Academiae Pro-Rectoie Ad 
Diem lunii A. M.IX^C.II. Pro Summis in Philosophia Honoribus rite 
obtinendis edtsseret Carolus Theophilus Sdilitte, Halberstadiensis. Halae 
Magdeburgicae, Uteris Christiani Henckelii» Acad. Typ. 

4'. Pp.86[aJ 

plate. 

Herm Jo. Franc Buddei SS. Th.D. mid Prof. Publ. Ord. Hodi-FQrsd. 
Sachsen-Hildburghausischen HochTerdienten Kirdien-Raths &c Historisdi- 
und Politisi'he ITntersuchung von der Alchemie, und was davon zu balten 
sey? aus dein l^ateinischen ins Teutsche iibersetzet. Nun aber mm 
Druck U'fonlort durv^h Fricderich Roth-Scholtzen, Herrenstadio Silesium. 
Niirnlicrg, Adum Jonathan Felfseckar, An. 1733. 

8*. !>. 146k a plates^ 

This has tK>ru ir^^riutrtl from Roth-Scholtx's Dntfukes Tktatrmm CMemdcwm. It 
is a Imiwlaiiun o(f the (hwtiUi^^ thesis. 

Historisch- und Politischc Untersuchung von der Alchemie. 

S^ KOTH-SCHOI.TZ ^rKlKl^KKiCHX l^eutsches Thcatrum Chemicimi, 17281 i. p. i. 

Uuddeus was bora at Anklam in IVMneraaia. 95 
June. it<7. showed givat ability at au varW age. 
and beKve be went to the Universitv of >\ ittem- 
berg in iN¥5. was already well slLilleiH in Hebrew. 
Chakke and Syriac. Having taken the degree of 
Master in 1M7 with great distincticcw he was 
associated to the fiscuItY of l^Oosophy in iNk^ and 
shortly after went to lena. In lOiU lie became 
pru^esnr of Greek and Latin at Ccburg. in i«i93 
of Ethks and l\}|]tics at the newly* 

WUbivlra. 1710. iv. pk N|i : 171^^ vi, 

pfk M-lQOk 

Ja Caspk ZettBBKT. lYAr Pn^tmum . . . m'i« 
... ."f kiMvanix /4Mf%st ... njnmm/ ... leoiX^, 
1711. pfk i7^-i»y 

Niccron, J/mm/ttt. 1733, jlxl p^ 3^55- 

Chanlepi^. .V«Mre«mi ZVcnV.'MVirtnr msfvritfmf tt 
a^ih^fmf, i7«\ iL ^letter BK pp^ 4100^7 >• 

Fktiikl, A«M«r^<SMje. 1753^ "^ *^ F^ 4^ 

founded University of Halle, and in 1705 ictmued 
to Jena as professor of Theotogy. He 
the' cekbrity of that UniTerstty by his 
carried 00 a large oorrespoodence. recciied the 
visits of strangers who desired to oMet hiai. and 
yet Rwnd time to write a great nrnnhnr of worics 
and dissertations. He died 9 November. 1739. 
at Gocha. of a slight cold whidi he negkcled and 
which ended in pDeumonia. 

StytK^ SMr Oex.ki^Au der kifJkerm CJkemie, 1765, 

Jcoannes GQnther. Z-tfAnudunm dtr Pnfesamrm 
drr L 'mrwrsifM /tfna jnT 1558 iar 1853. }«■, 185!. 

l\»eedortf. 

firaf*?i»4, 186?. L coL 

wtfrpt 

\frpr*'^m»:*, ii»t. l cot jjw. 
Ladrague. IwiudkifmeUmayfi SncacDSarrMB. 
i$?o. No. 549. 
Kop^ l\f Akiktwuf. 1886. L p. Ml. 

bOcking—burggra V 

131 

BUCKING (JoHANN Justus), Respandens. 

See UNSIUS (PAULUS). 

BUONVICINO (Benedetto). 
Analyse des piindpales E^ux Min^rales de la Savoie Par Mr. Le Docteur 
fionvoisin. 

4". Pp. 419-454. Extracted from the Miwtoires of the Turin Academy, 1784-85, 
voL ii. 

De la Pierre Hydrophane du Pigment Par Mr. Le Docteur Bonvoisin. 

4*. Pp. 475-497. From the Miwunrts of the Turin Academy, 1784-85, vol L 

Boonvidno or Bonvoisin was a doctor of Medi- which he communicated to the Academy. The 

doe. in practice 9X Turin, and a member of dates of his birth and death are not recorded, but 

tbe Academy of Sciences. He engaged in the he lived at the end of the eighteenth and beginning 

loalysis and examination of minerals, the results of of the nineteenth centuries. 

Reoss, Repertorium Comwuntatiimvm, 1803, pp. 
57. 107, HI, 116. 139, 141. 
Qoterd. La France LitUrairet i8a8, i. p. 566. 
A. C P. CaUisen, Medicinisches SchAftsleller' 

BURGGRAV (Johann Ernst). 

See CLODIUS (BALDUINUS). 

Bmggrav wrote a number of alchemical books :— 
Balneum Dianse, Magnetica Prisoonim Philoso- 
pborum CLavis, Lugd. Bat., i6oa 
Alezipbarmacum. 
De electro Philosopborum magico phisico. 

Borel, BihHoikica Ckimiea, 1654, p. 53. 

RoCh-Scholts, BUHotheca CAemica, 1737, p. 36. 

Eloy, DicHoHHoire Historiqme de la Midecine, 
1778, 1. p. 485. In this article (p. 486), Eloy 
indttdes a notice of J. P. Burggrav the younger. 

Ltxiccn der Jetxt lebenden Aertie^ Copenhagen, 
1830, iiu p. 324 (lists of his works). 

Poggendorif, Biograpkisck-liierarisckes Hand" 
wdrterbuch, 1863, i. col. 342. 

Biolychnium, & cura Morborum magnetica ex 
Paracelsi Mumia, Franckerae, 161 1, 8**. 

Achilles redivivus, Amstelcxl., 161 a, 8**. 

Biolychnium, seu Lampas vitae & mortis, Lugd. 
Bat, x6io, 8°; Francof., 1630^ la**. 

Libellus de Oleis. 

Gmelin, GeschickU der CkewUe, 1797, i. pp. 393, 
5ao. 

Sudhoff, BihHographia Paracelsica, 1894, pp. 
493, 494, 543, 544 (for the • Biolychnium *), 564 (for 
Qodius' work). 

BURGGRAV (Johann Philip). 

De doctis & nobilibus Empirids, Vorrede. 

See KUNCKEL VON LOWENSTERN (jOHANN), V. CuHose Chymischc Tractatleiiu 
1 72 1. 

J. P. Burggrav, the elder, was bom at Darm- 
stadt, 19 Feb., 1673, studied medicine at Giessen, 
Jena and Leyden, graduated 1694. resided in 
Darmstadt, and went to Franckfurt in 1706, and 
lived there for the rest of his life. He died in 
1746k He wrote some Medical Dissertations. 

His son, John Philip Buiggrav, the younger, 
was bom at Darmstadt, x Sept.. 170a At 18 
be began his studies and finisned at Halle, but 
graduated at Lejrden in 1790, when be returned to 
Fiaokfiirt. Here he remained engaged in practice. 

BOdiner, Acadeimae . . • Naturae Curwsorum, 
Hisioria, 175c, p. 509. Na 514. 

HaOer, BthhatMeca Boianiea, 1773, ii. p. 365 
(refers to Burggrav the younger, speaks of him as 
an old friend, and the Ltxicon Medicum as a work 
constructed on a vast scale, whidi however never 
got beyond B). 

HaUer^ Btbliotkeca Anaiomica, 1774, i. p. 374. 
(He ascribes the Biolychnium to J. Phil. Burggrav.) 

Haller, Biblioikeca Chirurjgica, \T7S* ii* P- 'S^* 

Strieder, Grundlage nt einer HesHscken GeUhr- 
ten rnnd Sckriftstelter Gesckickte, 1783, ii. p. 76. 

He died in 1775. He was author of a good many 
works, some of them of considerable magnitude. 

The present preface is not mentioned under 
their names, but as far as dates, etc. , are cofltemed, 
it mig[ht be by either : in the case of the younger 
man it would be a very early production, in the 
case of the elder it would belong to his mature 
period. 

Presumably it was Burggrav, the younger, who 
was received into the I^poldine Academy, 33 
Tune, 1741. Had it been the elder, BQchner would 
have probably recorded the date of his death. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Medicinm practicm, 1788, iv. 
p. 307 (refers to the elder). 
Gmelin, GesckUkte der ChenUe^ 1798. ii. pp. 167, 

437. 78s. 788. 

Reuss, Repertorium Commentationum^ ' Chemia* 
i8(^, p. 147 (quotes only Burggrav the younger). 

Bi(^apkU Medicate, Paris, Panckoucke, n.d., 
iii. p. 86 (gives an account of both). 

Poggendorif. Bu^apkisch-literarisches Hand- 
wSrterbuch, 1863, i. col 346 (also quotes only 
Burggrav the younger). 

132 BURGHART-^BURMAN 

BURGHART (Gottfried Heinrich). 

Zum allgemeinen Gebrauch Wohleingerichtete Desdllier-Kunst, welche in dem 
ersten Theil von Ab- und Eintheilung, Werckzeugen, allgemeinen Arbeiten 
und allem dem was diese Kunst iiberhaupt angehet, gnugsame Nachricht 
giebet; In dem andem Theil aber in bey nahe zweyhundert Processen, 
die Bereitung verschiedener destillirter Wasser, Brandteweine, Aqua vitae, 
Ros-solis, fiuchtiger-saurer-mineralischer Geister, Oele, Essenzen, Extracte 
und andrer truckner Chemischen Artzneyen deutlich vortraget; Und 
endlich in dem dritten Theile in viertzig Processen voni Einmachen 
mit Zucker und andern dahin gehorigen Confitur-Kiinsten, einigen Unterricht 
mittheilet: Nicht nur den Aertzten, Wund-Aertzten und Apotheckern, 
sondem auch Weinbrennem imd Destillatoribus, ingleichen Hauls-Vatem 
und andem Liebhabem dieser WissenschafTt, zu besondem Nutzen und 
Gebrauch aufgesetzet von D. Gottfried Heinrich Burghart, Med. Pract 
zu Brefslau. Mit KupfTern und einem hinlanglichen Register. Brefslau 

Bey Johann Jacob Korn. 1736. 

8". Pp. [16] [6] 40a [36]. Title red and black. 6 plates. 

Burghardt was bom in 1705 at Reichenbach. appeared the present work, and subsequent editions 

He was sent at the age of 20 to an apothecary in of it enumerated are : 1747 ; 1748 ; with additions, 

Friedland for chemical manipulation, studied medi- 1754 ; with additions b^ J. Chn. Wi^leb, 178a 

cine, graduated in 1730 at Frankfurt on the Oder, In 1736 he began a collection of scientific And 

and travelled a great deal He practised in Breslau, medical obser\'ations entiUed Medicorum SUesta- 

wrote papers on medical and surgical topics, and corum satura, which was continued Co 174^ in 

afterwards in 1743 was a teacher of mathematics eight parts, and contains papers on mioMferal 

and physics at the Roval College of Brieg. waters, salts, etc. , etc He also published obser- 

In 1736 he publisned Iter Sabt^hicum, or ex- vations on Seignette salt, Breslau, 1749. 8**. He 

cursions on the Zothenberg, in which he describes seems to have had some belief in transmatation. 

certain plants growing there. In the same year He died at Breslau in 1776. 

Hirsching, Versuch pkysicalisck-cktmischer Fuchs, Repertorium der chemischen LiUerahtr^ 

Lthrbegriffie^ i754i P- I4* 1806^08, p. Tibo. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Botanica^ ^T7% "• P/ 3^* Bic^aphie MiJicaU^ Paris, Panckoucke (1820- 

Haller, Bibliotheca Chirurgica^ ^77 S» "• P* '93 25), in. p. 87. 
(surgical papers). PoggendcMrff, Biographisch-literarisches Hofut- 

Baumer, Bibliotheca Chemica^ 1782, p. 112. uoorteHuch, 1863, i. col. 346. 

Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemie, 1797, ii. pp. 362, 
37O1 485. 595. 773. 775 \ 1799. '^ P- 16. 

BURLEIN (Jacob). 
Disputatio Medica de pemicioso Paracelsistarum Hoplochrismate. 

See THEATRUM SYMPATHETICUM, 1 662, p. 624. 

Haller quotes a dissertation, de feminis ex Jac. Burli'n, possibly the same person. Bibliotheca 
mensium suppressione barbatis, Altd. 1664, 4^, by Medicime practiae, 1779, i"« P* ^54* 

BURMAN (Charles). 
The Lives of those Eminent Antiquaries Elias Ashmole, Esquire, and Mr. 
William Lilly, written by themselves; containing, first, William Lilly's 
History of his Life and Times, with Notes, by Mr. Ashmole: Secondly, 
Lilly's Life and Death of Charles the First: And Lastly, the Life of 
Elias Ashmole, Esquire. By Way of Diary. With several occasional 
Letters, By Charles Burman, Esquire. London : Printed for T. Davies, 

in Russel-Street, Covent Garden. MDCCLXXIV. 

8**. Pp. (7) [i blank] 399 [xj. Portraits of Lilly and Ashmole. 

Ashmole's diary contained in this Tolume was 1715, with notes and continuation by Ashmole 
published in 1717 (B. M. 615, an); Lilly^s in (B. M. 1418, a 16), and other editions followed. 

burnet-^bvrrhus 

133 

BURNET (Duncan). 
latrochymicus, siue de Prseparatione et Compositione Medicamentorum 
Chymiconim artificiosa Tractatus Duncani Bometti Scod: In quo 
methodice, perspicue ac breviter, quidquid ad latrochymica pertinet, 
Candidads Medicinae ac Philosophise interioris aperitur. Studio ac Opera 
loannb Danielis Mylii, Wetterano Hassi Medicinas Hippocratioc & 
Chymicae Candidati nunc primum in lucem editus. Francofurti Typis 
Nicolai HofTmanni Sumpdbus Lucas lennis. M.DC.XVI. 

4*. Pp. [la] ii5[i blank^ With the auto^^raph of ** Johann liaptista Grofschedl." 
Prefixed Uiere is a poem to Burnet by Raphael EpUnus {sic for Kglinus) Iconius (^.r.). 

[Tractat von Zubereitung vnnd rechteni Gebrauch der Chymischen Medica- 
menten.] 

8**. Pp. 319 [i blank]. TiUe wanting. 

The title-page of the German translation b^ns : 

Tjrocinium Ch3rmicum, das ist : Von Zubemtung vnd Composition der Chy- 
mischen Medicamenten ein aufsf&hrUcher vnnd tremicber Tractat . . . Franckfurt, 
1618. 

Van der Linden quotes the 1616 edition, " editus 
studio Joan. Dan. Mylii." Mercklin besides the 
preceding mentions another: Francof. typis 
Kempfferi, 1631, in 4. Hendrdch quotes both the 
Utin editions and the German translation. Haller 
b the Bibliotheca Botanica calls him Duncan 
ftimet, and mentions the edition Francof. 1616, 
foL {sU\ But in the Bibliotheca AfedicimE 
pracHcm^ he says : — Duncani Bometi latro chemicus 
s. de praeparatione . . . medicamentorum, ed. 
altera studio J. Dan. Mylii Francof. 1616. 4^ 
LnccaBk 1631, 4*. and (also by Burnet) : — Tjrro- 
dniura chemicimi Francof. 1618, 8". This last is 

Van der Linden, De Scriptis medicis libri due, 

>637, p. 138. 

Mercklin, Lindemus renovatus, 1686, p. au. 

Hendreicli, Pandecta Brandenburgica^ 1099, p. 
664, 

Roth-Scboltz, Bihliotheca CkewUca^ lyvj^ p. 31. 

BURRHUS (JosEPHUS Franciscus). 

See BORRI (GIOSEPPE FRANCESCO). 

the German translation. So far as I am aware 
the word •altera' in the preceding title is an 
insertion of Haller's own. The word does not 
occur in the title of the 1616 edition, and possibly 
Haller copying the title from Van der Linclen, and 
considering that the book was edited by Mylius, 
may have thought that a previous edition had been 
printed by the author himself, or he may have 
meant the word to apply to the edition of 163 1 
only. Anyhow Mylius own statement is plain 
enough. 
Gmelin copying Haller makes the same mistake. 

Manget, Bibliotheca Scriptorum Medicorum^ 
1751, I. i. p. 371. 
Haller, Bibliotheca Botanica, 1771, 1. p. 42a 
Haller, Bibliotheca htedicince practicm^ ^777* ii* 

P- 455- 
Gmelin, Geschichie der Chemie, 1797, 1. p. 520. 

134 C. (C.>~C {k. M.) 

C. (C), L., Le, Conrad Cunrath, Lipsensis. 

See KHUNRATH (CONRAD). 

C. (E.), D.M, 
Ueber allgemeine Arzneien. 

See MAGAZIN ftir die hdhere Naturwisscnschaft und Chemie, 1784, i. p. 291. 
I assume that the author's initials are E. C, and that D. M. denote Doctor Medidnae. 

C* G* H. 

See H. (c. c). 

C. (H. D.). 
Wahrhafiter und in der Natur g^riindeter Bericht von der Generation und 
Regeneration der Metallen zu dem 2 nach dem tnickenen Weg, auf Danielis 
Georgii Morhofii Epbtel an Joelem Langelottum, durch H. d. C. 
MDCCXVI. 

8**. Pp. 15 [i blank]. Without place and printer. 

Wahrhaifter und in der Natur gegrundeter Bericht von der Generation und 
Regeneration der Metallen . . . auf Danielis Georgii Morhofii Epistel an 
Joelem Langelottum durch H. d. C MDCCXVI. 
See ROTH-SCHOLTZ (friederich), Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum, 1728, i. p. 331. 

C (J.)i Chymierastes. 

Das Geheimnifs der hermetischen Philosophie. [Sendbrief an] Den Lieb- 
habem der Hermetischen Philosophie. 
See CHYMISCHES Lust-Gartlein, 1747, p. 80. 

C. (J. E.). 

See BROKER (LAZARUS), 1736. 

C. (L.), Le. Combach (Ludwig). 

See SCHRODER (r. J. W.X Neuc Alchymistische Bibliothek, 1772, I. ii. p. 159. 

C. (P.). 

Georg Phaedronis • . • Arcana. 

See TENTZEL (ANDREAS), Chymisch-Spagyrischc Artzney-Kunst, 1736. 

C. (R. H.). 

See HOLLANDUS (iSAAC), Curieuse und rare Chyinische Operationes, 1714. 

C K M. V. S.—CABALA 

135 

C V. M. V, S. 

See PRAcnCA Leonis Viridis, 1619^ 

C. (W.), i>. Cooper (William). 

See PHILALBTHA (EYRiCNEUSX Sccrets Reveal'd, 1669. 

Of WiUiam Cooper, bookseller at the Pelican in 
Little Britain in tbe latter half of the seventeenth 
century, I have found no biogiaphical notice. All 
tbat one can infer is that he was devoted to 
Akbemy. wrote on it, translated treatises dealing 
with it, edited collections of tracts upon it, and 
made tbe publication and sale of books about it a 
specialty of his business. But indraendentlv of 
toe commercial side of the question, be roust have 
been himsHf a keen collector of Fjiglish treatises 
in the first instance, but without ne^ecting those 
m other languages, for he tells us that he not only 
had most of the Einglish books for sale, but many 
of those enumerated by Bord. 

Among the books edited and published by him 
there are the following : 

Philaletha, Secrets Reveal'd, 1669. 

The Philosophical Epitaph. 1673. 

A Catalogue of Chymicai Books, 1675. 

Ripley Reviv'd, 1678. 

Aurifontina Chymica. i68a 

Collectanea Chjrmica, 1684. 

Geber's Works, 1686. 

Wm. Simpson, Zjrmologia Physica [1670]. 

The Catalogue was issued t^ itself in a thin 
pamphlet in 1675, no^ P<4C^* ^^^ i^ appeared also 
alon^ with the Pkilosopkical Epitaph of 1675. It 
consists of English books solely, and it may con- 
tain some five or six hundred entries on a rough 
calculation. 

Besides it, Cooper issued other lists, appended 
to his various publications, and as these appeared 
at later dates, they sometimes contain books which 
could not be in the original Catalogue. To do 
iustice, therefore, to Cooper's knowledge of the 
literature one must include these lists as supple- 
mental to the Catalogue. Making necessary 
allowances for the period, the Catalogue is very 
well done, and is an advance in detail and precise 
information on Borel's BibUotkeca, 

CABiEUS (NicoLAUs). 

See CABEUS (NICOLAUS). 

CABALA Chymica. 

See KiESER (franz), 1606. 

See GRASSHOFF Oohann), Aperta Area Arcani Artificiossiini, 1687, p. 117. 

See GRASSHOFF (johann), Philosophia Salomonis, 1753, P* 102. 

This tract with its illustration is included of 
course in the reprint of GrasshofTs bool^ by Manget 
and in the Theatrum Ckemicum, 

A work entitled Cahbala Cfwmica ab Anonymo 
fuodam compilata, Harob., x6&|, 8**, is mentioned 
ID the Be^trag, 1785. p. 6^, but I do not know 
whether it hu any connection with the above or 
not Lenglet Dufresnoy {Histoire dt la PkilosopkU 

HemUtique^ 174a, iii. p. 342) speaks of Cabala 
Chymica, Hambiu'gi. 1680, 8**. It may be an 
earlier edition, but I have no means of deciding the 
question. Borrichius. who also quotes the 1680 
edition {Conspectus Scriptorum Chemicorum, 1697, 
p. 40, No. LXiii.), says it is more use^ for 
advanced students than for beginners. 

CABALA, Spiegel der Kunst vnd Natur: in Alchimia. Was der Weisen vralte 
Stein, doch fiir ein ding sey, der, da dreyfach, vnd nur ein Stein ist Welches 
alien miiheseligen liebhabeni der Kunst zu Ehren, mit hilflf Gottes, so klar 
als ein Spiegel fiirgestelt : Dauon vil bifshero geschrieben, aber wenigen 
bekandt Gantz offenbar mit kurtzen worten, der gantzen Warheit, durch 
dise beyligende Figuren, erklart, vnd an tag gegeben. Durch einen vnbe- 
kandten, doch genandten, wie jhm das Signet in diser ersten Figur zeugknuis 
gibt Gedruckt zu Augspurg, bey Dauid Francken, in verlegung Steffan 
Michelspachers aufs Tyroll. 1616. 

4*. Signatures A, B in fours. B4 is blank. Four engraved symbolical plates. 

Cabala, Spiegel der Kunst- und Natur: in Alchymia. Was der Weisen 
vralte Stein, doch fiir ein ding sey, der, da dreyfach, und nur ein Stein ist. 
Welches allem miiheseligen Liebhabem der Kunst zu Ehren, mit Hiilff 
Gottes, so klar ab ein Spiegel fiirgestelt: Davon vil bifshero geschrieben, 
aber wenigen bekand. Gantz offenbar mit kurtzen Worten, der gantzen 

136 

CABALA- CABEUS 

CABALA. Continued. 

Warheit, durch dise beyligende Figuren, erklart, vnd an Tag gcgeben. 
Durch einen unbekandten, doch genannten, wie ihm das Signet in diser 
ersten Figur Zeugnufs gibt [Vignette.] Gedruckt zu Augspuig, bey 
Johann Schultes, in Verlegung Job : Web Bucbhandler. 1663. 

4^ Signatures A-B3 in fours. B4 (blank?) is wanting. Four engraved sjrmboUcal plates^ 

Kopp quotes as the first edition, one of Augs- 
burg, 161 5, and an edition with a Latin title. 1616, 
which was reprinted without the author's name at 
Leipzig in 1704, and at Augsburg in 1704 and 
1716. In the Ouvaroff Catalogue there is a 
German edition, Leipzig, 1704. Besides the pre- 
sent two editions of 1616 and 1663, there is a thvd, 
Augsburg, 1690, small 4^ I have not seen a Latin 
version. 

Kopp assigns the book to Michelspacher himself. 
His name appears on the first plate as the printer, 
but it seems also to be contained in a monogram 
on the same plate, and it is to this possibly that 
allusion is made in the title. The dedicatory 
epistle to Dr. Johann Remmelin of Ulm is signed 
by SteSan Midielspacher from the Tyrol, in 
course of which he states that the author's name 
is indicated in a 83rmbolical way in the tract. In 
the successive editions the date at the end of this 
epistle is altered to suit the year of publication, so 
that we get the years 1615, 1663, and 1690 as those 
in which Michelspacher wrote the letter. If the 

Van der Linden, De Scriptis MedUis libri duo, 

1637. P- 436. 
Borel, Bibliotheca Chimica^ 1654, p. 213. 

Mercklin. Undtnius renovatus, 1686, p. 983. 

Roth-Scholtz. Bibliotheca Chemica, 1737. p. 36. 

Manget, Bibliotk^a Scriptorum Mahcorum, 
mi, II. i. p. 336. 

Restner, Medicinisches GeUhrUfi'LexicoHt 1740, 
p. 548. 

same plan be followed in the editioiis of 1704 and 
17 16, Michelspacher would thereby be made a few 
years more than a centenarian. 

The plates are identical in three editions I have 
seen. Init each impression is worse than the one 
before iL 

If the above be correct, then the editor or antbor 
is probably identical with Stephan Micfadtpacfaer, 
a physician from the Tjrrol, author of an anatomi- 
caJ work called Pinax microcosmugrapUcmSt s. L 
1615. 4**, with plates, quoted by Van der Linden, 
Mercklin, Manget, and Kestner. 

Fictuld says briefly that the plates contain the 
whole operations, "to the skimil ejre they are 
ravishing ; but to the ignorant only ' Bohemian 
villages/" 

Borel writes the putative author's name Stephanas 
Michel Spacherus, Tirolensis, and quotes the 1616 
edition, but all the other authorities, including the 
owner of the name himself, spells it Michdspacher. 

The only edition mentioned by Gmelin is that 
dated : AugusL VindeL , 1654, 4^ 

Jocher, Allgenuines GeUhritn-Lexicon, 1751, iiL 
col. 521. 

Fictuld, Probier-Slein, 1753, Th. i. p. 6a 

Gmelin, GtschickU der CMemie, 1797. i. p. 624. 

Ladrague. BiblioihiqueOuvart^^iktences Secrites, 
1870, No. 1299. 

Kopp, Die AlcMemie, 1886, ii. p. 33a 

CABEUS (NicoLAUs). 

Pbilosophia Magnetica in qua Magnetis natura penitus explicatur, et omnium 
quae hoc Lapide cemuntur causae proprise afferunter: Nova etiam Pyxis 
construitur, quae propriam Poli Elevationem, cum suo meridiano, vbique 
demonstrat. Auctore Nicolao Cabeo Ferrariensi Soc. Jesu. Ad Ludovicum 
XIII. Galliarum, et Navarrse R^em Christianissimum. Ferrari^ apud 
Franciscum Suecium superiorum permissu. 1629. 

Folio in sixes, pp. [16] 412. Index [12]. Engraved title-page. 

The present work was long subsequent to 
Gilbert's, whose views on certain points he criticises 
and tries to systematize. He was the first to notice 
electrical repulsion. 

For the early history of magnetism the most 
important work is the privately printed volume of 
notes by Prof. Sylvanus P. Thompson, issued with 
the English translation of the work De Magnete of 
Dr. Wniiam Gilbert of Colchester, 1901, small fol. 

There is an edition : Colon. , 1629, folio, of which 
there is a copy in the British Museum. 

Cabcus was born at Ferrara in 1585. at the age 
of 17 joined the Order of the Jesuits, was professor 
of Moral Philosophy and Mathematics at Parma, 
became a preacher in several places in Italy, went 
to Genoa as teacher of Mathematics and died there 
30 June, 165a He wrote also a commentary on 
the ' Meteorologica * of Aristotle. 

Alegambe, Bibliotheca Scriptorum Socieiatis 
Jesu, Antverp., 1643, p. 351. 

Witte, Diarium Biographicum^ 1688, Aaa i verso^ 
30 lune, 1650. 

Jacob Leupolds Prodromus Bibliotheca Afetallica, 

J733. PP- 39-40. 
Morhof, Polyhistor, ijyt, \\. p. 41a 
2^1er, Universal- 1 jexicon, 1733, v. col. 14. 
T5cher, Allgemcincs Gelehrten-Lexicon, 1750, i. 

col. 1532. 

Fischer. Geschichte der Physik, 1802, ii. p. 244. 
& passim. 

Backer, Bibliothkque des Ecrivains de la Com- 
pagnie de Jisus, Li^e, 1853, i"* S^rie, p. 159 (says 
he was born in 1602). 

PoggendOTff, Biographisch'literarisches Hand- 
worterbuch, 1863, i. coL 355. 

Poggendorff, Geschichte der Physik, 1879, p. 286. 

C£SAR—CAMEkARlVS 1 37 

Ci£SAR (Thsophilus). 
Akhhny Sinegel: oder kartz entworffene Practick, der gantzen Chymischen 
Konst: neben Anzeig, welche darzu tiiglich seyen, oder nit: AVas fiir ander 
herzliche treffentliche Kiinsten daher entspringen: Wie der Alten mil 
sdtzamen verdunckelten Reden vnd Wortem hievon beschriebene Biicher 
zaverstehen: Vnd darinnen sonderlich der falschen Alchimisten Betnig 
entdecket wird. Alles in zweyen lustigen Gesprachen verfasset: Vnd 
das erste vor diesem auis dem Arabischen von Roberto Castrensi in LAtein, 
Nun aber sampt dem andem so newlich Lateinisch beschriben worden, 
in vnser Teutsche Sprach vbergesetzt, Durch Theophilum Caesarem August. 
Gednickt zu Franckfiirt am Mayn, in Verlegung Vincentii Steinmeyers. 
MDCXIIL 

8**. Pp. 1x6. Title red and black. 

P. xi6. ColofJum: Gednickt tu Darmbstatt, bey Balthasar Hofmann, in Ver- 
legung Vincentii SteiniBeyers, ini Jahr Christi 1613. 

The prefoce is dated 1597. which points to an (pp. 86-1x6) is an anonymous dialogue "von der 

earlier edition ; Kopp mentions one of i ws, and Kunst Alchimisterey,'* between Chr)'sopliilus and 

adds that the book was often reprinted, but ^ys Theophrastus. On p. 86 is a woodcut of a wnllcd 

nothing of the author. It is in two parts. The city, with the appearance of a battle going on in 

first (pp. I4-85) is a translation of the dialogue, De the clouds abo\'e it ; a common enough niedic\'a1 

trum^igmraHome wutaUorum ascribed to MOKIENUS portent or vision. 

If. v.), translated by Robertus Castrensis ; the second 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire dt la Philosophie Gmelin, Gesckichtt der Chemie, 1797, i. p. 499. 
HerwUtiqui^ 1742, iii. p. xvx Schmieder, Gtschichte der Alchemie^ xSja, p. 33s. 

Beytrag *ur Gtxkickte der hdhem Chemie, X785, Kopp, Die Alchemie, x886, ii. p. 355. 

P-S97. 

CAJETANO (DoMENico M.\nuel). 

See KLETTENBERG OOHANN HEKTOR VON). 

CALCINATIO MetaUorum. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1661, vi. p. 559. 
Strictly this is a section of a tract De Adrop Philosophico, by guido de monte (y.r.). 

CALID. 

See KALID. 

CAMERA RIUS (Eli as). 
Q.D.B.V. Eliae Camerarii, Medic. Doct. & Professoris in Academia Tubing. 
Extraord. Acad. Oes. Leop. N. C. Colleg. d. Hector III. Dissertationes 
Tres, exhibentes 

I. Spirituum animalium statum naturalem, et P.N. occasione experi- 

menti Bellino-Bohniani. 
II. Spiritum D. Boylii fumantem obviaque circa ipsum phenomena. 
III. Usum et abusum potuum Thee et CafTe in his regionibus. 
Praefatio qusedam de Nuckianis Mercurij injectionibus continet Tubingae, 
Impensis Philiberti Brunnii. Typis Joh. Conradi Reisii. Anno MDCXCIV. 

8**. The tracts have separate signatures and pagination : title, dedication, preface, 
and verses, pp. [x6] ; Tract I. pp. 62 ; Tract II. pp. 48 ; Tract III. pp. 6a. Tracts II. 
and III. have been transposed in the binding. 

Camerarius, bom X7 Feb. , X673 (167a), at TUbin- dissertations. In Tubingen he made experiments 

1^, belonged to a family in which the art of heal- with ammonium sulphide, which he calls the 

ing was htfcditar^. He became a distinguished "fuming spirit of Ik>yle," though it was in reality 

professor at TQbingen, phjrsician and councillor known to it not discovered by Beguinus. Albrecht 

of the Duke of \\1irtemberg, a member of the von Haller was one of his students, as he himself 

Academia Naturae Curiosorum from x6^, and tells us. Camerarius died 6 (8) Feb., X734, at 

was the author of numerous medical treatises and Tttbingeo. 

138 

CAMEkARWS-CAMPANELLA 

CAMERARIUS (Elias). Continued. 

See the following for other membeis of the 
family, for Cameranus' own life, and for his works 
and dissertations : 

Roth-Scholt^ BiblioiMeca Chemica^ 1737, p. 36. 

Manget, Biiiioikeca Scriptorum Medicorum, 
1731, 1, it pp. 7-23 (contains reviews of his works 
and a repnnt of his funeral oration by the then 
Rector). 

Jacob Leufolds Prodromus Bibliatkeca MeUUHaB^ 
1732, p. 40 (refers to his " Dissertationes Tauri- 
nenses," Tubing.. 1713, 1717, 8^. 

Acta Pkysico-Medica Ac€uUmuB . . . Naturw 
Curiosontm^ Norimb., 1740, v., Appendix, pp. 169- 
176. 

Kestner, Medicinisches GeUkrUn- Lexicon^ 1740, 
p. 168. 

Idcher, AUgemetMCS GeUhrien'Lexicon^ 175°^ i* 
col. 1C91. 

Bttchner, Academia . . . Naturm Curiosorum 
Historia, 17^, p. 479, No. 19a. 

Portal. Histotrt de t Anatomic etdcla Chirurgic, 
1770, iv. p. 21^ 

Mailer, Bibltothcca Botanica^ 1773, ii. p. 19. 

Haller, BUliotMeca AmUamica, 1774, L p. 748 ; 

1777. M. P- 769- 
Haller, Bibiiothcca Chirurgica^ I774> t P> 538* 
Eloy, Dictiomnaire Histwiquc de la MSJeanCt 

^77^> ». P- 515- 
Haller, Bibisotbeca Medicitut fracticm^ 1768, iv. 

p. oa. 

Gmelin, Gtsckicktc der Ckcmic^ 17981 ii pp. 355, 

638. 763- 
Biographic Midicalc^ Paris, Panckoocke, iii. p^ 

132 (an excellent list of his dissertations). 

Sprengel, Gtsckickte dcr Arzncykundc, 1827, iv. 
p. 406. 

Dexdmeris, Dictionnairc Histcriquc dc la AUdC" 
cine, 1831, I. ii. p. 609. 

Bayle ft Thillaye, Biographic htidicaU, 1855. ii. 
p. 177. 

NouvelU Biographic Giniralc^ 1855, viiL col. 

325- 
uictionnaire Encyclopidiquc dcs Sciences Midi- 

calcs. 1870, xi. P- 778. 

AiUemcinc Deutsche Biographic^ 1876, vL p. 719. 

Billings, Index-Catalogue, 1881, ii. p. 654. 

CAMPANELLA (Thomas). 

Thomas Campanella Ord. Prsed. De Sensu Rerum, & Magia, Libros Quatuor, 
[In quibus Mundum esse vivam Dei Statuam, omn^que illius partes, 
partiiimque particulas Sensu donatas esse, alias clarion, alias obscuriori, 
quantus ipsarum sufficit conseruationi, ac Totius in quo consentiunt, pro- 
batur. Ac Arcanorum naturalium rationes aperiuntur.J 

Correctos & Defensos k stupidorum incolarum Mundi calumniis per 
Argumenta & Testiraonia Diuinorum Codicum, Naturae, sc. ac Scripturae, 
eorumd^mque Interpretum, scilicet, Theologorum & Philosophorum, exceptts 
Atheis.] lure potissimo dedicat consecratque. Parisiis, Apud Ludovicum 
Boullenger, vii lacobaei, sub signo sancti Ludouici, prope sancti Yues. 
M. DC XXXVI. Cum Privilegio R^s. 

4^ Pp. [x6] 92 ; 229 [x blank]. Engraving of Richelieu's arms at the top of the 
title-page. 

Campanella was bom at Stilo in Calabria, 5 
Sept., 1568, became a I>ominican, and won much 
fame as a disputant. He had ^[reat learning, a 
powerful memory, and a lively ims^^ination. and 
strove to start so many new notions m Philosophy 
and Medicine that he was accused of magic, 
atheism, and even treason, was imprisoned in 
Naples in 1599, and continued there for five and 
twenty years, besides being occasionally subjected 
to torture. He was liberated by Urban VI H. in 
1626, went to France in 1634, received a pension, 
and died at Paris, 21st May, 1639. 

His writings were voluminous, many of them 

Joh. Valentin Andrese, Mythologia Christiana, 
1619, p. xa * 

Janus Nicius Erythraeus (Giov. Victor Rossi), 
Ptnacotheca Imaginum illustrium doctrina vel 
ingcnii laude Virorum^ Lipsia;, 1643, i. pp. 41-43 ; 
171a, i. pp. 41-43. 

Crasso, Elogit <f Huomini Lettcrati, Venetia, 
1666, ii. pp. 2^-246, with a portrait 

Toppi, Bibltoteca Napolctana ct Apparato agli 
Huomtni illustri in Icttere di Napolit 1678, p. 293. 

were printed, but a lai^ge number exist or existed 
only in manuscript. 

The present work is dedicated to Cardinal 
Richelieu. It does not deal with Alchemy, but 
describes a kind of cosmology or SF>eculative 
physics, in course of which he tries to prove that 
every thmg is possessed of feeling. He discusses 
the senses, the intdlect, the soul, immortality, 
physiognomy, anima mimdi, the external world, 
sympathy and antipathy, magic. 

First edited by Tobias Adami, it appeared at 
Frankfurt, 1620. 4*^, with a fine engraved title-page. 

Another notable work of his is the 'Civitas 
Solis,' the description of an ideal State. 

Witte, Diarium Biographicum, 1688, Sig. O02 
recto, Ann. 1639. 

Em. Sal. Cyprianus, Vita et PhilosoMa Thorn, 
Campanella, Amstel. , 1705, 8** ; 1722, 8**. 

F'ope-Blount, Ccnsura Celcbrium Autorum^ 1710, 

P- 936. 

Jo. Fabricius, Historiec Bibliotheca Fabriciamt 
Pars///., 1719, p. 470; Pars V„ 1722, p. 434. 

Quetif & Echard, Scriptores Ordinis PreuUca' 
torum, 1721, ii. pp. 505-521. 

CAMPANELLA-CANEPARWS 

159 

CAMPANELLA (Thomas). Coniinued. 

BarcfaoKn, De MedUinm Origimg tt Progmtu 
DisxrtaiwmgSt 1733, Dissert zzi pL 433. 
SloOe, AnUiimmg mmt Hitioru der GeiaJMUii, 

»7a7f pp. 404, 549: 1736, pp. 421, 4M. 5*7. 577. 
753, and Zmjdtse^ pp. 151, 17a. 186. 

Nkeroo, Memotres, 1739, Tii. pp. 67-86 ; 1731, 

X.332. 

3iMriior, Polykisior, 1733, ii p. 341, &c. 

Zedkr, Umivenal-Lexicomt i733> ^' ^o\. 451. 

Kestner, Medicimisckes GtidkrUm-Lexicon, 1740, 
^169. 

Arnold, Kircken' und Ketur-HiskrU^ i74i» 
Th. in. c. viiL { 37 (T. ii. p. 400). 

Vogt, C€tialogms • . . Librorum raricmmt Ed. 
^ot 1747, p. 165. 

QumjEepi^, Nouveau DUtiminaire kistorique^ 
1750. Letter C. p. 34. 

rrertag, AnaUcta UUeraria^ 1750, p. 193. 

col 160X. 

Mor6ri, Le Gramd DutioHnaire kistorique^ 1759, 
ill p. 105. 

Brackar. Historia CHtua PhUosophue, 1766. IV. 
iLp. 107; 1767, vi. p. 834. 

Job. Matth. Schrockb, AMildungen uhJ LtbenS' 
kscAreihtmgen berUhwUer GtUkrUn, Leipz., 1766, 
i«* Sammlaof . a« Edit , pp. 68-79. 

Haller, Bihuoikeca Anaiomica, 1774, i. p. 344. 

EUyjT, DiciUmMairt HiUorique de la Midecitu, 
1778, 1, p. 53a 
Tiederoanii, Gtist der SpeAulaiiven PkilosofkU^ 

1796. V. p. 54a. 

Fiscber, GeschickU der Pkysik, 1801, i. p. 38. 

Tiraboschi. Storia della LeUeratura Italiana^ 
i8i3, viii. p. 164. &C. 

Watt, Bibliotkeca Britannica, 18 19, i. (authors), 
187 V. 

Ersch & Gniber. Allgemeine EncyklopddU^ 
i8a6, XV. p. 30. 

Rixner & Siber. Ijtben und Lekrwuinmngen 
berUhwUer Pkysiker, vl Heft, Sulzbach. 1836. 

Sprengel, Gtsckichie der Artneykunde, 1837, iv. 
p. 36. 

Dexeimeris, Dictionnairt historique de la Mide- 
cine, 1831, 1, ii. p. 6ia 

Grttsae, Lekrhuch einer allgemeinen Litterdr- 
geschickte^ 1853, III. i. pp. 683. 901, 903, 983, 1073 ; 
1853, III. ii. pp. 33a, 671. 

Stttckl, GeschicfUe der Pkilosophie des Mittel- 
alters, 1866, ill. pp. 343-^66. 

Plinjer, GescktchU der ckristlichen Religions- 
pkilosophie seii der Reformation^ 1880, i. p. 75 ; and 
in the iCnglish translation, 1887, p. loi. 

Moris Carriere, Die philosophische Weltan- 
schauung der Rrfonnatifmszeit, 1887, 3* Aufl. 3*' 
Thdl. pp. 315-396. 

CAMPESIUS (Joannes Antonius). 

Directoriuni Summx Summanim Medicinae, ad administrandum divinam 

Medicinam seu Lapidem Philosophorum in aegritudinum curd. 

Sie ULSTAD (PHILIP), Coclum Philosophorum, 1630, pp. 197-230. 

The author is just mentioned by Jdcher {Allge- and consequtintly it does not appear in Gmclin and 

meina Gelehrten-Lexicon, 1750, i. coL 160^), but Schmieder. 

nothing is added to the bare fact that he hved in It w-as known to Borel, Bibliotheca Chimica^ 

the 17th century, and wrote the above book. His 1654, p. 55. 
trut is not quoted by HaHer or Lenglet Dufresnoy, 

CAMPY (David de Planis). 

See PLANIS CAMPY (DAVID DE). 

CANDIDA Phoenix Philosophica oder auffrichtige Beschreibung der Materiae 
Lapidis und des Mercurii Philosophorum, durch die Gleich- und Geheim- 
nufe des Regenwassers. Worbenebenst zugleich die vera principia der 
Hermedschen Philosophise getreulich deut- und klarlich, wie auch die 
Operationes gedachter Materiae und des Subjecti artis, sattsam angezeigt und 
vorgetragen werden. Erster Theil. 

Symbol. Philosophic 
Prece, lectione, meditatione & labore. 
Franckfurt am Mayn, verlegts Christian Hermsdorff. M DC LXXX. 

13®. Erster Thdl, pp. 1-53 ; Anderer Thdl, pp. 53-345. Register, pp. [15]. The 
second' part has a short title, included in the pagination. 

As the Phoenix was an alchemical symbol, the another, Leipzig, 1717, 8°, enumerated in the 

name occurs repeatedly in the literature. See Beytrag zur GeschicAte der kohem Chemie, 1785, 

PHOENIX, and compare Kopp, Die Alchemic, 1886, p. 633, but there is no mention of the author, 
ii. p. 381. Besid» the pre.%nt edition there is 

CANEPARIUS (Petrus Maria). 
De Atramends cuiuscunque generis. Opus sane nouum hactenus k nemine 
promulgatufn in sex Descriptiones digestum. Auctore Petro Maria Canepario 

t*> 

CAltEPARlVS-^CAPtCWS 

CANEPARIUS (Petrus Maria). Continued. 

Cremensi Medico, & Philosopho, Venetiis Medicinam profitenti. Superionim 
pennissu, & Priuilegio. Venetiis, MDCXIX. Apud Euangelistam 

Deuchinum. 

4*. Pp. [i6] 368. Symbolical vignette. 

He is named P. Antonius Caneporius bv Arisius, 
who also says that he flourishea in 1503. which 
seems too early. He was born at Crema, was pro- 
fessor of Medicine at Venice, and published his 
book de Atranuntis, It is not very well arranged 
or %mtten, but it contains a number of observa- 

Borel. Biblioiktca Chimica^ 1654, p. 55. 

Mercklin, Lindenius renovatus, 1086, p. 898. 

Conrin^, In UniversaUm Artem Meaicam . . . 
Introduction 1687, p. 288 (Addit Schelhammeri). 

Arisius, Cremona literata, 1702. ii. p. 29a. 

Johann Heinrich Rudolff, Elementa Amalga- 
mationis, 1712, 4** ; in Roth-Scholtz, Deutxkes 
TMeatrvm Chemicum, mo, ii. p. 463. 

Fabricius, Bibtiographia Antiquaria, Harob. 
1716, p. 627 ; or, Hamb. 1760, p. 961. 

Manget, Bibliotheca Scriptorum Medicorum, 
1731. I. ». P« a6. 

tions on Chemistry and Medicine. Rudolff sajrs 
the first edition was published at Venice in 1598 and 
afterwards at London in x6i8. I have not seen 
these editions. It was reprinted at Venice in i6a^, 
at London in 1642 and 1660, and at Rotterdam m 
1718. Fuchs cites one of Rotterdam. 171 1, 4^ 

Jacob Leupolds Prodromus BiblioiheoB Metals 
lic(B, 1732. p. 41. 

Kestner, Alcdicinisches Gelckrtcn-Lexicon, 1740, 
p. 172. 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoirt dt la Philoso^kU 
Hermitique, 1742, iii. p. 131. 

Jdcher, Allgemeines GeUhrten-Ltxicon^ 1750^ i* 
col. 1622. 

(vmelin, Geschichte der Ckemie, 1797, i. p. 602. 

Fuchs, Repertorium der Chcmiscken Litteratur, 
1806-08, p. 118. 

• Notes on Books of Secrets,' Transactions of tht 
ArcluKol(^cal Society of Glasgow, 1883, iL p. 195. 

CANONES. 
Canones. 

See PHILOSOPHISCHE REGELN odcr Canoncs. 

Canones decern. 

See CLAVES (GASTON DE). 

Quinquaginta septem Canones de Opere Physico. 

See PENOTUS (BERNARD G.). 

In Theatrum CMemicum, 1656, ii. p. 133. 

CANTHIER. 

See JURAIN (abtala). 

CAPELLO (Giovanni Battista). 

Lessico Farmaceutico-Chimico contenente Ii Rimedj piil usati d' oggidi di 
Gio: Battista Capello undecima impressione riveduta, accresciuta, e da 
molti errori emendata da Lorenzo Capello suo Nipote Speziale all' Ins^na 
de' tre Monti in Campo di Sant' Appolinare. In Venezia MDCCXCII. 
Appresso Pietro Savioni sul Ponte de' Baretteri alF Insegna della Nave 
Con Licenza de' Superior!, e Privilegio. 

4*. Pp. 284. 

This book contains a short sketch of the history purple of the Ancients and Modems, and certain 
of pharmacy in Venice, and dissertations on the other pharmaceutical subjects. 

CAPICIUS (SciPio). 

De principiis rerum poema. 

See CONTARENI (gasparo), Dc clcmentis . . . Libri quinque, 1548. 

Capicius or Capitius or Capycius, or Capece, 
callea Gideota, came of an ancient Neapolitan 
ftuiiily, and was distinguished by his Latin poems, 
and by a work on the Magistracy of the kingdom 
of Naples compared with that of Rome. The 

present poem was first printed by Aldus at Venice 
m 1546 ; one edition appeared at Paris, 1548, 8*. 
and another at Frankfurt in 1631. In it hed«iiices 
all things from air. 

CAPICIVS—CARDANO 141 

CAPICIUS (SciPio). Continued. 

Crasso. Elegit Jt Hwomini UUtraH^ 1666^ ii. TOcber. AUgtmeines GtlekrUm-Uxiam, 1750. i. 

p. 1761 coL 1655. 

Toppi, Bihlioitca SafoUiana^ 1678; p. sSa Renouard, AmnaUs dt Flmprimerie dts Aide, 

Bayte. DicHomaire kisiorique ei criiiqiu, 1730, Pnris, 1825, L p. 326, No. la. 

CAPRERIUS (Alexander). 

See CARERius (Alexander). 

CAPUT de Sale Alchali. 

See GRATAROLO (g.), Verse Alchemis . . . doctrina, 1561, ii. p. 258. 
See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, iii. p. 1 8a 

CARAMUELIUS (Aspasius). 

See SCHOTT (CASPAR). 

CARANTA (lAGo). 
lacobi Carantae Cuneatis Doctoris Philosophi, & Medici Decadum Medico- 
physicanim Liber Primus De Natura Auri Arte Facti, & num sit Pharmacum 
cordiale. Rerum varietate, nee passim obuiorum, obiter, vel omninb 
praetennissorum explicatione Philosophis, & Medicis gratum, & necessarium 
opus. Ad Sereniss. Principem Subalpinorum. Sauiliani, Apud Christo- 
phorum Strabellam. 1623. Superiorum permissu. 

4". Pp. [40] 388. [2, 2 bUnk.] 

Book IL, which gives an account of a case of The f>resent work b mentioned quite fully by 

bydropbolMa, is referred to by Haller, but the Borel. by Lenglet Dufresnoy, and by Gmelin. 

author of the Beytrag opines that it is not a topic Jdcher prefers to call him Carania, and quotes 

an artist would Tike ! the present collection of tracts. 

There was an early edition of the present work, 
according to LeupoM, Sevill. 1613, 4 . 

Bord, Biblioiheca CkinUca^ 1654, p. 56; 1656, ^otXaX^ Hisioire de F Anatomic et de la Ckirurgie, 

p. S3- »770. ii- P- 440- 

Jacob Leupolds Prodromus Bibliotheca Metallic^, Haller, Biblioiheca Anatomica, 1774, i. p. 35a 

1713, p. 41. Haller. Biblioiheca Chirurgica, 1774, i. p. 310. 

Loiglet Dufresnoj, Histoire de la PhilosopkU Beytrag tur Geschichte der hdhem Chemie, 1785, 

Herm^Hqtie, 174a, iiu p. 131. p. 608. 

Jdcher, Allgemeines Gelehrten-Lexicon, 1750^ i. Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemie, 1797. i. pp. 502, 

col 1663. 568. 

CARAVANTA HISPANUS. 
Practica. 

See GRATAROLO (G.), Vera: Alchemiae . . . doctrina, 1561, ii. p. 264. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1 659, iii. p. 1 88. 

Nicolas Antonio calls him Caravantes, and styles him Anonymus, Biblioiheca Hispana Nova, 
Matriti, 1788, ii. Nova Appendix, p. 406. 

CARDANO (GiROLAMo), 
Hieronymi Cardani Mediolanensis Medici De Rerum Varietate Libri xvii. 
Adiectus est capitum, rerum & sententiarum notatu dignissimarum Index. 
Cum Oesareae Maiestatis gratia & priuilegio. Neq; deest illud Christianissimi 
Galliarum regis, ut uersa pagina indicat. Basileae, Anno M.D.LVII. 

Folio, in sixes. Pp. [la] 707 [i blank] [3a]. Numerous small woodcuts in the text. 
Some MS. notes. Vignette of Cardan, aged 49, dated 1553, on the title-page. 

Colophon: — Basileae, per Henrichum Petri, Anno M.D.LVIL 

This treatise is reprinted in the third volume of Cardan's Collected Works, 10 vols., Lugd. 1663, 
in folio. 

142 

CARDANO 

CARDANO (GiROiJiMo). Continued. 
OfTenbarung der Natur vnd Naturlicher Dingen, auch mancherlej wunderfaar- 
lichen und subtilen Wiirckungen : Durch den Hochgelehrten vnd weit- 
beriimpten Herren Hieronymum Cardanum, der Artzney Doctom zu Meyland 
in Latein beschrieben : Darinn auflfs aller kiinstlichste und fleissigste die 
Art vnnd Eigenschafil des gantzen vmbkreifs der Welt, beydes Himlischer 
vnd Eleraentischer Spheren, der Cometen, Gestims, Metallen, Gesteinen, 
Eynflufs vnd Wiirckung, sampt den Pflantzungen und seltzamen arlen der 
Beumen, Menschen vnd Tbieren, Wild vnd Zam, b^riffen : Sampt einer 
Newen Form vnd weifs die Safift allerley Kreuteren artlich heraufs zu Ziehen, 
mit verzeichnung der Instrumenten darzu kommlich vnd nutzlich : Item, 
Vom Tryb vnd Bewegnussen, welche durch das Fewer verrichtet, alfs die 
Alchymey, Destination, vnd anderen Kiinsten, Handtwercken vnd verborgenen 
Sachen, die gleich alfs ob sie wider die Natur geschehen, wol zu verwunderen. 
Letstlich, vieler Lenderen, Volckeren, vnd Stetten seltzame Gebreudv Sitten, 
vnd anderem, so bifsher von wenigen angezeiget vnd eroflfnet worden, wie 
aufs nachvolgendem Register genugsamlich abzunemmen. Jetz newlich 
gemeinem Vatterlandt zu gutem in die verstendtliche Teutsche zungen 
gebracht, durch Hulderichum Frolich von Plawen. Cum gratia & priuileg. 
Cses. Maiest. Getruckt zu Basel, durch Sebastianum Henricpetri. 

Folio, in sixes. Pp. [30, 2 blank] dcccxxviij. [2}. Title red and black : Medallion 
portrait of Cardan, aged 49, on the reverse and small woodcuts in the text. The last 
UKif, not numbered, contains the colophon : Getruckt zu Basd, Durch Sebastianum 
Henricpetri, im Jar nach der s^nadreichen Geburt Jesu Christi, M.D.XC1.. and on the 
reverse the printer's device : a hand froni a cloud striking with a broad-headed hammer 
on the top of a flaming rock. 

The present translation contains the whole of the 
De Varietate preceding, and also (pp. dclxxxvii.- 
end) an abstract of the more important matters in 
the 21 books of the De SubtilitaU. This latter was 
printed in 1550^ passed through man^ editions, 
was translated into French and is contained in the 
third volume of Cardan's works. 

This German translation, according to llaller, 
was printed at Basel, 1559, 1593, i^, all in folio. 

Cardan was bom at Pa via, 24 ^ptember, 1501, 
passed his childhood and youth in neglect and the 
harshest treatment, and as a consequence in bad 
health. When he was nineteen years of age he 
studied arithmetic and algebra at Pavia, in 1524 
began medicine at Padua and graduated in i^. 
The College of Physicians at Milan would not 
admit him a memt)er, and though he struggled 
hard to make a living bv teaching, by practice and 
by writing, he sunk gradually into absolute poverty. 
At last in 1539 he gained admission to the College, 
and in 154^ was appointed to the chair of Medicine 
in Pavia University. In 1545 he published his 
treatise on Algebra, which was an important con- 
tribution to uie science. By 1546 bis fortunes 
began to take a turn for the better ; he received a 
better salary from his chair, and he continued to 
write books, when in 1551 came the invitation to 
him to give his opinion on the iilness of Archbishop 
Hamilton of St Andrews. This ultimately in- 
volved a visit to Scotland and a residence here for 

some little time, during which he made a great 
improvement on the Archbishop's health — but he 
refused an invitation to settle here. At this time 
Scaliger [q.v,) published his criticism of Cardan's 
work Dt SubtilitaU, but in the opinion of their 
contemporaries, they were unequally matched, and 
the superiority lay with Cardan, who was greatly his 
superior in scientific knowledge. 

in i^6o the great affliction of his life fell upon 
him. His eldest son Giambattista was seized on a 
charge of poisoning his own wife — he admitted the 
crime, and though his father did all he could to 
secure a mitigation of the sentence, he was executed 
on 7 April, 156a From this catastrophe Cardan 
never recovered. In 1662 he resigned his chair at 
Pavia and went to Bologna, and after a good many 
difficulties accepted a post there as teacher. He 
endured much trouble, was imprisoned, and though 
he was at last liberated, he was forbidden to teach 
or to write. He went afterwards to Rome, and 
tli«% his death occurred on 20 Sept., 1576, and 
he was finally interred at Milan beside his father. 

Cardan was a scholar, philosopher, physician, 
mathematician, astrologer, gambler. He was also 
a voluminous writer ,- his works fill 10 folio volumes, 
in the edition printed at Lyons in 1663. Though 
he refers in the work Dt Subtilitate to chemiod 
tojMcs, he was not a chemist or alchemist, and he 
has not left any special book on the subject. 

JoannesMatthseusToscanus, /V//Mj//a/f<r, 1578, Naud^, Apologie pour tous Us Grands Person- 

p. 104, No. clxxiiii. ^^^ ' * * ^f^P^onnis de Magie^ 1^5* P* 34^ -f?^/ 

Johann Valentin Andreae, Mytholqgia Christiana, Tomasini, lilustrium Virorum £logia, tconibus 

1619, pp. 17, 36. exomata, Patavii, 1630, p. 55 (with a portrait). 

CARDANO—CARDILUCIUS 

143 

CARDANO (GiROLAMo). ConHmted. 

Van der Linden. Dt ScHpHs Medicis iikn duo, 
1637, p. aoj. 

Ghiiini, Ttatr^dHuominiLHterati^ 1647, i. p. 115. 

Bond. BikUoiht€a Chimica^ 1654, p. 56. 

Vosshis, De Uniuersa Matkesios Natura 6* Con- 
stiiuiiame LUer, 1660^ pp. 41, 231, 501, 38a 

Crano, Elogii d Hmomini Letterah^ Venetin, 
1666^ ii pp. 37-35 ^^ ^ portrait). 

SamL Parkn-, Disputaiio de Deo et providenHa 
dhdma, 1678, p. 68. 

Merddin,' Umdenims remavatms, 1686^ pp. 415-19 

Cborin^, In Uttiversam Artem Meaicam . . . 
Imtndmciw, 166^, pp. 4^ a8a. 

Maginis. £ptmjrmolqfJitum CritUum^ 1687, p. 181. 

Freher, TketUrum vtrorum eruditione cUtrommt 
1688. p. 127a, PI. 57. 

Paschius, De Nevis Inventis Tractatus, 1700, 

Pope-BkNUit, Censura Celebriontm Automm, 
1710^ p. 641. 

Teissier, Les Eloges des Homtmes Savams, 171 5. 
ilL pp. 97.11a. 

Jo. Fabridus, Hisiorite Biblioiketa Pahricianm 
Pen VI., 1724, p. 275. 

Fapndopoliis, HUtoria Gymnasii Patavini, 
ijjS, ii. p. 228, No. cxvii. 

StoU«, Anieitumg tur Historie der Gelahrkeii, 
1727. PP- 40a. 545-47. 616-7, 686, 70J; 1736, pp. 
4»9. S7a-73. 645-46, 716, 738 ; and Zusdtte, 1736, 
pp. 185. 244, 245. 

Bajle. Dictiomaire kisiorique et cntique, 1730, 11. 

Pp.51-^- 
Buddeus, Isagoge kisioric0'4keolcgicaf 1730, i. pp. 

238.393. 

Manget, Biklioikeca Scri^mm Afedicarum, 
vni, I. iL p. 33. 

Nioeron, Memoires, 1731, xiv. pp. 233-282 ; 1732, 
XX. p. 76. 

Stolle. AnUihtngxur Historie der Mtdicinischen 
CteUkrkeit, 17^1, pp. ^, 141-4, 873, 884. 

Jacob Leufedds Prodromus Dibltotkeae Metailica, 
1752, p. 41. 

Morfaof. Pofykistor, 17^, il p. 157 (C. & Scali^); 
il p. 109 (notice of his lite) ; ii. p. 240 (his fianiiliar 
Genius), fta 

Zedler, Grosses Universal-Lexicon, 1733, v. coL 

Arnold, Kirchen- und Ketter-Historie, 1740, i. 
p 916 (Th. it B. zri. c. xxii. S 37). 

Kestner, Medicinisckes Gelehrien- lexicon, 1740, 
p 176. 

Vogt, Catalogus lihrontm rariorum, 1747, p, 171. 

Chaurfepi6, Nonvean Dictiomnaire historique, 
1750^ ii., fetter C. p. 36. 

Frertag, AnaUcia litteraria, 1750, p. 21a 

jOcbo', Allgemeines Gelehrten-Lextcon, 1750, i. 
cof. 1668. 

Boerhaave, Methodus Studii Medici^ 1751, L p. 
131 ; ii. p. 692. 

Freytag. Adparatus litterarius, 1752, i. p. 43. 

Eloy, Dictionnaire kistorique de la Midecine, 
i7«. I. p. 216 ; 1778, 1 p. 538. 

Ci^nient, BibUothique Curieuse, 1756, vi. pp. 256- 
282. 

Montuda, Histoire des Mathematiques, 1758, i. 

p. 481. 

Brudcer, Historia Critica Pkilosophia, 1766, v. 
pp. 62-89, and 1767. vi. (Appendix), pp. 816-821. 

PortaU Histoire de PAnatomie et de la Ckirurgie, 
1770, i. p. 653. 

Haller, Bibliotkeca Botanica, \T7'^* P- 307. 

Haller, Bibliotkeca Anatomica, 1774, i. p. 199; 

i777i "• P* 7^ 
Haller, Bibliotkeca Ckirttr/j^ica, 1774, i. p. 188. 

Haller, Bibliotkeca Medians pracfictr, 1777, ii. 
p. 18. 

Saxius, Onomasticort, 1780, iii. p. i8t, Anal. 6x8. 

Tiedemann, Geist der Spekuiath>en Pkilosopkie, 
x7q6, v. p. 563. 

Gmdin, Gesckickte der Ckemie, X797, i. pp. 3x7- 

»9. 353- 
Hutdiinson, Biograpkia Medico, 1799, ^* PP- 

x86-i9a 

Fischer, Gesckickte der Pkysik^ i8ox, i. pp. 13, 
140, 149, 460 ; x8oa, ii. p. 2x. 

Tiraboschi, Storia aella Letteratura Italiana, 
18x0, vii. pp. 459, 520, 675. 

Watt, Bibliotkeca Britannica, X819, i. (Authors). 
X93a. 

Biograpkie Midicale^ Pans, Panckoucke( 1820-25). 
iii. p. X49. 

Rixner & Siber, Leben und L^kmuinungen 
berUkmtcr Pkysiker^ ii. Heft, with a portrait, 
Sulzbach, x8ao. 

Ersch & Gruber, Aligemeine Encyklopddie, i8a6, 
XV. p. 172. 

Sprengel, Gesckickte der Artneykunde, x8a7, 
iii.J>p. 30-38, 190, 3x0. 

Decdineris. Dictionnaire kistorique de la 
Midecine, X83X, I. ii. p. 629. 

Libri, Histoire des Sciences Matkimatiques en 
Italie, 1840. iii. pp. 150-4 ; 167-179. 

Hoefer, Histoire de la Ckimie, X843, ii. pp. 99- 
loi ; 1869, ii. pp. 94-96. 

Grftsse, Lekrbuck einer allgemeinen Literdr- 
gesckickte, 1852, iii. Abth. i. pp. 887, 904. X033. &c. 

Morley. Tke Life of Girolamo Cardano, of Milan ^ 
Pkysidan, London, x8^. 2 vols., 8*. 

Hayle & Thillaye, Biograpkie Midicale, X855, i. 
p. 20a 

E. H. F. Meyer, Gesckickte der Botanik, X857, 
iv. p. 4x3. 

Kluyskens, Des HommesciUbres dans les Sciences 
et les Arts . . . 1859, i. p. 183. 

Stdckl, Gesckickte der Pkilosopkie des Mittelalters, 
x866, iii. p. 4^2. 

Figuier, Vie des Savants illustres — La Renais- 
sance, 1868, pp. 129-156. 

IXctionnaire Encyclopidiqut des Scienca Midi- 
cales, X871, xii. p. 420. 

PUnjer, Gesckickte der Ckristlieken Religions- 
pkilosopkie, 1880, i. p. 68 ; English translation, 
X887, p. 91. 

Bilhngs. Index Catalogue, i88x, ii. p. 706; 2nd 
Series, X898, iii. p. X65. 

Haeser, Gesckickte der Medicin, i88x. ii. p. X20. 

Carriere, Die Pkilosopkiscke Weltansckauung der 
Reformationsxeit, 1887, ii, p. 7. 

W. G. Waters, Jerome Cardan ^ a Biographical 
Study, London. 1898, 8"*, pp. [a blank] vi. 30X [3 
blank] ; portrait. 

CARDI LUCIUS (JoHANN Hiskias). 
Magnalia Medico-Chymica, Oder die hochste Artzney- und Feuerkiinstige 
Geheimnisse, wie nemlich mit dem Circulato majori & minori oder dem 
Universal aceto mercuriali, und spiritu vini tartarisato die herrlichsten 

t44 

CARDIL UCIUS— CARDINAL 

CARDILUCIUS (JOHANN Hiskias). Continued. 

Artzneyen zum langen Leben und Heilung der unheilsamen Kranddieiten 
zu machen ; Zwar aus Paracelsi Handschrift schon im vorigen Seculo 
ausgangen, aber so corrupt, dafs est fast niemand verstehen konnen, itzo 
abcr aufs neue verhochdeutschet, und von Satz zu Satz erlautert, nebenst 
beygefiigtem Hauptschliissel aller Hermetischen SchrifHen, nemlich dem 
unvergleichlichen Tractat genannt: Offenstehender Eingang zu dem vormals 
verschlossenen koniglichen Pallast Dem gemeinen Nutz zum besten, und 
den Curiosen zu Gefallen publiciret von Johann Hiskia Cardilucio Com. 
Pal. Phil. & Med. Doct. Niirnberg, Jn Verlegung Wolflfgang Moritz 
Endters, und Johann Andreae Endters Sel. Erben. Anno M-DCLXXVI. 

r. Pp. [48] 409 [30, 1 blank]. 

Accordio^ to Ladrague, it was reprinted at 
Niirnberg m i^xo, under the title or Antrum 
Natuvxt et Artts reclusum, 8^, pp. xxxii 830^ to 
which was prefixed the Rosicnician tract, the 
Missiv^ by Polycarpus Chrysostorous. 

It contains Philaletha's Introitus Apertus, p. 297. 

Appended is a list of Errata in Ercker's Aula 
subterranean xd/a, ^.t/., of which he was editor. 

There was an earlier edition, NQrnberg, 1667. 

A continuation of the Magnalia Medico-Chymica 
appeared at NQmberg in 1680. It contained 
tracts. by Philalethes, George Ripley, Basil Valen- 
tine, and some others. 

In the preface of the present edition the author- 
ship of the first two tracts is assigned to Rupe- 
scissa. 

See LEFEBURK (NICOLAS), 1685. Neuvermchrtcr Chymischer Handleiter tmd 
Guldnes Kleinod, 1685. 

A new and enlarged edition by Cardilucius. 

Of this person the accounts given are somewhat 
vague and not altogether conconlant. He is called 
Cardilucius usually, but in one place Gmelin styles 
him Kardiluk, and in another Cardilucci, as if he 
were Italian, and speaks of him spending roost of 
his life in Germany. On the other hand he calls 
himself 'Comes Palatinus,' studied in Holland in 
1663. and became Doctor of Philosophy and Medi- 
cine. After this he spent some time m Mainz, in 
Frankfurt, and in Darmbstadt, and finally setUed 
in Nttmberg, where he was appointed physician to 
the Duke of WQrtemberg. He was a believer in 
Alchemy and Astrolo^, the doctrine of signatures, 
and the planetary influences in Medicine and 
Pharmacy; and be had a great esteem for Van 

Mercklin, Undenius renovatus^ x686, p. 608. 

Roth-Scholtx, Bibliotkeca CAemica, 1727, p. 37. 

Manget, Bibliotkeca Scriptorum Afedicorum, 
I73X, I. ii. p. 35. 

Kestner, Medicinixhes GeUhrten-Lexicon^ 1740, 
p. X77. 

Jttcher, Al^emeines Gelehrten- Lexicon, 2750, i. 
col. 167a 

Fictuld, ProHer-Stein, 1753, Th. I p. 11 ; Th. 
il p. 46. 

Petr&us, Banlii VaUntini Chymische Schriften, 
X760, Neue Vorrede, Sig. e ^ 

Haller, Bibliotkeca Botantca, 1771, i. p. C50. 

Eloy, Dictionnain kistorique de la Medicine^ 
177^, 1. p. 541. 

Helmont. His books are for the most part of a 
medico-chemical character ; he translated CroUius' 
Basilica Cketnica, NOmberg, 1684, and wrote a kind 
of commentary on it : KonigUicker Ckytniscker und 
Artzneyiscker Palast, 8**; edited works by Min- 
dererus Hartmann and Ercker, and wrote on the 
plfljzue. on medicine, etc * 

The date of his death is not given, but it may be 
about 1660, as has been suggested. 

According to Petraeus, Cardilucius was a name 
assumed by johann harprecht {q.v.). The 
author of the Beytrag indulges in some diaracteristic 
raillery over the *' master key" of the ** worthy 
Kardiluk." 

Haller, Bibliotkeca Medicine practicm^ 1779^ iii. 

P- ^S^ 
Baumer, Bibliotkeca Ckemica, 178a, p. 105. 

Beytrag nir Gesckickte der kdkem Ckemte^ 1785, 
pp. 533, 627, 65^ 

Gmelin, Gesckickte der Ckemie, X798, ii. pp. 35, 
a6 ; 253, 254. 

Fuchs, Itepertorium der ckemtscken Utteratur, 
X806-08, p. i6a 

Biograpkie Midicale, Paris, Panckoucke (i8ao- 
25), in. p. 159. 

Schroieder, Gesckickte der A Ickemie, X832, p. 411. 

Ladrague, Bibliotkique Ouvarvf, Sciences 
Secriies, X870, No, 617. 

CARDINAL (GiLBERTUs). 

See BERGWERCK und Probier biichlin, 1533, f. 29. 

See ALCHiMiA, das ist, alle Farben . . . zubereyten, 16 13, p. ii6. 

In the text of the Bergwerck . . . bUcklin his 
name is given Albertus^ though it is Gilbertus on 
the title-page. Albertus seems to be a misprint. 
This tract was also appended to Kertxenmacher's 
collection of receipts entitled i^Alckimia, das isi, 

Alle Farben, Wasser, . . . xubereyten, 1570, and 
subsequent editions. Ferguson, 'Some Early 
Treatises on Technological Chemistry,' Proceeding 
of tke Pkilosopkical Society of Glasgmo, 1888, xix, 
P.X43. 

CARERJUS^CARMINA 

»45 

CARERIUS (Alexander). 
Qosesdo, an arte metalla permutari possint 

See WITSSTEIN (karl), Disceptatio Philosophica, p. 157. 

Gucrins, or Carrerius, miyaHinl also Caprerius 
ud Cumrcxiiis, and Caternis, a lawyer of Padua, was 
bom in 1543. was decanns of the University and 
bidiopof & Andreae. He dgcHncd the professor- 
ship of Law to leave him more leisure for stud;|r and 
6ir his church duties. He, however, relinouisbed 
tliese, and devoted himself to writing the history 
ofMaa. In the latter part of his life he was 
<Q|md in di^Nites and lawsuits, and died of 
spopiezv so August, 1626. The inscription on 
^ tomb says i£ax he died in his 78th year. If 

Tomasini, lUustrium Virorum Etogia, 1630, 
A 363 (with a portrait). 

Bora, BiMiotkeca CMimica, 1654, p. 56, p. 57 
(under Caterrus). 

Frefaer, TMeafrttm vitvntm eruditione clarorum^ 
'^88, ii. p. 1044, and pL 47. 

Witte, Diarium Biografhicum, 1688, Sig. Y a 
^'iQcto; Ann. aoth August. i6a6. 

Papadopolns, Historia G^mnasii Patavini, 
V*enet 1726, ii. p. 28a, No. ccii. 

Jacob Ltupolds Prodromus Bibliotkeca Meiailicte, 

'•TSa. p. 41- 

so. the above cannot be the correct date of his 
birth. 

Though not a professor he kept up his inter- 
course with the students, and wrote dissertations, 
of which the present is one. 

Editions ot the above tract. Padua, 1574. 1579, 
4**. Basel. 1583, 158^ 8**. are enumerated. 

There Is an edition: ''Patavii, L. P. Elxcude," 
4^ ^- [31 I blank], 3a. It is not dated, but the 
epistle IS dated 1579. This seems to be really the 
first edition. 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoirt dt la Pkilosopkie 
HermJtique, 174a, iii. p. 131. 

Jdcher, Allgemeints Gelehrten- Lexicon^ 1750, i. 
col 1653. 

Beytrag zur Geschichie der hdhem Chemie, 1785. 

p. 547. 

Gmelin, Geschichie der Chemie ^ 1797. i. p. 298. 

Schmieder, Geschichie derAUhemie, 1833. p. 394. 
(He calls him a professor at Padua — but he is not 
mcluded among them by Tomasini, Gymnasium 
Patavinum, Uiine, 1654, 4**.) 

dARL (JoHANN Samuel). 

Johann Samuel Carls Zeugnufs von Chymischer Storgerey, sonderlich in 
neuen Exempeln : i. Panacea Talci. 2. Antimonii. 3. Solari. 4. Animali. 
5. Vegetabili. 6. Spiritu , Mundi & Acidis dulcificatis. Erwiesen aus 
Chymischen und Medidnischen Gninden und Erfahrungen. Samt einer 
Nachrede von Fatis Chymicis. Franckfurt und Leipzig, Bey Johann 
Christoph Gopner, Buchhandler 1733. 

8*. Pp. [16] 170 [14]. 

Johann Samuel Cari, son of Johann Ernest Carl, 
vas bom at Oehringen in 1676. He went to Halle 
and studied medicine with Frederic Hoffmann and 
Stabl, and obtained his licence in 1699. He then 

became phyndan of the Count of Lsenbur^- 
Stolberg, of the Count of Wittgenstein, and m 
1736 of the King of Denmark. He died 13 June, 
1757, at MeUdoct, in Holstein. He was one of the 
most devoted and distingui^ed pupils of Stahl, 
whose lectures he edited, and he wrote a number 
of worics in supfiort of Stahl's doctrines, but he is 
accused of having mingled with them a certain 

RoCh-Scholtz, Bihliotheca Chemica, 1727, p. 39. 
Manget, Biblioih^a Scriptorum Medicorum, 
1731, I. ii. p. 36. 
Addung's Sufflement to Jdcher's Lexicon, 
Jacob Ijtupotas Prodromus BibHaihecee MeiaU 

Item, 1732. p. 41. 
Haller, Bibhotheca Chirurpca, 177^, ii. p. 114. 
Haller, Bibliotheca Medictnte fracttca, 1788, iv. 

P* 354' 
Gmelin, Geschichie der Chemie, 1798, ii. pp. 367, 

S8^ 681. 7ia- 

Meusel, Jjexihon der vom Jahr 17510 bis 1800 
vtrsUfrbenen Teutschen Schrifisieller, Leipzig, 1803, 
ii. p. 25. 

amount of theosophy. He wrote a work, Lxipis 
L^dius PhilosofhicQ-pyrotechnicus ad ossium foS' 
siiium docimastam analytice demonstrandam adhi- 
bitus . . . Francof. a, M. 170^, 8*. He showed 
the identity of natural, artificial, and antimonial 
cinnabar, and gave its composition as 6 parts of 
mercury to i of sulphur {Eph. Acad. Nai, Cmr., 
17x2, pp. 379-403). and wrote a paper : ' Lapis ac 
lutum pro renovatione laboratorii chemici in et ad 
scholam medicam ' (Eph. Acad, Nat. Cur. , 1742, vi. 
App. pp. 110-X18). 

Fuchs, Repertorium der chemischen Liiieraiur^ 
1806-08, pp. 220, 227. 

Bio^cLphie Medicate, Paris, Panckoucke (i8ao- 
25), iii. p. 162. 

Dezeimeris, LHciionnaire historique de la 
Midecine, 18^1, I. ii. p. 6^ 

Phillippe & Ludwig, Geschichie der Apothehtr, 

1855. p. 576. 
Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie^ 1876, iii. p. 

782 (article by Hirsch). 

Haeser, l^hrbuch der Geschichie der Medicin^ 
1881, ii. p. 530. 

Hirsch, Uiographisches l^xihon der hervor- 
ragenden Aerzte . . . , 1884, i. p. 664. 

Kopp, Die Alchemic, 1886, i. pp. 69, 74. 

CARMINA. 
Cannen elegans (de Lapide Philosophorum). 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, ill. p. 763. 

146 

CARMINA-'CARTHE USER 

CARMINA. Continued. 
Carmina aliquot germanica cum versione latina. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, iv. p. 252. 

Carmina auf das Philosophische Werck. 

See FIGULUS (benedictus), Thesaurinella, 1682, p. 74. 

See RHYTHMI. 

See ALTE TEUTSCHE REIMEN. 

See REIMEN. 

Cannina varia de Lapide Philosophorum. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, iii. p. 736. 

CARRERIUS (Alexander). 

See CARERIUS (ALEXANDER). 

CARTHEUSER (Friedrich August). 

Chemische Beobachtung von der Reinigung des fliichtigen Bemsteinsalzes. 
See ALLGEMEIN niitzliches chemisch-physikalisches Mancherlei, 1781, i. p. 324. 

Friedrich August Cartheuser, the son of Johann 
Friedrich, was born at Halle in 1734. He was edu- 
cated at Halle and Frankfurt a. d. Oder, in 1749 
entered the university there, but after three months 
went to Berlin, where he studied under Pott, 
Gleditsch, and Nfarg^[raf. He mdiiated M.D. at 
Frankfurt a.d. Oder m 1755. He then visited the 
mines in Saxony, went to Bohemia, Franconia, and 
other parts of uermany, and in 1754 wasprofessor 
of mineralogy, botany, and chemistry, at Fhmkfiirt 

In 1756 [others 1766] he transferred himself to 
Giessen as professor of natural history and medicine. 
In 1778 he was made director oif the Botanic 
Garden, but in 1779 ^ resigned and withdrew to 
an estate at Idstein. near Bikenbach, and after- 
wards to Schierstein, where he died, Dec. is, 179S. 
He published numerous works on mioeFalpgy, 
mining, natural history, mineral waters, crystallo- 
graphy, the chemical analysis of plants, sal 
seditivum, etc., etc. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Boianica^ 177a, ii. p. 486, 514. Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemii, 1798, ii. p. 642, 

Strieder, Grundlagetu einer Hessischen GeUhrten etc.. etc. 

ttnd SchnftsteJler Gtschichte^ 1782, ii. pp. iax-ia5; Bio^apkie M^dicaU, Paris, Panckoucke (i8ao- 

"i. p. 557. 25), iii. p. 169. 

Meusel, Das giUkrU Teutsckland^ oder Lexikon Bayle & Thillaye, Bicgraphie Midicale, 1855, ii. 

der ietzt Uben<un Teutschen Schriftstellert 1796, i. p. 575. 

p. 559- 

CARTHEUSER (Johann Friedrich). 
Joh. Frideiici Cartheuseri Med. Doctoris Elementa Chemias Medicse Dogmatico- 
Experimentalis. Vna cum Synopsi Materiae Medicse Selections. In Vsum 
Tyronum Edita. Halse Magdeburgicae Sumtibus loan. Ernest. Fritschii. 
Anno MDCCXXXVI. 

8*. Pp. [16] 36a Index [8]. This is the first edition. 

Jo. Friderici Cartheuser Medicinse Doctoris ejusdemque in Regia Academia 
Viadrina Prof. Publ. Ordinarii Elementa Chymiae Dogmatico-Experimentalis in 
Usum Academicum conscripta. Venetiis Apud Dominicum Der^ni in 
Via Mercatoria sub Signo D. Antonii. MDCCLVI. Superiorum Permissu 
ac Privilegio. 

4*. Pp. 98 [2 blank]. 

This is uniform with the author's Pharmacologia^ 
and is intended to go along with it. The preface 
is dated Franckfurt a. d. O.. 1753, ^"^^ ii^ i^ 
he refers to the text-book which at the solicitation 
of his pupils he had published seventeen years 

previous. The new edition came out at Frank- 
furt in X753 according to Gmelin, and a third 
edition in 1766, 8^ The present, therefore, would 
be a reprint of that of 17C3. Fuchs quotes an 
edition of 1770, which he calls the third. 

CARTHEUSER—CASE 147 

CARTHEUSER (Johann Friedrich). Continued. 
Jo. Friderici Cartheuseri Medidnae Doctoris Ejusdemque in R^ia Academia 
Viadrina Prot Publ Ordinarii Pharmacologia Theoretico-Practica Ration! et 
Experiendae Superstructa in qua Medicamentorum Officinalium usitatiorum 
Praeparatio, Natura Modus Operandi, Vires atque Usus Medicus perspicue 
describuntur ac solide explicantur. Cui accedunt Elementa Chymise 
Dogmatico-Experimentalis, ac Tabulae Formularum Medicarum. Venetiis 
Apud Dominicum Deregni in Via Mercatoria sub Signo D. Antonii. 
MDCCLVI. Superiorum Permissu ac Privilegio. 

4'. Pp. viii. 336. 
This book was published at Berlin in 1745, ^^^ 1770 in 8", and at Cologne, 1763, 8". 

Jo. Friderici Cartheuser Med. Doct. et. Prof. Publ. Ord. Tabulae Formularum 
Medicarum Praescriptioni inservientes. Venetiis Apud Dominicum Deregni 
in Via Mercatoria sub Signo D. Antonii. MDCCLVI. Superiorum Permissu 
ac Privilegio. 

4^ Pp. [4]. 71 W 

This is uniform with the author's Pharmacologia. It was published at Halle, 1740, 
8'; 1748, 8*; Frankf. a, d. Oder, 1752. 8«» ; 1766. 8^ 

Cartheuser was bom at Hayn in Stolberg in 1704. He was a member of the Berlin Academy, famed 

He was a doctor of medicine of Halle, and from for his knowledge of Botany and Chemistry, which 

1740 to 1759 hdd the chairs of Chemistry and of he combined in his chemical examination of plants. 

Pharmacy and Materia Medica at Frankfiut a. d. O. He directed the attention of chemists to various 

to whkh were added that of Anatomy and Botany, vegetable products. He died in 1777. 
and afterwards of Therapeutics and Pathology. 

HsdkT,Bi3/io(MecaBolanicafi7y2,ii. p. 270, p,6gi^. Dezeimeris, Dictionnaire historigue de la AUde- 

Haller, Bibliotheca Chirurgica, 177$, »»• p. 349- ^i»^. 1831, I. ii. p. 640. 

Haller. BMioiheca Analomica, 1777, ii. pp. 248. Bayle & Thillaye. Biografhit Midicale^ 1855. i% 

777- p. 2^^ 

Qoy, Dictionnaire Historique de la Midecine, Phdippe & Ludwig. Geschichte der Apotheker^ 

1778. U p. 551. x8«, p. 58a 

Banmer, BUliotheca Chemica, ijSa, p. 38. Poggendorff, Biographisch-Literarisches Hand- 

Gmdin, Geschichte der Chemitt 1798, ii. pp. worteriuch, 1863. i. coL 384-5. 

^1-3. 683, etc. Dictionnaire Encychfidique des Sciences Midi- 

Meusel, Lexikon der vom Jahr 1750 bis 1800 cedes, 1871, xii. p. 704. 

verstorbenen Teutschen Schriftsteller, 1803, ii. p. 54. Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie, 1876, iv. p. 36. 

Fochs, Rtpertorium der chemischen Litleratur, Hirsch, Biographisches Lixihon der hennfrra- 

1806, p. a6o di passim. genden Aerzte, 1884, L p. 674. 

Biographie Midicale, Paris, Panckoucke (1820- Billings. Index-Catalogue^ 1881, ii. p, 728 ; 2nd 

25), ill. p. 17a Series, 1898, iii. p. 188. 

CASE (John). 
Lapis Philosophicus, sive Commentarius in octo libros Physicorum Aristot. 
in quo arcana Physiologise examinantur. Auctore Joanne Caso, in Medicina 
Doctore Oxoniensi, & olim collegij D. loannis ibidem praecursoris Socio. 
Accedit in Fine Ancilla Philosophias, seu Epitome in octo libros Aristot. 
Physicorum, eodem Auctore. Cum Indicibus locupletissimis. Francofurti 
ad Moenum, Apud heredes Andreae Wecheli, & Anton Hierat. M.DC. 

8**. Pp. [46, including the engraved symbolic plate, 3 blank] 1068. Index [23, 
I blank]. Ancilla Philosophise : 88. Index [7], I*nnter*s device [i]. 

This commentary on Aristotle deals with scholastic one or two medical papers, but his chief literary 

sobtletieiB and metaphysical vagaries, and has work consisted of commentaries and text-books on 

nothing to do with those of Alchemy. Aristotle, of which the present is one. It was first 

John Case was bom at Woodstock, entered printed in 1599. Case di«l 23 January, 1600, and 

St John's College, Oxford, in 1564, was B.A. in was buried in St. John's College Chapel. 

1568, M.A. in 1572, and M.D. in 1^39. He wrote This Joannes Casus must not be oonfotmded with 

148 

CASE-^CASTAIGNE 

CASE (John). Continued. 

Giovanni ddla Casa, the Archbisbop of Renevento, 
who might have been a cardinal, had not the 
church £ul a fit of the morals. According to some 
he was a true child of the pagan Renaissance, for 
while his Latinity would ha\e made Cicero greenly 

Haller, Bihlioikeca Amatomica, 1774, i. p. 772. 
Eloy, Dictionnaire Historique de la Sfidecine, 
^77^ ». p. 5Sa. 

CASSIUS (Andreas). 

jealous, bis morals might have made Martial 
blushingly scarlet He <ued in 1557. 

But Niceron defends him from these diaiges 
{M/mmrts, 1730, xil p. loa ; 173a, xx. p. 4$), 
and he is commended also by J. M. Toscanos 
{Peplus Italut^ 1578, p. 83. No. czxxix). 

Wood, Athentt Oxonienses^ ed. Bliss, 1813, u 
col. 685. 

Dictionary of National Biography^ 1887, ix. p. 
262. 

Andreae Cassii D. Hamburgensis de Extremo illo et Perfectissimo Naturae 
Opificio ac Principe Terrsenorum Sidere Auro de admirandi ejus naturl^ 
generatione, affectionibus, effectis, atque ad operationes artis habitudine. 
Cogitata Nobilioribus experimentis illustrata. 

Aurum & Adamas typi aetemitatis. 
Hamburgi, Sumptibus Georgii Wolffi. Anno M DC LXXXV. 

8". Pp. [8] 15a. Title red and black. 

There are three persons of this name who have 
to be distinguished : 

l^ Andreas Cassius the elder, ducal Secretary, 
married Sophia Vesteria, and had two sons, 
Christianus and Andreas. 

a^ This Andreas, of Schleswig, M. D. of Leyden, 
163a, physician in Hamburg, physician to the 
Dwce of Holstein, and to the Kshop of LQbeck, 
married Gertrude Staphorst, and had a son 
Andreas. He devised a bezoardic essence of great 
virtue in the plague, and invented red glass by 
means of tin and gold. He died at Hamourg, 27 
Mav, 1673. 

3 . Andreas Cassius, Tertius, of Hamburg, 
became, 1668, M.D. at GrOningen, and practised 
in LQbeck. He wrote on some medical subjects, 
and this tract on gold, in which the preparation of 
the purple of gold, made by his father, is described 
(p. Ill sqq,). 

There were other two persons of the same name 
but they do not concern tne present subject. 

The book contains what may be called the 
Natural History of Gold, the sources from which 
it is obtained ; its composition or elementary prin- 
ciples; how it is possibly formed, its properties, 

physical and chemical, and its alchemical transmu- 
tation. The book is commended by Stahl, and by 
Hannemann in his Cato Ckemicns, 1690, cap. iii 
sig. Ag tftrso {q.v.). 

The question as to whether or not Cassius was 
the actual discoverer of the gold purple is decided 
in the negative, correctly I think, by Beckmann, 
BeytrSjge %ur GeschichU der Erfindungen, Ldpng, 
X786, L p. 380 (English translation, 1814, i. p. aoi) ; 
but see what Kunckel says, Labaratorium CJ^rmt' 
cnm, 1767, p. 596, and Leibnitz, Misceltanea 
Berolinenna, 1710, i. p. 94 (in an article on 
phosphorus). 

The lives of the three are given by Joh. MoUer, 
Cimbria Literata, i744i i* p. 88. J5cher, Allge- 
meines GeUhrten- Lexicon^ T^isio, i. col. 1734. 

These writers point out that Andreas Cassius, 
second and third, have been confused with one 
another, as for example by Baumer, Biblioikeca 
Chemica^ 1782, p. 97. See also Orsckall (Joh. 
Christian) whose book Sol Sine Veste came out in 
1684. 

For the older literature of gold purple Wdgel 
may be consulted, Grundriss der mnen und ange- 
wandten Chemie^ 1777, ii. § 1088, d ; pp. 520-ax. 

CASTAIGNE (Gabriel de). 

Les Oeuvres du R. P. Gabriel de Castaigne, tant Medicinales que Chymiques, 
diuis^s en quatre principaux traitez. 
I. Le Paradis Terrestre. 
II. Le grand miracle de la nature metallique. 

III. UOr Potable. 

IV. Le Thresor Philosophique de la Medecine Metallique. 

Seconde edition. A quoy sont adioustez les Aphorismes Basiliens, & la 

methode particuliere pour bien faire le merueilleux Onguent appell^ Manus 

Dei. 

Destournez-vous du mal: & faites le bien. Psal. 32. 

A Paris, Chez lean Dhourry, au bout du Pont-Neuf, pr^s les Augustins, 

^ rimage S. lean. M.DC.LXI. Auec Priuilege du Roy. 

8**. Pp. 19 [il 93 [i blank] ; [a] 78 ; 138 ; 15 [i blank]. Each tract has a separate 
title-page dated im. This copy wants the Aphortsmts Basiliens, 

CASTAIG/fE—CA TALOGVS 

149 

CASTAIGNE (Gabriel de). CoHiimted. 

Gutaigne, aooordiog to Leoglet Dfoinsaaf, was 
aoordetier and almooer of Louis XIII.. "which, 
fcr a oonldier, was nearly as good as a bishoprick.*' 
But aooording to the docmneats prefiaed to the 
present work he was actually chosen bishop of 
woes in succession to Antoine Pichot, by the 
Img. He was also Dr. of Theology, Councillor 

Lengkt Dufresnoy, Hisioirt d* la PhilosopkU 
Htrmkiqmt, 174a, l p. 302 ; iii. p. 13a. 

HaOer. BiHioiktca \Udicinm praciicm, 1777. ii. 
11424: 1779, ill p. 120. 

and Almoner, and is called Abb6 General de Saint 
Ruls de Valence and Sainct Tiers de Sau, and 
"Conventuel d' Avignon." 

The tract LOr Potable qui guarit de tous wulux, 
was published at Paris, 161 1, 8^ ; Le grand Miracle 
de la Nature Metallique, Paris, 1615, 18**. 

Gmelin. Geschichte der Ckemie, 1797, i. pp. 504. 
568. 

Lai6ngaie,Bibliotkique Ouvarvf, Sciences Secrites, 
1870, No. 1615. 

CASTILUONEUS (Branda Franciscus). 

See PROSPECTUS Pharmaceutici Editio Secunda, 1698. 

CASTRENSIS (Robertus). 

See MORIENUS ROM ANUS, 1 5 59. 
See CiESAR (THEOPHILUS), 1613. 

CASTRILLO (Hernando). 
Historia y Magia Natural, o ciencia de filosofia oculta, con nuevas noticias 
de Ids mas profundos mysterios, y secretos del Vniverso visible, en que se 
tiata de animales, pezes, aves, plantas, flores, yervas, metales, piedras, aguas: 
semillas, Parayso, montes, y Valles. Per el Padre Hernando Castrillo de 
la Compania de Jesus, natural de Cadiz. Donde trata de los Secretos 
que pertenecen k las partes dela tierra. Con Licencia. En Madrid, 

Por Juan Garcia Infanzon. Ano 1692. Acosta de Francisco Sazedon, 
Mercader de libros: Vendese en su casa en la calle de Atocha junto k la 
Santissima Trinidad frente de la casa de los Fucares. 

4*. Pp. [la] 343 [16]. Title within a border. 

Ferdinand de Castrillo, a native of Cadiz, was 
admitted in 1603 to the Jesuits at the age of 16. 
He professed theolc^y for a long time, and was 
"Bctor of Caxoria. He died at Ossuna, 21 Nov. , 

1667, At an advanced age. Apparently he wrote 
only this one book : Afagia Natural o Filosofia 
«iUta, Primera Parte. Trigueros, L'lflstupina, 

^ Jocfaer, Allgemeines Gelehrten-Lexicon , 1750, 
L col. 1759. 

Antonio^ Bibliotheca Hispana Ncva^ 1783. i. 
P- 373 (quotes Part i. in the 1649 edition only). 

1636, 4*. Trigueros, Diego Perez de Kstupina. 
1649, 4*** 1" ^c British Museum there are both 
the latter of these, and another edition, Madrid, 
1649, 4°. This is a treatise on cosmogony, the 
elements and natural history, but not on Chemistry 
or Alchemy. 

Backer, Diblioth^uc des Ecrivains de la Com- 
Pagnie de J^sus, Cinqui^me S^rie, 1859, p. 126. 

'Notes on Books of Secrets,' Transactions of the 
Archadogical Society of Glasgow^ 1888 (N.S.), i. 

p. 323. 

CATALOGUS Manuscriptorum Chemico-Alchemico-Magico-Cabalistico-Medico- 
Physico-Curiosorum. No place [Vienna]. MDCCLXXXVIII. 

8*. Pp. XX vi. 310, 67 [i blank], 8. 

Zweitcs Vcrzeichniss einiger Fabricks-Artickel, 
xiv.-xxiii. ; Anhang. xxiii.-xxvi. 

Kopp refers to a similarly titled catalogue, 
Wien, Gi^er d. J. 1786. 

As his copy contains only pp. 50, and Anhang 
pp. 12, presumably it was the first issue of the 
catalogue, in the following two years enlarged to 
the above. 

As it stands the above contains the following 
separate lists : 

Title-leaf. 

Vorrede, i.-v. 

Erstes Verzeichniss von einigen . . . Artzneyen, 
vu-xin. 

Kopp, Die AUhemie^ 1886, ii., p. 223. 

Codices Manuscripti Alchemici, 3-263. 

Codices Manuscripti Chemici, 264-310. 

Codices Magici, 1-45. 

Codices Cat^listici, Mlrologici, Geoniantici, etc., 
46-67 (i blank). 

Druckfehler im Chemischen Catalog, 1-5. 

Druckfehler im Magischen Catalog, 6-7. 

Druckfehler im Cal^listischen Catalog, [i]. 

Appended to some of the entries are notes 
referrmg sometimes to the author, sometimes to 
the contents of the MSS. 

Ladrague, Bihliothique Ouvarqf^ 
SecriteSt 1870, No. 543. 

Sciences 

I So CATALOGUS^CHAMBON 

CATALOGUS Medicamentorum tarn simplicium, quam pneparatorum et 
compositoruin ad Usum Nosocomii Brixiae editus a Medica Deputatione 
lussu Illustrissimorum Praesidum Anno MDCCXCIV. Brixiae 

MDCCVIC. Ex Typographia Locatelliana cum Facultate. 

8*. Pp. i8 [a blank]. 

CATENA. 

See AUREA CATENA Homcri. 

CATO CHEMICUS. 

See HANNEMANN (jOHANN LUDWIG). 

CENSURA HERMETICA. 

See QUADRATUM ALCHYMISTICUM. Ali Puli, Centrum Naturae Concentratum 
p. 56. 

CENT-CINQUANTE-TROIS Aphorismes Chymiques. 
See HELMONT (franciscus mercurius van). 

CENTRUM Naturae Concentratum. 
See ali pull 

CEPHALUS (Arioponus). 

Mercurius Triumphans & Hebdomas Eclogarum Hermeticarum. Vni cum 

Commentariis Acroamaticis et Mysticis. In quibus de vnica, vera, summa, 

& antiquissima Philosophorum Medicina disseritur, Libris XIIX. Omnia 

Studio & Opera: Arioponi Cephali Eutopiensis. Cum Grat: & Priuil(^: 

Caes : Maiest : ad Decennium. Magdeburgi Excudebat Andreas Seydner 

Epoch: Chr: M.D.C. 

8**. Pp. [ao] 144. The vignette represents a dragon in a fire with the motto: 
Durare Mori et non Perire. The dedication to Rudolph H. is signed M. C. M. D., 
which stands for Martinus Copus, Medicinae Doctor, the Author. 

Apotelesmata Philosophica, Mercurii Triumphantis, de vera, et summa 
Antiquissimorum Philosophorum Medicina. In quibus Elucidatio & Clauis 
totius Operis. Lahore & studio Arioponi Cephali Eutopiensis. Cum Grat : 
& Priuil^. Caes. Maiest. ad Decennium. Magdeburgi Excudebat Andreas 
Seydner. Anno M.D.CI. 

4**. Pp. [72]. The vignette is the dragon as above, with the motto : Aut taceant 
aut discant. 

Borel, Bihliotheca Ckimica, 1654. p. 58. Beytrag %ur Gexhichie der kohem Chtmie^ 1785. 

Mercklin, Lindenius rtnavaius, 1686, pp. 87, 786. p. 584 (' a Latin poem, with expositions of mystical 

Lenglet Dufresno^, Histoirt dt la Pkilosophie and theosophic tenor. ') 

Hermitique^ 174a, iii. p. 133. Kopp. Die AkhemU, 1886, iL p. 366. 

CESARELLI (Hippolito). 

See ANTIDOTARIO ROMANO, 1635. 

CHAMBON (Joseph). 

Traits des Metaux, et des Mineraux, et des Remedes qu'on en peut tirer; 
Avec des Dissertations sur le Sel & le Soulphre des Philosopes, & sur la 
Goute, la Gravelle, la petite V^role, la Rougeole & autres Maladies : avec un 

CI/AMBON—C/fARAS 

i5t 

CHAMBON (Joseph). Continued, 

grand nombre de Remedes choisis. Par M. Chambon, cy-devant premier 
M^icin de Jean Sobieski, Roy de Pologne. A Paris, Quay des Augustins, 
Chez Claude Jombert, vis-kvis la Descente du Pont-neuf, k Tlmage Nostre- 
Dame. M.DCCXIV. Avec Approbation, & Privil^e du Roy. 

Pp. [42] 547 [5]. 

12" 

Ao edition of 1713 is (juoted in Jacob Ltupolds 
Prodrwmus and Gmelin ra addition to the above 
quotes another, Paris, 1760, la". 

Joseph Chambon was bom at Grignan, in Pro- 
vence, in 1647, in 1678 was Doctor of the Faculty 
at Avignon (of Aix, according to Dezeimehs). 
settled at Marseilles, was obligol to leave it, and 
went to Italy, to Germany, and to Poland, where 
he became physician of the King, John Sobieski, 
with whom he remained till the siege of Vienna. 
Wishing to know about the adherents of Paracelsus 
and Van Helmont, be journeyed to Holland, 
crossed to England, and thence to France. At 
Paris, through the influence of Fagon, he received 
his licentiateship, and practised with great reputa- 
tion, but on account of the Faculty not accepting 
bis promise about the use of secret remedies, he was 
not made a doctor. Having been asked to visit a 

Jacob Ltupolds Prodromus Bibliotheca Metallicet, 

>732, p. 43- 
Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire de la PhilosopkU 

HermetiqtUt I743» iii* p« 134* 

Gobet, Ijts Anciens Miniralogistis du Hayautiu 
de France^ 1779, ii* P> ^44* 

Haller, Bibliolheca Afedicinte praclicte, 1788, iv. 
pp. 2x4, 2x9. 

Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemie, 1798, ii. p. 356. 

patient, a Neapolitan, who was in the Bastille, he 
took up his cause and wrote a memoir in his 
defence to the King. In the coivse of this he 
made certain reflections on the Duke of Savoy and 
the Duke of Burgundy, and he himself was sent in 
consequence to the Bastille, where he remained 
two years. He then left Paris, returned to Mar- 
seilles, and was made physician to the Galleys by 
the help of the Count of Grignan ; but in 1705. 
having failed to save the life of the Countess of 
Grignan, who was attacked by smallpox, he threw 
up nis appointment, and Wwed. in retirement with 
his brother, who was dean of the Chapter of 
Grignan. He was still alive in 1732. He wrote 
Principes de physique rapporlis 4 la midednt 
pratique^ Paris, 3 parts, 1711, 17x4, 1716 respec- 
tively, 12** ; X750, 12", and one or two dissertations. 

Biographie Midicale^ Paris, Panckoucke (i8ao- 
25) iii. p. 213. 

Qu^rard, Lxl France Litt^raire, 1830, ii. p. 117. 

Dezeimeris, JHctionnaire kistorique de la wUde- 
cine, X83X, I. ii. p. 662. 

Nouvelle Biographie Ginirale^ '^SSt *x. col. ?9X. 

JHctionnaire Encyclopidique des Sciences Aiidi- 
cales, 1874, XV. p. loi. 

CHARAS (Moyse). 
Pharmacop^e Royale Galenique et Chymique, par Moyse Charas, Docteur en 
M^decine, ci-devant D^monstrateur de Fune & de I'autre Pharmacie au 
Jardin Royal des Plantes. Nouvelle Edition, revue, corrigte & tres-con- 
sid^rablement augmentde par M. L. M. de TAcad^mie royale des Sciences, 
& Docteur en M^decine de la Faculty de Paris ; avec les Formules Latines 
& P'ran^oises; le Tarif des M^icamens, & un Traits extr^ment curieux 
sur les £aux Minerales. Tome Premier, Contenant la Pharmacop^ 
Galenique. A Lyon, chez les Freres Bruyset, Libraires, rue Merciere, au 
Soleil & li la Croix d'Or. M.DCC.LIII. Avec Approbation et Privilege 

du Roy. 

4*. Pp. xvi. 440. 
Extra engraved title. Title red and black. 

Tome Second, Contenant la Pharmacop^ Chymique. 

Pp. viii. 441-876. [2 blank.] Title red and black. 

Traits abreg^ des Eaux Minerales de France. 

Pp. 72. Five plates of Apparatus. 

The editions of this work enumerated by the 
biblio^rai^ers are numerous : Paris, 1672, 1676, 
x68x, in 8° ; 1676, 1682, 1692, in 4** ; Lyons, 1693. 
and the present, 1753. 4^ It was translated into 
Latin : Pkarmacopeea Regia^ Geneva, X684, 4** 

(1683, Stolle and Weigel). According to MangeC 
the book was translated into many languages, even 
into Chinese, for the use of the EmpercM*. The 
English version was published in 1678, 4°. 

tS2 

CHAkAS—CHARTlER 

CHAR AS (Moyse). Continued. 

Theriaque D'Andromacus, avec une Description particuliere des Plantes, des 
Animaux & des Mineraux employez k cette grande Composition, et les 
Reformations & Observations necessaires, tant sur leur Election & Prepara- 
tion, que sur leur dernier melange. Par Moyse Charas, Docteur en Medecine, 
& Chymiste du Roy de la Grande Bretagne. Nouvelle Edition, Rev^e & 
augment^e. A Paris, chez Laurent d'Houry, rue S. Jacques, pr& les 

Mathurins, au S. Esprit M.DC.LXXXV. Avec Approbation & Privil^e 
du Roy. 

la^ Pp. [14, Engraved title included], 12, 505 [7]. 

The first edition appeared at Paris, 1668, ia°. A German translation was 
published at Frankfurt a. M., 1679, 8^ The 'Theriaque' consisted of 65 ingredients, 
and in this book a description of each of these is given. The engraved title contains, 
set in a landscape, vipers and a beaver, in both of which he took g^'eat interest 

Charas (1618-169)8), bom at Uz^, came to Paris, persuaded him to go to Spain to see the King, who 

and made himself known by his book on the 
'Theriaque.' He studied the anatomy and nature 
of the viper, on which he wrote two treatises, 
Paris, 1669, 8*, and 1672, 1678, 1690, 1694, tf* ; for 
nine years conducted the Course of Chemistry in 
the Jardin des Plantes and wrote his Pharmacop^. 
In x68o, on account of the revocation of the Edict 
of Nantes, he went to England — as he was of the 
reformed religion — and became the pharmacist of 
Charles 1 1. He lived in England for nve years, and 
passed to Holland. There the Spanish Amba^ador 

Acta Eruditarum, for Septr. 1683, p. 407. 
Manget, Bibliotheca Scriptorum Medicorum, 
1731, I. ii. p. 53. 
Jeuob Leupolds Prodromus Biblioihec<B metallka, 

»73?. P- 43- 

Eloy, Dtctionnaire Historique de la Midicine^ 

T^7^> »• P- 229 ; ^77^f >• p. 594- 

Portal, Histmre de V Anatomie el de la Chirurgie, 
1770, iii. p. 403. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Botanica^ Tiguri, 1771, i. 

P-54I- 
Haller, Bibliotheca Chirurgica, Bernae, 1774, i. 

P. 390. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Medicince prctcticee^ Basil. 
1779, iii. p. 245. 

Baumer, Bibliotheca Chemica, 1782, p. 109. 

Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemie, 1798, ii. pp. 251. 

Hutchinson, Biographia Medica, 1799, i. p. 193. 

Condorcet, "Eloges des membres de I'Acad^mie 
des Sciences de Paris,'* Oeut;rts, 1804, i. p. 132. 

Fuchs, Repertorium der chemischen Litteratur^ 
i8o6-o8, p. i8x. 

Watt, Bibl. Britannica, 18x9, i. (authors) 213/- 

was in poor health ; he went, much against his 
convictions, experimented with vipers, and his 
science having brought him into conflict vrith the 
Church, at the age of 72 he passed into the prison 
of the Inquisition, where he was confined for. four 
months. He ultimately went over to the Romish 
Church, and returned to Paris, where he was con- 

fratulated by the King on his change of views, 
le was shortly after made a member of the 
Academy of Sciences. He died 17 January, 1698, 
in his 8oth year. 

Bio^aphie Midicale^ Paris, Panckoucke (1820- 
25I in. p. 219. 

Ersch & Gruber, Allgemeine Encyklopddie, 1827, 
xvi., p. 156. 

£>^imeris, Dictionnaire Historique de la Al^de- 
cine, Paris, 1831, I. ii. p. 668. 

Biographic UniverselUy 1844, vii. p. ^04. 

Bayle & Thillaye, Biographic MidtcaU, Paris, 
1855, i. p. 445. liis list is somewhat different from 
Gmelin's. (The tone of this article and that by 
Dezeimeris may be observed. ) 

Nouvelle Biographic Ginirale^ 185 c ix. col. 712. 

Phillippe & Ludwig, Geschichte der Apotheker, 
Jena, 1855, P- S04. etc. 

Paul-Antoine Cap, Eludes biographiques^ i^ 
S^rie, Paris, 1857, pp. 1 17-130. 

Dictionnaire Encyclop^dique des Sciences M^di- 
calesy Premiere S^rie, 1874, xv. p. 416. 

Billings, Index-Catalogue^ 1881, ii. p. 843 ; 2d 
Series, 1898, iii. p. 334. 

Ilirsch, Biographisches Lexikon der hervor- 
ragenden Aerzte, 1884, i. p. 703. 

CHARLES VI., Roy de France. 
Oeuvre Royalle. 

See SENDivoGius (michael), Cosmopolite, 1629, p. 91. 

other entertainments of his lucid moments to have 

In the story of Nicolas Flamel, Charles VI. of 
France is introduced as sending Cramoisi to find 
out the truth of the reports which were circulating 
about Flamel's wealth. He is said amongst the 

Borel, Bibliotheca Chimica, 1654, p. 59. 
Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire de la Philosophic 
HernUtique^ 1742, i. pp. 216, 246, 469 ; iii. p. 134. 

engaged in alchemical experiments. The present 
tract is probably not by him. 

Hoefer, Histoire de la Chitnie^ 1842, i. p. 435 ; 
1866, i. p. 460. 

CHARTIER (Jean). 
Scientia Plumbi Saeri Sapientum. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1661, vi. p. 569. 

CHARTIER—CHEMIA 153 

CHARTIER (Jkan). OrnHnutd. 

The original work b in French : La Science dm said about him. His book is mentioned by Lenglet 
Piomt Saari des Sagu^ Paris, 1651, 4". The Dufresnoy. 
author is called a phjrskaan, but notbmg more is 

Bordy BiUidkeca Ckiwuca^ 1654, p. 59; 1656, p. Gmelin, Geschickie der ChemU^ 1797, i. p. 63a. 

56. Schmiedcr, Gtxhichit der Alckemie^ 18^ p. 431. 

Jaco^ Leufolds Prodromus Bihliotkecee MetaUiae^ Hoefer, Histmrt de la Ckimie, 1843, u. p. 33a ; 

173a, p. 44. 1869, ii. 324. 

Len»et Dulresno^, Histoire de la Philosopkie 
Hermmque, 174a, iii. p. 154. 

CHEMIA. 
De Chemia Senioris . . . Libellus. 

See ZADITH SENIOR. 

CHEMIA. 

See ARTE (De) Chemica Libri duo, 1602. 

CHEMIA IN NucE, Oder : kurze doch aufrichtige Anweisung zu der Wissenschaft 

der Zerlegung der Kor|>er. 

Et nos ferulae subduximus manum, & nos consilium dedimus. 

Juvenalis. 
Anno 177 7i den 20 May. 

No place or printer. 

8*». Pp. 16. 

On the title-page is a vignette of the sun surrounded by rays, with the sjrmbol of 
salt as a planet, and the motto: In Sole et Sale Omnia. This is apparently the 
second edition. 

[Another Copy.] 

Chemia in Nuce. 
See DREY Kleine Schriftcn, 1778, p. 5. 

CHEMIA Radonalis, das ist vernunfTtmafsige Anweisung, wie vermittelst der 
Spagyrischen Kunst, aus den drey Reichen der Natur die itziger Zeit 
gebrauchlichsten Artzeney-Mittel bereitet werden sollen. Welcher beygeftiget 
ist Praxis Chimiatrica, oder kurtzer doch deutlicher Unterricht, wie die 
vomehmsten Kranckheiten des menschlichen Leibes, aus ihren Ursachen 
und Zeichen sattsam erkant, und mit vorhero gezeigten Medicamentis 
gliicklich curiret werden konnen. Alles nach den Grund-Satzen der neuen 
Philosophiae ausgearbeitet, und aus den Englischen, in das Hochteutsche 
iibersetzet, auch mit niitzlichen Registern versehen. Franckfurt und 

Leipzig, Verlegts Johann Justus Erytropel, 1696. 

8*. pp. [58] 304 ; 270. Title red and black. 

[Another Copy.] 

This is a treatise on pharmaceutical chemistry, but I have not seen the original. It is not from 

Id the first part is contained the methods of W. Y-worths Chymicus rationalis : or the Funda- 

niaking different preparations of animal and mental grounds of the Chymical Art, London, 

v^table substances for medical use. The second 1692, 8*. An edition, 1697, of this latter work is 

enumerates diseases and the medicines with which mentioned by Gmelin {Gtschichte der Chemie, 1798, 

they are to be treated. ii. p. 695), but he gives the author's name erron- 

It purports to be translated from the l^nglish, eously as W. H. Worth. 

tS4 

CHRMIE^CHRiSTOFLE 

CHEMIE, 

See BIRKHOLZ (ADAM MELCHIOR). 

CHEMISCHE BELUSTIGUNGEN. Oder Sammlung auserlesene Kunststucke, 
die zur Bewunderung und zum Vergniigen gereichen. Leipzig, 1794. 

bey Friedrich August Leo. 

8*. Pp. XX. 258 [la]. a plates of apparatus. 

This is not a treatise on Chemistry but a couple 
of hundred startling effects producra bv chemical 
action, arranged in d^ht classes: i. Tricks with 
colours ; a. Sjrmpatbetic inks ; 3. Tree of Diana, 
etc ; 4. Phosphorus ; 5. Combustion experiments ; 

6. Explosions ; 7. Gases ; 8. Miscellaneoiis experi* 
ments. 

It is a collection of popular lecture 
tions. The author has not given his name. 

CHIMIA. 

Das Buch von der Kunst Chimia eines ungewissen Authors. 

See MORGENSTERN (PHILIP), Turba, 1613, i. p. 504. 
See MORGENSTERN (PHILIP^ Turba, 1750, i. p. 612. 

This is the translation of the tract ARTE (de) chymica (/.r.). 

CHIMICA (I^) del Gusto e deir Odorato o sia \ Arte di comporre facilmente, 
e con poca spesa i liquori da Bere, e le Acque odorose con un metodo 
nuovo per fare i liquori fini senza acquavite, Traduzione dal Francese. 
Firenze, MDCCLXXXXIL Nella stamperia Bonducciana con Approvazione. 

8". Pp. vii. [x blank] a8o. 6 engraved plates. 

The author of this work is called Abb^ Poncelet, 
and P^ Poljrcarpe, so that his name appears also 
as Polycarpe Ponodet, and he was bom at Verdun, 
but nothing else is said about him. He wrote a 
tract on thunder, x;66, and one on wheat, 177^ 
The present work appeared under the title Chimie 
du GoAt et de Vodorat .... Paris, 1755, ^ I °cw 
editions, Paris, 1774, 8" ; Paris, 1800, a vols. 8*, of 
which there is a copy in the British Museum. 

Qu^rard, La France littiraire^ 1835, vii. p. a6i. 
Biographie Universelle, i8a3, xxxv. p. 340 ; or. 
Id, no date, xxxiv. p. 45. 

Presumably the Italian translation was made from 
that of 1774. The French edition which I have 
seen is entitled Nouvclle Chimie du GoUt et de 
rOdorat, . . . par M. G. . . . Paris, 1819, a 
vols., 8*", with 10 plates. This is an enlargied and 
much altered edition from the above, but there 
axe paragraphs remaining which show that these 
two books only differ by the French edition being 
modernized and improved. 

Nouvelle Biographie Ginirale, x866, xl. col. 735. 
Poggendorff, Biografhisck 
wdrtervuch^ 1863, ii. cot 496. 

CHIMICA (La) per Le Donne. 

Parva leves capiunt animos. 

Ovid. 
Tomo Primo. In Venezia, MDCCXCVI. Dalla Tipografia Pepoliana 
Presso Antonio Curti q. Giacomo Con Privilegio. 

8*. Pp. XX. 343 [i blank], Tomo Secondo [a blank], iii.-viii, 333 [i] [a blank]. 
Pp. X73-6, numbered twice. 

CHESNE (Joseph Du). 

See QUERCETANUS OOSEPHUS). 

CHORTALASSEUS (Johannes). 

See GRASSHOFF OOHANN). 

CHRISTOFLE DE GAM ON. 
Le Tresor de Tresors. 

See linthaut (henri de), i6ia 

CHRISTOPHORUS^CHR YSANDER 

ISS 

CHRISTOPHORUS PARISIENSIS. 
Christophori Parisiensis Eluddarius. Das ist ein edles Biichlein voni rechten 
Grund, Mittel und Ende der wahren uhralten philosophischen universal 
Median, fiir etlich hundert Jahren von diesem authore beschrieben, jetzo 
aber in einer weit bessem Teutschen version, als fiir 40 Jahren geschehen, 
in Druck verfertiget Hamburg in Verlegung Gottfried Liebezeits, im 

Jahr Christi, 1697. 

8^. pp. 107-308. MS. title-page, MS. notes. 

This is a fragment from a copy of the Vitr aufs- Paris, 1649^ 8*. There is an edition of the second 
erlisene Teutsau CAewUscke BUchUin {§.v\ port, to which are added tracts by Raymund Lully, 

Dofresnoy mentions Elucidarium Chimicum^ Hall, 1610, 8**. 

Eluddarius seu artis transmutatoriae summa major cum Appendice. 

See THEATRUM CH£MICUM, 1661, vi. p. 1 95. 

Eluddarius. 

See viER AUSSERLESENE Tcutschc Chcmischc Biichlein, 1697, p. 107. 

Nothing^ is known of Christophorus Parisiensis. 
His date is given by Lenglet Uufresnoy as ta6o ; 
other writers say in general terms the thirteenth 
ceotniy. Even his name b vari«l; for Lenglet 
Dofresnoy calls him "Christophe de Paris ou de 
Perouse.'^ 

Schmieder has favoured us with a fancy bio- 
graphr. As he vras so little known he was 
probably not a teacher in the university, but 
IS to be looked for amount the monks. In that 
case, however, it is not in France that he is to be 
found, but in the Benedictine Abbey of St. 
AIImuis. Two Benedictines called 'Parisiensis' 
lived there and wrote a history ; the elder to 1359. 
when he died, the younger to 1375. The latter is 
known as Matthew of Paris, and the two are usually 

Nazari, Delia TramutcUiome metallUa Scpti Ire, 

Bwa«a» 157a, p. ^371 »S99. P- 137- 
Maier, ^nmMa AuretB Afens^, 1617, p. 543. 

Bord, atbUoikeca Chemica^ x654« P* 6x ; 1656, 

p. 58. 
Borrichius, Cansfectus Scriptorum Cktmicomm^ 

'^1 P» 32, No. xlviii. 

Loiglet Dufi^snoy, Hisioire de la PhilosophU 
HemUtiquc, 174a, i. p. 467 ; iiL p. 57, 134. 

confused under this name ; but as it is unUkely the 
elder was also called Matthew, possibly he was 
Christopher. And this is history I 

A good many writings are ascribed to him by 
Nazari, and his list is copied by Borel and sub- 
sequent writers. None of these have been printed, 
and, if the^ ever existed, or if they exist now, are 
in manuscript. 

Of the present work there was a German version 
published at Halle, 1608, according to the Beytrag, 
and one in Latin, at Paris^ x^9- In 1773 a new 
German edition was published at Frankfurt and 
Leipzig. No value is attached to this tract by 
Borri(£ius and other critics. In the Bibliotkkque 
Ouvaroff there is an edition of the German, Hall, 
1668, 8 , 137 pages not numbered. 

Fictuld, Probier- Stein y 1753, Th. ii. p. 58. 
Beytrag zur Geschickte der hdhem Chemie^ 1785, 

P- 591. 
Gmelin, Geschickte der Chemie, ^7^* i* p> 59* 
Schmieder, Geschickte der A Ichemte, 1833, p. 14a 
Hoefer, Histoire de la Chimie, 184a, 1. p. 380 ; 

1866. i. p. 404. 
LadrsLgue, Bibliothique Ouvarof, Sciences 

Sec rites, 1870, Nos, 717-731. 

Kopp, Die Alchemic^ x886, ii. p. 347, 378, 386, 

CHRYSANDER (Alitophilus). 
Aureum Seculum Patefactum: oder, die eroffnete giildene Zeit, darinnen 
das von alien Chymids und wahren Philosophis langst-gewiinschte Men- 
struum Universale, seu Materia Chaotica sonnenklar entdecket. Gott zu 
Ehrcn, und denen, die ihn lieben, zum erfreulichen Vergniigen ausgefertiget 
von Alitophilo Chrysandro. Niimberg, In Verlegung Johann Ziegers, 1706. 

8^ Pp. ao7 [i blank]. 

[Another Copy.] 

Ladrague, Biblufthi^ue Ottvarc^^ Sciences 

■ ja8. 

eidelberg, 1886, ii. 

Fictuld, Probier-Stein, 1753, "^b* ^^ P* 34* Ladrague, Bibliothiaue Ou 

Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemie, G<^ttmgen, 1798, Secrites, Moscou, 1878, No. im8. 

it p. 3x4. Kopp, Die Alchemic, Heidc 

p. 3^ 

Anhang Chymischer Ergotzlichkeiten. 

See DELiciiK Medics et Chirurgicae, 1703-1705. 

IJ6 

CHR YSIPPUS—CN YM/^ 

CHRYSIPPUS Fanianus. 

See FANIANUS (CHRYSIPPUS). 

CHRYSOGONUS DE PURIS. 

Das Pontische oder Mercurial-Wasser der Weisen, aus Philosophischen 
SchrifHen denen Sohnen der Kunst ordentlich vorgestellet, von Chrysogono 
de Puns Uranopolitd. 

Symbol, Aurea Vellera Sunt In Colcho: Hylealia Dona. 
Anno M DC LXXXIII. 

8". Sigs. A-B, in eights, or pp. [16]. Without place and printer's name. 

Pontische oder Mercurial-Wasser der Weisen. 

See ROTH-SCHOLTZ (friederich), Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum, 1728, i. p. 391. 

To the same anonymous writer these are also 
ascribed: 

Cynosura chemica tincturam universaUm iu" 
dicans, 1689, 4*^. 

Fictuld, Prohier-Sttin, 17^3, Th. ii. p. 1x8 (calls 
him an Englishman, a sophist and no philosopher, 
and says his tract is of no use). 

B^ttragzur GtsckichU dtr hdhern CAemie, 1785, 
pp. 635, 640. 

Staiua mercun'aiis ad tincturam particulartm 
ex universaU ortam, 1689, 4^ 

Gmelin. Geschichte der CMemie, 1798. ii. p. 14. 
Ladrague, Biblioihique Ottvaraf, Sciemces 
Secrites, 1870, No. 996, 
Kopp, Die Alckemie, 1886, ii. 340, 391. 

CHRYSORRHOAS, sive de Arte Chymica Dialogus. 
See GRATAROLO (g.^ 1561, L sig.*5 verso. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, ii. p. 1 39. 

See also penotus (Bernard g.). 

CHRYSOSTOMUS (Polycarpus). 

See drebbel (Cornelius), Tractat, 1723. 

The person concealed under this pseudonym is 
the author of a rather notable work entitled : 
Missiv an die kocherleuchtete BrUderschaft des 
Ordens des Goldenen und Rosenkreutnes^ first 
published in i7i(^ and afterwards reprinted in 
Cardilucius* Antrum natmrtB et artis reclusum, 
1710, in Christoph Helbig's ObservaHones medico- 
cJ^^mica, 171 1, and J. Ott. Helbig's Curiosa 
physica, 1714. A new edition was published at 

Fictuld, Probier-Stein^ 1753, Part i., p. iia. 
Beytrag zur Geschichte der hdhern C hemic, 1785, 
pp. 540. 650, 681. 
Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemie, 1798, ii. p. 331. 

Leipzig in 1783, with a list of two hundred Rosi- 
crucian books. Nothing is reported of the author ; 
even to the writer of the Beytrag his actual name 
^^'as unknown. On the three occasions when be 
refers to the A/issiv and its author the com- 
mendation and admiration are edged with the 
double meaning which makes the verdicts of the 
Beytrag anything but compliments. 

KIoss, Bibliographic der Freitnaurerei, 1844, 
No. 2433. 

Ladrague, Bibliothique Ouvarojf, Sciences 
Secrites, 1870, Nos. 1^31-32. 

Kopp, Die Alchemte, 1886, if. p. 305. 

CHYMIA. 

See BUCH (Das) Chymia. 

CHYMI2E Aurifodina Incomparabilis quam recludit Praeludium Prosimetricum 
'magicarum noctium sortes Sibyllinae Chymicae Vanni Granatum erutum, 
Authoribus immortalibus adeptis cui subjungitur Commentatio de Pharmaco 
Catholico. Lugduni Batavorum, Sumptibus Autoris, 1696. 

4*. Pp. [i*2 blank] 3-393 {sic, for 393), 10 engravings. Commentatio, 76 
[i] [3 blapk], I engraving. 

This is a reissue of the Reconditorium ac 
Reclusorium Opulentim Sapientiteque Numinis 
Mundi Magni, Arostel. 1666 {g.v.). 

The only difference is in the first sheet The 
first leaf of it is blank; the title-page is new, 

Epigramma in Zailum is on f 3 recto, and on the 
reverse is the Idoneum ad Lectorem Interverbium, 
The engraved Character Adeftorum (in red) and 
the engraved plate Chorus Philosophorum of the 
older edition have been omitted. 

CHYMIjE-^HYMISCHE 

157 

CHYMLE. Continued, 

RoCh-Sdioltz, BUUoikeca Ckewnca, 1727. p. 41. of hundred marks of fine gokL The Tkeatrum 

Beytrag tur GesckUkie der hdktm Cktwnt, 178c ChewUcum seems to me more productive accordinnf 

pi 644 ( *an exceUeot gold mine for the mining friends to its contents and value '). 

of Hermetic science ; it bears annuallj a couple 

CHYMICA Vannus. 

See RECONDITORIUM, 1666. 

See chymijE aurifodina, 1696. 

CHYMICAL Dictionary. 

See F. (j.), A New light of Alchymy, etc., 1674, p. 303. 

CHYMICUS. 

See CURIOSE (Der) Chymicus. 

CHYMIERASTES. 

See C. (J.), Chymierastes, 

CHYMIPHILUS Q. J.), Pseud. 
Der wahren Chymbchen Weisheit Offenbahrung, das ist; getreue und 
aufrichtige Entdeckung der Materie, welche genomnien warden mufs, wann 
man den wahren Weisen-Stein Lapidem Philosophorum Tincturam Univer- 
salem machen will ; aus vielen Theophrastischen Handschrifiten, vorhin 
niemahlen in den Truck kommen, mit gantz deutlich und klaresten Worten 
angezeiget, dais es klarer nicht seyn konte. Auch wegen derenjenigen 
welche in denen chymischen Handgriffen noch nicht sonderbar erfahren 
seynd, mit sonderbarem Unterricht und kiirtzester Unterweisung der 
nothwendigen Praeparationen versehen. Alles denen Liebhabem der 
Chymischen Weisheit zu Gefallen in offenen Truck gegeben von J. J. 
Chymiphilo. Getruckt im Jahr 1720. 

8*. Pp. [8] 219 [14, I blank]. Title red and black. Engraved plate of the 
Prague medal. 

[Another Copy.] 

The date has been cut off. 

Gmelin folk>wed by Schmieder and by Kopp 
says this book was pnnted at NQmberg. This is 
not stated in the above copv, and no place is given 
either by Fictuld or by Ladrague. The former 
writer condemns the book as ' lauter Sophistische 
Qoetscbernr/ except the episdes of Gualdus. 

The book contains a chapter on the antiquity of 
Alchemy, in which reference is made to the Greek 
alchemists; another contains an account of the 

Die Edelgebome Jungfer Alchymia, 1730, pp. 
178^285. 
Fictuld, Probier-Stein^ 1753, Th. ii. p. 52, 
Gmelin, Gtsckichte der Ckemie, 1798, ii. p. 307. 

transmutation made at Prague, and that witnessed 
by Helvetius, the curious history of Gualdus, and 
some other narratives ; and a third describes decep- 
tions practised by so-called adepts. 

I have followed the authorities in calling the 
author Chymiphilus, but I am inclined to think 
that this is a mere epithet, and that the initials 
may represent the author's name. 

Schmieder, Geschickte dtr Alchemie^ 183a, p. 5x7. 
Ladrague, Biblioihique Ouvaroff, Sciences 
SecrHes, 1870, No. 14^ 
Kopp, Die Alchemte, 1886, ii. p. 351. 

CHYMISCHE Abhandlung worinne die verschiedene Bereitung der Spiefsglafs- 
Tinktur . . . untersucht . . . wird. 
See VATER (christian). 

158 CHYMISCHE'-CHYMISCHER 

CHYMISCHE Hodizeit 

See ROSENCREUTZ (christian). 

CHYMISCHE Neuigkeiten von einer feinen Particular-Medicin, fortgesetiet 
mit einer hochst-deutlichen Beschrdbung der Materie des Steins der 
Weisen, und dessen wahren Grunde, auch femerer Handleitung von 
einem Philosophen aus der alten Welt Anno 1742. 

8". Pp. [7, I blank] 52 {He for 7a). 

The prdJEUX is si^^ T.G.X. Fictuld, ProHer- the author. There is a copy in the Biblioik^m 
Stein^ i753i 1*^* "• P- S'f makes no account of Ouvarof^ i870f ^fo» i^i. 

CHYMISCHE (Die) Sonne. 

See NEU-AUFFGEHENDE (Die) Chymische Sonne, 1740. 

CHYMISCHEN (Der) Weisheit Offenbahrung. 

See CHVMIPHILUS (j. J.). 

CHYMISCHER MONDEN-SCHEIN. 

Chymischer Monden-Schein, worinnen nicht allein angezeiget wird, das 
wahre Subjectum Philosophiae, sondern auch wo solches zu suchen sey, 
und dann wie solches praepariret werden soil; Auf ansuchen und bitten 
eines sonderbaren guten Freundes treulich aufgezeichnet, der erbaren Welt 
bekandt zu machen und drucken zu lassen erlaubet, von einem Der die 
Wahrheit nicht laugnet, verbergen will, noch kan. Franckfurt und 

Leipzig, Bey Johann Friedrich Fleischer, 1739. 

8"> Pp. 55 [if 4 blank], leaf of errata inserted at the end. Wants the frontispiece. 
MS. notes. 

About the authorship of this tract see stein brrgen. 

Chymischer Monden-Schein, worinnen nicht allein angezeiget wird, das 
wahre Subjectum Philosophise, sondern auch wo solches zu suchen sey, 
und dann wie solches praepariret werden soil ; Auf ansuchen und bitten 
eines sonderbaren guten Freundes treulich aufgezeichnet, der erbaren Welt 
bekannt zu machen und drucken zu lassen erlaubet, von einem Der die 
Wahrheit nicht laugnet verbergen will, noch kan. Franckfurt und Leipzig, 
bey Johann Friedrich Fleischer, 1744. 

8". Pp. 55 1^ pp. advertisement of chemical books]. The frontispiece forms a 
double page and is not included in the pagination. 

Chymischer Monden-Schein, worinnen nicht allein angezeiget wird, das 
wahre Subjectum Philosophiae, sondern auch wo solches zu suchen sey, 
und dann wie solches praepariret werden sdL Auf Ansuchen und Bitten 
eines sonderbaren guten Freundes treulich aufgezeichnet, der ehrbaren Welt 
bekannt zu machen und drucken zu lassen erlaubet, von einem, Der die 
Wahrheit nicht laugnet, verbeigen will, noch kan. Franckfurt und 

Leipzig, in der Fleischerischen Buchhandlung, 1760. 

8"' Pp. 55 [^ pp. advertisement of chemical books]. The frontispiece forms a 
double page, and is not included in the pagination. 

'* In the pale moonshine," says the Beytrag, It is quoted by Kopp, Die Alckemie, 1886, ii. 
"walking is uncertain. I go my wav in sunlight, p. 390. 
and go surely. " Beytrag tur Gtschichte der hdhem 
Chemie, 1785, p. 672. 

CHYMISCHER-^CHYMISCH' 1S9 

CHYMISCHER oder Alchymistischer Particularzeiger. 

See NAXAGORAS 0* £HRD VON). 

CHYMISCHER Zeig- und W^-Weiser, worinnen die Moglichkeit der 
Metallen-Verwandlung vor Augen gestellet, und der Weg zum Philosophischen 
Stein eroffnet wird. In Verlegung Johann Ziegers, Buchhandlers in 

Niirabeig. Anno 1689. 

24<^. Pp. 48. 
Ladrague calls it *Scig- und Wcg-Wciscr/ BibliotiUque Ouvarof, ScUmces Srcrites, 1870, No. 1289. 

CHYMISCHES Etwas in Nichts, das ist : Wie der hochberiihmte Stein der 
Weisen als eine edle Gabe Gottes, entfemet, und in hohen Dingen 
vergeblich gesuchet, aber nahe, und in geringen, gliicklich wird gefunden, 
in Etwas, doch griindlich entworffen, und mit einem vollstandigen Register 
versehen, von einem, der sich Mit In Gott BeLustiget. Drefsden und 
Leipzig, zu finden bey Gottfried Leschen, 1722. 

r*. Pp. 38. Index [lo]. 

The author's initials seem to be M. I. G. B. L. a disgrace for such a nian to spend his time in 

Fictold {Probier-Stein, ^7^* '^- *^ P* 4^)* ^^^' penning ** arch-lies" and sophistical deceptions, 

lioiis an edition of 17x8. He says that the author knowing them to be such 1 Ladrague, B^lioiJUque 

was a Saxon Decanus Theologize, and he thinks it Ouvarof^ Sciences Secretes, 1870, No. 144a 

CHYMISCHES Lust-Gartlein, in welchem die Verborgenheit der Natur 
und Kunst gepflantzet, daneben die Materie und Weise zum Lapide 
Philosophico zu wiircken, entdecket zu befinden. von Einem Liebhaber 
der Weisheit die im Verborgenen liget Ludwigsburg, Bey Christian 

Heinrich Pfotenhauer. A. 1747. 

8^. Pp. 106 (but pp. 64-65 are dropped). 

The following tracts are contained in this J. C. Cbymierastes den Liebhabem der Her- 

collection : metischen Philosophic Heyl, etc., p. 80. 

Tbeophrastus Paracelsus, Apocalypsis Hermctis, Johann Amd, Judicium uber die Vier Figuren 

von der Offenbahrung des verborgenen Geistes der des grossen Amphitheatri Henrici Khunraths, 

Natur, p. 4. p. 87. 

Hermeticae Philosophiae Studiosis [Kpistola], p. Otto Hellwig, Send-schreiben an P. Alexium 

17. Aufi^ustiner Ordens in Wien, p. 97. 

Philosophischcs Rfltzel in Teutsche Reimen Wahrhafifter und gerechter Prtn^ess vom Liquore 

gebracht durdi Filip Zesen von FUrstenau, p. ao. Alcahest und der Tinctur, p. lox. 

Das Geheimniifs vom Steine der Weisen or das Die Zubereitung des Liquoris, p. 103. 

Geheimnifs der bermetischen Philosophie, p. 22. Tugenden dieses Liquoris Alcahest, p. 105. 

Kopp, Die AUhemie^ 1886, ii. p. 375. 

CHYMISCHES Zwey-Blat. 
See LANGE Oohann). 

CHYMISCH- Unterirdischer Sonnen-Glantz ; das ist: Ausfiihrlicher Unterricht, 
von dem wahren Philosophisch-Chymischen Subjecto, und dessen naturlich- 
und nothigen Hand-Arbeiten, den sogenannten Lapidem Philosophonim 
aus alien dreyen Reichen sonder Anstand, Schaden und Unkosten zu 
verfertigen, Gott zu Ehren, der Warheit zu Steuer, denen armen Suchenden 
und SeufTzenden zum Trost und grosten Vergniigen ans Licht gegeben, 
von einem der Warheit besitzend und liebenden Freunde, der sich verdeckt 
nennet, Christlich, Fiirsichtig Vnd Stille, ist des Authoris Ernster Wille. 
Franckfurt und Leipzig, 1728. 

i6o 

CHYMISCH'-CLAIUS 

CHYMISCH-. Continued. 

8**. Pp. [14, including the Frpntispieoe] 424. Errata [a, a blank]. The Frootis- 
piece in two compartments repr«Mnts a mme. and a Chemist in the midst of his 
apparatus, in the of^en air. Folding plate full of symbols entitled: Tabula Aurea 
Salomonis et Hermetis. Title red and black. 

The volume contains the following tracts : 

Chymisch-Unterirdischer Sonnen-Glantz, p. x. 

Die drei letcten Capitel de Occulta Philosophorum 
Chymia (in verse), p. 24. 

Von Natflrlichen und Ul)ematQrlichen Dingen 
(Basilii Valentini), p. 43. 

Dicta Alani, p. 152. 

Metallurgia des Doctor Tanckii, p. 169. 

Fictuld assies this tract to Steinbergen, whom 
he identifies with chrys. fbrdinand von sabor 
{g.v.). The initials of the pseudonjrmous author 
correspond with those of Saber's, or of christian 

Fictuld, ProHeT'Steim^ 17231 Th. ii. p. i^ 
Beytrag xur Gtsckickte der hdhem Chemie, 1785, 
pp. 660, 663. 

Das 3^ und 4^ Buch aus den Wunderbahren 
Begebenheiten eines unbekandten Philosophi, pp. 
226, 282. 

£in Dialogus vom Stein der WeUen wo der 
Pneceptor Georgius und Disdpulus Albertus Qber 
Remhardi Fontinlein herrlich discuriren, p. 333. 

Aula Lucis, oder : Das Haufs des Lichts durch 
S. N. . . . beschrieben, . . . abersetzt durch 
J. L. M. C, p. 394. 

FRIBDRICH VON STRINBERGEN (^.V.) : C P. V. S. 

In the Beytrag^ while these two pasonases are 
identified, the authorship of the present wora is not 
mentioned at all. 

Kopp, DU Akhemii, 1886, ii. p>. 390 (among 
books having the sun as part of the title). 

CIMBALUM Aureum. 

See THEATRUM CHRMICUM, 1 659, ill. p. 78 1. 

CLAIUS (Johann). 
Alckumistica, das ist: ein wunderbarliche seltzame, vnd bewerte Kunst, aufs 
Mist gut Arabisch, Tiirckisch, vnnd Reinisch Goldt, jha auch das beste 
gedigen Silber zu machen. Wider die betriigliche Alchimisten, vnnd 
vngeschickte vermeinte Theophratisten [j/ir], von einem sondem guten Freiindt, 
(so durch dise Fantasey betrogen, vnnd zu nachster Armut gerahten), alien 
Hochverstandigen zur vermeidung diser falschen Kunst, gantz notdiirfTtig 
beschriben : durch M. lohannen Claium. 

Weil jetzund fast in allem Landt, 
Die Alchimey nimbt vberhandt, 
Das mancher wirdt dardurch verfurt, 
Wie man wol an Exempeln spiirt, 
Hab ich zu Spott der Alchimey, 
Bschriben die grofs betriegerey. 
Gedruckt zu Amberg, durch Michael Forster. Anno M.D.XCIIII. 

A^ Sig. Ajr=pp. 81. MS. additions, 4 pp. The date is partly obliterated, and 
may be M.U.XClII. Ine vignette represents a capillary filter. 

durch Aletophiluni Parrhesiensem." The first 
part seems a reprint of the present poem ; the 

This is in verse and contains a recommendation 
to farmers to spread stable and byre manure upon 
the fields, and Claius then proceeds to trace the second part contains an exposure of and warning 

profit that accrues thereby to the crops, to the 
cattle, to the poultry, to the orchard, and so at 
last to the owner. It is a brief sketch of rural 
economy. 

Kopp quotes an edition of Mahlhausen, 1616 : 
" Altkumistica, das ist, die ware Goldkunst, aus 
Mist durch seine Operation vnd Proces gut Goldt 
zu machen, Wieder die betrieglichen Alchjrmisten 
vnd vngeschickten vermeinten Theophiustisten 
von Herm Johanne Clajo beschriebcm. Nd)en 

against the tricks of fraudulent alchemists. 

JohannClaius, bom 1535, was a nativeof Herzberg 
in Saxony, Rector at Goldberg, then at Nord- 
hausen, and in 1574 pastor at Bendeleben in Thur« 
ingia. He was a Hebrew Scholar, and made 
several translations into that language, amongst 
others of the Gospels and Epistles, Leipzig, 1578, 
afterwards, 1586, in the form of a tetraglott, 
German, Greek, Latin and Hetn'ew. He is the 
first also who compiled a complete German 

angehencktem Special-Bdicht — Mennigklicben cur grammar, of which editions of 1578, 1604, and 
Nachrichtung und Wamung zusammengebracht 1651 are mentioned. 

Wolfius, Bibiidheca H^raa, 1737, iii. p. 361. 

Morhof, Poiyhisior, 173X 1. iv. c 4, §7, p. 751. 

Stolle, Anleitung tur nistorit der Gtlakrheit, 
I736» p. iia. 

Jttcher, Allgemetnes GtUhrten-Ltxicon^ >750, 
i. coL 1937. 

Gmelin, Gtschichte der Chemie^ i797i i* 518. 
Schmieder, Geschichte der Alchtmie^ 1832, p. 

3S«- 
Ailgemeine Deuhchi Biqgraphie, 1876, iv. p. 

270. 

Kopp, Die Akhemie, 1886, i. p. 237. 

CLANGOR— CLAUDER i6i 

CLANGOR Buccins. 

5.^ ALCHIMIA (De) Opuscula, i$$o, i. f. 19. 

See ARTis AURiFSRiE . . . volumina, 1610, i. p. 288. 

See MORGENSTERN (philipX Turba Philosophorum, 16 1 3, i. p. 389; 1750^ i. p. 473. 

See BiANGET 0- J*X Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, ii. pp. 147, 877. 

In the German translalion it is also called Der Fictuld, Probier-Stein, 1753, Th. i. p. 63. 
Thorn der Schalwuyen^ and it sometimes appears LaLdTVig\ie,Bi^/iofkigueOuvarvfiSa'^HcesSfcriies, 
nnder the fonn Clamor. 1870, No. 10x8. 

Borricfatus, Comsfectus Scri^orum CMemuorttm, \ 

>^t p. as. I "DOL 

CLARKE (William). 

The Natural History of Nitre : or, a Philosophical Discourse of the Nature, 

Generation, Place, and Artificial Extraction of Nitre, with its Vertues 

and Uses. By William Clarke. London ; Printed by E. Okes for 

Nathaniel Brook at the Angel in Cornhill, neer the Royal Exchange, 167a 

8^. Pp. [14J 93. [i blank.] Imperfect, wanting A,. 

William Clarke was bom at Swainswyke, near where he died, 24 April, 1684. Morhof calls him 

Bath, about 164a His university course was taken Royal phjrsician. 

in Merton College, Oxford, where he graduated Haller mentions a medical tract apparently by 

&A. i66z, M.A. 166a, and was elected fellow of him, but the treatise on nitre is that by whico he 

Merton in i66p. He afterwards studied medicine, is best known. It was translated into Latin : 

and took the degree of M.D., and, settling in Bath, NaturalU Historia Nitri^ Frankfurt, 1675, 8^, 

practised his profession there with the ^eatest London, 167^, S"* ; Hamburg, 1675, 8**. 

success and esteem. In spite of strong mduce- Long previous to Clarke's, a tract on nitre had 

ments to continue there, he removed to Stepney, been published by Thomas Chaloner, London, 

1584, small 4**, fL [2] 22. 

Mercklin, Lindenim renovatus^ 1686, p. 372. J5cher, Allgtpuines Gelehrttn-Lexicom, 1750^ i. 

Manget, Bibliotheca scriptorum medicorum, 1731. col. 1034. 

1. iL p. 6a Haller, Bibliotheca Anatomica^ X777« ii* P< I94« 

Jojcob Leupolds Prodromus Bibliolhecte metallic^, I^loy, Dictionnaire Historique de la Midecine^ 

'73a. p. 44. ^7J^ »• p. 6$4. 

Morhof, Polyhistor, 1732, ii. p. 421. Haller, Bibliotheca Medicina practicte^ 1779, i^i* 

Kestner, Medicinixhes Gelekrten-Lexicon, 1740, p. 274. 

p. aoa Wood, Athena Oxonienses, ed. Bliss, 1820, iv. 

coL 133. 

CLAUDER (Gabriel). 

Gabrielis Clauderi, D. Medici Ducalis Saxonici, Academici Curiosi, Dissertatio 
de Tinctura Universali (vulgd Lapis Philosophorum dicti). In qua 
I. Quid Haec sit. 2. Quod detur in Rerum Natura ; an Christiano consul- 
turn sit immediate in hanc inqvirere ; 4. e qva Materia : & 5. qvo modo 
praeparetur, per rationes, & Variorum experientiam perspicui proponitur; 
aliaqve curiosa & utilia, huic analoga, adnectuntur. Ad Normam Academiae 
Naturas Curiosorum. Cum Serenissimi Electoris Saxoniae Privilegio. Alten- 
buTgi apud Godofredum Richterum, 1678. 

4*. Pp. [12] 272. Index [24]. 

^ Another edition : Altenburgi, 1668, 4^ is men- to the criticism of Alchemy by Athanasius Kircher. 
^ioDed, and a reprint : Schediasma de Tinctura Another reply was made by BLAinvKNSTKiN (s.) 
Universalis Norimbergee, 1736, This is a reply is -v.). 

Gabrielis Clauderi, des beriihmten Medici Dissertation von der Universal- 
Tinctur oder dem Stein der Weisen, in welcher i. Was diese seye 2. ob 
sie in der Natur gefunden werde, und ob einem Christen niitzlich seye, 
selbe zu erforschen; 3. Aus was fur einer Materi; und 4. wie sie bereitet 
werde, durch Beweifs-Griind und Erfahrungen beschrieben wird, deme 

L 

I62 

CLA UDER-'CLA VE 

CLAUDER (Gabriel). Continued. 

noch andere niitzliche und curiose Sachen mit beygeftiget worden. Denen 
Liebhabem zu Gefallen, ins Teutsche verseUet von einem Teutsch-gesinnten. 
Numberg, in Verlegung Peter Paulus Bleul, Kunst- und Buchhandlem, 
Oettingen, gedruckt bey Stephan Rolcken, Fiirstl. Hof-Buchdrucker. 
Anno MDCLXXXII. 

8**. Pp. ai7 (mispurint for 271). Regbter M. Wants pp. aai-o. This is a 
translation of the Dissertatio, to which is appended (p. 323) tne tract entitled : Das 
vermittcht eines allgemeinen Magneten herabgeMogene Luffl-Gold. 

In his defence of alchemy against Kircher, and 
his teacher Roliinck, he did not rely on his own 
experience, but gathered historic evidence of the 

possibility of metallic transmutation, and did what 
he could for his time. 

Tractatus de Tinctura Universali ubi in Specie contra R. P. Athanasium 
Kircherum pro existentii Lapidis Philosophici disputatur. 
See MANGET (j. J.), Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, i. p. 119. 

Eine Abhandlung vom Universal Stein. 

See SCHRODER (fr. j. w.X Neue Alchymistische Bibliothek, 1773, !!• i* P* '• 

Gabriel Clauder, son of Joseph Clauder, 
laureated poet, rector of Altenburg, was bom there 
18 Oct., 1633, studied at Jena and Leipzig, and 
graduated M.D. there; travelled in Holland, 
England, and Italy, practised in his native place, 
and was physician to several of the Saxon pnnces, 
and as associate he contributed papers to the 
Academia Naturae Curiosorum under the name 

Mercklin, Lindenius renovahts, 1686, p. 310. 

Miscellanea Academue NaiunB Curiosorum^ for 
1691, Norimb, 1692; Appendix, pp. 215-338; 
Memoir, with a fine portrait of Clauder. 

Paschius, De Inventis Novis Tractatus^ 1700^ PP* 
364, 367, 373. (Refers to his method of embalming. ) 

Manget, Bibliotheca Scriptorum Medicorum^ 1731 , 
I. ii. pp. 63-76. 

Jacc^ Leupolds Prodromus Bibliothecte meiallictt, 
1733, p. 44. 

Kestner, Medici nisches Gelehrien -Lexicon, 1740, 
p. 200. 

jQchcr, Allgemeines Gelehrien-Lexicon^ ^750, i. 

col- »939' 
Btlchner, Academice . . . Naturte Curiosorum 

Historia, 17^5, p. 468, No. 67. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Botanica, 1771, i. p. 634. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Anatomica, 1774, 1. p. 500. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Chirurgica, 1774, i. pp. 366,477. 

Eloy, Dictionnaire Historique de la Midecine^ 

1778, I. p. 6$^ 
■, Biblx 
p. 105. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Medicina practicce, 1779, iii. 

Theseus. He died in October (BQchner says 
9 Jan.), 1691 (others 1690). 

Amongst his works must be mentioiied his 
Methodus balsamandi corpora humama, Altenburg, 
1679, 4^ ! ^^<1 ^ invenio cinnabarino, Jena, 1684, 
4° ; but he wrote also about a thermoscope, about 
gunshot wounds, about mirrors, and on natural 
history. 

Gmelin, Geschichie der Chemie, 1798, iL pp. 31, 
208, aao, 373. 

Fuchs, Repertorium der Chemischen Litteraiur, 
1806-08, pp. 148. 186, 195. 196, 198, 199, aoo. 

Biographic MidicaU, Paris, Panckoucke (iSao- 
25), iii. p. 281. 

Sprengel, Geschichte der Arxneykunde, 1827, i^* 
p. 189. 

Dezeimeris, Dictionnaire Historique de la 
Midecine^ 1831, I. ii. p. 823. 

Schmieder, Geschichie der Alchemie, 183a, p. 413. 

Biographic Universelle, 1844, viii. p. 300. 

Bayle & Thillaye, Biographic Midtcale, 1855, 
i. p. 502. 

Nouvelle Biografhie Generate, 1863, ^ ^ol. 696. 

Ladrague, Bihliotheque Ouvar^, Sciences 
Secrites, 1870, Nos. 590, 1230, 1632. 

Goiter, Elogia clarorum Altenkurgensium^ I7i3t 
p. 58. 

Dictionnaire Encyclopedigue des Sciences Medi- 
coles, 1875, xvii. p. 658. 

All^emeine Deutsche Biographic, 1876, iv. p. 278. 

Billing Index-Catalogue, 1882, iii. p. 208 ; 
2nd Series, 1898, iiL p. 66S. 

Kopp, Die Alchemic, z886, i. 218 (commends 
the author for the clearness of his exposition). 

Baumer, Bibliotheca Chemica, 1782, p. 90. 
Beytrag Mur Geschichie der hdhem Chemie, 1785, 
p. 630. 

CLAUSIER (J.-Louis). 

See QUiNCY Oohn), 1749. 

CLAVE (EsTiENNE de). 

Le Cours de Chimie d'Estienne de Clave Docteur en Medecine, qui est le 

Second Liure des Principes de Nature. A Paris, Chez Olivier de Varennes, 

rue S. lacques, au Vase d*or. M.DC.XLVI. Avec Priuilege du Roy. 

»•. Pp. [4] 188 [8]. 

CLA VE—CLA VIS 

163 

the present Cnrrr de Ckimie, The author must not 
be identified with Gaston Claveus or Duko^ which, 
indeed, seems to be a misnomer. He was author 
also of a work: Paradoxes des fierrts ei pUr^ 
reries, Paris, 1635, 8*. 

Weigel, EimUitung tur allgewuinen Sckeidt' 
kuHsi, 1788, i. pp. 15a, 153. 

Fuchs, Repertorium der ckemiscken Ldiieraimr^ 
1806-08, pp. 133, 140. 

Ladrague, Bi^iiaiJUftte Ouvan^, Scietues 
Secrites, 1870, Na 108 1. 

CLAVE (EsTiKNNS de). Continued. 

Banmer ascribes to him a work : Frincipes de 
Natmre^ Paris, 1635, 8*, and Weigel quotes another 
work, Nouvelle Lumiert pkiiosopkique des vrap 
Principes . . , de ia Nature^ par Clave, Pans, 
164X, 8*, which might be an earlier edition of 

Borel, BiUioikeca Ckimica, 1654, p. 61 ; 1656, 

P.59- 
jaaA Ltupolds Prodromus Bikliotkeca wtetallica, 

>73a. p. 44- 
Baomer, Bibiiotkeca CAewuca, 178a, p. 51. 

CLAVES (Gaston de). 

See DUCLO (GASTON). 

CLAVICULA. 

See LULLIUS (RAYMUNDUS). 

Clavicula Henneticae Scientiae Ab Hyperboreo Quodam Horis Subsecivis 
Calamo Consignata Anno do locx: xxxii. Marburgi Sumptibus 

PhiL Casimiri Mullen, M DCC XLVI. 

4*. Pp. aa 

Clavicula Hermeticae Scientiae Ab Hyperboreo Quodam Horis Subsecivis 
Calamo Consignata. Anno cIdcIccxxxii. 1786. 

La Clavicule de la Science Hermetique ecrite par un Habitant du Nord dans 
ses Heures de Lobir. L'An MDCCXXXII. 1786. 

8^. Pp. 76. Latin and French on opposite pages. Without place and printer's name. 

There is another edition in Latin and French, Amsterdam, P. Mortier, 1751, sm. 8**, pp. 73. quoted 
*f Ladrague. I have not seen it. 

LadiBgoe, Bibiiothigtie Ouvarof^ Sciences Secrites, 1870, Nos. 1475-76. 

CLAVIS Majoris Sapientiae. 

See ARTEPHIUS. 

CLAVIS Philosophias Chemicae. 

See DARIOT (claudeX Die gulden Arch, Schatz vnd Kunstkammer, 1614, Part ii. 

p. 123. 
See EROFFNETE GEHEIMNISSE des Steins der Weisen (1708), p. 447. 

CLAVIS Philosophorum. 

See ECK DE SULTZBACH (PAULUS). 

CLAVIS, sambt seiner Declaration der Chymischen HandgrilTen. 

See TRISSMOSINUS (SALOMON^ Aurcum Vellus, Tractatus iii. (1598), p. 82. 

See TANCKE (JOACHIM), Promptuarium Alchymiae,*i6ia Appendix Tomi Primi, 

p. 124. 
See erOffnete Geheimnisse des Steins der Weisen (1708), p. 229. 
See [schatz und Kunstkammer], p. 124 

CLAVIS Sapientiae. 

See ARTEPHIUS. 

i64 

CLA VIS^CLODIUS 

CLAVIS Thesaurorum. 

See NEANDER (theophilus), Heptas Alchymica, 1621, p. 361. 
See also schlCssel. 

CLAVIS totius philosophise chemisticae. 

See DORN (GERARD). 

CLEFS de la Philosophic Herm^tique. 

See LE BRETON (CHARLES). 

CLETTUS (Georgius). 
Augenscheinliche Erklarung aller und jeder Particularitaten, fiimembsten 
HandtgrifTen vnnd Vortheylen ad conficiendum Azot Philosophonim 
necessaria. 
See kieser (franzX Cabala Chymica, 1606, p. 375. 

CLIII. Aphorismes (Thymiques. 

See HELMONT (FRANCISCUS MERCURIUS VAN). 

CLin. Aphorismi. 

See HELMONT (FRANCISCUS MERCURIUS VAN). 

CLINGIUS (FRANCISCUS). 

Niitzliche Answeisung . . . iiber Basilii Valentini Chymische Schrifften. 
See PHILOSOPHISCHES Licht und Schatten, &c., 1738, No. iii. p. 63. 

Franciscus Qinge was a Prussian privy-coun- 
cillor, but I have failed to get any details about 
him. 

Other three tracts besides the above were written 
by him : *' Frevwillige Einladung zur Anweisung 
in der wahren Chymie oder Philosophia hermetica, ' 
1712, 4" J " Ein richiiger Wegweiscr zu der eini^en 
Wahrheit in Krforschung der verborgenen Heim- 
lichkeiten der Nalur," Berlin, 1701, 8**; "Antwort 
an Theodorum Candidtmi, wegen des Cluvers 
fameuse Charteque, wider den Wegweiser zur 

Roth-Scholtz, Bibliotheca Chemica^ 1727, p. 43. 
Dit Edelgeborne Jungftr AUhymia, 1730, p. 31a 

einigen Wahrheit, in Erforschung der verborgenen 
HeimlichkeiteD der Natur," Ibid. 1701, r. 

The author of the Jungftr Alchymia speaks of 
him as excellent, and says no ooe haul better 
insight into the compositk>n of the metals than he^ 
and in order to silence carping critics quotes a long 
passage from Clinge's reply. Kopp merely men- 
tions the "Richtiger Wegweiser" as by a Franz 
Clinge, and adds that it must have been reviewed 
by a certain Quver, probably Detlef ClQver of 
Schleswig, because of Qinge's published reply 
thereto. 

Kopp, DU Aickemu, z886, ii. p. 384. 

CLIVOLO (BARTHOLOMiEUS a). 

See VIOTTUS (BARTHOLOMiEUS) k Clivola 

CLODIUS (Balduinus). 

Balduini Clodii weyland gewesenen Fiirstlichen Marggravischen zu Durlach, 
demnach Fiirstlichen Anhaltischen zu Dessaw Rahts vnd Leib Medici. 
Officina Chymica, das ist : Kiinstliche Spagyrischen Zuzubereitung {sic) der 
Animalischen, Vegetabilischen, Metallischen vnd Mineralischen Medicam- 
enten, sampt deroselben heylsamen Gebrauch, vnd Wiirckung zur Gesundheit 
Menschliches Leibes. Sampt beygefiigtem Consilio, wie man sich in 
Pestilentzischen LaufTten verhalten soil. Jetzo publiciert vnd an Tag 
geben durch J. E. B. Medicum zu S. Getnickt zu Oppenheim bey 

Hieronymo Galleni, in Vorlegung Johann-Theodor de Bry, 1620. 

4<>. Pp. L8] 189 [7]. 

CLODIl/S^COCHEIM 

165 

CLODIUS (Balduimus). Continued. 

MercUin qnoCcs an editioo of Franddiirt, 1633, 
4*. Gmdin calk bim "Barth.*' and bis book: 
"Oftdnm (iiic) dijmica (xir), cooailinm and 
r^giiiien wie sadi milnnigUcben in pestilenziscben 
Uuften m Tcrfaalten, 4*, Oppenhdm, i6ao, 
Fnmkf.. 1633. 1*^ ^^ *> dtber that of the 
1633 edition, which I have not seen, or else it is 
a condensed form -of the i6ao title. 

Mercklin. Umdemims munftUms, 1686, p. 108. 
Haller, BibHaiMeca Atidicitut practice, Vm% "• 

P-495- 

>\etgd, EinUUung tmr aligtmeitun. Scheidt- 
hiiut, 1788, i. p. 147. 

CLOPINEL. 

See MEUN (jean de). 

This is taken by Gmelin from Haller, who also 
misnames him ' nartholonueus,* and gives the 
same title (but writes it correctly ofieina) ; and he 
further informs us that J. K. B. is Burggrav, and 
that the edition of 1653 had Burggrav's name. 

Ladrague quotes fiinf undersckUdUclu Tract At- 
Uin^ Frankfurt a. M. 1640. 4^ which contains the 
present work by Clodius, and others by Burggrav, 
Paracelsus, Komthaucr, etc., on epidemics. 

Gmelin, Gtschichte dtr Clumie^ i797f i* P- 570i 
Ladrague, BibHoth^me Ouvarxjf, ScUmces 
Secrites^ 1870, No. 1601. 

CNOFFEL (Andreas). 
Responsum ad Positiones de Spiritu Mundi quod in se continet Reserationem 
Tumbae Semiramidis. 
See MANGET 0« h\ Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, ii. p. 88a 

This paper first appeared in the Miscellanea of 
the Academia Naturas Curiosorum, Ann. 4 and 5, 
Append, pp. 265-380, Lips. 1676. 

The name of the author occurs also as CneufTel 
ud Kncephel. There are two persons of this 
name, and the identification of them requires 
attention. 

^ Tbey were both bom at Bautxen, and lived, one 
in the earlier, the other in the latter half of the 
seventeenth century. Andreas, the elder, was 
physician of Wladislas IV., and of John Casimir, 
Kmgs of Poland. He wrote one or two medical 
voriOy on goot, 1643 ; fevers, 1655 ; etc., and his 
death took place on 24 Dec, 1658, in the camp at 
Thorn. 

The younger Andreas is called by J5cher the 

Mercklin, Lindenius renavaius^ 1686, p. 4a. 

Wittc^ IHarium Biograpkicnm, 1688, sig. Mmm. 
4 neto^ Ann. 94 Dec, 1658. 

Manget, BUlioikiea Scriptomm medicot^m^ 
1731, I. ii. p. 87. 

Restner, Medicinisches Gilehrien- Lexicon, 1740, 
p-aoc. 

T^idier, Allgemeines Gelekrten-Ltxicon, 1750, i. 

Hauer, Bihliaiheca Boianica, iT7h i- 5^ (calls 
bim J. Aodr. Cnoefiel). 
Haller, Bibliotheca Anatomica, 1774, i. p. 613. 
Haller, BibUciheca Ckirur^a, 1774, i. p. 343. 
Haller, Bibliotheca Medictnte practica^ ^777* ii> 

son, but by Kestner — and this seems more accurate 
— the brother of the preceding. There is nothing 
very unusual in two brothers having the same 
christian name. He was physician of the Bishop 
of Elrmeland, and of Michael and John III., also 
Kings of Poland. He died in 1699 at Marienburg, 
where he was burgomaster. No separate works of 
his seem to have been issued, but a number of 
dissertations by him arc printed in the proceedings 
of the Academia Naturae Curiosorum. Witte and 
Mercklin (copied by Manget) have run the two men 
together, and put the works on gout and fever 
along with the dissertations under one heading, 
although there is an interval of twenty years 
between them. The present paper is by the 
younger man. 

568 (the elder) ; 1779, iii- 344 (the younger ; Haller 
had experienced the difficulty of distinguishing 
them). 

Eloy, Dictionnaire Historique de la Midecine^ 
177S, I. p. 671. 

Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemie, 1798, ii. pp. 27, 
217, 269. 

Fuchs, Repertorimm der chemischen Litteraiur, 
i8o6-o8, pp. 147, i^, 178. 

Bio^raphie Midicale, Paris, Panckoucke (1820- 
as), iii. p. 290. 

Kopp, Die Alchemie^ 1886, ii. p. 360 (Cnoffel 
der jUngere). 

COCHEIM (JoHANN Heinrich) von HoUrieden. 
£in Philosophisch vnd Chymischer Tractat: genandt: Errantium in rectam 
& planam viam Reductio. Das ist: Bestandiger, Vnwidersprechlicher, vnd 
gantz griindlicher bericht, von der wahren Vniversal Materia, defs grossen 
Vniversal Steins der Weisen, woraufs derselbige gemacht werde, vnd ob es 
nur ein einig ding : oder aber mehr dann eines : auch was es sey, vnd wie 
es mit seinem allgemeinen bekandtlichem Namen heisse: Aufs der Natur 
selbsten, auch vnfehlbare, naturgemassen, vnd Natur miigliche Consensu 
der furtrefflichen, schwerverstandlichen, vhralten, bewehrten Philosophen: 

i66 

COClfElAf-'CObEX 

C(X)H£IM (JoHANN Heinkicu) von Hollrieden. Continued, 

Allein zu Gottes Ehr, der lieben Warheit, vnd der wahren Chemiae zu stewer : 
alien Gottesliebenden^ der Wahrheit vnd wahren geschicklichkeit begierigen 
filiis doctrinae, zu sonderbarem ge&llen, vnd friichtlicher befiirderung jhies 
geheymen vorhabens: eygentlich demonstrirt vnd offentlich jetzunder an 
tag g^eben : Durch den Edlen, Gestrengen vnd Vesten, Johann Heinridien 
Cocheim von Hollrieden. Wird auch zu end angehengt, ein herrliche 
particular Arbeit, die sich Monatlich aufT ein merkliche gradation zur 
glantzenden Apollinis Kron in der Diani erstrecken thut. 

Frater Basilius Valentinus sagt Triumph. Antim. foL 141. 
Von vnerkandten vnd vnwissenden dingen soil niemand ein vrtheil fallen. 
Gedruckt zu Strafsburg, in Verlegung Eberhardi Zetznets Buchhandlers, 
1636. 

8°. Pp. [16] 119 [1 blank]. 

Fuchs, ReperUnium der Ckemis^ken IMteraiur^ 

Gmelin {GtxhichU der ChifiUe, 1797, i. 56a) 

auotes a previous edition. Hornbach. 1635, 8^, with 
le author's initials only, but calls him ' Holl- 
rinden.' Kopp {Die Alckemie^ 1886, ii. 384) spells 
his name neUrieden\ it is ceitainl}^ Hollrieden 
throughout the 1626 edition. This is an inter« 
esting tract, for though short it covers a good deal 
of ground and quotes leading authorities, of 
whom a list is given at the end. 

1806-08, p. 124, calls him correctly Hollrieden. 

Teutsckes Pegfeuer der Scheidekmnst^ 1700, p. 
1x4, calls him Hc^eden, and says that in spite of 
his promise he has not handled the subject. 

He is quoted as an authority in Die Edelgebome 
Jungfer AkhywUa^ 1730, p. 345. 

COCUS (Jacobus), Prases. 

De Putredine Theses Physicse, quarum Patrocinium pro Loco Facultatis 
Philosophicse in celeberrima Vitebergensi Academia suscipiet, D.O.M.A. 
Praeses M. lacobus Cocus, Ederslebiensis. Respondente lohanne Emerico, 
Hirschbergensi Silesio. Ad horam vii. 18 Januarij. Witebergae; Typis 
M. Georgij Mullerj. Anno cIdIdxciv. 

4*. Pp. [11, 1 blank], 

Haller quotes the above, one depeste^ Witteberg, Haller, Bibliotheca Botanica^ '^TJ^* i- P« 357* 

1607, 4**, and some others, and also a work in MS. : Haller, Bibliotheca Anafomica, 1774, 1. p. 275. 
Dendrographia S. de Plantis lib, iv. Haller, Bibliotheca Aiedicinee ^ractiea, 1777, ii. 

P- 3M. 

CODEX Medicamentarius, seu Pharmacopoea Parisiensis, ex Mandato Facultatis 
Medicinas Parisiensis in lucem edita, M. Hyacintho Theodoro Baron, Decano. 
Parisiis, apud Guilielmum Cavelier, vii JacobeA, sub insigne Lilii Aurei. 
M.DCCXXXII. Cum Privilegio Regis. 

4°. Pp. [14] cxxvj. [2] 251 [1 bl.] xxxvj. 

Baron was bom at Paris in April . 1686. and 
graduated doctor of medicine in 1710. He was 
professor of surgery, materia medica and pharmacy, 
and in 1730 the Faculty of Medicine elected him 
I>ean, which office he held till 1733. Inuring this 
period he endeavoured to complete the Faculty 
Library, and it was by bis care that the present 
work was compiled and published. This Pharma- 
copoea belongs to a time when chemical medicines 

Portal, Histoirt de fAnatomie etdela Chirurgie\ 
1770, v. p. 8a 
Gmelin, Geschiehte der Chemie, 1798, ii. pp. 378, 

419.754- 

had got an established footing. The lists of these 
are interesting. His death occurred 28 July, 1758. 
He was the author of a few medical dissertations, 
and he must not be confused with his son, who 
bore the same name, lived 1707-X787, and pub- 
lished a considerable niunber of works. 

The Codex was first published in 1733, then in 
1749, 4', 1758, 4", at Paris, and 1760, 4", at 
Frankfurt 

Biographie Midicale^ I^aris, Panokoucke (1820- 

,), i. p. 5^3- 

Qu^rard, La France littirairt, 1827, L p. 185. 
PoggendorfT, Biograpkisch'literariichei Hand- 
^Mertueh^ i8^3» t- cd. 104. ' 

CODICE^COELVM 167 

CODICE Farmaoeutico per lo Stato della Serentssima Repubblica di Venezia 
compilato per Ordine dell' Eccellentissimo Magistrato della Sanita. Padova 
M.DCCXC Nella Stamperia del Seminario presso Tommaso Bettinelli 
con pubbliche Permissioni e Privil^o. 

4*. Pp. arii. 274. 

COELHO (Manoel Rodrigues). 
Pharmacopea Tubalense Chimico-Galenica, Parte Primeira. Em que se faz 
nam so' huma reflexam physica sobre os Principios dos mixtos, expondo 
depois a difiini9ad de ambas as Pharmacopeas, e as oppera^Oes, em que se 
dividem, com os objectos della inteiramente explicados. Mas tambem 
se mostra hum dicionario com muitas vozes, e termos de ambas as 
PharmiU:ias, e a explica9a6 dos mais versados Synonomos, com que em 
diversos idiotismos se pedem os simpleces medicinaes; e finaliza com a 
indaga9ad dos ties Reynos Animal, Vegetal, e Mineral, com algumas objec^Oes 
propostas, e decididas ^ cerca dos medicamentos deste tam dilatado Imperio. 
Author Manoel Rodrigues Coelho, Boticario nesta Corte, e natural da Villa 
de Setubal. Offerecida. Ao Senhor Dezembargador. Joad Alvares Dacosta 
Cavalleiro Professo na Ordem de Christo, da Academia Real da Historia 
erudictissimo Academico, Dezembaigador rectissimo da Casa da Supplica^ao, 
Sapientissimo Expediente dos Aggravos, do Fisco dignissimo Juiz, das 
Na^Oes de Alemanha, e Amburguense meretissimo Conservador, do Real 
Tribunal do Conselho de Gucrra vigilantissimo Promotor, e do tombo 
da represalia Juiz Doutissimo. Por Carlos da Sylva Correa. Lisboa 

Occidental: Na Officina de Antonio de Sousa da Sylva. M.DCC.XXXV, 
Com todas as licengas necessarias. 

Folio. Pp. [2a] 536. Title red and black. 

Parte Segunda. Que contein hum tratado das mais usuacs. o selcctas 
composi9oens, tanto dos Antigos. como dos Modernos, e ainda algumas, (}uc por 
occultas senaO vulgarizavaO ; comos Calculos dos medicamentos IMrgantes, Nar- 
coticos, e Mercuriaes, e tambem com as annota9oens precisas, e necessarias para 
a sua mais prefeita manipuIa^aO. 

Pp. [6] 337-896. 

This pharmacopceia is mentioned by Hailer, Pereira. Elements of Materia Afedica, 1857, II. ii. 
^ibUotheca Boianua, 177a, ii. p. 699, by Gmdin, p. 856 (also an edition of 1751). 
^^kichte der CMemie, 1798, u. p. 377, and by 

COELUM Philosophorum, die auf alle Liebhaber der wahren Hermetischen 
Weifsheit ihre Influenzen herabflofsende, und das Firmament des Philoso- 
phischen Himmels Bestrahlende Planeten, oder: Bine auf wahre Praxin 
g^riindete, und durch die Experienz bestattigte, auch mit alien Handgriffen, 
und vielen der Zeit verborgen gehaltenen Geheimniifsen begabte Anleitung: 
Wie nicht allein in der so genannten Via Corporum, sowohl im nassen als 
truckenen W^e, das Hermetische Kleinod, sondern auch aus alien sieben 
Metallen, und verschiedenen Mineralien, tingirende Elexiria, oder so genannte, 
ihren grofsen Nutzen abwerffende Particulair-Tincturen, auch besondere rare, 
zur Restaurirung der menschlichen Gesundheit, und Wegnehmung vieler 
sonst gefahrlichen^ ja fast fur incurabel gehaltenen Kranckheiten dienende 
Medicamenta zu erlangen; aus besonderer Liebe des Nechsten an den 

i6ft 

COBL UM^ COMA US£N 

COELUM Philosophonim. Continued. 

Tag gegeben von einem Griindlicher Spagirischer Wissenschafften Cultore. 
Drefsden und Leipzig, in der Hiibnerischen Buchhandlung. 1739. 

8*. Pp. [14] 143 [i blank]. Folding title. 5 roagh woodcuts. 
Though the titles are analogous, there is nothing Beytrag %ur Gtschicktt der kdktm CAemie, 1785, 

000. 

J.<adrague, Bikliotkfqme Ouvareg^ Sckiuts 
StcriteSy 1870, No. 1459. 

in this book in common with that of Ubtad. 

For alchemical works entitled *'Coelum," see 
Kopp, Die AUhemie, 1886, ii. p. 361. 

COELUM Terrestre. 

See LAVINIUS (WENCESLAUS). 

COHAUSEN (JoHANN Heinrich). 

Hermippus Redivivus, sive Exercitatio physico-medica curiosa de Methodo 
rara ad cxv. Annos prorogandse Senectutis per Anhelitum Puellanim, in 
veteri Monumento Romano deprompta, nunc Ards medics Fundamentis 
stabilita, et Rationibus atque Exemplis, nee non singulari Chymiae Philoso- 
phicse Paradoxo illustrata et confirmata Autore Jo. Henr. Cohausen, M.D. 
Senectutis Marcor dissolvi profecto non potest, succurri tamen, ut quam- 
plurimum producatur. Galen l.d. Marc c. 5. 
Francofurti ad Masnum, Apud Job. Benj. Andreae & Henr. Hort. Anno 1 742. 

8*». Pp. [20] 9a 

This work was translated into German and 
published : Soran, 1753, 8**. 

The English version was made by Dr. John 
Campbell, Hermipfus redivivus: or the Sagis 
Triumph over Old Age and the Grave, London, 
Z748, small 8**, pp. [6J 124. This is a rare book. 
The second edition, London, 1749, 8°. In the 
Retrospective Review there is a chattering empty 
article on the prolongation of life, in which this 
book is noticed. There is a notice of Campbell 

the translator, in the Dictionary of NeUional 
Biografhy, 1886, viii. p. ^7^ and a list of his 
works is given by Watt, Bihiiotheca Britannica, 
1819, i. (authors) 188 w. and in Kippis's Biographia 
Britannica, 1784. iii. p. 909. 

Kippis puts the first edition of Campbell's version 
in 1743, which seems a misprint for 1748, and the 
second in i74y> He treats the translation as if 
it were an original work of Campbell's. 

Lumen Novum Phosphoris Accensum, sive Exercitatio Physico-Chymica, de 
causa lucis in Phosphoris tarn naturalibus qukm artificialibus, exarata ad 
provocationem celeberrimae Regias in Galliis Burdegalensium Academiae. k 
Joanne Henr. Cohausen, M.D. Reverendiss. & Cclsiss. Principis & 
Episcopi Monasteriensis & Padebomensis D. D. Francisci Arnoldi 
Archiatro Horstmario-Ahusano. Amstelodami, apud Joannem Oosterwyk, 
M DCC XVII. 

8^. Pp. [28] 306. Index, etc. [16]. Errata [2]. Title red and black. Engraved 
title included m the pagination. 

Joannis Henrici Cohausen Hildesiensis, Medicinae Doctoris. Tentaminum 
Physico-Medicorum Curiosa Decas de Vita Humana theoretice et practice 
per pharmaciam prolonganda. Ex veterum et recentiorum philosophonim 
ac chymiatrorum fundamentis rarioribus et secretioribus inventis, ratiodniis, 
experimentis, historice, ethice, medice, philosophice et chymice proposita 
et omnibus longaevitatis candidatis consecrata. Editio Secunda. 

Osnabrugi, [the rest cut off by the binder], [17 14?]. 

4*. Pp. [a8l 187 W 

COHAVSEH-COLLECTASEA 

i«9 

COHAUSEN (JoHAiCK Heinrich). Comhmud. 

|<rfMnn Haondi CofasBen was boni at 
benn in 1665, studied at FnoidBrt aud. O.. gradnted 
1699. settled at Mftnsier. and became the phTskiaa 
of the bisbop in 1717. He died at Udnsttr, 13 
J^t 1750^ He wrote a good nanr works : t«o 
asaiost tbe nae of snofl^ one 

Adeinog's Smfpkmunt to jOcber's 

SmM Adm hrmdUmrum^ ^^ifHL 1745. Mcnsc Ji 
^- H. 373 (a review of Ha muff ms Jfs^vrvmsY 

Mcnsely Lexictm der war JnMr 1759 Hs 1800 
veni^riemem Temtxkem SckHfbteUer, 1803. ii. pp. 
160-164. 

Pbrtal. His*oirw de fAmaitmU etdeia CkirmrxU. 

»770^ V. P.44- 
Halkr, Bihlwthtca Bctamua, 17731, n. 139^ 435. 

696. 

HaDer, BUlUikeca Ckirmrgua, 1775. iL p. 138. 

HaOar, BMiotktca Ammimmucm, 1777, iu p. 39. 

Eloj, Dictiommairg Huitrique St la Midecine, 
i77*iL p. 678L 

HaUer, BUHciktca Mtdicimm fracUcti, 1788. iT. 
^a6a 

Gmdin, Gtsckickit ier Ckemut, 1798, il pp. 345. 
4*2,703. 

Chalmers. TktGemeralBicgrmfkical Dkti4mary, 
1813, tt- P^ SIS 

COLE (Abdiah). 

5^ SKNNERT (DANIEL), 1 66a 

Cole (i6io?-i670?) was a translator and editor M 
A anmber of medical woric& For what little is on 

He mas a learned man. and a ratber 
satirical writer. 

There were several Cobausens. and Haller 
his reader against confounding tbrm. He 
ho«wcr. Is a little bit vague and seems to mix 

^'att. SMMikecm BHi^mmH-^^ 1819. i. (antbors) 

344/. 
BkiprmfkU .\riJkuJe, Paris. P^uickoacke (i8ao> 

asK "»- P- as^ 

RttmaftKtiit Rexrifve, London. 1833. vii. pp. &4> 

87. 

Ersch & Gnibcr. AUgnmeime Em^yki^faJit, i8a8« 

xviiL pl ai7. 

DeaeinMris, DictimMairr Nisi^^me «£r ii MSih- 
citu (1831). I. ii. ppL 84V44. 

Biagra^ku L'mtvterse/u, 1844, riii. p. 03. 

Bayle ft Thillaje, Biiigrafkie JdMkaU. i 

Bayle ft TbiUaye, Biiigrafkie M^iumie, 1855. ii. 
p. laa 

\omzrll€ Bi^rafkie Grm/nUe, 1856, xi. col. 67. 

All^ewuitu Demtscke Bii»m^e^ 1876. iv. pi 394. 

Duti<mHairt EM<rch*pjJifmt its Sciemces M6ii' 
Oiks, 1876. xviiL pi 698. 

Billings Imdex-Caiaiogme^ 1882. iii. p. 348 ; and 
Scries, 1898, iii. p. 734. 

Hirsch, Buigrofkisckes LexU«M JUr henvm* 
gendtm AtrUe^ 1885. iL pi 48. 

record about him see the Diciiomary «/ XaiUmai 
Bkgrafky, 1887, xl pi 263. 

COLLECTANEA Chymica : A Collection of Ten Several Treatises in Chymistry, 
concerning the Liquor Alkahest, the Mercury of Philosophers, and other 
Curiosities worthy the Perusal. Written by Eir. Philaletha, Anonymus, Joh* 
Bapt Van-Helmont, Dr. Fr. Antonie, Bemhard Earl of Trevisan, Sir Gea 
Ripley, Rog. Bacon. Geo. Starkey, Sir Hugh Piatt, and the Tomb of 
Semiramis, see more in the Contents. London, Printed for William 

Cooper, at the Pelican in Little Britain, 1684. 

8^. Pp. [6] 193 

The tracts in this collection are as follows : 

1. Eirenaeus Philaletha, Arccmuntt or secret of 
%heimmortall Liquor Alkahest, p. 5. 

2. Anonymus, Practice of Lights, p. 27. 

3. Job. Bapt. Van Helmont, Prttct/iolum^ p. 47. 

4. Fr. Antooie, Aurmm PotaMU, p. 73. 

5. Bemhard of Trevisan, Treatise, p. 83. 
0. George Ripley, Bcsome-boak, p. zoi. 

7* Roger Bacon, Speculum Alckymia, p. 125. 

8. George Starkey, Oil cfSulphur-vive, p. 137. 

9^ Hugh Platts, kemedies against Famine, p. 153. 

la H. V. D., Tumba Semiramidis, 

Notwithstanding the Latin titles the tracts are all 
in English, except the first, which is in both 
languages. Each tract has a title-page. 

[4, 1 blank] ; 32. 

In 1893, at London, appeared a volume entitled 
Collectanea Chymica; hetng certain select Treatises 
on Alchemy and Hermetic Medicine. The pre- 
fatory note states that the tracts were printed from 
a MS. belonging to the Inte Frederick Hockley, 
itself a transcript from an older work. No date is 
given for the MS., so that it is not possible to say 
whether or not it was taken from the present work. 
The 1893 edition contains the tract on the ' Alka- 
hest,' Antonie's 'Aurum Potabile,' Starkey *s 'Oil 
of Sulphur- Vive,' Ri(dey's 'Bosom book,* all as in 
the above ; the others are omitted, but it has a 
tract ' On the stone of the philosophers,' and one 
on the ' Preparation of the Sophick Mercury,* 
which are not in the older edition. 

COLLECTANEA Chymica I^idensia Maetsiana & Marcgraviana. 
See LE MORT (JACOB), ChymiiK Verae Nobilitas & Utilitas, 1698. 

COLLECTANEA quaedam ex Antiquis Scriptoribus. 

See DORN (GERARD), Trevisanus de Chymico Miraculo, 1600, p. 152. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, i. p. 768. 

See MANGET (j. J.)i Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, ii. p. 358. 

I70 

COLLECTANEA-COLLECTION 

COLLECTANEA ex Democrita 

See DEMOCRITUS. 

COLLECTI Processus de Lapide Philosophonim praeparando, aliisque secretis 
non vulgaribus. Oder von der Zubereitung des Steins der Weilsen, und 
andem raren Kunststiicken und Geheimnifsen. Nebst einem Curiosen 
Wein-Biichlein. Jense, Apud Joh. Bielckium, Bibliop. Litteris Krebsianis. 
MDCCIV. 

8^. Pp. 274 [i3f I blank]. 3 small woodcuts of apparatus. 

COLLECTION (A) of Scarce and Valuable Treatises upon Metals, Mines, and 

Minerals. Containing, 

L Curious Observations on Mines and 
the several Minerals produced; 
with plain Directions and Rules 
for finding them in all Countries. 

IL The Art of Melting, Refining and 
Assaying all Sorts of Metals, 
whereby any Person at a small 
Charge may try the Value of such 
Oars as shall be found, either by 
Rule or Accident With Instruc- 
tions for Sorting of Oar. 

III. Real Experiments, to try whether 
any Piece offered for Gold be true 
or counterfeit, what Colour any 
Berry, Leaf, Flower, Stalk, Root 
Fruit, Seed, Bark or Wood will 
give. With an infallible Method 
of preparing Colours, which shall 
neither stain nor fade like Ordinary 

IV. The Common Way of Refining 
Silver by Quicksilver. With some 
new Rules added for the better 
Performance. 

V. An Invaluable Discovery of all 
Sorts of Mines from Gold to Coal. 
Also, The Compleat Miner, with 
the Liberties, Laws and Customs 
of the Lead Mines within the 
Wapentake of Wirks worth in Derby- 
shire, in Fifty Nine Articles, being 
all that were ever made. 

VI. The Art of Dyalling, or Levelling 
Grooves, greatly desired by all 
Miners : Being a Subject never 
wrote on before, with an Explana- 
tion of the Miners Terms of 
Art, and several other curious 
Particulars. 

Colours. 

Being, A Translation from the Learned Albaro Alonso Barba, Director of 
the Mines at Potosi, in the Spanish West Indies, and the Observations of 
several Ingenuous Persons of our own Country, founded on many Years 
Experience. The Second Edition. London : Printed for J. Hodges, at 
the Looking-Glass on London-Bridge. 1740. Price bd. 3s. 

la*. Pp. [x6] 319 [page of advertisements]. Engraved frontispiece of apparatus for 
distilling mercury. 

Houghton's Compleat Mitur at London, in x68i, in 
i6'. 

The first edition of the present collection was 
printed by Oliver Payne at London in 1738, in la®, 
under the title: A Discovery <tf Subterranean 
Treasure \ vi», Cf all Manner of Mines and 
Minerals^ from the Gold to the Coal . . . t/ke whole 

The present edition contains : Barba, Art tf 
Metals, Book I., pp. 1-122, Book IL, pp. 129-194; 
Gabriel Platles' Discovery of all sorts of Mines, 
pp. 194-241 ; and Thomas Houghton's I^ara Avis 
in Terris : or the Compleat Miner, with a separate 
title-page, pp. 243-319. The others run on con- 
tinuous^. 

The English translation of Borba's Art of Metals founded on the Experience of Mr. Gabriel Plattes. 

was made by the Earl of Sandwich, and editions This is not correct, however, for it contains the 

appeared at London in 1670, 1674, small 8**. (see treatises of Barba and Houghton as well as that of 

BARBA (a. a.). Plattes' Discovery was published Plattes. It was reissued iu 1739, 12**, and then 

as a thin small 4* tract in 1639 and 1679, ^i^ came this second edition in 174a 

collbsson—colson xn 

COLLESSON (Jean). 
L'Idee Parfaicte de la Philosophie Hermetique. Ou TAbrege de la Theorie 
& Practique de la Pierre des Philosophes. Seconde Edition. Augment^ 
d'Obseruations pour Tlntelligence des Prindpes & Fondements de la Nature, 
& de la Philosophie Hermetique. Avec vne Meditation sur les Mysteres 
de la Sapience Diuine & Humaine. Par M. I. Collesson Doyen de Maign^. 
A Paris, Chez Heru6 du Mesnil, rue S. lacques, k la Samaritaine. 
M.DCXXXI. Avec Privilece (sk) du Roy. 

8*. Pp. 55 \i\. The second tract has a separate title-page, signatures, and 
pagination [zo, a blank] 79 [i]. 

Idea perfecta Philosophise Hermeticae, seu Abbreviatio Theorise & Praxeos 
Lapidis Philosophici observationibus . . . aucta. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1661, vi. p. I40. 

Collesson- calls himself a native of Saint-Dizier, he knew it, because persons of distinction refused to 
and Lenglet Dufresnoy says that he offered to teach become his pupils. Nothing seems to be known 
the secret, but apparently it was not believed that about him.. 

Borel, Bikliotkeea Ckimica, 1654. p. 64 ; 1656, Gmelin, Gesckickte der Chemie, 1797, i. p. 507. 
p. 61. Schmieder, Geschichte derAlchemU, 183a, p. 385. 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire de la Philosophie Ladrague, Bibliothique Ouxniroff^ Sciences 

HerwUHqwe^ 1743, iii. 137. Secrites, 1870, Nos. 1133-34. 

COLLOQUIA Chymica.* 

See KiESER (FRANZ), Cabala Chiroica, 1606, p. 383. 

COLLOQUIUM nuncupatorium, interloquentes Bonus et Lacinius. 

See LACINIUS Oanus), Pretiosa Margarita Novella, 1546, *iiij verso. 
See LACINIUS Oanus), Pretiosa Margarita, 1714, p. 5 (in German). 

COLLOQUIUM Oder Gesprech zwischen einem alten vnd jungen Studenten 
[Senior & Adolphus]. 

See OCCULTA PHILOSOPHIA, 1613, p. I. 

COLONNE (Fran90is-Mari£-Pomp&;)« 

See LE CROM. 

COLOURS to be observed in the Operation of the Great Work of Philosophers. 

See AURIFONTINA CHYMICA, 1680, p. 93. 

COLSON (Lancelot). 
Philosophia Maturata: an Exact Piece of Philosophy, containing the Practick 
and Operative part thereof in gaining the Philosophers Stone; with the 
wayes how to make the Mineral Stone, and the Calcination of Mettals. 
Whereunto is added, a Work compiled by St. Dunstan, concerning the 
Philosophers Stone, and the experiments of Rumelius and Preparations of 
Angelo Sala, all most famous Chymists in their time. Published by Lancelot 
Colson, Dr. in Phys. and Chym. London, Printed for G. Sawbridge, and 
are to be sold at his house upon Clerken-well-Green, 1668. 

34*. Pp. [10] Z43. 

172 

COLS 01^- COMB A CM 

COLSON (Lancelot). Continued. 

Philosophia Maturata, oder ein ausfuhrlicher Philosophiscfaer Tractat, wricher 
in sich b^reiffet die rechte Praxin, und den wirckenden Theil der Philosophic, 
zu Erlangung des Steins der Weisen. Nebenst den Wegen den Minenilischen 
Stdn und die Calcination der Metallen zu verfertigen. Welchen beygefiiget 
ist ein Werck des St Dunstan, von dem Stein der Weisen, sampt den 
curieusen Experimenten des Rhumelii, und Bereitungen des Angeli Sabe, 
beyde sehr beriihmte Chymici zu ihrer Zeit In Englischer Sprache an den 
Tag gegeben durch Lancelot Colson, der Artzney Doctor und Chymicus. 
Und nun den Liebhaber der Chymie zu gefallen ins Hochteutsche iibersetzet, 
durch J. L. M. C. Hamburg, Verlegts Gottfried Liebemickel, Buchh. im 
Dohm, 1696. 

8^. Pp. 93 [4 blank]. J. L. is Johann Langc 

There is a preface containing a very brief but so 
far correct notice of St. Dunstan '*tbe author." 
The first tract purports to describe the preparation 
of the two tinctures for silver and gold, but the 
processes are rendered as little inteUigible as 
possible by the names employed to denote the 
materials, the operations ana the results. It looks 
however as if there was after all little more than 
the preparation of sulphuric and perhaps nitric 
adds and their action upon various substances. 

The second tract (p. 8s) is entitled, * Dunstan of 
the stone of the philosophers with the experiments 
of Rumelius of New-Market,' and the last (p. 93), 
*Some principall preparations of Angelo Sala.' 

The preparations of Sala are for medical use, and 
consist of extracts tinctures, balsams and distilled 
waters from various plants. They have nothing to 
do with the preceding part. 

Colson, the editor, was an astrologer at the sien 
of the Royal Oak on Great Tower Hill, and pub- 
lished a series of Almanacs, 1660 to 1676. 

Ehmstan, the reputed author (934-988), after 
living at Glastonbury became Bishop of Worcester 
and of London, and finally Archbishop of Canter- 
bury. As he was famous for his love of nandicrafts, 

Bale, lllusirium Maioris Britannia Scripiorum 
. . . summarium, 1548, f. 68 (not a flattering 
notice of St. Dunstan). 

Roth-Scholtz, Bibiiotheca Chemica^ 1737, p. 44 
(the German translation). 

Gmdin, Geschichte der Chemif, 1798, ii. p. 319 
(the German translation). 

and skill as a smith and worker in metals, it was 
natural for him to be dairoed as an alchemist 
Stubbs apparently does not think that the book 
ascribed to him as his work, which appeared 
at Cassd in 1649, under the title 'TractaUis . . . 
de lapide philosophorum,' is geniuDe. I have not 
seen this work and do not know if it is the 
original of Colson 's translation. 

For my own part I am doubtful about Alchemy 
being cultivated in England in St Dunstan's time, 
and, if it were, whetner the language employed 
resembled what is used in Colson's tract. The 
pursuit of the philosopher's stone had hardly as ^'et 
begun in Europe. The mention of Alphidios in 
the text is suspicious. Though the exact date of 
that person is unknown he is generally placed in 
the twelfth century. His name and the quotation 
from him may of course have been inserted subse- 
quently, but of that there is no evidence. 

Still the belief that St Dunstan had had to do 
with alchemy was older than 1649, for Dr. Dee in 
his Diary in the year 1587 makes mention of his 
book, and his companion, Edward Kdley, is 
credited with founding his practice upon it 

Lives 0/ the Adepts in A Ichymistical Philosophy^ 
1815, p. 7a and p. 299. 

Ur. Dee's Diary^ Camden Society, 184a, p. 3^. 

Stubbs, AfemoriiUs of St. Dunstan (Rolls Series, 
• No. 63), 1874, Introduction, p. cix. 

Dictionary cf National Biography^ 1887, xi. 
p. 406, and 1888, xvl pp. 231-330* 

COMBACH (LuDwio). 

See NUYSEMENT (JACQUES DE^ Tractatus de vero Sale. 
See FERRARIUS, Chymische Abhandlung. 

Ludwig Combach was the son of Johann Com- 
bach, an architect, and brother of Johadin Combach, 
professor of Theology at Marburg. He was bom 
at Wetter, 5 May, 1^90, and after school went to 
Marburg. He acted as tutor to the jroung Baron 
V. Biihren. He studied Medicine, and alon^ with 
the son of Hermann Wolff, Hesse " Leibmedicus," 
visited Paris, Montpellier. Geneva, Itahr, and 
graduated at Padua. On his return to Hesse in 
i6ix> he succeeded H. Wolff as * Liebmedicus/ and 

Borel, Bibiiotheca Chimica, 1654. p. 64. 

Strieder, GrundlM gu einer Nessischen Gelehrten 
und Schriftsteller Geschichte, Gdttingen, 1783. ii. 
pp. 363-365. 

was held in great esteem by Count Moriz and still 
more by Wilhelm V. and Wilhelm VI. He died 
5 May, z6i(7, just 67 years old. He edited the 
works of George Rijpley, Cassell, 1649, ^l the 

K»ent tractate of Nu3rsement, Cassell. 1651, 8^; 
yden, 1671, la"; the 'Practica Medica' of CW. 
Maroldus, 16^, 4"; and wrote 'Threnodia in 
obitum Mauritii Hass. L.-heroico Carmine Scripta,' 
1633. 

Fuchs, Repertorium der chemischen IMteratur, 
1806-08, p. 146. 
Kopp, Die Aichemie, z886, ii. p. 337. 

COMITIBUS 173 

COMITIBUS (LuDOVicus de). 
Clara Fidelisq. Admonitoria Disceptatio Practicae Manualis experimento veraciter 
comprobata. De duobus Ards, & Naturae miracuUs: hoc est de liquorc 
Alchaest; necnon Lapide Philosophico, atque amborum materia operandi 
radone, Difficultate, Viribus, ac inter se Conuenientia, & Discrimine. De 
Salis quoque Tartari Volatili, &c. In gratiam Hermeticse Artis Studiosorum 
conscripta. Auctore Ludovico De Comidbus Macer. Phil. & Med D. Ope 
Viri peritissimi Ord. trium Magorum Equitis in Viridi Cruce Symbolica. 
Ad Serenissimam, & Imperialem Celsitudinem Leopoldi Guilielmi Archiducis 
Austriae, &c. Venedis, M.DCLXI. 

4®. Pp. [8] 46 [3. I Uank]. Woodcut border to the title-page; full page 
woodcut, "Sjrmbolum Adeptonim." 

Colophom : Veuetus, Per Frandscam NicoUnum, x66i. Superiorum permissn. 

Clara Fidelisque Admonitoria Disoeptado Practicae Manualis experimento veraciter 
comprobata. De duobus Ards, & Naturae miraculis: hoc est de Liqucxe 
Alchaest; nee non Lapide Philosophico, atque amborum materia, operandi 
radone, Difficultate, Viribus, ac inter se Convenientia, & Discrimine, De 
Sale quoque Tartari Volatili, &c. In gratiam Hermedcse Artis Studiosorum 
conscripta. Auctore Ludovico De Comitibus Macer. Phil. & Med. D. Ope 
Viri peridssimi Ord. trium Magorum Equitis in Viridi Cruce Symbolica. 
Francofurd, Apud Hermannum ^ Sande. M.DCLXI V. 

Ia^ Pp. [18] 1x6. Engraved title and S3rmbolic frontispiece not included in the pagination. 

Metallorum ac Metallicorum Naturse Operum ex Orthophysicis fundamentis 
recens Elucidatio qua eorum omnium Prindpia, Causae, Proprietates, Genera- 
tiones; Generadondmque modi apert^ ac iideliter enucleantur. Indeque 
Ards Chemicse, Theoricae, ac Practicse Veritas & ordo revelatur. Methodo 
breviori, clariori, diligentiori ac firmiori, quam ab alio quocunque, seu ex 
veteribus seu ex Recentioribus hucusque scriptore praestitum fuerit. Opus 
sane cuncds veritads Sectatoribus non minus udle quam gratum. Auctore 
Ludovico de Comitibus Maceratensi, Philosophiae ac Medicinae Doctore, 
Coloniae Agrippinse, Apud Joannem Busseum Bibliopolam sub Monocerote. 
Anno 1665. 

8*. Pp. 386 [2 blank]. Title red and black. Printer's device of a unicorn. 
Added to this treatise is a short tract: 'Appendix sinibolicae Crucis aliqualem 
iUustrationem exhibens,' ¥fith the symbolic woodcut of a cross, p. 965, which also 
oocurs in the preceding works. 

Tractatus de Liquore Alcahest, & Lapide Philosophorum. 

Metallorum ac Metallicorum Naturae Operum ex Orthophysicis Fundamentis 

recens Elucidado. 

Appendix Symbolicae Crucis aliqualemi illustradonem exhibens. 

See MANGBT (j* JOi Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, ii. pp. 764, 781, 840. 

Luigi de' Conti, or de Comitibus, was a an adept. Latterly he became blind. Of the 
native of Macerata. Borrichius speaks highly of Disceftaiio there was a French version by Robert 
him from personal intercourse, but doubts his being Prudhomme, Paris, 1669, 1678, X2^ 

Borrichius, Conspectus Scriptorum Ckemicorum, Beytragtur Gesch^ derhohem C/umie, 1785, p. 69a 
1697, p. 46. Gmelin, Gtschich/e dtr ChemU^ 1798, ii. p. ax. 

Rotn-Scholtz, Bibliotheca Chemica^ 1727, p. 45. Fuchs. Repertorium der chemischen Litteratur, 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire de la Fhilosophie 1806-08, pp. 159, 16a. 
Herm4tique, 1742, iii. " * ' * ^ 

Jdcher, Allgemeines GtUhrten'Lexicon^ 1750, 

i. col. 9037. 1870, Na I290. 

Schmieder, Gesckickte der Alchemie, 183a, p. 433. 
Lsidnigue,Bi^liotMque<htvarpf, Sciences Secretes, 

174 COMMENTARIA'-CON- 

COMMENTARIA iiber Gebers Werke. 
See GEBER, 1792. 

COMMENTARIOLUM in quoddam Epitaphium Bononise Studicmim, . . . 
lapidi insculptum. 

See BARNAUD (NICOLAS). 

COMMENTARIUS iiber den Bemhardum. 

See BECHER (JOHANN JOACHIM), Chymischer Gliicks-Hafen, 1726, p. i. 

COMMENTATIO de Pharmaco Catholico. 

See RECONDITORIUM ac Reclusorium opulentiae sapientiseque numinis mundi 
magni, 1666. 

COMPENDIUM utile ad credendum meditadonum experimentum. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, iii. p. 659. 

COMPOSITION des gebenedeyten Steins. 

See HELLWIG (CHRISTOPH VON), Fasciculus, 1719, p. I. 

COMPOSITUM de Compositis. 

See ALBERTUS MAGNUS. 

CONCORDANTIA Philosophoram. 

See NAXAGORAS (EHRD von). 

CONCORDANZ. 

See RdNiGLiCHE hermetische Special-Concordanz, 1723. 

CONCORDANZA de Filosofi. 

See NAZARI (Gio. battista), Delia Tramutatione Metallica Sogni tre, 1599, 
pp. 169-231. 

CONCURSUS Philosophonim. 

See medices (christian de), 1706. 

CONDEESYANUS (Hermannus). 

See GRASSHOFF (johann). 

CON- ET DISSENSUS Chymicorum de famigeratissimo Rustici Minoris 
Particulari oder ungleiche Meynungen von des Kleinen Bawers Particular, 
bestehende und vorgestellet in Funfzehen davon handelnden Processen. 
Woraus der Kunstliebende Leser den Con- & Dissensum derer Autonim 
derselben vemehmen wird nebst noch zweyen andern sehr curieusen 
Particularien de Exaltatione Solis Ejusque Animae Extractione in iiber 
30. der besten Processen bestehende. Mit grofsem Fleifs aus vielen Manu- 
scriptis zusammen getragen und den Liebhabern der Kunst zu Dienst auf 
Ersuchung, zum ofTentlichen Druck befordert denen curiositatis gratia des 
Jacobi Tollii Coelum Chemicum noch beygefuget worden. Durch Einen 
Freund der edlen Chymie und Metallurgie am griinen Hartze. Leipzig, 
bey Johann Herbord Klofsen, 17 15. 

8®. Pp. [xo] 70; Brevis Tractatio, pp. [8] 76. Tollius' tract is wanting, but for 
a separate copy see under Tollius. 

CON' ET DISSENSUS-CONRING 

175 

CON- ET DISSENSUS. ConHnued. 

The second tract has a separate title-page as follows : 

Brevis Tractatio de antiquissimo atque certissimo illo Particulari quod per 
Exaltationem seu Gradationem Solis S. Auri parari solet Oder kurtze, iedoch 
ausfUhrliche und richtige, HaadluDg von dem uhralten und bewahrtesten Particular 
welches durch Erhdh- und Vermehrung des Goldes-Farbe verrichtet ru werden 
pfleget. Batehende in dner swart kurtzen. doch deutlichen Beschreibung, was die 
Exaltatio s. Gradatio solis und derselben Nutzen sey, auch wie dieselbe verrichtet 
werden soUe, welches letztere in 3a davon handelnden auserlesenen theils selbst 
probirten Processen accurat gelehret und gezeiget wird. Denen Uberdiefs noch, 
zum Dienst der Kunstliebenden, ein ander schbn und bewtihrtes Particalare de 
Extractione Animae Solis beygefUget ist. Woraus dieselbe, wenn sie darzu n5thige 
operationes und Hand-Arbeit recht verstehen und gebrauchen, ohnfehlbar Gold- 
machen lemen k5nnen werden. Auf freundlich ersuchen guter Freunde also verfasset 
und zum £>ruck bsfbrdert. Durch EUnen Freund der edlen Chymie und Metallurgie 
am grUnen Hartze. Leipzig, bey Johann Herbord Klofsen, 1715. 

r. Pp. [8] 76. 

Ladrague, Biblioikiqme Ouvarof, Sciences Secrttes, 1870, No. 1436-37. 

See GRASSHOFF Qohann). 

See also BREVIS TRACTATIO. 

CONGERIES Paracelsicae Chemiae de Transmutationibus Metallorum. 

See DORN (GERHARD). 

CONRAD. 

See KHUNRATH. 

CONRING (Hermann). 
De Morborum remediis Magicis & Unguento Armario. 
See theatrum sympatheticum, 1662, p. 613. 

Conring was born at Norden in East Friesland, 
9 Nov.; x6o6. When he was five years old he was 
attacked by the plague, but he recovered after a 
long illness. In his earliest years he showed great 
capacity for learning, and in 1620 he studiol at 
Helmstftdt for three years. He went home for a 
short time, and in 1635 proceeded to Leyden, 
devoted himself to Theolc^ and Medicine and 
took the first degrees in lorj. He went back to 
Hdmstildt, was appointed to the Chair of Natural 
Philosophy in 10^, and in 1636 received the 
degree of doctor m philosophy and in medicine. 
He was next transferred to the Chair of Medicine, 
practised with success and was made private 
physician and councillor of the princess regent of 
Fnesland in 1749. Christina ot Sweden tried to 
induce him to remove to that country, but after 
some consideration he refused to leave Helmst^dt, 
and in consequence of this resolution the Duke of 
Bruns¥fick conferred on him the chair of law. 
He therefore studied jurisprudence and his learning 
and judgment were m much request in the settle- 
ment of many important disputes. 

He died 13 Dec, x68i, with the reputation of 
being the most learned man of his time in Germanjr. 
He was a prolific writer, and he produced a multi- 
tude of dissertations and books on all sorts of 
subjects including one or two on chemistry, and 

Frodin^. Leichtnprtdigt, Helmstftdt, i68x. 

Mercklm, Lindenius renovatus^ 1686, p. 407. 

Ccmring, In Universam ariem meaicam . . . 
Introduction 1687 ; Schelhammer's Addit., p. xx6 
(controversy with Borrichius about Hermetic 
chemistry). 

Witte, DiariuM Bicgraphicym, 1688, sig. Ssss, 
3 recto. Anno 1689, Jan. la. 

many on medicine, philosophy, natural science^ 
history, law, poetnr, antiquities. 

The book which specially concerns the student 
of the history of Chemistry is entitled : De Her- 
metica ^gyptiorum vetere o* nova ParacelHcorum 
Afedicina^ Helmstadii, 1648, 4°: revised and en- 
larged, 1669, 4°. As was to be expected from an 
Aristotelian and a Galenist, he was opposed to the 
Paracelsists, and refused to acknowledge the 
existence of an Egyptian Hermes or of E^ptian 
medicine or chemistry. He was in tiun cn tidied 
by Borrichius, who oelieved in the antiquity of 
chemistry on the ground of the Greek manuscnpts. 

The state of this question at the present time can 
be judged of by a consideration of the Leyden 
Papyrus, the Ebers Papyrus, Kopp's Beytrdge and 
the historical writings of Berthdot It is another 
illustration of the * vanity of dc^rmatizing.' 

Another work of Conrmg's ofmuch value for the 
study of medicine and the connect^l sciences 
during his time, which is repeatedly quoted in the 
notes of the present work is his /« universam 
artem medicam . . . Introduction Helmstadii, 1654, 
4**, enlaiged by his son-in>law Schdhammer, and 
published at Helmstiidt, X687, 4^ 

His collected works were published at Brunswick, 
1731, 6 vols, fol, with a life by Schmidt. 

Reimmann, Versuch einer Einleitung in die 
Historiam litterariam derer TeuischeHn X709, ii. p. 
X710, V. p. 346, etc. ; X713, vi. X3C^ etc., etc 

here are numerous references to Conring in his 
various capacities). 

Heumann, Poecile^ 1796, H. lib. I p. 33. 

Stolle, AnleitungMur Historic dtrGelahrkeit, 1727, 
p. 737, etc.; X736, p. 763, etc, etc.; Zttsatze, p. 348. 

t^ 

176 

CONRING-JCONTARENI 

CONRING (Hermann). Continued. 

Buddeus, Isagcge historico-tkeologica^ I730> t 
p. 340 (controversy with Borrichius). 

Manget. Bihliotkeca Scriptorum Meduomm^ 
17QI, I. ii. p. III. 

StoUe, Amleitung Mur Historie der Mediciniscken 
Gtlahrheit^ 1731. pp. a88, 389. etc., etc., etc. 
(numerous references}. 

Niceron, Minmres^ 1732, xix. pp. 249-386 (list 
of 90X writings). 

Zedler, Universal-LexicoH^ i7S3* ^i* <^^ X016. 

Kestner, MedUinisches GtUkr ten- Lexicon^ 174O1 
p. 3x4. 

Jacob Brucker, EkretUtwifel der DetUsciun. 
GeUhrsamkeit^ 1747, p. 159, with twojportraits. 

TOcher, AUgemeines GiUkrUn-Ltxtcon^ I75<\ i* 
col 3059 (list of writings). 

Eloy, Dictionnaire Historique de la Midtcinty 
»755. »• P- 25? (a mere note) ; 1778, i. p. 697. 

Kiicker, Historia Critica PhilosophuB^ 1766^ iv. 

HaUer, Bibliotheca Botanica, 1771, i. p. 484. 
Haller, Bihlioikeca Anatomica^ ^77 A% >• P* 359* 
Haller, Bibliotheca CAiryr;pca, X774, i. p. 347. 
Haller, Biblioikeca Medicinm fraeticet^ ^^777* il« 
pp. 633-626 (list of his writing). 
Baumer, Bibliotheca Chemtca, 1782, p. 2^ 
Beytrag »ur Geschichte der hdhem Chemte^ X785, 

P- 549. 

Gmelin, Gtuhichie der Chemie, 1797, L pp. 356, 
674. 
Watt, BUtiotheca Britamnica^ 1819, i. (authors). 

253*. 
Bicpu^hie Midicale, Paris, PanduMicke (xSao- 

35), in. p. 3x3 (list of writings). 

Sprengd, Geschichte der ArxmeyhumdCt 1837, iv. 

PP- 77* ^i. 553. 

Dexeimeris, Dictionnaire historique de la 
Midecine^ 183X, I. ii. p. 858. 

Bayle & Thillaye, Biographic MidicaU^ 1855, i. 
p. 40^ 

Phillippe & Ludwig. Geschichte der Apotheher, 

"^ft^ 

, Mahc, *'Zur Erinnenxngder ftrstlidien 
Wirksamkdt Hermann Conring's, Ahhamdlun- 
genderGesellschaftder Wissenschq/ten mm Gdttingnt, 
187^, xviii. pp. 4-51. 

Altgemeine Deutsche Biographic^ 1876, iv. p. 446. 

Dictionnaire Rncyclopauqne des Sciences hUdi- 
cales^ 1876, xix. a 65a 

Haeser, Gesckichk der Artneykunde^ 1881, ii. 
pp. X14, 270, 386. 

Billings, Index-Catalogue, 1883^ iii. p. 366; and 
Series, 189S, iii. p. 853. 

Hirsch, Biographisches Lexikon der hervorragtn- 
den Aerzte^ 1885, ii. p. 67. 

CONSIDERATIO oder Philosophische Betrachtung von der materia Lapidis, 
und seiner Bereitung. 

See BASILIUS VALENTINUS, Triumph Wagen Antimonii, 1624, p. 512. 
Ladrague, Biiliothique Ouvarqf, Sciencts Secrites^ 1870, No. 864. 

CONSILIUM conjugii seu de Massa Solis et Lunse, libri tres. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1660, V. p. 429. 

See MANGET (j. J.), Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, il p. 235. 
See STUDIUM ConsiHi Conjugii. 

According to Schmieder the anonymous author 
was possibly an Arabian alchemist, who flourished 
in the thirteenth century. He, however, brings no 
proof in support of this statement and Schmi«ler's 
dicta are to be accepted with caution. Maier 
styles him 'verus artifex.' 

Schmieder, Geschichte der Alchemic, 1833, p. 106. 
hadragixc.Biblioth^ue Ouvarof, Sciences Secretes , 
1870, No. X347. 

The tract was first published at Strasburg in 
1567, 8**, and afterwards at Frankfurt in 1605, 4°. 

It is greatly praised by Borrichius, who sajrs that 
parts i. and iii. are excdlent, but if the reader does 
not understand part iU he must be stupid or else 
fieUe stands in the way of his succeeding. 

Maier, Symbola A urea Afenstg, 16x7, p. 389. 
B<MTichius, Conspectus Scriptorum Chemicorum, 
T697, p. 35, Cap. XXXV. 

CONSTANTIA (Leona). 

^^ LEADE (jane). 

CONSUMMATA Sapientia. 

See schauberdt (johannX 1681. 

CONTARENI (Gasparo). 
Gasparis Contareni Cardinalis. ampliss. philosophi sua setate praestantissiini 
de.Elementis & eorum mixtionibus libri quinque, cum indice copiosiss. nunc 
primum in lucem aediti. 
Scipionis Capitij de principijs rerum poema. 

Npn satis una tenet [J?evue] ceratas anchora puppis. 

CONTARENI—CORDUS 

177 

CONTARENI (Gasparo). Continued. 

In geminam anchoram. 
Fundabat satis Aonias una anchora puppes, 
Dum tantum Ausoniis musa nataret aquis. 
Nunc quum Palladise sulcunt maria omnia naues, 
Visa Q una parum est anchora, facta duplex. 
Lutetiae Parisiorum per Nicolaum Divitem, uia sacerdotum, ad diuae 
Genouefes, sub insigni geminse anchorae. Cum Privilegio Regis. 1548. 

8**. Ff. [8] [i-8] 9-X19 [x blank]. MS. notes. The device is two crossed anchors. 

GasparoContarini,orContareni, orContarino, one 
oftheold family of that name, was bom at Venice in 
1483. He began the study of Latin and Philosophy 
there and finished at Padua. He was deeply skilled in 
Utin, an eloquent and intelligent man ; and acted 
as Venetian Ambassador to Charles V.. a position 
he occupied for five years. He was made a 
Cardinal in 1535. In 1541 he was sent bv Paul 
III. as \mxe to the Diet of Ratisbon, and after- 
wards to Bolo^a, where he died in 1542. He was 
horied at Venice in the Church of Santa Maria 
<lel]' Orto. His numerous works were collected 
and published at Paris in 1591, fol. For one of 

Slddanus, De Statu religionis et reipuhlicae, 
Carolo quinto^ Caesare, Commentarii, 1555, f. six 
^«^M, &c. (biographical notes). 

Paolo Giovio. Le Inscrittioni poitt sotto U vere 
inagini de gli Huomini Famosi in Lettered 
Venetia. 1558, p. aio. 

I^olo Giovio, Elogia Virorum Uteris Ulustrium, 
Basil, 1577, p. 118, and portraiL 

J. M. Toscanus, Peplus Italia, 1578, p. 56, No. 
xal 

Borel, Bibliotheca Chimica, 1654, p. 66; 1656, 
p. 63. 

Freher, Theatrum Virorum Eruditione Clar- 
orwn, Noribergae, 1688, p. 30, and plate 2 for his 
portrait. 

Du Pin, jyotfvetle Bibliothique des Auteurs 
'ccUsiastifues, k Mons, X703, T. xiv. p. 161 ; or in 

them, De Potestate Pontificis, quod divinitus est 
tradita, which is said to have been written in one 
night, he was attacked by Cyriacus Spangenberg 
in his book Wider die lose Sieben, tns TeufeTs 
Kamoffelspiel^ Eisleben, 1562. 4**; though he com- 
mends the book on the Magistracy and Govern- 
ment of Venice, Paris, 1543. 8*. Borel calls him 
" Alchimix scriptor," but that is not correct. 

He was the uncle (?) of Luigi Contareni, author of 
// vago e diletiez'oie Giardino, a collection of notes 
and data on a variety of topics. 

Contareni's life was written by Giovanni de la 
Casa, " diffusely and without dates." 

A New Ecclesiastical History of the Sixteenth 
Century, London, 1703, p. 429. 

Nicol. Comnenus Papadopolus. Historic Gym- 
nasii Patavini, Venetiis, 1726, ii. p. 47, No. Ixxxiv. 

Niceron, M^moires, Paris, 1733, xxii. pp. 33X-343. 

Jocher, Allgemeines Gelehrten-Lexieon^ 1750, i. 
col. 2072. 

Freytag, Adparatus litterarius, X755, iii. p. 239, 

Tiraboschi, Storia delta Letteratura Italiana, 
Firenze, 1809, VH. i. p. 296. 

Watt, Bibliotheca Britannica, 1819, i. (authors), 
253 «. 

Biographie Untverselle, 1852, ix. p. iii. 

Nouvelle Biographie Ginirale, 1856, xi. col. 646. 

Ferguson, "Notes on . . . Books of Secrets"; 
Transactions ^ the Archaological Society of Glas- 
gow, 1890. N.S. i. p. 422. 

CONTI (Luigi de'). 

See COMITIBUS (ludovicus de). 

COOPER (William). 
See C (w.). 

COPUS (Martinus). 

See CEPHALUS (ariponus). 

CORDUS (Valerius). 

^harmaconim omnium quse in usu potiss. sunt, componendorum ratio. Vulgo 
vocant Dispensatorium sive Antidotarium. Ex optimis autoribus tarn 
recentibus quam veteribus collectum, ac scholiis utilibus illustratum, in 
quibus inprimis simplicia diligenter explicantur. Autore Valerio Cordo. 
Cum alijs pluribus ad banc rem pertinentibus, quae sequenti pagina indicantur. 
Opera et studio Collegii Medici inclytae Reipub. Norimbergensis jam primum 
multo emendatius ac selectis compositionibus auctius in lucem editum. 
Cum copioso duplici indice : & Privilegio Imperiali. Norimbergse, Apud 
Christophorum Lochnerum, & Johannem Hofmannum. Anno M D XCII. 

Folia Pp. [8] 292 [7, I blank]. Printer's device on the title-page. 

M 

178 

CORDUS—CORNACCHINUS 

CORDUS (Valerius). Continued. 

Valerius, son of Euridus Cordus, a physician 
and botanist, was bom i8 Feb., 151^, at Simmers- 
hausen (or Simmesbau5en, or Simmetshausen, 
or Simsthausen), a village of Hesse, not at Erfiirt. 
He was educated by his father, studied medicine 
at various universities and became a devotee 
of botanv and Materia Medica, and ultimately 
one of the greatest botanists of his time. He 
travelled far and wide in Germany and other 
countries to see the mines and collect plants, and 
in 154a went to Italy to learn the botany of that 
country. He did not spare himself, the result of 
which was that he died of fever at Rome 35 Sept. . 
1544, in the 29th year of his age. He is spoken of 

Hieronjrmus Schreiber, Vita VaUrii Cordi, 
Argent. 1563, foL 

Spachius, Nowunclaior Scriptorum Medicorum^ 
iS9i» PP- «5S. 158. 159. »66, 176, 181, i86, 187. 

Adami, VUm Germanorum Medicorum^ 1620, 

p. A2. 

Van der Linden, De ScripHs medicis Libri duo, 

1657. P- 459- 
Mercklin, Lindentus renovatus, 1686, p. 1034. 

Conring, In Univtrsam Artem hiedicam . . . 
Introductio, 1687, pp. 964, 375. 

Freher, Theatrum Viroi^meruditiontclarorum, 
1688, ii. p. 1338, and pi. 54. 

Reimmann, Einleitung in die Historiam liter- 
ariam derer TentscJUn, 1713, vi. p. 765. 

Roth-Scholtz, Bibliotheca Chemica, 1737, p. 47. 

Muiget, Bibliotheca Scriptorum Meduorum, 
1731, I. ii. p. 116. 

Stolle, AnUitung zur Historie der Medicinischen 
Gelakrheit, 1731, pp. 637-630. 772. 773. 

Niccron, Mimoires, 1737, xxxvii. p. 37^. 

Kestner, Mediciniscfus Gelekrten-Lexuon , 1740, 
p. 319. 

J(k^er, Altgemeines Gekhrten- Lexicon^ 1750, i. 
col 3096. 

Eloy, Dictionnaift Historique de la hfidecinc^ 

1755. »• p. a^9 : »778, i. p. 705. 
Haller, Btbliotheca Botanica, 1771, i. p. 381. 
Haller, Btbliotheca Medicina practica, 1777, ii. 

P- IS- 
Haumer, Btbliotheca Chemica, 1783, p. 104. 

in the highest terms by Conring, Haller, and others 
for the amount and quality of Uie work he dkl, and 
with regret that his life full of promise was so 
brief. 

Besides the present work which was first pab- 
lished at NQmtxrg in 1535, was the first won of 
its kind on Pharmacy, and went throo^ several 
editions ; he wrote also Annotations 00 Dioacorides, 
Sylva rerum fossilium^ kisioria sUrpimwg^ and 
others, collect«l and published at Strasbiurg in 
1561 ; on Spermaceti, printed along with Gcsoer's 
book on minerals, Zurich, 1555. 8^, and an Epistle 
de trockiscorum viperinorum adulteraiiome, Francf. , 
1598. 

Strieder. Grundlage tu einer HessisclUm G€iekrtem 
und SchrjftsteUer Gesckichte, Gtfttingen, ii iTte, 
p. 388. [Strieder gives a Ion([ account of his famex 
Henricus Urban, odled Euriaus {i,e. ed [Hen]riciis 
Cordus, the late, or the last, because he was the 
youngest of thirteen children.)] 

Stoever, Life of Sir C, Linnetus^ i794* P* 55> 

Gmelin, Gescktckte der CAemie, 1797, L p. 335. 

Fuchs, Repertorium der ckewdscken LiUeraimr^ 
x8o6-8. p. 47. 

Watt, Bibliotheca Britannica^ 1819^ L (authors), 
p. 3^80. 

Btf^rapkie Afidicale, Paris, Panckoucke (i8ao- 
35). in. p. 337. 

Dezeimeris, Dictionnaire Historique de la Midi" 
cine, 1831, I. ii. p. 864. 

Kopp, Gesckickie der Ckemie, 1844, ii. pp. 10, 
113; 1847, iv. pp. 399, 300, 304, 313. 

Phillippe & Ludwig, Geschkhte der Apeikeker, 
»855. P- 416. etc. 

Ernst H. F. Mejrer, Gesckickie der Botanik, 
Kanipber^, 1857, iv. pp. 317-333. 

Allfffemetne Deutsche Bu^aphie, 1876, iv. pw 479. 

Dictionnaire Encyclopiaiqtu des Sciences Mm" 
cales, 1B77, XX. p. 433. 

Haeser. Lehrbuch der Geschichle der Medicine, 
1 88 1, ii. p. 316. 

Billings, Index-Catalogue, 1883, iii. p. 414 ; 3nd 
Series, 1898, iiL p. 918. 

Hirsch, Biographisches Lex ikon der kervorra- 
genden Aerzte, 1885, ii. p. 78. 

CORNACCHINUS (Marcus). 

Methodus, qua omnes humani corporis affectiones ab humoribus copia vel 

qualitate peccantibus genita^ tuto, cito, et iucunde Chymice & Galenice 

curantur. 

See HARTMANN (johann), Praxis Chymiatrica, 1647. 

This tract, though appended to Hartmann's, has 
a separate fly-title and pagination (with four fold- 
ing tables). The author was the son of Thomas 
Cornacchinus whose TabuUe medica he, along 
with his brother Horatius, published in 1605, a 
pupil of Hieronjrmus Mercurialis of whom he 
edited the Pnelectiones fisanee, Francof., 1603. 
fol., and professor of Medicine at Pisa. Borel 
and Kestner say the Meikodus was printed at 

Van der Linden, De Scriptis Medicis Libri duo, 

X6371 pp- 344 and 449. 

T. Btbliotkeca Ckimica, 1654, p. 66; 1656, 

p. 63. 

Nfercklin, Lindenius renovatus, 1686, pp. 778 
and XOI3. 

Manget, Bibliotkeca Scriptorum Medicorum, 
1731, I. ii. p. 117. 

Florence in 1619, 4^, but as the dedication to 
Robert Dudley, Earl of Warwick, is dated : Pisis, 
Id. Aprilis, M.DC.XX. there seems to be some 
discrepancy. Van der Linden & Mercklin quote an 
edition of Florence, 1639, 4**, but not one of 1619, 
and say that it is appended to lAyWvs* Pkarmacopma 
Spagyrica, Francf., 1638, 8^. This is probably 
ths edition referred to by Haller, who however 
calls the author Marcus Antonius Cornacchinus, 

Kestner, Medicinisckes Gelekrten-Lexicom, 1740, 
p. 319. 
Tbcher, Allgemeines Gelekrten-Lexicon, 1750, i. 

col. 3IOO. 

Haller, Bibliotkeca Medicines practicee, 1773, ii. 
p. 564- 

CORNELIUS— COSMOPOUTE 1^9 

^ ^ P-^ , , TM-T ■ r ■ -■—--VII --iM^ ^ 

CORNELIUS ALVETANUS ARNSRODIUS. 

Sie ALYBTANUS (CORNELIUS), ARNSRODIUS. 

COROLLARIA. 

See FIGULUS (benedictus), Thesaurinella, 1682, p. 69. 

CORRECTIO Fatuimm. 

See ALCHiMiA (de) opuscula, 1550, ii. f. I. 

See ARTIS AURirERiE . . . Volumina, 1610, i. p. 349. 

See MORGBNSTERN (PHILIP), Turba Philosophonim, 161 3, i. p. 475. 

See MANGET (j. J.X Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, ii. p. 165. 

See HORGENSTERN (philipX Turba Philosophonim, 1750, i. p. 578. 

See RICHARDUS ANGLICUS. 

The German title is *' Die reformirte Alcbymie oder Bestraffung der ftdschen Alcbimisten." 

Maier, SjtmMa Aurtm Mensm^ 1617, p. 4^8. Fictuld, ProHer-Stein^ 1753, Th. i. p. 63. 

- Borrichius, Ci7«j;^«c/»; Scripiorum Cmmuorum^ Ladregue, BUliothiqut Ouvarcg^ ScUncts 
1697, p. 33, f zxzL SecriUa, xS;^ No. 1019. 

CORTALASSEUS. 

See GRASSHOF Oohann). 

CORTESE (Isabella). 
I secreti della Signora Isabella Cortese ; ne' quali si contengono cose Minerali, 
Medecinali, Profumi, Belletti, Artifitij, & Alchimia; con altre belle curiosity 
aggiunte. di nuovo ristampati, e con somma diligenza corretti. In 
Venetia, Presso Lucio Spineda. 1625. 

8*. Pp. [x6] ao6 [a WankJ. Vignette. 

Other editions mentioned are : Venice, 1561 (the Chyrurgia^ Hamburg, 1592, 1596, 8^, Frankfurt 

first). 1565, 1584, 1643, 1677, 8°. There is also a a. M., 1596, 8**. 

German translation : Verborgene keimUcht KUnsU The authoress is called Cortesa, Cortese, Cortes! , 

md Wundervoerke in der Alchymie, Afedicin und but I have not met with any account of her. 

Roth-Scholtz, Biblioikeca Chemica^ 1727, p. 48. Sprengel, Geschickie der Artmykunde^ 1897, iii. 

Lenglet Dufresno^, Histoirt de la Philosophic p. 535. 

Hermitiquet 174a. iii. p. 140. Haeser, Geschichte der Mediein, 1881, ii. p. 2x4. 

Haller, BiilioUuca Bctanica^ 1771* i* P* 330- Ferguson, '* Notes on . . . Books of Secrets," 

HaUer, Bibliotheca Chirurpca, 177^, i. p. 267. Tmmactions of the Archaeological Society of Glas- 

HaDer, BibUoiheca MedictMm practtcce, 1777, ii. gow^ 1883, ii. p. 258 ; 1890. N.S. i. p. 225 ; 1896, ii. 

p. 138. p. 390- 

Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemie, X797, i. p. 303. Kopp, Die Alchemic, 1886, ii. p. 236. 

CORVINUS (JOHANN Friedrich). 
Geschichte der kiinstlichen Luft, zweiter Theil. 

See ALLGEMEIN niitzliches chemisch-physikalisches Mancherlei, 1782, ii. p. i. 

See SPIELMANN (JACOB REINBOLD). 

The dissertation on factitious air was first p) riam aeris factitii, Argentor, 1776, 4*, Pars ii., 
published at Strasburg : Dissertatio sistens histo^ 1777. 

Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemie, 1799. iii. pp. 3x7, 358, 369, 372. 

COSMOPOLITA. 

See PHILALETHES (iEYRENiCUS). 

COSMOPOLITA (Anastasius Philaretus). 
See nollius (henricus). 

COSMOPOLITE. 

See SENDIVOGIUS (MICHAEL). 
See KOSMOPOLIT. 

i8o 

COZZANDO-CRASSELLAME 

VI 

Apud 

COZZANDO (Leonardo). 

Leonardi Cozzandi Brixiani De Magisterio Antiquorum Philosoirfioruiii 
lUustrissimo ac Omatissimo Hippolito Fenarolo DicatL Genevse. 
Samuelem de Tournes. M.DC.LXXXIV. 

13^ Pp. [31. X blank] 421. [146. i blank]. Title red and black. 

Cozsando was born at Brescia, became a monk, 
and devoted himself to history and to philosophy, 
of which he was, for some tmie, professor. To 
enable him to pursue his own studies he withdrew 
into the countiy and finally went into the monas- 
tery, where in 1694 in the 74th year of his age, he 
was still writing books. He has left a numba* of 
works on history and philosophy, in Italian and in 
Latin^ one of which is a short literary history of 
Brescia. He had nothing to do with alchemy or 
chemistry. This book contains an account of the 

Bayle, NouvelUs de la Re^ublique des Uttres, 
Juin, 1685, p. 637 (reviews the present work). 
Acta Pkitosopiorum, Halle, 17x6, ii. p. 3x9. 

ancient schools of Philosophy. It was analysed 
and reviewed in the Ada Pkilosophorum in a 
manner complimentaiy to the author. The 
reviewer states what httle he knows about bim 
and tells us that the book was first brought under 
his notice by Stolle. From the foct that it is not 
referred to by Morbof , MoUer, and other writers 
on philosophy, he infers that the book is lare and 
little known. There is a copy in the BritiBh 
Museum* 

Stolle, AnUituHg zur Historie der Gtlakrkai, 

1736. pp. 353. 373- 

|5cher, Aiigemeirus GtUhrten-LtxUom^ ^79^ >• 
col. 3X6l. 

CRAMER (JOHANN Andreas). 
Joann. Andr. Crameri Elementa Artis Docimasticse, duobus tomis comprehensa, 
quorum prior Theoriam, posterior Praxin, ex vera Fossilium indole deductas, 
atque indubitata Experimentorum, summa cum accuratione institutonim, fide 
firmatas, ordine natural! & doctrina apertissima exhibet Editio altera, 
emendatior, ac turn in Theoria, turn in Praxi, ab Auctore ipso multis modis 
aucta & locupletata. Pars Prima Theoretica. Lugduni Batavoniniy Apud 
Conradum Wishoff, et Georg. Jac. Wishoff, Fil. Conr. 1 744. Cum Privil^o. 

8^. Pp. [14] 366. Index [28]. Pars Altera, Practica, pp. [x8] 380. Index [10]. 
6 folding piates of apparatus. 

Anfangsgriinde der Probierkunst. 

See GOTTLING (jOHANN FRIEDRICH AUGUST), 1 794. 

Cramer was bom at Quedlinburg, 14 Dec., 17x0. 
He taught assaying at I^den and London for some 
years and was finally Councillor for mines and 
metallurgy at Blankenburg, from X743 to X773. 
He died of dropsy at Berggiesshubel, Dresden, 
6 Dea, X777. Tnere is a favourable notice of him 
in the Allgetiuine Deutsche Biop^aphie, where he is 
called the greatest assayer of his time, and Bamner 

Haller, Bibliotheca Anatomica, 1774, i. p. 745. 
Eloy, Dictionnaire Historique de la Midecine^ 
X778. I. p. 727. 
Baumer, Bibliotheca Chemica^ 1782, p. 69. 
Crell, Annalen der Chemie^ X786, ii. pp. 376-384. 
Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemie, i799» >"• P> 5^ &c. 

a hundred years earlier said that he was jtistly 
reckoned among the best writers on the subject. 
He published his Docimasia at Leyden, 1736, and 
Elementa Artis DocimasHctE^ Leyden, 1739, a vols., 
8^ The English translation appeared at London, 
1741 ; and edition, 1764, 8*. The German transla- 
tion was made by C. V*, Gellert and published at 
Stockholm, 1746, 8", and Leipzig. 1766, 8^, 

Meusel, Lexikon der zmm Jahr 1750 bis 1800 
verstorbenen Teutschen Schriffsteller^ X803, ii. p. 187. 

Fuchs, Reperlorium der chemischen Litteratur^ 
1806-08, pp. 256, 413. 

Kopp, Geschichte der Chemie^ 1844, ii. p. 44 ; 
1847, iv. p. 157. 

Allgemeine Deutsche Biographic, X876, iv. p. 549. 

CRASSELLAME (Marc-Antonio). 

Das aus der Finstemifs von sich selbst hervorbrechende Licht, in drey 
Italienischen Gesangen nebst seiner Auslegung, worinnen das Geheimnifs 
des Steins der Weisen, nach physicalischen und verniinftigen Griinden 
deutlich vor Augen geleget wird. Aus dem Franzosischen libersetzt von 
C. F. K. M.D. et P.P. Langensalza, 1772. in Johann Christian Martini 
Verlag. 

8*. Pp. [X4] 350. 

CRASSELLAME—CRA WFORD 

i8i 

CRASSELLAME (Marc- Antonio). Continued. 

Das aus der Finsternifs von sich selbst hervorbrechende Licht. 
See HERMETiscHES A. B. C, 1779, "• P- 106. 

Extracts only. 

La Lumiere sortant par soi-meme des Tenebres, poeme sur la composition de 
la Pierre des Philosophes, traduit de Tltalien avec un Commentaire. 
See RICHEBOURG (j. M. D.), Biblioth^ue des Philosophes Chimiques, 1741, iii. 

p. 322. 

The original Italian poem is in three Canzoni of 
7, 8, and 10 stanzas respectively, and th« title runs : 
"A i veri Sapienti si discorre teoricaniente sopra 
la compositione della pietra de Philosophi ; di 
Fra Marc- Antonio Crassellame Chinese.' I do 
not know if it was published separately, but it was 
printed face to face with the French translation. 
The commentator, describing his lon^ continued 
labour in tr3ring to understand the writings of the 
philosophers, savs that an anonymous MS. in 
Italian fell into his hands and, finding it skilfully 
written, he translated it and added an exposition 
so that its lijp^ht should be diffused as widely as 
possible. Of the author he knew nothing except 
his anagram, so that the name appears to be a 
made up one. The Commentary was apparently 
written m Latin, but this version I have not seen. 
It was translated into French, with the Italian 
poem included, and was published with the title : 
La Lumiere sortant par soy mdme des Tenebres 
ou veritable theorie de la Pierre des Philosophes 
. . . Paris, L. d*Houry, 1687, 12*. The second 

I^englet Dufresnoy, Histoire de la Philosophie 
Hermitique^ 1742, iiu p. 225. 
Tollios, Safientia insaniens oder tolU Weifsheii, 

«753. p. 72. 

CRASSEUS. 

See GRASSHOFF (JOHANN). 

CRATA REPOA. Oder Einweihungen in der alten geheimen Gesellschaft der 
Egyptischen Priester. 1785. 

Without place and printer's name. 

Small square 8^ Pp. 3a. 

This little pamphlet has nothing to do with degrees, taken from what is said about it by the 
aldiemy or chemistry, but professes to give an out- 
line of the ceremony of initiation into the various 

edition " reveue et au^ent^ de CLiii. aphorismes 
chymiques," was published by d'Houry at Paris in 
169a, IS**. I have not seen it. The translat(Mr 
sa)^ that he knows nothing about the author. 

The translation and commentary, but not the 
Italian, were reprinted by Richebour^ (<l*v.)* 

The treatise is referred to by Tollius with grate- 
ful thanks to the learned translator, and the author 
is called by hun Frater Antonius Crasselamius. 

The present German version is from the French, 
but seemingly not from the edition of 1687. For 
instead of giving the assigned author's name as it 
appears there, Uie German translator, C. F. K., 
quotes it from Tollius and at the same time tran- 
scribes it incorrectly as '* Marcus Antoninus Cras- 
talamius. " 

Both translations are included by Kopp among 
alchemical books with ' light ' for their title, but he 
has not noticed that one is translated from the 
other, and he makes no allusion either to the 
Italian verses or the reputed author. 

Ladrague, BibliotJUque Ouvaroff^ 
SecriUs^ 1870, Nos. 1285- 1287. 

Kopp, Die A/cAemie, 18S6, ii. p. 385. 

Sciences 

ancients. 

CRAWFORD (Adair). 
Experiments and Observations on Animal Heat, and the Inflammation of 
Combustible Bodies; being an attempt to resolve these phenomena into 
a general law of nature. By A. Crawford, M.D. F.R.S.Ln and £. and 
Member of the Philosophical Societies of Dublin and Philadelphia. The 
Second Edition, with very large Additions. London : printed for J. 

Johnson, No. 72, St. Paul's Church-Yard. M.DCC.LXXXVIII. 

8^ Pp. [16] 491 [x blank]. 4 engraved plates. 

The author was bom in Ireland in 1748, and Poggendorff. Of the above book the first edition 

died 1795. ^^ ^"^^^ ^ physician at St. Thoma.*('s appeared in 1779. It is of importance as it dis- 

Hospital, aftervrards professor of chemistry at cusses the subject of specific beat^ especially of 

Woolwicfa, and a Fellow of the Royal Societies gases. It also deals with the chemistry of respira- 

of London and Edinburgh. tion. The German translation is by Crell, Leipzig, 

Lists^of bis works are given by Watt, Reuss and 1789, 8^. 

182 

CKA WFORD--CREIUNG 

CRAWFORD (Adair). ConHnucd. 

Groelin, GtickicktedtrCkemU^ '799^ iii* P- 304«ctc. 
Retiu, Reptrtorium Commentatianum ; Chtmia^ 
180J, pp. 17, 38. 188. 
Fischer, Geschichtt der Physik^ vols, vi., vii., viiL 

Tke Edinburgh Medical and Surgical Journal^ 
1817, xiii. p. ^3 (review of his expoiinents on the 
effect of tonics, etc., on the cohesion of animal 
fibre. The reviewer gives a brief estimate of the 
author's work in general). 

Watt, IHbliotkeca Britannica^ 1819, i. (authors), 
968r. 

Biofraphie Midicale^ Paris, Panckoucke, (i8ao- 

95). «"• P- 35*- 

Deseiiiieris, DicH&mmmin kUimifwe 4t tm. mUde- 
ciiUt 1831, I. ii. p. 8861 

Biegraikit UmaverMik^ 185% iz. pu 45^ 

NouvelU Biograf^ie GAUraUj 1856. a. ooL 381. 

Pogsendorfl^ Biegrapkixh4iieraruckis Hmmd- 
vtdrtemch^ 1863, L ooL 40^ 

Dictumnairt EmeycicpiSlfme des Sciemees M/di- 
caUs, 1879. xxii. p. 733. 

Billings, Index-Ca/aUgme, 1889, iii pu 494 ; and 
Series, 1898, iii. p. loia. 

Hirsch, Biograpkisckes Lexihom der Aervtrrm- 
genden Aertie, 1885, iu p. 103. 

DicHcmary «f National BUtgrapky^ 1888, xuL p. 
49 (article biy Hunt). 

CREILING (JOHANN KONRAD). 

Die Edelgebome Jungfer Alchymia, oder : eine durch Rationes, viele Exempla 
und Experimenta abgehandelte Untersuchung, was von der Akhymia zu 
halten und vor Nutzen daraus zu schopffen seye, nebst einem Zusatz von 
der Medicina Universal!, Universal-Process und einigen Kunst-StUcken. aus 
der Alchymie. Tubingen bey denen Gebriidem Cotta. 1730 

8^. Pp. [24] 424. Woodcut of the IVague Medal, p. 91. 

'Phis work appeared in the same year with a quite different tiUe-page :— 

Rhren-Rettung der Alchj^mie, odcr VemQnfftige Untersuchung, was von der 
herrlichen Gabe, welche die himmlische Weifsheit denen Menschen gesdiendcet, und 
insgemcin mit dem veriichtlichen Nahmen der Alchvmie beleget wird, zu halten seje. 
Durch Kationes, auch viele curiosa Exempla und Experimenta abgehanddt. Wobey 
noch von der Medicina Universali Meldung geschiehet. Saramt einem Anhang da 
Universal- Processes K^eyer alten wahrhafften Philosophorum, und kurtzer Consigna- 
tion etlicher Kunst-StUcke aus der Alchjrmie. Nicht nur denen Liebhabem dieser edlen 
Wissenschafnen, sondem auch alien andem, was Standes sie seyn m5gen, nutxlich und 
vergnUglicli zu lesen. Ehedessen geschrieben von einem bekannten Philosopho. Nun 
aber auf vicler Verlangen an Tag gegeben von einem Liebhaber der Chymie. Her- 
renstadt, bey Samuel Rothscholtzen, MDCCXXX. 

Still another title without the author's name is given in the Beylrag tur Geschichtt 
der hdhem Chemie^ '785, p. 663 : 

V. F. S. P. Edelgebome Junker Alchyraia, nebst einem Zusatz von der Medicina 
universali, Universalprocess und emigen Kunst<(tUcken aus der Alchymie. Tttbing., 
1730. 8*. 

The initials arc explained at the end of the ' Vorrede ' ; they are taken from the 
words Victrix Fortunoe SaPientia. 

The book is a defence of alchemy, based first 
upon natural principles, and secondly on the 
evidence of actual transmutations. It contains a 
good deal of interesting historical matter, but it 
has been injured by its fantastical title. 

This work was published anonymously, and 
even Schmieder did not know the author's name, 
although it had been given both by Fucbs and by 
Gmelin. 

Fuchs calls Creiling professor at Helmstttdt, 
whereas Kopp says he was professor of chemistry 
at Tubingen : but he may have been both. 

Meusel states that he was born at Ldchgau, 
WUrtemberg, 9 July, 167^, was professor of mathe- 
matics and physics at Tdbingen from 170 1 to 1745, 
when he resigned, and died at Tttbingen, 13 Sept« 
1753 (1750?). He wrote mathematical papers 
and the present work, but there is no reference to 
his being professor of chemistry anjrwhere. 

Kortum calls him a famous teacher at TQbingen, 
aprodigy of learning, who spent the greater port 
oihit life in his laboratory over alchemical pursuits, 
and wrote the Ehrenrtttmng der Alchemit. With 

all justice he could say in his autobiography : 
Qusesivi et inveni, quot lapides sophiae. 

The authorship is ascribed to Creiling also in the 
Fama Mystica nermetica, 1773, p. aa, and in the 
Sammtung der neuesten . . . B^petenhalent 1780, 
in the pr«ace. He is called the author of the very 
rare Ehrenretlung^ afterwards issued with the 
ludicrous title Die Edel^home Jumgfer Alchymia, 

Still more definitely is the subject discussed by 
Roth-Scholtz, who speaks of Creiling as his best 
friend and patron. He tells us that the MS. of the 
book was complete prior to 1707, and in that year 
he printed the title and contents from the MS. in his 
Bihliotheca Chemica. The book ^^'as eagerly 
looked for by the believers in transmutation, and 
in 1730 he expresses the hope that, as it deserved 
to be printed, the publication would not be de- 
layed, for it would be a misfortune if the author 
did not live to see it finished. The title given by 
Roth-Scholu is that of the Ehrenreituttg. The 
publication actually took place in 1730, but it must 
have been after that of Rotb-Sdx>hs's Thioirtem^ 
in which the above remarks oocnr. What pro- 

CREIIJNG 

183 

CREILING (JoHANN Konrad). Continued. 

duced the change of title from what stood in the 
MS. in 1727 I have not discovered. The alteration 
mtist have been made almost at oqce and the 
EkrenrcttuHg title must have been quickly can- 
celled, or the copies withdrawn from circulation, 
for that form is certainly far less common than 
Die Edtigebonu Jung/cr Alchymia. I have seen 
several copies of the latter, but only one of the 

RoUi-SchoItz, BibUoiheca Cktmica, 17^, pp. 
4-14. 

Roth-Scholtz, Deuisches Theatrum Chemicum, 
1730, ii. p. 827. 

Pictuld, Probier-StHn^ 1753, T^ »• P- 64. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Amafomica, 1777, ii. p. 28. 

Kortum verteidigei die Aickemie, 1789, p. 94. 

Gmelin, Gesckukte der Chemie, 17^. ii. pp. 
324. 325. 

Hermutisckes Journal^ 1801, I. i. p. 55 (interest- 
\n^ notice of Creiling). 
Vfeusel, Lexikon der vom Jahr 1750 his 1800 

([Another Copy.] 

former : and it is seldom that both titles are Quoted. 
Thus while Gmelin mentions only the former, 
Fuchs, Schmieder, and Kopp seem to know the 
latter alone. 

Besides the works in the present catalogue 
(Creiling published Hannemanns commentary on 
Elspagnet s Enchiridion physica; restituia, to which 
he prefixed a learned preface, Tubingen, 1718, 4^ 

t'erstorhenen Teutschen Schriftsteller, 1803, "• P* 
216. 

Fuchs, Reperlorium der chemischen Litieratur, 
1806-08, p. 251. 

Schmieder, Gesckickte der Aichemie, 1832, p. 

PoggendoHf, Biographisck-literarisches Hand- 
worientitch^ 1863, i. coL 495. 

Ladrague, Bibliothique Owoarcff^ Sciences 
Secrites, 1870, Na 1455 (without the author's 
name). 

Kopp, Die Aichemie, 1886, i. p. 244 ; ii. p. 382, 

£[Another Copy.] 

UDissertatio Academica de Aureo Vellere aut Possibilitate Transmutationis 
Metallorum banc Prseside Johanne Conrado Creilingio, Physics Experiment. 
£t Mathemat Professore Ordinario, Senatus Universitatis Seniore, Contub. 
Academici Rectore, £t Facultatis Philosophicse h. t. Decano. Defendent 
publice Magisterii Philosophici Candidati, Johannes Jacobus Erbe, Tubingensis. 
Johannes Fndericus Reinmann Tubingensis. Christianus Theophilus Gmelin, 
Tubingensis. Illustris Seminarii Ducalis Alumni. Ad D. H. L. C. Anno 
MDCCXXXVII. Tubings, Litteris Roebelianis. 

4*. Pp. 88. 

is part of the Dissertation is in three sections : Sectio II. De Salibus metallids . . . ftc. 
:tio I. De HIstoria Aurei Velleris, et de Sectio III. De Productione artifidali Ferri & 
P*^*^^ripii8 metallorum, ftc. Sulphuris, de Vegetatione metallorum, &c. 

■^^^issertatio de Aureo Vellere, Sectio iv. De Cautelis Quibusdam in Aurificio, 
Maxime Particulari, Utilibus. Hanc Preside Johanne Conrado Creilingio, 
Physicae Experimentalis et Mathemat. Professore ordinario, Senatus Univer- 
sitatis, nee non Facultatis Philosophise Seniore, et Contub. Academ. Rectore. 
Defendent Publice Magisterii Philosophici Candidati Albertus Christoph. 
Baumann, Keramio-Neohusan. Johannes Conradus Haas, Ar-Neohusanus. 
Illustris Seminarii Ducalis Alumni. Ad D. H. L. C. Anno MDCCXXXIX. 
Tubingse, Litteris Roebelianis. 

4^ Pp. 42 [2]. 

Abhandlung vom Goldenen Vliess oder Moglichkeit der Verwandlung der 
Metalle. Aus dem Lateinischen des Herm Job. C. Creiling, ordentlichen 
Lehrers der Mathematik und Physik &c. iibersetzt. Tubingen bei Jacob 
Friedrich Heerbrandt. 1787. 

8". Pp. [16] 176. 

ffli oonsitts of the four parts of the two pre- torium der chemischen Litteratur, 1806-08, p. 266) 
Mding rtiiwif iMMia. Thej contain matter bearing calls the second part " sebr hUbsch." 
OB tba hittoij of transmutation. Fuchs {Reper^ 

184 

CREILING^CREMER 

CREILING (JOHANN Konrad). Continued. 

Das Goldene Vliess. 

See MAGAZIN fiir die hohere Chemie, 1787, ii. p. i. 

Langlct Dufresiio^. Histoire de la Philosopkie Ladrague. BibUoikiifme 
Hermitiqtig^ i74S» i"- P« X42- Secrites^ 1870, No. 1 196. 

Omfarof^ Sciences 

CRELL (LoRENZ Florenz Friedrich von). 

Die neuesten Entdeckungen in der Chemie. Gesamlet von D. Lorenz Crell, 
Herzogl. Braunschweig. Liineburg. Bergrath. der theoret Arzneygelahrtheit 
und der Materia medica ordentL ofTentl. Lehrer zu Helmstadt; der Rom. 
KaiserL Academie der Naturforscher Adjuncte ; der Churfurstl. Maynzischen 
Academie der Wissenschaften, der Berlin. Gesellsch. naturforsch. Freunde, 
und der Herzogl Braunschweig, deutschen Gesellschaft MitgUede. Erster 
Theil. Leipzig, in der Weygandschen Buchhandlung. 1781. 

8*. Pp. [la] 250. [2]. 

ZweytcrTheil. [61 3-284. 

" ' 5 1 272. 

Vierter TheiU 1782, [6] 282. 

Drittcr Thei^ [16I 

Plate 
Funfter Thcil, [14] 274. 
Sechster Tbeil neost einem Register Uber 
aechs TheUejS] 992. 
SiebcDter Theil, [18] 37a 
Achlcr Theil, 1783. [61 282. Plate. 
Neunter Theil. xiv. fal 258. Hate, 

alle 

Crell was born at Helmstftdt, 21 January, 1744. 
He had the usual University training and took the 
degrees of D. I%il and D. Med., and was 
appointed professor of Chemistry and Mineralogy 
in the Carolinum at Brunswick in 1771. In 1773 
he removed to Helmstiidt as professor of Philosophy 
and became professor of Medicine in 1774. He 
discharged the duties of these offices till 18x0, when 
the University at Helmst&dt was abolished. After 
that he acted as ordinary professor of Chemistry at 
G&ttingen till his death, which happened there on 
7 June, x8i6. He had also been Brunswick 
Mining Councillor from 178a His portrait is 
given in AUgemeine Teutsche BUlioihek, vol. Lix. 

Crell made numerous chemical researches, which 
were published in various journals and in various 
languages, and he was diligent as a translator of 
chraiical books, having turned Black's ' Lectures,' 
Crawford on Heat, and others into German, but he 

Baumer, Bibliotheca Chemica^ 1782, p. 3. 

Meusel, Das Gelekrie Teutsckland oder Lexikan 
der ieizt'lebenden Teutscken Schriftsieller, 1796, 
i. pp. 642-647. 

Fiichs, Reperiorium der ckemiscken Liiteratur^ 
180608, pp. 454, 455, 471, 473, 520, 52^. 

Watt, Bibliotheca Britanmtca^ 1819, 1. (authors) 
269/. 

Zehnter Theil, [1-7] 8-286 [2]. 

Eilfter Theil, xviii. 268 [2]. 

Zwolfter Theil, 1784 [12] 254 [2]. Nebst einem 
Raster Uber die letztem sechs Thdle. pp. 177-210 
(misprint for 257-290). 

Dreiiehnter Theil, 1786, [8] 5-299 [i blank]. 
Plate. (This is vol. iv. of the Auswakl, and has a 
title-page to that effect.) 

is now remembered specially as the active editor of 
several series of chemical journals issued under his 
name between 1778 and 1803. Crell's 'Annalen,' 
'Journal,' *Archiv,' and ' Kntdeckon^en ' are 
standard works of reference for the history of 
Chemistry during the last quarter of the eighteenth 
century, just at tlie birth of the modem period. 
Lists of his works are ^ven by Meusel and PQtter. 
The following list of his journals may be useful : 

'Chemiscbes Journal.' 6 parts. 1778-1781. 

'Die neuesten Kntdeckungen in der Chemie.' 
13 parts. 1781-1786. 

'Chemisches Archiv.' 2 parts. 1783. 

' NeueschemischesArchiv.' 8 vols. 1783-1791. 

• Neuestes Cheraisches Archiv.' 1798. 

* Chemische Annalen.' 40 vols. 1784-1803. 

' Beitrftge zu den Chemischen Annalen. ' 6 parts. 

X785-X799- 

Putter, Versuck einer Academiscken Gelekrten- 
Gesckickte von der Georg-Augustus-Universiidt su 
Gdtiingen^ iii. (i8ao, by Friedrich Saalfeld), p. 80. 

Kopp, Gesckickte der Ckemie, 1845, i"* P* ^^3 

Poggendorff, Biografkisck-literarisckes Hand- 
wdrtemck, 1863, i. col. 

AUgemeine Deutscke Biograpkie^ 1876, iv. p. 587 
(articfe by Oppenheim). 

CREMER (John). 

See MAIRR (MICHAEL), Tripus Aureus, 

See MUSARUM HERMETICUM, 1749, P* 

I 
; 

John Cremer, abbot of Westminster, lived early 
in the fourteenth century. He was devoted to 
Alchemy, and had worked at it for thirty years, 
but the more he read the more he felt himself mis- 
led by the conflict of opinion and directions for 
work, so he resolved to go to some adept of repute 
and be put by him on the right path. He went to 

161 8, p. 183. 

533- 

Raymimd Lully in Milan in 1330, and from him 
he learned part of the mjrstery. On Cremer's 
persuasion Lully came to London where he re- 
mained two years. They worked together. Lully 
was presented to the King, Edward IIL, and 
promised to supply him with gold for a war 
against the Turks. The King received the gold 

CREMER—CROLUUS 

185 

CREMER (John). Continued. 

but used it against France, and Lully. feeling that 
be had Xxxxi deceived, departed suddenly to the 
great regret of Cremer, who never learned any 
more about transmutation. 

Two difficulties are connected with this story, 
one, that the name of Cremer does not occur 
^unong the abbots of Westminster, the other is the 

Michael Maier, Symbola Aurea AlenstF, 1617, 
pp. 413, 480. 

Ashmole. Theatrum CAemicmm Britannicum, 
1652, pp. 2x3, 465-67. 

Morhofj DeAMallorum transmutatiofu Epistola, 
\(yj^ p. 122. 

Borrichius, Conspectus Scriptorum Chemicorum, 
1697, p. 18. 

doubt that hangs round Lully's visit to England, 
and Borrichius questions Cremer's share in the 
business. 

A portrait of Cremer is given by Aslimole at the 
head of ' Hermes bird,* which Ashmole says was 
translated from Lully by Cremer. Cremer's story 
is quoted in most of the histories of alchemy. 

Die Edelgebome Jung/er Alch^mia, 1730, p. 194. 

Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemte^ X797. i. p. 52. 

Schmieder, Geschichte der Akhimie, 1832, pp. 
169, 172, 182. 

Hoefer, Histoire de la Chimie, 1842, i, p. 411 ; 
1866. i. p. 435. 

Kopp, Die AlchemiCy 1886, pp. 339, 359. 

CROLLIUS (OswALDUs). 
Osvaldi Crollii Veterani Hassi. Basilica Chymica continens. Philosophicum 
proprii laborum experientia coniirinatani descriptionem & vsum Remediorum 
Chymicorum Selectissimorum € Lumine Gratiae & Naturae Desumptorutn. 
In fine libri additus est Autoris eiusdem Tractatus Nouus De Signaturis 
Rerum Internis. Cum Gratia & Priuilegio S. Caes. Maiest. Francofurti, 
Impensis Godefridi Tampachii, Anno M.D.C.XX. 

8". Pp. 336 [47, I blank]. Pp. 177-180 dropped. 209-2x2 repeated. Tractatus 

ren. 

Signaturis, pp. lOO. Index [28]. Elegia de Antiqua Medicina Vlrici Bollingeri 
^ pp. 16. Tne Tract de Signaturis has a separate title, included in the pagination. 

An edition appeared at Geneva, 1631, 8^ Again 1658, 8°. with the notes of Hartmann & Michaelis. 

de 

&C., 

D. 0. M. A. Osualdi Crollii Veterani Hassi Basilica Chymica Continens. 
Philosophicam propria laborum experientia confirmatam descriptionem et 
usum Remediorum Chymicorum Selectissimorum ^ Lumine Gratiae et Naturae 
Desumptorum. In fine libri additus est Autoris ejusdem Tractatus Nouus 
de Signaturis Rerum Internis. Cum Gratia et Priuilegio S. Caes. Maiest. 
Francofurti, Impensis Godefridi Tampachij. 

Without date. 

4*. Pp. [16] 283. Index [25] ; Tractatus de Signaturis internis rerum, pp. [15, 
I blank]. So. Index [16] ; Elegia De Vera Antiqua Philosophica Medidna, scripta k. 
M. Vlrioo BoUinjp^o, etc., pp. 24. The title page is an elaborate symbolic engrraving, 
%irith portraits of Hermes, Morienus and Lully on one side, and Geber, R. Bacon and 
Panoelsiis on the other. This undated edition is a reissue of that of 1609, ^^^ some 
modificatioDS which are seen in the poems at the end. Sheet aa has been reprinted ; it 
contains catchwords not in the earlier edition, the inner lines of the border go down to 
the bottom ; the title-page also is diflferent. Sheet bb is the same in both ; but cc has 
also been reprinted with catchwords and tmrdering lines prolonged ; the poem ends on 
004 verso instead of cc4 recto^ and the register^ imprint and date have been omitted. 

D. 0. M. A. Crollius Redivivus. Das ist, Hermetischer Wunderbaum, warinn 
zu sehen, wie die wunderbahre Werck Gottes von Liebhabern wahrer 
Chymischer Artzney, recht zu verstehen, vnd zu erkenen ; vnd wie ein jeder 
Gottsfiirchtiger Artist, vnd Spagyrus derselben nachfolgen, aufT dais er 
dermal einest mit eigener gesegneter Hand-arbeit im Philosophischen Acker 
nicht nur ein Fiincklein, sondem wol gar ein starcken Strahlen defs Liechts 
der Natur, ohne sondere Miihe aufswiircken vnd erlangen mag. Aufs dem 
grossen Hermetischen Lustgarten zusammen getragen vnd in sieben Biichlein 
abgetheilet Durch Anonymvm von Feldtaw. 

i86 

CROLUUS 

CROLLIUS (OswALDUs). Continued, 

Syr. 14. 1 8. Wer sich mit seiner Arbeit nehret, vnd last ihm beniigen, 
der hat ein fein ruhwig Leben, das heist, ein Schatz vber alle 
Schatze finden. 
Gedruckt zu Franckfurt am Mayn, bey Anthoni Hummen. In Verlegung 
Johann Gottfried Schonwetters. M.D.C.XXXV. 

4^ Pp. [xo] 66. 30 engravings in the tesct. 

This is followed by Oswald Crollius' Errinerungs Vorrede, prp. i-ii3. and the Basilica 
Chymica, pp. 114-248, and Index [15, x blank]. There is no title-page. 

After this conies the tract on Signatures, vvith the following title-page : 

Oswaldi Crolii Von Wetter aufs dera FOrstenthiunb Hetsen, we^rland FflrstUchen 
Anhaltischen wolverordneten Leib Medici Tractat von den jnnerbchen Signaturen, 
Oder Zeichen aller Dinge. Oder von der wahren vnd lebendigen Anatomia der grossen 
vnd kleinen Welt. Von dem Authorc erstlichen beschrieben vnd zu vnterschicdlichen 
malen in Truck verfertiget: Nunmehr aber auflfdas fleissi^st vnd trewlichst Terteutscht. 
Getnickt zu Franckfurt am Mayn, bey Caspar Rdtel, m Verlegung Gottfridt Tani- 
pachs. Im Jahr 1609. 

Pp. 7a. Index [7, I bUink]. 

Though it has a separate title-page, signatures 
and pagination, it obviously forms part of the 
preceding. 

This seems a made-up book. Whether this 
i6a9 (?) edition of Crollius' Basilica^ wanting the 
title-pa^e, was issued with Feldtaw s later work, 
or whether this is a defective copy which happens 
to have been merely bound along with the otner, I 
am not sure. Judging however from them having 

been all issued together in 1647, with notes by 
Johann Hartmann {q.v\ I conclude that they 
form parts of one volume, and that owing to some 
publishing arrangement the title-page of Feldtaw's 
tract has been made to do duty for the whole. 
I have had no opportunity for ascertaining whether 
there, are other copies like this, or if there be any 
of the Basilica Chymica, 1629 (?), with Feldtaw^ 
Crollius redivivus^ 1635, at the end. 

D. O. M. A. Oswaldi Crollii Weterani Hassi Chymisch Kleynod. Hiebevor 
zwar aufsgangen jetzo aber durch den Hochgelehrten Johann Hartmannum 
M.D. gemehrt verbessert, mit nothwendigen Nods spagyricis zu Erlauterung 
der Artzneyen, geziert, vnd zum Ersten mal, neben dem Hermetischen 
Wunderbaum, in Truck aufsgangen alien Doctoren, Apoteckem, I^boranten, 
Balbierem und manniglichen sehr dienlich vnd niitzlich. Cum Gratia et 
Priuilegio S. Oes. Maiest. Francofiirti, Impensis Godefridi Schonwetteri. 
1647. 

This is followed by a printed title-page : 

Hermetischer Probier Stein, darauflf nicht allein alle vnd jede in defs Oswaldi 
GrolUi {sic) intitulirten Alch^rmistischen Kdniglichen Klejrnod befindliche prooefs vnd 
Chymische Artzneyen exanuniret vnd auflf die F'rob gesetzet, sondern dieselbe audi mit 
vnterschiedlichen andem schdnen vnd nOtzlichen durch selbst eygnen Handgriff vnd 
t&gliche Erfahrung approbirten Artzneyen vor diesem in Lateinischer Sprach vermeh- 
ret vnd verbessert worden. Von Johann Hartmann, der Artzney D. Fflrstlich- 
Hessischen gewesenen weitberiihmbten Leib Medico vnd Professom zu Marpurg an 
jetzo aber auflf vielfkltiger begehm. Neben angehengten Crollischen Tractiltlein von 
den jnnerlichen Si^naturen oder Zeichen aller Dinge vnd dem Hermetischen Wunder- 
baum, dem gemeinen Nutzen zum bestcn ins Teutsche versetzet. Franckfurt am 
Mayn, Jn Verlegung Johann Gottfried Schbn welters. M. DC. X XXXVI I. 

4^ Pp. [8] 392 [16]; Crollius redivivus, 83 [i blank]; Von den Sigpaturen. 
no title, pp. ox [10. i bfankl General engraved title with symbolic drawmgs and 
portraits 01 Hermes, Geber, Morieuus. R. Bacon, R. Lullius, Paracelsus. Engravings 
to ' Crollius rediviviis,' printed in the text. That tract has separate pagination and a 
title-page as follows : 

D.O.M.A. Crollius Redivivus. Das ist, Hermetischer Wundcrfaaum, warinn 
zu sehen, wie die wunderbahre Werck Gottes von Liebhabem wahrer Chymisgher 
Artzney, rocht zu verstehen, vnd zuerkennen ; vnd wie ein jeder Gottsf&rchtiger Artist, 
vnd Spagynis dersdben nachfolgen, auflf das er dermal einest mit eisener gesegneter 
HandarMit im Philosophischen Acker nicht nur ein Ftlncklein, sondern wol gar ein 
starcken Strahlen defs Liechts der Natur, ohne sondere MQhe aufswttrcken vnd 
erlangen mag. 

Aufs dem grossen Hermetischen Lustgarten zusammen getragen vnd in siet^n 
BUchlein abgetheilet. Durch Aooojrmum von Fekltaw. 

CROLUUS—CRONENBURGIUS 

i«7 

CROLLIUS (OswALDUS). Continued. 

Syr. i^ x8. Wer sich mit aeiner Arbeit nehret, Mind ULst jhm benUgen, der hat ein 
fein nihwig Lebeo, das heist ein Schatz vber alle Schfttxe finden. 
Gednickt zu Franckfurt am Mftyn, b^ Hans Friederich Weifs. M.D.C.XXXXVII. 

Pp. 83 [i blank]. 

The statement cm the engraved title-page that would indicate that the volume entitled Crollius 
this is the first publication of these tracts together, redivivus, &c. was a made up one. 

[Another Copy.] 

It wants the engraved title. 

In English it appears as Royal and Practical 
Chemistry, in Three Treatises, London, 1670^ 
small IqAao, Besides Crollius' Basilica it contains 
Hartmann's Practice of Chymistry, 

The 'Admonitory Prdace,' 'made English by 
H. Pinnell,* was puolished in Philosophy Keformed 
and Improved in tour Profound Tractates, London, 

Tbe 

The Basilica Ckymica coasists of three parts : 
an admonitory preface, in which Crollius discusses 
the doctrines of Paracelsus; the practical part, 
which is really a treatise on pharmacy and thera- 
peutics; and the treatise on Signatures. The 
remarks made by Conring and by Schelhammer 
are not much in commendation of either Crollius 
or his book, but it must be remembered that 
Conring was opposed to Paracelsus and his S3rstem 
and his followers. 

StoUe notices the work favourably. The 'Ad- 
monitory Prdace ' and Paracelsus' views in general 
are sevoely criticized by Libavius in his Examen 
PhilosophicB novce, 16 15, pp. 35-87, forming part 
of his Appendix Necessaria ^yntagmatis Arcan- 
orum Clumicorum^ q.v. 

On his Chemistry see Kopp. 

A German transmtion, altered from Hartmann's, 
ii.v. was brought oat a^n at NCimberg in 1684, 
by Johann Hi^ias Cardilacius, with a commentary. 

The French translation was executed by J. 
Marod de Boulene, Lyons, 1627, 8**. 

Bollinger, Encomium Wetterce Nachrichten v, 
Wetter, p. 148, and Basel. Lex, 1 Suppl. 
Van (KT I^den, De Scriptis Medici s libri duo, 

>^. p. 378- 
Borel, BibHotheca Chimica, 1654, p. 68; 1656, 

Mercklin, Lindenius renouatus, 1686, a 859. 

CoDring, In Universam Artem Meaicam . . . 
Introduction 1687, p. 135, p. 324, p. 370. 

Witte, Diarium Biographicum, 1688, Sig. G4 
nctOt Add. 16091 

Paochius, De Nevis Inventis Tracfatus, 1700, 
pp.401, 403. 

RfimmanPp Versuch einer Etnleitun^ tn die 
Historiam hierariam derer Teutscken, lii. 1709, 
p. 480. 

RoCh-Schokz, Bibliotheca Chemica, 1737, p. 48. 

St<d3e, AnlHtung tur Historic der Medicinischen 
Gelahrheit, 1731, pp. 693, 780. 

Kestner, Medtctnisches Gelehrten- Lexicon, 1740, 

P-a33. 
Lenglet Dufresno^, Histoire de la Philosophic 

Hermitique^ I74^ iii* P. i43- 

Jteber, Allgemeines Gelehrten-Lexicon, 1750, 
i. col. 22 la 

Eloy, Dictumnaire Historique de la Midecine, 
1755, L p. 267 ; 1778, i. p. 736. 

Baumer, Bibliotheca Chemtca^ 1782. p. 106. 

Stiieder, Grundla^ xu einer Hessischen Gelehrten 
vnd Sckriftsteller GeschichtCy G<3ttingen, ii. ( 1782) 

CROM. 

See LE CROM. 

CRONENBURGIUS (Bernardus Dessenius). 
De CcMnpositione Medicamentorum, hodierno aevo, apud Pharmacopolas, 
passim extantium : et quo Artificio eadem recte parari queant cum 

Treatise of Signatures (which is dated 1669) 
may sometimes be found separate from the 
Basilica, It is noticed by Paschius when tracing 
the history of Amulets and Talismans. 

Croll, or Crollius, was bom at Wetter in 1580, 
studied at Marburg, Heidelberg, Strasburg, 
Geneva, travelled, and became physician of Prince 
Christian of Anhalt-Bemberg. In medicine he was 
an adherent of Paracelsus, and invented several 
remedies. The first edition of the Basilica Chymica 
was published at Franckfurt, 1608 ; again in 1609. 
and afterwards in numerous editions. Crollius 
died in 1609. 

p. 424 (Pedigree of the CroU family) ; v. (1785) p. 
286 (notice of O. C). 
Beytrag »ur Geschichte der hohem Chemie, 1783, 

PP- S17, 591. 

Wdgel, Einleitung xur allgemcinen Scheide- 
hunst, 1788, i. p. 140. 

Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemie, 1797, i. pp. 290- 
92, 56a 

Fuchs, Repertorium der chemischen Litteratur^ 
1806, p. 94. 

Bi^aphie Midicale^ Paris, Panckoucke (1820- 

asK "»• p- 358. 

Sprengel, Geschichte der Arzneykuude, 1827, iii. 
p.j^8. 

Ersch & Gruber, AUgemeine Encyhlopddie^ 1829. 
XX. 169 (.short article by Baur). 

Thomson, History ^ Chemistry^ 1830, i. p. 174. 

Kopp, Geschichte der Chemie, 1843. i. p. 112 & 
passim. 

Ladrague, Bibliothique Otn'aroff, Sciences 
Secretes, 1870, Nos. 1599- 1600. 

Allgemeine Deutsche Biographic^ 1876, iv. p. 604. 

Dictionnaire Encyclopidique des Sciences Midi- 
caleSy 1879, xxiii. p. 401. 

Haeser, Geschichte der Medicin, x88i, ii. pp. 99, 
108, 2x5, 226. 

Billings, Index-Catalogue^ 1882, iii. p. 521 ; and 
Series, 1898, iii. p. 1044. 

Hirsch, Biographisches Lexikon der hervor- 
ragenden Aerstc, 1885, ii. p. 107. 

CRONENBURGIUS—CRUGNER 

CRONENBURGIUS (Bernardus Dbssbnius). CmUimmed. 

Simplicium atque Aromatum (quibus consistunt) expositionibu% ac plarommq; 
omnium delectu, Libri X. Non Media's & Pharmacopoeis tantiim, sed 
omnibus insuper renim cognoscendanim studiosis, utilissimi pariter ac 
necessarij. Ubi singula ad ipsissimam ueritatem expenduntur, plurimi 
errores aperiuntur, & controuersiae frequentes conciliantur, Autore Bernardo 
I>essennio Cronenburgio, Doctore Medico Coloniensi. 

In Invidiam Autor: 
l)octa manus Medici» tractat genus omne malonim, 
Ast mordax liuor, spemit opem medicam. 

Quid unoquoq; libro continetur, uersa pagina indicat Cum Indice 
locupledssimo, latino ac Germanico. Cum Gratia, & Privilegio Imperiali 
nouo, ad octennium. Francoforti, Apud Htered. Chr. Egenolphi, 

M.D.LV. 

Folio. Ff. [i8] 154. E|i:enolph*s device 00 the title-page and f. 154 verso. 

This phjrsician is described by some authorities 
under the name of Cronenburgius. by others under 
Dessenius, which is perhaps more correct. I have, 
however, followed Adami, Van der Linden, Van der 
Aa. and other writers, and called him Cronen- 
burgius. He was bom at Amsterdam in 1510, 
studied medicine at Louvain. went to Bologna, 
and. in 1539, became M.D. there; returned to 
Holland, and, after practising in various places, 
settled as professor of medicine at Grdningen 

Adami, Vittt Gtnmanarum Sfedicorum^ i6ao, p. 
217. 

Van der Linden, De scriptis medicis libri duo, 

«637. p. 8^ 

Borel. BibUotheca Ckimica, 1654. p. 78 ; 1656, 
p. 74 (under Dissennius). 

Mercklin, IJndertius removatus, 1686. p. 128. 

Conring. Im Univtrsam Ariem Medicam . . . 
Introduction 1687, p. 375. 

Freher. Theatrutn Virorum eruditione Claroruwi^ 
1688, ii. p. 1268 (under Dessenius). 

Haller, Bibliotkeca Boiamica, 177 1, L p. 316. 

Haller, Bibliotkeca Afedicimce fractictt, 1777, ii. 
p. 1 1 1 (under Dessenius). 

Manget, Bibliothecee Scriptorum Afedicorum, 
17x1, I. ii. p. 144. 

r'oppens, Bibliotkeca Belgica, 1739, i. p. 135. 

for nine years. He then went to Cologne, where 
he taiu^ht medicine, recei\-ed a pension, and, with 
great bune as a physician and botanist, died in 
157^ He wrote a defence of the old medicine 
against George Phaedro and the Paraoelsists, 
Cologne, 1573, 4*, a treatise 00 the plague, Cologne^ 
1564. 4^ and a letter to Matthiolus. 

Of the present work there was also an edition : 
Lyons. 1556, 8". 

Kestner, Medici nisckes Gelekrten- Lexicon, 1740. 
p. 233. 

Jdcher, Allgetmeimes Gelekrtem-Lexicom, 1750, i. 
col. 2213. 

Eloy. Dictionnaire Historique de la Midecime, 
1755. i. p. 380; 1778, ii. p. ^ (under Dessenius). 

Gmelin, Gesckickie der Ckemie, 1797. i. p. 255 
(under Desvmius). 

Fuchs. Refertorium der ckemiscken Utterattir, 
180608, p. 63 (under Dessenius). 

Bio^rapkie Midicale^ Pari.s, Panckoucke (1820- 

25). »»• p. 35?- 

Bayle & Thillaye, Biograpkie Midicale, 1855. i. 

p. 223. 

Van der Aa. Biograpkisck Woordenboeck der 

Sederlanden^ 1858, iii. p. 868. 

CROSSET de la Haumerie. 
See LE CROM. 

CRUGNER (Michael). 

D. O. M. A. Accipe, quod sentitur, antequam discitur. Michaelis Crugeneri, 
P.M.C. Chymischer aufgewickelter Gebrauch und Bereitung seiner Elixiren, 
welche zu heilsamer Cur der vornehmsten und bekantesten und aus ihren 
darinn beschriebenen Ursachen und Zufallen entspringenden Kranckheiten, 
so dem Menschlichen Leibe von Fufe an bifs auff die Scheitel, begegnen 
konnen: Zu erhaltung des Lebens, langwieriger Gesundheit, und zu 

CRUGNER 1S9 

CRUGNER (Michael). Continued. 

» verhtittung des Liebes und Gemiithes Beschwehrung dien- und niitzlichen, 
Dem beygefiigt ein besonderer Philo-Medico Chymischer Anhang, oder 
kurtzer Tractat, in welchem gelehret und gehandelt wird, worzu der Mensch 
von Gott dem Herrn tiichtig erschaffen sey. Item was er verrichten kan, 
und was er, wenn er von Gott zu einem Philo-Chymischen Medico berufTen, 
nothwendig konnen und wissen soil, Darbey werden etliche wenige doch 
besondre nutzbahre und tieffnachdenckliche Medicamente ersehen, und 
nebenst einem zwiefachen Register, so wohl der Capitum earumq'; sectionum 
als der rerum & verborum alien Liebhabern der Warheit und der rechten 
Hermetischen Artzney gefliessenen zu Nutz und Gefallen an Tag gegeben. 

Augustin. lib. 8. de Trinit 
Nullus reprehensor formidandus est amatori veritatis. Etenim aut inimicus 
reprehensurus est, aut amicus : Si inimicus insultat, ferendus est : 
Amicus autem, si errat, docendus est, & audiendus. 

Drefsden, in verlegung Christian Bergen, gedruckt in Seyfferts Druckerey, 1662. 

4°. Pp. [36] 24a. Register, etc. [42]. 

D.O. M. A. Michaelis Criigneri, P.M.C. Neu vermehrter Chymischer Fruhling. 
Das ist : sonderbarer Medico-Chymischer Tractat, sambt einer Astrologischen 
Continuation. Die Gewachse zu samblen, und zu gewissen Kranckheiten 
recht zu bereiten. Darinnen insonderheit kiirtzlich und treufleissig dar- 
gethan wird, welches nicht allein irrige Meinungen und falsche Procefse, 
sondem auch im G^entheil, richtige, kurtze und waare Procefse, mit sonder- 
baren Handgriffen, auch beygefiigtem Gebrauch und Nutz gewiesen wird. 
Alles mit hochstem Fleifs, eigner Erfahrung, und miihsamer Erforschung 
observiret, probiret, demonstriret und beschrieben vom Autore in Drefsden. 
Vomemlich alien Liebhabern der Warheit, und der rechten Hermetischen 
Artzney gefliessenen zu Nutz und Gefallen. Welchen vorher gesetzet 
Informatorium Medico-Chymicum oder Unterricht, was ein recht Chymischer 
Oder Hermetischer Medicus sey, und was von ihm erfordert werde. 

Augustinus 1. 8. de Trinit. 
Nullus reprehensor formidandus est amatori Veritatis: Etenim aut inimicus 
reprehensurus est, aut amicus : Si inimicus insultat, ferendus est ; amicus 
autem si errat, docendus est & audiendus. 

Niimberg, In Verlegung Wolffgang, defs Jiingern, und Johann Andreae 
Endter, Anno M.DC.LIV. 

4®. Pp. [16] 488 [19, I blank]. MS. notes. 

[Another Copy.] 

1). 0. M. A. Harmonia ad omnium Mysteriorum Cognitionem, Deo singulariter 
sic ordinante, certissima via est. Michaelis Criigneri, P.M.C. Chymischer 
Garten-Baw, das ist : Spagyrische Beschreibung Vier- und dreissigerley 
Gewachs und Krauter, nach rechter Fundamental und Hermetischer 

190 

crOgner 

CRUGNER (Michael). Continued. 

Anleitung: Welche auis der Putre&ctkm- und TnmspkmtatioQ sich Gener- 
im, yom stetssuchenden Autore fleissig observiret Allen liebhabern zum 
Anlais, zur femerer Speculation und Observation dem Menschen zum besten 
heraufsgegeben. Nebenst Angehangter kleinen Haliographia. 

August lib. 8. de Trin. 
Nullus reprehensor formidandus est amatori veritatis. Etenim aut inimicus 
reprehensurus est, aut amicus : Si inimicus insultat, ferendus est : 
Amicus autem, si errat, docendus est, & audiendus. 

Symbolum Autoris. 
Wer Gott zum Freunde hat, der darff sich vor den Menschen nicht 

furchten. 
Niimberg, In Verlegung Wolflfgang, des Jiingem, und Johann Andreae 
Endtem, Im Jahr 1653. 

4^. Pp. a86 [a blankl [Table in black and red. This, however, belongs to 
CrUgner's tract CkywUsclur ^ommer.^ MS. notes. 

[Another Copy.] 

D. O. M. A. Michaelis Criigeneri, P.M.C. Chymischer Sommer. Das ist : 
sonderbarer Medico-Chymischer Tractat, darinnen insonderheit kiirtzlich 
und treufleissig dargethan wird, wie die Gewachse nach rechter Influentz, 
und rechtem Mafs defs himmlischen, recht eingetheilten Zodiaci zu samblen, 
und dann femer Chymice und Astrologies recht zu praepariren seyn, so wol 
rechter Gebrauch und Nutz gewiesen wird. Alles roit hochstem Fleifs, 
eigner Erfahrung, und miihesamer Erforschung observirt, probiret, demon- 
striret und beschrieben vom Autore in Drefsden. Vomemlich Allen 
Liebhabern der Warheit, und der rechten Hermetischen Artzney Geflissenen 
zu Nutz und Gefallen an Tag geben. 

Augustinus 1. 8. de Trinit. 
Nullus reprehensor formidandus est amatori Veritatis : Etenim aut inimicus 
reprehensurus est, aut amicus. Si inimicus insultat, ferendus est ; 
amicus si errat, docendus est & audiendus. 
Niimberg, In Verl^ung Wolffgang dess Jiingem, und Joh: Andreae 
Endtem, Anno M.DC.LVI. 

4*. Pp. [12I 435 [i blank, 10]. Table at p. 97, and the folding table in red and 
black, p. 181, will be found in CrUgner's Chymischer Garttnbau. MS. notes. 

[Another Copy.] 

Criigner, or Crugener, flourished about the 
middle of the seventeenth centiuy, lived in 
Dresden, and was a chemist and a niedical prac- 
titioner of the school of the latro-mathematicians 
or latro-astronomers. He devised a number of 
medicines and specifics, in particular the *' materia 
perlata," of which he gives an account in a separate 

Reimmann, EinUitung in die Historiam litera- 
riam denr Teutschen^ Halle im Magdeburg, 1713, 
▼i. p. 592. 

KOtn-Scholtx, Bibliotheca Chemica^ 1727, p. 51. 

Kestner, Medkinischis Gtlehrten-LixicoH^ i740f 
p. 034. 

treatise, Gosslar, 1669, 8** ; in German, Frkf. a. M. 
1703, 8^. Besides those above mentioned he wrote 
also Chymischer Tanncndaum, Dresden, NttmberK, 
1650, 4 ; Astronomia parva, Osnabrtick, 1670, 4 ; 
Eclifsigraphia, Ibid. 1673,4®; Chymischer Herbst^ 
and Chymischer Wittier^ but it is a question if the 
last two were actually published. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Medicines pracficett 1779, i"* 
p. 225. 

Gmelin. Geschichie der Chemic, i797> i. p. 623. 

BiojpTLphie Midicale, Paris, Paoocoucke (1820- 
25), iii. p. 359- 

Ropp, Die Akhemie^ 1886, ii. ppw 379^ 391. 

CRUGNER—CRUX 

19! 

CRUGNER (Michael). Continued, 

The ' materia peiiata,' which the inventor sold 
for 34s. the ounce, and about which a good deal 
has been written, is, according to some, 'Anti- 
roooium diaphoreticum,' apparently the oxide of 
the metal. The question was discussed in an 
academic dissotation by Peter Gericke [prttses] 
and Arthur Conrad Ej-nsting {resp.) : Dissertaiio 
de Materia perlata^ Helmstadii, 1737 (or 1738, for 
the date is blurred), 4^, and the authorities there 
quoted. 

Keraer, Tetras Ckymiatrica, 1618, Sect, iv., 
sig. P a recto. 

Roth, Anleitung mr CAymie, 1721, p. 228. 

Boerhaave, Eletnenta CA/mue, 1731, ii. pro- 
cessus ccjdc 

The ' materia perlata ' here described is not to be 
confounded with the ' perlated salt ' of Proust, 
which was investigated by Scheele and described 
in Crell's Chemical Journal^ I79i» i. p. 120 
(English translation). 

Haller quotes three editions of the tract on this 
topic in German : Hudissin, 1667, 8° ; Ratisbon, 
1676, 8*» ; 1679, 8'. 

Weigel, Grundrifs der reinen und angewandten 

Chemie, im. »»• PP- S3». 534, § 1092, g- 

Fuchs, Repertortum der cJkemiscken Litteratur^ 
1806-08, p. 147. 

CRUSIUS (David). 
Theatnim Morbonim Hermetico-Hippocraticum seu methodica morborum, 
et curationis eorundem dispositio: multis elegantissimis problematis ac 
Hermedcse medicinse flosculis illustrata. Operi & studio D. Davidis Cnisij, 
Crimnicensis, Philosophi & Medici. 161 5. Erfurti typis Nicolai Schmuckij, 
Impensis Johannis Episcop. Bibliopolse Erfiirtens : 

8®. Pp. [15, I blank] 249. Index [8]. Appendix [12] [3 blank]. Folding table 
containing a scheme of diseases. 

2nd Part: 1616. Erfurti. Typis Mechlcrianis, Impensis Johannis Episcop. 
Bibliopolae. Pp. [16] 284. Index [11, i blank]. Folding table with another scheme. 
This part has a separate title, signatures, and pagination. 

The notices of Crusius are rather discordant. 

According to one account he was bom at Crim- 
mitschau near Altenburg, 99 January, 1589, 
graduated master of arts at Erfurt, studied at Jena 
and other universities, and became M.D. of Basel 
in 1609. H^ practised [>rivately at Erfurt, an^. 
declined many offers to become private physician 
of various princes. He accepted, however, the 
post of •• Rathmeister" and " Ober Schloss Herr" 
at Eriurt. His death took place on 15 July, 1640. 

Another version is that he was a native of 
Grimme, private physician of various princes and 
counts, and burgomaster of Erfurt. This is 
affirmed 00 the authority of Witte's Diarium 
H4Jgraphicum, but Stolle remarks that there is not 
a word about Crusius in that work, and further 
that there is evidence that Ejfurt at that time was 

Van der Linden, De Scriptis medicis libri duo^ 

1637, p. 131. 

Borel, Bibliotheca Chemua^ 1654, p. 71 ; 1656, 
p. 86. 

Merddin. Undenius renovatus, 1686, p. 240. 

Manget, Bibiiotheca Scripiorum Medicontm, 
1731, 1. U. p. i^ 

Steele, Amletiung xur Histone der Medicinischen 
Geidkrheit^ 1731, p. 274. 

Motscbmann, Erfordia liierata contin. , p. 99. 

not a municipality, so that there was no burgo- 
master. 

Stolle is ri^ht so far as the 1688 volume of 
Witte's Diartum is concerned. But there was 
another part issued in 1691, and Crusius' name 
may possibly be in it. I have not seen this part. 

By Borel there is quoted also a Daniel Crusius, 
author of *' Methodica Phisicae peripatetico-Her- 
meticse delineatio, Erphord. apud Birkner, 1617, in 

go,. 

Whether Daniel is a misprint for David, or 
whether they are distinct authors, I am unable to 
decide. 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, followed by Gmelin, refers to 
Daniel only and his book. 

Van der Linden calls him Crimnicensis, and 
mentions the Theatrum morbcrum only. 

Kestner, Medicinisches Gelehrten-Lexicon^ 1740, 

P- a35- 
Lenglet Dufresnoy, Hisioirt de la Pkilosophie 

HemUHque, 1742, iii. p. 144. 

Tocher, Allgemeines Gelehrten- Lexicon, 1750, i. 
col. 2233. 

Eloy, Dictionnaire Historiqne de la Midecitw^ 
177B, I. p. 739. 

Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemie, 1797, i. p. 519. 

Biographic Mddicale, Paris, Panckoucke (1890- 

25). "'• P- 3^- 

CRUX. 

D. O. M. A. I Crux absq; Cnice : | Das ist : | Wolvermeynte | Defension, deren, 
inter | Mundi calumnias bllihenden Teutschen j Gesellschaft ad S. Sanctum | 
Genannt | Vom Rosencreutz. | [Vignette.] Autore | Vito del Capo dela bona 
speranza. | 

x^a 

CRllX-^ULTOR 

CRUX. Continued, 

Non nobis Domine, non nobis, sed no- 1 mini tuo da gloriam.| 
M.DCXVII. I 

No place, prioter, or publisher. 

8*. Pp. [15, I blank! The vigoette is a falcon standing on the winged Earth 
ball, with a wreath in its beak, and an open book in its right foot,_and the motto : 
Gloria Virtute Paratur. 

This is a Rosicrucian tract of which Borel scka/i des Ordens des Rosenkreuttes^ 1783, pp. 83-4, 
(Bibliotheca Chemical 1654, p. 71) speaks of a MS. and by Kloss. Biblii^^rapkie der Frtimaurtrei^ 
It is mentioned also in Misstv an dtt , , , BrUder- 1844, p. 183, No. 2499. 

D. O. M. A. I Crux abscj; Cnice : | Das ist : | Wolvermeynte | Defension, deren, 
inter Mun-|di calumnias bliihenden Teutschen | Gesellschafft ad S. Sanctum | 
genannt | Vom Rosencreutz. | [Vignette.] Autore | Vito del capo dela bona 
speranza. | 

Non nobis Domine, non nobis, sed nomini | tuo da gloriam. | 
M.DC.XVIII. 

8". Pp. [15, I blankl The vignette is as in the 1617 edition, but the two issues 
are quite different throughout, not merely in the title-pages. The concluding lines in 
the two editions are as follows : 

Edition of 1617 : Da- | bam inter invidias & versecutiones {sic") me> | dius in capite 
bonae spei. Mense Sep- | tembri, Anno 1617. | Vitus del capo dela bona speranza. f 

Edition of 1618 : Da- | bam inter invidias & persecutiones me- | dius in capite bonne 
spei. Mense | Septembri. Anno 1617. | Vitus del capo dela bona speranza. | The 
final ornaments are different 

CRUX Symbolica. 
Symbolica Crux. 

See MANGET (j. J.), Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, ii. p. 840. 

See COMITIBUS (LUDOVICUS DE). 

CULPEPER (Nicholas). 

See SENNERT (DANIEL), 1660. 

Culpeper, bom 1616 at London, was at Cam- 
bridge in 1634, and was a good scholar. He was 
apprenticed to an apothecary, in 1640 he set up as 
astrologer aiid physcian, and was much esteemed 
in the latter capacity. His translation of the Phar- 
macopoeia of the College of Phjrsicians excited their 
indignation. His ' English Physician,' 1653, was a 

Haller, Bibliotheca Botanica, 1771, i. p. 477; 
1772, ii. p. ISO. 

Haller, Bihliothtca Medicina practica, 177^^ iiL 
p. 8 (several works). 

The Gentleman's Magazine, 1797, Ixvii. part 2, 

p. 563. 

Hutchinson, Biographia Afedica^ 1799, i. p. 234. 

Chalmers^ The General Biographical Dictionary, 
18x3, xi. p. 130. 

Watt. BibSoti 
276 a. 

lotheca Britannica, 18 19, L (authors) 

Bicj^raphie Medicate ^ Paris, Panckoucke (i8ao- 
35)' "»• P« 365- 

very successful manual. He wrote a number of 
medical books, and his hard work as a practitioner 
and author injured his health, and he died in Jan. 
1653-4. aged 38. 

His portrait is in the ' Last Legacy.' and in the 
' Directory,' or translation of the Pharmacopoeia. 

Dictionnaire Encychpidique des Sciences Midi- 
calest 1880, xxiv. p. 374. 

Haeser, Geschichte der Medicin, 1881, ii. p. 467. 

Billings, Index-Catahgue^ 1882^ iii. p. 557 ; and 
Series, 1898, iil p. 107a. 

Hirsch, Biographlsches Lexihon der hervor- 
ragenden Aerxte^ 188^, ii. p. 113. 

Dictionary of National Biography^ 1888, xiii. p. 
286. 

Sidney Peel, "Nicholas Culpeper. soldier, phy- 
sician, astrologer, and politician, ' Nineteenth 
Century, London, 1898, xliii. pp. 755-763. 

CULTOR. 

Cultor Spagiricae Medicinse. 

See ZWEY sch5ne Chymische Tractatlein. 

CULTOR^CURIOSE 193 

CULTOR. OmHnued. 
Griindlicher Spagyrischer Wissenschaften Cultor. 
Set COELUM Philosophonim, 1739. 

CUNRAD (Conrad). 

Set KHUNRATH (CONRAD). 

CURIEUSE Anmerckungen. 
Stt DELICLA Medicae, 1706. 

CURIEUSE Gedancken, von der wahren Alchymia, insonderheit dessen Prima 
Materia, nebst volliger Anweisung zu Pneparining des Lapidis Philosophonim 
und Universal-Medicin, mit alien darzu nothigen Handgriffen und Observa- 
tionibus treuhertzig entdecket, von einem Liebhaber der curieusen 
Wissenschaften und Membro des Collegii Curiosorum in Teutschland, 
Gedruckt im Jahr 1702. 

Without place nnd printer's name. 

8^. Pp. [60]. Foldinf^ enjipraved frontispiece, with portraits of Rasil Valentine and 
Paracelsus. 

The first chapter contains short notices of The historical notes are of some interest. The 

i^ted authentic cases of transmutation, the anonymity of this tract seems to have been well 

second treats of the character of a true alchemist, preserved, for it was not known to Gervasius. the 

aod the third of the first matter and how it is to be editor of the work of Abraham Kleazar (y.i'.) 

Pftpared, and how ' projection ' is to be made. Vorrede, sig. X 4 rfcto. 

CURIEUSE Untersuchung etiicher Mineralien, Thiere und Krauter, insonder- 
heit derer sich die Sophisten in prseparirung des Lapidis bedienen. Nebst 
Entdeckung der meisten hierbey vorfallenden Sophistereyen und falschen 
Processen, wie auch volliger Anweisung zu der wahren Materie, und rechten 
Bereitung des Philosophischen Steins, mit alien darzu nothigen Handgriffen 
und Observationibus treuhertzig mitgetheilet, von einem Liebhaber der 
curieusen Wissenschafiten und Membro des Coll^i Curiosorum in Teutsch- 
land. Gedruckt im Jahr 1703. 

8°. Pp. [79]. Folding frontispiece as in the Curieuu Gedancken, It is a revised 
and enlarged edition of that tract. 

Ladrague, Bibliotkique Ouvaroj^^ Sciences Secrites, 1870, No. 124a. 

CURIOSE CHYMICUS (Der). 
^r Curiose Chymicus, oder curioses Laboratorium Medico-Chymicum, &c. 
Der Curiose Medicus, oder sonderbare curiose Anleitung zur Medicin, &c. 
Der Curiose Chirurgus, oder curioser Begriff der Wund-Artzney, nebst einer 
voitrefflichen Frantzosen-Kur, Bericht von Aderlassen, Schropffen, &c. Mit 
Beyfiigung eines curiosen Urin Biichleins, wie die Wasser der Kranken zu 
besehen. Drefsden und Leipzig, Verlegtens Joh. Christoph Mieths Erben. 

1719- 

Cbirui 

tn 

whicfa is printed in'red and black. 

N 

194 CVRIOSE-CXXX 

CURIOSE CHVMICUS T^er) ComHmued, 

Der Curiose Ch>-micus, oder curioses Labontorium MediooOi]nnicaiii, &c. 
Der Curiose Medicus, oder sonderbohie cunose Anleitiing zur Median, &c 
Der Curiose Chirurgus, oder curioser Begriff der Wund-Artzney, nebst einer 
vortrefflichen Frantzosen-Cur, Bericht son Aderlassen. Schropffcn, &c. Mit 
Beyfligung eines curiosen Urin-Biichleins, wie die Wasser derer Kiancken 
zu besehen. Drefsden und Leipzig, Bey Goctlob Christian Hilscbem, 

privil. Hof-Buchflihrer, 1745. 

8°. Pp. Laboraiohum. 1S5 [7; Medicus. 1743, 4^ ; i*art ii. aos [mistalsie for 190^ 
Chirur£us. 122 fi blank]. L'ric-Michlein. 31 [5, i blank]. The genrrai title !S mi^ilaced 
in front of Pan ii. of the Mediciis. which has 00 sepvate title of its outu The other 
tracts ha\-e scpante titles This is a reprint of the 1719 edition. The book does not 
treat of chemistry or akbemr. but of medicinrr and surfer), ami the preparation and 
application of dniips. 

CXXX Gnind-Satze. 

Set ifUNDERT und dreissig Gnind-Satze. 

D. (M. C. M.)-'DALE 19$ 

D. (M. C. M.), />. Martinus Copus, Medians Doctor. 

See CEPHALUS (ARIOPONUS). 

D. (W, G. L.). 

5fr s * ♦ * 

D * * * ♦ 

See Respour. 

D. (H. v.). 

See TUMBA SEMIRAMIDIS. 

n. (R. E. J.). 

Klias der Artist, eine Abhandlung von der kiinstlichen Metallverwandlung. 

See SCHRODER (friedrich JOSEF wilhelm), Ncue Akhymistische Bibliothek, 
1771, I. i. p. 181. 

D.... 

Le Grand Livre de la Nature, ou I'Apocalypse Philosophique et Hermetique. 
Ouvrage curieux, dans lequel on traite de la philosophic occulte, de I'intelli- 
gence des hi^roglyphes des anciens, de la Soci^t^ des Freres de la Rose-Croix, 
de la transmutation des m^taux & de la communication de Thomme avec des 
etres sup^rieurs & interm^diaires entre lui & le grand architecte. V(i par une 
Soci^t^ de Ph. ... Inc. ... & public par D. . . . £>epuis I, jusqu' k 
I'an 1790. Au Midi, et de Tlmprimerie de la v^rit^. 

8*. Pp. 115 [i Wank]. Woodcut. 

"Oeuvre d'un imb^ile ou d'uD nuuivais plai- of hermetic tenns which it contains is a mere 

^^^ is Ladrague's comment {Bibliotkique synonymy. At the end are receipts to produce 

^2^'yf> Sciences Secrites, 1870. No. 601). recondite things : a water to soften metals, the 

*^,b^. It seems to be an allesorical account lamp of life, and so on. 
« initiation and transmutation. The dictionary 

^ALE (Samuel). 
^muelis Dalei, M. L. Pharmacolpgia, seu Manuductio ad Materiam Medicam : 
in qua Medicamenta Officinalia Simplicia, hoc est Mineralia, Vegetabilia, 
Animalia eorumque partes in Medicinae Officinis usitata, in Methodum 
natoxaiem digesta succincte & accurate describuntur. Cum Notis Generum 
Characteristicis Spederum Synonymis, Differentiis & Viribus. Opus Medids, 
Philosophis, Pharmacopoeis, Chirurgis, &c., utiiissiraum. Ad calcem 

196 

DALE—DANDOLO 

DALE (Samuel). Continued, 

adjiciuntur Indices iiecessarii. Quarta Editio, Indice Gallico, Germanico, 
Helgico aucta. 

o ^105 ppax^Sf 17 Sc T€xvrf fiaKprj, Hipp. Lib. L Aphor L 
Lugduni Batavorum. Impensis Job. Arnold. Langerak. M DCC.XXXIX. 

4^ pp. [4] vii. [5] 459 [51]. Fine Portrait of Dale. 

Samuel Dale, son of a silk-thrower, St. Marv. 
Whitechapel, was bom between 1658 and 1660. In 
1674 he was apprenticed to an apothecary, 
practised as a physician and apothecary at Brain- 
tree, in Essex, in 1686, was a diligent naturalist, 
botanist, and pharmacologist, imd a man of no 
small learning and acquirements. He was a 
friend of Ray. the naturalist, and Sir Hans Sloane, 
contributed papers to the Royal Society, and, 
besides the Pharmacoioj^af wrote an appendix to 
the History and .\nliquilies of Harwich and 
Dovercourt, by Silas Taylor, containing an account 
of the natural history of the locality. It was 
published in 1730, and again in 1732. His 
herbarium is now in the Hritish Museum ; a 

koth-Scholtz, liibliothcca Chemica^ 1727, p. 53. 
Manget, Bibliotheca Scriptonim Medicorum^ 

1731, I. ii. p. 159 (reviews of the Ixjok). 

Stolle, AnUituHg zur Histoirc der Medicinischen 
iUlahrheit^ 1731, pp. 700, 701. 
Jacob Leupolds Prodromus Jfibliothectr Mei(illic<v^ 

1732, p. 47. 

Boerhaave, Methodiis Studii Medici, 1751, i. 
p. 158 (commended). 

Haller, Bibtiotheca Bofanica, 1772, ii. pp. 14, 
690. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Auatomica, 1774, i. p. 795. 

portrait of him in oil is in Apothecaries* Hall ; 
an engraving of him at 78 years of age is pre- 
fixed to the present edition, and there is one 
by Vertue in the third edition which is repro- 
duced in the Journal of F)otany. Dale died 6 
June, 1739, *"** was biu^ied at Booking, near 
Hmintree. 

The Pharmacologia was first published at Lon- 
don in 1693, 8" ; again with a supplement in 1705 ; 
2nd ed., 1710 ; 3rd ed., 1737. Editions were 
printed abroad : Bremae, 1707, 1713 ; Lugd. Bat , 
1730 and the above. 

The Pharmacologia is still quoted as an 
authority on the introduction of certain substances 
as drugs. 

Eloy, Dictionnaire Hisioriqut de la MMtcine, 
1778, li. p. 12. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Medici nee pracfica, 1788, iv. 
p. 126. 

Fuchs, Repertorium der chemisrhen Litteratur, 
1806-08, p. 206. 

Watt, Bibliotheca Britannica^ 1824, i. (authors) 
p. 280 V. 

Journal of Botany, 1883, xxi, pp. 193-7 ; 225- 
231 (article by G. S. Boulger). 

Dictionary of National Biography^ 1888, xiii. 
p. 385 (article by G. S. Ik)ulger). 

DANDOLO (ViNCENzo). 
lYattato Elementare di Chimica presentato in un ordine nuovo dietro le 
scoperte moderne ; con Figure : del Sig. Lavoisier delF Accademia delle 
Scienze, della Societ\ Reale di Medicina, delle Societil d'Agricoltura di Parigi, 
e di Orleans, della Society Reale di Ix>ndra, dell' Instituto di Bologna, della 
Society Elvetica di Basilea, di quella di Filadelfia, Harlem, Mancester, Padova, 
ec. Recato dalla Francese nelF Italiana favella e corredato di Annotazioni 
da Vincenzo Dandolo Veneto Edizione seconda corretta, ed ampliata di due 
Dissertazioni inedite deir Autore sulla respirazione e sulla traspirazione, 
e di nuove annotazioni del Traduttore. Tomo Primo. In Venezia, Dalle 
Stampe di Antonio Zatta e Figli. cid.idcc.xcii. 

8*. Pp. [1-4] 5-399 [i blank]. 2 folding tables. 

Tomo Secondow 

Pp. viii. 305 [3 blank]. 13 plates. 

The third and fourth volumes have separate titles as follow : 

Ksame delle AfTinita' Chimichc e di tutti i relativi sistemi de' piu' celebri 
Chimici d' Europa. Opera del Sig. Morveau Socio di moltissime Accademic Recata 
dalla francese ncll italiana favella da Vincenzo Dandolo Veneto coll' a^giunta di 
alcune annotazioni, che serve di supplemento alia Traduzionc del Trattato Llementare 
di Chimica del Sig. Lavoisier. Edizione seconda corretta, ed ampliata di due Disserta- 
zioni del Sig. Lavoisier e di molte annotazioni del Traduttore. Tomo Terzo. In 
Venezia. Dalle Stampe di Antonio Zatta e Figli. cid.idcc.xcii. 

8 . Ppw viii. 996. 

bANDOLO—bARIor 

t97 

DANDOLO (ViNCENZo). ConHnued. 

Dixiooarii Veochio e Nuovo Nuovo e Vecchio di Nomenclatuia Chimica il secondo 
de* quali Qontlene la cbiave e le regole del nuovo sistema di Chimica di Viocenzo 
Dandolo Veneto che serve di Supplemento al Trattato Elementare di Chimica del Sig. 
I^voisicr; Trasportato in Italiano dal Francese, con note dell' Autore suddetto. 
Edizioiie seoonda corretta, ed ampliata di due Dissertazioni inedite del Sig. Lavoisier 
e di varie aniiotazioni del Traduttore. Tomo Quarto. In V'enezia. Dsdle Stampe 
di Antonio Zatta e Figli. CI3.IDCC.XCII. 

S". Pp. viii. 234. 46. 

The two dissertations are on respiration and on transpiration. 

[Another Copy.] 

Count Vincenzo Dandolo was bom at VTcnice 
6 (or a6) Oct., 1^58. He was a wealthy proprietor 
who took an active share in the events which led to 
the fell of the Venetian Republic in 1797. became 
a member of the great Council of the Cisalpine 
Republic, lived much in Paris, was governor of 
Dsumatia for five ^ears under Napoleon, and 
finally retired and lived privately on nis estate at 

Gmdin, Gesckickte dcr Chemie, 1799, iii. pp. 
290,652. 
Qu(h:ard, La France Utt^rairt^ 1830, ii. p. 381. 
Matthieu Bonafous, "Eloge historique de Vin- 

Varese near Conio. He was a member of the 
Instituto Italiano and of the Societa Italiana, and 
occupied himself with the breeding of sheep, the 
production of silk, manufacture of grape sujpr. 
ecnology, and wrote on these and other economical 
subjects. He was the author also of a work : 
FundamtHti delta scienza chimico-fisica^ Venezia, 
1795. ^c ^^'^ ^^ V'arese 12 (13) Dec., 1819. 

cent Dandolo," in Bibliothique Universelle «/<* 
Gentve, Nouvelle S^rie, 1839, xxi. p. ^. 

Poggendorff, Biographisch-literartxhts Hand' 
wbrterbuchy 1863, *• co^* 5*7- 

DANIELLI (RiGiNO), lustinopolitano. 
Canzone. 

See NAZARI (GIOVANNI battista), Delia Tramutatione Metallica Sogni tre, 1599, 
p. 159. 

nienioratus," doubtless the same person. But 1 do 
not observe his name in La|;neus' "llurnionia 
Chimica," which I presume is the work Horel 

lk)rel {Bibliotheca Chimica^ 1654, p. 72), quotes 
this poem : " Danielis lustinopolitani Cantilemi 
Chimica, ex Nasari " and under a separate head- 
ing: " Daniel de lustinopoli, Chimicus, a Lagnco refers to. 

DARCET (Jean). 

See ARCET (JEAN D*). 

DARIOT (Claude). 
Die gulden Arch, Schatz : vnd Kunstkammer, in drey theil vnderscheiden. Ini 
crsten werden aufsfiihrlich verhandlet drey Gesprach von Spargirischer prepara- 
tion vnd zubereitung der Artzneyen. Als warumb die nicht allein von den 
V^etabilibus vnd Animabilibus, sondern auch die von den Minerabilibus, 
hergenommene eintzele Medicamenta anderst als bifshero von den Ciallenisten 
beschehen, soUen vnd miissen praepariert werden, vnd dann auch wie selbige 
praeparation recht vnd wol vollbracht werden sollc. Im andern vnd letsten 
Theil hat der Kunstbegierige I^ser vieler als der fiirnembsten aufserlesenisten 
Philosophorum, Medicorum vnd Spargicorum (sic) Cieschrifften vnd Biicher. 
Allen der Chimei Liebhabern, sonderlich den Jungen angehenden nutzlich zu 
lesen. Durch M. Claudium Dariotum bestellten Stattartzt zu Beaulne, in 
Frantzosischer Sprach beschrieben. Nun aber insonderheit der Kunst 
Liebhabern ins Teutsch mit sonderbarem fleifs vbergesetzt, durch I. A. M. D. 
Den C^talogum aller Tractatlein findt man gleich nach der Vorred, deren 
etliche mit Figuren gezieret Getnickt zu Basel, In verlegung des Authom. 
M.DC.XIV. 

4*^. Pp. [20]. 309 (for 307) [i blank]. 8 woodcuts of apparatus in the text. Title 
red ojid black. 

196 

DALE—DANDOLO 

necesvil QuartJi Edhio, Indke Gallico, Germanico, 

DALE (Samuel). ComHnmed. 

adjiduntur Indkc 
Helgioo auctiL 

o /8*o« Ppaxi^ V St Tcxnf f^'^fi^ Hipp. Lib. I. Aphor I. 
Lugduni Batavonim. Impensis Joh. Arnold. Langerak. M DCC.XXXIX. 

4*. PpL[4l^ii.;5]459lS«} Fine Poftnut of Dale 

Samuel Dale, aoo of a sflk-throw^er, St. Marr. 
Whitechapel, was bom between 1658 ami 1660. In 
1674 he ik-as apprenticed to an apochecanr, 
practised as a phyacian and apotbecanr at Rraib- 
tree, in tissex. in i686i, was a diligent natnnlist. 
botanist, and pharmacolofi^ist, and a man of no 
small learning and acquirements^ He was a 
friend of Ray. the naturalist, and Sir Hans Sknnc. 
contributed papers to the Royal Society, and. 
besides the Pkarmatr*ii*^ay wrote an appoidix to 
the History and Antiauicies of Harwich and 
DoTctcourt, by Silas Taylor, containing an account 
of the natural history of the locality. It was 
published in 1730. and again in 1732. His 
herbarium is now in the British Museum ; a 

Koth-Scfaoltz^ /fi.ViWMu Ckrmh\7^ 1727, pi 55. 

Manget. Bs^/iotkti\2 5«-/7//i>r«« .\Muvrmm, 
1731, I. ii. p. 159 (re\-ic\»s of the Xtook). 

StoUe, AmJeitumg zmr Hish^trt Jer Medu'imisckem 
ittlakrkrit^ 1731, pp. 700. 701. 

Jacol> ljtmf>clds Prvdrvmus HiHu^kec^ Mfiallicff^^ 
17^ p. 47. 

Botfhaaw. MfthMlus StuMt MedUi, 1751. u 
p. 158 (commended). 

Haller, fiihtioikeca Boiamica, 1773, ii. pp. 14, 

Haller, BiHioikeca Amatomidt, 1774, i. p. 795. 

portrait of him in oil is in Apothecaries' Hall; 
an engraving of him at 78 years of age is pre> 
fixed to the present edition, and there is one 
by Vertoe in the third edition which b repro- 
duced in the Journal of Botany. Dale died 6 
June. 1739, *nd was buried at Boddng. near 
Hraintree. 

The Pkarm§ac*iiagia was first published at Lon- 
don in 1693. 8' ; again with a supplement in 1705 ; 
2nd ed., 1710; vd ed.. 1737. Editions were 
printed abroad : Bremae, 1707, 1713 ; Lugd. Bat . 
1730 and the above. 

The Pkanmacoitt>gi4s is still quoted as an 
authority on the introduction of certain substances 
as drugs. 

Elo\-. Diitiommaire Historiqi$e de la MitUcime, 
1778. iL p. 12. 

Haller. BiHiotkertf Medici ma fractictt^ 1788^ iv. 
p. ia6. 

Fudis. kepertorium dcr ckemixken Litterattir, 
1806-08. p. 906. 

Watt. BiMiotkeca Britannica^ 1824, i. (authors) 
p. 380 r. 

Jomrmal if Botany^ 1883. xxi. pp. 193-7 ; 225- 
231 (artide by G. S. Boulgcr). 

DicHfmary of Saiiimai Bi*)^apky^ 1888, xiii 

Lhchcmary of Aa/$<mai Bu^ 
385 (article by G. S. Roulger). 

DANDOLO (ViNCENzo). 
I'rattato Elementare di Chimica prt^sentato in un ordine nuovo dietro le 
scoperte niodeme; con Figure: del Sig. Lavoisier deir Accademia delle 
Scienze, della Society Reale di ^fedidna, delle Society d'Agricoltura di Parigi, 
e di Orleans, della Society Reale di Londra, deir Insdtuto di Bologna, della 
Society Elvetica di Basilea, di quella di Filadelfia, Harlem, Mancester, Padova, 
ec Recato dalla Francese nelF Italiana favella e corredato di Annotazioni 
da Vincenzo Dandolo Veneto Edizione seconda corretta, ed ampliata di due 
Dissertazioni inedite dell' Autore sulla respirazione e sulla traspirazione, 
e di nuove annotazioni del Traduttore. Tomo Primo. In Venezia, Dalle 
Stampe di Antonio Zatta e Figli. ci3.i3cc.xcii. 

8^. Pp. [1-4] 5-399 [i blank]. 2 folding tables. 

Tomo Secondow 

Pp. viii. 305 [3 blank]. 13 plates. 

The third and fourth volumes have separate titles as follow : 

Ksamc delle Affinita' Chimichc e di tutti i rdativi sistemi de' j»u' celebri 
Chimici d' Europa. Opera del Sig. Morveau Socio di moltissime Accademie Recata 
dalla francese nell' iuiliana favella da Vincenzo Dandolo Veneto coll' aggiunta di 
alcune annotazioni, che ser\'e di supplemento alia Traduzione del Trattato ^kmentare 
di Chimica del Sig. Lavoisier. Edizione seconda corretta, ed ampliata di due Disserta- 
zioni del Sig. Lavoisier e di molte annotazioni del Traduttore. Tomo Tersa In 
Venezia. Dalle Stampe di Antonio Zatta e Figli. c13.13cc.xc1i. 

8 . Ppw viii. 296. 

DAiTDOLO'-bARIor 

t97 

DANDOLO (ViNCENZo). Continued. 

DizioDarii Vecchio e Nuovo Nuovo e Vecchio di Nomendatuia Chimica il secondo 
de' quali Qontioie la cbiave e le regole del nuovo sistema di Chimica di Vincenzo 
Dandolo Veneto che serve di Supplemento al Trattato Elemeiita» di Chimica del Sig. 
I^ycnsier; Trasportato in Italiano dal Francese, con note dell' Autore suddetto. 
Ediiione seconda corretta, ed ampliata di due Dissertazioni inedite del Sig. Lavoisier 
e di vaiie annotazioni del Traduttore. Tomo Quarto. In V'enezia, Dalle Stampe 
di Antonio Zatta e Figli. cio.idcc.xcii. 

8^. Pp. viii. 234. 46. 

The two dissertations are on respiration and on transpiratioiu 

[Another Copy.] 

Count Vincenzo Dandolo was bom at Venice 
6 (or 26) Oct., 1^58. He was a wealthy proprietor 
who took an active share in the events which led to 
thebll of the Venetian Republic in 1797. became 
a member of the great Council of the Cisalpine 
Renblic, lived much in Paris, was governor of 
Dalmatia for five ^ears under Napoleon, and 
iinally retired and lived privately on nis estate at 

Gffldin, Geschichte der Chemie, i799f iii* PP* 
290,652- 
Qutod, La France litt^rairt^ 1830, ii. p. 381. 
Manhieu Bonafous, ''Eloge historique de Vin- 

Varese near Como. He was a member of the 
Instituto Italiano and of the Society Italiana. and 
occupied himself with the breeding of sheep, the 
production of silk, manufacture of grape su^, 
uenology, and wrote on these and other econonucal 
subjects. He was the author also of a work : 
FundameHii delta scitnza ckimico-fisica^ Venezia, 
1795. He died at Varese la (13) Dec, 1819. 

cent Dandolo," in Bibliothique UnivtrselU de 
Genive, Nouvelle S^rie, 1839, xxi. p. ^. 

Poggendorff, Biographisch-liieransckts Hand' 
uoorterbuch^ 1863, i. col. 517. 

DANIELLI (RiGiNO), lustinopolitano. 
Canzone. 

Su NAZARI (GIOVANNI battista), Delia Trainutationc Metallica Sogni tre, 1599, 
p. 159. 

menioratus," doubtless the same person. But I do 
not observe his name in Lapneus' " llarmonia 
Chimica," which I presume is the work Horel 
refers to. 

Uorel {Bibliothtca Chimica^ 1654, p. 72), quotes 
Jajspoem: " Danielis lustmopolitani Cantilemi 
Chimica, ex Nasari " and under a separate head- 
ing: "Daniel de lustinopoli, Chimicus, a Lagnco 

WRCET (Jean). 

See ARCET (JEAN D*). 

DARIOT (Claude). 
Die gulden Arch, Schatz : vnd Kunstkammer, in drey theil vnderscheiden. 1 111 
ersten werden aufsfiihrlich verhandlet drey Gesprach von Spargirischer prepara- 
tion vnd zubereitung der Artzneyen. Als warumb die nicht allein von den 
V^etabilibus vnd Animabilibus, sondern auch die von den Minerabilibus, 
heigenommene eintzele Medicamenta anderst als bifshero von den Gallenisten 
beschehen, sollen vnd miissen prsepariert werden, vnd dann auch wie selbige 
praeparation recht vnd wol vollbracht werden solle. Im andern vnd letsten 
Theil hat der Kunstbegierige I^eser vieler als der fiirnembsten aufserlesenisten 
Philosophorum, Medicorum vnd Spargicorum (sic) Geschrifften vnd Biicher. 
Allen der Chimei Liebhabem, sonderlich den Jungen angehenden nutzlich zu 
lesen. Durch M. Claudium Dariotum bestellten Stattartzt zu Beaulne, in 
Frantzosischer Sprach beschrieben. Nun aber insonderheit der Kunst 
Liebhabem ins Teutsch mit sonderbarem fleifs vbergesetzt, durch I. A. M. D. 
Den Catalogum aller Tractatlein findt man gleich nach der Vorred, deren 
etliche mit Figuren gezieret Getruckt zu Basel, In veriegung des Authom. 
M.DC.XIV. 

4**. Pp. [ao]. 309 (for 307) [1 blank]. 8 woodcuts of appcu^tus in the text. Title 
red and bteoc 

30O 

DA USTEN-DA VISSON 

DAUSTEN (John). Continued. 

Others term him a monk who reduced himself to 
poverty by his search for transmutation, while Bale 
and Tanner and Pits declare him to have been the 
very foremost alchemist of his time— Tanner says : 
" Akbemisticai artis aetate sua primus, et in 
An^Ua magister unicus"— in which case Ashmole 
thinks that " if he were master of so mudi learning 
as they confess him to be, and his poverty were not 
voluntary, he might have advanced himself to 
riches when he pleased." 

Several works appear under his name in the 
notices given by Pits and by Rord, and a list of 

Maier, Symbola Aurttt Memsa^ 1617, p. ^58. 

Pitseus, Rdatiotus Historicm de R^us Anglicise 
1619. i. p. 871. 

Ashmole, Tkeatrum Chemicum Britannicum^ 
1653, p. 357. and Notes, p. 473. 

Borel. oibliotheca Ckimica^ 1654. p. 73. 

Mercklin, Lindenius renavatus, 1686, p. 569. 

Borrichius. Conspectus Scriftorum Chemicorumt 

1607, p. 37, No. xxxvii. 
Roth-r 

>Scholtz, Biblioikeca Chemica, 17^7* P- 54< 

Fabricius, Bibliotheca Latina $H€dus el in/ima 
fetalis, 1734, Lib. iv. p. 39. 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Hisloire de la Philasophie 
Hermitiquey 1743. i. pp. oarj, 468 ; iii. p. 145. 

Tanner, Bibliotheca Britannico-Hibernica^ 17481 
p. 319. 

Fictuld, Probier^Stein, 1753, TIi. i. p. 64, 

his MSS. with the places where they are pi^escived 
is given by Tanner. 

Klaier's statement that Dausten *' left bdiind him 
a considerable Chemicall tract, which Janus 
Lacinius hath put in his Collections," could not be 
checked by Ashmole, as he had not been able to 
see Ladnius* Pretiosa Margarita ncveila, which he 
supposed might be the book meant, nor coold be 
m which of Dausten*s writings were printed there. 
The name of Dausten does not occur io that 
collection, and it is not easy to identify any 
writing by him, which, beskles, might possibly 
have been taken from a MS. 

(imelin, Gesckicktt der ChemU, 1797, i. p. 53* 

Ritson, Bibliograpkia Poetica, a CateJegme of 
En^leisk Poets^ London, 1803, p. i8x. 

^hmioder, Gtsckickte der Alchewue^ 18^, pi 164. 

Hoefer, Histairt de la Ckimie, 1843, 1. p. 410 ; 
1866, i. p. 4^ 

Biograpkte UniverselU^ 1853, x. p. 151. 

Nouvelle Biographic GHUrale^ i^SS* ^ciiL col. 

Ladrague, Bibliothkque Ottvarof, Scietues 
Secrites^ 1870, No. 786. 

Kopp, Die Alchemic, 1886, ii. pp. 340, 353, 376. 

Dicttotuiry of National Biography, 1888, xiv. 
p. 89. 

Rale, Index Britannue Scriptorum, edited by 
R. L. Poole and Mary Dateson (Anecdota Oxom- 
ensia), 1903, p. 196. 

DAVID (Gottfried). 
Godfridi Davidis, Unnensis, Phil, et Med. Doct Reverendiss. et Sereniss. Elect. 
Colon. &c. &a Ducatus VVestphalici Medici, Discursus Medico-Chimicus 
De Medicina Magnatum. 

Sirac. c, j8. v. 3. 
Disciplina Medici in conspectu magnatum collaudabitur. 
Tremoniae, Typis Johannis Friderici Riihlii, Anno M.DC.LXXXI. 

8". Pp. [4 blank] [13] 150 [i, i blank]. 

Nothing is known about the author, except that 
he was a physician at Unna, in Westphalia, whence 
called Unnensis, and had tifrater Germanus^ 
David David, a lawyer, and "Cx>nsul Unnensis." 

This book, which appears to be all that he 
wrote, contains a Praeloquium and three articles. 
The Praeloquium is a short history of all the 
deities, kings, nobles, and other persons of rank 
who have practised or patronised medicine. 

Art. I. De Magnatum Medicina, quani Magnates 
vel ipsi prseparare vel titulo condecorare dignati 
sunt 

Art II. De Medicamentis, quae virtute & precio 

Mercklin, Lindenius renovatus, 1686, p. 355. 
Manget, Bibliotheca Scriptorum Afedicorum, 
1731* I* ii- P* 163. 
Kestner, Afedicinischcs GeUhrten- Lexicon^ 1740, 

k celeberrimis Medicis Magnatibus commendantur ; 
and these are grouped under certain classes. - 

Art III. De aureo electorali pulvere. 

The book therefore contains some curious 
historical matter, and is an almost unique one on 
the subject. 

Haller, followed by Gmelin, gives the place of 
publication as Bremae, 168 1. Such simultaneous 
publication is not impossible^ but it seems more 
probable that Brenia: is a misprint for Tremoniae 
which besides may have been a less familiar name. 
I am not aware of any other mention of such an 
edition. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Medicina practicet, ^77% 
iii. p. 495. 
Gmeun, Geschichte der Chemie, 1798, ii. p. 359. 

p. 243. 

DAVISSON (William). 
Commentaria in Idseam Medicinae Philosophicae Petri Severini Dani, Medici 
incomparabilis & Philosophi sublimis: Ad faciliorem difficultatum enoda- 
tionem, quae in ipso, propter Lectoris in Philosophia Vetenim parum forsan 

DAVISSON^D. D. K, 

to! 

DAVISSON (William). Con/mued. 

versati defectum, apparere videntur, aditum praebentia. Operi & studio 
Willielmi Davissoni Nobilis Scoti ; Christianissimi Galliarum & Navarrse Regis 
Consiliarii & Medici ; domQs portique Plantarum Medicinalium, qui Parisiis 
in suburbio S. Victoris est, olim Praefecti : Nunc auteni S. Regiae Majestatis 
Poloniae & Suecise senioris Archiatri & Chemici ; S. Keginalis itideni Majestatis 
Personae Medici. Hagas-Comitis, Ex Typographia Adriani Vlacq. 

M.DC.LXIII. 

4^ Pp. 259. [1 blank]. 

This is the commentary. In 1660, same place ofSeverinas, and a later edition, Rotterdam, 1668, 
and printer, there had appeared Commemtariorum is mentioned. The present work and the Pro- 
. . . Prodromus, 4**, pp. 708, along with the Idea dromus are quite different. 

See SEVERINUS (PETRUSX Idea Mcdicinae Philosophical, 1660. 
Davidson, Davison, Davisson, D'Avissone or his name recorded in this place : and after him. 

D'Avissonus, Davidsoune. for the spelling varies, 
was bom about 1593 in Aberdeenshire. According 
to his nUcDt of descent he was well connected and 
could nirly call himself ' Nobilis Scotus ' {Prodro- 
MttsComMem/., p. 434). After graduating as doctor 
of Medicine he went to Paris about 1690. When 
the Jardio des Plantes was founded he was 
appointed the first Professor of Chemistry, a 
positioo be acquired doubtless by the reputation 
he had for his knowledge of the subject, and he 
was also Councillor and phjrsicion to the kin^, 
aad keeper of the garden in 1648. Writing in 
165a Sir Thomas Urquhart says : * * The excellency 
of Doctor William Davisson in Alchymy, above 
aU the men now Uving in the world, whereof by his 
wonderful experiments he g^veth daily proof, al- 
though his l^med books published in the Latine 
loqgoe did not evidence it, meriteth well to have 

Sir Thomas Urquhart, The Discovery of a most 
txquisite /ewel^ London, 1653, p. 3x3. 

Vfercklin, Undenius renovatus, 1686, p. 373. 

Cooring^ In Uuiversam Ariem Meaicam . . . 
Introduction 1687, Addit p. 136. The ' Prodromus' 
was attacked by Schelhammer. 

fia}^, Dietionaire Historique^ i73o» Art Morin, 
iil p. 424, note B. 

Man^get, BiiUoiheca Scriplorum Medicorum, 
17J1, I. ii. p. 16^ 

Kestner, Mtduinisches Gelehrten- Lexicon^ ^7AP% 

Lenglet Dufiresnay, Hisioire de la Pkilosopku 
HermiUque, 1743, iu. pp. 3, 145. 

Jocfacr,' AUgemtines Gelehrten-Lexicon, 1750. 
il col. 52. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Anatomical 1774, i. p. 484. 

Elo^y DidioHHaire Historique de la \Udecine, 
1778, iL p. 13. 

HaUer, Biblioih«:a Medicina practicar^ i779> 
liL pp. 25, 97. 

Gmdin, Geschichte der Ckemie, 1797, i. p. 604. 

Bujgrapkie Midicale, Paris, Panckoucke (1830- 
35). iu. p. 40a. 

In 1650 he resigned these appointments to become 
physician to John Casimir, King of Poland. He 
died in that country about 1669. His portrait 
painted by D. Schultz was engraved by P. Loni- 
oart. It was reproduced in Small's paper. 

Besides the commentary on Severmus, he \%TOte 
also a text book on Chemistry : Philosophia Pyro- 
technica, 1633-35, 1640-42, 1641, 1646, 1657; the 
French translation by Hellot in 1657, and one by 
Davidson himself in 1675. ^^ there be such an 
edition it must have appeared after his death. 
Oblatio SaliSy Paris, 1641, 8** ; Observations sur 
rantimoine, Paris, 165 1 ; Plicomastix, Danzig, 
1668 ; Collectanea Chimica Medico-Philosophical 
.\ntwerp, 1698. 

One of the most notable sections in the Philo- 
sophia Pyroiechnica is that on crystallography, 
which is iuustrated by an engraved plate of crystals. 

Granger, Biographical History of Englandj 1834, 
V. p. 338. 

Catalogues 0/ Scottish Writers^ Edinburgh, 1833, 
pp. 83, X15. 

The Book 0/ Bon-Accord^ Aberdeen, 18^9, p. 316. 

Hoefer, Histoire de la Chimie^ 1843, li. p. 343 ; 
1869, ii. p. 334. 

Kopp, Geschichte der ChemiefiB44, ii. p. 18. 

Diary and Correspondence of John Evelyn,¥, R.S. , 
1850, i. p. 354. 

Biographic Universelle^ 1853, x. p. 317. 

Baylc & Thillaye. Biographic Audicale, 1855, i. 
p. 518. 

Poggendorff, Biographisch-literarisches Hand- 
uhirtcrhuch, 1863, i. col. 527. 

John Small, ''Notice of William Davidson, 
M.D.," Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries 
of Scot land ^ vol. x. 1872-73, p. 365. 

Dictionnaire Encyclopidique des Sciences Medi- 
cates^ !«« S^rie, 1882, XX vi. p. 49. 

Dictionary of National Biography^ 1888, xiv. p. 
182. (Article by F. F. Henderson.) 

Biographical notices are given also in the 
Prodromus, pp. 407, 434, etc. 

D. D. K. DESTILLIR-KUNST, worinnen die raresten bereitesten kiinstlichen 
Stiicke, nebst einem Anhang einiger chymischen approbirten Kunst-Stticke, 
welche bisher sehr geheim gehalten worden, wie auch etlicher bewahrten 
und curieusen Experimenten. Leipzig, Verlegts Adam Wilhelm Kiefsling, 

«753 

8< 

Pp. 130. Woodcut of a furnace. 

Both parts consist of a number of methods for preparing compounds of gold, 
antimony, mercury, copper, etc., etc., partly for medical and partly for technical 
purposes, and partly also for what was called or thought to be transmutation. 

20i 

DBAN^DEE 

DEAN (Edmund). 

See NORTON (samuelX 1630, 1667. 

DEE (John). 

Monas Hieroglyphica. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, ii. p. 1 78. 

Rogerii Baconis Angli Epistola de Secretis Opt^ribus Artis et Naturae et de 
Nullitate Magiae Opera Johannis Dee ... ad sensum integrum restituta 
Nunc vero cum notis quibusdam partim ipsius Johannis Dee, partim edentk. 

See ROTH-SCHOLTZ (friederichX Dcutsches Theatrum Chemicum, 1732, iii. 

p. 287. 
See also BACON (ROGER). 

John Dee was bom at London 13 July. 1527, was 
educated there and at Chelmsford, and entered St. 
John's College. Cambridge, in 1542, was B.A. in 
1544-5, and fellow 1545^. He was one of the 
original fellows of Trinity, and taught Greek. In 
1547 he visited Holland, and on his return brought 
some astronomical instruments which he gave to 
Trinity. He graduated M.A. in 1548. Thereafter 
he studied at Louvain and went to Paris in i ()5o and 
taught Mathematics. He returned to England and 
shortly after he was tried on a charge of attempt- 
ing to poison Queen Mary. He was acquitted and 
set at liberty. In 156a he went to Antwerp to 
arrange about printing the Monas HUroj^lyphica, 
proceeded to Venice and later to Presburg in 
Hungary, to present the dedication copy to the 
Emperor, Maximilian II., and on his return to 
England he explained the meaning of it to Queen 
Elizabeth. She seems to have had a partiality for 
Dee and his occult science, for she had interviews 
vrith him more than once and held discourse 
with him about it, but — like Cornelius Agrippa — 
Dee got more promises of preferment tlmi actual 
appointments from those who had such in their 
gift. "Wlien he was unwell, however, the Queen 
sent her own physician to him. In 1574 the Queen 
visited him at Mortlake and was shown his magic 
crystal, in 1577 he went to Windsor to deliver nis 
views on a comet which had appeared, and again 
in 1578 he was consulted about the Queen's health 
and was sent to Germany to discuss her symptoms 
with physicians there. In 1580 he received another 
visit rrom the Queen, and in 1582 he was busjr with 
the alteration of the Calendar. Dee*s reputation as 
an alchemist brought him into contact with Edward 
Kclley, or Talbot, and for a couple of years they 
carried on experiments and began those conferences 
with spirits which were recorded and published 
long afterwards by Meric Casaubon in 1659, in a 
folio volume. They went ofif in company to Cracow, 
and no sooner were they gone than a mob broke 
into his house at Mortlake and destroyed books and 
instruments. Dee tried to And favour with Rudolph 
H. and Stephen of Poland, but to no purpose. 
They went to Prague, then to Erfurt and Casscl, 
and at last to TrUbau in Bohemia. In 1^86 he 
declined the offer of an appointment in Russia, and 
continued his spiritual conferences. Finally Dee 
and Kelley parted company in 1588-89, kclley 
returned to Prague and Dee came on to England, 
where he was once more favourably received by the 
Queen. In 1595-^ he was installed at Mancmster 
as warden of the College, but he did not succeed in 

this office. He had already tried to be purged fion 
the charge of being a conjuror and ' mvocator of 
divels.* and he once more applied in 1604 to King 
James for iustification from the accusation. He 
could not have gone to a worse person for this 
purpose, and his request was refused when the 
royal witch-hunter knew the nature of his studies. 
He left Manchester, returned to Mortlake, where be 
lived in poverty till bis death in 1607. 

The nrst edition of the Monas Hien^lyphUa 
was printed by Gulielmus Silvius at Antwerp, 1564, 
small 4**, ff. 28. The title-page is highly ornate 
with pillars, symbols, mottoes, and in tlie centre 
the 'Fionas' itself enclosed in an oviform re- 
ceptacle. The book is dedicated to the Emperor 
Maximilian II., and there is also a letter to the 
printer in which he is requested to set up the book 
in as close an imitation of the manuscript as 
possible, in so far as the diagrams, marks, capital 
letters, and so on are concerned. Af^parently Dee 
attached importance to such details, as they formed 
part of the significance of his symbol. 

There was a reprint : FraiKx>furti, Apud loandem 
W'cchelum & Petrum Fischerum consortes^ iS9i- 
It is a small 8®, pp. 107 [i blank] in which the 
diagrams and peculiarities of printing are retained. 
Otherwise it is very plain : the title-page has a 
meagre reproduction of the ' Monas,' but is devoid 
of ornament and is unattractive. Copies of these 
editions are extremely rare. In the British Museum 
Catalogue there are three copies of the 1594 edition 
onlv, none of that of 1591 or any other apart from 
collections. 

Halliwell says (Dr. Dec's Diary, p. 3) that it was 
frequently printed, but these are the only editions 
I have met with. He also says that he tried to 
explain the meaning of the tract in a paper to the 
Society of Antiquaries. I do not know whether or 
not that paper was ever printed. 

The edition of Roger Bacon's Epistola with Dee's 
corrections and notes was first (?) published : 
*' Hamburgi, Ex Hibliopolio Frobeniana Anno 
c:l3. Ij.cxviii." It forms a little square octavo, 
pp. 80, with an address to the Kosicnician Brother- 
hood. There followed an English version : *' Frier 
Bacon his Discoveiy of the Miracles of .\rt, Nature, 
and Magick, Faithtully translated out of Dr. Dec's 
own copy, by T. M., and never before in English. 
London, Printed for Simon Miller at the Starre in 
St. Pauls Church-yard, 1659." It is a small 
narrow duodecimo, pp. [la] 51 [7 of book adver- 
tisements] [1 leaf, blank ? wanting]. Both of these 
editions are extremely rare. 

DEE^DEUCTjE 

^3 

DEE (John). Continued. 

■ Asfapiofe, Tkeatrmm Ckeimuum BrUoMmicmm, 
i6a.p.478. 

oord, BibliotlUca CkewUca, 1654. p. 74. 

Morboi^ De Metallorum Tramsmuiatiout . . . 
EfiOola^ 1673, p. 154. 

KcrtH Happuck, . . . oder TeutscJUs Feg/euer 
dir Scheidekunsit 170a, pp. 109, 114. 

Thomas bmith, Vitat quommd^im ermditissi^ 
mmm ct illustrium viromm, London, 1707, 4**. 
No. viii. pp. 102. 

Niceron, Mimnrts^ 1729. L p. 545. 

^ Eiei^tbome Jurngftr Alckymia^ i79o» P- 

73.W- 

Rotb-Scfaolte. Dtmixhes Tktairum ChtmUum, 
im iii. pi 755 6* sqq. (Portrait as frontispieoe. ) 

Znller, Universal Lexicon, 1754. viL col. 302. 

Wddlcr, Hisioria As/rvmomue, 1741. p> 398- 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire de la t'hilosophic 
Htrmitique, 1742, i. pp. 310, 312, 473; iii. 
1x146. 

Tanner, Biblioikeca Britannico-Hibemica, 1748, 
p.a23. 

Bufmpkia Britannica, 1750, iii. p. 1633. 

J(i<»er, Allgemeimes GtUkrten' Lexicon , 1750, ii. 
col 64. 

Moreri, Le Grand Dictionnaire Historique, 

Fucfas, Reperiorium der ckemischen Litteratur, 
1806-08. p. 56. 

Beloe, Anecdotes cf Literature, 1807. ii. p. 263 
(about Dec's Art of K'avigaiion). 

Chalmers, The General Biojrrapkica I Dictionary, 
1813, XL p. 378. 

Ersch & Gruber. Allgemeine Encyklopadic, 
1832. xxiii. p. 319L 

Schniieder, Geschichte der Alckemif, 1832. pp. 
303. 306, 308. 

A Collection cf Letters illustrative vf the Progress 
of Science in England. . . . Edited by j. O. 
Halliwell for the Historical Society of Science, 

1841. p. aa 

L>*Israeli, Amenities 0/ Literature, 1841, iii. \x. 
180. 

Mackiiy, Memoirs of extraordinary popular 
Delusions, 1841, iii. p. 114; 1852, i. p. 152. 

Dilxiin, Bibliomania, 1842, p. 262 (sketch based 
upon Ileame's remarks in his edition of Chronica 
Joannis Glastoniensis, Oxford, 1726, ii. p. 498). 

The Private Diary (f Dr. John Dee, edit«l by 
James Orchard Halliwetl, for the Camden Society, 

1842. 4" 

'Xi'^i 

tiomnaire Historique de la Midecine, 
i77*.ii. PL la. 
Bcftrag tmr Geschichte der hShem Chemie, 

'7*S f 493- 
naamg, Geschichte der Menschlichen Sarrheit, 

17^ viL p. I. 

Kippn^ Bicgraphia Britasutica, 1793. v. p. 32. 

Gmdin, Gtschschtt der Chemie, i797» i. p. 311 
(docs not InKnr the difference between John and 
Arthur Dee). 

tionarv. 

347- 

Biographic Univcrselle, 1852, x. p. 267. 

Rose, ./ New General Biographical Dii 
1853, vii. p. 4^ 

Xour^lle Btograpfue Gdn^rale, 1855, xiii. col. 

Cooper, Athence Cantab rigienses, 1861, ii. p. 497. 

Poggendorfifi Biographisch-literarisches Hand- 
worterbuch, 1863, L col. 534. 

Ladrague, Biblioth^que Ouvaroff, Sciences 
SecrHes, 1870, Nos. 939, 940. 

Kopp, Die Alchemie, x886, ii. pp. 230, 234. 

Dictionary of National Bic^raphy, i888» xiv. 
p. 271 (article by Thomson Cooper). ' 

DEFINITIO, das ist: Eigentliche Beschreibung der vortrefflichen und verbor- 
geDen Kunst Alchimie. 
See BSNEDICTUS (liberius), Liber Aureus, 1630, p. 76. 
See HERMETISCHE (Der) philosophus, 1709, p. 54. 

DEHNE (JoHANN Christian Conrad). 

D. Job. Cbrist. Conr. Dehne Stadt- und Land- Physikus zu Schoningen. Versuch 
einer vollstandigen Abhandlung iiber die scharfe Tinktur des Spiefsglaskonigs 
und ihre gfossen Heilkrafte : nebst der Art, aus andern Metallen abniiche 
Tlnkturen zu bereiten. Helmstedt verlegts, Johann Heinrich Kiihnlin 

Universitats-Bucbhandler. 1779. 

8». Pp. [8)156. 

jects which appeared in 
Neueste Entdeckunj^fH, 

where he died in July, 1791. He wrote several 

Gnielin, Geschichte der Chemie, 1799, iii. pp. verstorbenen Teutschen Schriftsteller, 1803, ii. 
495-497. 765 («h« above work), 781, 783, 797. p. 299. 

Mcusd, Lexihon der vom Jahr 1750 bis 1800 Poggendorff, Biographisch-literarisches H^nd- 

wortcrbuch, 1863, i. col. 526. 

DELARVATIO Tincturae Pbilosophorum. 
Su LEONHARD von Altcnbiu-g. 

DELICIiE MEDICi*:. 

Vohimen Primum Deliciarum Medicarum, Chirurgicarum et Chymicarum, oder : 
curieuse Anmerckungen, darinnen sicb diejenigen, welche Medicinam und 

io4 

DEUajE—DEJUACIfY 

DEUCIiC If EDIC/E. Cmtimmed. 

Chymimi ttebcn, notziidi ergoCzen kocmen, so biftuihero in xdien Pnetenlai 
heramgegffbcn, ntinnidiio aber mil cinem volligen Register veraehen. 
lidpzig, Veriegis Chiistoph HuUse, 1706. 

8*. Pp. ;i6; [b* i^ ;i Uank^ [8] 9i-8ip : [39. i blauik]. Frontispieoe. Title red 
and Uack. Dmded intb 10 parts «idi thle^afc^ aU. esoepC tbe woond, bans 
included in the paginatkm. Tbe pre&oe is signed : Mooeian. Tbe title-page ot 
tbe first part is dated 1703; tbose of tbe seraod, tbird, fourtb, and fiftb--an in 
tbe second edition — are dated lyos* ^ <be sixth. 1704; of tbe seventh, eigbtb, 
ninth, and tenth, 1705. To parts (-ro there is added a snppleawnt b^ AUtoywlus 
Chrjrsander. In parts 5-7 it has a tide-page, bat not m parts S-ia Tbe title in part 5 
basfblknrs: 

Anbang Chymiscber ErgiitrHgkeiten, darinnen vider biiabero in grosser Hecm 
CabJnetten and Laboratoriis, vie aoch ScfariAien der Artisten gebeini-gefaalteii, ja 
sefar boch %'erkaufRe Secreta und Real-Proceae von Goldmacben entbalten, alien 
Liebhabem der edlen Alchjmie nir hochstcn Ergutxung cutdeckct von AlHophilo 
Cbrysandro^ Anno 1704. 

DELLE (Martinls de). 

Discursus de Universal!. 

5Af QUADRATUM ALCHVMISTICVM, 1705: All Puli, Centrum Natunc Concen- 
tratum, p. 59. 

" Martinus de Delle ex oppido Vitri in Duuatu perhaps he assisted him in his alchemical eaEpcri- 

M ediolaneusi " is the description given of the ments. 

author. He tells in the above how he %i-as \'isited He seems also to have been the de DeOe who 

in 1589 by a person from Gorlitx, who finding him v^Tote a cfaronide in verse iA the adventarot of 

engaged m tne perusal of alchemical books asked alchemists whom he had hcund of or enoonntered 

him if he understood what he read, and afterwards at Court. On this account Schmieder has sQrIed 

taking him out to the country showed him the him Court-poet 

'Spiritus Mundi' and the 'Materia uni\-ersalis.' Ejctracts from this manuscript were first published 

It IS a singidar story. in the Ferfemtr der Sckeide-Kunst^ and rdate to 

In Die Edtlgtborne Jungftr AlchywUa the author Denis Zaduure, Gassenhauer, and Edward KeUej. 

tells us that he had seen in manuscripts curious The}- are so quaint and so tersdy dramatic, that it 

processes ascribed to him, but that there was some is to be lamented the manuscript was not printed in 

uncertainty about his name as it appeared both as full, if tbe rest of it was as direct as these extracts. 

Martinus and Mardochseus. He is called a They were reprinted afterwards in Die Edeigtbome 

Camroer-dieuer of the Emperor Rudcdph II., and Jungfer Alcl^mia^ in theArf^^/andbySdunieder. 

Keren Haffuck^ . . . 0der Teutsckes Fegfetier Bey t rag xur Gesckickte der Ckemie, 1785, ppu 

der Scketde-Kmnst, 1702, pp. 73. 105, 107. 269, 489, 494. 

Die Edetgebome JUngfer Akkymia^ i73Pt PP* Schmieder, Gesckickte der A/ckemie, 1832. pp. 

67, 79, 301. 374. 301, 307. 332. 

Fictuld, Probier-Sleitt, 1753, Th. i. p. 65. 

DEMACHY (Jacques Fran(^ois). 

Klcmens de Chymie, suivant les Priiicipes de Becker & de Stahl, traduits du 
Latin sur la 11^ Edition de M. Juncker, avec des Notes : Par M. Demachy, 
Apothicaire Gagnant-Maitrise de THotel-Dieu de Paris. Tome Premier. Six 
vol. broch. 12 liv. A Paris, chez Simeon-Prosper Hardy, Libraire, rue S. 
Jacques, au-dessus de celle de la Parcheminerie, a la Colonne d'Or. 
MDCCLVII. Avec Approbation, & Privil^e du Roi. 

I2*». 

T. i. pp. xxiv. 536. Two plates of symbols. 
T. ii. pp. viij. 623 f I blaiikj 
T. iii. pp. viij. 599 [1 blank} 

Though this is in reality a translation of J uncker's 
Conspectus Ckemia {see juncker (johann)) suffi- 
cient has been added to it in the way of notes to 
make it so far an independent work. 

Demachy, bom 30 August, 1728. studied natural 
history and literature, then devoted himself 
specially to materia medica and pharmacy, and 
rose to be director of the central deportment for 
the hospitRlii. He was author of sevonal works on 

T. iv. viij. 392. 
T. V. viij. 412. 
T. vi. vij. [1 bl.] 283 [4, 1 blankj 

Pharmaceutical Chemistry, translated Pott's and 
Marggrafs collected papers and wrote a great 
deal of verse, essays and academic ^loges, which 
appeared in various periodicals. He died 7 July, 
1803. As was to be expected from a chemist who 
had been trained in the doctrines of Becher and 
Stahl. he never adopted the views intnxiaoed by 
Lavoisier. 

DEMACHY—DENS/NGER 20$ 

DEMACHY (Jacquks FitAN90is). Qmtimted. 

HaOo; BiUioiheca Amaiamia^ vm, ii p. 604. NomveUe Biogra^U GiniraU, 1855. xiiL col. 

Bkp^U MUicaU^ Pterii. Budmcke (iSao- 5x2. 

15I, m. pi 418. Phfllippe ft Ludwig, Gesckickie der Afoikeker^ 

Qo^raid, La Fratue LitUrairt^ i83c\ iL p. 467 1855. pp. 656, 90a 

{Sst of nmneroas chemical works). Poggendod!^ Biagrafkisck-literarisckis Hand- 

Jnrmaiit Ckimie MidicaU, Paris. 1843. y S^r. tadrUrbmch, 1863, L col. 547. 
0.01344. DicHonnaire Emcyc/of/dique de la MMtcine, 

iiograpkit Umiverselle, 1852, x. p. 3591 188a, xxvi. p. 556. 

DEMOCRITUS. 
Democritus Abderyta Gnecus de Rebus Sacris Naturalibus et Mysticis. (41m 

Notis Synesii & Pelagii. 
Tumba Semiramidis Hemietica^ Sigillatae [sic\ quAm si Sapiens aperuerit, non 
Cynis, ambitiosus; avarus, Regum ille thesauros, divitiarum inexhaustos, 
quod sufficiat inveniet H. V. D. Norimbergae, Apud Haeredes Job. I )an. 
Tauberi, M.DCC.XVII. 

8**. Pp. 63 [x of book advertisetiientsj. Title red and black. 

This is Tauber's reprint of Piziinenti's translatk>n sakl alx>ut Democritus, see Kopp, Beittdi^e, 1869, 

of Democntus 'De Arte S^cra Magna,' which he pp. 108-136; Kopp, Dit Akhemie, 1886, i. pp. 

nttk from a Greek MS. that was brought to him aoa, 219. ii. p. 319. and for the editions of 

bjrt native of Corfu. Pizimenti's translation was I>emocntus, see my own papers in the PnKeedings 

poUisbed at Padua in 1573, and was reissued with ofikt Phihsopkical Society, (ilasgow. 
tbe date altered to 1573. One copy of the 1572 To the list there given should be added other 

(dition is known and about a dozen of the issue of two copies of the 1573 Padua edition, one in the 

IW3. The edition of 1717, like the others, is rare. University Library, Cracow, uncut in the original 

tw translation was printed ns a supplement to covers ; and another in the Librar}' at Munich. 
Hialdns' MemoraHlia^ Colon., 1572, 1573, 1574. Compare with one another the remarks on 

and Kopp reprinted it in his Beitrdjiie zur Geschichte Democritus made respectively by W'iegleb {Hist or • 

iRrCAMw, 1869, pp. 137-143. The Greek text as isch-kritiscke Untersuchung der Akhemie, 1777, 

il costs in the MS. m St Mark's Library at Venice pp. 176-9) and by Kortum (k'ortuni xtrteidif^et 

m printed by Berthelot in his edition of the Greek die Akhemie, 1789, p. 76). 
akfaemists, Paris, 1888, 3 vols., 4**. For * Tumba Semiramidis' see notes under that 

Pot an exhaustive discussion of all that has been title. 

Collectanea. 

See DORN (GERARD), Trevisanus de Chymico Miraculo, 1600, p. 167. 

See THEATRUM CHRMICUM, 1659, i. p. 776. 

See .MANGET (j. J.), Bibliotheca Chcmica Curiosa, 1702, ii. p. 361. 
Summaria declaratio eorum, qua^ dicta sunt bactenus ex Democrito, per 
aenigmata. 
See DORN (GBRARD), Trevisanus de Chymico Miraculo, 1600, p. 194. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, i. p. 792. 

See MANGET 0* J-)» Bibliotheca Chcmica Curiosa, 1702, ii. p. 367. 

DEMOCRITUS (Christianus). 

See DIPPEL (JOHANN CONRAD). 

DENSINGER (Arsenius Bachmiel). 
Geber Redivivus, das ist : Warhaflftige Practica des Steins der Weisen, 
welche der Konig Geber klar in seinen Biichem, jedoch Stuckweis, 
zerstreuet, bin- und wieder beschrieben. Hemach von einem Philosopho 
in Ordnung gesetzt, und I^teinisch vor etlichen Jahren in Druck ausge- 
gangen, jetzo aber verteutschet, und mit fnichtbaren annotationibus, und 
abgekiirtzter Praxi, Beschreibung von dem Mercurio Philosophorum, wie 
auch mit einem Appendice un CoroUario vermehret worden, dem gemeinen 
Nutzen zum besten ausgegeben von Arsenio Bachmiele Densinger. Im 
Jahr Christi, 1683 (?). 

a4®. Pp. 57 [1 blank]. The date is paitly cut dSL 

3o6 DBNSINGER^DETHARDING 

DENSINGER (Arsbnius Bachmibl). Cantimied. 

Of this author I have doc found any record, spell his name Bachunael. Roth-SdwIUandFictiild 
The present book is cited both by Schnueder and on the other hand quote an edition of 1683, vhich 
by Kopp, but they give the date as 1643, and they confinns the present onei 

Roth-Schoks, BihlioUuca CkmUcOy lyay, p. 87. Schmieder, GtxkukU der Alckemu, 183a. p. 93. 

Fictuld, Probier-Steim^ 1753. Th. ii. p. 66. Kopp, Dit Alckimie, x886, ii. p. 387. 

DESCRIPTIO Philosophici Adrop. 

.SV^ MONTE (GUIDO MAGNUS DR). 

D'ESPAGNET (Jean). 

See ESPAGNET (JEAN Vf). 

DESSENIUS (Bernard), Cronenbuigius. 

See CRONBNBURGIUS (BERNARDUS DESSENIUS). 

DESTILLIR-KUNST. 

See D. D. K. Destillir-Kunst 

DETHARDING (Georg). 
Chymischer Probir- Ofen, darinnen alle Procefse und Handgriffe, die in 
Johannis Agricolse P. & M.D. Commentarijs und Notis, uber Johan : 
Poppij Chymische Medicin enthalten, und von ihm, (D. A.) fiir grosse, 
geheime, und gantz newe Kiinste ausgeruffen werden; Ein jeder absonder- 
lich, nach denn Principijs Chymicae Artis examiniret, erortert, und femer 
tarn Ratione qvkm Experientii, auch zum ofnern, aus D. Agr. eigenen 
Worten, hell und klar erwiesen wird: Dafs in gedachten Commentarijs 
und Notis, nichtes newes noch Geheimes, das etwas wehrt, sondem vielmehr 
Alte verlegene Waaren und Sachen, die bifsweilen nur von ihm etwas ver- 
andert, verkehret, ja oflft mehr verderbet als verbessert worden; Nebst 
vielen groben, HandgreifHichen, schadlichen Erroribus und Contradictionibus 
zu finden seyn; Allen Liebhabern der wahren, unverfalschten Chymiae, 
insonderheit aber denen, die von sothanen falschen, Chymischen Procefsen, 
nicht wollen verfiihret seyn, wie auch denn angehenden Studiosis dieser 
Kunst, hochniitzlich zu lesen und anzuwenden, Mit sonderlichem Fleifse, 
und nicht geringen Vnkosten abgewartet und an Tag gegeben durch 
Georgium Detharding, Biirgem und Apothekem in Alten Stetin. 

Felix, qvem faciunt aliena pericula cautum ! 
Gedruckt bey Georg Gotzken. In verlegung Jeremiae Mamphrasen, im 
Jahr 1648. 

4*. Pp. [16] 38. 344 [misnumbered for 324J. Index [37, i blank]. 

[Another Copy.] 

\n edition of this work, published at Stettin in 1656, 4*, is mentioned in Leupold's Prodrvmus, 

Kurtzer Discurs vom Auro Potabili, was es sey, vnd was es vor Eygenschafiten 
an sich haben muis, dadurcb man das Falsche vpn dem Wahren vnterscheiden 

DETHARDING ao; 

DETHARDING (Georg). Continued. 

konne. Daiaufs den hell vnd klar zu sehen ist, dafs das schwartzbraune, 
dicke, sdnckende Oel, welches Johannes Hintzius vor Aurum potabile 
verkaufit, falsch vnd Betnig sey. Aus erheblichen Vrsachen (die in 
der Vorrede enthalten) abgefasset vnd manniglichem zur Wamung sich vor 
solchen vnd deigleichen betrieglichen medicamenten zu hiiten, in ofTent- 
lichen Druck verfeitiget durch Georgium Dethardingen, Biirgern vnd 
Fiirstlichen gewesenen Hoff-Ap)otecker in Alten Stettin. Gednickt, bey 

Georg Gotzken Anno 1642. 

4**. Pp. (38. a bUnk) [48]. 

Georgii Dethardinges, Burgers und Apothekers in Alten Stettin, Nohtwendige 
Andwort und gegen-Bericht, auff die Ehrenriihrige, lasterliche schmah- 
und Liigen-SchrifTt, mit welcher D. Johannes Agricola, Stadt-Physicus zu 
Brefslau, ihn, an staat, das er auff das Scriptum Illusivum andworten, und 
den falschen Liigen-Procefs, die calcinationem & verae Tincturse Auri 
eztiactione, mit Hirschhorn, Bruntz und Brandtwein betreffend, verificiren 
und wahr machen soke, wider alle Christliche Liebe und Billigkeit beleget 

Plaut 
Bacchae Bacchanti (Agricolae) si velis adversarier, 
Ex insana insaniorem fades, feriet ssepius. 
Gedruckt in Alten Stettin. 

4**. Pp. [sj 26. At the end : Ciedruckt im Jahr 1684. bey Georg Gdttken. 

Scriptum Elisivum oder Rechtmassige Andwort und Gegenbencht, darinnen 
die Nichdge, in der Natur, Vernunfft und Chymischen fundamenten 
ungegriindete Apologia, welche H. Augustus Hauptman Dresdensis, zu 
Erhaltung der von H. D. Agricola in seinen Commentarijs iiber Poppium 
pag. 27. beschriebenen, und aus dem Auro mit Urin und Brantwein 
vermeinten Extrahirten Tincturae, Animae, &c., wieder den Discurs de 
Auro Potabili ohnlangst geschrieben, mit bestandt und darbietung Augen- 
scheinlicher Demonstration, wiederl^ und annihiliret wird. Durch Georgium 
Dethardingen, Biirgern und Apwtheckern in Alten Stetin. 

M. T. C. 
Nulla est capitalior injustitia, qvkm eorum, qvi tiim, ciim maxim^ fallunt, 
id agunt, ut viri boni esse videantur. 

Senec. lib. 2, de Clement, c. 2. 
Maluerim veris offendere, qvkm placere adulando. 

Gedruckt zu Alten Stetin, bey Gorg Geotzken (sic). Ad 1645. 

4'. Pp.[sa]. 

Scriptum Illusivum contra Hauptmannianum famosum scriptum Collisivum. 
Das ist: Vnumbgangliche beandwortung und wider-Rede, in welcher, D. 
Johannis Agricolae Phantastische Tinctura, Anima Auri, nach Chymischen 
Grunden Examiniret, verworffen, und was Augustus Hauptmann, Dresd. 
in dem Newgeschmiedeten CoHisiv- oder Famos-Iibell, dieselbe zu 

208 

DETHARDING—DEUSING 

DETHARDING (Georg). ConHnutd. 

Behaupten, vorgewandt, refiitiret und so viel nohdg, beleget wird durdi 
Georgium Dethardingen, Biirgem und Ap)othekem in Alten Stettin. 

Multitudo Errantium, errori non parit patrocinium, & quod in Misnia 
erratum est, in Pomerania Rectum Verumq; esse nequit. 

Stettin, Gedruckt bey Georg Gotzken. In verlegung Jeremiae Mamphrasen, 
Buchhandlern daselbst, und Caspar Klofsman Jun. in Brefslaw. Anno 
1647. 

4*. Pp. [8] 136. 

[Another Copy.] 

Imperfect, wanting the title and preliminary matter (sheet A), 
The preceding controversial works are directed two are identified, and another George Detbarding 

is described by him as living between 1671 and 
1747. who was a member of the Academia Naturv 
Curiosorum, and the author of a great number of 
academic dissertations on medical topics. Poggen- 
dorff takes this view alsa There were besides a 

against the writings and view's of Johann Agricola 
{q.v.) and Augustus Hauptmann. They are of 
interest as a criticism of theories and of modes of 
preparation. 

Little seems to be known of the author Ijeyond 

what he himself tells us. namely, that he was l ourt Cxeorge Christopher, a George Gustav and a George 

Apothecary in Old Stettin, flourished in the middle \\'illiam Detharding, so that some attention is 

of the X7th century, and was devoted to chemistry required not to confuse them, especially as tlie 

and alchemy from his vouth up. On the authority second name is sometimes omitted. I suspect that 

of Jcenicke, J5cher has distinguished him from the present man did not write some of the books 

another person of the same name who lived in and papers attributed to him by later biografrfiers 

Stralsund, and afterwards went to Gustrow as who have not oliserved the dates of publication with 

to^n physician in 1680, and who wrote some sufficient attention, but the confusion is very great, 

medical works and a Latin-Greek vocabulary for and I am not at all certain that the following 

students of surgery. By Jourdan, however, these references apply to the same person. 

Mangct, Bibliotheca Scriptorum Medicorum, 

1731, \. ii. p. 168. 

Jacob Leupoids Prodromus Biblioihecct metallic^, 

1732. p. 47. 

Joh. David Jaencke. Gelehrtes Pommerland, Alt- 
Stettin, 1734. 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire dc la Philosophie 
HerrtUtique, 1742, iii. p. 148. 

Jbcher, Ailgemeines Gelehtien- Lexicon , 1750, ii. 
col. 94. 

Adelung, Supplement to J5cher. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Botanica, 1772, ii. p. 47. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Chirurgica, 1774, i. p. ^11. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Medicina practica^ hi. p. 
442 ; iv p. 54. (These do not refer to the present 
writer apparently.) 

Fuchs, Repertorium der chemischen Uttrratur, 
i8o6-o8, p. 241. 

Bio/p^phie Afidicale, Paris, Panckoucke (1820- 
25), iii. p. 455. 

Pogf^endomfBiographiuh'literarixhes/fandwor- 
terbuch, 186^ i. col. 564 (quotes Jbcher, but does 
not follow hmi). 

DEUSING (Anton). 
Sympathetici Pulveris Examen: quo superstitiosa ac fraudibus Cacodaemonis 
implicita Vulnerum et Ulcerum curatio in distans, per Rationis trutinam, ad 
ipsas Naturae Leges expenditur; subversis Curae Sjrmpatheticae Fundamentis, 
ab Illustriss. Comite Digbaeo, nee non D. D. Papinio, & Mohyo, positis. 
Autore Antonio Deusingio, Med. ac Philos. Doct. Illiusque in Acad. Gron. 
& Oml. Prof. Prim. Celsissimi Principis Gubernatoris ac Provinciae Archiatro. 
Groningas, Typis Johannis CollenI, Bibliopolae & Typographi, 1662. 

12**. Pp. [12J 660. 

Anton Deiuiing was born in 1612. He had a 
long training, and was a man of great learning. 
He studied classics and philosophy at Harderwyk, 
and at Leyden mathematics, Arabic under Golius, 
and also Persian and Turkish. He then passed to 
medicine, graduated in 1637, and be^m practice in 
1638. He was chief physician of the Duke of 
Nassau. After professing matbematics at Meurs, 

he held professorships at Harderwyk and Groenin- 
gen, where he was created D.Phil., and ultimately 
became rector. He died at Groeningen in 1666, in 
his ^th year. He wrote numerous works on 
medicine, anatomy, physiognomy, cosmography, 
astronomy, physics, natural history, philosophv, 
and a number of controversial tracts, especially 
with De le Boe Sylvius, 

DEUSING^DIALOGUS 

209 

Haller, Bibliotkeca Medicinm fractica^ ^77^, }* 
p. 388 (projected edition of Avicenna) ; 1777, ii. 

p. 701. 
Gmelin, Gfschickte der ChemU, 1797, 1. p. 7^ 

(controversy with De le Boe Sylvius). 

Bio^apkU Midicale, Paris, Panckoucke (i8ao- 
as), ii'i. p. 461. 

Sprengel, Geschichtt der Arxneykunde^ 1827, iv. 
p. 187. 

D^imeris, Dictionnaire Histarique de la 
Midecine, 1834. II. i. p. 83. 

Bayle & Thillaye, Biographie Midicale^ 1855, i. 

p. 423- 
Van der Aa, Biographisch Woordenboeck der 

Nederlanden, 1858, iv. p. 137 (and references). 

Poggendorff, Biognzphisch-literarisches Hand- 
wdrterbuch^ 1863, I. col. 564. 

Billings, Index-Catalogue, 1882, iii. p. 711 ; 2nd 
Series, 1899, iv. p. 179. 

Dictionnaif^ Encyclopidique des Sciences Midi- 
cales, 1883, xxviii. p. 453. 

Hirsch, Biographisches l^xikon der kervorra- 
genden Aerzte, 1885, "• P* '70- 

DEUSING (Anton). Continued. 

Mercklin, Lindenius removaim, 1686, p. 63. 

Frdier, Tkeatrum virorum eruditione clarorum, 
x688, p. Z403. and plate 64. 

Witte, Diarium BicgrapAicum, 1688, Yyy 2 redo, 
z666 (no other date is given, but Deusing was said 
t€> be then 54 years of age). 

Roth-Scboltz, Bibiiotneca ckemtca, 1737, p. 55. 

Manget, Bibliotkeca Scriptormm Medicorum, 

^T'Sh I- ii. P- 171. 

Stolle^ Anleitung zur Historie der Medicinischen 
€S^lakrheit, 1731, pp. 280, 507. 

Niceron, Mimoires, 1733, ^i- PP- ^'43* 

Foppens, Bibliotkeca Belgica, 1739, i. pp. 71-75. 

Kestner, AfecUcinisches (aelehr ten- Lexicon, 1740, 
p. 247. 

J. F. Weidler, Historia AUronomice, 1741, p. 479. 

Jdcher, Allgemeirus Gelehrten-Lexicon, 175 1, iii. 
, 258. 

£k>y, Dictionnaire historiqite de la Midecine^ 
»7S5. »• P' a8i ; 1778, ii. p. 41. 

Portal, Histoire de V Anatomic etdela Chirurgie, 
1770, ii. p. 672. 

Haller, Bibliotkeca Anatomica, 1774. I p. 434 
{fl, long account). 

DIALOGI DUO. 

See BRACESCO (Giovanni). 

DIALOGUE CHYMIQUE de la Pierre physique. 
See TRES-ANCIEN Duel des Chevaliers. 

DIALOGUE (Le) de Marie & d'Aros, sur le Magistere d'Hermes. 

See RICHEBOURG 0* ^- ^'\ Biblioth^que des Philosophes Chimiques, 1780, i. 
p. 77. 

DIALOGUS de Arte Chymica. 

See CHRYSORRHOAS. 

DIALOGUS (Ein) vom Stein der Weisen, Praeceptoris Georgii, und Alberti 
Discipuli; darinnen der vierdte Theil des Grafen Bemhardi, von der 
Piactica Lapidis Philosophici ausgeleget und erklaret wird. 

See CHYMISCH-UNTERIRDISCHER Sonnen-Glantz, 1728, p. 333. 

See BERNHARDUS TREVISANUS, Chymischc Schrifften, I746(I747X p. 212. 

DIALOGUS inter Naturam et Filium philosophic. 

See MANGET 0« J'X Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, ii. p. 326. 

DIALOGUS MERCURII, Alchymistje et Naturae. 

See SENDIVOGIUS (MICHAEL). 

DIALOGUS PHILOSOPHIiE. 

See TRISSMOSINUS (SALOMON^ Aureum Vellus, Tractatus iii., 1598, p. 145. 
See TANCKE (JOACHIM), Promptuarium Alchymiae, 1610 ; Appendix Tomi Primi 

p. 238. 
See BROFFNETE Geheimnisse des Steins der Weisen, 1708-17 18, p. 272. 
See [SCHATZ und Kimstkammer], p. 238. 
See also entretien. 
See also gesprach. 

O 

3IO 

DICKINSON—DICTIONAIRE 

DICKINSON (Edmund). 

Edmund Dickinson Phil & Med. Reg. de Chrysopoeia sive de Quintessentia 
Philosophorum. Juxta exemplar Oxoniense editio hoc exemplar! long^ 
castigatior. Accessit ob argumenti analogiam Anonymi Christiani de Medica- 
mentis Universalibus Dissertatio. 

No place or date (17 — ?). 
8^. Pp. [4] 183 [i blank] ; 56. MS. notes. 

Schreiben an Herrn Theodor Mundan von der Goldkunst, oder Quintessenz 
der Filosofen. 

See SCHRODER (f. J. w.), Neue Alchymistische Bibliothek, 1771, I. i. p. i. 
See MUNDANUS (theodorus). 

Dickinson, son of the rector of Appleton in 
Berkshire, was bom 26 Sept., 1624. He was 
educated at Eton and Merton College, Oxford, 
graduated B.A. 1647. M.A. 1649, and finally M.D., 
3 July, 1656. He practised in Oxford for upwards 
of twenty years, was elected to the College of 
Physicians in London, and settled there in 1684. 
He was appointed physician to Charles II., and 
continued in the same position under James II. 
till 1688. He then retired, occupying himself with 
writing books and the practice of chemistry, till his 
death, 3 April, 1707. 

His chief work, upon which he spent many years, 
is entitled Physica vetus et nova, London, 170a, 4^, 
reprinted on the Continent His only contribution 
to chemical literature is the present epistle, the 

Roth-Scholtz, Bibliotheca Chemica, 1727, p. 56. 
Buddeus, Isagoge Hisiorico-Theologica^ 1730, i. 

p. 245- 
Buddeus, Compendium Histories Philosophies, 

I73». PP- 300, 301. 39«. 496. 497- 
Zedler, Universal-Lexicon^ *734. vii. coL 790. 
Stolle, Anleitung xur Historie der Gelahrheit, 

'736, pp. 363. 570. 

W. N. Blomberg, An Account of the Life and 
Writings of Edmond Dickinson, M.D., Physician 
to King Charles //, and King James U. , London, 
1737 ; 2nd edition, 1739. 

Kestner, Medicinisches Gelehr ten- Lexicon, 1740, 
p. 248. 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire de la Philosophie 
Hermitiqut, 1742. i. p. 481 ; iii. p. 148. 

Bioeraphia Britannica, 1750, iii. p. 1693. 

T5cher, Allgemeines GeUhrten-Lexicon, 1750, ii. 
col iia 

Fabricius, Bibliografhia Antiquaria, 1760, pp. 
39, 61, 312, 386, 5x7, 688. 

Bnicker, Historia Critica PhihsopkicB, 1766, IV. 
i. p. 6x7. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Anatomica^ X777, ii. p. 13. 

first edition of which was published at Oxford ia 
1686. Of Mundanus, to whom it is addresnd, 
litde apparently is known, but be it is who is 
credited with having directed Dickinson's attentioo 
and energy to the science. Dickinson laboured at 
it for years and seems ta have believed in the 
reality of transmutation as having himself witnessed 
it. It is also said that the king— who certainly had 
a fancv for chemistry— had a private laboratory 
where he found pleasure in watching Dickinson 

' * Grind away, moisten and mash up his paste. 
Pound at his powder . . ." 

His devotion to Chemistry led to his acquaint- 
ance with others equally interested in it, and so we 
find Becher, for example, dedicating to him his 
Tripus Hermeticus fattdicus (g.v.). 

E\o^,J>ictionnaire Historique de la MSdecine, 
1778, li. p. 47. 
Baumer, Bibliotheca Chemica, 178a, p. 97. 
Kippis, Biografhia Britannica^ I793. v. p. 175. 
Gmelin, Geschichie der Chemie, 1798, iL p. 3x9^ 
Hutchinson, Biographia Medica^ I799b '^ PP 

25a-255- 
Thomson, History of the Royal Society, 18x2, 

App. IV. p. xxvii. 

Watt, Bibliotheca Britannica, 1819, i. (authors), 
3021. 

Wood, Athena Oxonienses, ed. Bliss, i8ao, iv. 
col. 477, and see vol. I. (18x3), P- xl»x- i passim. 

Schmieder, Geschichte der Alchemic, 1832, p. 459. 

The Diary and Correspondence of John Evelyn, 
1850, ii. p. 375. 

Munk, Roll of the Royal College cf Physicians, 
1861, i. p. 370. 

Ladrague, Bibliothique Ouvart^, Sciences 
Secrites, 1870, No. 1214. 

Kopp, Die Alchemie, 1886^ i, pp. 99, 207; ii. 

p. 344. 

Dictionary of National Biography, x888, xv. p. 
33 (article by R. Harrison). 

DICTA Sapientum. 

See theatrum chemicum, 1659, iii. p. 857. 

DICTIONAIRE Hermetique, contenant ^Explication des Termes, Fables, 
Enigmes, Emblemes & manieres de parler des vrais Philosophes. Accom- 
pagn^ de deux Traitez singuliers & utiles aux Curieux de TArt Par un 
Amateur de la Science. A Paris, Chez Laurent D'Houry, rue Saint Jacques, 
devant la Fontaine Saint Severin, au Saint Esprit. M.DC.XCV. Avec 
Privilege du Roy. 

I2^ Pp. [X2] 2X6. 

DICTTONAIRE—DIENHEIM 

211 

DICTIONAIRE Hermetique. Continued. 

The two tracts which follow have a title-page : 

Traits Philosophique de la triple preparation de Tor et de Targent. Par Gaston le 

Doux dit de Oaves, Amateur des Ventez Hermetiques. A Paris, Chez Laurent 

d'Houry, ruK Saint Jacques, devant la Fontaine Saint Severin, au Saint Esprit 
M.D.XCV. [sic). Avec Privilege du Roy. 

Pp. 119 [ I blank]. 

The second tract (p. 49) is entitled : De la droite et vraie maniere de produire la 
Pierre Philosophique, ou le Sel argentifique & aurifique. 

Len(^ Dufresnoy {Hisioire de la Philosophit 
Hentdti^ue, 1743, iii. p. 148), says the dictionary 
is not bad, but as it was drawn up by Salmon, 
win was not an adept, the proper explanations have 
Euled sometimes to be given. This is true only to 
t limited extent The dictionary may be based on 
the short vocabulary which Salmon added to the 

first volume of his Bibliotkiaue des Phihsophes 
Chimiques, Paris, 1672, and Kichebourg inserted 
afterwards in his edition of 1754 {q.v.\ but there 
arc very great additions to it, as can be readily 
judged from the fact that, while Salmon's short list 
fills only twenty pages, the Dictionaire occupies 
two hundred and sixteen. 

DICTIONARIUM PARACELSI. 

See DORN (GERHARD), Thcophrastischc Practica, 16 18, p. 396. 

DICTIONARY. 

A Chymical Dictionary explaining hard places and words met withal in the 

writings of Paracelsus, and other obscure Authors. 

See F. O'X A New Light of Alchymy, etc., 1674, p. 303. 

It is a translation of the preceding. 

DICTIONNAIRE Abreg^ des Termes de TArt et des Anciens Mots. 

See RICHEBOURG (j. M. D.), Biblioth^que des Philosophes Chimiques, 1754, iv. 
p. 57a 

DIDACUS GERMANUS. 
Judidum Philosophico- Ethico- Chymico-Medicum de ilia Veteri toties jam 
ventilata & necdum resoluta Controversia An detur Lapis Philosophorum ? 
Et ejusdem indefinita in Morbis tarn praeservandis quhm curandis Virtus. 
Leviter mota a praenobili & excellentissimo D. Jacobo J. W. Dobrzensky de 
Nigroponte Phil. & Medic : Doctore, ejusddmq; in Univer : Pragensi Professore 
Extraordinario. Acriter defensa (Tit :) i D. Joanne Friderico i Rain ad 
Stennoll & Radelsegch, Inclyti Ducatus Carnioliae, Causarum Aulicarum 
Provincialidmque Assessore. German^ id est candid^ formi Epistolari 
conscriptum k Didaco Germano Philosoph : & Medicinal Doctore. Anno 

Domini M.DCLXXXIL 

No place or printer. 

8". Pp. [23, I blank]. 

Compare Dobnensky's tract on the Prwserva- merxtAOVitd hy GmcWxx {GeschichtederChemie^ 1798, 
Hvim Universale Natuntle. This was directed ii. p. 35), but he does not supply the author's real 
agimst the belief in the philosopher's stone. It is name. Beytrag^ 1785. p. 551. 

DIE mit dem Marte genau-vereinigte Venus. 
See TRACTATUS Physico-Chymicus, 1706. 

DIENHEIM (JoHANN Wolfgang). 
Medidna Universalis. 

Set TADA Trifida Chimica, 1674, p. 7. 

ai2 DIENHEIM^DIGBY 

DIENHEIM (JoHANN Wolfgang). QnUinued. 

Dienheim was Doctor of Laws and of Nf edidne, where iq their presence the straniper turned some 

and was Professor at Freybiirg in Breisgau. In lead into gold. The person who is reported to 

1603 while returning from Rome, he met a fdlow have done this was Alexander Setoo, known 

traveller, with whom he sailed from Zurich to Basel as the Cosmopolite. It is one of the most cir- 

In the latter place, after getting hold of Dr. Jacob cunistantially narrated episodes in the history of 

Zwinger, they went all three to a goldsmith's, transmutation. 

Paschius, De novis Inveniis . . . Tractahis, Gdldenfalk, Sammlnmg vnm mekr ais humdert 

1700, p. 343. TransmutatumS'geschick^, x?^ Na 35. 

Roth-Scholtz, Bibliotheca Chemica, 1777, p. 56. Kottmm verteidigtt die Alckewne, 1789, p. 163. 

Die Edeli^f borne Junker A khymia, 17^, p. ao6. Gmclin, Geschicku der CMemie, 1797, i. p. 514; 

Kestner, Medicinisches GelekrieH'Lextcon^ 1740, i79|8. ii. p. 4. 

]>. 249. Schmieder, Geschickte der AUkemie, 1833, p. 

Idcher, Allgemeiues Gelehrten-Lexicon, 1750, ii. 397. 

col. 1x6. Kopp, Die Alckemie, 1886. L p. 88 ; it p. 338. 

Haller. Bibliotheca Medicinet fracticee, 1777, ii. 

P-4X3- 

DIETZE (David Gottlob). 

De Generatione Metallorum consensu amplissimi philosophonim ordinis dis- 
putabunt Prseses M. Johannes Zacharias Platner, et Respondens David 
Gottlob Dietze, Stolberg, Misn. D. Aug. Anno MDCCXVII. H. L. Q. C. 
Lipsiae, Literis Andreas Martini Schedii. 

4«. Pp. 46 [1, I Wank]. 

The above is not quoted in Leupolds Prodromus tractu ad metalla eSbdienda concesso concurrenti- 

Bibliotkecee Mttallicee, 1732. p. 47. but another bus, von Adtem und Jttngem im Felde. S.p. 4**, 

appears under his name: ' Disputatio juris metal* Elrford, 1727.' 
lici de jure Senioratus metallici, metallicolis in 

DIGBY (Kenelm). 
Of Bodies, and of Mans Soul, to discover the Immortality of Reasonable Souls. 
With two discourses of the Powder of Sympathy, and of the V^etation 
of Plants. By Sir Kenelm Digby Knight. 

'^v)^r^% <f>v(rLV amicus \oyov 
KaTavorj(rai oUi Svvarhv tTvat^ 
Av€v T^s Tov 6\ov <f>v(r€(as \ 

Animae naturam, absque totius natura, 

Sufficienter cognosci posse existimas? 

Plato in Phaedr. 
London, Printed by S. G. and B. G. for John Williams, and are to be sold 
in Little Britain over against St. Buttolphs-Church, M.DC.LXIX. 

4**' I'P' [55' I blank] 439 [i blank] ; [10] 231 [i blank]. The second treatise and 
the two discourses have separate title-pages included in the pagination. 

Wood quotes editions : Paris, 1644, fol. ; Lon- Ross wrote a reply to Digby in TMe Philo$opkicai 
don, 1658, 1665, and 1669, all in 4". Alexander Touchstone^ London, 1645, 4^* 

Aufserlesene, seltzame Philosophische Geheimniisse und chymische Experimente, 
wie auch sonderbahre und zuvor nie eroffnete Artzneyen, Menstrua und 
Alkaheste, sampt dem wahren Geheimniifs das Sal Tartari fliichtig zu 
machen: welche alle von dem Wohlgebohmen Herm Kenelm Digby Rittem, 
und weiland Cantzlern Ihr. Majest. der alten Konigin von Engeland, mit 
vieler Miihe und Fleifs zusammen gelesen, und bifshero nach seinem Tode 
verborgen gehalten, jetzo aber dem gemeinen Besten zu Nutze ans Tages 
Liecht gebracht worden durch Georg Hartman, Aus der Englischen in 

DIG BY 

itj 

DIGBY (Kenelm). Continued. 

die Deutsche Sprache zum ersten Mahl iibersetzet von J. I^ M. C. Mit 
Chur Sachsischer Freyheit, nicht nachzudrucken. Hamburg, Auff Gottfried 
Schultzens Kosten, 1684. 

8°. Pp. [8j 269 [xx]. Portrait of Digby on p [8]. 4 separate plates of apparatus. 

[Another Copy.] 

[Another Copy.] 

Imperfect. 

Oratio de Pulvere Sympathetico. 

See THEATRUM SYMPATHETICUM, 1660, p. I. 
See THEATRUM SYMPATHETICUM, 1 66 1, p. I. 
See THEATRUM SYMPATHETICUM, 1662, p. ^2. 

Vermehrung des Theatri Chimici, oder der eroffneten Thiir zum Heimligkeiten 
in der Scheide-Kunst. 
See BLANKAART (steven), Theatrum Chemicum, 1700. 

Digby was bom 11 Julj, 1603. At the age of 14 
he accompanied his relative Sir J. Digby, who went 
as ambassador to Spain. In x6i8 he entered 
Worcester Coll^i^, Oscford, and there probably was 
inoculated with a fancy for the Occult Sciences by 
his tutor, Thomas Allen: He left in x6ao and went 
ODce more to the Continent, and in X622 was again 
at Madrid, and was there presented to Prince 
Charles (afterwards King Charles I.), and the 
Duke of Buckingham, with whom he returned to 
England in 1623. and was knighted a few days 
later by King James I. at Hinchmbrooke. 

In x6a7-28 he went on a filibustering expedition 
to the Mediterranean and destroyed the French and 
Venetian ships at Scanderoon. and returned the 
following year. His tutor's books and MSS. having 
been left to him, he presented them in 1632 to the 
Bodleian Library. On the death of his wife in 
1633 be withdrew to Gresham College and spent 
two years in retirement, occup3ring himself with 
chemical experiments. After some difficulties and 
troubles connected with his religion and politics, he 
was allowed to depart to France and while there 
published in 1644 his treatise "Of Bodies and of 
the Immortality of Man's SouL" 

In 1651 Evelyn witnessed at Paris some of his 
chemical experiments and attended the lectures of 
Nicholas Ldfebvre, who afterwards settled in Lon- 
don. In 1658 appeared the lecture on the Powder 
of Sympathy delivered, as he tells us, before a dis- 
tinguished audience at Montpellier. After the 
Restoration he returned to England and was well 
received. He continued his experimental work 
and was cm the Council of the Royal Society when 
it was incorporated in 1663. He died 11 June, 
i66? (but Witte says 11 July, 1655). 

'nie lecture on the Powder of Sympathy appeared 
at Paris in 1658, and it was translated at once into 

Witte, Diarium biographicum, 1688, Sign. Uuu 
3 verso ; Ann. Jtdy zx, 1655. 

Roth-Scholtz, BMUthica Chemica, 1737, p. 60. 

Bayle, DiUionairt historique et critique, 1730, 
iL p. 99a 

J4um Leupoids Prodromus Bibliatkeca Metallic^, 

173». P- 47* 
Zedkr, Umivenal'Lexieom, 1734, vii. col. 898. 

English by R. White and published in 1658, I2^ 
pp. [2 blank, 10] 152, [x, 3 blank} The second 
edition, corrected and augmented with the addition 
of an Index was published also in i6q8, but it was 
entirely reset and is quite different from the first 
edition. The third edition was published in x66o. 
the fourth in X664. In my ' * Notes on . . . Books 
of Secrets," written before I had seen the first 
English edition or aiiy notice of it, I suggested that 
the French edition might have been regarded as the 
first, and that the English translation might have 
been called the second edition, though it was the 
first of the translation. That, however, was incorrect, 
for there is really a first English edition, although 
it is very rare. It is curious that the author of the 
article in the Dictionary of National Biography 
should have made practically the same statement : 
that the ' second ' edition of 1658 is the only one 
known and is probably the original. 

Besides the edition of 1658. the Discourse in 
French was published also at Paris in z66o, 1681 ; 
La Haye, X700, X71S ; Paris, X749 ; Utrecht in 
168 1 ; in Dutch in the Theatrum Symfatheticum^ 
Leeuwarden, 1697, Amsterdam, X737 ; m German, 
Frankfurt, X664 (3rd Ed.), 1700 (5th Ed.). The 
literature on this subject, which is very extensive, 
was described by me m a paper read to the Archae- 
ological Society of Glasgow. 

No account of Digby's chemical experiments was 
published by himself, so far as I know. They 
were probably conducted in an empirical fashion, 
and they either failed of their expectisd result or 
Digby was not able to interpret what they did lead 
to. Anyhow he cannot be classed with eith^ the 
experimental pharmacists, the scientific chemists, 
or even the alchemists of his time. What remains 
of his experimental labours was published by Hart- 
mann, his operator, in 1683. 

Kestner, Medicinisches GelehrteH-Lexiam, 1740, 

p. 2^X. 

Biographia Britannica, 1750, iii. pp. 1701-X714. 

Chaufepi^, Nouveau Dictiomnaire historique et 
critique, x7^o. Letter D. p. 24. 

{5cher, Allgemeines Gelehrten-Lex,, 1750, ii. coL 
ialler, Bioliotheca Anatomicat I774» i< p* 473 
(nobilis vir, sed credulus). 

214 DIGBY—DIPPEL 

DIGBY (Kenelm). CarUinued. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Ckirmrgica^ 1771, L p. 35a. Mackay, Mtwtoirs of Extraariimary Fopmlar 

Eloy, Dictionnairt Histarique dt la Midecime^ Deluiums, 1841, iil p. aoo; 185a. L p. a66. 

1776, li. p. 5a. BiompkU Univtnelu, 185a, xi p. 54. 

Haller, Biblioikeca Medicina ^nuHat, 1779, iii. Hajlam, Introduction to the Literaturt of Europe ^ 

P- 2^ i8S4. "»• PP- 901. S9a- 

Kippis, Biographia Britannica, 1793. ^' PP- i^* Nomftlk BiograpkUGindrak, 1855. xiv. ooL 166. 

199- AlUbone. w4 CrUUal DicHonary of EmgHsk 

Gmelin, GeschUhU der Ckimie, 1797. L p. 658 ; Literature^ 1859, I pi 50a. 
1798, ii. pp. 4, 300, 338. Poggeodorff, Biograpkiich-Mterarixkes Naud- 

Gmelin, Geschickie der Ckemie, 1797. L p. 658 ; Literature^ 1859, I pi 50a. 

.4, 100, 338. Pomodorff. 

Thomson, History of tke Royal Society, 1812, toorterhuck, 1863, L col. 572. 

Appendix No. iv., p. xxi. R^musat, Histoire de la PkUotopkU en Angle- 

Chalmers, Tke iieneral Bit^rapkiccl Dictionary^ terre, 1875. i. p. 996. 

1813, xii. pp. 70-78. Kopp. Die Alckemie, 1886. u. pp. 34a, 351. 

Wood, Aikena Oxonienses, ed. Bliss, 1813-30 ; Dictionary of National Biograjfkr, 1888, xv. p. 

iii. col. 688 & passim. 60, and the references (article by S. L. Lee). 

Watt, Bibliotkeca Britannica, 1819. i. (authors), Fer^usoo, " Notes on . . . Books of Secrets.** 

303 w. Part VI. , Transactions ^ tke Arcketological Society, 

Glasgow. 1896, N.S., ii p. 18. 

DIPPEL (JoHANN Konrad). 

Analysis Cramatis Harmonici Hyper- Metaphysico- Logico-Mathematica, das 
ist: Chymischer Versuch zu destilliren per decensum, per ascensum & per 
latus, und in ihr Sal, Sulphur & Mercurium zu resolviren die drey 
harmonischen Systemata der heutigen Philosophie, nemlich des Cartesii» 
Spinosae und Leibnitzens; aus welchem so wol die Bauren, als die aller- 
subtilsten Ontologi und Mathemadci, so sie wollen, erkennen konnen, wo 
sie zu Hause sind ; welches gewifslich nichts geringes ist. In aller Freyheity 
und nicht gezwungen, heraus gewickelt und wiederum gehorig zusammen 
gerollt durch Christianum Democritum, Theologum, Medicum, Juridicum, 
Mathematicum, Logicum, Metaphysicum, & Ontologum per ignem. Zwe3rte 
Edition, durch den Auctor selbst von den Druck-Fehlem, so in die erste 
gekommen, gesaubert, und hie und da mit kleinen Zusatzen erlautert 
Anno MDCCXXXIV. 

4*. Pp. [2] 86. 

Christiani Democriti Theologi, Philosophi, Physici und Medici Auffrichtiges 
Glaubens-Bekantniifs und kurtze Nachricht was mit einem Schwedischen 
Studioso in den Waysen- Hause zu Halle wegen einiger Theologischen Streit- 
Fragen vorgegangen ist, nebst dessen Vorbericht und Beantwortung selbiger 
Fragen. Ezech. 3. v. 27. 1732. 

8**. Pp. [18] 7- no, and wants all after. Title red and black« 

Christiani Democriti Kranckheit und Artzney des Animalischen Lebens, wie 
beyde in einer Physisch-Medicinischen Untersuchung ihrem wahrem 
Ursprunge wieder zugeeignet, zugleich aber die Thorheiten des Mechanism! 
und Spinosismi aus dem Grunde entdeckt, mit augenscheinlichen Beweils- 
Griinden aus dem Bezirck der gesunden Vernunfft verstossen, und ein 
volliges Systema aller Bewegung in einem kurtzen Zusammenhange dar- 
gestellet worden. Aus dem Lateinischen von neuen iibersetzt, mit 
umstandlicher Beschreibung aller Chymischen und Medicinischen Experi- 
menten des Autoris, die vorhin in diesem Tractat nur mit wenig Worten 
bemerckt gewesen, wie auch mit einem angehangten curiosen, und nach 
den Becherischen und Stahlischen Grundsatzen ausgefuhrten Bedencken 
von dem einfaltigen und wahren Grunde der Zerlegung, Zusammensetzung, 

DIPPELr-DISCOURSE 

aiS 

DIPPEL (JoHANN Konrad). Continued, 

Verbesserung und Veranderung der Metallen : nebst dem dazu gehorigen 
Experimental-Beweise, wie ein ehrlicher Mann, ohne Dienst und Amt seinen 
Unterhalt vor sich selbst jederzeit erwerben konne: vermehret, und mit 
einem zureichlichen Raster versehen. Von einem unpartheyischen Liebhaber 
der Wahrheit Franckfurth und Leipzig, Verl^ts Johann Leopold Montag, 
Buchhandler in Regenspurg 1736. 

8°. Ppi [33] 413. Register [76]. The title is printed on two leaves of the first sheet. 

Vit^e Animalis Morbus et Medicina. Suae vindicata origini disquisitione 
Physico-Medica, qui simul Mechanism! & Spinosismi deliramenta funditus 
det^untur, & mathematidi evidendi ex sanae rationis circulo deturbantur, 
& integrum universi motus Systema concinnis vinculis nectitur. Auctore 
Christiano Democrito M.D. Lugduni Batavorum, Ex Officina Lucht- 

manniana 17 11 

8*». Pp. 16a 

Johann Conrad Dippd. or Christianns Demo- 
cntus, as be called himself (not Christianus 
Dippelius, as he appears in Arnold's Historit) 
was bom near E)armstadt in 1673 or 1673, studied 
theology at Giessen and Strassburg. medicine at 
Amsterdam, and graduated at Leyden ; a man of 
brilliant powers and of original views, but such as 
did not gain him any good will, of agreeable 
mannen, but vehement in his writings. On 
account of his opinions he led an unsettled life. 
being now in Holland, then in Denmark. Sweden, 
and back to ('crmany. He worked at Chemistry 
with considerable success, and he is remembered to 

Fabridus. Historia BUtiothec<g Fabriciarue, 1731, 
iv. pp. 483-489 (under Christianus Democritus). 

Roth-Sdboltz, Bibliotheca Chemua, 1737, p. 100 
(note on his portrait). 

Buddeus, isagc^i Hislorico-T/uologua^ 1730, ii. 
p. 1x98. 

Die Edelgehorm Jungfer Alchymia, 1730, pp. 336, 

Kestner. Medicinisckes GeUhrtin-Lexicon^ 1740, 
p. 356. 

Arnold. Ktrchen- und Ketur-Historitn, 1742, iii. 
p. I3X, &c. 

Tocher, AUgemeitus GelehrUH' Lexicon, 1750. ii. 
OCM. 149. 

Ficttdd. Probier-Stein, 1753, Th. ii. p. 5^. 

Haller. Bibliotheca Anatomica, 1777* "• P* 81 
(* Celebris chemicus et heterodoxus homo *). 

Kloy, DicUonncUre Historique de la Midecine, 
1778, ii. p. 61. 

Baumer, BWiotheca Chemica, 1783, p. 36. 

Strieder. Grundlagt tu einer Hesnscken Gelehrten 
umd Schrifbteller Geschickle, 1783. iii. pp. 89-135. 

Adelung. Geschickle der Menschlichen Narrheit, 
1765. i. p. 314. (It would be well while accepting 

this day by the ' oil ' which bears his name and 
which was obtained by the distillation of bones. 
From the in\'estigation of this oil by modem 
chemists some of the most important discoveries 
have taken thdr rise. lie was a voluminous 
writer on theological subjects. Though he asserted 
he should live to 1808, he died in 1734. 

Whether or not he is to be considered an 
"illuminated fanatic." or a man of "no fixed 
character" as regards his philosophy and theology 
must be left for individual consideration. Materials 
for arriving at a conclusion will be found in the 
following. 

Addung's mere narrative, not to attach his own 
value to his comments and opinions. He quotes 
lives of Dippd by Ackermann and by Hofmann, 
and for his works Strieder*s account of the learned 
men and authors of Hesse). 
Beytrag xur Geschickle der hdhem Ckemie, 1785, 

PP- 456. 543- 
Gmelin, Gesckickle der Ckemie, 1798, li. pp.^^9, 

330. 339.. 371. 383. 433; 1799. >"• »6 (gives him 
some praise as a chemist). 

Schmieder, Gesckickle der Alckemie, 1833, pp. 
486, 491, 501, 5x0 (a not unfavourable notice). 

Poggendorff, Butgrapkisck-lilerarisckes Hand- 
wortei^uck, 1863, i. "coL 576. 

Ladrague, Bibliotkique Ouvaroff, Sciences Secrites, 
X870, Nos. 79-83. 

Kopp, Die Alckemie, 1886, i. p. i« (describes 
Dippd s intercourse with CaCtano. He refers also 
to articles on Dippel by Karl Buchner in v. Rau- 
nicr*s Historisches Tasckenbuck, 3 folge, ix- Jahrg. 
1858, p. 307, and by Gustav Baur in Tkeok^isckes 
Lileralur-blall xur allgemeinen KirckenMgilung, 
1858, No. 17, p. 377). 

DISCEPTATIO de lapide Physico, 1668. 

See PANTALEON. 

DISCOURSE (A), between Eudoxus and Pyrophilus upon the Ancient War of 
the Knights. 
See HERMKTICAL (The) Triumph, 1723, p. 26. 

DISCOURSE of Fire and Salt. 

See VIGENERB (BLAISE DE), 1 649. 

2i6 DISCURS US—DIVERS 

DISCURSUS Chymicus quo disseritur: Deo summo trismegisto in chjrmicts 

omnia unice deberi, per quendam Philo-chynucum, primi quidem & nidi 

Minervd, pij cujusdam exercitij gratii, ex ejusmodi studio hactenus cum 

Deo primitiis conceptus, postmodum verb diving adspirante Gradi ulterius 

perficiendus. 

Anno 

HIC eXtat: sVperls referat qVI ars CVnCta sophorVM: 

FaXIt, Vt & frVCtVs haeC tibl sCrlpta ferant. 

[1662.] 
4'. Pp. 24. 

DISCURSUS de Universali. 

See DELLE (martinus de). 

DISCURSUS Philosophicus. 

See QUADRATUM ALCHYMISTICUM : ALI PULI, Centrum Nature Concentratum, 

p. 49- 

Initialled /. /. F., but whether these denote the ninety vears earlier than the eAxXox oi Der Herwu- 
author or not does not appear. Anyhow he is Hscht Nord-Stem. 

DISPENSATORIUM Pharmaceuticum Austriaco-Viennense, in quo hodiema 
die usualiora Medicamenta secundum artis regulas componenda visuntur, 
cum Sacrae Caesareae Regiaeque Catholicae Majestatis Privilegio. sumptibus 
CoUegii Pharmaceutici Viennensis. Viennae Austriae, Anno Incamationis 
Dominicae M.DCC.XXIX. Reimpressum apud Gregorium Kurtzbock, 
Universitatis Typographum, M.DCC.XLIV. 

Folio. Pp. [34] 273 [19]. Nova Pharmacopoeonim Taxa [la] 72 [i, i blank]. 
Folding engraved Title, and one large portrait of the Austrian Emperor Charles VI. 

There is another edition of this work : Vindobonae, 1756, fol quoted by Baumer, 
Bibiiotheca Chemica^ 1782, p. 114. 

DISQUISITIO de Helia Artium. 

See EGLINUS ICONIUS (RAPHAEL), 1606. 
See HAPELIUS (NICOLAUS NIGER). 

See PERCis (heliophilus A). 
DISTINCTIONES XXIX supra librum Turb». 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1660, V. p. 57. 

DIVERS Traitez de la Philosophic Naturelle. Sgavoir, la Turbe des Philosophes, 
ou le code de verity en TArt. La Parole Delaiss^ de Bernard Trevisan. 
Les deux traitez de Corneille Drebel Flaman. Avec le Tres-Ancien Duel 
des Chevaliers. Nouvellement traduits en Francois, par un Docteur en 
Medecine. A Paris, chez Jean d'Houry k Tlmage S. Jean, au bout du 
Pont-neuf, sur le Quay des Augustins. M.DC.LXXII. 

12°. Pp. [8] 398 [s, 1 blank]. 

La Turbe des Philosophes, p. i. II. De la Quinte Essence, p. 24^ 

La Parole Delaiss^, Traits de Bernard Corate Le Tres-Ancien Duel des Chevaliers ou Dialogue 

de la Marche Trevisane, p. 97. Chvmique de la pierre physique, p. 275, 

Deux traitei philosophiques de Corneille Drebel, An edition of this collection seems to have oome 

p. 175 : — " out at Paris, in 1618. Compare Schmieder, 

I. De la Nature des Elemens, p. 191. GtsckukU der Alckewne, 1833, p. 934, Na 4. 

DIVES-DOBRZENSKY ai7 

DIVES Sicut Ardens S * * ♦. 

See LIMOJON DE ST. DISDIER (ALEXANDRE TOUSSAINT DE). 
See DYDACUS SENERTUS. 

WVI Leschi Genus Amo. 

See SENDIVOGIUS (MICHAEL). 

WVINATIONUM C^era Septem, in Compendio scilicet: Physiognomia, 
Cbiromantia, Astrologia, Oniromantia, Teratoscopia, Geomanda, Onomantia. 
Oder kurtze Anweisung, wie man aus dem Gesicht, Handen, Sonn- und 
Monds-Lauffy Traumen, Wunderzeichen, Punctiren und des Menschen 
Nahmen, von bevorstehenden Gliick und Ungliick ein Prognosticon stellen, 
und andere Autores, so von dergleichen Materie geschrieben, desto leichter 
verstehen konne. Anno M.DCCVII. 

No place or printer. 
I2^ Pp. 139 [i] [4 blank]. 

This work is not concerned with alchemy or alphabetically arranged ; and. pp. 90-103, of natural 
chemistry, but deals solely with divination. It portents similarly arranged, 
contains, pp. 59-87, the interpretation of dreams, The author's name is not given. 

DOBRZENSKY (Jacob Johann Wenceslaus). 
Praeservativum Universale Naturale || Augustissimo Romanorum Imperatori 
Leopoldo I. humillime oblatum ; sine pretio pretiosissimum ; sine labore 
facillimum : contra oranem in Aura serpentem Contagionem, maximorum 
occasionem Morborum. natura stimulante, sensu obsequente, experientia 
observante ratione confirmante in artem deductum || & pro bono publico 
patefactam a Jacobo Joanne, Wenceslao Dobrzensky de Nigro Ponte, 
Philosophise & Medicinae Doctore, ejusdemque in Alma Universitate Caesarea 
Regidque (Darolo-Ferdinandea Pragensi Professore Extraordinario. 

Anno, qVo patrlos affLICta Vienna penates 
VIDerat, InVIso pestis ab Igne Mori. 

[1679.] 

Colophon: Excusum Pragae, Typis Universitatis Carolo-Kerdiuandeae in Collegio 
Sec. Jesu ad S. Clementeni. Anno M.DC.LXXIX. 

8«. Pp. [i]3i. 

In this pamphlet the even paging is on the recto, the odd on the verso. The 
above title occupies three pages, mdicated by the division lines. 

Gmdin speaks of him inaccurately as " J. Wilh. connected with medicine and natural history which 
Dobrxensky in Polen." Though his name seems appeared in the Rphtmerides of the Academia 
to be known, I have been unable to find any Naturae Curiosorum, but he was not himself a 
deCaik of bis life, but he was a professor at Prague, member of it. Mercklin quotes an edition of the 
and it seems more probable that he was a Pr<Bservativum Universale^ "cum experimento 
Bohemian. medico D. Johannis Baptists Alpruni de Con- 
He wrote about a dozen papers on various topics tagione Viennensi in fine adjecto," Pragae, 1680, 4°. 

Mercklin, Lindenius renovatus, 1686, p. 486. Haller, Bibliotheca Chirurgica, 1774, i. p. 397. 

Kfanget, Bibliotheca Scriptorum Medicorum, HaWtr, BidliolhecaAna/omi^a, 177^ i. pp.581, 

17^1, I. ii. p. 184. 709. 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire dt la Philosophie Gmelin, Geschichle der Chemie, 1797, i. p. 623. 
HemUtique^ 174a, iii. p. 149. 

Allgemeines natiirliches Praeservativ- oder Verwahrungs-Mittel wider alie . . . 
ansteckende Seuchen. 

See ZIMARA (MARCO ANTONio), Magischc Artzney-Kunst, 1685. 

This is a translation of the preceding tract 

2l8 

DOBRZENSK Y—DOLHOPFF 

DOBRZENSKY (Jacob Johann Wenceslaus). Continued. 
See also didacus germ anus. 
See also schwartzenwald Ooannes valentinus vonX 

DORMER (Augustus Michael). 
Gott hilff gnadig ! Medicinalischer Bericht, welcher von der jetzo writ und 
breit grassirenden, und immermehr herannahenden gefahrlichen ansteckenden 
Seuche, Natur, und Eigenschafft, wie auch Vorsorge, und Curation handelt, 
jedermanniglich sey Reich oder Arm, &c. zum besten aufs deutlichste mit 
wenigem zu Papier gebracht, Anno 1680. durch Augustum Michaelem 
Dormer, Med. Doct. und Practicum In Northausen, Verlegt von Jeremia 

Gottern. 

12". Pp. [16] 74. 

'Ilie author and book are quoted by Haller 1680, Ia^ I have met with no other mention of 

{Bibliotfuca Medicinte practice, 1779, *"• P« 477). ^^^ book, and nothing about the author. The 

but not quite coirectlv : Aug. Mich. Dorner {sU) work seems to be rare and unknown. 
Bericht von der ansieienden Seuche^ Northausen, 

DOLi*:US (Johann). 
Johannis Dolaei Tractatus novus nunquam antehac editus de Furia Podagrae 
Lacte victa & midgata, propria experientia conscriptus. Amstelodami, 

Apud Janssonio Waesbergios. M DCC VII. 

I^^ pp. [21, I blank] 135. Index [2]. [Catalogue of medical and Chemical 
books, 7]. Title red and black. 

Dol^, or Dolseus, was born at Hofgeismar, 
8 Sept. , 1650. studied at Heidelberg, traveUed, and 
became a cfoctor of medicine of Heidelberg, 1673. 
He was councillor and physician of the landgrave of 
Hesse-Cassel, ' decanus perpetuus ' of the Collegium 
Medicum, Member ot the Academia Naturae 
Curiosorum, 15 June, 1680, and Fellow of the 
Royal Society. He died in 1707 at Cassel. 

Manget, Bibliotheca Scriptorum Medicorum, 
1731, I. ii. pp. 186-192. (P. 191 contains a review 
of the present work. ) 

Stolle, Anleiiung sur Historie der Medicinischen 
Gelakrheit, 17^1. p. 354. 

Jacob Leupoids Proaromus Bibliothecte Metal Uc(f, 
ed. Brtickmann, 1732, p. 48. 

BUchner, Acudemia Naturcc Curiosorum . , . 
Historia, 1755, P- 47^. No. 91. 

Portal, Histoire de C Anatomie etdela Chirurgie, 
1770, iv. p. 37. 

Eloy, Diciionnaire Historique de la Midecine, 
1778, li. p. 77- 

Haller, Bibliotheca Medicince practiccp, 1779^ iii. 
p. 406. 

Strieder, Grundlage zu einer Hessischen Gelehrten 
und Schriftsteller Geschichte, 1783, iii. pp. 169-179. 

Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemie, 1798, li. p. 138. 

In the Ephemerides of the Academia Naturae 
Curiosorum there are one or two chemico-i^ysical 
papers by him. He wrote an Encyclopeedia medica 
theoretico-practica, Francofurti, 1684, 4', Amst 
1688, 8® ; Venet., 1691, 1695, 4® ; collected works, 
PVaiikf. 1703. This contains a portrait and a 
biography by Christian Franciscus Paullini {q.v\ 
but the biography has been considered too ornate. 

Thomson, History of the Royal Society^ 1812, 
Appendix, No. IV. p. xxix. 

Bio^raphie Midicale, Paris, Panckoucke (1820- 
25), iii. p. 502. 

Sprengel, Geschichte der Arxneykunde, 1827, iv. 

P- 395- 
Dezeimeris, Diciionnaire Historique de la 

Mddecine, 1834. II. i. 115. 

Bayle & Thillaye, Biographic Medicate, 1855, 

". 255- 

Poggendorff, Biographisch-literarisches Hand- 

wortervuch, 1863, i. col. 586. 

Haeser, Geschichte der Medicin^ 1881, ii. p. 380. 

Diciionnaire Ency eloped ique des Sciences MicU- 
caleSj 1884, XXX. p. 363. 

Hirsch, Biographisches Lexikon der hervorra- 
genden AerztCy 1885, ii. p. 200. 

Billings, Index-Catalogue, 2nd Series, 1899, v. 
p. 461. 

DOLHOPFF (Georg Andreas). 

Lapis Animalis Microcosmicus. Oder, die hochste Artzney, aus der Kleinen 
Welt des Menschlichen I^ibs. Sampt einem Tractatlein vom Vrin oder 
Harn des Menschen. Strafsburg In Verlegung Georg Andreas Dolhopffen. 
Im Jahr M.DC.LXXXI. 

8'. Pp. [16] 8a 

DOLHOPFF—DONZELU 219 

DOLHOPFF (Georg Andreas). Continued, 

The publisher is also the compiler of this small At the end of his preface be asks for hitherto 

colJectioD of observations upon animal products unpublished chemical tracts, as he was minded to 

ud upon urine (chiefly), and of the salts and other bring out a 5e\'enth volume to Zetzner's Tkeatrum 

substaoces obtainable from it The authors, from Ckemicum. That intention was never carried out 

whose works excerpts are made, are foh. Stary- so far as I know. 

dus, Martin Schmuck, Th. Kesler, Riplev, Samuel LaidT2L^gvi%BibliothiqueOut*arof, Sciences StcriUs, 

Norton or Edmund Dean, Amald of Villanova, 1870, No. 1271. 
Baal Valentin, Paracelsus, P. J. Faber, Conr. 
Khonrath. 

DOMINUS in limo, non malo malo. 

5>^ ZWEY vortrcffliche . . . Chymische Biichcr, 1759. 

DONZELLI (Giuseppe). 
Teatro Fannaceutico, Dogmatico, e Spagirico del Dottor Giuseppe Donzelli 
Napoletano, Barone di Dogliola. Opera, che nella xix. Edizione arricchita 
con la sua dovuta vaghezza, tanto di alcune Aggiunte in molti, e pi 11 luoghi 
del suo disteso, oltre le gi^ compilate dal proprio Figlio dell' Autore, D.F. 
Tomaso Donzelli, quanto maggiormente, per obbedire agli riveriti Ordini 
deir Illustre CoUegio de' Farmacopei Napoletani, colla sempre Inclita Autorit^ 
del quale pompeggia di' un Appendice, o sia di una intera Quarta Parte, 
rispetto alle Tre sue antecedenti, ridondante di varie accurate Addizioni di 
molti altre Composizioni le piu opportune, e le piii utili, che potevansi mai 
desiderare in tutto il suo corso, registrate dal M. P. Niccolo' Ferrara-Aulisio. 

Anzi vieppiii ormai divien celebre, merce al participarsi da Essa una 
esattissima Pratica di compor il roaggior numero di diversi Arcani Chimici 
sian i piii virtuosi, sian i piii sperimentati dagli Autori, e adesso gik ricevuti, 
in ordine alia totale debellazione di quei Malori, che infestar sogliono di 
continuo la nostra non men fragile Umanit^ : Come pure non solamente 
essa Opera per tale dassi a divedere nella descrizion di ogni altra Composizione, 
che viene ammessa gi^ dalla Medicina d' oggidi : Ed ancora nella distinta, 
curiosa, e profittevole Storia di cadanno suo specifico Ingrediente. 

Finalmente dimostrasi, oltre le sue solite figure de* Semplici, ricolmata da 
ben Sette copiosissimi, e riordinati Cataloghi, owero Tavole, & Indici e 
degli Santi Medici, e degli Semplici, e degli Autori, e delle Composizioni 
Nuove, ed Antiche, e de' Morbi con le loro Cure, e delle Cose piii notabili ; 
ed in ultimo ewi un Diario di tutto cio, che vel corso d' ogni Mese devesi 
raccorre, e conservare da qual si sia diligente, e zelante Farmacopeo. 
Edizione Ventesima. In Venezia, MDCCXXVIII. Presso Andrea Poletti. 
Con Licenza de' Superiori, e Privilegio. 

Folio. Pp. [52] 599 [i blank]. Title red and black. Vignette of pharmaceutical 
apparatus. 

Haller quotes this book^ mentions some of the Gmelin has taken what he says from Haller, 

editions, and j^ves a bnef list of the contents. He but he has misnamed the author ' Johann.' 

ascribes to him also tracts De opobalsamo and The 'Vita' prefixed to the present work is an 

DethericLca, published in 1640. Another work by 61oge and not a biography. 
him is the Antidotario Neapolitano correito, 
Neapoli, 1649, 4**. 

Toppi, Biblioteca Napoletana, 1678, p. 171. Haller, Bibliotheca Boianica, 1771, i. p. 460. 

Mercklin, LintUnius renoz'atus^ 1686, p. 709 Haller, Bibliotluca Medicime practice, 1777, ii. 

(onlv the ' Liber de Opobalsamo '). p. 649. 

\Ianget, Biblictheca Scriptorum medicorum, Gmelin, Geschichte der Chtmie, 1797, i. p. 673. 
1731, I. ii. p. 197. 

120 DONUM—DORN 

DONUM Dei. 

See BARUCH (SAMUEL). 

According to Fictuld (Probier-Stein, 1753. i. p. quite so old as that Fictuld does not venture to 

67), this tract, which describes the great secret of decide, but he is of opinion that in any case it bad 

the Hermetic Art is assigned to Barucb, who went the same author as the book of Abraham the Jew, 

into the Babylonian captivity. But whether it is and ther/at;»j/lr//jofZoroaster, which is very likely. 

DORN (Gerhard). 
Chymisticum Artificium Naturae, Theoricum & Practicum : cuius Summarium 
versa pagella clarids indicabit : Liber plane philosophicus, in gradam 
omnium verae Philosophise naturalis studiosorum aeditus per C^erardum Dom. 
M.D.LXVIII. 

Without place and printer's name. 

8^ Pp. [i-ii] ia-156. [4 blank.] Vignette and 5 woodcuts. 

A second and third part were published the following year. 

Clavis Totius Philosophise Chymisticae, per quam obscura Philosophorum 
dicta referantur. Compendium tres libros continens, partim physicos, 
medicos, & pro maiori parte chymicos. Cuius Summarium versa pagella 
indicabit. Per Gerardum Dom. Lugduni, Apud haeredes lacobi lunctas. 
M.D.LXVII. 

I6^ pp. 303. Four full page woodcuts of apparatus. MS. notes. 
Another edition : Herbornae, apud Christophorum Corvinum, 1594, 12*. 

Clavis totius philosophiae chemisticae. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, i. p. I92. 

Schliissel der Chimistischen Philosophy : mit welchem die heimliche vnd 
verborgene Dicta vnd Spriich der Philosophen, eroffnet vnd auffgeloset 
werden. Deme das Artificium supematurale, sampt sein angehorigen Stucken 
vnnd Theilen, wie in nachfolgenden blettern Sumarie zubefinden hinzu 
gethan worden, Anfangs durch den Ehrenvesten vnnd Hochgelehrten Herrn 
Gerardum Domaeum beider Artzney Doctorn lateinisch beschrieben, Jetz 
aber durch ein Liebhaber der Edlen Philosophy in Teutschsprach gebracht, 
vnd zu besserm Verstandt mit etlichen Fragen gemehret. Stralsburg, In 
Verlegung Lazari Zetzneri Buchhandlers. Anno M.DCII. 

8^ Pp. [16.] 414. Register [14.] Errata [i.] [i blank] [i blank leaf wanting.] 
Title red and black. Four woodcuts of Apparatus in the texL 

[Another Copy.] 

This copy has the final blank leaf. 
This is a translation of the Clavis. 

Commentaria in Archidoxorum Libros X. D. Doctoris Theophrasti Paracelsi, 
Magni, Terquemaximi Philosophi ac Medici prae cunctis excellentissimi : 
Antek nunquam in luce data. Quibus accessit Compendium Astronomiae 
Magnae eiusdem autoris, in amplam Operum eius declarationem, edam 
Latine prius nunquam editum. Per D. Gerardum Domeum. Cum locuplete 
Indice. Cum gratia & priuilegio Caesareae Maiestatis. Francoforti, 

M.D.LXXXIIII. 

8**. Pp. [24] 538. Index [36] [4 blank]. 

Astronomia Magna b^ns at p. 401 with a title-page included in the pagination. 
Without publisher's name, but doubtless Christopher Corvinus. 

DORN 22 1 

DORN (Gerhard). Continued, 
Congeries Paracelsicae Chemise de Transmutadonibus Metallorum, ex omnibus 
qu£ de his ab ipso scnpta reperire licuit hactenus. Accessit Genealogia 
Mineralium, atq; metallorum omnium, eiusdem autoris. Gerardo Dorneo 
interprete. Francofurti Apud Andream Wechelum. M.D.LXXXI. 

8-. Pp. 277 W 
Colophon : Francofurti Excudebat Andr. Wechelus, Anno Salutis M.D.LXXXI. 

[Another Copy.] 

Congeries Paracelsicae Chemise de transmutationibus metallorum. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1 659, i. p. 49 1. 

See MANGET (j. J.X Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, p. 423. 
Genealogia Mineralium atque metallorum omnium. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1 659, i. p. 568. 

The Genealogia mineralium and the De transmutationibus metallorum appeared together, Francofurti, 
1581,8*. 

Hermetis Trismegisti Tabula Smaragdina cum Expositionibus Gerardi Dornei. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, i. p. 362. 

See MANGET (j* J-)> Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, ii. p. 389. 

Monarchia Physica. 

See PARACELSUS (theophrastus), Aurora, 1577. 

De Naturae Luce Physica, ex Genesi desumpta, juxta sententiam Theophrasti 
Paracelsi, Germani Philosophi ac Medici prae cunctis excellentissimi, Trac- 
tatus. Cui annexa est modesta quaedam admonitio ad Thomam Erastum, 
Germanum etiam Philosophum atque Medicum, de retractandis calumnijs, 
& conuitijs in Paracelsum & suos perperam ac immeritb datis in lucem per 
quatuor Tomos, De noua Medicina. Gerardo Dorneo autore. Francoforti, 
Apud Christophorum Coruinum. M.D.LXXXIII. 

8**. Pp. 431 [really 433] [i]. Index [13, i blank]. 

The Admonitio ad Erastum begins on p. 355, phia Meditativa, p. 159 ; Philosophia Chjrmica, p. 

with a title-page. This contains : 199. 

In Part I. : Ph3rsica Genesis, p. 18 ; Physica In Part II. : De Tenebris contra Naturam et 

Hennetis Trismegisti, p. j? ; and Tabula Smarng- Vita brevi, p. 282 ; De Duello Animi cum Corpore. 

dina, p. 82; Physica Tnthemii, p. 135; Philoso- p. 314; De Lapidum preciosorum structura, p. 342. 

Liber de naturae luce Physica, ex Genesi desumta, in quo continetur Physica 
Genesis, Physica Hermetis Trismegisti, Physica Trithemij, Philosophia 
Meditativa, Philosophia Chemica. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, i. p. 326. 

The second part, Tractatus Alter, contains: De Duello Animi cum Corpore, and De Lapidum 
Tenebris contra Naturam et Vita Brevis, De Preciosorum Structura. 

Theophrastische Practica, das ist, aufserlesene Theophrastische Medicamenta, 
beneben eigentlicher Beschreibung derer Praeparation : Auch richtigem Nutz 
vnd Gebrauch, weyland durch Herren, Gerhard Dom, in Lateinischer 
Sprache beschrieben, ins Teutsch versetzt, vnd nunmehr in Druck befbrdert 
durch Michaelem Horingium Zittaviensem, Medic. Practicum zu Hall. 
Gedruckt bey Peter Schmidt, In vorlegung Michael Oelschlagers. Anno 

M DC xvin. 

8°. Pp. [8] 491 [11]. A I has been added to the date making it appear M DC XVIIII. 

232 

DORN'-DOSSIE 

DORN (Gerhard). Continued, 

The DicHomarium ParaceUi goes from p. ^96 in 1583. 8^, and was translated in a cootracted way 

to the end ; it was published separately at Franknirt into English by J. F. {q.v.). 

Trevisanus de Chymico Miraculo quod Lapidem Philosophiae appellant. 
Dionys. Zecharius Gallus de eodem. Auctoritatibus varijs Principum huius 
artis, Democriti, Gebri, Lullii, Villanovani, confirmati & illustrati per 
Gerardum Dorneum. Cum Gratia & Priuilegio Cses. Maiest. Basilese, 

Typ 

is Conradi Waldkirchii. Anno cId Idc. 

Pp. [5, 1 blank] 198 [4 blank} 

8' 

The tracts in this collection are the following : 

Bernhardus Trevisanus, De Alchimia Liber, p. i. 

Dionysius Zecharius, Opusculum Philosophise 
Naturalis Metallorum, p. 49. 

Annotuta qusedam ex Nicolao Flamello, p. X17. 

Testamentum Arnaldi Villanovani, p. 126. 

Aliae quredam Annotationes ex variis authoribus, 
p. 127. 

Collectanea qusedam ex antiquis Scriptoribus, 
p. 152. 

Collectanea ex Democrito, p. 167. 

Summaria Declaratio eorum, quae dicta sunt 
hnctenus ex Democrito, per a^niginata, p. 194. 

The first edition is that of Basel, 1583, 8**. 

This collection was reprinted in the Theatrum 
Chemicum^ 1602, i. pp. 773-901, and again in 1659, 
i. pp. 683-794 ; but although in the table of 
contents they are run together inaccurately, the 
mistake is not made in the book itself of deliber- 

Van der Linden, De Script is Medicis, lihri duo, 
i6j7, p. 178. 
Mercklin, Lindenius renovatus^ 1686, p. 350. 
Roth-Scholtz, Bibliotheca Cfumica, 1727, p. 58. 
Stolle, Anleitung zur Historic der Gelahrhtit, 

1727, P- 539- 

Manget, Bibliotheca Scriptormm Medicorttm, 
173T, \. ii. p. 197. 

Jacob Leupolds Prodromus Bibliotheca Metallic^, 

1732, p. 48. 

Restner, Medici nisches Gelchrten- Lexicon, 1740, 
p. 263. 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Hisioire de la Philosophic 
HemUtique, 1742, 1. pp. 284, 472 ; iii. p. 150, & 
pcLssim, 

Brucker, Historia Critica Philosophies, 1743, iv. 
pars i. p. 67;3. 

Jocher, Allgenuines Gelehrten-Lexicon, 1750, ii, 
col. 193. 

Fictuld, Probier-Stein, 1753, '^* "* P* ^' 

Haller, Bibliotheca Medictna practical, 1777, ii. 
p. 168 (Haller inadvertently calls him Georgius). 

ately describing the Annotata ex Flamello as if 
they formed a commentary on Denis Zadhaire's 
tract. 

Gmelin {Geschichie der Chemie, 1799, i. pp. 60- 
61) seems to have misunderstood the title of the 
tract as given both in this Collection (p. 117) and 
in the Theatrum Chemie um, i. p. 748. The error 
was apparently introduced by Manget, of entering 
F^lamel's Annotata as if they were written upon 
Denis Zachaire. See note on Zachaire. 

Grerard Dom flourished in the latter half of the 
XVI. century at Frankfurt a. M. He was a devoted 
adherent of Paracelsas and defended him from the 
attacks of Erastus and others, while he himself had 
a controversy with Jacques Gohory. He translated 
several of the works of Paracelsus into Latin, and 
besides those in the present collection wrote a 
good many others. 

Baumer, Bibliotheca Chemica, 1782, p. 10. 

Beytrag zur Geschichte der hohern Chemie^ 1785, 
pp. 208, 508. 577. 

Weigel, Einleitung zur allgemeinen Scheide- 
kunst, 1788, i. p. 129. 

Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemie, 1797, i. p. 264, 
&c. 

Biop-aphie Midicale^ Paris, Panckoucke (i8ao- 
25), iu. p. 512. 

Schmieder, Geschichte der A Ichemie, 1832, p. 321. 

PoggendorflF, Biographisch- liter arisches Hand- 
worterbuch, 1863, i. col. 596. 

Dictionnaire F.ncyclopidique des Sciences Af^di- 
cales^ 1884, xxx. p. 402. 

Kopp, IHe Alchemic, 1886, i. p. 220 ; ii. pp. 344, 

352. 363, 389- 
Sudhoff, Bibltographia Paracelsica, Berlin, 1894, 

i. passim. 

Billings, Index-Catalogue, 2nd Series, 1899, iv. 

p. 477. 

DOSS IE (Robert). 

Robert Dossie geofnetes Laboratorium : oder entdeckte Geheimnisse der 
heutigen Chemisten und Apotheker. Aus dem Englischen iibersetzt 
Zweyte mit Zusatzen vermehrte Aiiflage von Johann Christian AViegleb. 
Altenburg, in der Richterischen Buchhandlung. 1783. 

8*. Pp. [28] 452. Register [8]. 
Of Robert_ Dossie little or nothing seems to be burg, 1760; and the above, Altenburg, 1783, by 

recorded. He was an apothecary in London, and 
the date of his death is given as 20 Feb., 1777. 
He helped to found the S^iety for the encourage- 
ment of arts, manufactures and commerce, which 
first met in 1754. The works ascribed to him are 
the following : 

Elaboratory laid open, London, 1758, 8°. Trans- 
lated into German by G. H. Konigsdorfer, Alten- 

J. Chn. Wiegleb. 

Institutes of Experimental Chemistry, London, 
i7S9i 2 vols., 8*. German translation, Altenburg, 
1762, 2 vols., 8*. An edition of 1763 is mentioned. 

Theory and practice of chirurgical pharmacy, 
London, 1761, 8^ 

Papers in the Memoirs of Agriculture and other 
oeconomical arts, London, 1768-1781. 

DOSSIE—DREBBEL 223 

DOSSIE (Robert). Continued. 

Halkr, BihHoikeca Boiamica, 177a, ii. p. 479. Bi<^praphie M^dicaU, Paris, Panckoucke (i8ao- 

Haller, BihHoikeca Ckirurgica, 1775. i^- P* 47^* 35)t i"* P* S^?- 

Haller, Bihliotheca Anatomica, 1777, ii p. 551. Dereimeris, DicHonnaire Historique de la Slide- 

Buimer, Bihliotkeca Ckemica, 1782, p. 4a. cine, 1834, II. i. p. 12a 

J. D. Renss, Das gelehrte England^ 17^1- 1804. Philippe & Ludwig, Grschichte der Apotheker, 

Godin, Gesckickte der Chemie, 1798, ii. pp. 356, 18^5, p. 659. 

38a; 460-1, 696. Pogeendorff, Biographisch-literarisches Hand- 

Ftachs, Repertorium der chemischen Litieratur, worieHfuch, 1863, i. col. 597. 

DREBBEL (Cornelius). 
Comelii Drebelii von Alckmar in Nord-Holland Tractat oder Abhandlung 
von Natur und Eigenschafft der Elementen, ingleichen des Donners, 
Blitzes, Hitze, Kalte, VVindes, Regens, Hagels und Schnees, &c., so sich in 
der obern und untern Region erzeigen und wozu sie Anlafs geben. Deme 
vorgefuget einige Merckwiirdigkeiten, so man bin und ber von diesem 
weisen Mann angetroffen, nebst einem Anhang von der Quint-Essenz oder 
5ten Wesen in alien drey Reichen der Natur. Und einer Zueignungs- 
Schrifft, von dem Primo mobili oder erstbewegliohen Dinge. Wie auch 
Herm Edmund Hallei Erzeblungen von denen Winden, zusammen gesamm- 
let und herausgegeben von Polycarpo Chrysostomo. Leipzig, verlegts 

Johan Sigmund Straufs, Bucbhandler in HofT. 1723. 

8*. Pp. [28] 106. [List of books, etc., 5, 1 blank]. Title red and black. 1 wood- 
cut 2 engraved leaves. 

Halley's tract on the winds begins on p. 65>%ith a separate title, but the signatures 
and pagination are continuous. 

Comelii Drebbeli von Alkmar, des sehr beriihmten Philosophi und fiirtrefflicben 
Adepti, Griindliche Aufflosung, von der Natur und Eigenschafft der Elemen- 
ten, und was -die Ursache dafs Donner und Blitz, Hitz und Kiilte, Winde, 
Regen, Hagel und Schnee, fich in der obern und untern Region erzeugen, 
und worzu selbige Anlafs geben? Mit einem Anhang und klaren Beweifs, 
die von so vielen gesuchte Quint-Essenz aus alien dreyen Reichen zu haben, 
auch herrlichen Dedication vom Primo Mobili, sambt andern raren Physica- 
lischen Fragen, von einem Liebhaber der Hermetischen Kunst herausgegeben. 
Franckfurt am Mayn, verlegts Margaretha Gertraud Isingin im Jahr Christi 

1715- 

8®. Pp. 118. 

Abhandlung von der Quintessenz. 

See SCHRODER (fr. j. w.), Neue Alchymistische Ribliothek, 1772, I. ii. p. 291. 

Deux Traitez Philosophiques : 

I. De la nature des Elemens. 

II. De la Quinte-Essence. 

See DIVERS TRAITEZ de la Philosophic Naturelle, 1672, p. 175. 

Drebbel was bom at Alkmaar in Northern credited, though inaccurately, with the invention of 

Holland in 1572. Though only a peasant he was the thermometer. He discovered, in part acci- 

wealthy, but in the wars he was taken prisoner dentally, the lake formed when a tin salt is added 

and lost his property. On being set free he came to cochineal, which was used for dyeing scarlet, 

to London, where he died in 1634. He constructed and as an alchemist he was in communication with 

a submarine boat in which he sailed from West- Rudolph II. In the present work on the elements 

minster to Greenwich, and he seems to have been he describes experiments to illustrate the formation 

an ingenious mechanician and maker of apparatus, of the wind. 
and a clever optician, and he has been even His tracts were written in Dutch, and printed 

224 

DREBBEL—DRECHSZLER 

DREBBEL (Cornelius). Continued. 

at Rotterdam in 170a. They were translated 
into Latin by Joachim Morsius (Hamtmrg). 
1631 ; Geneva, x6a8. The French translation 
appeared at Paris, 1673, la*. Hoefer mentions 

Borel, De vero Teiescopii Inventore . . . Historia^ 
165^, pp. 19, 22, 37, 56, 57 (' vir circa n.itiine secrcta 
cunosissimus '). 

Bccher, Narrische Weifsheit, Frankfurt, 1682, 
p. 149. (The submarine boat. ) 

Merckhn, Lindenius renavatus, x686, p. 226. 

Paschius, De invtntis nov-antiquis Tractatus, 
Lips., 1700 (refers p. 624 to the thermometer, p. 
651 to the submarine boat with which he sailed 
under the Thames, p. 698 to his Ferpetuum Mobile, 
and p. 700 to various optical instruments). 

Morhof, PolyMstor, Lubecse, 1732, ii. p. 326 
(DrebbeVs telescope) ; p. 337 (tract on the Elements). 

Zedler, Universal Lexicon, Halle u. I^ipzig, 
17x4, vii. col. 1412. 

Weidler, Historia Astronomite, 1741, p. 437. 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire de la Pkilosophie 
Hermiiique, 1742, i. p. 472 ; iii. p. 152. 

Jbcher, Allgemeines Gelehrten- lexicon, Leipzig, 
17C0, ii. coL 212. 

Fictuld, ProHer-Siein, 1753, Th. i. p. 68 (ex- 
tolled for his pie^). 

Mor^ri, Le Grand Dictionnaire Historiqtie^ 
1759, iv. p. 245 (list of his inventions). 

Haller, Bibliotheca Afedicina practice, 1777, ii. 

P* 499- 
Eloy, Dictionnaire Historique de la Midecine, 

1778, it p. 80. 

Adelung, GesckickU der menschlichen Narrheit, 
1786, ii. p. 125 (calls him a charlatan). 

Beckmann, Beytrdge zur Geschichie der 'Erfin- 

a German translation, Erfurt, 1604. and Schmiedar 
says it was reprinted in Kleeblatt's Ch^^mdtdu 
Tractatlein, Frankf. u. Leipz., 1768. 8*. 

dungen, Leipzie, 179a, iii. p. 43 (gives an aooonBl of 
the discoveiT o7 scarlet). 

Gmelin, GescMickte der CAemie, Odttingen, 1797, 
i. pp. 308, 309, 358. 

J. C. Fischer, Gesckuhie der PhifHk^ 1801. t pp. 
183. aoo (on the microscope), ax^ (thermometer). 

Schmieder, GesckickU der AlcAemie, 183a, p. 359^ 

Ersch & Gruber, Allgemeine Encyklo^ddie, 1896^ 
xxvii. p. 357. 

Libn. histoire des Sciences Matk^maHqwes em 
Italic^ 1841, iv. p. 193 (about the thermooieter). 

Hoefer, Histoire de la Ckimie, Paris, x843, ii. 
p. 133; 1869, ii. p. 128. 

Biograpkie Untverselle^ 185a, xi p. a^ 

Nonvelle Biograpkie Ginirale^ X85X, xiv. coL 745. 

\'an der Aa, Biograpkisck Woordenboeck, Haar- 
lem, 1858, iv. p. 3aa (and the references). 

Poggendorff, Bicgrapkisck-literariukes Hand" 
wihie^uck, x86^, i. coL p. 60a. 

LAdnL^e,BidlioikiqMe Ouvarof.Sciemces SecrHes, 
1870, Nos. 922-23. 

Poggendorff, GesckickU der Pkysik, \9j% pp. 
a57 (tnermometer), a59 (life), a6o (microsoope, 
various machines). 

Mittkeilungen Mur GesckickU der Medium umd 
Natururissensckaften, kerausgegebem vam der 
Deutscken Gesellscka/t fUr GesckickU der Medieim 
und der Naturwissensckaftem, igo2. No. 3. p. 143 
(article by E. Wohlwill on the early history of the 
Thermometer). 

DRECHSZLER (Johann Gabriel). 

Q. D. B. V. Disputatio I. De Metallorum Transmutatione, et imprimis de 
Chrysopoeia oder Goldmachen, Qvam Ex benevolo Indultu Ampliss. Faciilt 
Philos. in Acad. Lips. Posterioris Disputationis vice Pro Loco in Eadem 
conseqvendo, Die IL April. Anno Christi M.DC.LXXIIL P. P. M. Joh. 
Gabr. Drechfsler, Gymnas. qvod Halae floret, ColL des. Lipsiae, Vypis 

Tiduae (sic) Job. Witrigau. 

4^ Pp. [16]. 

Q. D. B. V. Disputatio IL De Metallorum Transmutatione, et imprimis de 
Chrysopoeia oder Goldmachen, qvam Superiorum indultu, praeside M. Job. 
Gabr. Drechfsler, Gymnas. qvod Halse floret. Coll. des. Praeceptore suo 
sincere colendo, P. P. Abraham Christophorus Platz, Lipsiensis, Philos. Stud. 
Die in. April. A. M.DC.LXXIIL H. L. Q. C. Lipsiae, Typis Viduae 
Job. Wittigau. 

4'*. Pp. [16]. 

M. Gabriel Drechfslers Curieuser Tractat von Goldmachen, aus dem Lateinischen 

ins Deutsche iibersetzet von M.M. Drefsden und Leipzig, Bey Johann 

Christoph Miethen, 1702. 

r. Pp. 44. 

This is a translation of both Drechfsler's disputations. 

Drechfsler of Wolckenstdn was a Mag. Philoso- subjects as Hebrew poetry, David's harp, the 
phise, Baccal. Theol. and teacher in the gymnasium language of brutes, etc.. etc. He died ao Oct, 
at Halle. Besides the above, he vrrote on such 1677. 

DRECHSZLER—DREY 225 

DR£CHSZL£R (Johank Gabriel). Continued, 

Witte. DiaHum kiograpkUum, 1688, sig. Nnno Leipzig. i75«. calls the author a great philosopher, 

3 wrw. Ann. 90 OcL, i6^. hut has a very poor opinion of his knowledge of 

JuA UmpoUs Froirmmus BiHUikeut Metallic^, alchemy. ) 

ed BrfidoDann. 1732, p. 48. Gmeiin, GtschickU der Chemie, 1798, it p. 25. 

jacher, AUgemdnes GtiekrUn-Lexiam, 1750, il Schmiedcr, GesckickU der Alchemie, 1832. p. 

eolai3. 

rictuM. ProkUr-SUiH, 1753, Th. il p. 55. (He 
ncDtioiis a tract 00 gold-making, Frankfurt ft 

'\ 

opp, Die AlckemU, 1886, ii. p. 344. 

DREY CURIEUSE . . . Chymische Schrimen. 
Drey curieuse bifsher gantz geheixn gebaltene nun aber denen Liebhabern 
der KLunst zum besten an das Tages-Licht g^ebene Chymische Schrifften, als 
I. Nicolai Soleae Philosophische Grund-Satze, 

II. Herm C. L. v. L. Chymischer Catechismus. 

III. CXXX. Grund-Satze aus dem Toscanischen in das Teutsche iibersetzet 

von dnem Liebhaber Philosophischer Geheimnilse. 
Lefpzigy verlegts Johann Sigmund Straufe, Buchhandler in Hoff, 1723. 

8*. Pp. 4a Title red and black. Vignette of Dee's ' Monas Hieroglyphica.' 

The CXXX. GrundSdiu is a translation of the Centum viginti novem propositiones 
by Bracesco (q.v.), which precede his Dialogi duo. The hundred and thirtieth 
proposition is the extra one. 

Drey curieuse bifsher gantz geheim gebaltene nun aber denen Liebhabern 
der Kunst zum besten an das Tages-Licht gegebene Chymische SchrifTten, als 
I. Nicolai Soleae Philosophische Grund-Satze, 
IL Herm C. L. v. L. Chymischer Catechismus. 

III. CXXX. Grund-Satze aus dem Toscanischen in das Teutsche iibersetzet 
von einem Liebhaber Philosophischer Geheimnisse. 

Franckfurt am Mayn, auf Kosten eines Liebhabers denen Kindem der 
Weifsheit zum Nutzen wieder gedruckt 1733. 

8°. Pp. 40. Vignette of Dee's ' Monas Hieroglyphica.' 

DREY CURIEUSE Chymische Tractatlein. 
Drey Curieuse Chymische Tractatlein, betittelt: Ambrosii Miillers, Paradeis- 
Spiegel, darin zu besehen die hochste Medicin, Gold und Menschen damit 
zu curiren. Der Teutschen Schiitzen-Hoff, so der allererste Philosophus 
Adam, unser aller Vater ausschreiben und ausruffen lassen, an alle Schiitz6 
so Lust nach der Scheibe zu schiessen haben. Beschreibung des grossen 
Geheimnisses des Steins der Weisen, als der von Gott erbethenen und 
erhaltenen Weifsheit des Konigs Salomonis. Von einen (sic) Q. J. R. V. 
M. D. Franckfurt und I^ipzig, In Verlegung, Christian Liebezeits. 

Lauenburg, Gedruckt bey Christian Albrecht Pfeiffer. 1704. 

8^. Pp. ia8. 4 plates. 

The second and third tracts have separate titles, pagination and signatures, viz. : 
Das Andere Curieuse Chymische Tract&tlein, genandt : Der Teutschen SchUtzen- 
Hoff, so der aller erste Philosophus Adam, unser aller Vater ausschreiben und aus- 
ruflfen lassen, an alle Schdtzen, so Lust nach der Scheibe zu schiessen haben. 
Franckfurt und Leipzig, In Verlegung, Christian Liebezeits. Lauenburg, Gedruckt 
bey Christian Albrecnt Pfeiffer. Im ]&x 1704. 

Pp. 60. Folding table, printed on both skies ; folding plate. 

P 

226 DREY 

DREY CURIEUSE Chymische Tractatlcin. CanHnued. 

Dns Dritte Curieuse Chymiscbe Tractiltlein, genanot : BescfareibunK des grossen 
GeheimnUsses des Steins do* Weisen, nls der voa Gott erbethcnen und erhaltenen 
Weifsheit des Kbnigs Salomonis, von eincm Q. J. R. V. M. D. Franckfurt and 
I^ipzig. In V'erl^mg Christian Liehezeits. Im Jahr 1704. 

Pp. 16. 

This consists of three pieces from gUldknk kose, viz. : * Jestis»' * Eine sophistische 
Aria von der Weisen Stein,' ' Riitzel.' St€ v. (j. R.). 

Drey Curieuse Chymische Tractatlein, Das Erste, betitult: Giildene Rose, 
das ist, einfaltige Beschreibung des allergrossesten, von dem Allmitchtigsten 
Schopffer Hiiftels und der Erden Jehovah in die Natur gelegten, und dessen 
Kreundcn und Auserwehlten zugetheilten Geheimnisses, als Spinels der 
(jottlichen und Natiirlichen Weifeheit Das Ander Brun der Weifeheit und 
Erkafitnis der Natur, von einem unveigleichlichen Philosopho gegraben. 
Das Dritte Blut der Natur, oder : Entdeckung des alleigeheimsten Schatzes 
derer Weisen, seyende nichts anders, als der rothe Lebens-SafTt davon alle 
Geschopfe nach dem Willen des AUmachtigen herstamen, erhalten und 
fortgepflantzet werden. Franckfurt und Leipzig, 1706. 

8*". Pp. 7a Frontispiece extra. Title red and black. A fragment oootaining 
Giildene Rose only. 

The title as given above is repeated on a separate edited by a person calling hiroaelf anonyiius von 

page; but after the word 'Weisheit' there is schwartzpuss, ^.f. 

added : Ans Licht gebracht durch J. R. V. M.D. This collection was reissued at Fiankfurt. 1774, 

Franckfurt und Leipzig, Im Jahr 1706. See 8° {Beyirag *ur Geschickie der hShem ChemU, 1785, 

further under v. (j. R.). p. 676), and the tracts were included in PiJNF 

The second and third of these tracts are also curikusk chymische tractatlein, 1767, q,v. 

DREYFACHES Hermetisches Kleeblat 

See MONTE CUBITI (VIGILANTIUS DE), 1667. 

See Kopp, Die Alchemie, 1886, li. p. 338, for titles in which ' Kleeblatt ' occurs. 

DREY kleine Schriften als Beytrage zur Naturlehre und der hoheren Chymie, 
erstlich einzeln gedruckt, nun aber zusammen gezogen und herausgegeben 
von dem Verfasser selbst. Anno 1778. 

8*^. Pp.56. No place (Danzig?) or printer. 

The three articles are : Versuch ttber die all^meine Verwandschaft der 

Chemia in Nuce, oder : kurze doch aufrichtige drey N.iturreiche, Danzig, 1777, p. 19. 
Anweisung zu der Wissenschaft der Zerlegung der l^ndschreiben eines Meyerianers an einen Blacki- 
K6rper,i777, p. 5. aner in Ansehung der fixen Luft und der fetten 

Stture, 1778, p. 43. 

DREY unterschiedliche . . . Tractatlein. 

See KIESER (franz). Cabala Chemica, 1606. 

DREY vortreffliche und noch nie im Druck gewesene Chymische Biicher. als I. 
Johannis Ticinensis eines Bohmischen Priesters opusculum, genandt Processus 
de Lapide Philosophorum. II. Anthonij de Abbatia eines erfahren Munches 
in der Kunst, aufsgefartigtes Send-Schreiben. III. Des weltberiihmten 
Engellanders Edoardi Kellaei aufsfiihrlicher Tractat dem Kayser Rudolpho 
zugeschrieben. Allen der Geheimen und Hohen Kunst Liebhabem zu nutz 
und mercklichem Unterricht in Teutscher Sprach. iibergesetzet, heraufs 

DREY—DUCLO 

227 

DREY vortrefHiche, etc. Continued, 

gegeben, durch Einen der niemals gnug gepriesenen WissenschafH sonder- 
bahren Beforderer. Mit einer Wamungs- Vorrede wieder die Sophisten und 
Betri^^er. Hamburg, In Verlegung Johan Nauman, 1670. 

8*. Pp. i6a 

Petraeus' •Vorrede.* pp. 3-38. 
Dedicatorj Verses, pp. 39-41. 
Johannes Tidnensis' tract in verse is in Latin 
and Gcqpan 00 alternate pages, p. 42. 
Antbooios de Abbatia, p. 85. 

Edwardus Kellanis. p. 113. 

Petraeus was the editor of this collection ; see 
his 'Vorrede* to Rasilius Valentinus' Sckrifien, 
»7^. sig. k 5. xrrso. 

[Anodier Copy.] 

DUCHESNE (Joseph). 

See QUERCETANUS (jOSEPHUS). 

DUCLO (Gaston). 
Philosophia Chymica Tribus Tractatibus comprehensa. Quorum seriem sequens 
pagina indicat Opus doctissimum, et nunc pnmiim integrum in lucem 
editum. Auctore Gastone Dulcone Claveo, Subpraeside Nivemensi Gallo. 
Colonise Allobrogum. Apud lohannem Vignon. M.DC.XII. 

S". Pp. [15, I blank] ; 151 [1 blank] ; 94 [2 blank]. 

Tbe three tracts are : 

L Apologia Ckrysopctus et Argyropma adversus 
^^. ThomamErastum^ inquadis^aiuretdocetur, 
An, p(i4^ el qn&modo sit Ar^yro-Chrysopetia. 

H. De triplici prmparatione Auri et Argenti 
^ Arti summi necessaries vera et non fucata 
^**»uiratio. 

HI. De vera et recta roHone progignendi Lafidis 
P^ksopkici, . . . explicaiio. 

To these are added Canones decern^ which are 
the foundation of the whole work, and Penotus' 
epistle, preface, and marginal annotations. 

Other editions of the Ap^/ogia, Ne\*crs, 1590, 8**; 
Geneva, 1598; Urscl, 1602; of the De trip/id 
praparatione, Nevers, 1592 ; Ursel, 1601 ; Frank- 
furt, 1602 ; in French, Paris, 1695, 12" ; CJerman, 
Halle, 1617; De recta 6* vera ratione, Nevers, 

1592. 

Apologia Chrysopoeiae et Argyropoeiae adversus Thomam Erastum. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, ii. p. 6. 

Canones seu R^ulae decern, de Lapide Philosophico. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, iv. p. 414. 

See FILET (Le) d'Ariadne, 1695. 

De recta et vera Ratione progignendi Lapidis philosophici, seu Sal is Argenti fici 
et Aurifici. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, iv. p. 388. 

I>e triplici praeparatione Auri et Argenti. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, iv. p. 37 1. 

Traits Philosophique de la triple Preparation de TOr et de TArgent. 

See DicnoNNAiRE hermetique, 1695. 

Almost every authority gives the name of this 
author as Gaston Dulco Claveus, or Gaston de 
Clave called Dulco or Le Doux. But this, accord- 
ing to Gobet, is a ' horrible disfigurement of his 
real name, which is Gaston Duclo. This was 
Latinised to Claveus, and after^-ards it was re- 

translated as Gaston de Clave. Gaston Dulco is a 
transposition which gave rise to Le Doux, itself a 
translator's error. Duclo was born in the Nivernois 
about 1530, as on his portrait dated 1590 he is said 
to be 60 years of age. He studied law, and was 
an advocate at Nevers, but from a comparatively 

228 

duclo—dOttel 

DUCLO (Gaston). Continued. 

early age he soems to have taken also an interest 
in chemistry. Having read Krastus' attack on 
Paracelsus, he wrote the above Apologia, and 
published it at Nevers in i C90. It was dedicated 
to the Due de Nivemois, and in it he calls himself 
Gaston Duclo. with the date, Calends of April, 

1590.' 

Gobct says that Roth-Scholtx is the only one who 
has given Duclo's name correctly, but ne seems 
to have made a mistake, for in Roth-Scholtx's 
BibHoikeca the present writer appears under Claveus, 
and the person who is entered under du Clos flourished 
nearly a hundred years later, and besides is called 
Dommic, and is well known as the author of a 

Rorel, Bibliotheca Chimica, 1654, p. 6a. 

Roth-Scholtz, Bibliotheca Chemica, 1727, p. 42, 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Hisioire de la Philosiypkie 
Hermitique, 1742, i. pp. 317, 318, 474 ; iii. p. 154. 

Gobet, Les Anciens Mineralogistes du Royaume 
de France, 1779% >• Pp. 15-22. 

Baumer, Bibliotheca Chemica, 1782, p. 89 (Gasto 
Dulco Claveus). 

Bey t rag zur Gesckichte der hohem Chemie^ I785» 
pp. 570. 595- 

treatise on mineral wmten and ocber writings. 
Alter such a mistake one is a little doobdul of Vat 
accuracy of Gobet's views 00 this subject, and I 
have not been able to check than fay reference 
to the editions he quotes, but I have assumed 
that what he says is correct, and have given the 
author's name as Duckx It may be observed that 
although Ladrague quotes Gobet's opinioo. he 
adheres to the form Dulca 

Hoefer admits the possibility of Duko beiq^ a 
corruption of Duclos, m which case an akbenucal 
MS. m the Library of the Arsenal by Dudkia toKf 
have been by the present person. 

There is no mention of the date of his death. 

Gmelin, Gesckichte der Chemie, 1797, L pi 907. 

Fuchs. Repertorium der ckemiscktH Lttterahar^ 
1806-08, p. 99. 

Schmiedcr, Geschichte der Akhemie, 18^, pi 996L 

Hoefer, Hisioire de la Chimie, 1842, ii. p. 193 ; 
1869, ii. p. 118. 

Ladrague, Bihlioihifue Ottvarojf^ Sciences 
Secretes, 1870, Nos. 578, 963-96^ 

Kopp, Die Alchemie, 1886, u p. 54 ; iL p. 343 
(under Qaves). 

DUCROTAY DE BLAINVILLE (Henri-Marie). 
S^^ JOURNAL de Physique, etc. 

Ducrotay de Blainville was bom at Argues, near 
Dieppe. 12 September, 1778. He became M.D. 
of the Faculty of Paris, Assistant- Professor of 
Zoology, Anatomy and Comparative Physiology in 
the Faculty of Science, Assistant of Cuvier in the 
Jardin du Roi and College of France, and Professor 
of Natural History in the Atheniieum of Paris. 
He belonged to various scientific societies, and 
was a member of the Academy of Sciences. He 

Qu^rard, La France litf^raire, 18^0, ii. p. 635. Poggendorjff, Bicgraphisch-literarisckes Hmnd- 

Nouvelle Biographic G^nirale, 1862, vi. col. 171. worterbuch, 1863, i. col. 207. 

DUEL DES CHEVALIERS. 

See TRES-ANCIEN DUEL des Chevaliers. 

died in 1850 in a railway carriage during a journey 
between Paris and Rouen. 

His work was confined to Natural History. He 
wrote only a few books, but the number of 
memoirs which he read to the Societies and the 
papers which he published in journals is very 
great indeed. In addition, he was editor for a 
time of the above joumaL 

DUELLUM Equestre. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1661, vi. p. 529. 
See STERNHALS OOHANN). 

This is different from the preceding. 

DUTTEL (Philip Jacob). 

D. Philippi Jac. Diittelii, Reipublics Mefiiingensis, Physici Senioris, Demon- 
stratio Sincera, de Alchimistarum Vanitate, oder Aufrichtiger Beweifs der 
Eitelkeit der Goldmacher, da selbige ohne Grund vorgeben, mit dem Stein 
der Weisen nicht nur Gold zu machen, sondem auch mit dem Menstruo 
Universali das Gold radicaliter zu solviren, und mit denen Gold Tincturen, 
theils fast alle, ja sonsten incurable Zustande zu curieren, theils den 
Menschen vor Kranckheiten zu praeserviren und zu einem hohen Alter 
zubringen. Welchem beygefiiget ist, eine Anweisung und Information, wie 
ein Mensch, durch observirung einer guten Diaet, und Gebrauch einiger gar 
wenigen aufserlesenen Medicamenten, ohne die Gold-Tincturen, sich gesund 

DihTEL-DVUMViRA TVS 

129 

DUTTEL (Phiup Jacob). Continued. 

coDserviren, zu einem hohen Alter gelangen, und vor allerhand Arthen 
Kianckheiten, auf das moglichste prseserviren, und sein eigner Medicus 
sem konne. Augspurg, Zufinden im Mertz und Mayrischen Buch-Laden. 
MDCCXXXVII. 

8*. Pp. [la.] 98. [4.] MS. notes. 

Haller {Bibliotheca Botanica^ 1772, ii. p. 181) 
quotes bv Diittel : Tractatus dt viruUnta plantarum, 
indoU, August. ViDdel., 1722, 8**. 

The presenX author must not be confused with 
Al. J. bttttel, author of a IHssertatio de corpore 
Gummosa, Argentin., 1767, 4^ quoted by Gmelin, 
Gesckichie der C hemic, 1798, ii. p. 701. 

I have not succeeded in finding an3rtbing about 
this author. He is not mentioned by writers on 
the \astarf of alchemy. His attack, however, on 
aldMBiiy is sudi an uncompromising one that it 
mcnts oonsideratioo in order to learn what a con- 
temporary considered the weak points of the 
parnit. 

DUFRESNOY. 

See LENGLET DUFRESNOY (NICOLAS). 

DULCO Claveus (Gaston). 

See DUCLO (GASTON). 

DU MONSTIER. 

See LEFEVRE (NICOLAS), 1751. 

DUNSTAN. 

See COLSON (LANCELOT). 

DURASTANTES (Janus Matth^us). 

See MANLIUS DE BOSCHO (JOANNES JACOBUS), Luminare Majus, 1566. 

For this work Durastantes has contributed a 
vindication to the Senate of Macerata. indices, and 
^oommentary on Manlius' text. 

He belonged to Justinopolis (Capo d'Istria) but 
\ have not succeeded in nnding any details of his 
life. He flourished in the middle of the sixteenth 
^tury and was a voluminous author. A list of 
^ wntings is contained in his own work : Libellus 

de Voluminibus, & in Rhetorica, & in Poesi. 
& in Dialectica. & in Philosophia & Medicina 
tarn Theoriae, qu^m praxios, k se conscriptis. This 
enumeration is reprinted in the present work, 
f. 142, after his "Encomium in nonnuUos Italos, 
Picenos, Maceratenses, Sanctoiustanos, ct Medicos, 
et Pharmacopaeos, et Viros." 

Adelung, Supplement to Jocher*s Allgemeines 
Gelehrteti' Lexicon. 

Nouvelle Biographic Ginirale, 1858, xv. col. 443. 

Dictionnaire EncyclopMique des Sciences Midi- 
cales, 1884, XXX. p. 678. 

Van der Linden, De Scriptis medicis libri duo, 

%. P- 337. 
Mercklin, Undenius renovaius, 1686, p. 504. 

Manget, Bibliotheca Scriptorum Xfedicorum, 
»73ii l ii. p. 205. 
Haller, Bibliotheca Medicines practica, 1777. ii. 

PP- i64t 3ia» 

DU ROY (Jean Lucas). 
See BEGUIN (jean). 

DU TEIL. 

See GLAUBER OOHANN RUDOLPH), La premiere partie de Toeuvre Minerale, 1674. 

DUUM Viri Hermetici Foederati Epistel. 

See also FREUNDLICHES Send-Schreiben eines Adepti an die . . 

Hermeticos Foederatos, 1684. 
See hellwig (christoph von), Fasciculus, 17 19, p. 262. 

DUUMVIRATUS Hermeticus. 

See bechbr 0* J-)» Opuscula Chymica Rariora, 1719, No. IL p. 63. 

. Duum viros 

23P DUVAL—D YRRA CHIUM 

DUVAL (Robert). 

See VALLENSIS (ROBERTUS). 

DYDACUS SENERTUS. 

Sendschreiben an die wahren Schiiler Hermetis. 

See HERMETISCHE (Der) Triumph, 1765, p. 224. 
See HERMETISCHES A. B. C, 1779, iii. p. 15. 
See HERMETISCHES A. B. C, 1779, iii. p. 61. 

See LIMOJON DE SAINT DISDIER (ALEXANDRE TOUSSAINT DE). 

D]rdacus Senertus is a reading of Dives Sicut Ardens S * * * which stands for 
Sanctus Desiderius, i,e, Sanct Disdier. 

DYRRACHIUM Philosophicum. 

See XAMOLXIDES. 

R. C. D. M.^ECIC 

til 

E. C. D. M. 

See c. (E.), D.M. 

E. (R v.). 
50 von verschiedener Art, ganz neu erfundene und bewahrte Kunststiicke zur 
angenehmen Unterhaltung und Zeitvertreib fiir junge Leute, und andere 
Uebhaber von H. v» E. Zweyte verbesserte Auflage. Augsburg, 1798. 

In Verlag C. F. Biirglen, Buch- und Kunsthiindler. 

8®. Pp. 59 [s blank]. Title red and black. 

I have not found the date of the previous edition, tions given are very curious, considering the date 

It ^ a collection of trivial experiments, without anv of the book. The author can have known nothing 

special plan or end in view. Some of them will of the science of the time. Does H. v. E. stand 

svceed, others certainly will not. The.explana- for Hans von Kttner? 

BBERHARD (Johann Peter). 
Abhandlung von der Magie. 

See WIEGLEB (JOHANN CHRISTIAN), Die naturlichc Magie, 1782, p. i. 

iiiberhard, son of Christopher Eberhard in the 
Russian service, who invented an instrument for 
geographical measurements and wrote on mag- 
netism, brother of Johann Paul Eberhard, Stolberg- 
^ernigerode. Architect, was born at Altona, a Dec, 
^727. He took the degree of M.D., acted as 
IJocent from 1749, and Professor of Medicine from 
'756, of Mathematics from 1766, and Physics from 
1769 at Halle, and Bttchner says extraordinary 

Bofessor of Philosophy there.' He was the 
ectoral Assessor of the Academy of useful 

BOcbner, AcademuB . . . Naiura Curiosorum 
Hiitoria, 1755, p. 515, No. s8a 

Meusel, Lexikan der von 1750 bis 1800 verstor- 
henen Teutschen Schriftsteller, 1804, iii. p. 12. 

Sciences at Mayence, and was chosen a menil>er of 
the Academia Naturae Curiosorum, 20 Sept., 1753. 
He died at Halle, 17 Dec., 1779. 

He was the author of a number of books and 
papers on physical subjects, light, colour, heat, 
electricity, thunder storms, the Aurora borealis, 
general principles of nature, and the application 
of mathepiatics to the construction of machines, 
to optics, to mining, etc., which were published at 
Halle, and in the Acts of the Academy. 

Poggendorff, Biographischliterarisches Hand- 
wdrterhuchj 1863, i. col. 640. 

EBERLEIN (Caspar). 
Oleum Antimonii : Die Fixatio, sein Quinta Essen. 

See DARIOT (CLAUDE), Die Gulden Arch, Schatz- und Kunstkanimer, 16 14, Part ii. 

p. 293. 
See EROFFNETE GEHEIMNISSE des Steins der Weisen (1708), p. 579. 

Respecting the name of this person it may be called Eberlein, and in the text Oberlein ; but 
observed that in the contents ot the books he is which of these is the correct form I do not know. 

ECK DE SULTZBACH (Paul). 
Clavis Philosophorum. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, l6$9, iv. p. I007. 

ii2 

ECK-^EGUNUS 

ECK DE SULTZBACH (Paul). Continued. 

The only person who has taken special notice of 
this chemist is Hoefer, and he has, perhaps, read 
more into the above tract than its author could 
have had any knowledge of. Hoefer states that he 
is omitted by Lenglet Ehifresnoy, and is unknown 
to other historians. That is an oversight, because 
Lenglet Dufresnoy mentions him twice in his 
catalogue, and the name occurs also in Gmelin's 
history and elsewhere, so that he has not been 
absolutely neglected. 

But he did not live in the seventeenth century, as 
Gmelin implies, and he was not a wandering 
alchemist such as abounded in Germany at that 
time. A date, November, 1489, is specified in the 
tract itself, which must be accepted if the tract be 
deemed genuine. This is of some importance, for 
if Hoefcr's interpretations be onl^ partially true, 
the knowledge of certain chenucal phenomena 
must be placed much earlier than is usually done. 

In the tract Hoefer shows that the method of 
making the tree of Diana, by adding to a solution 

Borel, Bibliotkeca Chimica, 1654, pp. 84, 265. 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire <U la PhiloscfkU 
Hermitique^ 1742. 

Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemie, 1797, i. p. 513. 

Hoefer, Histoire de la Chimit, 184a, i. p. 446; 
1866, i. p. 471. 

of stiver in nitric acid some mercury with 
nitric add, was quite well known, though the 
details for the success of the experiment are not 
given. ^ 

The other anticipation or disooTeiy Hafanwl lor 
him by Hoefer is the increase in weight bf the 
calcination of metals, which is due to a 'apvil' 
which unites with them, for when the *aih' of 
mercury, or 'artificial cinnabar* (supposed to be 
the red oxide), is distilled, it gives off a spirit 
But do Eck's words express all that so precisely, 
and is Hoefer*s interpretation of his tenns c|utte 
legitimate? Still, discounting a large part of 
Hoefer's explanation, enough remains to nake the 
tract an interesting one. 

A work, * I>e lapide Phik»ophico.' said to be by 
Eck was edited by Tanckius. and published at 
Frankfurt a. M., 1604, 8*. By Ladragiie he is 
credited with the well-known tracts, Luduspimrwmm 
and Ljabor Mulitrum, I do not know his 
authority for this. 

Phillippe ft Ludwig, Gesckickie der 
i8q^ p. 50X (refers to the increase of 
calcination of metals). 

Cap, Ahules hiograpkiqms, 1864, iL p. 

Ladrague, Bthlioikiqiu Ouvarqf, 
SecrileSf 1870, Na 10x5. 

igfat hf 

ECKHART. 

Des getreuen £k:kharts entlauffener Chymicus, 1696. 

Des getreuen Eckarths Medicinischer Maul-Affe oder der entlarvte Marckt- 
Schreyer. 1720. 

See ETTNER (JOHANN CHRISTOPH VON). 

EDELGEBORNE (Die) Jungfer Alchymia . . . Tubingen, 1730. 

See creiling (johann conrad). 

EFFERRARIUS. See Ferrarius. 

EGENDORFFER (Wolffgang). 

Domus Sapientiae, in qua dies festus agitur k Sole Theologico. sive acta 
illustriora Angelici Doctoris Thomae de Aquino, Ex ord. S. Dominici. . . . 
M.DC.XCIV. Graecij, Apud Haeredes Widmanstadij. 

8°. Sigs. A-D, in eights. 
This is a life and cloge of Thomas Aquinas, and des not relate to chemistry at all. 

EGIDIUS DE VADIS. 

See AiGIDIUS DE VADIS. 

EGLINUS ICONIUS (Raphael). 

Disquisitio de Helia Artium ad illustrissimum principem Mauritium, Hassiae 
Landgravium, &c. Tpiapx^ Lipsiae, Apud lohannem Rosam Biblio- 

polam. Anno M.DC.VI. 

8". Pp. [141, 3 blank]. Title red and black. Vignette of chemical symbols. 

The above is included in hapelius' Cheiragogia 
Heliana^ i6xa, p. 103 (^.r.), but as will be seen by 
comparison of signatures F 7 recto to G 3 recto in 
the above with pp. 194-197 in the 1612 reprint, and 
of certain pages towards the conclusion, some 
changes have been made. 

This x6o6 edition has ' Raphael Eglinus Iconius' 
as the name of the author of the dedication at the 
beginning of it, and his initials R. E. I. at the end. 
In the 161 3 edition the author calls himself 
' Nicolaus Niger Hapelius, Anagrammatizomenos. ' 
Now this latter name is truly an anagram of the 

EGUUUS—EML£ 

i33 

EGLINUS ICONIUS (Raphael). Coniimted, 

famer, md id tbe i6ia editkxi the initials R. E. I. D. 
ud R. £. J. T. appear at the end of the prefaces, 
ud R. E. L at the end of the AfMcrismi, which 
nfinDS the identity, for the D. and T. are 
obiioiBl J adjuncts morely. 

Kopp quotes an edition of Marbuf|^ 1606, which 
hBQo the title-pase and at the end of the dedica- 
doo the name of Heliophiliis k Perds, so that there 
MO to he two editions, or at least two different 
Immi. of this book with the same date. The 
itprint in the Tkeatrmm Ckeimcum has been made 
rai this edition, and not from that of Leipzig 
above. It is prefiuxd hf an epistle * Philochemicis,' 
Mped Heiiophilus & Perds Philochemicus, which 
hBot m the Leipzig edition, but is in that of 1612. 
Roth'^clioltz malMS mention of another Marburg 
BiBlioo:— 

DiKjnisitio de lleiia Artista, in qua de nietal- 
kmiB tnmsformatione adversus Hagdiii & Percrii 
Jomtanim opiniones, evidenter & solids disseritur. 
[Editio postrema, correctior et melior.J Acces- 
smnt itoens Canoiies hcrmetici. de spintu, anima 
ftoorpore majoris & minoris mundi, cum appendice, 
Maqmgi. 1608, 8". 

This title resembles that given by Hapelius 
(p. 103^, but it is not identical with it. There is a 
oopToi this edition in the British Museum. 

m oGofiision seems to have arisen from the 
il>peannce of both names in the 1612 edition 
iMoed under the anagram of Hapdius. For in the 
'Diaquisitio Heliana.' which forms the second 
pvt, the * Prsefatio ' is headed : * Philochemids 
HdiophHis Ileliophilus Philochemicus, Nicolaus 
%er Hapelius Anagrammatizomenos S.,' and it 
has at the end the mitials R. E. J. T., and the 
^fiorismi similarly R. EL L This is repeated in 
w Tkeaimm Ckemicum, iv. p. 290. 

Bat io the same volume of the Tkeatrum^ p. 220, 
^ same tract occurs entitled : ' Nova Disquisitio 
^ Hdia Artista Theophrasteo, super metallorum 
Jusformatione . . . auctore Heliophilo a Percis 
i^iilochemico,' and prefixed (p. 914) is an address : 

Ga&rel, Umtuard-uf Curiosities : concerning the 
'^Usmanical Sculpiure of the Persians; . . . 
^ Sig. a^ recto ; p. 141 ; or Curiositates 
^*^iditg, Hamburgi, 1706, pp. 9, 100 (with 
dnwioR of the fish). 

Bora, BiUiotkeca Ckimica, 1654, p. 84. 

Alh. Bartholinus, De Scriptis Danorum, 1666, 

freher, Tkeatntm virorum eruditione clarorum, 
'w, p. 41^ portrait, plate aa 

Witte, Diarium Hographicum^ 1688, Sx, verso, 
^^g^Aug., 1622. 
^wridlnus. Conspectus Scriptorum chemicorum 

Ul^ 33. Na xhx (about Hapdras). 

HodBann, Lexicon Universale, 1698, ii. p. 135. 

*■ Philochemids Heliophilus a Percis Philochemicus 
S..* but with no R. E. J. T. at the end. 

What was the object of this mystification beyond 
the sport of the anagram it is hard to sec. As for 
the name Hdiophilus it seems to me purely an 
epithet, which by some misunderstanding has been 
erected into a pscudonjTu. ' Helio[Ailus a Percis ' 
is not much farther rcroo\'ed from being another 
anagram of Raphael tlglin Iconius. than ' Spes 
mea est in Agno.' is from being one of Joannes 
d'Kspagnet, and being actually interpreted as such. 

Raphael blglin. or Kglinus, called Iconius, was 
a Swiss, and was born at Gi)tz in Mlinchhof, 1559. 
Having finished his studies he went to Geneva and 
Basel, and frequently disputed there in public, was 

Cromoted to a school at Sonders in the Veltdin, 
ut on account of a tumult started by a monk had 
to leave in 1586. In 1588 he was ' psedagogus 
alumnoruni,' Professor of the New Testament, and 
diaconus at the cathedral of Zurich in 1392, where 
he was the first to introduce public discussions. 
Four years later he rose to be archdeacon and 
first introduced church songs. 

But he had become so infatuated with alchemy 
that not only his own estate but a good deal of 
other peoples' had gone in smoke up his furnace 
chimnev, and at last in 1601 his debts were so 
heavy that he fled from Zurich to Marburg, where 
he became doctor and professor of theology. 
Besides the above on Alchemy, he wrote several 
works on theological subjects, dedicatory verses to 
Bumct {q.v.), and a curious tract on marks 
observed on fish caught off Norway and in the 
Baltic. This book was printed under the title as 
given by Haller : Conjectura halieutica charac- 
terum piscium marinorum ad latera stupendo 
prodigio insignitorum desumta, Hanov., 161 x, 4*. 
lYesumably it is the same book which, called 
Prophetia halieutica, is referred to also by Gaffarel, 
who. however, mocks the idea of treating the 
marks as portents, or as prophetical, as some were 
indined to do. He died at Marburg, 20 Augt. , 1622. 

Schewchzer, Sova literaria Helvetica, for X703, 
Tigur. 1704, p. 3- 

Roth-Scholtz, Bihliotheca Chemica, X727, p. 57. 
Buddeus. Compendium Historic Philosophies, 

1731. P- 458- 
Manget, Bibliotheca Scriptorum Medicorum, 

1731, I. ii. p. 212. 

Jocher, Allgemeines Gelehr I en- Lexicon ^ X750, ii. 
col. 290. 

Haller, Bihliotheca Anatomica^ 1774, i. p. 320. 

Strieder, Grundlage zu einer Hessischen Gelehrten 
und Schrifisteller Geschichte^ X783, iii. pp. 299- 
318. 

Kopp, Die Alchemic, x886, i. p. 250-252 (note on 
* Elias m der Alchemic *). 

Ene Abhandlung von der kiinstlichen Metall-Verwandlung. 

See SCHRODER (F. J. w.), Ncuc Alchymistischc Bibliothek, 1771, I. i. p. 181. 

A translation of the Disquisitio, 

Cheiiagogia Heliana. 

See HAPSUUS (nicolaus NIGER). 

See also PKRas (heliophilus \\ Philochemicus. 

EHLE (Johann Georg). 
Hallische kurze doch hinlangliche Nachricht von nuUlichem Gebrauch und 
krattiger Wurkung verschiedener bewahrt gefundener Medicamenten, welche 

134 EHLE^EINFALTiGS 

EHLE (JoHANN Georg). ConHmmi. 

von Johann Georg Ehle mminirten Chfmioo weifeitiget und 

worden. 

No place, date, or prinier. 

8*. PpL 151, Register [%^ 

A ooUectioa of pharmaoeutkal prepantkms and tbeir oses in variooi diiOi'deii>. I iMwe ktmA 
no notice oC the comi " 

EHRENRETTUNG der Hennetischen Kunst, dmch sokhe chymiscb-physi- 
kalische Beweise dargethan, die jeder, auch nur mittelmassige Kenner and 
Kunstier leicht einsehen, selbst nachmachen, und dadurch zugldch ubeixeugt 
werden kann und soil: dass Alchjmie und Chrysopoeia keine leere 
Einbildung miissiger Kopfe sey, und noch weniger in die Zauber-Hdhle 
gelehrter \Vindmacher gehore. Erster TheiL Erfurt 17S5. bey Geoig 

Adam Keyser. 

8'. Pp. 61 [i}. 

Zwejier Theil. 1786. 
r. PpcTX 

Dritter Theil. 1786. 
8*. Pp. ii6. 

(*ans II. and III. hn\-e sepaiaie titles and signatures. 

The publisher sava that the author mas qixite The book is just mentioned bv Kopp {Dk 

unknown to him. ' He further sa}-^ that as an Alckemif, 1886, vl 583K and fav Lacfrafue ^BMio- 

enemf of alchemy he would oot have published a tki^tu C>«;un*^ 1870, No. 1535). but mith no 

work w hich would induce people to engage in the informatioo as to the author. It must not be 

pursuit, but as he was assured that in this case the confused with Creiling's EJutmttttumgderAUkjmif^ 

sutements w^ere not at ^-ahance with the principles Herrenstadt, ij^cx 
cf chemistry and physics he could not refuse to 
print iL 

EINFALTIGER iedoch deutlicher, und verhotfTentlich niitzlicher Unterricht von 
der Luna Compacta et Fixa, bestchende in einem kurtzen General-Bericht von 
derselben und dann in einer Collection von hundert Special-Processen davon. 
In welchen man die \-iderley Nfeynungen und Arten von deren Zubcreitung 
zu vemehmen und zu erlemen haben wird. Mit sonderbarem Fleiis aus vielen 
raren Schrifften zusammen getngen und zum nutzbahren Dienst der Kunst- 
liebenden also abgefasst und zum otTentlichen Druck befbrdert. Durch 
Einen Freund der edlen Ch>Tnie und Metallurgie am griinen Hartze. 
I^tpzig, bey Johann Herbord Klofsen, 1715. 

8*. I*T\ ;i6] 15:2. 

.\ scr:^=s of exper.mcn:5 upon $:I\er. Kopp hJL« Referetice to other works by the same pseudooy- 

not iDcl-jderi this among the books which rrJin- 10 mous author will be found under frei'ND. 

the " mcon " cr silver. 

EINF.\LTI(iS ANTWORIVSCHREIBEN. an die Hocherleuchte Frat defs 
lobiichen Ordens vom Rosencreuu, Aurt" 'hre an die Cielehrten Europse, 
aufsgesande Fanuim & Confess. Cs:c. 

Psal. 92. 
Herr wie sind deine Werck so grofe, deine Gedancken sind so sehr tieff, 
ein Thorichter gUub( das nichu ^Tid cin Narr achts nicht, &c 

No date, (4ace. or printer, and no 7hUr>natioo. 

J*. Sign. A ;n eight, but imperfect. w-.%ntin|c A 4 *»* 5- 

It is signed at the end : N. H. L. Fhtloso : A Chirooiediciaje Stndiosus, and it has 
the date. I^pdg. 16 November, 1^17. 

EINFAL TIGS—ELEONORA 

^35 

EINFALTIGS ANTWORT-SCHREIBEN. Continued. 

Kloss quotes this book and gives the date as 
tibove, and adds that it contains 8 unnumbered 
leaves. If this date be correct the entry in the 
Missiv, which nms thus: * Antwortschreiben an 

die Fraternit&t des Ordens vom RosenkreuU auf 
ihre Famara et confessionem, Leipzig, 1617, in 8**,* 
refers probably to the present tract. 

Missiv an die . . . Briiderschaft des Ordens des Kloss, Bibliographie der Freimaurerei, 1844, 
Goldenen und RosenJtreuixes^ 1783* P< ^S* No. 134. p. 183, No. 250X. 

EINSPORN (Gottfried). 
D. Gottfried Einsporas Medici Vratislauiensis Beschreibung einiger sonderbaren 
chimischen Versuche nebst einer Antwort auf die Frage : Zweyspornische 
Widerl^ung seiner Priifung der Lehre C. G. Kratzensteins von Diinsten und 
Dampfen. Erlangen 1751. Zu finden, bey Gotthard Poetsch, Univ. 

Buchhandl. 

8". Pp. [x'9] 10-77 ['» 2 blank]. 

Kratzenstein's opinions were thereupon criticised 
by some one under the pseudonym of Zweyspom, 
which elicited the above reply from Einspom, not 
without a reasonable protest on his part for the 
criticism not being properly authenticated at all, 
and secondly for the personality implied in the 
pseudonym. 

Gottlieb Kratzenstein's views were published in 
the following : Tk/orie de niix'ation des vapeurs et 
des exhalaisons^ demontr^e mathematiquement^ in 
French and Latin, Bordeaux, 1743, 4** 

There is no available information about this 
person except that he acted as Kespondens to a 

Oissertatio . . . de influxu chymiae in medi- 
dnam," Erfurt [1743I, 4®, with A. E. Bachner as 
Kineses [Bio^rafkie Midicale^ Paris, Panckoucke 
(i8ao-25), i^i* P- 4^)> ^^i^ wrote another work : 
* Untersuchimg, wie weit durch Wasserwagen 
der Metallen, Rein^keit und Vemiischung konne 
bestimmet werden ; nebst einer Priifung der Lehre 
9>G' Cratzensteins von Dtlnsten und Dampffen." 
'^rtangen und Leipzig [1745], 8*. (Fuchs, Reper- 
^^riuvt der chemischen Litteratur^ i8o6-o8, p. 284). 

ELEAZAR (Abraham). 

See ABRAHAM ELEAZAR. 

ELEONORA MARIA ROSALIA, Duchess of Troppau. 
Freywillig-auffgesprungener Granat-Apffel, defs Christlichen Samaritans. Oder 
aufs Christlicher Lieb defs Nachsten eroffnete Gehaimbnus, vieler vor- 
trefHichen, sonders bewahrten Mitteln und VVunder-haylsamen Artzneyen, 
wider unterschiedliche Zustand und Ubel defs Menschlichen Leibs, und 
Lebens ; welche mit sonderbahrem Fleifs, und auff das Hayl defs Nachsten 
allzeit nachdencklicher Sorg, aufs vieler Artzney-Erfahrner, und beriihmter 
Leib-Artzten, oder Medicin-Doctorn, lang gepflogener Erfahrenheit. Von der 
Durchleuchtigen Hertzogin, Hochgebohmen Fiirstin, und Frauen, Frauen 
Eleonora, Maria, Rosalia, Hertzogin zu Troppau, und Jagerndorff. Defs 
Heil. Rom. Reichs Gefiirsten Grafin zu Gradisca, und Grafin zu Adels- 
berg, Gebohrnen Furstin von Liechtenstain, Hertzogin zu Crummau, 
und Furstin zu Eckenberg, zusammen getragen. Auflfs neue vermehrt 
(sambt einer kleinen Diseta, wie sich bey jeder Kranckheit in Essen 
und Trincken zuverhalten, wie auch beygefiigten neuen Koch-Buch, in 
welchen allerhand rare und denen Patienten zu verschiedenen Kranckheiten 
erspriefsliche Speisen) nun zum drittenmahl in offentlich Druck verfertiget, 
zu allgemainen Trost, Nutz und Hiilff aller Beschwart- und so wohl 
Rath- als Mittel-lossen, armen Krancken, in Erinuerung [sic] dessen, 
der fiir uns die gehaimben Artzneyen seiner Liebe, in der zu unserer 
Seelen-Hayl eroffueten [sic] Seiten, aller Welt entdeckt, alien Krancken 
gemein gemacht, und eroffnet worden. 

i36 ELEONOkA^ELIAS 

ELEONORA MARIA ROSALIA. ConHnued. 

Cum Licentia & Facultate Superiorum, & PriviL Sac Cses. Majestatis. 
Wienn in Oesterreich, gedruckt und verlegt bey Leopold Voigt, Uiut. 
Buchdr. 1697. 

4^ Pp. [4] 499 [i blank]. Title red and black. 
Koch-Buch, pp. [a] lao [10]. 
The ' Koch-Buch ' has a separate title, as follows : 

Ein gantz neues und nutzbahres Koch-Buch, in welchem zufinden, wie man 
verschiedene herrliche und wohl-schmiickende Speisen von gesoCtenen. gebrattenen 
und gebachenen als allerhand Pastetten, Dorten. Krapffen, &c. Srhr kflnstlich und 
wohl zurichten wie auch allerhand eingemachte Sacben, so zum Confect auffgeseut 
werden, berciten soUe. Worbe^ ein Register, in welcbem zufinden, was vor SpeiKti 
denen Patientcn in unterschiedlichen Kranckheiten dienlich zu kochen seyen. oombc 
einer kurtzen Ordnung, wie man sich tiiglich in Essen und Trincken verhalten •oDe, 
damit nicht unscitige Kranckheiten venvsachet werden. Voo einer Hoch-adelidieo 
Persohn ziisammen getragen, und in Druck gegeben. 

Cum Licentia & Facultate Superiorum, ft Privil. Sac; Caes. Maiest. 

Wienn in Oesterreich, Druckts und verlegts Leopold Voigt, Univ. Bucbdrucker, 
Anno 1697. 

This seems to have enjoyed ^reat popularity, for apfel des Christlichen Samariters. . . . nadi 
it has gone through many editions and is possibly Wortlaut der zwdlften Auflnge aufs neue ' 

still in print. There is no copy of the above in the gegeben." 2 Th. Stuttgart, 1863, I6^ I have met 

British Museum Catalogue, but there is a recent with no notice of the authoress. 

reprint : * * Treuvillig aufgesprungener Granat- • 

ELIA LELIA CRISPIS. 

See XAAX LiELlA CRISPIS. 

ELIAS ARTISTA. 

Elias Artista mit dem Stein der Weisen. 

2 Chron. 13, 5. 
Wisset ihr nicht, dafs Jehova, der Elohim Israel, das Konigreich iiber 
Israel dem David gegeben hat, ihm und seinem Saamen, roit einem 
Salz-Bund ewiglich. 

1770. No place or printer. 

4^ Pp. 904 [a blank]. 

TabuU Hermetis, pp. 142-159. This is a commentary on the different sections of the Tabula 
Smaragdina, and forms chapter vii. of the work. 

ELIAS ARTISTA HERMETICA. 

Das Geheimnifs vom Salz, als dem Lebensbalsam und dem Schatz aller 
Schatze ; oder des Salzes gottliche Eigenschaften und seine Wunder- 
wirkungen zu freudigem und langem Leben. Gottlicher Weisheit zum Lobe 
auch zur Verherrlichung des himmlischen Salzbundes und den Menschen 
zum Vortheil geschrieben von Elias Artista Hermetica. Getreu nach der 
Ausgabe von 1770 erneuert Stuttgart, 1862. Verlag von J. Scheible. 

8". Pp. 148 [149-160, Scheible's Catalogue of mystical books]. Title red and black. 

This is a different work from the preceding. It edition is mentioned by Ladrague, BihUoUUqu€ 
treats of salt both from a physical and chemical Ouvaroff^ Sciences Secrites, 1870, Nos. 14x5.16. 
and from a mystical point of view. The 1770 

Geheimnis vom Salz. • 

See HERMETiscHES A. B. C, 1779, iv. p. 47. 

This consists of some modified extracts from the preceding. 

ELIAS DER ARTIST. 
Disquisitio de Helia Artium. 

See EGLINUS ICONIUS (RAPHAEL), 1606. 

BUAS—ELSHOLTZ 237 

EUAS DER ARTIST. Continued. 

Disquimtio Heliana de Metallonim tiansformatione. 

See HAPELIUS (n. n.X Cheiragogia Heliana, 1612, p. 103. 

Nova Disquisitio de Helia Artista llieophrasteo super metallonim transformatione 

. . . auctore Heliophilo k Percis. 

See PERCIS (HELIOPHILUS A), Philochemicus. 

These three tracts are practically identical. The author was Eglinus, and the other names are 
pseadoDjrms. See the note on egunus. 

Eine Abhandlung von der kiinstlichen Metall-Verwandlung. 

See SCHRODER (F. J. w.), Neuc Alchymistische Bibliothek, 1771, I. i. p. 181. 
This is a translation of the Disquisitio de Helia Ariium, 

Cheiragogia Heliana. 

See HAPELIUS (N. N.X 16 1 2. 

For the occurrence and significance of Elias in Beytrag xur Geschichte der hohern Ckemie, 1785, 

Aldwmical literature see a note by Kopp and the P* 501 (Pseudo-KIias). 

remarks of Ladrague. Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemie, 1798, ii. p. 316 

Borel, Bibliotheca Chimica, 1604, pp 113-113. (Pseudo-Ellas). 

Fictuld, ProHeT'Stein^ 1753, '^ i* P* 9^ (Elias IjBAmgat^Biblioth^ue Ouvart^, Sciences Secrites, 

in connection with Helvetius). 1870, Nos. ^56, 1415-16. 

Kopp, Dte Alchemie, 1886, i. p. 250. 

ELIXIER. 

See TINCTUR. 

ELIXIR Solis Theophrasti Paracelsi. 

See SCRIPTUM [anonymi] . . . elixir . . . tractans. 

ELIXIRIORUM Compositio. 

See GRATAROLO (c), Verac Alchemise . . . doctrina, 1561, ii. p. 220. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, iii. p. I20. 

ELSHOLTZ (JoHANN Sigismund). 
Ja Sig. Elsholdj, D. & Sereniss. Electoris Brandenburg. Medici Ordinarij, 
Clysmatica Nova: sive Ratio, qua in venam sectam medicamenta immitti 
possint, ut eodem modo, ac si per os assumta fuissent, operentur: addita 
etiam omnibus seculis inaudita Sanguinis Transfusione. Editio secunda, 
varijs experimentis per Germaniam, Angliam, Gallias atque Italiam factis, 
nee non Iconibus aliquot illustrata. Colonise Brandenburgicse, Ex 

Officina GeorgI Schultzl, Typogr. Elector. Impensis Danielis Reichelij, 
Bibliopolas. cIdIdcLXVII. 

8*. Pp. [13] 68. Title red and black. 4 separate plates. Not about Chemistry. 

In this work the author claims to be the dis- Major, who made a similar claim. This is de- 
coverer of infusion of drugs by venesection. On scribed by StoUe. 
thb sabject he had a controversy with Joh. Dan. 

Job. Sig. Elsholzens Destillatoria Curiosa : das ist : curiose und nacbdenksame 
Destillir-Kunst : oder der Gebraucb, die Liquoren oder Wasser, mit ihren 
Farben, iiber den Helm zu fiibren : wie solcber bis anhero, wo nicht 
unbewust : jedocb auch nicht so in Acht genommen worden, und bekandt 
ist. Darzu noch kommen Utis Udenii oder defs Niemands : und Guemeri 
Rollfinkens Chimische Non-Entia und Nichtwesende Dinge. Niimberg, 

238 ELSHOLTZ^ELUCIDATIO 

ELSHOLTZ (JoHANN Sigismund). Continued. 

In Verlegung Peter Paulus Bleul, Kunst- und Buchhandlem. [Im Jahr 
M.DC.LXXXIII.] 

13°. Pp. [xa including the frontispiece]. 307. [i blank.] One engraved plate. 
The lower margin containing the date has been cut very close in binding. 

The first edition appeared at Berlin 1674, 8*, pp. [14. including the frontispieoe], 176. 

The Curious Distillatory : or The Art of Distilling Coloured Liquors, Spirits, 
Oyls, &c., from Vegitables, Animals, Minerals, and Metals. A Thing 
hitherto known by few. Containing many Experiments easy to perform, yet 
Curious, surprizing, and useful : relating to the production of Colours, Con- 
sistence, and Heat, in divers Bodies which are Colourless, Fluid, and Cold. 
Together with several Experiments upon the Blood (and its Serum) of 
Diseased Persons, with divers other Collateral Experiments. Written Originally 
in Latin by Jo. Sigis. Elsholt. Put into English by T. S. M.D. Physician in 
Ordinary to His Majesty. London, Printed by J. D. for Robert Boulter, 

at the Turks-head, over against the Royal-Exchange in Comhil, 1677. 

8°. Pp. [16, including the frontispiece], iii. [x blank.] Plate of the Cinnamon 
plant, p. 63. T. S. is Thomas Sherley. 

Gmelin quotes an edition of 1688, 8°, which I have not seen, and it is not in the 
British Museum Catalogue. 

De Phosphoris Quatuor, Observatio. 1706. Editio Secunda. Jenae, prostat, 
apud Henricum Christoph. Croekerum, Bibliopol. 

8*. Pp. [8]. One engraving. 

The four varieties are : Phosphorus bononiensis ; 1653. On his return he was appointed Phjrsidan 

Phosphorus Balduini ; Phosphorus smara^dinus ; and Botanist to Frederick William, elector of 

Phosphorus fulgurans, which was exhibited by Brandenburg. He was a member of the Academia 

Krafn. Naturae Curiosorum, 1674, to which he cominuni- 

Elsholtz was bom at Frankfurt a. d. Oder, 26 cated some papers. He died at Berlin, 38 February, 

August, 1623, studied medicine at Wittenberg and 1688. 
Konigsberg. travelled, and graduated at Padua, 

Mercklin, Undent us renovatus, 1686, p. 68a. Btlchner, AcadtmuB . . . Nahtret Curiosormm 

Witle, Diarium bicgraphicum, 1688, Ann. Mart. Historia, 1755, p. 467, No. ^. 

x688, Sig. Aaaaa 3 recto (list of writings). Haller, Bibliotheca Botantca^ 1771, i. p. 516. 

Decad. II. Actorum Medicorum BerolinenHum Haller, Bibliotheca Anatomica, 1774, 1. p. 457. 

. . . Volumen vi., Berolini, 1726, pp. 1-5 (there Haller, Bibliotheca Chimrgica, 1774, i. p. ^7^ 

is a short sketch of Elsholu's life, and a portrait of ^Ioy> Dictiannaire Historique de la MMecime, 

him as a frontispiece to the volume). 17781 !>• P* i^* 

Roth-Scholtz, Bibliotheca Chemica^ 1727. p. 61. Haller, Bibliotheca Medicina practice, X779, liL 

. Manget, BihUotheca Scriptorum Atedtcorum^ p. 135. 

173X, I. ii. p. 2x4. Beckmann. Beitrdge tur Gesckichte der Er^H" 

StoUe, AnUitung zur Historic der Medicinischen dungen, 1792, iii. p. 554 ; English translation, 1814, 

Gtlahrheitt 1731. pp. 840-41. iii. p. 221. 

Jacob Lenpolds Prod romus Bibliotheae Metallico!, Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemie, 1798, ii. pp. 

1732, p. 49. X16, 137, 2 la 

Morhof, Polyhistor^ 173a, ii. pp. 37^, 44^ etc. F'ucns, Repertorium der chemischen lAttereUur^ 

Zedler. Universal-Lexicon^ X734, viii. col. 930. 1806-08, pp. 15X, 180, 183. 

Kestner, Medicinisches Gelehrten-Lexicon^ 1740, Biographic Alidicale, Paris, I^anckoucke (xSao- 

p. 272. 25), iv. p. a^ 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire de la Philosophic Dezeimens, Dictionnaire Historique de la Mide- 

Hermitique, 1742, p. 320. cine, 1834, II. i. p. 200. 

Icicher, Allgemeines Gelehr ten- Lexicon^ 1750. »>• Poggendorflf, Bii^raphisch-literarisches Hand- 
ed. 331. wortet^uch, X863. i. col. 660. 

ELUCIDARIUS Artis Transmutatoriae Metallorum Summa Maior. 
See CHRISTOPHORUS Parisiensis. 

ELUCIDATIO Secretorum, das ist, Erklarung der Geheimnussen, wie der Lapis 
Philosophorum funden, vnd die vniuersal Medicin erlanget wirdt, durch die 

ELUCIDA TIO—ENTRETIEN 239 

SLUCIDATIO Secretoruzn. Contifiued. 

Elxperimenta Raymundi LulUj Maioricani, Item, durch die Hermetische 
Phtlosophiam Bemhardi Comitis k Marchia, auch durch die Dicta Alani, 
vnd Claues F. Basilij Valentini Benedictini. Jetzt in Teutscher Sprach 
vertiert vnd zusammen getruckt, Zu Franckfort durch VVolflfgang Richtern, 
in Verlegung Nicolai Steinij. Anno M.DCII. Cum Gratia cS: Priuilegio 
Sacrae Casf. Maiest. 

la*. Pp. [94]i-i9i [i blank] [24], 193-358 [2 blank] 359-466. [i with Colophon 
and printars devioej [9 blank pages at the end.] Title red and black. 4 small 
woodcuts in Lully^s Tract. 

The dedicatioo to Georgius Schwallenberger, a Dicta Alani, p. 335. 
CaDonicuai etc., of St. Peters in Kritzlahr, " most Fratis Basilii Valentin! licncdictini Summorischrr 

sidlfiil in the Secret Philosophy," dated Frankfurt, Rericht, von dem Lupide Philusophorum, p. 359. 
ifioa, is signed by the publisher, Steinius. (This includes the two tracts : l\>m j^rossen Stein 

The tracts are : dfr Uralten Weisen (p. 367) and Die zw&lff 

Raymundi Lullii Kzperiinentn, p. i. SchlUssel (p. ^98). ) 

Bemhsudi Comitis Tervisani Bcricht von der \>i. Prima Materia Lapidis Philosophici. p. 465. 

Hennetischen Philosophin, 193. (A set of verses. ) 

(With a title and Foryvf/^ [pp. 24], not included in The tracts by Ikinihardus and fiisilius have 

the pagination, and the Tabula Simaragdina^ p. 200. ) title-pages, dated 1 603. 

EMANUEL, 
libellus duodecim aquarum. 

See GRATAROLO (c), VcKK Alchcmiic . . . doctrina, 1561, ii. p. 209. 
Sit THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, iii. p. I04. 

Rord, Bibluttheca Chimica, 1654, p. 85; 1656, p. 81. 

EMERICUS (Johannes), Respondens, 
See COCUS Oacobus), Prases. 

ENCELIUS (Christophorus). 

See ENTZELT (c). 

ENCHIRIDION Physicae Restitute. 
See ESPAGNET Oean d'). 

ENGELHARD. 
Liber de Lapide Philosophorum. 

See vier ntitzliche Chymische Tractat vom Stein der Weisen, 161 2, Si^^ \\ recto, 

ENGELHARD VON LOHNEYSS (Georg). 

See LOHNEYSS (GEORG ENGELHARD VON'). 

ENIGMA. 

See ENIGMA. 

ENIGME Philosophique. 

See SENDivoGius (MICHAEL), Cosmopolite, Nouvellc Lumierc dc la Phisique 
naturelle, 1629, p. 66. 

ENTDECKTEN (Die) Requisita Realia. 

See SINCERUS. 

ENTRETIEN d'Eudoxe et de Pyrophile sur Tancienne Guerre des Chevaliers. 
See TRIOMPHE (Le) Hermetique, 1689, 1699, p. 27. 

340 

ENTZELT— EPILOG us 

ENTZELT (Christoph). 

De Re Metallica, hoc est, de Origine, Varietate, & Natura Corponim 
Metalliconim, Lapidum, Gemmanim, atq; aliarum, quae ex fodinis eniuntur, 
rerum, ad Medicinae usum deseruientium, Libri III. Autore Christophoro 
Encelio SalueldensL Cum priuil^o Imper. Franc Apud Chr. EgeDolf^um. 

8*. Pp». [13, I blaok, I leaf wanting] 9ji [3 blank]. Five woodcats. The pagina- 
tion is irregular. The collation is the same as the following. In F there are two 
extra double leaves, but that in G is wanting. H is complete. This edition is 
undated, but is probably that of 1551. This copy wants aa, which contains Mdanch- 
thon*s letter to Egenolphus, dated 1551. Vignette of the altar and heart, but a di£Rprent 
design from the followuig. 

De Re Metallica, hoc est, de Origine, Varietate, & Natura Corponim 
Metallicorum, Lapidum, Gemmarum, atq; alianim, quae ex fodinis eruuntur, 
rerum, ad Medicinae usum deseruientium, Libri III. Autore Christophoro 
Encelio Salueldensi. Cum Priuil^o Imp. Franc Apud Haered. Christiani 
Egenolphi. M.D.LVII. 

8*. Sigs. a8, A-E in eights, F8 with two extra double leaves, G8 with an extra 
folding lesJ. H8, but 4 and 5 are in one. I to Q in eights, R7, last leaif blank (?) wanting; 
or pp. [15, I blank j. 271 [i blank, and last leaf (blank?) wanting]. The pagination is 
irregular. Five woodcuts. Printer's device of an altar and upon it a flaming heart, as 
Vignette. a2 contains Melanchthon's letter. 

Entzelt, Einzcld, Enzelius. Entzelius, Encelius, 
was a native of Saalfeld in Thuringia, and lived in 
the first half of the sixteenth century. He was 
rector at TangemiUnde in the Marck, and pastor at 
Osterhausen. He died 15 March, 1586, in his sixty- 
sixth year. He wrote a Clironicle of the Old 
Marck Brandenburg, (Minted at Magdeburg. 1579, 
and again at Saltzwedel, 1732, and one or two 
oUier works. He is said to have been a doctor of 
Medicine, which seems doubtful, and wrote his 
little book on metals. Philip Melanchthon gave 
him a strong letter of recommendation to Egenolph. 
the printer at P'rankfurt, dated 19 August, 1551, 
urging Egenolph to print the book and commend- 
ing the author for his diligence and for having 
inserted matter in his treatise which was to be 
found nowhere else. 

Egenolph appears to have complied with 

Gesner. Bihliotheca , . , in Epitomen redacta 
. . . per Josiam SimUrum^ 1583. p. 121. 
Van der Linden, De Scriptis Medici s libri duo, 

1637. p. 98. 
Borel, Bihliotheca Chimica^ 1654, p. 85. 

Mercklin, Lindenius renovatus, 1686, p. 176. 

Reimmann, Einleitung in die Hisioriam liier- 

ariam derer Teutschen^ 1^709, iii. p. 545. 

Roth-Scholtz, Bibliotheca Ckemica, 1727. p. 62. 

Manget, Bihliotheca Scriptorum Medtcorum, 

1731, I. ii. p. 221. 

dtolle. Anleitung tur Historie der Afedicinischen 
(Telahrheit, 1731, p. 594. 
/acoh Leupolds Prodromits Bihliotheca Metallica, 

1732. P- SO- 

Morhof, Polyhistor, 1732, ii. p. 403. 

Zedler, Universal-Lexicon, 1734, viii. col. 1303. 
Kestner, Medicinisches Gelehrten- Lexicon ^ 1740, 
p. 274 (quotes the editions of 1551, 1557). 

Melanchthon's reauest and to have printed the 
work at once in the undated edition, whi^ pro- 
bably from the date of the letter, is usually spcMoen 
of as of 1551. Reimmann, however, who does not 
seem to have known of an undated editioo at all, 
thinks that Egenolph did not print the book till 
1557. Comparison, however, of the two issues, 
and the better style of the undated one, would 
induce me to regard it as the eariier, and, possibly, 
of 1551. An edition of 1551 b mentioned in the 
Bibliotheca Rivinicma, there is one so dated 
(hypothetically) in the British Museum, and it is 
quoted by StoUe and by Kestner. In all these 
cases it is doubtless the undated edition to ndiicfa 
allusion is made. The book was induded in the 
Corpus juris et systema rtrmm metallicarum, 
Frankfurt, 1698 ; * a wretched German translation ' 
Reckmann csuls it. 

Lenglet Dufresno^, Histoirt de la Pkilcsopkie 
Hermitique^ 1742, iii. p. 155. 

Jcicher, Allgemeines GeleMrteU'Lexicom, 1750, 
ii. col. 343. 

Boerhaave, Methodus Studii Medici, ed. Haller, 
X751, p. 179 (Haller quotes an edition. Francolurti. 
1577, 8**. possibly a misprint for 1557). 

Haller, Bibliotheca Botanica^ ^77^* i- P- 356 
("De Uva Quercina," in Ub. III. cap IL p. 238, 
of the 1^57 edition). 

Gmelm, Geschichte der Chemie^ ^^797* >• p> 364 
(quotes both editions, 1551, 1557). 

Beckmann, Beytr&ge xur Geschichte der Erfin- 
dungen, 1799, iv. p. 34a ; English transition. 1814, 
iv. p. 16. 

Allgemeine Deutsche Bicgraphie, 1877, vi. p. 
155. 

EPILOGUS & Recapitulatio in Michaelis SendivogI Poloni Novum Lumen 
Chymicum. 

See SENDIVOGIUS (MICHAEL), Lunien Chymicum Novum, 1624. 
See ORTHELius (andreasX 1624. 

EPIMETHEUS^EPITAPHIUM 241 

EPIMETHEUS (Franciscus). 

See REUSNER (HlKRONYMUS), Pandora, 1588. 

EPISTEL. 

See ALEXANDER. 

See BRIEF. 

See SBND-BRIEF. 
See SEKDSCHREIBEN. 

EPISTOLA Andrea de Blawen. 

Su BLAWEN (ANDREAS DE). 

EPISTOLA Comelii Alvetani Arnsrodii. 

See ALVETANUS ARNSRODIUS (CORNELIUS). 

EPISTOLA Haimonis. 
See UAIMON. 

EPISTOLA ad Hermannum Archiepiscopum Coloniensem De Lapide Philo- 
sophico. 
See FiGULUS (benedictus), Thesaurinclla, 1682, p. 374. 

EPISTOLA Joannis Pontani. 

Su PONTANUS (JOANNF^). 

EPISTOLA de Metallonim Transmutatione. 

See MORHOF (D. G.). 

EPISTOLA Monachi cujusdam Benedictini ordinis de lapide philosophico, 
opuscula Platonis et Amoldi Villanovani recensens. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1660, V. p. 799. 

EPISTOLA Novi Praeservativi universalis naturalis. 

See SCHWARTZENWALD (JOHANN VALKNTIN VON). 

EPISTOLA de Principiis artis Hermeticae. 

See SENDlVOCilUS (micharl), Lumen Chymicum Novum ; Epilogus, 1624, p. 118. 

See THEATRUM CHKMICUM, 1661, vi. p. 474. 

EPISTOLA a! Re di Napoli. 
See ARNALDUS de Villanova. 

EPISTOLA vetus de metallorum materia & artis imitatio. 

See GRATAROLO (o.^ Verse alchemiic . . . doctrina, 1561, ii. p. 263. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, iii. p. 1 87. 

EPISTOLiE quinque Medicinales. 

See MUFETT (THOMAS). 

EPITAPHIUM Bononiense. 

See iELIA LiGLIA CRISPIS. 

In additioD to the authorities already noticed in explanation of it by Michael Maier, Symbola Aureal 
the remarks to this heading (Catalogue, p. 6, Mens<p^ 1617, p. x68, and by Kircher, (Edipus 
above), reCerence may be made to the attempted /Egyptiacus, Komce, 1653, ii. pp. 4x8-490. 

242 erbinAus—ercker 

ERBINAUS VON BRANDAU (Matthaus). 

Matthiii Erbinai von Brandau, Eq. Bohem. & Med. Doct Warhaffte Beschreibung 
von der Universal-Medicin, und Giildnen Tinctur Ursprung, Anfiang, Mittel 
und Ende, wie auch derselben Zubereitung nach der alten und neuen 
Philosoph. warhafften Griinden, wobey auch noch viele andere Curiose 
Sachen zufinden. Aus des Seel Herm Autoris MS to zum £>ruck befordert 
und communiciret durch T. P. G. L. M. S. Leipzig, Zufinden in Lanckischen 
Laden, M DC LXXXIX. 

8». Pp. [la] 148. 
T. P. G. L. is presumably Theophrasti Paracelsi Grosser Liebhaber, as in the oUier tract. 

Matthai Erbinai von Brandau, Eq. Bohem. & Med. Doct XIL Grund-Saulen 
der Natur und Kunst, worauf die Verwandelung der Metallen gebauet, 
benebst V. Vomehmer Artisten wahrhafften Processen, worunter einer des 
Th. Paracelsi, welcher noch niemahlen in Druck gesehen worden, iibersendet 
an Se. Hochfiirstl. Durchlauchtigk. Hn. Johann Christian, Hertzogen in 
Schlesien zur Liegnitz und Brieg, &c. &c. &c. aus des Hochseel. Herm 
Autoris, ob zwar etwas unleserlichen Manuscripto nebst einer, kurtzen 
Beschreibung Johannis Pontani Secreten Philosophischen Feuers auf B^ehren 
unterschiedener vornehmen Leute zum Druck befordert von einem Grossen 
Liebhaber des Theophrasti Paracelsi. M.DC.LXXXIX. 

8*. Pp. 50 [2 blank]. Folding plate. No place, but probably Leipzig. 

He is called variously ; Matthias von Brandau ; curing of a person suffering from the plagiM, both 

Matthias Erbe, Erben, and Erbin von Brandau ; by means of a red oil of which a few drops onlv 

Dr. Erben ; Matthias Erbin&us von Brandau, and were required to produce the desired effects. It is 

he has also the surname of Lobkowitz. In the he also who has put on reccM'd the account of the 

British Museum and some other catalogues he is assassination of Albrecht Beyer in or about 1570. 

entered under Brandau. Nothing is on record By the author of the Pegfeuer he is accused of 

about him except that he was a doctor of Medicine having deceived and misled many worthy people by 

and a Bohemian Knight. But he is quoted as the the seductive style of his treatise on the Universal 

authority for one or two narratives connected with Medicine, 
transmutation of lead into gold, and with the 

Keren Happuch . . . oder Teutsches Fegfeuer der Gmelin, Geschichte der Ckemie, 1798, ii. p. q8. 

Scheide-kunst, 1702, p. 126. Fuchs, Repertorium der chemischen Utteratur^ 

Die Edelgebome jungfer Alchymla, 1730, pp. x 806-08, p. 201. 

38, 76-7, 82, 189. Schmieder, Geschichte der Chemie, 1832, pp. 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire de la Philosophie 289, 365. 

Hermitique^ 1742, iii. p. 128. Ladrague, Bibliothkque Ouvaroff^ Sciences 

Fictuld, Pfvbier-Siein, 1753, Th. ii. p. 44. Secrites, 1870, Nos. 1 191-92. 

Beytrag zur Geschichte der hdhem Chemie, 1785, Sudhof, Bibliographia ParaceUica^ pp. 463, 628, 

p. 539. 702 (under Erbe and Erbin&us). 

ERCKER (Lazarus). 

Beschreibung allerfurnemisten Mineralischen Ertzt vnnd Bergkwercks arten, wie 
dieselbigen, vnd eine jede in sonderheit, jrer Natur vnd eygenschafit nach, 
auff alle Metalla probirt, vnd in kleinen Fewr sollen versucht werden, mit 
erklarung etlicher fiirnemer niitzlicher Schmeltzwerck, im grossen Feuwer, 
auch scheidung Goldts, Silbers, vnd anderer Metalln, sampt einem Bericht 
defs Kupffer saigerns, Messing brennens, vnd Salpeter siedens, auch aller 
saltzigen Minerischen proben, vnd was denen alien anhengig, in funff Bucher 
verfast, defsgleichen zuvom niemals in Druck kommen. Allen Liebhabem 
der Feuwerkiinste, jungen Probirern vnd Bergkleuten zu nutz, mit schonen 
Figuren vnd abrifs der Instrument, trewlich vnd fleissig an tag geben. Auffs 
newe an vielen orten mit besserer aufsfiihrung, vnd mehrern Figum erklart. 

ERCKER 243 

ERCKER (Lazarus). Continued. 

durch den weitberiihmten Lazarum Erckern, der Rom. Kay. May. Obersten 
Bergkmeister vnd Buchhalter, im Konigreich Bohem, &c. Mit Rom. Keys. 
May. Priuilegien. Gedruckt zu Franckfurt am Mayn, durch Johan 

Feyerabendt 1 5 98. 

Folio ff. [4] 134X3] [x blank, wanting]. Title red and black. Wants f. 3. 
41 woodcuts of apparatus, etc., in the text. Vignette of a laboratory. 

Aula Subterranea Domina Dominantium Subdita Subditorum. Das ist : Unter- 
erdische Hofhaltung, ohne welche weder die Herren regieren, noch die 
Vnterthanen gehorchen konnen. Oder griindliche Beschreibung der jenigen 
Sachen, so in der Tieffe der Erden wachsen, als aller Ertzen der Koniglichen 
und gemeinen Metallen, auch fiirnehmster Mineralien, durch welche nachst 
Gott, alle Klinste, Ubungen und Stande der Welt gehandhabet und erhalten 
werden, da dann fumemlich hierinn gelehret wird, wie sothanige Ertz- und 
Bergwercksarten, jede insonderheit ihrer Natur und Eigenschafft gemafs, auff 
alle Metalla probirt, und im kleinen Feuer versucht werden, nebst Erklarung 
einiger fiimehmer niitzlichen Schmeltzwerck im grossen Peuer, Item Ertz 
scheiden, bochen, waschen und rosten, auch Scheidung Goldes, Silbers und 
anderer Metallen, ingleichem Kupffer seigem, Messing brennen, Salpeder 
sieden, destination der Scheidwasser, und ihrem Brauch, auch zu nutzmachung 
anderer mineralischen Berg- und Saltzarten. Vormals durch den Weit- 
beriihmten und gantz Teutschland zierenden Herm Lazarum Ercker, weiland 
der Romischen Kayserl. Majest. Obristen Bergmeister auffs treulichste 
beschrieben. Anitzo aber, wegen Abgang der Exemplarien auffs neue mit 
vielen niitzlichen und nohtwendigen Stiicken und Secreten, so entweder 
Herr Ercker iibergangen, oder nach der Zeit inventirt worden, und andem 
Notis iiber S. Erckers Text mercklich vermehret, zusambt angehangter 
Aufslegung der Terminorum und Redarten der Bergleute, Probirer, Wardeinen 
und Miintzmeister, deren sie sich was ihre Profession belangt, zu bedienen 
pflegen. Ein sehr nutzlich und nohtig Werck vor die Herren der Bergwercke, 
Berg-Rahte, Ertz- und Artzneykiindiger, Probir-Discipeln, Laboranten, und 
alle die mit Metallen und Mineralien umbgehen miissen oder wollen. Mit 
moglichstem Fleifs gestellet und audsgefertiget, durch einige hochverstandige 
Bergwercks Erfahme und Liebhabere. Franckfurt, In Verlegung Johann 
David Zunners, Buchhandlers. Gedruckt bey Paulus Hummen Sel. Wittib. 
Jm Jahr M.DC.LXXII. 

Folio. Pp. [14. including the engraved title, hy P. Rilian, dated 1673] 33^ M* 
The engraved title is : 'Aula subterranea aliAs Probier Buch Herm Lazan Erckers,* 
and is dated 1673. 4' woodcuts of apparatus, etc., in the text 

The Intetfres Phraseologia Metallurgies is by Christianus Berwardus, and has a 
separate title, as follows : 

Interpres Phraseologiae Metallurgicae. Oder Erklftrung der fUmembsten Ter- 
minorum und Redearten, welche bey den Bergleuten, Puchem, Schmeltzem, Probirem 
und Mtintzmeistem, &c. in Benennung ihrer Profession Sachen, Gezeugs, GebHudei 
Werckschaift, und Instrumenten gebr&uchlich sind, wie nemlich solche nach gemeinen 
Deutschen zu verstehen. Nebenst angehilngter kurtzen Deduction defs loblichen 
Bergrechts und aller wohlhergebrachter Gewonheit, betreflfend den Bau der Bergwercke, 
aufif was Weise man nemlich zur I^hnschafTt einer Zeche, Masse, Gegendrum oder 
Kuckufs gelange, und deren hinwieder verlustig werde konnen. Auflf ertheilte 
HbchstlobT. FOntL Commission zusamen durch den Edlen und Hochgelahrten Herm, 
Christianura Berwardiun, J. C. & Assess. Jud Metal. Anitzo aber, cum venia 

244 ERCKER 

ERCKER (Lazarus). Continued. 

benemeriti Authoris, Herm Erckers Schriflften ixiit anpidiaoet, nmb etnes dnrcfa dfts 
andere desto besser ni verstehen, und also dem gemeinen Nutz zu Dienst mit sum 
Druck verordnet. Franckfurt am Majm, in Veiieguiig, Johann David Ztmners. 
Gedruckt bey Paulus Hummen SeL Wittib. Im Jahr M.DC.LXXIII. 

Pp. [4] 47 [i Wank]. 

This edition of 1672 has a preface to the reader being enj^aged in getting it up. A list of the 

with a set of verses, written by ' lohannes Hiskias errata in it was aftmvanu printed by Cardihidus 

Cardalucius,' who seems to have been the acting in his Magnolia MedicO'CJ^^wtua, 1676, pp. 40Z- 

editor, though he speaks of 'other skilled miners' 409 (^.v.)* 

Aula Subterranea Domina Dominantium Subdita Subditorum. Das ist : Unter- 
erdische Hofhaltung ohne welche weder die Herren regieren, noch die 
Unterthanen gehorchen konnen. Oder griindliche Beschreibung dererjenigen 
Sachen, so in der TiefTe der Erden wachsen, als aller Ertzen der Koniglichen 
und gemeinen Metallen, auch fumehmster Mineralien, durch welche, nechst 
Gott, alle Kiinste, Ubungen und Stande der Welt gehandhabet und erhalten 
werden, da dann fumehmlich hierin gelehret wird, wie sothanige Erts- und 
Bergwercks-Arten, jede insonderheit ihrer Natur und Eigenschafit gemaDs, 
auf alle Metalla probirt, und im kleinen Feuer versucht werden, nebst 
Erklarung einiger fiimehmer niitzlichen Schmeltzwercke im grossen Feuer, 
Item, Ertz scheiden, puchen, waschen und rosten, auch Scheidung Goldes, 
Silbers, und anderer Metallen, ingleichem Kupffer saigem, Mefsing brennen, 
Distillation der Scheidwasser und ihrem Brauch, auch zu Nutzmachung 
anderer mineralischen Berg- und Saltz-Arten. Vormahls durch den Welt- 
behihmten und gantz Teutschland zierenden Herm Lazarum Ercker, weiland 
der Romisch- Kayserl. Majest. obersten Bergmeister aufs treulichste beschrieben. 
Anjetzo aber bey dieser neuesten Auflage nicht nur mit vielen nothwendigen 
Erlauterungen und Geheimniissen, so entweder Herr Ercker iibergangen, 
und nach der Zeit erfunden worden, nebst andem Anmerckungen Qber 
seel. Erckers Text um vieles vermehret, sondem auch von alien Fehlem 
aufs sorgfaltigste gereiniget. Zusamt einem neuen angehengten griindlichen 
Unterricht von dem Salpeter pflantzen, dessen Ausfied- Praparirung und 
Gebrauch, benebst einer zulanglichen Nachricht von der Pulver-Manu&ctur, 
dasselbige mit denen dazu gehorigen Materialien zuzubereiten, wie auch 
Auslegung derer Kunst-Worter, welche sich die Bergleute, Probierer, Wardeinen 
und Miintzmeister zu bedienen pflegen. Ein sehr voUstandig und niitzlich 
Werck fiir Berg- und Hiitten-Bediente, und alle die mit Metallen und 
Mineralien umzugehen willens oder verbunden sind. Mit vielen nothwendigen 
und zu mehrerer Erklarung dienenden 42 Figuren gezieret Nach moglichstem 
Fleifs und Sorgfalt vermehrt und verbessert durch J. E. C. Einem des 
Berg- und Hiitten-Wercks nebst dem Miintzwesen und der Metallurgie 
erfahrnen Liebhaber. Fiinffte Auflage. Franckfurt am Mayn, Verl^ 
von Johann David Jung, 1736. 

Folio. Pp. [12, including the engraved title] 208 [4]. Title red and black. 
Engraved title by Badollet, and 44 woodcuts in the text 

Interpres Phraseologiae Metallurgicse, oder Erklarung derer ftlmdimsten Termin- 
onim und Redens-Arten, welche bey denen Bergleuten, Puchem, Schmeltzem, 
Probierem und Miintxmeistem, ftc in Benennung ihrer I^x>fessions-Saicfaen, Geieugs, 
GebHude, Werdocbafit und Instnimenten gebrilnchlicb sind, wie nemUcfa solche nacb 

ERCKER'-^ERLA UTERTE 

245 

GRCKER (Lazarus). Continued. 

dem gemdnen Deutscben su verstehen. Nebst angehMngter kurtzen Deduction des 
Idblichen Berg-Rechts und alter wohlhergebrachter Gewohnheit betrefTend den Bau 
derer Bergwercke, auf was Weise man nemlich zur Lehnschafft einer Zeche, Mafse, 
Gegendmm oder Kucktifs gelangen, und deren hinwiederum verlustig wcrden konne. 
Aut ertheilte Hocbstldbl. Fiirstl. Commifsion zusammen getragen. Durch den Wohl- 
Edlen und Hochgelahrten Hemi Christianum Berwarduin, J. C. & Assess. Jud. Metal. 
Anjetzo aber, cura venia benemeriti Autboris. Herm Erckers Schrifflen mit angeh&ngt, 
um eines durch das andere desto besser zu verstehen, und also dem gemeinen Nutz zu 
Dienst mit zum Druck verordnet. Franckfurt am Mayn, In Verlegung Johann 
David Jungs. Jm Jahr MDCCXXXVI. 

Folio. Pp. 36. 

Considering the importance of Ercker's treatise 
it is remarkable how little is on record about him. 
He was inspector-general of the mines of Hungary, 
Transylvania, and the Tyrol, which position he 
held under three consecutive emperors in the 
sixteenth 'century, and he calls himself of St. 
Annen Bogk. 

His book was highly prized at the time, for it 
was a record of practical experience, and was not 
burdened witli theories and hypotheses. 

The first edition was printed by Georg Schwartz 
at Prague, i574f in folio. Subsequent editions 
appeared at Frankfurt a. M. in 1580, the above in 
1598, 1629, all in folio. 

The work was enlarged and entitled Aula 
Subierranea, and was published in 1673 as above, 
1684. 4"* ; 1703, fol. ; and the above, 1736. fol., 
called the fifth edition. If this mean the fifth of 
the Aula there must be another edition which I 
have not noticed in the lists. 

The English translation was made by Sir John 
Pfcttus, and is headed FUta Minor, a punning 
title, which, as he explains, refers to his imprison- 

Roth-Scholtz, Bibliotheca Chemica, 1727, p. 63. 
Zedler. Universal- Lexicon, 1734. viii. col. 15 14. 
Jacob Leupolds Prodromus Bibliotheca Metallicee, 

I735» P- SO. 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire de la Philosophie 
HerwUtiqtu^ 1742, iii. p. 1^6. 

Jocher, Allgemeines GeleArlen- Lexicon, 1750. ii. 
col. 376. 

Baumer, Bibliotheca Chemica, 178a, p. 65. 

ment in the F'leet. The preface is dated 36 Feb. , 8{ , 
and the book was published in 1683. There is a 
copy in the British Museum. It was reissued with 
the date altered to 1686, which was effected by 
substituting V. for II. in the original da^e 
MDCLXXXIII. The inserted V. is not in line 
with the other figures, and as, in the copy which I 
have, the title is mounted on a guard, I presume 
either that the whole title leaf is a cancel, or else 
that the original title page was cut from the rest of 
the sheet to enable the alteration in the date to be 
made. I have not been able to compare the two 
title pages, as there is not a copy of the x686 issue 
in the Museum. 

The English edition is sumptuously printed with 
large engraved capitals, and it has a portrait of 
Pettas and "44 sculptures*' of apptuntus and 
operations. These have been re-engraved on 
copper (the originals arc on wood), with a change 
of costume in the operators from the sixteenth 
century to that of a hundred years later with a 
corresponding loss of vigour and realism. 

Gmelin, Geschichle der Chemie, 1797, i. p. 364. 
Fuchs, Repertorium der chemischen lAtteratur, 
i8o6-o8, p. 73. 
Biographie MidicaU, Paris. Panckoucke (i8ao- 

25). iv- P- 46. 

Thomson, History of Chemistry, 1830, i. p. 223. 

Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie, 1885, vi. p. 214 
(imder Erker). 

EREMITA Anonymus. 

See SPLENDOR Salis et Solis, 1677. 

EREMITA Suburbanus. 

See HELMONT (FRANXISCUS MERCURIUS VAN). 

ERLAUTERTE und aus der Erfahning erwiesene Wahrheit des Goldmachens, 
oder des so betittelten Lapidis Philosophorum. Abgehandelt in einem 
angestellten Gesprache zwischen Vatter und Sohn, iiber ein Avertissement, 
welches unter dem 16 Homung 1765. in der Frankfurter Sonnabends- 
Zeitung, Num. 27. und in der Erlanger-Zeitung Num. 17. von einer 
ungenannten Feder, an die Hochgelehrten Societaten zu London, Paris 
und Berlin eingeruckt gewesen ; und wohiber man sich gedachter Societaten 
unpartheyische Gedenkungsart offentlich ausgebetten hat Frankfurt und 
Leipzig, bey Johann Paul Kraufs 1767. 

8*. Pp. 62 [a blank]. 

In this dialogue an account is given of a universal are described, but whether it is all to be understood 
solvent, experiments made with which by the father literally or metaphorically it is a little difficult to say. 

Ladrague, Biblidkbpu Owforof^ Sciences Secrites^ 1870, No. 1484. 

246 

ERLdSUNG—EROFFNETE 

ERLOSUNG der Philosopher! aus dem Fegfeur der Chymisten. Das ist: 
Rechtmafsige Retorsion, im Nahmen der Philosophen denen ohnlangst 
ausgeflogenen drey Laster-Bogen entgegen gesetzt durch Ihrer Herrligkeiten 
Fiscal. Das Jahr zuvor, ehe das Fegfeur angeschiiret ward, 1701. 

8**. Pp. 54. No place or priater, but apparently by tbe same as printed the 
Fet^euer itself. See sSldnkr. 

An amusing piece of vituperation. Quite possibly suspect this last phrase has a double meaning. He 

bv Sdldner himself, the author of the Fegfeuer, goes through the ^e^t/Wcrrpanigraph by paragra[)h. 

He points out that the Ftg/euer was printed at and criticises the judgments paaoed on the difiierait 

Amsterdam, " vielleicht im Voigtlande," 170a, was chemists. 

sold at Frankfurt in the summer of 170Z, and in It is quoted by Roth-Scfaoltz^iA/ia/A«ca CAmmm, 

September of this year, "verlegt worden ist" I 1727, p. 63. 

ERNESTI (Johann). 

De Oleis variis Arte Chymica destillads. 

See HARTMANN (johann), Pra.xis Cbymiatrica, 1647, p. 397. 

There is considerable confusion about this author. 
Mercklin, followed by Manget, enters the work 
under Ernesti, and quotes an edition : Francofiirti, 
apud Casparum Roteliuni, 1634, 8**, but not the 
one above. He also treats Ej-nesti as a different 

gsrson from Johannes Ernest us Burggravius. In the 
ritish Museum catalogue Emesti has a separate 
place, editions of 1647, 8", i68a, 8*, and 1690, fol., 
are enumerated, and there is no cross reference to 
Burggravius. In the medical histories and bio- 
graphies I can find no reference to a Johannes 
Emesti, and on the other hand this treatise is 
assigned to J. E. Burggravius by Borel, Lipenius, 
Jocher, Lenglet Dufresnoy, but not by Haller or 
Gmelin. As if to complete the confusion Borel 

Borel, Biblioiheca Chimua, 1654, pp. 53, 88, 
265 ; 16^, pp. 51, 84, 247. 

Lipenius, Bibliotheca Realis Medica^ 1679, p. 313. 

Mercklin, Lindtnius retiavatus, z686, p. 574. 

Manget, Biblu^heca Scriptorum Medicorum^ 
1731, I. ii. p. 334. 

in one place assigns the work De Electro PkiU- 
sofkontm to Burggravius, but refers to Emestus, 
wno appears both with and without tbe name 
Burggravius, and in both places as that of the 
author of the Biolychnium, and in one as the 
«iitor of Drebbel. But Lenglet Dufresnoy, in his 
Index, p. 364, gives a cross reference to Burggra- 
vius, and yet under that heading makes Ernestus 
the principal name. 

Tne explanation then seems to be that the 
author's name was really Emesti, and that for 
some reason he received or adopted that of Burg- 
grav. The present tract, therefore, is identical 
with that which is mentioned in the note under the 
latter name. 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire de la Pkilosopkie 
Hermdtique, 174a, iii. p. 156. 

Jijcher, Al^meines GelehrteM' Lexicon, 1750, ii. 
col. 1494. 

EROBER- und Demolirung des . . . Fegfeuers der Scheide Kunst. 

See ALETHOPHILUS, 1705. 

• • 

EROFFNETE Geheimnisse des Steins der Weisen oder Schatz-Kammer der 
Alchymie, darinnen die vortrefflichsten Schriflffcen derer beruhmtesten alten 
und neuern Scribenten denen Liebhabern der Kunst dargestellet werden. 
Nebst vielen Kupfferstichen und andern dazu dienlichen Figuren. [Ham- 
burg, Bey Christian Liebezeit, in der Joh. Kirch, 1708-18.] 

Imprint cut off. 

4*. Pp. [x6] 816. Title red and black. Wormed. Portrait of Paracelsus. 
36 engravings. Woodcuts in the text. 

This is the Hamburg reprint of Trismosin's 
Aureum Vellus, 1598 {q.v.). Though the special 
titles are dated Hamburg, 1708, the general title- 
page is that of 17 1 8. 
The five * Tractatus ' contain the following : 
I. Trissmosinische Schriften, p. i. 
II. Paracelsische Schrifften, p. 91. 

Korndorfferische Schrifften, p. 129. 
III. I. Splendor Solis mit schbnen Figuren, p. 163. 

2. Spie^jel der Alchymey Ulrici Poyselii, p. 2x4. 

3. Clauis sampt seiner Declaration der 

Chymischen Handgriffen, p. 229. 

4. Allerley Particularia die Handtgriff zuer- 

lehrnen, p. 237. 

5. Ein Tincktur oder Elixier eines unbekandten 

philosophi, p. 250. 

6. Processus pro Tinctura auff den Mercurium 

Solis und Lunae, p. 256. 

7. Modus procedendi in pneparatione lapidis 

philosophici, p. 258. 

8. Dialogus philosophise, p. 272. 

9. Exemplum artis Philosophiae. Ean Exera- 

plum der philosophischen Kunst, p. 278. 

10. De lapide Philosophonmi 12 capita incerti 

author is, p. 281. 

11. Vom Stein der Weisen ein schdner Process 

Episcopi Melchioris Brixiensis Card. 
Romae, etc., und ein Philosophisches 

EROFFNETE^EROFNETES 

247 

1;R0FFNETE Geheimnisse. Continued, 

Werck und Gespr&ch von dem Gelben 
unnd Rotten Man, p. 296. 

12. Von dem Rebis einem Stein, p. 305. 

13. Varia Philosophica, p. 307. 

(a) Capitulum, darinnen das gantze Werck 

kUrtzHch b^riffen, p. 307. 
ib) Kin scliones Gedicht, p. 3za 
\c) Ein Gesprach, p. 31a. 
(d) Ean Gedicht, p. 314. 
{e) De Oleo Philosophonim, p- 314. 
(f) Vera prseparatio Mercurij, p. 315. 
14- Tractatus vom Saltz der Weisen, p. 3x5. 

15. Nouum Testaraentum, p. 318. 

16. Von dem Philosophischen Bley, p. 319. 

17. Avicenna Septem r^ulse ex quibus com- 

ponitur lapis Philosophonim, p. 320. 

18. Tabula Scientine raaioris, p. 321. 

19. I>e quinta essentia vini pulcherrimus tracta- 

tus, p. 342. 
2a Tabula Schmaragdina Hermetis Trisme- 
gisti patris Philosophonim, p. 335. 
*^ 21. Aufslegung unnd erkl^ning des Gemelds 

Oder Figur (in verse), p. 337. 
IV. I. Von der Bereitung des gebenedeyten 
Philosophischen Steins-Caspar llartung 
von Hoff, p. 34^. 

2. I>e Prima Matena Lapidis Philosophonim 

(in verse), p. 360. 

3. Vollkommener Bericht und Handgriff in 

Zubereitung des Lapidis Philosophorum 
und Tincturae Physicse, p. 370. 

4. Liber Secretorum loannis de Padua de 

Lapide Philosophorum. Liber Primus, 

p. 376. 

5. Liber secundus, p. 393. 

6. Liber tertius, p. 399. 

7. Clauis Philosophiae Chemicse, p. 447. 

8. Grundtlicher Bericht was die warhafftige 

Kunst Alchemia innhalte und vermag m 
Via Universali & Particulari, aufs sUlen 
Philosophis zusammen gezogen, p. 479. 

10. 

XX. 

12. 
13. 

14. 

15. 
x6. 

17- 
V. I. 

2. 
3. 

4. 

5. 
6. 

8. 

10. 
II. 

Hortus Diuitiarum. I>er Garten der Reich - 

thumb aller Weifsheit Gottes, p. 50a 
Ein Werck der Alchimey, p. 519. 
Zwo Tincturen auflf Weifs und Roth, p. 533. 
De Lapide in Aqua Mercurial i, p. 540. 
Ein Mercurij Arbeit und Augment mit dem 

Mercurio Lunae, p. 545. 
Ein schones Tract^tlein in welchem etliche 

schone und lustige Particular Stficklein 

begriffen sind, p. 554. 
Ein schon Stuck von Doctor Schencken, 

p. 563- 
Von dem Antimonio Philosophorum, non 

Vulgi, p. ^70. 
Oleum Antimonii : Die Fixatio, sein Quin|a 

Essen. Caspar Eberlein, p. ^79. 
Von Offenbahrung der Philosophischen 

Matcrien und Dingen, aufs welchen voll- 

bracht wirdt die Meisterschafift, in 

wirckung defs Edlen und gebenedeiten 

Steins der Philosophen^ p. 593. 
Thesaurus Philosophic Euferarij, p. 606. 
Tractatus darinn das gantze Secret der 

Alchimey vom Stein der Weisen begriffen 

ist, p. 623. 
Lux lucens in Tenebris, p. 636. 
Tractatus de Vitriolo Philosophorum, p. 64a. 
Oleum Vitrioli [by R. Bacon], p. 651. 
Experimenta . . . durch . . . Raimundum 

Lilium . . . unnd von Raimundo in Latein 

l^eschrieben. Jetz aber durch Herm 

Georgium Sanderreuter von Wasserburg 

verteutscht worden, p. 664. 
Das Buchlein von der natiirlichen Philoso- 

phey der Metallen des Edlen und Hoch- 

gelehrten Herren Dionisij Zacharij Galli, 

p. 727. 
Ein streit und GespnLch des Goldes und 

Mercurij wider den Stein der Weisen, 

P- 765. 
Etliche Komdorfferische Particularia, p. 773. 
Spiegel der Philosophey, p. 787. 

EROFFNETES Grab der Armuth. 

See ATREMONT (H. D'). 

EROFFNETES Philosophisches Vatter-Hertz. 

See VATER-HERTZ. 

EROFFNUNG der Thiire des Koniglichen Pallasts dafs sie sey das rohe 
Antimonium und Materia Secunda Lapidis Philosophorum, welche vor 
denen mit Blindheit geschlagenen verdecket, und von denen Weisen unter 
doppelsinnigen Reden denen Unwiirdigen verborgen gehalten worden, anjetzo 
aber auffs klarste durch griindliche Erweisung aller Welt wieder dargestellet 
wird durch einen Untersucher dieses vortreflichen Geheimnifses, der den 
Nahmen fiihret des Vorlauffers. Drefsden und Leipzig, zu finden bey 
Gottfried Leschen, 17 18. 

8**. Pp. [16] 160. The author's anagram is ' Zelus ipsi.' 

Ko\h-^\io\Xz, Bibliotheca Chemica, 1727, p. 64. \,2Ax2J^^,Dibliothkqu€Ouvarof^SciencesSecrit€s, 

Fictuld, Probier- Stein, 1753, Th. ii. pp. 140-x. 1870, No. 1438. 

BeytrtLg tur Geschichte der hohem Chemie^ xj^S* 

P-659- 

EROFNETES Philosophisches Vater-Herz. 

See VATER-HERZ. 

248 erQrterung—espagnet 

ERORTERUNG Dreyer Chymischen Fngeiit von denen Princ^ 

Sale, Sulphure & Mercuria Darinnen alien Liebhabem der Chjinie durc^ 
ein hiebey befindliches, und untriigliches Experiment deuUidi goeiget 
dafs solche in der Natur nicht fundirt, sondern dafs die Artisten par d 
das Tractament und Zusatz in der Zerlegung verleitet, diese za 
bewogen worden. Nebst einem Anhang. Entworffen non dnem der si< 
nennt Amator viae Regiae. Heilbronn, aufT Unkosten des Auctorisi und i 
dem Buchladen daselbst bey Paul Strauben in Commission zu haben, 1745. 

8*". Pp. ^ [2 blank]. 

ERRORS of a late Tract called A short Discourse ijf ike Qmn^senu 0^ 
Philosophers, 
See TRUE (a) Light of Alchymy, 1709, p. 89. 

ERSTES [. . . Zehntes] Tausend neuer Chymischer Versuche. 
See M. (d.), 1768. 

ESCHENREUTER (Heinrich). 

Fiinf kleine Tractatlein welche er in dem Closter Schwartzbach in Franken- 

Land Ao. 1403. den 6 May gefunden, und sie wiederum im Closter 

Marienzell, in Thiiringen, Ao. 1489. den 10. Octobr. verborgen, letzlich 

aber Ao. 1672. wiederum sind gefunden worden. Sammt dem darzu 

gehorigen Schliissel. 

See BASILIUS VALENTINUS, Chymische Schrifften, 1769, p. 993. 

Gallus Etschenreuter, according to Fictuld, mav Gallus Etschenreuter, says he was of Rattsbon, and 

be a poor guide, but he is an innocent compared with added some new alchemical signs to the bernietic 

Heinrich, for his judgment on this work is that it dictionary, and rdTers to the works of Basilius 

is " pure LUgen." Frobier-Stein, 1753, '^^- ii- P* Valentinus and to Gratarolus' OfusctUa qusedam 

6a Hoefer {Histoire de la Chimity 184a, i. p. 442 ; chjtmica in unum carpus coUecia, rrancot 1614. 8*. 
1866, i. p. 467) apparently confusing him with 

ESPAGNET (Jean d'). 

Enchiridion Physicae Restitutae. In quo verus Naturae concentus exponitur, 
plurimfque antiquae Philosophiae errores per canones & certas demonstrationes 
dilucide aperiuntur. Tractatus alter inscriptus. Arcanum Hermeticse Philo- 
sophiae opus: In quo occulta Natur^ & Artis circa Lapidis Philosophorum 
materiam Mi operandi modum canonic^ & ordinate fiunt manifesta. Utnimque 
opus eiusdem Authoris anonymi. Spes mea est in Agno. Secunda editio 
emendata & aucta. Parisiis, M.DC.XXXVIII. 

24^ Pp. 143 [3 blank]. 
The Arcanum has a separate tide and pagination : 

Arcanum Hermeticae Philosophiae Opus. In quo occulta Naturae & Artis circa 
Lapidis Philosophorum materiam & operandi modum canonic^ & ordinate fiunt 
manifesta. Opus eiusdem Authoris Anonymi. Penes Nos Vnda Tam SM^tinHa 
Editio emendata & aucta. Parisiis, M. DC. XXXVI 1 1. ^ accunaa 

Pp. 71 [x]. 

La Philosophic Naturelle restablie en sa Puret^. Oil Ton void k d^couuert 
toute roeconomie de la Nature, & oil se manifestent quantity d'erreurs de la 
Philosophic Ancienne, estant redig^ par Canons & demonstrations certaines. 
Auec le Traict^ de I'Ouurage Secret de la Philosophic d'Hermez, qui enseigne 

ESPAGNET 249 

£SPAGNET (Jean d'). ConHnued. 

la madere, & la fa^on de &ire la Pierre Philosophale. Spes Mea est in Agno. 
A FariSy Chez Edme Pepingud, en la grand' Salle du Palais, du cost^ de la 
Cour des Aydes. M.DC.LI. Avec Privilege du Roy. 

r. Pp. [3a] 378 [6] [2 blank]. 

On p. 249 the second tract begins with the following title : 

LX>uvTBge Secret de la Pbilosophie d'Hennez. CXi Ton d<Sx>uure tout ce que la 
Nature^ & TArt ont de cach^ touchant la Matiere de la Pierre Philosophale ; & la 
fa^on de la faire. Fait par le mesme Autheur du Traict^ precedent A Paris, 

M.DC.LL 

In the British Museum Catalogue this work is placed under Pachou (J.). The 
' Epistre ' to the bishop of Auxerre is signed Jean Bachou. 

^^Vrcanum Hermeticse Philosophise Opus. 

See ALBINEUS (NATHAN), Bibliotbcca, 1653. 

See MANGET 0* J0» Bibliotbcca Cbemica Curiosa, 1702, ii. p. 649. 

-Arcanum Philosophise Hermeticse. 

See HANNEMANN (jOHANN LUDWIG^ Pharus ad Opbir Auriferuni, ue, Commen- 
tanus in anonymi Galli Arcanum Philosophiae Hermeticse, 17 14. 

By Hanneroann was also edited : Veteris philosophi profundissimi physica restituta 
cum exegesi, Tubings, 1725, 4". 

Das geheime Werck der Hermetischen Philosophic worinnen die natiirlichen 

und kiinstlichen Geheimniisse der Materie des philosophischen Steins, wie 

auch die Art und Weise zu arbeiten richtig und ordentlich offenbahret sind. 

Von Joannes d'Espagnet Anagr. e. in u. mut. Penes Nos Unda TagL 

See ROTH-SCHOLTZ (friederich), Deutsches Thcatrum Chemicum, 1730, ii. p. 823. 

Enchiridion Physicse restitutse. 

See AI.BINEUS (NATHAN), Bibliotbeca, 1653. 

See MANGET (j. J.), Bibliotbeca Cbemica Curiosa, 1 702, ii. p. 626. 

• 

Espagnet's history is nearly as great an Arcanum he had perused. The author was concealed in the 

as that of which he has attempted the revelation, anagram, but was believed to be Don Tanus 

Hiough by the majority of writers— if not by all — Espagnet, a senator of the pcu'liament of Toulouse, 

be seems to be quite well known, he is still called In 1664, when Borrichius met the son, also a 

"Anonymus Gailus," and the books ascribed to senator of Toulouse, who was about sixty years of 

him appear under the two phrases "Penes nos age, a straight-forward, learned man, and a chemist 

nnda Tagi" and "Soesmeaest in Agno" which wholly devoted to the study of Rajrmund Lully, 

pass for anagrams of his name. It may, however, he asked him if his father had been an adept, and 

oe as well to note that the anagrams are by no had published the book. He received no satisiieu:- 

means strict, if " Joannes d'Espagnet " be the tion as to the first point, whether because the son 

form of the name operated on. For the former of did not know or would not tell Borrichius leaves 

these contains the letter », which is not in the doubtful, but he admitted the second. In this 

name, and only two ^'s, while the name has three, account Borrichius is followed by Fuchs. 

This discrepancy is frankly acknowledged in Roth- All other writers state that Espagnet was presi- 

Scholtz's reprint, where it is said : *'Anagr. einu dent of the parliament of Bordeaux; town- 

mutaL " Borrichius says that ' ' Don Janus Kspag- president Schmieder calls him, I presume, provost, 

net" can be taken out of the anagram, which, or head of the town council, who adds that he 

certainly, it can be, letter for letter, but then the followed Gaston Qaveus as a defender of alchemy, 

name never appeairs in that form. The other Nothing more is on record about his life, 

transposition is even farther astray, for it wants a There are various opinions as to the authorship 

d ana an n, and it has an m which does not appear of the books. Borel informs us that some affirmed 

in the name at all. that the Enchiridion was not by Espagnet, but by 

Apart, however, from this there is want of another who was called * Eques Impenalis,' or ' le 

unanimity as to Espagnet's identity and as to chevalier imperial,' which he admits he had 

the authorship of the tracts in question. difficulty in believing. Borrichius also sajrs that it 

Borrichius gives a very circumstantial account, was a question wh^er he was author or editor, 

He commends the Arcanum //erpu/iaepAiiosopAiig and the doubt turns up in Bayle, Lenglet Du- 

06ms as the wisest, most open and free from fresnoy, and others. 

ooGcurities and double meanings of all the works Hoefer holds a diflerent opinioo on the matter. 

tStM,yiLT 'JiAS r,V 

4*1, 

. . , 4fmt m, u^. wrxntrS ^vt *d xatt 

K^rV/ v^suu <y She Ar'..tMmm. . , 
«<(rfc ' arjrl^ w to ^!>t Emckirid*tm "jf 

wfittBK, aiul Dvwt -^ JU v*rT «Tle :a,ag x is 

iitiKir>m 4 a«^ traAKr-.t«» ^jrtnmk frrim x. 
<f«f»K 4kt^>« 41 Vxn a carj; ff.a? they saea to be 
Imt flK MtfMe vsCr^M, -m^* vu uid^m^ as Ani.Bjiiii 

flM«M hctv^e Av^.'#9l the Wiirlu to Pb;2aieti:a, bos 
il MMMM t/> me theau he has m^-vzxjeruood his 
MeaiaHHp Vf/>vV>f meaM cr^ oMvej that 
Mm, «V> vat ''.xTta^rilj an adrepc, vocM 
fMrf« tff^f^A cAMaf e* from a untoft be kvl bebcrad 
m lU tfuihrfoineM. hot be <lr>a ncc aftna that be 
was the vnhf/r. 

Withr^st a/*y zrinnwtnt or h^suunbnn Bajte 
tffiior«» the two djflknJties whicb bad been in 
«Milef»ce for a couple <3^ cestohn. and at once 
tiUtUm yjtffot^ti^ Uj have \jem preudent of the 

There was also an EnKlisb 

He m 
VA 
to 

Oftbe 

a Lacn. Paris, i6oS. 8" (vbkli is the §nt) : 1603, 
«•; i^. 1630^ 3»*: in Genoaa : Lcxpag. 1685, 
f*. Accortfinc to Ganefia tiie Arctmmm . . . ^fms 
fku appeared in the edition of 163ft. If 
nov pvui be ooMoiele and oorrB 
edition of 1638, caJkd editi* letwmdm, most be 
refpvded merdras a reprint or leia&ue of that of 
1603. 

Knchjrridjon Vbjuat Restitotac; or, the Sonunarj of Phjsicks rsoovvred. 
Wbenttn the true Harmony of Nature is explained, and many Erroors of the ancient 
fbilosopbers. by Canons and certain Demonstrations, are clearly eTidenoed and 
eirinced. ijondon. Printed by W. BentJey. and are to be sold by W. Sbeaxcs at the 
fMAt:, and Ro^jert Tukbein at the Phenix. in tbe New-Rents in S. Panis Chnrcfa-Yard. 

16s I. 

24*. Pp. [10, 2 blank] 167 [i blank]. 

iVifl, fHblintkfca Chi mica, 16^1, pp. 85, 271. 

yitnWA, /> Metalltjtum Trammutatione . . . 
K^ilota, iffj"^, p. 142; German translation, 1764, 
p, Ub. 

Ik^ffi^tiitM, Con%pectu% Scriptorum Chemicorum, 

\tjw, p' a'^^fiv. 

Kfrtn ifappuch . . . odtr Teuttches Fegfeuerder 
HcHtidi'Kuful, 1702, p. f/). 
N. /W/. von (iiUhrUn Sachen aufs Jahr \Tao, 

p. 3*7. 

KMh-Scholtz, liibliotkeca Chemica^ ^7^7* P- 64- 
' llftyle, IHcliunaire kisforique et critique ^ 1730, 
ii. pp, 4r/7.8. 

Koth H(:holtr., Dfutsches Theatrum Ckemicum, 
tJVh ii. p. 82.i. 

Morhcif, Poiyhis/or^ 1732, II. lib. 1, c. 15, §17, 
p. tfvi H' lib. 2, c. 3, )(6, p. 16^. 

Ht()ll«, Anteitung iur llistone der Gelahrheit^ 

17^* p. 5^- 

Lenglet Dufinesnoy, HisUnre dt la PkUcsophie 
HernUtique, 1742. L p. 389, 476, 477 ; iii. p. 157 
(and compare pp. 134, 190. for the Chevalier 
Imperial). 

Fictuld, Probier-SUin, 1753. Th. L pi 68. 

Brucker, Historia Critica Pkiiowphia, 1766, 
IV. i. p. 625, note j ; IV. ii. p. 616 

Baumer, Biblioikeca Chemica, 1782, p. ^5. 

Gmelin, Geschichfe der Cketnif, 1797, 1. p. 506; 
17^, ii. p. 4. 

Fuchs, Reptrtorium der ckemixhen Litieraiur, 
1806-08, p. 137. 

Schmieder, Geschichie der Alchemie^ 18^2, p. 357. 

Hoefer, Histoire de la CAimie, 1844, it. p. 333 ; 
1869, ii. p. 324. 

Ladrague, Biblioihique Ouvaroff, Sciences 
Sec rites, 1870, Nos. 1x28-30. 

Kopp, Die Alchemic, 1886, iu p. 345. 

ESPRIT Mineral. 

See KKSPOUR, 1668. 

KTSCHKNRKUTER (Gallus). 
Sond-brief an Wilhelm Gratarolum. 

Sa IIKRNHARDUS TREVISANUS, Chymische Schrif!len, 1746, 1747, p. 298. 

ETSCHENREUTER'-ETTMULLER 

251 

ETSCHENREUTER (Gallus). Continued. 

Gallus Etschenreuter was a physician of Ratis- 
bon, in the sixteenth century. He wrote: 
" dpaxAi6Xi^rroy, seu Calculus . . Item 

ipa-xjurroida^ seu partium drachmae dosis Argent 
1569." 8^. " De natura, viribus et effectious 
balneonim & salubrium fontium qui per Ger- 

Van der Linden, De Scriptis medicis libri duo, 
1637, p. 168. 

Borel, Bibliotkeca ChimUa^ i654f P* 89 ; 1656, 
p. 85. 

Mercklin, Lindenius renovaius, 1686, p. ^16. 

Manget, Bibliotkeca Scriptorum medtcorum^ 
1731. I. ii. p. 235. 

maniam celebres sunt. Argent. 1571," 8**. " Epis- 
tola ad Gratarolum," in Opuscula Ckemica, Franc. 
1614, 8**, and Franc. 1580, 8^. 

Fictuld says he was M.D. and chemist at 
Schlettstadt. He condemns this epistle as *'poor 
stuff" and " hollow quill-fencing." 

Kestner, Medicinisches Gelehrten- Lexicon, ^74^ 
p. 278. 

J5cher, Allgemeines Gelehrten- Lexicon, 1750^ ii. 
p. 417. 

Fictuld, Probier-Stein^ X7S3. T^- "• P* ^ 

Haller, Bibliotkeca Afedicina practical^ i777» ii* 
P- 173- 

ETTMULLER (Michael). 

Michaelis Ettmulleri, Philos. & Medic. D. hujusque in Alma Lipsiensi Prof. 
Publ. & Practici olim per omnem Europam celeberrimi. Opera Medica 
Theoretico-Practica, Mich. Ernestus Ettniullerus, Filius, Philosophiae & Medi- 
cinge Doctor, Anatomiae & Chinirgiac in eadem Academia Lipsiensi Professor 
Publicus Extraordinarius, & lUustris Academiae Leopoldinae Naturae Curios- 
orum Collega, innumeras, quibus hactenus scatuerunt, mendas sustulit, hiulca 
supplevit, luxata restituit, superflua delevit, novosque ex Manuscriptis 
Patemis Tractatus addidit Cum Privilegio Caesareo, Regis Polon. & 
Electoris Saxonici. Francofurti ad Moenum. Ex Officina Zunneriana. 
Anno Christi M D CCVIII. 

Folio. Pp. [36, including the engraved title] losa Title red and black ; vignette. 
Tomus II., Pars I. [a] xio8 ; Pars II. [2] 848, Index [100] ; i plate, p. 543. 

Michael Ettmfiller was bom at Leipzig, 26 May, 
1644, studied philosophy, mathematics, and medi- 
cine there and at Wittenberg, graduated in philo- 
sophy in 1662, and in 1663 pursued chemistry and 
l^rmacy under Michaelis. In 1666 he started on 
a long tour in Italy, France, England, and 
Holland, and was gomg to sp)end some months 
there when he was summoned home, whereupon he 
graduated Dr. Med. in Leipzig the day after his 
arrivaL He now devoted himself to practice and 
to study, wrote numerous dissertations, became a 

Witte, Diarium biograpkicunt, x688, Ann. 9 
Mar., 1683, Sig. Tttt 3 verso, 

Roth-Scholtz, Bibliotkeca Ckemica, 1727, p. 64. 

Manget. Bibliotkeca Scriptorum Meduorum, 
1731, I. ii. pp. 236-239. 

StoUe, Anleitung »ur Historie der Mediciniscken 
Gelahrkeit, 1731, pp. 291-4, p. 784. 

Zedler, Universal- Lexicon, 1734, viii. col. 3044. 

Kestner, Medicinisckes Gelehrten- Lexicon, 1740, 
p. 279. 

I5cher, Allgemeines Gelekrten- Lexicon, 1750, ii. 
col. 4x7. 

BUchner, Academice . . . Naiurce Curiosorum 
Historia, 175^, p. 465, No. 36. 

Eloy, Dictionnaire kistorique de la M^decine, 

^755* »• P- 339 ; 1778. ii. p. 164. 

Portal, Histoire de t Anatomic et de la Ckirurgie, 
1770, iii. p. 326. 

Haller, Bibliotkeca Botanica, 1771, i. p. 604. 

Haller, Bibliotkeca Anatomica, 1774, 1. p. 564. 

member of the Academia Naturae Curiosorum in 
1670, and in 168 1 be was created professor of 
botany and surgery. On 9 March, 1683, his death 
occurred ; according to some it was due to a hectic 
fever, according to others it was caused by a 
chemical expenment. He was the author of 
numerous works, especially on pharmacy, collected 
by his son Michael Ernst Ettmiiller, who prefixed 
a life of his father addressed to Liuras Schroeck, 
president of the Academia Naturae Curiosorum 
m 1703. It was reprinted by Manget 

Haller, Bibliotkeca Ckirur^ca^ 1774; i* P* 377* 
Haller, Bibliotkeca Medictnee practicee^ ^77^, i- 

P.98; 1779. »". p. 55. 173. 
Gmelin, (Jescktckte der Ckemie^ 1798, ii. p. 139, 

333. 356, 435. 

Hutchinson, Bwgrafkia MedicOy 1799, i. p. 291. 

Biograpkie Medicate ^ Paris, Panckoucke (1820- 
25), iv. p. 63. 

Thomson, History of Ckemistry^ 1830, i. p. 207, 

Dezeimeris, Dictionnaire Historique de la 
Midecine, 1834. II. i. p. 227. 

Bayle & lliillaye, Biograpkie SUdicale^ 1855, "• 
p. I. 

Haeser, Gesckickte der Medicin^ x88i, ii. p. 379. 

Billings, Index-Catalogue, 1883, iv. p. 380 ; 2nd 
Series, 1900, v. p. 164. 

Hirsch, Biograpkisckes Lexikon der kervorra- 
genden Aertte, 1885, ii. p. 310. 

Dictionnaire Enc^clopidique des Sciences 
Midicales, 1888, xxxvi. p. 354. 

253 

ETTMULLER—ETTNER 

ETTMULLER (Michael Ernestus). 
See ettmCller (michaelX 170& 

This person was the son of Michael Ettmfiller, 
and was born at Leipxig, a6 Augt., 1675. He 
studied at Zittau and Altenburg. %irent in 1692 to 
Wittenberg, returned to Ldpcig and graduated in 
arts. He then began medicine under some of the 
best men of the time, travelled in Germany, 
Holland, and England, and was made doctor at 
Ldpcig in 1699. He was subsequently appointed 
pnoiessor of anatomy and surgoy, in 17 19 pro- 

Manget, Bibliotheca Scriptorum Medicorum^ 
1731, I. ii. p. 23^ 

Acta Actidemtm . . . Natune Curiosorum, 1740, 
V. Appendix. 

Kestner, Medicinisckes Gelehr ten- Lexicon, 1740, 
p. 279. 

Tikfaer, Allgenuines GtUhrten-lxxicon, 1750, li. 
ooL 418. 

Bilchner, Acadtmue . . . Natura Curiosorum 
Hisioria, 17^5, p. 485, No. 253. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Botamica^ ^77^ ii< p* x6i. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Anatomica, 1774, i. p. 744. 

Haller. Bibliotheca Chirurgica, 1775, i>« P* ^3* 

Haller, Bibliotheca Afedicinee practices, 1776, i. 
p. 99 ; 1788, iv. p. 183. 

fessor of physiology and pathoiogy, was efected a 
member and then director oT the Acadeoua 
Naturae Curiosorum. and fiDed some other offices. 
He took great trouble over the *Acte' of the 
society, and conununicated several papers to it, 
wrote numerous dissertations, and edited his fiatber^s 
works. He did not concern himself with chemistry. 
He died at Ldptig, 25 SepL, 1732. 

Eloy, Dictumnaire Hisiorifue de la BUdtcine, 
1778. li. p. 165. 

Biographic Midicale, Paris, Panckoudce (1890- 
25). iv. p. 67. 

Dezdroeris, Dictiimnaire Historifue de la, 
Midecine, 1834, I. i. p. 24a 

Ersch & Gruber, Allgemeime EncyUopddie, 1843, 
xxxviii. p. 388. 

Nouvelle Biographic Ginirale, 1858. xvi coL 
639 (he is called Eraest-Michel in this article). 

Allgetmeinc Deutsche Biographic, 1877, vi. p. 400. 

Hirsch. Biographisches Lexihon der hervorra- 
gemdcn Acrxtc, x88^. ii. p* 310. 

Billings, Index- Catalogue, 1883, iv. p. 380; and 
Scries, 1900, v. p. 164. 

ETTNER (JoHANN Christoph von). 

Des getreuen Eckharts entlauffener Chymicus, in welchem vocnemlich der 
Laboranten und Process-Kramer Bofsheit und Betriigerey, wie dieselben zu 
erkennen und zu fliehen ; hernach bewahrteste Artzney-Mittel in allerhand 
Kranckheiten und Zufallen menschlichen Leibes zu gebrauchen; dann son- 
derliche, philosophische, politische, medicinische am Meisten aber Chymische 
Anmerckung und Process; wie auch eine griindliche Erortenmg vieler 
zweiffelhaffter Vortrage; endlich welcher Gestalt man auff Reisen und so 
wohl in frembden als einheimischen Zusammenkiinfften sich verhalten soil, 
mit Beyfugung Sinn- und Lehr-reicher, erschrecklicher und lustiger Begeben- 
heiten vorgestellet werden. Augspurg und Leipzig, bey Lorentz Kroniger 
u. Gottlieb Gobels sel. Erben, Buchhandl. 1696. 

8**. Pp. [16] iiao. Title red and black. Symbolic frontispiece included in the 
pagination. It represents a "Cbjrmicus" fleeing out of a laboratory pursued by 
* Eckhart * presumably, who is beating him with a pair of big crucible tongs. 

Haller c|Uotes an edition of 1697, 8^ Fictuld expresses great contempt for the book. 
Gmelin, copied by Schmieder, calU the book Entlarffter Chymicus, 

Manes Poterianse, i.e. Petri Poterii Andegavensis Consil. ac Medici Reg. 
Christianissimi, Inventa Chymica anxie hactenus desiderata, secundum 
men tern Autoris elaboranda, ex Autoris excellentissimi textu combinata, 
exhibente editione Francofurtensi Wilhelmi Richardi Stockii, sub Anno 
MDCLXVI. adjunctis enchirisibus accuratissimis. Francofurd & Lipsi^e, 
Apud Michaelem Rolachium. Anno 1692. 

8^ Pp. [561. including the frontispiece. At the end it is signed : Posnanias, d. 
12 Nov. Anni 1689. Joann. Cbr. Etner, D. C. & M. R. 

[Another Copy.] 

ETTNER 253 

ETTNER (JoHANN Christoph von). Continued. 

Manes Poteriani, Le. Petri Poterii And^avensis ConsiL ac Med. Reg. 
Christianissimi Inventa Chymica, anxie hactenus desiderata, secundum 
mentem Autoris elaboranda ex Autoris excellentissimi textu combinata« 
exhibente editione Francofurtensi Wilh. Richardi Stockii Anno M.DC.LXVI. 
adjunctis enchirisibus accuratissimis, product! k Joanne Christoph. Etner, 
Phil & Med. D. Sac Caes. Risque Pol. Mtis. Mtis ConsiL & Archiatro. 
Francofiirti & Lipsiae, Apud Hseredes Michael RolachiL 

4^ Pp. [40]. At the end it is signed : Posnaniae d. 12 Nov. Anni 1689. 
Joann. Chr. Etner. D. C. & M. R. 

This edition is not dated, but it must be subsequent to the other. 

Des getreuen Eclcarths Medicinischer Maul-AfTe oder der entlarvte Marckt- 
Schreyer. In welchen vomehmlich der Marcktschreyer und Quacksalber 
Bofsheit und Betriigereyen, wie dieselben zu erkennen und zu meiden, 
hemach bewahrtheste Artzney-Mittel, in allerhand Kranckheiten und zufallen 
menschlichen Leibes zu gebrauchen. Ingleichen eine grundliche Beschrei- 
bung und Gebrauch des Hirschberger-Landecker-Johannis-Toplitzer- 
Egerischen Sauerbrunn- und Carls-Bades. Dann sonderliche philosophische, 
politische, Chymische, am meisten aber medicinische Anmerckungen ; wie 
auch eine grundliche Erorterung vieler zweifelhaffter Vortrage; endlich, 
welcher gestalt man sich auf Reisen, und so wohl in frembden als einheim- 
ischen Zusammenkiinfften verhalten soil. Mit Beyfugung Sinn- und Lehrreichen, 
erschrocklichen und lustigen Begebenheiten vermehrter und unter gewissen 
Capiteln vorgestellet worden. Franckfurth und Leipzig, Bey Michael 

Rohrlachs seel. Wittib und Erben. 1720. 

8*. Pp. [14, induding the engraved title] 1072. Printed title red and black. The 
engraved title represents a quack's stage by C. Winckler. The costumes of the 
spectators are interesting. Haller says that editions of this book appeared at 
Frankfurt and Leipzig. 1694, 8** ; 1710, Z* ; and it is quoted by Stolle. 

Rosetum Chymicum, oder: Chymischer Rosen-Garten, aus welchem der 
vorsichtige Kunst-Beflissene Voll-bliihende Rosen, der unvorsichtige Laborant 
aber Dornen und verfaulte Knospen abbrechen wird ; In sonderliche Garten- 
Better abgetheilet und vorgestellet von Hanfs Christoph von Ettner und 
Eiteritz, Eqv. Ihro Romis. Kayserl. und Konigl. Majestat Rath, der Chymie 
Beflissenen. Franckfurt und Leipzig, Bey Michael Rohrlachs Wittib und 
Erben. 1724. 

8*. Pp. [12] 564. Title red and black. "The first edition was published at 
Leipzig. 1717, 8*», by Johann Friedrich Braun,"— says the author of the Beytrag, 
repeated by Gmelln. 

D. Joh. Christoph. von Ettner und Eittritz, Rom. Kayserl. und Konigl. Cathol. 
Majest. Raths, Vade et Decide Cain, oder : Gehe und schlage den Cain todt 
Franckfurt und Leipzig, Bey Michael Rohrlachs Wittib und Erben. 1724. 

8». Pp. 7a 

^54 

ETTNER^EUTHYMIUS 

ETTNER (JoHANN Christoph von). Continued, 

There is some confusion about the authorship 
of these writings. Gmelin draws a distinction 
between " Hans Chn. von Etner," author of the 
Routum, and "Joh. Chrph. Ettner," whom he 
crediu with the works which appeared under the 
pseudonym " £>er getreue Ecknard," and Kopp 
follows Gmelin in thus distinguishing these writers. 

In the Roseium, however, the author calls him> 
self Christoph, not Christian, so that so far as that 
goes Gmelin's distinction is unfounded, and Fuchs 
calls the author of the Rosetum "Joh. Chph. von 
Ettner u. Eiterilz." Roth-Scholtz and Schmieder 
have the name Christoph only, but they do not 

2uote either the Roseium or the Vade et Occide 
'ain, so that they are of no assistance in this diffi- 
culty. 

J6cher calls him Christoph, and ascribes other 
works to him. as is done by Haller also : D^r 
Unvriirdige Doctor, Augspurg, 1697, 8** ; Der 
Verwegene Chirurgus, Augspurg, 1698, 8*; Der 
Ungewissenhafle Apothecker, Leipzig. 1700, 8* ; 
Augspurg, 1753, 8* ; Der unvorsichtige Hebammc, 
172^ 8*. Ettner wrote also Betoardicum Mineraie 
txcLltcUum, »70i, 8**: De Podagra, Breslau, . 1693, 
4* ; and Satires, and Gmelin refers to the examina- 
Uon of the Eger Spring by him. 

Roth-Schoftz, it ma^ be remarked, calls one of 

the author's works " Entlauffener Chymicus"; but, 
under C. Ettner (p. 65), erroneously *' enllarffter 
Chymicus," which apparently is a confusion with 
the ** entlarvter Marcktschreyer. " As for the pseu- 
donym, it appears as Eckhardt. Eckhard, Eckhart, 

Roth-Scholtz, Bibliotheca Ckemica, 1727, pp. 61 
(Eckhardt), 65 (Ettner). 

Die Rdelgebome Jungfer Alchymia, 1730, p. 233. 

Manget, Bibliotheca Scriptormm Medicorum, 
1731, I. ii. p. a^o (discusses the identity o{ Eckardus 
wiUi Etnerus). 

StoUe, Anleitung xur Historic der Mediciniscken 
Gelakrheit, 1731, p. 6. 

Tbcher, Allgemeincs Gelehrtcn- Lexicon, 1750, ii. 
col 418. 

Fictuld, Frobier-Stein, 17^. Th. ii. p. 57. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Botantca, 1772, ii. p. 51. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Chirurgica, 1774, 1. pp. 470, 

541- 
Beytrag tur Geschichte der hohem C hemic, 1785, 

p. 662. 
Haller, Bibliotheca Medicina practicce^ 1787, iv. 

p. 137. 

and Eckart. in Roth-ScholU. but the author him- 
self uses the form Eckhart and Eckarth. 

A reason for making a distinction between the 
authors of these bool^ may be founded on the 
respective dates of publication ; those of '* Eckarth " 
appearing in the last years of the seventeenth 
century, and the Rosetum not till 17 17, or twenty 
^ears after. So far as one can see, however, there 
IS no author of the name of "Christian," and all 
the books emanate from "Christoph." both those 
with his own name and those with '* Eckarth's.** 

Beyond what is said of him on the title-pages of 
his books there is very little recorded. Strieker 
says he was bom at Glogau, and seems to have 
studied under Bohn and Ammann at Leipzig; and 
possibly at Konigsberg. Jocher describes him as 
a practitioner at Augsburg who was a doctor of 
philosophy and medicine, councillor and chief 
physician of the King of Poland at Posen, and 
was a knight and councillor of the Emperor. 
Judging by his books he seems to have been in 
active conflict with all the medical, pharmaceutical 
and chemical quackery of his time, and on that 
account his writings are of some value. 

Strieker remarks that he is an interesting medical 
writer from a folk-lore point of view, and his works 
are quoted by Grimm in his Dictionary for the 
words he supplies. 

At the same time he is referred to by Creiling 
{Die Edeleebome Jungfer Alchymia) as a living 
witness of the reality of the red and white stone, 
seeinp; that he had handled both. He was then 
residing at Breslau. 

Gmelin, Geschichte der C hemic, 1798, ii. pp. 291, 
323, 772 (and Index). 

Fuchs, Repertorium der chemischen Litteratur, 
1806-08, p. 243. 

Schmieder. Geschichte der Alchemic, 1832, p. 512. 

Wilhelm Strieker, " Dr. Ettner's medicinische 
Romane." Virchow*s Archiv fUr pathologische 
Anatomic . . . z866. xxxvii. pp. 131-139 (an in- 
teresting notice). 

Ladrague, Bibliothique Ouvaroff, Sciences 
Secrites, 1870, No. 1361. 

Billings, Index-Catalogue, 1883, iv. p. 380 ; 2nd 
Series. 1900. v, p. 164. 

Hirsch, Biographisckes Lexihon der hervorra- 
genden Aertte, 1885, ii. p. 311. 

Kopp, Die Alchemic, 1886, ii. pp. 377, 395 
(Hans Christian v. Ettner) ; p. 394 (Joh. Christoph 
Ettner). 

ETWAS in Nichts. 

See CHYMISCHRS Etwas in Nichts, 1722. 

EUFERARIUS. 

See FERRARIUS. 

EUTHYMIUS DE BRUSCA (C). 

C. Euthymii de Brusca, Vindiciarum Faulhaberianarum Continuatio. Das 
ist rechtmessige Rettung Herrn Johann Faulhabers Mathematici zu Vim 
Famae Sidereae, wider die Ehrenrtige Teutsche Diffamation-Schrifften, 
Expolitio Famae sidereae, &c. vnd Postulatum aequitatis plenissimum, &c 
genant, welche M. Zimpertus Wehe Lateinischer Schulen Collaborator zu 

EUTHYMIUS^EXPOSITIO 255 

EUTHYMIUS DE BRUSCA (C). ConHnued. 

Vim. Vnder dem falschen Namen Hisaise sub Cnice als durch oflentlichen 
Truck spargirt hat Moltzheim, Gedruckt bey Stephan Bidermann, Anno 
M.DC.XX. 

4*. Pp. [6] 38. 

This does not refer to chemistry or alchemy, found under s EMM ELI N (jOHANN) and surotius 
Other tracts relating to faulhabes (y.v.) will be (leonhakdus). 

EVONYMUS. 

See GESNER (CONRAD). 

See liebavt (jean). 

EXAMEN Alchymisticum. 
See pantaleon, 1676. 

EXEMPLUM artis Philosophiae. Ein Exemplum der Philosophischen Kunst 

See trissmosinus (salomonX Aureum Vellus, Tractatus iii. 1598, p. 153. 

See TANCKE (joachimX Pfomptuarium Alchymiac, i6ia Appendix Tomi Primi, 

p. 254. 
See eroffnete geheimnisse des Steins der Weisen, 1708-18, p. 278. 
.SV^ [scHATZ und Kunstkammer], p. 254. 

EXERCITATIONES in Turbam Philosophonim. 

See ARTIS AURIFER^ . . . Volumina, 1610, i. p. 99. 

See MANGKT ( J. J.), Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, i. p. 497. 

See UBUNG in die Turbam. 

EXPERIENTIA Naxagorse, 

See NAXAGORAS (ehrd von). 

EXPERIMENTIRTE KunstStiicke. 

See juGEL Oohann Gottfried), 1789. 

EXPLICATIO Oder aufsfuhrliche Erklarung vber das . . . von Joan-Rudolpho 
Glaubero aufsgangnes (Miraculum Mundi) intitulirtes Tractatlein 1656. 

See GLAUBER (JOHANN RUDOLPH). 

EXPLICATIO Centri in Trigono Centri per somnium. 
See MONTE hermetis Qoannes de), 1680. 

EXPOSITIO Alberti super Chymiam. 

See KIESER (FRANZ), Cabala Cbymica, 1606, p. 252. 

EXPOSITIO Epistolae Alexandri Regis. 

See ARTIS AURlFERiB . . . Volumina, 1610, i. p. 245. 

8$6 EXPOSITIO^EXTRACTUM 

EXPOSITIO et PracUca Lapidis Adrop, CoUecta ex Plimi Philosophi Libio 
qui intitulatur: Aromaticum Philosophorum Thesaurus et Secretum Secre- 
torum. 

See SBNDivoGius (michaelX Lumen Chymicum Novum. Epilogus, 1624, p. 125. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1661, vi. p. 477. 

EXTRACTUM ex Cimbalo Aurea 

See BARNAUD (NICOLAUS), THga Chemica, 1599, p. 37. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, ill. p. 781. 

/^-/^ (/. /.) 2S7 

F. 

Josephus Westphalus von der Goldtinctur der Weisen aus den Metallen; mit 
Anmerkungen von F . . . 

See SCHRODER (FRiEDRiCH JOSEPH wilhelm), Ncuc Alchymistischc Bibliothek, 
1774, II. ii. p. I. 

F. (A. C. v.). 

See ARDUINO (GIOVANNI), 1778. 

F. (J.). 

See AGRIPPA (heinrich CORNELIUS), Three books of Occult Philosophy, 1651. 

F. (J.)- 

A New Light of Alchymy : taken out of the Fountain of Nature and Manual 
Experience. To which is added a Treatise of Sulphur. Written by Michael 
Sendivogius : i,e. Anagrammatically, Divi Leschi Genus Amo. 

Also Nine Books of the Nature of Things, written by Paracelsus, viz. 

Generations 
Growths 

Of the . ^ 

Conservations 

Life, Death 

Renewing 

c ^' } oi Natural Tilings. 

Separation | ° 

Signatures 

Also a Chymical Dictionary explaining hard Places and Words met withal 
in the Writings of Paracelsus, and other obscure Authors. All which are 
faithfully translated out of the Latin into the English Tongue, By J. F. M.D. 
London, Printed by A. Clark, for Tho. Williams at the Golden Ball in 
Hosier-Lane. 1674. 

8«. Pp. [16] 351 [i blank]. 

Paracelsus' tract and the Chymical Dictionary have each a title-page, included 
in the pagination. There was an edition of this book in 4*, London, 1650, pp. [16] 147 
[13] [i blank] [a, 40]. 

It mav be questioned if J. F., who translated The Chymical Dictionary is practically a 

Agrippa s Occult Philosophy, be the same as the translation of Dorn's Dictionarium Paracelsi, but 

editor of the present work, and if either or both be considerable portions have been omitted, and the 

identical with John French, who wrote the Art of words have been subjected to alteration. 
Distillation. I have considered the subject under 
FKBNCH (John). 

F. (J. J.). 

Der Hermetische Nord-Stern, oder getreuer Unterricht und Anweisung, wie ai 

der Hermetischen Meisterschaft zu gelangen, nebst gutherziger Waraung 

R 

258 

F. (/ J.y-FABER 

^* (J* JO- Continued. 

und Ermahnung, wie sich vorhero jedennann wohl zu pr^fen habe, ebe er 
sich unterstehe, dieser so grossen und geheimen Wissenschaft zu unterweifen. 

in fossa uniti chare ignes, 
heraus gegeben von J. J. F. Sac Caes. Reg. M. C A. Liebhaber des giotsen 
Geheimnufs und wahren Weiisheit, nebst einem Anhang, handlend von der 
ewigen Weifsheit oder Magia, und sechs Tractatlein Philippi Aureoli Thee- 
phrasti Bombast ab Hochenheim. 

I. Psalterium Chymicum seu Manuale ParacebL 
II. De Tinctura Physica. 

III. Apocalipsis Hermetis. 

IV. Thesaurus Thesaurorum Alchimistarum. 
V. Coelum Philosophorum. 

VI. Secretum Magicum. 
Frankfurt und Leipzig, zu finden im Krausischen Buchladen. 1771. 

r. Pp. [8] 296. 

Appended to the tract vmi der ewigen Weifsheit 
Oder Magia, p. 127, is a Lohgesang von der Golt- 
lichen Weifsheit. 

For the Paracelsus items see Sudhoff, Biblio^ 
groMa Paracelsiea, 1894, p. 661, No. 46a. 

The present collection escaped the notice of 
Mook {Theaphrastus Paracelsus . . . 1876) as I 

See DISCURSUS Philosophicus. 

had occasion to point out, Bibliographic Para* 
celsica^ Part i., 1877, No. 11. 

See Kopp, Die Alchemic, 1886, it 540. for books 
named after the north star and others. 

This writer can hardlv be J. J. Ferber, who was 
a declared opponent of alchemy, and wrote a paper 
against It in the St. Petersbiurg Academy, which 
was afterwards printed at Berlin, 1788, 8". 

F. R. C. 

See V. 0* R«X ^-^-t Giildene Rose, No. vii. 

FABER (Albert Otho). 

Von dem medicinalischen Auro PotabiU, an den grofsmachtigsten Fiirsten 
Carolum II. von Grois-Britannien, Franckreich und Irland Konig, Beschirmem 
des Glaubens. Ein in der Praxi gegriindete £rzehlung» durch Albertum 
Othonem Fabrum, Sr. Koniglichen Mayestat Medicum ordinarium. Concedirt 
und zu drucken zugelassen den 29 Januarii, Anno 167^ Roger I'Estrange. 
Aus dem Englischen ins Hochteutsche iibergesetzt, und ist zu bekommen 
zu Franckfurt, Amsterdam, und Dantzig. Bey Henrico Wilmsonio, & 
Bartelsonio, Anno 1677. 

4®. Pp. 23 [1 Wank} 

The English edition was published with a Latin title :~De Auro Potabili 
Medidnali, ad Potentissimum Pnncipem Ourolum II. Magnae Britannise Franciae ft 
Hybemie Regem, Fidei Defensorem, practica recensitio, per Albertum Othonem 
Fabrum Sacr. Reg. MaJ^^ Med. Ord. Licensed Jan. 39, 167*. Roger L' Estrange. 
Printed for the Author, in the Old Palace near the Parliament Stairs, 1677. 

Small 4*. pp. 16, 16. 

An English edition is said to have been pub- 
lished at London, 167A, 4*^, but considering the 
date of the licence in the preceding that seems to 
me doubtful A Latin edition, FnuUcfiirt, 1678, 4^, 
is quoted. It is in the British Museum. It was 
reviewed in the Ephemerides Gallica for 1679. 
Haller mentions an edition of the German, Amst. 
1675, 4®. Such a German edition seems somehow 
to be improbable on account of the date and place 
of publication. 

Faber vras in practice at Lflbeck in 1641, then he 
went to Hamburg, next into the Sultzbacb-Palatine 
service in which he was physician both of court 
and camp, and finally to England, where he 
was appointed physician to Charles II. He 
died at London in 1678. He wrote two tracts: 
Paradoxon de marbo Gallico, Altona. 1660. 4*; 
and the above. 

FABER^FABRE 259 

FABER (Albert Otho). Continued. 

B^uwurides erudiiorum Gailica, 1679, No. 16, Haller, Bihlioikeca Medicine pracHcm, 1779, uL 

pp.a90.aa2. p. 133. 

Mercklin, Lindenius renavaius, 1686. p. ai. BtograpkU Midicale^ Paris, Pandcoucke (xSao- 

Mdller, Cimbria literata, 1744, ii. p. 188. '5)r *^' P* ^ 

T(}cher, Ailgemeines GelekrUn^Lexicom, 1750, ii. DicHonmaire Encyclopfdiqtu des ScUncis Midi' 

coL 46a caUs^ 4ime S6rie, 1877, i. p. ii. 

EIo^, Dictionnaire Historique de la Midecine^ Hirscb, Biografkixkes Ltxikon der keruarra- 

1778; li. p. 175. getuUn Aerxte, 1885, ii. p. ^aa. 

FABER (Jonas). 
Pharmacopaea Hermetica Das ist: Wunderreiche Tugent vnderschiedlichen 
Artzneyen als Tincturen, Essentzen, vnd Elixirien &c. so Melchior Meiisner 
Chymicus in Kitzingen elaborirt vnd bereit hat Durch Jonam Fabrum 
Phil, ac Med. Doctorem p. t. Physicum daselbsten beschriben, vnd zu 
jedermanniglichen sonderbahren Nutzen bevorab ins Bist: vnd Hertzogthums 
Francken gehorigen Inwohnern in Druck gegeben. 

Domine aperis manum tuam, & imples omne animal benedictione. 

PsaL 144. 
Gedruckt zu Wirtzburg, bey Elias Michael Zinck. 

8**. Pp. [a] 3a The License is dated : HerbipoU, 10 MartiJ, Anno i666u 

It contains notices of the virtues of certain secret remedies ' hermetically ' prepared from the metals, 
but the mode of preparation is not given. 

FABRE (Pierre Jean). 
Acutissimi ac celeberrimi Philosophi Petri Johannis Fabri Castrinovidarensis 
Doctoris Medici Monspeliensis Opera Reliqua volumine hoc posteriore 
coroprehensa ; cum Indice duplici, altero Capitum, altero Rerum ac Verborum 
locupletissimo. Libros in hoc Volumine contentos exhibet pagina quarta« 
Francofurti ad Moenum, Sumptibus loannis Beyeri. Anno M.DC.LII. 

4^ Pp. [16] X039 [i blank] : Index [34]. Vignette. 

The tracts contained in this volume are : Another edition of this second volume was pub- 
Hercules Piochymicus, p. i. lished by Beyer at Frankfurt in 1656, 4^ pp. [40], 
Hydrographum Spagyncum, p. 85. ' Propugnaculum/ pp. 71 [i blank], 1039 [' «ankj, 
Psedagogus [or Alchymista] Christianus, p. 307. Index m. The first volume of the collected wofks 
Secreta Chymica, p. 356. was published bv Beyer at Frankfurt, 165a, 4**, pp. 
Myrothedum Spagyncum, p. 50a [a8] 740 [44], ' Propugnaculum,' 71 [i blank]. 
Palladium Spa^[]rrMmm, p. 74a. 
Chirargia Spagirica, p. 949. 

Des scharffsinnigen, weltberufienen, und unvergleichlichen Philosophi Petri 
Johannis Fabri, der wahren Artzney Doctoris und weyland Stadt-Physici zu 
Montpellier, alle in zwey Theile verfassete Chymische Schriften, darinnen 
im ersten Theile enthalten. 

I. Die Universal-Chymie oder Anatomic der gantzen Welt, das ist, aller 
darinnen begrifTenen Dinge, neben einer beylauffigen klaren Information, 
was die Natur eigentlich sey, wie und woraus sie alle Dinge in den 3. Reichen 
producire, emahre und erhalte, ingleichen wie, nach Imitation derselben, der 
Lapis Philosophorum durch die Spagyrische Kunst verfertiget werden miisse. 

II. Die Universal-Weifsheit oder Anatomic des Menschen und der Metallen, 
worin die gantze Medicin, nebenst einer Entdeckung aller Kranckheiten und 
der Pathematum derselben, durch die Spagyrische Kunst renoviret gezeiget 
wird, nebst beygefugten sehr vielen niitzlichen Arcanis. Anfanglich von 

j6o 

FABRE 

FABRE (Pierre Jean). Continued. 

dem Autore in Lateinischer Sprache klar, hell und sehr deutlich beschrieben 
jetzo aber denen Liebhabern der Philosophie und der naturlidien Wiasen- 
schafiten, welche der Lateinischen Sprache unktindig, zum besten ins Deiitsdie 
iibersetzet, und mit doppelten Registem versehen. Mit Ihr. Romisch-KaTseri 
und Cathol. Majest. allergnadigsten Privilegio. Hamburg, in Vertegung 
Lucas Eding in der griinen Strasse, 17 13. Gedruckt, durch Georg Friederich 
Schultzen. 

4^ Pp. 1^48] 976. Res|ister [60]. Title red and black. Vol a has a title, induded 
in tbe paginauon ; pp. [24] 974. Register [43]. 

The second volume contains tbe following 
tracts: 

Hercules Pio-Chymicus. p. i. 

Hydrographum Spagyricum, p. 75. 

Aichymista Cbristianus, p. 181. 

Secreta Cbymica, oder Chymiscbe Geheimnissen, 
p. aoi. 

MjfTOtbecium Spagyricum, oder Spagyrische 
Apothecke, p. 438. 

Palladium Spagyricum, p. 647. 

Chirurgia Spagyrica, p. 833. 

Alchymiae Propognaculum, oder Der Aldiymie 
Brustwehr, p. Q17. 

Tbe remainder of this book with a new title-page 
(in black) and called the second edition, was 
reissued at Hamburg by Wolffgang Fickwetler and 
Christoph Wilhdm Brandt, in 1725, bot tbe date 
of the second volume remains 1713. 

[Von Wiirckung und Gebrauch der Gold Artzney.] 

13*. Wants the title-page ; Sigs. Aij to Bxij in twelves. Bxij is blank. 

Epistolae aliquot. 

See MANGET (j- J«)» Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, i. p. 304. 
Manuscriptum . . . Res Alchymicorum obscuras extraordinarii perspicuitate 
explanans. E Musaeo Gabrielis Clauderi. 

See MANGET (j. J.X Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, i. p. 291. 

Send-Scbreiben . . . von der Vortrefflichkeit der Chymischen . . . 
Schrifilen . . . Petri Job. Fabri. 
See ROTH-SCHOLTZ (friederich), Deutsches Theatniro Chemicum, 1730,11. p. 551. 

P. J. Fabre, a native of Castelnaudary in Lan- 
guedoc, was bom in the latter part of the sixteenth 
centur)r, and lived till 1650. He was a ph3rsician at 
his native place and at Montpellier. He was also 
a voluminous writer, but his work has been judged 
unfavourably by different critics. 

Of the above-mentioned works AlchymUta Chris- 
Hanus appeared : Tolosse, 1633, 8** ; Myroilucium 

Borel, Bibliotheca Chimica^ i654t P* 9i' 
Mercklin, Lindtnius renovatus^ 1686, p. 895. 
Roth-Scholtz, Bibliotheca Chemica^ X7^» P* 68. 
Roth-Scholtz, Deutsches Theairum Chemicum^ 

1730. ». p. ^^ 
Mangct, Bi 

Scriptorum Afedicorum, 

ibliotheca 
1731. I. ii. p. 347. 
Jacob Leupolds Prodromus Bibliothecee Metallicce^ 

173a. P- 52. 
Kestner, Medicinisches Gelehrten-Lexicont 1740^ 

p. 386. 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire de la Philosophie 
Hermitique^ 1743, iii. p. 159. (In T. i. p. 481 he 
makes one of his silly remarks about Fabre.) 

Tticher, Allgemeines Gelehrten-Lexicon^ 1750, ii. 
col. 47 z. 

Fictuld, Probier-SteiH, 1753, Th. ii. p. 63. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Chirurgica, 1774, i. pp. 383, 
314 (surgical books). 

Elo)r» Dictionmaire Historique de la Midecine^ 
1778, li. p. 176. 

Baumer, Bibliotheca Chemica^ 1783, p. 16. 

Can^re, Catalogue . , . des OuvroMS . . . sur 
Us Baux MiniraUs . . . 1785, p. 37, No. 84. 

Spagyricum, Tolosse, 1638, 8** ; Palladium Spagy- 
ruum, Argentorati, 1633, 8®; Propugnetculum 
Alchymiety Tolosae, 1645, 8"; and LHe Hell- 
scheinende Sonne, NQmborg, 170^, 8", a translatwo 
by Conrad Horlacher of his Epistle on the obscurity 
of Alchemy addressed to Frederick, Duke of 
Holstein, and printed at NOmberg, 1690. 4**. 

Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemie, 1797, L pp^ 

507-9- 
Fuchs, Repertorium der chemischen Litteratur, 

i8o6<o8, pp. IIO-II3. 

Biographie Medicate, Paris, Panckoucke (i830- 
25), iv. p. 87. 

Sprengel, Geschichte der Artneykunde, 1837, iv. 

p. 37a. 
Schmieder, Geschichte der Alchemie, 1833, p. 

385. 
Biographie Universelle, 1855, xiii. p. 364. 

Nouvelle Biographie Ginirale, 1858, xvi. coL 933. 

Kopp, Beitrdge Mur Geschichte der Chemie^ 
1869, i. p. 18. 

L^drague, Bibliothique Ouvaro^f Sciences 
Secrites, 1870, Nos. i30o-i. 

Dictionnaire Encyclopidique des Sciences Midi- 
cales, 4^e S^rie, 1877, i. p. 11 (calls him Jean- 
Pierre). 

Billings, Index-Catalogue, 1883, iv. p. 563 ; and 
Series, 1900, v. p. 434. 

Hirsch, Biographisches Lexihon der kervor- 
rcLgenden Aernte, 1885, ii. jx 333. 

iCopp, Die Alchemie, 1886, ii. p. 333, etc. , etc. 

FABRICIUS^FALCK 

261 

FABRICIUS (Wilhelm). 

Ste HILDANUS (WILHELM FABRICIUS). 

FACHS (Modestin). 

Probier-Biichlein, darinne griindlicher Bericht vermeldet, wie man alle Metall, 
vnd derselben zugehorenden Metallischen Ertzen und Getochten ein jedes 
auff sein Eigenschafiten vnd Metall recht probieren soL Defsgleichen Lehr 
vnd Vnterricht, der rechten Probier Oefen, Gewichten, Capellen, vnd Fliissen. 
Zu sampt angehangtem Bericht, aufs der H. Schrifit, vnd Erfahning durch 
die Proba, was vorzeiten die alten Patriarchen, Romer vnd Jiiden, zu Babylon, 
Jerusalem, vnd an den Grentzen derselben Lander, vor vnd nach der Geburt 
Christi, biis zu dem 1569. Jahre, fur Gewicht, Schrot, Kom vnd Geprage, 
zu dem alten Miintzen gebraucht vnd genommen haben. Allen Miintz- 
meistern, Wardienen, Probierem, Goldschmieden vnd andem, so mit Silber 
Oder Gekomt handeln, sehr niitzlich vnd dienstlich : Vnd jetzo zum andem 
mal in Druck verfertiget, vnd mit fleifs corrigirt : durch weylandt H. Modestin 
Fachsen, Fiirstlichen Anhaldischen gewesenen Miintzmeister, vnd Wardien 
zu Leipzig. Leipzig, In Verlegung Gottfriedt Grossen, Im Jahr Christi 
M.DCXXII. 

8**. Pp. [24] 236 [error for 257I. Register [^]. [i, Cokfhon\ Ldpzie, 
gedruckt durch Hieronymum RauscherD. Im Jahr Christi : M.ECJCXIL] [i blaokj. 
Folding plate of a furnace. Title red and black. 

Modestin Fachs. Fachsius, Fachsen, was master 
of the mint of the Prince of Anhalt, and in this 
book he gives a system of assaying. It must have 
been found useful, for Baumer refers to it being in 
its nineteenth edition. The book was printed at 
Leipzig as early as 1595, but I have met with no 

Roth-Scholtx, Bibliotheca Chemica^ 1727, p. 71. 
Jiicoi Ijtupolds Prodromus Bibliotheca Metallicat 
ed. Brilckmann, 1732, p. 53. 
BAiimer, BUliotkeca CAemica, 178a, p. 66. 

record of any edition between that and the present 
one. After it others are reported : Ldpsig, 1636, 
1671, 1678, 1680, 1689 ; Amsterdam, 1609. In the 
British Muse^tal are copies of 1595, 1669, 1678, and 
1689. / 

Gmelin, GesckicJUe der CAemiet 1797. L p. 365. 
Fuchs, Reperiorium der ekemisdUn lAiteraimr, 
1806-08, p. 96. 

FALCK (Joseph). 

Mundus Aspectabilis philosophice consideratus. Authoie R. P. Josepho Falck 
societatis Jesu, serenissimi ac potentissimi principis D. D. Caroli Alberti 
utriusque Bavar. Ducis et Electoris &c. olim confessaria Augusts 
Vindelicorum. Sumptibus Martini Veith Bibliopol. & Consort Happachian- 
orum. Anno M DCC XXXVIII. 

Folio. Pp. [la] 458. 5 engraved plates. 

Tlus is a treatise on general physics, cosmo- 
mphy^ and physiology, but not on chemistry. 
There is a chapter on Alchemy (p. 107), to which 
art he is opposeid. 

The autbor was bom at Freiburg, in Switxerland, 
in 1680, studied at Lyons, Paris, and Rome, where 
he joined the Jesuits. He was sent to Freiburg in 
the Breisgau to teach philosophy, and then to 
leach mathematics at the University of Ingolstadt. 
If e was tutor to the children of the Elector, but he 

Backer, Bibliothique des l&crivains de la Com' 
feignie de Jisus^ Liege, 1854, Il^e S6ie, p. i8a 

did not hold this post very long, for he died in 
April, 1737, of apoplexy. It is narrated that be 
had just seen the nrst page of the present work 
when he was seized. 

He wrote a work on the density of liquids, and 
one or two upon points relating to the Calendar. 

This author must not be confused with J. P. 
Falck who lived fifty years later, and wrote about 
Russian manufactures. 

Valentinus Rosinanis, Annales IngolsiadiemHs 
Academutf 178a, iii. p. 139. 

l63 

FALLOPPIO 

FALLOPPIO (Gabriello). 
Gabr. Fallopii wunderlicher menschlichem Leben gewisser, vnd sehr nutzUcher 
Secreten, Drey Biicher. 

I. Von allerhand Olien, Cerotten, Vnguenten, Pillulen, vnd EFectuarien. 

II. Von allerhand Weinen, vnd gebrandten Wassem, zu vnderschiedlichen 
Gebrechen vnd Schwachheiten dienlich. 

III. Von etlichen sehr nutzlichen Secreten aufs der Chymia. 

Allen Liebhabem der Kiinsten, vnd sorgfaldgen Haufsvattem dienlich zu 
lesen, vnd niitzlich zugebrauchen. Vom Authore selbst in Italianischer 
Sprach publicirt, jetzund aber Teutscher Nation zu gutem in vnser Mutter- 
sprach vbersetzet Gedruckt zu Franckfiirt am Mayn, In Wolffgang 

Hofimanns Buchtruckerey : In verlag Christoffs le Blon: Im Jahr 1641. 

8*. Pp. 474. Register [09, i blank]. 

[Another Copy.] 

Wants the title-page. 

Gabriele, or Gabriello Faloppia, Falloppio, Fal* 
lopius or Falloppius, was boni at Modena, 1523. 
lie was a pupil of Vesalius, travelled widely, and 
became a distinguished physician and anatomist, of 
which subject he was appomted professor at Padua, 
in 155 1. He died at Padua, 1562. in his 39th 

Castellanus, Vike lllustrium Medicarum, 1617, 
p. ao6. 
Melchior Adami, Vita Germanorum Medicorum^ 

1690, p. 90(L 

Tacobus rhilip. Tomasinus, lllustrium Virorum 
Elogia iconiius exomata^ Patavii, 1630^ p. 43, and 
portrait 

Van der Linden, De Scriptis Medicis libri duo^ 

GhihnL 

lini, Teatro dHuomini iMterati, Venetia, 
1647, i. p. 67. 

Tomasinus, Gymnasium Pataxnnum, 1654, p. 76. 

Mercklin, Lindenius renovatus, 1686, p. 311. 

Courin^, In Universam Artem Meaicam . . . 
Introductto, 1687, pp. 163, 266; pp. 125, 211, 277. 

Freher, Tkeatrum Virorum eruditione clarorum, 
1688, ii. p. 12^3 ; portrait, plate 56. 

Placcius, Tkeatrum Anonymorum et Pseudony- 
morum^ 1708, in the section : De Scriptoribus 
Pseudonymis detectis liber, p. 278 (quotes an 
edition, Venice, 1569, and states that the author 
was thought to have been Joannes Bonacius, not 
Falloppio). 

Pope Blount, Censura Celebriorum AutJkorum, 
1710, p. 596. 

Teissier, Les Elopes des Homnus Savons^ ^7^S* 
ii. p. 95. 

Freind, The History cf Pkysick, 1725-26, 2 vols., 
passim, 

Papadopolus, Historia G^mnasii Patavini, 
Venet, 1726, i, p. ^ic, No. bciiu 

Roth-Scholtz, Bibtiotheca Chemica, 17^, p. 72. 

Niceron, Mimoires^ 1728, iv. p. 396 ; 1731, x. p. 
313. 

Manget, Bibliotheca Scriptorum Afedicorum^ 

I73if I. ii. p. 25s. 

Stolle, Anleitungtur Historie der Medici nischen 
Gelakrkeit, 1731, p. 426, etc 

/acod Leupolds Prodromus BibliotheoB metallica^ 

173^. p. 53- 
Dougl 

jlas, Bibliographia Anatomica Specimen, 
ed. sec, Uigd. Bat. 1734, p. 115. 

vear. By certain authorities be b saki to have 
been bom in 1490, but this seems to be inaccurate. 
The present work on secrets is generally 
acknowledged to be spurious. Nevertheless it 
went through several editions : Italian, 1566, 1578 ; 
German, 1588, 1641. 

Zedler, Univfrsal'Lexicom, 1735, ix. coL 183. 

Kestner, Medicimisckes GeleMrtem-Lexicon, 1740, 
p. 289. 

Lenglet Dufiesnoy, Hisiaire fe la PkUosopkie 
Hirmetique, 1742, iii. p. 161. 

Chaufepid, Nouveau LHctiomnaire Historique et 
Critique, 17QO, ii. letter F, p. 12. 

Jocner, Atlgemeines GeleArten-Lexicon, 1750, ii. 
col. 512. 

Boerhaave, Metkodus Studii Medici, ed. Haller, 

i7Sii i. PP- 97, 159. 177. 27a. 291. 435. ^ 0>fc 
and works); ii. pp. 587. 724 (in suis chinu]^cis 
operibus gravissimns vir, dexterrimus anatomicus, 
anatomes professor, & chinirgus solertissimus), 
856. 
EUoy, Dictionnaire Historique de la Midecine, 

i7S5f ». P- 346 : 1778, ii. p. 193- 
Mor^n, Le grand Dtctionnaire historique, 1759, 

V. p. 3a 

Portal, Histoire de PAnatomie et de la Chirurgie, 
1770, I pp. ^67-589, etc, etc. 

Haller, Btbliotheca Botanica, 1771, i. p. 338. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Anatomica, 1774, 1. p. 218. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Chirurpea, 1774, i. p. 217. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Medectna practic€B, 1777, ii. 

p. 143- 
Saxins, Onoptasticon Uterarium, 1780, iii« pp. 

Carrere, Catalogue , . , des Ouvrages . . . sur 
les Eaux MiniraUs, 1785, p. 43, No. 96. 
Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemie, 1797, i. p. 303, 

33>. 351- 
Hutchinson, Biographia Medica, 1799, i. pp. 

295-297. 

Aikin, General Biography, 1803, iv. p. 21. 

Tiraboschi, Storia delta Letteratura Italiana, 
1 8 10, vii. p. 624. 

Andres, DeU origine progrcssi e staio attuale di 
ogni Letteratura, 18 16, vi. pp. 15, 18. 

Biographie Midicale, Pans, Panckoucke (i8ao- 
25), iv. p. m. 

FALLOPPIO—FAMA 263 

FALLOPPIO (Gabriello). CanHtmed. 

Sppeogd, Gesckickit der Arxmitj^kmMde^ 1S37, NouvtlU Biograpkk GiiUrak^ 1858. zriL ooL 66. 

ill p. ^5. Dictiommaire Emtyclofidifme dts Sciemces MSH" 

Dezeimeris, Dictiommaire Histori^iu dt ia caUs, ^tsat S^hc, 1877. l pi 167. 

Mideciney 18^ II. L p. 273. Haeser, GesckickuderMedicim^ 1881, ii. pi 48, etc 

Hoefer, Hutoire de la CkiwUt, 1843. ti. p. 133 : Kllings, Imdex-Caial^me, 1885, iv. p. 588 ; and 

1869, ii. p. 127. Series. I9cx>. v. p. 462. 

Elrsch & Gniber, AUgemeUu Emcyklofddie^ 1845. Fennisoo. ' Notes 00 . . . Bcx>ks vA SecrelSi* 

xlL p. 288 (by F. W. TbeOe). I'arts I. and II., TramsaOiims ^ the ArckmoUgicai 

Bayle et Thillaye, Bicgrapkie MidicaU^ 1855, L Society of Glasgow^ 1883, ii ppi 190. 251. 

p. 175. Hinch, BiograpkiscMes Lexikom der kervot^ 

Biographic Umit/ersclU, 1855, xiiL p. 56a ragrmdcm AenSt^ 1885. ii. p. 335 (article by HaeKr). 

FALSCHER und wahrer Lapis Philosophorum, oder: eines vomehmen und 

Christlichen Philosophi unschatzbarer Unterricht von allem demjenigen, was 

ihm bey kostbarster Suchung des Steins der Weisen, begegnet ist, worinnen 

derselbe alle diejenigen Streiche, welche denen betriigerischen Laboranten 

nur immer moglich sind, auszuiiben, aus eigener, mit vielen looo. Ducaten 

Unkosten verknOpft gewesener vieljahriger Erfahrung, Hbtorisch entdecket, 

sodann die unthiglichen Mittel, diese Betriigereyen bey Zeiten zu entdecken 

und selbigen zu begegnen, aufrichtig zeiget; hierauf aber die Wiircklichkeit 

des Steins der Weisen und durch was vor Mittel, imter gottlichem Beystand 

sowohl hierzu, als zu Verfertigung der herrlichsten Artzeneyen zu gelangen, 

klar lehret, dabey auch in einem ausfiihrlichen Anhang zeiget, wie sowohl 

alle ausserliche als innerliche Glieder und andere Kranckheiten mit wenigen 

Kosten zu heilen sind. 

Symbolum : 

Wem es Gott gonnt, dem giebt er es im Schlaf. 

Franckfurt und Leipzig, in Commission zu haben bey Daniel Christian 

HechteL MDCCLII. 

4^ Pp. [24] 416 [2]. Title red and black. Frontispiece and engraved plate of a 
horoscope separate at p. 89. The frontispiece seems to be expressive of the laborious 
futility of the Alchemists. It is a picture of a laboratory with furnaces and other 
apparatus. The people engaged are furnished with pipes, which they are busily 
smoking. 

P. 269 are the verses beginning " Ein Ding find man, in dieser Welt," and p. 313 
those beginning ** Eine treue Lehre will ich dir geben." 5^ alte teutsche reimen. 

P. 323 is the Appendix : — 

Anhang der Land- und Haufs-Apotheca, wie sowohl alle Uusserliche, als innerliche 
Glieder und Kranckheiten zu curiren. Wobey sonderlich zusammen gesammelte 
Artzney, womit sich die Armen selbst, imd das, fast ohne Kosten su curiren, auch ihre 
Median selber verfertigen konnen. 

The first part of this Appendix contains receipts and cures for various diseases. 
The second part is a sort of pharmacopoeia of common substances and the curative 
virtues of the preparations. They are far from attractive. 

This book is a reissue, with a new title-page, of sincerus hydrophilus* Der 
Chymischen und Heutigen Welt, Nutzbahre Schatz-Kammer, 1736, q.v. 

It is condemned in choice phraseology by Fictuld, Geschichte der hdhcm Chemie, 1785, p. 671. It ia 

Probier-Siein, 1753, Th. ii. p. 62, and on the also described by Ladrague, hibliotfUque Ouvarof, 

other hand it is recommended to all those Sciences Secrites^ 1870^ No. 1471. 
who honour hermetic science in the Beytrag zur 

FAMA Fratemitatis. 

See ALLGEMEINE und General Reformation, 1781. 

FAMA Mystica Hermetica von dem grossen Universal-Stein, oder Lapide 
Philosophorum der uralten Weisen, ein abgenothigter Beweifs von desselben 
wahrhaftigem Daseyn: als eine Antwort auf dasjenige Avertissement, das 

364 

FAMA-FA VLMABFR 

FAMA Mystica Hermetica. Continued, 

eine unbekannte, aber sehr eriauchte Feder, in dem Monat Homung, des 
Jahres 1765. durch das Frankfurter und Erlanger Wochenblat an die 
erlauchten Hohen Societaten London, Paris, Berlin &c &c abgegeben, und 
offentlich bekannt gemacht hat &c. Frankfurt und Leipzig, bey Johann 
Paul Kraufis. 1773. 

8*». Pp.88. 

This is a defence of the philosophers' stone cal examples, of which he quotes thirty-seven. Thfc 

against certain attacks by an unnamed author and book, therefore, to a certain extent goes akxig with 

by Baron von Bielenfdd. The author tries to Creiling's Die EiUlgebonu Jungfer Alcfyma^ 

demonstrate the reality of transmutation by various Kortura's VertMtidiguMg, and others, 
ooosiderations and arguments as well as by histori* 

[Another Copy.] 

FAMA mystica hermetica vom Universalstein der alten Weisen. 
See HERMETISCHES A B. C, 1779, ii. p. 163. 

FANIANUS (Johannes Chrysippus). 

I>e arte metallicse metamorphoseos ad Philoponum liber singularis. 
See ARTE (De) Chemica Libri Duo, 1602. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1 659, i. p. 3a 

De Jure Artis Alchemise. 

See ARTE (De) Chemica Libri Duo, 1602. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1 659, i. p. 48. 

.SV^ MANGET (j. J.), Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, i. p. 210. 

This tract was published at Montbdiard by 
Jacques Foillet, in 1601, a year before the edition 
of i6oa above mentioned. There is no difference 
between them except the date. 

It was reprinted bv Toppi, at the end of his 
Biblioteca^ with the following title : 

De Jure Artis Alchimiae, hoc est variorum Auc- 
torum & praesertim Jurisconsultorum juditia, & 
responsa, sid qwestionem quotidianam, an Alchimia 
sit ars legitima? 

Maier, Symbola A urea Afensa, 1617, p. 389. 

Borel, Bibliotheca Ckimica, 1654, p. 93. 

Toppi, Biblioieca Napoletana, 1678, pp. 387-391. 

McTcklin, Lindenius renavaius, 16S6, p. 553. 

Reyher, Disseriatio de Nummis quibusdam ex 
Chymico Aietallofactis, 1692, p. 46 et sqq. 

Keren Haptuch^ , , . oder Teutsches Fegfeuer 
der Scheide-Kunst^ 1702, p. 123. 

Roth-Scholtz, Bibliotheca Chemica ^ 1727, p. 74. 

Jacob Leupolds Prodromus Bibliotheca Metallic<B^ 

173a. P- S3. 

FARMACOPEA. 

See BERGOMa 

Fanianus was a lawyer at BaseL He wrote Liber 
de Metamorphosi metallica^ et an sit^ Basileae, 1560, 
4**; I'aris, 1560, 4**. De Arte metaUica Metamor- 
phoseos, . . , Basilefle, 1576, 8*. 

The legality of Alchemy and the question whether 
gold and silver artificially [H^epared were to be con- 
sidered equivalent to the natural has been discussed 
by Kopp. 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire de la Philosophic 
Hermitique^ 1742, iii. p. 161. 

Beytrag zur Geschichte der hohem Chemie^ 1785, 
pp. 510, 547- 

Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemie^ I797. ^- P- *97- 

Schmieder, Geschichte der Alchemic, 1832. p. 280. 

Hoefer, Histoire de la Chimie^ 18439 ii- p. 130 ; 
1869, ii. p. 125. 

Ladrague, Bibliothique Ottvaroff^SciencesSecrktes, 

1870. No. 544. 
Kopp, Die J 

Alchemic, 1886, i. 148 ; ii. p. 392. 

FASCICULUS unterschiedlicher alten raren und wahren Philosophischen Schrifflen 
vom Stein der Weisen. 

See HELLWIG (CHRISTOPH VON), 1719. 

FAULHABER (Johann). 

Johann Faulhabers, Vlmensis Mathematici. Zwey vnd Viertzig Secreta, welche 
er in defs H. Reichs Statt Augspurg offentlich zu affigieren, vnd mannigklich 

fiA ULHAB6R—FA VSTtUS 

265 

FAULHABER (Johann). ConHnued. 

zulehren von dem Loblichen Magistral gnadige Bewilligung erlangt hat 
Im Monat Octobris, defs 162 1. Jahrs. Gedruckt zu Augspurg, bey Dauid 
Francken, Im Jahr Christi, 1622. 

4^. Pp. [10, 2 blank]. 

This does not treat of alchemy or chemistry, but 
is a brief enumeration of "his miraculoas new 
inventions, sciences and secrets of various mathe- 
matical and other wonderful arts never before 
beard of." 

Faulhaber, bom at Ulm 5 May, 1580, a man 
of extraordinary diligence and labour, was an 
arithmetician at Ulm, and wrote a number of works 
on arithmetic and mathematics in which he was 

Boissardus, Continuatio secunda Iconum vir- 
orum illustrium, 1650, plate mm a. 

Arnold, Kirchen- und Ketzer-Historitn, 1741, ii. 
p. 243 (Th. ii. B. xvii. C. xvii. § 52). 

Jocher, AUgenuines GtUhrien- Lexicon ^ i7SO» ». 
col. 527. 

deeply skilled. But he was involved in mysticism, 
was a believer in the numerical cabala, and lost his 
time over Rosicrucianism and goldmaking, and was 
a disciple of Valentin Wei^el. He died of the 
plague m 1635. His portrait is given by Boissardus. 
For other writings connected with Faulhaber 

see C. EUTHYMIUS DE BRUSCA, JOHANNES REM- 

MELiNUS, and leonhardus sirroRius. 

Brucker, Hisioria Critica PhilosopkuB^ 1766, IV. 
ii. p. 211. 

Ersch & Gruber, Allgemeine EncyklopddU^ 1845, 
xUi. p. 83 (a long account by Gartzj. 

FAUSTIUS (Johannes Michael). 

Job. Michaelis Faustij, Med. Doct. Physici Francofurt. Ordinarij, Academ. 
Leopoldino Imperialis Theophili, Compendium Alchymist. Novum, sive 
Pandora Explicata & Figuris Jllustrata. Das ist, die Edelste Gabe Gottes, 
Oder ein Giildener Schatz, mit welchem die alten und neuen Philosophi, die 
unvollkommene Metall, durch Gewalt des Feuers verbessert, und allerhand 
schadlichc und unheylsame Kranckheiten innerlich und ausserlich, durch 
deren Wiirckung, vertrieben haben. Dieser Edition wird annoch, nebst 
vielen Kupffern, und iiber 800. Philosophischen Anmerckungen, ein voll- 
komenes Lexicon Alchymisticum Novum, und ein vollstandiges Register 
Rerum & Verborum, beygefiiget. Franckfurt und Leipzig, Verlegts Johann 
Zieger, 1706. 

8**. Pp. [32] 1071. Index [194]. 19 woodcut plates separate. Small woodcuts 
in the text. Title red and black, printed across two pages. Engraved title printed on 
two pages, both included in signature )(• I'he letterpress exp&ning the woodcuts is 
not paged, but is lettered from A to T. The pagination, however, runs on con- 
secutively. * Lexicon Alchemise,' pp. 104; 'Summarischer Begriff,' pp. 236. 

Hambiu-g in 1727, the former with a title-pa^ : 
" Lexikon Alchemiae D. Joh. Michaelis Faustii," 
and the latter with an interpolated very detailed 
title-page beginning: "Succincta & brevis Artis 
Chemise Instructio.'' Copies of Faustius' * Pan- 
dora ' occur without this supplement. See below. 

Schraieder quotes : Compendium AlchymieB 
novum^ Francof. 1706, 8*, as if it were a distinct 
work. 

The work has a preface by Faustius and a reprint 
of that by Hieronymus Reusner prefixed to ' Pan- 
dora.* The present work consists of the text of 
Pandora illustrated by numerous extracts and 
parallel passages from all the alchemical writers 
with the supplementary matter above mentioned 
added. See pandora. 

The remainder of the ' lexicon * and • Sum- 
marischer Begriff* were reissued together at 

[Another Copy.] 

Imperfect, wanting the ' Lexicon ' and ' Summarischer Begriff.* 

Philaletha Illustratus, sive Introitus Apertus ad Occlusum Regis Palatium, novis 
quibusdam Animadversionibus explanatus. Cum nova Praefatione qua Vita 
pariter ac Scripta, turn edita turn inedita, ^Eyrenaei Philalethae breviter 
exponuntur. Accessit his Narratio de Vita et Scriptis Starckii, nee non 
Dn. Doct. Becheri Pantaleon delarvatus. Opera Joh. Michaeli$ Faustii, 

366 

FA USTIVS^FEHR 

FAUSTIUS (Johannes Michael). QmHnMed. 

Medic Doct Reiquepublicse Francofiiitensis ad Moenum Physid Ordinarii, 
In Collegio Curiosonim died Theophili. Fnmcofurd ad Moenum, Sumpt 
Joh. Philipp. Andreae. Anno M DCC VI. 

8*. Pp. [64, includiog the Symbolic Frootispiece : 'SigiUum Sapientum'] 12a. 
Index [6]. 

The preDace by Faustius treats of Starkey and his 
KTorka. That by Wedel discusses briefly the history 
of Alchemy and of Philaletha, and Lange's also 
deals with historical examples of possessors of the 

" KomwuHtar Hhcr PhilaUtkd MeiaUverwamdlmmg^ 
Frankfurt, 1708 ; and 1728, 8*. 

Johann Michael Faust or Faustius was bom at 
Basel, 8 June, 1663, was physician at Frankfurt 
a. M., and died thov 7 October, 1707. He was 
received into the LeopokUne-Carolinian ^society, 13 
August, 1692, under the name of Theophilus. 

Argent 1688, 4", by J. M. Faustius. Is he identical 
with the editor of Pandora ?). 

Gmelin, G^sckickie der CkewUe, 1798, iL p. 321. 

Schmieder, GtxkuhU der AlchewUe^ 183a, p. 514. 

LAdrague, BibtioiJUqtieOuvart^,ScuMC€sSecrHes, 
1870, Na x^ia 

Kopp, the Akkemie^ 1886, iL pp. 338, 368. 

The work concludes with Becber's P«niaUam 
dSr/Scrvo/au, a criticism of Gassman(^. v.). Schmieder 
mentions only a German version of the above: 

Leoglet-Dufresnoy, Histwrt de la Pkilosopkie 
HtrwUtique^ 1742, i. p. 485 ; iii. pp. 161, 162. 

BQchner, AcademteB . . . Naiura Curiosorum 
Histaria, i7«, p. 479, Na 194. 

Haller, Btoliotkeca Amaiamica, 1774, i. p. 729 
(quotes a work : ««^ wrmpiimy de Stemutatione, 

FAUSTUS SABiEUS. 

See GEBER, Summa Perfectionis, 1682, p. 278; 1751, p. 330; 1792, p. 368. 

FEDRO (Georg). 

See PHiCDRO (georg). 

FEGFEUER der Chymisten. 

See SOLDNER ( ). 

See ALETHOPHILUS, Gliickliche Erober- und Demolining des . . . Fegefeuers 
der Scheidektinst, 1705. 

FEHR (JOHANN Michael). 

Hiera Picra, vel de Absinthio analecta, ad normam & formam Academias 
Naturae Curiosorum selecta, k Joh. Michaele Fehr, D. Phys. Svinfurt. 
Ordin. Anno salutiferi partes MDCLXVII. 

Qvae Deus occulta esse voluit, non sunt scrutanda; Qvae vero manifesta 
fecit, non sunt negligenda, ne & in illis illicite-Curiosi & in his 
damnabiliter inveniamur ingrati. Prosper de vocat. gent 
Lipsids, Impensis Viti Jacobi Trescheri, Bibliopolse Vratislaviensis. Literis 
Johan-Erici Hahnii. 1668. 

8®. Pp. [16] 176 [4]. Title red and black. 3 plates. Woodcut of an earwig 
(P* 79)* Folding woodcut of a leech ; folding address to the Academy at the end. 

Fehr was born at Kitxingen in Francoiiia (*' Kit- 
tinga patria mea," as he says in the present work, 
p. i2o), 9 May, 1610, according to Lochner (Jocher 
says 1601, and others 1620, but 1610 seems correct), 
studied at various German Universities, went to 
Italvand graduated M.D. at Padua in 1641. He 
settled at Schweinfurt and along with Johann 
Lorens Bausch and two other physicians started 
the Academia Naturae Curiosorum. After the 

death of Bausch who was the founder and first 
president, Fehr succeeded him in 1666 (see the 
address at the end of the present book), and worked 
hard to promote the interests of the Academy. He 
wrote Anchora Sacra seu de Scortonera tractatus^ 
Jena, x666, the present book, and numerous con> 
tributions to the Academy on Arnica, Plica, the 
Kissingen waters, and other medical and pharma* 
ceuUau topics. He died at Schweinfurt in 1688. 

Mercklin, Lindenius renovahis, Norimb. 1686, Stolle, Anleitung aur Historie der medicimiscAen 

p. 642. Gelahrheii, Jena, 1731, p. 850 (an extract about 

Lochner, Memoria J. Michaelis Fehr^ Jena, ' Paracentesis Abdominis ). 

i6qo, 4". (This was reprinted by Manget ) Kestner, Medicinisches Gelehrlen-Lexicon, Jena, 

Manget, Bibliotheca Scriptorum Medicorum, 1740, p. 291. 

Genev. 1731, I. ii. p. 264-272. J(k:her, Al^emeines Gelehrten' Lexicon^ Leipzig, 

1750, iL coL 543. 

FENR^FERHARJUS 267 

FEHR (JoHANN Michael). Continued. 

Bllchner. Academia . . . Nalunt Cmriasormm Fvudta, Referiorium der chtmiscken LitUraimr^ 

Hisioria^ 1755. p. 463, No. a. 1806^. p. 185. 

Haller, Btflioikeca Boiamica, Tlguri, 1771, I p. Bugru/kie MidicaU^ Paris, Panckoocke (1890- 

529' as). «v. pt 182. 

Haller, Bibliotkeca AncUomua^ Londioi, 1774, Sprenj^ Gtsckickie der Arxiufkumdet Halle, 

P- 613. 1827, iv. pp. 490. 5^, 553. 

Hallor, BUUoikeca Ckirurgica, Benue, 1774, i. Deceimeris. Dicttommatre Historique de la M^U- 

p. 434. cine^ Paris, 1834, II. i. p. 288. 

, 424. ctne^ fans, 18x4, 11. 1. p. van, 

Elo^, Dictionnture Historiqui de la Midecine^ BiegrapkU Umwenelu, 1855, xiii. p. 483. 

778, lu p. 202. Phulippe & Ludwig. Gescktchte der Afotkekert 

Haller, BiMioikeea Medicimee pracHcm, Basileae, leoa, 1855, p. 467 (foundation of the Academy and 

1779, iii. p. 192. list of early contributioas), 64^ 

Gmelin, Gtsckickie der Ckemie^ Gdttingen (1798), Hirsch. Bicgrafkisckes Lextkon der kervorragem^ 

ii. pp. 205, 907, 212. 766. den Aerxte, 1&5, iL p. 349. 

FEINE (Eine) Beschreibung der philosophischen Materie und ihrer Bereitung. 

See VI ER aufserlesene Teutsche Cbemische Biichlein, 1697, p. 228. 
See viER unterschiedene Cbymische Tractatlein, 1772, p. 23. 

FELDTAW (Anonymus von). 
See CROLLius (oswaldus). 

FERRARA-AULISIO (Niccolo). 

See DONZELLi (giuseppeX Teatro Farmaceutico, 1728. 

He edited the work of Dominico d'Aulisio : Delle scvole sacre likri duefostumi . . . puhlicaH dalsmo 
erede Nkolo Ferrara-Aulisiot Napoli, 1723, 4*. 

FERRARI (GiACOMo). 

See QUERCETANUS O^SEPHUsX Le Richezze della Riformata Fannacopea, 1677 ; 
1684. 

FERRARIUS. 

Fratris Ferrarii Tractatus Chemicus excellentissimus, hactenus in piincipio 
et fine plusquim dimidia parte mudlatus, & comiptissime sub comipto 
Efferarii Monachi nomine aliquoties publicatus, nunc ex MS. exemplari 
Dn. Nicolai Maii, Augustiss. Imperatoris Rudolfi secundi &c. quondam 
Consiliarij, integritati restitutus & philosophorum filiis sincere communicatus. 
Geismariae, Typis Salomonis Schadewitz. Sumptibus Sebaldi Kohlers. 
M.DC.XLVII. 

8*. Pp. 86. (Sigs. Aaa to Ffif3, in 8.) This seems to be a section taken from 
Combach's Collection mentioned below. 

De Lapide Philosophorum secundum verum modum formando, Efferarius 
Monachus ad Apostolicum quendam scribit 

See GRATAROLO (guglielmo), Verae alchemiae . . . doctrina, 1561, ii. p. 232. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, iii. p. 143. 

This is only an extract from the tractatus. 

Ein sehr ftirtrefflicher Chimischer Tractat an den Pabst geschrieben. 

See LANGE (johann), Chymisches Zweyblat, 1674. 

See LANGE (johannX Des Hocbgelehrten Philalethse und anderer auserlesene 
Chymische TractiCtlein, 1748 (1749X p* I07* 

i68 

FERRARIOS^PICII^US 

FERRARIUS. Continued. 
Chymische Abhandlung fiir den Pabst * ♦ ♦ nach einem Manuscript Herrn 
Nicol. Majus, . . . zum ersten mal erganzet und in Druck gegeben zu 
Geismar im Jahre 1647 von L. C. 
See SCHRODER (f. j. w.X Neue Alchymistische Bibliothek, 1772, I. ii. p. 159. 

This is a translation from the Tractahis aliquot and published at Geismar in 1647. See the Latin 
chemici singularts^ edited by Ludwig Coniboch, version above. 

Thesaurus Philosophise. 

See GRATAROLO (guglielmo), Vcrac alchemise . . . doctrina, 1561, ii. p. 237. 
See DARIOT (claudeX Die gulden Arch, Schatz vnd Kunstkammer, 1614, Part iil 
p. 17. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1 659, iii. p. 1 5 1. 

See EROFFNETE GEHEIMNISSK des Steins der Weisen, 1 708-1 718, p 606. 

Ferrarius, called also Efiferarius and Euferarius, 
is supposed to have been an Italian, an abbot or a 
monk of Ferrara, and to have flourished about 
laoo, the date 1280 put forward by Lenglet 
Dufresnoy being deemed too late. The ar^pment 
for the date started by Borrichius is that, since he 
Quotes the Turba, Geber and Morienus, but not 
Amaldus or Lullius, he must have lived prior to 

Maier, Symbola AuretB Afensa^ 1617, p. 389. 

Borel, Bibliot/uca CAimica, 1654, pp. 84, 89, 94. 

Borrichius, Conspectus Scriptarum Chemicorum^ 
1607, p. 14, No. xxi. 

Mangct, Bibliotheca Scriptorum Afedicorum, 
17^1, I. ii. p. 210. 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire de la Philosophic 
Hermitiqtte^ 1742, i. pp. 220, 467 ; iii. pp. 42, 162. 

the latter, that is about the b^inning of the thir- 
teenth century. I am not sftre that this is quite 
conclusive. Events of his life and the date ot his 
death are alike unknown, but the works ascribed to 
him are highly praised by Fictuld and are ** recom- 
mended to begmners," according to that writer*s 
formula. 

Fictnld, Proiier-SteiH, 1753, "J^* *• P* 7'* 

Gmelin, GeschichU der Ckemie^ i797f >• pp* 56-7. 

Schmieder, Geschichtedtr Alchemie, 1832, p. 129. 

Hoefer, Histoire de la Chimie, 1842, 1. p. 383 ; 
1866, i. p. 407. 

LAdmgaic.Biblioth^ueOuvarof^, Sciences Secrites, 
1870, Nos. 745-8. 

Kopp, Die Akhemie, 1886^ ii. p. 357. 

FERRO (Giovanni Maria). 

See quercetanus (josephus), Le Ricchezze della Riformato Farmacopea, 1677; 
1684. 

FEUER. 

See MOEBius (GOTTFRIED), Neu-angezUndt hellbrennendes Feuer, 1680. 

FEUER-STAB. 

Philosophischer und Magischer Feuer-Stab. 

See HERMOGENES. 

FEVRE (Nicolas Le). 

See LEFEVRE (NICOLAS). 

FICINUS (Marsilius). 

Biichlein von dem Stein der Weisen. 

See MONTE CUBITI (v. DE), Dreyfaches Hermctisches Kleeblat, 1667, p. 373. 

Buchlein vom Stein der Weisen. 

See HERMETISCHES A. B. C, 1778, i. p. 294. 

This is an extract only. 

Liber de Arte Chemica. 

See MANGET (j. J.), Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, I702» ii. p. 172. 

FICINUS 

369 

FICINUS (Marsilius). Continued. 

Das neunte Buch Marsilii Ficini vom Stein der Weisen Lapis Philosophonim 
genannt 

See H. (c G.), Fines wahren Adepti besondere Geheimnisse von der Alchymie, 1757, 
p. 183. 

Ficinus was born at Floreooe in i433i and w^ 
educated at the cost of Cosmo de' Medici. He 
studied philosophy, theolofnr, medicine, and music 
with the utmost zeal, and became professor of 
philosophy and priest and canon at Florence. He 
was a great favourite of Lorenxo de' Medici. He 
is remembered as the most devoted adherent of 
Plato and exponent of his philosophy, his admira- 
tion of which carried him to extremes. But he 
was also a student of and believer in alchemy and 
astrology, and he is one of the authorities on the 
plague in the fifteenth century (1477-78), having 
written a book // consiglio contra la PtsHUnHa^ 
translated into Latin by Hier. Riccius, Augspurg, 
1518, 4*; Basel. 1533. His other works d^ wiUi 
rdigious and philosophical subjects, and he made 
a translation of Plato, published at Florence 

about 1490, followed by other editions. That of 
Plotinus appeared in 1492,. As to the merits 
of these translations critics have held different 
opinions. 

Ficinus is reported to have been of very small 
stature, and though of delicate health to have been 
cheerfiU and lively, and extremely energetic, dili- 
gent and laborious. He died at an estate he 
possessed neai Florence in 1499, in the sixty-sixth 
year of his age. There is a legend that just after 
his death he appeared to a friend, Michael Mer- 
catus, with whom he had often discussed the 
question of immortality, and assured him that it 
was true. 

His collected works were published at Venice, 
1516, Basel, 1561, 1576, Paris, 1641, in two volumes 
folio. 

Paolo Giovio, Le Inxrittioni paste sotto le vert 
iwMgine de gli huomini Jamon in /ettere, Venetia, 

1558. p. 93. 
Paolo Giovio, Etcgia Virorum litteris illustrium^ 

1577, P- 56. 

J. M. Toscanus, Peflus Itaiue, 1578, p. a6. 
No. xli. (speaks of his * m brevi corpusculo amplum 
ingenium '). 

Boissardus, Icones quinqvaginta virorum illus- 
trium doctrina et eruaitione, 1597, i. pp. 154-157. 

Castellanus, Vita illustrium Medicomm^ 16x7, 
p. 171. 

Boissardus, Bibliotheca chalcographica illustrium 
virtute atque eruditione . . . clarissimorum I'ir- 
orum, 1650, plate Eee 3. 

Borel, Bibliotheca Chimica, 1654, p. 94. 

Vossius, De Univtrsa Mathesios Natura . . . 
Liber, 1660, pp. 184, 367. 

Mercklin, JLindenims renovatus^ 1686, p. 783. 

Magirus, Eponymologium criticum, 16)37, p. 349. 

Moller, ffomcmymoscopia, 1697, pp. 698, 699. 

Pope Blount, Censunx celebriorum Autkorum, 
17 10, p. 49a. 

Fabricius, Histonm Bibliotkecce Fabriciancs 
Pars iii. , 1719, p. 199. 

Schelhom, Ameenitates literarice, 1725, i. pp. 
18-136. 

Fabricius, Bibliotheca Greua^ 1726, xiii. p. 32a. 

Niceron, Mimoirts, 1728, v. p. 214; 1731, x. 

P- 314- 
Buddeus, Compendium Historic Philosophical 

X73^ PP- >42, 371. 
Stolle, Anleitung tur Historic der Medicinischen 

Gelahrheit, 1731, p. 879. 

Morhof, Polyhistor, 1732, i. p. 97 (I. i. 11. 3), i. 
p. 279(1. i. 23. 40); ii. p. 39 (II. i. 7. 15); ii. p. 
200 (II. ii. 10. i); iii. p. 525 (III. v. i. 3); iii. p 
528 (III. V. I. 7). 

Fabricius, Bibliotheca latina media et infima 
atatis, 1734, Lib. vi. pp. 496-7, cum Supplemento 
Mansii, pp. 165-6. 

Zedler, Universal- lexicon, 1735, ix. coL 806. 

Stolle, Anleitung tur Historic der Gelahrheit, 
1716, pp. 368, 370, 405, 406, 495, 624. 

Kestner, Medicinisches Gelehrten- Lexicon^ X740| 
p. 296. 

Freytag, Adparatus Litterarius^ 1752, i. pp. 
405-410; 1753, ii. 1204, 1360; 1755, iii. pp. 82-5, 

100-4, 349-361, 587. 761. 

Mor^ri, Le Grand Dictionnaire histortque, 1759, 
V. p. 148. 

Museum Mazguchellianum, 1761, i. p. 134, pi. 
xxviii. No. iv. 

Brucker, Historia critica Philosophia, 1767, i. 
pp. 540, 628, 659; 1766, ii. pp. 217, 223; 1766, 
IV. i. pp. 48-55. 

Haller, Bibltoiheca Anatomica^ 1774, >• P- 151* 

Saxius, Onomasticon literarium, 1777 , ii. pp. 

480. 593- 
Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemie, 1797, i. p. 

150- 
Buhle, Geschichte der neuem Phtlosophie, 1800, 

ii. pp. 72-77, 171-336. 

Aikin, General Biography^ 1803, iv. p, 85. 

FucIls, Repertorium der chemischen Litteratur, 
1806-08, p. 37. 

Tiraboschi, Storia delta Letteratura Haliana, 
1809, VI. ii. pp. 367, 309. 

Schmieder, Geschichte der Alchemic, 1832, p. 

23i 

-rsch & Gruber, Allgemeine Emyklopddie^ 1846, 
xliv. pp. I- 18 (elaborate article by Baehr). 

Wilh. Rud. Weitenweber, Ueber des Marsilius 
Ficinus Werk * de vita studiosorum* Prague, 1855, 

4 • 
Biographic Universelle, 1856, xiv. p. 91. 

Nouvelle Biographic G^n^ale, 1858, xvii. coL 

Stackl, Geschichte der Philosophic des Mittelaltert, 
1866, iii. pp. 151- 167. 

Ladngvte.Biblioth^ue Ouvaroff, Sciences Secretes, 
1870, Nos. 880-1. 

Franck, Dictionnaire des Sciences Philosophiques, 

1875. P- 537. 
Dictionnaire Encychpidique des Sciences Midi- 

cales, 4^me S^rie, 1878, ii. p. 86. 

Haeser, Geschichte der Medicin, 1881, ii. pp. 
70, 160. 

Billings, Index-Catalogue, 1883, iv. p. 966 ; and 
Series, 1900, v. p. 776. 

Kopp. Die Alchemic, 1886, i, pp. 188, 21a, 
259. 

rfo FICTULD 

FICTULD (HsRMAMir). 
Hennann Fidulds Abhandhmg n» der Akhymie und dendben Gewiftheit 
Erlang 1754. Feriegts, Johann Carl Tetzsdmer. 

r. PpL[6l2a6. 
When he mentioned this tract in the /VwAMr-SlRJt, 1753, Tb- i. pi 75, it was still in MS. 

Azoth et Ignis, das ist, das wahre Elementarische Wasser und Feuer oder 
Mercurius Philosophorum, als das einige nolhwendige der Fundamental- 
Uranfange und Principiorum des Steins der Weisen. Aureum Vellus oder 
Goldenes Vliefs was dasselbe sey, sowohl in seinem Urqmuige, als erhabenen 
Zustande. Denen Filiis Artis und Liebhabem der Hermedschen Philosophie 
dargelegt, auch, dais darunter die Prima Bfateria Lapidis Phiiosophorum, 
saint dessen Praxi verborgen, erofhet von Herman Fictuld. Leipzig, bey 
Michael Blochbeiger, 1749. 

8*. PpL [4, indndiog the finontispieoe] 379 [i]. 

Ladrague, BibliaikiqueOmfareg.SciemcesSecHteSy Fleece was founded b]r the Duke of Burgundy who 

1870, No. 1375. poisewcd the stone, in honour of the akbonical 

There is a note on 'Asoth' by Kopp, Dii art. He gives (chap, ii.) a list of authors who have 

Akk€tmie^ 1886, i. p. 3a written alchemical treatises entitled ' The Golden 

Fictuld asserts that the order of the Golden Fleece.' 

[Another Copy.] 

Hermann Fictulds Chymische Schrifften darinnen in zwolff koniglichen Palasten, 
von dem Stein der Weisen gehandelt winL Samt einer kurtzen Vonede 
ans Licht gestellet, durch Friederich Roth-Scholtzen, Herrenstadio-Silesium. 
Franckfurt und Leipzig, bey Johaim Christoph Gopner, Buchhandler in 
Niimberg. 1734. 

8*. Pp. [8] 25a Roth-Scholtz's arms on p. aja Title red and black. 

The tract has a separate title : 

Das edele Perldn und theurer Schats der Himmlischen Weishdt ; In zw5lff 
kdniglichen Palllsten vorgestellet und beschrieben ; Nemlich virie der Stein der 
Weisen vom Anfang bis sum Ende gemacht und bereitet werde; Nebst einem 
Anbang und Anweisung vom Chaos, daraus alles berkommt, so zu unserer Kunst 
gehiiret ; Samt einem Gesprtlcbe ; Um vieler Ursachen willen gen5thiget worden, 
solches heraus zu geben, von einem Liebhaber der ewigen Weifs- und V^irfaeit Gdtt- 
licher Geheimnissen, genannt Hermann Fictuld. Franckfurt und Leipsig, bey Joh. 
Christoph GOpner. MDCCXXXIV. 

The Ankang vom Chaos (p. 153) and the Gts^&ch (p. 199) have each a title, 
included in the pagdnation : 

Anhang und Anweisung vom allgemeinen natOrlichen Chaos der Natur-gemfissen 
Alchymie und Alchymisten ; daraus aJles berkommt, so su unserer Kunst gdibret. 

The other is : 

Ein Gesprilche zwischen dem K5nig Mascos, seiner Schwester Agos, und einem 
Hermetischen Lehr-Jttnger, von dem Stein der Weisen. zu femerer Erklttrung des 
Chaos und der Arbeit 

Fictuld {Probier-Siein. 17 C3, i. p. 73) is sorry more regard for bis own credit 1 Fictuld himself is 
there are so many misprints m this book, and says never in fault, 
that Mr. Gttpner, the printer, ought to have had 

[Another Copy.] 

Hermann Fictulds Chymische Schrifften, darinnen von dem Stein der Weisen 
gehandelt wird. Nebst Herm D. Johann Samuel Carls, Priiffimg der wahren 
und ftlschen Chymie; und einer Nacbrede von Fatis Chymids. Mit einer 

FICTULD VI \ 

FICTULD (Hermann). Continued. 

kurtzen Vorrede ans Licht gestellet durch Friedeirch (sic) Roth-Scholtzen ; 
Herrenstadio-Silesium. Franckfurt und Leipzig, bey Johann Christoph 

Gopner Buchhandler in Niimberg. 1734. 

8*". Pp. [8] 330. Roth-Scholtz's arms on p. aja Title red and black. 

In this copy the subsidiary title : Das edU which do not appear in the collection, was ap- 

PerUin, &c., has been put first, before the general parrntly cancellea and that in the preceding copy 

title and the preliminary matter. The present substituted for it« In every other respect the 

general title, referring as it does to certain tracts editions are identical 

Hermetica Victoria, das ist: vollkommen erfochtener Sieg und Triumph, des 
Welt-beniffenen und gleichwohl verachteten Herma-Phroditi, iiber die gantze 
Schaar der Gotter und Patronen des Metallischen und Mineralischen Reichs; 
dafs er, und nicht dieselben, die prima Materia Lapidis Philosophorum sey. 
Unter eineni im Traum gesehenen Reichs-Tage und daselbst gehorten 
Gesprache vorgetragen, und zum Druck befbrdert durch Herman Fictuld. 
Leipzig, bey Michael Blochbeiger, 175a 

8®. Pp. 224. 

Der langst gewiinschte und versprochene Chymisch-Philosophische Probier- 
Stein, auf welchem so wohl die Schrifften der wahren Adeptorum als auch 
der betriigerischen Sophisten seyn probiret worden. Wodurch einem ieden 
Sucher der Weisheit der rechte Weg gezeiget, und hingegen alle Irrwege 
entdecket werden, so dais er nunmehro gar nicht fehlen kan. In zwey 
Classen verfasset von Hermann Fictuld. Franckfurt und Leipzig, Bey 
Michael Blochberger. 1740. 

8*. Pp. 113, including the Frontispieoe. 
This contains only the first part or class. I have not seen the second part with this date. 

Der langst gewiinschte und versprochene Chymisch-philosophische Probier- 
Stein, auf welchem sowohl der wahrhafiten Hermetischen Adeptorum als der 
verfiihrischen und betriegerischen Sophisten Schrifften sind probirt und nach 
deren Werth dargestellt worden, beschrieben in Zweyen Classen, darvon 
die Erste bereits herausgegangen, gegenwartig aber von dem Authore von 
neuem iibersehen, corrigirt und von seinthero zu Handen gebrachten 
Authoren vermehret. Die zweyte Clafs aber hinzu gefiigt worden ist Durch 
Hermann Fictuld. Franckfort und Leipzig, Bey Verad Oriental! Wahrheit 
und Ernst Lugenfeind, 1753. 

8«. Pp. [a blank, la] 17a Title red and black. 

The first part has a separate title : 

Des Iflngst gewttnschten und versprochenen Chymisch*Philo8ophisdien Probier- 
Steins Lrste Oafs, . . . Zweyte und vemiehrte Auflage. Franckfort . . . 

The second part has a long title commencfaig : 

Des Uingst gewQnschten und versprochenen Chjrmisch-Philofophiscfaen Probier- 
Steins Zweyte Clals, . . . Franckfort . . . 1753. 

Pp. [i-aa] a3-i7i [i blank]. 

Des langst gewiinschten und versprochenen Chymisch-Philosophischen Probier- 
Steins Erste Classe, In welcher der wahren und achten Adeptorum und 
anderer wttrdig erfundenen Schrifften nach ihrem innerlichen Gehalt und 

tyt 

FICTULD 

FICTULD (Hermann). Continued. 

Werth vorgestellt und entdecket worden, durch Hermann flctuld. Dritte 
Auflage. Dresden, in der Hilscherschen Buchhandlung, 1784. 

8*. Pp. viii. 164 [a\ 

Besides these another edition is quoted : 176a. 
He divides the philosophers into two classes, the 
true and genuine adepts, who are pious souls, 
kirers of their neighbour and of posterity, some of 
whom have written works of edification, some 
suitable for bqj^nners, but others not Aroonr 
these worthy men Fictuld humbly places himself. 
The second class consists of sophists, arch-deceivers 

intennediate in Fictuld's opinion between thoe. 
It is not always easy to see Fictuld's principle o( 
classification, if he had any ; and it would noC be 
difficult to apply to his criticisms and fttimtw 
some of the depreciatonr remarks he applies to 
others. The rioiness of his vocabulary in abase is 
an abiding source of interest and edification. He. 
in torn, is not spared by a reviewer in the Arckiv 

whose books should be burned. There is nothing JUr Rasenkrtuxer, 

Turba Philosophorum, das ist: Gesammlete Spriiche der Weisen zur Erlauterung 
der hermetischen Schmaragd-Tafel, oder von dem Stein der Weisen, wie 
derselbige zu bereiten sey und erlangt werde. Zu Ehren der kunstbeflissenen 
Sohne der Weisheit heraus gegeben, durch Hermann Fictuld. 

Priifet alles; aber das Gute behaltet 
Ao. 1763. 

8**. Pp. 184. Somewhat wormed. 

In the ProHer-Stein^ ^753* T^* i* P- 75> this work is spoken of as in MS. at that 
time. The title is adopted, of course, from the <^d treatise of that name. 

Abhandlung von der Gewifsheit der Alchemic. 
See HERMBTISCHES A. B. C, 1779, iii. p. 288. 

Aureum Vellus, goldenes Vlies. 

See HERMETISCHES A. B. C, 1779, iii. p. 265. 

Ein Auszug aus etlichen sehr rar gewordenen . . . Werken . . . H. Fictulds. 
See H. (J. c), Von der Natur und Kunst, 1781. 

These consist of extracts from Das edU PerUin, 
p. 63 ; Anhang vom Chaos, p. 102 ; Ein Gesprache 
naischen Mascos und Agos, p. 130; Htrmetiscker 
Triumphbogen, or Cabbala tnystica natura, p. 142 ; 
and Occulta occullissime, p. 185. 

The editor reprinted these because the originals 
were so rare, and had not been seen by the editor 

of the HERMETISCHES A. B. C. 

Azoth et Ignis. 

See HERMETISCHES A. B. C, 1779, iii. p. 252. 

Einzelne Zeugnisse aus dem Probirsteine. 
See HERMETISCHES A B. C, 1779, iy- P- 71- 

Hermetica Victoria. 

See HERMETISCHES A, B. C, 1779, i"- P* 271. 

Turba Philosophorum. 

See HERMETISCHES A. B. C, 1779, iv. p. 15. 

Nothing is recorded about Fictuld's life, but his 
name and works are familiar to most writers on the 
subject, and the Probier-Stein is sometimes quoted 
and recommended as an authority, which it is not 
Doubtless some of the information he gives in it is 
correct, but he has made such erroneous state- 
ments in matters which can be checked, that he 
is tiuite unreliable in those where no check can be 
applied. 

Besides the above works he himself enumerates : 
' Gesprftch zwischen dem Kdnig Mascos und seiner 

Schwester Agos' appended to Das edU Perlein 
(^.t/.); • Hermetischer Triumph- Bogen &c nemlich, 
Cabbala mystica naturee, und Occulta occultissime.' 
According to Kopp {Die Alchemie, 1886, 
ii. p. 367) the person who printed under the 
pseudonym of Fictuld was really called Johann 
Heinrich Schmidt von Sonnenberg, who is not 
to be confused with Johann Georg Schmid (^.v.). 
But in the hermetisches A. B, C, 1779, "• ?• 72. 
the Probier-Stein is ascribed to a Baron Meinstoff^ 
without taking any notice of Fictuld. Which of 

FICTULD^FIGUL US 

273 

FICTULD (Hermann). Continued. 

these is correct I am unable to say. See also 
HERMETiscHES A. B. C, 1:^79. iv. P; 39- 

There is still another version. It is said that he 
was a native of Langenthal, and that his real 
name was Mummenthaler, that he had travelled 
much and seen much, but that he was certainly 
not an adept Count Franciscus Onuphrio de 

Fictuld. Probur-Siein^ i753i Th. i. pp. 71-76. 
(List of his writin^^ to date. ) 

Baumer, Bibliotluca CkemUa^ 1782, p. 99. 

ArckivfUr RosenkreuMtr, 1785, ii. pp. 399, 401. 

Beytrag tmr GeschickU der kSkem Cktmie^ 178^, 
pp. 560, 667, 670, 671. (Commends Fictuld for his 
thoroughness.) 

Semler, Unpartkeiische Samlungen zur Hiitorie 
der Rosenkreuxer^ 1788, iii. p. 165. 

Marsciano gave him a copy of his book in 1764. 
Fictuld died in 1777, in the se\-enty-eighth year of 
his age. Semler was of opinion that he did not 
err on the side of modesty, and points out that his 
name Her Mann FICtVLD is a chronc^ram for 
1656, but he does not deduce anjrthing from the 
fact, if it were intentional. 

Gmelin. GeschickU der Chemie, 1798, ii. p. 316. 

Murr, Ober den wakren Ursprung der Rosen- 
kreuxer und des Freymaurerordens^ i^3i P* 78. 

Fuchs, Repertorium der chemischen Lttteratnr^ 
i8c6-o8, pp. 259, 27a, 289. 

Schmieder, Gesckichie der Alckemie^ 1832, p. 544. 

"LskdngacBibiio/kMue Chtvarof, Sciences SecriiUs, 
1870, Nos. ^9. 540, 647, 1374-79. ^Sii- 

Kopp, Dte Alckemie, 1886, ii. 367, 373, etc, etc 

FIGULUS (Benedictus). 
Pandora Magnalium Naturalium Aurea et Benedicta, de Benedicto Lapidis 
Philosoph. MjTSterio. Darinnen Apocalypsis des Hocherleuchten Aegyptischen 
Konigs vnd Philosophi, Hermetis Trismegisti ; von vnserm Teutschen Hennete, 
dem Edlen, Hochthewrem Monarchen vnd Philosopho Trismegisto, A. Ph. 
Theophrasto Paracelso &c. Verdolmetschet : wie auch Tinctura Physicorum 
Paracelsica, mit einer Schonen Erklerung des auch Edlen vnd Hocherfahmen 
Philosophi, Alexandri von Siichten, Utrijusque Medicine D. Sampt Seiner 
Al. V. S. angehengten 3. Vnderschiedlichen Tractetlein, so vor nie gesehen 
worden, wie auch Anderen Ejusdem materia^ Corollariis, wie sie nach der 
Vorredt Specifiret (sic) werden : Allen Filiis Doctrinae Hermeticae zu nutz 
vnd gutem jetzo publiciret Durch Benedictum Figulum; Utenhoviatem, 
Fr : P. L. C. T. T. P. M. E. D. T. P. D. G. N. Getruckt zu Strafsburg, 

inn Verlegung Lazari Zetzeners. 1608. 

8®. Pp. [32] 292 [i, I blank], i woodcut. The vignette is a six-rayed star. 

In the centre circle is the symbol for Mercury, in the rays are the astronomical symbols 
for gold, silver, copper, lead, tin and iron. The book contains the following tracts : 

Liber Apocalypseos Hermetis, Theo. Paracelso, 
interprete, De supremo Mundi Secreto, p. i. 

I>e Vera Medicina Alexandri k Suchten Elegia, 
p. 17. 

Dialogus, Alexandri k Suchten, p. 49. 

Ex libro de tribus Facultatibus Alexandri k 
Suchten, p. 112. 

Explicatio Tincturce Physicorum Theophrasti 
Pkuracelsi, ab Alexandro k Suchten, p. 143. 

Reguke seu Canones aliquot Philosophici de 
Lapide Philosophico, p. 216. 

Tractiltlein von Lapide Philosophonim Anonymi, 
P- 234. 

Rythmi Germanici von diesem hogen Tinctur- 
werck Anonymi Authoris, p. 26^. 

De Auro Potabili Theophrastt Paracelsi, p. 275. 

Von der Krafft vnnd Wttrckung auch rechtem 
nutzlichem Gebrauch des herrlichen Antidoti so 
man Aurum Potabile nennet, p. 279. 

Rosarium Novum Olympicum et Benedictum. Das ist: Ein newer Gebene- 
deyter Philosophischer Rosengart, darinnen vom aller weisesten Konig 
Salomone, H. Salomone Trismosino, H. Trithemio, D. Theophrasto, &c 
gewiesen wirdt, wie der Gebenedeyte Guldene Zweig, vnnd Tincturschatz, 
vom vnverwelcklichen Orientalischen Baum der Hesperidum, vormittels 
Gotdicher Gnaden, abzubrechen vnd zu erlangen sey : Allen vnd jeden Filiis 
doctrinae Hermeticae, vnd D. Theophrasticae Liebhabem zu gutem trewlich 
erofifnet in zwen Theilen. Pars Prima. 

lamblichus. Deus in Coelo est, revelans mysteria 

Quicquid habemus boni, habemus profunda & abscondita. 

k Sole, vel ab ipso, vel per alia. 

s 

a74 

FIGULUS 

FIGULUS (Benedictus). Continued, 

Per Benedictum Figulum; Vtenhoviatem, Francum; Poetam L. C. Theo- 
logum ; Theosophum ; Philosophum ; Medicum Eremitam. T. M. Ge- 
truckt zu Basel, in verlegung des Autoris, Anno 1608. 

4^ Pp. [10] 83 [ I blank]. Diagrams in the text Title red and black. The 
vignette is a rose bush or tree with the metals as flowers, surmounted by tlie sun. 

Rosarii Novi Olympici et Renedicti, Pars Altera : In sich haltent ein Buch mit 32. 
Capiteln, Laurcntii Venturas Veneti, Medicinae Doctoris, &c. Aufs dem Latdn vertiert 
vnnd trewlich verdolmetschet. in vnser Tcutschen Sprach vor nie gesehen, De Lapide 
Benedicto Philosophorum, &c. Interprete Benedicto Figulo, Vtenhoviate, Franco, 
Poi»ta L. C, Theologo ; Theosopho ; Philosopho, Medico, hjreraita. D. T. P. D. G. N. 
Gretruckt zu Basel, in verlegung des Autoris. Anno BeneDICtI Regis & Maglstrl 
Gratlae & bonltatis, &c 

4*. Pp. [15, I blank] 117 [2] [i blank]. The vignette is a figure in Roman dress. 
The chronogram stands for 1608. 

The first part of this book consists of extracts 58 ; Aenigmata^ p. 71 ; Processus ad La^dem 

from Salomon Trismosinus, Trithemius, p. 16 ; PkUosophorum Monachi cuiusdam anomymi^ p. 79. 

Paracelsas p. 23 ; von Suchten, p. 56 ; Tracia- The second part is a translation oi Ventura*s 

htlus Rythmicus Novus vom Stein der Weysen^ p. work, Dt Lapidt Philosophorum. 

Thesaurinella Olympica Aurea Tripartita, Das ist: Ein himmlisch giildenes 
Schatzkammerlein, von vielen aufserlesenen Kleinodien zugeriistet, darinn der 
uhralte grosse und hochgebenedeyte Charfunckel-stein und Tinctur-schatz 
verborgen. In drey unterschiedliche Cellulas aufsgetheilet Allen Lieb- 
habem der himmlischen Warheit, und Hermetischen Philosophey, so den 
Grund der Hochmagischen Tinctur suchen, zu gute: Wie auch zu Befbrdening 
der edlen Alchimey anjetzo eroffnet und publicirt durch Benedictum Figulum 
Utenhoviatem Frana Poetam L. C Theologum, Theosophum, Philosophum, 
Medicum, Eremitam. D. T. P. D. G. N. M DC LXXXII. Franckfurt 

am Mayn, Jn Verlegung Georgii Wolffii Buchhandl. in Hamburg in S. Joh. 
Kirchen, Gedruckt durch Johann Gorlin. 

8*. Pp. [16, including frontispiece] 402 [should be 392. as pp. 225-234 are 
dropped] The vignette represents a rayed sun for gold, surrounded by the svmbols 
for silver, iron, mercury, lead, tin and copper. The book contains the following 
tracts: 

Secretum Magicum D. Philippi Theophrasti 
Paracelsi von dreyen gebenedeyeten Magischen 
Steinen, p. i. 

Bemhard, Graf von der Marck und Temis {sic) 
Symbolum Apostolicum Catialistisch erklaret und 
mit dem grossen uhralten Stein der Weisen ver- 
glichen, p. 42. 

Vincent -Koffskhy : Tinctur- Wurtrel, und auch 
Materia Prima defs gebcnedeyten uhralten Steins 
der Weisen, p. w. 

Alphidius : Kurtzer Bericht und Parabolisch 
Tractatlein, p. 66. 

CoroUaria qusedam in nostram Thesaurinellam. 
Processus Universalis Via:, Tincturae Rubedinis 
& Albedinis, Alchymicae artis: Magistri Nicolai 
Melchioris. . . . sub Forma Missa:, p. 69. 

Carmina auf das Philosophische Werck, 74. 

Thesauri nellae . . . Pars II. Genandt Schola 
Hermetica. darinnen zu studieren, wie der Kiinig- 
liche, Orientalische, Ehirchleuchtende Rubin defs 
gebcnedeyten Astralischen Magneten, defs Magi- 
schen und Chaldttischen Tinctur-Steins zu erlangen 
sey, p. 77- Contains : 

Raymundus LuUius: Tractat vom Philosoph- 
ischen Stein, p. 79. 

Xamolxides: Tractatus Aureus, quern Dyrra- 
chium Philosophicum vocavit, p. 91. 

Colloquium, p. 94. 

Colloquium Spiritus Mercurii cum Fratre Alberto 
Bayrs, p. no. \See also hautnorthon (j. p.), 
Lucema Salis Philosophorum, 1658, p. 1C9.J 

Divi Leschi Genus Amo (M. Sendivogius) : Col- 
loquium Hermetico-Spagyricum, das ist : Ein 
wunderhofliches, wolgegriindetes Chymisches Ge- 
sprftch zwischen der Natur, dem Mercurio, und 
emem Alchymisten, p. 121. 

Thesaurinella: . . . Pars III. Genandt und 
intitulirt. Lux in Tenebris Lucens Raymundi 
Lullii darinnen Bericht gethan wird, wie die nochste 
Geheimniifs der Natur zu erforschcn, und aas dem 
verborgenen ans Liecht zu bringen nach Philo- 
sophischen Branch . . ., p. 142, Contains: 

Rayinundus Lullius : Tractatus de praeparatione 
Lapidis Philosophici, p. 146. 

Arcanum de Multiplicatione Philosophica in 
qualitate, p. 193. 

FIGULUS^FIKENSCHER 

'^n 

FIGULUS (Benedictus). CotUinmed. 

Hortuhis Olympicos Aureoliis, Das ist : Ein himmliscbes, gfUdenes. Hermetisches 
Lust-G&tlciii. voo alten und neucn Pbilosophis gepflantzet und gexielet, dahnn zu 
6ndeD, wie die Coekstivisdie, Edle, Hochgebcsiedeyte Schwebelrofs und SchArlachblum 
defs hocbgUintzeodeii und Tingirenden Carfunckelsteins (dadurch Menschlicbe, 
Metalliscfae, und Vegetabtliscbe Cdrpcr ihre Renovation und hochste Perfection, oder 
Vollkomroenbeit erkingen mogen) zu brecben sey. Anjetzo alien Filiis Doctrinae 
Magyco-Spag>Ticae zu gutem eroffnet, gescbenckt und publicirt. Durch Benedictum 
Figulum Utenboviat Fr. Poetam L. C. Tbeologum, Tbeosopbum, Pbilosophum, 
Medicum. Eremitam. D. T. P. D. G. N. 

Anno TrIsMeglstse gratlae Del, In toto orbe Cbrlstlano genltas. Zum andem 
mal 1682. 

In Verlegung Georg WoIflC [p. 197]. 
Contains: 

Das Bfichlein Tbeo^^irasti mit der Himmlischen 
Sackpfeiffen, p. aoa. 

Theophrasti Tractatus de Lapide Pbllosopborum, 
P 209. 

Caspar Hartung vom Hof, Beschreibung von der 
Bereitung defs gebenede3rten Steins, p. 245. 

Eine warhafite und einfiUtige Aufsl^ung der 

Schriften aller Philosopben von dem . . . Stan 
der Weisen, p. 264. 

Ulricb Poysel : Spinel der Alchjrmey, p. 277. 

Georg Fueger: De Lapide Pbilosophorum, 
Tbeoria brevis, p. 300. 

Practica vom Universal oder gebenedcyten 
Tinctur Stein der Alten Weisen, Rythmic* gestel- 
let, p. 307. 

Paradisus Aureolus Hermeticus Fluens Nectart & Ambrosia, in cujus perlustra- 
tione sedulafidelis & ocularis offertur instructio, quomodo Aureola Hesperidum Poma, 
ab Arbore Benedicta Philosophica sint decerpenda : a variis Pbilosophis, tiim veteribus 
turn modernis plantatus. In gratiam et emolumentuni filiorum Doctrin^e Chemico 
Spagyricae (hue usque praeclusus) nunc reseratus & publici Juris factus, per Benedictum 
Figulum Utenhoviat. . . . 

Anno TrlsMeglstl SpagyrI ArCblatrl nobis DonatI, &c. De novo Impensis 
Georgi WolflRi ; 1682. [p. 317.] 

Contains : 

Alphonsus, Rex Castellae : Liber Philosophiae 
Occultioris (prsecipu* Metallorum) profundissimus : 
Cui titulum fecit, Clavis Sapientiae, p. 322. 

Aristoteles Alchymistes. Tractatus ad Alexan- 
drum Magnum de Lapide Philosophorum, p. 356. 

The three, tracts in the present collection had 
been published previously : Thtsaurintlla, Frank- 
furt a. M., 1608, 4®; Hartulus, Frankfurt, 1608, 
4" ; Paradisus, Frankfurt, 1600, 1608, 4**, and there 
was another work besides, Auriga berudictus spagy- 
ricus, Norimberg. 1609, 12^. In addition to these 
Gmelin quotes an edition of the Pandora, Strass- 
burg, 1600, 8^, but that mav be a misprint for x6o8. 

llie author's name is said to be Benedict Topfer, 

Borel, Btbliatheca Ckimica, 1654, p. 94. 

Roth-Scboltz, Bibliotheca Ckemica, ^7^7* P- 75- 

Fictuld, ProHer-Stein, 1753, Th. ii. p. 66. (' The 
author is not known ; he has collected extracts, some 
from adepts, some from sophists. What he has 
produced from his own store is vain imagining and 
sophistical deception, which demonstrates his 
ignorance of Alchemy.') 

Btytrag zur Gtschichie der kokem Chemie^ 1785, 

P- 590- 

Epistola ad Hermannum Archiepiscopum Col- 
oniensem, De Lapide Philosophico, p. 374. 

Divi Leschi Genus Amo (M. Sendivogios), 
Dialogus Naturae, Mercurii et Alchymistoe, p. 384. 

and he belonged to Utenhoven in Franconia, as he 
tells us. Schmieder thinks that his books bad 
some circulation because they were in German and 
were not without humour. No notice of his life 
has been forthcoming, but his books are known, 
and Semler has drawn attention to a passage in 
the preface to the Tkesaurinelia, in which are 
adumbrations of the Rosicrucian ideas some years 
before their manifesto bad been published. 

Semler, Unpartkeiiscke Samlungen Mur Historie 
der Rosenkreuter, 1786, i. p. 30. 

Gmelin, Gesckickie der Ckemie^ 1797, i. p. 316. 

Fuchs, Repertorium der chemiscken Lttteratur, 
1806-08, p. loa. 

Schmieder, Gesckickie der Alckemie, 1832, p. 349. 

Ladrague, Bibliotkique Ouvaroff, Sciences Secrites, 
1870, Nos. 608-9, 160^-6. 

Kopp, Die Aickemte, 1886, ii. p. 376. 

FIKENSCHER (Georg Wolfgang Augustin). 
Christian Wilhelm Baron von Krohnemann. Geschichte dieses angeblichen 
Goldmachers, eines der grofsesten und merkwiirdigsten Betriigers des sieben- 
zehnten Jahrhunderts. Aus archivalischen Quellen bearbeitet von Georg 
Wolfgang Augustin Fikenscher, Profefsor und Rector zu Culmbach, Adjunkt 
der philosophischen Facultat zu Erlangen, und Mitgliede einiger gelehrten 
Gesellschaften. Mit Kupfern. Niirnberg, in der Raspeschen Buchhandlung. 
1800. 

8*. Pp. 223 [i blank] [a pp. Errata]* Vignette, a medal, and three engraved 
plates of medals. 

376 

FIKENSCHER^FIORA VANTI 

FIKENSCHER (Gborg Wolfgang Augustin). Continued. 

Court, and be profeued to give iDlonnation on the 
subject to those who consulted him. 

In this course he continued for fully ten years, 
when at last be was detected as a cheat by the 
Master of the Mint He was then tried, con- 
demned, and executed in 1686. with a mocking 
inscription over him to the effect that while it was 
his intention to * fix * mercury, the result was just 
the opposite, for it was he who was in the fix. 

Krohnemann carried on alleged transmutations 
from the year 1677 at the Court of the Markgraf 
George William of Bayreuth. He affirmed that he 
had a process for ' fixing ' or solidifying mercury so 
that when it had been volatilized away a portion 
remained converted into gold. Silver was also pro- 
duced, and out of the metal so obtained he caused 
a medal to be struck in 1679 as a birthday present 
to the Markgraf. (See Tab. ii. Fig. 3.) He was 
ennobled and promoted to foremost c^ces at the 

Schmieder, Geschichte der Alchemie, 1832, p. 446. Kopp, DU AkhemU^ x886, L pp. 185, 195. 

FILET (Le) d' Ariadne, pour entrer avec seuret^ dans le Labirinthe de la Phiio- 
sophie Hermetique. 

Vir impius non cognoscet: & stultus non intelliget haec Ps. 91. 
A Paris, Chez I^urent d'Houry, rue S. Jacques, devant la Fontaine Saint 
Severin, au Saint Esprit. M.DCXCV. Avec Privilege du Roy. 

12^. Pp. [8] Z76. [3a 2, List of Chemical books.] Woodcuts in the text. 
This is said to be by Duclo or Dulco. It is not a translation of Reibehand's Filum An'admes {g.v,\. 

FILIUS SENDIVOGII. 

Sff HARPRECHT (JOHANN). 

FILUM ARIADNES. 

See REIBBHAND (CHRISTOPH). 

FIORAVANTI (Leonardo). 

Corona oder Kron der Artzney defs fiirtrefflichen, hoch vnd weytberiimbten 
Medici vnd Wundt Artztes Leonhardi Fioravanti von Bononia. In vier 
sonderbare Biicher vnterscheiden : 

In dem I. wird gehandelt von allerley vnterschiedtlichen Zeichen natiirlicher 
Ding, beneben vielen schonen vnd bewehrten Secreten der Medicin vnd 
Chirurgy. 

Das II. zeigt den Weg vnd Kunst allerley niitzliche vnd heylsame Artzneyen 
zu componieren. 

Das III. handelt von der Alchimy defs Menschen vnd der Mineralien. 

Das IV. vnd letzte halt vnd verfasset in sich viel schone Philosophische 
vnnd Medicinalische Discurs, so samptlich einem Medico zu wissen, hoch 
von nohten, 

Erstlich neuwlich in Italianischer Spraach von dem Autore selbst in Truck 
verfartiget Nunmehr aber in vnsere hochteutsche Spraach mit allem Fleifs 
versetzt. Gedruckt zu Franckfurt am Mayn bey Nicolaus HofTmann, In 
Verlegung Johann Berner. 1604. 

8*- Pp. [7, 1 blank] 507. Register [13], 

Leonhardi Fioravanti Medici von Bononia, Physica, das ist: Experientz vnnd 
Naturkiindigung. 

I. Von ErschafTung defs Menschen aufs den vier Elementen, dessen Com- 
plexion, EygenschafHen, Sinnen vnnd KrafTten, Gesundheit vnd Kranckheit, 
vnd den vier Jahrzeiten. 

FIORA VANTl vff 

FIORAVANTI (Leonardo). ConHnued. 

II. Von geheymen niemab erhorten Experimenten der Chinirgy vnd 
Artzney. 

III. Von inancherley Kranckheiten defs Menschen vnd deroselben Cur. 

IV. Von allerhandt Alchimisdschen gewissen vnnd probierten verborgeneu 
{sic) hohen Stiicken. ^ 

Jetzund aufs dem Italianischen ob seiner vnsaglichen Fiirtrefflichkeit, 
Hochheit und Geheimnufs w^en ins Teutsch vbersetzt Getruckt zu 

Franckfurt am Mayn, Bey Anthonj Hummen, In Verlegung Johann Bemerk^ 

m:dc.xviil 

8®. Pp. [8]. 440, an error for 46a. Register [10]. Title red and black. 
Imperfect ; wants pp. 329-332. 

I>el Coropendio De I Secreti Rationali, DelF Eccell. Medico, & Cirugico 
M. Leonardo Fiorauand Bolognese, Libri Cinque. 
Nel primo de' quali si tratta de' secreti pid importand nella professione 

Medicinale. 
Nel secondo si insegnano molti secreti appartenenti alia Cirugia, & si 

mostra il modo d' esercitarla. 
Nel terzo si cdtengono i secred piu ueri et piu approuad nell' arte dell' 

Alchimia. 
Nel quarto si scriuono molti Belletd, che usano le donne per apparer 

belle. 
Nel quinto si comprendono i secreti piii notabili in diuerse arti & esercitij. 
Con la Tauola di tutti i CapitolL Con Privilegio. In Venetia, 
Appresso Vincenzo Valgrisi. M D LXIIII. 

S*. Ff. [20] 183 [i]. 

Colophon'. In Venetia. Appresso Vincenzo Valgrisi. MDLXIIII. On the reverse 
as on the title, his device : a pair of hands out of clouds holding erect a cross round 
which is a serpent, and the name vincen (on the title, but Vincent at the end) divided 
by the cross. 

MS. index. 

Compendium Oder Aufszfig der Secreten, Gehaymnissen vnd verborgenen 
Kiinsten. Leonhardi Fioravand. 

I. Von Gehaymnissen der Medecin oder jnnerlichen Artzney. 
II. Von Secreten der Chirurgy vnd wie dieselbige zuiiben. 

III. Von wahrem Bericht, Kiinsten vnd Proben der Alchimy. 

IV. Von allerley Schmiincken, derer sich die Weiber zuvermehrung jhrer 

Schonheit zugebrauchen pflegen. 
V. Von sonsten vielen bewehrten Stiicken allerley vnterschiedlichen 
Kiinsten. 
Jetzund aufs dem Italianischen von wegen seines vielfaldgen Nutzens, &c. 
Ins Teutsch versetzet. Gedruckt zu Darmbstadt, durch Johann Leinhosen, 
In Verlegung Johann Bemers. Im Jahr 1624. 

^^* Pp* 399 [i blank]. Imperfect ; wants pp. 137-89 '55-^ 

37^ 

FIORA VANTI'-FIRENZE 

FIORAVANTI (Leonardo). Continued. 

Fioravanti was a native of Bolo^a where he vras 
bom in the earlier part of the sixteenth century. 
He studied medicine and practised in Palermo 
from 1548 to 1550, went with the Spanish fleet to 
Afirica, returned to Naples in 1555, went to Rome, 
Venice, and Bologna, where he was made doctor 
and chevalier, and finally count He published a 
number of works on medicine, which along vrith 
their author have been severely handled by some 
modem critics, but the treatment of his writings 
otherwise than historically is futile. Fioravanti was 
a chemist and pharmacist, and in his practice put 
unbounded trust in his specifics. The balsam 
which goes by his name, and which was in use till 
a comparati\'ely recent period, is a very complex 
mixture, but he also describes the preparation of 
certain definite compounds. 

Between 1564 and 1582 he published some works, 
of which various editions are quoted by the 
authorities, and some of which I have seen. 

Lo Spuchio di scitnxa universale libri tre, 
Venezia, 1564, 1593, 1609, 1679, all in 8**. 

// compendia dei Secreii raxionali intorno alia 
Mtdicina^ cirugia et alcfUmia, ib. 1564, 1571. 
1581, «9S, 1620, x6^, 1640, Turin, 1580. 8'. 

Li Carried Medtcinali^ Venet 156B, 8**; 1571, 

1573. 8* ; 1595. 1629, 8°. 

The French translation which I have seen is 
entitled : 

' Les Caprices de M Leonard Fioravanti Bolog- 
nois, touchant la Medecine : qui sont plusieurs et 

Borel, Bibliotheca Chimicaf 1654, p. 95. 

Toh. Crato a Kraftheim, Consiliorum et Epis- 
tciarum Medicinalium libri septem, 1671, i. p. 306 
(' Flora vantus, nebulo pessimus, qui Venetiis ejectus 
est*). 

Conring, In universam Ariem Medicam . . . 
Introduction 1687, p. 252. 

Orlandi, Notizie degli Scrittori Bolognesi, 17x4, 
p. 190. 

Roth-Scholtz. Bibliotheca Chemica, 1727, p. jj. 

Manget, Bibliotheca Scriptorum Afedicorum^ 
1731, I. ii. p. 287. 

Jacob Leupolds Prodromus Bibliotheca: Metallic^, 
17^2, p. 54. 

Zedler, Universal-Lexicon ^ 1735, **• ^o^- 96^- 

Kestner, Medicinisches Gelehrten-Lexicon, 1740, 

p. 300' 

Jdcher, Allgemeines Gelehrten-Lexicon, 1750, ii. 
col. 619. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Botanica, 1771, i. p. 342; 
177a, ii. p. 673. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Anatomica, 1774, i. p. 249. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Chirurgica, ijj^j i. p. 225 ; 

"775. "• P- 600. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Medicines practictB, 1777, ii. 
p. 1^9. (One of the first in Itaiy to use chemical 
medicines. ) 

Eloy, Dictionnaire Hisiorique de la Midecine, 
1778, li. p. 235. 

Fuchs, Repertorium der chemischen Litteratur, 
1806-08, p. 54. 

diuerses medednes nouudles de grande efficace, i 
toute sorte dc maladie, auec la maniere de les 
pratiquer : vtiles k chacun qui s*en voudra aervir. 
Traduites d'ltalien en Franfots, par M. Claude 
Rocard Apothecaire de Trojres.* [Printer's device.] 
A Paris, chec Pierre Cavellat, ru£ S. laoques 
i I'Escu de Florence. 1586; 8*. pp. [x6] 336 
[7, I blankji 

II tesoro delta viia humana, Ven. X57<\ 1582, 8*. 

La fisica, divisa in quattro libri, ibL 1582, 1603, 
8* ; 1629, 8*. 

La Cirugia, Venex. 158a, 1588, 1595, 1676, 8*; 
1699. 

The Compendium was translated into English 
and published: London, 1582, small 8*. pp. [16] 
142 [2]. 

The Chirurgerie was translated by John Hester 
and published : London, 1580, 4*, ff. [81 64 ; i6a6, 
4**. PP- [4]. "7 (^ for ix8K [5, X blank]. 

The Chirurgerie and Rational Secrets, along 
with several other medical tracts, were printed in a 
small 4^ volume in 1652 at London. 

Under the title of The ioyful luel, there was 
published at London, in 1579, a translation of the 
tract Regimento delta Peste^ Vencz. X565, X57X, 

1575. S''. 

A French version of the Specchio was made by 
Gatniel Chappujrs : Miroir Universel des arts et 
Sciences, Paris, 1584, 1586, 8*. 

Fioravanti died at Bologna, 4 Sept, X588. 

Biographie Medicate, Paris, Panckoucke (x8ao- 
25). iv. p. 149. 
Sprengel, Geschichie der Arxneykunde, X837, iii. 

p. 535- 
bcHmieder, Geschtchte der Alchemic, X832, p. 

395- 

Huefer, Histotre de la Chimie, X843, ii. p. X32; 

1869, ii. p. 127. 

Ersch & Gruber, Allgemeine Encyklopddie, X846, 
xliv. p. 292 (article by Theile). 

Biographie Universelle, 1856, xiv. p. 140 (article 
by Chaumeton). 

Nouvelle Biographie Ginirale, 1858, xvii. col. 
722. 

Poggendorff, Biographisch-literarisches Hand- 
worterbuch, 1863. i. col. 748. 

Ladragiie, Bibliothique Ouvarcff, Sciences 
Secretes, 1870, Nos. 1609-12. 

Dictionnaire encyclopidique des sciences medicates, 
4i^me S^rie, 1878, ii. p. 319. 

Haeser, Geschtchte der Medicin, x88x, ii. pp. xxa, 

»95- 
Hirsch, Biographisches Ijtxikon der hervorra- 

genden Aerzte^ 1885, ii. p. 368. 

Billings, IncUx-Catalcgue, X883, iv. p. 983; 2d 
Series, 1900, v. p. 805. 

Fergxison, * Notes on . . . Books of Secrets,' 
Transactions 0/ the A rcheeologiccU Society of Glasgow, 
1883, ii. pp. 19X, 251 ; 1890, N.S. L p. 45a 

FIORE DE FIORI. 

See ARNALDUS de ViUanova. 

FIRENZE. 

See FLORENCE. 

FlSCHMk-'I^LAMEL 2^9 

FISCHER (Eberhard Hsinrich). 

Eberhard Heinrich Fischers, Konigl. Preufs. Forster in der Grafschaft Mannsfeld, 
Brandenb. Antheils. Albertus Magnus der Andere. Das ist: Geheimnifse 
der Natur und Kunst vor alle Stande, als fur Kiinstler, Jager, Oekonomen, 
Professionisten, Handwerker &a zum Besten aus eignen Erfahrungen auf- 
gesetzet und mit nothigen Registem herausgegeben. In zwey Theilen. 
Altona und Leipzig, bey Johann Heinrich Kaven, 1797. 

8*. Erster Theil. Pp. [24. including a plate on p. [16]], aoa 

Zwejter und letzter Tbeil [10] 182. Wants pp. [11- 16] blank? 

Ferguson, ' Bibliograpbical Notes on . . . Books of Secrets,' Pt. iv., TransacHoms of the Archmological 
Society tf Glasgow, 1890, N.S. i. p. 331. 

FISCHER (LiEviNUs). 

I. N. R. 1. Beati Dn. Laevini FischerL M.D. De Aurea Auri Tinctura sive 
Veri auri Potabilis Medicina Commentarius ; qvo & genuina ejusdem prae- 
paratio ac usus spectabilis intimatur. Brunopoli. Literis Henrici KeslerL 
A.C. M.DCC.IV. 

4'. Pp. [6] 18. 

There were editions of the above published in De prolonganda vita dialogus, without place, 

1630, 1643, 12*, without place and printer's name. 1640^ 8". 

To him other works are ascribed by Mercklin : De loco vero ac foco affectus pr<Bcordialis vulgb 

Corpus medicina imperiale, Hemipoli, 1656, fol., kypochondriaci dicti, without place and date, 8*. 

1680^ 8*. Compare gisr, De tinctura Aurea, 

Merckhn, Lindenius reHOV€UMS, z686, p. 729^ Manget, Bibliotheca Scriptorum Medicorum, 

1731, I. ii p. 288. 

FLAMEL (Nicolas). 

Des beriihrnten Philosophi Nicolai Flamelli Chymische Werke, als 

1. Das giildene Kleinod der Hieroglyphischen Figuren. 

2. Das Kleinod der Philosophise. 

3. Summarium Philosophicum. 

4. Die grosse Erklarung des Steins der Weisen zur Verwandelung aller 

Metallen. 

5. Schatz der Philosophise. 

Den Liebhabem der Kunst aus dem Franzosischen in das Teutsche 
iibersetzt von J. L. M. C. Zu finden bey Johann Paul Kraus, Buchhandler 
in Wienn. 1751. 

8^. Pp. [6] 3—290 [2 blank]. Frontispiece with 2 subjects. 3 engraved plates 
with 7 subjects. Folding plate. Title red and black. 

After the above title is another tiUe in two compartments specifying : x. Das Buch 
der Hieroglyphischen Figiu^n, Nicolai Flamelli, and 2. Das wahrhafte Buch des 
gel^rten Griechischen Abts S3rnesii, Vom Stein der Weisen. 

Between pp. 112-3 is another title-pa^e: Das Kleinod der Philosophiae Oder das 
Original der Begierde Nicolai Flamelli, ein vortrefflich Werck, in welchem verfasset 
ist. die Ordnung und Manier, welche der vorgenannte Flamell in der Composition des 
Wercks der Natur gehalten hat, welche unter seinen Hieroglyphischen Figuren sind 
verstecket. Aus einem alten MS. An. 1751. 

Pp. 109-112 contain a list of alchemical books. 

This edition is not mentioned bv Roth-Scholtz. from Rotb-Scholtz. Lange's translation appeared 
Schmieder, Baumer, Gmelin. or Fuchs ; the last in 1673, and there is said to be an edition l^ Roth- 
two quote an edition of Hamburg, x68i, apparenUy Scholts in 1730. 

ado 

FLAM£L 

FLAMEL (Nicolas). Continued. 
Annotata qiiaedam ex Flamello. 

See DORN (gbrard), Trevisanus de Ch/mico Miraculo, 1600, p. 117. 

See THEATRUM CH£MICUM, 1659, 1. p. 748. 

See MANGET (j. J.), Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, ii. p. 350. 

This has been described as a comment by by him. But the whole idea it based on a mis- 

Flaniel on Denis Zachaire, and as Denis Zachaire understanding. See what is said under ZACHAIKI 

lived a century and a half after Flamel some have (den 15). 
felt a difficulty in believing these annotations to be 

Le D^sir d^sir^. 

See RICHEBOURG (j. M. D.}, Biblioth^ue des Philosophes Chimiques, 1740^ ii. 

p. 285. 
See SENDIVOGIUS (michael), Cosmopolite, 1629, ii. p. iii. 

Explication des Figures. 

See RICHEBOURG (j. M. D.), Biblioth^ue des Philosophes Chimiques, 1740^ il 
p. 195. 

Les Figures Hieroglyphiques. 

See arnaud (p.), Trois Traictez de la Philosophie Naturelle, 161 2, p. 45. 

This is the first edition. The English transKition was published at London, 162^, 
12°, with a folding plate. It was reprinted and published at London, 1889, small 4 , 
vrith an introduction, signed W. W. Westcott. 

The Hieroglyphicks. 

See SALMON (WILLIAM), Medicina Practica, 1 691, p. 521. 

Le Sommaire Philosophique. 

See RICHEBOURG 0* M. D.}, Blblioth^ue des Philosophes Chimiques, 1740^ ii. 
p. 263. 

Summarium Philosophicum. 

See VIER niitzliche Chymische Traclat. 161 2, sig. Fvj verso. 

See WASSERSTEIN der Weysen, 1619, p. 214. 

See MANGET (j. J.), Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, ii. p. 368. 

See WASSERSTEIN der Weisen, 1704, p. 164. 

See WASSERSTEIN der Weisen, 1 743, p. 1 54. 

See MUSiEUM HERMETICUM, 1 749, p. 1 72. 

Summary of Philosophy; or, Short Treatise of the Philosophers Stone. 

See AURIFONTINA CHYMICA, 1680, p. I45. 

Geschichte Nicolai Flamelli. 

See SAMMLUNG der neuesten und merkwiirdigsten Begebenheiten . . ., 1780. 

Histoire Critique der Nicolas Flamel et de Pernelle sa Femme. 
See w * * * (L.), 1761. 

Flamel is one of the most renowned of all the 
adepts, for in his case the philosopher's stone 
acted in its double capacity of conferring riches 
and long life. He was born about 1330 — though 
the date is by no means certain — acted as scrivener 
till an alchemical book vnritten on leaves made of 
the bark of a tree fell into his hands, when he 

forthwith began the search for the great elixir, 
which he succeeded in acquiring after twenty -four 
years' study, long journeys, hard labours, and 
many disappointments. His experiments were 
successful m 1382. The wealth he acquired was 
devoted to the building, restoring, and decorating 
of churches and hospitals. He is reputed to have 

FLAMML—PLORENTINUS 

2ftl 

FLAMEL (Nicolas). Omtimied. 

died in the year 14x8, bat Psud L4icas rdata that 
when traveling in Asia Minor he met a derrise 
who said that Flamel and his wife were still alive. 
This storj and the reports about Flamel's wealth 
were examined and cnticixed by blstienne FVanfois 
Villain in his history of Flamel {a.v. \ 

Most of the accounts containea in the histories are 
based on what is reputed to be Flamd*s own 
narrative, as given in his Hieroglyfkicks, His 
tombstone; diUed 14x8, from the old church of 

De La Bfartiniere, Tomhtau de la FoUe^ p. 37. 
(Martiniere, by the wav, savs that Flamel caused 
nis book to be printecL He forgot that printing 
was not known ather in Flamel's time, or for many 
years after.) 

Maier, Symiola Aurem Mensa, 1617, p. 333. 

Bord, BUtictheca cAimica, 1654, pp. 95, 265. 

Borel, Tresor de Recherches et AutiquiUx 
Gamloises et FretHfoises, 1655, p. 158. 

Conring, De Hermetica \iedicima Libri Duo, 
Ed. Sec., 1669, p. 421. 

Morhof^ De metallarum transmutatiome Efistaia, 

1673. p. 135- 

Mercklin, Lindenius renovatus, 1686, p. 833. 

Borrichius, Conspectus Scriptcrum Chemicarum, 
1697, p. 28, No. xxxL ; and in Manget. Bibliotkeca 
Che mica Curiosa^ 1709, i. p. 47, No. xliL 

Buddeus, An AlckemiUee sint in RefublUa 
ToUrandi^ vjon, p. 77; and in Roth-Scboltz, 
Deutsches Theatrum Ckemicum^ 1738, L p. 13a 

SCeren-ffappuch, . . . oder Teutsches F^euer 
der Sckeide-Kunst, 1703, p. 67. 

Naudaana et Patiniana^ X703« «» pp. 87, 210. 

Lucas, Voyage . . . dans la irrece^ FAsie 
Mineure . . . Paris, 17x2, pp. 98-1x2. 

Roth«Scholtz, Bibliotkeca Chemica^ 1727, p. 78. 
(Portrait of Flamel as frontispiece to Sttkck lii. of 
this book.) 

Die Edelgebome Jungfer Alchymia, X730, pp. 

243-47. 

Manget, Bibliotkeca Scriptorum Medicorum, 
X73X, I. il p. 288. 

Zedler. Universal- Lexicon^ I735i ix. col. X143. 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire, 1742, i. pp. 206- 
219 ; ill. p. X63. 

Fictuld, Prvdier-Stein, 1753, i. p. 76, 

Kloy, DicHonnaire Historique de la A/Aiecine, 
^7SS> >• 362 ; 1778, ii. p. 24X. 

MorixXt La Grand Dictionnaire Historique^ 

1759. V. p. 174- 

Villain, Histoire Critique, 176X. 

Les Bibliotkiques Francoises de la Croix du 
Maine et de Du Verdier, Paris, X772. Vol it pp. 
159- 161 ; vol. V. p. 123. 

Sammlung der . . . nemesten Begebenkeiten, 
1780. 

now 

m 

Saint-Jaoques-la-Boucherie, is 
the Hotd de Quut, at Paris. 

Lists of Flamd's worics are given by Bord. 
Rolb-Scholtz, Lenglet Dufresnoy, Adelung, Gmdin, 
Focbs, Schmicder, Kopp. 

Flamels portrait is prefixed to Stilck iii. of Roth- 
Schdu's Bihlwtkeca Ckemica, 

For his connection with Abraham Eleazar see 

ABSARAlf. 

Banmer, Bibliotkeca Ckemica, 1783, p. 84. 

B^ftrag ntr Gesckickte der kiikem Ckemie, lyB^, 
P.4W. 

Adelung, Gesckickte der Menscklicken Narrkeit, 
17B7, iiL pp. 242-302. 

Kortum verteiMget die Alckemie, X769, p. X07. 

Wiegleb, Untersuckung der Alckemie (1777) or 
1793. PP- 223-225. 

Gmelin, Gesckickte der Ckemie, X797-X799, 
passim. 

Widand, "Nikolas Flamel, Paul Lukas, und 
der Derwisch von Brussa, Kin Beytrag zur Ges- 
chtchte der Unsichtbaren, 1788.' Sdmmtlicke 
Werke, 1797, xxx. pp. X95-26X. 

Aikin, General Bio^apky, 1803, iv. p. 1x5. 

Introduction to Flamers Testament ^ Ix>ndon. 
1806. 

Fuchs, Repertorium der ckemiscken Litteratur, 
1806-08, p. 30. 

Tke Lives of tke Alckemystical Pkilosopkers, 
18x5, p. 30 ; ed. Waite, x888, p. 95. 

Schmieder, Gesckickte der Alckemie, x83a, pp. 
188. 60X. 

Hoefer, Histoire de la Ckimie, X842, i. pp. 427- 
435; «866, i. pp. 452-46a 

Erscfa & Gniber, Allgemeine Encyklopddie , X847, 
xlv. p. 54. 

Pouchet, Histoire des Sciences Naturelles au 
Mcyen Age, x8S3, pp. 399-412. 

Biograpkie Universelle, X856, xiv. p. 185 (by 
Ddaunaye). 

Figuier, LAlckimie et les Akkimistes, X856, pp. 
X7X.20O, 366. 

Nouvelle Biograpkie Ginirale, X858, xvii. cols. 
8x7-823. 

Ladrague, Bibliotkbque Ouvarof, Sciences 
Secretes, X870, Nos. 557-559. 802-8x3. 

Dictionnaire Encycloflaique des Sciences hUdi- 
cales, 4toie S6rie, X878, ii. p. 361 (and references). 

Du Sommerard, Mus^ des Tkermes et de t Hotel 
de Cluny^ Catalogue et description des objets dArt^ 
Paris, X883. p. 32, Na 345. 

Kopp, Die Alckemie, x886, i. pp. 94, X03, ao6, 
2x0, 2x3; ii. pp. 3x4, 3x6 ff., 358 1., 383, 386. 

Billings, Index'Catalqgue, 2nd Series, X900, v. 
p. 849. 

FLORENCE. 

See RiCETTARio Medicinale, 1567. 
See RICBTTARIO Fiorentiho, 1789. 

FLORENTINUS DE VALENTIA. 

Jhesus Nobis Omnia ! Rosa Florescens, contra F. G. Menapii calumnias. Das 

ist: Kurtzer Bericht vnd Widerantwoit, aufT die sub dato 3 Junii 161 7 ex 

agro Norico in Latein, vnd dann folgends den 15 Julii obgedachtes Jahrs 

Teutsch publidrte vnbedachte calumnias, F. G. Menapii, wider die Rosen- 

aSa FLOkEltTlNUS—FLO VEk 

FLORENTINUS DE VALENTIA. CamHnued. 

creutzische Societet. Au(s einfaldgem eyffer gestellet durch Florendnum 
de Valentii ord. benedicti minimum client 

do Idc cI* VII. 
Priusquam perquisiveris, ne cnmineris: 
Cognosce primum, atq; tunc increpa. 

No place, printer or publisher. 8*. Pp. [44 4 blank ? wanting]. 

Jhesus Nobis Omnia ! Rosa Florescens, contra F. G. Menapii calumnias. Das 
ist: Kurtzer Bericht vnd VViderantwort, auff die sub dato 3 Junii 1617 ex 
agro Norico in Latein, vnd dann folgendes 15 Julii obgedacbtes Jahis 
Teutsch publicirte vnbedachte calumnias, F. G. Menapii^ wider die Rosen- 
creutzische Societet Aufs einfaltigem eyffer gestellet durch Florentinum 
de Yalendi ord. benedicti minimum client 

cId Id c cI' VIII. 

Priusquam perquisiveris, ne crimineris: 

Cognosce primnm {sic\ atq; tunc increpa. 

8*. Pp. [46, 2 blank]. 

Though the title-page is almost identical with the preceding except in the date, the 
two editions are quite different from each other, as is obvious from the pagination. 

See 'ANTIKPI2I2 ad Responsum Florentini de Valentia, 1618. 

Kloss says that under this name and that of Th. Arnold, however, sa^ that Florentinus de Valentia 
Schweighard, Daniel Mogling concealed himself, was probably Valentin Andieae himsdf. 

Arnold, Kirchen- und Ketter- Hisiorien, 1741, ii. Ordens des Goldenen und Rosenkreuttes^ 1783* PP* 
p. 255 (Th. ii. B. xvii. c. xviii. § 27). 69, 7a 

Lenglet Dufresno^, Histoire de la PhihsopJUe Kloss, BibliographU der Freimaurerei, 1844, 
Hermuiique^ 1742, iii. p. 282. p. 182, No. 2496 ; p. 183, No. 2498 ; p. 185, 

Missiv an du kocherUuchteU BrUderschaft des No. 2524 ; p. 186, No. 2535 ; p. 189, No. 2558, 

No. 2564, No. 2565. 

FLORETUS A BETHABOR. 
Ben-Adams Traum-Gesicht. 

See MEHUN (JEAN de), Spiegel der Alchymie, 1771. 

See HERMETISCHES A. B. C, 1779, ii. p. 296. 

Roth-Scholtz mentions a separate edition of this Galli nach der Einode S. Michael. Hamburg, 

tract : Traum-Gesicht, welches Ben-Adam zur 1682, 8**. 

Zeit der Regierung Pucharetz des Koni^s von Gmelin quotes this as it stands, but puts 'Alama' 

Adama gehabt, und an Tag gegeben hat. Mit noch for * Adama,' and in the Spiegel the icing is called 

einem andem Tractatlein von der Reise Friedrich Rucharetz. 

Roth-Scholtz, Bibliotheca Chemica, 1727, p. 27. ha.dr9g\ic,BiSlioth^gve Ouvarof, Sciences Secrites, 

Beytrag zur Geschichte der hohem ChemiCy 1785. 1870, No. mi (calls the king, Rucharetz. which 

p. 634. seems the correct form). 

Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemie, 1798, ii. p. 14. Kopp, Die Alchemie, 1886, ii. p. 353. 

FLOYER (John). 

Inquisitio in verum Usum & abusum Calidorum, Frigidorum, & Temperatorum 
Angliae Balneorum. 
See VALLERIUS (NICOLAUS), Tentamina Physico-Chemica, 1699, p. 138. 

Von den herrlichen Wirkungen des kalten Badens und Trinkens des kalten 
Wassers. 

See OERTEL, Universal-Wasser doktor. No date. 

An inquiry into the right use of Baths, London, 1697, 8^ was the first edition of 
this work, and it went through several editions. The German translation appeared at 
Breslau in 1749, 8^. 

FLOYER—FLUDD 

283 

FLOYER (John). Continued. 

Sir John Floyer was born at Hintes, in Stafford- 
shire, in 1649, studied arts and medicine at Oxford, 
and graduated in both. He settled in practice at 
Lichfield, and acquired great reputation by his zeal 
and success in his profession. He died in 1724. 
He was a strong advocate for cold baths, and his 

Wood, Athente Oxoniemses, 1721, iu 979 ; ed. 
Bliss, 1820, iv. p. 532. 

Manget, Btbliotheca Scriptorum Afedicorum^ 
1731, I. ii. p. 289 (reviews). 

Jacod Leupolds Prodromus Bihlioth€c<E metallic<E, 

17^. p. 55- 

HaJler, Bwltotheca Botanica, 1771, i. p. 640. 

Hailer, Btbliotheca Anaiomica, 1774, 1. p. 783. 

EHoy. DicHonnaire Historique de la Midecine, 
1778, ii. p. 244. 

Carr^re, Catalogue . . . des Ouvrages . . . sur 
Us Eaux MiniraUs, 1785, p. 54, No. 133 ; p. 63, 
No. 153 ; p. 64, No. 154. 

Hailer, Bibliotluca MedicifUB practica, 1788, iv. 
p. zo. 

Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemie, 1798, ii. pp. 241, 
421. 

Chalmers, The General Biographical Dictionary, 
1814^ xiv. p. 416. 

Biof^apkie Midicale^ Paris, Panckoucke (1820- 
25)t >v. p. 166. 

views may have tended to depreciate him amon^t 
his fellows, as they ran counter to the practice 
of the time. On the other hand, Hailer sajrs 
that his work was not sufficiently well known, 
and even at the present day it is asserted that he 
has not obtained due recognition for what he did. 

Sprengel, Geschichte der Artneykunde^ 1827, iv. 
p. 408. 

Dezeimeris, Dictionnaire histyrique de la Mide- 
cine, 1834, H. i. 326. 

Ersch & Gruber, Allgemeine Encyktopddie^x^ng^ 
xlv. p. 426 (^ F. W. Theile). 

Bayle et Thillaye, Biographic Midicale, 1855, ii. 
24. 

Biographic UnivcrseUc, 1856, xiv. p. 26^. 

Nouvelle Biographic Ginirale^ 1858, xviii. col. 15. 

Allibone, A Critical Dictionary of English 
Literature, 1859, i. p. 608 ( Floyer and Dr. Johnson.) 

Dictionnaire encyclop^dique des Sciences Midi' 
cales, 46me S^rie, 1878, ii. p. 414. 

Haeser, Geschichte der Afedicin, 1881, ii. p. 646. 

Dictionary of National Biography, 1883, xix. 
p. 346. 

Billings. Index-Catalogue, 1884, v. p. 17; 2nd 
Series, 1900, v. p. 869. 

Hirsch. Biographisches Lexikon der hervorra- 
genden Aerzte, 1885, ii. p. 389. 

FLUDD (Robert). 
Clavis Philosophiae et Alchymiae Fluddanae. Sive Roberti Fluddi Armigeri, et 
Medicinae Doctoris, ad Epistolicam Petri Gassendi Theologi Exercitationem 
Responfum. In quo: Inanes Marini Mersenni Monachi Obiectiones, querel- 
aeque ipsius iniustae, immeritb in Robertum Fluddum adhibitse, examinantur 
atq; auferuntur : Seuerum ac altitonans Francisci Lanouii de Fluddo Judicium 
refellitur, & in nihilum redigitur: Erronea Principiorum Philosophiae Fluddanae 
detectio, k Petro Gassendo facta, corrigitur, & aequali iustitiae trutina ponder- 
atur: ac denique sex illae Impietates, quas Mersennus in Fluddum est 
machinatus, sincerae veritatis fluctibus abluuntur atque absterguntur. 

Super omnia vincit Veritas, 3 Esdr. 3. 12. 
Francofurti, Prostat apud Guilhelmum Fitzerum. Anno M.DC.XXXIII. 

Folio. Pp. 87 [x blank]. Vignette : A Rosy Cross with the motto : IDat Rosa mel 
Apibus. 

Discursus de Unguento Armario. 

See THEATRUM SYMPATHETICUM, 1 662, p. 507. 

Robert Flucld, or de Fluctibus, of Welsh descent, 
was bom at Milgate house, in the parish of 13ear- 
sted, Kent, in 1574. He entered St. John's 
Collie. Oxford. 1591, and graduated B.A. in 
1596. M. A. in 1598. Then like most of the scholars 
of the time he travelled on the continent, and six 
years elapsed, during which he visited France, 
Spain, Italy, and Germany. He had acquired a 
knowledge of chemistry and possibly of medicine, 
and on his return he became a member of Christ 
Church, Oxford, and graduated in medicine in 
1605. After several trials he was admitted to the 
College of Physicians in 1609. 

He practised in London, and was highly 
esteemed and very successful, and this fa^t 
apparently remains whether the explanation given 
of It by Fuller be correct or not. 

He was a believer in astrology, alchemy, sym- 
pathetic cures, and he introduced the Pathologia 
Dsemoniaca, in which all diseases are ascribed to 
evil spirits located in the four quarters of the 
earth. He is best known, however, as the most 
thorough-goin^ supporter in this country of Rosicni- 
cianism of which a defence passes under hb name, 
although its authenticity has been doubted. 

He died at London, 8 September, 1637, and was 
buried in Bearsted Parish Church. 

His works were published at Oppenheim and 
Frankfurt by different persons between the years 
1617 and 1638, in folio. They contain a number 
of curious and elaborate illustrations which must 
have entailed no small amount of labour on the 
author. Besides these, which form to a certain 
extent a consecutive series, there are the followiog : 

2«4 

FLUDD 

FLUDD (Robert). ConHnued. 

Pkih$opkia Mcvsaica, Gouda, 1638, small folio, it 
U] 153; English uanslation, MosaicaU Pkikuopky, 

^ 16], 56), entitled Tht Sftn „ 

Piutor Fosters Sponge, ordained ky him for the 
wifing away ^ the Weapon-Salve, London, 1631, 
small 4*, pp. [a blank, 6J 144. 68 ; translated into 
Latin : Responsum ad Hoplocrisma-Spongmmt 
Gouda, 1638, small folio, ff. 30. 

Apologia compendiaria, Fratemitatem de Rosea 
Cmcr suspicionis et infamim macuHs aspersam, 
veritatis quasi Fluctibus abluens et abstergens, 
Lu«L Batavorum, 1616, 8*. 

Tractatus Apologeticus Integritatem Societatis 
de Rosea Cruce defendens, Lugd. Batavorum, 1617, 
small 8<>, pp. 196 ; German translation : Schuts- 
schrift fUr die Aechtheit der RosenhreutMergeseii- 
ichetfi , . . liiersetMt von AdaMah Boom (i.e. 

Adam Mdchior Birkhob), Ldpcig, 1782, lo whkh 
Semler pablisbed ZmsdtM n der temtschem Ueker* 
settung von FludiTs Schutzschrift fi^ dU Rosem' 
hreutner^ Halle, 1785, 8*, pp. [u-zni] zviii-xxzii, 
21a. 

Traciatus theolago-philasopkicus in Hhrot tres dis- 
trihUus; quorum i. de vita, II. de morte, IIL ^ 
resurrectione, Cui imserumtmr nonmmlia smpiemHm 
veteris . . . fragmenta : . . • coUecta frairiHui: 
a Cruce Rosea dictis dedicaia d Rudolfo Ohw 
Brittano, Oppenheim, Anno ChrlstVs MVnDo 
Vlu (1617). 4\ pp. 196 Fa blank], whkii Bahk 
says was edited by Michael Maier. This and 
the preceding are seemingly not only the rarest 
of Fludd's works, but among the rarest of liteiary 
curiosities. There is also the treatise which be 
published under the pseudonym of Joachim FHsitis, 
Summum Bonum, rrankf., 1699, foL, which is 
included in the collected 

Boissardus,i9i^/f o/^a Chalco^raphica illustrium 
virtute atque eruditione , . , clanssimorum virorum, 
i6«>, plate Rr 4. 

Borel, Bibiiotheca Chimica, 1654, p. 97; 1656, 
p. 92. 

Mercklin, Lindenius renovatus, 1686, p. 941. 

Freher, Theatrum Virorum eruditione clarorum^ 
1688, ii. p. x^. Portrait, plate 61. 

Witte, Dtarium Biographicum^ 1688, Ll3t/, 8 
Sept, 1637. 

Naudteana et Patiniana^ 1703,/, p. xi6. 

Placcius, Theatrum Anonymorum et Pseudony- 
morum, 170B, in the Section : ' I>e Scriptoribus 
Pseudonymis detectis,' p. 386, p. 204, p. 477. 

Reimmann, Einleitung in ate Historiam titer- 
ariam derer Teutxhen, 1709, iii. p. 491 (a). 

Christ. Gottl. Praetorius, Duaertatio de variis 
variorum de philosophia Fluddiana sententiis^ 
Vite«b. 1715, 4*. 

Barchusen, De Medicinte Origine et Progressu 
Dissertationes, 1723, p. 454-47^ Dissertatio xxii. 
'de Roberti Flud Institutis Medicinse.* 

Buddeus, Compendium Histories philosophies^ 
1731, pp. 429, 433-4. 

Manget, Bibiiotheca Scriptorum Medicorum^ 
1731, I. ii. p. 298. 

Stolle, Anleitung xur Historic der Afedicinischen 
Gelahrheit^ 1731, pp. 229-233. 531. 

Morhof, Polyhistor^ 1732, i. p. 398 ; ii. pp. 18, 
160, 246, 356, 382. 399. 458. 

Douglas, BibliographitB anatomiccB Specimen^ 
edit. sec. 1734, p. 223. 

Zedler, Universal- Lexicon ^ I735. i*- col- *343- 

Stolle, Anleitung zur Historic der Gelahrheit, 

^73^> PR- 567. 569- 
Kestner, Medicinischcs Gelchrten-Lcxicon, 1740, 

p. 301. 

Arnold, Kirchen- und Ketsxr-Historien, 1741, 
ii. p. 251 (Th. ii. B.xvii. cxviii. §17); p. 254 
(§25); p. 26s(c.xix. §17). 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire de la Philosophic 
Hcrmitique, 1742, pp. i64-x66, a8i. 

Vogt, Catalogus Historico-Criticus Librorum 
Rariorum^ 1747, p. 281 {Opera) \ 291 (Frizni 
Summum Bonum, but he did not know that it was 
Fludd's) ; 509 (Rud. Otreb's Tractatus). 

Freytrag, Analecta Litteraria, 1750, i. p. 353 
(Frizzii Summum Bonum, ascribed to Fludd). 

TOcher, Allgemeines Gelchrten-Lcxicon, 1750, ii. 
CCH. 65a 

Fictuld, Probier-Stcin, 17^3, Th. i. p. 78. 

Kl(^, Dictionnaire histort^me des Sciences midi- 
caies, I7SS, i. p. 363 ; 1778, u. p. 945. 

Brucker, Historia Critica Phihsophiet^ 17^ IV. 
i. pp. 516, 6x J, 670, 691-93 ; IV. ii. p. 659. 

xialler, Bibiiotheca Anatomica^ I774« i- P* 337 
(homo finnaticus, Rosencruzianus, qui se nonut 
intelligi). 

Halfer, Bibiiotheca Medicinct practicm, vm* ii* 
p. 468 (contents of the six volumes of his collected 
works ; Rosencrucianae societatis homo fanaticus, 
subinde tamen utilia cogitata admiscens). 

Missiv an die hocherleuchtete BrUderschaft des 
Ordens des Goldenen und Rosenhreutnes, 1783, 
pp. 51, 1^3, 8o(Joach. Fnschii {sic)Sitmimmm bomum. 
Francos 1628 ; not ascribed to Fludd). 

Archiv fUr Rosenhreutser^ 1785, ii. p. 372 
(review of his SchutMschri/t). 

Beytrag xur Geschichte der hohem Chemie^ 1785, 

P- 517. 
Semler, Unpartheiische Samlungen Mur Hisicru 

der Rosenkreuxer^ 1787, ii. p. 7^ 

Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemie, 1797, i. p. 560. 

Hutchinson, Biographia Medica^ i799> i- P* 303. 

Buhle, Geschichte der neuem Philosophies x8oo, 
ii. pp. 438, 440, 445 ; 1809, ill p. 185. 

Aikin, General Biography^ 1803, iv. p. 142. 

Murr, Ober den wahren Ursprung der Rosen- 
hreuzer und des Freymaurerordens, 1805, pp. 40, 
52, 6a, 68. 

Buhle, Ueber den Ursprung und die vomehwute 
Schichsale der Orden der Rosenkreuxer und Frey- 
maurer, X804, pp. 907, 945 sqq. 

Nicolai, Einige Bemerkungen Uber den Ursprung 
und die Geschichte der Rosenhreuxcr und Freymaurer^ 
x8o6, Text, pp. 68, 74, 83, 85. 86 ; Anmerkungen, 
pp. 39, 44, 48 (against Buhle's views). 

Fuchs, Repertorium der chemischen Litteratur^ 
i8o6<>8, p. 538. 

Fuller, The History of the WorthUs of England, 
ed. Nichob, 1811, i. p. 503. 

Chalmers, The General Biographical Dictioncuyt 
1814, xiv. p. 417. 

Wood, AthencB Oxonienscs, ed. Bliss, 1815, iL 
col. 618 (J. Frizius, col. 620). 

Biographie Midicale, Paris, Panckoucke (1890- 
25), iv. p. X67. 

Granger, A Biographical History of Englandf 
1894, ii. p. 1x9 (Fludd s five portraits). 

Sprengel, Geschichte der Arxneyhunde, X897, iv. 

P 4a. 
Schmieder, Geschichte der Alchemic, 1832, p. 364. 

Dezeimeris, Dictionnaire historique de la Af/de- 
cine, 1834, II. i. p. 398. 

D*Israeli, Amenities of Literature, 1841, iii p» 
999. 

FLUDD-'FORSTER 

tSs 

FLUDD (Robert). Continued. 

Mackay, Attmoirs of Extraordifuuy Poplar 
DeimsioHs, 1841, iil pp. 155, a88 ; 1852, L pp. 174, 

Hoefer, Histoirt de la Ckimit, 1843, ii. pp. 185- 
190; 1869. pp. 177.182. 

Klosi, BikHograpkU der Prtimaurerei, 1844, 
p. z8i. Nos. 2481. 2482, 2483, 2485 ; p. 194. Na 
9617 Jsummuin bonum, auctore Joacnim Friczio 
{tic) Frenool z6a8 {sic) foL). 

Bayle ft Thillayep Bicgrt^kie MidUaU, 1855. i. 

m^rafkic Universelle^ 1856, xiv. p. 263. 

Nouveile BicmtMe GltUrak, 1858. zvii. col. 15. 

Allibone, A Critical DUHonary of English 
Uierature^ 1859, i. p. 609. 

Mnnk, The Roll of the Royal ColUge of 
Pinsicians, 1861, \. p. 14a 

St5ckl. Gtukickie der Pkilosopkie des Miltelaliers, 
1866, iii. pp. 472-76. 

FONS Chemica Veritatis. 

See PHILALETHBS. 

Franck, Dictionnairt des Sciences Pkilosopkiqttes^ 

1875. PP- 539-542- 
Dicttonnaire Encyclopidique des Sciences Midi- 

cales^ 4^iiie S^rie. 1878, ii. a ^18. 

Haeser, Gesckickte der Altdtcin, 1881. ii. p. 226. 

Billings, Index-Catalogue, 1884, v. p. 17; and 
Series, 1900, v. p. 870. 

Hirsch, Biografkisches I^exikon der kervom- 
gtnden Aerxte, 1885, ii. p. 389. 

Waite, Tke Real History of tke Rosicrucians, 
1887, pp. 283.307. 

Dtcttonary of National Biograpky, 1889. xix. p. 
348 (article by Rev. A. («ordon). 

Britisk Medical Journal, 1897. ii. p. 408. 

T. B. Craven, Doctor RobeH Fludd {Rokertus de 
Pluctibus) Tke Ef^lish Rosicrucian Life and 
Writings, Kirkwall, 1902, 8^, pp. zvu, 260. 
Portrait, vignette, illustrations in the text. 

FONTANA (Giovanni Maria Urbano). 

[Analyse des Eaux Thennales de Vinay avec des Observations sur les Insectes 
microscopiques qui y sont contenus ainsi que dans leurs Mousses. Par 
Mr. Fontana.] 

No place, date, or printer. 

4®. Pp. 92-122. Extract from the Aiimoires of the Ttirin Academy, vii« 1786, p. 92. 

Fontana, bom at Turin, 24 Dec., 17^ died at on Osmunda regalis. See Miwwires of the Turin 
Turin, 23 July, 1791. He wrote a chemical paper Academy, 1790.91. v. p. 93. 

FONTINA (Johannes von der). 

Die Fontina der Liebhaber der hohen Wissenschaft. 

See vier niitzliche Chymische Tractat vom Stein der Wciscn, 161 2, sig. Aij recto. 
See also JEAN DE la Fontaine. 

FORBERGER (Georg). 

See zachaire (denis), Von der naturlichen Philosophia, 1609, 1773. 

Georg Forberger was bom at Meissen, and 
towards the dose of the sixteenth century lived at 
Basel. He was an adherent of Paracelsus, and 
translated Alexander von Suchten's Tractat de 

Mercklin, Undenius renovatus, 1686, p. 816. 

Reimmanb, Einleitung in die Historiam liter- 
ariawi derer Teutscken, 1713, vi. p. 578. 

Manget, Bikliotkeca Scriptorum Medicorum, 
17 ji, I. ii. p. 302. 

Restner, Medicinisckes Getekrten-Lexicon^ 1740, 

Secretis Antimonii from German into Latin, Basil, 
1^75. 8". as well as historical works by Paolo 
Cjiovio and Guicciardini. 

Jticher, Allgemeines Gelekrten-Lexicon , 1750, 
ii. col. 67a 

Beytrag xur Gesckickte der kdkem Ckemie, 1785, 
p. «a 

Schmieder, Gesckickte der Alckemie, 1832, p. 
276. 

Ladrague. Bikliotkigue Ouvarqf, Sciences 
Secrites, 1870, Nos. 930-933. 

FORMOSUS, 

See TRAUME des griechischen Philosophus Aristobulus, 1762. 

FORSTER (JoHANN Reinhold). 

See scheele (carl wilhelmX Chemical Observations and Experiments on Fire, 
178a 

286 

FORSTER—FORTAUTIUM 

FORSTER (JoHANN RnifHOLD). ConHmud. 

who IS laid to have been desoeoded 
from a Scouman. who had left during the wan of 
Cromwell and lettled at Danzig, was born at 
Dirschau in East Prussia, as Oct., 17391 In his 
early years he was ne|flected, but in 1743 ^ ^^ 
sent to school at Manen Werther. next to Berlin, 
and in 174^ to the Gjrronasium at Joachinisthal, 
where he showed an aptitude for languages. In 
1748 he went to Halle. His father wished him 
to study law, he hinMelf preferred medicine, so t^ 
way of compromise he studied the<riogy, and 
acquired such a knowledge of it and such a likiniir 
for it that he thought of entering the Church, and 
in 1753 actually became pastor at Nassenhuben 
Dear Danzig. Without neglecting his duties he 
studied mathematics, history, ^ilosopfay, and 
natural history, which last inspirea him with a wish 
to travel. In the meantime, as his family expenses 
were increasing more rapidly than his mcome. he 
accepted an offer to go to Russia to superintend 
new settlements along a part of the Volga. On his 
return to St. Petersburg he present«i a report 
which induced the Government to ask him to draw 
up a code based on the civil code of the Germans. 
From Russia he went to England, where he 
published a translation into English of Lomonosov*s 
History of Russia and some other works. He 
refused oners to go as a preacher to Florida and to 
Maryland, and for a time lived at Warrington as 
teacher of French and German in the Dissenters' 
school. He passed to the Episcopal school, where 
he taught French for some years. An ofter to go 
to India having failed, be had to support himself in 
London by writing and translation, but after 
eifl^teen months he was offered the post of 

Aikin, General Biography, 1803, iv. p. 169 (full 
article). 

Meusel, Das gelehrte Teuischland, oder Lexicon 
der jetzt-lebenden Teutschen Schrifisteller, iii. pp. 

430-439- 

Fuchs, Repertortum der chemtschen Lttteratur^ 

1806-08. pp. 456, 509. 525. 526, 538- 

Thomson, History of the Royal Society, 18 12, 
Appendix iv. p. liv. 27 Feb., 1772. 

liiographie Midicale^ Paris, Panckoucke (1820- 
ac), iv. pp. 199-208 (excellent article with long list 
of his writings, by Jourdan). 

Erich & Gruber, Allgemeine Encyklopddie^ 1847, 
xlvi. pp. 376-382 (by Eckstein). 

naturalist oo Cook's second expeditioo, and hanng 
aooepCed it he joined the " Rescrfntion " in Joly. 
1772. The expedition returned in 1775. and a few 
months later r orsler bad prepared his report on 
the botany. But disagreements subsequently arose 
as to the writing the narrative of the ^K/nmt^ and 
his portion was ultimately rejected, and he was 
refused the cost of the plates. For his work be 
recei\Td no consideration from the Govemmeat, 
but his merit was recognized by the Untvcfsitr of 
Oxford, which made him a doctor of dvil mw. 
At this time his finances were so low that he was 
put in prison for debc He was relievod from lus 
debts m 1781 by Frederick II. of Prussia, who 
created him a councillor and appointed him to the 
chair of natural history at Halle, which be ooc^aed 
for eighteen years. He obtained the degrees of 
doctor of philosophy and of medidne, and was 
head of the botanic garden. He was not hum Mfiil 
as a lecturer or teacher, and he devoted himself 
mainly to translating narratives of travds^ and to 
the study of history and of technology. He died 
9 December, 1798. 

Forstcr was a man of immense knowledge of 
natural historv. and of enormous power of work. 
He was famifiar with seventeen languages, all of 
which he could speak and write. He is said, how- 
ever, to have had rough manners and a very keen 
tongue, to have been extravagant and fond of play, 
which threw him often into financial straits, so that 
possibly some of the complaints made against him 
were not without foundation, but all the same 
Forster is to be remembered as one of the dis- 
tinguished naturalists of the eighteenth century. 

Nouvelle Biographic GM/rale, 1858, xviii. p. aoa 

PoggendoHT, Biographisch-literarisches Haud- 
vwrterbuch, 1863, i. col. 77^ 

Allgemeine Deutsche Btographie, 1878, vii. p. 
166 (article by Alfred Dove). 

Dictionnaire Encyclop^dique des Sciences Midi- 
cales^ 46me S^rie, 1879. iii. p. 666. 

Dictionary of National Biograpfy, 1889, xx. 
p. 15 (contains a notice of the son J. G. Adam 
Forster, and a few notes on the father). 

Wilh. Schrader, GeschichU der Frtedrichs i/mi- 
versitdt zu Halle, 1894, i. p. 409, 537, 577. 

FORTALITIUM Scientiae, das ist: die vnfehlbare volkommeliche, vnerschatzliche 
Kunst aller Kiinsten vnd magnalien ; welche alien wiirdigen, tugendhafiten 
Pansophiae studiosis die glorwiirdige, hocherleuchte Briiderschaffl defs Rosen- 
creutzes zu eroffnen, gesandt. Daraufs dieselbige jhre gehorsame-kluge- 
fromme Discipul klarlich vnd ohne einige allegori nunmehr in demuht vnnd 
der forcht Gottes alle mysteria, seyt der Welt anfang hero verstehn vnd 
lernen mogen. Benebens sich griindlich vnnd augenscheinlich befindet, 
dafs Ehrngedachter, seliger, Gottliebender Fratemitet ringste Kunsten das 
Goldmachen, vnd Lapis philosophicus jederzeit gewesen seyen. 

Anno cIdIdCXVIL 
Deus providebit : qui credit, habebit 

No place or printer. 
8^. Sigs. A, B, C, in eights ; or pp. [45, z blank]. C8 (blank?) is wanting. 
The Fortalitinm is signed Ireneus Agnostus, The Copia IMerarum, F. G. Menapius. 

FORTAUTIUM—FOURCRO Y 

287 

FORTALITIUM Scientiae. Continued, 
Fortalidum Scientiae. cIdIdcxviii. 

8*. Sigs, A, B, C, in eights ; or pp. [45, 3 blank]. 
Tliis is nearly a line-for-line reprint of the 1617 edition, but the impression is not so clean. 

Lenglet Dufresnoy quotes the 1718 edition only, 
and is followed by the author of the Missiv. 

Kloss quotes both editions, and adds that this is 
the first appearance of the two names Irenaeus 
Agnostus and F. G. Menapius. lie states it as his 
conviction that the two names denote one person, 
who in all probability was Gotthard Arthusius, 

Dantiscanus, conrector of the gymnasium at Frank- 
furt a. M. He was a man of learning, took an 
active part in the compilation of De Bry's Travels, 
and wrote Ein ander Sendschreiben an die alter- 
seligste Fratemitet des gewUndschten Rosen- 
kreuttes^ printed along with the Fatna and Con- 
fession. See iRENiEUS and menapius. 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire de la Philosophie Ordens des Goldenen und Rosenkreutxes, 1783, 
Hermitique, 1742, iii. p. 284. p. 68, No. 56. 

Missiv an die hocherleuchtete BrUderschaft des Kloss, Bihliographie der Freimaurerei^ 1844, 

p. 183, No. 0497, and p. 177, No. 2442. 

FOURCROY (ANTOINE-FRAN901S de). 

Chemische Philosophie oder Grundwahrbeiten der neuern Chemie auf eine 
neue Art geordnet von A. F. Fourcroy, Arzt und Professor der Chemie. 
Aus dem Franzosischen iibersetzt von D. Johann Samuel Traugott Gehler, 
Oberhofgerichtsassessorn und Senatorn zu I^ipzig, auch der Oekonomischen 
Societal daselbst Ehrenmitgliede. Leipzig, bey Siegfried Lebrecht Crusius. 

1796. 

8*. Pp. viii. 182. 

This is a translation of the Philosophie chimigue, published at Paris in 1792, 8®, 
1795 ^^^ 1806. It was translated into most European languages. 

M^moires et Observations de Chimie, Par M. de Fourcroy, Docteur en Medecine 
de la Faculte de Paris, Censeur Royal, de la Soci^td Royale de Medecine, 
de celle d' Agriculture, Professeur de Chimie au Jardin du Roi & k TEcole 
Royale V^t^rinaire. Pour servir de suite aux Elemens de Chimie publics 
en 1782, par TAuteur. A Paris, Chez Cuchet, rue & hotel Serpente. 
M.DCC.LXXXIV. Sous le Privilege de TAcademie Royale des Sciences. 

8®. Pp. xvi. 447 [ij 3 plates. 

Tableaux Synoptiques de Chimie, pour servir de rdsum^ aux lemons donn^ 
sur cette science dans les ^coles de Paris. Par A. F. Fourcroy, Membre 
de rinstitut national, Conseiller d'£tat, Professeur de chimie au Museum 
d'histoire naturelle, k I'Ecole poly technique et h. TEcole de medecine. 
Paris, Baudouin, Imprimeur de Tlnstitut National des Sciences et des Arts. 
An VIII. 

Folio. Pp. II [i blank] 12 double folio sheets, contained in a portfolio. 

Fourcroy was bom at Paris, 15 January, 175c, 
where his father was a druggist, who could do little 
for the education of his son, but by the advice of 
Viq-d'Afyr he studied medicine, and after a hard 
struggle against poverty and jealous opposition he 
graduated in 1780, and turned his attention at once 
to scientific work. Four years later by the help of 
Buffon he succeeded Macquer in the chair of 
Chemistry in the Jardin des Plantes. In 1792 he 
was a deputy at the National Convention, and 
became one of the leading members of the Com- 
mittee of Public Instruction, and also one of the 
Committee of Public Safety. He assisted in 
organising the Nicole Polytechnique and in 
founding schools of medicine, drew up the scheme 

of the Ecole normale, and was created director 
general of Public Instruction. When the uni- 
versity was founded he expected to be made 
principal, but was passed over in favour of 
rontanes. This was a fatal disappointment, and 
shortly after, on 16 Deer., 1809, he died suddenly 
of apoplexy in the midst of his family at the age of 
fifty-four. 

Fourcrov's researches, carried on by himself and 
along with Vouquelin and others, covered the 
whole field of chemistry. He analysed minerals 
and mineral waters, investigated arra^omte, 
platinum, sulphurous acid, the combustion €A 
hydrogen in oxygen and the origin of nitric add 
in the water produced, fuknioating powd«rs, etc 

388 

FOURCRO Y^FRACASTORO 

FOURCROY (Antoine FRAN901S de). Caniinued. 

He examined various vegetable products, and 
showed that plants contained albumen, and ex- 
plained the formation of ether, but his most 
important investigations referred to animal sub- 
stances, the study of which had never been so 
sjrstematically undertaken previously. Fourcroy's 
extraordinary activity and energy were not exhausted 
by his multitudinous researches and his labours 
connected with or^nisation of education from the 
first grade to the highest. He was besides professor 
of chemistry at the Jardin des Plantes, the Ecole 
Polytcchnique, and at the Faculty of Medicine, and 
he spared no pains in making his lectures as clear and 

Carrire, Catali^ue . . . des Ouvrages , , , sur 
Its Eaux minerals, 1785, p. 541. (Fourcroy's 
classification of mineral waters.) 

Fuchs, Repertorium der chemischen Litteratur, 
1806-08. pp. 351, 401. 508-9, 548. 

Qu^rard. Ixi France LitUraire, 1829, iii. p. 178. 

Kopp, GeschUkte der ChemUt 1843-47, i. pp. 
334-329, et passim. 

Ersch & Gruber, Allgemeine Encyklopddie, 1848, 
xlvii. pp. 89 91 (b^ F. W. Theile). 

Biographie Uwtverselle, 1856, xiv. p. 521. 

Nouvelle Biographie GiniraU^ 1858, xviii. cols. 

338-343- , 

Cuvier, Rtcmeil des Rloges Hisiortques, 1861, i. 

pp. 299-335- 

FRACASTORO (Girolamo). 

complete as possible, while ia their delivery they 
were distinguished by a brilliancy and onuorical 
fervour which have never been surpassed. TheK 
lectures are practically contained in his Sfsikai* des 
Connaissances Ckymtques^ i8ox, 11 vols. 8*. which 
is the best account of the state of the sdeaoe at the 
time, as his article in the Emcyclepidie mHMHftu 
is of the greatest value for the history of it in the 
eighteenth centurv. 

He was a member of the Committee alanK with 
BerthoUet, Guyton-Morveau, and Lavoisier, wfaicfa 
was appointed to draw up the method of chemical 
nomenclature. 

Poggendorff, Biograpkisch-Hterarisckes Hamd- 
todrt^^cM, 1863, i. ool. 78a. 

Royal Society s Index, x868, ii. p. 677. 

Hoefer, Histoire de la Chimie, 1869, il p. 555. 

Kopp, Die Eniwickelung der CkewsU in der 
neueren Zeit, 1871, pp. 87, 88, 132, 203. 213, 304 
306, 398, 400, 527. 

Dictionnaire Encyclopidique des Sciences Midi- 
cales, 4^me S6ie, 1879, iii. p. 744 (long list of his 
publications). 

Haeser, Geschichie der Medicin, 1881, iL pp. 

739. 825. 

Billings, Index.Catalogue^ 1884, v. p. 128 ; 2nd 
Series, 1900, v. p. 1003. 

Hirsch, Biographisches Lexikon der kervorra- 
genden Aerzte, 1885, ii. p. 413. 

De Sympathia et Antipathia Renim. 

See THEATRUM SYMPATHETICUM, 1662, p. 650. 

Though his name is attached to the ' Dias- 
cordium Fracastorianum ' Fracastoro cannot be 
regarded as a chemist or pharmacist. His fame 
rests on his skill in medicine, which gained him 
the epithet of the ' successful,' and on his genius as 
a Latin poet. Mathematics and astronomy were 
also subjects of study, and he was one of the 
prominent men of the most brilliant era in the 
modem history of Italj. He was bom at Verona 
in 1483, and at his birth his lips were so nearly 
closed up that it was necessary to have them 
opened by a surgeon. He was an infant in his 
mother's arms and escaped uninjured when she was 
killed by lightning. After a careful education by 
his father he went to the University of Padua and 
had a distinguished career, being appointed to give 
lectures on Logic at the age of nineteen. He was 
present at various engagements between the French 
and Venetian troops, occupied a chair at Friuli. 

T. M. Toscanus, Peplus Italia, 1578, p. 73. 

Van der Linden, De Script is Medici s libri duo, 
1637, p. 209. 

Impenalis, Musctum Historicum et Physicum, 
1640, pp. 13-18 (with a portrait). 

Ghilini, Teatro ^Huomini Letterati, Venetia, 
1647, i. p. 119. 

Boissardus, Bibliotheca Chalcographica, 1650, 
Plate Pp. I. 

Mercklin, Lindenius renovatus, x686, p. 422. 

Freher, Theatrum virorum eruditione clarorum, 
1688, p. 1234 ; pi. 55. 

Coming, In universam Artem Medicam . . • 
introducHo, 1697. pp. 107, 410; 130, 207, 211. 

Nandaana ei Pattniana, 1703, «, p. 27 ; /., p. 19. 

Pope Blount, Censura Celebriorum Autkorum, 
1710J p. 581. 

Vtta selects quorundam erudiiissimorum ac 
illnsirium virantm, Vratislayise. 171 1, pp. s-ifii 

and was premier physician of Pope Paul III., who 
also appointed him to be physician to the Council 
of Trent. Towards the end of his life he retired to 
his estate in the neighbourhood of Padua— others 
say of Verona — where he died of apoplexy, 6 
August, 1553. He was buried in the Church of St 
Euphemia, at Verona. A statue with his portrait 
in bronze was erected to him at Padtta, and 
another subsequently at Verona. 

He wrote books on philosophical subjects, one on 
astronomy, and poems, which have recdved the 
approval of all competent critics. His collected 
works were published at Venice, 1555, 4*. His 
treatise on Sympathy and Antipathy and on Con- 
tagious Disease appeared first at Venice, 1546, 4^. 
at Lyons, 1550, and 1554, 16°, pp. 351, i Wank; 
Poemata Omnia^ I*atav., 1718, with portrait from 
the Paduan In-onze. 

Morhof, Polyhistor, 1714 (1732), I p. 1064 (L vii. 

3.8)- 
Teissier, Les Eloges des Hommes Savans, 1715, i. 

p. 169. 

Freind, The History of Physick, 1726, ii. p. 369, 
& passim. 

Fried. Otto Mencken, De Vita, morihts, scripHs 
meritisque Hyeronami Fracastorii commentaHo, 
Lips. 1731, 4'. 

Maffei, Verona Illustrata, Parte Seconda, 1731, 
PP* 337-347 (with a portrait-medal). 

Manget, Bibliotheca Scriptontm Afedicorum, 
1731, L ii. p. 306. 

Stolle, Anleitung tur Historic der Mediciniscken 
Gelahrheit, 1731, pp. X37-i39. 54^. 75'» 891. 

Niceron, Afemoires, 17^2, xvii. pp. 764-976. 

2^edler, Universal- Lextcon, 1735, ix. coL 1594. 

Kestner, Medicinisches Gelehrten-Lexicon^ 1740^ 

P-309. 

FRA CASTORO—FRANCKENBERG 

289 

FRACASTORO (Girolamo). Cantmued, 

Jocher, Allgemeines GtUkrlm-LtxicoH^ 1750, iL 
coL 696. 

Eloy, Dictionnairt histarique dt la Midecine^ 
1755, 1. p. 367: 1778. ii. p. 26a 

Mor^n, /-/■ Grand Dictionnaire histcrique, 1759, 
V. p. 283. 

Niatttuae, Conspectus Historia Medicorum Ckrvno- 
logicus, 176 1, p. 148. 

Portal, Histoire di tAntitomU et de la Ckirurgie, 
1770. i. p. 296; V. p. 589. 

Haller, Bibliothica Botamica, 1771^ L p. 276. 

Haller, BiblioUuca Ckirurgica, 1774, l p. 209. 

Haller, Btbliot/uca Medicimt practictt, 1776, i. 
p. 522. 

Hutchinson. Bwgrapkia Medica, 1799. 1. pp. 31a 4. 

Aikin. General Biography ^ 1803, iv. p. 197. 

Tiraboschi, Storia della Letteratmra Italiana^ 
1810. VIl. ii. pp. 475, 476, 559. 644. 

Chalmers, The General Biographical Dictionary^ 
18 14. XV. p. 57. 

Biographie MidicaU, Paris, Panckoacke (1820- 
25). iv. p. 234 (article by R. Desgenettes). 

Sprengel, GtsckUkte der Armeykunde, 1827, iii* 
pp. 200, 212, 215, 311. 

I^eidmens. Dutionnaire historique de la Mide- 
cine, 1835, H. ii- p. 38a 

Libri. Histoire des Sciences Math/matiques en 
/talie, 1840. iii. p. loa 

Ersch & Gruber, Allgemeine Encyklopddie, 1848, 
xlvii. p. 120 (article by F. W. Theite). 

Bayle & ThUlayc, Biographie Midicale^ 1855, i. 

P- 156. 

Biographie Universelle, 1856, xiv. p. 58^ 

Xouvelle Biographie GiniraU^ x^S^ xviii. p. 418. 

Poggendorff, Bu^raphisch4iterarisches Hand- 
toorterbuch^ 1863, i. coL 786. 

Dictionnaire Encyclopidique des Scieiues Midi- 
calesy 4^e S^e, 1879, iv. p. i. 

Haeser, Geschichte der \hdicin, 1881, ii. p. 132. 

Billings, Index-Catalogue, 1884, v. p. 135; 2nd 
Series, 1900, v. p. 1012. 

Hirsch, Biographisches Lexikon der hervorragen- 
den Aerxte, 1885, ii. p. 42a 

FRANCKENBERG (Abraham von). 

Raphael oder Artzt-EngeL Auff ehmaliges Ersuchen eines Gottliebenden 
Medici. A. S. Auffgesetzt von H. Abraham von Franckenberg, Equite 
Silesio, im Jahr 1693 (ssc). Jetzo aber durch zuthun guter Hertzen und 
Freunde verlegt, und ans Licht gebracht Zu Amsterdam, Gedruckt bey 
Jacob von Felsen, wohnhafft in der Utrechtschen Gasse, am Reguliers 
Marckt M DC LXXVI. 

4°. Pp. [2] 46 [i, I blank} Engraved emblematic title extra. 

Raphael oder Artzt-Engel. Auff ehmaliges Ersuchen eines Gottliebenden 
Medici. A. S. Auffgesetzt von H. Abraham von Franckenberg, Equite 
Silesio im Jahr 1639. Jetzo aber durch zuthun guter Hertzen und Forderer 
verlegt und ans Licht gebracht. Zu Amsterdam, Gedruckt bey Jacob 
von Felsen, wohnhaft in der Utrechtschen Gasse am Reguliers Marckt. 
M DC LXXVI. 

4°. Pp. M 46 [i, I blank]. Engraved emblematic tiUe extra. This is a different 
edition, in which the date 1639 is given correctly. 

a. (u. Gemma Magica oder Magisches Edelgestein, das ist, Eine kurtze 
Erklarung des Buchs der Natur, nach dessen sieben grosten Blattern, auff 
welchem beydes die Gottliche und Natiirliche Weifsheit, durch Gottes Finger 
hinein geschrieben, zu lesen ist : geschrieben von Abraham von Franckenberg. 

Im Buch der Weifeheit C. i. v. 4. 
Die Weifsheit wird nicht eingehen in einer bo(s-artigen Seelen. 

J. A. Th. 

Diese Weifsheit fallt nicht auff Un-Edle, besondern auff Tugend-Edle 
Gemiither. 
Zum Druck iibergeben und befbrdert durch einen Liebhaber des sel. 
Autoris. Mit Begnadigung und Freyheit des ApoUinis und der Musen. 
Amsterdam, Im Jahr Christi, 1688. 

8*. Pp. 159 [i blank]. 
T 

290 

FRANCKENBERG--FREIND 

FRANCKENBERG (Abraham von). Continued. 

Franckenberg, Lord of Ludwigsdorff in the 
principality of Oels, a Silesian nobleman, was 
bom on his estate. 24 June, 1593. He appears 
under various pseudonyms : Amadeus Friedlebius, 
Franciscus de Monte S. FrancLscus Montanus, 
Elysius. and wrote several books of mystical import 
and a life of Bohme, of whom he was a devoted 
follower. He had no respect for confession or for 
the communion, and having quarrelled with the 

Criests he went to Danzig, where he was entertained 
y the mathematician, Hevelius. He carried on a 

Placcius. Theatrufn Anonymorum et Pseudonym- 
orum, 1708. in the section entitled ' De Scriptoribus 
Pseudonymis detectis Liber,* p. 34. 

Roth-Scholtz, Bibliothua Cfumica, 1727. pp. 81, 
102. 

Stolle, Anleitung zur Historic der Gelahrheit, 
1736, p. 571 (wrote more systematically than 
Eiohme, but to follow him the reader must be a 
theologian, mystic, chemist and cabalist !). 

Arnold, Ktrchen- und Kct%er-Historien, 1741, 
Th. iil. c. ix. §§ 16, 17, 18. 19 (Tom. ii. p. 410); 
Til. iv. n. xxxii. § 75 (Tom. ii. p. 904). 

Vogt, Catalogus Historico-Criticus Librorum 
Rariorum^ i747i P- 284. 

Tocher, Allgemeines Gelehrten-Lexicon^ 1750. "i. 
col. 722. 

wide and learned correspondenoe, but would accept 
no offices because he thought they would lead him 
into many sins. He subsequently returned to 
Ludwigsdorff and died there 25 June, 1652. 

One of his books is entitled : 

Trium virorum chymicorum . . . nemlich Amadd 
Friedlebii, D. Rebentrosts und . . . G. Keilings 
Collectanea . . . de Bismutho, das ist etliche rare 
. . . Chymische Processe, Dresden und Leipag, 

1718, 8^ 

There is a copy in the British Museum. 

Fictuld, ProhierStein^ >753» »• P« 79- 

Brucker, Historia Critica Philosopkia, 1766, IV. 
i. pp. 695, 706. 

Mailer, Bibliotheca MediciiuE fracticte, 1777, ii 
p. 649 ; 1779, »"• P- 401. 

Gmelin, GeschichU der Chemie, 1798, ii. pp. 23, 
269: 1799, iii. p. 232. 

Fuchs, Reperiorium der chemischen Liiteraiur^ 
1806-08, p. 198. 

Poggendorff, Biographisch-literarisches Hand- 
worterbuch, 1863, i. col. 789. 

Ladrague, Bibliotkiaue Ottvaroj^, Sciences 
Secrttes^ 1870, Nos. 2 (i), 17, 54,78, 1089-91, 1708, 
1726. 

A ligemcine Deutsche Biographic, 1878, vii. p. 243. 

Kopp, Die Alchemie, 1886, ii. p. 327. 

FREDERICK, Duke of Holsatia and Sleswick. 
A letter concerning an Adept. 

See AURIFONTINA CHEMICA, 1680, p. 53. 

The author is presumably Frederick, or Fridericus 
IV., Duke of Schleswig-Holstein, who was born at 
Gottorp, 22 Dec. 1597. After a thorough education 
he travelled, and was in France in 1616, when his 
father died. He thereupon returned and undertook 
the cares of government in 1617. In 1621 he per- 
mitted the Dutch Remonstrants to settle and to 
build a town which was called after him Friedrich- 
stadt. During the war between the Emperor 
Ferdinand II. and Christian IV. of Denmark, he 
was compelled to receive the imperial troops though 
wishing to remain neutral, in consequence of which 
he was besieged by the King in Gottorp in 1629, 
for a short time, but was soon relieved by the 
concluding of a peace. He died 10 Aug. 1659, in 
his 62 year. 

He was a man of great learning, a master of 
many languages, and skilled in all the science of 
his time. He was the author of two or three works 

MoUer, Cimbria Literata^ I744i *• PP* 193**97. 

which have been printed, while others remain in 
manuscript. The opinion passed on him by Mei- 
bomius seems quite justified by facts: " I^ncipmn 
literatissimus, et literatorum princeps." He had 
enlarged a very fine library left him by his father. 
and had also a valuable museum, and a chemical 
laboratory in which chemists like Zobel and Lan- 
gellottus had pursued experimental researches. 

The present tract contains a romance-like story 
of an adept who possessed not only great wealth, 
but apparently knew the secret of the perpetual 
lamp and a method of communicating with his 
friends at a distance by means of a magnetic needle 
and an alphabet, an anticipation of wireless tele- 
graphy. The ideas were adopted but with a very 
sinister aspect thrown over them by Lord Lytton 
in his tale entitled The Haunted and the Haunters, 
A long account of the Duke is given by MoUer. 

Jocher, Allgenuines Gelehrten-Lexicon^ 1750. »»• 
col. 759. 

FREIND (John). 

Praelectiones Chymicae, in quibus omnes fere Operationes Chymicae ad vera 
Principia et ipsius Naturae Leges rediguntur, Oxonii habitae, Johanne 
Freind, M.D. ^d. Christ. Alumn. Amstelodami, Apud Janssonio- 

Waesbergios, M DCC X. 

8*. Pp. [16] 93 [3 pp. advertisements]. Title red and black. 

Freind was born at Croughton, or Croton, in thenes on the Crown, and Ovid's Metamorphoses. 

Northamptonshire in 1675, was educated at West- Subsequently he devoted himself to Medicine, 

minster school, and in 1691 went to Christ Church, communicated several papers to the Royal Society, 

Oxford, and studied under Aldrich. At first he took the degree of Bachelor of Medicine in 1703, 

was distinguished as a classical scholar and he and published his book Emmenologia, which has 

edited i£schines against Ctesiphon and Demos- been considered a remarkable exposition firom the 

FREIND 

291 

FREIND (John). Continued. 

iatro-mathcmatical or mechanical point of view. 
In 1704 he was appointed to the Chair of Chemistry, 
and delivered lectures thereon in the Ashmolean 
Mtiseum, and in 1705 went as army physician to 
Spain with the Earl of Peterborough. Afterwards 
he proceeded to Rome where he met Baglivi, the 
expounder of the above-mentioned medical theory. 
On his return he wrote a vindication of the Earl's 
conduct, printed at London in 1706, 1707, and in 
1709 appeared his Lectures on Chemistry, which 
were criticised by the Leipzig journalists, to whom 
he replied severely. In 171 1 he was in practice in 
London and became physician of George I. , was 
elected Fellow of the Royal Society in 1712, and of 
the Royal College of Physicians in 1716. In 1722 
he was sent to Parliament by Launceston, and in 
consequence of the vigour with which he expressed 
his views advantage was taken of the susp>ension of 
the Habeas Corpus Act and he was sent to the 
Tower, 15 March, 1723. In June he found security, 
and in November was liberated. Dr. Mead to his 
credit was his cautioner, though they were not on 
friendly terms. During his imprisonment he wrote 
a work on the Small-pox addressed to Mead, and 
sketched the plan of his history of Medicine. This 
work established his reputation, and in 1727 when 
George 1 1, came to the throne he appointed Freind 
to be physician to the Queen. He held this office 
however only for a few montlis as he died 26 July, 
1728, universally regretted. He was buried at 
Hitcham, in Buckinghamshire, and his widow and 
son were taken in charge by the King. 

The Prcvleciiones Chymicte appeared in 1709, 
and the second edition, London, 1726, 8^ pp. [16] 
177 [ I blank, 3 book advertisements, i blankj, with 

the Vindicia as an appendix. Besides the above 
of Amsterdam, 17 10, there is another, 171 8, 12% 
and Paris, 1727, 4*, 1735. The Elnglish translation 
has the following title : 

Chymical Lectures: in which almost all the 
Operations of Chymistry are reduced to their True 
Principles, and the Laws of Nature. Read in the 
Museum at Oxford, 1704. By John Freind, M.D. 
Student of Christ- Church, and Professor of Chymis- 
try. Englished by J. M. To which is added an 
Appendix, containing the Account given of this 
book in the Lipsick Acts, together with the Author's 
Remarks thereon. London, printed by Philip 
Gwillim, for Jonah Bowyer at the Rose in Ludgate- 
street, 171 2. 8<*, pp. [16] 200. 

Another edition is mentioned ; London, 1709, 8**, 
with the Emmenologia. The lectures (or rather 
the hypothesis of attraction advanced in them) 
were cnticised by Le Mort, and Freind's reply was 
published in the Philosophical Transactions^ No. 
331, pp. 310-342, for July, August, and September, 
171 1, and reprinted in the 1712 edition. 

The History of Physick in two volumes appeared 
at London, 1. 1725, ii. 1726, 8° ; 1751 ; a Latin 
translation by J. Wigan, London, 1734; a French 
translation by Stephen Pomet, London, 1727, 4". 
It is a classical work and is still of authority, 
especially for the Greek medicine, for which his early 
training in Greek stood him in good stead. It also 
was keenly criticised by Le Clerc, and a consider- 
able controversy arose over it, though the author 
himself took no part in it. 

His collected works in Latin were edited bv 
John Wigan, London, 1733, foL ; Venice, 1733, 4**, 
Paris, 1735, 4"*. 

Manget, Bibliotheca Scriptorum Medicorum, 1730, 
I. ii. pp. 341.346 (contains reviews). 

Stolle, Anleitung zur Historie der Medicinischen 
Gelahrhcit^ 1731, pp. 329, 546-48, 713-18, etc. etc. 

Edward Wilmot, The Harveian Oration, 1735, 
4" (Eloge of Freind). 

Zedler, Universal-Lexicon, 1735, ix. col. 1805. 

Niceron, M6moires^ 1736, xxxv. p. 255. 

Kestner, Medicinisches Gelehrten-Lexicon, 1740, 

p. 314- 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire de la Philosophic 

HemUtique, 1742, iii. p. 167. 

Biographia Britannica^ ^7SO, iii. pp. 2024-2044 
(an elaborate notice ; see Note F on the Chymical 
Prelections), 

Chaufepi^, Nouveau Dictionnaire Historique et 
Critique, 1750, ii. Letter F, pp. 82-87. (For the 
lectures on Chemistry, see Note D. ) 

Tocher, Allgemeines Gelehrten- Lexicon, 1750, ii. 
col. 738. 

Eloy, Dictionnaire historique de la Midecine^ 

1755. »• P- 371 : 1778. »• p. 268. 

Mor^ri, Le Grand Dictionnaire historique^ i759. 
V. p. 362. 

Portal, Histoire de r Anatomic et de la Chirurgie, 
1770, iv. p. 304. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Botanica, 1772, ii. p. 70. - 

Haller, Bibliotheca Chirurgica, 1775, ii. p. 40. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Anatomica, 1777, ii. p. 16. 

Baumer, Bibliotheca Chemica, 1782, p. 32. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Medicina practicce, 1788, iv. 
pp. 261-65 (with descriptive notes). 

Gmelin, Geschichte aer Chemie, 1798, ii. pp. 691, 
695, 715 (' History of Physick ' ). 

Hutchinson, Biographia Medica^ 1799, i. pp. 
314.322. 

Aikin, General Biography^ 1803, iv. p. 239. 

Fuchs, Repertorium der Chemischen LiitereUur^ 
i8o6-o8, p. 212. 

Thomson, History of the Royal Society^ 1812, 
Appendix iv. p. xxxii. Elected 1712. 

Chalmers, The General Biographical Dictionary, 
1 8 14, XV. p. 109. 

Andres, DelP origine, progressi e stato aituale 
di ogni Letteratura, x8i6, vi. p. 175. 

Biographic Midicale, Paris, Panckoucke (1820- 
25). iv. p. 263. 

Sprengel, Geschichte der Arxneykunde^ 1827, iv. 
p. 412. 

Dezeimeris, Dictionnaire historique de la Mide- 
cine, 1835, II. ii. p. 594. 

Ersch & Gniber, Allgemeine Encyklopddie, 1849, 
xlix. p. 8s (by F. W. Tlieile). 

Bayle & Thillaye, Biographic Midicale, 1855, ii. 
p. 186. 

Biographic Universelle, 1856, xv. p. 134. 

Nouvelle Biographic Gdnirule, 1858, xviii. col. 
782. 

Munk, The Roll of the Royal Collie of 
Physicians, 1861, ii. p. 44. 

Poggendorff, Biographisch-literarisches Hand- 
worterbuch, 1863, i. coU 797. 

Dictionnaire JEncyclop/dique des Sciences Midi' 
calesy 4ime S6rie, 1880, vi. p. 4a 

Haeser, Geschichte der Medicin^ 1881, ii. pp. 
608, 1087. 

Billings. Index-Catalogue^ 1884, v. p. 186 ; 2nd 
Series, 1900, v. p. 1069. 

Hirsch, Biographisches Lexikon der hervorrO' 
genden Aertte, 1885, ii. p. 433. 

Dictionary of National Biography^ 1889, xx. 
p. 241. 

The Asclepiad, 1889, vi. pp. 148-174. 

292 

FREITA G^ FRENCH 

FREITAG (Johann). 
De Unguento Armario. 

See THEATRUM SYMPATHETICUM, 1662, p. 609. 

There are two persons of this name, doctors of 
medicine. One, bom at Perleberg in the Priegnitz, 
1587* studied at Frankfurt on the Oder, Gottingen, 
Vienna, and Basel, graduated at Padua, and wrote 
a work on the Analogy between the Macro- and 
Microcosm. He died in 1654 (1667) at Ratisbon. 

The other, born at Niederwesel in the duchy ot 
Cleve, 30 Oct. 1381, studied at Helmst&dt, was 
Professor of Medicine, physician to the Bishop of 
Osnabrtick, finally went to Groningen on account 
of his religion, was appointed Professor of Medicine, 
practised and died, 8 Feb. 1641. He was opposed 
to the doctrines of Paracelsus, and engaged ia a 
controversy with Sennertus about them, and wrote 
a number of works on Medicine enumerated by 

Van der Linden, De Scripiis medicis libri duo, 
1637, p. 27a 

Mercklin, Lindenius renovatus^ 1686, p. 583 (for 
Joannes), p. 89 (for Arnoldus). 

Freher, Theatrum virorum eruditione clarorum^ 
1688, p. 1371, portrait, pL 63; p. 1383, portrait, 
pi. 64, 

Bayle, Dictionaire histortque, 1730, iv. pp. 
191-2 (Art. sennkrt). 

Manget, Bibliotheca Scriptorum Medicorum, 
1731, I. ii. p. 346. 

StoUe, AnUitung zur Historie der Mediciniscken 
Gelahrheit, 1731, p. 270. 

Kestner, Medictnisches Gtlehrten- Lexicon^ 1740, 

p. 316. 

Tbcher, AUgenuines GeUhrien- Lexicon, 1750, ii. 
coL 741-2. 

Matthise, Conspectus HistoruB Medicorum Chrono- 
Icgicus, 1761, p. 505. 

Van der Linden. The above tract is reprinted 
from his Noctes Afedica, Francof. 1616. 4". 

Mercklin, by some confusion, has placed it to 
the credit of Arnold Freitag, of Emmerick, bom in 
1561, from 1589 Professor of Medicine at Helm- 
stMdt, who resigned the post, however, and wrote 
some medical and religious books. Kestner has 
repeated this mistake b^ placing it under Amokl 
Freitag and not mentionmg it under Johann at alL 
Kestner is copied by J5cher, but if they had all 
consulted the Theatrum for themselves they woaM 
have seen that the author's name was Joannes, and 
the source the Noct. Med. Arnold Freitaic died 
in 1614. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Medicinee practicce, 1777, ii. 
p. 456. 

Chalmers, The General BiographiccLk Dictionary^ 
1814, XV. p. 118. 

Biographic Midicale, Paris, Panckoucke (iSao- 
25), iv. p. 267. 

I>ezeimeris, Dictionnaire historique de la Mide- 
cine, 1835, II. ii. p. 397. 

Itoyle et Thillaye, Biographic Midicale, 1855, L 

p. 37a. 
Biographic Universe lie, 1856, xv. p. 183. 

Dictionnaire Encyclopidique des Sciences Midi- 
cales^ 4^me S^rie, 1880, vi. p. 58. 

Billings, Index-Catalogue, 1884, v. p. 186 ; 2nd 
Series, 1900, v. p. 1071. 

Hirsch, Biographisches Lexihon der hervarra' 
genden Aerzte, 1885, ii. p. 434. 

FRENCH (John). 
The Art of Distillation : Or, a Treatise of the choicest Spagyrical Preparations, 
Experiments, and Curiosities, performed by way of Distillation. Together 
with the description of the choicest Furnaces and Vessels used by Ancient 
and Modern Chymists. And the Anatomy of Gold and Silver; with the 
chiefest Preparations and Curiosities thereof; together with their Vertues. 
In Six Books. By John French Dr. in Physick. To which is added in 
this Fourth Impression. Sublimation and Calcination: In Two Books. As 
also. The London-Distiller exactly and truly shewing the way (in words 
at length, and not in mysterious Characters and Figures) to draw all sorts 
of Spirits and Strong- Waters ; Together with their Virtues, and other Excellent 
Waters. London : Printed by E. Cotes for T. Williams at the Bible in 
Little-Britain, 1667. 

4'» Pp* ['6] 250. Contents [22]. Woodcuts in the text. 

The London-Distiller has separate pagination and the following title-page : — 

The London-Distiller, exactly and truly shewing the way (in words at length, and 
not in mysterious Characters and Figures) to draw all sorts of Spirits and Strong- 
Waters : to which is added their Vertues, with Additions of many excellent Waters. 
London, Printed by £. Cotes, for Thomas Williams, at the Sign of the Bible in Little- 
Britain, 1667. 

4", Pp. [a] 43 b]. I Woodcut in the text. 

[Another Copy.] 

FJl£XCIi--f^A£rXP 

393 

FRENCH (JoH>^ c>«.-:: 

At the end cf Book \1. ajt^ iht idutomixi^ 
The Process of the ¥2tt, ^rgyr^^m^ n 
celsas, p. 211. 
The Process of \bc E. 

KL fc-grrr 

brl. F.. 

-mmiir 

Leschi Genus Ama, p. ^^ 

The Process of the 
ing to Pootanos, p. 213. 

The SmaragdiDe tabae oe 
all Alchymie did Aiise. p. 2x3. 

Cootemporarj vith the 
one of which pwpfts to be a. 
the other tm-o bf T. F. M. D. 

The two are (Glaubers PktMfizcju Fmr^.y/^^ 
London, 1651. 4% azxl SeodiTa^ss A .Vnr Lif^ 
of Alckewiy, Loodoo. 1650, 4*. Tbe e^Asx% '*^* 
these were translated and edited br Frsaei: aur be 
briefly staled. 

1. Like the Art cf Distiuziiem^ tber v <re prtzsed 
for Thomas Williams at tbe itbwe :a LmJe-^^aJc. 
but by Richard Cotes. 

2. At the end of Giaaber's boc^^ t2^sre is as 
advertisement of the AWr Zjjfi/ arif cc ijae ylr? .;'' 
Distillation. 

3. Tbe woodcuL*: in Gla:iber s book atri 1:; tbe 
Art of Distillation are ideai^al so far as iber ^o. 

4. There are preparations in Fresxh*s Art sim> 
larly, if not identicaiiy. vorded whh those in 
Glauber's Furnaces. 

5. Passa^[es occur in the prefaces which are 
admittedly not identical, but on that very account 
bear sthkii^ evideiKe of tbe same hand. There 
are phrases, words, turns of expression, topics, in 
the prefaces which derK>te identity of antbonhipL 

For ezami:^, the * Epistle to tbe Reader ' pre- 
fixed to Sendivogius begins : ' Tlkrre is abundance 
of knowledge, yet but little truth known * ; while 
that to tbe Art of Distillation begins : * Tfaiere is a 
glut of ChymicaU books, but a scarcity of diymicall 
truthes ' ; analogous ideas, expressed in analogous 
terms. Similarly in the cooduding paragraph or 
sentences he apok>gises for his style and for the 
' Errata's ' — as be calls them, asks the reader to 
be candid or courteous, and if be knows more and 
can do better to give evidence thereof. In these 
passages thare is certainly not absobite identity in 
the words used, but the ideas are exactly the sanoe, 
the expressions are anakigous. in short they bear 
obviously that they were all written by the same 
person. 

With regard to the translation of A^ppa's 
Occult Pkilosofhy it may be observed that it is by 
a diflferent pnnter for a di£fcrent bookseller, and 
the translator omits the letters M.D. Lowndes 
says that J. F. stands for J. Freake. There was 
certainly a John Freke or Freake, but I am of 

Matthias, Conspectus Historic Medicorum Ckrvna- 
lojificuSf 1761, p. 638. 

EUoy, Dictionnaire Historique de la Midecine^ 
1778, li. p. 274. 

Chalmers, The General Biographical Dictionary, 
1814, vol. XV. p. lao. 

Wood, Athene^ Oxonienses, ed. Bliss, 1817, iil 
col. 346. 

FRESNOY (Nicolas Lenglet du). 

See LENGLET DU FRESNOY (NICOLAS). 

FREUND. 

Ein Freund, deme die Wahrheit bewust ist . . 

See METALLISCHER BAUMGARTEN, 1741. 

;e a ssppiT 
= tbe ."1*7 

nxiCiXfcV, if 

: ... 32 a.x. aocesM c( 
lI'-bj^ of ihT fci«L* Ir the K: 
«=." ic:3« b* S3.TS ' • I: arv Errtu * have passed 
silips of ray pesL or the Rriiklar's 
iZ3±it, and raeod them. If tboa 
.2 aoc apfarow* cf vbaz I hav« dooe. cottvince 
of TZT cii\Ki, bnr doB^ becer; for 
ookige the Severs of troth, aad. 
thrirxzKL' 

poLssagcs in tbe address to the reader in 
tbe *X'^-mJ Pki^Mkf^ir can be paraSek<d« and the 
mbove tridesxt prores cumulative^ that the L F. 
of these works is Tohn Freoch the author o^ the 
Ar7 jr DisTisJ^irum, 

The initials j. F. are appended to the address to 
the reaxier preoxed to Dr. E\Trard's translatioo of 
Tke DrHme PrwuMder cf Hermes Airn-trrius 
Trsjwie^isfMj. London. 1650. small 8*, pp. [i<>l 215 
[i b^ank] and London. 1657, 34% .[14^ 246 [4] 127 
^% book advertisements}. 

Tbe 1650 edition was primed by Robert White 
for Thomas Brewster and Gregory Moule, just as 
.\grippas O^-mlt Pkilasopkr was printed by R. W. 
for Gregory Monk: The 1657 edition was printed 
by J. Sk. for Thomas Brewster. 

'1 do not doabt that the initials J. F. again 
denote John French, for though there is nothing 
exactly resembling what has been quoted above 
from the other books the thoughts expressed in the 
preface are so like those in that to A Xew Light of 
Alchymie, that one is m-arranted in ascribing thera 
to the same author. Wood, it may be observed, 
thinks that J. F. the translator is probably the 
same as John Frendi. 

Tbe first edition of The Art of Distiliatiom was 
published at London in 1651, pp. [24] 199 [i, 15, 
I blank]; tbe second, in 1653-59, pp. [16] 191 
[i blank] ; 64(16] ; tbe third, in 1064 ; all in 4^ 

The author vras bom at Broughton, near Ban- 
bury, in x6i6i He was a surgeon in the army, 
became M.D., and wrote this book, and that on 
the 'Yorkshire spaw.' London, 1659, 1654. la*, 
reprinted long after at Halifax, in 1760, as ' 11m 
Harrogate Spaw,' la^ He died at Boulogne in 

1657. 

Biographic Af/dica/e, Paris, Panckoucke (i8ao- 
25). »v. p. a68. 

XouveUe Biographic G^n/raic^ 1858. xvtii. p. Boa. 

Dictionnaire Encyclop/difue des Sciences MiJi^ 
cales, 4teie S^rie, 18^, vi. p. 47. 

Dictionary of National Biographic , 1889, vol. xx, 
p. 251 (article by Gordon Goodwin). 

294 PR^ UND-^FR YD A U 

FREUND. Continued, 
Bin Freund der edlen Chymie und Metallurgie am ghinen Hartze. 

See BREVIS TRACT ATIO, 17 1 5- 

See CON- ET DISSENSUS Chymicorum De . . . Rustici Minoris Particulari, 171 5. 
See EINFALTIGER iedoch deutlicher . . . Unterricht von der Luna Compacta, 

1715. 

Ein Freund und Untersucher der Natiirlichen und Hermetischen Wahrheiten. 
See UNVORSICHTIG (Die) verlohrne . . . Philosophische Brieff-Tasche, 1728. 

FREUNDLICHES SEND-SCHREIBEN, eines Adepti scientiae & artis 
Hermeticae, an die so genannte Duumviros Hermeticos Foederatos, anlangende 
Deroselben Schrifiten, vor einigen Monaten aus Engelland nach Franckfiirt 
gesendet. Weifsenfels, zu finden bey Job. Briiblen, F. S. Hoff- und August 
Buchdr. Im Jabr Cbristi 1684. 

12°. Pp. 42 [6 blank]. 

FREYDAU (JoHANN Ferdinand von). 

See frydau (johann Ferdinand von). 

FREYWALDUS (Donatus), Misnensis, Respondens. 

See HORST (gregorius), Problematum Medicorum . . . decades priores 
quinque, 1608. 

FRIBE (Melchior). 

Epistola, sive brevis enumeratio bactenus k se in Cbemia actonim. 
See MANGET (j. J.), Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, ii. p. 875. 

Melchior Fribe was born at Friedland in Silesia, papers on medical subjects to the Academia Naturae 

34 Nov. 1629, was a doctor of medicine, practised Curiosorum, of which he was elected a member, 

at Landshut, and then at Zittau, was ' Physicus' at 15 Augt« 1672. He died at Mittweide in 169a 
Hayne in Misnia, and communicated a number of 

Mercklin, Lindfnius renovatus, 1686, p. 806. Haller, Bibliotheca Anatomica^ ^774^ i- p* 603. 

Manget, Bibliotheca Scriptorum Medicorum, Haller, Bibliotheca Chirurpca, 1774, i. p. 40$. 

1731, I. ii. p. 347. Haller, Bibliotheca MedicintB practictB, I779» iii< 

fidchner, Academia . . . Natures Curiosorum p. 339. 
Historia, 17^5, p. 466, No. 43 (calls him Fribe). Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemie, 17^/^, ii. pp. 139, 

Haller, Bibliotheca Boianica^ 1771, i. p. 569. 215 (calls him Friben). 

FROLICH VON PLAWEN (Hulderich). 

See cardano (geronimo), OfTenbamng der Natur, 1591. 

Is this the person who wrote a description of 1600, and Montfort's Enarrationts on Virgil, 1596^ 
Basel in verse, Basel, 1607, and edited commen- folio? 
taries of W. Musculus on Genesis and Romans, 

FROST (Ernest Bogislaus), Respondens, 

See ROLFlNCK (guerner), Dissertatio . . . de Tartaro, 1660, 1679. 

FRYDAU (Johann Ferdinand von). 

Licbt des Lichtes, das ist Bescbreibung und Beleuchtung des furstlicben und 
monarcbiscben grossen Gebeimnisses aller Geheimnisse, des Scbatzes aller 
Scbatze, des Steins der Weisen, den die Weifsbeit Gottes aus Liebe und 
Gnade zum Woblstand des menscblicben Gescblecbts in das Reicb der 

PR YD A U—FUEGER 

m 

FRYDAU (JOHANN Ferdinand von). Continued, 

Natur gepflanzt, und, wie solcher zu erlangen sey, geoffenbaret durch 
Johann Ferdinand von Frydau &c. 

Psalm 104, 24. Die Giite des Herrn ist in alien Dingen. 
Quedlinburg und Eisleben, in der Biesterfeldischen Buchhandlung. 1763. 

8*». Pp. 136. 

Sendschreiben an einen Durchlauchtigsten Prinz eines Hochfiirstlichen Hauses 
des Deutschen Reichs in welchem von dem grofsen hermetischen Geheimnifs 
dem Stein der Weisen gehandelt wird. Nach dem Original gleichlautend 
zum Druck befbrdert. Quedlinburg und Leipzig, in der Biesterfeldischen 
Buchhandlung 1762. 

8«. Pp. 64. 
Dated : Sonnenbcrg den 14. Novembr. 1758, and signed von Frydau. 

[Another Copy.] 

Both these works are in the Ouv;iroff Catalogue, wish of the admiring editor of the Hemutischis 

and Kopp quotes " Licht des Lichtes " ; but I have A. B. C (iv. p. 75) :— O gbttlich weiser Bruder, 

not seen them elsewhere, and have not found any dein Zeugnis bleibe bisans Endeder Zeitim Segenl 

notice of the author. There is only the fervent The author's name appears also as Freydau. 

luiiAr?igQR,Biblio{hiqueOuvaroff, Sciences Secrites^ Kopp, Die Alchemic, x886, ii. p. 388. 
1870, Nos. 1394-5. 

Sendschreiben. 

See HERMETISCHES A, B. C, 1779, iv. p. 75. 

t 

Licht des Lichts. 

See HERMETISCHES A. B. C, 1779, iv. p. 95. 

FUCHS (Georg Friedrich Christian). 

Erlauterungen einiger Verse welche in Basilius Valentinus Schriften vor- 
kommen. 

See teichmeier (Hermann friedrich), 1788. 

Fuchs, bom at Jena, 20 Augt. 1760, was son of 
Georg August Fucbs, Phil and Med. D. He was 
apothecary at Biirgel, near Jena, in 1787 was 
privat docent in the medical faculty, and 1783 
extraordinary professor of medicine at Jena, and 
afterwards superintendent of the asylum. He died 
22 Augt. 18 13, at BttrgeL He made numerous 
chemi(^ investigations, published separately, 
mostly at Jena. A list of these is given by Meusel, 

Meusel, Das gelehrte Teutschland^ oder Lexicon 
dtr jctttlebenden Teutschen Schriftsteller^ I79^ ii* 

P- 453- 
Gmelin, Geschickie der Chetnie, 1799. iii. pp. 

540-541 ; 671, b' passim. 

GUnther, and Poggendorff. In connection with 
the history of chemistry, however, he compile! two 
works still of use and value : Versuch einer U^ter- 
sichi der Chymiscfun Litteratur und ihrerBranchen, 
Altenburg, 1785, 8** ; and Repertorium der chemi- 
schen Litteratur von 49^ t/. Chr. Geburt bis 1809 in 
al^bet^ Ordnung auf GestelU^ Jena, i8o6-z8i2, 

Gilnther, Lebenskitun der Prtfessortn der Uni- 
versitdt Jena seit 1558 bis 1858, Jena, 1858, p. 133. 

Poggendorfi; Biographisch-hterarisches Hand- 
Vfdrierbuch, 1863, i. col. 813. 

Dictionnaire Encyclopidique des Sciences midi- 
cales, 46me S^e, z88o, vi. p. 248. 

FUEGER (Georg). 
Theoria brevis de Lapide Philosophico. 

See riGULUS (benedictus), ThesaurineUa, 1682, p. joa 

296 FUNF—FUSSSTEIG 

FUNF Curieuse Chymische Tractatlein, in welchen die allerdeuthchsten 
Ausdriicke derer, so jemals, als wahrhafftige Kunstbesitzer, von dem so 
sehr beruffenen Stein der Weisen geschrieben haben, anzutreffen sind. 
Nebst einer Vorerinnerung von J. W. Frankfurt und Leipzig, bey 
Johann Georg Efslinger. 1767. 

8**. Frontispiece, title, and introductory matter, pp. [32]. 

The five tracts have each a title-page and separate signatures and pagination. 
They are as follows : 

J. R. v., GUldene Rose, pp. 88. Joannes Fridericus Helvetius, Vitulus Aureus, 

Anonvmus von Schwartzfufs, Brunnen der Weifs- pp. (including the frontispiece), [i-is] 14-80. 

heit una Erckiinntnifs der Natur, pp. 47 (including See under these names rcspcctivdy. The first 

the frontispiece), [i blank]. three tracts were issued together in 1706 in DREY 

— Das Blut der Natur, pp. 79 (including the curieuse chymische tractatlein (q.v.). The 

frontispiece), [i blank]. frontispiece is the same in both collections with 

Joannes de Monte Raphaim, Vorbothe der . . . modifications as to details. 
Morgen-Rothe, pp. 40 (including the frontispiece). 

• • 

FUNFZIG von verschiedener Art, ganz neu erfundene und bewahrte Kunst- 
stiicke. 
See E. (h. v.). 

FURSTLICHE (Die) Rose von Jericho oder Moses Testament 

See HERMETISCHES A. B. C, 1779, iv. p. 39. 

In the first paragraph this is said to be the last Probier-Stein ascribed to Fictuld. See pictuld 

piece by the Baron Meinstoof. It is an excerpt (h.). For the *Rose' in alchemical titles sec 

only. This Meinstoof is presumably identical with kopp, Die Akhemie, 1886, ii. p. 377. 
Memstoff, who is named as the author of the 

FUNDAMENT (Das) der Lehre vom Stein der Weisen. 
See PVROPHiLUS, 1736. 

FUNDAMENTA Vera Chymiae. 

Paracelsus. 

Separate & ad maturitatem perducite. 

Anno M.DC.LX. 

8". Pp. 15 [i blank]. No place or printer. 

No author's name is given. The tract consists of 42 aphorisms or short 
paragraphs dealing with the fundamental notions of the composition of metals 
and their transmutation. 

FUSSSTEIG dess Fusssteigs. 
See SEMITA Semitae. 

G. (C)—G. (A M.) 

297 

G. (C) 

See GLASER (CHRISTOPHER). 

G. (F. A.). 

Das Philosophische Auge in der Chymie, den so lange von den allermeisten 
in Blindheit des Verstandes vergeblich gesuchten Lapidem Philosophorum 
Oder Stein der Weisen zu sehen, und so viel leichter zu finden, der Richt- 
schnur der Vernunft gemafs, mit Zuratheziehung und Gegeneinanderhaltung 
der bewahrtesten, von dieser Sache in Druck ausgegangenen Philosophischen 
Schriften, zur verniinftigen Priifung und treuhertzigen Warnung, bey miifsigen 
Stunden gescharffet von F. A. G. Jena zu finden bey Theodor Wilh. 

Ernst Guth. 1751. 

8^ Pp. [24] 72. 

The name of the author of this tract is not 
mentioned. Fictuld (ProbUr-Stein^ i753f Th. ii. 
p. 32) criticises him severely as bein{^ a follower of 
that ' arch -sophist * Pbilaletha. The book, how- 
ever, makes but passing allusion to that person, 
and the most important chapter is that in which 
the author gives a classification of the cheats and 

impostors who claim to possess or to be able to 
make the philosophers' stone. 

The book is just mentioned by Kopp {DU 
Alchemit^ 1886, li. 385) and by Ladrague {Bib- 
Uotkique Ouvarof, Sciences Secrites, 1870, No. 
1468). 

[Another Copy.] 
[Another Copy.] 

G ♦ ♦ (L.). 

La Lumi^re tirde du Cahos, ou Science Herm^tique du Grand-CEuvre 
Philosophique d^voil^. Par Mr. L. G * ♦. A Amsterdam. M.DCC.LXXXIV. 

24"*. Pp. 139 [i]- 

For the occurrence of the word Chaos with an 
alchemical significance see Kopp, Die Alchemie, 
1886, ii. p. 252, and for works in the title of which 
the word occurs, Ibid, p. 361. Nor should it be 

forgotten that the title of Baron Chaos was con- 
ferred on Richthausen, an alchemist (Bayer, CJkemie 
und Alchymie in ()sterreich, bis zum ifginnenden 
XIX, Jahrhundert, 1883, p. 36). 

G. M. B. D. S. 

See RADIX CHIMIiE, 1680. 

G. (P. M.). 

See HOLLANDUS (JOHANN ISAAC), Opera, i6oa 

J9i 

CALESVS—CALL US 

GALEXUS /CLAUDrc^u 

L Antidour.v di Caodio Galeso Pergameno Interpretato da 

Ang-.-lico Vicennno. Ncl quale si cootengono i doe Libri de gli Anddoo, 
quciio della Tberiaca i Panfiliano, Q Trattato d'essa k Pisone^ & il DboooD 
de' Sali TheriacalL Con I'lndice delle Cose piii nocabili. In Vioena, 

Apprcsso Domenico Amadio. M DC XIII. Con lioenza de' Supcfiori. 

Sink. lo. 3 blank". 

Tbe poMtion ol Galen as tbe 
Of cLi&iica! anoquitj after Hi 

lippocntes aad ife 

Middle Ajgcs. ii » 

uxkq j«stx)oed. Aod his system forms so disQadnet 

port di the hutonr of mediane liiat it is hsd^ 

Dcoesury lo p^ lifciiiim to cbe "^ " — 

il. Hisi^rt di tAnaiomue €t de ia Ckirwrpt^ 
1770. L ppi ';*>^y, ▼. s^-sfls. Ac. Ac. 
HaOer. Bibluikeca Satmmica, 1771, L ppi iii- 

^. f> i^ «3» !« 

ajTxl x-^*^- •■-? '^"-^ ■■Toie lie :x-i*rr.: iZ'l ^i^ne 
either vk'y-M o- ii>! «ur>;<c: Hr r^^: &;: bow- 

»crpc '.'.s •r..r.h m*rr .- ▼-.'*, -r !-?>:; oc 1430 y-rirs 

Che v^.y.'.r^ GaJenic phTv^-iro ar.d the advocazes 

<4 chetTi.c-C or ' spa^Tx r«:-r i.-:^ 

Castellan. us. Ti/tf /»''u:f''imm JJtJucrumi^ 1617 
p. IIS. 

Van der LincSea. /^r S:ri^it .Xftdicis Uh^ Jmo, 

i^i PP- ioa-i3i. 

K'matui ^Jhaitehus. ' V:ta. ' prrrized to his editioo 
of Galen s Works. Pans, 1639. 

Mercklxn, LinJtmtLS renavalus, 1S66. pp. 183- 

»4. 

Coonng, /• unn<rj:m Artem Sftdicam . . . 
IntrodtLcUo, 1687. p. 4^. Aic. &c. 

F'abricius. lUf^lioikec^ Grria. 1708, ii.. pp. 509- 
590 \hio}(tum CAnmo/4fgUMm, bii- Ph. I^abbet. 

Popc-B'ount, Censmra CeUbriorum Autkcr^m, 
Genev. 1 7 10, p. 163. 

Barchus#;n, Dt S/rdi^intr t/rigitu tt frogrtuu 
Diisertaiionei, 1723. pp. 246-276. 

Freind, The Hittary cf Phyack from the tiwu of 
Galen to the beginning of the Sixteenth Century^ 
1725-36. passim. 

Le Oerc, HisUnre de la Midecine, 1729, p. 66a 

Manj^et, Bibliotheea Scriptorum Medieorum, 
1731, I. ii. pp. 376-429. (Manget has reprinted the 
long life of Gaien by Kenatus Chartehus.) 

SioUe, Anieitun;^ zur Historic der ^leditinisiken 
Gelahrheit, 2731, pp. 85-90, &c. 

StoUe, AnUitung zur HiUorie der Gelahrheit^ 

1736. pp. 389-90. 557-58. 
Kestncr, Xtedicmtsches Geiehrten-Lexicon^ 1740, 

P- 327. 

Chaufepi^, Nuuveau Dictionnaire histonquet 

17 w, ii. letter G, p. 8. 

Jucher, Allgemeincs Gtlehrten-Lexicon^ '750i ii* 
col. 832. 

Ik)erhaave, Methodus Studii Medici, ed. Hallcr, 
ij^i, passim. 

Eloy, Dictionnaire historique de la Aiidecine, 
1755. »• 380 ; »778, ii. 290. 

GALERAZEYA. 

See AGRICOLA (DANIEL), 163I. 

GALLUS (Friedrich). 

Reise nach der Einode St. Michael. 

See under MEHUN (jOHANN von), Spiegel der Alchyraie, 177 1, p. 33- 

See THEORETISCH und praktischer Wegweiser zur hohem Chemie, 1773, P- 121. 

Halkr. Biblietkeca AnatomUa^ t77\^ L p. fe: 
1777. ii. pp. 736-739. 

HaDcr, Bibliotheea Chtrmrgica, 1774, L pi 85. 

Sazius, On^^wtastieom literarimm, 1775* ^ P> 3^7' 

Haller. Bibliotheea MedUimee pracHem, tjj^ 
:. ppi 23ft-373; 1777. iL p. 434 (tbe present 
Itahao morkl 

Bufgraphie MMicale^ Paris, Panckoucke (i8ao- 
•35K iv- pp- 304-324. article bj .A. L. Marquis. 

Sprengd, Geschichte der Ar%mejkmtukf 18133, iL 
pp. 132-176. 

Dexeimcris, DietionMoire historiftu de Im M^de- 
cine. 1835, II. IL pp. 430'47i- 

Bayle & ThiUaye, Bie^raphie UidicaU^ i8ss> >• 

pp. 7"-79. 
PhUlippe a Ludwig. Gesckicki^ der Aptikehv, 

1855. pp. 60, 373-377- 

Darembn^. Histoire des Sciences Midicaks^ 
1870, i. p. 207, Ac, &C. 

Haescr. Gtschichte der Medicin^ 1875. L |^ 

347-385. etc. 

Figuier. Vies des Savants illusires {de fAmtt- 
quite*). 1877, p. 366. 

Dictii'nnairc Encyclopidiqne des Sciences Midi- 
cales. i83o, 4cme Serie, vi. p. 500. 

\\\\\\j\%s. Index-Catalogue^ 1884, v. p. 242; and 
Series, 1901, vi. p. 13. 

Hirsch, Biographisches Lexikon der herverra^ 
gtnden Aerate, 1885, ii. p. 477. 

.Miiteilungen sur Geschichte der Medicin und 
der .\'aturwissenschaften, 1902, i. p. 3 (note on 
Galen's name by Wm. Cronert). 

Friedrich Gallus describes how finding acci- 
dentally a tract bv Paracelsus in a chapel in the 
Thuringian forest he was led to visit a hermit who 
dwelt in the solitude of ' St. Michael,' who claimed 
kinship with the noble family of Trautmannsdorf, 
and woo was a master of the deepest philosophy. 

He showed Gallus tbe philosopher's stone, aod 

said he was bom in 1462, which made him at the 
time of Gallus* visit 140 years of age. He died in 
1609. 

Whether this is a narrative of an actual event, an 
allegory, or a mere romance, it is difficult to say. 
There is no indication as to the author. 

GALLUS'-GEBER 299 

GALLUS (Friedrich). Continued, 

■ Roth-Scholtz, Bibliotfuca Chemica, 1737, p. 85. Ladrague, Bibliotkique Ouvarofy Sciences 

Fictuld, Probier-Steifty 1753. Th. l p. 85. Secrites, 1870, Nos. Iii3-iii4. 

Schmieder, Geschichte der AlcMemie, 1853, p. Kopp, Die AlcMemie, 1886, i. p. loz. 

a8x. 

GAMON (Christofle de). 
Le Tresor des Tresors. 

See LINTHAUT (HENRI DE), i6io. 

GANTZ neue eroffnete Pforte zu dem Chymischen Kleinod. 
See R. (I. M.), 1728. 

GANTZE (Der) Kern der Al-Chymie, das ist : Eine Erleuchtung der schwartzen 
Finsternis dem Mercuric philosophorum der alten Weisen, den rechten 
Glantz zu geben. Nach einem alten Exemplar so im Jahr 1580. in 
Strafsburg von Johann Faust gedruckt, nun aber denen Liebhabem der 
edlen Chymie zum Besten, ohne Versetzung eines eintzigen Buchstaben, aufs 
neue wieder aufgelegt. Hamburg, 1748. 

8**. Pp. 16 [3, I blank]. Etched vignette of an eagle, by Feller of Jena. 

This tract is in verse. It is a reprint with some modifications of the "alte 
DEUTSCHE REIMRN, de prima Materia des Steins der Weisen," f.v., and begins — 
after some preliminary verses — "Eine treue Lehr will ich dir geben." 

GANTZE (Das) Schema oder Figur. 

5^<? QUADRATUM ALCHYMISTICUM, 1705 ; All Puli, Centrum Naturae Concen- 
tratum, p. 78. 

GARAYE (Claude Toussaint Marot), Comte de la. 

See MAROT (CLAUDE TOUSSAINT^ Comtc de La Garaye. 

GARLANDIUS (Joannes). 

See HORTULANUS. 

GASSMANN (Franz). 

See PANTALEON. 

GASTON DE CLAVES. 

See DUCLO (GASTON). 

GEBER. 

Gebri Arabis. Chimicae cum Correctione, et Medulla G: Homi. M. d. Nor. 
Lugduni Batavorum Apud Amoldum Doude. 1668. 

This is followed by a fly-title : 

Gebri Arabis Chimia*sive Traditio summae Perfectionis et Investigatio Magisterii 
innumeris locis emendata, k Gaspare Homio Medico Reip. Noriber;^ensi5. Aocessit 
ejusdeni Medulla Alchimiae Gebncae. Omnia Edita, k, Georgio Homio. 

12**. Pp. [19, I blank] 179 (for 279) [i blank]. Engraved title, consisting of a 
black man with a shield, helmet, and mnce, from which floats a pennon bearing the 
first title. Behind the figure is a palm tree, at the foot of which crouches a tiger or 
leopard. At the bottom ii the imprint 

500 GEBER 

GEBER. Contintud. 
Gebri, Regis Arabum, Philosophi Perspicacissimi, Summa perfectionis Magisterii 
in sua natura ; Ex Bibliothecae Vaticanse Exemplari undecunq; emendatissimo 
edita, Cum vera genuina^; delineatione Vasorum & Fornacum. Deni4; libri 
Investigationis Magisterii & Testamenti ejusdem Gebri, ac Aurei Trium 
Verborum Libelli, & Avicennae, Summi Medici & acutissimi Philosophi, 
Mineralium additione Castigatissima. Gedani, Apud Brunonem Laurentium 
Tancken. Anno M DC LXXXIL 

8^. Pp. [23. I blank, engraved title included] 378 (should be 372, because 113-8 
have been dropped in paging). 9 plates of apparatus. 

Besides the Sumnia Perfectionis, Liber Investi- Authoris ignoti, Philosophici Lapidis Secreta, 

gationis and Testamentum of Geber, this volume metaphoric^ describentis Opusculum. p. a6i. 

contains: Merlini Allegoria, profundissimum [lAilosophid 

Liber Trium Verborum Kallid acutissimi, p. 235. Lapidis Arcanum perfect^ continens. p. 265. 

Avicenna : £)e Congelatione et Conglutinatione Kachaidibi. Veradiani, Rbodiani, et Kanidis 

Lapidum, p. 245. Philosophorum Regis Persanim, de Materia Philo- 

Also called Avicennn: Mineralia. sophici Lapidis acutissimi coUoquentium fragmeo- 

Cujusdam Epistolae quae Alexandri Macedonum tum, p. 270. 

Re^is nomine circumfertur, Interpretatio abditam Faustos Sabeeus ad Lectorem, p. 278. 
Philosophici lapidis, compositionem sapientibus 
acutissimi declarans, p. 254. 

Geberi des Koniges der Araber, scharffsinnigen Philosophi und wahren Adepti 
Curieuse vollstandige Chymische Schriften, worinnen in den vier Biichem 
das Quecksilber, Schwefel, Arsenicum, Gold, Silber, Bley, Zinn, Kupfer, 
Eisen, &c. Oefen, Instrument, Sublimationen, Descension, Desdllationen, 
Calcination, Solution, Coagulation, Fixation, Ceration, Test, Cement, Feurung, 
Schmeltzung, &c. ferner deren Anfange, Praparationen, Essenzen, Salze, 
Alaune, Atramente, Salpeter, Salarmoniac, Vitriol Antimonium, Bolus, 
Cinnober, Glafs, Boras, Essig, &c. abgehandelt werden; wie auch das 
Testament, Giildene Buch der dreyen Worter Kallid Rachaidibi, und andere 
Chymische Tractatgen, Summa, die ganze Kunst die unvoUkommenen 
Metalle, als Kupfer, Zinn, Bley, Eisen, &c in Vollkommene, als Silber 
und Gold zu verwandeln ; das ist : wie man Silber und Gold machen 
soil, enthalten, A lies aus einem uhralten MScpt. genommen, nach dem 
vorhandenen Exemplar in der Vaticanischen Bibliothec eingerichtet, mil 
gehorigen Figuren und Register versehen, und an Tag g^eben von 
Philaletha. Wienn, verlegts Joh. Paul Kraufs. 1751. 

8°. Pp. [24, Frontispiece included] 332 [4, advertisements]. Title red and 
black. 15 woodcuts in the text, most of which are copies from the early folio 
editions of Geber's works. 

This edition contains the following works : donier. Von der geheimen Composition des Steines 

Gebers Summa, in four books, p. i. der Weisen, p. 257. 

Das Buch der Dreyen Worter Kallid Rachaidibi, Eines unbekannten Autoris Geheimnifs vom 

p. 236. Stein der Weisen, p. 266. 

Rachaidibi, Veradiani, Rhodiani und Kanidis Merlini Allegorie vom Stein der Weifsen, p. 271. 

der vortrefflichsten Weltweifsen des Koniges in Geber : Das Buch der Untersuchung, p. 277. 

Persien, Stilcke von der Materie des Steins der Geber : Testament oder letzter Wille, p. 3P3. 

Weisen, p 2^8. Avicenna : Tractat von der Congelation und 

Sendscnreiben Alexandri des Koniges der Mace- Conglutination der Stdne, p. 319. 

Faustus Sabaeus an den Leser, p. 33a 

Commentaria iiber Gebers Werke, wodurch aus ihm selbsten wie auch aus vielen 
anderen Schriftstellem Materia Proxima Lapidis Universalis sowohl als ailer 
Partikular-Arbeiten erwiesen wird. Wien, 1792. 

8®. Pp. [27, I blank] 369 [1 blank]. 

GEBER 

301 

GEBER. Continued, 

The tracts in this edition are identical with those 
in the edition of 175 1, and are as follows : 
Gebcr, Summa. in four lK>oks, p. i. 
Das Buch der dreyen Wortcr KaUid Rachaidibi, 

p. 275. 
Rachaidibi, Veradiani, Rhodianiund Kanidis . . . 

Stiicke von der Materie des Steins der Weiscn, 

p. 286. 

Sendschreiben Alexandri dcs Koniges der Mace- 

donier. Von der geheinien Composition des Steines 
der Weisen, p. 294. 

Eines unbekannten Autoris G^eimnifs vom 
Stein der Weisen, p. 302. 

Merlini Allegoric voni Stein der Weisen, p. 306. 

Geber : Das Buch der Untersuchung, p. 311. 

Geber : Testament oder letzter Wille, p. 336. 

Avicenna, Tractat von der Congeladon und 
Conglutination der Steine, p. 353. 

Faustus Sabseus an den Leser, p. 368. 

[Another Copy.] Wien, 1792. 

Opera. 

See ALCHEMIA, 1 541. 

The works are : De inventione veritatis seu perfectionis metal- 

De investigatione perfectionis metallorum, p. i. lorum, p. 906. 

Summa perfectionis metallorum, sive perfect! De Fomacibus constniendis, p. 229. 
magisterij, p. 20. 

See GRATAROLO (OUGLIELMO), Veric Alchcmiae . . . doctrina, 1561, i. p. 112. 

Summa Perfectionis, sine perfecti magisterii, 

The works are : 

I>e Investigatione perfectionis metallonim, p. p. 118. 

112. 

De inventione veritatis slue perfectionis, p. 184. 
Liber Fomacum, p. 193. 

Liber investigationis magisterii. 

See GINiECEUM CHIMICUM, 1679, p. 164. 

See MANGET ( J. J.), Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, i. p. 558. 

Secretum. 

See under RICHARDUS ANGLICUS, Correctorium, 1581, f. 137 ; 1596, f. 137. 

This tract is entitled in the book : Des K5niges das gr5ste Secretum b^iffen, so auff Erden sein 
Gebers aufs Hispanien Buch der Heyligkeit so er mag : vnd desien sich die Venetianer hoch 
seinem Sohn zu lieb vnd nutz geschriben, darinnen rlihmen. 

Summa perfectionis magisterii. 

See GIN/ECEUM CHIMICUM, 1679, P- '• 

See MANGET (j. j.X Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, i. p. 519. 

The Sum. 

See SALMON (WILLIAM), Mcdicina Practica, 1691, p. 335. 

La Somme de la Perfection. 

See RICHEBOURG (j. M. D.), Biblioth^quc des Philosophes Chimiques, 1740, i. 
p. 85. 

Testamentum. 

See MANGET (j. J.), Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, i. p. 562. 

De Alchemia Dialogi duo. Quorum prior genuinam librorum Gebri Senten- 
tiam . . . retegit . . . 1548. 

See BRACESCO (GIOVANNI). 

(Jeber Redivivus, 

See DENSINGER (arsenius bachmielX i683(?)r 

302 

GEBER 

GEBER. Continued. 

Exercitationes perbreves in Gebri . . . Libros duos Summse Perfectionis. 
See GERHARD (johann). 

De Lapidis Physici Conditionibus Liber. Quo . . . Gebri & Raimundi 
Lullii methodica continetur explicatio. 1695. 

See VOGEL (ewald). 

Hitherto it has been the ciistom, though not a 
universal one. to identify Geber with ihe Arabian 
alchemist Dschabir Ben Hayyan. if this be 
correct all that is necessary is to produce proof 
of the identity by exhibiting the connection of their 
respective writings. Then what is known of the 
biography of the Arabian will of course serve for 
that ot Geber. The results of investigation so far 
have not led to any satisfactory result, for there 
are several different notices of Dschabir which do 
not agree, and which have caused Hammer-f*urg- 
stall to say that his biography is overshadowed by 
considerable contradiction and obscurity, and have 
led Steinschneider to call him an almost mythical 
personage. There seems, however, to be no 
reason for doubting that he lived and wrote the 
alchemical treatises enumerated in some Arabic 
books of reference. According to the Kilab-al- 
Fikrist (loth century) he was bom at Tarsus, 
lived at Damascus and at Kufa, and died a.h. 
160, that is A.D. 776-777. Other accounts which 
make him a native of Harran and flourishing in the 
third century of the Hegira, or an apostate Greek, 
or a native of Spain, have not the authority of the 
narrative in the Fikrist which is adopted by 
Hammer-Purgstall. 

According to native accounts he was a voluminous 
writer, and did not confine himself by any means 
to alchemy. His writings on this subject have 
been long known by Mss. in Arabic preserved at 
Leyden and Paris, and probably in other libraries. 
The contents of these mss. however were not 
readily accessible until they were published by 
Berthelot in 1893. 

As a result of his examination of them Berthelot 
has come to the conclusion that the Latin works of 
Geber have nothing reallv to do with the Arabic 
works of Dschabir, but tnat they are considerably 
later. 

If this view be correct it opens up an entirely new 
question, for if we know but little about Dschabir, 
of Greber we know nothing at all, except that he 
cannot be later than the fourteenth century, seeing 
that his name occurs in MSS. of that date. But 
to his nationality, to his exact date, to the origin of 
his name, there is no clue, and a still more difficult 
thing to account for is the clearness of the writings 
ascribed to him as compared with those of his 
presumed contemporaries and of many of those in 
succeeding cen tunes. 

The earliest printed work with a date bearing 
Gcber's name is entitled Flos Naturarum, There 
was a copy in the Pinelli collection, exemplar 
nitidissimum, as it is called, but the date is mis- 
printed : 'III. Nonas Augusti.* A copy is men- 
tioned in the catalogue of the Museo Borbonico, 
and there was one in Count Mac-Carthy's sale 
which brought 51 fr. There was formerly one in 
the Ste G6nevifeve Library at Paris, but it nas been 

Thevet, Les Vrais Pourtraits et Vies des Horn- 
mes illustres, 1584, ff. 73 recto — 74 verso. (The 
portrait given is of a personage whose very existence 
IS doubtnil. The biography is equally reliable.) 

missing for a long time. The description ^'ven 
by Ham is merely copied from that in the Pindli 
Catalogue, for he repeats the mistake in the date. 
He never saw a copy, and the book is passed 
over by Copinger, so that neither has he comeaotifis 
a copy anywhere. It is quoted by £>enis, Maittaire, 
Panzer, Brunet, and Graesse -but thej give no 
definite information about it. 

The book is a small 4°, without place or printer's 
name, but printed in Italy. It is m Roman tetter, 
a.^ lines to the page, and the copy before me hus 
16 leaves. The bMX>k has no signatures, catch- 
words, or numbers. The colophon, printed in 
capitals, runs thus : 

Opus Maximi Philosophi | Ac Regis Indiae Ge | 
beri Foeliciter | Hie Comple \ turn Est Ac 
I Impres | sum | AnnoIesuChristi M.OCCC 
I LXXIII. IIII. Nonas Augusti. | 

Two or three of the paragraphs refer to alchemy, 
but the bulk of the book consists of ' secrets ' based 
on the 'occult' properties of certain substances, 
and it closely resembles the style of the ' Magic of 
Kiranus.' There can be no doubt that this is one 
of the very rarest of books. 

The chemical writings of Geber, with which the 
preceding has nothing to do, passed through a 
number of editions. Besides those in the present 
collection there are the following. The first is in 
Roman letter, printed between 1470- 1480 (B. M. 
says Rome, 1473). without number or mark of any 
kind. It contains ff. 12a, 25-26 lines to the page. 
It is called a 4^ but the copy before me has the 
original manuscript signatures, and they are in 
eights ; Rome, printed from a MS. in the Vatican 
by Marcellus Silber, no date, 1490-1520, in small 
square 8**, of which there were two is.sues at least ; 
Strasburg, 1528, 1529, 1530 (?), 1531, all in folio ; 
Nuremberg, 1541, 4*' (with other works) ; Venwc, 
1542, 8'; Nuremberg, 1545, 4** (with other works); 
(1562?); Basel, 1572, 8*^; Strasbuig, 1598, 8* 
(1649, 12"); (1670?). These are in Latin. 

The German translation printed in the same 
style, and with the same illustrations as in the 
Latin, Strasburg. 1529. 1^30, folio; (1581?); 1625, 
8"; Frankfurt, 1710, 8**; Vienna, 1753. 8''. 

There are two translations in English, that by 
Richard Russell, London, 1678, and with a new 
title-page, 1686 ; Salmon's version, 1692 (as above), 
1707. 

The French version was not printed by itself, 
but in the Bibliothique, 1672, 1678, 1741. 

Besides these printed editions I have met with 
several MS. copies both on paper and vellum, of 
various dates, some of them as early as the 
fourteenth century. They are all in Latin, except 
one in Italian, in which language, so far as I am 
aware, there is no printed edition. Numbers of 
MSS. are preserved in the large libraries. 

Spachius, Nomenclator Scriptorum Medicorum^ 
1591. 0. 30. 

Nazari, Delia Tramuiatione Metallica Sogni hre^ 
»599. p. 138. 

GEBER 

303 

GEBER. Continued, 

Maier, Symbola Aurea Menur^ 1617, pp. 201-307. 

Naude, Apologie pour tous Us Grands Per sonna^es 
. . . soupfontut de Magie, 1625, p. 360; EnglLsh 
translation, 1657, p. 169. 

Leo Africanus, Africa Description 1632, p. 35a. 

Van der Linden, De ScHptis Medicis libri duo, 
1637. p. 169. 

Coming, De Hemutica Medicina^ 1648, pp. 369, 
372.3 ; i^, pp. 404, 405. 

Borel, Bibliotheca Chimica, 1654, p. lox 

Quenstedt, DialogusdepcUriis tllustrium doctrina 
et scriptis virorum^ 1654, p. 621. 

Borrichius, De Oriu et Progressu C hernia Dis- 
sertation 1668, p. 120, &c. 

Thevet, Histoire des plus illustres et sfavans 
hommes de leurs siecles, 1670, i. p. 295, and por- 
trait. (This portrait is different from that in the 
1584 edition.) 

Borrichius, Hemutis^ Aegyptiorum et Chemicorum 
Safientia vindicate, 1674, PP- S** 287, 413, 433. 

Mercklin, Lindenius renovatus^ 1686, p. 317. 

Borrichius. Conspectus Scriptorum Chemicorum, 
1697, p. 13, No. xviii. 

Herbelot, Biblioth^que Orientate, 1697, p. 387. 

Keren-Happuch, . . . oder Teutsches Fegfeuer 
der Schtide-Kunst, 1702, p. 54- 

Roth-Scholtz, Bibliotheca Chemica, 1727, p. 85. 

/acod Leupolds Prodromus BibliotheoB Metallicce, 

1732, p. 57- 
Maittaire, Annates Typographici , 1733, 1, i. p. 331. 
Zedler, Universal Lexicon, 1735, x. col. 474. 
Kestner, Medicinisches Gelehrten- Lexicon^ 1740. 

P- 336. 
Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire de la Philosophie 

Hermitiqtu, 1742, i. pp. 74, 464; iii. pp. 26, 33, 
45, 65. 169, 170. 

Eloy, Dictionnaire historique de la Midecine, 

»75S. i- P- 395 : 1778. i. p. 320. 
Casiri, Bibliotheca Arabico-Hispana Escurial- 

ensis, Matrili, 1760, i. p. 423. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Anatomiea, 1777, ii. p. 742. 

Oeuvres de Bernard Palissy^ ed. Faujas de Saint 
Fond & Gobet, 1777, PP- 318, 681 (note on Gebcr 
and the alchemists). 

Wiegleb, Historisch-Kritische Untersuchung der 
Alchemic^ 1777, pp. 192, 206, 368. 

Baunier, Bibliotheca Chemica, 1782, p. 75 (calls 
him a native of Seville and alludes to the obscurity 
of his writings). 

R. Watson, Chemical Essays , 1784, i. p. 17. 

Bey t rag zur Geschichte der hdhern Chemie^ 1785. 
pp. 35. ^ 484. 575. 576. 581, 608, 622, 630, 671. 

Nicolas Antonio, Bibliotheca Hispana Vetus^ 
1788, ii. p. 250. 

Weigel, Einleitung xur allgemeinen Scheide- 
kmmst, 1788, i. p. 122. 

Bibliotheca Pinelliana^ London, 1789, p. 539, 
No. 12782. 

Denis. AnmUium Typographicomm . . . Sup- 
pUmentum, 1789, Pars ii. p. 509. 

Kortum . . . verteidiget die Alchimie, 1789, pp. 
80, 113, 121, 246, 253-55. 

Abu 'I'feda, Annates Moslemici, edd. Reiske & 
Adler, Copenhagen, 1790, ii. p. 23. 

Metzger, Skitte einer pragmaHschen Uterdrgt' 
schichie der Medicin^ 1792. p. 121. 

Wi^leb, Geschichte , des Wachsthums und dtr 
Erjindungen in der Chemie in der dltesten und 
mtttlem 7Mt, 1792, pp. 89, 133. 207 (based on 
Bergman). 

F^zer, Annates Typographici, 1796, iv. p. 10, 
No. 50 (from Maittaire and Pinelli); p. 132, No. 
541 ; 1798, vi. p. 115, Na 783. 

Gmelin, Geschichte dtr Chemie, 1797, L p. 15, ftc, 
&c 

Hutchinson, Biographia Medica, 1799, i. p. 349. 

Aikin, General Biography, 2803, iv. p. 342. 

Beckmann, Beitrdge zur Geschichte der Erfin- 
dungen, 1805, v. pp. 271, 578 ; English translation, 
1814, iv. pp. 373, 575. 

Fuchs, Kepertorium der chemischen Litteratur, 
1806-08, pp. 11-12. 

Andres, Delt Origine di Ogni Leteratura^ 
Roma. 1813, v. p. 214. 

Chalmers, The General Bicgraphical Dictionary^ 
1 8 14, XV. p. 366. 

Ersch & Gruber, Allgemeine Encyklopddie, 1819, 
ii. p. 417 (article by Hammer). 

Kees, The Cyclopadia, 1819, xv. sub voce. 

Biographic Mddicale, Paris, Panckoucke (1820- 
25). iv. p. 369. 

Brande, 'General view of the Progress of 
Chemical Philosophy,' Dissertation prefixed to the 
'Supplement' to trie Encyclopcedia Britannica, 
1824, p. 6. (Afterwards printed in his Manual 0/ 
Chemistry, London. 1841 (p. 6), and 1848, i. p. vi.) 

Hain, /kepertorium Bibltographicum, 1827, I. ii. 
p. 439, Nos. 7504, ♦ 7505. 

'lliomson, The History 0/ Chemistry, 1830, i. pp. 
14, 116. 

'On Alchemy and the Alchemists/ Fraser's 
Afagazine, 1831, iii. p. 327, &c. 

^hmieder, Geschichte der Alchemic, 1832, pp. 
86.93. 

Hadji Khalfa, Lexicon Bibliographicum et ency- 
clopadicum, ed. Flttgel, 1835-1858. u-vix. passim. 

Dumas, Lcfons sur la Philosophic chimigue, 1837, 
p. 13 ; 1878, p. 14 ; Rammelsberg's translation, 
1839, p. 12. 

Davy. IVorhs, 1840, iv. p. 7 ; viii. p. 329. 

Wfistenfeld, Geschichte der Artibischen Aerzte 
und Natufforscher, 1840, p. 12, No. 25. 

Hoefer, Histoire de la Chimie^ 1842, i. pp. 309- 
323 ; 1866, i. pp. 326-34a 

Ibn-Khallikan, Biographical Dictionary, ed. De 
Slane, Paris, 1843, i. p. 300. 

Kopp, Geschichte der Chemie^ 1843-47, i. pp. 51- 
56, etc. ; ii. pp. 24-26, etc. ; iii. pp. 170-173, 301- 
30J, etc., etc; iv. pp. 174-176, etc., etc. 

W. H. Black, A descriptive . . . Catakgue of 
the Manuscripts bequeathed unto the University of 
Oxford by Elias Ashmole^ 1845, passim, 

Hammer-Purgstall, Literaturgeschichie der 
Araber, 1852, ii. p. 185 ; iii. p. 293. 

Pouchet, Histoire des Sciences Naturelles au 
Moyen Age, 1853, p. 182. 

Bayle & ThUlaye, Biographic MidicaU, 1855, i. 

' Phillippe ft Ludwig, Geschichte der Apotheker, 
185c, pp. 80, 378, 500, SOI, q6i. 

Figuier, L'Alchimie et Us AUkimistes, 1856, 
passim. 

NouvelU Biographic GiniraU, 1857, xix. coL 789. 

Bninet, Manuel du Librairt, 1861, iu coL 1516 
(copied from Pinelli and Mac-Carthy). 

Graesse, Trisor de Livres rares, 1862, iii. p. 40 
(from Pinelli and Mac-Carthy). 

Ferguson, 'Geber' in The Laboratory, 1867, p. 

71. 

LadmgQe^BibliothifMe Ottvarcf,SciencesSecrHes, 
1870, Nos. 664-668. 

Kitab-al'Fihrist^ ed. Fluegel, 1871-72. 

Steinschneider, ' Die toxicologischen Schriften 
der Araber bis Elnde xii. Jahrhunderts,' in Vxc- 
chow*s Archiv fUr fathol^sche Anatomic und 
PhysiologU, 1871. I. ii. pi 304. 

304 

GEBER—GEHEIMES 

GEBER. Continued, 

559 

The Popular Encyclopadia^ 1874, vL p. 
(article by Ferguson). 

Kopp, Beitrdge zur GexkichU der Chemu, 
Drittes Sttick. 1^5. pp. 13-54. (This is the fullest 
extant account of Geber.^ 

Lucien Leclerc, Histotre de la MAUcine Araie, 
1876, i. pp. 70-77, 303 (for his disciples). 

Figuier, VUs dts Savants iilustres (du Moyen 
Age), 1877, p. 30. 

Encyclopadia Brilannica, 1879, x. p. 125. 
(article by Ferguson). 

Dictionnaire Encyclop^ique des Sciences Midi- 

cales, ^btne S^e, 1881, vii. p. 194 (artide by 
L. Leclerc). 

Hirsch, Biographixhes Lexihm der heroom- 
genden Aerxte^ 1885, ii. p. 512 ^article by A. Hincfa)i. 

Kopp, Die Alchemie, 1886, u pp. la, 96, 163, 905, 
ai6, 223 ; ii. pp. 181, 250, ^ 327. 330, 335, 347. ^ 

Uves of Alchemystical Philosophers ^ ed. WaJte, 
1888, p. 44 (Geber is not mentioned in the 1815 
edition). 

Bertbelot, Introduction d rAtude de la ChimU 
des Anciens et du Moyen Age, Paris, 1889, pasHw^, 

Berthelot, La Chimie au Moyen Age, Tome iit, 
L'Alchimie Arabe, 1893. 

GEDANCKEN vom rechten Gebrauch der Naturweisheit, und der einigen 
wahren Universal-Materie, nebst dem daraus zu bereitenden Lapide Univer- 
sali, ac Magno. In einer Ant wort auf des Herm Nedagandri Brief an 
die Besitzer des Lapidis &c. mitgetheilet von einem Liebhaber der Cabal- 
istisch-Gottlichen Magie. Hamburg und Leipzig, 1754. 

80. Pp.32. 

Signed : Christum Gerendo Mundi Opprimam Vitia, and dated Dresden, den 25 
Sept., 1753. It may be observed that the initials C. G. M. are the same in the title 
page and in the signature phrase. For the letter to which this is a reply see 

NEDAGANDER. 

GEDICHT (Ein). 

See TRISSMOSINUS (salomonX Aiireum Vellus, 1598, TracUtus iii. p. 203. 

See erGffnete Geheimnisse des Steins der Weisen, 1708, p. 314. 

See TANCKE (joachim), Promptuariuni Alchemiae, i6ia Appendix Tomi Primi, 

p. 357. 
See [SCHATZ und Kunstkammer], p. 357. 

GEDICHT der achten Rosenkreutzer. 

See HERMETLSCHES A. B. C, 1 779, iii. p. 214. 

GEHEIME (Die) Naturlehre der Hermetischen Wissenschaft zur Verfertigung 
des gebenedeyeten Steins der Weisen, nach dem System des edlen Sendivogii. 
1770. 

8®. Pp. 78 [2 blank]. Wants pp. 3-4. 
See HERMETISCHES A. B. C, 1779, ii. p. 193. 

GEHEIME Unterredungen zwischen zweyen vertrauten Freunden, einem 
Theologo Philosophizante und Philosopho Theologizante, von Magia 
Naturali, deren Urspning und Principiis, wo bewiesen wird, dafs dieselbe 
eine natiirliche, nlitzliche und zulafsige Wissenschafft sey. Zum Dnick 
gegeben vom Collegio Curiosorum in Deutschland. Mit Anmerckungen 
aus der heutige Philosophie, von einem Liebhaber natiirlicher Wissenschafft 
1722. 

8°. Pp. [4] 184. Six woodcuts in the text, and a folding plate. 

There is nothing about Chemistry or Alchemy in antipathy, magnetic cures, amulets, the diviniog 
this book. It discusses magic among the ancients, rod, and subjects of that sort, 
witchcraft among the modems, sympathy and 

GEHEIMES und Verborgenes Chymisches Laboratorium. 
See w. (G.X 1739- 

GEHEIMNJSS—GEHEJMNJSSE y>s 

GEHEIMNISS aller Geheimnifse. 

See MEDICI NiscH- CHYMISCH- und Alcheinistisches Oraculum, I755» p. 41. 

According to the Missiv this is the worst and wissemschaft, vol. ti. Alph. 2, with the title : 

most imperfect version of the tract, and it differs Schliiisel dtr wahren Wfiskeit^ &c. 

widely from that contained in Schroder's Seye Miisiv an die Hocherltucktete Briiderscka/t des 

Sammlung der Bihtiothek fiir die hiihere Xa/ur- Ordem des Goldenemund HoseHkreutzes^ *783, P- 99. 

GEHEIMNISS (Das) der Hermetischen Philosophic, in welchem die Verbor- 
genheit der Natur und der Kunst, die Materie und Weise zu wiirken 
betrefTende, vom Steine der Weisen, durch gewisse Regeln ordentlich 
geoffenbarct wird. Aus der dritten vermehrten und verbesserten Latein- 
ischen Ausfertigung Parisischen Drucks ins Hochdeutsche ubersetzt. 
Frankfurt und Leipzig. In der Fleischerischen Buchhandlung, 1770. 

8°. Pp. [1-8] 9-88. The device consists of two serpents twined round n lily, with 
the sun and moon above, and the words : In Sole. 

Contains (pp. 9-10) PhUosophisches Rdtzel in deutsche Rei me gebracht durch Phillip 
Ziesen von FUrstenau. 

[Another Copy.] 

See CHYMISCHES Lust-Gartlein, 1747, p. 17. 

GEHEIMNISS von dem Leben und Vermehrung aller Dinge, oder: Reine 
Wahrheit der Hermetischen Philosophie, nebst dem darzu gehorigen 
Hermetischen Schliissel, cntworfen von einem Liebhaber der Chymie. 
Drefsden und I^eipzig, 1748. 

8°. Pp.70. [2 blank? wanting.] 

Fictuld says that the author takes the philosophers Fictuld, Probier-Stein^ 1753, Th. ii. p. 67, 
literally, so that these works are sophistical. luAdTViguc,Bibliothh/ueOitvaro^,SciencesSe€riies^ 

Fictuld ought to know ! 1870, No. 1466. 

GEHEIMNISS der Natur des Grofsen und Kleinen Bauers. 1731. 

See GRASSHOFF (JOHANN). 

GEHEIMNISS vom Salze. 

See ELIAS ARTISTA. 

GEHEIMNISS vom Stein der Weisen. 

See GEBER, Chymische Schriften, 175 1, p. 266. 

See GRBER, Commentaria iibcr Gebers Wcrkc, 1792, p. 302. 

This is a different translation from Morgenstem's. See Gkheimnuss des Philoso- 
phischen Steins. 

See SECRETA lapidis philosophici. 

(jEHEIMNISS der Verwesung und Verbrennung aller Dinge. 

See Grhei.mnuss der Verwesung und Verbrennung aller Dinge. 

GEHEIMNISSE von der Alchymie. 

See H. (c G.), Eines wahren Adepti besondere Geheininisse von der Alchymie, 

1757. 

U 

306 

GEME/MNISSE—TBSntDrs T^p^ TO 

GEHEIMNISSE aus der Geisterwelt, Magie und Alchymie beleochtet mid in 
ihrer natiirlichen Gestalt dargestellt nebst Bemerkungen tiber phjrsiflclie und 
politische Gegenstande zur Widerlegung ungegriindeter Meinuqgffi und 
Vorurtheile herausgegeben von einem Kosmopoliten. Frankfurt. am Main, 
in der Andreaischen Buchhandlung, 1795. 

8*. Pp. vi. 352. The title is quite misleading. It is a collection of short articles 
on different topics arranged alphabetically. There is one on " Goldroacben," and one 
on " Rosenkreuzer." 

GEHEIMNISSE einiger Philosophen und Adepten, aus der Verlassensdiaft eines 
alten Mannes. Erster TheiL Leipzig bey Christian Gottlob Hiladier, 1780. 

8°. Pp. [2]. 187 [x of book advertisements], a plates; 

Arcanum arcanoram arcaoissimum, pu 72. 

lUustrissimi Principis Americani nomine Hold- 
azob SI Dachem Diuinum Sal Magistrate cuncta 
Metalla in Aunim tingens, p. loa. 

Arcanum. Dieses hat der Pater Jesoitanim, 
mit Namen Nicolai, besessen, p. iii. 

Diesen Universal-Procefs hat ein sterbender 

The philosophers and adepts whose secrets are 
herein contained are the following : 

Lapis Philosophoruni est Mater qusedam mult 
arum filiarum, quanim una, scilicet sextogenita, ni 
Auus earn in uxorem ducat, eamque ad dextemm 
suam collocet, pariet Filium, Rore Cceli & Pin- 
guedine Terrse ditissimum, p. i. 

Antonii a Terra F. R.C. Processus secretissimus 
de Re^ni Astralis Virtute & in Sublunaria Corpora 
potentia. p. 47. 

Ignatii a Lilienheim F.R.C. Processus de 
Floribus yEtheris captandis singularis. p. 58. 

Processus Anonjrmi cujusdam de Materia chao- 
tica, p. 63. 

Martini de Delle. eines Maylanders, aus der 
Stadt Vitri gebttrtig, und wahren Adepti vener- 
abilis. F.R.C. Processus singularis de Materia 
Chaotica, p. 67. 

Capuciner seineni geliebten Confratri. mit 

Rlut untersclirieben, sub Sacramento hinterlasBen, 

p. 150. 

Mixtura prsecipua Magistralis qua Sal Diuinum 
Polychrestum acquiritur, cuius Inuentor Princeps 
Americanus de Huldazob a Dachem, I%ilosopbus 
sine pari fuit, p. 160. 

Mysterium de Urina, daraus dne Tinctur tu 
machcn, mit welcher andere Metallen kdnnen in 
Gold verwandell werden, p. 173. 

GEHEIMNISSE des Steins der Weisen. 

See EROFFNETE GEHEIMNISSE dcs Steins der Weiscn, 1 708-1718. 

Roth-Scholtz, who has entered tliis book under have been so ; but seeing that the book contains 

'Geheimnisse,' seems to think that it was nn the date 1708, they surely could hardly hope to 

attempt on the part of Liebezeii and Felginer to deceive the public by such an ostrich-like tridt as 

palm It oflF on the public as a new book. It may putting 1718 on the title-page. 

GEHEIMNUSS des Philosophischen Steins. 

See MORGEN.STERN (philipX Turba Philosophorum, 1613, i. p. 337; 1750, i. p. 409. 
See GEHEI.MNISS vom Stein der Weisen. 

HDI^IDI T^Sp^*^ t^O '•'• Das Geheimnufs der Verwesung und Verbrennung aller 
Dinge, nach seinen Wundern im Reich der Natur und Gnade, Macro et 
Microcosmici, als die Schliissel : Dadurch der Weeg zur Verbesserung 
eroffnet, das Verborgene der Creaturen entdecket, und die Verklarung des 
sterblichen Leibes griindlich erkandt wird. 

Job. 12. Es sey dann, dafs das Weitzen-Korn in die Erden falle, und 

ersterbe, so bleibts alleine, wo es aber erstirbt, so bringts viel Friichte. 

I Petr. 3. Die Erde und die Wercke die drinnen sind werden verbrennen. 

Zweyte und mit vielen curiosen ^bservationibus vermehrte Auflage. 

Franckfurt am Mayn, Bey Johann Friedrich Fleischer, 1733. 

8**. Pp. 109 [i blank]. The tail piece is a coffin ! 

According to Fictuld a person of the name of a person of great wisdom, and Fictuld recommends 

Cron claimed to be the author, but did not know it m the highest degree, of whatever value (hat laaj 

really anything about it. It was more probable be. In the ^iry/mf an edition Frankfurt, 1771,8/, 

that the tract was written bv von Loen, who was is quoted, and the book is called ' ' theosophical! 

'His Excellency the Resicient' of the King of mystical,— like most of the books on the subject of 

Prussia at Frankfurt. In any case the author was our tim^." 

TVD'ym IpOlp^ ^r^Or-GEHEMA 

9^ 

lllp^ TO. Continued. 

Fictuld, ProHer-Steim^ 1753, Th. i. p. 8a. IjBAniga^Bibiiaikifui Ouvarof^Scienets Secrites^ 

Beyirag zur Gexkichte der hdhem Chemie, 1785, 1870, No. 1456. (The work is ascribed to • S. E. 
p. 675. de Loen.*) 

See HERMETISCHES A. B. C, 1779, iv. p. 137. 

GEHEMA (Jan Abraham a). 

Der krancke Soldat bittende daiis er hinfiihro besser moge conserviret, mttleidiger 
tractiret, und vorsichtiger curiret werden. Allen hohen Generals-Persohnen 
und brafen Offidrem, die ihre Soldaten lieben, zu sonderbahren Nntzen. 
Hierbey ist gefiiget eine kurtze Information fiir die Feldscherer, wie sie 
sich bey alien Wunden und blesfuren zu verhalten haben, und selbige nach 
denen besten principiis curiren kdnnen. Sampt einer woleingerichteten 
Feld-Apotecke. vorgestellet von Jano Abrahamo i Gehema, Eqvit. Polon. 
Med. Doct Ehmals gewesenen Capitain und Ritmeister. 

Hiob. c 6. V. 5. 14. Dafs Wild schreyet nicht, wann es Grafs hat, der 
Ochse blotet nicht, wann er sein Futter hat. Wer Barmhertzigeit 
seinem NeChsten wegert, der verlasset des Allmachtigen Furcht. 
Verlegts Johann Adam Plener. Gedruckt im 1690. Jahr. 

12*^. Not paged. Sigs. A to G. in twelves. G13 blank. Woodcut of a soldier 
on Gxx verso. 

The • Feld-Apolecke ' is interesting. 

Der Qvalificirte Leib-Medicus. Abgebildet von D. Jano Abrahamo k Gelieflaa 
Eqvit & Indig. Pol. Verlegts Johann Adam Plener. Gedruckt : im i4^ 
Jahr. 

Not paged. Sigs. A, B, in twelves. Bia blank. 

By lloUer he is caHed Gehma. He was a Polish 
knight and doctor of Medicine, and his father was a 
Starost and a chamberlain of the King of Poland. 
His lather dying when he was 14 years of age, his 
education was n^lected and he was only trained 
to the use of arms and went with his regiment to 
Holland. During his stay at Utrecht and Leyden 
he acquired a taste for learning, studied the philo- 
sophy of Descartes, and having resigned his 
position as captiun of cavalry, devoted himself to 
Medicine at the University of L«yden, under 
Bontekoe. After graduating he served as physician 
with the Danish troops, and spent some time in 

Mercklin, Lindtnius renwatus, 1686, p. 501. 

Manget.Bi^iioikeca Scripiorum Afedicorum, ij^i^ 
I. iL p. 443. (Contains a notice of his work on 
* Plica polonica. ) 

Steele, AnUUung *ur Historie dtr Mediciniscken 
Ggiakrfuit, 1731. p« 749 (one of several writers on 
military medicine). 

Kestner, Medicinisches GeUhrUn' Lexicon , 1740, 

Moller, Cimbria Literata, 1744, ii. p. aiS. 

Jdcher, AUg^meines GeUhrten- Lexicon^ 1750, ii. 
col. 901. (This article is based on Moller's.) 

Portal, Histoire de F Anatomie etdeta ^kirurgie, 
1770, iii. p. 617. 

Haller, Bihlioikeca Boianica, 1771, i. p. 619. 

KJoy. Dictitnnaire hiUoriqju . de la mddtcine, 
1778, li. p. 3aa. 

H*Hfr» BibUotktcA.M§dicim(M fruchett, 1779, iii. 

Holstein. Subsequently he became physician- to 
the Duke of Mecklenburg, the dector of ^anden- 
burg, who appointed him Fiscalis heraldicus to the 
Academy ot Sciences, and the King of Poland, 
who made him a councillor. He was an ardent 
disciple of his two teachers above nMotianod mnd 
defended them on all occasions. He wts the 
author of a considerable number of books and 
dissertations on medical subjects, and be was 
opposed to some of the medical pcactioe of his 
time. The year of his birth and of his dnth.does 
not seem to be known, but he was still living, ia 
1703. 

p. 518. JTbesc contain lists of his works and 
notices of his life and views. ) 

Gmelin, GesckichU dtr Chemie^ 17981 ii. p. aj6. 
BiogmphU Midic^, Paris. Panckoucke (1890. 
as). »v. p. m, 
Sprengel, Gesckickte dtr Arzn^kundt, 1837, iv. 

p. 393- _ 

Bayle& Thillave. Biwrapkie MddictJt^tBss,.iu 
p. 115 phased on MolierjT 

Dic/imtnaire tntydtfidi^ue dts Scitmcts Midi- 
caltSy 4« Stfrie, i88i, vii. p. aoa. 

Haeser, Gesckickte dtr Medicin, x88x, ji.,4)p. 
378, 1057. 

^\\\\iig^, Index-Catalogue, 1884, v. . p. .319 ; .and 
Series, 1901, vi. p. 11 a. 

Hirsch. Buigrapkisckts jgxihn dtnknmrragen- 
den Aertte, 1885, ii. p. 515 (article by. H. H»eser). 

yA 

GEHLER (JOHAxy SASfucL TftAU<soTTi. 

Set rrjc^ctLfjf ^Asrronn: n.KJscov^ iej. Cbemiscfae PhiWyiphic^ 1796. 

GHiknr «is rxrr. at O.rf.tx i Nst, 1751. H-* 
waA^fi asm, aal !wk &if r^vct:n^^ f&<% !n.i:J:e- 

aiwl wu aftcrvar'li ocno >>* %r>i aifM&iAr of the 

k.d«>. 

«tf the 

Le;<s. ;r:7-9S -& vUi.,'r. to vtuch ivo 

Wcif, /Mr Ggiekrte \<u'Aan Lapsf, 178a 
Ottb. Ltxik»m ter O^^rUunfz. Scknf::U:Ur 

a. u 

MCOKi. ijtsik^m der vcm Jjkr 1750 .'i; i 

PofcgcxMloiir. Bi^grapJkax'k-iiiermrixka 
mJ'i£9tm.'M, iflci L eoJ. 867. 

IA^:iy,mnjire tn^-y^lopidiqme des SciemceM 
calft, 4* ^^^tie 1S81. vii. pi 305. 

Pinfknorhe (i8ao- 
JAkA- 

GEISSLER (Friedrich). 

Baum des I^bens ; das ist : Ghindlicher Bericht vom wahrfaafitigen Auro 
Patabili, wie ingleichen vom Wunderbahren Stein der Weisen, oder Grofsen 
Elixir derer Philosophen &c als der Hochsten AReZney. &c durch Friedrich 
Geiislem, von Freyberg aus Schlesien, Medic. & Chymicum. 

Sjrrach. iL 8. Du sobt nicht urtheilen, ehe du die Sacbe horest 
Erkenne es zuvor, und strafTe es dann ; Lafs die Leuthe zuvor 
ausreden, &c 
AuflT Verlag Veit Jacob Treschers. Buchhandl. in Brefslau. Jena, dnickts 
Job. Nisius. 1683. 

8'. Pp. 64. 

About GeissJer I ha^-e found no more than what 
he tutes on the above title-page, that he was of 
Freyberg in Silesia, and was a physician and 
chemist. Resides the n^yjve he wrote: ExcelUni 
noitri I'iridix Panacea /yonis cahaiitfici desMmta, 
ex illo Sapientum Antiqwirum fpnigmate, visitabis 
interiura terrtr^ rectificando, invenies occnltum 
laPidem vera universa: medicina, cum J!guris^ 
hux-imljerg. . 1678, 12'. 

Lebent- und Todestampe, Jena, 1682. 

Horrichhis, ('onspecttis Scriptomm Chcmicorum^ 
1697, p. 41, No. Ixv. 

Kotti-Scholtz, lUhliotheca Chemica^ ^727, p. 88. 

FictuM^ PntHer-Stein , 1753, '^' "• P* ^ (pouis 
out hit viaU of vitriol upoii him: — " a sophistical 
fwril^bler who has written such absurd follies and 
* whim-whams ' as nothing could be more foolish. 
He has not the smallest notion of the Hermetic 
phikjsophy, and his Aunmi potabilc is .is different 

In the title of the present woric, the word A ReZoey 
is a play on Aneney, and Aree is a red earth from 
which the genuine Xtemstruum Soiis is obtained. 
Horrichius thinks ttat this red earth is the residue 
after the distillation of green \itriol, known as 
colcothar. This is not unlikely. He evidently 
was engaged with the su(>stance, since in the title 
of the Panacea Letmis he quotes the aenigma or 
anagram I'itrioium got from the initials of the 
words after " visitabis." 

from the true, as arsenic from sugar candy,*' etc. 
etc.). 

Beytrag zur (iexckickte der kokem Ckemie, 1785. 
pp. 630, 634. 

Gmelin, (Uschickte der Ckemie, 1798, ii. p. a6 
(quotes a 1682 edition also of the above). 

I^adrague. Biblioikiqye Ouvarcg'^ Sciences 
Secrites, 1870, No. 1109. 

Kopp, Die Alckemie^ 1886, it pp. 23a; 378. 
379 : 386. 

See NKRI (ANTONIO), Olafsmacher-Kunst, 1678. 

GEISTLICHER Discurs und Betrachtung. 

See ALLGEMKINE und General Reformation, 1781. 

GELBEN (Vom) und Rotten Mann, ein Philosophisches Werck und Gesprach. 
See MKIX:hior Episcopus Brixiensis. 

GEMMA (Cornelius). 

I')e Naturae Divinis Characterismis ; seu raris & admirandis spectaculis, causis, 
indiciis, proprietatibus rerum in partibus singulis vniuersi, Libri II. Auctore 
p. Corn. Gemma, I^uaniensi, Regio Medicinae professore. P^culiarero 

OMMMA^ GltNEiiA TlON£ 

309 

GEMMA (Cornelius). Continued, 

partis vtriusque materiem vel argumentum sequens pagina planius explicabit. 
Antverpiae, Ex officina Christophori Plantini, Architypographi Regij. 
M.D.LXXV. 

8^ pp. I- 16. [31, I blank] 17*229 [10. i blank]. 
Tomus Secundus. pp. 284 [3, i blank]. Numerous woodcuts in the text. 

Cornelius, the son of Reinenis, called Gemma 
and Frisius, a distinguished physician, was bom at 
Louvain in 1534 (Adami). 28 Feb., 1535 {fiiog. 
MidX He was well trained in the Humanities by 
his father, and in the University he studied 
philosophy, mathematics, and medicine, in which 
he took his license, being skilled both in the theory 
and practice. He also acquired reputation as a 
rhetorician and poet. In 1569, b^ the Duke of 
Albs^ he was appointed in succession to Nicholas 
Biesius to the chair of medicine and taught with 
much renown. In 1670 he took the degree of 
doctor. 

His two principal books are the above, and that 
entitled Ars Cyclognomica^ printed by Plantin at 
Antwerp, 1569, 3 vols., 4°, and said to be very rare. 
Reimmann gives an account of it, and says that it 
is a treatise on the method of study and learning 
after the manner of Raymund Lully's Ars Brevts 
{q.v.\ if not based upon it. 

The present work is a disquisition on portents 
and prodigies in nature of every description, with 
their supposed connection with human afGairs. 
Monsters, of which he gives curious pictures, which 

Mirseus, Elogia Belgica sive illustrium Btlgii 
scripiarum , 1609, p. 97. 

Castellanus, yUa tllusirium Medicorum, 1617, 
p. 238. 

Adami, Vita Cermanorum Medicorum, 1620, 
p. 238. 

Van der Linden, De scrip/is medids librt duo^ 

1637. p. 127 

Ghif 
p. 220, 

Teatro ^Huomini letterati, 1647, "• 

Jo. Andr. Quenstedt, Dialogus de patriis illus- 
trium doctrine et scriptis Virorum, 1654, p. 115. 

Mercklin, Lindenius renovatus, 1686, p. 226. 

Freher, Theatrum virorum eruditione clarorum, 
1688, p. 1239, pi. ^5. (This article is all about the 
father, Gemma Frisius.) 

Reimmann, EinleUung in die Hisloriam lUerar- 
iam derer Teutscken, 1709, iii. p. 173. 

Teissier, Les Elogcs des Hommes SavaHs, 1715, 
i. pp. 224, 225, 226. 

Manget, Bibliotheca Scriptorum Medicorum^ 
1731, 1. ii. p. 444. 

Morhof, Polykistor^ 1732 (i. 2, ^, 39), i. p. 356 ; 
(ii. 2, 2, 4). ii. p. 27s ; (ii. 3, i, 2), ii. p. 453, 

Foppens. Bibliotheca Belgica, 1739, 1. p. 200 
(with a portrait of Gemma). 

Kestner, Medicinisches Gelehr ten-Lexicon, 1740, 

p. 337- 

Jocher, Allgemeines Gelehrten-Lexicon , 1750, ii., 

col. 914. 

occur in other books on the same subject, were 
viewed as special works of the Creator intended to 
foretell or indicate coming events. 

His views have not been much respected by 
subsequent historians and biographers, out allow, 
ance must be made for the change of ideas and 
for the different ways of observing and interpreting 
phaenomena which a lapse of three hundred years 
entails and the expositions of Cornelius must be 
regarded as illastrating the beliefs of his time. 

There is want of agreement among his biographers 
as to the cause and date of his death. Some say 
that it was due to stone, others to the plague, 
which seems more probable. 

It took place on the 12 Oct., 1576 (Eloy), 1577 
\Biog. Mid.), 1578 (Castellanus), 1579 (Adami), 
Teissier says in his fortieth year, others miply in 
his forty-second year, Adami says in his forty- 
fifth year. 

He was buried at Louvain, and left two sons: 
Raphael, who became a canon of St Peter's, and 
Philip, who continued the tradition of the family 
and became a physician. 

Eloy, Dictionnaire Historique de la Midecint, 

»755» '• P- 339 ; ^Tl^y "• P- 324- (Refers to the 
star which appeared in Cassiopea, and attracted 
the notice of Gemma, amon|[ many others.) 

Haller, Bibliotheca Botantca, 177 1, i. p. 353. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Anatomica, 1774, 1. p. 245. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Chirurj^a, 1774, i. p. 23a. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Medictnas practice, 1777, ii. 
p. 198. 

Saxius, Onotnasticort literarium, 1780, p. 447, 
and Anal, p. ^3. 

Chalmers, 7ne General Biographical Dictionary, 
1814, XV. p. 396. 

Biographie Midicale, Paris, Panckoucke (i8ao- 
35). »v. p. ^78. 

Garnier & Quetelet, Correspondance MathiwuUique 
et Physique, Gand, 1835- 1835, i. 

Sprengel, Geschichte der Arzneykumde, 1837, iii. 
pp. 247, 268. 

Bayle & Thillaye, Biographie Midicale, 1855, i. 
p. 288. 

Biographie Universelle, 1856, xvi. p. 137, 

Nouvelle Biographie GinircUe, r859, xix. col. 
854. 

Van der Aa, Biographisch Woordtnboech der 
Nederlanden^ 1862, vii. p. ^5. 

Poggendorff, Biographtsch-literarisches Hand' 
toorterbuch, 1863, i. col. 872. 

Haeser, Geschichte der Medicin, i88x, ii. p. 142. 

GEMMA Gemmanim Alchimistarum. 
See MEISNCR (lorentz). 

GENERATIONE (De) Metallorum Tractatus. 

See MUSAEUM HERMETICUM, 1 749, p. 505. 

3to 

GENTTERSBEnCER-GEkCKEN 

GENTTERSBERGER (Samuel). 

Speculum utriusq; luminis Gratiae et Naturae, das ist, Spiegel beyder Liechter 
Natiirlichen vnd Vbematiirlichen : darinnen, durch hiilff der edlen Kunst 
Chymiae, neben erklaning der Natur vnd Eigenschafiten der 7. Mdallen, 
so sie zum theil fiir sich selbst, zum theil gegeneinander haben. 
See NEANDER (theophilus), Heptas Akhymica, i62i,p.403. 

This title a^p-ees practically with that of the 
original edition of 161 1, as given by Murr, to the 
woras :' ** sieben Metallen " ; then in the earlier 
edition it runs thus : "etc. die ungezweifelte Lehre 
christl. Religion aus deni Licht der Natur abge- 
bdldet wird. And Murr adds venomously : " Wer 
tolcennt hier den Roaenkreuierischen Unsinn?" 

Rotb-Scholtz quotes the edition of Darmstadt, 
161 1, 8^, as well as this reprint of Neander's. 

Fictuld say5 the 161 1 edition was published by 
TbOlde, but he professes not to know the author. 
Whether Th51de got the MS. from some one else, 
or wrote it himsdf^ Fictuld does not discuss, but 
his judgment is that it is "sophistical rigmarole.*' 

Rotb-i)cholts, BibUotkica Chemica^ 1737. p. 89. 
Fictuld, ProbUr-Stein. 1753, Tb- »• P* 68. 
Haller, Bibliotkua Aledicinm practicm^ 1777. ii. 

The author styles himself Doctor of PliilQaopby 
and medicine, and physician of the town BenfiMm 
in the I*alatinate. 

Haller quotes Tkemata /ahvdUwUca, Maipqif, 
1606, 4% by Samuel Geutteisberger. It 1% of 
coUrsr, quite possible that these may be two 
different people, but it is abo possible (hat ooe or 
other of the names is a misprint, the orinn of 
which is obvious enough. Which of the two n the 
correct form 1 am not prepared to say. but in the 
present work the name is distinctly Gaittersbeifer. 
I have failed to find a notice of him. 

(imelin, GtschickU der Ckemie, 1797, i. p, 561, 
note s. 

Murr, Obfr den uxihrem Ursprmng der R^tem- 
kreuMer und des Freymanrerordtms^ i^oy, pi aa. 

GEORGI (JOHANN Gottueb). 

Umstandliche Nachricht von den behihmten Bestuschewschen Nerventiiiktmeii; 
oder sogenannten Lamottischen Tropfen. 
See ALLGEMEIN niitzliches chemischphysikalisches Mancherlei, 1782, ii. p. 342. 

I'he author of this report was bom at Colberg in 
Pomerania in 1738 (Meusel), or at Wachholzhs^n 
in Pomerania, 31 DNec., 1799. He was an apothe- 
cary at Stendal, went to St Petersburg in 1770, 
travelled about in Russia at the request of the 
Academy of Sciences, was made Adjunct of the 
Academy in 1776, and in 1783 member. In 1799 
he wiis made Russian Imperial ' Kollcgienrath.' 
He died at St. Petersburg, but the date of nis death 
is given variously: 13 Nov., 14 Nov., 1803; and 
97 Oct. , 1803, old style. 

Meusel, Das geUhrte Teutsckland, oder Lexikon 
derjettt lehenden Teutschen Schri/tstelUr, 1796, ii. 
pp. 537-5^; i8oi, ix, p. 4x4. 

Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemie^ 1799* '"• PP* 397t 
398, &c., &C. 

Alexis, Count of Riumin-Bestushev, was bom at 
Moscow in 1693. He had been raised to the 
highest dignities of the empire, when he was 
deprived of them all and exiled in 1758. Recalled 
14 July, 1763, he had his property restored, and 
was reinstated in the senate. With manly energy 
he carried himself both in fortune and misfortune, 

Gmelin, Geschichte der Ckemie, 1799, iii. p. 790. 
Kopp, Geschichte der Chemie, 1847, iv. p. 149. 

GEORGIUS, Praeceptor. 
See DiALOGUS. 

He wrote several works containing the resuhs. 
geographical, physical, anthropological, etc, of his 
travels m Russia, translated Cronsi^t's Mineralogy. 
and contributed papers to the Academy of Sdenoes 
on spontaneous inflammability, on Riisaan common 
salt and its purification, analjrsis of the water of the 
Neva, examination of Russian marbles, examination 
of potashes, on the transformation of gypsum into 
chalcedony, and writings on economics. 

Reuss, Repertorium Commentationum (Chemia), 
1803, pp. 69, 98, &c., &c. 

Ntrva Acta Academia Scieniiarum ImperieUis 
Petropolitanet, 1806, xv. p. xa 

Poggendorff, Biographisch-literarisdus Hand- 
worterbuchy 1863, i. col 876. 

and died 3X April, 1766 (not in X768). Six medals 
were struck in commemoration of him. 

The drug described in the present paper ^-as 
chloride of iron, though it was called a gold 
tincture, and it made raUier a commotion, and was 
described by several chemists. 

Hippolyte Kluyskeiis, Des Hommes c^Ubres dans 
les Sciences et Us Arts et des \i4dailUs qui con- 
sacrent leur Sout'enir, Gand, 1859, i. p. 119. 

GERCKEN (Johann). 

Kurtzer Bericht von Uhrsprung, Kraiit und Bereitung der Rohten Corallen 
und fiimemlich derer wahrhafften Tinctur, wie selbe miisse beschaffen seyn, 

GERCKER—GERHARD 311 

GERCKEN (Johann). Continued, 

nebst dero Kennzeichen, dabey auch zugleich angefiihret wird, wie alle 
bifsher in deneii Apotheken befindlich gewesene Corallen-Tincturen keine 
wahrhaffte und nicht aus deren inneren Wesen bestandene Tincturen, sondern 
nur scheinbahre und^veranderte Farben der aufgegossenen Spirituum seyn. 
Von Johanne Gercken, Med. Doctore. Vormahligen Churfurstl. Brandenb. 
Leib-Medico, jetzo Physico beyder Stadte Brandenburg. Ziun Druck 
gegeben 17 14. 

8*. Pp. 7a 

Rotb-Scboltz quotes an apparent continuation of date, and the judgment upon it is severely un- 

the preceding : Curieux und nUtzliche Observa- fiavourable. 

tiones oder Anwurckut^^n Ubtr die CoralUn- Keren Haffuck . . . oder Teutsckes Fegfeuer 

Tinctur, Brandenburg. 171^ 8**. In /Ceren der Scheide-Kunst, 1702, p. 126. 

Hapfuck ... he appears as the author of a work : Roth-Scholtz, Bibliotkeca Ckemica^ 1737, p. 89. 

Ultimum Afollinis Tesiamemtum, without place or Haller, Biblioikeca Botamica, 1773, ii. p. lao. 

GERHARD (Carl Abraham). 

D. Carl Abraham Gerhard, Konigl. Preufs. Ober-Berg- Ober-Rechnungs- und 
Ober-Bau-Raths, der Konigl. Acad, der Wissenschaften zu Berlin, und der 
Kayserlichen Acad, der Naturforscher Mitgliedes, Beitrage zur Chymie und 
Geschichte des Mineralreichs. Erster Theil. Berlin, 1773. ^' Christian 
Friedrich Himburg. 

8'. I'p. [6) 394. 2 plates. 

Zweiter Theil. Mit 5. Kupfcrtafelii. 1776. Pp. [4] 300. 

Gerhardwas born at Lerchenbrunn. near Liegnitz, ' dissertatio ' was on the garnets of Silesa and 
in Silesia, 26 (2) Feb., 1738. was a doctor of Bohemia (the pyrope), Francof. ad V. 1760, 4*, 
Medicine, and rose to be privy councillor for and theresifter his principal work related to miner- 
finance, war, and crown lands in Prussia ; com- alogy, on which he published numerous researches, 
missary for the administration of mines and smelting But he also wrote on geology, medicine, botany, 
works, in 1770 councillor for mining. He was materia medica, natural history and chemistry, and 
elected a member of several learned and scientific translated scientific travels, 
societies. He died at Berlin, 9 March, 1821. His 

Meusel, Das gelehrte Teutsckland oder Lexikon BiographU AJ/dicale, Paris, Panckoucke (i8ao- 

€Ur jetxt lebenden Teutschen Schri/tsteller, 1796, 25), iv. p. 393. 

ii. p. 536 ; 180X, ix. p. 416. Ersch u. Gruber. Allgemeine Encyklopiidu^ 1855. 

Gme£n, Geschichte der ChemU, 1798, ii. pp. 474, Ix. p. 476 (article b^ H. Doring^ 

60X, &c., &c. PoggendorfT, Btographisch^tterarisches Hand- 

Reuss, Repertorium Commentation um (Cbemia), wartetiuch, 186^, i. cot 88a 

1803, pp. 72, 174, 191. Hirsch, Biografhisches Lexikon der hervorra' 

genden Aerzte, 1885, it p. 532. 

GERHARD (Johann). 

Commentatio perbrevis & perspicua in Apertorium Raimundi Lullii, verorum 
Philosophorum facile Principis. De Lapide Philosophorum. Cum adjecti 
Interpretatione Testamenti Novissimi, Amoldo de Villi Novft, attributi. 
De eodem I^pide Autore Johanne Gerhardo D. & Medicinas Practicse 
Professore publico & ordinario in Academic Tubingensi. 
Rom. I. Invisibilia Dei, k CreatudL Mundi, per ea quae facta sunt, 
intellecta, conspiciuntur. 

Tubings Typis Philiberti Brunnii, Anno M.DC.XLI. 

r. pp. [24] 96. 

Johannis Gerhardi D. Exercitationes perbreves in Gebri Arabis Summi 
Philosophi Chemici Libros Duos Summae Perfectionis : Cum Annexi Analjrsi 
Partis Practicae Raimundi Lull! in Testamenta Tubingae, Typis Johan- 
Alexandri Celll & Impensis Philiberti Brunnl. 

8". Pp. 8(x 

3»2 

GERHARD 

GERHARD (Johann). Continued, 

Analysis Partis Practicae Raymundi Lullii in Testamento. 

See MANGET (j. J.), Bibliotheca Chcmica Curiosa, 1702, i. p. 778. 

Exercitaticnes perbreves in (iebri Arabis . . . libros duos Summae perfectionis. 
See MANGKT (j. J.), Hibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, i. p. 598. 

Panaceas Hermeticae, seu Medicinac Universalis Assertio ac Defensio Galeno- 
Chymica, Cui adjecta sunt : Ventilatio ac Discussio arduae illius Quaestionis 
in Medicina : Vtruni Aurum Obrizum foliatum aut in pollinem redactum, 
aut etiam ignitum, in vino vel aqua dcstillata, vel alio liquore, extinctum, 
intra corpus assumtum, Vsum & effectum habeat medicinalem salutarem? 
Arcanum Lullianuni, seu Modus Secretissimus conficendi & componendt 
Vniversalem Mcdicinam, per vcrum & gcnuinum Artis Spagyricae Artifidum. 
Auctore Johanne Gerhardo, Doctore & Prof. Med. Pract. Publ & Ordinario 
in Academic Tiibingensi. 

Hipp. Libr. de Arte. Artiuni ignotarum. Calumnia, proditio est propriae 

inscitiae & malignae natune. 
VlmaC: Typis & impensis Balthasari Kiihnen, Reipubl illius Typogr. Anno 
M.DC.XL. 

8". Pp. [28] 77 [x blank]. [2] 43 [i blank]. Arcanum Lullianum [2] 29 [i blank]. 

GERHARD (Johann Cunrad). 

Extractum Chymicarum Quaestionum sive Responsionis ad Theoriam lapidis 
philosophici editam in academia Regiomontana i quodam ibidem antichy- 
mista. Vbi Veritas Artis Chymicae etiam contra principia negantem asseritur 
^' multae difficiles & jucundae quaestiones discutiuntur : Auctore Johanne 
Cunrado Gerhardo, M.D. Illustriuin Comitum de Hoenloe & Civitatis 
Oringanae Physico. Argentorati, Impensis Heredum Lazari ZetznerL 

Anno M.DC.XVI. 

8^ Pp. [16] 132. Epi^amma. [il Colophon [i]: .Argentorati, excudebat 
Conradus Schcr. Anno M. DC. XVI. [2 blank]. 

[Another Copy.] 

Wants the 2 blank leaves. 

The confusion which exists regarding the person 
or persons called Gerhard is found even in Borcl, 
who was their contemporary. Under Joannes 
Gerhard he puts Extractum Chymicarum qucrs- 
tionum, and under J. Conrad Gerhard Qu(Fsti.mcs, 
without anything more. This is different fron» 
what appears on the above title. 

Mercklin has two distinct entries : under J. 
Conrad Gerhard are put 'Extractum , . . quajs- 
tionum' and 'Tractatus . . . de Chymiatria,' 
Basil. 1631 ; under J. Gerhiu-d : ' l)ecas quoss- 
tionum . . , 1643'; 'Panacea Hermctica/ 1640; 
'Commenutio ... in Apertorium R. Lullii,' 1641 ; 
* Exercitationes in Gcbri . . . Libros," 1635. 

Roth-Scholtz makes the same allotment, with the 
omission altogether of the ' Tractatus de Chy- 
miatria.' Baumer mentions J. Gerhardus only, 
calls him medical professor at Tubingen, and 
credits him with the same four writings : 'Decas,' 
' Panacea,* 'Commentatio' and ' Exercitationes,' but 

not the * Extractum. ' Gmelin quotes J. Conrad 
(jerhard only, calls him professor at TUlMngen. 
and assigns him all the preceding works, both the 
• Extractum ' and the others. 

Fuchs adds to our knowledge by calling J. 
C'onrad Gerhard a doctor of philosophy, ph>'sician 
to the Count of Hohenlohe, and 'Phj'sicus' at 
Oehringeri. He keeps the names distinct from one 
another, putting the * Extractum ' and ' Tr. de 
Chymiatria' under J. Conrad Gerhard and the 
other four under Johannes (jerhard, thus simply 
following Mercklin. 

On the other hand, Schmieder, copying from 
Gmelin, know s of J. Conrad Gerhard only.'calls him 
professor of medicine at Tubingen, and considers 
him the author of the Extractum, and of the Decas 
and Exercitationes in Gebri Summam as well. 

Kopp, however, calls J. Gerhard the TQbingen 
Professor and the author of the ExercHaiiones in 
Gebrum, He was four times Rector. 

CERHARD-^GESNER 313 

GERHARD (Johann Cunrad). Continued. 

Borel, Bibiiotkeca Chimica, 1654, pp. 103, 242. 266. Matthise, Conspectus Historic Medicorum chrono- 

Mercklin, Z,i«dV«/ttj/r«<wa/i«, 1686, pp. 557, 594. logicus, 1761, p. 480. 

Koth-Scholtz, Bihliotheca Chemica, 1727, p. 89. Daumer, Bioliothtca ChemUa, 1782, p. 96. 

Jacob Ijcupoids Prodromtis Bibliothcca Metallic^, Gnielin. Gesckichie der Cfumie, 1797, i. p. 518. 

17^, p. 58. Fuchs, Repertorium^ 1806, pp. 113, 135. 

Dufresnoy, Histoire de la PhiiosophU Ilerm^tique, Schniieder, Geschickie der Alckemie^ 1832, p. 353. 

1742, iii. pp. 67, 172. Kopp, Die Aicktmu, 1886, ii. p. 330. 

GERMAIN (Claude). 

Icon Philosophise Occultse, sive vera methodus componendi magnum 
antiquonim philosophonim lapidem. Aiictore Magistro Claudio Germain 
Parisino, Doctore Medico Vniversitatis Parisiensis. 

Nihil est tam absconditum, quod non aliquando manifestum fiat 
Parisiis, Apud Edmundum Couterot, \\k Jacobaea, ad insigne boni Pastoris. 
M.DC.LXXII. Cum Priviligio Regis. 

8*. Pp. [52] 98 [i, X blank]. 

Icon Philosophiae Occulta, sive vera methodus componendi magnum antiquonim 
philosophorum lapidem. Auct. Magistro Claudio Germain Parisino, Doctore 
Medico Universitatis Parisiensis. 

Nihil est tam absconditum, quod non aliquando manifestum fiat. 
Rotterodami, Typis viduaj Arnoldi Leers, M.DCLXXVIII. 

12'. Pp. [48] 48. 

Abbildung der geheimen Filosofie. 

See SCHRODER (f. j. w.X Neue Alchymistische Bibliothck, 1773, I. i. p. 280. 

Icon Philosophise occultae. 

See manget (j. j.), Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, ii. p. 84$. 

Borel, Bibliotheca Ckimica, 1654, p. 104. Gmelin, Gesckichte der Ckemie, 1798, ii. pp. 19, 

Borrichius. Conspectus Scriptorum Ckemicorum^ 246. 

1697, p. 47. No. Ixxix. Schmieder, Gesckichte der Alckemie, 1832, p. 432. 

Koth-Scholtz, Bibliotkeca Chemica^ 1737. p. 90. VaAT2JgCA^BibliotkkqueOuvaroff^SciencesSecrHes^ 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire de la Pkilosopkie 1870, No. 1086. 

Hermitiquey 1742, iii. pp. 75. 98, 172. Kopp, Die Alchemie^ 1886, ii. pp. 344, 353. 

GERVASIUS (Julius), Schwarteburgicus. 

See ABRAHAM ELEAZAR, 1760. 

GESCHICHTE der menschlichen Narrheit. 

.S>^ ADELUNG (jOHANN CHRISTOPH). 

GESCHICKTE (Der) Chymicus welcher nicht nur unterschiedener beriihmter 
Medicorvm vortrefliche Processe und Medicamenten griindlich und aufrichtig 
entdecket; sondern auch zeiget, in was fiir Kranckheiten und auf was fiir 
Art dieselben zu gebrauchen. Jena, Verlegts Johann Rudolph Croker, 
Buchhiindler. 

8*. Pp. [8] 760. The date has been cut off. 

GESNER (Conrad). 

De Secretis Remediis Liber aut potius Thesaurus, Evonymo Gesnero Philiatro 
authore. Hie liber non solum medicis & pharmacopoeis, apprime neces- 
sarius: sed omnibus rerQ naturalium, alchemise atq; ceconomide studiosis, in 

Jt4 CESl^Bf^ 

GESNER (Conrad). Continued. 

varijs turn stilladtijs Hquoribus, turn vinis medicatis appanindis, ac sn^gplof3 
cognoscendis viribus, vtilis atque iucundus fuerit. Accedit iam recens Jaoobi 
Bessoni Galli de absoluta ratione olea & aquas e medicamends sim{dicibiis 
extrahendi Liber doctissimus, nunquam ante hac in lucem acdttos. 
In utroque icones ad rerum declarationem passim adijciuntur {sk). 

8*. Pp. 58a Index [38]. 10 woodcuts. 

Colofkon, after the index: Tiguri per Andreun Gessnenun F. Anno Doniiii 
M.D.LIIII. B«ison's tract is wanting in this copy. 

The title of this edition as given hf Brunet {Afanme/, iL 1565) is quite diffiereot finoiD 
the above. 

Tresor des Remedes Secretz, par Evonyme Philiatre. Liure Physic, Medical, 
Alchymic, & Dispensatif de toutes substantiales liqueurs, & appareil de vins 
de diuerses saueurs, necessaire k toutes gens, principalenient it Medicins, 
Chirurgiens, & Apothicaires. A Lyon, Chez Antoine Vincent. M.D.LIX. 
Auec Priuilege de la maieste Royalle. 

a**. Pp. [47, I blank] 44a Index [61 past leaf (E8) blank? wanting! 6a wood- 
cuts of plants and apparatus. Some of the woodcuts have been roughly coloured 
yellow and blue by hand. 

This translation was made by Barth^emy Aneau, and the dedication is to Maistre 
Simon Guy, Surgeon. It first appeared at Lyons in 1555. F*or a notice of Anean see 
under his name. 

A new booke of destillatyon of waters, called the Treasure of Evonymus, 
containing the wonderful hid secrets of nature, touching the most apt formes 
to prepare & desdll Medicines, for the conseruation of helth : as Quintessence. 
Aurum Potabile, Hyppocras, Aromaticall wynes, Halmes, Oyles, Perfumes, 
garnishing waters, & other manifold e.xcellent confecdons. Whereunto are 
ioyned the forms of sondry apt Furnaces, and vessels required in this art 
Tran.slated (with great dilligence, & labour) out of Ladn, by Peter Morwyng, 
felowe of Magdaline Colledge, in Oxforde. Whereunto is added a profitable 
table or Index for the better finding of al such waters as seme aswel for 
medicines, as also for the principal matters or other, conteyned in the booke. 
Imprinted at London by John Day, dwellyng ouer Aldersgate, beneath Saynt 
Martines. Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis. 

4**. Title leaf; A, B ; B to Y, Aa to Yy, AA to KK, all in fours ; or pp. fiSldoS 
[16]. On KKiii verso is the Colophon : Imprinted at London by John Day, dwculRi^ 
ouer Aldersgate beneath S. Martins. The fyrst of June. 1565. Cum priuilegio R^iae 
Maiestatis. On KKiinfrcto: the Stationers' Arms. The same design appears on B 4 
verso, after the Table. Black letter. 58 woodcuts of plants and apparatus m the text. 

In addition to the woodcuts of plants, etc., the capitals are occasionally embellished 
with drawings, some of which are rather humorous. 

A peculiarity in this book is that the lines in each page are numbered by tens on the 
margin. This is made use of in the Index for facilitating reference. 

There is a considerable number of misprints in the pagination, but the book is 
perfect 

Kostlicher Artzneyschatz defs wolerfaren vnnd weytberiimpten Evonymi 
Philiatri : Darinnen behalten sind viel heimlicher bewarter Artzneystucken 
fiirnemlich aber die art vnnd eigenschafft der gebranten Wasseren vnd Oelen : 
Sampt grundtlicher Beschreibung, wie man die selbigen nit mm artig 
zubereiten, sondem auch nutzlich vnd heilsamlich gebrauchen solle: Defs- 
gleychen von bereitung allerhand Weinen, vnd wie den abgestandnen dmch 

C£SAfEk 

3IS 

GESNER (Conrad). Continued. 

hilff der gebranten Wassem, Crewiirtzen vnnd anderley Materi widerumb 
zuhelfien sey. Alles mit lieblichen schonen Figuren angezeigt vnd vorge- 
stellet : den Alchymisten, Haufs- und Ehehalten, sonderlich aber den 
Barbierem, Wundartzten, Apoteckern, vnd andern der Artzney liebhabem 
zulasen und zugebrauchen, so wol lustig als nutzlich vnnd nohtwendig. 
Erstlich durch obbemelten Philiatrum in Latein beschrieben: hemach von 
Johan Rudolph I^ndenberger von Ziirych ins Teutsch vbersetzt, vnnd mm 
an viel orten vermehret, mennigklichem zu gutem in den Truck verfertiget. 
Getruckt zu Ziirych im Jar MDCVIII. 

4**. Pp. [8] 353 [15]. Title red and black. Woodcuts. 

The first part was translated by Joliann Rudolph Landenbcrger. The second part 

rrate title-paee, which states clearly the author, the editor, and the translator : 
kostlichen Artzneyschatzes Evonymi Philiatri Ander theil: Darinnen von 

has aseparate title-paee, which states clearly the author, the editor, and the translator : 

Artrneya 
allerhand kunstlichen vnd bew&rten Oelen, Wasseren vnnd heimlichen Artmeyen, zu 

allerley defs Leibs innerlicheu vnd etisserlichen Kranckheiten zugebrauchen, gehandlet 
wirt. Sampt derselben ordenlichen bereitung und darzugehorigen nothwendigen 
schonen Figuren : Erstlich durch Weiland den Hochberlimpten Herren Coninad 
Gefsner, der Artzney Doctom, zusamen i^etragen, volgends durch Merm Caspar 
Wolffen, auch der Artzney Doctom, in Latein b^hrieben : Newlich aber der Idblicnen 
Teutschen Nation vnd der Lateinischen Sprach vnerfahmen, zu gutem, auflfe trewlichste 
verteiitschet, durch Johann Jacob Niischeler, der Artzney D. zu Ztirych. Getruckt 
zu Ztirych im Jar MDCVIII. 

4^ Pp. [4] 288 [16]. 

See LIEBAUT (jean), Quatre Livres des Secrets dc Medecine. M.VI.C. 

Conrad Gesner was bom at Ztirich in 1516, in 
the very poorest circumstances, studied at Stras- 
burg, Hourgcs, and Paris, and on his return to his 
native town had to take a poor situation in a school. 
He next went to Basel, studied medicine, spent 
three years in Lausanne as profesjior of Greek, 
studied medicine further at Montpellicr, took the 
degree of M. D. in Basel, and was appointed to the 
professorship of Ethics and Physics in Zurich, an 
office which he held for twenty-four years, at the 
same time practising medicine with success. He 
died at Ztirich, 13 I^c, 1565. of the plague, in his 
49th year. 

He wras a man of the greatest ability and of 
extraordinary diligence as is obvious from the 
quality and amount of the work which he left 
behind and which procured him the title of the 
German Pliny. He wrote books on all branches of 
Natural History especially on animals, collections 
on surgery, mineralogy, botany, on philology, 
learning, philosophy, medicine, and the present 
work De Remediis Secretis^ and he was the first to 
compile a universal catalogue of books which was 
published in 1545, and went through several 
editions. There is no more notable man in the 
history of learning and of science in the sixteenth 
century than Gesner. 

The first edition of this famous book appeared 
anonymoudv, or pseudonymously, or rather Evony- 
mously, at Ztirich in 155a. It is unknown to most 
of the bibliographers, who usually quote that of 15^ 
as the first. The first edition does not contain 
Besson's tract. Subsequent editions are: Lugd., 
Amoollet, 1554; Lugd., Vincent, 1^55; Araouet, 
1555; Venet. 1556; Lugd. 1558; I'rancof. 1578; 
Lugd. x6ao ; s.l. et a. , with Froschover's device. 
Bninet mentions an edition, Ztirich, 1558. The 
German translation appeared at Ztirich in 1555, 
158a, 1583, 1608. 

The rVoicfa traosktioD, by BartbAemy Aneau, 

was published at Lyons by Balthazar Amoullet. 
15^3, small 4** ; 1557, 8", and as above in 1559, an 
edition not mentioned in the Catalogues. 

The Italian translation was published at Venice, 
1560, 8'. 

The English translation by Peter Morw3m^ was 
first print^ by John Day at London, 1559, in 4^ 
The edition of 156^ is printed page for page but 
not line for line, with that of 1559. An edition of 
1564 is quoted by Gmelin (GeschUhie, i. p. 34a); 
but I have not seen it. and it is probably an error. 
In Dibdin's^iwef, Typ, Antiq, iv. p. 71, No. 1915; 
p. X04, No. 1944 ; p. 139, No. 2016, editions dated 
respectively 1559, 1^63, 1575, are described. I 
have not seen an edition of 1575. ai^<^ ^^ is men* 
tioned only on the strength of Herbert's notes. 

The book is interesting as a record of the 
Chemistry known by Gesner, the greatest natm*- 
alist, polyhistor and bibliographer m his time. It 
dads with distillation and is the forerunner of the 
books of Glauber and French, as it is the successor 
of those of Brunswicke and Ulstadt. It gives an 
account of plants to be distilled (with drawings of 
them), of furnaces and other apparatus, and the 
methods of getting the virtues out of plants, 
animals, and minerals, and their uses in effecting 
cures. It evinces considerable knowledge <^ 
practical pharmaceutical chemistry as then prac- 
tised, especially iis the author admits his want of 
skill in the art. 1 1 contains some singular remedtte, 
and some curious ideas. 

In 1569, after Gesner's death, a second part was 
printed at Ztirich by Froschover, in 8% It was 
edited b]^ Caspar Wolff or Wolfius, and no mvstery 
is made in it of Gesner being the author. It was 
reprinted at Franckfurt, 1578. The German trans- 
lation by Ntischeler was first published at St. 
Gallen, 1583. 4^ The above edition of 1608 is a 
reprint. 

3i6 

GESNEK 

(SKSNKR (CoNRAii). Continued 

It WAS trAiihlutetl into Knglish by GcOTge Kiker. 
Ami, iifKirr the lilli" Tkt Newt J ewtU of Healthy was 
printnl at Ix>ndoii by Ilciiry DeiihAm. in 1576, 4°. 
H.1m It WAS rciMU«!d iti 1599 by Peter Short, in 
4", with the title : The Practise 0^ the nnv and old 
Pkiiicke, 

In (ie»nrr*.s nketch of himself {liibliotheia, ed, 
SimlcT & Krisiiis, Tiffur, 1583, p. 138, col. b, 1. 40 
jyy.) hi; rcfcTH to the prrM.*ht work wliich he admits 
publishing anonynuiusly lN>c'aUM' \\v. wiis not (jiiitc 
Mtisti4-<! witti it ; 1558 is given as the date of the 
Hrst and (»f the Mxond tniition as well. This is 
apparpntly a double error, either a misprint, or a 
lilt of forgft fulness on (ji'srirr's {kiit. Almut bome 
of the «*dUioiis he ai>|M*aiH lather v.igue, but he has 
sai<l eornvtiy that iti'^tMin's tract was appended to 

rantal(r<»n. Pnnofkt^riiphiii, Risil. 1566, I'ars iii. 
j). 481. (The |Mirtrait here gitrcn is sourious, and 
IS tivd to |x>urtray other i>eople. See pp. 398, 
4^0. ) 

Simlrr. Vitii (\ Gntteri, ZUrich, i5W>, 4". 

joh. Samburus, /lOMff^ Ant\"erp. 1574, and 

tf^\^. I». J.V 
'I hi-(Hl. IWa, /ri»w«'i, 1580, fol. kj. 

Autobiographical sketch in the Ax/Zii'Mtrci;, ed. 
.Simler antiFrisiUH, 1583. pp. iy>-i42. 

Nicol. Keusmrr, /tonrs, 1387. Rvij ncto. 

lioi.ss:irrlus, Iconr^ I.S'K^ 'v. pi>. 130-153. 

Adami, I'lUr Gtrmant*rum Medkorum, 1^20, pp. 
146- 17 J. 

Van di'r Linden. A* si ri pit a mud ids libri duo^ 
'637, II. I a J. 

Ohiiini, Tratnt d' iluomini leiterati, Venet. 
1647, i. p. 40. 

lioissardus, IHbliotheta Chakographicay 1650, 
Mm4. 

(!ras.so, Elof^ii d' Ifuomini Utierati, Venetin, 
1666, i. pp. 36-29, ^'it^ ^ portrait. 

Mrrcklin, I .indeniu^ renttx'atus^ 1686, pp. 206-210. 

Magirus. H.ponymoloi^um Criticum^ Francof. 
i6«7, p. 38<;. 

Fn'her, Fheatrum virorum eruditione clurorum, 

1688. p. IJS.S, PI. 5^>- 

l'o|M*'Hlount, f't'nturii Celebriorum Autkorum, 
Cienrv. 1710, p. ^»6i. 

Ki'imman, I'lnkituHj^ in die Historiam liter- 
ariam dfrrr Teutstken, Halle. 1710. III. iii. pp. 

75^». 794 

leissicr, JihKes, 1715. ii. p. 195. 

Joh. FabriciiLs, Hi^toria Bibliotkecte Juibriciantr, 
1719, iii. pp. (/i-iob. 

J. A. Fabriciu-s fiibliotfuca Grerdi, 1726, xiii. 
p. 123 (Klenchus Mi-flicorum Velrrunu. 

Gottlieb Stolle. Ankitiuij^ znr Historic dtr 
GelaMrheit^ Jena, 1727, p. 21. 

Roth'Scholtz, liihliotketij Che mica, 1727. p. 67. 

(jottlieb Stolle, Afilritunj; »ur f/istorie dcr 
Mediiini.uht'ft (Ulahrheit, Jena. 1731 (in connection 
with medicine and natural history), passim. 

Manget, lUbliotheca Scriptorum Medicorum^ 

I73>. !• >». P- 46J. 

Morhof, Polyhistor^ 1732 (1. i. 18. 5), p. 197 ; 

(>. 4. 3- y). p- 742 ; ('• 4- 4- 5)f p- 750; <". 2.* 14- 5). 

p. 3^3: ('"• 7- «• 7). p. 604. 

Niccron, Sl/moitrs^ 1732, xvii. pp. 337-371. 
Douglas, niblio^raphitr Anatomic^ Sped men ^ 

17^ p. 74. 
Zedler, Universal-Ijextcort, 1735, x. col. 1290. 

Kestner, Medicinisches Gelehrten- lexicon , 1740, 
p. 340. 

Maittairc, .if// /if//i MM Typoi^raphicorum TomusV. 
Index y 174T, p. 438. 

the second editKm, aad not to the finL The 
present is the second edition. 

The present edition, 1554, which is not — ■— i«^"t 
by IkuQet. saems to ha\T been the first of Jaoqjoa 
Kesson's tract. Bninet quotes an editioD of 1559 
(of which there i« a copy in the Britisb Momsb 
(B. 214 (2) ). It was translated into French \tf the 
author, and a parallel edition in Latin and Fnsich 
was published at Paris, br Galiot Da Pr£, 1C71, 4*, 
accordmg to Bninet. It was enlarged 67 the 
addition of a second book. The Krencfa nenion 
afterwards appeared by itself : Art ei Mtyem Par- 
^aict de tirer Huyles et Eaitx, de toms Mediemwunis 
simples 6* Oleogineux (sic). I'aris, Galiot Da Pit 
1573, small 8*, A-D in eights, or ff. 31 (misnumberad 
for 32). There is said to have been another editioQ 
.It Paris in 1580, 8**. 

Brucker, likren-temptl dtr DttUschem. GeUknam 
keit, 1747. h>stes Zehend, pp. 21-25. 

Jc^her. Allgtmeines Gfiekrien-ljexicim, Z75<\ ^ 
col. 968. 

lioerluiave. Metkodus Studii Medici, ed. Mailer. 
^7S^i >• P- 73- &c., &c 

Clasimir Christ, Schmiedel, Life prefixed to 
Gt'sner's Opera Hotanica, Norimb. 1753, ^^• 

Floy. IMctionnaire Historique de la M/dtcime^ 

1755, *' P* ^ • '778, ii. p 337. 

.Mordri. I^ Grand LHctianmairg kisieriqmt, 
«7S9. V. ii. p. 179. 

David element. liibliotkeque Curiense, Leipcig, 
1760, ix. pp. i45-»7». 

Maxzuchclli, Museum Mazzuckelliamum, Venet 
17^)1 ; notice of Gesner, i. p. 308. Portrait 
medal. Tavola. Ivii. No. iv. 

Haller, IHbliotkeca Botanica, ^77T^* i- pp< 382-992. 

Mailer, Bibliotkeca AncUomica^ ^774t i< p« 188. 

Haller, Bibliotkeca Ckirurgiea, 1774. i. p. aio. 

lx*onard Meister, BerUkmte /.Uricher^ Basel, 
1782, Th. i. pp. 277-299. 

( Gottfried Emanuel von Haller, Bibliotkek der 
SikuriteK-Gesckickte^ ^785, ii. Nos. 821-830 (Life 
of (jfsncr) ; i. & ii. Index (for (iesner's writings). 

Sioever, Life of Sir C. IJnntrus, 1794, p. 55. 

Hutchinson, Uiot^rapkia Medica^ I799* *• PP 

351354- 

liioj^rnphie M^dicak, Paris, Panckoucke (i8ao- 

35). iv. p. 400 (article by Jourdan). 

Johann Hanhart, Conrad Gessner, Winterthur, 
1824, 8*. 

Sprcngel, Gesckickte der Artneykunde, 1827, 
iii. passim. 

Dezeimeris, Dictionnairt Historique de ia 
MMecine^ 1835, II. ii. p. 532. 

Kmil Isensee, Die Gesckickte der Afedicin, Ber- 
lin, 1840, i. p. 232. 

CJharles Hanulton Smith, Memoir of Gesnerpie. 
fixtjd to Sir W'm. Jardine's Tke NeUuralisi^ 
library, vol. xii., hkiinburgh, 1844. 

Ijcttre^ de Gui Patin, . . . par J.-H. Re\«i1I<- 
Parise, 1846, ii. p. 247. 

H. Lebert, Conrad (ksner als Arzt^ ZMricb, '854, 
8 . 

liayle & Thillayc, Biograpkie Midkale^ Paris. 
1855. '• P- 23'^- 

Philippe, Gesckickte der Apotkeker, ed. Lodyrig, 
»855« P- 4»6. 

Biosrrapkie Unix'erselle (1856), xvi. pp. 36i-564 
(article by Cuvier). 

Kmst H. F. Meyer, Gesckickte der Boianik, 
Konigsbcrg, 1857, iv. p. 322. 

Krsch & (f ruber, Allgemeine Encyklopddie, J857i 
Ixiv. pp. 345-358 (article by Escher). 

Nouvelle Biograpkie Ginirale, 1858, xx. col. 339. 

GESNER-^GESPRECH 317 

GESNER (Conrad). Continued. 

Rud. Wolf, Biographien xur KuUurgeschichte Heinrich Haeser, Lthrbuch dtr GesckickU der 

der Schweiz, ZUrich, 1858, i. p. 15. .Xfedicin, 1881, ii. pp. 10, 115, 148, 165, 907. 

Graesse, Trisor de Livres rares, i86a. iii. pp. Dictionnaire Encyclop^dique des Scifnces M/di- 

67-69. r.//«, 1882, 4« S^rie, viii. pp. 633-638 (article by L. 

PoggendorfF, Biograpkisch-literariiches Hand- Ilahn). 
wdrterbuch, 1863, i. col. 887. Ferguson, ' Notes on . . . Books of Secrets," 

Paul-Antoine Cap, Jttudes Biographiques, 2« Transactions of the Archaohgical Society of 

S^e, 1864, p. 47. Glasgow, 188^, ii. pp. 187-189, 251 ; 1885, i. pp. 

Figuier, Vies des Savants iliusfirs (La Renais- 2x7-18, 444-46. 
5ance). 1868, pp. 231-269. Billings, Index Catalogue, 1884, v. p. 398. 

Allgemeine Deutsche Biogniphie, 1879, ix. pp. Hirsch, Biographi%ches Ijexikon der hervorra- 

107-120 (article by J. Miihly). genden Aerxte\ 1885, ii. p. 538. 

GESPRACHE des Eudoxi und Pyrophili, uber den Uralten Ritter Krieg. 

See HERMETISCHE (Der) Triumph, 1707, p. 57. 
See HERMETISCHE (Der) Triumph, 1765, p. 57. 

GESPRACH vom Gelben und Roten Mann. 

See MELCHIOR, Cardinal et Episcopus Brixiensis. 

GESPRACH von der Kunst Alchimisterey. 

See C/RSAR (THEOPHiLUS), Alchimey-Spiegel, 1613, p. 86. 

GESPRACH vom Lapide Philosophorum. 

See HELLWIG (CHRISTOPH VON), Fasciculus, 1 7 19, p. 44. 

Also called Gesprach von .Stdne der Weisen. 

GESPRACH zwischen dem Merkur, einem Alchemisten und der Natur. 

See SENDIVOGIUS (MICHAEL). 

GESPRACH zwischen Vatter und Sohn. 

See ERLAUTERTE und aus der Erfahrung erwiesene Wahrheit des Goldmachens 
. . . abgehandelt in einem angestellten Gesprache zwischen Vatter und 
Sohn, 1767. 

GESPRACH zwischen dem weisen Saturn und einem Chemisten von der 
Materie und Vorarbeit des Steins. 

See HERMETISCHES A. B. C, 1779, iii. p. 209. 

An extract only. 
See V. (j. R.), Giildene Rose. 

GESPRACH. 

See also COLLOQUIUM, DIALOGU.S, ZUEIGNUNGS-GESPRACHE. 

« • 

GESPRACHE (Ein) zwischen dem Kdnig Mascos, seiner Schwester Agos und 
einem Hermetischen Lehr-J linger von dem Stein der Weisen zu femerer 
Erlarung des Chaos und der Arbeit. 
See FICTULD (HERMANN), Chymische Schrifilen, 1734, p. 199. 

GESPRECH (Ein). 

See TRISSMOSINUS (salomonX Aureum Vellus, 1598, Tractatus iii. p. 200. 

See tancke (joachim), Promptuarium Alchemiae, 1610, Appendix Tomi Primi, 

p. 351. 
See [SCHATZ und Kunstkammer], p. 351. 

See eroffnete Geheimnisse des Steins der Weisen, 1708, p. 313. 

3i« GETREUE^^IROLAMI 

GETREUE (Der) Eckhart. 

See ETTNER (JOHANN CHRISTOPH VON). 

GIGAS (Caspar), Respondens. 

Dissertatio Chimica de Antimonio. 

See ROLFINCK (WERNER), i66a 

GILBERTUS, Patriarch zu Constantinopel. 
Tractat vom Stein der Weissen. 

See HELLWIG (CHRISTOPH VON), Fasciculus, 1719, p. 147. 

GINitlCEVM Chimicum seu Congeries Plurium Authonim qui in Aitem 
Hermeticam de I^pide Philosophico scripserunt, quorum Tractatus nee in 
Theatro, aut alio Volumine usqub adhuc simul impressi ' fiieraht ' S«pa- 
dictorum turn librorum turn Authorum catalogus sequenti pagioa continetur. 
In Ciratiam Studiosorum Animorum qui huius Artis notitiam sectantur. 
Volumen Primum. Lugduni, M.DC.LXXIX. Apud lo: de Treuis. 

«•. Pp. [4] 727 [i blankj 

This appears to be all that was publisbcd. It is mentionod hut not described br 
Lenglet Dufresnoy (Histoirt de la Pkilosophie Herm/tique, 1742, iii. p. 43), from whicn 
it may be inferred that he had not seen a copy at that time, otherwise be vrodtd have 
undoubtedly enumerated the contents. 

Geber, Summa Perfectionis roagisteiii, p. x. Quibus Appendicis loco accessit : 

Gebcr. Liber investigationis, p. 164. t. H. Aquilae Thuringi cz JbfamKDpio 

Georgius Horn, Medulla Alchimiae in aphorismos doctrina, p. 51a 

contracta ex Gebro desumpta, p. 179. 2. Kz Epistola Eduafdi Kcdliei, p^ 513. 

Joannes Hraccschus. De Alchemia Dialogi duo : 3. Fragnientum ex Theorijs Joaonis Isaad 

Prior Gebri sensum explicans, p. 212; HoUandi, p. 513. 

.\lter Lignum vitae norainatus. Raimundi doc- Liber de principijs naturalibus, & principiji 

trinam, & misteria occulta artis pandens,p.332. Artis, p. 5x7. 

Brevis Lilxillus Minera Philosophonim dictus, Joannes Dausten, Visio in Chimicani, p. 548. 

p. 349. Avicenna, De mineralibus liber parvus, p. 554. 

Libellus alter, siv^ restrictus theoricus. Radius ab Alexander Rex, Kpistola abditam Phuosophici 

Vmbra vocatus cum eiusdem authoris brcvi dialogo, lapidis compositionem declarans, p. 561. 

p. ^68. Opusculum philosophic! lapidis secreia laelha- 

Oliverius de Oliverijs, Tractatus duo, Vnus de phoric6 describens, 566. 

lapide philosophico conficicndo, Alter dc auro Merlinus All^oria profundissiixnun I^pidi^ 

potabili, p. 415. arcanum perfect^ continens. p. 569. 

Panthaleon, Rifolium metallicum, sive medecina Recaidib, Veradianus, Rhodianus, & Kalid Res 

duplex pro metallis & hominibus, p. 453. Persarum : Fragmentum de Materia Phisici La- 
Joannes Belye, Tractatus singularis chimicus, pidis, p. Q73. 

p. 495. Lux Obnubilata suapt^ natura refulgens: ven 

Bernardus Trevirensis, Tractatus de lapide de lapide Philosophico Tlieorica, Pars prima, 

philosophonim, p. 503. p. 579. 

GIRARD DE TOURNUS (Jacques). 
See BACON (ro(;er), 1629. 

GIROLAMI (Flavio). 

Nuova Minera d'oro di Flavio Girolami. Nella quale con viue, & efficacissiine 
ragioni de' Scrittori famosissimi si dimostra, L'Arte Chimica esser verissuna, 
e con la Piera Filosofica potersi far I'Oro. Con le risposte k quelli c' hanno 
scritto contra taF Arte, & alle obiettioni, che si possono far' all' Auttoie; 
ilquale ^ pieno manifesta la grandissima potenza, e gli marauigliosissiini 
effetti del vero Lapis Philosophorum, e la natura, lodi & ecceUeaze de gli 
Alchimitti. Opera veramente piena di vaga, e beUa dottrina : jA i X«et|ori 

GIROLAMI—GLASER 319 

GIROLAMI (Flavio). Continued, 

diletteuole, & vtile : & a gli professori deir Arte necessaria, & opportuna. 

Con Privilegi. 

Virtus Securitatem Parit. 

In Venetia, M.D.LXXXX. Appresso Barezzo Barezzi. 

4". Pp. [8] 171 [12, X blank]. Vignette. ^ 

Borel. Bihliotheca Chitnua, 1654, p. 105. Gmelin, Gtschichie ier Ckemie, .17^, L p. 298 

Borrichius, Conspectus Scrip/orum Chemicorum, (calls him Girolari). 

'697, p, 45, No. IxxT. Hoefer, Histoire de la Ckimie, 1843, "• P- ^3* '* 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire de la Philosophie 1869, ii. p. 126 (calls him Girolari). 
HemUtique, 1742. iii. p. 174. 

GISE (Gerard). 

De Tinctura Aurea, sive Medicina ferfe Universali ejus Materia Pneparatione, 
viribus, & usu : in morbonim ultionem, ad vitam longam. k Gevardo Gise, 
Phil. & Med. Doct. Diversorum Principum, Comitumque Archiatro, Dioecesis 
Monasteriensis Medico, & Consule ultra 25. annos pnmario: ^Etatis suae 
anno 85. notificata, Warendorpii, Impressum k Christophoro Nagel» 1704. 
Reimpressum Bonnse 1728. k Leonardo Rommerskircheny Serenissimi 
Principis ac Electoris Colon. Typogr. Aulico. 

8°. Pp. [6] 80. 

The second tract is a German abstract of the preceding. 

Tinctura Aurea, oder Medicina fer& Universalis: In mehrentheils schwftren und 
durch gemeinen Mitteln sonsten vor incurabel*gehsdtenen Kranckheiten, nQtzlich zu 
gebrauchen. Durch Gerardum Gise. Phil. & Med. Doct. Vider FOrstUch-aiid 
gr&fflichen Persohnen Leib- und Land- Medicum, auch Uber 25. Jahr allhier q. 
Regierenden Burgemieistem, im 85Sten Jahr seines Alters den Krandken turn Trost 
und schleuniger Hdlff publicirt Im Jahr 1740. Warendorff: Getruckt bev 

Christoph Nagel, 1728. Zu Bonn getruckt b^ Leonard Roromerskirchen, Churfl. 
Hoff- Buchhandler und Ruchtnicker. 

Pp. 30. 

De Tinctura Aurea, sive Medicina ferfe Universali ejus Materia Praeparatione, 
viribus,.& usu: in morborum ultionem, ad vitam longam. k Geiardo .Gise, 
Phil. & Med. Doct. Diversorum Principum, Comitumque Archiatro,. Dioecesis 
Monasteriensis Medico, & Consule ultra 25. annos primario: .i£tads suae 
anno 85. notificata. Warendorpii, Impressum k Christophoro Nagel, 1704 
Reimpressum Bonnae, 1728. k Leonardo Rommerskirchen, Serenissimi 
Principis ac Electoris Colon. Typogr. Aulico. 

8*. Pp. [6] 80. 
This contains only the first tract, not the German .abstract. 

GLASER (Christophle). 

Novum Laboratorium Medico-Chymicum. Das ist: Neu-eroffnete Chymische 
Artzney- und Werck-Schul, in drey Bucher abgetheilet ; Das erste stellet vor 
eine kurtze, doch deutliche, Unterrichtimg aller der jenigen Stiicke, welche 
zu der Grund-Lemung, oder Theorie, dieser edlen Wissenschafft nothwendig 
erfordert, und verstanden werden miissen. Das zweyte entdecket die iiblichen 
Kunst- und Handgriffe, verroittelst welcher alle natiirliche C6rpere, des 
Vegetabilischen, Animalischen und Mineralischen Reiches, Feue^kun8tig 
bereitet, und in ihr subtilstes KrafTt-Wesen gebracht werden; samt b^y- 
.^f«igtem Berieht, ^e .und worzu ein jedes, so wol in der Medictn, .iJs 

320 

GLASER 

G LAS E R ' C H R I * T c FH L f. ». C I'Htinutd, 

Chirur^ie. nuulich ;:cbrauc*net verden soil Das drine begreifletv in diCTeti 
'jr.tr:r"^,h:r:d i^'ri-.n A^thril^njcn, :r. sich. hundert und neun Chymtsdie nnd 
ij-rhcime. so wol aii^-mcine, a!s sonderbare Geaifs- und Heil-Mittel; Wdcfae 
a*js den r>js:en und rjr:r:hm:r:>tcn Auihori'ous zusammen gelesen, und abo 
crstesmals in Frant/osis*- hrrr Sprache verabfasscl worden dnrch C. G. AnjeCK) 
abcr, Wfi^en s<:iner sender Vxiren Nutz^arkcit, denen Liebhabem dieser Rimst 
zu Ii«:b, in das Hocn-'rcuts'.ric ul^rrsetzct von Johann Marschalck Austriaco, 
Medic. Liccntiato & Chyinico. Demc beygefiigt ein Anhang, haiKDend 
von dem Grund und Krkanntnifs der Natur, der Rlcmenten, und aller 
ckmentirten Dinge, ^ie auch von dcrselben Gcbahning, Emahrui^ and 
Zerstorung Niirnberg, In Vcrltr^ung Michael und Johann Frideiich 

Endtern, 1677. 

8'. Pp. [$6] 666 1 13, 1 Mink]. En^jv«ni utle. 6 plates of apparatus. W 

pp. 4*^1-4^. 

[Another Copy.] 

Wants 2 plates of apfKimtus. Inserted is a view of the hot baths at Bolckenstein. 

Chimischer Wegweiser, das ist, sichere Anweisung zur Chimischen Kunst 
darinnen durch einen kurtzen Weg und leichte Handgriffe gewiesen wird, 
wie man allerley Artzneycn durch die Chimie bereiten kan. Erstlich in 
Frantzosischer Sprach beschrieben von Christophoro Glaser, Ordinar-Apotheker 
des Koniges und Ihrer Durchleuchtigkeit des Hertzogs von Orleans in Pariis ; 
Anitzo aber auff Begehren in unsere Teutsche Sprache iibersetzet von einem 
Philochimico. Jt*na, Verlegts Johann Jacob Bauhofer. Anno 1677. 

I2^ I'p. [22, 2 blank] 528 [12J. Front margin of the title cut in. 3 folding plates. 
Translated by Jean Menudicr, 

Chimischer Wegweiser, das ist, sichere Anweisung zur Chimischen Kunst, 
Darinnen durch einen kurtzen Weg und leichte Handgriffe gewiesen wird, 
wie man allerley Artzneyen durch die Chimie bereiten kan. Erstl. in 
Frantzosischer Sprach beschrieben von Christophoro Glaser, Ordinar- 
Apothecker des Koniges und Ihrer Durchlauchtigkeit des Hertzogs von 
Orleans in Paris ; Anictzo aber auf Begehren in unsere Teutsche Sprache 
iibersetzet von einem Philochimico. Jena, Vcrlegt von Matthai Birckners 
seel. Krben, [1710]. 

12°. Pp. [12] 528. Contents [12]. Title red and Mack. Engraved title, 
included in the pagination. Tliree plater, of apparatus. Damaged at the end. This 
i^ a reprint of the prece<ling. 

[Another Copy. J 

Wants the plates. 

(Ihristophcr (ilavr was born at Rasle, came to 
Ihiris, was demonstrator to Vallot, Professor of 
Chemistry in the Jardin du Rui, and was Apothe- 
cary to the King antl Ouk*- of Orleans. For a 
short time he was the teacher of I-.<*mery, who 
afterwards suecetMed him, and Lemery's reputed 
duisatisfiiction has been the cause of the (xtssing 

and exaggeration of an unfavourable judgment 
upon Glaser. As it is one-sided it requires con- 
siderable justification l)efore it can be accepted. 
He was involved in the poisoning case of the 
Marchioness de Brinvilliers, and was sent to the 
I^stille, but as there was nothing against him he 
was liberated. There seems little doubt that the 

G LASER 

321 

GLASER (Christophle). Continued. 

Marchioness and Saint-Croix obtained their poisons 
from Glaser, but possibly he had no knowledge of 
what was done with them. His name, however, 
appears in the literature relative to the case, 
whether it be legal or romantic, historical or 
epistolary. He died between 1670-1673, but his 
age is unknown. 

His one book was successful It passed through 
several editions, and was translated into English 
and German. 

It first appeared at Paris in 1663, in a handsome 

Afemoire du Procez extraordinaire conire la 
Dame de Brinvilliers , Paris, 1676, pp. 3, 19, 21, 
in 4°. This and another document : Arrest de la 
Cour de Parletnent . . . contre Dame Marie Mar- 
guerite d'Aubra^ and the Factum pour Dame 
Marie Marguerite d* Aubray were printed this same 
year, 1676, m la", at several places. I have before 
me copies of editions of Amsterdam, Cologne, and 
Paris. There is also an English translation : A 
Narrative of the Process against Madam Brinvil- 
liers ; and of her Condemnation and Execution , for 
having poisoned her Father and two Brothers, 
London, 1676, small 4", pp. 24. 

Conring, In Universam Artem Medicam , . . 
Introduction 1687, p. 384. 

De La Fare, Md moires et reflexions sur les prin- 
cipaux &vinements du rd^e de Louis XlV.y 1716, 
pp. 209-14. 

Roth-Scholtz, Bibliotfuca Chemica^ '^7^7* p. 92. 

Stolle, Anleitung zur Historie der Medicinischen 
Gelahrheit^ 1731 • p. 791. 

Jacob Leupolds Prodromus Bibliothecce metal- 
lica, 1732, p. 59. 

Gayot de Pitaval, Causes cHibres et intiressants^ 

^737^ '• PP- 267-326. 

E)e I^ Martini^re, Histoire de la vie et du regne 
de Louis AVK, 1740-42, iv. p. 229. 

Kestner, Medicinisches Gelehrten- lexicon, 1740, 

P- 347. 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire de la Philosophic 

Herm^tique, I74a» i". p. S* 

Reboulet, Histoire du regne de Ijouis XIV,, 
1746, V. p. 159. 

J<5cher, Allgemeines Gtlehrten-Lexicon^ 1750* ». 
col. 1016. 

Voltaire, Le Sikcle de Louis XIV,, Berlin, 1751, 
ii.jp. 59. 

noerhaave, Chemistry, ed. Shaw, 1753, i. p. 47. 

Fictuld, Probier-Stetn, 1753, Th. ii. p. 68. 

Marquise de S^vignd, Recueil des Lettres, 1754, 
iv. pp. 44-198. 

Fontenelle, Oeuvres, Amsterdam, 1764, v. p. 226. 

Idoyi Dictionnaire Historigue de la Midecine, 
1778, il p. 355. 

Baumer, Bibliotheca chemica, 1782, p. 33. 

8"; then 1667; Lyons, 1670; Paris, 1673; 
Brussels, 1676 ; Lyons, 1676 ; Paris, 1678 ; Lyons, 
1679. 

In German, 1677, 1684, 1710; English, 1677. 

Glaser is remembered for his method of making 
potassium sulphate, and to the native salt his name 
is attached. It is called Glaserite. I have discussed 
Glaser's life and chemistry in a paper read to the 
Philosophical Society of Glasgow, 1901. It is not 
yet published. 

Beckmann, Geschichte der Er/lndungen^ 1785, i. 
p. 278 ; ii. p. 571 ; English translation, 1814, ii. 

P. 503. 
Beytrag zur Geschichte der hdhern Chemie, 1785, 

p. 531. 

Weigel, Einleitung zur allgemeinen Scheide- 
kunst, 1788, L p. 158. 

Gnielin, Geschichte der Chemie, 1798, ii. p. 227. 

Fuchs, Repertorium der chemischen Litteratur, 
1806-08, pp. 161, 183. 

Biographic Medicate, Paris, Panckoucke (1820- 
25), iv. p. 437. 

Thomson, The History of Chemistry, 1830, i. p. 
235. 

Pierer, Universal Lexikon, 1835, v'"* P« 369- 

J. B. Dumas, I^efons sur la Philosophic Chimique, 
^837, p. 62 ; 1878, p. 69. RammelsDerg's German 
translation, 1839, p. 55. 

Alexandre Dumas, Celebrated Crimes, 1843, p. 
235. 

Hoefer, Histoire de la Chimie, 1843, ii. p. 290; 
1869, ii. p. 281. 

Albert Smith, The Marchioness of Brinvilliers 
the Poisoner of the Seventeenth Century, A 
Romance of Oldf Paris. London, 1846, 8®. 

Biographic Universelle, 1856, xvi. p. 615. 

Nouvelle Biographic Giinirale, 1858, xx. col. 794. 

Ravaisson, Archives de la Bastille, 1870, iv. pp. 
237, 244, 250 ; 1874, vii. p. 44. 

N. Blanpain, La Marquise de Brinvilliers, 
Paris, 1872, 12'. 

Montjoyeux, La Marquise de Brinvilliers^ Paris, 
n.d., 12'. 

The Popular Encyclopcedia, 1874, vi. p. 681 
(article by Ferguson^. 

EncycMpcedia Bntannica, 1879, x. p. 637 (note 
by Fer^[uson). 

LHctionnaire encyclopidique des Sciences Medi- 
cates, 4«S6rie, 1883, ix. p. 119. 

Kopp, LHe Alchemic, 1886, ii. pp. 37, 384. 

Legud, Midecins et Empoisonneurs au XVII* 
Si?cle, Paris, 1896, pp. 56, 66. 

Frantz Funck-Brentano, Le Drame des Poisons^ 
Paris, 1899, P« 9> ^c* English by George Maid- 
ment : Princes and Poisoners, 1901, pp. 10, 12. 

GLASER (JoHANN Heinrich). 

Joh. Henr. Glaseri Phil, ac Medici quondam in illustri & Antiquiss. Basiliensium 
Academic Anat. & Botan. Profess, meritiss. Tractatus Posthiimus de 
Cerebro, in quo hujus non fabrica tantiim, sed actiones omnes principes, 
sensus ac motus ex veterum & recentiorum placitis & observationibus 
perspicub ac methodic^ explicantur: Nunc primdm luci publicse expositus 
operi Joh. Jacobi Staehelini, Med. Doct. Basileae, Typis Jacobi BertschI, 
Francofurti, Apud Joh. Michael Riidigers, Anno M.DC.LXXX. 

8". Pp. [16] 2^1 [9]. Engraved frontispiece of a human .skin, included in the 
pagination. Not about Chemistry, but a premonition of Physiological Psychology. 

X 

322 GLASER-^lJiUBER 

GLASER (JoHANN Heinrich). Continued. 

Johann Heinrich Glaser was bom at Basel, Chair of AojUomy and BoCanjat IWmL He 
6 Oct.. 1699, became Doctor of Philosophy and. of the plafn>e. 5 Feb., 1675, aged 461 
after he had travelled and studied for nine years. Besides the above he wrole : 
also c^ Medicine. He obtained the Professorship Panegrrica Diisertaiio de Similiimdime. 
of Greek in 1665, but vacated it in 1667 for the Dispmtatio imamgmralis di rkewmoHsmm. 

Oraiio in ohiium HUromymi Bmukimu 

Mercklin, LimJenims remai'aiux^ 1686, p. 603. Herzog, Atkrmat Rauritae, \TJ%, pp. «35, 371. 

Witte. Diarium Biograpkicmm, i638. Sig. Kkkk. Haller, Bihiioikeca Mtdicitut frmcHc^. Vfj^ M. 

I recto, 5 Feb.. 1675. pp. 233. 528. 

Manget, Bibliothfca Siriptorum AfeJicormm, Bioi^rapkie MAiicaU, Paris, Panckoocke (i8»> 

1731. 1. ii. p. 475- 25). >v p. 440. 

Kestncr, Medicinisckes GeUkrten-Ijexicon^ 1740. Sprenf^el, GesckUkie der Artmeykmmde, 1897, iv. 

p. ^7. I*P- 210. 23a 

JocIkt, Allj^fmeine\ GeUhrten-ljexican^ 1750. ii. Baylf & Thillaj-e, BiograpkU AiddicaU^ ''SS *• 

cot. 1017. p. 489. 

Hallcr, Bihliotheca AnatomUa, 177^. i. p. 552. DUtionmaire Eiuyilop^diijme da Seiemces MUM- 

Haller, Biblioiluca (kirur/itra^ 1775, ii. p. 609. caUs, 4* S^rie, 1883, ix. p. 119L 

Elov, Dictionnairt Historique df la SuJecine, 
1778, ii. p. 355. 

GLAUBER (Johann Rudolf). 

Joannis Rudolphi Glaubcri Philosophi & Medici Celebcrrimi Opera Chymici^ 
Biicher vnd Schriflflen, so viel deren von ihme bifshero an Tag gegeben 
worden. Jetzo von neuem mit Fleifs iibersehen, auch mit edichen neuen 
Tractaten vermehret, vnd vmb mehrcr Bcquemlichkeit willen, in diese Fona 
zusammen getragen, sampt ein darzu verfcrtigten vollkommenen Registar. 
Mit Churf. Sachs, als Vicarii, Reichs-Privilegio. Franckfuit am Mayn, 

In Verlcgung Thomae-Matthiae Gdtzens. Im Jahr M DC LVIII. 

4". Pp. [24] 574. 2 plates. 
Continuatio Operum Chymicorum, . . . M.DC.LIX. 
4**. Pp. [12] 444. Index, &C. [18]. Engraved plate. 

The Works of the Highly Experienced and Famous Chymist, John Rudolph 
Glauber: Containing, Great Variety of Choice Secrets in Medicine and 
Alchymy in the Working of Metallick Mines, and the Separation of Metals: 
Also, Various Cheap and E^ie Ways of making Salt-petre, and Improving 
of Barren-Land, and the Fruits of the Earth. Together with many other 
things very profitable for all the Lovers of Art and Industry. Translated 
into English, and Published for Publick Good by the Labour, Care, and 
Charge, of Christopher Packe, Philo-chymico-Medicus. London, Printed 
by Thomas Milbourn, for the Authour, and are to be sold at his House 
next Door to the Gun in Little-Moorfields ; by D. Newman at the King's- 
Arms in the Poultry, and W. (hooper at the Pellican in Little Britain. 
M DC LXXXIX. 

Folio. I*p. [12] 440 (wants pp. 177-184). II. [4] 22a III. 92 (w'ants 49-53). 
Index [11, I blank]. 11 plates of apparatus and processes. 

See PACKE (CHRISTOPHER). 

Glauberus Concentratus, oder Kern der (ilauberischen Schrifften, worinnen 
alles unnothige Streit-Wesen weggelassen, was nutzbar ist, in die Enge 
gezogen, und was undeutlich oder verstecket, so viel moglich klar gemacht, 
und in Form eincs leicht begreifflichen Processes gebracht worden. Auff- 
gesetzt von einem Liebhaber Philosophischer Geheimnisse. Leipzig und 
Brefslau, Verlegts Michael Hubert, Anno 17 15. 

4**. Pp. [2] 862. Title red and black. MS. contents. 

GLAUBER 523 

GLAUBER (JoHANN Rudolf). Continued. 

Glauberus Concentratus oder Laboratorium Glauberianum ; Darinn die 
Specification, vnd Taxation dehren Medicmalischen, vnd Chymischen 
Arcanitaten, welche in enneldtem Laboratorio, von viel Jahren zu Jahren 
nach einander bereitet: vnd itzunder nach abgeschafTtem Laboratorio, an 
die begehrende zu distrubuiren {sic\ noch iibrig, bcgrifTen. Sambt aller dehren 
kiinstlichen Oefen, vnd Instrumenten, welche im Laboratorio gebrauchet, 
vnd viel gutes darmit verrichtet worden; nun mehr aber man dehren nicht 
langer von ndthen hat, sollen sie, neben andem Raritaten, vnd vielerhandt 
Mineralien, als da seyn. Gold, Sill>er, vnd anderer Metallen, Ertzen, vnd 
Handt-Steinen ; Wie auch mancherley Materialien zum laboriren n6thig ; 
Gleicherweyse den begehrenden gegen ein billiges iibergelassen werden. 
Durch den Authorem vnd Besitzer obgedachter Raritaten, den Vmwissenden 
zur nachricht beschrieben, vnd an tag gegeben. Zu Amsterdam, Bey 

Johan Waesberge, vnd der Witwe Elizaei Weyerstraet. Anno 1668. 

^- ^P* 75 [5 blank] MS. notes. A list of preparations, apparatus, ftc , for sale by 

. It is partially reprinted (p. 701) in 

Glauber. A very curious and probablv unique list 
the other Glauberus concentratus [q.v,) 

De Auri Tinctura sive Auro Potabili Vero. Quid sit & quommodo difTerat ab 
auro potabili falso & Sophistico quomodo Spagyrice prseparandum & 
quomodo in Medicini usurpandum. Per Joannem Rudolphum Glauberum. 
Amsterodami, Prostant apud Joannem Janssonium. cIdIdcli. 

r. Pp. 22 [2 blank]. 
Also at Franckfurt, 1652, sm. 8*. German translation, Amsterdam, 1646^ sm. 8^. 

La Teinture de TOr ou le Veritable Or Potable; Sa nature^ & sa difference 
d'auec TOr potable, faux & sophistique. Sa preparation spargique (51V), & 
son vsage dans la Medecine. Par lean Rudolphe Glauber. Et mise en 
Francois par le Sr. Du Teil. A Paris, chez Thomas lolly, Libraire 

lur^ rue S. lacques, au coin de la rue de la Parcheminerie, aux Armes 
d'Hollande. M.DC.LIX. Avec Privil^e du RoL 

8**. Pp. 22. This is a translation of the preceding. 

La Consolation des Navigants. Dans laquelle est enseign^ i ceux qui 
voyagent sur mer vn moyen de se garantir de la faim & de la soif, voire 
mesme des maladies qui leur pourroient suruenir durant vn long voyage. 
Mise en lumiere par lean Rodolphe Glauber en faueur de ceux qui entre- 
prennent de longues & perilleuses nauigations pour Tvtilit^ de la patrie. Et 
traduite en Francois par le Sieur Du Teil. A Paris, Chez Thomas lolly, 
Libraire lurd, rue S. lacques, au coin de la rue de la Parcheminerie, aux 
Armes d'HoHande. M.DC.LIX. Avec Privile^ Du Roi. 

r. Pp. [1-8] 9-64. 

Fumi NoTi Philosophici, sive Descriptio Artis Destillatorise Novae; nee non 
Sptrituum, Oleorum, Florum, alionimque Medicamentorum illius benefido, 
(iicilimA quMam & peculiari vii h vegetabilibus, animalibus & mineralibus, 
conficiendortim & quidem magno cum lucro; agens quoque de illorum usu 
Uiiti chymico quitm itiedico^ edita & publicata in gratiam veritatis Studidsorum 

324 GLA UBER 

GLAUBER (JoHANN Rudolf). Contifwed. 

per Joannem Rudolphum Glauberum. Amsterodami, Prostant i^md 

Joannem Janssonium, cIdIdcu. 

8^. Pars prima, pp. 67, Index [3] [3 blank] ; Folding leaf of apparatus. Pus 
Altera, pp. 148, Index [4]. Pars Tertui, pp. 55 (i blank]. Pars Quarta. has lost its 
title, pp. 3.83 (wants pp. 71-74). Index [a] [3 blank]. I^ars Quinta, pp. 54 [a blank]. 
7 woodcuts in the text Annotationcs in Appcndicciu Quint» Partis, {^ 7a. 

Furni Novi Philosophici oder Beschrcibung einer New- erfundenen Distillir- 
Kunst: Auch was fiir Spiritus, Olea, Flores, vnd andere dergleichen 
Vegetabilische, Animalische, vnd Mineralische Medicamenten, damit auff 
eine sonderbare Weise gantz leichtlich, mit grossem Nutzen konnen zugencht 
vnd bcreytet warden. Auch wozu solche dienen, vnd in Medicina, Alchimia, 
vnd anderen KUnsten konnen gebraucht werden. Allen Liebhabem der 
Warheit, vnd Spagyri.schen Kunst zu gefallen an Tag gegeben durch J. 
Rudolphum Glauberum. Zu Amsterdam, Bey Johan Jansson, 1661. 

8**. Pp. 94 [2] plate. Ander Thcil, pp. 238 [6] plate. Dritter Theil, 79 [4, 
I blank]. Vicrdter Thcil, 122 [2. 4 blank] plate and leaf of explanation. FunfTter 
Theil, 90 [7 woodcuts in the text] [i] ap}xrndix [9]. Annotationcs vber den 
Appendiceni, 106 [1,1 blank]. Kach part has a separate title-pai^e. The first part 
occurs with the date 1652. There arc editions, Franckfurt, 165a. and Prague, 1700, 8*. 
The English translation by J. K. (John French) v%as published at London, 1651, sm. 4*. 

Libellus Ignium : oder Feuer-Biichlein, darinnen von unterschiedlichen 
frembden und bifs Dato noch gantz unbekandten Feuem gehandelt: Wozu 
sie dienen, und was fiir unglaubliche Dinge und unaufssprechlicher 
Nutzen, dcm Menschlichcn Geschlecht dadurch kommen und zu w^en 
gebracht werden konne. Zu Gottes Ehre und Dienst defs Nechsten wol- 
meinend bcschrieben und an Tag gegeben, Durch Joh. Rudolph. Glauberum. 
Im Jahr Christi 1 703. 

8". Pp. 64. 

Miraculum Mundi. oder Aufsfiihrliche Beschreibung der wunderbaren Natur, 
Art, vnd Eigenschafft, defs Grofsmiichtigen Subiecti, von den Alten 
Menstruum Vniversale oder Mercurius Philosophorum genandt, dardurch 
die Vegetabilien, Animalien, vnd Mineralien gar leichtlich in die aller- 
heilsambste Medicamenten, vnd die vnvollkommene Metallen realiter in 
bestandig vnd perfecte Metallen konnen verwandelt werden. Allen Lieb- 
habem der Natiirlichen Wunderwercken zugefallen beschrieben vnd an Tag 
geben vnd jetzo auffs newe corrigiret vnd verbessert, Durch Johann Rudolph 
Glaubem. Mit Rom. Kays. May. Privilegio. Gedruckt zu Hanaw, bey 
Johan Aubry, in Verlegung Thomas Matthias Gotzens, Buchhandlers in 
Franckfurt. 1653. 

8**. Pp. [2] 105 [s blank]. The Latin version was printed at Amsterdam in 1653, 
sm. 8°. 

Miraculi Mundi Ander Theil. Oder Dessen Vorlangst Geprophezeiten Eliae 
Artistae Triumphirlicher Kin Ritt. Vnd auch Was der Elias Artista fiir einer 
sey? Nemlich der Weisen ihr Sal Artis Mirificum, als aller Vegetabilien, 
Animalien, vnd Mineralien hochste Medicin. Wie beweislich, wann es der 
Vegetabilien Sahmen oder Wurtzel beygebracht, dieselbe vnglaublicher 

GLA VBEk 3^5 

GLAUBER (JoHANN Rudolf). Continued. 

massen davon wachsen vnd sich vermehm. Vnd bey alien in- vnd eiiserlichen 
Kranckheiten der Menschen vnd Viehes, wie sie auch Nahmen haben 
mochten, vor all andern Artzneyen Miraculose wircket. Wie dan auch die 
Vnvolkommene Metallen Realiter nicht allein in 0 vnd J) zu verwandlen, 
sondern auch das feine O vber seinen Natiirlichen 24sten, auff den 28ten 
feiirbestandigen Grad dardurch zu bringen. Vnd was noch mehr ist, aus 
alien Krautern ein Naturliches O zu ziehen, vnd ein fixes O in ein jedes 
Kraut wiedervmb dardurch thun wachsen machen, miiglich ist. Also ein 
Herrlicher, Glorioser, vnd Triumphirender Monarch ist, 

Elias Artista, wenigen bekant, 

Et Arti€ Salia vielen genant. 
Dieses alles durch die grosse Gnad vnd Barmhertzigkeit Gottes erfunden, 
vnd durch dessclben weitere Hiilff vnd Beystandt den Freunden Public^ 
zu demonstriren, vnd wahr zu machen, sich erbietet vnd darstelt Johan 
Rudolph Glauber. Zu Ambsterdam, Bey Johan Janssoa 1660. 

8**. Pp. [20] 113 [i, 2 blank]. 

Miraculi Mundi Continuatio, in qua tota natura denudatur, & toti Mundo 
nude ob oculos ponitur; imb dilucide & apert^ demonstratur, fieri posse, 
ut ex Sale petne omnium Vegetabilium, Animalium & Mineralium summa 
Medicina paretur, ac ideo Sal petrae jure ac meritb verum Subjectum solvens, 
sive Menstruum Universale (rumpantur ilia omnibus Farnerianis Asinis) 
appellari queat. Miracula Divina manifestandi, & Hermeticae Medicinse 
studiosos docendi gratia conscripta, & in lucem edita Studio & Opera 
Johan. Rud. Glauberi. Amstelodami, Apud Joannem Janssonium. 

cIdIdclvih. 

^* ^P* 133 [3 blank]. 3 folding engravings of chemical processes. 
In 16^9, also at Amsterdam, he published Annotationes in nuptr editam Continua- 
iionem Aitraculi Mundi, in sm. 8®, pp. 37 [3 blank]. 

Explicatio oder Aufsfiihrliche Erklarung vber das vorlangsthin von Joan- 
Rudolpho Glaubero Aufsgangnes (Miraculum Mundi) intitulirtes Tractatlein : 
zur Bezeugung der Warheit vnnd dienst der Kunstliebenden durch den 
Authorem beschrieben vnd an Tag g^eben. Franckfurt am Mayn, Bey 
Thomas Matthias Gotzen. Mit Rom. Kays. Mayt. Freyheit nicht nachzu- 
trucken. M DC LVI. 

8**. Pp. 71 [i blank]. The Latin version appeared at Amsterdam in 1656, sm. 8*. 

Novum Lumen Chymicum. Hoc est, cujusdam recens inventi & Mundo 
nondum unquam patefacti Secreti ardui Revelatio, qua Mundo caeco 
clarum atque inexstinguibile Lumen ante oculos collocatur & quasi palpabiliter 
demonstratur, quod per universum terrarum orbem seque in frigidis ac in 
calidis regionibus passim Aurum probum inveniri atque utiliter elici possit, 
ita ut in cunctis illis locis, ubi arena & lapides reperiuntur, ne pedem quidem 
uspiam ponere queas, ubi non tantiim Aurum. sed vera etiam Materia 
Lapidis Philosophorum subminbtretur. In Honorem Dei atque Millium 

326 OLA UBER 

\ 

GLAUBER (JoHANN Rudolf). Continutd. 

aliquot afflictorum levamen ac solamen conscripta atque in publicum emis 
a Johan. Rudolph. Glaubero. Amstelodami, Apud Joannem Janssooiui 
a Waesberge, & Elisseum Weyerstraet 1664. 

8**. Pp. 45 [3 blank]. Not to be confused with the Novum Lumem Ck^uucmm of 

iiendivogius. 

Opens Mineralis. Pars Prima. Ubi docetur separatio auri h silicibus, aren 
argilld, aliisque fossilibus per salis Spiritum, quae aliis eliquari nequeun 
Item Panacea sive Medicina Vniversalis antimonialis, eiusque usus invent 
& publicata in gratiam Studiosorum artis Chymicae per Johannem Rudolphw 
Glauberum. Amsterodami, Prostant apud Joannem Janssonium. cId Ioc l 

r. Pp. 67, index [a] [3 blank]. 

Operis Mineralis Pars secunda, De ortu & origine omnium Metallonim & 
Mineralium, quo scilicet pacto ilia per Astra producantur ex Aqua & Terra corpus 
sibi suscipiant & multiplici forma formentur. In gratiam diligentium Naturae 
scrutatorum, conscripta a in lucem edita a Johanne Rudolpho Glaubero. T4itinitate 
donata. Amstelodami, Prostant apud Joannem janssonium, do l3C LH. 

Pp. 47 [i blank]. 

Operis Mineralis Pars tertia, in qua Titulo Commcntarii in libellum Paracdsi 
Coelum I*hilosophorum sivc Liber V'exationum dictum. Metallonim transmutationes in 
genere docentur, cum Appendice specialem earum processum, ut & eorundem 
eliquationcm, explorationem, separationem. aliasque necessarias operationes deoKXi- 
strante. In vcritatis testimonium conscripta & publici juris facta a Joanne Rudolpbo 
Glaubero. In Latinum idioma ex Germanico conversa. Amstelodami, Prostant 
apud Joannem Janssonium, cId Idclii. 

8*. Pp. no [2 blank]. 

Operis Mineralis, oder vieler kiinstlichen vnd nutzlichen Metallischc 
Arbeitten Beschreibung Erster Theil : Darinn gelehret, wie man das Go! 
aufs den Kifslingsteinen, Quartzen, Sand, Erden, vnd anderen armen Ber 
Arten, wclche sonsten mit Nutzen nicht zu schmeltzen seyn, durch de 
Spiritum Salis extrahiren vnd corporalisch machen soil : Auch wie aus dei 
Antimonio eine Panacea, oder allgeraeine Medicin, werde, vnd ¥rie sold 
zugebrauchen sey. Erfunden, vnd der Edien Spagyrischen Kunst, vn 
Hermetischen Medicin Liebhabern zu Gefallen beschrieben, vnd an T2 
gegeben, Durch Joan-Rudolphum Glauberum. Franckfurt am May 

Bey Matthaei Meriani S. Erben. M DC LI. 

8**. Pp. 124 [4 blank]. The first half of sheet G has the leaves numbered 97-100 
inclusive, after which the pagination is resumed. 

Operis Mineralis. Ander Theil : Vom Vrsprung vnd Herkoninien aller Metallen 
vnd Mineralien, wie nemblich dieselbe durch die A^tra gewircket, aufs Wasser vnd 
Erden jhren Leib nehmen, vnd in vielerley Gestalt formiret werden. . . . 

Pp. 76 [2 blank]. 

Operis Mineralis. Dritter Theil : Darinnen vnter der Explication vber defs Paracebi 
Riichlein, Caelum Philosophorum oder Liber Vexationuro genandt. der Metallen trans- 
mutationes in genere gelehret, mit einS Anhang vnd Zugab, darin auch derselbe Special 
Procefs sampt Jhrer Seigerung, Abtreibung, ^heidung vnnd Anderen darru gehorigen 
Arbeiten begriflen. . . . 

Pp. 183 [i blank]. 

Reprinted at Prague, 1705, sni. B**. 

[Another Copy.] 

This copy is much wormed. 

CLA UBER ^7 

GLAUBER (JoHANN Rudolf). Continued. 

La Premiere Partip De L'CEuvre Minerale, ou est enseign^e la separation de 
rOr des Pierres k feu, Sable, Argile, & autres Fossiles, par TEsprit de Sel, 
ce qui ne se peut faire par autre voye. Comme aussi vne Panache, ou 
Medecine vniverselle, antimoniale, & son vsage. Par lean Rudolphe Glauber. 
Et mise en Francois par le S' Du Teil. A Paris, Chez Jean d'Houry,^ 
k rimage S. lean, au bout du Pont-neuf, sur le Quay des Augustins. 
M.DC.LXXIV. Avec Privilege du Roy. 

8®. Pp. [i-6] 7-64. 

La 5>econde Partie de I'Oeuvre minerale. De la Naissance & Origine de tous les 
Metaux & Mineraux, de quelle fafon ils sont produits par les Axtres, soot composez 
d'eau & de terre, & re^oiuent diuerses formes. En faueur des Curieux. Par lean 
Rudolphe Glauber. Et mise en Fran9ois par le Sr. Du TeiL A Paris, chez Thomas 
lolly, Libraire lur^ ruc^ S. Jacques, au coin de la ru£ de la Parcheniinerie, aux 
Armes d'Hollande. M.DC.LIX. Avec privilege du Roi. 

Pp. [1-4] 5-48. 

La Troisiesme Partie de TOeuvre Minerale, ou Commentaire sur le Liure de 
Paracelse, appell^ le Ciel des Philosophes, ou le Liure des Vexations, dans lequel sont 
enseign^es les transmutations des Metaux ; Auec vn Appendix touchant la fonte, la 
separation, & les autres operations necessaires. Par lean Rudolphe Glauber. Et mise 
en Fran9ois par le Sr. Du Teil. Paris, chez Thomas lolly, . . . M.DC.LIX. . . . 

Pp. [i-io] ii-iii [i blank]. 

Teutschlands Wohlfahrt, Fiinffler Theil. Darinnen griindlich vnd aufsfiihrlich 
tractiret, was Alchymia sey, vnd wie durch dieselbe an alien Orten Teutsch- 
landes grosser Nutzen geschafift werden konte, gleichsam mit Fingem gezeiget 
wird. Gott als Gebern alles guten zum vordersten, wie auch alien hohen 
Hauptern des lieben Vatterlandes zu Ehren, vnd alien frommen vnd getrewen 
Ingesessenen Vnterthanen gegen alle deroselben aufslandischen Feinden, 
zu grosser hiilfTe vnd beystand, als ein getreiihes Landkind in ablegung 
gebiihrender schuldigkeit, wohlmeinend beschrieben, vnd an Tag geben. 
Durch Johan Rudolph Glaubem. Zu Ambsterdam, Bey Johan Jansson, 
1660. 

8**. Pp. 37 [i blank]. Engraved plate. Tabula Smaragdina, p. 19. Symbolum 
Hasilii Valentmi, p. ao. 

These two tracts and the plate are contained in Tanckius' Promptuarium, ii. 
p. 414 and p. 700, and in the ScMatz umd Kunst Kammer^ p. 414 and p. 700, only in 
them the ' Symbolum ' is in verse. 

Teutschlands Wohlfahrt in six parts was published at Amsterdam in sm. 8*^, 
1656- 1661, and in Latin : Prosperikis Germania, Amst. 1656, sm. 8*. 

Defs Teutschlandts-Wolfahrt Erster Tlieil. Darinnen von defs Weins, Korns, 
und Holtzes Concentrirung, sambt deroselben nutzbarlichern (als bifshero 
geschehen) Gebrauch gehandelt wird. Gott und den lieben Vatterlandt zu 
Ehren, und alien frommen und getreuen Haufshaltern zu guter Lehr und 
Erinnerung, wolmeinend beschrieben und an Tag gegeben Durch Joh. 
Rudolph. Glauberum. Prag, zu finden bey Caspar Wussin. 1704. 

8^. Pp. 704. Contains the six parts and the appendix to the fifth part. Tabula 
Smaragdina Hermetis (in part v.), p. 649. Symbolum F. liasilii Valentini (in part v.), 
p. 65a The plate belonging to the latter is wranting. 

Tractatus de Signatura Salium, Metallorum et Planetarum. Oder: Griind- 
licher Unterricht, wie, oder auff was Weise man gar leichtlich, nicht allein 
der Salien, Metallen, und Planeten, sondern auch der Worter, und Nahmen, 

32« GLA UBER 

GLAUBER (JoHANN Rudolf). Continued. 

ihre verborgene KrafTten, Bedeiitung, Natur und Eigenschafiten, nicht aufis 
Biichem, oder Schrifften, sondern blofs und allein aufs deren signatur 
durch einen Circulum, und Quadranten, erlemen, und aufsrechnen kan. 
Der Wunderwercken Gottes, Liebhabern zu gefallen, bcschrieben, und an 
Tag geben, Durch Joannem Rudolphum Glauberum. Gednickt iro Jahr 
Christi 1703. 

8*". Pp. I •43, 44 blank. 
P. 45: 

Libellus Dialo^orum, odcr : GesprUch-Biichlein, zwischen einigen Liebhabern der 
Hermetischcn Medicin, Tincturani Universalem betreffend. Allen walircn Liebhabern 
der guten Medicin zugefallen beschricben, und an den Tag komnieu lassen. Durch 
Joannem Rudolphum Glauberum. Gednickt im Jalir 1703. 

Pp. 45-130. The above was printed at Prague. 

The Libellus Dialogorum^ in Latin, was published at Amsterdam in 1663, sm. 8°. 

Traitt^ dc la Medecine Vniuerselle, ou le Vray Or Potable. C'est k dire, 
viie exacte description de la vraye Medecine vniuerselle, & de Tadmirable 
vertu qu*elle exerce sur les vegetaux, animaux & mineraux. Pour seruir 
de clair flambeau au monde aueugle, luy cnseignant le moyen de discemer 
le mensonge d'auec la verite ; & de secourir les jjauures malades abandonnez. 
Par lean Rudolphe Glauber. Et mis en Francois par le S' Du TeiL 
A Paris, Chez Thomas lolly, Libraire lure, rue S. lacques, au coin de 
la rue de la Parcheminerie, aux Armes d'Hollande. M.DCLIX. Avec 
Privilege du Roy. 

8°. Pp. [1-8] 9-61 [ij. Last leaf, blank, wanting. 

The Latin edition, as part of the Aliraculum Mundi^ appeared at Amsterdam iu 
1658, sm. 8". 

De Tribus Lapidibus Ignium Secretorum. Oder von den drey AUeredelsten 
Gesteinen, so durch drey Secrete Feuer gebohren werden : Vnd Erstlich 
von dem Lapide Philosophorum, welcher durch das secrete Feuer der Weisen, 
ins gemein Ignis Artephij genandt, bereitet wird. Zum Andern, von dem 
obern und untern Donnerstein, wie dieselbige von dem Meteorischen und 
untern kiinstlichen secreten Feuer generiret werden. 

Zum Dritten, wie defs Basilij Stein Ignis aufs dem Antimonio durch 
Kunst zu bereiten sey. Auch wie solche drey aller-edelste Steine der Welt, 
in Medicina und auch Alchimia zu gebrauchen. Allen Liebhabern der 
Gottlichen und natiirlichen Wunderwercken zu gefallen griindlich beschrieben 
und an Tag gegeben Durch Joh. Rudolph. Glaubenim. Im Jahr 
Christi 1703. 

8". Pp. 96. Pp. 80-96 contain CoUociuiuni Nuncupatorium, interloquutores 
Bonus & Lacinius. 

Glauber wrote a tract entitled De Igne Secrcto Philosophorum oder Geheimen Fetor 
der Weisen, Amsterdam, 1669, sni. 8°, pp. 54 [2]. 

Glauberus Redivivus ; Das ist : Der von Falschen vnd Gifftigen Zungen 
ermordte, vnd mit Lugen vnd Lastermaulern gleichsam begrabene, nun 
aber durch Hiilff vnd Zeugnufs der Warheit wieder auffgestandene Johann 
Rudolff Glauber : Oder klarer Beweifs, dafs Christoff Famers, Speyrischen 
Dohm-Stiffts Schaffners, falschgenandte Apologia nichts anders, als lauter, 

GLA UBEk 

32^ 

Franckfurt, Bey Thbmas 

GLAUBER (JoHANN Rudolf). Continued, 

aufs Neid vnd Hafe erdichte Liigen seyen. 
Matthias Gotzen. MDCLVI. 

8'. Pp. 118 [2 blank]. 

Glauber was attacked hy Christoflf Farner, in reply to whom he wrote an Apolopa 
contra Afendaces Christophen Famneri Calumnias^ Amstel. 1655. Other works against 
Glauber are Glauberus refulatus . . . das ist : ein hundert Liigen . . . au/s Glaubers 
selbst eigenen SckriffUn . , . 1661, 8®. 

Libellus Dialogorum. 

See above Tractatus de Signatura Salium. 

VViderlegung etlicher Johan-Rudolff Glaubers . 
See grOndliche widerlegung, i66i. 

Schrifften. 

Glauber was bom at Karlstadt in 1603 or 1604. 
He says he was brought up in Franconia, but 
nothing is recorded about his early life. He was 
not educated at any university, and it does not 
appear that he was trained as an apothecary, but 
he was fond of experimenting, and he travelled 
much trying to find a philosopher who would put 
him on the right lines, and he frequented the 
1al>oratories of princes where he found processes 
enough but no results. At the same time he 
studied the writings of the philosophers, and 
discoursed with learned men about the * secret 
fire ' of Artephius or the proper agent, but always 
found that they understood less of it than himself. 

liut after long and fruitless labours he admits 
that he had no success in attempting to perfect the 
metals, and he therefore turned his attention to 
more attainable results, though he never gave up 
his belief in transmutation. 

During his joumeyings he visited Salzburg, 
Vienna, Cologne, Basel, Frankfurt, and Kitzingen, 
before he settled in Holland. He was in his 21st 
year, say 1624 or 1625. when he was at Vienna, 
that he made the discovery in a mineral spring of 
the salt which has since borne his name. In these 
various places he must have spent forty years of his 
life, ^atherin^ by reading, observation, and most 
labonous trial, the physical, pharmaceutical, 
chemical, geological, mineralogical, and techno- 
logical knowledge which he subsequently published. 

In 1648 he went to Holland and took up his 
residence in Amsterdam where he founded a 
* Hermetic Institute,' and published his first book : 
Fumi novi PhiUsophici, translated into English by 
Dr. John French, London, 1651, 4", and into 
French by Ehi Teil, Paris. 1659, 8". This is 
certainly one of the most remarkable books on 
chemistry of the seventeenth century. Later on, 
ID 1656, he had to make a stand against the 
appropriation of his methods and discoveries 

Borel, Bibliotheca Chimica^ 1654, p. 105. 

van Vreeswyck, Sitvere Rivier^ 1684, p. 117. 

Mercklin. Lindtnius renovatus^ 1686, p. 673. 

Conring, In universam Artem Medicam . . . 
Introduction 1687, pp. 371, 384. 

StalU, Obstrvationum chymico-physico-medicarum 
. . . mensis . . . Julius 1697 ; reprinted Opusculum 
Chymico-physicihwudicum, 1740. p. 324. 

Reimmann, EimUiiung in die Historiam Htera- 
riam derer Teutschtn^ 1713. vi. p. 791 (a mere note). 

Stahl. Zuf&llige Gedanken . . . Uber den St»eii 
von dem sogenannten Sulpkure, 1718, p. 17 ; French 
translation, 1766, p. 8. 

Roth-Scholtz. Btbliotkeca Chemica^ 1737, pp. 93-96* 

Manget, Bibliotheca Scriptorum Meaicorum, 
1731. I. ii p. 475. 

against Farner, who had worked in bis laboratory, 
had come under a solemn promise not to reveal 
what he had learned, and yet afterwards published 
them as his own and ridiculed Glauber besides. 

Between 1653 and 1661 most of his larger works 
appeared. 1 hen his health gave way, and he was 
laid up for a couple of years, but in 166^ he 
published one or two other books, but neither 
these nor others which came out subsequently are 
so clear and satisfactory as their predecessors. 

Glauber had never l>een successful in making 
even a moderate competency, and at the close of 
his life his efforts to retrieve his fortunes failed him, 
and, in a state of poverty, he died at Amsterdam. 
His death is placed by some in 1657, 1668, and 
1673. Goos van Vreeswyck, however, gives so cir- 
cumstantial an account that it is difficult to leject 
it. He says the date was the 19 March, 1670, and 
he helped to wrap him in his winding sheet ; the 
funeral was at 3 o'clock afternoon in the Wester 
Kerk. The question was asked then as it has 
often been since, what wealth and honours he had 
left for his family. To this Vreeswyck makes a 
reply, the sum of which is that the wealth he left is 
to be found in his wxi tings. 

Adclung has accepted this date, which is further 
confirmed by the preface to Le Febure's chemistry 
published in 1670, where he is spoken of as if he 
were still alive. 

During his lifetime he published some thirty 
separate treatises. He himself says, however, that 
they represent not a tenth part of his discoveries 
and secrets. He was a keen observer, a per- 
severing and successful experimenter and inventor. 
He was anxious to promote technology and the 
industrial prosperity of his native country, but by 
his contemporaries, and by Adelung a century 
later, he was regarded as a dreamer and a 
charlatan. As a matter of fact he was far ahead 
of his time in *some of his economical views. 

Stolle, Anleilung zur Hislorie der Medicinischen 
Gelahrheit, 17^1, p. 778. 
Jact^ Ijeupotds Prodromus Bibliotheca Metallica, 

1732, p. 59. 
Morhof, Polyhistor^ 1732 (ii. 2*, 38. 1), ii. p. 421. 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire de la Philosophie 

HermHique, i742» i- PP- 410. 481 ; "»• PP- 175-177. 

Tocher, Allgemeines Gelehrten-Lexikon, 1750, ii, 
col. 1019 (a list of his writings merely). 

Fictuld, Probier-Stein, 1753, Th. li. p. 68. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Botantca, 1771, i. p. 492. 

Eloy, Dictionnaire Historique de la Midtcine^ 
1778, li. p. 3^6. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Medicina practica^ 1779. iii. 
p. 24. 

Bamner, Bibliotheca Chemtca^ 1782, p. 17. 

330 

CLA UBER-GLORIA 

GLAUBER (JoHANN Rudolf). Contumed, 

Beytrag zur Geschuhte dtr kokem ChemU, 1785, 
pp. 526, 616, 618. 6ao, 621, 623. 

Adelung, GeschUhte der mtnscklichen Narrheit^ 
1787, iv. p. 161 (depreciatory of course; list of 
Glauber's writings). 

Gmelin, GescjScA/e der CMemu, 1797, i. pp. 625- 
657, etc. 

Fuchs, ReftrtoriuM der ckemiscken Litterahir, 
1806-08, pp. 130-132, 15a 

Watt, Bibliotheca Britannica^ 1819, (Authors) i. 
419 A 

Biographie AUdicaU, Paris, Panckoucke (1820- 
25). »v. pp. 44«>-446. 

Thomson, The History of Chemistry, 1830, i. 
p. 226. 

^)m\\eA^x,GeschichtederAkhemie, 1832, p. 408. 

Hoefer, Histoire de la Chimie^ 18431 "• P* ^9° '* 
1869, p. 182. 

Kopp, Geschichte der Ckemie, 1843, i. p. ia8, 
etc 

PhilHppe & Ludwig, Geschichte der Apotheker, 
1855. P- 475. 

Biographie UmiverseUe, 1856, zvi p. 617. 
Figuier, LAlchimie et Us Aickiwtutes, 18 

[856, pp. 

Nouvelle Biographie GiniraU, 1^58^ xx. ooL 798. 
»^ J ^^^ ffi0gjraphisch'iiteransckes //! ' 

wdrterbmch, 1863, i. col. 909 (list of his worksy. 

12. 65, 85. 

Poggendorff, Biographisch-iiteransckes Hasid- 

•hich, 1863, 
Ladrague, Bibiiotkiqmg (htvarof^ Sciemeet 

Secrites, 1870, Nos. 55c, laoa-ia, 1690. 

Kopp, Die Enhmckehmg dtr Cktmrit im der 
neueren Zeit, 1873, p. 31. 

Kopp, Beytr&ge *ur GuckUkit dtr Olrwia, 1875, 
iii. p. 161. 

Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie^ x379, iz. pi 
221 (article by Ladenburg). 

Dietionnatre Encychpidiqme des Scumoa MkH* 
cates^ 4^me S^e, 1883, ix. p. laa. 

Billings. Index-Catalogme, 1884, v. p. 441 ; sod 
Series. 1901. vi. p. 2^ 

Hirsch, Biographisches Lexikam dtr kerwtrrm- 
genden Aertte, 1885, ii. p. 57^ 

Kopp, Die Alchtmie^ 1886, i. ppt 50, 203, 251; 
il pp. 367, 388. 

GLEICHNISS, oder Philosophisches Rathsel. 

See SENDIVOGIUS (MICHAEL). 

GLISCENTI (Fabio). 

See GLissENTi (fabio). 

GLISSENTI (fabio). 

Fabii Glissenti Brevis Tractatus in quo de Lapide Philosophorum Moraliter 
Disseritur, Latinitate donatus a I^urentio Straussio, Med. D. & Prof. P. 
Gissae, Typis Josephi Dieterici Hampelii, Academiae Typogr. cId Ioc LXXI. 

8". Pp. [12] 115 [1 blank]. 

[Another Copy.] 

Glissenti or Gliscenti was born at Vestone in the 
district of Brescia, devoted himself to medicine, 
and graduated at Padua. He practised in Venice 
with great success, and had the reputation of being 
one of the foremost physicians and philosophers of 
his time, a man of great ability and learning. 

The present work with a separate title- pwige : 
Breve Trattato net qual moralmente si discorte qual 
sia la Pietra di Filoso/i . . . was published along 
with his principal treatise : Discorsi morali contra il 
dispiacer del morire ... in Venetia, MDXCVI., 
4**, and is the last tract in the volume, flf. 566-596. 

Ghilini, Teatro cCHuomini Letterati, 1647, ii. 

P. 74- 

Borel, Bibliotheca Chimica, 1654, p. 105 (calls 

him Ciassenti). 

Cozzando, Libraria Bresciana, 1694, p. 78. 

Papadopolus, Historia Gymnasii Patavini, 1726, 
il p. 273, No. clxxxv. 

Roth-Scholtz, Bibliotheca Chemica, 1727, p. 146. 

Zedler, Universal-Lexicon, 1735, x., col. 1668 
(places bis death in 1620). 

The Discorsi morali is a sort of Dance of Death 
and the illustrations in which the Death skdetoo 
appears in numerous forms are interesting and 
valuable for conception and execution. 

The book according to Lenglet Dufresnojr. 
copied by Gmelin, appoued again at Venice, 1609, 
4**. They both quote the 1^96 edition of the Breve 
Trattato^ but not of the Discorsi moraU, Besides 
these he wrote plays and other works. He died at 
Venice in 161 1 according to Cozzando, but in i6ao 
according to others. 

^ Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire de la Pkilosophie 
Hermitique, 1742, iii. p. 177. 

Eloy. Dictionnaire historique de la Midtcime^ 
1778, ii. p. 357: 1755, i. p. 418. 

Beytrag xur Geschichte der hohem Chemie, 1785. 
p. 624. 

Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemie, 1797, i. p. 298. 

Schmieder, Geschichte der A Ichemie, 1833, p. 995. 

Hoefer, Histoire de la Chimie, 1843, "• P^ 13*: 
1869, ii. p. 126 (calls him feX Glissenti). 

GLORIA Mundi. Kleine Paradeis-Tafel. Das ist : Beschreibung der uralten 
Wissenschaft des Lapidis Philosophorum Autore Anonymo. 

GLORIA— GMEUN 

33" 

GLORIA Mundi. Continued, 

Aber muthwillens wollen sie nicht wissen, da(s der Himmel vor Zeiten 
auch war, darzu die Erde aus Wasser, und im Wasser bestanden 
durch Gottes Wort 2 Petr. 3, 5. 
Hof, in der Vierlingischen Buchhandlung. 1774. 

8°. Pp. [16] 165. Innhalt [2] [i blank]. 

The earliest edition which I have observed is 
dated 1620 and there are enumerated also editions 
of Frankfurt, 1648, Hamburg, 1692, and the re- 
prints in the collections mentioned below. 

The authorship of the tract is uncertain. Mercklin 
indeed assigns it to Robertus Vallensis, but on 
insufficient grounds ; Roth-Scholtx says the author 

Borel, Biblioiheca CMimica, 1654, p. 105. 

Mercklin, Lindenius rencvatus, 1686, p. 945. 

Roth-Scboltz, Bibliothica Chemica^ "^TH* P< I47* 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Hisioire de la PhilowphU 
Hermitigue, 1742, iii. p. 178. 

Fictuld, Probur-Stetn, 1753, Th. i. pp. 83, 135. 

Beytrag sur Gesckickie der hdkem Chemie, 1785, 
p. 616. 

is anonynious ; Fictuld says that though it may be 
by Barctus there is better reason for supposing it 
the work of Johann von Sternberg, author of the 
tract Rosarium. Anyhow these two ' noble treat- 
ises ' were the work of the same yen. He piles up 
eulogies on the present work which are more 
nauseating than his adverse criticisms are comical 

Fuchs, Repertorium der chemischen Litterahtr^ 
i8o6-o8, p. 95. 

LAdrvigue,'BsdUoiAifve Ouvarof^Sciences Secrites, 
1870, Nos. 1258, 1294-96. 

Ferguson, *The first History of Chemistry,' 
Proceedings (f the Philosophical Society cf Glasgow^ 
z886, xvii. p. 213. 

GLORIA Mundi, seu Tabula Paradisi. 

See ROTH-SCHOLTZ (friederichX Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum, iii. 1732, 

p. 357. 
See MUSAEUM hermeticum, 1749, p. 203. 

Extract vnnd Sumroarischer Inhaldt 

See SENDivoGius (MICHAEL), Lumen Chymicum Novum ; Epilogus Orthelii, 

1624, p. 213. 
See vernOnftige erklarung der Smaragdenen Tafel des Hermes, 1760, p. 22. 
See BARCius (m.). 

See STERNBERG O^HANN VON). 

Summa Libri qui vocatur Gloria mundl 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1661, vi. p. 513. 

See HERMETISCHES A. B. C, i. p. 95. 

This is an extract only. 

GLUCKLICHE Erober- und Demolirung des . . . F^efeuers der Scheide- 
kunst 1 705. 

See ALETHOPHILUS. 

GLUCKRADT (Christopher). 
See BEGUINUS Oohannes). 

Pseudonym for Johann Hartmann. 

GMELIN (Johann Friedrich). 

Allgemeine Geschichte der Pflanzengifte entworfen von Johann Friedrich 
Gmelin, der Arzneykunst Doktor, dieser und der Weltweisheit offentlichen 
Lehrer auf der hohen Schule zu Gottingen. Niirnberg, bey Gabriel 

Nicolaus Raspe, 1777. 

8*. Pp. [16] 525 [1 blank]. 
This copy oootains numerous MS. notes, apparenUy for a new edition. 

332 GMEUN-'GOBET 

GMELIN (JoHANN Friedrich). Continued. 

Allgemeine Geschichte der mineralischen Gif^e entworfen von. Joh. Fnech. 
Gmelin, der Arzneykunst Doktor, dieser und der Weltweisheit ofientlichen 
Lehrer auf der hohen Schule zu (jottingen. Niimberg, bey Gabrid 
Nicolaus Raspe, 1777. 

8*». Pp. 8 ; 316. 

Though not indicated on the title-pages, it is plain make the copy a perfect one : Allgewuiiu Gtxkitkk 

that these are the second and third volumes of a dtr Gifte^ ister Tbdl, Ldpdg, 1776, is ■**">*fflH 

general work on poisons. The above are complete by Meusel. 
m themselves, but the first volume is wanting to 

Geschichte der Chemie seit dem Wiederaufleben der Wissenschaften bis aa 
das Ende des achtzehenden Jahrhunderts von Johann Friedrich Gmdin. 
Erster Band, bis nach der Mitte des siebenzehenden Jabrhunderts. 
Gottingen, bey Johann Georg Rosenbusch. 1797. 

8®. Pp. viii. 777 [should be 779] [i]. The eight preliminary pages include the 
general title to the series. 

Zweiter liand. bis gegen d«is lezte V^iertheil des achtzehenden fabrhundots. 
(soltingcn . . . 1798. 

8*. Pp. [4] 790 [should be 778] [i, 1 blank]. 
Diitter liund. die Urzte Jahrzchcnde des achtzehenden Jahrhunderts. . . . 1779. 
8". Pp. [6] 1288 [should be 129.1] [96] [1, 1 blank]. 

This is the second part of the 8th division of the tion of dates and authors and titles, of mining 

" (ifschichte der KUnslc und Wissenschaften," statistics and of the discovery of substances, etc., 

(jottingen, which wjis the predecessor of the but it is devoid of systematic arrangement; there 

Munich series of Histories of Science. are no subdivisions or classification, and there is 

j. F. (imelin (1748- 1804) was the gnindson of nothing dealing with the development of the science 

Johann (ieorg Gmelin and father of L<*o|)olti, the ilself. The references to boolcs are drawn from 

author of the famous text-l)ook of which a translation Wcigel, Haller, and other writers, but Gmelin has 

was published by the Cavendish Society. N«»tices omitted what makes Weigel's lists so valuabl^ the 

of the different branches of the family are references to the authorities for the various editions, 

given by Ersch & Grul>er and by Poggendorff. There is no index of subjects so that it is impossible 

'I'he articles in the Al/j^efncine Deutsche Biographic to find anything except through the index of 

ai'e unsatisfactory. prof)er names, and it fiu* too frequently gives the 

(jmelin's ^/<*j£AirA/^ is one of the recognised lK)oks references inexactly. Gmelin's book, therefore, is 

of reference for the older Chemistry. It is not, not nearly so useful as it might have been, even 

however, really a history, but a collection of within its own scope, 
materials towards a history. It is a great enuniera- 

PUtter, Vcrauch finer acadcmischen iWlehrteH- 1869, ii. p. 364 (calls the historian of Chemistry 

Geschichte von iter Georg-Auj^ustus Univcrsitdt zu * Philipjxi-Fr^dric,' which is a mistake). 

Giittingen^ 1788, ii. p. 146 ; 1820, iii. (von Friedrich Ersch & Grulxir, Allgemeine Encyklopddie^ i860, 

Saalfeld), p. 75 ; 1838, iv. p. 278. Ixx. p. 393. 

Meusel, Das gclehrte Teutschlami, odcr Lex ikon Poggendorff, Bioj^raphisch-literarisches Hand- 

der jet zt lebenden Teutschen Schri/tsteller, 1796, ii. ivorterbuch, 1863, i. col. 914. 

p. 587; 1801, ix. p. 433. Kopp, Die Alchemie, 1886, p. x. ; i. pp. 114, 21a, 

Schinicder, GeschicMte der Alchemie^ 1832, pp. 243, 245, 248, 255, 258 ; ii. pp. 148, 204, aio^ 217, 

M. 581. 220, 256, 309. 315, 387. 

Hoefer, Histoire de la Chimie, 1843, '•• P- y?"^ I 

See KELS (heinrich wilhelm), 1791. 

A preface to Kels' dictionary. 

GNOSIUS (DoMiNicus). 

See HERMES, Tractatus Aureus, 1610. 

GOBET (Nicolas). 

Les Anciens Min^ralogistes du Royaume de France; Avec des Notes, Par 
M. (iobet. Premiere Partie. A Paris. Chez Ruault, Libraire, rue de la 
Harpe. M DCC.LXXIX. Avec Approbation, & privilege du Roi. 

8®. Pp. [6] xxxviij. 1.460. I plate. Seconde Partie, pp. [4] 461-910 [2]. 

GO BE T—GOCLENIUS 

333 

GOBET (Nicolas). Continued, 

Giobet was descended from a family belonging to 
Auvergne and was born about 1735. He studied 
chemistry with Rouelle, and mineralogy which he 
supplemented by journeying with Jars in 176a to 
see iron works. He was interested also in history 
and on a journey to Toulouse in 1767 he got from 
the Marquis de B^lestat a copy of the Memoirs of 
Cardinal de la Valette. and published them in 
Paris in 1772. 

In 1771 he had been made Keeper of the Archives 
of Monsieur and afterwards clerk of the Council of 
the Count d'Artois. He wrote a paper on the 
'Straits of Dover,' in the Journal de Physique^ 
1777, ix. ; translated Pallas' * Observations on the 

Journal Encyclopedia ue^ Annde 1775, iv. p. 25. 
Gmelin, Geschichte cUr Chemie, 1799, iii. pp. 643, 
670. 

Beckmann, Beitrdge zur Geschichte der Erfin- 

Formation of Mountains,' 1782, and along with 
Faujas de St. Fond brought out an edition of the 
works of Bernard Palissy, Paris, 1777, pp. [4], 
ix.-lxxvi., 734, in a large quarto volume, trom a 
chemist s point one of the best things he did was to 
reprint the Essays of Jean Rey with an introduction 
and notes. Paris, 1777, 8", pp. xxxij., 216, the first 
edition of 1630 having become extremely rare. 

Before he could carry out any of his important 
literary projects, his mind became unsettled and 
he died suddenly it is said in an asylum at Charen- 
ton about 1778 according to some, or towards the 
end of 1781 or the beginning of 1782 according to 
others. 

dungen, 1805, v. p. 585. English translation : 
18 14, iv. p. 580. 

Qu^rard, La France litleraire, 1830, iii. p. 385. 

Biographic UniverselUy 1857, xvii. p. 3. 

Nouvelle Biographic G^nirale, 1858, xx. col. 866. 

qui sont au grand 

GOBINEAU DE MONTLUISANT (Esprit). 

Explication . . . des ^nigmes et figures hieroglyph iques . . 

portail de Teglise . . . de Notre Dame de Paris. 

See RICHEBOURG (j. M. D.), Bibliotheque des Philosophes Chimiques 1754, iv. 
p. 366. 

GOBRAT. 

Janus Gobrat Sapiens manet. 

See MARENGUS (JOANNES BAPTISTA). 

GOCLENIUS (RoDOLPHUs). 

Tractatus de Magnetica Curatione Vulneris citra ullam & superstitionem, & 
dolorem, & remedij applicationem, orationis form^ conscriptus, ^ priori turn 
ob rerum & causarum, turn exemplorum etiam augmentum longb diversus : 
Accesserunt enim antiquissimorum Sophorum, Rhagaelis, Thetelis, Chaelis, 
Salomonis & Hermetis Periapta & Signaturae, quibus, quousq; & quantum 
sit habenda fides, simul indicator. 

Lege, intellige, judica. 
Auctor Rod. Goclenius Med. D. Illustris ac florentissimse Mauritianae 
phys. Professor Ordinarius. Marpurgi Cattonim, Ex Officina Rodolphi 
Hutwelckeri, Anno cIdIdCIX. 

12°. Pp. 167 [i blank]. 

Tractatus De Manetica (sic) Vulnerum Curatione. 

See THEATRUM SYMPATHETICUM, 1662, p. \^^. 

Synarthrosis Magnetica. 
Ibid,, p. 237. 

The author was bom at Wittenberg, 22 Augt., 
1572. He studied at Marpurg and at Copenhagen 
and Padua, and was created doctor of medicine in 
1601, on which occasion his thesis contained an 
exposition of the Paracelsian system. In 1608 he 
Ixcame professor of physics at Marpurg, of medi- 
cine in 161 1, and of mathematics in 161 3. When 
he was appointed in 1608 he delivered the present 
discourse on the Weapon -salve, which he revised 

and enlarged and published in 1609. Thereupon 
ensued a controversy between him and Roberti 
who was opposed to the salve. Goclenius never 
gave in, but continued writing on the subject for 
several vears. 

He also wrote on augury, chiromancy, astrology, 
and similar topics, and on medicine. The 
treatise on chiromancy, first published in 1597, 
was probably his thesis as Medicinal Candidatus. 

334 

GOCLENIUS^GOEUCKE 

GOCLENIUS (RoDOLPHUs). Continued, 

He enlarged and published it in 1603. and afain 
at Franckfurt in 1608, in which he himself oills 
it the third issue. At Marpurg in 1614 it once 
more appeared. It is identical vrith the 1608 
edition, nil except the first two sheets, which have 
been altered. (Jthcr editions quoted are of 1618, 
1631, 1668, all in small 8^ It may be worth the 

Rorcl. Bibliotheca Chimica, 1654, p. 105. 

Mercklin, Lindenius renovatui^ 1686, p. 949. 

Freher, Tkeairum virorttm eruditione clarorum, 
1688, p. 1C14, pi. 79. 

Witte, Dianum Biographicum, 1688, Sign. Q 4 
X'crso^ 2 Mar. 1621. 

Manget, Bibliotheca Scriptorum Medicorum, 
1731, I. ii. p. 485. 

Jacob l^upoldi Prodromus Bibliotkecte metallictr^ 

1732. p. 61. 
M< " 

[orhof, Polyhistor, 1732, (ii. 3. 1. 6), ii. p. 455. 
Zedler, Universal-lexicon , 1735, xi. col. 39. 
Keslner, Medicinisches GeUhrten-Lexicon, 1740, 

p. 349. 

locher, Allgemeines Gelehr ten- Lexicon, 1750, ii. 

col. 103 1. 

Freytag, Adparatus Litterarius^ '755, "•• PP« 

» 53-156. 

Portal, Histoire de r Anatomic etdcla Chirurj^ie, 

1770, ii. p. 338. 
Haller, Bibliotheca Anatomica, 1774, *• P' 277 ; 

1777, iL p. 747. 

Eloy, Dictionnairc histortque de la Midecine, 

1778, li. p. 359- 

Strieder, Grundlage xu einer Hessischen Gelehrten 
und Schriftsteller Geschichte, 1784, iv. pp. 488-500. 

attentioQ of the palmisti of dw pyewt dqr. He 

died 3 March, i6ai. 

Care must be taken not to ooofuie him (as kM 
been done bv Mercklin, Maof^, and fiiylf k 
Thillaye) with his fother, Rudolphos GockbId^ 
who was professor of logic at Marpurg. wole t 
prodigious number of dissertations, and died at 
Marpurg in 1628. 

Biographic MMicaU^ Paris. Panckoscke (i8ao- 
35), iv. p. 465. 

Sprengel, Geschichte ier Arziuykmmde, 1817, 
iv. p. 274. 

Dezeimeris, LHctiannaire hiiicrique de la MMe 
cine, 1835. II. ii. p. 57a 

Bayle & Thillaye. Biographie wUdiceUe^ tSss i 

p. 349- 
Biographic Unit'crselle, 1857, xvii, p. 6 (artkk 

liy D^gencttes). 

Krsch & Gruber. Allgemeine RncykiopddU, 1860^ 
I. Ixxi. pp. 365-7 (article by "kulb). 

PoggendorfiC Biographisch-literarixka Hmti- 
worlerbuch, 1863, i. col. 919. 

Haeser. Geschichie der Mtduin, 1881, a. pfk 
110, 346. 

Dictionnairc Rncyclopidique des Sciemces Midi- 
cales^ 4^nie S^rie, 18)83, ix. p. 471. 

Billings. Index-Catalogue, 1884, v. p. 465; and 
Series, 1901, vi. p. 272. 

Hirsch, Biographisches Lexikom der kervorrt- 
genden Aerxte, 1885, ii. p. 582. 

Ferguson, ** Notes on books of Secrets," TVaiw- 
actions of the ArchaologicaJ Society of Glasgom^ 
1890. N.S. ii. p. 4, 

GOELICKE (Andreas Ottomar). 

Andreae Ottoman Goelicke, Med. D. & Prof. Publ. Ord. h. t. Fac MeA 
Decani, Propempticon Inaugurale de Chrysopoeiae Vanitate. Francofurti 
ad Viadnim, Litteris Tobiae Schwartzii, Acad. Reg. Typ. 

4°. Pp. [81. At the end this tract is dated Francofurti cis Viadnim die XII 
Octobris, MDCuXXXll., which date is repeated by Gmelin. 

Goelicke was born 2 Febniary. 1671, at Nienburg 
on the Saal. in the principality of Anhalt. was 
educated at Zerbst. went to Berlin, where for a 
couple of years he was tutor to the son of Dr. Krug 
von Nidda. chief physician to the Elector of Bran* 
denburg. He next went to Frankfurt on the 
Oder and studied medicine for four years, graduated 
at Halle, and spent a year at Leyden and Amster- 
dam. On his return to Germany he practised 
medicine at Zerbst. in 1709 was made extraordinary 
professor of medicine at Halle, 1718 ordinary pro- 

Manget. Bibliotheca Scriptorum Medicorum, 
1731. 1. ii- pp. 486-493. (Manget reprints reviews 
of his histories from the Acta Eruditorum.) 

StoUe, Anleitung zur Historic des Medicinischen 
Gelahrheit, 1731, passim. 

locher, Allgemeines Gelehrten- Lexicon^ 1750* ii. 
col. 1045. 

Portal, Historic dc t Anatomic ct de la Chirurgie, 
1770, iv. p. 423, &c., &c. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Chirurgica, 1774, i. 589; 

1775. ii- P- 2M- 
Haller. Bibliotheca Medicina practtcce, 1776, i. 

pp. 72. 99 ; 1788, iv. p. 406. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Anatomica, 1777. ii. p. 32. 

fessor at Duisburg, and then at Frankfurt a. d. 0.. 
acted as physician for the district of L^ms and 
died at Frankfurt a. d. O. 12 June, 1744. in his 74th 
year. He was a devoted follower of Stahl, and 
notwithstanding his active life as a phjactan in 
practice, found time to write numerous academical 
dissertations and treatises on various parts of 
medicine. He is especially known by his histories 
of medicine, anatomy and surgery, Init he has been 
criticised for his inaccuracies. 

Eloy. Dictionnairc historiqiu de in hiidecime, 
1778. ii. p. 361. 

Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemie, 1798, ii. pi 193. 

Biographic Midicale, Paris. Panckoucke (iSao- 
25). iv. p. 469. 

Schmieder, Geschichte der Alchemic ^ 1832, (XMS- 

Dezeiincris. Dictionnairc histortque de la Aiite- 
cine, 1835, II. ii. p. 574. 

liayle et Thillaye, Biographic Midiccde, 1855, ii. 
p. 166. 

Daremberg. Histoire des Sciences Mtdicedts, 
1870, i. p. 34. 

Hirsch. Biographisches lexikon der MrrvotrU' 
genden Aerxte, 1885, ii, \), 587. 

G'dTTUNG^GOLDMA YER 3B5 

GOTTLING (JoHANN Friedrich August). 

Johann Fnedrich August Gottlings Professors zu Jena Anfangsgriinde der 
Probierkunst mit Cramers Erfahningen verbunden. Mit Kupfem. Leipzig, 
bey Johann Samuel Heinsius, 1794. 

8**. Extra title, xxx. 66a. Register, &c. {24]. 7 plates of apparatus. 

The extra title is as follows. 
Johann Andrei Cramers Anfangsgriinde der Probierkunst nach den neuesten 
Grunds&tzen der Chemie bearbeitet von Johann Friedrich August Gottling Professor 
zu Jena. Mit Kupfern. Leipzig, bey Johann Samuel Heinsius. 1794. 

Gottling was born at Derenburg, near llallter- Oiemistry, Weimar, 1794. and an annual Pocket- 

stadt, 5 June, 1755. He was an apothecary, book for Chemists, and numerous other chemical 

studied medicine at Gottingen, and ultimately works and papers. 

became I'rofessor of Chemistry, Pharmacy, and The present book is a translation of Cramer's 

Technology, at Jena, where he died i Septr., 1809. Elementa Artis Docimastica {q.v,). 
He wrote a work in defence of the Antiphlogistic 

Meusel, Das gelehrte Teutschland^ oder Lexikon der Universitdt Jena seit 1558 his 1858, 1858, p. 
der jet tt lehenden Teutschen Schrifisteller, 1796, ii. 210. 

p. 606 ; 1801, IX. p. 439 ; xi. p. 282 ; xiii. p. 484 ; Poggendorff, Bicgraphisch-literarisches Hand- 

xvii. p. 746, worterbuch, 1863, i. col. 923. 

Johannes G<intber, LebensskiMxen der Professoren Hirsch, Biographisches Ijexikon der kervorra- 

genden Aerxte^ 1885, ii, p. 590. 

GOISKE (Peder). 

See ROSENSTAND-GOISKE (PEDER), [1760]. 

GOLD des Lebens. 

See aurum Vitae. 

GOLD von Mittemacht. 

See MAULLIUS (JOHANNES PHILIPPUS), I714. 

GOLDMACHEN. 

See ERLAUTERTE und aus der Erfahrung erwiesene Wahrheit des Goldmachens, 
1767. 

GOLDMACHER-CATECHISMUS. 

See JUGEL OOHANN GOTTFRIED). 

GOLDMAYER (Andreas). 

Harmonia Chymica, de Novem Lapidum Philosophicorum Artificiosa Pre- 

paratione et Usu. Das ist, Chymische Harmoni von Neun Philosophischer 

Steine kiinstlicher Zubereitung, Nutz vnd Gebrauch: Von neuem, nach 

vieljahrigen Laboribus erfunden, vnd aufsgefertigt, auch alien Kunstliebenden 

zur besten Nachrichtung, ordentlich, vnd mit hochstem Fleifs beschrieben, 

mit glaubwiirdiger Philosophorum Zeugnussen approbiret vnd in Druck 

verfertigt. Durch Andrearo Goldmayer, Guntzenhausanum Francum, Comitem 

PaUtinum Caesareum, vnd Fiirstl. Bambergischen bestelten Mathematicum. 

Gedruckt zu Onoltzbach, durch Johan Lentzen, in Verlegung defs Autoris, 

Anno 1656. 

4'. Pp. [8] 69 W 

Goldmayer was bom in 1603 at Gunzenhausen. him a Count Palatine. He died at NUmberg, in 

He studied at Altdorf and Strasburg, declined a 1664, in the greatest destitution. His published 

professorship of Mathematics at Altdorf, and works consist of astronomical and astrological 

settled at NQmberg. where he lived t^ writing calculations and descriptions. 

caloidan and casting nativities. He foretold his The present work is not included in the lists of 

own death and that of Gustavus Adolphus of his writings. 
Sweden. The Emperor Ferdinand HI. created 

336 

GOLDMA YER--GRABNER 

GOLDMAYER (Andreas). Continued, 

Freher, Theatrum viromm eruditione clarormm, 
1688, p. 155X. 

J. G. Doppelmayr. Historischt Nachrichi von der 
NUrnbergisctun Mat ke mat ids und A'Unstlem, 
Nttmbcrg, 173a 

Jocher, Allgemeines GeUhrten- Lexicon , 1751, ii. 
col 1058. 

G. A. Will, NUmhemsckes GeUknem-UxUm, 
and Supplement bv C. C Nopitsch, NOmber^ n. 
Altdorf, 1755-58. x8(»-o8. 

Adelung, Gesckickte der Memchlickem, Narrkeit, 
1787, iv. p. 210. 

Foggendorff. Biograpkisch-literarisckes Hand' 
worferbuih, 1863, i. col. 936. 

GRAB der Armuth. 

See ATREMONT (H. D'). 

In addition to the authorities there cited, 
reference may also l)e made to Roth-Scholtz, 
Bibliotheca Cfiemicay 1727, p. 153, and to Fictuld, 

Prohier-Steiit^ 1753, Th. i. p. 85, who 'recooh 
mends * it to the searchers of wisdom. 

GRABA (JoHANN Andreas). 

Jehovae Adspirante Gratia Desuper ! EAA4>OrPA4>IA sive Cervi Descripdo 
Physico-Medico-Chymica, in qud tarn Cervi in genere, quam in specie ipsius 
partium consideratio Theorico-Practica instituitur, ad multifarium usum 
prassertim Medicum, omnibus ferb Corporis Humani Affectibus ceu Panacea 
apprime conveniens: Secundum Leges ac Methodum Academise Naturae 
Curiosorum elaborata. Multisq; Medicince Secretis instructa k Johanna 
Andrea Graba, D. Urbis Territoriiq; Erffurtens. Medico Ordinar. & Collegii 
Naturae Curiosorum Collega. Jenae, impensis Viti Jacobi Trescher, Bibl. 
Vratisl. Typis Johannis Nisi, Anno 1668. 

8*. Pp. 312 [37, 3 blank]. Title red and black. 

Graba was born in 1625 at Mul house, though 
some say at Erfurt. He studied at Konigslxirg 
for six years, settled in Erfurt as a physician, 
whereufMDn ensued a dispute with the other 
physicians for his practising without a degree. Finally 
he became a graduate of Giesscn. He went to 
Mulhouse, and had another dispute which ended 
in a law-suit for c.ilumny. He died there in 1669. 
I le was an early member of the Academia Natune 
Curiosorum, being admitted in 1661, and he wrote 
some tracts on medical subjects. 

Mercklin, Lindenius renovatus^ Norimb. 1686, 

P- 515. 

Witte, Diarium Biographicum, 1688, Sig. Cccc 

3 recto^ 1669. 

Manget, Bibliotheca Scriptorum medicorum, 
Genev. 1731, I. ii. p. 500. 

Motscbmann, Erfordia literata continuata, 1735, 

P- 389- 

Kestner. Medicinisches Gelehrten- Lexicon, Jena, 

1740, p. 356. 

J<3cher, Allgemeines Gelehrten' Lexicon, Leipzig, 
1750, ii. coL 1 108. 

Biichner, Academics . . , Naturee Curiosorum 
Historia, Halae, 1755, p. 464, No. 21. 

Matthine, Conspectus Historian Medicorum chrono- 
logicuSf 1 76 1, p. 746. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Anatomica, 1774, i. p. 563. 

Some of the authorities quote a 1667 edition of 
the present lxK)k, and Kestner even goes the 
length of correcting the entry in the Bibliotheca 
Riviniana of this 1668 crlition ! He says: '* Jenae 
1667, 8. nicht aber 1668, wie in Biblioth. Ri^-in. 
p. 518. stehet." He did not think there could be 
l)olh. There is no error more conimitable than 
that of denying the exi!»lencc of an e\iition which 
one has not seen. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Medicince practicee, iT77' 
ii. p. 406; 1779, iii. p. 67. 

Eloy, Dictionnaire historigue de la Midecine^ 

1778, >>. p. 377. 

Gmclin, Geschichte der Chemie^ Gottingen. 1798, 
ii. p. 207. 

Biographic Midicale, Paris, Panckoucke (1820- 
25). iv. p. 502. 

Dezeimeris, Dictionnaire Historique de la 
Midecine, Paris, 1835, II. ii. p. 609. 

Phillippe u. Ludwig, Geschichte der Apoiheker, 
Jena, 1855, p. 468. 

Dictionnaire encyclopidique des Sciences Mtii- 
cales, 46me S«5rie, 1884, x. p. 264- 

Hirsch, Biographisches Lexikon der kervorra- 
genden Aerztc, 1885, ii. p. 616. 

GRABNER (Karl). 

Bilder der Wunderkunst und des Aberglaubens. Mit Beriicksichtigung der 
sogenannten 21auberbucher von Albertus M., Dr. Faust, Paracelsus, Trittheim, 
Agrippa, u. a. m. Herausgegeben von Dr. Karl Grabner. 

GRABNER-^GRAMANN 337 

GRABNER (Karl). Continued. 

Somniay terrores magicos, miracula, sagas, 
Noctumos lemures, portentaque Thessala rides! 

HoRAT. lib. ii. Epist ii. 

Mit 20 bunten und schwarzen bildlichen Darstellungen. Weimar 1834. 
Druck und Verlag von Karl Grabner. 

8^. Pp. viii. [a] 966. [Advertisenoents 3, i blank]. Frontispiece and xo tables, 
partly coloured. The book contains nothing on Alchemy. 

GRAMAN (Georg). 

Ein sonderliche Chymische Reise vnd Haufs Apoteca, sampt aufsfiihrlichem 
Bericht, was fiir Vnterscheid zwischen der Galenischen vnd Paracelsischen 
Medicin sey, vnd wie mit denen aufs Edelsteinen, Mineralien, Metallen, 
auch frembden vnd einheimischen Balsam, Gewiirtzen, Bliiten, Samen vnd 
Friichten, nach Spagirischer Kunst bereiten subtiliteten, Tincturen, Essentzen, 
Oliteten, Extracten vnd Saltzen, durch Gottes Segen, die Gesundheit ein 
lange zeit erhalten, Vnd dann auch allerhand gefahrliche Kranckheiten, ohne 
sonderlich purgirn, mit kleiner dosi, subtiler masse vnd wenigen Tropflein 
gantz sicher, lieblich vnd anmutig von manniglichen selbst curirt, auch 
ermelte Artzneyen zur notturfft auff Reisen, in einem besonderm Kastlein, 
fiiglich fortbracht werden konnen, 1. a. laborirt, experimentirt vnd beschrieben. 
Durch Georgium Graman, Phil. & Med. Doctorem, an jetzo Grafflich- 
Gleichischen Leib- vnd Hof Medicum in Ohrdruff. 

8". Pp. [40] 160. [7, I blank]. 

Colophon : Gednickt bey Joachim Mechlers Erben, In Verlegung Johan. Birckners, 
Buchflihrer. Anno M. DC. XI IX« 

According to Haller this edition was printed at To the above editions of the present work 

Ahrdruff, and there were others at Schleusingen, Adelung adds Jena, 1629, 1670, and calls that of 

1630, 1679. He wrote also Bericht von der weissen 1679 the fifth edition, enlarged, and he spells the 

und rothen Ruhr, Halberstadt, 16x7, 4^ author's name Grammann. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Medkina fractica, 1777* "• Adelung, Forisetzung und Rrg&ntungen zu . , . 
p. 470. Jdchers Allgemeinen GeUhrien-Lexico, 1787, ii. col. 

1570. 

GRAMANN (Johann). 

Responsio M. loannis Gramanni Medici et Philosophi Erphurdensis, ad 
TrpoypafAfULTa quorundam Antichymistarum, in qua caeteris calumniis refutatis, 
Imperfectio artis Galenicse ostenditur, atq; gloriosa ilia ostentatio de funda- 
mentis optimb constitutis, & firmissimis rationibus demonstratis multisc); 
seculis comprobatis, redarguitur. 

lacobi 3. Quod si aemulationem amaram habetis & contentionem in 
corde vestro, nolite gloriari & mendaces esse adversus Veritatem. 
Non est enim ista sapientia b supernis descendens, sed terrena, 
animalis daemoniaca. 

Plato de Repub. Veritati irasci nefas est 

Erphordiae Excusa typis Pistorianis. Anno Domini M.D.LXXXXIIII. 

4°. Sig. A-D in fours, E 2, or, pp. [35, i blank], 

338 

GRAMANN—GRASSHOFF 

GRAMANN (Johann). Continued, 

Gramann, of Erfurt, was an enemy of Galen 
and his followers, and a supporter of the Spagiric 
medicine as appears from the very titles of his 
books. He invented an *anti phthisical tincture,* 
which Stahl is said to have classed with the 
* antihectic panacea ' of Poterius, by recommending 
them to be mixed and then to be thrown out at the 
window. His works are : 

Tractatus de Pharmaco I^U'gantc, Krphordin?. 

Van dcr Linden, De script is Med ids libri duo^ 

1637. p. 274- 

Borel, liibHotheca Chimka^ 1654, p. 106. 

Mercklin, Lindenius rrmwatus^ 1686, p. 596. 

Manget. Bibliotheca Scriptorum Afedicorum, 
1731, II. ii. p. 502. 

Kestner, hledicinisckes Gelehrten -Lexicon ^ 1740. 

p. 357. 

nailer, Bibliotheca liotanica, 177 1, 1. p. 388. 

X593» 4^ *^-^ in fours. Apologetica refniatio 
CaJumnine, auA Paracelsistae nimis viotenta, cor- 
rosiva et deleteria aeffris propinare a qoifaasdain 
( ialenicis dicuntur. No place (i*>phordue }\, 1593. 
4**, A-K in fours. La. 

Kurzcf IVricht wie mansich von der Djrsentene 
gifftigen Blutruhr und fliessenden PestiKnz ver- 
wahren soUe, Krfurt. 1598, 8*. Vom Theriak, 
Mithridat, ... 4*. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Medicines fracHctt, BasO. 
1779, iii. p. 31a (Hallcr's sunmiaiy of the 
' Apologetica refutatio' is amusing.) 

(imelin, Geschichie der Chemie, 1797, L p. 289. 

Biogniphie Medicate, Paris, Pandcoucke (i890> 

25). «v- P- 505. 
Sprengcl, Geschichte der Arxneykunde, 1837. iil 

P- 533- 
Ihctionnairc encyclop/dique des Sciences Midi- 

cales, 4^me S^rie, 1884, x. p. 285. 

GRAND (Le) Gri moire avec la Grande Clavicule de Salomon, et la Magic Noire. 
oil les Forces Infernales du Grand Agrippa, pour decouvrir tous les Tresors 
caches, & se faire ob^ir h, tous les Esprits ; suivi de tous les Arts Magiques, 
M.C.C.II. 

8°. Pp. 84. 8 woodcuts and a woodcut inverted bastard title. A chap book 
dealing with conjuration and black magic. Compare No. xii. in sammlung der ^russten 
Geheimnissc and also liarrett's mag us. A notice of ihis chap book is given by 
Nisard, Livre^ Populaires^ 1854, i. p. 159. It has nothing to do with Chemistry 
or Alchemy. 

GRAND (Le) Livrc de la Nature. 1790. 
See D . . . . 

GRASSEUS. 

See GRASSHOFF (johann). 

GRASSHOFF (Johann). 

Ein Philosophischer vnd Chemischer Tractat : genannt Der kleine Baur : 
Bifshero lang verborgen, auch aufs mifsgunst von etlichen hinderhalten vnnd 
verfalscht : Nun aber ex Bibliotheca Arnspurgensi Reverendiss. I)n. Ernesti 
Electoris & Episcopi Coloniensis gantz vollkommen herfur gebracht. Von 
der Materia vnd Erkantnufs defs einigen vnd wahren subjecti universalis 
Magni, & illius prajparatione : Welches alien Tincturen der gantzen Chemia 
vorgeht : vnd aufs dessen Geist alle ding der Welt Universaliter entspringen 
vnd herfur fliessen. Sampt beygefiigten Commentarijs loannis Walchii 
Schondorffensis {sic). Darinnen aller rechten philosophorum eygentliche vnd 
bestandige Meynungen, in einem Compendio vnd kurtzen begriflf, mit 
wahren natiirlichen fundamentis vnd gantz verstandtlichen griinden demon- 
strirt, vnd alien Doctrinae filijs fur Augen gestellt werden. 

Auch angehengter Epistel ad Cunctos Germaniae Philosophos. 

Spiritus Mundati & fixi sunt praesentifsima medicina Corporum alterand- 
onim. 
Strafsburg, In verlegung Eberhardi Zetzneri Buchhandlers. Anno M.DCXIX. 

8'. Pp. [16] 376 [15, 3 blank]. 

GRASSHOFF 339 

GRASSHOFF Qohann). Continued. 

Der kleine Bawr, pp. z-4i. In the index this is entitled Epistola authoris ad 

Walch's Commentaria, pp. 42-3c^ dominos Fratres de cnice Rosacea. 

Apostrophe ad cunctos Gennaniae Philosophos, Elucidatio Testamenti Rajrmundi Lullij, pp. 

pp. 355-369. 370-376. 

[Another Copy.] 

Imperfect. 

Ein Philosophischer vnd Chemischer Tractat Genannt : Der kleine Baur : Von 
der Materia vnd Erkantnufs de(s einigen vnd wahren Subjecti Universalis 
Magni & illius Praeparatione. Sampt beygefiigten Commentariis Johannis 
Walchii Schorndorffensis. Vnd in dieser andem Edition ist das Supple- 
mentum vom griinen Vnderzug beygedruckt Darinn zu finden wie das 
Particular zu machen, neben dem Procefs vom Universal. Auch angehenckter 
Epistel ad cunctos Germaniae Philosophos. Strafsburg, In verlegung 

Eberhard Zetzners, Buchhandlers. Anno M.DCLVIII. 

8^ Pp. [x6] 368. Index [13, i blank]. 

Der kleine Baur, pp. x-43. Apostrophe ad cunctos Gennaniae Philosophos, 

Walch's Commentaria. pp. 44-354. pp. 358-362. 

Supplementum von dem grtinen Vnderzug, pp. Elucidatio Testamenti Raymundi Lullij, pp. 363- 

355-357. 368. 

Aperta Area Arcani Artificiosissimi oder defs grossen und kleinen Bauers 
Eroffneter und offenstehender Kasten der allergrosten und ktinstlichsten 
Geheimniifsen der Natur, beneben der rechten und wahrhafftigen Physica 
Natural! Rotunda, durch eine Visionem Chymicam Cabalisticam gantz 
verstandlich beschrieben: Und einer Wamungs- Instruction und Beweifs 
gegen alle die, so das Aurum potabile ausserhalb der Tinctur dels universal 
Lapidis Philosophici per se in weniger Z^it zu verfertigen, andere falschlich 
persuadiren. Hamburg und Stockholm, In Verlegung Gottfried Liebezeit, 
Buchh. Hanau, Gedruckt bey Abraham Aubry, Hochgrafl. Hanauis. Hoff- 
Buchdr. Anno M DC LXXXVII. 

8*. Pp. [14] 336. Woodcut : " Figura Cabalistica." Title red and black. 

This is one of the variations upon the anonymous tract by Grasshoff called Der 
kleine Bauer, This edition contains : Der grasse Baiter^ p. i ; Lilium inter spinas : 
Der kleine Bauer ^ p. 67 ; Cabala Chymica^ p. 1x7 (with a ngure) ; Wamung, Instruc- 
tion und Beweifs ... p. aoa ; s Respons von den P. R. C, p. aa8. There was an 
edition of the IVamung in 1607. See warnung. 

Geheimniis der Natur des grofsen und kleinen Bauers, in welchem die Materie 
und Erkanntnifs des einigen und wahren Subjecti, Universalis Magni, & 
illius Prseparatio umstandlich beschrieben wird, sammt beygefiigten Com- 
mentariis Johannis Walchii SchorendorfTensis. Anno M DCC XXXI. 

8». Pp. [16] 64 ; 557 (for 357) [11]. 

Der grosse Bauer, pp. 1-64. Supplementum von dem griinen Untersug, pp. 

Der kleine Bauer, pp. 1-43. 355*357. 

Walch's Commentaria tkber den kleinen Bauer, 

ap. 44-354- 

Der grolse und kleine Bauer zwey philosophische und chymische Tractate 
von neuem aus Licht gestellet I^ipzig 1744. 

8*. Pp. [8] iza. The text merely without Walch's Commentary. 

340 

GRASSHOFF 

GRASSHOFF (Johann). Continued. 
Philosophia Salomonis oder: Geheimes Cabinet der Natur und Kunst des 
Weisen Koniges Salomons eroffnet durch den sogenannten groTsen und 
kleinen Bauer wahren Besitzern des koniglichen Steins. AugsbuTg 1755. 

bey Johann Jacob Lotters sel. Erben. 

r. Pp. [16] 207 [ I blank]. Title red and black. Woodcut 

Der grosse Bauer, p. i. 

Lilium inter Spinas ; Der kleine Bauer, p. 59. 

Cabala Chymica, p. 102. 

Warnung, Instruction, und Beweifs gegen alle 
die, so das Aurum potabile ausserhalb des Procefs, 
und PracfKiration Tinctur des Universals-I^pidis 

Philosophici, in wenig Zeit per se zu veifeitigen. 
und zu bereiten sich selbsten, ond andere fiihchnrh 
& sinistre persuadiren und fUmehmen, p. 177. 

Zwei Respons von den F. R. C. , p. aoo. 

This is a reprint of the Aperta Arcm Anam 
Ariificiosissimif 1687. 

Area Arcani Artificiosissimi de summis naturae mysteriis. Johannis Grassei aliis 
Chortalassei, lurium Doctoris & urbis Stralesundensis Syndici & Philosc^ 
insignis, nostri seculi Constructa ex Rustico ejus Majore & Minqre, & 
Physica naturali rotunda per visionem Cabalisticam Chemicam descripta. 
Quibus accessit Appendix Anonymi cujusdam Philosophi de Via ad Aurum 

potabile perveniendi. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1 66 1, vi. p. 294. 

See MANGET (j. J.), Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, ii. p. 585. 

The appendix contains : Admonitio, instructio & 
probatio contra omnes eos qui Aurum potabile 
extra processum & tincturam I^ipidis Philosophici 
universalis brevi temporis spatio praeparare sibi & 
aliis fals6 persuadent & sibi proponunt, p. 382, 

and Responsiones duse F. R. C. ad quosdam soos 
Clientcs, p. 393. 

This appendix is not reprinted by Manget, but 
the two tracts are contained in the 1687 and 1753 
editions of the Aperta Area Arcani Artijicicsissimi. 

UArche ouverte, ou la Cassette du petit Paysan. 

See RICHEBOURG (j. M. D.), Bibliotheque des Philosophes Chimiques, 1754, iv. 
p. 186. 

Aus des Doctoris luris, gewesenen Syndici zu Stralsund, Johann Grashofers, 
Chortolasseus genannt, Schriften : der Geheimnisse des grossen und kleinen 
Bauers, und seiner Cabala chemica: editione Leipzig, 1658. 

See HERMETISCHES A. B. C, 1778, i. p. 121. 

See CON- ET DISSENSUS Chymicorum de Famigeratissimo Rustic! Minoris 
Particulari, 171 5. 

See MYSTERIUM occultje Naturx. Anonymi Discipuli Johannis Grassei Chorto- 
lassei . . . De duobus Floribus Astralibus AgricoLne Minoris in ejus Area 
Arcani Artificiosissimi contentis. 

See MYSTERIUM occultcTc Naturx, Das ist : von der . . . Stemflufsigen Bluroen 
defs kleinen Bawerfs . . . 1657. 

Johann Grasshoff, a native of Pomerania, doctor 
of laws, Syndic of Stralsund, and afterwards 
councillor of Krnest, archbishop and elector of 
Cologne, wrote partly anonymously, but also under 
the names GrassoL'US (Crasseus, Grossieus), Chor- 
tolasseus and Ilermannus Condecsyanus. Of his 
chief work, "Der kleine Bauer,** a good many 
editions are pientioned, Franckfurt, 1617, 1623, 

Breslau, 1658, Leipzig, 1658, Halle. 1705, Ham- 
burg, 1705, in addition to the above. 

Other works ascribed to him are : Dyas chymica 
tripartita, Franckfurt, 1625, 4** ; Hamumia impeV' 
scnitabilis chcmico-t>hilosophica. Ibid. 1625, 8*, 
but the Harmouia is also assigned to Rhenanus. 
Latterly he lived privately in Livonia, and died at 
Riga, according to Witte's conjecture. 

GRASSHOFF—GRA TAROLO 

34t 

GRASS HOFF (Johann). Continued. 

Borel, Bibliotheca Chimica, 1654, p. 65. 

Witte, Diarium Biographicum, 1688, Sig. T4 
rccto^ 1623. 

Borrichius, Conspectus Scriptorum Chtmicorum^ 
1697, p. 35, No. liv. 

Keren Happuck , . . oder Teuisches Fegfeuir 
d4tr Sckeidekunst, 1702, p. 87. 

Kotb-Scholtz, Bibiiotkeca Ckemica, 1727, p. 156. 

Die Edelgebome Jungfer Alchjtmia, 1730, p. 34^5. 

Jijcher, Allgetneines GeUhrien-Lexicon^ '750| "• 
col. 1 134. 

Fictuld, Probier-Stein , i753i i. p. 62 (calls him 
Chortolassacus and GrasshoTOr). 

Beytrag zur GeschUhte der hohem Chetnie, 1785. 
p. 521, p. 607 (compares the study of tliesc books 
oy " adepts of the second grade " to the periis;U bv 
the country-folks of such books as Till Eilenspi^el, 
Dr. Faust, and Finkenritter). 

Semler, Unparteiische Samlungen sur HistorU 
der Rosenkreuzer^ 1786, i. p. 67 ; 1787, ii. p. 61. 

Gmelin, Geschichte der CAemie, 1797, i. p. 498, 
500, 501. .. 

Murr, (/ber den wakren Ursprung der Rosen- 
kreuzer und des Freymaurerordens, 1803, p. 39. 

Fuchs, Repertorium der chemiscken Lttteratur, 
i8o6^>8, p. 662 (under Chortolasseus). 

Schmieder, Gesckickte derAlckemie, 1832, p. 351. 

Kloss, Bibliograpkie der Freimaurerei^ 1844, 
p. 184, No. 2506, and p. 187, No. 2541. Responsum 
ad Fratres R. C, 1618, of which one of the authors 
is Heermannus Condesyanus {sic), 

Ladrague, Bibliotkique Ouvaroff, Sciences 
SccriieSt 1870, Nos. 1266-67, ij^i-42. 

Kopp, Die Aickemie, 1886, u, 230, 339, 343. 

[GRATAROLO (Guglielmo).] 

Verae Alchemiae Artisque Metallicae, citra Aenigmata, Doctrina, certuscjue 
modus, scriptis turn nouis turn ueteribus nunc primum & fideliter maiori ex 
parte editis, comprehensus : quorum elenchum *i Praefatione reperies. Habes, 
amice Lector, admiranda utilissimaq; multa, quae hactenus occultata, & ueluti 
sepulta iacuerunt: quorum editionis rationem in Praefatione ad philosophos 
Chemistas paucis intelliges. Basileae M.D.LXI. 

Folio in sixes, pp. [15. i blank] 244, 299 [i blank]. 

M 

Colopkon : Basileae per Henricum Petri & Petrum Pemam, Anno salutis humanae 
D.LXI. 

Chrysorrhoas, sive De Arte Chymica Dialogus, i. 

sig. *s ^' 

Dialogus loannis Hraceschi, cui titulus est 
Lignum vitse^ in quo etiam Gebri Philosophi ex- 
positio succincta continetur, i. p. 3. 

In eundem Braceschum Gebri interpreteni, 
animadversio, authore loanne Tauladano, i. p. 47. 
(The author is called Robertus Tauladanus in the 
title of the tract) 

Gebri Opera: De investigatione perfectionis, i. 
p. 112. 

Gebri Opera: Summa perfectionis^ i. p. 118. 

Gebri Opera: De inventione vcntatis sive per- 
fectionis, i. p. 184. 

Gebri Opera : Liber Fomacum, i. p. 193. 

Rogerii Bachonis De Alchemia libellus cui titulum 
fecit. Speculum Alchemiae, t. p. aox. 

Richard! Anglici Libellus vrpl Xin^ciaf, cui 
tittilum fecit, CorrectOTium, i. p. 207. 

Rosarius minor, i. p. 222. 

Liber Secretorum Alchemiae compositus per 
Calid, filium lazichi, i. p. 233. 

Loci aliquot practicse ex Gebero declarati per 
. . . Joannen Braceschum Vrceanum, i. p. 242. 

Liber de Magni lapidis Compositione et Opera- 
tione, Authore adhuc incerto (also called De 
Alchemia), ii. p. i. 

SentePtia loannis Baptistae Montani, de sub- 
liroatione, ii. p. 35. 

Rosarius philosophorum Amaldi de Villanova, 

». p. 35- 
Novum lumen eiusdem vel altenus, ii. p. 6a 

Epistola Magistri Amaldi de Villa nova super 
Alchvmiam ad regem Neapolitanum, ii. p. 65. 

Liber perfecti Magisteni, qui Lumen Luminum 
Duncupatur . . . vocatur etiam Flos flonim 
Amaldi de Villanova, loogh oorrectior & melior 
hactenus impressis, ii. p. 67. 

Practica Magistri Arnaldi de Villanova, ad 
Quendam Papam, ex libro dicto, Brcviarius librorum 
Alchymiac. it. p. 73. 

Alberti Ma§^i Ratisponensis episcopi deAlchy- 
mia liber intcgerrimus, ii. p. 78. 

Scriptum Alberti super Arborem Aristotelis, ii. 
p.- 102. 

Apertoriimi Raymundi Lullii De veri lapidis 
compositione, ii. p. 104. 

Ars intellectiva ejusdem super Lapidem Philo- 
sopbomm, ii. p. xia. 

Practica ejusdem, ii. p. 127. 

Idem de intentione Alchimistamm, ii. p. 139. 
(Doubtful tract?) 

Ejusdem Summaria Lapidis Consideratio ct eius 
abbreviationes, ii. p. 156. 

Ejusdem Libellus utilissimus de Mercurio solo, 
iu p. 163. 

Liber experimentonun, ii. p. 174. 

Pulchemmum opus de transmutatione metal- 
lorum, ii. p. 175. 

Capitulum valde magnum in albedine, & om- 
nibus nobilius, ex libro qui dicitur PhUosophus 
mirabilis, ii. p. i8a 

Liber Mercuriomm Raymundi Lullii, ii. p. 183. 

Intentio summaria, quae aliter dicitur Reper- 
torium, valde utilis sul intelligentiam Testament!, 
Codicilli & aliorum libromm Rajrmundi Lullii, iu 
p. 185. 

Aristotelis de Perfecto Magisterio exquisitum & 
inte^;errimum opus, &c., ii. p. z88. 

Libellus duodecim aquamm, ex libro Emanuelb, 
ii. p. 209. 

Aquie rubeae Avicenns ad tingendum quatuor 
spiritus sublimatos albos, ii. p. 21 1. 

Elixiriomm varia compositio & modus, ii. p. 220. 

Joannis de Rupesdssa liber de confections ver 
Lapidis Philosophorum, ii. p. 936. 

342 

GRA TAROLO 

GRATAROLO (Guglielmo). Continued. ' 

Tractatus de Marchastta, ex qua fit Elixir ad 

De lapide Philosophonim secundum verum 
modum formando Efferarii inonachi, ii. p. 23a. 

Thesaurus Philosophiae. ii. p. 237. 

Praxis universalis Magni operis, ex Raymundo, 
ii. p. 248. 

De lapidis philosophonim formatione epilogus, 
ii. p. a^. 

Practica Magistri Odomari ad discipulum, ii. p. 
240. 

Arcanum Philosophonim, ut ex Saturno facias 
aurum perfectum, ii. p. 250. 

Perfecta Salis communis prncparatio ad lapidcm 
philosophonim, ii. p. 250. 

Historiola Antiqua de Argento in aurum verso, 
ii. p. 252. 

[Another Copy.] 

There was a reprint of part of the above collection by Pcrna, Basileae, 1572, small 8*. pp. [16] 686 [30, 
2 blank]; 605 [i blank. 24]. 

Lapidis philosophici nomcnclatura. 

See vera: alchemic . . . Doctrina, 1561, ii. p. 265. 

album verissimum, ii. p. 254. 

Caput de sale alchali. iL p. 208. 

Qu^rstio an Lapis philosopliicus valeat cootra 
pestem, ii. p. 2C9. 

Vet us EpistoTa doctiss. de Metallonim materia, ft 
artis imitatione, ii. p. 26^ 

Practica Caravantis Hispani, ii. p. 264. 

Lapidis Philosophici Nomenclaturae, k GuUeiino 
Gratarolo collectns, ii. p. 265. 

loannis Aurelii Augurelli Chrysopcnae libri iii., 
et Geronticon Liber i. . ii. p. 269^ 

Regimina Artis, ii. p. 299. 

The tract on nomenclature was translated into 
English and published in H. P.'s Five Treatises of 
the Philosopher's Stone^ London, 1652, p. 65 ; but 
the author is misnamed ' Gratacolle.' 

Gratarolo was a native of Bergamo, where he 
was born in 1516. He went through the customary 
training, and then turned his attention to medicine. 
Having acquired a liking for Protestantism he 
settled in Basel in 1555, and remained there till 
1562, when he was summoned to Marburg as 
professor of medicine. He, however, remained 
only a year there, and returned to Basel, where he 
practised medicine and wrote several works. The 
date of his death is given variously by the different 
authorities. Nigidius, Freher, Boissard, Jbcher, 
Bayle give the date as 6 May, 1562. As against 
that are theses published by him on 9 May, 1562, 
and the works of Pomponatius and of Wilhelmus 

Petrus Nigidius, Elenchus Pro/essorum Academia 
Xlarpur^ensis vita defunctorum, 1591, p. 34. 

S[>achius, Notnenclator Scriptorum Medicorum, 
1 59 1, p. Tp 8l passim, 

Boissardus, /cones viros virtute <itque eruditione 
Ulustres reprcesentantes, 1599, iv. p. 116. 

Borel, Dibliotheca Chimica, 1654, p, 107. 

Qnenstedt, De patriis i/tusthum . . . virorum, 
1654, p. 302. 

Mercklin, Lindenius renavatus, 1686, p. 376. 

Reusner, Icones^ 1687, S. viij verso (portrait). 

Freher, Theatrum virorum eruditione clarorum^ 
x688, p. 1552, pi. 56. 

Teissier, Les Eloges des Hommes Savans, 1715, 
ii. p. 312. 

Papadopolus, /^w/(7rw Gymnasii Patavini, 1726, 
ii. p. 213, No. xc. 

Roth-Scholtz, Bibliotheca Chemica, 1727, p. 157. 

Bayle, Dictionnaire historique et critique, 1730, 
ii. p. 594. 

Manget, Bibliotheca Scriptorum Medicorumy 
17 ji, I. i. p. 507. 

Niceron, Mimoires^ I735i xxxi. p. 354. 

Kestner, Medicinisches Gelehrten- Lexicon, 1740, 

p. 359. 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire de la Philosophit 
Hermitique, 1742, i. pp. 285, 286, 473 ; iii. pp. 35, 
178. 

Aneponymus' Dialogus de substantiis pkysicis, 6*r., 
Argent. 1567. 

So Niceron quoting from his epitaph gives the 
date 16 April, 1568, he being in his fifty-second 
year, and Stricder gives the same date. He points 
out, however, that in the Diarium eruditorum 
virorum^ Frft. 161 2, Gratarolo is said to have died 
on 16 April, 1564, in his seventy-fourth year, which 
would carry his birth back to 1490, for which there 
is no authority, as in the above inscription he is 
said to have died in his fifty-second year. 

The dates given by the different authorities do 
not at all agree. 

His works treat of medicine, on the strengthening 
of the memory, rural economy, wine, Marpurg 
University, the hot springs in Rhaetia, &c He 
edited the works of Bernard of Trevisan, Pietro 
d'Abano, and a Praxis medica, which last however 
is doubtful. 

Jocher, Aligemeines Gelehrten- Lexicon, 1750, ii. 
col. 1 1 37. 

Matthia?, Conspectus Historiee Medicorum Chrono- 
logic us, 1 76 1, p. 133. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Boianica, 1771, i. p. 334, 

Haller. Bibliotheca Anatomica, 1774, i. p. 208; 

1777, ii. p. 735 (medical works only). 

Haller, Bibliotheca Afedicinee practicee^ "^777* U- 
p. 105. 

Eloy, Dtctionnatre historique de la Midecine, 

1778, ii. p. 380. 

Herzog, .-{thence Raurica:, 1778, p. 174. 

Strieder, Grundlage zu einer Hessiscken GtUkrten 
und Schriftsteller Geschichte, 1785, v. pp. 60-66. 

Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemie, 1797, 1. p. 299. 

Hutchinson, Biographia Medica, 1799, *• P* 37* 

Bonino, Biograjia medica Piemontese^ 1824, L 
p. 179. No. 1537. 

Schmieder, Geschichte der A Ichemie^ 1832, p. 351. 

Hoefer, Histoire de la Chimie^ 1843, >i» P- '3^ J 
1869, ii. p. 125. 

Billings, Index-Catalogue^ 1884, v. p. 555; and 
Series, 1901, vi. p. 420. 

Dictionnaire encyclopMique des Sciences Midi- 
cales, 4^me S^rie, 1884, x. p. 330. 

Hirsch, Biographisches Lexikan der hervom- 
genden Aemte^ 1885, ii. p. 634. 

Kopp, Die Alchemic, z886, ii. p. 342. 

GkA V£I^GRA VENHORST 343 

GRAVEL (Carl Herrmann). 

Fontina Bemhardi Revelata. Oder: Das, den Filiis Artis und dem Publico 
zum besten getreulich eroffnete konigliche Wunder-Baad des Grafens 
Bernhardi von der Marck und Tervis; worinnen die hellglanzende Sonne 
ihren Purpur nicht nur abl^et, sondem sich aucb, nach volliger Absterbung, 
in einem unsterblichen Phoenix und unzerstohrlichen Salamander wiederum 
revivisciret und von neuem belebet, In ganz reelen- und zuverlasigen 
Gedancken iiber die Bereitung des Steins der Weisen veroffenbaret und 
der kunstbegierigen Welt, ohne alle hieroglyphische- und oenigmatische- 
oder dunkle- und verborgene Redens-Arten, vor Augen geleget; da dann 
derselben zugleich griindlich und deutlich gezeiget wird: i) Was die 
philosophische Materie eigentlich sey, 2) wie solche zu erlangen, 3) woriimen 
der Philosophen ihr Magnet, oder anziehendes Mittel- und sogenanntes 
undeterminirtes Universal-Subjectum- 4) ihr Regulus hermaphroditicus- 
5) ihre Vennahlung Saturni, Martis et Veneris- 6) ihr griiner Low- 7) ihre 
Saphirische Blume- 8) ihre Columbae Dianae- 9) ihr Aquila und Mercurius 
duplicatus eigentlich bestehe; Auch 10) wie die radicalis Solutio Solis et 
I^unae geschehen- 11) die philosophische Materie in das Ovum physicum 
eingesetzet- 12) die Tinctura universalis ad corpora humana sowohl- als ad 
metalla, elaboriret, 13) die Projection damit verrichtet- und endlich 14) in 
infinitum multipliciret werden soil. Nebst einem Anhang verschiedener 
philosophisch- und cabballistischer Briefe. Allen Suchenden zum Trost, 
und denen Freuden der Alchymie zum guten, herausgegeben von Carl 
Herrmann Gravel, H. F. H, B. L. R. einem eifrichen verehrer der wahren 
Hermetisch-philosophischen Scienz. Erlang, druckts und verlegts Johann 
Carl Tetzschner, bey der Universitat Buchdrucker, 1750. 

8^. pp. [i*23] 136. Register [z6]. Symbolic frontispiece included in the 
pagination. Title red and black on three pp. 

GRAVENHORST, Die Gebruder. 

Aus dem Glauberschen Wundersalze wahren Schwefel hervorzubringen, ohne 

Beihiilfe des Feuers. 

See ALLGEMEIN Dutzliches chemisch-physikalisches Mancherlei, 1781, i. p. 185. 

This is a reprint of one of the few tracts pub- red alum, and Hrunswick green (ozychloride of 
lished by the brothers. The sulphur was obtained copper), of which he was the inventor. He died 
by allowing a piece of wormwood to putrify in a at Brunswick, 14 April, 1781 (1782, Fuchs). The 

younger brother. Christoph Julius, was born at 

separation was accounted for on the phlogistic Urunswick in 1731. He was m company with his 

hjrpothesis, which was quite competent for the brother, and carried on the works by himself after 

purpose. his brother's death. He himself died at Brunswick, 

Of the two brothers, the elder, Johann Heinrich, 17 January, 1794. 

was bom at Brunswick, 20 Oct., 1719. Beginning They had a method of coating iron, copper, and 

as a clerk at Celle he became a brewer, travelled to brass, with tin, which was the b^t at the time, 

improve his education, and began business along They published a few papers on the substances 

with his brother as a chemical manufacturer. He they manufactured, Brunswick, 1769, and five short 

was the first to start the making of Sal ammoniac papers on Brunswick green, 1771-1778. 
in Germany in 1759, and to prepare Glauber's salt, 

I. L. ab Indagine, TnJoUum, 1771, p. 3 (against Meusel, lexicon der von 1750 Hs z8oo versior- 

Gravenhorst). henen Uutschen SckriftstelUr, 1804, iv. p. ^34. 

Gmelin, Gesckichte der CAemie, 1798, ii. p. 588 ; Fuchs, Repertorium der chemiseken Lttteratur^ 

1799, iii. pp. 24. ^. S3, 891. 1806-08, p. 544. 

Pott, Biographu, Kopp, Gesckichte der Chemie^ 1845, iii. pp. 240, 

Crell, N, Entdeckungen, iv. p. 78. 309. 

Reuss, Repertorium Commentaiionum. Chemia^ roggendorfif, Biographisck-Uterarisekes Hand' 

1803. p. 151. wSrterhtch^ 1863, i. coU 943. 

344 GkEGORIUS'-GREIFF 

GREGORIUS (Petrus). 

Syntaxes Artis Mirabilis, in Libros Septem digestae. Per quas de omni re 
proposita, multis & prope infinitis rationibus disputari, aut tractari, omniiimque 
summaria cognitio haberi potest. Authore D. Petro Gregorio Tholosano I. V. 
Doctore, nunc in noua Academia Lotharingica Pontis Camassonij professore 
publico. 

Virtute Duce, Coraite Fortuna. 
Lugduniy Apud Ant. Gryphium. M.D.LXXXIII. Cum priuil^o Regie 
Maiestatis. 

16**. Pp. [x6] 190 [2 blank]. Gryphius emblem on the title-page. 

SyntaxewH Artis Mirabilis Alter Tomus. In quo, omnium scientianim & artiuin 
tradita est epitome, vndc facilius istius artis studiosus, de omnibus propositis, possit 
rationes & ornamenta rarissima proferre. . . . Lugduni, . . . M.D.LXXXV. 

Pp. 1055. Index [123, 4 blank] pp. 89-102 are folding. A plate of the winds. 

Commentaria in Prolegomena Syntaxecon Mirabilis Artis, Per quam de omnibus 

disputatur, habetiirque cognitio. Authore D. Petro Gregorio Tholosano I. V. 

Doctore, nunc in noua Academia Lotharingica Pontis Camassonij professore 

publico. 

Virtute Duce, Comite Fortuna. 

Lugduni, Apud Ant. Gryphium. M.D.LXXXIII. Cum priuilegio Regis 

Maiestatis. 

pp. 304, 350, 2 blank. Index, &c. [63, i blank]. Gryphius' emblem. 

Commentaria in Syntaxes Artis Mirabilis. Per quas de omnibus disputatur, 
habeturq; cognitio, in Libros VIII. digesta, In quibus plura omnino scitu 
necessaria pro illarum explanatione tractantur : quorum Elenchum habes 
proxime sequenti pagella. Auctore Petro Gregorio Tholosano I. V. Doctore, 
Professore & Decano in Academia Lotharingica Pdtimussana. Tomus I. 
Lugduni, Apud loa, Pillehotte. Sub Signo lesu. 1587. Cum priuilegiis 
Caesareae Maiestatis, & Christianissimi Galliarum Regis. 

8*. Pp. 322. 

Tomus II. 1587. Pp. [16] 930 [6] 101 [3 blank]. Index [93, 3 blank]. Folding 
table. 

Tomus III. In quo acutissinise, vtilissimre, & sublimes tractationes de Deo 
cdtinentur . . . 1587. Pp. [8] 734 [2 blank} Index [64]. 

Tomus nil. Pars prior. In quo . . . tractationes de Angelis, & de Immortalitate 
Animae continentur. Pp. [62, 2 blank] 237 [3 blank]. Pars posterior. De Immor- 
talitate Animae, libri tres, pp. [72] 464 [4 blank], 

Gregorius was a lawyer, doctor and professor at books on law, and he was possessed of vast 
Cahors, then at Toulouse, and finally at Pont k erudition, as Bayle says. He died in 1595. His 
Mousson in Lorraine. He wrote a number of books do not deal with alchemy or chemistry. 

Borel. Bibliotkeca Chimicay 1654, p. 107. Tocher, Allgemeines GeUhrUn-Lexican, 175O1 **• 

Bayle, Dictionaire historique et critique^ 1730, col. 1168. 
ii. p. 609. 

GREIFF (Friderich). 

Zehen der edlen vnd kostlichen Artzneyen, die aufs den fiimembsten Stiicken 
zusammen vermist, vnd auff Chymische Art bereittet, zu mancherley Kranck- 
heiten dienlich in vnderschiedlicher Form sicher zugebrauchen, schneller 
Wiirckung, vnd lieblich einzunemmen sind. Vnder welchen den Vorzug 
hat Theriaca Coelestis Qvercetani, oder der Chymische Theriac. Neben 

GREIFF^ GREISBL 

345 

GREIFF (Friderich). Continued, 

diesem sind vier Elixir, Als : Elixir defs Lebens aufs dem Quercetano. 
Schweifstreibend Elixir von der Theriac. Purgierend Elixir der Augspurger. 
Ruh Elixir aufs dem Laudano. Auff diese folgen die andere fiinff, Als : 
Erbrech Latwerg. Laxir Pillulen. Ruh Latwerg. AUes aufs dem Mynsicht. 
Purgier Pulver defs Graffen von Warwich. Vnd das Gold Pulver Alexandri 
Sidonii Scoti. Sampt kurtzer Beschreibung, wie vnd warumb sie also 
bereitet, was ihre Wiirckung, wie sie zu gebrauchen, vnd was sie an Gelt 
gestehen In defs Loblichen Collegii Medici in Tubingen, auch Herrn 
Rectoris, aller Facultat Professorum, Doctorum vnd Studenten Beyseyn, von 
den aufserlefsnesten Stiicken aufl'gelegt vnd bereittet. Von Friderich Greiffen, 
Medicinae Candidato vnd Chymiatro in Tubingen. Tubingen, Getruckt 
bey Philibert Brunnen, Im Jahr 1641. 

4'. Pp. 16. 

Consignatio Medicamentorum, tam Galenice quam Chymice compositorum 
et praeparatorum, quae pro tempore in Officina Greiffiana prostant, in 
Augustanorum tamen dispensatorio auctiori & nuper edito, exceptis paucis, 
non reperiuntur, additis eorundem Autoribus, summa dosi, & pretio conscripta 
& communicata. k Friderico Greiffio, Tubingae, Typis Philaberti Brunnii, 
Anno M.DC.XLI. 

4®. Pp. 15 [i blank]. 

Greiff was bom 29 Oct., 1601, lived, and died 
20 Nov., 1668, at Tubingen. His father was an 
apothecary, and the son, after taking the degree of 
Phil. M. in 1620 with great distinction, and not 
proceeding to medicine as his father wished, went 
into his business instead, turned his attention to 
chemistry, and finally to the preparation of chemical 
remedies, especially the * Theriaca coelestis ' of 
Quercetanus above mentioned. 

The above book appeared also in Latin : 

Mercklin, Lindenius trncvatus, x686, p. 806. 

Freher, Theatrum virorum eruditione clarorum^ 
1688, p. 1407. 

Man get, Bihliotfuca Scriptorum Medicorunty 
1731, I. ii. p. 512. 

Reslner, Medicinisckes GeUkrien- Lexicon, 1740, 
p. 361. 

Jocher, Allgtnuitus GeUkrien- Lexicon^ i75ii »• 
col. ii69i 

Dccas nobilissimorum medicamentorum Galenico- 
Chymico modo compositorum et praeparatorum, 
Tubing. 1 64 1, 4°. 

Consignatio njedicamentorum omnium, quoe in 
officina prostant. Tubing. 1632, 1634, 4®. 

Kurtzc IJcsclireibung ciner sehr geschmeidigen 
Feldapothck, Tubingen, 1642, 16°. 

Siebcn auserlesene trockne Arzneyen, Tiib. 1660, 

12^ 

He w rote also religious works, and some psalms 
and hymns. 

Haller, Bibliotheca MedicincB pracUca^ ^777, ii- 

P- ^99 ; 1779, iii- p. 398- 

Eloy, Dictionnaire historique de la Midecine^ 
ir?^, ii. p. 384. 

Gmelin, Geschichlt der ChcmU, 1797, i. p. 

584. 

PoggendorfF, Biographisch-literarisches Hand- 
worterbuch, 1863, i. col. 950. 

Hirsch, Biographisches Lexikon der hervor- 
ragenden Aerzte, 1885, ii. p. 645. 

GREISEL (JoHANN Georg). 

Tractatus Medicus De Cura Lactis In Arthritide. In quo indagata naturi 
lactis & Arthritidis tandem rationibus, & experientiis allatis diaeta lactea 
optima Arthritidem curandi methodus proponitur a Joh. Georgio Greisel, 
Philosophise & Medicinae Doctore. Editio secunda auctior & correction 
Budissinae, Impensis Joh. Wilischii, Typis Andreas Richteri, M.DC.LXXXI. 

12®. Pp. [41, 5 blank] 240 [26]. 

Greisel was bom at Vienna, was a physician in died 18 May, 1684, but Adelun^ says at Vienna, 
the army, professor of anatomy at Vienna, and He was a member of the Leopoldme Academy, and 
finally poysiciao at Znaym in Moravia, where be its Acts contain a number of dissertations by him. 

346 

GREISRL- GRE WER 

GREISEL (JoHANN Georg). Continued, 

Mercklin, Lindenius renavatus, x686, p. 087. 

Manget, Bibliatheca Scriptorum MeaicorMm^ 
\TK\, 1. ii. p. 5x3. 

Biichner. Academia . . . NaturcB Curiasorum 
Historia, Halae, 1755, p. 46^, No. 38. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Botamca^ 1771, i. P- 566. 

Hailer, Bibliotheca Medicimt practica, 1779, 
iii. p. 383. 

AdeluDg. Fortsetsuttg . . . «ar . . . Jdcktn , . . 
GeUkrten-Lexico, 1787, ii. coL 1603. 
Gnielin, GtsckUkte der Ckemu^ X798t >>• P>> 

Dtctionnairt Encyclopidique des ScUmces MMi- 
calts, 4^ine S^e, 1884, x. p. 608. 

GREW (Nehemiah). 

Experiences sur le combat qui arrive du mdiange de di verses liqueurs avec 
toutes sortes de corps. 

See RECUEIL d'experiences, 1679, p. i. 

Grew, son of the Rev. Obadiah Grew, was bom 
in 1641. He studied at Pembroke Hall, Cam- 
bridge, and graduated B. A. in 166 1. An essay on 
vegetable anatomy, which was read to the Royal 
Society and printed in 1671, procured him the 
fellowship of that society. The s;ime year he 
received the degree of M.D. at Leyden, and 
entered on practice, first at Coventr)', but soon 
after at London. His book on the anatomy of 
vegetables was published in 1672. Others on the 
same subject followed, imd he also published a 
numlxT of chemical papers on solution and certain 
points relating to plants between the years 1674-79. 
On Oldenburg's death (irew was appointed in 1677 
secretary of the Royal Society, and he edited the 
Transactions for 1678-79. In 1680 he was admitted 
an honorary fellow of the College of Physicians, 
and in 1681 appeared his catalogue of the Rarities 
belonging to the Royal Society, which was re- 
issued in 1694. 

Acta Lipsiensia, 1682, Mens. Mart., p. 57, p. i, 
ccii. 

Mercklin, Lindenius re/iuvatuSj 1686, p. 827. 

Wood, AtherKT Oxoniensfs^ 1721, ii. col. 837-38 ; 
ed. Bliss, 1820, iv. col. 267, 630, 773. 

Manget, Bibliotheca Scriptorum Mcdicorum, 
1731, I. ii. p. 514. 

Stolle, AnUitunii^ zitr Historic der Medicinischen 
Gelahrhcit^ 1731, p. 689. 

Morhof, Polyhistor, 1732 (ii. i. 1, 9), ii. p. 277 ; 
(iii. 7. 1, 5). iii. p. 603. 

John Ward, The Lives of the Professors of 
Gresham College, 1740, pp. 182, 233. 

Kestner, Medicintsches Gelehrten- Lexicon, 1740, 
p. 362. 

Chaufepi^, Nouveau Dictionnaire historiqtu ct 
critique^ 1750, ii, Letter G, pp. 91-3. 

Boerhaave, Met hod us Studii Medici, ed. Haller, 

175^ PP- ^38. 147- 

Biographia Brttannica, 1757, iv. p. 2^02. 

Portal, Histoire dc t Anatomic et dc la Chirurgie^ 
1770, iii. p. 550, etc. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Botanica, 1771, i. pp. 562-64. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Anatomica^ ^774, >• P- 665. 

Eloy, Dictionnaire historique de la Mddccine^ 
1778, li. p. 387. 

Aikin, General Biography^ 1803, iv. p. 561. 

GREWER (JoDOCUs). 

Secretum nobilissimum et verissimum. 

Then in 1682 his chief work od the anatooDjcf 
plants was published which has gained bim the 
reputation of being one of the most distinguished 
naturalists of the seventeenth cetitury. He wrote 
a {ximphlet in 1684 on * New Experimeots and 
usi*ful observations concerning Sea Water made 
fresh according to the patentee's Inrention,' but of 
all his investigations that which is fA the greatest 
interest to the chemist refers to his cxaniinatioo of 
mineral water at Epsom and the discovery in it of 
magnesium sulphate : Tractatus de sails catkariici 
amari in aquis Ebeskamensi^us et kujusmodi aliis 
contenti natura et usu^ London, 1695, and in 
English in 1697 and 1700. 

His work entitled Cosmologia Sacra, or a Dis- 
course of the Uniz>erse as it is the Great mre and 
Kingdom of God ^ appeared in X70X. 

Grew died suddenly 25 March, 171a. His 
funeral sermon, " Enoch's Translation," by the 
Kev. John Shower, was preached at Old Jewry, and 
published in 1712. 

Thomson, History of the Koyal Society, 1812, 
p. 44 ; A pp. iv. p. XX vi. 

Chalmers, The General Biographical Dictionary, 
1814, xvi. p. 314. 

Rees, The Cyclopcedia^ 1819, xvii. sign. B 4 recto. 

Biographic Medicate, Paris, Panckoucke (x8ao- 
25). Jv. p. 519- 

Kopp, Geschichte der Chemie, 1847. iv. p. 5a. 

Weld, A History of the Royal Society^ 1848, L 
pp. 261, 278, 280. 

Biographic Unii'crselle^ 1857, xni. p. 512. 

Nouvellc Biographic Ginirale, 1859, xxii. coL 4. 

Munk, The RoU of the Royal CoUegt ef 
Physicians of London, 1861, i. p. 382. 

Poggcndorff, Biographisch-litcrarisches Hand- 
worterbuch^ 1863, i. col. 952. 

Krsch & Gruber, Allgemeine Encyklopddie, 1871, 
xc. p. 437 (article by Ph. H. KUIb). 

Haeser, Geschichte der Medictn, 1881, ii. pp. 
282. 285. 

Hillings, Index 'Catalogue, 1884, v. p. 606; and 
Series, 1901, vi. p. 487. 

Dictionnaire Encyclopidique des Sciences Mtdi- 
cales, 46me Scrie, 1884, x. p. 685. 

Hirsch, Biographisches Lexikon der hentm' 
genden Aerzte, 1885, ii. p. 643. 

Dictionary of National Biography, 1890, xxia. 
p. 166 (article by G. S. Boulger). 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, iii. p, 699. 

GRE WER-^GROSSCHEDEL 

347 

GREWER (JoDOCUS). Continued. 

The Secret um, edited by Josl Balbian, was 
published at Leydcn, 1588, 1599, 8^ 

Maier, Symbola Aurea Mens<r, 1617, p. 268. 
Borel, Bibliotheca Chimica, 1654, pp. 108, a66. 
Borrichius, Conspectus Scriptorum CAemicorum, 
1697, p. 25, No. xxxvi. 

RothSchoItz, Bibliotheca Chemica^ 17271 p» 161, 
Schmieder, Geschichte derAlchemie, 1832, p. 261. 

GRIENSTEIN (J. J.). 

See PHILOTHEUS de Limitibus, Das 

The author was a priest, but that is all I have 
found about him. 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire de la Philosophie 
Hermitique^ 1742, iii. p. 179. 
Hoefer, Histoire de la CAimie, 1843, ii. p. 134 ; 

1869, ii. p. 129. 

Ladrague, Bibliothique Ottvaroff^ Sciences Secrktes^ 

1870, No. 961. 

Kopp, Die Alchemie^ z886, ii. p. 350. 

Hermetische Trikliniuin, 1792. 

GRIM (Herrman Niklas). 

Laboratorium Chymicum, Gehouden op het voortreffelycke Eylandt Ceylon, 
Soo in 't Animalische, Vegetabilische, als Mineralische Ryck. Wordende de 
Liefhebberen niet alleen de Praeparatien der selve trouwelyck op-geteyckent, 
maer oock desselver gebniyck, en hoedanigh sy nioeten geadhibeert worden. 
Dienende tot een bewys, hoe dat men de swaere Eysschen te vooren gedaen, 
grootelycks verminderen, en van betere bedienen kan. Door Hermannus 
Nicolai Grim, Medicinae Doctor, in dienst der Edele Nederlandtsche Gost- 
Indische Compagnie. Batavia, Gedruckt by Abraham van den Eede, 

Boeckdrucker der E. Compagnie, wonende in de Pringe-straet, in de 
Batavische Mercurius, Anno 1677. 

8*^. Pp. [15, I blank] 108. Index [5]. Krrata [2] [1 blank]. 

Grim (1641-1771) was a Dane by birth, travelled 
widely, and had a great knowledge . of foreign 
simples. He was the author of various papers, as 
well as of some books, such as Compendium medico^ 
chymicum. 

Ada Eruditorum, 1682, p. 38 (review of the 
Compendium medico^hymicum^ Batav. 1677). 
Kestner, Medicinisches Gelehrten' Lexicon, 1740, 

P- 363- 

ioh. MoUer, Cimbria Uterata, 1744, li. p. 249. 
dcher, Allgemtines GeUhr ten- Lexicon ^ 1750, ii. 
1x86. 
Eloy, Dictionnaire histarigue de la Midecine^ 
1778, ii. p. 388. 

Roth-Scholtz, Bibliotheca Chemiea, 1827,!. p. 161. 
Dezeimeris. Dictionnaire Historique de la Afide- 
cine, 1835, '^' "• P' 63'' 

In Dr. Cullen's Sale Catalogue 0/ Medical Books 
(181-?), p. 97, there is quoted: Pielat (Barth), 
luibora/orium Ceylonicum, Amst. 1679, 12*. This 
seems to be a pirated edition, and Kestner com- 
plains that the author of the work is never once 
named by the translator. 

Biographiskt Lexicon ofver namnkunnige Svenska 
man, Upsala, 1839, v. p. 203. 

Hoefer, Histoire de la Chimie, 1843, ii. p. 284 ; 
1869, ii. p. 275. 

Poggendorff, Biographisch-literarisches Hand- 
wdrterbuch, 1863. i. col. 954. 

Dictionnaire Encyclopidique des Sciences Midi- 
calesy 4^c S^e, 1884. x. p. 702. 

Hirsch, Biographisches Lexikon der hervorra- 
genden Aertte, 188^, ii. p. 6^3. 

Bricka, Dansh Btogrqksk Lexihon, 1892, v. p. 201 
(article by Jul. Petersen). 

GRONING (C. G.). 

See TRIEWALD (martin), 1795. 

GROSSCHEDEL (Johann Baptist). 

Proteus Mercurialis Geminus, exhibens Naturam Metallorum, id est, Operis 
Philosophici Theoriam & eiusdem praxin, siue Compositionem Lapidis secreti 
per Philosophorum sententias & authoritates elucidatus. Quod clarius ex 
titulis vnicuique tractatui prsefixis, cuiuis legenti facile patebit. Per Johannem 
Baptistam Grosschedelium ab Aicha, Equitem Romanum, Philosophum & 
Chymicum. Francofurti, Sumptibus Lucse Jennisii, Anno M DC XXIX. 

d?. Pp. 195 [x blank]. 

34« GROSSCHEDEL 

GROSSCHEDEL (Johann Baptist). Continued. 

The titles referred to are these : 

P. 9. 

Discurbus Philosophicus de Natura Metallonim et Lapide Philosophonini, ex veris 
Maginc Naturalis fundamentis deproniptus, publicaxjue Vtilitati traditus perJobanDem 
likiptistam Grosschedclium .ib Aicha, Kquitcni Romanum, Philosophum & OiymicuiD. 
Francofurti, Sumptibus Lucoc Jennisii, Anno M DC XXIX, 

P. 105. 

Mincralis. seu Physici Metallonim Lapidts diligens et accurata Descriptio : ad 
Macro- et Microcosm i Philosophicam Metaniorphosin : per Johannero Baptistani Gros- 
schcdeliuni ab Airha, K(}uiteni Romanum. Philosophum & Chymicuro. Fraooofurti 

ad Moenum, Sumptibus Lucae Jennisii, Anno M DC XXIX. 

Longlet Dufresnoy speaks of a 4'' edition. He Gmelin quotes an editioD of Hamburg, 1705- 
also refers to the Mineralis . . Lapidis There is certainly one of Hamburg, 1706. 

Dtscriptio, as if it were a sepiirate book. 

Trifolium Hermeticum : oder, Hermetisches Kleeblat : 

I. Von der Allgcmeinen Natur : 

II. Von der besondern, vnd der menschlichen Kunst : 

III. Von der verborgenen und geheimen Weifsheit: 

In welchem das grosse Buch der Natur, in seinen dreyen Reichen, ak 
nemblichen, dem Animalischen, Vegetabilischen, vnd Mineralischeny auffgethan 
vnnd erklart wird, nach aufsweisung eines jeden absonderlichen beygefiigten 
Tittels an seinem orth : Durch lohannem Baptistam Grolsschedel von 
Aicha, Equitem Romanam, Philochymicum. Franckfurt am Mayn, In 

Verlegung Lucae Jennisii. Im Jahr, M DC XXIX. 

8''. Pp. [9, I blank] 269 [1 blank]. 4 woodcuts. 

The tracts have separate title-pages : 

Erleutcrung dcfs AUgewaltigen grosscn Huchs der Natur, welches von dem All- 
mjichtigen Gott und Schopffer der Welt selbsten in 3. vntcrschicdliche Bletter oder 
regna abgethcilet, veifast und begriffen, darin aller Animalien, Vegetabilien vnd 
Mincralien, Geburt, Hcrkomnien, Wachsung vnd Mehrung verfast, vnd klarlich 
begriffen ist : Daraufs ein jcder KunstlielK-nder den rechten grund, vnd wahren 
verstand. den Lapideni Philosophorum zu praeparirn, sonnenklar fassen vnd erlanen 
kan : Durch lohannem liaptistam Grofsschedel von Aicha, Equitem Romanum, 
Philochymicum. Franckfurt am Mayn. In Verlegung Lucse Jennisii, Im Jahr, 
M DC XXIX. 

P. 67. 

Giiindlich- vnd wahrhafftiger Itericht, wie bcydes die Natur vnd Kunst, aufs 
linem einigcn fundamento herkommen, darinn bcstehen, und jhre beyde Operationes 
vnd Wirckungen gleichformig ru gliicklichem endt bringen vnd verrichten mUssen : 
Au^'h was das Vniuersal Subiectum der Natur, vnd Kunst, dadurch der Lapis 
Philosophorii, oder das Magnum Mysterium Philosophorum durch Kunst, mit htilff 
der Natur, mtisse verrichtet, vnd gemacht werden : Durch lohannem Baptistani 
Grofsschedel von Aicha, Equitem Romanum, Philochymicum. Franckfurt am 

Mayn. In Verlegung Lucae Jennisii, Im Jahr, M DC XaIX. 

P. 199. 

Magice Naturalis Dcclaratio : Das ist : Grtindtlicher Bericht vnnd Trewhertage 
Wahmung, an alle vnnd jede Exorcisten der Magiae, Cabalae vnd Necromantiae. wie 
darinnen vorsichtiglich zu wandeln, auch wie jeder hiedurch Christlich vnd zulessig den 
Engel defs Liechts an sich bringen, jhm dienstbahr machen, vnd zu gewiinschteni End 
durch Gottes Zulassung kommen mpge. Durch lohannem Baptistam Grofisscbedel 
von Aicha, der wahren Gottlichen vnd Nattirlichen Magiae Trewen Liebhabem. 
Franckfurt am Mayn. In Verlegung Lucae Jennisii, Im Jahr, M DC XXIX. 

A list of Grosschedel's works is given by Gmelin. in ' Patent form,' and having been published by J. 

Of these the most curious is the Calendarium Theod. de Bry. The version of it which I have 

NaturaU magicum perpeiuum. Nothing seems to seen is a manuscript in imitated printed letters, in 

be recorded about the author. black and red, with astrological and symbolical 

The Calendarium is described bv Gmelin as engravings, presumably those above mentioned, 

having been engraved in copper by Matth. Merian inserted in the text 

GROSSCHEDEL -GRUNDLICHE 549 

GROSSCHEDEL (Johann Baptist). Continued, 

Borel, Bibliotheca Chimica, 1654, p. xo8. Fictuld, Probier-Stein^ ^753. Th. i. p. 85. 

Mercklin. Lindenius rtnovatus^ 1686, p. 527. Gmelin, Geschickte der Chemie, 1797, i. pp. 522, 

Roth-Scholtz, Bibliotheca Chemica, 1727, p. 162. 562. 

Manget, Bibliotheca Scriftorum M^icorum, Schmieder^ Gcschichle der Alchemic, iB^^^ p. 377. 

1731, I. ii. p. 527. Hoefer, Histoire de la Chimie, 1843, "• P* 327; 
/acob Leupolds Prodromus Bibliotheca metallicce^ 1869, ii. p. 319. 

1732, p. 63. \jSLdi?igas,BiiliothiqueOtrvaroff^SciencesSecrites, 
Lenglet Dufresno^, Histoire de la Philosophic 1870, No. 1079. 

Hermitique^ 1742, ill. p. 179. Kopp, Die Alchemic, 1886, ii. pp. 338, 368. 

GROSSE (Die) Arglistigkeit derer sich der Satan bedienet bey der wahren 
Alchymie um die unverstandigen Sucher des Philosophischen Steins in alles 
zeitliche und ewige verderben zu stiirtzen, zur treuhertzigen Warnung und 
besser Anweisung entdecket von einem dessen Wahl-Spruch ist : 
In Christi Horto Dantur Thesauri Maximi Pretiosissimique. 
Erfurt, zu finden bey Augustino Crusio, 1731. 

12''. Pp. 45 [3 blank]. 
See by the same author : Kurtzer und griindlicher Unterricht vom wahren Trinck-Golde. 

GROSSE (Der) und Kleine Bauer. 

See GRASSHOFF (JOHANN). 

GRUNDLICH (Ein) philosophisch Sendschreiben. 
See p. (J.), 1779. 

GRUNDLICHE Beschreibung von denen Particular- und Universal-Tincturen. 
See THEORETISCH und praktischer Wegweiser zur hohem Chemie, 1773, p. i. 

GRUNDLICHE (Eine) Untersuchung und Entdeckung der Art und Eigenschafft 

des Goldes. 

See H. (e.), Ein ausfiihrlicher Tractat von Philosophischen Werck des Steins der 
Weiscn, 1702, p. 45. 

GRUNDLICHE Widerlegung etlicher Johan-Rudolff Glaubers zu Amsterdam 
herausgegebner Schrifften, sonderlich aber derer, darinnen er seine vermeynte 
Verbesserung der Metallen, aus blossem Bley oder Bley-Ertz 0 und )) mit 
grofsem Nutzen zu bringen, statu iret, wie der hintennachgesetzte Glaubrische 
Procefs mit mehrerm weiset, nebst Eroflhung seiner darzu gehorigen, doch 
bifshero von ihm in grofser Geheim gehaltenen, und allein vor sehr hohen 
Preifs feilen, nun aber sonder Entgelt zu aller Welt Wissenschafft in Kupffer 
gebrachten Destruir- und Reducir-Oefen. Anno 1661. 

8^. Pp. [2] 184 [i, I blank} Plates III.-VI. 

The volume has another title for which the above seems to have been substituted. 
It is as follows : 

Nothwendige Refutation auff etliche Johann- Rudolph Glaubers zu Amsterdam 
unwahre bifshero aufsgelafsene Bticher von Verbesserung der Metnllen insonderheit 
aber wider dessen heraufsgegebenen Ersten Appendicem oder Erklaning seines 
Ftinfften Thdls Teutschlandes Wohlfahrt, und hernachgedruckten und beygeieglen 
OcUv-BULttleins, in welchen Er, Glauber, ehrliche Leute Vndancks mr UngebUhr 
beschuldiget, und sonsten Ehrenriihrig antastet. Womit remonstriret wird, Dafs 
Glauber vielmehr das Contrarium zu tiberftlhren, und er selber redliche Leute in 
seinen gerlihmten Remonstrationen hintergangen, wider besser Wissen und Gcwissen 
ungebtthrliche Reverse selbigen abgenothiget, und so fort selbselbstcn an seinen 
promissen untreu worden, darin sein Vorget^n aus blofsen Bley oder Bley-Ertzt 0 und 

]) mit grofsem Nutzen zu bring?, nebenst seinem Alckahest, Auro potabili, und anderm 

mehr, gantz falsch befunden worden : Jedcrmanniglichen vor dergleichen Unwarheil 
nachrichtlich zu wamen. 

350 

GRUNDUCHE-GRUMMRT 

GRUNDLICHE Widerl^ung. Continued. 

Gott lu Ehren 

Das Bdte xu verwehren 

UDd sich rcdiich zu nehren. 

von 

C. D. M. A. a 

Eineni Liebhabem {^egriindeter Philosophischer Schrifiten, wdcher der Warbdt 
Freund, und der Itctricglichen Alchjrmistcrey Feind. Zu Leipsig in Dnick geben 
AnnoMDCLXl. 

GRULING (Philip). 

1). O. M. A. Philippi Grulingii Stolbergensis Medici Florilegium Chymkum, 
hoc est, Libellus Insignis dc quorundam Medicamentonim Chjmiicorum, 
utpote ; Essentiarum^ Magisteriorum, Extractonim, Salium, Tinctunnim, 
Florum, Croconim, Oleorum, Spirituum, Faecularum, Balsamonim, Aquanim, 
Pulverum, &c. vera Praeparatione, recto Usu & certa Dosi, multis exem[^ 
observationibusq; illiistratus, & tali ordinc dispositus, ut in curandis morbis 
cuilibet Medico cumulate sufficiat. 

Cato, Utilium rerum scientia non est premenda, sed per manus tradendau 
Lipsiai, Impensis Gothofredi GrosI Bibliopolse. Anno M.DCXXXI 

Pp. [24] 476 [27, X blank]. 

12* 

Grulinjj. or Griiling, was l)orn in 1593 at 
Stolbcrg in the Harz. He was conrector at Nord- 
hausen, studied medicine at a later age than 
usual, and rendere<l distinguished service to Nord- 
hauscn in 1626 during the plague The year 
following he settled at Stoll)erg, and became the 
Count's physician and HUrgermeister. He died in 
1667 (1666), aged 74. He was the author of 
several works. 

Van der Linden, De Scriptis Medicis libri duo^ 
1637. p. 405. 

Mercklin, Lindenius renai'atus, 1686, p. 912. 

Wilte, Diarium Hiographicum, x688, Sig. Yyy2 
ferso, Ann. i666. 

Manget, liibliotheca Scriptorum Medicorum^ 
1731, I. ii. p. 533. 

Kestner, .\ f edict nisches GfUhrten-Lexicon^ 1740, 

p. 364. 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histotre de la Philosophic 

HemUtique, 1742, iii. p. 180. 

Matthias, Conspectus Historia: Medicontm chrono- 
logicus, 1761, p. 578. 

PorUil, His/oire de rAnatomieet de la Chirurgie, 
1770. iii. p. 423. 

Haller, liibliotheca Botanica^ 1771, ». P- 562. 

The above is the first edition of the Floriitgum. 
and it appeared again in 1644. 1665. 4*. In tboe 
mention is made of pemvian fattrk* 

Curationum dogmatico-Henmeticarum ctutum 
prima. Lips. 1638, enlarged with other six 
* centuriae, * Northusse, 166a, 4* ; Lipsiae, 1668, 4*. 
The others arc medical, and do not refer to 
chemistry. His collected works: Opera OmmintM 
tjuatuor Tomos distributa^ Lips. z6CIq^ 8*. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Aitdicinet practicm, 1777, il 

p. 598- 

Kloy, Dictionnairt htstorique de la Midedai, 
1778. ii. 392. 

Biographic Midicalt^ Paris, Pandcoucke (xftK>- 
25)' »v. p. 528. 

Sprcngcl, GeschichU der Arzneykunde^ 1827, iv. 
p. 288. 

Dezeimeris, Dictionnairt kistoriqmt de Im Mik' 
cine, 1835, H. ii. p. 635. 

Phillippe & Ludwig, Gesckickit der Apetheker. 
i8«, p. 483- 

Hirsch, Biographisches Lexikon der kerwrrt- 
genden Aerate, 1885. "• p. 668. 

Dictionnaire Encyclof^dique des Sciences MiA- 
cales^ 46me St^rie, 1886, xil p. 349. 

GRUMMET (Christoph). 

Tractatlein vom Blut der Natur. 

See BRUMMET (christoph). 

See also GUMMERT (theophorus). 

Christoph Grummet was Kunckcl's assistant in 
Dresden, and in the belief that Kunckel had dis- 
covered transmutation was annoyed that he had 
not perceived the process, and thereupon proceeded 
to slander Kunckel in a way which cau.%d him 
much trouble. Kunckel gave afterwards a full 
account of the affair. Grummet attacked him in 

his tract, Vom Nitro oder Blut der Nattr, 
Dresden, 1677, 4°; Wittenberg, 1678, 8*; with* 
vindication, Leipzig, 1679, 8* ; and he wrote Sd 
non sine veste^ Rothenburg, 1685, la"*, against 
Orschall. Weigel gives the authors name as 
Bnunmet and says that the form Grummet is dot 
to a misprint. 

GRUMMET-^GUBBIO 

351 

GRUMMET (Christoph). Continued. 

Kunckel, Laboratorium Chymicum, 1716, p. 
606 ; 1722. p. 606. 

/>/> Edelgebome Jungfer Alchymia^ X73o. P- 290. 

Jacob Ltupolds Pradromus Bibliotfuca Mttallica^ 
1732, p. 63. 

Beytrag zur Oeschickte der hohern Chemie^ 1785, 

pp. 3S4. 533- 

Weigel, Einleitung zurallgemeinen Scheidekunst , 
1788, i. p. 372. 

Gmelin, Geichichte der Chemie^ 1798. "• p. 28. 

Fuchs, Repertorium der chemischen Litteratur^ 
1806-08, p. 186. 

Schmieder, Geichichte der Alchemie^ 1832, pp. 

4So» 454. 

Kopp, Die Alchemie, i886,«ii. p. 372. 

GRUND SATZE. 

See HUNDERT und dreissig Grund-Satze. 

GRUNDTLICHER Bericht, was die warhafftige Kunst Alchemia jnnhalte vnd 
vermag, in Via universali et particulari. 

See DARIOT (CLAUDE), Die Gulden Arch, Schatz- und Kunstkammer, 1614, Part ii. 
p. 163. 

See KROFFNETE Geheimnisse des Steins der Weisen, 1708- 17 18, p. 479. 

GUALDUS (Fridericus). 

[Schreiben des Gualdi an D. C. von R. und an Herrn N. N.] 

See CHYMIPHILUS (j. J.), Der wahren chymischen Weisheit Offenbahrung, 1720, 
pp. 104-142. 

Gualdi, Gualdo, Gualdus. Fridericus or Ludo- 
vicus. is considered an Italian by some, by others 
a German with the name Friedrich or Ludwig 
Waller. 

He was resident at Venice in 1680 or thereby, 
and though he made no show he was able to assist 
a noble family to put mines, which they were unable 
to carry on, into a prosperous condition. A mutual 
inclination sprang up between him and the daughter, 
but the obstacle to their union lay in his not 
belonging to the same class of society. This was 

fot over, however, by his giving or lending to the 
Republic a large sum of money which seems to 
have conferred on him the requisite rank, but 
nothing more is recorded either about the marriage 
or the money. Gualdus was known to possess a 
small but very fine collection of pictures. The 
nobleman, according to another account, a painter 
and critic, examining the collection, came upon a 
portrait obviously intended for Gualdus, which he 
at once recognisc^l as the work of Titian, who died 
in 1576. Gualdus did not deny the fact, but gave 
no explanation, and left Venice the following 
morning, so that the mystery remained unsolved. 
Nothing more was heard of him, but he is alluded 
to in the Compass der Weisen, 1782, as being still 
alive, and nearly 600 years old. When he was in 
Venice, a couple of centiu'ies earlier, he seemed a 

Keren Happuch . . . oder Teutsches Fegfeuer dtr 
Schiide-Kunst, 1702, p. 112 (refers to the preceding 
book, and discusses the probability of Gualdus' 
story). 

Die Edelgebome Jungfer Akhymia, 1730, p. 262. 

Lenglet DvSvtsnoy ,Histoire de la Philosaphie 
Hermitique^ 1742, iii. p. 18a 

Cohausen, Hermippus Redivivus, English trans- 
lation, London, 1748, p. 84. 

Fictuld. Probier-Stein, 1753, Th. i. p. 86. 
(Fictuld's account does not tally with the current 

GUBBIO. 

See quattrami da gubbko. 

man of middle age, though he asserted that he was 
much older, and the portrait apparently represented 
him as he then was. though it must have been 
painted more than a century previously. 

The narrative is told with various embellishments, 
hut there seems to have been some foundation for 
it, as the existence cf a person with these pretensions 
was currently reported at the time. 

The prose of the romance is furnished by the 
work cjuoted by Gmelin : " Der entlarvte Gualdus 
sive Frid. Gualdus ex se ipso mendacii et imposturae 
convictus. das ist, ausftihrlicher Beweifs, dafs 
dasjenige, was von einem 400 Jiihrigen Venetian- 
ischen Edelmanne und seiner Medicm vorgegeben 
wird, mehr fUr eine Fabel als wahrhaffte Geschichte 
zu halten." This seems to have accompanied 
Gmelin's copy of the Communication (see the 
following), but I have not met with it. 

Communication einer vortreffiichen Chymischen 
Medicin, Krafft welcher , . . der beriihmte Vene- 
tianische Edelmann Fridericus Gualdus^ sein Leben 
auff 400. Jahr zu diesen unsem Zeiten conservirt, 
und kUrttlich noch Anno x688. tu Venedig zu 
sehen ^ewesen. Augsburg, 1700. 12®. Pp. [60, 
includmg a portrait of Gualdus] 94 [2 blankl. 
This is said to be translated from precious Englisn 
and Italian Mss. The second part contains the 
letters to and from Gualdus, above mentioned. 

one, and he speaks of two persons of the same 
name.) 

Beytrag zur Geschichte der hdhtm C hemic, 1785, 
p. 502. 

Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemie, 1798. ii. p. 334. 

Schmieder, Geschichte der A Ichemie^ 1832. p. 464. 

Figuier, L'Alchimie et les Alchimistes, 1856. 

p. 17. 

Jennings, The Rosicrucians, 1870, p. 23 (adapted 
from Cohausen). 

Kopp. Die Alchemic, 1886, i. p. loi. 

352 GULDENS— GUNTHER 

GULDENE (Das) Fliifs. 

See MOGLIN (JOHANN LUDWIG). 

GULDENE (Die) Hoffnung, wie dieselbe von denen sich selbst-angebenden 
Alchymisten, oder Hem-Goldmachem, in dem Hertzen derer Gold- 
Begierigcn gezeuget; Durch vergehliche Unkosten in dem Laboratorio 
crnahret : In siissen Traumen ausgebohren : Am Ende aber, und auff der 
CajKille als cine Nichts-wiirdige Asche u. Thorheit erkannt wird. Alien 
denen, so wlircklich mit der Alchymisterey schwanger gehen, oder gar in 
der Geburts- Arbeit schwitzen, zur Uberlegung vorgestellet von Einem Licb- 
haber der wahren Weifsheit. Anno 1721. 

Without place and printcr*s name. 
4*. Pp. 31 [ I blank]. 

GULDENE (Die) Rose. 
See V. 0- R)- 

GULDENE (Das) Vliefs. 

See SIEBMACHER (jOHANN AMBROSIUS). 

GULDENER (Ein) Tractat vom Philosophischen Steine. Von einem noch 
Lebenden, docb vngenanten Philosopho den Filiis Doctrinae zur Lehre, den 
Fratribus aureae Crucis abcr zur Nacbricbtung bescbrieben. Anno 

M.DC.XXV. 

4®. Pp. 11-66. Vignette. 

This is a tract taken out of the German transla- version : Traciatus aureus de la^idt fkilowpkia, 
tion of the Museum Hermeticum. For the Latin see museum hermeticum, 1749. P- '• 

GULDENFALK (Siegmund Heinrich). 

Sammlung von mehr als hundert wahrhaften Transmutations-geschichten, odor 
ganz ausserordentlich merkwiirdige Beyspiele von Verwandlung der Metalleo 
in Gold oder Silber nebst der Art und Weise wie damit verfahren wordea 
Gesammelt und herausgegeben von Siegmund Heinricb Giildenfalk. Fiiisd. 
Hessen-Darmstidtischen Ober-I^ndkommissair. Frankfurt und Ldpzi^ 

bey J oh. Gcorg. P'leischer. 1784. 

8®. Pp. xxxvi. 443 [i blank]. 
A volume of the von Schiinfcldsche Lesebibliothek. 

Giildenfalk left the Hesse-Darmstadt service and metrical translation of the Psalms. Frankftxit, 176^ 

retired in 1780 to Frankfurt a. M. and then to ^'^y7\x\^ Die himmlische und hermetiscke Perlt, edit 

Homburg an der Hohe. He died in Sept. 1787, die gottliche und naliirliche Tinktur der Weisen^ 

but his age is not recorded. He published a Frankf. 1785, 8*. 

ArchivfUr Freimdurer und Rosenkreuttr, 1785, Schmicder, Geschichte der Alckemie^ 1859, pp. 

p. 402 (an unfavourable notice, taking the compiler 549, 595. 

to task for his uncritical method). la^^ri\f^\c,Bibiiothique Ouvarof,ScienctiSeerHes, 

Meusel, Lexikon der vom Jahr 1750 his 1800 1870, Nos. 562, 1418-19. 

verstorhenen teutschen Schriflstellcr^ 1804, iv. p. 457. Kopp, Die Alchemie^ 1886, i. p. 89. 

GUNTHER (Simon). 

Hortulus Sanitatis Amoenissimus. Hoc est : de Tuenda et Conservanda Bona 
Valetudine omnibus Literatis et Peregrinantibus Libellus accommodatissimos 
& maxime necessarius, in lucem editus cum Indice locupletissimo a Simone 

GUNTHER—GUIBERT 

353 

GUNTHER (Simon). Continued, 

Giinthero Gransoviensi Marchico. In Nobili Spira, Typis Augustini 

Scheideri, Impensis Authoris, & Heliae Kembachij. Anno M. DC. VIII. 

Pp. 15s [ I blank] ; Index [11, i blank]. 

12 

Mercklin, Lindenius renovatus, 1686, p. 971. 
Haller, Bibliotheca Botanka, 1771, i. p. 405, 

Haller, Bibliotheca Medictna practictF, 1777, ii« 
p. 403. 

GUERRE des Chevaliers. 

See ANCIENNE (U) Guerre des Chevaliers. 

GUTMANN (Aegidius). 

See GUTMANN (aegidius). 

GUIBERT (Nicolas). • 

Alchymia Ratione et Experientia ita demum viriliter impugnata & expugnata, 
vni cum suis fallacijs & delira mentis, quibus homines imbubinirat: vt 
nunquam imposterum se erigere valeat. Auctore Nicolao Guiberto, Lotharingo, 
Doctore Medico. Item de Balsamo, eiusque lachrymae quod Opobalsamum 
dicitur, Natura, Viribus & Facultatibus admirandis. 

Sapientum finis, Sapientiae communicatio. 
Argentorati. Impensis Lazari Zetzneri Bibliopolse. M.DCIII. 

8°. Pp. [16] 104. Zetuier's emblem with the motto : Scientia Immutabilis. 

The tract ' de Balsamo ' is separately paged and has a separate title and signatures 
so that it might go by itself — except that it is mentioned in the other title : — 

De Balsamo, eiusque Lachrymae, quod Opohal<%amum dicitur, natura, viribus & 
facultatibus admirandis. Per Nicolaum Guibertum Doctorem medicum Lotharingum. 
Argentorati, Impensis Lazari Zetzneri, M.DC.III. 

Pp. [4] 18 [2 blank]. 

Guibertus was bom about 1^7 at St. Nicolas de 
Port in Lorraine, studied medicine and graduated 
about 1 570. He travelled for many years in France, 
Spain, Italy and Germany, and practised in Castel- 
durante and Rome. He at first believed in trans- 
mutation and worked in the laboratory of Cardinal 
Granvelle. viccrov of the two Sicilies, and for the 
Cardinal of Augsburg translated German works b^ 
Paracelsus into Latin. In Naples he was associ- 
ated with Baptista Porta and Pizimenti, In 1579. 
under Pope Gr^ory XIII., he was appointed 
inspector-general of druggists' shops in the states 

Schenckins, Bibliotheca Medica, p. 416. 
Vai 

>37. . . 
norel, Bibliotheca Chimica, 1654. p. 108. 

Van der Linden, De Scriptis Medicis, Libri duo, 
«637, p. 370. 

Mercklin, Lindenius rencvatus^ 1686, p. 834. 

Roth-Scholtz, Bibliothica CAemica, 1737, p. 177. 

Manget, Bibliotheca Scriptorum Medicorum, 
1731, I. ii. p. 536. 

Jtuob Leupolds Prodromus Biblicthecce Metallica, 
17x2, p. 63. 

Morhof, Polyhistor, 1732 (i. 5. 2. 13), p. 938 
(De Murrfainis poculis dissertatio, Francof. 1579, 

Kestner, Medicinisches Gelehrten-Lexicon^ 1740, 

Lenglet Dufresncry, Histoire de la Philosophie 
Hermitique, 1742^ iii. p. 181. 

jOcher, Allgemeines Gelehrten-Lexicon^ ^750^ ii. 
col. 9q6w 

HaUer, BiblU^keca Botanica, 1771, i. p. 39a 

of the Church. He returned to his native country 
and lived at Vancouleurs. Having completely 
changed his views and considering that transmuta- 
tion was impossible and that the pursuit of it led to 
poverty and want, he wrote his books against 
Alchemy, and criticised his former friends who 
believed in it. He died at Vancouleurs about i6ao. 
In addition to the above he wrote : Assertio de 
murrhinis^ sive de iis qua murrhino nomine expri- 
muntur, Francof. 1597, 12**, and De interitu 
Alchemia metal lor um transmutatoria tractatus 
aliquot, Tulli, 16x4, 8*. 

Elo^, Dictionnaire historique de la Midecine, 
1778, li. p. 398. 
Beytragzur Geschichte det hdhem Chemie, 1785, 

p. 562. 

Adelung, F&rtsetgung , . , xu , . . Jbchers . . . 
Gelehrten-Lexico, 17B7, ii. col. 1673. 

Biographie Midicale, Paris, Panckoucke (1820- 
asj* iv. p. 544. 

Schmieder, Geschichte derAlchemie^ x8^, p. 357. 

Hoefer, Histoire de la Ckimie, 1843, i'* P* ^^ ! 
1869, ii. p. I2Z. 

Biographie Universelle^ 1857, xviii. p. 85. 

Nouvelle Biographie Ginirale, 1859, xxii. col. 

517. 
Po^teendorff, Biographisch-literarisches Hand 

todrteHuch, 1863. i. col 975. 

Hirsch, Biographisches Lexihon der hervorragen- 
den Aerste, 1885, ii. p. 693. 

Dictiimnaire encyclopidique des Sciences Midi- 
cales, 4^e Sdrie, 1886, xL p. 454. 

7. 

354 

C UIDIUS--G UMMERT 

GUIDIUS (Joannes). 

I)e Mineralihus Tractatus in Genere loannis Guidii Senioris Patritij Vob- 
teirani I. C. Ktate sua celeberrimi, Libri Quatuor; 

I fDe Moneta. 

, CDe Metallarijs. 

In quorum I . . •' 

1 ., -! l)e Artificibus Metallorum. 
I. agitur All.... 

In III. 

In II. 

[ l)e Metallis. 
De Auro, & Argento. 
De Gemmis. 
De Perro, & Armis. 
J)e Salinis. 

In nil. 

{ 

De Thesauris. 

De rebus aurds, & argentm. 

De Ornamentis. 

De Vestibus Auiatis. 

De Publica Vtilitate. 
De Priuata Vtilitate. 

Opus dill desideratum, ^ prseclarissimis I. C. summis laudibus insigiutam, 
nunc tandem temporis prima vice praelo diligenter submissum, & in hicem 
editum. Cum duobus Indicibus, vnus Titulorum, alter Renim notabiliiim. 
Superiorum Permissu, et Privil^io. Venetiis, M DC XXV. Apud 

Thomam Ballionum. 

4^ Pp. [40] 208 (for 198) [2 blank] double columns. Title red and black. 

There was apparently an earlier edition of this book published at Venice, 1618, 8*, and a later one 

at Frankfurt, 1627, 4**. 

Borel, Bibliotheca Chi mica, 1654, p. 109 (quotes 
the 1627 edition only). 

Mercklin, Lindenius renovatus, 1686, p. 596. 

Mangct. Bibliotheca Scriptorum Medicomm, 
I7«, I. ii. p. M7. 

Jacob Leu folds Prodromus Bibliothic<r Me tallica, 
'732t p. 63 (quotes three editions). 

Adelung, Fortsettung . . . nr . . . /3dUn . . . 

(leUhrten-ljexico, 1787, ii. coL 1677. 
Gmelin, Geschichte der Ckemie, 1797, i. p. 5001 
Hoefer. Histoire de la Ckimie, 1843. "• P. 33^* 

1869, ii. p. 32a. 

GUI DO DE MONTANOR. 

See MONTANOR (GUIDO DE) 

GUIRAUD (F.). 

See SENDivoGius (MICHAEL), Traicte du Soulphre, 1629. 

Guiraud was the translator. 

GULDEN (Die) Arch, Schatz und Kunstkammer. 

See DARIOT (CLAUDE). 

GUMMERT (Theophorus). 

Theophori Gummertens Treuhertzige Notification-Schriflft von Ursprung und 
Ende, das ist: Von der Generation und Vitrification derer Metallen, Mineralien 
und allerhand Steine, mit angehengter Beriihrung der Universal-Materia 
Lapid. Philosoph. aus einem einigen, geringen, iederman bekanten, und docb 
unerkanten Dinge, sambt andern raren Curiositaten, &c. Wie solcfae von 
dem Authore durch Gottes Gnade und unermiideten Fleifs seithero onter- 
suchet, und bey viel hundert Proben im Feuer und sonsten warhafit^ 
befunden worden, &c. An alle redlichgesinnete Liebhaber der Edlen 
Chymire, bey dieser letzten fast gefahrlichen Zeit, wohlmeinend abgelasseo, 

GUMMERT—GUTMANN 

355 

GUMMERT (Theophorus). Coniinued. 

Im Jahr Christi, 1674. Dresden, In Verlegung Andreae Lofflers. Gedruckt 
durch Melchior Bergens, Churfl. Sachs. Hof-Buchdr. seel, nachgelassene 
Wittwe und Erben. 

4**. Sigs. A4, B2, or pp. [12]. 

It seems to have been reissued in 1679. 

Leupold calls the author Theodor. Gmelin calls 
him Christoph Grummet [q.v.\ or Gummert, or 
Bnimmet {q.v.), and quotes the present disserta- 
tion, but I lupoid distinguishes C. Grummet from 
Theodor Gummert though their works appeared 
within five years of each other. It is possible thjit 

Jacob Leupolds Prodromus BibliotheccB Metallic^, 
Gmelin, Geschichie der Chemie^ 1798, ii. p. 28. 

they are identical, seeing that Christophonis and 
Theophorus have practically the same meaning, 
and could be used as synonjrms, but so far as 
can be judged from their respective writings and 
from what is said about Grummet by Kunckd, 
they appear to be different. 

Fuchs, Repertorium der chemischen LitieratuTt 
1806-08, p. 186. 

GUT (Ein) Fundament, oder Tractat vom Philosophischen Stein. 
See NEANDER (theophilus), Heptas Alchymica, 162 1, p. 227. 

GUTMANN (Aegidius). 

Offenbahrung | Gottlicher | Majestat. 

The above title is printed in large letters in the middle of the page, and is enclosed 
by four ornamental lines. Above the title is the following : 

Au^ustin. de militate credendi. | Nemini dubium est, omnes homines aut stultos 

aut sapi-]entes. Nunc autem sapientes voco, non cordatos & inge-lniosos homines, 

Deiq; 
cepta cogni- 1 tio : at(J; huic cognitioni vita & mores ] congruunt. | 

sed eos quibus est, quanta in esse homini | potest ipsius hominis 

firmissim^ per- 

To the sinister side of the title, printed perpondicularly along the page : 

Mar. Ficin. in Plat. ] 
Animse forma intima et divi- 1 
na solis divinis cognita. | 

Below the title : 

Parac. in Philos. Sagac. lib. i. cap. 2. | 
E>er Philosophus soil das am ersten betrachten, von wan- ) nen der Mensch komme und 
den andem den Eckstein legen. Dem- 1 nach der Theologus, damit er wisse, was der 
Leib und das tddliche | in ihm und das ewige sey, damit er denselben nicht zum Teuffel 
ver-)damme. Und der Jurist, damit er wisse, wie der Mensch nicht eine | Sau sev 
sondem eine edle Creatur, damach ihn wisse als einen | Menschen, nicht als ein Kalb 
zu uhrtheilen. Und der Medicus soil | diesen Anfang auch wissen, dafs er ihn nicht 
wie ein Viefa in die | Fleisch-Banck gebe, sondem bedencke Gdttliches Bildnifs | recht, 
wie der Artzney mit zu fahren. | 

On the dexter side of the title also printed perpendicularly along the page : 

Bemh. sup. Cant. Ser. 41. J 
Divina sunt, ft nisi expertis) 
prorsus incognita quae] 
effiunur.J 

This title-leaf is followed by the ' Elenchus Capitum,' and then by the other fly-title 
as follows : 

Offenbahrung G<ittlicher Majesttlt, Darinn angezeiget wird : Wie Gott der Herr 
anfUnglich sich auen seinen Geschdpfen mit Worten und Wercken geoffenbahret, und 
wie er alle seine Wercke, derselben Art, Eigenschaft, Kraft und WUrckung in kurtze 
Schrifft artlich verfasset, und solches alles dem ersten Menschen, den er sdbst nach 
seiner Bildntiis geschaffen, (iberreichet : Welches dann bifs daher gelaneet ist : Hie- 
bevor fast vor 60. Jahren auf vielfMltiges Suchen ediret, und aniezo, weils so rar und 
theuer, dafs auch ein Exemplar vor 30. 40. Thalr. verkaufft, und fast nicht zu erhalten 
gewesen, nunmehr gleichfals auff so vielfkltiges Be^ehren, sonderlich ftlr Gnaden> 
hungerige, Weisheit-suchende, Kunst-begierige, Gott-hebende und himmlisch-gesinnte 
Kinder Gottes wieder aufgeleget, und zwar also, dafs es nicht nur nach fleissiger 
Revision von sehr vielen und grossen Haupt-Druck-Fehlem gebessert. sondem auch 
mit angeltlgten unterschiedenen Anmerckungen vermehret. 

Without date, place and printer's name. 

4^ Title pp. [2I, Elenchus Capitum [32] ; second title and preliminary matter [40], 
Text, 530, Index [24] ; Text 5x4, Index [28J. 

GUTMANN—GUTWASSER 

GUTMANN (Akgidius). Continued. 

Gutmann (by wme mllcd Guetmann, and Outh- 
mann) lived in Ihc middle of Ihe sisiecnih cenlurjf, 
but very little is known nbout liim. l-p to his 
twcnlielh yvar he studied nns and i^itosophy, nnd 
Ibeii went to (he L'nivcnity, Init [icrKivine the 
emptiness of (he current topics, he travi-llcd nnd 
saw ihat even ihe commoti people were Ijctter 
iiulnicted, Yel be returiiLtl to the UniverEUy, till 
nbook entitled /Vi/uKii/imiu.- into his tuuids, wliiuh 
lie read and pondered with diligence, nnd from it 
learned the loftiness uf Ihe Divine Mnjciiy, and 
then for the third lime he visited the diflerenl 
Univcrsitius where ht- hi-ard discourses not on 
thpojophic but on heathi-tiish and ilevilisli uritings. 
n book, pcisuiiialily the mull of nil his 

.'S7S- , 

Hii 

author was livini; in Suabia about 1580, and was 
well known in AuRslwtg ill 1584. The dedicniion 
of the book to Ilukc Kredcrick v., CuunI Calatine 
on thr Khinc. is daleil " Kranekfurt am Mayn, 
ipws Nondinis VemaTilni' Anno i6r9," nnd this, 
thP first i-dition, i-( said to hnve been putilisbed at 
Anislrrdaiu after his death. This edition had 
become m mre thai some sintjr ye.irs Liter (as the 
prcseol title status) il was reprintird. ihi- editor 
beinj; Kcinrich AmmcrslKirh, pastor at Halber- 
stndt. It has neither place nor dnie. but it is said 
to hnvr appeaml at Fmnkfurl a. M., ur, according 
to Schelhom. at Halberstadl, in 1675. There is 
no evidence of this in the present copy so far as I 
can perceive. 

The ascription of the work 10 Gulniann is due to 
what is said in the E<lie. 

Spcrber, Fjho dtr ven Goll hecketlmckleltn 
Fraltrnilit dts Ibblichen OrJins R. C, Dantiig. 
1616, Prcef. ad Lect., p, la, (Contains a review of 

Colberg, /Jai Plalinisch-Httvulhcht! CMrisln- 

Borrichiiis, Coaiftclin Scrifloriim ChemkiirHm, 
'697. P- 34. ^o- lii. 

Kfrin Hntpuck . . . odtr Ttul!ihe> Ftgiruer 
dtr Scheidt-Xiinll, T702, p. 90, (A laudnlory 
notice. ) 

Reiinmann, Einliilang in Jit Uhloruim liler- 
ariam dim- Trulschen, 1709, iii. pp. ,113-18 (b). 

Roth-Scholti. BiHiothtca ChtmUa, 1727, pp. 
168-176. (Roth-Scholti gives a brief notice of the 
author, and a summary of the contents, and calls it 
an excellent book. ) 

Schelhorn. Amoenitalti Lilttarix. 1730, iii. p. 
166; 1736, v. p. 19a. 

Zedler, Uaivtnal Ijxicon, 1731, xi. col. 1+73. 

Morhof. Pelyhister. 173a (ii. a. 3. 8), p. 165 ; 
(u. I. 1 1. 7), p. 322 ; (ill, J. 1. 6), p. 554. 

Theophilus bineerus, fCachrickttn wn lauter 
alltn tind rartK BUthirn, 173a, iv. 

Stolle, Anititung lur Hhlorit der Cilahrheil. 
1736, p. 570, 

UHse/mldi^ Nachrickien, v. J. 1738, 3ter Beiir. 
p. 387- 

Arnold, Kirchtn- uad Kttxer-Hisloricn, 1741, 
ii. p. 321. 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Hisloire di la Philoapkit 
Hermtlijue, 1743, iii. p. 379. 

GUTWASSER (Benedict). 

Aus dem aufrichtigen Glaubensbelcenntnirs, j 
See HERMETISCHES A. B, C, 1779, ii. p. 41, 

ideas and lanjittge to those oif PajwxliDi, b 
dors not quote at all accnrateiy Gutnuuu'l fe 
of GeiMiis. I. i-s, which forms ibe ten a 
twenty-four books of commentary cotisiitiitiiii 
work. Rdmmann concludei by repeBliag Uor 
reniaik, that (lutmann propounds a frnt nu 
of probleins, liul does not eive a lohitiao of t 
C.'orrodi calls him A pupil of P&racelni. 

><tolle's criticism ii ttial the comnKDUiy to 
of illuminating the words of Moiet only ate 
them. He is very bilto- about thi* and B 
writinn, and says that he calculated on leoi 
sontelEing fRMn it, but wai ibanefnl^ daa 
Iloefer's remark is Ihat Guttnanu uieaJuof ac 
had been an eyc^tiieaa oifit. 

He is said to have been i 
nctual founder of the oida-. and that in any 
aniicipalion) of their doctrines arc to be Ion 
his book. Gmelin saj-s Ihat he hardly deier 
place in the history of^ chemistry. 

Kvery one emphasises the rarity of both edit 
That of 1619 was so rate Ihat <u mudi a) 
ilucats had been given for it. Stolle sayi than 
copy of il in Ihe Library of Jeita UninniR, 
ihe second ediiion, which is saM to be a linala 
nnd page for page reprint, I have Mcn as 
copy, and there is one in the British Mnseom. 

\ book entitled : Abgtnlllkirlt Ltkr- ■. £n 
Sckrifl vnder dm gtitmamHtscken Ofimiokn 
Patron, HamburK, 1677, 8", whidi I baTcnoli 
i« aoparenlly a criticism of or reply to GntOK 

Bnicker. Hiiloria Cri/ira PkUemif^dr, 1743 

i. p. 685. 

Vogl, Catalagus . , . Ijinmm rttriaram, i 
P- 499- 

Jocher, Allgemeinii GeUkrim-ljiitfii, 175 
col. 1287. 

Mailer, Biiliolktca Analaama, 1774, >. p. 3 

H. Corrodi, ATriHukt Gesckicktf dts CUHti 

■83, iii, p aSg. 

Brylrng mr CachitkU der kSken Ctrmie. 
pp, 496, 604 ("a strange and little known 
tiy an alchemist and ghosi-seer"). 

Semler, Unfarltiiichi Samfungtm lar HL 
dtr Rosmknuitr, 17B6, I pp. 43, 44,.86. 90, 9I 

Gmelin, Cejchickle dtr Cktmit, 1797, L pp. 
557- 

Miirr, Utftr dtn nakrta Urtpruiig dtr R 
krtHttr Mnd dti Frttmaurtrerdtnt, iCbs. p. 4; 

Fuchs, Stferlorii"' rf*>- .-»»«t'«f»~ tim^ 
1806-08, p. 83. 

Sprengel, r,t,fhu 
111. p. 537. 

Hoefer, HiUoiit di la Ckimit, 1843, ii. p, 
1860, ii p. 135. 

Kloss, BiHiogtafkii dtr FrrymauTtni. 1S4 
190, No. 8567. 

Graesse, Trisor dt Livrts ram, 186a, 
187- 

1783. 

1 dir cktmitcktn LiH 

Haeser, GtsckUUi dtr Mtditin, tSSi, i 

136. 

Kopp, Dit Althtmit, tBS6, L p. aia ; ii. ]x 

H. (C. G.).—H. (£.). 

357 

H. (C G.). 

Eines wahren Adepti besondere Geheimnisse von der Alchymie zum Gebrauch 
und Nutzen denen Liebhabern herausgegeben und mit Figuren erlautert 
von C. G. H. Drefsden, bey Johann Nicolaus Gerlach 1757. 

8*. Pp. [12] 376. Index [ao]. 14 Symbolical engravings of Chemical Operations. 

This anonymous treatise is divided into ten 
books with distinctive titles : 
I. Mercurius redivivus. p. i. 
a. Catholicon Physicorum, p. 35. 

3. Venus Vitriolata . . . nee noii Mars Vic- 
toriosus, p. 43. 

4. Elixir seu Medicinae Vitae, p. 63. 

5. Satumus Saturatus, p. 85. 

6. Metamorphosis Lapidum ignobilium, in Gem- 
mas quasdam pretiosas, p. 1 17. 

7. Alchymiae Compleraentum et Perfectio, p. 135. 

8. Auslegung der dunklen W5rter, &c., p. 163. 

9. Marsilius Ficinus, Vom Stein der Weisen, p. 
183. 

10. Nuysemenl, Tractat vou dem wahren 
geheimen Salsc der Philosopben, und allgemeinen 
Weltgeiste, p. 233. 

It is therefore neither more nor less than a 
translation of Samuel Norton's tracts, g.v. 

Compare Vigilantius de Monte Cubiti, Drey- 
fackes Hermetiichts KUeblat^ NUrnberg, 1667, 
which includes the tracts contained in this volume. 

Of the present work there is a copy in the Ouvaroflf 
collection. 

Ladrague, BibliotMqtte Ottvaroff^ Sciences Secrites, 1870, No. 1474. 

H. (E.). 

Ein ausfiihrlicher Tractat, von philosophischen Werck des Steins der Weisen, 
durch eine Jungfer E. H. genannt, Anno 1574. geschrieben. Samt einer 
griindlichen Untersuchung und Entdeckung, der Art und Eigenschaflfl des 
Goldes : Worinnen nicht allein die wahre Materie desselben wohl vememlich 
entdecket, sondem auch die Handlung seiner Bearbeitung treulich angewiesen 
wird, imgleichen die Tabula Smaragdina Hermetis in vielen, auch sonst 
noch einige tunckle Spriiche der Philosophen, sonderbahr gedeutet und 
erklahret werden. Dabey angefiiget : Ein Catalogus Librorum Kabalisticorum. 
Hamburg, zufinden bey Gottfried Liebezeit, 1702. 

8^ Pp. [8] containing the title, on the reverse of which is the interpretation of the 
•* Amaritudinis Poculum," and preface ; pp. 3-44, the first tract ; pp. 45-98. the second 
tract ; and pp. 99-103, the catalogue of cabalistic books. The second tract has a 
title-page which repeats the second part of the above title. 

We are not informed who the lady was who in 
1574 composed the present little tract. The second 
is also anonymous. The list of cabalistic and 
magic books contains the titles of 69 Mss. which 
were on sale at Leipzig in x6ii^ for 16000 imperials. 
Amongst other items it contains : No. 50. Ma^ia 
Kiramidis {sic), a famous book of magic which 
was afterwards edited by Rivinus and printed in 

Semler, Umpartheiisclu Samlungeti Mur Historie 
der Rosenkmuur^ 1786, 1 p. xiS; 1787, il. p. 55. 

1638, and was then translated into English. The 
Catalogus was reprinted by Semler, and the 
present work is quoted by him. The authoress, 
nowever. was unknown to him ; he thinks it is a 
translation from the French^ and the other tract 
from the Latin, which will be found in the 
Theatrum Chemicum, although the two versions 
differ widely from one another. 

Ladrague, Bibliothique Ouvarof^ 
Secritest 1870^ No. 143a, 

Sciences 

358 

H. (/. C)— HA GEN 

H. (I. C). 

Des Hermes Trismegists wahrer alter Naturweg. Oder: Geheimnifs wic die 
grofse Universaltinctur ohne (llaser, auf Menschen und Metalle zu bereiten. 
Herausgegeben von einem achten Freymaurer I. C. H. Mit vier Kupfem. 
Leipzig, bey Adam Friedrich Bohme. 1782. 

8**. Pp. viii. [x, I blank], loo. 

Beytrag %ur Gesckichte dfr kokern ChemU, 1785, 
p. 679. 

Ladrague, BibliotlUque Otrvan^, 
SecrttfSf 1870, Nos. 645-646. 

Von der Natur und Kunst. Kin Danksagungsschreiben an den erleuchteten 
Verfasser des hermetischen A. B. C. von eInem (Ehristlich gesinnten Ser- 
metischen Lehrj linger. Nebst einem Auszuge aus etlichen sehr lar 
gewordenen deutlich und aufrichtig abgefaisten Werken des beruhmten 
neuesten wahren Adepten, Hermann Fictulds. Als ein Eiiganzungsstock 
zum Hermetischen A. B. C. von Adamah Booz. Leipzig, 1781. verl^ts 
Adam Friedrich Bohme. 

8*. Pp. [16] 208. 

The extracts are from the following works of 3. Oas Gesprache zwischen Mascos. Agoi uad 
Fictuld : einem Filius (sic) Hermetis. a 13a 

X. Das edlc Perlein, 1734. p. 63. 4. Ausdem Hermetischen TriuxnphsbQgen: Gtb- 

a. Das allgeroeiDe natUrliche Chaos, p. 102. bala mystica naturse, 1741, p. 14a. 

Occulta occultissime, 1748, p. 185. 

Adamah Booz is the pseudonym of Adam Melchior Birkholx (^.v.)> 
Ladrague, BibliotlUqut Ouvaroff^ Sciences Secrites, X870, No. 1511. 

H. (J. F.), S. 

See HAUTNORTHON (JOSAPHAT FRIEDRICH), Suecus. 
See HARPRECHT (JOHANN). 

H. (L. C), P. T. 

See HELLWIG (CHRISTOPH). 

HAAS (JoHANN Conrad). 

See CREILING (jOHANN CONRAD), Dissertatio de Aureo Vellere, Sectio IV., 1739. 

HAGEN (Karl Gottfried). 

Grundrifs der Experimentalchemie zum Gebrauch bey dem Vortrage derselben, 
von Karl Gottfried Hagen, der Arzeneigelahrtheit Doctor und Professor, 
Konigl. Preufsischem Hofapotheker, dem Rom. Kaiserl. Akaderoie der 
Naturforscher und der Berlinischen naturforschenden Gesellschaft Mitglied. 
Mit 4 Tabellen. Konigsberg und Leipzig, bey Gottlieb Lebrecht Hartung, 
1786. 

8*. Pp. xvi. 389 [14, I blank]. Vignette. 

Vom Braunstein, und dessen erdigt alkalischen Theile. 

See ALLGEMEIN niitzliches chemisch-physikalischcs Mancherlei, 1781, i. p. 217. 

The above work went through several editions. 
The first, 1786 ; the second, 1791 ; the fourth, 
18x5. Hagen wrote also Grundsdtzc der Chemie, 
K5nigsberg, 1796, 8". A dissertation on the water 
at Thorn, in Latin, Regiomonti, 1788, 4'; in 
German, Kdnigsberg, 1789, 4"; Lehrbuch der 
Apotheker-JCMfut, Kdnigsberg, 1778, 8', 1781, 1782, 

1786, X792, 1 82 1, and papers in the A^^mi AcU 
Academice Natura Curiosarum, before the * Natnr* 
forschende Freunde ' at Berlin, in Crell's Annaku 
and in other journals. 

The author was born at Konigsberg, 24 Dec, 
1749, ^^^ "^^^ Hofapotheker. He becameDooeot 
in X77S, extraordinary Professor, 1779; Ofdiiiaiy, 

HAGEN^HAIMO 

359 

HAGEN (Karl Goitfried). Continued, 

1788, in the Medical Faculty ; in 1804 he was made 
Master of Arts, and in 1807 Professor of Chemistry, 
Physics, and Natural History in the Philosophic^ 
Faculty in the University there. He died at 
Konigsberg, 2 March, 1829. His elder brother 

C. E. Weigel, Grundrifs der reinen und ange- 
wandien Chemie, 1777, ii. 407 (§ 1022, d^). 

Gmelin, GeschichU der Chemie, 1799, lii. pp. 288, 
399, 568, 587. 625, 656, 726, 754. 

Fuchs, Repertonum der chemischen Litieratur, 
i8o6-o8, p. 506. 

Biographie Midicale^ Paris, Panckoucke (1820- 
25), V. p. 16. 

Kopp, Geschichte der Chemie, 1844, ii. p. 117; 
1847, iv. pp. 35, 38. 

Phillippe & Ludwig, Geschichte der Apoiheker, 
^^SSi pp. 641, 730. 827. 

Kluyskens, Des Hommes ciUbns dans Us Sciences 

and a grandson, both chemists, and a nephew, an 
engineer, were all natives of Konigsberg. 

The Lchrbuch der Apotheker Kunst had great 
influence on the art in Germany. 

ct les Arts et des Midailles qui consacrent leur 
Souvenir, 1859, ii. p. 6. 

Poggendorff, Biographisch-literarisches Hand- 
rvorterbuch, 1863, i. coL 992. 

A llgemeine Deutsche Biographic, 1879, x. p. 340 
(article by Ladenburg). 

Billings, Index-Catalogue, 1884, v. p. 776; 2nd 
Series, 1901, vi. p. 680. 

Dictionnaire Encyclopidiquc des Sciences Medi- 
cates, z886, 4^me S^rie, xii. p. 21. 

Hirsch. Biographisches Lexikon der hervorra- 
genden Aerzte alter Zeiien und ydlker, 1886, iii. 

P- 13. 

HAHN (JoHANN David), Prases, 

See VOLTELEN (floris jacobus), Respondens, 

Hahn, though a native of Germany, having been 
bom at Heidelberg, 9 July, 1729, spent the greater 
part of his life in Holland. He was a doctor of 
medicine of Leyden, and in 1753 ^^ appointed 
professor of philosophy, physics, astronomy, and in 
1759 of botany and chemistry at Utrecht. After- 
wards, in 1775, he went to Leyden as professor of 
medicine. He died there 19 March, 1784. Haller 
speaks of him as ' vir illustris et noster olim amicus.* 
He wrote a few papers on chemical subjects: 

Haller, Bibliotheca Botanica^ 1772, ii. p. 488. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Anatomica, 1777, li. p. 472. 

Weigel, Grundriss der reinen und angewandten 
Chemie^ 1777, >• PP. 49° ; ii. 472. 

Adelimg, Fortsetzung und Ergdnzungen zu . . , 
Jochers Allgemeinen Gelehrten-Lexico, 1787, ii. col. 

1735- 

Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemie^ 1798, ii. p. 712. 

Meusel, Lexikon der von 1750 bis 1800 verstor- 
benen Teutschen Schriftsteller^ 1805, v. p. 65. 

Fuchs, Repertorium der chemischen Litteratur, 
1806-08, pp. 304, 370. 

* Diss, de efficacia niixtioiiis in mutandis corporum 
voluminibus,' Lugd. Bat. 1751, 4* ; Comm. Lips., 
i. p. 648 ; 

' Oratio do Chemiru cum Hotanica conjunctione 
utili el pulchra,' Ultraj. 1759, 4** ('Oratio viri 
egregii,' Haller) ; 

* Oratio de Mathesi et Chemia, earumque mutuo 
auxilio,' Ultraj. 1768, 4** ; 

and some papers on mathematics. He also 
translated Watt's Logic into Latin. 

Biographie Medicate, Paris, Panckoucke (1820- 

25)1 V. p. 20. 

Poggendorff, Biographisch-literarisches Hand- 
worterbuch^ 1863, i. col. 993. 

Van der Aa, Biographisch WoorcUnboeck der 
Nederlanden, 1867, viii. p. 85. 

Billings, Index-Catalogue, 1884, v. p. 779. 

Dictionnaire Encyclopidique des Sciences Midi- 
cales, 1886, 4^me S^rie, xii. p. 29. 

Hirsch, Biographisches Lexikon der hervorra- 
genden Aerzte aUer Zeiten and Volker, 1886, iii. 
p. 17. 

HAIMO. 

Epistola de quatuor Lapidibus philosophicis, materiam suam ex minore mundo 
desumentibus. 

See SENDIVOGIUS (MICHAEL), Epilogus in Novum Lumen Chymicimi Orthelii, 
1624, p. 177. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1661, vi. p. 497. 

The authorities seem disposed to accept witliout 
demur the statement that the author of this tract 
was the Haimo who flourished in the ninth century. 
According to the accounts he was an An^lo-Saxon, 
a connection of Bede's, a pupil of Alcum's and a 
schoolfellow and friend of Rhabanus Maurus, and 
a Benedictine Monk. He became reader of theology 
at Fulda in 822, in 839 teacher at Corbey and 
Hirschfeld, but not Abbot, and in 840 bishop of 
Halberstadt. 

He entrusted the administration of the cathedral 
to an officer called Ruodger, whose residence and 
property near Halberstadt grew into the village of 
Haim or Hoym, from which the noble family of 
von Hoym may have been derived. 

He also founded the niouiistery of S. Wipertus on 
the Bode (now dissolvt^d), which is said to have led 
to the building of the neighbouring town of Qued- 
linburg. Into it he introduced Benedictine monks, 
who had been formerly pupils of his own at 
Hirschfeld, and made his school friend Rhabanus 
Maurus provost, after he had been driven out of 
Fulda by the lefractory monks there. Of the 
monastery nothing remains except the tiny but 
impressive crypt of the church, now enclosed by 
a range of farm buildings. 

He placed a fine hbrary in the cathedral at 
Halberstadt, but it probably perished in the fire of 
1 179. Haimo died at Halberstadt. 27 (28) March, 
853. 

36o 

HAIMO^HALLER 

HAIMO. Continued. 

He wrote commentaries oo almost all the books 
of the Old and New Testaments, homilies on the 
Gospels, summer and winter homilies, and a number 
of other works, some of which have been printed, 
though most of them appear to be still in manu- 
script. 

In the list of his works, at all events as given by 
Pits, nothing appears relative to any subject but 
theology and religion, and it may be doubted not 
onlv if the present work be by Haimo, but if 
alchemy was cultivated to any extent in Germany 
at that time. It may be doubted with still greater 
emphasis if alchemy — allowing that it were cul- 
tivated then— had been studied to such an extent 
and the possible sources of the wuiteria prima had 
been examined so exhaustively that the suggestion 

Naxari, Lklla Tratnutatione Metallica Sogni tre^ 
1599, p. 139 (just mentions the book). 

Pits, Rtlationum Historicarum de rebus Anglicis 
Tomus Primus^ 1619, p. 146 (Ann. 753). 

Borcl, Bibliotheca chimica, 1654, p. 11 1. 

Joh. Andreas Quenstedt, Dialogus de fatriis 
illusirium doctrina et script is virorum, Wittebergaj. 

x6w, p. 92- 

Roth-ScholtK. Biblioikeca Ckemica, 1727, p. 180. 

Fabricius, Biblioikeca Latina medi<B et in/imee 
^tatis, X735, Lib. viii. p. 543 (the alchemical tract 
is not mentioned). 

Zedler, Universal- Lexicon, 1735, xii. col. 950 
(and references). 

HALLER (Albrecht von). 

See PHARMACOPfEA Helvetica, 1771. 

Haller was bom at Berne, 16 Oct., 1708, studied 
medicine at Tilbingen in 1723, and at Leyden 
under Boerhaave in 1725, and was capped M.D. 
there in 1727. He visited London and Paris, pro- 
ceeded to Basel, where he lectured on anatomy, 
and reached Berne about 1729, where he began 
practice as a physician, for which, however, he had 
no special liking. In 1734 he was made professor 
of anatomy, a theatre was built for him. and he 
gave lectures and demonstrations on this subject. 
The University of Gottingen having been founded 
in 1736, Haller was invited to become professor of 
anatomy, botany, and surgery, and after some 
hesitation he accepted the post which he occupied 
till 1753. He then resigned on account of his 
health, and returned to Berne, where he A*'as 
ap{X}inted Ammann and filled various offices in 
the State. He died 12 Dec., 1777. 

Jacob Bnicker, Pinacothcca Scriptorum nostra 
/Etate Literis illustrium Decas IV., August 
Vindel., 1745. 

Btichner, Academic . . , Natures Curiosorum 
Hisioria, 1755, p. 513, No. 560. 

Putter, Versuch einer academischen Gelehrten- 
Geschichtt von der Georg- Augustus Universitdt au 
Gottingen, 1765, i. p. 89 ; 1788, ii. p. 39. 

Portal, Histoire de fAnatomie et dela Chirurgie, 
1770, iv. pp. 694-731, 8l passim. 

Eloy, Diciionnaire Historique de la Midecine, 
1778, il pp. 433-442. 

Jean Senebier, Eloge historique ct Albert de 
Haller . . . avec un Catalogue complet de ses 
(EwreSy k Geneve, 1778, 8°. pp. 104. 

Gottlieb Emanuel von Haller, Bibliothek der 
SchweiMer-Geschichte, 1785, il. Nos. 882-906 (works 

of a new source cootained in the preseot trvt 
could have been possiblj made. It was obIj ai a 
late date in the devdfOpment of the ponnit, nd 
when everjrthing elie bad been tried in vaiB^ that the 
alchemists at their wit's end turned to the naieritl 
supposed to be described in this tract. To ok iIk 
tract appears spurious, not bj Hainnob but reoeol; 
certainly not of the ninth century, roan likdf cf 
the seventeenth. Against its authentidtr also ii 
the fact that it did not appear in print ml it 
included in the sixth volume of the 
Ckemicum, If it had lieen known aad 
of value by the older alchemists in the amcHh 
century it could hardly have escaped inchidtD^ ia 
some of the collections that were then in drcubtna. 

Cave, Scriptorum EccUsiasticarmm Hitima 
literaria, 1743, "• P* ^t Ann. 841. 

locher, Allgemetnes Gelehrten-Lexiam, 1750^ il 
col. 1^x5. 

Aikin, General Biography, 1804, v. p. 8^ 

Ersch & Gmber, AUgewieine EtuyUopUu, 182B. 
2te Section, iii. p. 264. 

Schmiedo-. GeschichU der AkhewUe^ 1833, p. 1x6. 

Nouvelle Biographie GiniraU, 1858, xziu. ooL 121. 

Hoefer, Histoire de la Chimie, x&4a, i p. 335 ; 
1866. i. p. 354. 

Kopp, Geschichie der Chemie, 1844, ii. pp. X56, 

184, 233- 
Ladrague, Bibliothkque Owvaroff^ Sdtmm 

Secrites, 1870. No. 1147. 

No man had a greater reputation in Europe 
than Haller, and be received all the honoors 
that were to be had. He was prelfminent as as 
anatomist, physiologist, and botanist, a man of 
affairs and of administrative capacity, one of the 
most voluminous and successful of medic^ writers. 
distinguished as a poet and literary man. and the 
greatest of medical bibliographers. His da&sified 
catalogues of the literature of anatomy, botany, 
medicine, and surgery, in ten volumes, 4**, i77X- 
1788, accompanied by attracts, estimates, w 
criticisms, represent prodigious labour and reading, 
and an unrivalled knowledge of the history of those 
subjects. They are of the greatest value even nov 
for the study of the history of medicine. 

Haller, however, was not a chemist, hardly even 
a pharmacist, still one cannot but regret that be 
did not complete his set of bibliographies by a 
Bibliolheca Chemica. 

on his life), (see the Index of vols. i. and u. for 
other works). 

Adelung, Fortsetxung . . . «v . . . Jdckers . . . 
Gelehrten-Lexico, 1787, ii. col. 1742. 

Saxius, Onomasticon literarimm, 1788, vi. p. 416. 

Gmelin, Gcschichte derChemie, 1798,11. pp. 3^,4x4. 

Aikin, General Biography, 1804, v. p. 18. 

Condorcet, Oeuvres, An. xiii.(x8Q4),i. pp.365-4i9> 

Meuscl, Lexikon der von 1750 Hs 1800 verstof' 
benen Teutschen Schriftsteller, 1805, v. pu 86 (and 
references). 

Vicq d'Aryr, Eloges historiques. An. xiil (X805). 
ii. pp. 304-351. 

Fuchs, Repertarium der ckemiscken UUertdmr, 
1806-08, p. 292. 

Chalmers, The General Biographical Dietionarj, 
18x4, xvii. p. 59. 

HALLER—HALMALE 

361 

HALLER (Albrecht von). Continued. 

Rees. The Cyclofadia^ 1819, xvii. sui voce. 

Biographie Midicale, Paris, Panckoucke (1820- 
a^), V. pp. 38-63 (article by Jourdan and Boisseau, 
with a long account of his writings). 

Ersch & Gruber, Allgemeine Encvklopddit, 1827, 
ate Sect i. pp. 292-304 (article by Seiler). 

Sprengel, Geschichie der Arzneykunde, 1828, v. 
p. 69, &c., &c. 

Dezdmeris, Diciionnaire historigue de la Mide- 
cine, 1836, iii. i. pp. xi-31. 

Morwitz, Gesckukie der Medicin, 1849, ii. p. 258. 

Bayle & Thillaye, Biographie MidUaU, 1855, ii. 
pp. 3i6x-366. 

Phillippe & Ludwig, Gtschichte der Apotheker, 
>8w, pp. 533. 656, 662, 862. 

Kluyskens, Des Hommes calibres dans Us Scietues 
et Its Arts et des Midailles qui consacrent leur 
Souvenir, 1859, ii. p. 9, and the drawing of a 
medal. 

Rudolf Wolff, Biographien tur Kulturgeschichte 
der Schioeiz, 1859, Zweiter Cyclus, pp. 105-146, 
portrait. 

Poggcndorff, Biographisch-literarisches Hand- 
wortcrbuch^ 1863, i. col. 1003. 

Figuier, Vies des Savants il lustres (Savants du 
xviiie Sidcle), 1879, p. 264. 

Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie, 1879, x. p. 420 
(articte by lilbsch, with references). 

Haeser, Geschichie der Medicin, 1881, ii. p. 561, 
&c., &c. 

Billings, Index-Catalogue, 1884, v. p. 795 ; 2nd 
Series, 1901, vi. p. 704. 

Dictionnaire Encyclopidique des Sciences AUdi- 
caleSj 1886, 46me S^rie, xii. p. 72. 

Hirsch, Biographisches I^xikon der hervorra- 
genden Aerzte alter Zeiten und Volker^ 1886, iii. 

p. 31- 

HALLEY (Edmund). 

Erzehlungen von denen Winden. 

See DREBBEL (CORNELIUS), Tractat Oder Abhandlung von Natur und Eigenschaflfl 
der Elementen, 1723, p. 65. 

Halley, son of a soap-boiler, was born at 
Haggerston, 29 Oct., 1656. His fame rests on his 
astrouon^ical work, but he wrote one or two papers 
on chemical subjects, as on the saltness of the sea. 
He was professor of geometry at Oxford, 1703-20, 

Roth-Scholtr, Bibliotheca Chemica, 1727, p. 181. 

Biographia Britannica, 1757, iv. pp. 2494-2520. 

Mordn, Le Grand Dictionnaire historique, 1759, 
V. p. 497. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Anatomica, 1777, ii. p. 105 
(* Celebris matbematicus canipanam urinatoriam 
descripsit'). 

Addung, Fortsetzuug . . . su , . , Jochers . . . 
Gelehrten-Lexico, 1787, ii. col. 1756. 

Aikin, General Biography, 1804, v. p. 25. 

Chalmers, The General Biographical Dictionary^ 
18 14, xvii. p. 71. 

Rees, Tne Cychpcedia^ 1819, xvii. sub voce. 

Secretary of the Royal Society, 1713-21, Astronomer 
Royal, 1 7 19, and Foreign Associate of the French 
Academy, 1729. He died at Greenwich, 14 Jan., 
1742, aged 86. 

Wood, Athcnce Oxonienses, ed. Bliss, 1820, iv. 
col. 536. 

Weld, A History of the Royal Society, 1848, 
passim. 

Grant, History of Physical Astronomy, 1852, 
p. 102, & passim. 

Allibone, A Critical History of English 
Literature, 1859, i. p. 771. 

Kluyskens, Des Hommes c^l^bres dans Its Sciences 
et les Arts et des Midailles qui consacrent leur 
Souvenir, 1859, ii. p. 10. 

Dictionary of National Biography, 1890, xxiv. 
p. 104. 

HALMALE (Johan Frederik van). 

Merkurius Verheerlykt; Zynde een naukeurige verhandelinge van 't Begintzel, 
Aerd, Eigenschap en Uitwerkzelen van de Kwikzilver. Deszelfs kwaedaer- 
digheid, waer in die bestaet, aengewezen, en hoe die weg genomen en 
verbeterd kan werden. Zynde alsdan een Middel waer door vele sware en 
ongenezeligke Ziektens (door bygebragte Experimenten bevestigd) gered 
zyn: Benevens dien ook aengetoond dat de Mercurius het ware onderwerp 
der Philosophen is. Door Johan Frederik van Halmale, Med Doct tot 
Middelburg in Z^land. In Amsterdam, By Jan Ten Hoorn, Boekverkoper 
over *t Oude Heeren Logement. 1707. 

8*. Pp. [15, I blank] 246. Index [2]. Vignette with the motto: Myn Glas 
Loopt Ras. 

This work begins with a commendation of 
chemistry. Next follows its history, with brief 
notices of Geber, Lully, Arnaldus, liaisil Valentin, 
Paracelsus, Bemhard, Sendivogius, v. Suchten, 
V. HdmoDt and bis son, Philaletha, de Comitibus, 
Pantaleon. Then mercury and its compounds. 

of which the preparation, properties, and medical 
uses are discussed at length. 

Van der Aa merely mentions his name and books. 
Haller, and, after him, Gmelin quotes Ontleeding 
ewer de Amsterdamze Apothek, AmsL 1739 and 
1762, 8«. 

361 

HALMALE'-HAMMEN 

HALMALE (Johan Frederik van). Continued, 

Haller, BUliotheca Midicin^t practice, 1788, iv. Van der Aa, Bicgrafkisck 

p. -^ Stdtrlandtn, 1867. VIII. i. p. 1 
(mielin, Cieschichie <Ur Ckemie^ 17981 >>• p* 249> 

HALTEREN (Nicolaes van). 

Princelijck Gheschenck, of Tractaet der Medicynen. In 't welck natuerlijck 
en grondich de Ix>flijcke en wytberoemde Konst van Ghenesinghe, de 
krachten van alle Cniyderen ende ghewassen, als oock €k>mmen, Heraen, 
Olyen, Extracten, Wateren, gheene uyt-ghesondeit. Mitsgaeders de Com- 
positien aller Medicamenten, en de Remedien teghens alle Kiancheden, en 
Fenynen, die het Menschelicke gheslacht voorvallen, verhaelt werdeoi en 
by experientie goedt bevonden zyn. 

Hier is een Tractaet van de Alchymie voor de beminders Thec^ihnsd 
Paraceisi by ghevoegt. Eerst bcschreven door den Hoogh-gheleerden ende 
Experten Medicijn Nicolaes van Halteren, Dienaer des Godtlicken woorts 
binnen Hornaer. Ende nu tot eyghen kosten in 't licht ghebracht, door 
lohannem i Porta. t' Amstelredam, By Ian Evertsz. Cloppenborch, 

Boeckvcrcooper op 't Water in den vergulden Bybel, t^en over de Cooren- 
Beurs, 1633. 

4*. Pp. [8] 190 [2 blank]. 

Paracelsus' Tract, p. 179. Ilaller {Bibliotheca Medicine practicdt^ 1777, ii. p. 516) quotes this book, 
but gives the date 1623. 

HAMMEN (LuDwiG von). 

Ludovici von Ham men, D. Medici Regii de Herniis Dissertatio AcademicaL 
Accedunt de Crocodilo ac Vesicae Mendaci Calculo Epistolae et Responsiones 
ad Magnificum atque Excellentissimum D. Carol. Drelincurtium Medicum 
Regium & Professorem Primarium Lugd. in Bat longe Celeberrimum. Editio 
Tertia. Lugduni Batavorum, Apud Cornelium Boutesteyn. M DC LXXXI. 

12". Pp. [12], 7-135, [i blank]. 

This writer was a Prussian, born (at Danzig?) 
in 1652, studied medicine at Montpellier. and 
apparently took the degree of M.D. there. His 
thesis on the occasion was entitled : Curriculum 
medicum Monsptliense fro doctoratus gradu^ 
Monsp.. 1674, 4. He became physician to John 
Sobicski, King of Poland. The above seems to be 
his only book, for a work on the History of 

Merckliii, Lindenius renotuitus, 1686, p. 763. 
Manget, IHbliothtca Scriplorum medicorum^ 
1771, I. ii. p. 567. 
Kestner, Medtciniscfus GeUhrten-Lexicofty 1740, 

P- 374. 

locher, Allgemctnes GeUhrten -Lex icon ^ 1750, ii. 

col. 1343. 

Georgius Matthix. Conspectus Hisioricc Mcdi- 
corum chronologicus^ 1761, p. 865. 

Portal, Histoirt de l' Anatomie et de la Chir- 

urrit, 1770* "i- P- 536. 

Tialler. Bibliotheca Anatomica^ 1774. '• P- 678 
(Gedanensis vermiculorum spermaticorum inventor 
ab anno 167^). 

Haller. Bibliothica Ckirurgica, \tj\, i- p. 433. 

Danzig Physicians on which be was engaged was 
interrupted by his death, which took plaoe 15 
March, 1689. He has been credited by Matthiz, 
Haller and others with having; been the first to 
ol»erve spermatozoa, but Haeser has shown that 
this is due to confusing him with Johann Ham. 
who was a student at Leyden at the same time and 
who really made the discovery in 1677. 

Eloy, Dictionnaire historique de la Midecuu^ 
1778, ii. p. 444. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Aiedicinee practicct^ 1779. "*• 
p. ^70 (his thesis). 

Bioj^raphie Midicale^ Paris, Panckoucke (i8ao- 
25). V. p. 69. 

Sprengel, Geschichie der Arzneykunde^ 1827, iv. 
p. 250. 

H.iescr, Geschichie der Medici n, i88i, ii. p. 334. 

Billings, Index-Catalogue, 1884, v. p. 811. 

Dictionnaire encyclopidique des Sciences Midi- 
cales^ 1886, 46me S^rie, xii. p. 167. 

Hirsch, Biographisches Lexikon der hervorra- 
genden Aerzie aller Zeiten und Voiker^ 1886, iti. 

p. 43- 

HANCOCKE—HANNEMANN 363 

HANCOCKE (John). 

Vom gemeinen Wasser als dem besten Fiebermittel. 
See OERTEL, Universal-Wasserdoktor. 

John HaDcocke, D.D., an Knglish clergyman, 1722, 1723, 1724, 8*; 1726, 8**, 1772; French 

Rector of St. Margaret's, Lothbury, prebendary translation, by Niceron : Tratt^ des vertus m^dicin- 

of Canterbury, chaplain to the Duke of Bedford, ales de I'eau commune, Paris, 1725, 12^ 1730, I2^ 

had studied medicine and was a great advocate He is commended for his accuracy in the state- 

for the use of water in fever. On this subject ment of facts but he deprived them of their >^ue 

he wrote his book : Febrifugum magnum, or by his inferences and criticisms of others views, 
common water the best cure for feavers, London, 

Elo^, Dufsonnaire kistdrique d$ la Midecine^ Haeser, Gesckichie der Medici n, 1881, ii. p. 648. 
1778, li. p. 446. Billings, Index-Catalogue, 1884, v. p. 8x5 ; 2nd 

Allibone, A Critical Dictionary cf English Series, 1901, vi, p. 724. 
LiUrature, 1859, i. p. 781 (mentions Sermons^ 
* Ac' 1697-1739, but not the present tract). 

HANNEMANN (Johann Ludwig). 

Cato Chemicus Tractatus quo Verae ac GenuiniB Philosophiae Hermeticae, & 
Fucatae ac Sophisticae Pseudo Chemise & utriusque Magistrorum Characterismi 
accurate delineantur. Hamburgi, Apud Gothofr. Liebernickel. Literis 

Brendekii. Anno 1690. 

la^. Sigs. A to D in twelves, or, pp. [95, x blank]. 

This was published anonymously. Moller assigns it to Hannemann, and Kopp and other authorities 
do the same. 

Cato Chemicus. 

See MANGET (j. J.), Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, i. p. 368. 

Nova & Accurata Methodus cognoscendi simplicia V^etabilia juxta tnplicem 

cognirionem ,. Grammaticam. .. Philosophical. 3- Medican>.{g2r: * 
Neotericorum Philosophorum & Medicorum propriisque principiis super- 
structa, & curiosb adomata. Autore Johanne Ludovico Hannemann, Med. 
D. & Philosophiae Naturalis Prof. Publ. Ordinar. in Alma Christian-Albertina. 
S. R. I. A. N. C. Collega. 

Die rechte Hand defs Hochsten kan alles endren. Psal. lxxvii. Vers. xi. 
Kilonl, Literis & Sumptibus Joach. Reumanni, Acad. Typogr. 1677. 

4*. Pp. [3, 2 blank] 148. 

The author is accused by Schelhammer of having plagiarised in this treatise from 
Coming. 

Job. Ludovici Hannemanni D. & Philosophise Naturalis in Illustri Christian- 
Albertina Professoris Publici & Ordinarii : Leopoldinae Societatis Collegae 
Nestoris H. Ovum Hermetico-Paracelsico-Trismegistum. i.e. Commentarius- 
Philosophico-Chemico-Medicus, in quandam Epistolam Mezahab dictam 
de Auro. £t Historia Philosophico-Chemico-Medica de eodem metallo 
nativo & artificiali. In quo et 108. Quaestiones Chemicae ab Excellentiss. 
D. D. Morhofio propositae ab Autore solvuntur. Omnia, juxta adeptac 
Paracelsicas & Eclecticas Philosophiae principia. Una cum Fasciculo Episto 
larum ad quosdam nostri Seculi Medicos Celeberrimos, & Appendice 
Apologetico. Francofurti, Impensis Friderici Knochii, Anno M.DC.XCIV. 

8*. Pp. [68] 440, 28 [14. 2 blank]. 
Epistola, p. I. 108 Quaestiones. p. 251. 

r.r./y 

u- I. r: 

3 Z» 

xe 1 

r-nr -c ••^^ 

ij«. 1. .X. 3> 

tt 

: ■»-■ £.— . 

V. 

r- 4.« 

1 .' .—J ^. .-■ ir"jk ri 

-r c. Kf *r- .-« *:i 

r«5a. ?. 455- 

.:: . ' ■ . -/ 

■ ^ «: 

V ■ 

V. ; 

- ■ - - -■ ■- - -•■ > 

S'.'.JZTu .'»/--;-_" i^r-i.;"*^ t*P4_ T. pL 2jj: xd 
:^ .iTT*: -^^t ::;•»: C. p. ^T" 

'J" J 

r.:rt i-vx y 

: I 

■l:::- J-r . ^ 1 1: i«i.'. : 5cc -. p &u : i;. pi 569 

lfl£'trrr-^,v; ---•.-■ v.--. 

^.r*';.ri;/'^/^:a ff-i/ir.a de Avrro Phi:o5opr.:::' reccum cognito : Unde juxtt 
U'M': ,v;-'..;,i p^;t^t f^m opjs Ur.iver^'.issirr.iim iot:us Monarchise Chymicae 
in P'-^no Mj'-.'rrali : t ::m orr.r.c? in 5J0 quiq; genere Universales ejusdem 
H':;/rii Min'irahs J^pides. Tinc'.ineve par.iculares, cujus author, Nicolaus 
Nij^'-r Haj>«:liijs, Anagrammarizomenos. Accessit Tractatus Venccslai 
I-'ivinii, Moravi, dt: (Irjclo Terrestri, A:c. NIarpurgi Cattorum, ex Officina 

I'iKJoIplii ffijtvvdrkcri Anno cIoJdCXII. 

ff. I'lK [i^; io-»3 [i blank*. Every page is in a border. 

HAPEUUS'-HAR TMANN 

365 

HAPELIUS (NicoLAUS Niger). Continued. 

Tractatus de Coelo Tenrestri Venceslai Lavinii. p. 97. Hapelius : Disquisitio 
Heliana de Metallorum transformatione, p. 103. Aphonsmi Basiliani, p. 213. 

The Disquisitio Heliana is reprinted from the edition of 1606, for which see kglinls iconh'S (Raphael), 
and see also elias. 

Cheiragogia Heliana, de Auro Philosophico, nee dum cognito. 

See THEATRUM CHKMICUM, 1 659, iv. p. 262. 

Disquisitio Heliana, Aphonsmi Basiliani sive Canones Hermetici de spiritu, 
anima et corpore medio Majoris & Minoris Mundi. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, iv. p. 327. 

Disquisitio de Helia Artium. 

See EGLINUS ICONIUS (RAPHAEL). 
See also ICONIUS (RAPHAEL EGLINUS). 

Nicolaus Niger Hapelius is an anagram for 
Raphael Eglinus Iconius. though hardlv any of the 
oldier writers notice this, but assume Hapelius to 
be the author's real name, and enter the present 

Borel, Bibliothtca Chi mica ^ 1654. p. 167. 

Mercklin, LincUnius renovatus, 1686, p. 841. 

Borrichius, Conspectus Scriptorum Chemicorum^ 
1697, p. 33. 

Mangct, Dibliotheca Scriptorum Medtcorum, 
1731, I. ii. p. 589 (writes the name * Hapelius '). 

Heytrag zur Geschichit der hohern Chemie, 1785, 

P- 596. 

work under it accordingly. In addition to the 
references under Eglinus. the following which refer 
specially to Hapelius may be given. 

Semler, Unparteiische Samlungen zur Historie 
der Rosenkreuzer, 1786. i. p. 46. 

Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemie, 1797, i. p. 514. 

Hoefer, Histoire de la Chimie^ i843t »»• p. 333 ; 
1869, ii. p. 325. 

Ladrague, Bibliothlque Ouvarqff, Sciences 
Secritei, 1870, Nos. 556, 944-946 (under R. E. J. D.. 
but ladrague did not understand these letters). 

HARPRECHT (Johann). 

See HAUTNORTHON (jOSAPHAT FRIEDERICH). 

HARTMANN (Georg). 

See DIGBY (kenelm), Aufserlesene, seltzame Philosophische Geheimniisse und 
Chymische Experimente, 1684. 

Gmelin seems to ascribe the English version of 
the above to John Hartmann. Addung quotes his 
works : Preserver and restorer of health, London, 

Adelung, Portsetzung und Erg&nzungen zu . . . 
Jdckers Allgemeinen Gelehrien-Lexico, 1787, ii. 
col. 1813. 

i68a. 8** ; Digby's Secrets, London. i68a. S", and 
the above translation ; Family Phjrsician, London. 
1696.8*. 

Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemie^ 1796, i. p. 569. 

HARTMANN (Johann). 

lohannis Hartmanni Medicinae Doctoris et quondam Chymiatriae in Academia 
Marpurgensi Professoris celeberrimi, Principdmque Hassiae Archiatri Praxis 
Chymiatrica edita ^ Johanne Michaelis, Philosophige & Medicinae Doctore, 
& Professore ibidem extraordinario : & Georgio Euerhardo Hartmanno 
Authoris Filio. Huic postremae editioni adiecti sunt propter affinitatem 
materiae, tres Tractatus noui. 

I. De Oleis variis Chymicfe distilatis. 
II. Basilica Antimonij Hameri Poppij Thallini. 

III. Marci Cornachini D. M. Methodus, quae omnes Humani Corporis 
affectiones ab humoribus copia, vel qualitate peccantibus, Chymic^ 
& Galenice curantur. 
Genevae, Sumptibus Petri Chouet. M.DC.XLVII. 

8*, Ppw [i-io] II-63I. Index [33], 

A zj:.^* 

SStr 

m' 

. . . - .' . - .r^ .f ; i 

t 

* . :-L- «r : y.j:."i\ er. :c:i Part .i. 

'' / ^ ■. 

^ ;^. 

•' ' '' • ' -•^•. ':v.' V: <-,-.:: :- A:-■i^i-'^ I:^-. Riolani Com- 
;"''■''''■■' -' ■■ '':':-: c-.T. r.'.-i. H : :.->:7a::-:x cmm Hermedca. 
I/',./f.'. .'.'.I ' . .. .,....'.'; .\-.'-/:- I^:-:.-.- Hir\r:o Medico Aurelian. 
M../.'i7..* i /;..-. v.-;.. ..;'..., X'.rA ', i:^:-::: Marni'jm iSc haeredes loaa 

' '■'" '••"■'• ""•"•"i "''.i' M:./..» .. . M .ry. A-ii ;i ;„iri;sAn of chemistry, and mTOte in 

• •' ' .f '/,i. ...• ;... I :,f fr.. .-,..: .,f ,;.f...... rf it again.si Riolanus and the Paris 

"■• ■ '• ■•"'' »-ir""-iiK ''< •».*■ ^'•v*-M*,.nih i:.':iilty, -Aho had condemned the abuse, not to say 

HAR VETUS—HA UDICQUER 

367 

HARVETUS (Israel). Continued, 

the use, of its principles in medicine. Besides the 
present work he wrote : ' Defensio Chymise ad versus 
Apologiam & censuram Schola? Medicorum Pari si- 
ensium & in easdem Guilielmi Baucyneti, Medici 
Aurelianensis notationes,' Parisiis, 1604, 8^. This 
apparently was replied to by Riolanus under the 
pseudonym of Joh. Antarvetus : Apologia pro 
Judicio scholae Parisiensis de Alchymia, Paris. 1604. 
8°. The discussion was continu^ by Riolanus in 
another book : ' Ad Libavi Maniaro, Joan. Riolani 

Mercklin, JAndeniui renavatus^ 1686, p. 716. 
Manget, Bibliothica Scriptorum Medicorum, 
1731, I. ii. p. 603. 

Kestner, Medicinisches GeUhrten- Lexicon, 1740, 

p. 377. 

Georgius Matthiae, Conspectus Historia Medt- 

corum chronolopcus, 1761, p. 441. 

Haller, Bibhotheca Anatomica, 177^, i. p. 280. 

Haller. Bibliotheca Medici na practicce, i7T7, i"- 
PP-aaS. 350. 

EHoy, Dictionnaire kistonque de la MMectne^ 
1778. ii. p. 453- 

Responsio \xro Censura Scholae Parisiensis contra 
Alchymiam lata.' Parisiis, 1606, 8", pp. 184 [2]. 
He also engaged in another controversy : ' Discours 
contre le Paradoxe de Laurent Joubert, qu'il n'y 
a aucnne raison que quelques-uns puissent vivre 
sans manger durant plusieurs jours et ann^es.' 
Niort, 1597, 12". There was a Latin edition also, 
Aurelian. 1602, 8", of what Haller tersely styles 
* inanis altercatio.' 

Beytrag xur Geschichte der hokem Chemie^ 1785, 

pp. 562, 571. 
Biographie Midicale, Pans. Panckoucke (1820- 

25). V. p. 88. 

Haeser, Geschichte der Medicin^ 1881, ii. pp. 
116, 117. 

Dictionnaire encyclopAiique des Sciences Midi- 
calesj 4^me S^ie, 1886, xii. p. 496. 

Hirsch, Biographtsches Lexikon der hervorra- 
genden Aerzte alter Zeiten und Vdlker, 1886, iii. 
p. 72. 

HASELMEYER (Adam). 

Antwort an die Lobwiirdige Briiderschafft der Theosophen vom Rosenkreutz 

N.N. 

See ALLGEMEINE und General Reformation, 1 781, p. 99. 

Gmelin. Geschichte der Chemie, 1797, p. 562, 
note. 

Haselmeyer's name is not mentioned by Kloss. 
and it does not occur in the Missiv. 

HASLING (Elias Johannes). 

See HESSLING (elias JOHANNES). 

HAUDICQUER DE BLANCOURT. 

De TArt de la Verrerie. Oil ron apprend k faire le Verre, le Cristal, & 
TEmaiL La maniere de faire les Perles, les Pierres prdcieuses, la Porcelaine, 
& les Miroirs. La M^thode de peindre sur le Verre & en Email. De 
tirer les couleurs des Mdtaux, Mineraux, Herbes & Fleurs. 

Ouvrage rempli de plusieurs Secrets & Curiositez, inconnues jusqu'^ 
present. Par M. Haudicquer de Blancourt A Paris; (Thez Jean 

Jombert, pres les Augustins k Tlmage notre-Dame. M.DC.XCVIL 
Privil^e du Roy. 

Pp. [16] 602 [5, z blank]. 8 plates. 

Avec 

12 

There is an English translation : The Art of Glass. Tendon, 1699. 8*, to which was 
added an appendix on making glass-eyes. New edition of the French, Paris. 17 18, in 
two parts, Z2^. This is a reprint of the 1697 edition, to which has been added '* Traits 
des Pierres Precieuses." 

The original work is little more than a translation of Neri's CArte Vetraria, 

The author was bom in Picardv about 1650. and 
he traced his descent from a Robert Haudiquer 
who flourished in 1342. By some he is called 
Jean, by others Fran9ois. He lived in Paris and 
spent five and twenty years in accumulating 
material for the history of the nobility of his pro- 
▼inoe. He fell heir also to the collection of MSS. 
belonging to Frenfois Duchesne, whose daughter 
be married in 1684. In addition to his genealogical 
and heraldic studies he cultivated chemistry and 

even aflSrmed that he possessed some alchemical 
secrets. In consec^uence of a charge of forging 
ancient titles of nobility he was sent to the galleys 
in 170 1, and this was commuted to perpetual 
imprisonment. All his papers and collections were 
deposited in the Biblioth^ue Rovale. 10 Tuly, 1708. 
His works relate to the nobility of Picardy, 
Paris, 1693 or 1695, 4°, pp. 578. Historiad 
researches on the Ordre of the Saint-Ksprit, Paris, 
1695, 2 vols, 13*, and the present treatise on glass. 

l2 Jl 

j>iy-^r*? 

li-f T-.^irtf: -TrfiCiriicc 

-i. ":r:".~- zee 

I'C 

::c-«:i. 

_ -: .:i :cr: 

ViTTicr^ :•=•? AiuB 

y. 

-i W 

»' ■ » • 

j^''- " t' 

t • • ' 

• ,'i 

• t ' . 

,/.' t 

Lu-ii Ccsioend illios 

.'. ' . • : . ; z.^..- yr.rici. zi-A est sabjectum 

' .-; ■. ; -:r..v. .S-ii/ier.tum. nee con davis 

< >->::.:'.. r.trr.'ine alios pandente vd 

■ .' ff" , 'r.,',, ,.. ..'/.., .' .';;rf. p;r:i:f/iritioncrn hujus mirabilis saponis 

'■ "I"' "' ' , ')>ii r Mill rd-i'!' fi/ )f, j,f'f lilii alii rei in Mundo commisoetur, 
'jiiiffi frti iiiii .' Mffi'lriin im i\ifftltitii (\\i:i r.unr.tl F'hilosophi panacaeam ilkuD 
• •»•« ti-ii'rii • ftiiii < • iiitii. Ill ..iliirriii ;i/iljr.ti iiotninis ceu effigiei & imaginis 
i<i"ii'>'i I '■ >. 'i"< t'Hiili III! Ill tj ( iil.t MTiilnriiiii. Ad contestandum animum 
hMiiIii«hiii I i|I'| |imi1i III iliiiiiiii.i liilrlitri rjdcin rommunicata k filio Sendi- 

HAUTNORTHON 

369 

HAUTNORTHON Qosaphat Friederich). OnUimud, 

vogii, anagrammatic^ vocato: Tuis Ophir dono fert theca Satumi. Annum 
paMicationis ooodnet famosam illud Paracelsi vaticinium : 

ELIas artlVM artes DoCeblt. 
Et illud nostri Cosmopolitae : 

MonarChIa BoreaLIs aDVenlet. 
Et Bdhmii Teutonici: 

LILIVM e£>et fLores i septentrlone. 
Amstelodami, Apod Henricum Betkium, cum privilegio. An. MDCLVHI. 

8*. Pp. 167 [ij 

the Rkytkmi beginning : ' Res quaedam in hoc 
Mnndo inTenitor.' — 'Es ist ein Ding in di< 
WelL- 

Two short notes to the reader contain, i** : 
account by the author of the origin of the work and 
the meaning of the title * Filius Sendirogii,' and 
a* : the statement of the autbcMr's pseudonym : 
Josaphat F. Heutnortton. 

The appendix contains : ' Colloquium Spiritns 
Merctihi cum fratre Alberto Bayero sive Bavaro. 
M onacho Carroelitano, &c. . which was printed also 
in Figulus' Thesaurinella^ p. no, and must not be 
confused with the dialogue of Mercury, an AU 
chemist, and Nature, ascribed to Sendivogtus. 
Both dialogues are included in Roth-Sch^ts's 
edition of Sendivc^tis' Worics, 1718. pp. 72, 178. 

•PneCatio' is sgned '*J. F. H. a Filio 
ScDdivogii." which stands for Josaphat Fridericus 
HflDtnortton or Hantnorthon, or Heutnortton 

The ipotome oootains* i* the whole of the German 
of 1657, but Cappi ii ft V. have been enlarged. 
ite the end of Cap. viiL has been introducol a 
* Recapitiilaiio.' and a catalogue of the best and 
■fl useful aotbora, and a warning against the 
writingB of Glaaber (p. 63), to whcmi the author 
1MBS uDOOiBpfomisiDgly opposed. 

Then folknrs (pp. 64-136) a harmony of authors 
OD different parts of chenustry. in thirteen chapters, 
with an Eptlogus. 

Next comes the ' Dialogns praeparationem Lapidis 
PhikMOphici amplite detegens.' to which are added 

[Another Copy.] 

Dritter Anfang der Mineralischen Dinge vom Philosophischen Saltz. 

See ROTH-SCHOLTZ (friederich), Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum, 1728, i. p. 339. 

Prxiatio ad Mysterium occultae Naturae, anonymi discipuli Johannis Grassei 
ChortolasseL 

See THEATRUM CHEICICUM, 1661, vi. p. 523. 

Tractat vom philosophischen Salze. 

See HERMETISCHES A B. C, 1778, i. p. 157. 

The name of the author of these tracts appears 
under the initials J. F. H. S., with the additional 
title Filius or Sohin SendivogiL The last phrase 
has been supposed to denote actual kinship, but 
this is not in accordance with what is known other- 
wise of the author, and it means onl^ that he 
reverenced Sendivogius as his father, instructor, 
and example. The author, indeed, himself settles 
the question, for he says (Lucema, p. 154) : Ne 
quid l^or colendissime sinistri de me Auctore 
ha)us tractatuli cogites, quod e^o me magni istius 
Sendivogii filium nominem, saas velim. me car- 
naliter talem non esse, sed secundum doctrinam, 
quam ver^ patemam ex ipsius incomparabilibus 
opusculis habui, ut etiam ipse fatetur in tract. II. 
his verbis : Dixi tibi per sanctum Deum, quod 
pater filio debet, etc. 

The interpretation of the initials is. given in the 
Lucema^ p. 157, where the editor informs us that 
alter publishing the above German tract, he was 
inundated with letters asking for the author's 
name, and he did not know what it was if not 
/osafkat Fridericus HeninonUm. 

This name appears also as Hautnortton and 
Hautnorthon, and the S. stands for Suecus or 
Su€vus. 

In addition to the above tracts he wrote another, 
Sudum Philosophicum, in German and Latin on 
opposite pages, 1660. 8^, pp. 294 JTi blank]. This 
is a violent attack on Glauber. The same itiitials 
also appear in the 1695 edition of Hollandus' 
Ofus yegetoHU, as those of the editor, and 
' Northon or Hautnorthon. by birth a Swede, and 
son-in-law of the world-renowned Polish adept 
Sendivogius,' is the reputed author of certain 
'canonic rules' in verse, which are contained in 
the ' Hermaphroditisches Sonn- und Mond-Kind,' 

Now while the initials have been elucidated by 
the user of them himself, it has been gathered from 
other sources that Hautnorthon is a pseudonym, 
and that the author was Johann Ilarprecht. 

Borrichius tells us that Johann Harprecht (who 
liked to hide himself under the title ' Filius Sendi- 
vogii *), son of theTttbin^en professor, secretary for a 
time to Baron Cronstem at Riga, spent the whole 

2 A 

370 

HA UTNORTHON^HEADRICH 

HAUTNORl HON (Josaphat Friederich). Coniinued. 

winter with him in 1657, and during their in- 
tercourse admitted that he had got the MS. of 
(irasseiis' or (Jhortolasseus* * Kleiner Rauer' from 
a friend in Livonia, and had often read it and even 
transcrilx.*d it ; that he had no doubt of the truth 
of the processes, but as he had only some ores of 
lead from Misnia to ^ork on he meant to go to 
Holland to prove the truth of the MS. by experi- 
ment. When tluTf hf publisht'd certain tracts : 
De Sale Philosophoritm, I.ucerna Salts Philosophici, 
etc., under the name of Filius Scndivogii, In ihov 
he gives exprfssion to pious and God-fearing 
sentiments after the fashion of the old sages, but 
whether when he published them, he was an adept or 
not, liorrichius confesses he \*as very much in doubt, 
not merely Ixxause, shortly l^clore, Harprecht knew 
nothing whatever about the art of assaying metals, 
but especially on account of two observations in the 
writings themselves : one that the matter at the 
beginning of the great work is sweet, which points 
to the use of lead ; the other that the * crude spirit 
tinges, but not permanently,' which Borricnius 
shows is borrowe<i from a passage in the ' Kleiner 
Bauer.' 

In all this account, curiously enough, Bor- 
ricbius takes no notice of the initials J. F. H. S.. 
but Roth-Scholtz adds the remark that *'his name 
must have been Johann Friederich and not simply 
Johann, because J. F. H. S. stands on his writings, 
which may denote : Johannes, Filius, Harprechti, 
Svevus." Perhaps it may ; but it would surely 
have been more logical and reasonable on Roth- 
Scholtz's part to have put 'Johannes Fridericus 
Harprecht, Svevus.' Then Roth-Scholtz goes on 
to quote the passage from the Lucerna above 
mentioned in which the name of Josaphat Fri- 
dericus Hautnortton is given, after which all the 
entries are put under that title. 

While therefore Borrichius assigns the tracts to 
Harprecht, and exhibits no knowledge of Haut- 

Borrichius, Consfectus Scripiorum Chemicorum, 
1697, p. 35 (calls hmi Filius Sendivogii). 

Roth-Scholtz, Michaelis Sendivogii Chymi^che 
Schrifflen^ 1718, Vorbericht, p. 13. 

Roth-Scholtz, Bibliotheca Chemica^ 1727, pp. x88 
(calls him Harbrccht, and quotes the name Haut- 
norton) ; 196-204 (and notes). 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Misioire de la Philosophie 
HermHique, 174a, iii. p. 297. 

Fictuld, Probier'Stein , 1753, Th. i. p. 90 (re- 
commended to beginners !). 

Petraeus, Basilti VaUntitti Chymische Schriften, 
1769, Neue Vorrede, C2 verso-t^ recto. 

Baumer, Bibliotheca Chemica, 1782, p. 96. 

Beytrag tur Geschichte der hdhem Chemie, 1785, 
p. 617. 

nortton. Roth-ScbolU ignores the name of Hv- 
prechtj^and deals with Iiautnortton as the author. 

As Borrichius is quite positive about hii origin, 
the author was the son of Johann HarpredK. 
professor of law at Tabin|^n (who died 18 Sqitr., 
1619. Witte, Diarimm Butgraphicum^ ND4 ncH 
sub anno), and was bom in loio. It b powhk 
that he was impressed by Seodi%*ogius* tnoaBfr 
tations and attracted by his writings, and ia hii 
enthusiasm called himself his *son,*andendeavoarad 
to understand his writings and attain the pootion 
of an adept, and for this purpose travelled in onkr 
to find some one who could throw light 00 the 
subject But I have not found anything posilifdy 
stated alwut him. except what Bomchins sajs^iod 
the dates of his books ; not even the date of his 
death is reccMxled. 

Petraeus, however, has introduced some froh 
complications. He also identi6es Harprecht wilb 
the ' Filius Sendivogii.' and states that be made me 
of Grasseus' book. He then adds that he sold Ibe 
Mss.— on account of their illegibilitj — fior a fpak 
sum, that they were taken to Livonia, that rar- 
precht ultimately married a woman with moocgr, 
changed his name to Johann Hiskias CardiliicML 
and published a number of noedical and rhnsiril 
books. This also is possible, for, if the acoounti be 
correct. Cardilucius was still alive in 1680— atkmt 
one of his books appeared in that jtmx. Bat 00 the 
other hand those who mention Cardilucius. MalThir 
for example (Conspectus HiUorim AMkmam 
chronologicus, 1761, p. 830) make no reference wbsi- 
ever to his being the same person as Harprecht. 

Birkholz (AdaNlah Boos) accepts Boiiichii^ 
statement, but adds nothing to our knowledge of 
the facts. He states, however, that the nieB 
edition is that in Joseph Ferdinand Kleebhtt's 
Neue Herausgabe einiger rarremtordencr cktmuckfn 
sehrnuttbaren Tractdtlein, rrankfurt und LapBK* 
1768. 

AdaMah Booz, Die ganu kakere Cketmii, 17671 
Vorbericht, f.*4 recto. 

Soulier. Unparteiische Samittnj^en tmr ffiiitrit 
der Ro$(nkreuxer, 1788, iiL pp. 35-49. 

Gmelin. Geschichte der Chemie^ 1797* >• I^ ^ 
624. 

Fuchs. Repertorium der ckemisckem Littendw, 
1 806-08, p. 153. 

Schmieder, Geschichte derAlckemie^ 1833, p. 410^ 

Figuier, L'Alchimie et Us Aickimistes, 185^ 
p. 256. 

Ladrague, Bibliothique Ottvarojf^ Scienat 
Secrites, 1870, No. 1213. 

Kopp, Die Alchemie, 1886. ii. p. 386. 

HEADRICH (John). 

Arcana Philosophia or, Chymical Secrets, containing the noted and useful 
Chymical Medicines of Dr. Wil. and Rich. Russel Chymists, viz, 
I. Species Vitae, alias Universalis. 
II. Tinctura Regalis, calFd Scorbutick, &c. 

III. Species Coroborativa, alias Pleuretica. 

IV. Species Proprietatis. 
V. Species Minor. 

VI. A Pestilential Cordial, call'd his White Cordial. 

HEADRICH^HECKENHA UER 37 1 

HEADRICH (John). Continued, 

As also Several Curious Chymical Processes and Spagerick Preparations 
of Natural things for the use of Medicin, and many other things of great 
use and vertue in Eradicating the most Stubborn Diseases; Likewise Four 
curious small Treatises, viz. the I. of Fevers, the II. of the Jaundies, the 
III. of Madnefs, and the IV. of Diarrhaeas, Lientries, &c. by the Renowned 
and most Approved Dr. Aurelius Philipus Theophrastus Paracelsus, of 
Hoheneim. Published by John Headrich, Philo-Chymicus, and formerly 
Operator to Dr. Richard Russell. London, Printed and Sold by Henry 
Hills in Black-Fryers, the Publisher, at the Blew Ball in Hogsden, over 
against the Crooked Billet, near Shoreditch Church, and the Booksellers 
of London, &c. 1697. 

8*. Pp. [16] 128 [7. I blank]. 

Richard Russell of whom Headrich calls himself der and Kopp, but nothing seems to be known 

the operator, is known as the translator of the about the man himself. In the British Museum 

works of Geber and Beguinus. and possibly others. Catalogue he is called Headrick. 
Headrich's book is mentioned by (imelin, Schmie- 

Gmelin, GtschichU der C hemic ^ 1798, ii. p. 319. Kopp, Die Alchemie, 1886, ii. p. 351. 

Schmieder, Gtschichte der Alchemic, 1832, p. 460. 

HEBENSTREIT (Ernst Benjamin Gottlieb). 

Su SCHKELE (KARL WILHELM), OpUSCula, 1 788. 

. Hcbenstreit was born at Leipzig, 10 Feb., 1758. Vom rothen Spiefsglase, 1784; treatises on the 

He studied at the University there, and graduated sophistication of wines, on medicine and surgenr, 

in medicine, in 1785 was appointed professor &c. ; and translated Wallerius' Metallurgy, the 

extraordinary of general Medicine, and in 1793 of works of Bergman, Fontana, Fourcroy, Van 

Anatomy and Surgery at the University. He was Marum, and others. He died at Leipzig, xa Dec, 

a member of several societies. He wrote some 1803. 
papers : De aquae natura aerea, Leipzig, 1785 ; 

Wciz, Das gelehrte Sachsen, 1780. Sprengel, Gcschichtc der Arxncykundc^ i8a8, v. 

Meusel, Das gelehrte Tcutschland oder Ltxikon p. 873. 

derjctxt lebenden Teutschcn Schri/lsteller, 1797, iii. Dezeimeris, Dictionnatre hislorigue de la Midg- 

p- 135 ; «. p. ^2 ; xi. p. 327 ; xii. p. 338 ; ii. p. 64 ; cine, 1836. III. i. p. 67. 

N, i. p. 25s ; li. p. 126 ; iii. p. 143 ; iv. p. 242 ; v. p. Phillippe & Ludwig, Gcschichtc der Apotheker, 

560 ; vi. p. 235 ; vii. p. 532 ; viii. p. 327 ; ix. p. 338. 1855. pp. 622, 648, 738. 

Gmelin, Gcschichtc der Chcmic, 1799, iii. pp. Toggendorff, Biographisch-literarisches Hand- 

270, 296, 313. wortcrbuch, 1863, i. col 1043. 

Biographic Midicale, Paris, Panckoucke (1820- 
asX V. p. xo6. 

HECKENHAUER (Wilhelm). 

Wilhelm Heckenhauers des Jiingern, gewesenen Guardein und Miintz-Meisters 
in Augspurg, Logier-Biichlein, vorstellend, wie man kiirtzlich ohne Rechnung, 
allerley Silber auf allerhand Zusatze logieren konne. Anjetzo verbessert, 
vermehrt, und mit 3. Loth angefangen. Deme auch gantz neu beygefiiget 
ist, ein deutlicher Unterricht, wie man das Gold logieren konne und solle; 
Allen Gold- und Silber-Arbeitern, und welche sich des Logierens bedienen, 
zur Nachricht vorgestellet und zum Druck befordert von denen der Zeit 
Hoch-Obrigkeitlich-verordneten Vorgehern und Geschwornen der Gold- 
schmiden, auch zu finden auf der Goldschmids-Stuben in Augspurg. Mit 
Rom. Kayserl. Majestat allergnadigstem Privilegio. Daselbst gedruckt bey 
Joh. Jacob Lotter, 17 14. 

8". No pagination. Sigs. ) (1-7, A-Z, Aa-Gg in 8, Hb-Ll in 4 (-ff. 256). i leaf of 
errata. 

372 

HRRR'-HEINIKR 

HEER (Hekricus ab). 

SpAdacrene. Hoc est Fons Spftdanus, accuntunme dcsaipUi% addas bibeni 
modus, medicamina oxipotis necessaria. Et obaerfationiiin wtaBSaam 
oppido rararum liber unicus authore Henrioo ab Heen^ TnpgiQ^ So. 
Princ. Ferdinand! Elect Colon. Princ Leod. &c Medico Cubiculazio. EdUo 
correctior, & auctior cum Indice. Secunda Batava Editia Li^iim Bata- 
Torum, Ex Officini Adrian! Wyngaerdeiiy Anno cldlocxLTU. 

ra*. Pp. [aaj 159 [17] ; f8; 354 [31. 3 blank\ Vignette; with tlie motto: Aidm 
^^uae Pulchra. 

Mendrik van Heer belonged to a patrician 
faiDJlv of Tongret in the state of Liege, wbere be 
was (xMn about 1^70. He was distinguished \ff 
his knowledge of philosophy and the mathematics. 
He travelled in German v, Italy, Spain, France and 
PIngland, and knew the Ianf;uai?es of those countries 
as well as Latin, Greek and Helirew. He graduated 
sontewherc as \f . D. and settled in Liege as town* 
phjrsician from 1605. He was also physician of 
kmest Ferdinnnd, Klecior of Cologne. ' He died 
about 1636. He was a man of great erudition, of 
keen insight and solid judgment, who continued a 
diligent student to the close of his career. Every 
year he spent some weeks at Spa, on which he 
wrote the present book. 

Van der Linden, De uriptis wudicis libri duo, 

i6j7. p. 196. 

Mercklin, Lindenius renovatus, 1686. p. 394. 

Roth>Scholts, Bibliotfuca Ckemica, 1737, p. 106. 

Manget, Bibliothica Scriftorum Mtdicarmm, 
1731, L ii. p. 631. 

Foppeot, Bibliothua Belgica, 1739, i. p. 449. 

Kestner, MtdiciniKhis GeUkrUH-Lextcon^ 1740, 
p. 383. 

fcJcher, Allgemtifus GtUhrUri'Lexicon, 1750, ii 
col. 1433. 

Eloy, Dictionnairt historique de la \Udecine^ 

pro 

1755. i>- p. ao : 1778, ii. p. 471. 

Matthine, Conspectui Historia Afedicorum chrono^ 
logicus, X761, p. C48. 

Haller, Bibliothua Anaiamica, 1774, i. p. 353. 

HEILMANN (Johann Jacob). 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, vi. 1661. 

Heilmann was a physician at Zweibrilcke and 
edited the above volume from MSS. and rare 
editions which had escaped notice in the previous 
volumes of the Theatrum. In his preface he 
specially requests those who may have unpublished 
MSS. to let him have them for printing, as he 

Manget, Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, sig. 
f 3 verso, 

Di€ Edtlgtbome Jungfer Alckymia, 1730, p. 80. 

It first appeared at Liefe. 1614, 
editions are neDtioiied : i6s9. flT; L^pL BlO.. 

1645. 13*; 1683, 3 vols.. 16*; i68c uT te 
[24I. IS9 ["7l; [6] «S4 [19. I blMkJ. Lipa, 1^ 
13 . It was translated into French : Li4R rtgok 

1646. 8* ; 1645. 13* ; La Haje. 1739, i^« 
by Warner Chrooet, with notes 
especially in the Chemistry. V 
Spadacrene, Leodii, 16*4, fT^ was 
\^ HdmooL A book which pn 
tinction Is entitled: 'Obaenratio 
rarae in Spa et Leodii animnd^ 
mentis aliquot selectis.' Leodii. 1631, ST • Lip^ 
1645. 13*: Lugd. Bat.. X685. la* (appended to Ai 
Spadacrene\ 

Haller. BUlioikeca Ckirmmca, 1774, i. pi jfq. 
Haller, BUUatkeea iimUamm ftrmeHem^ 1717. & 

p. S?3- 

BiograpkU MOicak^ Paris, ffinrfcrmrhe (il»> 
as). V. p. 196. 

Sprengel, GtsckukU der ArMm^fhrnde, stij, if. 

pp. $47. 555. , . , 

Btografhie NoHomaU . . • dEr Bdrifm^ x8<f4& 
viii col. 83a (and references). (Artioe ty Alpboiw 
Le Roy.) 

Billings, ImdeX'Catalogm, 1885, vL pi 96; sad 
Series, 1901. vi. p. 983. 

Hirsch, Biograpkixkes Lexikam dmr kumm- 
genden AertU oiler Leitem umd VMer, i8l6^ in. 
p. no. 

intended to continue the Tkeafntm, No 
however, was ever issued. 

In the preface (sig. * 7 verso) he tdb the stny 
of Gustenhofer's transmutation at Strasbmi is 
1603. It was copied from him by Manget and is 
referred to by Erbini&us and others. 

Manget, Bibliotheca Scriptorum Medicertm, 
1731, I. ii. p. 633. 
Schroieder. Geschichtt derAlchemie, 183$, p. 33>- 

HEIMLIGKEIT (von der) aller Heimligkeiten. 

See NEANDER (theophilus), Heptas Alchymica, 1621, p. i and p. 321. 

HEINIKE (Samuel). 
Clavicula Salomonis oder SchlQssel zur hochsten Weisheit erklart, von Samud 
Heinike. Erster und Zweiter Theil. Prefsburg, bei Philipp Ulridi 

Mahler, 1789. 

S*. Pp. [8] 158 [3 blank} 

The Cliwicula Salomonis has nothing to do with conjuration, in Adelim^'s Gtschickie der Menxh 
chemistry or alchemy. See an article on the lichen JVarrheit, 1788, vi. ppw 33a-457. 
treatise, which deals with magic, demonology and 

HELBACH^HELCMER 373 

HELBACH (Friedrich). 

Olivetum, das ist, Kunstbuch, darinnen griindtlicher vnd aufsfiihrlicher Bericht 
gezeigt wird, wie man aufs alien Erdtgewachsen, Metallen vnd andern 
natiirlichen dingen, die zwey edelstenstiick in der Artzney, als Oel vnd 
Saltz, nach Alchymistischer arth extrahiren vnd machen konne : Darinnen 
auch beschrieben werden alle Oel vnd Saltz, so durch grossen fleifs vieler 
vomehmer Medicorum zu vnser zeit in wolbesteltcn Apothecken zufinden, 
auch von beriihmpten Medicis, Wundtartzten, Apotheckern vnd Alchymisten 
gebraucht werden : Aufs vielen Autoribus, auch noch vngedruckten 
Alchymistischen Schrifften zusammen getragen, vnd in zweyen Biichern 
fleissig beschrieben, Durch M. Fridericum Helbachium, Eckartshusanum. 
Gedruckt zu Franckfurt am Mayn, bey Johann Saur, in Verlegung Peter 
Kopffen. M.DC.V. 

4°. Pp. [18] 165 [11] [2] blank. Title red and black, i Woodcut. Imperfect: 
pp. 69-78 torn out. 

This work is mentioned by Haller as well as und Experimenten, Frankfurt, z6o6, 8^ This 

another by the same author : Oeno^n^phia. Wein- person is mentioned both by Jc^cher and Haller, 

kcJler. Oder Kunstbuch vom Wein und Krauter- but the latter puts [sic) after his name as if he had 

wein, Frankfurt, 1604. 4°. had some doubt about it. Certainly the form of 

At this time there lived also a Wendeliu von the title is exactly like those of Friedrich Helbach's. 
[dbach who wrote : Hortus Corporis, Artstgtirtlein 
des roenschlichen Leibes mil nothwendigen StUcken 

Helbach who wrote : Hortus Corporis, Artstgtirtlein I have not foimd any notice of these authors. 

StUc 

Tocher, Allgemeinei GeUhrten- Lexicon, 1750. ii. Haller, Bibliotheca Medicimg practica, 1777, ii. 

COL 1460. p. 368 ; p. 389 (Wend. v. Helbach). 

Haller, Bibliotheca Boianica, 1771, i..p. 401. Adelung, Fortseizung . , . tu . , , Jochers . . . 

GeUhrten-Lexico, 1787, ii. col. 1888. 

HELBIG (Johann Otto). 

See HELLWIG OOHANN OTTO VON). 

HELCHER (Hanss Heinrich). 

Aurum Potabile, oder Gold-Tinctur, dessen Prseparation, samt des Goldes 
Vortrefflichkeit und Anologie {sic) mit unserm C6rper, Wiirckung und 
Gebrauch curative so wohl als praeservative, deutlich beschrieben, und auff 
vielerley Einwiirffe ausfuhrlich geantwortet wird von Hanfe Heinrich Helcher, 
Phil. & Med. Doct. der Kayserl. Leopoldinischen Societal Naturae Curiosorum 
Mit-Gliede, und Practico in Schweidnitz. Schweidnitz und Leipzig, Bey 
Joh. Herbord Klofsen, Buchhandl. A. 171 2. 

8*. Pp. [16] no. 

Aurum Potabile, oder Gold-Tinctur, dessen Praeparation dafs die sicher, 
samt des Goldes Vortrefflichkeit und Analogie mit unserm Corper, Wiirckung 
und Gebrauch curative so wohl als praeservative, nebst andern Medicamenten 
vor allerley Kranckheiten deutlich beschrieben, und auff viele Einwiirffe 
ausfiihrlich geantwortet wird von Hanfs Heinrich Helcher, Phil. & Med. 
Doct der KayserL Leopoldinischen Societat Naturae Curiosorum Mit-Gliede, 
und Practico in Brefslau. Zum andern mahl vermehrter auffgelegt. 
Brefslau und Leipzig, Bey Joh. Herbord Klofsen, Buchhandl. A. 17 18. 

8*. Pp. [32] 309 [xo, I blank]. 

Helcher vras bom at Oels, in Silesia, 9 May, 12 Nov.. 1696. He practised at Oels and Schweid- 
167a (1671, Fucbs). Studied at Breslau and nitz " with more reputation than merit, for be was 
FrankKxrt a. d. O. and graduated M.D. at Leipzig, a man of ' secrets ' who^in an enlightened age like 

374 HELCHER^HELLWIG 

HELCHER (Hanss Hkinrich). Continued. 

oun [always th« ignorant Mlf-sufiicicnt boast of the and dung to his beliefs till the dose oC his hfc He 
rightef.-nth century] nourished himself on th«; old was elected a member of the Acidemia Natine 

chimatrras. long <t(;o condemm^d.'* He was a be> Cuhosoniro. 24 Juim. 171 i. under the naaie flf 
lievrr in pot^ible gold as the prraent writing testities Hicrothcus. He died of apoplexy, 30 OcL. 171^ 

Roth-Scholtz. liibliotheia C/umtca, 1727. pp* ^'lov, DuticHmaire kistarique de la M^dtdm, 

ao6-ao8. 1778, li. p. 478. 

Kestner, .\/eJn.iniKhti GeUkrten Lexicon, 1740. Fuchs, fCepertorium dtr chemisckem Uttenim, 

p 3^3- 1806-08. p. 305. 

jo<:her. Allgemrines GeUkrten- Ij^xicon. 1750. BiograpkU SfidicaU, Paris. PanckoiidK (xta>> 

li. col. 1460. 23). V. p. 138. 

BUchn<-r, Academic . . . Xatunr Curioi.-rum LAdmg\it,BUhotk^meOMvan^,SciefuesSeeriio, 

Historic, 17551 p. 489. No. a68. 1870. No. 1635. 

Georgius Malthiae. Conspectus Hi^toria Mfdi- Billings. Indtx-Caialogut, 1885, tI. p. 4a; and 

corum chronologicux, 1761. p. 753. Series, 1901, vL p 998. 

H ELI AS ARTISTA. 

Sec ELIAS. 

See c.LAUnF.R (johann rudolph). 

HELIOPHILUS a Pcrcis Philochemicus. 

See PKRCIS (HKLIOPHILUS A). 

HELLRIEDEN (Johann Heinrich Cocheim von). 
See COCHEIM (JOHANN HEINRICH; von Hollricdcn. 

HELLWIG (Christoph von). 
Chirurgia in Nuce, oder : Kurtze Anweisung, wie ein Chinirgus, oder Wund- 
Artzt, nechst G6ttlicher Hiilffe, allerhand Schaden, als Wunden, Geschwiire, 
Briiche, &c. mit wenigen, doch guten, Medicamenten in kurtzer Zeit heilen, 
und so wohl den Patienten als sich selbst glucklich machen konne; Jetzo 
vermehret, und von vorigen I )ruckfehlern gesaubert. Ans Licht gegeben 
von L. Christoph. Helwig, jetzo Med. Privil. in Erffurdt. Muhlhausen, 
Verlegts Michael Keyser, Buch- Handler. 17 18. 

8'. Pp. [8j 51 [3 blank]. 
The first edition, which was incorrccily printed, nvas published at Miihlhausen, 1709. 

Fasciculus unterschiedlicher alten raren und wahren I^ilosophischen Schrifften 
vom Stein der Weisen, aus einem alten Lateinischen Manuscripto ins 
Teutsche iibersetzet, nebst einer curiosen Epistel von denen Duum Viris 
Hermeticis Foederatis, und einer Vorrede von einem wunderbaren vermischten 
uncorrosivischen Menstruo ex Macro- & Microcosmo die Metallen zu sohiren, 
von Lie. Christoph von Hellwig, Med. Pract. Erff. Leipzig und Bremen, 
Verlegts Johann Andreas Grimm. Anno 17 19. 

8". Pp. [16] 302. Register [18]. Title red and black. 

1. Eines unlx:kanten Auloris Tract, wie der 5. Dessen Send-SchreilK;n von Erklarung der 
gebcnedeyte Stein der Weis<rn zu machen for, Von Geheirnnisse der alten Weltweisen, p. 82. 
(Composition des gebcnedeyten Sieins], p. 1. 6. Kines iinlxikanten .Autoris sehr niitzlicher 

2. Kr. Ilerckmanns von HeidellxTg Hiichlein Tractat in der Alchimie [or, Tractatus Alchymiae], 
von sccreten oder heimlichen Dingen (Geheim- p. 101. 

ntlssen) aller riiilosophorum, die ehmahls voni 7. Licht der Weltweisen [or, Lumen Philoso- 

Stein der Weisen geschrieben. [? Meckman], p. 30. phonim ; or. Luminare), p. 126. 

3. Kines unlxkantcn- Aul. CJfsjjriich voni Stemc 8. Andreiu Osiandri Tract, von der Philosophia 
der Weisen [or, (jcspnich vom Lnpide Philoso- oder Weltweisheit, p. 143. 

phoruin], p. 44. 9. GillxTti, Patriarchens ru Constantinopel Tr. 

4. Mag. Alcmanni von Ikjiionien in Italicn voll- vom Stein der Weisen, p. 147. 
kommcn Werck [also Alamanus]. p. 64. 

tiELLWtG %n 

HELLVVIG (Christoph von). Continued. 

10. Bernhardi von Trier, Canonici m Resens- 12, Arnoldi de Villa Nova Opus de Arte majori. 
pofg Tract, von Nachfolgung der Natur, p. 104. oder das Enrosse Werck, p. 254. 

11. Francisci Amolphini von Luca in Italien Tr. 13. J. O. B. D. Hell>*ig * Judicium de Duum 
de Lap. physico [or, philosophico] seu Summa Viris Hermeticis Fcederatis, & horum Epistola 
Rofiarii Philosoi^orum, p. 195. Buccinatoria secunda. p. 263. 

♦ (x.^. Jobann Otto, Baron de Hellwig.) 

Vennehrt und verbessertes neu eingerichtetes Lexicon Medico Chymicum, 
oder : Chymisches Lexicon, worinnem nicht alleine die Nahmen der nothigsten 
Laborum Chymicorum, sondern auch die gebrauchlichsten Vasa, Oefen, 
Instrumenta, &c. benennet ; nebst andem niitzlichen Dingen. Worbey auch 
unterschiedliche Stiicke, was vor Composita daraus prsepariret und laboriret 
werden, und von deren Tugenden, Krafflen, Dosibus, &c. zu finden. 
Lateinisch und Teutsch, nach dem Alphabeth eingerichtet. Nebst einen 
Anhang etlicher Apothecker-Taxe, als einer Zugabe in Druck gegeben durch 
L. Christoph von Hellwig, Jtzo Med. Pract. in Erffurt. Franckfurth und 
Leipzig, In verlegung Johann Christoph St6fsels seel. Erben. in ErfTurth, 
1718. 

8*. Pp. [8] 488. Frontispiece included. Title red and black. 
There was an edition, apparently of this book, in 1711. 8^ 

Neu eingerichtetes Lexicon Pharmaceuticum, oder Apothecker-Lexicon, wor- 
innen Teutsch-Lateinisch, und Lateinisch-Teutsch, beyde nach dem Alphabeth, 
die Stiicke, welche ex triplici Regno, oder dreyfachem Natur-Reiche, als 
regno Mineral!, Vegetabili, Animali, in der Medici n, Apothecke und Chirurgie 
gebrauchlich, zu finden: Darbey auch die Prseparata was von jedem Stflck 
zu haben, nicht weniger die Vires und Doses gesetzet worden, um sich 
desto besser und leichter darein zu richten; Vor diejenigen, welche der 
edlen Medicin, Apothecker-Kunst und Chirurgie zugethan, n6thig; vor 
andere aber, welche nicht dergleichen Profesfion, niitzlich und annehmlich 
zu lesen, und zu gebrauchen, Mit sonderm Fleifs und Miihe also eingerichtet 
und anitzo zum Drittenmahle in Druck g^eben von L. Christoph Hellwigen, 
P. L. C. & Pract Erffurt. Franckfurth und Leipzig, In Verl^ung Johann 
Christoph Stdssels seel Erben in Erffurt, 17 14. 

8*. Pp. [16. frontispiece included] 350 [2 blank]. Title black and red. 
Of this work there was an edition in 171a 

Das bey jetzigen Zeiten neu-eingerichtetes Pest-Apotheckgen, darinnen der 
Pest Ursprung, EigenschafU und Zeichen genau beschrieben; Samt einer 
deutlichen Anweisung, wie man sich mit schlechten und wenig kostenden, 
jedoch von Alt- und Neuen Medicis an vielen Menschen bewarth erfundenen 
Haufs-Mitteln von denen jetzt hin und wieder grasfirenden pestilentzialischen 
Fiebem und ansteckende Seuchen durch Gottes Beystand, so wohl vorsichtig 
prseserviren, als auch gliicklich curiren konne; Sonderlich denen Armen 
und dem Land-Mann, wie auch andem zum besten auffgesetzt; von L. 
Christoph Hellwig, Medic. Practic. Erffurtens. Franckfurt und Leipzig, 
zu finden bey Hieronymo Philippo Ritscheln, Buchhandler Anno 17 14. 

8-. Pp»[8]52[4]. 

57i 

MBLLWIG 

HELLWIG (CHRiSTora vow). dnUimmi. 

Regube de Formulis Medkamentoniin comcribendis, das ist: Von Reoe^- 
Schreiben, in lucem editae a L. Christophoro HeQwigio^ Tburaigo^ P. L 
Can. Phys. Tenstadiens. Francofuiti &: Lipsiae, KpoA JohanDem Qnlo- 
phorum Suysselium, Bibltopolam Erffiirtensem, M DCC VII. 

V. Pp. 76 [4 blank]. 

A lecond edition, enlarged, appeared in 1712. Moftrhmann sajs this is the 00I7 tract be vnle ■ 
Latin. 

L. Christoph. Hellwig. Cdlledi-Thur. P. L. Oes. u. i. z. Stadt-Physk. a 
Tannstadt in Thiiringen. De Vera Solutione Auri, oder : Berkiit nm der 
wahren Solutione Auri, dafs solche, mit kleiner Miihe, und Kosten, m 
kurtzer Zeit, gantz ohne Feur, allenthalben, zu Wasser und Lande, Wioten^ 
und Sommers, zu machen, und, dafs man Animam Auri extiahiren, and 
ein so genandtes Aurum potabile, leichtlich^ zu einer hohen Median haben 
k6nne ; aus der Erfahrung beschrieben. Nebst einem Sendschreiben, too 
Lapid. Philosophorum. Jena, Verlegts Job. Bielcke, BuchbandL 170a. 

8*. Pp. [1-9] iO'47 [i blank]. MS. notes. 

Kurtze Beschreibung, Lob, Nutz und Gebrauch, des Theriacs, und Mithridats: 
Nebst einem Anhange, von der Medicina Universalis und woher solche za 
kriegen, &c. aufgesetzet von L. Christoph. Hellwig, Cdlledi-Thur. P. L 
Caes. ietziger Zeit, Stadt-Physico zu 1 annstadt in Thiiringen. Muhlhauseo, 
zufinden bey Michael Kayser, Buchhandler, im Jahr 1704. 

8*. Pp. 54 [2 blank]. 
See HELLWIG (JOHANN OTTO VON). 

Cbriitoph von HellW|jg, Helwig, or Helbig. 
brother ol Johann Otto, %a5 born at Colin on the 
Losse, or Cdlleda, in Thiiringia, 15 July, 1663, 
went to Jena in x68i, and made great progress m 
medicine, when he was induced by his brother to 
accompany him on the Journeys he was obliged to 
undertake as a physician. He returned to Jena 
for a brief period and then went to Erfurt in 1685, 
and attended the courses of Vesti, Leichner, and 
Hartenfelss, and Appeared on four occasions in 
public disputations. 

In x688 after passing the examination as Candi- 
datus Medicinae, he b^gan pactice at Weissensee. 
In 1693 he removed to P ranckenhausen on the 
Kyffhiuser, and on the 28 June held his inaugural 
disputation for the licentiateship, under the pre- 
sidency of Hartenfelss, who a few days before had 
conferred on him the poetical laurel -wreath. 

In 1696 he was chosen physician by the town of 
TennstHdt in Thuringia, where he continued till 
1712, when he went to E>furt. and died there 27 
May, 1 721. 

On 3 August, 1716. he was created a Knight of 
the Golden Cross and Count Palatine. 

Roth-Scholtt, Bibliotheca Chtmica^ 1737, pp. 
74 (the ' Fasciculus ' ; ' no longer of any value, and 
most of the copies have been sold as waste paper '), 

210, 222-228. 

Motschmann, Erfordia Literata, 1729, i. pp. 
13C-161. 

Manget, Bibliotheca Scrip torum Mtdicorum^ 
lyai, L ii. p. 644. 

Jacob Ltupolds Prodromus BibliothecoB meta/iica, 
173a. pp. ^1 68. 

He wrote thirty-one books and half • doirn 
tracts in his own name on medidoe, snrgeiy, 
anatomy, botany, pharmacy, physics, ftc. Out of 
the most interesting of these has the title : Ammu- 
ihige Berg'Historien worinnen dit Eypemsckaptn 
und Nuts dtr MetalUn, Mineralien^ Erdem^ Edd- 
und andrer Steine beschriebtrt , mebst curicsen Rt- 
lationen, was vor denckwUrdige Sacktn am umttr- 
schiedenen Orten iiber und unterderRrdtn^vonukM' 
lick in der Baumanns- Hole und BrocheiS" Bergm 
sehen, Leipzig, 1702. He appeared under the 
pseudonyms Valentin Krilutenxianii, Gasptr 
Schroeder, and Constant Aletopbilns Hasbenger, 
and he edited works by his brother, by Sebastian 
Wirdig, Francken von Franckenau. CardilndiBk 
Conrad Kunrath, and others. 

Our author must be distinguished from another 
person of the same name wtK> gnuluated Nf.D. at 
Basel in 1666, was made professor the same year at 
Greifswald, and died there in 169a He was a 
member of the Leopoldine Academy. 

A third, possibl3r a son of the preceding, was also 
professor of medicine at Greifewald. 

Kestner, Afedicinisches Gelekrten'Lexicom^ 1740^ 
p. 386. 

MoUer, Cimbria Itteraia^ 1744* ii. p. 4991 (He 
interprets the initials L.C.H.P.T. to mean: Lie 
Cliristoph Helwig. Practicus Tenstadiensis.) 

Tocher, Allgemeines Ge/eMrten-Lexicom, 1750^ ii. 
col. 1478. 

Matthias, Conspectus Historiet Afedicorum ckrom§' 
lo^cus, 176 1, p. 874. (Ch. V. Hdiwig and bts 
pseudonyms.) 

HBLLWtG jn 

BLLWIG (Christoph von). C&nHmted. 

iailer, BUlidksca Anaiomica, vm, U. p. 8i. Sdunioder, Gtsckickie der AkJUmU, 1832, pp. 

Sloy, DUHomnairt Mistarifut tu la Aridecime, 453, 6oi. 

>8, u. p. 489. Desetmeris, Dictiomnaire kiitorique de la midt- 

3tytrag nor Gtsckickie der kdhem Ckemie^ 1765. cine, 1836, IIL i. p. 94. 

534. Pduendorff* Biograpkixh-lUerarisckes Hand- 

jindin, Gexhickie der Chemie, 1798, ii. pp. jai, wdrUrhuck, 1863, i. eoL 1058. 

L 683. Ladragne. Bibliotkique Ouvarof, Sciences Secrites, 

rndis, Repertorium der ckemiscMen Litteratur^ 1870, Nos. 1347-49. 

)6-c6, pD. 191, 225, aa6, 999. Hirsch, Biograpkisckes Ltxikon der kervorra^n- 

^i^grapkU Midicale, Paris, Panckoocke (i8ao- den AerMte auer Zciten und Vblier, 1886, ul p. 

I, T. p. 142. 139. 

ELLWIG (JoHAKN Otto vok). 

Job. Ottonis Helbigii, Dr. Chur-Fiirstl. Durchl. zu Pfaltz Rahts, Leib-Medici, 

and bey der Heyddberg. Vniversitat P. P. Griindliche Antwort, Auff 

Mgende Drey Fragen: 

L Was eigendich der Lapis Philosophonini sey? 

II. Worinnen seine Materia bestehe, und wie sie miisse bereitet werden ? 

III. Vnd endlich was man von denen Laboranten und Goldsuchem 

in^emein Alchemisten, an Herren-Hofen, halten sella ? An seinen geliebten 

Freund, C T. S. Dr. 

Heidelberg, In verl^;ung Johann Michael Riidigers Gedruckt bey Samuel 

Ammon. 

12*. Pp. 24. 

Job. Ott Lib. Bar. de Helwig, Magn. Britann. Eqvit &c. Curiosa Physica, 
oder Lehre von unterschiedlichen Natur-Geheimnissen, welche unter etliche 
Capitel gesetzet, und auf der ander Seite, befindlich sind, in etwas vermehret ; 
und ausgefertiget von L. Christoph Helwig, Colledi-Thur. P. L. Caes. Phys. 
in Tafistadt. In Verlegung Michael Kaysers. Sondershausen, Druckts 
Ludwig Heinrich Schonermarck, Fiirstl. Schwartzb. Hof-Buchdr. Im Jahr 
170X. 

12*. Pp. [12] 105 [x blank]. Interleaved with MS. notes. 

Johannis Ottonis Liber. Baronis de Hellwig, Magn. Britann. Eqvitis S. Reg. 
Maj. Danic Consiliarii &c. pise Memoriae, Arcana Maiora, oder curiose 
nnd niiztliche Beschreibung vieler wahrhaften Physicalischen, Medicinischen, 
Cbymiscben, Alchymischen, Chyrurgischen, und Oeconomischen Geheimnisse. 
Aus Weltberiihmter Leute, so wohl Indianischen Braminen oder Weltweisen, 
als auch Teutschen, Spanier, Italianer, Engellander, Hollander, Danen, 
Frantzosen, und anderer vortreflichen Manner Manuscriptis, und Correspon- 
dentzen, auch eigener Erfahrung, auf seinen zwantzig jahrigen weitlauftigen 
Reisen, mit sonderbaren Fleiis collegiret Mit unterschiedlichen schonen 
men Experimenten, Observationen, und Animadversionen vermehret Auf 
instandiges Verlangen vieler (so wohl Hoher als Niedriger) Patronen und 
Freunden, nunmehro in Druck gegeben, auch mit niitzlichen Figuren und 
nothigen Registem versehen, von L. Christoph Hellwig, Phys. zu Tannstadt. 
Erste Er6snung (sic for Er6fhung). Franckfiirt und Leipzig, verlegts 
Michael Kayser, Buchhandler in Miihlhausen, daselbst druckts Tobias 
David Bruckner, im Jahr 17 13. 

8^. Pp. (i«] 77 [i. Rmteur 9. I blank], a woodcuts. 

HELLWIG (JoHANN Otto von). Continmd. 

Zweytc trufnung gj. kt-gitiet {i,\ i i 

Priiie ., 73. ktgLjici 1. 1 bU 

103. R<viM« "^ 

'J 7'- K-gi-Lrrf/. 6S-9 lluppcd. 

~ .. .J] S4(foi ^^>. kr-i'. [6, I bUrkl 5 woodoiu. 

Neunle ., [j] 48. k^i;iiir.- [^.J. 

The fini litle u m black and red printed over iko pcteo. Each pan has ■ 
lllle somelinio Includrd, sometimes not, in tlie paginatioa oF the part. The btxrfc b 
ccarscly printed anil Ihi: woodcuts are Tery rude. This copy wajils ibc portrait and 
biographical notice liy hii tirothrr which are not iacluded in the pa^oalioo. 

GnKlin (p. 33a| i|uotes only an aUlion h'rankfuft nod Leipng. 1701. ia°. of the 

Johann. Ottonis de Helbig, Magnie firitannUe Ectuitis, & Serenis. Pnndpii- 
£ lee tons Palatini ConsilJarii, &c. Judicium de DuumTiris Hermeticit 
Kocderatis, & horum Epistola buccinatona secuada, Amico Ule petend per 
Epistolam responsonam connnunicatum, debitoque in booum publicum 
amore nunc editum. Jene^ Apud Samudem Adolphuni Mullenun Anno 
M DC LXXXIII. 

13", Pp. 45 [3 btankj 

rr the title: Judicium de viriha k 

Judicium de Duum-Viris Henneticis Foederatis, 

See HELLWIG (cHRtSTOPH voN^ Fasciculus, 1719, p. 363. 

HELLWIG (Johann Otto von). 

See ALifULi, Centrum Nature Concentrattim, 1682. 

See QUAEIRATUM ALCHVMISTICUM, 1705. 

Ji'« Alipum, Centrum Natur.-c Concentratum, 1756. 

Poggendoiif ascribes the above tract ; Ctnlrum by the way, is not noticed by Poggeadoifl' 31 
■' ' =-.... -fhedale i6ja is a tuispHnt for i68a; be ba: 

dered tEat Hellwig was not bom till 1654. 

r, Daniig. 1631, 13°. to Hell- The dale 163a is a misprint for ibSa: be has oot 

Helbig, anil Helwig, but as electoral councillor and physician and boDoraiy 

■' ■ ' " ' " " " """"jerg, be was privy councillor 1" 

anlc was cOnt^red 00 tlim b 

of Dentnark. and Charies 11 

professor nt Heidelberg, be was privy cotmcilliv . 

(jotha, the same ranltwas conferr ' ■■ ■ 

n i6u at COUcda in Thuringia. "fiom 1671 
idieif medicine at Jena, MrTurl, Altorf, and 

Olto Liber liaro von Hellwie. He was (jotha, the same rank was conferred on liim br 

he sludieit medicine at Jena, MrTurl, Altorf, and created him a Laiotiet. He died at Bayjculh in 

Bawl, and graduated M.D. at Krfurt in 1675. He 1698. He was the elder tirother of Christapli 

then wunt to Amsterdam, sailed to the Ensi Indies Hellwig, abov-e, and his portrait by Jacob I^tna is 

and practised fur some vears in itatavia. On his at Hrfurt. 

travels he mixed with all kinds of people, studied Besides the above he wrote also : imreUta in 

their languages and manners and learned much vtram tt tnaudilam fkysiiami. Batavie, 1678, 4* ; 

fn>m them. When be returned from the east he Hamburgi, t&So, ff ; Heidelberg, 1680^ ia\ vitb 

travelled in Portugal. Krnncc, Italy, Denmark, two letters, one on the pbilosofdier's stone and tbe 

Hotlanil. Knf^lnnd, knew most oF trie languages other on the Rosicrucians. 
and was received with much honour. He was the 

Mercklii). Limltnim rtnavalvs. 1686. p. 653. Jiu:ob Leupolds Prodramui BUliat/Uca UtIaUUm. 

Borrichius, Cuniptclus Scriplurum Ckemkorum, 1733. p. 67, 

1697, p. 44, No. Imi. Kesiner, Medicinischa GtUkrttn.- L4 rietn , 1740, 

Reimmann, EinltitHng U die tiiHoriam iiltr- p. 387. 

.triaiR dtrer Ttulschtn, 1709. iii. ji, 469. Lenglet Dufresnoy, Hislairt dt la PUlos^Ue 

Christoph Hellwig, notice prefixed to Anaaa Htrmtliqut, 1743, iii. pp. 183, 184. 

Maiora. 1711. ^in^tt, AUgcniiina Qtltkritn-Leiicon, vj^ \\. 

Roth-Scholti, liibliolhica Chemiea. 1737, pp' col' 148'' 

ais-319, and note pp. 330.333. Uoorgius Mallhifc, Cimsftclui Hiilarin MtH- 

Motschmnnn, Erfordia IJIimla, 1739, I p. 137 corum ehtvnologicHi , \-]i,u p. 867. 

(from the pecuding). Holler, Biblielktca Aaatomica, 1774. L pL 6j6. 

MatigGt. Uibliolheca Striplurum Miduorunt. ("In otn. 194. brevia qua»iam & portiro pamm 

1731, I. ii. p. 643. probabilla profert, de buminibus caudalis, taainii 

HELLWIG'-^HELMONT »* 

HELLWIG (JOHANN Otto von). Continued. 

mammas in dorso babentibus." But these, which GmeliD, Geschickie der Chemie^ 1798, ii. pp. 26, 

may have appeared incredible to Haller, may have 219, 270, 322. 

been merely misinterpretations by Hellwig 01 what Biographu M^dicaU, Paris, Panckoucke (1820- 

he saw on his travels). 25), v. p. 146. 

Misstv an die kocherUuchiete Briidenchaft des Schmieder, Geschichte dtr Alchemie, 1832, p. 453. 

Ordins des Goldenen und Rosenkreutus^ X783, p. Kloss, BibliograpkU der Freymaurerei^ 18+4, 

107. Nos. 2629, 2630. 

Beytrag xur Geschichie der hohem Chemie, 1785, Poggendorff, Biographisch-lUerarisckei Hand- 

pp. 533. 633. 654. tuSrterbuch, 1863, i. col. 1057. 

Eloy, LHctionnaire Historique de la Midecine, haiAmgxx^Bibliothique Ouvaroff,Sciences Secrites, 

1788. ii. p. 489. 1870, Nos. 1193-95. 1345. 1552- 

Haller, Bibliotheca Medicines practice, 1788, iv. Kopp, Die Akhemie^ 1880, ii. pp. 331, 332, 351, 

P- 294. 357, 375. 

HELLWIG (Otto). 

Send-Schreiben an P. Alexium Augustiner Ordens in Wien. 

See CHYMISCHES LUST-GARTLEIN, 1 747, p. 97." 

Haller [Bibliotheca Anatomica, 1777, ii. p. 146) Zittau, 1721, 4", by Otto Hellwig. Is he the same 
mentions a tract, Sonderbarer discours vom Urin, person as the above? 

HELMONT (Franciscus Mercurius van). 

C.LI I L Aphorismes Chymiques. Ausquels on peut facilement rapporter tout 
ce qui regarde la Chymie. Mis en ordre par les soins & le travail de 
L'Hermite du Fauxbourg. Nouvellement traduit du Latin en Francois, par 
M. S. D. R. A Paris, Chez Laurent d'Houry, rue Saint Jacques, devant 
la Fontaine S. Severin, au Saint Esprit M.DC.XCII. Avec Privilege du 
Roy. 

12*'. Pp. 33 [i blank} 

Limojon de Saint Disdier is credited with the work : La Lumiere sortant par soy mime des Tene- 

auihorship of this tract. But see Kellner. brts, Paris, 1692, 12", and is here bound separately. 

The Afhorisms were translated into English by I have not seen this edition. 

Chiistopner Packe. There are also copies of the Aphorismes dated 

The above forms the supplement to Crassellame's 1693. 

CLIII. Aphorismi. 

See KELLNER (david), Wohlangcrichtctes >Crariuin Chymicum, 1702. 

Francisci Mercurii Freyherm von Helmont Paradoxal Discourse, oder : Unge- 
meine Meynungen von dem Macrocosmo und Microcosmo, das ist : Von 
der grossen und kleinem Welt und derselben Vereinigung mit einander, 
worinnen von der Sonnen, Mond und Sternen, und ihrer Wiirckung und 
Einflufs, wie auch insonderheit von dem Menschen, Thieren, Erdgewachsen, 
Metallen und Mineralien, Steinen und Saltzen sampt andern curiosen Dingen 
aufs der Erfahrung nachdencklich gehandelt wird. Aufs der Englischen in 
die Hochteutsche Sprache iibersetzet, Hamburg, [the rest cut off by the 
binder]. 

8*. Pp. [6] 369 [for 389] [i blank]. Title red and black. 2 full page woodcuts. 

Franciscus Mercurius was the youngest of J. B. more brilliant man than his father, but he lacked 

van Hdmont's sons. His two elder brothers died his persistence and perseverance, and was unable 

of the plague. He was born probably at Vilvorde to concentrate his powers on any one department of 

hi 1618, it is doubtful if he went to the University, learning. His restlessness prevented him doing 

but he was endowed with unusually great abilities steady work. When still young he joined a band 

and seemed to be able to learn whatever he had a of gypsies in order to learn their language ; in 1662, 

wish for. He was an excellent linguist, an artist, after publishing his father's works, he went to 

a handicraftsman, a physician, a chemist (he led Rome, and while there drew on himself the notice 

people to believe that he had the secret and means of the Inquisition by some views he had promul- 

of transmutation), and a theosophist. He was a gated about metempsychosis, so that be found it 

300 

HELMONT 

HELMONT (Franciscus Mercurius vaw). 

ooMvcnient to Icmw, and in 1663 be was at ManU' 
hetm. and then be visited SuUbacb and stajred a 
coiiadvrahic Ume with the Count Palatine. Here 
he met Knorr von Kosfenroth, the author of K^ 
Ma Semudau. a man after bis own heart, and 
together they bef^n 10 translate the works of his 
father into Grrman. He returned to Holland, 
croftied to Kngland, and stajred some vears there, 
fNiUiahins one or t«o books in EoflisK and for a 
tinte at lout joined to the Quakers. Hanover was 
his next place of rrsidence, and here he was on 
friendly terms mith Leiboits, and finallj the 
Klectnss of Ikandenburg invited bira to oerlia, 
which he never afterwards lefL He died at Coelln 
a. d. Spree — a suburb of Berlin— in 1699. *S^ ^i- 

Koch-Scholu. Bibliotkeca Ckemua^ 1737, pp. 

^y^ 33S- 
Mangel. Bihliotkeca Scriptontm SMuormtm^ 

1731. I. ii. p. 648. 

Arnold, A'iiriM- umd Ketatr-Hisiaritm, 1740, 
ii. p. 397 (Th. iiL c^iiu i 25. sqqX 

focaer, AU^emeiiui GtUhrttn-Ltxuon, 1750^ iu 
col. 1471. 

Mor^. Lt grand Dittiamnaire kistortiftu, 1759, 

▼. P- 570- 

Brucker, Hisimria CriHca Philosophic, 1766. IV. 

i. p. 731. 
Haller. Bihlioiktca Anatomica^ 1774, L p. 46^ 
Ek^, Dictiommairt historique dt la Stidicime, 

1778, ii. pw 4B3. 
Haller, BihHciheca Mediein^t pracHem^ iT79, iii. 

Addung. GtschichU der wunschiichem A'arrheil, 
1787. ir. p. 394- 

Gmelin, GesikUhle der Chemit, 1798, ii. p. 314 
(quotes THermite du Fauxbourg' (fCoeUn) but 
does noC give van Helmoot's name). 

Bi^graJhU Umivertelle, 1817. xx. p. 19; 1857. 
xix. p. 83. 

has iatber's wroriu throogh theprei 
he wrote some of bis own. That of ommI iokn 
at the preaent daj bears the tide : AlfhtkH « 
XaSurmiis Nehrata hrtvissimim DtHmimA.StUmd 
i^7.J»o. P^^LjS. with the frootspieoel ia7[ 
coiophoaj. 2fi plates, and it doc ooh 
expound the pnndple of a rmtkMial alphahrt.l 
csplain the method oif tendiii^ deaf^Htfti 
understand what is said I17 the -****V»t of the fa 

Toe Gcnaan triwiafioni, Sobiiacli* 1667* Ad 
huK sayi was by Knorr won Roaenroth. 

He kft no writing on Clieiuistiy and doa 1 
seem to have had the special interest in it eiUbii 
by hisfisther. 

Ersch A Gfnbcr. AUgnmtimt ffniylfi^itf r, ill 
Sect. iL Tb. ▼.. pi 187. 

iCloaSi BthU^wmphu 4tr FMmmmrwni, iS( 
Not. 931 (Pssradonl Diaooiim), aaSa, jMh (l 
Alphabet). ^^ 

kopp, anchicUr der Cktmit, 1844, iL p^ ii^ 

Bayle k ThiDaye, Bi^pr^tphm hiddiaUi, itj 
i. p. 44^ 

Mom/tilt Bi^grmfkU Gdmiraif^ iScI, nfi. e 
864. 

Foggendorii, Bi^grmpkuehUiigruriad^ Htok 
worUrbmch^ 1863. i. ooL io6a 

Van do- Aa. Biogrmpkixk JTiiiFAnlwrf i 
Stderlmmdem^ 1867, vuL p^ 495. 

C Broeckz, U Barom Frmm^au JArrarr a 
HelwMmi, Anvcn^ 1870, 8*. ppu a8. 

Franck, Dictiomnmirt dts Sd€me9s pkUmafkitm 

1875. p. 1754. 

Haeser, GtschichU der Mediein. 1881. iL pi 3 
(the alphabet). 

Bi^raphu NatiomaU, pmhHie par CAeadiB 
koyaJt , . . de Belgium, 1884-85, vifi. cohb 91 
906 (article by Alphonae Le Roj^. 

HELMONT (JoHANN Baptista van). 

Aufgang der Artzney-Kunst, das ist : Noch nie erhdrte Gnind-Lehren ti 
der Natur, zu einer neuen Befbrdening der Artzney-Sachen, so wol d 
Kranckheiten zu vertreiben, als ein langes Leben zu erlangen. GeschridM 
von Johann Baptista von Helmont, auf Merode, Royenborch, Oorschc 
Pellines, &c. Erbherm. Anitzo auf Beyrahten dessen Herm Sohnes, Her 
H. Francisci Mercurii Freyherm von Helmont, in die Hochteutsche Spcad 
iibersetzet, in seine rechte Ordnung gebracht, mit Beyfiigung dessen w 
in der Ersten auf Niederliindisch gedruckten Edition, genannt Die Moige 
Rohte, mehr, oder auch anders, als in der Lateinischen, durchgeheiul 
wie auch mit einem ehmals ausgelassenen Tractat von der grossen Kia 
der Worte und Dinge, aus dem geschriebenen vennehret, von alien 
alien Editionen eingeschlichenen Fehlem gereiniget, und mit deutlidM 
Anmerckungen, so zu einem gnugsamen Schliissel aller dunckeln Oi 
dienen konnen, erlautert: Samt einer neuen Vorrede, darinnen ein Irarti 
Entwurfif aller Helmontischen Kranckheiten und Artzneyen: Wie aw 
einem vollstandigen Register. Sultzbach, In Verl^;ung Jobann Andn 
Endters Sel. Sohne, Gedruckt bey Johann Hoist, Anno M.DC.LXXXIII. 

Folio. Pp. [32] 1270 [59, I blank]. Title red and black. FhmCispieoe and 
portrait of Van Helmont separate. 

HELMONT 

38t 

HELMONT (JoHANN Baptista van). Continued. 

De Magnetica vulnerum Curatione, Disputatio contra opinionem Joan. Roberti. 

See THEATRUM SYMPATHETICUM, 1662, p. 457. 

Pnecipiolum : or the immature- mineral- electnim, the first metall : which is the 
minera of mercury. 

See COLLECTANEA CHYMICA, 1684, p. 45. 

Van HelmoDt was born at Bnissels in 1577. of a 
noble liEimily of Brabant, and he was the owner of 
leveral estates. He had finished his Arts course 
at Loavain l^ the time he was seventeen, but did not 
take the degree as he was dissatisfied with what he 
had been taught. He now turned to science and 
pursued algebra, astronomy, astrology, botany, 
philosophy, ethics, and even magic, but gave them 
up on account of the defects he found in them. 
lie was next attracted by Epictetus and Seneca and 
at last fell upon the writings of Thomas k Kempis 
and Tauler and went over to mysticism. Having 
resigned his property to his sister and given up the 
privil^es of his rank he turned to medicine, studied 
every author he could find, and made himself thor- 
oughly fiEuniliar with the works of Hippocrates and 
Galen. He astonished the doctors by the extent of 
his learning, and graduated at Lou vain in 1599. 
He spent a couple of years in Switzerland and 
Italy and returned home, and on the failure of the 
physicians to cure him of a slight disorder he gave 
up the school medicine and considered that his 
aun now was the overthrow of the system which 
had been erected on that of Galen. 

After this he travelled over the length and 
breadth of Europe and returned to Holland im- 
piesaed with the mterest and importance of chem- 
istry. Having married a rich Brabant lady, 
Marguerite van Ranst, he settled at Vilvorde, and 
to tl^ end of his life shut himself up in bis labora- 
tory pursuing chemical investigations and writing 
his various books. 

He was much esteemed by the Elector of Cologne, 
and Rudolph H. Matthias and Ferdinand II. sent 
him invitations to their courts, but he could not be 
indooad to leave his laboratory. 

He did not escape controversy, however, and in 
his reply to Roberti on the magnetic cure of 
wouna no fewer than twenty-seven propositions 
incompatible with the Catholic faith were dis- 
covered. He was kept in prison for a short time, 
but whc9Q it was found that he was not toying with 
heresy be was liberated. He had, however, to 
retract his opinions formally, and remained 'sus- 
pect ' for some time after ; something resembling 
a ticket-of-leave man under police supervision. It 
was not till two years after his death that his wife 
induced the Archbishop of Malines to make his 
rehabilitation complete. 

His discussion with van Heer about the water of 

Borel, Bibliothtca Ckimica, 1654. pp. 1x4, 366^ 
Lorenzo Crasso, Elogii if Huomtni Letterati, 
1666, ii. pp. i44-z«o, and portrait. 
Will Cooper, A Catalogue of Chymicall Books, 

167s, Sig. Q, reeto. 
WUte. 

MemoriiB SfedUorum nosiri seculi Claris- 
simorum refiovata decas prima, 1676, p. 125 (by 
Van Helmont himself and his son). 

Mercklin, Lindenius rtncvatus, 1686, p. 538. 

Conrin^, In Universam Artem Medicam . . . 
IntroducHo, 1687, pp. 55, 67, 70-73, 249, 252. 

Witte, Diarium hiographicum, 1688, 30 Dec. 
1644, sig. Ss. 4 verso. 

Spa was effervescent and sparkling while it lasted, 
but entailed no church censure. 

Van Helmont died of pleurisy at Vilvorde, 30 
Dec, 1664. During his lifetime he published thxee 
or four works : 

De Magnetica Vulnerum naturali et legitiina 
Curatione, Paris, 1621, 4**. 

De aquis Leodiensibus medicatis, Colon. Agr., 
1624. 8°. 

Febrium doctrina inaudita. Antwerp, 1642, 16*. 

Opuscula Medica inaudita. Col. Ag., x6m^, 8"; 
editio secunda, Amsterodami, 1648, 4*, containing De 
Lithiasi, de Febribus,de HumoribusGaleni, de Peste. 

His writings which had been nearly lost, were 
collected by his son, and witHbut much arrange- 
ment or editorial supervision by him were printed 
in a hurry, although they were looked after to 
some extent by Louis Eltevir, the printer. They 
appeared in a 4° volume, 'Ortus Medicinae,' Am- 
stelodami. 1648, 1655. and other editions are 
enumerated : 1652 (said to be the best) ; Venet., 
i6§i, fol. ; as * Opera Omnia,' Lugd. Bat, 16^ 
foho ; 1667, folio ; Francof., i68a, 1684, 4° ; Hafniae, 
1707, 4' (by Valentinus). 

Translations were made into Dutch, Rotterdam, 
1660, 4° ; French, Lyon, 1671, 4° ; German as 
above; English, translated by John Chandler: 
Oriatrike or Physick Refined, Ix>ndon, x66a, small 
folio, pp. [43, I blank] 1161 [i blank, 22]. Pre- 
fixed is a frontispiece containing portraits of Van 
Helmont and his son, and the coats of arms belong- 
ing to his different properties, with that of his wife. 
Cooper quotes an edition of X664. A translation 
of three of his tracts was made by Dr. Walter 
Charleton : A Ternary of Paradoxes : The Ma^- 
netick Cure of Wounds, The Nativity of Tartar tn 
Wine, The image of God in Man, London, 1650, 
4*, pp. k2] 147 fi blank], and there was issued 
along with it another translation also by Charleton 
from Van Helmont : Deliramenia Catarrhi : or 
the Incongruities, ImpossiHlities and Absurdities 
couched under the vulgar ofinion of Dejluxions, 
London, 1650, 4" pp. [xa] 75X1 blank]. 

Various judgments have been passed on Van 
Helmont at various times, represented by Guy 
Patin and Adelung on one hand and by the modern 
writers on medicine on the other. For his position 
as a chemist there may be consulted what is said 
by Kopp, Hoefer, Melsens, Chevreul and Alphonse 
LeRoy. 

Colberg, Das Platonisch-Hermetisches Christen- 
thum, 1690-91, Th. i. p. 197. 

Borrichius, Conspectus Scriptorum Chemicorum, 
X697, p. 42. 

Keren-Happuch . . . oder Teutsches Fegfeuer der 
Scheide-Kunst, 170a, p. 86. 

Reimmann, Einleitung in die Historiam liter- 
ariam derer Teutschen, 1709, iii. p. 437 b; X713, 
vi. pp. 607, 717, 788, 836. 

Pope- Blount, Censura Celebriorum Authorum, 
1710. p. 955. 

Morhof, Folyhistar, 1714, ii. pp. aox. 337.373.4«3- 

Acta Medicerum Berolinensium , X7ax, viii. (por- 
trait and short uotioe). 

3*2 

HELMOST-^HELVETIA 

HELMONT JvHa>s BAin?TA vasv. 

x>& vi- H-: -:.'■-.<:.: « •./« i_ii - :;. :V rZ-ij?r : 

V i.-.r-rC / - .• - . • •- . >.':/:• -- w J/ri:.-. r* ■ 
1-31 I. . ::. tii-xi r»pr.-: o« u !-•€ l»t bj— - 
<i*^:* IT.-- :.-» KT.. » li -rrrjriu &::r.3c:ied 10 

: kirn *}<.:'.r'.y,: i-^i -1 iii-iii 24- 2*5 53a, 

Arr.cld K:r,iun- '~r.i Ke:u "- //; ' . rv t x 740. 
i.Tr. c.v... 1 1, v/- • •- ?'■ 3^ 

coL 1472. 

F.ctuld, Pr.c:er.<u:n 1753 Th. L p. 9:. 

Moren, Ijt *triHj Ijun^n^zirt k2::.-n\f^t, 
1759, V. ^ 57a 

G«Grfi^:us Matthiar, Lcntpectus Hisi^r:a Mtd.- 
Cvrmm chn:moi-^i<:us, 17^1. p. 560. 

hn:*- ker . //z ;/. ru Ln :iia t'ii^.iyfkijt. 1 7:6, I V. 

I. p. 709- 

Portal, Histoin Je /'Ansij-mu tt d€ Ij. Lk:r- 

Haller. BihlicthfCJ. B-.t^nUii. 1771, L p 473. 

Hallfrr, liitlijtfuca .An. if. mi. .7, 1774. pp. 

418-21 (critic.sm and Lsi of h^ v^orksi. 

Haller, Bibliotkeca Chirurfrica, 1774, i. p. 307. 

Halter, Bibliotheca Stelicina practice, ^T71- ii- 
col. 518. 

Eloy. Dictionnaire Hiitoriqui dt la M^decine, 
1778. li. pp. 478-482 ; 1755, ii. pp. 20-24. 

iiaumer. hi'^lwthec^ Lhfmu\:. 1732, p. 3. 

Adeluni*. iW^chichte drr menichlichen Xjrrkeif, 
1787. iv. p. 257. 

Kortum zertcidiget die AUhemie . . . Duisburg. 
1789, p. 168. 

Melzger. Skitxe einrr pra^matischen Literjr. 
gtichichte der Medicitt^ 1792, p. 274, ^227. 

Gnielin. (Uichichte der Chemie, 1797, i. pp. 511- 
'3» 524-550. ^5. 677. 721 ; 1798, ii. pp. 375, 782, 

783. 

Hutchinson. Duigraphia Med tea ^ '799. i- PP- 
416-423. .. 

Murr, Uber drn ivahren Ur sprung der Rosen- 
kreuzer und des Freymaurerordens.i^'^, p. 79. 

P'uchi;, Kepertorium der ckemiscken Litteraiur, 
1806-08. p. 102. 

J.J. l-roos, Johann Baptist van Helmont^ Heidel- 
Ijcrg, 1807. 

Biographie Medicate, Paris, Panckoucke (1820- 
25). V. p. 147. 

Rixn<:r & Siber, Leben und Lehrmeinungen be- 
rilhmter Physiker, vii. Heft. Sulzbach, 1826. 

Sprengrl, Geschichte der Arzneykunde^ 1827, iv. 
pp. 130, 198, 292-316. 549, 591. 

Ersch & Griibcr, All^^emeine Encyklopddie, 1829, 
Sect, ii., Th. v. p. 187. 

Thomson, History 0/ Chemistry, 1830, i. p. 179. 

Z>L-7k«saJT 
.■:w iSjTt. III. L p. 97- 

LKedcT-css Heancas FnH 
/:"*-:■."«. -I J, LipL, r=3r. 4". 

Isessce, Cfor^'Aflr jVr 

kei, rUmetOfiaime 
i«, i&foc L p. 3P«. 

G .\. S=^«ss. y. B. r^» Utimumfs System iv 
Me^ij:n. Fraakf=rc a. M.. iflLfa 

HDcf^r Hizuire de U CkimU. 1843. il pL 140; 
i5cc^ ;_ p, XJ4. 

Kvpp. ii^xkxik:* cer Cktmie, 1843. L ppL iz6- 
X2-. if pcjjjm. 

Uttrt^ de Gut P,2iim, ed. J. H. Rc««iI16-Buii^ 
1-4'.. - pp. e:-. 225. 355, 503: u^ 117. 178,461; 
.. 77. \Ttie editor dots doc a|;ree with Fun's 

. piT.lOCS. • 

MoTB-.tz, Gej^kLkU der J/edicim, iftiS. L pi 1B9; 
lil^ ::- p 17^ 

/. Mrm^des Sjvamls, 1850 Panicle br Chevicnl). 

C Broeckx. Le prtmser Ouz'rta^^^ de /. B. m* 
h'e,mumt . , . en JEisjjfogie im Artem Medicau a 
Pcr^elsa rtsritm/tim. Pwiklid pcur le premier fais, 
.\n\^er&, x8f4 uefeieuce* in the Introductioo). 

Bayle ^'ThUiare, Bi*fgrapkU Midicale, 1855, ii 

Philiippe k L4id«ig, Ges^kuMu der AfoAtkr, 
1855. p. 470L 

'Si^^apkie Cnherselle^ 1817, xx. p. 15; 1857, 
XIX. p. 80. 

Cap, Etudes Hograpkiques^ Premiere S^rie, 1857, 
p. 90. 

\ouz^IU BLvrafkie GhUmk, 1858, xxiiL 001853. 

Ivluvskens, ues Hummus celAres daau ks sdmta 
et les arts et des Midailles qui cauacremt Uur 
sowieair, 1859. iL p. 531, and a "»*^*^ 

Pc^gendortf, Biograpkiscl^literarixkes Head- 
w^rterbuck. 1863. i. coL xo6ol 

Stockl. GtschickU der Pkilosopkie des MittdaUm, 
1866, iii. pp. 458-472. 

Van der .\a. Biograpkisck Woordenkodk der 
SeJm'anJ^n, x857. \-iiL p. 498 (and references). 

\\\ komnielaere. Etudes sur J^ B. vam Helmemt, 
Bruxelles, x868 (contains a minute biogiaphjX 

Figuier, k'tes des Savants illusires {SavoMls dm 
X171* Siicle\. 1870, pp. 379-405 (with referenoes). 

LsLdir<kgue,Btbli0tkeque Ouvarof ^Sciences SecrUet, 
X870, Nos. X617-X8, 1632. 

Franck, Dictionnaire des Sciences pkilasopkiques, 
1875. p. 1751. 

Melseos, AWiV^ kistorique sur/. B. van Helmomt.i 
propos de la dijimition et de la tkdorie de laJUmme, 
Bruxelles, 1875, 8** 

Allgemeine Deutsche Biograpkie, 1880, xi p. Tcn 
(article b^ Delff, who quotes only Rixner s 
Siber as his authorities). 

Haeser, Gesckickte der Afedicin, 1881, il p 
344, &c., &c. 

Biographie Sationale publiie par VAcadime 
Roy ale , , . de Belgique, 1884-85, viii. coL 9C0 
(article by Alphonse Le Roy). 

Billings, Index-Catalopte, 1885, vi. p, 47; 2nd 
Series, 190X, \i. p. 1005 ^nd the references). 

Dictionnaire Encyclopidique des Sciences midi- 
cales, 4^me S<*rie, 1886, xii. p. 6«. 

Hirsch, Biographisches Lexikan der kervorra- 
genden Aertte alter Zeiien und FSlker, 1886, iii. 
p. 142. 

HELVETIA. 

See PHARMACOPOF'A HELVETICA, I77L 

HELVETIUS 383 

HELVETIUS (JoHANN Friedrich). 

Johannis Friderichs Schweitzers, Guldenes Kalb, welches die gantze Welt 
anbetet und verehret, in welchen gehandelt wird von einem sehr hohen 
Wunder der Natur die Metalleu (i-zV) zuverandern, nemlich, Wie die gantze 
Substanz und Wesen des Bleyes in einer Minuten von einem sehr kleinen 
Komlein des warhafftigen Philosophischen Steins in ein vollkommen Gold 
zu Graffenhage verwandelt worden. 

Job. 37. V. 5. Gott machet Wunderding, aber wir k6nnen solche nicht 

verstehen. 
Seneca in seinem 77. Sendschreiben. Man mufs die Schmehereden der 
Unwissenden mit Gedult vertragen, und ist die Verachtung von dem, 
der auf Ehr und Tugend zu wandelt, selbst wieder zuverachten. 
In Teutsch verfertigt, und zum Druck befordert 1668. In Niirnberg, Bey 
Wolf Eberhard Felfsecker. 

S''. Pp. [8] 54. Plate of the Prague Medal. 

The Golden Calf, Which the World Adores, and Desires : In which is handled 
The most Rare and Incomparable Wonder of Nature, in Transmuting 
Metals; Viz. How the intire Substance of Lead, was in one Moment 
Transmuted into Gold-Obrizon, with an exceeding small particle of the 
true Philosophick Stone. At the Hague. In the Year 1666. Written in 
Latin by John Frederick Helvetius, Doctor and Practitioner of Medicine 
at the Hague, and faithfully Englished. London, Printed for John Starkey 
at the Mitre in Fleet Street near Temple-Barr, 1670. 

i2*>. Pp. [1-8] 9-129 [3 blank]. 

Will. Cooper, the chemical publisher in the Worlds Idol, pp. [10] 41 [i blank], published it 

seventeenth century, had translated this tract, along with his Philosophical Epiiath and some 

when he was anticipated by the publication of the other tracts and the Catalogue of Ckymical Books, 

above. He then abbreviated his translation, and, London, 1675, 8°. 
under the title : A Brief e of the Golden Calf, or the 

Joannis Friderici Helvetii, Vitulus Aureus, quem mundus adorat et orat. 
Oder : ein sehr curioses Tractatlein in welchem das rare und wundersame 
Werk der Natur in Verwandelung derer Metallen-Historien ausgefiihret wird : 
Wie nemlich das ganze Wesen des Bleyes in einem Augenblick durch Hiilfe 
eines sehr kleinen Stiicks des Steins der Weifsen zu dem allerbesten Gold, 
von obengenannten Herrn Helvetius im Haag gemacht und verwandelt 
worden. Aus dem Lateinischen iibersetzt. Frankfurt und Leipzig, bey 
Johann Georg Efslinger, 1767. 

8°. Pp. (including the frontispiece) [i-xs] 14*80. The frontispiece is an engraving 
of the Prague Medal. 

See fOnf Curieuse Chymische Tractatlein, 1767. 

The above is the fifth tract in this collection, but it is quite separate, and could perfectly well appear 
by itself, as indeed it does in the following entry. 

Joannis Friderici Helvetii, Vitulus Aureus, quem mundus adorat et orat. 
Oder: ein sehr curioses Tractatlein in welchem das rare und wundersame 
Werk der Natur in Verwandelung derer Metallen-Historien ausgefiihret 
?rird. Wie nemlich das ganze Wesen des Bleyes in einem Augenblick 

3a« 

HBLVETWS 

HELVETIUS (JoHAifif Friedrich). CamHnmtd. 

durch Hiilfe eines sebr kldnen Stikks des Sletiis der Wdfaa 
allerbetten Gold, von obengenannten Herm HeWeChif im Haag 
und verwandelt worden. Aos dem Lateiniicfaen fibeneUL 
und Leipzig, bey Johann Georg Elslinger, 1767. 

of 

Z', I'pu f 1-13] 14-toi, indudinf tht froiUMpifCf. which it an 
Prague Mecku. 

This is identical with the preceding, but has been tepwmted fron the oolleccioii. 

Giildenes Kalb. 

See ROTH-SCHOLTZ (FRIEDIRICH), Detitschcs Tbeatmin Chteiinwn, 1728*111.481. 

Vitulus aureus quern mundus adorat et orat 

See MANGET (J. J.), Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, i. p. 196. 

See MUSiCUM HERMETICUM, I749, P- S^S- 

Johann Friedrich Schweitxer, latinized Helvetius. 
mat grandfather of the philosopher, was born at 
KcHhen, in the Duchy ot Anhalt. in 1695 (Roch- 
Scholtz says 1631), studied medicine, went to the 
Hague, and became physician to the Prince of 
Orange. He was the anthor of one or two medical 
and botanical books, and also of some on alcheinv. 
as : De Alckymia oPuscula complura vcterumpkiio- 
sapkorum^ Irancof. 1650. which I have not seen, 
and which seems to me to be too curiously like a 
book with the same title printed at Frankfurt in 
15^ He is now remembo'ed by the present work. 
in which he gives an account of the transmutation 
of which he was witness in 1666. The book passed 
through several editions, and the case excited a 
great deal of discussion. Bv some it was looked 
on as conclusive proof of tne actuality of trans- 
mutation ; by others it was considered too puerile 
for comment. Kopp, however, asks if a man like 
Helvetius could have narrated such an occurrence 
either erroneously or untruthfully ; and he thinks 
that it would not be reasonable to assume either. 
On the strength of this cautious view more energetic 
believers in the occult have brought it forward at 
the present moment as historically incontestable. 
See Dr. G. H. Berendt, Das Buck der Wunder 
(1901, the book is not dated, but it came out this 
year), ii. p. 70^. 

Helvetius died at the Hague. 29 Augt.. 1709. 
His portrait is given in Roth-Scholtz's Bibliotheca 
Cktmica, ijv;, frontispiece to Stttck iv. 

The book was first published in Latin at 
Amsterdam, in 1667: at the Hague, 1702, 8*. pp. 
[x-6] 7-73, folding plate ; and, it is said, also m 
1705. The German version was published at 
Nfkrnberg, 1668; other editions quoted are 1675, 

Goosen van Vreeswyk, De Goude Le€uw^i(fj$j6, 

p. 5- 
Mercklin. Lindenius rencvatus^ Norimbergac, 

1686, p. 584 (mentions only three works). 

Spinoxn, De Nagelate Schri/ten, Amst. 1687, 4^, 
p. C85, or Opera Fosthuma, p. 533. 

liorrichius, Conspectus Chemicorum celebriorum^ 
1607. p. 40. 

Uarchusen, Pyrosophta succinct a^ 1698. p. 424. 

Hannemann, Jason [1709], p. 22. 

Morhof, Polykistor, 17 14, ii. p. 306 (*Homo 
exigui judicii. et circumforanere tantdm doctrinas*). 

Chymiphilus, Der wahren chymischer Weisheii 
O^Makrung, NUmberg, 1720, p. 71. 

Roth-Scholtz, Bibliotheca Chemica^ NUmberg. 
1727, pp. 237-247. Poftrait. (Long list of his works.) 

1727 ; Frankt a. M. 1705. 1796L Dutch : Cmdn 
JCalf, wasr im moMgetoomd wordi km dmr mUid 
van den pkiiosopkisckem SUeu Met Lsod in Gemdis 
veranderd, Amsterdam, 174^ 

Kopp has made a cunoos natginc 
deserves nocioe, ocharwiat it maj lead to 
When describioff Helvetios' *' Vitufan AareDS|"he 
adds in a parentnesis that be is not to be *'*w''"""' 
with a cootemporary physician in Kfithtn of 
exactly the same name, who, in 1655, at LqrdoL 
published an alchemical writing '* Ichtt aosnidits. 
Now below Hdvettus* portnut| as given fa^ Rolh- 
Scholts, is the inacriptioo: Johanoea FVidericm 
Helvetius, Anhaltinus Gtithtoensis. Meffidne 
Doctor, et Practicus ab A. 1661. Ha^ae oomitis, 
denique ab A. 1676. AmsfekidaMmtis, wns de 
transmutatione Plumbi in Auram testis cjns dcniqie 
fabricator. NaL A. 1631. 

On the other hand, in the Bejrirag Mmr Gtsekiekk 
dir hdhem Chemie, 1785. p. 6x7. occurs the foOov' 
ing : ' * 214. la Frider. Helvetii Ichts aus nkhts, 
Leiden 1655. 12. — Von einem Manne, do- sic^ 
getrauete, ein goldnes Kalb zu zeitgcn (he did 
not, but that does not affect the present aigo* 
ment !) kann man schon erwarten, dais er etwis 
aus nichts hervorbringen konnte." 

There is not the slightest doubt in these passage 
a.^ to the identity of Helvetius of Kdthen wkhue 
author of the Golden calf, and of the identity of Ibe 
author of '* Ichts aus nichts " also with the anthor 
of the Golden Calf. I am not awaze of any 
ground for the distinction Kopp draws. He is to 
very accurate that one hesitates to believa that be 
has here been in some sort of misappcehensioD, hot 
It seems to be the case. 

Roth-Scholtz, Deuisckes Theatrum Cktmicum, 
NUmberg, 1728, i. pu 481. 

Die F.delgebomt Jungftr Akkymia, TQbingeo. 
i73o> PP* 156 (the author says the narrative is 
by far the finest he knows). 335. 

Manget, Bihliotkeca Scriptorum Meditmrwm, 
Genevae, 1731,1. ii. p. 6ca (0>pted from Mercklin.) 

Kestner, Afediciniscnet GtUmrten-Ltxicon^ rj4p, 
p. 386. 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire de la Pki/oupkii 
HermiHque, Paris, 1742, i. pi 48a ; ii. p. 46 ; iil 
p. 185. 

Tharsander, Adeftus ineptus, Berlin, 1744, p. 331. 

locher, Allgemetnes GtUkrien-Lexiegm, 1730, ii. 
col. 1477. 

Fictuld, Probier-Steim, 1753, Th. i. p. 91 ; iL p.74 

HEL VETIUS'-HENCKEL 

3«5 

HELVETIUS (JOHANN Friedrich). Continued. 

Biographic MidicaU, Paris, Panckoucke (i820- 

as). V. p. 154. 

Ersch & Gruber, Allgemeine Encykhpddie, 1829, 
Sect, ii., Th. v. p. 250. 

Thomson, Tne History of Chemistry ^ 1830, i. 
p. z8. 

Schmieder, Geschichtt der Alchemie, Halle, 1832, 
p. 421. 

Hoefer, Histoire de la Chimie^ 1843, iu p. 336 ; 
1869, ii. p. 327. 

Kopp, Geschichie der Chemie^ 1844, ii. p. 169. 

Lavaler, Physiognomy, translated by Holcroft, 
Lond. 1848, p. 165 — ^where he commends Hel- 
vetiiis* Physiognomonica Medicinalis. 

Figuier, LAlchimie et 
pp. 211, 281. 

Nouvelle Biographic GiniraU^ 1858, xxiii. p. 872. 

Poggendorff, Biographisch-literarisches Hand- 
worterbuch^ 1863, i. col. 1061. 

Van der Aa, Biographisch IVoordetUoech der 
Nederlanden, 1867, viii. p, 5x0. 

Ladrague. Bibliothique Ouvaroff^ Sciences 
Secrites, 1870, Nos. i22z«23. 

Billings, Index-Catalogue^ 1885, vi. p. 50 ; 2nd 
Series, 1901, vi. p. 1008. 

Kopp, Die Alchemie, Heidelberg, 1886, i. p. 83 
sqq. &* passim. 

Berendt, Das Buch der Wunder, s.a. (1901), ii, 
p. 709. 

les Alchimistes, 1856, 

Georgius Matthise, Conspectus Historic Mcdi- 
eorum chronologicus, 1761, p. 847. 

Haller, Biblwtheca Botanica, 1771, ii. p. 512. 

Mo^isen, Verteichniss einer Sammlung von 
Bildnissen berilhmter Aertze, Berlin, 1771, part 2, 
p. 58. 

Wiegleb, Htstorisch-Kntische Untersuchung der 
Alchemie, Weimar, 1777, p. 301. (The story is 
DOt worth consideration according to him.) 

Eloy, Dictionnaire historique de la Midecine, 
1778, lu p. 482. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Medicince practices^ i779f 
iiL p. 98. 

Baumer, Bibliotheca Chemica, 1782, p. 95. 

Gf^denizXyi, Sammlung von . . . Transmutations- 
Gssckichten, 1784, p. 204. 

Beytrag xur Geschichie der hbhem Chemie, 
L^zig, 1785, pp. 499, 617, 621. 

Kortum verteidiget die Alchemie, Duisburg, 
1789, p. 179. 

Gmelin, Geschichie der Chemie, 1798, ii. pp. 

x^ 17. 

Murr, Litterarische Nachrich/en zu der Ge- 

achichte des sogenannten Goldmachens^ 1803, p. 86. 
Fuchs, Repertorium der chemischen Litteratur, 
1806-08, p. 158. 

Murr, Uber den wahren Ursprung der Rosen- 
kreuxer und des Freymaurerordens^ 1808, p. 80. 

'BsareW, Lives 0/ the Adepts, London, 1814, p. 81. 

Biographic Universelle, 18x7, xx. p. 22 ; and 
1857, xix. p. 84. 

HELWIGIUS (Christopherus). 

See HELLWIG (CHRISTOPH). 

HENCKEL (JoHANN Christoph). 

Einige neuentdeckte Chemisch-Physicalische Wahrheiten, denen Kennern der 
Natur-Lehre und Arzeney-Bereitungs-Kunst zur Beurtheilung und Anwendung 
hingegeben von D. Johann Christoph Henckel, Fiirstl. Schwarzburgl. Rath 
und Leibmedicus zu Amstadt. Leipzig, bey Christian Gottlob Hilscher, 
1769. 

8'. Pp. [8] 80. 

HENCKEL (JoHANN Friedrich). 

Pyritologia : or, a History of the Pyrites, the Principal Body in the Mineral 
Kingdom. In which are considered its Names, Species, Beds and Origin; 
its Iron, Copper, unmetallic Earth, Sulphur, Arsenic, Silver, Gold, original 
Particles, Vitriol, and Use in smelting. The whole compiled from a Collection 
of Samples ; from visiting Mines \ from an intercourse and Correspondence 
with Naturalists and Miners ; but chiefly from a course of Chymical 
Enquiries. With a Preface, containing an Account of the Advantages 
arising from Mine-works in general, and particular from those of Saxony. 
Translated from the German of J. F. Henckel, late chief Director of 
the Mines at Friberg in Saxony. London: Printed for A. Millar, in the 
Strand; And A. Linde, in Catharine-Street, in the Strand. M.DCC.LVII. 

8°. Pp. [i.-vii] viii. -XV., [i blank. 2] 376 [6]. Frontispiece. 

P3rritologia : oder : Kieis-Historie, als des vornehmsten Minerals, nach dessen 
Nahmen, Arten, Lagerstatten, Ursprung, Eisen, Kupflfer, unmetallischer 

2B 

386 HESCKEL 

HENCKEI. fJOKANN FRiEbRiCH). Contimied. 

Erde, Schwefel, Arsenic, Silbcr, Gold, dnfkcben Tbei^en, Vitii 
Sthmeltz-Nutzung. aus vieler Sammlung. Gruben-Beffthning, Umpi 
Hrirr-Wcuhsel mit Naiur- und Berg-Vc-retandigen, romehmlich aos Chf 
I'litersuchuiig, mil I'hysicalisch-Chfmischen Entdt^kungen, nebst le 
uitd n<i:hi^(.-n Kupffcrn, »ie auch einer Vorrcdc wwn Kutzen des Bog 
insondcrhdt di-s ( liut-S.ichsisrhon. gefertiget ^-on D. Johann Fi 
Htnckirl, Konigl. I'oln. and I'hurfursil. Sachs. I^nd- Beig- und 
I'liysicij in Frt-yWrg. I.«ip/ig, Vc-rlegts Johann Christian Martini, 
in der Nicolai-Strarse, 1735. 

V-. IV Im '<Joli. kt-^i'-it-r 31]. FTOiiinpinr nnd la Pblec. Title red and blwl. 

I>. Johann Kriedrich ][i:nk«l&, Kon. Pohl. und Churfl. Sachs. Boj 
KIdnc Mini-rolc^'ischi,- {sin und Chymische Schriffien, auf Gutbefind 
HtTrn Autoris, ntbst finer \'orrede von den Bergwercks-Wifsenscbad 
Vcrmchrung der Cammcral-Nutzungen, und mil Anmerckungen henu^ 
von Carl Friedrich Zimniermann. Drefsden und Leipzig, bej' Fr 

Hekel, 1744. 

8°. I'p. [48] 619 [44, I Wank) FtMine ptilc 
Olhcr cdinoiis quoted arc : 1747 ; Wien. I7(i9. 

Mineralogische, Chemise he und Alchymistische Briefe von reisendei 
andern (>e1ehnen an den ehematigen Chursachsischen Beisiath 
Henke). Erster Theit. Dresden, 1794. In der Waltherischm Ho 
handlung. 

a*. Pp- 397- Inhalt [6] [1 black]. Zwcvler Thdl, 1794, p[i 3a4. Innholl [7] 
[1 blank], ntilter Theil, 1795. pp. 191. Inhali [9] [4 blank]. 
One of hi* corrL-spondenls 15 M, Gollheil. which inieresiiriK mailer relating to the hislorf ol 
n a pseudonym for Klefeckcr. The Idlers conlain alogy and chemislrj- ai that time. 

F. M. von Rfspurs bcsondere Versuche vom Mineral-Geist , , . mit Ai 
ungen erst herau^egeben von Johann Friedrich Henkeln. 1771. 

See RESPUR (p. .M. VON). 

Henclcelius in Mineralogia Redivivus. 

See STEPHANl (jOH.\NN KMANUEL), I759. 

Hcnckel. or Henkri. was boni al Merscliurg, enumerated by Ihe aulborilies. He died 

II Aiif>i,, 1679, look Ihe decree ol M.D. and berg, 27 January. 1744. He is not to bee 

praciiiiid at PYtHberg ( Krtgebirgr). and became with a Berlin surgeon, Joaehim Friedricfa 

iniiiiiig countillor th.Tt^. He v,a-i elected a mtm. (Ilalier, BiH. Anal.. 1777. ii, pp, 314. 771 

bei of the Lcopoldme Ac.idemy, a8 Oct.. 172S. Chir.. 177s, ii. 260). 

Roth-Schollr, /UtIio/hKa Chfira. 1727, pp. llaWtr, liiblivlheci Anatomua. 1777- "-1 

248-261. [iaumer, liibliMhren Ckemica, 1783, p. 6t 

ManRCt. BiHiMita Siriplorum Mcdit^rum, Gmelin, iieschichu dtr Cktmie, xj^ ii. | 

'73'. 1- "■ !>■ (i^a (reviews from tlie A.ta 475 ( Pyriiologia, Flora Salumiians), 590 

l.ifiieniia, 1733. p. 408 ; 1726, p. 270). 706. 779 (Bethcsda ponuosa), 789 (baths) 

Jacoi Jj!u/ii<IJs Fradromus BiUiBllieai- mflalliea. iii. 9 (beer). 67 (niineialogy). 

edilctl liv llnickmnnn, 1733, p. 63. Reuss, Rtferlorium CcmtmtntaHo»itm, i 

Jilcher, Allgemfinn t;ttfhrlen-l.r.\k.iii. 1750, ii. {Chtmia tl Ra Melallica), pp. 105, iia, iB 

col, 1486, Fuchs, Rtptrlorivm dtr thimisclitn Lit 

BUchncr, Acadimia , . . .Va/iirrr Ciiriflsorum i8o6h38, pp. 240, 343, 347, 26a, 170, 277 
Respur), aSi, 294. 

, p. 176 Biograpkit Midicali. Ptaii, Panckoucb 
35), V. p. 156. 

HENCKEL-^HENSING 

387 

NouvelU Biographic GiniraU, 1858, xxiii. col. 
936. 

Poggendorff. Diographisch-literarisches Hand- 
worterbtuh, 1863, i. col. 1065. 

LsidragucBidiiotAi^ue Owaroff^ Sciences Secrites, 
1870, Nos. 1085, 1372, 1373. 

Allgemeine Deutsche aiographie, 1880, xi. p. 760 
(article by GOmbel). 

HENCKEL (JoHANN Friedrich). Continued, 

Erscb & Gruber, Allgemeine Encyhlopddie, 1829, 
Sect, ii., Th. v. p. 315 (article by Hassel). 

Schmieder, Geschichie der Alchemie, 1832, p. 596. 

Hoefer, Histoire de la Chimie, 1843, li. p. 371 ; 
1869, ii. p. 363. 

Kopp, Geschichte der Chemie, 1847, iv. p. 154, 
6^ passim. 

Biographie UniverselU, 1857, xix. p. 113 (article 
by Btfnbiiard). 

HENNICKEN (Gottfried). 

See THOMSON (GEORGE), 1 686. 

HENSING (JOHANN Thomas). 

Ignem esse Elaterem Naturae Vniversalem Assent, atque ad Experimenta 
Curiosa, Exercitii Chemici Fnictus, quae publice demonstrabit, videnda, 
Gives Academicos Florentissimos, ea, qua decet, Humanitate invitat Jo. 
Thomas Hensing, Med. D. et P. P. Extraord. Giessae, Impensis Eberhardi 
Henrici Lammers, Anno M DGG XXI. 

4°. Pp. i.i6. 

Admiranda Generationis Rerum Naturalium Exponit, atque Bonarum Artium 
Faulores et Cultores ut Phaenomena Naturae Openim Artis Chemicae Labore 
illustrata inspiciant adhortatur lo. Thomas Hensing, Med. D. et P. P. Elxtraord. 
Giessae, Impensis £berhardi Henrici Lammers, Anno M DCC XIX. 

Aurea Naturae Catena. 

Pp. 17-32. 

Pp. 33-48. 

Ad Exequiarum Laidis, non Graeciae, sed Magni Orbis h. e. Alchymiae, 
quae Filia Natu Maior Chemiae, habetur, Solennia Spectanda futuro 
die Octobris publice Chemicas facturus Demonstrationes Academiae 
Patres, Patronos atque Gives Excellentiss. Inclytos, Ornatiss. officiose et 
peramanter invitat D. lo. Thomas Hensing P. P. Giessae, Typis Vid, 

lo. Reinh. VVlpii, Acad. Typogr. ciDioccxxiv. 

4". Pp. 16. 

Discurs von dem Stein der Weisen. 

See WELLING (georg von), Opus Mago-Cabbalisticum et Theosophicum, 1735, 
p. 517. 

Hensing's name was Johann Thomas, not Theo- 
philus (Portal) or Theodor (Schmieder). He was 
bom at Frankfurt a. M., 30 Augt., 1683. His 
-'taste at first lay towards theology, and to study it 
and philosophy he proceeded to Leipzig, but on 
account of illness he went home, and giving up the 
church took to medicine and surgery. He returned 
to Leipzig and resumed his studies, and on the 
Swedisn mvasion left the town and travelled by 
Halle, Wittenberg, and Jena to Frankfurt. On 
the journey he made the acquaintance of Hofmann, 
Stahl, Bo-ger, Vater, Wedel and others. His 
attention was given specially to chemistry, ana- 
tomy, and botanv. After graduating at Giessen in 
1709 he gave lectures there, and in 1717 was 
appointed extraordinary professor of medicine. In 
1723 he was promoted to the new and unusual 
position of professor of chemistry and natural 
philosophy. He had an experimental laborator}', 
and great things were looked for from him, when 

he caught a fever, and died 27 Augt., 1726, at 

Wetzlar. 
Several Interesting works were written by him : 
Dissertatio inauguralis de vitriolo, Giessae, 1709, 

4^ 

Meditationes et experimenta circa acidulas Swal- 
bacenses (in German), Frankfurt, 1711, 8* ; 1728, 
8". 

Dissertatio dc Germinatione metallica artificiali, 
Giessae, 1718, 4". 

Dissertatio sistens cerebri examen Chemicum ex 
eodemque phosphorus singularis omnia inflamma- 
bilia accendens, Giessae, 1719, 4^. 

Dissertatio de vitriolo, an sit materia lapidis 
philosophici ? Giessae, 1725, 4** (a continuation 
of the inaugural one). 

Dissertatio de tinctura martis volatili. 

Von der Alchemic, worinnen er jeden, wamct 
sich dafUr htiten, 4°. 

388 

HENSING—HERMAPHRODJTISCHES 

HENSING (JoHANN Thomas). Qmiimied. 

Roth-Scholu, Biblioikeca Chemica, 1737, p. 723. 

Jacob /^u folds Prodromus Biblioikeca wutallicm^ 
173a. P- 69. 

Jcicher, Allgemtincs GeUkrten-Lexikon^ '750, 
ii. col. 1 514. 

Portal, Histoire de t Anatomie etdela Ckirurgie, 

1770, IV. p. C45. 
Haller. B^^' 

Bibliotheca Anatomica^ ^777, >'. p. 136. 
Strieder, Grundlage tu einer Hessiscken 
Gelekrten und SchriftstelUr Geschichtt^ 1785. v. 
p. 458. 

HEPTAS Alchymica. 

See NEANDER (THKOPHILUS). 

Gmelin, GtsekUkit 4er CkemU, 179s. ii p. 7*61 

BiograpkU Midicate, Plans, Puickoiicke (ita>- 
25), V. p. i6r. 

8chniieder. GesckickU derAUkemie^ 1839^ pi 517. 

Poggendofff, Bicgrapkisck-liierarUckes Hmii- 
wdrUrbmck^ 1863, i. ooL 1071. 

Ladrague. BiblioikiqMe Omvarog, Scuwm 
Sscriies, 1870. No. 5^ 

Hirsch, Biografkisckes Lexikom dtr kervem- 
gtnden Aerzte aller /^Un und Volker, x886. iii 
p. 162. 

/ 

HERCKMANN (Franciscus). 

Buch aller Geheimnlisse aller Philosophorum, welche jemahls von unserm 
Steioe geschrieben. 
See HELLWiG (CHRISTOPH VON), Fasciculus, 1719, p. 3a 

HERLICIUS (David). 

See HERMETISCHER ROSENKRANTZ. 

The author is called Herlich and Herlichius, 
Herliz and Heriizius. He was bom at Zeitz in 
Misnia, 38 Dec, 1557. Being in poor circum- 
stances he kept himself bv poetry and music, while 
a student at Leipzig, Wittenberg and Rostock. 
He took the degree of Philosophiae Magister, and 
in i^i was appointed Conrector at CJUstrow by 
the Duke of Mecklen!)urg, after which he was 
'Physicus' at Prenzlow and Anklam. In 1584 
he published almanacs vtith predictions, which had 
a great sale and were translated into other 
European languages. In 1585 he was made pro- 

Witte, Memorice Medicorum nostri seculi darts- 
simorum rencvata Decas prima, 1676, p. 73 (re- 
print of his life by Laurcntius Kichstadius). 

Freher, The at rum virorum eniditione clarorum, 
1688, p. 1366, portrait, plate 63. 

Wille, iJiarium Biographicum^ 1688, 15 Aug., 
1636, Sig. Kki verso (mentions this book as the 
• Rosetum Hermeticum'). 

Rolh-Scholtz, Bibliotheca Chemica^ ^7'^7i p. 283. 

Bayle, Dictionnaire histarique et critique^ 1730, 
ii. p. 752. 

Manget, Bibliotheca Scriptorum Medicorum, 
1731, I. ii. pp. 668-773 (reprint of his life by 
Laurentius Eicnsladius). 

Kestner, Medicinisches Gelehrten-Lexicon, 1740, 

P- 393- 

MoUer. Cimbria literata, 1744, ii. pp. 324-327. 

Freytag, Analecta litteraria^ I750» >• P' 442. 

Jocner, Allgemeines Gelehrten-Lexicon^ 1750, ii. 

col. 1533. 

fessor of mathematics at Greifswald, and at a later 
date, in 1598, was created M.D. and 'Physicus'at 
Stargard, went to Ltlbeck in a similar capadty, 
but returned to Stargard. where he suffered the 
loss of his whole library by fire. He died 15 
.August, 1636. 

He was a voluminous author writing on poetry, 
mathematics, medicine, astronomical and meteoro- 
logical prodigies, and on curious out of the way 
topics. He believed in astrology and in alchemy, 
but on the latter subject wrote only the work nov 
referred to. 

Georgius Matthiae, Conspectus Hislaria Medi- 
corum chronologicus, 1761, p. 354- 

Portal, Histoire de tAnatomit etdela Ckirurgie, 
1770, ii. p. 358. 

Haller, Biblioikeca Medicitut pracHat^ 1777, ii. 
P- "^yj (quotes the medical writings only, not tbe 
* Rosenkrantz'). 

Adelung, Geschichie der Memscklicktn Narrheit, 
1787. iv. p. ^3. 

Gmelin, Gesckichte derCkemit^ i7Sf7y >• p. 6191 

Biographie Midicale, Paris, Panckoucke (1820- 
25), V. p. 166. 

Kosegarten, Geschichte der Vnixtrsitdt Grtifs- 
wald, 1857, i. p. 223. 

All^meine Deutsche Biograpkie, 1880, xiL p 
118 (his portrait is at Greifswald University). 

Kopp, Die Alckemie, 1886, ii. p. 342. 

Dictionnaire encychpidique des Sciences mHi- 
cales^ 46me S^rie, 1888, xiii. p. 609. 

HERMAPHRODITISCHE (Das) Sonn- und Monds-Kind. 
See HERMETISCHES A. B. C, 1779, "• P- 30'- 

HERMAPHRODITISCHES Sonn- und Monds-Kind, das ist: Des Sohns deren 
Philosophen naturlich- iibernaturliche Gebahrung, Zerstohrung und Regeneri- 
ning Oder vorgestellte Theorie und Practic den Stein der Weilsen zu 
suchen und zu machen« Durch einen unbekannten Philosophum und 

tiERMAPHRODITISCHES— HERMES 

3^ 

ERMAPHRODITISCHES Sonn- und Monds-Kind. ConHnued. 

Adeptum in 12. emblematischen Figuren und so vielen Paragraphis. Mit 
Applicir- und Beyfiigung so vieler Canonischen Versen des benihmten Schwe- 
dischen Adepti Northons : aus einem alten manuscript gezognener praesentiret. 
Nun aber nach dem mystichen Verstand und innerem Weesen expliciret, 
nebst denen Caballistischen Zeichen Salomonis durch einen Lehrjiinger 
der Natur. L. C. S. Mayntz, bey Job. Friederich Krebs Buchhandler 
Gednickt in der Churf. Hof- und Univers. Buchdruckerey bey denen 
Haffn. Erben, durch Elias Peter Bayer, 1752. 

8^ Pp. 70. Frontispiece, 12 emblematical figures and one plate of cabalistic 
s3rmbols. 

The Swedish adept Nozthon here mentioned is J. F. Hautnorthon. 

ERMES TRISMEGISTUS. 

II Pimandro di Mercurio Trimegisto, tradotto da Tommaso Benci in linga 

Fiorentina. In Firenze 1549. Con priuilegio di Papa Paolo III. & 

Carlo V. Imp. & del Duca di Fiorenza. 

8**. Pp. [16] 119 [i blank ; Tavola, 7, i blank]. 

The ' Poemandres,' a philosophico-religious 
atise of the second century a.d. or thereby, 
s nothing to do with chemistry or alchemy, 
d it is a question for critical discussion whether 
not this Hermes is really identical with the 

thor of the Smaragdine fable. Round the 
ove book and other writings which accompany 
there has grown up a bulky literature which, 
>ugh it lies rather outside the scope of the 
sent work, cannot be passed over in a review of 
; whole subject. 

See Louis Menard, Hermes Tnsmegiste, tra- 
duction comfJite prMdie tCune itudt sur Forigine 
des livres Hermitiques^ Paris, 1866, 8^ 

John David Qiambers, The theological and 
philosofhical toorks of Hermes Trisnugistus 
Christian Neoplatonist^ Translated fromtheoriginal 
Greeky with preface, notes, and indices^ Edinburgh, 
1882. 8®. For the older literature consult Fabri- 
cius and Brucker. 

The English translation was made by Eh*. 
Everard and published at London, 1650, 1657, 
edited by John French {q.v.). 

Hermetis Trismegisti Erkantniils der Natur und des darin sich offenbahrenden 
Grossen Gottes, begriffen in 17 unterschiedlichen Biichern, nach Grichischen 
(sic) und Lateinischen Exemplare in die Hochteutsche Sprache iibersetzet, 
nebenst voTgesetzter sattsahmer Nachricht und Beweifs von der Person und 
Genealogie Hermetis, dessen Medicin, Chemie,. Natur und Gottes^Griinde, 
mit unterlauffenden vielen der Egyptier Weifsheit, und unterschiedlichen 
anderen Curiosa beriihrende Passagen. Verfertiget von Alethophilo. 
Hamburg, In Verlegung Samuel Heyls und Gottfried Liebezeits, Buch- 
handlem in St Johannis Kirchen. 1706. 

8**. Pp. [73, Frontispiece included] 142. Title red and bUck. 

The introduction contains an elaborate account of the ' person and genealogy of 
Hermes,' based mainly on Borrichius' researches, and includes (Sig. d3 verso) a 
translation of the * Tabula Smaragdina.* The rest of the book consists of a translation 
of the ' Pdmander,' ' Asclepius,' and the writings to * Tatius * and ' Ammon.' None of 
the other alchemical writings are included. 

Hermetis Trismegisti Einleitung in's hochst^ Wissen : von Erkenntnifs der 
Natur und des darin sich ofTenbarenden grofsen Gottes. B^riffen in 
siebenzehn Biichem, nach griechischen und lateinischen Exemplaren in's 
Deutsche tibersetzt, nebst Nachricht von der Person des Hermetis, dessen 
Medicin, Chemie, Natur und Gottes-griinde ; mit der Egyptier wundervoller 

Hi^rj^.i T'^-ir^fti-:!::: Trarjiiruii ^tr* ijrrr:.., dit T^p'ir^ P-Eliosopcaci iecresoL 
.r. ^Ji;.*:.^ i«*r;.t^r. c.v.ic:i r.:^ry: "^rro a. qcodAZ Adou^omx acbucj& ctB 
*r#'.--.:**-/t */ I/':'* ..1:-V.rir:^i. :: .y. tii ho: libro mo apiaT, a Alio ni 
up*^* y/.^." \\r...:^\ ^,r.ztz. t:^v. fj fxoc rcpcrirsr. Tandem open It 

^/•;, v-^ r^/^.\ loc'^itur, irxiex Icjtiriae es: : Qcd antem memiau^ tesas 

^*. >*;, ■;',, 'sz*' ''•-«' -C7. i : '- .*-'-*]► I^ncfs ».-Ji lac r-^:<:-. Pax f^^t Hcoor Pletuas. 
^/f '/:•>*. :» »''>rtc Vh»..«>rr '. -c^*-i tr. *^.t^-r: s ro r*«tr*r<* to aa edibao of i*soq» boi onlr «» 

lr.t«rVeaTed, %nh MS. notb. 

Tra/.tatus aureus de Lapidis Physici Secreto in Cap. 7. divisus ; Nunc verb 
a qu^xlam Anonymo Scholiis illustratus (cum epistola dedicatoria et pne- 
fatione;. 

:^fe JHfcAlkLM CHLMICUM, 1 6 59, i v. p. 587. 

.See MAN^LT J. J.;, Bibliothcca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, i. p. 4cxx 

Thi: (;oldcn Work. 

.See SALMON ''wiLMA.xf;, Mcdicina Practica, 1691, p. 179. 

C/uldcn 'I'ractatlein von der Composition des Steins der Weisen, in sieben 

Capitcl abgetheilet. 

Mee ALCHVMlSTlSCHts Sicbcn-Gcstirn, 1675, p. i. 
See AIXHVMISTISCHES Siebcn-Gcstim, 1772, p. 9. 

Giildcncr 'I'ractat von Zusammensetzung des Steins der Weisen. 
See HKKMKTlscHhs A. 15. C, 1778, i. p 311. 

Scptcm Tractatus, seu Capitula. 
See ARs CHKMICA, 1566, p. 7. 

I/TH Sept ChupitrftB. 

See KICHKH()(JK(; (j. M. D.), Biblioth^que des Philosophes Chimiques, 1740, I 
p. 16. 

mermes / m 

HERMES TRISMEGISTUS. Continued. 
Sept Traictez ou chapitres dorez. 

See JOLY (gabrikl), Trois Anciens Traictez dc la Philosophie Naturellc, 1626, 
p. I. 

Seven Golden Chapters. 

See LIVES of Alchemystical Philosophers, 181 5, p. 366. 

This is differeol from Salmon's version given above, and both are different from thai given l»y South 
in A Suggestive Inquiry. — 

Traicte de TOuvrage Secret de la Philosophie d'Hermez. 

See ESPAGNET (jean d'), La Philosophie Naturelle restablie en sa purete, 165 1, 
p. 248. 

Des Hermes Trismegists wahrer alter Naturweg, 1782. 
See H. (J. c). 

Liber Apocalypseos. 

See FIGULUS (BENEDICTUS), Pandora, 1608, p. i. 

The Emerald Table. 

See LIVES of Alchemystical Philosophers, 181 5, p. 383. 

liesides Salmon's version given below, others by H. P., 1652, Sig. A4 verso, and in South's 
will be found in The Mirror of Alchimy, 1597, Suggestive Inquiry, 1850, p. 7. 
p. 16, in Five Treatises of the Philosophers Stone, 

La Table d'Emeraude avec le Commentaire de THortulain. 

See RICHEBOURG (j. M. D.), Bibliotheque des Philosophes Chimiques, 1740, i. 
p. I. 

La Table d'Esmeraude d'Hermes Trismegiste, pere des Philosophes. 

See jOLY (GABRIEL), Trois Anciens Traictez do la Philosophie Naturellc, 1626, 

p. 25. 
See RESPOUR, Kares Experiences, 1686, livre iii. pp. 38-42 ; 1777, pp. 146-148. 
See RESPOUR, Besondere Vcrsuche, 1772, pp. 263-265, and 280-284. 

Schmaragt Tafel. 

See OCCULTA PHILOSOPHIA, 1613, p 5a 

Die Smaragden Tafel. 

See HERMETISCHER ROSENKRANTZ, 1659, pp. $2, 79. 
See HERMETISCHER ROSENKRANTZ, 1682, pp. $2, 79- 
See HERMETISCHE (Der) PHILOSOPHUS, 1709, p. 168. 

See ROTH-SCHOLTZ (friederich), Deutsches Theatrum Chcmicum, 1730, ii. 
p. 504. 

Die Smaragdene Taffel, von der Chimie. 

See WEDEL (georg wolffgangX Vemiinfftige Gedancken vom Gold-Machen, 

I734» p. 98. 
See ANNULUS PLATONIS, 1781, p. xviii. 

Smaragdina Tabula. 

See dorn (gerard), Trevisanus de Chymico Miraculo, 1600, p. 4. 

See bernhardus trevisanus, De Alchemia Liber, in theatrum chemicum, 

1659, i. p. 685. 
See bernhardus trevisanus. Liber de Secretissimo Philosophorum Opere 

Chemico, in manget (j. j.), Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, ii. p. 389. 

Ml MERMSS 

HERMES TRISMEGISTUS. ConHnued. 

The Smaragdine Table. 

See SALMON (WILLIAM), Medicina Practica, 1691, p. 258. 

Smaragdtafel (Die). 

See HERMETiscHES A. B. C, 1778, i. p. 57. 

Tabula Schmaragdina. 

See TRISSMOSINUS (Salomon), Aureum Vellus, Tractatus iiL (1598), p. 258. 
See TANCKE (JOACHIM), Promptuarium Alchemiae, Ander Buch, 1614, p. 413. 

See HERMETISCHER ROSENKRANTZ, 1659, pp. 52, 79. 

See HERMETISCHER ROSENKRANTZ, 1682, pp. 52, 79. 

See [SCHATZ und Kunst-kammer], p. 413. 

See EROFFNETE Gehcimnisse dcs Steins der Wciscn, (1708), p. 335. 

See HERMKTISCHE (Dcr) Philosophus, 1709, p. 168. 

Tabula Smaragdina. 

See BERNHARDUS TRKVISANUS, Von der Hermetischenn Philosophia . . . Ein 

Buch, 1582, Cv verso. 
See BERNHARDUS TREVisANUS, Bericht von der Hermetischenn Philosophia, in 

ELUCIDATIO Secretorum, 1602, p. 200. 
See ALBINEUS (NATHAN), Bibliotheca Chemica Contracta, 1653, sig. ^6 verso. 
See GLAUBER (jOHANN RUDOLPH), Teutschlands Wohlfahrt, Fiinfiter Thcil, 

Amsterdam, 1660, p. 19. 
See GLAUBER (jOHANN RUDOLPH), Teutschlandts Wohlfahrt, Prag, 1704, p. 6491 
See BERNHARDUS TREVISANUS, Drei Biicher von der Hermetischen Philosophie, 

in DER HERMETISCHE PHILOSOPHUS, 1709, p. 2 1 3. 

See NAXAGORAS (ehrd de), Aurei Velleris Supplementum, 1733, p. 24. 

See KLEFECKER (johann), Das Fundament der Lehre vom Stein der Weisoi, 

1736, p. 28. 
See BERNHARDUS TREVISANUS, Chymische Schrifften, 1746, p. 6 ; 1747, p. 6. 
See vernOnftige Erklarung der Smaragdenen Tafel des Hermes, 176a 
See hortulanus, Commentariolus in Tabulam Smaragdinam. 

Tabula Smaragdina de Alchemia. 
See alchemia, 1541, p. 363. 
See wedel (georg wolfgang), Introductio in Alchimiam, 1706, p. 59. 

Tabula Smaragdina, cum expositionibus Gerardi Dorn. 

See dorn (gerhard), De Naturae Luce physica . . . Tractatus, 1583, p. 82. 
See theatrum chemicum, 1659, i. p. 362. 

Tabula Smaragdina Hermetis, Die Wort der Geheimniifs des Hermetis. 

See roth-scholtz (friederich), Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum, 1730, ii. 
P- 531. 
Tabula Smaragdina, inter manus eius inuenta in obscuro antro, in quo humatum 
corpus eius repertum est. 
See marengus O^annes baptista), Palladis Chymicai Arcana detecta, 1678, 
Pars ii. p. 3 (cum commentario). 

Tabula Smaragdina, in ipsius sepulchre inventa, cum commento Hortulani 
philosophi. 
See ARS chemica, 1566, p. 32. 

HERMES 

S*3 

HERMES TRISMEGISTUS Continued. 

Tabula Smaragdina cui titulus Verba Secretorum Hermetis Trismegisti, W. 
Chr. Kriegsmanni et Gerardi Dornei commentariis illustrata. 
See MANGET (j. J.), Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, i. p. 380. 

Tabula Smaragdina seu Verba Secretorum Hermetis. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1661, vi. p. 715. 

Tabula Hermetis. 

See ELI AS, Elias Artista mit dem Stein der Weisen, 1770, p. 143. 

The first edition of the ' Tabula Smaragdina ' is 
that contained in the volume De AUhemia, Norim- 
berg. 1541. It was known, however, three hundred 
years before that date, and if Hortulanus. who 
wrote the ' Commentary ' on it, flourished, as has 
been said, in the tenth century, that would carry it 
bock another three himdred years. 

When it is considered that alchemy was known 
all along as the Hermetic Art, it is not surprising 
that a writing which with such a show of probability 
could be considered of ancient origin, which bore 
Hermes' name, and the meaning of which was 
esoteric, would be cherished and revered by the 
alchemists. The Tabula Smaragdina had all these 
qualifications. It is certainly not modem, it has 
been assigned to Hermes from the first, and its 
significance does not lie on the surface. The man 
that runs cannot read it, nor, for that matter, the 
man who sits. It is as profound a mystery, as 
great a puzzle as ' Aelia Laelia Crispis ' itself. 

But, in fact, everything concerning it remains a 
problem : its legendary and romantic discovery ; 
the original language, for it is known in Latin 
only ; its author, whether one of the several per- 
sonages of the name of Hermes, or an anonymous 

Wolfgang Jobst (Justus), Ckronologia . . . 
omnium illustrium medicorum, Francof. a. V., 

1556, p. 10. 

Nazari, Delia Tramutatione AUtallica, Sogni 
Tre, 1599, p. 139. 

Maier, Symbola Aurea: Afensa, 1617, p. 5 (inter- 
pretations of the Smaragdine Table). 

CluvcriuSj Germanice Antique Libri Tres^ 1631, 
p. 182. (Lib. I, c. 26, presumed derivation of the 
German people from Theuth, or Thoth.) 

Conring, De Hemtetica ^gyftiorum veiere et 
Paracelsicorum Nova Medictna^ Helmestadii, 1648, 

4^ 

Kircher, Oedipus Aegyptiacus^ 16^3, II. ii. pp. 

046-386. (' Medicina nieroglyphica, which may 
be considered Hermetic); pp. 387-434 (Alchimia 
hierc^lyphica,' which refers to liermes through- 
out); p. 428 ('Tabula Smaragdina' its doubtful 
history and whether it is by Hermes or not). 

Casaubon, De rebus sacris et eccUsiasticis exerci- 
tatiomes XVI. ad Cardinalis Baronii Prolegomena 
in Annates, 1654, pp. 66-80. (b^xercit. i. I^t. 10, 
discusses the question generally. ) 

Borel, Bibliotheca Chimica^ 1654, p. 115. 

J oh. H. Hottinger, Dissertationum Miscellan- 
earum Pentas, 16^, pp. 54-67. (Diss. ii. Elenchus 
scriptorum ecclesiasticorum supposititiorum, con- 
tains nothing about the chemicsil books). 

Dickinson, Delphi Phoenicizantes, 1655, p. 132. 

Georg Horn, Histories Philosophic^ libri septem, 
1655, pp. 122, 123, 317, etc. 

Rri^smann, Hermetis Tnsmegisti . . . Tabula 
Smaragdina d situ tenurarijsq; . . . vindicata, 1657. 

J. H. Ursinus, De Zoroastre . . . Her mete Tris- 
megisto^ Sanchoniathone . . . eorumque scriptis . . . 
exercitationes^ Norimbergse, 1661. 

writer who ascribed it to him to give it authority ; 
its possible connection with so-called Hermetic 
writings of an earlier time ; the subject with which 
it deals. 

The student of the history of chemistry cannot 
well ignore it, less perhaps now than ever, since 
the discovery of Egyptian writings, and especially 
of the medical papyrus by Ebers, which he calls a 
Hermetic treatise of 1^50 B.C. (a date coinciding 
>%nth that assigned to Hermes by Lambeck), has 
given a different aspect to the controversy between 
Conring and Borrichius, and has put the existence 
of Hermes on a new foundation. Other researches 
also have shown that the belief in a person or 
persons of the name of Hermes has been so wide 
spread and persistent that the whole Hermes- 
legend forms a legitimate subject of inquiry as to 
its origin and the probability of its being correct. 
One can hardly settle it as summarily as was done 
by von Murr : was man von Hermes Trismegist 
liest, sind blosse Milhrchen, and on the other hand 
the most that can be hoped for is that future dis- 
coveries may lead 10 at least a plausible theory, if 
not to perfect certainty regarding its origin. 

Borrichius. De Ortu et Progressu Chemia dis- 
sertation Halniae, 1668, p. 50, sqq. 

Conring, De Hermetica Medicina libri duo. 
Editio secunda. Helmestadii, 1669, 4°. 

Morhof, De Metallorum transmutatione ad . , . 
Joelem Langelottum . . . Efistola, 1673, p. Z02. 

Borrichius, Hermetis, yEgyftiorum, et Chemi- 
corum Sapientia ad Hermannt Conringii Animad' 
versionibus vindicata, Hafnise, 1674, 4 . 

Pet Dan. Huetius, Demonstratio evangelica^ 
i^9» PP- 57» 60 (Propositio iv. capp. 3 and 4, 
identification with Moses). 

Kriegsniann, Conjectaneorum de German icte 
Gentis Origine, ac Conditore, Hermete Trismegisto, 
. . . Liber Unus, Tubingse, 1684, pp. [8] 6^, 4^ 

Borrichius, Conspectus Scriptorum Chemtcorum^ 
1697, p. I. 

Moller, Homonymo-Scopia Historico-Philologico- 
Critica, Hamb., 1697, p. 255 (and references). 

Keren Happuch, . . . oder Teutsches Fegfeuer der 
Scheide-Kunst, 1702, p. 46. 

Henr. Adolph. de Wettering, Dissertatio . . . 
sistens Hermetem Trismegistum intra Sindonem 
cognoscendum^ 6* fer Tabulam Smara^dinam 
Naturte et Artis Pandoram mundo porrtgentem, 
Kilonii, 1707, pp. 64, 4^ 

Fabricius, Bibliotheca Gmca, 1708, i. pp. 46-85 (p. 
46 Poemander, etc. ; cap. x. p. 66 chemical writings). 

Lambecius, Prodromus Historice literaria, 17x0, 
pp. Z34-143. (Lib. II. cap. I, §6, catalogues of the 
works, discussions on their authenticity, references 
to authorities). 

Pope- Blount, Censura Celebriorum Author um, 
1710, p. I (he considers the works spurious). 

Morhof, Polyhistor, 1714, ii. pp. 167-170. 

^ ^ 

-^ -i:^,' 

rf?" 

.n. 

4^i .r-«<' 

:.. ^* 

.y ^ 

■»*■ j*rf * 41 ■ .' 

•'J* — 

■ ^ 

— ":./ 

'^ « ^ .-■ 

■*■ »■ 

• ^ /' »' '•■•.-•■ ' . » ■ • ^ < ■ ■ ■- 

• . I. "'..Ar-iZ'.-rjL . j^ ^z J5S. 365* 
" . -. . ■ — ; ■ , « "' • <-rr r>Krir : soc. ;~ 

MKJ'Ml.n' Af^ ^ Ir-'r/ 'I r...rr*pri or, T':.*; Victorious Philosophical Stone. A 

'lf';it,v rr»or< '//rrij'/'vi* i^ry: rr.orf; .rite'»ligibl#r than any has been yet, 

'//f»'Mriif.;'. '/ fi' ffTffi'rMrai Ma;.Mst*:r\. Translated from the French. To 

wh»'h r. ;i'M«'j. 'Ml'- Ann#:r/ War of tf.*: Knights. Translated from the 

^/ifin.in Ori^ifMl A', yMv;, Sorn*: Ann'-.;ations upon the most material 

I'oifih;, //li« r*' III' fv/r, 'f r;insl;irions diff<f:r. Done from a German Editioa 

(.nrwlofi, rntit'-d , ;iriH Sold by I'. Hand, at the Sign of the Black-Spread- 

r.ut/li-, fMJir Soriirr-.<l Houm- in the Strand. '723. 
W !•(» *vi,. '.vml"'iiii f»oriU:|>i#-« .■ Ill* liirli-rl, 1.17. fijjy. fi'. ^lli^ volume contains : 
Mil ^tlM•lll VV.i» ••( III* r. inr.Ji'" . . . H"wfriim 'Ilnr .\iiti<.'nt War of the Knights. . . . Tnins* 

III! t ti lit \\ I' li't* I 'I illl'i I MI'll ll, |l I. 

\ Ili-Milli • Ifil'^iili I i|(|fi*ir> .ilt'l l'\lri|i|illtlS 

ii|ifMi III! Nil) ii III U'lii ill l>ii r^iiiKhi'.. p. ^'i. 

I.itf-d from ihf German original, p. i. 

AtiiKitiittfMis ii|>on the most material passaffes, 
whftr th'' l-Miicn translation of The Anaenl war 

■\ I Hill !•• iIm imh |ii-«i|i1''. (iI lliiitii*. ion. f>( the Kiii|;htv, diflcis from the (lerman original. 
i-iiiiii«i< 'ii-* |iiii«i l|*iil !■ • V ■ I" ill' Si-i Ml rhiliiMiphv. I'iniii .1 ( icrman edition, p. 21. 

lMI|Miiil hlM ■« ll III Xiiliht*'. • " •). |l Ilfl. 

M|i;NMI'.'nrAI. Criir) Innmph. 

'tfC MMiMli I I t IM< ll>r|) llUllliph. 

s..- ii-iiiMi'Hi ilr' l!ninrti«|ur. 
,N<v \\\ VI ll>H Kiltri Kurt;. 

HERMETISCHE 19$ 

HERMETISCHE Araene. 

See SEMLF.R JOHAXX su^OMOX , Voa ichier bcrrsedscfacr Arxecc 17S6. 

HERMETISCHE /Die) Gesdbdttf*. 

Hermedsches JoumaL Zcr csdixnen Bemhigni:^ r^r Zweifler und Socber, 
von der hennedschen GeseCschafL 

Wahrheit ist nicht die Tochttr des Ar^sefaens soodem der Zeit- 
Erster Band. Eistes Stuck. Cambcrg an der Saale, bei Hofiauiin and 

Kompagnie ; i8ci. 

The ' Hcnnetk Sooetr ' occ^sseed apparectfr ctf two maDbers only : Kortnm and 
Babreois. RefereDcq to the ^teratare rdemn^ to it are gi-vcsi sader KcrtniiL 

HERMETISCHE Kunst 

5>^ RECHTE (DcT> wtii lu dcr HciiDetisclicn Kunst, 1773. 

HERMETISCHE (Der) Nord Stem. 
SeeyJj.}.\ 1771. 

HERMETISCHE (Der; Pbilosophus, oder Haupt-Schliissel, derer zu der 
Chymie gehorigen Materien, Urspnii^ und Herkommen aller Metallen und 
Mineralien. Das ist : Ein Weegweiser und Summarischer Bericht, wie 
nemblich das Universale Generalissimum, gleicbwie die Metallen und 
Mineralien durcb die Astra gewiircket, aufs Wasser und Erden ibren 
Leib endlicben durcb viele Jabre nebmen, und in mancberley Gestalt 
formiret werden, per Artem inner kurtzen Zeit zu erlangen sey ; und wie 
man folglicb aller Metallen und Mineralien Eigenscbafit auff das leicbteste 
erkundigen und erforscben solle. Allen fleissigen Nacbforscbem der Natur 
zu gefallen an vielen Ortben dieses Biicbleins klar bescbrieben, und in 
sieben Tractatlein bestebend zum Druck befbrdert Franckfurt und 

Leipzig, Verl^ts Jobann Gabriel Grabl, Bucbbandler in Wienn, 1709. 

8^. Pp. j[23, tDdading frontispieoe] 319^ [i blaxik; 4 Roister]. Title red and 
black. Frontispieoe in two compartments. The Tolume conta^ seven distinct tracts. 

Aureus liber de Prindpiis Naturae et Artis, p. 1. Bemhard von der Marck und Tenris. III. 

Definitio Alchymiae, p. 54. B6cber von der Hennetiscben Philosophie der 

Phoenix Alcbjrmiae. p. 75. Wdsen, p. 19^ 

Artephii. von der gefaehnen Kunst und Scetn Tabula Smaragdina. p. 213. 

der Weisen Geheimes Bucb, p. iqsl Alanus, Dicta, darinnen das GebeimnuCs Phik>- 

Joannis Garlandii. seu Hortulani Compen- sopbiscber Art an Tag gegeben wird, p. 304. 

dium Alchimiae. oder : Erkkrung der Smarag- An edition of Frankfurt. 1690. 8*, is quoted in 

discben Tafd Hermetis Trismegisti von der Jcuob Leupolds ProJromus Bibliotheca metallic^, 

Chhnia, p. 167. 1733. p. 7a Certain of the tracts seem to have 

Die Smaragden-Tafel, p. x68. been reprinted from the Hemuiischer Rosenkranlz. 

HERMETISCHE (Das) Triklinium, 1792. 
See PHILOTHEUS de Liroitibus. 

HERMETISCHE (Der) Triumpb oder der Siegende Philosophische Stein, 
Ein Tractat volliger und verstandlicber eingericbtet, als einer iemals 
bifsber gewesen, bandelnde von der Hennetiscben Meisterscbafft Hiebevor 
in Frantzosiscber Spracbe gedruckt, zu Amsterdam bey Heinrich Wetstein, 
Anno 1689. Nunmebro g^enwartig ins Deutsche versetzt. Leipzig und 
Gorlitz. Bey Jobann Gottlob Laurentio, 1707. 

8*. Pp. 234. Title red and black. Wants the frontispiece. Interleaved, with 
MS. 

.-rsc 3r» i-.ii'rx: rnii .-•■■■ :i;nin 

HERMmSCHS r»s- T-^mph oder der SKgende Philowpluschc Stein. 
^ i:V.:irtr ^*t ^v^Lirsdjctkn dngerichtct, als ciiier jemak bifeiiff 

Z^rr'i:S*tf ZA.^.\lxt.Il*Zst vzn 

i . 

r -xTijvriKscscr -^mrrie sccncku m Amsterdun bey Hcmricfa Wcbteffl, 
A .-re — .^:. N--.=r:r: r-?iir*irtiz ins Deotscfae FCTSCtzL FianMnrt 
-■^ L*i!rc:j^ rtv T:cu_-- ?i-l Kraats. 1765- 

Tt r-^n::! i-ti: jmia.' :c ■:c»:<-:!r -^it-r^ SrrwrSrhmbea aa die mwhrtn ScMer H< 

irxtwx x:::«'-.v.-«Tf t. 57. AnSena S • • * 

HERMETISCHE Iv- Tru— cl 

,>rfsr HtjiVir-CAl The Tr.'zmpb. 
S^n rsiOMFHt le. H insect .ie. 

HERMETSCHE W^-rh^ i 

HERMETISCHE L ^ Visi^rr^rhirt. 

j*Vs :-tK£:>£y D:<» Niijxichrs der hcrmcischen WissenschafL 

HERMETISCHtN Vor. cer Ph-l-jso^hia. 

HERMETISCHER Rcvser.knintz, dis isi . \1cr schone, aufeerlesene Chymischc 
TracLiticir^ nemlich 

I. Ancphu defs dhn.ten PhHosophi von der geheimen Kunst, und Stein 
der Weisen, Geheimes Buch. 

II. Johannis iiarlandii seu HortuLmi Angb. Compendium Alchimiae, oder 
Erkiarun*: der Saiani^dischcn Tafel Hermetis Trismegistu 

III. M. Amoidi de Villa Nova, Erklaning iiber den Commentarium 
Hortulani- 

IV. Bemhardi Comitis Trevis, absoiiderlicher Tractat vom Stein der 
Weisen. 

Allen Liebhabem dieser edlen Kunst zum besten, aus dem Latdn, ins 
Teutsche gebracht, und nun erslmals in I>ruck gefertiget 

Difs Buchlein ist viel Geldes wehrt, wirslu es recht verstahn. 
Die Giildin Kunst kein ander Buch dich besser lehren kan. 

HERMETISCHER-^HERMETISCHES 

397 

HERMETISCHER RosenkranU. Continued. 

Gednickt zu Hamburg, bey Michael Pfeiffern, in Verlegung Job. Naumans, 
Buchh. 1659. 

8*». Pp. [1-6] 7- 1 10 [2 blank]. 

HERMETISCHER Rosenkrantz, das ist : Vier schone, aufserlesene Chymiscbe 
Tractatlein, nemlich : 

I. Artepbii des uhralten Philosophi von der geheimen Kunst, und Stein 
der Weisen, Geheimes Buch. 

n. Johannis Garladii [sic] seu Hortulani Angli, Compendium Alchimiae, 
Oder Erklarung der Smaragdiscben Tafel Hermetis Trismegisti. 

HI. M. Arnoldi de Villanova, Erklarung iiber den Commentarium 
Hortulani. 

IV. Bernbardi Comitis Trevis absonderlicber Tractat vom Stein der 
Weisen. 

Allen Liebbabem der edlen Kunst zum besten, aus dem Latein, ins 
Teutscbe gebracbt, und nun zum andem mabl zum Druck befodert. 
Difs Biichlein ist viel Geldes wehrt, wirstu es recht verstahn, 
Die Gulden Kunst kein ander Bucb dich besser lebren kan. 
Gedruckt zu Hamburg, bey Michael Pfeiffern, In Verlegung Job Naumans, 
Buchh. 1683. 

8**, Pp. [1-6} 7-1 10 [2 blank, torn out]. 

This collection was made by David Herlicius (q.v.). There was a later edition, Frankfurt a. M., 
1747. 

Beytrag zur Geschickte der hoh^rn Chemie, ij^$, Ladrague, Bihliothtquc Ouvaroff^ Sciences 

p. 634. Secrttes, 1870. Nos. 1550. 155 1. 

Gmelin, Gesckichte der Chemie^ I797i >• p. 619. Kopp, Die Alchemie, 1886, ii. p, 342. 

Kopp. Beit rage tur Gesckichte der Chemie^ 1869, 
ii. p. 378. note 33. 

HERMETISCHES A. B. C. derer achten Weisen alter und neuer Zeiten vom 
Stein der Weisen. Ausgegeben von einem wahren (Jott- und Menschen- 
freunde. Erster Theil. Berlin, 1778, bey Christian Ulrich Ringmacher 

in Commission. 

Erster Theil. 8^. Pp. [2] [8] [1-6] 7-318. 
Zweiter Theil, Berlin, 1779. 8*». Pp. [2] 348. [2 blank]. 
Dritter Theil, Berlin. 1779. 8*. Pp. [2] 299. [i. 2 blank]. 
Vierter und letzter Theil, Berlin, 1779. 8*. Pp. 325. [3]. 

There was afterwards prefixed an extra title page : 

A. B. C. vom Stein der Weisen. Erster [Zweiter, Dritter, Vierter und leuterj 
Theil. Mit Churfllrstl. Silchsisch. gnMdigster Freiheit. Berlin, 1778 [1779]. bey Christian 
Ulrich Ringmacher. 

names of the authors of certain anonymous and 
doubtful tracts. Kopp, Die Alchemie, 1886, ii. p. 
332. 

The book consists of extracts from the current 
literature, which give an idea of what was con- 
sidered of importance to be studied at the time. 
It is also of some use as it sometimes supplies the 

A. B. C. I. 

I. Hermes. Die Smaragdtafel, p. 57. 

II. Samuel Baruch. Die Gabe Gottes, p. 61. 

III. Rabbi Abraham Eleazar. Schrift, p. 71. 

IV. Nodus sophicus enodatus, p. 73. 

V. Kinderbett des Steins der Weisen, p. 86. 

VI. M. Barcius, or Johann V. Sternberg. Gloria 
Mundi, Kleine Paradeis-Tafel, p. 95. 

VII. Johann Grashofer, Chortolasseus ge- 
nannt. Schriften ; Geheimnisse des grossen und 
kleinen Bauers ; Cabala Chemica, p. lai. 

GtU- 

VIII. Johann Siebmacher aus NUrnl)erg. 
denes Vlies, p. 145. 

IX. Johann Siebmacher aus Ntimberg. Was- 
serstein der Weisen, p. 156. 

X. Johann Friedrich Hautnorthon. Tractat vom 
philosophischen 5>alre, p. 157, 

XI. LeonaConstantia (Johanna Leade). Sonnen- 
blume der Weisen, p. 172. 

XII. Radtichs Brotoffcr. Elucidarius maior, p. 
176. 

39« 

HERMETISCHES 

HERMETISCHES A. B. C. Continued, 

XI II. Alexander v. Sochten. Elxplicatio 
Tincturse Pbfstcoruni Theophrasti Paracelsi, p. 

XIV. Alexander v. SucHten. De tribus 
Faculutibus. p. 314. 

XV. De Nuvsement Vom wahren Salx der 
Weisen und dem Allgemeinen Getst der Wdt, 

P 230 

XVI. Antonio de Abbatia. Bericbt von Ver- 

wandlung der Metallen, p. a6x. 

XVII. Aufrichtig deutscher Wegwetaer zum 
Licht der Xatur, p. 263. 

XVIII. Laurentius Ventura Wnetus. DeLapide 
Philosopborum, p. a68. 

XIX. Johann v. Padua. VoUendete 
Weisbeit. p. 283. 

XX. ManiUus Ficinus. BQcfaleui tod Sttb 
der Weisen, p. 994. 

XXI. John Dausteii. Rosarhim vom Stein der 
Weisen. p. 30a 

XXII. Hermes. GOldener Tractat voo Zusam- 
mensetxung des Steins der Weisen. p 311. 

XXIII. Raymundus Lullius. Apertorium de 
Compositione Lapidis Philosopborum. p. 31a. 

XXIV. Raymundus Lullius. Ehiddaniis fiber 
sein Testament und CodidU, p- 315. 

XXV. Aristotdes. Alchvmiscfae Schrift an Aki- 
andrum Magnum, de Lapide PhilosophanB, 
p. 316. 

A, B.C. II. 

I. P. Spiefs. Concordanz iilier das Nuysemenl 
Sal coeleste, p- 1 5. 

II. Benedict Gulwasser. Aufrichtig Chemisches 
Glaubens-Bekenntniss. p. 41. 

III. Das philosophische Vaterherz, p. 56. 

IV. Amor Proximi, p. 72. 

V. Das aus der Finstemifs von sich selbst hervor- 
brechende Licht. p. 106. 

VI. Fama mystica hermetica, p. 163. 

VII. Der rechte Weg zur hermetischen Kunst, 

P- ^JS- 
VIII. 

193. 

Sendivogius. Die geheinie Naturlehre, p. 

IX. Georg von Welling. Opus roago-cabalisti- 
cum et theosophicum. p. ^i. 

X. Franc. Sebast Fumis Melvolodemet, <rf 
Pisa. Non plus ultra V^eritatis, Untersudrang der 
bermetischen Wissenschaft, p. 269. 

XI. D. M . 3 Tract&tletn, p. a88. 

XII. Ben Adam. Traum-Gesicbt, nr Zdt der 
R^ierung Ruacharetz, Kdnigs von Adama, voa 
Floretus a Bethabor an den Tag gegeben, p. 39! 

XIII. Das hermaphroditiscbe Sonn> imd Moods* 
Kind, p. 301. 

A.B.C. III. 

L Der uralte Ritterkrieg, und hermetiscbe 
Triimiph, p. 15. 

II. Henry Vanghan (sic) genannt Kugenius 
Philaletha : Erbfneter Eingang zu des Kdnigs 
verschlofsnera Pallast, p. 73. 

III. (Henry Vaughan) : Von Ven^'andlung der 
Metalle, p. 78. 

IV. (Henry Vaughan) : Kurze Anleitung zum 
hinimlischen Rubin, p. 80. 

V. (Henry Vaughan) : Brunn der Chemischen 
Wissenschaft. p. 83. 

VI. (Henry Vaughan) : Magia Adamica, Alter- 
thum der Weisheil oder Himmel der Erde. p. 86. 

V^II. (Henry Vaughan) : Antroposophia Magica, 
p. 115. 
VI 1 1. ( Henry V^aughan): Anima magica abscondita, 
p. 122. 

IX. (Henry Vaughan) : Euphrates, die Wasser 
von Aufgang, p. 134. 

X. (Henr^ Vaughan) : Lumen de Lumine, neucs 
magisches Licht, p. 151. 

XI. Thomas Vanghan [sic\ .Aula Lucis, Haufs 
des Lichts, p. 177. 

XII. Aus Peter Stdners HazxSscfarift voo der 
Universal- Materie, p. 189. 

XIII. Aus Nedeganders kuner Anlciumg zmn 
Naturgeheimnifs, p. 203. 

XI^^ Aus der gUldenen Rose : durch L R. V.M.D., 
p. 207. 

XV. Aus dem GesprSch zwischen dem Saturn 
der Weisen, und einem Chemisten, p. 209. 

XVI. Aus Jamsthalers Gedicbt vom Stein der 
Weisen, p. 213. 

XVII. Aus dem Gedicbt der acbten Rosen- 
krcuzer, p. 214. 

XVIII. Aus den LehrsHtzen von der Weisen 
Steine, p. 216. 

XIX. Aus d. .-Vria von der Weisen Stein, p. 217. 

XX. Aus dem Brunn der Weisbeit, p. aid. 

XXI. Aus dem Blut der Natur, p. 225. 

XXII. Aus Fictulds Azoth et Ignis, p. 252. 

XXIII. Aus Fictulds Aureum Vellus. goldcnem 
VHiefs, p. 263. 

XXIV. Aus Fictulds Hermetica Mctoria, p. rji. 

XXV. Aus Fictulds Abhandlung von der Gewife- 
heit der Alchemie, p. 288. 

A. B. C. IV. 

I. Aus Fictulds Turlxi Philosophorum, p. 15. 

II. Aus der fiirstlichen Rose von Jericho, oder 
Moses Testament, p. 39. 

III. Aus Elias Artista Geheimnis vom Salze, 

p. 47' 

IV. Einzehne Zeugnisse aus Fictulds Probier- 

steine, p. 71. 

V. Aus Johann Ferdinand von Freydau Send- 
schreiben, p. 75. 

VI. Aus desselben Licht des Lichts. p. 95. 

VII. Aus Leonhards delarvatione Tincturae PhU- 
osophorum, p. 122. 

VIII. Aus V. Loen Geheimnifs der Verwesung 
und Verbrennung aller Dinge, p. 137. 

IX. Aus dem mikrokosmiscben Vorspiel eines 
neuen Hinimels und der neuen Erde. p. 167. 

X. Aus des Grafen Marsciano Sendschreiben 
und hermetischen Untersuchung, p. 202. 

For notes upon the above authors, see the respective entries. 

HERMETISCHES Journal. 

See HERMETISCHE (Die) Gesellschaft. 

HERMETISCHES'-HERMOGENES 

399 

HERMETISCHES Museum. Erster TheiL Allen Uebhabern der wahren 
Weisheit gewidmet von dem Herausgeber. Reval und Leipzig bey 

Albrecht und Compagnie . . . 

»•. Pp. 192. The date has been torn off. 

Zweyter Theil . . . (date torn off). 8*. Pp. 19a 
Dritter Theil, 1785. 8^. Pp. 179 [i blank]. 

Vierter TTjdl, Leipzig, 5790^ in Geislers, des jOngem, V'erlagshandlung. 8*. Pp. vi. 170. 
The date of parts I. and II. is 5782, which of course stands for 1783. 

Ladrague, Bibliotkiqne Ouvarvf, 1870, No. 626 Kopp. Die Alchemie^ 1886, ii. p. 341 (enumerates 
(only three parts are mentioned). four parts). 

The contents of the four parts are as follows : 

I. Warum gelangen nur wenige Menschen zum 
MeisterstOk der kdniglichen Kunst? eine Frage. 
boantwortet von dnem Mchten Maurer. I. , p. 13. 

3. Johann de Monte Raphaim. Vorbothe der 
am philosophischen Himmel hervorbrechenden 
Morgenr5the, I., p. 65. 

3. P. A. Theophrasti geheimes und vollstandiges 
WtinschhQtlein. . . . mit ciner Nachricht von des 
Verffissers Leben vermdirt von Sincero Aletophilo. 
Nach der Ejfurter Ausgabe von 1738 abgedrukt, 
I., p. HI. 

I. Johannis Augurelli GOIdenes Vlieis und Gol- 
derzielungskunst . . . dbersezt von M. Valentin 
Weigel . . . abgedrukt nach der Hamburger Aus- 
gabe vom Jahre 1716, II., p. 3. 

3. Reine Hermetische wahrheit von einem 
unbekannten Verfiasser, II., p. 143. 

1. SchlOssel zur wahren Weisheit, III., p. 3. 

2. Philadelphia oder brilderliche Liebe von 
Irenseus Philoctetes. III., p. 37. 

3. SendschreibeneinesAdepten.aberdasGeheim- 
nis der grossen Kunst, aus Gelegenheit derjenigen 
Lehren abgefafst, die .Xristseus seinem Sohne, das 
philosophische Meisterst&k betreffend hinterlassen 
hat. Der Name des Verfifissers Lst in diesero 
lateinischen Annagramma {sic) enthalten. Dives 
sicut Ardens, s. S^ctus Desiderius. zu Paris bey 
Lorenz D'Hour}', 1688, III., p. ^5. 

4. Liber de FVincipiis Naturalibus et de principiis 
artis Chemicae. Incerto Authore, III., p. 151. 

Die wahrhafte und vollkommene Bereitung des 
Philosophischen Steins der Brilderschaft aus dem 
Orden des GiUden- und Rosen- Creutzes. . . . Dabey 
angeh^get die Gesetze oder Regdn, wdche die 
ge^chte Rrdderschaft unter sich hiilt, denen 
Filiis Doctrinae zum Besten pubUciret, von S. R., 
iv. p. I. 

The * Gesetze,' p. 143. 

HERMITE (U) du Fauxbourg. 

See HELMONT (FRANCISCUS MERCURIUS VAN). 

Gmdin {Gesckichte der Chemie^ 1798, il p. 314) quotes the pseudonym but not its 
equivalent. 

HERMOGENES. 

Des aufrichtigen Hermogenis Philosophischer und Magischer Feuer-Stab, 
oder: Unvermeidlicher Kunstgriff zu dem Philosophischen Feuer zu 
gelangen, dadurch man zur Vollkommenheit dieses grossen Werckes, und 
herrlichen Wissenschafft koffit, und gleichsam durch einen Tubum das 
Innerste der Materie aller Weisen, und seinen edlen Geist aus der 
Fontina heraus ziehet, ausser welchem Tubo igneo oder Feuer-Stab, velut 
totius operis Directore & ignis Observatore, wovon kein Philosophus 
etwas erwehnet, das Werck keinen guten Succefs, vielweniger ein gewiinschtes 
Ende erlangen lean, von mir obbenannten, als ein Supplementum des gantzen 
Geheimnisses, denen Kunstbegierigen und dem Publico zu gut heraus 
gegeben, und entdecket worden. Leipzig und Halle, zu finden in denen 
Krugischen Buchhandlungen, 1741. 

8*. Pp. 62. 

In the preface to the present tract his works are 
enumerated by himself, and the tides copied by 
Fictuld and others. 

Afocalypsis spagyrica et phUo%ophica^ Leipzig, 

1739. 

Sfagvriickts und philosophisckes BrUnnUin^ 
1709 ; Ldpiig, 1741, 8*. 

Of the ' Feuer-Stab/ Kopp says there was an 
earlier edition of 1709. 

Fictuld says that the author has not revealed his 
name, but he is 'obviously an Arch-Sophist,' his 
writings are 'godless lies and pasquils,' and they 
deserve to be burned. There are no half-measures 
with Fictuld. 

400 

HERMOGENES—HER WIG 

HERMOGENES. Continued, 

But on th« other hand he seems to have been of 
some importance in the development of Rosicruci- 
anism, and is quoted repeatedly as an authority bv 
Semler. who links his name more than once witn 

Fictuld, Probier-Stein^ 1753, Th. ii., p. 76. 

Semler, Unparthtiische Samlungen zur Histarie 
der Rosenkrtuxer, 1787, ii. p. 167 ; 1788, iii. pp. 38, 
71, 85, 125, 164 (extracts from his writings), 177, 
188 ; 1788, iv. pp. 6a, 169, 1 80. Chronology, 1741. 

Fictuld's. Whether the latter, after his published 
criticisms, would have enjoyed being put in the 
same category may be doubted. This author does 
not appear in Kloss's list 

Gmdin. GtschichU der Chemie^ '7^* ^ P* 3'^ 
Ladrague, Bibliothique (hivarcjf. Sciences Secrites, 
1870, Nos. 1367, 1368. 
Kopp, Die A/ckemie, 1886^ ii. pp. 352, 386, 391. 

HERMOPHILE. 

Le Pseautier d'Hermophile, envoye a Philalethe. 

See RICHEBOURG (j. M. D.), Bibliothcque des Philosophes Chimiqiies, 1754, iv. 
p. 394. 

HERTODT VON TODTENFELDT (Johann Ferdinand). 

Epistola contra Philaletham. Responsio ad prsecedentem Epistolam. 
See MANGET (j. J.), Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, ii. pp. 697 and 699. 

Johann Ferdinand Hertodt, or Herdott, von 
Totenfeld. or Todtenfeldt, of Niclasburg in Mor- 
avia, bom 4 Feb., 1645. w.as a doctor of medicine, 
a member of the Leopoldine Academia . . . 
Naturae Curiosorum in 1670, and chief physician 
to the Emperor. In his youth he occupied him- 
self with writing books, but later on he abandoned 
this sort of work and practised medicine at 

Mercklin, Lindenius renovatus, 1686, p. 576. 

Roth-Scholtz, Bibliotheca Chemica, 1727, p. 284. 

Die Edelgebome Jungfer Alchymia, 1730, p. 97 
(intercourse with Wagnereck). 

Manget, Bibliotheca Scriptorum Medicorum, 
1731, I. ii. p. 681. 

Kestner, Medicinisches Gelehrten-Lexicon , 1740, 

P- 397. 
Jocher, Allgemeines Gelchrten-Lextcon, 1750, ii. 

col. 1562. 

Btichner, Academice . . . Natura: Curiosorum 
Historia, 1755, p. 465, No. 37. 

Georgius Matthiae, Conspectus Historic^ Medi- 
corum chronologicus^ 1761, p. 794. 

Brdnn, the capital of Moravia, with great acoepC- 
ance. He died in 1714. 

He wrote * Tartaro-Mastix Moraviae/ Vienme 
Austrian, 1669, 8^; 'Opus mirificum sexti diei,' 
Jenae, 1670, 8*; 'Crocologia, sive cnriosa Croci, 
regis vegetabiliura, enudeatio,' Jenae, 1671, 8*, and 
some papers in the Epkemerides of the Society. 

Portal, Histoire de VAnatomie etdila Chirurgie, 
1770, iii. p. 413. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Anatomica, 1774, i. p. c8i. 

Eloy, Dictiomnairt historiqve de la Afiaeciiu, 
1778, ii. p. 515. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Medicinee practice, 17791 ^ 
p. 258. 

„ Gmelin, Geschichte der Ckemie, 1798, iL pp. aofl^ 
216. 

Biographic Midicale, Paris, Panckoucke (1820- 
25), V. p. 176. 

Hirsch, Biographisches Ijexihon der kewerra- 
genden Aerxte aller Zeiten und Fdlher, 1886, iii 
p. 178. 

HERVERDI (Joseph Ferdinand). 

Joseph Ferdinand Herverdi, M.D. in Rotterdam, Erklarung des mineralischen 

Reichs. Ein Be3^rag zur Geschichte der Alchymie. Berlin, bey Arnold 

Wever, 1783. 

r. Pp. [4] 124. 

The Beytragdoes not spare the author's obscurity, 
errors, and divagations from sound sense. 

Beytrag tur Geschichte der hohem Chemie, 1785, 
p. 683. 

Meusel, Das gelehrte Teutschland oder Lexicon 
der jetzt lebenden Teutschen Schriftsteller, 1797, 
iii. p. 269 ; 1786, Nachtrag, i. p. 273. 

Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemie^ i799, iii. p. 235. 

Meusel quotes the above, but knows nothing 
about the author. Schmieder calls him Hervordi. 
which seems inaccurate. 

(This is an inaccurate reference, and I have failed 
to correct it). 
Schmieder, Geschichte der Alchemie^ 1832, p 

adrague, Bibiiotkique Otcvarqf, 
Secrites, 1870, Nos. 586-7. 

Sciences 

HERVVIG (Henning Michael). 
The Art of Curing Sympathetically, or Magnetically, Proved to be most true 
both by its Theory and Practice, Exemplified by several Cures performed 
that way. With a Discourse concerning the Cure of Madnefs, And An 

HERWIG^HESSUNG 401 

HERWIG (Henning Michael). Continued, 

Appendix to prove the reality of Sympathy. Also an account of some 
Cures performed by it in London. Written originally in Latin by H. M. 
Herwig, M.D. London, Printed for Tho. Newborough at the Golden 

Ball in St. Pauls Churchyard, R. Parker at the Unicom under the Piazza 
of the Royal Exchange, Comhil ; and P. Buck at the Sign of the Temple, 
at the Temple-Gate in Fleetstreet, 1700. 

12°. Pp. [15, I blank] 151. Advertisement of Chemical Books at the End [1} 

Watt {Biblioikeca Britannica, '^^Jk (authors) i. 490 «) quotes : Ars Curandi Sym- 
paiketica^ Culemburgi, no date, 12°. There is a copy in the British Museum (1038. a. 
a9). 

HESSLING (Elias Johannes). 

Theophrastus Redivivus hoc est Usus Practicus Azothi, sive Lapidis Philosophici 
Medicinalis, qui vera Tinctura corporis humani, Gratii divini in his ultimis 
temporibus nobis redonati : Des theuren, Edlen, Hocherfahmen, vnd weit- 
beriihmten Philosophi Teutsches Landes, Philippi Theophrasti Paracelsi 
von Hohenheim : Beyder Artzney Doctoris, Medicorum Monarchse, & 
Principis. Welches Gebrauch nechst GSttlicher Hiilffe in gliicklicher 
gefiihrter Praxi in denen Kranckheiten, die mir die nechst verflossene 
Jahre der gnadigen wider Erlangung defs Azothi vnter Handen kommen, 
war sein befunden habe Ich M. Elias Johannes Hefsling, Amstadiensis 
Thuringus, jetziger Zeit Pfarrherr zu Aurach Vahinger Ampts an der Ens 
im Fiirstenthumb Wiirtenberg, vnd der Edlen Medicin alter Practicus. 
Auff sonderbar gnadiges Begehren vomehmer frembder Herren von mir 
zum Truck iibergeben. 

Christlicher Leser hore mich bier, 

Richt nicht zugeschwindt bitt ich von dir, 

Liss mich zuvor bedachtsamlich, 

Dann judicir vemiinfftiglich. 
Franckfurt, In Verl^^ng Johann-Willhelm Ammons md Serlins. Im 
Jahr Christi 1659. 

4°. Pp. [8] 27 [i blank]. 

Theophrastus Redivivus, Illustratus, Coronatus & Defensus. Hoc est: Vsus 

Practicus Azothi, Lapidis Philosophici Medicinalis, qui vera Tinctura 

Corporis humani : et Elixirij novi correcti : aliorumque arcanorum Medi- 

camentorum, gratis divini in his ultimis mundi temporibus nobis redonatorum. 

Des Edlen, Hocherfahmen, vnd Welt beriihmten, durch Gottes Genaden 

erleuchteten Philosophi Deutsches Landes; Philippi Theophrasti Paracelsi, 

von Hohenheim; beyder Artzeney Doctoris, Medicorum Monarch® & 

Principis Helvetic!. Durch welchen die, wider den Erstmahls publicirten 

llieophrastum Redivivum, aufsgestrewete vngottliche Calumnien, vnd sehr 

vnchristliche Diffamationes des Anonymischen Concipisten Imposturse & 

Appendicis, vemiinfftig abgelehnet; vnd die in schrifiten eingebrachte 

objectiones bescheidentlich vnd Christlichen beantwortet hat : Elias lohannes 

Hefsling, Amstadiensis Thuringus : Philosoph. & Vtriusque Med. D. Quondam 

ac 

403 

HESSUNG^HEURimrS 

HESSLING (Elias Johannes). C&mHmtti. 

Pastor Wirtenbergicus, zu Aurach, Vayhinger Ampts : noviter vocalns Con- 
cionator Aulicus, Hasso-Homburgensis. Anjetzo Medicus Piacticiis in 
Aurach. 

Ovi : Perfer & obdura, dolor hie dbi proderit olim. 
Zum ]>uck vberschicket von 7x>ffingen, Anno i66a. Vnd vnder dem 
Verlag des Authoris gednickt zu Hamburg, Anno 1663. 

4*. Pp. 48, 304. P. 21, portrait of Paracelsus with his left hand 00 the poouiiel 

of his sworxl. inscribed Azot. 

Beyond what he 8a3rs about himself on his title- 
pages I have not found anything about Hessling. 
Gmelin calls him Masling and quotes only Tkeo- 
phrastu% redivivus^ >659. This book seems to have 
provoked a controversy, for Koth-Scholtz gives the 
title of a criticism intended as a warning to the 

Roth-Scholtz, Bibliotiuca Chtmua, 1737. p. a86. 

Btytrag zur GtschUhie der kokem Ckemie, 1785, 
p. 619 (1659 edition). 

Adelung, Forisettunf^ ... km . . . Jdcktrs . . . 
GtUhrten-Ltxico^ 1787, li. col. 1975. 

public: * Impasiura Theefkrmsti 
Stuttgart, 1660. and to th^ Hessling relied in hb 
Friedens- und KritpBotke^ 1660, as weD as in the 
present work. Addung quotes: Breymmgha 
larvahts a se txflosus^ Caioel, 1665, 4*. 

Omdin, Gttckicktf der CMtmu, 1797, i. pi te. 
~ " JCniSck 

Mook, Tktepknuius Parucelsmj, eime 
Studie, 1876, p. X35. etc. 

SudboflE^ BUiugrapkiu Panuitlsita, 1894. ppi 
600, 601, 606. 

HEURNIUS (Johannes). 

See BROUCHUISIUS (DANIEL), SecreU Alchimiae Magnalia, 1612. 

Heumius wrote a preface in defence of alchemy. It is not meotioned at aU bj Mercklin. Only the 
edition : Colon. Agnp. 1579. 4*", is quoted by Niceron. 

lohannis Hevrnii Vltraiectini De Peste Liber. 
Ex Officina Plantiniana Raphelengij, cId.Io.cxv. 

4^. Pp. 37 [3]. Plantin's device with the motto : Lahore et Connanfla. 
Mercklin quotes an edition : Lugd. Bat. 1600, 4*, onlj. 

lohannis Hevrnii Vltraiectini de Febribus Liber. Ex officinft Plantiniani 

Raphelengii, 16 10. 

4^ Pp. [8] 124. Plantin's device as in the preceding. 
Mercklin quotes an edition : Lugd. Bat. 1598, 4*, only. 

Jan van Heurne, Johannes Heumius, was bom 
at Utrecht, 25 Jan., 1543 (others 11 Augt.), of an 
old family. As a school boy he showed no aptitude 
for learning, for it is said that at the age of 1 1 he 
could not read, and at 15 had not acquired the 
rules of grammar. But about that time he woke 
up, and worked so hard that he soon made up 
for his lost time, and at 18 he went to Louvain 
where he studied philosophv, matiiematics, and 
medicine. After three years he went to Paris and 
continued his studies, and when he was 34 pro- 
ceeded to Italy, spending a long time at Padua for 
the sake of the lectures then given. He reluctantly 
refused an invitation to accompany the Venetian 
ambassador to Constantinople, and finally in 1571, 
at the age of a8, took the degree of Doctor of 
Medicine at Pavia. He remained there two years, 
but left Italy secretly on account of a conspiracy 
which had been formed to prevent him getting a 
chair, and reached Utrecht in 1573, where he 
began to practise medicine, and be^me physician 
of the Prince of Egmont, and a Senator. 

Illtutrium Hollandia et WestfrisuB Ordinum 
alma Academia Leidenns, 1614, pp. 124 (portrait) 

— 14X. 
Adami, I'ita Germanarum Medicorum^ i6flo 

p. 3M. 

In 1581 he was appointed to the chair of 
medicine at L^den, which he occupied for twenty 
years till his cfeath. He was six times rector of 
the university, and he was the first who, at the 
students' request, gave practical demonstratioos 
of anatomy. 

After suffering for three years from calculus he 
died II Aug., 1601, aged 58, on his birthday day 
according to Witte, but in 1598 aocordiog to 
Mercklin. As, however, he places his birth in 
1543. and gives his a^e as 59, be moat have made 
a slip in the year of his death. 

With the exception of the preAioe in defence of 
alchemy which he wrote for BnMichaisias' collection. 
all his works deal with the institutes, study and 
practice of medicine, with special ^\*»^^»*^ and 
with the history of the art as snown by his editions 
of Hippocrates. They were ultimatelj collected 
bv his son Otto, and published at Leydeo. 1609, 
4 , and at Lyons, 1658, folio. 

Van der Linden, D< Scriptis wudicis Hkri dw, 

1637. p. 277. 

Joh. Andr. Quenstedt, Dialogus dt fairm 
iliustrium doctrind et scriptis virorttmt 1654, 
p. ia4. 

HEURNIUS-^HILDANUS 

403 

HEURNIUS (Johannes). 

Crasso. Elof[ii tPHuowuni iMUraii, 1666, ii. 
PPL 64-68, with a portrait 

Mercklin. LineUnius renovatus, 1686, p. 605. 

Conring, /» Universam Aiiem Medicam . . . 
Introdnctio, 1687, pp. 109, 25a 

Freher, TfucUrum virorum eruditione clarorum, 
1688. pp. 1307-10, plate 59. 

Witte. Diarium Biografhicum, 1688, Sig. A 4 
verso, II Aug., 1601. 

Pope-Blount, Censura CeleMorum Auikorum, 
i7«o, p. 799. 

Teissier, Les Eloges des Hommei Savaru, 1715. 
»▼- PP- 397-400. 

Manget, Bibliotheca Scriptorum Medicomm, 
1731, I. ii. p. 684, 

ScoUe. Anliitung tur Histarie der Mediciniscken 
Gtlahrhtit, 1731, pp. 15 (his life). 240 (woriu). 709. 

Niceron, Memotres, 1737, xxxvii. p ^. 

Foppens, Bibliotheca Beltnca, 1739, ii. p. 660. 

Kestner, Medicinisches Gelehrten- Lexicon, 1740, 

Oupar Burmann, Trajectum Erudihtm^ 1750, 

P- >34- 
jadbcTf Atlgewuines Gelehrten-Lexicon^ I750» ii- 

COL 1578 (a long account). 

Georgius Matthiae, Conspectus Hisiorim Midi' 
cormm ckronolo^icus^ 1761, p. 321. 

Portal, Histotre de t Anatomic et de la Ckirurgie, 
1770, ii. p. 311. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Anatomica, 1774. i. p- 270. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Medicinte practice, 1776^ J. 
PP- 96, 37, 4a, p, 64, 66. 67, 96 ; 1777, "• p. 27a. 

Btographte Midicah^ Paris, Panckoucke (1820- 

25). V. p. 179- 
Sprengel, Geschichte der Arxneyhunde^ 1827, iii. 

P.i43- 
Dezeimeris, Dictionnaire historique de la Mide- 

cine, 18^ iii. i. p. 123. 

lAormVL^ Geschichte der Medicin, 1840, ii. p. 156. 

Van der Aa, Bioj^aphisch Woordenhoeh der 
Nederlanden, 1867, vni. p. 733 (and references). 

Haeser, Geschichte der Medtcin, 1881, ii. pp. 
129, 141. 

Billings, Index-Catalogue^ 1885, vi. p. 194 ; 2nd 
Series, 1902, vii. p. 100. 

Hirscb, Biograthisches Lexicon der hervorra- 
genden Aerxte oiler 7.eiten und Vdlher, 1886, iii. 
p. 189. 

Dictionnaire Encyclopidique des Sciences Midi- 
cales, 4^e S^e. 1888, xiv. p. 104. 

HEUTIGE ALCHIMIST (Der). 

See PLUSIUS (BDUARD). 

HIERONYMUS de Zanetinis. 

Conclusio & comprobatio Alchymise, qua dispositioni & argumentis Angeli 
respondetur. 

See THSATRUM CHSMICUM, 1 659, iv. p. 247. 

HILDANUS (WiLHELM Fabricius). 

Schatzkammerlein der Gesundheit, inhaltendt FunfT vnd Zwantzig aufserlesene 
nlitzliche Regulen vnd Lehrstiick, die Gesundheit lang zu erhalten, durch 
den Weylandt Hochgelehrten, vnd Weitberiihmbten P. vnd Medicum 
Herm Johannem Posthium, Churfiirstlicher Pfaltz wohlbestelten Leibartzt, 
zu samen bracht, vnd in einem Patent an Tag geben, nun aber, dem 
gemeinen Mann zu gutem, weitleufftig erklart, mit vielen niitzlichen vnd 
bewehrten Artzneyen geziert, in dieses Hand Btichlein gebracht, vnd an 
Tag geben : Durch Guilhelmum Fabricium Hildanum, Fiirstl. Marggravischen 
Badischen, wie auch der Loblichen Statt Bern bestelten Medico-Chirurgum 
Ordinarium. Gedruckt zu Franckfurt am Mayn, bey Erasmo KempfTem, 
In Verlegung Matthsei Merian, Im Jahr 1628. 

4^ Pp. [1-25] 26-142 [9 blank]. Vignette with the motto : Hinc Sanitas. 

His name is given variously as Wilhelm Fabry, 
and Fabriz, Gimidmus Fabricius, and Guilielmus 
Fabricius HHdanus. He was so called from the 
village of Hilden near Dflsseldorf, where he was 
bom 25 June, 156a He was educated at Colo|^e, 
studiedf surgery with Cosmas Slotanus, a pupil of 
Vcsalins aiKl surgeon of the Duke of jOltch. In 
1585 he went to MeU, the following year to 
Fvjreme. next to Geneva, where he remained for 
four years with lean Griffon, ao able surgeon, who 
practiaed Tagkacoui'i method* ^ '-« '"- 

He 

m 

1590, and trained his wife in surgery and obstetrics, 
and returned to Hilden and Cologne. In 1597 he 
went again to Switzerland, and remained at 
Payeme and Lausanne till 1615, when he was 
invited to Bern as town and canton physician. He 
was also physician to the Margrave of Baden- 
Hochberg m Durlach. 

He was considered one of the best trained 
surgeons in Germany at the beginning of the seven- 
teenth century, and he made many oontribotioiis 
to the literature of the subject He alto wroC* on 

404 

HILDANUS^HILDEBRANDT 

HI LD ANUS (WiLHELM Fabricius). Continued. 

the mineral waters of Switierland. He invented 
some ingenious instruments, and presented skeletons 
to Cologne and Bern. 

Van der Linden, De Scriptis mtdicis Hbri dito^ 

Mercklin, Lindtnius renovatus^ 1686, p. 373. 

Conrin^, In Univtrsam Artem A4tdicam . . . 
Introduction 1687, p. 398 (Introductio c.Xii. S4)- 

Freher, Theatrum virorum eruditiome clarorum^ 
1688. p. 1365, PI. 62. 

Witte. Diarium Biographicum, 1688. Sig. Gg a 
rtcto^ 14 Feb. , 1614. 

Christianus Polycarpus Leporinus, Vita, Qued- 
linburg. i7aa. 4*. 

Maoget, Bibliothtca Scriptormm Midicorum^ 
I72I, I. ii. p. 689. 

Stolle, Anleiiung tur Historie der Medicinischen 
Gelahrheit^ 1731, pp. 8io, 839, 830, 837, 839, 851. 

Kestner, Mediciniscfirs Gelehrten- Lexicon ^ 1740, 
p. 387. 

Tbcher. Allgenuines Gelehrten-Lexicon, 1750, ii. 
col. 495. 

Georgius Matthiae. Conspectus Historia Medi- 
coruM chronolo^cuSy 1761, p. 367. 

Portal, Hi stoi re de t Anatomic et de la Chirurgic, 
1770, il pp. 263-275, & passim. 

Haller, Bibiiotkeca Botanica, 1771, i. p. 421 ; 
177a, ii. p. 676. 

He died at Bern, 14 Feb.. 1634, to the 74II1 
of his age. of asthma, having suffered som 
previously from gout. 

Haller, Bibiiotkeca Anaiomica, 1774, i. p|k 99S- 

97. 

Haller, Bibiiotkeca Ckirurgica, 1774, i. pi 359 ; 

»775. ii. p. 60a. 

Haller, Btiliotkeca Afedicin^e practicm^ 1777* "• 
pp. 305.308. 

Eloy. Dictionnaire kistorique de la MUeeme^ 
1778. 11. p. 525. 

Gottl. Eman. von Haller, Bibliotkek Sckweiaer- 
Gesckichte, 1785, i. Nos. 651, 13416^ 1575, 1607. 
1608. 1754 (notices of his wonu). 

Rees, TJU Cycloftedia, iSi^ ziv. under Fafaricm 

Biographic Midicale, Pans. PaoduxidBe (itoD- 
25), iv. p. oa 

Sprengd, Geukichte der Ar*neykmmde, 1807, iv. 

pp. ^53. 577-5?a. &C-. &c. 
Btographie Universelle^ ^^SS* ^i*'* P- ^i* 
Alleemeine Deutsche Biographic , ^^77$ ^ P^ S>^ 

(Article by Hirsch.) 
Haeser, Geschichtc der Afedidm, 1881, ii. pp. 

439. 976, 982. 

Billings, Index-Catalogue, 1883, iv. p. 566; and 
Series, X9cx>, v. p. 427. 

Hirsch, Biogra^hlschcs Lcxikom der hervorra- 
genden 'Aertte oiler Zeiten und VSlker, i885, ii 
p. 325. (Article by Kleinwiichter.) 

HILDEBRANDT (Georg Friedkrich). 
Chemische und mineralogische Geschichte des Quecksilbers abge£Eisst von 
Georg Friederich Hildebrandt der Arzneikunde und Wundarzneikunst Doctor, 
der Anatomie und Chemie ordentlichem Lehrer zu Braunschweig, ordent- 
lichem Assessor im Ober-Sanitats-Collegium daselbst, der Romisch-Kaiserlichen 
Akademie der Naturforscher Mitgliede, und der Koniglich Grofsbrittannischen 
Societal der Wissenschaften zu Gottingen Corresjx)ndenten. 
Nee roanet vlla sui similis res ; omnia migrant, 
Omnia commutat Natura, et vertere cogit. 

Lucretius de rerum natunu 
Libr. VI. V. 828. 
Braunschweig im Verlage der Schulbuchhandlung. 1793. 

4*. Pp. X. 476. 
An excellent monograph with numerous lists of books and papers. 

Hildebrandt was bom at Hanover, 5 June, 1764, 
graduated M.D., was privat-docent at Gottingen, 
in 1786 professor of anatomy in the Anatomical and 
Surgical Institute at Brunswick, assessor of the 
Obo'-Sanit&ts Collegium, ordinary professor of 
medicine at Erlangen in 1793. ^^ chemistry in 
1^96, and of physics in 1799. He was also Coun- 
cillor of the King of Prussia. He died in 18 16. 

He contribute largely to scientific periodical 
literatiue, and wrote works on medicine, his 
Manual of Anatomy being regarded as a classic in 
its day. 

Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemie, 1799. iii. pp. 289, 
097, &c., &c. 

G. W. A. Fikenscher, Academische Gelehrten- 
Geschichte der Universit&t eu Erlangen, Nflmberg, 
S806. 

Besides the above he wrote : An£angsgiiliide der 
Chemie, zum Grundriss akadetnischer voriesangen 
nach den neuen Sjrsteme abgefasst, Erlangen, 1794, 
q^ vols. ; Encyclop&die der gesammten Cheoiie, 
Erlangen, 1799-1818, 8** ; Lehrbuch der Chemie 
als Wissenschaft und als Kunst. Erlangen. 1816, 
8** ; Anfangsgrtlnde der Metallurgie, Erlangen, 
1 81 6, 8*^ ; Chemische Betracbtungen der Lol^- 
berey, Erlangen, 1795, ^! Dissertatio de mttal- 
lorum nobilium piuntate arte parandft, Erlangen, 
1796. 80. 

Elschenburg, Entwurr einer Geschichte der 
Collegii Carolini in Braunschweig, Berlin, i8ia. 

8^. 

Nova Acta physico-enedica Academiee . . . Natunt 
Curiosorum^ Erlangen. 1818, ix. pp. 15-54. 

HILDEBRANDT--HILL 40$ 

HILDEBRANDT (Gkorg Friederich). ConHnued, 

Scfavrdgger. Journal fUr Ckemie und Physik, AllgemHne Demtscht Biograpkie^ 1880, xii. p. 403 

1819, XXV. p. 16. - (article by Hirscb). 

Biograpkie MidicaU, Paris, Panckoucke (1820- Haeser. Geschichte der Mtdicin^ 188 1, ii. p. 848. 

35), V. p. 188. Billings, Indtx-Catalogue, 1885, vi. p. ao8 ; and 

Sprengel, Geschichie der Artneykundt, 1838, v. Series, 1902, vii. P- 113. 
p. 545* Dictionnaire En^clopidique des Sciences Midi- 

roggendorff, Biographisch-liierarisckts Hand- caUs^ 4toe S^rie, 1888, xiv. p. 113. 
w9rt€^uch, 1863, L coL 1103. 

HILDEBRANDT (Johann Bernhard). 

De Lapide Philosophico : das ist von dem Gebenedeyten Stein der Weysen 
Oder Chemia. Zu griindlichem vnnd warhafftigem Bericht, alien Werden 
Liebhabern, der Waren, Edlen vnd Reinen Kunst Chemiae, gantz hell 
vnd klar, aus Briiderlicher Liebe vnd Wolmeinung geschrieben durch 
Johann Bernhard Hildebrandt, von Hildebrandseck einen liebhaber der 
Kunst Alchymiae. Gedruckt zu Hall in Sachsen bey Peter Schmidt, In 
Vorl^;ung Joachimi Krusicken. Anno M DC XVIII. 

8*. Not paged. Sigs. A'L in 8, M in 4 (= pp. 183, i blank). 11 woodcuts. 

The running title of this poem is : Das Bucb Magnesia. It may be compared with 
that of Jamsthaler. 

HILDENBRANDT (Paulus) von Hildenbrandseck. 

Auriferae Artis, das ist, Der Goldkunst : die man Chemiani nennt, Vhralteste 
Authores vnd Anfanger. Oder: Turba Philosophorum. Zum Andern, ein 
vortrefflicher Tractat, dels hocherleuchten vnd Sinreichen Philosophi Rogeri 
Bachonis, Den ich von einem guten Freundt Teutsch beschrieben bekommen, 
(welcher zuvor niemals Teutsch getruckt) Von der warhafftigen Composition 
defs Lapidis Philosophorum Theorice & Physice gantz lustiglich beschrieben, 
darinnen nicht allein die natiirlichen Vrsachen, sondern auch Theologische 
Exempel nach der Natur demonstrirt werden. Zu nutz vnd dienst alien 
wahren Kunstliebenden der Natur, so der Lateinischen Sprach vnerfahren, 
mit fleiis auffs best zusammen gelesen, vnd in Truck gegeben : Durch 
Den Edlen vnd Vesten Paulum Hildenbrandt von Hildenbrandseck. Ge- 
truckt zu Franckfort, durch WolfTgang Richtern, In Verl^ung der samptlichen 
Bassseischen Erben, 1608. 

8°. Pp. [19] 4-168. TiUe red and black. Woodcut. 

Propositiones Maximar, seii Satzungen der Gold- in Germaniciun idioma versum per me, M. Laur- 

kuDst Oder Chemiae Artis, Sig. A. 7. entium loha. Anno Salutis 1^96. 

Turba Philosophorum, p. 4. The tract by Roger Bacho is not taken from the 

Rogerius Bacho, De Sole, p. 109. Ars Aurifera. (Jnder the title * Tractat vom 

Rogeritts Bacho, Theorica, p. 116. Golde' it was reprinted by Roth-Scholu. 

Rogerius Bacho, Practick oder Procefs de Sole. Whether or not the two preceding writers have 

p. laS. anv connection with one another, as seems pro- 

The title of the above would induce the belief bable, I have been unable to ascertain, and I have 

that it is a translation of the Ars Aurifera of 1572, not been fortunate enough to find any notice of 

or 1610 ^.v.), but in reality it contains only the them. There is a copy of the Ars Aurifera in the 

'Propositiones' and the 'Turba' from that work. Ouvaroff collection, and it is also mentioned by 

At the end of the ' Turba ' is this note : Ex Latino Kopp. 

Ladrague, BibHotkique Ouvaroff Sciences Kopp, Die Alckemie, 1886, ii. p. 544. 
SeeriUSt 1870, Na 606. 

HILL Gohn). 

Das heilige Kraut, oder die Krafte der Salbey zur Verlangerung des menschlichen 
Lebens. Von Dr. Johann Hill. Aus dem Englischen. Wortgetreu nach 
der Ausgabe von 1778. Stuttgart, 1853. Antiquariat von J. Scheible. 

16*. Ppi. 4a. [9 pp. advertisement.] 

406 

MILL-^mRSCmNG 

HILL (John). Continued. 

This is port 4 of SchdUe's Series called AnHqmarixkt Rariidten. 

The original work, entitled Th£ virtues of Sage, appeared at London in 1765, 8". 
The German translation, of which the above declares itself to be a reprint, was pub- 
lished at Altenburg, 1778, S**. 

Hill, son of the Rev. Theopbilus Hill, of Peter- 
borough or Spalding, was bom about 17 16. He 
was apprenticed to an apothecary, studied botany 
of whicn he must have acquired a good knowledge, 
went on the stage and failed as an actor, returned 
to his first occupation and entered on the life of 
a literary man. His edition and translation of 
Theophnistus upon Stones brought him into notice, 
and his botanical writings which were numerous 
and extensive gained him fame and distinction, for 
oa accotmt of his book : * The Vegeuble system, ' 
in six and twenty folio volumes, the King of 
Sweden conferred on him the Order of Vasa. and 
henceforth he used the title 'Sir.* He also pro- 
cnred from St Andrews the diploma of Doctor of 
Medicine. 

Besides his more laborious contributions to 
botany and natural history, he threw off all kinds 
of literary work with the utmost ease, wrote plays 
— which were unsuccessful — and lost fame m 
notoriety as a man of fashion and a journalist who 
retailed society scandal and town talk in a weekly 

Portal, Histoire de r Anatomit et dt la Chirurgit^ 
1770, V. p. 509 (* History of Animals ' commended). 

Haller, oibliotkeca Botanica, 1772, ii. pp. 356- 
362 (' Magnis inde botanicis operibus cdebns'). 

Haller, Biblioiheca Anatomica, 1777, ii. p. 456. 

Adelung, Fortsettung , , . zu . . , /ackers . . . 
Gelehrfen-Lexico, 1787, ii. col. 2044. 

Gmelin, Gesckickte der Ckemie, 1799. iii. p. 781. 

Aikin, General Biografky, 1804. v. p. 1^. 

Fnchs, Refertorium aer chemischem Ltiteratur, 
1806^, p. 30?. 

Chalmers. The General Biographical Dictionary^ 
1814, xviL p. 491. 

magazine and in one or two unsavounr novels. 
His reports on the aflEsirs of others led to tbeir 
interference with his personal oomftart, bat HID 
seems to have been pachydermatous boUi in body 
and mind, and a drutx>ing did not stop fauB 
grubbing. 

Among his voluminous productions there b 
hardly anything on chemistiy and not much on 
pharmacy. The only place m which he displays 
some knowledge of the former subfect is in the 
notes which he added to his translation of Theo- 
phrastus. That work was published at London in 
1746, 8*. pp xxiii. [i blank], an [ij. It is of 
interest as being the only translation m Eogtirii, 
and it has become rare. H01% book was turned 
into French, and published, but without the Greek 
text, at Paris, 1754. large i2roo^ pp. xxiv. 287 [i 
blankl and into German by A. H. Raumgartncr, 
Niimberg, 1770, 8*. 

Hill died of gout at his residence in Gokkn 
Square, 22 Nov., 1775. 

Biographie Midicale^ Paris, Panckoucke (1820- 

25L V. p. loa 
WaU. ^*' 

Biblioiheca Briiannica, 1824, i. 496 s. 

Weld, A History of the Royal Society, 1848, L 
p. 484 (Hill's reviews of the works of the Royal 
Society). 

Allibone, A Critical Dictionary of English 
Literature, 1859, i. p. 846. 

Poggendorff, Biographhch-literarisches Hand- 
worterkuch, 1863. i. col. 1104. 

Billings, Index-Catalogue, 1885, vL p. 21X ; and 
Series, 1902, vii. p. 115. 

Dictionary of National Biograpkf^ 1891, xxvi. 
P- 397. 

HILTEBRANDT (Gustavus Adolphus). 

Neu-Eroffneter Anmuthiger Bilder Schatz, inn Theologischenf Moralischen 
Historischen, Politischen, Chim- und Alchimistischen. Erlauterungen, Allen 
Sinn- und Weifsheit Liebenden zur Lustigen Beschawung, und Gremiiths- 
Ergotzung, mit Allerhand Zierlichen Denckwiirdigen Spriichen, kurtz verfasten 
beliebigen Historien und Gleichiissen, mit besonderm Fleife, und ohngesparter 
Miihe vorgestellt, durch Gustavum Adolphum Hiltebrandt, Franckfurt, In 
Verlegung, Ludwig Bourgeat, Universitet Buch-Fiihrern, In Mayntz, Im Jahr, 
1674. 

4^ pp. [8] 410. Title red and black. 100 emblems in the text This is a col- 
lection of emblems, and does not treat of alchemy. 

HIPPODAMUS (Johannes). 

See PENOTUS (BERNARD G.), Theophrastisch Vade-Mecum, 1596 and 1597. 
See also HOPPODAMUS (johannes). 

HIRSCHING (WiLHELM Simon Christian). 
Versuch Physicalisch-Chymischer Lehrbegriffe zu moglicher Priifung des 
Wesens, des Bestandnisses, und der Wirkungsart des so benichtigten 
Metallverwandelnden Meisterstiickes und dessen vorgeblicher Nutzanwendung 

HIRSCHING^HJARNE 

407 

HIRSCHING (WiLHELM Simon Christian). CmHnued. 

zu einem allgemeinen Genefsmittel in Absicht dniger Vergnugung einer 
Natur- und Grundforschenden Wiisb^erde entworfen von W. S. C Hirsching 
Der Arzneygelahrhdt Doctom und Practico in der Kaiserlichen Reichstadt 
WindsheiixL Leipzig verlegts Carl Ludwig Jacobi 1754. 

a*. PpL[a4]488. [16]. 

A delieooe of alchemy on k priori grounds as well 
as by instances of acuiai trmsmofation. In the 
first chapter lefeieuce is made to GOstenhiifiier. 
Thumeyiaer, and his gold-iron nail, Dienbeim and 
Seton, Comdius Martini whose arguments were 
refuted by an experiment, Cajctano^ and to the 
more recent case described by Burghardt, and to 
Weose! Seller and Bdcticher. These are considered 
undeniable evidence. Afterwards the composition 
of the metals is discussed, and their alchemical 
elements : sulphur and mercury. 

Hirsching was bom at Wincuheim, 6 Febi . 1736. 
He was sent in 1743 ^ ^^ newly-founded university 
at Baireoth, but stayed there only for a short time 

Bauroer, BibUotkeca cktmica^ 178a. p. 99. 
Gmelin. GtschichU der ChewUe, 1798, iL pp. 336^ 

194- 
Meusel, Lexikan der von 1750 Hs 1800 vtrsioT' 

benem ieuiscken ScMriftstelUr, x8o^ v. p. ^i. 

Fochs, Reptriorium der chewuscken Littermiur, 

1806-08, p. 315. 

and proceeded to Erlangen, aiid finally to Jena 
where he took the degree of M.D. in 1747. He 
then practised in windshcim. in 1751 became 
physician at Maynbemheim and in 1760 of the 
superior baili«>icks oi Ufienbdm and Creylingen. 
He died at Uffenheim, 18 May, 1770. 

Besides the abo\'e be i»Tote: Dissertatio de 
Anodynis strict^ sic dictis, Jena, 1747. 4' : Kurze 
Nachricbt von einem ohnweii Wiodsheim auf dem 
Gipfel des sogenannten Kehreberges bervorquel- 
lenden sehr ntitzlichen Gesundtmmiien nun 
Unterricht derer. so sich dessen io Zukunft be- 
dieneii wollen, Rothenburg. 175a, 4**, besides 
memoirs in Delius' Frdnkische Sammlungtn. 

BiographU MidicaU^ Paris, Panckoucke (i8ao- 
35), V. p. 330. 
Schmieder, (jtschichte der Alckemie, 1833, p. 

568. 

Poggendorff. Biographisch-literarisclus Hand- 
wifrterhucht 1863, i. col. iixo. 

HISTOIRE de la Philosophie Hermetique. 1743. 

See LENGLET DUFRESNOY (NICOLAS). 

HISTORIOLA andqua de Argento in aunim verso. 

See GRATAROLO (GUGLIELMO), Vcrac Alchemiae . . . doctrina, 1561, ii. p. 252. 

HJARNE (Urban). 

Urbani Hieme quondam Gubematoris Provincialis Honorarii, Archiatr. Reg. 
et Praesid. Reg. Coll. Med. &c. Actonim Chemicorum Holmiensium, Tomus 
Primus. Hoc est, Parasceue sive Praeparatio ad Tentamina, in Reg. Labora- 
torio Holmiensi peracta, ut et Compendiosa Manuductio ad Elementa et 
Prindpia Chemica rite investiganga (j/V), cum Annotationibus Job. Gotschalk 
Wallerii Phil, et Med. Doct. Chem. Metallurg. ac Pharmaceut. Profess. 
Reg. et Ord. Acad. Imper. N. C. ac Reg. Acad. Stockholm. Soc. 
Stockholmiae, Typis et Impensis Laur. Salvii, 1753. 

8". Ppi zviii. [3] 383. Index, &c. [8. i blank]. Frontispiece, a plates. 

. . . Tentaminam Cbemiconim . . . Tomus Secundus. Nunc primum in lucem 
editorum, cmn Annotationibus. . . . 

Cum Privilegio S. R. M:tis Suecise & S. R. M:tis Polonicae ac Electoris Saxon. . . . 

Pp. xi. [x] 194 [xo]. Editions appeared in 1706, 1712, 8^ 

HjHme was bom at Sqvoritz, Ingermanland, in 
Sweden, 90 Dec., 1641 , of good family. After 
stud^ng medicine at Upsida, where be sustained a 
thesis in x66a, he went to London and was admitted 
to the Royal Society, 2 Dec., 1669, proceeded to 
Fans and devoted two years to tlie study of 
anatomv, physics and chonistry, and is said to 
have taken toe degree of M.D. at Angers. On his 
return to his own coontry he was received with 

much distinction on account of the reputation 
he had acquired especially in chemistry. He was 
appointed premier physician to the King, president 
01 the Medical Council, director of the Royal 
Laboratory which he had succeeded in getting 
established in Stockholm and in which he did 
much investigation. In order to familiarize himself 
with the best metallurgical processes he made two 
visits to Germany, and was afterwards made vice- 

4oS 

HJARNE^HOFFMANN 

HJARNE (Urban). Continued. 

president of the Council for Mines. He was a 
member of the Commission appointed by Charles 
XII. to examine the validity of the process bv 
which Paykull professed to convert lead into gola, 
and of the reality of which be seemed to be con- 
vinced. 

After a long and laborious career he died 22 
March, 1724, at Stockholm, aged 83. 

Acta LifsUnsia, 1684, p. 79 (review of the 
analysis ot mineral waters) ; 1714, p. 128 (review 
of the Acta et Tentamina). 

MoUer, BUliotkeca Septtntrionis eruditi, Hamb. 
ft Lips., 1699, pp. 238, 429. 

Die Edtlgtbarnt Jungfer Alchymia, 1730, p. 224. 

Manget, BUliotkeca Scriptorum Medicorum^ 
1731, I. ii. pp. 686, 688 (reprints from Acta Idpsi- 
emsia), 

StoUe, Anieitung sur HistorU dtr Medicinixken 
Gelakrkeit, 1731^ pp. 599, 601. 

Kestner, Medtctnisches Gelehr ten- Lexicon ^ 1740, 
p. 400. 

Tocher, Allgemtines GtUhrtenljtxicon^ 1750, ii. 
col 1585. 

Hafier, Bibliotkeca Botanica, 1772, ii. p. 137. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Anatomica, 1777. ii. p. 49a. 

Elo^, Dictionnaire kistoriqne de la Midicine, 
1778, li. p. 522. 

Haller, Bibliotkeca Medictna practice, 177^ iii. 

Baumer, Bibliotkeca ckemica, 1782, p. 34. 

Carr&re, Catalogue . . . des Ouvrtiges . . . sur 
Us eaux mitUraUs, 1785, pp. 82, 83 (calls him 
Antoine-Urbaiu Hiarna). 

Gmelin, Gesckickte der Ckemie^ 1798, ii. pp. xi8. 

H j&iie is known by his observations on formic 
acid, nickel, increase of weight by caldnation, 
ammonia firom the distillation of plants, minenl 
waters. He was a voluminous authcMr. aind a list 
of his writings is given by Eloy and in the Swedish 
biographical dictionary. 

In his honour a medal was struck for what be 
had done for the natural history, raetallurgjr, 
language and poetry of his native countqr. 

(his chemical knowledge), 119, 350 (antiseptic 
* balsam ' for preserving wood and dead bodies). 

Reuss, Repertorium Commentationum, m. 
{Ckemia et Res Afetallica\ 1803, p. 134. 

Fucbs, Repertorium der ckemtscken Uiteratm^ 
i8o6k>8, pp. 150, 216. 

Thomson, History of the Royal Society, 1812, 
Appendix iv. p. xxA. 

Biograpkie MidicaU, Paris, Panckoucke (iSao- 
25), v. p. 186. 

Sprengel, GesckickU der AnmeykMndt^ 1827, iv. 

PP- 547. 550. 

Schmieder, GesckickU der AUkemUt 183a, p. 506. 

Biograpkiskt Lexicon Sfver Namnkumuige Sven- 
ska Man, Upsala, 1840, vi. pp. isy^ioy (and 
references). 

Hoefer, Histotre de la Ckimie, 1843, iL p. 305; 
1869, it p. 296. 

Kopp, GesckickU der Ckemie, 1844, ii pp» 19 
(life), 61, 100; 1845, iii. pp. 9. 4a, xa6; 1847, iv. 

pp. 157. 363- 
Kluyskens, Des Hommes ciUbres dam ks 

sciences et Us arts et des AfidaiUes qui cmuacrmi 

Uur Souvenir, i8to, ii. p. 33. 

Kopp. Die AUkemU, z886. L p. 193. 

DUttonnaire Encyclopidiqtte des Sciences Midi' 
cales, 4ime S^e, i^, xiv. p. 181. 

HOCHZEIT. 

See ROSENCREUTZ (christian), Chymische Hochzcit 

HOFFMANN (Friedrich). 
Friderici Hofmanni Frid. Fil. Med. Doct. Mind. Exercitatio Medico-Chymica 
de Cinnabari Antimonii, ejusque eximiis Viribus, usuque in morbis secretiori, 
quo ipso via ex ilia veram panaceam conficiendi aperitur. Adjecta sunt 
Experimenta ac Ratiocinia varia curiosa. Lugduni Batavorum, Apud 
Petrum Vander Aa, Bibliopolam, 1685. 

12*. Pp. [i-io, engraved title included] 11-157 [a, i blank]. [4, adv.]. 

Friderici Hoffmanni, Professoris & Medici Elect. Brandenb. E>emonstratiooes 
Physicae Curiosse, Experimentis et Observationibus Mechanids ac Chynuds 
lUustratae. Halae Magdeburgicae, Apud Christoph. Andream 2^t]enim, 
Acad. Typog. Anno MDCC 

4r Pp. 56. 

Friderici HofTmanni Dissertationum Physico-Chymicarum denuo recusanim 
Trias quarum Prima de Generatione Salium Secunda de Analysi Chymico- 
Medica Reguli Antimonii Medicinalis Tertia de Mercurio et Medicamentis 
Mercurialibus Selecds agit Halas Magdeburgicas Sumptibus loh. ChristiO* 
phori Krebsii Im Durchgang des Neuen Rathhauses M DCC XXIX. 

4*. Pp.96. 

HOFFMANN 

409 

HOFFMANN (Frikdricu). Continued. 
Friderici Hoffmanni Consiliarii, Medici et Professoris Regii, Societatis Regime 
Britannicse Sodalis, Observationum Physico-Chymicarum Selectiorum Libri 
III. In quibus multa curiosa Experimenta, et lectissima^ virtutis Medi- 
camenta exhibentur, ad solidaniy & rationalem chymiam stabiliendani 
prsemissi. Venedis, M DCC XL. Apud Sebastianum Coleti. Superionim 
Pennissu, ao Privilegio. 

4*. Pp. [i6] 192— misprinted 292. 

Vom Wasser als Universalmedizin. 

See OERTEL, Universal-Wasserdoktor. No date. 

Petri Poterii Opera Omnia . . . cum Annotationibus et Additamentis . . . 
Friderici Hoffmanni. 

See POTERIUS (PETRUsX Opcra Omnia, 1698. 

Hoffmann, one of the most distinguished phy. 
skaans of the I7th-i8th century, was tx>rn at Halle, 
19 Feb., 1660. His parents were able to give him 
an exoedlent education, and at the age of 13 he 
began the study of Latin. After his father's death 
in 1675 he began his course in Arts and graduated 
in 1^8. He then commenced the stud^ of medi- 
cine at Jena under Wolfgang Wedel. m 1680 he 
passed to Erfiirt and was taught chemistry by 
Casper Cramer, and received the degree of doctor 
5 Feb., i68x, on which occasion he wrote his thesis 
*De Cinnabari Antimonii.' On account of the 
skilful exposition and knowledge of chemistry it 
displa3red, the dissertation was highly commended, 
and in consequence a course of chemistry which he 
gave attracted a large audience. 

He next went to Minden, in Westphalia, where 
he practised medicine most successfully. After a 
couple of yean he proceeded to Holland, and 
passed over to England, stopping in London and 
Oxford. At Minden in 1685 he had been appointed 
ptgrsJdan to the fortress, but in addition Frederick 
wtUiam. Elector of Brandenburg, made him not 
only physician to the principality, but private phy- 
sician as well. In 1688 he was at Halberstadt, 
where he again distinguished himself, and wrote a 
disMrtation ' De insumcientia acidi et viscidi,' in 
which he controverted the views of Cornelius 
Bootekoe. 

When Frederick III., Elector of Brandenburg 

Manget, Bibliotheca Scriptorum Medicorum^ 
1731, I. ii. pp. 716-732, with a portrait (Contains 
reprints of reviews. ) 

StoUe^ AnUitung zur Historie des Medicinischen 
Gelakrkeit, 1731, p. 370 (Life) b^fassim, 

Jacob Leupolds Prodromus BUltoiheca metallicce^ 

173a. ». p. 72- 
Acta Pkysico-Medica Academia . . . Naiura 

Curiosomm, 1744, vii., Appendix, pp. 269-302. 

BQchner, Academia . . . Natutw Curiosorum 
HUtoria, 175^ p. 482, No. 225. 

Elo^, Dichonnairt kistorique de la Midecine, 

175s. "• P- 52 ; 1778, ii. p. 546. 

Georgius Matthiae, Conspectus Historic Medi- 
carum chronol^cus, 1761, p. 789. 

Portal, Histoire de t Anatomic et de la Chirurgie, 
vm, iv. pp. 181-184. 

Haller, Bibliotkeca Anatomica, 1774, i. pp. 733- 

"Hi 

aUer, Bihliotheca Ckirurpca, 1774, i. p. 531. 
Haller, BikHotkeca Medictnm ftactkm^ 1779, iii. 

and Hrst king of Prussia, founded the University 01 
Halle, alx>ut 1689, Hoffmann was appointed Pnm- 
arius professor of Medicine in 1693, and drew up 
the Statutes of the Faculty. 

Honours and distinctions began to come to him. 
He was elected a member of the Leopoldine 
Academia Natunc Curiosorum, member of the 
Berlin and St. Petersburg Academies, and Fellow 
of the Royal Society. He was in great request at 
various Courts for his advice and skill, and the 
king brought him to the Court in 1708 as his 
physician, but Hoffmann did not care for the posi- 
tion and in January, 17x2, returned to Halle. 

In 1734 when on a visit to his daughter and son- 
in-law in Berlin, he had to undertake the cure of 
the King who was suffering from the effects of his 
campaign on the Rhine, and in this he succeeded 
at the end of five months. He left in April, 1735. 

His wife died in 1737, and the year following he 
was seized by a violent fever from which, however, 
he recovered. His death took place on 12 Nov., 
1742. A fine portrait of him is prefixed to his 
edition of Poterius' works. 

His writings refer almost entirely to medicine, 
and were chiefly in the form of academic disserta- 
tions, of which he wrote a prodigious number. A 
few, however, refer to pharmacy and to mineral 
springs. His collected works fill in the Geneva 
edition, 1740-1760, 11 vols, folio; Naples, 1753, 25 
vols. 4° ; 1^3, 27 vols. 4° ; Venice, 1745, 17 vols. 4". 

I. 536-574 (sa3rs he was bom at Klausthal in the 

arr). 

Baumer, Bibliotheca Chcmica^ 1782, p. 32. 

Adelung, Fortsetzung und Ergdnzungen zu . . . 
Jikhers allgemeinen Gelehrten-Lexico^ 1787. ii. col. 
2056. (List of his dissertations and works.) 

Gmehn, Geschickte der C hemic, 1798, ii. p. 33, 
&c. , &c. 

Hutchinson, Biographia Medica, 1799, i. p. 448. 

Aikin, General Biography y 1804, v. p. 222. 

Fuchs, Repertorium der chemiscken Litteratur^ 
1806-08, pp. 194, 201.4, 219, 228, 239, 253, 255. 

Chalmers, The General Biographical Dictionary , 
1814, xviii. p. 37. 

Rees, The Cyclopcedia^ 1819, xviii. sub voce. 

Biographic M^dicalc, Paris, Panckoucke (1820- 
25). V. p. 239. 

Sprengel, Geschichte der Arzneykunde^ 1827, iv. 
pp. 403-405 ; 1828, v. pp. 254-281, b* passim. 

Dezeimeris, Dictionnaire kistorique de la Aiide- 
cine, 1836, III. i. p. 207. 

ff. 

4IO 

HOFFMANN 

HOFFMANN (Friedrich). CotUinued. 

Hoelier, Histoire de la Ckimit^ 1843, iL pp. 93a- 
a4X 245, aji ; 1869, ii. pp. 234.334, 337, 343. 

Kopp, Gtsckichte der ClumU, 1843, i. pp. 193. 
196, if passim, 

Morwits, Gtschichte der Medicin^ i849i ii< p* S31. 

Bayle ft ThiUayc. BiographU MidUaU, 1855. ii. 

p. 103. 

Pogxeodorfi^ Biograpkisck-literarisckts Hand- 
wdrt^uck^ 1863, i. ool. 1133. 

AUgtwuisu Deutukt BiograpkU^ x88o. vk. pp. 
584-88 (article by Hirsch). 

Haeser. Gtschichte der Afedicim^ 1881, iL p. 509. 
ftc. &c. 

Hirsch, Biographisches Lexihon der hervarra- 
gemden Aersie alter Zeiten und VHher^ 18861, iii. 
p. 338 particle by Pagd). 

tXcHonnaire Emcyehpidique des Sciemces Mddi- 
cales, 4iroe S^e, 1888, xiv. p. 187. 

HOFFMANN (Johann Moritz). 
Johannis Mauricii Hoffmanni, Serenissimi Marchionis Onoldo-Brandenburgici 
Consiliarii Aulici & Archiatri Primarii, Antehac Vniversitatis Altdorfinae 
Senioris & Facultatis Medicas Profess. Publici, Academiae Leopoldino-Carolino 
Cassarese Naturae Curiosorum Adjuncti, Heliodorus dicti. Acta LabonUorii 
Chemici Altdorfini, Chemiae fundamenta, operationes praecipuas & tentamina 
curiosa, ratione & experientia sufTuIta, complectentia. Norimbergae et 

Altdorfii, Apud Haeredes Job. Dan. Tauberi. Anno M DCC XIX« 

4^ Pp. [6J 388. Title red and black. Auctuariiim 54. Advertisements [a]. 
Index etc. 13. 

The Auctuarium has a separate title* page : 

Auctuarium Notas, Observationes, et Experimenta ad Actorum Sect. I. Dedara- 
tionem ulteriorem necessaria una cum Programroate invitatoria ad Inauguratioiiem 
Laboratorii Chemici Altdorfini praemisso et Monumento ad memonam posteritatis 
publice erecto ac Indice Rerum ac Verbonim exbibens. Norimbergae ft Altdorfii. 
Apud Haeredes Joh. Dan. Tauberi. Anno MDCCXIX. 

Johann Moritz Hoffmann, son of Moritz, was 
born at Altorf, 6 Oct., 1653 (i6c3, Bikchuer). He 
studied Latin and Greek at Fferspruck in Fran- 
conia, and medicine at Altorf and Frankfurt a. d. O. 
He then departed to Padua, spent two years in 
Italy, and returned home in 1674. He resumed 
his studies at Altorf and graduated M.D. in 167^ 
In 1677 be was appoint^ extraordinary, and in 
1681 ordinary professor of Anatomy, and of Chem- 
istry in 1683. In the laboratory which was erected 
br the urgent pressure of his father he gave courses. 
He also s^ve lectures on botany. In 1709 he 
resigned the Chair of Anatomy and held that of 
practice of Medicine until his departiupe to the 
Court of Anspach. 

In 1684, imder the name of Heliodorus II. he 
entered the Leopoldine Academy, and on the death 
of Lochner in 1731 became Director, an office 
which carried with it a niunber of titles. 

Jo. Jac. Baier, Biographim professorum hiedicinee, 
qui in Academia AUorfina unquam vixerunl, 1738. 
p. 129. 

Virorum Clarissimorum ad Schelhammerum 
epistola selectiores, Epist ix. p. 130. 

Manget. Bibliotheca Scrtptorum Afedicorum, 
i73ii I. ii. pp. 73a-743. (Reviews of his works and 
extracts from them.) 

Stolle, AnleitMHg zur Historie der pudicinischen 
Gelahrheit, 1731, pp. 304, 369, 796-7- 

Jacob Leupolds Prodromus BibliotheoB melalliae, 

1732, p. 73- 
Kestner, Mediciniuhes Gelehrten-Lexicon^ 1740, 

p. 409. 

Jocher, Allgemeines Gelehrten- Lexicon^ 1750, ii. 
. 1659. 

Btichner, Academia . . . Natura Curiosorum 
Hisioria, 175^ p. 473, No. i3i. 
Eloy, DtcHonnaire hisiorique de la Midecine^ 

^7SSf^ »>. p. 59 ; ^n^y ". p- 544. 

His skill as a physician made him much sought 
after by distinguished people and especially the 
princes of the house of Anspach, In two joiirnm 
to Italy in 1695 and 1701 he a'^'VMnpan'iHl the 
representative of the bouse, and he was invited to 
reside at the Court But his attachmeDt to the 
University of Altorf, was so great that it was not 
till 1713 that he accepted the invitation and re- 
moved to Anspach. He died there 31 Oct., 17*7, 
aged 74. 

His writings are chiefly anatomical and physio- 
logical, but besides the above he wrote: Labora- 
torium novum chemicum apertum niedicinB 
cultoribus, Altorf^ 1683. and chemical papers in 
the Acta of the Leopoldine Academy for 1688, 
1691, 1694, 1697-98. He was the first ptofesaor of 
chemistry at ^torf. 

Georgius Matthias, Conspectus Historim Medi- 
corum chronologicus, 1761, p. 777. 

Portal, Histoire de I 'Anatomie etdela Cktrmrgie^ 
1770, iv. p. 75, b' passim, 

Haller, Bibliotheca Botamica, 1771, i. pw 635. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Chtrurgica, 1774, ^ P- 45X* 

Haller, Bibliotheca Anatomica, 1774, *• PP- ^37* 
639* (* Professor AltdorfinuSi vir eniditus, neque 
ab anatome alienus '). 

Haller, Bibliotheca AfedicituB practicm, 17791 
iii. p. 373. 

Baumer, Bibliotheca chemica, 1783, p. 31. 

Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemie^ i79oi it* pp< I33f 
235. 245, 257. 

Hutchinson, Biographia Medica, 1799, u pi 447. 

Reuss, Repertonum Commentatiommm, 1803, iii. 
{C hernia et Res Metallica)^ pp. 44, 48, 68, 134. 

Fuchs. Repertorium der chemischin LUieraiMr^ 

1806-08, pp. 188, 199, 305, 3X1. 

411 

HOFFMANN (Johahn Moutz). 

1814, xrin. PL 36. 

Rees, The CjcUfmdim, i8i9» 

Bicgrapku MiikaU, Pvn, 
as). V. p. a6i. 

Sprengd, GtwkirkU dgr Artmtjkmmdd, ilot 
p.4«6. 

HOGHELANDE (Thiobald vox). 

Merces Alchioiistanuii, in smgnhri hi pfamii mimcvo. Das isi: Aitiidie 
Schulfiihrung vnd Vntenrdsung. wie cm filhxs doctrinae. der sicfa je nicfat 
wil wamen lassen, mit geringen, in efiectn, Experimcten Tiid Idchtem 
Fewer, sein Hauls vnd HoflT, Tnd alles was cr hat, Terdisdlliren, so wol 
auch mit prachtigem Gnfichenfahren Tnnd hin ¥7x1 wider rdten, sdne 
Fills caute versparen konne, dais er im Alter desto besser moge zu Fafs 
lauffen. AUes in pnud, anff gcrathwol ezpcrimentirt, yrxi nach hinweg- 
raumung defs serai logitiiiiy gar genaw calculirt, auch mit \feiancholischem 
Ohrenkratzen getiewlicfa summiit, vnd durch einen mit Schaden eifihmen 
Laboranten, (qui Ihistri melhis eras fore semper ail, seramq; adeb nunc 
in fundo qmerit pantmooiam,) Cabalistiscfa auffgezeichnet, an jetzo aber 
gantz verstandlich an Tag geben darch Tbeobaldum von Hohenland, 
Mittelboigensem. Getrnckt zu Franckfurt am Mayn be>' Wolfi^gang 

Richtem, in Verlegong Egenolff Emmels, Im Jahr M.DC.X. 

4*. Pp. [33] 179 [i bfank^ \*igiiette with tbe motto : On L.abora et Fniere. 

Theobald van Hoghdande aus Mittelburg, Abhandlung von denen Hinder- 
nissen bey der Akhimie. Darin gezeiget wird, was ein Liebhaber dieser 
Kunst zu wissen, und zu meiden hat, wenn er zur Vollkommenheit gelangen 
will. Aus dem Lateinischen in das Deutsche iibersetzet Gotha, Verlegts 
Christian Mevius, 1749. 

8*. PpL[3o]i76. Title red and bbck. 

De Akbemiae difficultatibus Liber. 

See THEATRX7M CHKMICUM, l6$9, L p. I09L 

See MANGST 0- J-)» BiUiotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, i. p. 556. 

HOHELANDE (Ewald vom). 

Kurtzer bericht vnd klaier beweils, das die Alchimey, oder, wie sie sonsten 
gemeinlich genant, die Goldmacherkunst, ein sonderbar geschenck Gottes, 
vnd derw^en mehr als gewils vnd warhafitig. Von dem edlen vnd 
hocher&hmen Ewald von Hohelande beschrieben. In deutsch vorsetzt 
durdi I. T. P. D., 1604. Leipzig, In Verlegung Jacob Apels. 

8*. Pp. 88. Vignette of Jacob wrestliug with tbe mngel. 

The translator of the above is Joachim Tancke. transmutation. lu dealing with this simple matter 

It was written by Ewald von Hohelande, from Schmieder has made confusion. He places (p. 361) 

Midddborg, to his brother Johann von Hohelande the work under Theobald von Hoghelande but he 

to ooovinoe him of the truth of Akhemical Art, states (p. 340) that it yizs dedicated by him to his 

which he does by describing certain histories of brother Ewald, which is doubly wrong. 

See voGEL (ewald). 

Some writers identt^ Theobald and Ewald von assumption that they are the same Theobald is 

Hohelande or Hoghdande from Midddburg in regarded as a writer who having first written 

Sedand, while others keep them distinct Ewald against alchemy afterwarxls brought forward cvi- 

if alw ideiMifitd wMi fiwidd Vofd. On the dence in support of it. 

4I» 

aOBELANDE—HOLLAmUS 

HOHELAXDE (Ewau> tot). 

'594. T. pp. 

\oo oen Iiiweipcn dor 
at Fraakfsrt a. M. . i6oc.» 4* : aad cbe 

pro defessuoe Ajcizrosuz oactn bcstnzm 
ifeeXM, fsi Loilu raa^ et 
CoioBiae. 16C34, 8*. Gcrmaa 

Vaa der Linda, ZV Scriftis 
«6g^, pi 44^ 

Bord. Btktutkeca. CkimucA^ 1654, pt 119. 

Korfaof. D€ UeUiUmm trtuumwfMtiwme . . 
efitUia, \trjy, p. 141. 

KiMJfc BMtdJkeca vetmj ft mc«, 167C, pL 408. 

MercuB, LimdeMims rrmac^/mj, 1666, Dl 993, 

Borricfaias, Ccmxpeetus Scripigrmm Ck 
i«97. p. 3a, No. a*x. 

Ktrai Happmck . . . oJkr Ttmttcka F^emer der 
Scluide-KuMsi, 1702. p. 133 (put in the black list 
\ntmam. be wrote wnbont doing anj good). 

Mangel, BMidJUca Scriptomm Medicarwm^ 

mt, I. ii. p. 745- 

Lengiet Dnfresoof , Hisiaire de la PkiUwpku 
HtrwUtiqtu^ 174^, L p. 474 ; iii. p. 188. 

Idcber, AU^wtettus Gtlekrien-Ltxiom^ ^7§^ ^^ 

' 1666 (dbtioguisbes between Evald and Theo- 
bdJd). 

Fictnld, ProHer-Siam^ i753« "ni. L p. 94. 

I77«. a. PL 

d€ U Midaam, 
Chewacm^ iTte^p. 91. 

pp. SA 570. S**. 5«4. SM- 

\ 1767, n. p. 68w 
Gfoeim. Geackdckie der CkemeU^ ^797^ ^ ^ 3^9 
(cans the aatbor Ewald or Tbeobald). 

J 

1806-08. p. 95 
Schmieder. Gettkickte der AUkemde, 1858, pp. 

339* 3*^ 

Hoeier, Hisimrt de U Ckiweie^ 1843. ii. p. 154: 

1869. ii. PL U9. 

\ an der Aa, BUmftiaA WMrdatk^dt der 
\ederimmdem, 1867. \ III ii. p. 966L 

Ladnkgac^Bi^/iMAifme Omvarvf, Sciences SecrHu^ 

1870. Nos. sns^ 

HOLLANDUS (Isaac). 

Isaaci Holland! sonst auch Flandri genannt Curieuse und rare Chymiscbe 
Operationes, worinnen nicht allein einige bifshero unbekannte G^ieiinnisse 
die rechte Universal-Tinctur zu erlangen, angezeigt; besondem das Funda- 
ment aller solcher Operadonen, so in Ausziehung des Saltz und Oels aus 
denen Mineris bestehet, auf eine gar deutliche Weise gezeiget wird. Allen 
Liebhabem der Chymie zu ihrer theils besondem Wamung weitlaofftige 
und betriigliche Wege zu meiden, theils zu einer griindlichen Manuduction 
diese treffliche Erkanntnifs rechtschaffen zu erlemen, aus einem alten 
Autographo MSCto des Autoris heraus g^eben von R. H. C. Ldpag 

und Gardeleben, In Verlegung Ernst Heinrich Campen, privil^rten Budi- 
handler der alten Marck, 17 14. 

8^. Pp. [16] 400. Title red and black. Curious little woodcuts of apparatus in 
the text. 

Fragmentum de opere Philosophorura. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1659, ii. p. 1 26. 

De Salibus et Oleis Metallonim. 

See STAHL (georg ernst), Fundamenta Chymiae, 1746, i. p. 237. 

HOLLANDUS (Johann Isaac). 

Magistri loannis Isaaci Hollandi, Viri in Philosophia, potissimiim verb in 
Chymia celeberrimi, Opera Mineralia, siue de Lapide Philosophico, omnia, 
duobus libris comprehensa. Nunquam antehac edita, ac nunc primiiin 

HOLLANDUS 

413 

HOLLANDUS (Johann Isaac). Continued. 

ex optimis manu-scriptis Teutonicis exemplaribus fidelissimb in Latinum 
sermonem translatay k P. M. G. Middelburgi, Excudebat Richardus 

Schilders, Ordinum Zelandise Typographus. 1600. 

8°. Pp. [16] 431 [i blank]. Curious little woodcuts in the text. 

Defs weit und breit benihrnten Johannis Isaci (sic) Holland! Geheimer und bifs 
dato verborgen gehaltener trefflicher Tractat, von ihm genannt: Die Hand 
der Philosophen, mit ihren verborgenen Zeichen. Wie auch desselben Opus 
Satumi mit Annotationibus. Item : Opera Vegatabilia (sic) so viel davon 
biis dato hat konnen erforschet werden. Mit grosser Miih und Fleifs 
auds erforscheten Niederlandischen Manuscriptis verhochdeutschet, nebenst 
fleissigster Nachreissung aller darin enthaltenen Figuren. Von einem geiibten 
Liebhaber der Hermetischen Philosophy. Dabey mit angehenckt worden 
ein zwar kleiner, aber iiberaufs herrlicher Tractat so von Michaelis Sendivogii 
Diener herkomt, un ohn Zweiffel vom Hn. Sendivogio selber gestellet worden, 
darin der Gnind der Metallischen melioration mit Fingern gleichsam gezeiget 
wird. Franckfurt, In Verlegung Thomse Matthiae Gotzens. M DCLXIVI. 

8®. Pp. 384 (317-8 omitted). 12 engravings. 16 woodcuts. The date seems to 
be a misprint for MDCLXVII. 

The tract (pp. 317-381) by ' Sendivogius' servant ' has the following title-page : 

Ein (iberaufs kostlicher Philosopb. Tractat von denn Irrg&ngen der Alcbymisten 
und AufsfUhnuig von denselben. Darin den recbtschaffenen Filiis Doctrinse die Irrsalen 
der gemeinen Alcbjrmisten und Procefs-Drescher flir Augen gestellet, und sie gleichsam 
bey der Hand daraufs geleitet, und auffs treulichste in der Gebtlhrung der Natur, in 
alien drey Reichen, Als dem Animalischen. V^etabilischen und Mineralischen unter- 
richtet werden, nebenst Vormahlung mit lebendigen Farben, wie die Philosophische 
Tinctur und auch der Metallen Particular- Verbessenmg zu erlernen und anzustellen 
sey; Und kombt dieser gtUdene Tractat von Herrn Michaelis Sendivogii Diener, 
dessen Author ohn Zweififel Herr Sendivogius selber ist. Publiciret durch obgemeldten 
Liebhaber. Anno M.DC.LXVII. 

The ' Philoiophical Hand,* engraving and name, 
was adopted by a certain Justus Siroplicius Hortu- 
lanns for a tract on the philosopher's stone, which 
see. The difference is toat while Hollandus uses 
certain pictorial symbols of his own in the engrav- 
iog, he gives the ordinary chemical svmbols for the 
Sfllts intended in the text, and it is these which are 
used by Hortulanus. 

According to Roth-Scholt£ the Opus VegetaHU 
appeared in 16^ It was printed again in 1695. 
fftja^ 144, e^ted by 'John Sendivogii genannt 
J. F; H. S.,' that is J. F. Hautnorthon, or Johann 
Harprecht. That also may be the interpretation 

of the title ' Sendivogii Diener,' in the foregoing 
tract, although Hautnorthon usually calls himseu 
* Filius ' or ' Sohn Sendivogii.* 

There is an English tran^tion entitled : Certaint 
Secrets of Isacke Hollandus concerning the ViMtall 
and Animal I worke^ which was printed with Para* 
celsus' A hundred and foureteene Experiments 
and Cures, . . . London, 1596, pp. 32-54 ; and also 
in Three exact Pieces of Leonard Phioravant^ . . . 
London, 1652. 

The tract by ' Sendivogius' servant ' is not to be 
confused with that by von Hoghelande bearing the 
same name. 

Sammlung unterschiedlicher bewahrter Chymischer Schriften, namentlich : 
Joh. Ifaaci HoUandi Hand der Philofophen, Opus Satumi, Opera Vegetabilia, 
Opus Minerale, Cabala, de Lapide Philofophico, Nebst einem Tractat von 
den Irrgangen derer Alchymiften, Auctoris incerti, neue und verbesserte 
Auflage, mit gehorigem Fleise iibersehen, und mit einem Verzeichniis derer 
in jeglichem Tractat befindlichen wichtigsten Materien vermehret wie auch 
mit nothigen Kupffem gezieret. Wien In Verlag bey Joh. Paul Kraufs, 
Buchhandler, 1746. 

8*. Pp. [3a] 762. 129-138 dropped, and 224-5 doubled. Title red and black. 
WoodciiU m the text. 16 plates, separate. 

414 

HOLLANDUS 

HOLLANDUS (Johann Isaac). Omiimmed. 

This is a reprint of the editioo of 1667 and ooncahis tht tncto as foOovs : 

Die Hand der Philosophen, with the plales» pp. Opera Vefpfahflia, pp. 173-3^ 

Ein vortrefflicber phtlosophucber IVadat 

Un elixir zu machen von Urin, pp. 95-1 ix 
Die andere Art der Alchymie. oder das grosse 

Elixir, pp. 113-119. 

Die dritte Art der Alchymie, Ixir genannt, pp. 

ii^iaa 
OpnsSatumi, pp. iai*i7a. 

den Irrgingen derer Akfajuusten, pp. 335-4001 
Opus Minerale, pp. 401-560. 
Anhang eines Fragmenti von der Cabala, ppu 

Tractatns de Lapkle Philosophico, oder 
.Stein der Weisen. pp. 581-768. 

Fragroentum ex Theorijs. 

See TRACTATUS duo Chemici, 1647, p. 33. 

See GINiCCEUM CHIMICUM, 1679, p. 5 1 3. 

This was translated into tlnglish with the title : 
A Frarmtnt out of the Theorickts cf Is, Iscaacut 
tsic) Hollandus, and published with Paracelsus* A 
Mumirtd and foureteeru Experiments and Cures, 

London. 1596. p. a8, and again along with TTtrte 
exact Pieces of Leomard Pkiaravant . . . London, 
1652. 

Opera Mineralia, sive de Lapide Philosophico omnia. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, l6$9, iii. p. 304. 

Opus Satumi. 

See BASILiUS VALENTINUS, Triumphwagen Antimonii, 1624, p. 465. 

This tract is contained in the reprint of this edition of Basilius Valentinus, 
Ndmbeig, 1676, p. 362. 

The English translation of the ' Opus Satumi' Basilius Valentinus' Of Natural and Supemaiural 
was nuide by Daniel Cable and printed along with Things, London, 1671. small 8*. p, xSa. 

Tractatus de Urina. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1661, vi. p. 566. 

Little seems to be known about the persons 
called Hollandus. By most authorities Isaac is 
regarded as the father and John Isaac as the son, 
but Manget inverts this and calls John Isaac the 
father and Isaac the son. Boerhaave says they 
were natives of Stolk, and Van der Aa of Stolk- 
wijk in Krimpenaarwaard. Schmieder gives reasons 
for believing that they lived early in the fifteenth 
century, and Van der Aa sa3rs tliat the younger 
Hollandus lived about 1440; others (such as 
Sweertius, Athena Belgicet, Antw. 1628) put them 
at the end of the sixteenth century, or even, as 
Ber^mann does, at the beginning of the seventeenth. 
Nen, when about to describe a paste to imitate 
gems, says he took it when he was m Flanders from 
Isaac Hollandus. Now though Neri was there in 
all likelihood towards the end of the sixteenth or in 
the early years of the seventeenth century, his 
words Kardly imply that Hollandus was alive at 
that lime, and that Neri got the process from him 
direct. But there is no impossibility in it. 

There is also such a want of unanimity in assign- 
ing the writings to their respective authors, that 
one is almost disposed to question whether instead 
of two persons there may not have been one only. 

Antonio Neri, L'Arte I'etraria^ Firenze, 1612, 
lib. V. cap. xci. p. 79. 

Maier, Sym^oia Aurea Mensa, 1617, p. 263. 

Van der Linden, De Scriptis Medicis libri duo^ 
1637, p. 283. 

Borel, Bibliotheca Chimica, 1654, p. 126. 

Mercklin, Lindenius renovatus^ 1686, p. 621. 

Borrichius, Conspectus Scriptorum Chemicorum, 
1697, p. 29. 

Keren Happuch, . . . Teutsches Fegfeuer der 
Scheide-Kunst, 1702, p. 66. 

This seems to be the refult arrived at by Ladngoe 
who enters all the writings nnder John Isaac, and 
takes no notice of IsaAc 

Borel and Gmelin, though both reoogniznig 
father and son, make no attempt to sort the titles, 
but put them imder the authors conjointly. Leng- 
let Dufresnoy, however, followed by Schmieder, 
has made the attempt; but comparison of their 
allotment with the above titles, taken from the 
books themsel\-es. will show either that they bate 
confused the persons, or that in the copies tliejr 
consulted, the names of the authors were different 
from what they are in the above. 

The analogy of the writings to those of BasifiiB 
Valentinus has been pointed oaX by some writers, 
and Van der Aa, who tikes the fifteenth ceutuiy as 
their time, goes the length of saying that not onty 
Paracelsus has whole passages which might have 
■been transcribed from Hollandus, but even Boyle 
had got credit for what Hollandus had known 
previously. 

The writings which pass under their authofship 
have been commended bv Boerhaave. and Isaac is 
said to have been skilnil in enamelling and in 
imitating precious stones. 

Roth-Scholtz, Bibliotheca Chemica^ 1737. p> 204 
(Opus Vegelabile). 
Manget, Bibliotheca Scriptorum wudicorum, 

173 1, 1. ii. p. 74c 

Boerhaave, Elenunta Chemiett 1733, i. pw 18. 
Jacob Leupolds Prodromus Bibliothecee metalHcet^ 

1732. p. 74. 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoirt de la Phihsophu 

Hermitique^ J742, i. pp. 231, 469 ; iii. p. 191. 

Ibcher, Allgemeines GtJehrlett-Lexicon^ ^7S^» "• 
col. 1674, and coL 199a, under Imuk { /^kamsus). 

HOLLANDUS^HORLACHER 

41 S 

HOLLANDUS (Johann Isaac). Continmti. 

Boerbaave. Meikodus Stmdii MetKei, 1751, i. 
p. X42. 

Flctuld, Probier-Stein^ 1753. Th. i. pi 95 ; Th. 
u- P^ 77* (He considers the present work is not by 
the " dear good innocent Hollandns.") 

Georgios Matthice, Cofupectus Hisi&ri4t Xfedi- 
corum chronologUus^ 1761, p. X17. 

Banner, Bidliothtca CA^mua, 1780, |x 85. 

Torbem Bergmann, ffisioria CAemut wtedimm 
sat iftxMTum iuvum, a medio secuH vii, admedittm 
ucmU xvii.j Upsaliae, 178a, p. 19, or Wie^kb's 
translation io his GtxkickU . . . da^ CMamu tn dtr 
dUexUn und mittlem Zeii, Berlin and Stettin. 1792, 

P- 174. 
Brytrag tur GesckickU der hSkem CkemU, 1785. 

pp. 490, 584, 623. 
Gmelin, GesckickU der Ckemie, 1797, i. pp. 126- 

1^9. 557- 

P^icfas, Repertmrimm der ckewdxken Utieratmr, 
1806-06, pp. lo-aa 

Thomson. Histery «f Cktmisirj, 183P, i. pu 43. 

Scfamieder, Gesckickie der AUkewue^ 183a, pp. 
aio. 214. 

Hoeier. Histoire de la Ckimie, 1843. ii. p. 452 ; 
1866. L p. 477. 

Kopp. Gesckickie der Ckemie, 1843, i. p. 72, A 
passim. 

Flgnier. L'Alckimie et les AUkimu'sies, 1856, 

pp. 15. >7t 83. 

Van der Aa. Bietrapkisck Woordembceck der 
Sederiamden, 1867, \\\\. il p. 986 (and references). 

Ladrague, Bihliotkique Ouvarof^ Sciences Secrites^ 
1870, Nos. 815-823. 

Kopp, Die Alckemie, 1886. i. p. 97 ; ii. pp. 173. 

347. 3SO. 365. 

HOLLRIEDEN (Johann Heinrich Cocheim von). 

See COCHEIM OOHANN HEINRICH) von Hollrieden. 

Though this anthor*s book is referred to at some 
length hf Semkr and after him by Morr, nothing 
seems to be recorded, about him personallj. Sem- 

ler writes his name Cocheim, Mnrr as above^ Kloia 
Kochheim von Hellrieden, but in the book itself it 
is Cocheim. 

Kloss, Bibliegrapkie der Frtimtamrerti, 1844, 
No. 9616. 

Semler, Unparieiiuke Seumlumgen tur Historic 
der Rosenkreuur^ 1787, ii. p. 1591 

Murr, \Jber den wakren Ursprmng der Rosen- 
kreuter und des Frtymaurerordens, 1803, p. 63. 

HONORTHON (Johann Friedrich). 
See harprecht Oohann). 

HOPPODAMUS (Johannes). 

See ARNALDUS de Villa Nova, 1748. 

Hoppodamus is said to be a pseudonym of Johann Lange. See also hippodam us. 

Kopp, Die Alckemie^ 1886, it p. 335. 

HORING (Michael). 

See DORN (gerhardX Theophrastische Practica, 161 8. 

Addo&g presomet he bdonged to Carinthia, for he wrote : Beschreibung des Landes Kkmthen, 
Leipdg. 1608. 8*. 

Addong, FortsetMung und ErgSnxungen zu . , . Jdckers allgemeinen Gelekrten-Lexico, 1787, ii. 
coL 3141. 

HORLACHER (Conrad). 

Bibliotheca Chemico-Curiosa, D. Mangeti enucleata ac illustrata. Das ist: 
Kern und Stem, der vomehmsten Chymisch-Philosophischen Schrifften, die 
in D. Mangeti Bibliotheca Chemico-Curiosa befindlich seynd. Welche mit 
sonderbaren Anmerckungen allerseits erlautert, daraus auch die vornehmste 
Chymische Denck-Spniche und bewahrteste Experimenta excerpiret oder 
kiirtzlichy jedoch aber mit sonderbarem nutzbringenden Fleifs zusammen- 
getragcn, auch also in drey Classes abgetheilet und heraus gegeben durch 
Conrad. Horlachem, J. U. ac Med. D. & Cand. SS. Theol. Franckfurt, 
Zufinden bey Wolfiang Michahelles und Johann Adolph. 1707. 

8*. Pp. [96]4M [14]. MS. BOlit in dphw. 

4i6 

HORLACHER-^HORN 

HORLACHER (Conrad). Continued. 

Horlacber published books and papers, but 
nothing is said about his life except that he was a 
physician and chemist at Ulm at the end of the 
seventeenth century. He edited Fabre's Heli- 
scheinende Sonne, NUrnberg. 1705, 8**, pp. [66] 
304 [30, 3], frontispiece and six plates, the present 

Die Rdelgebomt Jungfer Alckymia^ 1730, p. 252 
(cf. 139). 

Tocher, Allgenutnes Gtlehrten-Lexicon^ 1750, ii. 
col. 1706. 

Georgius Mattbiae, Conspectus Historic Medi- 
corum chronolop^cus^ 1761, p. 880. 

Haller, Bibhotheca Anatomica^ 1774, i. p. 748. 

coDdensation of Manget*s Bikliotkeca — the use of 
which it is hard to see— ^Tote Metkodus Urimo-^ 
scopite perfacilis ei perspUua, Ulm, 1691, ta*, and 
against venesection and purgation, and 00 nmons 
other medical topics. Haller styles hini * Hefanonti* 
anus Thraso,' wnich is not compliroentaiy. 

Haller, Bibliotkeca Chirurgica, i77jn t p> 507. 
Beytrag tur GeschUkU der hdherm Ckewde^ 176^ 

P- 559- 
Haller, Biblioiheca Medicine practicet^ 1788, hr. 

Gmelin, GeschichU der Ckemie, 1797, i. pi 
269 ; 1798, ii. pp. 300-302. 48a 

HORN (Caspar). 

See GEBER, 1668. 

See BERNHARD TREVISANUS, 1 746-7. 

Caspar Horn was born at Freyberg in Misnia in 
1 1583. At an early age he took a taste for medi- 
cme, went to Wittenberg and studied under 
Sennertus for six years. Then he went to Basel 
and took the degree of M. D. in 1616. He returned 
to Freyberg, spent a short time in Dresden, and in 
1623 settled at Plauen in Thuringia as a physician 
and practised there with such acceptance that, when 
he left in 1633 for Freyberg, it was with great 

K5nig, Bibliotkeca Vetus et Nova, 1678, p. 412. 

MercKlin, Lindenius renovatus, 1686, p. 159. 

Witte, Diarium Biographicum, 1688, sig. Fff 2, 
recto, Ann. 1653. 

Manget, Bibliotkeca Scriptontm Medicorum^ 
mi, I. ii. p. 753. 

Restner, Medicinisches Gelehrten-Lexicon, 1740, 
p. 414. 

Jbcher, Allgemeines Gelehrten-Lexicon, 1750, ii. 
1707. 
Fictuld, Probier-Stein, 1753, Th. ii. p. 78. 

regret on the part of the people. He oontimied in 
practice at Freyberg for twenty years, and his death 
in 1653, at the age of 70, was much lamented. 

He does not seem to have done any literarj vofk 
except this edition of Geber, and even it be aid ooc 
himself publish. 

K5nig, however, speaks ot a Caspar Horn, 
who, An. 1629, " librura de elephante evulgavit," 
but they seem to be diflferent 

Georgius Nfatthiae, Conspectus Historic httdi' 
corum chronologicuSf I76i> p. 578. 

Haller, Bibliotkeca Anatomica^ ^774* i* PP* 55^' 
370. 

Haller, Bibliotkeca Medicinte fractiat, 1777, 
ii. pp. 458, 548, 606. (It is doubthil if the works 
quoted are by the above author.) 

Eloy. Dictionnaire kistoriqtte de la Midecine, 
1778, ii. p. 561. 

Biographu MHicale, Paris, Panckoucke (itav 
25), V. p. 289. 

HORN (Christopher). 

De auro medico philosophorum Dialogus scholasticus. 
See theatrum chemicum, 1660, v. p. 869. 

The above tract appeared originally at Frankfurt, 
1615, 8*. He wrote adso : * Hortulus medicus Hip- 
pocraticus, spagyricus, Helmontianus,' Cassel, 
1610. 4°, but Haller gives the date 1601, and calls 

Kbnig. Bibliotkeca Vetus et Nova, 1678, p. 412. 
Haller, Bibliotkeca Medicince practicce^ ^777^ ii- 

pp. 4131 587- 
Beytrag tur Gesckickte der kokem Ckemte, 1785, 

p. 599. 

the author Christianus. To Christoph he assigtf 
a tract ' De inflammatione hepatis,' Altdorf, i^ 

4^ 

Adelung. Fortsettung . . . mu . * , Jdckers . . 

Gelekrten-Lexico, 1787, ii. col. 2142. 
Gmelin. Gesckickte der Chemie, 1797. i. p. 5*^ 
Biographic AUdicale, Paris, Panckoucke (iSao* 

25). V. P- 289. 

HORN (Georg). 

Medulla Alchimiae in aphorismos contracta ex Gebro desumpta. 
See geber, 1668. 

See GINiECEUM CHIMICUM, 1679, p. I79. 

George Horn was bom in 1620 at Greussen 
(Schwarzburg-Sondershausen) ; Witte calls him 
' palatinus,' Reimmann says of 'Kemnat in der 
Ober-Pfaltz.' 

The Bohemian troubles drove him to Bayreuth, 
he stopped for a time at Nttrnberg, and went next 
to Holland. At the Hague he became tutor to an 

English youth and accompanied him to England, 
and during his residence declared himself in nvour 
of Protestantism. He returned to Holland to 
occupy the chair of history, politics, and geography 
at Harderwick, and thence removed to Leyden to 
be professor of history, about 1648. In 1650 be 
engaged in a controversy with Is, Vossius abool 

HORN-HORST 417 

HORN (Georg). ConHnued. 

the age of the world, wliicli Voarios tbougiit was Under the name of Honorins Rerius he wrote a 

miderstated aeoording to the corrent chrooologies. work in Latin 00 the slate of vut Church in 

He wrote a ooosiderable nmiiber of books, and England, with an appendix containing the decrees 

in particiilar Area Mtsis, shte Hist^rU Mundi; a of the Synod of Glasgow against the bishops, 1647. 

canons little book. Area Norn swe HUtoria Im- 4*. 

feriorum et Regworum^ a comdito orbe ad nostra Horn was a man of wide reading and varied 

Umpara ; Historic fkUosopkics likri sefUm, 1655. knowledge, bat fell into inaccuracies by depending 

4*, works on the history of England. Scotland, too much on his memory ; he could. howe\*er. put 

and Ireland, on geocimphy, etc. So for as I am his statemenu and ideas very tersely and exactly. 

aware the above is his only lepuate writing on He is said to have lost 5000 florins through an 

al^iemy, but he has spoken of it at some length alchemist at the Hague. He died insane at the 

both in bis Area Mosis and Hisioria pkilosopkica. age of 50, in 1670 at Leyden. 

Kdnig, BiblUlluca Veins et Nena^ 1678, p. 41a. Stolle, AmUilung sur Historic der Gelakrheit, 

FVeber, Theairum xHrorum eruditione clararum^ 1727. PP- 555- 

x688, p. 1066. Manget, Biblioikeca Scriptorum Mtdicorum^ 

Witte. DiariuM Biegrapkieum, 1688, sig. £>ddd 17^1, I. il p. 753. 

4 verso^ Ann. 1670. Ibchcr, Allgemieines Getehrten-Lexieon^ 1750, ii. 

Rdmmann, Einteitung im die Historiam Liter- col. 1708. 

ariam derer TeutscMen, 1710, v. pp. 210, 562, 464, Mor6ri. Le Grand Dictionnaire kistorique et 

542, 728, 813 (^rrtf A/osis), critiane, 1759, VI. i. p. 80. 

Morhof, Pol/histor^ 17 '4i i* P> 916 ; il pp. 4, AUcin, General Biography^ 1804. v. p. 274. 

15a, etc Nouvelle BiagraptUe GiniraU, 1858, xxv. col 179. 

Acta Pkilatophormm, Halle, 1716, St. vi. pp. Ferguson, 'Notes on. .. Books of Secrets. 'Supp. 

1099-61 (review ol\m Hisioria Philosopkiea), III., Transactions of ike Arckaological Society of 

Glasgow, 1899, N.S., iii. p. 406. 

HORN (JoHANN Bernhard). 
Johann Bernhard Horns Chym. & Metall. Cult. S3mopsis Metallurgica oder 
kurtze, jedodi deutlicbe Anleitung zu der hochst niitz- und ergatzlichen 
edlen Probier-Kunst verfasset in xv. Tabellen. Daraufs ein Liebhaber 
der Kunst solche mit leicht- und geringer Miihe griindlich erlernen und 
begreiffen kan. Auf ersuchen des Autoris fleisigst durchsehen, und 
folglich auf gutbefinden nebst einer Anrede an den Leser, denen Freunden 
der Berg-Wercke, Ertzschmeltzens und Probirens zu Lieb, Dienst und 
Gefallen zum Druck befordert Durch D. David Kellnern, h. t. Practicum 
in der Kayserlichen freyen Reichs-Stadt Nordhausen, auch Fiirstl. Sachfs. 
und Graft. Stollbergischen Leib- und Hoff-Medicum. In Verlegung Johann 
Christoph Weidners Buchh. 1690. 

8*. Pp. 22. 15 Tables, of which No. i folds. Pp. 104 [2]. Title red and black. 

According to Leopold this book was published Ertze, wenn sie Gold und Silber halten, zu gute zu 

at Fhuiklurt. machen, Franckfurt, 1690, 8^ also edited by 

Horn wrote also: Wohlg^^rOndeter Anschlag Kellner. 
und Bedencken, wie die wude antimonialische 

Jacob Leupolds Prodromus Biblioikecee wuialliag^ J5cher, Ailgemeines Gelehrten- Lexicon, 1750, 
«73a. P» 74» "• col- »709' 

HORST (Gregorius). 

Gregor. HorstI D. Philos. & Med. Problematum Medicorum BtpavtvTiKiav 

Decades priores quinq;. In illustri VVitebergi cum consensu Superiorum, 

in gratiam Candidatorum Medicinae conscripts, & publico privatocj; examini 

subjectae. 

Arist lib. 2. Metaph. cap. I. 

Ov /iovov X^Lpiv ix€iv BlKaiov TOVTOis &v avTis Koivuvrjo'ai rats 8o^ai9, dkXA 

Kai rots cTi circiroXoiOT^v a7ro<^i/va/Lievois ; koI yap o^roi <rvfi/3ak\ovrai 

Tt. &c 

Wittebergae, Typis Cratonianis, per Joan. Gorman, Anno M.DC.VIII. 

4*. Pp. [81 Title in a woodcut border, cut in at the bottom. There are five 
dissatatkms each with teparate title-page, and signatures. 

2D 

418 

HORST 

HORST (Grsgorius). Continued, 

2TN 6S0 Decas Problematum Mediconim, ad pr|dpiianim fefariuin'oognitiooeni 
ft curationem in servient. Quam Praeside Gregorio Hontio. Philosophiae ft Med. D. 
In Inclyta Wittenbergensium Academia Public^ respondendo tuebitur Martinus 
Walthenis, MonsterbergA Silesius. In auditorio Medicorum ad diem q Februarij. 
Wittebergae, Typis Cratonianis, per Johan. Gorman. Anno NLDCVIII. 

4^ Sigs. A and B in fours, or pp. [16]. 

ZTN 6B0 Problematum Medicorum Decas, Graviiisimorum capitis aflfectuum 
cognitionem ft curationem illustrans. Quam . . . Public^ respondendo tuebitur M. 
Toachimus K5ppen Magdeburgensis Saxo. In auditorio Medicorum ad diem 96w 
Februarij. witteber^e, . . . 

4^. Sigs. A, B, C, in fours ; or pp. [24]. 

ZTN 6B0 Problematum Medicorum Decas, Qu^ facit ad aliquot sensuum exteri- 
orum affectiones cognoscendas ft curandas, Quam . . . Public^ respondendo propug- 
nabit, M. lohannes Joadiimus Anomoeus, Lincio Austrius. In auditorio Medicorum 
ad diem 4 Martij. Wittebergae, . . . 

4'. Sigs. A, B, C, in fours ; or pp. [24]. 

ZTN GEO Problematum Medicorum Decas, Continens controTersas qu^iones 
morborum quonindam oi|[anoruin vocis ft respirationis, Quam . . . defendet Respon- 
dens M. Donatus Freywaklus, Misnensis. Ad diem 5. Martij Wittebergae, . . . 

4**. Sigs. A, B, in fours, Ca ; or pp. [20]. 

2TN 6S0 Problematiun Medicorum Decas, Controversas aliquot quaestiooes ad 
cordis ft ventriculi affectiones cognoscendas ft curandas pertinentes determinans, Quam 
. . . tuebitur Respondens M. Wolfgangus Schallerus Freibergensis Misnicus. Ad 
diem 9. Martij. Wittebergae, . . . 

4^ Sigs. A, B, in fours, C 2 ; or pp. [20]. 

Kurtze Nohtwendige Bericht, Erstlich, von den Vrschlechten oder Kinds- 
Biattem, wie auch Masern, Roteln, Rotesucht oder Kindsflecken. Zum 
Andern von der Roten Ruhr, Zum Dritten von der in Anno 622. xu 
an&ng defs Jahrs, vnd folgend bin vnd wider miteinreissenden newen 
Hauptschwachheit. Zum Vierdten, wie man sich in einreissenden Pestzeiten 
zu verhalten habe, zu vnterschiedlichen Zeiten vor diesem dem gemeinen 
Mann zum besten in Truck verfertiget durch Gregor. Horstium, der Artzney 
D. Fiirstl. Hessischen Leibartzt, vnd defs H. Rom. Reichs Statt Vim 
bestalten Physicum primar. Giessen, bey Caspar Chemlin, Anno 1624. 

^' Pp. [8] 137 [12] [3 blank]. 

Gregorius Horst, nephew (but Haller says 
•filius ) of Jacob Horst, also a physician, was 
bom at Torgau, 5 Nov., in 1578. His earlv 
schooling was obtained at Torgau and at Hal- 
berstadt and Ilfeld. His course in arts and 
philosophy was taken in Helmstadt and Witten- 
berg, where he received the degree of Phil. 
Mag. in 1600, and then, as was the habit, he 
visited other universities and finally studied medi- 
cine and graduated M.D. at Basel, 28 March, 
1606. Shortly afterwards he was appointed to a 
chair of medicine at Wittenberg, but almost 
immediately removed to Saltzwedel as physician. 

Johann Daniel Dieterich, Oratio funehris qua 
Gregor io Horstio, Archiatro Uimensi farentavit. 
In Horstius' Opera^ Norib., 1660; Goudie, 1661; 
reprinted by Manget in 1731. 

Witte, Memoria Medicorum nostri seculi Claris- 
simorum renovata Decas prima, 1676, p. 67 
(Dieterich's Funeral Oration). 

In 1608 he was made professor of medidne tt 
Giessen and physician to the Landgrave of Hesse. 
He occupied this position till 1622, when be 
accepted an invitation to Ulm to be town physidao 
and president of the College. He died at Ulm. 
9 Aug., 1636, after a laborious carter as a 
practitioner and author. His works are for the 
most part medical, but there is a dissertatioo 
*De natura ihermanim,' Giessen, 1618, 4*, and a 
work : ' Decas phamiaceuticarum exercitationom,' 
4**; Giessen, 1611, B** ; Ulm, 1618. 4*»; 1628, 4]'. 
They are highly commended by Schelhammer in 
his notes to Conring's Introduction 

Kdnig, Bihlioiheca Fetus ei Nova^ 1678, p. 413^ 

Mercklin, Undenius renovatus, 1686, pp. 359- 
363. 

Freher. Theatrum virorum eruditiane clanrum^ 
1688, p. 136^. portrait, pL 62. 

Witte. Diarium Biographicum , 1688, sig. KK 
I recto^ 9 Aug. , 1636. 

HORST—HORTULANUS 

419 

[ORST (Gregorius). Continued. 

CoonDf. In wmiversam. ArUm Medicam . . . 

ffwdmetio^ 1697, Schelhammers AddUanunta^ p. 

I 

byle, DictUmaire kisionqme ei criHqme^ 1730^ 

X 79X. 

langety Biblioikeca Scriftorum Medicarum, 

I, 1. it pp. 753-763. (Contains a reprint of 

tericfa's funeral oration.) 

toUe, Anleitung xur HistorU der Mediciniicken 

akrkeit, 1731. pp. a66, 367. 750. 7^1. 

Lestner, Medicimisckes GtUkrUn'Lexiamt 1740^ 

j£er, AUgemeints Gelekrien'Lexicon, 1750, il. 
17x6. 
Iciy, Dictummaire kistoriqiu de la Midecine^ 

c iL p. 65 ; 1778, li. p. 563. 

lordn, Lt Grand DicHonnaire kistorique et cine, 1836, HI. u p. ajo. 

Bii 

Strieder. Grundlage Mueiner Hessiscken GtUktien 
und SckrifisUlUr GeschickU, 1786^ vi. p. 183. 

Ginelin, GtxhUkU der CkewM, 1797, i. p. 594. 

A. We]rerroann, NachrickUn von GeUkrten und 
KUnstUm aus Ulm, 1798, 1899, 8*. 

Hutchinson, Bioj^af^ua Mtdica^ i799i ^ P^ 455* 

Fuchs, Repertonnm der ckemiscken Liiteraiur^ 
1806^, pi 96. 

Chalmers, The General Biographical Dictionary^ 
1 814, xviiL p. 191. 

Reea^ Tke CjKiofmUa, 1819, xviii. snh voce, 

Bioffrafkie Miaicale, Paris. Panckoucke (1890- 
2sj, V. pi 99a 

ErKh ft Gruber, Allgewuine Encyklofddie^ ate 
Sect, 1834, xi. p. 68. 

Daeimeris, DicHonnaire kistoriqne de la Mide* 

»f«<; 1759. ^ P- 8i» 

f^fhiap^^ Conspectus Histories Medicorum ckronth 

cms, 1761, p. 516. 

ortal, Histoire de V Anatowtieet de la Ckimrgie, 

>, u. p, 355- 

[aller, Btbliotkeca Botanica, 1771, i. p. 409; 

B,u. p. 678. 

[aller. Btbliotkeca Anatomica, 1774, i. pp. 303, 

•3DX. 

[aUer, Bibli4>tkeca Chirurgica^ X774» i* PP- 249i 

Bayle & Thillaje, Bicgrapkie nUdicaU. 1855, i. 
^OMvelle Biograpkie Ginirale^ 1858, xxv. col. 

■^^ 

199. 

Poggendorff, Biograpkisch-literarisckes Hand- 
wMerhtck, 1863, L col 1145. 

Haeser, Gesckickte der Mtdicin, 1881, it p. 4x6 ; 
1883, iii. p. 42a. 

Billings, Index-Catalogue, 1885, vi. p. 369 ; 3nd 
Series, 1903, viL p. 305. 
rapkisck 

Hirsch, Biograpkisckes Lexikon der kervorro' 
iiller. Bibliotkeca Medicince practice, 1777. ii. genden Aerxte, 1886, iii. p. 383. 
358, 380. 434. 633 ; 1779, iii p. 418. Dictiannaire encyclopidique des Sciences Afidi- 

cales, 4inie S^e. x888, xiv. p. 435. 

)RTULANUS. 

^ommentaire sur la Table d'Emeraude d'Hermes. 

See RICHEBOURG (j. M. D.), Biblioth^ue des Philosophes Chimiques, 1740, i. 
p. 2. 

iortulani Philosophi ab hortis Maritirois Commentanolus in Tabulam Smarag- 
dinam Hermetis Trism^^isti vtpl xq/ula^. 
See ALCiwiA, 1541, p. 364. 

See ARS CHEMICA, 1 566, p. 33. 

Compendium Alchemise, oder Erklaning der Smaragdischen Tafel Hermetis 
Trism^sti. 

5^/ HERMETISCHER ROSENKRANTZ, l6$9, p. 5 1. 
See HERMETISCHER ROSENKRANTZ, 1682, p. 5 1. 

See HERMETISCHE (Der) Philosophus, 1709, p. 167. 

See ROTH-SCHOLTZ (friederich), Deutsches Theatnim Chemicum, 1730^ ii. 

p. 499. 
See HERMES. 

Drklarung iiber den Commentarium Hortulani. 
See ARNALDUS de Villanova. 

^ractica vera Alchymiae. 

See ORTHOLANUS. 

lie present edition of 1541 is of importance, for 
u tbe first both of the Tabula Smara^dina of 
mes and of the Commentariolus written by 
tolanus to elucidate it. 

The whole book appeared again in 154^ with a 
new title: Alchemise Gebn Arabis philosophi 
solertissimi, Libri, cum Reliquis, ut uersa pagella 
indicabit. loaft: Petreius NurembergeO. denuo 

420 

HORTULANUS 

HORTULANUS. ConHnued, 

nenifle excudi faciebat. Anno M.D.XLV.. 4*, pp. 
[16] 30a b]. It has an elaborate ornamental title- 
page. It was printed at Berne by Mathias 
Apiarius at the expense of Pctreius, and is a 
reprint of the previous edition. The CoMHun/a- 
riolus begins on p. 295. 

So far as I have observed hardly anyone who 
has discussed the question in connection either 
with Hortulanus or Garland has taken notice of 
these two earliest editions of the commentary, but 
has quoted only those of 1560 and 1571. 

These may now be described. The 1560 edition 
has this title : 

Compendium Alchemiae. loannis Garlandii. 
Angli philosophi doctissimi : cum Dictionario 
eiusdem artis, atque de metalloruni tinctura prce- 
paratio ned; eorundem Libdlo, ante annos DXX. 
[A.D. io40Jeodem authore conscripto. Adiecimus 
eiusdem compendij per Amoldum de Villanova 
explicationem. Cum tractatu de Salium Aliimi- 
num^ue varietate, compositione & usu, Scriptoris 
incerti. Omnia nunc primum in lucem edita. 
Basileae Anno M. D. LX. 

The contents are as follows : 

Praefatio to Mclchior, Bishop of Basel, by 
Basilius Joannes Herold. 

loannis Garlandii Angli Philosophi doctissimi 
Compendium Alchimi? sive in tabulam Sma- 
ragdinam Hermetis Trismegisti vcpl x#m^ Com* 
mentarij, p. i. 

Pnecatio, p. 1. 

Tabula Smaragdina, p. 2. 

Commentarij, p. 5. 

Amoldus de Villanova, in commentarios Hor- 
tulani expositio, p. 33. 

Joannes Garlandius, Synonymorum in arte 
alchimistica expositio, p. 53. 

Joannes Garlandius, I>e pneparatione Elixir 
libellus, p. 72. 

Joannes Garlandius, De Mineralibus liber, p. 93. 

Joannis Garlandij vita, p. 172. 

At the end of the life is a list of Garland's works 
taken from Bostonus Buriensis, in which appears 
the title : Ortolanus, Lib. i., followed by the words : 

• Laus, honor, virtus & gloria.' This is merely 
the present commentary to which Boston has 
erroneously given the name of the author, and the 
four words form the opening of Hortulanus' 

• Pnecatio ' with which the commentary begins. 

The 1 57 1 edition is a reprint of that of 1560, but 
differs from it in the title and other particulars : 

Laurentii Venturae Veneti, Artium et Medicinae 
DocL De Ratione conficiendi Lapidis philosophici, 
liber unus. Ad Othonem Henricum Principem 
Palatinum. Huic accesserunt eiusdem argumenti 
loan. Garlandij An^li liber unus. Kt ex speculo 
magno Vincentij libn duo. Cum Privilegio Caesar. 
Maiest. Basileae M.D.LXXI. 8vo, pp. [16] 203 
[19, 2 blank] ; 121 [7, 2 blank] ; 173 [i blank]. 

The contents of Part I. are as follows : 

Epistle to Count Otho Heinrich, dated : Venet. 
Idibus Maij, 1557. 

The printer to the reader. 

The contents. 

Liber de Alchimia, p. i. 

iCnigma della pietra phisica di Lorenzo Ventura, 
ftc, p. 200. 

Index. 

Part II. contains the following : 

Joannis Garlandii Angli Philosophi doctissimi 
Compendium Alchimiae, sine in tabulam Sma- 
ragdinam Hermetis Trismegisti ircpl xitf^cutc Com- 
mentarij, p. I. 

Amoldiis de Vttfamovm, in Comineiiterioi Hor- 
tulani Expositio, p. 23. 

Joannes Garlandius Anglus. SyBOoymorum ii 
arte Alchimistica expositio, p. 36. 

Garlandius: De pneparatione Elixir libeflo^ 

P- SI. 

Garlandius : De Mineralibus liber, p. 67. 

Joannis Garlandij philosophi excdlentisBum Villi, 
p. laa 

Leonardi Proebstdij Carmen, p. [isa]. 

Summa Capitum, pp. [i24-ia8j. 

The « Summa ' is new, but Herald's ' Praefiilio' ii 
omitted. 

Part III. consists of articles taken from te 
Speculum majus of Vincentus and others. 

Except Mansi, those who have quoted tkii 
reprint refer to it as if it were a separate nb* 
licatioo and had not appeared under the title of 
another work. If there be a separate edUiOB of 
1 57 1, which is quite possible, I have not seen it 

The commentary is the same in both these 
editions, so that the distinction drawn betveei 
them by £>om Rivet, namely that the editkm of 
1560 is an abridgement of that of 157 1. made by 
the author himself or by some other person snb- 
sequently, has not only no foundation in tel, 
leaving the dates out of the question, bat has boI 
even any support from the actual titles. Dob 
Rivet, hoift-ever, took his dcscriptioo ooC froa 
copies of the books, but from the entries is 
Lipenius and the Bibliotkeca Barberiama^ 1681, 
p. 452, 2. Tlie only difference is in the first chapter, 
which in the 1560 edition is lengthen^ by tke 
insertion of the ' Tabula Smaragduia,' omitted in 
the 1571 edition. In every other respect the two 
issues are identicaL 

So far as I know these books also are rare. 

When the 1541 and 1560 editions are compared 
with each other there are several points of diffeveooe 
to be observed. 

1. The title. 

2. The introduction of Garland's name. 

3. The additional tracts. 

4. The statement that the edition of 1560 is the 
first. 

5. The differences in the two versions. 

I and a. It will be noticed that the phrase 
' Compendium Alchymiae ' and Garland's name do 
not occur in the tides of the eariier «iilioos, but 
were introduced by Herold either df his ovo 
initiative, or, more probably, from the manuscript 
he used, while that of Horttilanus has disappeared 
from the 1560 and 1571 editions. 

3. As to the additional tracts th^ do not occnr 
in the editions of 1541 and 1545, and they ait 
assigned not to Hortidanus, but to Garland. That 
they are by him is a question of evidence, but their 
authenticity has been categorically denied b^ 
Haur^u. 

4. The statement that the edition of 1560 is the 
first, signifies : either that Herold did not know.tbe 
editions of 1541 and 1545, which seems unlikdy, or 
that he meant that the version of Hortulanus^ Com* 
mentary, which he was giving, as ynSX as the other 
tracts were now printing for the first time, and in 
this sense he may have been correct, as will be 
seen from the following. 

^ The differences between the efailier and later 
editions are well marked. There are thirteeo 
chapters in the editions of 1541 and 1545, as 
agaia^t twenty-one in those oi 1560 and 191. 
There are dififoent readings throughout and dinr 
ent arrangement of words, and m the 1560 and 

HORTULANUS 

431 

HORTULANUS. OmHnuaL 

ic^i editions chapter v. has an introdnclory part 
WBich is not contained in the prerious editions. 

As an illustrati<m of the differences the opening 
mrds of Hortnlanus' * Prae&tio ' may be giiren. 
la the IC41 edition thej are: Ego dictns Hortu- 
lanns, aB hortis mahtimis nuncnpatus, peUe 
Jaoobina innolutus, indignos uocari disdpulus 
philosophise. ... In the 1560 edition: Ego 
qiudeni Hortnlanus, ab borto, vd ab arce 
nnritima dictus, Jacobina pelle inuolutus, nouis- 
simus philosophonun, indignus vocari disdpulus 
philosophiae . . . 

It may be inferred, therefore, that the editors of 
tht two editions drew frtMn different manuscript 
sources, and this is confirmed by Herold giving on 
the margin of his edition a few varioas readings 
whidi happen with one exception to be those of the 
edHicm of 1541. 

The existence of these two di£ferent printed 
versions has not. so far as I am aware, been 
noticed or mentioned befcve. 

The authorship of the ' Commentariolus ' has 
given rise to some diversity of opinion. Most of 
the older writers have accepted the identity of 
Garlandia and Hortulanus without criticism, 
though they are not unanimous as to the date at 
which he flourished. Recent researches have 
settled that John de Garlandia, a native of Eng- 
land, resident in France, poet, musician, mathe- 
matician, grammarian, was bom in the latter half 
of the twdfth and lived on to the middle of the 
Uiirteenth century, and was thus a senior contem- 
porary of the scholars who have made this period 
conspicuous in the annals of learning. On the 
Round of identity this would be the &e also of 
Hortulanus. Fabricius. however, did not admit 
it and Kopp has made the remark that the question 
was not to be so readily answered as Morhof 
aroeared to think. More recently still, Haur^u, 
who in 1879 corrected the patent misconceptions of 
Dom Rivet about the editions, alluded to above, 
has denied altogether that Garland had anything to 
do with alchemy, and has rejected the works on the 
subject attributed to him. 

Influenced by certain manuscripts he is of 
opinion that Hortulanus is the same as a person 
called in them Martinus Ortholanus. who wrote a 
treatise which is contained in the Tkeatrum Chemi- 
cum {see ortholanus) and is dated 1358. If there 
be donbt about the connexion of Hortulanus and 
Garlandia. there is equal if not more about the 
existence of Martinus Ortholanus. That the name 
oocors in manuscripts is hardly sufficient to estab- 
lish the existence of the person. For, in a manu- 
script at St Gallen of the fourteenth century, 

icfciied to by Kopp {Beitrdge, i860. {>. 381), the 
opening of the ' Praefatio ' nms thus : Ego a. 
dictus Ortulanus ab ortis Martini nuncupatus, kc.^ 
instead of 'ab hortis maritimis.' That one of these 
readings is an error of transcription is pretty 
obvious. The meaning in either case is somewhat 
obscure, but it would not take much effort 00 the 
part of a possibly puzxled scribe to convert 

* Ortulanus, ab ortis Martini ' into ' Martinus 
Ortulanus.' .\11 this is a matter for investigation, 
and anyhow it would be premature to assign the 

* Commentariolus ' of Hortulanus to a Martin 
Ortolan or Lortholain. about whom Haur^u 
admits that he had no lasting fame. or. it would be 
more correct to say. had none at alL 

While something has been said in support of the 
various opiuions. no argument sufficiently cogent 
and conclusive has been put forward to induce 
belief that the problem of authorship has been 
solved. 

As to the ' ex[x>sitio ' assigned to Amoldus de 
Villanova, its authenticity, other things being 
equal, must obviously depend on the date fixed for 
Hortulanus. If he be identical with Garlandia the 
exposition could quite well be by Amoldus, who 
flourished in the latter part of the thirteenth 
century. But if be be the same as Ortholanus and 
lived in the fourteenth century or later, the exposi- 
tion could not be by Arnoldus, and Haurdau in his 
dissertation on Amoldus, quite logically considers 
it not to be by him. 

Kopp, too, has pointed out that this ' expositio ' 
does not appear in any list of Amoldus' writmgs, so 
that apart from the date, it is possibly not a 
genuine writing of Amoldus. Dom Rivet speaks 
of a treatise : La clef de I'abrt^gf^. of which there is 
a manuscript * k I'abbaie des Dunes. ' Can this be 
a translation c^ the ' expositio ' ? 

The Commentary was often printed and it was 
translated into English, French, and German. 

The translation mto English was made from the 
1 541 text, and was printed along with Roger 
Bachon's The Mirror of Alchimy, London, 1597, 
pp. 17-27. The French translation was also made 
from the 1541 text, and was published along with 
Le Mircir d^Alquimie de Rogier Bacon ^ Lyons, 

1557. pp. 30-56. 

The German version by Tohann Schauberdt is 
appended to Pantheus' Vorarchadumia {sic), 
Magdeburg, 1600, 1608. 

^ it is somewhat difficult to disjoin Hortulanus 
and Garland some of the following references apply 
to both and some to the two individually. Refer- 
ence may be made also to ortholanus, where the 
connection with Hortulanus is further considered. 

Spadiius, Nomenclator Serif torum Medicorum, 
1501, p. 31 (the Basel, 1571 edition). 

Maier, Svmbola Aurea Mentm, 1617, p. 4^6. 

I^ts, ReitUionum Historicarum de rebus Anglicis 
Tomus primus, 1619, p. 184. 

Van der Linden, De scriptis medicis libri duo^ 
1637, p. 37a (the Basel 1560 edition). 

Borel, Bibiioiheca cMimica. 1654, pp. loi, lao. 

Morfaof, De MetaUarum Transmutaiione ad , , . 
Joekm Langelottum . . . Epistola, 1673, p. loa. 

Lipenius, Bibliotkeca realis medica, 1679, p. 96 

(eoition of 1571) ; p. 99 (edition of 1560). 

Borrichius, Conspectus Scriptorum Chemicorum, 
1607, p. 25. 

FabriciiiSy BiHiotkeca Gntca, 1708, i. p. 69; 
ed. Harle.s, 1790^ i. p. 78 (quotes the commentary 
•# 'Ortho^amif sa^ nortnaiiut, ntdoquii '). 

Polycarp Leyser, Historia poetarum et poematum 
medii arm, . . . Halae, 1721, pp. 311-541 (and 
references). 

Oudin, Commentarius de Scriptoribus Ecclesite 
Antiqute, 1732, ii. col. 609 (A.D. X040; J. de 
Garlandia, poet and chemist). 

Roth-Scholts, Deutsches Tkeatrum Chemicum, 
1730, ii. p. 500 (translation of the ' Vita (Sarlandii ' 
in the 1560 edition). 

Fabricius, Bibliotkeca Laiina media ei injtmee 
atatis, 1735, Lib. vii. p. ^6 (p. 58, thinks the 
alchemist and the grammarian are different; and 
that the latter flourished about Z040); Klorontise, 
1852, iii. p. 19 (Mansi, in his note, refers to Oudin 
for making them identical^. 

Tanner, Bibliotkeca Brttannico-Hibemica^ 1748, 
p. 309. 

4t2 

HORTULANUS 

HORTULANUS. ConHnued. 

Tdcbcr, Aligewuines GfUhrtem-Lexicom, 1750^ ii 
col. 863. 

Fkrtuld, ProH€r-St€iM, 1753. Th. i. p. 97. 

Mor6i, Le Grand Dictionmairg kisiori^mg ti 
crUique, 17^, V. ii. p. 77. 

Arekivfur Freiimdurer tmd RoxnkreuMer, 1783, 
i. p. 341 (doc a translation, but '* an attempt to put 
in modern dress writings the dictioo of wnich nas 
repeUedrKaders"). 

Btytrag tmr GtsckukU der Mkem CJUmU, 1785, 
pp> 57^ (P- S77» ^o. 32. for the edition with 
Ventuni, 1571), 584. 

Semler, Umparieiiscke Samiungen »ur HisUtrie 
der Rosenkreuaer^ 1786, i. pp. 38, 78. 

Gmeiin, GtxkickU der CJUmie, 17^, L p. 6a 

Scfamieder, GeschkkU der Alckemte, 1833, p. 117. 

Hoefer, HisUnrt de la CJUmie, 1843, l p. 417; 
1866, L pi 44i« 

Kopp, Gesckickie der CJkemie, 1844, ii. pp. 147, 
156^ i«; 1847, ir. 347. 

Jommat des Savants, 1851, p. 386 (article by 
Cberreul). 

Figuier, i*Akkimie ei les Alckimistes, 1856. 

PP- 41, Sft »3i. 363. 

186^ Tbmtii.ed. Albert Waj. PraeCaoe, ppL ini- 

Hisioire Htiraire de la France^ 1868, TiiL pp. ^ 
98 (article by Dom Rivet); xzL pp. 3fi973» ^^ 
pp. »«-i3. 77-103. 94^-950 (articles by Victor Le 
Oerc). 

Kopp, Beitrdge ntr Gesckickie der Ckemie, 1869, 

Ladragoe, BibHaikifme Ommni^^ Sdeatts 
SecrHes, 1870. Now 1366. 

Notices et Extraiis des ManmscrUs delaBOti*- 
ikiqme NoHonaU^ 1879, XXVII. n. pp. 3S-^ 
(article 00 omitted and spurious writing of GailsiKi 
bgr Bartbekmj Hanrten and correctioo of Doa 
Fuvet's confusion about the 1560 and 1571 ediliom). 

Histcire LitUraire de la France^ '^II ''^^ 
95. 96 (article 00 Amauld de VOknesve 
Hanr6aa, denying the authenticity of the ' Ei- 
pdsttio*). 

Kopp, Die Alckemie, 1886^ iL pp. ^43-348. 

Dichanary tf Naiumal Biografmy, 1889, sl 

436 (under gakland; article by C. L. Kings- 

^ 

ferdf 

HORTULANUS (Fontanus). 

Fontani Hortulani, Fata Chymica, in Beschreibung der wahren und falschen 
Chymie, mit beygefiigten acht raren Tractaetgen und zum Theil alien kost- 
bahren Manusciiptis, bestehend: 

1. In Ubereinstimmung der grofs- und kleinen WelL 

2. In Anzeigung : woher die Menschen ihre Signaturen genommen, und 
wodurch viele Kiinste und Wissenschaften erfunden worden. 

3. Stellet Magische Sigill- und Bildungen fiir, nach dem Biblischen 
Namen und Gegeneinanderhaltung des Gestims, mit der Signatur der 
Planeten, und den Beweifs, woher die Magische Bildniiis, so grosse Kraft 
und Wiirckung haben. 

4. Erklaret die Chymische Worter, so bey dem Laboriren und Berdtong 
der Chymischen und andern Artzneyen vorkommen. 

5. Lehret einige auserlesene Artzneyen verfertigen^ deren sich die 
hocherfahrnen Natur-Kiindiger voriger Zeiten bedienet 

6. 1st ein Tractat vom Alter, wie man sich nemlich solches ertraglich 
machen kan &c. 

7. Archiv der Dames oder Geheimniisse, die zu menschlicher Zierde 
und Schonheit gehoren. 

8. Eine Anweisung zu einer kleinen Haufs-Farberey. 
CasseU Bey Johann Bertram Cramer. 1740. 

4**. Pp. [16, frontispiece included] 464. 

Beytrag eur GexhichU der kdkem Ckemie^ 1785, Gmeiin, Gesckickie der Cketme^ 1798* ii- P 3^^ 
p. 666 (quotes an edition, Frankfurt, 1737, 4^). 

HORTULANUS (Justus Simplicius). 

Die Philosophidche Hand, das ist: Wahre und griindliche Philosophische 
Hand-I^itung zu dem beriihmten und hochgeprie^i^eneii Stein der Weiseo. 

HORTULANUS'-HULFFE 

423 

HORTULANUS (Justus Sxmplicius). Continued. 

In welcher sowohl die Theoria als auch die Praxis zu diesem hohen Werck 
zu gelangen, so deutlich als niemahls gezeiget, und alien Liebhabem der 
edlen, wahren und uralten Hermetischen Philosophie zum Nutz und nothiger 
Anweisung vor Augen gestellet, und aus den hinterlassenen Schrifften eines 
unbekannten Philosophi und wahren Adepti treulich communiciret wird von 
Justo Simplicio Hortulano. Leipzig, Bey Johann Christian Martini, 

Anno 1 7 19. 

^' ^P* 53 [3 blank]. Symbolic frontispiece of a right hand, tree, etc Pp. 15-16 
dropped. 

The ' Philosophical Hand ' here used as a frontispiece is identical with that 
elucidated by J. I. Hollandus. Over the thumb and first to fourth fingers are the 
symbols for saltpetre, Roman vitriol, salammoniac, alum, common salt, respectively ; 
on the palm of the hand the sjrmbol for mercury, and on the ball of the thumo that ror 
sulphur. There is no explanation given of the symbols as is done by Hollandus. The 
tract is in two parts ; the first contains some general considerations as to the ' Stone ' ; 
the second professes to deal with its matter and preparation. 

HORTULUS Olympicus Aureolus. 

See FiGULUS (benedictus), Thesaurinella, 1682, p. 197. 

HORTUS Divitiarum. Der Garten der Reichthumb aller Weifsheit Gottes. 

See DARIOT (CLAUDE), Die Gulden Arch, Schatz, und Kunstkammer, 1614, Part ii. 

p. 190. 
See EROFFNETE Geheimnisse des Steins der Weisen (1708), p. 500. 

HOUGHTON (Thomas). 

Rara Avis in Terris: or The Compleat Miner. 

See COLLECTION (A) of Scarce and valuable Treatises upon Metals, 1740, pp. 243- 
319- 

The first edition has this title: Rara Avis in 
Terris : or the Compleat Miner, in two Books ; the 
first Icon taining, the Liberties, Laws and Customs 
of the Lead-Mines, within the Wapentake of 
Wirksworth in Derbyshire; in fifty-nine Articles, 
being all that ever was made. The second teach- 
eth the Art of dialling and levelling Grooves; a 
thing greatly desired by all Miners ; being a sub- 
Watt, Biblwiheca Britannica^ 1824, i. (authors), 

ject never written on before hy any. Vnius Labor, 
multorum laborem allevat. By Thomas Houghton, 
London : printed in the year 168 1, 12°, pp. ^] 105 
[t\ Other editions are mentioned, 1688, 1729, 
1738. Houghton also wrote the Laws and Customs 
of Miners in the Forest of Dean, in Mendip, ftc, 
and some other works on mines and economical 
subjects. 

Allibone, A critical Dictiomary cf Engli^ 
Littrature^ 1859, i. p. 897. 

HOUPREGHT (John Frederick). 

See AURIFONTINA CHYMICA, i68a 

Houpreght signs the dedication of the book to Charles lU 

HULFFE wider die Armuth aufs den geheimen Schatz-Kasten der iiberreichen 
alleredelsten Chimie und Alchimie. Allen Mittel- und Hulff-bediirfftigen, 
die durch Kunst, der Natur wollen Handbieten, und sich vor Arbeit nicht 
wollen eckeln lassen. Zu eintraglichen Nutzen wolmeinend mitgetheilet von 
Experto Ruperto. Jm Jahr 1702. 

i2'. Pp. 128 [10]. 

A series of receipts for experiments with the metals, for testing them and separating 
them. A table of chemical symbols is given at the end. 

424 

HUGiNVS^UUSEM 

HUGINUS A BARMA. 

S M. T. F. P. 
HcmKticss pobhnttmiiL 
Si€ 1MX>K Tnfida Cbtflrica, 1674, pi 137. 

Edidie PhikMopluiche gj^iiAfff^ 

Ste IMDA Trifida Chimici, 1674, pi 2&4. 

167 [I 

id 

l» 

Thn tra&vaty^c ror.tax.i two ptaftes oolj. 
Hofiatn tract «as fini frizzed at Pans ui 1637. 
A hModred and t«coty jrean later a penoo caUmg 
bf fmdl * Fe. Th. An, . . .* tned to fet a copr ^ 
the Uxik m Che bhmiw bnt ni vua, and' be 
txtmed c^cf handralft of Mle catahigts bnt ■ew 
Mw It roeiitioaed. OtMcmnf thott it «m aakaovs 
to Leni^kt DnfresKijr be bid alami come to the 
ooDclttMOo that It «M cntifeif Ion. wbcn be 
oUaioed it aio«^ with a DOHiber of oiben froai a 
bookseller Pierre Dcrieu and reprialed it. It 
appeared in a unall voiome at Pans, i779» X3*, pfi. 

Borriduus, Contfectus S<riptorum Mtdicarum, 
1607. p. 43, No. Ixix. 

VfAxTueask^ Hastlii V'aUmJimi . . . Chjmuacke 
Sckri/Un, 1769, Neoe Vorrede, sig. c 8 i^erto. 

la zt, 
S M. I 
Th. Aa. . . 
Boffiicfaiaft 

by* 

i7«o^ pp. 19B. 3 

1806-08. PL 1 16. 

HUNDERT und dreissig Grund-Saue. 

See DKEY Curietise . . . Chymische Schrifften, 1723, p. 28. 
See DREY Curietise . . . Chymisclie SchrifReii, 1733, pi 2S. 

The 1733 edition b quoted by Rotb-ScfaoUz, 
Bibliotktca Ckemica, 1727, p. 167. As Fictuld has 
pUced the book in hb second class there can of 

coone be noponble 
Stein, 1753, Th. S., PL 73). 

in it at aD [f^nkur- 

HUNDERT drei und funfzig Aphorismi. 

See HELMONT (FKANCISCUS MERCURIUS VAN^ 

HUNDRED (A) and fifty-three Chemical Aphorisms. 

See PACKE (CHRISTOPHER). 

HUSER (JOHANN). 

See PARACELSUS (aureolus philippus theophrastusX 1603. 

Details of H user's life do not seem to have been 
preserved. He lived at the end of the sixteenth 
and Ijeginning of the seventeenth century, was in 
practice at Waldkirch in Baden, became councillor 
and physician of the Klcctor Ernest of Cologne, 
and at his ^request collected the works of ParaceUus, 
both printed and in manuscript, and published a 
' definitive ' edition— as it would be called now — 

Conring, De Hermelica Medicina libri duo, 1648, 
p. 17^ ; 1669, p. 177. 

Reimmann^ Versuch einer Einleitung in die 
Hiitoriam literariam derer Tcutscher, 1713, vi. 
p. 571- 

Kestner, Medictnisches GtUhrten-l^xicon^ I740f 
p. 422. 

Ibchcr, Allgemeines GtUhrUn- Lexicon, 1750, iL 
col. 1785. 

which appeared at Basel, 1589, 1590 (1591)10 tes 
volumes 4". and again in 1603, as above. Cooring 
not only says that Huser^s versions difier from those 
by Dom. Bodenstein, and others, but adds that bis 
good faith is justly suspected, and apparently thinks 
that a strong enough reason for not prefeniog 
them to the others. Thu opiiiion. however, can 
be compered with SudhoTs remarks. 

Mook, Theophrastus Paracelsus, Hue Kritiscki 
Studie, 1876, p. 85. 

Ferguson, Bibliografkia Pasracglsica, 1885, Put 

p. 34 ; 1890, Part in. p. 61. 

Hirsch, Biograpkischei Lexikcn der knimrt' 
genden Aerxte, 1886, iii. p. 325. 

Sudhoff, Biblio^apkia Paraeelsica^ 1894, passim. 

11. 

426 

HYDROPHILUS—HYDROP YROGRAPHUAi 

HYDROPHILUS (Sincerus). Continued. 

This work is in the form of a story of adventure, 
a sort of chemical romance. It contains refnints 
of the two poems : ** Ein Ding find man, in dieser 
Welt,' p. 269; and No. 111. of the ' Alte teutsche 
Reimen^ ' Eine trene Lehr will ich dir geben,' 

p. 313. 

The appendix begins on p. 323 and has a 
separate title : 

Anhang der Land- und Haufs-Apotheca, Wie 

sowohl alle iUisserliche, als innerliche Glieder und 
Kranckheiten zu curiren. Wobe^ sonderlich ni- 
sammen gesammelte Artxney, womit sicb die Ann«) 
selbst, und das, fast ohne Kosten zu curiren, audi 
ihre Medicin selber verfertigen kdnnen. 

This book appeared afterwards under the title: 
'PALSCHER und wahrer Lapis Philosophonun,' 
Franckfurt und Leipzig, 175a, 4*, g.v. 

HYDROPYROGRAPHUM Henneticum, or the Metallick water fire translated 
by John Frederick Houpr^ht. 

See AURIFONTINA CHYMICA, 1680, p. I. 

/. (/. cy-MDAcmE 427 

I. (I. G.). 

See JUGEL OOHANN GOTTFRIED). 

1. N. V. E. J. 

See NAXAGORAS (EHRD VON). 

ICH SAGS NIGHT, i>. Johann Siebmacher Nurnbergensis. 

See SIEBMACHER OOHANN AMBROSIUS). 

ICONIUS (Raphael Egumus). 

See EGUNUS iconius (Raphael). 

See HAPEUUS (NICOLAUS NIGER). 
Murr, Uber dem. waJkrtm Ursprumg 4tr Rostnkrtwur umd dts Freymamrtronkm, 1803, p. 19. 

IDEA Ghemiae Bohmianae Adepts. 169a 
See bohme Qacob). 

Beytrag sur GtxhidkU dtr kdkerm CAemie, 1785, p. 64a. 

IM GOLDE SUCHT. 

See SCHMID 0- <^')y 1706- 

INDAGINE (Innocentius Liborius ab). 
Bifolium Chemico- Physico- Metallicum, bestehend in zwo besondern Abhand- 
lungen, deren die erste den Zink und Galmey, die andre aber den Arsenik, 
benebst einigen Merkwiirdigkeiten, griindlich untersuchet. Ausgefertiget 
und zu weiterer Untersuchung ans Licht gestellet, von I. L. ab lndagine» 
L.M. Amsterdam und Leipzig, bey Johann Schreuder, 1771. 

8-. Pp. [12] 227. [I]. 

In this he quotes a good deal from Henckel, and transcribes from Ldhneits and Cramer the method 
for extracting sine followed at Goslar. 

Trifolium Chemico-Physico-Salinum, oder, Dreyfache chemisch-physikalischc 
Abhandlung, worinnen drey beriihrnte Salze, namentlich Salmiac, Salpeter, 
und Borax, nach ihrer Natur und Wesenheit, Namen und Krfindung, 
benebst einigen Merkwiirdigkeiten, betrachtet werden. Ausgefertiget von 
einem Kenner und Liebhaber chemischer Wahrheiten> der sich ncnnet 

42S 

INDAGINE-^INSTRUCTIO 

INDAGINE (Innocentius Liborius ab). Continued. 

Innocentius Liborius ab Indagine. Amsterdam und Leipzig, bey Johann 
Schreuder, 1771. 

8*. Pp. [xa] aoa. [i] [i blank]. 

[Another Copy.] 

Besides these two books he wrote some others : 
Chemisch-physicalische Nebenstunden^ Hof, 1780, 
8", pp. a 16; Memorabilia Bi smut hi, Niimbcr^, 
178a, 8*; Pkilosophiscke und physikaliscke Zett- 
verfreib, Niimb., 1783; Philosopkische und physi- 
kaliscke Abkandlungen^ NUmo., 1784. In the 
Nebenstunden, p. a 15, he speaks of the WegwHser 
xur kokem Cfumie, as composed by him. 

The first of these contams in Section 5. a con- 
tribution to the history of tlie Rosicrucians. It was 
afterwards printed separately, 1784, 8^, pp. 3a. 

The .author of the Beytrag says that the name 
of the author is obviously fictitious, lliis is correct. 
His real name was Johann Ludolph Jager, and he 
was a native of the Magdeburg district, born about 
1738. He is said to have gone first to the Uni- 
versity of Tubingen, then in 1747 to Leipzig, and 
in Z76a to Helmst^dt. where he studied under 
Beireis and gave out that he had been examined 
by him for the licentiateship in medicine, which 
office he assumed. He next went to Brunswick and 
wrote a paper against the Gravenhorsts* manufac- 
ture of salammoniac, ' which is printed in the 
Trifolium above. He was employed there in the 
porcelain works, afterwards returned to Leipzig, 
lived privately, and communicated to the Kconomic 
Society proposals for the manufacture of saltpetre 
and borax, which, it is said, were not received with 
favour. He died 16 March, 1787. 

Meusel quotes an *Abhandltmg vom Toback- 
rauchen,' Wolfenbtittel, besides the Nebtnstunden 
and Metnorabilia Bismutki, but not those above. 
There does not seem to be any reason for doubting 
that Johann Ludolph ab Indagine (g.v.) is merely 
another form of bis pseudonym and does not 
denote a different person. 

In the review of his book * Memorabilia Bis- 

Mercklin, Lindenius renovatus, 1686, p. 618. 

Jocher, Allgemeitus Gelehr ten- Lexicon, 1750, ii. 
col. 1884. 

Baumer, Bibliotheca Chemica, 178a. p. 73. 

Missiv an die kcckerUucktete BrUderschaft des 
Ordens des Goldenen und Rosenkreutxes, 1783, 
p. 117. 

Arckiv fUr Freimdurer und Rosenkreuter, 1785, 

"•p. 354. 

Beytrag xur Geschichte der kokem Ckemie, 1785, 
pp. 678, 679 (No. 537, ' Memorabilia Bismutbi '). 

Gmelin, Gesckickte der Ckemie, 17991 iii. pp. 344, 
618. 

muthi' in the Arckiv, he is called J. C. ab 
Indagine, and is spoken of as a person well skQkd 
in chemistry, but too much given to gold-making. 
He had considerable knowledge of the empiriol 
chemistry then in vogue and his papers shovn some 
originality of view and treatment, but his opinkm 
was that borax was not a natural salt but an arti- 
ficial one made by the Venetians. 

This view, therefore, was different from that of 
Joh. Georg Model, who was Imperial CouncOkr 
and died at St. Petersburg in 1775, to whom jSger 
refers. Model had investigated borax, and showtd 
how to purify it by solution in water, and he ooo- 
sidered it a natural product, as is evidenced by the 
title of his dissertauon : ' De borace natiTa penii 
Borech dicta. Londini, 1747.' 4*; German tianda- 
tion, Stuttgart, 1751, 9^. See Giaelin, Gtsckuhit 
der Ckemie, 1798, li. p. m. * 

In the Nebenstunden he discusses the derivatioQ 
of the word ' Chemia ' and the antiquity of glaSi 
and shows himself througtx>ut widdy read is 
chemical literature. 

Thoufh the Beytrag .seems to anticipate some' 
thing of the kind, he cannot of courae be confused 
vrith Johann de Indagine who flourished in tbe 
fifteenth century, was prior of the Carthnsian Mon- 
astery at Eisenach, Erfurt and Frankfurt a. d. 0., 
and wrote a number of works on ecclesiastical 
subjects and the history of several heresiea. He 
must also be distinguished from Johann de In- 
dagine, a clergyman at Sleinheiin, who lived in the 
sixteenth century and wrote books on astrologr, 
chiromancy, and similar topics. These two are 
distinguished by Jocher, but in the Beytrag ibejr 
are apparently identified, for the magical works are 
ascribed to the Carthusian prior. 

Meusel, Lexicon der vom Jakr 1750 bis 1800 
verstorbenen Teutscken Sckri/isteller, 1806, vl p. 

313. 

Schmieder. Gesckickie der A/ckemie, 183a, p. 595. 

Kloss, Bibliograpkie der Freimaurerei, 1844. 
Nos. 3641, 3643. , 

Poggendorff, Biograpkisck-liierarisckes Hand' 
worterbuck, 1863, i. coL 1186. 

LaAngatR.Bi^ioikique Ouvaraf.SciemeesStcrHes, 
Z870, Nos. 1409- 1414. 

kopp. Die AUkemie, 1886, ii. p. 8. 

INDAGINE (Johann Ludolph ab). 

See MONTANUS (LUDWIG CONRAD), 1751. 

As is observed in the preceding article there 
seems no reason for doubting that Johann Ludolph 
ab Indagine is identical with Johann Ludolph 

ij&ger, who uses the pseudonym Innocentius 
liborius ab Indagine. The initials are the iame 
in the three names. 

INSTRUCTIO Patris ad Filium de Arbore Solari anonym! Philosophi Galli. 

See THEATRUM CHEMICUM, 1661, vi. p. 163. 

430 

ITTERSHAGKN 

ITTERSHAGEN (Georg Christian). 

The book ig dedicated to Christiui Friedrich 
Carl, Margrave of Anspach and Bayreuth, and the 
dedication is dated Braunschweig, i Nov., 1773. 

Prior to this time Reaumur had invented the 
so-called porcelain which went by his name, and 
Ittershagen in the above not only claimed it as an 
invention of his own which he offered for sale, but 
went the length of calling the product the finest 

J. L. ab Indagine, Chewdxh-fkysUoHsclu Ntben- 
strntdem, 1780, p. 125. 
Meusel, Das gtkkrU TeutKklamd odor Ltxikom 

Continued. 

genuine porcdain. For this approp 
author has been severely criticisBd bg 
Indagine. Of the author there is Te 
record. He was at one time ' Kircfae 
the first ' Kreis' at Riga, afterwards live 
at Walk. He was a native of the Eichsf 
date is given. He died at Riga early lai 

der jetui lekenden Teutscken ScArtflsA 
iii. p. 560 ; Supp. i. 1786, p. 314 ; Sup| 
fK 3ao; iiupp. xi. 1834. p. 57. 

Arsenik durch Kunst zu erzeugen. 

See ALLGEMEIN niitzliches chemisch-physikalisches Mancherlei, 178I9 i. 

J.-JACQUIN 

431 

See PETRUS de Zaiento, Vom Metallischen Kunststticke der Weisen. 

J. D. K. 

See K. (J. D.). 

J. (I. N. V. E.). 

Su NAXAGORAS (EHRD VON). 

J. J. CHYMIPHILUS. 

See CHYMIPHILUS. 

JACOBiEUS (Oligerus). 

De Oleo Montis Zibinii . . . libellus, 

See ARIOSTUS (FRANCISCUS). 

Oligerus Jacobseus, that is Holger Jacobsen, was 
born at Aarhus, 6 July, 165a Alter graduating in 
Arts and Medicine at Copenhagen be travelled in 
France, I<^i Hungary, Germany. England and 
the Low Countries, to perfect himself in the 
sciences. He made the acquaintance and friend- 
ship of the most distinguished men of his time and 
cairied on a learned correspondence with them. 
He returned to Aarhus in i6rj% and soon after, in 
1680, was appointed professor of philosophy and 
medicine at Copenhagen. He was entrusted also 
with the arranging of the Royal Collection of 
Curiosities, of which he printed a description: 

Mercklin, Lindenius renavatus, 1686, p. 815. 
Niceron, M^wurires, 1729, i. p. 379; 1730, x. 

P-74- 

Msaig^t,BiiUafAeca Scriptorum Medicorum.xjy.^ 
11. i. pp. iii.-x. 

Zedler. Universal- Lexicon^ 1735. »*▼• coJ. 53. 

Kestner, Medictnisches Gelekrten- Lexicon, 1740, 

p. 423. 

Tdcher, Allgemeines Gelthrten-Lexicon, 1750, it 
ooL i8ao. 

Cbaufepi^, Nouveau Dictionnaire fdstorique et 
critifue^ 1753, "i« letter 1, p. 3. 

Joh. Goltl. Wilh. Dunkel, Historisch-Critische 
Nachrickttn von verstorbenen Gelihrien, Cotben, 

1753. I- "• p. «37. No. r;^. 
Qo^, Dtctumnaire kistorique de la Midecine, 

»75S. ". p. 77 ; 1778, »»• p. 584. 

1690. 

AiusiEum Regium^ Hafniae, 1696, and Supplement, 
1699. 2 vols. fol. , and he was made a councillor of 
the Tribunal of Justice. 1699. He died 18 June, 
1701, from sorrow for the death of his wife. She 
was a daughter of the famous physician Thomas 
Bartholinus. 

His papers which were published in the Acta 
Ha/niensia, vols, ii.-v., relate for the most part to 
the anatomy of animals. The present work, of 
which he was editor and translator, is described 
under Ariostus. He wrote also the funeral oration 
of his father-in-law, Bartholinus, Hafniae, 1681, 4*. 

Portal, Histoire de tAuatomie etdela Chirurgie, 

1770. P- 523.. 

Haller, Bibliotheca CkirurpcOy I774> i* P- 435. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Medictmg fracticct^ ^779, i"* 
p. 360. 

Gmelin, Gesckickte der Chemie, 1798, ii. p. 42a. 

Biographic MAHcale^ Paris, Pandcoucke (1820- 

25)» V. p. 336. 

Sprengel, Geschichte der Artneykunde, 1827, iv. 
p. 2^59. 

Bayle & Thillaye, Biographic Midicalc, 1855, ii, 

p. 31- 
Hirsch, Biographisches Lexikon der hervorragem- 

den AerttCt 1886, iii. p. 363 (article by Jul. Petersen). 

Bricka, Dansk Biogra/Ssh Lexikon, 1894, viii. p. 

376 (by J. Petersen). 

JACQUIN (NicoLAAS Jozeph). 

Nikolaus Joseph Edlen von Jacquin's kais. konigl. Bergraths, der Chymie 
und Krauterkunde offentlichen ordentlichen I..ehrers an der Hobenscbule 

4Sa 

JACQUIN—JAMSTHALER 

JACQUIN (NicoLAAS Jozeph). Continued, 

zu Wien, der kais. Academie der \^ssenschaften zu Petersburg, der konigl 
Gesellschaft zu Stockholm, Upsal, Mantua, der medicinischen Gesellschaft zu 
Paris, der churpfalzischen Academie der Wissenschaften zu Mannheim, der 
physisch-medicinischen Gesellschaft zu Basel, der naturforschenden Freunde 
zu Berlin, &c. Mitglieds, Anfangsgriinde der medicinisch-practischen Chymie, 
zum Gebrauche seiner Vorlesungen. Zweyte Auflage. Wien, gednickt 

bey Christian Friederich Wappler. 1785. 

8*. Pp. [16] 526 [17. X blank]. 

First edition, Wien. 1783 ; third edition. 1791. 
The book is interesting for being in German, in 
compliance with the request of the Emperor in 
1783, that lectures in the University should be 
delivered in German. 

Nicolaas Jozeph J acquin (Meusel calls him Jakob) 
was born at Leyden, x6 Feb., 1727, graduated 
M.D. and went to Vienna in 1752. During the 
years 1755-1759 he travelled in America for botani- 
cal purposes, and on his return was made councillor 
for mines, professor of chemistry, mining and 
metallurgy at Schemnitz, and professor of chemistry 
and botany at Vienna. In 1797 he retired, in 1806 
he was created a baron, and his death occurred at 
Vienna 24 (26) Oct., 1817. He worked principally 
at botany, and took great care of the garden at 
Vienna, which under his superintendence became 
one of the most notable in Europe. 

He executed various analyses, but his most 
important contribution to chemistnr was his defence 
of Black's fixed air against Meyer*s Acidtim pingue' 
with the title : Examen chymicum doctrinas Meyeri- 
anae de acido pingui et Blackiana: de acre fixo, 
retpecUi calcis, Vindob., J. P. Kraus, 1769, 8^ 

Haller. Bibliothtca Botanica, 1772, ii. p. 49a 

Weigel. Grundriss der reinen und angewandten 
CAtmie, 1777. i. p. 52 (§54, 6). 

Baumcr, BiHioiheca Chemica^ 1782, p. 60. 

Meusel, Das geUhrtt Teutschland, odtr I^xiluin 
derjeizt lebenden Tcutschen Schri/fsielirr, 1797, iii. 
p. 496 ; X. p. 7 ; Nachtrag, i. p. 307 ; ii. p. 15^ ; 
lii. p. 174 ; IV. p. 306 ; v. p. 683 ; vi. p. 303 ; vii. 
p. 7. 

Gmelin, Geschichte der Chetnie, 1798, ii. p. 634 ; 
1799, iii. pp. 306, 473, 659, 693. 916. 

Fuchs, keperiorium der chemischen Litteratur^ 

1806^ pp. 374, 455. 514. 

Biographic Universelle^ 1818, xxi. p. 376; or, 
1858, xx. p. 515. 

Biographic XUdicale, Paris, Panckoucke (1820- 

25). V- P- 337. 

Delvenne, Biographie du Koyaume des Pays- 

BtLS, 1829, i. p. 562. 

Raimann, Rede sur Geddchtnifsfeier Nickolaus 

Joseph Freiherrn v. Jacquin's, 

pp. 96, and in German, 1770, 8**. He was vwleBtljr 
attacked by the followers of Meyer, but thirtf 
vears later Black's view was taught as an estib- 
lished fact and a part of chemical doctrine bf 
Jacquin's son, Joseph Franz, who succeeded bis 
father at Vienna. See his Elemenia Chemia, 1793, 
i. p. 144, Section xxii. De Acido Carbonica 

The present work was written with special refer- 
ence to the needs of the physician and apothecary, 
and consists purelv of descriptions of methods of 
preparation and ot the properties of various coid- 
pounds. The coarse b^ns with plants, passes to 
animals, and closes with minerals. A short coarse 
of assaying completes the book. There is no 
theory ; only a collection of facts clearly eoougfa 
described. Such explanations as are given are 
based on phlogiston. The classification of inor- 
ganic substances throws light on the amount of 
knowledge then possessed. 

Other works referring to chemistry are : Mis- 
cellanea Austriaca ad Botanicam, Chemiam et 
Historiam naturalem spectantia, 1778-81, 4*1 > 
vols. ; Collectanea ad botanicam, chemiam e( 
historiam naturalem spectantia, 1786-96, 5 voli., 4* 

Ersdi & Gniber, Alfgemeine Encyklop&die, i857' 
a* Sect , xiv. p. ^7. 

Hoefer, Histotrt de la Chimie, 1843, ii. p^ 5^ •' 
x86o, it p. 35S - 

Kopp, Geschichte der Ckemse, 1845, iii p. 5"' 
1847, iv. p. 8a 

Phillippe & Ludwig, Geschichte der Apotke^- 
1855. pp. 658, 696. 

Van der Aa, Bicgraphisch Wotrrdenbcek iff 
Nederlanden, i860, ix. p. 69 (and references). 

Nouvelle Biographie Ginirale^ 1861, xxvl coL 

Poggendorflf, Bicgraphisrh-lUerarisches Haiti' 
toorterbuch, 1863, i. col. 1185. 

Wurzbach, Biographisches Lexikon des Keuff' 
thums Otsterreich, 18(53, x. p. a6 (and refereooei). 

Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie, x88i. m P- 
631 (b^ Reichardt). 

Billmgs, Index-Catalogue^ 1886, TiL p. 153. 

Hirsch, Biographisches Lexikon der hervtm- 
genden Aertte^ 1886, iii. p. 368. 

JAGER (JoHANN Ludolph). 

See INDAGINE (INNOCENTIUS LIBORIUS AB). 

JAMSTHALER (Herbrandt). 

Viatorium Spagyricum. Das ist : Ein Gebenedeyter Spagyrischer Wegwdscri 
in den edlen Sonnengarten der Hesperidum zu kommen, vnnd dafeM 
den Giildenen Tinctur Zweig defs vniversals (sonsten Lapis niiloMphoram 
genandt.) zu erlangen. Alles in einem Historico-Poetischen Discun ttmpt 

JAMSTHALER^JEAN 

413 

^^^(STHALER (Hzurahdt). dmUmmed. 

Enehhn^ ddis Antfaoris guitzem Ldien, Terfist Ynd besdnieben dnrdi 
Herbfandt Jamsdudem. Naninelir alkn Filiis DoctriitK ru Lieb an Tig 
giegeben, Tiid mit sdiooen in Kupfier gestochenen Figuren gezieiet. 
Fnnckfuit am Majn, In Veriegung Locae Jennisl. Anno \LDC< XXV. 

8*. pp. [i6] a8a 31 fa^vm^ Tit> and text enclosed in a beaded border. 

la Ibe MOK voliime and apparently kxwing port aDesorj of the preparation of the phOosopher s 

it if Thomas Nortoo*s CreJe JfM {g. v. ). stooe. 

rke tag^^ncags are symbolical of hennetical pro- Jamsthater's book is mentioned by Kopp. and is 

ideas. The wbole poem seems to be an commended— at least not condemned— in the Z^- 

. . . 9da Tewtrnkti Ptgftmtr Kopp» DU AUkewne, 1886. ii. p^ 384. 

jedicht vom Stein der Wdsen. 

See HERMETISCMES A. B. C, 1779, iii. p. 213. 

This is an extract only. 

iTom Stdn der Weisen, iind zwar tchi Jamsthalers ersten [zweyten] Tinctur. 
See V. 0* i^X Gtildene Rose. 

WTTOR Pansophos seu Flgura Aenea quadripardta cuncds Musaeum hoc 
introeuntibus, superionim ac inferionim sciendam Mosaico-hermedcam 
analytioe exhibens. 
See MUSAEUM hermeticum, 1749, P- ^3- 

nJS Gobrat Sapiens Manet 

See MARENGUS (JOANNES B.APTISTA). 

IN DE LA FONTAINK 

Me Fontina der Liebhaber der hohen Wissenschafft. 
See VIER ntitzliche Chymische Tractat, 161 2, Sig. Aij. 

lis it a tfanthrioo of the old French hermetic 
1 ' La Fontaine des Amooreox de Science ' 
en Iqr Jean de la Fontaine. He was a native 
ilenaames, who lived there in 1413, and wrote 
poem. Lenglet Dufresnoy, for the sake of a 
has pven a fancy picture of him, entirely 
pied with researches in his laboratory, except 
I he shot himself up in his reveries and wrote 
I the Hermetic science in French verse, ' c'etoit 
sar Iblie.' Schmieder, however, has surpassed 
oerdjr Letiglet Dufresnoy but even Jean him- 
in his reveries, and has set down most 
krfol nonsense on the subject. He ascribes 
poem to Balthasar Brunner, 'Latin de Fon- 
(I) a perfectly well-known ph3rsician of Halle 
le sixteenth century, who appears to have 
prtMecuted alchemical researches, and whose 
etl works were printed in 1617 and 1624. 
lieder adds that * under his latinized name and 
a diange of his christian name, certain tracts 
s were jpnnted after his death, with the title : 
innis oe Fontina Vier nfitzliche chymische 
tatkin, Halle, 1613. r.' It would be difficult 
It more inaccuracies and unfounded assump- 
into the same space. 

Lenglet Ehifresnoy quotes three editions of the 
poem : an early one, undated, with other pieces in 
verse; a second, 'revii et corrig^ par Antoine du 
Moulin, Lyon, chez Jean de Toumes, 1547, i6* * ; 
a third, nuis. chez Guillard, 1561. x6^, and the 
reprint in the third volume of the Roman de la 
Rose, Paris, 1735, la**, 3 vols. Besides these. 
Pierre Rigaud published an edition : La Meialiifue 
TransformaiioH. Contenant trois anciens traictet 
en Htkme Franfoise. Lyon, 1618, i6'. ff. 88, The 
three treatises are ' La Fontaine des amoureux de 
science ' ; ' Les remonstrances de Natur k I'Alchy- 
raiste errant,' by Jean de Meung ; * Le Sommaire 
Pbilosophique,' of N. Flamel. The last two seem 
to have been printed here for the first time, but the 
first, says the editor (I presume Ri^ud himself), 
had been printed previously at Pans and Lyons. 
but in a very corrupt manner, and he found it 
necessary to revise tlie text, which he did from 
printed and manuscript copies. He omitted also 
the illustrations of apparatus contained in the 
Lyons edition. 

This seems to have been the last of the editions, 
and the work had dropped into oblivion till it 
appeared again in a limited issue by Genty: 

2S 

434 

JEAN 

JEAN DE LA FONTAINE. ConHnued. 

La Pomiauu du Amtmmtx (U Scitmct compoidt par 
Ukan de la Fontaiiu de Valenciennes^ en la ComUi 
da Henault Poewu Herm4Hque du XV* Siecle 
PublU par Ach. Genty, Paris, Poulet-MalaasU et 
de Broise, 1861, small square &, pp. [4] 93 [3 J 

The editor has prefix«l an introduction con- 
taining an outline of the historv of alchemy, and 
added some notes at the end. One regrets that be 
has given no account of the author and of the 
prerious editions of the book, which would have 
been more appropriate and useful than the 
historical sketch. 

Lenglet Dufresnoy. Histoirt de la Philosopkie 
Herwtdti^ue, 1742, L p. 047 ; iiu p. 166. 

Georgius Matthiae, Conspectus Historic Afedi- 
corum chronolojricus, 1761, p. 651. 

Schmieder, Gexhichte der Alchemit^ 1832. p. 320. 

Grilsse, Lehrhuch einer allgemeinen Literdr- 
geschichte^ 184a, II. ii. p. 646. 

As Matthue infonnt m^ ^^nUttm BacUmae 
translated into English oertain books of Jean d« k 
Footaine, and Sakrnion THssmosinas. Copies of 
these translations in Ashmole's handwritiDg exist 
among the Ashmolean Manuscripts and are de- 
scribed by Black. They consist of the present tract 
by Tean de la Fontaine, the two tracts by Jean de 
Menun (^.v.), namely: *Les RemontFanoes de 
Nature,' and ' La R^ponse de I'Alchimiste.' and 
the treatise of Synesius the Gredt Abbot. Tlie 
treatise by Trissmosinus is the 'Golden Fleece.' 
These translations do not seem to have been 
printed. 

W. H. Black, A descripHve . . . Catakpu of the 
Manuscripts keqmeathed unto tMe Uni^fersity tf 
Oxford by Elias Asktnole, 184^. coL 94, Na ^ 
(Jean de la Fontaine, Ac); coL 1089, No. 1395 
(Trissmosinus). 

JEAN DE MEHUN. 

Der Spiegel der Alchymie des vortreflichen Philosophen Johann von Mehun. 
Aus dem Lateinisch-Franzosischen iibersetzt Dem noch beygefuget wordeiu 
Ben-Adams Traum-Gesichte durch Floretum a Bethabor; Nebst Friedridk. 
Galli Reise nach der Einode St Michael. Ballenstadt und Berabuxgi ii» 
der Biesterfeldischen Hof-Buchandlung. 1771. 

8*. Pp. 44. 45-8 four pp. of Book advertisements. 

Jean, called de Meun, or Meung, or Mehun, or 
Mehung, or Mesung, or Mung, from his birthplace, 
andClopinel, because he was lame, flourished from 
the mindle of the thirteenth century down to 
about 1330. Dufresnoy says Z38o to 1365. others 
la^o to 1336. He was a poet at the Court of 
Philip the Fair, and continued the ' Romance of 
the Kose,' begun about 1240 by William de Loris. 
He is said to have introduced into this ' Romance ' 
two poems : ' I^es Remontrances de Nature k 
TAlchimiste errant,' and 'La Rdponse de I'Alchi- 
miste k Nature.' These are contained in the 
edition of the Romance, Paris, 1735. They are 
assigned to Jean in the Biograpkie Universelle, 
and by Lenglet Dufresnoy and others, but accord- 
ing to Bninet they are insertions made in the 
sixteenth century. These works are said to have 
been printed in a collection of alchemical poems, 
Lyons, 1557, 8*; Paris, 1612, 1613, 8'. It is 
contained in Rigaud's collection : La Metallique 
Transformation. Contenant trois anciens traictet 

Maier, Symbola Aurea Mensa, 1617, p. 343. 

Borel, Bibliotkeca Ckimica, 1654. p. 155. 

Morhof, De transmutatione Metallorum ad . . . 
Joelem Langelottum . . . Epistola, 1673, p. 133. 

Borrichius, Conspectus Scriptorum Chemicorum, 
1697, p. 27, No. xxxviii. 

Quetif & Echard, Scriptores Ordinis Pretdica- 
torum^ Lut Par. 1719, i. p. 741. 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoirt de la PhUosophie 
HemUtique, 1742, i. p. 193 ; iii. p. 234. 

Jticher, Allgemeines Gelehrten-Lexicon, 1750^ I 
coL Z969 (under Clopinel). 

Fictuld, Probier-Stein, 1753, Th. il p. 94. 

Les BtbliotfUques Francoises de La Croix du 
Matme et de Du Verdier, 177a. i. pp. 545-8. 

Bevtrc^ Mur GeschicfUe der hdhern Ckemie, 1785, 
pp. 634,67$. 

en ritkme Frunfcise, Lyon, x6i8^ S. 915-58. See 
the note to Jean de la Fontaine. 
As for the Afiroir tt alchymie some regard it as 

fenuine, but Hoefer is of opinion that it is spnriogsr 
t was printed along with the 'Miroir* of Roger 
Bacon, Lyons, 1557, pp. xoo-x^, and in the 
reprint of the 15^7 collection, Pans, chez Charki 
Sevcstre, i6ia, 8*; pp. 3-33. The Beytrag calls il 
an " unimportant fragmenL" 

To Jean de Mehun is also ascribed the first woik 
on fortune-telling in French. The editions men- 
tioned by Gr&sse are: Paris, 1556, 4*; 1577-, 8*; 
1615, 8" ; Lyons. 1580, 8**. Those which are now 
before me are the following: Le plaisant leu da 
Dodechedron de Fortune, . . . renouueU^ ft change 
de sa premiere edition, Paris, 1560, 4^, pp. [e/^ 
and two tables of two leaves each moonted on 
guards], cxliiii. The other is the v«y rare English 
translation : The Dodechedron of Fortmie ; or, 
the Kxercise of a Quick Wit . . . Englisbed by 
Sr. W. B. Knight, London, 1613, 4', pp. [a6] X44» 

Gmelin. Gesckickte der Ckemie, 1797, i. pp. 59^ 

307. 
Schmieder, GesckUhte der AlcJkemiet 1832, pk 

164. 

GrSLsse. Lehrbuch einer altgemeinen LiivSsr* 
gesckickte, 184a, H. iu pp. 633. 638. 1083, xoB^ 
1088 ; 1852. III. i. p. 664. 

Hoefer. Histoirt de la Ckimie, 184a, i. p. 407 ; 
1866, i. p. 429. 

Pouchet, Histoirt des Sciences NaturelUs em 
Moyen Age, 1853* p. 2^7- 

Figuier, L'Alcnimte et les alckimistes, 1856, 
p. 88. 

Histoirt Littiraire de la France, 1856, xziii. pfk 
1-61. 

Bu^apkie Universelle, Paris, no date^ mvk 
p. 149- 

JEAN 

43S 

J^^AN DB MEHUN. OmHnued. 

, Mmmmei dm Likrmin, i86a, iii. ool. 1679. 

Ji^oefcr. NouveUe BiografkU GHUraU, 1865, 
r. coL 040. 

[Another Copy.] 

Ladrague, BUlioikiqwt Omvmro^, ScutUfs 
SecrtUs, 1870, No. 788-994. 

Kopp, Die AlcMemie, 1886, i. p. 6 ; il pp. 31X, 

3ai. 353. 378. 393- 

[Another Copy.] 

Beweiiis der Natur, welchen sie den irrenden Alchymisten thut 

See WASSERSTEIN der Weisen, 16 19, p. 156. 
See WASSERSTEIN der Weisen, 1704, p. 128. 
See WASSERSTEIN der Weisen, 1743, P* 'i^* 

Demonstratio Naturae. 

See MU8AXUM HSRMBTICUM, 1 749, p, 1 45. 

Ein Gesprach zwischen der Natura vnd den irrenden Alchimisten. 
See VIER niitzliche Chymlsche Tractat, 16 12, sig. Cj verso. 

Auazuge aus einer Abhandlung welche den Titel hat : Wasserstein der Weifsen. 
See MAGAZIN fiir die h6here Naturwissenschaft und Chemie, 1787, ii. p. 365. 

JEAN DE ROQUETAILLADE. 
See RUPBSCISSA Oohannes db). 

JEAN XXII. 
L'Ait IVansmutatoire. 

See bacon (rogbrX De PAdmirable Pouvoir et Puissance de TArt & de 
Nature, 1629. 

Eztrafagans de Crimme &lsi. 

Seg KIRCHBR (athanasius), Mundus Subterraneus, 1665, ii. p. 309. 
See MANGBT (j, J.\ Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, i. p. 102. 

The first work is said to have been originally 
written in Latin. 

To Pope John XXII. is also ascribed a tract : 
•L'Eludr da Philosophes,* which with the pre- 
oedinf^ appeared at Lyons. 1557, small 8vo, pp. 
90K, in company Mrith Roger Bacon's work : ' le 
Miroir d'Alquimie,' and others. 

Tlias pope, who lived from 1244 to 1334, and 
mridfd at Arignon, converted the psilace, it is said, 
into a laboratory, where he pursued the art of 
tmnsnnitatioo, which he had acquired from Ar- 
naldns de Wlanova or Raymund Lully. His 
Iflboiin were attended with rach success that he 
left b^ind him twenty-five millions of florins, 
wlikh Lengiet Dnfresnqy endeavours to show he 
had no means of acquiring except by his alchemical 
operations. Perhaps it was owmg to his possessing 

Bordj Bibli4fik§€a Ckimica^ 1654, p. lax (the 
iw edition] ; 16^, p. 1x5. 

liUrchar, Mimnius Sukterrmuus, 1665, il p. 308 ; 
life, ii p. 908. 

the secret and to his success in using it, that he 
promulgated in 13x7 his famous bull against the 
alchemists, printed by Kircher and Manget: 
Spondent quas non exhibent divitias paupo-es 
afchymistae. He may have found by observation 
and experience that they were ignorant, and he 
may have wished to prevent them learning what 
he knew. Whatever that was, he has taken care 
not to reveal it in the books of which he is the 
reputed author. 

This contradiction — not unprecedented — between 
precept and practice, has caused some perturbation 
of mind among later critics. Lengiet Dufresnoy 
it[nores the buU and acknowledges the alchemy ; 
Kircher does the reverse ; Wiegleb tries to reconcile 
the two. Anyhow the pursuit of alchemy was not 
stopped by the edict 

Lengiet Dufresnoy, Histaire di la PhilcsapkU 
Hermitique, 1742, i. pp. 187-193, 468 ; iii. pp. 41, 
X90. 

436 

JEAN^JOEL 

JEAN XXII. ConHnued. 

iach«r, AUgtmeines GelekrUn'Ltxicom^ 1750^ ii. 
1904 (inserts ' De arte metallonim transraa- 
tatoria ' among his writings). 

Wiegleb, Historisch-krittsche Unterntchung der 
Akk€mie, 1793. p* 396. 
Gmelin, Gtschukte der Ckemie, 17^, i. p. 55. 
Schmieder, GeschichU der AUhemte^ 1832, p. 159^ 

Hoefer, Histoin de la CJdwtie, 1842, i. p. 407 ; 
1866, i. p. 431. 

Figuier, L AUhimie et Us AUJUwUsiis, 1856^ pp. 
117, 1x9. 

LAidngue.BiiiioiJUftie Ouvanjf,ScietugsS€criits, 
1870, No. 787. 

Kopp, Die Akkemie, x886, I pp. tS. 335. 

JESUS. 

5^^ V. (J. R.X M.D., Giildene Rose, No. ii. 

JM GOLDE SUCHT. 

See SCHMID 0- 0.x 1706. 

JOB. 

Prodromus Jobi Chymici. 

See MAULL (JOHANN PHILLIP), Griindliche Beschreibimg . . . 1714. 

JOEL (Franciscus). 

Francisci Joelis, WeyL der Artzney Doctors, und Professors zu Gryphswald^ 
Chirurgia oder Wund-Artzney : In sieben Theile abgetheilet, und diuch 
aufserlesene Fragen und deutliche Auslegungen erklaret Anitzo alien 
Wund-Aertzten, zu grossen Nutzen, in Teutscher Sprach zum erstenmahl 
heraus gegeben. Niirnberg, Verlegts Johann Daniel Tauber. Drudcts 

Cbristian Sigismund Froberger. Im Jahr 1680. 

8*. Pp. [33, X blank] 5aa Engraved title included in the pagination. 

Joel was born on i Sept., x»>8, at Sz515s, in 
the district of Oedenburg in Hungary, and was 
educated at Olmutz and Vienna. When he was 
aged 18 he took up the study of medicine, and 
liv«l tit>m 1596 with a physician at Neustadt till 
1538, when he removed to Leipzig and then to 
Wittenberg and Berlin. After staying some time 
there he was summoned to Gusirow by Prince 
Albert to be court apothecary. In 1543 he 
married and went to Stralsund, but in 1549 or 
1 551, on account of religious differences, he retired 
to Greifswald to practice medicine. After four 
years he was appointed town physician and took 
his licence at Rostock. In 1559 he was admitted 
professor at Greifswald, and was rector of the 
university in 1568 and 1577. In 1563 he was 
married for the second time. His death occurred 
QO Oct.. 1579. He was the most distinguished 
professor at Greifswald in the sixteenth century. 

He began to publish after he had been forty 

Mercklin, Lindenius renovatus, 1686, p. 288. 
Conring, In Universam Artem Medicam . . . 
Introduction 1687, pp. 245 (Int. vii. §13); 354 (Add. 

vii. § 13, • & * *). 

Manget, Bibliotkua Scriptorum Medicorum, 
1731, II. i. p. xxvi. 

Stolle, Anleitung tur Historie der medicinischen 
Gelahrheit, 1731, pp. 239, 266, 267, 730. 

Zedler, Universal-Lexicon, 1735. xiv. col. 1048. 

Kestner, Medicinisches Getehrten- Lexicon^ 1740* 

p. 430. 

Jttcher, Altgemeines Gelehrten-Lexicon^ '750, ii. 
col 1900. 

Christ. Steph. Scheffel, Vitte Prvfessorum Medi- 
corum in Academia Gryphiswaldensi^ 1756, p. 30. 

years in practice. His works deal with medkal 
topics, and include some of interest from a 
historical point of view : Dissertatio de Paraoelsids 
qusestionibus, 1571 ; De morbis hyperphysicis et 
rebus magicis Theses : cum Appendice de ludis 
Lamiarum in Monte Bructerorum quem Blocksberg 
vocant, Rostochii, 1580, 8°, in which be attacked 
the superstition and alchemy of Tliuniejrsser, und 
provoked thereby a controversy. His name also is 
attached to a tract of a different class : Sumraa 
Scoticse concionis de sanctificatione Sabbathi per F. 
Joelem excerpta. The collected edition of bis 
works was begun bj Matthseus Bachmetster in 
z6i6, continued by his son Frandsctis Joel, and by 
his grandson of the same name, to 1630, 1631, at 
Hamburg, LUneburg, and Rostock, in six volumes, 
4**. and then at Amsterdam in 1663, io a revised 
edition. His promised work latrochemia was not 
included in the above. In his medical views he was 
opposed to Paracelsus. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Anatomica, 1774, i. p. 33161 

Haller, Bibliotheca Chirurgica, Z774» >• P- 300; 
1775. »»• P- 603. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Medicinee fracticm^ vi77* ii* 
pp. 285, 388. 

Eloy^ Dictionnaire hiUcrique de la Midecimi, 
1778, ii. p. 604. 

Biographic Afidicale, Paris. PanckoudLe (iSad- 

as). V. p. 356. 
Sprengel, Geschichte der Arxneykunde, 1807, iv. 

P- M6. 

Dezeimeris. Dictionnaire historique de la Miie^ 
cine^ 1836. III. i. p. 279. 

Gottlieb Mohnike, l>es Johannes Frederus Lekm 
und geistliche Gesange, Stralsund, 1840^ iii. pp. 7, ^ 

JOEL-^JOHANS 437 

JOEL (Franoscus). ConHnued. 

Kosegartn, GtsckichU d€r UnivtrsU&i Grti/s- Billines. Index-Catalogue, 1886^ vii. p. 346. 
^tfoJd, 1857, i. p. 903. Hirsch, Biographisches Lexil^m der kervorra 

Hart Zeitung, 1870, p. 88a. genden Aerxie^ x886, iiu p. 399 (by Pagel). 

AUgtmeine Deuixhe Biographie^ 1881. xiv. p. Zur Gexkichte der Brockenreisen, lianbiirg, 

xia (by Pyl). 1891, 5th ed. , p. 67 (in R. Steinhoflfs ' Nachtrag \ 
HacKT, GesckUkU der Medicim, 1881, ii. p. xit. 

JOHANN VON MEHUNG, 

See JEAN DB MEHUN. 

JOHANN VON MESUNG. 

See JEAN D£ MEHUN. 

JOHANN DE MONTE CUBITI. 

See MONTE CUBITI (JOHANN DE). 

JOHANN DE MONTE HERMETIS. 

See MONTE HERMETIS (jOHANN DE). 

JOHANN DE MONTE RAPHAIM, 

Su MONTE RAPHAIM (jOHANN DE). 

JOHANN DE MONTE-SNYDER. 

See MONTE-SNYDER O^HANN DE). 

JOHANN VON TETZEN. 
Johannis Ticinensis, eines Bohmischen Priesters, Anthonii de Abbatia, eines 
in der Kunst er^Bihmen Monchs, und Edoardi Kellsei eines Welt- behriihmten 
Engelanders vortreffliche und aufsfiihrliche Chymische Biicher, Allen der 
Geheimen und Hohen Kunst-Liebhabern zu Nutz und mercklichem Unterricht 
in Teutscher Sprach iibergesetzet, und heraufs gegeben durch einen, der 
niemals gnug gepriesenen Wissenschafit, sonderbahren Beforderer. Mit 
einer Wamungs-Vorrede wider die Sophisten und Betrieger. Hamburg, 
In Verlegung Gottfried Liebezeits. 1691. 

«•. Pp. 160. 

Venede, p. 3. J. de Tetten, Aeiii^^ma, p. to. 

J. de TeUen, Processus, Latin and German, Antonius de Abbatia, Sendbrief!^ p. 85. 
p. 48. E. Kellaeus, Tractat an Rudolphum, p. 1x3. 

Processus de Lapide Philosophorum. 

Sa DREY vortreffliche . . . Chymische Biicher, 1670, p. 42. 

Chymische Schrifiten; oder Process vom Stein der Weisen. 

• 

See ROTH-SCHOLTZ (friederichX Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum, 1732, iii. 

p. 607. 

In his historical introduction the editor of the chemist who had copied, as clearlv as he could, the 

above coUection saTS that Johannes Ticinensis was original MS. written in 14x3 illegibly in a nioiUcish 

a priest in the kingdom of Bohemia, who had hand, and translated it into German rhymes from 

lived some three hundred years earlier, that is the Latin. 

about 1370, a very learned man with much practice Schmieder says he was a contemporary of 

fai the art, as he was informed by an experienced Basilius Valentinus, and that though his name in 

43« 

JOHANN-^JOHANNES 

JOHANN VON TETZEN. Continued. 

German looks like that of a Pomeranian noble, and 
in the Latin like that of an Italian, he was in 
reality a Bohemian monk, and was named after 
his birth-place, perhaps Teschen in Upper Silesia 
— which IS not in Bohemia. Schmi»ler's hypo- 
thetical biographies must be received with reserva- 
tions, a priest in Bohemia Ls not necessarily a 
Bohemian monk, and the date — not to say the 
existence— of Basilius Valentinus is quite unde- 
termined. K.opP accepts the date and the 
Bohemianism ; Fictuld desires befi^inners to hold 
him in respect on account of his writings: but 
Borrichius is not of the same opinion when he 

Borrichius. Conspectus Scriptorum Chemicorum, 
1697, p. 15, No. xxi. 
Fictuld, Probier-Stein, 1753, Th. i. p. 148. 
Baumer, Bibliotheca CkemUa, 17^1, p. 77. 
Schmieder, GtsckickU dtr AlchemU, 1833, p. 909. 

calls him "scriptor multas caliginis^ et quo 
insigni damno posset carere hasc disciplina.*^ 

The first edition of the present coUection has the^ 
title: Drey vortrefiliche und noch nie im Dmd:- 
gewesene Chymische BQcher. als I. Joharnite 
Tidnensis eines Bdhmischen Priesten opuscnhinL 

fenandt Processus de Lapide Philosophonim . . . 
[amburg, in Verlegung Johan Nauman, 1670, 8*, 
pp. i6a The above is almost a line for lizie andL 
pafi^e for page reprint of this edition. 

Johann von Tetxen's two works are entitled r 
'Processus de Lapide Philosophorum,' in X4K: 
stanzas of rhyming Latin verse, and the otheK^ 
is in prose and is caUed 'iEoignoa.' 

Ladrague. BUUoHUque Owvar^^ 
Secrites, 18701, No. 107^. 

Kopp, Die Alckemte, x886, i. p. 905; it 
3x0, 336. 351. 

JOHANNES VON DER FONTINA. 

See JEAN DE LA FONTAINE. 

JOHANNES DE PADUA. 

Arcanum de multiplicatione philosophica in qualitate. 

See TANCKE (JOACHIM), Promptuarium Alchymiae, Ander Buch, 1614, p. 252. 
See NEANDER (theophilus), Heptas Alchymica, 1621, p. 22L 
See FiGULUS (benedictusX Thesaurinella, 1682, p. 193. 

Libri Secretorum de Lapide Philosophorum. 

See DARIOT (CLAUDE), Die Gulden Arch, Schatz- und Kunstkammer, 1614, Part ^ 

p. 32- 
See EROFFNETS Geheimnisse des Steins der Weisen (1708), p. 376. 

Lilium inter Spinas. 

See NEANDER (theophilus), Heptas Alchymica, 162 1, p. 157. 

Praxis de Lapide Minerali. 

See SCHAUBERDT (johann), Consummata Sapientia, 168 1, p. 31. 

VoUendete heilige Weisheit. 

See hermetisches A. B. C, 1778, i. p. 283. 

Kopp raises the question if this tract is identical 
with that published by Schauberdt ; it is ; bat the 
order is different, and there are some verbal 
alterations, and different spelling. 

Schauberdt Eroffnete Geheimnisse 

pp. 168-213 Lib. I. pp. 376-393- 
pp. 31- 49 Lib. II. pp. 393-399. 
pp. 49-165 Lib. IIL pp. 399-447. 
In Schauberdt's edition there is no division into 
books, and in pp. 213-330 there is a Kurxe WUdtr- 
holung which is not included in the other. 

No account of this writer is forthcoming. Maier 
calls him ' Germanicus scriptor,' which seems out 
of keeping with his name, and says that though he 

Maier, Symbola Aurem Mensce, 1617, p. 267. 
Jacob Ltupolds Prodromus BibUothecm Metallic^, 

i73«. P- 109- 
Tbcher, Allgemeines GeUhrttn- Lexicon, 1750, ii. 

col. 1935. 

Fictuld, Probier-^iein, '753. Th. i. p. 117. 

has entered into the minutest details of manipula- 
tion as if that were the chief thing, yet he oooceils 
some wheat among that chaff, and gives important 
directions for the preparation of tl^ stone. lod* 
dentally he makes some curious observations upon 
different kinds of springs and baths. Fictuld conh 
mends him for his clear and complete exposition. 
In the Beytrag an edidon dated Magdebing, 160a, 
4**, is mentioned as well as that of Frankfurt, z68i, 
Jocher ascribes to him the tract Lilium inter 

13 

Spinas (though, according to others, it was written 
1^ Grasshof), Viridarium Mathematicorum^ and 
De Imperio et Jurisdictione. 

B^trag Mur GescAickte der h9kem. Ckewue^ 1785. 

503- 

P- 585. 
G 

melin, Gesckickte der CAemie, 1797, L 
Ladrague, Biblioikique OutHuyf'^ 
Secrites, 1870, No. 1075. 
Kopp, Die Alcketmie, x886. i. p. aao, note *. 

JOHANNES— JORDAI^ 

439 

JOHANNES PAUPERUM. 
Abbreviatio . . . de Secretis Secretonim. 

See ARTis AURlFERiE . . . Volumcn Tertium, 1610, p. 131. 

JOHANNISKRAUT (Das), chemisch-medicinisch abgehandelt, von Anthropo- 
Mago-Botanophilo. Leipzig, verlegts Adam Friedrich B6hme 1781. 

8*. Pp. 76 [a blank]. 
At the end is an alphabetical list of all the writers who have referred to this plant. 

JOHNSON (WiLUAM). 
Lexicon Chymicum. 

See MANGET 0- J-)> Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, i. p. 217. 

Johnson, who lived in London at Amen Corner 
in the middle of the seventeenth century was a 
chemist and follower of Paracelsi^. The Lixicon 
was published with the following title in red and 
black : 

Lexicon Chymicum. Cum obscuriorum Ver- 
bonim, et Rerum Hermeticarum, turn Phrasium 
Paracelsicarum, in scriptis ejus : et aliorum Chy- 
micorum, passim occurrentium. planam explica- 
tionera continens. Per Gulielroum Johnsonum 
Chymicum. Londini, excudebat G. D. impensis 
Gulielmi Nealand, apud quem prostant venales sub 
Signo Coronae, in vico vulg6 vocato Duck-lane, 

Mercklin, Lindenius rencvatus, 1686, p. 379. 
Manget, Bibliotheca Scriptorum Medicorum^ij^i, 
11. i. p. xxvi. 
Jacob Ltupolds Prodromus Bibliothccct metallic^, 

173^> P- 77- 
Kestner, Medicinischcs GeUhricn-Lexicon^ 1740, 

P-43I- 

1653, Small 8^, pp. [3 blank, 16] 350 [4 blank] ; 
Liber Secundus. 1653: pp. [7, x blank], Vita 
Paracelsi [15, i blank], Lexicon, 86 [a blank] 
Chemical characters, errata, and licence to print 

n 

he book was again published bv Nealand in 
1660. in a larger 8**, pp. [12] 359, [i blank] ; Liber 
Secundus. i6te: pp. [34] 73, characters [11, 5 blank]. 
Besides these Mercklin mentions an edition by 
Nealand, 1657, 8* ; Francofurli apud Wendelinum 
Moewalclt, 1676, S'', and this revised and corrected 
by Joh. Christoph Vogelsanp, Francof. et Lipsiae, 
apud Johannem Henricum EUIingerum, 1678, 8^ 

Lenglet Dufresnoj, Hisioirt de la Philosophu 
Hermhique, 1743, iii. pp. 63, 190. 

Jocher, Allgtmeines GeUhrUn-Lexicon, 1750, ii. 
col 1953. 

Gmelin, GeschichU der Ckemie, 1797, i. p. 69a. 

JOLY (Gabriel). 
Trois Anciens Traictez de la Philosophie Naturelle. 

1. Les Sept Chapites (sic) dorez, ou bien les sept Sceaux Egyptiens, & la 
Table d'Esmeraude d' Hermes Trismegiste. 

2. La Response de Messire Bernard Conte de la Marche Treuisane, k 
Thomas de Boulongne, Medecin du Roy Charles huictiesme. 

3. La Chrysop^e de lean Aurelle Augurel, qui enseigne Tart de faire Tor. 
Les deux premiers n'ont encore est^ traduits en Fran9ois, & le troisiesme est 

corrig^ des fautes suruenues en la precedente impression. Par Gabriel loly. 
A Paris, Chez Charles Hulpeau, demeurant k la rue Dauphine ^ TEscharpe 
Royale, & en sa boutique sur le Pont-neuf, proche les Augustins. 
M.DCXXVL Avec Privilege du Roi. 

8*. Pp. [8] 89 (for 81) [i]. This copy wants Augurellus' poem. 
Lenglet Duiresnoy, Histoire de la Philosophie Herm/Hque, 1743, iii. p. 107. 

JORDAN (JoHANN Ludwig). 

loannis Ludovici Jordan Gottingensis Societatis Phys. Gotting. Sodalis 
Disquisitio Chemica Evictorum Regni Animalis Ac Vegetabilis Elementorum. 
In Certamine Literario Civium Academiae Georgiae Augustae Die IV. lunii 

440 JORDAN—JUGRL 

JORDAN (JoHANN Ludwig). Continued. 

M DCC XCIX. Praemio A Rege M. Britanniae Aug. Constititto A Ifedi- 
corum Ordine Ornata. 

In contemplatione naturae nihil potest videii superuacuum. Plin. 
Gottingae Typis Joann. Christian. Dieterich. No date (1799?). 

4*, Pp. iv. 88. 

Jordan (1771-1853) was a physician at Claustbal, and chemistry in Crell's, Scherer's and Schwd^fer's 

afterwards warden of the Mint and teacher of journals. The above was orowned by the Gdttiniceo 

chemistry and smelting in the mining school there. Academy. 
He was the author of papers on mineralogy, mining 

Poggendorff, Biograpkisch-iiUrarisches Hand' I^oyal Society, Calaicgmt of ScUmH/U Po^tn^ 
w9rMttck, 1863, i. coL laoa. 1869. iii. p. 578. 

[Another Copy.] 
JOSEPHUS WESTPHALUS. 

See WKSTPHALUS (JOSKPHUS). 

JOURNAL de Physique, de Chimie, et d'Histoire Naturelle. 
See OBSERVATIONS siuT la Physique, etc 

JUNGKEN (JoHANN Helfrich). 

See JUNGKEN (JOHANN HELFRICH). 

JUGEL (JoHANN Gottfried). 
Johann Gottfried Jugels hochstniitzliches Berg- und Schmeltz-Buch, in Zwey 
Theile getheilet. In dem ersten Theil wird gehandelt von der wahren 
natiirlichen Erzeugung derer Mineralien und Metallen in denen Adem 
der Erden, samt ihren besondem Eigenschaften, auch wie dieselben zu 
erfinden seyn. In dem andem Theil wird gehandelt von dem schlechten 
Zustande des ietzigen Berg-Wesens, femer von der wahren natiirlichen und 
noch nie entdeckten Rostung, Beschickung und Schmeltzung derer Ertze, auch 
von der Stein- und Kupfer-Seigerung. Nebst einem Anhange, daraus zu 
sehen, die Fiirtreflichkeit derer in Schlesien befindlichen edlen und sehr 
reichen Gold- und Silber-haltigen Ertz-Gebiirgen, wie nemlich dieselben zo 
Hohen Landes-Herrschafll. Interessen und des gantzen Landes Besten 
konten genutzet werden. Allen Liebhabem der Metallurgie zu grossem 
Nutzen, und dem edlen Bergbau zur Aufnahm und Erhebung, aus dem 
Lichte der Natur, durch eigene Praxin entdecket. Berlin, zu finden bey 
Johann Andreas Riidiger. 1743. 

8". Pp. [x-ii] 12-189 [x blank] 5 plates. 

Dicta Philosophica, oder General-Physik dieser sichtbaren Welt, von der 
Generation aller Dinge, aus der wahren Prima Materia, besonders aber der 
Geschopfe im mineralischen Reich ; der Creaturen Auf- und Untergang, wie 

JUGEL 441 

JG£L (JoHANN Gottfried). Continued, 

auch deren Verharlichung daraus zu erkennen ; den Grund zu den hdchsten 
Geheimnissen der Natur zu erlangen ; alle geheime Wirkungen offenherzig 
zu betrachten, dafs dadurch der so lang verborgene Nutzen mit Augen zu 
sehen und zu b^reifen. Nach einer sechs und zwanzig jahrigen Unter- 
suchung, aus lauter natiirlichen Erfahrungen dargestellet, von Johann 
Gottfried Jugel, der geheimen Naturwissenschaften Cultore. Brefslau, 

1764. bey Johann Ernst Meyer. 

8«. Pp. 316 [a] [a blankj 

Johann Gottfried Jugels freyentdeckte Experimental-Chymie, oder Versuch den 
Grund natiirlicher Geheimnisse durch die Anatomie und Zerlegungskunst, 
in dem astralischen, animalischen, vegetabilischen und mineralischen Reiche 
durch systematische Grundsatze, Lehrsatze, Beweise, Gegensatze, Gegen- 
beweise, Anmerkungen, Versuche, Erfahrungen und darauf folgende Schliisse, 
nebst dem deutlichen Naturbegrifife der metallischen Generation, wie solche 
taglich in der Erde getrieben wird, durch eine lange Untersuchung, also 
vorzustellen, dafs es ein jeder Naturforschender einsehen und erkennen 
kann ; In zwey Theile abgefasset, und zu jedermanns Nutzen und Vergniigen 
dem Drucke iiberlassen. Leipzig, verlegts Johann Paul Kraufse, Buch- 
handler, 1766. 

8^. Pp. [14] i-ao8 [309-314] 215-368. Frontispiece: Author's likeness, and 
mining scene below it [aj Pp. 309-314 contain the Vorbericht of part 3, and are 
not numbered. 

Kopp's remark is that this is anything but a treatise on experimental chemistry in the common sense 
*f the term. 

Goldmacher-Catechismus in Frag und Antwort, zum Nutzen und Vergniigen 
aller derjenigen, welche in diesem Hospital krank darnieder liegen, lehrend, 
wie sie wieder zur wahren Erkanntnifs gelangen konnen. aufrichtig beschrieben 
von einem Liebhaber in Philadelphia. Berlin und Leipzig, 1776, bey 
Christian Ulrich Ringmacher. 

8*. Pp. viii. 80. 

The Vorbericht is signed "Der Autor Chyguliemist," which is obviously an anagram for '* Jugel, 
^lymist** 

Griindliche Nachricht von dem wahren metallischen Saamen, oder Prima Materia 
Metallorum, wie aus derselbe das gantze mineralische Reich seinen Ursprung 
hat. Nach eigener Erfahrung gepriifet, durch ordentliche Wiirckungen der 
Natur bestatiget, und auf eine vorher noch unbekannte Art der Welt mit- 
getheilet, durch Johann Gottfried Jugel Philos. Cult Leipzig und 

Zittau, Verlegts Johann Jacob Schops, Buchhandler. 1754. 

8*». Pp. [8] 184. 
Kopp says there was another edition in 1766. He gives an abstract of Jugel's views. 

Sehr geheim gehaltene und nunmehro frey entdeckte experimentirte Kunst- 
Stiicke die schdnsten und raresten Farben zu verfertigen; ingleichen die 
Vergoldung und Versilberung, sowohl kalt, als im Feuer, auf Metall, Glas 

44a JVGEL 

JUGEL (JoHANN Gottfried). Cantimted, 

und Porcellain, den feinsten gelben und weissen Tombac, rare Compositionen 
der Edelgesteine, Glasuren, Hob- und Stein-Vergoldung zu machen ; wie 
auch Anweisung, das metallische Wachsthum zu bef6rdem, das Gold radkaliter 
aufzuschliefsen, unreife Eklelgesteine zur Reife zu bringen, fleckichte und 
gelbe Diamanten zu reinigen, und den blassen ihr Feuer wieder zu geben; 
nebst vielen andem unbekannten chemischen Experimenten, und gehdmen 
Naturarbeiten. Den Chemicis, Mahlem, Goldschmieden, Lackirem, und 
andern Natur- und Kunst-Liebhabem zum Nutzen und Vergniigen heraus- 
gegeben. Mil einem vollstandigen Register. Zwey Theile. Neueste und 
durchgangig verbesserte und vermehrte Auflage. Zittau und Leipzig, bey 
Johaiui David SchOps, 1789. 

e*. Pp. [10] a88 ; 306 [17, 3 bUnkJ 

Philosophische Unterredung zwischen dem Fliegenden Mercurium und einem 
gemeinen Schmeltzer, worinnen gantz vollkommen und gnindlich gezei^ 
und gewiesen wird, das sonst noch nie entdeckte und zu der grossen Welt- 
Oeconomie hochst benothigte wahre und natiirliche geheime Rdst- und 
Schmeltz-Wesen, alle fliichtige und subtil-Metallhaltige Ertz- und Berg- 
Arten, den erforderten Umstanden nach, mit ihren dazu gehorigen Besdiidc- 
ungen zu zeitigen und figiren; Nebst einem vollkommenen und grundUchen 
Bericht der Natur und Creatur, wie solche nach dem irrdischen Verlauff 
aller Z^iten durch den Geist ihrer Geburth wieder aufgeloset, und in ihr 
erstes Wesen gelangen mogen, zu einem augenscheinlichen Beweiis in 
Regnum Minerale ausgefiihret, welche geheime Wahrheiten durch dem 
Grund der Natur noch niemahls so deutlich sind erfunden und an das 
Licht gestellet worden. Wobey auch ferner mit angefiihret wird, wie die 
itzigen Rost- und Schmeltz- Arbeiten auf denen meisten Haupt-Gebiirgen 
Teutschlandes eingerichtet und getrieben werden. Zur griindlichen Erkantnifs 
der wahren Natur, zu Erforschung ihrer Heimlichkeiten, und Erhebung des 
edlen Bergbaues in alien Landen, durch eigene Experimente entdecket 
von Johann Gottfried Jugel. Berlin, zu finden bey Johann Andreas 
Riidigern, privil. Buchhandl. 1743. 

8^ Pp. [1-9 frontispiece included] 10-254 [a blank]. Title red and black. 

Johann Gottfried Jugels Physica-Subterranea, oder Bewegungskraft der element- 
ischen Wirkungen, die auf und in unserm mineralischen Erdboden verrichtet 
werden. Ein Opus aller seiner gefundenen geheimen Einsichten in das 
dreyfache grofse Naturreich, das Unsichtbare sichtbar, und das Umbegreif- 
liche begreiflich und vorstellig zu machen, welches er nach einer 46jahrigen 
Naturforschung, als ein Freund aller Menschen, also aufrichtig mittheilet 
Berlin und Leipzig, bey George Jacob Decker 1783. 

8*. Pp. [i.-ix.] x.-xvi. 553. 

Von der Scheidung der Vier Elementen aus dem Ersten Chaos, und wie 
nach deren eingepflanzten Liebe eines in dem andem unaufh6rUch seine 

JUGEL^JUmXEM 44S 

JUGEL (JoHAn GormiiD). 

WlBricmig luiklMEl, aoi dcRo Qwmm w Ticiney Asapesuie:; 21 alien 
drefen Reicliai n T^gr fflwula wertSen, '^^^"■^ «% o& ^rzsa EjKntia 
solcber Wmkuqg der Matmim VobfczbSb^ ajs (5e PxiiB& >fa2em alkr 

UDCi miveffiJscfat 

GehetmiiisK zo anem Gfimd ihrer Efkesz^s^ gf>gf^ 10c L G. L 
Einem ennjgeu Kiiwtin A^*•^s^^\^^ ■■ DcLu. Ber Jobum Andreas 

Rndiger. 1744. 

[Anodier Copj.] 

JohttDn Goctfiried Jqfd m bon :■ 1707 •«>»• kzA zgx bfxsae, vl iul hs. vrts Ja^ei ::« hu 
iwe bis Ptmua SmUi\\mm%, sj%^ m lot dedc»- tnc .tsK za tcnper. aead as crnocus. Ji »:. tiK oh 
tin where he s^ he is ia hii T^ch jcar>. TfaoscJb anrrt iiar be a i^'llj •rvvr irv^ 'JuA to nc^ »& 

act > Mtiie Pi lieii in he was gqied by the KJag a oss^rtk. He 7»cc» ^ 5 :^ '.::■% i:i«E» ^ ioczk 'jf tiK 
'^ ' in 174X After 1771 he l-red a seeks aix^ve ^-cs, sc» ti.^ ::«? avVg' "aaj t« 

Bo&i, and an jm-couhi of his npsaed kaov^edce of jadx^JL "J. -j} "msu. u^ i^ k.^ 

ffhrmislfy hfraair a tmbu of the Roskracai dsl'^lzr is,' r'^—^_ 

Socktw, AU his hie had been deroted ^o iht ^otsji wa J \Z0t 'vjk^mijst. U uxaesue 

iutiAUgation of neCme. and 'ia sx aad itrtj i^ ^j'J'j r.. .\i *j:«t ^srl i^t %art tiia: r. req: 

he had recorded bis lievs ia the Maxie- kck e5sn i'^ *•'*-' -'^*-^. rtr -<aTft 

May, 1786^ 9X Berfin, in his 79>h year. yctsxz, 'J. 

Kopp has taken sobk uoobie with \iam. As a of \stt tu'jvl vx£KS*'g/i.zJ»f. IljA. 
de Kopp is one of the horest of cribcs. a piiacd ^jcue c/ Jafc't 'x>>u u-e qay^ni br Gseua. 

jnd^ an nnwauped aad f^jciUMS batonaa, aad £« :3 -Viirtiti oy 
decidmK tfie ncnts of each one fay his owa tase 

Fictohl, PraHerSUim, 1753, Tb. iL p. ia Meaao, ^jcO^w ^irr vom JaJkr 1750 H/ 1800 

HaDer, BMuiUea BMrnme^, 177a. il p. 4S6. vtntorhtmem Temlschen Ukrtftsuikr. tbc^ n. pp. 

, BiMaikgr/i CkemucM, lytet, p. 70. 

GtacMUkU der kikerm Ckgwtu, iT^S ' dcxquedcr. OtidtuMM 4£r AUkemU, 183a. pp. 

Addnag. Pm fmU ay — rf Ewfimsamgm av . . . rYcr***^!!^ Bt^rmpkiuk^lUenuitcUt Hmmd^ 

Mmrt Jlgnmmem, (SOekrUm-Usnc*. vj^fj^ il cqL wirUrtmcJk^ tjehx. l ooL iao&. 

3344. ljjMAx^:^^MaliotAsfM€Owarcf,ScuMUMSecreUs, 

Gnehn. CrahKnhir dfer Ckgmu, 179I, au p. 934; 1870^ Sut. 11 

170a iu. ppi 561, 67, 964. AUiemam€ iMmtuMe Bt^gra^ku, 1881. «▼. p- 65S 

rnchs, Meferttrimm Ser €kemdaekem, LiUeraimr, (fay Gfti^el>. 
180608, ppu a77. 3". 313^ 34<. 3S9^ 3^ 3^4. 3^ Kopj^ OuAUM^mu. iW>. u. pp. 253^57- 

JUNCKER (JOHAn). 

Conspectus Fonrntlanim Medkanun, Eihibens Tabfulis XVL Tain Methodum 
Rationalem, Qoam Remedioram Specimina, ex Praxi Stahliana Potissimum 
Desumta et Thenpiae Geneiali Acoonunodata. Auctore D. Joanne Junckero, 
Medidnae Practico Orphanotrophei HaJensis, Halae Magdebuigicae, Utteris 
et Impensis Orphanodopbei MDCCXXIIL 

4\Ppt;4lisx T«le red and Uack. Vifnetle of a sower, with ibe motto : Illo 

SDienQente levaoor* 

johann jimkcr. or loadKr, was bora at Lchn* Paedacocy. He studied medjctne at Lrfbn. and 

darIL near Cifin. ^ Dec. 1679 l«3 Sept.. 167& fnetntd in Witgenstem and I-ingen. he then 

(Hirsch); 3 June, 1680 <Eloy>: others 1683I rctnnMd to HaDc. became ordinary pbysKaan to 

studied at Gievea, Marbvc, and Halle, where he the Paedagocr and Orphanage in 1716. took the 

te 1701^ aad 1707 at the Royal dmree of ICD. in 1717, «» created ^sirfiMnr of 

JUNCKER-JUNGKEN 

JUNCKER (Johann). ConHnued. 

mediciDe in the uiuTersity, and was subfeatientljr 
promoted to be a Prussian Hofrath. He died 25 
October, 1759. 

He was a devoted adherent of Stahl, and 
advocated his doctrines in a vast number of 
academic dissertations on medicine, and he com- 
piled a series of works entitled 'Conspectus,' viz. : 
'Conspectus Therapiae spedalis,' 1707; 'Con- 
spectus Medicinse.' 1718 ; * Conspectus Chinirgiae.' 

yiMJCugtH^BibluUktca Scrifiorum Mtdicarum, 1731, 
II. i. pp. xxzY.-xxxviii. 

StoUe, AnieiiuHg gur HiUorU der AitdicinixlUH 
Gtlakrktit, 1731. p. 796. 

Lenglet Dufresno^, Histoirt tU la PkilasopkU 
Hirwuti^tu, 1743. iiL p. 193. 

&latthi0e, Conspectus Historim Medicorum chntmo- 
It^ficus, 1761, p. 556. 

Portal, Histoire eU FAnatomU ei de la Chirurgie^ 
1770. iv. p. 578. 

Haller, Btbliotkeca Balamua, 1771, L p. 435; 
177a, ii. 23a 

Haller, Bibluftkeca Ckirurgica, 1775. ii. pp. 58, 
6ai. 

Haller, BUliolhica Anatomua, 1777, ii. p. 335. 

Haller, BUlioiktca Medicinm Practicm, 1777, ii. 

Elo^, Dictionnairt kislori^ue de la MddectHe, 
MTyBf iL p. 624 (refers to another Johann Juncker, 
at least fifty years earlier, who wrote a poetiod 
paraphrase of Hippocrates' Aphorisms, Erfurt, 1610, 
ifl^, and Compendiasa Metkodus tkerapeuHca^ lb. 

x«a4. 4*). 
Baumer, Biblioikeca Ckemica^ 1782, p. 36. 

Addung, FortsetMung . . . s« . . . fdckers 

aUgttnHnen GelehrUn'JjtsncOt 1787, ii. coU 2347. 

i^i ; ' Conspectus TherapiK generalts,' 1725 ; and 
htt ' Conspectus Chemiae tbeoretioo-practicae,' 1730- 
1734, translated into German by Johano Joai^um 
Lange, 1749-175^. and into French by Jacques 
Fran9ois Demachy, Paris, 1757, in 6 vols. Some 
of these passed through several editfons. Tbey 
are arranged in tables, a catal<^gue of which is 
given by Manget 

Fried. Carl GoUk>b Hirsching. HisUrisck. 
liUrarisckes Handkuch herUhwUer und denkwMr- 
diger Persomett wekke im dem x8. JaksrkmMderte 
gestorben simd, Leipsig, 1797, III. iL p. 154. 

Gmelin, GescMickte der Cktwde^ 17^ ii pp. 36a, 
3^ 6^9. 681, 699. 

Fuchs, Repertorium der cMemiscMem LiUeratmr, 
1806.08, pp. 252, 2«, 364, 277, 983, 336. 

Meuadf, LextMtm der vom jakr 1750 Hs 180Q wr- 
storbenen TemtsckeH SchriftsUlkr, i3o6, VL pp. 
340-347 (see his references). 

Bu^graphie UniverselU, 1818, zzii. p. 150; no 
date. xxL p. 33a 

Biograpkie MidicaU, Paris, Panckoucke^ (iSao- 
25), V. 379 ^list of his works). 

Deseiniens, Dictiomnaire kistoriqm de la Mtde- 
cime, 1836, III. i. p. 988 (list of his woriul 

Bayki ft Thillaye, BiegrapkU MidicaU. i8ss u- 

Nouvelie Biograpkie GiniraU^ t86z, xzviL coU 
238. 

AUgewuine Deutsche Biograpkie^ z88k, liT. p. 
693 ya<f Hirsch). 

Hacser, Gesckichte der Meiecin^ x88i, it p. 530. 

Billings, Index-Catalogue^ 1886, vii. p. 306 ; and 
series, 1903, viii. p. 542. 

tX€mtr\s de Chymie, traduits . . . avec des notes. i757. 

See DEMACHY (JACQUES FRAN9OIS). 

JUNGKEN (Johann Helfrich). 

Joh. Helfirici Jungken, M.D. Physici Francofurtensis Chymia Experimentalis. 
Siva, Naturalis Philosophia Mechanica : ubi Prior Pars Generosiorum 
Remediorum fabricam ex Triplici Regno cum omnibus manipuladonibus, 
fideliter exhibet. Pars Altera eidem Medicamenta, inter alia, ad quosconque 
morbos generaliter adaptare docet. Adjectis Monitis Medicis Afiectus 
Puerorum concernentibus. Nee non Experimentis Renim Naturalium 
Prindpia, Commentarii loco, illustrantibus. Editio Prioribus long^ auction 
Francofurti ad Moenum, Apud Johannem Maximilianum k Sande, Anno 
M D CCI. 

4*. Pp. [8] 830. Index [8. 2]. Title black and red. Engraved title included 
in the pagination. Imperfect, pp. 283-6 torn out 

Corpus Pharmaceutico-Chymico-Medicum, sive Concordantia Pharmaceuti- 
corum Compositorum Discordans; Modemis Medicinae Pracdds dicata. 
Quippe in ea invenient tantum non omnia notissimorum Dispensatoriorum, 
tam Veterum nunc minus consueta, quam & Recentiorum hodiemo die 
magis usualia Composita, juxta morborum seriem ita disposita, ut uberrima 
inde pateat & in promptu sit Materia Medica cujusvis genio nata; Notis 

JUNGKEN 

445 

JUNGKEN (JoHANN Helfrich). Continued, 

ad mentem Clarissimonim Vironim hinc inde breviter illustrata, studio & 
opera Johannis Helfrici Jungken, Physici Francofurtensis, Academici Curiosi, 
dicti ApoUonii Cum Gratia & Privilegio Sacras Caes. Majest & Sereniss. 
Elect Saxoniae. Francofurti ad Moenum, Sumptibus Friderici Knochii, 

BibUop. Anno MDCXCVII. 

4*. Pp. [i6 frontispieoe included] 744 ; 712, Index [38, a]. Title red and black. 
Vignette with the motto : Spes Sola Deus. 

Johannis Helfrici Jungken, Physici Francofurtensis, Lexicon Chymico-Pharma- 
ceuticum, in Duas Partes distinctum, ubi Pars Prior continet selectos 
Processus Chymicos potissimum hactenus magis usuales & originaliter h 
Medicorum, non vero Pharmacopolarum Laboratoriis prodeuntes, Pars Altera 
ezhibet Composita Pharmaceutico-Galenica, tarn hactenus usualia, qu^m 
alia his subordinata, & correctiora dicta. Editio Tertia, Novitatibus 
nonnullis auctior reddita, & quidem cum Praefamine, de Contractioribus 
Pharmacopoliis, juxta modernae rei Medicae statura, rite instituendis, atque 
Medicorum non tantum privatam Medicamentorum Chymicorum elabora- 
tionem, sed & Dispensationem, ^ Pharmacopolis hinc inde acriter impugnatam, 
concernente &c. Norimbergae, Apud Johannem Fridericum Riidigerum, 

Anno M DCC XXIX. 

8*. Pp. [48] 275 [13]; 535 [38, 3 blank]. Title red and black, printed across 
two pages. 

Of the Lexicon ChymicihPharmaceuticum Eloy quotes editions: Norimbergae, 
1709, 1716. 

Jungken, or jUngken, or Juncken, or Junken, 
was torn 19 Dec., 1648, at Caldern, in Hesse, 
studied at Marpurg and Heidelberg and graduated 
in medicine at the latter place in 1671. He 
went to Switzerland, and in 1675 ^^ appointed 
court physician to the Duke of Birkenfeld. In 
1677 he left on account of the war and became 
phjTsician of Count Witgenstein. He left for 
Frankfurt in 1680 and travelled with Count 
▼on Hohenloh the Imperial Ambassador. He 
next spent three years in Speyer. and after- 
wards settled at Frankfurt in 1689, where he 
became physician to the garrison, then to the 

Mercklin, Limdenius renovatus, 1686, p. 601. 

Conring, Im Universam Artem Meaicam . . . 
Introductio, 1687, Add. xi. § 6, p. 387. 

Manget, Bibliotheca Scriptorum Medicorum^ 
17^1, II. i. p. zxziv. (with reviews from the Acta 
lApHensia), 

StoUe, AnUUung »ur Historie der Mediciniicfun 
Gelahrheit, 1731, pp. 366, 367, 736. 

Kestner, MtdUtnisches Gelehrten-Lexicon^ 1740. 

P- 437- 

Lenglet Dufretnoy, Histoire de la Philosophie 
HermiHque^ 174a, i. pp. 417, 485 ; iii. pp. 7, 19a, 

193. 

fa 

[Ocher, Allgemeines Gelehrien- Lexicon , 1750, ii. 

col. 2023. 

BClchner, Academite . . . Natura Curiosorum 
Historia^ 17^5. p. 482, No. 2x9. 

Portal, Histoire de I' Anatomic etde la Chirurgie, 
1770. iv. p. 145. 

Haller. Bibliotheca Botanica^ 1771, i. p. 627. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Anatomtca, 1774* i* p* 763. 

hospital, and finally 'Physicus Ordinarius.' He 
also acted as pnvate and court physician to a num- 
ber of the reigning nobility. He was received as a 
member of the Academia Natura* Curiosorum, 19 
Feb., 1696. He died at Frankfurt 5 Jan., 1726. 

Other editions of the preceding were : Chymia ex- 
perimentalis curiosa, z68x, 8*, pp. [22] 898, with an 
engraved title and a plate of apparatus. 1694, 1701; 
Lexicon Pharmaceuticum. 1698, 8" ; Corpus Phar- 
maceutico-Chymico-Medicum Universale, 17x1, 2 
vols. fol. ; X732, fol. , and he wrote some works on 
medicine and notes on Agricola's Commentaries on 
Poppius. 

Haller. Bibliotheca Chirur^ica, 1774, i. p. 508. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Medicma practica, X777, ii. 
p. 448 ; 1779. iii. p. 496. 

Eloy. Dictionnaire historique de la Midecine^ 
177B, li. p. 6a6. 

Baumer, Bibliotheca Chemica, 17B2, pp. 31-32. 

Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemie, 1798, li. pp. 232, 
333. 260, 372, 385. 786, 787. 

Fuchs, Repertonum der chemischen Liiteratur, 
1806-08. pp. 166. 185. 

Biographie Midicale, Paris, Panckoucke, (1820- 

25). p. 377. 

Dezeimeris, Dictionnaire histonque de la Mide- 

cine, 1836, III. i. p. 293. 

Bayle & Thillaye, Biographie MidicaU, 1855, ii. 

P- 427. 
Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie, x88x, xiv, p. 

726 (b^ Strieker). 

Bilhngs, Index-Catalogw, 1886, vii. p. 3xa 
Hirsch, Biographisches Lexihon der hervomi» 

genden Aertte^ 1886, iii. p. 421 (by Strieker). 

446 

JURAIN 

JURAIN (Abtala). 
Abtala Jurain Filii Jacob Juran Hjle nod Coahyl; Aus dem iEthiopiichen 
ins Lateinische, und aus dem Lateinischen in das teutsdie tnmslatiret und 
iibergesetzet durch D. Johann Elias Mullar, Phyfico-Magico-Medtco 
practicum. Hamburg, MDCC XXXII. 

8^. Pp. [4] 103 [i blank.] The titto-pafe lemis to be a canod. 

In the addren to the reader the editor of this 
tract sa3rs his name was de Canthier, and that he 
was 61 years of age. The author, Abtala Jurain 
tells (p. 19) of his parentage, his discovery of the 
stone and of the Society of"* Warck adamisten" to 
which he belonged, and how he was nuide chief of 
all the philosophers in Ethiopia. MuDer, who 
appears as the translator, wrote one or two books. 

Sa MULLER (J. B.). 

Ladrsgoe quotes from F. J. W. Sdirikler's Newt 
Omdin, Gesckichie der ChtmU^ 1799, iii. p. 243. 

Sammhmg ier BiM§^Uk fUr die JMert Natmr- 
wUMMtekaft umd CJkmu, 177^^ iL ppi 91-iu, 
another work by this same author : Da Araben 
Abdallah Jurain Varkadamia odor Gddkunst im 
iUofofiscben Steine, and adds that it was written 
in gold letters upon parchment and bdooged to 
an Arabian hermit, who set the greatest store by it 
The editor, however, would not gnaniitoe its 
authenticity. 

L»dngae,S$SiUiMiftie Owvaref, Sciences SecrHes, 
1870^ Na 1334. 

K, (C. A.'^K.^E. L, D.) 447 

K. (C. A.). 

Die allgemeinen Oeconomischen Maximen, wie sich solche aus dem B^;riffe 
der Oeconomic herleiten und bey einer jeden Oeconomie sehr niitzlich 
gebrauchen lassen, nebst einem Beweise, dafs dieselben in denen Privat- 
Oeconomien, da man sich der Natur und Kunst bedienet» und welche 
uns dergleichen Sachen gewehren, die das meiste Geld ins Land bringen, 
sonderlich durch die Mathemadk, Fhysick und Chymie erhalten werden, 
kiirtzlich vorgestellet von C. A. K. Halle im Magdeburgischen, 1728. 

Zu finden in der Rengerischen Buchhandlung. 

8*. Pp. [la] 116. 

This is really a treatise on economics, but in the discoveries made to the aflfairs of everyday life, 

chap. iii. the author points out the practical and It is in fact an early advocac|r of the practictl 

economic advantages of the study of mathematics, importance of the study of physical science^ and is 

physics, and chemistry, and gives examples of the thoiefore of special interest at this time (x9oii)ii 
profitable results following from the application of 

K. (C. R). 

See CRASSELLAME (MARCO ANTONIO). 

K. (D. D.). 

See DESTILLIR-KUNST, 1 753. 

K. (E. L. D.). 
Der Triumpf-Wagen des Vitriol oder Natur und kunstmafsige Beschreibung 
von der Generation, und Wundem dieses grofsen Subjects der Alchymie 
einem jeden eifrigen Forscher und Sucher dieser edlen Kunst zum Nutzen 
aufgefuhret von £. L. D. K. Frankfurt und Leipzig, 1770. bey Johann 
Georg Fleischer. 

8*. Pp. 7a. 

P. 49. Rogerius Baco . . . Tractat von der Tinctur und Odil des Vitriols . . . 
aus dem Englischen ttbersetzt von £. L. D. K. 

The title certainly reminds one of Dasil Valentine's other substances which are of interest, historically, 
Cmrrus Triumphalis Antimonii. The book con- from their empirical character, 
tains a number of experiments on green vitriol and 

Btytrag mot Gtschichie der kdkim Chunie^ 1785, Kopp, DU Alckemie, 1886, ii. p. 329. 

pi 674. Lmag}xe^BitiiaMfug Owarqff lefties S§rr^ 

r, Gtschiekte derAlckiwne^ 1832, p. 145. 1870, No. X488. 

[Another Copy.] 
[Another Copy.] 

Wants pp. 47^72 containing Roger Bacon's tract on tb^ Tincture and Oil of Vitriol. 

448 

K, (G, A.y-KAUD 

K. (G. A.). 

Su MAI£K (michaelX Chymisches Cabinet, 1708. 

K. (J. D.). 
Die durch seltsame Einbildung und Betriegerey Schaden bringende Alchy- 
misten-Gesellschafil, nach ihren gewdhnlich Merckmahlen und Eigen- 
schaflften, welche sie von sich spiihren lassen, nebst Anfuhrung einiger 
Discurse, was von der Alchymie zu halten, wie auch Erzehlung etlicher 
untiichtigen Processe: Worbey auch viele in Conversation gebrauchlidie 
h^fHiche Reden, und unterschiedliche Ergdtzligkeiten zubefinden, in einen 
niitzlichen Lust-Spiele vorgestellet von J. D. K. Franckfiirht und Leipzig, 
. . . Heinrich Zichler, 1700 [?i709]. 

12 

last line 

*• Pp. [15 frontispiece included] 297 [i blank]. Title red and black. The 
le is partiaUy cut off. The preface is dated : Nordhausen den 17. Dec. 1699. 

This is a play in which the alchemists of the time 
are ridiculed, the author, in .his preface, being 
careful to distinguish their pursuit from chemistiy. 
It is mentioned by Groelin, Gtschichte der Chrmte, 
1798, ii. p. 293, and Kopp quotes it from him in 
his note upon ' ' Alchemy on the Stage *' {Die 
Alchemie, 1886, i. p. 258). Kopp also refers to an 
article on Christian Renter by r riedrich Zamcke, 
who shows that the said Renter was not the author 

(Abhandlungen der philolog. histor. Classe der 
K6n. Scichs. Gesell. aer Wissenscbaften, Leipng, 
1884, ix. p. 582). 

There was a French comedy, in 3 acts, not 
mentioned by Kopp, a few years earlier than the 
present : Les Stn^fUurs au la Fierrt PkiUnopkaU 
ifArUquin, Amsterdam, 1695, la^, pp. [z-6] 7-198 
[4 list of new books], with 3 illustrations aiid a 
frontispiece. 

KALID BEN JAZICHL 

Liber Secretorum Alchemiae. 

See ALCHEMiA, 1 541, p. 338. 

See GRATAROLO (c), Vera Alchemiae . . • doctrina, 1561, i. p. 233. 

See ARTIS AURlFERiG . . . volumina, 16 10, i. p. 208. 

See MANGET (j. J.), Bibliotheca Cbemica Curiosa, 1702, ii. p. 183. 

See ARN ALDUS de Villa Nova, Chymische Schrifften, 1748, p. 273 (in German). 

Buch der Geheimnuss. 

See MORGENSTERN (PHILIP), Turba Philosophoruro, 1613, i. p. 274. 
See MORGENSTERN (PHILIP), Turba Philosopborum, 1750, i. p. 335. 

Secreta Alchymiae. 

See SALMON (WILLIAM), Medicina Practica, 1691, p. 284. 

Of this writer Maier says that he was a con- 
summate artist in chemistry, and repeats, what the 
book itself tells us, that it was translated from 
Hebrew into Arabic and then into Latin. He 
farther commends him for his reverence and 
prudence in treating the art as a divine revelation 
only to those worthy of it. Fkjrrichius describes 
the tract as ' of deep and hidden meaning, to which 
if you bring no illumination you will carry from it 
none away. 

Schmieder calls the author a Jew, but gives no 
authority for his statement that the Arabic manu- 
script came to NiirnberK about 1500. There is 
no notice of his life; he is not mentioned by 
Gmelin and Kopp, and the Hebraic origin of the 
book lacks confirmation. His name appears in 
various forms : Nazari calls him ' filius Azichi 
iudei.* Borel, in consequence of some misprint or 
other accident, has made two persons out of one 
and has got into general confusion. He enumer- 

ates : * Liber Secretorum Regis Calid, filii laricfai 
sine lapidis Philosophic! secreta secretonun ad- 
miranda, . . . e.x Hebrseo primum in Arabicura, 
et demum in Latinum traducta . . . Francofurti. 
Sumptibus ac Typis Joannis Bringeri, 161 5, in 
3 [PP- ['~^] 9*5^ {}' ^ blank]] & Norimberg. cum 
Gebro' (which is probably me 1541 or the 1545 
edition above) ; and ' Calid ludaei Ke|[is, filii lazichi 
vel Azichii liber secretorum Alchemiae in Theatre 
Chemico, ex aliis dicitur, filius Isid. ft Isidori, ^el 
Seid, comipto nomine,' and he farther attrifaiutes 
to him the ' Liber Trium Verbonim ' which passes 
under the name of Kalid Rachaidibi. Borel has 
made a slip in saying that the ^ Liber Secretorum 
Alchemiae is in the Theatrum Chemicum, 

He has been confused with Kalid ben lend, and 
with Kalid Rachaidibi, as is done by Manget. 

The first edition of the * Liber Secretoruni 
Alchemiae' seems to be that of x^i, above. It 
was reprinted in the 1545 edition of tluit collection 

KAUD 

449 

KAUD BEN JAZICHI. Continued. 

which appeared under the title : Alckemue Gebri 
. . . Lihri, cum Reliquis, pp. 274-293. and there 
was the 1615 edition above mentioned. It was 
translated into French and published along with 
R. Bacon, Hortulanus, &c., Lyon, 1557, pp. 57- 

Nazari, Delia tramutatione metallica sogni Ire, 

Maier, SjtmMa Attrae Mensa^ 1617, p. 71. 
Bord. Bibliotktca Chimica^ 1654, p. 54. 
Mercklin. Lindenius rencvatus^ 1686, p. 137 
(calls him filius Jarichi). 

107 
into 

65-109 ; 
con and 

; and in the reprint. Paris, z6xa, pp. 61 
_ _ English, and published with R. Bacoi 
Hortulanus, London, 1597, pp. 28-53. in which he 
is styled both Calid and Galid. lazich and larich. 

Borrichius. Conspectus Scriftorum Ckemicorum, 
1697, p. 13, No. xviiL ; p. 23, No. xxxi. 
M&ngeUBi^luflMeca ScripfyrumMedicorum, 17$!^ 

I. ii. p. 5. 
Schmieder. Gesckickie der AkkemU, 183a. P- KM- 
IjAAxvLgait^BUliotJUque Ouvarqf,Sciaues Secriies, 

1870. Nos. 684-687. 

KALID BEN JESID. 

Entretien du Roi Calid et du Philosophe Morien sur la Magistere d'Hermes. 
See RICHEBOURG 0. M. D.), Biblioth^que des Philosophcs Chimiqucs, 174O1 "• 
p. 56. 

See MORIENUS. 

In the year 683, Caliph Jesid, Kalid's father, 
died, and Moaouyaih II., Kalid's brother, succeeded 
but lived only for a few months. Katid being 
young, between 15 and 20 years of age, Merouan 
was made Caliph, on condition that Kalid should 
be next, but instead of that he appointed his own 
son, Abd-el-Malik, to succeed nim. He had 
married Kalid's mother on his accession, but had 
made the blunder of calling him illegitimate. 
When this was repeated by Kalid to his mother, 
she was so infuriated that she either had Merouan 
removed by poison or by suffocation in pillows 
while he was asleep. Kalid thereupon gave up the 
succession, and spfent the last twenty years of his 
life in the encouragement of wise and learned men 
and in the prosecution of the sciences, especially of 
alchemy. He was the most learned not only of the 
Ommiades but of the whole Koreisch stock. His 
teacher was the Greek monk and adept Morianos 
(Morienus ?) ; he gathered about him all the Sages 

Nazari, Delia tramuiaiione metallica sogni tre, 

I599i pp. 137, 141- 

Maier, SymMa Aurece Mensce^ 1617, p. 32. 

Borel, Bibliotheca Chimica, 1654, p. 54. 

Borrichius, Consfectus Scriptorum Chemicorum^ 
1697, p. 12, No. xvii. 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire de la Philosopkie 
Herm^tique, 1742, i. pp. 86-98, 466 ; iii. p. 130. 

Schmieder, Geschickte der Alchemie, 1832, pp. 
104. 121. 

Hadji Khalfa, Lexicon bibliqgrapkicum etencyclo- 
petdicum^ ed. FlOgel, 1835-18(8, iii. d. 97 ; iii. p. 
59a, No. 7114; iv. p. 413. No. 9016; V. pp. 87, 
980, No. 10x33; vi. p. 53. No. 12698 (Medilet 
Manr&nos, the book of the monk Marianos and 
Khfllid Ben Yezid concerning alchemy). 

WOstenfeld, Geschichte der Arabiscken Aertte 
umd Naturforscher, G()ttingen, 1840, p. ^ No. 17. 

Hoefer, Histoire de la Chimie, 1842, u p. 331 ; 

of Egypt, and Stephanus the elder translated for 
him Greek books into Arabic. He died in 70a 
according to Hammer-Purgstall. in 704 aocofding 
to Ibn KhaUikan. foUowed bv I.^lerc. but in 708 
according to Tagriberdi in his Egyptian history, 
quoted by Hammer-Purgstall. 

The alchemical writings ascribed to Kalid in the 
Fihrist (loth century) are : book of the leaf, the 
great ; book of the leaf, the little ; the book of 
heats ; the book of admonition to his father Jesid 
about the art of alchemy ; Hadji Khalfa adds : the 
book of compassion in four sections : i*, of the 
knowledge of the philosophers' stone (others say 
the troubles), a", of weights, 3', of the method of 
preparation, 4**, of the properties of the stone. 
There is also a poem : the Paradise of Wisdom ; 
a book on the secrets of alchemy, and his con- 
versations with Marianos. Leclerc assigns to him 
not only this last but also the Liber Secretorum 
and the Liber triiun verborum. 
1866, i. p. 350 (author of the ' Liber Secretorom 
and * Liber tnum verborum '). 

Ibn Khallikan, Biographical Dictionary, edited 
by Baron M*Guckin de Slane. 1843. i. [246]. p. 
481. 

Kopp, Geschichte der Chemie, 1844, ii. p. X93- 

V. Hammer, LiteraturgtschichU der Araher, 
Wien, 1851, Erste Abtheilung, Zweiter Band, pp. 
z85'Z90. 

Figuier, L'Alchimie et Us Alchimistes, 1856. 
pp. 14, 26. ^ 

Ibn Khaldun, Prolegomena, ed. M*G. de Slane, 
part iii. p. 193 (in Notices et Extraits des manu- 
scrits de la Bibliothique ImpiriaU, . . . Paris. 
1868, xxi. p. 209). 

KU&b-af'FihAst, ed. Gustav Flilgel, Leipng. 
1871-72, ii. zoo, Notes 2z, 22. 

Leclerc, Histoire de la Midecine Arabe, Z876, i. 
p. 64. 

KALID RACHAIDIBI. 

Liber Trium Verborum. 

See ARTis AURiFERiE . . . voluiDina, 1610, i. p. 226. 

See THEATRXnkI CHEMICUMy 1660, V. p. 186. 
See GINiECEUM CHIMICUM, 1679, p. 573. 

See GEBER, Summa Perfectionis, 1682, p. 235. 
See MANGET (j. J.), Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, ii. p. 189. 
See ARN ALDUS de Villa Nova, Chymische Schrifften, 1748, p. 321^ 

aF 

450 

KAUD^KASTELL 

KALID RACHAIDIBI. Continued. 
Buch der drey W5rter. 

See MORGBNSTERN (philipX Turba Philosophonim, 1613, i. p. 501 ; 1750^ i. p. 367. 

See GEBER, Chymische Schriften, 175 1, p. 236. 

See GBBER, Commentaria iiber Gebers Werke, 1792, p. 275. 

The ascription of the * Liber trium verbonim ' to 
Kalid, or Kallid, or Kanid Rachaidibi. or Calid 
Rachiadabi according to Nazari, is based upon the 
statement at the end of the printed editions. Con- 
cerning the author Schmieder remarks that * he was 
an Arabic alchemist who lived about 1200, and was 
often confused with Kalid ben lexid. There 
appears to be no Arabic manuscript forthcoming, 
but one mav exist, though it may not be mentionMi 
in the catalogues. The Latin translation was first 
printed in the Ars Aurifera^ Basel, 1572, then in 
the Theatrum, in Manget*s Bibliotheci^ in the 
Danzig x68a edition of Geber, and in German in 
Roth-Scholtz's translation of Geber.' Schmieder 
infers from this that the original was to be sought 
for in Basel. But there he is wrong, for the tract 
had been printed in Italy a hundred years before, 
sometime oetween 1470 and 1480, in the editio 

Nazari, Delia tramutatione metal lica sogni tre, 
1599, p. X39. (He adds the title of the first 
chapter, 'De qualitate lapidis,* as if it were a 
distinct tract, and has thereby misled Borel. ) 

Borel, Bibliotheca Chimica, 1654, p. 54. 

Mercklin, Lindenius renovatus, z686, p. 1^7 
(ascribes the * Liber trium verborum ' to * Kalid 
mius Jarichi '). 

KALLID. 
See KALID. 

princep of Geber's works. It there 
capituia. Ixxxxii.-lxxxxix., and it is to be obacfVed 
that Kalid*s name is not mentioned as the anther's. 
This was not done till Marcellus Sflber printed at 
Rome the revised edition of this ▼olome from a 
copy in the Vatican Library. Silber's edition is 
undated, but it is prior to i^aa In it not ooly is 
the name of Kalid mtroduced, but there are some 
additions to the text which presumably wrere taken 
from manuscript sources. 

In this volume Kalid's tract occupies Sigs. t iii 
recto to X I recto, Silber's edition was re|»inted bf 
Petrus SchoefTer, Venetiu, 1542, and the tract is 
contained in ff. 106 verso to no verso. 

The Danzig i68a edition is a reprint of these, and 
the German translation is made from them. 

What credence is to be attached to the date 1200. 
I am unable to say. 

Manget, Bibliotheca Scr^torum Medicontm^ 
1731, I. ii. p 5 (follows Mercklin). 

Fictuld, Probter-SteiH, 1753, Th. i. p. 98 (* not 
for beginners '). 

Schmieder, Gesckickte der Alckemie, 18^, p. 105. 

Hoefer, Histoire de la Ckimie, 1842, 1. p. 331 ; 
1866, i. p. 350. 

LAdr2Lgue,BibliotMyue Owarojf.ScieHces StcrHes^ 
1870, Nos. 688-691. 

KANIS or KANID. 

See KALID RACHAIDIBI. 

KARDILUK (JoHANN Hiskias). 

See CARDILUCIUS (JOHANN HISKIAS). 

KASTELL (C. V. V.). 

C. V. V. Kastells Adeptus Realis. das ist kiirtzliche Zuschrifft an alle 
respective Hochgeneigte Liebhaber der wahren und reellen Alchymie^ 
bestehende 

(i) In einer treuhertzigen Wamung vor allerhand betriiglichen Metall- 
und Mineral- auch Special- und Particular- Processen. 

(2) Einem ghindlichen Beweifs, dafs nicht nur ehemahls eine Gold- 
hervorbringende Wunder-materia, oder so genanter Stein der Weisen 
warhafftig und gewifs gewesen, sondern auch zu dato noch bey verschiedenen 
Menschen gefunden, und durch G5ttliche Beyhiilffe wurcklich bereitet 
werden konne. 

(3) Einer aufrichtigen Gestandniifs obigen Autoris, dass Er durch 
Gottliche Gnade solches Geheimniifs nicht nur besitze, sondern auch 
resolviret sey, einigen redlichen Patrioten solches oculariter zu demoostrir^ 

KASTELL-^KEIL 451 

IKASTELL (C. V. v.). Continued. 

und zu eroffnen. zum andem mahl aufgelegt Leipzig zu finden in 
Groschuffs Buchladen, 17 16. 

8*. Pp. [x6]. 

In the British Museum there is a tract called what from the above. Against it was written 

^d!i*^/ttj ^^a/». containing title-page, preface, and Adiptus Fatalis, 1721, (^.t;.)* Kopp mentions 

index only, and dated 171 5. The name of Kastell both 'Adeptus Fatalis' and *Adeptus Ineptus' 

does not appear on it, and the title varies some- by Wegener, but not the present tract. 

KEIL (Christoph Heikrich). 
Compendi6ses doch vollkommenes Anatomisches Handbiichlein, darinnen alle 
und jede Theile des Menschlichen Leibes in natiirlicher Ordnung denen 
An^ngem der Chirurgie vorgelegt und so deutlich beschrieben werden, 
dafs sie auch so gar ohne Figuren und Kupfier zu erkennen und 
zu finden. Mit grossen Fleifs colligiret und zusammen getragen, von 
Christophoro Heinrico Keil, Phil. & Med. Doct wie auch Physico 
Ordinario der Stadt nnd {sic) Sechs Aemter Wunsiedel. Leipzig und 
Hof, Verl^s Johann Christian Martini, 1730. (i) 

8^. Pp. [8, frontispiece included] 143. Register [17]. TiUe red and black. 

Compendidses doch vollkommenes Chirurgisches Handbiichlein, darinnen 
enthalten, wie alle lehrbegierige Chirurgi sich in alien und jeden Verwund- 
ungen, Schaden und Operationen des menschlichen Leibes verhalten, und 
denenselben mit dienlichen Mitteln, geschickten Handgrifien, bequemen 
Instrumenten, und guten Bandagen heilsamlich begegnen soUen. Alles 
aufs kiirtzeste und deutlichste, auch auf die neueste und beste Art vor 
Augen gestellet, von Christophoro Heinrico Keil, Phil, et Med. Doct wie 
auch Phys. Ordinario der Stadt und sechs Aemter Wunsiedel. Leipzig 
und Hof, Verlegts Johann Christian Martini, 1730. (2) 

8°. Pp. [8, frontispiece included] 356. Register, etc. [17, x blank]. Title red 
and black. 

Haller {BibL Chirurgicat 1775, ^ P* 3°4) quotes did not know the first. He calls it a text book for 
an edition of Leipzig. 1747, tne sixth, because he beginners by a physician of WOnsiedel. 

Compendioses doch vollkommenes Medicinisch-Chymisches Handbiichlein, 
nach der Ordnung des Alphabeths verfasset, worinnen alle drey Reiche 
Vegetabile, Minerale & Animale und folglich die gantze Materia Medica 
mit enthalten, nebst denen daraus verfertigten iiblichsten und nothigsten 
Productis samt deren Nutzen und Gebrauch alien Anfanger der Medicin 
zum besten entworfTen von Christophoro Heinrico Keil, Phil. & Med. wie 
auch Physico Ordinario der Stadt und Sechs Aemter Wunsiedel. Leipzig, 
1734. Verl^ts Johann Christian Martini, Buchhandler in der Grimmischen 
Gasse. 

8*. Pp. [16, frontispiece included] 279 [25]. Tide rod and black. 

Compendioses doch vollkommenes Medicinisch-Chymisches Handbiichlein, 
nach der Ordnung des Alphabeths verfasset, worinnen alle drey Reiche 
Vegetabile, Minerale & Animale und folglich die gantze Materia Medica 
mit enthalten, nebst denen daraus verfertigten iiblichsten und n6thigsten 

452 KEIL 

KEIL (Christoph Heinrich). Continued. 

Producds samt deren Nutzen und Gebrauch alien AnBingem der Median 
zum besten entworffen von Christophoro Heinrico Keil, Phil. & Med. Doct 
wie auch Phys. Ordin. der Stadt und Sechs Aemter Wunsiedel. Die 
vieite und verbesserte Auflage. Leipzig, 1742. Verlegts Johann Christian 
Martini, Buchhandler in der Grimmischen Strasse. 

8*. Pp. [z6, frontispiece or engraved title included] 283. Indices [31]. Title red 
and black. 

Compendi6ses doch voUkommenes Medicinisch Chymisches Handbiichlein, 
nach der Ordnung des Alphabets verfasset, worinnen alle drey Reiche 
Vegetabile, Minerale & Animale und folglich die gantze Materia Medica 
mit enthalten, nebst denen daraus verfertigten iiblichsten und ndthigsten 
Productis, samt deren Nutzen und Gebrauch. Allen Anfangern der 
Medicin zum besten entworffen von Christophoro Heinrico Keil, Phil. & 
Med. Doct. wie auch Phys. Ordin. der Stadt und Sechs Aemter WunsiedeL 
Die Sechste und verbesserte Auflage. Mit K6nigl. Pohln. und ChurftirstL 
Sachs, allergn. Privilegio. Leipzig, 1748. Verlegts Johann Christian 

Martini, Buchhandler in der Grimmischen Strasse. 

8^. Pp. [16, engraved title or frontispiece included] 283. Indices [ai]. Title red 
and black. 

Compendioses doch voUkommenes Philosophisches Hand-Biichlein, das ist: 
Philosophische Grund-Satze zur Universal-Tinctur auf Menschen und 
Metallen, womit alle wahre Philosophi so von der Welt bis hieher gewesen 
sind, iibereinstimmen, Als welches der wahre Grund alle Philosophische 
Biicher griindlich zu verstehen, und die hochste Medicin zu machen. Mit 
grofsen Fleifs zusammen getragen, von Christophoro Heinrico Keil, PhiL & 
Med. Doct. wie auch Phys. Ordinario der Stadt und sechs Aemter 
Wunsiedel. Leipzig und Hof, Verlegts Johann Gottlieb Vierling. Anno 
1736. 

8^. Pp. 176, frontispiece included. TiUe red and black. 
This is the edition quoted by Gmelin, by Fuchs, and by Schmieder. 

Compendioses doch voUkommenes Philosophisches Hand-Biichlein, das ist: 
Philosophische Grund-Satze zur Universal-Tinctur auf Menschen und 
Metallen, womit alle wahre Philosophi so von der Welt bis hieher 
gewesen sind, iibereinstimmen, Als welches der wahre Grund alle Philoso- 
phische Biicher griindlich zu verstehen, und die hdchste Medicin zu machen. 
Mit grossen Fleifs zusammen getragen von Christoph Heinrich Keil, PhiL 
& Med. Doct. wie auch Phys. Ordinario der Stadt und sechs Aemter 
Wunsiedel. Dritte Auflage. Hof, verlegts Johann Gottlieb Vierling, 

privilegirter Buchhandler, 1768. 

8*. Pp. 175 [i blank]. Engraved symbolic frontispiece included in the pagination. 

This edition is in the Ouvarofif collection. 

I have not found any notice of Keil. Besides The author of the ^^n^/rd^ speaks contemptuously 

these he vnoic a. Lexicon medicihphysicum, batanico- of his other works, which he styles * Handbttchd- 

iechnicum, versum a J. A, S. et auctum, Amst, chen.' 
1767, 8*. 

KEIL—KELLEY 

4S3 

^£IL (Christoph Heinrich). Continued. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Bottmica, ^77^ u* P* 574- 
Haller, BUliotktca Ckirurgicat 1775* ii. pp. 223, 

Haller, Bibliotktca Anaiomica, 1777, ii. pp. 288, 

Beytrag tur GesckichU dtr kohem Ckemie^ 1785, 
p. 664. No. 458. 

GmdiOy GesckichU dtr Ckcmie^ 1798, ii. p. 333. 

Fuchs, Repertorium der chtmiscken IMteratur, 
i8o6-o8, p. ^o. 

Schmieder, GesckickU dcr AlckewUe, 183a, p. 544. 

Ladrague, BibliotlUque Ouvarof, Sciences 
Secritest 1870, Nos. 1397-98. 

KEIR (James). 
Versuche und Beobachtungen iiber die Auflosung der Metalle in Sauren und 
ihre Niederschlagungen nebst einer Nachricht von einem neuen zusammen- 
gesetzten sauren Aufldsungsmittel, zum Gebrauch bey einigen technischen 
Operationen, zur Scheidung der Metalle von James Keir, Esq. Mitglied 
der konigl. Gesellsch. der Wissenschaften in Ix)ndon. Aus dem Englischen 
iibersetzt von Ludewig Lentin. Gottingen, bey Johann Christian Dietericlu 

1791. 

8°. Pp. 4a In quires. 

Keir, a native of Stirlingshire, was born 29 Sept., 
1735. He studied medicine at Edinburgh, entered 
the army as an ensign in 1757 and spent his spare 
time in reading the classics and military writers. 
He rose to be captain, retired in 1768, and settled 
at West &T>mwich where he studied geology and 
chemistry, and engaged both in research and in 
manufactures. 

He started a glass work at Stourbridge, in 1778 
he was manager with Boulton and Watt, in 1780 
he established alkali and soap works, and in 1794 
opened a colliery. 

Gmelin, Gesckichte der CAemie, 1799, iii. pp. 293, 

314, 376. 931, 963. 

Scherer, Allgemeines Journal der Chemie, 1801, 
vi. p. 902. 

Reuss, Das Gelehrte England^ 1804, Nachtrag, 
Tb. i. p. 566. 

Thomson, History of the Royal Society ^ 18x2, 
Appendix iv. p. lix., 8 Dec, 1785. 

KELLER (Christian Friedrich)» 

See respour (p. M. de), Rares Experiences, 1777. 

KELLEY (Edward). 
Edouardi Kellaei Angli Tractatus duo egregii, de Lapide Philosophorum, 
una cum Theatro Astronomiae Terrestri, cum Figuris, in gratiam filiorum 
Hermeds nunc primum in lucem edid curante J. L. M. C. HamburgL 
Apud Gothofredum Schultzen, Prostat & Amsterodami apud Jansonio- 
Waesbeigios. Anno M.DC.LXXVI. 

8*. Pp. 125 [3 blank]. x6 woodcuts. 

In 1776 he published his translation of Macqtier's 
Chemical Dictionary, a vols., 4^; again in 1777 
in 3 vols., 8**, including as a supplement the second 
edition of his Treatise on Gases, contributed various 
papers to the Royal Society of which he was 
elected a fellow in 1785, and published : The first 
fart ^ a Dictionary ofchemistry^ 6*^., by J. IC 
F.R.S. and S.A.Sc., Birminghsun, 1789, 4, pp. 
[4] XX. 208. It went no farther, however, because 
he gave up the phlogiston theory under which be 
had begun it 

His death took place on xi Oct., X820. 

Upcott, A Biographical Dictionary of the living 
Authors of Great Britain and Ireland^ i8i6w 
Nouvelle Biographie Ginirale^ 1861, xxvii. ooL 

530. 
PoggendorfiE^ BiograpJUschMterarisches Hand" 

wdrterhuch^ 1863, i. coL 1237. 

Dictionary of National Biography ^ x89a, ixu 

P..3I3- 

[Another Copy.] 

Wants the end blank leaf. 

Bach von dem Stein der Weisen . . . nun aber nebst einer Vorrede von dem 
Leben und Schrifften Kellsei zum Druck befordert. 
Su ROTH-SCHOLTZ (friederich), Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum, 1732, iiL 
p. 733. 

454 

KELLEY 

KELLEY (Edward). Continued. 
Via humida, sive Discursus de Menstruo Vq^etabili Satumi. 

Su ROTH-SCHOLTZ (friederichX Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum* 1732, iii. 
p. 801. 

Excerpta quaedam ex Epistolis. 

See TRACTATUS duo Chemici, 1647, p. 31. 

See GINiECEUM CHIMICUM, 1679, p. 513. 

See ROTH-SCHOLTZ (friederich), Deatsches Theatrum Chemicnm, 1732, iii 
p. 799. 

Tractat 

See DREY vortreffliche . . . Chymische Biicher, 1670, p. 113. 
See JOHANN VON tetzen . . . Chymische Biicher, 1691, p. 113. 

Aus einem Schreiben Eduardi Kellaei. 
See TiEDA Trifida Chtmica, 1674, p. 30a 

Though there are many discrepancies in the various 
narratives of Kelley's life, there is enough unanimity 
to show that he was an unscrupulous adventurer, 
not to say a thorough-soing scoundreL He was 
therefore a man of ability without any moral re- 
straint His recorded tulventures form one of the 
romantic episodes in the history of alchemy. 

He was bom at Worcester i Aug., 1555, and was 
trained as an apothecary, so that he bad some 
familiarity with chemistry. He went to Oxford and 
Wood has originated the statement that it was 
under the name of Talbot that he entered Glouces- 
ter Hall. He next became a lawyer in London or 
in Lancaster, and in 1580 is said to have had his 
ears cropped on the pillory in the latter place either 
for coinmg or forging old deeds ; for misdeeds any- 
how. According to one account he went after this 
to Wales and there, at an inn where he stopped, he 
purchased for a small sum from the landlord a 
book which he recognised as an alchemical one, 
and an ivory box containing some white powder 
and the fragments of another with some heavy red 
powder. These had been taken from the tomb of 
a bishop at Glastonbury, it is said, which had been 
broken up and ransacked because it had been 
reputed to contain much treasure. But this was 
all that had been found and the disappointment of 
the sacrilegious thieves had been great, while the 
book — which Dr. Dee apparently speaks of as the 
Book of Dunstan — and the boxes had been treated 
as worthless till Kelley perceived their value and 
rescued them. 

Maier, Symbola Aurea Mensa, 1617, p. 481 (' his 
history and miserable end are fresh in our 
memories '). 

Asbmole, Theatrum Chemicum Britannicutn^ 
1652, pp. 465. 324, and notes p. 478. 

Borel, Bibliotheca Chimica, 1654, p. 139. 

A True and Faithful Relation of what passed 
. . . between Dr. John Dee . . . and some spirits 
. . . London, 165^, fol. (See the Preface and the 
Postscript to it, m which Casaubon, the editor, 
refers to what Ashmole says. The book contains 
also a portrait of Kelley.) 

Morhof, De Afetallorum TransmuUUione ad , , , 
Lafigelottum Efistola, Hamb., 1673, P- '5^* 

Mercklin, Ltndenius renovatus, 1686, p. 255. 

Johann von Tetzen . . . und Edoardi Kelleei . . . 
Ckymiscke Biicher, 1691, p. 33 (notice of Kelley, by 
the editor). 

He next went to London and seems to haive 
made the acquaintance of Dr. Dee at Mortlake in 
1582. After spending .some time in experimeats on 
transmutation, and carrying on his £unoos con- 
ferences with spiriu, tbey and their wives went 
abroad in company with a Polish nobleman, Albert 
Lasky, in 1583. Kelly arrived at last at Prague. 
where he performed a transmutation for the Lord 
of Rosenberg. The Emperor Rudolph IL, who 
was devoted to alchemy, having heard of this» was 
anxious to see him. By another demoostratioo be 
gratified the Emperor wbo^ it is said, made him a 
knight Kelley entered into the imperial service 
and having boasted of his knowledge of the secret 
became practically a prisoner. Aftowards, he had 
more liberty, but having (|uarreUed with a certain 
Georg Hunkler, and havmg killed him, he was 
again imprisoned. He tried to escape by means of 
his bedclothes from the window, but in doing so 
he fell^ and after lingering some time, he died nt)m 
the injuries he had received. This was in 1595. 

The details of Kelley's life are confused and con- 
tradictory, and a cntical examination of them 
would -take more space than a brief note like the 
present. 

The works which pass under his name are ' Sir 
Edward KeUe's Worke,' and his tract * Concerning 
the Philosopher's Stone written to his especiaU 
good Freind, G. S. Gent,* in Ashmole's Theatrum, 
pp. 324-333. These were translated and published 
at Hamburg, 1673, 8*, 1676, 8**, as above. 

Keren Uappuch . . . oder Teutsches Ftgfeuer der 
Scheide-Kunst^ 1702, pp. 106- no. 

Roth-Scholtz, Bibliotheca Chemtca, 1737, p. xoi 
(portrait). 

Die Edelgebome jUngfer Alckymia^ I730> p 68. 

Manget, Bibliotheca Scriptorum Meduorum, 
1731, II. i. p. xlviii. 

Zedler, universal-Lexicon, 1737, xv. coL 419. 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire de la Pkilaiphie 
Hermitique, 1742, i. pp. 306, 473 ; iii. pp. 193-4. 

J&cher, Allgemeints Gelehrten- Lexicon^ i7SP, iL 
coL 2059. 

Fictuld, Probier-Stein^ 1753, Th. ii. p. 82. 

Matthiae, Conspectus Historice Medicorum chrwto- 
logicuj, 1761, p. 38a. 

Morhof, ydm Gotdmachen, Bajnneuth, 1764, p 
123. 

KELLE Y—KELLNER 

455 

KELLEY (Edward). Continued, 

John Weever. AnHent Funeral Monuwunts, 
1767, Discourse, p. xlv. (account of an incantation 
bjr Kdley at Walton in le dale). 

Eloy. Dictummaire historiqut de la Midecine^ 
1778, ii. p. 634. 

Baumer, BiUiUkeca Chemica, 178a, p. 88. 

Beytrag tur GtsckichU der hohem Chemie, 1785, 
pp. 266, 493, 626. 

Gmelin, GtschickU der C/umu, 1797, i. pp. 963, 
510-11. 

Fuchs, Repertorium der chemischen Litteratur, 
1806^ p. ^8. 

Biographte Univfrselle^ n.d., xxi. p. 503, 

Wood, AtJunm Oxoniensts^ ed. Bliss, 1813, i. p. 
Ix. col. 588, 639^3, 741 ; 1817. iii. col. 286 ; 1820, 
iv. col. 3^ 

The Lives of Alchemptical Philosophers, 1815, 
pp. 72, 299 ; waite's edition, 1888, p. 153. 

Bu^p^pkie MidicaJt, Paris, Panckoucke (1820- 
25), V. p. 410 (quotes an edition Hamburg, 1673, 
8^ and Fragmenia d /, Combachio edita, Giessen 
(sic), 1647, 12"). 

William Lillys History of his Hfi and times, 
1822, pp. 223-227 (with a portrait of Kdlej). 

Schniieder, Geschichte der Akhemie, i83a« pp. 
302, 601. 

Godwin, Lives of the Necromancers^ 1834, p. 377. 

Mackay, Memoirs af Extraordinary pofmUsr 
Delusions, 1841, iii. p. 114: 1852, i. pp. 154-161. 

The Private LHary of Dr. John Dee, . . . edited 
by John Orchard Halliwell (Camden Society), 184a, 
passim. 

Hoefer, Histoire de la Chimie^ 1843, iL p. 135 ; 
1869, ii. p. X29. 

Figuier, L'Alchimie et les Alchimistes, 1856, pp. 
200-208. 

Ladrague, Bibliothiqne Ouvarof, Sciences 
Secrites, 1870, Nos. 941, 942. 

Allibone, A critical Dictionary of Enf^isk 
Literature. 1878, ii. p. 1013. 

Kopp. Die Alchemic, 1886. i. pp. 194. 197 ; ii. 
pp. 230, 336. 

Dictionary of National Bia^praphy, 189a, xxx. p. 
342 (article by T. Seccombe). 

KELLNER (David). 

Emeuert- verbessert- und vermehrte, sehr niitz- und erbauliche Scheide-Kunst, 
worinnen enthalten die rechte Art und Weise, wie man die vermischte 
Metalla, sonderlich Gold und Silber kiinstlich von einander scheiden und 
bringen soil, dafs iedes absonderlich pur und rein erhalten, und recht 
genuUet werden k5nne. Der heutigen curieusen Welt, sonderlich aber den 
Chymischen Laboranten, Miintz-Bedienten und Goldschmieden, zu dienstl. 
Nach- und Unterricht, mit sonderbarem Fleifs, theils aus eigener, theils aber 
aus anderer erfahmen Leuten Praxi und raren Manuscriptis, auf freund- 
liches Ersuchen, also kurz verfasset, durch D. David Kellnem. Chemnitz, 
Bey Conrad St6lseln und Sohn, 1727. 

8". Pp. [8] 164 [4]. Title red and black. Vignette with the motto: Doctorum 
Gloria Merces. 

This is probably a new edition either of Art or Anleitung tur Probier-Kunst^ Gotha, 1690, 8*. 
sgparatoria oder Scheidehunst, Leipzig, 1693, 12*. but of which I do not know. 

Officina Chymico- Metallica Curiosa. Oder : Curieus- Chymisches Laboratorium 
in welchem wie aus gemeinem Bley, durch meinst experimentirte diensahme 
Mittel und geschickte Handgriffe, Gold und Silber zu bringen deutlich 
gelehret wird. Nebst XV. raren und plausiblen Particularien, auch einer 
kurtzen Beschreibung wie das Gold ohne Feuer solviret oder calciniret 
werden k5nne. Liebhabern der edlen Kunst und den diirfiligen Nechsten 
zum besten vorgestellet von Dr. David Kellnern Unterschiedl. Grossen 
Herren bey die 40. Jahre, successive & respective gewesenen Leib- Hof- 
und Land-Medico. Nordhausen, Verlegts Johann Heinrich Grofs, 1723. 

8*. Pp. 20, 124. 

[Another Copy.] 

[Anodier Copy.] 

4S6 KELLNER 

KELLNER (David). ConHnued. 
Via R^;ia Naturae simplidssunse simplidssima ducens per simplicissimum 
laborem ad utilissimam metallorum melioradonem, quam, qui ainbulabit^ in 
simplidtate inveniet Modum ac Motum simplidssimum ad simplicissimam 
veritatem udlissimas metallorum meliorationis. Das ist : Der einfaltige, dcx:h 
Konigliche Weg der ein^tigen Natur, welcher durch einfiiltige Arbeit 
zu der niitzlichsten Verbesserung der Metallen fiirhret; Wer diesen Weg 
in hbchster Einfadt wandelt^ der wird finden die einfaltigste Arth und 
Weise, wie auch die einfiUtigste Wahrheit, Metallen mit Nutz zu verbessem, 
gezeiget durch einen der Hermetischen Philosophie Eigebenen, dessen Tauff- 
und Geschlechts-Nahmen die ersten Buchstaben seines Symboli anzeige Jesvs 
est Redemptor, Aus dessen hinterlassenen Schrifflen hervor gesucht, und auf 
Ersuchen curieuser Leute zum Druck befbdert {sk\ von Dr. David Kellnem. 
Nordhausen, Verl^gts Carl Christian Neuenhahn, BucHh. 1704. 

8^^ Pp. 109 [i blank]. Tide red and black. 
This is the only work of Kellner's referred to by Schmieder. 

VVohlangerichtetes iErarium Chymicum Antiqvo-Novum, oder Alt- emeuert- 
und reichlichst vermehrte Chymische Schatzkanuner, in welcher nicht allein 
L. Martini Schmuckens, sondem auch vieler andem vomehmen Chymicorum, 
bey 200. herrliche, sehr curieuse Secreta Chymica, meinst auff Verbesserung 
derer Metallen, theils aber zugleich auch aufif gute Medidnen, gerichtet 
und mit sch6nen Notis & Observationibus, ex praxi coUecds, illustriret, 
enthalten. Aus vielen Manuscripds mit sonderbahrem Fleifs zusammen 
getragen und der heudgen Curieusen Welt zu Lieb und Dienst, auf 
Ersuchen, also beschickt, und mit angehengter Vorstellung der zur Edlen 
Chymie gehdrigen imd in 153. Aphorismis bestehenden Wissenschaft des 
jiingem Hn. von Helmont, sub Eremitse nomine sich darstellende, zum 
offentlichen Druck bef5rdert durch D. David Kellnern KQnigl. Preus. und 
FiirstL Sachs. Land Medicum. Leipzig, Verl^;ts Joh. Herbord Klofs, 
Buchhandl. 1702. Delitsch, druckts Christian Koberstein. 

8". Pp. [23] 386 [misprinted 389]. Title red and black. Imperfect 

KurtJEe Vorstellung der zur edlen Chymie geh5rigen WissenschafTt, bestehend in 
CLiii. Aphorismis oder Siltsen, dahin alles, was sur Alcbymie gehdret, gar fUgllcfa 
gezogen werden kan. Vormahls in lateinischer Sprache zu Amsterdam, durch den 
rilngem Herm van Helmont sich Eremtam Suburbanum nennend, heraus g^eben, 
letzo aber der curieusen teutschen Welt zu Dienste in dero Mutter-Sprache tibosetzt, 
und also zum drittmahligen Druck befordert von D. David Kellnem. 

8**. Pp. [30]. 

J. B. H. Wohlg^riindeter Anschlag und Bedencken, wie die wilde Anti- 
monialische Erze, wenn sie Gold- und Silber-haltig seyn, zu gute gemachet 
auch iiber ihrer gemeinen Gehalt angereichert werden kdnnen. Allen 
curiensen (sic) Berg- und Schmeltz-Werks Liebhabem und Freunden, so gut 
alfs es communidrt worden, nebst noch einigen andem aus raren 
Manuscriptb und bewehrten Autoribus selbst colligirten Observatis und 
Observandis von Gutmachung des Spiefsglafs- und anderer fliichtigen 
Erze, auch einigem Gebrauch des Antimonij und dessen productorum in 

KELLNER'-KELS 

457 

^LLNER (David). Continued. 

der Alchymie zur Transmutation entweder ihrer selbst, oder anderer Metallen, 
in Gold iind Silber &c. zu Lieb und Dienst alsokurz, iedoch treulich, 
aufgesetzet und zum durck {sic) befdrdert durch D. David Kellnem, H. t 
Practicum in der Kayserl. freyen Reichs-Stadt Nordhausen, wie auch 
Fiirstlichen Sachs, und Graffl. Stollbergischen Leib- und Hoff Medicum. 
In Verl^ung Johann Christoflf Weidners Buchhl. 1690. 

8®. Pp. [1-7] 8-137 [misnumbered for 128]. Title red and black. 

Synopsis Metallurgica. 

See HORN (johann bernhardX Synopsis Metallurgica, 169a 

Of Kellner very little seems to be known beyond 
>Hiat is stated on the title-pages of his works. He 
^was bom at Gotha, studied medicine at Helm- 
stUdt, and graduated there in 1670, his dissertation 
being de osstum constituiiane naturali et prcBter- 
naturali. He became physician at Nordhausen, 
and pursued chemistry and metallurgy, and wrote 

Keren Happuck . , . oder Teutsches Fegfeuer der 
Sckeide-Kunst, 1703. p. 126. 

Manget, Biblictheca Scriptorum Medicorum^ 173I1 
II. i. p. xlviii. 

Jiuob Leupdds Prodromus Dibliotheca Afetallica, 

1732. p. 78. 
Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire de la Phiiosophie 

Hermitique^ i743> >"• P* i94< 

Jocher, AUgemeines Gelehrten- Lexicon , 17^, ii. 
coL 9059 ; Rotermund's Portsettung^ iBio, iii. col. 
187. 

Matthias, Conspectus Historic Medicorum ckrono- 
logieuj, 1761, p. 878. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Chirurgica^ ^77A' *• 490« 

Eloy, Dictionnaire kistoriqite de la Midecine^ 
1778, li. p. 634. 

Haller, Btblioiheca Medicince prcuHcm^ i779> i>i* 

pp. 353. 279. 358, 502. 
Beytrag zur Geschichie der kdhem Chemie, 1785, 

p. 539 and p. 558. (In this last the author ascribes 

.several books on these subjects. Among them was 
a Berg und Saltztoercks-Buck ; Synopsis Afnsei 
Afefallici Aldrovandi, Lipsia*. 1701, la"; Hock^ 
nutzbare und bewdhrte edle Bier-Brauer-iCmnsi^ 
i^io ; and some surgical papers. The dates of his 
buth and death are not given. 

to Kellner a small tract against ' Elias ' published 
in 1704, and possibly also the "Gliickhche Ero- 
ber- und Demolirung • . . des . . . Fegefeuers der 
Scheidekunst .... 1705, q.v.) 

Minerahgische, Chemische und AlckymisHscke 
Briefe . . . an den Bergratk J. F. Henkel, 1794, ii. 
p. 134 (letters from Kellner to Henkel). 

Gmelin, Geschichte der Ckemie, 1798, ii. pp. 390, 
342 ; 1799, i". PP- 9. 55- 

Fuchs, Reperiortum der chemischen Litlerahtr, 
1806-08, pp. 316, 346. 

Biograpkie Midicale^ Paris, Panckoucke (i8ao- 
35), V. p. 411. 

Schmieder, Geschichte der Alchemie^ 1833, p. 513. 

Ladrague,^i^/ia/^»^ Ouvaroff^ Sciences SecrHes^ 
1870, No. 136a. 

Hirsch, Biographisches Lexicon der hervorru- 
genden Aertte^ 1886, iii. p. 451. 

Kopp, Die Alchemic, 1886, il pp. 358, 384. 

K£LS (Heinrich Wilhelm). 
Onomatologia Chymica Practica oder vollstandig practisches Handbuch der 
Chemie in alphabetischer Ordnung zum Nutzen und Gebrauch fur Aerzte, 
Apotheker, Fabrikanten, Kiinstler und andere Personen, von Heinrich 
Wilhelm Kels unter der Aufsicht und mit einer Vorrede von Johann 
Friedrich Gmelin, Hofrath und Professor zu Gottingen Ulm, in der 

Stettinischen Buchhandlung 1791. 

8*. Pp. [10} Columns, 772. Indices, pp. [39} 

Kels was born at Liebenau, in the county of 
Hoya, in 1759. was an apothecary in Hannover, 
ana after studying medicine in Gottingen, from 
1787 to i79ii graauated Dr. Med. at IielmstHdt, 
went in 1791 to Surinam as second chief surgeon to 
the military hospital of the Dutch West India 

Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemie, 1799, iii. pp. 393- 
395. 505. 651 (Onomatologia), 77K, 791, 856. 

Meusel, Lexikon der vom Jahr 1750 bis 1800 
verstorbenen Teutschen Schriftsteller, 1806, vL p. 

464. 

Company. He died at Bellair in Surinam, 15 
June, 1703. 

His chemical papers were published in Crell's 
Annalen, and he wrote a LHssertalio de carbane. 
vegetali, Helmst. 1791, 4^ 

Biographic Midicale, Paris, Panckoucke (i8ao- 
35). V. p. 413. 

PoggendorflF, Biographisch-literarisches Hand- 
worterbuch, 1863, i. col. 134a 

Hirsch, Biographisches Lexikon der hervorrC' 
gmdm Aertte^ z886, iii. p. 453. 

458 

KERCKRING^KEREN 

KERCKRING (Theodor). 
Commentarius in Cumim triumphalem Antimonii. 

See BASILIUS VALENTINUS. 

Kerckring, of a Liibeck family, was born at 
Amsterdam, or, according to others, at Hamburg, 
but the exact date of his birth is not recorded. At 
the age of i8 he made rapid progress in Latin 
under Spinosa, and under a medical man Frans van 
Knde, whose daughter, in bis absence, used to ^ive 
lessons, and whom Kerckring ultimately married. 
He studied medicine, and acquired great reputation 
as an anatomist and chemist. He practised several 
vears in Amsterdam, and was highly esteemed for 
his learning, skill, and acumen, by Leibnitx, 
Clauder, Kirchmajer. and others. 

After travelling a long time in Holland and in 
France he went to Hamburg in 1678, and there 
pursued his medical work, a>Uectmg an anatomical 
museum which is said to have been the admiration 
of all visitors. 

He was a Fellow of the Royal Society, and from 

Morhof, Dt Afetallarum Transmutaiione . . . 
Episiala, 1673, p. 45 ; German translation, 1764, 

Hallervord, Biblioiheca Curiasa, 1676, p. 384. 

K&nig, Bibliotheca velus et nova, 1678, p. 444 
(medicsd works only). 

Mercklin, Undenius renovatus, 1686, p. 996. 

Conrin^, In l/niversam Artem Meaicam . . . 
Introductto, 1687, Add. iv. §39, p. 183. 

Keren-Happuch . . . oder Teutsckes Ftgftuer der 
Scheide-Kunst, 170a, p. lai. 

Manget, Bibliotheca Scriptorum Medicorum, 
1731, I. ii. p. xlix. 

Stolle, AnUitung xur Historie der M^icinischen 
GelaArheU, 1731. PP- 477. 478, 498, 499. 

/aa>b Leupolds Prodromus Bibliotheca metallica^ 

1732. p. 79- 
Zedler, 

Universal-Lexicon, 1737, xv. p. 478. 
Goelicke, Introductio in Historiam Liiterariam 
Anatotnes^ Francof. ad Viadrum, 1738, pp. 315- 

323. 

Kestner, Medicinisches Gelehrten-Lexicon, 1740, 

p. 442. 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire de la Philosophie 
Hermitiqtu, 1742, iii. p. 194. 

Moller, Cimbria Literata, 1744, ii. pp. 408-411. 

Jttcher, Allgemeines Gelehrten-Lexicon, 1750. >'• 
coL 3069 ; Kotermund's Fortsetxung^ 1810, iii. 
col. 239. 

Chaufepi^, Nouveau Dictionnairt historique et 
critique, 1753, iii. letter K, p. 15. 

Fictuld, Probier- Stein, 1753, Th. ii. p. 83. 

Portal, Histoire de VAncUomie etde la Chirurgie, 
1770, iii. p. 404, & passim, 

Haller, Bibliotheca Chirur^ca, 1774, i. p. 392. 

Eloy, Dictionnairt historique de la Midecifie, 
1778, it p. 636. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Medicince practice, 1779, iii. 
p. 268. 

Baumer, Bibliotheca Chemica^ 1782, p. 6. 

Beytrag xur Geschichte der hohem Chemie, 1785, 

p. 5»9. 
Saxius, Onomasticon Itterariutn, 1785, v. p. 164. 

Biographie Universelle, no date, xxi. p. 537. 

the year 1685 bore the title of ' 
Hamburg of the Grand Duke of Tttacaaj. 

He di^ a Nov., 1693, f>^°^ ^^ ^"^^ ^ ^ ' 
is said, and in his 30th year according to 
but that cannot be, whoi it is considflrad 
was publishing his works in 1665 and 1670. 

His principal work, SpicUegium Amai9 
was published at Amsteroam, 1670. 1673, ^ 
a collecied edition of his anatomical writ 
Leyden, 1717, 4*. 

The commentary on Basilius VaIentiDt»a| 
in 1665, and other editions: Amsterdun, 
Geneva, 1671, 168^ X2^ 

In Gennan: Nttmberg, 1724, and Nft 

1752. 
In English, by Richard Russell, Loodoi 

8^, and Waite's edition, London, 1893, 8*. 

Gmelin, Geschichte der ChewtU, 1798, iL 

134- 

Hutchinson, Bio^aphia Medica, 1799, ^ 

FUchs, Repertortum der chewuxkm LiU 
1806-08, p. 243. 

Thomson, History of the Royal Society 
App. iv. p. xxvil, January, 1677. 

BiogrcLphie Midicale, Paris, Panckoodn 
as), V. p. 416. 

Sprengel, Geschichte der Arauymmde, xi 
pp. 247, 470. 

I>elvenne, Biographie dm Royaume des Pa 
1829, ii. p. 6. 

Schmieder, Geschichte der Alchemie, \^ 
208,43a 

Dezeimeris, Dictionmaire historique de U 
cine, 1836, III. i. p. 319. 

Hoefer, Histoire de la Chimie, 1843, IL | 

1869, ii. p. 326. 

Kopp, Geschichte der Chemie^ i847i iv. p. 

Bayle & Thillaye, Biographie MidicaU, 
ii. p. 137. 

Schroder, Lexikon der Hamburgischen t. 
steller, Hamburg, 1857, iii. 

Nouvelle Biographie Ginirale^ 1861, xx< 
605. 

Van der Aa, Biographisch Woordemt€ 
Nederlanden, 1862, x. p. 131 (calls him Tbc 
Ko-ckkring). 

Poggendorfii Biographisch-liierarisekos 
worterbuch, 1863, i. col. 1346. 

ljaLdmgue,Biblioth^que Ouvaroff, Sciences S 

1870, No. 854. 

Haeser, Geschichte der Medicin^ 1881, ii. ( 
334. 

Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie, i88a, xv. 
(by Hirsch). 

Billings, Index-Catalogue, 1886, vii. p. 37 
Series, 1903, viii. p. 622. 

Hirsch, Biographisches Lexihon der hes 
genden Aerxte, 1886, iii. p. 4g6 (by C. E. Da 

Geneeshundige Courant, Tiel, 1896, x. '. 
(by R. Krul). 

KEREN Happuch, Posaunen Elise des Kiinstlers, . . . 

See SOLDNER (— ). 

See also koranhapuch (jamimah). 

KERKRING—KESSLER 

45^ 

KERKRING (Theodor). 

See KERCKRING (THEODOR). 

K.ERN der Alchymic. 

See PHILALETHES (iRENiCUS PHILOPONUS), 1685. 

KERN der Al-Chymie. 

Su GANTZE (Der) Kern der Al-Chymie, 1748. 

KERNER (Arnold). 
D. O. M. A. Tetras Chymiatrica, proponens Praestantiam et in Medicina 
Efficaciam, Auri, Mercurii, Antimonii, & Vitrioli, & Medicamentorum ex 
illis paratonim : Opposita Misochymis eadem sat frivol^ calumniantibus, ab 
Amoldo Kernero Lipsensi Med. D. Philochyiniatro. Erphordiae, ex 

typographic Johannis Rohbock, Impensis Johannis Birckneri Bibliopolas Erf. 
1618. 

8». Sigs. A 
Erphordise, Ex t 
poise. Anno 

to S in eights ; or, pp. [sSs* and 3 blank] S 7 recto, hi 
ypographeo Johannis Rdhbockii, Tmpensis Johannis 
M. DC. XVI 1 1. 

has the Colophon : 
Birckneri Biblio- 

[Another Copy.] 

[Another Copy.] 

Little is recorded about the author. He was a 
zealous supporter of chemistry, and discovered a 
balsam described in his Discurs thereon, Elrfurth. 
1618, 8°. This I have not seen. There was a later 

Mercklin, Lindenius renwaius, 1686, p. 89. 

Manget, Bi^Hotkeca Scriptorum Medicorum, 
im, II. i. p. L. 

Jacob Leufolds Prodromus Bibliotheca metallica, 
17^. p. 8a 

Kestner, Aftdicinisches Geiehrten-Lexicon , 1740, 

P»445' 

edition bearing this title : Balsamus vegeiaHlis vel 
Sulphuris cotnfositus. Das ist, Kurtster dock 
grUndlUfur Discurs von einem kSstlichen vegeta- 
bilischen oder Scfno^l Balsam^Cass/A, 1651, i8mo. 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Hisioire de la Phitosophie 
HemUtiqtte, 1743. iiu p. 194. 

Jbcher, Allgemeines Gtlehrten-Lcxicon^ ^7S9t ii« 
col. 2070; Roiarmund's Fortsetxung, i8io,iii. C0LS51. 

Matthiae, Conspectus Historue Medicorum chrono- 
logicus, 1 761, p. 555. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Medicinm prcLcticm^ I777i ii* 
PP- 405. 547; 1779. »»• p. a6. 

KERTZENMACHER (Petrus). 

See ALCHIMIA, das ist, alle Farben, Wasser, Olea . . . zubcreyten, 16 13. 

In Ltupolds Prodromus the 1720 edition is quoted 
and the author is called ' Kretzmacher/ whereas 

Jacob Jjcupolds Prodromus Bibliothua metallicee, 

17^. p. 85. 
Beytrag »ur Gesckickte der hdhern Ckcmie, 1785, 

PS77. 

Gmelin mentions only that of 1570, but calls him 
Kerzenmacher. See the note under alchimia. 

Gmelin, Gesckickte der Ckemie, 17^7, i. p. 293. 
Schmieder, Gesckickte derAlckemte, 183a, p. a8o. 

KESSLER (Thomas). 
Vierhundert aufserlesene Chymische Procefs und Stiicklein, theils zur jnner- 
lichen, theils zur Wund- vnd ausserlichen Artzney dienstlich, bifs anhero in 
geheim verhalten : An jetzo aber mit vielen guten vnd geschwinden Hand- 
griffen verbessert, zu Nutzen der Hermetischen Medicin Liehabern an Tag 
gegeben durch M. Thomam Kefslem Chymicum & Civem Argendnensem. 
Zum dritten mal auffgelegt, vnd mit allem fleiis wieder vbersehen vnd 

46o KESSLRR--KHAUD 

KESSLER (Thomas). Continued. 

vermehret Stralsburg, In Verlegung Johannis Philippi Sartorii Buch- 

handlers. Anno M DC XXXII. 

8*. Pp. [8] 188. Index, etc [9. 3 blank], i woodcut of apparatus. 

Das dritte bundert, pp. [la] i6a Register [4]. i woodcut 
Das Tierdt bundert, pp. [4J96. Index [4]. a small woodcuts. 

The first and second hundred are together : the third and fourth have separate titles and pugination. 

Grodin quotes an edition of 1699, and Frankfurt, edition, and also of the fourth edition, Ndmberg, 
16^1 : 00 p. 568 he quotes the above. In the 1641, 8^. 
Bntish Museuru (1034. g. 8) there is a copy of this 

Keslenis Redivivus, Das is, FiinfT hundert aufserlesene Chymische Procefs vnd 
Artzneyen, theils zu jnnerlichen vnd eusserlichen Leibskranckheiten, theils 
auch zu Verbesserung der mindern Metallen hochnutzlich. Deren erstlich 
vier hundert durch M. Thomam Keslerum Chymicum & civem Argend- 
nensem an tag gegeben vnd zum vierdten mal auffgdegt, an jetzo aber von 
einem vomehmen Chymico aufTs new vbersehen, vnd mit Hinzusetzung defis 
funfiten hunderten in formliche Ordnung vnd gewiise Classes gesetzet Mit 
einem ordentlichen Regifter. Franckfurt am Majm, In verl^ung Johann 
Beyers. M.DCXLL 

8°. Pp. [14, a blank] 536. Register [13, i blank]. 

This edition is in the British Museum (1033. b. (1034. e. 16 (i)), and also the fifth edition, Franck- 

7 (i)). Gmelin quotes editions NOmberg, 1045; furt a. M., 1666, 8** (1033. a. 15). This last one 

Ftankfiirt a. M., 1666 ; Strasburg, 1692 ; rlermst. only is quoted by Kopp. 
1713. The 1645 edition is in the British Museum 

Keslerus Redivivus. Das ist, Fiinff-Hundert Aufserlesene Chymische Procefs 
und Artzneijen, Theils zu innerlichen und ausserlichen Kranckheiten, Theils 
auch zu Verbesserung der mindern Metallen hochnutzlich. Deren erstlichen 
Vier-Hundert durch M. Thomam Keslerum, Chymicum et Civem Argentin- 
ensem an den Tag gegeben und zum Sechstenmahl auffgel^t, anjetzo 
aber: Von einem vomehmen Chymico aufT das neue iibersehen, und mit 
Hinzusetzung dels Fiinfilen Hunderten in formliche Ordnung und gewisse 
Classes gesetzet, Mit einem ordentlichen Raster. Franckfurth am 

Mayn, in Verlegung Georg Andrea Hermsdorffs, Gedruckt, bey Johann 
Balthasaro Wachtem, Anno 17 13. 

S". Pp. [12] 536 [12]. The title is printed across two pages. 

Kesler, or Kessler of Strasburg wrote collections Procefs und StMckUin, Strasburg, 1630, 8*. followed 

of chemical receipts, Gmelin ascribes to him by Kopp. To this Schmieder adds an edition of 

Secreta, Oppenheim, 1616, 8<*, and Secreta Chymica^ FrankAirt a. M. . 1641, but he may have confused 

Frankfurt, 1616, 8**, which I have not seen. He it with the '500 Processe' above mentioned, 
also mentions Dreyhundert aufserlesene Chymische 

T5cher, AUgemeines Gelehrten-Lexkon, 1750, ii. Gmelin, GeschichU der Chemie, 1797, 1 pp. 521, 

col. 2073 ; Rotermund's Fortsetzung und Ergant- 568. 

ungen^ 1810, iii. col. 272. Fucbs, Repertorium der ckenUxhen LitUratmr^ 

Fictuld, ProHer-Stein, 1753, Th. ii. p. 84 (calls i8o6-o8, p. 228. 

the author an * Arch-Sophist ' and his alchemical Schmieder, Geschich/ederAichemie,tSyi,p^jf6, 

processes ' deceptions and lies '). Kopp, Die Alchemie, 1886, ii. p. 328. 

See QUERCETANUS (jOSEPHUS), 1631. 

KHALID. 

See KAUD. 

KHUNRATH 461 

KHUNRATH (Conrad). 

Medulla Destillatoria et Medica. Das ist, Warhafftiger eigentlicher grundt- 
licher bericht, wie man den Spiritum Vini, durch mittel seines hinter jhme 
verlassenen Saltzes, Item die Perlen, Corallen, defsgleichen alle andere 
Oliteten aufs den Crescentibus, als Friichten, Resinen vnd anderen Sachen 
mehr, zum Auro potabile vnd andern Arcanen dienstlich, Kiinstlich 
Destilliren, nachmals in Quintam Essentiam, zur hochsten exaltation bringen 
soil. Item etzlicher herlicher Wundt Balsam, Stichpflaster vnd Guldene 
Wasser, praeparationes administrationes et effectus, wie dan das Register 
den gebrauch ordentlich aufsweiset, Mit sondem fleiis, den Filijs Doctrinae 
zum besten CoUigiret, vnd in Truck ofTentlich verfertiget worden, durch 
C. C. L. Gedruckt zu Schlefswig, durch Nicolaum Wegener. 

4\ Ff. [3, I blank] ; 123. Index [7, errata i]. Preface dated Schleswig, 1594. 

This seems to be the first edition, and it is said edition: Leipzig, without date and printer's name, 
to have been published in 1596. There was an 8**, ff. [3] 146 [11 J. 

Medulla Destillatoria et Medica tertium aucta & renovata. Das ist: Griind- 
liches vnd vielbewehrtes Destillier vnd Artzney Buch, darinnen begriffen, 
wie der Spiritus Vini, durch mittel seines hinter jhm verlassenen Saltzes, Auch 
allerley kostliche Oliteten, Spiritus, Salia, &c., aufs mancherley animalibus, 
mineralibus vnd vegetabilibus, kiinstlich kdnnen destillirt, vnd in quintam 
essentiam zur hdchsten exaltation gebracht : Auch vermittelst solcher 
Extractionum, Aurum Potabile, allerley herliche Medicamenta, Wundbalsam, 
Stichpflaster, Guldene Wasser, vnd dergleichen, Laut zu endt gesetzer voll- 
kommenen Registere prseparirt, vnd in allerhand vorfallenden Gebrechen 
vnd Kranckheiten heylsamlich gebraucht werden : Mit besonderm fleifs vor 
dieser zeit aufs eigener erfahrung, vnnd sonsten gewissem Grund zusammen 
colligirt, Jetzo aber auffs newe zum Dritten mahl trewlich revidirt, in eine 
richtigere Ordnung gebracht, Vnd mehr als die helfite vermehret vnd 
gebessert: Durch Conradum Khunrath Lipsensem. Vnd jetzt von einem 
Hochgelahrten vnd Vornemen erfahmen der Artzney vnd Chymiae, &c. 
menniglichen zu gutem in Druck befordert Cum gratia & Privilegio 
Sac. Caes. Majestatis ad decennium k prima impressionis cujuslibet die. 
Hamburg, Ex Bibliopolio Frobeniano. Jm Jahr: 1605. 

4'. Ff. [8] 1-12, pp. 13-628. Index [35, 1 blank]. Title red and black. 

In this third edition the work has been entirely recast and much enlarged. The 
sixth edition is dated Hamburg, 1638, 4^ 

Medulla Destillatoria & Medica, Das ist, VVahrhafltiger eigentlicher griindlicher 
bericht, wie man den Spiritum Vini, durch mittel seines hinder jhm 
verlassenen Saltzes, item die Perlen, Corallen, defsgleichen alle andere 
Oliteten aus den Crescentibus, als Friichten, Resinen, vnd anderen Sachen 
mehr, zum Auro potabile, vnd andern Arcanen dienstlich, kiinstlich distUliren, 
Nachmals in quintam Essentiam, zur h6chsten Exaltation bringen sol. Item, 
Etlicher herrlicher Wundbalsam, Stichpflaster, vnd giildener Wasser Praepara- 
tiones, administrationes & effectus, wie dann das Register den Gebrauch 

462 

KHUNRATH 

KHUNRATH (Conrad). Continued. 

ordentlich aufsweiset Mit sonderm fleiis, den Filijs Doctriiue, zum besten 
colligiret, vnd in Druck ofTentlich verfertiget Durch, C.CL. Eiisleben. 

Without date and priDter's name. 

8®. Ff. [4] 171 verso. Index [la]. Title red and black endowed in a border. 
7*he preface is dated Schleswig, 1594. 

[Another Copy.] 

Conrad Kbunratb, possibly a brother of Heinrich 
Kbunrath, was a physician and chemist of Leipzig, 
who lived some time in Denmark and was at 
Schleswig in 1594, whence he dedicated his book 
to the magistrates and council of the free towns, 
Lttbeck, Lttneburg, &c. He was anxious to pro- 
mote the knowledge and use of chemical medicines, 
and besides the present work he wrote: FUnf 
schdne Tractdtlein de Elleboro, rore sotis, absinthio, 
saccJkaro und der SchJange, Leipzig, 1597, 8^, and 
one or two other books. 

A second part of the Medulla was published in 
1614. after his death. Moller says correctly that 
the first edition of his book bore only his initials 

Borel. Biblwiheea Chimica, 1654, p. 65 (enters 
him under ' Conradus Lipsensis '). 
MoUer, Homonymo-Scopia, 1697, p. 688. 
Kestner, Medicinisches Gelehrten-Lexicon^ 1740. 

P- 444* 
Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire de la Philosophie 

HerwUtique, 1742, iii. pp. 198, 199. 

Moller, Cimbria literata, 1744, ii. p. 439. 

TOcher, Allgemeines Gelehrten-Lexicon, 1750, ii. 
ooL 9081. Rotermimd's ForisetMung^ 1810, ii. col. 
3xa. 

Chaufepi^, Nouveau Dictionnaire historique et 
critique, 1753, iii. letter K, p. 56. 

Matthise, Conspectus Historic Medicorum chrono- 
logicMS^ 1761, p. 364. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Botanica, 1771, i. p. 391. 

C. C. L. They stand for Conr£dus Coorathus 
Lipsensis. 

His book was successful, as it seems to have 
passed through a number of editions. 

The enumeration of these is not very satisfactory 
as some are undated, and it is not easy to make the 
editions tally. 

no date ? 1596, 8*. 

no date 

Schleswig 

Eisleben 

Leipzig 

Hamburg 

Hambuig 

Leipzig 

Leipzig 

3rd edition 
6th edition 

1599. 
1605. 

1638. 

i68a 

I703- 

Haller, Bibliotheca Afedicinee fractica, 1777. ii. 
p. 313. (Haller here calls him erroneously C. C. 
k. and quotes a number of editions, which I have 
not seen confirmed.) 

Gmelin, Geschichte der Ckemie, 1797, L p. 361. 
(Just copies Haller, even to repeating C C. K., 
and ic^9, for 1594.) 

Fuchs, Repertonum der cJumischen Litteratur^ 
i8o6-o8. p. 98. 

Biografhle Univerulle^ 1818, zziL p. 587; no 
date, xxii. p. 23^ (article by Weiss). 

Biographic Midicale, Paris, Panckoucke (i8ao- 
25)* V. p. 465. 

LAdn^e, Bibliothique OuvaroJ^, Sciences Secrites, 
1870, No. 1 1 18. 

Billings, Index-Catalogue t 1886, vii. p. 385 ; and 
Series, 1903, viii. p. 633. 

KHUNRATH (Heinrich). 

Von Hylealischen, das ist Pri-Materialischen Catholischen oder Algemeinen 
Natiirlichen Chaos der Naturgemessen Alchymiae vnd Alch3rmisten ; Wieder- 
holete, vernewerte vnd wolvermehrete Naturgemefs-Alchymisch vnd Recht- 
lehrende Philosophische Confessio oder Bekentnus ; Henrici Khunrath 
Lips: Gottlicher Weisheit Liehabers {sic\ vnd beyder Artzney Doctor : 

Hhoch-mah-el ! 
Dem Lesterer. 
Ob dir schon was ist vnbewust, 
Nicht dest* minder eim andems ist bewust. 
Cum Privilegio S S. Caesareae Ma*** speciali. 

8^ Pp. [34] 469 [i, with woodcut ; 2 blank]. Title red and black, with wood- 
cut border ornament. The woodcut is the owl with spectacles, two torches and two 
candles, with the lines : 

Was helffen Fackeln, Liecht oder Brillen 
Wann die Lent nicht sehen woUen. 

Colophon (p. 469): Gedruckt zu Magdeburgk, durch Joachim Schmiedt, 
vorlegung Johann Francken Anno 1616. 

In 

KHUN RATH 

463 

KHUNRATH (Heinrich). Continued. 

Other editions are : Magdeburg, 1598 (the first), 
1606, 8^; Strasburg. 1599, 1700, 12*; 1786 (^.f.). 
There seems to have beoi an earlier work: Con- 
fessio de Chao Physico-Chemicorum Catholico ; 

the preface of which is dated Magdeburg, 1596^ 
but the edition before me was printni by Dolhopff, 
Argentorati, 1699, 12", pp. [4] 84. 

Alchymisch philosophisches Bekenntnis vom universellen Chaos der natur- 
gemassen Alchymie, von Heinrich Khunrath, beyder Arzneygelahrheit Doktor, 
und Liebhaber gottlicher Weisheit. Mit beygefiigter Warnung und Ver- 
mahnung an alle wahre Alchymisten. Neue von den deutschen Sprachfehlem 
ohne Verletzung des Sinnes gesauberte, und mit des Verfassers Anmerkungen 
versehene Auflage. Leipzig, bey Adam Friedrich B5hmen, 1786. 

8*. Pp. 348. 
New edition of ' Von Hylealischen . . . Chaos.' 

Amphitheatrum Sapientiae iEtemae Solius Verse, Christiano-Kabalisticum, 
Divino-Magicum, nee non Physico Chymicum, Tertriunum, Catholicon: 
instructore Henrico Khunrath Lips: Theosophise amatore fideli, et Medicinae 
utriusq; Doct: Halleluiah! Hallelu-Iah ! Hallelu-Iah Phy diabolo ! 
E Minibus Vix Vni. Anno M.D.C.H. Cum Privilegio Caesareae Maiest: 
ad Decennium A Prima Impressionis Die. 

Folio. Ff. [4], pp. 60, 222 [i] [i blank]. Colophon: Hanovise Excudebat Gui- 
lielmus Antonius, mdcix. Portrait, engraved title, ten engraved symbolic plates, nine 
of them double, not in the pagination. 

Numerous editions of this book are reported 
Prague, 1598 ; Magdeburg, 1602 ; Hanau, 1604 
Magdeb., 1606; Frankf., x6o8; Leipz.. 1608 
Ltibeck. 1608; Magdeb., 1608; Hamb., 161 1 
1648, 1651 ; Hanau, 1653 ; Frankfurt, 1653 
Hamb., 171a Most of these, as Moller sa3rs, are 
probably fictitious. That of 1602 seems to be 
mentioned by Khunrath himself ; perhaps he was 
referring to the date on the above title-page. De 
Bore admits the existence of one edition only, this 
of 1609, and takes no notice of the others, except 
that of Frankfurt, 1653, and it, he shows, is not a 
new edition but only that of 1609 with a new dated 
litle-page. But he should have mentioned the 

colophons, for if the 1653 edition has the 1609 
colophon there is not much more to be said as to 
the identity of the two, except as concerns the 
more recent title-page. 

Of the four unnumbered leaves two contain in a 
tabular form a scheme of the book: 'Sum ma 
Amphitheatri Sapientiae iCtemae solius verse Chris- 
tiano-cabalistici divino-magici, &c., which belongs 
to p. 18 of the first part. The other two also con- 
tain a table marked * * belonging to p. 151 of the 
second part These tables, as well as certain of 
the illustrations, are sometimes awanting. 

Johann Amdt (^.v.) wrote a commentary on the 
first four figures in this book. 

Magnesia Catholica Philosophorum, oder eine in der Alchymie h6chst nothwen- 
dige und augenscheinliche Anweisung, die verborgene catholische Magnesia 
des geheimen Universalsteins der achten Philosophen zu erlangen. Von 
Heinrich Khunrath, beyder Arzneygehahrheit Doktor, im Jahr 1599. griindlich 
geschrieben und zu Magdeburg herausgegeben. Neue, von den Sprach- und 
Druckfehlem gesauberte Auflage. Leipzig, bey Adam Friedrich B6hmen. 

1784. 

8*. Pp. [2] vi., 112. 

The signatures begin on the half sheet, because the preliminary matter occupjring 
half a sheet has signature )(. The preface is signed J. Y. R. 

Wahrhafter Bericht vom philosophischen Athanor und dessen Gebrauch und 
Nutzen, von Heinrich Khunrath, beyder Arzneygelahrheit Doktor, und treuen 
Liebhaber gottlicher Weisheit. Wegen seiner iiberaus grofsen Seltenheit 
nach der dritten im Jahr 161 5. zu Magdeburg im Verlag des Verfassers 
gedruckten Ausgabe aufs neue von den deutschen Sprachfehlem ohne 
Verletzung des Sinnes gesaubert, und mit einem historischen Vorberichte 

464 

KHUNRA Tff^KIESER 

KHUNRATH (Heinrich). ConHnued. 

von seinem sammtlichen Schriften, nebst dem in Kupfer gestochenen Athanor 
auf Begehren herausgegeben. Leipzig, bey Adam Friedrich Bdhmen, 1783. 

8**. Pp. 58. Frontispiece. Pp. 15-16 dropped. MS. notes. 

First edition, Magdeburg, 1603 ; 1615 ; 8*. Groelin (i. 387) considers this the only thing by Khunrath 
of any value. 

Judicium iiber Henrici Khunraths Amphitheatrum. 
See ARNDT Oohann). 

The author of the Beytrax says (p. 396) : how a 
pious man like Amdt could occupy himself with 
the comfortless works of Khunratn is as great a 
mystery to him as the Amphitheatrum itself! 

Khunrath, or Khtinrath, or Kunrath, or Kun- 
raht, or Cunrath, or Cunraul, or Conrad, was bom 
at Leipzig in 1560, studied medicine, graduated at 
Basel in 1588, was a follower of Paracelsus, wrote 
his curious theosophic or mystical books, and died 
at Ldpsig (Dresden, Moller), in 1605, aged 45. 
His portrait is gpven in the Amphitheatrum, 

He believed m the transmutation of stones and 
metals, and the prolongation of life by the Elixir. 
His writings are obscure and full of symbolism. 

Another work of his is entitled : Hochntitzliche, 
unumgtogliche, und gar nothwendige Drey Fragen 
die . . . Curation . . . Sandes, Grieses, Steins, . . . 
betreffend, Leipzig, 1607. It was reprinted Frank- 
furt und Leipzig, 1788, 8**, pp. 38 [a blank]. 

Van der Linden, De Scriptis Medicis libri duo, 
1637, p. 197 (quotes the treatise on gout only). 

Petrus Borellius, Bibliotheca Chimica, Paris, 1654, 
p. 130. 

Quirinus Kuhlmann, Der neubegeisterter BShme, 
Leiden, 1674, cap. xi. pp. 72-75. 

Hallervord, Bibliotheca Curiosa, 1676, p. 405. 
(" Zebd, liber superstitiosus," edited by Khunrath.) 

Mercklin, Undenius rencvatus, 1686, p. ^96. 

Witte, Diarium biographicum^ 1688, sig. D4 
rtcto\ ^Sept., 1605. 

Bomchius, Conspectus Scripiorum Chemicorum^ 

i607i p. 33- 
Moller, Homonymo-Scofta, 1697, p. 688. 

Keren Happuch . . . oder Teutsches Fegfeuer der 
Scheide-Kunit^ 1702, p. 120. 

Manget, Bibliotheca Scripiorum Medicorum, 
1731, II. i. p. Ixxxvi. 

Zedler, universal-Lexicon, 1737, xv. col. 2136. 

Kestner, Medicinisches Gelehrten- Lexicon, 1740, 
p. 444. 

Arnold, Kirchen- und Ketzer-Historien, 1741, 

"• p. 331; i742» »"• c. 2, pp. 11-14. 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire de la Philosophie 
Hermltique^ 1742, i. pp. 382, 475 ; iii. p. 198. 

Brucker, Historia Critica Philosophtce, 1743, IV. 
i. p. 675. 

Moller, Cimbria literata, Hauniae, 1744, ii. p. 
440. (This is the fullest account.) 

JcJcher, Allgemeines Gelehrien- Lexicon, 1750, ii. 
COL 2081 ; Rotermund's Forisettung^ 1810, iii. col. 

Chaufepi^, Nouveau Dictionnaire historigue^ 
1753. »"• letter K, p. 55. 

Fictuld, Probier-Stein, 1753, Part i. p. 100 
(lavishly lauded with the stock phrases). 

He wrote also : De igne Mag^orum Philosophor- 
umque secreto externo et visibUi, das ist: ^ilo- 
sophische ElrkUirung des . . . Glut- und Flammeo- 
feucrs der uralten Weisen . . . ; nebst Johann 
Amdts philosophisch-kabalistischen Judicio Qber 
die vier ersten Figuren des . . . Axnphitheaters. 
Neue . . . Auflage. Leipzig, 1783, 8^, pp. 109. 
First ed. Strasburg, x6o8. 

Khunrath is still of authority with modem 
devotees of occultism, and two of the symbolic 
plates in the Amphitheatrum have been reproduced 
and commented on bv de Guaita, but some of the 
older writers showed him no mercy. The author 
of the Fegfeuer says that the * Amphithea/rum 
and other things all bear witness to his disgusting 
arrogance and ignorance. He wrote not from the 
Spint of God but from the ignorant devil of pride.' 

Matthise, Conspectus Hisiorim Medicorumckmuh- 
logicus, 1761, p. 064. 

De Bure, Bibliographie instructive, 1764, vl 
p. 248. 

Elo^, Dictionnaire historique de la M/decine, 
1778, li. p. 647. 

Archiv fiir RosenkreuMer, 1785, ii. pp. 39^, 40a 

Beytrag sur Geschichte d!er hdhem Chemu, 1785, 
pp. 287, 513, 579, 583, 587 (criticises Khunrath with 
ferocity). 

Adelung, Geschichte der menschlichen Narrheit 
1787, V. p. 91. 

Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemie, 1797, i. pp. 287, 
288, 569. 

von Murr, Uber den wahren Ursfrung der 
Rosenkreuter und des Freymaurtroraens, 1803, 
p. 8. 

Fuchs, Repertorium der chemischen Litteratur, 
1806-08, pp. 73-76. 

Biografhie Universelle, 1818, xxii. p. 587; no 
date, xxiL p. 235 (article by Weiss). 

Biographie Midicale^ Paris. Panckoucke (1890- 
25). V. p. 464. 

Sprengel, Geschichte der Artneykunde, 1827, iiL 

p. 533. 

Schmieder, Geschichte der A Ichemie, 1832, p. 322. 

LAdngaefBiblioth^gue Ouvaroff, Sciences Secrites, 
1870, Nos. 973-980. 1596. 

Allgemeine Deutsche Biographic, 1882, xv. p. 709. 

Billings, Index-Catalogue, 1886, vii. p. 385. 

Kopp, Die Alchemic, 1886, i. p. 219; ii. pp. 361, 
375. 

Stanislas de Guaita, Essais de Sciences Aiaudites, 
I. Au Seuil du Myst^re, 1890, pp. 57-59, 99-147. 

KIESER (Franz). 
Cabala Chymica. Concordantia Chymica. Azot Philosoph. Solificatum. Drey 
vnterschiedliche, niitzliche, vnd zuvor nie aufsgegangene Tractatlein, ohn 

KJESER-'KIESSUNG 46$ 

• 

KIESER (Franz). ConHnued. 

welcher Hiilfe niemandt in Ewigkeit Chymiam veram verstehen, noch das 
mmmum Arcanum erlernen wtrdt 

In welcher I. Der rechte Grundt vnnd Fundament aller natiirlichen vnd 
vbematiirlichen Dingen erklaret wird. 

Im IL Viel schoner Veigleichungen vnnd Vbereynsdmmngen {He) etlicher 
alien vnnd newen Philosophischen Schrifften, von wahrer Bereytung defs 
Pkilosophischen Steins, Colligiret von H. Alexandro von Siichten, Med. D. 
Desr aller Inhalt post Prseiationem zu finden. 

Im III. Augenscheinliche Erklarung aller vnd jeder Particularitaten, 
fumembsten Handtgriffen vnnd Vortheylen, ad conficiendum Azot Philosoph. 
necessaria, So Georgius Clettus, I. V. Lie. selbst inn praxi wahr oder falsch 
bdimden, von jhm einem guten Freunde in Miisiven communiciert 

Jetzo aber alien Flliis doctrinse zu besonderm Nutzen vnd Crefallen an 
Tag geben, von Francisco Kiesero, Chymico vnd Medico zu Franckfurt 
Miihlhausen, Bey Martin Spiessen, In Verlegung Johann Spiessen, &c. Anno 
M.DC.VI. 

8*. Pp. [24] 581 [i]. 4 woodcuts. Title red and black. 

Van Sucfaten's tract is made up of extracts from Seven colloquies follow : 

A nomber of sources, as Paracelsus, Bemhardus' I. between a lajrman and an artist, p. 383. 

^vNMvjK (p. 177) ; De Prima Materia Lapidis, II. between Demogorgon and Reyniundus, p. 

^MP- 193 (in verse)| ; Liber Arlomi (p. ao6) ; 293. 

^Ptcuationes Phantasticse (p. aj3); Lapis Philo- III. between Spiritus, Anima, and Corpus and 

*9banun ad quendam Papam (p. 240) ; Expositio the Love of philosophy, p. 325. 

^Ooerti super Chymiam (p. 252) ; Particulare IV. between Mens and Corpus, p. 35a 

piHltiani Schmakenrinck ex Secretis artis Domi. V. another between Mens and Corpus, p. 357. 

J^B^ Albert (p. 968) ; Lapis Alberti Magni Rebis VI. between Mens and Virtus, p. 36a 

^ 'TS) ; Norma, &c. (p. 277). VII. between Potentia and Vir, p. 369. 

Then, p. 375- 

Axot Philosophonim solificatum, das ist, Wahrhafftige, vnd Augenscheinliche 
Crklftnmg aller Particularitilten, wie auch aller fUmembsten Handtgrinen vnd Vor- 
theilen, so tu rechter Bereytung des wahren Philosophischen Steins requirirt vnd 
erfordert werden. Heymlicher vfi vertrawter weifs von Herren Geor. Qet. I. V. Lie. 
aufi eygener Erfahrung einem fUmemmen D. vnnd Chymico zu Me3mtK schrifftlich 
communicirt M.DC.VI. 

Vignette of a conjoined set of symbols, 

Lenglet Dnfresno^, HUtoirt de la Philosophie Gnielin, Gtschickie der Ckemie, 1797, i. p. 563 
Hermimque^ 1742, iii. p. 195. (calls him Rieser), 1798. ii. p. 24. 

BevtragMur Geschickte der hdhem Chemie, 1785, Kopp, Die Alchemie, i9S6, ii. p. 230, 

KIESSLING (JoHANN Gottfried). 

Johann Gottfried Kieislings, Jur. Pract. & dictse artis Cult. Relatio Practica de 
Arte Probatoria Mineralium & Metallorum. Das ist : Griindliche Erzehlung, 
wie alle und jede Mineralia auf gewisse Metalle, diese hinwiederum in sich 
selbst, ingleichen Miintzen, im Feuer, durchs Aqua fort, Aqua Regis, und 
Cementiren, probieret, und geschieden werden, Benebst der Nachricht, was 
allenthalben darzu ndthig, und ein Probierer oder Guardain, so wohl 
hiervon, als denen zum Miintz- und Saiger-Hiitten-Wesen, samt deren 
Verrichtungen wissen soil. Worbey noch einiger ander^r zu dieser Kunst 
dienlichen Anweisungen gedacht wird. Leipzig, verlegts Michael Bloch- 
berger. 1741. 

8*. Pp. [8, frontispiece included] 179 [r blank]. ^' 

This first edition is not quoted by Omelin, 

2Q 

466 KIESSUNG--KIRCHBR 

KIESSLING (JOHANN Gottfried). Contimted. 
Johann Gottfried Kleisliiigs» Jur. Pract Ar <fictae artis Cidt Rdatio Pnctkra 
de Arte Probatoria Mineralium & Metalloruin, Das isl : Grilndlicfae Eraefalung, 
. wie alle und jede MineiaKa auf gewisse Metalle, diese hinwiedemm in sich 
selbst, ingleichen Miintzen, im Feuer, dnrdis Aqua fort. Aqua Regis, und 
Cementireny probieret und geschieden werden, Benebst der Nachricht, was 
allenthalben darzu ndtbig, und ein Probierer oder Guardain, so wohl hiervon, 
als denen zum Miintz- und Saiger-Hiitten-Wesen, samt deren Verriditungen 
wissen soil. Worbey noch einiger anderer zu dieser Runst dienlichen 
Anweisungen gedacht wird. Andere Auflage. Ldpag, ¥erlq;t5 Michael 
Blochbeiger. 1752. 

8*. Pp. [16, froDtispieoe iodnded] 504. 

This is a genuine book on asssmng and gives a The most important diangt is that the female 

good idea of the processes and reagents of the figure who in the first edition is merdj looking in 

time. In the first edition symbols and characters through a window, in the second is represented as 

are used, but in the second the names are given in holding a rope or chain which is hanging down 

fuU. The frontispiece, which represents an assayer's into the room, and to which are attadied the 

laboratory, has been modified in the second edition, .planetary symbols of the metalib 

Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemitf 1799, "^' P* 55* Fuchs. Refertorium der cAewnsekem LittenUvr, 

X806-08. p. 372. 

KINDER-BETT des Steins der Weisen, durch einen unbekandten Chevalier in 
Frantzosischer Sprache beschrieben. Und nun aus dem Frantzosischen ins 
Teutsche iibersetzet, durch J. L. M. C. 

Hermes und Geber. Wer diese Kunst einmahl zu Ende bringet, wenn 
er auch gleich Tausendmahl tausend Jahr lebete, und alle Tage vier. 
Tausend Menschen zu ernehren hette, wiirde er doch Qbrig genug 
haben. 
Hamburg, Verl^;ts Gottfried liebemickeL 1692. 

S*. Pp. 45 [3 blank]. 

This seems to be the second part of the collection translator was Johann Lange, Medidnae Candi- 
called Nodus sophuus encdatus, 1693, separated datus. 
from the rest. See the note on that work. The 

Beytrag %ur Geschichte der hohem Chemie^ 1785, Ladrague, BibliothiqMe Ouvarq^^ Sciences 

p. ^44. SecriUs, 1870, Na laoi. 

Kopp, Die Alchemu, 1886, ii. p. 383. 

See NODUS sophicus enodatus, 1692. 
See HERMETISCHES A. B. C, i. p. 86. 

KINDER-SPIEL (Das). 
See LUDUS Pueronun. 

KIRCHER (Athanasius). 
Athanasii Kircheri Fuldensis Buchonii h Soc. Jesu Presbyteri: Ars Magna 
Lucis et Umbrae, in X Libros digesta. Quibus admirandse Lucis & Umbrae 
in mundo, atque ade6 universa natura, vires effectusque uti nova, ita varia 
novorum reconditiorumque speciminum exhibitione, ad varios mortalium 
usuS) panduntur. Editio altera priori multb auction 

nniHS {sic) ro-iiona 

cos rb (TKOTOS avT^s oinoi ir6 (sic) ^& avrrjs 

Sicuti tenebrve ejus ita & lumen ejus. 

Psalm 138. 

KIRCHER iM 

KIRCHER (Athanasius). Continued. 

AmstdocUuni, Apud Joannem Janssonium k Waesbeige, & Hnredes Elbiei 
Weyerstraet Anno cIdIoclxxi. Cum Privilegio Sacr. Caesar. Majestatis, 
& Ord Holl. & Westfr. 

Folio. Pp. [32] 810 [9, I blank]. Numerous woodcuts and cogmT^p. 
„rmvcd title included in the Damnation. 3 plates, and foldio 
true pagination is 710, 100 pp. oeing dropped between 424-525. 

I^ngrmved title included in the Damnation. 3 plates, and folding plate separate. Ine 

100 pp. oeing dropped between 424-525. 

De Bure quotes an edition of Rome, 1646. 

Athanasii Kircheri e Soc Jesu Ars Magna Sciendi, in XII. libros Digesta, 
qua Nova & Universali Methodo per Artificiosum Combinadonum contextum 
de bmni re proposita plurimis & prope infinitis radonibus disputarii 
omniumque summaria qua&dam cognitio comparari potest Ad Augusds* 
simum Rom. Imperatorem Leopoldum Primum, Justum, Pium, FelicenL 
Amstelodami, Apud Joannem Janssonium k Waesbeige, &: Viduam Eliiei 
Weyerstraet Anno cIdIoclxix. Cum Privilegiis. 

Folio. Pp. [18, including the engraved title and the Emperor's portrait] 482 [10^ 
Engravings and a few woo^nits in the text 2 separate plates, ^printed taolea. 
Engraved title-page to Part II. between pp. 246-247, p. 249 the Tree of Philosophy. 

Athanasii Kircheri Societatis lesu, Magnes sive de Arte Magnedca Opos 
Tripartitum quo universa Magneds Natura, eiusque in omnibus Sciendjs & 
Artibus vsus, noua methodo explicatur: ac praeterea h viribus &: prodigioak 
effectibus Magneticarum, aliarumque abditarum Naturae modonum in 
Elemends, Lapidibus, Plands, Animalibus, elucescendum, multa hucusque 
incognita Naturae arcana, per Physica, Medica, Chymica, &: Mathematica 
omnis generis Experimenta recluduntur. Edido Tertia. Ab ipso Authoce 
recognita, emendataque, ac mulds nouorum Experimentorum proUematis 
aucta. Romae MDCLIV. Sumpdbus Blasij Deuersin, &: ZanobijM asotd 
Bibliopolarum. Typis Vitalis Mascardi. Superiorum permissu, &: Priuilegija. 

Folio. Pp. [32, including the engraved title] 618 [28I Title red and black. 
Vignette. The cSmperor's coat of arms, sig. f 3 verso. Numerous engravings and 

woodcuts in the text 

• 

The present work first appeared at Rome, 1641, Prolusiones Magneticsi, Romn, 1645, 4* : Msff- 
4f.; the seooiid edition at Cologne, 1643, 4*** He neticum naturae regnum, RomsB, 1667, 4*, pp. tjk^ 
Wrote also : Ars Magnesia, Herbipoli. 163Z, 4** ; 

Athanasii Kircheri e Soc. Jesu Mundus Subtertaneus, in XII. libros digestui; 
quo Divinum Subterrestris Mundi Opificium, mira Ergasteriomm Natune 
in eo distribudo, verbo iravTafjLop<t>ov Protei Regnum, universse deniqvie 
Naturae Majestas & dividae summa rerum varietate exponuntur. Abditonim 
effectuum causae acH indagine inquisitae demonstrantur ; cognitae per Ards it 
Naturae conjugium ad humanae vitse necessarium usum vario experimentorum 
appartu, necnon novo modo, & radone applicantur. 

Tomus I. Ad Alexandrum VII. Pont Opt Max. 
Amstelodami, Apud Joannem Janssonium &. Elizeum Weyerstraten, Anno 
cIdIoclxv. Cum Privilegiis. 

Folia Pp. [30] 346. Index [6]. Portrait of Kircber and of Alexander VII., 
engraved title ancri4 separate plates, all extra. Woodcuts in the text 

Tomus secundus. Pp. [u, including the engraved title] 487. Index [9]. 7 plates. 
Woodcuts. 7 tables. 

There was an edition in 1678. 

468 

KIRCHBR 

KIRCHER (Athanasius). Continued. 
Sentenda de Unguento Armario ex libro III. ejuadem de Arte Afagneiica 
desumpta. 

See THBATRUM SYMPATHETICUM, 1662, p. 567. 

De Lapide Philosophorum Dissertatio ex Mundo Subterraneo descripta. 
Su MANGET (j. J.X Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, i. p. 54. 

De Alchymia Sophisdca. 

See MANGET 0- J-)> Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, i. p. 82. 

Diatribe de prodigiosis Crucibus, quae tarn supra vestes hominum, qulUn res 

ab'as, non pridem post ultimum incendium Vesuvij Montis, Neapoli com- 

paruerunt. 

See SCHOTT (CASPAR), loco-Seriorum Naturae et Artis . . . Centuriae Tres, p. 506. 

of Saxony to Malta, and was received with great 
distioction by the Graod Master. He returned to 
Rome and acted for eight years as professor of 
mathematics, and alterratls resigned. He died 
98 Nov., 168a 
Kircher was a man of vast — almost cumbrous — 

Kircher was born 2 May, i6oa, at Gejrsa, near 
Fulda. In 1618 he ioined the Jesuits, devoted 
himself to study, and was appointed to teach 
mathematics, philosophy, and Oriental lanyiages 
at the University of WtUtzburg, a duty which he 
duicharged in the most brilliant manner. On the 
outbreak of the thirty years' war he went to Avif^- 
noo, where he studied antiquities for two years, and 
was advised hy Pdresc to attempt the interpretation 
of Egyptian hierogljrphics. He vras on the point 
of gomg to Vienna as professor of mathematics, 
when he was suddenly called to Rome. 
. In 1637 he accompanied the Cardinal Frederick 

Akgambe, Bibliotheca Scriftorum SocietatU 
Jtsu, 1643, p. 48. 

Crasso. Elegit d' HuaMimi UtteraH^ Venetia, 
1666, i. pp. 381-383, with a portrait. 

KOnig. Btbliolkeca Vetus ei Nova, 1678. p. 446. 

Merc^n, Umdenius renovahu, 1686, p. 94. 

Magirus, Eponymologium Criiicum, 1687, p. 495. 

Witte, Diarium Biographicum, 1688, Sig. Qqqq 
4 versoy Nov. 1680. 

. Reimmann, Einleitung in die Historiam Liter- 
ariam derer Teutschen, 1700, iii. p. 176. 

Acta Philosofhorum, 1710, ii. (StQck vil). p. 193. 

Manget, Bibliotheca Scriptorum Meaicorum, 
1751, II. i. p. Hi. 

Stolle, Anleitmng xur Historic der Medicinischen 
Gelahrheit, 17^1, pp. M3, 535. 

Jacob LeupoJds Prodromus Bibliothecee Metalliae, 

1733. P- So- 
Morhof, Polyhistor, Ed. tertia, 1732, i. pp. 357, 

72^; ii. 156, &c., &c. 

Niceron. Mimoires des Hommes illustres^ i754» 

xxvii. p. 189. 

erudition, of equal credulity, superstition, and con- 
fidence in hu own opinion. His works in number. 
bulk, and usdessness are not surpassed in the 
whole field of learning. 

He was an opponent of alchemy and wrote 
against it in the Mundus subterraneus. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Boianica, 1771, i. p. 463 ; 
1772, ii. p. 682. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Anatamica^ 1774, i. p. 434. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Chirurgica, 1774, t p. 334. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Medianm pructtcm^ ^777, ii. 
p. 672. 

Elo^. DicHotMaire Historique de la Midecine, 
17^ li. p. 638. 

Saxius, OnomasttcoH literarium, 1782, iv. p. 416. 

Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemie, 1797, L pp. 739. 

743 : 1798. ii. p. 31. 

Biographie Unwerselle^ 1818, xxii. p. 440; no 
date, xxi p. 642. 

Biographie Mtdicale, Paris, Panckoucke (xSao- 
2s)j V. p. 425. 

Sprengel, Geschichte der ArMmejthunde, x8a7, iv. 
PP- 275 (note), 480. 

Schmieder, Geschichte der Alchentie, 1832, p. 
412. 

Janus, Breslau. 1847, ii. pp. 599-608 (by Schnei- 
der). 

Backer, Bibliothique des Ecrivains de la Com- 

StoUe, Anleitmng xur Historic der Gelahrheit, pagnie de Jisus^ 1B53, ire SMe, pp. 422-433; 1861, 
171M5, pp. 326, ^59, 361 ('a learned windbag '), 698. viime S^rie, j). 285. 
Zedler, Universal'Lt 

'Lexicon, 1737, xv. col. 755 
(and references). 
Kestner, Medicinisches Gelehrten-Lexicon^ 1740, 

PU444- 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire de la Philosophic 

Hermitique, 1742, i. p. 482 ; iii. pp. 61, 195. 

Vogt, Catalogus historico-criticus libromm rari- 
orum, 1747, pp. 381-2 (rarity of the ' Oedipus 
A^yptiacus '). 

mcner, Allgemeines Gelehr ten-Lexicon, i7$o, ii. 
col. 2095 ; Rotermund's Fortsetxung, 1810, iii. col. 

Dunkel, Historisch-Critische Nachrichten von 
verstorbenen Gelehrten, 1757, III. iv. p. 792, No. 
2884. 

Portal, Histoire de I' Anatomic et de la Chir- 
urgie, irr^, ii. p, 644. 

Figuier, LAlchimie et les Alchimistes, 1856. 
pp. 41, 9a 

The English Cyclopeedia, Biography. voL iii. 
1856, col. 717. 

Nouvelle Biograbhie Generate, i86x, zzvii coL 769. 

Poggendorflf Biographisch-literarisches Hand- 
wdrterbuch, 1863, i. col. 1258. 

Allgemeine L>eutsche Biographic^ 188a, xvi. p. i 
(by Erman). 

Hillings, Index-Catalogue, 1886, vii. p. 441 ; 2nd 
Series, 1903, viiL p. 7^ 

Kopp. Die Alchemte, 1886, i. p. a3a 

Hirsch, Biographisches Lexicon der hervorra- 
genden Aerzte, 1886, iii. p. 478 (by Pagel). 

Sommervogel, Bibliothbgue de la Com^agnie de 
Jisus, 1893, Bibliographic, iv. col. X046-1077. 

KIRCHMAJER^KIRCHWEGER 

469 

K^IRCHMAJER (Georg Caspar). 

fi. C. D. Metalio- Metamorphosis, Principiis ac Experimends Curiosis 
Metallurgicis asserta, sub Praesidio Georg. Casp. Kirchmajeri, Prof. Publ. 
Academ. Wittebeig. Senioris, Imper. Leopoldin. Phospb. Secund. Publica- 
bitur ad d. Decembr. A. cloIacXCIII. In Auditorio Majori, k Re- 
spondente, Ludovico Gaspare Mayero, Neukirchensi-Franco. Wittenbergae, 
Typts Christiani Schrodteri, Acad. Typ. 

4*. Pp. [a] 32. [4 pp. added on, apparently belonfring to a different thesis.] 

I^e author of the Beytrag is unable to a^ree with Kircbniajer's thesis that iron and other metals were 

for the US6 of mankind. 

^•^t prepared by Adam 

GeorgI Casp. Kirchmajeri, in Electorali VViteberga P. P. Acad. C^ de 
Phosphoris et Natura Lucis, nee non de Igne, Commentatio Epistolica. 
Wittebeigse, Apud Johannem Henricum Ellingerum, Bibl. Anno 

CiD IDCLXXX. 

4'. Pp. [2] 72 [6]. Title red and black. Vignette. 

Kirch maier, Kirchmajer, Kirchma^r — all the 
forms occur — was bom at Uffienheim m Franconia 
ao (99) July^ 16^5. He became professor of rhe- 
toric at Wittenberg, and was received into the 
Academia Naturae Curiosorum in 1677 under the 
name of Pbo^phorus II. He was a man of immense 
attainments and his studies embraced numismatics, 
physics, chemistry, metallurgy, mineralogy, zoology 
and medicine, and his numerous works on the most 
varied subjects won and maintained for him great 
odebrity. 

He died 28 Sept. (Oct.), 1700. 

Mercklin, Lindtnius renovatus^ 1686, p. 324. 

Adolphus Clarmundus, Vita clarissimorum in re 
liUrana Virorum^ das ist : Lebens-Beschreibung 
tilicker HauptgeUkrtem Mdnntr^ Wittenberg, 1705. 
ti. pp. 26O'270^ with a portrait. 

Manset, Biblioikeca Scriptorum Medicorum, 
17^1. II. L p. lii. 

jiuob Leupolds Prodromus Bibliothecte Metallica^ 
1732, p. 81. 

Zedler, UnivenaULexicon^ 1737. xv. col. 77a 

Lenglet Dufiresnoy, HisUnre de la Pkilosophie 
Hermitiqmey 1742, iii. p. 195. 

MoUer, Cimbna literata, 1744, i. p. 320 (under 

KoDckel)^ 

lOcher, AUgewuimts GeUhrieU'Lexicon, 1750^ ii. 
ooL ao97 (list of his numerous, varied and curious 
books); RoCermund's PortseUung, 1810, iii. ooL 

Bttchner, Academim . . . Natura Curiosorum 
HisioriOj 1755, p. 468, No. 69. 

Matthue, Conspectus Historite Medicorumchrono- 
loguus^ 1761, p. 799. 

Haller, Bibliotheca Botanica, 1771, i. p. 509. 

Hfldler, Bibliatheca Anatomica, 1774, i. p. 474. 

Eloy, Dictionnaire kistorique de la Midecine, 
1778, li. p, 6«. 

Haller, Biblioikeca Meduinm practicce^ i779i "*• 
p. 72- 

Kirchmajer had already written a tract on phos- 
phorus : Noctiluca constans et per vices fulgurans^ 
diutissimiauasita, nunc reperta, Wittebo'gae, 1676, 
4^, ff [12J. Beckmann a notes the later tract of 
1680, p. 7, for Kirchmajer s accoimt of an experi- 
ment on the phosphorescence or fluorescence of 
fluor spar, wluch Beckmann thinks was the first 
publication of it Rotermund ascribes to Kirch- 
majer the discovery of etching on glass, but the art, 
as Beckmann shows, was Imown to Schwanhard 
before Kirchmajer and lone before the decompo- 
sition of fluor spar by Scheele. 

Beytrag %ur Gesckickle der k&kem Ckemie^ 1785, 

P- 551. 
Saxius, Onotnasticon literarium, 1785, v. p. 109. 

Beckmann, BeytrUge »ur Gesckickle der Erfn- 
dungen^ 1792, iii. p. 555 ; English translation, 1814, 
iii. p. 222. 

Gmelin, Gesckickle der Ckemie, 1798, ii. pp. 275, 

320. 
Fuchs, Kepertorium der ckemiscken LiUeralur^ 

1806-08, p. 200. 

Biograpkie MAUcale^ Paris, Panckoucke (zSao- 
25), V. p. 427. 

Schmieder, Gesckickle der Alckemie, 1832, pp. 

455. 474. 
Bicgrapkie Universelle^ no date, xxi. p. 647. 

Kopp, Gesckickte der Ckemie^ 1845, iii. jx 328 

(histor]^ of phosphorus). 

Figuier, LAlckimie et les Alckimisles, 1856, p. 

311. 
Nouvelle Biograpkie Ginkrale, z86i, xxvii. coL 

PoggendoHf, Biograpkisck-lilerarisckei Hand' 
worterbuck^ 1863, i. col. 1261. 

Allgemetne Deulscke Biograpkie, 1882, xvi. p. 16 
(by W. Hess). 

Hirsch, Biograpkixkes Lexicon der kervorragen- 
den Aerste, 1886, iii. p. 479. 

Billings, Index-Catalogue, 1886, vii* p. 442 ; and 
Series, 1903, viii. p. 735. 

KIRCHWEGER (Anton Joseph). 

Aurea (Datena Homeri. Das ist: Eine Bescbreibung von dem Urspning der 

Natur und natiirlichen Dinge, wie und woraus sie gebohren und gezeuget, 

auch wie sie erhalten und wiederum in ihr uranfangliches Wesen zerstdret, 

werden, auch was das Ding sey, welches alles gebahret und wieder zerstocet. 

410 

KIRCHWRGER 

KIRCHWEGER (Anton Joseph). CanHnued. 

gantz simpliciter nach der Natur selbtt eigner Anleitung und Ordnuiig mit 
seinem schonsten natiirlichen rationibus und Ursachen iiberall illustriret 
Neue Auflage, welche nach einem accuraten und vcdlstandigen Manuscript 
fast auf alien Blattem verbessert, und an sehr vielen Orten um ein grosses 
Theil yermehret, in Zwey TheUen, weil kein echter dritler Theil vorfaimden 
ist Mit KdnigL Poln. und Churfl. Sadis.' aHeign. Privilegia I^pzig, 
verlegts Samuel Benjamin Walther. 1738. 

8*. pp. [x6, frouUspiece included] 406. Index [zd]. Title red and black. 
* Symbolic engxmviog and woodcat 

Aureae Catenae Homeri Dritter Theil de Transmutatione Metallonfm, oder 
eine Beschreibung von den TInctuien, wie solche aus alien Ertzen, Metallen, 
&c., kOnnen zubereitet und dadurch die geringere Metallen und Edelgesteine 
in bessere verwandelt werden, Nebst einer curieusen Historisdien Nadmcht^ 
von Verwandelung der geringeren Metallen in Bessere. Von einem 
aufrichtigen Liebhaber der Chymie. Frandcfurth und Leipzig, 1736! 

8*. Pp. [8] 46 [a blank]. Title red and black. 

The fint edition of the Awna Catena Howuri^ 
QODtaining two parts, wai published at Frankfurt 
aad Leipoff bjr Johann Georv K&hme, 1723, 8°, pp. 
[xa. including the ' Catena in redl 464 (with a 
fbloiog leaf ),T4a 4 blank]. Symbolic engraving, 
title in red and black. 

Lenglet Dufresnoy gives the date of the first 
edition as 1623. but that is obviously a misprint. 

After the 1798 edition as above came the third : 
Leipzig, X738. 8*. pp. [16, including the ' Catena ' 
in red, as the finootiraiece]. 406 [x6]. Sjrmbolic 
plate. Title in red and black. 

Other editions: Jena. 1754 (?); Jena, 1757; 
Vienna, i7$7(?)- 

Then, with the title : Annulus Platonis, Berlin 
and Leipzig, 1781 \s.v\ This is said to have been 
edited by Wdllner and lugeL 

The book vras translated into Latin by Favrat, 
and punished: Franoofurti, Esslinger, 176a, 8**, 
and again at Hall in Swabia in 1770. 
. Ladrague mentions a translation into French : 
'Chained*Or d'Homere/ by Sitandre in the i8th 
centunr. which existed in manuscript in the Ouvar- 
off Libcary, and bad not been printed, and an 
adaptation or modified translation : La Nature 
di6voil6e, Paris, 177a, a vols., xa**, said by Barbier 
to have been translated by a physician, Dufournel. 
. The third part appeared first in i7a(S as above, 
and again in 1737, and it Mras reprinted in 1770. As 
to oftni happens when a bibliographer has not seen 
some parucular edition, Ladrague considers the 
date 1796 given by Fictuld as a mistake for 1727. 
But while right in affirming a 1727 edition, which 
it given also in the Be^trag^ he is obviously wrong 
in denying a 1736 edition ; both exist. 

The authorship of this work is not at all certain. 
The author of the Btytra^ thinks it was written 
about 1654 by a Rosicrucian of Utrecht, and the 
manuscript lay in the Imperial Library at Vienna. 

Fictuld, who quotes only the 1738 edition of the 
original work, says the author is not known, but he 
follows the same principles as his master Sincerus 
Reoatus, skilled m his way in the description of 

sophistical chemical processct, bat not an * Adeptnt 
Hermeticus.' About the third nut Fictuld camioC 
express himself too strongly : ' ror the good of his 
reputation the author suppressed his name; the 
book is a collection of ardi-lies and sophistical 
deceptions, which are for the destruction of ttioae 
who have iaith in them. They deserve to btf 
burned publicly by the executibiierto prevent them 
doing more mitchief. Alas for the predous time 
wasted upon them 1' 

Lengkl Dufresnoy assigns the 1728 editioD lo 
Naxa^oras, I do not know upon what ^uad, Cor 
there is nothing in the book to indicate its atitlxx> 
ship. Whether the third part was by Naxagoras, 
as Ladrague suggests, or not, I am unabfe to 
decide. 

The best-founded view seems to be that it was 
written by Anton Joseph Kirchweger, who was a 
doctor of medicine and ' physicus ' at Gmundao, in 
Upper Austria, and died in 1746c This vrork 
attracted a great deal of attention, and was one of 
the books rnd by Goethe at the time when he wat 
interested in alchemy. The title is taken inxn the 
Iliad, VIII. V. i7-a6 ; and AdaMah Boos quotes 
similar expressions. Catena deflMnUa ei rota dmp- 
/arts of Rajrmon Lull, Aureus funis, scalajacoki, 
smperins et itUeriut of Hermes, to denote, as Lull 
puts it, that by which wise nature governs aU her 
instruments by constant revolving and circulating. 

Kirchweger wrote another work : Microscopium 
Dasilii Valentini sive commentariolum et cribolum 
ttber den grofsen Kreusapfel der Welt, Berhn, 179a 

The editors of the 178 1 edition, or Anmmlus 
Platonis, in discussing (Vorrede, p. ix. note) the 
third part, reject it as spurious and foisted on the 
original work. "It does not come from 'our* 
school," and they speak of themselves as the 
genuine brethren of the deceased author, and 
the sole legal inheritors of the book. They assert 
that the author was Herwerd von ^orcbenfcinmiN a 
teacher of medicine at Cromau and Landpl\X5icus 
in Moravia, and *' a worthy member of ' our^ secret 
brotherhoodin which he bore the name of Uomerus." 

Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histoire de la Philosephie Beytrag tur QeackUkt^derkSkem Ckeemie, 1785, 
Hermitique, 174a, iiu p. 133. p. 661. 

i7S3t 

p. 33. 

KIKCHWBGEit^klRSTMN 

Ki\ 

KIRCHWEGER (Anton Joseph). Continued. 

AdaMah Boos, DU ganwe kdkere CkemU und 
Naimrwisaenseka/if 1787. p. 87, note. 

Hdosits^ Aiigtmehus BUchir- Lexicon^ 1812, L 
00L146. 

BraneCy Manmel du Likrairt, x86i, ii. col. 1197. 

Ladngae,BMufiJU^tu Omforof^ Sciences Secrites, 

Barbier. Dictionnaire des Ouvrages Anampmes, 
i»7«. iii. col. 398 d. 

Kopp, A urea Catena Homeric Braimschwdg, 
1880. 8r. 

Kopp, DU AlckemiCt 1886. ii. p. 209. 

Goethe, " Oichtung und Wabrbeit," ii. Acbtes 
Bucb., Werke^ ud. pp^ 119^ 349^ 

KiRSTBN (GboroX 

Georgii Kifstenii, D. ac Prof« Regij in Stetinensi Paedagogio, Adversaria, et 
Ammadversiones, in Johannis AgricobCy D. ac Physici Breslaviensis Com- 
mentaria in Poppiam, & Chinirgiam parvam. Darinnen der falsche, und 
beCrieg^lidie gebrauch der Chjrmischen Artzneyen, das Aurum potabile und 
andere PanacAs belangend; wie auch der irrige Methodus Medendi, und 
was in der kleinen Chirurgia, und Alchemia, oder Transmutadone Metallorum 
nebenst den uneriiorten Rodomontaden, und unglaublichen Geschichten ohne 
grund vorgebracht worden, Augenscheinlich und Sonnenklar gewiesen, und 
wiederleget wild. Allen Liebhabem der Wahrheit, Medids, Chirurgisi 
wahren Chymids, Balbierern und Feldsdierem zur Nachricht gesdirieben, 
and niitzlich n lesen. 

Hippocrates Lege sua. 
Omnium profectb Artium Medicina nobilissima. Veriim propter eorum, 

qui earn exercent, ignorantiam, eorumq; qui temere de his judicant, 

omnibus artibus jam longe inferior habetur. 
Gednic^t zu Alten Stettin, bey Georg Gdtzken. In Verlegung Jeremiae 
Mamphraien, Bochhandlers, Anno 1648. 

• 4^. Pp. [54] 594. {zo]. Engraved title included in the pagination. 

• Kkstett, Kintein, Kintejm, Kirstenius, was born 
mt Stettin, ao January, 1613. At Halle he began a 
€onrse of study of phiknophy and medicine, which 
iMad aennd yeacB and led him to Jena, Strasburg, 
TfUxngoi, Lcgrden, Franecker,Groningen, Utrecht, 
mot^ again to Leyden, where be devoted four years 
to botany, and finally received his degree. lie 

physician. He died there March ^, 1660, and his 
funeral discourse was pronouncea by Henrictis 
Schsevius (Witte) or Schrevius (Haller). His writ- 
ings—besides the present criticbm of johann 
AGRICOLA (^.r.)— consist of DUquisitumes Pkjfi<h 
logica, Stettin, 1651 ; a collection of academical 
disputations, and Oratio de medicina dignitaie et 

mtoided now to travel, and declined chairs at pr<Bstantia contra Platonem et Plinium^ Stettin, 
Dorpat and Greifswald, but was persuaded to 1647. 
retum to Stettin as professor of medicine and royal 

Henningus Witte, Memoria Medicorum nostri 
MCuU ciarissimorum renovata, 1676, Oecas Se- 
cuoda, pp. 309-214 (reprint of the funeral pro- 
gramme of Henricus Schsevius). 

MerckUn, Liifdenius renovatus, 1686, p. 332. 

Freber, Theatrum yirorum eruditione ctarorum, 

i6Ba p. 1387. 

Witt*, 2?tarium Bi^grafhicum^ 1688, Sig. O003 
verso^ 4 March, x66o. 

, Mai^E^, BiSHotheca scriptorum tnedicomm, 1731. 
lU i. p. Iii. (contains a reprint of his funeral 
Aralkm). 

StoUci Anleitung *ur Historic der Medicinischen 
GelaAf^'f, 1731, pp. 4, 278, 279. 
.Zedler, Univtrsal-Lcxicon^ 1737, xv. coL 801. 

Kestner, Medicinisches GeleArten- Lexicon, 1740, 

Nioeron, Mimaires, 1740, ^U, pp. 179-182. 
Jitchcr, Aiigemeines GeleMtft'Lixtam^ 1750, it. 

col. 2105 : Rotermund's Fortsetnung, 1810, iii. coU 
412. 

Chaufepi^, Nouveau Dtctionnaire kistorique tt 
critique^ 1753, iii. letter K, p. 43. 

Kloy, Dictionnaire histarigue de la Ai^dedne, 

I7SS. ". p. 98 '. ^77^^ »• p. 641. 

Matthiie, Conspectus Historic Medicorum ckrono- 
Icjgicus, 1761, p. 591. 

Haller, BibliotTuca Botanica, ^77i* i* P* 483* 

Haller, Biiliothtca Cktrurgica^ i774t i* p. 346. 

Haller, Bidi. Medicina Practice, ^777* "• P« 7*6. 

Gmelin, Gesckichtt der Chemie, 1797, i. p. 663. 

Fuchs,. Repertorium der chemisckim LUitratur, 
1806-08, p. 146. 

Bayle et Thillaye, BiogrdphU MidicaU, 1855. i* 

p. 439- 
Hirsch, Biographisckes Lexikon der heruorro' 

genden Aerzte alUg Zeiten und Vdlker^ 1886, iii p. 

48a. 

473 

KiRSTEN^KLEFEKEk 

KIRSTEN (Michael). 
Non-entU Chymicau 

See UTIS UDENIUS. 

KIR WAN (Richard). 

See SCHEELE (KARL WILHELM), 178a 

Kirwan was born io Ca Gshray in 175^ He 
finished his edocalioo at Poictien and St Omer 

by the death of his brother mccecdcd to the Camily 
csute of CiegK >» i755- He was called to the 
Irish bar in 1766^ but soon relinquished law for 
Kicnoe. which he pnmied in London. He lived 
there from 1777 to 1787. and became aoooainted 
wHh many of the most notable people of the time, 
carried on a wide oorrespondenoe and held recep- 

tions which formed a lendcsroas for distinguished 
penonases. He contributed papers to the Royal 
Society Mr which the Copjer medal was contnied 
upon him. In 1784 he pubHsned his book on minera- 
logy, which had much success as bdn^ the first 

systematic work on the subiect in En||[lish. Even ^ ^ „ « 

now it is an intcnsting landmark in the history of he was the recipioit of many honours both at 
mineralQcyt as it ihows the minerab that were home and fixmi foreign countries. He died i June, 
known, the sjTstem of classification and the amount 
of knowledge of thdr composition. Thb was fol- 

lowed by his essay on Phlogiston in 1787, which, 
on being recognised as a thoroqgh expootioQ of 
the theory, was at once translated into French, each 
chapter in turn ha^ng a refutatioo appended to it 
He replied to the criticism, but in 1791 he went 
over to the antiphlogistic view. 

In 17O7, on account of bis health, he took up his 
abode in Dublin and threw hiitiadf into the work 
of the Royal Irish Academy and other wcieties. to 
vrhicb he contributed papers on <Jirwii%liy, pure 
and applied. He had a keen cuubuteisy ower the 
Huttonian theory and wrote a book on the analysis 
of mineral waters, 17^ He was a chemist of dis- 
tinction without havm|( made any strfldng discovery, 
a widdy known and highly accomplished man, and 

Gmelin, GfxhichU der CkemU^ 1799, i"- PP* 

r, AUgtwuines Journal der Ckemie^ 1801, 
vu p. 90a. 

Tilloch, Pkiiosopkical Magmzitu, i8oa, xiv. p. 
553, with a portrait. 

^Fuchsi Kepertorinm der ckemiscMem Liiieraiur, 
18064)8. pp. SM, 547. 

Annual Roister foriBi^, IX 177. 

GenitewtajTS Magaxime^ 181 a. Ixxxii.. part i. p. 

Thomson, History of the Royai Society, 181a, p. 
483 (about Phlogiston); Apfk. iv. p. Ivii.. 34 Feb., 
i;w> (calls him Richard Kirwin). 

BiograpkU UniverseUe^ 1818, xxii. p. 456 ; no 
date, zxi- P* 651. 

Watt, Bibludheca Britanmica^ 1834, Authors, ii. 

574/ 
Bitgrapkie Midicale, Paris, Panckoucke (i8ao- 

aS). ▼• P- 433. 

1812. 

Gorton, A Gemerml Butgrafkicml 
London. 1898, iL p. 961. 
Tbonuoo, Tke Hisiery oy CkeuuUry^ 1831, ii. pi 

>37- 
Sdimieder. Gexkickie der Akkemie, 1833, p. 581. 

Cuvier. Hieteiwe des edemtes maimreiUs, 1845, ▼. 

Academy, Proceeduun^ 1850. iv. App. 
Na viii. p. Izjod. (article by M. uooovwi) ; tb, pi 
481 (with portrait : article tnr Dr. PSdodlsy. 

Tke English Cyclopetdi^ fiM^mphy, voL iii. 
1856, coL 717. 

Nouvelle Biagrapkie Ginirale^ 1861, zzviL coL 
791. 

Pogeendorfi^ Biographisckrliierarisckes Hand' 
wdrtaiucA^ 1863. L coL ta6^ 

Kopp^ Die AlckenUe, 1886, ii. p. 148. 

Dichineant of National Biegr^ky^ 189a, xzxL pi 

KLEEBLAT. 

Su MONTE-CUBITI (V, DE). 

KLEFEKER (Detlef). 
Das Fundament der Lehre vom Stein der Weisen, oder des Uraltesten 
Philosophi Hermetis Trismqi;isti Tabula Smaragdina. Welche Tafel Usher 
von den meisten fiir ein unaufloslich Ratzel gehalten worden: Diesdbe hat 
nunmehro in Teutscher Sprache mit experimentirter Wahrheit deutlich erklaiet, 
und darum sich genennet, Pyrophilus. Vorerinnerung ! Alle gerechten 
Exemplarien von dieser Schrifit hat der Auctor eigenhandig unterschrieben 
und besiegelt Gedruckt und verlegt durch Conrad K6nig, E Hoch-EdL 
Hochw. Raths Buchdrucker, in Hamburg. 1736. 

Pp. 116. Signed Pyrophilus and aealed. 

4*. 

KLEFEKER—KLETTBNBERG 

473 

KLEFEKER (Dstlef). ConHnmed. 

' Tin •Ator of HoAel's letters nys that his 
was Dedef KklidKr, tint he was a ' ro)ral Pnmiao 
CofnmissioDariiis' who lived at Hamburg and 
dealt in foreuni nxxhice. In his earlier letters he 
caDed himseu Micfaael Gottheil, but be afterwards 
used his own name when he had attained his 
ofajest, which was to get access for himsdf and his 
cxcdlent friend to Henkel's laboratory and money 
bag. The said friend was a Dr. Wicherts of Ham- 
bare, who seems to have dictated the letters which 
Klneker wrote out and sent. At all events the 
editor treats them as emanating practically from 
one person. We gather from jp. 199 of the letters 
that the name Pjnophilus which appears in the 
present work is another of Klefdcer's pseudonyms. 

The tetters addressed to Henkel treat of various 
chemical topics. 

Meusel quotes the present book and sutes that 
he has seen it assi(i^ed to Jobann Klefeker. but he 
is of opinion that it can hardly be by that person. 

- Bair^ »mr GexkkkU der kdkem ChemU, 1785, 

. Gmelin, GexkUhU der Ckemie, 1798, iL p. 328. 

Mimtraltgisckt, Ckemiscke una Akhymiscke 
Bri^ • . • 4M der . . . Bergratk /. F, Henkel, 

Meusel, Ijexikon der vom Jahr 1750 his 1800 
verstorbenen Teuiscken SckHflsUller, 1808, vii. 

KLEINE Bawer (Der). 

Set GRASSHOFF (JOHANN). 

KLEINE Paradeisstafel. 

See GLORIA MUNDI. 

Ladrague states that on p. 116 of the Ouvaroff 
copy below the word Pyrophiius iswritten KlefSecker 
hamburgensis, and that Weiss in his article says 
that in a sale catalogue this book is attributed to 
Johann Klefecker. But he has not noticed the 
confirmation of the authorship which is printed on 
p. ti6, the note, namdy, which gives the date and 
apparent name of the place: Ge^eben aus den 
Kleefer-Fddt-Ek, im Jahr ChrisU 17361. nMines 
Alters im Ein und Secbtxigsten Jahr. Obviously 
the name of the place is an anagram of Detlef 
Klefeker. 

The present copy wants a supplement, pp. 1x7- 
132, with some other tracts, including one on per- 
petual motion by Klefeker, mentioned by Ladrague. 
The title of the supplement is: Ab^enbthiffte 
Beylage, gehorig an dem Tractat, betitult: das 
Fundament . . . Ibid. 1736. 

BiografkU Universtlle^ 1818, xxii. p. 465; no 
date, xxiL p. 16. (Article by Weiss, who identifies 
him with Johann Klefeker.) 

Schmieder, Gesckickie der Alchemie^ 185a, p. 56. 

Nauvelle Bio^aphie Ginirale^ 1861, xxvii. coL 
826. (This article is on Johann Klefeker, but it 
does not include the present work among his 
writings.) 

Ladrague, Bibliothique Ouvarof ^Sciences SecrHes, 
1870, No. 1369. 

KLEIN (Ein) Rosen Gartlein, darinnen die Philosophia Naturalis und Voll- 
komniifs aller Metallischen Sachen begriffen seind. 
See TANCKE (joachimX Promptuariiun Alchymiae, Ander Buch, 161 4, p. 19. 

KLEINOD. 

See R. (l m.X 1728. 

KLETTENBERG (Johann Hektor von). 

See BKSONDERE CURIEUSE ENTREVUE, 1 72 1. 

This book seems to be rare, for Kopp states that 
he had searched in several libraries for it in vain. 
It is anonymous, but he gives reasons for thinking 
h may have been written by David Fassmann at 
Leipng who was the author of a number of such 
conversations. 

The two adventurers, who are here brought 
together, had nothing to do with each other, and 
their deaths were separated by a few years, but 
there was such a similarity in their lives that an 
Interview between them after they had worked out 
dMir fates seems a matter of course. 
. DomenicoManuelCaietano(orCajetani, Caetano, 
Gaetano), who passed himself off as a Count, and 
rose ultimately to high offices m Germanv and 
Austria, was the son of a peasant at Pietrabianca 
. near Naples. Friends helped in his education, he 
was apprenticed to a g^oldsmith, acquired and 
exhibited juggling tricks in Italy. He discovered 

a treasure which had been buried by an unknown 
alchemist along with a manuscript describing the 
preparation of the stone. He gets the name of 
being in possession of it, and of having exhibited 
its transmuting power whereby he gained atdit. 
This he did in Madrid with wch success that he 
was persuaded by the Bavarian ambassador to go 
to Brussels to Maximilian Emanuel of Bavaria, who 
was then Governor of the Spanish Netherlands. 
He did so and won the governor's confidence, and 
at the same time promised to make a quantity of 
the stone. Honours were conferred upon him and 
he gradually obtained 60000 gulden. When be 
had got all be could he tried to escape, but he was 
captured and kept in the Castle of Grunewald for 
six years. At tne end of that time he ^t away 
somehow, and in 1704 Mras at Vienna as 
Count Ruggiero, where in presence of Emperor 
Leopold iThe performed certain tiansmnfaljont. 

474 

KLBTTELNBBRG 

KLETTENBERG (Johann Hektor von). Cmtimmed. 

MdflgainvMkrtodktoniaketlMMoaeinqaaittiij. iMiacioo vhkb was not 

la 170s tte Eanrar died, but Ouitaao focMd a 

iiatioa m PriBoeJblMnn Wilbdti onbe Palad^^ 

Bat for Mne reason ttaa Couiit vcDC to Bcrlia and 

■MKla his former pnMDisei 10 Kinff Frederick I., and 

aieolad soooessftil ezperimeiits in presence of 

Conmd Dippel, a believer in aiofaemv, but a sbnewd 

psisun, wbo was not iaipressed bjr the nobility and 

tiileaorthestraafcc He had promised within sixty 

days to andce a laripe quantity oC the transmutins 

■Mdia for gold and sUver, (or the Kinc. ThehUlcr 

gave the adept oumerous and valoaole presents, 

and bestowed on him also important office 81, But 

of going on with his preoarations he 
himseli and went to Hildesheim and 

Ob his fttnm he made fresh drmandi, 

to sdl the secret outnght, and asked far 

money to take him to Italy. This conduct mised 

about his previous doiiici at V^^ 
the King against him. It 
process he had given 10 the Royal 

preparing the slone was a fsilure. and ^ 

CTpostu hired with, he escaped 10 Haasbvi^ Uov 
however he was anresifld and contufuil IR l|» 
fartiem at Kflstiin. On his stating limt km 
uffA do any experimental work in prisQiL.be 
ttOEfln to Berlin, did a Uttk and Had to 
on the Main. He was c 
sent to Kftstrin, and as it wm lound thai he 
would not or coukl not fulfil las 
was coodeamed to death. In August. 
seutence was carried out; dressed in 
covered with tinsel, be was hanfwi om. a 
decorated with the 

Hannemann. TkubauaiH^ iT^Zt P* 34* 

Hannemann, Jason [1709]. p. 41. 

Dit Rdeigthonu Junjg/tr Aickjrmdm, 1730, pp. 

WH-134. 

Petraeus, Fr. Baji/ii Vakntini . . . Ckfwtitckt 

^€krifitm^ Letpcig, 1769, i. Neue Vorrede, sig. b6 

warm c^vtno. 

GttldemUk, SamwUmmg rmi wtekr mis kmmderf 
TVatUmmtaHomu^tsckiekiem, 1764, pp. 94-107. 

B€ytra£ smr Gtsckicktt dtr kdktrn CktwsU^ 1765, 
pp. 384-416. 

Klettenberg was boni at Frankfurt a. M. in 1669, 

and at school dispUved unusual abilitv. acquiring 

FVench and Latin with facility. Stirred t^ ambition 

be had the fancy to be a statesman, and to enrich 

himself he engaged in alchemical pursuits. But 

his experiments misouried, and be lost in them 

and in dissipated living what little money be 

poesessed. Pressed by crKiitors be went to England 

and resided for a time at Cambridge, but be bad to 

depart from it also for the same reason, and 

wanderM up and down, bonxjwing money from 

people who believed in his power to transmute, 

and pajring them with promises. When at the end 

of bis resources, he returned to Frankfurt and tried 

by a successful marriage to attain the [k)sition he 

desired. He lapsed once more into loose living, 

and having killed a relative called Stallburg, said 

to be a rival, in a quarrel or duel, tried to get away, 

but was secured and imprisoned in Frankfurt. In 

some way unknown he effected his escape and 

secured a safe pass from the Elmpax>r. He changed 

his name. lived in Bremen, Nfainz, Prague, and 

other plao^ and pursued his method of getting 

monej from people by promising them the proceeds 

-of lus transmutatioo expieriments. The work 

always proceeded favourably up to a certain point. 

but when it was nearing completion and the people 

were expecting a successful issue, important business 

compelled him to take a long journey, and he 

departed promising to return and complete the 

work, which he never did. In this way he acquired 

considerable sums, Uved in great style and kept 

■a secretary, and appeared as a nobleman at some 

'of the German courts. As Baron von Wildeck he 

visited the Duke Wilhelm Elmst of Saxe- Weimar, 

and spoke of a process he had for extracting gcrid 

and silver from ores by means of a preparation 

which did not alter, and afiinned that it was a 

metallurgical and not an alchemical method. 

The Duke gave him aoo Tblr. to prepare the 

matnriai at lUnenau. The first triab were success- 

liil, toot when the process was repeated at Weimar. 

.19 Aflf. 17x3, it was supci vised by two walchtel 

Christianus Democritns, AmfnckHgur PntaigMi^ 

p. SI. 

Hisiariscktr Berickt 90m Sem Ltkm da Gmfm 
Caetamo, Berlin and Frankfurt, 1790^ 8*. 

Gmdin. QiKksdOi Ser Ckmdi^ 1798, ii. pp. 

»ihmieder. G^aOdMtSerAkknn^iJ^yi^^^^ 
Kopp, DU AUhewsU, 1886, >• PPi 9lf t9l« 18& 
"95. ^9f' 

metallurgical experts who reported that the ad^ 
intioduceid silver along with the flaxes and other 
materials he employed. He was accordingly dis- 
missed, 24 Aiv. 17x3, without having to refund 
the money he had received. This same year he 
published his book entitled: DieentlarAeAlchjrmia. 
set up as an alchemist, and went to the Court of 

Saxonv where his previous history was unknown, 
and where he imposed on everyone by his manners 
and by his sumptuous scale of living. His £une 
having come to the ears of Augustus the Strong, in 
1714 he made an undertaking to supply the King 
within fourteen mouths with a univenal tincture of 
unlimited power and an elixir of life, and to rescrre 
this and all htt other secrets for the King alone. 
He^ thereupon, proceeded to fulfil his part of the 
baz)^n in a laboratory that bad been furnished far 
him at considerable cost But time passed, he still 
indulged in his oki habits and coatraated debts, 
and be made excuses for the delay 6i the work. 
He was in favour with the King who permitted 
him to revisit his native town. When bs laa'tbe 
risk of being arrested on account of the dud, he 
withdrew to a place in the neighbourhood where 
he lived till the spring of 1716. On his return 
to Dresden lie represented to the King that the 
previous labours having come to nothing on account 
of the unexpected duration of his absence, he must 
begin anew. The following year passed also and 
the King became impatient and distrust£iil, and at 
last a commission of enquirr was appointed to 
ascertain the reason of the delay, and Klettenberg 
was ordered to bring his work to a coocluskxi. 
He made attempts to gain complete freedom but 
he was watched carefully, and when he planned to 
escape, was traasfcrred lo the K5nigsa(ein, the 
great castle near Dresden. 

On * Walpurgis-night,' 1719, he cootnvQ4 to 
break out, and, with aa agility worthy of hu name, 
to climb down the high steep rocks on which the 
castle stands. How he effected it vrithput iajuxy is 
surprising to aqr one who knows the pia^x^ fod 
he had better factune than soma of the FraJKit 

-JTM?/- <7S 

KLETTEKBERG {Jobasv HMKTom tok^ 
off ikB lm wr 

Kiipp. Atf AkMewui. 1K6. i. ppi 174-180. 185. 

mm 

KNOR (Louis Gilhomme de). 

Basiliiis Valentmus Redhivus seu Astrum Rud^ans Akfavmicum. Das ist: 
Der wiedcr walfgdLtbtc Basilios Valentiaus oder HeUglantzendes Gesdrn 
der Akhjmie, wekbes gamtz bell und klar zdget, so wohl der alten lis 
neuen wahren Sophonmi einhdlige, deutiiche, and unfehlbahre Meynung tod 
der erUen and andem philosophischen materie Vor- and Nach- Arbeit des 
gr08sen Wevcks, denen |Eigenscbaflten der gemeinen und Philosoph. MetalL 
SaL and Mineralien. Aus den bewahrtesten Schrifften der Pbilosophorum 
vcrfuKty dabey eine gantz Idchte gewisse und accurate Methode angewiesen, 
wie die Vor-Arbeit voUbracht werden niufs, welches von keinen bifshero 
gesdicfaen, wodorch die meisten sonst vorfallende Dubta von sich selbst 
ao^dioben weidcn, Samt beygefugten kurtsen und deutlichen Alchym- 
PhjBC^ogiachen Raisonement des Autoris^ ¥on Louis Gilhomme de Kn6r, 
lledi PUb-Chym. Leipzig, In Verlegung des Autoris, und zu finden 

bey Johann Friedrich Braun, 17 16. 

8*. Pp. [16] 160. Titk red and Mack. 

• [Anodier Copy.] 

8*. Pp. [16] 1601. Titk red and black. Title-page damagrd Wants pp. 131-158. 

[Another Copy.] 

8*. Title wanting. Pp. [4] [14] 16a 

This oo|>7 has a dedication to the Bishop of EichstlUt added, dated Ldpcig, a May. 
1716, which is not contained in the other copies. 

Das NOthige Nosce T^ zu Erhahung der Lebens-Flammen durch eine doppelte 
Panacea, so aus der wahren Minera Solis der Sophorum durch ribhtige 
/Spagirische Handgriffe prsepariret wird; Allen Gesundheit-liebenden zu 
derselben Erhaltung, so sie aber verlohren, dero Recuperirung, samt einer 
richtigen und accuraten Manuduction der Zubereitung vorgesetzter Panacea, 
recommendiret und prsesentiret durch Louis Gilhome von Knor, Philoi»' & 
Medic D. Leipzigp Bey Johann Grofsens Erben, 1714. 

a*. P^[i6]zfl7[i).. Title red and blaok.' 

476 KNOR-^KONIGUCMB 

KNOR (Louis Gilhomme de). ConHnued. 

The tnie name of this penoo was Ladwic WD- Besides the abovcL be wrote also Pk 

voa Knflr. which he aeems to have had a comfemdita^ cder Kurntr tmmhali guitr mmi kt- 

imcf to turn iato rather nrasoal French. His wdkrter Artmtjwdtitl^ Naitmberg, 1765, 8*, 
is known, but I have found no detaik of his description of an alkalinr gold-salt, and Dms mii 

aaogA that it ended in 1754. Haller calls him GewHrae FrOcJkiem, PJamMtm, KrAmUm^ Bim 
D. U w. ▼. Kndrr. Saamtem mmd Otstklmwten mtg^UUt klagmsm^ 

fif , 1755, 8*. and one or two on practical medicine. 

Lenglet Dufresnoj. Hisimre 4e ia PkihtapkU JofAtr, Ai^gnmeima GeUkrtem'Ltxicomi Roter- 
Henmdtiqm, 1743, in. p 196. mund's FortMttmmg mmd Ewgdmxmngtm^ 181Q, iii. 

Haller, BiMi€ikt€a Boiamicm, 177a, ii. p. 451. ooL 566. 

,B0tr^f mr GtsckUkit dtr kUiem Ckewtit, Dodmeris. DicHommatrt kisiorifue de ia MSd^ 

i^ ppi 654. 656. dme, 18^. IIL i p. ^. 

Wiehn. GexkidkU der CkemU, 1798. ii. pp. Hirscn, Bicgrapktxkes Lexikom der ktrtfcrrm-' 

39a» 343, 386. gmdem Aermtt, 1886. iii. p. 506. 

Meinel. Lexikom der vom Jakr 1750 his 1800 Kopp. Die Akktmie, 1886. ii. ppu 337, 35S. 
mrU^iUnen teutscken Sekriftsielier, 1808, m pi 

KOCHHEIM (JoHANN Heinrich) von Hollrieden. 
See COCHEIM OOHANN HEINRICH) voo Hollrieden. 

5^ also HOLLRIEDEN (jOHANN HEINRICH COCHEIM VON). 

KOMUVES (Paulus Adamus). 

Dissertatio de Oleo Minerali Secretissimo Vero Auro Potabili, cujus conficiendi 
modum ai^x>siiit Ac Authoritate. et Consensu lUustrium, Perillustrium, ac 
lifagnificorain, Spectabiliuin, Clarissinioruin, & Excdlentissimorum Vironim, 
Perillustris, ac Magnifid Domini Universitads Rectoris, Illustrissimi, 
Magnifid, ac Clarissimi Indytae Facultads Medicse D. Pnesidis, Perillustris, 
Spectabilis, Clarissimi, ac Excellendssimi Indytae Facultads Medical Domini 
DecanL Venerabilis Domini Senioris lyjy. Sac Csesareae Majestatb Con- 
siliarionim, ac Archiatrorum, nee non Clarissimorum D D Professonmi, 
adeoque todus AmpUssimi D.D. Medicorum Collegii, in Andquissima ac 
Cdeberrima Universitate Viennensi Publico DD. Doctorum Scrudnio in 
Dissertadone Inaugurali exponit Paulus Adamus Kdmiives, Hungarus 
Sz^plakiensis AA. LL. & Philosophise Magister, nee non pro suprema 
Doctoratiis Laurea Candidatus. Disputabuntur tempore & loco consuetis. 
Die Mensis Anno M DCC LI I. Viennae, Typb Frandsd Andreae 
Kirchbeiger, Universitads Typographi. 

4^ Pp. [12] 14. 

KONIG. 

Der sich alter Welt zeigende Konig in seinem Purpur- Mantel, Das ist: 
Die ohnverfalschte Warheit uns^er Chjrmischen Operadon in Berdtung 
der Universal-Tinctur, entdecket sich ohne dntzige dunckle Redens-Arth 
aufs zweyen uhr-alten Manuscriptis, und offenbahret sich in sdnem herrlichen 
Geschmuck. Wdches zu Dienste sdnes bediirffdgen Nachsten zum Druck 
befbrdem und an Tag geben wollen dn Liebhaber der Philosophic. 
Franckairth, Verlegts Samud Tobias Hocker, M DCC XL 

8*. Pp.48. 

KONIGLICHE Hermedsche Special-Concordanz, worinnen sie, samt dero gantzem 
Fundament, bestehe, nach der Abthdlung, wie der Conspectus Capitum & 
Contentorum so stracks auf dem andem Blate ausweiset und anzeiget, samt 

K(»najCHE 

icfa imgescfaatt scihiqbe wad dreisc s^iei dsnth eedftcbtes Lfthontocnun 
ChymicaiBp sie in der Tbat imd Wjivbek ginrriifH, oder fjuxz and fv ion 
dcradbigm ilk un§jf ii tinuipen Siaiiaie, and xhrer ridit^pai Var and >CjKh> 
Albeit valiren Boeimi^ abigefubnet mdesi: Von dnen liebluber der 
idnen Wabrfadt, wddier dardi die Gmde Goctes duinnen. ^Knnittdst 
der £zperienz» kat gcgmndet, sonst aber Seiner Rom. Kjjserikben vie 
lodi Pjlbnlhrhm Majrtfaien X.aX.P. dmcb ofiendicben Dnicfc an den Tj^ 
gcgdxn. Bic61an and Leipi^ ber Michid Hubert, 17^5. 

**• ^ 7P3- [> j- 'Tttfe rvd and black priaied across rB\> pMCcs. 

Ffetidd {PrOurSSeim^ 1753. Th. i. pi 103J KvBckri. AKufUft^ t^men<, :s;i>*.r» :;#v^>^^ 
tlriSK tbii vcriL ID Naz^ons; it k mc >». 1870^ No. i»7. 
Hoaed fay KoppL Ladngme pob it 

[AnoCber Copy.] 

The imprint has been cut oC 

KOPPE (JoachimX Respondens. 

See HORST (GRKGORirsX Problenumim Mediconim . . . decades priores quinouei 
1608. 

KOFFSKY (ViHCMrnus). 
Fratris Yincendi Kofiskhii eines groisen Pbilosophen und Mtochen des IVrt^ 
diger Ordens zu Danzig. Hennedsche Schriften, denen wahren Sch\i)orn 
und Nachfolgem unserer geheimen Spagirischen Kunst turn Nu« iHsachriclH^n 
und hinterlafeen den 4ten Octobr. Aa Domini MCCCCLXXVllL Zwcy 
Theile. Niimberg, bey Jobann Adam Stein, 1786, 

8*. rp> W "9 (>]• Two diagrammatic v^XKxfcuts. Woodcut* of apparalut. 
Sjmbolic engraving. 

Tinctur-Wuitzel, und auch Materia prima defs gebenedeyten uhralton StttiiM 
der Weisen. 

See FiGULUS (bknedictus), Thesaurinella, 1681, p. 5a. 

,AL^ title-page can be trusted and Kofiski or alchemy bad not had any hIRm Ui Rioiiplni lh# 

Koffsky was a Dommican friar at Dantig. who left pursuit. He may be regimlml In Iha mwiniiiHP m 

his wntmgs to his pupils and followers on Oct. 4, the flnt Polish student uf the aH. Aftw llin 

1488. then the bnll of Pope John XXII. against Rtformatlon the manuscript wm (bund Itnill up In 

47S 

KOFFSK y-^€R TUM 

KOFFSKY (Viifcnrnus). Canhmud. 

tht <kNslBr qT ibe Bonntcrj in 156a This hap- 
poied «o oltai that one gets quite to know these 
nHUMMeripts ; they ooie iroai--cloiitcri. 

The LjUin origioal is said bjr Schmieder to have 
httSk flrsl pubBshed in Benedictus PIguhis' Tkesaur^ 
imHim,;iM, and anin in i68si as above, but that 
is hiaccarate kx the i68a edition is in German. 

Borrichius, Cowj^/au Scripiorum CJUmicarmm, 

LoMrieC Dofrano^, Histoire it ia PMiloM^JUe 
NtrmOme, 174a, iiL p. 196. 
nebild, FrpUerSMm, 1753. Th. i. pi loi (not 

Tlie German trandatkiiit he M^s, was pvblHlKd at 
Daniig,'- i68i« 4*. The iUostntions aie of 

Bomchius has no h^ opinioa of the anthor: 
* Vincenti» KoAkyln sot TimOMr 

tamen 

aefl qoK 

Beyirwg tmr GttckickU dm Mkerm Qktmie, 1765. 

p. ^34. 
Gmelin. Ge$ckicktr der Owwa 17^ ii> p^ 4- 
Schmieder, GtsckukU dtr Akmmit^ i833i» P> ^39^ 
Ladragne. BiUiakifm Onw^ 

StcfHUf 1870, NoSb 876« 879> 
Kopp, Die AicAemae, iM, n. p. 339. 

KORANHAPUCH Gamimah). 

S^ TRITHJUM OohannX Giildeiies Kleuiod« 1782. 

KORNDORFFER (Bartholombus). 
Beschreibung der Edelgesteine. 

See ROTH-SCHOLTZ (priederich), Dentsches Tbeatrum Chemiciiin, 1730^ ii. 
p. 567. 

Ediche Koradorfferische Pardcularia. 

See DA RIOT (claudeX Die gulden Arcfa, Schatz imd Ktmstkammer, 1614, Part iiL 

p. 227. 
See EROFFNETE Geheimnisse des Steins der Wdsen [1708^ p. 773. 

Of this writer nothing seems to be known except 
the titles of his books. He was alive in the year 
i«u and had returned safe and sound to (iennanj 
aSa having been away in heathendom. In this 

Geoc^ Caspar Kirchmajer. Noctiluca Constasu, 
1676^ sign. B3 verso. 

Mercklin, Lindeuius renovaius^ 1686, p. 116 
(* De TSnctura Gemmanun/ 1635). 

Roih-Sdioltc, Theatrum Ckemicum^ 1730, ii. p. 

567. 
Manget, Bibliotkeca Scriptorum Medicorum, 

I73i7n. I p. Izxxi. 

Jacob Leufolds Prodromus Bibliotkeca metaliica, 

173a, p. 83(*TincturaGemnianim,' Frankf.« 1636, 

8^ 

book whieh he wrote on pracious stones was in- 
tended to open the ^es 01 his coontiynicn to the 
frauds perpetrated on them in their guise. Kirch- 
majer speaks of a book b^ Bartholoaueus Koni- 
dorffer, De Vitro amtimonit eism^kmrf, 

Tdcber, AligtwuiHCS Gelekrten'Lexicom, 1750, ii. 
cxA. 2148 ; Rotermund's Fortsetgttng, z8iq^ iii. ooL . 

7.38. 

Fictnkl, FrobierSttin^ 1753, Th. it, p. 8^ 

Beytrag tur GeschicJUe der k5kem Ckemtse, 1785, 
p 614. 

Gmelin, Gesckickte der CAemie, 1797, L p. 52a ; 
1798, ii. p. 4. 

Schmieder, Gesckickte derAickemie, zgsa, p.fl6B. 

Kopp, Die Alckemie, z886, i. p. 243 ; ii. p. 381. 

KORNDORFFERISCHE SCHRIFFTEN. 

See TRISMOSINUS (salomonX Atireum Vellus [1598], Tractatns ii. p. 55. 

See TRISMOSINUS (salomonX Aureum VcUus, 1599, ii. p. 87. 

See EROFFNETE Geheimnisse des Steins der Weisen [1708], p. 129. . 

KORTUM (Karl Arnold). 

Karl Arnold Kortum der Arzneiwiss. Doktor und Arzt in Bocfaum Verteidiget 

die Alchimie gegen die Einwurfe einiger neuen Schriftsteller besohders des 

Herm Wieglebs. Daisbuig, in der Helwii^schen Universitats-Bochhand- 

lung, 1789. 

. r. Pp. [4, 4 WMik] 36a : 

kortum-^krA utermann 

479 

KORTUM (Karl Arnold). Continued. 

Kortum was bom at Mahlbeim on the Ruhr 5 
July, 1745. He settled as physician at Bochum in 
Westphalia in 1770. He was author of numerous 
writings on all sorts of subjects, and was a believer 
in alchemy which he tried to defend in the present 
work, and in a supplement : Nock ein paar Worte 
Ubtr Alchymie und Wiegleb, Duisburg, 1791. 
Having b^un to correspond with Pastor Bahrens 
of Schwerte, near Dortmund, in 1795. ^^ ^^^ 
Worked together for a vear, and then in October, 
1796, by means of a notice in the * Reichs-Anzeiger ' 
announced the existence of a * Hermetic Society,' 
which had been formed for the furtherance of the 
work of the alchemists throughout Germany. 
There was no such society, but the notice elicited 
the £act that there were roanj persons engaged in 
alchemical pursuits. The nction of this Society 

Meusel, Das geUhrie Teutsckland oder Ltxikon 
derjetzt Ubtnden teutschen Schri/tstelifr, 1797, iv. 
p. 233 ; X. p. 125 ; Supplements : ii. p. 184 ; iv. p. 
363 : V. p. 796 ; vi. p. 362 ; vii. p. 125. 

J. F. Benzenberg, ' Nachrichten (Jber die Her- 
metische Gesellschaft ' ; Gilbert's AnnaUn der 
Physik, Halle, 1803, pp. 493-496. 

Biographic MidicaU, Paris, Panckoucke (i8ao- 
25), V. p. 450 (list of his works). 

Neuer Nekrolog der DeutschJm for 1824, ii. p. 83a 
(quoted by Kopp). 

Dezeimeris, Dtctionnaire historique de la Mide- 
cine^ 18^, HI. i. p. 345. 

Schmieder, Gt^chichte der Alckemit, 1832, p. 596. 

Kopp, Gestkickte der Ckemi*^ 1844, iu p. 256. 

Kopp. * Ueber den Verfall der Alchemic und die 
Hennetische Gesellschaft ' ; read 31 January, 1845, 
printed in DenkschrifUn der Gesellsckaft fur Wis- 
senschaft und Kunst in Giessen, Giessen, 1847, 
Bd« i. Heft. z. It was reprinted as a separate 
pamphlet. 

Figuier, L'Alckimie et les Akkimistes, 1856, 
pp. X07-10Q. 

Poggendorff, Biographisck-literarisches Hand- 
wdrierluck, 1863, i. col. 1306. 

Kopp. Beitrdge %ur Geschic/Ue der Chemie, -1869, 
ii. p. 518, note 41. 

was maintained for about three vears, tiU the first 
part of the ** Hermetisches Journal" (^.r.) appeared. 
Complaints and dissatisfturtion beganto beoommoa^ 
and Koitum withdrew from the management flkx 
got it taken up by by a Baron d. F. von StenShayiu 
It lasted till 1805 when the suspended jqqtdaI was 
cot.tinued by another called ' Hermes.' But it 
received no support and confideace in the Society 
having been shaken, it could not be resuscitated. 

Kortum lived for some years later, and died 15 
Augt., 1824 : Bilhrens in 1833. 

The history of the Hermetic Society has been 
narrated by Kopp and more recently by ScfaultK, 
who has examiived the archives of the Slociety now 
at Giessen, and who vindicates Kortum from every 
questionable motive. 

Laidnguit,Bid/iotkigue Ouvarq^,Sdenfa Secri/es, 
1870, No. 1428. 

K. Bimbaum. *£in StQck Alchemic aus dem 
Anfange des Neunrehnten Tahrhunderts.* Bruno 
Meyer's Deutsche Warte, Leipzig. 1873, iv. pp. 
449.461. 

Arcanologische Zeiisckri^, i Nov., 1878, No. 14, 
p. 209, 

H. K. \onl{\n%\xx%,Die HermetisckeGesellsckdfi. 
Ertdhlung in niedmieutsch^r Mundart, Leipsig, 
1878. pp. 243. (This is not a history, but a romance, 
though Kortum figures in it) 

AUgemeine Deutsche Biografhie, i88a. xyi. p. 
728 (by J. Franck, about the * Jobsiade'). 

Hirsch, Biagraphisches Ltxikon der ktrvorra- 
genden Aerxte, 1886, iii, p. 532 (by Pagel). 

Kopp, Die AUhemie, 1886. xi. pp. isa-i63; 290- 
303 (this last contains a reprint of the above-men- 
tioned Giessen pamphlet). 

K. Deicke, Der Jobstadendichter Curl Arnold 
Kortum. Sein Lehen und seine Schri^ten, MOh- 
leim, a. d. Rtihr (1893 ?). . . 

Ernst Schultce, Das letwte A^fiaeker^ der 
Alcketnie in Deutsckland vor 100 Jahren, Die 
Hermeiische GeseiUchafl, i796-i8i9, Leipzig, 1897, 

pp.44- 

KOSMOPOLIT. 

See G£H£IMNISSE aus der Geisterwelt, 1795. 

KRAUTERMANN (Valentinus). 

Der curieuse und wohl-erfahrne Chymist, welcher nicht alleine die aus dem 
Mineral-Vegetabilischen und Thier-Reiche hergenommene, und in der 
Medicin gebrauchlichste Chymische Processe griindlich und deutlich lehret, 
sondem auch anweiset, wie solche nach denen geh6rigen Kunst-Griffen 
geschicklich zu bereiten, um solche zu Erhaltung menschlicher Gesundheit 
bey alien zustossenden Kranckheiten in rechter Dosi niitzlich zu gebrauchen. 
Aus benihmter Chymicorum Schrifften, theils auch aus eigener Praxi 
zusammen getragen, mit n6thigen Registem versehen, von Valentino Krau- 
termann. Andere Auflage. Leipzig und Amstadt, Verlegts Johann Jacob 
Beumelburg, 1738. 

8*. Pp. [12, frontispiece included] 480 [ao]. Title red and black. 
QmtUn <|uotes also an edition, Amstadt, 1789, 8*. 

4So krAutrrmann 

KRAUTERMANN (VALurnNusX QmUmmuL 

Das in der Median g^xancfaKdiste R^gnum Aniniale oder Thier-Rcidi, 
Darinnen entludten 

L Eine accuimte Beschrdbung aUer Th(iere) mdi dem Leben, es sey 
in- Oder auslandisch, zw(e]r)- oder vierfufeig, wild oder zahm, geflugelt and in 
der Lu(ft) oder im Wasser lebend, &c. 

II. Bin hdchst-dienlicher Unterridit, wie d(ie) guten and nutzlicdien 
Thiere zu erhalten und zu vermehren, die schidlichen hii^;eg^ zu iangen, 
zu vertilgen and auszuroCten. 

III. Eine vollkommene Anweisong, wie und was von jedem Thiere in 
der Median und Oeconomie zu gebniuchen und zu nutzen sey. Mit Fleifs 
also zusammen getragen, und mit nddiigen R^;istem anieCzo zum andem' 
mahl vennehrter zum Druck befordert von Valentino Kiautermann. 
Amstadt und Leipzig, In Verlegung Ernst Ludwig Niedtens, 1728 (?). 

r. Ppi [8. frootispiece indnded] 464 [33. i bUnk]. Title red and black, sli^fatlj 

Historisch-Medicinisches R^num Minerale, oder Metallen- und Mineralien- 
Reich, und zwar in II. Haupt-Theilen, da in dem Ersten enthalten dne 
aonirate Beschreibung aller Ertze, Mineralien, Metallen und Edelgesteine, 
wie sie wachsen und gefiinden werden, und wo sie in der Median und 
sonsten zu gebraudien; Im Andem aber die vollkommene Scheide- und 
Probier-Kunst, darinnen gehandelt wird, was Scheiden and Probieren 
sej, wie es vorzunehmen, so wohl im nassen ab trodcenen Wege, 
wie die Ertze nach ihrem Gehalt zu erkennen, &c. samt etlichen raren 
Processen und Experimenten &c Nebst nothigen Register, von Valentin 
Krautermann. Amstadt, Verl^;ts Johann Jaa>b Beiimelburg, 1747. 

8*. Pp. [16. frontispiece included] 47a. Index [8]. Title red and black. 
Other editions mentioned are Franldnrt, 1716^ 1717 ; Amstadt, 1796. all in 8^. 

Der acoirate Scheider und kiinstliche Probierer, welcher griindlich zeiget und 
beschrdbet 

I. Die Erzeugung der Metallen und Mineralien insgemdn, samt deren 
Erkanntniis. 

II. Was Schdden und Probieren sey, auch wie solches vorzunehmen, 
sowohl im nassen als trockenen Wege. 

III. Die Schmdtzung und Probierung allerhand guter und geringer Ertze, 
nach ihren eigentlichen rechten Gehalt, auch auf Gold und Silber. 

IV. Zum Probieren. dienliche Mittel und W^e, als, Probier-Wagen, 
Gewichte, Capdlen, &c und deren Verfertigung^ samt Bereitung verschiedener 
scharfier, zum Schmehzen und Probieren dienlicher Wasser, &c 

Alles mit besonderm Fleifs zusammen getragen und mit nothigen Registem 
ausgeferdget von VaL Krautermann, Med. Pr. Thur. Franckfurth und 
Leipzig, In Verlegung Emst Ludwig Niedtens, Budi-Handlers in Amstadt, 
1717. 

8^. Pp. [16. frontispiece included] 311 [9]. Title red and black. 

Valentin Kriiutermann is one of Christoph von treated as an independent name. He also wrote : 
Hellwig's pseudonyms, but it is not unfrequenUy Dtr w9kUr^akme A^oikeker, Amstadt, 17^ 8**. 

krA utermann^kriegsmann 

481 

KRAUTERMANN (Valentinus). Continued. 

Pachs, Repertorium der ckemiscken LiiUruimr, 
1806-08, pp. 232, 251, 264. 
Rotermund, Fortxtuung mu . . , Jdchtrs AUp- 

JacU Leupolds Prcdromus Bibliotheca metallic^, 
173a, p. 84. 

Lenglet Dufresno^, His tat re de la Pkilosophie 
Hermitu^ue, 1742, iii. p. 196. 

Matthias, Conspectus Historic Medicorum chrono- 
if^gicm, 1761, p. 874. 

Baiimcr, Hibliothfca Chemica, 1782, p. 116. 

Gmelin, Geschichte der Chemie, 1798, ii. pp. 383, 
683. 

meinen Gelehrten-Ltxtco, 1810. UL ooL 776 

to Hcllwich (Christian) in J(k:her, ii. coL 1466, and 

to Motschmann. Erfordia Uterata, i. pp^ i|9-s6f). 

Ladrague. BibUoUUque Ouvarojf, Sciences 
Secretes, 1870, Nos. 1350. 

Billings. /ndex-Catal(^e, 1886, vii. p. 537. 

KRELLEN (Franz). 

See WARNUNG, Instruction und Beweifs . . ., 1607. 

KRIEGSMANN (Wilhelm Christoph). 
Wilhelm Christoph Kriegsmanns Taaut oder Aufslegung der Chymischen 
Zeichen; damit die Metallen und andere Sachen von Alters her bemerckt 
werden : Auff Begehren beschrieben. Franckfurt, Bey Thoma Matthia 
G6tzen. M.DC.LXV. 

8*'. Pp. [4] 75 [i blank] [4]. Folding plate. 2 engravings. 

The dedication to Dr. Johannes Tackius is dated ' Hartemburgi Calend. Sep- 
temhr. 1665.' 

Commentaria in Tabulam Smaragdinam Hermetis Trismegisti. 
See MANGET (j. J.), Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, 1702, i. p. 380. 

In one of his books Kriegsmann palls himself 
Wilhelm Christian, but his real name is Wilhelm 
Christoph. He was born in 1633 at Barchfeld in 
the principality of Schmalkalden. From school 
at Schmalkalden he went in his fifteenth year to 
Jena, where he resided for three years and then 
proceeded to Helmstildt for two years. He studied 
theology and languages, of sevrral of which he 
acquired a knowlcxlge, in particular of those of the 
East. At the age of twenty he might have had a 
professorship, but he declined it on the score of his 
youth, and accepted the invitation of Count Fried- 
rich Emich to Hartenburg to act as tutor in the 
Leiningen family. The Count came to esteem him 
highly and made him Kirchenrath. In 1674 he 
went to Darmstadt at the request of Ludwig VI. 
as Kammerrath, but in 1677, on account partly of 
jealousies partly of changes in the Court itself; he 
resigned, and was appointed by the Elector Carl 
Ludwig of the Palatinate to be Kammer- and Rech- 
nungs-rath at Mannheim, 15 Sept., 1678. He held 
the position but for a short time, as his death 
occurred 29 Sept. , 1679. 

He was the author of a numljer of works, ecclesi- 
astical and religious, which by their unusual themes 
give evidence of a certain originality of mind and 
view. Among them are a tabular view of Ray- 
mund Lully's Ars\ a work entitled : Forteresse 
royale: bevcstigter Herm-Staat: flir junge Herm 
als zuklinftige Regenten, Frf. a. M., 1673, la" 
(really politico-moral advice or directions to young 
princes, but thought by some to be a treatise on 
fortification, much to Strieder's amusement, who 
has given a sketch of its plnn) ; De secreto Philoso- 

Mercklin, Lindcnius renovatus, 1686, p. 372. 

Reimmann, Einleitung in die Historiam liters 
ariam derer Teutschtn^ 1709, Th. ii. p. 88 (places 
his death in 1678). 

Manget, Bibliotheca Scriptorum Medicorum, 
1731, iT. i. p. Ixxxiii. 

Jacob Leupolds Frodromus Bibliothecce metal lica, 
«732, p. 85. 

phorum igne, ubi simul de igne sacro Hebraeorum, 
Chaldaeorum &c. Frf., 1671, 8"; Epistola quod 
Plato sit insignis scriptor ch^micalis operisque 
Philosophorum lapidis dialogi, qui CriUas sive 
Atlanticus inscribitur rite doceat, Dannst, 1671, 
8"*. Haller gives, a different title, but whether it 
denotes the same or a different book I am unable 
to say, though they are probablj the aune : Epis- 
tola qua probatur ouod Plutarchus(j»c)sit insignis 
scriptor chymicus. Darmst., 1671, 8V^ There is one 
tract not enumerated by Strieder : •"*??B oder : die 
wahre und richtige Cabahih mit Ku{)fier und 
Tabellen erUlutert, Frankfurt und Ldpng, 1774, 
small 8**, pp. [10] 52, 4 printed tables. 2 engraved 
tables. 

Reference has already been mule under Hermes 
to his two tracts in connection with that personage 
—one containing a ' Phoenidan ' and a Hebr^ 
version of the table. One is entitled: Hermetis 
Trismegisti . . . Tabula Smara^dina k situ temer- 
arijs(); nunc demum pristino genio vindicata, small 
8^, pp. [6] 3a, engraved Utle and two plates ; no 
place or date in the copy before me. Strieder 
apparently had not seen this edition, for he gives a 
descriptive title only, and refers to Manget's reprint. 
The other tract is that in which he discusses the 
hy(>othesis that the German race, the T^tons, are 
derived from Theut or Hermes: Conjectaneorum 
de Germanicae gentis origine ac Conditore, Hermele 
Trisroesisto . . . Liber unus, . . . Tubings. 1684, 

4^ pp. M 64. 

Kriegsmann has got but little esteem for all his 
learning and writings. 

Kestner, Medicinisckes Gekkrten'Lexictm, 1740, 

P- 449* 
Lenglet Dufresnoy, Histmre 4e la Philuopkie 

Hermitique^ 1743, iii. pp. 64, 196. 

Moller, Cimbria literata, 1744, ii. p. 991. 

J5cher, All^emdmes Gelehrtem-Lmkem^ 17^ 
ii. col 2169; Rotermund's Fortsettung, t8xo, iii, 
col. 883 (from Strieder). 

2H 

4«2 

KRIEGSMANN'-KONSTEL 

KRIEGSMANN (Wilhelm Christoph). ComUmmuL 

HaDer. BikiUikeea Medicimm frmctum^ 1779^ m. p. 6i« ( 

iSL pi 997. mden from 

Striedcr. GrmrndioMe sm eimer Hessuckem TboonoB, Tkt 

GtUkrtem umd SckrifitttlUr GtxkidUe, 1787. vn. p. 13. 

ppu 34i-54<^ Sdumieder. Getekiekit der 

Beckmann, Beytr&gt nur GtxkukU der Erfim^ Kopp» Beitrigi wmr 

dungen, 179a, nL p^ 37Q ; English trinshirinn, 1814, p. jTtc 

KROHNEMANN (Christian WilhklmX Baron von. 

See HKENSCHER (GEORG WOLFGANG AUGUSTIN), I&XX 

Krohimnaiui was hai^fwi as an iniposior in i6ft 

Sdimieder, GesekickU der Akkewue, tS^s, pi 4461 F«nier. VAiddmne et Us Akkimtuiu, 185^ pi 
Kopp. Die Akkemse, i. pp. 185, 195. 

Figaet, VAUMi 
i6a 

KRUGER (Rudolph August). 
Q D. B. V. Dissertatio Ph3rsico-Chiinioo Medkm Inaiigiiii]]s» De Amo Medlocy 
seu Medicamentis ex Auro Paiandisi quam Cdsisamae, Serenissiinae aiqne 
Invictissimae Principi Annae, ICagnae Britanniae, &c &c &c. Reginae^ 
nee non Illusdissimae Societad Regiae Londinensi, atqne Giatiosissimae 
Facultati Medicae in Academia Qxoniensi hnmilKme atqne decenter 
exhibuit Rudolphus Augustus Kruger Bninsvioens: V. M. Doctor, et 
Serenissimi atque Potentissimi Principb ac Domini, Domini Emesti, Ducis 
Hildburghusani Medicus Aulicus. Ad Exemplar Qionienae BnmswigK 

Typis expressit Jo. Georg ZilUger, Sereniss. Duds Bninsr. & Loneb. 
Privilegiatus Typogr. Aulicus» M DCC XIII. 

4*. Pp. [8, engraved mle indnded] u8 [6). VlpMtle on tbe printod tide of *e 
Sheldooian llieatre, Qzibrd. 

This is a disSfertatioD on all the preparatiotts of in meditine. References to the antfaorities are 
gold which had been proposed to dale for ose given. 

Jaecb Lempalds Prodrvmms Bikiicikec^ mutaJiuM, Lengkf Dnfresno^. HiOmrt de la Pkiim^pkie 
1732. p. 85. Hermdtifme, 174a, in. p. 197. 

Goelin. GexMicAU der Ckemse. 179B. ii p. 566. 

KRUGENER (Michael). 

See crCgener (michael). 

Matthiz, Comtpeetms Hitiorim Mediemum ekrtmtieguus, 1761, p. 841 

KUCHELBECKER (Georg GottlobX Respondem. 

De Phlogisto . . . Disputatia 
See wipacher ,da\id\ 1752. 

Gindin calls him incorrectlj H. Goctfr. KOcbd- remm metalHcmnam frfin. Lips.. 175a. 4* Focfas 
becker. but qxiotes the Dissert^fw de sa^omitms, does not place the latter onder tbe fear 175a, bat 
Lips^. 1756. 4^. and the aboTic De ^legisi* tmimns onder 173a, which looks like a mistake. 

Gmelin. GesckidUe Jer CAemue, 1798, iL ppi 701- Fncfas. Repertarimm der chewuuken Utferaimr, 
;^ja. 1806^)8, Pin 354, 333. 

KUNSTEL (Joh.\nn WolpfgakgX 

D. Jo. Wolfilg. Kunstd, Dissertatio Medicachymica de SaUbas Metallorum 
pr^eseitim Auri et MercuriL Editio Tertia. Lipsise Apud Ja Fried. 

Gleditsdi et Filium. Recusa Anno cId Id cc LX. 

4*. pp^:««. 

KIJNSTEL—KUNCKEL 4S3 

KUNSTEL (JoiiANN Wolffgang). Continued, 

An edition of Leipsig, 171 1, 4°, pp. 22, is that quoted by Gmelin. It is the second according to 
Billings. 

Manget, Biblioiheca Scriptorum Medicorum, Gmelin, Geschichte der Ckemit^ 17^, ii. p. 325. 
1731, II. i. p. Ixxxvi. (Review of the above from Billings, Index-Catalogue, 1886, vii. p. 57a 
the Acta Lipsiensia, Ann. 171 1, p. 214,) 

KUNCKEL (Johann). 

Johann Kunckels, Churfurstl. Brandenburgischen Geheimten Cammer-Dieners. 
Chymischer Probier-Stein, de Acido & Urinoso, Sale Calid. & Frigid, 
contra Herrn Doct. Voigts, Spirit Vini Vindicatum, an die Weltberiihmte 
K6nigl. Societat in Engeland, als hieriiber erbatene hohe Richter. Worbey 
angefuget die Epistola contra Spir. Vini sine Acido, so an Herrn D. Voigten 
abgelassen. Berlin, In Verlegung Rypert V6lckers, Buchhandlem, 

M.DC.XXCVI. 

8°. No pagination. Sigs. A. B. )( in eights, wanting )( 1 ; A-M in eights, N six. 

D. Johann. Voigts Spiritus Vini sine Acido Vindicatus. 

A-Dy in eights. 

Johann Kunckel von Ldwensterns, Konigl. Schwedischen Berg-Raths, und der 
Kayserl. Leopold. Societat Mit-Glieds, d. Hermes III. V. Curiose Chymische 
Tractatlein; als: 

I. Chymische Anmerckungen, darinn gehandelt wird von denen Princip. 
Chym. Sal. Acid. & Alcalibus; Fixis & Volatilib. in denen 3. Regnis; wie 
auch vom Geruch und Farben &c. mit Anhang einer Chymischen Brille, 
contra Non-Entia Chym. 

II. Niitzliche Observationes von den Fixen und fliichtigen Saltzen, 
Auro & Argento Potabili; Spiritu Mundi u.d.g. wie auch von den Farben 
und Geruch der Metallen, Mineral. &c. 

III. Epistola, contra Spiritum Vini sine Acido. 

IV. De Phosphoro Mirabili; dessen leuchtenden Wunder-Pilulen ; sampt 
einem Discurs vom Nitro. 

V. Probier-Stein, de Acido & Urinoso, Sale Calido & Frigido; contra 
Herrn D. Voigts Spir. Vini Vindicatum. 

Wobey zugleich angehanget wird: Christoph Brummets Tractatlein vom 
Blut der Natur. Nebst einer Vorrede : De doctis & nobilibus Empiricis : 
D. Johannis Philippi Burgravii, Med. Francof. ad Moenum. Franckfurth 
und Leipzig, 1721. 

8°. Pp. [12] 512 [48]. 1 engraving. Folding tide. Each tract has a separate 
title included in the pagination. 

P. 489: 

Das Blut der Natur, aus eigener Erfahrung handgreifflich angewiesen. danu mit 
gewissen Experimenten rura Verfolg seiner Notification-Schriflft auffgesetzet und heraus 
gegeben von Christoph Brummeten, C. Franckfurth und Leipzig, 1721. 

Johann Kunkels von Lowenstem Vollstandiges Laboratorium Chymicum, 
worinnen von den wahren Principiis in der Natur, der Erzeugung, den 
Eigenschaften und der Scheidung der Vegetabilien, Mineralien und Metalle, 

4m KVNCKEL 

KUNCKEL (JOHANN). Cantimued. 

wie aach von Verbessenn^ der Metalle gehandelt wird. Vierte verbesserte 
Auflage. Berlin, 1767. In der Riidigerschen Buchhandlung. 

ar. IV [4] 671 [17]. I pfaoe. 

The 6r»t ediuoti was pubiisbed at Hamboris and An edhioo of 1738 is in Ladngiie's BikHttk^m 
Lnpng in 1710. 5*, pfx 40. indnding a portnit of Omvarcf^ 1870. Nol 1239. 
Kopckci; 7J7 137). 

Johann Kunckels, ChurfiirstL Sachs, gebeimen Kamnierdieners und Chimid 
Xutzlicbe Observationes oder Anmerckungen, Ton den Flxen und fluchtigen 
Saltxen, Auro und Argento potabiliy Spiritu Mundi und dergleichen, wie 
auch Ton den Farben und Geruch der Metallen, Mineralien und andem 
Erdgewachsen ; Durch vid-Jahr^ eigene Erfibrung, Muhe und Arbeit mit 
FTeiis untersucbet, angemercket, und nun auff vieler der Edien Chimie 
B^issenen und unvcrdrossener Naturforscber instandiges Begduen zn dero 
Nutz und Gefallen an den Tag gegeben. Hamburg, Auff Gottfried 

Schultzens Kosten, im Jahr 1676. 

ff*. No pagiaatkm. a leaves^ ^iiss^ A>tu in eights, F in four, G in six. 
Ck> blank. 

Johann Kunckels, Chur-FursiL Sachs, geheimten Kammer-Dieners und Chymid, 
Oeflentliche Zuschrifft von dem Pbosphoro Mirabili und dessen leuchtenden 
Wunder-Pilukn samt ai^ehangten EHscurs von dem weyland recht benahmten 
Nitro, jetzt aber unschuldig genandten Blut der Natur, an die Gesammte 
Hocber&hmen Chur-Fursd. Sachs. Herren Ldb- Hoff- imd Stadt-Medicos 
in Drdisden. Herauis g^eben in \Vittenbeig Ann. 1678. Leipzig, 

bey Michael Rufswurm. Druckts Job. Wilh. Rniger. 

8*. Pp.[2blaak, ia,^bUak]88>blank]. 

Johannb Kunkdii Elect Sax. Cubicularii intimi & Chymid Philosophia 
Chemica Experimends Confirmata in qua agitur de prindpiis Chymids, 
Salibus addi & alcalibus. fLxis & volatilibus, in tribus illis Regnis, Mineral!, 
Vegetabili, & Animali, itemque de odore & colore, &c. Accedit Perspidlium 
Chymicum contra Non-ciuia Chymica. Amstelsedami, Apud Joannem 
Wolters, 1694. 

12'. I^ [i6» ccgraxird title-page included' 333 [3 blank]. Printed title-page, red 
and black. £ngEa\ed vigijctte. 

Jc^iannis Kunkelii, Elect Sax. Cubicularii intimi & Ch)'mid utiles Observationes 
sive Animadversiones de Salibus &xis ^ \x>latilibus, Auro & argento potabili, 
Spiritu mundi, & similibusw Item de colore & odore metallonim, 
mineralium aliarumque rerum qtue a terra producuntur. Proprii multonim 
annorxun experienda, opera & labore diligenter in\'estigata & ani mad versa, ac 
nunc ad multorum nobilissim^ artis Ch)'micx Studiororum & indefadgatorum 
naturse scrutatorum instantes peutiones usui eorum studioque in lucem edita. 
Primum ab Authore Germanice conscripta, nunc verb Latinitate donata. \ 
Carolo Aloisio Ramsaia Londini 6: Roterodami, Apud Henriciun 

Wilsonium & Consortes. Anno cIj I jc lxxviii. 

12'. !>. [x>>] 122 [a biankl; [7. i blankl 160 [i3, coataimng list of the Royal 
Society. 2 blank]. Eagrared titie>fHige inchxfe^ in the 

KUNCKEL 

4SS 

KUNCKEL (JoHANN). Continued. 

The second tract has a title-page, and the Royal Society list also contains a 
separate title-page : 

Johannis Kunkelii Elect. Sax. Cubicularii intimi & Chymici Observationes 
Chymicse, in quibus a^itur de principiis Chyniicis. Salibus addis & alcalibus, 
Axis & volatilibus, in tnbus illis Kegnis, Mineral!, Vegetabili. & Animali, itemque 
de odore & colore &c. Und cum appendice PerspiciYli Chyinici contra non-entia 
Chymica. Propria experientiA conscnpta, diversis experimentis probata, & veritatis 
artisque Studiosorum utilitati in lucem edita. Primiim ab Authore Germanic^ con- 
scripta, nunc .ver6 Latinitate donata. k Carolo Aloisio Rarosalo. Londini ft 
Roterodami, Apud Henricum Wilsonium & Coiisortes. Anno cIoIjCLXXViii. 

Kunckel, or Kuukel, was bom at Hiitten, near 
Rendsburg, about 1630 (others 1638). He was at 
no university, but began with an apothecary. 
His father was an assayer, and he had thus 
very early familiarity with chemical operations, 
and he was latterly prompted to visit workshops 
and nianufaclories to g.ain acquaintance with the 
methods there followed. He studied metals, and 
though he believed in transnmtation, his know- 
ledge and skill and experimental ability made him 
one of the chief chemists of his time. One of his 
most famous investigations was upon the produc- 
tion of phosphorus, of which he himself tells the 
story. His aoility promoted him to be director of 
the laboratory and chamberlain at the Court of 
Lauenburg and next at Dresden. He gave courses 
of chemicad instruction at Wittenberg, in 1677 ; the 
Elector of Saxony made him director of the Anna- 
berg laboratory. Disputes and backbitings caused 
by envy made him accept the invitation of the 
Elector of Brandenburg in 1679, and he departed 

Georg Caspar Kirchmajer, Noctiluca Constans^ 
1676, sign. C2 redo. 

G. C. Kirchmajer, Dt Phosphoris . . , Commen- 
tation 1680, p. II. 

Mercklin, Lindenius renai>atus, 1686, p. 623. 

Keren Happuch . . . oder Teutsches Fegfetur der 
Sckeide-Kunst, 1702, p. 121. 

Die Edelgeborne Jungfer Akhymia, 1730, p. 290, 

Manget, Bibliotheca Scriptorum Mtdicorum^ 

1731, lY. i. p. Ixxxvi. 

StoUe, Anleitung zur Historie der Medicinischtn 
irtlahrheit, 1731, p. 847. 
Jacob Leupolds Prodromus Bibliotheca meiailicte, 

1732. p. 85. 

Morhof, Polyhistor, 1732 (ii. 2*, 22, 5), ii. p. 

379- 

Zedler, Universal-Lexicon, 1737, xv. col. 2125. 

Kestner, Medicinisches Gelekrten- Lexicon, 1740, 

p. 451- 
Lenglet Dufrcsnoy, Histoire de la Philosophie 

Hertn^tique, 1742, iii. 197. 

Moller, Cimbria literata, 1744, i. pp. 3x9-322. 

Jocher, Allgemeines Gelehrten- Lexicon, 17^0, ii. 
col. 2185 ; Rotermund's Fortsetzung, 1810, iii. col. 

979- 
Chaufepid, Nouveau Dictionnaire historique et 

critique, 1753, iii. letter K, p. 54 (on phosphorus). 

Fictuld, Probier- Stein, 1753, Th. ii. p. 86. 

BUchner, Acadcmiee . . . Naturce Curiosorum 
Hisioria, Halae, 1755, p. 480, No. 198. 

De Bure. BibUographie Instructive, 1764, ii. 

P- 587- 

Eloy, Dictionnaire historique de la Midecine^ 
1778, ii. p. 646. 

Baumer, Bibliotheca Chemica^ 1782, p. 54. 

Bey t rag zur Geschichie der hohem cketnie, 1785, 

PP- 35 ^ 50'. 628. 

Beckmann, Beytrdge nur Geschichie der Rrfin- 
dungen, 1786, i. p. 38c. (About ruby glass, 
samples of which by Kunkal are in the Green 

to Berlin. Thereafter be went to Stockholm, where 
he was ennobled with the name von Lowenstem, 
in 1693. He died at his estate of Dretssighufen, 
near Pernau, 20 March, 1703 (though others say at 
Stockholm in 1702). He was admitted a member 
of the Acadeniia Naturae Curiosorum in April, 1693, 
with the name Hermes HI., and wrote a con- 
siderable number of books on chemistry as well as 
an enlarged translation of Neri's Arte Veiraria 
with Christopher Merrett's notes, Frankfurt & 
Leipzig, 1679, 4**. with portrait and plates ; Ibid. 
1689. 4", with poor impressions of the portrait and 
plates. It was afterwards turned into French by 
Baron d'Holbach, and published at Paris in 1752, 
in large 4^ 

KunckePs works, especially his Laboratorium 
chymicum, are of some use for the history of traas- 
mutation, as he records several cases of such actioo, 
more particularly those of Sebald Schwertzer and 
David Beuther. and they also contain autobio- 
graphical details. 

Vaults at Dresden at the present time.) English 
translation, London, 18 14, i. p. 204. 

Gmelin, Geschichie der Chemie, 1798, ii. pp. 39, 
116, 117, 140, 153-170. 270. 

Hutchinson, Biographia Aledica, 1799, "• P* 35* 

Fuchs, Repertorium der chemischen Litteratur, 
1806-08, pp. 143. 182, 18^, 200k 209, 2^ 341, 307. 

Chalmers, The General Biographical Dictionary^ 
1815, xix. p. 427. 

Biographie Universelle, 1818, xxh. p. 583; no 
date, xxii. p. 234 (article by NA'eiss). 

Biographie AUdicaU, Paris. Panckoucke (1820- 
25), V. p. 463. 

Schmieder, Geschichie der Alchemie, 183a, p. 
449. 

Hoefer, Histoire de la Chimie, 1843, ii. pp. 199. 
213 ; 2nd Ed. 1869, ii. pp. 191-205. 

Journal de Chimie MidicaU, 1843, 2me S6ie, ix. 
pp. 710-712 (by A. Cbevallier). 

Kopp, Geschichie der Chemie^ 1843, i. pp. i73> 
177 & passim, 

Bayle & Thillaye, Biographie Medicate, 1855, i. 

p. 4?i. 

F'lguier, LAlchimie et les Alchimistes, 1856, pp. 
15. 65, 67. 161. 

PoggendorfT, Biographisch-literarisches Hand- 
worterbuch, 1863. i. col. 133a 

Lad rague, Bibliothique Ouvarof, Sciences Secriles^ 
1870, Nos. 1227-1229. 

Kopp, Beitrdge Mur Geschichie der Chemie^ ^875, 
iii. pp. 193-201. 

Haeser, Geschichie der Medicin, 1881, ii. pp. 
224, 487. 

Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie, 1883, xvii, p. 

376. 

Billings, Index-Catalogue, 1886, vii. p. 576 ; 2nd 
Scries, 1903, viii. p. 881. 

Kopp, Die Alchemie, 1886, i. pp. 56^5ft^xrfiw. 

Bricka, Dansh Biogra/lsh Lexicon^ 1895, ix. p. 
599 (by Jfrgeoaon). 

4S6 KUNRAHT'-KURTZER 

KUNRAHT. 

Set KHUintATH. 

KUNST Akhimisterey. 

Set CCSAR (THEOPHlLUsX Akhimy Spiegel, 1613, p. 86l 

KUNST-Biichlein, oder grundlicher Gebnuich von Eu-Arbeit, in and ausserfaalb 
Feuers aus Alchymischen und naturlichen Gninde, ndimlich, Haiten, 
Wdchen, Schmeltzen, Schdden, Abtrdben, Probieren, Lotaii, Etzen, 
Abfonnen, Abgiessen, &c. Wie auch jede Farben zubeidlen, erhalten, 
bessem und wiederbringen : Als Zinn Mahlen, Schreiben, Illuminiren, Ver- 
giildcn, Stiicken, Edelgesteinen. Nebenst beygefugtem Register. Franck- 
furth und Leipzig, Verl^^ts Johann Caspar Meyer, Anno 1687. 

la*. Pp. 903 [9, 4 blank]. 

This u a nrprint in modernised langinige of a colours, for dyeing, iDuminating. etc, and the ood- 
tract which has Uie foOoiring title: KunttkMckUin^ doding part is a reprint of the tract : Reckier Ge- 
gtrrcktem grUndtUckem gekramcks aUer kmmsibaren bramch a AUkiwm^ '53i* (f**^*)- 
tVertkUMi . . ., Augspivv. 1537, small 4*, C xxxviL Fcrenson, ' Some early Treatises on Tecfano- 
[1]. It contains in toe first part receipts for steel logical Chemistry,' Procmiings of the PkilosopkUal 
and iron, solders, flnzcs. etching, etc ; for taking Society cf Gleugtnt^ 1887-38, xix. p. 153 ; and Sup- 
spots and stains out of doth ; for making inks and pleroent, Ibid^ 1893-94, zxv. pp. 234-335. 

KUNST (Von der) Chimia. 

See MORGKNSTERN (philipX Turba Philosopfaonim, 161 3, i. p. $04- 
See MORGENSTERN (PHILIPX Turba Philosophorum, 1750, L p. 612. 
Set ARTE (De) Chemica. 

KUNST Stiicke die schdnsten und raresten Farben zu verferdgen. 

Set JUGEL OOHANN GOTTFRIED), 1 789. 

KURELLA (Ernst Gottfried). 

See L. (F. c), Sammlung achthundert und sicbcn und flinfeig chymischer 
Experimente, 1759. * 

Knrella was bom at Neidenburi; in East Prussia, different parts of niedidne, on anatomy, surgery, 

12 March, 1735. graduated doctor of roedidne at pharmacy, &c, &c, and dissertations and reviews. 

Konigsberg in 1746, and was a Councillor of the He wrote also : Ch3rmische Versucbe und Erfabr- 

ObercoUegium Medicum and Obercolksium Sani- ungen, i-5tes Stiick, Berlin, 1756-1759. 

tatis at Boiin. He wrote a number of works on He died at Berlin, July 28, 1799. 

Haller, Bihlioikeca Ckirurgica, 177^ ii. p. 493. mund*s Fortsetzung und Ergdmxungtn^ 1810, iii. 

HaUer. Bihliolktca AmaUnmica, xttj* u- P* 434- co^ 9^- 

Baumer. BibliotJuca CkemUa, 1783, p. 43. Btograpkie MidicaU, Paris, Panckoucke (i8ao- 

Meusd. Das geUkrte Teutsckland oder Ltxikon 35), v. p. 465. 
dtrjtixt lebendem Teutscken SckrifisUller, Lemgo, Dezeimeris. Dictionnairt kistorique de la Mide- 

1797, iv. pp. 317-18. cine, 1836, III. i. p. 357. 

Gmdin. GtschickU der CkewUe, 1798, ii. pp. 473- Poggendorff, Biogrt^hiick'literarisckes Hand- 

475. worterbuch, 1863, L col. 1333. 

Fuchs, Refertorium der cMemiscken Liiieratur, Billings. Index -Catalogue, 1886, vii. p. 578 ; snd 

1806-08 pp. 333. Series, 1903, viii. p. 884- 

Jocher, Allgewuines Gelehrten-Lexicon \ Roter- Hirscfa. Biograpkisckes Ltxikon der hervorra- 

genden Aerxte, 1886, iil p. 574. 

KURTZER (Ein) Tractat von der Occulta Chemiconim Philosophia. 
See occulta (Von der) Chcroicorum Philosophia, cin kurtzer Tractat. 

KURTZER und griindlicher Unterricht vom Wahren Trinck-Golde und 
Allgemeiner Artzeney, darin erortert wird, ob, woraus und wie es bereitet 
werden kdiine? Item was es wiircke? woran es zu erkennen und ob iemals 
dergleichen von den Adepds feilgeboten und verkaufft worden sey? so wol, 

KURTZER—KUS 487 

KURTZER und griindlicher Unterricht, etc. Continued, 

den frommen Suchern des Philosophischen Steins, als auch den Patienten, um 
sich fUr den Betnig der heutigen so genannten Gold-Essentzen und Universal- 
Medicinen zuhalten, zum besten gestellet von einem, dessen VVahl-Spruch ist : 
In Christi Horto Detegitur Thesaurus Maximaque Panacea. Erfurt, zufinden 
bey Augusto Crusio. 1 7 3 1 . 

i2*. Pp. 21 [3 blank]. 

The author of the above wrote also die grosse arglistigkeit derer sich der Satan bedienet bey dcr 
Wahren Alchymie (^.v.). 

KURZE jedoch griindliche und einfaltige Anleitung zu dem grossen Natur- 
geheimnifs des Lapidis Philosophici. 1753. 

See NEDAGANDER. 

KURZE und deutliche Vorstellung der Edlen Probier-Kunst, was eigentlich 
dieselbe sey, worinnen sie bestehe, was vor Instrumenten darzu erfordert 
werden, wie man zu der rechten Erkanntnufs aller Mineralien und Metal- 
lischen Ertzen zu gelangen, und welcher Gestalt endlich die Erkannten recht 
zu probieren, und in der Probierung zu tractiren seyen. Nebst einem ausfiihr- 
lichen Bericht, von Saltpeter sieden, und Erklaning aller Chymischen Worter 
und Zeichen. Von einem dieser edlen Kunst Preisswiirdigst Ergebenen. 
Niirnberg, Bey Johann Friedrich Riidiger. A. 17 18. 

I^^ Pp. [24] 523 [x blank]. TiUe red and black. The frontispiece (not included 
in the pagination) depicts an assajrer's laboratory. 

The present work is a treatise on the assaying of For older books on the same subject see 
metallic ores. It gives nn account of the reagents, SCHRBITTMANN, Probitrbucklein^ und PROBIKR 
apparatus, furnaces, precautions, list of technical rUchlein auf Gold. . . . 
terms, and methods for analysing ores in the dry 
way. 

KURZE Nachricht von den Metallischen Glalisern und der Vitrification des 
(ioldes in Amausen von einem Liebhaber der Chymischen Grund-Mischu^g. 
Leipzig, bey Christian Gottlob Hilscher. 1767. 

8°. Pp. 4^ 

Discourse upon ruby glass, upon fluxes and (^.v.). is assigned here (pi. la) to Grummet That 
metallic oxides, upon artificial ^ems, etc. The however seems to be a alia for it was the reply 
tract, Sol sine veste, usually ascribed to Orschall which Grummet HTOte : Sot non sine vestt. 

KUS (Georg). 

See BORRiCHius (OLAUSX Metallische Probier-Kunst, 1680. 

With Borrichius as preeses he was respondens C. Luft (1682), 4", if. 7. of which there is a copy io 
also of a dissertation : De Ascite, Hafniae, lit. Vid. the British Museum (T. 557. (33.) ). 

Billings, Index-Catalogue^ 1686, vii. p^ 581. 

Ill - 

«#