Witchcraft discovered and punished. Or, The tryals and condemnation of three notorious witches, who were tryed [at] the last assizes, holden at the castle of Exeter, in the county of Devon: where they received sentance for death, for bewitching several persons, destroying ships at sea, and cattel by land, &c. To the tune of, Doctor Faustus: or, Fortune my foe.

[Transcribed from the EEBO-TCP keyboarded edition (CC0 1.0, textcreationpartnership). Original spelling retained.]

[page 531]

Witchcraft diſcovered and puniſhed.

Or, the Tryals and Condemnation of three Notorious Witches, who were Tryed the laſt Aſſizes, holden at the Caſtle of Exeter, in the County of Devon: where they received Sentance for Death, for bewitching ſeveral Perſons, deſtroying Ships at Sea, and Cattel by Land, &c.

To the Tune of, Doctor Fauſtus: or, Fortune my Foe.

Now liſten to my Song good People all,
And I ſhall tell what lately did befall,
At Exeter, a place in Devonſhire,
The like whereof of late you nere did hear.
At the laſt Aſsizes held at Exeter,
Three Aged Women that Impriſoned were
For Witches, and that many had deſtroy'd;
Were thither brought in order to be try'd.
For Witchcraft, that Old Wicked Sin,
Which they for long time had continued in:
And joyn'd with Satan, to deſtroy the good,
Hurt Innocents, and ſhed their harmleſs blood.
But now it moſt apparent does appear,
that they will now for ſuch their deeds pay dear:
For Satan having lull'd their Souls aſleep,
Refuſes Company with them to keep.
A known deceiver he long time has been,
To help Poor Mortals into dangerous Sin;
Thereby to cut them off, that ſo they may,
Be plung'd in Hell, and there he made his Prey.
So theſe Malicious Women at the laſt,
Having done miſchiefs, were by Iuſtice caſt:
For it appear'd they Children had deſtroy'd,
Lamed Cattel, and the Aged much annoy'd.
Having Familiars always at their beck,
Their Wicked Rage on Mortals for to wreck:
It being prov'd they uſed Wicked Charms,
To Murther Men, and bring about ſad harms.
And that they had about their Bodys ſtrange
And Proper Tokens of their Wicked Change:
As Pledges that to have their cruel will,
Their Souls they gave unto the Prince of Hell.
The Country round where they did live came in,
And all at once their ſad complaints begin:
One loſt a Child, the other loſt a Kine,
This his brave Horſes, that his hopeful Swine.
One had his Wife bewitched, the other his Friend,
Becauſe in ſome things they the Witch offend:
For which they labour under cruel pain,
In vain ſeek remedy, but none can gain.
But Roar in cruel ſort, and loudly cry,
Deſtroy the Witch, and end our miſery:
Some uſed Charms by Mountabanks ſet down,
Thoſe cheating Quacks, that ſwarm in every Town.
But all's in vain, no reſt at all they find,
For why? all Witches to cruelty are enclin'd:
And do delight to hear ſad dying groans,
And ſuch laments, as wou'd pierre Marble Stones.
But now the Hand of Heaven has found them out,
And they to Iuſtice muſt pay Lives, paſt doubt:
One of these Wicked Wretches did confeſs,
She Four Score Years of Age was, and no leſs.
And that ſhe had deſerved long before,
To be ſent packing to the Stigian ſhore:
For the great miſchiefs ſhe ſo oft had done,
And wondered that her Life ſo long had run.
She ſaid the Devil came with her along,
Through Crouds of People, and bid her be ſtrong:
And ſhe no hand ſhould have, but like a Lyer,
At the Priſon Door he fled, and ne're came nigh her.
The reſt aloud, crav'd Mercy for their Sins,
Or elſe the great deceiver her Soul gains;
For they had been lewd Livers many a day,
And therefore did deſire that all would Pray
To God, to Pardon them, while thus they lie
Condemned for their Wicked Deeds to Die:
Which may each Chriſtian do, that they may find
Reſt for their Souls, though Wicked once inclin'd.
FINIS.
