Alberuni's India, Vol. 1 (al-Biruni, 1888)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: Internet Archive scan (alberunisindiaac01brnm) (https://archive.org/details/alberunisindiaac01brnm).
Al-Biruni’s India (c. 1030) — the most searching medieval account of Indian religion, philosophy, science and customs ever written by an outsider. Sachau’s English translation (1888), vol. 1.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================
ALBERUNI’S. INDIA.


AN ACCOUNT OF THE RELIGION, PHILOSOPHY, LITERATURE,
GEOGRAPHY, CHRONOLOGY, ASTRONOMY, CUSTOMS,
LAWS AND ASTROLOGY OF INDIA
ABOUT A.D. 1080.


An English 250111011, with Motes and Fndices.


BY


Dr. EDWARD C. SACHAU,


Professor in the Royal University of Berlin, and Principal of the Seminary for
Oriental Languages ; Member of the Royal Academy of Berlin, and
Corresponding Member of the Imperial Academy of Vienna ;
Honorary Member of the Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland, London,
and of the American Oriental Society, Cambridge, U.S.A.


IN TWO VOLUMES.


VOL, I.
LONDON:
Teh ا 1 ا‎ nual 1خ ج110‎ EFL Tals
1888.


[All rights reserved.] :


٠ bad .


Se rn Ballantyne Press
BALLANTYNE, HANSON AND CO. 9 :


1 , EDINBURGH AND LONDON -
; :


ae
نا‎


>


CaS ~=--- oe » =
0 4
- 3-9
٠
5
-
5
ب‎ .
5
-
5
-
+
»


=


1


Dedicated


TO


CHARLES SCHEFER,


MEMBRE DE L’INSTITUT, PARIS,
AS
A HOMAGE BOTH TO


Pie M ANG AUN Deki Ei. SCHOLAR: |


VOL I: 0


PREFACE,


Sean seine


1


THE literary history of the East represents the court of Mabmid
King Mahm{id at Ghazna, the leading monarch of Asiatic dausi.
history between A.D. 997-1030, as having been a centre
of literature, and of poetry in particular. There were
four hundred poets chanting in his halls and gardens,
at their head famous Unsuri, invested with the recently
created dignity of a poet-laureate, who by his verdict
opened the way to royal favour for rising talents; there
was grand Firdausi, composing his heroic epos by the
special orders of the king, with many more kindred
spirits. Unfortunately history knows very little of all
this, save the fact that Persian poets flocked together
in Ghazna, trying their kasidas on the king, his minis-
ters and generals. History paints Mahmid as a suc-
cessful warrior, but ignores him as a Mecenas. With
the sole exception of the lucubrations of bombastic
Utbi, all contemporary records, the Makdmdt of Abt-
Nasr Mishkani, the Zabakdt of his secretary Baihakt,
the chronicles of Mulld Muhammad Ghaznavi, Mahmtid
Warrak, and others, have perished, or not yet come to
light, and the attempts at a literary history dating from
a time 300-400 years later, the so-called Tadhkiras,
weigh very light in the scale of matter-of-fact examina-
tion, failing almost invariably whenever they are applied
to for information on some detail of ancient Persian
literature. However this may be, Unsuri, the pane-


Vill PREFACE.


cyrist, does not seem to have missed the sun of royal
favour, whilst Firdausi, immortal Firdausi, had to fly
in disguise to'evade the doom of being trampled to
death by elephants. Attracted by the rising fortune
of the young emperor, he seems to have repaired to his
court only a year after his enthronisation, 2.6. A.D. 998.
But when he had finished his Shdhndma, and found
himself disappointed in his hopes for reward, he flung
at him his famous satire, and fled into peaceless exile
(A.D. 1010). In the case of the king versus the poet
the king has lost. As long as Firdausi retains the
place of honour accorded to him in the history of the
world’s mental achievements, the stigma will cling to
the name of Mahmid, that he who hoarded up perhaps
more worldly treasures than were ever hoarded up, did
not know how to honour a poet destined for immor-
tality.

And how did the author of this work, as remark-
able among the prose compositions of the Kast as the
Shdhndma in poetry, fare with the royal Meecenas of
Ghazna ?

Alberuni, or, as his compatriots called him, Abi
Raihan, was born A.D. 973, in the territory of modern
KKhiva, then called Khwarizm, or Chorasmia in anti-
quity.2 Early distinguishing himself in science and
literature, le played a political part as councillor of
the ruling prince of his native country of the Ma’mtini
family, The counsels he gave do not seem always to
have suited the plans of King Mahmfd at Ghazna, who
was looking out for a pretext for interfering in the
affairs of Independent Khiva, although its rulers were
his own near relatives, This pretext was furnished by
a military émeute,


١ Cf. J. Mohl, Le Livre des Rois, traduit, &e. Publié par Mme.
Mohl, 1876, préface, pp. xl. seq.

* There is a reminiscence of his native country, i. 166, where he
speaks of a kind of measure used in Khwarizm. ,


Mahmftid
and Albe-
runl,


PREFACE. ix


Mahmtid marched into the country, not without some
fighting, established there one of his generals as provin-
cial governor, and soon returned to Ghazna with much
booty and a great part of the Khiva troops, together
with the princes of the deposed family of Ma’mtin and
the leading men of the country as prisoners of war or’
as hostages. Among the last was Abti-Raihin Muham-
mad Ibn Ahmad Alberuni.

This happened in the spring and summer of 4.1.
1017. The Chorasmian princes were sent to distant
fortresses as prisoners of state, the Chorasmian soldiers
were incorporated in Mahmtid’s Indian army; and Al-
beruni—what treatment did he experience at Ghazna?
From the very outset it is not likely that both the king
and his chancellor, Ahmad Ibn Hasan Maimandi, should
have accorded special favours to a man whom they knew
to have been their political antagonist for years. ‘The
latter, the same man who had been the cause of the
tragic catastrophe in the hfe of Firdausi, was in office
under Mahmtid from 4.2. 1007-1025, and a second
time under his son and successor, Mas‘tid, from 1030—
1033. There is nothing to tell us that Alberuni was
ever in the service of the state or court in 13223. A
friend of his and companion of his exile, the Christian
philosopher and physician from Bagdad, Abulkhair
Alkhammar, seems to have practised in Ghazna his
medical profession. Alberuni probably enjoyed the
reputation of a great 111111071118, v.e. astrologer-astrono-
mer, and perhaps it was in this quality that he had
relations to the court:and its head, as Tycho de Brahe
to the Emperor Rudolf. When writing the “Ivocxa,
thirteen years after his involuntary immigration to
Afghanistan, he was a master of astrology, both ac-
cording to the Greek and the Hindu system, and indeed
Eastern writers of later centuries seem to consider him
as having been the court astrologer of King 0.
In a book written five hundred years later (v. Clresto-


x PREFACE.


mathie Persane, &e., par Ch. Schefer, Paris, 1883, 1. p.
107 of the Persian text), there is a story of a practical
joke which Mahmitd played on Alberuni as an astrolo-
cer. Whether this be historic truth or a late invention,
anyhow the story does not throw much light on the
author’s situation in a period of his life which is the
most interesting to us, that one, namely, when he
commenced to study India, Sanskrit and Sanskrit
literature.

Historic tradition failing us, we are reduced to a
sincle source of information—the author's work—and
must examine to what degree his personal relations are
indicated by his own words. When he wrote, King
Mahmid had been dead only a few weeks. Le 701 est
mort—but to whom was Vive le roi to be addressed ?

Two heirs claimed the throne, Muhammad and
Mas tid, and were marching against each other to settle
their claims by the sword. Under these circumstances
it comes out as a characteristic fact that the book has
no dedication whatever, either to the memory of Mah-
mid, or to one of the rival princes, or to any of the
indifferent or non-political princes of the royal house.
As a cautious politician, he awaited the issue of the
contest; but when the dice had been thrown, and
Mas‘td was firmly established on the throne of his
father, he at once hastened to dedicate to him the
ereatest work of his life, the Canon Masudicus. If he
had been affected by any feeling of sincere gratitude,
he might have erected in the “Ivéuca a monument to
the memory of the dead king, under whose rule he had
made the necessary preparatory studies, and might have
praised him as the great propagator of Islam, without
probably incurring any risk. He has not done so, and
the terms in which he speaks of Mahmiid throughout
his book are not such as a man would use when speak-
ing of a deceased person who had been his benefactor.

He is called simply The Amtr Mahmid, ii. 13 (Arabic


PREFACE. x1


text, p. 208, 9), The Amtr Mahmiid, may Cd's mercy
be with him, 1. 116 (text, p. 56, 8), The Amir Mahmiid,
may the grace of God be with him, i1. 103 (text, p. 252, II).
The title Amir was nothing very complimentary. It
had been borne by his ancestors when they were simply
generals and provincial governors in the service of the
Samani king of Transoxiana and Khurasan. Speaking
of Mahmiid and his father Sabuktagin, the author says,
Yamin-aldaula Mahmiid, may God’s mercy be with them,
i. 22 (text, p.11, 9). He had received the title Yamin-
aldaula, 1.6. The right hand of the dynasty (of the
Khalhf), from the Khalif, as a recognition of the legiti-
macy of his rule, resembling the investiture of the
German Emperor by the Pope in the Middle Ages.
Lastly, we find at 11. 2 (text, p. 203, 20) the following
terms: “ Zhe strongest of the pillars (of Islam), the
pattern of a Sultan, Mahmiid, the lion of the world and
the rarity of the age, may God’s mercy be with him.”
Whoever knows the style of Oriental authors when
speaking of crowned heads, the style of their prefaces,
which attains the height of absurdity at the court of
the Moghul emperors at Delhi, will agree with me that
the manner in which the author mentions the dead :
king is cold, cold in the extreme; that the words of
praise bestowed upon him are meagre and stiff, a poor
sort of praise for a man who had been the first man in
Islam, and the founder of Islam in India; lastly, that
the phrases of benediction which are appended to his
name, according to a general custom of Islam, are the
same as the author would have employed when speak-
ing of any acquaintance of his in common life who had
died. He says of Mahmid (1. 22): “ He utterly ruined
the prosperity of the country (of India), and performed
those wonderful exploits by which the Hindus became
like atoms of dust scattered in all directions, and like a
tale of old in the mouth of the people.” To criticise
these words from a Muslim point of view, the passage of


Se


a


xil PREFACE.


the ruining of the prosperity of the country was per-
fectly out of place in the glorification of a Ghazi lik
Mahmid. |

That it was not at all against the moral principles of
Alberuni to write such dedications to princes is shown
by two other publications of his, with dedications which
exhibit the customary Byzantinism of the time, In the
preface of the “ Chronology of Ancient Nations” (trans-
lated, &c., by Edward Sachau, London, 1879), he extols
with abundant praise the prince of Hyrcania or Jurjan,
Shams-alma4li, who was a dwarf by the side of giant
Mahmtid. The studied character of the neglect of
Mahmitid in the “Ivéuxd comes out more strongly if we
compare the unmerited praise which Alberuni lavishes
upon his son and successor. The preface of his Canon
Masudicus is a farrago of high-sounding words (in
honour of King Mas‘td, who was a drunkard, and lost
in less than a decennium most of what his father’s
sword and policy had gained in thirty-three years.
The tenor of this preface, taken from the manuscript
of the Royal Library in Berlin, is as follows :—

To those who lead the community of the believers in the
place of the Prophet and by the help of the Word of God
belongs “the king, the lord majestic and venerated, the
helper of the representative of God, the furtherer of the
law of God, the protector of the slaves of God, who
punishes the enemies of God, Abt-Said Mas‘tid Ibn
Yamin-aldaula and ’Amin-almilla Mahmtd—may God
give him a long life, and let him perpetually rise to
clorious and memorable deeds. For a confirmation of
what we here say of him hes in the fact that God, on
considering the matter, restored the right (we. the right
of being ruled by Mas tid) to his people, after it had been
concealed. God broughtit to light. After he had been
in distress, God helped him. After he had been rejected,
God raised him, and brought him the empire and the
rule, after people from all sides had tried to get posses-


1 لت‎ xii


sion of it, speaking: ‘ How should he come to rule over
us, 25 we have a better right to the rule than he?’
But then they received (from God) an answer in the
event (lit. sign) which followed. God carried out His
promise relating to him (Mas tid), giving him the inheri-
tance without his asking for it, as He gave the inheri-
tance of David to Solomon without reserve. (That is, the
dead King Mahmid had proclaimed as his successor his
son Muhammad, not 1135 00, but the latter contested the
will of his father, and in the following contest with his
brother he was the winner.) If God had not chosen
him, the hearts of men would not have been gained (?)
for him, and the intrigues of his enemies would not
have missed their aim. In short, the souls of men
hastened to meet him in order to live under his shadow.
The order of God was an act of predestination, and his
becoming king was written in the Book of Books in
heaven (from all eternity).

“He—may God make his rule everlasting !—has
conferred upon me a favour which was a high distinc-
tion to me, and has placed me under the obhgation of
everlasting gratitude. For although a benefactor may
dispense with the thank-offerings for his deeds, &c., a
sound heart inspires those who receive them with the
fear that they might be lost (to general notice), and
lays upon them the obligation of spreading them and
making them known inthe world. But already, before
I received this favour, I shared with the inhabitants of
all his countries the blessings of his rule, of peace and


justice. However, then the special service (towards


his Majesty) became incumbent upon me, after (until
that time) obeying in general (his Majesty) had been
incumbent on me. (This means, probably, that Mas tid
conferred a special benefit (a pension?) on the author,
not immediately after he had come to the throne, but
some time later.) Is it not he who has enabled me for
the rest of my life (Alberuni was then sixty-one years


XIV PREFACE.


old) to devote myself entirely to the service of science,
as he let me dwell under the shadow of his power and
let the cloud of his favour rain on me, always personally
distinguishing and befriending me, &c.? And with
regard to this (the favour conferred upon me), he has
deigned to send his orders to the treasury and the
ministry, which certainly is the utmost that kings
can do for their subjects. May God Almighty reward
him both in this and in yonder world,” &c.

Thereupon, finding that his Majesty did not require
his actual service, and besides, finding that science stood
in the highest favour with him, he composes a book on
astronomy, to which he had been addicted all his life,
and adorns it with the name of his Majesty, calling it
Canon Masudicus (Alkdnin Almasividt), &e.

To put the phrases of this preface into plain language,
the author was in favour with King Mas‘fid; he had
access to the court—living, probably, near it—and
received an income which enabled him to devote him-
self entirely to his scientific work. Besides, all this
appears as a new state of things, the reverse of which
had been the case under the king’s predecessor, his
father, Mahmtd. We do not know the year in which
this change in the life of Alberuni was brought about.
Perhaps it was in some way connected with the fact
that the chancellor, Maimandi, died A.D. 1033, and that
after him one Abti-Nasr Ahmad Ibn Muhammad Ibn
“Abdussamad became chancellor, who before, 7.e. from
1017 to 1033, had administered Khwarizm, the native
country of Alberuni. He and Maimandi had been
political antagonists—not so he and “Abdussamad.

The difference of the author’s condition, as it appears
to have been under Mas‘fid, from what it was under
Mahmtid when he prepared the "Ivé:«a, is further illus-
trated by certain passages in the book itself. When
speaking of the difficulties with which he had to grapple
in his efforts to learn everything about India, he con-


101 XV


tinues: “ What scholar, however, has the same favour-
able opportunities of studying this subject as I have ?
That would be only the case with one to whom the
erace of God accords, what it did not accord to me,a
perfectly free disposal of his own doings and goings;
for it has never fallen to my lot in my own doings and
goings to be perfectly independent, nor to be invested
with sufficient power to dispose and to order as 1
thought best. However, 1 thank God for that which
He has bestowed upon me, and which must be con-
sidered as sufficient for the purpose” (i. 24). These
lines seem to say that the author, both at Ghazna and
in India, at Multdn, Peshavar, &c., had the opportunity
of conversing with pandits, of procuring their help, and
of buying books; that, however, in other directions he
was not his own master, but had to obey a higher will;
and lastly, that he was not a man in authority. =

In another place (i. 152) he explains that art and
sclence require the protection of kings. “For they
alone could free the minds of scholars from the daily
anxieties for the necessities of hfe, and stimulate their
energies to earn more fame and favour, the yearning for
which is the pith and marrow of human nature. The
present times, however, are not of this kind. They are
the very opposite, and therefore it is quite impossible
that a new science or any new kind of research should
arise in our days, What we have of sciences is nothing
but the scanty remains of bygone better times.” Com-
pare with this a dictum quoted (1. 188): “The scholars
are. well aware of the use of money, but the rich are igno-
rant of the nobility of science.”

These are not the words of an author who basks in
the sunshine of royal protection. The time he speaks
of is the time of Mahmiid, and it is Mahmtid whom he
accuses of having failed in the duties of a protector of
art and science imposed upon him by his royal office.
Firdausi, in his satire (Mohl, i préf. p. xlv.), calls


XV1 PREFACE,


him “wz rot quina ni foi nt loi ni manieres” (royales) ;
and he says: “Sz le row avait 016 un homme digne de
renom, tl awrait honoré le savoir,’ .عوك‎ It is most
remarkable to what degree Firdausi and Alberuni agree
in their judgment of the king. To neither of them had
he been a Meecenas. ,:

In the absence of positive information, we have tried
to form a chain of combinations from which we may
infer, with a tolerable degree of certainty, that our
author, during the thirteen years of his life from 1017
to 1030, after he had been carried from his native
country to the centre of Mahmtid’s realm, did not enjoy
the favours of the king and his leading men; that he
stayed in different parts of India (as a companion of
the princes of his native country ?), probably in the
character of a hostage or political prisoner kept on
honourable terms; that he spent his leisure in the study
of India; and that he had no official inducement or
encouragement for this study, nor any hope of royal
reward.

A radical change in all this takes place with the
accession of 112800. There is no more complaint of the
time and its ruler. Alberuni.is all glee and exultation
about the royal favours and support accorded to him
and to his studies. He now wrote the greatest work of
his life and with a swelling heart and overflowing
words he proclaims in the preface the praise of his
benefactor. Living in Ghazna, he seems to have for-
gotten India to a great extent. For in the Canon


" Masudicus he rarely refers to India; its chapter. on


Hindu eras does not prove any progress of his studies
beyond that which he exhibits in the “Ivévca, and at
the end of it he is even capable of confounding the era


1 The Canon Masudicus, extant in four good copies in European
libraries, waits for the patronage of some Academy of Sciences or some
Government, and for the combination of two scholars, an astronomer
and an Arabic philologist, for the purpose of an edition and transla-
tion,


PREFACE. XVil


of the astronomers, as used in the Khandakhddyaka of
Brahmaeupta, with the Guptakala.

If the author and his countrymen had suffered and the author's
were still suffering from the oppression of King Mah- Ta
mfid, the Hindus were in the same position, and per- >
haps it was this community of mishap which inspired
him with sympathy for them. And certainly the
Hindus and their world of thought have a paramount,
fascinating interest for him, and he inquires with the
greatest predilection into every Indian subject, how-
soever heathenish it may be, as though he were treating
of the most important questions for the souls of Muham-
madans,—of free-will and predestination, of future
reward and punishment, of the creation or eternity of
the Word of God, &e. To Mahmifd the Hindus were
infidels, to be dispatched to hell as soon as they refused
to be plundered. To go on expeditions and to fill the
treasury with gold, not to make lasting conquests of
territories, was the real object of his famous expeditions ;
and it was with this view that he cut his way through
enormous distances to the richest temples of India at
Tanéshar, Mathura, Kanoj, and Somanath.

To Alberuni the Hindus were excellent philosophers,
cood mathematicians and astronomers, though he naively
believes himself to be superior to them, and disdains to
be put on a level with them (i. 23(.2 He does not
conceal whatever he considers wrong and unpractical
with them,.but he duly appreciates their mental
achievements, takes the greatest pains to appropriate
them to himself, even such as could not be of any use
to him or to his readers, eg. Sanskrit metrics; ,and
whenever he hits upon something that is noble and
erand both in science and in practical 1116, he never
fails to lay it before his readers with warm-hearted
words of approbation. Speaking of the construction of
the ponds at holy bathing-places, he says: “In this


1 For a similar. trait of self-confidence cf. i. 277, last lines,


XVlil PREFACE.


they have attained a very high degree of art, so that
our people (the Muslims), when they see them, wonder
at them, and are unable to describe them, much less to
construct anything like them” (11. 144).

Apparently Alberuni felt a strong inclination towards
Indian philosophy. He seems to have thought that the
philosophers both in ancient Greece and India, whom
he most carefully and repeatedly distinguishes from the
ignorant, image-loving crowd, held in reality the very
same ideas, the same as seem to have been his own, 2.e.
those of a pure monotheism ; that, in fact, originally all
men were alike pure and virtuous, worshipping one sole
Almighty God, but that the dark passions of the crowd
in the course of time had given rise to the difference of
religion, of philosophical and political persuasions, and
of idolatry. “The first cause of idolatry was the desire
of commemorating the dead and of consoling the living ;
but on this basis it has developed, and has finally
become a foul and pernicious abuse” (i. 124).

He seems to have revelled in the pure theories of
the Bhagavadgitd, and it deserves to be noticed that he
twice mentions the saying of Vyasa, “ Learn twenty-
five (z.¢., the elements of existence) by distinctions, &c.
Aiterwards adhere to whatever religion you like; your
end will be salvation” (i. 44, and also i. 104). In one
case he even goes so far as to speak of Hindu scholars
as “enjoying the help of God,’ which to a Muslim means
as much as inspired by God, guided by divine inspiration
01. 108). These words are an addition of the author’s
in his paraphrase of the Brihatsarihitd of Vardhamihira,
vy. 8. There can be scarcely any doubt that Muslims
of later times would have found fault with him for going
to such length in his interest for those heathenish
doctrines, and it is a singular fact that Alberuni wrote
under a prince who burned and impaled the Karmatians
(cf. note to 1. 31). :

Still he was a:Muslim; whether Sunni or Shi‘a


PREFACE. XIX


eannot be gathered from the “Ivéuca. He sometimes
takes an occasion for pointing out to the reader the
superiority of Islam over Brahmanic India. He con-
trasts the democratic equality of men with the castes


of India, the matrimonial law of Islam with degraded.


forms of it in India, the cleanliness and decency of


Muslims with filthy customs of the Hindus. With all:


The author’
character,


this, his recognition of Islam is not without a tacit
reserve. He dares not attack Islam, but he attacks the
Arabs. In his work on chronology he reproaches the
ancient Muslims with having destroyed the civilisation
of Eran, and gives us to understand that the ancient
Arabs were certainly nothing better than the Zoroastrian
Eranians. So too in the Ivécca, whenever he speaks of
a dark side in Hindu life, he at once turns round sharply
to compare the manners of the ancient Arabs, and to
declare that they were quite as bad, if not worse. This
could only be meant as a hint to the Muslim reader not
to be too hauehty towards the poor bewildered Hindu,
trodden down by the savage hordes of King Mahmitd,
and not to forget that the founders of Islam, too, were
certainly no angels.

Independent in his thoughts about religion and
philosophy, he is a friend of clear, determined, and manly
words. He abhors half-truths, veiled words, and waver-
ing action. Everywhere he comes forward as a champion
of his conviction with the courage of a man. As in
religion and philosophy, so too in politics. There are
some remarkable sentences of political philosophy in
the introductions to chapters 1x. and lxxi. As a poli-
ticlan of a highly conservative stamp, he stands up
for throne and altar, and declares that “their union
vepresents the highest development of human society,
ull that men can possibly desire” (i. 99). He is capable
of admiring the mildness of the law of the Gospel: “To
offer to him who has beaten your cheek the other cheek
also, to bless your enemy and to pray for him, Upon


(


XX PREFACE.


my life, this is a noble philosophy; but the people of
this world are not all philosophers. Most of them are
ignorant and erring, who cannot be kept on the straight
road save by the sword and the whip. And, indeed,
ever since Constantine the Victorious became a Christian,
both sword and whip have ever been employed, for
without them it would be impossible to rule” (ii. 161).
Although a scholar by profession, he is capable of taking
the practical side of a case, and he applauds the Khalit
Mu‘dviya for having sold the golden gods of Sicily to
the princes of Sindh for money’s worth, instead of
destroying them as heathen abominations, as bigoted
Muslims would probably have liked him to do. His
preaching the union of throne and altar does not prevent
him from speaking with 112015111560 contempt of the
“ preconcerted tricks of the priests” having the purpose
of enthralling the ignorant crowd (1. 123).

He is a stern judge both of himself and of others.


Himself perfectly sincere, it is sincerity which 26


demands from others. Whenever he does not fully
understand a subject, or only knows part of it, he will
at once tell the reader so, either asking the reader’s
pardon for his ignorance, or promising, though a man
of fifty-eight years, to continue his labours and to
publish their results in time, as though he were acting
under a moral responsibility to the public. He always
sharply draws the limits of his knowledge; and although
he has only a smattering of the metrical system of the
Hindus, he communicates whatever little he knows,


cuided by the principle that the best must not be the.


enemy of the better (i. 200, 6-9), as though he were
afraid that he should not live long enough to finish the
study in question. He is not a friend of those whx
“hate to avow their ignorance by a frank J do noi


know” )0. 177), and he is roused to strong indignation |


whenever he meets with want of sincerity. If Brahma-
gupta teaches two theories of the eclipses, the popular


PREFACE. ° XX1


one of the dragon Rahu’s devouring the luminous body,
and the scientific one, he certainly committed the sin
against conscience from undue concessions to the priests
of the nation, and from fear of a fate like that which
befell Socrates when he came into collision with the
persuasions of the majority of his countrymen. Cf '
chapter lix. In another place he accuses Brahma-
cupta of injustice and rudeness to his predecessor,
Aryabhata (i. 376). He finds in the works of Vara-
hamihira by the side of honeSt scientific work sentences
which sound to him “ 1176 the ravings of a madman”
(ii, 117), but he is kind enough to suggest that behind
those passages there is perhaps an esoteric meaning,
unknown to him, but more to the credit of the author.
When, however, Vardhamihira seems to exceed all
limits of common sense, Alberuni thinks that “to such
things silence is the only proper answer” (ii. 114).

His professional zeal, and the principle that learning
as the fruit of repetition (ii. 198), Sometimes induce him
to indulge in repetitions, and his thorough honesty
sometimes misleads him to use harsh and even rude
words. He cordially hates the verbosity of Indian
authors or versifiers,| who use lots of words where a
single one would be sufficient. He calls it “mere
nonsense—-a means of keeping people in the dark and
throwing an air of mystery about the subject. And in
any case this copiousness (of words denoting the same
thing) offers painful difficulties to those who want to
learn the whole language, and only results in a sheer
waste of time” (1. 229, 299, 19). He twice explains
the origin of the Dibajat, 2.6. Maledives and Laccadives
(i. 233; ll. 106); twice the configuration of the borders
of the Indian Ocean (i. 197, 270). .

Whenever he suspects humbug, he is not backward in
calling it by the right name. Thinking of the horrid
practices of Rasdyana, 4.6. the art of making gold, of

1 Of. his sarcasms on the versifying bias of Hindu authors, i. 137.

VOL. I, 0


XXil PREFACE.


making old people young, &c., he bursts out into
sarcastic words which are more coarse in the original
than in my translation (i. 189). In eloquent words he
utters his indignation on the same subject (i. 193):
“The creediness of the ignorant Hindu princes for gold-
making does not know any limit,” &. There is a spark
of grim humour in his words on i. 237, where he criti-
cises the cosmographic ravings of a Hindu author:
“We, on our part, found it already troublesome enough
to enumerate all the seven seas, together with the seven
earths, and now this author thinks he can make the
subject more easy and pleasant to us by inventing some
more earths below those already enumerated by our-
selves!”” And when jugglers from Kanoj lectured to
him on chronology, the stern scholar seems to have been
moved to something like a grin. “I used great care in
examining every single one of them, in repeating the
same questions at different times in a different order
and context. But lo! what different answers did I
get! God is all-wise” (ii. 129). |
In the opening of his book Alberuni gives an account
of the circumstances which suggested to him the idea
of writing the ‘Ivévcea. Once the conversation with a
friend of his, else unknown, ran on the then existing
literature on the history of religion and philosophy,
its merits and demerits. When, in particular, the
literature on the belief of the Hindus came to be criti-
cised, Alberuni maintained that all of it was second-
hand and thoroughly uncritical. To verify the matter,
his friend once more examines the books in question,
which results in his agreeing with our author, and his
asking him to fill up this gap in the Arabic literature
of the time. ‘The book he has produced is not a polemi-
cal one. He will not convert the Hindus, nor lend
a direct help to missionary zealots. He will simply
describe Hinduism, without identifying himself with it.
116 takes care to inform the reader that he is not respon-


The ten-
dency of
his work.


PREFACE, ° XXill


sible for whatsoever repugnant detail he has to relate,
but the Hindus themselves. He gives a repertory of
information on Indian subjects, destined for the use of
those who lived in peaceable intercourse with them, and
wished to have an insight into their mode and world of
thought (1. 7; 11. 246).

The author has nothing in common wjth the Muham-
madan Ghazi who wanted to convert the Hindus or to
kill them, and his book scarcely reminds the reader of
the incessant war between Islam and India, during
which it had been prepared, and by which the possi-
bility of writing such a book had first been given. It
is like a magic island of quiet, impartial research in
the midst of a world of clashing swords, burning towns,
and plundered temples. The object which the author
had in view, and never for.a moment lost sight of, was
to afford the necessary information and training to
“any one (in Islam) who wants to converse with the
Hindus, and to discuss with them questions of religion,
science, or literature, on the very basis of their own cwwili-
sation” (il. 246).

It is difficult to say what kind of readers Alberuni had, the author
or expected to have, not only for the “Ivécca, but for all 0
his other publications on Indian subjects. Probably
educated, and not bigoted or fanatical Muslims in Sindh,
in parts of the Panjab, where they were living by the side
of Hindus and in daily intercourse with them; perhaps,
also, for such in Kabul, the suburb of which had still a
Hindu population in the second half of the tenth century,
Ghazna, and other parts of Afghanistan. When speak-
ing of the Pulisasiddhdnta, a standard work on astro-
nomy, he says: “A translation of his (Pulisa’s) whole
work into Arabic has not hitherto yet been undertaken,
because in his mathematical problems there is an evi-
dent religious and theological tendency ’! @. 375). He


1 Alberuni does not seem to have shared these scruples, for he
translated it into Arabic (cf. i. 154).


XXIV PREFACE.


does not tell us what this particular tendency was to
which the readers objected, but we learn so much from
this note that in his time, and probably also in his
neighbourhood, there were circles of educated men who
had an interest in getting the scientific works of India
translated into Arabic, who at the same time were suffi-
ciently familiar with the subject-matter to criticise the
various representations of the same subject, and to give
the preference to one, to the exclusion of another. That
our author had a certain public among Hindus seems
to be indicated by the fact that he composed some
publications for people in Kashmir; ننه‎ preface to the
edition of the text, .م‎ xx. These relations to Kashmir
are very difficult to understand, as Muslims had not
yet conquered the country, nor entered it to any extent,
and as the author himself (i. 206) relates that it was
closed to intercourse with all strangers save a few Jews.
Whatever the interest of Muslims for the literature of
and on India may have been, we are under the impression
that this kind of literature has never taken deep root;
for after Alberuni’s death, in A.D. 1048, there 1s no more
original work in this field; and even Alberuni, when he
wrote, was quite alone in the field. Enumerating the
difficulties which beset his study of India, he says: “1
found it very hard to work into the subject, although I
have a great liking for it, in which respect I stand quite’
alone in my time,” &e. (1. 4). And certainly we do not
know of any Indianist like him, before his time or
after.

In general it is the method of our author not to speak
himself, but to let the Hindus speak, giving extensive
quotations from their classical authors. He presents a
picture of Indian civilisation as painted by the Hindus
themselves. Many chapters, not all, open with a short
characteristic introduction of a general nature. The body
of most chapters consists of three parts. The first is
a précis of the question, as the author understands it.


The author’s
method,


The author’s
critical
mind,


PREFACE.  - XXV


The second part brings forward the doctrines of the
Hindus, quotations from Sanskrit books in the chapters
on religion, philosophy, astronomy, and astrology, and
other kinds of information which had been communi-
cated to him by word of mouth, or things which he


had himself observed in the chapters on literature,


, historic chronology, geography, law, manners, and cus-


toms. In the third part he does the same as Megas-
thenes had already done; he tries to bring the sometimes
very exotic subject nearer to the understanding of his
readers by comparing it with the theories of ancient
Greece, and by other comparisons. As an example of
this kind of arrangement, cf Chapter v. In the dis-
position of every single chapter, as well as in the
sequence of the chapters, a perspicuous, well-considered
plan is apparent. ‘There is no patchwork nor anything
superfluous, and the words fit to the subject as close as
possible. We seem to recognise the professional mathe-
matician in the perspicuity and classical order through-
out the whole composition, and there was scarcely an
occasion for him to excuse himself, as he does at the
end of Chapter i. (1. 26), for not being able everywhere
strictly to adhere to the geometrical method, as he was
sometimes compelled to introduce an unknown factor,
because the explanation could only be given in a later
part of the book.

He does not blindly accept the traditions of former
ages; he wants to understand and to criticise them. He
wants to sift the wheat from the chaff, and he will
discard everything that militates against the laws of
nature and of reason. The reader will remember that
Alberuni was also a physical scholar, and had published
works on most departments of natural science, optics,
mechanics, mineralogy, and chemistry; ¢f. his geolo-
gical speculation on the indications of India once having
been a sea (1. 198), and a characteristic specimen of his
natural philosophy (i. 400), That he believed in the


XxV1 PREFACE.


action of the planets on the sublunary world I take for
certain, though he nowhere says so. It would hardly
be intelligible why he should have spent so much time
and labour on the study of Greek and Indian astrology |
if he had not believed in the’truth of the thing. He |
gives a sketch of Indian astrology in Chapter lxxx.,
because Muslim readers “are not acquainted with the .
Hindu methods of astrology, and have never had an
opportunity of studying an Indian book” (ii, 211). '
Bardesanes, a Syrian philosopher and poet in the |
second half of the second Christian century, condemned |
astrology in plain and weighty words. Alberuni did
not rise to this height, remaining entangled in the
notions of Greek astrology.

He did not believe in alchemy, for he distinguishes
between such of its practices as are of a chemical or
mineralogical character, and such as are intentional
deceit, which he condemns in the strongest possible
terms (1. 187). |

He criticises. manuscript tradition hke a modern -
philologist. He sometimes supposes the text to be
corrupt, and inquires into the cause of the corruption ;
he discusses various readings, and proposes emenda-
tions. He guesses at lacune, criticises different transla-
tions, and complains of the carelessness and ignorance
of the copyists (11. 76; 1. 162-163). He is aware that
Indian works, badly translated and carelessly copied by
the successive copyists, very soon degenerate to such a
degree that an Indian author would hardly recognise
his own work, if it were presented to him in such a
garb. All these complaints are perfectly true, particu-
larly as regards the proper names. That in his essays
at emendation he sometimes went astray, that, eg. he |
was not prepared fully to do justice to Brahmagupta, |
will readily be excused by the fact that at his time it
was next to impossible to learn Sanskrit with a suffi- |
cient degree of accuracy and completeness.


A


\

| /

\ PREFACE. XXVil
\


When I drew the first sketch of the life of Alberuni
ten years ago, I cherished the hope that more materials
١ for his biography would come to light in the libraries
' of both the East and West. ‘This has not been the
case, so far as [am aware. To gain an estimate of his
character we must try to read between the lines of his
books, and to glean whatever minute indications may
there be found. A picture of his character cannot
therefore at the present be anything but very imperfect,
and a detailed appreciation of his services in the ad-
vancement of science cannot be undertaken until all
the numerous works of his pen have been studied and
rendered accessible to the learned world. The principal
domain of his work included astronomy, mathematics,
chronology, mathematical geography, physics, chemistry,
and mineralogy. By the side of this professional work
he composed about twenty books on India, both transla-
tions and original compositions, and a number of tales
and legends, mostly derived from the ancient lore of
Eran and India. As probably most valuable contribu-
tions to the historic literature of the time, we must
mention his history of his native country Khwarizm,
and the history of the famous sect of the Karmatians,
the loss of both of which is much to be deplored.


‘Ee
The court of the Khalifs of the house of Omayya at on the ori.


Damascus does not seem to have been a home for ees
literature. Except for the practical necessities of ad- mie
ministration, they had no desire for the civilisation of
Greece, Egypt, or Persia, their thoughts being engrossed |

by war and politics and the amassing of wealth. Pro-

bably they had a certain predilection for poetry common

to all Arabs, but they did not think of encouraging
historiography, much to their own disadvantage. In


many ways these Arab princes, only recently emerged


20 PREFACE


from the rocky wilderness of the Hijiz, and suddenly
raised to imperial power, retained much of the great
Bedouin Shaikh of the desert. Several of them, shun-
ning Damascus, preferred to stay in the desert or on
its border, and we may surmise that in their house-
holds at Rusdfa and Khundsara there was scarcely
more thought of literature than at present in the halls
of Ibn Arrashid, the wily head of the Shammar at Hail.
The cradle of Arabic literature is not Damascus, but
Bagdad, and the protection necessary for its rise and
growth was afforded by the Khalifs of the house of
Abbas, whose Arab nature had been modified by the
influence of Eranian civilisation during a long stay in
Khurasan.

The foundation of Arabic literature was laid between
A.D. 750 and 850. Itis only the tradition relating to
their religion and prophet and poetry that is peculiar
to the Arabs; everything else is of foreign descent.
The development of a large literature, with numerous
ramifications, is chiefly the work of foreigners, carried
out with foreign materials, as in Rome the origines of
the national literature mostly point to Greek sources.
Greece, Persia, and India were taxed to help the sterility
of the Arab mind.

What Greece has contributed by lending its Aristotle,
Ptolemy, and Harpocrates is known in general. A de-
tailed description of the influx and spread of Greek
literature would mark a memorable progress in Oriental
philology. Such a work may be undertaken with some
chance of success by one who is familar with the state
of Greek literature at the centres of learning during the
last centuries of Greek heathendom, although he would
have to struggle against the lamentable fact that most
Arabic books of this most ancient period are lost, and
probably lost for ever.

What did Persia, or rather the Sasanian empire, over-
run by the Arab hordes, offer to its victors in literature ?


١ Persian ele-
ment in
Arabic
literature.


PREFACE. XXIx


It left to the east of the Khalifate the language of
administration, the use of which during the following
‘centuries, till recent times, was probably never much
discontinued. It was this Perso-Sasanian language of
administration which passed into the use of the smaller
Eastern dynasties, reared under the Abbaside Khalifs,
\and became the language of literature at the court of
yne of those dynasties, that of the Samant kings of
ransoxiana and Khuradsan. Thus it has come to pass
at the dialect of one of the most western parts of
an first emerged as the language of literature in its
‘tihest east. In a similar way modern German is an
ispring of the language used in the chanceries of the
uxembourg emperors of Germany.

The bulk of the narrative literature, tales, legends,
novels, came to the Arabs in translations from the Per-
| slan, e.g. the “Thousand and One Nights,” the stories told
by the mouth of animals, like Kaltla and Dimana, pro-
| bably all of Buddhistic origin, portions of the national
lore of Eran,taken from the Khuddindma, or Lord’s Book,
and afterwards immortalised by 110811515 but more
than anything else love-stories. All this was the fashion
under the Abbaside Khalifs, and is said to have attained
\the height of popularity during the rule of Almuktadir,
J.D. 908-932. Besides, much favour was apparently
ed upon didactic, pareenetic compositions, mostly
_in the garb of a testament of this or that Sasanian
r sage, e.g. Anushirvan and his minister Buzurju-
‘kewise upon'collections of moralistic apotheems.
م‎ was translated from Persian, or pretended to
| Books on the science of war, the knowledge of
s, the veterinary art, falconry, and the various
is of divination, and some books on medicine
rebus venereis, were likewise borrowed from the
s. It is noteworthy that, on the other hand,
re very few traces of the exact sciences, such as
atics and astronomy, among the Sasanian Per-


6 PREFACE,


sians. Either they had only little of this kind, or the
Arabs did not choose to get it translated.

An author by the name of ‘Ali Ibn Ziyad Altamimt
is said to have translated from Persian a book, 27-
alshahriydr, which, to judge by the title, must have
been a system of astronomy. It seems to have been
extant when Alberuni wrote his work on chronology:
vide “ Chronology of Ancient Nations,” translated, &
by Edward Sachau, London, 1876, p. 6, and note p. 36
Perhaps it was from this source that the famous Alk
warizmit drew his knowledge of Persian astronor
which he is said to have exhibited in his extract fi
the Brahmasiddhdnta, composed by order of the Kha
Ma‘mtin. For we are expressly told (vide Gildemeister,
Scriptorum Arabum de rebus Indicis loci, &c., p. 101)
that he used the media, 4.6. the mean places of the
planets as fixed by Brahmagupta, whilst in other
things he deviated from him, giving the equations of
the planetary revolutions according to the theory of
the Persians, and the declination of the sun according
to Ptolemy. Of what kind this Persian astronomy was
we do not know, but we must assume that it was of a
scientific character, based on observation and compu-
tation, else Alkhw4rizmi would not have introduced
its results into his own work. Of the terminology
of Arabian astronomy, the word Jauzahar =
draconis, is probably of Sasanian origin (gaocith
well as the word 2 (= canon), 2.6. a collection oi{
nomical tables with the necessary explanations,
also kardaj, kardaja, a measure in geometry ©
psth of the circumference of a circle, if it be i
with the Persian karda, 1.6. cut.

What India has contributed reached Bagdad
different roads. Part has come directly in trans
from the Sanskrit, part has travelled through
having originally been translated from Sanskrit
Prakrit ?) into Persian, and farther from Persia


Indian ele-


ments in
Arabic
literature.


PREFACE. XXXI


Arabic. In this way, eg. the fables of Kalila and


. Dimna have been communicated to the Arabs, and a


book on medicine, probably the famous Caraka, Cf.
Fihrist, p. 303.

In this communication between India and Bagdad
we must not only distinguish between two -different
roads, but also between two different periods.

As Sindh was under the actual rule of the Khalif
Mansfir (A.D. 753-774), there came embassies from that
part of India to Bagdad, and among them scholars, who
brought along with them two books, the Brahmasid-
dhénta of Brahmagupta (Sindhind), and his Khanda-
khédyaka (Arkand). With the help of these pandits,
Alfazari, perhaps also Yaktb Ibn Tarik, translated them.
Both works have been largely used, and have exercised
a great influence. It was on this occasion that the
Arabs first became acquainted with a scientific system
of astronomy. They learned from Brahmagupta earlier
than from Ptolemy.

Another influx of Hindu learning took place under
Harun, A.D. 786-808. The ministerial family Barmak,
then at the zenith of their power, had come with the
ruling dynasty from Balkh, where an ancestor of theirs
had been an official in the Buddhistic temple Nawbehar,
Le. nava vihdra = the new temple (or monastery). The
name Barmak is said to be of Indian descent, meaning
paramaka, i.e. the superior (abbot of the vehdra?). Cf.
Kern, Geschichte des Buddhismus in Indien, 11. 445, 543:
Of course, the Barmak family had been converted, but
their contemporaries never thought much of their pro-
fession of Islam, nor regarded it as genuine. Induced
probably by family traditions, they sent scholars to
India, there to study medicine and pharmacology. LBe-
sides, they engaged Hindu scholars to come to Bagdad,
made them the chief physicians of their hospitals, and
ordered them to translate from Sanskrit into Arabic
books on medicine, pharmacology, toxicology, philo-


Xxxil PREFACE.


sophy, astrology, and other subjects. Still in later
centuries Muslim scholars sometimes travelled for
the same purposes as the emissaries of the Barmak,
e.g. Almuwaffak not long before Alberuni’s time (Codex
Vindobonensis, sive medict Abu Mansur liber fundamen-
torum pharmacologie, ed, Seligmann, Vienna, 1859, pp.
6, 10, and 15, 9). :

Soon afterwards, when Sindh was no longer politically
dependent upon Bagdad, all this intercourse ceased en-
tirely. Arabic literature turned off into other channels.
There is no more mention of the presence of Hindu
scholars at Bagdad nor of translations of the Sanskrit.
Greek learning had already won an omnipotent sway
over the mind of the Arabs, being communicated to
them by the labours of Nestorian physicians, the philo-
sophers of Harran, and Christian scholars in Syria and
other parts of the Khalifate. Of the more ancient or.
Indo-Arabian stratum of scientific lhterature nothing 8
reached our time save a number of titles of books, many
of them in such a corrupt form as to baffle all attempts
at decipherment.

Among the Hindu physicians of this time one ابن دهن‎
is mentioned, 4.64. the son of DHN, director of the
hospital of the Barmaks in Bagdad. This name may
be Dhanya or Dhanin, chosen probably on account of
its etymological relationship with the name Dhanvantari,
the name of the mythical physician of the gods in
Manu’s law-book and the epos (ef. A. Weber, Zndische
Lniteraturgeschichte, pp. 284, 287). A similar relation
seems to exist between the names Kanka, that of a
physician of the same period, and Kdikdyana, an
authority in Indian medicine (cf Weber, 7. ,.ه‎ pp. 287
note, and 284 note, 302).

The name رأطر‎ that of an author of a book on
drinkables, may be identical with Atri, mentioned as a
medical author by Weber, l. c., p. 288.

There was a book by one جيدبا‎ (also written (بيدياة‎ on


PREFACE. XXXi11


wisdom or philosophy (cf. Fihrist, p. 305). According


to Middle-Indian phonetics this name is = vedavydsa
A man of this name, also called Vydsa or Bddardyana,
is, according to the literary tradition of India, the
originator of the Vedanta school of philosophy (¢
Colebroke, Essays, i. 352), and this will remind the .
reader that in the Arabian Sufism the Indian Vedanta
philosophy reappears.

Further, an author pps, Sadbrm,? is mentioned,
unfortunately without an indication of the contents of
his book. Alberuni (i. 157) mentions one Satya as the
author of a jdtaka (cf. Weber, J. ¢, p. 278), and this
name is perhaps an abbreviation of that one here
mentioned, 2.e. Satyavarman.

A work on astrology is attributed to one ks,
SNGHL (vide Fibrist, p. 271), likewise enumerated
by Alberuni in a list of names 158). The Indian
equivalent of this name is not certain (cf. note toi. 158).

There is also mentioned a book on the signs of swords
by one 3%, probably identical with Vydghra, which
occurs aS a name of Indian authors (cf. Fihrist, p.
315).

The famous Buddha legend in Christian garb, most
commonly called Joasaph and Barlaam, bears in Fihrist,
p. 300, the title .موراسف ولوهر‎ The former word is gene-
rally explained as Bodhisattva, although there is no
law in Indian phonetics which admits the change of
sattva to saf. The second name is that of Buddha’s
spiritual teacher and guide, in fact, his pwrohita, and
with this word I am inclined to identify the signs in
question, 1.6, ,بلوهد‎

What Ibn 1178011 in his chronicle (ed. by Houtsma)
relates of India, on pp. 92-106, is not of much value.


. His words on p. 105, “the king كوش‎ = Ghosha, who


1 Benfey in Kalilag und Damnag, Einleitung, p. xliii, note 3. The
word has received currency in the form Bidpai,
* Cf. Benfey, l. ¢.; Einleitung, p. xl.


XXXIV ‘PREFACE


lived in the time of Sindbad the sage, and this Ghosha
composed the book on the cunning of the women,” are
perhaps an indication of some fables of Buddhaghosha
having been translated into Arabic.

Besides books on astronomy, mathematics الحساب)‎
,(الهندى‎ astrology, chiefly jdtakas, on medicine and
pharmacology, the Arabs translated Indian works on
snakes (sarpavidyd), on poison (vishavidyd), on all
kinds of auguring, on talismans, on the veterinary art,
de arte amandi, numerous tales, a life of Buddha, books
on logic and philosophy in general, on ethics, politics,
and on the science of war. Many Arab authors took
up the subjects communicated to them by the Hindus
and worked them out in original compositions, commen-
taries, and extracts. A favourite subject of theirs was
Indian mathematics, the knowledge of which became
far spread by the publications of Alkindi and many
others.

The smaller dynasties which in later times tore the
soverelgnty over certain eastern countries of the Khali-
fate out of the hands of the successors of Manstr and
Harun, did not continue their literary commerce with
India. The Bant-Laith (A.D, 872-903), owning great
part of Afghanistan together with Ghazna, were the
neighbours of Hindus, but their name is in no way
connected, with the history of literature. For the
Buyide princes who ruled over Western Persia and
Babylonia between A.D. 932 and 1055, the fables of
Kalla and Dimna were translated. Of all these princely
houses, no doubt, the Samanides, who held almost the
whole east of the Khalifate under their sway during
892-999, had most relations with the Hindus, those in
Kabul, the Panjab, and Sindh; and their minister,
Aljaihani, probably had collected much information
about India, Originally the slave of the Samanides,
then their general and provincial governor, Alptagin
made himself practically independent in @hazna a few


PREFACE. XXXV


years before Alberuni was born, and his successor,
Sabuktagin, Mahmiid’s father, paved the road for the
war with India (i. 22), and for the lasting establish-
ment of Islam in India.

Some of the books that had been translated under The author
the first Abbaside Khalifs were extant in the library | Tndis tefore


he wrote


of Alberuni when he wrote the ’Ivéica, the Brahma- tie Present


siddhanta or Sindhind, and the Khandakhddyaka or a
Arkand in the editions of Alfaziit and of Yaktib Ibn
Tarik, the Caraka in the edition of “Ali Ibn Zain, and
the Paficatantra or Kalua and Diumna. He also used an
Arabic translation of the Karanasdra by Vittesvara
(ii. 55), but we do not learn from him whether this was
an old translation or a modern one made in Alberuni’s
time. These books offered to Alberuni—he complains
of it repeatedly—the same difficulties as to us, viz.,
besides the faults of the translators, a considerable
corruption of the text by the negligence of the copyists,
more particularly as regards the proper names.

When Alberuni entered India, he probably had a
good general knowledge of Indian mathematics, astro-
nomy, and chronology, acquired by the study of Brahma-
gupta and his Arabian editors. What Hindu author
was his teacher and that of the Arabs in pure mathe-
matics (الجساب الهندى)‎ is not known, Besides هم‎
and Yakfib Ibn Tarik, he learned from Alkhwirizmi,
something from Abulhasan of Ahwaz, things of little
value from Alkindi and Abt-Ma‘shar of Balkh, and
single details from the famous book of Aljaihani. Of
other sources which he has used in the “Ivdica, he
quotes: (1.) A Muhammadan canon called Alharkan, i.e.
ahargana. I cannot trace the history of the book, but
suppose that it was a practical handbook of chronology
for the purpose of converting Arabian and Persian dates
into Indian ones and vice versd, which had perhaps been
necessitated by the wants of the administration under
Sabuktagin and Mahmtd. The name of the author is


a ee Se


i


XXXVi PREFACE.


not mentioned. (2.) Abfi Ahmad Ibn Catlaghtactn,
quoted i. 317 as having computed the latitudes of Karli
and Taneshar. |

Two other authorities on astronomical subjects are
quoted, but not in relation to Indian astronomy,
Muhammad Ibn Ishak, from Sarakhs, 11. 15, and a book
called Ghurrat-alzijdt, perhaps derived from an Indian
source, as the name is identical with Karanatiaka.
The author is perhaps Abti-Muhammad Alnaib from
Amul (cf, note to ii. 90.)

In India Alberuni recommenced his study of Indian
astronomy, this time not from translations, but from
Sanskrit originals, and we here meet with the remark-
able fact that the works which about A.D. 770 had been
the standard in India still held the same high position
A.D. 1020, viz., the works of Brahmagupta. Assisted
by learned pandits, he tried to translate them, as also
the Pulisasiddhdnta (vide preface to the edition of the
text, § 5), and when he composed the Ivécxa, he had
already come forward with several books devoted
to special points of Indian astronomy. As such he
quotes :—

(1.) A treatise on the determination of the lunar
stations or nakshatras, 11. 83.

(2.) The Khaydl-alkustfaini, which contained, pro-
bably beside other things, a description of the Yoga
theory, li. 208.

(3.) A book called The Arabic Khandakhddyaka, on
the same subject as the preceding one, il. 208.

(4.) A book containing a description of the Karanas,
the title of which is not mentioned, il. 194.

(5.) A treatise on the various systems of numeration,
as used by different nations, i. 174, which probably
described also the related Indian subjects.

(6.) A book called “ Key of Astronomy,” on the ques-
tion whether the sun rotates round the earth or the
earth round the sun, 1. 277. We may suppose that in


PREFACE, XXXV11


this book he had also made use of the notions of Indian
_ astronomers.

(7.) Lastly, several publications on the different
methods for the computation of geographical longitude,
1. 315. He does not mention their titles, nor whether
they had any relation to Hindu methods of calculation,

Perfectly at home in all departments of Indian astro-
nomy and chronology, he began to write the Ivécxcd.
In the chapters on these subjects he continues a literary
movement which at his time had already gone on for
centuries; but he surpassed his predecessors by going
back upon the original Sanskrit sources, trying to check
his pandits by whatever Sanskrit he had contrived to
learn, by making new and more accurate translations,
and by his conscientious method of testing the data of
the Indian astronomers by calculation. His work repre-
sents a scientific renaissance In comparison with the
aspirations of the scholars working in Bagdad under the
first Abbaside Khalifs. .

Alberuni seems to think that Indian astrology had
not been transferred into the more ancient Arabic
literature, as we may conclude from his introduction to
Chapter Ixxx.: “ Our fellow-believers in these (Muslim)
countries are not acquainted with the Hindu methods
of astrology, and have never had an opportunity of
studying an Indian book on the subject,” 11. 211. We
cannot prove that the works of Varahamihira, ¢.g. his
Lrihatsamhitdé and Laghujdtakam, which Alberuni was
translating, had already been accessible to the Arabs at
the time of Manstir, but we are inclined to think that
Alberuni’s judgment on this head is too sweeping, for
books on astrology, and particularly on jdtaka, had
already been translated in the early days of the Abba-
side rule. Cf. Fihrist, pp. 270, 271.

As regards Indian medicine, we can only say that
Alberuni does not seem to have made a special study
of it, for he simply uses the then current translation of

VOL. I. | d


2011 PREFACE.


Caraka, although complaining of its incorrectness, i.
159, 162, 382. He has translated a Sanskrit treatise
on loathsome diseases into Arabic (cf preface to the
edition of the original, p. xxi. No. 18), but we do not
know whether before the “Ivécxa or after it.

What first induced Alberuni to write the "Ivéica was
not the wish to enlighten his countrymen on Indian
astronomy in particular, but to present them with an
impartial description of the Indian theological and
philosophical doctrines on a broad basis, with every
detail pertaining to them. So he himself says both at
the beginning and end of the book. Perhaps on this
subject he could give his readers more perfectly new
information than on any other, for, according to his
own statement, he had in this only one predecessor,
Aleranshahrf. Not knowing him or that authority
which he follows, ae. Zurkain, we cannot form ‘an
estimate as to how far Alberuni’s strictures on them
(i. 7) are founded. Though there can hardly be any
doubt that Indian philosophy in one or other of its
principal forms had been communicated to the Arabs
already in the first period, it seems to have been some-
thing entirely new when Alberuni produced before his
compatriots or fellow-believers the Sdirkhya by Kapila,
and the Book of Patafjali in good Arabic translations.
It was this particular work which admirably qualified
him to write the corresponding chapters of the Ivévxd.
The philosophy of India seems to have fascinated his
mind, and the noble ideas of the Bhagavadgitd pro-
bably came near to the standard of his own persua-.
sions. Perhaps it was he who first introduced this
gem of Sanskrit literature into the world of Muslim
readers,

As regards the Puranas, Alberuni was perhaps the
first Muslim who took up the study of them. At all
events, we cannot trace any acquaintance with them on
the part of the Arabs before his time. Of, the litera-


PREFACE, XXXIX


ture of fables, he knew the Pafcatantra in the Arabic
edition of Ibn Almukaffa.

Judging Alberuni in relation to his predecessors, we
come to the conclusion that his work formed a most
marked progress. His description of Hindu philosophy
was probably unparalleled. His system of chronology
and astronomy was more complete and accurate than
had ever before been given. His communications from
the Puranas were probably entirely new to his readers,
as also the important chapters on hterature, manners,
festivals, actual geography, and the much-quoted chap-
ter on historic chronology. He once quotes Razi, with
whose works he was intimately acquainted, and some
Safi philosophers, but from neither of them could he
learn much about India.

In the following pages we give a list of the 3 His Sanslerit
books quoted in the ’Ivécca :— raul

Sources of the chapters on theology and philosophy :
Sdmkhya, by Kapila; Book of Pataiyjali; itd, 1.6. some
edition of the Bhagavadgttd.

He seems to have used more sources of a similar
nature, but he does not quote from them.

Sources of a Pauranic kind: Vishnu-Dharma, Vishnu-
Purdna, Matsya-Purdna, Vayu-Puréna, Aditya-Purdna,

Sources of the chapters on astronomy, chronology,
geography, and astrology: Pulisasiddhdnta ; Brahmna-
siddhanta, Khandakhddyaka, Uttarakhandakhddyaka,
by Brahmagupta; Commentary of the K handakhddyaka,
by Balabhadra, perhaps also some other work of his;
Lrihatsamhitad, Paicasiddhdntikd, Brihat -jdtakam,
Laghu-ydtakam, by Varibamihira; Commentary of the
Lrihatsairhitd, a book called Sr NRA (perhaps Sarva-
_ dhara), by Utpala, from Kashmir; a book by Aryabhata,
junior; Kar anasdra, by Vittesvara ; Karanatiuaka, by
Vijayanandin; Srtpdla; Book of the Ren (sic) Bhuvana-
kosa; Book of the Bréhman Bhattila ; Book of Durlabha,


xk


xl PREFACE.


from Multan; Book of Jivasarman; Book of Samaya;
Book of Auliatta (2), the son of Sahawi (?); Zhe Minor
Manasa, by Puficala; Sridhava (Sarvadhara ?), by
Mahadeva Candrabija; Calendar from Kashmir.

As regards some of these authors, Sripila, Jivagar-
man, Samaya (2), and Auliatta(?), the nature of the
quotations leaves it uncertain whether Alberuni quoted
from books of theirs or from oral communications which
he had received from them.

Source on medicine: Caraka, in the Arabic edition of
‘Ali Ibn Zain, from Tabaristan.

In the chapter on metrics, a lexicographic work by
one Haribhata (?), and regarding elephants a “ Book
on the Medicine of Elephants,” are quoted.

His communications from the Mahabharata and
Rémdyana, and the way in which he speaks of them,
do not give us the impression that he had these books
before him. He had some information of Jaina origin,
but does not mention his source (Aryabhata, jun. ?)
Once he quotes Manu’s Dharmasdstra, but in a manner
which makes me doubt whether he took the words
directly from the book itself.

The quotations which he has made from these sources
are, some of them, very extensive, e.g. those from the
Bhagavadgitéd. In the chapter on literature he men-
tions many more books than those here enumerated,
but does not tell us whether he made use of them for
the “Ivécca. Sometimes he mentions Hindu individuals
as his informants, eg. those from Somanath, 1.161, 165,
and from Kanoj, 1. 165; 11.

In Chapter i. the author speaks at large of the radical
difference between Muslims and Hindus in everything,
and tries to account for it both by the history of India
and by the pecuharities of the national character of its
inhabitants (i. 17 seg.) Everything in India is just

1 The places where mention of these books occurs are given in
Index I. Cf. also the annotations on single cases.


Greek مدق‎
other paral-
lels.


PREPACE. xli


the reverse of what it is in Islam, “and if ever a custom
of theirs resembles one of ours, it has certainly just the
opposite meaning” (i.179). Much more certainly than
to Alberuni, India would seem a land of wonders and
monstrosities to most of his readers. Therefore, in
order to show that there were other nations who held
and hold similar notions, he compares Greek philosophy,
chiefly that of Plato, and tries to illustrate Hindu
notions by those of the Greeks, and thereby to bring
them nearer to the understanding of his readers.

The role which Greek lterature plays in Alberuni’s
work in the distant country of the Paktyes and Gandhari
is a singular fact in the history of civilisation, Plato
before the doors of India, perhaps in India itself! <A
considerable portion of the then extant Greek literature
had found its way into the library of Alberuni, who
uses it in the most conscientious and appreciative way,
and takes from it choice passages to confront Greek
thought with Indian. And more than this: on the
part of his readers he seems to presuppose not only that
they were acquainted with them, but also gave them
the credit of first-rate authorities. Not knowing Greek
or Syriac, he read them in Arabic translations, some of
which reflect much credit upon their authors. The
books he quotes are these :—


Plato, Phedo.
Timeus, an edition with a commentary.


Leges. In the copy of it there was an appendix relating .


to the pedigree of Hippokrates.

Proclus, Commentary on Zimeus (different from the extant

one).

Aristotle, only short references to his Physica and Metaphysica.
Letter to Alexander.

Johannes Grammaticus, Contra Proclum.

Alexander of Aphrodisias, Commentary on Aristotle’s voy

akpoacts.

Apollonius of Tyana.

Porphyry, Liber historiarum philosophorum (?).

Ammonius.


PREFACE.‏ ءا


Aratus, Phenomena, with a commentary.


Galenus, Protrepticus.
mepl cuvSécews PapudKwv TaY KaTa 7010105٠


mepl cwSécews Papudkwy KaTa yevy.
Commentary on the Apophthegms of Hippokrates.
De indole anime. —
Book of the Proof.
Ptolemy, Almagest.
Geography.
Kitdb-almanshiradt.
Pseudo-Kallisthenes, Alexander romance.
Scholia to the Ars grammatica of Dionysius Thrax.
A synchronistic history, resembling in part that of Johannes
Malalas, in part the Chronicon of Eusebius. Cf. notes to i.
II2, 105.


The other analogies which he draws, not taken from
Greek, but from Zoroastrian, Christian, Jewish, Mani-
chean, and 5011 sources, are not very numerous. He
refers only rarely to Eranian traditions; cf Index II.
(Persian traditions and Zoroastrian). Most of the
notes on Christian, Jewish, and Manichzean subjects
may have been taken from the book of Eranshahri (cf.
his own words, 1. 6, 7), although he knew Christianity
from personal experience, and probably also from the
communications of his learned friends Abulkhair على‎
khammar and Abfi-Sahl Almasihi, both Christians from
the farther west (¢f. Chronologie Orientalischer Volker,
Linleitung, p. xxxii.). The interest he has in Mani’s
doctrines and books seems rather strange. We are not
acquainted with the history of the remnants of Mani-
cheism in those days and countries, but cannot help
thinking that the quotations from Mani’s “ Book of
Mysteries” and Thesaurus Vivificationis do not justify
Alberuni’s judgment in this direction. He seems to
have seen in them venerable documents of a high
antiquity, instead of the syncretistic ravings of a would-
be prophet.

That he was perfectly right in comparing the Sffi
philosophy—he derives the word from godia, 1. 33—


PREPACE. xliii


with certain doctrines of the Hindus is apparent to
any one who is aware of the essential identity of the
systems of the Greek Neo-Pythagoreans, the Hindu
Vedanta philosophers, and the Stfis of the Muslim
world. The authors whom he quotes, Abii Yazid
Albistimt and Abti Bakr Alshibli, are well-known
representatives of Sufism. Cf. note to i. 87, 88.

As far as the present state of research allows one to
judge, the work of Alberuni has not been continued.
In astronomy he seems by his Canon Masudicus to
represent the height, and at the same time the end, of
the independent development of this science among the
Arabs. But numerous scholars toiled on in his wake,
whilst in the study of India, and for the translation of
the standard works of Sanskrit literature, he never had
a successor before the days of the Emperor Akbar.
There followed some authors who copied from his
-"Ivétxa, but there was none who could carry on the
work in fis spirit and method after he had died,
eichteen years after the composition of the "Ivé.kca.
We must here mention two authors who lived not long
after him, under the same dynasty, and probably in the
same place, Ghazna, viz., Gardézi (cf note to 11. 6), who
wrote between A.D. 1049 and 1052, and Muhammad
Ibn ‘Ukail, who wrote between A.D. 1089 and 1099
(cf. note to i. 5). OF the later authors who studied
Alberuni’s ’Ivécca and copied from it, the most notorious
is Rashid-aldin, who transferred, eg. the whole geogra-
phical Chapter xviii. into his huge chronicle.

When Alberuni entered India, times were not favour- India at the
able for opening friendly relations with native scholars. time.
India recoiled from the touch of the impure barbarians.
The Pala dynasty, once ruling over Kabulistan and the
Panjab, had disappeared from the theatre of history, and
their former dominions were in the firm grasp of King
Mahmfid and under the administration of his slaves,
of Turkish descent. The princes of North-Western


xliv PREFACE.


India had been too narrow-minded, too blind in their
self-conceit, duly to appreciate the danger threatening
from Ghazna, and too little politic in due time to unite
for a common defence and repulse of the enemy.
Single-handed Anandapala had had to fight it out, and
had succumbed ; but the others were to follow, each one
in his turn. All those who would not bear the yoke
of the mlecchas fled and took up their abode in the
neighbouring Hindu empires.

Kashmir was still independent, and was hermetically
sealed to all strangers (i. 206). Anandapala had fled
there. Mahmifd had tried the conquest of the coun-
try, but failed. About the time when Alberuni wrote,
the rule passed from the hands of Sangramadeva,
A.D, 1007-1030, into those of Anantadeva, A.D. 1030-
1082.

Central and Lower Sindh were rarely meddled with
by Mahmitd. The country seems to have been split
into minor principalities, ruled by petty Muslim
dynasties, ike the Karmatian dynasty of Multan, de-
posed by Mahmtd.

In the conditions of the Gurjara empire, the capital of
which was Anhilvara or Pattan, the famous expedition
of Mahmid to Somanath, A.D. 1025, in some ways re-
sembling that of Napoleon to Moscow, does not seem
to have produced any lasting changes. The country
was under the sway of the Solanki dynasty, who in
A.D, 980 had taken the place of the Calukyas, King
Camunda fled before Mahmfd, who raised another
prince of the same house, Devagarman, to the throne;
but soon after we find a son of Cémunda, Durlabha, as
king of Gurjara till A.D. 1037.

Malava was ruled by the Prdimiara dynasty, who,
like the kings of Kashmir, had afforded a refuge toa
fugitive prince of the Pala dynasty of Kabulistan.
Bhojadeva of Malava, ruling between A.D. 997 and
1053, 15 mentioned by Alberuni. His court at Dhar,


PREFACE. xlv


where he had gone from Ujjain, was a rendezvous of
the scholars of the timp.

Kanoj formed at *.at time part of the realm of the
Pala princes of 2 .uda or Bengal, who resided in
Mongir. During’ che reign of Rajyapala, Kanoj had
been plundered’ and destroyed by Mahmtid, a.p. 1017,
in consequence of which a new city farther away from
the mlecchas, Bari, had been founded, but does not ~
seem to have grown to any importance. Residing in
this place, the King Mahipala tried about A.D. 1026 to
consolidate and to extend his empire. Both these rulers
are said to have been Buddhists. Cf. Kern, Geschichte
des Buddhismus in Indien, 11. 544.

The centres of Indian learning were Benares and
Kashmir, both maccessible to a barbarian like Alberuni
(i. 22), but in the parts of India under Muslim admini-
stration he seems to have found the pandits he wanted,
perhaps also at Ghazna among the prisoners of war.

India, as far as known to Alberuni, was Brahmanic, The aut
not Buddhistic. In the first half of the eleventh cen- dhism.
tury all traces of Buddhism in Central Asia, Khurasan,
Afghanistan, and North-Western India seem to have
disappeared ; and it is a remarkable fact that a man of
the inquisitive mind of Alberuni knew scarcely any-
thing at all about Buddhism, nor had any means for
procuring information on the subject. His notes on
Buddhism are very scanty, all derived from the book
of Eranshahri, who, in his turn, had copied the book of
one Zurkan, and this book he seems to indicate to have
been a bad one. Cf 1. 7, 249, 326.

Buddha is said to be the author of a book called
Cidaémant (not Gidhdmana, as I have written, i. 158),
ue. Jewel, on the knowledge of the supranaturalistic
world.

The Buddhists or Shamanians, 1.0. Sramana, are called
Muhammira, which I translate the red-robe wearers,
taking it for identical with raktapata. Cf. note tol. 21.


xlvi PREFACE.


Mentioning the trinity of the Buddhistic system,
buddha, dharma, saigha, he calls Buddha Buddhodana,
which is a mistake for something like the son of Suddho-
dana. Cf. note to i. 40 and i. 380, which latter passage
is probably derived from the Vishnu-Dharma (on which
vide note to 1. 54).

Of Buddhistic authors there are mentioned Candra,
the grammarian, 1. 135 (¢f Kern, eschichte des Bud-
dhismus in Indien, 11. 520), Sugriva, the author of an
astronomical work, and a pupil of his, 1.

Of the manners and customs of the Buddhists, only
their practice of disposing of their dead by throwing
them into flowing water is mentioned, 11. 169.

Alberuni speaks (ii. 11) of a building erected by King
Kanishka in Peshavar, and called Kanishkacattya, as
existing in his time, most likely identical with that
sttipa which he is reported to have built in consequence
of a prophecy of no less a person than Buddha himself.
Cf. Kern, /.c.,i1. 187. The word bthdr, 2.6. vihdra, which
Alberuni sometimes uses 12 the meaning of temple and
the like, is of Buddhistic origin. Cf Kern, l.¢., 11. 57.

Among the various kinds of writing used in India, he
enumerates as the last one the “ Bhatkshuki, used 1
Udunpir in Pirvadesa. This last 1s the writing of
Buddha,” i. 17 3. Was this Udunpfir (we may also read
Udannapir) the Buddhistic monastery in Magadha,
Udandapuri, that was destroyed by the Muslims, A.D.
1200? Of. Kern, /.¢., il. 545.

The kosmographic views of the Buddhists, as given
by Alberuni, i. 249, 326, ought to be examined as to
their origin, Perhaps it will be possible to point out
the particular Buddhistic book whence they were taken.

He speaks twice of an antagonism between Buddha
and Zoroaster.

If Alberuni had had the same opportunity for travel-
ling in India as Hiouen-Tsang had, he would easily
have collected plenty of information on Buddhism.


PREFACE. xl vii


Considering the meagreness of his notes on this subject,
we readily believe that he never found a Buddhistic
book, and never knew a Buddhist “from whom I might
have learned their theories,” 1.249. His Brahman pan-
dits probably knew enough of Buddhism, but did not
choose to tell him.

Lastly, India, as known to Alberuni, was in matters
of religion Vishnuitic (vatshnava), not Sivaitic (Sativa).
Vishnu, or Narayana, is the first god in the pantheon of
his Hindu informants and literary authorities, whilst
Siva is only incidentally mentioned, and that not always
in a favourable manner. This indicates a remarkable
change in the religious history of those countries. For
the predecessors of Mahmiid in the rule over Kabulistan
and the Panjab, the Pala dynasty, were worshippers of
Siva (cf. Lassen, Indische Alterthumskunde, 3, 895), as
we may judge from their coins, adorned with the image
of Nanda, the ox of Siva, and from the etymology of
their names. Cf note to 11. 13,and Lassen, J. ¢.,; 3, 915.
The image of Nanda reappears a second time on the
coins of the last of the descendants of King Mahmtid on
the throne of Ghazna.


CONCLUSION.


It was in the summer of 1883 that I began to work at
the edition and translation of the Ivécca, after having
fulfilled the literary duties resulting from my journey
in Syria and Mesopotamia in 1879 and 1880. A copy
of the Arabic manuscript had been prepared in 1872,
and collated in Stambul in the hot summer months of
1873. . [

In order to test my comprehension of the book, I
translated it into German from beginning to end between
February 1883 and February 1884. In the summer of
the latter year the last hand was laid to the constitu-
tion of the Arabic text as it was to be printed.


شك سوسم hea‏


xl vill PREFACE.


In 1885-86 the edition of the Arabic original was
printed. At the same time I translated the whole book
a second time, into English, finishing the translation of
every single sheet as the original was carried through
the press.

In 1887 and the first half of 1888 the English trans-
lation, with annotations and indices, was printed.

My work during all these years was not uninter-
rupted.

Translating an Arabic book, written in the style of
Alberuni, into English, is, for a person to whom English
is not his mother-tongue, an act of temerity, which,
when I was called upon to commit it, gravely affected
my conscience to such a degree that I began to falter,
and seriously thought of giving up the whole thing alto-
gether. But then there rose up before ‘my mind’s
eye” the venerable figure of old MacGuckin de Slane,
and as he had been gathered to his fathers, I could not
cet back the word I had given him. Cf preface to the
edition of the Arabic text, p. 7111. Assuredly, to do
justice to the words of Alberuni would require a com-
mand over English like that of Sir Theodore Martin,
the translator of “ Faust,’ or Chenery, the translator of
Hartri.

As regards my own translation, I can only say I have
tried to find common sense in the author’s language,
and to render it as clearly as I could. In this I was
greatly assisted by my friend the Rev. Robert Gwynne,
Vicar of St. Mary’s, Soho, London, whose training in
Eastern languages and literature qualified him to co-
operate in revising the entire manuscript and correcting
the proof sheets.

Perhaps it will not be superfluous to point out to the
reader who does not know Arabic that this language
sometimes exhibits sentences perfectly clear as to the
meaning of every single word and the syntactic construc-
tion, and nevertheless admitting of entirely different


PREFACE. xlix


interpretations. Besides, a first translator who steers
out on such a sea, like him who first tries to explain a
difficult, hardly legible inscription, exposes himself to
many dangers which he would easily have avoided had
kind fortune permitted him to follow in the wake of
other explorers. Under these circumstances, I do not
flatter myself that I have caught the sense of the author
everywhere, and I warn the reader not to take a trans-
lation, in particular a first translation, from Arabic
ior more than it is. It is nothing absolute, but only
relative in many respects; and if an Indianist does not
find good Indian thought in my translation, I would
advise him to consult the next Arabic philologist he
meets. If the two can obtain a better insight into the
subject-matter, they are very likely to produce a better
rendering of the words.

My annotations do not pretend to be a running com-
mentary on the book, for that cannot be written except
by a professed Indianist. They contain some informa-
tion as to the sources used by Alberuni, and as to those
materials which guided me in translating. On the
phonetic peculiarities of the Indian words as transcribed
by Alberuni, the reader may compare a treatise of mine
called Indo-Arabische Studien, and presented to the
Royal Academy of Berlin on 21st June of this year.

My friend Dr. Robert Schram, of the University of
Vienna, has examined all the mathematical details of
chronology and astronomy. The results of his studies
are presented to the reader in the annotations signed
with hisname. All this is Dr. Schram’s special domain,
in which he has no equal. My thanks are due to him
for lending me his help in parts of the work where my
own attempts at verification, after prolonged exertions
in the same direction, proved to be insufficient.

Of the two indices, the former contains all words of
Indian origin occurring in the book, some pure Sanskrit,
some yernacular, others in the form exhibited by the


1 PREFACE.


Arabic manuscript, howsoever faulty it may be. The
reader will perhaps here and there derive some advan-
tage from comparing the index of the edition of the
Arabic original. The second index contains names of
persons and places, &c., mostly of non-Indian origin.

It was the Committee of the Oriental Translation
Fund, consisting at the time of Osmond de Beauvoir
Priaulx, Edward Thomas, James Fergusson, Reinhold
Rost, and Theodore Goldstiicker, who first proposed to
me to translate the "Ivé:ca. Thomas, Goldstiicker, and
Fergusson are beyond the reach of human words, but
to O. de Beauvoir Priaulx, Esq., and to Dr. Rost, I desire
to express my sincerest gratitude for the generous help
and the untiring interest which they have always ac-
corded to me, though so many years have rolled on since
I first pledged to them my word. Lastly, Her Majesty’s
India Office has extended its patronage from the edition
of the Arabic original also to this edition of the work in
an English garb,

Of the works of my predecessors, the famous publica-
tion of Reinaud, the Mémoire géographique, historique et
scientifique sur 1 Inde, Paris, 1849, has been most useful
to me, Cf. on this and the labours of my other pre-
decessors § 2 of the preface to the edition of the Arabic
original.

The Sanskrit alphabet has been transliterated in the
following way :—a, 4d, 1, 4, u, i—r1, ai, au—k, kh, g, gh,
n—c, ch, J, jh, i—t, th, d, dh, n—t, th, d, dh, n—p, ph,
b, bh, m—y, 7, l, v—8S, sh, 8, h.


EDWARD SACHAU.


BERLIN, August 4, 1888.


TABLE OF CONTENTS.


(For Alberunt’s Synopsis of the Single Chapters of the Book,
vide pp. 9-16.)


——}4——.


VOL. PAGE
I. 3. AUTHOR’S PREFACE.


9. SYNOPSIS OF THE EIGHTY CHAPTERS.
17. CHAPTER I., AUTHOR’S SPECIAL INTRODUCTION.
27. CHAPTERS II.-XI., ON RELIGION, PHILOSOPHY, AND
RELATED SUBJECTS.
125. CHAPTERS XII.-XVII., ON LITERATURE, METROLOGY,
USAGES, AND RELATED SUBJECTS.


196. CHAPTERS XVIII.-XXXI., ON GEOGRAPHY, COSMO-
GRAPHY, AND ASTRONOMY.


319 TO VOL. IL. Pp. 129. CHAPTERS XXXII.-LXII., on Curo-
NOLOGY, ASTRONOMY, AND RELATED SUBJECTS.


€
11. 130, CHAPTERS LXIII.-LXXIX., oN MANNERS AND Cus-
TOMS, FESTIVALS, AND RELATED SUBJECTS.


211, CHAPTER LXXX., ON ASTROLOGY.
247. ANNOTATIONS OF THE TRANSLATOR.
403-431. INDICES.


ALBERUNI’S INDIA


AN


ACCURATE DESCRIPTION OF ALL CATEGORIES
OF HINDU THOUGHT,


AS WELL THOSE WHICH ARE ADMISSIBLE AS


THOSE WHICH MUST BE REFECTED.


COMPOSED BY


"ABU-ALRATHAN MUHAMMAD IBN *AHMAD
A A A
ALBERUNL.


VOlLval. e A


Page 2.


rt. On tra-
dition, hear-
say and eye-
witness.

2, The dif-
ferent kinds
of reporters.

3. Praise
of truthful-
ness,


PREFACE.


IN THE NAME OF GOD, THE COMPASSIONATE, THE
MERCIFUL.


No one will deny that in questions of historic authen-
ticity hearsay does not equal eye-witness ; for in the latter
‘the eye of the observer apprehends the substance of that
which is observed, both in the time when and in the
place where it exists, whilst hearsay has-its peculiar
drawbacks. But for these, it would even be preferable
to eye-witness ; for the object of eye-witness can only be
actual momentary existence, whilst hearsay comprehends
alike the present, the past, and the future, so as to apply
in a certain sense both to that which 7s and to that
which is not (t.e. which either has ceased to exist or


has not yet come into existence). Written tradition |


is one of the species of hearsay—we might almost say,
the most preferable. How could we know the history
of nations but for the everlasting monuments of the
pen ?

The tradition regarding an event which in itself does
not contradict either logical or physical laws will invari-
ably depend for its character as true or false upon the
character of the reporters, who are influenced by the
divergency of interests and all kinds of animosities
and antipathies between the various nations. We must
distinguish different classes of reporters.

One of them tells a lie, as intending to further an


4 PREPACE,


interest of his own, either by lauding his family or
nation, because he is one of them, or by attacking
the family or nation on the opposite side, thinking that
thereby he can gain his ends. In both cases he acts
from motives of objectionable cupidity and animosity.

Another one tells a lie regarding a class of people
whom he likes, as being under obligations to them, or
whom he hates because something disagreeable has
happened between them. Such a reporter is near akin
to the first-mentioned one, as he too acts from motives
of personal predilection and enmity.

Another tells a he because he is of such a base
nature as to aim thereby at some profit, or because he
is such a coward as to be afraid of telling the truth.

Another tells a lie because it is his nature to lie, and
he cannot do otherwise, which proceeds from the essen-
tial meanness of his character and the depravity of his
innermost being. _

Lastly, a man may tell a lie from ignorance, blindly
following others who told him.

If, now, reporters of this kind become so numerous
as to represent a certain body of tradition, or if in the
course of time they even come to form a consecutive
serles of communities or nations, both the first reporter
and his followers form the connecting links between
the hearer and the inventor of the he; and if the
connecting links are eliminated, there remains the
originator of the story, one of the various kinds of liars
we have enumerated, as the only person with whom we
have to deal.

That man only is praiseworthy who shrinks from a
le and always adheres to the truth, enjoying credit
even among liars, not to mention others.

It has been said in the Koran, “Speak the truth, even if
at were against yourselves” (Stira, 4, 134); and the Messiah
expresses himself in the Gospel to this effect: “ Do not
mind the fury of kings in speaking the truth before them.


Page 3.


PREFACE. 5


They only possess your body, but they have no power over


your soul” (cf. St. Matt. x. 18, 19,.28; St. Luke للد‎ 4).


In these words the Messiah orders us to exercise moral
courage. For what the crowd calls courage—bravely
dashing into the fight or plunging into an abyss of de-
struction—is only a species of courage, whilst the genus,
far above all species, is to scorn death, whether by word
or deed. | لم‎

Now as justice )0.6. being just) is a quality hked and
coveted for its own self, for its intrinsic beauty, the
same applies to truthfulness, except perhaps in the case
of such people as never tasted how sweet it is, or know
the truth, but deliberately shun it, like a notorious har
who once was asked if he had ever spoken the truth,
and gave the answer, “If I were not afraid to speak
the truth, I should say, no.” A Lar will avoid the path
of justice; he will, as matter of preference, side with
oppression and false witness, breach of confidence, fraudu-
lent appropriation of the wealth of others, theft, and all
the vices which serve to ruin the world and mankind,

When I once called upon the master “Abi-Sahl 1 onthe
‘Abd-Almun‘im Ibn ‘Alt Ibn Nth At-tiflist, may God Muslim”
strengthen him! 1 found that he blamed the tendency of Miia
the author of a book on the Mu'tazila sect to misrepresent ا‎
their 126017. For, according to them, God is omniscient Tk weer
of himself, and this dogma that author had expressed in Foserd tthe

indus.


such away as to say that God has no knowledge (like criticism of


6 6 the book of

the knowledge of man), thereby misleading uneducated pranshahri.
: : 3 Til. Bérani

people to imagine that, according to the Muttazilites, asccato


write a book


God is ignorant. Praise be to God, who is far above all on the sub-


such and similar unworthy descriptions! Thereupon I 7 ye


pointed out to the master that precisely the same method *3i432""
is much in fashion among those who undertake the task
of giving an account of religious and philosophical


systems from which they slightly differ or to which they


are entirely opposed. Such misrepresentation is easily .


detected in a report about dogmas comprehended within


——
i


6 PREFACE.


the frame of one single religion, because they are closely
related and blended with each other. On the other hand,
you would have great difficulty in detecting it in a
report about entirely foreign systems of thought totally
differing both in principle and details, for such a research
is rather an out-of-the-way one, and there are few means


of arriving at a thorough comprehension of it. The ~
same tendency prevails throughout our whole literature —


on philosophical and religious sects. If such an author
is not alive to the requirements of a strictly scientific
method, he will procure some superficial information
which will satisfy neither the adherents of the doctrine
in question nor those who really know it. In sucha
case, if he be an honest character, he will simply
retract and feel ashamed; but if he be so base as not to
give due honour to truth, he will persist in litigious
wrangling for his own original standing-point. If, on
the contrary, an author has the right method, he will do
his utmost to deduce the tenets of a sect from their
legendary lore, things which people tell him, pleasant
enough to listen to, but which he would never dream of
taking for true or believing.

In order to illustrate the point of our conversation,
one of those present referred to the religions and doc-
trines of the Hindus by way of an example. There-
upon I drew their attention to the fact that everything
which exists on this subject in our literature is second-
hand information which one has copied from the other,
a farrago of materials never sifted by the sieve of
critical examination. Of all authors of this class, I know
only one who had proposed to himself to give a simple
and exact report of the subject sine 170 ac studto, viz.
"Abti-alabbas Aléraénshahri. He himself did not believe
in any of the then existing religions, but was the sole
believer in a religion invented by himself, which he
tried to propagate. He has given a very good account
of the doctrines of the Jews and Christians as well as


Page 4.


PREFACE. 7


of the contents of both the Thora and the Gospel.
Besides, he furnishes us with a most excellent account
of the Manicheans, and of obsolete religions of bygone
times which are mentioned in their books. But when
he came in his book to speak of the Hindus and the
Buddhists, his arrow missed the mark, and in the latter
١ part he went astray through hitting upon the book of
1 Zarkin, the contents of which he incorporated in his
" own work. That, however, which he has not taken
from Zarkdn, he himself has heard from common people
among Hindus and Buddhists.

At a subsequent period the master ’Abti-Sahl studied
the books in question a second time, and when he found
the matter exactly as I have here described it, he incited
‘me to write down what I know about the Hindus as a
help to those who want to discuss religious questions
with them, and as a repertory of information to those
who want to associate with them, In order to please
him I have done so, and written this book on the
doctrines of the Hindus, never making any unfounded
imputations against those, our religious antagonists, and
at the same time not considering it inconsistent with
my duties as a Muslim to quote their own words at full
lencth when I thought they would contribute to eluci-
date a subject. 11 the contents of these quotations
happen to be utterly heathenish, and the followers of the
truth, v.c. the Muslims, find them objectionable, we can
only say that such is the belief of the Hindus, and that
they themselves are best qualified to defend it.

This book is not a polemical one. I shall not produce
the arguments of our antagonists in order to refute such
of them as I believe to be in the wrong. My book is
nothing but به‎ simple historic record of facts. I shall
place before the reader the theories of the Hindus
exactly as they are, and I shall mention in connection
with them similar theories of the Greeks in order to
show the relationship existing between them. Jor the


8 PREFACE.


Greek philosophers, although aiming at truth in the
abstract, never in all questions of popular bearing rise
much above the customary exoteric expressions and
tenets both of their religion and law. Besides Greek
ideas we shall only now and then mention those of the
Stifis or of some one or other Christian sect, because in
their notions regarding the transmigration of souls and
the pantheistic doctrine of the unity of God with crea-
tion there is much in common between these systems.

I have already translated two books into Arabic, one
about the origines and a description of all created
beings, called Sdmkhya, and another about the emanci-
pation of the soul from the fetters of the body, called
1 0101/0/1 (Pdtatyjala ?). These two books contain most
of the elements of the belief of the Hindus, but not
all the single rules derived therefrom. I hope that the
present book will enable the reader to dispense with
these two earlier ones, and with other books of the same
kind; that it will give a sufficient representation of the
subject, and will enable him to make himself thoroughly
acquainted with it—God willing!


TABLE OF CONTENTS.


CHAPTER I.


ON THE HINDUS IN GENERAL, AS AN INTRODUCTION TO OUR ACCOUNT Page 5.
OF THEM.


CHAPTER II.


ON THE BELIEF OF THE HINDUS IN GOD.


GHAPTER IIT:

ON THE HINDU BELIEF AS TO CREATED THINGS, BOTH “ INTELLIGIBILIA ”’
AND “ SENSIBILIA.”
CHAPTER IV.

FROM WHAT CAUSE ACTION ORIGINATES, AND HOW THE SOUL IS CON-.


NECTED WITH MATTER.


CHAPTER V.


ON THE STATE OF THE SOULS, AND THEIR MIGRATIONS THROUGH THE
WORLD IN THE METEMPSYCHOSIS.


CHAPTER VI.


ON THE DIFFERENT WORLDS, AND ON THE PLACES OF RETRIBUTION IN
PARADISE AND HELL.


CHAPTER VII.


ON THE NATURE OF LIBERATION FROM THE WORLD, AND ON THE PATH
LEADING THERETO.


10 CONTENTS.


CHAPTER VIII.


ON THE DIFFERENT CLASSES OF CREATED BEINGS, AND ON THEIR NAMES.


CHAPTER IX.
ON THE CASTES, CALLED “COLOURS” (VARNA), AND ON THE CLASSES
BELOW THEM.
CHAPTER X.


ON THE SOURCE OF THEIR RELIGIOUS AND CIVIL LAW, ON PROPHETS,
AND ON THE QUESTION WHETHER SINGLE LAWS CAN BE ABROGATED
OR NOT.


CHAPTER XI.


ABOUT THE BEGINNING OF IDOL-WORSHIP, AND A DESCRIPTION OF THE
INDIVIDUAL IDOLS.


CHAPTER XII.


ON THE VEDA, THE PURANAS, AND OTHER KINDS OF THEIR NATIONAL
LITERATURE,


CHAPTER XIII.


THEIR GRAMMATICAL AND METRICAL LITERATURE.


CHAPTER XIV.


HINDU LITERATURE IN THE OTHER SCIENCES—ASTRONOMY, ASTROLOGY,
ETC.


CHAPTER XV.


NOTES ON HINDU METROLOGY, INTENDED TO FACILITATE THE UNDER-
STANDING OF ALL KINDS OF MEASUREMENTS WHICH OCCUR IN
THIS BOOK.

CHAPTER XVI.


NOTES ON THE WRITING OF THE HINDUS, ON THEIR ARITHMETIC AND
RELATED SUBJECTS, AND ON CERTAIN STRANGE MANNERS AND
CUSTOMS OF THEIRS.


CHAPTER XVIL


ON HINDU SCIENCES WHICH PREY ON THE IGNORANCE OF PEOPLE.


CONTENTS. II


CHAPTER XVIII.


VARIOUS NOTES ON THEIR COUNTRY, THEIR. RIVERS, AND THEIR OCEAN
—ITINERARIES OF THE DISTANCES BETWEEN THEIR SEVERAL
KINGDOMS, AND BETWEEN THE BOUNDARIES OF THEIR COUNTRY.


CHAPTER XIX.


ON THE NAMES OF THE PLANETS, THE SIGNS OF THE ZODIAC, THE
LUNAR STATIONS, AND RELATED SUBJECTS.


CHAPTER XX. Page 6.


ON THE BRAHMANDA.


CHAPTER XXI.


DESCRIPTION OF EARTH AND HEAVEN ACCORDING TO THE RELIGIOUS
VIEWS OF THE HINDUS, BASED UPON THEIR TRADITIONAL LITERA-
TURE.


CHAPTER XXII.


TRADITIONS RELATING TO THE POLE.


CHAPTER XXIII.‏ . غ


ON MOUNT MERU ACCORDING TO THE BELIEF OF THE AUTHORS OF THE
PURANAS AND OF OTHERS.


CHAPTER XXIV.


TRADITIONS OF THE PURANAS REGARDING EACH OF THE SEVEN DVIPAS.


CHAPTER XXV.


ON THE RIVERS OF INDIA, THEIR SOURCES AND COURSES.


CHAPTER XXVI.


ON THE SHAPE OF HEAVEN AND EARTH ACCORDING TO THE HINDU
ASTRONOMERS.


CHAPTER XXVIII.


ii ON THE FIRST TWO MOTIONS OF THE UNIVERSE (THAT FROM EAST TO
WEST ACCORDING TO ANCIENT ASTRONOMERS, AND THE PRECESSION
OF THE EQUINOXES) BOTH ACCORDING TO THE HINDU ASTRONOMERS
rye AND THE AUTHORS OF THE PURANAS


سابك


12 CONTENTS.


CHAPTER XXVIII.


ON THE DEFINITION OF THE TEN’ DIRECTIONS.


CHAPTER XXIX.


DEFINITION OF THE INHABITABLE EARTH ACCORDING TO THE HINDUS.


CHAPTER XXX.


ON LANKA, OR THE CUPOLA OF THE EARTH.


CHAPTER XXXI.


ON THAT DIFFERENCE OF VARIOUS PLACES WHICH WE CALL THE
DIFFERENCE OF LONGITUDE.


CHAPTER XXXII.


ON THE NOTIONS OF DURATION AND TIME IN GENERAL, AND ON THE
CREATION OF THE WORLD AND ITS DESTRUCTION.


CHAPTER XXXITI.


ON THE VARIOUS KINDS OF THE DAY OR NYCHTHEMERON, AND ON
DAY AND NIGHT IN PARTICULAR.


CHAPTER XXXIV.


ON THE DIVISION OF THE NYCHTHEMERON INTO MINOR PARTICLES OF
TIME.


CHAPTER XXXV.


ON THE DIFFERENT KINDS OF MONTHS AND YEARS.


CHAPTER XXXVI.


ON- THE FOUR MEASURES OF TIME CALLED MANA.


CHAPTER XXXVII.


ON THE PARTS OF THE MONTH AND THE YEAR.


CHAPTER XXXVIIL.


ON THE VARIOUS MEASURES OF TIME COMPOSED OF DAYS, THE LIFE OF
BRAHMAN INCLUDED.


CONTENTS. 13


CHAPTER XXXIX.


ON MEASURES OF TIME WHICH ARE LARGER THAN THE LIFE OF
BRAHMAN.


CHAPTER XL.


ON THE SAMDHI, THE INTERVAL BETWEEN TWO PERIODS OF TIME,
FORMING THE CONNECTING LINK BETWEEN THEM.


CHAPTER XII.


DEFINITION OF THE TERMS “KALPA’’ AND “CATURYUGA,” AND AN Page 7,
EXPLICATION OF THE ONE BY THE OTHER.


CHAPTER XLII.


ON THE DIVISION OF THE CATURYUGA INTO YUGAS, AND THE DIFFERENT
OPINIONS REGARDING THE LATTER.


CHAPTER XLIII.


A DESCRIPTION OF THE FOUR YUGAS, AND OF ALL THAT IS EXPECTED
TO TAKE PLACE AT THE END OF THE FOURTH YUGA.


CHAPTER XLIV.


ON THE MANVANTARAS.


CHAPTER XLV.


ON THE CONSTELLATION OF THE GREAT BEAR,


CHAPTER XLVI.


ON NARAYANA, HIS APPEARANCE AT DIFFERENT TIMES, AND HIS
NAMES.


CHAPTER XLVII.


ON VASUDEVA AND THE WARS OF THE BHARATA.


CHAPTER XLVIITI.


AN EXPLANATION OF THE MEASURE OF AN AKSHAUHINI.


CHAPTER XLIX.


A SUMMARY DESCRIPTION OF THE ERAS. |


14 CONTENTS.


CHAPTER L.


HOW MANY STAR-CYCLES THERE ARE BOTH IN A “KALPA” AND IN A
6“ CATURYUGA.””


CHAPTER LI.


AN EXPLANATION OF THE TERMS “ ADHIMASA,” “ UNARATRA,” AND THE
‘““AHARGANAS,” AS REPRESENTING DIFFERENT SUMS OF DAYS.


CHAPTER LILI.


ON THE CALCULATION OF “AHARGANA” IN GENERAL, THAT IS, THE
RESOLUTION OF YEARS AND MONTHS INTO DAYS, AND, VICE VERSA,
THE COMPOSITION OF YEARS AND MONTHS OUT OF DAYS.


CHAPTER LIITI.


ON THE AHARGANA, OR THE RESOLUTION OF YEARS INTO MONTHS,
ACCORDING TO SPECIAL RULES WHICH ARE ADOPTED IN THE
CALENDARS FOR CERTAIN DATES OR MOMENTS OF TIME.


CHAPTER LIV.


ON THE COMPUTATION OF THE MEAN PLACES OF THE PLANETS.


CHAPTER LV.


ON THE ORDER OF THE PLANETS, THEIR DISTANCES AND SIZES.


CHAPTER LVI.


ON THE STATIONS OF THE MOON.


CHAPTER LVII.


ON THE HELIACAL RISINGS OF THE STARS, AND ON THE CEREMONIES
AND RITES WHICH THE HINDUS PRACTISE AT SUCH A MOMENT.


CHAPTER LVIII.


‘HOW EBB AND FLOW FOLLOW EACH OTHER IN THE OCEAN.


CHAPTER LIX,


ON THE SOLAR AND LUNAR ECLIPSES,


CONTENTS. 1s


CHAPTER LX.


ON THE PARVAN,


CHAPTER LXI.


١ ON THE DOMINANTS OF THE DIFFERENT MEASURES OF TIME IN BOTH
RELIGIOUS AND ASTRONOMICAL RELATIONS, AND ON CONNECTED
SUBJECTS.


CHAPTER LXII.


ON THE SIXTY YEARS-SAMVATSARA, ALSO CALLED “SHASHTYABDA.” Page 8.


CHAPTER LXIII.


ON THAT WHICH ESPECIALLY CONCERNS THE BRAHMANS, AND WHAT
THEY ARE OBLIGED TO DO DURING THEIR WHOLE LIFE.


CHAPTER LXIV.


ON THE RITES AND CUSTOMS WHICH THE OTHER CASTES, BESIDES THE
BRAHMANS, PRACTISE DURING THEIR LIFETIME,


CHAPTER LXV.


ON THE SACRIFICES.


CHAPTER LXVI.


ON PILGRIMAGE AND THE VISITING OF SACRED PLACES.


CHAPTER LXVII.


ON ALMS, AND HOW A MAN MUST SPEND WHAT HE EARNS.


CHAPTER LXVIII.


ON WHAT IS ALLOWED AND FORBIDDEN IN EATING AND DRINKING.


CHAPTER LXIX.


ON MATRIMONY, THE MENSTRUAL COURSES, EMBRYOS, AND CHILDBED.


CHAPTER LXX.,


ON LAWSUITS,


16 CONTENTS.


CHAPTER LXXL


ON PUNISHMENTS AND EXPIATIONS.


CHAPTER LXXII.


ON INHERITANCE, AND WHAT CLAIM THE DECEASED PERSON HAS ONS IT.


CHAPTER LXXIITI.


ABOUT WHAT IS ‘DUE TO THE BODIES OF THE DEAD AND OF THE LIVING
(THAT IS, ABOUT BURYING AND SUICIDE).


CHAPTER LXXIV.


ON FASTING, AND THE VARIOUS KINDS OF IT.


CHAPTER LXXYV.


ON THE DETERMINATION OF THE FAST-DAYS.


CHAPTER LXXVI.


ON THE FESTIVALS AND FESTIVE DAYS.


CHAPTER LXXVII.


ON DAYS WHICH ARE HELD IN SPECIAL VENERATION, ON LUCKY AND
UNLUCKY TIMES, AND ON SUCH TIMES AS ARE PARTICULARLY
FAVOURABLE FOR ACQUIRING IN THEM BLISS IN HEAVEN.


CHAPTER LXXVIII.


ON THE KARANAS.


CHAPTER LXXIX.


ON THE YOGAS.


CHAPTER LXXX.


ON THE INTRODUCTORY PRINCIPLES OF HINDU ASTROLOGY, WITH A
SHORT DESCRIPTION OF THEIR METHODS OF ASTROLOGICAL CAL-
CULATIONS.


CHAPTER I.


ON THE HINDUS IN GENERAL, AS AN INTRODUCTION Page o.
TO OUR ACCOUNT OF THEM.


BEFORE entering on our exposition, we must form an Deserip:
. ٠. . ٠. 5 tion ot the
adequate idea of that which renders it so particularly dif- barriers


which se-


ficult to penetrate to the essential nature of any Indian parate the
subject. The knowledge of these difficulties will either ‘earache
facilitate the progress of our work, or serve as an apology evel minke
for any shortcomings of ours. For the reader must euiarly dit
always bear in mind that the Hindus entirely differ Muslim to
study any


from us in every respect, many a subject appearing Indian
intricate and obscure which would be perfectly clear لطن‎
if there were more connection between us. The barriers
which separate Muslims and Hindus rest on different
causes.

First, they differ from us in everything which other First rea-
nations have in common. And here we first mention ference of
the language, although the difference of language also 0
exists between other nations. If you want to conquer Ra
this difficulty (4c. to learn Sanskrit), you will not find“
it easy, because the language is of an enormous range,
both in words and inflections, something like the
Arabic, calling one and the, same thing by various
names, both original and derived, and using one and
the same word for a variety of subjects, which, in order
to be properly understood, must be distinguished from
each other by various qualifying epithets. For nobody
could distinguish between the various meanings of a
word unless he understands the context in which it


Oise B*


18 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


occurs, and its relation both to the following and the
preceding parts of the sentence. The Hindus, lke
other people, boast of this enormous range of their lan-
cuage, whilst in reality it is a defect.

Further, the language is divided into a neglected
vernacular one, only in use among the common people,
and a classical one, only in use among the upper and
educated classes, which is much cultivated, and subject
to the rules of grammatical inflection and etymology,
and to all the niceties of grammar and rhetoric.

Besides, some of the sounds (consonants) of which
the language is composed are neither identical with the
sounds of Arabic and Persian, nor resemble them in
any way. Our tongue and uvula could scarcely manage
to correctly pronounce them, nor our ears in hearing to
distinguish them from similar sounds, nor could we
transliterate them with our characters. It is very
difficult, therefore, to express an Indian word in our
writing, for in order to fix the pronunciation we must
change our orthographical points and signs, and must
pronounce the case-endings either according to the
common Arabic rules or according to special rules
adapted for the purpose.

Add to this that the Indian scribes are careless, and
do not take pains to produce correct and well-collated
copies. In consequence, the highest results of the
author’s mental development are lost by their negli-
gence, and his book becomes already in the first or
second copy so full of faults, that the text appears as
something entirely new, which neither a scholar nor
one familiar with the subject, whether Hindu or Muslim,
could any longer understand. It will sufficiently illus-
trate the matter if we tell the reader that we have
sometimes written down a word from the mouth of
Hindus, taking the greatest pains to fix its pronuncia-
tion, and that afterwards when we repeated it to them,
they had great difficulty in recognising it.


CHAPTER 1: 19


As in other foreign tongues, so also in Sanskrit, two
or three consonants may follow each other without an
intervening vowel—consonants which in our Persian
crammatical system are considered as having a hidden
vowel. Since most Sanskrit words and names begin
with such consonants without vowels, we find it very
difficult to pronounce them.

Besides, the scientific books of the Hindus are com-
posed in various favourite metres, by which they intend,
considering that the books soon become corrupted by
additions and omissions, to preserve them exactly as Page 10.
they are, in order to facilitate their being learned by
heart, because they consider as canonical only that
which is known by heart, not that which exists in
writing. Now it is well known that in all metrical
compositions there is much misty and constrained
phraseology merely intended to fill up the metre and
serving as a kind of patchwork, and this necessitates
a certain amount of verbosity. This is also one of
the reasons why a word has sometimes one meaning
and sometimes another.

From all this it will appear that the metrical form
of literary composition is one of the causes which
make the study of Sanskrit literature so particularly
difficult.

Secondly, they totally differ from us in religion, as Second rev.
we believe in nothing in which they believe, and vice religious»
versa. On the whole, there is very little disputing Stee:
about theological topics among themselves; at the
utmost, they fight with words, but they will never stake
their soul or body or their property on religious contro-
versy. On the contrary, all their fanaticism is directed
against those who do not belong to them—against all
foreigners. They call them mleccha, we, impure, and
forbid having any connection with them, be it by
intermarriage or any other kind of relationship, or


by sitting, eating, and drinking with them, because
1 : عد‎


20 ALBERUNDI’S INDIA.


thereby, they think, they would be polluted. They
consider as impure anything which touches the fire
and the water of a foreigner; and no household can
exist without these two elements. Besides, they never
desire that a thing which once has been polluted should
be purified and thus recovered, as, under ordinary cir-
cumstances, if anybody or anything has become unclean,
he or it would strive to regain the state of purity.
They are not allowed to receive anybody who does not
belong to them, even if he wished it, or was inclined to
their religion. This, too, renders any connection with
them quite impossible, and constitutes the widest gulf
between us and them.

In the third place, in all manners and usages they
differ from us to such a degree as to frighten their
children with us, with our dress, and our ways and
customs, and as to declare us to be devil’s breed, and
our doings as the very opposite of all that is good and
proper. By the bye, we must confess, in order to be»
just, that a similar depreciation of foreigners not only
prevails among us and the Hindus, but is common to
all nations towards each other. I recollect a Hindu
who wreaked his vengeance on us for the following
reason :—

Some Hindu king had perished at the hand of an
enemy of his who had marched against him from our
country. After his death there was born a child to
him, which succeeded him, by the name of Sagara.
On coming of age, the young man asked his mother
about his father, and then she told him what had hap-
pened, Now he was inflamed with hatred, marched
out of his country into the country of the enemy, and
plentifully satiated his thirst of vengeance upon them.
After having become tired of slaughtering, he compelled
the survivors to dress in our dress, which was meant as
an ignominious punishment for them. When I heard
of it, I felt thankful that he was gracious enough not


Third rea-
son: The


radical dif-


ference of


their man-


ners and
customs,


rea-
Aver-


Fourth
son:


CHAPTER Tf. 21


=


to compel us to Indianise ourselves and to adopt Hindu
dress and manners.
Another circumstance which increased the already


existing antagonism between Hindus and foreigners is sion of the


Buddhists


that the so-called Shamaniyya (Buddhists), though they towards the


countries of


cordially hate the Brahmans, still are nearer akin to the West,


whence they
had been


expelled.


them than to others. In former times, Khurasan, Persis,


‘Irak, Mosul, the country up to the frontier of Syria, Firstinroads


f the Mus-


was Buddhistic, but then Zarathustra went forth from tims into


India.


Page 11.


Adharbaijin and preached Magism in Balkh (Baktra).
His doctrine came into favour with Kine Gushtasp,
and his son 15162013780 spread the new faith both in
east and west, both by force and by treaties. He
founded fire-temples through his whole empire, from
the frontiers of China to those of the Greek empire.
The succeeding kings made their religion (v.e. Zoroas-
trianism) the obligatory state-religion for Persis and
‘Irak. In consequence, the Buddhists were banished
from those countries, and had to emigrate to the coun-
tries east of Balkh. There are some Magians up to the
present time in India, where they are called Maga.
From that time dates their aversion towards the coun-
tries of Khuraésan. But then came Islam; the Persian
empire perished, and the repugnance of the Hindus
against foreigners increased more and more when the
Muslims began to make their inroads into their country;
for Muhammad Ibn Elkasim Ibn Elmunabbih entered
Sindh from the side of Sijistan (Sakastene) and conquered
the cities of Bahmanwa and Milasthana, the former of
which he called Al-manstra, the latter Al-ma mira.
He entered India proper, and penetrated even as far as
Kanauj, marched through the country of Gandhara, and
on his way back, through the confines of Kashmir, some-
times fighting sword in hand, sometimes gaining his ends
by treaties, leaving to the people their ancient belief,
except in the case of those who wanted to become Mus-
lims. Ail these events planted a deeply rooted hatred
in their hearts.


22 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


eer Now in the following times no Muslim conqueror
oat 0 passed beyond the frontier of Kabul and the river Sindh


Mabmid.” until the days of the Turks, when they seized the power
in Ghazna under the Saémani dynasty, and the supreme
power fell to the lot of Nasir-addaula Sabuktagin.
This prince chose the holy war as his calling, and there-
fore called himself Al-ghdzt (1.e. warring on the road of
Allah). In the interest of his successors he constructed,
in order to weaken the Indian frontier, those roads
on which afterwards his son Yamin-addaula Mahmfd
marched into India during a period of thirty years and
more. God be merciful to both father and son! Mah-
21200 utterly ruined the prosperity of the country, and
performed there wonderful exploits, by which the Hindus
became like atoms of dust scattered in all directions,
and like a tale of old in the mouth of the people. Their
scattered remains cherish, of course, the most inveterate
aversion towards all Muslims. ‘This is the reason, too,
why Hindu sciences have retired far away from those
parts of the country conquered by us, and have fled to
places which our hand cannot yet reach, to Kashmir,
Benares, and other places. And there the antagonism
between them and all foreigners receives more and
more nourishment both from political and religious


sources.
لكين‎ In the fifth place, there are other causes, the mention-
self-concelt Ing ot which sounds like a satire—peculiarities of their
dus, and national character, deeply rooted in them, but manifest
0 to everybody. We can only say, folly is an illness for


foreign. | Which there is no medicine, and the Hindus believe that
there is no country but theirs, no nation like theirs, no
kings lke theirs, no religion like theirs, no science like
theirs. They are haughty, foolishly vain, self-conceited,
and stolid. They are by nature niggardly in communi-
cating that which they know, and they take the greatest
possible care to withhold it from men of another caste
among their own people, still much more, of course


Page 2


CHAPTER I. 23


from any foreigner. According to their belief, there is
no other country on earth but theirs, no other race of
man but theirs, and no created beings besides them have
any knowledge or science whatsoever. Their haughti-
ness is such that, if you tell them of any science or
scholar in Khurasan and Persis, they will think you to
be both an ignoramus and a liar. If they travelled and
mixed with other nations, they would soon change their
mind, for their ancestors were not as narrow-minded
as the present generation is. One of their scholars,
Varahamihira, in a passage where he calls on the people
to honour the Brahmans, says: “ The Greeks, though
impure, must be honowred, since they were trained in
sciences, and therern excelled others. What, then, are
we to say of a Brahman, if he combines with his
purity the height of scence?” In former times, the
Hindus used to acknowledge that the progress of science
due to the Greeks is much more important than that
which is due to themselves. But from this passage of
Varahamihira alone you see what a self-lauding man
he is, whilst he gives himself airs as doing justice to
others. At first I stood to their astronomers in the
relation of a pupil to his master, being a stranger
among them and not acquainted with their peculiar
national and traditional methods of science. On having
made some progress, I began to show them the elements
on which this science rests, to point out to them some
rules of logical deduction and the scientific methods of
all mathematics, and then they flocked together round
me from all parts, wondering, and most eager to learn
from me, asking me at the same time from what Hindu
master I had learnt those things, whilst in reality I
showed them what they were worth, and thought myselt
a great deal superior to them, disdaining to be put on a
level with them. They almost thought me to be a
sorcerer, and when speaking of me to their leading men
in their native tongue, they spoke of me as the sea or as


24 0: 418121 011:5 1


the water which is so acid that vinegar in comparison 8


sweet.

Personal = Now such is the state of things in India. I have

the author. found it very hard to work my way into the subject,
although I have a great liking for it, in which respect 1
stand quite alone in my time, and although I do not
spare either trouble or money in collecting Sanskrit
books from places where I supposed they were likely
to be found, and in procuring for myself, even from very
remote places, Hindu scholars who. understand them
and are able to teach me. What scholar, however, has
the same favourable opportunities of studying this sub-
ject as 1 have? That would be only the case with one
to whom the grace of God accords, what it did not
accord to me, a perfectly free disposal of his own doings
and goings; for it has never fallen to my lot in my own
doings and goings to be perfectly independent, nor to
be invested with sufficient power to dispose and to order
as I thought best. However, I thank God for that
which he has bestowed upon me, and which must be
considered as sufficient for the purpose.

The author The heathen Greeks, before the rise of Christianity,


declares his


intention of held much the same opinions as the Hindus; their


comparin
Grane educated classes thought much the same as those of
because of the Hindus; their common people held the same


their being


nearakin, idolatrous views as those of the Hindus. There-
and of their


strictly fore I like to confront the theories of the one nation
character as with those of the other simply on account of their
with those of close relationship, not in order to correct them. For
‘that which is not the truth (ve. the true belief or
monotheism) does not admit of any correction, and all
heathenism, whether Greek or Indian, is in its pith and
marrow one and the same belief, because it is only a
deviation from the truth. The Greeks, however, had
philosophers who, living in their country, discovered
and worked out for them the elements of science, not of


popular superstition, for it is the object of the upper


Page 13.


The author’s
method.


CHAPTER I. 25


classes to be guided by the results of science, whilst the
common crowd will always be inclined to plunge into
wrong-headed wrangling, as long as they are not kept
down by fear of punishment. Think of Socrates when
he opposed the crowd of his nation as to their idolatry
and did not want to call the stars gods! At once eleven
of the twelve judges of the Athenians agreed on a sen-
tence of death, and Socrates died faithful to the truth.

The Hindus had no men of this stamp both capable
and willing to bring sciences to a classical perfection.
Therefore you mostly find that even the so-called
scientific theorems of the Hindus are in a state of utter
confusion, devoid of any logical order, and in the last in-
stance always mixed up with the silly notions of the crowd,
ég. immense numbers, enormous spaces of time, and
all kinds of religious dogmas, which the vulgar belief
does not admit of being called into question. Therefore
it is a prevailing practice among the Hindus jurare in
verba magistri; and I can only compare their mathema-
tical and astronomical literature, as far as I know it, to
a mixture of pearl shells and sour dates, or of pearls
and dung, or of costly crystals and common pebbles.
Both kinds of things are equal in their eyes, since they
cannot raise themselves to the methods of a strictly
scientific deduction.

In most parts of my work I simply relate without
criticising, unless there be a special reason for doing so.
I mention the necessary Sanskrit names and technical
terms once where the context of our explanation de-
mands it. If the word is an orzginal one, the meaning
of which can be rendered in Arabic, I only use the
corresponding Arabic word; if, however, the Sanskrit
word be more practical, we keep this, trying to trans-
literate it as accurately as possible. If the word is a
secondary or derived one, but in general use, we also
keep it, though there be a corresponding term in Arabic,
but before using it we explain its signification. In


26 ؛'‎ ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


this way we have tried to facilitate the understanding
of the terminology.

Lastly, we observe that we cannot always in our
discussions strictly adhere to the geometrical method,
only referring to that which precedes and never to that
which follows, as we must sometimes introduce in a
chapter an unknown factor, the explanation of which
can only be given in a later part of the book, God’
helping us! ١


CHAPTER II.
ON THE BELIEF OF THE HINDUS IN GOD.


THE belief of educated and uneducated people differs in The nature
every nation; for the former strive to conceive abstract 00
ideas and to date general principles, whilst the latter
do not pass beyond the apprehension of the senses, and
are content with derived rules, without caring for de-
. tails, especially in questions of religion and law, regard-
ing which opinions and interests are divided.
The Hindus believe with regard to God that he is
one, eternal, without beginning and end, acting by free-
will, almighty, all-wise, living, giving life, ruling, pre-
serving; one who in his sovereignty is unique, beyond
all likeness and unlikeness, and that he does not re-
semble anything nor does anything resemble him. In
order to illustrate this we shall produce some extracts
from their literature, lest the reader should think that
our account is nothing but hearsay.
In the book of Patafjali the pupil asks: pan ee
“Who is the worshipped one, by the worship of whom Fatatjal.
blessing is obtained ?”
The master says:
“Tt is he who, being eternal and unique, does not for
his part stand in need of any human action for which
he might give as a recompense either a blissful repose,
which is hoped and longed for, or a troubled existence,
which is feared and dreaded. He is unattainable to
thought, being sublime beyond all unlikeness which is
abhorrent and all likeness which is sympathetic. He


28 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


by his essence knows from all eternity. Anowledge, in
the human sense of the term, has as its object that
which was unknown before, whilst not knowing does
not at any time or in any condition apply to God.”

Further the pupil speaks:

“Do you attribute to him other qualities besides
those you have mentioned ?”

The master says:

“He is height, absolute in the idea, not in space, for
he is sublime beyond all existence in any space. He
is the pure absolute good, longed for by every created
being. He is the knowledge free from the defilement
of forgetfulness and not-knowing.”

The pupil speaks:

“Do you attribute to him speech or not?”

The master says:

» As he knows, he no doubt also speaks.”

The pupil asks :

“Tf he speaks because he knows, what, then, is the
difference between him and the knowing sages who
have spoken of their knowing ?”

The master says:

“The difference between them is time, for they have
learned in time and spoken in time, after having been
not-knowing and not-speaking. By speech they have
transferred their knowledge to others. Therefore their
speaking and acquiring knowledge take place in time.
And as divine matters have no connection with time,
God is knowing, speaking from eternity. It was he
who spoke to Brahman, and to others of the first beings
in different ways. On the one he bestowed a book;
for the other he opened a door, a means of communi-
cating with him; a third one he inspired so that he
obtained by cogitation what God bestowed upon him.”

The pupil asks:

“ Whence has he this knowing ?”

The master answers :


Page 14.


CHAPTER 1 | 29


“ His knowing is the same from all eternity, for ever
and ever. As he has never been not-knowing, he is
knowing of himself, having never acquired any know-
ledge which he did not possess before. He speaks in
the Veda which he sent down upon Brahman :

“<« Praise and celebrate him:who has spoken the Veda,
and was before the Veda.”

The pupil asks:

“ How do you worship him to whom the perception
of the senses cannot attain ?”

The master says :

“ His name proves his existence, for where there is a
report there must be something to which it refers, and
where there is a name there must be something which
is named. He is hidden to the senses and unperceiv-
able by them. However, the soul perceives him, and
thought comprehends his qualities. This meditation
is identical with worshipping him exclusively, and by
practising it uninterruptedly beatitude is obtained.”

In this way the Hindus express themselves in this
very famous book.


١


The following passage is taken from the book iid, Quotation
a part of the book Bhdrata, from the conversation be- book 4.
tween Vasudeva and Arjuna :—

“JT am the universe, without a beginning by being
born, or without an end by dying, I do not aim by
whatever I do at any recompense. I do not specially
belong to one class of beings to the exclusion of others,
as if I were the friend of one and the enemy of others.
I have given to each one in my creation what is suffi-
cient for him in all his functions, Therefore whoever
knows me in this capacity, and tries to become similar
to me by keeping desire apart from his action, his
fetters will be loosened, and he will easily be saved and
freed.”


This passage reminds one of the definition of philo-


30 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


sophy as the striving to become as much as possible svmi-
lar to God.

Further, Vasudeva speaks in the same book :—

“Tt is desire which causes most men to take refuge '
with God for their wants. But if you examine their
case closely, you will find that they are very far from
having an accurate knowledge of him; for God is not
apparent to every one, so that he might perceive him
with his senses. Therefore they do not know him.
Some of them do not pass beyond what their senses
perceive ; some pass beyond this, but stop at the know-
ledge of the laws of nature, without learning that above
them there is one who did not give birth nor was born,
the essence of whose being has not been comprehended
by the knowledge of any one, while fis knowledge
comprehends everything.”

The Hindus differ among themselves as to the defini-
tion of what is action. Some who make God the source
of action consider him as the universal cause; for as the
existence of the agents derives from him, he is the
cause of their action, and in consequence it is his
own action coming into existence through their inter-
mediation. Others do not derive action from God, but
from other sources, considering them as the particular
causes Which in the last instance—according to external
observation—produce the action in question.

In the book Sdmkhya the devotee speaks : “ Has there
been a difference of opinion about action autl the agent,
or not?”

The sage speaks: “Some people say that the soul is
not alive and the matter not living; that God, who is
self-sufficing, is he who unites them and separates them
from each other ; that therefore in reality he himself is
the agent. Action proceeds from him in such a way
that he causes both the soul and the matter to move,
like as that which is living and powerful moves that
which is dead and weak,


On the
notions of
the action
and the
agent.


Quotation
from the
book
Sdmkhya.


Page 15.


31 ا 0


“Others say that the union of action and the agent is
effected by nature, and that such is the usual process
‘in everything that increases and decreases.

“Others say the agent is the soul, because in the
Véda it is said, ‘Every being comes from Purusha.’
According to others, the agent is time, for the world is
tied to time as a sheep is tied to a strong cord, so that


its motion depends upon whether the cord is drawn


Philosophi-

cal and vul-

gar notions

about the

nature of
od.


tight or slackened. Still others say that action is
nothing but a recompense for something which has
been done before.

“ All these opinions are wrong. The truth is, that
action entirely belongs to matter, for matter binds the
soul, causes it to wander about in different shapes,
and then sets it free. Therefore matter is the agent,
all that belongs to matter helps it to accomplish
action, But the soul is not an agent, because it is
devoid of the different faculties.”

This is what educated people believe about God.
They call him @évara, 4.6. self-sufficing, beneficent, who
gives without receiving. They consider the unity of
God as absolute, but that everything beside God which
may appear as a unity is really a plurality of things.
The existence of God they consider as a real existence,
because everything that exists exists through him, It
is not impossible to think that the existing beings are
not and that he 2s, but it is Impossible to think that he
is not and that they are.

If we now pass from the ideas of the educated people
among the Hindus to those of the common people, we
must first state that they present a great variety. Some
of them are simply abominable, but similar errors also
occur in other religions. Nay, even in Islam we must de-
cidedly disapprove, ¢.g. of the anthropomorphic doctrines,
the teachings of the Jabriyya sect, the prohibition of
the discussion of religious topics, and such like. Every
religious sentence destined for the people at large must


52 41811211715 114


be carefully worded, as the following example shows.
Some Hindu scholar calls God a point, meaning to say
thereby that the qualities of bodies do not apply to him.
Now some uneducated man reads this and imagines,
God is as small as a point, and he does not find out
what the word point in this sentence was really intended
to express. He will not even stop with this offensive
comparison, but will describe God as much larger, and
will say, “He is twelve fingers long and ten fingers broad.”
Praise be to God, who is far above measure and number !
Further, if an uneducated man hears what we have
mentioned, that God comprehends the universe so that
nothing is concealed from him, he will at once imagine
that this comprehending is effected by means of eye-
sight; that eyesight is only possible by means of an eye,
and that two eyes are better than only one; and in con-
sequence he will describe God as having a thousand eyes,
meaning to describe his omniscience.

Similar hideous fictions are sometimes met with
among the Hindus, especially among those castes who
are not allowed to occupy themselves with science, of
whom we shall speak hereafter.


00


CHAPTER III.


ON THE HINDU BELIEF AS TO CREATED THINGS, BOTH
‘INTELLIGIBILIA ” AND “ SENSIBILIA.”


On this subject the ancient Greeks held nearly the notions of
: 3 : 3 the Greeks
same views as the Hindus, at all events in those times and the sufi


before philosophy rose high among them under the care aha e a


of the seven so-called pillars of wisdom, viz. Solon of ا علا‎
Athens, Bias of Priene, Periander of Corinth, Thales of
Miletus, Chilon of Lacedzemon, Pittacus of Lesbos, and
Cleobulus of Lindos, and their successors. Some of Page 16.
them thought that all things are one, and this one thing

is according to some 70 AavGavew, according to others

n Ovvayts ; that 6.0. man has only this prerogative
before a stone and the inanimate world, that he is by

one degree nearer than they to the first Cause. But

this he would not be anything better than they.

Others think that only the first Cause has real exist-
ence, because it alone is self-sufficing, whilst everything
else absolutely requires it; that a thing which for its
existence stands in need of something else has only a
dream-life, no real life, and that reality is only that one
and first being (the First Cause).

This is also the theory of the Swifts, Le. the sages, origin ot
for لاي‎ means in Greek wisdom (copia). Therefore a gie.word
philosopher is called paildsdpd (didocodos), 1.6. loving -
wisdom. When in Islam persons adopted something
like the doctrines of these philosophers, they also adopted
their name; but some people did not understand the
meaning of the word, and erroneously combined it with

VOL, I. Cae


34 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


the Arabic word suffa, as if the Sii/i (= iArcaogot) were
identical with the so-called ’A/hl-assuffa among the com-
panions of Muhammad. In later times the word was
corrupted by misspelling, so that finally it was taken for
a derivation from si/,i.e. the wool of goats. Abt-alfath
Albusti made a laudable effort to avoid this mistake
when he said, “‘ From olden times people have differed
as to the meaning of the word sift, and have thought
it a derivative from sf, i.e. wool. I, for my part,
understand by the word a youth who is 5470, 1.6. pure.
This séft has become ,هع‎ and in this form the name
of a class of thinkers, the Sufi.”

Further, the same Greeks think that the existing
world is only one thing; that the First Cause appears in
it under various shapes; that the power of the First
Cause is inherent in the parts of the world under dif-
ferent circumstances, which cause a certain difference of
the things of the world notwithstanding their original
unity.

Others thought that he who turns with his whole
being towards the First Cause, striving to become as
much as possible similar to 7¢, will become united with
wt after having passed the intermediate stages, and
stripped of all appendages and impediments. Similar
views are also held by the Si%/i, because of the similarity
of the dogma.

As to the souls and spirits, the Greeks think that
they exist by themselves before they enter bodies; that
they exist in certain numbers and groups, which stand
in various relations to each other, knowing each other
and not knowing; that they, whilst staying in bodies,
earn by the actions of their free-will that lot which
awaits them after their separation from the bodies,
4.6. the faculty of ruling the world in various ways.
Therefore they called them gods, built temples in their
names and offered them sacrifices; as Galenus says in
his book called apotpemtixos eis tas téyvas: “ Excel-


Galenus.


12386 76


Plato,


CHAPTER III. 35


lent men have obtained the honour of being reckoned
among the deified beings only for the noble spirit in
which they cultivated the arts, not for their prowess in
wrestling and discus-throwing. Sg. Asclepius and


Dionysos, whether they were originally human beings:


in bygone times and afterwards deified, or were divine
beings from the very beginning, deserved in any case
the greatest of honours, because the one taught man-
kind the science of medicine, the other the art of the
cultivation of the vine.”

Galenus says in his commentary on the aphorisms of
Hippocrates: “As regards the offerings to Asclepius,
we have never heard that anybody offered him a goat,
because the weaving of goat’s-hair is not easy, and
much goat’s-meat produces epilepsy, since the humours
of the goats are bad. People only offer him a cock,
as also Hippocrates has done. For this divine man
acquired for mankind the art of medicine, which is
much superior to that which Dionysos and Demeter
have invented, 4.6. the wine and the cereals whence
bread is prepared. ‘Therefore cereals are called by the
name of Demeter and the vine is called by the name
of Dionysos.”

Plato says in his Zimeus: “The @eot whom the
barbarians call gods, because of their not dying, are
the daipoves, whilst they call the god the first god.”

Further he says: “God spoke to the gods, ‘ You are
not of yourselves exempt from destruction. Only you
will not perish by death. You have obtained from
my will at the time when I created you, the firmest
covenant.’”

In another passage of the same book he says: “God
is in the single number; there are no gods in the plural
number.” ١

These quotations prove that the Greeks call in
general god everything that is glorious and noble, and
the like usage exists among many nations, They go


36 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


even so far as to call gods the mountains, the seas, &c.
Secondly, they apply the term god in a special sense
to the First Cause, to the angels, and to their souls.
According to a third usage, Plato calls gods the Sekindt
(= Modca:). But on this subject the terms of the
interpreters are not perfectly clear; in consequence
of which we only know the name, but not what it
means. Johannes Grammaticus says in his refutation
of Proclus: “The Greeks gave the name of gods to
the visible bodies in heaven, as many barbarians do.
Afterwards, when they came to philosophise on the
abstract ideas of the world of thought, they called these
by the name of gods.”

Hence we must necessarily infer that being deified
means something like the state of angels, according
to our notions. This Galenus says in clear words
in the same book: “If it is true that Asclepius was
a man in bygone times, and that then God deigned
to make him one of the angels, everything else is idle
talk.”

In another passage of the same book he says: “God
spoke to Lycurgus, ‘I am in doubt concerning you,
whether to call you a man or an angel, but I incline to
the latter.’”

There are, however, certain expressions which are
offensive according to the notions of one religion, whilst
they are admissible according to those of another, which
may pass in one language, whilst they are rejected by
another. ‘To this class belongs the word apotheosis,
which has a bad sound in the ears of Muslims. If we
consider the use of the word god in the Arabic language,
we find that all the names by which the pure truth, we.
Allah, has been named, may somehow or other be applied
to other beings besides him, except the word 41147,
which only applies to God, and which has been called
his greatest name.

Ii we consider the use of the word in Hebrew and


Johannes
Gramma-
ticus.


Galenus.


Difference
of denomi-
nating God
in Arabic,
Hebrew,
and Syriac.


Page 18.


357 ا 0


Syriac, in which two languages the sacred books before
the Koran were revealed, we find that in the Thora and
the following books of prophets which are reckoned
with the Thora as one whole, that word Rabb corre-
sponds to the word 4/147, in Arabic, in so far as it can-
not in a genitive construction be applied to anybody
besides God, and you cannot say the rabb of the house,
the rabb of the property (which in Arabic is allowed).
And, secondly, we find that the word ’Hloah in Hebrew
corresponds in its usage there to the word Rabb in
Arabic (i.e. that in Hebrew the word 758 may apply
to other beings but God, like the word رت‎ in Arabic).
The following passages occur in those books :—

“The sons of Hlohvm came in unto the daughters of
men ” (Gen. vi. 4), before the deluge, and cohabited with
them.

٠ Satan entered together with the sons of Hlohim into
their meeting” (Job i. 6).

In the Thora of Moses God speaks to him: “I have
made thee a god to Pharaoh” (Exod. vii. 1).

In the 82d Psalm of the Psalter of David the fol-
lowing occurs: “ God standeth in the congregation of
the gods” (Ps. Ixxxii. 1), 2.6. of the angels.

In the Thora the idols are called foreign gods. If
the Thora had not forbidden to worship any other being
but God, if it had not forbidden people to prostrate
themselves before the idols, nay, even to mention them
and to think of them, one might infer from this expres-
sion (foreign gods) that the order of the Bible refers
only to the abolition of foreign gods, which would mean
gods that are not Hebrew ones (as if the Hebrews had
adored national gods, in opposition to the gods of their
neighbours), ‘The nations round Palestine were idol
worshippers like the heathen Greeks, and the Israelites
always rebelled against God by worshipping the idol of
Baal (lit. Ba‘ld) and the idol of Ashtaréth, 1.6. Venus.


From all this it is evident that the Hebrews used to
%


38 ALBERUNTI’S INDIA.


apply the term being god, grammatically a term like
being king, to the angels, to the souls invested with
divine power (v. p. 34); by way of comparison, also,
to the images which were made to represent the bodies
of those beings; lastly, metaphorically, to kings and to
other great men.

Passing from the word 600 to those of father and
son, we must state that Islam is not liberal in the use of
them; for in Arabic the word son means nearly always
as much as a child in the natural order of things, and
from the ideas involved in parentage and birth can
never be derived any expression meaning the Hternal
Lord of creation. Other languages, however, take much
more liberty in this respect; so that if people address a
man by father, it is nearly the same as if they addressed
him by siv. As is well known, phrases of this kind
have become so prevalent among the Christians, that
anybody who does not always use the words father and
son in addressing people would scarcely be considered
as one of them. By the son they understand most
especially Jesus, but apply it also to others besides
him. It is Jesus who orders his disciples to say in
prayer, ‘‘O our father which art-in heaven” (St.
Matt. vi. 9); and informing them of his approaching
death, he says that he is going to his father and to
their father (St. John xx. 17). In most of his speeches
he explains the word the son as meaning himself, that
he is the son of man.

Besides the Christians, the Jews too use similar ex-
pressions ; for the 2d Book of Kings relates that God
consoled David for the loss of his son, who had been
borne to him by the wife of Uriah, and promised him
another son from her, whom he would adopt as his
own son (I Chron. xxii. 9,10). If the use of the
Hebrew language admits that Salomo is by adoption a
son of God, it is admissible that he who adopted was a
Jather, viz. God.


Page 19.


39 ا 6


The Manichzans stand in a near relationship to the Note :ده‎

Christians. Mant expresses himself in a similar way in thea,
the book called Kanz-al’ihyd (Thesaurus Vivificationis) :
“The resplendent hosts will be called young women and
virgins, fathers and mothers, sons, brothers, and sisters,
because such is the custom in the books of the prophets.
In the country of joy there is neither male nor female,
nor are there organs of generation. All are invested
with living bodies. Since they have divine bodies, they
do not differ from each other in weakness and force, in
length and shortness, in figure and looks; they are like
similar lamps, which are lighted by the same lamp, and
which are nourished by the same material. The cause
of this kind of name-giving arises, in the last instance,
from the rivalry of the two realms in mixing up with
each other. When the low dark realm rose from the
abyss of chaos, and was seen by the high resplendent
realm as consisting of pairs of male and female beings,
the latter gave similar outward forms to its own chil-
dren, who started to fight that other world, so that it
placed in the fight one kind of beings opposite the
same kind of the other world.”

The educated among the Hindus abhor anthropo-
morphisms of this kind, but the crowd and the mem-
bers of the single sects use them most extensively.

They go even beyond all we have hitherto mentioned,
so as to speak of wife, son, daughter, of the rendering
pregnant and other physical processes, all in connection
with God. ‘They are even so little pious, that, when
speaking of these things, they do not even abstain from
silly and unbecoming language. However, nobody
minds these classes and their theories, though they be
numerous. ‘he main and most essential point of the Notions of
Hindu world of thought is that which the Brahmans cate Hin-
think and believe, for they are specially trained for pre- 00 5
serving and maintaining their religion. And this it is Anchen
which we shall explain, viz. the belief of the Brahmans.


40 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


Regarding the whole creation (ro év), they think that
it is a unity, as has already been declared, because
Vasudeva speaks in the book called Gitd: “To speak
accurately, we must say that all things are divine; for
Vishnu made himself the earth that the living beings
should rest thereupon ; he made himself water to nourish
them thereby ; he made himself fire and wind in order
to make them grow; and he made himself the heart of
every single being. He presented them with recollec-
tion and knowledge and the two opposite qualities, as
is mentioned in the Veda.”

How much does this resemble the expression of the
author of the book of Apollonius, De Causis Lerwm, as
if the one had been taken from the other! He says:
“There is in all men a divine power, by which all
things, both material and immaterial, are apprehended.”
Thus in Persian the immaterial Lord is called Khudhd,
and in a derivative sense the word is also used to mean
a man., 2.6. a human lord.

I. Those Hindus who prefer clear and accurate defi-
nitions to vague allusions call the soul pwrusha, which
means, man, because it 1s the hving element in the
existing world. life is the only attribute which they
give to it. They describe it as alternately knowing
and not knowing, as not knowing év 7pa€ev (actually),
and as knowing ب‎ duvayer (potentially), gaining know-
ledge by acquisition. ‘The not-knowing of purusha is
the cause why action comes into existence, and its
knowing is the cause why action ceases.

11. Next follows the general matter, 2.6. the abstract
brn, Which they call avyakta, 1.6. a shapeless thing. It
is dead, but has three powers potentially, not actually,
which are called sattva, rajas, and tamas. I have heard
that Buddhodana (sic), in speaking to his adherents the
Shamanians, calls them buddha, dharma, 50110710, as it
were intelligence, religion, and ignorance (sic). The first
power is rest and goodness, and hence come existing


Purusha.


Page 20.


Avyakta.


CHARTER Ty. AI


and growing. The second is exertion and fatigue, and
hence come firmness and duration. The third is languor
and irresolution, and hence come ruin and perishing.
Therefore the first power is attributed to the angels,
the second to men, the third to the animals. The ideas
before, afterwards, and therewpon may be predicated of-
all these things only in the sense of a certain sequence
and on account of the inadequacy of language, but not
so as to indicate any ordinary notions of time.

111. Matter proceeding from évvamus into mpakis under vyakta and
the various shapes and with the three primary forces Hews
is called vyakta, 1.6. having shape, whilst the union of
the abstract tAn and of the shaped matter is called
prakritv. This term, however, is of no use to us; we
do not want to speak of an abstract matter, the term
matter alone being sufficient for us, since the one does
not exist without the other.

IV. Next comes nature, which they call ahantkdra. Anaikara.
The word is derived from the ideas of overpowering, de-
veloping, and self-assertion, because matter when assum-
ing shape causes things to develop into new forms, and
this growing consists in the changing of a foreign ele-
ment and assimilating it to the growing one. Hence
it is as if Mature were trying to overpower those other
or foreign elements in this process of changing them,
and were subduing that which is changed.

V.-IX. As a matter of course, each compound pre- Mahabnata.
supposes simple elements from which it is compounded
and into which it is resolved again. The universal
existences in the world are the five elements, 2.6. accord-
ing to the Hindus: heaven, wind, fire, water, and earth.

They are called mahdbhita, 1.6. having great natures.
They do not think, as other people do, that the fire is
a hot dry body near the bottom of the ether. They
understand by fire the common fire on earth which
comes from an inflammation of smoke. The Vayu annotation


7 ١ ; . from 70
Purdna says: “In the beginning were earth, water, wind, Purana. 4


02 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


and heaven, Brahman, on seeing sparks under the
earth, brought them forward and divided them into
three parts: the first, pdrthiva, is the common fire,
which requires wood and is extinguished by water; the
second is divya, 6.6. the sun; the third, vidyut, 2.6. the
lightning. The sun attracts the water; the lightning
shines through the water. In the animals, also, there 8
fire in the midst of moist substances, which serve to
nourish the fire and do not extinguish it.”

X.-XIV. As these elements are compound, they pre-
suppose simple ones which are called paiica mdtdéras,
1.6. five mothers. They describe them as the functions
of the senses. The simple element of heaven is Sabda,
1.6. that which is heard; that of the wind is sparsa,
1.6. that which is touched; that of the fire is réipa, 1.¢.
that which is seen; that of the water is rasa, 1.6. that
which is tasted; and that of the earth is gandha, te.
that which is smelled. With each of these mahdbhita
elements (earth, water, &c.) they connect, firstly, one of
the paiica-mdtdras elements, as we have here shown;
and, secondly, all those which have been attributed to
the mahdbhita elements previously mentioned. So
the earth has all five qualities; the water has them
minus the smelling (= four qualities) ; the fire has them
minus the smelling and tasting (7.e. three qualities) ; the
wind has them minus smelling, tasting, and seeing (i.e.
two qualities); heaven has them minus smelling, tast-
ing, seeing, and touching (7.e. one quality).

I do not know what the Hindus mean by bringing
sound into relation with heaven. Perhaps they mean
something similar to what Homer, the poet of the
ancient Greeks, said, “ Those tnvested with the seven melo-
dies speak and give answer to each other in a pleasant
tone.’ Thereby he meant the seven planets; as another
poet says, ““ The spheres endowed with different melodies
are seven, moving eternally, praising the Creator, for it 8
he who holds them and embraces them unto the farthest
end of the starless sphere.” 7


Pafica
mataras,


Page 21.


CHAPTER III. 43


Porphyry says in his book on the opinions of the
most prominent philosophers about the nature of the
sphere: ‘The heavenly bodies moving about in forms
and shapes and with wonderful melodies, which are
fixed for ever, as Pythagoras and Diogenes have ex-


plained, point to their Creator, who is without equal -


Indriy ani.


Manas.


and without shape. People say that Diogenes had
such subtle senses that he, and he alone, could hear the
sound of the motion of the sphere.”

All these expressions are rather hints than clear
speech, but admitting of a correct mterpretation on a
scientific basis. Some successor of those philosophers,
one of those who did not grasp the full truth, says:
“Sight is watery, hearing airy, smelling fiery, tasting
earthy, and touching is what the soul bestows upon
everybody by uniting itself with it.” I suppose this
philosopher connects the sight with the water because
he had heard of the moist substances of the eye and of
their different classes (lacuna); he refers the smelling
to the fire on account of frankincense and smoke; the
tasting to the earth because of his nourishment which
the earth yields him. As, then, the four elements are
finished, he is compelled for the fifth sense, the touch-
ing, to have recourse to the soul.

The result of all these elements which we have enu-
merated, 2.6. a compound of all of them, is the animal.
The Hindus consider the plants as a species of animal
as Plato also thinks that the plants have a sense,
because they have the faculty of distinguishing between
that which suits them and that which is detrimental to
them. The animal is an animal as distinguished from
a stone by virtue of its possession of the senses.

XV.—XIX. The senses are five, called wndriydnt, the
hearing by the ear, the seeing by the eye, the smelling
by the nose, the tasting by the tongue, and the touching
by the skin.

XX. Next follows the will, which directs the senses


44 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


in the exercise of their various functions, and which
dwells in the heart. Therefore they call it manas.

XXI.—XXV. The animal nature is rendered perfect
by five necessary functions, which they call karmendri-
ydnt, 1.6. the senses of action. The former senses bring
about learning and knowledge, the latter action and
work. We shall call them the necessaria. They are:
1. To produce a sound for any of the different wants
and wishes a man may have; 2. To throw the hands
with force, in order to draw towards or to put away ;
3. To walk with the feet, in order to seek something
or to fly from it; 4, 5. The ejection of the superfluous
elements of nourishment by means of the two openings
created for the purpose.

The whole of these elements are twenty-five, viz. :—

1. The general soul.

2. The abstract rn.

3. The shaped matter.

4. The overpowering nature.

5—9. ‘The simple mothers.

10-14. The primary elements.

15-19. The senses of apperception.

20. The directing will.

21-25. The instrumental necessaria.

The totality of these elements is called ¢attva, and all
knowledge is restricted to them. Therefore Vyasa the
son of Paradsara speaks: ‘“ Learn twenty-five by dis-
tinctions, definitions, and divisions, as you learn a
logical syllogism, and something which is a certainty,
not merely studying with the tongue. Afterwards
adhere to whatever religion you like; your end will
be salvation.”


Karmendri-
yani.


Page 22.


Recapitiula-
tion of the
twenty-five
elements,


2 80111
longing to
be united
with the
body, is so
united by
intermedi-
ary spirits.


(45 0


CHAPTER IV.


FROM WHAT CAUSE ACTION ORIGINATES, AND HOW THE
SOUL IS CONNECTED WITH MATTER.


VOLUNTARY actions 000 originate in the body of any
animal, unless the body be ime and exist in close con-
tact with that which is Lone of itself, 4.6. the soul.
The Hindus maintain that the soul is © mpa€&eu, not
év Ouvaet, ignorant of its own essential nature and of
its material substratum, longing to apprehend what it
does not know, and believing that it cannot exist unless
by matter. As, therefore, it longs for the good which
is duration, and wishes to learn that which is hidden
from it, it starts off in order to be united with matter.
However, substances which are dense and such as are
tenuous, if they have these qualities in the very highest
degree, can mix together only by means of interme-
diary elements which stand in a certain relation to
each of the two. Thus the air is the medium be-
tween fire and water, which are opposed to each other by
these two qualities, for the air is related to the fire in
tenuity and to the water in density, and by either of
these qualities it renders the one capable of mixing
with the other. Now, there is no greater antithesis than
that between body and not-body. Therefore the soul,
being what it is, cannot obtain the fulfilment of its
wish but by similar media, spirits which derive their
existence from the matres sinvplices in the worlds called
Bhirloka, Bhuvarloka, and Svarloka. The Hindus call
them tenwows bodies over which the soul rises like the


46 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


sun over the earth, in order to distinguish them from
the dense bodies which derive their existence from the
common five elements. The soul, in consequence of
this union with the media, uses them as its vehicles.
Thus the image of the sun, though he is only one, is re-
presented in many mirrors which are placed opposite to
him, as also in the water of vessels placed opposite.
The sun is seen alike in each mirror and each vessel,
and in each of them his warming and light-giving effect
is perceived.

When, now, the various bodies, being from their
nature compounds of different things, come into exist-
ence, being composed of male elements, viz. bones,
veins, and sperma, and of /emale elements, viz. flesh,

Page 23. blood, and hair, and being thus fully prepared to receive
life, then those spirits unite themselves with them, and
the bodies are to the spirits what castles or fortresses

Five winds are to the various affairs of princes. In a farther stage

the fone. of development five winds enter the bodies. By the

first and second of them the inhaling and exhaling are‏ .رومز
effected, by the third the mixture of the victuals in the‏
stomach, by the fourth the locomotion of the body from‏
one place to the other, by the fifth the transferring of‏
the apperception of the senses from one side of the body‏
to the other.‏


The differ. The spirits here mentioned do not, according t) the
ence 01 the . . . . ل‎
soulsde- notions of the Hindus, differ from each other ir sub-


pending . 1 :
upon هه‎ stance, but have a precisely identical nature. However,


difference of


the bodies their individual characters and manners differ in the
eee. Same measure as the bodies with which they are united
differ, on account of the three forces which are in them
striving with each other for supremacy, and on account
of their harmony being disturbed by the passions of
envy and wrath.
Such, then, is the supreme highest cause of the soul’s
starting off into action.


On the other hand, the lowest cause, as proceeding


we


CHAPTERTLYV: 47


from matter, is this: that matter for its part seeks for on matter
perfection, and always prefers that which is better to (wisn with
that which is less good, viz. proceeding from Svvapus "°°
into mpa&s. In consequence of the vainglory and
ambition which are its pith and marrow, matter pro-

duces and shows all kinds of possibilities which it
contains to its pupil, the soul, and carries it round
through all classes of vegetable and animal beings.
Hindus compare the soul to a dancing-girl who is clever mustrations
in her art and knows well what effect each motion and tioular ‘kind
pose of hers has, She is in the presence of a sybarite قلعت أ‎
most eager of enjoying what she has learned. Now she

begins to produce the various kinds of her art one after

the other under the admiring gaze of the host, until her
programme is finished and the eagerness of the spectator

has been satisfied. ‘Then she stops suddenly, since she

could not produce anything but a repetition; and as a
repetition is not wished for, he dismisses her, and action

ceases. The close of this kind of relation is illustrated

by. the following simile: A caravan has been attacked

in the desert by robbers, and the members of it have

fled in all directions except a blind man and a lame

man, who remain on the spot in helplessness, despairing

of their escape. After they meet and recognise each

other, the lame speaks to the blind: “I cannot move,

but I can lead the way, whilst the opposite is the case

with you. ‘Therefore put me on your shoulder and

carry me, that I may show you the way and that we

may escape together from this calamity.” This the

blind man did. ‘They obtained their purpose by helping

each other, and they left each other on coming out of

the desert.

Further, the Hindus speak in different ways of the action of
agent, as we have already mentioned. So the Vishnu ine from an
Purdna says: “ Matter is the origin of the world. Its {ye
action in the world rises from an innate disposition, as
a tree sows its own seed by an innate disposition, not


48 ALBERUNTS INDIA.


intentionally, and the wind cools the water though it
only intends blowing. Voluntary action is only due to
Vishnu.” By the latter expression the author means
the living being who is above matter (God). Through
him matter becomes an agent toiling for him as a friend
toils for a friend without wanting anything for himself.
On this theory Mani has built the following sentence :
“The Apostles asked Jesus about the life of inanimate
nature, whereupon he said, ‘ If that which is inanimate
is separated from the living element which is com-
mingled with it, and appears alone by itself, it is again
Page 24. inanimate and is not capable of living, whilst the living
element which has left it, retaining its vital energy
unimpaired, never dies.’ ”
On matter The book of SAmkhya derives action from matter, for
of Eee the difference of forms under which matter appears
the Sambo depends upon the three primary forces, and upon whether
khya school 1
of philoso. One or two of them gain the supremacy over the
ais remainder. ‘These forces are the angelic, the human,
andthe animal. 'The three forces belong only to matter,
not to the soul. The task of the soul is to learn the
actions of matter like a spectator, resembling a traveller
who sits down in a village to repose. Hach villager is
busy with his own particular work, but he looks at
them and considers their doings, disliking some, liking
others, and taking an example from them. In this way
he is busy without having himself any share in the
business going on, and without being the cause which
has brought it about.
The book of Sarnkhya brings action into relation with
the soul, though the soul has nothing to do with action,
only in so far as it resembles a man who happens to
get into the company of people whom he does not
know. ‘They are robbers returning from a village
which they have sacked and destroyed, and he has
scarcely marched with them a short distance, when
they are overtaken by the avengers. The whole party


CHAPTER IV. 49


are taken prisoners, and together with them the inno-
cent man is dragged off; and being treated precisely
as they are, he receives the same punishment, without
having taken part in their action.

People say the soul resembles the rain-water which
comes down from heaven, always the same and of the
same nature. However, if it is gathered in vessels
placed for the purpose, vessels of different materials, of
gold, silver, glass, earthenware, clay, or bitter-salt earth,
it begins to differ in appearance, taste, and smell. Thus
the soul does not influence matter in any way, except
in this, that 15 gives matter hfe by being in close con-
tact with it. When, then, matter begins to act, the
result is different, in conformity with the one of the
three primary forces which happens to preponderate,
and conformably to the mutual assistance which the
other two latent forces afford to the former. This
assistance may be given in various ways, as the fresh
oil, the dry wick, and the smoking fire help each other
to produce ight. The soul is in matter like the rider
on a carriage, being attended by the senses, who drive
the carriage according to the rider’s intentions. But
the soul for its part 18 guided by the intelligence with
which it is inspired by God. This intelligence they
describe as that by which the reality of things is appre-
hended, which shows the way to the knowledge of God,
and to such actions as are liked and praised by every-
body.


VOL. I. D


ا 2


CHAPTER V.


ON THE STATE OF THE SOULS, AND THEIR MIGRATIONS
THROUGH THE WORLD IN THE METEMPSYCHOSIS.


As the word of confession, “There is no god but God,
Muhammad is his prophet,” is the shibboleth of Islam,
the Trinity that of Christianity, and the institute of
the Sabbath that of Judaism, so metempsychosis 8
the shibboleth of the Hindu religion. Therefore he
who does not believe in it does not belong to them,
and is not reckoned as one of them. For they hold the
following belief :—

The soul, as long as it has not risen to the highest
absolute intelligence, does not comprehend the totality
of objects at once, or, as it were, in no time. Therefore
it must explore all particular beings and examine all the
possibilities of existence; and as their number is, though
not unlimited, still an enormous one, the soul wants an
enormous space of time in order to finish the contem-
plation of such a multiplicity of objects. The soul
acquires knowledge only by the contemplation of the
individuals and the species, and of their peculiar actions
and conditions. It gains experience from each 0
and gathers thereby new knowledge.

However, these actions differ in the same measure as
the three primary forces differ. Besides, the world is
not left without some direction, being led, as it were, by
a bridle and directed towards a definite scope. There-
fore the imperishable souls wander about in perishable
bodies conformably to the difference of their actions, as


Beginning,


develop-
ment, and
ultimate
result of


metempsy-


chosis.


Page 25.


CHAPTER V. 7


they prove to be good or bad. The object of the micra-
tion through the world of reward (ae. heaven) is to
direct the attention of the soul to the good, that it should
become desirous of acquiring as much of it as possible.
The object of its migration through the world of pun-
ishment (2.e. hell) is to direct its attention to the bad ~
and abominable, that it should strive to keep as far as
possible aloof from it.

The migration begins from low stages, and rises to
higher and better ones, not the contrary, as we state
on purpose, since the one is a 21101185 as possible as the
other. The difference of these lower and higher stages
depends upon the difference of the actions, and: this
again results from the quantitative and qualitative
diversity of the temperaments and the various decrees
of combinations in which they appear.

This migration lasts until the object aimed at has
been completely attained both for the soul and matter ;
the lower aim being the disappearance of the shape of
matter, except any such new formation as may appear
desirable ; the higher aim being the ceasing of the desire
of the soul to learn what it did not know before, the
insight of the soul into the nobility of its own being
and its independent existence, its knowing that it can
dispense with matter after it has become acquainted
with the mean nature of matter and the instability of
its shapes, with all that which matter offers to the
senses, and with the truth of the tales about its
delights. Then the soul turns away from matter; the
connecting links are broken, the union is dissolved.
Separation and dissolution take place, and the soul
returns to its home, carrying with itself as much of the
bliss of knowledge as sesame develops grains and
blossoms, afterwards never separating from its oil.
The intelligent being, intelligence and its object, are
united and become one.

It is now our duty to produce from their literature


52 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


some clear testimonies as to this subject and cognate
theories of other nations.

Vasudeva speaks to Arjuna instigating him to the
battle, whilst they stand between the two lines: “If you
believe in predestination, you must know that neither
they nor we are mortal, and do not go away without a
return, for the souls are immortal and unchangeable.
They migrate through the bodies, while man changes
from childhood into youth, into manhood and infirm
age, the end of which is the death of the body. There-
after the soul proceeds on its return.”

Further he says: “How can a man think of death
and being killed who knows that the soul is eternal,
not having been born and not perishing; that the soul
is something stable and constant; that no sword can
cut it, no fire burn it, no water extinguish it, and no
wind wither it? The soul migrates from its body, after it
has become old, into another, a different one, as the body,
when its dress has become old, is clad in another. What
then is your sorrow about a soul which does not perish ?
If it were perishable, it would be more becoming that
you should not sorrow about a thing which may be dis-
pensed with, which does not exist, and does not return
into existence. But if you look more to your body
than to your soul, and are in anxiety about its perish-
ing, you must know that all that which is born dies,
and that all that which dies returns into another exist-
ence. However, both life and death are not your con-
cern. ‘They are in the hands of God, from whom all
things come and to whom they return,”

In the further course of conversation Arjuna speaks
to Vasudeva : “ How did you dare thus to fight Brahman,
Brahman who was before the world was and before
man was, whilst you are living among us as a being,
whose birth and age are known?”

Thereupon Vasudeva answered : “ Eternity (pre-exist-
ence) 15 common to both of us and to him, How often


Quotations
from the
book Gitd.


Page 26.


CHAPTER V. 53


١ have we lived together, when I knew the times of our life
and death, whilst they were concealed from you! When
I desire to appear in order to do some good, I array
myself in a body, since one cannot be with man except
in a human shape.”

People tell a tale of a king, whose name I have
forgotten, who ordered his people after his death to
bury his body on a spot where never before had a dead
person been buried. Now they sought for such a spot,
but could not find it; finally, on finding a rock pro-
jecting out of the ocean, they thought they had found
what they wanted. But then Vasudeva spoke unto
them, “This king has been burned on this identical
rock already many times. But now do as you like; for
the king only wanted to give you a lesson, and this
aim of his has now been attained.”

Vasudeva says: “‘ He who hopes for salvation and
strives to free himself from the world, but whose heart
is not obedient to his wish, will be rewarded for his
action in the worlds of those who receive a good re-
ward; but he does not attain his last object on account
of his deficiency, therefore he will return to this world,
and will be found worthy of entering a new shape of a
kind of beings whose special occupation is devotion.
Divine inspiration helps him to raise himself in this
new shape by degrees to that which he already wished
for in the first shape. His heart begins to comply with
his wish; he is more and more purified in the different
shapes, until he at last obtains salvation in an uninter-
rupted series of new births.”

Further, Vasudeva says: “If the soul is free from
matter, it is knowing; but as longas it is clad in matter,
the soul is not-knowing, on account of the turbid nature
of matter. It thinks that it is an agent, and that the
actions of the world are prepared for its sake. There-
fore it clings to them, and it is stamped with the im-
pressions of the senses. When, then, the soul leaves

0


ea ik ee‏ ببسيو جرت يسيس رم


١ 98‏ به
ae‏ اف “سياه حب poate‏


54 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


the body, the traces of the impressions of the senses
remain in it, and are not completely eradicated, as it
longs for the world of sense and returns towards it.
And since it in these stages undergoes changes entirely
opposed to each other, it is thereby subject to the
influences of the three primary forces. What, therefore,
can the soul do, its wing being cut, if it is not suffi-
ciently trained and prepared ?”

Vasudeva says: “The best of men is the perfectly
wise one, for he loves God and God loves him. How
many times has he died and been born again! During
his whole life he perseveringly seeks for perfection till
he obtains it.”

Inthe Vishnu-Dharma, Markandeya, speaking of the
spiritual beings, says: ‘ Brahman, Karttikeya, son of
Mahadeva, Lakshmi, who produced the Amrita, Daksha,
who was beaten by Mahadeva, Umadevi, the wife of
Mahadeva, each of them has been in the middle of this
kalpa, and they have been the same already many
times.” |

Varahamihira speaks of the influences of the comets,
and of the calamities which befall men when they
appear. ‘These calamities compel them to emigrate
from their homes, lean from exhaustion, moaning over
their mishap, leading their children by the hand along
the road, and speaking to each other in low tones,
‘We are punished for the sins of our kings; ” where-
upon others answer, “ Not so. This is the retribution
for what we have done in the former life, before we
entered these bodies.” 8 1

When Mani was banished from Hrinshahr, he went
to India, learned metempsychosis from the Hindus, and
transferred it into hisown system, He saysin the Book
of Mysteries: ‘ Since the Apostles knew that the souls
are immortal, and that in their migrations they array
themselves in every form, that they are shaped in every
animal, and are cast in the mould of every figure, they


Page 27.


Vishnu-
Dhara.


Mani,


CHAPTER V. 55


asked Messiah what would be the end of those souls which
did not receive the truth nor learn the origin of their
existence. Whereupon he said, ‘Any weak soul which
has not received all that belongs to her of truth perishes
without any rest or bliss.” By perishing Mani means
her being punished, not her total disappearance. For
in another place he says: “The partisans of Bardesanes
think that the hving soul rises and is purified in the
carcase, not knowing that the latter is the enemy of
the soul, that the carcase prevents the soul from rising,
that it is a prison, and a painful punishment to the
soul. If this human figure were a real existence, its
creator would not let it wear out and suffer injury, and
would not have compelled it to reproduce itself by the
sperma in the uterus.”

The following passage is taken from the book of Patanjaii.
Patafijai:—“ The soul, being on all sides tied to
ignorance, which is the cause of its being fettered,
is like rice in its cover. As long as it is there,
it is capable of growing and ripening in the tran-
sition stages between being born and giving birth
itself. But if the cover is taken off the rice, it ceases
to develop in this way, and becomes stationary.
The retribution of the soul depends on the various
kinds of creatures through which it wanders, upon
the extent of life, whether it be long or short, and
upon the particular kind of its happiness, be it scanty
or ample.”

The pupil asks: “ What is the condition of the spirit
when it has a claim to a recompense or has committed
a crime, and is then entangled in a kind of new birth
either in order to receive bliss or to be punished 2”

The master says: “It migrates according to what
it has previously done, fluctuating’ between happiness Page 28.
and misfortune, and alternately experiencing pain or
pleasure.” :

The pupil asks: “If a man commits something which


~ eels


56 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


necessitates a retribution for him in a different shape
from that in which he has committed the thing, and if
between both stages there is a great interval of time
and the matter is forgotten, what then ?”

The master answers: “It is the nature of action to
adhere to the spirit, for action is its product, whilst
the body is only an instrument forit. Forgetting does
not apply to spiritual matters, for they le outside of
time, with the nature of which the notions of long and
short duration are necessarily connected. Action, by
adhering to the spirit, frames its nature and character
into a condition similar to that one into which the soul
will enter on its next migration. The soul in its purity
knows this, thinks of it, and does not forget it ; but the
light of the soul is covered by the turbid nature of the
body as long as it is connected with the body. Then
the soul is like a man who remembers a thing which he
once knew, but then forgot in consequence of insanity
or an illness or some intoxication which overpowered his
mind, Do you not observe that little children are in
high spirits when people wish them a long life, and
are sorry when people imprecate upon them a speedy
death? And what would the one thing or the other
signify to them, if they had not tasted the sweetness of
life and experienced the bitterness of death in former
generations through which they had been migrating to
undergo the due course of retribution ?”

The ancient Greeks agreed with the Hindus in this
belief. Socrates says in the book Phaedo: “We are
reminded in the tales of the ancients that the souls


Quotations
from Plato
and Proclus.


, go from here to Hades, and then come from Hades


to here; that the living originates from the dead, and
that altogether things originate from their contraries,
Therefore those who have died are among the living.
Our souls lead an existence of their own in Hades,
The soul of each man is glad or sorry at something, and
contemplates this thing, This impressionable nature


CHAPTER V. 67


ties the soul to the body, nails it down in the body,
and gives it, as it were, a bodily figure. The soul
which is not pure cannot go to Hades. It quits the
body still filled with its nature, and then migrates
hastily into another body, in which it is, as it were,
deposited and made fast. Therefore, it has no share in .
the lving of the company of the unique, pure, divine
essence.”

Further he says: “If the soul is an independent
being, our learning is nothing but remembering that
which we had learned previously, because our souls
were in some place before they appeared in this human
figure. When people see a thing to the use of which
they were accustomed in childhood, they are under the
influence of this impressionability, and a cymbal, for
instance, reminds them of the boy who used to beat it,
whom they, however, had forgotten. Forgetting is the
vanishing of knowledge, and knowing is the soul’s
remembrance of that which it had learned before it
entered the body.” .

Proclus says: “Remembering and forgetting are
peculiar to the soul endowed with reason. It is
evident that the soul has always existed. Hence it
follows that it has always been both knowing and for- Page 20.
getting, knowing when it is separated from the body,
forgetting when it is in connection with the body. For,
being separated from the body, it belongs to the realm
of the spirit, and therefore it is knowing; but being
connected with the body, it descends from the realm of
the spirit, and is exposed to forgetting because of some
forcible influence prevailing over it.”

The same doctrine is professed by those Safi who sai

: 5 ¢ doctrine.
teach that this world is a sleeping soul and yonder
world a soul awake, and who at the same time admit
that God is immanent in certain places—eg. in heaven
—in the seat and the throne of God (mentioned in the
Koran). But then there are others who admit that


58 00 ا‎ INDIA.


God is immanent in the whole world, in animals, trees,


and the inanimate world, which they call his untversal
appearance. To those who hold this view, the entering
of the souls into various beings in the course of metem-
psychosis is of no consequence.


( 59 )


CHAPTER VI.


ON THE’DIFFERENT WORLDS, AND ON THE PLACES
OF RETRIBUTION IN PARADISE AND HELL.


THE Hindus call the world loka. Its primary division The three
consists of the upper, the low, and the middle. The 1
upper one is called svarloka, 4.6. paradise; the low,
nigaloka, 4.6, the world of the serpents, which is hell ;
besides they call it naraloka, and sometimes also pdtdla,
1.6. the lowest world. ‘The middle world, that one in
which we live, is called madhyaloka and manushyaloka,
7.e.the world ofmen. In the latter, man has to earn, in
the upper to receive his reward ; in the low, to receive
punishment. A man who deserves to come to svarloka
or ndgaloka receives there the full recompense of his
deeds during a certain length of time corresponding to
the duration of his deeds, but in either of them there is
only the soul, the soul free from the body.

For those who do not deserve to rise to heaven and to |
sink as low as hell there is another world called tiryag-
loka, the irrational world of plants and animals, through
the individuals of which the soul has to wander in
the metempsychosis until it reaches the human being,
rising by degrees from the lowest kinds of the vegetable
world to the highest classes.of the sensitive world. ‘The
stay of the soul in this world has one of the following
causes : either the award which is due to the soul 18 not
sufficient to raise it into heaven or to sink it into hell,
or the soul is in its wanderings on the way back from
hell; for they believe that a soul returning to the human


18 جم ريال .بحم


60 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


world from heaven at once adopts a human body,
whilst that one which returns there from hell has first
to wander about in plants and animals before it reaches
the degree of living in a human body.

The Hindus speak in their traditions of a large num-
ber of hells, of their qualities and their names, and for
each kind of sin they have a special hell. ‘The number
of hells is 88,000 according to the Vishnu-Purdna.
We shall quote what this book says on the subject :—

“The man who makes a false claim and who bears
false witness, he who helps these two and he who
ridicules people, come into the Lawrava hell.

» He who sheds innocent blood, who robs others of
their rights and plunders them, and who kills cows,


comes into Rodha. Those also who strangle people


come here.

‘Whoso kills a Brahman, and he who steals gold,
and their companions, the princes who do not look after
their subjects, he who commits adultery with the family
of his teacher, or who lies down with his mother-in-law,
come into Taptakumbha.  ,

“ Whoso connives at the shame of his wife for greedi-
ness, commits adultery with his sister or the wife of has
son, sells his child, is stingy towards himself with his
property in order to save it, comes into Mahdjwila.

‘‘Whoso is disrespectful to his teacher and is not
pleased with him, despises men, commits incest with
animals, contemns the Veda and Puranas, or tries to
make a gain by means of them in the markets, comes
into Savala.

““ A man who steals and commits tricks, who opposes
the straight lne of conduct of men, who hates his
father, who does not like God and men, who does not
honour the gems which God has made glorious, and
who considers them to be like other stones, comes into
Krimisa.

‘““Whoso does not honour the rights of parents and


Quotation
from the
Vishnu-
Pura ud,


Page 30.


20 61


grandparents, whoso does not do his duty towards the
angels, the maker of arrows and spear-points, come to
Lalabhaksha.

“The maker of swords and knives comes to Vigasana.

“He who conceals his property, being greedy for the
presents of the rulers, and the Brahman who sells meat
or oil or butter or sauce or wine, come to Adhomukha.

“He who rears cocks and cats, small cattle, pigs, and
birds, comes to Rudhirdndha.

“Public performers and singers in the markets, those
who dig wells for drawing water, a man who cohabits
with his wife on holy days, who throws fire into the
بط‎ ases of men, who betrays his companion and then
= him, being greedy for his property, come to
Rudhira.

“He who takes the honey out of the beehive comes
to Vaitarani.

_ “Whoso takes away by force the property and
women of others in the intoxication of youth comes
to Krishna.

‘“Whoso cuts down the trees comes to Asipatravana.

“The hunter, and the maker of snares and traps,
come to Vahniwdla.

“He who neglects the customs and miles and he who
violates the laws—and he is the worst of all—come to
Sandansaka.”

We have given this enumeration only in order to
show what kinds of deeds the Hindus abhor as sins,

Some Hindus believe that the middle world, that one according


Oo some


٠. ٠. iF
for earning, is the human world, and that a man wan- pindus, the


migration


ders about in it, because he has received a reward which iiyough


does not lead him into heaven, but at the same time PMantsen4
saves him from hell. They consider heaven as a higher قي‎ 3°


stage, where a man lives in a state of bliss which must **"
be of a certain duration on account of the good deeds
he has done. On the contrary, they consider the wan-
dering about in plants and animals as a lower stage,


62 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


where a man dwells for punishment for a certain length
of time, which is thought to correspond to the wretched
deeds he has done. People who hold this view do not
know of another hell, but this kind of degradation
below the degree of living as a human being.

All these degrees of retribution are necessary for this
reason, that the seeking for salvation from the fetters
of matter frequently does not proceed on the straight
line which leads to absolute knowledge, but on lines
chosen by guessing or chosen because others had chosen
them. Not one action of man shall be lost, not even
the last of all; it shall be brought to his account after
his good and bad actions have been balanced against
each other. The retribution, however, is not according
to the deed, but according to the intention which a man
had in doing it; and a man will receive his reward
either in the form in which he lives on earth, or in that
form into which his soul will migrate, or in a kind of
intermediary state after he has left his shape and has
not yet entered a new one.

Here now the Hindus quit. the path of philosophical
speculation and turn aside to traditional fables as re-
gards the two places where reward or punishment is
given, ¢.g. that man exists there as an incorporeal being,
and that after having received the reward of his actions
he again returns to a bodily appearance and human
shape, in order to bé prepared for his further destiny.
Therefore the author of the book Sdikhya does not
consider the reward of paradise a special gain, because it
has an end and is not eternal, and because this kind of
life resembles the life of this our world; for it is not
free from ambition and envy, having in itself various
degrees and classes of existence, whilst cupidity and
desire do not cease save where there is perfect equality.

The Stfi, too, do not consider the stay in paradise a
special gain for another reason, because there the soul


delights in other things but the Truth, 4.64. God, and its '


Page 31.


Moral prin-


ciples of


metempsy-


chosis.


The
Sdmkhya
criticises


metempsy-


echosis.


Safi
parallel,


CHAPTER VI. 63


thoughts are diverted from the Absolute Good by things
which are not the Absolute Good.
We have already said that, according to the belief of On the soul


leaving the


the Hindus, the soul exists in these two places without Sete
a body. But this is only the view of the educated popular
amoneg'them, who understand by the soul an indepen- a
dent being. However, the lower classes, and those who
cannot imagine the existence of the soul without a
body, hold about this subject very different views. One
is this, that the cause of the agony of death is the soul’s
waiting for a shape which is to be prepared. It does
not quit the body before there has originated a cognate
being of similar functions, one of those which nature
prepares either as an embryo in a mother’s womb or as

a seed in the bosom of the earth. Then the soul quits
the body in which it has been staying.

Others hold the more traditional view that the soul —
does not wait for such a thing, that it quits its shape
on account of its weakness whilst another body has
been prepared for it out of the elements. This body
is called atwahika, i.e. that which grows in haste, because
it does not come into existence by being born. The
soul stays in this body a complete year in the greatest
agony, no matter whether it has deserved to be rewarded
or to be punished. This is like the Barzakh of the
Persians, an intermediary stage between the periods of
acting and earning and that of receiving award. Tor
this reason the heir of the deceased must, according to
Hindu use, fulfil the rites of the year for the deceased,
duties which end with the end of the year, for then the
soul goes to that place which is prepared for it.

We shall now give some extracts from their litera- Quotations
ture to illustrate ‘these ideas, First from the Vishnu 7 Vishia
Purdna. eae

“Maitreya asked Parigara about the purpose of hell schoo."
and the punishment in it, whereupon he answered: ‘ It
is for distinguishing the good from the bad, knowledge


64 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


from ignorance, and for the manifestation of justice.
But not every sinner enters hell. Some of them escape
hell by previously doing works of repentance and ex-
piation. The greatest expiation is uninterruptedly
thinking of Vishnu in every action. Others wander
about in plants, filthy insects and birds, and abominable
dirty creeping things lke lice and worms, for such a
length of time as they desire it.’”

In the book Sdirkhya we read: “ He who deserves
exaltation and reward will become lke one of the
angels, mixing with the hosts of spiritual beings, not
being prevented from moving freely in the heavens
and from living in the company of their inhabitants,
or like one of the eight classes of spiritual beings, But
he who deserves humiliation as recompense for sins
and crimes will become an animal or a plant, and will
wander about until he deserves a reward so as to be
saved from punishment, or until he offers himself as
explation, flinging away the vehicle of the oe and
thereby attaining salvation.”

A theosoph who inclines towards metempsychosis
says: “The metempsychosis has four degrees :

1. The transferring, v.e. the procreation as limited
to the human species, because it transfers existence
from one individual to another ; the opposite of this is—

“2, The transforming, which concerns men in parti-
cular, since they are transformed into monkeys, pigs,
and elephants.

“3, A stable condition of existence, like the condition
of the plants. This is worse than transferring, because
it is a stable condition of life, remains as it is through
all time, and lasts as long as the mountains,

“A. The dispersing, the opposite of number 3, which
applies to the plants that are plucked, and to animals
immolated as sacrifice, because they vanish without
leaving posterity.” .

Abti-Ya‘ktib of Sijistin maintains in his book, called
“The disclosing of that which is veiled,” that the species


Page 32.


Muslim
authors on


metempsy-


chosis.


Quotations
from Johan-


CHAPTER VI. 6s


are preserved ; that metempsychosis always proceeds in
one and the same species, never crossing its limits and
passing into another species.

This was also the opinion of the ancient Greeks;


2


for Johannes Grammaticus relates as the view of Plato 2°%,G™™


maticus and
Plato.


Page 33.


that the rational souls will be clad in the bodies of
animals, and that in this regard he followed the fables
_ of Pythagoras.

Socrates says in the book Phedo: “The body is
earthy, ponderous, heavy, and the soul, which loves it,
wanders. about and is attracted towards the place, to
_ which it looks from fear of the shapeless and of Hades,
the gathering-place of the souls. They are soiled, and
circle round the graves and cemeteries, where souls
have been seen appearing in shadowy forms. This
phantasmagoria only occurs to such souls as have not
been entirely separated, in which there is still a part
of that towards which the look is directed.”

Further he says: “It appears that these are not the
souls of the good, but the souls of the wicked, which
wander about in these things to make an expiation for
the badness of their former kind of rearing. Thus they
remain until they are again bound in a body on account
of the desire for the bodily shape which has followed
them. They will dwell in bodies the character of
which is like the character which they had in the world.
Whoso, .و6‎ only cares for eating and drinking will enter
the various kinds of asses and wild animals; and he
who preferred wrong and oppression will enter the
various kinds of wolves, and falcons, and hawks.”

Further he says about the gathering-places of the
souls after death: “If I did not think that I am
going first to gods who are wise, ruling, and good,
then afterwards to men, deceased ones, better than
those here, I should be wrong not to be in sorrow about
_ death.”

Further, Plato says about the two places of reward and


WOL, I, E


66 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


of punishment: “ When a man dies, a daimon, 1.6. one of
the guardians of hell, leads him to the tribunal of judg-
ment, and a guide whose special office it is brings him, to-
cether with those assembled there, to Hades, and there he
remains the necessary number of many and long cycles
of time. Telephos says, ‘The road of Hades is an
even one.’ I, however, say, ‘If the road were even or
only a single one, a guide could be dispensed with.’
Now that soul which longs for the body, or whose deeds
were evil and not just, which resembles souls that have
committed murder, flies from there and encloses itself in
every species of being until certain times pass by.
Thereupon it is brought by necessity to that place
which is suitable to it. But the pure soul finds com-
panions and guides, gods, and dwells in the places
which are suitable to it.”

Further he says: “Those of the dead who led a
middle sort of hfe travel on a vessel prepared for
them over Acheron, After they have received punish-
ment and have been purified from crime, they wash
and receive honour for the good deeds which they
did according to merit. Those, however, who had
committed great sins, eg. the stealing from the sacri-
fices of the gods, robberies on a great scale, unjust
killing, repeatedly and consciously violating the laws,
are thrown into Tartarus, whence they will never be
able to escape.”

Further: “Those who repented of their sins already
during their lifetime, and whose crimes were of a some-
what lower degree, who, eg. committed some act of
violence against their parents, or committed a murder by
mistake, are thrown into Tartarus, being punished there
for a whole year ; but then the wave throws them out to
a place whence they cry to their antagonists, asking
them to abstain from further retaliation, that they may
be saved from the horrors of punishment. If those now:
agree, they are saved ; if not, they are sent back into


CHAPTER VI. 67


Tartarus. And this, their punishment, goes on until
their antagonists agree to their demands for being re-
lieved. Those whose mode of life was virtuous are
liberated from 1/656 places on this earth. They feel 8
though released from prison, and they will inhabit the
pure earth.”

Tartarus is a huge deep ravine or gap into which the
rivers flow. All people understand by the punishment
of hell the most dreadful things which are known to
them, and the Western countries, like Greece, have
sometimes to suffer deluges and floods. But the de-
scription of Plato indicates a place where there are
elaring flames, and it seems that he means the sea or
some part of the ocean, in which there is a whirlpool
(durdir, a pun upon Zartarus), No doubt these de-
scriptions represent the belief of the men of those
ages.


Sec _—~


BPR “دساح‎ wy wre te +


, 02%)


CHAPTER VII.


ON THE NATURE OF LIBERATION FROM THE WORLD,
AND ON THE PATH LEADING THERETO.


Ir the soul is bound up with the world, and its being
bound up has a certain cause, it cannot be liberated
from this bond save by the opposite of this identical
cause. Now according to the Hindus, as we have
already explained (p. 55), the reason of the bond is
ignorance, and therefore it can only be liberated by
knowledge, by comprehending all things in such a way
as to define them both in general and in particular,
rendering superfluous any kind of deduction and re-
moving all doubts. For the soul distinguishing between
things (ra évta) by means of definitions, recognises its
own self, and recognises at the same time that it is its
noble lot to last for ever, and that itis the vulgar lot of
matter to change and to perish in all kinds of shapes.
Then it dispenses with matter, and perceives that that
which it held to be good and delightful is in reality
bad and painful. In this manner it attains real know-
ledge and turns away from being arrayed in matter,
Thereby action ceases, and both matter and soul become
free by separating from each other. |
The author of the book of 201017011 says: “The con-
centration of thought on the unity of God induces man
to notice something besides that with which he is
occupied. He who wants God, wants the good for the
whole creation without a single exception for any reason
whatever; but he who occupies himself exclusively with


First part :
Moksha in
general.


Page 34.


Moksha ac- :


cording to
Patanjalr.


CHAPTER VII. 69


his own self, will for its benefit neither inhale, breathe,
nor exhale it (Svdsa and prasvdsa). When a man
attains to this degree, his spiritual power prevails over
his bodily power, and then he is gifted with the faculty
of doing eight different things by which detachment is
realised ; for a man can only dispense with that which
he is able to do, not with that which is outside his
grasp. These eight things are :—

» 1. The faculty in man of making his body so thin
that it becomes invisible to the eyes.

» 2. The faculty of making the body so heht that 1 is
indifferent to him whether he treads on thorns or mud
or sand.

“3. The faculty of making his body so big that it
appears in a terrifying miraculous shape.

“4. The faculty of realising every wish.

» 5. The faculty of knowing whatever he wishes.

“6. The faculty of becoming the ruler of whatever
religious community he desires.

“7, That those over whom he rules are humble and
obedient to him.

“8, That all distances between a man and any far-
away place vanish.”

The terms of the 5011 as to the knowing being and sati
his attaining the stage of knowledge come to the same” By
effect, for they maintain that he has two souls—an
eternal one, not exposed to change and alteration, by
which he knows that which 15 hidden, the trans-
cendental world, and performs wonders; and another,

a human soul, which is liable to being changed and being
born. From these and similar views the doctrines of
the Christians do not much differ.

The Hindus say: “If aman has the faculty to per- the difter-
form these things, he can dispense with them, and will chao
reach the goal by degrees, passing throwelk several 1° iret to
stages: ae Patanjali.


“1, The knowledge of things as to their names and


en‏ نص


70 411120115 20144


qualities and distinctions, which, however, does not yet
afford the knowledge of definitions.

“2, Such a knowledge of things as proceeds as far 8
the definitions by which particulars are classed under
the category of universals, but regarding which a man
must still practise distinction.

“3 This distinction (viveka) disappears, and man
comprehends things at once as a whole, but within
time.

“4, This kind of knowledge is raised above time, and
he who has it can dispense with names and epithets,
which are only instruments of human imperfection.
In this stage the zntellectus and the 71161110615 unite
with the zntellectum, so as to be one and the same
thing.”

This is what Pataiijali says about the knowledge
which liberates the soul. In Sanskrit they call its
liberation Moksha—i.e. the end. By the same term
they call the last contact of the eclipsed and eclipsing
bodies, or their separation in both lunar and _ solar
eclipses, because it is the end of the eclipse, the moment
when the two luminaries which were in contact with
each other separate.

According to the Hindus, the organs of the senses
have been made for acquiring knowledge, and the plea-
sure which they afford has been created to stimulate
people to research and investigation, as the pleasure
which eating and drinking afford to the taste has been
created to preserve the individual by means of nourish-
ment. So the pleasure of 601115 serves to preserve the
species by giving birth to new individuals. If there
were not special pleasure in these two functions, man
and animals would not practise them for these pur-
poses.

In the book Gitd we read: “ Man is created for the
purpose of knowing; and because knowing is always
the same, man has been gifted with the same organs,


Page 35.


On know:


ledge ac-
cording to
the book
Gitd.


Quotation
from Plato’s
Pheedo,


CHAPTER VII. 71


If man were created for the purpose of acting, his
organs would be different, as actions are different in
consequence of the difference of the three primary forces.
However, bodily nature is bent upon acting on account
of its essential opposition to knowing. Besides, it
wishes to invest action with pleasures which in reality
are pains. But knowledge is such as to leave this
nature behind itself prostrated on the earth like an
opponent, and removes all darkness from the soul as
an eclipse or clouds are removed from the sun.”

This resembles the opinion of Socrates, who thinks
that the soul “being with the body, and wishing to
inquire into something, then is deceived by the body.
But by cogitations something of its desires becomes
clear to it. Therefore, its cogitation takes place in that
time when it is not disturbed by anything like hearing,
seeing, or by any pain or pleasure, when it is quite by
itself, and has as much as possible quitted the body
and its companionship. In particular, the soul of the
philosopher scorns the body, and wishes to be separate
from it.”

“Tf we in this our life did not make use of the body,
nor had anything in common with it except in cases of
necessity, if we were not inoculated with its nature,
but were perfectly free from it, we should come near
knowledge by getting rest from the ignorance of the
body, and we should become pure by knowing our-
selves as far as God would permit us. And it is only
right to acknowledge that this is the truth.”


Now we return and continue our quotation from the the process
0


know-
ledge ac-
cording to
Gitd and
another
source.


book Gta.

“Likewise the other organs of the senses serve for
acquiring knowledge. The knowing person rejoices in
turning them to and fro on the field of knowledge, so
that they are his spies. The apprehension of the senses
is different according to time, The senses which serve
the heart perceive only that which is present. The


See )1ل‎


72 ALBERUNTS INDIA.


~


heart reflects over that which is present and remembers
also the past. The natwre takes hold of the present,
claims it for itself in the past, and prepares to wrestle
with it in future. The reason understands the nature
of a thing, no regard being had of time or date, since
past and future are the same for it. Its nearest helpers
are reflection and nature; the most distant are the five
senses. When the senses bring before reflection some
particular object of knowledge, reflection cleans it from
the errors of the functions of the senses, and hands it
over to reason, ‘Thereupon reason makes universal
what was before particular, and communicates it to the
soul. Thus the soul comes to know it.”

Further, the Hindus think that a man becomes know-
ing in one of three ways :—

1. By being inspired, not in a certain course of time,
but at once, at birth, and in the cradle, as, eg. the sage
Kapila, for he was born knowing and wise.

2. By being inspired after a certain time, like the
children of Brahman, for they were inspired when they
came of age.

3. By learning, and after a certain course of time,
like all men who learn when their mind ripens.

Liberation through knowledge can only be obtained
by abstaining from evil. The branches of evil are many,
but we may classify them as cupidity, wrath, and ignor-
ance. If the roots are cut the branches will wither.
And here we have first to consider the rule of the two
forces of cupidity and wrath, which are the greatest and
most pernicious enemies of man, deluding him by the
pleasure of eating and the delight of revenge, whilst in
reality they are much more hkely to lead him into
pains and crimes. They make a man similar to the
wild beasts and the cattle, nay, even to the demons and
devils.

Next we have to consider that man must prefer the
reasoning force of mind, by which he becomes similar


Page 36.
Cupidity,
wrath, and
ignorance
are the chief
obstacles to
Moksha.


CHAPTER VII. 73


to the highest angels, to the forces of cupidity and
wrath; and, lastly, that he must turn away from the
actions of the world. He cannot, however, give up these
actions unless he does away with their causes, which
are his lust and ambition. Thereby the second of the
three primary forces is cut away. However, the abstain-
ing from action takes place in two different ways :—

I. By laziness, procrastination, and ignorance accord-
ing to the third force. This mode is not desirable, for
it will lead to a blamable end.

2. By judicious selection and by preferring that which
is better to that which is good, which way leads to a
laudable end.

The abstaining from actions is rendered perfect in this
way, that a man quits anything that might occupy him
and shuts himself up against it. Thereby he will be
enabled to restrain his senses from extraneous objects
to such a degree that he does not any more know that
there exists anything besides himself, and be enabled
to stop all motions, and even the breathing. It is
evident that a greedy man strains to effect his object,
the man who strains becomes tired, and the tired man
pants; so the panting is the result of greediness. If
this greediness is removed, the breathing becomes like
the breathing of a being living at the bottom of the sea,
that does not want breath; and then the heart quietly
rests on one thing, viz. the search for hberation and
for arriving at the absolute unity.

In the book 6110 we read: “How is a man to ob- Further
tain liberation who disperses his heart and does not from Gttd.
concentrate it alone upon God, who does not exclu-
sively direct his action towards him? But if a man
turns away his cogitation from all other things and
concentrates it upon the One, the light of his heart will
be steady like the light of a lamp filled with clean oil,
standing in a corner where no wind makes it flicker,
and he will be occupied in such a degree as not to


Prin ا جهن‎ Ste ipa


74 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


perceive anything that gives pain, like heat or cold,
knowing that everything besides the One, the Truth,
is a vain phantom.”

In the same book we read: “ Pain and pleasure have
no effect on the real world, just as the continuous flow
of the streams to the ocean does not affect its water.
How could anybody ascend this mountain pass save him
who has conquered cupidity and wrath and rendered
them inert ?”

On account of what we have explained it is necessary
that cogitation should be continuous, not in any way
to be defined by number; for a number always de-
notes repeated times, and repeated times presuppose a
break in the cogitation occurring between two consecu-
tive times. This would interrupt the continuity, and
would prevent cogitation becoming united with the
object of cogitation. And this is not the object kept
in view, which is, on the contrary, the continuity of
cogitation.

This goal is attained)either in a single shape, 1.6. a
single stage of metempsychosis, or im several shapes,
in this way, that a man perpetually practises virtuous
behaviour and accustoms the soul thereto, so that this
virtuous behaviour becomes to it a nature and an
essential quality.

Virtuous behaviour is that which is prescribed by
the religious law. Its principal laws, from which they
derive many secondary ones, may be summed up in the
following nine rules :—

1. A man shall not kill.


2. Nor lie.

3. Nor steal.

4. Nor whore.

5. Nor hoard up treasures.

6. He is perpetually to practise holiness and purity.
7. He is to perform the prescribed fasting without


an interruption and to dress poorly.


The nine
command-
ments of
the Hindu
religion.


Page 37.


CHAPTER VII. 7


8. He is to hold fast to the adoration of God with
praise and thanks.

9. He is always to have in mind the word dm, the
word of creation, without pronouncing it.

The injunction to abstain from killing as regards
animals (No. 1) is only a special part of the general
order to abstain from doing anything hurtful. Under
this head falls also the robbing of another man’s goods
(No. 3), and the telling lies (No. 2), not to mention the
foulness and baseness of so doing.

The abstaining from hoarding up (No. 5) means that
a man is to give up toil and fatigue; that he who seeks
the bounty of God feels sure that he is provided for;
and that, starting from the base slavery of material life,
we may, by the noble liberty of cogitation, attain eternal
bliss.

Practising purity (No. 6) implies that a man knows the
filth of the body, and that he feels called upon to hate
it, and to love cleanness of soul. Tormenting oneself
by poor dress (No. 7) means that a man should reduce
the body, allay its feverish desires, and sharpen its senses.
Pythagoras once said to a man who took great care to
keep his body in a flourishing condition and to allow it
everything it desired, “Thou art not lazy in building
thy prison and making thy fetter as strong as possible.”

The holding fast to meditation on God and the angels
' means a kind of familiar intercourse with them. The
book Sdmkhya says: “ Man cannot go beyond anything
in the wake of which he marches, it being a scope
to him (ae, thus engrossing his thoughts and detaining
him from meditation on God).” The book 6114 says:
“All that which is the object of a man’s continuous
meditating and bearing in mind is stamped upon him,
so that’ he even unconsciously is guided by it. Since,
now, the time of death is the time of remembering what
we love, the soul on leaving the body is united with
that object which we love, and is changed into it.”


ايه Fi‏ د كا


76 ALBERUNI'S INDIA.


However, the reader must not believe that it is only
the union of the soul with any forms of life that perish
and return into existence that is perfect /eberation, for the
same book, Gétd, says : “He who knows when dying that
God is everything, and that from him everything pro-
ceeds, 15 liberated, though his degree be lower than that
of the saints.”

The same book says: “Seek deliverance from this
world by abstaining from any connection with its follies,
by having sincere intentions in all actions and when
making offerings by fire to God, without any desire for
reward and recompense; further, by keeping aloof from
mankind.” The real meaning of all this is that you
should not prefer one because he is your friend to
another because he is your enemy, and that you should
beware of negligence in sleeping when others are awake,
and in waking when others are asleep; for this, too, is
a kind of being absent from them, though outwardly
you are present with them. Further: Seek deliverance
by guarding soul from soul, for the soul is an enemy if
it be addicted to lusts; but what an excellent friend
it is when it is chaste!”

Socrates, caring little for his impending death and
being glad at the prospect of coming to his Lord, said :
“ My degree must not be considered by any one of you
lower than that of the swan,” of which people say that
it is the bird of Apollo, the sun, and that it therefore
knows what is hidden; that is, when feeling that it will
soon die, sings more and more melodies from joy at the
prospect of coming toits Lord. “ At least my joy at my
prospect of coming to the object of my adoration must
not be less than the joy of this bird.”

For similar reasons the 5011 define Jove as being en-
crossed by the creature to the exclusion of God.

In the book of Pataiyali we read: “ We divide the
path of liberation into three parts :—


“T, The practical one (kriyd-yoga), a process of habitu-


Quotations
from Gitd.


Greek
and Safi
parallels.


Second
part: The
practical
path leading
to Moksha


7 “11 ال 1 لل


ating the senses in a gentle way to detach themselves according to
from the external world, and to concentrate themselves Pismnu.
upon the internal one, so that they exclusively occupy aa
themselves with God. This is in general the path of
him who does not desire anything save what is sufficient Page 3s.
to sustain life.”

In the book Vishnu-Dharma we read: “The kine
Pariksha, of the family of Bhrigu, asked Satdnika, the
head of an assembly of sages, who stayed with him, for
the explanation of some notion regarding the deity, and
by way of answer the sage communicated what he had
heard from Saunaka, Saunaka from Uéanas, and Uganas
from Brahman, as follows: ‘God is without first and
without last ; he has not been born from anything, and
he has not borne anything save that of which it is 1m-
possible to say that it is He, and just as impossible to
say that it is Wot-he. How should I be able to ponder
on the absolute good which is an outflow of his benevo-
lence, and of the absolute bad which is a product of his
wrath ; and how could I know him so as to worship him
as is his due, save by turning away from the world in
general and by occupying myself exclusively with him,
by perpetually cogitating on him 2?’

“Tt was objected to him: ‘ Man is weak and his life
is a trifling matter. He can hardly bring himself to
abstain from the necessities of life, and this prevents
him from walking on the path of liberation. If we
were living in the first age of mankind, when life
extended to thousands of years, and when the world
was good because of the non-existence of evil, we might
hope that that which is necessary on this path should
be done. But since we live in the last age, what,
according to your opinion, is there in this revolving
world that might protect him against the floods of the
ocean and save him from drowning ?’

“Thereupon Brahman spoke: ‘Man wants nourish-
ment, shelter, and clothing. Therefore in them there


ee‏ ل


78 ALBERUNTIS INDIA.


is no harm to him. But happiness is only to be found
in abstaining from things besides them, from superfluous
and fatiguing actions. Worship God, him alone, and
venerate him; approach him in the place of worship
with presents like perfumes and flowers; praise him
and attach your heart to him so that it never leaves
him. Give alms to the Brahmans and to others, and
vow to God vows—special ones, like the abstaining
from meat; general ones, like fasting. Vow to him ani-
mals which you must not hold to be something different
from yourselves, so as to feel entitled to kill them.
Know that he is everything. Therefore, whatever you
do, let it be for his sake; and if you enjoy anything of
the vanities of the world, do not forget him in your
intentions. If you aim at the fear of God and the
faculty of worshipping him, thereby you will obtain
liberation, not by anything else,’ ”

The book 0110 says: “ He who mortifies his lust does


not go beyond the necessary wants; and he who 15


content with that which is sufficient for the sustaining
of life will not be ashamed nor be despised.”

The same book says: “If man is not without wants
as regards the demands of human nature, if he wants
nourishment to appease thereby the heat of hunger and
exhaustion, sleep in order to meet the injurious influ-
ences of fatiguing motions and a couch to rest upon,
let the latter be clean and smooth, everywhere equally
high above the ground and sufficiently large that he
may stretch out his body upon it. Let him have a
place of temperate climate, not hurtful by cold nor by
heat, and where he is safe against the approach of
reptiles. All this helps him to sharpen the functions
of his heart, that he may without any interruption con-
centrate his cogitation on the unity. For all things
besides the necessities of life in the way of eating and


clothing are pleasures of a kind which, in reality, are .


disguised pains. To acquiesce in them is impossible,


CHAPTER VII. 79


and would end in the gravest inconvenience. There is
pleasure only to him who kills the two intolerable
enemies, dust and wrath, already during his life and not Page .ود‎
when he dies, who derives his rest and bliss from within,

not from without; and who, in the final result, is able
altogether to dispense with his senses.”

Vasudeva spoke to Arjuna: “If you want the abso-
lute good, take care of the nine doors of thy body,
and know what is going in and out through them.
Constrain thy heart from dispersing its thoughts, and
quiet thy soul by thinking of the upper membrane of
the child’s brain, which is first soft, and then is closed
and becomes strong, so that it would seem that there
were no more need of it. Do not take perception of
the senses for anything but the nature immanent in
their organs, and therefore beware of following it.”

11. The second part of the path of lberation is The path of
renunciation (the via omissionis), based on the know- tion us the
ledge of the evil which exists in the changing things of of the 0
creation and their vanishing shapes. In consequence 0
the heart shuns them, the longing for them ceases, and 0
aman is raised above the three prumary forces which are
the cause of actions and of their diversity. For he who
accurately understands the affairs of the world knows
that the good ones among them are evil in reality, and
that the bliss which they afford changes in the course
of recompense into pains. Therefore he avoids every-
thing which might aggravate his condition of being
entangled in the world, and which might result in
making him stay in the world for a still longer period.

The book 6710 says: “Men err in what is ordered
and what is forbidden. They do not know how to dis-
tinguish between good and evil in actions. Therefore,
giving up acting altogether and keeping aloof from it,
this is the action.”

The same book says: “The purity of knowledge is
high above the purity of all other things, for by know-


50 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


ledge ignorance is rooted out and certainty is gained in
exchange for doubt, which is a means of torture, for
there is no rest for him who doubts.”

It is evident from this that the first part of the path
of liberation is instrumental to the second one.

111. The third part of the path of liberation which is
to be considered as instrumental to the preceding two
is worship, for this purpose, that God should help a man
to obtain liberation, and deign to consider him worthy
of such a shape of existence in the metempsychosis in
which he may effect his progress towards beatitude.

The author of the book 670 distributes the duties of
worship among the body, the voice, and the heart.

What the body has to do is fasting, prayer, the fulfil-
ment of the law, the service towards the angels and the
sages among the Brahmans, keeping clean the body,
keeping aloof from killing under all circumstances, and
never looking at another man’s wife and other property.

What the voice has to do is the reciting of the holy
texts, praising God, always to speak the truth, to
address people mildly, to guide them, and to order
them to do good.

What the heart has to do is to have straight, honest
intentions, to avoid haughtiness, always to be patient,
to keep your senses under control, and to have a cheer-
ful mind.

The author (Patafijali) adds to the three parts of the
path of liberation a fourth one of an illusory nature,
called Lasdyana, consisting of alchemistic tricks with
various drugs, intended to realise things which by nature
are impossible. We shall speak of these things after-
wards (vide chap. xvii.) They have no other relation to
the theory of Moksha but this, that also in the tricks of
Rasayana everything depends upon the intention, the
well-understood determination to carry them out, this


determination resting on the firm belief in them, and | —


resulting in the endeavour to realise them,


Worship as
the third
part of the
path of
liberation
according to
Gita,


On Rasa-
yana as a
path leading
to Moksha.


81 ا 6


According to the Hindus, liberation is union with on the
God; for they describe God as a being who can dis- ein
pense with hoping for a recompense or with fearing ae
opposition, unattainable to thought, because he is sub-
lime beyond all unlikeness which is abhorrent and all
likeness which is sympathetic, knowing himself not by
a knowledge which comes to him like an accident, re-
garding something which had not in every phase before
been known to him. And this same description the
Hindus apply to the liberated one, for he is equal to God
in all these things except in the matter of beginning,
since he has not existed from all eternity, and except
this, that before lberation he existed in the world of
entanglement, knowing the objects of knowledge only
by a phantasmagoric kind of knowing which he had
acquired by absolute exertion, whilst the object of his
knowing is still covered, as it were, by a veil. On the Page go.
contrary, in the world of liberation all veils are lifted,
all covers taken off, and obstacles removed. There the
being is absolutely knowing, not desirous of learning
anything unknown, separated from the soiled percep-
tions of the senses, united with the everlasting ideas.
Therefore in the end of the book of Patatijaii, after the CRE ae
pupil has asked about the nature of liberation, the 2014.
master says: “If you wish, say, Liberation is the
cessation of the functions of the three forces, and their
returning to that home whence they had come. Or if
you wish, say, It is the return of the soul as a knowing
being into its own nature.”

The two men, pupil and master, disagree regarding
him who has arrived at the stage of liberation. The
anchorite asks in the book of Sarnkhya, “Why does eee,
not death take place when action ceases?” ‘The sag
replies, “Because the cause of the separation is a
certain condition of the soul whilst the spirit is still
in the body. Soul and body are separated by a natural
condition which severs their union, Frequently when


‘VOL, I, F


52 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


the cause of an effect has already ceased or disappeared,
the effect itself still goes on for a certain time, slacken-
ing, and by and by decreasing, till in the end it ceases
totally; eg. the silk-weaver drives round his wheel with
his mallet until it whirls round rapidly, then he leaves
it; however, it does not stand still, though the mallet
that drove it round has been removed; the motion of
the wheel decreases by little and little, and finally it
ceases. It is the same case with the body. After the
action of the body has ceased, its effect is still lasting
until it arrives, through the various stages of motion
and of rest, at the cessation of physical force and of the
effect which had originated from preceding causes.
Thus liberation is finished when the body has been
completely prostrated.”

In the book of Patafijali there is a passage which
expresses similar ideas. Speaking of a man who re-
strains his senses and organs of perception, as the turtle
draws in its limbs when it is afraid, he says that “he
is not fettered, because the fetter has been loosened,
and he is not liberated, because his body is still with
him.”

There is, however, another passage in the same book
which does not agree with the theory of liberation as
expounded above, He says: “ The bodies are the snares
of the souls for the purpose of acquiring recompense.
He who arrives at the stage of liberation has acquired,
in his actual form of existence, the recompense for all
the doings of the past. Then he ceases to labour to
acquire a title to a recompense in the future. He frees
himself from the snare; he can dispense with the parti- —
cular form of his existence, and moves in it quite freely —
without being ensnared by it. He has even the faculty
of moving wherever he likes, and if he like, he might
rise above the face of death. For the thick, cohesive
bodies cannot oppose an obstacle to his form of exist- —
ence (as, ¢g.a mountain could not prevent him from —


From Pa-
tanjali.


Safi pa-
rallels.


Page 41.


On those
who do not
reach
Moksha
according to
Sdmkhya.,


CHAPTER VIl. §3


passing through). How, then, could his body oppose an
obstacle to his soul?”

Similar views are also met with among the Sifi.
Some Stift author relates the following story: “A com-
pany of Safi came down unto us, and sat down at some
distance from us. Then one of them rose, prayed, and
on having finished his prayer, turned towards me and
spoke: ‘O master, do you know here a place fit for us
to die on?’ NowlI thought he meant sleeping, and so I
pointed out to him a place. The man went there, threw
himself on the back of his head, and remained motion-
less. Now I rose, went to him and shook him, but lo!
he was already cold.”

The 8011 explain the Koranic verse, “We have
made room for him on earth” (Stra 18, 83), in this
way: “If he wishes, the earth rolls itself up for
him; if he wishes, he can walk on the water and in
the air, which offer him sufficient resistance so as to
enable him to walk, whilst the mountains do_not offer
him any resistance when he wants to pass through
them.”

We next speak of those who, notwithstanding their
greatest exertions, do not reach the stage of liberation.
There are several classes of them. The book Sémkhya
says: “He who enters upon the world with a virtuous
character, who is liberal with what he possesses of the
goods of the world, is recompensed in it in this way,
that he obtains the fulfilment of his wishes and desires,
that he moves about in the world in happiness, happy
in body and soul and in all other conditions of life. For
in reality good fortune is a recompense for former deeds,
done either in the same shape or in some preceding
shape. Whoso lives in this world piously but without
knowledge will be raised and be rewarded, but not be
liberated, because the means of attaining it are want-
ing in his case. Whoso is content and acquiesces
in possessing the faculty of practising the above-men-


= Ae


84 ALBERUNTIS INDIA.


tioned eight commandments (sic, wide p. 74), whoso


glories in them, is successful by means of them, and
believes that they are liberation, will remain in the
same stage.”

The following is a parable characterising those who
vie with each other in the progress through the various
stages of knowledge:—A man is travelling together
with his pupils for some business or other towards the
end of the night. Then there appears something stand-
ing erect before them on the road, the nature of which
it is impossible to recognise on account of the darkness
of night. The man turns towards his pupils, and asks
them, one after the other, what itis? The first says:
“T do not know what it is.” The second says: “I do
not know, and I have no means of learning what it is.”
The third says: “It is useless to examine what it is,
for the rising of the day will reveal it. If it is some-
thing terrible, it will disappear at daybreak; if it is
something else, the nature of the thing will anyhow be
clear to us.”” Now, none of them had attained to know-
ledge, the first, because he was ignorant; the second,
because he was incapable, and had no means of know-
ing; the third, because he was indolent and acquiesced
in his ignorance.

The fourth pupil, however, did not give an answer.
He stood still, and then he went on in the direction of
the object. On coming near, he found that it was pump-
kins on which there lay a tangled mass of something.
Now he knew that a living man, endowed with free
will, does not stand still in his place until such a
tangled mass is formed on his head, and he recognised
at once that it was a lifeless object standing erect.
Further, he could not be sure if it was not a hidden
place for some dunghill. So he went quite close to it,
struck against it with his foot till it fell to the ground.


Thus all doubt having been removed, he returned to .


his master and gave him the exact account. In sucha


A parable
showing
people

in the
various
degrees of


knowledge.


CHAPTER VII. 8s


way the master obtained the knowledge through the
intermediation of his pupils.
With regard to similar views of the ancient Greeks Parallels


rom Greek


we can quote Ammonius, who relates. the following as a, authors,
sentence of Pythagoras: “ Let your desire and exertion Plato, and
in this world be directed towards the union with the First >
Cause, which is the cause of the cause of your existence,
that you may endure for ever. You will be saved from
destruction and from being wiped out; you will go to
the world of the true sense, of the true joy, of the true
glory, in everlasting joy and pleasures.”

Further, Pythagoras says: “How can you hope for
the state of detachment as long as you are clad in
bodies? And how will you obtain liberation as long as
you are incarcerated in them ?”

Ammonius relates: “Empedocles and his successors
as far as Heracles (sic) think that the soiled souls always
remain commingled with the world until they ask the
universal soul for help. The universal soul intercedes Page 42.
for it with the 111611106166, the latter with the Creator.
The Creator affords something of his light to Intelligence;
Intelligence affords something of it to the universal soul,
which is immanent in this world. Now the soul wishes
to be enlightened by Intelligence, until at last the
individual soul recognises the universal soul, unites
with it, and is attached to its world. But this is a pro-
cess over which many ages must pass. Then the soul
comes to a region where there is neither place nor time,
nor anything of that which is in the world, like transient
fatigue or joy.”

Socrates says: “The soul on leaving space wanders
to the holiness (to xa@apov) which lives for ever and
exists eternally, being related to it. It becomes like
holiness in duration, because it is by means of something
like contact able to receive impressions from holiness.
This, its susceptibility to impressions, is called Lntelli-
gence.”


56 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


Further, Socrates says: “The soul is very similar to
the divine substance which does not die nor dissolve,
and is the only intelligibile which lasts for ever; the
body is the contrary of it. When soul and body unite,
nature orders body to serve, the soul to rule; but when
they separate, the soul goes to another place than that —
to which the body goes. There itis happy with things ~
that are suitable to it; it reposes from being cireum-
scribed in space, rests from folly, impatience, love, fear,
and other human evils, on this condition, that it had
always been pure and hated the body. If, however, it
has sullied itself by connivance with the body, by
serving and loving it so that the body was subservient
to its lusts and desires, in this case it does not ex-
perience anything more real than the species of bodily
things (To cmparoedés) and the contact with them.” 3

Proclus says: “The body in which the rational soul
dwells has received the figure of a globe, like the ether
and its individual beings. The body in which both the
rational and the irrational souls dwell has received an
erect figure like man. The body in which only the
irrational soul dwells has received a figure erect and
curved at the same time, like that of the irrational
animals, The body in which there is neither the one _
nor the other, in which there is nothing but the nourish-
ing power, has received an erect figure, but it is at the
same time curved and turned upside down, so that the
head is planted in the earth, as is the case with the
plants. The latter direction being the contrary to that
of man, man is a heavenly tree, the root of which is
directed towards its home, 2.6. heaven, whilst the root
of vegetables is directed towards their home, te. the
earth.”

Beran | The Hindus hold similar views about nature, Ar-
an Advattha JUDA asks, “What is Brahman like in the world?”
ing to putai- Whereupon Vasudeva answers, “Imagine him like an
sie Asvatiha tree.” This is a huge precious tree, well


6


=v FE Ry I OIE PL “tay


CHAPTER VIL 87


known among them, standing upside down, the roots
being above, the branches below. If it has ample
- nourishment, it becomes quite enormous; the branches
spread far, cling to the soil, and creep into it. Roots


and branches above and below resemble each other to -


Page 43.


Safi jee
els


such a degree that it is difficult to say which is which.
- “Brahman is the upper roots of this tree, its trunk is
the Veda, its branches are the different doctrines and
schools, its leaves are the different modes of inter-
pretation ; its nourishment comes from the three forces ;
the tree becomes strong and compact through the senses.
The intelligent being has no other keen desire but that
of felling this-tree, 2.6. abstaining from the world and
its vanities. When he has succeeded in felling it, he
wishes to settle in the place where it has grown, a
place in which there is no returning in a further stage
of metempsychosis. When he obtains this, he leaves
behind himself all the pains of heat and cold, and
coming from the heht of sun and moon and common
fires, he attains to the divine lights.”

The doctrine of Patafjalt is akin to that of the
Sift regarding being dunes in meditation on the
Truth (1.6. God), for they say, “As long as you point
to something, you are not a monist; but when the
Truth seizes upon the object of your pointing and
annihilates it, then there is no longer an indicating
person nor an object indicated.”

‘There are some passages in their system which show
that they believe in the pantheistic union; 6.7. one of
them, being asked what is the Truth (God), gave the
following answer: “How should I not know the being
which is 7 in essence and Not-in space? If 1 return
once more into existence, thereby I am separated from
him; and if I am neglected (ie. not born anew and
sent into the world), thereby I become light and be-
come accustomed to the union” (sic).

Abii-Bekr Ash-shibli says: “Cast off all, and you

I 3


88 ALBERUNTIS INDIA.


will attain to us completely. Then you will exist; but
you will not report about us to others as long as your
doing is like ours.”

Abf-Yazid Albistimi once being asked how he had
attained fis stage in Sufism, answered: “I cast off my
own self as a serpent casts off its skin. Then I con-
sidered my own self, and found that I was He,” we.
God.

The Sfifi explain the Koranic passage (Stira 2, 68),
“Then we spoke: Beat him with a part of her,’ in the
following manner: “The order to kill that which is


dead in order to give life to it indicates that the heart —


does not become alive by the lights of knowledge
unless the body be killed by ascetic practice to such
a degree that it does not any more exist as a reality,
but only in a formal way, whilst your heart is a reality
on which no object of the formal world has any in-
fluence.”

Further they say: “ Between man and God there
are a thousand stages of hght and darkness. Men exert
themselves to pass through darkness to light, and
- when they have attained to the stations of light, there
is no return for them.”


The various
classes of
creatures
according to
Sdmkhya.


0 7)


CHAPTER VIII.


ON THE DIFFERENT CLASSES OF CREATED BEINGS, AND
ON THEIR NAMES.


THE subject of this chapter is very difficult to study and
understand accurately, since we Muslims look at it from
without, and the Hindus themselves do not work it out
to scientific perfection. As we, however, want it for
the further progress of this treatise, we shall communi-
cate all we have heard of it until the date of the present
book. And first we give an extract from the book
Sdinkhya.

“ The anchorite spoke : ‘ How many classes and species
are there of living bodies ?’

“ The sage replied ; ‘There are three classes of them—
the spiritual ones in the height, men in the middle, and
animals in the depth. Their species are fourteen in
number, eight of which belong to the spiritual beings:
Brahman, Indra, Prajapati, Saumya, Gandharva, Yak-
sha, Rakshasa, and 2140698. Five species are those of
the animals—cattle, wild beasts, birds, creeping things,
and growing things, ue. the trees. And, lastly, one
species is represented by man.’”

The author of the same book has in another part of
it given the following enumeration with different names :
fe Beene Indra, Erajapa, Gandharva, Yaksha, Rak-
shasa, Pitaras, Pigaca.”

The Hindus are people who rarely preserve one and
the same order of things, and in their enumeration of


things there is much that is arbitrary. They use or


90 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


invent numbers of names, and who is to hinder or to


- control them ?


In the book Gétd, Vasudeva says: “ When the jirst of
the three primary forces prevails, it particularly applies
itself to developing the intellect, purifying the senses,
and producing action for the angels. Blissful rest is one
of the consequences of this force, and liberation one of
its results.

“When the second force prevails, it particularly ap-
plies itself to developing cupidity. It will lead to
fatigue, and induce to actions for the Yaksha and Rak-
shasa. In this case the recompense will be according
to the action.

“If the third force prevails, it particularly applies
itself to developing ignorance, and making people easily
beguiled by their own wishes. Finally, it produces
wakefulness, carelessness, laziness, procrastination in
fulfilling duties, and sleeping too long. If man acts, he
acts for the classes of the Bhiita and Pisaca, the devils,
for the Preta who carry the spirits in the air, not in
paradise and not in hell. Lastly, this force will lead
to punishment; man will be lowered from the stage
of humanity, and will be changed into animals and
plants.”

In another place the same author says: “ Belief and
virtue are in the Deva among the spiritual beings.
Therefore that man who resembles them believes in
God, clings to him, and longs for him. Unbelief and
vice are in the demons called Asura and Rakshasa.
That man who resembles them does not believe in God
nor attend to his commandments. He tries to make
the world godless, and is occupied with things which
are harmful in this world and in the world beyond, and
are of no use.”

If we now combine these statements with each other,


Page 44.


The author
enumerates


eight classes jt will be evident that there is some confusion both in -


the names and.in their order. According to the most


of spiritual
beings.


Criticisms
on this list.


CHAPTER VIII. 01


popular view of the majority of the Hindus, there are
the following eight classes of spiritwal beings :—

1. The Deva or angels, to whom the north belongs.
They specially belong to the Hindus. People say that
Zoroaster made enemies of the Shamaniyya or Bud-
dhists by calling the devils by the name of the class of
angels which they consider the highest, 2.64. Deva. And
this usage has been transmitted from Magian times
down to the Persian language of our days.

2. Daitya ’ddnava, the demons who live in the
south. To them everybody belongs who opposes the
religion of the Hindus and persecutes the cows. Not-
withstanding the near relationship which exists between
them and the Deva, there is, as Hindus maintain, 0
end of quarrelling and fighting among them.

3. Gandharva, the musicians and singers who make
music before the Deva. Their harlots are called Ap-
saras.

4. Yaksha, the treasurers or guardians of the Deva.

5. Rdkshasa, demons of ugly and deformed shapes.

6. Kinnara, having human shapes but horses’ heads,
being the contrary of the centaurs of the Greek, of
whom the lower half has the shape of a horse, the upper
half that of a man. The latter figure is that of the
Zodiacal sign of Arcitenens.

7, Ndga, beings in the shape of serpents.

8. Vidyddhara, demon-sorcerers, who exercise a
certain witchcraft, but not such a one as to produce
permanent results. 5

If we consider this series of beings, we find the
angelic power at the upper end and the demoniac at the
lower, and between them there is much interblending.


The qualities of these beings are different, inasmuch


as they have attained this stage of life in the course of
metempsychosis by action, and actions are different on
account of the three primary forces. They live very
long, since they have entirely stripped off the bodies,


02 4181217 171:5 11


since they are free from all exertion, and are able to do
things which are impossible to man. They serve man
in whatever he desires, and are near him in cases of need.

However, we can learn from the extract from Sdikhya
that this view is not correct. For Brahman, Indra, and
Prajipati are not names of species, but of individuals.
Brahman and Prajaipati very nearly mean the same,
but they bear different names on account of some
quality or other. Indra is the ruler of the worlds. Be-
sides, Vasudeva enumerates the Yaksha and Rakshasa
together in one and the same class of demons, whilst
the Puranas represent the Yaksha as guardian-angels .
and the servants of guardian-angels,

After all this, we declare that the spiritual beings
which we have mentioned are one category, who have
attained their present stage of existence by action dur-
ing the time when they were human beings. They have
left their bodies behind them, for bodies are weights
which impair the power and shorten the duration of
life. Their qualities and conditions are different, in the
same measure as one or other of the three primary forces
prevails over them. The first force is peculiar to the
Deva, or angels who live in quietness and bliss. The
predominant faculty of their mind is the comprehending
of an idea without matter, as it is the predominant
faculty of the mind of man to comprehend the idea in
matter.

The third force is peculiar to the 214569 and Bhiita,
whilst the second is peculhar to the classes between them.

The Hindus say that the number of Deva is thirty-
three kot or crore, of which eleven belong to Maha-
deva, Therefore this number is one of his surnames,
and his name itself (Mahddeva) points in this direction.
The sum of the number of angels just mentioned would
be 330,000,000.

Further, they represent the Deva as eating and drink-
ing, cohabiting, living and dying, since they exist


Page 45.


On the
Devas.


CHAPTER VIII. 93


within matter, though in the most subtle and most
simple kind of it, and since they have attained this by
action, not by knowledge. The book Patafiyali relates
that Nandikesgvara offered many sacrifices to Mahadeva,
and was in consequence transferred into paradise in his
human shape ; that Indra, the ruler, had intercourse with
the wife of Nahusha the Brahmin, and therefore was
changed into a serpent by way of punishment.

After the Deva comes the class of the Pitaras, the On the Pita-

deceased ancestors, and after them the Bhita, human Rishis.
beings who have attached themselves to the spiritual
beings (Deva), and stand in the middle between them
and mankind. He who holds this degree, but without
being free from the body, is called either Rishi or
Siddha or Muni, and these differ among themselves
according to their qualities. Siddha is he who has
attained by his action the faculty to do in the world
whatever he likes, but who does not aspire further, and
does not exert himself on the path leading to liberation.
He may ascend to the degree of a Rishi. Ifa Brahmin
attains this degree, he is called Brahmarshi; if the
Kshatriya attains it, he is called Rdjarshi. It is not
possible for the lower classes to attain this degree.
Rishis are the sages who, though they are only human
beings, excel the angels on account of their knowledge.
Therefore the angels learn from them, and above them
there is none but Brahman.

After the Brahmarshi and Rajarshi come those classes
of the populace which exist also among us, the castes,
to whom we shall devote a separate chapter.

All these latter beings are ranged under matter. Vishnu the
Now, as regards the notion of that which is above Eau
matter, we say that the tA» is the middle between and Rudra.
matter and the spiritual divine ideas that are above
matter, and that the three primary forces exist in the tA
dynamically (év dvvdue). So the dAy, with all that is
comprehended in it, is a bridge from above to below.


Pips


94 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


Any life which circulates in the #A7 under the exclu-
sive influence of the First Cause is called Brahman,
Prajdpati, and by many other names which occur in
their religious law and tradition, It is identical with
nature in so far as it is active, for all bringing into
existence, the creation of the world also, is attributed
by them to Brahman.

Any life which circulates in the Ay under the influ-
ence of the second force is called Ndrdyana in the
tradition of the Hindus, which means nature in so far
as it has reached the end of its action, and is now striv-
ing to preserve that which has been produced. Thus
Narayana strives so to arrange the world that it should
endure.

Any life which circulates in the dA» under the influ-
ence of the third force is called Mahddeva and Sankara,
but his best-known name is fudra. His work is
destruction and annihilation, ike nature in the last
stages of its activity, when its power slackens.

These three beings bear different names, as they cir-
culate through the various degrees to above and below,
and accordingly their actions are different.

But prior to all these beings there is one source
whence everything is derived, and in this unity they
comprehend all three things, no more separating one
from the other. This unity they call Vishnu, a name
which more properly designates the middle force; but
sometimes they do not even make a distinction between
this middle force and the first cause (ie. they make
Narayana the causa causarwm),

Here there is an analogy between Hindus and Chris-
tians, as the latter distinguish between the Three Per-
sons and give them separate names, Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, but unite them into one substance.

This is what clearly results from a careful exami-


nation of the Hindu doctrines. Of their traditional 1


accounts, which are full of silly notions, we shall speak


Page 46.


CHAPTER VIII. 95


hereafter in the course of our explanation. You must
not wonder if the Hindus, in their stories about the
class of the Deva, whom we have explained as angels,
allow them all sorts of things, unreasonable in them-
selves, some perhaps not objectionable, others decidedly
objectionable, both of which the theologians of Islam
would declare to be incompatible with the dignity and
nature of angels.

If you compare these traditions with those of the Greek paral-
Greeks regarding their own religion, you will cease to about Zeus.
find the Hindu system strange. We have already men-
tioned that they called the angels gods (p. 36). Now
consider their stories about Zeus, and you will under-
stand the truth of our remark. As for anthropomor-
phisms and traits of animal life which they attribute to
him, we give the following tradition: “When he was
born, his father wanted to devour him; but his mother
took a stone, wrapped rags round it, and gave him the
stone to swallow, whereupon he went away.” This is
also mentioned by Galenus in his Book of Speeches,
where he relates that Philo had in an enigmatical way
described the preparation of the @ura@vetov Pappwaxoy in
a poem of his by the following words :—

“ Take red hair, diffusing sweet odour, the offering to the gods,


And of man’s blood weigh weights of the number of the mental
facultres.”


The poet means jive pounds of saffron, because the senses
are five. The weights of the other ingredients of the
mixture he describes in similar enigmatic terms, of
which Galenus gives a commentary. In the same
poem occurs the: following verse :—


“ And of the pseudonymous root which has grown in the district
in which Zeus was born.”


To which Galenus adds: “This is Andropogon Nardus,
which bears a false name, because it is called an ear of
corn, although it is not an ear, but.a root. The poet


96 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


prescribes that it should be Cretan, because the mytho-
logists relate that Zeus was born on the mountain
Atkratov in Creta, where his mother concealed him
from his father Kronos, that he should not devour him
as he had devoured others.”

Besides, well-known story-books tell that he married
certain women one after the other, cohabited with
others, doing violence to them and not marrying them ;
among them Europa, the daughter of Phoenix, who was
taken from him by Asterios, king of Crete. After-
wards she gave birth to two children from him, Minos
and Rhadamanthus. This happened long before the
Israelites left the desert and entered Palestine.

Another tradition is that he died in Crete, and was
buried there at the time of Samson the Israelite, being
780 years of age; that he was called Zeus when he had
become old, after he had formerly been called Dios; and
that the first who gave him this name was Cecrops, the
first king of Athens. It was common to all of them
to indulge in their lusts without any restraint, and to
favour the business of the pander; and so far they were
not unlike Zoroaster and King Gushtésp when they
desired to consolidate the realm and the rule (sic).

Chroniclers maintain that Cecrops and his successors
are the source of all the vices among the Athenians,
meaning thereby such things as occur in the story of
Alexander, viz. that Nectanebus, king of Egypt, after
having fled before Artaxerxes the Black and hiding in
the capital of Macedonia, occupied himself with astro-
logy and soothsaying; that he beguiled Olympias, the
wife of King Philip, who was absent. He cunningly
contrived to cohabit with her, showing himself to her
in the figure of the god Ammon, as a serpent with two
heads like rams’ heads. So she became pregnant with
Alexander. Philip, on returning, was about to disclaim
the paternity, but then he dreamt that it was the child - |
of the god Ammon, Thereupon he recognised the child


Page 47.


CHAPTER VIII. 97


as his, and spoke, “ Man cannot oppose the gods.” The
combination of the stars had shown to Nectanebus that
he would die at the hands of his son. When then
he died at the hands of Alexander from a wound in
the neck, he recognised that he was his (Alexander’s)
father.

The tradition of the Greeks is full of similar things.

We shall relate similar subjects when speaking of the
marriages of the Hindus.

Now we return to our subject. Regarding that part Soa,
of the nature of Zeus which has no connection with |
humanity, the Greeks say that he is Jupiter, the son of
Saturn; for Saturn alone is eternal, not having been
born, according to the philosophers of the Academy, as
Galenus says in the Book of Deduction. This is suffi-
ciently proved by the book of Aratos on the Sawopeva,
for he begins with the praise of Zeus:


“We, mankind, do not leave him, nor can we do without him;
Of him the roads are full,
And the meeting-places of men.
He is mild towards them ;
He produces for them what they wish, and incites them to work.
Reminding them of the necessities of life,
He indicates to them the times favourable
For digging and ploughing for a good growth,
Who has raised the signs and stars in heaven.
Therefore we humiliate ourselves before him first and last.”


And then he praises the spiritual beings (the Muses).
If you compare Greek theology with that of the Hindus,
you will find that Brahman is described in the same
way as Zeus by Aratos.

The author of the commentary on the ®aiwopeva of
Aratos maintains that he deviated from the custom of
the poets of his time in beginning with the gods; that
it was his intention to speak of the celestial sphere.
Further, he makes reflections on the origin of Asclepius, Page 4s.
like Galenus, and says: “We should like to know

vio lad 1. G


98 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


which Zeus Aratos meant, the mystical or the physical
one. For the poet Krates called the celestial sphere
Zeus, and likewise Homer says:


‘ As pieces of snow are cut off from Zeus.’”


Aratos calls the ether and the air Zeus in the passage :
“The roads and the meeting-places are full of him, and
we all must inhale him.”

Therefore the philosophers of the Stoa maintain that
Zeus is the spirit which is dispersed in the dAn, and
similar to our souls, 2.6. the nature which rules every
natural body. ‘The author supposes that he is mild,
since he is the cause of the good; therefore he is right
in maintaining that he has not only created men, but
also the gods.


Throne and


tar.


al


(rogue)


CHAPTER IX.


ON THE CASTES, CALLED “COLOURS” (VARNA), AND ON
THE CLASSES BELOW THEM. |


Ir a new order of things in political or social life is
created by a man naturally ambitious of ruling, who
by his character and capacity really deserves to be a
ruler, a man of firm convictions and unshaken deter-
mination, who even in times of reverses is supported by
good luck, in so far as people then side with him in
recognition of former merits of his, such an order is
likely to become consolidated among those for whom
it was created, and to continue as firm as the deeply
rooted mountains, It will remain among them as a
generally recognised rule in all generations through the
course of time and the flight of ages. If, then, this new
form of state or society rests in some degree on religion,
these twins, state and religion, are in perfect harmony,
and their union represents the highest development of
human society, all that men can possibly desire.
_ The kings of antiquity, who were industriously de-
voted to the duties of their office, spent most of their
care on the division of their subjects into different
classes and orders, which they tried to preserve from
intermixture and disorder. ‘Therefore they forbade
people of different classes to have intercourse with each
other, and laid upon each class a particular kind of
work or art and handicraft. They did not allow any-
body to transgress the limits of his class, and even


100 41811201115 INDIA.


punished those who would not be content with their
class.

All this is well illustrated by the history of the
ancient Chosroes (Khusrau), for they had created great
institutions of this kind, which could not be broken
through by the special merits of any individual nor by
bribery. When Ardashir ben Babak restored the Per-
sian empire, he also restored the classes or castes of the
population in the following way :—

The first class were the knights and princes.

The second class the monks, the fire-priests, and the
lawyers.

The third class the physicians, astronomers, and other
men of science.

The fourth class the husbandmen and artisans.

And within these classes there were subdivisions, dis-
tinct from each other, lke the species within a genus.
All institutions of this kind are like a pedigree, as long
as their origin is remembered; but when once their
origin has been forgotten, they become, as it were, the
stable property of the whole nation, nobody any more
questioning its origin. And forgetting is the necessary
result of any long period of time, of a long succession
of centuries and generations,

Among the Hindus institutions of this kind abound.
We Muslims, of course, stand entirely on the other side
of the question, considering all men as equal, except in
piety; and this is the greatest obstacle which prevents
any approach or understanding between Hindus and
Muslims.

The Hindus call their castes varna, i.e. colours, and
from a genealogical point of view they call them jataka,
le. births. These castes are from the very beginning
only four.

I. The highest caste are the Brihmana, of whom the
books of the Hindus tell that they were created from
the head of Brahman. And as Brahman is only another


Castes of
the ancient
Persians.


The four
castes.


Page 49.


CHAPTER TX. IOI


name for the force called nature, and the head is the
highest part of the animal body, the Brihmana are the
choice part of the whole genus. Therefore the Hindus
consider them as the very best of mankind.

11. The next caste are the Kshatriya, who were
created, as they say, from the shoulders and hands of ©
Brahman. Their degree is not much below that of the
Brahbmana.

111. After them follow the Vaisya, who were created
from the thigh of Brahman.

IV. The Sadra, who were created from his feet.

Between the latter two classes there is no very
great distance. Much, however, as these classes differ
from each other, they live together in the same towns
and villages, mixed together in the same houses and
lodgings.

After the Sfidra follow the people called Antyaja, who tow-caste
render various kinds of services, who are not reckoned a
amongst any caste, but only as members of a certain
craft or profession, There are eight classes of them,
who freely intermarry with each other, except the fuller,
shoemaker, and weaver, for no others would condescend
to have anything to do with them. These eight cuilds
are the fuller, shoemaker, juggler, the basket and shield
maker, the sailor, fisherman, the hunter of wild animals
and of birds, and the weaver. The four castes do not
live together with them in one and the same place.
These guilds live near the villages and towns of the
four castes, but outside them. ش‎

The people called Hadi, Doma (Domba), Candala,
and Badhatau (sic) are not reckoned amongst any caste
or guild. ‘They are occupied with dirty work, lke the
cleansing of the villages and other services. ‘They are
considered as one sole class, and distinguished only by
their occupations. In fact, they are considered like
illegitimate children; for according to general opinion
they descend from a Stidra father and a Brdhmani


102 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


mother as the children of fornication; therefore they
are degraded outcasts,

The Hindus give to every single man of the four
castes characteristic names, according to their occu-
pations and modes of life. 777. the Brahmana is in
general called by this name as long as he does his work
staying at home. When he is busy with the service
of one fire, he is called ishtin ; if he serves three fires, he
is called agnihdtrin ; if he besides offers an offering to
the fire, he is called dikshita. And as it is with the
Braéhmana, so is it also with the other castes. Of the
classes beneath the castes, the Hédi are the best spoken
of, because they keep themselves free from everything
unclean. Next follow the Doma, who play on the lute
and sing. The still lower classes practise as a trade
killing and the inflicting of judicial punishments. The
worst of all are the Badhatau, who not only devour the
flesh of dead animals, but even of dogs and other
beasts.

Each of the four castes, when eating together, must
form a group for themselves, one group not being
allowed to comprise two men of different castes. If,
further, in the group of the Brahmana there are two
men who live at enmity with each other, and the seat
of the one is by the side of the other, they make a
barrier between the two seats by placing a board
between them, or by spreading a piece of dress, or in
some other way; and if there is only a line drawn
between them, they are considered as separated. Since
it is forbidden to eat the remains of a meal, every single
man must have his own food for himself; for if any one
of the party who are eating should take of the food from
one and the same plate, that which remains in the plate
becomes, after the first eater has taken part, to him who
wants to take as the second, the remains of the meal,
and such is forbidden.

Such is the condition of the four castes. Arjuna


Different
occupations
of the castes
and guilds.


Customs of
the Brah-
mins.


Page 50.


62 103


asked about the nature of the four castes and what
must be their moral qualities, whereupon Vasudeva
answered :

“The Braéhmana must have an ample intellect, a
quiet heart, truthful speech, much patience; he must
be master of his senses, a lover of justice, of evident
purity, always directed upon worship, entirely bent
upon religion.

“The Kshatriya must fill the hearts with terror, must
be brave and high-minded, must have ready speech and
a liberal hand, not minding dangers, only intent upon
carrying the great tasks of his calling to a happy end.

“The Vaisgya is to occupy himself with agriculture,
with the acquisition of cattle, and with trade.

“The Stidra is to endeavour to render services and
attention to each of the preceding classes, in order to
make himself liked by them.

“Tf each member of these castes adheres to his cus-
toms and usages, he will obtain the happiness he wishes
for, supposing that he is not negligent in the worship of
God, not forgetting to remember him in his most im-
portant avocations. But if anybody wants to quit the
works and duties of his caste and adopt those of another
caste, even if it would bring a certain honour to the
latter, it is a sin, because it is a transgression of the
rule.”

Further, Vasudeva speaks, inspiring him with courage
to fight the enemy: “ Dost thou not know, O man with
the long arm, that thou art a Kshatriya; that thy race
has been created brave, to rush boldly to the charge,
to care little for the vicissitudes of time, never to give
way whenever their soul has a foreboding of coming
misfortune? for only thereby is the reward to be ob-
tained. If he conquers, he obtains power and good
fortune. If he perishes, he obtains paradise and bliss.
Besides, thou showest weakness in the presence of the
enemy, and seemest melancholy at the prospect of


ge AEN‏ ...لل ص ييه جد


ae ee


aS


بحم


104 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


killing this host; but it will be infinitely worse if thy
name will spread as that of a timid, cowardly man, that
thy reputation among the heroes and the experienced
warriors will be gone, that thou wilt be out of their
sight, and thy name no longer be remembered among
them. I do not know a worse punishment than such
a state. Death is better than to expose thyself to the
consequences of ignominy. If, therefore, God has
ordered thee to ficht, if he has deigned to confer upon
thy caste the task of fighting and has created thee for
it, carry out his order and perform his will with a
determination which is free from any desire, so that
thy action be exclusively devoted to him.”

Hindus differ among themselves as to which of these
castes 1s capable of attaining to liberation ; for, according
to some, only the Brahmana and Kshatriya are capable
of it, since the others cannot learn the Veda, whilst
according to the Hindu philosophers, liberation is
common to all castes and to the whole human race, if
their intention of obtaining it is perfect. This view


is based on the saying of Vydsa: “ Learn to know’ —


the twenty-five things thoroughly. Then you may
follow whatever religion you like; you will no doubt
be liberated.” This view is also based on the fact
that Vasudeva was a descendant of a Sidra family,
and also on the following saying of his, which he
addressed to Arjuna: “ God distributes recompense
without injustice and without partiality. He reckons
the good as bad if people in doing good forget him; he
reckons the bad as good if people in doing bad remem-
ber him and do not forget him, whether those people be
Vaigya or Sidra or women. How much more will this
be the case when they are Brihmana or Kshatriya:”


Moksha and
the various
castes.


Page 51.


0001


CHAPTER د‎


ON THE SOURCE OF THEIR RELIGIOUS AND CIVIL LAW,
ON PROPHETS, AND ON THE QUESTION WHETHER
SINGLE LAWS CAN BE ABROGATED OR NOT.


THE ancient Greeks received their religious and civil 47an°


among the


laws from sages among them who were called to the Gn
work, and of whom their countrymen believed that ل‎
they received divine help, like Solon, Draco, Pythagoras,
Minos, and others. Also their kings did the same; for
Mianos (sic), when ruling over the islands of the sea
and over the Cretans about two hundred years after
Moses, gave them laws, pretending to have received
them from Zeus. About the same time also Minos (sic)
gave his laws.

At the time of Darius I., the successor of Cyrus, the
Romans sent messengers to the Athenians, and received
from them the laws in twelve books, under which they
lived till the rule of Pompilius (Numa). This king
gave them new laws; he assigned to the year twelve
months, whilst up to that time it had only had ten
months. It appears that he introduced his innovations
against the will of the Romans, for he ordered them to
use as instruments of barter in commerce pieces of
pottery and hides instead of silver, which seems on
his part to betray a certain anger against rebellious
subjects.

In the first chapter of the Book of Laws of Plato, the quotation


from Plato’s


Athenian stranger says: “ Who do you think was the Zaws.


106 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


first who gave laws to 7017 Was he an angel or aman?”
The man of Cnossus said: “He was an angel. In
truth, with us it was Zeus, but with the Lacedeemonians,
as they maintain, the legislator was Apollo.”

Further, he says in the same chapter: “It is the
duty of the legislator, if he comes from God, to make
the acquisition of the greatest virtues and of the highest
justice the object of his legislation.”

He describes the laws of the Cretans as rendering
perfect the happiness of those who make the proper
use of them, because by them they acquire all the
human good which is dependent upon the divine good.

The Athenian says in the second chapter of the
same book: “The gods, pitying mankind as born for
trouble, instituted for them feasts to the gods, the
Muses, Apollo the ruler of the Muses, and to Dionysos,
who gave men wine as a remedy against the bitterness
of old age, that old men should again be young by
forgetting sadness, and by bringing back the character
of the soul from the state of affliction to the state of
soundness.”

Further he says: “They have given to men by in-
spiration the arrangements for dancing, and the equally
weighed rhythm as a reward for fatigues, and that they
may become accustomed to live together with them in
feasts and joy. Therefore they call one kind of their
music pratses, with an imphed allusion to the prayers
to the gods.”

Such was the case with the Greeks, and it is precisely
the same with the Hindus. For they believe that their
religious law and its single precepts derive their origin
from Rishis, their sages, the pillars of their religion,
and not from the prophet, 4.64. Narayana, who, when
coming into this world, appears in some human figure.
But he only comes in order to cut away some evil
matter which threatens the world, or to set the world
right again when anything has gone wrong. Further, no


The Rishis,
the authors
of Hindu
law.


Page 52.


Whether
laws may be
abrogated or
not,


Different
matrimonial
systems,


The story of
Pandu and
Vyasa.


CHAPTER X. 107


law can be exchanged or replaced by another, for they
use the laws simply as they find them. Therefore they
can dispense with prophets, as far as law and worship
are concerned, though in other affairs of the creation
they sometimes want them.

As for the question of the abrogation of laws, it
* seems that this is not impossible with the Hindus, for
they say that many things which are now forbidden
were allowed before the coming of Vasudeva, eg. the
flesh of cows. Such changes are necessitated by the
change of the nature of man, and by their being too
feeble to bear the whole burden of their duties. To
these changes also belong the changes of the matri-
monial system and of the theory of descent. For in
former times there were three modes of determining
descent or relationship:

1. The child born to a man by his lecitimate wife is
the child of the father, as 15 the custom with us and
with the Hindus. |

2. If a man marries a woman and has a child by her;
if, further, the marriage-contract stipulates that the
children of the woman will belong to her father, the
child is considered as the child of its grandfather who
made that stipulation, and not as the child of its father
_ who engendered it.

3. If a stranger has a child by a married woman, the
child belongs to her husband, since the wife being, as it
_ were, the soil in which the child has grown, is the pro-
perty of the husband, always presupposing that the
sowing, ae. the cohabitation, takes place with his con-
sent.

According to this principle, Pandu was considered as
the son of Santanu; for this king had been cursed by
an anchorite, and in consequence was unable to cohabit
with his wives, which was the more provoking to him
as he had not yet any children. Now he asked Vyasa,
the son of Pardgara, to procreate for him children from


108 418112101715 11


his wives in his place. 202011 sent him one, but she
was afraid of him when he cohabitated with her, and
trembled, in consequence of which she conceived a
sickly child of yellow hue. Then the king sent him a
second woman; she, too, felt much reverence for him,
and wrapped herself up in her veil, and in consequence
she gave birth to Dhritarashtra, who was blind and
unhealthy. Lastly, he sent him a third woman, whom
he enjoined to put aside all fear and reverence with
regard to the saint. Laughing and in high spirits, she
went in to him, and conceived from him a child of
moon-like beauty, who excelled all men in boldness and
cunning.

The four sons of Pandu had one wife in common,
who stayed one month with each of them alternately.
In the books of the Hindus it is told that Parasara, the
hermit, one day travelled in a boat in which there was
also a daughter of the boatman. He fell in love with
her, tried to seduce her, and finally she yielded; but
there was nothing on the bank of the river to hide
them from the looks of the people. However, instan-
taneously there grew a tamarisk-tree to facilitate their
purpose. Now he cohabited with her behind the tama-
risk, and made her conceive, whereupon she became
pregnant with this his excellent son Vyasa.

All these customs have now been abolished and ab-
rogated, and therefore we may infer from their tradi-
tion that in principle the abrogation of a law 1s allowable.

As regards unnatural kinds of marriage, we must
state that such exist still in our time, as they also
existed in the times of Arab heathendom ; for the
people inhabiting the mountains stretching from the
region of Panchir into the neighbourhood of Kashmir
live under the rule that several brothers have one wife
in common. Among the heathen Arabs, too, marriage
was of different kinds :—

1. An Arab ordered his wife to be sent to a certain


Birth of
Vyasa.


Various
kinds of
marriage


with Tibe-


tans and
Arabs.


Page 53.


Marriage
among the
ancient
Iranians.


CHAPTER X. 109


man to demand sexual intercourse with him; then he
abstained from her during the whole time of her preg-
nancy, since he wished to have from her a generous
offspring. This is identical with the third kind of
marriage among the Hindus.

2. A second kind was this, that the one Arab said to
the other, “Cede me your wife, and I will cede you
mine,” and thus they exchanged their wives.

3. A third kind is this, that several men cohabited
with one wife. When, then, she gave birth to a child,
she declared who was the father; and if she did not
know it, the fortune-tellers had to know it.

4. The Nikadh-elmakt (= matrimonium exosum), 1.¢.
when a man married the widow of his father or of his
son, the child of such a marriage was called daizan.
This is nearly the same as a certain Jewish marriage,
for the Jews have the law that a man must marry the
widow of his brother, if the latter has not left children,
and create a line of descent for his deceased brother ;
and the offspring is considered as that of the deceased
man, not as that of the real father. Thereby they want
to prevent his memory dying out in the world. In
Hebrew they call a man who is married in this way
Yabham.

There was a similar institution among the Magians.
In the book of Tausar, the great herbadh, addressed to
Padashvar-girshah, as an answer to his attacks on
Ardashir the son of Babak, we find a description of the
institution of a man’s being married as the substitute
for another man, which existed among the Persians.
If a man dies without leaving male offspring, people
are to examine the case. If he leaves a wife, they
marry her to his nearest relative. If he does not leave
a wife, they marry his daughter or the nearest related
woman to the nearest related male of the family.
Jf there is no woman of his family left, they woo by
means of the money of the deceased a woman for his


110 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


family, and marry her to some male relative. The
child of such a marriage is considered as the offspring
of the deceased.

Whoever neglects this duty and does not fulfil it,
kills innumerable souls, since he cuts off the progeny
and the name of the deceased to all eternity.

We have here given an account of these things in
order that the reader may learn by the comparative
treatment of the subject how much superior the insti-
tutions of Islam are, and how much more plainly this
contrast brings out all customs and usages, differing —
from those of Islam, in their essential foulness. — a


Origin of
idol-worship
in the nature
of man.


6 0121


CHAPTER XI.


ABOUT THE BEGINNING OF IDOL-WORSHIP, AND A
DESCRIPTION OF THE INDIVIDUAL IDOLS.


It is well known that the popular mind leans towards
the sensible world, and has an aversion to the world of
abstract thought which is only understood by highly
educated people, of whom in every time and every
place there are only few. And as common people will
only acquiesce in pictorial representations, many of the
leaders of religious communities have so far deviated
from the right path as to give such imagery in their
books and houses of worship, like the Jews and Chris-
tians, and, more than all, the Manicheans, These


- words of mine would at once receive a sufficient illus-


tration if, for example, a picture of the Prophet were
made, or of Mekka and the Ka‘ba, and were shown to
an uneducated man or woman. Their joy in looking
at the thing would bring them to kiss the picture, to
rub their cheeks against it, and to roll themselves in
the dust before it, as if they were seeing not the picture,
but the original, and were in this way, as if they were
present in the holy places, performing the rites of pil-
erimage, the great and the small ones.

This is the cause which leads to the manufacture of
idols, monuments in honour of certain much venerated
persons, prophets, sages, angels, destined to keep alive
their memory when they are absent or dead, to create
for them a lasting place of grateful veneration in the
hearts of men when they die. But when much time


112 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


passes by after the setting up of the monument, genera-
tions and centuries, its origin is forgotten, it becomes a
matter of custom, and its veneration a rule for general
practice. This being deeply rooted in the nature of
man, the legislators of antiquity tried to influence them
from this weak point of theirs. Therefore they made
the veneration of pictures and similar monuments ob-
ligatory on them, as is recounted in historic records,
both for the times before and after the Deluge. Some
people even pretend to know that all mankind, before ~
God sent them his prophets, were one large idolatrous
body.

The followers of the Thora fix the beginning of ido-
latry in the days of Sertich, the great-grandfather of
Abraham. The Romans have, regarding this question,
the following tradition:—Romulus and Romanus (3),
the two brothers from the country of the Franks, on
having ascended the throne, built the city of Rome.
Then Romulus killed his brother, and the consequence
was a long succession of intestine troubles and wars.
Finally, Romulus humiliated himself, and then he
dreamt that there would only be peace on condition
that he placed his brother on the throne. Now he got
a golden image made of him, placed it at his side, and
henceforward he used to say, “We (not 7) have ordered
thus and thus,’ which since has become the general
use of kings. Thereupon the troubles subsided. He
founded a feast and a play to amuse and to gain over
those who bore him ill-will on account of the murder
of his brother. Besides, he erected a monument to the
sun, consisting. of four images on four horses, the green
one for the earth, the blue for the water, the red for the
fire, and the white for the air. This monument is still
in Rome in our days.

Since, however, here we have to axplain the system and
the theories of the Hindus on the subject, we shall now
mention their ludicrous views; but we declare at once


Page 54.


Story of
Romulus
and Remus.


Idol-wor-
ship as re
stricted 5
the low
classes of
people.


CHAT ا‎ 113


that they are held only by the common uneducated

people. For those who march on the path to liberation,

or those who study philosophy and theology, and who

desire abstract truth which they call 5070, are entirely

free from worshipping anything but God alone, and

would never dream of worshipping an image manufac-
_tured to represent him. A tradition illustrative of

this is that which Saunaka told the king Pariksha in

these words :—

There was once a king called Ambartsha, who had Story of


King Am-


obtained an empire as large as he had wished for. - But barish and

afterwards he came to like it no longer; he retired from 1
the world, and exclusively occupied himself with wor-
shipping and praising God for a long time. Finally,

God appeared to him in the shape of Indra, the prince

of the angels, riding on an elephant. He spoke to the

king: “Demand whatever you like, and I will give it

you,”

The king answered: “I rejoice in seeing thee, and
I am thankful for the good fortune and help thou
hast given; but I do not demand anything from thee,
but only from him who created thee.”

_ Indra said: “The object of worship is to receive a
noble reward. Realise, therefore, your object, and accept
the reward from him from whom hitherto you have
obtained your wishes, and do not pick and choose,
saying, ‘ Not from thee, but from another.’”

The king answered: “The earth has fallen to my lot,
but I do not care for all that is in it. The object of
my worship is to see the Lord, and that thou canst not
give me. Why, therefore, should I demand the fulfil-
ment of my desire from thee?”

Indra said: “The whole world and whoever is upon
it are obedient to me. Who are you that you dare to
Oppose me ?”
| The king answered: “J, too, hear and obey, but I

worship im from whom thou hast received this power,


1701. 1. 11


114 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


who is the lord of the universe, who has protected thee
against the attacks of the two kings, Bali and Hiran-
yiksha. Therefore let me do as J like, and turn away
from me with my farewell greeting.”

Indra said: “If you will absolutely oppose me, I will
kill you and annihilate you.”

The king answered: “ People say that happiness is
envied, but not so misfortune. He who retires from
the world is envied by the angels, and therefore they
will try to lead him astray. I am one of those who
have retired from the world and entirely devoted them-
selves to worship, and I shall not give it up as long as
1 live. I do not know myself to be guilty of a crime
for which I should deserve to be killed by thee. If
thou killest me without any offence on my part, it is
thy concern. What dost thou want from me? If my
thoughts are entirely devoted to God, and nothing else


is blended with them, thou art not able to do me any —
harm. Sufficient for me is the worship with which I '


am occupied, and now I return to it.”

As the king now went on worshipping, the Lord
appeared to him in the shape of a man of the grey
lotus colour, riding on a bird called Garuda, holding in
one of the four hands the sankha, a sea-shell which
people blow when riding on elephants; in the second
hand the cakra, a round, cutting, orbicular weapon,
which cuts everything it hits right through; in the


third an amulet, and in the fourth padma, i.e. the red —


lotus. When the king saw him, he shuddered from
reverence, prostrated himself and uttered many praises.


The Lord quieted his terrified mind and promised him —
that he should obtain everything he wished for, The '
king spoke: “JI had obtained an empire which nobody —


4


disputed with me; I was in conditions of life not —


troubled by sorrow or sickness. It was as if the |
whole world belonged to me. But then I turned away ©
from it, after I had understood that the good of the


Page 55.


CHAPTER XI. 115


world is really bad in the end. I do not wish for any-
thing except what I now have. The only thing I now
wish for is to be liberated from this fetter.”

The Lord spoke: “That you will obtain by keeping
aloof from the world, by being alone, by uninterrupted
meditation, and by restraining your senses to yourself.”

The king spoke: “Supposing that I am able to do
so through that sanctity which the Lord has deigned
to bestow upon me, how should any other man be able
to do so? for man wants eating and clothing, which
connects him with the world. How is he to think of
anything else ?”

The Lord spoke: “Occupy yourself with your empire
in as straightforward and prudent a way as possible:
turn your thoughts upon me when you are engaged in
civilising the world and protecting its inhabitants, in
giving alms, and in everything you do. And if you are
overpowered by human forgetfulness, make to yourself
an image like that in which you see me; offer to it
perfumes and flowers, and make it a memorial of me,
so that you may not forget me. If you are in sorrow,
think of me; if you speak, speak in my name; if you
act, act for me.”

The king spoke: “Now I know what I have to do


in general, but honour me further by instructing me


in the details.”

The Lord spoke: “That I have done already. I have
inspired your judge Vasishtha with all that is required.
Therefore rely upon him in all questions.”

Then the figure disappeared from his sight. The
king returned into his residence and did as he had
‘been ordered.

From that time, the Hindus say, people make idols,
some with four hands like the appearance we have
described, others with two hands, as the story and
description require, and conformably to the being which
is to be represented.


116 ١ ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


Another story of theirs is the following :—Brahman
had a son called Narada, who had no other desire but
that of seeing the Lord. It was his custom, when he
walked about, to hold a stick. If he threw it down,
it became a serpent, and he was able to do miracles
with it. He never went without it. One day being
engrossed in meditation on the object of his hopes, he
saw a fire from afar. He went towards it, and then a
voice spoke to him out of the fire: “What you demand
and wish is impossible. You cannot see me save
thus.” When he looked in that direction, he saw a
fiery appearance in something like human shape.
Henceforward it has been the custom to erect idols of
certain shapes.

A. famous idol of theirs was that of Multin, dedicated
to the sun, and therefore called Aditya. It was of wood
and covered with red Cordovan leather; in its two eyes
were two red rubies, It is said to have been made in
the last Kritayuga. Suppose that it was made in the
very end of Kritavuga, the time which has since elapsed
amounts to 216,432 years. When Muhammad Ibn
Alkasim Ibn Almunabbih conquered Multin, he in-
quired how the town had become so very flourishing
and so many treasures had there been accumulated, and
then he found out that this idol was the cause, for
there came pilgrims from all sides to visit it, There-
fore he thought it best to have the idol where it was,
but he hung a piece of cow’s-flesh on its neck by way
of mockery. On the same place a mosque was built.
When then the Karmatians occupied Multan, Jalam
Ibn Shaiban, the usurper, broke the idol into pieces
and killed its priests. He made his mansion, which
was a castle built of brick on an elevated place, the
mosque instead of the old mosque, which he ordered to
be shut from hatred against anything that had been
done under the dynasty of the Caliphs of the house of
‘Umayya. When afterwards the blessed Prince Mah-


Narada and
the voice
from the
fire.


Page 56.


The idol of
Multan call-
ed Aditya.


The idol of
Taneshar
called
Cakra-
svamin,


CHAPTER XI. . 117


mtid swept away their rule from those countries, he
made again the old mosque the place of the Friday-
worship, and the second one was left to decay. At
present it is only a barn-floor, where bunches of 5
(Lawsonia inermis) are bound together.

If we now subtract from the above-mentioned num-
ber of years the hundreds, tens, and units, 4.6. the 432
years, as a kind of arbitrary equivalent for the sum of
about 100 years, by which the rise of the Karmatians
preceded our time, we get as the remainder 216,000
years for the time of the end of the Kritayuga, and
about the epoch of the era of the Hijra. How, then,
could wood have lasted such a length of time, and
particularly in a place where the air and the soil are
rather wet? God knows best!

The city of Taneshar is highly venerated by the
Hindus. The idol of that place is called Cakrasvémin,
1.6. the owner of the cakra, a weapon which we have
already described (page 114). It is of bronze,’and is
nearly the size of aman. It is nowlying in the hippo-
drome in Ghazna, together with the Lord of Somandath,
which is a representation of the penis of Mahadeva,
called Linga. Of Somanath we shall hereafter speak in
the proper place. This Cakrasvémin is said to have
been made in the time of Bharata as a memorial of wars
connected with this name.


In Inner Kashmir, about two or three days’ journey The idol


Sarada in
Kashmir.


from the capital in the direction towards the mountains
of Bolor, there is a wooden idol called Sdérada, which is
much venerated and frequented by pilgrims.


We shall now communicate a whole chapter from the Quotation


from the


book Samhitd relating to the construction of idols, samnita of


Varahami-
hira.


which will help the student thoroughly to comprehend
the present subject.

Varaihamihira says: “If the figure is made to repre-
sent Rama the son of DaSgaratha, or Bali the son of
Virocana, give it the height of 120 digits,” 2.6. of zdol


&
©


118 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


digits, which must be reduced by one-tenth to become
common digits, in this case 108.

“To the idol of Vishnu give eight hands, or four, or
two, and on the left side under the breast give him the
figure of the woman Sri. If you give him eight hands,
place in the right hands a sword, a club of gold or iron,
an arrow, and make the fourth hand as if it were draw-
ing water; in the left hands give him a shield, a bow, a
cakra, and a conch.

“Tf you give him four hands, omit the bow and the
arrow, the sword and shield.

“Tf you give him two hands, let the right hand be
drawing water, the left holding a conch,

“Tf the figure is to represent Baladeva, the brother of
Narayana, put earrings into his ears, and give him eyes
of a drunken man.

“Tf you make both figures, Narayana and Baladeva,
join with them their sister Bhagavatt (Durgi=Hka-
nansi), her left hand resting on her hip a little away
from the side, and her right hand holding a lotus,

“Tf you make her four-handed, place in theright hands
a rosary and a hand drawing water; in the left hands, a
book and a lotus.

“ Tf you make her eight-handed, place in the left hands
the kamandalu, 1.6. a pot, a lotus, bow and book; in the
right hands, a rosary, a mirror, an arrow, and a water-
drawing hand.

“ 11 the figure is to represent Samba, the son of Vishnu,
put only a club in his right hand, If it is to represent
Pradyumna, the son of Vishnu, place in his right hand
an arrow, in his left hand a bow. And if you make
their two wives, place in their right hand a sword, in
the left a buckler.

“'The idol of Brahman has four faces towards the four
sides, and is seated on a lotus.

“ The idol of Skanda, the son of Mahgdevar is a boy
riding on a peacock, his hand holding a sakti, a weapon


Page 57.


CHAPTER XI. 119


like a double-edged sword, which has in the middle a
pestle like that of a mortar.

“The idol Indra holds in its hand a weapon called
vajra of diamond. It has a similar handle to the saktz,
but on each side it has two swords which join at the
handle. On his front place a third eye, and make him
ride on a white elephant with four tusks.

“ Likewise make on the front of the idol of Mahadeva
a third eye right above, on his head a crescent, in his
_ hand a weapon called ,ه5072‎ similar to the club but with
three branches, and a sword; and let his left hand hold
his wife Gauri, the daughter of Himavant, whom he
presses to his bosom from the side.

“To the idol Jina, z.e. Buddha, give a face and limbs as
beautiful as possible, make the lines in the palms of his
hands and feet lke a lotus, and represent him seated
on a lotus; give him grey hair, and represent him with
a placid expression, as if he were the father of creation.

“Tf you make Arhant, the figure of another body of
Buddha, represent him as a naked youth with a fine
face, beautiful, whose hands reach down to the knees,
with the figure of Sri, his wife, under the left breast.

“The idol of Revanta, the son of the sun, rides on a
٠ horse like a huntsman.

“The idol of Yima, the angel of death, rides on a
buffalo, and holds a club in his hand.

“ The idol of Kubera, the treasurer, wears a crown, has
a big stomach and wide hips, and is riding on a man.

“The idol of the sun has a red face lke the pith of
the red lotus, beams like a diamond, has protruding
limbs, rings in the ears, the neck adorned with pearls
which hang down over the breast, wears a crown of
several compartments, holds in his hands two lotuses,
and is clad in the dress of the Northerners which reaches
down to the ankle.

“Tf you represent the Seven Mothers, represent several Page ss.
of them together in one figure, Brahmani with four faces


4
ران مونب‎ EE حيدم صر ويه‎ AIS ALLS سا‎ IER DS a a? و‎


een


poi sascha tae aia


120 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


towards the four directions, Kaumari with six faces,


Vaishnavi with four hands, Varahi with a hog’s head .


on a human body, Indrani with many eyes and a club
in her hand, Bhagavati (Durga) sitting as people
generally sit, Camundaé ugly, with protruding teeth
and a slim waist. Further join with them the sons of
Mahadeva, Kshetrapala with bristling hair, a sour face,
and an ugly figure, but Vinayaka with an elephant’s
head on a human body, with four hands, as we have
heretofore described.”

The worshippers of these idols kill sheep and buffaloes
with axes (kutdra), that they may nourish themselves
with their blood. All idols are constructed according to
certain measures determined by zdol-fingers for every
single limb, but sometimes they differ regarding the
measure of a limb. If the artist keeps the right
measure and does not make anything too large nor too
small, he is free from sin, and is sure that the being
which he represented will not visit him with any
mishap. “If he makes the idol one cubit high and
together with the throne two cubits, he will obtain
health and wealth. If he makes it higher still, he will
be praised.

“ But he must know that making the idol too large,
especially that of the Sun, will hurt the ruler, and
making it too small will hurt the artist. If he gives it
a thin belly, this helps and furthers the famine in the
country ; if he gives it a lean belly, this ruins property.

“Tf the hand of the artist slips so as to produce some-
thing like a wound, he will have a wound in his own
body which will kill him.

“Tf it is not completely even on both sides, so that
the one shoulder is higher than the other, his wife will
perish. |

“If he turns the eye upward, he will be blind for
lifetime ; if he turns it downward, he will have many
troubles and sorrows.”


121 ا 06000


If the statue is made of some precious stone, it is
better than if it were made of wood, and wood is better
than clay. “The benefits of a statue of precious stone
will be common to all the men and women of the
empire. A golden statue will bring power to him who
erected it, a statue of silver will bring him renown, one
of bronze will bring him an increase of his rule, one of
stone the acquisition of landed property.”

The Hindus honour their idols on account of those
who erected them, not on account of the material of
which they are made. We have already mentioned
that the idol of Multan was of wood. yg. the 0
which Rama erected when he had finished the war with
the demons was of sand, which he had heaped up with
his own hand. But then it became petrified all at once,
since the astrologically correct moment for the erecting
of the monument fell before the moment when the
workmen had finished the cutting of the stone monu-
ment which Rama originally had ordered. Regarding
the building of the temple and its peristyle, the cutting
of the trees of four different kinds, the astrological
determination of the favourable moment for the erec-
tion, the celebration of the rites due on such an occa-
sion, regarding all this Rama gave very long and tedious
instructions. Further, he ordered that servants and
priests to minister to the idols should be nominated
from different classes of the people. “To the idol of
Vishnu are devoted the class called Bhigavata ; to the
idol of the Sun, the Maga, 4.6. the Magians; to the idol
of Mahadeva, a class of saints, anchorites with long
hair, who cover their skin with ashes, hang on their
persons the bones of dead people, and swim in the
pools. The Brahmana are devoted to the Light page so.
Mothers, the Shamanians to Buddha, to Arhant the
class called Nagna. On the whole, to each idol certain
people are devoted who constructed it, for those know
best how to serve it.”


tig 9 TEI‏ .جم


١


122 ALBERUNTIS INDIA.


Our object in mentioning all this mad raving was to
teach the reader the accurate description of an idol, if
he happens to see one, and to illustrate what we have
said before, that such idols are erected only for unedu-
cated low-class people of little understanding; that the
Hindus never made an idol of any supernatural being,
much less of God; and, lastly, to show how the crowd
is kept in thraldom by all kinds of priestly tricks and
deceits. Therefore the book Gitd says: “Many people
try to approach me in their aspirations through some-
thing which is different from me; they try to insinuate
themselves into my favour by giving alms, praise, and
prayer to something besides me. I, however, confirm
and help them in all these doings of theirs, and make
them attain the object of their wishes, because I am
able to dispense with them.”

In the same book Vasudeva speaks to Arjuna: “Do
you not see that most of those who wish for something
address themselves in offering and worshipping to the
several classes of spiritual 5611105, and to the sun, moon,
and other celestial bodies? If now God does not dis-
appoint their hopes, though he in no way stands in
need of their worship, if he even gives them more than
they asked for, and if he gives them their wishes in
such a way as though they were receiving them from
that to which they had addressed their prayers—viz.
the idol—they will proceed to worship those whom
they address, because they have not learned to know
him, whilst he, by admitting this kind of intermedia-
tion, carries their affairs to the desired end. But that


which is obtained by desires and intermediation is not


lasting, since it is only as much as is deserved for any
particular merit. Only that is lasting which is obtained
from God alone, when people are disgusted with old
age, death, and birth (and desire to be delivered there-
from by Mokska).”

This is what Vasudeva says. When the ignorant crowd


Quotations
from Gita
showing
that God is
not to be
confounded
with the
idols.


26 الل‎ AL 123


get a piece of good luck by accident or something at
which they had aimed, and when with this some of the
preconcerted tricks of the priests are brought into con-
nection, the darkness in which they live increases
vastly, not their intelligence. They will rush to those
jigures of idols, maltreating their own figures before
them by shedding their own blood and mutilating their
own bodies.

The ancient Greeks, also, considered the idols as
mediators between themselves and the /irst Cause, and
worshipped them under the names of the stars and the
highest substances. For they described the First Cause,
not with positive, but only with negative predicates,
since they considered it too high to be described by
human qualities, and since they wanted to describe it
as free from any imperfection. Therefore they could
not address it in worship.

When the heathen Arabs had imported into their
country idols from Syria, they also worshipped them,
hoping that they would intercede for them with God.

Plato says in the fourth chapter of the Book of Laws:
“Tt is necessary to any one who gives perfect honours
(to the gods) that» he should take trouble with the
mystery of the gods and Sakinat, and that he should
not make special idols masters over the ancestral gods.
Further, it is the greatest duty to give honours as much
as possible to the parents while they live.”

By mystery Plato means a special kind of devotion.
The word is much used among the Sabians of Harran,
the dualistic Manicheans, and the theologians of the
Hindus.

Galenus says in the book De Indole Amme: “ At
the time of the Emperor Commodus, between 500-510
years after Alexander, two men went to an idol-mer- Page 6o.
chant and bargained with him for an idol of Hermes.
The one wanted to erect it in a temple as a memorial
of Hermes, the other wanted to erect it on a tomb as a


124 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


memorial of the deceased. However, they could not
settle the business with the merchant, and so they
postponed it until the following day. The idol-merchant
dreamt the following night that the idol addressed him
and spoke to him: ‘O excellent man! I am thy work.
I have received through the work of thy hands a figure
which is thought to be the figure of a star. Now I am
no longer a stone, as people called me heretofore ; I am
now known as Mercury. At present it stands in thy
hands to make me either a memorial of something im-
perishable or of something that has perished already.’ ”

There is a treatise of Aristotle in which he answers
certain questions of the Brahmins which Alexander had
sent him. There he says: “If you maintain that some
Greeks have fabled that the idols speak, that the people
offer to them and think them to be spiritual beings, of
all this we have no knowledge, and we cannot give a
sentence on a subject we do not know.” In these words
he rises high above the class of fools and uneducated
people, and he indicates by them that he does not
occupy himself with such things. It is evident that
the first cause of idolatry was the desire of commemo-
rating the dead and of consoling the living; but on this
basis 15 has developed, and has finally become a foul
and pernicious abuse.

The former view, that idols are only memorials, was
also held by the Caliph Mu‘awiya regarding the idols
of Sicily. When, in the summer of A.H. 53, Sicily was
conquered, and the conquerors sent him golden idols
adorned with crowns and diamonds which had been
captured there, he ordered them to be sent to Sind, that
they should be sold there to the princes of the country ;
for he thought it best to sell them as objects costing
sums of so-and-so many denars, not having the slightest
scruple on account of their being objects of abomin-
able idolatry, but simply considering the matter from a
political, not from a religious point of view.


CHAE EE Iya x IT


ON THE VEDA, THE PURANAS, AND OTHER KINDS OF
THEIR NATIONAL LITERATURE.


_ VEDA means knowledge of that which was before un- sundry
known. It is a religious system which, according to 0 she
the Hindus, comes from God, and was promulgated وذ‎
by the mouth of Brahman. The Brahmins recite

the Veda without understanding its meaning, and in

the same way they learn it by heart, the one receiv-

ing it from the other. Only few of them learn its
explanation, and still less is the number of those who
master the contents of the Veda and their interpretation

to such a degree as to be able to hold a theological
disputation.

The Brahmins teach the Veda to the Kshatriyas.

The latter learn it, but are not allowed to teach it, not
even to a Brahmin. The Vaisya and Sidra are not
allowed to hear it, much less to pronounce and recite
it. If such a thing can be proved against one of them,
the Brahmins drag him before the magistrate, and he
is punished by having his tongue cut off.

The Veda contains commandments and prohibitions,
detailed statements about reward and punishment in-
tended to encourage and to deter; but most of it con-
tains hymns of praise, and treats of the various kinds
of sacrifices to the fire, which are so numerous and
difficult that you could hardly count them.

They do not allow the Veda to be committed to the veda


transmitted


writing, because it is recited according to certain modu- by memory.


126 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


lations, and they therefore avoid the use of the pen,
since it is liable to cause some error, and may occasion
an addition or a defect in the written text. In conse-
quence it has happened that they have several times
forgotten the Veda and lost it. For they maintain that
the following passage occurs in the conversations be-
tween God and Brahman relating to the beginning of
all things, according to the report of Saunaka who had
received it from the planet Venus: “ You will forget
the Veda at the time when the earth will be submerged ;
it will then go down to the depths of the earth, and
none but the fish will be able to bring it out again.
Therefore I shall send the fish, and it will deliver the
Veda into your hands. And I shall send the boar to
raise the earth with its tusks and to bring it out of the
water.”

Further, the Hindus maintain that the Veda, together
with all the rites of their religion and country, had been
obliterated in the last Dvapara-yuga, a period of time
of which we shall speak in the proper place, until it
was renewed by Vyasa, the son 05

The Vishnu Puréna says: “ At the beginning of each
Manvantara period there will be created anew a lord
of a period whose children will rule over the whole


earth, and a prince who will be the head of the world, ١


and angels to whom men will bring fire-offerings, and
the Great Bear, who will renew the Veda which is lost
at the end of each period.”

This is the reason why, not long before our time,
Vasukra, a native of Kashmir, a famous Brahmin, has
of his own account undertaken the task of explaining
the Veda and committing it to writing. He has taken
on himself a task from which everybody else would
have recoiled, but he carried it out because he was


afraid that the Veda might be forgotten and entirely —


vanish out of the memories of men, since he observed


that the characters of men grew worse and worse, and —


Page 61.


Vasukra
commits the
Veda to
writing.


CHAPTER XIl. 127


that they did not care much for virtue, nor even for
duty.

There are certain passages in the Veda which, as they
maintain, must not be recited within dwellings, since
they fear that they would cause an abortion both to
women and the cattle. Therefore they step out into the
open field to recite them there. There is hardly a single
verse free from such and similar minatory injunctions.

As we have already mentioned, the books of the
Hindus are metrical compositions like the Rajaz poems
of the Arabs. Most of them are composed in a metre
called sloka. The reason of this has already been
explained. Galenus also prefers metrical composi-
tion, and says in his book Kara yévn: “The single
signs which denote the weights of medicines become
corrupt by being copied; they are also corrupted by the
wanton mischief of some envious person. Therefore it
is quite right that the books of Damocrates on medi-
cines should be preferred to others, and that they should
gain fame and praise, since they are written in a Greek
metre. If all books were written in this way it would
be the best ;” the fact being that a prose text is much
more exposed to corruption than a metrical one.

The Veda, however, is not composed in this common
metre, Sloka, but in another. Some Hindus say that
no one could compose anything in the same metre.
However, their scholars maintain that this is possible
indeed, but that they refrain from trying it merely from
veneration for the Veda.

According to their tradition, Vyasa divided it into The four


pupils of


four parts: Rigveda, Yajurveda, Sdmaveda, and Athar- Visa and

vanaveda. Vedas.
Vyasa had four sishya, 2.6. pupils. He taught a sepa-

rate Veda to each of them, and made him carry it in

his memory. They are enumerated in the same order

as the four parts of the Veda: Paila, Varsaiipdyana,


Jaimini, Sumantu.


128 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


Each of the four parts has a peculiar kind of recita-
tion. The first is Rigveda, consisting of metrical com-
positions called ric, which are of different lengths. It
is called Rigveda as being the totality of the rv.
It treats of the sacrifices to the fire, and is recited in
three different ways. First, in a uniform manner of
reading, just as every other book is read. Secondly, in
such a way that a pause is made after every single
word. Thirdly, in a method which is the most meri-
torious, and for which plenty of reward in heaven is
promised. First you read a short passage, each word
of which is distinctly pronounced; then you repeat it
together with a part of that which has not yet been
recited. Next you recite the added portion alone, and
then you repeat it together with the next part of that
which has not yet been recited, &c., 50. Continuing to
do so till the end, you will have read the whole text twice.

The Yajurveda is composed of kdndin. The word
is a derivative noun, and means the totality of the
kdndin. The difference between this and the Rigveda
is that it may be read as a text connected by the rules
of Sarhdhi, which is not allowed in the case of Rigveda.
The one as well as the other treats of works connected
with the fire and the sacrifices.

I have heard the following story about the reason
why the Rigveda cannot be recited as a text connected
by the rules of Sarhdhi :—

Yajnavalkya stayed with his master, and his master
had a Brahmin friend who wanted to make a journey.
Therefore he asked the master to send somebody to his
house to perform there during his absence the rites to
Homa, 1.6. to his fire, and to prevent it from being
extinguished. Now the master sent his pupils to the
house of his friend one after the other. So it came to
be the turn of Yajnavalkya, who was beautiful to look
at and handsomely dressed. When he began the work
which he was sent for, in a place where the wife of the


On the Rig-
veda, ~


Page 62.


On the
Yajurveda.


The story of


Yajna-
valkya,


Samaveda
حم‎

and Athar-

vanaveda.


CHARLERRALL. 129


absent man was present, she conceived an aversion to
his fine attire, and Yajnavalkya became aware of it,
though she concealed it. On having finished, he took
the water to sprinkle it over the head of the woman,
for this holds with them the place of the blowing after
an incantation, since blowing is dishked by them and
considered as something impure. Then the woman said,
« Sprinkle it over this column.” So he did, and at once


the column became green. Now the woman repented


having missed the blessing of his pious action; there-
fore on the following day she went to the master, asking


him to send her the same pupil whom he had sent the


day before. Yajnavalkya, however, declined to go
except in his turn. No urging had any effect upon


him; he did not mind the wrath of his master, but
simply said, “Take away from me all that you have


taught me.” And scarcely had he spoken the word,
when on a sudden he had forgotten all he knew before.
Now he turned to the Sun and asked him to teach him
the Veda. The Sun said, “How is that possible, as I
must perpetually wander, and you are incapable of
doing the same?” But then Yajnavalkya clung to
the chariot of the Sun and began to learn the Veda
from him; but he was compelled to interrupt the
recitation here and there on account of the irregularity
of the motion of the chariot.

The Sdmaveda treats of the sacrifices, command-
ments, and prohibitions. It is recited in a tone lke
a chant, and hence its name is derived, because séman
means the sweetness of recitation. The cause of this
kind of recital is, that Narayana, when he appeared on
earth in the shape of Vamana, and came to the king
Bali, changed himself 1250-١ 2 Brahman and began to
recite the Samaveda with a touching melody, by
which he exhilarated the king, in consequence of which
there happened to him the well-known story.

The Atharvanaveda is as a text connected by the

WOh. I, I


. Brahma-purdna, i.e. the nature charged with the preserva- —


130 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


rules of Sarndhi. It does not consist of the same com-
positions as the Rig and Yajur Vedas, but of a third
kind called bhara. It is recited according to a melody
with a nasal tone. This Veda is less in favour with
the Hindus than the others. It likewise treats of the
sacrifices to the fire, and contains injunctions regarding
the dead and what is to be done with them.

As to the Puranas, we first mention that the word
means jirst, eternal. There are eighteen Puranas, most
of them called by the names of animals, human or
angelic beings, because they contain stories about them,
or because the contents of the book refer in some way
to them, or because the book consists of answers which
the creature whose name forms the title of the book
has given to certain questions,

The Puranas are of human origin, composed by the
so-called Rishis. In the following I give a list of their
names, as I have heard them, and committed them to
writing from dictation :—


. Adi-purdna, i.e. the first.

. Matsya-purdna, 2.e. the fish.

. Ktirma-purdna, t.e. the tortoise.

. Vardha-purdna, t.e. the boar.

. Narasimha-purdna, i.e. a human being with a lion’s head.
. Vamana-purdna, z.e. the dwarf.

. Vayu-purdna, 2.6. the wind.

. Nanda-purdna, i.e. a servant of Mahédeva.
. Skanda-purdna, 2.6. ason of Mahadeva.

. Aditya-purdna, i.e. the sun.

. Soma-purdna, 4.6. the moon.

. Sdmba-purdna, 2.6. the son of Vishnu.

. Brahmdanda-purdna, i.e. heaven.

. Mdrkandeya-purdna, i.e. a great Rishi.

. Tdrkshya-purdna, t.e. the bird Garuda.

. Vishnu-purdna, i.e. Narayana.


بم يسم
مد نح ON AN DW‏ كا كن تت


م
N‏


| يم ايم
دي B‏ نس نحن


بم
“I‏


tion of the world.
18. Bhavishya-purdna, i.e. future things.


Of all this literature I have only seen portions of the


Matsya, Aditya, and Vayu Puranas,


List of the
Puranas.


Page 63.


11


CHAPTER XII.


Another somewhat different list of the Puranas has


give it


been read to me from the Vishnu-Purdna. I


here in extenso, as in all questions resting on tradition


ions as


it is the duty of an author to give those tradit
completely as possible :—


1. Brahma.
2. Padma, 2.6. the red lotus.
3. Vishnu.
4. Siva, 2.6. Mahadeva.
5. Bhdagavata, 4.6. Vasudeva.
6. Ndrada, 2.6. the son of Brahma.
7. Markandeya.
8. Agni, 2.6. the fire.
9. Bhavishya, 2.6. the future.
10. Brahmavaivarta, 2.6. the wind.
11. Linga, 0.6. an image of the aidota of Mahddeva,
12. Vardha.
13. Skanda.
14. Vadmana.
15. 0
16. Matsya, 2.6. the fish.
17. Garuda, 2.6. the bird on which Vishnu rides.
18. Brahmdanda.


These are the names of the Puranas according to


It con- A list of


Smrite


the Vishnu-Purdna.
The book Smriti is derived from the Veda,


tains commandments and prohibitions, and is composed books.


by the following twenty sons of Brahman :—


1. Apastamba. 11. YAjnavalkya.
2. Pardéara. 12. Atri.

5 Satatapa. 13. Harita.

4. Samvarta. 14. Likhita.

5. Daksha. 15. Sankha.

6. Vasishtha. 16. Gautama.

7. Angiras. 17. Vrihaspati.
8. Yama. 18. Katyayana.
9g. Vishnu, 19.

10. 3 20. Usanas.


Besides, the Hindus have books about the jurispru-
dence of their religion, on theosophy, on ascetics, on
the process of becoming god and seeking liberation


-


132 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


from the world, as, e.g. the book composed by Gauda
the anchorite, which goes by his name ; the book Sdm-


khya, composed by Kapila, on divine subjects ; the book ٠


of Patafyali, on the search for liberation and for the
union of the soul with the object of its meditation ;
the book Nydyabhdshd, composed by Kapila, on the
Veda and its interpretation, also showing that it has
been created, and distinguishing within the Veda be-
tween such injunctions as are obligatory only in cer-


tain cases, and those which are obligatory in general; —


further, the book 71477101150, composed by Jaimini, on
the same subject; the book Laukdyata, composed by
Brihaspati, treating of the subject that 12 all investiga-
tions we must exclusively rely upon the apperception of
the senses; the book Agastyamata, composed by Agastya,
treating of the subject that in all investigations we
must use the apperception of the senses as well as tradi-


tion; and the book Vishnu-dharma. The word dharma ©


means reward, but in general it is used for religion; so
that this title means Zhe religion of God, who in this
case is understood to be Narayana. Further, there are
the books of the six pupils of Vy4sa, viz. Devala, Sukra,
Bhargava, Vrihaspati, Yajnavalkya, and Manu. The
Hindus have numerous books about all the branches
of science. How could anybody know the titles of all


of them, more especially if he-is not a Hindu, but a —


foreigner ?
Besides, they have a book which they hold in such


veneration that they firmly assert that everything which — ظ‎


5 عجوب > 5
اويا eae‏ موب


occurs in other books is found also in this book, but not
all which occurs in this book is found in other books.
It is called Bharata, and composed by Vy4sa the son
of Paragara at the time of the great war between the
children of Pandu and those of Kuru. The title itself
gives an indication of those times. The book has
100,000 Slokas in eighteen parts, each of which is called
Parvan. Here we give the list of them :—


Page 64.


Mahd-
bharata.


6 133


1. Sabhd-parva, i.e. the king’s dwelling.

2. Aranya, t.e. going out into the open field, meaning the
exodus of the children of Pandu.

3. Virdta, t.e. the name of a king in whose realm they dwelt
during the time of their concealment.

4. Udyoga, i.e. the preparing for battle.

5. Bhishma.

6. Drona the Brahmin.

7. Karna the son of the Sun.

8. Salya the brother of Duryodhana, some of the greatest heroes
who did the fighting, one always coming forward after
his predecessor had been killed.

9g. Gadd, z.e. the club.

10. Sauptika, 2.6. the killing of the sleepers, when Agvatthaman
the son of Drona attacked the city of Paficdéla during
the night and killed the inhabitants.

11. Jalapraddnika, 2.6. the successive drawing of water for the
dead, after people have washed off the impurity caused
by the touching of the dead.

12. Stri, 2.6. the lamentations of the women.

13. Sdnti, containing 24,000 Slokas on eradicating hatred from
the heart, in four parts :

(1.) Rajadharma, on the reward of the kings.

(2.) Danadharma, on the reward for almsgiving.

(3.) Apaddharma, on the reward of those who are in need and
trouble.

(4). Mokshadharma, on the reward of him who is liberated
from the world.

14. Asvamedha, 7.e. the sacrifice of the horse which is sent out
together with an army to wander through the world.
Then they proclaim in public that it belongs to the king
of the world, and that he who does not agree thereto is to
come forward to fight. The Brahmans follow the horse,
and celebrate sacrifices to the fire in those places where
the horse drops its dung.

15. Mausala, 2.6, the fighting of the Yadavas, the tribe of V4su-
deva, among themselves.

16. Asramavasa, 1.6. leaving one’s own country.

17. Prasthdna, 2.6. quitting the realm to seek liberation.

18, Svargdrohana, 2.6. journeying towards Paradise.


These eighteen parts are followed by another one
_ which is called Harivaisa-Parvan, which contains the
traditions relating to Vasudeva.
In this book there occur passages which, like riddles,
admit of manifold interpretations. As to the reason of Page 65,


134 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


this the Hindus relate the following story :—Vy4dsa
asked Brahman to procure him somebody who might
write for him the Bhdrata from his dictation. Now عط‎
intrusted with this task his son Vinaéyaka, who is re-_
presented as an idol with an elephant’s head, and made
it obligatory on him never to cease from writing, At
the same time Vyasa made it obligatory on him to
write only that which he understood. Therefore Vyasa,
in the course of his dictation, dictated such sentences
as compelled the writer to ponder over them, and thereby _
Vyasa gained time for resting awhile.


0550


CHAPTER XIII.
THEIR GRAMMATICAL AND METRICAL LITERATURE.


THE two sciences of grammar and metrics are auxiliary nist of
books on


to the other sciences. Of the two, the former, grammar, grammar.
holds the first place in their estimate, called vydékarana,

ae. the law of the correctness of their speech and ety-
mological rules, by means of which they acquire an
eloquent and classical style both in writing and reading.

We Muslims cannot learn anything of it, since it is a
branch coming from a root which is not within our
grasp—I mean the language itself. That which I have

been told as to titles of books on this science is the
following :—

1. Aindra, attributed to Indra, the head of the angels.

2. Candra, composed by Candra, one of the red-robe-wearing

sect, the followers of Buddha.

3. Sakata, so called by the name of its author. His tribe,
too, is called by a name derived from the same word, viz.
Sdkatdyana.

. Panini, so called from its author.

. Kdtantra, composed by Sarvavarman.

. Sasidevavritti, composed by Sasideva.

. Durgavivritte.

. Sishyahitdvritti, composed by Ugrabhtti.


حل OM‏ كه ممن


I have been told that the last-mentioned author was gsnan Anan-
the teacher and instructor of Shah Anandapala, the son jismaster
of Jayapala, who ruled in our time. After having com- 78"??"
posed the book he sent it to Kashmir, but the people
there did not adopt it, being in such things haughtily con-
servative. Now he complained of this to the Shah, and


136 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


the Shah, in accordance with the duty of a pupil towards
his master, promised him to make him attain his wish.
So he gave orders to send 200,000 dirham and presents —
of a similar value to Kashmir, to be distributed among
those who studied the book of his master. The con-
sequence was that they all rushed upon the book, and
would not copy any other grammar but this one, show-
ing themselves in the baseness of their avarice. The
book became the fashion and highly prized.
Talerelating Of the origin of grammar they give the following
of grammer, account :—One of their kings, called Samalvahana, ie.
in the classical language, Satavahana, was one day in a
pond playing with his wives, when he said to one of
them “ Madudakam dehi, 1.6. do not sprinkle the water on
me. The woman, however, understood it as if he had said
modakam deht, i.e. bring sweetmeats. So she went away
and brought him sweetmeats. And when the king
disapproved of her doing so, she gave him an angry
reply, and used coarse language towards him. Now he
was deeply offended, and, in consequence, as is their
custom, he abstained from all food, and concealed him-
self in some corner until he was called upon by a sage,
who consoled him, promising him that he would teach
people grammar and the inflexions of the language.
Thereupon the sage went off to Mahadeva, praying,
praising, and fasting devoutly. Mahadeva appeared to
him, and communicated to him some few rules, the like
of which Abul’aswad Adduw’ali has given for the Arabic
language. The god also promised to assist him in the
further development of this science. Then the sage
returned to the king and taught it to him. This was
the beginning of the science of grammar.
ise Grammar is followed by another science, called
fhe Haacs chandas, 1.6. the metrical form of poetry, corresponding
impos” to our metrics—a science indispensable to them, since
aes all their books are in verse. By composing their books
Page 66. in metres they intend to facilitate their being learned


0 01 137


by heart, and to prevent people in all questions of
science ever recurring to a written text, save in a case
of bare necessity. For they think that the mind of
man sympathises with everything in which there is
symmetry and order, and has an aversion to everything
in which there is no order. Therefore most Hindus are
passionately fond of their verses, and always desirous
of reciting them, even if they do not understand the
meaning of the words, and the audience will snap their
fingers in token of joy and applause. They do not want
prose compositions, although it is much easier to under-
stand them.

Most of their books are composed in Sloka, in which
I am now exercising myself, being occupied in compos-
ing for the Hindus a translation of the books of Euclid
and of the Almagest, and dictating to them a treatise on
the construction of the astrolabe, being simply guided
herein by the desire of spreading science. If the Hin-
dus happen to get some book which does not yet exist
among them, they set at work to change it into Slokas,
which, are rather unintelligible, since the metrical form
entails a constrained, affected style, which will become
apparent when we shall speak of their method of ex-
pressing numbers. And if the verses are not sufficiently
affected, their authors meet with frowning faces, as
having committed something hke mere prose, and then
they will feel extremely unhappy. God will do me jus-
tice in what I say of them.

The first who invented this art were Pingala and Books on


2 4 metrics.
حلت‎ (?0 7 7). The books on the subject are nu-


merous. The most famous of them is the book Gaisita
(?G—AI—S-—T), so called from its author, famous to
such a degree that even the whole science of metrics
has been called by this name. Other books are that of
Mrigalafichana, that of Pingala, and that of ؟) أولياند‎ 0
(Au) —L—Y— A—N-—D). I, however, have not seen
any of these books, nor do I know much of the chapter


~ 138 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


of the Brahma-siddhdnta which treats of metrical cal-
culations, and therefore I have no claim to a thorough
knowledge of the laws of their metrics. Nevertheless,
I do not think it right to pass by a subject of which 1
have only a smattering, and I shall not postpone speak-
ing of it until I shall have thoroughly mastered it.

In counting the syllables (ganachandas) they use
similar figures to those used by Alkhalil Ibn Ahmad and
our metricians to denote the consonant without vowel and
the consonant with vowel, viz. these two signs, | and >,
the former of which is called laghu, 2.6. light; the latter,
guru, 1.6. heavy. In measuring (mdtrdchandas), the guru
is reckoned double of a laghu, and its place may be
filled by two laghu.

Further, they have a syllable which they call long
(dirgha), the measure or prosody of which is equal to
that of a guru. This, I think, is a syllable with a
long vowel (like kd, ki, ki). Here, however, I must
confess that up to the present moment I have not
been able to gain a clear idea of the nature of both |
laghu and guru, so as to be able to illustrate them
by similar elements in Arabic. However, I am in-
clined to think that 109/4 does not mean a consonant
without vowel, nor guru a consonant with vowel, but that,
on the contrary, /aghw means a consonant with a short
vowel (e.g. ka, ki, ku), and guru means the same with
a vowelless consonant (e.g. kat, kit, kut), like an element
in Arabic metrics called Sabab )0.6. - 0 vv, a long
syllable the place of which may be taken by two short
ones). That which makes me doubt as to the first-
mentioned definition of /aghu is this circumstance, that
the Hindus use many laghw one after the other in an
uninterrupted succession. The Arabs are not capable
of pronouncing two vowelless consonants one after the
other, but in other languages this is possible. The Per-
sian metricians, for instance, call such a consonant
moved by a light vowel (2.e. pronounced with a sound like


On the
meaning of
the techni-
cal terms
laghu and -
guru.


Page 67.


Definition
of matra.


GHAPTERG XII, 139


the Hebrew Schwa). But, in any case, if such conso-
nants are more than three in number, they are most
difficult, nay, even impossible to pronounce; whilst, on
the other hand, there is not the slightest difficulty in
pronouncing an uninterrupted series of short syllables
consisting of a consonant with a short vowel, as when
you say in Arabic, “ Badanuka kamathalt sifatika wafa-
muka bisa‘ati shafatika” (i.e. Thy body is like thy
description, and thy mouth depends upon the width of
thy lip). Further, although it is difficult to pronounce
a vowelless consonant at the beginning of a word, most
nouns of the Hindus begin, if not exactly with vowel-
less consonants, still with such consonants as have only
a Schwa-like vowel-sound to follow them. If such a
consonant stands at the beginning of a verse, they drop
it in counting, since the law of the guru demands that
in it the vowelless consonant shall not precede but fol-
low the vowel (ka-t, ki-t, ku-t).

Further, as our people have composed out of the feet
(افاعيل)‎ certain schemes or types, according to which
verses are constructed, and have invented signs to
denote the component parts of a foot, 4.6. the consonant
wth and without a vowel, in like manner also the
Hindus use certain names to denote the feet which are
composed of laghu and guru, either the former preced-
ing and the latter following or 2166 versd, in such a
way, however, that the measure must always be the
same, whilst the nwmber of syllables may vary. By
these names they denote a certain conventional prosodic
unity (ae. certain feet). By measure, I mean that laghu
is reckoned = one mdtrd, 1.6. measure, and guru = two
110110. If they represent a foot in writing, they only
express the measure of the syllables, not their number,
as, 6.0. (in Arabic) a double consonant (kka) is counted
as a consonant without vowel plus a consonant with
vowel, and a consonant followed by Tanwin (kun) is
counted as a consonant with a vowel plus a consonant


140 41811201715 INDIA.


without vowel, whilst in writing both are represented
as one and the same thing (ze. by the sign of the con-
sonant in question).

Taken alone by themselves, laghw and guru are
called by various names: the former, la, kali, ripa,
cimara, and graha; the latter, ga, nivra, and a half
amégaka. The latter name shows that a complete
amésaka is equal to two guru or their equivalent. These
names they have invented simply to facilitate the ver-
sification of their metrical books. For this purpose
they have invented so many names, that one may fit
into the metre if others will not.

The feet arising out of combinations of laghw and
guru are the following :—

Twofold both in number and measure is the foot ||,
1.6. two syllables and two mdtrd.

Twofold in number, not in measure, are the feet, | <
and > |; in measure they are = three mdtrd | | | (but,
in number, only two syllables),

The second foot > | (a trochee) is called krittikd.

The quaternary feet are in each book called by dif-
ferent names:

<< paksha, 2.6. the half month.
|| > jvalana, i.e. the fire.
| > [ madhya (? madhu).


> || parvata, 2.6. the mountain, also called hdra and rasa.
|| [| ghana, 2.6. the cube.


The feet consisting of five mdtrd have manifold
forms; those of them which have special names are the


following :—
| > > hastin,i.e. the elephant.! <<] (? lacuna).
> | > kdma, 8.6. the wish. | ||| -


A foot consisting of six mdtrd 15 <<<.


Some people call these feet by the names of the
chess figures, viz. :


jvalana = the elephant. parvata = the pawn.
madhya = the tower. ghana = the horse.


Names of
laghu and
guru.


The single
fect.


060 Ke ALL: 141


In a lexicographical work to which the author on the ar-


ome: rangement
he 7 . . ٠ of the feet.
ىون‎ (? Haribhatta) has given his own name, the feet Quotation
هرو‎ from Hari-


composed of three laghw or guru are called by single حلتقطة‎
consonants, which in the following diagram are written
on their left :—
Diagram.

> sixfold (ze. containing six mdtrd).

<  hastin.

< kama.

| (2? lacuna).
<  gvalana.

| madhya.

| parvata.
| threefold (2.e. containing three mdird).

By means of these signs the author teaches how to
construct these eight feet by an inductive method (a
kind of algebraic permutation), saying:

“Place one of the two kinds (guru and laghu) in
the first line unmixed (that would be <<<, if we Page 6s.
begin with a guru). Then mix it with the second
kind, and place one of this at the beginning of the
second line, whilst the two other elements are of the
first kind (|<<). Then place this element of admix-
ture in the middle of the third line (<|<), and lastly
at the end of the fourth line (<<|). Then you have
finished the first half.

“Further, place the second kind in the lowest line,
unmixed (|||), and mix up with the line above it one
of the first kind, placing it at the beginning of the line
(< ||), then in the middle of the next following line
(| < |), and lastly at the end of the next following line
(|| <). Then the second half is finished, and all the
possible combinations of three mdtra have been ex-
hausted.”


First half.


5.
3 5
8


This system of composition or permutation is correct,


142 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


but his calculation showing how to find that place
which every single foot occupies in this series of per-
mutations is not in accordance with it. For he says:

“Place the numeral 2 to denote each element of a
foot (ve. both guru and laghw), once for all, so that
every foot is represented by 2, 2, 2. Multiply the
left (number) by the middle, and the product by the
right one. If this multiplier (i.e. this number of the
right side) is a daghu, then leave the product as it is;
but if it is a guru, subtract one from the product.”

The author exemplifies this with the sixth foot, ze.
| > |. He multiples 2 by 2, and from the product (4)
he subtracts 1. The remaining 3 he multiplies by the
third 2, and he gets the product of 6.

This, however, is not correct for most of the feet, and
I am rather inclined to believe that the text of the
manuscript 15 corrupt.

The proper order of the feet would accordingly be the
following:


iT. IL. 111 ١ اه‎ 1


I.

3 < < -
| < — | <
= | - |

| | |


cope Ban
/\
اتات‎ tho,


2


|


The mixture of the first line (No. I.) is such that one
kind always follows the other. In the second line
(No. II.) two of one kind are followed by two of the
other; and in the third line (No, III.) four of one kind
are followed by four of the other.

Then the author of the above-mentioned calculation |
goes on to say: “If the first element of the foot is a
guru, subtract one before you multiply. If the multi-
pher is a guru, subtract one from the product. Thus
you find the place which a foot occupies in this order.”

As the Arabic verse is divided into two halves or
hemistichs by the arvd, 2.6. the last foot of the first


On the
padas.


On the
metre
Arya.


Page 69.


CHAPTER XIII. 143


hemistich, and the darb, 2.6. the last foot of the second
hemistich, in like manner the verses of the Hindus are
divided into two halves, each of which is called foot
(pdda). The Greeks, too, call them feet (lacuna),—
those words which are composed of it, cvAAd8n, and
the consonants with or without vowels, with long, short,
or doubtful vowels.

The verse is divided into three, or more commonly
into four pdda. Sometimes they add a fifth pdda in
the middle of the verse. The pddas have no rhyme,
but there is a kind of metre, in which the 1 and 2
paddas end with the same consonant or syllable as if
rhyming on it, and also the pddas 3 and 4 end with
the same consonant or syllable. This kind is called
Aryd. At the end of the pdda a laghu may become a
guru, though in general this metre ends with a laghu.

The different poetical works of the Hindus contain
a great number of metres. In the metre of 5 pdda,
the fifth »dda is placed between pddas 3 and 4. The
names of the metres differ according to the number of
syllables, and also according to the verses which fol-
low. For they do not like all the verses of a long
poem to belong to one and the same metre. They use
many metres in the same poem, in order that it should
appear like an embroidered piece of silk.

The construction of the four 74008 in the four-pdda
- metre is the following :—


—
a < < paksha=1arméuka.'| < < _ paksha. is
x < | | parvata. > | parvata. >
=< | | > > > _ paksha. =
ب بع‎
pat > > paksha. < > paksha. 5
1 || > jvalana. || > jvalana. 3
2 | < | | > | madhya. >
> < | | parvata. < || parvata. ب‎
بع‎ > >  paksha. | | > jvalana. a


144 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


This is a representation of a species of their metres,
called Skandha, containing four pdda. It consists of
two halves, and each half has eight amgaka.

Of the single amégaka, the 1st, 3d, and 5th can never
be a madhya, 2.6. | > |, and the 6th must always be
either a madhya ora ghana. If this condition is adhered
to, the other amsakas may be anything at all, just as
accident or the fancy of the poet wills it. However,
the metre must always be complete, neither more nor
less. Therefore, observing the rules as to the formation
of certain amégakas in the single pddas, we may repre-
sent the four pddas in the following manner :—


LPG ذا‎ a <0 ie 1|]
0ل‎ 8 bon el || eh | i ee
10111 ce <i) pe ee
aac Viet < ee | <a) ee 2 | fli eee


According to this pattern the verse is composed.

If you represent an Arabic metre by these signs of
the Hindus, you will find that they mean something
entirely different from what the Arabic signs mean
which denote a consonant with a short vowel and a
consonant without a vowel. (The Arabic sign | means
a consonant without a vowel; the Hindu sign | means
a short syllable; the Arabic sign 0 means a consonant
followed by a short vowel; the Hindu sign < means a
long syllable.) As an example, we give a representation
of the regular complete Khafif metre, representing each
foot by derivations of the root .فعل‎


Metrum Khafif.


GC we 2 Cw Frc فى‎ fC ws -
)1.( إفاعلان مستفعان فاعلانن‎
represented by derivations of the root .معل‎
(2.) loloolo loololo loloolo:
represented by Arabic signs.
(2) Glee at Pa << |e


represented by the signs of the Hindus.


Page 70.


Arab and
Hindu nota-
tion of a
metre.


CHAPTER XI. 145


We give the latter signs in an inverted order, since
_ the Hindus read from the left to the right.

I have already once pleaded as my excuse, and do so
here a second time, that my slender knowledge of this
science does not enable me to give the reader a complete
insight into the subject. Still I take the greatest pains
with it, though I am well aware that it is only very
little I can give.

The name Vritta applies to each four-pdéda metre in On the
which the signs of both the prosody and the number of Pritta.
the syllables are like each other, according to a certain
correspondence of the 70005 among themselves, so that
if you know one pdda, you know also the other ones,
for they are like it. Further, there is a law that a pdda

cannot have less than four syllables, since a pada with
less does not occur in the Veda. For the same reason
the smallest number of the syllables of a pdda is four,
the largest twenty-six. In consequence, there are
twenty-three varieties of the Vritta metre, which we
_ shall here enumerate :—

1. The pdda has four heavy syllables (guru), and here you can-

not put two laghu in the place of one guru.

2. The nature of the second kind of the pdda is not clear to me,

so I omit it.


3. This pdda is built of
ghana + paksha.


Lt | <<
4. =2guru + 2laghu + °° 3guru.
-- | | cae Ce


It would be better to describe this pdda as = paksha +
jvalana + paksha.


=2krittika + jvalana +  paksha.‏ .و
2< 4< 000 |4< | <=
=ghana + madhya +  paksha. Page 71.‏ .6
LTT | |> | <<‏
=ghana + parvata + gvalana.‏ ,7
LI tI <|| || >>‏


146 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


8. = kdma, kusuma, jvalana, guru.


=) rae asl [|< <
9. = paksha, hastin,  jvalana, madhya, 2 guru.
<i. pees Il< |<| -
10. = paksha, parvata, jvalana, madhya, paksha.
vara > || | | > | <<
11. = paksha, madhya, 2 jvalana, hastin.
ede. |<| | Set He a eee
12, = ghana, gvalana,  paksha, 2 hastin.
LTT | || > | ale
13. = parvata, kama, kusuma, madhya, 1
Sil | sie) Vasu dacs alg || >
14. = hastin, paksha, parvata, kusuma, parvata, laghu, guru.
ls <x o<|ly 1 lle) ol
15. = 2 paksha, parvata, kusuma, 2 kama, guru.
ee =< || ||| ينه‎ ae |
16. = paksha, parvata, | kama, kusuma, paksha, laghu, guru.
ae Sipe aie bys = ee) =
17. = 2paksha, parvata, ghana, jvalana, paksha, laut
اا م || 2ه‎
18. - 2 paksha, parvata, ghana, jvalana, 2kdma, guru.
2-7 ex ||]. || <6 اا تت‎
19. = guru, 2 paksha, parvata, ghana, jvalana, 2 70011110: guru.
<< | 4 eee ee
20. = 4 paksha, qvalana, madhya, paksha, 2 madhya, guru.
on eee || |\<| (<<).
21. = 4 paksha, 3 Jvalana, 2 madhya, guru,
Oe epee eee eee nd | || eae <
22. =4paksha, kusuma, madhya, jvalana, 2madhya, guru.
<< << l= || ا‎
23. = 8 guru, 1olaghu, kama, jvalana, laghu, guru.


a 2 52 1/2: 0 | >


CHAPTER XIII. — 147


We have given such a lengthy account, though it be
only of scanty use, in order that the reader may see
for himself the example of an accumulation of laghus,
which shows that /aghwu means a consonant followed by
a short vowel, not a consonant without a vowel. Further,
he will thereby learn the way in which they represent
a metre and the method of their scanning a verse.
Lastly, he will learn that Alkhaltl Ibn Ahmad exclu-
sively drew from his own genius when he invented the
Arabic metrics, though, possibly, he may have heard,
as some people think, that the Hindus use certain
metres in their poetry. If we here take so much
trouble with Indian metrics, we do it for the purpose
of fixing the laws of the Sloka, since most of their
books are composed in it.

The Sloka belongs to the four-pdda metres. Hach Theory of
pdda has eight syllables, which are different in all four “°"°"™
paddas. The last syllable of each of the four pddas
must be the same, viz. a guru. Further, the fifth
syllable in each pdda must always be laghu, the sixth
syllable guru. The seventh syllable must be Jaghu in
the second and fourth pdda, guru in the first and third
pddas. The other syllables are entirely dependent
upon accident or the writer’s fancy.

In order to show in what way the Hindus use Quotation |
arithmetic in their metrical system, we give in the magupta.
following a quotation from Brahmagupta: ‘The first
kind of poetry is gdyatri, a metre consisting of two
pddas. If we now suppose that the number of the
syllables of this metre may be 24, and that the smallest
number of the syllables of one pdda is 4, we describe
the two padas by 4 + 4, representing their smallest
possible number of syllables. As, however, their largest
possible number is 24, we add the difference between
these 4 + 4 and 24, we. 16, to the right-side number,
and get 4 + 20. If the metre had three pddas, it
would be represented by 4 + 4 + 16, The right-side


ا
a‏
|


rast ALBERUNIS INDIA.


pdda is always distinguished from the others and called
by a separate name; but the preceding pddas also are
connected, so as to form one whole, and likewise called
by a separate name. If the metre had four pddas, it
would be represented by 4 + 4 + 4 + 12.

“Tf, however, the poet does not use the pddas of 4, 2.2.
the smallest possible number of syllables, and if we
want to know the number of combinations of the 24
syllables which may occur in a two-pdda metre, we
write 4 to the left and 20 to the right; we add 1 to 4,
again 1 to the sum, &c.; we subtract 1 from 20, again
1 from the remainder, &c.; and this we continue until
we get both the same numbers with which we com-
menced, the small number in the line which commenced
with the greater number, and the greater number in
the line which commenced with the small number.
See the following scheme :—


4 20
5 19
6 18
7 17
8 16
9 15
10 14
11 13
12 12
13 II
14 10
15 9
16 8
17 7
18 6
19 5

20 4


The number of these combinations is 17, 4.6. the dif-
ference between 4 and 20 plus 1.

“As regards the three-pdda metre with the presup-
posed number of syllables, 4.4, 24, its first species is


Page 72.


CHAPTER XIII. 149


that in which all three pddas have the smallest. pos-
sible number of syllables, 2.6. 4 + 4 + 16.

“The right-side number and the middle number we
write down as we have done with the pdédas of the two-
pada metre, and we make with them the same calcula-
tion as we have done above. Besides, we add the left-
side number in a separate column, but do not make it
undergo any changes. See the following scheme :—


4 4 16
4 5 T5
4 6 14
3 7 13
4 8 12
4 9 11
4 10 10
4 11 3
4 I2 8
4 13 7
4 14 6
4 15 5
4 16 4


“This gives the number of 13 permutations, but by
_ changing the places of the numbers forwards and back-
wards in the following method, the number may be
increased sixfold, 2.6. to 78 :—

“J, The right-side number keeps its place; the two
other numbers exchange their places, so that the middle
number stands at the left side; the left-side number
occupies the middle :—


he
4 4 16
5 4. 15
6 4 14
7 4 13 &e.


» 11.-11 1. The right-side number is placedin the middle
between the other two numbers, which first keep their


150 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


original places, and then exchange them with each


other :—
its
4 16 4
4 15 5
4 14 6
4 13 7 &e.
IIT.
4 16 4
5 15 4
6 14 4
7 13 4 &e.


“TV.-V. The right-side number is placed to the left,
and the other two numbers first keep their original
places, and then exchange them with each other :—


17.


Oa
eo


ARR


—
aS‏
حد 001 5ه


4 &e.


“ Because, further, the numbers of the syllables of a
pada rise like the square of 2, for after 4 follows 8, we
may represent the syllables of the three 70005 in this
way: 8+8+8(=4+4+16). However, their arith-
metical peculiarities follow another rule. The four-
pada metre follows the analogy of the three-pdda
metre.”

Of the above-mentioned treatise of Brahmagupta I
have only seen a single leaf: it contains, no doubt,
important elements of arithmetic. God affords help


CHAPPER ا‎ 151


and sustains by his mercy, ae. | hope one day to learn
those things. As far as I can guess with regard to the
literature of the Greeks, they used in their poetry
similar feet to the Hindus; for Galenus says in his book

Kata yevy: “The medicine prepared with saliva dis- Page 73.
covered by Menecrates has been described by Damo-
crates in a poem composed in a metre consisting of
three parts.” |


C5204)


CHAPTER XIV.


HINDU LITERATURE IN THE OTHER SCIENCES,
ASTRONOMY, ASTROLOGY, ETC.


THE number of sciences is great, and it may be still
ereater if the public mind is directed towards them at


such times as they are in the ascendancy and in general .


favour with all, when people not only honour science


itself, but also its representatives. To do this is, in the ©


2
A


Spite a + سيويج وى‎ + a


first instance, the duty of those who rule over them, of
kings and princes. For they alone could free the minds
of scholars from the daily anxieties for the necessities
of life, and stimulate their energies to earn more fame
and favour, the yearning for which is the pith and mar-
row of human nature.

The present times, however, are not of this kind.
They are the very opposite, and therefore it is quite
impossible that a new science or any new kind of
research should arise in our days. What we have of
sciences is nothing but the scanty remains of bygone
better times.

If a science or an idea has once conquered the whole
earth, every nation appropriates part of it. So do also
the Hindus. Their belief about the cyclical revolutions
of times is nothing very special, but is simply in accord-
ance with the results of scientific observation.

The science of astronomy is the most famous among
them, since the affairs of their religion are in various
ways connected with it. If a man wants to gain the
title of an astronomer, he must not only know scientific


Times un-
favourable
to the
progress of
science.


On the
Siddhantas,


CHAPTER XIV. 153


or mathematical astronomy, but also astrology. The
book known among Muslims as Sindhind is called by
them Siddhanta, i.e. straight, not crooked nor changing.
By this name they call every standard book on astro-
nomy, even such books as, according to our opinion,
dofnot come up to the mark of our so-called 277, te.
handbooks of mathematical astronomy. They have five
Siddhantas :—

I. Strya-siddhdnta, 2.e. the Siddhanta of the sun,
composed by Lata.

11. Vasishtha-siddhdnta, so called from one of the
stars of the Great Bear, composed by Vishnucandra.

111. Pulisa-siddhdnta, so called from Paulisa, the
Greek, from the city of Saintra, which I suppose to be
Alexandria, composed by Pulisa.

IV. Romaka-stddhdnta, so called from the Rim, «e.
the subjects of the Roman Empire, composed by
~ Srishena.

V. Brahma-siddhdnta, so called from Brahman, com-
posed by Brahmagupta, the son of Jishnu, from the
town of Bhillamala between Multan and Anhilwara,
16 yoyana from the latter place (?).

The authors of these books draw from one and the
same source, the book Partdmaha, so called from the
jirst father, v.e. Brahman.

Varahamihira has composed an astronomical hand-
‘book of small compass called Pafica-siddhantikd, which
name oucht to mean that it contains the pith and mar-
row of the preceding five Siddhantas. But this is not
the case, nor is it so much better than they as to be
called the most correct one of the five. So the name
does not indicate anything but the fact that the number
of Siddhantas is five.

Brahmagupta says: ‘‘Many of the Siddhantas. are
Sfrya, others Indu, Pulisa, Romaka, Vasishtha, and
Yavana, 4.6. the Greeks; and though the Siddhantas are
many, they differ only in words, not in the subject-


q
7
1

'


“ea‏ رجن


154 ALBERUN?S INDIA.


matter. He who studies them properly will find that
they agree with each other.”

Up to the present time I have not been able to pro-
cure any of these books save those of Pulisa and of
Brahmagupta. JI have commenced translating them,
but have not yet finished my work, Meanwhile I shall
give here a table of contents of the Brahma-siddhdnta,
which in any case will be useful and instructive.

Contents of the twenty-four chapters of the Brahma-
siddhinta — 1

I. On the nature of the globe and the figure of heaven
and earth.

2. On the revolutions of the planets; on the calcula-
tion of time, 1.6. how to find the time for different longi-
tudes and latitudes; how to find the mean places of the
planets; how to find the sine of an are.

3. On the correction of the places of the planets.

4. On three problems: how to find the shadow, the
bygone portion of the day and the ascendens, and how
to derive one from the other.

5. On the planets becoming visible when they leave
the rays of the sun, and their becoming invisible when
entering them.

6. On the first appearance of the moon, and about
her two cusps.

7, On the lunar eclipse.

8. On the solar eclipse.

g. On the shadow of the moon.

10. On the meeting and conjunction of the planets.

11. On the latitudes of the planets.

12. A critical investigation for the purpose of dis-
tinguishing between correct and corrupt passages in the
texts of astronomical treatises and handbooks.

13. On arithmetic ; on plane measure and cognate
subjects.

14. Scientific calculation of the mean places of the
planets.


Page 74.


Contents of
the Brahma-
siddhdanta.


On the
literature of
Tantras and
Karanas.


CHARTEREXIV, 155


15. Scientific calculation of the correction of the
places of the planets.

16. Scientific calculation of the three problems (vy.
chap. 4).

17. On the deflection of eclipses.

18. Scientific calculation of the appearance of the
new moon and her two cusps.

19. On Kuttaka, ve. the pounding of a thing. The
pounding of oil-producing substances is here compared
with the most minute and detailed research. This chapter
treats of algebra and related subjects, and besides it
contains other valuable remarks of a more or less
arithmetical nature.

20. On the shadow.

21. On the calculation of the measures of poetry and
on metrics.

22. On cycles and instruments of observation.

23. On time and the four measures of time, the solar,
the civil, the lunar, and the sidereal.

24. About numeral notation in the metrical books of
this kind.

These, now, are twenty-four chapters, according to
his own statement, but there is a twenty-fifth one,
called Dhydna-graha-adhydya, in which he tries to
solve the problems by speculation, not by mathematical
calculation. I have not enumerated it in this list,
because the pretensions which he brings forward in
this chapter are repudiated by mathematics. I am
rather inclined to think that that which he produces is
meant to be the 70110 metaphysica of all astronomical
methods, otherwise how could any problem of this
science be solved by anything save by mathematics ?

Such books as do not reach the standard of a Sid-
dhanta are mostly called Tantra or Karana. The
former means ruling under a governor, the latter means
following, i.e. following behind the Siddhanta. Under
governors they understand the Acdryas, i.e. the sages,
anchorites, the followers of Brahman,


156 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


There are two famous Zantras by Aryabhata and
Balabhadra, besides the Rasdyana-tantra by Lhénu-
yasas (2). About what Rasféyana means we shall give a
separate chapter (chap. xvii.)

As for Karanas, there is one (lacuna) called by his
name, besides the Karana-khanda-khédyaka by Brah-
magupta. The last word, khanda, means a kind of
their sweetmeats. With regard to the reason why he
gave his book this title, I have been told the follow-
ing :—


Sugriva, the Buddhist, had composed an astrono-


mical handbook which he called Dadhi-sdgara, 1.6. —
the sea of sour-milk; and a pupil of his composed a —


20 ود وو‎ eee ee ee ee eee


book of the same kind which he called Kiira-babayd (2),
2.6. &@ mountain of rice. Afterwards he composed an-
other book which he called Lavana-mushtt, 2.6. a hand-
ful of salt. Therefore Brahmagupta called his book
the Sweetmeat—khddyaka—in order that all kinds of
victuals (sour-milk, rice, salt, &c.) should occur in the
titles of the books on this science.

The contents of the book Karana-khanda-khidyaka
represent the doctrine of Aryabhata. Therefore Brah-
magupta afterwards composed a second book, which he
called Uttara-khanda-khddyaka, 1.e. the explanation of
the Khanda-khddyaka. And this book is again followed
by another ‘one called Khanda-khddyaka-tippd (ste), of
which I do not know whether it is composed by Brah-
magupta or somebody else. It explains the reasons
and the nature of the calculations employed in the
Khanda-khaddyaka. I suppose it is a work of Bala-
bhadra’s.

Further, there is an astronomical handbook composed
by Vijayanandin, the commentator, in the city of
Benares, entitled Karana-tilaka, we. the blaze on the
front of the Karanas; another one by Vittesvara the


son of Bhadatta (? Mihdatta), of the city of Nagarapura, .


called Karana-sdra, 4.6, that which has been derived


Page 75.


CHAPTER XIV. 157


from the Karana; another one, by Bhanuyagas (?), is
called Karana-para-tilaka, which shows, as I am told,
how the corrected places of the stars are derived from
one another.

There is a book by Utpala the Kashmirian called
Réhunrdkarana (2), 2.6. breaking the Karanas; and
another called Karana-pdta, 2.6. killing the Karanas.
Besides there is a book called Karana-ciddmani of
which I do not know the author.

There are more books of the same kind with other
titles, e.g. the great Mdanasa, composed by Manu, and the
commentary by Utpala; the small Mdnasa, an epitome
of the former by Puiicala (?), from the southern country ;
Dasagitikd, by Aryabhata; Arydshtasata, by the same ;
Lokdnanda,so called from the name of the author; Bhat-
tila (?), so called from its author, the Brahman Bhattila.

The books of this kind are nearly innumerable.

As for astrological literature, each one of the follow- on astroto-


: 0 : ical litera-
ing authors has composed a so-called Samhita, viz. :— Piva tHe
5 so-called
Mandavya. Balabhadra. Samhitas.
Paragara. Divyatattva.
Garga. Varahamihira.
Brahman.


 Samhité means that which is collected, books containing
ظ‎ something of everything, 6.0. forewarnings relating to a
_ journey derived from meteorological occurrences ; pro-
ظ‎ phecies regarding the fate of dynasties; the knowledge
of lucky and unlucky things; prophesying from the
lines of the hand; interpretation of dreams, and taking
auguries from the flight or cries of birds. For Hindu
scholars believe in such things. It is the custom of
their astronomers to propound in their Sambhitas also
the whole science of meteorology and cosmology.
Each one of the following authors has composed a the Jata-


5 31 : kas, 2.€.
book, Jdtaka, 1.6. book of nativities, viz. :— books on
; ١ 0
Parasara. Jivasarman. ciate
Satya. Mau, the Greek.


Manittha.


158 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


Varihamihira has composed two Jatakas, a small and
a large one. The latter of these has been explained
by Balabhadra, and the former I have translated into
Arabic. Further, the Hindus have a large book on the
science of the astrology of nativities called Sdérdvalt,
ze. the chosen one, similar to the Vazidajy (= Persian
guzida ?), composed by Kalyina-Varman, who gained
high credit for his scientific works. But there is
another book still larger than this, which comprehends
the whole of astrological sciences, called Yavana, we.
belonging to the Greeks.

Of Varahamihira there are several small books, eg.
Shat-parcasikd, fifty-six chapters on astrology ; Hord-
paica-hotriya (2), on the same subject.

Travelling is treated of in the book Yogaydtrad and
the book Tikani(?)-ydtrd, marriage and marrying in the
book Vivaéha-patala, architecture in the book (lacuna).

The art of taking auguries from the flight or cries
of birds, and of the foretelling by means of piercing a
needle into a book, is propounded in the work called
Srudhava (? Srotavya), which exists in three different
copies. Mahadeva is said to be the author of the first,
Vimalabuddhi the author of the second, and Bangala the
author of the third. Similar subjects are treated in the
book Giéidhamana (?), 1.6. the knowledge of the un-
known, composed by Buddha, the originator of the sect
of the red robe-wearers, the Shamanians; and in the
book Prasna Gudhdmana (?), 1.6. questions of the science
of the unknown, composed by Utpala.

Besides, there are Hindu scholars of whom we know
the names, but not the title of any book of theirs, viz. :—


Pradyumna. Sarasvata.
Sangahila (Sriakhala ?). Piruvana (?).
Divakara. Devakirtti.
Parésvara. Prithidaka-svamin.


Medicine belongs to the same class of sciences as
astronomy, but there is this difference, that the latter


Page 76.


Medical
literature.


CHAPTER XIV. 159


stands in close relation to the religion of the Hindus.
They have a book called by the name of its author,
i.e. Caraka, which they consider as the best of their
whole literature on medicine. According to their belief,
Caraka was a Rishi in the last Dvdpara-yuga, when
his name was Agnivesa, but afterwards he was called
Caraka, v.e. the intelligent one, after the first elements
of medicine had been laid down by certain Rishis, the

_ children of Siéitra. These latter had received them from
Indra, Indra from Aévin, one of the two physicians of
the Devas, and Aégvin had received them from Praja-
pati, 2.6. Brahman, the first father. This book has been
translated into Arabic for the princes of the house of
the Barmecides.

The Hindus cultivate numerous other branches of on Paiica-
science and literature, and have a nearly boundless ae
literature. JI, however, could not comprehend it with
my knowledge. I wish I could translate the book
Pancatantra, known among us as the book of Kalila
and Dimna. It is far spread in various languages, in
Persian, Hindi, and Arabic—in translations of people
who are not free from the suspicion of having altered
the text. For instance, ‘Abdall4h Ibn Almukaffa‘ has
added in his Arabic version the chapter about Barzéya,
with the intention of raising doubts in the minds of
people of feeble religious belief, and to gain and prepare
them for the propagation of the doctrines of the Mani-
cheeans. And if he is open to suspicion in so far as he
has added something to the text which he had simply
to translate, he is hardly free from suspicion in his
capacity as translator.


00601


CHAPTER XV.


NOTES ON HINDU METROLOGY, INTENDED TO FACILITATE
THE UNDERSTANDING OF ALL KINDS-OF MEASURE-
MENTS WHICH OCCUR IN THIS BOOK.


CoUNTING is innate to man. The measure of a thing
becomes known by its being compared with another
thing which belongs to the same species and is assumed
as a unit by general consent. Thereby the difference
between the object and this standard becomes known.

By weighing, people determine the amount of gravity
of heavy bodies, when the tongue of the scales stands
at right angles on the horizontal plane. Hindus want
the scales very little, because their dirhams are deter-
mined by number, not by weight, and their fractions,
too, are simply counted as so-and-so many /fulis. The
coinage of both dirhams and fulis is different accord-
ing to towns and districts. They weigh gold with the
scales only when it is in its natural state or such as
has been worked, 6.9. for ornaments, but not coined.
They use as a weight of gold the swvarna = 12 tola.
They use the ¢ola as frequently as we use the mithkdl.
According to what I have been able to learn from them,
it corresponds to three of our dirhams, of which 10
equal 7 mithkdl.

Therefore 1 tola = 2;'5 of our mithkadl.

The greatest fraction of a 1010 is ,يذو‎ called 70
Therefore 16 mdsha = 1 suvarna.


The Hindu
system of,
weights. ,


CHAPTER XV. 161
Further,


1 mdsha = 4 andi (eranda), t.e. the seed of a tree
called Gaura.

1 01101 =4 yava.

Iyava =6 kald.

tkald = 4 pdda.

1 pdda = 4mdri (?).


Arranged differently we have—


I suvarna = 16 masha = 64 andi = 256 yava = 1600 kala =
6400 pada = 25,600 mdré (2).

Six mdshas are called 1 drankshana. If you ask
them about this weight, they tell you that 2 drank-
shana = 1 mithkdél. But this is a mistake; for I
mithkdl = 5% mdsha. The relation between a dratk-
shana and a mithkdl is as 20 to 21, and therefore 1
draikshana = 1 جلي‎ mithkdl. If, therefore, a man gives
the answer which we have just mentioned, he seems to
have in mind the notion of a mithkdl as a weight which
does not much differ from a drankshana; but by
doubling the amount, saying 2 dravkshanas instead of
I, he entirely spoils the comparison.

Since the unit of measure is not a natural unit, Page 77.
but a conventional one assumed by general consent, it
admits of both practical and imaginary division. Its
subdivisions or fractions are different in different places
at one and the same time, and at different periods
in one and the same country. Their names, too, are
different according to places and times; changes which
are produced either by the organic development of lan-
suages or by accident.

A man from the neighbourhood of Somanath told me
that their mthkdl is equal to ours; that


1 mithkal = 8 ruvu.
I ruvu = 2 pdali.
1 pale = 16 yava, 8.6. barley-corn.


Accordingly 1 mithkal = 8 ruvu = 16 0018 = 256 yava.


This comparison shows that the man was mistaken
yO) Tied ) L


162 ALBERUNTS INDIA.


in comparing the two mithkdls; that what he called
mithkdls is in reality the tola, and that he calls the
mdsha by a different name, viz. 1.

If the Hindus wish to be particularly painstaking in
these things, they give the following scale, based on the
measurements which Varihamihira prescribes for the
construction of idols :—


“1 renu or particle of dust


= 1 raja.
8 raja = 1 bdldgra, ze. the end of a hair.
8 bdlagra = 1 likhyd, i.e. the egg of a louse.
8 likhya = 1 ytkd, we. a louse.
8 yuka = I yava, 8.06. a barley-corn.


Hence, Varahamihira goes on to enumerate the measures
for distances. His measures of weight are the same as
those which we have already mentioned. He says:


4 yava = I andi.

4 andt = I mdsha

16 mdsha = 1 suvarna, i.e. gold.
4 suvarna = 1 pala.


The measures of dry substances are the following :—


4 pala = I kudava.
4 hudava = 1 prastha.
4 prastha = 1 ddhaka.


The measures of liquid substances are the following :—


8 pala = 1 kudava.
8 kudava = 1 prastha.
4 prastha = 1 ddhaka.
4 ddhaka = 1 drona.


The following weights occur in the book Caraka. I
give them here according to the Arabic translation, as
I have not received them from the Hindus vivd voce.
The Arabic copy seems to be corrupt, lke all other
books of this kind which I know. Such corruption
must of necessity occur in our Arabic writing, more
particularly at a period like ours, when people care


Varabami-
hira on
weights.


Weights
according to
the book
Caraka.


CHAPTER XV. 163


so little about the correctness of what they copy.
“ Atreya says:
6 particles of dust
67
8 mustard-seeds
2 red rice-corns
2 peas


I marict.

1 mustard-seed (rdjikd).
I red rice-corn.

I pea.

I andi.


And 1 andi is equal to 4 ddnak, according to the
scale by which 7 ddnak are equal to one dirham.


الا اا اا


Further :
4 andi = 1
8 mdsha = I cana (?).

1 karsha or suvarna of the
ا اد‎ weight of 2 dirhams.
4 suvarna = 1 pala.

4 pala = 1 kudava.
4 kudava = 1 prastha
4 prastha = 1 ddhaka.
4 ddhaka = 1 drona.
2drona = 1 surpa.
2éirpa = t1jand (}).”


The weight pala is much used in all the business
dealings of the Hindus, but it is different for different
wares and in different provinces, According to some,
1 pala = +; mand ; according to others, 1 pala = 14
mithkdl; but the mand is not equal to 210 mithkdl.
According to others, 1 pala = 16 mithkdl, but the

mand is not equal to 240 mithkdl. According to others,
I pala = 15 dirham, but the mand is not equal to 225
dirham. In reality, however, the relation between the
pala and the mand is different.

Further, Atreya says: “1 ddhaka = 64 pala = 128 Psse7®
dirham = 1 ratl. But if the andi is equal to + ddnak,
one swvarna contains 64 andi, and then a dirham has
32 andt, which, as each andé is equal to $ ddnak, are
equal to 4 ddnak. The double amount of it is 14 dir-
ham” (sic).

Such are the results when people, instead of trans-
lating, indulge in wild conjecture and mingle together
different theories in an uncritical manner.


164 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


As regards the first theory, resting on the assumption
of one suvarna being equal to three of our dirhams,
people in general agree in this—that


I suvarna = + pala.


1pala = 12 dirham.
I pala = علي‎ mand.
Imana@ = 180 dirham.


This leads me to think that I swvarna is equal to 3
of our mithkdl, not to 3 of our dirham.

Varadhamihira says in another place of his Samhita :

“Make a round vase of the diameter and height of
one yard, and then expose it to the rain until it ceases.
All the water that has been collected in it of the weight
of 200 dirham is, if taken fourfold, equal to 1 ddhaka.”

This, however, 1s only an approximate statement,
because, as we have above mentioned in his own words,
1 ddhaka is equal to 768 either dirham, as they say, or
mithkal, as I suppose.

Sripila relates, on the authority of Varahamihira, that
50 pala = 256 dirham =1 ddhaka. But he is mistaken,
for here the number 256 does not mean dirhams, but the
number of the swrarna contained in one ddhaka. And the
number of pala contained in 1 ddhaka is 64, not 50.

As I have been told, Jivasarman gives the following
detailed account of these weights :

4pala =1 kudava.
4 kudava = 1 prastha.
4 prastha = 1 ddhaka.
4 ddhaka = 1 drona.
20drona = 1 khdré,

The reader must know that 16 mdsha are 1 suvarna,
but in weighing wheat or barley they reckon 4 swvarna
= 1 pala, and in weighing water and oil they reckon 8
suvarna = 1 pala.

The balances with which the Hindus weigh things
are yaptotiwves, of which the weights are immovable,
whilst the scales move on certain marks and lines.


Various
authors on
weights.


The Hindu
balance.


Dry
measures.


Page 79.


CHAPTERUXY. 165


Therefore the balance is called ¢uld. The first lines
mean the units of the weight from 1 to 5, and farther
on to 10; the following 11268 mean the tenths, 10, 20,
30, &c. With regard to the cause of this arrangement
they relate the following saying of Vasudeva :—

“J will not kill Sigupdla, the son of my aunt, if he
has not committed a crime, but will pardon him wnézl
ten, and then I shall call him to account.”

We shall relate this story on a later opportunity.

Alfazari uses in his astronomical handbook the word
pala for day-minutes (1.é. sixtieth parts of aday). Ihave
not found this use anywhere in Hindu literature, but
they use the word to denote @ correction in a mathe-
matical sense.

The Hindus have a weight called ,ه5707‎ which is
mentioned in the books about the conquest of Sindh.
It is equal to 2000 pala; for they explain it by 100 x
20 pala, and as nearly equal to the weight of an ox.

This is all I have lighted on as regards Hindu
weichts.

By measuring (with dry measures) people determine
the body and the bulk of a thing, if it fills up a certain
measure which has been gauged as containing a certain
quantity of it, it being understood that the way in
which the things are laid out in the measure, the way
in which their surface is determined, and the way in
which, on the whole, they are arranged within the
measure, are in every case identical. If two objects
which are to be weighed belong to the same species,
they then prove to be equal, not only in bulk, but also
in weight; but if they do not belong to the same species,
their bodily extent is equal, but not their weight.

They have a measure called 5054 (2 sibi), which is
mentioned by every man from Kanauj and Somanath.
According to the people of Kanauj—

4 bist = 1 prastha.
1 bist = 1 kudava,


166 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


According to the people of Somanath—
16 bist §==1 panti.
12 pantt = 1 mora.
According to another theory—
12 bist | = 1 kalasi.
1 bist = 1 mdna.
From the same source I learnt that a mdna of wheat
is nearly equal to 5 mand. Therefore 1 bist (?) 8
equal to 20 mand. The bist corresponds to the Khwa-
rizmian measure sukhkh, according to old style, whilst
the kalast corresponds to the Khwarizmian ghir, for
I ghir = 12 sukhkh.

Measures of Mensuration is the determination of distances by
lines and of superficies by planes. A plane ought to
be measured by part of a plane, but the mensuration
by means of lines effects the same purpose, as lines
determine the limits of planes. When, in quoting
Varaihamihira, we had come so far as to determine the
weight of a barley-corn (p. 162), we made a digression
into an exposition of weights, where we used his
authority about gravity, and now we shall return to
him and consult him about distances. He says—


8 barley-corns put together = 1 azgula, 2.6. finger.


4 fingers = 1 rdma (2), z.e. the fist.

24 fingers = 1 hattha, 18.6. yard, also called dasta.
4 yards = 1 dhanu, 7.e. arc = a fathom.

40 arcs = 1 nalva.

25 nalva = 1 krosa.


Hence it follows that 1 kroh = 4000 yards; and as
our mile has just so many yards, 1 mile=1 kroh.
Pulisa the Greek also mentions in his Siddhanta that
1 kroh = 4000 yards,

The yard is equal to 2 mikyds or 24 fingers; for the
Hindus determine the sanku, 4.0. mikyds, by idol-fingers.
They do not call the twelfth part of a mikyds a finger
in general, as we do, but their mikyds is always a span.
The span, 2.64. the distance between the ends of the


Page 80.


The relation
between

yojana, mile,
and farsakh.


CHAPTER XV. 167


thumb and the small finger at their widest possible
stretching, is called vitaste and 32150

The distance between the ends of the fourth or ring-
finger and the thumb, both being stretched out, is called
gokarna.

The distance between the ends of the index-finger
and of the thumb is called karabha, and is reckoned as
equal to two-thirds of a span.

The distance between the tops of the middle finger
and of the thumb is called .ه227‎ The Hindus maintain
that the height of a man is eight times his ¢é/a, whether
he be tall or small; as people say with regard to the
foot, that it is one-seventh of the height of a man.

Regarding the construction of idols, the book Samhita
Says :—

“The breadth of the palm has been determined as 6,
the length as 7; the length of the middle finger as 5,
that of the fourth finger as the same; that of the index-
finger as the same minus + (u¢. 4%); that of the small
finger as the same menus ++ (ue. 35); that of the thumb
as equal to two-thirds of the length of the middle finger
(2.e. 33), So that the two last fingers are of equal length.”

By the measurements and numbers of this passage,
the author means idol-fingers.

After the measure of the kroga has been fixed and
found to be equal to our mle, the reader must learn
- that they have a measure of distances, called yojana,
which is equal to 8 miles or to 32,000 yards. Perhaps
somebody might believe that 1 kroh is = + farsakh,
and maintain that the farsakhs of the Hindus are
16,000 yards long. But such is not the case. On
the contrary, 1 kroh = + yojana. In the terms of
this measure, Alfazdri has determined the circumfer-
ence of the earth in his astronomical handbook. He
calls it juin, in the plural ’ajwdn.


The elements of the calculations of the Hindus on Relation


between


the circumference of the circle rest on the assumption


168 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


croumfere that it is thrice its diameter. So the Matsya-Purdna 1

‘diameter. says, after it has mentioned the diameters of the sun
and moon in yojanas: “The circumference is thrice —
the diameter.”

The Aditya-Purdéna says, after it has mentioned the
breadth of the Dvipas, i.e. the islands and of their
surrounding seas: “The circumference is thrice the
diameter.”

The same occurs also in the Vdyu-Purdna. In later
times, however, Hindus have become aware of the
fraction following after the three wholes. According
to Brahmagupta, the circumference is 34 times the
diameter; but he finds this number by a method
peculiar} to himself. He says: “As the root of 10
is nearly 33, the relation between the diameter and
its circumference is like the relation between 1 and
the root of 10.’ Then he multiples the diameter
by itself, the product by 10, and of this product he
takes the root. Then the circumference is solid, 1.e.
consists of integers, in the same way as the root of
ten. This calculation, however, makes the fraction
larger than it really is. Archimedes defined it to be
something between #2 and 22. Brahmagupta relates
with regard to Aryabhata, aaah him, that he
fixed fe circumference as 3393; that he fixed the dia-
meter in one place as 1080, in another place as 1050.
According to the first statement, the relation between
diameter and circumference would be like 1 : 3,45.
This fraction (;4,) 1s by 2 smaller than 7. However,
as regards the second statement, it one no doubt a
blunder in the text, not of the author; for according to
the text, the relation would be like 1 : 3+ and some-
thing over.

Pulisa employs this relation in his calculations in
the proportion of 1 : 3 yes‘

This fraction is here by so much smaller than one-
seventh as it is according to Aryabhata, i.e. by جد‎


60 169


The same relation is derived from the old theory,
which Ya‘kib Ibn Tarik mentions in his book, Com-
positio Spherarum, on the authority of his Hindu
informant, viz. that the circumference of the zodiac
is 1,256,640,000 yojana, and that its diameter is
400,000,000 0

These numbers presuppose the relation between cir-
cumference and diameter to be as 1: 3 45%%49.000.
These two numbers may be reduced by the common
divisor of 360,000. ‘Thereby we get 177 as numerator
and 1250 as denominator. And this is the fraction
(#4;5) which Pulisa has adopted.


1250


0000


CHAPTER XVI.


NOTES ON THE WRITING OF THE HINDUS, ON THEIR)
ARITHMETIC AND RELATED SUBJECTS, AND ON CER-
TAIN STRANGE MANNERS AND CUSTOMS OF THEIRS.


THE tongue communicates the thought of the speaker
to the hearer. Its action has therefore, as it were, a
momentary life only, and it would have been impos-
sible to deliver by oral tradition the accounts of the
events of the past to later generations, more particularly
if they are separated from them by long periods of
time. This has become possible only by a new dis-
covery of the human mind, by the art of writing, which
spreads news over space as the winds spread, and over
time as the spirits of the deceased spread. Praise
therefore be unto Him who has arranged creation and
created everything for the best!

The Hindus are not in the habit of writing on hides, —
like the Greeks in ancient times. Socrates, on being —
asked why he did not compose books, gave this reply:
“T do not transfer knowledge from the living hearts of
men to the dead hides of sheep.” Muslims, too, used
in the early times of Islam to write on hides, eg. the
treaty between the Prophet and the Jews of Khaibar
and his letter to Kisra. The copies of the Koran were
written on the hides of gazelles, as are still nowadays
the copies of the Thora. There occurs this passage in
the Koran (Stira vi. 91): “They make it kardtis,” «.e.
touapia, The kirfds (or charta) is made in Egypt,


Page 81.


On various
kinds of
writing
material.


On the
Hindu
alphabet.


CHAPTER XVI. 171


being cut out of the papyrus stalk. Written on this
material, the orders of the Khalifs went out into all the
world until shortly before our time. Papyrus has this
advantage over vellum, that you can neither rub out
nor change anything on it, because thereby it would be
destroyed. It was in China that paper was first manu-
factured. Chinese prisoners introduced the fabrication
of paper into Samarkand, and thereupon it was made
in various places, so as to meet the existing want.

The Hindus have in the south of their country a
slender tree like the date and cocoa-nut palms, bearing
edible fruits and leaves of the length of one yard, and
as broad as three fingers one put beside the other.
They call these leaves 1011 (tdla or tér = Borassus fla-
belluformis), and write on them. They bind a book of
these leaves together by a cord on which they are
arranged, the cord going through all the leaves by a
hole in the middle of each.

In Central and Northern India people use the bark of
the ¢i#z tree, one kind of which is used as a cover for
bows. It is called bhirja. They take a piece one yard
long and as broad as the outstretched fingers of the
hand, or somewhat less, and prepare it in various ways.
They oil and polish it so as to make it hard and smooth,
and then they write on it. The proper order of the
single leaves is marked by numbers, The whole book
is wrapped up in a piece of cloth and fastened between
two tablets of the same size. Such a book is called
path (ct. pusta, pustaka). Their letters, and whatever
else they have to write, they write on the bark of the
tuz tree.

As to the writing or alphabet of the Hindus, we have
already mentioned that it once had been lost and for-
gotten ; that nobody cared for it, and that in conse-
quence people became illiterate, sunken into gross
ignorance, and entirely estranged from science. But
then Vydsa, the son of 22285018, rediscovered their


172 ALBERUNTIS INDIA.


alphabet of fifty letters by an inspiration of God. A
letter is called akshara. 1
Some people say that originally the number of their
letters was less, and that it increased only by degrees.
This is possible, or I should even say necessary. As for
the Greek alphabet, a certain Asitdhas (sic) had formed
sixteen characters to perpetuate science about the time
when the Israelites ruled over Egypt. Thereupon
Kimush (sic) and Agenon (sic) brought them to the
Greeks. By adding four new signs they obtained an
alphabet of twenty letters. Later on, about the time
when Socrates was poisoned, Simonides added four
other signs, and so the Athenians at last had a complete
alphabet of twenty-four letters, which happened during ©
the reign of Artaxerxes, the son of Darius, the son of —
Artaxerxes, the son of Cyrus, according to the chrono-

oraphers of the West.

The great number of the letters of the Hindu alpha-
bet is explained, firstly, by the fact that they express
every letter by a separate sign if it 15 followed bya |
vowel or a diphthong or a hamza (visarga), or a small
extension of the sound beyond the measure of the
vowel; and, secondly, by the fact that they have con-
sonants which are not found together in any other —
language, though they may be found scattered through
different languages—sounds of such a nature that owr
tongues, not being familiar with them, can scarcely pro-
nounce them, and that our ears are frequently not able
to distinguish between many a cognate pair of them.

The Hindus write from the left to the right like the
Greeks. They do not write on the basis of a line,
above which the heads of the letters rise whilst their
tails go down below, as in Arabic writing. On the
contrary, their ground-line is above, a straight line
above every single character, and from this line the
letter hangs down and is written under it. Any sign
above the line is nothing but a grammatical mark to


Page 82.


On the local
alphabets of
the Hindus.


On the
word Om.


CHAPTERS VI; 173


denote the pronunciation of the character above which
it stands.

The most generally known alphabet is called Siddha-
mdtrikd, which is by some considered as originating
from Kashmir, for the people of Kashmir use it. But
it is also used in Varanasi. This town and Kashmir are
the high schools of Hindu sciences, The same writing
is used in MadhyadeSa, 2.6. the middle country, the
country all around Kanauj, which is also called Arya-
varta.

In Malava there is another alphabet called Ndgara,
which differs from the former only in the shape of the
characters.

Next comes an alphabet called Ardhandgari, 1.¢. half-
nagara, so called because it is compounded of the
former two. It is used in Bhatiya and some parts of
Sindh.

Other alphabets are the Malwdri, used in Malwashau,
in Southern Sind, towards the sea-coast; the Saindhava,
used in Bahmanwa or Almanstira; the Karndta, used in
Karnatadesa, whence those troops come which in the
armies are known as Kannara; the Andhri, used in
Andhradega; the Dirwart (Dravidit), used in Dirwara-
deSa (Dravidadega) ; the Zari, used in Laradeéga (Lata-
dega); the Gauwrt (Gaudi), used in Pirvadesga, 4.6. the
Eastern country; the Bhatkshukt, used in Udunptr in
Piirvadega. This last is the writing of Buddha.

The Hindus begin their books with Om, the word of
creation, as we begin them with “In the name of
God.” The figure of the word om is GY. This figure
does not consist of letters; it is simply an image
invented to represent this word, which people use,
believing that it will bring them a blessing, and
meaning thereby a confession 02 the unity of God.
Similar to this is the manner in which the Jews write
the name of God, viz. by three Hebrew yods. In the
Thora the word is written YHYH and pronounced


174 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


Adonai; sometimes they also say Yah. The word
Adonai, which they pronounce, is not expressed in
writing,

The Hindus do not use the letters of their alphabet
for numerical notation, as we use the Arabic letters in
the order of the Hebrew alphabet. As in different parts
of India the letters have different shapes, the numeral
signs, too, which are called aka, differ. The numeral
signs which we use are derived from the finest forms of
the Hindu signs. Signs and figures are of no use if
people do not know what they mean, but the people of
Kashmir mark the single leaves of their books with
figures which look lke drawings or hke the Chinese
characters, the meaning of which can only be learned
by a very long practice. However, they do not use
them when reckoning in the sand.

In arithmetic all nations agree that all the orders of
numbers (eg. one, ten, hundred, thousand) stand in a
certain relation to the ten; that each order is the tenth
part of the following and the tenfold of the preceding.
I have studied the names of the orders of the numbers
in various languages with all kinds of people with
whom I have been in contact, and have found that no '
nation goes beyond the thousand, The Arabs, too, stop
with the thousand, which is certainly the most correct
and the most natural thing to do. I have written a
separate treatise on this subject.

Those, however, who go beyond the thousand in their
numeral system are the Hindus, at least in their
arithmetical technical .terms, which have been either
freely invented or derived according to certain etymolo-
gies, whilst in others both methods are blended together.
They extend the names of the orders of numbers until
the 18th order for religious reasons, the mathematicians
being assisted by the grammarians with all kinds of
etymologies.

The 18th order is called Pardrdha, .6.ة‎ the half of


On their
numeral
signs.


Page 83.


CHAPTER XVI. 175


heaven, or, more acurately, the half of that which is
above. For if the Hindus construct periods of time out
of Kalpas, the unit of this order is a day of God (i.e. a
half nychthemeron). And as we do not know any body
larger than heaven, half of it (pardrdha), as a half of
the greatest body, has been compared with a half of the
greatest day. By doubling it, by uniting night to day,
we get the whole of the greatest day. There can be no
doubt that the name Pardrdha is accounted for in this
way, and that pardr means the whole of heaven.
The following are the names of the eighteen orders of The eight-


een orders


numbers سبع‎ of numera-
tion.
1. Ekam. 10. Padma.
2. 11. Kharva.
3. Satan. 12. Nikharva.
4. Sahasrar. 13. Mahdpadma.
5. Ayuta. 14. Sanku.
6. Laksha. 15. Samudra.
7. Prayuta. 16. Madhya.
8. Kote. 17. Antya.
9. Nyarbuda. 18, Pardrdha.


I shall now mention some of their differences of
opinion relating to this system.

Some Hindus maintain that there 1s a 19th order Variations
beyond the Pardrdha, called Bhitri, and that this is the inthe 7
limit of reckoning. Butin reality reckoning is unlimited ; one
it has only a technical limit, which is conventionally
adopted as the last of the orders of numbers. By the
word reckoning in the sentence above they seem to mean
nomenclature, as 11 they meant to say that the lancuage
has no name for any reckoning beyond the 19th order.

It is known that the unit of this order, 2.6. one bhiri, is

٠١ equal to one-fifth of the greatest day, but on this subject
_ they have no tradition. In their tradition there are
_ only traces of combinations of the greatest day, as we
' shall hereafter explain. Therefore this 19th order
is an addition of an artificial and hyper-accurate
nature.


176 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


According to others, the limit of reckoning is kofi;
and starting from 7011 the succession of the orders of
numbers would be oti, thousands, hundreds, tenths;
for the number of Devas is expressed in kétis. Ac-
cording to their belief. there are thirty-three 70145 of
Devas, eleven of which belong to each of the three —
beings, Brahman, Narayana, and Mahadeva.

The names of the orders beyond that of the 18th
have been invented by the grammarians, as we have
said already (p. 174).

Further, we observe that the popular name of the
5th order is Dasa sahasra, that of the 7th order, Dasa
laksha ; for the two names which we have mentioned in
the list above (Ayuta and Prayuta) are rarely used.

The book of Aryabhata of Kusumapura gives the
following names of the orders from the ten till 10


kote :-—
Ayutamn. Koti padma.
Niyutaim. Parapadma.
Prayutam.


Further, it is noteworthy that some people establish
a kind of etymological relationship between the dif-
ferent names; so they call the 6th order Niyuta, ac-
cording to the analogy of the 5th, which is called
Ayuta. Further, they call the 8th order Arbuda,
according to the analogy of the gth, which is called
Nyarbuda.

There is a similar relation between Nikharva and
Kharva, the names of the 12th and 11th orders, and
between Sanku and Mahdsanku, the names of the 1 3th
and 14th orders. According to this analogy Mahé-
padma ought to follow immediately after Padma, but
this latter is the name of the roth, the former the
name of the 13th order.

These are differences of theirs which can be traced
back to certain reasons; but besides, there are many
differences without any reason, which simply arise


Page 84.


CHAPTER XVI. 177


from people dictating these names without observing
any fixed order, or from the fact that they hate to


avow their ignorance by a frank I do not knqw,—a —


Numeral
notation.


word which is difficult to them in any connection
whatsoever.

The Pulisa-siddhdnta gives the following list of the
orders of the numbers :—


4. Sahasram. 8. Kot.
5. Ayutarir. 9. Arbudam.
6. Niyutar. 10, Kharva.


7. Prayutam.


The following orders, from the 11th till the 18th, are
the same as those of the above-mentioned list.

The Hindus use the numeral signs in arithmetic in
the same way as we do. I have composed a treatise
showing how far, possibly, the Hindus are ahead of us
in this subject. We have already explained that the
Hindus compose their books in Slokas. If, now, they
wish, in their astronomical handbooks, to express some
numbers of the various orders, they express them by
words used to denote certain numbers either in one
order alone or at the same time in two orders (eg. a
word meaning either 20 or both 20 and 200). For
each number they have appropriated quite a great
quantity of words. Hence, if one word does not suit
the metre, you may easily exchange it for a synonym


which suits. Brahmagupta says: “If you want to


write one, express it by everything which is unique, as
the earth, the moon; two by everything which is double,
as, eg. black and white; three by everything which is


threefold; the nought by heaven, the twelve by the
names of the sun.”


I have united in the following table all the ex-


pressions for the numbers which I used to hear from‏ ظ


them; for the knowledge of these things is most


essential for deciphering their astronomical handbooks


AOL. I, M


samudra, sdgara, 4.6. the
sea.

abdhi.

dadhi.

dis, 2.6. the four cardinal
points,

jaldsaya.

krita. P

5 = ars

artha.

indriya,
senses,


26. the five


Pdndava, 2.6. the five royal
brothers.
pattrin, madrgana.
6 = rasa.
anga.
shat.
الدره م‎ (2) 2.6. the year.
ritu (2).
masdrdham.
7 = aga.
mahidhara.
parvata, i.e. the moun-
tains.
saptan.
naga, 4.6. the mountains.
adrt.
2010,
= vasu, ashta.
dhi, mangala.
gaja, naga.
dantin.
9 = go, chidra.
nanda, pavana.
randhra, antara.
navan = 9. Pa


ALBERUNTS INDIA.


178


Whenever I shall come to know all the meanings of
these words, I will add them, if God permits! Pa,


stinya and kha, both mean-‏ = هو
ing point.‏
gagana, 1.6. heaven.‏
viyat, 2.6. heaven.‏
dkdsa, t.e. heaven.‏
ambara, 2.6, heaven.‏
abhra, 2.6. heaven.‏


I = ddi, we. the beginning.


sasin.

indu.

itd.

urvard, dharani.

pitdmaha, i.e. the first
father.


candra, 4.6. the moon.
sitdmsu, t.e. the moon.
ripa.
rasmt.
2= yama.
asvin.
ravicandra.
locana, 4.6. the two eyes.
akshi.
dasra.
yamala.
paksha, i.e. the two halves
of a month,
netra, 2.6. the two eyes.


3 = trikdla, 2.6. the three parts

of time.

trijagat.

trayam.

pivaka, vaisvénara, da-
hana, tapana, hutdsana,
jvalana, agni, i.e. fire.

[ériguna, [ 2.6. the three first
forces.

loka, 4.6. the worlds, earth,
heaven, and hell.

trikatu.


4 = veda, 8.6. their sacred code,
because it has four parts.


GHA PIER: AVF, 179


10 = dis, khendu. 14 = manu, the lords of the
asd, Ravana-siras. fourteen manvantaras.
15 = tithi, 2.6. the lunar days in
each half month.
16 = ashti, nripa, bhiipa.
17 = atyashti.
18 = dhriti. Page 88.


11 = Rudra, the destroyer of the
world,
Mahddeva, i.e. the prince
of the angels.


isvara. : 1
akshauhint, te. the army | 19 = atidhriti. =
Kuru had. 20 = nakha, kriti.


utkriti.‏ = 21 ب
strya, because there are‏ = 12


22 =
twelve suns. ee
epee
dditya
248
arka, ne. the eis 25 = tativa, i.e. the twenty-five
ee? Ohare. things, through the
sahasramsu, knowledge of which


13 = visva. liberation is obtained.


As far as I have seen and heard of the Hindus, they
do not usually go beyond twenty-five with this kind


of numerical notation.
We shall now speak of certain strange manners and Strange


manners


customs of the Hindus. The strangeness of a thing andcustoms
evidently rests on the fact that it occurs but rarely, and Hence
that we seldom have the opportunity of witnessing it. “®° °°
If such strangeness reaches a high degree, the thing
becomes a curiosity, or even something like a miracle,
which is no longer in accordance with the ordinary laws
of nature, and which seems chimerical as long as it has
not been witnessed. Many Hindu customs differ from
those of our country and of our time to such a degree
-as to appear to us simply monstrous. One might
almost think that they had intentionally changed them
into the opposite, for owr customs do not resemble
theirs, but are the very reverse ; and if ever a custom of
theirs resembles one of owrs, it has certainly just the
opposite meaning, |

They do not cut any of the hair of the body. Originally
they went naked in consequence of the heat, and by
not cutting the hair of the head they intended to pre-


vent sunstroke.


150 ALBERUNTIS INDIA.


They divide the moustache into single plaits in
order to preserve it. As regards their not cutting
the hair of the genitals, they try to make people
believe that the cutting of it incites to lust and
increases carnal desire. Therefore such of them as
feel a strong desire for cohabitation never cut the
hair of the genitals.

They let the nails grow long, glorying in their idle-
ness, since they do not use. them for any business or
work, but only, while living a dolce far mente life, they
scratch their heads with them and examine the hair for
lice.

The Hindus eat singly, one by one, on a tablecloth
of dung. They do not make use of the remainder of a
meal, and the plates from which they have eaten are
thrown away if they are earthen.

They have red teeth in consequence of chewing areca-
nuts with betel-leaves and chalk.

They drink wine before having eaten anything, then
they take their meal. They sip the stall of cows, but
they do not eat their meat.

They beat the cymbals with a stick.

They use turbans for trousers. Those who want little
dress are content to dress in a rag of two fingers’ breadth,
which they bind over their loins with two cords; but
those who lke much dress, wear trousers lined with
so much cotton as would suffice to make a number of
counterpanes and saddle-rugs. These trousers have no
(visible) openings, and they are so huge that the feet
are not visible. The string by which the trousers are
fastened is at the back.

Their sidar (a piece of dress covering the head
and the upper part of breast and neck) is similar to
the trousers, being also fastened at the back by
buttons.

The lappets of the kurtakas (short shirts from the
shoulders to the middle of the body with sleeves, a


181 اا 0


female dress) have slashes both on the right and left
sides,

They keep the shoes tight till they begin to put
them on. ‘They are turned down from the calf before
walking (?).

In washing they begin with the feet, and then wash
the face. They wash themselves before cohabiting with
their wives.

Ceunt stantes velut palus vitis, dum mulieres ab 0
sursum moventur velut occupate in arando, maritus vero
plane otiosus manet. ,

On festive days they besmear their bodies with dung
instead of perfumes.

The men wear articles of female dress; they use
cosmetics, wear earrings, arm-rings, golden seal-rings on
the ring-finger as well as on the toes of the feet.

Miseret cos catamate et viri quar rebus venerers frua non
potest pushandila 01680, qua penem bucca devorans semen
elicit sorbendum.

In cacando faciem vertunt versus murum retegentes
pudenda ut videantur a pretereuntibus.

— “Sacra faciunt virilibus linga dictis, que est 0
veretri Mahadeva.

They ride without a saddle, but if they put on a
saddle, they mount the horse from its right side. In
travelling they like to have somebody riding behind
them.

They fasten the kuthdra, i.e. the dagger, at the waist
on the right side.

They wear a girdle called yajnopavita, passing 1
the left shoulder to the right side of the waist.

In all consultations and emergencies they take the Pase 9
advice of the women.

When a child is born people show particular atten-
tion to the man, not to the woman.

Of two children they give the preference to the younger,
particularly in the eastern parts of the country ; for they


102 41-1120 171:5


maintain that the elder owes his birth to predominant
lust, whilst the younger owes his origin to mature re-
flection and a calm proceeding,

In shaking hands they grasp the hand of a man from
the convex side.

They do not ask permission to enter a house, but
when they leave it they ask permission to do so.

In their meetings they sit cross-legged.

They spit out and blow their noses without any
respect for the elder ones present, and they crack their
lice before them. They consider the crepitus ventris as
a good omen, sneezing as a bad omen.

They consider as unclean the weaver, but as clean
the cupper and the flayer, who kills dying animals for
money either by drowning or by burning.

They use black tablets for the children in the schools,
and write upon them along the long side, not the broad
side, writing with a white material from the left to the
right. One would think that the author of the follow-
ing verses had meant the Hindus :—


“‘ How many a writer uses paper as black as charcoal,
Whilst his pen writes on it with white colour.
By writing he places a bright day in a dark night,
Weaving like a weaver, but without adding a woof.”


They write the title of a book at the end of it, not at
the beginning,

They magnify the nouns of their language by giving
them the feminine gender, as the Arabs magnify them
by the diminutive form.

If one of them hands over a thing to another, he
expects that it should be thrown to him as we throw a
thing to the dogs.

11 two men play at Nard (backgammon), a third
one throws the dice between them.

They like the juice which flows over the cheeks of


CHAPTER XVI. 183


the rutting elephant, which in reality has the most
horrid smell.

In playing chess they move the elephant straight on, On the
not to the other sides, one square at a time, like the chess.
pawn, and to the four corners also one square at a time,

. like the queen (firzdn). They say that these five squares
(i.e. the one straight forward and the others at the
corners) are the places occupied by the trunk and the
four feet of the elephant.

They play chess—four persons at a time—with a
pair of dice. Their arrangement of the figures on the


chess-board is the following :— 5
Gul, Horse. |Elephant| King. Pawn. Tower.
Pawn. Pawn. Pawn. Pawn. Pawn, Horse.


Pawn. | Elephant.


سس ساسم لللبنتيتشيحت- _ بيس | | | | | |S‏ سس سس الس مامه


Pawn. King.
King Pawn
Elephant.| Pawn.


Horse. Pawn. Pawn. Pawn. Pawn. Pawn.


————— | | | |  |J ببس سس سس سيت‎  —.h DS


Tower. Pawn. King. |Elephant.; Horse. | Tower.


184 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


As this kind of chess is not known among us, I shall
here explain what I know of it.

The four persons playing together sit so as to form a
square round a chess-board, and throw the two dice
alternately. Of the numbers of the dice the five and
six are blank (ze. do not count as such). In that
case, if the dice show five or six, the player takes one
instead of the five, and four instead of the six, because
the figures of these two numerals are drawn in the
following manner :—


6 5
Aes aoe GAT


so as to exhibit a certain likeness of form to 4 and 1,
viz. in the Indian signs.

The name Shdéh or king applies here to the queen
(firedn).

Each number of the dice causes a move of one of the
figures.

The 1 moves either the pawn or the king. Their
moves are the same as in the common chess. The king
may be taken, but is not required to leave his place.

The 2 moves the tower (rukh). It moves to the third
square in the direction of the diagonal, as the elephant
moves in owr chess.

The 3 moves the horse. Its move is the generally
known one to the third square in oblique direction.

The 4 moves the elephant. It moves in a straight
line, as the tower does in our chess, unless it be pre-
vented from moving on. If this is the case, as some-
times happens, one of the dice removes the obstacle,
and enables it to move on. Its smallest move is one
square, the greatest fifteen squares, because the dice
sometimes show two 4, or two 6,ora4 220 86. In
consequence of one of these numbers, the elephant
moves along the whole side on the margin of the chess-
board; in consequence of the other number, it moves


Page gt.


CHAPTER XVI. 185


along the other side on the other margin of the board,
in case there is no impediment in its way. In con-
sequence of these two numbers, the elephant, in the
course of his moves, occupies the two ends of the
diagonal.

The pieces have certain values, according to which

the player gets his share of the stake, for the pieces are
taken and pass into the hands of the player. The value
of the king is 5, that of the elephant 4, of the horse 3, of
the tower 2, and of the pawn 1. He who takes a king
gets 5. For two kings he gets 10, for three kings 15,
if the winner is no longer in possession of his own king.
But if he has still his own king, and takes all three
kings, he gets 54, a number which represents a pro-
gression based on general consent, not on an algebraic
principle.

If the Hindus claim to differ from us, and to be The innate
something better than we, as we on our side, of course, othe Hindu
do vice versd, we might settle the question by an ex- carpal
periment to be made with their boys. I never knew a
Hindu boy who had only recently come into Muham-
madan territory who was not thoroughly versed in the
manners and customs of the people, but at the same
time he would place the shoes before his master in a
wrong order, the right one to the left foot, and vice versa ;
he would, in folding, turn his master’s garments inside
out, and spread the carpets so that the under part is
uppermost, and more of the kind. All of which is a
consequence of the innate perversity of the Hindu
nature.

However, I must not reproach the Hindus only with customs ot
their heathen practices, for the heathen Arabs too com- Arabs.
mitted crimes and obscenities. They cohabited with
menstruating and pregnant women; several men agreed
to cohabit with the same woman in the same period of
menstruation; they adopted the children of others, of
their guests, of the lover of their daughter, not to men-


186 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


tion that in some kinds of their worship they whistled
on their fingers and clapped with their hands, and that
they ate unclean and dead animals. Islam has abolished
all those things among the Arabs, as it has also abolished
them in those parts of India the people of which have
become Muhammadans. Thanks be unto God!


007


CHAPTER XVII


ON HINDU SCIENCES WHICH PREY ON THE
IGNORANCE OF PEOPLE.


WE understand by witchcraft, making by some kind of on alchemy
delusion a thing appear to the senses as something dif- Hindusits
ferent from what it is in reality. Taken in this sense, Sal
it is far spread among people. Understood, however, Page .هو‎
as common people understand it, as the producing of
something which is impossible, it 1s a thing which

does not lie within the limits of reality. For as that

which is impossible cannot be produced, the whole affair

is nothing but a gross deception. Therefore witch-

craft in this sense has nothing whatever to do with
science.

One of the species of witchcraft is alchemy, though
it is generally not called by this name. But if a man
takes a bit of cotton and makes it appear as a bit of
gold, what would you call this but a piece of witch-
craft? It is quite the same as if he were to take a bit
of silver and make it appear as gold, only with this
difference, that the latter is a generally-known process,

1.6. the gilding of silver, the former is not.

The Hindus do not pay particular attention to al-
chemy, but no nation is entirely free from it, and one
nation has more bias for it than another, which must
not be construed as proving intelligence or ignorance ;
for we find that many intelligent people are entirely
given to alchemy, whilst ignorant people ridicule the
art and its adepts. Those intelligent people, though


188 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


boisterously exulting over their make-believe science,
are not to be blamed for occupying themselves with
alchemy, for their motive is simply excessive eagerness
for acquiring fortune and for avoiding misfortune. Once
a sage was asked why scholars always flock to the doors
of the rich, whilst the rich are not inclined to call at
the doors of scholars. ‘‘The scholars,’ he answered,
“are well aware of the use of money, but the rich
are ignorant of the nobility of science.’ On the other
hand, ignorant people are not to be praised, although
they behave quite quietly, simply because they abstain
from alchemy, for their motives are objectionable ones,
rather practical results of innate ignorance and stupidity
than anything else.

The adepts in this art try to keep it concealed, and
shrink back from intercourse with those who do not
belong to them. Therefore I have not been able to
learn from the Hindus which methods they follow in
this science, and what element they principally use,
whether a mineral or an animal or a vegetable one. I
only heard them speaking of the process of sublimation,
of calcination, of analysis, and of the waxing of tale,
which they call in their language 1010/00, and so I guess
that they incline towards the mineralogical method of
alchemy.

They have a science similar to alchemy which is
quite peculiar to them. They call it Rasdyana, a word
composed with rasa, 2.6. gold. It means an art which
is restricted to certain operations, drugs, and compound
medicines, most of which are taken from plants, Its


principles restore the health of those who were ill


beyond hope, and give back youth to fading old age, so
that people become again what they were in the age
near puberty; white hair becomes black again, the
keenness of the senses is restored as well as the capa-
city for juvenile agility, and even for cohabitation, and
the life of people in this world is even extended toa


The science
of Rasayana.


Nagarjuna,
the author
of a book on
Rasayana, ,


Page 93.


The alche-
mist Vyadi
in the time
of King Vik-
ramditya.


CHAPTER XVII. 189


long period. And why not? Have we not already
mentioned on the authority of Patafijali (v. p. 88) that
one of the methods leading to liberation is Rasdyana ?
What man would hear this, being inclined to take it
for truth, and not dart off into foolish joy and not
honour the master of such a wonderful art by popping
the choicest bit of his meal into his mouth ?

A famous representative of this art was Nagarjuna, a
native of the fort Daihak, near Somanath. He excelled
in it, and composed a book which contains the sub-
stance of the whole literature on this subject, and is
very rare. He lived nearly a hundred years before our
time.

In the time of the King Vikramaditya, of whose era
we shall speak hereafter, there lived in the city of
Ujain a man of the name of ١7501, who had turned
his whole attention to this science, and had ruined on
account of it both his life and property, but all his
zeal did not even avail him so much as to help him to
. things which, under ordinary circumstances, are easily
obtained. Becoming restricted in his means, he con-
ceived a discust to that which had been the object of
all his exertions, and sat down on the bank of a river
sighing, sorrowful, and despairing. He held in his
hand his pharmacopeia, from which he used to take the
prescriptions for his medicines, but now he began to
throw one leaf of it after the other into the water. A
harlot happened to sit on the bank of the same river
farther down, who, on seeing the leaves pass by,
gathered them, and fished up some relating to Hasd-
yana. Wyadi did not notice her till all the leaves of
his book had gone. Then the woman came to him,
asking why he had done so with his book, whereupon
he answered, “Because I have derived no advantage
from it. I have not obtained what I ought to have
obtained ; for its sake I have become bankrupt after
having had great treasures, and now I am miserable


190 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


after having so long been in the hope of obtaining hap-
piness.” The harlot spoke: “Do not give up a pursuit
in which you have spent your life; do not despair of the
possibility of a thing which all sages before you have
shown to be true. Perhaps the obstacle which prevents
you from realising your plans is only of an accidental
nature, which may perhaps be removed by an accident.
I have much solid cash. It is all yours that you may
spend it on the realisation of your plans.” Thereupon
Vyadi resumed his work.

However, books of this kind are written in an
enigmatic style. So he happened to misunderstand a
word in the prescription of a medicine, which meant
ow and human blood, both being required for it. It
was written raktémala, and he thought it meant red
myrobalanon. When he used the medicine it had
no effect whatsoever. Now he began to concoct the
various drugs, but the flame touched his head and
dried up his brain. Therefore he oiled himself with
oil, pouring it in great quantity over his skull. One
day he rose to step away from the fireplace for some
business or other, but as there happened to be a peg
projecting from the roof right above his head, he
knocked his head against it, and the blood began to
fiow. On account of the pain which he felt, he looked
downward, and in consequence some drops of blood
mixed with oil dropped from the upper part of his skull
into the caldron without his noticing it. When, then,
the concocting process was finished and he and his wife
besmeared themselves with the concoction in order to
try it, they both flew upintothe air. Vikramaditya on
hearing of this affair left his castle, and proceeded to
the market-place in order to see them with his own
eyes. Then the man shouted to him, “Open thy mouth
for my saliva.” The king, however, being discusted, did
not do it, and so the saliva fell down near the door,
and immediately the threshold was filled with gold.


Story about
the piece of
silver in the
door of the
Govern-
ment-house
in Dhara.


Page 94.


CHAPTER XVH. I9I


Vyadi and the woman flew to any place they liked.
He has composed famous books on this science. People
say that both man and wife are still alive.

A similar tale is the following:—In the city of
Dhara, the capital of Malava, which is in our days ruled
by Bhojadeva, there les in the door of the Government-
house an oblong piece of pure silver, in which the out-
lines of the limbs of a man are visible. Its origin is
accounted for by the following story :—Once in olden
times a man went to a king of theirs, bringing him a
Rasdyana, the use of which would make him immortal,
victorious, invincible, and capable of doing everything
he desired. He asked the king to come alone to the
place of their meeting, and the king gave orders to keep
in readiness all the man required.

The man began to boil the oil for several days, until
at last it acquired consistency. Then he spoke to the
king: “Spring into it and 1 shall finish the process.”
But the king, terrified at what he saw, had not the
courage to dive into it. The man, on perceiving his
cowardice, spoke to him: “If you have not sufficient
courage, and will not do it for yourself, will you allow
me myself to doit?” Whereupon the king answered,
“Do as you like.” Now he produced several packets of
drugs, and instructed him that when such and such
symptoms should appear, he should throw upon him
this or that packet. Then the man stepped forward to
the caldron and threw himself into it, and at once he
was dissolved and reduced into pulp. Now the king
proceeded according to his instruction, but when he had
nearly finished the process, and there remained only one
packet that was not yet thrown into the mass, he began
to be anxious, and to think what might happen to his
realm, in case the man should return to life as an
immortal, victorious, invincible person, as has above been
mentioned. And so he thought it preferable not to
throw the last packet into the mass. The consequence


Sipe beh tn USAR AO ag سجرج‎ i جاب‎


192 ALBERUN?PS INDIA.


was that the caldron became cold, and the dissolved
man became consolidated in the shape of the said piece
of silver. :

The Hindus tell a tale about Vallabha, the king of
the city of Vallabhi, whose era we have mentioned in
the proper chapter.

A man of the rank of a Siddha asked a herdsman
with reference to a plant called Zhohar, of the species of
the Lactaria, from which milk flows when they are torn
off, whether he had ever seen Lactaria from which
blood flows instead of milk. When the herdsman
declared he had, he gave him some drink-money that
he should show it to him, which he did. When the
man now saw the plant, he set fire to it, and threw the
dog of the herdsman into the flame. Enraged thereby,
the herdsman caught the man, and did with him the
same as he had done to his dog. Then he waited till
the fire was extinguished, and found both the man and
the dog, but turned into gold. He took the dog with
him, but left the man on the spot.

Now some peasant happened to find it. He cut off
a finger, and went to a fruit-seller who was called
Ranka, i.e. the poor, because he was an utter pauper,
and evidently near bankruptcy. After the peasant had
bought from him what he wanted, he returned to the
volden man, and then he found that in the place where
the cut off finger had been, a new finger had grown.
He cut it off a second time, and bought again from the
same fruit-seller all that he wanted. But when the
fruit-seller asked him whence he had the finger, he was
stupid enough to tell him, So Ranka went out to the
body of the Siddha, and brought it on a carriage to his
house. He stayed in his old abode, but managed by
degrees to buy the whole town. The king Vallabha
desired to own the same town, and asked him to cede
it to him for money, but Ranka declined. Being how-
ever afraid of the king’s resentment, he fled to the lord


Story of the
fruit-seller
Ranka and
the king
Vallabha.


CHAPTER XVII. 193


. of Almanstira, made him presents of money, and asked
him to help him by a naval force. The lord of Alman-
stra complied with his desire, and assisted him. So he
made a night-attack upon the king Vallabha, and killed
him and his people, and destroyed his town. People
say that still in our time there are such traces left
in that country as are found in places which were de-
stroyed by an unexpected night-attack.

The greediness of the ignorant Hindu princes for
gold-making does not know any limit. If any one of
them wanted to carry out a scheme of gold-making,
and people advised him to killa number of fine little
children, the monster would not refrain from such a
crime ; he would throw them into the fire. If this
precious science of Rasayana were banished to the
utmost limits of the world, where it is unattainable to
anybody, it would be the best.

According to the Eranian tradition, Isfandiyad is said An Branian
to have spoken when dying: “ Katis had been given the Pesce
power and the miraculous things mentioned in the Book
of the Law. Finally he went to the mountain Kaf as a
decrepit man, bent down by old-age, but he returned
thence as a lively youth of well-proportioned figure and
full of force, having made the clouds his carriage, as God
allowed him.”

As regards charms and incantations, the Hindus have دن‎ the bird
a firm belief in them, and they, as a rule, are much in- 4
clined towards them. The book which treats of those
things is considered as a work of Garuda, a bird on
which Narayana rode. Some people describe this bird
in such a way as to indicate a Sifrid-bird and its doings.

It is an enemy of fish, catching them. As a rule,
animals have by nature an aversion to their opponents,
and try to beware of them; here, however, there is an
exception to this rule. For when this bird flutters
above the water and swims on it, the fish rise from the
VOL, I. N


194 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


deep to the surface, and make it easy to him to catch
them, as if he had bound them by his spell. Others
describe it with such characteristics as might indi-
cate a stork. The Vayu Purdna attributes to it a
pale colour, On the whole, Garuda comes nearer to a
stork than to a Sifrid, as the stork is by nature, ike
Garuda, a destroyer of snakes.

Most of their charms are intended for those who have
been bitten by serpents. Their excessive confidence in
them is shown by this, which I heard a man say, that he
had seen a dead man who had died from the bite of a
serpent, but after the charm had been applied he had
been restored to life, and remained alive, moving about
like all others.

Another man I heard as he told the following story :
“He had seen a man who had died from the bite of a
serpent. A charm was applied, and in consequence he
rose, spoke, made his will, showed where he had de-
posited his treasures, and gave all necessary information
about them. But when he inhaled the smell of a dish,
he fell down dead, life being completely extinct.”

It is a Hindu custom that when a man has been
bitten by a venomous serpent, and they have no charmer
at hand, they bind the bitten man on a bundle of reeds,
and place on him a leaf on which is written a blessing
for that person who will accidentally light upon him,
and save him by a charm from destruction.

I, for my part, do not know what I am to say about
these things, since I do not believe in them. Once a
man who had very little belief in reality, and much less
in the tricks of jugglers, told me that he had been
poisoned, and that people had sent him some Hindus
possessing the knowledge of charms, They sang their
charms before him, and this had a quieting effect upon
him, and soon he felt that he became better and better,
whilst they were drawing linesin the air with their
hands and with twigs,


The effect of
charms on
the bite of
serpents.


Hunting
practices,


Page 96.


CHAPTER XVII. 193


I myself have witnessed that in hunting gazelles they
caught them with the hand. One Hindu even went so
far as to assert that he, without catching the gazelle,
would drive it before him and lead it straight into the
kitchen. This, however, rests, as I believe I have found
out, simply on the device of slowly and constantly
accustoming the animals to one and the same melody,
Our people, too, practise the same when hunting the
ibex, which is more wild even than the gazelle. When
they see the animals resting, they begin to walk round
them in a circle, singing one and the same melody so
Jong until the animals are accustomed to it. Then
they make the circle more and more narrow, till at last
they come near enough to shoot at the animals which
lie there in perfect rest.

The shooters of Kata-birds have a custom of beating
copper-vessels during the night with one and the same
kind of beat, and they manage to catch them with the
hand. If, however, the beat is changed, the birds fly
off in all directions.

All these things are peculiar customs which have
nothing whatsoever to do with charms. Sometimes the
Hindus are considered as sorcerers because of their
playing with balls on raised beams or on tight ropes,
but tricks of this kind are common to all nations.


( 196 )


CHAPTER XVIII.


VARIOUS NOTES ON THEIR COUNTRY, THEIR RIVERS, AND
THEIR OCEAN. ITINERARIES OF THE DISTANCES BE-
TWEEN THEIR SEVERAL KINGDOMS, AND BETWEEN
THE BOUNDARIES OF THEIR COUNTRY.


THE reader is to imagine the inhabitable world, 7
oixovpévn, aS lying in the northern half of the earth,
and more accurately in one-half of this half—z.e. in
one of the quarters of the earth. It is surrounded by
a sea, which both in west and east is called the compre-
hending one; the Greeks call its western part near their
country wxeavos. This sea separates the inhabitable
world from whatever continents or inhabitable islands
there may be beyond it, both towards west and east; for
it is not navigable on account of the darkness of the
air and the thickness of the water, because there is
no more any road to be traced, and because the risk
is enormous, whilst the profit is nothing. Therefore
people of olden times have fixed marks both on the sea
and its shores which are intended to deter from enter-
ing it.

The inhabitable world does not reach the north on
account of the cold, except in certain places where it
penetrates into the north in the shape, as it were, of ©
tongues and bays. In the south it reaches as far as
the coast of the ocean, which in west and east is con-
nected with the comprehending ocean. This southern
ocean is navigable. It does not form the utmost
southern limit of the inhabitable world. On the con-


The inhabit-
able world
and the
ocean,


The orogra-
phic system
of Asia and
Europe.


CHAPTER XVIII. 197


trary, the latter stretches still more southward in the
shape of large and small islands which fill the ocean.
In this southern region land and water dispute with
each other their position, so that in one place the con-
tinent protrudes into the sea, whilst in another the sea
penetrates deeply into the continent.

The continent protrudes far into the sea in the west-
ern half of the earth, and extends its shores far into
the south. On the plains of this continent live the
western negroes, whence the slaves are brought; and
there are the Mountains of the Moon, and on them are
the sources of the Nile. On its coast, and the islands
before the coast, live the various tribes of the Zanj.
There are several bays or gulfs which penetrate into
the continent on this western half of the earth—the
bay of Berbera, that of Klysma (the Red Sea), and that
of Persia (the Persian Gulf); and between these gulfs
the western continent protrudes more or less into the
ocean.

In the eastern half of the earth the sea penetrates as
deeply into the northern continent as the continent in
the western half protrudes into the southern sea, and
in many places it has formed bays and estuaries which
run far into the continent—bays being parts of the sea,
estuaries being the outlets of rivers towards the sea.
This sea is mostly called from some island in it or
from the coast which borders it. Here, however, we
are concerned only with that part of the sea which
is bordered by the continent of India, and therefore is
called the Indian Ocean.

As to the orographic configuration of the inhabitable
world, imagine a range of towering mountains like the
vertebree of a pine stretching through the middle lati-
tude of the earth, and in longitude from east to west,
passing through China, Tibet, the country of the Turks,
Kabul, Badhakhshin, Tokharistén, Bamiyan, Elghor,
Khurasin, Media, Adharbaijin, Armenia, the Roman


198 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


Empire, the country of the Franks, and of the Jalalika
(Gallicians). Long as this range is, it has also a con-
siderable breadth, and, besides, many windings which
enclose inhabited plains watered by streams which
descend from the mountains both towards north and
south. One of these plains is India, limited in the
south by the above-mentioned Indian Ocean, and on
Pageo7, 11 three other sides by the lofty mountains, the waters
of which flow down to it. But if you have seen the
pe ere soil of India with your own eyes and meditate on its
formation. nature—if you consider the rounded stones found in
the earth however deeply you dig, stones that are huge
near the mountains and where the rivers have a violent
current; stones that are of smaller size at greater dis-
tance from the mountains, and where the streams flow
more slowly ; stones that appear pulverised in the shape
of sand where the streams begin to stagnate near their.
mouths and near the sea—if you consider all this, you
could scarcely help thinking that India has once been
a sea which by degrees has been filled up by the allu-
vium of the streams.
First orien- . The middle of India is the country round Kanoj


tation re- A 3 z : :
garding Ma- (Kanauj), Which they call Madhyadeéa, 4.6. the middle
dhyadesa, 3 ١

Kanoj, of the realms. It is the middle or centre from a geo-


Mahtra, and : : : : Qe ae
Tanéshar. graphical point of view, in so far as it lies half way be-


tween the sea and the mountains, in the midst between
the hot and the cold provinces, and also between the
eastern and western frontiers of India. But it is a
political centre too, because in former times it was the
residence of their most famous heroes and kings.

The country of Sindh lies to the west of Kanoj. In
marching from our country to Sindh we start from the
country of Nimrdz, 4.6. the country of Sijistén, whilst
marching to Hind or India proper we start from the
side of Kabul. This, however, is not the only possible
road. You may march into India from all sides, sup-
posing that you can remove the obstacles in the way.


Hindu
method of
determining
distances.


GOAREPRUX VIN: 199


In the mountains which form the frontier of India
towards the west there are tribes of the Hindus, or of
people near akin to them—rebellious savage races—
which extend as far as the farthermost frontiers of
the Hindu race.

Kano} lies to the west of the Ganges, a very large
town, but most of it is now in ruins and desolate since
the capital has been transferred thence to the city of
Bari, east of the Ganges, Between the two towns there
is a distance of three to four days’ marches.

As Kanoj (Kanydkubja) has become famous by the
children of Pandu, the city of Mahtra (Mathurd) has
become famous by Vasudeva. It lies east of the river
Jaun (Yamund). The distance between Mahtra and
Kanoj is 28 farsakh.

Tanéshar (Sthdnésvara) hes between the two rivers to
the north both of Kanoj and Mahtira, at a distance of
nearly 80 farsakh from Kanoj, and nearly 50 farsakh
from Mahtira.

The river Ganges rises in the mountains which have
already been mentioned. Its source is called Gangd-
dvdra. Most of the other rivers of the country also rise
in the same mountains, as we have already mentioned
in the proper place.

As for the distances between the various parts of
India, those who have not themselves actually seen
them must rely upon tradition; but unfortunately it is
of such a nature that already Ptolemy incessantly com-
plains of its transmitters and their bias towards story-
telling. Fortunately I have found out a certain rule
by which to control their hes. The Hindus frequently
estimate the burden an ox could bear at 2000 and 3000
mand (which is infinitely more than an ox could carry
at once). In consequence they are compelled to let the
caravan make the same march to and fro during many
days—in fact, so long until the ox has carried the
whole load assigned to it from one end of the route to


بحي بير روا« وشا en ae‏ اج كوا اي


200 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


the other, and then they reckon as the distance between
the two places a march of such a number of days as the
caravan has altogether spent in marching to and fro.
It is only with the greatest exertion and caution that
we can to some extent correct the statements of the
Hindus. However, we could not make up our mind to
suppress that which we know on account of that which
we do not know. We ask the readers pardon where
there is anything wrong, and now we continue.

A man marching from Kanoj to the south between
the two rivers Jaun and Ganges passes the following
well-known places :—Jajjamau, 12 farsakh from Kano},
each farsakh being equal to four miles or one kuréh ;
Abhipiri, 8 farsakh ; Kuraha, 8 farsakh ; Barhamshil,
8 farsakh ; the Tree of Praydga, 12 farsakh, the place
where the water of the Jaun joins the Ganges, where
the Hindus torment themselves with various kinds of
tortures, which are described in the books about religious
sects. The distance from Prayaga to the place where
the Ganges flows into the sea is 12 farsakh (sic).

Other tracts of country extend from the Tree of
Prayaga southward towards the coast. Arku-tirtha, 12
JSarsakh from Prayaéga; the realm Uwaryahdr, 40 far-
sakh , Urdabishaw on the coast, 50 Jfarsakh,

Thence along the coast towards the east there are
countries which are now under the sway of Jawr ; first
Daraur, 40 farsakh from Urdabishau ; Kanjt, 30 far-
sakh ; Malaya, 40 farsakh ; Kiénk, 30 farsakh, which is
the last of Jaur’s possessions in this direction.

Marching from Bari along the Ganges on its eastern
side, you pass the following stations :— Ajodaha (Ayo-
dhya, Oudh), 25 farsakh from Bart; the famous Band-
rast, 20 farsakh.

Thence changing the direction, and marching east-
ward instead: of southward, you come to Sharwar, 5
farsakh from Banarasi; Pédtaliputra, 20 farsakh عر‎
Mungiri, 15 farsakh ; Janpa, 30 farsakh ; Daigumpir,


From
Kanoj to
the Tree of
Prayaga
(Allahabad)
and to the
eastern
coast.

Page 98.


From Bart
to the
mouth of
the Ganges.


CHAPTER XVIII. 201


50 farsakh; Gangdsdyara, 30 farsakh, where the
Ganges flows into the sea.

Marching from Kanoj towards the east, you come to
Bart, 10 farsakh; Digum, 45 farsakh; the empire neon el
of Shilahat, 10 farsakh; the town Brhat, 12 farsakh. 5
Farther ده‎ the country to the right is called 707
the inhabitants Zari, people of very black colour and
flat-nosed like the Turks. Thence you come to the
mountains of Kamri, which stretch away as far as the
sea.

Opposite Tilwat the country to the left is the realm
of Naipal. A man who had travelled in those countries
gave me the following report:—“ When in Tanwat, he
left the easterly direction and turned to the left. He
marched to Naipal, a distance of 20 farsakh, most of
which was ascending country. From Naipal he came
to Bhoteshar in thirty days,a distance of nearly 80
farsakh, in which thereis more ascending than descend-
ing country. And there is a water which is several
times crossed on bridges consisting of planks tied with
cords to two canes, which stretch from rock to rock, and
are fastened to milestones constructed on either side.
People carry the burdens on their shoulders over such
a bridge, whilst below, at a depth of 100 yards, the water
foams as white as snow, threatening to shatter the rocks,
On the other side of the bridges, the burdens are trans-
ported on the back of goats. My reporter told me that
he had there seen gazelles with four eyes; that this was
not an accidental misformation of nature, but that the
whole species was of this nature.

“ Bhoteshar is the first frontier of Tibet. There the
language changes as well as the costumes and the
anthropological character of the people. Thence the
distance to the top of the highest peak is 20 farsakh.
From the height of this mountain, India appears as
a black expanse below the mist, the mountains lying
below this peak like small hills, and Tibet and China


202 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


appear as red. The descent towards Tibet and China is
less than one farsakh.”

Marching from Kanoj towards the south-east, on the:
western side of the Ganges, you come to the realm of
Jajihitt, 30 farsakh from Kanoj. The capital of the
country is Kajirdha. Between this town and Kanoj
there are two of the most famous fortresses of India,
Gwaliyar (Gwalior) and KAlanjar. Dahdla |— farsakh|,
a country the capital of which is Tiauri, and the ruler
of which is now Gangeya.

The realm of Kannakara, 20 farsakh. Apsiir, Bana-
vas, on the sea-coast.

Marching from Kanoj towards the south-west, you
come to Ast, 18 farsakh from Kanoj; Sahanyd, 17 far-
sakh; Jandrda, 18 farsakh ; Rdjauri,15 farsakh ; Bazdna,
the capital of Guzarat, 20 farsakh. This town is called
Narayan by our people. After it had fallen into
decay the inhabitants migrated to another place called
Jadtira(?).

The distance between Mahtira and Kanoj is the same
as that between Kanoj and Bazana, viz. 28 farsakh.
If a man travels from MAéhtira to Ujain, he passes
through villages which are only five farsakh and less dis-
tant from each other. At the end of a march of 35 far-
sakh, he comes to a large village called Didahi; thence


From Kanoj
to Banavas.


Page go.


From Kanoj
to Bazana.


From MA-
hia to
Dhar.


to Bimahtir, 17 farsakh from Didahi; Bhdilsdn, 5 far-


sakh, a place most famous among the Hindus. The
name of the town is identical with that of the idol wor-
shipped there. Thence to Ardin, 9g farsakh. The idol
worshipped there is called Mahakdla. Dhdr, 7 farsakh.

Marching from Bazina southward, you come to JMai-
war, 25 farsakh from Bazina. This is a kingdom the
capital of which is Jattaraur. From this town to
Malava and its capital, Dhar, the distance is 20 farsakh.
The city of Ujain lies 7 farsakh to the east of Dhar.

From Ujain to Bhailasin, which likewise belongs to
Malava, the distance is 10 farsakh,


From Ba-
zana to
Mandagir.


From Dhar
to Tana.


Notes about
various ani-
mals of
India.


CHAPTER XVIII. 203


Marching from Dhar southward, you come to Bhiwimi-
hara, 20 farsakh from Dhar ; Kand, 20 farsakh ; Namd-
vur, on the banks of the Narmada (Nerbudda), 10
farsakh ; Alispiir, 20 farsakh ; Mandagir, on the banks
of the river Godavar, 60 farsakh.

Again, marching from Dhar southward, you come to
the valley of Namiyya, 7 farsakh trom Dhar; Mahratta-
Désh, 18 farsakh; the province of Kunkan, and its
capital, Tana, on the sea-coast, 25 farsakh.

People relate that in the plains of Kunkan, called
Dénak, there lives an animal called sharava (Skr.
Sarabha). It has four feet, but also on the back it has
something lke four feet directed upwards. It has a
small proboscis, but two big horns with which it attacks
the elephant and cleaves it in two. It has the shape
of a buffalo, but is larser than a ganda (rhinoceros).
According to popular tales, it sometimes rams some
animal with its horns, raises it or part of it towards its
back, so that it comes to le between its upper feet.
There it becomes a putrid mass of worms, which work
their way into the back of the animal. In consequence
it continually rubs itself against the trees, and finally
it perishes. Of the same animal people relate that
sometimes, when hearing the thunder, it takes it to be
the voice of some animal. Immediately it proceeds to
attack this imaginary foe; in pursuing him it climbs
up to the top of the mountain-peaks, and thence leaps
towards him. Of course, it plunges into the depth and
is dashed to pieces.

The ganda exists in large numbers in India, more
particularly about the Ganges. . It is of the build of a
buffalo, has a black scaly skin, and dewlaps hanging
down under the chin. It has three yellow hoofs on
each foot, the biggest one forward, the others on both
sides. The tail is not long; the eyes lie low, farther
down the cheek than is the case with all other animals.
On the top of the nose there is a single horn which 8


لهاج YET Sm‏ ., > كيار بو سجر ا nate tan‏ نيد


204 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


bent upwards. The Brahmins have the privilege of
eating the flesh of the ganda. I have myself witnessed
how an elephant coming across a young ganda was
attacked by it. The ganda wounded with its horn a
forefoot of the elephant, and threw it down on its face.

I thought that the ganda was the rhinoceros (or
karkadann), but a man who had visited Sufala, in the
country of the Negroes, told me that the kark, which
the Negroes call impild, the horn of which furnishes the
material for the handles of our knives, comes nearer
this description than the rhinoceros. It has various
colours. On the skull it has a conical horn, broad at
the root, but not very high. The shaft of the horn (lit.
its arrow) is black inside, and white everywhere else.
On the front it has a second and longer horn of the
same description, which becomes erect as soon as the
animal wants to ram with it. It sharpens this horn
against the rocks, so that it cuts and pierces, It has
hoofs, and a hairy tail like the tail of an ass.

There are crocodiles in the rivers of India as in the
Nile, a fact which led simple Aljahiz, in his ignorance
of the courses of the rivers and the configuration of the
ocean, to think that the river of Muhran (the river
Sindh) was a branch of the Nile. Besides, there are
other marvellous animals in the rivers of India of the
crocodile tribe, makara, curious kinds of fishes, and an
animal like a leather-bag, which appears to the ships
and plays in swimming. It is called burl (porpoise 2).
I suppose it to be the dolphin or a kind of dolphin.
People say that it has a hole on the head for taking
breath lke the dolphin. 3

In the rivers of Southern India there is an animal
called by various names, gréha, jalatantu, and tandud.


It is thin, but very long. People say it spies and les


in wait for those who enter the water and stand in it,
whether men or animals, and at once attacks them.
First it circles round the prey at some distance, until


Page 100.


CHAPTER XVIII. 205


its length comes to an end. Then it draws itself
together, and winds itself like a knot round the feet of
the prey, which is thus thrown off its legs and perishes.
A man who had seen the animal told me that it has
the head of a dog, and a tail to which there are attached
many long tentacles, which it winds round the prey, in
case the latter is not weary enough. By means of these
feelers it drags the prey towards the tail itself, and
when once firmly encircled by the tail the animal is
lost.
After this digression we return to our subject.
Marching from Bazana towards the south-west, you From 100
come to Anhilvira, 60 farsakh from Bazina; Soma- 0
1101/1, on the sea-coast, 50 fursakh.

Marching from Anhilvara southward, you come to From anhil-
Lérdésh, to the two capitals of the country, 217,07 and tarint, 7
lihanjtr, 42 farsakh from Anhilvara. Both are on the
sea-coast to the east of Tana.

Marching from Bazana towards the west, you come
to Multan, 50 farsakh from Bazaina; Bhatt, 15 farsakh.

Marching from Bhatt towards the south-west, you
come to 470, 15 farsakh from Bhati, a township be-
tween two arms of the Sindh River; Bamhanwd Alman-
stira, 20 farsakh ; Léhardni, at the mouth of the Sindh
River, 30 farsakh.

Marching from Kanoj towards the north-north-west, From Kanoj
you come to Shirshdraha, 50 farsakh from Kano} ; 0
Pinjaur, 18 farsakh, situated on the mountains, whilst
opposite it in the plain there lies the city of Tanéshar;
Dahmdla, the capital of Jalandhar, at the foot of the
mountains, 18 farsakh ; Balldwar, 10 farsakh ; thence
marching westward, you come to Ladda, 13 fursakh ;
the fortress Rdjagiri, 8 farsakh; thence marching north-
ward, you come to Kashmir, 25 farsakh.

Marching from Kanoj towards the west, you come From Kanoj

‘ 5 é A to Ghazni.
to Diydmau, 10 farsakh from Kanoj; Kutt, 10 farsakh ; Page rox.
Andr, 10! farsakh ; Mirat, 10 farsakh; Pdnipat, 10


206 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


Jarsakh. Between the latter two places flows the river
Jaun; Kawital, 10 farsakh ; Sunndm, to farsakh.

Thence marching towards the north-west, you come
to Adittahaur, 9 farsakh ; Jajjantr, 6 farsakh ; Manda-
hikir, the capital of Lauhawur, east of the river Irawa,
8 farsakh ; the river Candraha, 12 farsakh; the river
Jailam, west of the river Biyatta, 8 farsakh ; Wathind,
the capital of Kandhar, west of the river Sindh, 20
Jarsakh ; Purshéiwar, 14 farsakh ; Dunpiir, 15 sac :
Kabul, 12 farsakh ; ea 17 farsakh.

eae avout Kashmir lies on a plateau surrounded by high inac-
cessible mountains. The south and east of the country
belong to the Hindus, the west to various kings, the
Bolar-Shah and the Shugnan-Shah, and the more remote
parts up to the frontiers of Badhakhshan, to the Wakhan-
Shah. The north and part of the east of the country
belong to the Turks of Khoten and Tibet. The distance
from the peak of Bhoteshar to Kashmir through Tibet
amounts to nearly 300 farsakh.

The inhabitants of Kashmir are pedestrians, they
have no riding animals nor elephants. The noble
among them ride in palankins called /att, carried on
the shoulders of men. They are particularly anxious
about the natural strength of their country, and there-
fore take always much care to keep a strong hold upon
the entrances and roads leading into it. In consequence
it is very difficult to have any commerce with them.
In former times they used to allow one or two foreigners
to enter their country, particularly Jews, but at present
they do not allow any Hindu whom they do not know
personally to enter, much less other people.

The best known entrance to Kashmir is from the
town Babrahan, half way between the rivers Sindh and
Jailam. Thence to the bridge over the river, where the
water of the Kusnari is joined by that of the Mahwi,
both of which come from the mountains of Shamilan,
and fall into the Jailam, the distance is 8 farsakh.


The upper
course of
the Sindh
river and
the north
and north-
west fron-
tiers of

India.


Page 2.


CHAPTER XVIII. 207


Thence you reach in five days the beginning of the ravine
whence the river Jailam comes; at the other end of this
ravine is the watch-station Dvdr, on both sides of the
river Jailam. Thence, leaving the ravine, you enter
the plain, and reach in two more days Addishtan, the
capital of Kashmir, passing on the road the village
Ushk4ra, which lies on both sides of the valley, in the
same manner 28589

The city of Kashmir covers a space of four farsakh,
being built along both banks of the river Jailam, which
are connected with each other by bridges and ferry-
boats. The Jailam rises in the mountains Haramakdt,
where also the Ganges rises, cold, impenetrable recions
where the snow never melts nor disappears. Behind
them there is Mahdcin, 1.6. Great China. When the
Jailam has left the mountains, and has flowed two
days’ journey, it passes through Addishtén. Four far-
sakh farther on it enters a swamp of one square farsakh.
The people have their plantations on the borders of this
swamp, and on such parts of it as they manage to
reclaim. Leaving this swamp, the Jailam passes the
town Ushkara, and then enters the above-mentioned
ravine.

The river Sindh rises in the mountains Unang in the
territory of the Turks, which you can reach in the
following way:—Leaving the ravine by which you
enter Kashmir and entering the plateau, then you have


for a march of two more days on your left the mountains


of Bolor and Shamilin, Turkish tribes who are called
Bhattavaryén. Their king has the title Bhatta-Shah.
Their towns are Gilgit, Aswira, and Shiltas, and their
language is the Turkish. Kashmir suffers much from
their inroads. Marching on the left side of the river,
you always pass through cultivated ground and reach
the capital; marching on the right side, you pass
through villages, one close to the other, south of the
capital, and thence you reach the mountain Kularjak,


208 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


which is like a cupola, similar to the mountain Dun-
bawand. The snow there never melts. It is always
visible from the region of Takeshar and Lauhawar
(Lahore). The distance between this peak and the
plateau of Kashmir is two farsakh. The fortress Raja-
تداع‎ hes south of it, and the fortress Lahtir west of it,
the two strongest places I have ever seen, The town
Rajiwart is three farsakh distant from the peak. This
is the farthest place to which our merchants trade, and
beyond which they never pass.

_ This is the frontier of India from the north.

In the western frontier mountains of India there live
various tribes of the Afghans, and extend up to the
neighbourhood of the Sindh Valley.

The southern frontier of India is formed by the
ocean. The coast of India begins with Tiz, the capital of
Makran, and extends thence in a south-eastern direction
towards the region of Al-daibal, over a distance of 40
farsakh. Between the two places hes the Gulf of
Tiran. <A gulf is like an angle or a winding line of
water penetrating from the ocean into the continent,
and is dangerous for navigation, specially on account of
ebb and flood. An estuary is something similar to a
culf, but is not formed by the ocean’s penetrating into
the continent. It is formed by an expanse of flowing
water, which there is changed into standing water and
is connected with the ocean. These estuaries, too, are
dangerous, for the ships because the water is sweet and
does not bear heavy bodies as well as salt water does.

After the above-mentioned gulf follow the small
Munha, the great Munha, then the Bawéarij, 2.6. the
pirates of Kacch and SOmanath. They are thus called
because they commit their robberies on sea in ships
called bira. The places on the coast are:—Tawalleshar,
50 farsakh from Daibal; Léhardni, 12 farsakh; Baga,
12 farsakh ; Kacch, where the mukil-tree grows, and
170701, 6 farsakh ; Sdmandth, 14 farsakh; Kanbdyat,


TLe west-
ern and
southern
frontiers of
India.


CHAPTER XVIII. 209


30 farsakh ; Asawil, 2 days; Bihréj, 30 farsakh (2);
Sandan, 50 farsakh; Stbdra, 6 farsakh; Téna, 5
farsakh.

Thence the coast-line comes to the country Ldrén,
in which hes the city of Jimiér, then to Vallabha,
Kini, Darvad. Next follows a great bay in which
Singaldib lies, 2.e. the island Sarandib (Ceylon). Round
the bay lies the city of Panjaydvar (sic). When this
city had fallen into ruins, the king, Jaur, built instead
of it, on the coast towards the west, a new city which
he called Padnér.

The next place on the coast is Ummalndra, then Ram-
sher (Rameshar?) opposite Sarandib; the distance of the
sea between them is 12 farsakh. The distance from
Panjayavar to Ramsher is 40 farsakh, that between Ram-
٠. sher and Setubandha 2 farsakh. Setubandha means
bridge of the ocean. It is the dike of Rama, the son of
10353735113, whichhe builtfrom the continent to the castle
Lanka. At present it consists of isolated mountains
between which the ocean flows. Sixteen farsakh from
Setubandha towards the east is Kzhkind, the mountains
of the monkeys. Every day the king of the monkeys
comes out of the thicket together with his hosts, and
settles down in particular seats prepared for them. The
inhabitants of that region prepare for them cooked rice,
and bring it to them on leaves. After having eaten
it they return into the thicket, but in case they are
neglected, this would be the ruin of the country, as
they are not only numerous, but also savage and aggres-
sive. According to the popular belief, they are a race
of men changed into monkeys on account of the help
which they had afforded to Rama when making war
against the demons; he is believed to have bequeathed
those villages to them as a legacy. When a man
happens to fall in with them, and he recites to them
the poetry of Rama and pronounces the incantations of
Rama, they will quietly listen to him; they will even

VOL. 1, 0


٠
1
1
ا‎


210 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


lead on the right path him who has gone astray and
give him meat and drink. At all events, thus the
matter stands according to popular belief. If there is
any truth in this, the effect must be produced by the
melody, the like of which we have already mentioned
in connection with the hunting of gazelles (v. p. 195).

The eastern islands in this ocean, which are nearer to
China than to India, are the islands of the 270007, 0
by the Hindus Suvarna-dvipa, i.e. the gold islands.
The western islands in this ocean are those of the Zanj
(Negroes), and those in the middle are the islands
famm and the Diva islands (Malediva, Laccadiva), to
which belong also the Kumair islands. It is peculiar
to the Diva islands that they rise slowly; first, there
appears a sandy tract above the surface of the ocean ; it
rises more and more and extends in all directions, till
at last it becomes a firm soil, whilst at the same time
another island falls into decay and melts away, finally
is submerged and disappears in the ocean. As soon as
the inhabitants become aware of this process, they search
for a new island of increasing fertility, transport there
their cocoa-nut palms, date palms, cereals, and house-
hold goods, and emigrate to it. These islands are,
according to their products, divided into two classes, the
Diva-kiidha, 4.6. the Diva of the kauri-shells, because
there they gather kauri-shells from the branches of the
cocoa-nut palms which they plant in the sea, and Déva-
kanbdr, 1.6. the Diva of the cords twisted from cocoa-
nut fibres, and used for fastening together the planks of
the ships.

The island of Alwdkwdk belongs to the Kumair


Page 103.


Islands in
the Indian
and Chinese
Seas.


islands. Awmazr is not, as common people believe, the


name of a tree which produces screaming human heads
instead of fruits, but the name of a people the colour of
whom is whitish. They are of short stature and of a
build lke that ofthe Turks. They practise the religion
of the Hindus, and have the custom of piercing their


On the
rainfall in
India.


CHAPIEREXYVILT 211


ears. Some of the inhabitants of the Wdaékwdk island
are of black colour. In our countries there is a creat
demand for them as slaves. People fetch from thence
the black ebony-wood; it is the pith of a tree, the other
parts of which are thrown away, whilst the kinds of
wood called mulamma’ and shauhat and the yellow
sandal-wood are brought from the country of the Zanj
(Negroes).

In former times there were pearl-banks in the bay
of Sarandib (Ceylon), but at present they have been
abandoned. Since the Sarandib pearls have disap-
peared, other pearls have been found at Sufala in the
country of the Zanj, so that people say the pearls of
Sarandib have migrated to Sufala.

_ India has the tropical rains in summer, which is called

varshakdla, and these rains are the more copious and
last the longer the more northward the situation of a
province of India is, and the less it is intersected by
ranges of mountains. The people of Multan used to
tell me that they have no varshakdla, but the more
northern provinces nearer.the mountains have the var-
shakéla. In Bhatal and Indravédi it begins with the
month Ashadha, and it rains continually for four
months as though water-buckets were poured out. In
| provinces still farther northward, round the mountains
of Kashmir up to the peak of 7110011 between Dunpir
| and Barshawar, copious rain falls during two and a half
١ months, beginning with the month Sravana. However,
on the other side of this peak there is no rainfall; for
| the clouds in the north are very heavy, and do not rise
much above the surface. When, then, they reach the
mountains, the mountain-sides strike against them, and
the clouds are pressed like olives or grapes, in conse-
quence of which the rain pours down, and the clouds
never pass beyond the mountains. Therefore Kashmir
has no varshakdla, but continual snowfall during two
and a half months, beginning with Magha, and shortly


212 ALBERUNTIS INDIA,


after the middle of Caitra continual rain sets in for a
few days, melting the snow and cleansing the earth.
This rule seldom has an exception ; however, a certain
amount of extraordinary meteorological occurrences is
peculiar to every province of India.


Ger 2832)


CHAPTER XIX.


ON THE NAMES OF THE PLANETS, THE SIGNS OF THE
ZODIAC, THE LUNAR STATIONS, AND RELATED SUB-
JECTS.


WE have already mentioned, near the beginning of the

book, that the language of the Hindus is extremely Page وود‎
rich in nouns, both original and derivative, so that in

some instances they call one thing by a multitude of
different names. So I have heard them saying that

they have a thousand names all meaning 854018 ”م‎ and, no
doubt, each planet has quite as many, or nearly as
many names, since they could not do with less (for the
purposes of versification).

The names of the week-days are the best known The names
names of the planets connected with the word bara, ot thewerls
which follows after the planet’s name, as in Persian the
word shambih follows after the number of the week-
day (dishambth, sthshambth, &c.) So they say—

Aditya bara, i.e. Sunday. Brihaspati bara, v.e. Thursday.

Soma bara, 2.6. Monday. S‘ukra bdra, 2.6. Friday.


Mangala bara, 2.6. Tuesday. | Sanaiscara bara, 2.6. Saturday.
Budha bara, 2.6. Wednesday.


And thus they go on counting, beginning anew with
Sunday, Monday, &c.

Muslim astronomers call the planets the lords of the On the
days, and, in counting the hours of the day, they begin dierwin,
with the dominus of the day, and then count the planets
in the order from above to below. For instance, the sun
is the dominus of the first day, and at the same time the


214 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


dominus of its first hour, The second hour is ruled by
the planet of the sphere next under the sphere of the ~
sun, 4.64. Venus. The third hour is ruled by Mercury, '
and the fourth by the moon. Therewith the descending ~
from the sun to the eather, i.e. the atmosphere of the
earth, has an end, and in counting they return to Saturn.
According to this system, the dominus of the twenty-
fifth hour is the moon, and this is the first hour of
Monday. So the moon is not only the dominus of the
first hour of Monday, but also the dominus of the whole
day.

In all this there is only one difference between our
system and that of the Hindus, viz. that we use the pau
هع نميهم‎ so that the thirteenth planet, counted from
the dominus diet, is the dominus of the succeeding night.
This is the third planet if you count in an opposite —
direction, 2.64. ascending from the lower planet-spheres
to the higher. On the contrary, the Hindus make the
dominus diei the dominus of the whole vuyOnpepor, so
that day and night follow each other without having
each a separate dominus, This, at all events, is the
practice of the people at large.

Sometimes, however, their chronological methods
make me think that the @pau cacpixat were not entirely —
unknown to them, They call the hour hora, and by
the same name they call the half of a zodiacal sign in
the calculation of the némbahra. The following cal-
culation of the dominus hore is derived from one of
their astronomical handbooks :—

“ Divide the distance between the sun and the degree
of the ascendens measured by equal degrees, by 15, and
add to the quotient 1, dropping a fraction if there be
any. This sum is then counted off from the dominus
0161, according to the succession of the planets from —
above to below.” (The planet you arrive at in the end
is the dominus of the hour in question.) This calcula-
tion is more of a nature to make us think of عدم‎


On @pac
Katpikat and
par tone-
علطام‎


Order of the
planets and
their nota-
tion.


Page 105.


On the
twelve suns


CHAPTER AIX 215


Kaipixat as having been used, than of @pae ionpe-
pia.

It is a custom of the Hindus to enumerate the planets
in the order of the week-days. They will persist in
using it in their astronomical handbooks, as well as in
other books, and they decline to use any other order,
though it be much more correct.

The Greeks mark the planets with figures, to fix
thereby their limits on the astrolabe in an easily intel-
ligible manner, images which are not letters of the
alphabet. The Hindus use a similar system of abridge-
ment; however, 1761 figures are not images invented
for the purpose, but the initial characters of the names
of the planets, e.g. 4 = Aditya, or the sun; ¢ = Candra,
or the moon; 6 = Budha, or Mercury.

The following table exhibits the commonest names
of the seven planets :—


The Planets. Their Names in the Indian Language.
Aditya, sdrya, bhanu, arka, divakara, ravi, bibata (?),
1 1 ya,
eli.
Soma, candra, indu, himagu, sitarasmi, himarasmi,
Moon alate asta ctia porate
sitamsu, sitadidhiti, himamaytkha.
Mats Mangala, bhaumya, kuja, 4ra, 731218,
maheya, krdarékshi (?), rakta.
‘ 4 it dhana, vitta (?),
Mercury ١ Bue Soy cindra, jia, bo , (?)
Jupiter Vrihaspati, guru, jiva, devejya, devapurohita, deva-
: mantrin, angiras, sfiri, devapita.
nee Sukra, bhrigu, sita, bhargava, Asbati (?), dinavaguru,
bhriguputra, 4sphujit (?).
en Sanaigcara, manda, asita, kona, 4dityaputra, saura,
, Arki, stiryaputra.


The multiplicity of names of the sun as exhibited
in the previous table was the cause which led the
theologians to assume also a multiplicity of swns, so


216 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


that according to them there are twelve suns, each of
which rises in a particular month. The book Vishnu-
dharma says: “Vishnu, 8.6. Narayana, who is without
beginning in time and without end, divided himself
for the angels into twelve parts, which became sons
to Kasyapa. These are the suns rising in the single
months.” Those, however, who do not believe that the
multiplicity of names is the source of this theory of
twelve suns, point out that the other planets also have
many names, but each only one body, and that, besides,
the names of the sun are not only twelve, but many
more. ‘The names are derived from words with generic
meanings, e.g. Aditya, 1.4. the beginning, because the
sun is the beginning of the whole. Sawtri means
every being which has a progeny, and since all progeny
in the world originates with the sun, he is called
Savitrt. Further, the sun is called Ravi, because he
dries wet substances. The juice in the plants is called
vasa, and he who takes it out of them is called ravi.

The moon too, the companion of the sun, has many
names, 6.0. Soma, because she is lucky, and everything
lucky is called somagraha, whilst all that is unlucky is
called pdpagraha. Further, Nisesa,2.e. lord of the night,
Nakshatrandtha, 1.e. lord of the lunar stations, Duyesvara,
i.e. lord of the Brahmins, Sédiirsu, 41.6. having a cold ray
because the moon’s globe is watery, which is a blessing
to the earth. When the solar ray meets the moon, the
ray becomes as cool as the moon herself, then, being
reflected, it illuminates the darkness, makes the night
cool and extinguishes any hurtful kind of combustion
wrought by the sun. Similarly the moon is also called
Candra, which means the left eye of Ndrdyana, as the sun
is his right eye.

The following table exhibits the names of the months.
Disturbances and differences in lists of these names pro-
ceed from the causes which we shall mention (v. p. 228)
when speaking of the enumeration of the different earths.


Names of
the moon.
Page 106.


The names
of the
months.


217


muy | ” uvuediy | ° : : * 2 pooS 414241 91014 OY 50014011 OFF TEYSVAT, اننا‎
"elVYBAIC | ' eunieA | ' : ; ; 0510471111 oy} Aq 091:59 ‘AJOAOT | ٠ * eovyg | * ٠ 2006911
0 | 2 (ies . ٠ 80111 SOYSTINOU oY 107 11191111811101 | ' ueysyd | ' "6 eysneg
‘TiYSBA, | * 122050902 kes ee, : ١ : * خن0]10‎ 0111 Aq 09480190 | ' ٠ 1353
‘uvysnd | ° esvyg | ‘ : ٠ 119171 591111 PUB TOU 0} 517110100 89415 OFF | ' “Wed | 0 الح‎
TE}IAVS | * 109001 | o م‎ : 2 : 9 * p10, 17م‎ 011805100 | ° SCID fe) es elndvasy
"068101 | ٠ CaCl DULY whee : ; : : : epoya oy} 5018090101 321 | ° eunivA | * 1581
‘ueuediy | ° nuystA | * : ‘ : : 51191 oy} OY] djey surpiopy | ' wvAuelirg | ' * BUBARIS
IiVBUPIA | ' JUBASVATA | * ; : ١ : leer : 8481 514811 | ‘ " 29197 | ' * 77
1200501 | ° nueyg | ٠ [leyJop UL JOU VIOUS UT OTOYA\ OY} 18 SHOOT OF{T | ' JUBASBATA | ٠ eyrysted ¢
ninety | ١ “ans | | Ssuoubanuos dee ou ta gsoddo rou op fou | 1) لعسسد‎ | pee
TAVY | * JUBUINsUTTYy | ° : 5 SUTISOL JOU 10417917 UI 111008 25514010 | ' nuystA | * + *e1iTeg9
Smee ‘nunand-pinpy 3 ‘DULLDYP-NLYSLA
qepnovuso A 9} 01 2 8 DUMDYP-NUYStA OY} 01 821112100018 891318 [ز‎ 959114 JO 2111118911 13 6111 09 8 51010 01


sung ALOT],


sung ou,


CHAPTER XIX.


218 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


People think, with regard to the order of the names
of suns as given by the Vishnu-dharma, that it is
correct and undisturbed ; for Vasudeva has a separate
name in each month, and his worshippers begin the
months with Margagirsha, in which his name is Kesava.
If you count his names one after the other, you find that ©
one which he has in the month Caitra, Vishnu, in accord-
ance with the tradition of the Vishnu-dharma.

The names of the months are related to those of the
lunar stations. As two or three stations belong to each
month, the name of the month is derived from one of
them. We have in the following table written these
particular stations with red ink (in this translation with
an asterisk), in order to point out their relationship with
the names of the months.

_ If Jupiter shines in some lunar station, the month to
which this station belongs is considered as the dominant
of the year, and the whole year is called by the name of
this month.

If the names of the months given in the following
table differ in some respects from those used heretofore,
the reader must know that the names which we have
hitherto used are the vernacular or vulgar ones, whilst
those given in this table are the classical :—


The Months. Faces 0 The Months. fae a en
3| Krittika.* 16| Vigdkha.*
Karttika a 4| Rohini. Vaisdkha 17| Anurdédha.
ae / * *
Margasgirsha 1 2 0 Jyaishtha | 5 te belt
7| Punarvasu. 20| Pirvashadha,*
Pausha i 8} Pushya.* Ashadha . 3 21| Uttarashadha.
bs g| Aslésha, : 22| S'ravana,*
Magha . .1 10| Magha.* Sravana ٠ 3 23| Dhanishta.
111 Parva-phal- 24| S/atabhishaj.
guni. * 25| Parva-bhadra-
Phalguna 12| Uttara-phal- || Bhadrapada pada. *
guni, 26 | Uttara-bhAdra-
13} Hasta, pada. :
: 14| Citra.* Revati.
Caitra 4 15| SvAtt. Agvayuja Agvint. *
Bharani.


Page 107.


The names
of the
months
derived
from those
of the lunar
mansions,


CHAPTER XIX. 219


The signs of the zodiac have names corresponding to ده‎ the


names of


the images which they represent, and which are the the signs of
same among the Hindus as among all other nations. 0-06
The third sign is called Mthuna, which means a pair
consisting of a boy and a girl; in fact, the same as the

Twins, the well-known image of this sign.

Varahamihira says in the larger book of nativities
that the word applies to a man holding a lyre and a
club, which makes me think that he identified Mithuna
with Orion (Aljabbdér), And this is the opinion of
common people in general, to such a degree that the
station is known as Aljauzd (instead of the Twins),
though Aljauz&i does not belong to the image of this
sign.

The same author explains the image of the sixth sign
as a ship, and in 115 hand an ear of corn. I am inclined
to think that in our manuscript there is a lacuna in this
place, for a ship has no hand. The Hindus call this
sien Kanyd, 1.6. the virgin girl, and perhaps the passage
in question ran originally thus: “A wirgin in a ship
holding an ear of corn in her hand.” This is the lunar
station Alsimadk Ala‘zal (Spica). The word ship makes
one think that the author meant the lunar station
Al‘awwdé (8, n, y, ©, ¢, Virginis), for the stars of الل‎
form a line, the end of which is a curve (like the keel
of a ship).

The image of the seventh sign he declares to be jive.
It is called 7uld=balance.

Of the tenth sign Varahamihira says that it has the
face of a goat, whilst the remainder is a makara (hippo-
potamus). However, after having compared the sign
with a makara, he might have saved himself the trouble
of attributing to it the face of a goat. Only the Greeks
require the latter description, because they consider the
sign as composed of two animals, as a goat in the part
above the breast and as a fish in the lower part. But
the aquatic animal called makara, as people describe


220 _ ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


it, does not require to be explained as a composition of
two animals,

The image of the eleventh sign he calls a bucket, and
the name, Kwmbha, corresponds to this statement. How-
ever, if they sometimes enumerate this sign or part of
it among the human figures, this proves that they, fol-
lowing the example of the Greeks, see in it Aquarius.

The image of the twelfth sign he describes as the
figure of two fishes, although the name of the sign in
all languages signifies only one fish.

Besides the well-known names, Varaéhamihira men-
tions also certain Indian names of the signs which are
not generally known. We have united both kinds in
the following table :—


3 : 588 8 é eed
5 8 37 2 ا‎ E 35 8 “i 2 ع‎
5 285 B ws 34 8 Pea
6 م5‎ 8 8 nS id 2 م5‎ 5 8 nom
Na 3s ons لحا‎ 2 3 og
5 HE gab 2 2 He, 5 ob
3 2 Sols a a Bis
H a Aen ca 78h
o | Mesha. Kriya. 6 | Tula. Jiga.
1 | Vrishan. Tambiru. 7 | Vriscika. Kaurba.
2 | Mithuna. Jituma. 8 | Dhanu. Taukshika.
3 | Karkata. Kulira. | 9 | Makara. Agokiru.
4 | Simha. Liyaya. ١ 10 | Kumbha. | Udruvaga.
5 | Kanyé. Partina, 11 | Mina, ; ese arte


It is the custom of the Hindus in enumerating the
zodiacal signs not to begin with o for Aries and I
for Tawrus, but to begin with 1 for Aries and 2 for
Taurus, &c., so that Pisces are No. 12.


CHAPTER XX.
ON THE BRAHMANDA.


BRAHMANDA means the egg of Brahman, and applies in the egg of
Brahman,


reality to the whole of heaven (as@7p), on account of its its coming
being round, and of the particular kind of its motion. tlewatee
It applies even to the whole world, in so far as it ig Page 109,
divided into an upper and an under part. When they
enumerate the heavens, they call the sum of them
Brahmanda. The Hindus, however, are devoid of train-
ing in astronomy, and have no correct astronomical
notions. In consequence, they believe that the earth
is at rest, more particularly as they, when describing
the bliss of paradise as something like worldly happi-
ness, make the earth the dwelling-place of the different
classes of gods, angels, &c., to whom they attribute loco-
motion and the direction from the upper worlds to the
lower.

According to the enigmatic expressions of their tradi-
tion, the water was before every other thing, and it
filled the space of the whole world. This was, as 1
understand them, at the beginning of the day of the soul
( purushdhordtra, p. 332), and the beginning of formation
and combination. Further, they say the water was roll-
ing and foaming. Then something white came forth
from the water, of which the Creator created the egg
of Brahman. Now, according to some, the egg broke;
Brahman came forth from it, the one half became the
heaven, the other the earth, and the broken bits between
the two halves became the rains. If they said mouwn-


222 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


tains instead of rains, the matter would be somewhat
more plausible. According to others, God spoke to
Brahman: “I create an egg, which I make for thy
dwelling in it.” He had created it of the above men-
tioned foam of the water, but when the water sank and
was absorbed, the egg broke into two halves.

Similar opinions were held by the ancient Greeks
regarding Asclepius, the inventor of the medical art;
for, according to Galenus, they represent him as holding
an egg in his hand, whereby they mean to indicate that
the world is round, the egg an image of the universe,
and that the whole world needs the medical art. Ascle-
pius does not hold a lower position in the belief of the
Greeks than Brahman in the belief of the Hindus, for
they say that he is a divine power, and that his name.
is derived from his action, 2.6. protecting against dryness,
which means death, because death occurs when dryness
and cold are prevalent. As for his natural origin, they
call him the son of Apollo, the son of Phlegyas (?), and
the son of Kronos, 2.6. the planet Saturn. By this
system of affiliation they mean to attribute to him the
force of a threefold god.

The theory of the Hindus, that the water existed
before all creation, rests on this, that it is the cause of
the cohesion of the atoms of everything, the cause of
the growing of everything, and of the duration of life in
every animated being. Thus the water is an instrument
in the hand of the Creator when he wants to create
something out of matter. A similar idea is propounded
by the Koran xi. 9: “ And his (God’s) throne was on the
water.” Whether you explain it in an external way
as an individual body called by this name, and which
God orders us to venerate, or whether you give it the
intrinsic meaning of realm, 4.6. God’s realm, or the
like, in any case the meaning is this, that at that
time beside God there was nothing but the water and
his throne. If this our book were not restricted to


Greek par-
allel : Ascle-
plus.


Water the
first ele-
ment of
creation.
The egg of
Brahman
broken in
two halves.


Page rro.


Quotation
from Plato’s
Timeus.


Quotation
from Brah-
magupta.


CHAPTER XX. 223


the ideas of one single nation, we should produce from
the belief of the nations who lived in ancient times in
and round Babel ideas similar to the ege of Brahman,
and even more stupid and unmeaning than that.

The theory of the division of the ege into two halves
proves that its originator was the contrary of a scientific
man, one who did not know that the heaven compre-
hends the earth, as the shell of the eve of Brahman
comprehends its yolk. He imagined the earth to be
below, and the heaven in only one of the six directions
from the earth, 2.6. above it. If he had known the
truth, he might have spared himself the theory of the
breaking of the egg. However, he wished by his theory
to describe one half of the egg as spread out for the
earth, and the other half as placed upon it for a cupola,
trying to outvie Ptolemy in the planispheric represen-
tation of a globe, but without success.

There have always been similar fancies afloat, which
everybody interprets as best suits his religion and
philosophy. So Plato says in his Zimeus something
like the Brahmanda: “The Creator cut a straight thread
into halves. With each of them he described a circle,
so that the two circles met in two places, and one of
them he divided into seven parts.” In these words he
hints, as is his custom, at the original two motions of


the universe (from east to west in the diurnal rotation,


and from west to east in the precession of the equi-
noxes), and at the globes of the planets.

Brahmagupta says in the first chapter of the Brahma-
siddhdnta, where he enumerates the heavens, placing
the moon in the nearest heaven, the other planets in
the following ones, and Saturn in the seventh: “The
fixed stars are in the eighth heaven, and this has been
created round in order to last for ever, that in it the
pious may be rewarded, the wicked be punished, since
there is nothing behind it.” He indicates in this chapter
that the heavens are identical with the spheres, and he


224 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


gives them in an order which differs from that of the
traditional literature of their creed, as we shall show
hereafter in the proper place. He indicates, too, that
the rownd can only be slowly influenced from without.
He evinces his knowledge of the Aristotelic notions
regarding the round form and the rotating motion, and
that there is no body in existence behind the spheres.

If it is of this description, evidently Brahmanda is
the totality of the spheres, 2.6. the ,م6107‎ in fact, the —
universe, for retribution in another life takes place, ac-
cording to the ideas of the Hindus, within it.

Pulisa says in his Siddhdnta: “The totality of the
world is the sum of earth, water, fire, wind, and heaven.
The latter was created behind the darkness. It appears
to the eyes as blue, because it is not reached by the
rays of the sun and not illuminated by them like the
watery non-igneous elobes, 2.6. the bodies of the planet
and the moon. When the rays of the sun fall upon —
these and the shadow of the earth does not reach them,
their darkness disappears and their figures become visi-
ble in the night. The light-giver is only one, all the
others receive the ight from him.” In this chapter '
Pulisa speaks of the utmost limit that can be reached,
and calls it heaven. He places it in darkness, since he
says that it exists in a place which is not reached by
the rays of the sun. The question as to the blue-grey
colour of heaven which is perceived by the eye is of too ©
ereat an extent to be touched upon here.

Brahmagupta says in the above-mentioned chapter:
“Multiply the cycles of the moon, 2.64. 57,75 3,300,000,
by the number of the yojana of her sphere, 4.6. 324,000,
and you get as the product 18,712,069,200,000,000, 4¢.
the number of the yojana of the sphere of the zodiac.” —
Of the yojana as a measure of distance we have already
spoken in the chapter on metrology (ch. xv. p. 167).
We give the just-mentioned calculation of Brahma-
gupta, simply reproducing his words without any re-


Quotation
from the

Siddhdnta
of Pulisa.


Quotations
from Brah-
magupta,
Vasishtha,
Balabhadra,
and Arya-
bhata,


225 ا ل


sponsibility of our own, for he has not explained on
what reason it rests. Vasishtha says that the Brah-
manda comprehends the spheres, and the just-mentioned
numbers are the measure of the Brahmanda, since the
sphere of the zodiac is connected with it. The com-
mentor Balabhadra says: “ We do not consider these
numbers as a measure of heaven, for we cannot define
its greatness, but we consider them as the utmost limit
to which the human power of vision can penetrate.
There is no possibility of human perception reaching
above it; but the other spheres differ from each other
in greatness and smallness, so as to be visible in various
degrees.” The followers of Aryabhata say: “It is suffi- Page عد‎
cient for us to know the space which is reached by the
solar rays. We do not want the space which is not
reached by the solar rays, though it be in itself of an
enormous extent. That which is not reached by the
rays is not reached by the perception of the senses,
and that which is not reached by perception is not
knowable.”

Let us now examine the bearing of the words of these criticisms
authors. The words of Vasishtha prove that the Brah- aiferent
manda is a globe comprehending the eighth or so called the quater
_ zodiacal sphere, in which the fixed stars are placed, and 0
that the two spheres touch each other. Now we on our
own part were already obliged to assume an eighth
sphere, but there is no reason why we should suppose
a ninth one. :

On this head the opinions of people are divided.
١ Some hold the existence of a ninth sphere to be a neces-
ظ‎ sity on account of the rotation from east to west, in so
١ far as it moves in this direction and compels everything
which it comprehends to move in the same direction.
Others assume the ninth sphere on account of the same
motion, but suppose that it by itself is motionless.

- The tendency of the representatives of the former
theory is perfectly clear. However, Aristotle has proved


VOL Fl, 1


226 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


that each moving body is brought into motion by some-
thing moving which is not within itself. So also this
ninth sphere would presuppose a mover outside itself.
What, however, should prevent this mover from putting
the eight spheres into motion without the intermedia-
tion of a ninth sphere ?

As regards the representatives of the second view,
one might almost think that they had a knowledge of
the words of Aristotle which we have quoted, and that
they knew that the first mover is motionless, for they
represent the ninth sphere as motionless and as the
source of the east to west rotation. However, Aristotle
has also proved that the first mover is not a body,
whilst he must be a body, if they describe him as a
slobe, as a sphere, and as comprehending something
else within itself and motionless,

Thus the theory of the ninth sphere is proved to be
an impossibility. To the same effect are the words of
Ptolemy in the preface of his Almagest: “The first
cause of the first motion of the universe, if we consider
the motion by itself, is according to our opinion an in-
visible and motionless god, and the study of this sub- |
ject we call a divine one. We perceive his action in
the highest heights of the world, but as an altogether
different one from the action of those substances which
can be perceived by the senses.”

These are the words of Ptolemy on the first mover,
without any indication of the ninth sphere. But the
latter is mentioned by Johannes Grammaticus in his
refutation of Proclus, where he says: “ Plato did not
know a ninth, starless sphere.” And, according to Jo- '
hannes, it was this, 4.6. the negation of the ninth sphere,
which Ptolemy meant to say.

Finally, there are other people who maintain that
behind the last limit of motion there is an infinite rest- —
ing body or an infinite vacwwm, or something which they
declare to be neither a vacwwm nora plenum. These


Aristotle,
Ptolemy,
Johannes
Grammati-
cus.


0 ال عر‎ Ley)


theories, however, have no connection whatsoever with
our subject.

Balabhadra gives us the impression of holding the
same opinion as those who think that heaven or the
heavens are a compact body holding in equilibrium all
heavy bodies and carrying them, and that it is above
the spheres. To Balabhadra it is just as easy to prefer
tradition to eyesight, as it is difficult to us to prefer
doubt to a clear proof.

The truth is entirely with the followers of Aryabhata
who give us the impression of really being men of ereat
scientific attainments. It is perfectly evident that
Brahmainda means the ai@jp, together with all products
of creation in it.


00


CHAPTER .خخ‎


DESCRIPTION OF EARTH AND HEAVEN ACCORDING TO THE
RELIGIOUS VIEWS OF THE HINDUS, BASED UPON
THEIR TRADITIONAL LITERATURE,


THE people of whom we have spoken in the preceding
chapter think that the earths are seven like seven
covers one above the other, and the upper one they
divide into seven parts, differing from our astronomers,
who divide it into cAéwara, and from the Persians, who
divide it into Kishvar. Weshall afterwards give a clear
explanation of their theories derived from the first
authorities of their religious law, to expose the matter
to fair criticism. If something in it appears strange to
us, so as to require acommentary, or 11 we perceive some
coincidence with others, even if both parties missed the
mark, we shall simply put the case before the reader,
not with the intention of attacking or reviling the
Hindus, but solely in order to sharpen the minds of
those who study these theories.

They do not differ among themselves as to the num-
ber of earths nor as to the number of the parts of the
upper earth, but they differ regarding their names and
the order of these names. I am inclined to derive this
difference from the great verbosity of their lancuage, for
they call one and the same thing by a multitude of names.
For instance, they call the sun by a thousand different
names according to their own statement, just as the
Arabs call the lion by nearly as many. Some of these
names are original, while others are derived from the
changing conditions of his life or his actions and facul-
ties. The Hindus and their like boast of this copious-
ness, whilst in reality it is one of the greatest faults of


On the
seven
earths.
Page 112.


Differences
in the
sequence of
the earths
explained as
resulting
from the
copiousness
of the
language.


The earths
according to
the Aditya-
Purdna.


CHAPTER XXI. 229


the language. For it is the task of language to give a
name to everything in creation and to its effects, aname
based on general consent, so that everybody, when hear-
ing this name pronounced by another man, understands
what he means. If therefore one and the same name or
word means a variety of things, it betrays a defect of the
language and compels the hearer to ask the speaker
what he means by the word. And thus the word in
question must be dropped in order to be replaced either
by a similar one of a sufficiently clear meaning, or by
an epithet describing what is really meant. If one and
the same thing is called by many names, and this is not
occasioned by the fact that every tribe or class of people
uses a separate one of them, and if, in fact, one single
name would be sufficient, all the other names save this
one are to be classified as mere nonsense, as a means
of keeping people in the dark, and throwing an air of
mystery about the subject. And in any case this
copiousness offers painful difficulties to those who want
to learn the whole of the language, for itis entirely use-
less, and only results in a sheer waste of time.
Frequently it has crossed my mind that the authors
of books and the transmitters of tradition have an aver-
sion to mentioning the earths in a definite arrangement,
and limit themselves to mentioning their names, or that
the copyists of the books have arbitrarily altered the
text. For those men who explained and translated the
text to me were well versed in the language, and were not
known as persons who would commit a wanton fraud,
The following table exhibits the names of the earths,
as far as I know them. We rely chiefly on that list,
which has been taken from the Aditya-purdna, because
it follows a certain rule, combining every single earth
and heaven with a single member of the members of the
sun. The heavens are combined with the members from
the skull to the womb, the earths with the members from
the navel to the foot. This mode of comparison illus-
trates their sequence and preserves it from confusion :—


*80 118 جز‎ 117]110811:16 A}


a -_-~ +

Sons 2 ae = :
x 2 © بغ‎ .8 | 2 4
5 م = 1 28 ع‎ &
<n 8 wd a <S + <3
8 a nd 0 م‎ 0

a a or م4‎ se
< 2 20 2 si m


<< ‘yas 1ك 5 نلا‎ 1119 0001 510110 *111119 2
S | "870197026 391] yrep 9114 | ان ال‎ per (9 MoTed oy} | Jo 177189 oy | Jo 111188 3 -0]08 ayy
ب‎ TUN 10811151151 | 151010-10 ]7]13,8 | TuNYyQ-eyyey | 901(110-471؟‎ | 1501110-8119115191 | ‘epeyypg | 01نم‎ 610111
=
S | ‘souey noyy “eregseaqdy (2) VII انان 010 نا كان انه (زدنانا ينانا لان‎
5-5 Se
3 سه‎
2 د & حك اح‎ ay =
“pt - 5 2 = 6 a 6
م20‎ 117/574 Ss + 2 3 uy; s =
< > A = a a 2
3 5 =
a) =
5 4 3 5 = Ss ce
S | ‘SOUeN TOUL 5 $ S 5 = $
: a R 8 2 8 = 5
9 < > a fe
2 é *‘quosoidoyy 9 | "sooUy
0 9 1آ134171*‎ © 8 9 *Sso0oUuy 9 . ¥
3 0 eee I WL 151014 OU AML | م30 وه‎ | 89041189 OUT, 883] oT, 1 "g003 ONL,


|p om | | 5


11 1
oy} JO 9051112 OU,


الست ص ااا ل سس ل مسي جح سج eee‏


Page 113.


ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


230


Page 114.


On the
seven
heavens.
Quotations
from
Johannes
Grammati-
cus, Plato,
and Aris-
totle.


CHA RLEREXX I: 231


THE SPIRITUAL BEINGS LIVING ON THE SEVEN
EARTHS ACCORDING TO THE VAYU-PURANA.


Of the Danavas—Namuci, Sankukarna, Kabandha (?), Nishku-
bada(?), Sdladanta, Lohita, Kalinga, Sv4pada; and the master of
the serpents— Dhanaijaya, Kaliya.

Of the Daityas—Surakshas, Mahajambha, Hayagriva, Krishna,
Janarta (?), Sankhakhsha, Gomukha; and of the Rakshasa—
Nila, Megha, Krathanaka, Mahoshnisha, Kambala, Asvatara,
Takshaka.

Of the Danavas—Rada (?), Anuhlada, Agnimukha, Tarakaéksha,
Trigira, Sisumara ; and of the RAkshasa—Cyavana, Nanda, Visala.
_And there are many cities in this world.

Of the Daityas—K4lanemi, Gajakarna, Uftjara (?); and of the
Rakshasa—Sumali, Muiija, Vrikavaktra, and the large birds called
Garuda.

Of the Daityas—Virocana, Jayanta (?), Agnijihva, Hiranydéksha;
and of the Rakshasa—Vidyujjihva, Mahaémecha; the serpent
Karmara, Svastikajaya.

Of the Daityas—Kesari ; and of the Rakshasa—Urdhvakuja (2),
Satasirsha, i.e. having a hundred heads, a friend of Indra ; Vasuki,
a serpent.


The king Bali; and of the Daitya Mucukunda. In this world
there are many houses for the Rékshasa, and Vishnu resides there,
and Sesha, the master of the serpents.


After the earths follow the heavens, consisting of
seven stories, one above the other. ‘They are called
loka, which means “ gathering-place.” In a similar
manner also the Greeks considered the heavens as
gathering-places. So Johannes Grammaticus says in
his refutation of Proclus: “Some philosophers thought
that the sphere called yana€ias, 1.6. milk, by which
they mean the milky way, is a dwelling-place for
rational souls.” The poet Homer says: “Thou hast
made the pure heaven an eternal dwelling-place for the
gods. The winds do not shake it, the rains do not
wet it, and the snow does not destroy it. For init there
is resplendent clearness without any covering cloud.”

Plato says: “God spoke to the seven planets: You
are the gods of the gods, and I am the father of the
actions; I am he who made you so that no dissolution


ا ل ALBERUNIS‏ 252


is possible; for anything bound, though capable of
being loosened, is not exposed to destruction, as long
as its order is good.”

Aristotle says in his letter to Alexander: “The
world is the order of the whole creation. That which
is above the world, and surrounds it on the sides, is the
dwelling-place of the gods. Heaven is full of the gods
to which we give the name of stars.” In another place
of the same book he says, “The earth is bounded by
the water, the water by the air, the air by the fire, the
fire by the ai@jp. Therefore the highest place is the
dwelling-place of the gods, and the lowest, the home
of the aquatic animals.”

There is a similar passage in the Vdyu-Purdna to
this effect, that the earth is held in its grasp by the
water, the water by the pure fire, the fire by the wind,
the wind by heaven, and heaven by its lord.

The names of the lokas do not differ like those of
the earths. There is a difference of opinion only re-
garding their order. We exhibit the names of the
lokas in a table similar to the former (p. 230).


What members of Their Names
The Number of the | the Sun they repre-} according to the
eavens. sent according to Aditya, Vayu and


the Aditya-Purdna. Vishnu Puranas.


I. The stomach. Bhirloka.
11. The breast. Bhuvarloka,
Tits The mouth. Svarloka.
LV, The eyebrow. Maharloka.
Vd ine oe Janaloka.
ove the
VE. 2 13770101.
VIl. The skull, Satyaloka.


This theory of the earths is the same with all Hindus,
except alone the commentator of the book of Patafijali.
He had heard that the Pitaras, or fathers, had their
gathering-place in the sphere of the moon, a tradition
built on the theories of the astronomers, In conse-


Page 25,


Criticisms
on the com-
mentator of
Patanjali.
Page 116.


The system
of Dvipas
and seas,


CHAPTER XXT, ons


quence he made the lunar sphere the first heaven,
whilst he ought to have identified it with Bhirloka.
And because by this method he had one heaven too
many, he dropped the Svarloka, the place of reward.

The same author differs besides in another point.
As the seventh heaven, Satyaloka, is in the Puranas
also called Brahmaloka, he placed the Brahmaloka
above the Satyaloka, whilst it would have been much
more reasonable to think that in this case one and the
same thing is called by two different names. He ought
to have omitted the Brahmaloka, to have identified
Pitriloka with Bhtrloka, and not to have left out the
Svarloka.

So much about the seven earths and the seven
heavens. We shall now speak of the division of the
surface of the uppermost earth and of related subjects.

Dip (dvipa) is the Indian word for island. Hence
the words Sangaladtp (Simhaladvipa), which we call
Serendib, and the 10160701 (Maledives, Laccadives). The
latter are numerous islands, which become, so to speak,
decrepit, are dissolved and flattened, and finally dis-
appear below the water; whilst at the same time other
formations of the same kind begin to appear above the
water like a streak of sand which continually grows
and rises and extends. The inhabitants of the former
island leave their homes, settle on the new one and
colonise it.

According to the religious traditions of the Hindus,
the earth on which we live is round and surrounded by
a sea. On the sea lies an earth like a collar, and on
this earth hes again a round sea hke a collar, The
number of dry collars, called islands, is seven, and
likewise that of the seas. The size of both dvépas and
seas rises in such a progression that each dvipa is the
double of the preceding dvipa, each sea the double of
the preceding sea, 2.6. in the progression of the powers
of two. If the middle earth is reckoned as one, the


234 ALBERUNI’'S INDIA.


size of all seven earths represented as collars is 127.
If the sea surrounding the middle earth is counted as
one, the size of all seven seas represented as collars is
127. The total size of both earths and seas is 254.

The commentator of the book of Patafijali has adopted
as the size of the middle earth 100,000 yojana. Accord-
ingly, the size of all the earths would be 12,700,000
yowand. Further he adopts as the size of the sea which
surrounds the middle earth 200,000 ygjana. Accord-
ingly, the size of all the seas would be 25,400,000 ©
yojana, and the total size of all the earths and seas
38,100,000 yojana. However, the author himself has
not made these additions. Therefore we cannot com-
pare his numbers with ours. But the Vdayu-Purdna
says that the diameter of the totality of earths and seas
15 37,900,000 yoyana, a number which does not agree
with the above-mentioned sum of 38,100,000 yojana.
It cannot be accounted for, unless we suppose that the
number of earths is only six, and that the progression
begins with the number 4 instead of 2. Such a num-
ber of seas (7.e. 6) may possibly be explained in this
way, that the seventh one has been dropped, because
the author only wanted to find the size of the contin-
ents, which induced him to leave the last surrounding
sea out of the calculation, But if he once mentions
the continents he must also mention all the seas which
surround them.: Why he has commenced the pro-
gression with 4 instead of 2, I cannot account for by
any of the principles of the calculation as they have
been laid down.

Each dvtpa and sea has a separate name. As far as
we know them, we place them before the reader in the
following table, and hope that the reader will excuse us
for so doing.


The size of
the Dvipas
and seas,
according to
the com-
mentator of
Patahjali
and the
Vayu-
Purana.


Page 117.


ااا سس سس سس سس سس سس سس سس تس سس سس ص سس سس سس سس سس سح سس ص سس سس سجس سس سس سس I‏


111


ب


°
Boe
Bro
Bor
ع ع2‎
BB
he Ma

5


-BIVYYSNg


ed Ap
“epawlory


“edyap-I[Vur[yg
“ed Ap

-BOUNBLIYT

‘edlAp-esn y


“edlap-vyyg
‘edtap-nquree


*sedtaqy


"101 2141 JOOMS
027 4


"011170-55
jo 0011 83
0 ا‎ 001 1


*OUIM-OOII
2١+ “BING


“TUE 1
‘aa “epuBuUlLy ped


"T9qy4nq
‘aa “epuvurezitey


rar
007 ا‎ 11


10008
0:1 “BUBABT


"stag


x 171110111 1-71


"09.11 8 JO 011117111
20


‘9a1] B JO 011117111
‘BABS


81501 4
2170111711


01118 ]0117 710 01111711 3
21


jo 91101 oq}‏ 29 رمات
“T[VU[’S‏


‘901} B JO OULU OY}
نه لكل‎


‘90.1} 17 JO 9111811 1
0101 م‎


0011 1


"171119111 رآ 2118 - ق‎
—eluvyeg Jo 301811191111110 OY,


‘vareyysng *.101 1741 JOOMS
21 4
"9031102 عي‎
0+ 1
1 *]11-8
10111 1 ا‎ 0
لان م‎
0111111 ا‎ on arta
; “OUTM
, ‘euvd-IBONS
ابن‎ ْ ‘ap 11
. 11
cate 07+ “BlBYS
*sBdlaq *svOg


‘eAtUR


*BITYS Y


‘BIVSYSTYU PV


‘siding


"BING


TEE


1911011111178 -8 194171]


"stag


*"SOUIBN IB[NOVUIO A


235


CHAPTER XX:


EE أ‎ 7 77-7 ١7 [ [|*آ[‎ 1


236 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


The differences of the traditions as exhibited by this
table cannot be accounted for in any rational way. They
can hardly have sprung from any other source but from
arbitrary, accidental changes of the enumeration. The
most appropriate of these traditions is that of the
Matsya-Purdna, because it enumerates the dvipas and
seas one after the other according to a fixed order, a


sea surrounding an island, an island surrounding a sea, —


the enumeration proceeding from the centre to the
periphery.

We shall now in this place record some related sub-
jects, though it would perhaps be more correct to treat
of them in some other part of the book.

The commentator of the book of Patafijali, wishing
to determine the dimension of the world, begins from
below and says: “ The dimension of the darkness is one
kott and 85 laksha yojana, 1.6. 18,000,000 yojana.

“Then follows Naraka, ve. the hells, of the dimension
of 13 koti and 12 laksha, 1.6. 131,200,000 yojana.

“Then follows darkness, of one laksha, 1.6. 100,000
youanda.

“ Above it lies the earth Vajra, so called on account
of its hardness, because the word means a diamond, and
the molten thunder-bolt, of 34,000 yojana.

“ Above it lies the middle earth Garbha, of 60,000
Yojana.

“ Above it lies the golden earth, of 30,000 yojana.

“ Above this the seven earths, each of 10,000 yojana,
which makes the sum of 70,000 yojana. The upper one
of them is that which contains the dviépas and the seas;

“Behind the sweet-water sea lies Lokdloka, which
means a not-gathering-place, 1.6. به‎ place without civilisa-
tion and inhabitants,

“Thereupon follows the gold-earth of one Kofi, ie.


10,000,000 yyana ; above it the Pitriloka of 6,134,000 _


Yojana.
“ The totality of the seven lokas, which is called Brah-


Page 118.


Quotation
from the
commenta-
tor of Patan-
jali.


CHAPTER ا‎ 257


manda, has the dimension of 15 7011, 1.6. 150,000;000
yojana. And above this is the darkness tamas, similar
to the lowest darkness, of 18,500,000 yojana.”

We on our part found it already troublesome to
enumerate all the seven seas, together with the seven
earths, and now this author thinks he can make the sub-
ject more easy and pleasant to us by inventing some more
earths below those already enumerated by ourselves!

The Vishnu-Purdna, when treating of similar subjects,
says: “There is a serpent under the seventh lowest
earth, which is called Seshdkhya, worshipped among
the spiritual beings. It is also called Ananta. It has
a thousand heads, and bears the earths without being
molested by their heavy weight. These earths, one
stored above the other, are gifted with good things
and happiness, adorned with jewels, illuminated by
their own rays, not by those of sun and moon. The
latter two luminaries do not rise in them. Therefore
their temperature is always equal, they have everlasting
fracrant flowers, blossoms of trees and fruit; their in-
habitants have no notion of time, since they do not
become aware of any motions by counting them. Their
dimension is 70,000 yojana, the dimensions of each
being 10,000. Narada, the Rishi, went down in order
to see them, and to acquaint himself with the two kinds
of beings which inhabit them, the Daitya and Danava.
When he then found the bliss of paradise to be rather
insignificant in comparison with that of these earths,
he returned to the angels, giving his report to them,
and rousing their admiration by his description.”

Further, the following passage: “ Behind the sweet-
water sea lies the gold earth, the double of the totality
of the dvipas and seas; but not inhabited by men nor
by demons. Behind it lies Lokdloka, a mountain of the
height of 10,000 yoyana, and of the same breadth. Its Page rio.
whole dimension is 50 koft, 1.6. 500,000,000 yajana.”

The totality of all this is in the Hindu language


238 ALBERUNTS INDIA.


sometimes called dhdtri, i.e. holding all things, and
sometimes vidhdtri, 1.6. letting loose all things. It is also
called the dwelling-place of every living being, and by
various other names, which differ as people differ in
their opinions about the vacwuwm. Those who believe
in the vacuwm make it the cause why all bodies are
attracted towards it, whilst those who deny the vacwwm.
declare that it is not the cause of the attraction.

Then the author of the Vishnu-Purdna returns to the
Lokas and says: “Everything which a foot can tread
upon and a ship sail in, is Bhirloka.” This seems to
be an indication of the surface of the uppermost earth.
The air, which is between the earth and the sun, in
which the Siddhas, the Munis, and the Gandharvas,
the musicians, wander to and fro, is the Bhuvarloka.
The whole of these three earths is called the three
prithivt. That which is above them is Vydsa-mandala,
4.e. the realm of Vyasa. The distance between the
earth and sun 1s 100,000 yojana, that between the sun
and the moon is the same. The distance between the
moon and Mercury is two dakshas, 1.6. 200,000 yojana,
that between Mercury and Venus is the same. The
distances between Venus and Mars, Mars and Jupiter,
Jupiter and Saturn, are equal, each being 200,000
yojana. The distance between Saturn and the Great
Bear is 100,000 yojana, and that from the Great Bear
to the pole is 1000 yojana. Above it is Maharloka, at
a distance of 20 millions of yojana ; above it, the Jina-
loka, at a distance of 80 millions; above it, Pitriloka, at
a distance of 480 millions; above it, Satyaloka.”

This sum, however, is more than thrice the sum
which we have mentioned on the authority of the com-
mentator of the book of Patafijali, 1.6. 150,000 yojana.
But such is the custom of the copyists and scribes in
every nation, and I cannot declare the students of the
Puranas to be free from it, for they are not men of
exact learning.


The origin
of the south


(ees on


CHAPTER XXII.
TRADITIONS RELATING TO THE POLE,


THE pole, in the language of the Hindus, is called


dhruva, and the axis saldka. The Hindus, with the pole, ana


the story of


Somadatta.


exception of their astronomers, speak always only of
one pole, the reason of which is their belief in the dome
of heaven, as we have heretofore explained. According
to Vayu-Purdna, heaven revolves round the pole like a
potter’s wheel, and the pole revolves round itself, with-
out changing its own place. This revolution is finished
In 30 muhiirta, 1.6. in one nychthemeron.

Regarding the south pole, I have heard from them
only one story or tradition, viz. the following. They
had once a king called Somadatta, who by his noble
deeds had deserved paradise; but he did not like the
idea of his body being torn away from his soul when
he should depart into the other world. Now he called
on the Rishi Vasishtha, and told to him that he loved
his body, and did not wish to be separated from it; but
the Rishi informed him that it was impossible to take
along with oneself the material body from this world
into paradise. Thereupon he laid his desire before the
children of Vasishtha; however, these spat in his face,
scoffed at him, and changed him into a canddla with
ear-rings in both ears, and clad in a kurtak (ve. a short
shirt worn by the women round the shoulders, reaching
down to the middle of the body). When he came in
this condition to the Rishi, Visvamitra, the latter found
him to be a disgusting spectacle, and asked him what


240 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


was the reason of his appearing so, whereupon Soma-
datta informed him, and told him the whole story.
Now Visvamitra became very angry on his account; he

Page 120. ordered the Brahmans into his presence in order to per-
form a great sacrifice, among those also the children of
Vasishtha, and he spoke to them: “I wish to make a
new world, and a new paradise for this pious king, that
there he may obtain the fulfilment of his wish.” There-
upon he began to make the pole and the Great Bear in
the south, but then Indra, the ruler, and the spiritual
beings began to fear him. They went to him, humbled
themselves before him, and asked him to desist from
the work he had commenced on this condition, that
they would carry Somadatta with his body, just as it
was, into paradise. This they did, and in consequence
the Rishi desisted from making a second world, but
that which he had already made up to that moment
remained,

It is well known that the north pole with us is called
the Great Bear, the south pole Canopus. But some of
our people (Muslims) who do not rise above the unedu-
cated mass, maintain that in the south of heaven too
there is a Great Bear of the same shape as the northern,
which revolves round the southern pole.

Such a thing would not be impossible nor even
strange, if the report about it came from a trust-
worthy man, who had made long sea-voyages. Cer-
tainly in southern regions stars are seen which we do

Sripalaon not know in our latitudes. So Sripdla says that the
zt people of Multan see in summer time a red star a little


Sala. Aljai- Z
hani on the below the meridian of Canopus, which they call Swa,


fever-star.

Brahma- 4.¢, the beam of crucifixion, and that the Hindus consider
gupta on the 1 8 ;
Sisumira. 16 35 unlucky. ‘Therefore, when the moon stands in


the station Pirvabhadrapada, the Hindus do not travel
towards the south, because this star stands in the
south.

Aljaihani relates, in his Book of Routes, that on the


CHAPTER AXAILL 2h


island Langabalts there is a large star visible, known
as the fever-star. It appears in winter about morning
dawn in the east as high as a date-palm tree, having an
oblong shape, composed of the tail of the Small Bear
and his back, and of some small stars situated there;
it is called the axe of the mill. Brahmagupta mentions
it in connection with the Fish. The Hindus tell rather
ludicrous tales when speaking of the figure in which —
they represent this group of stars, viz. the figure of a
four-footed aquatic animal, which they call Sakvara and
also Sifwmdra. 1 suppose that the latter animal is the
great lizard, for in Persia it is called Susmdr, which
sounds much like the Indian Sigwmdra. Of this kind
of animals there is also an aquatic species, similar to
the crocodile and the skink. One of those tales is the
following. ٠
When Brahman wanted to create mankind, he divided The story of

himself into two halves, of which the right one was 0
called Virdy, the left one Manu. The latter one is the

_ being from whom the period of time called Manvantara
has received its name. Manu had two sons, Priyavrata
and Uttanapada, the bow-legged king, The latter had
a son called Dhruva, who was slighted by one of the
wives of his father. On account of this, he was pre-
sented with the power to turn round all the stars as he
pleased. He appeared in the Manvantara of Svayam-
bhuva, the first of all Manvantaras, and he has for ever
remained in his place.

The Vdyu-Purdna says: “The wind drives the stars Quotations


round the pole, which are bound to it by ties invisible to Purd ad
man. They move round like the beam in the olive-press, “م‎
for its bottom is, as it were, standing still, whilst its end
is moving round,

The Vishnu-Dharma says : “Vajra, one of the children
of Balabhadra, the brother of Narayana, asked the Rishi page sz.
Markandeya as to the pole, upon which he answered:
When God created the world, it was dark and desert.


VO Leck, Q


242 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


Thereupon he made the globe of the sun shining, and
the globes of the stars watery, receiving the lght of
the sun from that side of his which he turns towards
them. Fourteen of these stars he placed round the
pole in the shape of a 51517070, which drive the other
stars round the pole. One of them, north of the pole,
on the uppermost chin, is Uttanapada, on the lowest
chin Yajna, on the head Dharma, on the breast Nara-
yana, on the two hands towards the east the two stars
Agvini the physicians, on the two feet Varuna, and
Aryaman towards the west, on the penis Samwatsara,
on the back Mitra, on the tail Agni, Mahendra, Marici,
and Kagyapa.”

The pole itself is Vishnu, the ruler of the inhabitants
of paradise; he is, further, the time rising, growing,
cetting old, and vanishing.

Further, the Vishnu-Dharma says: “If a man reads
this and knows it accurately, God pardons to him the
sins of that day, and fourteen years will be added to
his life, the length of which has been fixed before-
hand.”

How simple those people are! Among us there are '
scholars who know between 1020 to 1030 stars. Should .
those men breathe and receive life from God only on
account of their knowledge of stars ?

All the stars revolve, whatever may be the position
of the pole with regard to them.

If I had found a Hindu able to point out to me with
his finger the single stars, I should have been able to
identify them with the star-figures known among Greeks.
and Arabs, or with stars in the neighbourhood in case
they did not belong to any of these figures.


Brahma-
gupta on
the earth
and Mount
Meru.


Balabhadra
on the same
subject.


(e243% |)


CHAPTER XXIII.


ON MOUNT MERU ACCORDING TO THE BELIEF OF THE
AUTHORS OF THE PURANAS AND OF OTHERS.


WE begin with the description of this mountain, since
' 15 is the centre of the Dvipas and seas, and, at the same
time, the centre of Jambtidvipa. Brahmagupta says:
“ Manifold are the opinions of people relating to the
description of the earth and to Mount Meru, particu-
larly among those who study the Puranas and the reli-
gious literature. Some describe this mountain as rising
above the surface of the earth to an excessive height.
It is situated under the pole, and the stars revolve
round its foot, so that rising and setting depends upon
| Meru. It is called Meru because of its having the
faculty of doing this, and because it depends alone
upon the influence of its head that sun and moon
become visible. The day of the angels who inhabit
Meru lasts six months, and their night also six
months,”
_  Brahmagupta quotes the following passage from the
| book of Jina, i.e. Buddha: “Mount Meru is quad-
rangular, not round,”

The commentator Balabhadra says: “Some people
١ say that the earth is flat, and that Mount Meru is an
illuminating, light-giving body. However, if such were
the case, the planets would not revolve round the
horizon of the inhabitants of Meru; and if it were
shining it would be visible because of its height, as the


20900 Ne ee ees


244 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


pole above it is visible. According to some, Meru con-
sists of gold; according to others it consists of jewels.
Aryabhata thinks that it has not absolute height, but
only the height of one yojana, and that it is round, not
quadrangular, the realm of the angels; that it is in-
visible, although shining, because it is very distant from
the inhabited earth, being situated entirely in the high
north, in the cold zone, in the centre of a desert called
Nandana-vana. However, if it were of a great height,
it would not’ be possible on the 66th degree of latitude
for the whole Tropic of Cancer to be visible, and for the
stun to revolve on it, being always visible without ever
disappearing.”


All that Balabhadra produces is foolish both in words |


and matter, and I cannot find why he felt himself called
upon to write a commentary if he had nothing better
to say.

If he tries to refute the theory of the flatness of the
earth by the planets revolving round the horizon of
Meru, this argument would go nearer proving the
theory than refuting it. For if the earth were a flat
expanse, and everything high


BN 7° on earth were parallel to the


ane perpendicular height of Meru,


there would be no change of
horizon, and the same horizon
would be the equinox for all
places on earth.

On the words of Aryabhata
as quoted by Balabhadra we
make the following remarks.

Let A B be the globe of the earth round the centre
H. Further, A is a place on the earth in the 66th de-
eree of latitude. We cut off from the circle the are
A B, equal to the greatest declination. Then B is the
place in the zenith of which the pole stands.

Further, we draw the line A C touching the globe in


Page 122.


The author
criticises
Balabhadra.


The state-
ments of
Aryabhata
examined
by the
author.


2007 245


the point A. This line lies in the plane of the horizon
as far as the human eye reaches round the earth.

We join the points A and H with each other,
and draw the line H B 0, so that it is met in 0 by
the line A .ل‎ Further, we let fall the perpendicular
A Ton HC. Now, it is evident that—

A T is the sine of the greatest declination ;


T B the versed sine of the greatest declination ;
_ TH the sine of the complement of the greatest declination.


And as we here occupy ourselves with Aryabhata,
we shall, according to his system, change the sines in
kardajdt. Accordingly—


LV AP IES Oye
اه كك 01ل ل‎
كت ددر‎ 0S:


Because the angle 8 A C is a right angle, we have
the equation—


eee DAL 1) C,‏ نل


And the square of A T is 1,951,609. If we divide it
by T H, we get as quotient 622.

The difference between this number and T B is 324,
whichis BC. And the relation of B C to BH, the latter
being sinus totus = 3438, is the same as the relation of
the number of yojanas of B C to the yojanas of BH. The
latter number is, according to Aryabhata, 800. If it
is multiplied by the just-mentioned difference of 324
we get the sum of 259,200. And if we divide this
number by the sinus totus we get 75 as quotient, which
is the number of yojanas of B C, equal to 600 miles or
200 farsakh.

If the perpendicular of a mountain is 200 farsakh,
the ascent will be nearly the double. Whether Mount
Meru has such a height or not, nothing of it can be
visible in the 66th degree of latitude, and it would not
cover anything of the Tropic of Cancer at all (so as to
intercept from it the light of the sun). And if for those


216 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


latitudes (66° and 23°) Meru is under the horizon, it
is also under the horizon for all places of less latitude.
If you compare Meru with a luminous body like the sun,
you know that the sun sets and disappears under the
earth. Indeed Meru may be compared with the earth.
It is not invisible to us because of its being far away
in the cold zone, but because it lies below the horizon,
because the earth is a globe, and everything heavy is
attracted towards its centre.

Aryabhata further tries to prove that Mount Meru
has only a moderate height by the fact that the Tropic
of Cancer is visible in places the latitude of which is
equal to the complement of the greatest declination.
We must remark that this argument is not valid, for we
know the conditions of the lines of latitude and other
lines in those countries only through ratiocination, not
from eyesight nor from tradition, because they are unin-
habited and their roads are impassable.

If a man has come from those parts to Aryabhata and
told him that the Tropic of Cancer is visible in that lati-
tude, we may meet this by stating that a man has also
come to ws from the same region telling us that one
part of it is there invisible. The only thing which
covers the Tropic of Cancer is this mountain Meru. If —
Meru did not exist, the whole tropic would be visible.
Who, now, has been able to make out which of the
two reports deserves most credit ?

In the book of Aryabhata of Kusumapura we read
that the mountain Meru is in Himavant, the cold zone,
not higher than a yojana. In the translation, however,
it has been rendered so as to express that it is not higher
than Himavant by more than a yojana.

This author is not identical with the elder Arya-
bhata, but he belongs to his followers, for he quotes
him and follows his example. I do not know which of
these two namesakes is meant by Balabhadra.

In general, what we know of the conditions of the


Page 123.


Matsya-
Purdira
on Mount
Meru and
the moun-
tains of
the earth.


CHARTER AXITT, 247


به


place of this mountain we know only 27
About the mountain itself they have many traditions.
Some give it the height of one yojana, others more ;
some consider it as quadrangular, others as an octagon.
We shall now lay before the reader what the Rishis
teach regarding this mountain.

The Matsya-Purdna says: “It is golden and shining
like fire which is not dulled by smoke. It has four
different colours on its four sides. The colour of the
eastern side is white like the colour of the Brahmins,
that of the northern is red like that of the Kshatriya,
that of the southern is yellow like the colour of the
Vaisya, and that of the western is black like the colour
of the Sidra. It is 86,000 yojana high, and 16,000 of
these yojana lie within the earth. Hach of its four sides
has 34,000 yojyana. There are rivers of sweet water
running in it, and beautiful golden houses inhabited by
the spiritual beings, the Deva, by their singers the
Gandharva, and their harlots the Apsaras. Also Asuras,
Daityas, and Rakshasas are living in it. Round the
mountain hes the pond Manasa, and around it to all
four sides are the Lokapdla, 1.e. the guardians of the
world and its inhabitants. Mount Meru has seven
knots, 4.6. great mountains, the names of which are
Mahendra, Malaya, Sahya, Suktibam (2), Rikshabam (?),
Vindhya, Pariyatra. The small mountains are nearly
innumerable; they are those which are inhabited by
mankind.

“The great mountains round Meru are the follow-
ing: Himavant, always covered with snow, inhabited
by the Rakshasa, Pisdca, and Yaksha. Hemakita,
the golden, inhabited by the Gandharva and Apsaras.
Nishadha, inhabited by the Naga or snakes, which have
the following seven princes: Ananta, Vasuki, Tak-
shaka, Karkotaka, Mahdpadma, Kambala, Asvatara.
Nila, peacock-like, of many colours, inhabited by the


Siddha and Brahmarshi, the anchorites. The mountain Page 24+:


248 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


Sveta, inhabited by the Daitya and DAnava. The
mountain Sriigavant, inhabited by the Pitaras, the
fathers and grandfathers of the Deva. Not far to the
north of this mountain there are mountain-passes full
of jewels and of trees which remain during a whole
kalpa. And in the centre of these mountains is
Ilavrita, the highest of all. The whole is called
Purushaparvata. The region between the Himavant
and the Sringavant is called Kaildsa, the play-ground of
the Rakshasa and Apsaras.”

The Vishnu-Purdna says: “The great mountains of
the middle earth are Sri-parvata, Malaya-parvata, MAl-
yavant, Vindhya, Triktita, Tripurantika, and Kailasa.
Their inhabitants drink the water of the rivers, and live
in eternal bliss.”

The Vayu-Purdna contains similar statements about
the four sides and the height of Meru as the hitherto
quoted Puranas. Besides, it says that on each side of it
there is a quadrangular mountain, in the east the Mal-
yavant, in the north Anila, in the west the Gandhama-
dana, and in the south the Nishadha. |

The Aditya-Purdna gives the same statement about
the size of each of its four sides which we have quoted
from the Matsya-Purdna, but I have not found in it a
statement about the height of Meru. According to this
Purana, its east side is of gold, the west of silver, the
south of rubies, the north of different jewels.

The extravagant notions of the dimensions of Meru
would be impossible if they had not the same extrava-
gant notions regarding the earth, and if there is no
limit fixed to guesswork, guesswork may without any
hindrance develop into lying. For instance, the com-
mentator of the book of Patanjali not only makes Meru
quadrangular, but even oblong. The length of one side
he fixes at 15 Kofi, 1.6. 150,000,000 yojana, whilst he
fixes the length of the other three sides only at the
third of this, we 5 oti. Regarding the four sides of


Quotations
from the
Vishnu,
Vayu, and
Aditya
Purdnas.


The com-
mentator of
. Patahijali
on the same
subject.


CHAPTER XXIil. 249


Meru, he says that on the east are the mountain
Malava and the ocean, and between them the kingdoms
called Bhadrasva. On the north are Nila, Sita, Sringa-
dri, and the ocean, and between them the kingdoms
Ramyaka, Hiranmaya, and Kuru. On the west are the
mountain Gandhamadana and the ocean, and between
them the kingdom Ketumala. On the south are
Mravarta (?), Nishadha, Hemaktita, Himagiri, and the
ocean, and between them the kingdoms Bharatavarsha,
111110111115118, and Harivarsha.

This is all I could find of Hindu traditions regarding Buaanistic

Meru; and as I have never found a Buddhistic book,”
and never knew a Buddhist from whom I might have
learned their theories on this subject, all I relate of
them I can only relate on the authority of Aléranshahri,
though, according to my mind, his report has no claim
to scientific exactness, nor is it the report of a man who
has a scientific knowledge of the subject. According
to him, the Buddhists believe that Meru les between
four worlds in the four cardinal directions; that it is
square at the bottom and round at the top; that it has
the leneth of 80,000 yojana, one half of which rises into
heaven, whilst the other half goes down into the earth.
That side which is next to our world consists of blue
sapphires, which is the reason why heaven appears to
us blue; the other sides are of rubies, yellow and white
gems. Thus Meru is the centre of the earth.

The mountain Kdf, as it is called by our common
people, is with the Hindus the Lokéloka. They main- Page جه‎
tain that the sun revolves from Lokdéloka towards
Meru, and that he illuminates only its inner northern
side.

Similar views are held by the Zoroastrians of Sog- A tradition
diana, viz. that the mountain Ardiy& surrounds the astrians of
world; that outside of it is 4hdm, similar to the pupil of Sepa
the eye, in which there is something of everything, and


that behind it there is a vacwwm. In the centre of the


250 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


world is the mountain Girnagar, between our دشرأ(‎
and the six other «Aiwarta, the throne of heaven. Be-
tween each two there is burning sand, on which no
foot could stand. The spheres revolve in the climata
like malls, but in ours they revolve in an inclined course,
because our clima, that one inhabited by mankind, is
the uppermost.


)0 2510


CHAPTER XXIV.


TRADITIONS OF THE PURANAS REGARDING EACH OF THE
SEVEN DVIPAS.


finds all the words and meanings which occur in the according to
present chapter to be totally different from anything ana Viv
corresponding in Arabic. As for the difference of words, uae
it 15 easily accounted for by the difference of languages
in general ; and as regards the difference of the meanings,
we mention them only either in order to draw attention
to an idea which might seem acceptable even to a
| Muslim, or to point out the irrational nature of a thing
| which has no foundation in itself.
| We have already spoken of the central Dvipa when
| describing the environs of the mountain in its centre.
It is called Jambi-Dvipa, from a tree growing in it, the x Jamps-
branches of which extend over a space of 100 yojana.
In a later chapter, devoted to the description of the
inhabitable world and its division, we shall finish the
description of Jambti-Dvipa. Next, however, we shall
describe the other Dvipas which surround it, following,
as regards the order of the names, the authority of
Matsya-Purdna, for the above-mentioned reason (v. p.
236). But before entering into this subject we shall
here insert a tradition of the Vayu-Purdna regarding
the central Dvipa (Jambti-Dvipa).
According to this source, “there are two kinds of the innavi-


tants of


| WE must ask the reader not to take any offence if he Description


inhabitants in Madhyadega. First the Kimipurusha. madnya-
: - dega, ac-
Their men are known as the gold-coloured ones, their cording to
Vayu-Pur-


women as swrenu. They live a long life without ever 4,7.


2559 عل ل‎ 11 0115 INDIA.


being ill, They never commit a sin, and do not know
envy. Their food is a juice which they express from
the dates of the palm trees, called madya (?). The
second kind are the Haripurusha, having the colour
of silver, They live 11,000 years, are beardless, and
their food is sugar-cane.” Since they are described as
beardless and silver-coloured, one might be inclined to
take them for Turks; but the fact of their eating dates
and sugar-cane compels us to see in them a more south-
ern nation. But where do we find people of the colour
of gold or silver? We know only of the colour of burnt
silver, which occurs, eg. among the Zanj, who lead a
life without sorrow and envy, as they do not possess
anything which gives birth to these passions. They
live no doubt longer than we, but only a little longer,
and by no means twice as long. The Zanj are so un-
civilised that they have no notion of a natural death.
If a man dies a natural death, they think he was
poisoned. Every death is suspicious with them, if a
man has not been killed by a weapon. Likewise it is
regarded with suspicion by them, if a man is touched
by the breath of a consumptive person.
2. Saka- We shall now describe Sdka-Dvipa. It has, according
eens to the Matsya-Purdna, seven great rivers, one of which
equals the Ganges in purity. In the first ocean there
are seven mountains adorned with jewels, some of which
are inhabited by Devas, others by demons. One of them
is a golden, lofty mountain, whence the clouds rise
which bring us the rain. Another contains all the
Page 126. medicines. Indra, the ruler, takes from it the rain.
Another one is called Soma. Regarding this mountain
they relate the following story :—
The story of Kasyapa had two wives, Kadri, the mother of the
Vinata. snakes, and Vinata, the mother of the birds. Both
Garuda libe- ©, : rk
Hee lived in a plain where there was a grey horse. How-
m ansof the 61761 the mother of the snakes maintained that the
~~" horse was brown. Now they made the covenant that


CHAPTER XXIV.


; 253
she who was wrong should become the slave of the
other, but they postponed the decision till the follow-
ing day. In the following night the mother of the
snakes sent her black children to the horse, to wind
themselves round it and to conceal its colour. In con-
sequence the mother of the birds became her slave for
a time.

The latter, Vinataé, had two children, Antiru, the
guardian of the tower of the sun, which is drawn by
the horses, and Garuda. The latter spoke to his mother :
“Demand from the children nourished at your breast
what may restore you to liberty.” This she did.
People also spoke to her of the ambrosia (amrita),
which is with the Devas, Thereupon Garuda flew to
the Devas and demanded it from them, and they ful-
filled his wish. For Amrita is one of those things
peculiar to them, and if somebody else gets it, he lives
as long as the Devas. He humbled himself before them
in order to obtain the Amrita, for the purpose of freeing
therewith his mother, at the same time promising to
bring it back afterwards. They had pity upon him,
and gave it him. Thereupon Garuda went to the
mountain Soma, in which the Devas were living.
Garuda gave the Amrita to the Devas, and thereby
freed his mother. Then he spoke to them: “Do not
come near the Amrita unless you have before bathed
in the river Ganges.” This they did, and left the
Amrita where it was. Meanwhile Garuda brought it
back to the Devas, and obtained thereby a high rank
in sanctity, so that he became the king of all the birds
and the riding-bird of Vishnu.

The inhabitants of Sika-Dvipa are pious, long-lived
beings, who can dispense with the rule of kings, since
they do not know envy nor ambition. Their lifetime,
not capable of any change, is as long as a Tretayuga.
The four colours are among them, we. the different
castes, which do not intermarry nor mix with each other.


254 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


They live in eternal joy, without ever being sorry.
According to Vishnu-Purdna, the names of their castes
are Aryaka, Kurura, Vivirnga (Vivathéa), and Bhavin (?),
and they worship Vasudeva.

The third Dvipa is Kuga-Dvipa. According to the
Matsya-Puréna it has seven mountains containing
jewels, fruit, flowers, odoriferous plants, and cereals.
One of them, named Drona, contains famous medicines
or drugs, particularly the visalyakarana, which heals
every wound instantaneously, and mritasamjivan, which
restores the dead to life. Another one, called hari, is
similar to a black cloud. On this mountain there is a
fire called Mahisha, which has come out of the water,
and will remain there till the destruction of the world ;
it is this very fire which will burn the world, Kuéa-
Dvipa has seven kingdoms and innumerable rivers
flowing to the sea, which are then changed by Indra
into rain. To the greatest rivers belongs Jaunu (Ya-
muni), which purifies from all sins, About the in-
habitants of this Dvipa, Matsya-Purdna does not give
any information. According to Vishnu-Purdna the
inhabitants are pious, sinless people, every one of them
living 10,000 years. They worship Jandrdana, and
the names of their castes are Damin, Sushmin, Sneha,
and Mandeha.

The fourth, or Kraufica-Dvipa, has, according to the
Matsya-Purdna, mountains containing jewels, rivers
which are branches of the Ganges, and kingdoms the
people of which have a white colour and are pious and
pure. According to Vishnu-Purdna the people there
live in one and the same place without any distinction
among members of the community, but afterwards it
says that the names of their castes are Pushkara,
Pushkala, Dhanya, and Tishya(?), They worship
ل‎

The fifth, or Salmala-Dvipa, has, according to the
Matsya-Purdna, mountains and rivers, Its inhabitants


. Kuéa-
vipa.


دي


S


4. Kraufica-
Dvipa,


Page 127.


SAlmala-‏ ”.ع
Dvipa.‏


6. Gomeda-
vipa,


7. Pushkara-
vipa.


CHAPTER XXIV. 256


are pure, long-lived, mild, and never angry. They
never suffer from drought or dearth, for their food
comes to them simply in answer to their wishes, with-
out their sowing or toiling. They come into exist-
ence without being born ; they are never ill nor sorry.
They do not require the rule of kings, since they do not
know the desire for property. They live contented and
in safety ; they always prefer that which is good and
love virtue. The climate of this Dvipa never alters in
cold or heat, so they are not bound to protect them-
selves against either. They have no rain, but the
water bubbles up for them out of the earth and drops
down from the mountains. This is also the case in
the following Dvipas. The inhabitants are of one kind,
without any distinction of caste. Every one lives 3000
years.

According to the Vishnu-Purdna they have beauti-
ful faces and worship Bhagavat, They bring offerings
to the fire, and every one of them lives 10,000 years.
The names of their castes are Kapila, Aruna, Pita,
and Krishna.

The sixth, or Gomeda-Dvipa, has, according to the
Matsya-Purdna, two great mountains, the deep-black
Sumanas, which encompasses the greatest part of the
Dvipa, and the Kumuda, of golden colour and very
lofty ; the latter one contains all medicines. ‘This
Dvipa has two kingdoms.

According to Vishnu-Purdna the inhabitants are
pious and without sin and worship Vishnu. The
names of their castes are Mriga, Magadha, Manasa, and
Mandaga. The climate of this Dvipa is so healthy and
pleasant that the inhabitants of paradise now and then
visit it on account of the fragrancy of its air.

The seventh, or Pushkara-Dvipa, has, according to
the Matsya-Purdna, in its eastern part the mountain
Citrasdld, i.e. having a variegated roof with horns of
jewels. Its height is 34,000 yojana, and its circum-


256 ALBERUNTIS INDIA.


ference 25,000 yojana. In the west hes the mountain
Manasa, shining lke the full moon; its height is
35,000 yojana. This mountain has a son who protects
his father against the west. In the east of this Dvipa
are two kingdoms where every inhabitant lives 10,000
years. The water bubbles up for them out of the
earth, and drops down from the mountains. They
have no rain and no flowing river; they know neither
summer nor winter. They are of one kind, without
any distinction of caste. They never suffer from
dearth, and do not get old. Everything they wish for
comes to them, whilst they live quiet and happy with-
out knowing anything else but virtue. It is as if they
were in the suburb of paradise. All bliss is given to
them ; they live long and are without ambition. So
there is no service, no rule, no sin, no envy, no oppo-
sition, no debating, no toiling in agriculture and dili-
gence in trading.

According to the Vishnu-Purdna, Pushkara-Dvipa is
so called from a large tree, which is also called nya-
grodha, Under this tree is brahma-ripa, ve. the figure
of Brahman, worshipped by the Deva and Danava.
The inhabitants are equal among each other, not claim-
ing any superiority, whether they be human beings or
beings associating with the Devas. In this Dvipa
there is only a single mountain, called Idnasottama,
which rises in around form on the round Dvipa. From
its top all the other Dvipas are visible, for its height
is 50,000 yoyana, and the breadth the same.


CHAPTER XXV.
ON THE RIVERS OF INDIA, THEIR SOURCES AND COURSES.


THe Vdyu-Purdna enumerates the rivers rising in the Page x8.
well-known great mountains which we have mentioned fom’ Payal
as the knots of Mount Meru (vide .م‎ 247). To facili- 7”


tate the study we exhibit them in the following table :—


Names of the Rivers which rise in them in |


The Great Knots. Nagarasamvritta,


Trisagé, Be Ikshulé, Tripava (2),


Mahendra, 1 Ayana (?), رتستلنفعضقآ‎ ١7 ةكت‎
Malaya, . Kritamal4, Tamravarmna, Pushpajati, Utpala-
vati (!).
Godavari, Bhitmarathi, Krishna, Vainyda, Sa-
Sahya, . vanjula, Tungabhadra, Suprayozs, Paéjaya(?),
Kaveri.
Sukti Rishika, Balika )!(, Kumart, Mandavahint,
Sige Kirpa (1), Palasini.
Sona, Mahanada, Narmada, Surasa, Kirva (?),
Mandakini, Dagarna, Citrakaitaé, Tamasa,
Riksha, . Pipyala, Sroni, Karamoda (?), Pisabika (?),
Citrapala, Mahavegé, Batijulé, Baluvahini,
Suktimati, Shakruna (?), Tridiva.
Tapi, Payoshni, Nirbindhyé, Sirva (? ), Nish-
0 adha, Vénva, Vaitarani, Sini, تتطقط‎ (!)
ya, Kumudvati, Toba, Mahagauri, Durga,
Antasila.


Vedasmriti, Vedavatt, Vritraghnt (?) Parnas,
Pariyatra, © . Nandana, Saddana (?), Ramadi (2), Para
Carmanvati, Lapa (?), Vidisa.


VOL. I, hk


258 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


The Matsya-Purdna and Vdayu-Purdna mention the
rivers flowing in Jambti-Dvipa, and say that they rise
in the mountains of Himavant. In the following table
we simply enumerate them, without following any
particular principle of arrangement. The reader must
imagine that the mountains form the boundaries of
India. The northern mountains are the snowy Hima-
vant. In their centre lies Kashmir, and they are con-
nected with the country of the Turks. This mountain
region becomes colder and colder till the end of the
inhabitable world and Mount Meru. Because this
mountain has its chief extension in longitude, the rivers
rising on its north side flow through the countries of the
Turks, Tibetans, Khazars,and Slavonians, and fall into the
Sea of Jurjin (the Caspian Sea), or the Sea of Khwarizm
(the Aral Sea), or the Sea Pontus (the Black Sea), or the
northern Sea of the Slavonians (the Baltic) ; whilst the
rivers rising on the southern slopes flow through India
and fall into the great ocean, some reaching it single,
others combined.

The rivers of India come either from the cold moun-
tains in the north or from the eastern mountains, both
of which in reality form one and the same chain, ex-
tending towards the east, and then turning towards the
south until they reach the great ocean, where parts of
it penetrate into the sea at the place called the Dike of
Rama. Of course, these mountains differ very much
in cold and heat.

We exhibit the names of the rivers in the following
table :—


The rivers of


Europe and
Asia rising
in the Hima
laya and its
extensions
to west and
east.


Page 129.


Rivers of
India.


CHAPTER XXV. 250


Sindh or Biyatta Candrabhaga| Biydha Iravati to | S/atarudra
the river 11 or to the west | the east of or
of Vaihand. ‘ Candraha. | of Lahore. Lahore. Shataldar.


Sarsat,
flowing ١
through | Jaun. Ganga. | Saray" | Devika. Kuht.
the country :
Sarsat.
Gomatt. | Dhutapapa.|  Visala. anes Kaugiki. | Nigcira.


Gandakt. | Lohité. | Drishadvatt. ae Parnaéa. | Vedasmriti.


Vidasini. | Candana. Kawana. Paré. |Carmanvati.| Vidisa.


S‘ipra, rises
: in the
Venumati.| Pariydtré | Karatoya. | Shmahina.
. and passes
Ujain.


In the mountains bordering on the kingdom of Kaya- Sindh river.
bish; 7c. Kabul, rises a river which is called Ghorwand, **8° 3°
on account of its many branches. It is joined by
several affluents :—

1. The river of the pass of Ghtiizak.

2. The river of the gorge of Panchir, below the town
of Parwan.

3, 4. The river Sharvat and the river Sawa, which
latter flows through the town of Lanbaga, 2.6. Lamghan ;
they join the Ghorvand at the fortress of Drita.

5,6. The rivers Nur and Kira.

Swelled by these affluents, the Ghorvand is a great
__ river opposite the town of Purshavar, being there called
the ford, from a ford near the village of Mahanara, on
the eastern banks of the river, and it falls into the river
Sindh near the castle of Bittir, below the capital of
Alkandahar (Gandhara), 2.e. Vaihand.

The river Biyatta, known as Jailam, from the city of


260 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


this name on its western banks, and the river Canda-
raha join each other nearly fifty miles above Jahravar,
and pass along west of Multan.

The river Biydh flows east of Multan, and joins after-
wards the Biyatta and Candaraha.

The river IrAva is joined by the river Kaj, which rises
in Nagarkot in the mountains of Bhatul. Thereupon
follows as the fifth the river Shatladar (Satle}).

After these five rivers have united below Multan
at a place called Pavicanada, 2.6. the meeting-place of
the five rivers, they form an enormous watercourse.
In flood-times it sometimes swells to such a degree
as to cover nearly a space of ten farsakh, and to rise
above the trees of the plains, so that afterwards the
rubbish carried by the floods is found in their highest
branches hke birds-nests.

The Mushms call the river, after it has passed the
Sindhi city Aror, as a united stream, the rier of
Mihrén. Thus it extends, flowing straight on, be-
coming broader and broader, and gaining in purity of
water, enclosing in its course places like islands, until
it reaches Almanstira, situated between several of its
arms, and flows into the ocean at two places, near the
city Loharani, and more eastward in the province of
Kacch at a place called Sindhu-sdgara, 1.6. the Sindh
Sea.

As the name wnion of the five rivers occurs in this
part of the world (in Panjab), we observe that a similar
name is used also to the north of the above-mentioned
mountain chains, for the rivers which flow thence
towards the north, after having united near Tirmidh
and having formed the river of Balkh, are called the
union of the seven rivers, The Zoroastrians of Sogdiana
have confounded these two things; for they say that
the whole of the seven rivers is Sindh, and its upper
course Laridish. A man descending on it sees the
sinking of the sun on his right side if he turns his


Rivers of
the Panjab.


Hranian
tradition.


CHAPTER XXV.° 261


face towards the west, as we see it here on our lett


side (ste).
| The river Sarsati falls into the sea at the distance of Various
_. a bowshot east of Somanath. indie of


The river Jaun joins the Ganges below Kanoj, which
hes west of it. The united stream falls into the great
ocean near Gangasagara.

Between the mouths of the rivers Sarsati and Ganges
is the mouth of the river Narmada, which descends
from the eastern mountains, takes its course in a south-
western direction, and falls into the sea near the town
Bahroj, nearly sixty yojana east of Somanath.

Behind the Ganges flow the rivers Rahab and Ka-
wini, which join the river Sarwa near the city of Bari.

The Hindus believe that the Ganges in ancient times
flowed in Paradise, and we shall relate at a subsequent

+ opportunity how it happened to come down upon
earth.

The Maisya-Purdna says: “ After the Ganges had Quotation
settled on earth, it divided itself into seven arms, the Bintan
middle of which is the main stream, known as the page بدو‎
Ganges. Three flowed eastward, Nalini, Hradini,
and P&avani, and three westward, Sita, Cakshu, and
Sindhu.

The river Sita rises in the Himavant, and flows
through these countries: 5301113, Karstuba, Cina, Var-
vara, Yavasa (?), Baha, Pushkara, Kulata, Mangala,
Kavara, and Sangavanta(?); then it falls into the
western ocean.

South of Sita flows the river Cakshus, which irrigates
the countries Cina, Maru, KAlika (?), Dhilika (?), Tuk-
hara, Barbara, Kaca (?), 00 and Barwancat.

The river Sindh flows through the countries Sindhu,
Darada, Zindutunda (?), Gandhara, Rirasa (?), Krira (?),
Sivapaura, Indramaru, Sabati (?), Saindhava, Kubata,
Bahimarvara, Mara, Mriina, and Suktirda.

The river Ganges, which is the middle and main


م


Sige‏ اوج وي > نيوو


ايد int‏ ا مح ناه > وك aes‏ وعد ae‏ كووب سي Vea Bek‏ =


<a 70 ذخ‎


م خ


262 4181101715


stream, flows through the Gandharva, the musicians,
Kirnnara, Yakshas, Rakshasa, 110780318, Uraga, 2.6.
those who creep on their breasts, the serpents, Kalapa-
orama, 4.6. the city of the most virtuous, Kirnpurusha,
Khasa (?), the mountaineers, Kirata, Pulinda, the
hunters in the plains, robbers, Kuru, Bharata, Paficala,
Kaushaka (7), Matsya, Magadha, Brahmottara, and
Tamalipta. These are the good and bad beings
through whose territories the Ganges flows.  After-
wards it enters into branches of the mountain Vin-
dhya, where the elephants live, and then it falls into
the southern ocean.

Of the eastern Ganges arms, the Hradini flows through
the countries Nishaba, Upakéna, Dhivara, Prishaka,
Nilamukha, Kikara, Ushtrakarna, 4.6. people whose lips
are turned like their ears, Kiradta, Kalidara, Vivarna, ©.
the colourless people, so called on account of their intense
blackness, Kushikaéna, and Svargabhtmi, 4.6. a country
like Paradise. Finally it falls into the eastern ocean.

The river Pavani gives water to the Kupatha (7), who
are far from sin, Indradyumnasaras, 4.6. the cisterns of
the king Indradyumna, Kharapatha, Bitra, and Sanku-
patha. It flows through the steppe Udyanamartra,
through the country of the Kusapravarana, and Indra-
dvipa, and afterwards it falls into the salt sea.

The river Nalini flows through Tamara, Harhsamarga,
Samtthuka, and Pirna. All these are pious people who
abstain from evil. Then it flows through the midst of
mountains and passes by the Karnapravarana, 2.64. people
whose ears fall down on their shoulders, ASvamukha,
4.6. people with horse-faces, Parvatamaru, mountainous
steppes, and Rimimandala. Finally it flows into the
ocean.

The Vishnu-Purdna mentions that the great rivers
of the middle earth which flow into the ocean are
Anutapata, Shikhi, Dipapa, Tridivé, Karma, Amrita
and Sukrita.


Vishnu-
Purana.


0220


CHAPTER XXVI.


ON THE SHAPE OF HEAVEN AND EARTH ACCORDING TO Page 132.
THE HINDU ASTRONOMERS.


Tus and similar questions have received at the hands
of the Hindus a treatment and solution totally different
from that which they have received among us Muslims.
The sentences of the Koran on these and other subjects the Koran,
necessary for man to know are not such as to require a 2
_ strained interpretation in order to become positive cer- 0-0
tainties in the minds of the hearers, and the same may
be said regarding the holy codes revealed before the
Koran. The sentences of the Koran on all subjects
necessary for man to know are in perfect harmony with
the other religious codes, and at the same time they are
perfectly clear, without any ambiguity. Besides, the
Koran does not contain questions which have for ever
been subjects of controversy, nor such questions the
solution of which has always been despaired of, eg.
questions similar to certain puzzles of chronology.

Islam was already in its earliest times exposed to the Islam


10 falsified :
machinations of people who were opposed to it in the 1. Bya


bottom of their heart, people who preached Islam with pe
sectarian tendencies, and who read to simple-minded
audiences out of their Koran-copies passages of which
not a single word was ever created (ue. revealed) by
God. But people believed them and copied these
things on their authority, beguiled by their hypocrisy ;
nay, they disregarded the true form of the book which
they had had until then, because the vulgar mind 1s


264 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


always inclined to any kind of delusion. Thus the
pure tradition of Islam has been rendered confused by
this Judaistic party.

Islam encountered a second mishap at the hands of
the Zindiks, the followers of Mani, like Ibn Almukaffa’,
‘Abd-alkarim Ibn ‘Abi-al‘auja’, and others, who, being
the fathers of criticism, and declaring one thing as just,
another as admissible, &c., raised doubts in weak-minded
people as to the One and First, 2.64. the Unique and
Eternal God, and directed their sympathies towards
dualism. At the same time they presented the bio-
graphy of Mani to the people in such a beautiful garb
that they were gained over to his side. Now this
man did not confine himself to the trash of his sectarian
theology, but also proclaimed his views about the form
of the world, as may be seen from his books, which were
intended for deliberate deception. His opinions were
far-spread. Together with the inventions of the above-
mentioned Judaistic party, they formed a religious
system which was declared to be the Jslam, but with
which God has nothing whatever to do. Whoso opposes
it and firmly adheres to the orthodox faith in conformity
with the Koran is stigmatised by them as an infidel and
heretic and condemned to death, and they will not
allow him to hear the word of the Koran. All these
acts of theirs are more impious than even the words of
Pharaoh, “I am your highest lord” (Sura, 79, 24),
and “I do not know of any god for you save myself”
(Sura, 28, 38). If party spirit of this kind will go on
and rule for a long time, we may easily decline from the
straight path of honour and duty. We, however, take
our refuge with God, who renders firm the foot of every
one who seeks Mim, and who seeks the truth about
Him.

The religious books of the Hindus and their codes of


11. By the .


dualists.


ape an Se
of


Hindus for tradition, the Puranas, contain sentences about the shape


of the world which stand in direct opposition to


their as-
tronomers.


CHAPTER XXXVI. 265


scientific truth as known to their astronomers. By

these books people are guided in fulfilling the rites of

their religion, and by means of them the great mass of

the nation have been wheedled into a predilection for
astronomical calculation and astrological predictions

and warnings. The consequence is, that they show much
affection to their astronomers, declaring that they are
excellent men, that it is a good omen to meet them, and

firmly believing that all of them come into-Paradise and

none into hell. For this the astronomers requite them astrono. _
by accepting their popular notions as truth, by con- popuar
forming themselves to them, however far from truth thie”
most of them may be, and by presenting them with such °""*
spiritual stuff as they stand in need of. This is the

reason why the two theories, the vulgar and the
scientific, have become intermingled in the course of

time, why the doctrines of the astronomers have been


disturbed and confused, in particular the doctrines of


those authors—and they are the majority—who simply
copy their predecessors, who take the bases of their
science from tradition and do not make them the objects
of independent scientific research.
We shall now explain the views of Hindu astrono- General


mers regarding the present subject, viz. the shape of on the
rotundlty


heaven and earth. According to them, heaven as well of the earth,
as the whole world is round, and the earth has d-and Vane
elobular shape, the northern half being dry land, the "30
southern half being covered with water. The dimen- Page 133.
sion of the earth is larger according to them than it is
according to the Greeks and modern observations, and

in their calculations to find this dimension they have
entirely given up any mention of the traditional seas

and Dvipas, and of the enormous sums of 17/070110: attri-

buted to each of them. The astronomers follow the
theologians in everything which does not encroach upon

their science, e.g. they adopt the theory of Mount Meru

being under the north*pole, and that of the island


266 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


Vadavamukha lying under the south pole. Now, it is
entirely irrelevant whether Meru is there or not, as it
is only required for the explanation of the particular
mill-like rotation, which is necessitated by the fact that
to each spot on the plane of the earth corresponds a spot
in the sky as its zenith. Also the fable of the southern
island Vadavimukha does no harm to their science,
although it is possible, nay, even likely, that each pair of
quarters of the earth forms a coherent, uninterrupted
unity, the one as a continent, the other as an ocean
(and that in reality there is no such island under the
south pole), Such a disposition of the earth is required
by the law of gravitation, for according to them the
earth is in the centre of the universe, and everything
heavy gravitates towards it. Evidently on account of
this law of gravitation they consider heaven, too, as
having a inl shape.

We shall now exhibit the opinions of the Hindu
astronomers on this subject according to our translation
of their works. In case, however, one word or other in
our translation should be used in a meaning different
from that which it generally has in our sciences, we ask
the reader to consider only the original meaning of the
word (not the technical one), for this only is meant.

Pulisa says in his Siddhdnta: “ Paulisa the Greek
says somewhere that the earth has a globular shape,
whilst in another place he says that it has the shape of
a cover )2.6. of a flat plane). And in both sentences he
is right; for the plane or surface of the earth is round,
and its diameter is a straight line. That he, however,
only believed in the globular shape of the earth, may
be proved by many passages of his work. Besides, all
scholars agree on this head, as Vardihamihira, Arya-
bhata, Lave Srishena, Vishnucandra, and Brahman.
If the earth were not round, it would not be girded
with the latitudes of the different places on earth, day
and night would not be different in winter and summer,


Quotation
from the

Siddhdanta
of Pulisa.


CHAPTER XXVI. 267


and the conditions of the planets and of their rotations
would be quite different from what they are.

“The position of the earth is central. Half of it is
clay, half water. Mount Meru is in the dry half, the
home of the Deva, the angels, and above it is the pole,
In the other half, which is covered by water, lies Vada-
vamukha, under the south pole, a continent like an
island, inhabited by the Daitya and Naga, relatives of
the Deva on Meru. Therefore it is also called Dait-
yantara.

“The line which divides the two earth-halves, the
dry and the wet, from each other, is called Niraksha, 6.
having no latitude, being identical with our equator. In
the four cardinal directions with relation to this line
there are four great cities :—


Yamakoti, in the east. Romaka, in the west.
Lank4, in the south. Siddhapura, in the north.


“The earth is fastened on the two poles, and held by
the axis. When the sun rises over the line which
passes both through Meru and Lanka, that moment is

— noon to Yamakoti, midnight to the Greeks, and evening
ظ‎ to Siddhapura.”
In the same manner things are represented by Arya-


bhata.
Brahmagupta, the son of Jishnu, a native of Bhilla- Quotation
rom the
mala, says in his Brahmasiddhdnta: “Many are the Brahmas
dhanta ©


sayings of people about the shape of the earth, specially Brahma-
among those who study the Purdnas and the religious ~ ea
books. Some say that it is level like a mirror, others Page 134.
say that 16 15 hollow like a bowl. Others maintain that

it is level like a mirror, inclosed by a sea, this sea being
inclosed by an earth, this earth being inclosed by a sea,

&¢e., all of them being round like collars. Each sea

or earth has the double size of that which it incloses.

The outside earth is sixty-four times as large as the
central earth, and the sea inclosing the outside earth is


268 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


sixty-four times as large as the sea inclosing the central
earth. Several circumstances, however, compel us to
attribute globular shape both to the earth and heaven,
viz. the fact that the stars rise and set in different
places at different times, so that, eg. a man in Yama-
koti observes one identical star rising above the western
horizon, whilst a man in Rim at the same time observes
it rising above the eastern horizon. Another argument
to the same effect is this, that a man on Meru observes
one identical star above the horizon in the zenith of
Lanka, the country of the demons, whilst a man in
Lanka at the same time observes it above his head.
Besides, all astronomical calculations are not correct
unless we assume the globular figure of heaven and
earth. Therefore we must declare that heaven is a
clobe, because we observe in it all the characteristics
of a globe, and the observation of these characteristics
of the world would not be correct unless in reality it
were a globe. Now, it is evident that all the other
theories about the world are futile.”

Aryabhata inquires into the nature of the world,
and says that it consists of earth, water, fire, and wind,
and that each of these elements is round.

Likewise Vasishtha and Lata say that the five ele-
ments, viz. earth, water, fire, wind, and heaven, are
round.

Varahamihira says that all things which are per-
ceived by the senses, are witnesses in favour of the
globular shape of the earth, and refute the possibility
of its having another shape.

Aryabhata, Pulisa, Vasishtha, and Lata agree in this,
that when it is noon in Yamakoti, it is midnight in
Rim, beginning of the day in Lanka, and beginning of
the night in Siddhapura, which is not possible if the
world is not round. Likewise the periodicity of the
eclipses can only be explained by the world’s being
round. : :


Quotations
from various
astrono-
mers.


Considera-
tions re-
garding the
rotundity of
the earth,
the balance
of gravity
between the
northern
and south-
ern halves,
and the at-
traction of
gravitation,


Page 135.


CHAPTER XXVI. 269


Lata says: “On each place of the earth only one-half
of the globe of heaven is seen. The more northern our
latitude is, the more Meru and the pole rise above the
horizon ; as they sink down below the horizon, the more
southern is our latitude. The equator sinks down from
the zenith of places, the greater their latitude is both in
north and south. A man who is north of the equator
only sees the north pole, whilst the south pole is invi-
sible to him, and vice versd.”

These are the words of Hindu astronomers regarding
the globular shape of heaven and earth, and what is
between them, and regarding the fact that the earth,
situated in the centre of the globe, is only of a small
size in comparison with the visible part of heaven.
These thoughts are the elements of astronomy as con-
tained in the first chapter of Ptolemy’s Almagest, and
of similar books, though they are not worked out in
that scientific form in which we are accustomed to give
them,

(Lacuna,)

for the earth is more heavy than the water, and the
water is fluid like the air. The globular form must be
to the earth a physical necessity, as long as it does not,
by the order of God, take another form. Therefore the
-earth could not move towards the north, nor the water
move towards the south, and in consequence one whole
half is not terra firma, nor the other half water, unless
we suppose that the terra firma half be hollow. As far
as our observation, based on induction, goes, the terra
firma must be in one of the two northern quarters, and
therefore we guess that the same is the case on the
adjacent. quarter. We admit the possibility of the
existence of the island Vadavamukha, but we do not
maintain it, since all we know of it and of Meru 8
exclusively based on tradition.

The equatorial line does not, in the quarter of the
earth known to us, represent a boundary between terra


270 411281121715 45.


firma and the ocean. For in certain places the con-
tinent protrudes far into the ocean, so as to pass beyond
the equator, eg. the plains of the negroes in the west,
which protrude far towards the south, even beyond the
mountains of the moon and the. sources of the Nile, in
fact, into regions which we do not exactly know. For
that continent is desert and impassable, and likewise
the sea behind Sufala of the Zanj is unnavigable. No
ship which ventured to go there has ever returned to
relate what it had witnessed.

Also a great part of India above the province of Sindh
deeply protrudes far towards the south, and seems even
to pass beyond the equator.

In the midst between both lie Arabia and Yemen,
but they do not go so far south as to cross the equator.

Further, as the ¢erra firma stretches far out into the
ocean, thus the ocean too penetrates into terra firma,
breaking into it in various places, and forming bays
and gulfs. For instance, the sea extends as a tongue
along the west side of Arabia as far as the neighbour-
hood of Central Syria. It is narrowest near Kulzum,
whence it is also called the Sea of Kulzum. |

Another and still larger arm of the sea exists east of
Arabia, the so-called Persian Sea. Between India and
China, also, the sea forms a great curve towards the north.

Hence it is evident that the coast-line of these
countries does not correspond to the equator, nor keep
an invariable distance from it,

(Lacuna,)
and the explanation relating to the four cities will follow —
in its proper place.

The difference of the times which has been remarked
is one of the results of the rotundity of the earth, and
of its occupying the centre of the globe. And if they
attribute to the earth, though it be round, inhabitants—
for cities cannot be imagined without inhabitants—the
existence of men on earth is accounted for by the


Quotations
rom the
Vayu and
Matsya Pu
ranas.


Page 136.


Anote ofthe
author on
the passage
from the
Matsya-Pu-
raya.


Brahma-

gupta and
Vardihami-
hira on the


law ©
gravitation,


CHAPTER XXVI. 271


attraction of everything heavy towards its centre, “e.


the middle of the world.

Much to the same effect are the expressions of Vayu-
Purdna, viz. that noon in Amaravati is sunrise in Vai-
vasvata, midnight in Sukha, and sunset in Vibha.

Similar, also, are the expressions of Matsya-Purdna,
for this book explains that east of Meru lies the city
Amaravatipura, the residence of Indra, the ruler, and
his wife; south of Meru, the city Sammyamanipura, the
residence of Yama, the son of the Sun, where he
punishes and requites mankind; west of Meru, the city
Sukhapura, the residence of Varuna, 1.6. the water; and
north of Meru, the city Vibhavaripura, belonging to the
Moon. Sun and planets revolve round Meru. When
the sun has his noon position in Amaravatipura, it is
the beginning of the day in Sammyamanipura, midnight
in Sukha, and the beginning of the night in VibhAvari-
pura. And when the sun has his noon position in
Sarhyamanipura, he rises over Sukhapura, sets over
Amaravatipura, and has his midnight position with
relation to Vibhavaripura.

If the author of the Matsya-Purdna says that the
sun revolves round Meru, he means a mill-like rotation
round those who inhabit Meru, who, in consequence of
this nature of the rotation, do not know east nor west.
The sun does not rise for the inhabitants of Meru in
one particular place, but in various places. By the
word east the author means the zenith of one city, and
by west the zenith of another. Possibly those four cities
of the Matsya-Purdna are identical with those men-
tioned by the astronomers. But the author has not
mentioned how far they are distant from Meru. What
we have besides related as notions of the Hindus is
perfectly correct and borne out by scientific methods;
however, they are wont never to speak of the pole unless
they mention in the same breath also the mountain Meru.

In the definition of what is /ow the Hindus agree
with us, viz. that it 1s the centre of the world, but their


272 ALBERUNTS INDIA.


expressions on this head are subtle, more particularly
as this is one of the great questions which is only
handled by the most eminent of their scholars.

So Brahmagupta says: “ Scholars have declared that
the globe of the earth is in the midst of heaven, and
that Mount Meru, the home of the Devas, as well as
Vadavamukha below, is the home of their opponents ;
the Daitya and Danava belong to it. But this delow is
according to them only a relative one. Disregarding
this, we say that the earth on all its sides is the
same; all people on earth stand upright, and all heavy
things fall down to the earth by a law of nature, for
it is the nature of the earth to attract and to keep
things, as it is the nature of water to flow, that of fire
to burn, and that of the wind to set in motion. Ifa
thing wants to go deeper down than the earth, let it
try. The earth is the only low thing, and seeds always
return to it, in whatever direction you may throw
them away, and never rise upwards from the earth,”

Varahamihira says: “ Mountains, seas, rivers, trees,
cities, men, and angels, all are around the globe of the
earth. And if Yamakoti and Rim are opposite to each
other, one could not say that the one is dow in its
relation to the other, since the low does not exist. How
could one say of one place of the earth that it is low,
as it 1s in every particular identical with any other
place on earth, and one place could as little fall as any
other. Every one speaks to himself with regard to his
own self, ‘7 am above and the others are below, whilst
all of them are around the globe like the blossoms
springing on the branches of a Kadamba-tree. They
encircle it on all sides, but each individual blossom has
the same position as the other, neither the one hanging
downward nor the other standing upright. For the
earth attracts that which is upon her, for it is the below
towards all directions, and heaven is the above towards
all directions.”

As the reader will observe, these theories of the


0
rom Bala-
0-5 and
the author’ s
criticisms
on them.


Page 137.


CHAPTER XXVI. 273


Hindus are based on the correct knowledge of the laws
of nature, but, at the same time, they practise a little
deceit upon their traditionalists and theologians. So
Balabhadra the commentator says: “It 15 the most
correct of the opinions of people, many and different as
they are, that the earth and Meru and the zodiacal
sphere are round. And the Apta (?)-purdna-kara, ie.
the faithful followers of the Purana, say: ‘The earth
is like the back of a tortoise; it is not round from
below. They are perfectly right, because the earth is
in the midst of the water, and that which appears
above the water has the shape of a tortoise-back ; and
the sea around the earth is not navigable. The fact
of the earth being round is proved by eyesight.”

Here the reader must notice how Balabhadra declares
the theory of the theologians as to the rotundity of the
back to be true. He gives himself the air of not
knowing that they deny that the womb, ze. the other
half of the globe, is round, and he busies himself with a
traditional element (as to the earth being like the back
of a tortoise), which, in reality, has no connection with
the subject.

Further, Balabhadra says: “ Human eyesight reaches
to a point distant from the earth and its rotundity the
96th part of 5000 yojana, 4.6. 52 yojana (exactly 52).
_ Therefore man does not observe its rotundity, and hence
the discrepancy of opinions on the subject.”

Those pious men (the Apta (?)-purana-kéra) do not
. deny the rotundity of the back of the earth ; nay, they
maintain it by comparing the earth to He back of a
tortoise. Only Balabhadra makes them deny it (by
the words, “the earth is not round from below,” supra),
since he understood their words as meaning that the
water surrounds the earth. That which rises above the
water may either be globular or a plain rising above
the water like an inverted drum, 4.6. like a segment of
a round pilaster.

VOL. I. 5


274 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


Further, the remark of Balabhadra (v. p. 273),
that man, on account of the smallness of his stature,
cannot observe the rotundity of the earth, 15 not true ;
because even if the human stature were as tall as the
plumb-line of the highest mountain, if he were to make
his observation only from one single point without
going to other places, and without reasoning about the
observations made at the different places, even such a
height would be of no avail to him, and he would not be
able to perceive the rotundity of the earth and.its nature.

What, however, is the connection of this remark
with the popular theory? If he had concluded from
analogy that that side of the earth which is opposed
to the 70110 one—I mean the lower half—was also
round, and if he then had given his theory about the
extent of the power of human vision as a result of
reflection, not as a result of the perception of the
senses, his theory would seem to have a certain foun-


dation.
Calculation With regard to Balabhadra’s definition of the extent
on tne ex- .
tentot | Which may be reached by the human eye, we propose


human


1

:

:

|

5

|

:

;

|

7

4

!

:

1

ْ 3 0

vision on the following calculation :— :

aa Let A B round the centre H represent the globe of ١

the earth. B is the standing- ١

point of the observer; his
stature is BC. Further, we —

draw the line C A, so that it F
touches the earth. 8

Now it is evident that the 4
field of vision is B A, which '
we suppose to be equal to
1 of the circle, 4.64. 32 degrees, :

if we divide the circle into 4
360 degrees. i
According to the method — 1

followed in the calculation of the mountain Meru (in
chap. xxiii), we divide the square of T A, 1.6. §0,625, by ا‎


Paze 138.


CHAPTER XXVI. 275


H T, we. 3431’. So we get as quotient TC = 0° 14’ 45”;
and B C, the stature of the observer, is 0” 7’ 45”,

Our calculation is based on this, that H B, the sinus
totus, is 3438’. However, the radius of the earth is,
according to the circumference which we have men-
tioned, 795° 27’ 16” (yojana). If we measure B C by
this measure, it is =I yojana, 6 kroga, 1035 yards
(=57,035 yards). If we suppose BC to be equal to four
yards, it stands in the same relation to A T, according
to the measure of the sine, as 57,035, 1.6. the yards
which we have found as the measure of the stature, to
_A T according to the measure of the sine, 4.46. 225. If
we now calculate the sine, we find it to be 0° o’ 1” 3”,
and its arc has the same measure. However, each degree
of the rotundity of the earth represents the measure of
13 yojana, 7 kroga, and 3334 yards (sic). Therefore the
field of vision on the earth is 2913 yards (sve),

(for an explanation of this calculation see the notes.)

The source of this calculation of Balabhadra’s is the
Pulisa-siddhénta, which divides the are of the quarter
of a circle into 24 kardajdt. He says: “If anybody
asks for the reason of this, he must know that each of
these kardajdt 15 ys of the circle=225 minutes (= 3?
degrees). And if we reckon its sine, we find it also
to be=225 minutes.” This shows us that the sines are
.. equal to their arcs in parts which are smaller than this
_kardaja. And because the sinus totus, according to
Pulisa and Aryabhata, has the relation of the diameter
to the circle of 360 degrees, this arithmetical equality
brought Balabhadra to think that the arc was perpen-
dicular; and any expanse in which no convexity pro-
trudes preventing the vision from passing, and which
is not too small to be seen, is visible.

This, however, 1s a gross mistake; for the arc is
never perpendicular, and the sine, however small it
be, never equals the arc. This is admissible only for
such degrees as are supposed for the convenience of


276 2411 تر‎ 0015 INDIA.


calculation, but it is never and nowhere true for the
degrees of the earth.

If Pulisa says (v. p. 267) that the earth is held
by an axis, he does not mean thereby that in reality
there exists such an axis, and that but for it the earth
would fall. How could he say such a thing, since he
is of opinion that there are four inhabited cities around
the world, which is explained by the fact that every-
thing heavy falls from all sides down towards the earth?
However, Pulisa holds this view, that the motion of the
peripheric parts is the reason why the central parts are
motionless, and that the motion of a globe presupposes
two poles, and one line connecting them, which in the
idea is the axis. It is as if he meant to say, that the
motion of heaven keeps the earth in its place, making
it the natural place for the earth, outside of which it
could never be. And this place lies on the midst of the
axis of motion. For the other diameters of the globe
may also be imagined to be axes, since év duvaywer they
are all axes, and if the earth were not in the midst of
an axis, there might be axes which did not pass through
the earth. Hence one may say metaphorically that the
earth is supported by the axes.

As regards the resting of the earth, one of the ele-
mentary problems of astronomy, which offers many and
creat difficulties, this, too, is a dogma with the Hindu
astronomers. Brahmagupta says in the Brahmasid-
dhinta: “Some people maintain that the first motion
(from east to west) does not le in the meridian, but
belongs to the earth. But Varaihamihira refutes them
by saying: ‘If that were the case, a bird would not
return to its nest as soon as it had flown away from it
towards the west.’ And, in fact, it is precisely as
Varahamihira says.”

Brahmagupta says in another place of the same book:
“The followers of Aryabhata maintain that the earth


is moving and heaven resting. People have tried to '


The axis of
the earth
according to
Pulisa.


Whether the
earth moves
or is at rest,
according to
Brahma-
gupta and
the author.


Page 130.


CHAPTER XXVI. 277


refute them by saying that, if such were the case, stones
and trees would fall from the earth.”

But Brahmagupta does not agree with them, and says
that that would not necessarily follow from their theory,
apparently because he thought that all heavy things are
attracted towards the centre of the earth. He says:
“On the contrary, if that were the case, the earth would
not vie in keeping an even and uniform pace with the
minutes of heaven, the pranas of the times.”

There seems to be some confusion in this chapter,
perhaps by the fault of the translator. For the minutes
of heaven are 21,600, and are called prdna, 4.6. breaths,
because according-to them each minute of the meridian
revolves in the time of an ordinary human breath.

Supposing this to be true, and that the earth makes
a complete rotation eastward in so many breaths as
heaven does according to his (Brahmagupta’s) view, we
cannot see what should prevent the earth from keeping
an even and uniform pace with heaven.

Besides, the rotation of the earth does in no way im-
pair the value of astronomy, as all appearances of an
astronomic character can quite as well be explained
according to this theory as to the other. There are,
however, other reasons which make it impossible.
This question is most difficult to solve. The most pro-
minent of both modern and ancient astronomers have
deeply studied the question of the moving of the earth,
and tried to refute it. We, too, have composed a book
on the subject called Miftah-ilm-alhava (Key of
Astronomy), in which we think we have surpassed our
predecessors, if not in the words, at all events in the
matter.


0


CHAPTER ا‎


ON THE FIRST TWO MOTIONS OF THE UNIVERSE (THAT
FROM EAST TO WEST ACCORDING TO ANCIENT
ASTRONOMERS AND THE PRECESSION OF THE EQUI-
NOXES), BOTH ACCORDING TO HINDU ASTRONOMERS
AND THE AUTHORS OF THE PURANAS.


THE astronomers of the Hindus hold on this subject
mostly the same views as ourselves. We shall give
quotations from them, but shall at once confess that
that which we are able to give is very scanty indeed.

Quotation Pulisa says: “The wind makes the sphere of the

buble! from fixed stars revolve ; the two poles keep it in its place,

aaa and its motion appears to the inhabitants of Mount
Meru as a motion from the left to the right; to the
inhabitants of Vadavamukha as one from the right to
the left.”

In another place he says: “If anybody asks for the
direction of the motion of the stars which we see rising
in the east and rotating towards the west until they set,
let him know that the motion which we see as a west-
ward motion appears different according to the places
which the spectators occupy. The inhabitants of Mount
Meru see it as a motion from the left to the right,
whilst the inhabitants of Vadavamukha see it as the
opposite, as a motion from the right to the left. The
inhabitants of the equator see it exclusively as 8
westward motion, and the inhabitants of the parts of
the earth between the poles and the equator see it
more or less depressed, as their places have more or


CHAPTER ا‎ 279


less northern or southern latitude. The whole of this
motion is caused by the wind, which makes the spheres
revolve, and compels the planets and the other stars to
rise in the east and to set in the west. This, however,
is only an accidens. As for the essentia ret, the motions
of the heavenly bodies are directed towards the east,
from Alsharatin towards Albutain, the latter lying east
of the former. But if the inquirer does not know the
lunar stations, and is not capable of procuring for him- Page x40.
self by their help an idea of this eastward motion, let
him observe the moon herself, how she moves away from
the sun once and a second time; how she then comes
near him, till she finally joins him. This will give him
an idea of the second motion.”
Brahmagupta says: “The sphere has been created Quotations
as moving with the greatest rapidity possible about two Brahma-
gupta and
poles without ever slackening, and the stars have been Balabhadra.
created where there is no Batn-hit nor Sharatén, 7.6. on
the frontier between them, which is the vernal equinox.”
Balabhadra, the commentator, says: “ The whole
world hangs on two poles, and moves in a circular
motion, which begins with a kalpa and ends with a
kalpa. But people must not therefore say that the
world, on account of the continuity of its motion, is
without beginning and without end.”
Brahmagupta says : “ The place without latitude
(Niraksha), divided into sixty ghatikd, is the horizon
for the inhabitants of Meru. There east is west; and
behind that place (beyond the equator) towards the
south is Vadavamukha and the ocean which surrounds
it. When the spheres and the stars revolve, the meri-
dian becomes an horizon common to the Devas (in
the north) and the Daityas (in the south), which they
see together. But the direction of the motion appears
to them as different. The motion which the angels see
as a motion to the right, the Daityas see as one to the
left, and vice versd, just as a man who has a thing on his


280 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


right side, looking into the water, sees it on his left.
The cause of this uniform motion which never increases
nor decreases is a wind, but it is not the common wind
which we feel and hear; for this is lulled, and roused,
and varies, whilst that wind never slackens.”

In another place Brahmagupta says : “ The wind
makes all the fixed stars and the planets revolve
towards the west in one and the same revolution; but
the planets move also in a slow pace towards the east,
like a dust-atom moving on a potter’s-wheel in a direc-
tion opposite to that in which the wheel is revolving.
That motion of this atom which is visible is identical
with the motion which drives the wheel round, whilst
its individual motion is not perceived. In this view
Lata, Aryabhata, and Vasishtha agree, but some people
think that the earth moves while the sun is resting.
That motion which mankind conceives as a motion from
east to west, the angels (Deva) conceive as a motion
from left to right, the Daityas as one from right to left.”


This is all I have read in Indian books on the sub-
ject.

Their speaking of the wind as the motor (supra)
has, I think, only the purpose of bringing the subject
near to the understanding of people and to facilitate its
study; for people see with their own eyes that the
wind, when blowing against instruments with wings
and toys of this kind, puts them into motion. But as
soon as they come to speak of the first mover (God),
they at once give up any comparison with the natural
wind, which in all its phases is determined by certain
causes. For though it puts things into motion, the
moving is not its essence; and besides, it cannot move
without being in contact with something, because the
wind is a body, and is acted upon by external influences
or means, its motion being commensurate with their
force.


Criticisms
of the
author.

The wind
as the
motor of the
sphere.


CHAPTER XXVII. Bie


Their saying that the wind does not rest, simply
means that the moving power works perpetually, and
does not imply rest and motion such as are proper to
bodies. Further, their saying that it does not slacken
means that it is free from all kinds of accidents ; for
slackening and weakening only occur in such bodies or page r4r.
beings which are composed of elements of conflicting
qualities.

The expression that the two poles keep the sphere of on the two
the fixed stars (p. 278) means that they keep or pre- the spheres
serve it in its normal state of motion, not that they
keep or preserve it from falling down. ‘There is a story
of an ancient Greek who thought that once upon a time
the Milky Way had been a road of the sun, and that
afterwards he had left it. Such a thing would mean
that the motions ceased to be normal, and to something
like this the expression of the poles keeping the sphere of
the fixed stars may be referred.

The phrase of Balabhadra about the ending of the on the
motion (that it ends with a kalpa, &c., p. 279) means nature of
that everything which exists and may be determined “

arithmetically has no doubt an end, for two reasons:
jirst, because it has a beginning, for every number
consists of one and its reduplications, whilst the one
itself exists before all of them; and, secondly, because
part of it exists in the present moment of time, for if
days and nights increase in number through the con-
tinuation of existence, they must necessarily have a
beginning whence they started. If a man maintains
that ¢ime does not exist in the sphere (as one of its
immanent qualities), and thinks that day and night
have only a relative existence, exist only in relation to
the earth and its inhabitants, that if, eg., the earth were
taken away out of the midst of the world, also night
and day would cease to exist as well as the possibility
of measuring elements composed of days, he would
thereby impose upon Balabhadra the necessity of a


282 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


digression, and compel him to prove the cause, not of
the first, but of the second motion. The latter cause is
the cycles of the planets, which have only a relation to
the sphere, not to the earth. These cycles Balabhadara
indicates by the word kalpa (v. p. 279), since it com-
prehends them all, and since all of them begin with its
beginning.

If Brahmagupta says of the meridian that it is
divided into sixty parts (v. p. 279), it is as if any one of
us should say, the meridian is divided into twenty-four
parts; for the meridian is a medium for measuring and
counting time. Its revolution lasts twenty-four hours,
or, as the Hindus will have it, sixty ghatikd (or ghar’).
This is the reason why they have reckoned the risings
of the zodiacal signs in ghatikd, not in tumes of the
meridian (360 degrees).

If, further, Brahmagupta says that the wind causes
the fixed stars and the planets to revolve, if he besides,
in particular, attributes a slow eastward motion to the
planets (p. 280), he gives the reader to understand that
the fixed stars have no such motion, or else he would
have said that they, too, have the same slow eastward
motion as the planets, not differing from them save in
size and in the variation which they exhibit in the re-
trocrade motion. Some people relate that the ancients
originally did not understand their (the fixed stars’)
motions until, in long periods of time, they became
aware of them. ‘This opinion is confirmed by the fact
that Brahmagupta’s book does not, among the various
cycles, mention the cycles of the fixed stars, and that
he makes their appearing and disappearing depend
apon invariable decrees of the sun.

If Brahmagupta maintains (p. 278) that to the in-
habitants of the equator the first motion is not a motion
to the right and left, the reader must bear in mind the
following. A man dwelling under either of the two
poles, to whatever direction he turns, has always the


The meri-
dian divided
into sixty
ghatikd.


On the fixed
stars.


The direc-
tion of the
heavenly
motion,

ak seen from
different
points of the
earth.


Page 142


CHAPTER XXVII. 283


moving heavenly bodies before himself, and as they
move in one direction, they must necessarily first stand
opposite one of his hands, and then, moving on, come
to stand opposite his other hand. The direction of this
motion appears to the inhabitants of the two poles just
the very contrary, like the image of a thing in the
water or a mirror, where its directions seem to be ex-
changed. If the image of a man is reflected by the
water or a mirror, he appears as a different man stand-
ing opposite to the spectator, his right side opposite to
the left of the spectator, and his left side opposite to


_ the right of the spectator.


Likewise the inhabitants of places of northern lati-
tude have the revolving heavenly bodies before them-
selves towards the south, and the inhabitants of places
of southern latitude have them before themselves
towards the north. To them the motion appears
the same as to the inhabitants of Meru and Vadava-
mukha, But as regards those living on the equator,
the heavenly bodies revolve nearly above their heads,
so they cannot have them before themselves in any
direction. In reality, however, they deviate a little
from the equator, and in consequence the people there
have a uniform motion before themselves on two sides
the motion of the northern heavenly bodies from right
to left, and that of the southern bodies from left to
right. So they unite in their persons the faculty of
the inhabitants of the two poles (viz. of seeing the
heavenly bodies moving in different directions), and it
depends entirely upon their will, if they want to see
the stars move from the right to the left or 46
verst.

It is the line passing through the zenith of a man
standing on the equator which Brahmagupta means
| when he says that it is divided into sixty parts (v. p.

279).


The authors of the Puranas represent heaven as a


204 41811201715 1.


dome or cupola standing on earth and resting, and the
stars as beings which wander individually from east to
west. How could these men have any idea of the
second motion? And if they really had such an idea,
how could an opponent of the same class of men con-
cede the possibility that one and the same thing indi-
vidually moves in two different directions ?

We shall here communicate what we know of their
theories, although we are aware that the reader will
not derive any profit from them, since they are simply
useless.

The Matsya-Purdna says: “The sun and the stars
pass along southward as rapidly as an arrow revoly-
ing round Meru. The sun revolves round something
like a beam, the end of which is burning when its
revolution is very rapid. ‘The sun does not really
disappear (during the night); he is then invisible only
to some people, to some of the inhabitants 01 the four
cities on the four sides of Meru. He revolves round
Meru, starting from the north side of Mount Lokaloka ;
he does not pass beyond Lokaloka, nor illuminate its
south side. He is invisible during the night, because
he is so far away. Man can see him at a distance
of 1000 yojana, but when he is so far away, a small
object sufficiently near to the eye can render him
invisible to the spectator.

“When the sun stands in the 00 of Pushkara-
Dvipa, he moves along the distance of one-thirtieth
part of the earth in three-fifths of an hour. In so
much time he traverses 21 laksha and 50,000 yojana,
1.6. 2,150,000 yojana. Then he turns to the north, and
the distance he traverses becomes thrice as large. In
consequence, the day becomes long. The distance which
the sun traverses in a southern day is 9 Koti and 10,045
yojana. When he then returns to the north and revolves
round Kshira, v.e. the Milky Way, his daily march is
1 71011 and 21 laksha yojana.”


Quotation
from the
Matsya-
Purdna.


0


10 on
the theory of
* the Matsya-
Purdna,


Page 143.


CHAPTER XXVII. 285


Now we ask the reader to consider how confused
these expressions are. If the author of the Mats) dit
Purdna says “the stars pass as rapidly as an arrow,
.ع‎ we take this for a hyperbole intended for unedu-
cated people; but we must state that the arrow-like
motion of the stars is not peculiar to the south to the
exclusion of the north. There are limits both in the
north and south whence the sun returns, and the time
of the sun’s passing from the southern limit to the
northern is equal to the time of his passing from the
northern lmit to the southern. Therefore his motion
northward has the same right of being described as as
rapid asan arrow. Herein, however, lies a hint of the
theological opinion of the author regarding the north
pole, for he thinks the north is the above and the south
the below. Hence the stars glide down to the south
like children on a see-saw plank.

If, however, the author hereby means the second
motion, whilst in reality it is the first, we must state
that the stars in the second motion do not revolve round
Meru, and that the plane of this motion is inclined
towards the horizon of Meru by one-twelfth of the circle.

Further, how far-fetched is his simile in which he
connects the motion of the sun with a burning beam!
If we held the opinion that the sun moves as an un-
interrupted round collar, his simile would be useful
in so far as it refutes such an opinion. But as we
consider the sun as a body, as it were, standing in
heaven, his simile is meaningless. And if he simply
means to say that the sun describes a round circle, his
comparing the sun to a burning beam is quite super-
fluous, because a stone tied to the end of a cord describes
a similar circle if it is made to revolve round the head
(there being no necessity for describing it as burning).

That the sun rises over some people and sets over
others, as he describes it, is true; but here, too, he is
not free from his theological opinions. This is shown


285 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


by his mention of the mountain Lokaloka and his re-
mark that the rays of the sun fall on it, on its human
or north side, not on its wld or south side.

Further, the sun is not hidden during the night on
account of his great distance, but because he is covered
by something—by the earth according to us, by Mount
Meru according to the author of the Matsya-Purdna.
He imagines that the sun marches round Meru, whilst
we are on one of its sides. In consequence we are in
a varying distance from the sun’s path. That this is
originally his opinion is confirmed by the later follow-
ing remarks. That the sun is invisible during the night
has nothing whatever to do with his distance from us.

The numbers which the author of the Matsya-Purdna
mentions I hold to be corrupt, as they are not borne
out by any calculation. He represents the path of the
sun in the north as threefold that in the south, and
makes this the cause of the difference of the length of
the day. Whilst in reality the sum of day and night is
always identical, and day and night in north and south
stand in a constant relation to each other, it seems
necessary that we should refer his remarks to a latitude
where the summer-day is 45 ghatikd, the winter-day
15 ghatikd long. |

Further, his remark that the sun hastens in the north
(marches there more rapidly than in the south), re-
quires to be proved. The places of northern latitude
have meridians not very distant from each other, be-
cause of their being near to the pole, whilst the
meridians’ become more distant from each other the
nearer they-are to the equator. If, now, the sun hastens
in traversing a smaller distance, he wants less time
than for traversing the greater distance, more especially
if on this greater Yistance his march is slackening.
In reality the opposite is the case.

By his phrase when the sun revolves above Pushkara-
dvipa (p. 284) is meant the 1126 of the winter solstice.


Quotation
from the
Vayu-Pur-
ana.


Page 144.


Quotation
from the
Vishnu- 4
Dharma.


CHAR VE REX XVI, 287


According to him, on this line the day must be longer
than in any other place, whether it be the summer
solstice or another. All this is unintelligible.

Similar notions are also found in the Védyu-Purdna,
viz. “that the day in the south is twelve muhirta, in
the north eighteen, and that the sun between south and
north has a declination of 17,221 yojana in 183 days, ie.
94(+°) yojana for each day.”

One muhirta is equal to four-fifths of an hour (=48
minutes). The sentence of the Vdayu-Purdna applies
to a latitude where the longest day is 142 hours.

As regards the numbers of the yojanas mentioned
by the Vdyu-Purdna, the author means evidently the
portio of the double declination of the sphere. Accord-
ing to him, the declination is twenty-four degrees;
therefore the yojanas of the whole sphere would be
129,1574. And the days in which the sun traverses
the double declination are half the solar year, no regard
being had to the fractions of days, which are nearly
five-eighths of a day.

Further, the Vdyu-Purdna says “that the sun in the
north marches slowly during the day and rapidly dur-
ing the night, and in the south vice versd. Therefore
the day is long in the north, even as much as eighteen
muhirta.’ ‘This is merely the language of a person
who has not the slightest knowledge of the eastern
motion of the sun, and is not able to measure a day’s
arc by observation.

The Vishnu-Dharma says: “The orbit of the Great
Bear lies under the pole; under it the orbit of Saturn ;
then that of Jupiter; next Mars, the Sun, Venus,
Mercury, and the Moon. They rotate towards the
east like a mill, in a uniform kind of motion which is
peculiar to each star, some of them moving rapidly,
others slowly. Death and life repeat themselves on
them from eternity thousands of times.”

If you examine this statement according to scientific


288 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


principles, you will find that it is confused. Conceding
that the Great Bear is wnder the pole and that the
place of the pole is absolute height, the Great Bear
lies below the zenith of the inhabitants of Meru. In
this statement he is right, but he is mistaken with
regard to the planets. For the word below is, accord-
ing to him, to be understood so as to mean a greater or
smaller distance from the earth; and thus taken, his
statement (regarding the distances of the planets from
the earth) is not correct, unless we suppose that Saturn
has, of all planets, the greatest declination from the
equator, the next greatest Jupiter, then Mars, the Sun,
Venus, .عن‎ and that at the same time this amount of
their declination is a constant one. ‘This, however,
does not correspond to reality.

If we take the sum total of the whole statement of
the Vishnu-Dharma, the author is right in so far as the
fixed stars are higher than the planets, but he is wrong
in so far as the pole is not higher than the fixed stars.

The mill-like rotation of the planets is the /irst
motion towards the west, not the second motion indicated
by the author. According to him, the planets are the
spirits of individuals who have gained exaltation by
their merits, and who have returned to it after the end
of their life in a human shape. According to my
opinion, the author uses a number in the words
thousands of times (p. 287), either because he wanted
to intimate that their existence is an existence in our
meaning of the term, an evolution out of the dvvapus
into the وهم‎ (hence something finite, subject to
numeration or determination by measure), or because
he meant to indicate that some of those spirits obtain
moksha, others not. Hence their number is liable to
a more or less, and everything of this description is of
a finite nature. .


002050-


CHAPTER XXVIII.
ON THE DEFINITION OF THE TEN DIRECTIONS.


THE extension of bodies in space is in three directions:
length, breadth, and depth or height. The path of any
real direction, not an imaginary one, is limited; there-
fore the lines representing these three paths are limited,
and their six end-points or limits are the directions.
If you imagine an animal in the centre of these lines,
1.6. Where they cut each other, which turns its face
towards one of them, the directions with relation to
the animal are before, behind, right, left, above, and
below.

If these directions are used in relation to the world,
they acquire new names. As the rising and setting of page x45.
the heavenly bodies depend upon the horizon and the
jirst motion becomes apparent by the horizon, it is the
most convenient to determine the directions by the
horizon. The four directions, east, west, north, south
(corresponding to before, behind, left, and right), are
generally known, but the directions which lie be-
tween each two of these are less known. These
make eight directions, and, together with above and
below, which do not need any further explanation, ten
directions.

_ The Greeks determined the directions by the rising
and setting places of the zodiacal signs, brought them
into relation to the winds, and 50 obtained sixteen
directions.

VOL, I. 0


200 ALBERUNI’S INDIA,


Also the Arabs determined the directions by the
blowing-points of the winds. Any wind blowing be-
tween two cardinal winds they called in general Nakbd.
Only in rare cases they are called by special names of
their own.

The Hindus, in giving names to the directions, have
not taken any notice of the blowing of a wind; they
simply call the four cardinal directions, as well as the
secondary directions between them, by separate names.
So they have eight directions in the horizontal plane, —
as exhibited by the following diagram :—


Dakshina.


Madhyadesa,


1.0.
the middle country.


Uttara.


Besides there are two directions more for the two
poles of the horizontal plane, the above and below,
the former being called Upari, the second Adhas and
Tala.

These directions, and those in use among other
nations, are based on general consent. Since the hori-
zon is divided by innumerable circles, the directions
also proceeding from its centre are innumerable. The


Page 146.


CHAPTER XXVIII. 291


two ends of every possible diameter may be considered
as before and behind, and therefore the two ends of the
diameter cutting the former at right angles (and lying
in the same plane) are right and left.

The Hindus can never speak of anything, be it an
object of the intellect or of imagination, without. repre-
senting it as a personification, an individual. They at
once marry him, make him celebrate marriage, make his
wife become pregnant and give birth to something. So,
too, in this case. The Vrshnu-Dharma relates that
Atri, the star who rules the stars of the Great Bear,
married the directions, represented as one person, though
they are eight in number, and that from her the moon
was born.

Another author relates: Dakska, 2.6. Prajdpati, mar-
ried Dharma, 2.6. the reward, to ten of his daughters, 2.
the ten directions. From one of them he had many
children. She was called Vasu, and her children the
Vasus. One of them was the moon.

No doubt our people, the Muslims, will laugh at such
a birth ofthe moon. But I give them still more of this
stuff. Thus, eg. they relate: The sun, the son of Kas-
yapa and of Aditya, his wife, was born in the sixth Man-
vantara on the lunar station Visakha ; the moon, the son
of Dharma, was born on the station Krittika; Mars, the
son of Prajipati, on Pirvashidha; Mercury, the son of
the moon, on Dhanishth’; Jupiter, the son of Angiras,
on Pirvaphalguni; Venus, the daughter of 181311211,
Pushya; Saturn on Revati; the Bearer of the Tail, the
son of Yama, the angel of death, on Aglesha, and the
Head on Revati.

According to their custom, the Hindus attribute
certain dominants to the eight directions in the
horizontal plane, which we exhibit in the following
table س:‎


202 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


Their Dominants. |The Directions.|! Their Dominants. | The Directions.


Lndta. ee / East. Varuna,. . West.
The Fire, . S.E. Vaytye oy! oe NEV.
Y ATna, ال‎ South. Kuru? ive North.
Pritht; pee S.W. Mahédeva, . N.E.


The Hindus construct a figure of these eight direc-
tions, called Réhucakra, i.e. the figure of the Head, by
means of which they try to gain an omen or prophecy
for hazard-playing. It is the following diagram :—


South.


JUPITER


اننا


West.


North.


The figure is used in this way: First, you must know
the dominant of the day in question, and its place in
the present figure. Next you must know that one of
the eight parts of the day in which you happen to be.
These eighths are counted on the lines, beginning with


CHAPTER XXVIII. 293


the dominant of the day, in uninterrupted succession
from east to south and west. Thus you find the domi-
nant of the eighth in question. If, e9. you want to
know the fifth eighth of Thursday whilst Jupiter is the
dominus diet in the south, and the line proceeding from
the south terminates in north-west, we find that the
dominant of the first eighth is Jupiter, that of the
second is Saturn, that of the third the sun, that of the
fourth the moon, and that of the fifth Mercury in the
north. In this way you go on counting the eighths
through the day and the night till the end of the
vuxOnuepov. When thus the direction of the eighth of
the day in which you are has been found, it is considered page 147.
_ by them as Rahu; and when sitting down to play, you
must place yourself so that you have this direction at
your back. Then you will win, according to their belief.
It is no affair of the reader to despise a man who, on
account of such an omen, in a variety of games stakes
all his chances on one cast of the dice. Suffice it to
leave to him the responsibility of his dice-playing.


( 294 )


CHAPTER XXIX.


DEFINITION OF THE INHABITABLE EARTH ACCORDING
TO THE HINDUS.


In the book of the Rishi Bhuvanakoga we read that the


The Rishi
Bhuvana-


koga on the inhabitable world stretches from Himavant towards the


south, and is called Bharata-varsha, so called from a
man, Bharata, who ruled over them and provided for
them. The inhabitants of this ofcovyévn are those to


whom alone reward and punishment in another life


are destined. It is divided into nine parts, called Vava-
khanda-prathama, 8.6. the primary nine parts, Between
each two parts there is a sea, which they traverse from
one khanda to the other. The breadth of the inhabit-
able world from north to south is 1000 yojana.

By Himavant the author means the northern moun- ~
tains, where the world, in consequence of the cold,
ceases to be inhabitable. So all civilisation must of
necessity be south of these mountains.

His words, that the inhabitants are subject to reward
and punishment, indicate that there are other people
not subject to it. These beings he must either raise
from the degree of man to that of angels, who, in con-
sequence of the simplicity of the elements they are
composed of and of the purity of their nature, never
disobey a divine order, being always willing to worship ;
or he must degrade them to the degree of irrational
animals. According to him, therefore, there are no
human beings outside the olxovpévn (i.e. Bharata-
varsha).


inhabitable
world.


CHAPTER: 21 205


Bharatavarsha is not India alone, as Hindus think,
according to whom their country is the world, and their
race the only race of mankind; for India is not
traversed by an ocean separating one khanda from the
other. Further, they do not identify these khanda with
the dvipas, for the author says that on those seas
people pass from one shore to the other. Further,
it follows from his statement that all the inhabitants
of the earth and the Hindus are subject to reward
and punishment, that they are one great religious
community.

The nine parts are called Prathama, 1.6. primary ones,
because they also divide India alone into nine parts.
So the division of the oixoupévn is a primary one, but
the division of Bharatavarsha a secondary one. Be-
sides, there is still a third division into nine parts, as
their astrologers divide each country into nine parts
when they try to find the lucky and unlucky places
in it.

We find a similar tradition in the Vdyu-Purdna, viz. Quotation
that “the centre of Jambu-dvipa is called Bharata- Purina.’
varsha, which means those who acquire something and
nourish themselves. With them there are the four 0
They are subject to reward and punishment; and
Himavant les to the north of the country. It is
divided into nine parts, and between them there are
navigable seas. Its leneth is 9000 yojana, its breadth
1000; and because the country is also called Sam-
nara (?), each ruler who rules it is called Samnara (?).
The shape of its nine parts is as follows.”

Then the author begins to describe the mountains in
the khanda between the east and north, and the rivers
which rise there, but he does not go beyond this de-
scription. Thereby he gives us to understand that,
according to his opinion, this khanda is the otcoupévn. Page 148.
But he contradicts himself in another place, where he


206 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


says that Jambu-dvipa is the centre among the Nava-
khanda-prathama, and the others lie towards the eight
directions. There are angels on them, men, animals,
and plants. By these words he seems to mean the
dvipas.

If the breadth of the oixovyévn is 1000 yojana,
its length must be nearly 2800.

Further, the Vadyu-Purdna mentions the cities and
countries which lie in each direction. We shall exhibit
them in tables, together with similar information from
other sources, for this method renders the study of the
subject easier than any other. |

Here follows a diagram representing the division of
Bharatavarsha into nine parts.


South.
Nagadvipa. Oo اس‎ Tamravarna.
Gabhastimat.


Indradvipa or


3 ise
© Saumya. Madhyadéga, 2.6. | Kaserumat. -
= the middle country. 3
Gandharva. NBO
North.


We have already heretofore mentioned that that part
of the earth in which the olxovyévn lies resembles a
tortoise, because its borders are round, because it rises
above the water and is surrounded by the water, and
because it has a globular convexity on its surface.
However, there is a possibility that the origin of the
name is this, that their astronomers and astrologers
divide the directions according to the lunar stations.


On the
figure
Ktirma-
cakra.


CHAPTER XXIX. 297


Therefore the country, too, is divided according to the
lunar stations, and the figure which represents this
division is similar to a tortoise. Therefore it is called
| Kérma-cakra, i.e. the tortoise-circle or the tortoise-
shape. The following diagram is from the Sarihitd of


| Varahamihira,
! Sours,
|
Sm ع‎ A
1S تع جم ع‎
bag a8 se
W 7 > a كين‎ “<A
%, % 5 SS Ss
0 95 قا‎ Qs 2) fo)
“Gye 0g AS SS
Gs 5 0
1 Re : 37
7 5
يم‎ 0
ع‎ Jyeshthd. 04155831 نع‎
5 011 *05141811113 5
& Parvashadha. ‘eipry 8
& <A
On Ay? ft
era Bis oy
og عت‎ 3 .
2 Type بم بع‎ £0,
oe Seth es pe
KP” Dr الج‎ Tana} te Lo @
XS) Wey 8.3 2 %, >,
oo ae به‎
om ies KA)
wy 82 5 2
ع 8 ف‎
بم نب يي‎
ane
در ين.‎ Ay
20


Varahamihira calls each of the Nava-khanda a varga, Page x40.
1 he division
He says: “By them (the vargas) Bharatavarsha, 4.6, of Bharata-


varsha


half of the world, is divided into nine parts, the cen- according to
tral one, the eastern, &c.” Then he passes to the south, hira ال‎

and thus round the whole horizon. That he under-

stands by Bharatavarsha India alone is indicated by


his saying that each varga has a region, the king of


208 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


which is killed when some mishap befalls it. So


belong

To the 1st or central varga, the region Paficala.
J) 2G. Vara, é , 7 Magadha.
» 3d varga, : ١ + Kalinga.
» 4th varga, ; : 5 Avanti, 2.6. Ujain.
75 5th varga, : : 7 Ananta.
» Oth varga, : : 7 Sindhu and Sauvira.
a 7th varga, : : 7 Harahaura.
» 8th varga, ; ‘ 7 Madura.
a oth varga, : : 7 Kulinda.


All these countries are parts of India proper.

Most of the names of countries under which they
appear in this context are not those by which they are
now generally known. Utpala,a native of Kashmir,
says in his commentary on the book Samhitdé regarding
this subject: “The names of countries change, and
particularly in the yugas. So Multan was originally
called Kaésyapapura, then Harnsapura, then Bagapura,
then Simbhapura, and then Mudalasthdna, Le. the origi-
nal place, for mila means root, origin, and ¢éna means
place.”

A yuga is along space of time, but names change
rapidly, when, for instance, a foreign nation with a
different language occupies a country. Their tongues
frequently mangle the words, and thus transfer them into
their own language, as is, e.g. the custom of the Greeks.
Either they keep the original meaning of the names, and
try a sort of translation, but then they undergo certain
changes. So the city of Shash, which has its name from
the Turkish language, where it is called Tash-kand, 6.
stone-city, 15 called stone-tower in the book yewypadia.
In this way new names spring up as translations of
older ones. Or, secondly, the barbarians adopt and
keep the local names, but with such sounds and in such
forms as are adapted to their toncues, as the Arabs do
in Arabising foreign names, which become disfigured in


On the
change of
geographi-
eal names.


Page 150.


CHAPTER XXIX. 299


their mouth: eg. Bishang they call in their books
11150117, and Sakilkand they call in their revenue-books
Farfaza (sic). However, what is more curious and
strange is this, that sometimes one and the same lan-
guage changes in the mouth of the same people who
speak it, in consequence of which strange and uncouth
forms of words spring up, not intelligible save to him
who discards every rule of the language. And such
changes are brought about in afew years, without there
being any stringent cause or necessity for it. Of course,
in all of this the Hindus are actuated by the desire to
have as many names as possible, and to practise on them
the rules and arts of their etymology, and they glory in
the enormous copiousness of their language which they
obtain by such means.

The following names of countries, which we have
taken from the Vadyu-Purdna, are arranged according to
the four directions, whilst the names taken from the
Samhitd are arranged according to the eight directions.
All these names are of that kind which we have here
described (ae. they are not the names now in general
use). We exhibit them in the following tables :—


The single countries of the middle realm, according to

the Vayu-Purana.

Kuru, 288618, Salva, Jangala, Stirasena, Bhadra-
kara (!), Bodha, Pathesvara, Vatsa, Kisadya, Kulya,
Kuntala, Kasi, Kogala, Arthaydshava (?), Puhlinga (),
Mashaka (!), Vrika.

The people in the east :—

Andhra, Vika, Mudrakaraka(?), Pratragira (?), Vahir-
gira, Prathanga (?), Vangeya, Malava (!), Malavartika,
Prdgjyotisha, Munda, Abika(?), Tamraliptika, Mala,
Magadha, Govinda (Gonanda ?).

The people in the south :—

Pandya, Kerala, Caulya, Kulya, Setuka, Mashika,
Rumana (?), Vanavasika, Maharashtra, Mahisha, Ka-


300 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


linga, Abhira, fshika, Atavya, Savara (2), Pulindra,
Vindhyamfli, Vaidarbha, Dandaka, Milika (!), Asmaka,
Naitika (!), Bhogavardhana, Kuntala, Andhra, Udbhira,
Nalaka, Alika, Dakshinatya, Vaidega, Strpakaraka,
Kolavana, Durga, Tillita (?), Puleya, Krala (!), Rtitpaka,
Tamasa, Tarfipana (7), Karaskara, Nasikya, Uttaranar-
mada, Bhanukacchra (?), Maheya, Saraswata (2), Kac-
chiya, Surashtra, Anartta, Hudvuda (?).

The people in the west :—

Malada (?), Kartisha, Mekala, Utkala, Uttamarna,
Bagarna(?), Bhoja, Kishkinda, Kosala, Traipura, Vaidika,
Tharpura (7), Tumbura, Shattumana (?), Padha, Kar-
napravarana (!), Hina, Darva, Hthaka )!(, Trigartta,
Malava, Kirata, Tamara.

The people in the north :—

Vahlika (!), VAadha, Vana (?), Abhira, Kalatoyaka,
Aparanta (?), Pahlava, Carmakhandika, Gandhara, Ya-
vana, Sindhu, Sauvira, 42.6. Multan and Jahrawéar,
Madhra (?), Saka, Drihala (?), Litta (Kulinda), Malla (2),
Kodara (?), Atreya, Bharadva, Jangala, Daseruka (1),
Lampaka, 181210123 (?), 501113, ل‎


The names of the countries for the tortorse-figure, as
taken from the Samhita of Vardhamihira.


I. The names of the countries in the centre of the
realm :—

Bhadra, Ari, Meda, Mandavya, Salvani, Pojjihana,
Maru, Vatsa, Ghosha, the valley of the Yamuna, Saras-
vata, Matsya, Mathura, Kopa, Jyotisha, Dharmaranya,
Sfirasena, Gauragriva, Uddehika near Bazina, Pandu,
Guda = Tanéshar, Asvattha, Paficila, SAketa, Kanka,
Kuru=Tanéshar, Kalkoti, Kukura, Pariyatra, Audum-
bara, Kapishthala, Gaja.

II. The names of the countries in the east :-—

Afijana, Vrishabadhvaja, Padma-Tulya (sic), Vya-
ghramukha, 2.e. people with tiger-faces, Suhma, Kar-
vata, Candrapura, Stirpakarna, i.c. people with ears like


age 151.


Page 152.


Page 153.


Page 154.


Page 155.


CHAPTER XXIX, 301


sieves, Khasha, Magadha, Mount Sibira, Mithila, Sama-
tata, Odra, ASvavadana, 2.e. people with horse-faces,
Dantura, 4.6. people with long teeth, Pragjyotisha,
Lohitya, Krira-samudra (sic), i.e. the milk-sea, Puru-
shada, Udayagiri, 2.64. the mountain of sunrise, Bhadra,
Gauraka, Paundra, Utkala, Kasi, Mekala, Ambashtha,
Ekapada, 2.6. the one-footed people, Tamaliptik4, Kau-
salaka, Vardhamana.

111. The names of the countries of the south-east
(Agneya) :-—

Kosala, Kalinga, Vanga, Upavanga, 1100 Anga,
Saulika, Vidarbha, Vatsa, Andhra, Colika (?), 0000
karna, 4.4. people whose ears are directed upwards,
Vrisha, Nalikera, Carmadvipa, the mountain Vindhya,
Tripuri, Smagrudhara, Hemaktitya, Vydlacriva, ie.
people whose bosoms are snakes, Mahagriva, 4.6. people
who have wide bosoms, Kishkindha, the country of the
monkeys, Kandakasthala, Nishida, Rashtra, ب‎
Purika, Nagnaparna, Savara.

IV. The names of the countries in the south :—

Lanka, 2.6. the cupola of the earth, Kalajina, Sairi-
kirna (?), Talikata, Girnagara, Malaya, Dardura, Ma-
hendra, Malndya, Bharukaccha, Kankata, Tankana,
Vanavasi on the coast, Sibika, Phanik4ra, Konkana
near the sea, Abhira, Akara, Ven4 a river, Avanti, ie.
the city of Ujain, Dasapura, Gonarda, Keralaka, Karnata,
Mahatavi, Citraktita, Nasikya, Kollagiri, Cola, Kraun-
cadvipa, Jatadhara, Kauverya, Rishyamtika, Vaidtirya,
Sankha, Mukta, Atri, Varicara, Jarmapattana (ste),
Dvipa, Ganardjya, Krishnavaidtrya, Sibika, Stryddri,
Kusumanaga, Tumbavana, Karmaneyaka, Yamyodadhi,
Tapasdsrama, Rishika, Kafici, Marucipattana, Divarsa (!),
Simhala, Rishabha, Baladevapattana, Dandakavana,
Timingildgana (?), Bhadra, Kaccha, Kufijaradari, Tamra-
parna.

V. The names of the countries in the south-west
(Narita) -—


302 ALBERUNDS INDIA.


Kamboja, Sindhu, Sauvira, 1.6. Multan and Jahravar,
Vadavamukha, Aravimbashtha, Kapila, Paragava, ie.
the Persians, Sidra, Barbara, 111818, Khanda, Kravya,
Abhira, Cafictika, Hemagiri, Sindhu, KAlaka, Raivataka,
Surishtra, Badara, Dramida, Maharnava, Narimukha,
é.e. men with women’s faces, 4.4 the Turks, Anarta,
Phenagiri, Yavana, 4.6. the Greeks, Maraka, Karnapra-
varana.

VI. The names of the countries in the west :—

Manimin, Meghavan, Vanaugha, Astagiri, 4.4. the
country of sunset, Aparantaka, Santika, Haihaya, Pra-
gastadri, Vokkana, Paficanada, 7.e. the union of the five
rivers, Mathara, Parata, Tarakruti (?), Jringa, Vaisya,
Kanaka, Saka, Mleccha, 2.64. the Arabs.

VII. The names of the countries in the north-west
(Vayava) :-—

Mandavya, Tukhara, Talahala, Madra, Asmaka, Kult-
talahada, Strirajya, 4.6. women amongst whom no man
dwells longer than half a year, Nrisimmhavana, 2.64. people
with lion-faces, Khastha, 2.6. people who are born from
the trees, hanging on them by the navel-strings, Venu-_
mati (?), 2.6. Tirmidh, Phalgulu, Guruha, Marukucca,
Carmaranga, 4.6. people with coloured skins, Ekavilo-
cana, 4.6. the one-eyed men, Stlika, Dirghagriva, ze.
people with long bosoms, which means with long necks,
Dirghamukha, 2.6. people with long faces, Dirghakeéga,
0.6. people with long hair.

VIII. The names of the countries in the north ب:‎

Kailasa, Himavant, Vasumant, Giri, Dhanushman (!),
12.6. the people with bows, Kraufica, Meru, Kurava,
Uttarakurava, Kshudramina, Kaikaya, Vasati, Yamuna,
1.6. a kind of Greeks, Bhogaprastha, Arjunayana, Ag-
nitya, Adaréga, Antardvipa, Trigarta, Turaganana, 1.4,
people with horse-faces, Svamukha, 02 people with
dog-faces, KeSadhara, Capitanasika, 4.64. flat-noses, D4-
sera, Kavatadhana, Saradhana, Takshasila, 2.6. Marikala,
Pushkalavatt, 4.6. Ptikala, Kailavata, Kanthadhana,


Page x56.


Page 157.


On Romaka,
Yamakoti,
and Siddha-
pura.


CHAPTER XXIX.


303
Ambara, Madraka, Malava, Paurava, Kacchara, Danda,
Pingalaka, Manahala, Hiina, Kohala, Sataka, Mandavya,
Bhiitapura, Gandhara, nan Hematala, Rajanya,
Khajara, Yaudheya, Dasameya, Sydmika, Kshema-
dhiirta (?).

IX. The names of the countries in the north-east
(Aisina) :—

Meru, Kanashtharajya, Pasgupala, Kira, Kasmira,
Abhi, Sarada, Tangana, Kultita, Sairindha, RAshtra,
Brahmapura, inane magia Vanarajya, Kirata, Cina,
Kauninda, Bhalla, Palola, Jatasura, Kunatha, Khasha,
Ghosha, Kucika, Ekacarana, 2.6. the one-footed people,
Anuvisva, Suvarnabhtimi, ze. the gold land, Arvasu-
dhana (s7c), Nandavishtha, Paurava, Ciranivasana, Trine-
tra, 2.6. people with three eyes, Pufijadri, Gandharva.


Hindu astronomers determine the longitude of the
inhabitable world by Lanka, which lies in its centre on
the equator, whilst Yamakoti hes on its east, Romaka
on its west, and Siddhapura on that part of the equator
which is diametrically opposed to Lanka. Their remarks
on the rising and setting of the heavenly bodies show
that Yamakoti and Rtim are distant from each other
by half a circle. It seems that they assign the countries
of the West (ze. North Africa) to Rim or the Roman
Empire, because the Rtiim or Byzantine Greeks occupy
the opposite shores of the same sea (the Mediterranean) ;
for the Roman Empire has much northern latitude and
penetrates high into the north. No part of it stretches
far southward, and, of course, nowhere does it reach
the equator, as the Hindus say with regard to Romaka.

We shall here speak no more of Lanka (as we are
going to treat of it in a separate chapter). Yamakoti
is, Epeardine to Ya‘ktib and Alfazari, the country where
is the city Tdra within a sea. I have not found the


slightest trace of this name in Indian literature. As


kott means castle and Yama is the angel of death, the


304 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


word reminds me of Kanediz, which, according to the
Persians, had been built by 1211803 or Jam in the
most remote east, behind the sea. Kaikhusrau tra-
versed the sea to Kangdiz when following the traces of
Afrasiib the Turk, and there he went at the time of.
his anchorite life and expatriation. For diz means in
Persian castle, as 1016 in the Indian language. Abt-
Ma‘shar of Balkh has based his geographical canon on
Kanediz as the o° of longitude or first meridian.

How the Hindus came to suppose the existence of
Siddhapura I do not know, for they believe, like our-
selves, that behind the inhabited half-circle there is
nothing but unnavigable seas.

In what way the Hindus determine the latitude of
a place has not come to our knowledge. That the
longitude of the inhabitable world is a half-circle is a
far-spread theory among their astronomers; they differ
(from Western astronomers) only as to the point which
is to be its beginning. If we explain the theory of the
Hindus as far as we understand it, their beginning of
longitude is Ujain, which they consider as the eastern
limit of one quarter (of the o/covyévn), whilst the limit
of the second quarter lies in the west at some distance
from the end of civilisation, as we shall hereafter ex-
plain in the chapter about the difference of the longi-
tudes of two places,

The theory of the Western astronomers on this point
is adouble one. Some adopt as the beginning of longi-


‘tude the shore of the (Atlantic) ocean, and they ex-


tend the first quarter thence as far as the environs of
Balkh. Now, according to this theory, things have been
united which have no connection with each other. So
Shaptirkan and Ujain are placed on the same meridian.
A theory which so httle corresponds to reality is quite
valueless. Others adopt the 15101105 of the Happy Ones
as the beginning of longitude, and the quarter of the
oixoupevy they extend thence as far as the neighbour-


The meri-
dian of
Ujain the
first meri-
dian.


Page 158.


Other first
meridians
used by


Western as-


tronomers.


CHAPTER XXIX., 305


hood of Jurjin and Nishaptir. Both these theories are
totally different from that of the Hindus. This subject,
however, shall be more accurately investigated in a sub-
sequent chapter (p. 311).

If I, by the grace of God, shall live long enough, I
shall devote a special treatise to the longitude of Nisha-
ptir, where this subject shall be thoroughly inquired
into.


VOL, I. U


0


CHAPTER XXX.
ON LANKA, OR THE CUPOLA OF THE EARTH.


THE midst of the inhabitable world, of its longitudinal
extension from east to west on the equator, is by the
astronomers (of the Muslims) called the cupola of the
earth, and the great circle which passes through the
pole and this point of the equator is called the merzdian
of the cupola. We must, however, observe that whatever
may be the natural form of the earth, there is no place
on it which to the exclusion of others deserves the
name of acupola; that this term is only a metaphorical
one to denote a point from which the two ends of the
inhabitable world in east and west are equidistant,
comparable to the top of a cupola or a tent, as all
things hanging down from this top (tent-ropes or walls)
have the same length, and their lower ends the same
distances therefrom. But the Hindus never call this
point by a term that in our language must be inter-
preted by cupola; they only say that Lanka is between
the two ends of the inhabitable world and without


On the
meaning of

’ the term
cupola of the
earth.


The story of latitude. There Ravana, the demon, fortified him-


self when he had carried off the wife of Rama, the
son of Dagaratha. His labyrinthine fortress is called
درو‎ ws (?), whilst in our (Muslim) countries it is
called Yavana-kotv, which has frequently been explained
as Rome.


Rama.


CHAPTER XXX. 307


The following is the plan of the labyrinthine fort-
Tress :—


Door of the road leading to the castle.


Rama attacked Ravana after having crossed the Page 150.

ocean on a dyke of the length of 100 yoyana, which he
had constructed from a mountain in a place called
١ Setubandha, 1.6. bridge of the ocean, east of Ceylon. He
fought with him and killed him, and Réma’s brother
killed the brother of Ravana, as is described in the
story of Rama and Ramayana, Thereupon he broke
the dyke in ten different places by arrow-shots.

According to the Hindus, Lanka is the castle of the on the
demons. It is 30 yojana above the earth, 1.6. 80 far- ae
sakh. Its length from east to west is 100 yajana ; its
breadth from north to south is the same as the height
(2.e. thirty).

It is on account of Lanké and the island of Vadava-
mukha that the Hindus consider the south as foreboding
evil, In no work of piety do they direct themselves


308 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


southward or walk southward. The south occurs only
in connection with impious actions.
The Art The line on which the astronomical calculations are
"based (as 0° of longitude), which passes in a straight
line from Lanka to Meru, passes—
(1.) Through the city of Ujain (Ujjayini) in Malava
(Malva).
(2.) Through the neighbourhood of the fortress Rohi-
taka in the district of Mult&n, which is now deserted.
(3.) Through Kurukshetra, 2.64. the plain of Taneshar
(Sthanesvara), in the centre of their country.
(4.) Through the river Yamuna, on which the city of
Mathura is situated.
(5.) Through the mountains of the Himavant, which
are covered with everlasting snow, and where the
rivers of their country rise. Behind them hes Mount


Meru.
The situa- The city of Ujain, which in the tables of the longi-
1011 0 ٠. . 2 .
Ujain, tudes of places is mentioned as Uzain, and as situated


on the sea, is in reality 100 yojana distant from the sea.
Some undiscriminating Muslim astronomer has uttered
the opinion that Ujain lies on the meridian of Al-
shabtrkan in Al-jtizajan; but such is not the case, for
it lies by many degrees of the equator more to the east
than Al-shabtrkan. There is some confusion about the
longitude of Ujain, particularly among such (Muslim)
astronomers as mix up with each other the different
opinions about the first degree of longitude both in east
and west, and are unable to distinguish them properly.

No sailor who has traversed the ocean round the

The author's place which is ascribed to Lank&, and has travelled in —


conjecture


aboutLaika that direction, has ever given such an account of it as
pits, tallies with the traditions of the Hindus or resembles —
them. In fact, there is no tradition which makes the —
thing appear to us more possible (than it is according
to the reports of the Hindus), The name Lanka, how-


ever, makes me think of something entirely different, —


A certain
wind as the
cause of
small-pox.


Page 160.


CHAPTER XXX. 309


viz. that the clove is called lavang, because it is im-
ported from a country called Langa. According to the
uniform report of all sailors, the ships which are sent
to this country land their cargo in boats, viz. ancient
Western denars and various kinds of merchandise,
striped Indian cloth, salt, and other usual articles of
trade. These wares are deposited on the shore on
leather sheets, each of which is marked with the name
of its owner. Thereupon the merchants retire to their
- ships. On the following day they find the sheets
٠ covered with cloves by way of payment, little or much,
as the natives happen to own.

The people with whom this trade is carried on are
demons according to some, savage men according to
others.

The Hindus who are the neighbours of those regions
(of Lanka) believe that the small-pox is a wind blowing
from the island of Lank& towards the continent to carry
off souls. According to one report, some men warn
people beforehand of the blowing of this wind, and can
exactly tell at what times it will reach the different
_ parts of the country. After the small-pox has broken
out, they recognise from certain signs whether it is
virulent or not. Against the virulent small-pox they
use a method of treatment by which they destroy only
one single limb of the body, but do not kill. They
use as medicine cloves, which they give to the patient
to drink, together with gold-dust; and, besides, the
males tie the cloves, which are similar to date-kernels,
to their necks. If these precautions are taken, per-
haps nine people out of ten will be proof against this
malady.

All this makes me think that the Lanka& which the
Hindus mention is identical with the clove-country
Langa, though their descriptions do not tally. How-
ever, there is no communication kept up with the latter,
for people say that when perchance a merchant is lett


310 ALBERUN?S INDIA.


behind on this island, there is no more trace found of
him. And this my conjecture is strengthened by the
fact that, according to the book of Rama and Ramayana,
behind the well-known country of Sindh there are
cannibals. And, on the other hand, it is well known
among all seamen that cannibalism is the cause of the
savagery and bestiality of the inhabitants of the island
of Langabalts.


00511


CHAPTER XXXII.


ON THAT DIFFERENCE OF VARIOUS PLACES WHICH WE
CALL THE DIFFERENCE OF LONGITUDE.


HE who aims at accuracy in this subject must try to on the
determine the distance between the spheres of the meri- 0
dians of the two places in question. Muslim astrono- 0
mers reckon by equatorial times corresponding to the
distance between the two meridians, and. begin to count
from one (the western one) of the two places. The
sum of equatorial minutes which they find is called
the difference between the two longitudes ; for they con-
sider as the longitude of each place the distance of its
meridian from the great 01616 passing through the pole
of the equator, which has been chosen as the limit of
the otxovuévn, and for this first meridian they have
chosen the western (not the eastern) limit of the ot«ov-
.سم‎ It is all the same whether these equatorial tumes,
whatsoever their number for each meridian may be, are
reckoned as 360th parts of a circle, or as its 6oth parts,
so as to correspond to the day-minutes, or as farsakh
or yojana.

The Hindus employ in this subject methods which
do not rest on the same principle as ours. They are
totally different ; and howsoever different they are, it 8
perfectly clear that none of them hits the right mark.
As we (Muslims) note for each place its longitude, the
Hindus note the number of yojanas of its distance from
the meridian of Ujain. And the more to the west the
position of a place is, the greater is the number of


;
5


1 وى mie.‏ تب فوع


312 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


31


yojanas ; the more to the east it is, the smaller is this
number. They call it desdntara, 1.6. the difference between


the places. Further, they multiply the desdntara by ٠


the mean daily motion of the planet (the sun), and
divide the product by 4800. Then the quotient repre-
sents that amount of the motion of the star which
corresponds to the number of yojana in question, 22.
that which must be added to the mean place of the sun,
as it has been found for moon or midnight of Ujain, if
you want to find the longitude of the place in question.

The number which they use as divisor (4800) is the
number of the yojanas of the circumference of the earth,
for the difference between the spheres of the meridians
of the two places stands in the same relation to the
whole circumference of the earth as the mean motion
of the planet (sun) from one place to the other to its
whole daily rotation round the earth,

If the circumference of the earth is 4800 yojanas, the
diameter is nearly 1527; but Pulisa reckons it as 1600,
Brahmagupta as 1581 yojanas, each of which is equal
to eight miles. The same value is given in the astro-
nomical handbook Al-arkand as 1050. This number,
however, is, according to Ibn Tarik, the radius, whilst
the diameter is 2100 yojanas, each yojana being reck-
oned as equal to four miles, and the circumference is
stated as 6596.%. yovanas.

Brahmagupta uses 4800 as the number of yojanas
of the earth’s circumference in his canon AKhanda-
khddyaka, but in the amended edition he uses, instead
of this, the corrected circumference, agreeing with Pulisa.
The correction he propounds is this, that he multiplies
the yojanas of the earth’s circumference by the sines of
the complement of the latitude of the place, and divides
the product by the sinus totus; then the quotient is
the corrected circumference of the earth, or the number
of yojanas of the parallel circle of the place in question.
Sometimes this number is called the collar of the meri-


On the cir-
cumference


of the earth.


Page 161.


Quotations
from the
Khanda-
khadyaka
and the
Karana-
tilaka.


The equa-
tion vyasta-
trairdgika.


CHAPTER XXX f; 215


dian. Hereby people are frequently misled to think
that the 4800 yojanas are the corrected circumference
for the city of Ujain. If we calculate it (according to
Brahmagupta’s correction), we find the latitude of Ujain
to-be 16+ degrees, whilst in reality it is 24 degrees.

The author of the canon Karana-tilaka makes this
correction in the following way. He multiplies the
diameter of the earth by 12 and divides the product
by the equinoctial shadow of the place. The gnomon
stands in the same relation to this shadow as the radius
of the parallel circle of the place to the sine of the lati-
tude of the place, not to the senus totus, Evidently the
author of this method thinks that we have here the
same kind of equation as that which the Hindus call
vyastatrairasika, 1.6. the places with the retrograde motion.
An example of it is the following.

If the price of a harlot of 15 years be, eg. 10 denars,
how much will it be when she is مل‎ years old?

The method is this, that you multiply the first number
by the second (15 X IO = 150), and divide the pro-
duct by the third number (150: 40 = 3#). Then the
quotient or fourth number_is her price when she has
become old, viz. 3 denars.

Now the author of the Karana-tilaka, after having
found that the straight shadow znereases with the lati-
tude, whilst the diameter of the circle decreases, thought,
according to the analogy of the just mentioned calcula-
tion, that between this increase and decrease there is a
certain ratio. Therefore he maintains that the diameter
of the circle decreases, 1.6. becomes gradually smaller
than the diameter of the earth, at the same rate as the
straight shadow increases. Thereupon he calculates the
corrected circumference from the corrected diameter.

After having thus found the longitudinal difference
between two places, he observes a lunar eclipse, and
fixes in day-minutes the difference between the time of
its appearance in the two places. Pulisa multiplies


314 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


these day-minutes by the circumference of the earth,
and divides the product by 60, viz. the minutes (or
6oth parts) of the daily revolution. The quotient,
then, is the number of the yojanas of the distance
between the two places. |

This calculation is correct. The result refers to the
great circle on which Lanka hes.

Brahmagupta calculates in the same manner, save
that he multiplies by 4800. The other details have
already been mentioned.

As far as this, one clearly recognises what the Hindu
astronomers aim at, be their method correct or faulty.
However, we cannot say the same of their calculation of
the desantara from the latitudes of two different places,
which is reported by Alfazari in his canon in the fol-
lowing manner :—

“ Add together the squares of the sines of the lati-
tudes of the two places, and take the root of the sum. -
This root is the portio.

“Further, square the difference of these two sines
and add it to the portio. Multiply the sum by 8 and
divide the product by 377. The quotient, then, is the
distance between the two places, that is to say, according
to a rough calculation.

“Further, multiply the difference between the two
latitudes by the yojanas of the circumference of the
earth and divide the product by 360.”

Evidently this latter calculation is nothing but the
transferring of the difference between the two latitudes
from the measure of degrees and minutes to the mea-
sure of yojanas. Then he proceeds :—

» Now the square of the quotient is substracted from
the square of the roughly calculated distance, and of
the remainder you take the root, which represents the
straight yojanas.”

Evidently the latter number represents the distance
between the spheres of the meridians of the two places


Calculation
of the
desdntara
according to
Alfazari.


Page 162.


The author
criticises
this method.


Another
calculation
of the
degdntara.


CHAPTER XXXI. 315


on the circle of latitude, whilst the roughly calculated
number is the distance between the two places in
longitude.

This method of calculation is found in the astrono-
mical handbooks of the Hindus in conformity with the
account of Alfazari, save in one particular. The here-
mentioned portio is the root of the difference between
the squares of the sines of the two latitudes, not the
sum 01 the squares of the sines of the two latitudes.

But whatever this method may be, it does not hit the
right mark. We have fully explained it in several of
our publications specially devoted to this subject, and
there we have shown that it is impossible to determine
the distance between two places and the difference of
longitude between them by means of their latitudes
alone, and that only in case one of these two things is
known (the distance between two places or the differ-
ence between the longitudes of them), by this and
by means of the two latitudes, the third value can be
found. |

Based on the same principle, the following calcula-


-_ tion has been found, there being no indication by whom


it was invented :—

“Multiply the yoyanas of the distance between two
places by 9, and divide the product by (/acwna) ; the
root of the difference between its square and the square
of the difference of the two latitudes. Divide this
number by 6. Then you get as quotient the number
of day-minutes of the difference of the two longi-
tudes.”

It is clear that the author of this calculation first
takes the distance (between the two places), then he


reduces it to the measure of the circumference of the


circle. However, if we invert the calculation and re-
duce the parts (or degrees) of the great circle to yqanas
according to his method, we get the number 3200, 0.
100 yojanas less then we have given on the authority ot


316 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


Al-arkand (v. p. 312). The double of it, 6400, comes


near the number mentioned by Ibn Tarik (i.e. 6596.2,
Vv. p. 312), being only about 200 yojanas smaller.

We shall now give the latitudes of some places, as we
hold them to be correct.

All canons of the Hindus agree in this that the line
connecting Lank&é with Meru divides the olcovpévn
lengthways in two halves, and that it passes through
the city of Ujain, the fortress of Rohitaka, the river
Yamuna, the plain of Taneshar, and the Cold Moun-
tains. ‘The longitudes of the places are measured by
their distance from this line. On this head I know of
no difference between them except the following pas-
sage in the book of Aryabhata of Kusumapura :—

“People say that Kurukshetra, 2.6. the plain of
Taneshar, lies on the line which connects Lanké with
Meru and passes through Ujain. So they report on
the authority of 21159. But he was much too intelli-
gent not to have known the subject better. The times
of the eclipses prove that statement to be erroneous,
and Prithusvamin maintains that the difference be-
tween the longitudes of Kurukshetra and Ujain is 120
yojanas.”

These are the words of Aryabhata.

Ya‘ktb Ibn Tarik says in his book entitled Zhe Com-
position of the Spheres, that the latitude of Ujain is 43
degrees, but he does not say whether it lies in the north
or the south. Besides, he states it, on the authority of —
the book Al-Arkand, to be 43 degrees. We, however,
have found a totally different latitude of Ujain in
the same book in a calculation relating to the distance
between Ujain and Almanstira, which the author calls —
Brahmanavata, 2.6. Bamhanwa, viz. latitude of Ujain,
22° 29’; latitude of Almanstira, 24° 1’.

According to the same book, the straight shadow in
Lohaniyye, 2.6. Loharani, is 53 digits.


A criticism
of Arya-
bhata of
Kusuma-
pura on the
meridian of
Ujain.


On the lati-
tude of
Ujain.


Page 163.


CHAPTER XXXI. 317


On the other hand, however, all the canons of the
Hindus agree in this, that the latitude of Ujain is 24
degrees, and that the sun culminates over it at the time
of the summer solstice.

Balabhadra, the commentator, gives as the latitude
of Kanoj 26° 35’; as that of Taneshar, 30° 12’.

The learned Abt-Ahmad, the son of Catlaghtagin,
calculated the latitude of the city of Karli (2), and
found it to be 28° ,“و‎ that of Taneshar 27’, and both
places to be ‘distant from each other by three days’
marches. What the cause of this difference is I do
not know.

According to the book Karana-sdra, the latitude of
Kashmir is 34° 9’, and the straight shadow there 8,5
digits.

I myself have found the latitude of the fortress
Lauhtr to be 34° 10. The distance from Lauhitir to
the capital of Kashmir is 56 miles, half the way being

rugged country, the other half plain. What other lati-
tudes I have been able to observe myself, I shall
enumerate in this place :—


Ghazna. : : wees oS | 11 5 00
Kabul . : 33.47 | Purshavar . : 5 0004
Kandi, the guard- avon Waihand . : meu 0

of the prince. 5 5055 55 alam : 33820.
Dunpdir : : . 34°20’ | The fortress N anans eye? 2 ey


The distance between the latter place and Multan is
nearly 200 miles.


Salkot : : : : : 15 32 5
Mandakkakor . ‘ : : eS 1a 50
Multéin  . ; , : : 7” 20010


If the latitudes of places are known, and the distances
between them have been measured, the difference be-
tween their longitudes also may be found according to
the methods explained in the books to which we have
referred the reader.


318 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


We ourselves have (in our travels) in their country
not passed beyond the places which we have mentioned,
nor have we learned any more longitudes and latitudes
(of places in India) from their literature. It is God
alone who helps us to reach our objects!


005


CHAPTER XXXII


ON THE NOTIONS OF DURATION AND TIME IN GENERAL,
AND ON THE CREATION OF THE WORLD AND ITS
DESTRUCTION.


ACCORDING to the relation of Muhammad Ibn Zaka- 02 the no-


tion of time


riyyi Alrazi, the most ancient philosophers of the according to
Greeks thought that the following five things existed spray philo-
from all eternity, the creator, the wniversal soul, the first

vA, space in the abstract, and time in the abstract. On

these things Alrazi has founded that theory of his,

which is at the bottom of his whole philosophy.
Further, he distinguishes between time and duration

in so far as number applies to the former, not to the

latter; for a thing which can be numbered is finite,

whilst duration is infinite. Similarly, philosophers

have explained time as duration with a beginning and

an end, and eternity as duration without beginning and

end.

According to Alrazi, those five things are necessary
postulates of the actually existing world. For that
which the senses perceive in it is the An acquiring
shape by means of combination. Besides, the 227
occupies some place, and therefore we must admit the
existence of space. The changes apparent in the world
of sense compel us to assume the existence of time, for
some of them are earlier, others later, and the before
and the afterwards, the earlier and the later, and the
simultaneous can only be perceived by means of the


320 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


notion of time, which is a necessary postulate of the
existing world.

Further, there are living beings in the existing world.
Therefore we must assume the existence of the soul.
Among these living beings there are intelligent ones,
capable of carrying the arts to the highest perfection ;
and this compels us to assume the existence of a
Creator, who is wise and intelligent, who establishes
and arranges everything in the best possible manner,
and inspires people with the force of intelligence for
the purpose of liberation.

On the other hand, some sophists consider eternity
and time as one and the same thing, and declare the
motion which serves to measure time alone to be finite.

Another one declares eternity to be the circular
motion. No doubt this motion is indissolubly con-
nected with that being which moves by it, and which
is of the most sublime nature, since it lasts for ever.
Thereupon he rises in his argumentation from the
moving being to its mover, and from the moving mover
to the first mover who is motionless.

This kind of research is very subtle and obscure.
But for this, the opinions would not differ to such an —
extent that some people declare that there is no time
at all, while others declare that time is an independent
substance. According to Alexander of Aphrodisias,
Aristotle gives in his book مهنم‎ axpoacis the follow-
ing argumentation: “Hverything moving is moved by
a mover;” and Galenus says on the same subject that
he could not understand the notion of time, much less
prove it.

The theory of the Hindus on this subject is rather
poor in thought and very little developed. Varahami-
hira says in the opening of his book Sazihitd, when
speaking of that which existed from all eternity: “It
has been said in the ancient books that the first
primeval thing was darkness, which is not identical —


Page 164.


The notions
of Hindu
philoso-
phers on
time.


CHAPTER XXXII. 321


with the black colour, but a kind of non-existence like
the state of a sleeping person. Then God created this
world for Brahman as a cupola for him. He made it
to consist of two parts, a higher and a lower one, and
placed the sun and moon in it.” Kapila declares:
“God has always existed, and with him the world, with
all its substances and bodies. He, however, is a cause
to the world, and rises by the subtlety of his nature
above the gross nature of the world.” Kumbhaka
says: “The primeval one is Mahdbhita, 2.6. the com-
pound of the five elements. Some declare that the
primeval thing is 20106, others nature, and still others
maintain that the director is karman, 1.6. action.”

In the book Vishnu-Dharma, Vajra speaks to Mar-
kandeya: “Explain to me the times;” whereupon the
latter answers: “Duration is démapurusha,’ 4.6. @
breath, and purusha, which means the lord of the wu-
verse. Thereupon, he commenced explaining to him
the divisions of time and their dominants, just as we
have propounded these things in detail in the proper
chapters (chap. xxxiii. e¢ seq.)

The Hindus have divided duration into two periods,
a period of motion, which has been determined as tue,
and a period of rest, which can be determined only in
an imaginary way according to the analogy of that
which has first been determined, the period of motion.
The Hindus hold the eternity of the Creator to be
determinable, not measurable, since it is infinite. We,
however, cannot refrain from remarking that it is
extremely difficult to imagine a thing which is deter-
minable but not measurable, and that the whole idea
is very far-fetched. We shall here communicate so
much as will suffice for the reader of the opinions of
the Hindus on this subject, as far as we know them.

The common notion of the Hindus regarding creation The Day of


Brahman a


is a popular one, for, as we have already mentioned, period of
y : creation, the


they believe matter to be eternal. Therefore, they do Night of
VOL. 1, xs


115 انك لل ناك 1 222


not, by the word creation, understand a formation of
something out of nothing. They mean by creation only
the working with a piece of clay, working out various
combinations and figures in it, and making such arrange-
ments with it as will lead to certain ends and aims
which are potentially in it. or this reason they at-
tribute the creation to angels and demons, nay, even
to human beings, who create either because they carry
out some legal obligation which afterwards proves
beneficial for the creation, or because they intend to
allay their passions after having become envious and
ambitious. So, for instance, they relate that Visva-
mitra, the Rishi, created the buffaloes for this purpose,
that mankind should enjoy all the good and useful
things which they afford. All this reminds one of the
words of Plato in the book Zimwus: “The @eod, 2.
the gods, who, according to an order of their father,
carried out the creation of man, took an immortal soul
and made it the beginning; thereupon they fashioned
like a turner a mortal body upon it.”

Here in this context we meet with a duration of time
which Muslim authors, following the example of the
Hindus, call the years of the world. People think that
at their beginnings and endings creation and destruc-
tion take place as kinds of new formations. This,
however, is not the belief of the people at large. Ac-
cording to them, this duration is a day of Brahman
and a consecutive night of Brahman; for Brahman is
intrusted with creating. Further, the coming into
existence is a motion in that which grows out of some-
thing different from itself, and the most apparent of
the causes of this motion are the meteoric motors, 4.64.
the stars. These, however, will never exercise regular
influences on the world below them unless they move
and change their shapes in every direction (= their
aspects). Therefore the coming into existence is limited
to the day of Lrahman, because in it only, as the


Brahman a
period of
non-crea-
tion.


Page 165.


Critical
remark of
the author.


Brahman’s
waking and
sleeping.


CHAPTER XXXII. 323


Hindus believe, the stars are moving and their spheres
revolving according to their pre-established order, and
in consequence the process of coming into existence
is developed on the surface of the earth without any
interruption.

On the contrary, during the night of Brahman the
spheres rest from their motions, and all the stars, as
well as their apsides and nodes, stand still in one
particular place.

In consequence all the affairs of the earth are in one
and the same unchanging condition, therefore the coming
into existence has ceased, because he who makes things
come into existence rests. So both the processes of act-
ing and of being acted upon are suspended; the elements
rest from entering into new metamorphoses and com-
binations, as they rest now in (/acuna; perhaps: the
night), and they prepare themselves to belong to new
beings, which will come into existence on the following
day of Brahman.

In this way existence circulates during the life of
Brahman, a subject which we shall propound in its
proper place.
| According to these notions of the Hindus, creation
_ and destruction only refer to the surface of the earth.
By such a creation, not one piece of clay comes into
existence which did not exist before, and by such a
destruction not one piece of clay which exists ceases to
exist. It is quite impossible that the Hindus should
have the notion of a creation’as long as they believe
that matter existed from all eternity.

The Hindus represent to their common people the
two durations here mentioned, the day of Brahman and
the night of Brahman, as his waking and sleeping ; and
we do not disapprove of these terms, as they denote
something which has a beginning and end, Further,
the whole of the life of Brahman, consisting of a suc-


eee‏ كع وود


324 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


cession of motion and rest in the world during such a
period, is considered as applying only to existence, not
to non-existence, since during it the piece of clay exists
and, besides, also its shape. The life of Brahman is only
a day for that being who is above him, 1.64. Purusha (ef.
chap. xxxv.). When he dies all compounds are dissolved
during his nzght, and in consequence of the annihilation
of the compounds, that also is suspended which kept
him (Brahman) within the laws of nature. This, then,
is the rest of Purusha, and of all that is under his
control (/ié. and of his vehicles).

When common people describe these things, they
make the night of Brahman follow after the night of
Purusha 5 and as Purusha is the name for a man, they
attribute to him sleeping and waking. They derive
destruction from his snoring, in consequence of which
all things that hang together break asunder, and
everything standing is drowned in the sweat of his
forehead. And more of the like they produce, things
which the mind declines to accept and the ear refuses
to hear.

Therefore the educated Hindus do not share these
opinions (regarding the waking and sleeping of Brahman),
for they know the real nature of sleep. They know
that the body, a compound of antipathetic hwmores,
requires sleep for the purpose of resting, and for this
purpose that all which nature requires, after being
wasted, should be duly replaced. So, in consequence
of the constant dissolution, the body requires food in
order to replace that which had been lost by emacia-
tion. Further, it requires cohabitation for the purpose
of perpetuating the species by the body, as without
cohabitation the species would die out. Besides, the
body requires other things, evil ones, but necessary,
while simple substances can dispense with them, as
also He can who is above them, like to whom there is
nothing.


Vulgar and
scientific
notions on
the sleep of
Brahman.


CHAPTER XXXII. Woe


Further, the Hindus maintain that the world will Notions re-
perish in consequence of the conjunction of the twelve ond ot CER
suns, which appear one after the other in the different aoe
months, ruining the earth by burning and calcining it,
and by withering and drying up all moist substances.

Further, the world perishes in consequence of the union

of the four rains which now come down in the different
seasons of the year; that which has been calcined attracts
the water and is thereby dissolved. Lastly, the world
perishes by the cessation of light and by the prevalence
of darkness and non-existence. By all this the world
will be dissolved into atoms and be scattered.

The Matsya-Purdna says that the fire which burns
the world has come out of the water; that until then it
dwelt on Mount Mahisha in the Kusha-Dvipa, and was
called by the name of this mountain.

The Vishnu-Purdna says that “ Maharloka hes above
the pole, and that the duration of the stay there is one page 166.
kalpa. When the three worlds burn, the fire and
smoke injure the inhabitants, and then they rise and
emigrate to Janaloka, the dwelling-place of the sons of
Brahman, who preceded creation, viz. Sanaka, Sananda,
Sanandandda (?), Asuras, Kapila, Vodhu, and Pati¢a-
Sikha.”

The context of these passages makes it clear that Abt-Me-


shar uses


this destruction of the world takes place at the end of a Indian |
kalpa, and hence is derived the theory of Abt-Ma‘shar
that a deluge takes place at the conjunction of the
planets, because, in fact, they stand in conjunction at
the end of each caturyuga and at the beginning of each
haliyuga. If this conjunction is not a complete one,
the deluge, too, will evidently not attain the highest
degree of its destructive power. The farther we advance
in the investigation of these subjects, the more light
will be shed on all ideas of this kind, and the better
the reader will understand all words and terms occur-


ring in this context.


326 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


Aléranshahrt records a tradition, as representing the
belief of the Buddhists, which much resembles the silly
tales just mentioned. On the sides of Mount Meru
there are four worlds, which are alternately civilised or
desert. A world becomes desert when it 1s overpowered
by the fire, in consequence of the rising of seven suns,
one after the other, over it, when the water of the
fountains dries up, and the burning fire becomes so
strong as to penetrate into the world. A world becomes
civilised when the fire leaves it and migrates to another
world; after it has left, a strong wind rises in the world,
drives the clouds, and makes them rain, so that the
world becomes like an ocean. Out of its foam shells
are produced, with which the souls are connected, and
out of these human beings originate when the water
has sunk into the ground. Some Buddhists think that
a man comes by accident from the perishing world to
the growing world. Since he feels unhappy on account
of his being alone, out of his thought there arises a
spouse, and from this couple generation commences,


Buddhist
notionsfrom
Aléran-
shahri.


000527


CHAPTER XXXIII.


ON THE VARIOUS KINDS OF THE DAY OR NYCHTHEMERON,
AND ON DAY AND NIGHT IN PARTICULAR.


ACCORDING to the general usage of Muslims, Hindus, pefnition
and others, a day or nychthemeron means the dura- night oe
tion of one revolution of the sun in a rotation of the
universe, in which he starts from the one half of a
great circle and returns to the same. Apparently it is
divided into two halves: the day (1.¢. the time of the
sun’s being visible to the inhabitants of a certain place
on earth), and the night (ue. the time of his being in-
visible to them.) His being visible and being invisible
are relative facts, which differ as the horizons differ.
It is well known that the horizon of the equator, which
the Hindus call the country without latitude, cuts the
circles parallel to the meridian in two halves. In con-
sequence, day and night are always equal there. How-
ever, the horizons which cut the parallel circles without
passing through their pole divide them into two un-
equal halves, the more so the smaller the parallel circles
are. In consequence, there day and night are unequal,
except at the times of the two equinoxes, when on the
whole earth, except Merfi and Vadavamukha, day and
night are equal. Then all the places north and south
of the line share in this peculiarity of the line, but only
at this time, not at any other.

The beginning of the day is the sun's rising above Manushya-
the horizon, the beginning of the night his disappearing
below it. The Hindus consider the day as the first, the


328 ALBERUNTI’S INDIA.


night as the second, part of the nychthemeron. There-
fore they call the former Sdvana, 1.6. a day depending
on the rising of the sun. Besides, they call it Manu-
shydhordtra, i.e. a human day, because, in fact, the great
mass of their people do not know any other kind of day
but this. Now, assuming the Sdvana to be known to .
the reader, we shall in the following use it as a standard
and gauge, in order thereby to determine all the other
kinds of days.

After the human day follows Pitrindm ahordtra, 2¢.
the nychthemeron of the forefathers, whose spirits,
according to the belief of the Hindus, dwell in the
sphere of the moon. Its day and night depend upon
light and darkness, not upon the rising and setting in
relation to a certain horizon, When the moon stands
in the highest parts of the sphere with reference to
them, this is a day to them; and when it stands in the
lowest parts, it is night to them. Evidently their moon
is the time of conjwnetion or full moon, and their mid-
night is opposition or new moon. Therefore the nych-
themeron of the forefathers is a compete lunar month,
the day beginning at the time of half-moon, when the
light on the moon’s body begins to increase, and the
night beginning at the time of half-moon, when her
licht begins to wane. This follows of necessity from
the just-mentioned determination of the noon and mid-
night of the nychthemeron of the forefathers. Besides,
it may be brought near to the reader by a comparison,
as the bright half of the light on the moon’s body may
be compared to the rising of half of the globe of the
sun over the horizon, and the other half’s setting below
the horizon. The day of this nychthemeron extends
from the last quarter of a month to the first quarter of
the succeeding month; the night from the first to the
second quarter of one identical month. The totality
of these two halves is the nychthemeron of the fore-
fathers. :


Page 167.


Day of the
fathers.


Day of the
Devas.


age 168, |


CHAPTER XXXII. 329


Thus the subject is explained by the author of Vishnu-
Dharma both at large and in detail, but afterwards he
treats it a second time with very little understanding,
and identifies the day of the forefathers with the black
half of the month from opposition to conjunction, and
their night with its white half, whilst the correct state-
ment is that which we have just mentioned. This view
is also confirmed by their custom of offering gifts of
food to the forefathers on the day of conjunction, for
they explain noon to be the time of taking food. For
this reason they offer food to the forefathers at the
same time when they themselves take it.

Next follows the Divydhordtra, 1.e. the nychthemeron
of the angels. It is known that the horizon of the
oreatest latitude, 4.6. that of go degrees, where the pole
stands in the zenith, is the equator, not exactly, but
approximately, because it is a little below the visible
horizon for that place on earth which is occupied by
Mount Meru; for its top and slopes the horizon in
question and the equator may be absolutely identical,
although the visible horizon lies a little below it (ae.
farther south). Further, it is evident that the zodiac
is divided into two halves by being intersected by the
equator, the one half lying above the equator (z.e. north
of. it), the second half below it. As long as the sun
marches in the signs of northern declination it revolves
like a mill, since the diurnal arcs which he describes
are parallel to the horizon, as in the case of the sun-
dials. For those who live under the north pole the
sun appears above the horizon, therefore they have day,
whilst for those living under the south pole the sun is
concealed below the horizon, and therefore they have
night. When, then, the sun migrates to the southern
signs, he revolves like a mill below the horizon (ve.
south of the equator); hence it is night to the people
living under the north pole and day to those living
under the south pole.


330 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


The dwellings of the Devaka, 4.6. the spiritual beings,
are under the two poles; therefore this kind of day
is called by their name, 2.6. the nychthemeron of the
Deva.

Aryabhata of Kusumapura says that the Deva see
one half of the solar year, the Danava the other; that —
the Pitaras see one half of the lunar month, human
beings the other. So one revolution of the sun in the
zodiac affords day and night both to the Deva and
Danava, and their totality is a nychthemeron.

In consequence our year is identical with the nych-
themeron of the Deva. In it, however, day and night
are not equal (as in the nychthemeron of the fore-
fathers), because the sun moves slowly in the half of
the northern declination about its apogee, by which the —
day becomes a little longer. However, this difference
is not equal to the difference between the visible horizon
and the real one, for this cannot be observed on the
clobe of the sun. Besides, according to Hindu notions,
the inhabitants of those places are raised above the ا‎
surface of the earth, dwelling on Mount Meru. Who-
ever holds this view holds regarding the height of Meru
the same opinions as those we have described in the —
proper place (in chap. xxi.) In consequence of this
height of Mount Meru, its horizon must fall a little
lower (ae. more southward than the equator), and in
consequence the rate of the day’s being longer than the
night is lessened (as then the sun does not entirely
reach his northern apogee, where he makes the longest
days). If this were anything else but simply a reli-
gious tradition of the Hindus, besides being one regard-
ing which even they do not agree among themselves,
we should try to find, by astronomical calculation, the
amount of this depression of the horizon of Mount
Meru below the equator, but as there is no use in this
subject (Mount Meru being simply an invention), we
drop it.


CHAPTER XXXIil. 331


Some uneducated Hindu heard people speak of the
day of such a nychthemeron in the north, and of its
night in the south. In connection with these elements
he determined the two parts of the year by the twe
halves of the zodiac, the one which ascends from the
winter solstice, called the northern, and the one which
descends from the summer solstice, called the southern.
Then he identified the day of this nychthemeron with
the ascending half, and its night with the descending
half. All of which he has eternised in his books.

Not much better is what the author of the Vishnu-
Dharma says:— “The half beginning with Capricornus
is the day of the Asura, 4.6. the Danavas, and their
nicht begins with the sign of Cancer.” Previously he
had said: “The half beginning with Aries is the day
of the Deva.” This author acted without any under-
standing of the subject, for he simply confounds the
two poles with each other (for according to this theory
the half of the sun’s revolution, beginning with Capri-
cornus or the winter solstice, would be the day of the
beings under the north pole or the Devas, not that of
the beings under the south pole or Asuras, and the
revolution of the sun beginning with Cancer or the
summer solstice would be the day of the Asuras, not
their night). If this author had really understood the
sentence, and had known astronomy, he would have
come to other conclusions.

Next follows the Brahmdhordtra, 1.6. the nychtheme- Day of Brah-
ron of Brahman. It is not derived from light and dark-
ness (as that of the forefathers), nor from the appearing
or disappearing of a heavenly body (like that of the
Devas), but from the physical nature of created things,
in consequence of which they move in the day and rest

in the night. The length of the nychthemeron of
Brahman is 8,640,000,000 of our years. During one
half of it, ze. during the day, the ether, with all that
is in it, is moving, the earth is producing, and the


|


332 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


changes of existence and destruction are constantly
going on upon the surface of the earth. During the
other half, 4.4. the night, there occurs the opposite of
everything which occurs in the day; the earth is not
changing, because those things which produce the
changes are resting and all motions are stopped, as
nature rests in the night and in the winter, and con-
centrates itself, preparing for a new existence in the
day and in the summer.

. Each day of Brahman is a kalpa, as also each night,
and a kalpa is that space of time which Muslim authors
call the year of the Sindhind.

Lastly follows the Purushdhordtra, ve. the nychthe-
meron of the All-soul, which is also called Mahdékalpa,
ae. the greatest kalpa. The Hindus only use it for the
purpose of determining duration in general by some-
thing like a notion of time, but do not specify it as
day and night. I almost feel inclined to think that
the day of this nychthemeron means the duration of
the soul’s being connected with the Ay, whilst the
night means the duration of their being separated from
each other, and of the resting of the souls (from the
fatigue of being mixed up with the oA»), and that that
condition which necessitates the soul’s being connected
with the dy or its being separated from the dA reaches
its periodical end at the end of this nychthemeron.
The Vishnu-Dharma says: “The life of Brahman is
the day of Purusha, and the night of Purusha has the
same length.”

The Hindus agree in assigning to the life of Brahman
a hundred of his years. The number of ow years which
corresponds to one of his years betrays itself to be a
multiplication of 360 with the number of our years,
which correspond to one nychthemeron of his. We
have already mentioned (p. 331) the length of the
nychthemeron of Brahman. Now the length of a year
of Lrahman is 3,110,400,000,000 of our years (4¢,


Page 169.


Day of Puru-
sha.


Parardha-


kalpa, -


CHAPTER XXXII, 333


360 كا‎ 8,640,000,000). A hundred years of the same
kind, reckoned in our years, are represented by the
same number increased by two ciphers, so that you get
in the whole ten ciphers, viz. 311,040,000,000,000.
This space of time is a day of Purusha; therefore his
nychthemeron is.double of it, viz. 622,080,000,000,000
of owr years,

According to the Pulisa-Siddhdnta, the life of Brah-
man is a day of Purusha. However, it has also been
mentioned that a day of Purusha is a pardrdhakalpa.
Other Hindus say that pardrdhakalpa is the day of kha,
1.e. the point, by which they mean the first cause, on
which all existence depends. The kalpa occupies the
eighteenth place in the scale of the degrees of the num-
bers (see .م‎ 175). Itis called pardrdha, which means
the half of heaven. Now, the double of this would be
the whole of heaven and the whole nychthemeron.
Therefore kha is represented by the number 864, fol-
lowed by twenty-four ciphers, this number representing
our years (cf. p. 331).

These terms must, on the whole, be rather considered
as a philosophical means of conveying an abstract
notion of time than as mathematical values composed


of the various kinds of numbers, for they are derived


from the processes of combination and dissolution, of
procreation and destruction.


000000


CHAPTER XXXIV.


ON THE DIVISION OF THE NYCHTHEMERON INTO MINOR
PARTICLES OF TIME,


TuE Hindus are foolishly painstaking in inventing the
most minute particles of time, but their efforts have
not resulted in a universally adopted and uniform
system. On the contrary, you hardly ever meet with
two books or two men representing the subject iden-
tically. In the first instance, the nychthemeron is
divided into sixty minutes or ghatt. We read in the
book Sridhava by Utpala the Kashmirian: “If you
bore in a piece of wood a cylindrical hole of twelve
fingers’ diameter and six fingers’ height, it contains three
mand water. If you bore in the bottom of this hole
another hole as large as six plaited hairs of the hair of a
young woman, not of an old one nor of a child, the three
mand of water will flow out through this hole in one
ghatt.”

Each minute is divided into sixty seconds, called
cashaka or cakhaka, and also vighatikd.

Each second is divided into six parts or prdna, te.
breath. The above-mentioned book, Sriéidhava, explains
the prdna in the following manner: “It is the breath
of a sleeping person who sleeps a normal sleep, and not
like a man who is ill, who suffers from retention of the
urine, who is hungry, or has eaten too much, whose
mind is occupied with some sorrow or pain; for the
breath of a sleeping person varies according to the '


Ghati.


Cashaka.


Prana,


Page 170.


Vinadi.


Kshana.


Nimesha,
lava, truti.


*«CHAPTER XXXIV.


335
conditions of his soul, which originate either from desire
or fear, according to the conditions of his body, depend-
ing upon the emptiness or fulness of his stomach, and
according to various accidents disturbing the kind of
humor which is considered the most desirable.”

It is all the same whether we determine the prdéna
according to this rule (one nychthemeron = 21,600
prdna), or if we divide each ghati into 360 parts
(60 X 360=21,600), or each degree of the sphere into
sixty parts (360 X 60= 21,600).

As far as this all Hindus agree with each other in
the matter, though they use different terms. So, for
instance, Brahmagupta calls the cashaka or seconds
vinddt, likewise Aryabhata of Kusumapura. Besides
the latter calls the minutes ndéd?. Both, however, did
not use particles of time smaller than the prdna, which
correspond to the minutes of the sphere (60 X 360).
For Pulisa says: “ Zhe minutes of the sphere, which are
21,600, resemble the normal breaths of man at the time
of the equinoxes, and when man is in perfect health,
During one breathing of man the sphere revolves as far
as one minute.”

Other people insert between minute and second a
third measure, called kshana, which is equal to one-
fourth of a minute (or fifteen seconds), Hach kshana
is divided into fifteen ald, each of which is equal to
one-sixtieth of a minute, and this is the cashaka, only
called by another name.

Among the lower orders of these fractions of time there
occur three names which are always mentioned in the
same sequence. The largest is the nimesha, 1.6. the
time during which the eye, in the normal state of
things, is open between two consecutive looks. The
lava is the mean, and the truti the smallest part of
time, the latter word meaning the cracking of the fore-
finger against the inside of the thumb, which is with
them a gesture expressive of astonishment or admira-


336 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


tion. The relation between these three measures varies |
very much. According to many of the Hindus—


2 truti=1 lava,
2 lava=1 nimesha.


Further, they differ as to the relation between the
nimesha and the next higher order of fractions of time,
for according to some the latter (kdshthd) contains
fifteen, according to others thirty nimesha. Others,
again, divide each of these three measures into eighths,


so that—
8 truti=i lava.
8 lava=1 nimesha.
8 nimesha=1 kdshthd (2).


The latter system is used in the book Sridhava, and
has also been adopted by S MY (?), one of their learned
astronomers. He makes this division still more subtle
by adding a further measure, smaller than the ¢truft,
which is called anu, and eight of which are 026

Kashtha, ٠ ‘The next higher orders, parts of time larger than the
nimesha, are kdshthé and kald. We have said already
-(p. 335) that with some Hindus sald is only another
name for cashaka, and is considered as equal to piven:
kadshthd. Further—


1 kdshthé=15 nimesha.
I nimesha=2 lava,
1 1010-2 6


=


Others reckon thus—


1 kalé=zth minute of the nychthemeron= 30 késhthd.
1 kashthéd= 30 nimesha. ,


And the further fractions such as those just men-
tioned.
Lastly, others reckon thus—


I cashaka=6 nimesha.
I nximesha=3 lava,


Here ends the tradition of Utpala,


CHAPTER XXXIV, 307
According to the Vayu-Purdna—


1 muhirta = 30 kald.
1 kald = 30 kashtha.
I kdshtha = 15 nimesha.


The smaller fractions are disregarded by the Vdayu-
Purina.
We have no means of settling the question as to which page .ب‎
of these systems is the most authentic one. Therefore
it is the best for us to adhere to the theory of Utpala
and S M Y (2), i.e. to divide all measures of time smaller
than a prdna by eight—


I prdna = 8 nimesha. 1 lava = 58 1,
1 nimesha = 8 lava. 1 truti = 8 anu.


The whole system is represented in the following


7 table :—
How many times the
The names of the mea- smaller one is con- | How many of it are con-
sures of time. tained in the larger tained in one day.
one.

Ghati, Nadi . ‘ 60 60
Kshana : 4 240
Cashaka, Vinadi, 1

Fenland perl? fi we 3000
Prana ; 6 21,600
Nimesha 8 172,800
Lava 8 I, 382, 400
Truti 8 11,059,200
Anu 8 88,473,600


_ The Hindus have also a popular kind of division of Prahara.
the nychthemeron into eight prahara, 1.6. changes of

the watch, and in some parts of their country they

have clepsydre regulated according to the ghati, by
which the times of the eight watches are determined.

١ After a watch which lasts seven and a half ghafé has
elapsed, they beat the drum and blow a winding shell

VOL. I. x!


338 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


called sankha, in Persian spéd-muhra. I have seen this
in the town of Purshiir. Pious people have bequeathed
for these clepsydre, and for their administration, lega-
cies and fixed incomes.

Further, the day is divided into thirty muhirta,
but this division is not free from a certain obscurity ;
for sometimes you think that the muhirtas have
always the same length, since they compare them either
with the ghaté, and say that two ghatt are one muhiria,
or with the watches, and say that one watch is three and
three-quarters muhirta. Here the muhirtas are treated
as if they were hore wequinoctiales (v.e. so and so many
equal parts of the nychthemeron). However, the num-
ber of such hours of a day or of a night differs on every
degree of latitude, and this makes us think that the
lenoth of a muhtrta during the day is different from
its length during the night (for if four watches or fifteen
muhirta represent a day or a night, the muhirtas
cannot be of the same length in the day and in the
night, except at the times of the equinoxes).

On the other hand, the way in which the Hindus
count the dominants of the muhirtas makes us more
inclined to the opposite opinion, that, in fact, the '
muhtrtas are of different length, for in the case of day ©
and night they simply attribute to each of them fifteen
dominants. Here the muhtirtas are treated like the
hore oblique temporales (v.e. twelve equal parts of the
day and twelve equal parts of the night, which differ
as day and night differ).

The latter opinion is confirmed by a calculation of
the Hindus which enables them to find the number of
the muhirtas (which have elapsed of the day) by
means of the digits which the shadow of a person
at the time measures. From the latter number you
subtract the digits of the shadow of the person at
noon, and the remaining number you look out in the


Muhtrta,


CHAPTER XXXIV, 339


middle column of the following diagram, which we have
taken from some of their metrical compositions. The
corresponding field of the upper or lower columns
shows the number of muhtrtas which you wanted to
find.


have elapsed before


The muhirtas which
I 2
noon ,


shadow in question is
larger than the noon-


How many digits the
96
shadow . 4 8,


have elapsed after L25e TI TOs) OF ied


noon .


The muhirtas ‘ater! |
141 13


The commentator of the Siddhdnta, Pulisa, comments whetnerthe


on the latter opinion, and blames those who in general /07¢%)°f3


declare one muhirta to be equal to two ghatt, saying s2sble or
that the number of the ghatt of the nychthemeron Page 2:
varies in the different parts of the year, whilst the
number of its muhtirtas does not vary. But in another
place he contradicts himself, where he reasons about
the measure of the muhirta. He fixes one muhiirta as
equal to 720 prdna or breaths, one breath being com-
posed of two things: the apdna or the inhaling, and
the prdna or the exhaling of breath. Two other terms
of the same meaning are nihsvasa and avasvdsa. How-
ever, if one thing is mentioned, the other is tacitly
included and understood ; as, for instance, 11 you speak
of days, you include the nights, meaning to express
days and nights. Accordingly a muhirta is 360 apdna
and 360 prdna.

In the same manner, when speaking of the measure


340 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


of a ghatt, he only mentions the one species of breath,
connoting the other, for he explains it in general as
equal to 360 breaths (instead of 180 apdna and 180
pranda).

If now the muhirta is measured by breaths, it is
dependent upon the ghati and the hore wquinoctiales as
the gauges of its measure. But this is exactly the con-
trary of what Pulisa intends, for he argues against his
opponents who maintain that a day has fifteen 8
only, if he who counts them dwells on the equator ‘or
somewhere else, but at the time of the equinoxes.
Pulisa observes that the abhyit coincides with noon
and the beginning of the second half of the day;
that, therefore, if the number of the muhirtas of the
day varied, the number of the muhirta called abhyit
and denoting noon would vary too (ze it would
not always be called the eighth muhirta of the
day).

Vyasa says that the birth of Yudhishthira took place
in the white half, at noon, at the eighth muhirta. Tf an
opponent means to infer from this that it was the day
of an equinox, we answer by referring him to the state-
ment of Markandeya, viz. that the birth took place at
full moon in the month Jyaishtha, a time of the year
which is far distant from an equinox.

Further, Vyasa says that the birth of Yudhishthira
took place at the 0871/11, when the youth of the night was
gone, at midnight, at the eighth (muhtirta) of the black
half, in the month of Bhadrapada. This date, too, is
far distant from an equinox.

Vasishtha relates that Vasudeva killed Si¢upila, the
son of the daughter of Karhsa, at the 0671711. The
Hindus tell the following story of Sigupila. He had
been born with four hands, and one day his mother
heard a voice from above saying, “When that person
who will kill him touches him, his two superfluous


Story of
Sisgupala.


‘CHAPTER XXXIV. 341


5


hands will fall off. Thereupon they put the child to
the bosom of each of those who were present, and when
it came to be touched by Vasudeva, the two hands fell
off, as had been prophesied. Now the aunt spoke
to him, “ Assuredly you will one day kill my child;”
whereupon Vasudeva, who was still a child, answered,
“TI shall not do that except he deserve it for some
crime committed intentionally, and I shall not call him
to account until his misdeeds exceed ten,”
Some time afterwards Yudhishthira was occupied
with preparing a sacrifice to the fire in the presence of
the most famous personages. He consulted Vyasa as
to the rank of the guests present and the honours due
_ to the president of such an assembly, consisting in the
presentation of water and roses in a cup, and Vy4sa
advised him to make Vasudeva the president. In this
assembly also SisupMla, his cousin, was present, and
now he began to rage, maintaining that he had a better
claim to such an honour than Vasudeva. He boasted
much and went even so far as to abuse the parent of
Vasudeva. The latter called the present company to
witness as to his bad behaviour, and let him do as he
liked. However, when the affair lasted too long, and

passed beyond the number of ten (muhtirtas), Vasudeva
took the cup and threw it at him, as people throw with
the cakra, and cut off his head. This is the story of
SigupAla.

He who wants to prove the above-mentioned theory Criticisms
(like Pulisa, viz. that the muhdrtas are thirty equal
parts of the nychthemeron), will not succeed unless
he prove that the abhijit falls together with noon and
with the middle of the eighth muhdirta (so that the
day consists of twice seven and a half equal muhdrtas,
and likewise the night). As long as he does not prove

this, the muhiirtas differ in length as days and nights,
though just in India only very little, and it is possible


342 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


that in times distant from the equinoxes noon falls
either at the beginning or at the end of the eighth
muhtrta, or within it.

How little exact is the learning of the author (Pulisa)
who meant to prove this, is evident from the fact that
among his arguments he produces a tradition from
Garga to this effect, that at the 0871711 of the equator

Page173. there is no shadow; for, in the first instance, it is not
true save at the two days of the equinoxes; and,
secondly, if it were true, it would not have anything
to do with the subject he tries to prove (as the ques-
tion of the different length of day and night and their
divisions does not refer to the equator, where day and
night always equal each other, but only to southern or
northern latitudes of the earth).

Dominants We represent the dominants of the 5121 8


of the mu-


hirtas. in the following table:


ad
2 mn
Age The dominants of the Muhtrtas The dominants of the Muhtrtas in the
Ae in the day. night.
o° ع‎
ع‎ ==
I Siva, z.e. MahAdeva. Rudra, z.e. Mahadeva.
2. | Bhujaga, 2.6. the snake. Aja, 2.6. the lord of all cloven-
footed animals.
9. | Mitras | Ahirbudhnya, the lord of Uttara- |
bhadrapada.
As eed Pishan, the lord of Revatt. ©
5. | Vasu. Dasra, the lord of Asvini.
6. | Apas, 2.6, the water. Antaka, ze. the angel of death.
7, | Visva. Agni, 2.6. the fire.
8. | Viriicya, z.e. Brahman. DhAtri, z.e. Brahma the preserver.
0. | Kesvara (?), 2.6. Mahadeva. | Soma, the lord of Mrigasirsha.
10. | Indragni. Guru, 2.6. Jupiter.
11. | Indra, the prince. Hari, 2.6. Narayana.
12. | Nisdkara, 2.6. the moon. Ravi, 2:6. the sun.
13. | Varuna, 2.6. the lord of the | Yama, the angel of death.
clouds.
14. | Aryaman. Tvashtri, the lord of Citra.
15. | Bhageya (?). Anila, 2.6. the wind.


CHAPTER XXXIV. 343


Nobody in India uses the hours except the astrologers, On the
for they speak of the dominants of the hours, and, in Hiindn a8
consequence, also of dominants of the nychthemera. The peat
dominant of the nychthemeron is at the same time
the dominant of the night, for they do not separately
establish a dominant for the day, and the night is,

in this connection, never mentioned. They arrange
the order of the dominants according to the hore tem-
porales.

They call the hour hord, and this name seems to indi-
cate that in reality they use the hore oblique tempo-
rales; for the Hindus call the media signoruwm (the
centres of the signs of the zodiac) hord, which we Mus-
lims call nimbahr (cf. chap. lxxx.) The reason is this,
that in each day and each night always six signs rise
above the horizon, If, therefore, the hour is called by the Pase 4
name of the centre of a sign, each day and each night has
twelve hours, and in consequence the hours used in the
theory of the dominants of the hours are hore oblique
temporales, as they are used in our country and are
inscribed on the astrolabes on account of these doml-
nants.

This opinion is confirmed by the following sentence
of Vijayanandin in the Karana-tilaka, i.e. the first of
the canons. After having explained the rule how to
find the dominant of the year and of the month, he
says: “To find the horddhipati, add the signs which have
risen since the morning to the degree of the horoscope,
the whole being reckoned in minutes, and divide the
sum by 900. The quotient you get count off from the
dominant of the nychthemeron, counting the planetary
spheres from above to below. The dominant of a day
you arrive at, is at the same time the dominant of the
hour.” He ought to have said, “To the quotient you
get add one, and count off the sum from the dominant
of the nychthemeron.” If he had said, “Reckon the


344 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


equatorial degrees which have risen,” &c., the caleula- —
tion would have resulted in 7070
The Hindus give certain names to the horw oblique,


which we have united in the following table. We think
they are taken from the book Sridhava.

hoo

2 Wheth Wheth

2 | Namesof th gether i oThel in th ina

|Horksin the day.| Jarome 07 night. | Save‏ بوء

BS

i: Raudra. Unlucky. || Kalaratri. Unlucky. |
2 Saumya. Lucky. Rodhini. Lucky.
3: Kardala. Unlucky. Vairahma (?). | Lucky.

4. Sattra. Lucky. Trasantya. Unlucky.

5 Vega. | Lueky. Gihaniya (?). | Lucky.

6. Visala. Lucky. Maya. Unlucky.

7. Mrityuséra. | Unlucky, Damariya (%). | Lucky. '
8. Subha. Lucky. Jivaharani. Unlucky.

9. Kroda. Lucky. oshini. Unlucky.

10, Candala. Lueky. Vrishni. Lucky.

11, Krittika. Lucky. Dahariya (?). | The most _
unlucky
ofall, —

12. Amrita. Lucky. Cantima (?). Lucky.


The book Vishnu-Dharma mentions, among the ndgas
or serpents, a serpent called .0و2‎ Kulika. Certain por-
tions of the hours of the planets stand under its in-
fluence. They are unlucky, and everything which is
eaten during them hurts and is of no use for anything.
Sick people who treat themselves with poisonous medi-


cines do not recover, but die and perish. During these ..


times no incantation is of any avail against the bite of —
a snake, for the incantation consists in the mention of
the Garuda, and in those inauspicious times the stork
himself cannot help in any way, much less the mention
of his name.

These times are represented in the following table


Names of
the twenty-
four horas.}


What time
is under the
influence of
the serpent
Kulika.


Page 175.


CHAPTER XXXIV. 345


where the planetary hour is reckoned as consisting of


150 parts.
:
5 53 |
The Dominants of 3 2 Ew 2 2
the Hours. a 5 2 5 - = =
D = 2 = = > 2
Number of the
150 parts of
the hour be-
fore the be-
ginning of the
time of Ku-
kas. 1 1 71 0 0 17 144 86
Number of the
parts during
which the in-
fluence of Ku- 2
lika lasts .| 16 8 37 2 1 6 64
2


( 346 )


CHAPTER XXXV.


ON THE DIFFERENT KINDS OF MONTHS AND YEARS.


Definition of THE natural month is the period of the moon’s syno-


dical revolution. We call it physical because it de-
velops in the same way as all natural phenomena,
rising out of a certain beginning like non-existence,
increasing by degrees, and growing, standing still when
the climax is attained, then descending, waning away
and decreasing, till at last they return to the non-
existence whence they came. In the same manner the
light develops on the body of the moon, since she
appears after the moonless nights as a crescent, then
as a young moon (after the third night), and as full
moon, and thereafter returns through the same stages
to the last night, which is like non-existence, at all
events with reference to human senses. It is well
known to everybody why the moon continues for some
length of time in the moonless nights, but it is not
equally known, not even to educated people, why she
continues some time as full moon. They must learn
how small the body of the moon is in comparison with
that of the sun, that in consequence the enlightened
portion by far exceeds the dark one, and that this
is one of the causes why the moon must necessarily
appear as full moon for some length of time.

That the moon has certain effects on moist substances,
that they are apparently subject to her influences, that,
for instance, increase and decrease in ebb and flow


the lunar .
month.


Effects of
moonlight.


Page 176.


Solar
month.


CHAPTER XXXV. 347


develop periodically and parallel with the moon’s
phases, all this is well known to the inhabitants of sea-
shores and seafaring people. Likewise physicians are
well aware that she affects the humores of sick people,
and that the fever-days revolve parallel with the moon’s
course. Physical scholars know that the life of animals
and plants depends upon the moon, and experimen-
talists know that she influences marrow and brain,
eggs and the sediments of wine in casks and jugs, that
she excites the minds of people who sleep in full moon-
licht, and that she affects (?) hnen clothes which are
exposed to it. Peasants know how the moon acts upon
fields of cucumbers, melons, cotton, &c., and even make
the times for the various kinds of sowing, planting, and
erafting, and for the covering of the cattle depend upon
the course of the moon. Lastly, astronomers know that
meteorologic occurrences depend upon the various phases
through which the moon passes in her revolutions.

This is the month, and twelve of them are in techni-
cal language called a lunar year.

The natural year is the period of a revolution of the
sun in the ecliptic. We call it the natwral, because it
comprehends all the stages in the process of generation
which revolve through the four seasons of the year.
In the course of it, the rays of the sun as passing

through a window-glass and the shadows of the sun-
- dials reassume the same size, position, and direction in
which, or from which, they commenced. This is the
year, and is called the solar one, in antithesis to the
lunar year. As the lunar month is the twelfth part of
the lunar year, the twelfth part of the solar year is a
solar month in theory, the calculation being based on
the mean rotation of the sun. If, however, the calcula-
tion is based on his varying rotation, a solar month is
the period of his staying in one sign of the zodiac.

These are the well-known two kinds of months and
years,


348 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


The Hindus eall the conjunction amdvdsyd, the
opposition pirnimd, and the two quarters ATVH (?).
Some of them use the lunar year with lunar months
and days, whilst others use the lunar year but solar
months, beginning with o degree of each zodiacal sign.
The sun’s entering a sign is called 5011/1011. This
luni-solar calculation is, however, only an approxima-
tive one. If they constantly used it, they would soon
feel induced to adopt the solar year itself and solar
months. In using this mixed system they had only
this advantage, that they could dispense with inter-
calation.

Those who use lunar months begin the month with
conjunction or new moon, and this method is the canoni-
cal one, whilst the others begin it with the opposition or
full moon. I have heard people say that Varahamihira
does the latter, but I have not yet been able to ascer-
tain this from his books. The latter method is for-
bidden. Still it seems as if it were rather old, because
the Veda says: “ Men say the moon has become com-
plete, and by her becoming complete also the month
has become complete. Thus they speak because they
do not know me nor the interpretation of me, for the
Creator of the world commenced creating with the white
half, not with the black half.” But possibly these words
are only a saying of men (not really a sentence taken
from the Veda).

The numeration of the days of the month begins with
the new moon and the first lunar day is called BRBA,
and again enumeration begins with full moon (i.e. they
count twice fifteen days, beginning with new moon and
full moon). Each two days which are equidistant from
new moon or full moon have the same name (or num-
ber). In them, light and darkness on the body of the
moon are in corresponding phases of increasing and
waning, and the hours of the rising of the moon in one
day correspond to the hours of her setting in the other.


On luni-
solar
calculation.


Beginning
of the lunar
month.


The month
counted as
two halves.


CHAPTER XXXV. 349


For the purpose of finding these times they use the
following calculation :—
Multiply the elapsed lunar days of the month, if
they are less than 15, or, in case they are more, the
difference between them and 15, by the number of the
ghatis of the night in question. Add 2 to the product,
and divide the sum by 15. Then the quotient repre-
sents the number of ghatts and minor fractions of time
between the first night, and either the setting of the
moon in the night in question, one of the nights of the
white half, or the rising of the moon in the night in
question, one of the nights of the black half.
This calculation is based on the fact that the space
of time between the first night and the rising or setting
of the moon in some following night of the same luna-
tion varies by two minutes (ghati), and that the nights
vary, lasting either a little longer or a little shorter
than thirty minutes. If, therefore, you count thirty
minutes for each nychthemeron, and you divide the
product by half the number of the minutes, you get
two minutes for each nychthemeron. As these two
minutes, however, agree with the difference of the
nights, they multiplied the number of nychthemera
by the measure of the night, 2.6. the number of its
ghatis (see above, ll. 6, 7), whilst it would have been
more accurate to multiply by the half of the sum of
the ghatts of the night in question and of the first night
of the lunation. It is useless to add the two minutes, Page 177.
for they represent the moment when the crescent of
the moon first becomes visible, but if this moment were
adopted as the beginning of the month, the two minutes
would be transferred to the conjunction.
As months are composed of days, there are as many Various
: kinds of
kinds of months as there are kinds of days, Hach months.
month has thirty days. We shall here use the cw day
(Savana, v. chap. ¥xxili.) as a standard.
In agreement with the Hindu calculation of the re-


350 ALBERUNTS INDIA.


volutions of sun and moon in a kalpa, a lunar month
= 29182995 nychthemera. You find this number by
dividing the sum of the days of the kalpa by the
number of its lunar months. The number of the lunar
months of a kalpa represents the difference between the
revolutions of sun and moon in it, viz. 5 3,433,300,000.

A month has 30 lunar days, for this number is
canonical, as the number of 360 is canonical for the
number of days of a year. The solar month has 30
solar days and 303342254 civil days.

The month of the fathers is equal to 30 of our months,
and has 885472444 civil days.

The month of the angels is equal to 30 years, and has
10,957254 civil days.

The month of Brahman is equal to 60 kalpas, and
has 94,674,987,000,000 civil days.

The month of Purusha is equal to 2,160,000 kalpas,
and has 3,408,299,532,000,000,000 civil days.

The month of Kha has
9,467,498, 700,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 civil days.

By multiplying each of these months by twelve, we
get the number of days of the corresponding year.

The lunar year has 354,%225* civil days,

The solar year has 365 34°55 civil days.

The year of the fathers has 360 lunar months, or
10,6314764%, civil days.

The year of the angels has 360 of our years, or
131,493¢0 civil days.

The year of Lrahman has 720 kalpas, or
I,136,099,844,000,C00 civil days.

The year of Purusha has 25,920,000 kalpas, or
40,899,594,384,000,000,000 civil days. |

The year of Kha has
I 13,609,984,400,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 civil days.

The latter number is mentioned by the Hindus,
although it is written in their books that there is no
combination of numbers beyond the day of Purusha, for


Various
kinds of
years,


The day of
Purusha.


CHAPTER XXXV. 351


it is the first and the last, and is without a beginning in
the past and without an end in the future. The other
kinds of days, of which months and years (those of the
fathers, the angels, and Brahman) are composed, refer
to beings who stand wnder Purusha in the order of
beings, and whose duration is defined by certain limits
of time. The day of Purusha is simply an abstraction
of the Hindu mind to denote that which is above the
soul (dtman), for they make no distinction between
purusha and dtman except in the order or sequence in
which they enumerate them. They speak of Purusha
in terms resembling those of the Siffis, viz. the he is not
the first, and is not something else. It is quite possible Page 178.
in imagination to extend the idea of duration from the

, existing present moment towards both sides, 2.e. towards
the past which no longer exists, and towards the future
which possibly will exist, and} to measure duration ;
and if some part of it admits of being determined by
days, imagination also admits reduplications of it in the
euise of months and years. In all this it is the inten-

١ tion of the Hindus that we should refer the years
invented by them to certain periods of life, beginning
with the coming into existence, and ending with de-
struction and death. However, God the Creator is
sublime beyond either, and also the simple substances
(air, fire, earth, water) do not know coming into exist-
ence nor destruction (in periodical returns), Therefore
we stop with the day of Purusha, and do not think it
necessary to use still larger periods of time.

Things which do not rest on intrinsic necessity offer A tradition

a wide field for difference of opinion and arbitrary the years of
systematising, so as easily to become the source of Bear and
numerous theories. Some of them may be developed ا‎
according to a certain order and rule, whilst others are
devoid of such. In the latter class I reckon the follow-
ing theory, but unfortunately I have forgotten from
what source it has come to me: “33,000 human


352 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


years are one year of the Great Bear; 36,000 human
years are one year of Brahman, and 99,000 human
years are one year of the pole.” However, as regards
the year of Brahman, we remember that Vasudeva
speaks to Arjuna on the battlefield between the two
ranks: “The day of Brahman is two kalpas;” and in
the Brahmasiddhdnta there is a tradition from Vyasa, the
son of 2385078, and from the book Smriti, that kalpa
is a day of Devaka, 7e. Brahman, and also a night of
his. In consequence the there-mentioned theory is
evidently wrong (one year of Brahman being infinitely
longer than 36,000 years). Further, 36,000 years are
the period of one revolution of the fixed stars in the
ecliptic, since they pass one degree in 100 years, and
the Great Bear belongs to them. However, in their
traditional literature the Hindus separate the Great
Bear from the fixed stars, and attribute to it a distance
from the earth which differs from the real distance,
and therefore they describe it by qualities and con-
ditions which in reality do not belong to it. If the
author of that theory meant by the year of the Great
Bear one revolution of it, we do not see why it should
revolve so much more rapidly than the other fixed
stars (for, in that case, the diameter of its course would
be much larger than that of the others), nor why
it should form an exception to the laws of nature
(according to which all fixed stars revolve at the same
distance from the earth and in the same time); and
the pole has no revolution which might be considered
as a year of it. From all this I conclude that the
author of the theory was a man entirely devoid of
scientific education, and one of the foremost in the
series of fools who simply invented those years for the
benefit of people who worship the Great Bear and the
pole. He had to invent a vast number of years, for
the more outrageous it was, the more impression it
would make.


00


CHAPTER XXXVI.
ON THE FOUR MEASURES OF TIME CALLED MANA,


Mara and pramdna mean measure. The four kinds
of measures are mentioned by Ya‘kfib Ibn Tarik in his
book Compositio Spherarum, but he did not know them
thoroughly, and, besides, the names are misspelled, if
this is not the fault of the copyists.

They are—

Saura-ména, 2.6. the solar measure.

Sdvana-mdna, 2.6. the measure depending upon the rising (civil
measure),

Candra-mdna, 7.e. the lunar measure.

Nakshatra-mdna, 2.6. the lunar-station measure (sidereal mea-
sure).


There are days of all four kinds of measure, days of an
individual nature, which, when compared with other
days, show a certain difference of measure. However,
the number 360 is common to all of them (360 days of
each class being a year). The civil days are used as a
gauge to determine thereby the other days.
As regards the saura-mdna, it is known that the solar Measure.


ment of the


year has 3653555 civil days. Dividing this sum by §our aifter.


3200
0: : : t kinds of
360, or multiplying it by 10 seconds (= عع‎ day), you sears ana
56609 days.


get as the measure of the solar day Is27 $35 civil day.
According to the Vishnu-Dharma, this is the time of page 179.
the sun’s passing 1158
The civil day, based on the sé@vana-mdna, is here used
as the unit of a day, for the purpose of measuring
thereby the other kinds of days. ;
VOL. I, Z


354 ALBERUNTS INDIA.


The lunar day, based on the candra-mdna, is called
titht. Dividing the lunar year by 360 or the lunar
month by 0 you get as the measure of the lunar
day 32% o> civil days (wrong: read 70322433 civil
day).

According to the Vishnu-Dharma, this is the time
during which the moon is visible when she is far dis-
tant from the sun.

Nakshatra-mdna is the period of the moon’s passing ~
through her twenty-seven stations, viz. 2742202) daysum
This number is the quotient which you get by dividing
the days of a kalpa by the number of the revolutions
of the moon in a kala. Dividing it by 27, ار‎ get as
the time of the moon’s passing one station I3$5z civil
days. Multiplying the same number by 12, as we have
done with the lunar month, we get 32725:254 civil days —
as the time of the moon’s passing twelve times through
all her stations. Dividing the first number by 30, we get
as the measure of the sidereal day 345345 civil ee

According to the Vishnu-Dharma, the sidereal month
has only twenty-seven days, whilst the months of the
other measures have thirty days ; and if a year is com- —
posed of these days, it has 327477257 days (see above).
Evidently there is a fault in the text of Veshnu-Dharma,
as the month is reckoned too short.

The sawra-mdna 15 used in the computation 5 the
years which compose the kalpa and the four yugas in
the caturyugas, of the years of the nativities, of the
equinoxes and solstices, of the sixth parts of the year
or the seasons, and of the difference between day and
night in a nychthemeron. All these things are com-
puted in solar years, months, and days. |

The candra-mdna is used in the computation of the
eleven karana (v. chap. lxxvii.), in the determination
of the leap month, in the computation of the sum of
days of the tnardtra (v. chap. 11.(, and of new moon and
full moon for lunar and solar eclipses (v. chap. lix.)


What use 5
made of the
saura-mana,
candra-
mdna, and
sdvana-
mand.


CHAPTER XXXVI, 5


In all these things the Hindus use lunar years, months,
' and days, which are called tzthi.

The sévana-ména is used in the calculation of the
vara, 2.6. the days of the week, of the ahargana, i.e. the
sum of the days of an era (v. chap. li.) ; in determining
the days of marriage and fasting (v. chap. lxxv.); the
stitaka, v.¢. the days of childbed (v. chap. lxix.); the
days of the uncleanness of the houses and the vessels
of the dead (v. chap. lxxil.); the 011150, 4.6. certain
months and years in which Hindu medical science pre-
scribes the taking certain medicines; further in deter-
mining the prdyascitta, 1.6. the days of the expiations
which the Brahmans make obligatory for those who
have committed some sin, times during which they are
obliged to fast and to besmear themselves with butter
and dung (v. chap. lxxi.) All these things are deter-
mined according to sévana-mdna.

On the contrary, they do not determine anything

٠ by the nakshatra-mdna, since it is comprehended in the
~— candra-mdna.
Every measure of time which any class of people
may choose by general consent to call a day, may be
considered as a mdéna. Some such days have already
been mentioned in a preceding chapter (v. chap. xxxill.)
However, the four mdnas par excellence are those to
the explanation of which we have limited the present
chapter.


0


CHAPTER XXXVII.
ON THE PARTS OF THE MONTH AND THE YEAR.


As the year is one revolution of the sun in the ecliptic,
it is divided in the same way as the ecliptic. The latter
is divided into two halves, depending upon the two
solstitial points. Correspondingly the year is divided
into two halves, each of which is called ayana.

When the sun leaves the point of the winter solstice, he
begins to move towards the north pole. Therefore this
part of the year, which is nearly one half, is referred to
the north and called uttardyana, 4.6. the period of the
sun’s marching through six zodiacal signs beginning
with Caper. In consequence, this half of the ecliptic
is called makarddi, i.e. having Caper as beginning.

When the sun leaves the point of the summer solstice
he begins to move towards the south pole; therefore
this second half is referred to the south and called
dakshindyana, i.e. the period of the sun’s marching
through six zodiacal signs beginning with Cancer, In
consequence, this half of the ecliptic is called karkdds,
ie. having Cancer as beginning.

Uneducated people use only these two divisions or
year-halves, because the matter of the two solstices is
clear to them from the observation of their senses.

Further, the ecliptic is divided into two halves, ac-
cording to its declination from the equator, and this
division is a more scientific one, less known to the
people at large than the former, because it rests on
calculation and speculation, Hach half is called kila.


Uttardyana
and dak-
shindyana.


Page 180.


Uttaraktila
and daksha-
hiila.


12 357


That which has northern declination is called uttarakila
or meshddt, 1.6. having Aries as beginning; that which
has southern declination is called dakshakdla or tulddi,
Le. having Libra as beginning.

Further, the ecliptic is by both these divisions divided The seasons.
into four parts, and the periods during which the sun
traverses them are called the seasons of the year—spring,
summer, autumn, and winter. Accordingly, the zodiacal
signs are distributed over the seasons. However, the

Hindus do not divide the year into four, but into six
parts, and call these six parts ritu. Each ritw com-
prehends two solar months, 2.6. the period of the sun’s
marching through two consecutive zodiacal sions. Their
names and dominants are represented, according to the
most widespread theory, in the following diagram.

I have been told that in the region of Somanath people
divide the year into three parts, each consisting of four
months, the first being varshakdla, beginning with the
month Ashadha; the second, Stakala, i.e. the winter;
and the third, ushnakdla, 4.6. the summer.


n The Zodiacal Signs | Capricornus’ Pisces and Taurus and
5 of the Ritu. and Amphora. Aries, Gemini.
A
aS a
Bo & The} Shigi Vasanta or Grishma or
hee OA ae م‎ Kusumakara. Nidagha.
fee
=) م5‎ 8 ji
5 Their domi- A | : : Indra the
iS Waite. Narada. Agni the Fire. Ruler!
en ري ل ل‎ ---  عممعلعولمعلعلا‎
Scorpio and Virgo and Cancer and The Zodiacal Signs g
Sagittarius. Libra. Leo. of the Ritu. 3
8 Fe
| : Ba 8
Hemanta. S’arad. Varshakala. Their names. Bes
a oo
5
Ag
Vaishnava. Prajapati. | Visvedevah. |Their dominants. 3


ا ا وروي بي


If this is really the case, we must not —


1
1
17
i
4


358 ALBERUNTS INDIA.


I am inclined to think that the Hindus divide the
ecliptic by such an opening of the circle which divides
the circumference of a circle into six parts, a measure
which is equal to the radius, beginning with the two
solstitial points, and that therefore they use sixth parts
of the ecliptic.
forget that we, too, sometimes divide the ecliptic, be-
ginning with the two solstitial points, at other times
beginning with the equinoctial points, and that we use
the division of the ecliptic in twelfth parts side by
side with that in fourth parts.

The months are divided into halves from new moon
The
Vishnu-Dharma mentions the dominants of the halves
of the months, as we give them in the following table :—


The dominants of the
Bright half of each


The dominants of the


The Names of the Black half of each


month. month,‏ ركنا فصر

Caitra, Twashtri, Yamya.
Vaisikha, Indragni, Agneya
Jyaishtha, . Sukra, ; Raudra.
Ashadha, Visvedevah, Sarpa.

Srdvana, Vishnu, Pitrya.
Bhadrapada, Alapeh ا‎ Santa.

Asvayuja, Agana و(؟)‎ Maitra.
KaArttika, Agni, . Sakra.

Margasirsha, Saumya, Nirriti.
Pausha, Jiva, . Vishnu.
Magha, : Pitrya, Varuna.
Phalguna, . Bhaga, Pashan.


Page 181,


The domin-
ants of the


singlehalves to full moon, and from full moon to new moon.


of months.


00000


CHAPTER XXXVIII.


ON THE VARIOUS MEASURES OF TIME COMPOSED OF _ Page 182.
DAYS, THE LIFE OF BRAHMAN INCLUDED.


THE day is called dimas (dimasu), in classical language Recapiiala,


tion of the


- divasa, the night rdtri, and the nychthemeron ride, SLIM:
The month is ‘called mdsa and its half paksha. The first time.
or white half is called suklapaksha, because the first
parts of its nights have moonlight at times when people
do not yet sleep, when the light on the moon’s body
increases and the dark portion? decreases. The other or
black half is called krishnapaksha, because the first
parts of its nights are moonless, whilst other parts have
moonlight, but only then when people sleep. They are
the nights when the light on the body of the moon
wanes, whilst the dark part increases.

The sum of two months is a 71716, but this is only an
approximative definition, for the month which has two
paksha is a lunar month, whilst that one the double
of which is a ritw is a solar month.

Six ritw are a year of mankind, a solar year, which
is called barh or barkh or barsh, the three sounds h,
kh, and sh being much confounded in the mouth of the
Hindus (Skr. varsha).

Three hundred and sixty years of mankind are one
year of the angels, called dibba-barh (divya-varsha), and
12,000 years of the angels are unanimously reckoned as
one caturyuga. There is a difference of opinion only
regarding the four parts of the caturyuga and regarding
the multiplications of it which form a manvantara and


360 ALBERUN?S INDIA.


a kalpa. This subject will be fully explained in the
proper place (v. chaps. xli. and xliv.) |

Two kalpas are a day of Brahman, It is the same
if we say two kalpas or 28 manvantaras, for 360 days
of Brahman are a year of Brahman, 1.6. 720 kalpas or
10,080 manvantaras.

Further, they say that the life of Brahman is 100 of
his years, 7.¢. 72,000 kalpas or 1,008,000 manvantaras.

In the present book we do not go beyond this limit.
The book Vishnu-Dharma has a tradition from Mar-
kandeya, who answers a question of Vajra in these
words: “ Kalpa is the day of Brahman, and the same
is a night of his. Therefore 720 kalpas are a year of
his, and his life has 100 such years. These 100 years
are one day of Purusha, and the same is a night of his.
How many Brahmans, however, have already preceded
Purusha, none knows but he who can count the sand
of the Ganges or the drops of the rain.”


ay‏ ا


CHAPTER XXXIX.


ON MEASURES OF TIME WHICH ARE LARGER THAN
THE LIFE OF BRAHMAN,


ALL that is devoid of order or contradicts the rules laid want of sys-
down in the preceding parts of this book is repulsive ea sigs t
to our nature and disagreeable to our ear. But the poeta of
Hindus are people who mention a number of 281268,
all—as they maintain— referring to the One, the First,
or to some one behind him who is only hinted at.
When they come to a chapter like this, they repeat the
same names as denoting a multitude of beings, measur-
ing out lives for them and inventing huge numbers.
The latter is all they want; they indulge in it most
١ freely, and numbers are patient, standing as you place
them. Besides, there is not a single subject on which
the Hindus themselves agree among each other, and
this prevents us on our part adopting the use of it. On
the contrary, they disagree on these imaginary measures
of time to the same extent as on the divisions of the
day which are less than a prdéna (v. chap. xxxiv.)

The book Sridhava by Utpala says that “a man- Page 183.
vantara is the life of Indra the ruler, and 28 manvan- 0
taras are one day of Pitamaha, i.e. Brahman. His life mined by
is 100 years, or one day of KeSava. The life of the gent
latter is 100 years, or one day of Mahadeva. The life
of the latter is 100 years, or one day of 1597318, who is
near to the Supreme Being. His life is 100 years, or
one day of Sadasiva. The life of the latter is 100


years, or one day of Viraficana, the Eternal, who will


362 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


last for ever, even when the preceding five beings
perish.”

We have already mentioned that the life of Brahman
is as long as 72,000 kalpas. All numbers which we
shall here mention are kalpas.

If the life of Brahman is a day of KeSava, his year,
consisting of three hundred and sixty days, has
25,920,000 kalpas, and his life, 2,592,000,000 kalpas.
The latter is 1 day of Mahadeva; his life, therefore,
93,312,000,000,000 kalpas. The latter is 1 day of Iévara;
therefore his life 3,359,232,000,000,000,000 kalpas.
The latter is 1 day of Sadasiva; therefore his life
120,932,352,000,000,000,000,000 kalpas. The latter is
one day of Viraficana, of which the pardrdhakalpa is
only relatively a very small part (v. 2. 175).

Whatever may be the nature of these calculations,
apparently the day and the centenniwm are the elements
out of which the whole from beginning to end has
been constructed. Others, however, build their system
on the small particles of the day which we have pre-
viously mentioned (in chap. xxxiv.) In consequence,
these people differ among themselves regarding that
which they compose, as they differ regarding the par-
ticles out of which they compose. We shall here give
one system of this kind as invented by those who use
the following metrologic system :—

1 ghatt = 16 kald.

1 kala = 30

1 kashthad = 30 nimesha.
I nimesha = 2 lava.

1 lava = 2 trufi.


The reason of this division is, as they maintain, the
fact that the day of Siva is composed out of similar
particles ; for the life of Brahman is one 070114 of Hari,
1.6. Vasudeva. The life of the latter is 100 years, or
one kald of Rudra, 1.6. Mahadeva; the life of the latter *
is 100 years, or one kdshthd of Iévara; the life of the


The same
determined
by trutis.


CHAPTER XXXIX. 363


latter 15 100 years, or one nimesha of Sadasiva; the
life of the latter is 100 years, or one lava of Sakti; the
life of the latter is 100 years, or one trwti of Siva.


If, now, the life of Brahman is

72,000 kalpas,

the life of Narayana is
155,520,000,000 kalpas ;
the life of Rudra,
513747 71,200, 000,000, 000 ;
the life of igvara,

; 000,000 ,000 ,000,000 ,160 ,572,502,780 و5

the life of Sadasiva,

173, 328,992, 714,096, 640,000, 000, 000, 000, 000,000,000 ;

the life of Sakti,
10,782,449,978,758, 523,781, 120,000,000,000, 000,000,000,000,000,000.
The latter number represents one truti.

If you compose a day out of it according to the above-
mentioned system, it has 37,264,147,126,589,458,187,
5 50,720,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000_  kal-
pas. The latter number is one day of Siva, whom they
describe as the eternal one, who is exempt from being pro-
created and from procreating, free from all qualities and
attributes which may be applied to created things, The
last-mentioned number represents fifty-six orders 01
number (.¢. units, tens, hundreds, thousands, &c., &c.) ;
but if those dreamers had more assiduously studied arith-
metic, they would not have invented such outrageous
numbers. God takes care that their trees do not grow
into heaven.


00


CHAPTER XL.


ON THE SAMDHI, THE INTERVAL BETWEEN TWO PERIODS
OF TIME, FORMING THE CONNECTING LINK BETWEEN
THEM.


THE original savidhi is the interval between day and
night, 4.6. morning-dawn, called samdhi udaya, 1.6. the
5011071 of the rising, and evening dawn, called sav-
dhi astamana, 1.6. the 8011108 of the setting. The
Hindus require them for a religious reason, for the
Brahmans wash themselves during them, and also at
noon in the midst between them for dinner, whence an
uninitiated person might infer that there is still a third
50111011. However, none who knows the subject pro-
perly will count more than 570 5.

The Puranas relate the following story of King Hiran-
yakasipu, of the class of the Daitya :—

By practising devotion for a long period, he had
earned the claim that any prayer of his should be
eranted. He asked for eternal life, but only long life
was granted to him, for eternity is a quality of the
Creator alone. Not having obtained the realisation
of this wish, he desired that his death should not be
effected by the hand of a human being, angel, or demon,
and that it should not take place on earth nor in heaven,
neither in the night nor in the day. By such clauses
he meant to avoid death, which is unavoidable by man,
His wish was granted to him.

This wish reminds one of the wish of the devil that
he should be allowed to live till the day of resurrection,


Page 184.
Explanation
of the two
samdhis.


Story of
King Hiran-
yakagipu
and his son
Prahlada.


CHAPTER XL. 365


because on that day all beings would rise from death.
However, he did not attain his object, as it was only
conceded to him to live till the day of the well-known
time, of which it has been said that it is the last of the
days of trouble.

The king had a son called Prahlada, whom he in-
trusted to a teacher when he grew up. One day the
king ordered him into his presence to learn what he
was studying. Now the boy recited to him a poem,
the meaning of which was that only Vishnu exists,
whilst everything else is illusion. This went much
against the opinions of his father, who hated Vishnu,
and therefore he ordered the boy to be intrusted to
another master, and that he should learn to distin-


. guish a friend from an enemy. Thereupon he waited


a certain time, and then examined him again, when the
boy answered, “I have learned what you have ordered,
but I do not want it, for [ am in friendship alike with
everything, not in enmity with anything.” Now his
| father became angry and ordered him to be poisoned.

. The boy took the poison in the name of God and thought
' of Vishnu, and lo! it did not hurt him. His father
said, “Do you know witchcraft and incantations?” The
boy answered, “No, but the God who has created me
and given me to thee watches over me.’ Now the
wrath of the king increased, and he gave orders to
throw him into the deep sea. But the sea threw him
out again, and he returned to his place. Then he was
thrown before the king into a huge blazing fire, but it
did not hurt him, Standing in the flame, he began to
converse with his father on God and his power. When
the boy by chance said that Vishnu is in every place,
his father said, “Is he also in this column of the por-
tico?” The boy said, “Yes.” Then his father jumped
against the column and beat it, whereupon Narasiznha
came forth from it, a human figure with a lion’s head,
therefore neither a human being, nor an angel, nor a


366 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


demon. Now the king and his people began to fight
with Narasirnha, who let them do so, for it was day-
time. But when it was towards evening and they were
in the 50711076 or twilight, therefore neither in the day
nor in the night, then Narasiznha caught the king,
raised him into the air, and killed him there; therefore
not on earth nor in heaven. The prince was taken out
of the fire and ruled in his place.


Saindhi Hindu astrologers require the two saridhi, because

used 0 . . .

astrology, then some of the zodiacal signs exercise the most power-
aranami-


hira quoted. ful influence, as we shall explain hereafter in the proper
place. They make use of them in a rather superficial
way, simply reckoning the time of each samdhi as one
muhirta = two ghatt = 48 minutes. However, Varaha-
mihira, excellent astronomer as he is, always only used
day and night, and did not allow himself to follow the
opinion of the crowd regarding the savidhi. He ex-
plained the 5011:0764 as that which it really is, viz. as
the moment when the centre of the body of the sun

Page 185. gtands exactly over the horizontal circle, and this
moment he establishes to be the time of the greatest
power of certain zodiacal signs.


SR i Besides the two samdhi of the natural day, astrono-
the year-half merg and other people assume still other samdhis
and its com- ,


006 which do not rest on a law of nature nor on observa-
cession of tion, but simply on some hypothesis. So they attribute


noxes, a samdhi to each ayana, 4.6. to each of the year-halves


a 5011071 of seven days before its real beginning. On
this subject I have an idea which is certainly possible,
and even rather likely, viz. that this theory is of
recent origin, not of ancient date, and that it has been
brought forward about 1300 of Alexander (=A.D. 989),
when the Hindus found out that the real solstice
precedes the solstice of their calculation, For Pui-
jala, the author of the Small Mdnasa, says that in the
year 854 of the Sakakila the real solstice preceded his


CHAPTER XL. 367


calculation by 6° 50’, and that this difference will in-
crease in future by one minute every year.

These are the words of a man who either was him-
self a most careful practical observer, or who examined
the observations of former astronomers which he had
at his disposal, and thereby found out the amount of
the annual difference. No doubt, also, other people
have perceived the same or a similar difference by
means of the calculation of the noon-shadows. There-
fore (as this observation was already much known)
Utpala of Kashmir has taken this theory from Pufjala.

This conjecture of mine is confirmed by the fact that
the Hindus prefix the samdhis of the solstices to each
of the six seasons of the year, in consequence of which
they begin already with the twenty-third degrees of the
next preceding signs.

The Hindus assume a 50:11:07, too, between the dif-
ferent yugas and between the manvantaras ; but as the
bases of this theory are hypothetical, so everything else
derived from them is hypothetical. We shall give a
sufficient explanation of these things in the proper
place.


( 368 )


CHAPTER XLII.


DEFINITION OF THE TERMS “KALPA” AND “CATURYUGA,”
AND AN EXPLICATION OF THE ONE BY THE OTHER.


TWELVE thousand Divya-years, the length of which has
already been explained (v. chap. xxxv.), are one catur-
yuga, and 1000 caturyugas are one kalpa, a period at
the beginning and end of which there is a conjunction
of the seven planets and their apsides and nodes in 0”
of Aries. The days of the kalpa are called the kalpa-
ahargand, for dh means day, and argana means the swm.
Since they are civil days derived from the rising of the
sun, they are also called days of the earth, for rising
presupposes an horizon, and an horizon is one of the
necessary attributes of the earth.

By the same name, kalpa-ahargana, people also call
the sum of days of any era up to a certain date.

Our Muslim authors call the days of the kalpa the
days of the Sind-hind or the days of the world, counting
them as 1,577,916,450,000 days (sdévana or civil days),
or 4,320,000,000 solar years, or 4,452,775,000 lunar
years. The same sum of days converted into years of
ay civil days is equal to 4,383,101,250 of them, and to

2,000,000 divya-years.

The Aditya-Purina says, “ Kalpana is composed of
kal, which means the existence of the species in the
world, and pana, which means their destruction and
disappearance. The sum of this existing and perish-
ing is a kalpa.”

Brahmagupta says, “Since the planets and mankind


On the mea-


sure of a
caturyuga


and a kalpa.


CHAPTER XLI. 369


in the world came into existence at the beginning of
the day of Brahman, and since they both perish at
the end of it, we must adopt this day of their existence
as a kalpa, not another period.”

In another place he says: “A thousand caturyuga are Page 186.
one day of Devaka, i.e. Brahman, and a night of his is
of the same length. Therefore his day is equal to 2000
caturyugas.”

In the same way Vyasa the son of Pardgara says: “ He
who believes that 1000 catwryugas are a day and 1000
١ caturyugas a night, knows Brahman.”

Within the space of a kalpa 71 caturyugas are equal Relation be-
to I manu, 1.e. manvantara, or Manu-period, and 14 اراد‎
manus are equal to 1 kalpa. Multiplying 71 by 14, 4ك‎
you get 994 caturyugas as the period of 14 manvan-
taras, and a remainder of 6 caturyugas till the end of

the kalpa.

If we, however, divide these 6 catwryugas by 15, in
order to find the samdhi both at the beginning and end
of each of the 14 manvantaras, the number of the
samdhos being by 1 larger than that of the manvantaras,
the quotient is .قطنم‎ If we now insert 2 caturyuga
between each two consecutive manvantaras, and add the
same amount both at the beginning of the first and the
end of the last manvantaras, the fraction of 2 disap-
pears at the end of 15 manvantaras (2 xX 15 = 6). The
fractions at the beginning and end of the kalpa repre-
sent the samdhi, v.e.a common link. <A kalpa, includ-
ing its samdhi, has 1000 caturyugas, as we have said in
the first part of this chapter.

The single parts of a kalpa stand in a constant rela- Conditions
tion to each other, one bearing witness regarding the Panag
other. For it commences with the vernal equinox, a aoe
Sunday, the conjunction of the planets, their apsides
and nodes, which takes place there where there is neither
Revati nor Asvint, 2.6. between them, at the beginning
of the month Caitra, and in the moment of the sun’s


VOL, I, 2A


370 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


rising over Lank&. When there occurs an irregularity
with one of these conditions, all the others become con-
fused and are no longer valid.

We have already mentioned the number of the days
and the years of a kalpa. Accordingly a caturyuga, as
zoo0th of a kalpa, has 1,577,916,450 days and 4,320,000
years. The numbers show the relation between a kalpa
and a caturyuga, and show further how to determine
the one by the other.

All we have said in this chapter rests on the theory
of Brahmagupta and on the arguments by which he
supports it.

Aryabhata the elder and Pulisa compose the manvan-
tara from 72 caturyugas, and the kalpa from 14 man-
vantaras, Without inserting anywhere asamdhi. There-
fore, according to them, a kalpa has 1008 caturyugas ;
further, 12,096,000 dwya years, or 4,354,560,000 human
years.

According to Pulisa, a caturyuga has 1,577,917,800
cwil days. According to him, therefore, the sum of the
days of a kalpa would be 1,590,541,142,400. These are
the numbers which he uses in his book.

I have not been able to find anything of the books
of Aryabhata. All I know of him I know through
the quotations from him given by Brahmagupta. The
latter says in a treatise called Critical Research on the
Basis of the Canons, that according to Aryabhata the
sum of the days of a caturyuga is 1,577,917, 500, 1.¢.
300 days less than according to Pulisa. Therefore Arya-
bhata would give to a ain 1,590,540,840,000 days.

According to Aryabhata and Pulisa, the kalpa and
caturyuga begin with midnight which follows after the
day the beginning of which is the beginning of the —
kalpa, according to Brahmagupta.

Aryabhata of Kusumapura, who belongs to the school
of the elder Aryabhata, says in a small book of his on
Al-nif (2), that “1008 catuwryugas are one day of Brah-


Theories of
Aryabhata
the elder,

Pulisa, and
Aryabhata


the younger.


Page 187.


CHAPTER XLI. 371


man. The first half of 504 catuwryugas is called utsar-


| . ptnt, during which the sun is ascending, and the second


half is called avasarpini, during which the sun is de-
scending, The midst of this period is called sama, we.
equality, for it is the midst ‘of the day, and the two
ends are called durtama (?).”

This is so far correct, as the comparison betwen day
and kalpa goes, but the remark about the sun’s ascend-
ing and descending 15 not correct. If he meant the
sun who makes owr day, it was his duty to explain of
what kind that ascending and descending of the sun is;
but if he meant a sun who specially belongs to the day
of Brahman, it was his duty to show or to describe him
to us. J almost think that the author meant by these
two expressions the progressive, increasing develop-
ment of things during the first half of this period, and
the retrograde, decreasing development in the second
half.


0000


CHAPTER XLII.


ON THE DIVISION OF THE CATURYUGA INTO YUGAS, AND
THE DIFFERENT OPINIONS REGARDING THE LATTER.


The single THE author of the Vishnu-Dharma says: “Twelve hun-


parts of a


caturyuga red diwya years are one yuga, called tishya. The double


pie ” of ib iste dvdpara, the triple a tretd, the quadruple a
pe ee krita, and all four yugas together are one caturyuga, 1.¢.
eee the four yugas or 5.
“Seventy-one caturyugas are one manvantara, and
14 manvantaras, together with a sazrdhi of the duration
of one kritayuga between each two of them, are one
kalpa. Two kalpas are a nychthemeron of Brahman,
and his life is a hundred years, or one day of Purusha,
the first man, of whom neither beginning nor end is
known.”
This is what Varuna, the lord of the water, communi-
cated to Rama, the son of Dagaratha, in primeval times,
* since he knew these things thoroughly. The same
information has also been given by Bhargava, “Ze.
Markandeya, who had such a perfect knowledge of time
that he easily mastered every number. He is to the
Hindus lke the angel of death, who kills them with
his seat, being aprati-dhrishya (rresistible).
Brahmacupta says: “The book Smriti mentions that
4000 devaka years are one kritayuga, but together with
a 501110171 of 400 years and a sarrdhydiiga of 400 years,
a kritayuga has 4800 devaka years.
“ Three thousand years are one ¢retdyuga, but together


CHAPTER. ع‎ 373


with a samndhi and a samndhydimégsa, each of 300 years, a
tretayuga has 3600 years.
| “Two thousand years are a dvdpara, but together
with a samdhi and a samdhydrisa, each of 200 years,
a dvdpara has 2400 years.
“A thousand years are one kali, but together with a
samdhi and a saimdhydmésa, each of 100 years, a kale-
yuga has 1200 years.”
This is what Brahmagupta quotes from the book
Smriti.
» Divya years are changed into human years by being puration of
multiplied by 360. Accordingly the four yugas have jujas’


Yyugas.
the following sums of human years :—
A kritayuga has 1,440,000 years,
besides 144,000 وو‎ 5010/11
and 144,000 ,, samdhyamsa.
Sum total 1,728,000 years=one kritayuga.
A tretdyuga has 1,080,000 years,
besides 105000 | samadhi,
and 108,000 _,, samdhydnsa. Page 188,
Sum total 1,296,000 years=one tretdyuga.
A dvdpara has" 720,000 years,
besides G2000 20s sandhi,
and 52,0600 ys samdhydmsa.
Sum total 864,000 years=one dvdpara.
A kali has 360,000 years,
besides 50000 sa samdhi,
and 56600 samdhydmsa.
Sum total 432,000 years=one kaliyuga.


“The sum of the krita and tretd is 3,024,000 years,
and the sum of the krita, tretd, and dvdpara is
3,888,000 years.” ١

Further, Brahmagupta says that “Aryabhata con- Aryabbata
siders the four yugas as the four equal parts of a catur- quoted by.
yuga. Thus he differs from the doctrine of the book gupta.


Smriti, just mentioned, and he who differs from us is an


374 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


opponent.” On the other hand, Brahmagupta praises
Paulisa for what he does, since he does not differ from
the book Smriti, for he subtracts 1200 from the
4800 years of the kritayuga, and diminishes the re-
mainder still more and more, so as to get 77005 which
correspond with those of the Smriti, but yugas without
samdhi and sarndhydmsa. As regards the Greeks, we
may notice that they have nothing like the tradition
of the Smriti, for they do not measure time by yugas,
manvantaras, or kalpas.

So far the quotation from Brahmagupta.

As is well known, there is no difference of opinion
on the sum of the years of a complete caturyuga. There-
fore, according to Aryabhata, the kaliyuga has 3000 divya
years or 1,080,000 human years. Each two yugas has
6000 divyw years or 2,160,000 human years. Hach
three yugas has 9000 dwya years or 3,240,000 human
years.

There is a tradition that Paulisa in his Siddhdnta
specifies various new rules for the computation of these
numbers, some of which may be accepted, whilst others
are to be rejected. Soin the rule for the computation
of the yugas he puts 48 as the basis and subtracts one-
fourth of it, soas to get 36. Then he again subtracts
12, for this number is his basis of subtraction, so as to
get 24, and subtracting the same number a third time,
he gets 12. These 12 he multiplies by 100, and the
product represents the number of divya years of the
yugas.

If he had made the number 60 the basis, for most
things may be determined by it, and had made one-fifth
of it the basis of subtraction, or if he had subtracted
from 60 consecutive fractions of the remaining number,
first + = 12, from the remainder + = 12, from the re-
mainder + = 12, and from the remainder } = 12, he
would have obtained the same result which he has found
by his method (60-4=48,-7=36,-$=24,-3=12). |


The rule of
Paulisa.


Criticism
thereon.


CHAPTER XLII: ans


It is possible that Paulisa simply mentions this method
as one among others, and that itis not that one in par-
ticular which he himself adopted. A translation of his
whole work into Arabic has not hitherto yet been under-
taken, because in his mathematical problems there is
an evident religious and theological tendency.
Pulisa deviates from the rule which he himself gives Pulisa cal-


culates how


when he wants to compute how many of our years have much of the


elapsed of the life of Brahman before the present kalpa. roan Hash


Up to the time of his writing, eight years five months fore wera
and four days of a new kalpa had elapsed. He counts """””
6068 kalpas. As, according to him, a kalpa has 1008
caturyugas, he multiplies this number by 1008 and gets
6,116,544 caturyugas. These he changes into yugas by
multiplying them by 4, and he gets 24,466,176 yugas.

As a yuga, according to him, has 1,080,000 years, he
multiplies the number of yugas by 1,080,000, and gets Page xo.
as the product 26,423,470,080,000, 4.6. the number of

years which have elapsed of the life of Brahman before

the present kalpa.

Perhaps it will seem strange to the followers of criticisms
Brahmagupta that he (Pulisa) has not changed the 0
caturyugas into exact yugas, but simply changed them
into fourth parts (by dividing them by 4), and mul-
tiplied these fourth parts by the number of years of a
single fourth part.

Now, we do not ask him what is the use of repre-
senting the catwryugas as fourth parts, inasmuch as
they have no fraction which, in this manner, must be
reduced to wholes. The multiplication of the whole
caturyugas by the years of one complete caturyuga, v.e.
4,320,000, would have been sufficiently lengthy. We,
however, say that he would be correct in doing so if he
had not been influenced by the wish of bringing the
elapsed years of the present kalpa into relation with the
last-mentioned number, and multiplied the complete
elapsed manvantaras by 72 in agreement with his


376 ALBERUNIS INDIA.


theory ; further, if he had not multiplied the product
by the years of a catwryuga, which gives the product of
1,866,240,000 years, and, moreover, had not multiplied
the number of the complete catwryugas which have
elapsed of the current manvantara by the years of a
single catwryuga, which gives the product of 116,640,000
years. Of the current caturyuga there have elapsed
three yugas, 1.6. according to him, 3,240,000 years. The
latter number represents three-fourths of the years of a
caturyuga. He uses the same number when computing
the week-day of a date by means of the number of the
days of the here-mentioned number of years. If he
believed in the above-mentioned rule, he would use it
where it is required, and he would reckon the three
yugas as nine-tenths of a caturyuga.

Now, it is evident that that which Brahmagupta re-
lates on his authority, and with which he himself agrees,
is entirely unfounded ; but he is blind to this from sheer
hatred of Aryabhata, whom he abuses excessively. And
in this respect Aryabhata and Pulisa are the same to
him. I take for witness the passage of Brahmagupta
where he says that Aryabhata has subtracted something
from the cycles of the Caput Draconis and of the apsis
of the moon, and thereby rendered confused the com-
putation of the eclipse. He is rude enough to compare
Aryabhata to a worm which, eating the wood, by chance
describes certain characters in it, without understanding
them and without intending to drawthem. “He, how-
ever, who knows these thine thoroughly stands oppo-
site to Aryabhata, Srishena, and Vishnucandra like the
lion against gazelles. They are not capable of letting
him see their faces.” In such offensive terms he attacks
Aryabhata and maltreats him.

We have already mentioned (v. chap. xli.) how many
civil days (sdévana) a caturyuga has according to the
three scholars. Pulisa gives it 1350 days more than
Brahmagupta, but the number of years of a caturyuga


Brahmagup-


ta’s harsh
criticisms
on Arya-
bhata.


Different
lengths of
the solar
year.


CHAPTER XLII, S77


is the same according to both. Therefore, evidently
Pulisa gives the solar year more days than Brahma-
supta. To judge from the report of Brahmagupta,
Aryabhata gives a caturyuga 300 days less than Pulisa,
and 1050 more than Brahmagupta, Accordingly, Arya-
bhata must reckon the solar year longer than Brahma-
gupta and shorter than Pulisa.


000


CHAPTER XLIII.


A DESCRIPTION OF THE FOUR YUGAS, AND OF ALL THAT
IS EXPECTED TO TAKE PLACE AT THE END OF THE
FOURTH YUGA.


THE ancient Greeks held regarding the earth various
opinions, of which we shall relate one for the sake of
an example.

The disasters which from time to time befal the earth,
both from above and from below, differ in quality and
quantity. Frequently it has experienced one so in-
commensurable in quality or in quantity, or in both
together, that there was no remedy against it, and that
no flight or caution was of any avail. The catastrophe
comes on lke a deluge or an earthquake, bringing
destruction either by the breaking in of the surface,
or by drowning with water which breaks forth, or by
burning with hot stones and ashes that are thrown
out, by thunderstorms, by landslips, and typhoons; fur-
ther, by contagious and other diseases, by pestilence,
and more of the ike. Thereby a large region is stripped
of its inhabitants; but when after a while, after the
disaster and its consequences have passed away, the
country begins to recover and to show new signs of life,
then different people flock there together like wild —
animals, who formerly were dwelling in hiding-holes
and on the tops of the mountains. They become
civilised by assisting each other against common foes,
wild beasts or men, and furthering each other in the
hope for a life in safety and joy. Thus they increase —


On natural
cataclysms.


Page ب+-وع‎


CHAPTER XLITITI. 379


| to great numbers; but then ambition, circling round
them with the wings of wrath and envy, begins to dis-
turb the serene bliss of their life.
Sometimes a nation of such a kind derives its pedi-
sree from a person who first settled in the place or
distinguished himself by something or other, so that he
alone continues to live in the recollection of the suc-
ceeding generations, whilst all others beside him are
forgotten, Plato mentions in the Book of Laws Zeus, we.
| Jupiter, as the forefather of the Greeks, and to Zeus is Pedigree of.
traced back the pedigree of Hippocrates, which is men- cote
_ tioned in the last chapters added at the end of the book.
We must, however, observe that the pedigree contains
only very few generations, not more than fourteen. Itis
the following :—Hippokrates— Gnosidikos-——Nebros ب‎
Sostratos — Theodoros — Kleomyttades — Krisamis —
Dardanas—Sostratos— دلو سوس‎ | (?)—Hippolochos—Po-
. daleirios —Machaon—Asclepios—A pollo—Zeus—Kvro-
nos, 2.6. Saturn.
The Hindus have similar traditions regarding the Hindu
١ Caturyuga, for according to them, at the beginning of ا‎
it, ie. at the beginning of Kritayuga, there was happiness azes or
and safety, fertility and abundance, health and force, 7“
ample knowledge and a great number of Brahmans.
_ The good is complete in this age, like four-fourths of a
. whole, and life lasted 4000 years alike for all beings
during this whole space of time.
Thereupon things began to decrease and to be mixed
with opposite elements to such a degree, that at the
beginning of Tretayuga the good was thrice as much as
the invading bad, and that bliss was three-quarters of
the whole. There were a greater number of Kshat-
riyas than of Brahmans, and life had the same length
as in the preceding age. So it is represented by the
Vishnu-Dharma, whilst analogy requires that it should
be shorter by the same amount than bliss is smaller, 2.¢.
by one-fourth. In this age, when offering to the fire,


380 - ALBERUNTS INDIA.


they begin to kill animals and to tear off plants, Be
tices which before were unknown.

Thus the evil increases till, at the beginning of Dva-
para, evil and good exist in equal proportions, and like-
wise bliss and misfortune. The climates begin to differ,
there is much killing going on, and the religions become
different. Life becomes shorter, and lasts only 400
years, according to the Vishnu-Dharma. Atthe begin-
ning of Tishya, 4.6. Kaliyuga, evil is thrice as much as
the remaining good,

The Hindus have several well-known traditions of
events which are said to have occurred in the Treté and
Dvapara yugas, ¢.g. the story of Rama, who killed Ra-
vana; that of Parasurama the Brahman, who killed every
Kshatriya he laid hold upon, revenging on them the
death of his father. They think that he lives in heaven,
that he has already twenty-one times appeared on earth,
and that he will again appear. Further, the story of
the war of the children of Pandu with those of Kuru.

In the Kaliyuga evil increases, till at last it results —
in the destruction of all good. At that time the inhabi- _
tants of the earth perish, and a new race rises out of —
those who are scattered through the mountains and hide
themselves in caves, uniting for the purpose of worship-
ping and flying from the horrid, demoniac human race.
Therefore this age is called Aritayuga, which means
“ Being ready for going away after having finished the
work,” ;

In the story of Saunaka which Venus received from
Brahman, God speaks to him in the following words: —
“When the Kaliyuga comes, I send Buddhodana, the
son of Suddhodana the pious, to spread the good in the
creation. But then the Muhammira, 4.6. the red-wear- —
ing ones, who derive their origin from him, will change
everything that he has brought, and the dignity of the —
Brahmans will be gone to such a degree that a Sidra,
their servant, will be impudent towards them, and that


Page rgt.


Description
of the
Kaliyuga.


CHAPTER 7 301


a Sidra and Candala will share with them the presents
and offerings. Men will entirely be occupied with
gathering wealth by crimes, with hoarding up, not re-
fraining from committing horrid and sinful crimes. All
this will result in a rebellion of the small ones against
the great ones, of the children against their parents,
of the servants against their masters. The castes will
be in uproar against each other, the genealogies will
become confused, the four castes will be abolished, and
there will be many religions and sects. Many books
will be composed, and the communities which formerly
were united will on account of them be dissolved into
single individuals. The temples will be destroyed and
the schools will lie waste. Justice will be gone, and
١ the kings will not know anything but oppression and
١ spohation, robbing and destroying, as if they wanted
١ to devour the people, foolishly indulging in far-reaching
hopes, and not considering how short life is in com-
parison with the sins (for which they have to atone).
١ The more the mind of people is depraved, the more will
١ pestilential diseases be prevalent. Lastly, people main-
tain that most of the astrological rules obtained in that
age are void and false.
| These ideas have been adopted by Mani, for he says: saying of |
“Know ye that the affairs of the world have been ee
changed and altered; also priesthood has been changed
since the odatpas of heaven, 1.6. the spheres, have been
changed, and the priest can no longer acquire such a
knowledge of the stars in the circle of a sphere as their
١ fathers were able to acquire. They lead mankind astray
by fraud. What they prophesy may by chance happen,
but frequently it does not happen.”
The description of these things in the Vishnu-Dharma description
is much more copious than we have given it. People eee
will be ignorant of what is reward and punishment; {Sine ”
| they will deny that the angels have absolute know- Fake
ledge, Their lives will be of different length, and none


382 ALBERUNI'S INDIA.


of them will know how long it is. The one will die as —
an embryo, the other as a baby or child. The pious
will be torn away and will not have a long life, but
he who does evil and denies religion will live longer. —
Siidras will be kings, and will be like rapacious wolves, —
robbing the others of all that pleases them. The doings
of the Brahmans will be of the same kind, but the
majority will be Sidras and brigands. The laws of the —
Brahmans will be abolished. People will point with —
their fingers at those who worry themselves with the —
practice of frugality and poverty as a curiosity, will
despise them, and will wonder at a man worshipping ~
Vishnu; for all of them have become of the same .
(wicked) character. Therefore any wish will soon be
Page roe. granted, little merit receive great reward, and honour '
and dignity be obtained by little worship and service.
But finally, at the end of the yuga, when the evil
will have reached its highest pitch, there will come for-
ward Garga, the son of J-S-V (?) the Brahman, 4.6. Kali,
after whom this yuga is called, gifted with an irresis- |
tible force, and more skilled in the use of any weapon
than any other. Then he draws his sword to make
good all that has become bad; he cleans the surface of
the earth of the impurity of people and clears the earth .
of them. He collects the pure and pious ones for the
purpose of procreation. Then the Kritayuga lies far —
behind them, and the time and the world return to —
purity, and to absolute good and to bliss.
This is the nature of the yugas as they circle round 1
through the Caturyuga. ظ‎
مسر‎ origin Lhe book Caraka, as quoted by ‘Alt Ibn ‘Zain of
0 Tabaristan, says: “In primeval times the earth was
Curate always fertile and healthy, and the elements or maha-
bhita were equally mixed. Men lived with each other
in harmony and love, without any lust and ambition,
hatred and envy, without anything that makes soul and |
body ill. But then came envy, and lust followed.


CHAPTER XLIII. 383


Driven by lust, they strove to hoard up, which was dif-
ficult to some, easy to others. All kinds of thoughts,
labours, and cares followed, and resulted in war, deceit,
and lying. The hearts of men were hardened, the
natures were altered and became exposed to diseases,
which seized hold of men and made them neglect the
worship of God and the furtherance of science. Igno-
rance became deeply rooted, and the calamity became
ereat, Then the pious met before their anchorite
Kriéa (?) the son of Atreya, and deliberated ; whereupon
the sage ascended the mountain and threw himself on
the earth. Thereafter God taught him the science of
medicine.”

All this much resembles the traditions of the Greeks, Quotation
which we have related (in another place). For Aratus tus.
says in his Sasvoueva, and in his intimations referring
to the seventh zodiacal sign: “ Look under the feet of
the Herdsman, 1.6. Al awwd, among the northern figures,
and you see the Virgin coming with a blooming ear otf
corn in her hand, 12.6. Alsimdk Ala‘zal. She belongs
either to the star-race, which are said to be the fore-
fathers of the ancient stars, or she was procreated by
another race which we do not know. People say that
in primeval times she lived among mankind, but only
among women, not visible to men, being called Justice.
She used to unite the aged men and those who stood
in the market-places and in the streets, and exhorted
them with a loud voice to adhere to the truth. She
presented mankind with innumerable wealth and be-
stowed rights upon them. At that time the earth was
called golden. None of its inhabitants knew pernicious
hypocrisy in deed or word, and there was no objection-
able schism among them. They lived a quiet life, and
did not yet navigate the sea in ships. The cows afforded
the necessary sustenance.

« Afterwards, when the golden race had expired and
the silver race come on, Virgo mixed with them, but


384 ALBERUNDIS INDIA.


without being happy, and concealed herself in the
mountains, having no longer intercourse with the women
as formerly. Then she went to the large towns, warned
their inhabitants, scolded them for their evil doings,
and blamed them for ruining the race which the
golden fathers had left behind. She foretold them
that there would come a race still worse than they,
and that wars, bloodshed, and other great disasters
would follow.

“ After having finished, she disappeared into the moun-
tains till the silver race expired and a bronze race came
up. People invented the sword, the doer of evil; they
tasted of the meat of cows, the first who did it. By all
this their neighbourhood became odious to Justice, and
she flew away to the sphere.”

The commentator of the book of Aratus says: “ This
Virgin is the daughter of Zeus. She spoke to the
people on the public places and streets, and at that
time they were obedient to their rulers, not knowing
the bad nor discord. Without any altercation or envy
they lived from agriculture, and did not travel on sea
for the sake of commerce nor for the lust of plunder.
Their nature was as pure as gold.

“But when they gave up these manners and no
longer adhered to truth, Justice no longer had inter-
course with them, but she observed them, dwelling in
the mountains. When, however, she came to their
meetings, though unwillingly, she threatened them, for
they listened in silence to her words, and therefore she
no longer appeared to those who called her, as she had
formerly done. |

“ When, then, after the silver race, the bronze race
came up, when wars followed each other and the evil
spread in the world, she started off, for she wanted on
no account to stay with them, and hated them, and went
towards the sphere.

“There are many traditions regarding this Justice.


Page 193.


A scholion
on Aratus.


CHAPTER. XLITI. 385


According to some, she is Demeter, because she has the
ear of corn; according to others, she is Tuyn.”
This is what Aratus says.
The following occurs in the third book of the Laws Quotation
7 of Plato :-— Tao
“The Athenian said, ‘There have been deluges, dis- ne
eases, disasters on earth, from which none has been
saved but herdsmen and mountaineers, as the remnants
of a race not practised in deceit and in the love of
power.’
“The Knossian said, ‘At the beginning men loved
each other sincerely, feeling lonely in the desert of the
world, and because the world had sufficient room for
all of them, and did not compel them to any exertion.
There was no poverty among them, no possession, no
contract. There was no creed among them, and neither
_ silver nor gold. There were no rich people among
them and no poor. If we found any of their books,
they would afford us numerous proofs for all this.’ ”


0) Op 28


( 386 )


CHAPTER XLIV.
ON THE MANVANTARAS.


As 72,000 kalpas are reckoned as the life of Brahman, 4
the manvantara, 2.6. period of Manu, is reckoned as the


period. His post is occupied by another Indra, who
then rules the world in the new manvantara. Brahma-
cupta says: “Ifa man maintains that there 15 1100 1
between two manvantaras, and reckons each manvan-
tara as 71 caturyugas, he will find that the kalpa is too
short by six caturyugas, and the minus below 1000 (1.8.
in 994) is not better than the plus above 1000 (we. in
1008, according to Aryabhata). Both numbers, how-
ever, differ from the book Smriti.”

Further he says: “ Aryabhata mentions in two books
of his, the one of which is called Dagagttikd, the other
ArydSstasata, that each manvantara is equal to 72 catur-
yugas. Accordingly he reckons a kalpa at 1008 catur-
yugas (14 X* 72).”

In the book Vishnu-Dharma Markandeya gives to
Vajra the following answer: “ Purusha is the lord of
the universe; the lord of the kalpa 18 Brahman, the '
lord of the world; but the lord of the manvantara is
Manu. There are fourteen Manus, from whom the
kings of the earth, ruling at the beginning of each man- —
vantara, descended.”

We have united their names in the following table :— ©


The single
manvanta-
ras, their
Indras, and


the children 1116 of Indra, whose rule ends with the end of the


of Indra.


Page 194.


عر Ee‏ ا ا ا een‏


VI
5


cI
11


OI


OW *‏ هذ تح الهم


N


بر


- 18111861


=
By
6
2
ع‎
8
(sp
®
4


- 81 914 JO


17171
21


eryndevipny
TUIVAYSVULIBY (T
TUIVAYSVUTY VIG,
‘VYSyeVd


TUIVAGS
VIVASVATS A,
8151118390
اتات‎
(;) eseuryyg
TUS} NY
VYSTOOIBAG
evanyqurehpZag
"1011101-11


ot} 01 +23
911 171


OY} JO 5050812 OUT,


ekyneyg
(2) eAYyqrey
ergndeysyeq
erqyudeipnyy
vryndeunrey qd
VUIVYC-NUyst A
TUIVAGS
CYVASVATIL A
81131119531170
7110117
8111919
111117
7110011919
تدم‎ 141
٠51111811 الخر1-131151)‎


90111 04 Sut
-0100017 8905118 جز‎ ALO,


)( 11

(2) 1
91110

0111
0.11

10111
end

-NUYSTA
210

- 071110


11114
001170 918 OAT 3891]


81924884718 A
71811153190


2101111
(4) 5896
1101077
VYSTOOIBAG


VANYQuUVABAG


١800:1110 301110 5033
1038+ 89518 جز‎ ALOT,


(j) pApe-vedugpng 81105 716 rong
(;) BApPB-BIJLOTA "79590821310 TyeVdseVAl

“ey ysors
-eaog ‘eo-seaopednuyaA ‘(j) 1ه‎ UVUIBYPVULY
(;) 181114190311711 VYLUBAI “VSV.IYLAIGG eysti A
"711011511101 1918 ]117111714 ]( 9 1
0151717170117 [ن‎ 194811711 121 11


SULY 8

| ‘BY SOuIN 1111170957 ‘sefvar, | “dur oyy ‘Teg
TypAreg ‘euysring ‘(¢) eseqeN 1
(ن)‎ Byynuvsg “euunApeyes “any Nang


(4) eqqowy (ن)'‎
‘eyvAyeg ‘ekayyquiesng “nypurqr[eg


elvpusing
vavlouryy


({) vyeny


ايك 87717 YeAy yy‏ م817 ماكر ‘eysuelnuge‏
01 8نم حكن )2(

(2) ByBAyTED
nue, JO 110101112 oy} 10 9811 oy, qrosedt A.


| Butog JoyjO 4118 TATA 11011111109 UT SUTTJOU 1
OYA ‘VIPUT SI 2187118411181 ISI OY} JO 191111 oy} 88 2211811]


eUeIN {-NUYystA
or} 0} 2571200018 “potsed ove Jo
291117115115090 9} 18 69113: OYA 511188 9511 JO
2ه‎ 1115] 914 1181 JO 1917211110 9114 Jo 835081 OUT,


*171191111-1115 4
9011 01 +73
812111 Jo 893121716 OUT,


MN
6
6


لك فب بك الك لا 21


368 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


The difference which the reader perceives in the enu-
meration of the future manvantaras beyond the seventh
one, arises, as I think, from the same cause whence
the difference in the names of the Dvipas is derived
(v. pp. 235, 236), viz. from the fact that the people care
more for the names than for the order in which they
are handed down to posterity. We may here rely on
the tradition of the Vishnu-Purdna, for in this book
their number, their names and descriptions, are given
in such a way that renders it necessary to us to con-
sider also the order in which it gives them as trust-
worthy. But we have refrained from communicating
these things in this place, since they offer only very
little use.

The same book relates that King Maitreya, a Ksha- —
triya, asked 202864313, the father of Vyasa, about the
past and the future manvantaras. Thereupon the latter
mentions the name by which each Manu is known, the
same names which our table exhibits. According to
the same book, the children of each Manu will rule the
earth, and it mentions the first of them, the names of
whom we have given in the table. According to the
same source, the Manus of the second, third, fourth,
and fifth manvantaras will be of the race of Priyavrata,
an anchorite, who stood in such favour with Vishnu,
that he honoured his children by raising them to this
distinction.


Page 195.
The tradi-
tion of
Vishnu-
Purdna re-
lating to the
manvanta-
Tas.


(= 389~ )


CHAPTER XLV.
ON THE CONSTELLATION OF THE GREAT BEAR.


TE Great Bear is in the Indian language called Saptar- a tradition
shayas, 1.6. the Seven Rishis, They are said to have been ل‎
anchorites who nourished themselves only with what it Victnins,
is allowable to eat, and with them there was a pious
woman, Al-suhd (Ursa Major, star 80 by £). They
plucked off the stalks of the lotus from the ponds to eat

of them. Meanwhile came Zhe Law (Dharma?) and
concealed her from them. Every one of them felt
ashamed of the other, and they swore oaths which were
approved of by Dharma. In order to honour them,

٠ Dharma raised them to that place where they are now

seen (sic),

We have already mentioned that the books of the Quotation
Hindus are composed in metres, and therefore the authors ا‎
indulge in comparisons and epitheta ornantia, such as
are admired by their countrymen. Of the same kind
is a description of the Great Bear in the 5011/11 of
Varahamihira, where it occurs before the astrological
prognostics derived from this constellation. We give
the passage according to our translation :+—

“The northern region is adorned with these stars, as
a beautiful woman is adorned with a collar of pearls
strung together, and a necklace of white lotus flowers,

a handsomely arranged one. Thus adorned, they are
like maidens who dance and revolve round the pole as
the pole orders them. And I say, on the authority of


1 Samhita, chap. xiii. 7. 1-6,


390 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


Garga, the ancient, the primeval one, that the Great —
Bear stood in Magh4, the tenth lunar station, when
Yudhishthira ruled the earth, and the Sakakala was
2520 years after this. The Great Bear remains in each
lunar station 600 years, and it rises in the north-east.
He (of the Seven Rishis) who then rules the east is
Marici; west of him is Vasishtha, then Angiras, Atri,
Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, and near Vasishtha there is a '
chaste woman called Arundhati.”

As these names are sometimes confounded with each
other, we shall try to identify them with the corre-
sponding stars in the Great Bear :—


Marici is the 27th star of this constellation.
Vasishtha ,, 26th 5 7


Angiras 99 25th 25 535 ::
Atri » 18th i> 7 7
Kratu » 1 6th 9 ” ”
Pulaha gael 76a 7 9 9


Pulastya ,, 19th ,9 7


These stars occupy in our time, 1.6. in the 952nd year
of the Sakak4la, the space between 14° of Leo and 134°
of Spica (Virgo). According to the peculiar motion of the
fixed stars, as we know it, the same stars occupied at |
the time of Yudhishthira the space between 82° Gemini _
and 202° of Cancer. |

According to the motion of the fixed stars, as adopted —
by the ancient astronomers and Ptolemy, these stars
occupied at that time the space between 264° of Gemini ~
and 83° of Leo, and the here-mentioned lunar station
(Magha) occupied the space between 0 - 800 minutes
in Leo, a

Therefore it would be much more suitable i the
present tume to represent the Seven Rishis as standing
in Magha than in the time of Yudhishthira. And if —
the Hindus identify Magha with the Heart of the Lion,
we can only say that this constellation at that time
stood in the first degrees of Cancer.


Criticiams
on Garga.


Page 196.


CHAPTER XLV. 301


_ The words of Garga are without any foundation; they
only show how little he knew of that which every
one must know who wants to fix the places of the
stars, elther by eyesight or by means of astronomical
observation on certain degrees of the signs of the
zodiac.
_ 1 have read in the almanacs for the year 951 of the note froma
Sakakala which came from Kashmir the statement ean
that the Seven Rishis stand since seventy-seven years
in the lunar station Anuradha. This station occupies
the space between 34° and the end of 162° of Scorpio.
However, the Seven Rishis precede this place by about
a whole zodiacal sign and 20 degrees, 4.64. by 13 signs
(v. p. 390). But what man would be able to learn all
the different theories of the Hindus, if he does not dwell
among them!

Let us now first suppose that Garga is right, that he rxamina-
has not stated the precise place in Magha which the senate
Seven Rishis occupy, and let us suppose that this place ie poten
was O of Magha, which would correspond to o° of Leo toa a
for our time. Further, between the time of Yudhish-
thira and the present year, 4.6. the year 1340 of Alex-
ander, there is an interval of 3479 years. And, lastly, let
us suppose that Vardhamihira is right in saying that the
Seven Rishis dwell 600 years in each lunar station.
Accordingly, they ought in the present year to stand in
17° 18’ of Libra, which is identical with 10° 38° of Svati.
However, if we suppose that they stood in the midst 01
Magha (not in the beginning), they ought at present
to stand in 3° 58’ of Visdkha. And if we suppose that
they stood in the end of Magha, they ought at present
to stand in 10° 38’ of Visakha.

Hence it is evident that the statement of the Kash-
mirian calendar does not agree with the statement in the
Samhitd. Likewise, if we adopt the rule of the said
calendar regarding the precession of the equinoxes, and
reckon with this measure backward, we do by no means


302 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


arrive at Macha as the lunar station in which the Seven
Rishis stood in the time of Yudhishthira.

Hitherto we used to think that 7m owr time the revo-
lution of the fixed stars is more rapid than in former
times, and we tried to account for this by peculiarities
of the shape of the celestial sphere. According to us,
they move one degree in 66 solar years. Therefore
Varaihamihira highly astonishes us, for, according to
him, the rate of this motion would be one degree in
forty-five years, 4.6. much more rapid than at present,
whilst Ais time precedes ours only by 525 years.

The author of the canon Karanasdra gives the fol-
lowing rule for the computation of the motion of the
Great Bear, and of the place which, at any given time,
it occupies :—

“Subtract 821 from the Sakakila. The remainder
is the basis, .6.ة‎ the number of years above 4000 which
have elapsed since the beginning of the Kaliyuga.


“Multiply the basis by 47, and add 68,000 to the


product. Divide the sum by 10,000. The quotient re-
presents the zodiacal signs and fractions of them, 7.
the position of the Great Bear which was sought.”

The addition of 68,000, prescribed in this rule, must
be the original position of the Great Bear at the be-
ginning of the basis, multiplied by 10,000. If we
divide 68,000 by 10,000, we get the quotient 64, de.
six zodiacal signs and twenty-four degrees of a seventh
sion,

It is evident that if we divide the 10,000 by 47, the
Great Bear has wandered through one zodiacal sign in
212 years, 9 months, and 6 days, according to solar time.
Accordingly it wanders through one degree of a sign —
in 7 years, 1 month, and 3 days, and through one lunar
station in 94 years, 6 months, and 20 days.

Now there is a great difference between the values of
Varahamihira and those of Vittesvara, if there is nota
fault in the tradition. If we, by way of an example


Rule of the
Karanasara
to find the
position of
the Great
Bear at any
time.


CHAPTER XLY. 303


23


make such a computation for the present year (1030
A.D.), we get 9° 17’ in the lunar station Anuradha as
the position of the Great Bear.

The people of Kashmir believed that the Great Bear
wanders through a lunar station in 100 years. There-
fore the above-mentioned calendar says that of the
present centennium of the motion of the Great Bear
there is still a remainder of twenty-three years.

Mistakes and confusion such as we have here laid Theological
open arise, in the first place, from the want of the neces- mixed up
sary skill in astronomical researches, and secondly, from astronomy.
the way of the Hindus of mixing up scientific questions
with religious traditions. For the theologians believe
that the Seven Rishis stand higher than the fixed stars,
and they maintain that in each manvantara there will
appear a new Manu, whose children will destroy the
earth; but the rule will be renewed by Indra, as also
the different classes of the angels and the Seven Rishis.

The angels are necessary, for mankind must offer sacri-

fices to them and must bring to the fire the shares for
them; and the Seven Rishis are necessary, because they Page 197.
must renew the Veda, for it perishes at the end of each
manvantara.

Our information on this subject we take from the The ae
Vishnu-Purdna. From the same source we have taken different
the names of the Seven Rishis in each manvantara, as tara.
exhibited by the following table :—


nm “7


nueyy ATWO ynq ‘STYSIY 1040 9} 1011 VIPUT 101111911 SVAA 9191+ VILIUVAULL STI} UT


06


0110110 Vy
10
00017
تمك‎
80101101
111
17118510 .117 ]ل‎
BUR INV)


UU ay Vy


nYyVepoA
11107
pue 1141180


01141


ؤ :


Bypeovyyy | 10ر51‎ 5 tong equusy br
eynsjnin | vdueyeidysty | volsrepeaqye y, BYOULITN €1
yei0de y, TRAQULOd J, 9419 1101 ZI
nuyst A qeurysnde A. eiyplusy 8180511 II
11117110797 249 11111 07111111 01
4ر288‎ 7111 11111 1 7114179 6
17101) JO ]05 83 :
01011 1 001 VALTBY yeurydyy 8
11101701811117 م‎ 177 7181 71118151 A 4
+ر8.11] ماع 17117 اا‎ 971] 11111 9
)( eredy ee LIsepa A 11181018417117 |S
211 nyywig 11111901 م1104‎ 1
8م0118‎ A JO 1101517110 OL, 5
| 911017 15147 | 71101 7191 | vyqureyselig | 5
1
+ c 3 | I 2 5 2
م‎
م‎
Bog
2


BISVJYN A
eek A
nk
ZUVULYSTAV FT
sefneuneidy


181151104 م‎
1711781117 JO


1108 OY} BSBA A ©


BIPLUNGAST A,

1111511189 |
nygqug
VYVIVA


1 89


‘SVIVIJUVAUB]L 911 UL 58090 11800 91+ Jo 531118 9117 30 8 6 يز‎ -1 858 91]+ ‘a°2 ‘STYSTY 510498 9113


ene
sedvyng
(i) qeduyosy
Vy oVN
VAJOYSYNG
0179
0011158 1 1] 111
7] 10171171]
(i) 187518
efuvlieg


VIVAL


(i) 209784


ALBERUNDS INDIA.


394


Page 108.


On the
nature of
Narayana,


Crs9 55)


CHAPTER XLVI.


ON NARAYANA, HIS APPEARANCE AT DIFFERENT TIMES,
AND HIS NAMES.


NARAYANA is according to the Hindus a supernatural
power, which does not on principle try to bring about
the good by the good, nor the bad by the bad, but to
prevent the evil and destruction by whatever means
happen to be available. For this force the good exists
prior to the bad, but if the good does not properly develop
nor is available, it uses the bad, this being unavoidable.
In so doing, it may be compared to a rider who has got
into the midst of a cornfield. When he then comes
back to his senses, and wants to avoid evil-doing and to
get out of the mischief he has committed, he has no
other means but that of turning his horse back and
riding out on the same road on which he has entered
the field, though in going out he will do as much mis-
chief as he has done in entering, and even more. But
there is no other possibility of making amends save
this.

The Hindus do not distinguish between this force
and the First Cause of their philosophy. Its dwelling
in the world is of such a nature that people compare
it to a material existence, an appearance in body and
colour, since they cannot conceive any other kind of
appearance.

Besides other times, Narayana has appeared at the
end of the first manvantara, to take away the rule of
the worlds from Valakhilya (?), who had given it the


396 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


name, and wanted to take it into his own hands,
Nardiyana came and handed it over to Satakratu, the
performer of a hundred sacrifices, and made him
Indra.

Another time he appeared at the end of the sixth
manvantara, when he killed the King Bali, the son of
Virocana, who ruled the whole world and had Venus
as his vazir. On having heard from his mother that
the time of his father had been much better than his
time, since it was nearer the kritayuga, when people
enjoyed more profound bliss and did not know any
fatigue, he became ambitious and desirous of vying
with his father. Therefore he commenced doing works
of piety, giving presents, distributing money, and per-
forming sacrifices, which earn the rule of paradise and
earth for him who finishes a hundred of them. When
he was near this term, or had nearly finished the ninety-
ninth sacrifice, the angels began to feel uneasy and to
fear for their dignity, knowing that the tribute which
men bring them would cease if they stood no longer in
need of them. Now they united and went to Nara-


-yana, asking him to help them. He granted their wish,


and descended to the earth in the shape of Vamana,
i.e. @ man whose hands and feet are too short in com-
parison with his body, and in consequence his figure is


Story of
Bali, the son
of Virocana,


‘thought to be hideous.


Narayana came to the King Bali whilst he was offer-
ing, his Brahmans standing round the fires, and Venus,
his vazir, standing before him. The treasure-houses
had been opened and the precious stones had been
thrown out in heaps, to be given as presents and alms.
Now Vamana commenced to recite the Veda like the
Brahmans from that part which is now called Sdmaveda,
in a melancholy, impressive kind of melody, persuading
the king to grant him liberally what he would wish
and demand. Upon this Venus spoke stealthily to him:
“This is Narayana. He has come to rob thee of thy


CHAPTER XLVI. 307


rule.” But the king was so excited that he did not
mind the words of Venus, and asked Vamana what
was his desire. Thereupon Vamana said, “As much
as four paces of thy realm, that I may live there.”
The king answered, “ Choose what you wish, and how
you wish it;” and according to Hindu custom, he
ordered water to be brought to pour it over his hands
as a sign of the confirmation of the order he had given.
Now Venus, because of her love to the king, brought
in the jug, but had corked the spout, so that no water
should flow out of it, whilst she closed the hole in the
cork with the kusa grass of her ring-finger. But Venus Page x00.
had only one eye; she missed the hole, and now the
water flowed out. In consequence, Vamana made a
pace towards east, another towards west, and a third
towards above as far as Svarloka. As for the fourth
pace, there was no more space in the world; he made,
by the fourth pace, the king a slave, putting his foot
between his shoulders as a sign of making him a slave.
He made him sink down into the earth as far as Patala,
the lowest of the low. . He took the worlds away from
him, and handed the rule over 10 6
The following occurs in the Vishnu-Purdna :— Quota
“The King Maitreya asked Paragara about the yugas, Puriya. ©

So the latter answered, ‘They exist for the purpose
that Vishnu should occupy himself with something in
them. In the Kritayuga he comes in the shape of
Kapila alone, for the purpose of spreading wisdom;
in Tretdyuga, in the shape of Rama alone, for the pur-
pose of spreading fortitude, to conquer the bad, and to
preserve the three worlds by force and the prevalence
of virtuous action; in Dvapara, in the shape of Vyasa,
to divide the Veda into four parts, and to derive
many branches from it. In the end of Dvapara he
appears in the shape of Vasudeva to destroy the giants ;
in the Kaliyuga, in the shape of Kali, the son of
J-sh-v (?) the Brahman, to kill all, and to make the


398 ALBERUNTS INDIA.


cycle of the yugas commence anew. That is his
(Vishnu’s) occupation.’ ”

In another passage of the same book we read:
“Vishnu, 2.6. another name for Narayana, comes at the
end of each dvdpara to divide the Veda into four parts,
because men are feeble and unable to observe the whole
of it. In his face he resembles Vyasa.”

We exhibit his names in the following table, though
they vary in different sources, enumerating the Vyasas
who have appeared in the caturyugas of the present or
seventh manvantara which have elapsed :—


Svayambht 16 Dhanamjaya


I
2 Prajapati 17 Kritarhjaya
3 Usanas 18 Rinajyeshtha (?)
4 Brihaspati | 19 Bharadvaja
5 Savitri 20 Gautama
6 Mrityu ("067 ل‎
7 Indra 20035 110111
8 Vasishtha 23 Veda-vyasa
9 Saérasvata | 24 Vajasravas
10 0 010-26 Somasushma
II Trivrisha [7826 Bhargava
12 Bharadvaja 27 Valmiki
13 Antariksha | 28 Krishna
14 Vapra (?) | 29 Asvatthiman the son
15 121211111 of Drona


Krishna Dvaipayana is Vyasa the son of Paragara.
The twenty-ninth Vyasa has not yet come, but will
appear in future.

The book Vishnu-Dharma says: “The names of
Hari, 2.6. Narayana, differ in the yugas. They are the
following: Vasudeva, Sarnkarshana, Pradyumna, and
Aniruddha.” |

T suppose that the author has not here preserved the
proper sequence, for Vasudeva belongs to the end of
the four yugas.

The same book says: “ Also his colours differ in the
yugas. In the Kritayuga he is white, in the Treta-
yuga red, in the Dvapara yellow, the latter is the first


Enumera-
tion of the
Vyasas of
the seventh
manvan-
tara.


Quotation
from VPishnu-
Dharma.


CHAPTER XLVI. 399


phase of his being embodied in human shape, and in
the Kaliyuga he is black.”

These colours are something like the three primary
forces of their philosophy, for they maintain that Satya
is transparent white, Rajas red, and Tamas black. We Page 200.
shall in a later part’of this book give a description of
his last appearance in the world.


( 400 )


CHAPTER XLVII.
oN VASUDEVA AND THE WARS OF THE BHARATA.


Analogies of THE life of the world depends upon sowing and pro-


the course of


nature to. creating. Both processes increase in the course of
tne nists time, and this increase is unlimited, whilst the world
is limited.

When a class of plants or animals does not increase
any more in its structure, and its peculiar kind is estab-
lished as @ species of its own, when each individual of
it does not simply come into existence once and perish,
but besides procreates a being lke itself or several
together, and not only once but several times, then this
will as a single species of plants or animals occupy the
earth and spread itself and its kind over as much terri-
tory as it can find.

The agriculturist selects his corn, letting grow as
much as he requires, and tearing out the remainder.
The forester leaves those branches which he perceives
to be excellent, whilst he cuts away all others, The
bees kill those of their kind who only eat, but do not
work in their beehive.

Nature proceeds in a similar way; however, it does
not distinguish, for its action is under all circumstances -
one and thesame. It allows the leaves and fruit of the
trees to perish, thus preventing them from realising
that result which they are intended to produce in the
economy of nature. It removes them so as to make room
for others,

If thus the earth is ruined, or is near to be ruined,


4


Story of the
birth of
Vasudeva.


CHAPTER UE VIL 401


by having too many inhabitants, its ruler—for it has a
ruler, and his all-embracing care is apparent in every
single particle of it—sends it a messenger for the pur-
pose of reducing the too great number and of cutting
away all that is evil.

A messenger of this kind is, according to the belief
of the Hindus, Vasudeva, who was sent the last time in
human shape, being called Vasudeva. It was a time
when the giants were numerous on earth and the earth
was full of their oppression ; it tottered, being hardly
able to bear the whole number of them, and it trembled
from the vehemence of their treading, Then there was
born a child in the city of Mathura to Vasudeva by the
sister of Karhsa, at that time ruler of the town. They
were a Jatt family, cattle-owners, low Stidra people.
Karnsa had learned, by a voice which he heard at the
wedding of his sister, that he would perish at the hands
of her child; therefore he appointed people who were
to bring him every child of hers as soon as she gave
birth to it, and he killed all her children, both male and
female. Finally, she gave birth to Balabhadra, and
~Yasoda, the wife of the herdsman Nanda, took the
child to herself, and managed to keep it concealed from
the spies of Karhnsa. ‘Thereupon she became pregnant
an eighth time, and gave birth to Vdsudeva in a rainy
night of the eighth day of the black half of the month
Bhadrapada, whilst the moon was ascending in the
station Rohini. As the guards had fallen into deep
sleep and neglected the watch, the father stole the
child and brought it to Nandakula, 2.e. the stable of the
cows of Nanda, the husband of Yasoda, near Mathura,
but separated from this place by the river Yamuna.
Vasudeva exchanged the child fora daughter of Nanda,
which happened to be born at the moment when Vasu-
deva arrived with the boy. He brought this female
child to the guards instead of his son. Karhsa, the

VOL.. I. 2 0


402 _ ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


ruler, wanted to kill the child, but she flew up into
the air and disappeared.

Vasudeva grew up under the care of his foster-
mother Yagod4 without her knowing that he had been —
exchanged for her daughter, but Karhsa got some inkling
of the matter, Now he tried to get the child into
his power by cunning plans, but all of them turned out
against him. Lastly, Karnsa demanded from his parents
that they should send him (Vasudeva) to wrestle in his
(Karnsa’s) presence. Now Vasudeva began to behave
overbearlngly towards everybody. On the road he had
already roused the wrath of his aunt by hurting a
serpent which had been appointed to watch over the
lotus flowers of a pond, for he had drawn a cord through
its nostrils lke a bridle. Further, he had killed his
fuller, because the latter had refused to lend him clothes
for the wrestling. He had robbed the girl who accom-
panied him of the sandal-wood with which she was
ordered to anoint the wrestlers. Lastly, he had killed
the rutting elephant which was provided for the pur-
pose of killing him before the door of Karhsa. AI this
heightened the wrath of Karnsa to such a degree, that
his bile burst, and he died on the spot. Then VAasu-
deva, his sister’s son, ruled in his stead.

Vasudeva has a special name in each month. His
followers begin the months with Margasirsha, and each
month they begin with the eleventh day, because on
this day Vasudeva appeared, 3

The following table contains the names of Vasudeva
in the months :—


Page 201.


The names

of! Vasudeva
in the differ-
ent months.


CHAPTER XLVII. 403


اللا ee‏ او ا ا ا ا ne ae ee ne‏


The Months. 0 ee The Months. prep
Margasirsha | Kesgava Jyaishtha Trivikrama
Pausha Narayana AshAdha Vamana
Magha Madhava Sravana Sridhara
Phalguna Govinda Bhadrapada | Hrishikeéga
Caitra Vishnu Agvayuj a Padmanabhi
Vaisikha Madhusfidana | KAarttika Damodara


|


Now the brother-in-law of the deceased Karhsa be- continua-
came angry, went rapidly to Mathura, took possession Fema
of the realm of Vasudeva, and banished him to the °°
ocean. Then there appeared near the coast a golden
castle called Baroda, and Vasudeva made it his resi-
dence.

The children of Kaurava (z.e. Dhritardshtra) had the
charge of their cousins (the children of Pandu). Dhri-
tarashtra received them and played dice with them, the
last stake being their whole property. They lost more
and more, until he laid upon them the obligation of
expatriation for more than ten years, and of conceal-
ment in the remotest part of the country, where nobody
knew them. If they did not keep this engagement
they would be bound to return into banishment for a
like number of years. This engagement was carried
out, but finally came the time of their coming forward
for battle. Now each party began to assemble their
whole number and to sue for allies, till at last nearly
innumerable hosts had gathered in the plain of Tane-
shar. There were eighteen akshauhint. Each party
tried to gain Vasudeva as ally, whereupon he offered
either himself or his brother Balabhadra together with
an army. But the children of Pandu preferred him.

They were five men—Yudhishthira, their leader, Arjuna,
the bravest of them, Sahadeva, Bhimasena, and Nakula.
They had seven akshauhint, whilst their enemies were


404 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


much stronger. But for the cunning devices of Vasu-
deva and his teaching them whereby they might gain
victory, they would have been in a less favourable
situation than their enemies. But now they conquered ;
all those hosts were destroyed, and none remained ex-
cept the five brothers. Thereafter Vasudeva returned
to his residence and died, together with his family,
who were called Yadava. Also the five brothers died
before the year had reached its end, at the end of
those wars.

Vasudeva had concerted with Arjuna the arrangement
that they would consider the quivering of the left arm
or left eye as a mysterious intimation that there was
something happening to him. At that time there lived
a pious Rishi called Durvasas. Now the brothers and
relations of Vasudeva were -a rather malicious, incon-
siderate set of people. One of them hid under his coat
a new frying-pan, went to the anchorite, and asked him
what would be the result of his pregnancy, jeering at
the pious man. The latter said, “In thy belly there
is something which will be the cause of thy death and
that of thy whole clan.” When Vasudeva heard this
he became sorry, because he knew that these words
would be fulfilled. He gave orders that the pan should
be filed away and be thrown into the water. This
was done, There was only a small part of it left, which
the artisan who had done the filing considered as insig-
nificant. Therefore he threw it, as it was, into the
water. A fish devoured it; the fish was caught, and the
fisherman found it in its belly. He thought it would
be a good tip for his arrow. ١ 0 |

When the predestined time came, Vasudeva rested
on the coast under the shadow of a tree, one of his feet
being crossed over the other; the fisherman took him
for a gazelle, shot at him, and hit his right foot. This
wound became the cause of the death of Vasudeva. At
the same time the left side of Arjuna began to quiver,


End of Vasu-
deva and

of the five
Pandu
brothers.


Page 202,


ه


CHAPTER 1 405


and then his arm. Now his brother Sahadeva ave
orders that he should never any more embrace anybody,
that he might not be bereft of his strength (?). Arjuna
went to Vasudeva, but could not embrace him on account
of the state in which he was. Vasudeva ordered his
bow to be brought, and handed it over to Arjuna, who
tried his strength at it. Vasudeva ordered him to burn
his body and the bodies of his relations when they had
died, and to bring away his wives from the castle, and
then he died.

Out of the filings or bits of iron which had fallen off
when the pan was filed a bardi bush had grown. To
this there came the Yadavas, who tied together some
bundles of its twigs to sit upon. Whilst they were
. drinking there arose a quarrel between them; they
beat each other with the bardi bundles, and killed each
other. All this happened near the mouth of the river
Sarsati, where it flows into the sea, near the situation of
Somanath-

Arjuna had done all he had been ordered by V4su-
deva. When he brought away the women, they were
suddenly attacked by robbers. When, now, Arjuna was
no longer able to bend his bow, he felt that his streneth
was going. He whirled the bow in a circle above his
head, and all who stood under the bow were saved,
while the others were seized by the robbers. Now
Arjuna and his brothers saw that life was no more of
any use to them, therefore they emigrated to the north
and entered the mountains, the snow of which never
melts. The cold killed them one after the other, till
at last only Yudhishthira remained. He obtained the
distinction of being admitted to paradise, but before
that he was to pass through hell in consequence of the
sole lie which he had spoken in his life, at the request
of his brothers and of Vasudeva. These were the words
which he had spoken within hearing of the Brahman
Drona: “ Agvatthdaman, the elephant, has died.” He


406 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


had made a pause between Asvatthdman and the ele-
phant, by which he had led Drona to believe that he
meant his son. Yudhishthira spoke to the angels: “ If
this must be, may my intercession be accepted on be-
half of the people in hell; may they be freed from it.”
After this desire of his had been granted, he went into
paradise. |


ا 60


CHAPTER XLVIII.


AN EXPLANATION OF THE MEASURE OF AN AKSHAUHINT.


EACH akshauhini has to antkint.


» antkint WE MTCOP

>  camd » 3 pritand.

» pritand re Co UII.

3. vahint "3 035 0070
0 » 01

» guma » 3 sendmukha.
SM SCOIMUNG 2,5, 3 pattt,

59 DALE * ede PAL,


In chess, the latter is called rukh, whilst the Greeks
call it chariot of war. It was invented by Mankalus
(Myrtilos?) in Athens, and the Athenians maintain that
they were the first who rode on chariots of war. How-
ever, before that time they had already been invented
by Aphrodisios (sic) the Hindu, when he ruled over
Egypt, about 900 years after the deluge. They were
drawn by two horses.

The following is a tale of the Greeks: Hepheestos
loved Athene and desired to possess her, but she refused
him, preferring to remain a virgin. Now he concealed
himself in the country of Athens, and intended to seize
her by force, but she pierced him with a spear and then
he let her go. From a drop of his blood, which had
dropped to the earth, there grew Erichthonios, He Page 203.
arrived on a chariot like the tower of the sun, the
holder of the reins riding together with him. Similar
to this are the.customs of the hippodrome, as they exist
in our time, the running and driving with carriages in
the race.


408 ALBERUNI’S INDIA.


A vatha comprehends besides, one elephant, three
riders, and five footmen.

All these orders and divisions are necessary for the
preparation for battle, for pitching camp and breaking
up camp.

An akshauhini has 21,870 chariots, 21,870 elephants,
65,610 riders, 109,350 footmen. |

To each chariot there belong four horses and their
conductor, the master of the chariot, armed with arrows,
his two companions armed with spears, a guard who
protects the master from behind, and a cartwright.

On each elephant there sits its conductor, and behind
him the vice-conductor, a man who has to goad the
elephant behind the chair, the master, armed with
arrows, 12 the chair, and together with him his two
spear-throwing companions and his jester, hauhava (?),
who on other occasions runs before him.

Accordingly the number of people who ride on chariots
and elephants is 284,323 (sec). The number of those
who ride on horses is 87,480. The number of elephants
in an akshauhiné is 21,870; the number of chariots,
too, is 21,870; the number of horses is 153,090; the
number of men, 459,283.

The sum-total of the living beings of one akshauhini,
elephants, horses, and men, 1s 634,243; the same num-
ber for eighteen akshauhint is 11,416,374, Viz. 393,660
elephants, 2,755,620 horses, 8,267,094 men.

This is an explanation of the akshauhint, and of its
single parts.


END OF VOL. I.


PRINTED BY BALLANTYNE, HANSON AND CO,


EDINBURGH AND LONDON. / /
لم‎

{\ سأ‎ 4
bt


Titt Wa


pe
8


05423 .4833 1
Alberuni’s India : an account of the


il


Princeton Theological Seminar


i


wi


:


0
ا


3 1 له
i ee‏ 4 3


rs


9 i
gaa fe CBSE) يح كي‎ "4 ' 8 oy
(eae
١ he ب‎
|


: 0 ش‎ / ١ ' ‘ ;
١ آنا‎ 00100 ae ie
} ip yale ees 1


5


0 =e oe - ان عن ل‎ = 0 8 ~~" ; 5
See? ع م‎ , Sas ss


Ue ence‏ وا erat‏ حتت


Liars Peary Waele WIP A
re a ere ad


8 1 1 لوا‎ ( } 1
“7 1 ش 1 ; 3 ا‎ 7 ba i i La); 0 1 0 1 0 1 , '
0 Pe PS 0 i 1 aa ١ ا‎ 30 ead weed wee Ve
1 A 1 ١ ايل‎ 1 rn Aria
3 ل 1 ا‎ Ay Aer Ae Roe
k t4 0 3 4
\


Pa "1
' 0
؛‎ 11


+
4


١ Pinas ;
١ tr ee kee
har Vee الل‎
4 1 7 1 ED) |
6 rl oo B ١ bp
١ 3 eA ma) 3 و‎ a
3 35 4p Vy x


A ME oe
Sen OR ney
ع‎


د خا عو مه وذ عبرم ود يعو AR‏
Se ee ee‏


Fo we ene
Ase en
SS ere nya
SEAR م مويه‎


عه عار"
ع vol‏ جه سيو مزعي eed‏
اح جوت PN Re‏
