================================================================================
TOWER OF BABEL LIBRARY
================================================================================
Title: The Bishops' Bible (1572 Edition)
Creator: The Bishops' Bible translators (Matthew Parker, Archbishop of Canterbury, and others)
Translator: The Bishops' Bible translators (New Testament 1568; whole Bible 1568, revised 1572)
Edition: London, 1572
Source: Internet Archive (1572-bishops-bible), scan of the 1572 edition
Public domain: Edition published 1572; public domain.
Artifact ID: bishops-bible-1572
Note: Transcribed from a facsimile scan; the OCR is rough in places (interleaved
columns, marginal notes mixed with text), particularly in the New Testament. The
complete text of all books is present.
================================================================================

Virtis nini i)

conteynyng the olde »
Teslament and the newe.
Euar

te
I ey

G

tee o

hu isthe Cap of Oded, who &
Jautd,

‘deena o 13005 f to g uth 4.) a

(gts Leffe op Patol whom Wfalas the proplete wz ptct N
10 f. here shall come a spuigge oog le stemme oy ‘| 9 .
Cwhiche i Chait ) and a paung shoote hall growe out of 4 * roote, the spiritcot the Lorde Qhatlrett vpn hure a monethegs

U e or : 9 ry 1 ene
In the fine of Baum Joab the fonne of S enclt wan lite Ay ak tae
ö r fonguen a

acted: Sodoch nud Bbtathac es: Sarqias leribè, that is, chanceloz : Wanazzs ouerlecr Celetic and POhettti, whiche were of the garbe anigs perfor. Sfaghan and Sad were prophetes in his time. 8 Be

naunt vpon the b sect etari, that ia, wpter of the

obe he did eate tht o counterteted fcaped from th

a |
= ines caine bpon h

Dauid had epght wpnes, Egia, Abtgat, Beihlabe, ger, Ma- ep elected bum, ct

; Daind cut acha, Abigail, Yehidoc , Hbicty were motherg ol thele chüdien “ me that he in ordet as they go, befde other gneubines, and other chudren 0 IESSE. : : Ip pte 19. i inanp. ; . n a8 at Fade unte 1990 ot wa-
Here at Dauid end e third age, & it con- . N Sicheg be anden ö teyneth yeres1o20 Vand within this | \ zer that Due Baule he ececuten eile f age in the yere 3699 from the creatiõ 5. dap. . J loan eluctte-

ofthe worlde, the children of Istael went out of Egypt, and ioyning the yeres from
Adam vnto Dauid,there were 4204. yeres.

Ycre rtturneth the prlest-
) hoobto the ae.
, leasar in the time of Solo-

Siftersto Davide

Am{nadab-

Solomon was tonstituted king of Istael of his father
Dad who fine his other Tthomas, and Joab, ano
Semei: teceiued of God the gyft ol wysedome, gage a notable iudgement of the har lortes chiidzen, made the temple by the helpe of H yr am in feuen peres and feucn monethes, and the tenth dap ol September dyd consecrate it. brought the arke ol od into the tẽ pie, teceaued honorably the quecnc of Saba, and at the last he futd his olde age bythe loue of women, and by the wo sbipping of olcs, a ther-
> fozethe Loz sweze that he would deude hig hmgdome from the hande ok his sonne: and after he had raigner foarte peres he was buried in the cuit of Iam. 3. Beg. i. cap.

Nathan. i

Nathan & he whom autdalopted vnto

his fom he was

not Maid the pro phet.wythe counted

; of this Jonabab;
Amon ho, defloate

his liters. 1609.13.

Sammaz-
! Joab.

In the time of Solomon „ Banaias the forme of Joiada was ruler ouer the hoast:
Sadoch and Tzarias wert priesles, Beliot. and Haid children of
Hela were setiwes:
Josaphat was ketozder: Azarias sonne of
Nathan was fet outer them which ollisted the ting: y Muar stuarbof y house: B= pura let oacr the tributtg. 3. Re. .

Solomon. N

G a 1 Amon n. 3

pion we * | thefirtt iy ee 3 sonne.

F Adonias Wag deposed hy Dauld, becanse he woolde N raigne, and dpb appopnt Solomon, who ftuc hun because he dyd afke A bisaak the Sunamite to wpfe. 3. Reg. :.

A
Amasa

Aman wag lieftenaunt ouet the battaylegol Daud, whom

onb slue d edu e. vitullp vnder the tolour of finbgafing hym,

G Abfolon was a verp fapze man, he flac his brother B= mon, he had the fauout of the people, he toke frem his father his kungdome, lap with bis concubineg, at fat Was llapne with thace speortg. 2. Regum. 18.

H Amon did delile his sister Thamar in his fapned sickenesfe, dopng hum ferinte by the counfelt ot onadab and

tgertoze was laue by Ddfolon, who dled from hig fa-

ther, and bp lutt of Joab was rctoncutd. 2. Reg. 13.

n This Azacl was a are 5 b the sonn a man verp swilft in running, whom Abner n did kill, wheevpon him (clée allo was Gagne.
© This soab Wag ID — vominion agamst ait auids setuannt. whõ be napntapned in hit be danke been. ie Soe of b Abicn went wit to it ) Daard when he coke away
Pal ban t from the head of Saul in his diate ie te
5 Fee Milde Dauid wolüͤlde not suffer him. 2.48 eg. om
Dran oz Natan the sonne ef Dauid the be

descended, as approrcity: bea:
10 Ware im the eight ae. an rom zm x lo gopng downe

Chiristes lyne.

0 1 * . . . . mt t AMbefe be the nomes ofthe hinges which p 1
9 = en: 0 1 4 8 ts | ® | Holanien rpon Israti, that ia N en E
5 5 8 8 ö that the hinges t with the other: K Ih tennflar hing ot the tors, hich rut them high! the Binges ol Atze lcinges]l I of Juda seldpucd etheon inges of EA Iracl. good of aazan vrponde the mountarnen ofthe Weben n pS Pel ahi 8 guy dl utog ag pe would sap, ot one A) Perties, thotiws, beyond the maunten Calping. Ftp r. ies Lie IN ati! Sian ot pecans ans iran
2 a 5 | i ig 0 8 be frre Roe a ö | & ihe whalt lanbe should be dc filed.of them. Immer >
| et natn , i . } deluer them and bring them from thence, whom the Jeweg 1 oe 9 cas | a lekt foz, and beleuc that he in the Messiag. *
ARobi fing the é ae ; . ö aue ne 1 Prophetes in the times of the kinges und folawin 5 of Istael. N the apiice 0 107 ’

the poanger N 7 men. did much t G leroboam toke ten cats of his cioke of
Achta the Sidomte, fled into Egypt foz the foarte ol Solomon, but after hic death returned into Stchtm, and was elected king of the ten triben, he made the got: den talueg, and put them in Dan z Wes thel, and coufed the people of Ilrael to commit iDolitric, which did facrifics ta the calucs, who hraring the thzeate of
Abdo the rzophete, and after hio hand whfche he Liretched against Ibdo was drped vp. and by his preyer rell ored ageinc: hehe prophete being Maine of a man ay 1 de 3 a 550 Of the falle
‘iftines, {| Fophete, the (aide FZ eroboam lcaum oe ee faa. not big fade crooked iwapes, notwit ,
Gand he lived standing the prophetes countell, and akevill inthe fightof king connie! of Achtas by hip wyfe of the
| God. f. Re. 13. | recoucricof his chude. and heating the beaup tidynges of his ociolation, departed, and his fanne Madab reigitd attee hun. 3. Reg. 11. ö

| K Hela ruled cuill, who in bla dannkene |
“YBaals though he nesse was fame in Chncla of Ianmi, be- |

HNadab besieging
Tebethon the citie

fonnes , suffer the tn uasion of Susar king of Egypt, who take awap the

ii. Sin. “ee ee ii. Sin. 27

\

zuuic) JO

a... xxiili. Sin.

Semcias.
Iehn.

runes

. reas lepzoued of ing head captapnt of halfe of his hoglce
ö Ichu the praphet men, and Jenui ding befiegen by Ams

bs after he bab burl: a
5 = ti, wa by ore in Tharsa.
ä ded Ramaagainst . 8 ‘oe en vii Si ig {OK Hela. Bla, and ltttrd by
' hon. 8 34: wenadab, Ala j lS his friende Dprd,
E I | and Sag buryrd
| = 2 in Thatsa. 3. Reg
| xii. Sin. & 13.16.
= N I Amrithse peres before he Dpdrafgne,
2 D ye dpd warrt With Chidnt the fonne
= of Gmath: att er he had dinldtd Bamaz
Ali. f ria dptd. 3. Ktg 16. P
& Kinges of
3 | N Syria. a : ,
J N Benadab war
Solomon. ring again *
Ichu. 3. Hrg. 15. thab was takẽ
7 CA didright mu of him, und akbefoze $ lode, 69. ter word (ct at be suppzessrd! ( ptofapaar. hibertie, whertht stues, and 25 kae he was re

Zacharias. afcer, toz that

proucd, af He-

Mieke- Abdias, as.

N Benadab.

lien the p2a: phete: he allo

M Achab the sonnt of Amrt. did cutl be, desirged Jabie the Lord adone all the binges that ramche sonnt
Verc before him, he worthipped Waal, of Achab un

and made him a temple: in hig was Jericho bunded. This cha impzt but by the soned Micheas the praplyet and Aue Haz r ef god bth fox hic Bincpard, and at lat was fe Padre,
Cane with an arrowe. 3.

time Samaria, rower tf god

Reg. 22. $n Is led, anv was

; ' gare A timt Beltag prophecied of the dzaught, ttrangicd © who due 470, prophets of Wal, and tos Yfacl, fa _ fearcof Itlobel he fied into the delart. ] dped. z. !
‘Ochorias becaule he counfeled with the, Thefe kynn faz dias dees FL ges of Syrn twpie. 50. tle men ! 5 tw pie. 50. ol his chi are of Heling, the were they i A third. 50. cfcaped,' whiche d)
I dut he pred. hfpoy!
4. Ktg. 1. much! po)
[Fock = 515 5 5 . 1 O Ioram. Elizeus Oloram slue Miche the 0051 chotias ba © mother Atha- 12 wit casting hun 0 - lia the daughter af Achab, which 3 = W lang, nal dome praugked him to do til before the 5 ™“ sizeug the prophete rael. land. hr fought with Jozam king 3 UD in his tyme gaue ot Asrael his vncle agent Asa: A 5 water inthe defart to theee kyngeg and
O Buda ond el king ofthe Aflplans. Inihe N cit hoatkes, that 8, ta Jotam kpng of
Hicculalem, beficging of Ramoth Gasgad he 1 Ara Jolaphnt kyng at Juda, änd ta feare nat. xt. Was laine, Whale brothers 42. 8 the hyngok dame, fighting againll the |
Ve called tyc Fehu at the fame time due: {: Moadites, whale kong offecd hin eldest
' place where Beltas the praphrte was taken N inne ko 2 a burnt ockryng: and nkter that
React Was op into potadist. 4. Reg. v. Joram had efcaped the kamme of a= : the paliep ef betting: bis hips (as Elrazar the prophrte marin at the telling or the leperg he was were distroycd m Afiongaber. 5 Reg. 22. waunded at the ficge af Ramath. and at 2 | to wyfe che daughter of Tehad king af Isracl. and d the last slayne vy Tehu with an artowe.
7 d builocd dp againie idolatrix. he killed feuen o 4. Beg. 3. 7. 8. 9.
* ken wich anincurable dilease that hia bows

en: Me was burped iu the citie of Daum, vat not rg. 22
‘=

~ iB

— 9 1 Inne 1

topfe of Toiava did hide fe= cctie spxe petes, and nurlshed him vp.
And this B®: thalia was Dif: honozabip

treafure

paration of the kemple, a aftce he had killed

achari the onne of Jota: da the Vtshop whieche made him kyng, he toke vpon hin honour due vn:

Wichoutking.

(rac? he was lapne, € ther fore deltueted him vp the citic, e the walles to be fpop led , and the vesseis of the téple to bt ca: ried awap.

4. Reg. 14.

D Ounias to: ued Tillage wel, but he

gen King of

priestes office vnder Jzaria,

d, Ozee, Johel, & Pootag.
4. Beg. 15.

E loatban bnil= ved the gate of the téptewhict is called beau tikull, and o. the WHebsewes
{tio called th gate of Joa than, of othe: the to wre of flocke, onde who Efat thi prophete fate! the Lorde fie: ting. And the prophets Maum and Mi cheas began tt prophecie.

*. eg. 15.

F Achaz drewi bia sonne tho rough the fire, he Was pesie
Send of Nalin. and Phacee, would not fol low the tounse of Ela , he fozfoke god, a destroped the oznamenteg of the tempie.
4. Reg. 16.
Ind in this mans daped
Wac Bone bupided.

ch bis father destroped, he pulled dodvne the
10 cf the ad {worden of Relates he humbied ta estru ad a ligue lrom the angelt of his delinerie from ret ful nie ot men: aud he geiung no thankes to God

n ane of bio recouecy bp the prophete E fat by the

9 5 he was tecoucred, he fong hig canticle

a the house ofthe Lozd to the ambaftaz
YF Prophrit tebuked him. 4. Be. 10. Ela. 37.

Sophonids.

( Teremias.

Olda.

Ringes of
Babylon.

* Merodac.

N
„ od pl.

zung;

\

vi.

Baldam.

Without

Eing. 23.

} i 8 abel ad cort and ten sonneg of Ze d the kourtie and two bret

Hoztas he hilled bp tubes

ahetes and priesleg of maria, and turned the temple of 14 sento a common iabeg. 4. Aeg. 21.

ed vnto him, and B=
* cg. 22.

M Ieroboam bounded out all the coates tf Dlract, according to the wordes of the Lozde whiche was spoken by the prophete Jonas. 4. Beg. 14.

N Man2o0n Gp geting odd. talentèg of siluer to Phul to go from hym. prouoked the binges anger agamst hym.
4. Beg. 15. -
Phul and other folowing him, catgned after Sar danapalus the last monarchie of Isspria. and to terouer ther old dignttitic, dyd warte vpon ther bor2 derers, eu vnto Ezerhiag, whe Sennacherib was billed in the temple of his owne chudzen, vpon his Acpng a= wap from Judea mo Asfpzia, oll his armie bepng destroped. 4.18 (5.19.

Obdias. or Obeth-

not ecitt the king ol the Issprians tr destropmg all the countrep deponde
Jordane with the two tnbes and the half: here began the destruction of

o Face the sonne of Romeling dyd

the ten tribes. 4. Beg. 15. |

Rafnir e of Kemy oh

a)

anz. |

© Salmasafiere
\

p osee the king of Ilraei though he gaue li-

Aung. a sennachesih.

Assarzdon.

of Israel were bzougbt intd captiuitie vnder
Salmaualar bing ol ihe
Assprtang, aniougelt
Whom was Tobias.
4. Beg. 17.

＋

dtkiled the streetes of Hiernfalem with the blood of the propheteg, at the last he percesulng his wickednesse, chaunged his life to a bettet.
Reg. 21.

1 This tofias finding the boohe of
Deuteronomic inachelt he deltcots

ed al the idolatrie nthe high placed,

he burnt all the bones of the false

plophered and priestes in Bethel,

ng Addo the prophete did prophecie,

it made a greaccafter , and dyd en-

ertase the worshipping of Goo, he

was apne with an arrow bp the

archero, vpon Whase death Jeremi

the proplycte did wzyte his lamentationg, and in the xti. pere of bis luingdome Jer cum be gan to propbeeie, Ding the sinultudeg af a waking rod, ofa bopling pot and a lin= nen gird le. 3. Eldrag. 1. Atet. 13.

Merodac honoured the king of Traci &- zechiag, to whofe messengerd he detect ed ehe treofurce of the Loides hone and of hid one houte, for Whiche offence the hingts of Babylon did euer molec tht Rungdoine of
Juda. E sai. 38.

Toacas hag trade king Of the people. Phas rao sudstituted hym, and placed to dzother.
4. Regum. 13.

A foachun the fir begotten sonnt ot lofua being made king bp Pharzo king of Egypt, gauc him a great fũme ot mo-
Hep: he dyd eupli before the
1. zd, wherfoze Vrias the prophete dyd repzone bpm, but he dyd thzeate the prophetc, ¢
‘therehpon Vrias fied into Egppt, bat he returned hym

againcand fluc him, to Short letemi sapd, that he should be burped ipke an afte. This loachim, alter he had flapne
Vrias ,tinpzifoncd leremi, & cut the booke of the prophecie ol
Baruch in pecees, and woulde not de Warned by the cxample ok the Rechabites: It the tak was flapne of Mabuchodonofoz, and thzowne without the
Walles. - Beg. 24.

B Teconias the feconbe , deliue-

red him lelfe by the counsell ol
Jetemi into the handes of
Nabuchodonosor when he c= turned from Mierulalem, in whiche tranfintaratton desidt othet x. M. was Daniel, € = zechiel, and the thet chudzen.

4 Re. 2.

C sedechias who first was called Mathantas, being without any frare of al the warninges geuen bnto hym bp the prophtte, ag belieged of Pabuchodonofor, ond led blinde into Wabpplon, and there dped a fhamefall death, and wag buried 4. At. 26.

Here endeth the fourth age,

hauing yeres as the Hebrues write 473 . after the seuentie
485. and from Adam to Sedechias tyme. 4612.

D Salatbie wag sonne to Joachim the pouns
00 1. Itconias, nephewe to Sedechies.

EZorobabel sonne to Salathiel dyd expound the riddle ot the strength of the wine, of the
Bing, ol the woman, and ol the tructh, vnto
Danus fonne of Idaplis, for which he gaue hun rewordes, and in the lecondẽ pere ol his

rülgne graunted to «
5 fimike the temple

K Cyrus alter he had apne Baltasar, ktanslated his kingdome ot 78 abplon to him feife, who gaur the Jewes in captinine their litenfe to tecture the numder Was 50000, that Departed within three perc : this detine= tic was brought aboot dy the request ol Bag= geus, Jacharie, and Jozobabel.3. Edzas. 2.

Eliachim, or Ioathim ·

L. Cambifes otherinpfe called Nabuchodonosoz, had the Monarchie of the tast seut᷑ peres together, he tozbad the buplding of the temple, he deyng delitont to de anozed tyke a god in Isr del? at the lak was fapne. In his time was Holophernas his chiele caps tapne , disromfited by Judith, whole head fhe ent of and shewed ii openly vnto the peoi 8 ral ae whetbpon the ele ok thanks e hankes or het vlctozie.

Ake. fic.

Jeconias
3.moncthes.

C Sedechias,
Mathauias.

pe FS ——

D
Salathiel.

E
Zorobabel. 4
N

Christes line.

| Builmoradae,

and people of Israel, whole cpes he py out, and une hi8 N
ALD desitoped the temple,
De Aue Satan, and Sophomthe prophetes of the
Lozde, with diuers of the nobilitie of the Jewes,
This man at the tat faz hid pride was turned into a wilde beast, and fcuen moncthes together had his dwelling with them: bucthzough the praper of
Daniel and his leuen petes penannce he was testozed agaune. Daniel. 4.

il a

aosor. 7.

Nabuchodonosor the lesse, was talled the sonne ol the great, he did deauttfic notobne the tenipsc, ond repairco his pzineclp pollace of Wabplon, he made a garden whiche dyd hange, foz his wpueß lahe. Wan. 6.

ry

G Euvilmoradac inthe time that his fa: thee mag turned into a bea, did manp Wicked thinges, and foz that his fathec kept not proitule withhun, kcaring that he woulde rise ogatne, he counleied with Joachim, and töke vp his fathers cartase againr, and deulded it into 300. pecces, and gaue it bate 300.buiturcs.
Thts king of Babpld had thzee sonnes, of the whithe one Was Baltalar.
4. HMRegum. 25.

H Baleafar the last bing of
Babplan, be made a fealt sobecin he was drñke: he commaanded the vesseig of the teinple of God to be Dftd athis table, wherin he a his wines dranke, at what tune he law a hand in a wall Wziting. Mane, cechel, phares, Whithe Dantel dpd interpzete rhe wozdes thus: Mane, God hath nuuibzed thy kingdome and brought it to un end,
Techel, thou att Waped in the ballance - and att founde to light , Phares, thy kingdome ts dealt in partes, and is geuen to the Medes and Perfians : And that night he was Qapne of C pzus vn der whom sufan was deliuered ftonthe actusation ol the elderg. Dan. 13.

Kinges of
Persia.

1 1 8 or
Nabuchodonofor. 5 Aggeus
Darius sonn of Astriage raigned wit
Cpzus hp nephew / wh siue Baltalar to whom Cy rua tommtt ted the donunis of Wa dyplon, and o the Medes: This Darius tone Wane
With him into the Medeg, and extolle him nboue all his noble men, and dell uered hpm from We lions denne.

1. Eldzas. 6. N

Darius sonne of Idapsis.

=a

’

Dred of the

B. tohn the tonne of Judag, the brother of Jesus. who censpirtd agapnst bts brother John to get the hee bisboppricke , and ther vpon gat the kamilidritte of Magosus in trust of whõ he rose against hig bro ther, yer vpon Jon umpaticntiic slue his beother

eslus: Joz

hieh oct Ochus the king at 5 suggestion of Dagofus, did call foz a=

apne the tri-

ute of the. 7. pete, whicht
Wan relcaled by Eldzas.
1. Mach. 9.

These be the names ok the
Cine of Hies rusale m.
Solima: Luza:
Bethel: lerololima: Gebus ;
Heliz: Hierufa. falcm, & Salem.

C. In Simons:

tpme Jesus made $ booke ol Mapfence, eohich w called
Etele siasticus, of which Dunon he mabeth there mention.

1, Mach. 9.

D.Onias priest forme of Sf: mon the iat, ko the erueltie of Antiochas the great king of Spria fled to Ptolomic into Egypt, e there builacd atemplelikc to the Jtweg, which endured
250. peres, till the tyme of
U aspasian tye en 9 who destroped the citte. K

1. Mach. z.

— Alchimus as made the bisbop by De: metrius, and alwap adacr: larte to Judas achabeus, be deltroped the Walleg of the toute ok e Korde, and the wares of the mopheteg, he was sersken and mifcrabip

parusie.
I Mach, a

Bishoppes.

vchtag a Jewe, a butler to Irtaxerses in the cattle of 4ufis, phearpng the landr ol Hicrusalem to dt in great afflictions, and

aner

- E

priclt, and other pritsteg, he builded the walles with sixe

A. Under Artaxerfes len, Neemias the sonne of Het

being pined tcherwith, the king pitipng dim, gaue hin lecters of imbaffage to terufaten and there he minutreh neceMarice fox the duldyng olthe wozke: and by the helpe of Ellzaphat vpe

porches, as in this roun? agar here vnder Written appearceh.
Hehad manp refitting him fothac by che (pace of two percs the workmen were fapne to holde in one hande their trowels, and in the other hande their fwozdes, and Mremtag delmered thr peopie ol Ifrael from vfurieg. Ind while Eldzag read che tae, and the people Wrepyng, ht wylled them to come together to heare the lade foure tpmes in the dap, and foure trmes inthenpght. Ind so Peemias dped, 4 Was burped

next to the wall which he dpd bullde. 3. E ld. 5.
A. Ardeises when he raigned, EIras repaired the com mon J. ibrarle, s repaired the tawe burnt al thr Chaldeca.
& benifed newe taracteg of letters moze easie to de written read, and foz that he was called a swift seride, and had license ol Artaxerses to teache the tawe of God in
Hierusalem, à gaue hym power to kraunchesse the r= nites from all tribntes,¢ to minifter punishment pporalitran(greffours.

Este

Tefus.

(ge
Wah, mes ,

F. Prolomeus the sonne of Lagt, vnder d colour of facrificpng entred Dierusnlem and solde manp captines of
Jurte and Gartzim. Belk. rt.

F

8 Prolomeua
G. Ptolomeus Philadelphus bepnga\ fon of Lagi. great louer of bookes and leacnpng, a the counsuple ok Demetrius g
Tristeus, deliuertb .t20000.
Jewes, und sold eche of them for

Prolomeus
Philadęlph.

oblatlong into q temptc of God, he retcaued the
70. interprrters

en Wicxandzia 8 ptolomeus b ( ) N krõ E leozar the >

hye pric , and f

after their inter- : Prolomeus

pretation, whiche Was done in. 70.|\ Epiphancs. dapeg. he sent them home agapne with great rewardeg, he remitted the tribute ot the. 7. pere to the ministers of Pirolomeus the temple. Dan. 13. Fhilometor
After these kingts of Egypt there were other kinges in Egypt which be not here (rt butpll
Cleopatra, Which beyng conquered with her louer Bnthonic,
1 the lande of Egypt camt to be in the possession ol the omaneg. 5

we teado of three temples in the Scripture, irn the temple of the Lorde made bp Solomon, the feconde in the mount Baz rasun, made bp Manasses the biother of Padus hye prtest m the tyme of Darius the lat king of the Assprians the thirde in Egypt in the region of Elipolcos of Ontas the priest.

* ©. Alexander tranflated the kingvome o the Perfies to him

seike, and toke Tprug and Waza, and in his anger was gopng to H lerusalem, becaufe Padus the pret denprd him doch his tribute and his bictuels, but Jadus and other ol the priestes met him, whom he dpd reuerence.

0 50 ad 0 Zz

Chriftes line.

\ Longimanes,

H. xerfes taignen after Zrtarerfe: his fother two monethes, after 2
Sogdianus his sonne. 7. montthes, and after him his fonne Dariuscalled
Bastard. 20. pereg, onder æHom Es
| Srpt lende rectedcd from the Per-

feng, after his death raigned Irtaxtrite or Alu erus, who taigned oaer
117. Prouinces:in the dapes of this
Dattus, Plato the
Phuosopher was tamoug. Ed. .
Assustus, or
\ Artaxerfes.

1. Affuerus after his

suggestion of Magolus his lieftenaunt restoʒted agayne the tribatea that were relcafed bp Eldras to the mnisters ol thetcmple.

N. Antiochus Epiphanes after he har de of the death of his father a cowardy of

ig drother, being pledge at Rome, rd primly awar,e was reccaucd ns

Kinges of
Grecia.

o-Alexand.of

Maa to certaine cittesof Sia.
5 he put inthe temple the dos of apiece. compelled thé
Itwes to wazihipit,
Kinget of 4
‘ice. N donia. Kinges of Syria.

Philip Kin of M 1 8 nia.

bate of. . ycres. sabdued Jurie, ducrrame Pbt=

of Egypt, foz
Whole crucitic
Omas the hye iest firbbe to tolemeus E:

Hanse.
. Mach. .

AL
Selevaut
Philopacor.

MM. Seleuchus Phitopator the fennc of
Antiochus mages font Eliodore to Hes rusalem ¢ofpople the trrasurie of the wherdpon he was lane two poung men, who pet at the Ls of Omas was ratsed bp agapns, an fent vuto hin. 2. Mach.

of Klathathias.

A.Mathathias paiett in Bevin, bai nat the bpe pztest, after he had sispue the messengers of Antiochus, Which cempelled the propleof Jirgel to comme dolatrie and after i Hehondlarne the Fave m the fight of them alt that did sactifiet bpon the aulter, he ficd wil fine of his chudzen, and with others which feated God, and

hid them seiurg in caues

A und in Sabbath dee atharhias. Yon the Sabbath daye b
5 eus, taught thtm to vie ar-

monr, and testozed the je drt gef the fathers, destroped the ontter of the Idols, circuut= cited the chubrenthet were nat cirer meucd, and taworde his
Be2ih he made a testoment,

Me children

B. ludas Machabens that notable triumpher in Istael, who hab neuer p lke befoze noz after, Whose wor kes be set out in the booke of the

Chiles lines

’ | P. Demetrius Wag onercomeos Inttothn the pounger, by Triphon after he wil returned fram Bravia. 1. Mach. 10. 11.

O. Antiochus Sag the lat king of the
Dihrians, the lande of Syria was trwutarp to the Romane, ond Ponipei was sent against Tigrauen king of Brmenta, de made Scaurug iteftenaunt in Spzto, and then when Ariftobolus æ Pircanus were at Debate, and being receaued into
Mierusalem bp Wircanus kriendeg, he brake bp the temple whrtin Prutobolug friends were. a

N
N

Machabces, after * nate after at
Aandyng in defence y ene 1 he Wag be.“ tins ok the lawe of God, * 5 foze s soz he e 5 he Was slapne, and made the poz offered him lelke as ches of the
1. ach the Werzde. a ap
J. . 9. 8 2 his hozle.
We And atter hel had made
C. Iopathas ffoode . Hircanus bikupthkullpe to the ! fhop, fhe led ent of God, 4 Iristobalus but at the last he en L. simon @ pʒu- With his chit- Za was guilcfatlp flaine dent man tpl: Melchj. Parent g. Mathan. Den captiuc p. with hig. 2. sounes of his olde age, to Rome, andl Demetrios.

Triphö. 1. Mach. 9. aud vietozious, but at roc lat he wes dayne vngratiousip cf his senne in lage

D. Eleazar goyng az 1. Mach. 15.

here ended the kingdome of
Spzla, which came into the

‘

Kyngesof J
Syria.

vont to supplant the _ Empire ok the Ane J
Elephant, which as | F. Iohn Hircanus did open twe iRomanes. the young ·

pought, carped ntichus, gopng through f armie kis-

of the cygh: lockers of Da ud, and gane to Intiochus to tapse vp hig siege from

Triphon fine his maiz

hug on doth fines , Picrufatent. 300. talentes, fer Ylexander, and Jokelled rhe Elephant, and ta itplt the marmure of nathas the Wachauitt
Which dpd oppzesla the people for the spoplpng R. Antiochus} with his two sonnes. Triphon. hun to death. of the graue: he was the firk the pounger 1. Mach. 1. I
1. Mach. s. that biulded hofpitatles foz gaue the pxiell N 2 ficke folkes , which he did hood to Jona- ; Wz f with the telt of the monev. thas, ard was i
2 slain by sleight of Trtphon, who delited to caigne.
1. Mach. II. 8
1. This dude boun C le, The Prefidentes | of Syrie. ohan . .

ouecrcommpng bis brother Yurcanug in bottaple, was taken o2tfoner in Hierusalem of Pompeius,
& brought to Rome: but he bieaking prifon out of Rome, with a great multitude of the Jewes, befiencd Plexandzia, which he wWoulde
Halte destroped, but
@riftobolus Wag taken and broaghe agapne ta Rome
With his chudzen.

Hircanus.

G. Aristobosus an e tis ram parla Ar }
W he fet the erowne on his \~ owne head, and ot the suggestio nof his wife, he billed his brother Intigonus.

H. Alexander fle abont .1000. of the Lewes, and he obeyng his wolle gauc vp his Crawne.

Ariftobolus king.

LAlexandra his wife premifpng to her fonne Bir: canug the dominion, put in pzifon Briftoboins her other fone.

x. Hireanus after his mothers death Was cha'eo ef

Empcrours of Rome.

tulius — (A.)

r f

his brother Arifroboins e discomfited, he ficd to Hic rusalem, æ at the lak agreed that Yristobolus Meld 0
M. Antigonus the be thicke ruler, and Hircanas vnder him, whlch S. Iulius Cæsar in the fi 0 f Aristobohis Hirtanus Went to Aretha hing of Arabia fe tpme of Waffing
By the helpe of Wi= cretelp, to helpe him agapne to his Daminton liefetcnaunt of Sp- ＋.
Pa 0 5 e. ‘elll thren. Sohiche Dretha commpng into Furic tla , Garred with raus. a den 5 are” 5 En. btlieged Mierusalem, and shoulde hauc Pompeius, Kalter rn x 4 YS taken it pf one Scauruc his bictogic, held the an N 90 5 duke of the Ramancs hat chieke rule. 3. peres g
1 ca oo, Atilobolus. ) not rapsed bp the siegt and fc and. 7. moncthes, vir gg, to cele Departed, for -befoze him the him into the Bing: tomon wealth pis
Dome agapnt:and he goucrned vnder co= Sac .

Hauyng manp thonfanbe men of the

sulleg. 464. perts, and from the tyme

eee,

tons, besieged M. of Romulus it was | fai N ouerned under 7. bat oe dans A 1 1 n ingeg. 240. peres, q 5 at the ende where eg fuctceded the conted Anugonus kpng, lulles bntell tutta n Hircanus afs Elie Marcs 55 ter he had cut os hu ‘ 7 >
- og Lifanias. uled alone.
4 | ? r. Crassus take non |
; almost all the golde ‘ ider ee after the takpng of Beihsura and the of the Temple tom —
‘of ofen of Hiernsalem. and his pramile made to the Jeweg the which Pompei
‘chia wee their lames, he droue ont Philip out of Antto- 1 kept his handes latthe tthe sast he and Il ysiag bounde of their owne armic and cleane, he spent it
* Delon neundement of Demetrius Sother, the chüdzen of bpon his fouldters
0 us were flapne. 1. Mach. 2. that he hod in Pareee Sorher the forme of Scleuchus returnyng te thla, wherbpon he fen hie bethe Sntiochus with WL plia,s did contitute Tlchünue had golde cramincd
— Thhop, with whom Bnechodes was fent ints Jurie, e into hie mouth, and gehn ped manp about Oterusalem, he loft Michanoz, who war therof dyed.

Jonah e bende of Fudas,who wa tilled bp wacchides a

odathag, withdrawing his helpe, altho f ine many thinges. Alexander ng with Mak oe Chriftes line.

of Epiphants, the laid Bacthideg waz dellroped. t. Mach. 10. |

%

6g: Lhenewe I esta

who inet allp treateth of the actes of Chiste. wherin Waul doch tract Titu ates . huge of bis Death, relurrercion and als | Fea „Ie couch eng en OP DePAE geit were Nha. O keution. Chapters. 28. rie, S gf all fpirituall conuerfation, and reaps: wherin chichp is treated the fortitude of Chztfte, of herctitics. Chapters. 3.
Yeo lawts) arke. 3 rape yw of Mattherwe . „ir dnn the Bpottie commenveth Phüeme agen 11 kpeaketh chiefly of the onnnnctation oe 1 a he wre e oan e 7 a/ ti Lee eee e Cen ele e eee
5 iin: F 1 Chapter. 1.
1 11 6 175 In Whom Chiles dtuinitte is chiefly sptwed, Whtrim the B pole Meweth the weak . eae , lohn. and other acteg of his dinine power. Chapters. 21. unrl 200 les tine, and the per a whet in S. Luke beelareth the sendyng of the holy mebre. ee pe . uf ye b Eo ich Chuck ad 1 ghost after his bisibie asfennon into heauen, € of the God and man. Chapters 11 wer ee af § ls. of Apo. Vac tes of the Aposties. tspeciallp of Paul, wherin is g
Apolleg allo let out as it were the poung agcof the Churche 1
110 ig ont in her Grft gronth. Chapters. 28. oe olle. tin Maul doth renoke the Romanes from the Wherin Fames geueth exhortation vnto pas bo 5 ethers ot the Gentiles, declareng the order ol their tient lafferong, and that there 18 no exctpt:on o
Romants. “) sustisicatton, what shoulde proccede and what spould tamer, Opersons before God: and doth allo open the huttes
Cbolot their (n@tfication. Ehapters. 16. ret Nen bi “Le rene kozbiddeth warres
1 Wherin he both calt backe soine that were deccanep chantable, and Both Gren Pn 1 es of kalse Bpottics ¢ Hslofophers by their cloquence 7 — 5 5. some which were Deccaucd bp the sudaicall obser- whertn Peter generh thankes vnto God,
Corinth. en of the lawe, he calteth them backe to true Legales which bp the death of his lonnt did mercifully faut

allo. all mankinde, and doth inttruct to good like diuerg
Peter states of men. Chapterg. 5.
5 2 In which the Bpoltic mdaceth the brleuerst holde the true faith, he doth note and tondempn

faith. and to t he mi dome of op. Chapters. 16.
2 Wherin Paul buon their conuersion and trpen-
' tanner, prapleth and comfozteth them. Chapterg. 3. wherin Paul calleth home agapne such ag were the fallencifc of hrretirg, end Doth delcribe the Les de bp false prophtteg, that thep shoulde res cande commpng of Chur. Chapters. 3. ) turne backe to the lawe and to their ceremortieg,

—~ 7 I Fn Which (aint John deth teltifie
Galach. Oand wylleth then to come agapneto the truc faith of tance and life, ona men cue the Sospe ll. Chapters. 6. leha.

Bookes.

finnes, affirmpng that we haur Telus Chive wherin the Ipostle prapseih the Ephessang, aduocate with the father, disfwadyng men from which did persist tonstantip in the faith of the Gol-
Ephefians.

Chapt the lone of the wezidc, and perlwadyng them te pell reccaned. Chapters. 6.

wherin the Apostie prapleth the Philippians, foz
1 $ thot after they hab reccaucd the wozde of trueth,
Philippians. € thep did not reccaue the falle Apo tles. Chapters. 4.

wherin Paut blameth the Coloksians for that m

fone God and their neighvours. Chapters .
2 wberm he commendeth the clect Lady and her fonnes, and doth exhorte them to bzotherlp loue, and both admonicht them to elchewe heretibes.
Chapter. 1.

3 In this he prapleth the godlmesse of his beloard
Haus which he extendto vnto straungers, and he both rrhozt him to perseutr styll in that godlineste and well dopng. Chapter. 1.

In the which the Ppollte doth admoniche au

they wete reduced bp the falle à posties, ond exhozs teth them to returne fo the veritit ot the Golpell.
Chapters. 4.

I Wherin he Doth commende the CT heffatoniang,

e whith reccanyng the Wolde of tructh though thep menok their own faluation, and he doth bryngm
Sapiẽtial. sutker ed perlecution of their owne kinrcoe, pet they Inde. by the ch the alrercanon that was era ats prac did perfitt tn the faith, noz woulde receane the falle chactand tye deupil, and doth detelt rhe fc of che the ewher Thessalo- Apottics. Chapters. 5. N herctikcg. Cheptet. 1.

4 pe Bile nians. 2 hte ve Bpottie ber oe ok the Jatt

tymea, of the commnpng, ond ot the persecutton, of 8 lation vn
2 og antechzust , ok his aduauncement and ouerthzowe. John b 2 athe Alle of ator olen by eram: Chapters. 3. tribulations which the Churche of Chie did ples pre: 1 wherin Paak instracteth him of the order and Prophe- Apen. O then fuffer, s Hopheneth al’ of (ach triwalatuons eeptes of officc ol Bishops and Deacons, and of all eccle- tical, which the Church Gait afore , aia geblp tp: N fiatticait di ciplinr. Chapters. 4. in the time of antechzist, ano of the punt ne ning genen Yimoth. 2 whetin Dani doth exhert him to the crotone of of them which de dampned, and of the rtwardeg bo hig marttt dome and doth inlourme him of all the rulcg the ele ct. Chapitts. 31.
Bpotties. g (of the cathotibe neritic, and Ghat shalbe done in the hebookes Jatt dapes, and of his oronc luffetpng. Chapters. 4.

Ii.

¢ Faultes escaped.

Inthe kirst prologue, pag.; line. 25. destoped (reade) destroped.

27. line, neither the (reade) neither by the.

In Matthe we, chap. 26. vearle. /i. (reade) this (tciowe.)

In the actes, chap. 3. bearfe .4, they sealed (veade) they sapled.

Chap. ß. bearle.;, conuerfation, (reade) conuertion.

Romanes, chap. u. vearse.9. in the margent write. Pfal. 68.

Colostang, chap.;. vearse. 6. the worde of God, reade) the worde of Christ.
Hebzues, chap. . vearse. 8, righteoulnelle, (reade) rightnesse.

Ere is to be noted, that such partes and chapters which be marked and noted with fuch femy circles at the head of che,

vearfe or line,with fuch other te xte, may be left vntead in the pnblique reading to the people, that therby other chap- 8

ters and places of the scripture makyng more to their edification and capacitie may come in their roomes. And here let che. ee foc of Christ and dilpenser of the misteties of God, haue a due aud weightie consideration, to reade this hie treafure
4 Ode worde with all reuerence and grauitie, truely, distinctly, and sensibly: for it isthe mightie power of God to falustion

‘Ofuery one that beleuet i: So let the hearers also with all mekenesse and lowlinesse, receauc this worde that is thus grafted and“ 4
4 hee among {t them by the great mercie of God, which worde is able to saue their soules faith the holy A postle faint :
4 i. ames. For as both the reader and hearer be pronounced blessed by Chtistes one mouth, who heate the worde
1 of God and do fulfyll it: So be they pronounced both reader aud hearer by the holy prephete Jeremie

accurfed which do the worke of God fraudulently, and negligently ; From the which he defende vs who bought vs with his most precious blood, To whom with the father and the holy gholt be all honour and glorie, Amen.

SA) spake openly in his Gospell, saying: Keatamini scripturas, quia de) i bos putatis in ipfis vitam eternam babere, et ille fant gue testimomium perbilent ens Search ye the ee in them ye thinke to haue 7
HG \eternall lyfe, and thofe they be which beate witnes of me.
Thefe wordes were firft spoken vnto the lewes by our fauiour, but by hym in his doctrine ment to all: for theß concerne all, of whar nation, of what tongue, of what profession socuer any man be. For to all belongeth it to be called vnto cternall life, so many as by the witnes of the scriptures defire to finde eternall life. No man, woman, or chylde, is excluded from this saluation, and therfore to seuery of them is this spokẽ proportionally yet, and in their

degrecs and ages, and as the reason and congruitie of their vocation may alke. For nor fo lycth it in charge tothe
{|| worldly artificer to searche, or to any other priuate man fo

Siew 1 NS wy exquifitely to ftudic,as it lyeth to the charge of the publike

— re eA Il ecacher¥6 fearchein the scriptures, to be the more able to walke in the houfe of God (which is rhe Church of the lyuyng God, the pyller and ground oftrueth) ro the & Tim. establishing of the true doctrine of the fame, and to the impugnyng of the false. And though whatfocuer difference there may be betwixt the preacher in office, and the auditor in his vocation, yet to borh ir is said,
Search pe the fertptures, whereby ye may fynde eternall lyfe, and gather witnesses of that saluation vhich is in Christe Fetus our Lorde. For although the prophete of God Moyses, byddeth rhe kyng when Deut he is once fer in the throne of his kingdome, to defcribe before his eyes the volume of Gods lawe, according to the example whiche he shoulde receaue of the priestes of the leuiticall tribe, to haue it with him, and to reade in it all the dayes of his life, to thende that he might learne to feare the Lorde his God and to obsetue his lawes, that his heart be not aduaunced in pryde over his btethren, not to swarue eyther on the ryght hande or on the left: yet the reafon of this precept for that it concerneth all men, may reafonably be thought to be commaunded to all men, and all men may take it to be spoken to them selfe in their degree. Though almightic God him felfe spake to his captayne Iosue in precife wordes, Nen recedat volumen legns budus ab ert tuo fed me- Tofie.t, J ditaberis in eo diebus ac noétibus oc. Let not the volume of this booke depart from thy mouth, but muse therin both dayes and nyghtes, that thou mayest kepe and perfourme all thinges which be written init, that thou mayest direct well thy way and vnderstande the fame : yet afwell spake almightie God this precept to all his people. 5

in the directions of their wayes to himwarde, as he ment it to Iosue: For that he hath care of all, he accepteth b 8

5 . : . Phe.vi.

no mans person, his wyll is that all men fhoulde be saued, his wyll is chat all men shoulde come to the way I. Tim. i of tructh. Howe coulde this be more conucniently declared by God to man, then when Chrifte his welbe- loh. xin loued fonne our most louing sauiour, the way, tlie trueth, and the lyfe of vs all, dyd hyd vs openly Searche the leriptures, assuring vs herein to finde etcrnalllife, to finde full tcftification of all his graces and benetes towardes vs in the treasure thereof: Therefore itis most conuenient that we fhoulde all fuppofe that
Christe spake to vs all in this his precept of searching the scriptures. If this celestiall doctour (fo aucthorifed by the father of licauen, and commannded as his only sonne, to be hearde of vs all) biddeth vs bufily to
Search the scriptures: of what spirite can it procecde to forbid the reading and studiyng of the scriptures?
If the grosse lewes vied to reade them, as some men thinke that our faniour Christ dyd thew by such kynd of
Ipeaking, rheir vsage, with their opinion they had thetin to finde eternall lyfe, and were not of Christe rebuked or disproued, either for their searching, or for the opinion they had, howe superstitiously or superfjcially soeuer some of them vsed to expende the {criprures? Howe muche more vnaduisedly do suche as bost them selfe to be either Chtistes vicars, or be of his garde, to lothe christen men from reading, by their couert slaunderous reproches of the scriptures, ot in their aucthoritie by lawe or statute to contract this libertie of stu-

ng che worde of eternall saluation? Christe calleth them not onlye to tlie single readyng of scriprures
(faith Chrisostome) but fendeth them to the exquisite fearching of them, for in thein is erernall lyfe to be founde, and they be (faith hym selfe) the witnefle of me: for they declare out his office, they commende his beneuolence towardes vs, they recorde his whole workes wrought for vs to our saluation. Antechriste therefore he mutt be, that vnder whatsoeuer colour woulde geue contrary precept or counsayle, ro that whiche Christe dyd geue vnto vs. Very litle do they refemble Christes louing spirite mouing vs to fearche

E 1 ; -
Or our comfort, that wyll difcourage vs from suche learching, or that woulde withe ignoraunce and forget- ’

Z. Ka e sted

Math xvii-

= . 8 . > . — a . 7 fulnesse of his benefitc to raigne in vs, fo that they might by our ignoraunce raigne the more franklyin our

donleiences, to the daunger of our saluation. VVho can take the light from vs in this miserable vale of blind- 4 nesse, and meane not to haue vs stumble in the pathes of perdition to the rnine of our soules? whowyllen- Pfal xxi uie vs this bread of lyfe prepared and set on the table for our eternall sustenaunce, and meane not to famishe or in steede thereof with their corrupt traditions and doctrines of man, to infect vs? All the whole scrip- M Tin rure, saith the holy apostle Saint Paul inspired from God aboue, is profitable ro reache, to reproue, to recost eee rightcoufneffe, that the man of God may be founde and perfect, instructed to cucry

worke.

Searche theretore good reader (on Gods name) as Christe byddeth thee the holy seripture, * ~
- K i j *

Lal. i.
Psal. cxix.

e

Hedre.v.

1. Cor. xini.

Math.vii.

Math. xi.
E sal. lxi.
1. Cor. xii.
Apoc. ii.
Sipi. i.
Job. xilil.

Sap! i.

Pal. lxviu.

Lohn. xx.

Hber. v.

Cor. x.
Math. xxi

lo. ii. l. cxix.
Ax vi.

The Preface.

thou mayest finde thy saluation: Let not the volume of this booke (by Gods owne warrant) depart from thee, but occupie thy selfe therein in the whole iourney of this thy worldly pilgrimage, to vnderstande th way hewe to walke ryghtly before hym all the dayes of thy lyfe. Remember that the prophete Dauid pronounceth hym the blessed man whiche wyll muse in the lawe of God both day and night, remember that he calleth him bleffed whiche walketh in the way of the Lorde, whiche wyll searche diligently his testimonies and wyll in their whole heart secke the fame. Let not the couert suspitious insinuations of the aduerfaries driuc thee from the searche of the lioly seriptute, either for the obscuritie whiche they fay is in them, or for the inscrutable hidden mifteries they talke to be comprifed in them, or for the ftraungnes and homlynes of the phrafes they woulde charge Gods booke with. Chrifte exhorteththee therefore the rather for i diffi. cultie of the fame,to fearche them diligently. Saint Paul wylleth thee to haue thy senses exercised in them, and not to be a chylde in thy senses, but in malice. Though many thinges may be difficult to thee to vnderstande, impute it ratlier to thy dull hearing and reading, then to thinke that the scriptutes be insuperable, to them which with diligent searehing labour to discerne the euill from the good. Only fearche with an humble spirite, aske in continuall prayet, secke wirh puritie of life,knocke with perpetuall perseueraunce, and crye to that good fpirite of Chirifte the comforter: and surely to cucry fuche afker it wyll be geuen, such fearchers must nedes finde, to them it wylbe opened. Christe hun felfe wyll open the sense of the {ctiptures, not to the proude, or to the wyse of the worlde, but to een and contrite in heart: for he hath the kay of
Dauid, who openeth and no man shutteth, who fhutecth and no man openeth. For as this spirite isa bening and liberall spirite, and wyll be easyly founde of them whiche wyll early in carefulnesse ryse to fecke hym, and ashe promiseth he wyll be the comforter from aboue to teache vs, and to leade vs into all the wayes of trueth, if that in humilitic we bowe vnto hym, deniyng our ownc natutall senses, out carnall wittes and reafons: so is he the spirite of puritie and eleaunes, and will receede from him, Mhose conscience is subieet to filthynesse of lyfe. Into suche a soule this heauenly wysdome wyll not enter, for all petuerse cogitations wyll sepatate vs from God: and then howe busyly soeuer we fearche this holy table of the seripture, yet wyll it then be a table to suche to their owne snare, a trap, a stumbling stocke, and a recompence to them felfe. VVe ought therefore to searche to finde out the ttueth, not to opptesse it, we ought to seeke Chtiste, not as Herode did vnder the pretence of worfhipping hym to destroy hym, or as the Pharifecs searched the seriptutes to difprouc Christe, and to diseredite him, and not to folowe him: but to embrace the saluation whiche we may Icarne by them. Nor yet is it inough fo to acknowledge the seriptures as some of the Iewes dyd, of the holyest of them who vsed suche diligence, that they could number precisely, not only euery verse, but euery word and sillable, how oft euety letter of the alphabete was repeated in the whole scriptures: they had some of them suche reuerence to that booke, that they woulde not fuffer in a great heape of bookes, any other to
Jay ouer them, they woulde not suffer that booke to fall to the grounde as nye as they coulde, they woulde costly bynde the bookes of holy scriptures, and cause thent to be exquisitely and ornately written. VVhiche deuotion yet though it was not to be discommended, yet was it not for that intent, why Chrifte cõmended the {criptures,nor they therofalowed before God: For they did not call vpon God in a true fayth, they were not charitable to their neighbours,but in the middes of all this deuotion, they didftcale, they were adulterers, they were flaunderers and backbiters, euen muche like many of our chriftian men and women nowe a dayes, wlio glory much that they reade the scriptutes, that they fearche them and loue them, that they frequent the publique sermons in an outwarde fhewe of all honestie and perfection, yea they can pike out of the scriptutes vertuous sentenses and godly preceptes to lay before other men. And though these maner of men do not muche erre for such fearching and ftudiyng,yct they fec not the scope and the principall state of the scriptures, which is as Chrifte declarcth it, to finde Chrifte as their fauiour,to cleaue to his faluation and merites, to be brought to the lowe repentaunce of their liues, and to amende them selfe, to rayse vp their fayth to our fauiout Christe, fo to thinke of him as the scriptures do teftifie of hym. These be the principall causes why Chrifte did sende the Iewes to fearche the seriptutes: for to this ende were they wrytten, faith
Saint John, Her siripta funt vt credatis, & ve credeutes vitam babeatis eteraam. These were written to this intent, that ye fhoulde beleue, and that through your beliefe ye fhoulde haue euerlasting life.

6 a ee good reader, great cause we haue to extoll the wonderous wisdome of God, and with great thankes to prayse his prouidence, considering bowe he hath preserued and renued from age to age by speciall miracle, the incomparable treasure of his Churche. For first he did inspire Moyses as lohn Chrifoftome doth teftific,to wryte the stonie tables, and kept him in the mountaync fourtie da 5 to geue him his lawe: in he sent tne prophetes, but they suffred many thousande aduetsities, 2 ded did folowe, all
Bes, ee, ee were brent vp. He then inspired agayne another man to repayre these ee W a eS of their leauinges fer them agayne together: after that, he prouineed preters thoulde take them in hande: at the last came Chrifte him felfe, the Apo-

es did reccauc them, and spread them througliout all nations, Christe wrought his miracles and wonders: and what folowedt after thefe great volumes the Apoftles alfo did wryte as Saint Paul doth fay, These be po to the instruction of vs that be come into the ende of the worlde: and Chrifte doth fay, Ye thereore crre, because ye knowe not the {criptures nor the power of God: and Paul dyd fay, Let the worde of
Chrifte be plentifullamong you: and agayne faith Dauid, Oh howe fete be th 55 4 5 905 te: he saide not to my hearing, but to my throte, aboue the hony or the hon b ey
: 187 DU y eombe to my mouth. Yea Moyles
Lith, Thou thale meditate in them cuermore when thou rifeft, when thou sittest downe,when thou goelt to sleepe, continue in them he saith: and a thousande pl ö ont che - i places more. And yet after fo many testimonies thus {po
0 3 some persons that do not yet fo much as knowe what the seriptures be: wherevpon nothing is a Ren 5 ee done amongest vs: In this whiche pertayne to this lyfe, we eee pirituall goodes we haue no fegarde. Thasferre Iobn Chrifof?. It mult nedes fignific
0 1 ing to our vnderftanding,thatalmightie God hath had fuch care to preseribe these bookcs thus land ay chen only, but to maintaine them and defende them againft the malignitie af the

: Who alway went about to destroy them: and yet could these neuer be so Baton

ut

| ‘The Preface. | ,

od

but that he woulde haueghem continue whole and perfect to this day, to our finguler comfort and inftruction, where other bookes of mortall wife men hauc perifhed in great numbers. It is recorded that Prolomeus

Philadel phus kyng of Egypt, had gathered together in one librarie at Alexandria by his great coste and dili-

gence, feuen hundred thousand bookes, wherof the principall were the bookes ot Moyles, whiche reserued

not much more, then by the {pace of two hundred yeres, were all brent and confumed in that battavle when

Cæsar restored Cleopatra agayne after her expulsion. At Conftantinople perished vnder Zenon by Mecom-

mon fire, a hundred and twentic thoufande bookes. At Rome when Lucius Aurel Antonius dyd raigne, his ‘

notable librarie by a lightning fro heauen was quite confumed: yea it is recorded that Gregorie the brit. did Lohannes ;

caufe a libraric of Rome mo only certaine Paynims workes to be burned,to thintent the feriptures of Sarifbert,

God fhould be more read and studied. VVhat other great libraries haue there ben cõsumed but of late daes: . b .

And what libraries haue of olde throughout this realme almost in cucry abbcy of the same, ben destroyed 1 ye 8.

fundry ages, besides the loffe of other mens priuate ftudies, it were to long to rehearse. VVherevpon feyng 14 0

almightie God by his deuine pouidence, hath pteserued thefe bookes of the seriptures fafe and sounde. and gibus,

that in their native languages they were firft written, in the great ignorauncc that raigned in these rongues

and contrary to all other cafualties, chaunced vpon all other bookes in mauger of all worldly witres Po

would fo fayne haue had them deftroyed, and yet he by his mightie hande, would haue them extant 2 wit-

nesses and interpreters of his will toward mankind: we may soone feecaufe moft reuerently to embrace thefe

deuine testimonies of his wyll, to studie them, and to fearch them, to inftrué our blinde nature fo fore cor-

rupted and fallen from the knowledge in whiche firft we were created. Yet having occafion geuen some-

what to recouer our fall, and to returne againe to that deuine nature wherein we were once made, and

at the last to be inheritours in the celestiall habitation with God almightie, after the ende of our mortali-

tie here brought to his dust agayne: These bookes I fay beyng of suche estimation and aucthoritie, fo muche

reuerenced of them who had any meane taste of them, coulde neuer be put out of the way, neither by the

spyre of any tiraunr,as that tiraunt Maximian destoyed all the holy seriptures whercfocuer they coulde be Galfride

founde, and burnt them in the middes of the market, neither the hatred cither of any Porphirian philoso- n.

pher or Rhetoritian, neither by the enuie of the romanystes, and of fuch hypoerites, who from tyme to time

did euer barke against them, some of them not in open sort of condempnation : but more cunningly vnder

suttle pretences, for that as they fay, they were fo harde to vnderltande,and {pecially for thar they attirme it

to bea perilous mattet to tranflatethe text of the holy scripture, and therefore it can.notbe well tranflared.

And here we may bcholde the endenour of fome mens cauillations,who labour all they can to slaunder the

tranflatours,to finde fault in fome wordes of the translation: but them Jelfewill neuer fet pen to the booke,

ro set out any translation at al. They can in their constitutions prouinciall vnder payne of excommunication, Tho. arüdel

inhibite al other men to translate them without the ordinaries or the prouinciallcounfayle agree therevnto: jn condlio

But they wyll be well ware neuer to agrec or to geue counsayle to fet them out. VVhiche their suttle com- apud oxon.

passe in effect, tendeth but to bewray what inwardly they meane, if they coulde bring it about, that is, vtterly an 1407. arto suppresse them: being in this their iudgement, fatre vnlike the olde fathers in the primatiue Church, who did. 7.

hath exhorted indifferently all perfons,afwell men as women, to exercise them selues in the seriptures, which

by Saint Hieroms aucthoritic be theseriptutes of the people. Yea they be farre vnlike their olde forefathers

that haue ruled in this realme, who in their times, and in diuers ages did their diligence to translate the

whole bookes of the seriptures, to the erudition of the laytie, as yet at this day be to be seene diuers bookes

translated into the vulgar tongue,foinc by kynges of the realme, some by bishoppes, some by abbottes, some

by other deuout godly fathers : fo defirous they were of olde tyme to haue the lay fort edified in godlynes

by reading in their vulgar tongue, that very many bookes be yer extant, though for the age of the speache

and straungenesse of the chare& of many of them almost worne out ofknowledge.In whiche bookes may he

seene evidently howe it was vied among the Saxons, to haue in their Churches read the foure gofpels,fo di-

stributed and piked out in the body of the euangelistes bookes, that to euery Sunday and festiuall day in the

yere, they were forted out to the common ministets of tlie Churche in their common prayers to be read to

their people. Nowe as of the most auncient fathers the prophetes, Saint Peter testifieth that thefe holy —

men of God had the impulfion of the holy ghost, to fpeake out these deuine testimonies: so it is nor to be i. Pet. i. doubted but that these latter holy fathers of the englishe Church, had rhe impulsion of the holy ghost, to fer

out thefe saered bookes in their vulgar language, to the edification of the people, by thehelpe whereof they A@.xvii might the better folowe the example of the godly Christians, in the begining of the Churche,who not only

receaued the worde withall redinesse of heart, but also did searche diligently in the scriptures, whether the

docttine of the Apostles were agreable to the same seriptures. And these were not of the rascall sort (saith the . deuine storie) but they were of the best and of most noble byrth among the Theffalonians, Birrhenses by i. Peti.

name. Yea the prophetes them selues in their dayes, writeth S. Peter, were diligent searchers to inquire out

this saluat iõ by Christe, searehing when and at what article of time this grace of Christes dispensation should

appeare to the world. VVhat ment the fathers of the Church in their writinges, hut the aduauncing of these

holy bookes, where some do attribute no certaintie of vndoubted veritie, but to the canonicall fcriptures. AOS ae

Some do affirme it to be a foolifhe rashe holdnesse to beleue hym, who proueth not by the seriptures that mei

whiche he affirmeth in his worde. Some do accurse all that isdeliucred by tradition, not founde in the legall ae *

and euangelicall seriptures. Some fay that our fayth must needes stagger if it be not gequnded vpon theauc- uz thoritie of the seripture. Some testifieth that Christe and his Churche ought to be aduouched out of the Tertullian. scriptures, and do contende in disputation, that the true Churche can nor be knowen, bur only by the holy de doctrina leriptures: For all other thinges (faith the same aucthor) may be founde among rhe heretikes. Some affirme christiaus. it to be a sinfull tradition that is: obtruded without the seripture. Some playnely pronounce, that not Chrisost. in

to knowe the seriptures, is not to knowe Christe. VVherefore let men extoll our the Churche practises as * yghly as they can, and let them set out their traditions and customes, their decifions in synodes and coun- a,

fayles, with vaunting the prefence of the holy ghoft among them really, as some doth affirme it in their wri-; p.

2 „ a * * 1, ¥ fing, let theirgroundes and their demonstrations, theit foundations be as stable and as strong as they 1
9 — — — 7 K 11 L 1

—— ee i ! 7— im ,,

e der 1.

Psal. xi.

Concilium braccar. secundum.

Inter leges
Edward.

Ex archiuis de ftatu landauensis ecclie, in vita archiepifcopi dubritii & in
I. capgraue.
Rom xv.
Ind pet may it de trut that
W. of Malsveric spziteth, that Phaganus and Deruutanug were lent aficr
(as Coadiutours) Wilh thefe ltarntd men to the preaching of the Solpell. whlche was neuer extinguished in
Szitanie, std
Joseph ol Bs ramath ia his

e, a to S. sten the ft doshop of
Darter. thep

openlę az uouche.

The Preface.

them out: Vet wvll we be bolde to say with Saint Peter, EAemus wes firntorem fc rmontm propheticum, our part a more ble grounde, the peal eticall wordes (of the are ae be not to eS ee therefore of the fame Saint Peter with thefe wordes : cui dum attenditis cen lucerne af parenti in obscuro loco, rete facitis a dia illucefiat,toc. VVherevnto faith he, whyle ye do atrende as to alight shining in a darke place ye do well a till the day light appeare, and till the bright starte do atise into our heal tes. Fot this we know,that al the = pheticall feripture ftandeth not in any priuate interpretation of vayne names, of seuctall Churches 1 tholique and vniuerfall seas, of singuler and wylfull heades, whiche wyll chalenge by cuftome all decifion 10 pertayne to them only, who be working fo muche for their vayne superioritie, that they be not asnamed now to be of that numbet, Qui dixerunt lingaam noftrans magnificabimus, labia neslra a nobis furt.quisnofler domiuus eff: V Vhiche haue fayd, with our tongue wyll we prevayle, we are they that ought to fpeake, who is lorde ouer vs. And whyle a {hall thus contende for their ftraunge claymed aucthoritie, we will proceede in the reformation be 5 and doubt no more by the helpe of Chtiste his gtace, of the truc vnitie to Christes catholique Eborche 1d of the vprightneffe of out fayth in this prouince, then the fpanifhe cleargie once gathered together in cou faile(only by the commaundement of their king, before whiche tyme the Pope was not fo acknowledged i hisauétthoritie which he now claymeth) I fay as surely dare we trust, as they dyd trust of their fayth hea 5 rie. Vea no lesse cõfidence haue we to ptofesse that, which the fathers of the vniuersall ble nbege in Affrike as they wryte them selfe did professe in their epiftle writté to Pope Celestine, laying before his fi 3 the foule corruption of him felfe(as two other of his predicessours did the like errour)in falsifyng the Ana of Nicen counfayle, for his wrong chalenge of his uewe claymed aucthoritie: Thus urytyng Mao = inftifimegue prouiderunt (Nicea et Africana dicreta)quectrague negotis in suis losis (obi orta sunt) finienda,nee vnicwiqui prota Pica ss.
$i spiritus dcfaturams,ua cquitasa bai facerdotibus et prudenter videatur, & constautissime teneatur, maxime, quia bnicuique cercessum of, 6 5 ditie cffenfus fuerit cognitorum,ad comilia fue provincie,vel etiam vit isale proaccare. That(the Nicen and Afftican decrees) baue most prudently and iustly prouided for all maner of matters to be ended in theit tetitories where they had their beginning, and they trusted that not to any one prouince fhoulde want the grace of the holy ghost | wherby both the truth or equitie might prudently be fecne ofthe chriftian prelates of Chritte and might be alfo by them moft conftantly defended, {pecially for that it is graunted to euery man (if he be ech b the iudgement of the cause once knowen, to appeale to the counsayles of his owne prouince, or els to ‘Be vniuersall. Except there be any man,whichmay beleue that our Lorde God would inspire the righteoufnefle of examination, to any one singular person, and to denie the fame to priestes gathered together into counfaile without number. &c. And there they do require the bishop of Rome to fend none of his clarkes to exe cn ue 5 causes, left els fay they, mought be brought in the vayne pride of the worlde into the l ae ee In this antiquitie may we in this chtistian catholique Church of Englande, repofe our sknowyng by out one annales of auncient recorde, that kyng Lucius whofe confcience was muche touched with the miracles whiche the seruauntes of Chrifte wrought in diuers nations, thervpon beyng in grcat loue with the ttue fayth, sent vnto Eleutherius then byflop of Rome, requiring of h mir cheiftan religion. But Eleutherius did redyly geue ouer that care to king Lucius in his epistle, for 1185 the king as he wryceth, the vicar of God in his one kingdome, and for that he hadreceaued the faith of Chrifte : 4 d fe that he had alfo both teftamentes in his rcalme, he wylled him to drawe out ofthem by the tote 50 0, and by the counfaile of his wisemen, his lawes, and by that lawe of God to gouerne his ine of Brit 1 and not fo muche to desire the Romane and Emperours lawes, in the which some default might b f fide faith he, but in the lawes of God nothing at all. VVith which aunswere the kinges legates Eluat 857 1 4 winus sent as messengers by the king to the Pope, returned to Britanie aga 525 Ta be ee 15 b i op,and Medwine alowed a publique teacher: who for the eloquence fad knowledge the cho
Bene ee eee home agayne to kyng Lucius,and by their holy preach ingles andthe 95 e with oa Ae their baptismc. &c. Thus farre in the storie. Nowe therfore knowing and be: VV i a queciangue preferipta fuvt ad neff rem dcétrinam prefevipta ifunt, vt per pacieutiam G consclationem scrix-

. as: atloeucr is afore writté,ts written before for our instruction, that we through the pacience and comfort of scirptures might haue hope, the only furetic to our fayth and comsci 15 fc to the setiptures. VVherevpon whyle this eternall worde of God b f NE EE eo, de will haue pacience with all th i eee ee le 1 eli iy hae temas of men, who labour fo pen to magnific their tongues, to bene od. 15 wil take comfort by the holy {criptures against the maledictions

f o noutishe our hope continually there with, so to liue and dye in this com-

5 ane 110 10 0 pertayne to the elect numbet of Chtistes Churche, howe fatre soeuer we be onde are Sh poke of fuche who 175 them selues to be the vniuerfall lordes of all aue in 5 ayth and consciences, at pleasute. Finally to commend further vnto thee good reaene peas eee de lesse needefull, hauing fo nyc folowing that learned prefea of Canterbutie hich a a the diligence of that godly father Thomas Cranmer late byfhopin the fet out. And be a ae to Be prefixed before the tranflation of that Byble that was then
Bybles, it was though 0 ercof be fo waste d, that very many Churches do want their conuenient

„it w. ght good to some well disposed men, to tecognise the fame Byble againe into this fourme

e mech d the order of the text, not as condemning the former tranflation, dea ee ae 10 er translation, excepting the 9 180 text from whiche as litle vaeseaped, eythet by such as Lesen 1 vee de nee fame in the spirite of charitie ide ing of the bookes,or by the ouersight of the printer, to cortect the ion oktbese bobles 9215 es what diuersitie hath ben seene in mens iudgementes fte Church ‘as ese dayes, though all directed theit labouts to the glory of God, urche,to the comfort of their chriftian brethren, and alwayes as God dyd furthet

open vnto them a afublzorne ene 19 05 they were torefourme their former humaine ouerfightes,rather then refut the gyft of the holy ahost v ho from tyme to tymeis refident as that hea-

uenly

The Pr eface,

uenly teacher and leader into all trueth, by whofe direction the Churche is ruled and gouerned. And let all men remember in them selfe howe errour and ignoraunce is created with our nature: let frayle man confeffe with that great wyse man, that the cogitations and inuentions of mortall men be very weake,an 1 ons fone deceaued: For the body fo subiect to corrupriõ doth oppresse the soule, that it can not as of dutie it ought. Men we be all, and that which we know, is not the thoufand part of that we knowe not
VVhereupon faith saint Austen, otherwyse to iudge then the truth is, this temptation ryseth oF the frailtie of man. A man so to loue and sticke to his owne iudgement, or to enuie his brothers, to the perill of dissoluing tlie christian communion, or to the perill of schisme, and of heresie, this is diabolical refumption: but foro judge in euery matter as the truth is: this belongeth onely to the angelicall perfection. Notwithstanding ood reader, thou.niayft be well assured nothing to be done, in this tranflation eyther of malice or wylfull meaning in altering the text, eyther by putting more or lesse to the fame, as of purpofe to bryhg in any priuatciudgement by falsification of the wordes,as fome certaine men hath ben ouct bolde foto do,fitle regarding the maiestie of God his scripture: but so to make it ferue to their corrupt error, as in alleaging the senrence of faint Paule to the Romaines the. 6. one certaine wryter to proue his farisfaction, was boldto turne the word of Santi tationen into the word of Satisfaclionem, Thus. Sicut exbibuimas antea merabra vestra feruire immundicie et iniguis tati ad inignitatem, ita deinteps exbibsamus membra noftra fernire iustitiæ in fatiffattionem. That is,as we haue geuen our members 1 to vneleanneffe, from iniquitie to ĩniquitie: euen fo from hencefoorth let vs geue our members to seruerigh- oe teousnesse into satisfaction: where the true worde, is into sarctification. Euen folikewife for the aduauntage Ae of his caufe,to proue that men may haue in their pray et fay th ypon saintes, ortuptiy alleagerh Saint Paases di de Sers text, 4d pbilemonem, Thus. Fidem uam babes in domino Iefu & in omnes fantios leauing out the worde Charitaten which would penitentz, haue tightly ben distributed vnto omnes anten. As fides vn to in domino Tofu. VVhere the text is, fudiens ebaritatem zum idem Hosi-
& fide quem babes in domino Iesu & in omnes sanftos. c. It were to long to bryng in many examples, as may be openly u de Spe. & founde in fome mens wrytynges in thefe dayes, who would be counted the chiefe pillers of rhe Catholique tone fayth, or to note how corruptly theyof purpofe abuse the text to the comoditie of their caufe.V Vhat maner of tranflatiou may men thinke to looke fox at their handes, if they fhould tranflate the seriptures to the comfort of Gods elect, whiche they neuer did, nor be not like to purpose it, but be rather studious only to feeke quarrels in other mens well doynges, to picke fault where none is: And where any is escaped through humaine neęligence, there to erye out with their tragicall exclamations, but in no wyse to amende by the spirite of charitie and lenitie, that whiche might be more aptly fet. VVhervpon for frayle man (compaffed hym felfe with infirmitie) it is most reasonable not to be to seuere in condemning his brothers knowledge or diligence where he doth erre, not of malice, but of fimplicitie, and {pecially in handeling of thefe fo deuine bookes fo profounde in fenfe; fo fatre paffing our naturall vnderftanding. And with charitie it ftandeth, the reader not to be offended with the diuersitiè of transsatours, nor with the ambiguitie of tranflations : For as
Saint Austen doth witnesse, by Gods prouidence it is brought about, that the holy fcriptures whiche be the Dedo&t. salues for euery mans sore, though at the first they camè from one language, and thereby might haue ben christi. Lbs spread to the whole worlde: nowe by diuersitie of manye languages, the rranflatours fhoulde spreade @P 5 the saluation (that is contayned in them) to all nations, by fuche wordes of vtteraunce, as the reader i might perceane the minde of the translatour, and fo con sequentlyto come to the knowledge of God his wyll and pleasure. And though many rathe readers be deceaued in the obfcuritics and ambiguities of their translations, whyle they. take one thing for another, andwhyle they vfe muche labour to extricate them selues out of the obscurities of the fame: yet I thinke (faith he) this is not wrought without the proud of God, both to tame the proude arrogancie of man by his suche labour of searching, as also to epe his minde from lothsomnesse and contempt, where if the Icriptutes vniuerfally were to casie, he woulde lesse regarde them. And though (faith he) in the primatiue Churche the late interpreters whiche did translate the seriptures, be innumerable, yet wrought this rather an helpe, then an impediment to the readers, if they be not to negligent. For faith he, diuers tranflationshaue made many tymes the hardet and darker fentences, the more open and playne : So that of congruence, no offence can iuftly be taken for this newe labour, nothing preiudicing any other mans iudgement by thisdoyng, nor yet hereby profefling this to be fo absolute atranflation,as that hereafter might folowe no other that might fee that which as yet was not vnderstanded. In this poynt itis conuenient to confider the iudgement that Iohn, once by- Artitulo r fhop of Rochefter was in, who thus wrote: It is not vnknowen, but that many thinges hath ben more dili- cõtra Luth. gently discussed, and more clearely vnderstanded by the wittes of these latter dayes, afwell concerning the gofpels as other seriptures, then in olde tyme they were. The cause whereof is (faith he) for that to the olde men the yse was not broken, or for that their age was not sufficient exquifitely to expende the whole re fea of the seriptures, or els for that in this large field of the seriptures, a ma may gather some cares vntouc ed after the haruest men, howe diligent soeuer they were. For there be yet (faith he) in the gofpels very many darke places, whiche without all doubt to the posteritie fhalbe made muche more open. For why should we difpayre herein, feing the gofpell (wryteth he) was deliuered to this intent, that it might be vtrerly vnderstanded of vs, yea to the very inche. VVherfore, forasmuche as Christe fhewcth no lesse loue ro his Churche now, then hitherto he hath done, the aucthoritie wherof is as yet no whit diminished, and forafmuch as that holy spirite the perpetuall keper and gardian of the fame Church, whofe gyftes and graces do slowe as conti- 7 nually and as aboundantly as from the deginning: who can doubt, but that such thinges as remayne yet vn- 1 nowen in the gospell, snalbe hereafter made open to the latter wittes of our posteritie, ro their cleare vne derstanding. (Thus farre this wryter.) Only good readers let vs oft call vpon the holy spirite of God our heaucnly father, by the mediation of our Lorde and sauiour, with the wordes of the octonary psalme of Dauid, pfil crix
She did fo importunatly craue of God to haue the vnderstanding of his lawes and we se ve — ole on our knees pray to almightic God, with that wyse kyng Solomon in 1 wor Lay inst 71 God

d our opini- 5. aspire fo hye

De docici. chriftia.

d The Preface. | .

God of my fathers, and Lorde of mercies (thou that hast made all thynges with thy worde, and didst ordayne man through thy
Sy $i) wifdome, that he fhoulde haue dominion ouer thy creatures ae, | which thou hast made, and that he fhoulde order the worlde ac-
„C oording to holinesse and righteousnesse, and that he fhoulde execute iudgement with a true heart) geue me wifdome whiche is euer about thy seate, and put me not out from among thy chyldren: For I thy seruaunt and sonne of thy handmayden am afeeble person, of a fhort time, and to weake to the vnderstanding of thy iudgementes and lawes. And though a man be neuer so perfect among the children of men, yet if thy wisdome be not with him, he fhalbe of no value. O sende her out ther fore from thy holy heauens, and from the throne of thy maiestie, that fhe may be with me, and labour with me, that
I may knowe what is acceptable in thy
— firhe: for sne knoweth and vnderstandeth all thinges, and sne fhall leade me soberly in my workes, and preserue me in her power. So fhall my workes be acceptable by Christe our Lorde, To whom with the father and the holy ghost, be all honour and glorie, worlde without ende.
Amen.

| Ihe prologue. » *
A prologue Or preface made by

Thomas (ranmer,late Archbifhop of

Canterburie.

Oncernyng two Cundzy Cortes of people, it teemeth much necessarie that some cheng be e fapde in the entrie of this bookie by the wap of a preface or prologue, wherby hereafter it may be both the better accepted of them which hitherto coulde not well beare ft, and allo the better vled of them which heretofore haue milused tt.
For truely some there are that be to flowe and neede the spurre, some other seme to quicke, and neede moze of the brpdle: fome lofe their game by Gort shotyng, some by ouer shotyng tome walbe to much on the leit hande, | some to much on the ryght. In che kormer fort be ali

f Psal. cxix.a
It is toode: Non in solo panc viuit homo, fed in omni verbo dei. Man hall not lpue by bread only, but Mach. nir a.

Luk xii. g.

J 5 woulde not be tedi- § chrifo
5 ordes and lesle rome then he doth there, becaule 3 b I si bug een ee eee that enerp man shoulde reade by him selte at home in the meane gome.

and

Ee Sp | 1 a . ˙—’Ü˙Ü˙0
12 P rOLO sue
And that FJ exhort pou(faith he) and euer haue ¢ wit ex hort vou, that you(mot only here in the Churche) geue oa 5 that that is sard by the preacher: but that also when pe be at home in pour houles, ve apply pour felurs from tyme to tyme to the readyng of holy scriptures: which thyng allo J neuer lin to beate into the cares of them that be my kamiliers, aud with whom J haue priuate acquatntaunce and cons uersation. Let no man make excuse and lay (Caith he) J am bufied about matters ot the contmon wealch. J beare this office, or that, I am a crattes man, J must applie mine occupation, J haue a wyfe, mychiidren mutt be fed. mp houscholde must J prouide kor: Briekly, J am a man ol the worlde, it is not for me to reade the scriptures, that belongech to them that haue bidden the worlde kar well, which ipue in solitarmelle and contemplation, and haue ben brought pp and continually nosilled in learnyng and religion. Co this aunswerpng: what sayest thou man (faith he) is it not foz thee to study and to reade the scxipture, because thou art encumbred and distract wich cares and bulinesse: So much the more it is behouekull tor chee to haue defence of fcriptures, howe much thou art the moze dillresled in worldip daungers. They that be free and karre from trouble and entermedlyng of wozidlp thynges, ipue in sategarde and tranquilitie, and in che calme, or within a sure hauen. Thou art in the middegk of the sea of worldly wickednesse, and therkore thou needest the more of ghostly succour and comkort: hey lit karre from the strokes of battaple and farre out of gunne choote, and therfore they be but seldome wounded, Chou that standest in the korekront of the boat, and nyest to thine enemies, muk needes take nowe and then many strokes, and be greeuouflp wounded, and therkore thou bak mok neede to haue thy remedies and medicines at hande. Chy wyfe prouoketh thee to anger, thy chylde geueth thee occalion to take sorowe and pentiuenesse, thine enemies tye in wapte kor thee, thy kriende
(as thou takest hym) sometyme enniech thee, thy nepghbour miftepozteth chee or pickech quarels
Agaynst thee, thy mate or partener vndermineth thee, thy lorde, iudge. or iustice, threatneth thee, poucrtic is papnetull vnto thee, the lofle of thy deare and welbeloued cauleth thee to mourne, prolperitie eralteth thee, aduerlitie bringeth thee lo we: Brielly. so diners and lo manikolde occalions ot cares, tridulations, and temptations, beset thee and befiege thee rounde about, where cant thou haue armour or lortresse agaynst thine allauites? where canst Chow haue salues fo2 thy sores, but of holy
{cripture? Chy fleshe mult necdes be prone and subieet to klechly lustes, which daply walkest and art conuerlaunt among women, feel their beauties fet Coots to the eye, hearest their nice and wanton wozdes, l(mellest their baulme, ciuct, and mulke, with many other Ipke prouocations and stirringes: except thou hast in a redinesse wherwith to tuppresse and auoyde them, which can not els where be had. but only olit of the boty scriptures. Let vs reade and (eke all remedies that we can, and all shalbe litte inough. Howe Hall we then do pf we tuffer and take daply woundes and when we haue done, wpll lit styll and searche fo2no medicines? Doest thou not marke and continer howe the fmith, malon, og catpenter,o2 any other handy crattelman, what neede soeuer he be in, what other Witt so euer he make,
He wyll not sell nor lap to pledge the tooles of his occupation: fo2 then howe shoulde he wozke his feate, or get hig lyuyng therby? Ol lpke mynde and affection ought we to be towardes holy (cripture, For as mällets, hammers, lawes, chefils, ares, and hatchets, be the tooles of their occupation: So be the bookeg of the prophetes, and Apostles, and all holy writers inspired by the holy ghost, the instrumentes of our faluation. nhertore let vs not sticke to bye and prouide vs the Byble. that is to lay. the bookes of
Holp scripture: and let vs thinke that to be a better ie well in our house then either golde or siluer. For
Iplie as theeues be loth to allault an boule where they knowe to be good armour and artillerie: fo
Awherfocuer these holy and ghostiy bookes be occupied, there neither the deuyll nor none of his angels dare come neare. And they that occupy them be in much fafeqarde,and haue a great contolation, and be the redier vnto all goodnesse, the Mower vnto all euyll: and pf they haue done anp thyng amille, anone euen by the syght of the bookes their consciences be admonished, and they ware sory and ashamed of the kact. Peraduenture they wyll fap vnto me: Howe and yl we vnderclande not that we reade, that is contepned in the bookes: hat then? Suppole thou vnderstande not the deepe and profounde misteries of scriptures, pet can it not be but that much kruite and holinesle mut come and growe vnto thee by che readyng: kor it can not be that thou shouldest be ignoraunt in all thynges alpke. For the holy qhott
Hath fo ordered and attempred the seriptures, that in them al well publicanes kisherg and sbeepheardes. map lpnde their edification, as great doctours their erudition. For thole bookes were not made to barne glozie, lrke as were the wettynges ot the gentile Philolophers and Rethorltians, to the intent che maticrs choulde be had in admiration kor their hye styles and oblcure maner and writyng, wherok nothyng can be vnderskanded without a marfer or an expolitour: But the Apostles ¢ prophetes wzote their bookes so, that their speciall intent and purpole myght be vnderstanded and perceaued of euery reader, whiche was nochyng but the edification ol amendement of the (pfe of them that reade or heare it. who is it that readyng or hearyng read in the Gospell, Blessed are they that be mecke, Blessed are they that be mercifull,Blefied are they that be of cleane heart, and such other lpke places, can perceaue nothyng ercept he haue a mailter to teache hym what it meaneth Like wyle the lignes a miracles with all other Hitozies of the doynges of Chrilte or his Apottles, who is there of fo fimple wit a capacitie, but he map be able to perceaue and vnderstande them? Chese be but excules and clokes foz the rayne, a coueringes of their owne idle flouthkulnelle: But tpl ye wyll fap F can not vnderstande it. what mats uaple: Howe shouldest thou vnderstande, yl thou wylt not reade, nor loke vpon it? Take the bookies into thyme handes, reade the whole orp, and that thou bnderttandett, bepe it well in memorie: that thou vnder handelt not, reade it agapne, and agayne: yl thou can neither fo come by it, countaple with tome other that is better learned. Go to thy curate ¢ preacher, sge we thy felt to be delirous to know a learne: and J doubt not but God leyng thy diligence and readinesle (ik no man els teache thee) wyll bpm telke vouchtale with his holy {pirite to lummate thee, a to open vnto thee that which was locked fro deh j Remember

‘The prologue.

emember the Eunuch of Candace Qiieene of Ethiopia, which albeit he wa barberous countrey, and one occupied with worldly cares and duet et 1 bis N was readyng the feripture. owe coulider, pk this man pallyng in his iourney was to diligent asto reade the fertpture: what thynkert thou of tyhe was he wont to do tittyng at Home? Agayne he that letteth not to reade albeit he dyd not vnderstande. what dpd he then trowest thou, after that when he

d learned and gotten vnderstandyng Kor that chou mapest wel knowe that he vnderstoode not what

e redde:hearken what Philip there faith onto hym. canderdtandest thou what thou readest- And he nothung albamed to conkelle his ignotaunce, aunkwered Dowe choulde J vnderhande hauyng no body to sbewe me the wap? Lo, when he lacked one to chewe hemthe war, and to erpounde to hym the scriptures, pet dyd he reade: and therfore God the rather prouided for hym a guide of the way, that taught hym to vnderstande it. God perceaued his wplipng and towarde mpnde, and therfore he lent hym a teacher by a by. Cherkore let no man be negligent about his owne health and Caluation: Though thou haue not Philip alwapes when thou wouldell, the holy gholt which then moued and Eirred vp Philip, wyll be redy and not kayle thee yr thou do thy diligence accordyngly. All tiele thynges be written vnto vs foz our edification and amendement. which be borne towardes the latter ende of the wonde. The readyng of the scriptures is a great and strong bulwarke or fortresse agapnst finne: the ignoraunce of the lame, is a greater ruine and destruction of them that wyll not knowe it. Chat is the thyng that bryngeth in herilie that is it that cauleth all corrupt and peruerle lyuyng. that is it that bryngeth all thynges out ok good order. Pitherto all that J haue fapde, J haue taken and gathered out of the korefapde lermon of this Holy doctour faint John Chrilostome: nowe pf J choulde in lyße maner biyng foorth what the felfe fame doctour spealleth in other places, and what other doctours and writers lay concernyng the fame purpole, J mpghe seeme to you to write another Byble, rather then to make a preface to the Erbe. wherkore in ewe wordes to comprehende the largenelle and vtilitie of the trips ture, ho we it contayneth kruitkull infruction and erudition kor eucrp man, pt any thyng be necessarpto be learned, of the holp fcripture we map learne it. It falshood salbe reproued, theror we map gather wherwithall. It any thpug be to be corrected and amended, yk there neede anp exhortation or confolas tion, ot the scripture we map well learne. In the scriptures be the fat pastures of the soule, therin is no venimous meate, no vnholsome thyng, they be the berp daintie and pure feedyng. He that is ignoraunt, hall fynde there what he sboulde learne. He that is a peruerse sinner, hall there tynde his dampnation to malte bpm to tremble fo2 keare. He that laboureth to ferue God, hall tude there his qlozie, and the pronuillions of eternall ipfe,crboztpig hym moze diligently to labour. Herett may princes learne howe to gouerne their subiectes: Sublectes obedience, loue, and dreede to their princes: Hulbandes howe they shoulde behaue them vnto their wiues , Howe to educate their chuldren and leruauntes: And cons trary the wines, children, and seruauntes, map kno we their duetie to their hulbandes, parentes, and maisters. Here map all maner of perfons, men, women. poung, olde, learned, vnlearned, riche, poore, priestee, lap men, lordeg, ladpes, olficers, tenauntes, and meane men. virgins, wiues, widdowes, la wyars, marchauntes, artificers, hulbandmen, and all maner ot persons of what estate or condition soeuer they be, may in this booke learne all thinges what they ought to beleuc, what they ought to do. a what they should not do, al well coneernyng almightie God, as allo concernyng them selues and all other. Briellip, to the readyng of the leripture none can be enemie, but that either be fo sicke that they loue not to heare an of any medicine. or eis that be fo ignoraunt that they knowe not seripture to be the most healthkull medicine. Cherfore as touchyng this former part, J wpll heare conclude, and take it as a conclusion: sufticiently determined e appointed that it is conuenient and good the scriptures to be redde of al foztes and kyndes of people, and in the vulgar tongue. without kurther allegations o2 probations fo2 the fame, which Mali not neede,fince that this one place ol John Chrisodoine is inough and lufficient to I ge perl wade all them that be not frowardlp a peruertly let in their owne wylkull opinion pecially nowe biabnesk dach that the kinges highnelle being tupreme head nert vnder Cheille of this Churche of Euglande-hath ap. auen proued with his ropal aslent the letting foorth hereof, which oni to all true a obedient Cublectes ought mcd kon to be a sustictent reason for the alowaunce of the fame, without kurther delap . reclamation, or resistaũce, * although there were no preface nor other realon herein exprelled. Cherfore no we to come to the seconde and latter part of my purpole:here is nothyng fo good in this worlde, but it map be abused, and turned from vnhurtkull a wholfome, to hurtkuil and noytome. hat is there aboue better then the funne, the
Indone, and the starres? Pet was there that tone occasion by the great beautie and vertue ol them, to Deere ton dichonour God. and to defile them lelues with idolatrie, geuyng the honour of the lpuyng God and e bee treatour of all thynges, to such thynges as he had created. what is there here beneath better then tite, water, meates, drynkes, metals ot golde, filuer, iron. and steele? Pet we fee dayly great harme and much mischiele done by euery one of thele, alwell for lacke of wifoome a prowtdence of them that lulfer eupll, as by the malice of them that woke the euyll. Chus to them that be euyll of them selues euere thong setteth for warde and increaseth their euyll. be it of his owne nature a thyng neuer lo good: Ipke
Ascontrarplp, to them that studie and endeuoure them felues to goodnesse, cuery thyng prcuapleth 4 them, and proliteth vnto good be it of his owne nature a thyng neuer fo bad as S. Paul saro. Hits qui Romas diligunt deum, omnia cooperantur in bonum, All thinges do bryng good successe, to such as do lowe God, euen ag out of most venimous wormes is made triacle, the mot foucraigne medicine foz the preleruatiõ of mans health in time of daunger. whertore J would aduise pou al that come to the reading oF hearing okthis booke, which is the worde of God, the mot precious ie well and mos holy reliaue that remarneth
Bau earth: that ye bryng with pou the feare of God, and that pe do it with all due reuerence. ¢ ble pour ee therot, not to vapne glorie of kriuolous dilputation: but tothe honour of Goo, N of

ertue, and edification both of pour felues and other. And to the intent that my wordes may oy:

Ihe prologue.

moze regarded, J wyll ble in this part the aucthozitie of faint Gregorie Nazianzene, like as in the other
J dpd of saint John Chrilostome. It appeareth that in is tyme there were fome (as J feare nie there be alfo nowe at thele dayes a great number} which were idle bablers, and talkers of the scripture out of sealon and all good order, and without any increale of bertuc,oz erample of good lpuyng: to them he writeth all his kirst booke, de theologia. Wherkoze F fall brietly gather the whole ellect and recite it here vnto you. Chere be fome (Caith he) whole not onlp rares and tongucs, but allo their kistes be whetted and redy bent all to contention and vnprokitable dilputation, whom J woulde wiche as they be vehement and earnest to realon the matter with tongue, fo they were all redy and practiue to do good deedes. But koralmuch as they subuertyng tie order of all godlinesse, haue refpect only to this thyng, howe they may bynde and loofe lubtile questions, fo that nowe enerp market place, cucry ales
Houle and tauerne,cuery featt houle, briekly cuerp company of men, euery afiembly of women, is kylled with such talke: Since the matter is fo (Catth he) and that our fayth and holy religion of Chrille bes gynneth to ware nothyng cls but as it were a sophistrie or a talßyng cratt, I can no lesle do but fap fome thyng thervnto. It is not kyt (faith he) fo2 euery man to dilpute the hygh quettions of diuinitie, neither is it to be done at all tymes, neither in euery audience mul we dilculle euerp doubt: but we mutt knowe when, to whom, and howe karre we ought to enter into luch matters. First it is not kor euery man, but it is tor such as be of exact and exquilite iudgementes. and luch as haue spent their tyme befoze in studie and contemplation, and luch as before haue clensed thein selues al well in soule ag bodp, or at the teak endeuoured them felues to be made cieane. For it is daungerous (faith he) for the vncleane to touche that thyng that is molt cleane, lpke as the sore epe tabeth harme by lokpng vpon the tunne. Secondarilp, not at all tymes, but when we be repoled, and at rest from all out warde dregges and trouble, and when that our heades be not encumbred with other worldy and wandryng imaginations: as ył a man shoulde mingle balme and dirt together. For he that Hall iudge and determine such matters and doubtes of scriptures, mul take his tyme when he map apply his wittes thervnto, that he may therby the better lee and discerne what is tructh. Thirdly, where, and in what audience.
There and among thofe that haue ben studious to learne: And not among fuch as haue pleature to trifle with fuch matters. as with other thynges of pastime, which repute fo2z their chiele delicates, the disputation of brah queftions, to chewe their wittes, learnyng and eloquencie in reafonpng of hygh matters. Fourthly. it is to be considered howe karre to wade in luch matters ot difficultic, No further
(faith he) but as euery mans owne capacitie wyll serue bp, and agapne no kurther then the weahenesse or intelligence of the other audience map beare. soz lyke as to great nopse hurteth the eare, to much meate hurteth the mans body, heauy burthens hurt the bearers ot them, to much rapne doth moze hurt then good to the grounde, briekly in all thynges, to much is nopous : euen fo, weaße wittes and weake consciences may soone be opprelled with ouer harde questions. Flap not this to dil wade men from the knowledge of God, and readyng or studipng of the lecripture: For Flap that it is as nes cessarie fo2 the {pte of mans soule, as foz the body to breache. And pt it were pollible fo to liue j woulde thinke it good kor a man to spende all his life in that, and to do none other thyng. J commende the lawe which biddeth to meditate and studie the scriptures al wayes both nyght and dap, and sermons a prea; chynges to be made both mornyng, noone. and euentyde, and God to be lauded and blesled in all tyres, to bed warde, krom bed, in our iourneys, and all our other workes. J forbyd not to reade. but J korbyd to reason. Neither lorbyd J to realon fo farre as is good and godlp: but J alo we not that is done out of feafon, and out of mealure and good order. A man map eãte to much ok honp be it neuer fo swecte,. and there is tyme lor euerp thyng, and that thyng that is good, is not good pk it be vngodlp done.
Euen as a flowre in wynter is out of season, and as a womans appareil becommeth not a man, neither contraryly, the mans the woman. neither is weepyng conuenient at a bridale, neither laughyng at a buriall. Nowe pt we can obferue and liepe that is comelp and tymelp in all other thynges: hall noc we then the rather do the lame in the holy scriptures? Let vs not rune koorth as it were wilde horles. that can fuffer neither bridle in their mouthes,noz fitter on their backes. Let vs kepe vs in our boübeg, and neither let vs go to farre on the one fide lest we returne into Egypt, neither to karre ouer the other, lest we be carped away to Babylon. Let vs not syng the song ot our Lorde in a straunge lande, chat is to lap, let vs not dispute the worde of God at all aduentures, ar well where it is not to be reatoned, as where it is, and al well in the cares ol them that be not kyt therfore, as or them that be. Ik we can in no wyse forbeare but that we mut needes difpute, let vs korbeare thus much at the leatt, to do it out of tyme and place conuenient: Ind let vs entreate of thole thynges which be holy, holyly: and vpon thole thynges that be misticall, misticallp: and not to btter the deuine misteries in the cares vn worthp to heare them, but let vs knowe what is comely, atwell in our feilence and balkyng. as in our garmentes wearpng, in dur seedyng, in our gesture, in our gopnges, in all our other behaupng. This contention and debates about ceriptures and doubtes therot specially when such
45 do pretende to be the fauourers and studentes therok can not agree within them kelues) doth. mot hurt to our selues, and to the furtheryng ok the caute and quarrels that we woulde haue furs thered aboue all other thinges. And we in this cat he) be not vnlite to them that being mad let their owe houfes on lire, and that slap their owne children, or beate their owne parentes. J maruaple much (faith he) to recount wheror commeth all this defive or vayne glorie, wheror commeth all this tongue itche, that we haue fo much delpght to callie and clatter? And wherin is our communication?
Hot in the commendation of vertuous and good deedes, OF holpitalitie, of lowe bet wene christian brother and brother. ok loue betwene man and Wpke, ol virgimtie and chastitie, and of almes to warde the poore: Qot in plalmes and godlp songes, not in lamentyng kor our linneg, not in reprellpng the allections OF the body, not in prayers to God, Me talke of fcripturc, but in the meane tyme we Wit

: “woe

‘The prologue.

ot our flethe by fatyng, watchyng, and weepyitg, we male not thts spte a meditation of death

not skriue to be lordes duer our appetites and affections, we go nada to pull do wne att bun and hygh myndes, to abate our kumiche and rancorous omactes, to reckrayne our lustes and bodyly delectations, our vndilcrete soro weg our lalciuious mirth, our inordinate lonyng. our infatiable hearyng of banities,our nen without meature dur inconuenient thoughtes, and briellg to rekourme our lyle and maners: but all our holinesse contisteth in talkyng. And we pardon eche other from all good lyuyng · o that we may fiche falt together in argumentation. as though there were no mo wayes to heauen but this alone the way of lpeculation and knowledge (as they tale it) but in very deede it is rather the wap of fuperfinous contention and fophittication, Hicherto haue F recited the mynde ol
Gregorie Nazianzene in that booke whiche J {patie of before,

f The fame aucthour fapty allo in an other place, that the learnyng of a chrillian man ought to begyn of the keare of God, to ende in matters ol bye speculation: and not contraryly to begyn with tpeculation. and to ende in teare. For speculation

(saith he) either bye tunnyng 02 knowledge, pk it be not stayed with the bridle of feare to oende God, is daungerdus, and inough to tumble a man headlong do wne the hyll. Cherkore faith he the keare of God mutt be the tirst begynnyng. and as it were an J. B. C. or an introduction to all them that all enter into the very true and mot kruittul knowledge of holy scriptureg. where as is the leare of God, there is
(faith he) the hepyng ol the commaundementes:and where as is the kepyng of the commaundementes, there is the clenlyng of the kleshe: which kleshe is a cloude before the loules eve, and lutkereth it not purely to fee the beame of the heavenly lyght. Where as is the clenlyng of the fleshe, there is the illumination of the holy ghost. the ende of all our desireg, and the very lyght wherby the veritie of lcriptures is feene and perceaued. This is the mynde and almost the wordes of Gregorie Nazianzenc doctour of the Greene Churche, of whom Caine Jerome faith: that onto bis tyme the latine Churche had no writer able to be con:pared and to mae an enen matche with hym. CTherkore to conclude this latter part, euery man that commeth to the readyng of this holy booke, ought to bryng with hym firl and kormost this leare of almightie God, and then next, a firme and stable purpole to rekourme his ovone felfe accordyng thervnto, and lo to continue, proceede, and prolper from tyme to tyme, chewyng hym felfe to be a sober a frutttull hearer and learner: which pk he do he Hall proue at the length well able to teache, though not with his mouth, yet with his lyuyng and good example, which is ture the mot liuely and effectuous fourme and maner ol teachyng. He that other wile intermedleth with this booke, let hym be allured that once he Hall make a count therfoze, when he Hall haue layde to hym as it ig written in the prophete Dauid, Peccatori dicit deus. &c. wnto the vngodly sayde God: hy doest thou preache my la wes and takest my testament in thy mouth? wheras thou patel to be rekourmed, and hak ben partaker with adulterers. Thou hast let thy
- mouth Cpeake wickednefle, and with thy tongue thou ball tec foorth deceipt. Thou lattest andipakel agapnst thy brother, and hast flaundered thyne owne mothers fonne. Chele thynges hast thou done, and J helde inp tongue, and thou thoughtest wickedly that J am euen luch a one as thy selke:
But J wyll reproue thee, and let bekore g thee the thynges that thou hast done. O conlider this ve that korget God, lest J plucke pou away, and there be none to deliver you. noho fo ollereth me thankes and prapse, be honoureth me: and to hym that ordereth his conucrfation ryght. writ
I hewe the fal vation of
God.

q Prayfe be to God.

Pfal. 30.

=i A deler ption of the yeres from the creation of the woflde, vntill this prefent qere of 15 6 S. drawen for

che most part gut of the holy Scripture, with declaration of certayne places, wherin is certayne difference of the reckening of the yeres.

FE recken from Adam vntill the flood, a thousand fixe hundred fiftie and fixe yeres.
Genesis. 5. and. &. and from the flood vntill Abraham. 292. yeres. Gencfis.11.

V

fixtic.Gen.25. And frõ Iacob to Iofeph.go .yeres. Ioseph liued afterward. iio. yercs. Gen 50.

From the death of lofeph vntyl Moyfes,th ere ĩs (accordi

Moyses till tne departure of the children of Israel out of Egypt. 80. yeres. Actes. 7.

— — „ „ —— a .— ayned in the wildernesse. 0. yeres. Deu. 29. And then were brought into the

The people rem 8 bad ol was goucrnour ouer the said people after Moyfes.32.yeres.

land of Chanaan by Iosuah who

— ¢£

After Iofuah Othoniel gonerned. S. yeres. Iud. 9. then Aod. 80, Iud. 3. After Aod, Debora fourtie, Iudges. 3. Then Gedeon other sourtie yeres. Judges. 8.

273% | Abimelech goncrned after Gedeon chree yeres. Iud. g. then Thola. 23. yeres. Iud. 30. Thola

being deceaticd,the people were.18-yeres vnder the tyranny of the Ammonites. Iud. 10.
TSK ˙———

the hands of the Ammonites, & gouerned. &. yeres. Iud. r. yeres. Iud. 2. Then Elon. 10. yeres. Iud. ia.

2755 lephte deliuered the pcople from

After Iephte, Abeffan gouerned. 7

2833. d. 20. yeres. Iud. 13. Then Eli

Abdon gouerned after Elon eyght yeres. Iud. 12. Then Sampfo fourtic yeres. i. Sam. 4.

After Eli, Samuel and Saul gouerned fourtie yeres: but the scripture, because of Saulsroyall dignitie attributeth all this gouernment to him. Actes. 7.

2943. | Dauid raigned after Saul. 40. yeres. 2. Sam. 5. Solomon his fonne raigned three yeres before the building of the remple,whichis, 480. yeres after the departure out of Egypt.;3.Kinges.6.

and raigned in all. 40. yeres. q. King. li.

3004. Rchoboani the sonne of Solomon raigned. 17. yeres. 3. King. 12. Also Abiam his sonne raigned

three yeres. 3. King. 15. Then Asa 41. yeres. 3. King. i;.

30.1. after Afa.25. yeres. 3. King. 15. And Ioram his sonne raigned three yeres with

Iofaphat raigned 5 ora i
5 f 4. King. 8. Ochozias raigned after Ioram. 7. yeres. 2. Chro. 22.

his father, and fiue yeres alone.

3117- Achalia the mother of Ochozias raigned seuen yeres. . Reg. il. Ioas raigned after her fourtie

yeres. 4. Reg. ia. After him Amasias his sonne raigned. rꝙ. yeres. 4. Reg. 4.

x After Amafias the people were without king cleuen yeres, as we may gatiter by the. 4. and
. chapter of the. . Reg. Then Azarias raigned. 5. yeres. 4. Reg. t.

Joathan raigned after Azarias sixreene yeres. 4. Reg. 15. After Ahaz his fonne raigned. t6. veres. 4 Reg. ib. And after him, Ezechias. 29. yeres. 4. Reg. 18.

3317. and

Manaffes the fonne of Ezechias raigned. 55. yeres. 4. Reg. 21. Amon his fonne two yeres.
3.monethcs

4. Reg. 21. Then Iosia. zi. yeces. 4. Reg. 22. And Iehoaz three monethes. 4. Reg. 23.

334 O. and

n ches Eliachim, otherwyse called foachin raigned eleuen yeres. 4. Reg. 23. And after him, lechonias
C. mon <

three monethes, after which time he was led captiue into Babylon. 4. Reg. 23.

Sedechias raigned. u. yeres, and then was slayne, the citic of Hierufalem with the temple rafed downe, and the people led captiue into Babylon, where they remayned. vo. yeres. 4. Re. 25.

397 . and

5 7 After the o. yeres of captiuitie, Cyrus the fitst monarke of the Persians, fet the people at li-
ö monethes 85

hertie againc, and suffered them to returne into their one lande. It was reuealed to Daniel the prophete, that there fhoulde be 70. weckes of yeres, (which is 490. yeres)teckening from the commaundemenr geuen to buyld the citie, vntill Iesus Christ. Dani. 9. And this commaundement was geuen by Darius Longimanus the twentith yere of his empite. Nehem. 2. which was. 64. yeres after the aforesayde deliueraunce. VVhertore reckening the fayde. 64. yeres after the deliueraunce, and adding therto the. Jo. weekes aforesayde reucaled vnto Das

niel, wefhall finde that from the fayde deliueraunce vntill the death of Chtist, there is fiue hundreth fiftic and foure yeres.

55 o. and

— — — 5 —d NJ —— f From the natiuitie of Christ to this present yere, we recken a rhoufande , fiue hundred sixtie smonctncs

& eyght:from which number if we fubtract the yeres from his birth vneil his death(which is

three and thirtie)we fhall finde that from the end of the fayd seuentie weekes of Daniel, vntil this prescnt yere, it is. 1535. yeres. a

All whiche aforesayde beyng well examined and reckened , ye fhall finde tharsince the crea-

tion of rhe world to this present yere of.1568. the yeres amount to. 53. yeres, and fixe monethes.

— — —— 3 ee —

Prom Abrallam vntill Isahac, a hundred yeres. Gen. 17. From Isahac vntyl Iacob, + aya,

ng to Philo) sixtie yeres. And from | }

it is likelyest that i

written Daniel De
Nehemias the seconds ·

m was taken from Hur ig

rth the 50

we to dwelhin ts dyed; then to the lande of ue and twenue ac. Gene. 27. e yeres of the am and Risfuc.

Cb. Ide i the place of his bi yere of his age, andes
Charran where his fat} eYNE.7§ .yeres came
Ni e Fi yeres after, he hegat If
So he that reckeneth th peregrination of Abrah cessoures, ill the deht gypt , beginning atcha departed out ofhise finde e men ue beginning their reckeni birth 1 they (hall tthe:
20 Je And thus ought Gene, and Act. 7. treating t derstanded. e
* The yeres that the pe gouerned by thofe that the (eripturs« called Iudges, including from Iosuz to
Samuel, (excepting the time of the o ptession vader the Ammontes) a mountech to. 5 §7.yeres. Now itisfayd
Act. 13. that this time amounteth to about. 430. yeres. Where is to be no. ted, that this place hath ben cotrup. ted, and in stecde of three hundrech they haue set fonte hundreth: whiche leading of, 300. agrecth very well with chat whiche is contayned in the fertptures touching the layde yeres.

tame that he

ountrey she Shall cioned Exod, 74.

ople were

u De, Thaziahn.

bAmafias rvigned 29, yeres. che ij · ye re of the sayde Ieroboam , and began to raigne puer Israel in Samana
4. Re. 4, do the 29. yeres of the raigae of Amafias finifhed che 15.yereufthe sayd Icroboam: now itis mantel that
Azarias the fonne of Amatlas bega to raigne but the. 27. yere of the faye
Icroboam. 4. Keg, 1. then 1e foleth , chat betweene the cude of te raigne of Amafias, and the begun? oP Azarias, there fallech out clean yeten that are left out.

hetweege at ning of

othe

*There is difference thors rouching the begin : vo. wekes of Daniel - on fayde wecekes tron the
Cyrus + other fromthe 0
Darius Longimanus , 49 seas from the fixce yere of the 0 15

e Chou nickel aa. yere, because char thut W ae
1 hate relatio

leraunce of l.

roft

Enefis.
Exodus.
Leuiticus.

Iosuah.

Iudges.

Ruth.

First kinges, or Samuel.
2 Kinges, or Samuel.

3. Kinges.

4. Kinges.

The Airst part.

Numerus.
Deutcronomium.

The feconde part.

1. Cronicle.
2. Cronicle.
1. Esdtas.

2. Esdras.
Hester.
Iob.

Tie thirde part of the Bible.

The Pfalter.

The Prouerbes of Solomon.
Ecclefiaftes or Preacher.
Cantica canticorum.

Esai.

Ieremi.

Lamentation of Ieremi.
Ezcchiel.
Daniel.
Osea.
Iocl.

é

Amos.
Abdias.
Jonas.

d Micheas.
Nahum.
H abacuc.
Sophonias.
Aggeus.
Zacharias.

Malachias.

The fourth part of the Bible called eA pocryphus.

3.Efdras.

3. Esdras.

Tobias.

Iudith.

Booke of wysdome.

Ecclesiasticus or the booke of Iesus Syrach.

The reftc ofthe booke of Hester.

The order

The Gospell 8 e

Lhe actes of the Apostles.
S.Paules Epistle to the Romanes.
1. To the Corinthians.

2. To the Corinthians.

To the Galathians,
To the Ephesians.

To the Philippians.

To the Colossians.

. To the Tliessalonians.

2. Io the Thessalonians.
1. Timothe.

2. Timothe.

Baruch.

The song of the three children.
The ftory of Susanna.

The ftory of Bel, and the Dragon.
The prayer of Manafics.

1. Machabccs.

2.Machabecs.

of the bookes of the

newe Testament.

The fifth part.

S. Luke.
S. Iohn.

To Titus.

To Philemon.

To the Hebrucs.

The Epistle of S. Iames.
1. Of S. Peter.

2. OfS. Peter.

1. Of S. Iohn.

2. OFS. lohn.

3. Of S. Iohn.

The Epistle of S. Iude.
The reuelation of S. Iohn.

9 Proper leflons to be read for the first

leffons both at Morning and Enening prayer, on the Sundayes

throughout the yergand for some also the seconde leffons.

r of I Mattins. [ Euenfong. [Trimitie Sunday Mattins,

Aduent.
Che firk. | Elai. i. ii. ‘ * iit xv. tit. xx. andayes ated attins.
Chriftmas.
Che first.xxxbii.

ii. * ru.

“Sundayes after{ Mattins.

the Epiphanie.
Che kirtt. xliiii. ii. li. itt, Iv. iii. vii. v. | ltr,
Septuagesima. Gen. i.
Sexagelima. iii.

Quin gasgeäwe ix.

cat.

First Sunday.| Gen. rir.

fl xxvii. iii. xxxir. tlit, xliii.

. Exod. iii. vi. ix.
Filter day. Mattins. i, Leslon. Exod.xii. tt. Lellon. Roni. vi.

Mattins.

The kirst. Num. xvi. li. xxiii.

iii. Deut. iiii. uin. vi.

v. diff,
Sunday after

Assention day. Deut. rit.

itlunday. | Mattins.

i. Lelson. il. Lellon.

M,attins. 1

| een b

q Sundayes after Easter.

Deut. chi.

Actes. x.
Then Peter opened his mouth. &c.

| €fat.it. rrtit, xxvi. xxxii.

Euen ong.

xliii.

Euensong.

xl vi. liif. vi. lvist. lxiiii.

Euensong.

Exod.xiiii.
Actes.ii.

Euensong.
Num. xxii.

xxv.
Deut. v.

| Deut xiii.

| Euensong. ildome. i.
Actes. rir,

t fortuned when

Apollo went to

Corinth. &c. vnto

After these thinges.

i. Lesson. ti. Lesson.

Gen. xviii.
| Mat. iii.

oN *

Euensong.

Josue.i.

9 San ee ayes after Trinitie.

Che lirst. Jolue. x. Josue. xxiii. ii. Judic. tit. Judtc. v. ili. i. Ring. it. t. Ging. tif, iii. rit. rit,

b. 1 xvi. bf, ii. King. xii. ii. Bing. xxi. bit. rit, xxitii. viii. iii. Ring. xiii. iii. ing. xi. ix. xviii. Tie:
T. Crt, refi. xi. litt. Ging. v. tit. Ging. ix. xii. x. rot, xiii. rir. xxiii. xiiii. Jeremie. v. Jeremie.xxii. rb. xrxv. rece, | rt. Ezech. ii. Ezech. citi. roit. rot, rbiit, xviii. xx.n„F rrittt, xix. Daniel. iii. Daniel. vi. xx. Joel. ii. Miche. vi. xxi. Abacuc. ii. Prouer. i. xxii. Prouer.ii. tit, xxiit. Ti. Lil. xxuii. xiii. xilit. xxv. xb. xvi. xxvi. xvii. xix.
L eslons proper for holy dees
Mattins. Euensong.
S. Andree. Prou. xx. Prou. xxi.
S. Thomas xxiii. xxiiit. the Agostle.
Natiuitie of
Christe. Sta G i. J ai. tx. at. bff,
Keen 5 God fpake once
. againe to Achas. i. ii. Titus. ttt.
8 . vnto The kindnesse men of good wyll. and Ioue. &c.
S. Steuen. 2 i. Lesson. Prou. xxbiii. | Cccle, itt, ti. Lesson. Act. vi.and. vii. Actes, bit.

Steuen full of taith and power ccc vnto. And when fourtie yeres. &c.

And when fourtie yeres were expired, there appeared vn. to Moyses. &. vn to. Steuen full of the holy ghost. &c

* (ti)

S. Iohn.

t. Lesson. ii. Lesson.

Innocentes.

Circumfition day.

i. Lesson. it. Lesson.

Epiphanie.

i. Lellon. ii. Leflon.

Conuertion of
S. Paul.

i. Leslon. ii. Keslon.

Purification of the virgin
Maric.

S. Mathie.

Aununciation of our Lady.

VVednefday afore Eaftcr.

Thurfday afore
Ealter.

Good Friday.
Eafter cucn.

Munday in
Eastet wecke.

i. Lesson. ii. Lellon.

Tuesday in
Easter Wecke.

i. Leslon. ti. Lellon.

Mattins.
Eccle. b. poc. i.
Jere. xxxi.

voto, Moreouer I hearde Ephraim.

Gen. xbti.
Rom. ii.

fat. Ir,
Lub, iii.

vnto. So that he was fuppoted to be the fonne of
Ioseph.

mildome. v.
Actes.xxii. vnto. They hearde hun.

wisdome. ix.

ildome. xix.

Eccle. ii.
Osta.xiii.
Danitl. ix.

Gen . xxii.
Jacharie. ix.

Exod. xbi.
Mat. xxviii.

Exod. xx.
Luk. xxiiit.

vnto. And behold

two of them.

Euensong,
Eccle. vi.
AJ poc. xxii. wildome. i.

Det. x.

And nowe [frael.

Coloss. tt,

Esai. Ixix.
John. ii.

Into. Aster this he went to Caper. naum,

notfdome. bi.
Actes, xxvi.

upifdome. xi.

Eccle. i.
Ecclc. ttf,

Olca.xisii.
Sere. xxxi.

Cat. li.
Exod. yt,

rod. xi.
Actes, iii.

xed. revit, t. Cozinth. xv.

S. Matke.

Philip and
Iacob.

Assention day.
Munday in

whitfon weeke.

i. Lesson.

ii. Lelson.
Tuesday in

whitson weeke.

S. Barnabe.

t, Lellon. ii. Lesson.

S. Iohn Baptist.

i. Leslon. ii. Lellon.

S. Peter.

i. Leslson.
Ii. Lellon.

S. Iames.

S. Bartilmewe.
S. Matthewe.
S. Michael.

S. Luke.

S. Simon and Iude.

1. Lesson.
All Saintes. i. Lessen.

fi, Lt sen.

chaRtening.

Saintes by faith. svoto. If ye enduie

Mattins. Eucnfong.
Ecleciii. i. Eccle. b.
Eccle. vii. Eccle. ix.
Deut. . iii. Bing. tf,
Gen. xi. Gen. rit, vnto, These are the ae 0 me

xx. men &c. vnto generation of Sem. Moyfes 1 mr
* elders returned. i. Cor.xii. l. Ling, rir. Deut. xx.
Dauid came to
Saul in Ramatha,
Eccle. x. a 5 ili ¢ ¢ e
Votes. xilii. actes Le certayne daycs.
Mala. iii. ae iti, at. Litt,
Wal Jug Guta: VV hen
Iesus hearde.
Etcle. xv. Eccle.xix.
Actes, ih Actes, ttt,
Eccle. xxi. xxiii.

xxb. xxix.

xxxix. xliiii.

li. Jeb. i.
Job. 24. 27. xlil. wistome. il. Wisteme. b.

Avnito. Bleffed is ra- (nt. His icloufic ther the barien. Alo.
Hebe xi. xit. Apcc. tix.

llynto .Ard fawe

an angel stande.

He olde Tcftamentis appointed
19] foz the fir Lelssons at Mos,
SF>ibitpiig @€ Cucneng praper, and hae. \\\| Dalbe read through cuery pere once, except certapne bookes and chapters which be leat
Medikipng, a might belt be Cpa: red, d therkore be left vnread.

@ The newe Tessament is appopnted for the seconde Lessons at Wornynge Cuenpag praper, and shalbe read ouer orderlp euerp pere thzife, belide the Epistles and Golpelg: Except the Apo: calipg, out of the which there be only certapne
Lellons appoynted vpon diuers proper keastes.

And to knowe what ons chalbe read euerp day: Fynde the dap of the moneth in the
Kalender kolowpng. and there pe Mall perceaue the bookes and chapters that chalbe read foz the
Weflons both at Mornpng and Euenxug praper.

@ And here is to be noted, that whenfoeucr there be any proper Palmegor Lellong appopnted for the Sundaves, 02 foz anp fea moueable or vnmoueable: Chen the Plalmes and Leffons appopnted in the Balender, chalbe omitted fo; that tyme.

Oe ar gues

dapes. or. xxix. dap of Pouember.

xi. or. xiii. dap of Februarie.

In Ca

Dundapes.

ise Proper plalmes on certayne dayes.

U
Quadtagesima. vi

oo Bhcorder 5 restof holy {eripture

befide the Pfalter, is appoynted to be read,

¢ A briefe declaration when every Terme beginneth and endeth,
E it knowen that Cater Terme beginncth alwayesthe.rbiitaap after Caer,reefenpng Calter dap kor one: and endeth the unday next after the Alsention dap.
Trinitie Ferme beginneth. rit. dapes afte
Mienaelmas Cerne beginneth the. ix. or.x
= Hyllary eri beginneth the. xxiii. oz. r* fer Terme, on the ention day. In Crinitie Cerme, ou the Oatiuicicof faint John Baptitt.

In Micbae mas Terme, on the keast of i Saintes, In Hilary Cerme on the feak ol the uriftca an of our Lady, the Queenes Judges of weltminster do not vle to sit in indgement, nor vpon any

eptuacefima,
Sexagelima,

dd before Cater. 55 weekes.

ix

Rogations. U
VVhithanday. Sate after, Si weekes,
Trinitie lunday. viii

@ De mult note allo that the Collect, Spice. and Sache appopmed fo2 the Sunday, chan
Cerue all the weekte after, except there fall fume feast that hath his proper.

when the veres of our Lo: map be deuided into foure euen partes, which is euerp fourth pere, then the Bundapletter leapeth, and that pere the Plalmeg and gelong which serue for the. rriti. day of Februarte, halbe read agapne the day kolowyng. except it be Sunday. which hath proper Lessons of the olde Festament ap: popnted in the Cable serupng to that purpole.

Alco, wherfoeuer the begynnyng of anp
Lelio, Cpitte, o: Gotpeliig not expresled: there pe mud begyn at the begynnyng of the Chapter.

And wherloeuer is not expressed howe farre shalbe read: there Hall you reade to the ende of the Chapter.

Item, lo oft as the fir Chapter of Caine
Watraewe is read either for Lesson o2 Golpell. pe at! begyn the fame at: The birth of lesus
Chrilte was on this wise. &c. Ind the thirde Chap:

ter of saint Lulies Golpell sbalbe read vnto: So that he was supposed to be the sonne of Iofeph.

hittunday, and continueth.xix. tober, and endeth the. xxbiit.
, bap of Januarie, and endeth the

& (iii)

re An Almanacke.

us · J jo Arp yxy ayy
Arp ahr punfn N

% ano fo sal 247,

zqunu up 291 u es uro
Arp uonuaqy
Arpung juonpy

1562. D. D bs. Janu. lu. 29, Mar. iii. (bit. [rbit. xxix.
563. BI. | € |7Feorup4, u. Apatl|rbi. xx. xx. .
1564. Dit. Ao. Faun ls. 85 viii. ri. [ert (3, Decein.
1565. bill. G (8, Febzu [7-Darch|2. srxvili. xxxi. sio. June. iti,

1566. I. | ff lo. 27. cbrzun4. rx. srxiii. ii. lt.
507 L. E bs. Jauu. u. 30. Mar. v. (pitt. 8. Mait. 30. Mou.
2568. I DI. Febru gz. Marchsis. April. xxiuii. xxl. . June. xx viu.
7569. III. B 6. 23. Febatt fro, rot. lxrix. 129. att. xx vii.

1570, rit. | Au (22. Janu. S. 26. Mat. i. ttt, xiiii. 3. Deceim.

1571. Iii G su. Febzu. 8. 15. April.sxxi. xxiiii. g;. Junii. (tt,
1572. Tb. f Eß. zo. 6. (rit, rv. 25, Mali. zo. Nou.
1673. T bi. D 27. April. zo. April.sio. Maii.xxix.

157 4. TIC . Hebru. 24. lu. April. 7. Maii. 20. Malti. xxx. rr viii.
1575. T DIü W zo. Janu. i. 3. ix. rit. lxii. trrvit.
1576. | vir. Ali. Febzu. Z. Marche. leebitt. xxxi. ho. Juni.. Decem
1577 l. F g. 20, Febeul7. iii. rvi. 26. Mail. i.

— — — — —— s.uH ——

1578. II, E. Janu.su. 30. Mar. v. buli. xv. 30. Nou.
579. il. D siß. Febru. 4 Marche. April.xxvꝰ. xxvisi. . Funti. xxix.

u, Cz. Janu. 7. Nebrzuß. it. ett. ett. sxxb ui.

A 8. E56. Mat. It, siiit. sriiii. z. Decem

— — —-¼

W , Tcban. 58

5. April.xxi. rxiiii. ;. Juuii. ii.

1587. (ti, A lu. Febru. f. March. lic. xxii. xxv. 4. Junũ.;. Secem

1588, | rit, G 4. Febru. zi. Febru. /. riti. (roi. 26. Mail. i.

Note that the supputation of the pere ot our Lorde, in the Churche of Crolande, beginneth the. xrv. day ol Marche, the lame day suppoled to be the fir dap vpon

which the wozlide was created, and the day when cyrine was conceaued in the wombe of the virgin ax fe d

24 te 0 tynde Fafterfor e

tt

ee ieee ett [apna

March. 26. xx vii xx vii

i Apnlrbi. rv iebut_ kit xx uiii b ittt April. ix. i ini vi aii oi

March. 26. rx vii xx viii xxix sxxiit xy

xx it Apzil. ix. T fi xi scrii [citi ot
1 (Mpatat. in March xix lee rx i «da

1 Apzii.xvi. x vii xvui xix xx xxi x
Ap tl — it

Mpa li. Di vill
Lol March. 2s. xx bit xx vt xx xxiũi xu. tx

TDU April.x vi. x cri xii xi riui rv
Düül Apia. [it iii b March rx. xtti Apzil.i. eit April. 23. rxxlili biii xi ee ⁵rxxi xxii

¶ hen pe haue kounde the Sunday letter in the vppermost line, guide pour eye downe warde from the lame, till ye come ryght ouer agaynst the prime, and there is che wed both what moneth and what dap ot the moneth Caller kalleth that pere.

qe = 2 1 —— 11 — ——— 17 n ñ ́Zt(aͥ . lde to be obferued for holy dayes, and none other.

Se = oat is to sap: all Sundayes in the vere. The dayes of the feastes of
AEN Uh EN the Circumcisionok dur Lorde Jesus Christe. Ok the Eptphauie.

And Of the Durtfication of the blesled virgyn. Ok faint Wacthirsthe
Ey 2 Apostle. Ok the Annunciation ok the blesled virgyn. OF faint ae Pon U Markethe Euangelist. Ok faint Dotiip and Jacob the Apostles.
Pk the Affenfion ok our Lorde Felus Christe. Ok the Hatinttieok

faint John Baptist. OF faint Peter the Apostle. Ok faint games the Apostle.
Offaint Bartismewepostle. Of saint Patthewethe Apostle. Of faint Michael the Archangel. Ok faint Luke the Euangelist. Ok laint Simon and June the
Aposties. OF All Saintes. Ok saint Andrewe the Apostle. OF faine Thomasthe
Apostie. Ok the Nat iuitie of our Lode. Ok laint Steuenthe Martir. Ok faint
John the Euangelist. Ok the holy Innocentes. Munday and Tuelday in Eater

Weeke, Munday and Tnesdap in Wihitfon weeke.

& (iii)

pA Table for the order of the Plalmes,

to be fayde at e Mornyng and Enenyng prayer.

Mornyng prayer. | Euenyng prayer.

i — il. ili. iti. v. (bi, vii. vi.

Ik x. (cit, xiti.xiiii. m iit rb. x vi. vii. r viii.
Tee (wig. ee. FEL. xxti.xxii. xxiui. xxv. xxbi. x vii. xx viii. xxix. xxx. xxxi. xxxu. xxxili. xxriiii.
Di kxxb.xxxbi. rxx vii.
* A |erebitt. xxxix. xl. srli. clit, xcin.

rl vii. ribttt. xlix. iii. liiii. Iv.

— Ut, rv. Livi.

ut sit. vii. viii. lix. lx. lri. a ata xiit. lxiiii. x v. lx vi. ix vii.
11 xviii. ö xix. xx.

Ixxiii. lxxiiii.

T slxxv.lxxvi.lxxvii. Ixx viii. N
L Ilxxix.lxxx.lxxxi. xxxu.Ixxxiii. Ixxxiiii. Irxxb.

bit flxxxvi. Ixxxvii.lxxxviii. i xxxix.

rhit ire. ret. rat. rciii. xcitii.

2 Lit (ecb. xc vi. xc vii. xc viii. xcix.c.ci.
F stii.ciii. \ctitt.

15 (cb. cht,

xxii c vii. c viii. cir.

Zit cx. cxi.cxii.xiii. sexliii. cry,

rea lorbt. erbit. erbtit. cxix. Inde. iii.

rb JInde. v. Inde. itt.

Erbt Inde. v. Inde. tt.

TTBil stxx.cxxi.cxxii. “ERAT. cxxiiii.txxv. rtr hin scxxxii.txxxiii.txxxiiii.txxxv. cxxx vi. cxxxvii. cxxxvii.
IX sexxxix.cxi.cxli. cxlii.cxliii.

Tr rr criti. crib, ECE cxl vii. txl viii. cxlix. cl.

cxxvi.cxxvii.cxxvui.cxxix.cxxx.cæxxi.

— eee.

The moone. xxx. oe

rileth vii. min.) >

Sunne = honre 3 Morne orver- H falieth e Lu. min = 1 Mornyngprayer.|Euenyng prayer }

. Teston. ti. 4 Lellon. (i. Leldn t. Lefton.
A Kalend.] Circumcilion. Gen. xvii Rom. ui. Deut. x. Coloff. il. it. 20. Oct. S. Stepha ji: Gen. 1. Mat. i Mat.. Gen. I. Hon. 1. c nu. No. Oct. S. Johan. fut flit n oe it
8 id. No. Oct. Innocent. fait v. ii ii
Donag Depo. Edw. Reg. v bit [eit ca Jig a
Diek bill. Id. Epiphauie Do. b Elai. Ir. Luk. in. Ela. xlir. Tur. Joh.
Ig vii. Id. Felix æ Januaru. y.: Gen. ix. RU v. Gen. rit. Rom. P. vi Albi. Id. Tuciami priest. [bit lxiii bi srinii i
B. lo . Id. Joyce virgin. fic kx ii bl vi
— = iii. Id. Paul first Here. xx vii viii rviti pin
1 d Illi. Id. Sol in 7 Aquario. ri srir ix OC all itr:
| ic Bid. Id. Archad Martix. (rit [ext ir inti ok

tas, [pllary bishop. I xi xi xi xi
8 stix. Ki. Febr. Fenix priest.sxiui xxv. xi rxrvi ru
Alxpiii. Kl. Ilidore martir. T rxxbii [rit rv xiu

e The it. 8. etteth

Tbiusb vii. Kl. Marcellus mart.s ru xxix xiiii xxx ritii
EL rxvi. e fulpit. Tpi xxxi xv cxxxii cb dtp. XI. Prilta virgyn. but xxxui rvi ttrxum xbi fe rü. AI. Ciistane bichop. EI |eerd bi reroute . Cont it rut. Kl. Fabian t Sebast. TE xxxbiii [ryt rrrixr i q xn. KI. Agnes virgyn. [I tl vir rli litt ia Alti. Ki. Miucent martir.rxii [elit rr Irlitii iii br. Kl.E meration big. LTH ru,“ iets rip v
Ic te. Kl. Timothe bichop.sxxuit xi xi DT
Ed piii. Kl. Couuer. of Paul. rx b orb (UND, Ae v. Act. rrit.|Wifd. D x vi
ö e vi. Ri. Polycarpe bishops xx v. E Ki roti |€ vi. Kl. Juliau bishop. rxvu (1 I rxriii Exod.i. bill g v. l. Aguis the fecond| rp EOD, li. xxb iii r
YW Ki. Ualerie bishop. rx [ttt xx vi v r.
Ain 6 flit. Ni. atilde Queenc. rz vii exbu bir ri

c Prid K Saturn r Cuct. rx ix ie a. | at

a AD oh

q An admonition to the Reader.

1 f
Here in this Ralender be appopnted almost to all the apes of enecp monet: nimes of faintes (as they call them) this we haue done (gentle Keadec) not fo that we accom + them all koz saintes, of whom we cepute forme not fo2 good: 02 pet fo; thar epthze (bowe ban c they be) we judge
Anp deuine worship oz hondur to be rekerted to them: buc eather that ti. 2e shaulot be as notes and markes of (ome certapne matters, whole appoented tyntes to kag ve, as tt may du much goas: lo to be ignsraunt of the same, map do to men mach huct. And this is the reason of * ald purpale. Farewell.

q Hebmarie hath xx vin. dayes.

T he moone. xxix.

| a4 ve oom Me pi |
Sunne 8

kalleth iin. min. 4,⏑ñ½n0 {Momyng prayer. | Euenyng prayer.

Is Lefton i. Tellon. . Tegan. ni. Teslon

wm BD d Ralend. |Beigit big. Fi Falk, it (Exod. ri. Mark. i. Exod. xi. i. Cor.xiit

urifica. Marit. sii t Ulisd. ix. ii [Wild. xti. xi ö

TIE ale E lili, No. Blale vithop. . Exo. xiii. iii Exo. xiiui. rv
Big Prid. Nd. Gilbert confessor. D rv ili ꝑxvi r vi
All) Pionas, Agathi virgin. bi frvii b ri li. Cor.i.
TD ib (bid, Id. Dorithi virgin. df [rir l fr evi. Id. Angule virgin. Dit tri. viii xx in d vi. Id. Paul bishop. IE xxuii. pat rxxiui li fit le vv. Id. Appoline virgin. x xxxii. rxrin v l. d.] Solin Pilces. xi uri. 15 e eb

fi. Ad. Sotheris bishop. i Leu. xix.sxi pn
L ud. Id. Eulalia virgin. ri xxvi. xi Mum. c(t

| id dus. AUlkrane bichop. iti Num. rit rit [rit liz
Dic 5 bi. Kl. Malentine bish. rd {rit xi xvi r bit d rv. Kl. Faustin bishop. u krbüii xv xx ri

e ritt. KI. Justan birgin. TDi xxi irbt xi ii

Sunne riseth at. vii.

ae Tb t Lit. Polichzon bihop zd ject Tul. di. i. Txiuuii xlit
Rv. 1 U |e xl. KI. Simeon bishop. Fir l
Ari. Kl. Sabin t Julian. xxx lit tri tt
| Nl. 1 birgin. i xxxxii fit rrr iin
I Deut. i. itil
(ttt v v vi n 2 Ecce. 1. Ephe. i. bil |g b. gia burg r xb ent be Wie Deu. vil. ii lun. Kl. Alexander bith. [eco viti 1 eu. Bl. Austine bishop. Bir
A ae Id. Kl. Ol Walde vichop. ri? (rit
„

Equinoc-

tium.

Sunne riseth at. vi. and fetteth at. vi.

Marche hath. xxxi. daes,

T he moone. xxx.

rileth. 5 n 15.
Sunne houre. ae v. min, 45,
. | EOS * clon (1. Acton, effort in [do | alen. | Dautd bishop. xxx Deut. vi Tuk. xii. Deu. pi S phe. vi. e . M. Cedde bichobß. rb kit rx Phil. 1.
Fk v. No. Maurim ck Aste. xx ritt Ixxi I
Iq suiui. No. Adrianti mare. i trxii rv xxiiii fut
Fifi. No. Foce t Eulebi. I xx bi ni fü
Ditt |b pid. No. Ulictoztis mart.. kxbii rbii xxviii Coloss.i. lc | Nonas.] Perpetue mart. xxix vit xxx {ti
H fx krrrüu IE

ee!

ive)

Morning prayer. Euenin g prayer,
„ re rnc

k bi.

Id. Agapit mart. fü g v.

Id. Solin Ariete.

vil rruii put it

ir John. i. r 8 xi f. Thel. i

nie bil. AI. Apt. Hilarli.

bit fk rrvi. Nl. G etrudis Patti. (ttt iii uu t rv. Kl Edwarde king. . [b 2 vi l. EIn. . rb Aru. Kl. Jole.hulb. Mar. 11 vit vi viii sii.iii.

ib ri. KI. Cuthbert bi). ix rn tet e eit. Ki. Benedic abort. ? fi pin ett r.. id ri. Kl. Affrodoli bi. [evi rit ix uiii bi rbit (rt srviii fi
Eccle.iii.stu

Avi. Juda. ceric Jud. xx. iii bit {6 vi. Kl. Unth 1. Eltus. .
“DL je v. El. Kuperti bichop. tts F Witt, d iini. Kl.] UMictozintmart. rin uu 1vi [i King. i. bile. t. rut le jit, Kl. Quirim mart. i. king. li. x vu sili Hebre.i. itt f Did. Kl. Adelmi bishop. T iii srrvnt v ii

le = |

Sunne riseth at. v. andfetteth at. vii.

K. Apnulhath. xxx. dayes.

The moone. xxix.

Morning prayer. Euening prayer.
. i

Orpseth 5 55 min. 15.
Sunne houre

Okalleth vi. min. 45.

I. Telson. ii. Lelson . Tesson.sui. Tesson.
{ si. king. vi John. xixst. bin. vii. Hebre. in.

elend. Thcodoze birg.

NLA. No. Marie Egypt. |i vit rx ie (ttt b lin. Nb. Richardeconfe. iit fr krri xi. v

HE c sprid. Ho. Ambrole bith, ft [ete Actes. i. (rit tt vi bin d |Monas. Martiman dich. v ritt * — [rb | vit ;

— e (bit. 4d. Sexti martir. |r tum tt {putt

t jou. Fd. Euphemie, [oir g vi. 45. Egelippi r foci. (init

nit cite {A jd. Id. Perpe 1115 (cru Ii xxiii xi
Ib fin. 75 [Paths of bit, vit, rritit vu vii Irxbd rii c in. Sol m Taurus. I xx bi bi! bui Ixxvi iti
7 dd sprid. ni, 28 ent. 7 rrvui — I Irxix Jacob. i. if P we

EU king. tilted cits litte

l. Pet. i.

Un Dult ix t iti
- i aie — 1 iphege emart. Air ri vi ru fait

Tu e Ku. ru. Kl. Uictoris mart. xx ti xbii xiiii [tite k ti. Kl. Simconis bich. xi rv vit cvi L ar. Kl. Sotheris ih. —.— run ix ꝑrviii fi. Pet. :.
‘ir. KI. D. George. xxl rr tx xx I:

ul. K.. Ulkrideconkel. ert itet xri tra sili

Dc vii. Kl.] Marke Euang. xrb Ecler Ecclc. b. fi. John. i.
DI d bi. Kl. Cletl. bilh. Rom. xp lu. king. zj rrui ii. Rinn. 24. ii

Tao eee iti. king. i rxxitii 3. Hing. iii

Till E lit. K!. Uitalis mare, xxviũ iii ix i M nt. la uit. zl 3 b rxvi bi |
. x lb

jerbit, vii l. iii. Joh. aT ee ili. Joh.

(May hath. xxxi. dayes.

T he moone. xxx.

rileth. v. min. zo.
Sunne 5 a
1 8 vii. mi. 42.
. een eee Leden. aleud, Thin € Facov. f Eccle. vii Act. viii. Eccl. ix. Judas. l. c bi. N. Achanalt bich. 1 1 king. ix xxvui . kyng. r. Rom. i. tie dv. . Jnuc. of p crosle. tir rt rl. Math. i. xu tt
Hitt le uiii. N20. Christopher. — rui 1.—— ri iii lf d. 0 No. Godaàrdi. rv Hi xi (ttt
— . $20. paid. Nd. Johu Euang. ! 7 oe a bit v
108. Pongs. Johnok Beuer. xx lpt viii 5 = 5 jrrii: bit cpu. Ad. Tränl. D. Pier. i— 44. kylg. i. vii ning H pu
4b. Sordiam bich. I

* i (ttit. n Gemini g H. Id. Seruali confel.
TbinAsprid. Bo. Bonifatce mare.

Soul

Morning prayer. ] Euening g prayer.

Ic [rbtt. Xl. BU junit. Ban. bi. coi xv TIA a rv ritt rote Rv i

d [evt. KI. Transl. of Bar. E xb rou r

. nf se rv. XI. Diolcort mart. ol NUR xv and ferteth Fim. Kl. Dunstane bish. IE xi

at. vl.

8 g (viti. Kl. Barnardine. ri xi. xitit ui
. i

Kl. Helene queene. try \tir l. Eldr.i. iti biti. Ki.] Julian virgin. [ret g
Let. Kl. Deliderimart. dix. I. Serunl.martir. irxitir vit
* 1 put. Al. Aldelmi € Urbi. ti. Eldr. f. Trin 5 0 it

k sv. Kl. bi, Kl. August. angl. bi. 41 sini ftxuii g vi. Kl. Bede priest. u. vi! see vun x
1 5 U _ Se El. Germane bth. [revit lr sfrrvi rx xi b (iti, KI. Maxim bishop. (crix ao revit —_[ibelter.it. iret
|e Wii, BU Feticisbithop, [rex Heller. t. trbitt lu ru
1 — | d. Kl. Petronilla virg. xxx mei Mark. i. v

Sunne rie seth at. ini. min. 45. and setteth at
Vili, min. 39.

June hath. crv. dayts.

T he moone. xxix.
Re
Sunne Irpleth 5 e | unne .. —
. bill mine“ 2 eee

x I . Tellon. it. Leon i. Tesson. jit ee [Balend. Michome. Jult. “ shester. bi Mark. Mark. 11. gelt. vii. [Coz Tb.

tit tit |€ |titi, No. Marcellt. mart. iT viii ili x ri
All g lik. No. Eralmus oth. [iti Job. I. i Job. ii. i. Cor. i.

6 a paid, Mo.| Petraci confef, i fi v tin i
0 |b Delia. wWonifaccbih. |v v vi vi iii

Ic bin. Id. Claudius bich. r vii! vii viii iii
— 1 vii. Ad. Pau. bich. Const. pn MR (pitt * b
(rut vt

b. 3.0 inte Felici. ix kiiti fe ttt vii g int. Id. Getuli martir. — [rd 1 ris viii

Eccle. x. Act.xiiii. Eccle.xii. Act. xv.

liu. Id. Barnabe apost. fi i L rix.sii.Cor.ix.

51 — rom |b pzid. Id. Solin Cancro.
; Dit Ic dus. Solstitium estiuum. Litt tt Tin ttl

1＋ dd [rbttt. Kl. Juli. Cra. bith. iu 225 eb rriui i

g * 7a, Albant mati, rote ae
1 | Aleit. Kl.“ Botulphi confe. bit rxxii b [riti. . Darcie Marcel. xx xxxiiii iii [rexb iii lc xii. Kl. Gerualis᷑ Porth. xx sxxxbi lit rxxbui [ttt
Lid ri. Kl. Malburge virg. Tr xxxviii v lrrrir [bd f sr. Kl. Paulini bishop. xu ich vi (elt vi bit |€ ix. Kl. Etheldred. Falk. Tri |e vit Prou. 1. Ephe. i. bi Ig viii. Kl.] John Baptist. El Mala. iii. Math. iii Mat. xiiii Mat.xiiii.
Ibu. Al. Amandi bishop. rr Prou. i. Tun. viii ou. i. Ephe. ii. riiii 5 vi. Kl. Joh. Pau.mar. cri siiii 5 v ni iti Ic b. Kl.] Crescens. xxbii vi r vii iii

d un. Kl. Tron. bich. Falk, ‘orif|but

f RTE aul. EE Pirou. x. (Lub. xii. Nrou.xi. Ephe. bi.
| | | | 1 | |

2 i. xxxi

dunne nletn at. iii.

ndfetteth 1

Tun.

. | ro 1 rileth. Stitt mun. 8 2 |
K oure 1 7 8 ;
Sunn dd ; int © Morning prayer. Euening prayer,
| Ee .

— . July Hath. wert. bape,

T he moone. xxx.

\
. eld. Leffon f. Lellonaetton. ou. xii. Luk. riu.ssor0. cui. Phil. f. be ro

rie [g Bateud. Octa. Joh. bapt. nbi. No. UGilita. of Mar. [un b v. No. Gregozte bihop. |i rv ttt rot fe fin. No. Transla. Marti. ut bmi ri ix un
— D . o. Zoe pürgin. p tr bu ri Cotton.

e sprid. Qa. Oct. et. ⁊ Pau. vi srxii bit rx li

u

g bin. Id. viii rx vi __|tr
Alvi. Id. Cirilli bichop. rx vin ri b bi. Ad. Seut᷑ bet. mar. T rxxi

cv. Id. Benedic abbot. X.

revit ui xxix i. Lett,

John. I. bi ti li

[b |rbt. Ki. Benelmekpng. (edit Jere. i. |p rit [c feb. Al. Arnulph bichop. [CoAT hui |__|» teat d |rtiif, KI. Roffine t Juli. r vi bn lin e sriii. Kl.] Margaret virg.

t tu. Kl. Praxede virgin. Tri fr

¹ ri vi

Ari. Kl. Marie Magdal. rü fu ru iii. Tim. l. r. Kl. Appolin bichop. Tri (ett ri cv [tt
Id ix. NI. Ja

l. Fal Chrilti. vir. (erie rbi ju [rot ttt pin. l. James apotle. Ir Ecci. xi. sriti Ecc.xxiii iin d vit. Kl. Anne mot. Mar. ird Jer. cya rim deve. xiv. Titus. i. litle vi. Ml.] Seuen Acepers. Tr; xx rv xi ti. iii. t v. Kl. Sampfon vith. rr lett vi rriii Phile. i. in. Bi Martha virgin. Ter rrũ roi rv Hebre.i.
Ai. Kl. Abdon z Senn. rr xrbi rb tri ui
EL (b Piid. nen bifhop. xxx rx vii xit t ii
— — . ‚——

( Aug hath. xxxi. Dapes.

] T he moone. xxx.

Orpleth lili.min.zð. 1 iz
: Sunne oure prayer. Euening prayer.

Olalleth vii. min. 5.

| Morning

Ta [_ Pelion Lefton | i estan, c (Balenv.|Zammasday. |i Jer. xxx. John. xx. Jer. cert (Hebe. iw.
Dit d iii. No. Stephen bishop. T execu [ert rxxui v
DT le litt. Mol Jnuk. of Steph. I xxriui Actes. i. rxxrv vi
Fk [patd. No. Justine priest. u frrxbot [it rrxvn vi g | S20naS. Marie. D rxxviit (ttt xxxix ii
TW [Tut Id. Tran. of Christ. . xl in rl ltr

ooo

iT |b vn. Id. Name of Jelus. . [rite L srliii r tc bi. Id. Ciriac t᷑ his felo. . leit bi Iv. eit. xi

id v. Id. Romammartir.— kiwi vil Tbiii {rit e (ttt. 2d. Lautenct nart. “ xlix vu U [ret
Conf ji. 4. Tiburtit Sula. (te (te lit Jacob. i.

Dit g prid. Id. Clare virgin. [Lamen.tie Mamł. ii u dns pppd. T his fel. i ttt fi iii i

TD d (ix. I. Septembzis. n li Ezech.ii.jiiut itt sc [rbitt, Bl.] lin Vir. Alp. Ma Zech iti xiti vi v
Sunne ri- sd ron. Kl. Roche martir. . [vit ritii (rift i. Bet. i.

seth at. v.

ban e i. |e (evi. K. Octd. of Laur. n [rie rv vi fu

at. vil kt . Agapet.martir. Dit (exe vi xrxiui iii g iti. Kl. Magnus mart. ar Dan. i. vu Dam. it. iii
F rut. Kl. TLudouicbichop. T [tit Irbitt uni 0

(b ru. Bl. Warnard conkel. T v ix vi il. Pet. t.
EDIT |e ri. VI. Athanal. mart, TI vii rx but i d r. Kl.] Tall. Tin ix ri x 11

elk. Kl. Darkthhof.apösf. [erutt Eccl.rxxv xxii Ecc.xxix i. Jon. i.

Fiiit |f visi. K. Ludouickpng. [ced Dani.xi.srruuii Dan. xu. i

in (gq vi. BI. Zepher. bishop. [rot [ett rrxuti rissii HM

Avi. Ruth martir. bn Olea. 1. xxv Ole. i. cit ttit xxvi v. vi. v

i |v |b. Kl. Augustine bi. Tr ö ini lc un. Kl. Beheadot John. reir vii lrxvii viii ti. iii. Joh.
Tit gd (tu. Al.] Felix Audatct. rr six [rrbut x IJude. i.
Math. tlre Mom. i.

dt? le id. Kl. Wausim bichop. srxx ri
N |

ne ri at. VI.

fetteth

¶ September hath. rev, days.

The moone. xxix.

Sunne

‘gt 9 ume

1 thr [ Falend. Opics bichop.

D gun. No. Antoni martir. [i

Morning prayer. Euening prayer.

SOUNTES J

li. Tesson sti.Tellon i. . eien fü. Lesion.
Ole. xtii. ach. 11. Ose. TI. NO. ii.

Joel. i. iii Joel. u. ut

— u. . Lupt bichop. fa itt uli Amos. i. [titi
5 rit b prid. No. Mopli proph. iu Amos u. sv ui v f gc Pongs. Dog dapes ende. P [tte vi fbf id (biti, Id. Eugen confel. vi bit vr vin bi pont tt ot

e pn. 4d. Enurchibichop. [bu vir vit ix jb t vi. Id. Matt.of Marit. pit Abdias.isix Honas.! ie bit g vw. FoalGorgontmartivic [Joule iii

Diu | ltt. 5. Hillari bishop. f Mich. i. ri ich. if. 1 mt ii. Id. Porthi t Hyacin. tt ui {ett litt. [rit rb Ic (paid. Id. Martiman bry. u riii vi (rite

15 iit d Idug. AL A ii 5 — Naum. i. xtii
— e irbitt, Al. Poly crosst. wait [Manin.ulrp {tit rv

F srvii. e | Abacuc.isxvi (Abaca. x vi

1 Ig (roi. at ett Soph. l. ff. Ko: 1.

hae Al. Lam ett tu ut

) g 8. Ulcto. E C020. ric Age. il. lit
Zac. ii.ĩti jute

Dit, a Al. Eula, fat. cx iii. v. iret bt i

e ri. Kl. S. Dathertve. jeri Ecclt. 35. irra Eccle. 38.|bt

I c. Kl. Dauritiesoct. u Sach:burrm Tat. Tac. vii. vir:

uu gr. Kl.“ Tecla pirgin. rut ir rut r bee
Ilbin. Kl. Andochi martir. xt xi rey en lir

pu. al. Firimim bichop. rr xi iecwt run &

e bi. Kl. Ciprane Just. rb! Mala. i. ri Mala. li. xi d v. Kl. Colme t Dam. iervit in srrvin

f 1 xp Tobi. i.

reir Eccle. 39. ti

Sunne rifethat.vii. and fetteth at. v.

¶ Ottober hath. xxxi. dayes.

T he moone. xxx.

Orpleth 50 . —
Sunne oure 5

—ͤ

Morning g prayer. Evening prayer.

Cfatteey ilii Be

oa | (i. Lellonit.Leffon| teflon. T ellon. roi [AlGalend. | Remige. Tobi. v. Mar. n. Tobi. vi. i. Cor. vi. b vi. d. Teodcgar. bish. vii v {out ot. a lc |v. No. Candidi martir. (tlt jie vi r tt
Id litt. No. Francis tonfel. HH ri vil rii (iti |
Ie fit. No.] Appolin martir. V iii vin {rusit ini
Ek |pud. No. Fayth virgin. U Judit. i. ix Judit. li. con® lg Fonas.] Marci Mercel. vit iu r iii vi
COM | Avi. Id. Pelagie virgin. bit v ri vi bi bil b vil. 4d. Dennis. lic vii ri piii viii
|c vi. Id. Gereonis mart. i six riui r sir

iD 1 v. Id. Hithalu bichop- r ri. xiut xu r fil |e fin. Id. Niltridi bichop. ii [rt rv rut xi i iu. 2d. ] Edwarde. rin xv vi ir vi vit

pd. Id. in Scorpio | rftit (Wifo. I. Tu. di. i Niitd. ii. [rut
1 ela Idus.

— (Wotfrane bishop fro ili di. ii iii Galat.i.
7 cpu. Kl.] Mouembus“ ni v il vi (tt
F |c |vbt. XI. Etheldrede virg. Tb [bit (tie vii iii dev I. ZukeEnane. Tbili Eccle. li. i Job. i. [ttt rbil se a) ee Se ae vit (Wwild.ir.(o Hild. r. |b

Dif [riit. l. Austrobert virg. xi bi tu vi ru. Kl. xi.thouland birg. xi. thouland virg. cc rin vli * [Ephel. i.

rit Ali. K. Mati Soloime. xi [rb [biti n

fili (b it. Al Mun omane bishop. |rriit ee ix K iii
. kx. Ki. Magloti bichop. xi rr ie (tit

ti Id vit. Bll Crispine t᷑ Crisp. xc Eccle.ii. xi n Iv le vu. Ki. Euarist. pichop. rr fim xu vv vi ir it bi. Gl. Fat. TDi bi xui vii [Phil. .

pill g v. a Simone Jude. revit Jo. ==) ii = Job it un. Kl. Narcisli vithop. Ixxix Eccl. viii.srv seu iii

a rot |v ltt. Kl. Germam conkel. r T [eb II
C N Bl.“ Falk. [pee (eti| ri ri Tollosl.i.

C Nouember Hath. xxx. Benes:

Je moone.xxix.

e Orvleth wan 8 > / ˙—— lo 25) —ů se un win. e, 2 ———

H. Lellon ti. Lesfon f. Leong,

Tellon.
Aild. iii. Ul. F v. Apoc.xix.

mi lui
{ri tit

1 fn. 0 Minikride birg.
95 N. A manti Uta.

(tt
(itt: iti

stxxũ txxiiit

ii. Thel. i.

= vu. abu bith. a Irli vi flu

e tri. Kl.“ Edmonde arch. Toi ritt it (bat elite b k rv Kl. Hugh bihop. TU Tb roie g run. Ki. Init. fegt EfzEab. T BIĩ 7 L riviu ti. Tim. i.

Alxlii. Kl. Elizab. matro. fir [rites b xu. Kl. Edinunde king. r Ie '

Ali sc xi. D leet ili d |r

ri {f bl ene etm tt. br ltt Phile.i.
| beb2e.t.

unne ri at. vid. d setteth iii,

xi fit
55 d ii. Al. Fatt, Saturn. bale (rit 111 iii b e Pd. Ri. Andree apost. rv Mrou. xx. x. (Actes, i. Lou. rxisvvi

Note, that the beginning of the.rrbt. Chapter ol Ecclefiatticus pte
But when one is. &c. mut be read with the. rrv. CELE.

1 a ny 4 x © * 4 5 ‘yt f N — von 8 9 4 wr 1

a 3 hath. xxxi. Bayes,

T he moone. xxx.

ae | re 5 a mi. 15. = —
Sunne houre — Mornine : E ae - enaleth. dun . Morning eee

ent. Lefton TLeiion. . Lesfon

kid | Eligit bichop. Ela. ruin | Actes. ii. Ela. c v. Mebre. vu.
1 Fg litt. No. Libantt. vi ii vii vii
Jiu. Mo.| Barbara big. ren e e a b (pd. Nd. Dimiundebih. [ii xx. xi rr ie je | Nena. Sabt ot abbot. |rritt vi xi ki
Fd bin. Id. Nicholas bi. Z rx di. bil. rxxbi xi
Dit se vu. Ib. Fare virgin. i frxxvn Idi. ll. rxbiit xu n Toncept.of a e “erie pit ere James..
Ig. Id. Ciprian Cipuian abbot. ? kxxxi ix xxx it ar) Alti. 3d. Eulaliedirgin. claret r exert im. en U iii. Id. Damalt bich. I frxxv Ti xrbi tit e an lel c pid. pid. Id. Sol in Capricorne. vii Err xlt xxxvii tt ib | fetteth at. a Sous. | Lutte vit in. min. 30.

= (tite 3 Kl.] Januarti. sfriut ru rlũt xlit

rpm. Kl.] QAaleru bishon. D trim rv srliiii —
Iürbil. Kl. e rat ee xvi xlvi 1 0

li. Pet. i. le lx. K N tie lx lit lit |
PUM Id lxiti. Kl. Fatt, Juiũ mar. tr ii rr liii i Iii e et. = RI. Lhomas apott. eri Were xi sProu. 24. fl. Achn. i. ik ri. Kl.] Thirtie mart, levi Ela. lv. xxx Ela. pi. ti
Tar. Kl. Gictorte virg. vii rriii sĩvduiti me ix. Kl. Fatt. 2 wih, ng ux lrriiit x — tit \Sfat, ix. |Lub. xxii Ela. bu, (Litus.tt, Di. Titus. iil.
Prou. 28. Act. 5.7. Eccle iii Act. vii.
Eccle. v. Apoc. i. Eccle. vi. Apo.xxui.
Tb. Uulild. i. t. John. v.
Elai.Ixii. ii. John.

1 Ixrttt iii. John. xx viii xi Jude. i.

The creation : Genelis.

The first booke of Moyles, called in

, Hebrue of the firft worde of the booke * Berefchith,and in Greke Genesis.

wy The firft Chapter.

2 Che earth and the deapthes, ; Lyght. s The firmament o2 heauen.

10 Che earth, and the sea. 14 Chelunne, the moone, and the skarres.

21 Filshes. 24 Che beastes of the earth. 25 The creation of man. 29

God geueth vnto man the power of procreation, and cubdueth all thynges vnto hym. 3 Gods prouision kor lyuelode. :

N

N I

= — f 5 2 5
2— = - ==, Fis == = pe 5 —.— ̃ oe —— 5 2
=> end te : = — 8 5

ee

h

N pry in
( iH f
N

Si

sarc T
Nt aq ti

ay
. ins 5

öNthe begin- 6 And God sald: let there be a firma be dae ment betwene the waters, and let it n make a dümsion betwene waters and „ behze. A ab Cod ere
7 And God made the © firmament, and ting abroad fet the diuision betwene the waters Ques which (were) vnder the firmament and auen the Waters that (were) aboue © the e

(aN 9 ;
Toe, — was voypde: firmament: and it was fo. {at cxlbi. ae SMG lwarknes rn 8 And God called the firmament the f vpon the fate of the Y deepe, and the) heauen: and the euenyng and tenz Fe spirite of God moued vpon the kace of nung were the seconde day. é the waters. * 9° And God {ain let the © waters vn- ie
: And God sayde, let there be light: and der the heauen be gathered together indebe there was light. e to one plate, and let the dupe laude ap- B. bee, 4. And God lawe the lpght that it was peare: and it wast. ; eee ae good: and God deuided the lyght from 10 And God called the drie laude p earth, en the darknes. and the gatheryng together of waters e

oeh th 5 te God called the light day, andthe called he We God sabe that it ne darknes night: and the euenyng e the was good. f
Pac mompug Were the keck Day, i a 1 And God sayde: e wont

The creation

(0 The odneg o
God in pro-

1 png

ian beat, before thep were made.

(g Frnitfuimile in trees and hearbes,
Was beforc sun 02 moone
Was inadt.

Psal. i. b.
Deut. iili. b.
The. 4. dap

Ch) These
Ipahtes wert not made to scrue Astronomers phantasies: but fo

igneg in natural chinges, and tokens of goos mercie
©}; Wzath.

&

0 N Tht true ofe of the heanenip bodpes
4s oft cepea-

ed, lest men shoulde abuse

ene fruitful trees peeldyng frnite

ter his kynde, Which hath leede in te selfe vpon the earth: and it was lo.

12 And the earth brought forth both bud and hearbe apt to seede after his kynde,

and tree peeldyng frnite, Whiche hath

seede in it selfe, alter his kynde.

13 And God lawe that it was good. And the euenyng and the mornyng were the thirde dap. —

14 And God layde: let there be lyghtes in the firmament ok the heauen, that they may deuide the day and the nyght, and let them be fur figues, k seasons, and for Bayes, and peres. g

15 And letthem be for lyghtes in the firmament of the heauen, that they mae geue light vpõ the earth: and it was fo.

16 And God made two great lpghtes: a greater lyght to rule the day, and a lesse lyght to rule the nyght, and [be made] starres also. 1

17 And God set them in the firmament of the heauen, to shpne vpon the earth,

18 And to *rule the day and nyght, and to make difference betweene the lyght and the darkuesse: and God law that it was good.

Ieexxxid 19 And the euenyng and the moznyng

The.) dap.

55 Ho more

e creatids of creatures art to be loked

spet Hod

were the fourth day.

20 And God sayde: let the waters bryng foorth mouyng creature that hath ipfe, and foule that may flee vpon the carth in the open firmament of heauen.

21 And God created great whales, and cuery lyuyng € mouing creature, which

the waters brought foorth after they

Lynde, c euerp fethered foule after their uynde: and God fab that it was good.

22 And God o blessed them, saying: We fruitekul, and multiplie, and fyil tie wae |

ters ot the fea, and let foule multiplie

2Che day of ref is blessed. from the earth as a well to water it.

The ryuers nameg. 16 God korbpddeth
19 Adam geuethn

tion of Holy mariage.

Ge D fis.
NE — TR - 3 = foorth (both; budde and hearbe apt to inthe earth. —
25 And the euenyng and mornyng were

the fitt dap.

24. And God sayde: let the earth bryng foorth lyuyng creature after his kynde, cattell, wornie, and beastes ok the carey

after his kynde: and it was fo,

25 God made the beast of the earth ulter his kynde, and cattell after his kynde, and euery thyng that creepech vpon the

earth after his kynde: and God lawe that it was good.
26 . God saide: et vs make man in o

our image, after our lpkenesse, and let

them haue rule of the fisshe of the fea, ¢ of the foule ok the apre, and of tattell, ¢ of all the earth, and ol euery ereepyng thyng that creepeth vpon the earth.
27 So Gdd created man in his wowne image, in the iniage of God created he him, male and female treated he them.
28 And God bielled™ them, and Gad fapde vnto them: be fruitefull, k nuit: plie, and repleniche the earth, e subdue it, and haue dominion of the fillhe of the sea, and foule of the apre, € of euerp ty: uing thing that moueth vpon the earth.
29 And God sayde: beholde, J haue ge-

uen you euer. hearbe bearing leede,

which is in the vpper face of all p earth, and euery tree in the which is the fruite ok a tree bearing seede, that they may be meate vnto pou:

30 To euerp beast of the earth allo, and to euery birde of the aire, and to euery luch

thing that ereepeth vpon v earth, which

doth liue, J haue geuen euerp greene hearbe for meate: and it was fo.

31 And God lawe euery thyng that he 1

had made: and beholde, it was exceedyng good. And the euenyng € the mo uyng were the firth day.

J The. ij. Chapter.

4Vrepeatpng of thynges koretolde in the kirk. s The cloude

a 7 He rehearteth agapne the fathio k man.
8 Man in the paradise of plealure. 10 The wood of lpfe, 19 td ue ane 4 13.14

man the tree of & . ames vnto all iuyng thyng 2 nowledge of good and euyll

22 Woman is created, 2; The institu-

day he rested from all his worke which he had made.

3 And God plessed the seuenth dave, ag
E lanctified it: becaufe that in it he had a vetted from all his worke whiche God «

ordepned to make.
Thele are the generations of cb. ted

of map,

ö The. 6j.

() Ont God, and three pers long.

Coloss. ii b.

m) an ig created Ipke vnto Hod in peetecte na: ture. which bp
Unne he acters
Swarde coz-

n) Weoughl to labour 1 kepapze this image so oft tepeated,
VVifduid,
Ecde ij. a.
Math xixa

(0) LAH procreation is the blespngal

Gca.viie,

&

The creation

W

(e) This bale

degpnnpng

man shoulde men ce,

ice he wared oude of

the image

ok God.

this part the earth taltwarde from

radise of pleafare 0

Where
Eden wes.
Esaias. 37.
Ezech. 27.
(t) In (acy tmarucloas a-

contapne Fro one fratte.

(t) Which did
2 the opty ipte.

( The fame agreeth ich the suc-
Seffe that fos lowed

Eecle. 24. d. e

nens aud ot the earth when they were created, n the dap when the Lod God made the earth and the heauens.

And euerp plant of the fielde before it was in the earth, and euerp hearbe of the fielde before it grewe. For the Lod
God had not (eet) caused it to rayne vppon the carth, neither (was there a man to tyll the grounde.

But there went vp & miste from the earth, c watered the whole face of the grounde. N

The Lode God allo dyd shape man,
(euert] pnt fro of the grounde, € breathed into his nolethrylles the breath of lyfe, and man was a lyuyng soule.

g And the Lowd God w planted a garden eastwarde in Eden, and there he

* put the nian whom he had shapen.

9 Moreguer, cut of the grounde made the Lode God to growe “ enery tree, that was fayze to fyght, and pleafaunt to eate: The tree © of lyfe in the myddest of the garden, and the tree of
® knowledge of good and eupll.

Jo And out of eden there went foorth a flood to water the garden, and from thence it was deuided, and became into foure heades.

II The name of p first is Pison, the fame

mexcusable, that could not

is it that tompasseth the whole tandeof
Y hauilah, where there is golde:

And the golde of the lande is very good. There is also Bdellium, and the
Om stone.

Led

| Genelis.

14, The name ok p thirde rpuer ts "Hide: we

hon: the fame is it that com

alletl JE j

gel, it goctl toward the eat fine ok Ae e ficia : Ethe fourth rpuer is Euphrates, 15
1 Andthe Tord God toke the man, and

put hym in the garden of Eden, that he

ris,

ann anbkepeit, us,
16 And the Lorde God commaunded weer wy" the man, saying: eating, thou shalt eate 0 Se ok eilery tree of the garden: Sen |

therof, thou shalt dye the cw death. gag
18 Andthe Told God fayde : It is not ae

good p the man should be alone, J wyll *

make hym an c helpe “lyke vnd hym. ie is

oka n) what the bufbanoought to thpnke of

His Wpfe: and
What the wile ow

fore hym.
D

20 And the man gaue names to all cat: tell, and foule of the apre, € euerp brast of the fielde: but for man founde he not an helpe lyke buto hym.

21 The Lod God tansed a deepe sleepe to fall bpon Adam, and he slept, and he toke one of his ribbes, and closed vp the place with fleshe in steade therol.

22 And the ribbe which the lord god had

taken from man, made he a woman x « gape

. prought her vnto the man 8

N n

(0) Man

sbe wed him-
{etfe Lorde of all beaftes, bg geupna then names.

martages ace made op God
1. Cor. xi. b.

Wi

H _

= re ac creation Ge neli S. of woman,

23 And man (aide: This is nowe bone ak ther and his mother, and halbe toyned dated ae my bones, and fleche of my flethe, fhe with his Wye: and they thall become Es
Sew (halbe talled v wonan, because che was one flethe.

dun taken out okman. a 25 And they were both naked the man g e 24. For this cause Hail inan leaue his ka- and his wife, and were “ not achamed. aer
OBS ol out
9 5 ngtur

: Sa» This figure is fpoken of in the. x. vearfe of this Chapter before, and mpi
„ ; rTaepresenteth the situation of Gods garden.
ö

AyD
5355 es

2 — ee 9

f r are i 5 oN AG

Fthere be any kyngdome vnder heauen that is excellent in beautie, in aboun-
* daunce of kruites, in plenteoulnes, in delytes and other gyktes: they which haue

witten of countreys, do prapte aboue all. the fame that this figure repretenteth.

Whertore, with the partes of thole wryters. Moyles exalteth this paradile, as dite
| ip belonging vnto it. And it is very well lye, that the vegton oz kingdome of ckden
Hath ben lituated in that countrey. as it appeareth in the. xxxbii. Chapter of Clatas

the. xi. vearse, and in the. xx vii. of Ezechlel the. xxili. vearse. Mozeouer, where

as Moyles fapde that a flood dyd proceede from that place: I do interprete it, krom

. the courte ol the waters, as vr he choulde haue sayde that Adam dyd inhabite in the
* klooddes syde, o2 in the lande which was watered of both ixdes. Hotwebeit, there is no great matter in that, eyther that Adam bath inhabited onder the place where both flooddes come together towarde Babylon and Seleucta, or aboue: It is duk

cient 6 he hath ben in ã place watered of waters. But the thing is not davke nor hard

to vnderstande howe this kloodde hath ben deuided in koure heades. soz they be two

' flooddes which be gathered in one, then they leperate them telues in diuers partes.
So in theyr ioynyng and klowyng together, it is but a lloodde, wherok there is t wo
Heades into two chanels from aboue, and t wo to warde the fea, when it begynneth

to seperate it selte abrode. But to declare vnto pou the diuersities of the ryuers

names, befpdes their vluall and principall appellations, and howe they be called as they palle through eche prouince, with the interpretations of the fame, J thynhe it rather tedious and combzefome, then prokitable. wherkore the limple lense of Mops

les is, that the garden wherol Adam was the owner, was watered with waters,

1 the courte of this kloodde was there, whiche was deuided into foure heades.

The womã seduced

Genesis.

The. ij. Chapter.

Che serpent beapleth the woman. 6 Che trancgrellion ok the co i
8 when Adam and Heua knewe their oltenceg, they fledde Kale ee

{png their fault. 14 The serpeut is cursed. 15 The leede Fetus is promise our.
Cher Golpell. 16 womans mileries foz fine, 17 The puinptmen of Adam. Hani

appopnted to labour. 20 Peua.

ae tte ‘ J
XS =

! ! ae

ttl { f 9 N a
1 1010 N |e

i 0 f

rt te

oa

1 t he 5 = e
4 tl CERO Me

i NO the lerpent ewas luttiller then

„euerp beast of the fielde which p lord
God hadde made, and he sayde vnto the woman: pea, path God saide,

A 1
Wild. u. d.

ade
Make Deug pe fhatl not rate of

Doubt of godg
Nod fopit tos warde her.

euery tree of the garden;

2 Ad the woman lapde buto the serpent: We cate of 5 fruite of the trees of the garden.

3 Wut as forthe fruite ofthe tree which iS in the myddes of the garden, God ath sayde, ve shall not cate ofit, neither

3 that ye touche of it, © lest peraduenture

os pl dpe. s

ene 4. And *the lerpent fayde vnto the wo-

ee man: ye shall not dye the death.

Wenge) 5 Jfor God doth knoiwe, that the fame

day that ye cate therok, pour eyes Mall

) atha c
. ich be opened, and © pe shalbe euẽ as gods, che, Uliowyng good aud euyll.

5 And lo the woman seing that the fame tree was good to cate of, and pleasaunt to the eyes, and a tree to be delired to make one wile, toke of the fruite therok, and dyd © cate, and gauc allo vnto her

The

a

Caen

bitin cre
Ng ot re, S00

e
. ie 100 i
. Ad Term d

MAH

a . . ; 8 nig AM i 7

With her, and he dyd

hulbande beyn cate.
Then the eyes ofthenrboth were o- 25

pened, and they knewe that they wert naked, and they solwed © fygge leaues together, x made then selues apernes.

8 And they heard the voyte ofthe Lor
God, walkyng in the garden inp coole of the day: and Adam and his wy hyd themlelues fromthe prestuct of the
1020 God amongst y trees of the garden.

9 Andthe Lorde called Adam, € sapde vnto hym: where art thou-

10 Which fayde : Jhearde thy voyce in

the garden, and Was afrayde ! becaule
J Was naked, and hyd my selke.

II And he fayde; Who tolde thee that thou Walt nakedApatt thou not cater of the lame tree, tonternyug the which I tommaunded thee that thou shouldest not cate of it:

12 And Adam said: The woman whom thou gauelt (to be With me, The gaue me okthe tree, and J dyn eate.

13 And the Lord God saꝝd vnto the woman: dohy hast thou done this: And the woman sayde: the lerpent begyled
Mw 59 + . vnto p ferpent:

nd the lo ai f ent: gee gee Ai wecaule

Eccle. xxv.

1. Tun. n. d.

The cozz
Tilptton of all the nature of man bp sinne.
) Such are the clohes we mak t to court out senne.

(g) The torrupcion of mans nature alter synne. here apetareth.

(h) Boar plape th the hepocrite.

(i) Idant durdentth
God und the
Wontan wir hig kauft.

n Pz. howe.

In the minister 1s 5 author of n mifchicfe pus ne

The promifed fecde.

Genelis.

Adam.

GWetause thou hak done this, thou art hearbe of the fielde. —

C

(i) The con-

tmuall fpght ok che chyldrẽ of Sod.

Chriite.

O The calainitics ¢ misetits Whiche continnaltp fo iowetl) mane
Apnde foz
(pane.

5. Cor. xilil.f

n) che shulde haue ben his
Wyles school-

(o) It ts not the age of the caͤrth, but the

barapne.

SYN

tursed aboue all cattel, and aboue euery beast of the fielde: vpon thy belly shalt thou go, and dust shalt thou cate all the daves of thylyle. *

15 Jwyll also put“ eunitie betweene ec e the woman, betweene thy cede and her seede: and 0 it thall treade
Downe thy head, and thou shalt treade vpon his heele. „

16 But vnto the woman he sayde: OF wyll very much multiplie thy sorowe, and thy griefes of chylde bearyng, In sorowe shalt thou bing foorth childzen:

thy delire (halbe) to thy hulhande, and he Khalil haue the rule of thee.

17 Uuto Adam he sayde: wWeeaule thou
Hak hearkened vnto w the voyte of thy
Wyke, and hast eaten of the tree concer: nyng the whiche Jcommaunded thee, laying, thou shalt not eate of it, cursed is the grounde for thy lake, in soro we shalt thou cate of it all the dayes of thy lyte.

18 Thome also and thistle shall it bryng foorth to thee, and thou shalt cate the

19 Inthe sweatte of thy face shalt thou cate thy breade, tyll thou be turned a: gayne into the ground, for out of it watt thou taken: Foz dust thou art, and into dust shalt thou be turned agayne.

20 And Adam called his wöfes © name Grint
Heu beraule he was the mother ofall e lpuyng. i Garn de

21 Unto Adam also and to his wyfe dpd the Lorde God make garmentes of a) x fkynnes, and he put themon. ee a tha

22 And the Lorde God sayde: Beholde, pa the man is become as one of vs, in ¢
Eno wing good and euyll: And nowlelt peraduenture he put foorth his hande, . and take allo of the tree of lpfe and cate, ¢ and lyue for euer. C0 car

23 Therefoze the Lode God sent hyn woo foorth frõ the garden of Eden, to worke dn the grounde whente he was taken.

24. And so he O droue out man, and at the east side of the gardẽ of Eden he let Cherubins, and a fierie two edged [worde, to kepe the Way of the tree of lpfe.

rs
(t) Adam em reuse in this ipfeobtepnes
Felicn

tie why pe lofts bp mk.

q The. inj. Chapter,

1 Cain. a bel and Cain do
8 He kylleth his brother Abel. n

Hoema.

offer gyftes vnto the Lorde. 6 Cain is rebuned of the Lorde.
Cain is curled. 13 Cain delpaireth. 15 Hertoch. 18 Jrad,

Meutacl, Mathulael. 9 Lamech and his wpues, Ada, Sella. 21 Jubal, 22 Thubalcain,

Uu N fai. Ni), VY yearns RAN 1 NY aie
7 7 i i f — 2 if) é ie ty : pe Nu et: 2 50 S iy e aN ah * BASS devs
Uy 1 ä =

We
WT.

N. ati

J

Ye haue gotten a man of the

Zr PeD20C, e protcading, brought foostls

— x
2 ea ase
N
N° — .
ER an 5 aay 8
4 my? e i" af on 7 * \
BD! ; 1. 1
| G

26 The worchyppyng of God is restored.

Mi i

his brother Pabel, © and Habel was a a) gen keper of sheepe, but Cain was a tyller of oes,

the grounde. the ght OP
3 And in proceffe of dayes it came to 4 0.

pasle, that Cain brought of the fruite ok . eier the grounde, an © oblation vnto 5 lorde: 1 5

Habel wer ae

Habel flayne.

4 Habel also brought of the firtipnges of his sheepe, e ol che fatte thereof: and the Lorde had respett onto Pabel, and to his oblation. 3

5 Wut bnto Cain and to his offeryng he had no vefpect : © for the whiche caule
Cain was exceedpng wroth, and his tountenaunce abated.

6 And the Lorde {aide vnto Cain: why art thou wroth: and why is thy tountenaunce abated? N

ebr xi a th
The fart v abel mad i oblatidõ occeptable.

not thy sinne at the doores: Also bnto

betty thee khall his delire be, and thou shalt haue dominion ouer hym.

3 And Cain™ talked with Mabel his brother: and it came to palle when

they were in the ficlde, Cain role vp a-

„ gapynst abel his brother, e slewe him.
9 And the Torde laid vnto Cain: where

is abel thy brother; Which layde © F

„ wote not: Am Imp brothers keper-

10 And he sapde: What hast thou done

O the voyte ok thy brothers blood crpeth buto me out of the grounde.

Ht And nowe art thou tursed from the earth, which hath opened her mouth to receaue thy brothers blood from thy hande.

12 If thou tyll the grounde, che chall not

peelde vnto thee her strength. A fu-

yee gitiue and a vatabound shalt thou be in the earth.

a7, H 13 And Cain sayde vnto the Lord: My

iniquitie is moze ™ then that it may be

mee? korgeuen.

14 Beholde, thon halk tast me out this day fromthe vpper face of the earth, € from thy face shall I be bya, kugitiue also and a bacabounde hall J be in the earth: and it shall tome to passe, that euery one that fyndeth me shal llay me.

15 And the Torde laid vnto him: © Tle-

a care oz ig holp fain=

tts.
(1) The ver

(0) A great
Funpsbmene

nt e tudes

Genesis.

semen 7 Jkthon do wen, walt thou not ore-
(sete tedue: and ykthou doest not well, lpeth

rply whosdeuer slayeth Cain, he shalbe

punished seuen folde. And the Lorde let
à marke vpon Cain, lest 9 5 man kyndyng hym choulde kyll bpm,

is (And Cain went ont from the prez sente ofthe Lorde, x dwelt in the lande of Nod, castwarde from Eden.

17 © Cain also knewe his wyfe, whiche conceaucdand bare Henoch, and bupl-

dyngatitie, he called the name of the © name of his lonne

same titie after the
Henoch.

18 Unto p fame Henoch was borne Fran:
Irad begat Debniact Mehuiaelbegat
Methulael, Methulael begat Lamech,

19 ·0 And Lamcch toke vnto hym two wyues, the name ot the one was Ada, and the nanie of the other was Sella.

20 And Ada bare Jabel, which was the father of such as dwel iu the tentes, and of such as haue cattell.

21 His brothers name was Jubal, which was the father of such as handle Barpe and Organ. f

22. And Sella allo bare Thubaltain, which wrought tunnyngly euerp craft of brasse and of iron, the fitter of Thubaltam was Poca,

23 And Lamech saide buto his wines
Ada and Sella: Heare np vopce pe wpues of Lantech, hearken bnto my speache: for I haue layne a man to the woundpng of my selfe, € a poung man to myne owe punichment.

24. If Cain fhalbe auenged seuen folde,

truely Tamech seuentie tymes € {euen tyines.

25 Adam knelbe His Wyte agapne, and she bare a sonne, and called his name
Seth: For God slayde He) hath appoynted me another seede in steade of abel

whom Cain fletbe,

26 And vnto the lame Seth allo there was borne a sonne, and he called his name Enos: then began men to male
© inuotation in the name of the Lorde.

The. v. Chapter.

1 He repeateth the creation of man. Men. Adams age. 6 Seth. o Enos. 12 Wa halaleel. 1 Henoch. 25 WDathulelah. 29 Noah, 32 Che Cones of Poah.

ted he them, and blesled them, and called their name © Adam in the dave of their creation.

3 And Adam lpued an hundreth and thirtic yeres, and begate a sonne tu his owe one his image, t called his name Seth.

7 ‘ A üiij 4 All

(q) The exto

muntcation ?

banichment of
Cam.

(r) Tempo tall gyftg wh the God bello

Cf) Foz Set focuct caute

this was oon, it was agamq the uintieution ot matrimonie

D

(t) Lamech a tprant regardeth no mang councell: but thynketh chet he nape meze fatclp persecut ne tut men

en Cam.

By the
Het part, iht
Whole ferutce of Hod ig figs nilled, whithe

(t) The hul= bande andthe fopft, do one man.

cc) Worles peaketh nos of Cam end such, for that they mez not of the hatch, ntither come
Cbrüllr of

sift 0 thetv une.

BE · A 2

Religion restored.

— — — —— -— —

Gen eli 85

Noah,

Al the Dapes of Adam after he had be- | tyght hundreth peres, € begate sonnes

1. Chro. l. a.

(t) Idam ipucd vnto Pohas fathers

apes.
(g) Thu the rewarde ol fin
18 Death, thorowout all ages,

Cy) Manx ho iy patriarkes
Ipued in the church at onc tyme.

W

(i) Thep be only rchtarstd bp name, Who were ag lyghtes in the
Churthe.
(B) Ye lputd vntpl the. 84. percof Moahs tpfe,

4 gotten Seth, were eyght hudzeth peres,

and he begat sonnes and daughters.

5 © And all the dayes that Adam lyued were nine hundreth aud thirtie peres, q) and he dyed.

6 Seth lpued an hundzeth € fpue peres, and begat Enos.

7 And Seth lpued after he begat Enos

oy ęyght hundreth and seuen peres, and begat sonnes and daughters. 5

8 Andall the dapes ol Seth were nine

hundreth e twelue peres, and he dyed.
Enos lyued ninetie peres, and begate

Kenan. ; .

Io And Enos lpued alter he begate Ke-

nan eyght hundreth ¢ fiktie peres, and

begate sonnes and daughters.
And all the Bayes of Enos were nine
® hundreth €fpue yeres, and he dyed,

12 Renan lpued seuentie peres, and begate Mahalalcel.

3 And Renan liued akter he begate Paz halaleel epght hüdreth € fourtie peres, and begate sonnes and daughters.

14 And all the dayes of Kenan were nine hundreth and ten peres, and he dped.

II

15 Mahalaleel lined sirtie and fiue peres,

C

ca) This corrupt ion began long befoze
Noahs tyme.

daughtergo the wicked,
Without alt
; 25 ts 9 827 t) God ha gonc about di
55 be tall the tore 15

and begate Jered.

16 And againe Mahalaleel lined after he begate Hered eyght hundreth e thirtie peres, and begate sonnes k daughters.

17 And al the dayes of Mahalaleel, were eyght hundreth ninetie and fine peres, and he dyed.

18 Hered lyued an hundreth sixtie ¢ two peres, and he begate Henoch.

19 And Jered liued after he begat Henoch,

and daughters.
20 And all the dayes of Perved were nine hundreth sirtie and two peres e he died.
21. Henoch lyued sixtie and fiue peres, t begate Methulelah. 5
22 And Henoch walked with God after he begate Methuselah three peres, and begate sonnes e daughters.

And al p dayes of Henoch were threr om

hundreth sixtie and fiue peres,

24. And Henoch Walked with God: and he was no more seene, for God toke him away. ‘

25 og hethulelah also lyued an hundreth

eyghtie and leuẽ peres, and begate La- 2

mech.

26 And agayne Methusalah lyued after 0

he begat Lamech seuẽ hundreth eightie and two peres, and begate sonnes and daughters.

27 And all the dayes of Methuselah ©

were nine hundreth sixtie € nine peres, 8.25

and he dped.
28 Tamech liued an hundreth eyghtie k two peres, and begate a sonne,

29 And called his name Noah) saping: fe
This same Mall conikort vs as concer: 0 ning our worke, e sorowe ol dur handes

about the earth, which God cursed.

30 And Tamech lpued after he begat
Noah, fine hũdreth ninetie € fiue peres, and begate sonnes and daughters.

31 V And all the dayes of Lamech were seuen hundreth seuentie and seuẽ peres, and he dyed,

32 Mypah was fiue hundreth pere olde, €
Moab begate Sem, Ham, E Japheth.

The. vj. Chapter.

The caule of deluge.; An hundred and twentie veres geuen fo2 conuerlion a amendement

ok lpke. 4 Giantes. The wickednesse of man

prouoßeth God. It repenteth God that

ne had made man. Che generations of Noe the iust. 1 God loretelleth vnto Moab hym

I O it came to passe, that when men““ be-

8 Qf N
NG U n q - 0 Ss N 95 *
Neg 7

Awicarth, there were daughters borne vnto thé:

2 God allo sawe the daughters of men that they were fayre, € they toke them
Wyucs, such as theyliked, from among

hemall.

And the Lorde fayde: © My spirite

taule he is fleshe: pet his dapes Mhalbe

elke the generall deluge. 15 The kachion of the

And the ™ sonnes ok

hall not alwayes stryue with man, bez

arke, is who chould enter the arte.
San hundreth and twentie peres.

4 But there were Giantes in thole daes *

E

inp earth: W yea eater that the sonnes of God tame vnto the daughters of mé,

hundzeth n

Face 44

7 2 r. xi. g.
(1) Be dire.

bit tymts.

(aq) Luthe he
He patriarhss tehtorsed bt kot, Dye io this mans darts.

5 c

of ye fas

and Hadde begotten chyldren of them, 15

the fame became myghtie men of the wonlde, and mien of reno we.

But God sawe that the malice of man was great in the carth, and all the

imagination of the thoughtes of his 3

heart (as) only cupll cuery dap.

Gi

And it repented the Lord that he had cen made man ppon the earth, r he was touched with sorowe in his heart. A

no g

God lab
Co lp fous

pecoed .

And the Lorde sayde: J wyll from the vpper fate of the earth, destroy man
Whom PY hane created, krom man vnto

9Thest are the generations of Hoah:
Noah (was; a iust man, and perfect in his generations: And Poah wal-

0 with trueltie.

Cn And God loked vpon the earth, and beholde Vit was corrupt: kor all fleshe had corrupt his way vpon earth.

And God sayd vnto Noah: the wende ok all fleshe is come befoze me, for the earth is fylled with crueltie through

ropred bath religion z 151 B

With the earth. |
Mone 14. Make thee an Arke ol!“ pine trees: dee zh bitations halt thou make in the arke, and shalt pitch it within and with out with pitche.
15 And ol this fashion Malt thou make it: The length of the arke schalde j three hundreth cubites, the breadth of it fiftie

Md the Loyd laid
S vnto Noah: conte
Altbou and al thy
VAG houle intoß arke:
„Afoz thee haue J iHeene rpahteous
> Ibefoge me in this generation.
— Pl euerpy cleane beast thou shalt take With thee seuen and seuen, the male and his female, but ok pncleane tattell two, the male and his female.
3 Of foules also of the ayre seuen and seuen, the male and the female, to kepe
(cede alyue vpon the face of all the whole earth. N
For after H seuen dayes, I wyl rapne bpon the earth fourtie dayẽs and four-

tit nightess¢ all substaunte that J haue

) Hoty, e

t, and
Migge. e

(e) God

DO! nor

Boah fo dent 4 bt ok on

Mcungain,

r ˙¹ oe

Genesis.

them, and beholde J wyl destroy them

cubites, € the height of it thirtie cubites.

Is Awyndowe chalt thou make in the

arke, ande in a tubite chalt thou finiche o eI i

itaboue: but the poor of the are halt Se" thou fet in the spde therof 7 With ite e loftes one abone another shalt thous

make it.
17 And beholde, J, euen I do bryng a

(p) It seemed eto the

fludde of waters vpon the earth, to de- wg vn

wa tee

onder heauen, and enery thyn

that is in the earth challperiche. 2

18 with thee allo wyll J make ch m couenaunt:and thou shalt tome into the

arke, thou and thy fonnes thy wife, and

thy sonnes wyues with thee.

And of euerp lpuyng thyng of all flelhe, Ha payre of euery one shalt thou bryng into the arke to kepe them alyue
With thee, they shalbe male x female.
20 Ok fethered foules also after their

kinde, and of all cattell after their kinde: bol euery Wognte of the earth after his

kynde, two of euery one shall come vuto thee, to kepe (then) alpue.

2l And take thou with thee of all meate that is eaten, and thou shalt lay it vp
With thee, that it may be meate for thee and them

22 *soah™ therfore dyd actording vnto all that God tonmaunded hym leuenj so dpd he.

q The. vij. Chapter.

Noah is commaunded to enter the arne. 5 Noah entrech the arke. 1 The ouerklowyng ok the deluge. znoho did enter with Noah 17 Howe great the waters of Che kludde were.

made, wyll J destroy from the bpper fate of the earth. .

Noah therfore did according bnto all that God tommaunded him.

6 And Noah was fire hundrech pere olde, when the fluddes of water came

vppon the earth.

7 And Moah tame, and his sonnes, and his wyfe, and his fonnes wpues with him to the arke, because of the waters of the fludde. 1

8 Pf cleaue beastes, and of vncleane

- beattes and of foules, and of euery such as creepeth vpon the earth,

9 There © came two ¢ two vnto Noah vnto the arke, the male and the female, as God had tommaunded Hoah.

to And fo it tame to passe after seuen dapes, that the waters of the fiud were

h. vpon the cart) 1 Ju

wherin is the breath of d.

The ple ok the urke.

Cq) That

Y #oah Mourn

be fafe though all the Wozlde perishe.

(t) Sodo prompfe made
Noah more re dy to do gods commiaunde= ment.

() Mot one papze alone, as 5 in the next
Chapter.

Ct) Gop could haue fed al muatulouslyr: but he
Woutde hare mraneg vsed.

(n) The trus and ful obedrence of Moab

Mat.24..d. uk. x vii. f. i. Pet. in. d.
(d) Hoah obeped not in one thing, dut in all that god commaimdrd.

flower to ob
Hops writ.

(t) Ito . dain, so nowe

to Hoah, god cauled all cattell to tome.

* — ä
The flood. Genelis. Nod
N um 10 . e ye wm fo fh 1 ke. 7 8 W 1 nt ii .
CE ei YS GE e UL
0 0 0 4 ayes 1 ö fi "4 4
TNS
ö =e i ( a or iat frre 0 i sa | ari aa
IG}
Le pe
Sy 8 5 1. ; Pf
2 a f= jot pk CE My 40.
= : 1 0 a i it) 2. r = U y ee aye 0 4 e e, eee e, a * 134 oy 1 0 i Zuse. A enn
N pve ta eae Uh e , N W
. J 8 * . N Ag 3 Pay eit 175 Au: 1 7 N OY NN NA "(oy Danae A *
5 ( } Ine 8 . e 8 peutic 15 11 iii 10 te multe

(g) Zn the lattet ende of
Dox, when all ehynges were moste pleafaunt, the this destruction Fam,

ch) God in his punpshment geuech place ot tepentaunce.

C1) This (a

scemeth vncredible to the sense of man.

The hand
. 8 stoped the Waters out of thearke

i

) Mopyseg sh declateth
Oi the god-

pe ig saued. th

en the de-

C 3

u Inthe fire hundreth pere of Noahs lpfe, in the feconde moneth, the seuen-

teene day of p moneth, in the lame day

Were all the fountapnes of the great
Decpe broken bp, and the wyndowes of heauen Were opened. ;

12 And the rayne was bpon the earth

fourtie dayes and fourtie nightes.

Inthe selfe fame day, entred Poah, and Sem, and Ham, and Japheth the sonnes of Noah, and Moats Wyke, and the three Wines of his founes with the into the arke. 40 l
14. They,“ and euery beast after his

Rinde, aud al che cattel after their kinde, pea and euery worme that creepeth vponthe grounde after his kinde, and enc: rpe byrde after his kinde, and euery fleevng aud fethered fonle. 5

15 dine they came vnto Noah into the arke two and two, ot all fleche wherein is the breath of lpfe.

16 Aud they entryng in, came male and female of all fleshe, as God had come maunded hin: and W God shut hym in rounde about, ¥

17 And the fludde tame fourtie dayes Dp: on the earth, and the waters were increased, and bare vp the arke, whiche
Was lyft vp adone the earth.

18 The waters also wared strong, and were encrealed exceedynglp vpon the earth: and so the arke bpper fate of the waters.

19 And the waters preuayled exceeding-

ly bpon the earth, and al the high bites

that are vnder the w whole heauen,

were couered.
20. Fyfteene cubites vpward did the waz

ters preuayle, so that the mountaynes

were couered.

21 And wall flethe pertthen, that moued vpon the earth, in foule, in tattell, in beast, and in euerp wornie that creepeth ape the earth, yea, and euery man

22 So that all that had the beeath of
Ipfe in his noftrittes throughout all that
Was on the dape lande, dped.

23 And euery ubltaunce was destroyed

that remayned and that was in the vpper part of the grounde, both man and

went vpon the

D

m) Ther
Were other particuler kluddes, but this inag baie ucrfatt,

VVildxs

Eccle. xl.

at (s, ch las.

non mane
He? Moples ·

cattell, and Wore, and the foule of the

heauen, they were euen destroyed front

of the earth, ande v Noah onipe remay- * ned aliue, and they that were with him ”

in the arke.
24 Wut the water preuayled vpon the earth, a hundreth and fiftic dayes.

The

woycked .
1. Vetere

Genesis.

J The. viii. Chapter. waters of the generall ouerklowyng do decreate. 4 The arke r t n b te Rauen is tent koorth. s Moah kendeth koorth a rote 10 He 11 7 Hen pi 5
13 Che waters are d2ped. 16 Noah is bydden to go out okthe arke. 18, Be goeth out. 20 He ollereth an acceptable facrifice vnto God. 21 Che Deluge Hall be no moze, The heart of man is eupll.
11 D God w remebred by Moah dyd knowe that the waters
Pic: Noah andenerybealt, Were abated vpon the earth.
1110 Vfand all the cattell that 12 And he avode pet other leuen dayes, C
Was with hym in the and sent foorth the Done, whiche retur-
. arke:and God made? ned not vnto hum any more, fac an 0 Ja wynde to passe vpon 313 And it tame to pale in the sirehundreth genau at the earth, and the wa- and one pere, in p first moneth, the kirlt nn, terstcalled. * [day] of the moneth, the waters were = bann 2 The kountapnes allo of the derpe, and diped vp from the earth, Cand Noah Lee. the windowes of heauen were stopped, remoued the toueryng of the arke, and and the rayne from heauen was re- looked, and beholde, the vpper fate of strapned. ö the grounde was dryed vp. g Ga
3 And the waters from the earth retur- 14 And in the seconde moneth, in the se- ma he ned, Gopng and comnung agayne: and uen and fibentic day ok the moneth ard renvayes two aller the ende ol the hundreth and klil- was the earth Dyed, | ee, fitl) day, the waters were abated, 15 And God spake vnto Noah, saying: W

4 And in the seuen moneth, in the seuenteenth day of moneth, the arke rested bpon the mountaynes ol Armenia.

5 And the waters were goyng and decreating vntyll the tenth moneth: In

the tenth moneth, and in the lirst daß of the fame moneth, were the toppes ol the mountaynes seene.

„ s . dd after the ende of the fourtith day,

* it came to pale that! Moah opened

onc (tap. 150. daͤrtg, that ig, fornwhatwith fircnionethes
“Deb. Ara-
Tat,

the wyndo we ol the arke which he had l

made, poe
7. And he sent foorth a Nauen, whiche

Went out, goyng foorth, and returnyng,

Dntyll the waters were dryed vp vpon

the earth. .:: , „

8 Andagapne he fent foort a Doue from him, that he myght ste yt the waters were abated from the bpper face of the

4 grounde.- Pl ,

And the Doue founde no rest for the sole of her foote, and He returned bnto

him into the arke, for the waters (were) ~

in the vpper kate of the whole earth,
Then he put foorth his hande, k tooke her, and pulled her to hin into the arke.

And he abode pet other leuen dapes, and agapne he seut foorth the Dou out of the arke:

n And the Done came to hym in the enge — CUCHADE, and loc, in her mouth was an a tg Oliue leate that Qe had pluct, wher-

ere rwde
. Vater. t

rer

Is “Go foorth of the arke, thou, and thy wife, thy fonnes, and thy fonnes wines with thee.

17 And bryng foorth with thee euery D beast that is with thee, or all fleshe, both foule and cattell, and euery worme that crepeth bpon the earth, that they may
S breede in the earth, and being loorth nat fruite, and multiplie vpon earth. pn

18 And fo Noah came foozth, and his 2%, sonnes, his wyfe, and his sonnes wiues Ka.
With hym:

19 O€nerp beast also, and every wore, euery foule, and Whatlocuer trepeth bpon the earth after their kyndes,
Went out of the arke.

20 c Aud Noah builded an aulter Lato} . oars
HLopde, and tooke of euerpcleane bealt, daa et and of euery tleane foule, x offred burnt n veneoffering on the aulter nde aneh

21 And the Torde G smelled a [weete Sedan
(or quiet) saudur and the Lord Pfapde ene in his heart: J wyll not hencefoorth © e curse the grounde any moze lo- mans Cet fake , fo2 the imagination of mans“ . heart is euyll ceuers from“ his pouth: Wage een. neyther Wp IJ smyte any moze euery thyng lyuyng, as J haue done. .

22 Bet therefore Mall not sowyng tyme and hatuest, © colde and heate, fone = mer and Wynter, day and nyght, cealle a t all the dayes of the earth. N

brent Of Gods
¶ The

eth nepther in nor out, without gods coms maund ment.

(h) So by the great prom

Denice of God, nothing peryshed in v arke

wzath.

Thie worlde at hig tune shal haue ai ende.

ig promiled to

a) The lawvlc of niariage tepated.

(b) The do- 2

unnson ouer

restoted to ma

5 N 8
Genel: 18. Gods couenaunt,
The. ix Capter. 0

4 oa

title ofthefworde. Che couenaunt of God with Noah that the deluge Halbe no
595 15 6010 Ane am the coucnaunet, the raynebowe in the cloudes. is Che sonnes of Noah, Chanaan. 20foah an hulbandman planteth a vine. 22 He is moched or his lonne beyng ouercome with wyne. 25 Chanaan is cursed. 26,27 Dem and
Japheth be blessed. 29 The peres of Noah.

6 “i, :
10 ZB BS 2 —
A SER 2 LF
1 ä
8 n 3
IU 5 1

4 is — | he 2 * z
BA eee A as ERE

A N r .
Ma ae PK

poy mia ey ee 1

fren Noah, 8 © God spake also vnto Noah, eto his (a) Chet

A1 Pr and bis fonnes,efaide lonnes with hym, aying: a m= tonto them, be fruit Weholde, J, euen J establishe my coz
4 Je and nuultiplie, and unenaunt with pou, and With © pour S
We E repleniche the earth. seede after vou: . "a
ZONE SO Tye keare of you k 10 And with euery lining creature that n [Ihe dreadof vou, halbe is with you, in foule, in cattell, in euery

vpon euery beast of the earth, and vbdon beat of the earth whiche is with vou, tuery foule of the apre, vpon al that nio- ok all that go out of the arke, whatloueth vpon the earth, and vpon all the teuer liuing thyng of the earth it be.

nabe fisbes of the fea, into pour hande are u And my eouenaunt J make with pon, kl uu sexta they e deliuered. that from hentefoorth euery fleche be

Sone cee 3 Eliery thyng that moueth it selfe, and not rooted out with the waters of a
Gena d. that liueth, shall be meate for von, euen fludde, neither shall there be a fluddet

biken 5 And lurely pour blood of pour ipues that is with vou, for euer. 5

 Matxxvic nian fhall his blood be Med, fog in the

Apoc. xui. c

Runte wu) 7 Wilk dtath.

as theꝰ greene hearbe haue J geuẽ vou destroy the earth any niore. N

Leuxviid dll thinges.. 12 And God sayde: this is the O token of ch
Hh 4. Wut ( flesh in the life therok (which is the couenaũt which J make between ane, wache hn peo the blood therof, shall ve not tate. me and pou, and euerp Ipupng creature n

signe.

e, Wp OBMrequivesatthehandeofenery 13 JJ do set mp G bowenthe cloude, and e cher bealt Wyll I require it, aud at the hand it shall be fora token betwweene me and fo of man, at the bande of mans brother the earth. N ene
+ Wyll J require the life ok man. 14. And it shall come to pasle, that when“ Fella
6 Who so! sheddeth mans blood, © by a biyng à cloude bpon the earth, the C mal owe also shalbe seene in p fame claude.
(t) The maz “eRe, he nian. 15 And J wyll thinke vpon my coue-

e fruitefull, and multiplie vou, nannt Whiche is betweene me and you,
2 breede in the earth, and increale there- and enery lining ereature in all fleshe: in. f and it shall no more come to patie, that
. | Waters

cts ae :

all.

fleshe.
16 And the bowe shalbe in the conde,
10 and J wyll loke vpon it, that I may © mr thin bpon the euerlasting couenaunt, ee bet weene god and euery lining creature
5. in all fleche that is vpon the earth.

„

token of the conenaunt which J haue made betweene me and all fleche that is vpon carth.

13 The sonnes of Noahs goyng foorth of the arke, were Sem, Ham, c Japheth:

be, Arlld am is the father of Chanaan.

„ Theld are the three sonnes of Noah, x

„ ok them was the ™ whole earth ouer-

ba spread.

yA 20 Noah allo began to be an“ hulband-

le nian, and planted a vineparde.

21 And he drynkyng ok the wyne, was dronken, and vncouered w within his tent.

22 And ham the father of Chanaan, lee-

Philillines. Che Chanaanites. 22 Che landes were deuided after the deluge.

pele are the generati-

Wons of the fonnes ok

Japheth: and vnto

nd Thogarma.
4 The chil fama
18. Kitthim, and Donammt.
>. {thete were the © Jles of the genkiles deuided in their landes, euery one
< alter his tongue, and alter his kinrede,
4 a att nations,
O° coe chüldzen of ham, Chus: and wis.
) end Hut and Chanaan, 2 ba ND the children of Chus: Seba, and f nD SoS DabtHaly, and Naamah,
5 48 Nhe chudren of Naamah: Seba, and
, dan, Thus allo begat Hümrod. .
The lame began © to be mightie in

„

Qegnesis. vi. waters make a fludde to destroy all his two brethren without. —

17 And God layd vnto Noah, This isthe

dien of Jauan: Elisasæ Thar-

oo

23 And Sem and J bb etgkenga (0) geg it vpon their choul- den dec.

ders and commyng backwarde, conte ileal

red the nakednesse oF their father

namelp their faces beyng turned albap,

puter chould ee their fathers naked-

24 And Boah awoke from his wine and

anewe what his “ pounger lone had e a done vnto him. YOUNG ehad as father fom

cams a mocber

25 And he sapde: curled be Chanaan a eee, seruaunt of sernauntes Ral he be bnto eur his brethren. Tutte toon’

ee K es Ahlesled be the Senso

20 God of Sem, and a be a e e Rasi

27 God chall enlarge Japheth: and ye Feb alte shall dwell in eee Seer
Chanaan shalbe his leruaunt. n= hve

28 Moah liued after © the fludde three eden, hundred and fiftie veres. genes

29 And all the dayes of daß, were nine ove

bp che Patri: vng the nakednelle of his father, tolde hundred and filtie peres, and he dyed, ae tpuco pucplt
The.x. Chapter. me
- Nd,

Che lonnes ol Japheth. 5 Ok what pertons landes were deuided. Che sonnes of
Yam, s Nimroth. 9 prouerbe. 0 Babplon. i Allur, Hintue is buplt. 14 The

fonnes of Sem. Peleg. 32 Ol whom

the earth, for he Was a mightie hunter « She before the Lorde: Whertore it is lapde, ‘ena
€uen as Pimrod the mightic Hunter Heede before the Lode, i : a thon ot
10 The begynuyng of his kingdome was bbc

Babel, and Erech, c Acad, and Calnel „ „wolte. in the lande of Sinar, —

u Outok that lande came Assur, and duit: ‘

Ded Nintue, and the titie Nehoboth, . 0. and Calab 7 ’ 0 af or the

un Relenalfo veeweene nine ¢ehatad, *

and it is a great citie. ;
3 Mbraim begat Tudim, and Aua- e te; mim, and Tehabim, and Hephthutm mre
14. Pathrulim atfo and Calluhim (ont of Wenner
Whom came Philisthtun) r Capthoem. C
15 Chanaan begat Son his firstborne s-

sonne, and o Heth, , ae
16 And Hebuli, and Emori, and Girgasi, «cee:

. 90 99 The se-
17 And Him allo, and Arkt, and Sim. eee

18 And Aruadi, and Semari,and Hama- „ge.
(hi: and alter warde were the kinredes terwaroety ofthe Chanaanites spread abrode. n

is The border of the Chauaanites was 3 from Sidon as thou commest to Gerar

vnto Azah, and as thou goest vnto
Sodoma,,

Noah.

10 Tor p viel.
Gng promised to Sem, tes

fied but in the farnitte of It-

ber.
1.Chro.i.¢.

CBYEheles uentie interpreters adde here Camam.
Oo cber a preac her, gaue his sonne his name ok the dtutsion ot tongues.

Or, Phaleg.

* W 1 901 3
(b) fatmroD ond his posteritie, nuading other mens pollessions.

60 Hebre, man said to his neighur.
(e) Though they wanted ntcessarie stuffe. pet they would go sozwarde with great papneg.
(d) Here nppearceh thete

_ woufutl pride,

ambition, and tonterpt of
— 4J.

wicked, steme verp hat de to

tzhgrowen.

(h) An argunieht of the three pet sons in one God-

cad.

(t) Hon mo
¢afclp ouerthroweth the practice of

He wicktd.

Sodonia and Gomorra, and Adama, and Seboim, euen vnto Leta. l
20 Theste are the chudren of Ham intheir hkinredes, in their tongues, countreys, gan in their nations.

D 21 Unto Sem alld the father of all the

chlldren of Heber, and elder brother of
« FYapheth,there were chpldzer bone.
22 The chyldzen of Sem: Clam, and
Allur, Arphaxad and Lud, and Aram.
23 The chyldren ol Aram: Us, and Hul,
SGether, and Mas.

24 Arpharad begat Selah, and Selah ch pegat Heber. ;

‘25 Unto Heber allo were borne two bonnes: the name ok the one was Peleg, for in his dapes was the earth deuided, and his bothers name was

The. xj. Chapter.

One language in the workde. z Che towre Babel is buylt. 7 Che misterie of the
9 Babel. io The age ok Sem, Arphaxad.

trinitie. 8 The confulion of tongues.
2 Selah, Heber. 16 Peleg.

e all the whole n carth © was of one.
N yy) language and lyke
Ilpeache. —

. And when they went foorth from the

— — aastt, thep founde a playne in the lande of Sinar, and there they abode.

And“ one vs prepare © brpcke, and burne them in the fire. And they had brpcke Foz ee slyme had they in steade of morter. |

4 And they lapd: Go to, let vs buylde bs

A titie and à towre, © whose toppe max

reache vnto heauen, and let vs make vs a name, let peraduenture we be stattered abrode into the vpper face of the
Whole earth.

But the Lorde came downe to lee the eitie and towre whiche the chyldren ok men buplded.

And the Lorde sapd: Beholde, © the people is one, and they haue all one language, and this they begin to do: neither is there any let to them krom all those thinges Whiche they haue imagined to do.

7 Conie on, let vs go downe, and there

Ytonkounde their language, that eue-

A

Genesis.

~~ from that place into the vpper kate of gad

layd to another: Cone, let

Jactan. f 8
26 Hactan begat Almodad, and Saleph, >
Hazarmaueth, and Jerah, 5
27 And Hadoram, and Casal, and Ditla, “
28 Obal allo, and Abimael, and Seba,
29 And Ophir, and Hauilah and Jobab, all thele were the chyldren of Jattan.
30 And their dwelling was from Mela,
10 on goest vnto Sapher, a mount ot e tast. ‘ zi Thele are the chyldren ol Sem alter their kinredes and tongues, in their. landes and nations. a
31 And lo thele are the kinredes of the chplozen of Poah alter their gentrations in their peoples: and of these were the nations deuided in the earth after. the flood. 4

rye one perceaue not his neighbours 45 speache.
8 And fo the TLorde c stattered them oe

nagt blen
In also dines

all the earth, and they lekt of to buplde aan that citie, eme

9 And therkore isthe name of it called g
Wabel, betause the Lord dyd there ton- ans founde the language of all the earth: a and from thence dyd the Lorde lcatter “ pa abode vpon the face of alt the earth.

A
10 6[*Xbele are the ™ generations Of ch are

the flood. «poo u And Sem lined after he begat Ate" pharad kiue hundreth peres, and begat, a8 fonnes and daughters. a, steal
12 Arpharad itued fine and thirtie pores. siains

and begat Selah. | a

1; And Arpharad lined after he begat

Selah, loure hundreth and three yore: . and begat sonnes and daughters. ‘ den liued thirtie veres, and begat « er. y
15 And Selah liued after he begat H.. ber,foure hundreth and three peres, and begat sonnes and daughters. ‘
16 And Heber lined thirtie and four’ peres, and begat Peleg. ;

17 And

bram.

ane And o Heber liued after he begat pe-
. leg, foure hundreth and thirtie veres:
. and begat sonnes and daughters.

gat Ren :
Chro. d. 19 and cles lpued after he begat
KReu two Hundzeth and nyne peres:
ànd begat sonnes and daughters.

20 And Keu liued two and thirtie peres, and begat Serug.

21 And Veu lpued after he begat Se-

rug two hundreth and seuen peres:

and begat sonnes and daughters.

22 And Serug liued thirtte pere, atid begat Machoz.

23 And Serug liued after he begat Na-

chor, two hundreth peres: and begat.

sonnes and daughters.
6124. And Pachor syued nyne and twentie
;peres, and begat Tarah.

25 And Machor liued after he begat Ta-

rah an hundzeth and nineteene peres:

Genelis.

27. These aret

La

he generations of Tarah:
Larah begat 0 Abram, h Ca) Yoraham
Haran: Haron begat Lot, When pitas
28 And Paran dyed m the peefence of his rene. father Laval), in the lande of his nat -
Uitte, euen in Ur of the Chaldees.
29 Abian € Machor toke them Wines: the name of Abrams Wifel was] Sarai. cer andthe name of Machors wyfe, Was] mes»
Milcha, the daughter of Haran, the father of Dilcha, k the latherok Jicha. z=
30 ne Sarai was © baren, and had no Kd
„ 0 3 IYdr un to zi And Tarah toke Abzan his sonne, Keser and Lot the fonne of Haran his sonnes „en d sonne, and Sarat his daughter in lawe t,o. his lonne Abrams wple, and they de- Nee parted together from Ur of the Chal- enn, dees, that they myaht ' go into the land rege of Chanaan: and they came vnto ae sg ran, ann dwelt there. .
3 And the dapes of Tarah, were two Nebe. eb.

and begat sonnes and daughters. a e and fiue peres, and Tarah oie Aa dan, (26 Tarah liued seuentie veres and be- ed in Haran. chan.
Hain, gat Abram, Nacho, and Haran. . Herne itt borne a ’ : a
Bhs J The xij. Chapter. a

vnto him agapne.

CFF [PD © the Lod had er fapde vnto Abram:“
I get thee ont of thy toũtrey, and ont of thy naz tion, and from thy fa thers house, vnto a lande that J wyll

shew

ple, aud wyll blesse thee, and make thy

bie great, that thou shalt be seuenj a ng.

3 JJ Will also blesse them that bietle

thee, and curfe thé that turleth thee :
_ - andin thee thal all kinredes of the earth be blessed.

4 And fo Abram o departed, euen as che Lore had spoken vnto hym, and
Lot went with hum: and Abzam was leuentie and fluc yeres old when he de-
) Parecd out of Haran, 7 e nd Abram © toke Sarat His wyle, yee = AND Lot his brothers sonne, & all their

ubstaunte that they had in polleslion,

Che

leg of 5 urch, God
Pi outer:

2 And J will make of thee a great peo-

Abram is bydden to go out ol his countrey. 3 Chute. 4 Abram goeth out. / The lande of Chauaan is promised him. Che olde testament. io To auoyde kamine, he delcendeth in to Egypt. 14 His wife is with violence caried away into the Houle of Pharao. 17 Pharao is lmytten of God, lor the carping awap ol Abrams wyke. w Abrams wyke is rendered

(A) de mea-

and the“ soules that they had begot- net e

ten in Haran, and they departed, that ache

they might tome into the lande ol Chae don

naan: and into the lande of Chanaan

they came. 5 — oj

6 Ahan passed through the lande, e

among tht

was then in the lande. b this lande: And there W buylded he an nen

vnto the place of “ Sichem, vnto the rong late, plalne of Mozch. And the Changanite sons et a „ Hebze.
And the Lorde appearyng vnto 2. Spree 155 bram, fayd, Unto thy feede wyl J gene „. is thankefull

aulter vnto the Lode whiche appea- een 9h red vnto hyni. pate) et

3 And remouyng thence vnto a moun- gur. tayne that was eastwarde from We- G thel, he pitched his tent, hauyng“ Be- Fc thel on the weft lyde, k Hal on the cast: sere atic and there he buyldyng an aulter vnto „ be the Lorde, dyd W call vpon the name of Sonam 292 the Lode. — Gun b

9 And Abram toke his iournep, gos deren pug and fourneping towarde the trou. south. - a

Genelis.

aud the woman was taken into Pha-

16 Aud c he entreated Abram well for her fake: and he had sheepe and oxen,

and he alles, menfernauntes, æ mapdeseruauntes, the alles and camelles.
Wut the D Lorde plagued Pharao

and his Houle with great plaques, be-

càuse of Sarai Abrams wpfe. N

18. And Pharao catlyng Abram, sapde: why halk thou done this vnto nie-

19 Why diddest thou not tel me, that she
Was thy wyfe: why saydest thor, che is mp sister: and fo J might haue taken her to be my Wyler Nowe therfore be-

A bran,

(v) Pz are ini thein that fa. 5

tilfie then or fectiong, . |

fame

(t
Dhar oe

innocent toy,

holde, there is thy wpft, take her, and ge

go thy way.

20 And Pharao © gaue his men commaundement concerning him:and they tonuaped him foorth, and his wpfe, and

all that he had.

Captef?;

1 Ibram goeth out of Egypt. Lot and Abram ryche men. 8 Abram deuideth the lande wich his brother Lot. 12 Lot dwelleth in Sodome, and Abram in Chanaan. ; Che Sos domites. 14 he lande ol Chanaan is promiled agayne vnto Abram. 13 He buyldeth an

“A bram,
Qe 10 l And the there was” a famine in that
Nang fat. lande, and therfore went Abram downe into Egypt, that he myght fofourne there, kor there was a grecuons famine in the laude. n Aud When he was come neare to enter into Egypt, he sapde vnto Sarai his
Wife: beholde, J knowe that thou art a cm) 28 faye woman to loke vpon: evens thot 12 Therkore Mall it come to passe, that he woe. when the Eqyptians see thee, they shall fay, she is his wyfe, and they wyll Kyll me, but they wyll laue thee aliue:
Get, I Sap Zl pray thee, that thou art my mene, lilter, that Pmayp fare Well for thy fake,
Peine Aid that my soule may line through thy of od. occasion. —
14. And so when Abram was come into
Egypt, the Egyptiaus behelde the woman, for she Was very fap ee.
(Theor 15 The (o printes allo of Pharao sawe
Bae her, and cömended her before Pharas,
— ¢ The. xiij bes aulter vnto the Lorde. K
A SEA Adify Abram © gat cp pare JOC) d | bpm vp out of Egypt,
. en Har bis Wife, an a
Nun en 22 “aah Hat he had, and ot ae ee ee LA g with hym toward the callpng. se AZ . |Sonth..... 2 epee. 2, MUD Abiam was“ bee
Mien r ry ryche in tattell, in filucr and in golde.
Oden.

frou the south towarde Wethel, vnto

— the plate where his tent had ben at the
8 begypnnyng, betwene wethel and pat:

eon 4. Euen W pnto the place of the aulter-

When cher Whjiche he had made there at the kirst,
Wods gra. And there Abram called on the name
Gare okthe Morde. n
Heede 5 Tot also whiche went with Avant, . ds trugen. had sheepe, cattell, and tentes. see 6 Anderthe lande was uot able to beare derte g the in, that they might dwell together:
5 by for theyrꝰ substaunte was great, so that
@ ta they coulde not © dwelltogether.

bur em. 7 And there fell a stryfe betwene © the

heardmen of Abranis cattell, and the heardmenok Lottes tattell:Moreoner, the Chanaanites, and Pherisites dwel-

3 Aud he went foorth on his tourney, |

led at that tyme in the lande.

8 Then sapde © Abram vnto Tot: let there be no strike J pray thee betweene thee and me, and betweene my heardmen and thyne, for we ™ be brethren.

9 Is not the whole lande before thee-

J wyll go to the ryght: or pF thou de-
2 a the ryght hande, J wyll go to he le a

10 And fo Lot lpftyng vp his eyes, bez
Helde all the countrey of Jordane, whiche was well watred euery where

befoze the Lorde destroyed Sodomie

and Gomorrh, euen as the garden of the Lede, lyke the lande of Egypt as thon commest vnto Soar.

1 Then Lot“ chole all the playne of
Jordane, and toke his tourney from che east, and fo departed the onelbrother] from the other.

1 Abram dwelled in the lande of Chanaan, and Lot abode in the cities of the playne, and pitched his tent vntill So-

Donte,
3 But

Seperate thy selle JF pray thee from en me: yk thou wilt tale thelefthande,© §

ample ro pacifethr that are fallen

gapnst
1 0}; play N
Tot dez

b
5 very MF conlidtrall

32 @4

Genef, 15.

1 as the dust man can number the dust okthe earth, then call thy a

(n) Thou
Abraham 920

alter the length ofit, aftert ; ieee of tt: for J wyllgeuclt bnte oo 15 5

18 Then Abram taking downe his tent, Eis one came and dwelled in the playne “of hen ="
Mamre, which is in Hebron, st buzalded 1 there an auster vnto the Tode.

Sp The. xiii Chapter

Warre is made hpon the Sovomites and Amaleciteg, and others. 12 Sodome is faciied. 13 Che captiuitie of Lot is chewen to Abram, 15 Abram deltuereth Lot. 18
Melchiledech meeteth Abram hym lelle, to whom Abram ym selle geueth the tenth of his goodes. Abram refulech to take the pillage. 5

ND it came to passe in the
78 0 dayes of Amraphel kyng ot Simnar, Arioch kyng ok Elafar, Chodozlaonter
ö kyng of Elam, and Thi-

Anne Dal kyng of the nations: eu, 2 (Thele e) made warre with Wera kyng mot ok Sodome, and with Birla kyng of

, Somberhe, and with Sinab kyng of

Adna, and with Semeber kyng of Seool, and with he kyng of Wela, the same is Soar, 9

All these were iayned together in the bale of DidviNy, where (Nowe) the falt feats, weer

4 Foz twelne yere w were they subiecte to kyng Chodorlaomer, and in the thirteenth yere rebelled.

And iinthe fourteenth yere tame Chodozlaomer and the kynges that were
With hym, and {mote the “ Glauntes in
Alftavoth-carnatin , and the Lufimes

in Ham, andthe Emims in the playne of Cariathaun,
And the Horites in their mount Deie,

vnto the playne of Paran Which bordereth vpon the wyldernelle.

W 7 Andthey returnyng, tame to En nil-

pat which is Cades, and smote all the cuntrey of the Amalecites, and allo ctharmrortes that dwelt in Paseson-

And there went out the kyng ok Sob ane, and the kyng of Gomorrhe, and bocnrngot Adna, and the kyng ok Sedul, and the kyng ok Wela, whiche is

d Though olaomer

Soar.

And e they ioyned battell with them iu the bale of Siddim: that is to faye,
With Chodorlaomer the kyng of Elam, and with Thidal kyng ok nations, and
With Amraphel kyng of Dinar, and with Arioch kyng of Elalar, foure kynges agaynst © fyue. oe

10 And the vale of Siddim was full of e llyme pyttes: and © the kynges of So: f dome and Gomorrhe fledde, and fell 10

(e) hep myght haue fought mieanes of reconciliatton, by eigene ie neighbouts. 55

nninber tere andthey that remapned, fedde to ae mountayne. ele

1 And they takyng all the goodes of toner ses.
Dodonie and Gomiorrhe, and all their vittaples, went their wap.

12 And they carped awaye G Lot also () The goo
Albans brothers fonne, €his goodes, Bees of the
(for he dwelled in Sodome) and de- geren. parted, g moh 8

13 And there tame one that had estaped, E and tolde Abram the Hebrewe, whiche
OWelled in the plapne of Mamre the
Amorite, brother ot Eschol, and brother

of Auer, whiche were © confederate © nge with Abram. de

14 When Abram hearde thathis bother poem war was taken, he armed his erercised von gige lseruauntes! Whiche were borne in his Suse owne house, three hundreth tt eyghteen, an and folowed outhem vntyll Dan. e

Ig And he and his leruauntes Were parted [ itt companies] agaynst the by nyght, and finote them, and pursued them vnto Hoba, which lyeth on the left hand

of Daunascus. nf Wem

J
Melchifedecn.

see. 16 AND’ reeouered ali the goobes, and
Troma also brought agayne his brother Lot, & dees of is goodes the Wonne allo, æ the people.
17 After that he returned agayue from

the laughter of Chodonaonmer- aud of

the kynges that were with hym, came

the kyng of Sodome foorth to mieete

hym in the valey Sauch, which is the
2. Sam. 18 c. Rynges dale. :
Hebrevica. 18 And * elchiledech kyng of Salem cn The vi hrought foorth breade and wine: e he

bamsormic 19 Add blelled hym, laying: Wlessed be andasape Abram vnto the hygh God pollessour

ham.

1 God is protectour and hi

Genelis.

hande : and Abram ( gaue him tithes of all.

And the kyng of Sovome fayde vnto &

Abram: © geue me the soules, and take the goodes to thy lelft.

22 And Abram aunlwered the kyng of

Sodome: Jhaue tpft vp my hande

vnto the Lord the bye God, pofleffour ™
„ . eer 4

of heauen and earth,
That J wyll not thyne fo muthe as a threede or shoe lat: chet, left thou shouldest faye, J haue made Abram rypche:

@ Saue onlpe that which the voung men haue eaten, and the portions of the

men which went with Aner, Elchol, x in

Mamre, which shal take their portiõs.

re ot Abram. 4 J forme is promiled Abram, Jtahac. 6Abram

iuste by kapth. The lande of Chanaan is promiled Abram the thirde tyme. 3 The bon · dage and delyueraunce of the chridren of Ffract is koretolde.

e Fter these thynges- the

he tas ANON? wore of the Tode came se, SENS wnt ee “bon,
Gere wee 92 aping:© feare not Abram
Seen, AS AS gram thy chielde land thy cue exceedyng ; great relbarde, ch ber 2 And Abram fapde : Lorde God what
Ae Wylt thon geue me when J go chyldespear lelle, the chylde of the ftewardtip of ie my houle is this Eleazer of Damatto z
1 %. And Abram aide: See, © come thou

ee Halk genen vo feede : 10 home) in ine of Gone ve Houle is mpne heire.
4 And beholde, the wozde of the Lorde

promised teed: therfore Aba

a me cane vnto hym, faping, be shall not be bene s thine heire: but one that shall come out ok thine own bowels chalbe thine heire.
Renn b. 5 And he brought hyniout, and fayde: * gehen Wloke vp vnto heauen- and tell the baden, tarres, f thou be able to number them. bal en o. And he lapde vnto hym: enen fo chall thy seede be.
Remi 6 And [Abram beleucd the Lord, that heren: counted he to homo fo? rightedusmnesle. putatton. And agayne he laide vnto him: Jam
00 See the Tode that” brought thee out of fleece: * A vof the Chaldecs, to geue thee this go ksoaroe lande, x that thou myghtest mberite it. a, „ 8 And be fayde : Lode God Wherby
Genxid chall knoe that J Malt inberite tt: e? He Aunhwered vntd hym: Lake an ga —evferofthceyercolde, a (he Goate
Dee of three vere olde, and a thret pere olde
9 Nanume, a turtle Douc allo, Ea poung

Pigeon.

Io He toke therefore all thelse vnto hym,

u And when the foules fell on the carua- E

and o deuided them inthe nuddes, and layde euery peece one ouer agaynst another: but the birdes deuded he not.

ses, Abram droue them away.

r And wheẽ the funne was downe, there

fell a deepe sleepe vpon Abram: and lo, an horrour of great darknesse fell por

hym.
And he sapde vnto Abram: * Rnowe chis ofa suertie, that thy seede shalbe a straunger in a lande that is not theirs, and Chali lerue them, and they hall entreate them eupll peres,
But the nation whom they Mall serue

Wyil Judge: and afterward chall they g?

tonie out With great substaunce.

And thou shalt go to thy fathers in 5

peate, and shalt be buried in a good olde age. i i

16 Wut in the fourth generation they hal

17 And so it was, that when the

come hyther agayne: for the © wickednesse of the Amorites is not pet full.

sonne
Went dowue, and it was twylpaht, be holde a finokpug furnesse and a“ fire brande goyng betweene the laid peeces.

18 In that same day the Lorde made a

tonenannt with Abram, saping: vnto thy seede haue J geuen this lande, *f0 the ryuer of Egypt, euen wake the

(A) Sed apdeth his word to th former sacram eig (o) far

Ahinocozues, Mbich oeainery E gppiirom ao nic fine

take of all that is

© foure hundreth 115

A bram.

Hebr vib n) ae cette

Couctowinede, | |

) One tide talihe shondt ot be burt:

to othn z.

0 Chisde:

an oldt maner ininakpngof
Yeogats amdg

A ctes. vb. tn che

not thile pe res un e cobs gos f

D

t ü cht

Gen. xub ;
Peot us

ine. che of

ram. SGegnelis. | . =
Vibe great ryuer, the ryuer of Euphrates. and the“ Giauntes,

aa. 19 The Henites and the Kentzites, and 21 The Amorttes allo, and the Thann ae
Deantye Heth anites, and Girgalites, ethe Jebulites.
20 And the Hethites, and the Perizites, 7 4

a dero q The. XVI. Chapter.
1 Sara piouldetg Her hande mapden tor her dutbande. 4 Dagar conceaueth and tcor> pF e Jana walt from Sara. 9 An angel comkorteth her. 12 nohat maner
I Aral Abeams Wwyfe 3 And he said: Hagar © Sarats mayne, © Sr e
AV Ss BN a 8 2 3 C> sutatccuri
(( bare hym © no chrl- whente camest thou- and whither wylt i on
SEP Pen: but che hada” —_ thou go: hefayde:F flee feo the fate e
75 a wage e 8 19 0 Sarai. 2 7 nan, ame, 9 Andthe angell of the Lorde layde vn-
Ne n 5 bn to her: © Returne to thy ultresfe a: ‘eine ute
5 E apne, and submit t ¢ not to make nowe the Lome path retteapnen mie. haldes. eie vnder her fie

that tan not beare I pray thee gon 10 And agayne the angellorthe Loy p Sen

nisterg ehat

ron to np mapde it mapbe chat J map be (apde buto her: J Wil numtiplie thy Feth. n., Duilded by her : and Abzamobexede? seede in luch mutter che nog be ons per

the voyte of Sarat, bred for multitude, a
And Sarat Abrams wyfe toke Hae 11 And the Lordes angel fat vnto her: gar her mayde the Egyptian, after j- Set, thou art with chylde, and {halt bram hadde dwelled ten yeres in the beare a lonne, and chalt tal his name That lande ok Chauaan, and gaue her to her Jlingel:because the Lorde hath hearde is, ste Lord gee be 8 be 15 wple. 0 thy tribulation. 9 * nd he went in vnto Hagar, and che 12 He allo Wyll be a wylde man and his D conceaued. And when she sawe that she hande aby be 3 5 B 5 e
Hadconceancd, her mistrelse was del- Veuerp mans hande again hym: and hte piled m her eyes. 7 he shall dwell m the prelente of all his FES.

Hrdoghtnarie

meso 5 And Sarai fayde vnto Abzam: petzen. pl tha cane

ed bx
God.

there is wrong done vnto me bythee: 13 And the called the name of ot Aer haue geuen my mapde into thy bo- ö that tbat vnto om Thon ien mieten. ote, whiche seyng that she hath ton- on me: for che layde, © haue JJ not allo cei her teaued, Jam defpifed in her eyes, heare loked after hym that leech mee: nen the Lorde be iudge betweene thee e me. 14. *vaberforep well was called the well sg
6 aut brant sayde to Sarai: be- okhym that lyueth and seeth me: and it Wera one holde D thvmapde is in thy hande, do ts e betweene Cades and Bared. weden with her as it plealeth thee, And when 15 And Hagar bare Abranafoune, and Gn
Sarai dealt hardly with her, che fledde Abani called his lonnes name which (in) be at from the kate of her. Hagar bare vnto hym, Plinael. eee
7 “see 55 eee 16 And en Was forte froreand fire 101 tbe p wildernes, leuen eres olde, when Hagar bare Isnin- rosemre.as by the well that is in the way to Sur, ben, 3 e J a

005 hab forme hope ee q The. xvij. Chapter. ot hig cuts
5 Hbpate 18 named Abraham, 7 Chanaan is promtted puto Ab: e kylth tyme, 4
? Citcumcition a token of the touenaunt. 15 Sarai is named ene were 8 miled agapne onto abraham. 13 Lbzaham prayeth for Samael. 20 Jlmael isbleticr, ee
2 Abraham circumciseth hym felfe, Jlmael, and his housholde feruauntes. ü „
N Hen Abram was nine- 3 And Abram fellon his face, & God Chen.

Atie pere olde aud nine, talked Withbym,faping: — Fu h ithe Lorde appearedto 4. Jtis J, behold my couenaiit lis with eae fe,

0 hm, and layde vn- the, and thou shalt be a father ofrmanp disown: on:
MA Heo hym: J am the ae © nations. Co) feat ot ee“ mightic God, wake 5 Melther {hall thy name any more be gere before me, and be thou perfect. called Abam, but thy name fhalbe cal- abe

Bim, 2 Aud J wyll make my conenauntbe: led Abraham: oza father of many na aa

tweene me andthee, and wyll multiplie tions haue J made thee. Rom. uu. . the erterdynglp. 5 . ‘ 4 BI J wyll 7

n. (sti Genes ,

Abram, Ifmael,

ee ee —
O Me 6 JJ Wyll make thee erteedyng krutte- and the thalbe (amotier) of nations, pea pase 15 255 wyll make nations of thee, vea F kynges of people shall sprynge of her. 5
Sede dern And kynges (hall spryng out of thee. 17 Wut Abraham fell vppon his face, cn SM
Rane er 26 2 f; , a ? „ metz anp: reer 7 Moreouer J wyll make mp coue- and Laughed, and lapde in his heart: aan fayuns. naunt betweenẽ me andthte, e thyscede chall a chylde be borne vnto hym that is en
Lell älter thee, in thetr generations, bp an? an hundreth pere olde: And chall Sara dhl... —euerlalting couenaüt, J may dec od that is ninetie pere olde beare-
Cerdan buto the, and to thy lecde after ther, 18 And Abrahamlapde vnta God: 0 a punt mesg And J wyll geut bnto thee and to thy that Ilniael myght lyue in thy lyght. ar en ann ee ler de after thee,the lande Saag yo 19 cello ene aa gh e bebe mend: Art a straũgerseuen] al the lande of Cha- une in deede, e thou eren boeetert: naaan, for an euerlastyng pollession, and chalt call his name Jlahat: and J wyi x ne „5 Wyrll be their“ God. establiche my coucnannt with hym got
(c) hene. g And God laid agayne vnto Abraham: kor an euerlastyng couenaunt and) With mantis imeem” thou shalt kepe np touenaunt therfore, bis seede after hm. but ke. seen’. both thou d thy leede after thee in their 20 a as deche ee Spo ae ok this leit. entrations. haue hearde thee: for I haue © blessed 2.2
| 10 This is my couenaunt which ve chall him, and wyll make him fruttekull, and i pone kepe betweent me c vou, and thy {ede wyl multiplie him ercedingly : Twelue agent. after ther euere n amoug A 1 pa bn Wilt make dat vou halbe circun ° * DD ecu IL Be chal cirtumcile the fleshe ofpour 21 Wut np couenaunt wyl J make with ae foreskyn, and it halbe ab tokenoftheto- Ilahat whiche Hara shall beare vnto ,
0 Pod che. Ucnaunt betwtirt me and pou. thee, cuen ' this tyme twelne moneth. . debe ne 12 And euery man chylde of eyght dayes 22 And he left of talkyng with hym, dane chat is bert - lde shalbe tircuniciled amongu you in and departed vp from Abraham. cha hv ten ok man: ) ; . inen pour 99 7 7 0 be ee 91 th 23 etnias Wer i 0 ulus 0, Bt come ofthe in thy houle, as he that is bought and {uch as were borne in his houle, c al nf ba ae eal of any straunger, whiche is not 12 was f A wie cen
Manes bkthy {ecde. as Were men chyldren, whiche Were a- de ge e ou 13 Ohe that is borne in thy houle, and he mongst the men ol Abrahams houle, ¢ 1 5 bald oe allo that is bought with money, mult | hben: untedes be tirtumtcised: t mychconenaüt euen in the felfe same dap, as God Had mematmance halbe in pour fleshe for an euerlastyng en 9 ot ; Ane tek.“ eguenaunt, 24 Abraham allo hym selfe was nine
14 And the vntircumcised manchylde, in
Whole fleshe the loreskyn is not tirtum- his korelskynne was tirtumciled.
@ Greone HED, O that soule chalbe eut of fromhis 25 Wenge his sonne was thirtit pere old
Gods fac: people, betaule he hath broken my toue- w not be ertas naunt.

Bet SOS 15 And God lapde vnto Abraham: 0 26 The lelke fame day was co Abraham Ge, enn den Sarai thy wyke chalt thou not call Sa- tirtumcised and Ilmael his fonne. neee acm en ral, but Sara Wall her name be.

Presto 16 And J wyll blelle her, and geue thee
Bimal, afonne ok her: pea, J wyn blelle her, straungers were civcunretfed with him.
— The. xviij. Chapter f

A1 8
Heb.xiii.b.

Yee MD the Lorde' appeared loc, co thrce men stoode by hym: Aud sess"
N onto hyminthe playneof when he sawe them, he ranne to meete dae
Yeo ance, and he late in them krom the tent dooze,and © bowed ae
BA his tent doore in the heate hym lelle towarde the grounde, pat here
RBS

Koo ofthe Day. 3 And layde: Wozde, pf J haue nowe | ho
'* And he lilt vp his eyes and loked, and kounde fauour in thy fight, © patie 15 et
| ie

(a) In exam-

ple of erue 8 holpitautie. .

Abraham.

not away J praye thee from thy fernaunt.

4 © PLetatitle water, J pray you, be fet, and washe pour feete, and rekreche pour selues vnder the tree.

5 And J wyll fet a morsell of bread to comtort pou heartes withall, and then shall pou go pour wapes: © for euen therekore are ve come to pour seruaunt.
And they fapde : do euen so as thon hatt

6 Tokens
Niruc holei-
Aut.

apde.
. 6 And Y Abraham went apace into the tent vnto Sara, sayde: Make redy at ae, one three peckes or fine meale, kncade n fit and make takes vpon the hearth, rege 7 And Abraham runnyng vnto his woe beats, feta‘? calfe tender and good, ble. and gaue it bnto apoung man, and he hasted to make it redy at onte.
8 And he toke butter and mylke, and the dcalke which he had prepared, and set it before them, and stoode hym selfe by pe them vnder the tree: €™ they dyd cate, ment 9 And they sapde vnto hym: where is
Sava thy wife: e aunlwered, behold, in the tent.
Cen. xv e. 10 And he sayde: 37 Wyil certaynely vez rm, turne vnto thee O according to the tune age bk lpfe: and lo, Sara thy wyfe Tall eine halie à sonne. That heard Sara in the tent doore, which was behynde hym.

I Abraham and Sara were both olde, and well stryken in age: and it ceassed do be with Sara after the maner as it is with women. 1

ume I Therefore Sara c laughed within

Bran. her selle, saping: Nowe J am waxed
Hide shal J geue my selfe to lust, and my
TLorde olde also-

fuse
¢

) Hou

Its naturalip: n her conn= fcneie 19 to be

pied.
Peter. ui. b.

N Debye,
Aydden,

loked toward Sodome: and Abraham
Went with them to bryng them on the

0) I tox v. /
185 17 Andthe Lorde fayde : thal J hyde from Abzaham that thing which JJ do,
Deyng that Abraham (hall furely be
à great and a mpghtie nation, and all

elan. 1

Genelis.

the nations of the earth shalbe blesled

in hym-

19 J knowethis also, that he wyll comniaunde his chyldren and his houleholde after him, that they kepe the Way of the Lord, and to do tuftice and indgement, that the Lorde may bryng bppon
Abrahã that he bath spoken puto hun.

20 And the lorde faide: W hetause the trye ok Sodome and Gomoirhe is great

and betaule their inne is exceding gree-

uous:
21 J Wyil go downe nowe, andiee whe-

ther they haue done altogether accor- &

dyng to that crye whiche is come vnto nie: and yf not, J wyll knowe.

22 And the nien departed thence, z went

to Sodomeward: but Abrahamstodde

pet before the Lorde.

And Abraham drewe neare, and laid:
Wylt thou alfo destroye the righteons
With the wicked:

24. Ifthere be “° fiftie ryghteous within the citie, wylt thou destroye and not
{pare the place for the fake of fiftie ryghteous that are therein:

25 That be farre from thee that thou shouldest do after this maner, and llaye

x

(p) Fothers ‘
Ought to teach

their chyldien

thsiudgementeg uf Gan,

(q) Sod han

of our ünnes tompell hym to vengr aan:

Oz, peraduenture.

CC) Abzzham wisheth not

y wicked ta be vnpuniched: but the Godly to be delturred ont ot this vtter destructid.

the ryghteous with the wicked, x that

the ryghteous should be as the wicked,

that be farve from thee: Shall not the

iudge ofall the worlde do accordpng to t:

ryght-
26 And the Lode sayde: If J fynde in
Sodome fiftie ryghicous within the es

Rom, iii.

tie, J Wl fave all the plate fo their Gores

fakes.
27 And Abraham aunlweryng, sayde:

W beholde J haue taken vppon moto!

speake vnto the Lorde, whiche am but dlist and alshes.

28 If there shall lacke fine of fiftie ryghteous, Wylt thou destroy all the citie for

Lacke] of fiue: And he laide: It IJ fynde

9 fourtie and fiue J wyl not destroy

them.

29 And he proteaded to speake vnto hym

àgayne, and sayde: What pf there (hall be fourtie founde there: He aunswered:
I wyll not do it for fourties fake.

30 He sayde vnto hym agayne: O let not my lord be angry that H speake: What yf there shall thirtie be founde there-
And 15 1 J wyll do nothyng yf FB fynde thirtie there.

31 be sayde agayne: O fee J haue taken vppon me to speake noive allo vnto

25 uy my

godly haue of their neighbours.

ss Genelis.

ee nn HOT ET de

my Hom : What ifthere shalbe twentle founde there? Pe aunkwered, J wyll not destroy them) for twenties lake.

, 32 And he sayde: O let not my Lorde be

angry, and J wyll speake vet but this es one: Phat it coten shalbe found therenot condemne N dae. C The. xix. erp coztupt.

Che hofpitatitie of Lot, lust of the Sodomites. 14

20 Lot conkesseth the 8
26 The wyfe of Lot is turned in

38 Ammon.

a
N 1
| foe

2 SSI
N N

ah

OUT us r i

8 W
A 24

A1 7

e
D ing (them) role bp to mecte them, and he bowed hym selke with his face towarde the grounde.

And he layde: Oh my Tordes, turne in FH praye pou, into pour fernauntes
Houle, and tary all nyght, and* wache pour feete, and pe shall ryse vp early to go in your wayes. Whiche sayde, nay: but we wyll byde in the streates all nyght.

And he prealled vpon them exceedinglye: and they returnpug in vnto hym, entred into his houfe, the made them a feast, and did bake vnleuened bread, and they did eate. ö

4 And bekore they went to rest, the men

(a) The godlyt scke ottafion to byng foozth the frnites of fayth.

(b) Mospita-
Utie commendeb.

Gen. xvii. a

WN

receaupng angels. 5
God delpuereth Lot from the Sodomites, whom he koretelleth. Lot is laughed to scorne ol his lonnes in lawe. 16 God compels leth Lot hym selke to go out. 13 The towne Segor is faucd by the prayers of Lot. mercie of God. 24 The destruction of Sodome and Gomorrbe. to a stone ot falt. 29402 Abraham Lot is delpuered.
30 Lot goeth out ot Segor. 3 The incest of Lot with his daughters. 37 Moab.

e 5 oh
G yp!

th — 5 Y 1
Su ö Ne fn 2
{ r a4 t 22 N
1 te r 0 i‘
N tts — Ni y
H

„
U

He aunswered, J wil not destroylthem] for tennes sake.

33 And the Lorde went his way assoone as he had left tonununpng with Abraham, and Abraham balto] turned vnta

his plate.

Chapter.

3 He prepareth a banket kor them. 4 Che the subuerlion of

i * it

7 . 2 ee 18 1 2 1 at 0 ee

me ;
Hy

ro tN

5 And they callyng vnto Lot, fayde vnto hym: where are the men whiche ang came in to thee this nyght- bryng them gau ont vnto vs, that we may knowe them.
6 And Tot went out at the doore vnto them, and shut the doores after hom.
7 And sayde: Map, for Gods fake brethren, do not (lo wickedly. g
8 Behold, J haue two daughters whiche haue knowen no man them wyll ) „ 54 bryng out nowe vnto pou, and. do e with them as it teemethj good in vor eyes: only vnto these men do nothyngfo2 therefore tanie they vnder the (a
Dore ol mprooke. Se e
5 bret
And they layde, stande backe cher in a

iourne, and wyll he be nowe a iudge: we wyll surely deale worse with thee then with then. And they prealled fore vpon the manteuen ! Tot, and came to breake vp the Doone. a

jo Wut the men put foorth their hande, aud pulled Lot into the boule to them, and (hut to the doore.

11 And the nien that were at the doore ofthe boule © they frioke with blyndenesse both small aud great, fo that they were werped in sekyng the doore.

1 And the men lapde vnto Tot: Halk thou here any belides: fonne in lawe, and thy sonnes, and thy daughters, and whatsoeuer thou ballin the citie, bryng them out of this plate:

„ 13. For we wyl destroy this plate, betause

the *erpe of them is great before the face

dl God for the Lode hath fent © vs to

destroy it.
14. And Lot went out, and spake duto

his o sonnes in lawe which maried his

daughters, saying: Staude vp, get pe out of this place, for the Lorde wyll o-

uerthrowe this citie. But he seemed as though he had mocked, vnto his sonnes in lawe.

5 And when the mornyng arose, the augels caused Lot to © speede him, saping:
Stande vp, take thy wyfe, and thy two

daughters which be at hande, lest thou

perishe in the inne of the titie.

e 16 And as he prolonged the tyne, 'the

men taught both him, his wile, and his two daughters by the handes, the
Lorde beyng mereyfull vnto hym: and

they brought hym foorth, and fet höym

without the titie.

17 And when he had brought them out, he w sapde: Sane thy felfe, and loke not behynde thee, neither tary thou in all this playne (countrepß; Sane thy selfe in the mountaine, lest thou perishe.

ele 18 And Lot layde vnto them: Oh notso

my Lordes.

19 Wcholde thy seruaunt hath founde grace in thy syght, and thou bak magnified thy inerty which thon halt shewed vnto me in lauyng my lyke: © wee

tapne, lest some harme fall vppon me, and I dye.

Geholde here is a titie by to flec vnto, eulen ponder litle one: Oh let nie elcape thyther: Is it not a litie one, and my

Genelis.

5 thepfaidagayne, he tame in as one to so-

holde F can not be laued in the moun-

ine Ag

21 Aud he lapde to hym: See, J haue

receaued thy “request as i as Face this thing, that J wyit not ouerthrowe
15 citie toz the whiche thou halt spo-

22 Halte thee, aud be saued there: for
I tan do nothyng tyl thou be come thyther, and therfore the name of the citic is Soar, ,

23 And thefonne was nowe rysen vpon the earth, aud Lot was entred into
Sdar.

24 Then the Lorde rapned ppon Hodome and Goniorrhe © brymstone and lire, from the Lorde out ok heauen:

25 And ouerthrewe thole cities, and ail that plaine region, and all that dwelled in the cities, and that that grewe vpon the earth.

26 Wut Lots wyfe folowyng him, loked behynde her, & was turned into a pile 0 ore ve: ler of fait. Fat wende

27 Abahani eplyng bp early, gote hym dn un to the place where he stoode before the Sent e presente of God, and loked towarde wert
Sodome and Gomorrhe, and towarde all the lande of that playne countrey,

28 And behelde, and lo the sinoke of the mT at arose, as the snioke of a furnesse.

29 And it came to passe, that when God = destroyed the tities of that region, © be d sw de, thought vpon Abraham, and lent Lot machen dut from the middest of the ouerthrow, Fee." when he ouerthrewe the cities, in one of the whiche Tot dwelled.

30 And Tot departed out of Soar, and dwelled in the mountapne with his two daughters: © for he feared to tarp in Soar, but dwelled in a caue, he and engt haere his two daughters. ö —

31 And the elder laid vnto the pounger: San our father is olde, and there is not a man inthe earth to tome in vnto vs ak ce ter the maner or all the worlde. a abe

32 Come, let vs geue dur father wine to. at eien drynke, and lye with hym, that we may a meas saue seede of our father. aie ee

33 And lo they gaue their father Wine to ebe ah, drinke that night: and the elder daugh- or quicken. ter went and day with her father, aud.
© he perteaued it not neither When she ene laye Downe, neyther when the role e b d 7 * ; cinperannce.

34 And on the morowe the elder sapde. vnto the younger: beholde, pelternight.

25 tity lap:

“ 2, escape thither fafe.
(p) The an: geil huo in cõmaunde men both to fauc
Lot, and ta destrop Soa dome, fo that one mut v: done bekeze the other.

Deut r9 c.
Esau. x iu. b. feremi. Le.
Ezec. 16.d.
Ames ini
Luk. Xvu. c.
(q) S terriblo and newe pits nifhinent kfoz fo dutragioug ne we linnes.

(t) yet the angel had pro-

Gen eft Sy Abraham,

Thus were both the daughters of

lap J with my kather: let vs male hym 36

daungerous thyng tobe: © ne ra fall.

drynkt wyne this nyght also, e go thou and lye with hym, that chou mapest rayse vp leede of our father. And they

made their kather © drynke Wyne that

nyght allo.

tog dne. . 35 Ad the pounger arole, and lape with

she lay dowue, neither whẽ che rose vs. buto this day. ga,
The. xx. Chapter. ö
1 Abraham is a toidurner in Gerar, where his wyke is talen by force, Abimelech 18 chydden, 4 his praper. 7 Godfaueth Abimelech from doyng ampile. Abraham a pros phete. 9 Abimelech chideth Absaha himlelke. 1: Sara the niece of Thare by his tonne, athe niece of Abraham by his brother. 14 Abimelech renderech the wyle with gikteg.
17 Abraham prapeth Coz Ibimelech.
1 ND Abraham © depar- bnto bs: c what haue J offended thee,
ö = at N25) ted thence towarde the that thou hall brought on me k onmy t's teach PAVZ’ fouth countrey, & dwelled kingdome co great a sinne- thou halt Sham n 8 82 AbetweeneCade- and Sur, done deerdes vnto me that ought not to an grasger eee. and soiourned in Gerar. be done. i ata asi
And Abraham fayde of Sara his 10 And Abimelech {aide vnto Abraham: „s
(h) Abraham Wyte, 0 she is my ee Abime- what lawest thou that thou hast done C dec nene lech kyng ol Gerar lent, and fet Sara this thyngteueren AWap. u Abzahã aunswered: Foz J thought n
2 But God tame to Abimelech by night thus] surely the keare of God is not in „ Hane wen in a dreame, and saide to hym: Dee, this plate and they Mal slaye me fog my den ben ne thou art but a Dead man for the wo- wpues lake. | ry are keth Bod. mans fake whiche thou halt taken a- 12 bet in very deede fhe is my hiker, for wap, for she is a mans Wyfe. she is p daughter of my father, though
4. But Abinielech had not pet touched {fhe be not the daughter of my mother, her: and he lapde, Lorde wylt thou and che became my wpke. flay ryghteous people: z And akter God cauled me to wander
Saide not he vnto me, che is my sistere cout ok my fathers houle, JJ fayde onto yea and she her lelke layde, he is my bro- her: this kyndnelle (halt thou shewe
„ be rd ther: with Wa Lingle heart, and inno- vnto me, in all places where we come,
Mena «een handes haue J done this. that thou say of mie, he is my brother. Cee, annie 6 And God sapde vuto him in a deeame: 14 Then“ toke Abimclech sheepe and o cw

mans wpke.

thieatninges,

(g) A good
Uyng kpudeth manp good

ourtourg.

hym: Ebeperceaucd it not, neither whe

wote well that thon dyddest it in the

syue: “ Wut and yk thou delpuer her

uauntes, and tolde all tele fapinges in their eares: and the men Were lore

ukrayde.
9. Then Abinielech called Abraham, € f sapde vnto hom: What halt thou done

Lot with chylde by their father. 2

37 And the elder bare a sonne, and called his name Moab: the fame is the father. of the Moabites vnto this vay, ¢

38 And the pounger bare a sonne alio, x called his name Benanmm: the fame: is the father ofthe chyldren of Ammon

oxen, men seruauntes and wonien ler- &

geuen thy brother a thouland peetes of

0 not agayne, be sure that thou (halt dye lyluer: beholde,“ it is as a toneryng of a ea oferpentaneee tht death, (botythouj and all that thou chync eyes vnto all that are with thee, ce halt. and to all lother: and thus Che Was re- ane

8 Therekore, Abimelech rysyng bp be- proued. cker

tines in the moruyng, called all his ser- 17 And lo Abraham praped vnto God, € othe

Gorn heated Abintelech and his wife, and his mapdens € they bare chyldren.
18 For the Lorde had tlosed vp all the

wonmbes of the house of Abimelech, because of Abrahams Wyte.
* C The

incelp moe

write of Sb

25 inglenesle of thy heart: J kept theeale ¶nauntes, x gaue (them) vnto Abraham, ann
. so that thou shuldest not inne D against and delpuered hym Sara his wyke a g me, and therekore sulfred J thee not to gapne. kent. touche her. 15 And Abinielech layde: beholde my
"pee Mowe therefore delpuer the man his lande lpeth before thee, dwell where it D

Wpke agayne, for he is a prophete, and plealeth thee best. '

te he Mali pray for thee ,tharthoumayelt 16 But vnto Sara he faide: SceF hance

Genel; 9

J The.xxj. Chapter.

J lahac is borne. othe chanketulnesse of the minde ol Sara. 8 Che d i of Zlahac.i: Che true children of Abraham bp Ffahac. 14 Hagar Geen soe
/ An angell comkorteth Wagar. 13 OF Ffmacla great people. archer.

20 Ilmael an archer,

22 The couenaunt of Abimelech with Abraham. 25 Abraham reproticty Abimelech kor

a mel tanen awape.
1 Berlabee. 3 Abraham planteth a groue,

He Low visited az ra às he had promised, and did Dito her accori Anger be han (pore.
Ne oz Sara conceaued,

(b) al thyneparc done

mow 4. And Abraham ctrcumtiled his forme

t) Sora et geucth
Sod thankes shat fhe Wag

become a dother

6 Wut ! Sara sapde: God hath made me to“ retopec, fo that all that heare, wyll ioy with me.

7 She lapd also:who would haue layde bnto Abraham, that Sara shoulde haue geuen chyldren sucke- for J haue borne (bint) a sonne in his olde age.

ene. To
Mea laughter.
) It isthe tte ol th

t
Mother, if fhe

and Abraham made a great feast the lame day that Hlahac was weaned,

Sara law allo the sonne of Hagar the
Egyptian, whiche fhe had borne vnto
Abraham, (tobe; © a mocker.

Jo Wherfore the sayd vnto Abeavam:© cast out this bond woman, € her sonne: for the sonne of this bonde Woman, chal not be heyre with my sonne Jlahat.

And this saying was berp greenous in Abraljans light, becaule ok his sonne.

12 And God fapde vnto Abraham, let it not be greeuous in thy fight, because of the tad and of thy bonde woman: In

her vopte, for © in Jlahac thall t ian ede be called. Acer auh, 13 Moreouer, ofthe fonne of the bonde woman wyll J make a nation, becaule
. he is thy leede. alten 4 And fo Abraham role vp carly in e the moznyng, and tooke bread, and a en bottel of Water, and gaue it vnto Hagar,

ction to; lof Bod.

15 And the water was

8 The chylde grewe, and was Weaned,

al that Sara hath laid vnto thee,heare

27 They aflurea couenaunt bet wene them wit and poth call bpon God. r

pnttyng it on her Moulder, and the lad allo, and sent her awap:whodepar ting, wandered bp and downe in the wildernesse of Beer! seba.

put in the bottell, and © the tast the lad vnder some one of the trees:

19 And God o opened her eyes, and the sawe a well of water, and the went and filled the bottell With water, and gane the lad drinke.

20 And God was with the lad, and he u

grewe, and dweit in the Wyldernesse, and became a principall archer.

21 And he dwelt in the wyidernesse of
Paran, “ and his mother got hym a wyfe out of the lande of Egypt.

22 And at the fame lcason, Abimelech and Phitol his chiele captapne (pake onto Abraham, saping, God (is] with thee in all that thon doest:

23 And nowe therefore, sweare vnto me euen here by God, that thon wylt not hurt mie, nor my chyldren, nor my chyl-
Dens children:but that thou shalt deale with mie and the countrey where thou hast ben a straunger, accordyng vnto
My kyndnesse that J haue shewed

thee.
2% m Abraham laide, Y will [weare.
25 And Abrahamrebunked Abmelcch for a wel of water, which Abim eieches seruauntes had violentiy taken away.
26 And Abimiclech said, J wote not who

hath done this thing: allo thou age

‘© Sheba.

(i) hep wert tuiteip punished. who abuling gong

(k) Becaufe ol hid promtie
Fake:toz it appeäreth not that Blmact praptd to
God, oz reprnted hym.

(1) he bzingyng vp and gonernce ment ok Fils imacl, ts geuen to bis mother.

(m) when
God withdraweth hig helpe, we sec not v meanes which be hard at hunde.

come from

(o) Though he was a wy'de man. ytt heobercd hig mother in choling b's wpfe.

p) Ged prowidetl) loz the quietneg of his sttuaunt.

ce cht. Lys vnto me.

(a) Thorgh he bare klug ininric patient ly. et hauyng occaßen be prousbeth for bpmlcife.

me not, nepther hearde Jlokit; but this 31

dap.

27 And Abraham toke sheepe and Oren, and gaue them vnto Abuneiech: e they made both of then a leage together.

28 And Abraham let seuen ewe lambes by them selues.

29 And Abimclech lay puto Abahani:

what meane thefe seuen ewe lambes 33

whiche thou hatt {et by them selues- er seba, and G called there on the name (22-8 e aunkwered: for thele seuen ewe okthe Londa the euerlasting God. He den werte laämbes (hate chou take o my hande, “ 34. And Abraham soiourned in the Phili- ad: tansy fare that they mapbe a wytnesle vnto me, tines lande a long sealon. Mano

that J haue digged this well. 1 *

¢ The. xxij. Chapter. a
ö Abraham is commaunded to facrifice his lonne. 3 The obedience of Abraham to God worde. 6 Flabaca figure ot Chiste. Abraham 3 in awe of nie Abraham ish. 18 Christe. 20 The chyldren of Machor by Melcha. 22 Bathuel. 23 Rebecca.
Boe e D ’ SH aig, NT a TT i
ON ER az Hie eH sete Way N
Hillis ig é BA 1 6 r 1 seri} * am sh 977 e 1 me « N 44 Oh iN
A1 ter these sapin JE | |
* Ea | ges Plavachisfonne, and clove wood for e god did Orempt Abra- the burnt offering, and role bp, and got ron, se 4 Hani, and sayde vnto hymto the place whiche God had apmade mute pce Eh ra eat dere J Pete Gh ent and boagaint Vase: =I I „here Jam. e thirde day Abra am l ft vp 9 15 e >» eee Aud he lade: take his epes and lawe the ret : e
Wesen e thy sonne, thyne onlye 5 And sapde vnto his young inen, byde 10 nien bonne Ilahac whanthou louest eget here with the Alle, Jand the lad will woo ssp tice vnto the lande Moriah, and offer go ponder eorMhip, and tonie agayne abl cst Him there for a burnt offering bponone ko pon. ) und ede 10 nec 6 . Ele aban one the wood of the 28
: 5 urnt offeryng, and layde it vpon Jla-
3 Then Abraham rose bp carly nthe hac his sonne: but he him selfe tokẽ fire le

mornyng, and sadled his Alle, and toke two of his poung men with hym, and

Genelis.

3 Thus made they a leage together at

Abraham,

Wherefore the place is called weer seba, becaule that there they lware both of them.

Beer seba: and Abimelech and Phicol his chiefe taptayne rose vp, and turned agayne tuto the lande of the Philistines.

And Abraham planted a wood in We-

in his hande and a knyfe, and they
Went both of them together. |
7 Then

braham.

7 Then spake Kone vnto Abraham pcr his kather, and layd, W my father. And mares he aunbwered, here am B my sonne. He moat. fade, {ee here is fyre and wood, but where is the beast for burnt facrifice:
3 Abrahain aunswered: Dyp© God wyll prouide a boast for burne satrifite: and so they went both together.
And when they came to p place which
God had shewed him, Abraham buplt an aulter there, and drelled the wood, aud bound Jlahat his sonne, and layde him on the aulter aboue bpo the wood. jo And Abahani stretchyng foorth his

Che dest ry in trou-
Homie mak-

on the proence Of

* pd.

hande, toke the knypfe to haue killed his

sonne. * .

Cu Andthe angel of the Lord called vn-

Abraham. And he sayd, here lam] J:

12 And he fayde: lay not thy bande dpon the chylde, neyther do any thyng vnto hym, kor nowe FJ knowe that thou fearest God, c haᷣst for my fake not spared yea thine onlye sonne. 5

3 Aud Abraham lifting vp his eyes, looked: and beholde, behynde [byin) there was a Kannne caught by the hornes in a thicket: and Abraham went € tooke the Kaunme, and offered hym vp fora burnt offering in the steade o his sonne.

14 And Abrahan © called p name of the plate, the Lorde wyll see. As it is sapde this day, in the mounte will the Love be seene. 11 N

1j And the angell ok the Lorde tryed bn-

Genelsis.

to him from heaven, saying: Abraaham,

XIII to Abraham from he * ne 0 m heauen the setonde

16 And sayd: by my selfe haue J fwome sayeth the Lorde, © pecan n hast ) Sd oe done this thyng, and hast not spared b: peathpne oulye sonne, Spi
17 That in biefling J wyll blesse thee, and in multiplping J Wpll multiplie oh woe thy seede as the ftarves of heauen, and D * as the sande which is vpon the fea hoe, and thy seede shall poslesse the gates ot his enemies. a
18 And in thy seede shall all the nations of the earth be biefled, © becaule thon go ge hast hearde my voyte. kan the gutes
So turned Abrahamagaine vnto his Kr . young men: and they rose vp, and went together to Beer seba, and Abraham dwelt at Beer seba.
20 And after these thynges, one tolde Abraham, saying: beholde Mucha, che. hath allo borne chyldren vnto thy brother Machor, :
21 dus his eldest fonne, and Buz his brother, and Camuel the father of the Am.
Sprians, „
22 And Cheled, and Hazo, and Pildach, and Jidlaph, and Wethuel.
23 And Wethuel begat “Rebecca. These « Ribla. eyght did Milcha beare to Nachor Abrahams brother. a
24. Ander) his concubine called Neumah, (0 spe wos she bare allo Tebah, x Gaham, Tha- vent nn has, and Maacha. 9
= lie ; 5 Ly had. nog a bone. the

War de, to pronoke men co godlyneg nat

J The. xxiii. Chapter.

Abraham bewapleth Saras death. 6 he byeth the kielde of her buriall of the chyldren ol Heth. 1 Sara is laped in graue. Mambre, or otherwyse Hebon.

Ara was an hũdreth

pan ! e

Bros” 10 NER and seuen and twentie

mer, Genes! pee ain (so long lined

WA: Ache. -.

fte. y 4. 2 = And Sara dyed in
Ciriath arba, the sanie is Hebron, in the lande

Wenpaht dent p coms
M eurst dp:
Mall man: de.

of Canaan: and Abraham came to - mourne for Sara, and to weepe for her.
And Abraham stoode bp fro the fight ofhiscorle, and talked with the fonnes
. of heth, faying: 5 e + Pama traunger and a foriner amongelt you: gene me a poslession to bury in with vou, that J map bury my corte out of ni sight. *
And the cheldren ol eth aunlwered

Abraham, faping vnto hy: —
6 Heare vs myp Lorde, thou art a sree are, prince of God amongest vs, in the chie- re

fest ol our sepulchres bury thy dead: none of vs shall forbyd thee his sepulchre, but thou mayest bury thy dead
[therin.] Pe
7 Abraham stoode vp and bowwed hym W selfe before the people of the lande, that is, the chyldren of Heth. a *
8 And he tonmumed with them, saping: „ yor; In.
Il it be pour mynde that JJ Matburp your fouls. my dead out of my sight, heart me, and speake for me to Ephron the sonnt of
Sohar, 1 hat he may geue me the caue ok n

Machpelah, whiche he hath in Werne

Abraham. G en elt Sy Abraham,
©) Theow- bk his kielde: but for as much money? uer, what is that betwirt thee and ne: ehe. as it is Worth Hail he geue it me, for a bury thersore thy dead.

possession to burp in ammongest vou.

D ae. 10 (For Ephron dwelleth amongest the

chyldrenof Heth) and Ephron the Hethite aunswered Abraham in the audiente ofthe chyldren of Heth, and ok all that went in at the gates of his cittc, saping:

A
(e) She no- II () Mot lo my Lod, heare meithe fielde

destie and liberahtic of this noble man.

geue I thee, and the taue that therinis geue I thee allo, in the prelente of the

sonnes of ny people geue J it thee, bu-

rye thy dead.

12 And Abraham bowed him selke before

the people of the lande.

13 And lpake vnto Ephron in the audi-

ente of the people of the countrey, faying: yr thou Wylt geue it; then J pray thee heare me, J wyll geue syluer for the fielde take it of me, and J will burp my dead therin.

14 Ephron aunlwered Abraham, saping

(t) A ficte 18 in value foure grotes, when the ounce tg at epyght groteg.

vnto hym:

15 My Tord, hearken vnto me, the lande

A1

(a) Zac admonished hyn to take order with his kamute.

(b) In olde. maner of ta-
Bpng an othe:
Wherehp the tifcriour dpd teftific bis subiection.

is Worth foure hundred © sicles of fle

phron, and wayed him the liluer which he had fayde in the aundiente of the sonnes of Heth, tuen foure hundred syluer sicles of currant money amongest marchauntes.

And the fielde of Ephron in Machpe-

ial), which was before Mamre, euẽ the fielde and the caue that was therein, and all the trees that were in the ficide, and that were in al the borders rounde about, was made sure

18 Unto Abraham for a possession in the

fight of the chyldren of Heth, before all that went in at the gates of the titie.

19. After this dyd Abraham bury Sara

his wyfe in the double taue ok the fielde that ipeth before Mamre, the lame is
Mebron in the land of Chanaan.

20 And so both the fielde e the taue that

is therein, was made vnto Abraham a sure possession to bury in, by the sonnts

¢ The. xxiiij. Capter.

2 Abraham sendeth his man to seeke a wre for Flaac, the whiche God prouideth foz hym.
The maner ofthe Hebrewes othe. The tapth ot Abraham to the promyle ol God. 12 A fapthftll praper of iᷣbrahams seruaunt to God. 15 Rebecca a kapre virgin is offred onto the seruaunt, not wyttyng it. 18 Rebecca moderate and colde in wordes. 27 The leruaunt doeth tyankesbnto God. 23 The marueplous diligence of Rebecca and Laban, to tye straungers warde. 3 The seruaunt declareth the caules ol his iourney and what thinges happened hym therein. 5 what Gods blesling is. 47 Rebecca the neece of Nachoz by his lonne. vo They commit all thinges vnto God. ; The leruaunt oslereth gpites vnto wes

becca and her parentes. 58 The content of the mapden is acked. N becca is conducted

vnto Jsahac. o The parentes do blefle Rebecca. 67 Nahac taketh Rebecca to wife.

MD Abraham was old & stricken in dapes, land the Horde had

a 0 ham f
And Abzaham saide
Al Synity his eldest feruatit ofhishouse, whiche had the rule duer all that he had: put Y thy hande vnder mythigh: ö

And J wyll make thee sweare by the

Lorde God of heauen, and God of the earth, that thou shalt not take a wyfe vnto my soune of the danghters of the
Chanaanites, amongest which J owes

4 Wut thou shalt go vnto my countrey,

and to my kinred, ande o takte a wife vnto my sonne Ysahat.

imam. 5 But the leruaunt layd vnto hynn per-

eblessed Abraham mall

aduenture the woman wyll not agree to tome with nu vnto this lande, chall
I bryng thy sonne againe vnto the land whiche thou tammest out of:

6 To whom Abraham aunswered: bez

ware that thou bang not m lonne thyther agayne.

7 The Lorde God of heauen ™ whiche

toke me from my fathers houle, c from the land of my kinred, and which spake vnto me, and that [ware brito me, fay ing, vnto thy seede wyll J geue this lande: he shall fende his angell before thee, and thou shalt take a wpfe vnto m fonne fromthente.

3 Neuerthelelle, if the woman wyl not

folowe thee, then shalt thou be clcare from this my othe: © onipe bring not my sonne thyther agayne.

9 And

16 And Abraham hearkened onto E-

J Be prt’
Wadeth de
Gods ben, dentätts wu
God win prospet des

lourntr

e) Jen it? ket med de id earns Guy

some w

vnto hem ·

; aham.

And the seruaunt put his hand vnder

the thigh ol Abraham his maister, and ware to hym as conternyng ö matter.

jo And the seruaunt toke ten Camelles of

5 the Camelles of his maister, e departed
(F had of al maner of goods of his maister with him and so he arose € went to
Mesopotanua, vnto p titie of Nachor.

n And made his Camelles tolpe downe without the citic by a Welles {ide of waz ter at euen, about the time that women

conte out to drawe water.

bun 12 And he saide: Lord God of my mai-

ms ster Abraham, J pay thee “fende me

good speede this day, and shewe merty vnto my maister Abraham.
Lo, I stande here by the well of wa-

gra-
| hat is,

10f the fuddes.

te be- 13 titie tome out to drasbe water:
14. Nolvt let the damsel to whom J fay, stoupe downe thy pitcher J pray thee, that J map drinke: Be the fay allo, nunke, and J wyll gene thy Camelles drinke also: let the fame be the that © thou hast ordeyned for thy seruaunt Jsahac, and thereby shall Y knowe that thou hast shewed mercy on wtp maister.

) 3 wople
8 pj0s

mip the gelt

God.

4 ou. cx.

15 And it came to palle per he had lefte speakyng, beholde, Rebecca came out,

the daughter of wWethuel, sonne to Milcha, the wyfe ol Nachor Abrahams brother, and her pytcher vpon her shoulder:

16 The damlel was very fayre to looke de and pet a mayde, and vnknowen of man: and fhe went downe to the wel, and filled her pitcher, and came vp.

17. Aud the seruaunt runnyng to meete her, layde: let me J pray thee drinke a litle water of thy pitcher.

18 And she sayd: drinke my Lorde. And fhe hasted, and let downe her pytcher vpon her arme, and gaue him drinke.

19 And when Khe had geuen han drinke, she sayde: J wyll drawe water for thy
Camelles alfo, vntyl they haue dronke vnough. *

20 And che poured out her pytcher into the trough hastyly, and ranne agayne vnto the Well to Dear. water} and drew

kior all his Camelles.

2 And the man wondred at her but held
0 peace, to witte whether the Lorde not.

= 22 And as the Camelles had left drin-

Sede es comme
Min Bedec-

sO stage tp
„ q

es,

ie, BUG, the man tooke a golden earring

Gene

ter, and the daughters of the mẽ of this

made his tourney prosperous, o:

1S.

of halfe a fickle wayght and two drate-

lettes for her handes, of ten sickles

wWayght of golde, a

23 And layde: whole daughter art thou: tell me J pray thee: is there rowme in thy fathers hoult fords to lodge in-

24. She aunswered hym: Jam the daughter of Wethuel the sonne of Mil cha whiche she bare vnto Pathor.

25 And said moreouer vnto him we haue litter and prouender pnough, and also rowme to lodge in.

26 And the man bowed hymlelfe, and worchipped the Torde,

27 And sapde: blessed be the Lorde God of mp maister Abraham, whiche hath not left destitute my matter of his mertye and trueth: for when J was © on (S24 my iourney, the Lode brought me to rer

nip matters brothers houle. dernde

28 And the damsell ranne, and told them 0d. of her mothers boute thele thinges.

29 And Rebecca had a brother callen D
Taban:and he ranne out vntothe man, leuenj to the Well.

30 For assoone as he had seene the earerynges and the bratelettes in his sisters hande, and hearde the wordes of Rebecca his fitter, saping, thus sapde the man vnto me: he went out vnto the man, and lo, he stoode with the Caz melles by the well foe, 500

z1 And he lapde come thou O blesled of 4 the Lord Wwherfore standest thou with- pen out: I haue dresled the house, c rowme comesyoryer. foz thy Cameiles.

32 And then the mã came into the Houle, and he vnharnessed the Camelles, and brought lytter and prouender kor the
Cameiles and water to Wath his feete, ethe mens feete that were with him.

33 And there was fet meate before hym tocate:™ but he sapd, J wyll not eate > er vntyll J haue sayde myne arande. And wom ec: he fayd:fay on. e

34. And he lapde: J am Abrahams serua

35 And™ God blessed my matfter mer- Lanner, ueylously, that he is become great, and n hath geuen him sheepe and oren, finer des. and golde, men seruauntes, and mapdeseruauntes, camelles and alles,

36 And Sara mp maisters wyfe bare ual hyma sonne © when fhe Was olde, and meat ie vnto him hath he geuẽ all that he bath. benef ome

37 And my maister made me lweare, sas

ing: thou shalt not take a wyle any,

XV.

Pram.

Chanaanites in whole lande J dwell:
38 But thou shalt go vnto my fathers house, and to my kinred, and take a wife bute my sonne. |
39 And J fayde vnto my maister: perade

uenture the woman wpll not folowe

me. N ö
40 And he anlwered me: the Lord before

whom J walke, wyll sende his angell

with thee, and prosper thy iourney, and thou shalt take a wyfe for my sonne of my kinred, and of my fathers house.

41 Then shalt thou be free from this
Othe (made) to me, when thou comme to my kinred: and yf they geue not thee
Cone} thou shalt be free from this othe made] to me.

42 And so J came this day vuto the wel, and sayde: O Lorde the God of my malster Abraham, if it be fo nowe that thou makest my iournep whiche J go

pzosperous,

43 Beholde, J stande by the well of water: and when a virgin connneth foorth to drawe water, and J fay to her, Geue me (A pray thee] a little water of thy pitcher to drinke: N

44. And she say to me, Drinke thou, and
J wyllalso drawe for thy Camelles:let the lame be the woman whom the
5 Hath prepared fog my malsters

onne.

45 And before J had made an ende of speakyng in niyne heart, veholde, Nebecca came foorth, and her pitcher on her shoulder, and she went downe vnto the well, and drewe water, and J

God was a guide tohpne infigteurnep: pet he prapeth not to bpm,

fayde vnto her, Gene me drinke J pray

thee, -

46 And che made hatte, and toke downe herr pitcher from her choulder; and fain:
Dainke, aud J wyll geue thy Camelles drinke also. So JJ dranke, ard she gaue the Camelles drinke also.

7 47 And F alned her, faving : whole daughter art thous She answered: the daughter of Wethuel Nachors sonne,

d whom Mucha bare vnto hym: and J deins. pilit the earring! vpon her face, and the

bracclettes vpon her handes.
48 Aud J bored my selfe, and worchtp-

ped the Lorde, and blessed the Lorde

God of my mailer Abraham, whiche had brought me the ryght way, to take

‘Imp maisters brothers daughter onto

his sonne.

—— meme.

Genesis.

sonne amongest the daughters of the 49 Nowe also if (hey wyll consent to deale

57 And when Abrahams leruaunt heard

go.
59 So they let Rebecca theyr fitter go,

Lanz

merepkully and truely wich my mar ster, tel me: Wand if not, tel me allo, that
Imap turne me to the ryght hande, or W to the left. fly

50 Then aumlwered Laban and we thuel, saping: This saping is procee-
Ded enen of the Lorde, we can not therelore fay vnto thee epther good o:

51 Weholde, Rebecca lis) before thee, 0 pam take her, and go, that the may be thy

maisters sonnes wife, euen as god hath - sapde.

theyr wordes, he worshipped the Lorn, bowyng hym selfe towarde the earth.
3 And the seruaunt toke foorth ie- „ ya,
Welles of sylner, and iewelles of golde,
And rapment, and gaue them to Rebectd: and to her brother, and to her mio: ther he gaue “ costly gyftes
54 And they did eate and drinke, both he and the men that were with hym, and taried all night: and when they vole vp in the mornyng, he laid: let me depart vnto np maister. f
55 Her brother and her mother aunlwered: let the danilell abyde with bs, and f be but euen ten dapes, and then (hall
56 Helayde vnto them: hynder me not, G beholde, the Lorde bath profpered my tourney, fende me away therefore, that
Imap go to mp maister.
57 And they sayde: © we wyll call the Ge damsell and engutre at her mouth. mene
58, And they called forth Rebecca, and ee fayde vnto her: wplt thou go wich a this mans And che aünliwered, J wyll 9M
Pa ; eg

c Drectous
Eruites,

and her nurse, x Abrahams seruaunt, and his men.

60 And they blessed Nebecta, and sayde vnto her: thou art our fitter, growe itv to thousande thoulandes, and thy seede u. 5 possesse the gate of his enemies. 1

or And Rebecca arose and her damselles, and gat them vp vpon the Camelles, and folowed the man: and the ee toke Rebecea, and went his

ape. ö

62 And Pfahac was commyng from the wape of the well of the lyuyng and sceyng me: for he dwelt in the South

And

DH.
„ cite 100

ou,
＋

raham.

And Jlahac > Was gone out to pra in the fielde at the euentide, and he ti vp his eyes, and saw the Camelles tom

efougit 6 olitarthe

SI Wahant proceeded

Ye] naliche bare hym
Zimran, and Foclan, land Medan, and Midien, and Pelbac, and Suah.
Poclan begat Seba and Dedan, and the sonnes ok Wedan were Allurim, and Letusim, and Teummim.

4 Andthe fonnes of Midian, Ephah, €
Epher,epanoch, & Abida, € Eldaah: all these were the chüdren ok Cetura.

5 And Abraham gaue al his goodes vnto Isahat: f as A!

6 Burt vnto the sonnes of the concubines whiche Abraham had, he gaue gyftes, and Y sent them away from Jlahachis sonne ( whyle he pet lyued) eastwarde

sn vuto the east countrev. |

Wai. And these are the dayes ofthe peres of

Wd

)Aamegof e came

Deed threstore and fifteene yeres, .

And then Abraham waryug awap, dyed in a lustie age, beyng an olde man, when he had liued pnough, and © was gathered to his people.

9 And his sonnes Jlahac and Jlmael buryed hym in the double cane in the fielde of Ephron sonne of Hoar the Hethite, before Mamre.

23 10 Whiche fielde Abraham bought of the

lonnes of Heth: there was Abraham

8 buryed and Sara his wyke.

I ap it came to passe after the death dt Abraham that God blesled his sonne
Plabac, and Jlahat dwelled by the

ell of liuing and seeing me.

N In

! ened
A after ac.

Qenesis.

Abrahanis lyfe which belived, an hun-

ahat. e 2 210 Ilahat

sayd, it is mp maister): therfore shet

an aie — couered 125 te e seruaunt tolde Jsahac a

thinges that he had done. —
67 And Plahac brought her into his mother Saraes tent, and toke Rebecca,
= pil! 0 Wilke, and whe loued
: hac receaued com 5 ter his mother. : *

pe

12 Thele are the generations of Ilmael

Abrahams sonne, whiche Hagar the
Egyptian Saraes handmapde bare vnto Abraham.

13° And thele are the names of the sonnes of Ismaecl, accordyng to the names of their kindred:the eldest sonne of Ismael, Nabaioth, and Cedar, and Adocel, and Mibsam,

14 And Misma, and Duma, and Mala,
Hadar, and Thema,

15 Jetur, Raphis, and Cedma.

16 These are the sonnes of Ismael, and thele are their names by theyr townes and tastles, © twelue printes of their housholdes.

17 And these are the peres of the lyle of

Ilmael, © an hundred and thirtie and euen pere: and he Waring alway, dyed, and Was layed vnto his people.

18 And they dwelled from Hamlah vnto
Sur, that is by the border ol Egypt as thou goest toward Assur, aud he died in the presence of all his brethren.

(a) The chic: lelt part of the huldandg dutie th

fed

oed vo lo

metueloullp.

(e) Me spoed ale

o out. 48. ter his larher.

r be dwelt or fill,

19 And theleare the generations of Hla C

Hac, Absahams sonne: Abraham begat

was fourtie pere olde when he toke Rebecca to Wpke, che daughter of Wethuel the pzan “ of
Meldpotanua, and fitter to Laban the
Oprian.

21 And Plahae made intertession vnto the Lorde “for his wpfe, © betaule fhe
Was barren: and the Lord was intreated of hym, and Rebecca his Wyle cow

ceaued. s
22 And the childrtẽ stroue together with: in her wonrbe : therfore fhelard, if lit 9

ce Padan
Aram.

te In the pre sence of his wyfe. 3

(t) God wold teach that the increalt of the godlp secde. & the Churche, tommeth only from hym.

Esau.

Aliue, Or with chile.

fo, why am J thus wherefore Me gehen went to asde the Lorde. to ome settete 2 ann = aretwo mauer of people in tho wombe, and two nations shalbe Deutded out of thy bowelles, and the one nation shalbe mightier then the other, and the elder halbe seruaunt vnto the vounger.
24 Kherefore when her tyme was come to be delluered, behold, there were two twynnes in her wombe.

that she might
Have forme res ulation from
Yesurn.

D 25 And he that came out fpeft, was red,

dhe Abe and Oe Was all ouer as it were a heamindeunfoe= rie garmeut, and they talled his name be. Elan. * *

and his bande holdyng Elan by the

heele, and his name was called Jacob: and Plahac was © threscore pere olde

(i) So Isu-

peces, with p When they Were bone, 7 J 8 sont of cbel- 277 And the bopes grewe, and Elau be-

dz

„Aman of tame à cunnyng hunter, and a“ Wylde oven, „ man: but Jacob was a' perfectman, right.
J The. xxvj. Capter.
God in the myddest of kamine. blesseth and feedeth Jlahac. Changan is prompsed to
Jlahac. 4 Christe. Ilahac tapth that his wyfe is his lister. n The very great care ol
God fo Flabac and his wyle. ij The Philistines do Kop Jlahacs pittes, and dryue him out. 17 God blesspng Jsahac, gyueth hym rpches. 19 He diggeth other pittes. 22 1 thankelgeuyng. 24 God comkorteth Jlahac. 25 IJlahac doth call vpon God. 28 Pbimes lech entreth into a league with Flabac, conde marpage.
AI Nedthere fell a famine

E nnthe land, besides the irst that was in the dapes of Abzaham:
And Jsahac went vnto Abimelech, king

(a) Behe kingeg of Gerar were called
Zbimelech, aa the kinges of
Egypt Phadog.

od

And the Lowe appeared vnto hym, and layde: Go not downe into Egypt,

shewe vnto thee.
Soiourne in this lande, and J wyl be with thee, and Wyll blesse thee:for vnto

these countreys, and J Wyll perkourme the othe whiche J Mare vnto Abzaham thy father. 5
4 And wyl make thy seede to multiplie as the starres of heauen, and wyll geue vnto thy seede al these countreys: and in thy seede h shall all the nations of the carth be blessed:

N *
Genes.

And the Lorde fayde vnto her: there
29 Jacob sodde pottage, and Esau tame

32 E

26 And alter hym cane his brother out,

3; Beer · seba the citie. 34 Esau maketh a les

my tommaundementes, my Hatutes, ea,

—okthe Phlüstmes, vnbut) abyde in the lande whiche J hall

thee and vnto thy seede J Wyll geue all

lish,

= 1 intentes, : |

28 Jlahat loued Elau, because he dyd

a 15 his venison, but Nebetca Aug obe acob.

from the fielde, and Was fayntie:
30 And Esau sapd to Jacob: fcede me F pray thee, with that fame red pottage, for J am fayntie: and therfore Was his oe Dae ional
31 And Jacob lade: sell ine this day thy dad endet cet au sayde:lo, J am at the poynt to ame dye, and what profite hail this byzth- ex ryght do me- ; - th
33 Jacob aunswered: Meare to me then this day. And he lware to hint, x solde his O bpzthryght vnto Jacob. 00
34 Then Jacob gaue Esau bread and a pottage of ryse, and he dpd eate and a drinke, and rose vp, and went his wap: and Elau little regarded his byrth-

and my lawes.
6 And Jsahac dwelled in Gerar. 4
7 Andthe men ot the place alked bin) 5

of his Wyle. And he sapde, He is mane

mipfifter : for he feared to fap, she is my treet

Wpke, lest the men of the place choulde du.

haue kylled hym, becaule of Rebecca, . whiche was beautitull to the eye.
8 And after he had ben there a long

time, Abimelech king ofthe Philistines n

loked out ata Windowe,¢ © fave PH gare,

hat sportyng with Rebecca his wyfe. dhe
9 And Abimelech called Jlahat, and

sald:beholde, she is of a suretie thy wile,

and why saydest thou, fhe is my sister-

To whom Jlahat aunswered:becausc

I thought that J might peraduenture

haue dyed for her lake. C waite
1o Abimelech aid: why hast thon done Chi

this dnio vs one or the people myght ae

iyghtly haue lyne by thy wyfe, aud fo ce

shouldest thou haue brought © sinne e

vpon vs. wie

a

sahac. pie, sapiug: c that toucheth this man o his wypke, shall dye the death.
2 Then Jlahac lowed in that lande, and receaued inthe same pere an hundred bahn kolde : and the Lorde blesled hym.

13 And the man waxed myghtie, e went foorth, and grewe tyll he was exceeding
17 Fo2 he had possessiõ of sheepe, of oxen,
C and ampghtie houcholde: and therfore

e the ( Philistines had ennie at hym.

oe 15 For the Philistines “ stopped and fplled vp with earth all the welles which his seruaiutes had digged in his father
Abrahams tyme.

16 And Abimeiech lapde vnto Jlahac:
Get thee from vs, kor thou art mightier then we a great deale.

17 Therclore Jsahat departed thence, and abode in the valley of Gerar, and dwelt there. ;

13 And Plahac returning, digged againe the Welles of water which they digged

geasures.
Or, Ied.

rr. ndpleagre not them luce.

Or pit ted his nit!

in the dayes of Abraham his father,

which the Philistines had stopped after the death of Abraham, € named them after the same names by the which his father had named them.

19 Jlahacs seruauntes digged in the valley, and foundea well ol springyng

20 And the heardmen of Gerar did striue
With Plabacs heardmen, saping: the water is ours. Then called he the well en becaule they stroue with

pin. 4

21 And they digged another well, and stroue for that alfo: and he called the nanie of it“ ennutie.

22 And then he departed thente, e digged another Well, for the which they stroue not. Therfore called he it! roonith, saying: the Lorde hath made vs nowe

roome that we may entreale vpon the earth. 1

) Thus it dll prosper phat the godly ut in hande.
Huyng.

t Efek,

Ahe blettyn
IE of ere dag no >

Genelsis.

23 And he went vp thente to Weer seba.

24 And the Lode appeared vnto hym the lame night, and Flayde: Jam the
God of Abraham thy father, eave not,

for J am with thee, and wylbletfe thee ee

And multiple thy seede for my seruaunt
Abrahams fake,

25 Aud he bulded an cwaulter there, and called vpon the name ok the Lode, and pitched his tent: and there Ilahats leruauntes dygged a well.

26 Then came Abimelech to him from
Gerar, and Ahnzath his friende, and
Phicol the captaine of his arnne.

27 And Jlahat sayde vnto them: wherfore come ye to me, seyng pe hate me, and haue put nie away from pou-

28 Whiche aunlwered: woe sawe mot certainly that the Lod was with thee, and We sayde: let there be nowe anoth betwirt vs, enen betwirt vs and thee, and let vs make a league with thee:

29 That thou shouldest do vs no hurt, as
We haue not touched thee, and as we

XVI

A

Ks
(i) 5 coms

07018 gtea-

(m) Trureeligion maß be professcd bekoze men.

(n) Elans patience, mad: hig enennes his krendeg.

D

cc In seyng, we fawe,

haue done vnto thee nothyng but good,

€fent thee away in peace: for thou art nowe the blessed of the TLorde.

30 And W He made thema keast, and they dyd cate and drynke.

3. And they vole bp betymes in the mornyng, and ware one to another: And
Ifsahac sent them awap, and they departed from hym in peate.

32 And the fame daye Jlahacs seruauntes came aud tolde hym ofa well which they had dygged, and layde vnto hym, we haue kounde water.

33 And he called it Sebah: and the name of the titie is called ) Weer-scba vnto this day.

34 Elau was fourtie pere olde, € he toke

(o) The godlp declare
Chen selues not ta beate teuengyng mendes.

(p) He restoteth the name which his ka-

a wyle (called) Judith, the daughter of r

Wecri an Hethiite, and Balemath the daughter of Elon, an Hethite (alto. ]

35 Which were difovedient vnto Jsahat and Rebecca,

F ci The. xxvij. Chapter.

ie I Ilahac byddeth Elau of his huntyng to prepare hym a dylshe. Jacob by the

lubtiltie of his mother, koretaneth aware his blellyng. 26 Jlahac hysseth his lonne. 23 Flabac blelleth Jacob. 32 Esau beyng returned fro huntyng. bryngeth meates to his father, 34 Efau after great outerpes, at the last is blelled. 39 Jlahac blesseih Cla. 41 Glau hateth Jacob, and tleatneth his death. ; Rebecca prouideth fo2 Jacob a departyng into Melopotamia.

C 5 And

ther gaut che place b:

Gen. xxi.

& A bittere nesse of spirite.

(9) The affimitic of the bnaqovlp, is
Ddaung ecrous
Ktronblclome-

ND it came to pafle,

that whẽ Jlahac Wwar-
97 KN ed olde, c his eyes wert

dimme, fo that he could
N

his eldest sonne, ¢ laide

onto hym, my sonne-
And he sayde vnto hym: here am J.

2 And he lapde: Beholde, “fant nore

Genefis.

Tice Chapter.

not fee, he talled Esau

18 When he came to his

19 And Jatob sayde vnto his father: J

ce, lde, and knowe not the daye of mp cree Death). 5 . wegen 3 Nowe therefore take I pray thee thy oider. Weapons, thy quyuer and thy bowe, and get there to the fielde, that thou mapyest take me some venisou. ‘d
4 And make nie well tastyng meates, such as J loue, and bryng it to me, that chou J map tate,“ that my soule may blesle ane. hee belore that J dye. be che 5 Wut Rebecca hearde when sahact

thought tore signe ouer to
His sonnt, the

spakt to Esau his fone: And Clan wet into the fielde to hunt venison, and to bryng it.

And O Rebetta spake vnto Jacob her sonne, faying: Weholde, J haue hearde thy father talkyng with Elau thy brother, and saying:

eritaunce.
(e) Such pez cuner exumpies, art not to ve folo ed of vs. a

tie meate, that J may cate, and blesse

thee before the Lorde, afoze mi death.
8 Nowe therfore my tonne heare mp

voyte in that which J cõmaunde thee.
9 Getthee to the flocke, and bryng me

thence two good kyddes fro the goates,

and J wypll make of them pleafaunt

meates for thy father, such as he loueth.
10 And thou shalt bryng it to thy father that he may eate, and that he may blesle thee before his death.

Then said Jatob to Rebecca his mother: Beholde, Elan my brother is a heary man, and Jam simoothe:

12 My father (hall peraduenture feele mee, and FJ Mall feeme vnto hym as though @ Went about to begyle hym, and fo shall IJ beyng a curse vpon me, and nota blessyng.

C n And his mother sayde vnto him, Upon me be the curfe my sonne: only heare my bopee, and go and fetche me then.
14. And Jacob) Went, and fet them, and brought them to his mother: and his mother made pleasannt meate, such as chers mynde. the knewe his father loued.
Op 15 And Rebecca fet goodly rayment of

he settelied her selfe vppon Gods proimfc, and not weped the daungers that myght fotows

ont fault, wh mpaht haue

taxied vntplt god had ehaũ-

Wing me venilon, and make me dain-

her eldest sonne Elau, whiche were in the house with her, and put them vpon
Jatob her pounger fonne:

16 And she put the saynnes of the kiddegs vpon his handes, and vpon the smoothe ok his necke. N

17 And she put that pleasaunt meate and bread, whiche The had prepared, in the hande or her sonne Jacob.

father, he sayde: my fathers And he aunlwered, here am
J: who art thou, np fonnez

am Esau thy eldest fonne, J haue done accodpng as thou baddest me: aryse FJ pray thee, spt, and eate of my venilon, that thy soule may blesse me.

20 And Jlahat laid vnto his sonne: how dd

tommeth it that thou batt founde it fo

quickly my sonne? He aunlwered: Y the lorde thy God brought it to my handes.
Then sapde Jlahat vnto Jacob:

Conte neare, and J wyll feele thee my

sonne, whether thou be my very sonne
Esau, or not.

22 Then went Jatob to Jsahac his father, and he keit hyni, and sayde: The boyte is Jacobs voyte, but the handes are the handes of Elau.

23 And o he knewe him not, because his handes were hearp as his brother Esaus handes: and fo be blessed hym.

24 And he asked him: art thou my sonne
Elau :? And he sayde: that J am.

25 Then sayde he: Bryng me, e let me tate of my sonnes benifon, that my foule may blesse thee, And he brought hym, and he ate: and he bought hym wine also, and he dran ke. 0

26 And his father Jlahat said vnto him: .
Come neare, and kysse me, my sonne.

27 And he went vnto him, e Kyssed him, and he smelled the sauour of his rayment, and blesled hym, e saide: See, the sniell of my sonne, is as the smell of
à fielde which the Lorde hath blessed.

28 God geue thee © of the deawe of hea uen, and of the fatnesse of tie earth, and plentie of torne and wine. a

29 People be thy seruauntes, and nat so ons bowe to thee: be lorde ouer thy brethren, and thy mothers children stowpe
With reverence vnto thee : cursed be he that turleth thee, and blesled be he that blesseth thee.

z0 Assoone

(0 One kaalt brpngeth anos ther when
Gods Wordt ts once koʒfaken.

(80 His tand: taunte hyndered not Sods
Decree.
That we he conciad'
With hprnclle
1 blessung
Was {ure ie
Jatob.

E

eee eee

* ie Genelis.

20 Affoone as Plahac had made an ende ok blesspug Jacob, & Jacob was scarle gone out fronithe peefence of Jlahat his father, then tanie Elau his bother from his huntyng.

And ow he allo had made a pleafaunt meate, and brought it vnto his father,

aryse, and eate of his sonnes venilon, that thy soule may blesse me.

he merre
. of God.

an thy lonne, thy first borne Elau.
And Jlahat was greatly astonied out of mealure, and sayde: which lis hej and

nifon aud brought it me, and Jhaue eaten of al before thou camest: and haue blesled hym, pea he shalbe blessed.

34 When Eau hearde the wordes of his father, he eryed aloude ct bitterly aboue mealure, and sayde vnto his father: fait me, JJ also am (the forme] O my

ather.

35 Who aunlwered. Thy brother came with subtiltie, and hath taken albaye thy blessyng.

36 And he laid agayne: Js not he right: ly nanied Jacob: for he Hath vndermyned ni nowe two tymes. (Hirt) he toke away ip birthright: and lec nowe hath he taken away my bleslyng allo.
And he fayde : halk thou kept neuer a blessyng for mez

37 Plahac aunswered, and sayde vnto
Elau: Beholde, J haue made hymthy
Pode, c all his brethren haue J made his seruauntes: Moreouer, with cone and wine haue F stablisshed han, what
Thall J do vnto thee nowe my sonne-

38 And Elau sayde vnto his father: hast thou but chat one blesspng my father:

flebre. i.

39 Then Jlapyac his father aunlwered, thet ole

and laide vnto his father: let my father

32. Then his father Jlahac sapde vnto hym: who art thou; He aunswered: J

41 And Esau hated Jacob, betause of the where lis be] then that hath hunted ve-

42 And dete Wordes of Elan her elder Late

XVI plesle me, J am allo (thy fone) Y my

father. Sd lylted vp Elau hi
N v p €lau his vopte,

Cp) The wita

and layde vnto hym: beholde, „thy dne er dwellyng place halbe the fatuefle of thee wc

theeartl), and of the deawe of heauen Kaen from aboue.

40 And though thy [worde that thou Bese"

nue, and shalt be thy brothers seruaunt: dickes and it hat come to patie, that chou Matt

get the maisterie, € thou chalt loole his

poke from of thy necke. ö

G

blesspng that his father blesled hym withall. And Esau layde in his heart:
The dayes of sorowyng for imp father are at hande, then Wyll J flape my bed der brother Jatob. eueren sonne were tolde to Nebecca: And fhe sent, ⁊ called Jacob her pounger fonne, c saide vnto hun: Beholde, thy brother
Esau as touchyng thee doth comkorte hym selke (Full purpolpngj to kyll thee.

43 Nowe therefore my forme heare my

voytce: make thee redy, ande flee to Lae nne ban my bother at Haran, hopeot abrt=

44 And tary With hin awhyle vntyl thy a .

brothers fiercenesse be lwaged,

45 And vntvyll thy brothers wrath turne

away fromthee,¢ he forget the thinges which thou hak done to hym:then wyll
I sende and fet thee awap from thence: „ Ie ne why chould J be delolate of vou both e am in one dap- tu

46 And Kebecta spake to Plabac: Jam races.

weery of my lyfe™ for the daughters of Heth. Bf Pacob take a wpfe of the La. Ege daughters of etl), luch as thele (which aun wiote

are] dt the daughters of the lande, what wn good shall my lyfe do mez |

te send Jacob d wap.

The. xxviij. Chapter.

Jtahac forbyddeth Jacob to take a wyle ok the maydens of Chanaan, wherevnto Jacob obepethj. 9 Efau against his fathers wyl taketh a wile of the daughters of Almacl. n Jacob goyng into Haran, leeth a ladder ina dreame. 1; CHa»

O fo Jlahat called d Jatob, and © blelled hun, and charged hin, and sapde vnto hum:
Sec thou take not a bupfeofthe daughters

naan is promised to Jacob. 15 God comtorteth Jacob. 17 The house ot God. 9
Bethel. Luza. r0 Che vowe ol Jacob. He asseth koode and clothyng.

of Chanaan:

Arile and get thee to! Melsopotamia, „e. to the houle of Wethuel hy mothers fai ther, and there take thee a wpfe of the daughters of Laban thy mothers

brother, ia Cij 3 And

5 S =
— Spe od

tpe eae he 9 a
. A ath
A 4. Ai.

eea fy.

ant, I EE ail ‘li

We —

n eat 06

SHAE . 4 aK tH }

i 7 N. An

3 And God almyghtie blesse thee; and make thee to encreale, € multiplie thee,

o) pt ba Hat thou mapest be a number of peoscp le

out be tops And geue the blesling of Abraham vn-

shoudd be f 10

ae oo iy to thee, and to thy seede with thee, that

bee. thou mapest reteaue to inherite p lande wherein thou art a straunger, whiche
God gaue vnto Abraham.

* 5 Thus PHlahac lent foorth Jacob: and

Baban, sonne of Weehuel the Syrian, and brother to Rebecca Jacob and Esaus mother.

veto 6 When Elausawe that Plahac had blessed Jatob, and {ent hym to Meso-

koozth, who menesorre: Potanua to fet hym a wyke from thence, omen A AUD that as he blessed him, he gaue him
à charge, saying, thou shalt not take a wyke of the daughters of Chanaan:
2 7 And that Jacob had obeyed his ka-

ther and mother, and was gone to Mefopotanita:

8 And Clan seyng allo that the daughters of Chanaan pleated not Jsahac his father:

0 Hera) 9 Then o went Elau vnto Ismacl, and

Nelas tone vnto the wyues which he had; Ma-
Fe enen Hhalah the daughter of Ilmael Abra-
He pans 19 the lifter of Mebaioth to ine 2 his! yp e. f es, 10. Pacob departed from Beer eb, and

Went towarde Haran,
11 And he came vnto a certayne place, æ tarxed there all night, becaule the funne

ene 1.
See!

* 2 15 i
(y 3

he went towarde Mesopotamia, vnto

6 „

=. et, ee :
1 zy, Sy : iy . 5 sates i GY i

I 8 Ae , E N Hi ile 4 ö

f ad te ‘a f N e id 10 2 ' a) Ker N 0 \ aire . nnn i i i i af ft y en , 5 ee ee fl it NGA we

Was Downe: and toke ok the stones ol the plate, and put vnder his head, and
1 8 hym downe in the lame plate to

12 And he dreamed, and beholde there

stoode Oalather vpõ the earth, and the e toppe of it reached vp to heauen: and ane see, the angels of God went vp e downe 2 90 vpon it. . 5 anal hh
13 Bea, and God from aboue leaned vpponit, and sayde: J am the Lord God C of Abraham thy father, and the Godot
Plabac, © the land which thou sleepest © 74" von, wyll J gene thee and thy leede. panes
14. And thy seede syalbe as the dust of the save, earth and thou chalt spreade abzode to pani the Welt, to the east, to the north, and pit to the south: and in thee, andin® thy (a feede, Hall all the kynredes of the earth be blessed. ai
15 And see, Jam with hee, and wyll be thy keper in all (places) whyther thou goest, and wyll bryng thee agayne into sire this lande: Jor I wyl not leauc thee, vntyll I haue made good that whiche
Jhauc pronnled the. |
16 When Jatob was awaked out of his fleepe, he lapde: Surely the Lorde is in this place, and J knewe it not. Gee
17 And he was a frãyde, and saide: howe dreadefull is this place: it is none other : a but cuenthe houle of God, c it the » gate of heanen. 7
18 And Jatob rose vp early in the mornyng, and toke the er pen ed

OR os

°

layed vnder his head, and™ pitched it vpon an ende, and powred oyle in the toppe of it.
19 And he called the name of the plate
Wethel: but the name of the citie was be called Luz, before tyme.
20 And Jatob vowed a vowe, saping: ben, o Hf God wyll be with me, and wpll e gepe me in this iourney in which J go,

thc. ath arob not cen-

ition with

Hop, but vp- 8 mocration of

33 Simeon. 34 Leui. 35 Juda.

real ha

on his tourney, c came into the lande of the
AN people of the east.

5 And las) he loked a bout, beholde, there
Was a wel in the field, and loe, threc flockes of sheepe lay there by, for at that well were the flockes watered: and there was a great stone vpon the well mouth.

pm.
Children.

wn

brought, and they roulled the tone frõ

the Welles mouth, x watred the sheepe,

t put the tone agayne bpon the welles

mouth vnto his plate. ‘

And Jacob saide vnto them: My brethren, Whente be pez And they layde: of
Haran are we.

5 And he lapde vnto them: Knowe ye
Laban the fonne of Pachor: They fapde : we knowe hym.

And he fayde onto then: is “he in

Jood health: And they sayde: heis in

good health, and beholde his daughter

Rachel connneth with the sheepe.

172 And he sayde: log lit is] yet a great

Whyle to nyght, neither is it tyme that the cattell should be gathered together: en um sheepe, and go and feede wnt” And they sayde: we may not vntyll all the flockes be brought together, and

tyl they roule the stone from the Welles

Mer . Uouth, and so we water our sheepe.

games hyle he pet tallied with thein, wae men” chel came with her fathers thecpe : foe

she kept ther, a

lo Alldoue as Jatob sawe Nachel the

2 god ab

Genesis.

Hen © Jacob went

And thyther were all the fockes z

and wyll geue me bread to cate, and
Clothes to put on:
21 ae 1 oe Ta my faz e in laktie: the J ob. e: then shal the Lord
22 And this stone whiche J haue let vp on an ende, shalbe Gods Houle: and of all that thou shalt gene me, J wyl surely geue the tenth vnto thee. *

q The. xxix, Chapter.

Jacob commeth to Laban. 4 Che vnknowen he calleth brethren. 9 Rachel keedeth
„ sseepe. n Jacob kplleth Rachel in the Lorde. 13 Laban clyppeth Jacob, and hysleth hym. 17 Lea is bleare eyed. 18 Jacob becommeth bonde kor Rachel leuen peres. 22
Laban fiepeth the mariage. 23 Lea is geuen kor Rachel, 32 Lea conceaueth Ruben.

daughter of Laban his mothers brother, e the sheepe of Labanhis mothers brother, Jacob went € rouled the stone fromthe Welles mouth, e watered the flocke of Laban his mothers brother.

And Jatob kyssed Rachel, and lift vp

his voyte and wept.

12 And Jacob tolde Machel that he was gen v her fathers © bother, and that he was kenne

Vebectaes sonne: Therelore rannte the

and tolde her father.

And when Laban hearde certapnely tell of Jatob his litters sonne, he ranne to meete hym, and unbraced hym, and kylled hym, and brought bynt to his

Houle: And he tolde Laban Hall these

thynges. ca e alone,

14. To whom Laban sapde: Well, chou and fo bite art my bone c n fleshe. And he abode Counce. with hynithe spate ofa moneth.

15 And Laban {aid vnto Jacob: Though thou be my brother, shouldest thouther-

Fore serue me for naught Tell ine e n

what hall thy wages vez though oles

16 Taban had two daughters, the elder vs oe. called Lea, and the vounger Kachel.

17 Tea was tender eyed: but Rachel was beautifull and well fauoured.

18 And Jatob loued Rachel, and sayde:
I wyll serne thee seuen yere fo Rachel thy vounger daughter. ö

19 Taban aunswered: Pe is better that I geue her (onto, thee, then that shoulde gene her to another man: abide
With N le. of h Daughe

20 And Jacob serued seuen vere for Mae chel: aud they feemed vnto hym but a fewe dayes, kor the loue he hadde to

her.
J Cif 21 And

(t) That is. vpon what

(3) Auro

Ch) AU an hype pocrite, he hath respece

to hig owne gapne inthe mariage oz this seilyng

lacob,

mw — A Genelis.

2 — & 3 ,
* n

ae ss oe

57 fa! " 6 6 x
(ries PAT EAT SUA 425 117 pitt f Ea

Sceeeeee fF 1210 ayy »
Nen 5 e

Na

U

3 And God almpghtie blesle thee; and make thee to entrease, æ multiplie thee,

De bat 75 thou mapest be a number of peouit of g es fhouveiops 4. and geue the blessing of Abraham vnauler Babs to thee, and to thy seede with thee, that
Hoa thou mapest reteaàue to inherite p lande wherein thou art a straunger, whiche
God gaue vnto Abraham.
Thus J sahac lent foorth Jatob: and he went towarde Wefopotamia, vnto
Laban, fonne of Wethuel the Sprian, and brother to Kebecta Jatob and E-
One, baus mother.

When Esaulawe that Jsahac had blessed Jacob, and sent hym to Mesopotamia to fet hym a wpke from thence, and that as he blessed him, he gaue hum a charge, saping, thou (halt not take a wyle of the daughters ol Chanaan:

And that Jatob had obepyed his fac ther and mother, and was gone to Mesopotanua:

8 And Elau seyng also that the daugh-

vie ot hypocrt- 6

aneanes of repentaunte, oz amendenent.

W 7

ters of Chanaan pleated not Jlahat

his father: wacacy 9 Then went Efau vuto Ismacl, and
Heres oke vnto the wynes (which he had} Maan ens Halah the danghter of Ilmael Abraety / hams sonne, the filter of Pebaioth to
95 behis Wpke.

Went towarde Haran.
1 And he came vnto a certayne place, c tarxed there all night, betaust the sunne

eg Ale
\ i 4755 1 .

10 Jatob departed from Beer seba, and

N
0 10 J U

was downe: and toke of the ones of the plate, and put vnder his head, and

layde hym downe in the same plate to fleepe,

“12 And he dreamed, and beholde there

stoode a lather bpd the earth, andthe 7% toppe of it reached bp to heauen: and &
{ce,the angels of God went bp e downe grat vpon it. 0 antl ge
3 Bea, and God from aboucteanenbp: _ pon it, and sayde: Jam the Lord God C of Abraham thy father, and the God ol
Plabac, © the land which thou sleepest — vpon, wyll I geue thee and chy seede.
14. And thy seede shalbe as the dust ol the sual earth, and thou Malt spreade abrode to inte 10 the Welk, to the east, to the north, and & to the south: and in thee, and in © thy seede, all all the kynredes of tye earth
15 And see, J am with thee, and Wyll be thy keper in all (places) whyther thou gocit, and wyll bryng thee agayne into this lande: For I wyl not Mleauc thee, vntpll J haue made good that whiche
J hauc promisedthee. 7
16 When Jatob was awaked out of his sleepe, he sapde: Surely the Woe is in this plate, and J knewWe it not. f
17 And he was afrayde, and lade: howe ae dreadefullis this plate: it is none other but euenthe “ houle of God, eit the 1 gate of heauen. faye
18 And Jatob rose bp carly in the mornyng, and toke the stone that he 175 ay

chem.

layed vnder his head, and™ pitched it vpon an ende, and powred ople in the toppe of it.
19 And he called the name of the place
Wethel: but the name of the’ citic was called Luz, before tyme.
Doe 20 And Jatob vowed a vowe, saying: paid, ( Hf God wyll be with me, and wyll kepe me in this iourney in which J go,

Ilraelites

hel
0 an ih trot coni with

ton

od, but vpoccallon ot
DD proes whtch piokcd foz: yerccoz¢ w nlration ht ggetheut to
Fiore ol pthankel-

3 Simeon. 34 Leui. 5 Juda.

Ki?

on his tourney, & tame into the lande of the people of the east.
And las) he loked az bout, beholde, there i 7 —wasa wel in the field, and loe, three flockes of sheepe lay there bp, for at that well were the flockes watered: and there was a great stone vpon the well mouth. :

pm.
Children.

3 And thyther were all the flockes |

brought, and they roulled the tone frõ the Welles mouth, e watred the sheepe, t put the stone agayne vpon the Welles mouth vnto his place.

And Jacob laide vnto them: My brethren, whente be ye; And they layde: of
Haran are we. b

5 And he lapde vnto them: Knowe pe
Laban the w sonne of Pachor- They lapde: we knowe hym.

And he sayde vnto them: is“ he in

AJood health: And they layde: he is in

good health, and beholde his daughter

Rachel commeth with the sheepe.

7 And he layde: tog lit is] pet a great

whyle to nyght, neither is it tyme that

B the cattell should be gathered together:

2 nae rae" fheepe, and go and feede

Hotere An 5 f

mot 8 And thep fayde : we may not vntyll all the flockes be brought together, and tyl they roule the ftone from the welles mouth, and so we water our sheepe. nohyle he vet talnked with them, Na chel tame with her fathers cheepe: for she kept them. a
10 Alloone as Jacob sawe Nachel the

' ettuat inpngyng 9
0 5 olchpidzen

4 melee

Genelis.

Men © Jacob went

and wyll geue nie bead to cate, and clothes to put on:
21 oe De 15 ene my faz infaftic: then be my God. 1 1
22 And this stone ny haue fet vp on au ende, shalbe Gods house: and of all that thou chalt geue me, J wyl lurely gene the tently vnto thee, *

The. xxix. Chapter.

Jacob commeth to Laban. 4 Che vnknowen he callech brethren. » Rachel keedeth
„ ssheepe. 1 Jacob kylseth Kachel in the Lorde. 13 Laban clyppeth Jacob. and kysseth hpi, 17 Lea is bleare eyed. 18 Jacob becommeth bonde kor Rachel leuen peres. 22
Laban hepeth the mariage. z Lea is geuen kor Rachel, 32 Lea conceaueth Ruben.

daughter of Laban his mothers bro-

ther, e the Heepcof Labanhis mothers

brother, Jacob went & rouled the stone

from the welles mouth, e watered the

flocke of Laban his mothers brother,

1 And Jatob kyssed Rachel, and lift vp his bopee and wept.

12 And Jacob tolde Kachel thathe was oer her fathers © brother, and that he was enn

Kebettaes sonne: Therelore ranne the and tolde her kather. i
And when Laban hearde certapnelp tell ol Jatob his fitters fonne, he ranne C to meete hym, and imbrated hym, and kylled hym, and brought hyn to his house: And he tolde Laban all these co sw, thynges. caufes be

14. To whom Taban fapde: well, thou a fo bare art my bone Emp fieche. And he abode ounce. with hym the {pace of a moneth.

15 And Laban laid vnto Jacob: Though thou be my brother, shouldest thou therfore ferue me for naught 2 Tell me what Halt thy wages be-

16 Laban had two daughters, the elder called Lea, and the vounger Kachel.
17 Tea was tender eped: but Rachel

was beautifull and Well fauoured.

18 And Jatob loued Rachel, and sayde:
I wyls lerue thee seuen pere for Rachel thy pounger daughter. ö

19 Laban aunswered: ( It is better that I geue her onto the, then that z shonlde geue her to another man: abide with nie.

20 And Jacob serued seuen pere fo2 Nachel: and they seemed vnto hym but a fewe dayes, kor the loue he hadde to

her.
* Cif 21 And

(e) The Wea

(g) Bacob wonlde not through iolenefle charge his vnclt.

Ch) As an hypocrite, he hath reipect to hig omic gapne in the o maärtage OF this scilyng of his daug ter.

0 She tn. 2 And Jacob said nto Laban; geue thers nucthe= mes my Wife that A map lye With her, dd for my dapes are fulfylled. a

lay goin 22 Then Waban gathered together all
* the men of that plate, and made a feast.
23 And when cuen was come, he toke

b. Genes.

ter 7 his handmapde, to be her leruaunt. a |
30 So lay he by Rachel allo, and lo- Meron, ued Kachel moze then Lea, and serued © hym pet seuen peres moze,
31 When the Lode sawe that Lea was «:

Onan Lea his daughter, and brought her despised, he made her kruitfull, and 0 eee to hynt, and he went in to her. Rachel remapned baren. « Oe de (Le 24. And Laban gaue vnto his daughter 32 And Tea conceaued and bare afonne, het Wonks mae, Lea Zilpha his mayde [tobe] herser- andthe called bis name “Ruben: for the Tun
* uaunt. layde, © the Lord hath loked vpon imp chechl
25 And when the mornyng was come, tribulation: nowe therfore nw hulband © Bris beholde it was Lea. Then sapde heto Wyll loue me. gane
Laban : Wherefore Va thou plaped 33 And fhe conceaucd agapne, and bare a Heer thus with me: dyd not J lerue thee for sonne e sayde: The Lorde hath hearde trouble,
Cine, r ONY eee a nO
; | | : he cate
8 pe 26 Waban aunswered: © It is not the led his name Simeon. « Shimon; eG ion e rice marry p pounger 345 ae ey Bete chee fonne, —
Aenne efoze the first borne. N poe : Move this once wyll n
5 27 Palle out this weeke, e then we wyll hulbande kepe me compam, becaͤuse de Rene cue thee this also for the seruite haue borne him three sonnes: and ther sacked one Whiche thou shalt ferue me pet feuen 11 115 his name called Leni, tonines, fr vexes moe. 35 And she conceaued pet agapne, and ebene 28 And Jacob dyd euen fo, and passed bare hyma sonne, saping: Jobe Well mariage out the weeke: and then he gaue hym J prayse the Lorde. Therekoze the Warn
Machel his daughter to wpfe also. called his name Juda, x left bearyng. nan
29 And Laban gaue to Rachel his daugh- mu ee
1 a Teh
The. xxx. Chapter. e
Emmer Rachel complapneth to her hutbande ol bavermetic. 4 Rachel geue a the Wyfe bnto Jacob. 6 Dan. 1; Aler. ij Lea byeth with denies offen a great bagut: her hulbande myght lye with her, and conceaueth. 18 Flachar, 20, Jabulon. 21 e Dina. 22 God geueth conceaupng vnto Rachel. 24 Joleph. 25 Jacob alketh ite houlchold. cence to depart, and his wages. 29 God enriched Laban for Jacobs cake. 32 Fae cob afheth wages for cheepe o diuers colours, which be peanẽd of Meepe ol one cos lour. 43 Jacob verp ryche. i
1 Achel when che sawe 5 And Wilha tonteaued, and bare Ja-
0 that (he bare Jatob no tob à sonne. J .
| , schüldzen, Heenniedber 6 Then saide Rachel: God hath geuen
N ZN lister and layde vnto sentente on my fide,and hath allo heard 1 e Jatob: Geue me chu“ my voyte, and bach geuen me a fonne: e.
(> eri dien, els J am but therfore called che hym“ Man. vo eat as Godlpe

anger, which ekeered the

hie are, agaynttRachel, and lapde: Am J in erb Sods Meade, whiche kepeth fromthee mipyeth. the fruite of thy wombe-

5 Wilha, go in vnto her, € Me hall beare
Y vpon my knees, that J allo map haue
Gene chyldren by her.

mans witte, whd scketh vnlasswekull meanes to her enulous pucpole.

7 And z8llha Nathels fernantconecaucd {mails againe € bare Jatob another sonne. en

3 And Rachel fad: with godly wrast- leet lynges haue J wrastled with my fitter,

cc Nepliah. at 15, my
Oc haue gottenthe vpper hande: and oat

wrattelyas

the called his name Pephthait. a9

9 When Tea lave that the had left bea- bea 7 ryng chyldzen o che toke Zupha her bees mapde and gaue her Jatob to wyfe. eos y

Jo And Zilpha Leas m̃ayde bare Jacob unpeye a fore, ab:

un Then sapde Lea, Good lucke: and „/. called 4+

ob.

eb. dalled his namie “Gad.

ey 1 And Zilpha Leas seruaunt bare Jadcob an other fonne.

z Then laide Lea: happy am F, for the
97 „ daughters Wyll call me blesied: and dalle his name“ Aler.

tis 14. And Ruben went out in the dapes of pen, the wheate haruelt, € founde ? Man-
Nei. Ddragozas in the fielde, and brought

ane them vnto his mother Lea. Then laid nih of thy sonnes Mandragoras.
15 To whom Tea aunswered: Is it not renough that thou hast taken away my
C hulband, but wouldest take away my jou * lonnes Mandragoras allo z Then saide mae Rachels Well, let hym sleepe with chee ah this night for thy sonnes Mandragoras. mint. 6 And Jacob came from the fielde at euen, and Lea went out to meete hym, and lapde: thou shalt come in to me, for
J haue bought thee in deede with my
‘forne Mandragoras. And he slept with herthat same nyght.
17 And God hearde Lea, that the conttaued, and bare Jatob the fift sonne.
® se 18 Then sapde Lea: God hath geuen
3 me a rewarde, betause J gaue my map-

K KX KX & *

knit, end mea © den to my hulbande: and fhe called hun
„„ Jlaächaͤr.
1? And Lea tonteaued vet agayue, and attvarde, © bare Jacob the fire lonne.
20 And Lea fayde: God hath endued me with a good dowrie, nowe wypll my

Genelis.

ae < Natchel to Lea: Geucme FH praye thee

28 Alld he sayde: Appoynt What thy re-

XX.

haue borne byntfice sonnes: and called his name Zabulon. ae.

1 After that, che bare a daughter, and. Th. ae nanie Dina. e dyng.

22 And God remembred Nachel, x God =. epeatbe he and mane her fete: e

? teugty, her

23 So that (he conceaned ebareafonne: e andfapde, God hath taken awaye my ber wombe. rebuke. 2

24. And the called his name! Joseph, laying: the Torde geue me pet another sonne. :

25 Affoone as Rachel had bome Joseph, Jacob sapde to Laban : Send me
Away, that J mape go vnto my owne place, and to my tountrey.

26 Geue me mp wpues and my chyldren for whom J haue ferned thee, and let me go: for thou knowest What seruite ©, weer
J haue done thee. N

27 To whom Laban aunlwered: J cama. pray thee, pt J Hane founde kauour m thy syght (tary) : for I haue proued that the Torde blessed me for thy lake.

0 Th at 15y addyng.

(i) News his iui. yexes tts
UICC AB expirtd.

() This bps pocrite foca= keth of Sed,
E pet he worshippeth kalse gods, and con-
(mneth in his wWickedntlse.

. fhaibe, and J wyll geue ct

thee.]

29 But he saide vnto him: Thou knoweft what seruice J haue done thee, and in what takyng thy tattell haue ben vnder me: 8

30 Jon that litle which thou haddest be-

fore I came, is nowe intreased into a

multitude, wand the Lord hath blesled

« My face.
(m) All the mcrease of our boar in to be token fo: ot
Gods hande.

„ x . 5 N x fF i 25 2 |
* 2 N. = t re 2 — a 2. 2 15 4 5
0 N oy 1 — J 0 A * f A “i e.
U . a ‘a é mii Sai %j «
5 ö Yin, 1
2 a A a Nee
105 8 i é
95 N 2 NU 4 10 * d * 7 0 0
N Sy 7 ot, 0 a 1 bin, —
Mi 1 + ae eh Mall „ ae 2

Laban.

thee through “my trauell: but nowe

Wher Hall J make prouision for mpue

E ownebhoufe also: g

zi And he lapde: What Hall J then“ geuc thec : And Jatob aunfhered,
Thou shalt geue me nothyng at all: vf

“ny foote.

o) The co-
Retous hath no reipeet of
F hinderaunee of hus fcruafit,

but of be thou wylt do this thyng for me, then
Wyll J turne agapne, feede thy shecpe, and kepe them.
32 J wyll go about all thy flockes this
Day, and feperate from them all the cattell that ave spotted ¢ of Diners colours: and all the blacke among the sheepe, € the partie € {potted amongst the kiddes cyanate, the lame; c shalbe my re warde. gte ate: 33 So chall mp ryghteoulnes aunswere
Soarve halte kor me “in tune to tome: forit shal come
Aenne. kor mp rewarde before thy kate. And

euerp one that is not specked and partie

amongst the goates, € blacke amongst

the shecpe, let it be competed theft in me.

1 34 And Laban sapde: go to, would God it myght be atcordyng to thy saying.

35 . Lherfore he toke out the fame day the

hee goates that were ryngstraked and

of diners colours, c all the thee goates

TO We.

that were {potted and coloured, and all

that had Whyte in them, x all the blacke

Genelis.

the rest ol Labans sheepe.
37 © Jacob toke roddes of greene populer, hasell, and chesle nut trees, aud pil-

led whyte strakes in them, and made „

the whyte appeare in the roddes.

38 And put the roddes which he had pi- =

led, leuenj before the sheepe, in the gutters and watryng throughes when the sheepe tame to drynke, that they should tonteaue when they came to drynke.

39 And the sheepe conceaued before the roddes, E brought foorth lambes ryngstraked, spotted, and partie.

40 And Jacob did seperate these lambes, and® turned the faces of the sheepe whiche were in the flocke of Laban, towarde these ryngstraked, and al maner of blacke: and so put his owne flockes

by them selues, and put them not with

ZLabans cattell.

41 And in euerp tonteauyng tyme of the stronger cattel, Jacob layed the roddes before the eyes ol the tattell in the gut: ters, namely that they myght conceane bekore the roddes.

4 Wut when the tattell were feeble, he

hl 2

lacoh

Oats t

put them not in: and so the feedler were

Labans, and the stronger Jatobs.

amongst the sheepe, and put them inthe 43 And the man“ intrealed exteedingly, Mae kepyng ol his sonnes. ö and had much cattell, and mayde ler- ng
36 And let three dapes iourney betwirte uauntes, and man seruauntes, and ca- wal hinnselfe and Jatob: and so Jacob kept mels, and alles. .
The. xxxj. Chapter.
Che chyldren ol Laban do grudge at Jacobs richesse. 3 God commaunde returne into his countrep. 5 Jacob declareth Gods benelites to a laueth Jacob that Laban do hym no harme. 16 Jacob returneth into his countrey
Laban not wyttyngtherok, 9 Rachel hath tollen her fathers idolles. 2 Laban pure fucth Jacob. 24 Che care of God kor Jacob that Laban do bpm no harme. 25 Laban
Ale be ene ae 40 1 34 Rachel, her fathers begyleth hym. 38 Jacob declareth to Laban hi is dili gence, his trauayle. 44 A league betwene Laban and Jarob, ae ee
A 1 he heardthe ; And the Lode lapde bute Jacob: O stag an oN, 215 80 of 15 nae agayne into che laude of thy fa ae
A.cban.thinke fal bans fonnes faye thers, and to thy kynrede, and J wyll dane share ing, Jacob hath — bewith thee, pee ae Wy cage

{|} take away all that

Therfore
Was gur Fathers, and Trano che ro ptent Eealted Kachel

and Lea to the fieide vnto his flocke,

Ne | and of one fathers 5 And sayde bnto them: .
= em: J see pour fa

(goodes! Hath he thers countenaũte that: d gotten all his alo: that it is not towar

nie as it was wont to be: but the God

of my father hat
2 And Jatob behelde the countenaunce 10 pe nen ben wih me.

As yester- 6 And pe knolbe Us day, yer of Laban, and beholde, it was not to- ued * kather tothe del. ba 115 i yelterday. Wardes byni“ as it was wont to be. wer.

7 lit

cob.

shalbe thy rewarde: then bare all the nsheept ringstraked. 7
9 Thus hath God taken away the in: trease of pour fathers flocke, and geuen
B 10 But in rammpng tyme, J lifted vp

Je fignift-

sth the hee poate allo:

5 vndct sbeepe rare yy contay ne the coutts.

beholde, the “ Bammies leaped vpon

the sheepe that were ringstraked, spot-

ted, and partie.

And the angell of God spake vnto me ina dreanie, saying: Jacob: And J aunswered: here am J.

12 And he sayd: lift vp nowe thyne eyes, and fee all the Rammes leapyng vpon the theepe that are ringstraked, spotted, and partie: for J haue seene all

hn, that Laban doth vnto thee.

mene 13 J am the God of Bethel, where thou annoyntedst the stone let vp on an ende, and where thou vowedst a vowe vnto me: nowe therefore aryse, and get thee out of this countrey, and returne vnto

the lande where thou wast borne.

14 Then aunswered Rachel, and Lea, and faid vnto him: haue we had as pet any portion or inheritaunte in cur faz thers honse- N. a

15 Doth not he count vs euen as straun-

Osun Jers e for he hath solde vs, e hath quite

mews. deuoured allo our money.

a 16 Therkore all the ryches whiche God

' Hath taken from our father, that is ours and our chyldrens: nowe then
W i God hath fapde onto thee,

Hoos eyt
Orth N

19 t bores af Faiths pues
OM suditcleg.

and bynes vp vpon camelles:

18 And carped away all his flockes, and all his substaunte whiche he had protcured, the intreast of his cattell which he had gotten m“ Mesopotamia, for to go to Hlahac his father vnto the lande

©) theo. hanaan.

gene 19 Wut Labandꝰ was gone to sheare his

een cheepe: and Rachel had olen her faz

rern re ers O images.

de 20, And Jatob tate away the heart of

mee of Laban the Sprian,in that he tolde him

at not that he fied,

21 So fled he, and all that he had, and

upg
Si

Genelis.

mpne eyes, and sawe ina dreame, and

at do. a
C 17 Then Jacob role vp, t set his sonnes

(n) The wier
Bed hagge of theit power, as Dilate did.
By mane

hood.

? acob coutde not wel abpde the de-
Grous of images.

(q) It was

XXI. made hym selfe redy, and palled otter the ryuer, and set his face strayght to-
* 7 An Gilead.

z nthe thirde day after, was it
Laban that Jacob feb, i 55

23 Then he toke ™ his brethzen with Pc, hun, and folowed after him seuen dates 8 ce ouertoke him at the mounte r 02

* Be were ftolns.

24. And © God tanie to Labanthe Sy- o Smeg rian in à dreame by nyght, and sayd bre Tae to him: take heede that thou speake not ts Ge to Jacob ought“ saue good. r

25 And Laban onertoke Jatod, and Ja- goodte cob had pitched his tent in the mounte: >
And Waban with his brethren, pitches alfo vpon the mounte Gilead,

26 And Laban fad to Jacob:what hak D thou done : for thou Hatt stollen awap mp heart, and caryed away ny daughters as though they had ben taken captine with the lworde.

27 Wherkore wentest thou away secretly vnknowen tome, and dyddest not ghet tell nie, Wh myght haue let thee go (ms nen thy way with mirth and songues, With) ehm. tymbrell and harpe- berge: pt fe

23 And hast not suffred me to kysse my Hees chyldren and my daughters: thou walt e.

a foole nowe in fo doyng.

29 Fotis win myhand throngh God to do you hurt: But the God of pour father spake vnto nie pelternight, laying:

Lake heede that thou speake not to
Jatob ought laue good.

30 And nolbe though thou wouldest nedes be gone away, because thou fore longest atter thy fathers boule, pet „ „ ge. wherfore hak thou stollen np gods: en

31 Jatob aimlwered and fapde to La- une de

ban: betause J was aAkrapde, e thought them betas ; that peraduenture thou wouldest take san. away thy daughters from me.

32 Wut With Whonisoeuer thou kindest

thy gods, ( let hyni dpe. Pere before

our brethren, seeke that thyne is by mie, and take it to thee: Wut Jatob wyst not that Rachel Chad olen them. 50

33 Thenwent Laban into Jacobs tent, ae

and into Leas tent, and into the two wl

maydseruaunts tentes:but found them E not. Then went he out of Leas tent, and entred into Nachels tent:
34. And Rachel had taken che images, and put them in the camelles strawe, & fate Downe vpon 1 : — oe 115 re
ö tent, but found themnot. Hees tossed bp all P tent, ben at

Jacob.

35 Then sapde the to her father: my

CH So this

fupcritit:on

Sichem.

(t) This mag gods bez nefite, pee bez

Jatobs fake: fo “Focob coins
{eth it his.

(u) God woulde not haue the seruaunt dekrauded of his ut re wurde,

Lord, be not angry that I can not ryse

pp before thee, kor the custome of women is tome vpon mie. So searched he, but? founde not those images.

36 And Jatob was wroth, and thode with Laban. Jacob also aunswered and lapd to bint: what haue JJ trespalfedz or what haue J offended thee, that thou dock sore pursue after mez

37 Thou hast tolled vp all my stuffe, and what hast thou foundt of all thy houleholde stuffe z put it here before thy brethren and my brethren, that they map iudge betwixt vs both.

38 Wehold, this twentie pere Hane I ben with thee, thy sheepe and thy goates haue not ben barren, and the rammes

blk thy flocke haue J not eaten.

39 Whatsocuer was tome (of beastes]! J brought it not vnto thee, but made it good my selfe:of ny hande diddest thou require it that was Molen by dap oz

nyght.

40 J was ii suche cafe, that by day the

heate consumed me, and the krost by nyght, and my flepe Departed from nune eyes.
Thus haue J ben twentie pere in thy
Houle, and serued thee fourteene peres for thy two daughters, and fice pert for thy cheepe, and thou hast chaunged my re warde ten tynies. 7

42 And extept the God of my father,

the God of Abraham, and the feare of

sahac had ben with me, surely thou haddest {ent me away nowe all emptie: but God behelde my tribulation and the labour of ny handes, and rebuked
[chee] pesternyght.

43 And Laban aunswered and fayd vn-

to Jacob: these daughters are my daughters, and Hele chyldren are my chyldren, ct thele sheepe are my sheepe, and all that thou seest is myne: and what can I do this day vnto these my daughters, or vnto their chilogen which

eee

— re RE

—— — ů— they haue borme-
44 Nowe therfore tome on, ande jet vs ¢,,

make a league J and thou, which may plete ;

bea wytnesle betwene me andthee. esi
45 Then toke Jacob a stone, and let it vp dean on end Ce fire fo; Wns

46 And Jatob sapde vnto his brethren: gather stones. And thep tobe stones, and made an heape: and they dyd cate there bpon the heape.

And Laban called it Jegar Sahadutha: but Jacob called it Galeed.

43 Then fade Laban:this heape is witnesse betwene thee and me this dap, » therkore it is called Galced, a

49 And Mispah: for he said, the Lor loke betwenethee and me when we are 1
Departed one from another, ;

50 Af thou shalt bere my daughters, 02 halt take C other Wwpues belide my daughters: here is no man with vs, be: holde, God lis? Wytnesse betwirt me au and thee. 1

51 And Laban lapde moreouer to Jatob: beholde this heape, and this stone
{et vp on ende, whiche J haue lapde betibirt me and thee,

62 This heape be witnesse, and allo this ftone fet bp on ende, that J wyll not tome ouer this heape to thec, and thou shalt not come ouer this heape and this stone {et bp on ende vnto me, to do any harme.

53 The God of Abraham, and the © ¢
God of Machoz, and the God of theyz fii father, be indge betwirt vs. And Ja- 800 0
555 9 by the feare of his father

at.

54 Then Jatob dyd satrifice vpon the mounte, and called his brethren to cate bread:aànd they did cate bread, and taryed all nyght in the hyll.

55 And early in the mornyng Taban rose bp, and kpffed his sonnes and his daughters, and“ bleffen them: gs and Laban departyng, went into his d plate agapne.

(r) Thi be @pruhe

baus had das

el the gol ·

C The

an Genelis.

The xxxij. Chapter.

God comkorteth Jacob with a vilion of angels. 4 Jacobs mellengers being tent, reauireth the fauour of his brother Eau. Jacob deuideth the people and att his fubltaunce into two parcelles. 9 Jacob prapeth in his diltresses, takyng holde on Gods promise, and conketlyng his vnworthpnelse. ; Jacob lendeth gyltes buto Elan his brother, 24 Jacob wrattee lech with an angel, that he may not keare his brother kor the tyme to come. 28 Jacob is nas med Ilrael. zr Che Jewes do not eate the tino we ok the thigh.

At Jatobwent foorth 13 And he taryed there that lame nyght,
OU his tourney, and and toke of that Whiche came to hande,

Le

e he angelles of Goo = appefent for €fau his brother: he oo cer”

came and met him. 14. Two hundred thee gotes, and twentie Ee ger
And when Jacob law hee gotes, two hundred sheepe e twen- darbe da them, he fapde: thisis tie rammes, bee gods holte, calledthe 15 Thirtie mache camettes With theyz auen ace name ofthe lame place,“ Mahanaim. toltes, fourtie kine, and ten bulles tien: few d. cs. 3 And Jacob sent messengers before tle shee asses and ten foales: him to Elau his brother, vnto the lande 16 And deliuered them into the handes
OD bk Steir, the fielde of Edom: ol his seruauntes, euery droue by them
„ 4. And he tonunaunded them, saying: selues, and sayde bute his seruauntes: enger Thus thal pe speake to my Lode go koorth before me, and put a face bee Elau, thy seruaunt Jacob sayeth thus: twice droue and droue. moons J hanie ben a straunger with Laban, 17 And he conmaunded the formost, fay: pian, Ali haue stayed there vnto this time. ing: HF Esau my bother meete thee,
5 And haue oxen alles, and sheepe, men- „and alke thee, saping, Whole art thouseruauntes, andwomenseruauntes:and and whyther goest thouz and whole haue sent to shewe lit my Lord, that J are thele (hat go) before theemay finde grace in thy sight. 18 Thou shalt fay, they be thy seruaunt
B © And the messengers tame agayne to Jacobs, and it is a prelent sent vnto my
Jacob, saping: We came to thy brother Horde Elau, and beholde, he him selle
€fau, and he connneth to nieete thee, tommeeth after vs.
‘And hath foure hundred men with him. 19 And so commaunded he the seconde,
7 ut Jacob was greatly afrayde, and and the thirde, and all that folowed the wist not whiehe way to turne him lelfe: droues saying: on this maner fee that and deuided the people that Was with pou speake vnto Esau when ye meete him, and the cheepe, and oxen, and ta- hym. melles, into two companies: 20 And fay moreouer: beholde, thy ser-
8 And layd, it Esau tome to the one part uaunt Jacob allo commeth after vs: fo: „kli fice. and snite it, the other shall saue it Life. he sayde, J Wyll appeace“ His wreath ier. 9 And Jacob said agapne: g Godok With ther present thatgoeth before me, „gang
5 my father Abraham, and God ofmyfa- — andatertard J will {ee him mp felfe, en ther Hfahac, Lode whiche saydest vn- (peraduenture he Wyll receaue“ime to 21 to me, returne vnto thy conntrey, and to grace. banka, . thy kinred, x J Will do well wich there: 21 Do went the present before hym: and nen 1° Jam “not worthy of the least of all he taryed al that night in the company.
Grimm DEO mertyes and trueth whiche thou 22 And he rose vp the lame nyght, and
Waun Halt shewed onto thyferuaunt:fo2 with toke his two wpues, e his two maydemy staffe came J ouer this Jordane,æx seruauntes, and his eleuen sonnes, and Num xi. nowe haue J gotten two companies, went ouer the forde* Jabot. Dewi i Delluer nie from the hand of my bro- 23 And he toke them, ad lent them ouer a(oltare
: Her Elgu for J fearebym,letthe wyll the ryuer, and lent ouer that he bad, bean ae al- come and sinpte me, veaj cb the mother 24. And Jacob was left hym selfe © az gem rae’ With the chyldren. lone: and there wralteled aman with we miu? 12 Thou saydelt, J wyll surely do thee hynt , vnto the breakyng ok the dap. benen oacrs
SOD, and make thy seede as the fande 25 And when he lawe chat he coulde not 0 e ofthe sea, whiche can not be numbred preuaple agaynst hymn, Helinote hym acre m foz inultitude. vpon the hucklebone of his thigh, an aoe neth.

E

U 10
Oy \ : ay) rT WY, 65 . f N 0
U Mi 52 ö
N : ‘8 ina 11 e 15

n

the hucklebone ol Jatobs thigh loosed out of ioynt as he Wrastled with hun.
2s And he faid:let me go, for the day brea-
G nech Wonder eg will not let e

| (i) we ought

20 Jacob buyldeth an aulter vnto God.

— —Atob Ipftyng bp his
Ore fox wo eyes, looked, and beholde Esau tame, Hae uyng with hym foure hundred men: and he deuided the chüldrẽ vna to Lea, and vnto Baz chel, and bnto the two handmapdens.
2 And he put the handmaydens k theyz chyldren foruiost, and Lea and her chil-
Sach e dien after, and Rachel and Joleph de pier: Hhindermolt. tiucof gue, 3 And he went before them, and bowed him selke to the grounde seuen tymes, vntill he came to his bother.
© Elan ranne to meete hym, and im-

a XSS

Genelis.

. A os = ss = 2 Ra 2 — 5 2 ot a — 3

Fe

rd 22 1 nnd
(a J
1 ay 7 CAM: SM ty e N ee TTA Aas
J NG itl WN eee ellis l 8

7 he face of

Descour khee go, except thou blefic me. 31, And as he Went over Pentel, the Gor e 27 an be tape vnto hym: what is Py sunne role vpon hyn and he halted vp- ae
| Bet GOD de names He aunswered: Jacob, pouhis thigh. | ee ee

to vs. 28 Pe sapdt: thy name thalbe called no 32 And therekore it is that the chyldren Dan be

c That is, moze Pacob, but Ilrael: Foz as a of Jsrael cate not of the sinnowe that

d prince Hatt thou wzästeled With God, (hranke in that place of the thigh, vnto

Nane. and With men, and hast preuayled. tts dap: because that he touched the

cw ert 29 And Jatob alked him, laing: tell“? hucklebone ol Jacobs thigh, about the

eie. me thy name. And he sapde: wherefore linnowe that shranke.

ter ods doelt thou alte after my name: And he

be god, Whteh

when. The. xxxiij. Capter.

1 Esau meeteth his brother, with whom Jacob countermeeteth. 4 Ełau kpsseth Jacob
5 his brother, and is at an attonement with hym.

8 And he lapde: what is au the droue ine,

ity
Las
1 Dark Net 1

2 ff
TS 7 it it ANE

f 1 { N a 5 7 6
57 N a N.
1 3 > i 1 ll ;
ERE HIN } . )
Dawe A rel 5

c That is;

11 Clay receaueth his brothers gylt.

brated him, and fel on his necke, and bil
{ed him, and they wept.

5 And he lpft vp his eyes, and sawe the women € the children, and said: whence
Hak thou thele: And he aunlwered: they are the o chudren which god hath geuen thy seruaunt.

6 Then came the handmapdens koorth, and their chyldren, and dyd their obeysaunte.

7 Nea also with her children, tame and dpd their obepsaunce : And last of all sox came Joleph and Rachel, and dpd Lace? theyr obe yfaunte. usta

C

abr iq
CC) et the godiy de not (0790

N a of Els

whiche J met: He aunlwered iche ma

pb. Qenelis.

may finde grace in the fight of my lorde.
And Esau saide: I haue inough my
Aide kepe that thou batt vnto thy
C10 And Jacob aunlwered: Pay F prap thee, but if J haue founde grace in thy sight, reteaue J pay thee my present of mip hande: fo2 haue seene thy face, as though J had feene the face of God, and so thou batt receaued me to grace.

thee: fo2 God hath had niercy on nie,

Jeti led him, and He toke it,

1 And he saide: let vs take our iournep, and go, J wyll go before thee.

neon 13 OFacod aunlwered him: my lord, thou

rocks klo west that the chyldren are tender,

see and the {niall and great cattell with

ee poung vnder my handes, which ik men

. should ouerdryue but euen one dap, all the flocke wyll dye.

14, Oh let my Lorde go before his teruaunt, and J wyll depuc fapre and foftlp, attording as the tattell that goeth be-

pere is fet otha berp itn ee,
* 30 Chey be blamed of Jacob thexr kather.
11 Ina the daughter of
. Lea, whiche the bare vnto Jacob, went out

i eto see the daughters

„ SS batty ofthe lande. tnte 2 , . , whom Whe Sichem
1 ; he sonne of Hemor the

Heute Lowe of the tountrey sawe, he toke her lay with her, and forted her.
3 And his heart lape vnto Dina the daughter of Jacob, and he loued that damsell, and fpake “ kyndly vnto her.
4. And Sichem spake vnto his father
Hemoz,faping : get me this mayden vnto my wyke. — N
5 And Jacob heard that he had defiled ina his daughter, (his sonnes beyng with their tattell in the fielde) and Jaz ae helde his peace vntill they Were

Te 6 And Hemorthe father of Sithem, ©

ue, ent out vnto Jacob to conunon with

t nc we en hym. 5 2

Nes 7 And when the fonnes of Jacob (cont-

er, ning out ofthe fielde) hearde it, it greened them, and they were not Wa little

ner: but it
AND mea ne. (a:

eir.
15 And Elau sapd: F will leaue fone of

n Oh take my blessyng that is brought and J haue inougl. And so he contpel-

q The. xxxiiij. Chapter.

13 But the sonnes of Jacob aunfivered

xxIij

fore me, and the thyldren be abic to endure, vntill J come vnto my Lord vnto

90 ech 1 0 be aunfwered: D itz I chall finde grace in thefight of my Torde. 1

6 So Esau went his way agayne that

same day vnto Seir.

17 And Jatob toke his iaurney towarde

Suchoth, and buylt him an houst, and

made boothes for his cattell: and there:

fore is it, that the name ok the place is called“ Suchoth. the y

(8) There ts

1s And Facob came toSale,a titie of O- nach

pt, which i them, Y whiche is in the lande of Cha- nne. naan, after that he was come fromche- el

lopotamta, and pitched before the cite. J.

John. tiit.

19 And“ bought a parcell of grounde, Aces vn.

where he pitched his tent, ok the chyl-
Deen of Hemor Sichenis father, for an hundreth peeces ol money.

20 And he o made there an aulter, and 111 ee

called it, the mightie God of Jlrael.

seruice.

The rauishing of Dina. 8 Hemor requireth Dina fora wyle kor his forme. The fonties of Jacob do guylekullp require the Sichemites to be circumcised. 20 Che oration of Hemor tothe people. 25 Simeon and Leui do murther the circumcized Sichemiteg.

wroth, betcause he had wrought folly in
Ilrael, in that he had lien with Jacobs daughter, which thing ought not to be done.

3 And Hemoz communed with them, a

saping: the soule of my fonne Sichem, longeth for pour daughter, J pray pou

© geue her him to wpke. Os enen

thers confent,

9 Aud make marpages with vs, and vue

geue pour daughters vnto vs, and tade

dur daughters vnto pou,
10 And pe (hall dwell with vs, and the

lande shalbe before pou: dwell, and do pour busines therein, and haue possessi-

ons therin. n And Sichem faid, bnto her kather and

vnto her brethren: let me finde grace in pour eyes, and whatsocuer ve appoint me, that wyll J gen

gene. .
H Alte freciy of me both doldzy and (FNS

gyktes, and J wyll geue accordyng AS syste pe say puto tite, so that pe geue me the anner daniel to Wwpfe. er 115 to Sichen and Henior his father talhing amongestthemselnes e

lacob. Genesis Elau. becanfe he had defiled Dina their sister. staunte, and all their cattell © be ours: gerede

zz 14. And they fayde buto them: we can let vs only tonsent vnto them, and they fete ai not do this thing, that we shoulde gene. Will dwell with vs. metal 2

Gerd: lr sister to one that is“ vncirtumc- 24. And vnto Hero? Hichenihts sonne, aks

tence for them

ee vs.

C ys But in this will we consent vnto vou: if pe wyll be as we be, € all the males amongest you be w tircunicised:

16 Then Wyll we geue our daughters vnto pon, and take pour daughters to vs, and Will dwell with vou, and be one

eople.

md But and if pe wyll not hearken vnto vs to be tirtunicised, then wyll we take our daughter, and go our waͤpes.

18 Theyr wordes plealed Hemoz, and
Sichem his sonne.

And the young man deferde not fo2 to do the thing, betaule he had a tuft to
Jatobs daughter: he Was also most (et by, of all that was in his fathers Houle.

20 Then Hemor and Sichem his sonne
Went vnto the gate of their titie, and communed with the men ok their atic,

N she gates of saping: f N

cho cpe com- 21 These men“ lyue peaceably among

mon fort are

fed, for that were an abonnnation vn-

* D2,

men children.

(i) Common affeindles and tudgententes

wert then in

moze perswa- vs and Dwell in the lande, and do th ey

de hende oltupatton therein: and beholde, the

‘a lande is large inough for them, we will take their daughters to wiues, € geue them our daughters.

22 Only herein Will they confent vnto vs for to dwell with vs, and to be one people: if all the males that are among vs be tirtumtised, as they are circumci-

{edz
23 Shall not their goodes and their sub-

The. xxxv. Chapter.

God commaundeth Jacob to go vp into Bethel, and to buylde an aulter. 2 Jacob commaundeth the idols to be taken away. 5 God putteth Jacobs enemies in keare. Jacob commeth into Bethel. „Che house ol God. 8 Debora dyeth. 10 God nameth Jacob
Ilrael agapne. 12 Chanaan is promised hym agapne. 15 Bethel. foorth Beniamin, drech. 19 Ephzatha. 21 The graue ol Rachel. 22 Buben lpeth wi

his fathers concubine, 23 Che tonnes of Jacob. 27 Jacob commeth to Fabac, 2 Wae

hac dpeth. :
I RN Sel ND God fayd vnto
Ehn Go Jacob: aryse, and get allp procure $ 8 thee vp to Wethel, and huge ke dwell there, and make a there an aulter vnto
3 God that appeared

vnto thee when thou

™ Hearkencd all that went out at the (m ers gate of his citic: and all the males were ene citcumeiled, whatsocuer went out at an ben the gate of his titie. i

25 And the thirde day, whyples they were foze, two of the sonnes of Jatob, B
Simeon Leui Dinas Wbzethren, tone en eyther of them his lworde and went tne dan

to the citie boldely, and fluc all that was male,

26 And slue also Hemor and ) Sichem his sonne with the edge ok the lwozde, and toke Dina out ok Sichems Hout, and went theyr wap.

27 And the sonnes of Jacob conmyng bpon the dead, ( spoyled the titie, be- “The. caufe they had deliled their fitter, 90 Wed

28 And toke their sheepe, oren, and their ane asses, and whatsoeuer was inthe cite, N

Co) Ee tne
Nitrate güne
8 pu nishtd

and allo in the fieldes. lla
29 And w all their goodes, and all their e

children, and their wiues, toke they taptiue, and made hauocke ok all that was in the boufe,

30 Wut Jatob sayde to Simeone Leui: pe haue troubled me, and made me to “fist be abhorred of the inhabitours of the land of the Chanaanite and the Pheredite: and J beyng kewe in number, they hall gather the selues together again me, and flap me, and so shall J and mp houle be destroped.

zi And they aunlwered: choulde © he

deale with our sister, as with an harlot:

own autta tions.

16 Rachel bringin

fleddest from the face of Esau thy

brother. (b
2 Then fayde Jacob vnto his honse- «

holde and to all that were with hym: e

put away the straunge gods that are qo

among pou, and be cleane, and chaunge

pour garmentes.

8 3 Foe

Foz we wyll aryse and go vp to Wethel, and J wyll make an aulter there vnto God, whiche hearde ine in the day of my affliction, and was with me in the way whiche J went. :

And they gaue vnto Jacob all the © straunge gods whiche they had in their hand, and al their caringes which were in theyr eares, and Jatob hyd them vnder an oke whiche was by Sichem.

And when they departed, the feare of
God fel vpon the tities that were round about them, and they did not purlue the sonnes of Jacob.

Zo came Jacob to Tus, whiche is in the lande of Chanaan (the fame is Bethel) he and all the people that was
Wich hint.

And he builded there an aulter, and ne «= CALCD the place, the God ol Bethel, bemn canle that god appeared vnto hun there when he fled frö the face of his brother.
8 Wut Debora Kebeccas nurle died, and

was buryed beneath Wethel vnder an oke: and the name of it was called, the ke oflamentation.

9 And God appeared onto Jacob agayne, after he came out of Mesopotamia, and blesled him. |

lo And God sayd vnto him: thy name is
Jatob, notwithstanding thou shalt be no moze called Jacob, but Plrael shalbe thy name: e hẽ called his name Jlrael.

1 And God sayd vnto him: Jam God almightie, ve fruite full and nuiltiplie: a

hus one mo follie luted all tht hte

3 ttt he pourged f

ftonfir:

15 pioz

made dnpia beloze,

shall spring of thee, yea and kinges (hall tome out of thy loynes.

And the lande which J gaue Abraham and Jsahac, wil Ygeue vnto thee, and vnto thy seede after thee wyll J geue that lande allo.

And lo God departed from him, in the place where he had talked with hum.
14. And Jacob let vp on ende in the place

where he talked with himleuen a one let he vp on ende, e powred drinke offering theron, ⁊ powred allo oyle theron.

BUC LB ag
Ahe ag

NG that ig alten, 3

TS

Helc are the generations of Efau, the lame is Edom. lau toke his wines
Foal Of daughters of Cha-
LESS) naan; © Ada p daugh-

0 Mints ¢

Genelis.

nation, and © a multitude ok nations

15 And Jatob caued the name of the

place where God fF | ch)
Bethel. pake With hym,

Gi
16 And they departed from Wethel: and;

when he Was but a fielde breadth from
Ephzath, Rachel beganto trauell, and in trauapling, the was in peri:

17 and as The was in paynes of her labour, the nud wife saide vnto her: keare not, for this sonne is thyne allo.

18 Then as her soule was a departing o
(kor The Died he called his name Wen.
Ont, but his father called hynr Beniamin.

19 5 92 5 died de Was burt:

in the Wap to Ephrath, Whiche is
Weth lehent. ö 8

20 And Jacob & set vp a stone on ende vpon her graue: whiche is called Raz chels grauestone vnto this day.

21. And Ilrael went thence, and pitched his tent beyonde the towre of Eder.

22 And as Ilrael dwelt in that land, Nuben went and © lay with Bilha his fathers concubine: And it tame toPlracts eare. The sonnes of Jatob Were twelue in nuniber.

23 The sonnes of Lea: Ruben Jacobs first borne sonne, and Simeon, ¢ Lem, and Juda, and Jlachar, and Zabulon.

24 The sonnes ot Rachel: Joseph and
Weniamin.

25 And the sonnes of Wiha Racheis handmayde: Dan and Nephthali.

26 And the fonnes of Zilpha Leas handmayde: Gad and Aler: Lhele are the sonnes of Jacob which were borne him in Mesopotaàmia.

27 And fo Jacob came bnto Jlahac his father to Mamre, vnto Cirtath-arba,
™ Whiche is Hebron, where Abraham and Jlahat dwelt.

28 And the dayes of Jlahat were an hundred and fourescore peres.

29 And Jlahat detayed awap, and dyed, and was layde vnto his people, beyng olde and full of dayes: and his sonnes
Esau and Jacob buryed him.

q The xxxvj. Chapter.

2 The wyues of Efau. 6 Clau dwelleth on mounte Seir. 7 €fauand Jacob ryche men.
Che generations of Elau, the father of the Jdumeans. 1 Amalech.

ter of Ebon an Hethite, and Aholibama. the daughter of Ana, the daughter of,

Sibcon an Heute,
And watemath Ilmaels daughter,

and fitter of Mebaioth. ;

XXIII.

called Bechanen. thitis,
0 of

n. .
“ Ephratha.

(i) God ta: eth away hts gutes, furthe abufe of tiem,
4 na the sonne ol my forowe,
„ Tha the sonne of my tyght hande.

(k) Dnips meirdzall of her sepulchre, becaule of the dope of resutsection.

Y Thus the deuill, to Maan der the whole
Churche, and to vere the deth some to

hozribit sinne.

m) De had ben froin hym nome. 43. petes:that is. xx. in Mesopo tana g. xxiii. tit in the land of Chanaan.
(n) Atwu aftcrwards fo calleb.

(o) Jacob was nowe a hundreth ond t wentie peres olde: for he
Wag bore

When Fiahac

was üx nt.

c Gen. xx viii

Thelcripture doth not

4 And Ada bore duto Elau““ e ua Jes

friende.

(c) He mcantbut his owne: =

tute foz the bene site of his .

2B « dene 8 Thus dwelt Elau in mounte er,

thence when

¢ now after bis

Glaus sönes.

ee wet « 16 © Dube Theman, duke Omar, duke

thonsande vn-

Genel:s.

and Walemath bare Kehuel.

And Aholubama bare Jehus, and Jalain. and Corah. These are the sonnes ok lau, whiche were borne hym in the lände ok Chanaan. 5
‘6 And Elau toke His wyues, and his sonnes and daughters, and al the soules bk his houle, his goods, and all his cat tell, and al his substaunce which he had got in the lande of Chanaan, and Went into a countrey abay © from the fate of his brother Jatob.

Foz theyr ryches was much, and they toulde not dwell together: aud the land wherein they were straungers toulde not reccaue them, betause of theyr polsessions.

$7

the same Esau, is Edom.

9 These are the generations of Elau, father ofthe Edomites in mount Seir.

10 And these are the names of Esaus

sonnes: Eliphas the fonne of Ada, the

wyle of Elan, and Vehuel the forme of
Walemath the wife ol klau.

11 And the sonnes of Eliphas, were
Theman, Omar, Sepho, and Gatham, and Cenaz.

12 And Thinma was concubine to Eliphas Esaus sonne, and bare vnto Eliphas Amalet: and thele be the sonnes of Ada Esaus wife.

z And thele are the sonnes of Nehuel:

„ Mahath, and Zerah, Samma, and

« MBAs thele were ß sonnes of wale-

«
C
€
«

eee math Elaus wpfe.

‘14. And thele were the sonnes of Aholibama the daughter of Ana, daughter of
Sebeon Elaus wife: and fhe bare vnto
Elau, Jehus, aud Jalam and Corah.
15 Acie were * dukes of the sonnes of seg, Elall. O The children of Eliphas the kirst borue sonne of Elau were thele.

Sepho, duke Cenas, and duke Corah, duke Gatham, e duke Annalee: thele are the dukes that came of Eliphas in the lande of Edom, and thele were the
« fonnes of Ada.
17 These also are the children of Nehuel
< €faus sonne: duke Pahath, duke Serah, duke Sauna duke Mtzsa. These are the dukes that cane of Kehuel, in the lande of E dom: and thele are the sonnes of Wasemath Elaus Wyte.
Celis Thele were the chyldren of Aholibama Claus wple: dune Jehus, duke

Ea
Jalam, duke Corah: these dukes cane of Aholibama the daughter of Ana‘
Elaus wpke. 0
19 Thelc aͤre the chyldren of Elan, and thefe are the Dukes ok them, whiche
Elau is Edom. f :
20 Thest are the chyldren of Seir the:

(was called] Thimna.
23 The chyldren ok Sobal were these:.
Aluan, and Manahath, and Ebal, Sepho, and Onan. 0
24. Thest are the chyldren of Sebeon, both Ata and Ana: this was that Ana. that founde © mutes in the Wyler. Osan aN as fhe fedde her father Sebeons «dou alles. © dittinctiondf
25 The chyldren of Ana were thele : Di‘ mucins fon,¢ Aholibama the daughter of Ana. case.”

26 These are the chpldzen of Difon:.
Hemdan, and Elban, and Pethran, « and Cheran. ;

27 The chyldren of Eler are hele: Bilhan, and Saauan, and Acan. ‘

28 The chyldren ol Dilan allo ave thele: «

Us and Aran. 3

29 These are the dukes that came ol. the Horites: duke Laton, duke Hoval, , duke Sebcon, duke Ana, 0

30 Duke Dilon, duke Cer, duke Dilan: these be the dirkes that came of Hol, al

HG they dukedoms in the lande of, cir, ; 0

31 Thele are the kinges that raigned in Y

the lande of Edom, before there raig- fe ned anp king vpon the chyldren of HE 4 racl. : coon |

3 Wtla the sonne ok Weoz raigned in castes”
Edom: and the name of his atic was!“
Dinhabah. *

33 And when wWela dyed, Jobab the. sonne of Serah out ok Wolra raigned 1 in his steade. :

34. When Jobab alfo was dead, Huos 10 the lande of Temani, ratgned in

is steade. —

35 And akter the death of Huta, W. Qe
Hadad the sonne of zsedad, which MEW ne the Madianites in the field of the Moa- * "soe bites, raigned in his steade: c the name dan ok his citie was Auith. ‘

36 When

acob.

‘=p 636 When Hadad was dead, Samlah of
Malrecah raigned in his steade.

Oe 07 37 When Samlah was dead, Haul “of

ion the ryuer of Rehoboth raigned in his

bn steade.

b, 8 When Saul was dead, Waal hanan

a 155 sonne of Athbor raigned in his

¢ cade, 8

39 And after the death of Waal hanan

the sonne of Achboz, Hadar raigned in

his steadte: and p name of his date was
Pau, c his wyfes name © Mehetabel, the daughter ol Matred, the daughter

of Mezaͤhab. N

(i) 105 * women (a8 meat tth BP :

11 kd ien names) § wert of great guour among

Genelis.

40 Thele are the names w of thedules «cn Some that came of Elau, actozdyng to their edge
Rinredes, places, xc names: dune Tini- « pe we na, duke Muah, dune Jetheth, ‘

4 Dube Ahollbamah, duke Elah, duke
Duke € .

42 Duke Cenaz, dune Theman, duke.

Mlblar, a

43 Duke Magdiel, dune Fran, Hhelk:

be the dukes of Edom, attordyng to‘

thetr habitations in the lande of their.

possessions. This Elau is the father ok the Edomites.] 0 a ‘3B

q The. xxxvij Chapter.

Jacob inhabiteth the lande of Chanaan. 2 Joleph accuseth his brethren. 4 The firk dreame ol Joleph. 9 The other dreame of Joleph. is The brethren of Joleph do contult about his death. 22 Ruben deliuereth him. 23 Joleph is cast into a ppt. 26 By the coun-

cell of Judas he is solde to the Jlmaelites. 32 Che apparell of Joteph imbre wed with the blood of a Hyd is carped to his father. 34 Jacob lamenteth his fonne Joseph, 35

Joleph is Colde to Putiphar.

n
Vi Sv
Wye

Mauer any i

| Ne

0 ic — 2 Wat 85 8
Aid} 0 8 ai 28 ' a
11 e cx

5 Lale Uti 8 : 7005
7 "UTP ‘{ TR op a SATS ae reer
— ae eR r d Bl M

Atob dwelt in the land
I wherin his father was
AZM Tong straunger, euen

linz lande of Chanaan,
O\\ IThele are p genera tious of Jacob: when
; —Joseph was seuenteen eres olde, he kept sheepe with his brethren, and the ladde was with v lonnes of BUA, and with the sonnes of Zu pha, his fathers wyues. And PFoleph bought vnto his father © their cupll

N.

D brat: eee

report. 18

3 But Ilrael loued Poleph moze then „ „ se all his chyldren, betause he begate hyni men a in his Golde age: and he made hyma fe ous

coate of many “ colours. „ Peeces.
4 And when his brethren saw that their ane father loned hym moze then all his e

brethren, © they hated hynt and coulde ee not speake peaceably vnto bynt. Satta came (ro god,

Moreouer, when Poleph “ had dreamed a dreame, he tolde it his brethren, 10

ich Hated hym pet the moze, 8 which hated hyn y Di 0 8

ct) Wopfea woulde shewe

hoe none of thele thyngeg tame bp

: chaunce.

the wicked hate them.

(b) Bp chiete of the fantilfe, the

dead.

(The gob! tate ofa hou

older foz bis men a deastes.

And he lad vnto them: Heare I prap vou this © dreame which J haue dreamed.

„ Weholde, we were byndyng sheaues in the fielde: and lo, my (heafe arole and stoode vpright, e beholde, pour sheaues

stoode rounde about, and made obepfaunce to my fheafe.

To whom his brethren layde: Shalt

thou be a kyng in deede on vs: 02 shalt thou in deede haue domimon duer vs-
And they hated hyn pet the more, betause of his dreames and of his wordes.
And he dreamed pet another dreame,

and tolde it his brethren, saying: behold

haue had one dreame moze, and beolde, the sunne, and the moone, Ex). starres made ol eysaunte to mme.
And when he had tolde tt to his father and his brethren, his father rebuked hym, and fayde vnto him: What is this dreame that thou hat dreamed 2 Shall
Y and thy mother and thy brethren in deede come to bowe to theez n And his brethren enuied hym: but his father noted the saying.

12 1g brethren alsdo Went to kepe his fa

thers cattell in Sichem.

1 And © Pfrael sayde vnto Joleph: do not thy brethren kepe in Sichem: come, and J wyl sendethee to them.

C 14 He aunswered: here am J. And he

and mie g.

Ennte and malice hauing

Menpe tke brett, linde ene-

sayde vnto hom: Go (J prape thee} fee whether it be well with thy brethren and the cattell, and bzyng me worde agayne, And fo he sent hym out of the bale of Debron, t he came to Sichem.

5 And a tertayne man founde hym, and

beholde he Was Wandryng out of his

Wape in the fielde, and the man asked

hym: what sekest thon:

He aunswered: J {eke my ™ brethren, tell me J prape thee where they kepe lcattell)

17 And the mansayde, They are departed hente: for J haue hearde them fay, let vs go vnto Dothan. Thus went
Fein after his brethren, and founde

hem in Dothan.

18 And when they sawe hyma farre of, before he came at them, they toke counz tell agaynst hymn? for to slea hym.

end im lug: 19 For one sayde to another: behold, this

ter.
4 Mailter of

dreames.
(m) Sinne

sot of God.

Dez be bode
* the epes n: dut

“notable dreamer tommeth.

20 Come nowe therefore and let bs slape hym, and ew cast hym into fome pit, and
We Wyll fay, soine naughtie bea hath

Genelits.

— r
Lofeph,

deuoured hym: and we shall fee what wyll tome of his dreames. D

21 When Ruben hearde that, he ryo a», hym out of their handes, and lade: let aue vs not Kyll hom. ont bong

22 And Ruben fapde moreouer vnto the: Sehn shed no blood but) tast hym into this ebe pit that is in the wyldernesle, and laye

no haͤnde vppon hym: this he tapde) namely that he myght ryd hym out of their handes, and delpuer hym to his father agayne.

23 And when Joseph was come vnto his brethren, they strypt hym out of his coate, his partie coloured coate that
Was vpon hyni.

24. And they toke hym, and tast hym into an einptie pit, wherein was no Wa smn ter. ö though ies

25 And they fate them downe to eate ("es
Head : and as they lyft vp their eyes auen and loked about, and behold there came o a tonpanp of Ylmaelites from Gilcad, . and their tamelles laden With spiterie, bawlme, and mirrhe, and Were gopng downe ta cary it to Egypt. N

26 And Juda fayde vnto his brethren:

What © auapleth it vf we flay dur bro- 0 ens ther, and kepe his blood setrete- hele

27 Come on, and let bs fell hym tothe wen“
Ilmaelites, and let not our hande be urs bpon him: for he is our brother and our fleshe. And his brethren were content. .

28 Then as the Madianites mar- aer chaunt men palled by, they driewe and u lyft Joleph out of the pit, and solde hun ante

vntõ the Ilmaelites for twentie peetes gam
1 N they brought Joseph in- 5

gypt.

29 Then Ruben came agapne vnto the pit, and beholde, Josehh (was] not in the pit: then he rent his clothes,

30 And went agapne vnto his brethren, saping: the lad is not (vonder; wo is me,
Whyther Hall J go-

31 And they tone Josephes coate, and
Hand akyd, and dipped the coate in the

32 And they sent that partie coloured toate, and cauled it to be brought vnto 2 their kather, and layde: © This haue hai
We founde, see whether it be thy sonnes w toate, or no. 8

33 And he knewe it, faying: It is mi formes coate, a naughtie beast bath De uoured hym, Joleph is without doubt rent in peetes.

34 And

() Thü
Swag won then murthe before Hop;

4. And Jacob rent his clothes, t put fackcloth about his lopnes, and mourned for his sonne a long season.

35 But all ( his sonnes r all his daughters rose bp to comfort hym: neuerthelesse He woulde not be comforted, but

res. 35 Jarah.

Wout that tyme “Bue
N das went downe from his brethren, and gate de him toa man called Pre rah of Adulam. 4
And there he faww™ p
Ahne. 0 daughter ola man cal moo <. led Sua, A Chanaanite : and he toke her, and went in to her. 33
3 And che conceaned, and bare a sonne, and called his name Er.
4 And fhe conceaued agayne, and bare a sonne, and called hym Oran.
5 And she conceaned agayne, and bare
ür pet a sonne, whom (he called Selah: €

A 2
The cur- { de Hhe- ¢ 2

rd

paltthing. ¢ sun he was at ew Chesib whe she bare him. me And Judas ( gane Er his first borne
© < fonne a wpfe, whole name was Thamar. :
5.7 And Er Judas lirst borne fonne was
Wicked in the (ght of the Lorde, and the Lorde slewe hynt.
8 And Judas lapde vnto Onan: Goin liehe o thy brothers wpe, and marrit her, welle that thou mapelt stirre bp leede vnto e, Dy brother. duh. And when Onan perceaued that the lten, seede shoulde not be his, therfore when he wet into his brothers Wyle, he spyl-
< leditonthegrontine, € gaue not seede
‘ bntobis brother,

10 ae the thyng which he dyd, displeaah

the word °

allo e Lorde: Wherforc he slewe hym c Allo.

1 Then lapde Judas to Thamar his mae, daughter in lawe: © Remapne a wyance, dope at thy fathers Houle, tyil Selah
* „ imp sonne be growen. (Fo2 he fayde, © me ll peraduenture he dpe allo as his brc-
Me, khren dyd. ind Thamar went ¢ dwelt

A Gencsis.

q The. Xxxviij. Chapter,

XXV]. :

fayde, J Wyll go downe into the graue bato mp sonne, mournyng: And thus his father wept for hym.

36 Andthe Madiamtes lolde hym in Egypt bnto Putiphar, chiefe officer of g
Pharaos, and his chiefe stewarde. cane

the an or

chiese of tbe slaugbter men or coe er.

Che martage ol Judas. Er. 4 Onan. 5 Selah, Er taketh Thamar to wple.
7 Er dieth. 10 Onan the enutous is (mitten of God. Thamar the wydowe a. bydeth with her father, 12 Judas. his wyle being dead, goeth out to sheare cheepe.
1s The incest ol Judas with Chamar his daughter in la we. 24 Judas cõmaunded his daughter in la we beyng accuted ol whordome to be brent, and akter ward acknowledgeth the fault, 27 Thamar bryngeth koorth two twynnes. Pha-

in her fathers house. J
2 And in procelle oftyme, the daughter of Sua Judas wpfe oped: Then Judas when he had left mournyng, Went vnto his sheepe shearers to Thymmath, he and his friende yirah of Adula.

BB And one tolde Thamar, saping: beholde, thy father in lawe goeth bp to
Thinmath to sheare his sheepe.

14 And Che put her widowes garmentes t of from her, and touered her with a. bayle, and dilgupled her {elie , and fate *. T her downe in “av open place, Whiche reves isby the wapspdeto Thinmath, kor: 0% ne betause that she sawe Selah was gro- roto e
Wen, and fhe was not geuen vnto Hymn bene to wpfe. 2

15 When Juda lawe her, he thought it had ben an harlot, betause she had touered her face. :

16 And he turned to her vnto the way, x fayde, Come J prape thee, let ie ye. with thee. (Foz he knewe not that it ne was his daughter in law.) And she an- ener ane swered: what wylt thou geue me for to. lye with ther ‘

17 Then sayde he: J wyll sende thee a: kyd fronithe flocke. She layde: Then. geue me a pledge tyll thou sende it.

18 He sapde: What pledge Mail Z gene thee: She lapde: Thy fignet, thy «some bracelet, and thy staffe that is inthyne ar hande. And“ He gaue it her, and layt bas he by her: and (he was with chylde by. CO Shas the hyn. 1 1

19 And she gate her bp, and went, and «grin put her vaple from her, and put on her ‘D>
Wpdowes rayment. ee This te

20 And Judas fent the kyd by His™ ne ben fricude Adulam, for to receaue his c

5 Dij pledge

pledge againe from the womans hand: but he founde her not. b be Us. 21 Then alked he the men of the fame mewn < place, faping: Where ts the harlot bun n. that fate openly by p Wayes syde- They ihr inhone. aunlwered: There is no harlot here.
Ros. 22 dt tame therkore to Juda againe aud mien ten al. fapde vnto hym, J tan not fynde her: and allo the men ot the plate layde, that there was no harlot there.
23 And Juda sayde: Let her take it to her, est we be shamed: beholde, J

Crenelis.

[pertaine) am IJ with chylde: And faide ‘ also, Loe J pray tice whole are these, this seale, and this beacetet, and this. ftaite, >
26 And Juda acknowledged them, and D fade: She hath ben move rightedus meds then J, betause J gaue her not Selah e my sonne. And he lay with her no more. e
27 Wut When the tyme Was tome that « "esta, fhe chonlde be deliucred, beholde there ah
Was two twynnes in her wombe.
28 And when she trauapled, the lone)

(n) He esreth ¢ ©) Ok a:

meet edis ent the kyd, c thou hast not found her. put out his hande, e the mpdwple tobe nenne

outwarde Mi fame then 24. And it tanie to palse, after threc mo- E bounde ared thieede about it, saping: W b er. nethes one tolde Juda, saping: Tha- this is come out first. a cee” nat thy daughter in lawe Hath played 29 And he plucked his hand backe againe,

the harlot, and with playing the harlot and beholde, his bother tame out. And

ts become great with chyrde. And Ju- she sayde: Wherekore hast thou rent a.

da sapde: BGrypng her foorth, that she rent vppon thee- and called his name
0 Sus. ima be C brent. Phares, | aer «25 And when they bought her foozth, zo Afterward came out his brother, that

had the red threede about his hande: and his name was called Zarah.

urns in (he leut to her father in lawe, faping : yen. Gy the man vnto whom thele thynges 9

The. xxxix. Chapter.

Joleph is fold to Putiphar. 2 Godis with Joleph. 5 God biellech Putiphar kor Jolephs fake, 8 Joleph denyeth whordome onto his Lady his mistrelle. 14 Jole ph ae of whordome of his Lady, is impriloned. 21 Godtaketh compalsion vpon Foleph,

, ss N 7 1 rT ae i 0 1155 {iN V f n Alf 4 2 1 ; 9 = U 75 1 ho
2 Ne Na ut d , cry
4 2 , iL? . 0 far 8 ae . Dts 8 0
Aue =? We SG e n ney! pe 43 7 Pole

8 he” fj |
70 d 5

an ial

V -

r

UAE i oy * , u

vill Da n . os 3 2 ; a all ff ih 91 5 El N ft o rics GAC Uh

CTY WAP IRR *. uA 0

Ala Nao SS it CF Ae }

M n e

ane te W
Uy ee U ltteer

S| Dleph was bought brought hym thyther.

h onto Egypt, and Putt 2 And God was with Joleph, and he Lee
EAS phar,a Lowe of Pha- became a co luckie een m a
N Wa Sol rr ca he eee Egyptian. 79 97

5 ö „ 3 And his maitt 005 as fa

bought hynt ot the BL an 9

== maclites, whiche had

ethem.

5 her epes vpon Joleph, and fares Come]

9 There is no man greater in the houle then J, neither hath he kept any thyng

hwyfe: how then can J do euenthis
5 great à wickednes, F sinne against those Ged. 0 God-e . . : ‘
Pon I. And after this maner spake the to Joene leph day by day: but he hearkened not vuto her to sleepe Pneare her, or to be in her company.
And ona certaine tonuement dap, Jo-

0 dalttrie i put!

mel, two
Meat finns ~~

sinesse, and there was none of the houlholde by, in the honse. 8

Rie 2 Then the taught him by the garment,
5 laying: lye with me. And he © teft his
Ming garment m her bande, and fledde, and
A2ot hym out.

vnthankkull.
2 MD it canie to passe

N baker, had offended their lorde the kyng ol
Egypt. 4

Genells.

eon me but only thee, because thou art

seph entred into the houle to do his bu-

rafter thele ! thynges,

XXVI].
3 And when lhe fawe that he badiefte

his Zarmient inher hande, and was sied C

14. “ She called vnto the men of her A) Were te
Houle, and tolde them, saying: pn peat ht hath brought in an Hebe vnto vs e eee do vs shame: for he tame in to me to 9 haue lyen with me, and J began to trie

With a loude voyte:

5 And when he hearde that J lyft vp

my voyte and crped he left his garment
With nie, e fled away, and got hym out.

16 And che layed vp his garment by her, vntyll her Lorde tame home.

17 And The tolde hini With these wordes, faying : This Hebrue seruaunt whiche thou batt brought vnto vs, came vnto me to do me shame.

18 Wut afloone as J lyft vp my voyte and eryed, he left his garment with me, and fledde out.

19 When his maister w hearde the wor- Haan des of his wyfe whiche che tolde hym, eo laping, after this maner dyd thy {ere » uaunt to me: he Wared wroth.

20 And Jolephes niatster w tobe bym, Cn) ia ee and put hym in prplon, euen into the somber plate where the kynges prpsoners lape cone bounde: and there continued he in © ann prilon. 9

21 But the Lod was with Joleph, and shewed hym™ mercie, and got hymfauour in the sight of the lord ok the prilon.

22 And the! keper of the prison commit- © ted to Josephes hande all the prisoners that were in the prilon Houle and what and, so euer was done there, that drd he. dane?

23 And the keper ofthe prilon loked vnto

nothyng that was vnder his hande, sepng that the Lod was with hym: Foz whatsoeuer he dyd, the Lorde made it to prosper.

The. xl. Chapter.

Joteph minictreth onto the butler and baker ol Pharao. 5 Chey see dreameg.
9 Che butlers dreame, the which Joleph interpreteth. 15 he expoundeth allo the dreame ofthe baker. 20 The feat ol Pharao on his birth dap. 23 The butler

2 And Pharao was angry agaynst his two officers, agaynst the chicfe butler and the chiefe baker. 1
3 And put them in warde in his chiele stewardes Houle, euen in the prison and ente place where Joseyh was bounde. denen
4 And the Ochiefe ste ward gaue Joleph wee g D ij à charge led to Hert.

a

dis reconci-

mercie appea-

TL

Peph.

(e) Pzisoners are not tightly to be ioked vp von and conider ed.

(d) Birotas gers and witches art cone

dempn

Ome

the byng pro-

be that pcre.
83 That ts, griñie: such maner spcaches nre often in Moyseg in

the next chap»

ter, and othec-
Where.
Or, number.

Cg) That is,

tale thee out ol pʒison.

Jose hoped well to hane ben soner delweeed: but
God wyl haue no {pine pre= scribed.

G
1 serued them: cafonin warde.

a charge with them, and they tontinued a

And they dreamed epther ok them

in one night, both the butler and the ba-

ker ofthe kyng of Egypt, whiche were

bounde in the pryson house, epther of them his dreauie, c eche mans dreaune ora sundry interpretation.

When Joleph came in vnto them in the mornyng, and G loked vpon them, beholde they were sadde.

And he asked Pharaos chiefe officers that were with hym in his maisters
Warde, saying: voherfore loke pe fo ladlye to day-

g They aunswered him: We haue rea:

med a dreame, and haue no man to dedave it. And Joseph sayde vnto them:

do not w interpretinges belong to God:

tell me J pray pou.
9 Aamthechlele büner tombe his breame

to Joseph, and saide vnto him: Inmy

dreame, me thought there stoode a vine before me, i v
10 And in the vine were] three braunches, and it was as though it budded, c her blossomes (hot foorth: and the clusters therof brought foorth rype grapes. n And JJ had Pharaos cup in my hand, and toke ofthe grapes and presled them in Pharaos cuppe, and deliuered Pharaos © cuppe into his hande. .
1 And Joleph fayde vnto hym, this is the interpretatiõ of it. The three braunches are three dapes. i
Foz within thece dapes shall Pharao lyft c vp thine head, and restore thee into thine office agayne, and thou shalt deliuer Pharaos cup into his hande af:

enesis.

butler.
14 But W thynke on me when thou art in good cafe, and shewe mercy A peave

thee] vnto me, and make mention of me

to Pharao, t bring me out ofthis Hout:
15 Jor J was priuilp by stealth taken away out ofthe lande of the Hebrewes: and here also haue J done nothyng at all wherfore they shoulde haue put m into this dungeon. \
16 When the chiefe baker sawe that the

°c.

interpretatiõ Was © good, he layd vnto o¢,,
PFoleph :methoughtalfoinmydzeame gees that J had three whpte wycker bak =

kettes on my head, 0

17 And in the bppermaost balket there ,

Was of all maner bake meates for Pha-

ràao, and the birdes dyd cate them out ol

the basket ly. was dpon my head.
13 And W Polbph aunlwered and faide:

three balkettes, are three dapes: Foz
Within three dayes Mhatt Pharao take thy head krom thee, and chall hang thee ona tree, and the birdes thail eate thy fleche from of then.
19 And it came to passe the thirde doy, which was Pharaos birth dap, ther he made a featt vnto all his seruaunteand he lyfted bp the head of the chief.

butler, and of the chiefe baker among

his leruauntes: N
20 And restored the chicfe butler vnto his butlership agapne, whithe also reached the tuppe into Pharaos hande.
21 Wut he hanged the chlefe baker, euen as Joseph had interpreted vnto him.

22 Peither by the chiefe butler re- pv

this is the interpretation thereof, The aan

Pharao.

thynges, and that bolvelp,

) ee
1 ts of

member Joleph, but ww forgat hom. , ter the olde maner when thou walt his f eee
: . On
Eee
The. xlj. Chapter. ode
The dreame of Pharao of seuen kyne. 5 Inother dreame ol eares ot come. 5 Che butler mentioneth Loleph bekore Pharao. 4 Joleph beyng ien outol een. declareth Pharao his dreameg, koretellyng aboundaunce and famine. 39 Joleph is made kit enn . te ee. 48 Joleph gathereth the grayne ö ousnes. 50 The sonnes of Joleph. : epueaim, 54 Famine through the whole worlde. e eee
1 Malter o two yeres kpne, and fat fleshed, and fedde in a
Pharao dreamed, and medowe. beholde, he thought 3 And seuen other kyne tame vp alter that he stoode bya ry- them out ok the rpuer, euyll fauoured,
\ liners spde. and leane fleshed, e stoode by the other
2, And there came out of

Ryne bpon the brynke of the rpuer.

the ryuer seuen goodiy 4. re

Tae
1 BAO TL cf, eo se fg

TANS;

WAN ie | im ‘hs
3 n ss
2 . AC N
2 (oe

) es ORS: 0 0

oS Ff) Fon. WR 0 eat hay dh DOA

kyne dyd eate bp the seuen well fauon-

red and fat kyne: and Pharao awoke,

) Though spirituall ine of

rea he {econde tyme: and beholde, senen ma bares of corne grewe vppon one stalke, mer, Lake and goodlxv. done 6 And agapne, seuenthinne cares, blamie. 15 with the east winde sprang vp alter hem. N
8 7 Andthe lenen thinne cares deuoured the senen ranke ¢ full cares, And Phabao àwaked, and see lit was) a dreanie.
8 Amd when the mornyng came, his spi-
Vite was troubled, and he sent and called for all the southlayers ol Egypt, and all the pie men thereof; and Pharao tolde them his dreame, but there was
“none of them that coulde interprete it ng nto Pharao. eo, The spake the chiele butler puto Pharao saping: Ido remember mp laultes this day:

fo Pharao beyng angry with his seruauntes, put in warde in the chiele stebaden houle both me, and the chieke

i Aud we dreamed both of vs in one uyght, and eche mans dreame of a sundiy interpretation.

1 And there was with vs w a young man, an Hebzue borne, seruaunt vnto thechiele stewarde: to whom when we tolde them, he declared our dreames to

J actcordyng to eyther of our dreames.
And as he declared them to vs, euen

5 And he slept agapne, and D dreaned

14. Pharao © sent therfore and called Jo- (0 hö seph: and they bought him hastyly out ene ol the dungeon. And he chaued hümlelfe uche and chaunged his rayment, and came warde. nto Pharao. l

1j And Pharao fayde vnto Joleph: J C haue dreamed a dreame, eno man can interprete it:æ J haue beard fay ok thee that assoone as thou hearest a dreame, thou canst interprete it.

16 Joseph aunswered Pharao, faying: , nm
Not J, but God shall gene Pharao . an aunlwere of peace. CO We gan

17 And Pharao sapde vnto Joseph: In wee my dreame mie thought J stoode by a henden. ryuers syde,

18 And there came out ofthe ryuer seuen fat flesshed and well fauoured kyne, and fedde ina medowe.

19 And then senen other kyne came out

after them poore, and very pil fauoured and leane flesshed, such as J neuer saw in all the lande ol Egypt, they were fo ll fauoured.
20 And the seuen leane aud pil fauoured kyne, did eate bp the first senen fat kine:
21 And when they had “eaten them vp, a man coulde not perceaue that they had eaten them, but they were styll pu fauoured as they were at the begynnyng: and Jawoke.
22 And J saw againe in mp dreame, and
D iti beholde,

"D2, fo

leane.

& Conte ine to the inwarde parts of them.

Pharao.

stalke, full and fayre. .
„Or., 23 And beholde, seueu cares agape "Wore a thered, thinne, and blasted with the catt wynde, sprang vp after them.
24 And the thinne cares deuoured the senen good eares: and J haue tolde the southlapers, but there was no man that coulde tell what it nieaneth.
25 And Joseph aunswered Pharao: both!
Pharaos dreames are Wone, God hath

eden the wed Pharao what he is about to meanyng. o. N 1 patente 26 The seuen good kyne, are seuen eres,

comet, but also

ome bute and the seuen good cares are leut peres
Aue chu Allo: and it is but one dreame. annie, 27 Lykewyle the seuen thinne and euyll aoa de fauoured Line that came vp after them, arc seuen peres, and the {eucn emptie ck blasted cares with the cast wynde, chalbe seuen peres of famine,

28 This worde which J haue sayde vnto Pharao, is it that God is about to do, and sheweth it vnto Pharao.

29 Beholde there tome seuen peres of

| (i) Lett ha rad fhonloe a anp thyng of his idols that

Sod is onlp a vcholder of the
Worlde, and

lande ol Egypt. W
30 And agapne, there hall aryse after then seuen peres Wok fanune, and all the plenteonsnes shalbe forgotten in the lande of Egypt: and the famine chall

tonsume the lande. .

31 Meither Mall the plenteousnes be knowenmthe lande, by veafon of that faz mine that (tall come) after? for it chalbe exteedyng great. 288

32 And as conternyng that the dreame was doubled vnto Pharao the feconde tyme: beholde, the thyng is certainly prepared of God, and God wyll Mort: ly bryng it to passe.

33 Nowe therfore” let Pharao prouide fo2a man of vnderstandyng, and wile-

Laß Gos donne, f set him ouer the land of Egypt.

a en the 34 And let Pharao do this alfo „that he

amchen, imake“officers ouer the lande, c take vp

0 Ch) God ts meeciful tuer,

cuen in his pu

mishmenteg.

Ct) We are

prrp negligét

in gods judge

ments, vf wor

remember not

that the tyme g at 8

Len the likt part okthe inheritaunce in p land wild, ok Egypt in the seuen plentedus veres.

cm goin 35 And e let them gather all the foode of
Eau gol these good peres that tome: and laye vp
Sosa CONE bnder the hande of Pharao, and

e let them kepe foode in the cities.

36 And so shall that foode be for store in the lande agaynst the seuen peres okfamine, which Mail come in the lande of
Kah that y lande perishe not through

anune. i

Genesis. a.

beholde, scuen cares sprang out ofone

great plenteousnes throughout all the

37 And the saying seemed good in ß eyes of Pharao; and in the eyes ot all his ser-

uauntes. a

38 Then fade Pharao vnto his seruauntes: Map there be founde a man che as this is, in whomthe spirite of God

is: e

39 And Pharao saide vnto Joleph: For- en alinuch as God hath chewed thee all n this, there is no man of vnderstandyng ©, cnn
02 of wiledome Ipke vnto thee, Gabe

40 Thou therfore shalt be ouer my house, and accordyng to thy worde Mati all my 5

copie be “ruled: only in the krynges! « cate wyll I be aboue thee. f

41. And Pharao sapde agayne vnto Yo: F seph: beholde, J haue let thee ouer all o 35 0:

the lande ok Egypt. Tn ne

42 And Pharao toke of his rpng from kore. his baude, and put it bpon Jolephes wees hande: c araped him in cloth of rapnes, be grace
Eputa golden cheyne about his necke. sx.

43 And let hym vpon the best charet he e had saue one: and they cried before him, tender father, and made hym ruler te duer all the lande of Egypt. gen i

44. And mozcoucr Pharao lard vnto Jo- g seph: © J am Pharao, and without des tice shalno man h lyft vp his hande oz CO tem foote in all the lande of Egypt. oan

45 And Pharao called Jolephes name man,
“Zaphnath Paancach, & he gaue hym an to W Wpfe Alnath the daughter of Potipherah priest of On. Then went Joseph duer the · lande of Egypt.

46 (And he was thirtie pere olde when he stoode before Pharao king of Egypt)
And Joseph departyng from the prefence of Pharao, © went thoughout all the lande of Egypt.

4.7 And in the seuen plentcous peres, the di fact brought fooztl great ftoze fo; 10 4

Y Dp.

43 And he gathered vp all the foode of the seuen plenteous peres which were aus in the lande of Egypt, and layedvp the 05 foodc.in the tities: the foode of the sar feldes that grew rounde about cuery tifte, laped he by in the fame, i

49 And Joseph © taped vp torne infiore (3
Ipke vnto the sande of tise fea, in multi- an tude out of measure, vntyll he left nun bryng: for it was without number.

50 And bnto Joleph were borne two founes before the veres of famine camc: w which c Alnath the daughter ol Poti „eas pherah priest of On, bare vnto oe aul

(t) Thu word Abzech, semeth rather

an Gs

whom fe cretes are seuealed. ,

b) Beyng
G and (ariel, he could wot

wea torte

from his but kinrede,

Genelis.

51 And Joleph called the name of the

„e, kirst fonne, “ADanafle: for God (lavve he]

hath made nie forget al my labour, and all my fathers housholde.
5 The name ol the leconde called he“

Ephrain, for c God (favd hej hath tau-

fed nit to be fruite full in the lande ol my trouble.

And when the seuen peres of plenteousnesse that was in the land of Egypt,
Were ended,

54 Then tamethe leuen peres ok dearth, atcording as Joseph had sayde, and the

dearth Was in all landes: but in all the
J The. xlij. Chapter.

XXIX. lande of Egypt, was there yet foode.
55 And when che lande of Gayot alle be:
Lan to hunger, the people erped to ch cw ee
Pharao for bead. And Pharao fayoe Fache

vnto al the gyptians, go vnto Joleph: ate and what he fayeth to ou, that do.
56 And the dearth was throughout all

the lande: and Joseph opened all the

barnes Wherein was come, and lolde

vnto che Egyptians: for the famine

Wared fore in the lande of Egypt.
57 And all countreys came into Egypt to

Joseph, for to bye (corne] becault that

the famine was lo foze in all landes.

1 Jacob fendeth his sonnes into c gypt to bye koode. Joleph agnised his brethren. |

9 They are tempted ol him. 17 Chey be thrust into prylon. 21 The brethren of Josephdo

submit them felucs, as knowledgyng their offences. 24 Foteph weepeth, Simeon is committed to warde. r They returne to their kather, to fetch Beniamin. 5 Cher kinde money in the mouth of their Caches, 38 Jacob wyll not deliuer Beniamin.

„5 DD Jatob seing that

0 85 sonnes: Why gape ye f

— J haue hearde that there is torne in Egypt: get pou downe thyther, and bye vs corne from thence, that we map liue, and not dye. i

3 So Went Jolephes ten brethren done to bye torne in Egypt.
4. Wut w2entamin Polephes. bother,
Woulde not Jacob sende with his other brethren: for he saide, lest peraduenture destruction tome bpon hyni.
3 And the sonnes of Jrael tame to bye torne among other that came: for there
Was dearth in the lande of Chanaan.

Suge 6 And Joleph was © gouernour inthe

a 5 When

lande, and solde to all the people of the lande. And Josephes brethzen tanie and c bowed them selues with theyr fates downe to the grounde before Hint. n Joseph fave his brethren, he knewe them, and made © hym lelke

straunge vnto them spake W roughly spyes.
Ia 9 17 And he put them altogether in warde

vnto them, saping: Whence come pez
They aunlwered, out of the lande of
Chanaan to bye vitayle.
And Joleph knewe his brethren, but they kñewe not him.
And Joseph remembred his dreames
Whiche he dreamed of them, and layde vnto them: ye are © spyes, and to fee
Where the lande is“ Weake, is your

tommpng.

Fo And they sayde Hnto hym: nap my « The se-
Lord, but to bye vitayle thy seruauntes nage che are come, ‘

I Me are all one mans sonnes, and Axe true. meane truely, and thy seruauntes are

no sppes.

12 And he layde vnto them agapne: nay but G euen to fee where the lande is o Seat” weake, is pour comnung. date

13 And they said: we thy seruauntes are stone wi:

twelue brethren, the sonnes of one man arr. in the lande of Chanaan, and beholde, the poungest is this day with our kather, e one, no man woteth where he is.

14. And Joleph saide vnto them: that Kea

is it that J spake vnto you when F btn, 0

sayd, ye art spyes. si

&

1j Hereby pe chalbe proued: by) the lyfe

of Pharao, ve shall not go hence, except pour poungest brother tone hither.
16 Sende dut one of pou, whiche may fet our brother, and pe shalbe kept in pry-

on, that pour wordes may be proued whether there be am trueth in pou: 02 cls (by) the © lyfe of Pharao, ve are but

three 8.

Daye .
18 And Joleph laid vnto them the Hirde

Day: this do te liue, (for) J feave God.
1 Ifye be true men, let oue of peur brethren be bonde in the boule of pour pryfon: and go pe, carry torne to put away the famine from your housholde.
20. Btit brvng your voungest brother ‘i

h) It was heard in fo coz supt a court and countrep,

tobe altoge = ther brvefilcty

(i) Custom maketh sinall faultcs not to ve thonghe
Dpon,

co

D

(k) Thefeare of God is the degunnyng of
à faythful ond siice ce ocaluig

5 wut

ae —
Pharao. Gen esis. Tofeph,
Leman, cuen the Lod of the lande, te a nen
21 Aud oue fayde to another: We haue fpyes of the nner bm: wei 6
Hege perply “finned agaynst e 31 N ma 5 Wr ane et of ae when hebe tee we Wande 2, wWebe twelve brethren, fonnes of our cits
Ee e father sone is awap, and the youngest tin" cn) Sunes not Heare him: and therfore is th ; kather! aficnan, trouble tome vpon vs. a 12 day with our father in the lande
And Ruben aumswered them, saping: of Chanaan.
F eae ney not sinne against the lad, a ! | OM F
7 blood is re- that ye meane truely: leaue one of your ie, and see, nowe his bl b brethren here 7 7 me, hg 1
23 They were not aware that Joleph 15 eve 10 ae pout boule:
© vnderltoode them: for he (pate vnts holdes, and get p 0 them by an interpreter. 34 And being pour poungest brother vnto
And he turned from them and wept: me, that I may knowe that you are no and turned to them agayne, and com- sppes, but meane truelp: so wyll J deli-
1 muned with them, and pay aes nem N ber and pe Chait occu-
Sante on from amongest them, and “ boun pie — me it him before thep2 cpes, 35, Andas they emptied theyr sackes, be- F
Sse And Jolcph commaundedto ful their holde, enery mans bundell of money
F ans was in his sacke: And when both they beben kante. lackes With corne, e to put euery in 8
Been money in his facke, aud to geue them andtheir © father lawe the bundelles 9 z nan. Vitaple to spende by the way: and thus i de bate S dyd he vnto them. 36 And acob theyr 511 915 10
26 Ard they laͤded theyr alles with the them: Me haue pero an 0 115 sr
Ciorne, and Departed thence. deen, Poleph is away, and Simeon > em fthemopencd his sacke awap, t pe Will take Weniamin away: se tered
27 And as one ofthem op b eh cer, um ko; to geue his asse prouender inthe ® all thele thinges are agayn me. me bee, Inne. he elpied his money, for it Was 37 Ruben {aid vito his father: flay 1 1 zes wehen in his latkes mouth. two sonnes pt dane bpm pot t bee ao me 28 Andhe laid bnto his brethren, my mde agapne: Deliver hum to my hande, e ney is restored me agapne, fo? lo, it is Iwill bring him to the agapne. tan a bel.. kuen in nm lacke. Aud their heart“ kay- 38 And he fatd : Dy sonne on 10 15 meg
1 led them, and they were altonped, and downe with you, for his brother rat
G> Gere lapd one to another, Whyphath©@ God dead, and heisieft alone: ik destruction 11 neee dealt thus with vs- . come vpon hym by the way whiche zr sa tometyirom 29 And they tame vnto Jatob their fa- go ye (hall bring my gray head with {o- f
2 ther, vnto the lande of Chanaan, x tolde rowe vnto the graue. 1115
Him all that befell vnto thein, saping: ö dune.
J The. xliij. Chapter. b b seph are sent backe with Beniamin and gyktes. 6 The troubles ol een a Dantes to be made redy kor his brethren in his houte.
2 Simcon is brought out of pryton. 24 Che feete ol Jolephs brethren be wached. zo Foe seph weepeth. 32 Pts brethren do cate with him. It is vnlawkull fo the Egyptians to eate with the Hebrewes. ‘
N the dearth was gapne and bye vs a litle foode.
N 5 lande. 3 Juda aunlwered him, and fayd, The
2 And it came to passe man did solemply protest vnto vs faywhen they had ea- ing: ye shall not fee ny face, except pour
22 tie tape tenbdpthecome which brother be with uae | da they had brought out 4 If thou wylt lende our brother with ok the lande of Egypt, vs, we wyll go downe, and bye thee de vnto then: goa koode.

5 But vfthou wylt not sende Hynt, we wyll not go downe: for the man fapde vnto bs, pe shall not fee my fate, ex-

at kept pour brother be with pou.

ee 6 And Jlrael sapd: Wherefore dealt ve

sa cruelly with me, as to tell the man

that ye had peta brother: on 7 They aunswered, The man alked vs fhouide

rede, faping : Is pour father pet aliue: haue pe (wot another) brother z And we

thefe Wordes: Could We by any meane

knowe, that he Would fay, bryng pour

brother downe wich pou: a

8 The laid Juda vnto Ilrael his father:

send the lãd with nie, that we map arise and go, and that we may liue, æ not dye,

mo), chen.

He wonld belt
Ihe be:

9 YF wylbe suretie for hym, of my handes (halt thou require hym: pf bryng hyn not to thee agayne, and fet him befoze thine epes, then let me beare the blame for euer.

of Truelp extept we had made this tarping, by this we had returned the seconde tyme.

n And their father Ilrael sapde vnto

them: ikit mut nedes be fo, nowe then

do thus. Take of the best fruites of the lande in pour veslelles, and bryng

5 man D a present, a curtsie of bawme,

and acurttte of hony, spytes and nurre,

nuttes and alniondes.

And take double“ money in pour hande, t the money that was brought agayne in pour sackes, take it agayne pt pee peraduenture it was some

uerlight. 5 a
3 Lake also pour brother with you, and

arise and go agayne vnto the man.

e, 14. And e God almightie geue pou mer-

en ve in the sight of the man, that he may

ab deliuer vou pour other brother, & this!

n Wenianun: and thus J am as one that

8 quite robbed of his chyldren.

15 Thus toke they the peefent,and tiple fomuche moze money in their bande,
With wWentamin, and role vp, and went downe to Egypt, e stode before Joseph.

16 When Joleph lawe wzeniantin with them, he layd to the ruler of his houle: byng thele men home, and flay, and make redy, for these men fall dyne
With me at noone.

d the man did as Joleph bad, and
Ought them into Jolephes houle.

hm cite heluceisse.

Ot the ry of ihe lande,
. ®hig

wig had pro well witty oT betoze,

i Ne wisdome

ite.

Genesis.

straptely of “ our (Hate) and of our kine

tolde hym accordyng to the tenour of

pea both we e thou, c also dur meany.

30 And Joseph

XXX.

18 Whenthe men were brought into Josephes houtle,™ they were rede f Co) Bn enen laid: betause of the money that came in coats: our lackes niouthes at the kirst tyme, r art we brought in, that he may seeke „ fumble occalion agäpnst vs, and violentlp lap betevpen handes bpon vs, to bryng vs in bondaͤge, and our alles also.

19 Therekore tame they to the man that was the ruler ouer Jolephes houle, and communed with him at the dooze of the Houle,

20 And sayde: oh fir,© we came downe hyther at the fyrst tynie to bye foode.

21 And as we tame to an Inne, we opened our sackes, and behold, euerp mans money was in the mouth of his facke, . leuenj our money in ful wapght, and we haue brought it againe in our hande.

22 And other money haue we brought allo in our handes to bye foode: but we kan not tell who put our money in our sackes.

23 And he sapd: peace be vnto pou, feare not: your God, and the God of pour father, bath geuen pou that trealure in 5 vour sackes: I had pour money. And ian de he brought Simeon ont to them. Wu

24. And the man led them into Jolephes ien,
Houle, and gaue them water to wache their feete, rxgaue their alles prouender.

25 And they made redy their present agaynst Joseph tame at noone: for they hearde (far) that they should eate bread there.

26 When 4 tame home, they brought the present into the Houle to hym, whiche was in their handes, and saab them selues to the grounde be-

ore him.

27 Aud he asked them of their welfare, Pee. and sayd: Is pour father, that old man whiche ye tolde me of, iu good Health: and is he pet aliue:

23 They aunlwered: Thy seruaunt our father is in good health, € is pet alpue.
And they © bowing them selues, made theyr obeysaunte.

29 And he lifting vp his eyes, behelde his brother Beniamin his mothers sonne, and sayd: is this pour vounger brother of whom pe spake vnto mez And he said: God be“ merepfull vnto thee my ys

sonne. fox made halte (for his“ de. en,

heart did melt vpon his brother) and 2 soughtl where to Weepe, and entred 15 bent, e
IS © Bowels.

Ct) Ther
Woulde fhewt them felnes nocent defore they be accased.

Josephes
Drcame which they mockt desore.

— — —uv—

Joseph.

Genesis.

— lofepl,

CCC

his chaumber and Wept there.

31 And he walhed his fate, and came out, and rekrayned hym lelfe, and sayde: {et bread on the table. l

3 And they prepared for hym by hym lelfe, and for thein by them lelues, and for the Egyptians Which dyd cate with

men, him, by them selues, becaule © the E-
Mbeceanes . gypplians may not cate bread with the
Pet Hebrewes: for that is an abhominatrueth. o) The canse xivi. Chapter.
Oration of Judas vnto Joleph.
AI he commaunded eG Moy the ruler of his Houte,
2 saving: fill the mens e faekes with foode, as muchas thep can cary, ft put euerp mans mo-
— ~ npin bis lackesmouth: d benen 2 And put™ my cup,my liluer cup in the is comaumeo lackes mouth ol the poungest, and his date corne money also. And he did according nottobefoioe to the worde that Joseph had lade. mercnonebys 3 And in the morning affoone as it was ern lyght, the men were let go, thep, and
4 their asses.

4 And when they were out of the citie, and not pet farre away, Joseph sayde vnto the ruler of his houle: bp, and folowe after the men, € when thou dock oucrfake them, thou shalt fay vnto them: wherkore haue ye rewarded cuyl fo2 good:

5 Is not that the cuppe in the whiche

“In 5 mp Lord drinketh : and fo2 the Which rene hee conlulteth with the propheciers:
00 Me went Ye haue cuill done that pe haue done.

matter: but

the lame Wordes vnto them.

bis is la :

bpm 7 And they aunlwered him: wherfore
Heng la peth inp Lorde suche wordes? God
Stance forbid that thy seruauntes should do fo.

kaun en 8 Weholde the money which we founde

| in dur sackes mouthes, we brought a-

gapne vnto thee, out of the land of Cha:

2 naan: hoe then shoulde we steale out

of {hp Howes Houle eyther fituer or golde-

9 With whomsoeuer of thy seruauntes it be founde, v let hin dye, and we allo
Wyll be my TLordes bondmen.

10 And he laid, Howe allo let it be aetorduig vnto pour wordes:he with whom

( en
17 be distrete g wyle,

benin s 6 And When he oucctoke them, he sayd

tion to the Egyptians. 8
33 And they latte before hym the firg borue, according to his age, ⁊ the youn: gest according to his vouth: and! che men® mernepled among them selues.
34 And he {ent rewardes vnto them from bekore him selfe: but 2entamins part was five tines so muche as any of theirs: and they dronke, and were

7 Man ta his feloye
(p) en caused thet to Mamaply,

made mery with him. e Pfonle

The. xliiij. Chapter.

Joleph commaundeth his cuppe to be put in the tacke of Benjamin. 4 Che cuppe is attached in the lache of Beniamin. iz Joleph accuseth his brethren of thelt.

18 The

it is founde, shalbe my seruaunt, and ye halbe blamelesse. 5
1 And at once cuerp man toke downe his lacke to the ground, and euery man opened his sacke. ö ä
Iz And he searched, and began at the eldest, and left at the poungest: and the tuppe was founde in Wemamins sacke.
3B Then they rent theyr clothes, and la-
Ded euery mã his alle, and went againe vnto the cite.
14 And Jnda and his brethren tame to ¢
Polephes Youle (for he was yet there) and they fell before him on the ground.
15 And Joseph sapde vnto them: what deede is this that ye haue done: Wote 1 e not that suche a man as J do con- „ te gle bench

(c) This: mum was u cloafe a tif: sembltt as his mailt.

ather.
18 Then Juda went vnto hin, and said:
® Db my lorde, let thy seruaunt (A par 97 thee} {peake a worde in my lordes ma cares, and be not inflamed with wrath ente agapust thy seruaunt, fo: W thou art fever euen as Pharao. . chen
19 My lorde alked his seruauntes, fay 6 30% ing: haue ye a father, or a brother- opie
20 And we aunlwered my lorde: we haue a father that is olde, and a voung v lad, which he begat in his age: and the
. - = brother

bother of the fayd lad is dead, and he is all that is left of his mother, and his father loueth hun.

21 And thou laidest vnto thy seruauntes: bryng him vnto me, that I may fet my eyes bpon him.

22 And we aunlwered my Lorde, that the lad could not go from his father, fo if he shoulde leaue his father, he were but dead.

23 Then laydestꝰ thou vnto thy ser-

conte with pon, loke that pe see my face no more.

dur father, we chewed hym the wordes

of my Torde. N

25 And our father fayde vnto vs: go az

gayne, and bye vs a litle foode.

26 And we aunfibered, we can not go
Dolbne : neuerthelesse, ik our poungest brother be with bs, then wyll we go downe, for we may not {ee the mans fate, extept our poungest brother be with vs.

27 Aud thy seruaunt our father sayd vnto vs: ye knowe that my Wyfe baͤre me two sonnes. . a

23 And the one went out from me, and

"I Dieph.coulde no longer rekrapne

so before all the that e stoode by byin,

ed: ™ caule euery man to auopde.
And there remayned no man with

fn ad)

him, Whyle Joleph vttered hym selke
«ig, Dito his brethren. | mae * And He wept aloude,and the Egypie kians aud the houle of Pharao heard.
3 And Joseph sayde vnto his brethren:

Jam Jolseph, doch my father yet lyue-
And his brethren © contd not armlibere

4+ And Joleph layde onto his brethren,
COME neare to me J peay vou. Andthey

Genelis.

tlatintes : except pour poungest brother

24. And when we tame vnto thy seruaunt

JThe. xlv. Chapter.

Joseph peldeth him telle to be knowen ot his brothers, 5 He comkorteth them. 8 Joseph

by the will of God beyng Cent into Egypt, is made gouernour ouer Egypt, and fendeth

for his father. . 15 He hplleth his brethren, weepyng. 16 Pharao commaundeth Jacob to be brought into Egypt. 21 Joleph geueth gyltes vnto his brethren. 24 He exhorteth them vnto loue. 26 It is tolde Jacob that his lonne Joleph lpueth.

Wherefore he cry-

bint, they were fo IS prekene hey abathed at his pre-

IJ sayd, G of a suxetie he is torne in peeces and J fave him not lincte. n
29 And if pe take this allo away from me, and destruction come vnto Hint, pe
Thali bayng my gray head with lorowe vnto the graue.

30 HObe therefore when F come to thy seruaunt my father, and the lad be not

() Jesepy taht vnderande What

lye they had
1 ue 1010 ok his felipny.
E We nesse will beweve it felfe.

With vs feng that his fe“ hangeth or Spt. by thelabnes tite.) ee Sree

31 Then syall it come to paffe, that asfoone as he seeth that the lad is not come, he wyll dye: fo shall we thy fer: uauntes bryng the gray head of thy lertaunt our father with lorowe vnto the

graue.

31 For I thy seruaunt became suretie for the lad before n father, and salde: Ht
IJ hryng hym not vnto thee agayne,* Or, 87
I That beare the blame vnto my father Ame: or all my lyfe long. e

33 Mobb theretore J prap thee, let me thy seruaunt byde here kor the lad, and be my lordes (o bondman, and let the lad go bp with his brethren.

34. For howe tan J go vp to my father, ik the ladde be not With me: vnlesse J woulde fee the wretchednelle that © chr: shall come on my father. circ telang

ple of their paͤrenteg.

(n) Ytoken of godlpnesse, not to feare the blame of breakpng pronule and fides, utic.

cane neare. And he (aid, J an PFoleply pour bother who ye soldẽ into Egypt.

Moe therefore be not greeued Here-
With neither Wlet it seeme aeruel thing in pour eyes, that ve solde nie hyther: for God did sende me before pou to preserne lyfe.

6 For this is the seconde pere of dearth in the lande, and fine niore are behinde, in the whiche there shall neyther be caryng nor haruest.

7 Wherfore God sent me before you, to 28 preserue vou a posteritie in the earth, z ge and to saue pour liues by a great Delt? cine. neraunce.

8 So nowe it was not ye that sent me hyther, © but God whiche Hath made ine a father to Pharao, and lorde of ail

(d) He doth not ontpe lorgeue their inne: but also coucreth their shame.

naut.

(e) Though
God ble the

wilked, and turne their do

his house, and ruler throughout all the eden lande of E t. a 25
* 9 Dalle wine,

lacob,

9 Haste you,and go vp to my father and tell him: thus laieth thy sonne Joleph,
God hath made me lord of Vall Egypt, tome Downe therfore vnto me, tary not.

(f) De doth not bragge of

his glozp, dut eie lo And thou Malt dwell in the land of ©
Geber Holen“ and be a neyghbour vnto me,
Ae thon, e thy chyldren, and thy chyldrens panes: dthildren, thy Teepe, and thy beattes,
“Gothen. Aud all that thou halt.
11 And there wyll J prouide thee sustenaunce (for there remaine pet fiue peres of dearth) lest thou and thy housholde, eres: (e all that thou hast come © to pouertie. bel mene, 12 And beholde pour eyes do fcc, and the

eyes allo of my brother Benianun, that
Wenne nine own mouth speaketh vnto you.
10e 13 Therfore tell my father of all my glo-

rie in Egypt, and of all that vou haue seene, and make halt, and bryng my father hyther. ae

ge 14 And he tel on his brother wWentanins

gehen hecke, and wept: and Benianm rden. Wept on his necke. agg 15 Moredouer He kissed al his brethren,

token of full reconciliation betwixt chem.

and Wept bpon them: and after that, his brethren talked with him.

16 And the fame lthereot was hearde in
Pharaos housc, so that they sayde: Josephes brethrẽ are tome. And it pleased
Pharao well, and all his seruauntes.

17 And w gharao spake vnto Joseph: say vnto thy brethren, this do pe: lade pour beastes, and go (813) returne vnto the lande ol Chanaan:

m 8
2 Gods sin er worzke, fo2 the E gyptians coulbe not abpde the

sholdes, and come vnto me, and J Wpll gene pouthe good of the land of Egypt, and pe Chall eate the fat ofthe lande.

19 And thou allo Halt tömaunde [them]

1 Che goyng of Jacob into Egypt.
Che sonnes of Jacob. 27 seuentie

A1 Srael toke his tour: e KEN nep with all that he had, and came to Beer eva, and Hoffred offeringes vnto the God ok his father Jsahat. a And God spake vnto
Ilrael in a bifion by nyght, saying: Faz cab, Jatob : And he aunswered: here

(a> In the degynnong of

his iournep he calleth vppon

Genesis.

18 Lake pour father, and your houle-

this do ve: ™ take charets with pou ont of the lande of Egypt for pour chyldren, and foz pour wpues, and brpng our father, and tome.
20 Also ! regarde not pour stuffe, for the good ok all the lande of Egypt is pours,
21 And the children of Ilrael dyd euen

so: and Joleph gaue them charettes,

accordyng to the commaundement of
Pharao, and gaue them vitayle also to spende by the way. 7

22 And he gaut vnto eche ok thẽ chaunge of raiment:but vnto Bemanun he gaue * three hundred peeces of fiver, and fine

thaunge of raynient.

to
23. And bnto his father he sent alter then same maner ten alles laden with good

out of Egypt, and ten she asses laden
With corne, E bread, and meate, for his kather by the way.
24 So fent he his brethzen away, and they Departed: and he sayd vnto them,

fee that “ pe fall to no stryfe on the 05 w

Wap. g
25 They departed therfore fron Egypt,

and came into the lande of Chanaan, d t

vnto Jacob theyr father.

26 And tolde him, faping : Joseph is pet aliue, and is gouernour ouer al the land of Egypt. And Jatobs heart wauered, for he beleued them not.

27 And they tolde hym all the wordes ok
Joleph, whiche he had faid vnto them: se

And when he sawe the charets whiche

(u) Then

gts chan

en the
U

God. hor

* Let fot your eye spate yoy
Veflelles

“ Mouth,

« VV loofed,

Joseph had fent to cary hin the spirite 1

of Jatob their father reulued.

28 tach! salde: I haue] © inough.

that Joleph my sonne is yet alpue: J
Will go, and see him, per that J dye.

The. xlvj. Chapter.

God comkorteth Jacob. and rene weth hi es, ie persons that entred into Egypt sores o 1 seph meet yng his father zylleth him. 34 Che Egyptians do detpite all heardmen.

29 Foe

an J.
3 Andhelapoe: Jam God, the God ol thy father, W feare not to go downe into

Egppt fol I wyll there make ok the

a great people. :

4 OF Wyil go downe with thee into 158
Egypt: and J wyll surelp make thee "5" tome vpagapne, and Joleph shall put

His hande bpon thyne epes.

e) Big bn
925 not ot

¢ t
Would 1 “cf

5 And Jacob role vp from Beer seba: and the sonnes of Ilrael caryed Jacob their father and their childrẽ, and their
Iwpucs, inthe charettes whiche Pharao had sent to cary him.

m 6 Add they toke their cattell, and the e goodes whiche they had gotten in the
„e lande ok Chanaan, x came into Egypt, me both Icob and all his seede with him,

His sonnes, e his sonnes formes with

6 hint, his daughters, and his sonnes

daughters, and all his seede brought he

with him into Egypt.

aps These are the names of the chyldren

bol Plraciwhich came into Egypt, both

Jatob and his sonnes. Kuben Jacobs

tfirst borne.

9 The children of Ruben: Panoch, and

Phalln, hesron, and Charmi.

he god- 6

ute Jann, and Ohad, and Jathin, and n Sohar, and Saul the sonne of a Chaz
. naanttishe woman. put The chyldren of Leu: Gerson, Cehath, and Merari. N
The children of Juda: Er, x Onan,
Selah, e Phares, and Zarah: but Er and Onan dyped in the lande ok Chanaln. An. The children ol PPhares allo were

gHesron and Panui. — 7 z And the childeen of Hlachar : Thola,
Puuah, and Job, and Simron. .
A. The chyldzen of Zabulon: Served, and Klon, and Jahelel.
1 Thele be the chuͤdren of Lea, whiche he bare vnto Jacob in Melopotamia,
*, with his daughter Dina. All the soules of his fonnes and daughters, om. ¢ male] Oothirtie and three. n
5 The chuͤdren ol Gad: Siphion, and m, Paggi, Sunt, and Elbon, Eri, x Arodi, e “7 Tech bal 04 Haan
® e children of Aler: © Imnah, an

Jiluah, and Jifut, and Beriah, and
. Herah their litter. And the chyldzeno
, Verlah: Heber, and Malchtel. a
Bis. 18) Thele are the formes of Zulpha, who
Laban gaue to Lea his daughter: and
« thele He bare vnto Jatob, leuen] fitz ny , teene soules. m9 The chyldren of Kachel Jacobs © me < Wife: Joleph and Weniamin.

And vnto Joseph in the lande of

. Egppt, were bone Manasles, and
. Ephrain, which Alenath the daughter

Genelis.

io The children ol Simeon: Pemucle

XXII].

of Potipera priest of On bare vnto him.“

be thudren of zsemtamin: Sela, and.

5 5 bys! Gera, € Maaman, «

5 LU ll 3 *

an ate, ppun, and Huppun

22 Thele are the chyldren of Kachel 8 which He bare vnto Jacob, el ¢ soules altogether, <

23 And the childrenof Dan: Husun.

24. The childzen of Paphthali: Pabfect, ‘ and Gun, Jeser, and Sillem. :

25 Thele are the fornes of Bilha, which
Laban gaue bnto Rachel his daughter and fhe bare these vnto Jacob alta-

gdether seuen soules. :

26 And so the soules that tame moi Det D cob into Egypt, whiche came onto his loynes, besides Jatobs sonnes wyues,
Were altogether threstore «fire soules.

27 And the fonnes of Joleph whiche' were borne hym in Egypt, Were two. soules: fo that all the soules of the house a of Jacob whiche came into Egppt, were O threltore and ten. (4) 3 fons

28 And he {ent Juda before hym onto LEP,
Joseph, to direct his fate vnto Gosen, Mere and they came into the lande ol Golen.

29 And Joleph made redy his charet, anek anne. and went vp “ to meete Jlrael his faz * D2, 70 cher vnto Golen, and prelented him {elf 5 vnto hin, and he fell on his necke, and e
Wept on his necke a good whyle. not cb ng

30 And IJlrael sapd vnto Joleph: nowe ta am J content to dye, inlomuche as J haue seene thy face, and betaule thou art pet aliue. ö

31 And Joleph sayde vnto his brethren, and vnto his fathers Houle: yl gn ere go bp, and (heme pharao, and tell hin: 0 mp brethren, and inp fathers houle, Wi whiche were in the lande ol Chanaan, are tome vnto nie.

32 And they are shepheardes, for theyz trade hath ben to leede tattell: and they haue brought theyr sheepe and they tattell, and all that they haue.

33 And ikthat Pharao call vou, and afke vou, what pour occupation is:

34. Be shal annswere: o thy leruauntes haue ben occupied about cattell from our childhood nto this tyme, we and dur fathers: that ye may dwell in the lande of Gosen. For euery out that kepeth cattell isan © abhomination vnto the Egyptians.

tude as camo

(n) Joseph

ts nat ashamed ok the basenes ot his kintede.

(o) pryde of the enemit mabe

Churche, and

¶ The Ba oper |

a

geuen the prices of the king.

N K r N
SPAN TAN

ee >

= = Sa
Cn 8 — wm, ° 0 -

2 it il

“SS SS

1 n
LT eel

65 wad i Ca

ip = Bi 80 N

N 10 0 e
Mi f i 4

Oleph came ther-
\/ | fore & tolde Pha-
1X, \y sai vag, and said: My
N father € up bre-

the, theyr heepe,

and thepz cattell, and all that they

haue, are tomeout of v lande of Cha-
Naan: and beholde, they are in the lande of Gofen.
„Of che 2 AndPoleph toke “ of the company of
1 his brethren (even) fiue men, and prelented them vnto Pharao. i
3 Aud Pharao fayd vnto his brethren:
Coo sate e What is pour occupations And they
A e auulwered Pharao:thy seruauntes are
Nee nr =O nepers of cattell, both we, and also emaneoof = uit fathers, | ofthe occa 4 They said mozeoner vnto Pharao for wf. o solourne in the land are we come, for

thy seruaunts haue no pasture for their tattell, so fore is the fanushment in the lande of Chanaan: Nowe therefore let thy seruauntes dwell in the lande of

Cates, Sosen.

Ehm a And Pharao layde vnto Foleph : thy ren kather ethy brethrt are toisse vnto thee, n. The lande of Egypt is betore thee:

Genelis.
The. xlvij. Chapter. N
Joseph telleth vnto Pharao the commyng ok his father, and bryngeth in his brethren. acs ran 9046 e ee aribcattel and landes. 22 Liuing tg

0 e T 3 2 9 5 ee e. 3 Hen kor meate and drinke, geue them felues to be bondmen. zo Jacob wyll be buryed with his fathers,

e 0 % % „ ai (hy PP \ 2
0 W tf Me

Acer

i Che land ot Gosen is geuen

Oy inves 4
N.

ag

ANS

geen es i Ad

fs
0 E> e

vee PA
Werren

I) ‘he eae

ee
22 4 om 2
„ ue Agta le 5

55 Oe ae

0 WN be 5
N N N x 1 “allt N 25 i

4 PAN SK . 0 2

Nf IID Ht na i 0

Jatob ™ blessed Pharao. eae
E
God, #8

them pollellions in the lande ok Egypt; yw in the best of the land, euen the land ol? 4"
Rameles, as Pharao had tömaunded.
2 Aud Joseph made prouifion for bs father and his beethzen, and all Dist, thers housholde with bread: @ enento 175 the mouthes of the young chyldren. i
13 There was no bread in all the kan,

2 ph.

for the dearth was exceedyng sore, so

that the lande of © Egypt, and the land

mre ok Chanaan were famished by realon of ans the dearth.

C 14 And Joleph brought together all the money that Was founde in the lande of
Egypt and of Chanaan, for the come which they bought: and he laped bp

mae the money in Pharaos house.

moe’ 15 When money fayled in the lande of E-

c gypt and of Chanaan, all the Egypti-

ans tame vnto Joseph, and saide, Geue

vs bread: Wherefore suffrest thou vs to

s dye before thee WHE our money tisspent-

fem 16 Then sapde Joleph, O Bryng pour

mo cattell: and J wyll geue pou for your ens caltell y money faple.

im 17 And they brought their tattell vnto

a Joseph: and Joseph gaue them bread for horses and sheepe, and oxen, c asses, and fedde them with bread for all their tattell that pere.

18 Wut wWhenthat pere was ended, they tame vnto hym the next pere, and sapde vnto hym: We wyl not hyde it from my lorde, Howe that our nioney is spent: my lorde allo had our heardes of tattel, nether is ther ought left in pfight of my lode but enen our bodies ¢ our landes.

19 Wherekore lettest thou vs dye before thine epes, both we and our lande: bye vs and our land for bread, and both
We and our lande wyll be bounde vnto
Pharao: onlye geue vs seede, that we map lyue, and not dye, e that the lande

go not to waste.

20 And so Joseph bought all the lande ol

Egypt for Pharao: Foz the Egyptians

solde euery man his possessions, becaule

the dearth was so sore vpon them: and fo the lande became Pharaos.

And he caused the people to moue krom citie to citie, frõ one spde of Egypt into the other.

22 Duly the lande ofthe priestes bought

pon pro-

The

) Ged pued the dete iyde ol people, b

treme mgtt,

bis

fn thar” 21 bro

K. the

liueraunce of his chyldren. e Frterthese deedes, one
S tolve Foleph: beholde, ie N Ischypfather is licke. And
0 ehe toke with hym his two e Manasses
5 . Then this meflage as Declared vnto Jacob: beholde, thy

Genesis.

XXX J. . he not: o for the priestes had a portion % D. aligned them of Pharao, and bod ‘cate 15 165 15 their poztio Which Pharao gaue them: 3
Wherfore they solde not their landes.

23 Then Holeph fayde vnto the folke: beholde, J haue bought pon this dape and pour lande for Pharao: Lo, here is seede for you, € pe thallfowe the land.

24. And of the intrease you chall geue the
™ fpfth part vnto Pharao, and foure da bed partes thatbe your ovbne forfeede of the nical

elde, and for you e them of pour houleholdes, and for pour chyldren to cate,

25 And they aunlwered: Thou halt saued our lyues, let vs kynde grace in the syght of my lorde, and we wylbe Pharags seruauntes.

26 And Joseph made it a lawe ouer the lande of Egypt vnto this daye, that

Pharao shoulde haue the fyft part, © os a except p lande ofthe prieltes only, which ese
Was not Pharaos. *

27 And Hicael dwelt in Egypt, euen in they tountrey ol Gosen, and they had their possessions therin, and grewe and multiplied erceedynglp.

28 Moreouer Jacob lpued inthe lande of
Egypt seuenteene peres so that p whole age of Jatob was an hundred and c e fourtie and seuen peres. ae”

29 When the tyme drewe nye that Ilra- 5 el must dye, he {ent foz his fonne Foleph and fayde vnto him: If Jhauc founde < grate in thy syght, oh put thy bande vn- «. der my thygh, and deale mercifully and

trulp with me, that thou bury nie not in Egypt. nage We

30 Wut J (hall sleepe with my fathers, porns and thou Malt cary me ont of Egypt, € ts. bury nie in their burpall. And he aunswered: J Wyll do as thou halt fapde. gene

31 And he fayde: Sweare vnto nie. And % 30s he sware vnto him. And -Fetael“ woz- ommmete shipped towarde the beddes head. Bowe

ym selte.

(q) Be would

The. xlviij. Chapter.

Joleph with his chyldren viliteth his ticke father. 5 Jacob adopteth Ephraim and
Manasses vnto him. 8 Jacob blesleth Jolephes chyldren. 21 Jacob fozetelleth the de-

sonne Poleph cõmeth vnto thee. And deln Je sraeĩ toke his strength vnto hym, and dm et ee

ate vpon the bedde. een

3 And Jacob sayd vnto Joseph: God dee alnipghtie appeared vnto nie at Zu; in an the lande of Chanaan, and blesled me, an

and layde vnto me: 4 We- Gen, Sar.

and tause thee ta multiplie, and wpll make a great number of people okthee, and wyll geue this lande vnto thy seede after thet vnto an euerlastyng pollessi-

on.
5 And nowe thy two sonnes Manasses and Ephraim, whithe were borne vnto

butothee into Egypt, are myne, euen

as Ruhen and Simeon are mine.
6 And the children which thou hast gotten after them, chalbe thyne owne, and

deulded, they coll haue no seucrall inhe-

brethren in their inheritaunte.

7 And when J came from Mesopotamia, Rachel dyed vpon my hande in the land of Chanaan, by the way, when there was but a fieldes breadth to come vnto Ephratha: and J buried her there in the waye to Ephratha, the fame is
Bethlehem.

Gods wozde.

and sapde: What are these:

Joseph sayde vnto his father: They are my sonnes whiche God hath geuen me Here. And he fapde: Oh being them to nie, and let me blesse thenn.

10 (And the eyes of Israel were drmme for age, fo that he coulde not (well) fee)
And he beonght them to hym, and he kyssed them, and inibrated them.

And Jsrael sapde vnto Joleph, J

V

II

Oele: had not thought to haue seene thy face: ges contiber and yet loe, © God hath chewed me aleb Gad, ho o thy seede.

Fenske 12 And Joleph toke them away frö his

é lappe, and he bowed hym selfe with his fate to warde the earth.

3 Then toke Joseph them both, Ephra-
Int with his ryght hande towarde BE raels left bande, and Manasses with his left hande towarde Jlracls ryght hande, and brought them vnto hym.

() Sor the thpngces that were Nowe in

22 Joleph.

D Jacob called for his founes, aud sayde:
Come together, that
. i may tell pou what
2) {hall come on you in the last dapes.
Gather pe together, c lonnes ol Jacob, bearken vn-

thee in the land of Egypt before Jtame

o halbe called after the names of their

8 And Ylrael beheld Josephes sonnes,

Genesis.

4 Weholde, J wyll make thee fruiteful, 14 And Ilrael stretch

hande, and layed it vppon Ephraims

head, which was the younger: and his left hande vpon Manasses head, guy:

dyng his hande wyttynglp, for Manat ses was the first borne.

15 And he blelsed Joseph, and sapde: h &

God in whole syght my fathers Abra-

Hani EPlahac dyd walke, God which ° hath fedde me al my ipfe long vnto this ™ ther

day,

16 And the angell which hath deltuered me from al cuyt, blesse these laddes, and W let my name be named in them, and the name of my fathers Abraham
E IJsahat, ⁊ that they may “qrorve into

à multitude in the middes of the earth.

17 hen Joseph {ave that his father laped his ryght hande vpon the head of
Ephraim, it displeased hym: and he lift vp his fathers hande, to haue renioued it 1 Ephzeatins head vnto Manasles

ed

18 And Joleph sapde vnto his father,
Hot so my father, foz this is the fick me : put thy right bande vpon his

19 And his father would not, but lapde:
© F knowbe it well my fonne, J knowe lt well, he shalbe allo a people, and shalbe great: Wut his younger bother hal: be greater then he, and his serde Matt become a great people.

20 And he blessed them that day, ¢ faide:
™ In thee let Ilrael bietle t saye, God make thee as Ephraim, x as Maͤnasles.
And he fet Ephraim before Manalles.

21 And Jfrael {aid vnto Joleph: behold
I dpe, c God chalbe with pou, ¢ bryng vou againe vnto 2 land ot pour fathers.

22 Moreduer, J haue geuen puto thee a

portion of lande aboue thy brethren,

With J gat out of the hand of the Amorite in ny sworde, and in my bowe. 8

ae ¢ The. xlix. Chapter. |

Jacob foretelleth what chall behap his tonnes, 3 Ruben, 5 Simeon a Leui hriste

to be borne ol Judas. 1; Jabulon. 14 Jlachar. 16 Dal. 18 Christe, 10 Gab. a Hephthal
27 Beniamin. 29 Jacob wylbe burped with histathers, 3; He dpeth.

to Israel pour father.

3 Vuben my first borne, thou art my myght, € the beginning of my strength,
“> the noblenelle of dignitic, and the noblenesse of power.

4. Unstable as water, thou shalt not be the chiefest, vecaule thou Wentest vp to thy fathers bedde: for then pen

tho

ed out his ryght

All the eg ngen.

der my nun
The word

fignificthta

multiple as fhe

D

q) vet C free giftes re not to be ellet-

med by chee: der of natur.

(1) Bs Gos minister he pronouncety what God hath eerces

Gos
Ete apptare m thtse two tt f it hd t Spe aternt bietring hre chploztn.

cc A thulde

a) Sint
Coo geet that Ke loft all 8 great DF

hben right (wi i tuen te a che eln

to Leut: the ergo to J

ob.

WS)

Genesis.

thou my couche with goyng vp.

Simeon and Leut brethzen, are truell instrunientes in their habitations.

/ mp soule, come not thou into their setretes, neither into their congregations letimine honour be bnited : foz in their Wath they slewe a man, and in ee selfe wyll, they dygge downe a
Wal > :

Cursed be their wath, foz it was shamelesse, and their fiertenesle, fog it
Was cruell: J wyll deuide them in

XXXIII J.
21, Nephthalim is a hynde fent for a present geuyng goodly Wordes.

22 Joleph is lyke a florychyng bongh,. a bough borpchyng by a well {poe whole] finall boughes ran vpon the wall.

23 The archers haue greenoufly prouoked © Hy, and shot him through with Gebe af: dartes, they haue hated him to his hin- soon ens deraunte. wae
24 But his bowe abode fatt, and the armes of his handes were made strong
™ by the handes of the myghtie God of

Daughter:

ein) The de-

Jatob, and statter them in Ifrael. Jatob: Ont ok him shal come an heard- 1h see

Juda, thou art he hort thp brethren an * i Seb aie
(hall prapse: Thy hande halbe in the 25 © From thy fathers God which hath oder

necke of thine enemies, thy fathers chi- helped thee, and from the almpghtie 0 .

dren (hall stowpe before thee. which Hath bleed thee with bieflinges waver

Juda is a lions whelpe: fro thy spople

from heauen aboue, with blessynges of

my sonne thou art tome on hye. He the deepe that lyeth vnder, a with biel:

layed him downe, and couched himlelfe spnges ol the brestes and of the wonibe.

as à lion, and as a lionelle: who wyll 26 Lhe blessynges of thy fathers thall 2 ooce pment tirre bya vp- be stronger then the blesunges ormpel- aue ous, potter The stepter Hal not depart from Ju- ders: vnto the vtniost of the hylles of ser el

was pushed.

Mesdag is
Ae pramnistd

Da, and a law geuer from betweene his feete, © vntyll“ Silo come: And vnto

the worlde, they shalbe on the head of cc.
Joseph, aud on the toppe of the head ol

Salah. bein shall the gatherpng of the people bpm that was feperate from his bre-

7 b thren. ö
Bari: yy Ie shall bynde his foale“ꝰ vnto p vine, 27 Weniamin e shall rauische asa Wolfe: ear z And his asses colt vnto the braunche: ) e In the mornyng he Mall deuour the wove.

ügmktd ng 58

wasched his garment in wine, and his clothes in the blood of grapes.

1 His eyes (Malbec) redde with wine, and his teeth whyte With mylke.

z Zabulon (hall dwell“ besyde the hanen of the {eae nye the hauẽ of shippes,

his border chalbe vnto! Sidon.

14. Plachar 13) © a “Arong asse, cou-

chens hym downe betweene two bure

15 5 15 And lawe that rest was good, and the

pon and at nyght he shall deuide the pople. f
28 All thele are the twelue tribes of JE
‘Yael: and this their father spake vnto them, and blesled them, euery one of them blessed he with a seueral blessing.
29 And he charged them, and sayde onto them: When J halbe gathered vnto my people, bury me with my fathers „ e in the cauc that is in the field of Ephron arne the Hethite,

) CThtet itt manpe

the place, but

lande that it Was plealaunt: and bowed 30 In the caue that is in the fielde of nec his shoulder to beare, and betame a ser Machpelah, which is before Mamre in gon: ove uaunt vnto tribute. the lande of Chanaan, which Absabam
16 Dan shall indge his people, and our oak bought with the fielde of Ephron the the tribes of Yael. Hethite fo a pollession to bury in. a.
17 Danthalbe a serpent in the way, an zi Where as were buried Abraham and Sea. adder in the path, bytyng p horlse heeles, Sara his wyfe, and where as were bu- 7 and his ryder fell baͤckewarde. tied Jlahat and © Rebecca his Wile? k Cen e-
18 J haue wapted for thy laluation there J buried Lea, a
2 O Tode. 32 The fielde and the taue that is therin of Las Death inert, 19 Gad, an hoast of men hall ouerctome was bought of the chyldrer of Heth. hym: but he chall duertome (him at the 33 And when Jacob had made an ende
„ lat. oktommaundpng all that he would vn
„ Out ol the fat lande) of Aler shalbe his to his sonnes, he v plucked bp his fecte the fete ote mare: §— byeAD, AND he Chall geue plralures foz vnto the bedde and dyed: and was put zee
Wanne: akpng. Into his people. 276

ly nge m

MtSwiti,

Eij

¶ The

Genesis.

1 Jacobs bodpis annopnted. zChe waplyng of Egyptians. 7Foteph burpeth his father in Chanaan, with a great retinue and mournyng. 0 Funeral rites are celebrate for Jacob. 15 The brethren of Joleph do pray for pardon. 18 Joleph remitteth all infuries vnto his brethren, and speaketh gentelly vnto them. r0 Loleph korelpea keth the deliueraunce of his brethren. 26 Joleph dyeth. ö ;

Rene
Fe Pa SN oy dE

RR — S
—— — Cs

DID

house, lande of Egypt:

a) Maturall

ozowe pk it be in measure, is not to be reprchended.

e kyssed hym.

ded his seruauntes the philitians © to im- Gosen.

dutwarde to enbawöwed Ilrael. gen sou And fourtie dayes were continned(foz

rnption: but

exceedyng great companic,

were ended, Joleph spake vnto p hoͤuse his kather leuen dapes.

My father made ine lweare, efayde, sayde:
0 N dye, bury me in the graue which
IJhaͤne made me in the landeok Chana- the place is call

IJ tome agapne.
@) Seong thee lweare.
Wan pad bus ; And Joseph went vp to bury his kanaũtes ol Pharao that were the elders Mamte.

2 f ll Fl 1 i
; AG 627 5

Iosephes mourhyn a - Juz,

J q The.!. Chapter. . 1 ¢

t mm (Wvept 00 bpon him, and 8 And all the houle of Joleph and his
. 1 brethren, and his fathers houle: ontye
And Joseph tõmaun- their chyldren, and their sheepe, k their cattell, left they behynde in the lande of

Sis whe bane his father. And the phifitians 9 And there went with hym allo charb rettes and © horsemen: and it was an

neee 3 fo long doth) the imbawmpng last) and

a vapne cete- g Jo And they tame to the torne flooze of

Geiss khe Egyptians “ mourned tor him thee Atad, Which is beyonde amore and

aecremonialt ledre and ten Bayes, ; there they made a great and erteedyng
4 And when the dayes of mournyn sore lamentation: and he mourned foz

of Pharao, faying: If J haue kounde n And whenthe inhabiter nde kaugur in pour eyes, speake I prap vou fseuenj the ne tbe che ate inthe eaves of Pharao, saping: yng mthe come floore of Atad, they

de: This is a great mournyng vnto the Egyptians. Wherekore the nanie ol

ed, The mournyng of an. Nowe therfore let ine go vp F pray the Egyptians, x it is Bevan A 9111

thee, and bury my father, and then wyl 12 5 And his sonnes dyd vnto hym attor- C

a png as he had tommaund m.
6 And pharao lapde : Go vp, and burv 1; For his sonnes taryed 155 the
% thy father, “ accordyng as he made lande ok Chanaan, ⁊ burped hym in the tàue of the fielde Machpelah, whiche

. fielde Abraham bou to
* ther and wich hym went all the ser- burp in of enbion the Dethite, befor

IA And

Cad oe shout and aim

Genefis. XXXVI.

C 14 And oon somthin into Egypt a- alpute. ; . gayne, he and his brethren, and all that 21 Feare not therefore, Onowe J wyfl vo 2 a
Went vp with hym to bury his kather, norpshe e eur cyon Aud he toe ae> 0

feph.

assoone as he had burped hym. tomorted them, and spake 5 eee
And when Joltphes brethren sawe to then. reer e

15 F
* ye that th civ fath er was dead they saide 2 23 oseph Dwelt in E t | . heactes, nce 8 7 „he and his faz
= OF*FJoleph nay peraduenture hate vs, € chers boule > and Poteph ued e an 1 8 reswarde vs agaͤine all the eupll whiche hundred and ten peres. Mente. 79.

eteg: e nued az

we dyd vnto hym. 23 Aud Joseph sawe Ephralmis childzen ier ve
16 And they dyd lende a meflage vnto euen Hnto the thirde aeneeasion 5 mothe att

Joleph, laying: Thy father dyd com- vnto Machir the sonne ol Manalles, emer,

maunde before he dyed, faying: Were chyldzen * bone on Jo Or,
This wyle chall pe lay onto old, knees. * 2
Forgeue (4 par the! the trespalle ok thy 24. And Joleph sapde vnto his brethren, =

The brethren, and their finne : for they re- Je dpe, EGod Wyll surelp vilite vou, wartete re Warded thee euyll. And nowe we praye and bryng vou out of this lande, puto wen mud tobe e thee korgeue the trespasle of the seruuun the lande whiche he [ware vnto Aba: n pe tes ok the God ol thy father. And Jo- ham, Plahac, and Jacob. B

seph wept when they spake vnto hym. 25 And Joleph tokean othe of the chyl-
„ Also his brethren tame vnto hym, and dien ok Prael, faying: God Wyll not i fell flat before his fate, saping: beholde, faple but vilite pou, and pe Mall cary ny ( sorop
1 webe thy seruauntes. bones hente. fu bis
D 19 To whom Jolseph sapde: Feare not, 26 And so Joleph dyed when he was an wens am J God: hundred and ten peres olde: And they mists 20 Be thought evil against me, but Gd inibawmed hym with spptes, puttyng
79 co turned it vnto good, to bryng to passe as hym ina chest in Egypt.
Ar it is this day, and to saue muche people

Ihe scconde bookeof Moyses, in Latin

in Hedzue witha Gele worde called Exodus, and in Hebrewe Velle schemoth.

The first Chapter. N
Che sonnes of Jacob gone into Egypt. 8 Che newe Pharao oppresseth the people of Jlrael. is Che mydwpfes kearyng God do laue the male chyldren or the Hebrues.
20 God prouideth kor the mydwykes which feare the Lorde.
Ss bese are the kullokthem. ö
Te names of the 3 wWuttherearole vp a newe kyng in E- B nm ree, chudzen of Gl gypt, which © knewe not Poleph: So rael, whiche And he sapde dntohisfolkewebolde, K. came into E- the people of the chyldren of Ilrael are
Agypt with Pa: greater and nyghtier then we. ca dag
8 seobe euerymã 10 Cone on, let vs deale wyttylp with the, ene. y came with his lest they multiplic, etek it come to passe,
N Nhousholde: that ik there be any Warre, they ioyne
— — Ruben, Si- them lelues vnto our enemies, r fight ameon, Leut, and Juda: gaynst vs, c fo get them vp out of land.
3 IJlathar, Zabuion,andweniamin, u Therkore dyd they let talke mailters
4 Dan and Pephthali, Gad g Aser. ouer them, to kepe thé vnder with bur-
5 All the soules that tame out of the line thens: And they buylt vnto Pharao of Jacob, were seuentie: treasure cities ithom x Naamses.
6 _ Wut Joleph was in Egypt alredy, € 12 But the moze they vercd then the gage fer
Af Joleph dyed, and all his brethren, and more they © multiplied aud grewe: so cle
* all that generation. that they abhorred at the syght of the een,
1 7 And the children of J srael were fruit- chyldren of Ffracl. | twas. FULL, encrealed, mulaiplicd,€ Wared 13. And the Egyptians helde the children exccedyng mpghtie, and the lande was ok Ylrael in bondage en mertie,

emoth

ffi

» fo beare
14 And

Exodus.

C 14 And they made their lyues bytter vnto them in that cruell bondage, in tlape, aud bricke, and all maner of Woke in the fielde: for all their bondage where-

| in they lerued them was ful of tirannie. ce) eames 15 And the kyng of Egypt“ spake vnto

eie diuers wapeg to oopresse the
Churche.

the mydwykes of the Hebrues women:
(of which the one was nanted Siphrah and the other Puah) and sayde:

16 When ve do che office of a mydibyte to the wonien of the Hebrues, and fee in the birth tyme that it is a box, ve shall kyl it: but if it be a daughter, it (hal liue.

17 Motwithstanding, the mpdwifes feared God, H and dpd not as the kyng of
Egypt commaunded ehem, but faved

the men chyldren. lled fo: the.

“ (cates.

Le) It was better to obep
Bod then man.

18 And the kyng of Egypt

God for bis names take, wplil delpuer his Thurche feom the at= fliction of tts

three monethes.

Cel Ife

a I .
? ra . 0
2 a 2 D 1
2 r 5 — 7 ps als e 7 5 i ihe (i N
805 = — * . * N 1 r f,
> . — ts + CH Te = U
— aN — 12 if 7 * if = A
ZF — oe ~ 2 0 — =
: >. r rie tees —— D VE au 1 — I
— — 8 : —5 & J 1 = 2 Hen
E , ( 5 N = \: . shits i = rn N 1 — x PH as te Tone of RA’ TEx Bi 4 ¢ a Y= Ha Be
5 e At | Ri st be Aas H
—. — — 5 = a Wag meng ae oe yet ae 1
8 oo ee == n 7 Nee eee 2 a i ee 1
— — — . 11. 83 WAS Ht. Comey
= — 5 250 ~y jt it Hitter) ji) 3 we 5 Jd
<< Sean AT oy a oR r BN at Sa 10 }
= — — S en R —
= — ä 2 2 2 “as 98 my N.
— — * . ai A 4 0 a — ee 5 ant „ A*
2 8 By U
2 6 ‘J '

N Re 8 2. pas — i CNN unt n 1 . wie
ö \ 5 * 4 5
Bo i aig: fe TANT
7 2 ane a nye gull tas
2 a By ma TRY 1 f vf y Pa

ranncs.
God in trouble, and he regardeth them. q i I
Al 9 77 ; an
“x out of the house of Le-
LO Ul, and toke to wyfe a daughter of Lent,
8 2 8 5 5 i |
Ca) efatth {ate >) 8 ued and are à lonne: gras, ee and When © the fe that it was a proper childe, He hyd him

mydwyfes, and sayde vnto them: why S haue pe dealt on this maner, and haue saued the men chyldren- .

19 And the mydibpfes aunfwered Pharao: that p Hebrues women are not as the women of Egypt: for they are niore liuely women, and are deliuered per the ’ mydwpkes come at them.

20 And‘ God dealt Well therefore with ) „, the mydwyfes: and the people multi- nne plied and wared very myghtie. ching

21 And it tanie to passe, that becaule the

midwiles feared God, be made them une
3 Eber

22 And Pharao charged all his people, saping: All the men chyldren that are borne, cast into the ryuer, and saue the mapde chyldren alpue.

7 The. ij. Chapter.

2 Moyles is borne. ; He is hydden in a backet a cast into a place where ledge groweth.
10 Moples is adopted of the daughter of Pharao. 1 Moyses murthereth an Egyptian which (mote an Hebrue. ; Bet weene them that are at ttrpfe,he woulde {et an attonee ment. 15 Mopfes fleeth from Pharao. 16 He defendeth maydens from the iniurie of shepheardes. 21 He marpeth Sephora to wyke. 23 Che chyldren ol Ilrael do erpe vnto

Ey if

$ And the daughter of Pharao tame downe to Wallhe her selfe in the 1 55

Oppresseq

fi

and her mapdens Walked along by the ryners syde: And when the fawe the basket among the flagges, the lent her

mapde to fetch it. ü

6 And when she had opened it, she sawe it was a chylde: and beholde, the babe wept. And e she had compaffion on it, and sayde: it is one of the Hebrues chyldren. :

Then lapde his filter to Pharaos daughter: shall I go and tall to thee a nurse of the Hebrues women, to nurse thee the chylde: 5

8 Pharaos daughter aunswered her: go. And the mayde ranne and called the

gore = OCHpldes mother. ;

me 9 To whom Pharaos daughter fayoe:

Take this chylde away, and nurfe it for

as mme, and J wpll rewarde thee. And the

woman toke the chylde, Enurledit vp.

10 The chylde grewe, and she brought it puto Pharaos daughter, and it was made her sonne. And (he called ỹ name of it Mopses: because ssapde he} IJ toke hym out ok the water.

1 And in thole dapes, when Moples was waxed great, he went out vnto his brethren, € loked on their burdens, aud spyed an Egyptian smytyng an Hebrut which was one of his brethren.

Iz. And he loked rounde about, and when he sawe no man by, be slewe the Egyptian, and hyd hym in the lande.

God ch his. by bandes of my cnemu

ehe god-

Huch heall Deed

0 €
The godlpe
Ml, Otc not
Ws folowen, 13

day, beholde, two men of the Hebrues stroue together: And he {aide vnto hun

thou thy felowe: #

14 Heaunhwered: © who made thee a man of aucthoritie and a indge ouer vs: vintendest thou to kyll me, as than kyl ledst the Egyptian: And optics feared

. Kieth to Mopses of deliuerpng Ilrael.

Exodus.

And when he was gone out another

that dyd the wong, Wherekore smytest

AEXV | : aud fayde : OF a suretie this g is
Eiben suretie this thyng is

5 And Pharao heard of it, and went
About to slaye Moyses. And Moyses fleyng from the face of Pharao, dwelt in the lande ol Madian: and he late downe by the welles syde. g

16 The priest ol Marian had vij.daugh- „ ters, which tame and drewe [water and filied the troughes for to water their faz thers: sheepe. f

17 And the shepheardes tame and dzone them away: but Moyles stoode vp and helped them, and watred their sheepe.

18 And when they came to Kaguel their father, he sapde: owe tame it to pale that pe are tome so soone to dap-

19 And they aunswered: A man ol Egypt deliuered vs from the handes of the shepheardes, and fo drewe vs water, and Watered the sheepe.

20 Me saide vnto his daughters: € where

is he: why haue pe so lett the man: Call

hym, that he may cate bread.

And Doyles was content to dwell
With the man: € he gaue Moples Sephora his daughter: l
22 Which bare him a sonne, and he called

his name Gershom: For he saide, YS

haue ben a straunger in a straunge land.

23 And in protesse of tyme the kyng of
Egypt dyed, and the chyldren of Hiract syghed by the realon of °° bondage, and cryed. a

24. And their complaynt tame vp dito
God from the bondage: and God heard ge their mone, and God remembred His de ca he
Aa and Nita.

atob.

25 And God loked bpon the chyldren of en „and God had respecte puto

(g) wonldire trouble folerce ok:e i the gedlac exc enteng thar vocation.

Ch) Tha he continued the remembraüce of the reden

(i) Their bondage waxpng oer, com pelled them to scbe to God.

ck) Gods free

. J The. iy. Chapter. 6

0 e sheepe ol his kat er in lawe. God in the middest of a bulshe spea e eee nee Ehen e 12 God with Moples. ; Che

name of God. 14 God teachech Moples how and in What cort he woulde that he ould

deltucy his people.

ll of the Lorde appeared flambe of fire out ofthe

) Though she Churche be greuoulipe ntt lit ted, pet the pre.cnce of
Hod kepeth e trom dellruc-

tion proud.

i a i i ee a,

And when ß Lorde sawe that he tame am that am. Aud he laid: This shalt >
7 forto fee God called onto hum out of the thon lap onto the chyldren of Piracy a middes ofthebullhe, r lapde: Moyses, Ji am, Vath leut me vnto vou. 0
% sp s Moylcs: And he answered, here am J. 15 And God {pate further buto Boyles, 2s", neh e 5 And he laid: Draw not nigh hither, Thus shalt thou fay vnto the chyldren panne put thy shoes of thy fete, for the place of IAsracl: The Lode God of pour ‘suas! eueren e wWhercon thou standest, is holy ground. — fathers, the God of Abraham, the God enden dere '. 6 And helayde: Jam the God of thy of Jlahac, and the God of Jacob hath 9 father, the God of Abraham, the God seut me vnto pou: This is ip nanie for a of Plahac, and the God of Jatob. And cuer, and this is my memoriall into ge-
Moyles hid his fate, for he Was afrayde neration and generation. to loke vpon God. : 16 Go, and gather the elders of Ilrael to-
W 7 Andthe Lozde saide: J haue sure- gether, and thou shalt faye onto them, opeorter , p leene the trouble ol m people which The Lorde God of pour fathers, the oo church. art in Egypt, and haue heard their crie God of Abraham, the God of Pfahar, dne krom the kate of their talte maisters: fo: and the God of Jatob appeared onto meh oncg - J knowe their sorowes, ä me, and sapde: In vilityng, haue J vi: ahm 3 And am tome downe to deliuer thẽ sited you, and know that which is done

Wc ane out ok the hande okthe Egyptians, and to pou in Egypt.

fase. to bryng them out of that lande, vnto a 17 And J haut lapde: © F wpll bryng op -

ene good lande g a large, vnto a lande that pou out ok the tribulation of Egypt, vn- pee

cee flolbeth With mplke and honp,euen vn- to the land ok the Chanaanites, and ee ewe

to the plate of the Chanaanttes, and Hee thites, and Amorzites, and Phertzites, «cn.

thites, and Aniorites, and Pherizites, and geuttes, and Jebulites, euen into a

and Heuites, and ofkthe Jebulites. land which floweth with milke e bony.

Nowe therfore beholde the tonplaint 13 And they Mall heare thy voyte: Then

of the chyldren of Ilrael is come vnto both thdu and the elders ol Ilsrael shall

me: and J haue allo seene the oppressis go vnto the kyng of Egypt, and fay di

wherwith ) Egyptians oppresledthem. to him: The Tord God of the hebrues co soe

10 Come thon therforc, and J wyll lende hath (w met with vs, and nowe let vs a thee vnto Pharao, that thou mapest go [we beteche thee} three dapes tourney hove. bryng my people the chyldren of Hltack into the wyldernesse, and do latrikite ok"

elideret. out of Egypt. N vnto the Lode our God. 9 0

© coe 11 And Mopfes {aide vnto God: O what ig And Jam lure that the king of Egypt i
Bui, a am to go bnto Pharao, and to bung wyl not let vou go, cet a mightie 1 ence. the chplozen of Ilrael out of appt: hand. a can

12 And he aunlwered. For J wyllbe 20 And J wyll stretche dut mp hande, ¢

Os
With thee: andthisthalbeatokenduto smpte Egypt with al my wonders whi- *

ede, thecthat J haus len ther. WAkter that che J wyll do m the middes therok, aud n people outofe- ate thacde wl te yous.” 9 ena w He ay chall serue God bpon this moũ- 21 And © F wyll get this people faudur . is
Dau and — 5 4

z umthe fpabeo ians, fo that
SHOES 13 And Doyles sayde vnto God: behoi When Fe thariuebamennptie 5 when J come bnto the chyldren of yl: 22 But à Wyte shall boro we of her neighrael, aud tall lap vntothem: the God. bour, and ok her that soiourneth in her ol your fathers hath fent me vnto vou. houle,iewels of fpluer, and iewels ol a Vil
And if they faye vnto nie, what is thy golde, and rayment: and pe Mall put names What andere wall Y geue thes them on pour fonnes and daughters, € 94 b Wii u. 14 And God aunswered Moples: OF Thai inter

p Mi : 1
See robbe the Egyptians. a 55 i N 4 eeee N : U
| q The. 117. Chapter. 0
God geueth three lignes vnto Moples, where with he e, ce La he is tent a dehuerer from God. Arodd herewith he map testitie vnc Pharao that sia

e turned into a ferpent, and the ferpent into the rodde agapne. s The hande of Moples leprous. 10 Moples lapeth fo? An lelle
Cownelle oktoung 14 God angred with Mopleg, geueth hym Aaron kor an oratour. cunmatteth fer 79 e nen ba Wpil deftrop Doptes, 25 Sephora cits ses to mecte hym. ement of God Taxon goeth agaynst Move

Moyses

Ou bean. 3

And he sayde: Cast it on the grounde.
And he tast it on the grounde, w and it

the syghtokit. j

4 Ande Lorde sapde vnto Moyles:
Put foorth thy hande, and take it by the taple. And therefore he put foorth his

wos bul emptibie ye ond.

¢

rodde in his hande. J y this thing shall they beleue that

the Lod God of their fathers, the God

ol Abraham, the God of Jlahat, € the

God of Jacob hath appeared vnto thee.

6 And the Lowe sayde furthermore vnto hym: Thrust thyne hande into thy bosome. And he thruste his hande into his bolome: and When he toke it ont agayne, beholde his hande was leprous, tuen as snowe.

And he sayde: Put thine hande into thy bosome againe. And he put his hand into his bosome agapne: and plucked it out of his bosome, and behold, it was

u kurned agayne as his (other) flefhe,

wn 8 Mherfore pf they wyll not beleue thee,

neither heare p bopee of the first signes, et wyll they beleue for the bopee of the etonde signes 5

9 But e if they wyl not beleue these two signes, neither hearken vnto thy voyce: thou shalt take of the water of the riuer and polbze it vpon the drye lande, and the water which thon takest out of the riuer shalbe (turned) into blood vpon the drye lande.

Tnttozitie kw op 5

mic to! to wonbe kt fiancs

e) They

Naht learne

zul wag in

BOS handt e ell

ne 10 Moyles layd vuto the Lode: Oh my

8 e nmoditieg i the Capp. zun to their

Low, Fam ueither vesterday nor ver

petterday a mand eloquẽt, neither fence

tno? chou halt spoken vnto thy seruaunt: but

eas Jamslowe mouthed, e owe tounged.

e WU And the Powe lapd vnto hym: Who

hath made mans month: or who maz

keth the dummbe, o2deafe, the seyng, 02 the blynde : ane not J the Lorde-

12 And nowe go, and © F wplibe with

thy mouth, and teache thee what thou

4 Gop

staunt

nent meg b toß ende

Bich be coi: ral) bith,

— Ce

Exodus.

becanie a serpent: and Doyles fled frõ

hande, and caught it: and it became a

XXXV].

14 And the Lore was angry with os
Moyses, and sayde: Do no 0 iisvosce
Aaron thy brotherthe“ Leute, that he “Or Les. tan speake: For lo, he commeth foorth C to meete thee: and when he leeth thee, he wyll be glad in his heart.
15 Therkore thon shalt speake onto him, and put hele wordes in his mouth, and
I wuͤbe with thy mouth, and With his mouth: and wyll teache vou what pou ought to do.
16 And He shalbe thy spokesman vnto the people, and he shalbe seuen he chalbe to thee in steade ok a mouth, aud) Oz. thou shalt be to hint. in steade of God. ,
17 And thou shalt take this rodde in thy 2 Shale be hande, wherewith thou Matt do mi- sie. races, e
18 Therkore Doyles went and returned een to Jethro his father in law againe and ewe lam vnto him: Let me go J prap thee nowe, and turne agayne vnto my brethren which are in Egypt, and see whether they be yet aliue. And Jethro lald to Moyles:go in peate.
19 And the Lorde sayde vnto Doyles in
Madian, Go and returne agayne into
Egypt: for all the men are dead whiche went about to “ kill thee, « geelee thy
20 And Doyles toke his wyfe, and his © sonnes, and put them on an afte, and
Wentagapne to Egypt: And Mopses toke the rodde of God in his hande. — g
21 And the Torde sapde vnto Moyses: we her
When thou art entred and come into dad
Egypt agapne, fee that thou do © al! 0 ae the Wonders befoze Pharao whiche B sun: vo haue put in thy hand: but J wyll hold dae pre. his heart, æ he Hal not let the people go. * weber
22 And thou shalt faye vnto Pharao: 25
Thus sapeth the Lode, Israel is my sonne (eve) np first borue sonne.
23 And JJ sapde vnto thee, that thou let mp sonne go, that he may serue nie. And ir thou refuse to let him go: beholde. ZH do flay thy sonne leuen thy first borne.
24. And it tame to passe by the way in the
Inne that the Lorde met hym, and e
Woulde haue w kylled hym. not bene
25 And Sephora toke a stone, aud CE „he away the fozeltin of her forme, and calt ia Mete it at his fete, and sayd: a blooddy hu hr bande art thou 5 nie. aui de c) e let hun go, pe lapdc:
26 Then he let hung lood-

ehylde.

(n) That 10. the Lord that
Woulde haue
Byllrd hym.

2 “ d | — al
Ex O As. M ov

“ a blooddy hulbande, betaule of ber cir- 1 all the elders of the chyldren o >> cunicision. racl,

27 Then laid the Lorde vnto Aaron:go 30 And Aaron told all the wordes which mecte Moyles in the wyldernelle. And the Tord had spoken vnto Moyses: and he went and met him in the mounte ob ddp miracles in the fight of the people.
God, and kissed him. 31 And the people beleued.ꝰ And when

P) Boy
Co) 6 28 And® Moyles tolde Aaron all the they Hearde that the Lorde had vilited Bae mene he wonrdes ok the Lorde whiche had sent the children of Alrael, and had locked aue man. Hin, and all the signes Whiche he had ppon their tribulation, they bowen the charged hum withall. selues, and worchipped.
19 So went Moyses and Aaron, and ga- . 15
\ The. v. Chapter. | *
¢ ; o bnto Pharao. 15 The gouernours ouer Ilrael crpe out vnto Phard. 2e @Bopiee and Aan che ot the people; 8 BOpEES COMpLOPNEED to God. 0
| Al D Poyses and Aaron wenten 10 Then went the talkemalsters ok the
20 J afterward and told Pha- people, and the officers out, and tolde
% rad Thus lapelh the. the people, faying: Thus läpeth Pha-
MENV/ A Lorde God of Jsrael: let rao, J wyil geue pou no more stralbe.
3 CONC a inp people go, that they u Go pour selues and gather pon straw y la a4 mape holde a feast vnto where ye can finde it: yet chall none of oes mme in the wyldernesle. pour labour be minished. bra 2 And Pharao sapde: © who is He 12 And fo were the people scattered au tame ool =: Lorde that J shoulde heare his voyte, abrode thronghout all 5 land of Egypt, bean künden . AND let Israel gor J knolbe not the kor to gather stubble in steade ofstrawe. alen ee. Torde, nepiher yl J let Ilrael go. 1; And the talkemaisters hasted them enn
3 And thep sayde, The God ok the He- forwarde, saping: fulfpll pour wake, un
On brzewes is called ouer vs: let vs go we pour daylp taskes in their due tyme, as
— pray thee three dapes tourney into the il von haͤd strawe.

Hebrues.

delert, and do facvifice vnto the Lorde our Gon: lest he smyte vs With pestilence or With the sworde. a

4 Then laide the kyng of Egypt vnto

them: wherkore do pe, Moyses and Aa-

14. And the officers of the children of JE C rael which Pharaos talkematters had set ouer them, were beaten, And they sayde vnto them: wherkore haue pe not

fulfilled your talke in makyng of brpcke both pesterday and to day, as well as in tymes past-
15 The offiters allo of the children of Hl vael, came €© tomplapned vnto ha- «30 f Wherkore dealest thou thus ae
With thy leruauntes sa
16 There is no strawe geuen vnto thy

ron let the people from their workesget pou vnto pour burthens.

5 And Pharao sayde furthermore: bez holde, there is much people nowe in the lande, and pou niake them leaue thepe burthens.

CEs 6 And Pharao © chinaunded the same

beaten of dap, ö talkmaisters Which Were anon: seruauntes, and they fay vnto vs, make

crate, Sen gest the people and the officers faying: brycke: and thy otis are beaten, » 9,

coeur the. 7 De (hall geue the people no moze and the fault is thyne owne people. 19 7 strawe to make brycke Withal, as ve did 17 He fapbe :pou are idle, idle are pou: at wid! in tyme patted: let them go and gather and therkore pou lay, we will go, and do saa them strawe then selues. facrifice vnto the Lorde. 1

8 And the numberof bricke which they were wont to make in tyme passed, lay vnto their charges also, and minithe nos thing therok: for they be idell, and therfoze crye, saying: we wyll go, and do faz get bnto 111 God.

9 They must haue moze worke layed thyng of ur daple

28 vponthem, that they may labour ther- eee e

: talke in due tynie: .
Sehe, ULAND not regarde payne wordes. zo And they inet Moyles and au
7 whi

/

18 Go therfore nowe, x worke, and there shall no strawe be geuen vou k pet (all. da. ve deliuer the whole tale of bricke. .

10 And the officers ok the chüdren of Pl rael did fee that they Were in worse call, after it was lapde, ye shall minishe no-

( The true

yes

out from Pharao. soni 21 And salde vnto them: W The Torde mae look ppon pougtudae pou, which Hach

inthecpes of Pharao, and in the epes of his feruauntes, and haue puta sWworde in their hande to flay bs.

a flincke.

® fhalt thou lee what
M5) Wp Go vnto Pha-

rao: for ina mightie bande shal he let them

— 90, and in a ae 1 5

hande shall he dryue them out of his

lande. a

2 Aud God spake vnto Moyses, and laid

i vnto him: Jam Jehouah.

ann) 3 JJ appeared bnto Abraham, Plahac,

and Jacob as an almightie God: but

in my name Jehouah was J not kuowen vnto them.

Moreouer “ J made a couenaunt
With them, to geue them the lande of
Chanaan, the land of their puͤgrimage, aims wherein they were straungers.

1 „ 5 And therekore J haue allo heard the

mon Jroning ot the childrẽ of Jlrael, whom the Egyptians kepe in bondage, and haue remenibzed my couenaunt.

6 Wherlore fay vnto the chudren of HE rach: Jam PFevouah, I wil bryng vou out from the burthens of the Egyptians, and will ryd pou out of their bondaͤge, and will deliuer pou in a stretched

dut arme, and in great iudgementes.

b 7 And J will take pou® for my people,

and wilbe to you a God: And pe shall knowe that J am the Lord pour God

S Which bang pou out from the burthens

ofthe Egyptians.

8 And J will bryng von into the lande,
Concerning the whiche J did likt bp my hand to geue it vnto Abraham, Jlahac, aud Jacob, and wyll geue it vnto vou for à possession: (for) Jam Jehonah.

% And Doyles tolde the hidden ol PE

rael euen lo: but they! hearkened not vnto Moyles for anguishe of spirite and

Boples eis qintly itd

A ay,

as

Aer now
Bt glpaht
B pcopie ~ bitheredicr e odeped.

) 3s the
Maut wag

| Exodus.

which doodemtheir way as they ame 22 O Moyles returned vnto the Lorde, .,

XXXVII J. and sayd: Lore, wherkore halt thou fo scape ’

euyll intreated this people: And wher- hin weudor fore hast thou fent ald — 5

made the lauour of vs tobe abhozred 23 Fo: sinee J tame to Pharao to speake dre

in thy name, he hath fared foule with epd this tolke, and pet thou Hatt not deliuered thy people at all.

ram the father of Moyles and Aaron. 23 Aaron the father ol Padab and Abiu. 25 Eleazer father of Phinees. 29 Doyles is commaunded to tpealie to Pharao. ~

Nnto Doyles : Nowe 10 Andthe Lorde spake vnto Moyles,

laying: 6
II Go in, and speake vnto Pharao king of Egypt, that he let the chudren of JE | racl go out of his lande. N
Iz And Mopses spake before the Lorde, saping: beholde, the children of Israel hearken not vnto me: howe then that, <>"
Pharao heare me, whiche amor WA 4e , tirtumtiʒed lippes: ' Speache : or
13 And©che Lorde spake bnto Mopses 4. and vnto Aaron, t gaue them a charge ander concerning the chyldren of (Aro and dane aeg concerning Pharao king of Egypt, that want ern they shoulde bring the childrenof HE as we rael out ol the lande of Egypt. bend
14. Thtse be the heades of theyr fathers ‘se houles. The children of Kuben p first. Or, borne sonne of Israel, are these:anoch , (ows lego. and Phalln, Helton and Charis hele Sm debe the children of Kuben. M
15 The chyldren of Simeon: Jemuel, dcr ve and Jamin, Ohad, c Jachin, Sohar, ane and Saul the sonne of the Chanaant: , emmroure tithe woman: Hele are the kinredes ok
Simeon. ‘
16 These also are the names of the chyl-
Deen of Leut in their generations: 5
Gerson, and Cehath and Merari: Lett -n liued an hundred thirtie and seuen pere. ade euro
17 The fonnes of Gerson: Libn, and ase
Simi by their kinredes. ee
18 The chyldren ol Cehath: Amram, €.
Phar, and Hebron, and Tlziel. And
Tehath lined an hundred thirtie and three pere. ,
19 The children ol Merari: Mahlt, and.
Muti: these are the kinredes of Leu by « their geueratious. 0
20 Amram toke Jochebed © his fathers . e sister to wyfe, and she bare hym Aaron een and

troge.

"D2, lich

e

and Moyses:and Amram lined an hundred and thirtie and leuen peres.

21 Aud the chyldren of Ishar: Corah,

NMepheg, and Sichzt. |

22 The chyldren of Chel: Milael, Elza-

phäan, and Zithri.
(a) Barons 23 And Aaron toke * Elileba, daugh-
Thecibeot „ter ok Aiminadab, and fitter of Naha-
A. fon to wyfe, Whhiche bare hym Madad, and Abthu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.
24 Thethyldren of Corah: Assir, and
Eltanah, and Abialaph: thele art the kinredes of the Corahites.
25 Eleazar Aarons fonne, toke him one of the daughters of Putiel to wple, whiche bare hym Phinees: and these

are the principal fathers of the Leuites

5 „ .
Exodus.

Moyfe

theonghout their kinredes. ‘
26 This is that Aaron and Doyles too whom” the Lorde fayds * Weade the <a 3, childzen of Plract out of the lande of E «Leia gypt, accorduig to theyr armies, at
27 These are that Moyles and Aaron, sa! which spake to Pharao king of Egypt, % that they might bryng the chyldren ok. %
Ilrael out of Egypt. It ga,
28 And in the day when the Lorde fake vnto Doyles inthe lande of Egypt,
29 Me spake vnto hym, laying: J amthe
Logbde :{peake thou vnto Pharao the ¢ king of Egypt all that J fay vnto ther.
30 And Doyles layde before the Horde: beholde, J am of vntircumctzed lippes, t how Mhatl Pharao geue me audience:

¢ The. vij. Chapter.

1 Moyles with Laron is tent vnto Pharao. 3 God cautech fiqnes,chat he onlye may be nmowen mightie. to Che rodde ol Moyses is turned into a serpent. n The enchaun- g ters do the lame. ww mater turned into blood. 22 Che enchaunters do the fame. ;

A 1 MDthe Torde sayde

é onto Poples: behold,

J haue made thee

Caner Pharaos @ God: and

peer Aaron thy brother ders. shalbe thy prophete.

2 Thou chalt speakcall that J conmaunde thee, and Aaron thy bother shall speake vnto Pharao, that he seude the chudren of Jlrael out

of his lande.

©) oo, 3 Ander) J Will harden Pharaos heart,

and multiplie my nuracles € mp wonders in the lande of Egypt.

4 Wut Pharao shall not hearken vnto von, that J may let my bande vpon Egypt, and bryng out myne armies, and my people the chyldren of Israel out of the land of Egypt in great iudgnientes.

5 Andthe Egyptians shall knowe that
Jam the Loyd, when F stretch foorth my hande vpon Egypt, and bryng out

the children of Jlrael frõ among them.

© ene 6 Moyses and Aaron did as the Lod onippSobich tommaunded them, seuen so did they. ftom, 7 Moyles was d fourescore pere olde,

and Aaron fourescore and three, when eren: they spake vnto Pharao.

eae 8 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyles

W and Aaron saping:

9 If Pharao speake vnto pon, faying, schewe a miracle for you: thou shalt fay vnto Aaron, Takc thy rod, and cast it before Pharao, that it may be a serpent.

he executed this tust iugde

hym.

e
SORE Wan

Io Then went Moyles and Aaron in bdr to Pharao, and dyd euen as the Lorde had tommaunded: and Aaron catte foorth his rodde before Pharao, and bea his seruauntes, and it (Curned} to a

erpent.

n Then Pharao called for the © wyle oor men, and enchaunters: and those lorte- au rers of Egypt dyd in like maͤner with aa their sorterie. .

12 For they cat downe every man his rod, and they (turned) to serpentes: but
Aarons rodde did eate vp their roddes.

13 And he helde Pharaos heart that he hearkened not vnto them, euen as the
Lorde had sayde.

14. The Torde also sayde vnto Moyses: 1.
Pharaos heart is“ hardened, he relu- deu
{etl to let the people go. burthen

15 Get thee vnto Pharao in themozniig, loe, he wyll come vnto the water, and thou shalt stand bpd the ryuers brincke agaynst he conte: and the rodde whiche was turued to a serpent, Male thou take in thyne hande:

16 And thon shalt fay onto hym: the
Lorde God ol the Hebrewes hath sent me vnto thee, saying: Hee my people go, that they may serue me in the wyldernesse: and beholde, hytherto thou wouldest not heare.

7 Thus sayeth the Lord, In this thou eu fhalt knowe that Jam the Lorde: be. dc holde,“ J wyll smyte with the ae me

cen

zues of Egypt

that is in my hande, the waters whiche are in the ryuers, and they shalbe turned to blood.

183 And the fishe that is in the river, Hatt dye:and the ryuer shall corrupt, and it
(hall greeue the Egyptians to drinke of the water of the ryuer.

19 And the Lode spake vnto Mopses: say vnto Aaron, Take thy rodde, and stretche out thyne band © ouer the waz ters ol Egypt, ouer their streames, ouer their riuers and pondes, and all pooles of water whiche they haue, that they map be blood, and that there may be blood throughout all v lande of Egypt, both in veslelles; of wood, e also of stone.

20 And Moyses and Aaron did enen as the Lorde commaunded: and he lpfte vp the rodde, and smote the waters that were in the ryuer in the fight of
Pharao, and in the sight of his seruaun-

hre
Ilraclsteg pin wert ned, Are pe turned ec

owe, he firite

=< HE Torde spake vnto

iy 8 Mopyses, go vntoppha-

) Sea} rao €tell hym; Thus

ABA lapeth the Tord: Let

1 At) my people go, that they map serue me.

—— And it thou retule to

trim le them go, beholde, J wyll sinyte all ent. thy borders ™ with frogges: nso, 3 ges, Miche Hall go vp and come into thine boule, and into thy priuie chaumber where thou slepest, and vpon thy bed, into the houle of thy leruauntes, and Dpon thy people, and into thyne ollens, and vpon al thy vitapyles in store:
4 And the frogges shall come vp vppon thee, and on thy people, and vpon all thy seruauntes.

And the Lorde spake puto Moyses: fay vnto Aaron, stretch foorth thyne

Go can
1 wemens at bts
Magepng
RDI, i

Otter the ryuers, andouer the pondes: and caule frogges to come vp vpon the lande of Egypt.
And Aaron stretehed his hande ouer
P waters of Egypt, t the frogges came vp and couered the lande of Egypt.
And © the lorterers did like wife with their sorcerie, and brought krogges vp

delecond 6
Bue,

e hole. 7 les with

A arty tg

Exodus.

J The.viy,

And the riuer shall scraule with frog: -

Dande with thy rod ouer the streames,

Egyptians coulde not drinke of the waters ol the ryuer, and there Was blood throughout all the lande of Egypt.

22 © And the euchaunters of Egypt dyd lpkewpse with their sorteries, and he even ie eral neyther did

rken vnto them, as the 1 had sayde. .

23 And Pharao turned him selfe, and went agapne into his house, and G set not his heart thervnto.

24 And the Egyptians wdygged rounde

about the ryuer for water to dzinke: for»

they coulde not drinke of the ryuer.

25 And it continued feuen dayes after that the Lorde had finyten the ryuer.

Chapter.

the water of

2 Frogges. 8 Pharao prapeth Moyles to pray Coz hym. 12 Moptes prapeth for Pharao. j Pharao is hardened. 16 Lyce in man and beat. and nopsome beastes. haͤrdened.

20 fflpes,oz all k̃ynde of wyide fierce

25 Pharao intreateth Mopses to pray for hym. 32 Pharao is

bpon the lande of Egypt.

8 Then Pharao called for Moyses and
Aaron, and sapde: pray © pe vnto the
Torde that he mape take away the frogges from me, and from my people: and JJ will let the people go, that they map do satrifice vnto the TLorde.

9 And Moyses sapde nto Pharao: glory herein betause of me, andl(appoynt) when J thal pray for thee, and for thy seruauntes, and for thy people to dryne away the frogges from thee and thy houses: and they map remayne but in the ryuer onlye.

10 Me sayd: to morowe. © And he fapae, euen as thou hast said:that thon mapest knole that there is none like vnto the ode our God.

1 And so the frogges shall depart from thee, and from thy houses, from thy seruauntes, and from thy people:and thal remapne in the rpuer onlpe.

12 WMoples and Aaron Went out from
Pharao, and Moyles cryed buto the
Lorde, as touching the frogges whiche he had brought against Pharao.

z Andthe Lorde dyd actordyng to the saying of Moyses:and the frogges dyed out of the houles, out of the courtes and

fieldes. 14 And

XXXIX tes:and © all the water that Was in the ryuer, turned into blood. ;

And the fithe that was in the ryuer dped: and the ryuer corrupted, and the

(1) Ther howd: bane
Brower gods honde iu that thyng, wherin lap their wealth and latette.

(k) The faithfull duetcame this temptation through gods
§porde confr= med by a heauenlp vision.

() Song
Wozkeg are not lyghtly to ve conädered.
(m) CThese eircumstaüccg declare that

ig Was no vapne illuson

(d) Wppas etites fearce with Podg tadgement, pretend accr= tayde repens taunce.

Ce) De is
Wylled to kozsake his artogancie, and rez iopce in the mercie of god. which he shald attapne by the paper ot godg teruauntes.

(k) Be meas neth not the differpng of
Moples praper: but to houe telpite that nyqht, koʒ the peoples de-

uuerie.

(g) The tise
Reb are dehutred from

temporali pus nishme ar, o the praper o the fapehfull.

Plagues of Egypt.

© Stanke.

ch) God most casilpe duerthzoweth the scrength of

man.
The thirde plague.

(10 The smaltest beast cs haue strength tnough to hurt, bepng

God hath proned the kapth af his sertates.

Cl) They
Woulde not secuit ouertone of any man, therkozte thep confesse
Gods power agapnst ihem-

Woulde haue al this matter done publihlp.

C 14. And they gathered them together vp-

pon heapes, and the lande“ had an euill simell (tyrough them.)

15 Wut when Pharao lawe that he had

rest geuen hun, he hardened his heart, and hearkened not vnto thei, as the
Howe had sayde.

16 And the Lord sayd duto Moses, Say

vnto Aaron: Stretche out thy rod, and finpte the dust of the lande, that it map be (turned) to lyte throughout all the lande of Egypt.

17 And they did so: for Aaron stretched

out his hande with his rodde, and smote the dust of the earth, Whiche turned to lyte in man and beast: fo that all the dust of the lande (turned) © to lyte throughout all the lande ol Egypt.

18 And the enchaunters “atlaped like-

Wife with their enchanntinctes tobring foorth lyte, v but they toulde not: and the lyce were both vpon men x beastes.

19 Then laid the enchaunters vnto Pha-

rao: O this is the finger of God. And
Pharaos heart remapned obftinate, and he hearkened not vnto them, euen as the Lorde had layde.

20 And the Lorde lapde vnto Doyles:

ryse bp carly in the mornyng, and stand before Pharao, lo, he wyll come foorth
™ vnto the water, and thou shalt fay puto hun, Thus lapeth the Lorde: Tet mp people go that they may serue me.

D 2 Els ik thou wylt not let my people go,

* Swarmes of fices.

behold, J Will end “ all maner of flyes both bpon thee and thy seruanntes, and thy people, t into thy houses: and the houles of the Egyptians shalbe full of flyes, and the ground wheron they are.

Sz, Spe 22 And the land of Golen where inp peo-

rate,

(n) Bencfites

und plagues are in Gods onlyr hande.

ple are wm J tause tobe wonderkull in that day, x fo that there shal no flyes be there: herby thou shalt know that
EI N ode in the myddest of the carth.

Exodus.

23 And FJ will puta“ diuision betweene

my people and thine:and evento mo- vo.

rowe Mall this miracle be done.

24. And the Lord dyd euen lo, e there tame an intollerable warme of flyes in to the boule of Pharao, and int his ser-

uauntes houses, and into all the land of

Egypt: and the land was corrupt with 5

these flyes. .
25 And Pharao called for Doyles and

Aaron, and sapd: “© Go, and do latrilite 80

vnto pour God in this lande.

26 And Mopses aunswered, It is not

meete that we fo do: for we must offer vnto the Lorde our God, that which is

0 an abbomination vnto the Egypte *

ans. Lo, if wt sacrifite that which is an abbomination vnto the Egyptiaus before theyr eyes, wyl they not {tone bs:

27 We wyll go three dayes tourney into a the delert, and facvifice vnto the Lode n

dur God, as he bath ( tõmaunded vs.

28 And Pharao sayd: J Will let vou go, that ve may sacrifite vnto the Lorde pour God in the wyldernesse, but go not farre away: pray for me.

29 And Moyses sayd, beholde, J will go out from thee, and pray vnto the Lord, that the flyes map depart from Pharao, and from his seruauntes, and from his people to morowe: but let Pharao from hence foorth dale deteiptfully no moze, that he Wyll not let the people go, to satrifice vbnto the Lode:

30 And Moyses went ont from Pharao, and © prayed vnto the Lode.

31 And the Lorde did accordyng tothe « saping of Moyses: and the flyes departed from Pharao, and from his fers we uauntes, and from his peoplesand there

remapned not one.
32 And Pharao hardened his heart once

moze at this time, and dpd not let the

people go.

The. ix. Chapter.

1 Deach ok cattell. 8 Boples. ij Haple. 27 Pharao acknowledgeth his ollence, and be lecheth Moyles to pray kor hym. 33 nohen Moples prapeth, the arte or 5

He Torde said vnto Moy-
(ses, go in vnto Pharao, and thou shalt tell bym,

SS 63

VE

Sa God of the Hebrues: Let ly people go, that they may ferue nie.

Thus sapeth the Torde

2 If thon refule to let them go, and

Wylt holde them styll

3 Beholde, the hande of the Lowe is vpon thy flocke Which is in the fielde,

[fo2) vpon Porses, vpon asses, vpon ta’ melles, vpon oxen, and vpon ch her t

> pet l ga

sptpprug l onelp to be folowed.

(t) Tbebb
Bed m tha neceslitie pt tende great tligan.

o-

7 U

pot

there shalbe a mightie great ne an

And the Lode Hall do Wonderfully betweene the beastes of Ilrael, and the beastes of Egypt, fo that there shall nothyng dye ofall that pertayneth to the children of Asrael.

nos 5 And the Lorde appoynted a tyme,

le, faping: to morowe the Lorde (hail ft

ur: nithe this worde in the lande.

m And the Lorde dyd that thyng on the

es morowe, and all the tattell of Egypt

u, dyed: but ok the cattell ot the children of

ene Illrael, dyed not one.

eet) 7 And Pharao lent, and beholde, there

e. was not one of the tattell of the Ilrae-

B lites dead: And the heart of Pharao

hardened, and he did not let the peole go. *

8 And the Lod faid bnto Moyses and
Aaron: take pour handes full ot asshes out of i furnace,e Moyses thal sprinckle it vp into the ayre in p fight of Pharao:

9 And it shalbe dust in all the lande of
Egypt, and shalbe fbelling sores with blaynes both on man t beast throughout all the lande of Egypt.

10 And they toke alshes out of the fur-

nace, and stoode before Pharao: and

ann Moples © sprinkled it vp into the ayze, ino and there Were lwellyng sores With mc blapnes, both in men and in beastes:

1 And © thefogcerers could not stande

rh bekore Boyles becaule of the blaynes:

foz there Were botches vpon the enchaunters, and bponal the Egyptians.

12 Andthe Lorde hardened the heart of
Pharao, and he hearkened not vnto them, as p Load had said vnto Moyses.

3. And the Lorde sayde vnto Moyles: rise vp early in the morning, and stande before Pharao. and thou (halt tell hun,
Thus sapeth the Lorde God of the hebrues: Let my people go, that they may serue me:

14 Or els J wyll at this tyme sende all my plagues vpon thine htart, and vpon thy seruauntes, and on thy people, that thou mayest knowe that there is none lyke me in all the earth.

1; Jor now J will stretch out my hand, that I map lmpte thee and thy people with pestilente, and thou shalt perpthe

om the earth.

6 And in very deede © for this tause haue J “kept thee, for to Merwe thee ny power, and that my name may be declared throughout all the worlde.

¢

zues of Egypt. Exodus.

17 Bet exaltest thou thy selfe agaynst my people that thou wylt not let them go:

18 Beholde, to morowe this tine Hwy sende downea® mightie great Hayle, cer. euen suche a one as Was not in Egypt ere fince the foundation thereof was lapde, n vnto this tyme.

19 Sende therfore nowe, and gather thy beattes, all that thou hat in the fielde:
Jor dpon all the men and the bealtes whiche are founde inthe fielde, and not brought home, Mall the hayle fall, and they shall dye. a

20 And as many as feared the wore W. = of the Lorde amongest the sernauntes rena of Pharao, made their sernauntes and an ee their beastes fice into the houses. D

2 But he that regarded not the worde ok the Lord, left his seruauntes and his beastes in the fielde.

22 And the Lorde sapde vnto Mopses: stretche foorth thyne hande vnto heauen, that there may be hayle in all the

lande of Egypt, vpon man, and vpon

beastes, and vpon all the hearbes ok the fielde throughout the lande of Egypt.

23 And Doyles stretched foorth his rod The tuch vnto heauen, and the Lord © thundred plague.

(1) Ilelemen-

and Hayled, and the fire ranne a long ende vpon the grounde, and the Lorde hay- wann de led in the lande of Egypt. *

24. So there was haple, and fire mingled with the hayle, so greeuous, and such as there was none throughout al the land of Egypt since people inhabited it.

25 And the haple sinote throughout all the lande of Egypt all that was in the fielde, both man c beast: and the hayle smote all the hearbes of the fielde, and broke all the trees of the fielde.

26 Onlp in the lande of Gosen where the oan of Ilrael were, was there no

ayle. N

27 And Pharao sent and called for Moy- E ses and Aaron, and sayde vnto them, J haue nowe finned:the Lorde is righ- ©, adden, teous, and J Entry people are vngodiy. o. ee

28 Prap ve bnto the Lorde, that these Sage. thundringes of God aud haple may be wa sufficient, and I will let pou go, and ye chall tary no longer.

29 qpovits (aye vnto Dim: Assoone as © u oe.
Fam out of the citic, J Wpll spreade ua e abzode my handes vnto the Torde aud lader the thunder shall teasse, neyther hall Sharet there be any more Hayle: that thon >: mayest knowe howe that the e

H

lagues of Egypt.

vngodlipnes.

the other.
“ Hidde.

ce A snaie.

30 Wut J

the Lordes.

uauntes pet feare not the ow face of the orde God.
And fo the flare and the barlye were

finytten, for the barly was fot vp, and the klare was boulled:

gor 32 Wut the wheate and the rye were not

finytten, for they were late sowen.
3 And Moyles Went out of the citte fro
Pharao, and fpzead abrode his handes

The. x. Chapter.

God hardeneth Pharao. 4 Moyles threatnech Pharao, locustes. is Pharao acknowledging his line, reauireth that praper be made foz him. tao, 2 Darknesle so grolle, that it might be kelt.

FX] ND the Lode sapde
S) | Dnto Doyles,go in vn-
CF] to Pharao: fo2 J haue
- S| hardened his heart, €

before hum,

2 And that thou teil in the audience of

thy sonne, rok thy sonnes sonne what

thinges J haue done in Egypt, and the nuracles Which J haue done amongest them: that they may know howe that

Jamthe Logde.

And fo Moyses and Aaron came vnto
Pharao, and said duto hin, Thus sayeth the Lord God ol the Hebrues: How long wilt thou refuse to submit thy felfe vnto mie? Let my people go, that they map serue me.

4 On elsifthou rekuse to let my people go, beholde, to niorowe wyll J bryng greshoppers into thy coattes :

And they Mall coner the face of the earth, that it can not be {rene : and they
{hall cate the residue which remayneth vnto yon and is estaped from the haple, and they shall cate euerp greene tree that veareth you fruite in the fielde.

6 And they shall ful thy houses, and all thy seruauntes houles, and the houles of all the Egyptians, after suche a maz ner, as neyther thy fathers, nor thy fathers fathers haue seene fince the tyne they were bpon the earth vnto this dap. And he turned him selke about, and went out from Pharao.

And Pharaos seruauntes fayde vnto

Hint: howe long Mall he be“ hurtkull

vnto vs: Let the men go, that they may

We

ExOdus.

knowe that thou and thy ser-

Plaguesof 80

vnto the Lorde: and the thunder and
Hayle teassed, neyther rayued it vpon the earth.

34 And when Pharao sawe that the « „. rayne, and the hayle, and thunder were ae teasled, he sinned yet moze, and harde- da ned his heart, he and his seruauntes: an

35 And the heart ol Pharao was hardened neyther woulde he let the chyidren of Piracl go, as the Lorde had fayd by the hande of Poyscs,

19 Moyles prapeth kor Pha-

feruc the Lorde their God: knowelt thou not pet that Egypt is destroyed-

8 And Mopyses e Aaron were brought againe vnto Pharao, and he sayde vnto © them, 0 Go and serue the Lorde pour
God: but who art they that shall go? n

9 And Moyles aunlwered: we Will go nt with our poung, and with our olde, pea, ae and with our sonnes c with our daugh- tom ters, and with our sheepe, and with our oren we mult go: for We must holde a feast vnto the Lorde.

1o And he said vnto them: Let the Lod be fo with vou, as J Will let you go, and pour chyldren: take heede, for ve haue some nulchieke in hande. n

1 Map not so, but go they that are men, and serue the Lorde: foz that was pour desire. © And they were thrust out of 4
Pharaos presence. —.—

12 Andthe Lorde sayde vnto Moples: ansé
Stretch out thyne hand ouer the lande .

ented,

of Egypt for avethoppers, that they ker may come vpon the land ok Egypt, aud due eate all the hearbes of the lande, and all va that the hayle left behynde.

13 And Mopses stretched foorth his rod sree duer the lande ol Egypt, and the Lorde he brought ano cast winde vpon the lande a all that day, and all that nyght: aud in a the morning the cat winde brought the wi! grelhoppers. 817

14 And the grechoppers went vp ouer ser all the lande of Egypt, and remapned E in all quarters of Eqypt very greeuoul-
Ipe : before them were there no suche greshoppers, neither after them halbe.

15 Foz they touered all the face of the earth, so that the lande was darkte, and they did eate al the hearbes of the a

gues of Egypt.

and all the fruttes ofthe trees whatsdener the Hayle had lefte: there Was no greene thyng left in the trees hearbes of che ficlde though al ß land of Egypt.

16 Therefore Pharao called fo2 Mopfes and Aaron in haste, and sapde: J haue sinned agaynst the Lod pour Good, and agapnst pon:

17 Aud nowe forgeue me my sinne only this onte, and pray vnto the Lord pour
God that he may take awaye from me this death only.

18 And Moles] went out from Pharao, and paaped vnto the Lorde.

19 And the Lode turned a myghtie strong Weft wynde, and it toke awaye

the grashoppers, and tast them into the

red lea: fo that there was not one gralhopper in all the coastes of Egypt.

20 And the Torde hardened Pharaos heart, fo that he woulde not let the childeen of Hitacl go.

21 And the Lode fayde vnto Moyses:
Stretche out thy Pande vnto heauen, that there may be vpon the lande of Egypt darknesse which may be felt.

riety 22 And Moyses siretched foorth his hand

gu, vnto heauen: and there was a thicke

le

dat. _ DATKCneMe vpon all the lande ol Egypt

© Speake thou therfore in the cares

ol the people, that euery man borowe of

his neighbonr, and euery woman okher

Dun of syluer, and ie wels e.

Andthe Lorde chall gene the people kauour in the syght of the Egyptians:
Porcouer, Doyles was a very great man in the lande of Egypt in the pee of Pharaos seruauntes, and in the lyght ok the people.

And Doptes sayde, Thus fayth the

orde: tt he ode sapde vnto Doyles: de At mydnyght, wy a go out in- 9 And the Lorde sapde! 50

e

death of the first borne of all thynges.

three dayes long.
23 Mo man sawe another, neither rofe vp from the place where he was by the ace of thaec dapes: But al the chuͤdren of Israel had light where theid welled,
24. And Pharao talled for Moyses, and sayde, Go, and serue the Lorde: onlye let your sheepe pour oren abyde, and let pour chyldren go With pou,
25 And Moyses sapde: Thon must geue vs also offeringes and burnt offe- ae

fess elde

vinges, for to do sacrifite vnto the Lorde wenge our God. : jt a mac at
26 Our cattell allo Khali go with vs, and cbse os

there (hati not one hooke be left hehynd, fo therof nnist we take to serue pone dur God: neither do we knoe with what we must do seruice vnto the od vntyll we come thyther. |
27 But the Lowe Hardened Pharaos heart, and he woulde not let them go. g
28 © And Pharao sayde vnto hym: Get ö thee from me, and take heede vnto thy (2) beso
(eife that thou feet my face no moze: for far
Whenfocucr thou conimestin my tyahe, tor, temo thou shalt dye. manlpter be
29 And Moyles sayde: Let it be as thou halt lapde, J wyll see thy fate no more.

maunded.

Thersoze, the,

cales ought to be ol good hope. 7

J The. xj. Chapter.

Che Lorde commaundech the Bebzetwes to robbe the Capptiangs 4 The

to the mpddest ol Egypt,

Anda the fir borne in all the land ol
Egypt Malt dye, euen fr the first borne of Pharao that sytteth on his seate, vnto the first borne of the mapde seruaunt that is behynde the mll, and all the first gendred of the cattell. dent der,

6 And there shalbe a great erye through- et out all the lande ol Egypt, such as there ae
Was neuer none lyke, nor shalbe.

7 Wut amongst the chyldren of Blract shal not a dogge moue his tounge, from aman vnto a beast: that pe may knolbe
How that che Lod putteth a difference betweene the Egyptians and Ysracl.

3 H And these thy leruauntes shal al tome (©) Tun dowue buts me, and fall before me, and arne fay: Get thee out, and all the people a of that are vnder thee, and then Wyll J aged depart. And he went out from Pharao with an angry countenaunte. "Op, ine

lead anger.

(b) That sucrerdeth ofter him in the unperial trowne as hepre apparaimt. soz dy syttyng. un

Fj Ph

godip in such

— ͤ — — ˖ ‚˖—·1

The Passouer. Exodus. n passouer

Ph rad shall not heare pou, that my wonders before Pharao: And the Lon -
Wonders map be multiplied in the land Hardened Pharaos heart, fo that he

of Egypt. woulde not let the chyldren of Ilraei
10 Aud Moyses and Aaron dyd all these go out ok his lande.

q The. xij. Chapter.

1@be charge and matter of eatyng of the Paflouer, 25 A charge is geuen parentes to teache their chyldren the misterie ofthe Pallouer. The murder ot thefiri borne of
Egypt. 31 Pharao casteth out the chyldren of Alrael. 35 The Je wes do robbe the
Egyptians of golden and fpluer vellels. 37 The chyldren of Ilrael do go out. 40 Thep
Was Egypt foure hundreth and thirtie peres. J; Che maner of celebratyng the
Palsouer. 8 g

, ND the Lome fpake 1 Ok this maner (hall pe eate it: with we bnto Moples and Aae vour lopnes girded, and pout chooes on
N „ ronm the lande of E. pour feete aum yout faite your hand, e ah, Z i :

gypt faping: and pe chall eate it in hatte > foe it is fa
2 by LA, This moneth shalbe the Lordes passouer. ute
VB) kz Vipnto vouß begynnyng 12 Fo; Wyül pale throngh the lande of wera

ae of monethes, andthe Egypt this fame nyght, and Wyll smywte first moneth of the pere Mall it be vnto all the first borne vf Egypt from manto pou. beast, and vpon all the gods of Egypt J
3 Speake ye vnto all the congregation Wwyll exetute iudgement: J lam] the of Hirael, laying: In the tenth dapt ob Node. i this moueth, euery nan take vnto hynn 13 And the blood shalbe vnto pou a token
Ca) GO AMIaNIbe actording top house ol the fa- inthe houles wherin vou are: and whẽ creefonates thers, a lanibe throughout euer y house. J see the bogen wyll passe ouer vou,
Ache: 4. Ikthe houshold be to litle fo p lambe, fand the plague all not be pon vou to let hym take his neyghbour Whiche is destroy pou when Pimple the lande of next vnto his houle, accordpng to the Egypt. ö munder ok the loules, euerv one ok you 14 And this day chalbe vnto vou a remẽ C attordyng to his catyng shaͤl make pour praunce: and pou chall kepe it an Holy

toumt for a lanibe. keast onto the Lorde throughout your
5 And let the lambe of pours be without generations, ve Mall kepe it holy for an „ bienulhe, a male oka pere olde (wbiche) brdimaunte kor euer. be

ye shal take out fromamong the sheepe, 15 Seuen dapes thal ye cate vnleauened ora and from aniong the goates. bread, fo that euen the fiwlt day pe puta’ bree
6 And ye Malt Repe hym in vntyll the wap leauen out of your houle: Foz who e fourteenth day ok the lame moneth:and do euer eateth leauened bread from the b On cuery assemble of the congregation of flürst dape butyl the seuenth Dayc, that ve Hfcact Matt Kyll hymabout euen. —_foule chalbe rooted out of Hiraci.

„ aoe And they hall take of the blood and 16 The kirst day chalbe a hölp connocatt’ ale, Arruelton the twolirde poftes, and on on, and the seuenth dap halbe an holy ane, — We Dpper Dao? post, euen in the houses convocation vnto pou: there chalbe no
, Wers ther chall eate bun. maner of wonke done in the, laue about b ade 8 And thex chall eate the fleche the same that only Which cucry mau mut cate,
Sekrete. nyght, rost with fire, and with vnleaue- that only may pe do. )

ned bread:and With sowze hearbes they 17 And pe chaloblerue the featt of vnc fall eate it. uened bread: korthis fame dap have
9 See that ve eate not therokf rawe, nor brought pour arnnes out ofthe lande of sodden with water, but roste with fire: Egypt, therefore ve chall oblerue this the head keete, and purtenaunte therokl. dap and all pour chyldren after vou, by
10 And pe Mhallict nothyng of it remayne an eucrlastyng decree. vnto the moming: That which remay- 18 The kirst moneth, and the kourteenth

neth of it dutyll the mozoWe, chall ve dave en ve mall burne with fire. — ye ok the moneth, at eren PY galt

ues of Egypt.

eate vnleauened bread, buto the. xxi. day of the fame moneth at euen againe.
19 Seuen dapes thal ther be no leauened bread founde in pour houses: and whofocucr cateth leauened bread, that soule shalbe rooted out from the congregatiõ of Hicael, whether he be straunger oz bowme in the lande. am 20 he shall eate nothyng leauened: but ee in all your habitations (hall pe cate vnm- kcauened bread.
2 Mopses called for the elders ofFfract, i and sayde vnto them: Choose out, and take pou to euery housholde of you a n; fambe, and kyll the passouer.
22 And take abunehe of Jlope and dip it

the vpper post of the doore, and the two syde postes, with the blood that is in the bason: c none of pou go out at the doore of his houle vntyll the mornyng.

2 Forthe Lord Wyll passe ouer to smyte

blood vpon the vpper doore post and the two syde postes, he wyll pale ouer the
DOO, and wyll not suffer the destroyer to tonie into pour house to plague pou.
24 Therfore shall pe obserue this thyng
55 an ordinaunte to thee € thy sonnes

whiche the Lode wyll geue pou, accordyng as he hath promised, ye shall kepe this seruite. .

26 And When pour chyldren alke you, what maner of seruice is this pe doz

27 Be shall sape, it is the sacrifice of the odes pallouer, whiche palled ouer the houses ofthe chyldren of Ilrael in
Egypt, and he smote the Egyptiaus, and saued our houles. And the people

bowed them selues, and worshipped.

E r8 And the chyldren of Ilrael went and

dyd as the Lorde hadde commaunded
Moyles and Aaron, euen so dyd they. an 29 And at mydnyght the Lorde {mote the first borne in the lande of Egypt, frõ the first bome of Pharao that sate on his seate, vntyl the first bome of the cap: tiue that was in prison, and all the firste gendred ol tattelil.

0 Aud Pharao rose in the nyght, he and his seruauntes, and all the €gpptians, and there was a great erye in Egypt:

Or there was not a Houle where there as not one dead.

And he ralled vnto Moples and Aar

in the blood that is in the bason, c strike

the Egyptians: and when he seech the

25 And when pe be tome to the lande

by nyght, saying: Ryfe vp, and get you out from aniongst imp people, both vail and allo the chyldren of Israel: and go, aud lerue the Lorde as ve haue fayde.
32 an eee and pour drones as. ale li : ait aoe, 5 haue fapde: and depart,
33 And the Egyptians were fierce vpon the people, that they myght lende them dut of the lande in hafte: kor they sapde, we be all (but) dead men. ;
34. And the people toke there dowgh befoze it was sorbred, Whiche they had in
_ fore, being bounde in clothes vpon their fhoulders,
35 Andthe chplozen of Peaet dyd accoz: dyng to the laying of Moyles: and they borowedofthe Egyptians tewels of fil: ner, and iewels of golde, and rayment.
36 Audthe Lord gaue the people fauour in the syght of the Egyptians, fo that they graunted such thynges as they rebuch : And they robbed the Egyptians. a i
37 Walnd the chtldren of Ilrael tote their gane tourney from Kameses to Suchoth, mera, fire hundred thouland men of foote, besyde chyldren. a .
38 And a great multitude of sundry other nations Wet also with them, and cheepe wanne and oxen, and erceedyng much cattell. ear
39 And they baked vnleauened cakes of gad the dowgh whiche they brought out of
F

I It they

Egypt, for it was not sowred: For they were thuist out ol Egypt, and tould not tary, nether had they prepared for them selues any prouision of meate.

40 The dwellyng of the chyldren of HE rael which they dwelled in Egypt, Was foure hundred and thirtie eres.

41 And when the foure hundred ¢ thirtie peres were expired, euen the selfe fante day Departed al the hoastes of the Lord out of the laude of Egypt.

432 Itis a nyaht to be obserued dnto the

Lorde, in the whiche he brought them out of the lande of Egypt: This is that nyght of the Lorde, whiche all the chylbien of Ilrael must kepe thronghout their generations.

43 And the Lorde sapde vnto Mopses and Aaron, This is the lawe of pafloa: there shall no straunger cate there-
Ot. J

44. But cucry seruannt that is bought for monep, after ie 5 batt circunicised

m, hail cate therat, a ij ; 45 Astraunger

Exodus.

45 Astraunger t an hired seruaunt hall shalbe as one that is borne in the lande:

not cate therof.. fo no vncirtumtiled person chall cate

aflouer.

N *
Oltring of chefirstbon

46 In one house shall it be eaten, thou

shãlt carry none of the flesshe out of the
Houle, neither Mhall ve breake a bone

therok.
47 All the congregation of Israel Hait

thevof.

49 One maner ot lawe thalbe vnto hym

that is borne in the lande, and vnto the straunger that dwelleth among pon,

so And all the chyldren of Hiract dyd as

oblerue it. the Torde commaunded Doyles and
43 Ika straunger allo dwell among you, Aaron, euen so dyd they. ̃ and wyl holde pallouer vnto the Lod, 51 And the lelke lame day dvd the Lorde

of the kyzste

begotten onte od, 0

wett deltue-

death only, but from bon=
Dage.

Sanctifie.

and auàuncement of his kpngdome, (c= png our deliuecauncekatre palicth that of the Jewes.

C non nics

Ce) Sod wpiseth $ canic of the ceremomt
10 be dttered atthe cetebraston therof.

keremo- 5

let hin cirtumtise all that be males, aud then let him tome and obferuc if, and he

bryng the choldren of Ilrael out of the lande of Egypt with their armies.

The. xiij. Chapter.

Che first bore thynges mull be fanctified vnto God.; The remembraunce of the dee itueraunce mutt be celebrate. 8 Chyldren mutt be taught that they were deliuered krõ the tirannie of Pharao. 12 All Cir borne thynges be Gods, 14 Chyidren mull be

taught w

hy thynges kirst borne be feperate vnto the ble ol God. 17 hy the Lord dyd

leade about the chyldren of Egypt by the delert. 19 Moyses carpeth the bones ol Foe

leph. r1 The pyller of cloude and of fire.

2 Avifo euer openeth the e Owonde among p chpl-
Ideen of Piracl, alwell of man as of beast, fo it is mine.
© And Moyles laide vnto the people: pe ought to remember this day in whi-

al the first borne, what

II

che ve tame out of Egypt ont ofß house

of “bondage : for through a myghtie hande the Lode bronght you from thence : there Hallnolcanencd bread be taten.

4 This dape came pe out, in the month
ο Abib b

When the Lorde bath brought thee

into the lande of the Chanaanites, He: |

thites, Amorites, Heuites, and Jebu-

Repe this seruice in this fame month.

6 Seunen dapes thou shalt eate vnleaue-

dayes, and there thal no leauened bread

be leene nor vet eaten with thee in al thy

quarters.
© And thau shalt shewe thy sonne in

that day, laying: This is done betause

of that Whiche the Lode dyd vnto me when J came out of Egypt.

Lordes lawe may be in thy mouth: for in a strong bande the Lode brought thee out of Egypt.

10 Kepe therfore this ordinaunce in his

fcafon from pere to pere.

And it wyll come to passe that p Lord

thal bryng the land of the Chanaanites, which he fare vnto thee and to thy fathers, and shall gene it thee,

12 And then thou shalt appoynt vnto

the Lorde all that openeth the matrice, and euery firltipng that tommeth ofa beak which thou batt, pfitbe a male, it halbe the Lordes.

And euerp firstlyng ok an asse, thou halt redeeme With a lambe: pithoure deeme hym not, thou shalt beeake his

cance: 0 lites, Which he [ware vnto thy fathers necke: All the first borne amongst thy ache that he would geue thee, a lande wher- thyldren also shalt thou bye out.

be habe in plc and honp floweth: thou chalt 14 And when thy sonne alke ther in time nefites.

to“ come, saping: what is this: Thou fhalt faye vnto hym: With a myghtie

e ee eee comer „ Tinleauened bread shalbe eaten seuen 8

15 And when Pharao was verp loth to

let vs go, the Lorde slewe all the first

bose in the lande of Egypt, alwell the

first borne of man, as the firstlyng of beast: Therefore J latrifice puto the
Loade all the males that open the ml’ trite: but all the first borne of my cyl
Deen Jredeeme. N
16 This

A 1 Hdthe Lom o spake 9 And it shalbe as a signe vnto thee muse a), % use vnto Doyles, saping: pppon thyne hande, and as a remem- 4 ake offers 1) Sanctifie vnto me braunte betweene thyne eyes, that the wn

myght be ty dtepelpn w. ted in om bs tes, so chu thence mpg flow a lin

conlessan # cht month,

40 to 0

16 This shalbe as a token vppon thyne seph with him: for hel hande, k as a remembzaunte betweene of frael bag ab wü thyne epes that the Lorde hrought vs ly bifite pou, and ye (hall take my bones out ot Egypt through a myghtie hande. awap hente with pon.

7 It came to pale, that when Pharao 20 And they toke their iourney from Suz

Dghaͤd let the people go, God caryed them coth, and Abode in Etham in the edge ot

not through the way of the lande ofthe the wyldernesle.

Philistiues, which was the more nygh 21 And the Lorde went before them by

Yay. But God saide: lest peraduenture day in a pyller of a cloude to leade them e the people b repent whẽ they see warre, the Way, and by nyghtin A pyller of fire
Nene. and fo turne agayne to Egypt. to geue them lyght, that they myght go mot 18 But God led the people about though both by day and nyght. ö fate the way ofthe Wyldernelse okthe redde 22 The piller ok the eloude departed not o sam: ene = fea, and the chyldzen of Alrael went bp by dape, nor the pyller of fire by upght, die poate yen chaͤrnessed out of the lande of Egypt. out of the syght ol the people. Decne Hee mi 19 And Moyles toke the bones of Jo-

mans eeason, tuen in theic befperated tale.

J The. xiiij. Chapter.

1 God commaundeth to pitche their pauilions in a daungerars place, that he map be the moze glozitied, 4 God hardeneth the heart ol Pharao. pharao pursueth Ilrael.
10 Che Ilraelites dilpapryng of delineraunce do grudge. 13 Moyles promileth them their laletie by God. 15 Moples crying to God, is COMMAND to deuide the lea with his rod. 19 Che angell kolowyng the tentes of Ilrael, they pate through the middes ofthe (ea. 24 God drowneth Pharao with his armie. zr Che Praelites do feare
God when they see the miracle.

D the Lorde spake alter ß chilnen of Ilrael:but the childrẽ gr |vuto Moyles, saying: of Ilrael vent out with an hye hande.
IJ. Dpeake to the chyl- 9 And the egyptians folowed after thé,
A dedre of Pract, that they andal the lorses and charettes of haz turne k pitch their ten- rao, and hs horsemen, and his Hoalt
Ates before Pi hahtroth onertoke them pitchyng ok their tent
— T hetweene Migdol and byte lea beide Pi hahlroth before Bathe fea, ouer agaynst Waal. sephon, and absephon. before that shall they pitche by the sen. 10 And when Sharao drewe nygh, the
3 For Pharao wyll fay of the chyldzen chyldren ol Irzel lit vp their eyes, and of Ilrael: they are tangled in the lande, beholde, the Ecyptians kolowed alter the wyldernelse hath chut them in. them, and they ere sore afrapde: and
4 And J wpll harden Pharaos heart, ie oy of Ilrael eryed out vnto
* \ a) See the
Wyll get me Honour bpon Pharao, and WM Wut they {ayde mto Moples: © bee a bponal his hoast: The Egyptians also —caule there Were to graues in Egypt, e chall knowe that Jamthe Torde. And halt thou therkore bought vs away kor bann sre

they dyd euen fo, to dyeinthe wildertesle-Woherkorc hal ez
5 Andit was tolde the kyng of Egypt thou serued vs thus for to carry bs dut “pars that the people fledde. And the heart ok of Egypt: eeu

ae f
Pharao and of his seruauntes hv 1 Dyd pe A, tee N 125 rie agapnst the people, and they faid : w aping, le en rat, th me wenn bel b serue the Egyptiaus: Jor it had ben bet- C

rael go out of our seruite- ter for vs to haue lrucd the Egyptians,
„Ind he made redy his charette, and then ko to dpe in le wyioernciic, toke his people with hym. 13 And Doples tude puto the people: Pe

8 7 Andtoke fice hundred chosen tharets, Feare pe not, stand fyi, and beholde gente and all the ch of ea, 111 capt: the faluation of th: Horde whiche he ma taynes vpon euery one okthem. Wyll chewe to poutlis dap Kor pe that ehe.

And the Lorde hardened the heart of 5 seene baer dap, CAL ge em no more foruer. a
Pbaraokyng of Egypt, and he folowed ee th Ft 14 The

. of Egypt.

Exodus.

Plagues of Egy

‘

—ͤ ͤ— TTT

d i ve

When we
Saen

14 The Lorde shau fyght he vou, and ve shall holde our peace.

Lale 15 And the Lorde fayde buts Moyles:
* Wherforeꝰtryest thou vntome- {peake
50 vnto the chudren of Ilrael hat they go ts to de one forwarde. a | eiche ne 16 But lyft thou bp thy rod, ard stretche date ehre dut thy hande oner the sea, ald deuide it een agecnon alunder, and let the childrer of Israel go on drye grounde thronghthe middes of the sea.
¢ 7 And beholde F ceuen) J vyll Harden the heart of the Egyptiars, and they shall folowe after them and J Wyll get me honour vpon Phario and vpon all his hoast, and vpon hö charettes, and vpon his horsemen.
Kc, 18 And the Egyptiais shal know that ment cen - J amthe Lode, wen J haue gotten them tere me honour bps Pha, vpon his chaz ba. t — vets, and vpon his ip2femen, e © Aud the angeibf God which went
Teds of before the hoast of Israel, renioued and

widen. went behynde then: and the pyller of the cloude went from before their face, and stoode behyme thim, |

20 And came betweenethe tentes of the
Egyptians, ant thetentes of Ilrael, and it was a cloude aid darknelle, and gaue lyght by nyght and all the nyght long the one tanie nd at the other.

21 And Moysesstrethed out his hande ouer the sea, che Jorde cauled the lea to go backe bya ver strong east wynde all that nyght, and made the fea drye

Ps 8 7 587 N * . a
“ = = eae (tiny |
«3 py, e
| Nee / ry

i
T., Q 5 e 9 *
MANN 55 ic. . N NED

Wr.
4 % . nn i Nien ; || ee coe er dee
5 Fabi a

N Na
A u

llandej and the waters were deuided.

ft hande.

23 And the Egyptians folowed, € went in after them to the myddest of the fea, euen all Pharaos horses, his cha- vee. rettes, and his horsemen. uren

24. And in the moznyng watche, the «ew
Tod loked vnto the hoast or the Egyp-

(b) Str ih apne con:
Denice ol the vngodly, fo thete beter tn

e ang mentioned he tians out of the pyller ofthe fire and of tom” the doude,and troubled the hoast of the age
Egyptians, ö bare z

25 And toke ok his charet wheeles, and taryed them awap violeutly: So that einn the Egyptians fapde,© Let vs flee fed ah the face of Ilrael, for the Load fighteth for them agaynst the Egyptians. 1

26 And the Loade saydt vnto Moyles: 5
Stretche out thyne bande ouer the fea, that the Waters may come againe vpon tose the Egyptians, vpon their charets, and vpon their horsemen.

27 And Maples stretched foorth his haud gre ut ouer the sea, and it tame agapne to his vs tourse early in the morupng, and the c - gyptians fled agaynst it: and the Lorde

duerthrewe the Egyptians in the middest ok the sea.

28 And the water returned, and touered the charettes, and the horlemen, and all the hoast ol Pharao that tame into the fea after them, fo that there remayure

t

name evo!
(b) wos gpouidente

eceacht,
N Lale

pong of Moyles.

nos one of them.

29 But the childecn of Jlrael walked bppon drye (lande] though the middest of the fea, and the waters were a wall vnto them on the right hande of them, and on the left. f

o Thus the Torde deliuered Jlrael the selle same daye out of the bande of the

q The. xv. Chapter.

Exod

us. III
Egyptians: and Jlrael lawe the Egyptians dead bpon che fea lyde. N

31 0 And Ilrael sawe that myghtie power which the Lowe chewed bpon the

Egyptians: and the people feared the

Lorde, and belcued the Lorde and his seruaunt Moyses. n l

(m) The beneftes tha:
We reccaue of
God, and 913 tudgementeg agapnid the
Wicked, tende al to th: por: pole, thut we choulde tance m feare of yym, and bz strengthened in the layth of big promiles,

1 Woptes and the Jiractites do geue thankes to God kor their conquest. 25 God mul

Hen Moyles ethe chil-

AD dren of Ilrael lange a

this sounge vnto the
ALorde, and sapde Won this maner: J wil fing
| vnto the Lolde, for he
3 hath triumphed gloriotislie, the horse and hyni that rode vpou hy bath he ouerthrowen in the lea. mi: 2 The Lorde is my strength and pralse, e ald he is become my faluation : he is
„ mim God, and J wyll glorilie hym mp fathers God, and J wyll crate hym. nai 3 The Lorde is aman of warre, the acon onde is his nanie. a ae 4. Pharaos charets and his hoast hath

sth be als

Whether 3

allo are drowned in the red lea.

5 The deepe waters hath couered them, they sunke to the bottonte as a stoue.
Thy ryght hande Lorde is become

glorious in power, thy ryght hande

Lorde hath all to dalshed the enemic.

7 And in thy great glorie thou hast duerthrowẽ then that role vp agayntt thee: thou sendest fobrtch thy wath, whiche conlumed them enen as stubble.

S$ Through the wynde of thy nolethrils the water gathered together, p fluddes stoode styll as an heape, and the deepe deten Weled together in the heart of

dt: iy ee

9 © Che enenne fayde, J wyll folowe
[on the) J wpll ouertake them JJ wyll deulde the spoyle, and my lust chalbe fatiltied vppon them: J wyll drawe my

orde, myne hande shall destroy them.

10 Thou diddest blowe with thy wynde, the fea couere thé, they luke as leade m the myghtie waters.

HN Who is like vnto thee O How amouglt bolyn te a is 11 thee, fo groves ut

elle, fearetull in prayses, tyerb-
Pug Wenders 7 al * W

s out fot, thet hun {rife leth 02

Mt ontp itfones

ech to 6
Ds to

Auel tage

r focs,

eared(ag

re) with ge, De

Ht flee ms

Blappe,

tol}

he cast into the fea, his cholen taptaynes

be hearkened vnto. Sicknes. God the healer. 27 They come into Elim.

12 Thou stretchedst out thy right hande, the earth lwalowed them.

3 Thou in thy mercie hast tarped this people which thou hast redeemed, aud hast bronght them in thy strength vnto thy holy habitation.

14 The nations hal heare, be akraide, lorowe shall come bpon Palestina. Jeet

15 Thenthe dunkes of the Edomites shal- pore, nat be amazed, and the myghtyest of the tne hie,
Moabites tremblyng hall come vpon shee muvee them, al the nhabiters of Chanaan thal soa
Ware fayut hearted. Dental.

16 Feare t dreade hal fall vpon them, in

the greatnelle of thine arme they shalbe C

as styll as a stone, tyll thy people passe

through, O Lorde, whyle this people

passt through which thou Hatt gotten.

17 Thou shalt bryng them in, and plant them in the mountayne of thine inheri-

tante, the place Word which thou hast made for to dwell in, the fanctuaric, O
Low, which thy handes haue prepared

18 The TLorde (hall raigne for euer and

euer.

d) He thes
Weth howe

(e) Eck we swouide at an tpme be orf= couraged, let vs ftpil Aec to thesr promi-

19 For Pharao on horsebacke went in with his charettes and hozsenien tuto dr enz the sea, and the Lorde brought the wa- een ters ofthe fea vpon them: But the chyl- Koran dren ol Ilrael went on drye [land] in the lehnen middest ol the sea. 1
20 And Miriam a prophetisse, the sister of Aaron, toke a tyinbrell in her hande, aud allthe women tame out alter her with tymbrelles and daunces. |
21 And Miriam lang before them: Ding pe vnto the Horde, for be hath truumphed gloridully: the horse and his rider bath he ouerthrowen in the lea,
22 Aud so Moyles bronght Picracl from the redde sea and they went out into the wyidernesse of Sur: aud they Went three dayes long in the wildernelle, aud

de no waters. | e i And

a neither

tonsiderpng

Mopses bp
Whole miniterte a 1 reteaued fuch denetites, noz remembzyng

the straunge

wzought foz th em ulredp.
* Laught.

(g) Sperbp

learne Howe

the praper of

| fap can pres

_ uapie. wheronto, bp the

| Srample of
Molses, howfocuce p wozld murinureth at vg, and dif= truiteth gods

goodnes, let

(h) Sods temptation

this ende, that g

the seerctes of mens hearteg map be proued and tcuealed to the wozlde.
(The cause of all miserit that we fuf= let, is in our lelues: whom
God neuce fozlaketh, elca : uing stedfastig vnto hem.

Exodus.

23 Ind when they tame to Marah, they toulde not drynke of the waters of Marah, for they were bytter: therefore the name of the place was called Marah.

24 And the people murmured agapntt

Moyses, faping : What (hall we drinke-

25 And he trped vnto the Lorde, and the.

Lorde shewed hym a tree, whiche when he had cast into the waters, the waters were made lweete: There he made them an ordinaunte and a lawe, and there He proued hym,

S 26 And sayde: If thou © wylt hearken

vnto the voyte of the Lorde thy God,

wylt do that whieh is right mbisight

and wylt geue cave vnto his kommaun

dementes, and kepe all his ordinaunces: then wyll J put none of these dileasez

vponthee, which J haue brought vpon the Egyptians: fo? Jam the Lon chat

healeth thee. |
27 And the children of Piraet came to ¢: lim, where were twelue Welles of water, and threescore and ten palme trees:

and they pitched their tentes there by the waters.

J The. xvj. Chapter.

They come into the defert of Sits, 3 They murmure kor koode. 3 He grudgeth agaynst
God, who grudgeth agaynst his ministers, 10 God fpeaketh to Moyles in a cloudẽ. 13 It rapneth quaples and Manna. 20 Manna beyng kept doth stynke and rotte. 22 On the
Sabboth it was not la wkull lo much as to dresse meate. 5 In the Sabboth God rapneth not Manna. 28 God rebuketh the Ilraelites. becaule they kept not the Sabboth.
Manna is reserued fog a testimonie vnto their succellours. 36 Gomor, Ephi.

Zz. | tourney from Elim, c all the congregation of
Je the chyldren of Jsrael

e came to the witdernes i ant Mok Sin, whiche is be-
2 pig Ve

tweene Clim & Sinai, the fpfteentl) day of the keene monett

ad 1 departyng ont ot the lande of

gypt.
2 And the whole congregation of the

chyldren of Ilrael murniuved agayntt

Moyles and Aaron in the w 4 nelle, oe

4 Then sayde the Lorde vnto Moyles
Weholde, J wyll rayne bead krom heauen to pou, and the people tall go out t gather a certaine rate euery DAY, that I map proue them whether ther wyll walke in my lawe, or no. The

pee

In

[ na.

co) The sixt day they shall prepare for

them selues that which they will being

in, and let it be twyse as muche as they

gather in daylyv. g
And Moples and Aaron sayde vnto

the chyldren of Israel: At euen ye shall

know that it is the Lord which brought pou out of the lande of Egypt.

And in the morning ve shal see the glorye of the Lorde, betause he hath heard pour grudgynges agaynst the Lorde:
And what are we, that ve haue murmured agaynst vs: ö

8 And Mopses sapde: At euen shall the
Lord geue pou flethe to cate, andm the mornyng bead inough, for the Lode hath heard pour murmuringes which ve murmure agaynst Dim: for what are we; Hour murinurings are not against

s, but agapnst the Lode.

9 And Moples spake vnto Aaron: fap buto al the congregation of the children of Israel, come foorth before the Lord: for he hath hearde your grudgynges.

lo And as Aaron spake vnto the Whole congregation ofthe chyldren of Jsrael, they looked towarde the wyldernesse, and beholde, the glory of the Togde appeared in the cloude. ö

1 Peis the Lorde fpake vnto Moyles,

aping:
11 Jhaue hearde the murnmringes of the children of Sivact,tetl themtherfore and say: at euen pe shall eate fleshe, and in the moznyng pe shalbe fplled with bread, and pe shall knowe that J am the Lorde pour God.

3 And at euen the quailes tame vp and coucred the tentes, and in the mornyng the deawe lay rounde about them.

4. And when the deawe was gone, beholde, vpon the grounde in the wyldernesse there lay a mall rounde thyng, as small as the hoare frost on the ground. 5

5 And when the children of Ilrael saw lt they said euery one to his neighbour, tis Manna: for they Wist not What it was. And l the bread whithe the Lorde hath geuen pou to cate,

„n 16, This is the worde whiche the Lorde
Hath commannded: © gather of it euepe man fo2 him selfe for to cate, a gomer full for euery man, atcording to the munber of your foules, and take euery nan for them whiche are in his tentes.

17 And the thildren of Jlrael did even lo,

care

fyoutd niger
1 wohl-

cart

od waz-
Uthat he th this that the
Mimledge of nap stit k
Aer in dur

Exodus.

Moyses said vnto thẽ: This

And gathered some more, some selle.

18 And when they did meate it with a gomer, vnto him that gathered much, remäpued nothpng oucr, and vnto hym that had gathered litle, was there no lacke:euery man gathered luffitlent fo2 his catyng.

19 And Moyses sayde vnto them: © fee that no man let ought remayne to the mornyng.

20 Motwithstanding, © they hearkened not vnto Moyses: but soine of them lekt ol it butill the mornyng, and it waren © full of wormes x cozrupted: and Moyses was angry with them.

21 And they gathered all mornpnges euery man as muche as fufficed fog his eatyng: and alldone as the heate of the sunne came, it moult,

22 And the sixt day they gathered twile as nuiche bread, two gomers for one man: and all the rulers of the congregation tame and tolde Moyses.

23 e sapd vnto them, This is that whiche the Lorde hath layd: To moroswe is the rest of the holy labboth vnto the
Lorde, bake that whiche pon will bake to dap, and sethe that ye will (ete, and that whiche remapneth, lap vp tyll the mornyng. 4

24 And they layed it vp till the morning as Moyles bad: and it did not corrupt, neyther bred there any worme therein.

25 And Moyles sapde: cate that to dap, for it is the sabboth vnto the Lorde, to day ye shall not finde it in the fielde.

26 Sire dapes pe shall gather it, and in the fenenth day whiche is the fabboth, in it there shalbe none.

27 MNotwithstandyng, there went out some of the people in the seuenth day for to gather, and they founde none.

28 And the Lorde fapde vnto Woyles:
Powe long refuse ve to kepe my tommaundementes and my lawes-

29 See, the Lorde hach geuen yon a sabboth, therfore he geueth pou the sirt day breãd for two dayes: byde therfore eucrye man at home, and let no man go out of his place the seuenth day.

30 And the people rested the seuenth day.

31 And the boule of Jlrael called the name therof Manna: and it Was like toriander seede, but yet Whyte, and the taste of it was lyke Wafers made With

honpe. 5
32 and Moyles sapd: this is that 1

(e) This doctrine at'o pertalnech to vs,
Who ate vydden to afke butourdarlo foods, and forbpdden to be carefull for to niozome.
() The farelj= lesle dilobedience of the copie.
(4) Ho Gen puuusheth thẽ y grecoilp gather goodeg, trustyng rather to their owne riches and Diltgence, then to his goodies and proutdence.

Ch) That good that ig gathered accordyng to
Gods wyll, to kept fafe fox them that bicit with a good conscience.: That that ig gothered other wyse coinmeth lo naught.

(i) Unlawful touctyng ig krusttate.

ao

The obst mate frowardnes of the people reprehendẽd

E

(1) Manna

Wag a igure

of Christe, the heauẽly foode of our soales.

Ma anna. Exodus. Mn
7 As the Lorde tommaunded Moyses. he Howe conunaundeth, ful a gomer 34 de Moyses,

ö oli mathe may be kept for pour chyl- lo Aaron lapde it vp before the testimo- : dren after pon, that they may fee the mie to be kept. bread wherwith J haue fed vou in the 35 And the chyldzen of Ilrael dyd cate wyldernesse when J bought vou out Manna rfourtic peres, vntil thet came fad of the lande of Egypt. toa land inhabited and lo they did eate ah:

33 And Moyses spalke vnto Aaron: Tabe Manna, euen vntill they came vnto the anne
à pot, and put à gomer full of Manna bonrders okthe lande of Chanaan. me therein, and lay it vp before the Torde, 36 A gomer , is the tenth part of an epha. oa to be kept for pour children after vou. dae

u
The. xvij. Chapter. ö 115
They come vnto Raphidim. r Chey grudge for want ol water. 4 Woptes prapeth to N

HD all the tongregation of the children of
S IJlrael went on theyr s | lourneps frd the yl n Y dernesle of Sin, after
— 5 ‘ofthe Lorde, and pitched in Raphidim, there was no water for the people to drinke.

the tommaundement
2 And ß people dyd chyde with Moy-

Ged t j ge ses, and sayde: geue vs Water to danke, benoteemeure Moyles said vnto then: why chyde vou wunden With me- wherfore do pe tempt p Lorddee als 3 There the people thirsted for water, quettion, and p people murmured agaynst Poy-

ses, and fade: Wherefore hast thouthus brought vs vp ont of Egypt, to kil me, ⁊ my childzen, and mp cattell with thprst-

And Moyses tryed bnto the Lorde,

saying: What shall J do vnto this peo-

RCE ON =,
SNES a =:
— Nets =

God. 6 Mater is geuen out of the rocse. / To tempt God. 8 The Amalekites be slayne of the childrẽ of Aral io Josue. 14 God foretelleth the destruction of the Tmalekites.

ea ed oh
— 4 Se a
“< Nar gg eh SA.
S eps Ses N
S SEE eS

5 in en 110
9 n oples lapde 6“ Josud:
Moy 10 vnto cha

ae Joho

Chole vs out men, and go fight with Amelet, and to morowe F will stande on the toppe of the hill, and the rodde of
God shalbe in my hande.

jo Josua did as Moyses bad hym, and fought with Amelec: and Doyles and
Aaron, and Hur, went vp to the toppe of the hyll. a

11 And it tame to passe, that when Mopses helde vp his hande, © Ilrael had the better: and when he let his hande downe, Amelec had the better.

12 Wut Moyses hands were heauie, and

der him, and he lat downe theron: and
Aaron and Hur stayed vp his handes, the one on the one side, and the other on

—Ethro ö priest of Ma-
CEM pian Moyples father in
Ya) Tale, heard of al that
SSN god had donefarDoy-
© fes, and for Ifrael his people, and that the
— Tod had brought JE rael out of Egypt.
2 Therekore he toke Sephora Moyses wyfe, after he had sent her backe,
And her two lonnes, of which the one was called Gershom: for he sapde, J haue ben an allaunt in a stràunge land:
4. The name okthe other was Elieser: for the God of my father [favde hej Was mine helpe, and deliuered me from the
Iworde of Pharao. |
5 And Jethro Moyses father in lawe, tame With his tio fonnes, € his wife, vnto Doyles into p wildernesse, where he abode by the mounte ol God.
And he saide vnto Moyles : I thy fa ther in la we Jethro am come to thee, and thy wyfe also, and her two sonnes with her.

B 7 And Doyles went out to meete his father in lawe, and did obepfaunce, and uplled hym: and eche alked other of his health, and they tame into the tent.

8 And Moyles tolde his father in lawe all that the Lorde had done vnto Pharao and to the Egyptians for Ilraels lake, and al the trauale that had! come

them i

EXxOd

therfore they toke a stone and put it vn-

eS.

the other fide : And his handes renmpned stedye, vntül the goyng downe of the funne.

3 And Josua dilcomforted Amelet and

his people with the edge of the Worde. ¢
14. And the Lorde fayde vnto Moyles: +3
Wrpte ™ this for a remembraunce in a 05 booke, and commit it into the cares of 15

Josud, for I will vtterly put out the re:

meurdtaurce of Amelee krom vnder 98

heauen. > &

15 And Moyles made an aulter,and called the name of it: The Lorde is he that worketh miracles for me,

16 Fore faid: the © hande is on the seate of God, the Lord wil haue warre with
Amalet frõ generation to generation.

J The. xviij. Chapter.

Jethro commeth to lee Moyles, and the wyke and children of Moples. 8 Moyles declareth the deliueraunce of the chyldren of Ilrael to his father in lawe. 10 Jethro conte. ling the God ol Flracl, offereth lacrifice. 15 To seeke God. 1s Moyles appopnteth other iudges With hym, and what maner ones they be.

bpon them by the wap, and howe the
Lorde deliuered them. N
And Jethro reioyced ouer al the good: nesse which the Lorde had done to YE rael, and becaule he had delinered them out of the handes of the Egyptians,
Io And Jethro sayd: blessed be the Lod which hath deliuered pou out of hand of the Egyptians, and out ol the hand of
Pharao, which hath allo deliuered his people from vᷣ captinitie of p Egyptians.

Nowe J knowe that the Torde is greater then all gods: for in the thyng whereby they dealt cruelly with them, were they destroyed them selues.

And Jethro Moyles father in lawe toke burnt offeringes and satrifices, to offer to God: And Aaron and all the elders of Ilrael tame to cate bread with
Moyles father in lawe before God.

13 And on the morowe Moyles fate to iudge the people: and the people stoode about (Boyles from morning vnto euẽ.

H

C

bled at, af thé that perseeute gads Church.
„ Jehouah
Nissi, that is, the Lord, my banner.

This Hes brace phzale

14 And when Mopses father in lawe ¢

sawe all that he dyd vnto the people, he sayd: what is this that thou doest buto the people: Why sittest chou thy selfe alone, and all the people stande about thee from morning buto euen- .

15 And Moyes fayde to his father in lawe: because the people cone vnto ine to seeke counsayle of God.

16 When they haue a matter, they pes

lethro. xOdus.

@a eth her young oneg v f d . pg 9 205 g oneg vpon her wyngeg, searpng oncip inans dtotence,
Aua setdi cho, sxued the cloudt that kept of the Egyptian fozce,

D

A

ht mance and place of the lawe eb tifthed is let koorth, that fo
Am a benete myght be rettaued with due reuerenct. a) Thae cp departed out of Raphidim, cont
Swag a great wap from
Sinai.

(b) ov woͤnlde haue his be neũteg rehearsed that the people

ct) Sepn thep haue sene ertence

tauses vnto God: had sayde. 1 e
20 And thon shalt teache them ordtnaun- 25 And Moyles chole actiue men out of « tes and lawes, and shew them the way all Ilrael, and made them as heades wherein they must walke, F the woe oduer the people, namelp rulers ok thou- wa that they mult do. sandes, rulers ok hundrethes, rulers of ane
21 Morzeouer, thou shalt seeke out among kiltithes, and rulers of tennes, apni, ali the people, men ofactinitic (and) fucly 26 And they indged the people at all fea: as feare God, true men hating conetoul- bons: but brought the harde taules vnnes, and place (of thete) ouer the people] to Mopses, and iudged all small mat: rulers of thoulandes rulers of hun: ters them lelues. drethes, rulers ok liktithes, and rulers ok 27 And Moyses let his father in lawedetennes, part: and he went into his owne lande.

q The. xix. Chapter. |

They come to mount Sinai. ; Che people of Ilrael, the people ot God. 6 A priestly kingdome, an holy nation. 7 Moyles declareth the worde of God. 9 God woulde that credite sbould be geuen to Moptes wordes. 10 The people is commaunded to be tanctitied. 1: He that toucheth the mountapne, is stoned. 14 The people is sanctiłied. 16 God appeareth in thunder and lightning. to be keared ol the people. 22 Che priestes are sanc-

tikied. 24 Che people and priesles map not touche the hyll.
1 N' the thirde monetg nie aboue all nations: for al the earth when the chplozen of is mpne. 10
Ts) PleaclwWeregone out 6 pe chalbe vnto me allo a kingdome
De ofthe lande ol Egypt, okpriestes, x an holy people: And tele
0) [the fame day canie are the wozdes whiche thou halt fay » they into the wylder- vuto the children of Jlrael. nefle of Sinai. 7 Mopyles tame and called for the elders
* departed from Kaphi- okthe people, and lapde before they fa- :5.. dun, and were cone to the desert of Si- tes all thele wordes Whiehe the Borde an apatite bye 17900 Aae in the couimaunded hym. 99 ernesse, and there Ilrael camp: 3 An er, mne be mount p And the people aunlwered altogeth rf

mic 1
3 Wut Moyses went vp vnto God, and sayd . w 6 Nt 4 the Lorde called vnto hym out of the pd, we will do. And Moyles brought e

mountapne, saping: Thus thait thou 9 And the Lorde lapd vnto Mopfestlo, &
© fap buto the house of Jacob, and tell AyD but 0, 85 the chyldren of Plcacl, Atome vnto thee im a thicke cloude, 0 8

5 that n
4 Pehanefeene what J did bnto he. Wh cher auc urch nenen

Egyptiaus, and toke vou vp vpon“) MPoyles shewedt he peo? mne ee e pou A ith the Ade wondes okthep ofa my lelfe.

lo And (es:
5 sorwctherefore pf pe wyll heare my 7 b e e ft

vopte in deede, and kepe niy couenaunt, to day and to mo m be pe (hall be (a8) a deare“ treafure vnto walhe theyr hes. Wucche 003

and cube

ace

° 5 ps. b 5 7 cleanc dot malt be fir fanctificd per Gods worde tan be rocked he eutwatd figns of tye mvard pur iir regard, an was leite

take hatme, the would cẽceaue che harmt in her orone body.

awe.

i And be redy against the thirde day, for

the thirde Day “the Torde wyll come

downe m the light of all the people vp-

pon mount Sinai.
1 And thou shalt set boundes vnto the people rounde about, x say: take heede to pour selues that ye go not bp into the mount, or touche the border of it: whosoeuer toucheth the mounte, shall surelye dye.

1 There (hati not an hande touche it,

whether it be beast, or man, it Hall not liue: When the trumpet bloweth long, then may they tome vp into the mountapne.

C 14. And Moyles went downe from the mount vnto the people, and fanctified them, and they washed their tlothes.

15 And he sayd vnto the people: be redy agaynst the thirde day, and come not at
{your} wyues.

16 And the thirde day in the mornyng there Was“ thunder and lyghtnyng,

and a thicke cloude vpon the mount,

gems and the vopte ok the trunpet erteedvng an loude, fo that all the people that was in ls. the hoast was afrayde.

17 And Moyses brought the people cut ofthe tentes to meete with God, and thei stoode at the neather part orthehil.

18 And mount Sinai was altogether on

J Tbelawt en

Ghimeur, men ste-

lier, 24 An aulter of earth.

D God spake all
Ylthese wordes and laid.

e AJaunthe zordthp
8 p houle of “bondage.

GS D, whiche haue

brought thee out of the ae 3 Thou shalt haue none other Gods
© inmy fight.

ma + Thou shalt make thee no“ grauen

Sen image, neyther any sinulttude that is in
2 heauen aboue, epther in the earth beneath,oz in the waters vnder the earth.

Thou shalt not bowe downe to them, neyther lerne them: for J the
4 TLord thy God, ama gelous God, Wand

en, V llite the finne of the fathers © bpon e Dechpidren, onto the thtrde and fourth

(bs lef

vi MSodg

hh, er an ineth the uct foutme,

EX Od

cls he chalbe stoned, 02 shot through:

The. xx. Chapter.

lande of Egypt, out of

3 Remember the labboth day that thou

alt makt thee no grauen tmoge, and to fell downe betore it. to wonsbüꝰ laber effers. ( a Led we fhoulde thinks it a light fault, God K. enge
Thal frye soli poe 1 5 all sinnetull bp natutt, and therclec the g

Us. q xlvi}. “4

a smoke, because the Lode destended downe bpon it in fire, and the fmoke
Hanne ‘Madge vp as the smoke of a

> the 7
. he mount quaked ex

19 And when the voyte of the trumpet blewe long, and Wared louder and louder, Moples spake, and God aunlwered hym by a voyte.

20 And the Lode came downe vpon ee mount Sinai, cuen in the toppe of the feel hill: æ when the Lord called Boyles bp into the top of the bil, Moyses went vp.

21 And the Lode sayd vnto Mopses: ©
Go downe, charge the people, let they breake out from their boundes to see the
Lorde, and fo many of them perishe. wanted

22 And let the priestes also Whiche come rerum to the Lorde fanctifie them selues, lest the Lorde destroy them. 0

23 And Moyses {aid buto the Lord: The dees people tan not tome vp into the mount Sehen

- Sinat, for thou chargest vs, saying: fer D boundes about the hill, and fanctifte it.

24. And the TLord sayd vnto him: Away, and get thee Downe, € thon shalt tome vp, thou and Aaron with thee: but let not the priestes and the people pre- ne funie for to come bp bnto the Lord, lett Kes ewe he destroy them. N

25 And lo Doyles went downe vnto the they bete people, and tolde then. 10

bpm to va in moze ample mogee, ond gencth manpest cokens of

(©) Nowe nedekull then be magistrateg

tie, lo mutt thep gene thé example of sover fpfe.

4 3 Let vs haue no slraunge gods. / An othe. s Che sabboth day. 12 Parentes. 1; To murder. 14 To be a whoremaister. 15 Thelt. 16 False witnesse. 17 Concupiscence. 19 God appeared in lyghtnyng, that he might be ĩeared. 23 Let there be made no gods of golde and sil-

generation of them that hate me:

6 And shewe mercy vnto “ thousandes 0 soosmee in them that loue me, and kepe my cont’ dach wg maundementes. nation.

7 OT You Chait not take the name of the ca) gegn
Bowe thy God in baynesforthe Lorde ai
Will not holde him giltlesle that taketh amd. his name in vayne.

deinned.

Cl) The dap
18 halowed,

fanctifie it. n then the
9 ( Dire dapes shalt thou labour, and th: both do all that thou halt to do. felucs.
10 But the seuenth day is the sabboth of the Lorde thy God: init thou shalt do sur btn, no ntanerof Worke, thou and thy sonne, crrcoswrory and thy daughter, thy man leruaunt, ase bes and thy mayde seruaunt thy cattet, and the straunger that is within thy rde

cut) Site bares be free foʒ voto Ae

he lawe.

Exodus.

The lap

rere Pac ts ee
@ Ses 1 Fon in fire dapes the Lorde made 20 And Moyles sayde vnto the people:

ue ien eae and earth, the sea, and all that. keare not, for Cod is come to proue yon, ff
Theitcond un themis, and rested the senenth day: and that his feare may be before pour table... wherfore the Lode blesled the seuenth 21 e oe uae be 1 — fe naur, is meant da and halowed it. a n he people *) stoode a arre ok: d zhhe we 12 O hhondur 0 thy father and tho mo- and Moyses went into the ™ thicke on
1) une ther: that thy dapes © may be long in cloude where God was.

birne, l the lande Whithe the Lorde thy God 22 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moyles, andfupeen sg genet thee. Thus thou shalt fay vnto the chyldren &

be contapued. (t) —
13 Thou shalt not Rll. pls fa a Thon shalt not Oconwnit adulterie.

bea bnta ail

bea pata eit 15 Thou chalt not“ fkeale. recone 5 Thou shalt not w beare false witnelse
Gomme agaynst thy neyghbour. checke Riad 17 Thon shalt not © conet thy neygh-
Hoyos bours honse, nepther Malt thou couct
Sot’ thy nepghbours wpke, noz his man sertalen - Ua lt, nor his mapde nor his ore nor his
Her : Alle, ozwhatsdener thy neighbourhath. dl bean 18 And © all the people fay the thundesde n. der and lightning, and the nopfe of the
Tee trumpet, and the mountapne lmohing: been. And whenthe people lawe it, they remame inoued, and ftoode a farre of: ae 19 And laid vnto Moyles, 0 Talke thou
Fan de, wil) ve, and we u pu hearc: wut let

with the outa not God talke with vs lest We dye.

rde acte, the inwarde alket tion, with all that praceede th therof, is candempned. (t) we a Saree bath aur handed, aureped, and aur mpndcs from another mans good.
Ind here all auarice and vnlawful gapnes 10 dilpzoued. (b) Hereim tauilles, wzong accufations ,bricflp all falsc language to our nepghbours honderaunte, is excluded. (x) ‘Chere be three begreen in trespasling ro be confivercd: the appetite or inclinatian to euyll.the ronfent, E the acte, ul execution of the canfent. These two latter pertalneth to the former preceptes. The Grit, that to, naughtie uppetite, in this place is condempned. (p) Sod gaue his commaundementeg in open fight,p no oft ender inpght be excused. (3) This terrour that agasted the people, declareth the otice ok the lawe: which, our weakneg tansibered, can da nothpog but toucht vs with creccame hazraur, and drpue vs to sceke that in Christe. whlche woc want in aur sclucs. (aa) Betem therkeze Goo brareth with dar fraplencs, that, feyng we cannot abyde ta heare hem our letues, vleth the ministerie of man, foz a mane to teftifie vnto vs his wpll.

2 Ok bying of bondmen. 74 daughter fold klor a bondwoman. 12 Manklaughter. 15 J frp. ker ofparentes, 16 Theft. 17 Aflaunderer of his father. is Brawlers. 20 He that imyteth his bondman. 22 He that stryketh a woman with chylde. 24 The punychment of tyke kor
Iphe, 26 He that pulleth out an eye, or slriketh out a toothe ol bondmen. 28 A pulping ore.
3 he that diggeth a pitte where into an oxe kalleth. 5 An ore kyllyng another.

A
@,comis, 1 [ele W are the lawes
Bory ef chit 1 18 whiche thou shalt set the Hebzucg ; before them. cuit, 2 [iy Ff thou bye a ser-

that is, ozbers tiken foz the

Ni taunt that is an He-

Md, SD Me bauc,fire peres he chall
Deut. xv. =. serue, t in the scuenth,
Led ne he shall go out free (paving) nothyng, daten ot: 3 If he tame alone, he shall go out a woud perf lolie: and pk he came marped, his wyfe

te hept, tat bhall go out with hy. ebenes: 4 And il his maister haue geuen hym
0 swe multe à wyte, and (he bane borne him sonnes dhe. d: daughters: then the wpfe and her

chyldreu shalbe her maisters, and he
Thali go out alone.

5 And yk the seruaunt lay: I loue mp maister, my wyfe, and my chyldren, J

of Ilrael: e haue stene that haue talked with you from out of heauen.

23 Bt shall not make therfore t) with me gods ol siluer, neyther hall ye make pe gods of golde. 8

24. An aulter ol earth thou shalt mate « vnto me, and theron offer thy burnt of Co wi, feringes, and thy peace offeringes, thy ms shecpe, and thyne oven: In all places where J thall put the remembraunce of my name, thyther J wyll come vnto thee, and blesle thee. et

25 And ik thou wylt make mean aulter of fone, fee thou make it not of hewen oc stone: els if thou lyft vp thy toolt vpon it, thou halt poluted it.

The. xxi. Chapter.

Wyll not go out free: 90
© His matter Mail bryng hym vnto za the iudges, and set hym to the doort or en the doorepost, and his maister Mal bore « his cave though with a naule, and he halbe his seruaunt © fo euer.
7 And ifa man fell his daughter to be a: seruaunt, the shal not go out as the men . seruauntes do. ü f
If the pteale not her maister, who fan
Hath owe) promised her mariage, then ue chall he let her redeeme her leike: To dn
Acti her vnto a strannge nation hall he fe haue no power, seyng; he despiled her.
9 Ik he haue pronmpled her onto his jaw sonne to wyfe, he shall deale with her aan
AS men do with their daughters. 1
10 And ik he take hym another per e

() Ne speaketʒ of the lorhlomenesse that lo lowed the lat il eng et hin luste-

sudiciales.

„ marpage shall he not minishe. n 1 And ik he do not! thele three vnto her, ns Che Mal che go out free e pay no money.
1 He that finpteth aman, that he dye, shalbe layne foptt. | my ; Ika man lap not awayte,but God de-

¢ t ol

poynt thee a*place whither he thal flec,
Ika man come presumpteousip vpon

0 105 that he dye. _

west 15 He that smpteth his fathero2 his mo-

ge ther, let hyn“ be slayne forit.

15 He that stealeth a man, and selleth him, ik he be proued vppon hym, chalbe slapne for it. .

17 And he that curleth his father or mo-

meme ther, shalbe put to death forit. ö

8 If men stryue together, and one finite

„another with a ftone,oz with his fyste,

and he dpe not, but lpeth in his bed:

m 19 Ik he rile agayne, and walke without vpou his ttaffe, then that he that smote hym go quite, saue only he shall beare his charges for leesyng his tyme, and
Thali pape for his healyng. N

20 And ika man smyte his seruaunt o his mayde with a rod, e they dye vnder his hande, he halbe greeuouliy puntthed.

mit 21 And ikhe continue a day or two, it

shal not be reuẽged for he is his money. mes, 22 J men striue, k hurt a woman with

8 chyide, fo that her frnite Depart from

U

he shalbe sore punished actording as the
Womans hulbande Wyll lape to his charge, and he shall pay as the dapes men wyll appoynt hyn.
23 And ik anp destruction folowe, “ then ht shall geue life for life,

mt 24. Epe fo eye, tothe for tothe, bande for
U

e a man steale an
We ore o2a fheepe,and kul it, or fell it: he shall ree ftoze fine oven for an
Dy) \\ ore, foure sheepe fora

her foode, her vayment, and duetie of

lier (bin) into his bande, then J wyll

his neyghbour to flay hym with guyle, thou shalt take him from inpne auiter

ö 3 her, and pet no destruction folow: then

hande foote for foote
25 Wuürnpng

8 je chall let them go
~ gut free for the tothes fake, themg

ok his like whatsdeuer is lapde vpõ hint.
And whether he haue gored a foune

02 à daughter, accordyng to the fame

ludgement Mall it be done vnto him.

32 But ik it be à seruaunt ora mayde that the ore hath gored, then he shall geue vnto their maister thirtie sicles, and the ore shalbe stoned. '

33 Ika manopena well, or digge a pitte, and touer it not, aud an oxe o2 an alle fall therein:

34 The owyuer ok the pitte hall make it good, t geue money vnto their maister, and the dead beast shall be his. i

35 Ikone mans ore hurt another, that he dye: then they Mall lell the lyue ore, and deuide the money, and the dead ore also they shall deuide.

36 Or iklit be knowen that the ore bath led to pushe in tyne past, e his maister
Hath not kept hyni: he thall paye ore for oxe, and the dead shalbe his owne.

The. xxij. Chapter.

Whereforẽ Naughtcr oftentpmes and muche inconucnicnce doth ensue: aS A iue,

(8) Th
953 ante t rule struauteg with moder. tis, agthoug e vnwozthy o them, must 1.5 em go krce.

ene. ix.

ALE

Do oo

fouloc do vs to vnderstand. how heyndunz n matter it : sor and man annop his image.

—shauesttolenit.

The Iudiciales.

he shall restore double.

5 Afamando hurt ficlde or vincparde, and put in his beast to feede in another mans fielde: of the best of his owne fielde, aud of the best ol his owe vine-

. parade, hall he make restitution.
Suotm ne 6 f fire breake out and tatche in the dete © HOMES and the stackes of corne, or the

leked to, it

goed. e ffandyng come, or fielde be consumed there with: he that kyndeled the kyre,
2 hall male restitution. f

Ik aà man deliuer his neyghbour money or stuffe to kepe, and it be stolen out of his houle: if the theefe be founde, let hym pay double:
8 Andikthe theefe be not founde, then the good man of house shalbe brought vnto the Judges, that it may be kno-
Wen whether he haue put his hande vnto his neyghbours good.
And in al mance of trespasle, whether it be for ore, asse, or Meepe, rayment, or any maner ok lott thing, which another chalengeth to be his: the cause of both parties hall conie before the Judges, and whomthe Judges condemne, let him pay double vnto his neyghbour. io Ja man delpuer vnto his neyghbour to kepe, asse, ore, shecpe,or whatlseuer beast it be: and it dye, or be hurt, or taken away by enemies, x no man fee it:

11 Then shall an oth of the Lorde be bez tweene them, that he hath not put his hande vnto his neyghbours good: and the owner of it (hall take the oth, and the other shall not make it good.

Cf) Becanfeot 12 And ikit be 0 stollen from hym, then

falibod to pre-

J lad foz thinges yi in 7 custobie.

(2) That is, whethee he

(e) ekoze he
Tpake of thpnges lpuelesse lest in oneske-
Prag, now o thynges that brate ly

benen. ho shall make restitution vnto the owfruein ms ner therok. Ikit be torue in peetes, then wan rater let hin bryng recorde of the tearing, aud ee he shall not make it good.

thynges, then

thpnacs hue-

leffe, fo that $ to

3 And ik a man borowe ought of his neighbour, and it be hurt, or els dye, and

moe part of

dune the owner therot be not by: he shall actes, lürelp make it good.

ormimests 14. Wul if the owner therokbe by, he Matt mere e not make it good: if it be an hired thing,
Coram: it tame kor his hire.

Owner be pre lent, he can oke to his owne good: dut in his absence he the bozower, that mante tynits doeth abuse hym. hesrutteth to

c — 1 r i ie
Exodus.

aie, whether it be ore, alle, or sheepe, 15 Jkaman entice a mayde that iB

betrouthed and lye with her, Goh e ö

¢

endowe her, and take her to his i a

16 OAndifher father relule to gene her oe

vnto him he chal pay money, according i

to the dolbrie of virgins. Brun
* Thou shalt not fufer a witche to

vue. 50

18 Wholdeuer lpeth with a brast, thar 9 be flapne for it. be

19 He that offereth buto any gods Sm

laue vnto p Lord only, he chalbe killed. f

20 Gere nota straunger, neither oppresse 4.

him: for ve were straungers in the land =

of Egypt. (hee
21 He thall trouble no wydowe nor fa: tox

therlesle chylde. Fit
22 If pe shall euyll entreate them, and wan they erye out vnto me, J wyll surelpe wal heare theyr cxpe. tate! 5

Sproat fo greaga
Dillane,
(b) e

cattit to à dogge. en and euũ speakpng, both foz ouopdyng disorder, and conside fenteth. Cp) Bp this cceemonie they were taught, tat all prophane otherwyse, ought to be halowed, x offred vnto Sd that we haue. Mow this ceremonte being taken awape, pet ty our partes, m ottering and geuyng to Gods lputip tmage the F which was ceremontatt,end for a trine, they wete taught haw from an heathenishe and prophane conusriation. -

¶ The

. rabernacle. 8575 1 8 =

; - ¢ The. xxiij. Chapter.

: 14 lpe. 2 An ppright Judge, z and 6A poore perlon./ In innocent. 8 Gykteg. » pll-
1 grime. Che labboth ot the seuenth day. 1j Che keast ot the 1 8 25
~~ 16 The eal of the kittith day. of tabernacles in September. 18 Blood. 19 Fprst kruites.
| 5 The. 9 5 e ien e. 0 b Straunge derer not to be praped vnto.
25 To serue God, blefling, intirmitie. 25 The baren. 2 nsherefozre God dyd c
Chanaanites by litle and litle. S

Hou Halt not Hane gods neither let it be hearde out of ti 7 to do with any false re: mouth. p Ke () bleme

fe port, neither shalt thou 14 Thee feastes thon shalt holde vnto 1051 0 put chint hand with me ma perc. pencfites,

the wicked, to be an 15 Lhouthatthepethe feat ok vnleaue- dla e vurighteous Witnesle. ned bread: thou shait tate vnleauened aug atv) 2 Thou shalt not folow — bread seuen dates long, as J commaun- deen ue a mmiltitude to do cull, neither shalt dedthee, in thetpmeappopnted of the Were“
Lae thou“ speale in a matter ok uistice acco:- moneth Abib: for in that moneth pe in? kn:
Kaus ding to the greater number, sor to per- came out of Egypt, and Re that no Wenns, bal uert indgement. man appcare before me emptie. 1 es

; Neither chalt thon “ esteeme a poore 16 Andthe feast of o haruest whenthon caeerdee non man in his caule. reapest the first krustes of thy laͤboures, ue an 4 Yfthou meete thyne enemies ore whiche thou halk sowen in the fielde: age

mine dalle goyng astrap, thou shalt bung And the feast of ingathering, whiche ade cr them to himagapne. . is in the end ofthe ere hen thon halt mae nd ß If chou fee the asse of him that ha- gathered in thy labours out of tie field. rapa) al 4 tes "tech eheefineke vnder his burthen, thou 17 ¶Thele] three tunes in the pere, chall all wee come

haved y itd Gp:

halt not passe by and let hun alone, but thy men chyldren appeare before the SMhutore

ties (hale helpe hynn to lyft hym vp agayne. Torde God. b r bene
% Thou hal not hunder the inhtokchy 18 Thoucpaltnototkerche blood of um sires mit bodre in his sinte. sacrifice C vpon leauened bread, neither nern

mae 7 Ktpe thee kart from a falle matter, shallthe kat of my featt vemayne bn- kc, tba be eee and the umocent and righteous ser thou tuyll the mornyng. 5 27 ere = flapnot: fo: J wyll not tustifie the 19 The kirst of the first fruites ol thy land, cee ee Wicked. thon shalt bryng into the houle of the bra mene 8 Thau Chait take no gyltes: fo: Tode thy Gon: thon shalt not seethe star a gpftesbundethefeyng,andperuertthe = akpdde inhis mothersmyle. Funn nen Wordes of the righteous. 20 Behold J sende an augell before thee, an wich fees’ gy Thou shalt nat oppresse a straunger: to kepe thee tthe Way, aud to bipng Hole
Bo klor ve know the ow heart of a straunger, thee into the place whiche J haue pre- perme.

t. Tor, b.

mio, leyug pe were straungers in the lande pared. 4 (1 Sap ate ne af Egypt. ‘ ‘ 21 Beware of hym, and heave his voyce, netstat ie to HSikcyeresthou (halt sowe thy lande, and resist hn not: fo2 he wyll not spare rma ray and gather in the fruites therol. pourmildeedes, and mp name is in hin. ena

ep teur

n And the leuenth pere thou halt let it 22 But and ikthon shalt indeede hearken wache e

Bt ene ‘Ory 0 1 . . al tl at speake, J ee ta true o rest and lie ll, that the poore of thy puto his voyce, c do 0 5 ben. fon it hach pss people may 0 cate: And what they wylbe an encine vnto thyne enenues, ales

Hina loaue, the beastes of the fielde Matt cate. anadnerfarte vnto thine aduerlaries. e aes Ine maner chou sbalt Deal with 23 *Foampne angelt thal go before 122 thy vineyarde and thyne oliue tree. and bryng thee in vnto the! ech 5. e Hire Dates thou halt do hy wone, and Pethites aud Pharesites, s and sca ok i 4 the fenenth day as chalt a i a en, tes,! lune o hat thyne ore and thyne afte may rett, all de e W and the sonne of 195 mayde as the 24 Thou shalt not bowe donne 59 5 mini, traunger nay be rekreched. gods, neither serue the erlich re: N., In all hinges that / haue saide vn- p woes of them: but a of them.
> to pon, be circunispect: ) and make no and breake downe the images 0. rehearsal of the names of strannge 25 And pe halle Je and dd tommaundet

ba trom 5
; od, 8
Mthe Lord conn mabcth vs forget his lawe, then reliques of superstnton:

Iudiciales.

n J vill proleng thy lyle

to mn honour

and thy saluation. 2

tlinenic 18

cclartd in the. ix. to the
Hebrew

and he fhall blesse thy bread and thy
Water: and J wyll take all sicknelles away from the middest of thee.

26 There shall no woman haue any vntymely byzth, nor be vnkrintekull m thy lande: the number ok thy dapes J
Wpll fulfill.

7 FY will sende my keare before thee and
Wyll destroy all the people whyther thou chalt go: & J wyll make all ay enemies (Curie) theyr backes vnto tee.

28 And J wyll lende hornettes before

thee which (hall deine out the Heuites,

the Chanaanites, and the Hethites, before thee.

29 Meuerthelesse, J wWyll not cast them out before thee in one pere, lest the land

ExOdus.

growe to a wyldernesse, and the beat of the fielde multiplie agaynst thee,
30 Wy litle and litle J Wyll dryue them ont before thee, vntyl thou be increaled, and inherite the lande.
31 And J wyll make thy toastes from the red fea, vnto the fea of the Phil

U

Ceremonies

tines, and from the © vefert vnto the . Fm

riuer: For J wyll deliuer the inhabi- vi tours ofthe lande into thyne hand and thou shalt driue them out bekore thee.

32 Thou shalt make no couenaunt with them, noz with theyr gods.

33 Neither let them dwell in thy lande, left they make thee sinne against me:for if thou serue their gods, it wyll surely be thy decay.

The. xxiii. Chapter.

1 Moyles is commaunded to go vp vnto the mounte. 4 Moples wryteth the word of God into one volume, and readeth them vnto the people.

d he laid vnto Pop-
OY | les: Come vp vnto the
Loe, thou and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, cthe threscore and alten elders of Blrael,
* and pe shall worship a karre ok.

2 And Doyles hym selle alone shall go vnto the Lorde:but they shall not come nygh, neither hall the people go vp with hym.

3 And Moples came and tolde the people all the wordes of the Lorde, and all the indgementes: Aud all the people aunswered with one vopce, and lapde:
All the wordes whiche the Lorde hath sayde wyll we do.

4 And Moples wrote all the wordes of the Lord, and role vp early, and let him

an aulter vnder the hill, and. xi. tones,

‘According to the. xi. tribes of Pirael,

5 And sent young meu of the children of
Pca, Wwhiche brought burnt offeringes, and offered peace offeringes of oren vnto the Lorde.

(oem rere 6 And Doyles toke halfe of the blood, and put it in basins, and the other halle

he spinckled on the aulter.

18 7 And he toke the booke ol the concnafit,

t read it in the audiente ok the people:
And they sayd, All that the Lod hath sapd, wyll we do, and be obedient.

8 And Doyles toke the blood, x sprincktled it on the people and fayd : Gtholde, this is the blood of the coucnatit which the Lode hath made with vou vpon

ail thefe wordes.
9 Then went Moyles and Aaron, Pa-

Dab, and Abihu, and the threscore and

ten elders of Ilrael vp.

Io And they la the God of Ilrael: and there was vnder his keete as it were a
Worke of a Saphire Tone, € as it Were the heauen when it is cleare.

Ir And ( he layde not his hande vpon aan the nobles of the children of Israel:and d they saw God, and did eate and deine, aer

12 And the Loz said vnto Mopses: Come “* vp to me into the Hill, and be there, and
FJ wyll geue thee tables of stone, and a saw c cõmaundementes which J haue
Written, that thou mayest teache them.

B And Moyses role vp, and his minister
50 osuah: and Moyses went vp into the hill of God,

14. And said vnto the elders Lary ye here C vntill we come agapne vnto vou: Behold, here is Aaron and Hur With pou.
If any man haue any matters to do, let hym tome to them.

15 And Moyses went vp into the mount, aud a cloude touered the hyll.

16 And the glory of the Lord abode pou the moũt Sinai, a the cloude couered it fir days: e the seuenth day he called buto Moses out ofpᷣ middes of the doude.

17 And the fight or the glozy ofthe Lord, was like confumpneg fire on 5 toy ol the hill, iu the eyes ok p children ol Plract.

18 And Moples Went into the middcs of the cloude, and gate hym bp into the berni de K pyre Was in the mount

durtie dayes and fourtie nyghtes.
Poy Che

idr. yi?
15 4 mail of wordts

Exodus.

The. xxv. Chapter.
" God requireth voluntarie qpftes of the people fo

e tabe rm acle.

the mahyng of the t ‘ g oGhearkc. „Che werkes leate. Cherable. s Che holy e N

1 candlesticke.

11 *¹ IND the Lorde spake 5 And Nammes skynnes that are red. ¢
2 | vato Mopses, ping. the lkpunes of Tarus, Sahm Wood:
12 Speake bnto the chi- 6 Oyle fo2 lyght, {pyces for annoyn-
. dae of Ilrael, that thet tyng opie and for sweete fence; ¢
0 being mePanoffering: 7 Pnir stones, and stones tobe fet in the. top we pe shall take it of euery Ephod, and in the beck plate. :

fio’ - man that geneth it 8 And let them make me a fanctuavic, 25 wi. Willingly with his heart. that J map dwell amongst them.

This is the offering whiche pe hall 9

And actordyng to an that J shewe

take of thein, golde, and filuer,¢ bralle,
And ble we silke, and purple, and star-

thee, boch after the fathion of the tabernacle, and after the fachion of the orna-

let, and White silke, and goates sheere.] mentes therof, enen fo shall ye make it.

NW A K M A. 4 W HR K M M A M AN M W M A

„

NN ieee

1 e

erat fl 2

a ß e N -

i * Testimonse

15 Aud the barres shalbe in the ringes e

tim wood, two ai wen nal ts pe 17 5 and shall not be taken cw see co
à cubite and a de, and a cubite roi tt. ae. aba hatte nh. * 16 And thou shalt put in the arke, the Ge

1 And thou shalt ouerlay it with pure testimonie whiehe J Mall geue ther. Te
Golde, within and without (halt thou 17 And thou shalt make a merty r e
Ouerlay it, and shalt make an hye bpon ok pure golde: two cubites and a halfe cr e ita crowne of golde rounde about. long, and a cubite aud a hatte beode. 4

12 Andthou Malt catte foure ringes of 18 And thou Chale make“ two Chern- e sno, os golde for it, and put them in the koure bins of golde: euen ofa whole worke da bee corters therot:two ringes shalbe in the halt thou make them in the two endes. h
ONC corner, and two in the other. of the mercy seate. as Zoteph

3 And thou chalt make barres of Sit:

lo And they shall make an arke of Sit-

obere,

19 And the one Chernbim (halt chou etre apna tim wood, and toner them with golde, make on the one ende, and the other on Le
C. Ia. And put the barres in the ringes a the other ende: euen of the bunte med enen fra long by the sydes of the arke, that the feate shall pe make Cherubinis in the. 39 aͤrkke may be boone With them. two W

n „ K „ „ K „ „ „ „ „ „
‘ae RAR & K „ „„ Re ARF AAA A RAH KR K 4 *
R RM ͤ „ K K K 2 XR K nr

realem

1 pith hammer
20 Aud

1 ie tabernacle. Exodus. The taberny
20 And the Cherubms shal streteh foorth shall geue thee. ies

wonie.

theyr winges abrode ouer an Hye, couering the mercy seate with their winges,

: and their faces hall loke one to ano-
¢

ther: tuen to the mercy seateward (hall

+ the faces of the Cherubins be.

thou shalt put the witnesse that J

fingers brode rounde about, and make a golden crowne also tothe hoope rounde about. f

26. And male kor it loure ringes ok golde, and put the rynges in the torners that art on the foure feete thercok. ;

27 Euenouer against the hoope shall the

ringes be, to put in barres to beare the table Withall.

28 And thou shalt make p barres of Sittim wood, c overlay them with golde, that the table may be borne with them.
2 And thou shalt make his dishes, and spones, coueringes, € bowles to powre
< out With all: euen of fine golde thait thoumakethemn.

30 Aud thou shalt {et vpon the table shewe bread bekore me alwayv.
31 And thou shalt make a candelsticke of

2 And thou shalt put the merty seate a-

P. . boue bpon the arke, and in the arke
25 4%

22 And kromthente J Wyll testifie vntothee, and J wyll common with thee. from bpon the merty feate, from be: tweene the two Cherubins whiche are - vpon the“ arke of witnelle, of all thin <2 3,

ges whiche J wyll geue thee in cam- e ene vnto the chyldren of HE e rael. .

2 * K K „ „ GM K K K „ «„ K „% K % „ „„ „ „ „ an

out of the other. 0
33 Thute bolles like vnto almondes, with.
à knop and a flowre in one braunche:
And theec bolles like almondes tu theo ther braunche, with aknop ¢ a Mowe, < attording to the fire braunches that proceede out of the tandelsticke. 0
34. And in the candelsticke it selfe there wpalbe) foure bolles like vnto almondes, with their knoppes and flowres. 0
35 And there halbe a knop vnder to. 5 braunches of the fame in three plates, according 6 the fire braunches that pro-. ceede Gul ofthe tandelsticke. f
36 Their knoppes and their braunches chalbe of it: and it fhalbe one whole. worke, euen of pure golde. .
37 And thou shalt make the feutn lampes okit, and the seuen lampes e f

abernacle. °

ol (halt thou put on hye theron, to gene

light pate the other {pde that is ouer a: aynst it.

1 38 The snulfers and the veslels of the

mmuffe, halbe of pure golde.

Hou shalt make the ta-
; bernacle with ten cur:
V | taines of whyte twyned {plke, and blewe elke, and purple, and i starlet: and in them
~ thou shalt make Cherubins of brodered worke. ö
The length of one curtayne (chalbe eight € twentie cubites, and the breadth of one curtayne, loure cubites: and euerye one of the curtaynes shall haue one mealure. N
3 Flue turtapnes (halbe] coupled toge-

aN

Exodus.

ce) Chee talent of the tem ple is balued

39 Oka talent of fine gold cal he make it, with all thete pelfels. he . of tome at. 207

40 Loke therefore that thou make them ponmbcszof > alter the fathion that was chewed thee ne in the mount. 5

¢ The xxvi. Chapter.

Che kachion of the tabernacle, Che vaile. 32 Che standyng of the arne. 34 Che standyng of the seate ol mercy. 35 The skandyng of the table and ok the candelfticke, z valle, or the hangyng at the entraunce of the tabernacle- : eae

Piya A ig "hg Re jac re Mill
E

ee oe , |

ANI: QUIN 89

E 165%

W = a ne 8 2

N gad d cose sc00o @ Heer . Nee r dr eee

‘a aN 9 oF 0 = et ¢ i 15 AG 1 i 1 1 T bin +H! >! it SC We et! 7 Tay 80 52 5 Kt 2 if fe U a at a 7 i a ac (3 e 0 9 nat N GRP i i
Weal CRAIN ian NE ye | ,, 175 Nr ! en cg a a hy SS GE ree AR RG

And ß shalt make fiftie taches of gold, atid couple the curtaines together with the taches: and it shalbe one tabernacle.

7 And thou thalt make curtaynes of
Soates heere, to be a toueryng vpon the mae leuen curtaines shalt thou

¢ *
> The length ofone turtaine lchalbeithirtie tubites, and the breadth of one turtapne foure cubites : c the eleuen (walbe all of one measure.

And thou shalt couple kiue curtapnes

lo And thou shalt make fiftie loupes in the edge of the vttermost turtayne on the one fide, euen in the edge ol the touplyng scurtapnej and fiftie loupes in the

- other certayne of the seconde coupling.

1 And thou shalt make fiftie taches of brasse, and put them onthe loupes, and couple the coueryng together, that it

lay be one. mak G tit 12 And

The tabernacle.

12 Andthe reninaunt that resteth in the

curtaines of the covering eututhe halle

curtatne that resteth, chalbe left on the backe sydes ofthe tabernacle.

13 That a cubite on the ont syde, and a tubite on the other syde, which may rez mayne in the length of the turtaines of the toueryng, may remayne on eyther sydt of the tabernacle to touer it withal.

‘14. And vppon the tabernacle, thou that

make a tonerpng of Rammes fkynnes

« dped red, and pet a touerpng aboue all

ok Larus skynnes. J

C15 And thou fhalt make boordes for the

N tabernatle ok Sittim wood, to stande

« ppryaht.
16 Ten tubites long Mall euerp boorde be, and a tubite and a halle brode. landes 17 Two“ tenons shall there be in one boorde, fet in order, as ladder staues one of.. . from another: and thus Chale thou mac for all the boordes of the taber-

“ nace,

18 And thou Chait make boordes foz

the tabernacle (even) twentte boordes

« onthefouth side, euen full south.

19 Aud thou shalt make fourtie sockettes

bol liluer vnder the twentie boordes:two

sockettes vnder one boorde for his two tenons, and two fockettes vnder ano-

K K „ K 4 7

ther boorde kor his two tenons.

20 Inlpke maner, in the seconde {poe of the tabernacle towarde the north, there chalbe twentie boordes. :

21 And fourtic sockettes of spluer: two

e

ining 0 — 8 r mes
— ‘
| r Ens

Exodus.

The tabernag,

socliettes vnder one boorde, and two foe hettes vnder another boorde. ;
22 Aud ui the west eude of che tabernacle, D thou shalt make fire boordes. K
23 And two boordes shalt thou make in: the comers of the tabernacle, in the meetyng together of the two sydes: /
24 And they shalbe coupled together beneatic, and lpkewyle shalbe coupled aboue to a rynge: and thus shall it be faz. the two boordes that are in the comers:

25 And they shalbe eyght boordes Harting.

sockettes of siluer, euen sirteene sockets:
[that there may be} two fockets vnder one boorde, c two vnder another boorde.
26 And thou shalt make barres of Sittim wood, fire for the boordes of the tabernacle in one syde, c
27 And fiue barres for the boordes of the. E tabernatle on the other spde, and fine. barres for the boordes of the tabernacle in the west ende. 0
28 And the niddle barre shall go alonge: through the nuddest of the boordes fro‘ the one ende to the other. :
29 Aud thou (halt touer the boordes With). golde, and make their ringes of golde to put the barres throͤugh, and thou shalt touer the barres with golde allo. f
30 And thou shalt reare bp the tabernacle, atcordyng to the fassion thevot, as it was shewed thee inthe mount.
31 And thou shalt make abayle of blewwe. 05 silke, of purple, skarlet, and whpte Ody. ned lilke: ol brodered worke With Che-

i

7) 16) Rigs

AA r TT i SPN i —
Mee 01 =

I 5

Exodus.

lin.

rubims (hall pe make it. the vayle, and the tandelsticke ouer a- ‘
2 And hang it vpon foure pillers of Sit- Qainst the table en the south five of the:

tim wood couered with golde (whole tabernacle, and put the table on the

head palit Nor standing vpon n 1908 ; :

* foure lockets of fuer. 36 And thou shalt make an hanging for‘

33 And thou shalt bang vp the vaple ou the doore of thetabernacle of blew Allie

the taches, that thou mapest bryng in purple, scarlet, and whyte twyned silke.

Within the Dayle the aͤrke of witnesse, Wrought With needle Worke. 6

agand the baple fall deuide vnto pou the 37 And thou Malt make for the hanging

holy place] from the most oly (place. fiue pillers of Sittin wodd, and cover:

34 And thon hale put the mercy seate them with golde, and their kuoppes<

vponthe arke of witnelle, in the holpest halbe of golde, and thou chalt catt fue

plate. sockets of brasse for them. "em

35 And thou shalt put the table without

J The. xxvij. C hapter.

1 The fourme of the aulter of the burnt tacriktce. v Che kachion or the entraunce of the tabernacle. r0 The opie of the lampe.

5 NO thou shalt make his beesomes, his balons, his fleshe-
9 lan aulter of Sittin — hookes, his firepannes: and all the vel. wood, fiue cubites long sels thereof thou shalt make ok brasle.
; Cue fine cubites beoade, 4 And thou halt make buto it a gred-
Jsit chalbe foure square, —trenalfolike a net of bralle, and bpon-

and three cubites hye. that net thalt thou make koure beaten:

And thou shalt make ringes in the koure corners therotf. vnto it hornes in his foure corners:his 5 And thou shalt put it vnder the tom-
N hornes shalbe of © the fame as it is of, palle of the aulter beneath, that the. zug., AND thou Malt couer it with brasse. net may be in the middest of the aul-
3 And make his achpannes for his athes, ter.

0 N 2.
D | BSF =
NY ete ; ong
0 & ae N
* e
A t 5 i
5 N ey ie ar
1 N

8 And make the aulter holowe with. them with boordes: euen as it was (herbed thee in. an them be put in the ringes a- the monnt, fo shalt thou make it. ; n | . bp the fides of the aulter, to beare 10 5 And

“In fiftie.

Exodus.

% tabernacie on the fouth fide, even full fouth: the curtaines for the court shalbe of Whyte twined filke of an hundzeth tubites long for one side. ö ,

10 And twentie pillers therok, with their twentie sockets of brasse: but the knops ok the pillers and their whopes shalbe

siluer. Pe

TR AR „ A K R RX XK HK *

10 “ar
0 Hy N 0
5 ro =
Jey f| Sie P dn hin SF! WN "a i 4 5 55 Dey Atti
Lett bh * oh * i a
‘

„lt

y

SM TA

; Fiktie tubites (halve in the tourt east-

Warde, euen full east.

C14. The curtapnes of one syde halbe of
„ fifteene cubites, the pillers of them ther, and the lockets three.

15 And likewise on the other fide shalbe turtaines ok fifteene cubites, with their
« fthace pillers and three sockets.

16 And in the gate of the tourt chalbe a vayle of twentie cubites of blewe lilke, purple, and scarlet, and white twyned silke wzought with needle worke, and foure pillers with their foure sockets.

17 All the pillers rounde about the tourt shalbe whoped with siluer, and their knoppes shalbe of siluer, and their sockets of brasse.

18 The length of the court shalbe an hundred tubites, and the breadth filtie on euer side, and the heyght of the cur-

9 And thou shalt make the court of the n

rep
0 if

if
Hitt

In like wilt onthe north {poe there: shalbe curtaynes of an hundred cubites long, and twentie pillers, with their: twentie forkets of brasse, and the knops. and the whopes of liluer.

12 And the breadth of the tourt Whiche: is westwarde, Mall haue curtaynes of. fiftie cubites, and the pillers of them: shalbe ten, and the lockers ol them ten.

8 pen e
2 es + e oa 8
N at ifs Ae peated | ie US aes
9 ALA: ak
1 5 RS
NN i quince ory

„

tapnes shalbe fine tubites of Whpte. twyned filke, and their sockettes of. brasse. b

19 All the vessels of the tabernacle in all, maner of seruice, and the pinnes therof,- pea and all the pinnes allo of the court, thaibe of brasse.

20 And thou (halt commaunde the chy (rt dren of Jlrael that they gene thee pure. cl oyle oline beaten for the light, that: roa

they map make the lampes to bonne ot alwapes. bm

and
£ ted caust inn

tion without the vayle whiche is before . noe

th oe

pers lt

yr

F

oe)

Baie

—= i

ei

un

ii

LS

SOVTH?

SE

on, Oe

in

j eg
‘ SES

Up

seat Wy

tel

ers ok, J. tubites her

ath ottyectite Sree SS CELE SD — „ Faru A aya heave, and cartatng of twined Lanett, tion ; f Sols their Locketkes ;

ewe dug on the nant lde tubes on he sonty lot, n Sey there are as. fl „Dith

a weis ald. ve ebe 10 which there art. 10. pllletg of.5. cubiten high, with their focheites ad h

is ok tuned tin ng. an

Eutin e. gree fide oa cates long, and. 3. pillers of. 5. cubiten high, dolth their heaves ond locke steg.

bikes long. beylic at the entry ofthe court embrodtreh With. s viller g.

gab eg, and elite ing of twined Unnen.

xodus.
9 The. xxviij. Chapter.

Che deckyng ok Aaron the priest, 6 Che Ephod,oz the ornament that shoulde be vpon the shouiders. 1 The pectorall or fomacher of iudgement.

D take thou bnto thee Aaron thy brother, and his formes
With hun fromamong the children of Jlrael, that Aaron may mi-

: —nlster vnto me in the
„ Driestes office, Nadab, and Abihu, Elea-
Fzar and Ithamar, Aarons sonnes.
2 And thou shalt make holy raynient
« fo2 Aaron thy brother, glorious and
© beautifull.
3 And thou shalt speake vnto all that are Wile hearted, whom J haue filed
« With the spirite ol wildome, that they make Aarons rapment to confecrate him, that he may minister vnto me in the priestes office.
4 These are the garmentes which they
« {hall make, a brestlap and an ephod, a runicle, a brodered coate, a miter, and a girdle, these holy garmentes shall they make for Aaron thy brother and his lonnes, that they may minilter vnto me inthe prestes office.
5 And let them take golde, blewe filke, purple, scarlet, and Whyte twined silke,
<6 Ley shall make the ephod of golde, blewe silke, purple, stariet, and whyte timed filke, with brodered worke.
W The wo sides shall tome together, and be closed bp in the two edges therok.
8 And the girdle of the ephod shalbe of the same wozkmanthip,and of the fame ttuffe, euen of golde,biewwe filke, purple, ftarlet, and whpte twined filke,
And thou shalt take two Onpx tones,
And graue in them the names of the children of Jlrael. o Sire names ok them in the one stone, and the other lire in the other stone, ac: ftondyng to their birth. u Aifter the worke of a stone grauer and ok himthat graueth signettes, chalt thou grane (he tivo stones, with the names
* ofthe childzen of Ysrael, and that make them to be fet in ouches of golde.
1 And thou (halt put the two stones vponthe two shonlders of the ephod s that
„ . ther map be) stones ok remenwzannte

bnto the children of Ilrael: and Aaron. shal beare their names bekore the Tow vpon his two shoulders foz a remembraunte. .
3) And thou (halt make couches of golde:.
14 And two haynes of fine golde of a ter- C tayne length, linke worke ß Wreathed, and fatten the wreathed chaynes to the. ouches. ;
15 And thou shalt make the brestlap of. iudgement with brodered worke: euen alter the Worke of the ephod thou that: make it (namely) of golde, blewe sike, purple, scarlet, and whpte twined silke.,
16 Foure square it shalbe and double, an ade bredth long, and an hande bredthr0de. :
17 And thou shalt fill it with foure rowes. of stones:in the first rowe shalbe a Sardius, a Topas, and Smaragdus.
18 Juthe setonde rowe, a Kubi, Saphir, and Diamonde. :
19 In the thirde a Lyncurius, an Achat, and an Ametyst. ‘
20 In the fourth a Turtas, an Onyx, and a Jaspis:and they shalbe fet in golde in their inclolers. 2
21 Aud the stones halbe grauen, as tig: . nettes be grauen with the names ofthe . O children of Ilrael, euen with twelue names, euery one with his name accor ‘ dyng to the twelue tribes. 0
22 And thou shalt make vpon the brestlap two faftenpng chaynes of pure golde< and Wreathen worke. :
23 And thou shalt make like wile vponthe brestlap two ringes of golde, and put. them on the edges of the brestlap. ‘
24. And put the two wreathen chapnes ok golde in the two ringes which are in the edges of the brestlap. l
25 And the other two endes of the chalnes. thou that fatten in two clole ouches,. and put them vpon the shoulders ofthe ephod ou the fozefine of it. =
26 And thou Malt pet nia. two ringes ok golde, which thou shalt put in che. two edges ok the brestlap seuen) in the. borders therof, towarde the inlide ok. the ephod oner agaynst it. ;
27 And.

¢

abernacle.
27 And pet Mo (otherjringes of gold thon

sides of p Ephod beneath oucr agaynst the brestlap, alowe where the sides are ioyned together vpon the brodered gyrdle of the Ephod.

28 And they shall bynde the brestlap by his ringes, vnto y ringes of the Ephod, with a tale of blewe silke, that it may lye clofe aboue the brodered gyrdle of the Ephod, and that the brestlap be not loosed from the Ephod. *

29 And Aaron (hati beare the names of the children of Ilrael in che brestlap of ilidgenient vpon his heart, when he goeth into the holy plate, for a remembraunte befaze the Lorde al way.

30 And thou shalt putin the brestlap of ludgment © the “Crim € the Thummint and they shalbeleuen ppd Aarons heart Whe he goeth in before the Lord:

dite and Aaron (hall beare the iudgement

a okthe children ol Ilrael vpon his heart

mies, before the Lorde alwap.

eeu z And thou Mhattmake the tunicle puto

mx) the Ephod, altogether ofbiewe silke.

anne | a>,

nt
X KX „

4 E .

tet. were ¢

in the middest of it, hauyng a bonde of

toe © wWouen Woke rounde about the cotter mir bk it, as it were the coller of a partlet,
Mons that it rent not. ente in 33 e. make pomgranates of blewe sylke, and

bf purple, ànd of scarlet, rounde about ene, bhe heim, and belles ol gold betweene ere them rounde about.
Min: And let there be tuer a golden bell and e, d pomgranate:a golden bell and a pommeas granate rounde about vpon the hem ok time, «<< kbhe tunicle.

thou do bnto them,
When thou halowest the to be my priestes.
Thou shalt take one
ANG] poung calfe, and two
— rannunes 5 are with-

ollt bleu wehe: e * b

keanened tempered with ople, and waofc euleauened annopnted with ople:
Wheaten floure chalt thou make the.

€
€
€
€
€ c c

Exodus. shalt make, and put them on the two

36 And thou Hatt make

mor 32 And there shalbe an hole forthe head

And beneath vpon the hen thou shalt

And vnleauened bread, and cakes vn-

In 7 when he unmnttreth, and the found Rate‘ behearde when he goeth into the holy

place Defore the Lorde, x when he com meth out:and he shall a Oe ¢ Ce) Is eho

sonld fap, he

d plate of pure ene
GOLD, and graue theron as lignettes are ne. grauen, the holynes of the Torde. eulen,
37. And put it on a blewe fylke lalt to be.: pon the mytre, euen vpon the fore: ~~ front of it. 1 re
38 And it shalbe vpon Aarons korehead, „ a oe that Aaron may © peare the lune oF © fae he the holp thinges, whiche the chüdrengk. eon:
Picael halo we nail their holy gpftes: Weed and it shalbe alwayes vpon head, fo: the reconciling of then before 4 the Lorde. 3
39 And thou Malt mate a coate of white splke, embrodered with knottes, ⁊ thou shalt male a mytre of whyte (plite, and a gyrdie of needle Worke, .
40 And thou Matt make for Aarons. sonnes allo coates, and thou shalt make. for them gyrdles, x bonettes (halt thou: make for them, glorious and beweifin,
AL And thon shalt put them pon Aaron. thy brother, e on his sonnes with hym, and shalt annoynt them, Band fill their cb is handes, x fanctific them, that they map uche minifter vnto mie in the priestes offite. Pang
42 And thou shalt make them lvnnen e pur purer sloppes to couer their priuities: fed the. e loynes vnto p thighes they shal reache. bared
43 And they shalbe vpon Aaron and his ume Rate sonnes When they come into the taber- weber cle of the tongregatiõ, or Whe they come. vnto the aulter to minitter in holmes: 0 0a

be otherthat they beare no finne, € fo dye. Ind «29°95

it shalbe a lawe for euer vnto Aaron, 8 be and his seede after hint. :

ched with

35 And Aaron shall haue it vpon hym ae a The. xxix. Chapter. ¢
Che maner to contecrate priestes onto God, and the rite to olter kor them. zs The cor: ‘ tinuall daylp lacrifice. 5
A. i dis thyng also shalt 3 And thon shalt put them in a maunde,

and bryng thein in the maunde with. the talfe and the two raimmes. :
4 And bryng Aaron and his sonnes vnto the doore of the tabernacle of the. congregation, c wache thé with water.
5 And take the garmentes, and put bp-* pon Aaron, the coate, the tunicle of the.
Ephod, and the Ephod it selke, and the. brestlap, € gyrde them to hym with the brodered gyrdle Which is in the Ephod.
6 And put the mytre bpon his a :

, 2 ned ehrougg his fore: © the chief pie

The tabernacle. Exodus. ö The tabernach

W 7

anopnt Dyn,
And bryng his lonnes, and put coates vpon them:

9 And gyrde them with gyrdels, alwell
Aaron as his sonnes, and put the bonnettes on them, and the priestes office shalbe theirs kor a perpetuall lawe, and thou shalt fill the handes of Aaron, and the handes of his sonnes. vnto the Torde for a sweete sauour, a

Io And thou Malt caule a talfe to be (atrikite made by fire vnto the Lord. brought before the tabernacle of wit- 19 And take the other Ramme, and Av nesse: and Aaron and his sonnes Hall ron ct his lonnes thall put theyr handes put theyr handes vpon the head of the ppon his head. calfe. 20 Then shalt thon kyll hym, and take ol

1 And thou shalt kyll hym before the his blood and put it vpon the tip of the
Tord, by the dooze of the tabernacle ol right eare ol Aaron, and bpon the tip of witnesse. the right care ok his konnes, and vpon

2 And take or the blood of the talle, and the thone oktheyr right handes, and put it vpon the hornes of the aulter pon the great toc of theyr right foot,

With thy finger: and porbze all the ret) and sprinckle the blood vpon the aulter

of a blood beside the bottome of the rounde about. aulter.

21 And chou shalt take of the blood that Y

3 And take all the kat that couereth oe is bpon the aulter, æ of the anopntyng inwardes, and the Kall (that is fon the oyle, and sprinckle it vpon Aaron ¢ his lyuer, and the two kydneys, and the fat vestmentes, and vpon his sonnes and that is vponthem, and burne them vb- ppontheyr garmentes, with hym, and onthe auler. * be a halowed and his clothes, and

C 14 But the flesh of the talle, and his [kin, his sonnes and theyz clothes, with him. and his doung, Halt thou burne with 22 And thou shalt take the fat of the a. 99 . the hoast: it is a synne ol- Vamme, e his runmpe, and the fat that

touereth the inwardes, and the kall of
15 Thou shalt allo take one Kannne, and che puer, and the two Rydtreps and iW g N a

abernacle.

fat that is bpon thein, and the right ne. bhoulder, for that Ramme is a™ ful old „ ferpng: a
23 And a spumell of bead, and a cake of u. oyled bread, and a Wafer out of the bal
‘Bet of vmeauened bread that is befo2e
‘ the Tord. =
€.24. And pit all vpõ the handes ol Aaron, mw and on the handes of his sonnes, and ec «Wane them for a waue offeryng be-
Mee fore the Lord. — em’. And agayne thou shalt take it from ol their handes, and burne it vpon the aulen“ ter for a burnt offeryng, to be a sauour wert. < ok sweetnes before the Lorde : for it is a mom lacrikite by fire vnto the .o d. figs 26 And thou shalt take the brest of the me „ Bamme ok Aarons consecration, and wane it for a waue offeryng before the
Lord, and it shalbe thy part.
27 And thou shalt fanctifie the brest of the wane offeryng, and the shoulder of mere the heane okkeryng, which is waued ben. c heaued pp of the Ramune of the conmot letration for Aaron and foz his sonnes.
28 And it chalde Aarons and his sonnes hr. by a fatute for ener from the chüdrẽ m <« ofBfract, for it is an heaue offeryng: € it shalbe an heaue olferyng fed the chllden of Braet of the facrifice of theyr

of all ee do fig °

‘peace offerynges, euen theyr Deane offteryng (Hall it be vnto the Lord.

29 And the holy garmentes of Aaron

ng. bhalbe his sonnes after him to be anopn-

ee. ted therein, and to kyll theyr handes

„therein. |

zo And that fonne that is priest in his

steede after hym, shall put then on fe-

uen dapes, when he cõmeth into the taberuacle of wytnelle to minister in the holy place.

F. 31 And thou shalt take the Ranune of

« the confecration, ꝶ seethe his flesh in the

« bolyplace.

32 And Aaron and his sonnes hall cate the fleshe ofthe Ramme, and the bread thatis in the bafket, cuen by the doore ofthe tabernacle of wytnesse.

3 And they shall eate them, becaule the attonement was made ther with to kyll theyr handes and to confecrate them: vut a straunger chall not eate therof, bez taule they are holy.

34. And yt dught ot the flesh of the tonse-

na „ „ „

R K K Di XK K «„ J

Exodus. 1

tration, or of the bread, remayne vnto. the moznyng, thou shait burne it with bob ee eaten, because itis:
35 Therfore Matt thou do vnto Aaron: and his sonnes euen so, accordyng to all. een e a tommaunded
: alt thou ;
Hattie | halt thou kyll theyr :
36 And thou shalt offer enery day a caife« fora finne offeryng fo2 to recosile Withall: and thou shalt clenle the aulter whẽ thou reconsilest vpon it, and thou fait: annoyntit, to fanctifie it. ;
37. Henendapes thou shalt reconfile bps the aulter, and fanctificit, eit shalbe an: aulter most holy: and whatsoeuer toucheth the aulter, shalbe holy. “7
38 This is that which thou halt offer. Der bponthe aulter, euen two Lambes of, one pere old day by day tontinuallp:
39 The one thou shalt offer in the mornyng, and the other at euen. 5
40 And with the one Lambe, a tenth, deale of flowre nungled with the fourth part ofan hyn ofbeaten ople: and the. fourth part of an hyn of wyne kor a. oF hints drynkofkerpng. re
41 Andthe other Lambe thon shalt offer. dan at euen and shalt do thereto accordyng a to the meate offeryng € drinke offeryng. tirccsars. in the morning, to be an odour ofa sweet. fauour, and à satrifice by fire vnto the:
; Lode, ö 4
42 And let this be a continuall burnt of: fering amongst pour children after vou, before the doore of p tabernacle of witnesse before the How, where J will meete vou, to speake there vnto thee.
43 Thert J will meete with the children. of Ilrael, and (eye place} (hall be sanctified in my glorie. . —
44. And FJ will fanttifie the tabernacieof witnelle and the aulter: and J will. lanctifie also both Aaron t his sonnes, to be my priestes. :
45 And J wil Dwell amongst the chyl-. den of lrael, and will be their God: «
46 And they shall knowe that Jam the:
Pond theyr God, that brought them out. of the lande ol cary for to dwell a=: mongst them leuen] J the Lord their.
God. 5

The.

The tabernacle.

— eee

Exod US.

0 J The. xxx. Chapter.

Che fourme of the aulter ok incense. 6 The slandyng thereol. 12 The monpe to the ple ok the tabernacle. ; A licle. 18 The bralen lauere. 2 Che makpng of holpe ople.

35 The makipng of incente,

= 2 Drhou shalt make an aulter for [weete

ere incense: of Sittin
Ay wood shalte thou

be inn ot,
Yr ¥

a A A A

ws

A

Arr make it.
20 0 A cubite long, and a
=) *3aZ7 | eubite brode, cuẽ foure square shall it be, and

Ge dee proccede out © ofit. —
3 And thou shalt duerlape it with fine

gold, both the ruffe t the walles round

we

eananrroannae 6

here about, and his hones alfo and tale

fidet. make vnto it a trowne of gold round about,

_4 And two golden ringes halt thou

make to it on either fide, euen vnder the trowut, that they mayt be as places fo2
< thebarresto beare it Withall.
5 And thou chalt make the barres of
Sittint wood, e toner them with gold.
6 And thou shalt put it before the vayle tfthat is by the arke of testimonie befort the mercie seate, that is, vpon the testimonie where J wpyll meete with thee.
25 % And Aaron Mall burne theron weete
« ineenfe euery mompug when he deel seth the lampes, cuen then shall he burnc it.
8 And lykewile at euen when he setteth

“i 025 rnef.

Dp the lampes be shall burne incense, ¢

this incensing shall be perpetuallp be-

me the Lord throughout pour genera: ons.

do. ler ae Je Mall offer no © straunge incense

other lozt the

is hert prelcti-

uo o hoods .

thereon. noz burnt facrifice nor meate offerpng, neither powre any drinke offerxpngthereon. a lo And Aaron shall reconsile vppon the hornes of it once in a pere, With the blood of the sinne offeryng of retonliling, euen once in the pere Thal he recon: file vpon it through pour generations: it is most holy vnto the Lorde.
* And the Torde fpake vnto Mopses, aping: | a 2 52 thou takest the {time of the childrẽ become to of Israel “© after thep2 number, they
{hal gene euery man a recõsiling of his dule vnto the Lorde when thou nunibrest them, that there be no plague a-

S „ K „ „ „ K „

ge thep were not
05 be num-

zed. n di j
Od: redempiion. as he dyd in Dauids dapcg. 2. Reg.

two cubites hye: the hornes therok shall

Sop bp that ablation they redeemed their lpucs,whd eis God would kyu,
2 $e

offeryng vnto the Lode. - ;
15 The riche shall not pafle and the poore hall not go vnder halfe a sicle, but pe. hall geue an heaue offerpng vnto the.
Lorde, that he may haue merce on: pour soules. f

16 And thou shalt take the reconfilyng’ |

monpe of the children ol Ylracl, and, shalt put it vnto the bie of the tabernacle ofthe congregation, that it may bea. memortall vnto the chyldren ol Jlracl. before the Lord, that he may haue mertie vpon pour soules. f
1 And the Lode fpake vnto Mopses,. aping: ‘

18 Thou shalt make a lauer ok brasse, c his foot allo of brasse, to washe withall, and shalt put it betwene the tabernacle. of the congregation and the aulter, and. put water therin. :
19 For Aaron and his sonnes Chall wathe: their handes and their feete therin.
20 Euen when they go into the tabernacle of the congregation, or whenthey go

in to the aulter to mmister and to burne the Lordes offerpng, they hall washe them selues with water lest they dye.
21 Hikewbile they shal wache their handes

their keete, ett they dye: and it (halbe. >

an ordinaunce vnto them for euer, both vuto hym te his seede, throughout their generations.

2 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saping: a
23 Lake vnto thee principal spices, of the.

mot pure Mirrhe fine huͤdreth w licles, | 0)" of fweete Oynamond haife fo much,

euen two hundreth and fiftic sicles, of sweete Calamus tivo tie sicles. vo
24. Ok Cassia fiue hundreth ticles, alter. the waight of the fanttuarie, and of oylc

Olpue an hyn:
25 And

The tabernay

hundreth and fil’. |

C.

nonies.

25 And thou shalt make of the oyle an holy opyntnient, euen an oyntmentcompound akter the trat of the apoticarie:
26 It shalbe the oyle of holy oyntment,
D and thou shalt annopnt the tabernacle okthe congregation therwith, and the are ot the testimonie,
27 And the table and al his apparell, and the candlesticke and all his veslels, and the aulter ofincente,
28 And the aulter ok burnt facvifice with all his veslels, and the lauer t his foote.
‘oo And thou shalt sanctifie them, that they may be moft holye: whatloeuer toucheth them, shalbe lanctikied. zo And thou shalt anoynt Aaron and his sonnes, and tonsecrate them, that they
975 minister vnto nie in the priestes
0 0 ite. zi And thou shalt speake vnto the children of Ilracl, saping: This shalbe an holy oynuting ople vnto me, throughout pour generations.
32 Upon mans fleche shall it not be

D the Norde spake
Nd

‘JZ vnto Doyles, saping:

A y Beholde, J haue cate

INS

29 ed by name welalecl the fonne of Uri, the
N sonne ol Hur, of the

— tribe of Juda,

And J haue flied hym̃ with the

ppirite ot God, in wisedome and vnder-

e standyng, in knowledge, and in all

en maner wozke , **

4 To fpnde out wittie deuiles, and to
Worke in golde, suuer, and in bralle,

5 And in the craft to let stones, and to

de this 3

aner Workmanthip.
And beholde, J haue geuen hym to be

his companion Poliab the tonne of

Achtlamec, of the tribe of Dan: and in pgeheartes ok all that are wile hearted haue put wisedome, to mate all that

haue commaunded thee : N
7 The tabernacle of the congregation, the arke of the tettimonic, € the mere

polbeed, neither shal pe make any other

catue in tymber, and to worke in all

n after the makpug ofit:forit isl 5 halbe holy bnto yon, 5 wm

3 Wholocuer maketh ihe that, oz whosoeuer putteth any or it vpon a straũger,
Mall periche fron amongstt his people. ;

34. And the Lorde sayde onto Moyles:
Lake vnto thee [weete spices, Starte,
Onpcha, MWeete Galbanum : thele spices With pure Frankenlente, ok eche a:
Ipke wapght. N 6

35 And make ok them lweete lmellyngincenfe,afterthe cvaft of the apotitaric, » mingled together, pure and holy. J

36 And beate it to powder, and put of it. before the arke of the testimonie inthetabernacle of the congregation, where
IJ Wyll meete With thee : it shalbe vnto. vou most holy. ‘

37 And vou (hal not mate to pour selues, after the makyng of that incense Which. thou Malt make: it shalbe vnto ponholy for the Lorde. j

38 Whosoeuer Hall make lyke vnto that.

to smell thereto, chall perishe from a-

mongst his people.

¢ The. xxxj. Chapter.

God geueth his spirite to Wefaleel and Poliab the workemen, to inuent all thynges which appertayne to the trimme makyng of the tabernacle. 13 nabat ligne the Sabboth is. 18 Cables ot fone written with the linger of God.

seate that is thervpon, and all the furniture of the tabernacle:

8 And che table and his furniture, and 23 the pure tandlesticke with all his furniture, and the aulter of incense,

9 And the aulter of burnt offeryng and

all his furniture, and the lauer with his

cc vessels.

oote,

lo The vestmentes to minister in, and the holy garmentes fo2 Aaron the priest, and the garmentes of his lonnes to minister in:

11 And the annoyntyng oyle, and fivecte intense forthe sanctuarie: accordyng to all that J haue commaunded thee, hal

12 And the Torde {patie vnto Moyles,

saying: *

B > cake vnto the children of Israel, and say, In any wylt fee that ve kepe emp) Sabbothes: foe it is a signe betweene me € vou in pour generations, for to e a P the Lorde am he that doth sanctitie vou.

* 14 Repe

age tabernacle. | Exo dus a The Sela ö

C14 Kepe my Sabboth therefore, fozit is the Sabboth throughout their genera: | holy vnto pou. He that defiteth it shal- tions: it is a perpetuall couenaunt.

. be put to death: for whosoeuer worketh 17 Foz it is a signe betweene me and the therin, the lame soule shalbe rooted out children of Israel for euer: for in fir from amongst his people. dayes the Howe made heauen and

15 Orr dapes Mall men wozke, and in carth, and inthe senenth dap he vette.

the seuenth dap is the Sabboth of the and was rekreched. ö

holy rest of the Lorde: whosoeuer dot) 18 And when the Lorde had made an n

any worke in the Sabboth dap shall end ok tommmupng with Boyles vpon u

dye the death. the mount Sinai, he gaue hym two ta- 11 705
16 Wherekore let the thildren of Israel bles ok wunesse, euen tables of fone, dran

kepe the Sabboth, that they obferue writen © with the finger of God. 7

. J The. xxxii. Chapter.

1 Che Itraelites do prap vnto the golden calfe. 7 God warneth Moyles of the linne

of the people. Che people of Israel ofa stpsse neche. 1 Moples intreateth God fog

Ilrael, cityng his promiles. 15 Mopfes descendeth of the hyll. The tables delertbed

Of God. 19 Moples beyng angry breaketh the tables, and the calle. 21 He chideth his

ö <> brother Daron. 27 The Idolaters be murdered of the Leuites at Moyles commaundement. zo Doptes rebubeth the offence of the people. zr He wyll be putten out of the

boote oflpte, and haue the peoples ollence pardoned, 3; Thep that be writen in the booke of God. 5 ;

. PH . a

Murg

Wi

44%
N

WAY 7: 8 ad
„N x ES . ali
AHORA “Ciba

; 72 * F

: b —
0 1 ea

Oh x Sey!

N 9 * =
1 Tg ub Des. 7
Ae e msi
0 p Hon \

N 80 Sei Tyr ee
2 N ug 8 0 We Ss 2 en LAN

N. Sot TS ah HY De eS ipa TP tt 2 path e Un ed A

f

Md when ß peo- 2 And Aaron aya bnto them: Plucke of

A 1 i

ple lawe that tt the golden caryn in the
3 Nt ges which are in th ben ba „waslögo Moyp- cares of pour wiues, of r es of neu ses came downe pour daughters, k bring them vnto me. a 18 out ofthe moun- 3 And all the people plucked of the gol’
. taine they gathe- den earinges Which they had in their

red them selüues cares, and brought them vnto Aaron. oz. cgein? together vnto 4. And he receaued them ok their handes,

Aaron, and sazd Fk kachtoned it with made ok . oy) vnto hym, Np, make vs Gods to go be- tit a calfe of molten ber laid, 1 foe Dsifor wewote not whatisberome hele be thy gods O Beach, Which ow
P el Povles, the man that brought brought thee out ofthe lande ol Egypt.

out or the lande of Egypt. 5 And when Aaron fare that, he mene

an aulter before it, and Aaron made proclamation, saping: To morowe is the holy dap ofthe Lorde,

6 And they rose vp in the mornyng and

blftered burnt offeringes, and broͤught peace offeringes also:and the people lat them downe to eate and drinke, and
N role vp agayne to play. “alll
15 7 And the Lord sayd vnto Moyses: G get thee Dolbue, thy people which thou broughtest out of the lande of Egypt, hath marred all.

8 Thepare turned quickly out of the wap whiche Jtommannded them: for they haue made thema calfe of monlten mettall, and haue worshipped it, and haue offred thervnto, saying: Thele be thy goddes O Ilrael, whiche haue brought thee out of the lande of Egypt.

9 And the Lode sayd vnto Moyses, J haue scene this people: and beholde, it is a stpfnecked people. —

1o And nowe luffer me, that my wrath may Ware whot againt them, and consume them: and J wyll make of theca mightie people.

n And Doyles besought the Lorde his
God, and layd: O Lord why doth thy
Wath Ware whot agaynst thy people whiche thou Hak brought out of the lande of Egypt with great power, and with a mightie hande

12 Wherfore should the Egyptians speake and say: Fora mischieke dyd he bryng them out, euen for fo flay them in the mountapnes, c to consume them from the fate of the earth: Turne from thy fierce Wrath, and repent of this euyll deuisej Agayntt thy people.

3 Remember Abraham, Jlahac, and
Ilrael thy seruauntes, to whom thou warest by thy owne selfe, and fayactt vnto them: J wylt multiplie pour seede as the starres of heauen, and all this lande that J haue spoken of wyll J geue vnto pour seede, and they Mall inherite it for euer. 8

C4, And the Lorde refrapued hym teife from the eu whiche he fayd he would do vnto his people.

15 And Doyles turned his backe, e went downe fromthe byt, € the two tables of the testimonie Were in his hande.

16.. And the lame tables were Witten in both the leaues, (euen) on the one side, a on the other, were they written: And thele tables Were the oke of God, and the wWeiting was the weiting ot

that haue the worle:

God, grauenin the tables.
17 And when Foray hearde the noyse padi Bie 5 they t owted, he fayde

J there is lach Don nopse of warre
18 And he aunswered

them that haue the masterie, nor ok thé

(but! JJ do hear thenopse ofchemthatlng ’ J

10 Andafloone as he tame nigh vnto the hoast, he fare the calf, and the 815 fing: and Moyses wrath waren whot,

and he cast the tables ontof his handes, and brake them beneath the hyll.

20 And he toke the talle whiche they had

„made, and burned it in the fire, € stampt lt into pouder,¢ strawed it inthe water, t made the childrẽ of Ilrael dunke of it,

21 And Moyses said vnto Aaron: What D did this people vnto thee, that thou hast brought fo great a sinne vpon them-

22 And Aaron aunswered, Let not the
Wath of ny Lode ware fierce: thon N knolbestthe people that they are leuen fet on mischiete.

23 Jor they sapde vnto me: Make vs goddes to go before vs, for we wote not what is become of Moyles, the man that brought vs out of p land of Egypt.

24. And J laid vnto them: Let thenrthat haue gold, plucke it ol: And theibronght it vnto me, and J did cast it into the fire, and therof tame out this calfe.

25 Mopyles therfore lawe that the people were naked and that Aaron had made them naked vnto their shanie, amongest their enemies) f

26. And Moyles stode in the gate of the hoast, and sayd: Who l pertapneth to the
Lorde, let hym come] vnto me. And all the sonnes of Lein gathered theselues together vnto hym.

27 And he sam vito them, Thus lapeth the Lord God of Israel: Put euery ma his lworde by his lide, and go in and out froui gate to gatethroughout the hoast, and flay euery man his brother cucry man his companion, and euery man his neighbour.

28 And the chyldrẽ of Len dyd as Pop? ¢« ses had laid: And there fel of the people
5 same day about three thoulande men.

29 And Moyses sayd: Fill pour handes O:

vnto the Lord this day, euery mandpo ar. his sonne, x bps his bother, x that there may be geuen you a blessing this day.
30. And on the morowe Moyles {aid vnto
5 people, Pe haue finned à great sinne:
27 And

mount, although thee }

: , reuciatton to
It is not the trie of Jene.

—<<_<-_ i i ——_ rt -_ oo :
Ceremonies, Exodus. Ceremonie,

And nowe F Will go vp vnto the Lord, 33 Andthe Lorde sapd vnto Moyles: » 35 peraduenture J may purchase an at- Wyll put hymout of my booke that sans tonement for your sinne. Hhath sinned agaynst nie. ta
31 Moyles therefore went agayne vnto 34 And nowe go thou, bryngthe people
Gander the Lorde, and lade: O Oh, thispeo- puto the place whiche J laid vnto thee,
Hocns Pie haue siuned a great finne, and haue behold nune angel chal go before thee: de daes nd nape them gods of golde. 4 P euerthelater, in that dap when J viz
Seer. 32 And nowe forgeue them their sinne:o: lite J wyl dilite their finne dps them.

ORT ik thou wylt not, wype me J prap thee 35 Andthe Lorde plagued the people, 155 bauer dg but ok thy © booke whiche thou hat because they made the calfe Whiche ane
1 peice Watters, ; Aaron made. pei bac e a ¢ The.xxxin. Chapter. j Aa e people an angel to guyde them. ; God rekuseth to go vp with his is 4 pi 1 755 mourneth. The tabernacle of the congregation, or of the couenaunt. 9 Moßples tatheth with God kamiliarly. 12 He requireth God to be with him in reducing the people, and the wap to be chewed him. To finde grace befoze God.
1 Mopies is mercpully hearde. 15 He delireth to (ee the glory of God. 22 He is bydden to stande in a rocke. N
1 [MD the Lorde fayde vnto the tabernatle of the congregation
6 a LDS} | bute Mopses: Depart whiche was without the hoast.
* KN and go vp hence, thou 8 And when Mopses went out vnto the
CS and the people whiche tabernacle, all the people rose vp, and

thou hast brought out stode euery man at his tent doore, and
2 otthe lande of Egypt, loked after Doyles, vntul he was gone vnto the land which J into the tabernacle. ware vnto Abraham, Jlahac, x Jatob, 9 And alloone as Moyles was entredin saying, vnto thy feede wyll J geue it. to the tabernacle, the cloudie piller def
2 And J will send an angell before thee, tended, and stode at the doore of the taand Jwyll cast out the Changamtes, bernacle, and he talked with Moples. the Amorites, c the Hethites, the Phe- 10 And all the people sawe the cloudic reʒzites, the Heuites, and the Jebulites: piller land at the tabernacle doore, and
„Sememe. 3 Into a lande that floweth with“ they role vp and worschipped euery man hate niplke and hony. Jor J wyll not go a- in his tent doore. lane n mongest vou ny selfe: for ye are a styl- 1 And the Lord spane vnto Moyles © ar ku hug. noctked people, lest J consume thee in kate to fate, as a man speaketh vnto his n the wap. N kreeude. And he turued agayne into the gr“
4 And when the people hearde this cuil hoast: but the young man Joluah his tedinges, they sorowed:and no man dyd eruaunt the fonne of Nun, Departed put on his best rapment. not out of the tabernacle.
5 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyles: 12 And Moyses said vnto the Low: See,
Day buto the chyldren ol Ilrael, ye are thou sapest vnto me, Leade this people a styknecked people: I must come once foorth: x thou hast not shewed me whõ fodayuly vpon you, and make an ende thou wylt lend with nie. And thou halt ol you: therefore nowe put thy goodiy sayd moreouer, J knowe thee by name, rapment from thee, that J may wyt Fthon hast also found grate in my fight. what to do vnto thee, 3 Nowe therforze, i Jhaue founde fa-
6 And the children of IJsrael lapde their ubdur in thy ght, then I pray thee shew . goodly rapment from them, euen by the me thy! wap, that Pinay know ther, aa mount Hozev. and that J may finde grate in top tox,
W 7. And Popses toke the tabernacle, and sight, and consider allo that this naton seers aoe oa tye Hoatt afaree of tsthypeopie, 4 rom the hoast, and called it the taber- 14. And he fad: o with = natle of the congregation: And fo it ether ald Ppl an f came to passe that cuerv one whiche 15 He layd vnto hym: Ikthy prelence go

. woulde pray vnto the Lorde, went ut not with me,cary vs not hence. 605

HENS
Jah

remonies,

16 | Foz howe shall it be knowen here, that J and thy people haue founde faz uour mn thy sight, but in that thou goest with vs: Il thou goest with vs, har

not J and thy people haue precunnence before all the people that are bpon the fate of the earth? hf

17 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moyses:

wyll do this allo that thou hat layd, fo2 thou halt founde grace in my fight, and J knolbe thee by name.

18 And he sayde: J beleche thee shewe me thy glorie. ;

19 Who aunswered: J wyll make all my
©) good go before thee, € J Wypll call in the name of Jehouah before thee:

tart and decnon to ig np ploz eng by, i feunde paloue -

t np
E Icho-

6 om anst not

lande ol Chanaan.
17 goddes made of mettall.

ouer the face of Mopses.

d the Lord saide vnto Moyles : hewe thee wo tables of ftonelike
9 ||bnto the first, and 7
Wyll Wepte vpon thele so S| tables, p wordes that deere inthe first tables whiche thou brakest.

2 And be redy inthe morning and come bp carly bnto the mount of Sinai, and thou shalt stande there for nie in the top of the mount. l

3 There shall no man tome bp with thee, neither let any man be seene thorowout al the mount, neither let Heepe nozoren feede before the hyll.

4 And Moyles hewed two tables of stone like buto the first, and role vp car: lye in the mornyng, and went vp vnto the mount Sinat as the Lode had conunaunded hym, ¢ toke in his hande the two tables ok stone.

es > And the Lord destended in the tloude,

e and ode with hin there: and he cal-

ee, led pponthe name of the Lorde,

e And the Lorde passed by before hyn,
And crped, Lorde, Lorde, God, strong, merepkull and gracious, long suffering, and aboundaunt in goodnes € trueth,

7 And kepyng mercy in store for thou-

di.

* ch Ny
4 Vopsex.

Exodus.

God byddeth Moyles to prepare newe tables. treateth God to go with the people, commendyng Gods mercy.

landes, forgening wickednes, vngodiy- ,

and Wyl chewe merty ta whom Wyll shewe mercy, and Wy haue compallioh, on whom J wyit hane compatlion.
20 And he said furthernioze, Thou map. elt not see my fate: for there shall no man see me, and lpue. a Gan ne layd: Bcholde, there
F y me, and thou (hak
Mn eagles g 5 ——
22 And Whyle my glory goeth fooztt 5
E wyll put thee in a clyft of the ie
7 7 15 Pu my Hand bpon thee, While passe by.
23 And J wyll take awap myne hande, and thou Chait fee my backe partes: but my face Hall not be leene.

The.xxxitij.Chapter.

6 The names ol God. s Moples en.

1 God promileth the

12 Company kepyng with the Gentiles, and idolatrie is korbidden. g 18 Che lolemnitie of tweete bread,

Che Sabboth. 22 Che feast of Pentecosle, and of tabernacles.
28 The kalt of Mopfes. Che ten wordes. 2 The face of Mopses horned.

19 DE the kirct borne.
26 The kirst kruites.
34 vaple

nes and sinne, and not leauing one inne: cent, biliting the wickednes of the fa: thers bpon the chyldren, and bpon the chyldrens chyldren, (even vnto the third and fourth generation.
8 And Moyses made hatte, and bowen hyin selfe to the tarth, and worchipped,
9 And layd: If J haue founde grate in thysight, O Lorde, then let my Zoe
J pray Chee go in the middest of vs, or it is a styfuetked people: and thou halt haue merey vpon dur wickednes and our fine, and shalt take vs fo2 thine inheritance,
And he laid: Weholde,F make a conc: naunt befoze all thy people, x J will do meruayles, such as hane not den done in all the worlde, neither in all nations:
E all the people amongest whiche thou art, shall fee the worke of the Lorde:fo: it is a terrible thyng that J wyll do

[Oo

With ee. as

1 BRepe diligently those thinges that J connnaunde thee this day: Weholde, J tast Gut before thee, the Amiorites, Chanaamtes, Hethites, Pherezites, Deuites and Jebulites.

1 Take heede to thy (cif, let thou make any compact with the inhabitours of the lande whyther thou goest, lest they be cause ok riine amongest pou:

9 ij 13 But

Inf

Oz,

ludiciales

133 Wu oucrthrowe their aulters, and breake their nnages, and tut downe heir graues.

C 14 Thon shalt worchip no straunge Gon:
Cocos kor the Lorde is called iclous, because

5 ‘alt he 18 a iclo us God.

thatenvotice 15 Test ik thou make any agreement wehe? With the iuhabitours of the lande, and beaonew they go a whoring after their gods, and mange dd latrifice vnto their gods: they call
-Yoz ged.

thee, and thou cate of theyr facrifice.
16 And thou take of their daughters vnto thy sonnes, and their danghters go a

whoryng after their gods, and make

thy sonnes go a whorpng after their gods also. ö

17 Thou halt make thee no gods of

mettall.

18 The feast of vnleauened bread halt thoukepe:Seuen daies thon shalt cate vnleauened bread, as J commaunded thee in the tyme of the moneth Abib: for in the moneth Abib thou camest out ol Egypt. 1

19 All that openeth the matrice is myne, aid al that breaketh the matrice amon-

gest thy cattell it it be male, whether it

be ore or sheepe. 5

20 Witt the firstling of the asse thou fait

bye out with a lambe: and if chon re-

deeme hym not, thou thalt brealze his

necke. All the first borne of thy fonnes thon shalt redeeme: ⁊ fee that no man appeaxe before me emptie.

21 Sire dapes thou shalt wozke, and in

the seuenth day thou shalt rest, both from earyng and reappng.
ö 22 Thou shalt obferne the feast of
D weekes with thy firk fruites of wheate haruest:and the feast of ingatheryng at the peres ende..
23 Thpplt in a pere shall all pour men

chyldren appeare before the Lode Je-

Houal) God of Israel. :

24. Fo2H wyll cast out the nations before thee, and enlarge thy coattes : neyther hall any man despre thy lande,
When thou shalt go vp to appeare before the Lorde thy God thryle in a pere.

25 Thou shalt not offer the blood of my

Exodus.

latrikite pow leanen, neither hall cugit of the sacrifice of the least otaslcucr be left bute the mornyng.

26 The fick rype krnites of thy lande

thou shalt byng vnto the house of the
Torde thy God. Thou shalt not seethe a kyd in his mothers mylke.

27 And the Lorde fapde vnto Moyses:
Write these wordes, for after the tenour or these wordes, J haue made a conenaunt with thee and with Israel.

28. And he was there with the Lorde fourtie dayes and fourtie nyghtes, and dyd neither eate bread, nor driinke wa-

ter: and he wrote vpon the tables che

wordes of the couenaunt, [ever] ten commaundementes.
29 And when Mopses came downe from mount Sinat, the two tables of testimonie were in Moyses hande:
When he came downe from the mort, .
“Moyles wyste not that the suynne of eh face (hone, whyle be talked with pm. j a

30 And Aaron and all the chyrdren of Sch

„ e bpon Mopses: and be: weber

holde, the suynne ol his face shone, and they were atrayde to come nye hym.

31 And when Moyses had called them,
Aaron and all the chiefe of the tongregation came vnto him: and Boyles talked with them. =

32 And afterivarde all the chyldren of
Ilrael tame nye: and he commannded them all that the Lode had sayde bu: to hym in mount Sinai.

33 And when Moyses had made an ende

ok communpng With them, he put a © nce

toneryng bpon his face.

34. And agayne when Moyses Went in e

before the Lorde to speaue with hym,

he toke the coueryng ok, vntyll he came nde out: And he tame ont and spake vnto ™*

the chyldren ol Ilracl, that whiche he
Was commaunded,

35 And the chyldren of Ilrael sawe the face of Moples: that the kynne of
Moyles face shone, and Moyles put the coueryng vpon his face agayne, Div tyll he went in to commune with hym.

C The

TO

XO

monies.

nes ol the people in offering. ded bnto the people cf Moples.

2 trsoze

he rut to ther gis r.
Mv.

. conunaunded, faying:
«Offering vnto the Lorde: nabofoeuer is

„ [beaueoferyng) to the Lode, namely golde, syluer, and brasse,
6 And blewe silke, purple, starlet, white
‘- fplke,goatesheere, = -
7 And Ranunesfkynnesrved,¢ Larus
B. fhyunes, With Sittim wood,
8 Oyle lor light, and spyces, for annoyntyng oyle, and for the lWeete incense.

And Onypr stones, and stones to be set

inthe Ephod, and in the brestlaßp. do And let all them that are wise hearted
© among pou come and make all that the
TLorde hath tounnannded.

i The tabernacle, and the tent therol, a his conering, t his ringes, his boordes, his barres, his pillers and his lockets.
‘2 The arke € the staues therof with the mierty seate t the baile that couereth it: z The table and his barres, and all his besslels, and the thew bread:

. The tandelsticke of light and his fur-

miture, and his lampes with the oyle for
C5 The intense aulter and his barres,

the annoyntyng oyle, and the lweete in-

dense, and the hangyng ofthe doore at
„ the entryng in ok the tabernacle:

brasengrediron, his staues, and all his vesllels, the lauer and his foote:

his pyllers, and their fockettes, and the

rel gration ofthe childrẽ of Ilrael, saying:

5 Take from aniongest you an heaue of a wyllyng heart, let hym bryng that

1s The aulter of burnt facrifice with his

7, And the hangynges ok the tourt, with

Us.

The. . Chapter.

The Sabboth is commaunded. 4 First kruites are required, and gykteg. 21 Che redi
. : 54110 Dac ) rediso Belaleel and Ooliab the artificers, are commen:

hangpng in the dooze of the tourt,

18 The pinnes of the tabernacle, and the 4

pinnes of the conve with their cordes:
19 Che niinilteing garmentes to min

c

ster in the holy plate, and the holy vest-

7 Suche ag
4 Opyertapne to

the seruice of

mentes fo: Aaron the prick, and tihe < Hiersvemee

vestmentes of his sonnes that cheunay ‘

nnnister inthe priestes office,
20 And all the congregation of the

cl |

dren ol Isracl, departed from 5 sente ol Moyses::

21 And euery one came, as many as their heartes couraged them, x as manpas their spirites made them wyllyng, and brought an heaue offering for the Lord, to the makyng ok the tabernacle of the congregation and forall his vses, t foz the holy bestmentes.

22 And they tame both men and women, tuen as many as were wyllyng hearted, and brought bracelettes and earinges, ringes and chapnes, whiche ie-

the pie

D

welles were all of golde: e all the men

brought a waue offeryng of golde vnto the Lorde.

23 And euerp man with whom Was found blewe silke, purple, scarlet whyte filke, and Goates heere, ered fkynnes of Kannnes, and Larus (kynnes, brought them. g

24 All that dyd heaue vp an oblation of golde and brasle, brought an heaue offering vnto the Lode: and all nien with

whom was founde Sittim wood fo.

any maner Worke of the minifiration, brought it.

Hearted, dyd spinne with their handes, and bought the spun Worke, both of blewe luke, purple, scarlet, æ white like.
26 And all the wonien that extelled in wildonte of heart, spun Goates heecre.
27 And the lordes brought Onyr (tours, and stones to be fet in the Ephod, and in the brestlasx.
28 And spyte, and ople for lyght x for the anoynting ople, ¢ for the lwweete intense.
29 And che chyldren of Asrael brought a willing offerpng bnto the Horde, both men z women, as many as had willing

heartes, to bryng for all maner Worzkes,

Whiche the Lode had commaunded to bemnade Opythe handes of Boyles,
N Uj

¢
25 And all the women that were wyse

0 Wipng
Mopses ds a mimt er ther-

30 And *

ludiciales.

of Israel: beholde, the Lord hath called by name Belaleel p forme of Uri, the sonne ol Hur, of the tribe of Juda.
31 Amd hath filled hyim with the spirite of God, in wildonie and vnderstanding,

in knowledge, and in all maner wozke,

32, To finde out curious worzkes, which are made in golde, siluer, and bea fle:

33 In the cvafte of stones to fet them, and in taruing of wood to make any

Exodus.

30 And Moyses sayde vnto the chyldren

maner of subtile worke.

34 And he hath put in his heart that he may teache, both he and Poliab, the
On of Achisamech, of the teibe of Dan.

35 Them hath he filled with wyldome of heart, to worke al maner of grauen

t
{sth
God. l

and brodtred, k needle worke, in blew

filke and purple, in starlet and whyte füllte, and in weauyng, and to do all ma: ner of worke and wittie deuiles.

The. vi. Chapter.

e makyng ok the tabernacle. 3 Che peoples redye wyll. s The makyng ofthe
1 1 Ors ate 20 Ok the tables. 31 Okthe barres. 35 Ok the vaple.

Nd Besaleel wrought

and Doliab, and all

A wpse hearted men, to
[whomthe Tord gaue

wpyldonie and vnder-

standyng, to knoe

Hove to worke all mae ner of worke for the seruice of the sanctuarie, and all that the Lode had commaunded. 5

2 And Moples called Besalcel, Ooliab, and all the wyse hearted men, and such as the Lord had geuen wyldome vnto, and as many as their heartes couraged to tome vnto that worke, to worke it.

3 And they receaued of Boyles all the
Heaue offering whiche the 1 of ae Da neen orke of the seruice of p sanctuarie, to make it withall: And beside , they brought free offeringes vnto it euery day in ß morning.

4 And all the wyse men that wrought all the holy woke, cante euery man from his worke whiche they made:

5 And they spake vnto Moyles, faying:
The people bryng to niche, and more then enough for the seruice and worke whiche the Lorde hath commaunded to be made:

6 Andthen Moyles gane commaundement, and they tauled it to be protlaymed throughout the hoast, saying: See that neither man nor woman prepare any more worke for the heane offering of the sanctuarie: t so the people were forbydden to bryng.

W 7 FJorthe stuffe they had, was suffitient

for all the worke to make it e to much.

an 8 All the Wyle Hearted inen therefore,

and they that wrought fo. the tabernadlt, made ten curtaynes of Whyte twy-

ned lilke, blewe filke, purple, and starlet, with Cherubim of brodered
Worke made he them. 8
9 The length of one curtaine was twentit c eyght tubites, Ethe breadth foure: . and the turtapnes were all of one sise.

10 And he coupled fiue curtaines by them

selues, and other fine by them selues.
1 And he made loopes of blewe silke along by the edge of one curtayne, euen in the seluedge of the coupling turtaine: and lykewyse he made on the syde ol.

the coupling turtayne on the other side.

12 Fifticloopes made he in the one curtayne, and fiftic in the edge of the cou: plyng curtayne on the other fide: e the. loopes helde one curtayne to another.

3 And he made fiftie taches of golde,. and coupled the curtapnes one to another with the taches: (fo) was it made one tabernatle. i

14 And he made eleuen curtapnes ok. C

goates heere, to be a tent ouer the ta bernacle. N f
1 The length ok one curtayne had thirtie tubites, x was foure tubites bade, . and they all tleuen of one file, 0
16 And he coupled fine curtaynes by the felnes and fire by them selues. .
17 And he made fiftie loopes along by. the border of the vttermost couplyns. turtayne, and fiftic in the edge of the other touplyng curtapne, i.
18 And he made fiftic taches of brasse, to
Ar the tent together, that it nwght. ne. ;
19 And he made a coueryng vpon the tent of Rammesthynnes bell on vet. another of Taxus skynnes abdue that.
20 And he made standyng boordes £02, the tabernacle, of Sittin wood. The

rabernacle.

21 The length of a boorde was ten tubites, the breadth one tubite e a halfe.

D. 22 One boorde had two tenons, wherby thep were topned one to another: and

thus made he for all the boordes of the

‘ ¢abernacie.

23 And he made twentie boordes fo? the

south side ofthe tabernacle.

24. And fourtie sockettes of siluer vnder

the twentte boordes: two sockettes vnder one boorde for his two tenons, and two sockettes vnder another boorde for his two tenons.

25 And kor the other hide of the tabernacle, whiche is towarde the north, he made twentie boordes,

26 And their fourtic sockettes of siluer:

two sockettes vnder one boorde, and

tbbo sockettes vnder the other boorde.

¢
G
¢
¢

Thele 27 And towarde the“ west ende of the

tabernacle he made fire bordes.

28 And two other boordes made he in the torners of the tabernacle, for either side.
29 And they were iopned close beneath aͤnd aboue with a ring: and thus they dpd to both the torners.

zo And there were eyght boordes, and sixteene sockettes of luluer: vnder euerp boorde two sockettes.

zi And he made barres of Hittin wood:

table. 17 Ok the candelsticke.

Md Besaleel made the
AA ALC of Sittum wood:
Wstwo cubites € a halfe long, Ca cubite and a i X34 Halfe brode, and a cu:
12 Abite and a halle hygh.
And oucriarde it with fine goldt within e without, and made a crowne of golde to it rounde about.
3 And cast for it foure rynges of golde forthe foure corners of it: ł᷑wo rynges ftor the one lyde, and two for the other.
4. And made baͤrres of Sittim wood, and couered them with golde.
5 And put the barres in the rynges, along by the fide of the arke, to brare the
äͤrke withall.
And he made the merty leate of pure dolde:tiwo cubites and a halfe was the length thereok, and one tubite and a halle the breadth.
7 And he made two Cherubinis of thitke

ae, a

¢
é c
‘ c

Exodus.

The. xxxvij. Chapter.

The makyng and kramyng of the arke of the testimonie. 6 Ol the mercy leate. io Ol the
25 Pk the aulter of incense.

fine for the boorde ö in he ane ie, des of the tabernacle .
3 sand hue for the boordes of the taberforth 7 905 ld — and fine barres.

e ti c

me be he tabernacle in the.
33 And he made the nwodest barre to‘ chut through the boordes 0 theoneendetotheother, wom.
34. And ontrlayde the boo des with gold, and made rynges of golde to thnk the. barres through, and touered the bares.
35 And he made a vayle al blewe fitke, ‘ purple, scarlet, and whyte twined filke: « euen with Cherubims made he it okbrodered worke. ;
36 And he made thervnto foure piers: of Sittin wood, and ouerlapde them. with golde: their knoppes were also of. golde, and he cast for them foure sotnettes of filuer. 9
37 And he made an hargyng for the tabernacie doore, of blewe silke, purple, scarlet, and whyte twined filke of needle worke, :
38 And the fine pyllers of it, with theyr. knoppes: and ouerlapde the knoppesof them, and the Hoopes with golde:<

lx.

theyr fine fockettes alfo were ok bralle. 8

gold, bpd the two endes ofß merty seat.
8 Pne Cherub onthe one end, and another Cherub on the other ende: euen of.

binis namelp in the endes therof.

9 And the Cherubuns spread out hep? {i

the merey seate made he the © Cheru- i 5

t kl

mz? the that
Cheru-

bim ¢ mercy

e, werecast together.

wynges aboue on bye, c couered p mer- ane ware,

ty seate therwith: And their faces were. one to another, euen tothe mercy seate warde were the faces ol p Cherubims.
10 And he made the table of Sittim. wood: two cubites (was] the length therot, and a cubite the breadth, anda; cubite and a halle the height of it. J
And He ouerlayde it with fine golve, « and made therbnto a crotwne of galoe < rounde about. ;
12 And made there vnto an hoope of an. hande brode rounde about: and made. bpon the boope a crowne of golde. rounde about, 0

13 And he catte for it foure rynges ol.
H (ij golde, <

II

The tabernacle.

C

K K X

i

a . K K K K K K NRHA HA AHO AOA

Oz, as somt ¢

cade i;
Leu e.

thit w, tongs.

golde, and put the rynges in the foure

‘ comers that were in the foure kette

„ thereof. a

14 atte harde by the hoope Were the

ringes into the htelye the barres were

put, to beare the table witball,

‘is Amd he made the barres of Sittum

wood, and touered them with goldr, to

« Bearethe table withall.

‘16 And made the vellels for the table of

; 5 gold, his dishes, his incense cuppes,

his touerynges, e his bowles to powre out with all. n

17 And he made the tandelsticke of pure golde, euen of a whole Worke made he the tandelsticke, his staffe, his braunthes, his bolles, his knoppes, and his flowres were ol one pecce.

18 Sire braunches proceeding out of the fines therol: three braunches of the candelsticke out of the one side thereof, and three braunches ol the candelsticke ont ol the other side thereof.

19 Aid in one braunch thee bolles made like vnto almondes, with a knop and a flowze: and in another braunche three bolles made like almondes, with a knop and a flowre: and fo throughout the fire braunches that proteede out of the tandelsticke. 2 a

20 And vpon the tandelsticke selfe, were foure bolles after the fathion of al-

K M X & A A a a A G a a

a ath ean a oe A

Jed he made the burnt

tim wood: fiue cubites f was the length theresite By ot, and fiue cubites the
LY breadth euen] foure ed square, and theee cubites hye. |

2 And he made vnto it hornes in the foure corners of it, proteedyng out of it : and he ouerlapde it with bate,
3 And he made all the veslels of the aulter, the ashpannes, and belomes, and basins, fleshchokes, < fire pannes: all the vellels therok made he of brasle.
4. And he made a beaten grediron oknet-
« Worke vnto the aulter, ronnde about a-

lowe beneath, vnto the middest of the

Aulter. 5

Exodus.

SEE Ey TT enna eer ⁵˙ö nnr. iy |

The Xxxxviii. Chapter.

Che sraming of the aulter of burntfacrifice, 8 Ol the bralen lauer. Ok the en: traunce. r4 The accompt and lumme of the price offered of the people.

offering aulter of Sit-

eg
The tabernay,

mondes, With knoppes and floures.
Under euery two braunches a knop of the fame, and a knop vnder two!“ braunches of the same, and a unop vnder two braũches of the fame according: to the fire braũches p proteede out ofit.
22 And the knoppes and the braunches proceeded out of it: and it was all one. peece of pure thicke golde. 0
23 And he made his seuen lampes, with. the snuffers, and veslels for the snuffe, ol pure golde. N *
24 Euen of a talent of pure golde made he it, with all the vessels therof, 0
25 And he made the incense aulter of Sittim woodrthe length of it was a cubite, and the breadth a cubite, for it was foure square:and two cubites hye, with hones proteedyng out of it. :
26 And he couered it with pure golde, both the top and the sides therof round. about, and the hornes of it: and made vnto it a crołwne of golde round about.
27 And he made two rynges of golde fo ‘ it seuen vnder the crowne therof in the. two corners of it, in the two sidestherbk to put barres in, for to beare it withal.
28 And he made the barres of Sittin: wood, k ouerlayde them with golde.
29 And pe made the holy anoyuting ole, and the lweete pure teenie, after the.
àpoticaries craft. Ol

[on KXMͤ MK K K A

5 And cast foure ringes of braslse for the. foure endes of the grediron, to put. barres in. *

6 And he made the barres of Sitti: wood and couered them with brasse:

7 And put the barres into the ringes in the foure corners ol the aulter to beare. it with all, and made the aulter holowe within the boordes. :

3 And he made the lauer of brasse, and the foote okit alfo of brasse of the glal
{es of the women allemblyng, whiche came together at the doore of the tabernaele of the congregation. a

9 And he made the court on the foutl. side, full south: and the hanginges of the:
Ane tobyte twined lille, Da’ ving a hundzeth cubites. is

abernacle.

o Their pillers Were twentie, and their bzasen sockettes twentie: but the kuoppes of the pyllers and their hoopes were of siluer. .
11 And on the northspde the hangynges were an hundred cubites, their pillers were twentie, and their fockettes of brasse twentie: but the knoppes and the

hoopes of the pyllers were ot siluer. n, On the west syde were hangynges of.

fiftie cubites, ten pillers, and their ten

sockettes: but the knoppes and the

Hoopes of the pyllers were of filuer.
And towarde the east syde full easte, were hangynges of liftie cubites.
C.. The hangynges of the one {poe of the gate Were fifteene cubites long, with three pillers and three lockettes. ay And of the other fine ofthe tourt gate, were hangynges allo of fisteene tubites long, with three pillers x three sockets.
16 All the hangynges ofthe court rounde about, were of whyte twyned funke:
17 But the sockettes of the pillers were ol brasse, and the knoppes € the hoopes were ok filuer, and the toueryng of the heades was of filuer: and all the pillers ot the court were hooped about
With liluer. —

18 And the hangyng of the gate of the court Was needle worke, ol ble we sulke, purple, scarlet, and whyte twyned silke:

twentie cubites long, t fiue in breadth, sauer against the hanginges ok the court.
And their pillers were foure, and their foure sockettes of brasse, c the knoppes dor siluer, andthe heades ouerlayde with

\ siluer, and hooped about with siluer.
Aber 20 And all the“ pynnes of the tabernae. ce and of the court rounde about, were

en bk brasse. „ beers”
This is the © sũme of the tabernacte

Be nor 21 me (euer) of the tabernacle of p tongregati-

a 0
2 Tbeptr- (
— petteg 8

ae okthe Leuttes by the bande of Ithamar, sonne to Aaron the priest.

22 And Betslaleel the sonne of Uri, the

sonne of Hur, of the tribe ol Juda,

Exodus. ,

on, as it was toũted actordyng to the tõmaundement of Moyles, for the office

Ixy.

23. And With hymwas Ahotiad fonncof.
Ahilamach, of the tribe of Val a tun- 2 nyng Workeman, an embroderer, and a-
Worker or needle Works, in blewe luke, purple scarlet, and Whyte twyned fille, ;

24. All the golde that Was octupyed lor all the worke of the holy plate, was the golde of the waue offeryng, twentie

t

_) ANDnHE talentes, and feuen hundzed.

and thirtle sicles, after the litle of the. lanctuarie. 1
25 And the summe ot siluer of them that
Were numbred in the congregation,
Was an Hundzed talentes, and a thou-. sande seuen hundred and thrce score and fifteene sicles, after the sicle of the sanctuarie. a ‘
26 For euery man an halfe weyght, euen halfe a sicle, after the ficle of the santtuarie, fo2 all them that went to be numbzed, from twentie pere olde and aboue, euen for fire hundred thoulande and thzee thousande, and fiue hundreth and kiftie men. f .
27 And ol the hundred talentes of siluer were cast the sockets ofthe sanctuarie, and the sockettes of the vayle: an hundred sockettes of the hundred talentes, «
à talent to euerp socket. <
28 And ol the thoulande feucn hundred seuentie and fine sicles, he made. knoppes to the pillers, and ouerlapde the heades, and hooped them. ‘
29 And the bale of the waue offeryng

was three score t ten talentes, and two.

thoufande and foure hundred fices..
30 And therwith he made the fockettes « to the doore of the tabernacle of thecongregatio and the brasen aulter t the. bralen grediron foz it, with all the. vessels of the aulter,

31 And the sockettes of the court rounde <

about, and the sockettes for the court. gate, and all the pinnes of the tabernacic, and all the pinnes of the court. rounde about. LR

The tabernacle.

id ofthe blewe silke,

purple, c scarlet, they

made vestmentes of

o ministration, to do ser-

A suite in the Holy place:

and made the holpe

garmentes for Aaron as the Lorde tommaunded Moyles,

2 And he made the Ephod of golde, blewe silke, purple, starlet, and whyte

twpned luke.

3 And they dyd beate the golde into thinne plates, and tut it into wpers to
Worke it in the blewe silke, purple, scarlet, and in the fine whyte with brodered
Worke. N

4 And they made two lydes foz it, to tlose then vp by the two edges.

5 And the broderpng ok the girdle that

Was bpon it, was of the same stuffe, and

after the same worke, of golde, blewe

K „ „„ „„ „ „„ „ „„ 4 „% „„ „„ „ „„ „„ „ 4 „ K K K K A

„ fllke, purple carlet, and twyned whyte sillke, as the Lord tömaunded Moples.

6 And they wronght Onpr stones closed

mn ouches of golde, and graued as sig-

nettes are grauen, with the names of the thyldren of Iscael.
B. And he put them on the shonlders ol the Ephod, that they shoulde be stones fkor a remembraunce of the chitozen of
„ Ilcael, as the Lorde commaunded
MPMoples.
8 And he madethe brestlap of brodered
< Yorke lpke the Worke of the Ephod, cuenok gold, blewe fitke purple, ftariet, and twyned whyte filke,
9 It was foure square: and they made the brestlap double, an hande breadth long, and an hande breadth brode.
Jo And they fylled it with foure rowes of stones. The fir rowe, a Sardius, a
Topazius, and a Smaragdus. cH The setonde rowe, a Kubie, a Saphire, and a Diamonde.

12 In che thirde rowe, a Tyncurius, an

Achates, and an Amethyst.

z In the fourth rowe, à Turcas, an
« Ouyr, and a Jaspis: and they were
0 9 in ouches of golde in their inclo-
0 ers.

14. Aud the twelue stones were grauen as signets, with the names of the chil-

Exodus.

q The .xxxix. Chapter.

Che deckyng of Haron. 2 The Ephod, o2 coueryng of the sboulders. s The Pettorale. or furniture fo2 the brest. 22 The coate. 0 Che Holy plate. 31 Che people offereth the
Lorde all that he commaunded to be done.

The tabernac,

dren Of Pleael, euerp stone with hig‘ nanie, actordyng to the twelue tribes.
15 And they made vpon the brestlap tiwo . fastenyng chaynes of Wetthen workeand pure golde. | ‘
16 And they made two ouches of goive, and two golde ringes: and put the two. ringes in p two corners ok the brestlap.
17 And they put the two chaynes of: golde in the two ringes in the corners of the brestlap. .
18 And the two endes of the two chaynes. they fattened in the two ouches, and put them on the shoulders of the Ephon, « vpon the forefront of it. mS
I9 And they made two ringes of golde, and put them on the two corners of the. brestlap vpon the edge of it which was on the insyde by the Ephod. 0
20 And they made two golden ringes, and put them on the two sydes of the.
Ephod, beneath on the fore syde of it, and ouer agaynst his felowe, aboue bp: on the broderyng of the Ephod. 5
21 And they strayned the brestlap by his ringes vnto the ringes of the Ephod.

S

> With alate of ble we fitke, that it myght.

be bpon the broderyng of the Ephod,
Ethat the brestlap shoulde not be tooled from of the Ephod, as the Lorde tom. maunded Doyles, 0
22 And he made the tunicle vnto the
Ephod of wouen Worke, altogether ol bietbefilke: © | i
23 And there was a hole in the myddest. of pe, as the toller of a partlet, with a bande rounde about the collet, : that it shoulde notrent. J
24. And in the tunicle they made hemmes with ponigranates of blewe filke, purple. scarlet, and whyte twyned filke. f
25 And they made litle belles of pure golde, and put them amongst the pour, granates rounde about vpon the edge. of the tunicle. :
26 A bell and a pomgranate, a bell and d. ponigranate rounde about the hemmes of the tunitle to minister in as the Lord commaunded Doyles, ‘
27 And they made coates of fine whyte silke of wouen wozke, fox Aaron and: his sonnes.

ae com-

jonies.

28 And a mitre of fine whyte fitke, and goodly bonctics oft fine whyte suke, and
.« lpnnen floppes of twyned whyte filke,

29 And a girdle of twyned Whyte like,
„ blew, purple, and scarlet, euenof needle
« Woke, as the Hovde conumaunded
Mopystes.

0 And they made the plate of the holy crownc okkine golde, and wrote vpon it

with grauen worke as lignets are gra-

« uen, Lhe hoh nes of the Lorde.

zi And tyed vnto it alate ofblewWe fitk,to fkasten it an hye vpon the nutre, as the
TLorde commaunded Moyles.

32 Thus was all the worke of the tabernacle (eters) of the tabernacle of the congregation finished: And the children of
Iltael did according to al that the lorde tommaunded Doyles, euen so did they.
33 And they brought the tabernacle vnto
< Moyles Leuen)] the tabernacle and all his furmture, his taches, his boozdes, his barres, his pulers, æ his fockettes,
34 The conerpng of Rammes skynnes
Nredde, and the coueryng of Taxus fskynnes, and the hangyng vaple,
35 The arke of the testimonie, and the baͤrres therof, and the mertie seate,
36 The table and all the veslels hereof,

couereth the tabernacle.

the Lorde spake onto Boyles, fayina :
By, INS N at the first day of thc
8 int O moneth thait

thou set bp the tabernatle, euen the tabernacle ofthe congrega-

N
KY)

* a K „ E al

3 And put therin the arke of the testimonie, and touer the arke with the vaylt: and thou shalt bring in the table, and order it accordyng to the appoyntment therok:
＋ And thou shalt bryng in the candelslicke, and lyght his lampes,
5 And set the incenle aulter of golde be-
< forethearkc okthe teftimonic, and put pebangeng at the doore of the taber-
0 ¢ +
And set the burnt offeryug aulter before the Dooze of the tabernacle leuen of the tabernacle of the congregation.

E „ * R a

The. xl. Chapter.
2 The tabernacle is erected.; 4 A cloude, the ligne of the prelence ol the Lorde

Fxodus. 2 ‘Ts.

and the Herve bread, a

37 | Live pure candlesticke with planes < ¢ therok, enen with the lampes to be pre-- pared, and al the vellels therof, and the oyle for lyght, 5

38 The golden aulter, and the annointeng! ople, and the [weete incenle, and the « hangyng of the tabernacle dooze, j

39 And p brasen aulter with his grediron: of bralse, his barres and all his vessels, « the lauer aud his foote.

40 The curtapnes of the court with his pillers and sockettes, the hangyng to. the court gate and his pynnes and cordes, and all the vessell of the seruice of the tabernacle, euen of the tabernacleof the tongregation. 8

41 The ministryng vestmentes to serue in the holy place, æ the holy vestmentes for Aaron the priest, and his formes ray: | nentes to minister in, in p priestes office:

42 Attordyng to all that the Lorde commaunded Doyles, euen so the chyldren

ok Hlracl made all the worke. ;

43 And Moyles dyd loke vpon all the.
Woke: and beholde, they had done it as the Lorde had commaunded, euen
10 hadthey done it: and Moyses blelled . g

em. _

"AAR A A A

And set the lauer betweene the tabernatle ofthe tongregatiõ and the aulter, and put water therein. ;

3 AndmaketHecourtrounde about, c. hang vp the hangyng at the court gate.

9 And thou that take the annopntyng oyle, and amioynt the tabernacle, and. all that is therin, and halow it with all. the vessels therok: and it shalbe holy.

Io And thou (halt annoynt the aulter ol burnt offeryng and all his veslels, aud sanctifie the aulter: and it shalbe an aulter most holy. ‘

1 And thou shalt allo annoyne the lauer and his foote, and lanctifie it. :

12 And thon that bryng Aaron and his.

sonnes vnto the doore of the tabernaclc. of the congregation, and walhe them with Water.

3 Andthou Malt put vppon Aaron the.

holy vestmentes, and annopnt Pym, K. santtifie hym, that he may mige le me

Ceremonies.

to me inthe priestes office,

C. 1 Aud chon halt bryng his lonnes, and

< clothe them With garnientes,

15 And annoynt Hemas thou diddest an-

nopnt their father, that they may mi nister vnto ine in the priestes office : For their annopntyng shalbe an enerlasting

puesthodd vnto them thoughout all

16 And Moyses dyd attordyng to all that a the Lode tommaunded hym, euen fo

dpd ht. a
17 Thus was the tabernacle reared bp the first day in the first moneth, in the
. “feconde pere. ‘

18 And Mopyses reared bp the tabernacle, and fastened his sockettes, and set

their generations.

) <DF the commvig of
Fechudzen e of Ifracl out

of Egypt.

barres otit, and reared bp his pillers.
19 And spread abrode the tent ouer the kabernacle, and put the coueryng of

the tent an hye abdue it, as the Lorde

„ tommaunded Doyles, - ce Sbettw fc 20 AND he toke the Otestimonie, and put e

vponthe arke.]

21 Andhe brought the arke into the ta-

bernacle, and hanged vp the vaple, and

dc.0suered the arke of the testimonie, as the Lorde commaunded Mopses.

22 And he put the table in the tabernacle of the congregation in the north (poe of the tabernacle Without the vaple,

23 And set the bread in order before the

Torde | cue) as the Lode had com-

maimded Moyses.
24. And he put the candlesticke in the ta-

bernacle of the congregation, ouer a-

gapnst the table towarde the south syde ok the tabernacle, a

25 And (ct bp thelampes before p Lose: asthe Torde conunaunded Moyles,

26 And he put the golden aulter in the

The ende of the feconde booke of Moyles, called in the Hebrue Velleschemoth, and in the
' Latine, Exodus.

Exodus.

30 And he let the lauer betweene the D

pp the boordes therof, and put in the

ef tt in the arke, and set the barres to the
« avke, and put the mertie seate an bye

38 For therloude of the Lord was vpon

tabernacle of the congregation befoz¢ the bayle,

27 Andbuvut lweete incente thereon, as the Lorde commaunded Mopses. ö

28 And he hanged vp the hangyng at the doore of the tabernacle: a

29 And set the burnt offerpng aulter by the entryng in of the tabernacle that is the tabernacle of the congregation, and offered burnt offerynges, and meate offerpnges theron, as the Lorde tommaunded Moyles. f

tabernacle ok the congregation and the Eon. aulter, and powzed water therein, to washe withall.

31 And Moyles, Aaron, and his sonnes, walshed their handes and their feete thereat, 1 J

32 Whenthep went into the tabernacle ol the tongregation, and when they went

to the auiter they wasched them selues,
AS the Lode commaunded Mopses.
And he reared vp the court rounde aboutthe tabernacle and the aulter, and
{et vp an hangyng at the tourt gate :and fo Moyses finished the worke.

34. And the cloude coucred the taber- Naa nacle of the tongregattõ, and the glorie of the Lorde fylled the taͤbernatle.

35 And Moyses toulde not enter into the tabernacle of the congregation, becaule the cloude abode theron, and the glorie of the Lorde fylled the tabernacle.

36 And when the cloude was taken vp from ok the tabernatle, the chuͤdren ot
Ilrael tone their tourneps throughout their armics: a J

37 And WHE thecloude was not taken vp, they iourneped not tyll it was taken vp.

the tabernatle by bap and fire by might, en! th

in the fight of all the boule of Pltael wee thoughout all their arniies, 1
2 Kt

IONICS.

14 Ok Birdes.

Md the Low
: called vnto ee Moyses, and
„ bpdake vnto hun ut of the ta-

Way 5 S bernacte of the

r

Ikacoman of you bring a satrifice vnto the Lorde, pe chall bryng pour sacrifice from among thefe cattell, euen krõ among the beefes andthe @ sheepe.

Ik his sacrifice be a burnt offeryng of beefes, let hym offer a male without blemishe, and bryng hym of his owne n“ boluntarie wyll, vnto the doore of the
, kaäbernacle of the congregation before
. the Lorde.

A And he shall put his © hande vpon the head of the burnt facvifice, and it

, tonement.

mio) And he shal kill the bullocke before the

oe Tord: And the priestes Aarons sonnes

hall bryng the blood, and sprinnkle it ser, kTounde about vpon the aniter that is phy the doore of the tabernacle of the

« COlgregation,

And then shall he flay the burnt offe-

. kyng, and hewe hym in peeces.

. 7 And the sonnes of Aaron the prick
« {hall put fire vpon the aulter, and put
Wood vpon the fire.

And the priestes Aarons sonnes shall lay the partes, euen the head and the fat, bpon the wood that is on the fyre in

the aulter.
But the inwardes and the legges

§ ag " 0
A might
Pte an 9

Leuiticus.

meee let ‘a congregation ,
1 Sa) 58 WA LH] Speake vn-
SS a the children

of Jlcael, € thou shalt fap vnto them:

hen: shalbe accepted for hym to be his at-

thereok chall he © wathe in water,

— . 7˙ —ñ— — ——

Ill 10

25 The chirde booke of Moyses, called

in the Hebrue¶ Vaicrab, andd in the Latine Leuiticus

The first Chapter.

2 The oder ok burnt offerpngeg. 10 Ok Sheepe or Goates.

æthe priest shall burne all in the aulter, that they may be a burnt laerifice anof-- feryng made by fire for a sweete odour vnto the Lorde. .
10 And ik his satrifite be of flockes namely: of the sheepe or goates, let hym bryng
& male without blemishe for a brent: offerpng: 5
1 And let hym byl it on the north foe, of the aulter, before the Lorde: And the priestes Aarons sonnes, han sprinckle the blood round about vpon the aulter.
Iz And he shall cut it into his peeces, euen.
With his head and his fat:and the priekt . fhall put them vpon the wood that lyeth vpon the fire in the aufer. *

I; But he shall wache the inwardes and

the legges witch water, and the priest. hall brpng altogether, and burne it vpon the aulter fo2 a burnt offeryng, an oblation made by fire for a sweete sauour vuto the Lode, ;

14. If the burnt offeryng for the facrifice . of tise Lode be of fowles, he shall being < his lacrifite of turtle doues, or of thes | ponngpigeons. i

15 And the prick hall bryng it vnto the. D. „ auiter, aud wryng the necke a sunder . eve voir: of it, and burne it on the aulter: but the «vector vn.

à naile

blood therok shalbe wroung out vpon e inser the {poe of the auuter. ;
16 And he shall plucke away his croppe . with his fethers, and cast them belpoe. the aulter on the east part, in the place of alches. :

17 And he shall beeake the wynges of it,

but plucke them not asunder: And the prielt shal burne it vpon the auiter,cuen « bpon the wood that is bpon the fire, that it may be a burnt offervng, an oblation made by fire for a siweete lauour. vnto the Lorde.

The

The. ij. Chapter. 5 *

che order of meate offerpnges. 4 Ok bread baken. 11 Chere shalbe no leuen in anpofferyng. 1; Al meatẽ offerpnges mut be seasoned with fate.

Sacrifices. ze ho soule that will offer
A 8 N ey à meate offeryng vnto
. —S< lithe Lowe his offering

n ecaufe it dot!) remapne of that which

~ „„ Af aA A N KR RFR RF R T RHR „ „

¢
C

mas burnt in ¢ the honour of
God, and ther

fore tpahe

«

Ap) | Wee chalbe of fine flowze: and He Mail poure oyle
8 DY ppon it, and put fran: kenlente theron:
And Mhal bring it vnto Aarons sonnes the priestes: And he shall take therout his handkull of the flowze, ¢ of the opie with all the frankenlence, and the priest fail burne it for a memioziall of hym vpon the aulter to be an offerpng made by five for a fivecte fauour vnto the
Torde. f 1 :
And the remnaimt of the meate offeryng Mhalbe Aarons and his sonnes, a thyng molt holy of the satrikices of the Lorde, made by fire. —
4 Il thou bryng also a meate offeryng that is baken in the ouen, let it be an vn-

but o ieh: leatiened cake of fine flowze mpngled

lp, that tg, the priesteg.

«

With ople, or an vnleauened Wafer annoynted with oyle.

5 Ik thy meate offeryng be baken in

the frying pan, it shalbe of vnleauened klowre mpugled with ople.

6 And thou (halt part it in pecees, and powre oyle thereon: that it may bea nieate offeryng. a

7 And pkthy nate offeryng be a thyng broyled bpon the grediron, let it be of

- lobe myngled with opte.

8 And chou shalt bryng the meate offeryng that is made ofthele thinges buto the lord, x Chait deliuer it vnto the priest, that he map offer it vpon the aulter.

¢ The ij. Chapter.
Che order ol peace oferpnges, s Ol Sheepe. „Ok Lambes. 12 DE Goates.

peace offeryng, and he take it from among
Bisoithe droues, whether it
Abe a male o2 feniale, he
N emiche before the Lorde. in

2 And put his hande vpon the head of his offeryng, and kyll it at the doore of the tabernacie of the congregation: And

Leulticus.

Sacr if

9 And the priest shall take from the. meate offervug a memozlall therof and. shall burne it vpon the aulter: that it may be a burnt offeryng for a sweete. fanour vnto the Lode, ‘

Io And that Which is left of the meate' offeryng, shalbe Aarons € his fonnes:.
It is a thyng moste holye of the offetynges of the Lorde made by fire.

It All the meate offerynges which pe har: bryng buto the Lorde, thatbe made.
Without leauen: Foz pe shall neither: burne leauen no bony in any offering. Om of the Lorde made by fire. ta

12 In the oblation of the first Fruites yest:
Malt offer them vnto the Logne : but. sr they shall not be burnt vpon the aniter im for à {ivecte saudur. ente

13 All the meate offerpnges alfo halt Fin thou season with falt neither shalt thou: maxis suffer the fait of the couenaunt of thy.
God to be lackyng from thy meate olfe- 9 ryng: but vpon all thyne offerynges. thou shalt bryng “fait, (On

14. And pkthou offer a meate oferpng of an the first friutes vnto the Lorde, thou
{halt offer for the meate offeryng of thy a first fruites, eares of corne dryed by the. a fire (cuen) beaten wheate, of full cares, 2

15. And thou Malt put ople vpon it, and lap trankenfence theron: that it may be 2%
à meate offeryng. 1

16 And tht priest (hall burne part or the ures beaten cozne, and part of that aple Wit) a al the franckensence, for a remébzaunce:“ ; and it chalbe a sacrifice puto the Lorde made by fire,

X— —Kx ̃ ͤ»UP— K „

Aarons sonnes the priestes Chal fprinkle. the blood vpon the aulter round about.
And he (halt offer somewhat of the. peace offeryng, to be a sacrifice made by five vnto the Torde: euen the kat chat. -.0 coucreth the inwardes, and all the fat: that is vpon the inwardes: .
4 Andthe two kioneps and the fat that. is onthem, and vpon the flankes, the.
Ball with the luer Chali he cave awarwith the kidneyͤs. f
~~ 5 And

Non the aulter, with the burnt latri-

kite which is vpon the wood that is on

the fire, to bea burnt satrifice made by gz, fie for à sweete sauour vnto the Lod,
6 Fl he bryng a peace offeryng vnto the

Lorde from of the flocke, let hym offer

male or female, but without blenushe.

7 And! yf he offer a Lambe for his satri-

ice, he shall bryng it before the Lorde,

8 Amd put his hand vpon his offeringes

head, and kyll it before the doore of the tabernacle of the congregation: and
Aarons sonnes Kall sprinkle the blood thevof rounde about the aulter.

9 Aud of the peace offeryng let hyn bryng a facrifice made by fire vnto the
J. orde, the fat thereok, and the runipe altogether, which they Mall take of harde by the backe bone: and the fat that touereth the in wardes, and all the fat that is bpon the inwardes,

o And the tivo kidneys, and the fat that

is vponthem, and vponthe flankes, and

the kall that is vpon the liner Mall he take away With the kidneps.

‘
é
‘
‘
¢
¢

¢ c
C4

¢ c

5 9) (hail inne though is?
~ Wee 2 | nopauncee in any of the tommaundementes of the Low which trarie to any ofthe:

enn: 3 As yk the priest that is annoynted, do der inne accordyng to the fine of the peoae. ple let hymbryng for his sinne which he eur. hath sinned, a poung bullocke without
. kenne v the Lorde for à sinne of lun s ng.

vnto the doore of the tabernacle of the congregation before the Lord, and Mail put his hand vpon the poung bullockes head, and kill the young bullocke before
N the Love,
Mit. 5 And the priest that is annoynted“ shall take of the voung bullockes blood, and bepng it into the tabernacle of the con-
Aregation. : :

a X fk ⁊l UR

Ss. Leulticus.

5 And Aarons sonnes chall burne them uu And the prick chall burne them vpon

¢ The. ij. Chapter.

Che olferyng made foz sinnes done of ignoraunce, 1 for the whole congregation, 22 for the ruler.

ought not to be done, but shall do con-

oe, 4 And he chall bryng the poung bullocke

Pan.

the aulter, to be the foode of alacrifices made by fluc tuto the Lode. 4 * :

12 Ak his offeryng bea Goate, be Mall bryngit before the Lorde, ‘

13 And put his haude vpon the bead of ‘

it, and kyll it before the tabernacle of the

kongregation: and the sonnes of Aaron hall spriukle the blood therok vpon the aulter rounde about.

14. And he shall bring therok his offering, euen a facvifice made by fire vnto the!
Lord, the fat that couereth p inwardes, t all the fat that is vpon the inwardes.

15 And the two kidneys, and the fat that is vponthem, and vpon theflankes, and. 0 the kall bpon the liuer thall he take. away with the kidneys. =

16 And the priest Mati burue them vponthe aulter, for the foode of the latritice made by fire for a sweete lauour: All. the fat is the Lordes. ¢

17 Let it be aperpetuall statute for your eye generations theoughout your dwel- ene lynges, d ve eate neither fat noz blood. Genera.

' oh

R RM N N NM A

6 And the priest shall dippe his finger in the blood, and sprinckle therok seuen tymes belore the Lorde, euen before the vayle of the sancttuarie. ce

7 Aud the prick Matt put foe of the. blood before the Lord, vpon the hornes. of the aulter of sweete intence, which is. in the tabernacle of the congregation, ¢ «
{hall powre all the blood of the young bullocke vnto the bottome of the aulter of burnt offeryng, which is at the. doore of the tabernacle of the congregation. 0

3 And he shall take away all the fat of. the bullocke for the sinme offeryng, the. C fat that couereth the inwardes, aud all. the fat that is about the inwardes,

9 And the two kidneyes, and the fat. that is vponthem, ¢ vpon the flanckes,

andthe kall vpon the luer shall he take away with the kidneys, 0

Io Asit was taken awap in the bullocke d of the peace offeringes: and let the priest-

burne them vpon the aulter of burnt.

offeryng. f 0 N

II Wütthe umme okthepoungbulammg, Exo.xxix.c

Ceremonies.

bea it vnto

and aul his fleshe, with his head and lis legges, with his inwardes e his doung,
[ Wall he beare out

12 And cary the whole bullocke altogether out of the hoast vnto a cleane plate, eueu where the alshes are powred out, t burne hym there on wood in the fire: euen by the place where the alshes are caft out, shall he be burnt.

3 HEtive whole congregation of Ilrael sinne though ignoraunte, e the thing be hyo from the eyes of the multitude, and

a nan

the cõßmaundementes of p Lordewhich shoulde not be done, and haue offended:

14. nabhé the linne which they haut finned is knowen, the congregatio shal bring a poung bullocke for the linne, c bring him befoze 5 tabernacle of the congregation,

15 And the elders of the multitude chall put their handes vpon the head of the bullocke before the Lorde: And the bullocke shalbe flapne besore the Hod.

16 And the priest that is annoynted, (hail bryng of the bullockes blood into the tabernacle of the tongregation.

17 And the priest shall dippe his finger in che blood, and sprinckle it seuen tymes before the Lorde, euen before the vayle.

Ds Aud chall put ok the blood vpon the
Hhornes ofthe aulter, which is before the

+ Borde in the tabernacle ok the congre-

gation, and fhall powre all the blood

vnto the bottome ok the aulter of burnt offeryng, which is before the Doo of the tabernacle of the congregation.

Aud he shall take his fat from hyn, aud burnett vpon the aulter,

20 And shall do with this bullocke as he

yd with the bullocke forsinne, euen fo chall he do with this: And the prick shal make anattonement for then, and it shalbe forgeuen them.

21 And he shall bryng this bullocke without the hoatt, e burne hum as he burned the first bullocke: Forit is an oblation

fkorthe sume ok the congregation.

22 When a Lorde sinneth, and cOmitteth

through ignoraste any of these thynges

Which the Lorde his God hath koz-

bidden to be done in his conmaunde-

© mlentes, and hath offended:

mW „ „ „ „ „ „ K „„ „„ HF „ A

„ „ „ „ Fan „ anna &

¢

¢
¢
¢
¢
€
¢
¢
¢

© Othe ve 23 And ik his sinne be, shewed vnto hym

which he hath done, he Halil bryng his offeryng, euen] an hee goate Without blemifhe,

Leulticus.

haue done somewhat agaynst any of

24 And lay his hande vpon ö head o the

hee goate, and kyil it in the plate where the burnt offeryng is bled to be kylled pefoze b Lorde: For it is a sinc offering.
25 And let the priest take ofp blood of the. sinne offeryng with) his finger, patie. vpon the hornes of the burnt offerpng aulter, and powze his blood vnto the ‘ bottome of the burnt olferyng aulter,
26 And burne all his fat vpon p aulter as. p kat of the peace offeringes: And p priest chal make an attonement for him as töcerning his sinne, it shalbe forgeuẽ him.
27 If one of the common people of the. lande sinne through tqnozaunce, ⁊ commit any of the thynges which the Loy‘ - hath korbidden in his cOmaundementes: to be done, and so hath trespassed:
28 If his fine which he Hath finned: come to his knowledge, he Mall bryng for his offeryng a Chee goate from a‘ e flockes without blemishe for. his fitne which he hath sinned, :
29 And lay his hande vpon the head of: the sinne offerpng, and lay the func: fering in the place of burnt offerpuges. zo And the priest Matt take of the blood L therof with his finger, and put it pou: the hornes ofthe burntofferpng aulter, c powre all the blood vnto the bottom. of the aulter, ; zi And hall take away all his fat, as the fat of the peace offerpng is taken. away: And the priest chal burne it vpon. the aulter, that it may be a sweete lanour vnto the Lorde, and the priest hat: make an attonement foz hy, and it. shalbe forgeuen hym. 0
3 And pf he bryng a sheepe for a sinne . offeryng, he chall bryng a female without blenuche, f
33 And lay his hande vpon the head ol, the linne olferyng, and slea it for a sinne. offering in the plate where they kil the. burnt offeryng. fe
34 And the prielt chal take of the bloodol thelnne olferyng with his finger x put. it vpon the homes of the burnt offering aulter, and shall powre the blood there; ot vnto the bottome ok the aulter.
35 »And he (hall take albap all the fat le therol, as the kat of p sheepe of the pear’,
Offering is wont to be taken away: And. the prielt chall burne it vpon the aultelthat it may be the Lordes burnt faci fice, and the prielt shall make an atton’ | ment for his sinne that he hath commit-, ted, and it shalbe forgeuen hym. 7h x

gation of an othe,

Fa soulc sinne, and

heare the vopte of
Zon Abeaving aud tsa witvi tiefe whether hehath
| 1S scene or knowen of tt, if he do not btter it, he

{yall beare his sinne.

Either ik a soule touche any vncleane thyng, whether it be the tarion of an vntleane beat, or a carion of vncleane cattell, ora tarion of vncleane crecping thynges, and is not Ware of it: beholde, he is vntleane, and hath offended.

Either ik he touche any vncleannesse of man, whatsoeuer vncleannesse it be that a man ts wont to be defiled withall, and is not ware of it, and tommeth
„. to ß knowledge okit, he hath trespalsed.

4. Either it a soule weare, and prondunteth with his lippes to do euill or to do good, whatsoeuer it be that aman (hall pronouute with an othe, and the thyng be hyd from hym, and commicth to the knowledge of it, and hath offended in one ok these:

thinges, he shall confeffe that he bath
‘finned in that thyng. ö

6 Therkore shall he bryng his ie
« Offering vnto the Looe, kor his sinne whiche he bath finned, a female from the flocke, alambe o2 a shee goate, for a linne offering: And the priest shal make
0 i: attonement for hym concerning his sinne.

And ik he be not able to bryng a sheepe, he chall bryng for his trespalse whiche he hath sinned, two turtle doues, or two poung pigeons vnto the Lorde: one for a sinne offering, e the other lor a burnt bllering.

8 And he chall bryng them vnto 5 priest, which shall offer the sinne offering first, and wryngthe necke a sunder of it, but plucke it not cleane of. -
And he Hall sprinckle of the blood of the sinne offering vpon the five of the
LAulter, and the rest of the blood shall he bo be by the bottome of the aulter:for ltisasinne offering.

10 And Ye shall offer the seconde fo2 a
« burnt offering, as the maner is: and fo shall the priest mate an attonement for

Leulticus.
¢ The. vj. Chapter.

Ok othes, Che clenting of hym that toucheth oncleane thynges.
15 Ind ok linne done by ignoraunce.

a 5 When he hath finned in one of these

6 The pur 5 c

hym kor the sinne whiche he hath fine ned, and it Malbe forgeuen l 4 .

1 And ikhe be not able to bryng two turfie doues, or two poung pigeons, then he that hath siuned shall bryng for his. offering the tenth part of an Epha of fine floure for a sinne offering: but put none oyle thereto, neither put any frankenlente theron:for it is asinne offering.

12 Then shall he bryng it to the prietk, . and the priest shall take his handfull of: it for à remembraunce thereof, Eburne< it vpon the aulter, to bea sacrifice for the
Lod made by fire: for it is à sinne ollering. 0

B And the priest Mall make an attonement fo hym as tonchyng his sinne that he hath finned in one of these, and. it shalbe forgeuen hym: And the rem-
3 — chalbe the priestes, as & meate offer

ing. :
14. And the Torde spake vnto Moples, ©

saying: ;
15 If a soule trespasse and sinne thozowe . ignoraunce in thinges that are tonsecrated vnto the Lorde, let hymm bryng foz « his trespalse vnto the Lord, a Kamme. without blemishe out of the klockes, bar

lued in money at two ficles, after * the. Erol

ficle of the sauttuarie, that it may be fo2 «

à trespasse offering. f
16 And he shall make amendes foz the. chath done in the holy.

ning his ignoraunce, wherein he crved, « and was uot Ware, and it chalbe forge-

uen hym. ö :
19 015 is a trespasse offering, fo the.

trespalle ne agaiust the Lorde. Ce j 2

Th

cdg
Ife

¢ to

Ceremonies.

Exo.xxix 8

Ex. xx vii. g

of Haron and his sonnes.

e MD 1
NV bnto Moyles, saying.
5 INS If a soule sume and
„ eetrespasse agaynst the

to kepe, or that was put into his hands,

or doth violent robberie or wrong vnto

his neyghbour, N
Or ikhe haue founde that which was

{off and denieth it, and lweareth falsely

vpon whatsoeuer thing it be that a man

doth, and sinneth therem: |

4 HE he haue lo finned and trespassed, he shall restore agayne that he toke violently away, or the wrong which he did, or that whiche was deltuered byin to kepe, or the lost thyng which he founde:

5 And all that about whiche he hath sworne falselp, he Mall restore it agayne in the whole summe, and shall adde the fifth part moze thereto, and geue it vnto him to whom it appertayneth, the same day that he offereth for his trespasse.

6 And let him bryng for his trespasse vn-

to the Lode a Kamnie without ble-

« mifhcout ofthe flocke, that is esteemed

« Worth a trespasse offering vnto p priesi.

5 And the pnest shall make an attone-

ment for hym before the Lorde, and it

shalbe forgeuen hym Whatloeuer thing tit be that he hath done and trespassed therein.

8 And the Tordt spake vnto Moyles,

. faying:

9 Connnannde Aaron and his fonnes,

saping: (This is the lawe of the burnt

offering. The burnt offering shalbe vpon the harth of the aulter all nyght, vnto the moruyng, and the fire (atthe kyndled on the aulter.)

Io And the priest hall put on his linnen garment, and his linnen breeches vpon his fleshe, aud take away the alshes vppon the eee the fire confumed the burnt facvitice in the aulter, and he shall put them belide the aulter,

1 And put of his rapment, and put on other and tarry the althes out without

the hoalst vnto a cleane plate.

I The fire vpon the aulter chall burne

* a M A A &

Ww

e e ee ee e 6 8 HR 4 A ef AS & 6

«6
N

€

Leuiticus.

Che offering fo2 linnes whiche are done wyllyngly. offeringes. iz The fire mud abyde euermore vpon the aulter.

Crema

9 Che lawe ofthe burnt 0
20 The offering < styll, neuer be put out: Wut the pret shall laye wood on it euery day in the. , morning, and put the burnt facvifice vp- 20 ponit, and he shall burne theron the fat. an of the peace offeringes. 108

4 fume, fy

3 © Lie fire hall euer burne vpon the e
2 tt :

before the Lord, euen before the aulter: an

a memoriall of it vnto the Lorde. a
16 And ot the rest therot, Hall Aaron andhis sonnes eate: vnleauened Mall it be. eaten in the holy place, euen in the court: of the tabernacle of the congregation: they shall eate it. .
17. It Hall not be baken with leauen: J.
Hane geuen it vnto them for their portt-, on of my sacrifices made by fire: It is most holy, as is the sinne offering, and. the trespasse offering. 0
13 All the males among the chyldren of.
Aaron (hall cate ofit: It shalbe a ta. tute for euer in pour generations concer ning the facvifice of the Lorde made by. fire: let euery one that toucheth it, be.

holy. f

19 1 00 the Lorde spake vnto Moyles, ping: 0

20 This is the offering of Aaron, and ol. his lonnes, whiche they shall offer buts the Lord in the day when he is annoy. ted: The tenth park ok an Epha af. floure fo2 a meate offering perpetual, halle of it in the mogning, and halle, therof at npg ht. ‘
21 In the krping panne it chalbe made with ople, and When it is kryed, Hou, chalt bryng it in: and the banken pects. ofthe meate offeringes shalt thou offer. fora sweete sauour bnto the Looe.
22 And the priest of his lonnes thatis a. nopnted in his steede, hall offer it: 7

is the Lordes ogdinaunce for euer, °° halbe burnt altogether. ape!
Fo euery meate offering that ts m fot

Ss

Ces.

for the priest, halbe burnt altogether, and chall not be eaten.

24. And the Lorde spake vnto Moyles,
« faping:

25 Speake vnto Aaron, and vnto his sonnes, and say, This is the lawe of the
{inne offering : In the place where the burnt offering is kylled, shall the sinne offering be kylled before the Lorde, for it is most holy. ö eetitd. . 26 The priest that offereth it, Mall cate tt: Inthe holp plate that it be eaten, cueũ in the tourt ofthe tabernatle of the

congregation. |
27 Whaͤtlsoeuer shall touche the ficthe

a a an a

¢
¢
¢ c
¢
¢
¢
¢
¢

We Shewyple this is the
N 6 lave of the trespasle they kyll the burnt of:

offering: it is motte

Kkering, chall they byl!

the trespasse offering also, € the blood

thereof shall he sprinckle rounde about bpon the aulter.

3 All the fat thereof hall he offer, the rumpe, and the fat that couereth the inwardes,

4 And the two kydneys and the fat that is on them, and vpon the flankes, and the kall that is on the liner Malt thou take away with the kydneys.

5 Andthe priest shallburne them vpon

the aulter, to bea sacrifice made by fire

« bnto the Lorde: for it is a trespasse
: offering,

All the males among the priestes Malt

kate thereot: it shalbe eaten in the holy

plate, for it is most holy.

5.7 As the sinne offering is, fo is the trel-

pate offering, one law feructh for both: that wherwith the priest shall make attonement, chalbe his.

8 And the prick that offereth any mans

q burnt offering, Mall haue the fapnne of

b burnt offering whiche he hath offred.

„Andau the meate offering that is ba-

d ken in the buen, and that is drelled in

the panne, and in the fring panne shal-

be the prieltes that otkereth it.

holy.
Inthe place where

R M M M ® M A&A K M R K K

I |

J The. vii. Chapter.

1 Trespasse oferpriges. Sinne olkerpnges. n DE peace offerprges, z Che lat and the blood may not be eaten.

XVI. thereof, chalbe holy: and when there droppeth of the blood therok vpon rink garment, thou shalt wache that wyeron it droppeth, in the holy place. ‘

28 Wut the carthen pot that it is sodden Leu in, halbe broken: And ykit be sodden in a brasen pot, it halbe scoured, x renled ee 0

29 the males among the priestes (hat « cate thevof, for it is most holy, a

30 And no finne offeryng Whole blood! is brought into the tabernacte of the. congregation to reconcile withall in the
Holy place, shalbe eaten: but halbe burnt in the fire.

«„ a 6 n N „

lo And euery meate offering that is nuingled with ople, and that is drye, thai‘ pertayne bnto all the sonnes of Aaron, and one shall haue as muche as ano-

ther.

1 This is the law of the peace offering, ü whiche he shall offer vnto the Lorde.

12 If he offer it to geue thankes, he chall . bryng vnto his thanke offering vnlea- tannery to uened cakes mingled withoyle, and vn- Hanes, tye leauened wakers annoynted With oyle, „d ern, and cakes mingled with ople of fine ahl floure fryed. e

3 He (hall bryng his offering, with cakes denne dnl of vnleauend bread fo2 his peace offe- nchen le ringes, to geue thankes: CE baz

14 And ol all the sacrifice he shall offer one for an heaue offering vnto the
Lorde, and it shalbe the priestes that. sprinckled the blood of the peace olfe-

ringes. —
15 And the fleche of his peace offeringes forthankesgeuing, chalbe cate the fante © day that it is offred: And let hym leaue. nothyng of it vntul the miorowe. ‘
16 But il the offering of his sacrifite be a vowe, or of his owne free wyll. it shalbe eaten the same day that he offereth his. satrifice: and if ought remayne vntill. the moore, it maybe eaten. ‘
17 But às muche of the offered flethe as remapneth vnto the thirde dap, shalbe burnt with fire. * ;
18 Andifany of the ficth of his peace olkeringes be eaten in the thirde day, then
Ju Malls .

Ceremonies.

Exo.xxix 8

ol Haron and his sonnes.

“a! e RE cs Horne fpae
Yo Re 10 2 3 8
2 1 N J If a soule sume and e etrespasse agapnst the e Lodde, and dente vnto
[eA his neyghbour that which was taken hin to kepe, or that was put into his hands,
02 doth violent robberie or Wrong vnto his neyghbour,
3 Drr ik he haue founde that which was lost, and denieth it, and lweareth falfely ppon whatsoeuer thingit be that a man doth, and sinneth therein:
4. Ik he haue so finned and trespassed,
© He Mail restore agayne that he toke violeutly away, or the wong which he did, dz that whiche was deltuered hym to
Kepe, or the lost thyng which he founde:
5 And all that about whiche he hath fsworne falsely, he shall restore it agayne ithe whole fumme, and shall adde the fllilch part more thereto, and geue it vnto him to whom it appertapneth, the fame dap that he offereth for his trespasse.
And let hun bryng for his trespalle vnto the Torde a Kamme without blemie out of the flocke, that is esteemed
Worth a trespasse offering vnto 5 priesi.
5 And the priest (hall make an attone-
B. ment for hym before the Lorde, and it shalbe forgeuen hym Whatsoeuer thing it be that he hath done and trespalled therein.
8 ‘ And the Lozde spake vnto Moyfes,
„ laping:
9 Commannde Aaron and his lonnes, saping: (This is the lawe of the burnt
‘ offering. * The burnt offering shalbe ppon the harth ofthe aulter all nyght,
Vvnto the mornyng, and the fire shall be

kyndled on the aulter.)

Ex g. Io And the priest shall put on his linnen

garient, and his linnen breeches vpon his fleshe, and take away the alshes vppon the whiche the fire consumed the burnt sacrttice in the aulter, and be that put them belide the aulter,

n And put ok his rayment, and put on
« Other and carry the asches out without the hoast vnto à cleane plate.

12 The lire vpon the aulter Hail burne

Leuiticus.

¢ The.vj. Chapter.

Che offering for finnes whlche are done wyllpngly. »The lawe ofthe burnt offeringes. j Che fire mult abyde euermore vpon the aulter. r0 Che oltering

¢

«
« c

styll, e neuer be put out: Wut the pret
{halliaye wood on it euery day in the. moruing, and put the burnt facvifice vp- 2"

pont, and he hal burne theron the fat. e

of the peace offeringes. cet
B The fire shall euer burne vpon the des

aulter, and neuer go out. e,
14 This is the larbe of the meate offt ving, which Aarons sonnes shall bryng ans before the Hod, euen before the aulter:- d
1; And one okthem shalltake his hand- Ja. full of the floure of the meate offering, and of the oyle, and al the franckenfence: whiche is vpon the nieate offering, and. shall burne it vnto a remembraunte vppon the aulter for a sweete sauour, even: a memoriall of it vnto the Lorde. 0
16 Andof the rest therot, atl Aaron and: his sonnes cate: vnleauened shall it be. taten in the holy place, even in the court of the tabernacle of the congregation‘ they shall cate it. 0
17, It shall not be baken with leauen: J.
Hane geuen it vnto them fo2 their portion of my facvifices made by fire: It is. most holy, as is the sinne offering, and. the trespasse offering. ‘
18 All the males among the chyldren of
Aaron (hall cate ofit: It shalbe a statute for euer in your generations toncerning the satrifite of the Lorde made by. fire: let euery one that toucheth it, be.

holy.
19 And the Loge spake vnto Mopses, saying:

20 This is the offering of Aaron, and ol.

his sonnes, whiche they Mall offer vate: the Lord in the day when he is annoynted: The tenth part of an Epha ok. floure foz a meate offering perpetual, halfe of it in the morning, and halte therof at nyght. ‘
21. In the frping panne it chalbe made with oyle, and whenit is kryed, thou shalt bryng it in: and the baken pects. ofthe meate offeringes chalt thou offer fora sweete fanour vnto the Lorde.
22 And the prict of his sonnes, that is au nopnted in his steede, Halt offer it: It. is the Tordes ozdiaunte foz euer, it halve burnt altogether, j
23 Forcucry meate offering that is mare.

S

Leulticus. for the priest, shalbe burnt altogether, agand shall not be eaten.

24 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses,

ing:

4 vnto Aaron, and vnto his sonnes, and say, This is the lawe of the fine offering: In the place Where the burnt offering is kylled, shall the {inne offering be kylled before the Lorde, for it is most Holy. **

26 Tht priest that offereth it, call cate

it: In the holy plate shall it be eaten,

eueñ in the court of the tabernacle of the

thercof, shalbe holy: and when there

droppeth of the blood therof vpon any‘ garnient, thou shalt wache that wherou it droppeth, in the holy plate. ‘

28 Wut the carthen pot that it is sodden Leu. in, halbe broken: And ykit be sodden m.
à brasen pot, it shalbe scoured, e rensed in the water. ‘

29 All the males among the priestes hat « eate therot, for it is most holy. 4

30 Aud no finne offeryng whole blood! is brought into the tabernacle of the. congregation to reconcile withall in the

an

congregation. . holy place, chalbe eaten: but chalbe
27 Whatsocuer shall touche the Aethe burnt in the fire. 5

¢ The. vii. Chapter. <

1 Trespasle oferpriges. Sinne offerpnges. n Ok peace offerpuges. ;

z The fat and the blood map not be eaten. 5

I Ike wyle this is the 10 And euery meate offering that is min-

X *
„ „ „K „ a M A K „ „4 K „ „ „ 4 «„ na a

sawe ok the trespalse
S offering: it is moste hol.

gled with ople, and that is drye, shall pertayne vnto all the sonnes of Aaron, and one (hall haue as muche as ano-

ther. :

I This is the law ofthe peace offering, | whiche he Hall offer bnto the Torde.

12 If he offer it to geue thankes, he chall . bryng vnto his thanke offering vnlea- egen. uened cakes mingled withoyle, and vn- sims, hs leauened wakers annoynted with oyle, e n, a eee e with ople of fine < tesonmt

dure fryed. € an confeficd |

B He (hall bryng his offering, with cakes ede wiof vnleauend bread for his peace offe- chm rem

Ose Inthe place where

= < they kyll the burnt of:

———— fering, shall they kyll

the trespasse offering also, € the blood

thereof Mall he sprinckle rounde about bpon the aulter.

3 Allthe fat thereof shall he offer, the rumpe, and the fat that couereth the inwardes,

A And the two kydneys, and the fat that

« (Wonthent, and vpon the flankes, and

M R KXR „„ K M M & 9

take away with the kydneys.

5 Andthe priest shallburne them vpon the aulter, to be a satrifice made by fire bute the Lorde: for it is a trespallt

f offering.

All the males among the priestes Mall

kate thereof: it shalbe eaten in the holy

place, for it is most holy.

7 Als the fine offering ts, fo is the trel-

halle offering one law serueth fo? both:

that wherwith the pelt (halt make at-

„ tonement, chalbe his.

. And the priest that offereth any maus

a burnt offering, (hall haue the skynne of

v burnt offering whiche he hath offred.

Andau the meate offering that is ba-

f n the duen, and that is drelled in

; Poe pane, aud inthe frying panne. thal

be the prieltes that offereti it.

XR W „ „

the kall that is on the liner shalt thou

ringes, to geue thankes: : C i
14 Andof all the sacrikite he shall offer onc for an heaue offering vnto the
Lorde, and it shalbe the priestes that. sprinckled the blood of the peace olferinges. . =
15 And the fleshe of his peace offeringes for thankes geuing, shalbe caté the fanie ’
Day that it is offred: And let hym leaue nothyng of it vntill the morowe. <
16 But if the offering of his facrifice be a. bowe, or of his owne free wyll, it shalbe eaten the fame day that he olfereth his. satrifice: and if ought remayne until. the morowe, it may be eaten. <
7 Wut as muche of the offered flethe as remayneth vnto the thirde day, chalbe burnt with fire. i
18 And if any of the fleth of his peace offeringes be eaten in the thirde dap, then
FZ it Mhalt<

Ceremonies.

je

euiticus.

„ fshall he that offereth it obtayne no fa 29 Speake vnto the chyldren of Ffraq :

Leuit. iii. e.

Gen ix. a.

Leut): vii. e and. xix.f.
Dcut xi. b.

uour, neither shall it be reckened vnto

him, but shalbe an abhonination: ther:

© fore the soule that eateth of it, shal beare his sinne.

19 And the fleshe that toucheth any vn-

« deane thing, shal not be eaten, but burnt

With fire: and okthis fiethe all that be

cleane, shall cate therot.

20 But ik any loule cate of the fleshe of the peate offering that pertayneth vnto the Lord, hauing his bnelenneffe vpon hum: the fame soule shall be cut of from among his people.

21 Pozreouer, the soule that doth touche any bneleane thyng, that is of the vntleannesse of man, or of any vncleane beast, or anp abhonnnation that is vntleane, and then eate of the fleshe of the peace offering whiche pertayneth vnto the Lorde:that soule shal be cut of from his people.

saying: .

23 Speake nto the thyldren of Jlrael, and sap: Pe shall eate no maner fat of beeues, ot sheepe, and ok goates.

24. Meuerthelater, the fat of the beast that dyeth alone, and the fat of that which is torne with Wilde beastes, shal-

be occupied in any maner of ble: but ye

shall in no wyse eate ok it.

For Whofoencr cateth the fat of the beast, ol which men bie to bryng an offering made by fire vnto the Lorde: that soule that eateth it, shall be cut of from his people.

Moreoner, pe* shall cate no maner of blood, whether it be of foule or of beast, in any pour dwellynges. ü

«
€ c

¢
“

« c
C
«

«
€

«
€

«
€

nels

a aaa a

** 27 Whatsoeuer soule it be that eateth any

maner of blood, the fame soule shall be tut ol from his people.

E. 3 And the Lode talked with Moyses, fsaping: °

IND he Lorde spake onto Mopses, saping:
Take Aaron and his sonnes with hym, and the vestures, and the annoynting ople, and a bullocke for afinne of:

fering, and two Nammes, and a balket

22 And the Torde spake vnto Moples,

¢ The. vii. Chapter.
6 The avittopntyng of Jaron and his fonnes,

and lay: He that bringeth his peace ne, ryng buto the Lorde, let hyn bapng 75 gilt vnto the Tordol his peace offering:

30 Lt his owne handes bryng the offeringes of the Lorde made by fire: euen the kat with the brett hal he bryng, that. the brest may be waued for awaue offfring before the Horde. N

1 Andthe priest Halt burne the fat vpon the aulter, and the brest halbe Aarons‘ and his sonnes. :

32 And the ryght Moulder shall ye gene: bnto the prielt for an heaue offerpng of. pour peace offerpnges. :

33 The same that offereth the blood of. the peace offeringes and the fat among the sonnes of Aaron, shall haue the right shoulder for his part: f

34. For the“ waue brest and the heaue wart shoulder haue J taken of the chyldren

ol Ilrael, euẽ of their peace offeringes, and haue genen them vnto Aaron the. priest c vnto his formes, by a statute for. euer fro among the chyldren of Ilrael.

35 This is the annoynting of Aaron, and. the annoynting of his sonnes cocerning f the facvifices of the Lode made by fire, in the day when he offred them to be. priestes vnto the Lowe, ©

36 And these be the [portions] whiche the
Torde commaunded to be geuen them. in the day of their annoynting from a. mong the chyldren of Jlrael, bya statute kor euer in their generations.

37 This is the law of the burnt offering, and of the meate offering, and of the fx.

crifite for firme and trespalle, for consecrations, and for the peace offering:

38 Whiche the Lord conumaunded Poyses in the mount of Sinai, whẽ he tommaunded the children of Israel to offer their satrilites vnto the Lorde in the.
Wyldernellt of Sinai.

aon K & & a a

of vnleauened bread: 0
3 And gather thou all the tongreg ation together vnto the ooze of the taberna de of the congregation. 0
4 And Doyles dyd as the Lorde tom maunded him: and the people were ga thered together vnto the dooze of he. tabernacle of the congregation. 5 Ad!

nd Moyses sayd vnto the congregaf 1 This is the thing which the Lord
© commannded to be done.
And Moyles brought Aaron and his soimes, and wached them with water:
„And put vpon him the coate, and gyrded hym with a gyrdle, and put vpon
„ hynithe robe, and put the Ephod thervon, whiche he gyrded With the brodered garde that Was in the Ephod, and bounde it vnto himtherewith.
4 And he put the brestplate tyeron, and put inthe brestplate the Urin and the
Thumnunt.
9 And he put the cap of estate vpon his ghtad, and put vpon the cap, euen bpon the forefront, the golden plate, the holy dtrowue, as the Lorde commaäunded

¢

Popses.
% And Boyles toke the anndyntyng pyle, and annoynted the tabernacle and althat was therin, and fanctified them.
1 And lprinckled therof bpon the aulter seuen tymes, and aͤnnoynted the aulter and all his vesselles, the lauer and his tosote, to sanctifie them. N
And he powred ofthe annoynting oyle vppon Aarons head, c annopnted hym, to santtikie hyn.
3 And Moyles brought Aarons sonnes, and put toates vpon them, and gyrded them with gyrdles, and put bonettes ypon their heades, as the Lode com-
¢: maunded Moples.
A. And he brought the Wullocke for the fie offering: and Aaron ¢ his sonnes put their handes vpon the head ol the
Bullocke for the sinne offering.
5 And Moyses llewe hym, and toke the blood, which he put vpon the hornes of the aulter rounde about with his fin-
Jer, and purisied the aulter, and powred the blood at the bottome of the aulter d fanttifled it, to make recontiliatið bps it.
16 And he toke all the fat that was vpon the inwardes, and the kall ok the liner, and the two kydneys and their fat, and f Boyles burned it vpon the aulter.
J7 But the Bullocke, x his hide, his flesh, aud his dounge, he burnt with kyre
Without the hoalt, as the Lorde comf i maunded Moyles, a And he brought the Nauune fo2 the burnt offering, and Aaron e his somies i Bandai bandes vpon the head of the

2 Whiche Moples killed, and sprinckled

Leulticus.

22 Aud he brought the oth

28 And Moyses toke them from of their

xv.

the blodd bpd the aniterrounde About.

20 Aud Boyles tut the Ramme into his.

peetes, and burnt the

abt ft h head, the pecces, «
And Walhedp inwardes e the leages:

in water, e Moyses burnt ne euerywhyt vpon the aulter: forit was.

a burnt facvifice fora fivecte sauour, and

an offering made by fire vnto the Lord,

as the Lode commaunded Moyses.

er Rane, « E xxi namelp the Namme of confeerations: « 9 and Aaron and his sonnes pnt their

handes vpon the head of the Kamme,

23 Which Moples slewe, and toke of the.

blood ofit, and put it vpon the tip of Aarons right care, and vpon the thumbe of his ryght hande, aud vpon the great. tot of his ryght foote.

24. And Doyles brought Aarons founes,

and put of the blood on the tippe of the: right care ol them e bpon the thumbes. oltheyr right handes, x vpon the great. toes of their ryght feete: and Moyses. spunckled the blood vpon the aulter< rounde about. .

25 *Andhetoke the fat, and the rumpe, kao

and all the fat that was vpon the inwardes, and the kall of the liner, and the two kydneys with their fat, and the

ght shoulder. F

26 And out of the basket of vnleauened?

bread that was before the Torde, he toke one vnleauened cake, and a take ot opled bead, and one Wafer, e put thein on the fat, and vpon the right shoulder:

27 And put altogether bpon Aarons han-

des, x vpon his founes handes and waued it a waue offering before the Lord.

&

handes, and burnt them vpon the aulter for à burnt offering: These were consetratious for a sweete sauour and
(icvifice made by fice vnto the Lode. |

29 And Doyles toke the brest, and Wa- ko

wed it for a wane offering before the.
Lorde: for of the Ramme of tonsetrations, it was Moyles part, as the Love‘ commaunded Mopfes.

30 And Doyles toke of the annoynting.

oyle, aud of the blood which was bpan ‘ the aulter, e fpeinetsied it bpon Aaron. and vpon his garmentes, and vpon his. sonnes and on his formes garmentes. with hin: and fanctified Aaron and his vestures, and his formes and his lonues.

vestures with hyu.
1 Ft ij ai And

Sacrifices.

ENV. xxix. f.

31 And Moples sapde vnto Aaron and his sonnes:Woylt the fleshe at the doore of the tabernacle of the congregation, and there * cate it with the bread that is in the balket of consecration, and as J tommaunded, saping, Aaron and his formes shall cate it. 8

32 And that whiche remapneth of the fleshe and ok the bread, shall pe burne with fyre. ö

K K W E nna & &

of the tabernatle of the congregation seuen dayes, vntyll the dayes of pour ton-

nnann KR AR

the Lorde is shewed.

D inthe eyght dap,
Moyles called Aaron

R K K

the elders of Israel.
Amd he layd bnto Aaz
8 rö: Take thee a poung ial Calfe for a fin offering, and a Kamnie fo2 a burnt offering, both without blemishe, and bryng them before the Lorde. —

And vnto the chyldren of Hlraci thou shalt speake, saping: Take ye an hee
Goate fo2 a sinne offering, and a Calfe ¢ a Lambec both ofa pere olde, without blemishe, foz a burnt sacrifite.

4 Allo à Bullocke € a Kamme fo2 peace

offeringes to offer before the Lord, and
& meate offering mingled With ople: fo2 today the Lod will appeare vnto pou.
And they bronght that whiche Mopses commaunded, before the tabernacle of the congregation: and all the tongre-
CAL tame and {lode before the Lord.

And Moyles sayd: This is the thyng
Whiche the Lord tomnmnaunded that ye should do, e the glozy of the Lorde shall appeare vnto pou, f
7 And Moyses sayde vnto Aaron: Go

vnto the aulter, and offer the facrifice

for thy sinne c thy burnt offering, and

Malic an attonement fo2 thee and foz

the people: c thou shalt offer the offe-

ring of the people, and make an attone-

ment for them, as p Lod cõmaunded.
8 Aaron therkore went vnto the antter, and slewe the Calfe of the sinne offering, whiche was for him selfe.
9 And the lonnes of Aaron broughtthe blood vnto him, and he dypt his finger in the blood, and put it vpon the hornes

We

r no A ee Fe

ON

a6 K K HR AR we „4 „ „

~ Leuiticus.

And pe shall not depart fromthe dooze.

The. ix. Chapter.
8 The kprst offeringes ol Jaron. 22 Haron blelseth the people. az The glorie of

and his sonnes, and

Saer tfices setratious de at an ende: for feuendayen: shall he fill pour hande. —

34 As he did this dap: euen so the Lone:
Hath tommaunded to do, to make an attonement for pou. a

35 Therelore shall ye abyde at the doore of the tabernacle of the congregation: day and nyght seuen dapes long, and kepe the watch of the Lord, and pe Nhat not dye: for fo J am tommaunded. 6

36 And so Aaron and his sonnes, dyd ay. thinges whiche the Lorde commaun-

Ded by the hande of Moyles. a

«
é
é
€

of the aulter, and powred the blood at the bottome of the aulter. J
10 But the fat and the two kydneys, and the kall of the liuer of the finne offering: he burnt vpon the aulter, as the Lorde. tommaunded Moyses. ‘
The flesh and the hyde he burnt with. fyre without the hoast. 0
12 And he slewe the burnt offering, and. Lea
Aarons sonnes brought vnto hym the. blood, whiche he sprinckled rounde ave bout vpon the aulter. * g
13 And they brought the burnt offering vnto hym with the peeces therof, c the. head:and he burnt them vpõ the aulter.
14 And he dyd wache the inwardes and the legges, and burut them vpon the. C burnt offeryng in the aulter. ‘
15 And then he brought the peoples offering, taking the Goate whiche was the. sinne offering for the people, ¢ sleweit,
€ offered it for sinne, as he dyd the first.
16 And brought the burnt offering, and. offered it as the mauer was. 1
17 And he brought the nieate offering, | Leica and filled his hande therof,and burnt. vpon the aulter, beside the burnt watt. fice of the mioruyng. .
18 He slewe allo the Wullocke and the
Nammee forthe peace offering, whiche. was for the people: and Aarons sonnes brought vnto hym the blood, which he. sprinckled bpon the aulter round about.
19 And the fat of the Wullocke, and of the
Ramune, therumpe, and that couereth. the inwardes, and the kidnepes, and the.
Kall of the liuer. ¢
20 And they put the fat vpon che breastes, and he burnt the fat vpon the aulter: 5
21 But the breastes and the ryght Nur

ab and Abihu.

ron waued for a waue offering

92710 the Lorde, as the Lorde conr maunded Doyles, f

And Aaron lift vp his hande ouer the

2» copie and blelled them, ¢ came downe

fra offering of the finue offering, burnt

offering, and peace offeringes.
And Moyles and Aaron went into the

* abernacle of the congregation, & came

Leulticus.

IXVII N out, and blessed the people: and the glo-

rie ot the Lorde appeared vnto all the people.

24. And there tame a fire out from bekore u Pee

the Lorde, and consumed vpon theaul- ci. ter the burnt offering e the kat: Whiche when all the people fare, they gaue thankes, and fell on their faces.

€ “pity 8 Chapter.

are forbidden wyne. r

ron, toke eyther of thẽ his censar, and put fire therein, and put cense there vpon, and offred c straunge fire before e, whiche he commaunded

=, the Tot eva: them not. ö 6
2 And there went a fire from the Tord, em and tonlumed them, and they dyed before the Lorde. :

Then Moyses fapde vnto Aaron:
This is it that the Lorde spake, saying:

none

done nye me, and before all the people n J Wylbe glozified. And Aaron helde rn His peace. |

en + And Moyses called Misael and Elsaon, Phan the lonnes of Msiel, the vncle of ving Aaron, x fayd vnto them: Come neare,

, tuarie, out ofthe hoatt, 8
And they went to them e caryed them yes, es had sayde.

And Doyles sayde vnto Aaron, and

Uncouer not your heades, neither rent

conte vpon allthe people: But let vour methzen the whole haule of Ilrael, be-

ath kyndled. b
Grae ele Canetti, that is, I Will

2 hat Moyses alca
5 them selueg, jc j

ves J Wyll be © fanctified in them that

man, “ALY pour brethren from befoze the sance inthetc coates out ok che hoalt, as Moy-

sx Dato Eleazar r Ithamar his lonnes: o

POUT clothes, Jett ye dye, and lest Wrath

alee burnyng whiche the Lorde :
And go not pe out from the doore of

Padab and Abihu are layne, 6 Itrael mourneth fog them. „Che prettes

the tabernatle of the congregation lest N ve dye: fo2 the annoynting oyle of God pene vote, And Hep dyd as Popses

3 And the Lorde spake vnto Aaron, saying:
9 hou Halt not drinke wine nor strong

deinke, thou noz thy sonnes that are with thee, when ye go into the tabernade of the congregation, lest ye dye:
Let it be a lawe for euer throughout vour generations.

Io And that pe may put differenee be-

tweene holy and vnholy, betweene vncleane and cleane:

And that ye may teache the ehyldren

of Ilrael all the statutes whiche the B
TLorde Hath spoken vnto them by the handes of Moyses. a

12 And Moyses sapde vnto Aaron, and

vnto Eleazar, and Ithamar his sonnes that were left: Lake the meate offering that remayneth of the facvifices of the Lord made by fire, and eate it without leauen beside the aulter: for it ts most holy,

13 Bt shall cate it in the holy plate, be-

taule it is thy duetie, thy fonnes ductie, of the lacrifices of the Lord made by five: for fo J am tommaunded.

14. And the wane brest and heave shoul-

der shall ye cate in a cleane place, thon

aͤnd thy sonnes and thy danghterswith

thee: For they be thy duetie, and thy sonnes ductie, geuen ont of the peace ij offeringes

hene of Alx the Lordẽ destroy them. Some other, when he sapde to Moyles in the. 29. of the lame boake. Bnd J wpllinecte
Lj

; a J
019 And thus b> gerne Whiehe arc nighest me, ir the strap and do amisse, that is, I wll punishe them, J wil punishe other uche

tert umane tealon fapeth S

Pevden, iet it might ape 8 the common bie of lamentyng the dead aimongelt the Israclites (ct Foor), whiche Yaron aud hin sonnes be

0 f mieares.

15 The heanec shoulder € the wane brest shali they bryng in with the sacrifites made by fire of the fat, to waue it for a waue offering before the Lorde: and it halbe thyne and thy fonnes with thee bpa lawe for euer, as the Lorde hath tonimaunded. a

16 And Mopses sought the goate that was oftred for sinne, c see, it was burnt.
And he was angry with Eleazar and

Ithamar the sonnes of Aaron whiche
Were left aline, saping:
17 Mherefore haue ve not eaten the sinne

offering in the Holy plate: seingit is most

holy, € God Hath geuen it von, to beare

Leulticus. olteringes of the children of Ilrael. the sinne ol the congregation, —ꝑ

N

to agreement forthem before the Ae
18 Weholde, 5 blood of it was not brought in within the Holy place: Be shoulde haue eaten it in the Holy plate, as J i
19 d Aaron fayde vnto Moyses: Bepölde his day haue they okkerrd thete ume olkering, and their burnt offering before the Lorde: Wand suche thinges ane are tome vnto me, if J had eaten the wan sinne offering to dap, choulde it haue damen ben attepted in the fight ofthe Lone, hen
20 And when Boyles hearde that, he . was content. ; en lame

bic cale o che. |

3 The xi. Chapter.

Ok beaftes, fisshes, and byrdeg: whiche be cleane, and whiche

be vncleane.

D the Lorde spake

* \ on buto Moyles and Aa-
: 2 . ron, and fayde buto
85 Le, SD

7 xs V

a 1 peake bnto the ey Ichyldrenof Blcael,and fay : These are the beastes whiche ye (hall cate, among all the beastes that are on the earth.
3 Whatsdeuer parteth the hoofe, and is dlouen footed, and chaweth tud among the beastes, that shall pe eate.
<4 Meuerthelesse, these shall ye not eate,
; of them that chawe cud, and deuideth the hoofe : (onlpe as is the Camell,
Whiche chaweth cud, but he deuideth not the hoofe, therefore is he vntleane
Vvnto vou.
5 Euen so the Conne whiche chaweth the tud, but deuideth not the hoofe, he is vncleane to vou.
<6 And the Hare, though he chaweth the tud pet because he demdech not p hoofe, he istherefore vncleane to pou.

Geavirz. *

8.7 Andagayne the Swyne, though he

deudde the hooke, and is clouen footed,
« pet he chaweth not the cud, he is vn-
(lleane to you.

8 Oft their fleche Hall ve not eate, and their tarkasses shall pe not touche: but. let them be vncleane to you. ‘

9 These shall ve eate, of all that are in the waters: whatsoeuer Hath finnes and skales in the waters, seas, and rt, uers, that shall pe eate. ‘

10 And all that haue not finnes norskales. in the sea and riuers, of all that moue and liue in the waters, let them be abhomination vnto pou. ‘

1 They Hay, shalbe an abomination: vnto por: pe shall not eate of their ficth, « but abhorte their carkaffes. g

Iz Tet all that haue no finnes nog skales in the waters, be abhominable bnto.

you.
3 Thele are they whiche pe thal ab-

horre among the foules, and that ought. not to be caten, for they are an abhomt. nation: The Egle, the Gothauke, and the Osprap, a Uultur, and the Hpte alter his ¢ inde, f
15 And all Nauens after their kinde, «
16 The Estrich, the nyght Crowe, the.
Coockowe, and the Hauke alter his.

kynde,
- 17 The

7 Leulticus. exlx. eates.

The Falton/ the Commozant,tbe great wrought in: and it mut be plunged in

a the enen an aug denn butyl; pte, ellitane, the Pye theeuen and lo shallitbe geanled.

18 Epe Sinh Jer alter his binde, 33 Al maner of earthen bellell wherin-

‘ walowe. to any ofthem falleth, halbe vntleane 3
0 e l ates tat nt and go 520 all that therein is, and it chalbe v.
20 Bee omination zoken. ‘
“pat al foure, be an ab) 34. All 8 ae 1 that is bled to vnto pou. iery tree- be taten, ył any fuc ater come bps it,
Bet thele nay tee ae go thalbe vntleane: And all maner depnke pyng thyng ta :euen those that haue that is bled to be drunke in all maner ppon foure fer a vpon their feete, furl) beffels, shalde vncleane. ‘
Mis ides on the earth. 35, And euerp thyng that their carkalse to leape ep f them ye may eate: the falleth vpon, thalde vncleane, whether

Di achter his ünnde the Seinem alter — itbeanenoz kettle, let itbe brchens hen

8 en the Hargol after his kinde, hey are vncleane, and chalbe dneteane

oY ö is kinde. vnto pou. ‘=
| pene fuss ice and haue 36 Aeuerthelater: pet the fountaynes, K
4 alt Ibe abhonnnation vnto and Welles, and collection of waters, koure keete, tha chalbe cleane styll: 165 that nie tot.
« you. : 2 eth their carkafles,fhalbebueteane. «
24 raue eee 0 ot tbe dead tarkasse of any such fall
‘ aa Ade the euen: pon any seede died to sowe, it Mail vet.
N e styll: ¢
25 And fan wa uh 38 e Fatty water be pollen by-.
« ofthem,thall wache h 4 on the fede, and a dead caͤrkalle fail
+ _bncleatte A hoofe, and theron it chalbe vncleane vnto yon. ota ah chaweth cud, 39 Bf any beatt of ae 0 19 A
2 : and any man touche the dead car-
11 ᷣ Oe am me eae
} d path üer goeth vppon bis tyll the euen. ts
27 aid Whatldeuer goeth) fies that 40 he that eateth of the dead tarkasse of sitet ae rere“ fal te be eae
« Soorailto ithe enen: And he allo that. unte yous and Who fo doth March ehe carkalle of it, chall wache
. « thet carkaffe* shalbe vncleane vnty His clothes, and be bncleane utp the « the enen. :
28 And he that beareth the tarkalle of euen. ng thyng that creethem, hall wache his clothes and be 41 Ap bon ae CRE abhoutina::°
« bucleane vntyll the euen: foz luch are an nace 5 vntleane vnto pou, 2 Whatlocuer goeth vpon the brest, i 1 he 3 70 l 1 and whatsdeuer goeth vpon foure, or. among the thynges all creepyng. the earth: the Wealel, and the Poule, that hath mo keete among epy

): of « nde: thynges that treepe bpon the earth ; of
. r Narbe, the Ble the that fee ve eate not, for they are abbo-:
„ Latert,the Snaple, and the Mooie. minable.

bho-
Gt Thele are vntleane to you among a 43 Be (hall not make ait oa that creepe: wholdeuer doth touche nunabie with nothyng 4 eiu chem when they be dead, halbe vn- neither make pour selues Pr entietby.:
„ Ceanebutptitheenen: them that xe e pon God: Be
62. And whatldeuer any ok the dead tar- 44. Foz Jamthe L ‘ab pe lhalbe Holy,
; Kafles ok them doth fall bpon, chalbe fanchifted Wap 12 yall not Defyle
„ bndcane whether itbe vellellor wood, kor Jam holy: mauer okertepingb erapment, o fbinne oz lacke, oz what- pour soules pan the earth:
MNT vellell it be that any worke is thyng that er 45 Fo

Of ia Leul cticusS. Of meatez olteringes of the childzen ol Hlraet. the sinne of the congregation, to make
15 The heaue shoulder e the wane brest agreement for them before the Lone, shall they bryng in with the facvifiees 18 Beholde, ö blood of it was not brought made by fire of the fat, to waue it fora in within the holy place: Be shoulde waue offering before the Lorde: andit haue eaten it in the holp place, ag J shalbe thyne and thy sonnes with thee tommaunded. 8 bpa lawe fo2 euer, as the Lorde hath 19 And Aaron sapde vnto Moyles: Wecommaunded. ; holde, this day haue they offered their
16 And Popses fought the goate that inne offering, and their burnt offering „ was offred for sinne, k see, it was burnt. before the Hove: and luche thinges tah
And he was angry with Eleazar and are tome vnto me, if J Had eaten the conten?
Ithamar the sonnes ol Aaron whiche inne offering to dap, choulde it haue drehn
Were left aliue, aping: benaccepted in the fight ofthe Lorde: um
17 Dabherefore haue pt not eaten the sinne 20 And when Poyses hearde that, he d u offering in the holy plate: seingit is mmost was content. ö EON Lama holp,€ God bath geuen it pon, to beare !

dle case a ‘ eure *

The xi. Chapter.
Okt beastes, fischeg, and byrdes: whiche be cleane, and whiche

be vncleane.

9 2 D the Lorde spake 3 Ok their flethe shall ye not eate, and.

vnto Moyses and Aa- their carkasses hall ve not touche: but. ron, and sayde bnto let them be vncleane to pou.

Ws them: 9 These shall pe eate, of atl that are in
W. Speake pnto che. the waters: whalloener hath fines: chyldrenof Israel, and and kkales in the waters, seas, and vt,

lay: Thele are the uers that shall ye ate. f beastes whithe ye chall eate, among all 10 And all that haue not kinnes norskales . the beastes that are on the earth. in the sea and riuers, of all that moue

3 Whatsoeuer parteth the hoole, and is and line in the waters, let them be ab-

CAN
V.

— ¥

Gern. vit a.

Deut. xia

tlouen footed, and chaweth tud among —honrination vnto pou. ;

the beastes, that shall ye eate. I They Play, halbe an abhomination

4 Meuerthelesle, these hall ye not eate, vnto vou: pe chall not cate of their flesh,

of them that chawe cud, and deudeth but abhorre their carkalles. ;

the hoofe: onlxe as is the Camell, 12 Tet all that haue no finnes nor skales.
Whiche chaweth cud, but he deudeth in the waters, be abhonunable buto. not the hoofe, therefore is he vncleane pou. ‘ buto vou. 13. Thelt are they whiche pe chall ab
5 €uenfo the Comme whiche chaweth horre among the konles, and that ought the tud, but deudeth not the hoofe, he. not to be eaten, for they are an abbome .
Abs vpaclcane to you. nation: The Egle, the Gochauke, and.
6 And the Hare, thongh he chaweth the the Olprap, ‘

eud yet becaule he deudeth not phoofe, 14 The Uuitur, and the Kyte after his C heistherekore vntleane to von. kinde, ‘
6.7 And agapne the Swpne, thongh he 15 Andall3Ranensafter their kinde, deudde the hoofe, and is clouen footed, 16 The Estrich, the nyght Crowe, the vyet he chaweth not the cud, he is vn- Coockowe, and the Hauke after his.

tfleane to pou. kynde, The

17 Eye Falcon, the Cormorant, the great

Owle, f acke, the Pellicane, the Pye,
1 Tbe Stanke, the Jay alter bis kinbe, b the Lapwpng,and the Swalowe.
% Let all koulcs that creepe and go
1 ppon all foure, be an abhomination vnto pout. coy pet these may ve cate, of enery creepyng thyng that hath wynges, and go pponfdure [fete | : euen thole that haue dt bowynges aboue vpon their fete, to leape withall vpon the earth. nix. Euen thele of them pe may eate : che
“age after his kinde, the Selaam after his kinde, the Pargol after his kinde, aͤnd the Hagab after his kinde.
2 Alls other sfoules that treepe and haue fdurc feete, halbe abhounnation vnto

tier toucheth the carkasse of them, shalbe vncleane vntyll the euen:
25 And wholdeuer beareth the tarkasse okthem, shall wache his clothes, and be vnclcane vntyll the euen.
26 And tuery beast that hath hoofe, and is not clouen footed, nor chaweth cud, uch are vncleane vnto pou: euery one that toucheth them, shalbe vncleane.
27 And Whatsoeuer goeth vppon his
„ babes, among all maner brastes that gs on all foure [feete|fuch are vntleaͤne vo por: and who fo doth touche
„ their tarkasse * shalbe vncleane vntyll the even.
28 And he that beareth the carkasse of them, chall wache his clothes, and be

vntleane vnto you,

C. 29 And let thele also be vncleane to pou, along the thynges that creepe vpon the earth: the Wealel, and the Moule,
_ Aud the Toade after ther kinde:

© Lacert,the Snaple,and the Moole.

chat treepe: wholdeuer doth touche a m When they be dead, chalbe vn-
1 Aud butyl the euen.

aa whatsoeuer any of the dead carf falls of them doth fall vpon, chalbe ara bhethertt be befell of wood, ee PHient,o2 lkinne, o: facke, 02 What:
Eber pellell it be that any Wonke 1s

. pou.
1 In such ye be vntleane: and whoso-

vncleane vntyll the euen: fog such are

% The Pedhogge, the Steilio, the
431 Thele are vncleane to yon among all

n
Loeulticus. IX.

wrought in: and it mut in the water, and it halbe bene bun .
| ane bnityil; the euen, and lo hall it be cleansed.
33 All mauer of earthen vellell Wherinfo anpokthemkalleth, chalbe vncleane,
Den that therein is, and it chalbe. 4.
34. All maner meate allo that a be eaten, yl any such Watt une it ; fhalbe vntleane: And all maner drynke that is bled to be drunke in all maner!
5 my sig Ay n ‘
35 Aud euerpthyng that their ca < falleth bpon, chalbe Aude whether * it be ouen orkettle, let it be broken: Fo)‘ they are vncleane, and chalbe vntleane vnto you, .
36 Meuerthelater, pet the fountaynes, F and Welles, and collection of waters, chalbe cleane styll: but that which tou. cheth their carkaffes shalbe vncleane.
37 If the dead tarkasse of any {uch faul bpon any seede died to sowe, it hall pet be tleane styll: f ;
38 Wut and yf any water be powred vpon the seede, and a dead caͤrkalle fall theron, it halbe vncleane vnto vou.
39 If anp dealt of which ve map eate, dye and any man touche the dead tarkasse thereof, he shalbe vncleane vntyll the euen. *
40 he that eateth of the dead carkalle of it, (hall wache his clothes, and be vntleane vntyll the euen: And he allo that. beareth the carkasse of it, Mall wache his clothes, and be vntleane vntyll the « euen. :
41 Let euery treepyng thyng that cree- 6 peth bpon the earth be an abhomination, and not be eaten. *
42 Whatsoeuer goeth dpon the brest, and whatsoeuer goeth vpon foure, o2° that hath mo feete among all tcreepyng. thynges that creepe vpon the earth: of . that {ce pe eate not, for they are abhominable. :
43 Be chall not make your soules abhonunable with nothyng that creepeth, neither make pour lelues vncleane with them, that pe shoulde be dekyled therbp.«
4.4. Fo: J amthe Lorde your God: Be. lanttifiẽd therkore, and pe shalbe holy. for J am holy: and ye chall not defyie . pour soules with any aner of creepiug. thyng that creepeth vpon the ahs 1 rok

ereus.

D

Gen. xvil. b.

Luk. ii. d.

i at

‘45 For J am the Lorde that brought vou out of the lande of Egypt, to be pour God: pe shalbe holy therfore, foz
Jam holp. .

‘46 This is the lawe of beastes t foules, and ok euer lyupng creature that mo-

vnto Mopses, saping:

Speake vnto the
8 s || Hilden of Ilrael, and
757 Veg \y say: pfa woman hath
(5) conteaued seede, and borue a man chylde,

‘fhe shalbe vncleane feuen dapes: euen

According to the dayes of the seperation of her inkirmitie Mail (he be vncleane.
And in the eyght dap, the fleshe of the childes foreskinne shalbe cut away.
4 And Khe Hall then continue in p blood bk her purifiyngthree and thirtie dapes:

She shall touche no halowed thyng,

* nozconte into the fanctuavic, vntyll the

tyme ok her purifiyng be ont.

5 Il she beare a mayde chylde, she chalbe vncleane two Weekes, accordyng as in her seperation: and the Hall continue in the blood of her purifiyng three score

¢ c
€
¢ c c c
‘
‘ c c c c c c c c

Che priestes mul haue acontiderati
47 Dt the leperous garmentes.

La
S

S

poe)

et ta

ce

E bo J

the lkinne of his fleshe: and when the heere in the fore is turned to whyte, and

€
€
€
U
€
€

Leulticus. -

Ceremgn

q The.xij. Chapter.

2 Dlawe howe women Houde be purged after their delpucraunce.

MD the Lowe fake

on, and iudge who are lepers.

U
€
€
: Ihe. xiij. Chapter.
“
«
€
“
€

ucth in the waters, and ok eue

ture that creepeth vpon the earth, erea-

47 That there niay be a differente betweene the vncleaue and cleane, anode, tweene the beast that may be eaten and ‘ the beat that ought not to be eaten

arn wien te Dayes of
6 And when the dayes of her purikiyng are out, whech Allen
à daughter, the Hall bryng a lambe of one pere olde for a burnt offeryng, and

à voung pigeon or a turtle done for a‘ finne offeryng, vnto the doore ok the. cp of the congregation, vnto

e priest: ‘

7 Which shall offer them before the
Lord, and make an attonement fo: her, and the shalbe purged of the issue of her

blood. “And thisis the lawe for herthat

hath borne a male or female.
31 Wut and pf che be not able to bryng a.

two young pigeons, the one for p burnt: offering, e the other for a sinne offering:
And the priest chall make an attonemet' for her, and the shalbe cleane.

a „„ „„ „„ «4ä4„ „ 4 „„ an

the sore also seeme to be lower then the skinne of his fleshe, it is a plague of: leprosie: and the priestes chall loke on. hym and indge hym vncleane.
4 Béthece bea whpte piece Thin ok his fleche, and seeme not to be lower then the fkinne, northe heere thereof is turned vnto whyte, the puest Hall Hut. vp [bem that hath the plague {enc dayes.
5 And p prick chall lone vpon him againe the seuenth day: and ik the plague seeme to hinito abide styll, æ the plague grole. not in the fhinne, the prick Mall Mut vp
[bem that hath p plague, seuen ad

a

M R K „ R K ie)

at

€

er it be for afonne 02 fo: < bukiia

ambe, the chall bryng two turtics 02. Lukiid

e priest shal loke on him agayne coeur nay: Then p eHeplaguedse parker, aud not growenin then npnne the priest Mall indge m cleane foritis but a scabbe: And e shall washe his clothes and be cleaune.

B lit yl the feabbe growe in the skynne atter that he is seene of the priest and iudged cleane, he halbe seene of the priest agayne. oe
8 Athe pret re chat the feabbe be growen abrode in the sainme, the priest Mall make hym bneleane:(fr) it is à leprosie. gig When the plague ofthe leprosie is in a man, he shalbe brought vnto the priest. o And the priest chall see hym: And yk the fivellpng be Whyte in the suynne, and haue made the heere Whyte, and there be rawe flethe in the [Wellyng,
It wilde an olde leprosie in the laynne dokhis fleshe, and the priest thal make hy vncleane, and Hall not Hut hym pp, seyng he is vncleane.
Ita leprosie breake out abzode in the slipune, and couer all the skynne from his head to his foote Wheresoeuer the priest loketh, ‘ys z Then the priest shall confider : and pf the leprosie haue couered all his flethe, he shall iudge the plague to be cleane, btecaule it is all turned into whytenesse, and he chalbe cleane.
4 But and if there be rawe fleshe on him when he is seene, he halbe vncleane.
5 And the priest shal fee the rawe fleshe, and declare hym to be vncleane: for the ralbe fleshe is vnclcane, seyng it is a leprosie. N dé Or yk the rawe flethe turne agayne e. aud chaunge vnto whyte, he Mall tome tothe priest:
7 And the priest shall see him: & behold, yk the sore be chaunged vnto whyte, the priest halt iidge the plague cleane, and he shalbe cleane. s The fleshe also in whole fkinne there
« ta bylc, and is healed, N
‘lp And in the plate of the byle there ap-
; Beate a byte rysyng, either a shynyng
ü bebte and lome what reddilhe, it (hall
15 tleene of thepriest.
20 And yf when the priest seeth hym, it
Pee lower then the suynne, and the f ere therok be chaunged onto whyte, tenet that iudge hym vncleane: for theo of leproste, broken out of

X KK K X „ K „ „„

vm Mt 44 «„ 2—

Leuldcus.

efkynne, |

21 But and pf the priest lone on it there be no whyte heeres therin, and pk. i 0 the luynne, but be «
¢ » We pric All fi 2 n anes, p yall hut hym vp f. ;
22 AndyFit spreade abrode in the suynne, the priest chall make hym — — fez. yng it is a sore. c
23 Wut and yt the spot stande styll and growe not, it is a starre of a byle, and cherfore the priest chall declare hym to. be cleane. ' 8
24. If there be any flethe in whole saynne there is a hotte burnyng, and the quicke « fleshe that burneth haue a whyte spot, somewhat reddishe or Whyte, 1
25 The priest shall loke vpon it: and pf. the heere in that bright spot be chaũged to whyte, and it appeare lower thenthe skynne, it is a leprosie broken out of the burnpng, and therkore the priest chall iudge Dyin vncleane, seyng it is p plague. of leprosie. ‘
26 But ykthe priest loke on it, and there be no Whyte heere in the bryght spot, and be no lower then the other skynne, but be darker, the priest Hall shut hyn. bp seuen dapes. 0
27 And the priest hall loke on hym the seuenth dav:and vf it be growen abrode in the lkynne, the priest hall iudge hym. vncleane, seyng it is pᷣ plague ot leprosie.
28 And ykthe spot stande styll in it, and. gꝗrobe not in the skynne, but is darke, it isa risyng of the burnyng, and the priest-
Mall therkore declare bynicteane, seyng it is a scarre of the burnyng. :
If man or woman Hath a sore vponthe head or the bearde, x
30 The priest chall see the sore: and pit appeare lower then the leynne, and. there be in it a pelowe hecreand thinne, the priest shall mdge him vntleane, seing that the fame frettyng is atoken of te prosie byon the head or bearde. s
31: And ykthe priest loke on the lore of the . fret, and it leeme not lower then the skynne, and that the heere is not blac, the priest Matt thut bp the frettyng sore scuen dayes. en ;
32 And inthe {enenth day the pelt Mal , loke on the fore: and pf the fret be not. growen, and there be in it no peloweheere, 5 the fret sceme not lower then the lkymie, 0
33 pe fhalbe hauen, but the fret that, he not shaue: and the priest Hall ae

and B

ö Leprosie.

G

R & WW M m N MM X „ 2d

Num. va.
4. Reg. 5.4. «
‘

tho fret scuen dayes mo.

34 And in the seuenth dap the prick shall

lotke on the fret: and yk the fret be not

growen in the lkynne, 102 sceme lower

then the other lkynne, the priest shall

(lense him: he Hall washe his clothes,

and be cleane. 5

35 Burt il the fret growe in the skynne

« after Dis clenspng, .

36 The priest shall loke on hym: and yl the fret be growen in the skynne, the

« patett hall not seeke for velowe Heere, for he is vntleaue.

J. 37 But it he see the fret stande still, e that

there is blatke heere growen vp there-

nin, the fret is healed, j he shalbe cleane,

« €thc prick shal declare hin to be cleane.

38 If there be many white spottes in the

: {hinne of the fleshe ol man or woman,

39 The priest hail loke vpon it: and yk

the spottes in the lkynne of their sleshe

be somewhat darke and Whyte withal, tit isa frenkell growyng in the skynne:

therkore he is cleane. a

40 And the man whole heere is fallen of

his head, he is baulde vet cleane.

41 And he that hath his heere fallen of

an the part of his head towarde his

face, is forchead baulde, pet cleane.

42 If there be in p baulde head or baulde

forehead a whyte reddishe fore, there is

leprosie sprong vp in his baulde head 02

baude forehead.

43 And the priest hall loke vpon hym: ¢ pf the rysyng ol the fore be whyte reddishe in his baulde head or baulde fore-
Head, alter the maner of leprosie which is in the skynne ofthe fleshe,

4.4. Then he is a leprous man & vncleane:
And the priest hal make him vncleane, fo2 the plague therof is in his head.

45 The leper in whom the plague is, thal haue his clothes rent, æ his head bare,
€ shall put a toueryng vpon his lippes,

Hand chall trye: vncleane, vneleane.

46 And as long as the dilease lastech vp-

on hym, he chalbe defied and vncleane:

he shall dwell alone, euen“ without the tanipe shall his habitation be.

4 The garment allo that the plague of

leprosie is in, whether it be a woollen

gaͤrment or a lynnen garment,

48 Whether it be in the warpe or woole

of lynnen or of Woollen, either in a skin, dz anp thyng made ofskynne:

Jeulticus.

49 Ik the discase be light greene, or some-
What reddishe in the garmẽt or keine 5 whether it he in the Warpe or Woofe, o> any thyug that is made of lune: then. it is aplague of leprosie, x halbe shewed vnto the priest. “

50 The priest therfore shal fee the plague. : and shut it vp seuen dayes. *

5 And he hall oke on the plague the seuenth day: which, k it be increaled in the garment, Whether it be in ß warpe
02 Woofe, or in a slinne, or in any thyng: that is made of skinne, it is the leprofie: ota frettyng fore, it is vncleane. j

$2 And he Hall burne that garment, eyther warpe or Woofe, Whether it be woollen orlynnen, or any thyng that is. made of skinne wherin the plague is, for it is a frettyng leprosie, it shalbe burnt in the fire, ,

5 Ikthe priest lee that the plague is not growen in the garment, either in the:
Warpeo? woole, oz in whatsdeuer thing: of skinne it be,

54 The pret hall tommaunde them to. wache the thyng wherm the plagueis, and he shall shut it vp seuen daes mo.

55 And the priest Hatt loke onthe plague: agayne after that it is walshed: and yk. the plague haue not chaunged his tolour, and is spread no further abrode, it is vntleane, thou shalt burne it tu. the lire: for it is fret inwarde, whether it be bauld behynd [tn the head or before.

55 And yk the puest set that the plague is darker after that is is Wasched, he Mall: tut it ont of the garment or out of the. skinne, or out of the warpe, or out ok the:
Woofe. i

57 And yk it appeare styll iu the qarnient, ; either inthe Warpe, or in che woofe, 02. in any thyng made of Minne: it is a: spreadyng plague, thou halt burue that wherin the plagne is, with fire.

58 Mortouer the garment, either warpe-

or Woofe, or whatsocuer thiig of sainne «

it be which thou hast walshed, yr the. plague be Departed therkrom, it chalbe

Wallhed onte agayne, audthen it shal-

be tleane. 3

This is the lawe of the plague of le prosie in a garment whether it be wool; len or lynnen, either in the warpe or

Wwoofe, o2 in any thyng of fRinnes, to:

make it deane or vncleane. i

The

} ofie.

ND the Lowe {pake
. vnto Moyses, saying:
This is the lawe of

his clenspng: He Halbe
5 ON bought bnto the priest,

And the priest shal go gut without the tampe, and the prielt hall loke vpon byt, and yr the plague bkleprosie be healed in the leper,
4 Then Chall the priest tommaunde to take for hym that is cenfed, two lyue birdes and cleane, and cteder wood, and astarlet Aale) and plope.
And the priest shall commaunde that one of the birdes be killed in an earthen vessell, and vpon runnyng water.
And he (hall take the lyuyng birde, with the ceder wood, the scarlet late] and the ysope, and shall dippe them, and the luung birde in the blood of the llaine birde vpon the runnyng water.

37 And he shall sprinckle vpon hym that must be clensed of his leprosie seuen tymes, and cenfe hym, and hall let the spuyng birde go free into the fielde.

And hethat is clenled shall washe his dtlothes, and shane of all his heere, and
‘ Wathe hym selfe in water, that he may be tleane: And alter that shall he come
« lito the hoast, and shall tarp without his tent seuen dapes:

‘9 But inthe seuenth day, he shall Hane of all his heere, namely] his head, his
„ bearde, and his browes, euen all his beere chalbe hauen ok: And he chall
Vathe his clothes, and also wache his

fiche in water, and he chalbe cleane.

, In the eyght day he shall take two

: hee lambes Without blemishe, and an

„ ebe lambe of a pere olde without ble-

che, and three tenth deales ok fine

d.: nolhre for a meate offeryng myngled

een Ach ople and a logge of opte.

ve 4 che puest that maketh him cleane,

a bryng the man that is to be made
3 he Downe PES, before the e

. wrden the tabernacle of the

0 e priest chall take one lambe,

‘ chest hem fo atrelpalfe offeryng,

wende ok ople, and waue them fora

Waueofferpngbe i

bug before the Torde.

Che clentyng of the leper, 34 and ofthe houte that he is in.

the leper in the day ol

Leuiticus. Lx.
The. xiiij. Chapter.

a M KR Aa

13 And he Hal slea the lambe in the plate where the sinne offerpng and the Mer ‘ offerpng are flayne, cuen in the holy place: for as the finne offeryng is the. priestes, euen fo is the trespalle offering, seyng it is most holy. ‘

14. And the priest shall take of the blood of the trespasse offering, and put it vpon the tippe of the ryght care or hym that.

is to be dented, and bpon the tihunbe ok his right bande, and bpon the great toc « of his ryght foote. :

Iy The priest chall take of the logge of. ople, and pore it into the paulme ok. his left hande: f

16 And he shall dippe his ryght linger in the oyle that is in his left hande, and. sprinckle of the oyle with his finger lehen tymes before the Lorde. <

17 And of the rest of the ople that is in his hande, Mall the priest put vpon the tippe of the ryght care ol hym that is for to. be clensed, and vpon the thumbe of his. ryght hande, and vpon the great toe of « his ryght foote, euen vpon the blood of the trespasse osferyng. :

18 And the remnaunt of the oyle that ts. in the priestes hande, he thal powre vpõ « the head ol hym that is for to be clensed: and the priest shall make an attonement for hym belore the Lorde. ;

19 And the priest halt offer the finne. offeryng, and make an attonement for hym that is to be dented krom his vntleannesse, and then shall be kyll the. burnt offeryng. :

20 And the priest shall offer the burnt of: « feryng and the meate offeryng vpon the aulter: and the priest hall make an. attonement for hym, € he shalbe cleane. .

21 If he be poore andeannot get so nuich. Leut b.

he shall take one lambe for a trespasse. D offering, to waue it for his attonement, aͤndatenth deale of fine flowre mingled. with ople for a meate offerpug, and a. logge of oyle, 0
22 And two turtle doues, or tiwo poung. pigeons, such as he is able to get: wherof the one shalbe for a sinne offeryng, and the other for a burnt offerpng.
23 Aud he shall bryng them the eyght -
Day for his tlensyng onto the priest be-

fore the doore of the tabernacle of the.

kongregatton

Leuiticus. e dtongregation bekore the Lode. a

Leprosie.

24 And the priest Hall take tise lanibe that is for the trespasle offeryng, c the logge

bfople, and waue them fo2a waue offe-

ryng before the Lorde.
25 And he shal kill the lambe for the trelpasse offeryng, and the priest shall take ot the blood of the trespasse offerpng,

care that is to be clensed, and vpon the thombe of his right bande, and vpon the great toe of his right foote.
26 And the priest hall powre of the oyle into the pautine of his owne left bande:
27 And the priest thall with his right finger, sprincule of the oyle that is in his lekt hand, seuen tymes before the Lod,
28 And the priest Ayal put of the oyle that is in his hande, vpon v tippe of the right ere ot hym that is to be clensed, x vpon the thombe of his right hande, and vpbon the great toe ot his right foote, euen in the place where the blood of the trel-
. pälle offeryng was put.
29 And p rest of the oyle 5 is in the priestes hande, he Hal put vpon the head of him that is to be clensed, that he may make an attonement for him before the Lord.
30 And he shall offer one of the turtle doues, or of the poung pigeons, such as he tanget:
31 „Such (I &y) as he is able to get: the one for à sinne offering, € the other for a burnt offeryng, with p meate offeryng:
And p priest hau make au attonement for hym z is to be clensed before p Lord.
3 This is the lawe of hym it whom is the plague of leprolie, and whofe hande is not able to get that which pertaineth to his clensyng.
And the Lorde spake vnto Mopyses and Aaron, saping:
34 When ye be come vnto the lande of
Chanaan, which F geue pou in posselsion, and pk JJ put the plague of leprosie in a honse of the land of your possession:
35 He that oweth the honse Malt come,
„ €fell the puest, laying: Me thinke that there is as it were a plague in p house.
36 Then the priest shaͤll comaunde them to emptie the house, before the priest go into itto see the plague, that all that is in the house be not made vncleane: and thẽ mull the priest go in to see the houle.

S AA & „„

K AA N AN A & A

&

And he shall see the plague:and pf the plague be in the walles of the boule, a that there be hollowe ftrakes, greenish

and put it vpon the tippe of his right

-O2 reddishe, which seeme to be lower then the wallit lelfe: 5
38 Then the pret shall go out of ß house. tothe doore of the houle, and chut bp tie
Houle seuen dapes. 0
39 And the patett Chall come agapne the. seuench day, e yl he fee that the plague be increased in the walles of the houle.
40 Lhenthe priolt Chall cmaunde them. ¢ to take away 5 stones in which plague! ls, and let them catt them into a faule.
125 wen the citie, 0
41 Aud he Hall comniaunde the house ta be straped within rounde ang, 9 powre dut the dust that they scrape of without the atic into a foule plate.
42 And they shall take other ftones and put the in the place of thole stones, and other morter to platter p Houle Withall.
43 And ifthe plague come againe, € breake out in the houle after that he hath taken « aay the stones and scraped the house,
E after that he hath plastered the houle,
44. Then the priest shall come and leit: e yk that the plague bath growen further in the houle it is a frettyng leprolie inthe houle, it is therfore vntleane.
45 And he shall breake downe the houle, and the stones of it, and the timber therof, and all the morter of the Houle: and he shall carp them out of the citie into
_ afouie place,
46 Mozeouer, he that goeth into p houte . all the whyle that it is chut vp, shalbe
Ducleane vntyll the euen. i
47 Hcallo that sleepeth in the Houle, shal.
Wathe his clothes: he lykewyse that ea. teth inp house, hall wache his clothes.
4 And pf the priest tome and lee that the. G plague hath spread no further in houle after that it is newe plastered: the priest. shall tudge that boule deanc, because the plague is healed. ;
49 And let hym take to clense the Hoult’ withall, two birdes, ceder wood, anda. scarlet lale and plope. 0 so And he shal kill one of the birdes in an earthen deffell,¢ bpon runnyng water:
51 And take the ceder wood, and the. plope, and the scarlet [Tate] with the ly’. uyng birde, and dippe them in the blood ok the slayne birde, and in the runnyug
Water, x sprinckle the houle lenẽ tynies.
5 And he hall tlense the houle with the. blood of ö birde c with the running We. ter with thetining birde wih the euer. wood, € the plope, and the * an ;

Me Leuiticus. lexi,

＋ Hut he hall let the lpuyng birde flee 55 Andor the lepzolt

3 nto the brode fleldes the towne into the v2 J

a 15 mai an attonement for the houte,

and it chalbe cle ane.

This is the lawe for all maner plague

Vofleprolie and fret,

—U— ——

ae

— SR Ss SCS ae se

ND the Lorde spake

1 5 vnto Moyles and Aa-

8 4 5! ae ae he

e peake vnto the chil-
75 60 ©) dren of Ilrael, and fay
8 N vntothem: whosoeuer
N hath a runnyng issue out of his fle che, is vntleane by reason of that islue. 5
And this shalbe his vncleannelle in his ilsue: ik his fleshe runne, or pf his fleshe be stopped from his issue, then it is vndleaunesle.
4 Euery bed wheron he lpeth that hath the issue, is vncleane: and euery thyng wheron he sitteth, is vncleane.
Wholdeuer toucheth his bed, thall washe his clothes and bath hymselfe in water, and be vncleane vntyll the euen.
6 And he that sitteth on any thing wheraon he lat that hath the issue, thal wathe his clothes, and bath him selfe in Water, ald be vntleane vntyll the euenyng.

7 Hethat toucheth the fleshe of him that häth the islue, chall wache his clothes, aud bathe hym lelfe in water, and be
« butleane vntyll the euen.

Ihe allo that hath the uc, spyt vpon hym that is cleane, he Mall wache hes clothes, and bath huͤnselke in water,

‘ and be vntleane vntyll the euen.

5 ft What faddie socuer he rydeth a ponthat hath piffue,thalbe bucteane,
4 nd whosoeuer toucheth any thyng
1 at was vnder hym, shalbe vncleane f hy the euen: And he that beareth any

f 40 thynges chall wache his clothes,

ud bathe hym elfe in water, and be

n alltane vntpll the euen.

I And wholdeuer he touch

i heth that hath
: i tue, and bane not wasshed his ie es in Water, chall wache his clo-
„ bebiendbache bym felfe m water, and eh 2ltleane vntyll the euen.

The vellell ok earth that he toucheth

J The. xv. Chapter.

> 19 Che maner of purgyng the vncleannesse both of men and women.
31 The children of Ilrael must leperate them telues from vncleannelle.

e of garment e house,

36 Fora (Wellyng, for a scabbe i. chynypng whpte, ma W.
7 Lo teache when it must be made vn-

cleane, and tleane: this is the lawe ok -

leprosie.

oo % Ane „ „„ „

which hath the issue, chalbe broken: and all beffels of wood shalbe rensed in
' water. €
3 When he also that hath any ilsue, is
- dented of his issue, he shall number him seuen dayes for his clensyng, and wache his clothes, and bathe his fleshe in runnyng water, and so shall he be cicane.
14 And the epght day he shall take to. hym two turtle doues, 02 two poung. pigeons, and come before the Lorde vnto the doore Of the tabernatle of the tongregation, æ geue them vnto the priest.
15 And the priest Mall offer them, the. one for afinne offerpng, and the other for a burnt offeryng: and the priest (hall « make an attonement for hym bekore the
Lorde, as tonternyng his issue. 8
16 If any mans seede depart fro hym in his sleepe, he (halt wache all his fleshe. in water, and be vncleane vntyll penen.
17 And euery garnient, and euery lkinne. wherin is such seede of lleepe, Malde. walched with Water, and be vncleanc vntpll the euen. ¢
18 And ik he ö hath such an ifluc of seede, do lye with a woman, they Mall both. wache them felues with Water, and ve. vntleane vntyil the euen. ——
19 Also pfa woman chall haue an issue, C land j her issue in her fleshe shalbe blood, she shalbe put apart seuen dapes: whosoener toucheth her, shalbe vntleanevntyll the euen. : ;
20 And all that che lyeth bpon tn tyme of her seperation, halbe vncleane: lylte. as euery thing allo that fhe sitteth vp-
21 Wholdeuer toucheth her bed, hall wache his clothes, and bathe hym selfewith water, and be vncleane vntyll the euen. ‘
22 And Wholdeuer toucheth any thyng. chat fhe fat vpon, chall wache his clos thes, and bathe hym selfe in water, pes

Leuiticus. n
„ bc vucleane butyl the euen. shall count her seuen dayes: and after
G23 So that whether he touche her bed, 0

j Leprosie.

that, The shalbe cleane.

Leuit. 18. e.

tue, and of hym whole seede runneth:
N — as the vncleanenelse of her lepe- rene in his fleepe, and is dekpled. ration. 32
27 And whosoeuer toucheth any of these 33 Allo ok her that for her seperation is. shalbe vncleane, and chall walhe his put apart, æ ołfwhosoeuer hath a rundlothes, and bathe hym selke in Water, nyng issut, whether it be man or woand be vncleane . K the euen. man, and of hym that lpeth with her.
28 Wut ik The be cleanled of her (Tue, she Which is vncleane. caf

5 The. xvj. Chapter. 5
6 2nshat Taron must do. 8 Ok the us goate. 14 The clenlyng of the sanctuarie. ;
5 Jae the least ol the cleulyng. 21 Jaron conlesleth the fines of the children ot ‘ f Nd the Lowe fpake okthe thildrẽ of Ilrael, two her goates< a A. ) vnto Mopses after the kora tinue offeryng, and aranime fora.
1 death ofp two sonnes burnt offerpng. ‘
‘ Aok Aaron, when they 6 And Aaron shall offer his bullocke for;

0 offered before» Lozde, his sinne offering, and make an attone- He
: Land dped. ment for hym and for his houle. :
22 And the Lorde sayde 7 And he shall take the two hee goates, vnto Mopses: Speake vnto Aaronthy and present them before the Torde at. brother, that he tome not at all tvmes the doore of the tabernacle of the con into the holy plate within the vayle, bee gregation. 6 fore the mertie sente which is vvon the 8 And Aaron chall cast lottes over the.
, arke, that he dye not: Jor J Wyll ap- two goates: one lot shalbe for the Lord,
Reg. b. « pekeare in the; cloude dponpinerctefeate, and the other for the {cape goate. g a Wut with this thyng shal Aarontome 9 And Aaron shall bryng the goate by-

ond anp veffell wheron fhe hath lytten,

he shalbe vncleane vntyll the euenyng.

24 And pfa man lye with her, and her

seperation come bpon hym, he chalbe

vncleane seuen dayes: and all the bedde wheron he lyeth chalbe vncleane.

25. Allo Ha woman haue an islue of her blood many dapes, out of the tyme of her seperation, or fit runne beyond her seperation, let all the dapes ok the issue of her vncleanenesse, be euen as dayes of her feperation, tor he is bncleane.

26 Euerp bedde Whereon the lpeth as long as her issue lasteth, halbe vnto her as the bedde of her seperation: ad whatlocuer he litteth vpon shalbe vn-

~> A A HR A K A KA A A „ „ A

into the holy place: enen with a young

bullocke for a sinne offeryng, and with

a ramme fora burnt offeryng.
4 He shall put the holy lynnen toate vpon hym, and shall haue lynnen breeches vpon his fleshe, and shalbe girded with a lynnen girdle, and with a lynnen cap shall he be attired. These are holy garmentes:therfore shall he washe his fleshe in water when he doth put them

e

On.
5 And he shall take of the congregation

29 Aud in the eyght day, che hall take vnto her two turties, o: two young pr. geons, and bryng them vnto the preg « before che dooze ok the tabernacle of yg: congregation, ;

30 And the priest shall offer the one for a linne offeryng, and the other for a burnt. offeryug, and make an attonement forher before the Lord, as tonternyng the. ilsue of her vntleanenesle. i

31 Thus shall pe syft the chyldren of Fe: rael from their vncleanenesse that they. dye not in their vncleanenelle: iktheydefyle my tabernacle that is among thé,

32 This is the lawe ol hym that hath an

on which the Lordes lot fell, and offer hym fora sinne offeryng. 3
Io But the goate on which the lot fell to be the {rape goate, shalbe fet aliue before
Lorde to reconcile with, and to let. hym go as a {cape goate into the Wildernelle. .
And Aaron Malt bryng the bullocke for his sinne offeryng, and reconcile f02 hym elke and for his houle, and call. kyll the bullocke fo2 his finne offervng. . ¢ n And He chall take a censer fuil o pyri

monies.

puruingtoales from of the aulter before the Torde, aud Mall fill his hand full of
Adbeete incense beaten small, and bryng them withm the vaple.
And put the incense vpon the fire be-
‘5 ene the Lorde, that the tlonde of the ingente may couer the mercy leate that is ppon the witnesse, and he (hall not dye.
„ And he chall take of the blood of the
4 mocke and iprinckle it with his finger bpon the mercy feate eastward: and befoxe the nierty seate Chall he sprinckle of the blood with his finger seuen tymes.
4 Then hall he kyll the goate that is the peoples fine offering, € bryng his blosd Within the vayle, EDO with that blood as he dyd With the blood of the bullocke, lprinklyng it vpon the mercy seate, and before the mercy seate.
16 And he Mhalt reconcile the holy place from the vncleannesses of the chyldren of Hiracl, and from their trefpaties in all their sinnes: And so shal he do forthe tabernacle of the congregation that is set among them, euen among their vndleannesses.

/ And let there be no body in the tabernade ofthe tõgregation when he goeth umto make an attonement in the holy place, vntyll he come out, and haue made an attonement for hym selfe, and for his housholde, and kor all the congeregation of Jsrael. az And he shall go out vnto the aulter that is before the Lorde, and reconcile ppouut, and thal take of the blood of the

Ce oa

bullocke, and ofthe blood of the goate,

and put it vpon the hornes of the aulter kbunde about.

9 Sothall he sprinckle ofthe blood vpbonit with his finger seuen tymes, and dleanse it, € halowe it from the vntleaunelle or the chyldren of Firat.

Qo And when he hath mãde an end ofre-

* nin the holy plate, and the taber-
1 917 of the congregation, and the auld me hall bryng the line goate. ö
’ ud Aaron (hall put both his handes bonthe head of the liue goate, and con?

les in all their fin nes, puttyng them vpa 9 head of the goate, and send hun ih p by the hand of a conuenient man,
Aud evoldernetle. nd the goate chall beare vpon hym

~~ they, mildeedes vnto the lande of

maaiee — p

ie Oer hym all the mildeedes of the
Yuldren of Jsrael, and all their trespal-

Leuiticus. bexlij.

seperation, and he shall lett f into the wpldernellt. gee .
23 After Aaron chall come into the tabernade ot the congregation, and put or the eat an en he put on when into the holy pt ;

tamer he holp place, and lee:
24. And let hym wache his fleche with water in the holy plate, and i on fe F owne rapment, and then come out, and offer his burnt offering, and the burnt; offering ol the people, and mate an attonement for hym selle, and for the peo-

ple.
25 And the fat of the finne offering that: he burne bponthe aulter. ,
26 And he that tarped foorth the goate fer the tape goate, Halt Wache his clo- E thes, aud bathe his fleshe in Water, and then tome into the hoalt. ;
27 And the bullocke for the {inne offering, the goate for the sinne offering, whole blood was brought in to clense the holy plate, shall one cary out without the: hoast to be burnt in the fire, with their
Ckinnes their fleshe, and their dounge.
28 And he that burneth them, shall wach his clothes, and bathe his fiethe in water, and then come into the hoast. ;
29 And this shalbe an ordinaunce fo2 euer vnto pou: that in the tenth day of the senenth moneth pe hunible pour soules, and do no worke at all, whether it be. one of pour owne countrey, or a straunger that soiourneth among vou. ¢
30 Fozrthatday (hail the priest make an attonement foz pou to cleanse pou, and that ye map be cleane from all pour sinnes belore the Loge. ‘
31 Let it bea Sabbath of rest vnto von, and ye fhall hunible pour foules by an ordinaunte fozr ener. :
32 And the priest whomhe fal annopnt, and whom he hall consecrate to minister in his fathers steade, shal make the attonement, and shall put on the linnen clothes, and holy vestmentes. :
32 And chall reconcile the holy fanctua KF rie, and the tabernacle of the congrega tion, and chall cleanse the aulter, male an attonenient, 15 the netz pa for . allthepeopicofthecongvegaon,
34 And his chalbe an cuerlastyng didtk-Eowerb nannce vnto pon, £0 make wd aàttonefi dren of Ilrael for all ment tor the chyldr i their finnes once a pere. Aud he dvd as.

ommaunded Moyles. ; the Lordec 5 1.

Ca) That man ¢

ged with as c

led a man.

(b Being geuen and redpe ¢ to the wozship . ping of them,

and to commit ¢ dolatric.

>. ail

Ordinaunces.

$a The. xvij.

thep not offer, a

l Fee EAI MD he Loge spake
Niers vnto Doyles, saping:
NS O) Speake vnto Aaron lf ane vnto 1 en: and vuto all the chylf 0 the chy

Who NY) deen of Jsrael, and {ap

=e 82} onto them: This is the thing whiche the Lode hath charged, saping:

3 What nian soeuer ofthe house of We rael kylleth an oxe, or lanibe, or goate a tie hoast, or that kylleth it out of the hoast,

4 And brpngeth it not vnto the doore of che tabernacle of the congregation, to

« oferan offering vnto the Lorde before

the dwelling place of the Low, blood

shalbe imputed vnto that man, be bath shed blood, aud that man shalbe cut of wi from among his people.
5 waberfore, whenthe chyldren of Ilrael bryng their offeringes that they offer in the wylde fielde, they chall bryng them vnto the TLorde, euen vnto the doore of the tabernacle of the congregation by the priest, to offer them for peace offeringes vnto the Lorde. N

6 And the priest (hall sprinckle the blood vpon the aulter of the Lorde, whiche is before the ooze of the tabernacle of the congregation, and burne the fat for a sweete sauour vnto the Lorde.

. And let them no moze offer their offeringes vntd deupls, after ꝰ whom they

haue gone a whoryng: This shalbe an

K A K K A A „ „ „

generations. .
8 And thou chalt fay vnto them: wohat-

soeuer man it be of the houle of Ilrael, or of the straungers whiche soiourne az mong pou, that offereth a burnt offe-

J The. xviij.
3 Che Ffraclites may not wake after the m

D the Lorde spake

dl vnto Doyles, saying:
I. Mpeake vnto the chyldzen of Jlrael,

and say vnto them:

J 0 the Lowe pour

~ Leuiticus.

4 Li sacritice must be bought to the doore of the tabernacle. 7 To deupls may ' io They map not cate blood.

ordinaunte for euer vnto them in their

Chapter.

ring or facrifice,
9 And brngeth it not vnto the co doorcof

¢
§
¢
‘

the tabernacle of the congregation ta Sts offer it vnto the Lode: that man cha L n

the

of Ilrael, or of the straungers that so- 5

be cut ol from among his people.
10 And whatsoeuermanit be of the house

toürne among you, that eateth anymaner ol blood, IJ wyll {et my face against that soule that eateth blood, and Wyll tut hym ok from among his people: n Forthetife ofthe lleche is in the blood, and J haue geuen it vnto pou bpon the aulter, to make an attonement for your soules: forthis blood shall make an at n 9 f
12 Therkore J layd vnto the chyldrenok
PBieaed: Lernolt coptbe neither let anp straunger that solourneth among vou, eate blood. :
3 And whatloeuer man it be of the chyldren ot Israel, or of the straungers that soiourne among pou, whiche hunteth and catcheth anp beatt or foule that. map be eaten, let hym powre out the blood thereof, and toner it with dust.

4. Foz the lyfe of the fiethe is the blood. C

of it iopned] with his lyfe: therefore J.

lapde vnto the thyldren of Jlrael, pe Cena,

dule of vou eate blood,

thal eate the blood of no maner of fleth, a

for the life of all fleshe is the blood ther-
. df: whosdeuer eateth it, halbe cut ol.
15 And euerp foule that eateth it whiche.

Dyed alone, or that whiche was tornewith Wylde beastes, whether it be ont of pour owne countrey, or a straunger, he Thali wache his clothes, and bathe.
Hymn elfe in water, and be vncleaue vr to the euen:and then shall he be cleane.

16 It he wache them not, nor bathe his. M

fleshe, he chall beare his inne.

Chapter. N 7

aner of the | | ees,
What degrees of hinred may marry together. the Egyptians nor Chanaanites

3 Alter the dopnges of the lande of.
Egypt wherein pe dwelt, chall pe not do: and after the doinges of the lande ol ;
Chanaan whyther J wpll bryng you, shall yt not do: neither Walke in their. ordinauntes. i

4 But do after my ludgementes e

and. xwüd

. Leulticus. IXXIII .

; e mint ordinannces, to walke ther- chalt thou not diftouer her nakednesse.

N 5 29 am the Lorde pout God. 8 The nakednesse of thy fathers wife Den a.

„ pe shall kepe therfore mine ordinaun- (halt thou not distouer: fo2 it is thy faz andxxvii « og and mplndgementes:“ which Ka. —tthers nakednesle. © Cor. va.
% man do He Chall lyue in them: Pam 9 Theusbal not discouer the naued- „nne
. the Londe. a + nelle of thy fitter, the daughter of thy ‘tin ws.

None shall approthe to arp kinred of —_father,or daughter ofthy mother, we: we his fleche, fo2 to bneduer their naked- ther che be borne at home, oz without. b de

Leuiticus. xviii. of Leuiticus.

‘| fe: Jamthe Lorde. 10 Thou halt not vrcouer the naked- «Pe

9 enable okthy father, e the nesse of thy lonnes daughter, 02 thy ee.
) nabednelse ol thy mother chalt tiounot daughters daughter, for that is thyne 0 er
5. bntduer, for she is thy mother: therforee owne nakednelle. « MO is fer”

, ** it

ae

: Degrees of kinred,whiche let matrimonie, Degrees ofaffinitie or aliaurice,whiche let "

2s it is fet foorth in the. xviii. of matrimonie, as it is set foorth in the

His fathers 5 His mothers { fier. fier, His vncleg DR 3

wypfe.

Mopses map not take to
Sopfe

Hisdaugdter,

forme, or daughier.

¶ Therfore 58 Moytes may not marry with women that are of his kinred or aliaunce.

according to that Which is here aboue contapned: Like wile Marie Moyles titer, may

not marky with the men whiche are of her kinred and aliaunce. And it is to be noted,

that belides the perfons here specilied, are compriled the alcending and delcending of the tame degree, either of kinred or aliaunce.

RRA A 0 4 K „ „ „ „ „ „„ „ „ K K „ «„ „ „ „ „4 „ „ „ «„ A

‘
‘
¢
¢
‘
‘ iy
¢ i
¢
¢
¢
¢ t f
¢ b
¢
¢ f
¢
¢

4 dThenanednesle ol chy fathers wiues ¶ nelle ok thy mothers hitter: for che is th
0 fe outer begotten of thy father, which mothers kinl woman. f thy fitter: thou chalt not diltouer her 14 Thou Chale not vncouer the naledn Nacdnesle. nesle of thy fathers brother, that is, alto at gen 1 the naked- ton Ne go fn vnto his wyfe,«
0 athers sister: fo I whiche is thyne aunt. i
5 fat ers kinlwoman. W 15 Thou chalknot ditduer nakednesle.

Ou thatt not dilcouer the naked: olthy daughter in awe, for pe thy.
| BI onnes «

„ „ eo

a

Lewt.xx.c.
NIaAt. XII. a.

Gen. & Nix. e

Leuit xv. c.
Ezec. xxil. c

Leun xx b. u. Reg Xl. a.

ra a) Scedeis

nere put foz

chyldz

zen.
Leut. xx. b.
Rom.. d.

Lcuit. x x. b

Deut. 27. c.

xP
A

Leuit. xi. g. i. Pet. i. c.

Leut. vil. d.

Ordinaunces.

flonnes Wyte: therckore shalt thou not vntccuer her nakednesle.
16 Thou thalt not vncouer the nakednesse okthy brothers wife, for that is thy brothers nakednesse.
17 Thon shalt not discouer the nakednesse okthe wyfe and her daughter, net ther chalt thou take her sonnes danghter, or her daughters daughter, to vncouer their nakednesse: For they are her
« kinliwomen, and it were wickednesse.
18 Thou shalt not take a wyfe and her ssister also, to vere her, that thou wouldelt vncouer her nakednesse vpon her in her lpkestyme.
19 Thou shalt also not go vnto a woman to vncouer her nakednesse, as long ds she is put apart for her vncleannesse.
20 *Morcouer, thou (halt not lye with ty neighbours wpke, to defile her with
« {eede.

D Thon shalt allo not geue of thy teeve

to offer it vnto Moloch, neither shalt

thon dellile the name ofthy God: Jam

the Lode.

22 Thou shalt not lpe with mankynde

as with womankynde, fo it is abhomi-

nation.

23 Thou Malt lpe with no maner of beast to defite thy selfe therwith:neither

shall any woman stande before a beast

rrr

2 5 ¢ n
N
«

1 6 PW the Lode spake

vnto Doyles, saping:
™ | Spcake vnto all the
Wide congregation ofp chyldien of Jlrael, and fap
ANG a vnto them: e shalbe a holy, for I the Lorde pour God am Holy.
3 He shall feare euery man his mother and his father, e kepe my Sabbathes:
Jamthe Lode pour God.
4 Be shal not looke vnto idols, no make vou moulten goddes: Jamthe Lode
5 If pe offer a peace offering onto the
Tonrde, ye shall offer it at pour pleasure.
It shalbe eaten the fame day ye offer tit, and on the morolwe: And if ought remapne vntpll the thirde day, it shalbe
„ burnt in the fire. b

8“
€
€ c
U
€
« c

E o 6 8 Ge

Leulticus.

q The. xix. Chapter.

J tepetition oflawes pertaynyng to the ten commaundementes. 9 conlideration for the poore. 26 Witchcralt is korbidden.

O rdinauy ' :

to lye downe therto, fo it is vnnaturall confusion. 0
24. Be hall not defile pour selues in any of these thinges: for in all these, the natlous are defiled whiche J cast out before

pou.

25 Wherthrough the lande ts defiled and
FY wyll bifite the wyckednelle thercol bpon it, pea and the lande it selfe hath . vomited out her inhabitauntes. 0

26 Be shall kepe therfore mine ordinaun- Leuna ces and my iudgementes, and commit ‘ none of these abhonnnations, neither any of pour owne nation, nor any straũger that soiourneth among pou: <

27 (Foz all these abhominations, haue the men of the lande done whiche were before you, and the lande is defiled.) ;

28 Shall not the lande spewe vou out alfo if pe defile it, as it spewed out the nations that were before pour oy

29 Jor Wholoeuer shall commit any of; these abhonunations, the same fonies. that connnit them chall be cut of from: among their people. ‘

30 Therekore thall pe kepe myne ordinauuces, that pe commit not one ofthese. abhominable customes whiche werecommitted before vou, and that ve defile not pour {clues therein: J am the. oh
Lorde pour God. :

„ K „„ „„ „ „ „

7 And ifitbe eaten the thirde dap, it is 2 vncleane, and not accepted. :
3. Therkore he that cateth it, shall beare his sinne, betause he bath dekiled the halowed thing of the Lord, and that soule shalbe cut of from among his people. ;
When pe reape the haruelt of pour n land, thou shalt not thorowiy reape the. torners of the fielde, neither Malt thou. gather the gleaninges of thy haruest.
10 Thou hate not dishonest thy vineparde, neither gather in thozowly the grapes of thy vineparde, but thou Malt. leaue them for the poore and straunger:
J am the Lode pour God. — n e shall not steale, neither deale falle e pe, neither lye one to another. „bah n * Be shall not [weare by my name fee. falsely, neither shalt thou defile the De name ofthy God: J anithe Lorde.
Iʒ Thou

naunces.

on Malt not do thy neighbonr
3 62501 neither rob hym * neither Mall

che Works Hye abyde with thee.

the mornyng. g

hen shalt orbefpit the deate,* net-

„ ther put a stumblyng blocke before the

8 pipude, but Malt feare thy God: Jam he Lorde. 8 8

j Be Mall do no vnrighteoulnesse in

iudgement, thou thattnot fauour the

% perlon poore, no: Honour the perlon

„ mightie, but in rightedulnes chalt thou indge thy neighbour. i

6 Thou lhalt not go vp and do wne with

tales among thy people, neither halt

ws thou stande © agapnst the blood of thy
% neighbour: Jam the Torde.

7 Thou shalt not hate thy brother in

thyne heart, but halt in any Wyle re-

puke thy neighbour, k sukfer not sinne bponhym. g. .

Thou shalt not auenge nor Wapte to

do dilplealure agaynst the chyldren ot

‘shy people, but shalt loue thy neighbour

then as thy elle: Jam the Torde.

y Pelhalkepe mine ordinauntes. Thou

shalt not let tattell gender with a tontrary kinde, neither ow thy fielde with mingled leede, neither shalt thou put on any mingled garment of linnen and wollen.

20 Wholdeuer lieth and medleth with a
Women that is a bondmapde betrothedto a hulbande, but not redeemed, norfreedome geuẽ her, the shalbe stourged, but they Thali not dye, becaule the
Was not free.

du And he thall bryng for his trelpasse bnto the Lore, before the doore of the tabernacle of p congregation,a a Ramme

! fora trespalse offering.
> Aud the prick hall make an attonetiene for hym with the Wamme which

forthe trelpalle belore the Lord, tondhe wh 1 he hath done: e hath done, thal

be forgeuen him. 5 1 ai
When pe tome to the lande, and haue we all maner of trees conuenient a eaten of, ye shall counte the fruite eok as vntirtumctzed: euen three

Leuiticus.

Db.

pere shall they be W yncirtum pou, and (hall not be eaten ‘aa !

255 ch the fourth pere, all the fruite of d

oly and

n a a 0 commendable to

n the fifth pere shall ve cate

cat ea aT

ereot:

„ God. e

2 ethailnot cate vpon blood, neither chall pe vle witchtrakt, nor
W i) 2 obserue

Baty ae een co guns aas

„neither chalt thou m Ezee. xlilii. e the tultes of thy bearde. e

28 Be hall not rent pour fleshe for any soules fate, nor print any markes vpon pou: J am the Torde.

29 Thou shalt not make thy daughter common, that thon wouldest caule her to be an Whore, lest the lande allo fall ta een become ful of wickednesse.

30 Be shall kepe my Sabbathes, c keare myplanctuaric : Jam the Torde. a

31 Be thallnot regarde them that worke with spirites, neither seeke alter soothfapers to be defiled by them: J am the ode your God.

32, Thou shalt ryse vp before the Hore head, and reuerente the face of the olde man, and dreade thy God: J am the
Bode. 5 i

33 Ila straunger soiourne With thee in pour lande, ve (hall not bere hym. ,

34. Wut the straunger that dwelleth Exoxdie with vou, chalbe as one of your one - nation, and thou shalt loue hymas thy selfe, for pe were straungers in the lande of Egypt: I am the Lorde pour God.

5 Be (hall do no vnrightedousnelle in iudgement, in metparde, in wapght, or in mealure.

36 Truc balauntes, true wayghtes, a « per, true Epha, and a true Hin shal pe haue: an ot
Jam the Lorde pour GOD whiche cure chey brought vou out of the lande of Egypt. vied tones

37 Therkore shall pe oblerue all my ov oe & dinauntes, and al my tudgententes,and do them: Jam the Lorde.

(b) That ia,

Leuit.xii d.

i. Reg. 28. a.

Eccle. viii. a, j. Tim. v. a

A tif The

V nlawfull coniunctions.

Leçui. xvill.c

J will bende myne anger agaynst that man.

(b) That is, winketh and

neglecteth to

Upll hem,

fecke alter Soothlapers. 1% Ok ince

e IND the Torde spake hea, ears Unto Mopses, saping:
This shalt thou fap

Chey that geue of their chyldren to loch wan dre therkore. 6 Igainst luche as 8

a

«
U

(as TADS jot the chyldren of

Ilgers th

: at SA ral, 02 of the straun-
. at d well in Ilrael, that geueth bf his chyldren vnto Moloch, let hym be Mayne : the people of the lande shall
© gneriobelnic hym with stones.
3 And FY Wypl setmp face agapnst that man, and wyll cut hymof krom among his people, because he bath geuen his chyloren vnto Moloch, kor to defile my flanctuarie, t to pollute my holy nanic,
4 Amd though that the people of the lande © hyde their eyes fromthe man

that geueth his chyldren vnto Moloch,

© nd Kyll hyin not:

5 I wyil put my fate agaynst that man, and agapust his kynred, and wyll cut phym ot, and all that go a whoring after
« Hynito commit whordome with Moloch from among their people.

6 If a soule turne hym selke after wet das worke with lpirites, and after soothsapers, to goa Whoring after them, J wWuyll put imp fate agaynst that soule, and
Wypyll cut hym ok krö among his people.

W. Oandctifie pour felues thereforc and

Leuit. xix. a

Rath. xv. a.
Prou. xx c.
Exo. xxi. b.

Deu. x xil. a u. Reg. xi. 2.

Leul.xvilli. a

Lewxviii,a

be holp: for J am the Lode pour God.
8 Bepe ye myne ordinauntes, and do
Ha : Jamthe Lowe whiche lanttitlie pon.

9 Whosoeuer he be that despileth his father or his mother, let hym dye: kor he hach denunished the estimation of his

clo And the man that breaketh wedlocke with another mans wpfe, euen he that bfzeaketh wedlocke with his neyghbours Wyke, let be flayne both the adulterer and the adultresse.

i And the man that lpeth * with his ka-

Deut.xvinc ¢

thers wyfe,and vntouereth his fathers

nakednes, let them both die, their blood be vpon them,

12 Ja man lpe with his daughter in

labe, let them dye both of them: they

haue Wrought abhomination, their blood be vpon them.

Leuiticus.
The. xx. Chapter. ; :

21 Jkaman take his bothers wple, it is father t mother, his blood be vpon him. 3 hisbroth 5

Volawfull coniunctio,,

3 Ikaman also tye with mankinde ak < ter the maner as with women kynde, Mane they haue both committed an abhonuee let them dye, their blood be vpon them. ;

14. And ik a man take a wyfe, and her mother also, it is wickednesse: They thay. burne with fire both hym € them, that there be no wickednelse among yon.

15 And“ ifa man le with abeast, let ppm Leu dye, and pe shall slea the beast alsoo .

16 Ika woman go vnto any beast, and lye done thereto, thou Malt kyil the: women and the beast also:let them dye, their blood be vponthem. ‘

17 Ata man take his fitter, his fathers‘ ¢ daughter, orhis mothers daughter, e. see her nakednesse, and che his nakednesle, isa wicked thing, they shalbe cut ol in the fight of their people: he. hath vncouered his fitters nakednesle, he shall beare his sinne. ‘

18 Ika man lye With a woman Hauing Le her natural dileale, and vncouer her na‘ ae kednesse, and open her fountapie, ande the allo open the foũtayne of her blood,

they chall both be cut of from among

their people. i

19 Thou halt not vncouer the naked- Lau nesse of thy mothers fitter, * nor of thy: kathers fitter : for he that doth lo, bath‘ vntouered his next kyn, they Mal beare their mildoyng. ‘

20 Haman lpe with his vncles wee, « and Oneouer his vncles nakednelle, they hall beare their firme, and shall, dpe chyldlesse. . an bncleane thyng: he bath vncouered his brothers nakednesle, they Males tchyldlesse. oa

22 Be shall kepe therefore all myne odt L. nauntes, and all my iudgementes, and do them: that the lande whyther JJ. bryng vou to dwell therein, spewe vou. not out, 5

23 Be shall not walke in the maners ol this nation, whiche J taste ont beforc pou: Foz they committe all tele: thinges, and therfore J abhorred the.

24. But I haue lapde vnto you, pe Mall enheritẽ their lande, and J pli gene

N aunces.

on to possesse it, euen a lande that
; ae with mylke and Hony: Jam the Lowe your God, whiche haue seperated vou from other nations.
„ And therefore Hall ve put difference
Bbetweene tleane beastes and vncleane,
„ betweene vncleane koules and cleane: f ve shal not defile pour soules in beastes and koules, and in all maner creeping
Ithinges that the grounde brpngeth foorth, whiche J haue leperated from

him, that is by his mother and his father, by his lonne, and his daughter, and his brother, 1 g And by his lister a mayde that is Oupe
„ vnto hym, whom no man hath knowe: for her shall he be defiled.
4 But he shall not be defiled bpon hym that hath aucthorttie among his people, to pollute him selfe.

wis Tetthem not make baldnesse vpon

their head nor shaue of ö lockes of their
; 1 1 nor make any cuttinges in their fleshe.
They shalbe holy onto their God, and ust pollute the name of their God, for the lacrifites of the Lorde made by fire, f and the bread of their God they do
; offer therfore they Hatt be holy.
8.7 Ker them not take a wyfe that is an i « Whore, o: polluted, nor put from her bul
. band:fo2 such a one is holy bnto his god.
8 Thou shalt fanctific hym therfore, for he ofkereth vp the bread of thy God: he
„ Wall therefore be holy vnto thee, for J
I the Lorde which fanctifie you, am hosp.
‘9 wil a priestes daughter fall to play the
1 Dore, che polluteth her father, there-
4 Pete eve bucne with fire.
158 e that is the hie priest among his bre-
ö ple pon whole head the annopnting
* meh powzed, and that confecrated
Dee to but on beltments shal not u Dees head no vent bis clothes: mah ther go to any dead body, nor mate hymselte vncleane by his father

Leulticus.

bj. von ne pee ‘
26 _AVYerto2e shall pe be holy vnto me, for ‘
75 Wa be — n haue 1 a
N nation : ne be.
27 Il there be a man or woman that Deu. xi b worketh with a spirit, oz that eas: Prams saper, let them dye: Men chall ouer-

whelme them with stones, the ; be vpon them. ee Te

* J The. xxj. Chapter, g
= q lawe fo2 the priettes. F
2 J ie W the Lorde fapde on his mother. :
1 / vnto Mopses, Speake 12 Meither Mall go ont of the sanctuarte,
© Awe JN vom the priestes the nor pollute the holy place of his God for‘ e O sonnes of Aaron, e sax the crowne of the annopnting oyle ok.
6 [Se onto them: Let none his God is vpon him: Jam the Log. «
| [LOY ibe defiled by a cole a- 13 He shall take a mayde vnto his wife. Peak. mong his people: 14. Buta wydowe, a deuorsed woman, oz € ö
2 Wut by his kynsinan that is nye vnto à polluted, or a harlot, these shall he not

marrie: but shall take a mayne of his one people to wyfe. ‘

15 Meither shal he defile his leede among

is people: fo2 I am the Lorde whiche anctifie hym. i

16 ' And the Lozde spake vnto Moyses, aping: .

17 Speake vnto Aaron, and lay: Whosoeuer of thy seede in their generations.
Hath any defornitie, let hym not prease for to offer bread vnto his God:

18 For whosoeuer hath any blemiche, ü Res. b.
Mall not come neare: as if he be blynde or lame, or that hath a brused nole, or. Ov. that hath any nulshapen member: ‘

19 Or is broken footed, or broken handed,

20 Oris crooke backt, 02 bleare tyed 02 haue a webbe or other blemishe in his. eyes, or be lnuruic, or fkabbed, or bath. his stones broken: .

at No man that hath a blemishe, € is of 8 D the feede of Aaron the priest, Mall come. nye to offer the latrifites ol the Lorde. made by fire: When he hath a deform.
12975 hum not preale to offer the bread of his God. } . g

22 Let him eate the bread of his God,. euen ofthe most holy, and of the holp :

23 Only let him not go in vnto y vaple no: tome nye the aulter, because he ls deko; 0 med, that he pollute not my sanctuarie: for J amthe Londe that lancatie them.

24. And Moyses tolde it vnto Aaron and. to his sonnes, and vnto all the choldren. 5

of Ilrael. N Ee

Ordinaunces.

and when they choulde be offered.

od the 111 spake
8 25 vnto Moyles, faping:

‘and his sonnes, that they be feperated from
. the holy thinges of the

children of Ilrael, and

„5 „„ „ „ e a i

w er
D o es
Ss

hat man soeuer of the seede of Aaron is a leper, or Hath a running issue, he

he be tleane: And who fo toucheth any man that is vncleaue by reaton] of a. dead body, or a man Whole seede runneth from hym in his sleepe,

5 Oz wholoeuer toucheth any creepiug
< thpug, wherebp he may be made vntleane, ora man, of whom he map take
‘ eee vncleannes he hath:

<6 The fame soule that hath touched
* anpfucde, chalbe vncleane vntyll euen,

“
“
€
4“
Leuit. xv. a. c 4.
€
é
é
€

and shall noteate ofthe holy thynges, vntyll he haue walhed his fleshe with water.
7 And when the funne is downe, he halbe cleane, and shall afterwarde cate ofthe holy thynges, foralmuche as it is his foode.

piss

Exodxxiice3 * DF abeatt that dyeth alone, or is rent

With wylde beastes, wherbyhe may be
„ , defiled, he Mhall not cate: J am the
Lorde. N

9 et them kepe therefore myne ordinaunce, left they for the fame lade sinne ppon them, and dye for it, it they defile tit: Hehe Lorde fanctifie them.

J There Hall no straunger eate of the holy thing, neither a ghest of ö priestes, neither Wall an hyred seruaunt cate of
« theholythpng.

cH But if the priest bye any foule with monep, he Hall cate of it like as he that

Leuiticus.
The. ij. Chapter.

uh ought to abstayne from eating the thinges that were offered. 19 Howe, what,

Speake bnto Aaron

shall not eate ot the holy thinges, vntyll

ts borne in his houle: they shall cate of. his meate. j
12 If the priestes daughter allo be maried vnto a staunger, she may not eate of the halowed heaue offeringes: :
; Notwithstanding fp priestes daughter bea wydowe or deuorsed, and haue no chylde, but is returned vnto her fathers Houle agayne, fhe shall eate of her fathers meate, al weil as the dyd it in. her pouth: But there (hall no straun-
90 N pos E the bay ch ‘
14. Haman eate of the holy thyng vn-
Wittingly he shal put the filth parttner vnto, and geue it vnto the priest with the. halowed thyng. 0
15 And the priestes (hall not defile the holy thynges ok the chyldren of Israel, whiche they offer vnto the Lorde:
16 To lade them selues with nuldoyng and trespasle while they cate their holy
3 — fo: I the Lorde do halowe em. .
75 And the Lode spake vnto Moyles, aping: <
18 Speake nto Aaron and his fonnes, < and vnto all the children of Israel, and, fay vnto them: Whatsoeuer he be of the house of Ilrael, or straunger in Jlrael, that wyll offer his sacrikice for all his vowes, and for all his freewyil offeringes whiche they wyll offer vnto the.
Lorde fo; aburnt offering: ;
19 Be shall offer at your pieafure,a male without blenushe, ol the beefs, of the. sheepe, or of the goates. :
20 Bnt Whatloener hath a blemiche, that.
{hall pe not offer:for it shal nat be atteptable for you.
2 And WhHoloeuer bryngeth a peace offe- <p ring vnto the Lorde, to accomplyshe his vowbe, ora freewyll offering in beckes: or sheepe, it shalbe perfite to beaccepted, there shalbe allo no blemishe therein.

22 Wlynde, or broken, or lane, or hauyng

à wen, oz skuruie, or stabbed, pe hall « not offer suche vnto the Corde, nor put

à burnt offering of any suche vpon the. aulter vnto the Torde. ‘
23 Abullocke or a sheepe that hath any « member superfluous o2 lackpug may’: eft thou offer for a freewyll offering: but for a vowe it shall not be ted de, 1

5 Leuiticus. bil.

He (hail not offer buto the Lord that which is bruled, 02 trusshed, or broken, dorcut away, neither thal you make any
„ ofkeryngtherof in pour laude,

25 Peither of a straungers hande hall
>) coffer the bread of your God of any
“fine, becanfe their corruption is th the, and they haue dekozuutie in thẽ seiues: and therkore shall they not be accepted

faz vou.
26 and the Lorde spake vnto Moyses,

« faping: 4
2 When abinlocke ra chene dea goate is brought foorth, it chalbe seuen dapes vnder the dane: And from the epght day and thentefoorth it halbe accepted for a burnt sacrifice vnto the Lorde,

trumpettes. 34 The featt of tabernactes,

= ND the Lorde spake
17 vnto Mopses, saping:
N || Speake vnto the chi den of Israel, and fay
. Eye onto the: Lhe feattes
CY) GCLN I of the Lorde which pe
| shall call holy conuocations, euen these are my feastes. ib. Sire Dapes pe chall worke: but the seuenth day is the Sabboth of rest, an
« holpcduocation, so that ve do no worke therin: it is the Dabboth of the Lorde im all pour dwellynges.
4. Thele are the feastes of the Lorde,

ata ah P A . „% — ĩðͤ Oe Coe

tw

euen holy tonnocations, which ye shall

broclapme in their seasons.
5 In the fourteenth day of the first mo-
„ nethat euen, is the Lordes Passouer:
. 6 Aud on the fifteenth day of the fame moneth, is the feast of vnleauened bread vnto the Lorde: seuen dapes pe mult
„ Gate bnleauened bread. —
. 7 Inthe first dap pe hall haue an holy
. dern ee (hal do no seruile worke
Le gout pe hail offer faccifices made by
Bs 90 vnto the Lorde throughout thele f an dapes: and in the seuenth Day is i; holy conuocation, pe Tall do no ler-
4 e therin. e faying: he Lorde spake vnto Moyles,

Dpeake vnto the children of Jl-
Cl, and lay vnto them: ohen ye be

The xxiit, Chapter.

2 Of theholpdapes, 3 OF the Sabboth, 5 Che Paslouer. 6 Che teak of vnleauened bread. io The teat ot the fir kruites. 16 whitlontide. 24 Che keast of blowyng

28 And whether it be cove or ewe, ye

chall not kyll it and! E. one day. her young both in

29 When ve wyll offer athanke offeryng ;

bnito the Lorde, offer it wyllyngiy :;
30 And the fame dap it muttbe en, vp, fo that pe leaue none of it vntyll the: morowe: Jamthe Tode. 6

31 Therfore shall ye kepe my cõmaundementes and do them: Jam the Lorde.

32 Neither Chal ye pollute my holp name, enter or J 4 among the rael: J am the Torde

which halo we you, *
33. And that brought por out of the lande.
3 de. to be pour God: Pam the

€

tome into the lande which J geue vnto vou, and reape downe the haruest ther: of, pe hall bryng a theate of the first frnites of your haruest vnto the priest:
II Which Chall waue the sheafe before . the Lorde, to be accepted for pou: and euen the morowe after the Sabboth the priest shall waue it. i
2 And ye shall offer that day when ve waue the theafe, an hee lanbe without blemishe of a pere olde, for a burnt offeryng vnto the Lorde: 8
13 And the meate olferyng therof, chalbe made of two tenth deales of fine fisure . myngled with ople, to bea satrifite made byfire vnto the Lord foz asweete sauour: and the drynke offeryngtherof shalbe of wine, euen the fourth deale . of au hun. :
14 And pe thal cate neither bread noz par ¢ ched torue, nor greene cares, vntyl p {cite < lame day that ve haue brought an olfering vnto pour God: Let this be alawe . for euer in pour generations, and in all. pour dwellynges. :
15 And pe shall tount vnto you front the. morobe after the Sabboth, euen from. the day that ve brought the (heale of. the waue offeryng, seuen Sabbothes they shalbe complet: . ‘
16 Eden vnto the morowe after ꝰ seuenth
Sabboth chall ve number fiftic dayes. and ye fall bryng om mate offe: -
- k. 6 ryng vnto the Lorde. 17 And

c D55

nan aon &

Solempne feastes.

Leuiticus.

Solempne Feattes

17 And pe Mall bryng out of your habita- cut of from among his people. ‘

tenth deales offine flowre, and that are

made with leauen, for first fruites vnto

d the Torde.

Num. as d. 18 And ye Mall bryng with the beead * {es nen lambes without dekormitie, ot one pere ofage, and one young bullocke, and two rannnes, which schall serue fora burnt offerpng vnto the Torde, with their meate offeringes and their drinke offeringes, to be a sacrifite made by fire fo2 a lWeete sauour vnto the Lorde.

19 Then ye shall prepare an hee goate for
à sinne offeryng, and two lambes of one vere olde kor peace offerynges.

20 And the priest Mail waue them with the bread of the first fruites for a waue offering before the Lorde, and with the two lambes: they shalbe holy to the
Worde for tye priestes. e

21 And pe Mall proclayme the same day, that it maybe an holy tonuotation vnto

vou ye shall do no seruile worke therin, let it be a lawe for euer in all pour dwel-

lynges throughout pour generations.

Leuit iy b. 22 And whe ye reape downe the haruest

Deut. 24. d.: of pone lande, thou chalt not make

cleane riddaunte of the corners of thy

fielde when thou reapest, neither shalt thou make any after gatheryng of thy haruest, but shalt leaue them vnto the pooze aud the straunger: J am the

Lorde pour God.

5 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyles;

« faying:

24 Speake bnto the chyldren of Jlrael,

and lay: In the leuenth moneth, in the first dap of the moneth shall pe haue
Sabbath ,* euen the remmembraunce of blowyng of trumpettes, an Holy tonuocation.

25 He Khali do no seruile wozke therein, but offer sacrifice niade by fire vnto the
Torde.

26 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyles,

faping:

a „ &

\

K KM KA AA ARR A

D

K G Kn ARAKRAAKR „ „ SA

R M „ K „ K „

Num 1. a.

K K KK K K A K „ HK

G

Leult. f. f.

2 Theꝰ tenth day also of the selfe seuenth

moneth is a day of retontilyng, therfore shall it be an holy conuocation vnto pou eye Mall hunible pour soules, and of: fer sacrifite made by fire vnto the Lord.
28 Be shall do no worke p fame day, for it is à dap ok retõciling, to make an attonement for pou before the Lord pour God.
29 Foz Whatlocuer foule it be that humbleth not hyn selle that dap, he shalbe

<< That (s,
You shall falt.

N K W N N a a

3 Let it be vnto pou a Sabbath of rest,

39 Moreouer, in the fifteenth day o

tions two waue loaues made of two zo And whatsocuer soule do any Worke

that day, the same foule wyll F destroy.

krom among his people.

let it be a lawe for euer in your generations, and in all pour dwellynges. g and pe (hall humble pour fonles in the. ninth day of the moneth at euen: from

euen to euen chall pe celebrate pour
Sabbath.

3 And the Lorde spake vnto Moysts,

saping:

c say: The fifteenth day of the fame leuenth moneth is the feast of tabernacies seuen dapes vnto the Lorde. :

35 The fir day is an holy tonuocation:.

pe hall do no seruile worke.

36 Seuen dayes pe shall offer tacvifice

made by fire vnto the Lorde, and in the eyght dap halbe an holy conuocation vnto vou, and pe hall offer sacrifices. made by fire vnto the Lorde: It is the. folempue assemblie, and ye Mall do no seruile worke therin. 1

7 These are the feastes of the Lorde,

which ye shall call holp conuocations, . for to offer sacrifice made by fire vnto. the Lorde, burnt offeryng, meate offeryng, sacrifites, and drynkte olferynges, euery thyng vpon his day:

38 Wespde the Habbathes or the Lozve, .

and besyde pour giftes, besyde all pour vowes, and all pour free offerynges which ype geue vnto the Lorde,

seuenth moneth when ye haue gathered in the kruite ol the lande, ye shall kepe holy day vnto the Lorde seuen dapes:.
The first day shalbe a Sabbath, tyke.

wille in the eyght day shalbea Sabbath.
40 And pe shall take you inthe first day

the kruites of goodly trees, braunches of palme trees, and the bowes of thicke . trees, and Willowes ofthe brooke, and
Nall retoyce belore the Lord pour God. seuen dapes.

4i And ye chan kepe this fealt puto the.

Lorde leuen dayes in the pere: It Har « be a lawe for euer in pour generations, that ye kepe it in the leuenth moneth.

42 Be thal dwell in boothes seuen dayes:

euen all that are Jsraelites borne shall. dwell in boothes: f

hat pour chudre ou map.
43 That v chüͤdzen after you owe:

31 Ye chall do no maner Worke therkore:

34 Speake vnto the chyldren of Ilrael, f

Num ip b.
2. Efdse,
2. Macu 10

k the.

frances Leuiticus. xxvii}. ehowe that J made the Hilden Jam the Lode pour God. f

0 af “pte to divellin boothes when J 44. And Doyles declared vnto the chilbronght them ont ok the lande ol Egipt: dren ok Ilrael the kealtes ok the Lorde, oe

q The. xxiiij. Chapter,

Che ople for the lampes. 15 He that blatphemeth mute be stoned. 1) he chat kylleth shalbe kylled. ac. i

ST? K =
87 Sa = = y =
= ee, SE = a = 2 W

ä

e ee, e ee e dd the Lorde fpake 8 Euerp Sabbath he hall put them . 25
J. A |vuto Doyles saping: rowes before the Horde euermore, of
5445 ™ | *Commaunde the the chyldren ol Ilrael shall they be ol-

Wechildrenof Ilraelthat fkered for an euerlastyng touenaunt. cane f 8 they bryng vnto thee 9 And they shalbe Aarons and his ed,

Ig pure ople oline beater sonnes, which Chall eate them in the ho",
8 forthe lyght, to causle holy plate: Foz they ave molt holy vnto ae ram

the lampes to burne continually, hym of the offerpnges of the Lorde ae

3 withoutthe vaple of Wirnelle in the made bp fire, by a perpetua ltatute. (Hcave, wn
« fabernace of the congregation hall 10 And the sonne ofan Plractitifhe wike, mann

Aaron drelle them both cuenyng and whole father was an Egyptian, went eum

„ Mompng before the Lorde altayes: gut among the chüdzen of Ilrael: And f g.
Ext it be a lawe for euer in pour gene: this lonne or the Ilraelitiche wyle and Hetero

— p K —

. vations, aman of Pleael ftrone together in the zan cust,
‘4+ He shall dresse helampesbponppure hoast. 1

4 Wtbletticke bekoze ; tithe womans sonne aue ,
5 And thou ch ae He be aud 1 ae en bene the Lorde, 5 ate

. bake tiwelne cakes therof, two tent and curled, and they brought hym bn- theca vense-
10 deales halbe in one 15 a ‘ to Doyles: His mothers name was eien a thou chalt fet the in two rowes, Selonnth, which was the daughter of ws». ems foronarowe, pon the pure table be: Dibni ol the tribe of Dau. g de the Lorde. 12 And they' put hym in warde, that the an

plane § name

„And put pure frantent inde ofp ght be shewed the. ente vpon the minde of Hozdemighebe ye ehem
+ roles, that they may be brad of tee z And the Lorde spake vnto Moypfses, ne

¢ membraunte and fiest table and
5 fire bnto the Lore, ryng made by

tconde com-

saping:
14: aBrmngtie te 50 auhande nee i 2

Exod. xxi.b

Deat. xv. a.

Ordinaunces.

hoast, and let all that hearde hym, put

their handes vpon his head, and let all

the nuiltitude stone hum.

15 And thou shalt speake vnto p children of Ilrael, saping: Mholoeuer curseth his God, shall beare his sinne.

16 And he that blasphemeth the nanie of the Lorde, let him be slayne, and all the nultitude hall stone hym to death:
Whether he be borne in the lande, or a straunger, when he blasphemeth the name ofthe Torde, let hym be slapne.

D 17 And he that kylleth any man, let hym dye the death.
18 And he that kylleth a beast, let hym make hym good, beast for beak.
19 And pra man caulear blemishe in his

J The. xv. Chapter.

Che Sabbath of the teuen peres, 3 and ot the pere of Jubilee, other wite called the fiftieth pere. 23 Che fale and redeemyng of landes, houles, and perfors,

M the Lorde spake ery) bute Mopyses in moũt
„ Sinal, saping:

2 büdbrnof Aka the

f, s children of Israel, and

F Ke lay vnto them: When

5 . . ye be tome into ß lande

which J gene pon, the lande hall rest

IIR

aud kepe Sabbath vnto the Lode,

3 SDfre peres thou halt sowe thy fielde,

And fice yeres thou shalt cut thy vinevaͤrde, and gather in the fruite therok.
4 But the; seuenth pere shalbe a Sabbath ot rest vnto tlje lande, the Lordes
Sabbath it chalbe: thou Chale neither sowe thy fielde, nor tut thy vineyarde.
That which growech of the owne accorde of thy Harnett, thou shalt not reape neither gather the grapes that thou hast left behynde: for it is a yere of rest vnto the lande.
6 And the rest of the lande shalbe meate for pou, euen kor the, for thy seruaunt, e for thy mayde, for thy hired seruaunt, and for the straunger that soiourneth with thee:
And for thy cattell, and for the beattes that are in thy lande, Mall ail the enktreale therok be meate.
8 And thou shalt nuniber leuen Sab-
« bathes of peres vnto thee, even leuen tynies seuen yere, and the {pace of the
« fenen Sabbathes of peres wylbe vnto thee nine and fourtte peres.
9 And then thou chalt caule to blowe

AM

„ „ „ „ „„ „ „ „ „„ „ „„ „„ „ „„

Leuiticus.

13 In the pere ok this Jubilee pe Matt‘

Ordinaune

neighbour: as he hath done, so shall it be done to hym.

20 Boke kor broke, epe forepe, and tooth da, for tooth: euen as he hath blenulched g kon. man, so shall he be blemilched agapne,

21 Andhe Hhatkpllethabcatt, set hym as it: and he that kylleth a man, let

pm dpe.

22 Be shall haue one maner of lawe, even for the straunger alwell as for one of pour one countrey: for J am the
Lorde pour God.

23 And Moyses tolde the childrẽ of Fira: el, e they brought hym that had cursed dut ok the hoast, and stoned hym with stones: And the chüldren of PHirael dyd as the Lorde conmaunded Movies,

the trumpet of the Jubilee in thetenth
Day of the fenenth moneth, euen in ỹ day of attonement thal pe make the trumpe. blolbe throughout all pour lande. . io And pe shall halowe that pere, even. the fiftieth pere, and protlayme libertie throughout all the lande vnto all theinhabiters thereof; for it shalbe a Jubilee onto pou, and pe shall returne every. man vnto his possession, and euery man g vnto his kinred agayne. n Apereof Jubilee that that fiftieth pere be vnto vou: Be Chall not so we, neither b reape that which groweth of it selle, neither gather the grapes that are left:.
12 Foz that pere of Pubiice shalbe holy. vnto pou: but pe chall eate of the entreale therof out of the fielde. ;

returne cuerp man vnto his polssession 80

agayne. I

14. If thou sellest ought vnto thy neyghbour, or byest ought of thy neyghbours hande, ye chal not oppresse one another.

15 Wut According to the nuntber of eres after the Jubilee yere thou Chale bye of thy neighbour: and accordyng vnto the number of peres of the kruites he Chall sell vnto thee.

16 According vnto the multitide of peres he shall enerease the price therol and ac „ ont coding tothe kewnelke ot peres, he Mal ge mauche the price of it:korthe W number fi ol fruites doth he sell vnto thee. rroantt 3

17 Oppzesse not ve therfore euery n g fen

the da

naunces.

his neighbour, but thon that feare thy
God: For J ain the Tode pout God.
Wherlore pe shall do alter myne ordinaunces, and kepe mp lawes, and do them, and ve (hall dwell in the lande in

afetic. ,
19 ban the lande hall geue her kruite,

and ye Mall cate your kpll, and dwell

erin in laketie.

49 pk pe Mall fap what (hail we eate the leuenth peres for we hall not sowe, nor gather in our increale: /

Jwyll sende my blessyng vpon pouin the firt vere, and it Thali bryng foorth fruite forthret veres.

1 And ye shall sowe the eyght pere, and eate pet of olde kruite vntyll the ninth pere: cuen vntill her kruites come pe shall tate ok olde store.

9 The lande chall not be solde to

~ “watte:foz the lande is myne, e pe be but

staungers and solourners with me.

24. Ju all the lande of pour posseslion, ye

„ fhal v graunt a redemption fog p lande.

25. Il thy brother be waxed poore, and

yf any of his kinne tome to redeeme it,
1 hym bpe out that which his brother olde.

26 And yt he haue no manto redeeme it, and his hande hath gotten and founde as much as may be sufficient to bye it out agapne:

27 The let hyni tount howe long it hath ben solde, and delpuer the rest vnto the man to whom he lolde it, that he may returne to his possession agayne.

28 But and yk his hande cannot get sulficient to restore to the other agayne, the that which is solde shal remayne in the hande of hym that bath bought it, bntypll the ere of Jubilee: and in the
Jubilee it chall come out, and he hall returne vnto his poslession agayne.

2 And pka man fell a dwellyng houle in

abated citie, he may bye it out agayne
Within a whole pere after it is folde: within a yere may he redeeme it.

But and pf he bye it not out agapne

0 the {pace of a full yere, then the qoute that is in the Walled citie, halbe baullhed, as translated to hym that
Ought it and his succeslours after
Dy, r hail not go out in the Jubilee. ae the houles of vyllages, which
55 no Walles rounde about them, re counted as the fielde ol the toũtrey:

JLeulticus.

pach solde away of his pollession, and

bexix.

and therefore they may be bon agayne. and Chal go out inthe Hegel

32 Notbithstandyng, the aties of the

: dees Honits of the tities of cllion, may the Weuites rez

33 And yfãa man purchase of the i the house that was solde, be dite of their poslession, shall go out in the pere of Jubilee: for the houtes of the cities of the Leuites, are their posselsion among the children of Bfcact,

34. Wut the fielde of the suburbes of their cities may not be solde: for it is their perpetnall possession.

35 Il thy brother be waren poore and fallen in decay with thee, thou shalt relieue hym as a straunger or sotourner, that he may lyue with thee.

36 And thou (halt take none vlurie of
Pp, or vantage: but thou shalt feare thy God, that thy brother may lyue with thee.

37 Thon shalt not geue hym thy money

vpon vlurie, nor lende him thy victuels

for encreale.

J am the Lode pour God, Which brought pou out of the lande of Egypt, to geue pou the lande of Chanaan, and to be pour God. ö
39 If thy brother that dwelleth by thee

be Waren poore, and be solde onto thee, thou shalt not tompell hym to ferue as abonde seruaunt:

40 Wut as an hired sernaunt, and as 4 soiourner he chalbe with thee, and shall serue thee vnto the pere ol Jubilee.

41 And then Chall he depart krom thee, both he and his children with hym, and shall returne vnto his owue kinred agayne, and vnto the poslession of his fathers Hall he returne. .

42 For thevare my seruauntes, which 7 brought out of the lande of Egypt, and fall not therkore be solde as bondmen.

3 Thou shalt not rule ouer py ceuctly,

but (hait feare thy God.

Thy bondleruaunt and thy bondemayde which thou Mate haue halbe of the heathen that are rounde about von: of them shall pe purchale seruauntes and maydes. 4 g

45 Morcouer, of the chüdzenok b Traine gers that are soiouruers aon pou, of theim shall pe bye, cot their kanulies that are With von, mb poll 10

e E 0 your lande: thele chalbe? 46 And

Exod. 22. d.
Deut. 23. d.

Ezecir.22.6,

Exod 21. a.
Deut. ig. c

Ordinaunces.

46 And pe Hall take them as inheritaũce for your children after pon, to possesle them for an inheritaunte, they thalbe

pour bondmen for euer: but ouer your

brethren the children of Jlrael, pe Mall not rule one ouer another truellp.

» G 47 Ik a soiourner o2 straunger ware

riche by thee, and thy brother that

. dwelleth by hym Ware poore, and fell hym selfe vnto the straunger or soiourner bythet, or to the stocke of the straunecrs kinne:

48 Akter that he is solde, he map be redeemed agapne: one of His brethzen map redeeme hym:

49 Either his vntle, or his vncles sonne map bye hym out: or anp that is nye of kinne vnto hym of his kinred, may redeeme hym: either yk his hande can get fo much, he may be bought out.

| 50 And he (hall recken with hym that

bought hyn from the pere that he was solde in, vnto the pere of Jubilee: and

J The. xxvj. Chapter.
They are blessed that kepe thole thynges that God biddeth. 14 J curte to them

that breatie them.

F chall* make pou no
A wols nor grauẽ image,
Hneither reare pou vp any piller, neither chall pe {et vp any iniage of
EN stone in pour lande to bowe downe vnto it:

for Nam the Lorde pour God.
2 Be shall kepe mp Sabbathes, and re-

ucrence my lanctuarie: for J am the

3 If pe walke in my ordinaunces, and kepe mp connnaundementes, æ do the:

4 J wyll sende vou rapne in due season, and the lande shall peelde her increase, and the trees ot the fielde shall geue their fruite:

5 And pour threschyng shal reache bnto the vintage, e the vintage shall reache vnto sowyng tyme: and pe (hall eate pour bread in plente dusnesle, and dwell in pour lande lafelp.

6 And J wpyll sende peace in the lande, and ye shall lye downe without any man to make pou afrayde: And J wypll ridde cupll beastes out of the lande, and there Mall no [worde go throughout pour lande.

7 And ye shall Hale pour enemies, and

Leuiticus.

Ordinaun,

the pace of his deyng, haibe attordyng vito the number of peres, according to the tyme of an hired seruaunt thai he be with hym.

st Ifthere be vet many peres behynde accordyng vnto them let hym geue a: gaine for his deliueraunte of: the money that he was bought for.

5 If there remapyne but kewe peres py: to the pere of Jubilee, let hym count with hym agayne: and accordyng vnto his peres, geue hym agayne for his redemption. N ö

5 And he shalbe with hym pere by pere as an hired seruaunt: and the other (hat not raigne truelly ouer him in thy fight,

54 If he be not redeemed thus, he chall go out in the pere of Jubilee, both he and his chudren with hym:

55 For vnto me the children ol Ilrael are seruauntes, they are my leruauntes which J brought out of the lande of
Egypt: ‘J ant the Torde pour God.

they thal fall befoze pou bpon p worde.

8 *Andfine of you thall chafe an hun- A dred, and an hundred of pou shall put = ten thoufande to flight: € pour enemies
(hall fal before pou vpon the [Wworde.

9 Foz J wyll haue respect vnto vou, and 2 make pou increase, and multiplie pou, and fet vp my touenaunt with you.

10 And ve shall cate olde store, and carp out olde, because of the newe.

n And J wyll make my dwellvng plate among you, and my sonle shalnot lothe pou. N

2 J wyll walke among pou, and wilde pour God, and pe shalbe my people.

13 Jan the Powe pour God whi bought you out of the lande of Egypt, that pe choulde not be their bondmen, and J haue broken the chapnes of pour poke, and made pou go bpright. oa”

14 But and ik ye wyll not hearken vnto vr me, nor Wyll not do after thele conv’ maundementes: :

1 And pf pe hall dispise myne 02d! nauntes, etther if pour soule abhorre my lawes, fo that pe wyll not do all nir tommaundementes, but breake my co-

uenaunt, FZ
16 Hallo wyll do this vnto vou: 15 sit

5 cursinges.

sutnption, and the burnyng ague to conlume pone eyes, aud gender sorowe of heart: And pe Mall sowe your (cede in bayne, for pour enemies Chall eateit.
, And J wyll let my face agaynst vou, c yo thail kall before your enemies : they that hate you shal raigne ouer you, and ye (hall fle WHE no man koloweth vou.

zs And pf pe wyl not pet forall this hear-

ken vnto me, then W yl FJ punishe vou scuen tymics moze for your sinnes:

v And Wyll breake the pride of pour power, and J wyll make pour heauen as iran, and pour earth as brasse.

10 And your labour shalbe spent in vayne: for pour lande shall not geue her inreale, neither thall the trees of the lande geue their kruites.

1 And ik pe walke contrarie bnto me, and wyll not hearken vnto me, J Wwytt bayng leuen tymes mo plagues bpon vou, actordyng to pour sumes.

1 J wyll allo sende in wylde beastes vpon pou, which shall robbe pou of pour children, and destroy pour cattell, and make pou felve in number, and caule pour hye wapes to be desolate.

23 And ik ye may not be refourmed by one thpages;but hall walke contrary me: ö a

4 Then wyll J alfo walke contrarie buto you, and Wyl punishe vou yet seuen tymes for your sinnes.

And J wyll sende a sworde vpon vou, that hall anenge my touenaunt: And when pe are gathered together within pau tities, J wyll leude the pestilente sal! vou, and pe shalbe delyuered in-

7 2115 bande of the enemie.
1 d whe Fs Hane broken the “tatfe of
: ur bread o ten wyues Chall bake pour
AD in one ouen, and they Chall deliver
Pon Your bread agayne by Wayght, ve
„ cate, and not be fatiltied,
; ce if ye wyl not pet for all this hear-
28 qq tO me, but walke agaynst me:
9 8 Walke contrary buto you allo ent yo ation, and wyll chastile pou segE: aentes more for pour sinnes. ines dcn Gi the fleshe of pour
ö ¢
) “allve denon, he ok pour daughters ta ae detiroy pour hye plates, and ark ay pour unages, and cast pour atiy ts bean P bodyes of pour idols, ty foule Cav abhorre pou,

Leuiticus.
Wyll bryng vpon pon feavefulnetie,con- 31 And Wyll make

8 pour cities desolate,

ph 5 mune vnto naught, mell t

sweete odours, er

32 ms 2. gO e buto a wüͤder-

> emies Whicl

th Na p at it. 1

n pli strowe pou among the

Heathen, and wyll darbve 5 .

after pou: and your lande chalbe waste

and pour cities defolate, f

34. Then shall the lande enioy her Savbathes as long as it lyeth voyde, and ye chalbe in pour enemies lande:euen then

shaͤll the lande rest and enioy her Sabbathes.

35 As longas it lyeth voyde, it shall rest: betause it dyd not rest in pour Sabbathes when pe dwelt vpon it.

36 And vponthem that are left alpue of vou, I will sende a fayntnesse into their heartes in the landes of their enemies: and the sounde of a shakyng teafe hall chase them, and they fail fice as fleyng fromasworde: they shall fall, no man folowyng vpon them.

37 They chall fall one vpon another as it were before a sworde, euen nd man

Ixxix,

folowyng vpon them, and pe shall haue

no power to stand before pour enemies.

38 And pe shall periche among the heathen, and the lande of pour enemies shall eate vou vos. N

39 And they that are left of you, Hal pine
Albay in their vnrighteoulnesse seuen in pour enemies landes, in the nuldeedes of their fathers shall they consunie with them.

40 And they shal tonfesse their mildeedes

and the uildeedes of their fathers, foz their trespalle which they haue trelpalsed agaynst me, and foz that allo that they haue Walked contrary bute me.
41 Therkore, J allo wyll walke contrarie vnto them, and wyl bring them into the lande of their enemies: And then at the least way their vncircumtised heartes shalbe tamed, and they Matt willingly aceept their? sinne. ,
42 Then J wyll remember my cote naunt With Jacob, and up coucnaune with Jlahac,
He ane wl remember, and Wyll thynke on the lande.
43 sakes allo shalbe left of them aud shall entoy her Sabbathes Whyte he weth Wate without thent: And 11

and my tonenaunt wil)

9 That 18, the punithment for

their sinne.

G

„

Deut. iini. e.

Ca) As ofthis tonne or Hig daughter.

Num. iii g.

Ordmaunces.

chan willingly accept their sinne, because they difpiled my lawes, € because their loule abhorred my ordinaunces.

44 And pet for all that, when they be in the lande of their enemies, J wpil not cast them awap, neither wyll abhorre them to destroy them vtterlp, and to breake my conenaunt with them: for J amthe Lode their God.

45 J wpll for their fakes remember the

Leulticus.

couenaunt of olde, when J brought mya ont 5 ses — 5 nae in iad the heathen, that J mpght be tho
God: Jamthe Lode, aie

46 Thele are the ordinauntes, and ludgementes, and lawes, which the Lore made betweene hym and the childzen of
Ilrael in mount mat by the hande of
Moyles.

¢ The. xxvij. Chapter.

18 divers vowes, and ok tithes. 28 4 thyng teperate from the vle ol man, can not be solde, nor redeemed: but, remapneth to the Lorde.

d the Lorne fpate onto Doyles saying:

dren of Pract, and lay

vnto them: If anp man wyl make afin

guler vowe of a person

bnto the Lozde, by thy estimation,

3 Then thy estimatton shalbelthus]: Of

sirtie, shalbe by thy estimatiton fiktie
*ficles of siluer, after the sitle of the
. fanctuarie:

Aud it it be a female, then thy valuation shalbe thirtie sicles. |

5 And from fine peres to twentie, thy
« Daluation shalbe of the male twentie sitles, and of the female ten licles.
And krom a moneth onto fine yeres, chy estimatlon shalbe of the male at fiue

cles of siluer, and the female at three lsitcles of siluer.

he be a male, then thy price shalbe fit: teene sicles, and fo the female ten fictes,
<> But ik he be poorer then thou batt esteemed hym, he shall present hym felfe bekore the priest, and the prick chall value hym: atcordyng as the bande of

25 „ „ RMA RR A 8

hym that vowed is able to get, euen so shall the priest value hym.
9 If it be a beast of Which men bryng an offeryng vnto the Torde, all that any man geueth of luch vnto the Tord, fshalbe holy.

J He shall not alter it, nor chaunge it, a

good for a bad, or a bad for a good: And i he chaunge beatt for beast, then both

K BR „„ K „

Was chaunged, chalbe holy,

Speakc bnto the chile |

the male from twentie peres olde vnto

And from sirtie yeres olde and aboue, i

the same beast and it allo wherwith it

1 Ifit be any maner of vntleane beast, ol which men do not offer a facvifice: vnto the Torde, he shall fet the beast before the priest: ‘
Iz And the prick shall value it, whether it be good or bad: and as the priest letteth it, so shall it be. ;
3 But ik he wyll bye it agapne, he tail; geue the fife part moze aboue that it: was fet at. ;

14. If any man deditate his houle to be.

Holy vnto the Lorde, the prick shall fet: it, whether it be godd or bad: and as. the priest hath set it, so shall it stande. ;

15 And when He that fanctified it wy!t:

redeeme his houle, let hym gene the fift. part of the money that it Was indged. at therto, and it halbe his.
If a man halowe a peece of his inherited lande vnto the Lode, thou Malt, valuc it accordyng to the seede therok

An Homer of barly seede shalbe {et at:

fiftie sicles of siluer.

17 If he halowe his fielde immedlatlp. fed the vere of Jubilee, it shalbe worth: accordyng as thou doest esteenie it.

18 But and ik he halowe his fielde after. the Jubilee, the priest Matt recken vnto. hym the money, accordyng to the num. ber of the peres that remayne, vnto the. peres ol Jublllec folowyng, and it hal be abated by thy estimation. i f

19 Il he that tonlecrated the fielde Wyll. redeeme it agayne, let hym put the lift. part of the price that thou didst value it, at therunto, and it shalbe his.

20 And if he wyll not redeeme the field, but selleth the fielde to another nau: he.
(that vowed may redeemt it no morc.

21 But when the fielde goeth out 7 La

monies.

a jubllee, and it shalbe holy vnto
‘ 10 5 asa fielde seperate from tommon bles, and it shalbe the priestes

a ion. —
E, ee fanctifie vnto the Lorde a fielde which he Hath bought and is not

: ofthe grounde of his inheritaunte:
The prielt hal recken vnto him what

a lt is worth vnto the pere of Jubilee,

and he shall gene the price that it is fet

atthe fame Day, as a thyng conletrate puto the Norde.

24. And in the pere of Jubilee, the fielde |

hall returne vnto himok whom it was f W to hym whole inheritaunte of lande it was. he,
5 Andall thy valuation shalbe according tothe licle ; of the sanctuarie: One sicle tontapneth twentie gerahs.
“Se Wut the first borne of the beastes that isthe Lordes first borne, may no man
. fanetifie, whether it be ore or Theepe, foz itts the Lordes alredie.

on If it be an vntleane beast, he chall re-

dẽeme it as thou shalt set it at, and geue the fift part moze therto: Orikit be not redeemed, it halbe folde actordyng to thy estimation.

28 Notwithstandyng, nothyng seperate

from the tommon vle that a man doth

The ende of che thirde booke of Moyses.

Leuiticus.

XXX |: seperate vnto the Lode of all that bes e ath, whether it be man or beatt 5 lande of his mheritaunce, maybe solde ale ere hebr. mon ble, i 20 ee is most holy vn-

29 Mothing seperate from the common: F ble, whiche shalbe fepecate fron aie. ‘ fhalbe redeemed but dye the death.

30 Euerp tithe of the lande allo, both of the 928 of bean, and of the fruite ‘

the trees is the Lordes, and is lanctified vnto the Lorde. .

31, Andik a man wyll redeeme ought ok
1 let hym adde the fift part

32 And euery tythe ofore and ol cheepe, and of euery beatt that goeth vnder the rob, euen euerp tent) halbe holy on: 40% Chat is, tothe Lorde. cane

33 Ye chall not locke if it be good or bad, nter

le o

nor chaunge it: els if he chaunge it, both aeg it and that it was chaunged withalt, 6"
11 halowed, and may not be redee-

34. These are the commanndementes. whiche the Torde commaunded by-

. Doyles vnto the chyldren of Jlrael in mount Sinai. a)

iL §

The nadel of the armie Numer! 4 =
~ .I he fourth bookeof Moyses, called
Nuten g in the Hebrewe Vaiedabbar, and in the Latin Mumeri. 4 bese o ¢ The first Chapter.

cacl, x that ¢ p their cribts 1

9. fpake vnto
A. ‘| Doyles in the
‘ — A wildernesle of
Sina, in the
‘ ‘tabernacle of
5 the congrega-
0 J ex. tion, the first
< = dap of the se-
‘ SS Se) CONDE moneth inthe letond pere after they were come dut of the lande of Egypt, saping: :
Ero xc 2 Takt pe the funime of all the multe
Nu. tu de ok che children of Isracl, after their

1. Reg. 4. a

All that are apt for battaile, are numbred. 49 Che tribe ol Leni must minitter in the tabernacle.

Md the Load

« kinredesehoutholoesof their fathers, with the number of their names, all that are males, head by head,

3 From twentie peres olde and about, gCcuen all that go fdorth to the warre in

them throughout their armies.

4 And with vou chalbe men ok euery

tribe, suchsas are the heades of the housesoftheir fathers,
5 And thele are the names of the men that shall stand with pou: ok the tribe ot
BVuben, Elizur, the sonne of Sedeur.
6 DF Simeon, Seluntel the sonne of
Suri Saddai.

ct

2:7 Of Suna, Kahlo, the sonne of 2

‘ minadab,
8 Pl Jlachar, Nathanact the fonne
« of Zuar.
‘9 Df Zabnlon, Eliab thefonne of Held.
Jo Among the chyldren of Joseph: of
Ephzaim, Elisama the sonne of Anmi-

* hudr of Manalle, Gameliel the sonne ot

Pedazur.

I Ot Weniamin, Abidan the forme ol
‘12 Of Dan, Ahiezer the sonne of Ammi
Saddai.

13 Ok Aser, Pagiel the sonne of Otran.
‘14. Of Gad, Elisah the sonne of Duel.

Cis MEMephthatt, Ahira p sonne of Enan.

16 There were or great fame in the congregation, princes of the tribes of their fathers, and heades ouer thoulandes in
Israel.

17 And Moyses c Aaron toke these men whiche are exprelled by their names.

RK A

Israel: thou and Aaron {hall number

13 And they called all the tongregation together the first day of the second moneth, and they were reckened throughout their kinredes and houles of their. fathers, attordyng to the number ok. their names, from twentie peres olde: and aboue, head by head. _¢

19 Asthe Torde conunaunded Moyles euen fo he numbred them in the wildernesse of Sinai. 0

20 So were the chyldren of Ruben, Ilraels eldest sonne, throughout their generations, and their kinredes, and honles. of their fathers, accordyng to the number of their names, head by head, all. males from twentie peres old x aboue, as many as did go foorth to the warre:

21 The number ok them that were of the:

tribe ol Ruben, was fourtie e sixe thou-- D lande, and five hundred. .
22 Ofthe chyldren ot Simeon throughout their generations, æ their kinredes, and houles of their fathers, the fumme. of the in the number of names head by. head, all the males from twentie peres. and aboue, whosoeuer myght go foorth to the warre: g
23 The summe of them that were of the. tribe of Simeon, fiftie € nine thoulande. and three hundred. 5
24. Ok the chyldren of Gad theoughout. their generations, and their kinredes,; r houcholdes of their fathers, the nun ber of the names from twentte peres k. aboue, all that went foorth to p Warre:
25 The number of then that were of the. tribe of Gad, was fourtic and fiuc thou fand, fire hundred and fiftie. é
26 Ok the chyldren ol Juda theoughout: their generations, and their kinredes, and Houles of their fathers, the number « of names frd tiwentie pere s k abone, all. that were able to go foorth to p warre: .
27 The number of them that were of the: tribe of Juda, was threltore and fourteene thoulande, and lire hundred.
28 Ok the chyldren ok Jlachar thous): € out their generations, x their kinredes c houles of their fathers, the number ot names fromtwentie peres and aboue, whiche went all foorth to the eae 5 au 2

<1 Numeri. a *

out their generations, and their kin-

Ehe number of them that were of the

del lace, was fiftic and foure

„ theulande and foure hundted.

„„ Mf the chylozenof Zabulon theough-

ont their generations, € ther kinredes and joules ok their kathers, the number

of names from twentie peres and a bone, all whiche were able to go foorth

n che hoalt:
0 5 be mmer ok chem that were of the
3 flibe of Zabulon, was fiftic and {even
“ ¢houfande and koure hundred.
«OE the chyldzen of Joleph (namelz)

3 sfehe chyldren of Ephmum thoughout

their generations, and their kinredes

and houles of their fathers the number

‘ ofnames from twentie peres € aboue,

all that went out to the warre:

. The number of them that were of the

tribe of Ephraim, Was fourtie thouland

and kiue hundred.

34 Okthe thyldren of Maͤnasse through-

bduttheir generations, e their kinredes, a and houses of their fathers, the number

of names from twentie peres olde and

aboue, all that went out to the warre:
75 The number of them that were ofthe tribe of Manafle, was thirtie and two thousande and two hundred.
36 Ok the chyldren ol Wemanun throughout their generations, ᷑ their kmredes and houses of their fathers, the number ok names front twentie peres and aboue, all that went foorth to the warre:
37 The number ofthem that were ofthe tribe of Bemamm, was thirtie and fine thousande, and foure hundred.
8 Ok the chyldren of Dan throughout their generations, and kinredes, and houles oktheir fathers, the number of names from twentie peres olde andaboue, all that went foorth to the warre:
39 Lie number of them that were of the tribe of Dan, was threscore and two f thoulande and seuen hundred.
4 Of the chyldren of Afar thronghout their generations, and their kinredes,
‘ and Doutes of their fathers the number she names from twentie yeres and
4 aie that went out to the warre:
155 ee of ey that were of the s was fourtie Z
: fande and fine hundred. and one thou:

HE Okthe chuldren ol Rephthali through-

N

redes, and houles of their fathers, the e of tenet from Are Ns.

at 0

* denn ehe,
43 The number of them that were of: the tribe of Pephthal, ae fiftie and. three thonlande and foure hundred.
44 These are the summes whiche Moyles and Aaron numbred, and the prinres be Sead, 1 Poa men which.

v one for the houle ;

ih oi — 5
45 So were all the numbers of the chyldeer of Israel throughout the bate . of their fathers, from twentie peres‘ aud aboue, all that went foorth to thewarre in Pcaci: N ‘

46 All they J lap, were in numder sire Prodi. hundred thouland, and three thouland, Name.

fiue hundred and fiftte. .
47 Wut the Leuttes after the tribes of. their fathers, were not nunibred a-

mong them. f j
48 Foz the Lopve spake vnto Moyles, ; faying: e

49 Only thou shalt not number the tribe o Leut, neither take the summe of them among the chyldrenok Ylrael. :

50 Wut thou halt appopnt the Teuites. over the tabernacle of wytnesse, k ouer all the vessels thevof, and ouer all thinges that are in it: Bea, they shall brare. the tabernacle, and all the vellels ther. ot, and they chall minister in it, and Tait. dwell rounde about the tabernaclee.

51 And wheẽ the tabernacle goeth foorth, the Leuites Mall take it downe: and. when the tabernacle is to be pitched, the
Leuites shal set it bp:and ik any straunger tome nye, he shall dye. F

5r And the chyldren of Piraet shall pitch. their tentes , euery man in his owne. tampe, and euery man vnder his ownestanderd thronghout their hoastes.

But the Leuites shall pitche rounde. about the tabernacle of Wytnesle, that. there be no wrath vponthe congregan’< on of the chyldren of track: and the
Teuttes Mail kepe the watche of the. tabernacle of wytnesse. ;

54 And the chyldren of Israel dyd Acro dyng to all that the Horde coimnaun-.
Ded Moyles, euen so dyd they. ‘

1. ij The:

A

SPAS [ILD the Lorde spake vnto Moples and Aaz ron, saping:

Euery man ok the sschyldren of Israei Mat pitche vnder his owne standerd, & vnder the ensigne of their kathers houles: farre of about the tabernacle of the congregation {hall they pitche. N

On the east side to warde the rifing of the sunne, chall they ok the standerd of the hoast of Juda pitche, throughout their armies: And Pahesson the fonne of Aminadab, shalbe captapne of the sonnes of Juda.

4 And his hoast e the number of them,

sixe hundred.
5 Next vnto hyi Mall they that be of the tribe of Jlachar pitch: and Pathanael the sonne of Zuar, halbe taptapne of the chyldren of Jsachar.
6 Dis hoast and the number thereof, fie: tie tt foure thouland and foure hundred.
B. 7 And then the tribe of Zabulon, and
FEliab the sonne of Helon, chalbe capktapne ouer the chyldren of Zabulon.
8 And his hoast e the number of them, filtie and seuen thouland and foure hundred. *
9 So that the whole number of the whole hoast of Juda, arc an hundred thousande, fourstore and sixe thouland, and foure hundred, throughout their armies: and thele shall first moue.
10 On the southside shalbe the standerd of the hoast of Kuben, atcording to their armpes: and the captayne duer the fonnes of Ruben, halbe Ellzur the sonne of Sedeur.
1 And his hoast e the number of them, fourtie and sixe thouland and fiue hun-

Dre o :

12 And fast by hyn chall the tribe of Si nieon pitche, and the captayne over the sonnes of Simeon, chalbe Salunnel the sonne of Zuri Saddai.

3 And his hoast e the number of them, fiftic and nine thonfande and three hun: dred.

€ (14. And the tribe of Gad alsd, and the cap-
« fayne ouer the fonnes of Gad, halbe

Elasaph the sonne of Duel.

R M M A we a M „ J
K „% K M K M K „ „„ „ „ K &

R ann z :

R an

annaneannanr ABA a a

R A K „

a @a a R „ A a

¢ The. ij. Chapter, .
2 Che order of the tentes. Che heades of the kinredes of Ffract,

threscore and fourtcene thoufande and

15 And his hoast e the number of them. fourtie and fiue thoufande, fire bun , and fiftie. ‘

16 Al hat Were numbred with the campe: of Ruben, an hundred thoulande, fiktie and one thoulande, foure hundred and fiftie, throughout their arnnes: and thes. chall set foorth in the setonde plate.

17 And the tabernacle of the congregatlon shall go with the hoatt of the Le‘ | uites, inthe nuddes of the tampe: And.
AS they ipe intheir tentes, euen fo shall they proceede in the tourney, euery man in his degree, and vnder their owne. standerdes. 3

18 Onthe west lide shalbe the standerd of the campe of Ephraim, accordyngto

their arnnes, and the captaine over the.

fonnes of Ephraim, shalbe Elisama the.

sonne of Anuhnd. 0

19 His hoast and the number of them, fourtie thonsande and fiue hundred.

20. And fast by hym, shalbe the tribe of.
Manasse: and the captayne ouer the fonnes of Manasse, thalbe Gamaitel« the sonne of Pedazur. f

21 tS hoast and the number ok them, D thirtie and two thoufande, and two hundred. . ‘

22 Aud the tribe of Wemamin allo: and‘ the captayne duer the fonnes of Benianun, chalbe Abidan p sonne ol Gedeon.

23 His hoast t the number of them, thirtie and fiue thoufande ¢ foure hundred.

24 Allthe number of the campe of Ephraim, were an hundred thoulande, eyght thoulande, and an hundred, thorowouttheir armes: and they shall go. inthe thirde place. 5 ‘

25 The standerd of the hoattof Dan, chal. kepe the north fide with their armies: « and the captapue ouer the chyldren ol.
Dan, shalbe Ahiezer the sonne of Am-

mi Saddai. :

26 dos hoast and the number of them, threlcoze and two thoulande, and {e-« ven hundred. : g

27 And fast by hyn thal the tribe of Aler. pitch: and the taptayne over the sonnes of Aser, halbe Pagiel pᷣsonne of Ocran.

28 dis hoast t the number of them, four’ tie and one thoufand and fiue hundred.

29 And the tribe of Pephthali: e the taptayne ouer the chyldren of Ken abe;

esof the Leuites.

8 Ahira the sonne of Enan. a 0 is honk and the number of them,
2° rae and three thoulande and koure

i ed.
Dube that were numdned with the

; poatt of Dan, were an hundred thou-

fande, liktie and seuen thouland and fire unde: And they shall go hinmost with their standerdes.

„ hele are the fummes of the chyldren ok Flcacl throughout the houles of the kathers, euen all the numbers that

their tentes next to the habitation.

Tas] Hele also are the gene-
| [Sao] vations of Aaron and

e
{ a aN -
SEAN Win
> Waa ay
, f 2
= . * N 75

ꝙ— —— ——— ͤ— K—

Moyles, in p day that the Lorde spake with
Moyles in mount Si-

nai.

2 And thele are the names okthe sonnes of Aaron: Naͤdab the eldest lonne, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.

j Thtse are the names of the sonnes

are Of Aaron whiche Were priestes an-

« nopnted, and whole hande was conse-

‘ ated to minister.

4 And Nadab and Abihu dyed before

the Torde, when they offred straunge

ire belorthe Loe in the wyldernelle

of Sinat, and had no chyldren: And E-

„ leasar and Ithamar ministred in the

« fight of Aaron their father.

5 fine Lode spake vnto Moyses,
© , Swng the tribe of Leut, and let them bl lore Raronthe prielt, that they may
85 lerue hym:

7 And take the charge with hym, euen the charge of the Whole congregation

az 5

aa ew oo RS

_ before the tavernacte ofthe tongregatt-

on to do the seruite of the tabernacle.
‘8 17 hall kepe all the instrumentes
: 105 tabernatle of the congregation,
. Ae the charge ofthe chyldren of FE
0 x lo do the leruite of the tabernacle.

70 thou shalt geue the Leuites puto g lena 9 — ip for they are
„ chyldzen or Jlrael. ee

‘ © And thou shalt appoynt Aaron and

Numer.

The. iij. Chapter.

Che Leuitesgo not to battell, but minister in the lanctuarie. 21 They pitche

. Ixxxiyy. pitched throughout their Hoattes. fice: hundred thonfanve, the b fine. | bunt a apie ly ethoufand fite

33 Würthe Teuites were not numbers - among the chyldren of Ilrael, as che.
Tode tommaunded Doyles,

34. And the chyldren ol Ilrael dyd accoz-<
Dyng to all that the Torde commaunded Doyles, fo they pitched with their ftanderdes,and fo they iourneyed euery one throughout their kinredes, according to the houcholdes of their kathers.

K K W R A K W aw

his sonnes to wayte on their priectes olfice: and the straunger that commeth nye, shalbe slayne. g
II ai the Lorde spake vnto Moyles, ping: 0

12 Weholde, Jhaue taken the Leuites from among the chyldren of Ylrael “ for Eci all the first borne that openctt the ma- Num vm e. trice among the chyldren ol Ilrael, and the Lenites halbe mine. <

13 Wecaule all the firt borne are mypue: « forthe same day that J smote all the first borne in the lande of Egypt, J halowed vnto me all the first borne in FE. rael, both man and beast, and mine they shalbe: Jam the Lorde, 0

14. Aud the Lorde spake vnto Moyles in D the wyldernesse of Sinai, saping: ;

15 Number the chyldren of Leut after the houles of their fathers in their kinredes: All that are males from a moneth old and aboue, shalt thou number.

16 And Moyses numbred them, according to the worde of the Lorde, as he
Was commaunded. g

17 And these were the chyldren of Teul. in their names: Gerson, and Caath,

18 And these are the names of the chyl-- dren ol Gerlon in their kinredes: Libni, and Semci. 1 0

19 The sonnes of Caath in their kinredes:.
Amram, Jelaar, Debron, and Oziel.

20 And the formes of Merart in their Kin redes: Maheli, and Muli. These are. the kinredes ofthe Lenites, accordyng. to the houles iet Rune 1 b *

ic if ib:

21 Ok Gerfon can 5 ii Ales

¢

Offices of

mtes and the kinred of the Semeites.
LThele are the kinredes of the Gerlsnmttes,

22 And the summe of them after the number ok all the males, from a moneth old and aboue, was counted feucn thoulande and fine hundred.

23 And the kinredes of the Gerlomtes

shall pitch behinde the tabernacle welt
Waͤrde.
24 The captapne and most auncient of the boule of the Gersonites, halbe Eliafaph the sonne of Lact.

a nn

fon in the tabernacle of the tongregation, shalbe the tabernacle and the pauilion, the couering thereot, and the vaple of the doore of the tabernacle of the congregation:

26 And the hangynges of the court, and the turtapne of the doore of the court whiche is rounde about the tabernacle, and the aulter, and the codes of it for all the seruite thereok.

27 And of Caath, canie the kinred of the
Amramites, and the kinred of the Jzecharites, the kinred of the Hebronites, and the kinred of the Dstelites ; Lhele are the kinredes of the Caathites.

28 And the number or allthe males from

dà moneth olde and aboue, was epght

thoulande and sixe hundred, hauing the tharge ot the lanctuarie.

29 And the kinred of the chyldren of Ca-

ath, fall pitche on the fouth {pode of the

« ftabernace.

‘30 The taptapne and most auntient of

« the Houle of the kinred ofthe Caathites,

fshalbe Elilaphan the sonne of O ziel.

31 And their charge shalbe the arke, the table, che candelsticke, and the aulters, t the vessels of the sanctuarie that they nunister in, and the vayle, x Whatloener belongeth to the ministration therol.

32 And Eleazar the sonne of Aaron the priest, shalbe captayne ouer all the captaines of Ne Teuites, and haue theouersight of them that wayte vpon the sanctuarie.

33 Andof Merari canie the kinred of the
Maͤhelites, and the kinred of the Musites: Thele are p kinredes of Merari.

34 And the summe of them accordyng to

the number of al the males, from a mo-

neth olde and aboue, was fire thonusand and two hundred.

N K M A S M K „ee wah N AA KR AN

K K „ K „ „ A W an

es A M N

ta ® fF wn P

Numer i 3

25 And the charge of the chyldren of Ger-

(a) Sicles were of two sorteg: the one temmon, the other belongyng to the sanctuatte and that of the santtuarte was double t ae the common. The common siele waped two grotes, and the sanctuarie sicit foute. Che feripture in this place, and in the thirtie of CrooUe, and @ scchtel four tie and fiue, sapeth, that the sanctuarie {tcle Doth wap twentie Gcrahs, whiche

del: andchetechalß 05 sonne of Ay,‘ hael: and these shall pitche onthe 1 spde of the tabernacle. l north
36 And vnder the custodie and charge of. the sonnes of Merari, shalbe 5 boordeg. of the tabernacle, the barres, pyllers and fockettes therot, and all the vellels. therot, and all that serueth therto::
37 And the pillers of the court rounde about, With their sockets, their pinnes, and their cordes. J
38 But on the forefront of the tabernacic. towarde the east, before the tabernacie: of the congregation eastwarde, thai:
Moyles € Aaron and his sonnes, pitche. and wapte to kepe the sanctuarie, and to kepe the chyldren of Ysrael: And the: straunger that commieth nye, thalbe: flapne. ‘
39 And the whole summe of the Leuites. whiche Moyles and Aaron numbzed. at the commaundement of the Torde throughout their kinredes, euͤen all the. males from à moneth olde and aboue,
Was* twentie and two Moufande,

40 And the Lorne lapde vnto Mopses::

Number all p first borne that are males. among the chyldren of Jlrael, from a. moneth olde and aboue, and take the: number of their names. .
41 And thou shalt appopnt the Leuites. to me (for A am the Lorde) for all the. first boone of the children of Ilrael, and. the tattell of the Leuites for all the first gendred of the cattellof the chyldren of:
IJcracl. i c
42 And Moyles numbred, as the Lorde: con:maunded hym, all the first borne ok. the chyldren ol Ilrael. ;
43 And all the first borne males, rehearsed by their names, from a moneth olde. and aboue, accordyng to their nuniber, were twentie and two thoufande, two. hundred and threscore and thirteene.
44 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyples,. aping: ‘
45 Lake the Lenites foz al the first borne of the chyldren of Israel, and the cal. tell ot the Leuites for their cattell, æ the.
BLeuites shalbe myne: J am the Torde.
46 And for the redeeming of the two Purr. dred and threstore and thirteene, which. ate mo then the Fetes, in the first. orne of the chyldren ol F en „ Tat.

he Wapgbt ol

Q

Grecians do call Obolus, & wein Eng

C 9
Ipthe, an heifepeme, when epgüt grotes of our money Sag an ounee: and the Debzueg do Thune ret zo clas dot wap the Wor ght ot lis

teene batlx e comes,

the Levi (

35 The captapne and the most auncien t of their boule that were of the BitteeD of: 1

-softhe Leuites.

7 fiue sicles of enery head, after
A Ty Wachtel the fanctuaric, the ficie he ontapnpngtiventiegerals,
4g And geue the money wherewith the a adde number of them is redeemed, vnto
AFJaron and his sonnes.
4 And Poples tobe the redemptionmo-
Aneyok them that were redeemed, beyng

mothenthe Leuites:

D the Torde spake
OS) | bnto Doyles and Aa-
Wel ron, saping:

Take the summe of
A lithe chyldren of Caath fro among the lonnes

A

‘
¢
‘ c
¢ c
¢
¢
¢
‘

redes and houles of their fathers:

3 From thirtte peres and aboue, vntill

flftie, all that enter into the hoast for to

do the woke in the tabernacle of the tongregation.
4 This thalbe the office of the chyldren ok Caath in the tabernacle of the tongregation, {about} the most holy.
5 And when the hoast remouetl), Aaron and his sonnes chall tome and take downe the couering vaple, and wrap thearke ot wytnesse in it:
‘¢ And hall put thereon a coucrpng of
‘ Badgers skinnes, and fhatl spreade vpa Ae that is altogether of blew like,and put in the barres therok.

3% And vpon the shewe table, they hal spreade abrode a cloth of blew lune, and put thereon the dishes, incense cuppes, and goblets, and pottes to powre With:
‘ hall fhalbe bread thereon conte
8 And they Chant spreade pon them a dtouering of skarlet, and toner the fame
« With a coueving ok Wadgers (kinnes, dd put in the barres thereof,

And they chall tate a cloth of blewe
Alke, and touer the candelsticke ok light, an a bes ne an tenlaͤrs, f e bessels whiche they oc-
3 au they Mall put both it and all the spans thereok, within a toueryng of
5 bart ers kkinnes, and put it bpon a

n Aud vpon the golden aulter, they Mall

Numeri.

The. ij, Chapter.

Che offices of the Leuites,

IxxXIIIl. so Okthe first borne of the children of Ilrael toke he this money: [even] g poe : fande three hundred and three fore and. fiue sicles, after 5 sicle of the sanctuarie.

5 And Moyses gaue the money of them that were redeemed, onto Aaron and bis Tas 1 5 the wordokthe

, euen as the Love 4 ve commaun g

NM A M K

spreade a cloth of blewe suke, and couer it with a touering of Wadgers fires, «
And put to the barres therof. :
2 Aud they Khali take all the instrumentes wherewith they minister in the. santtuarie, and put a cloth of blew filke « vpon them, and cover them with a co-< uering of Badgers skynnes, and put. them on a barre. F
3 And thep shall take away the affhes. from the aulter, and spreade a putple cloth thereon. :
14. And put vpon tt all the veslels thereof’ C that they minister Withall, euen the. cole pannes, the fleshe hookes, the fire shouels, the balens, t the other veslelsof the aulter: and they shall spreade vppon it a couering of Wadgers skinnes, and put to the barres of it. _
15 And when Aaron c his sonnes haue made an ende of coucring the sanctuarie, and all the vessels of the sanctuarie, agaynst that the hoast remoue, then the. sonnes of Caath shall come in for to. beare: but they shall not touche any ho-
Ive thyng, lest they dye. And this is the. charge of the sonnes of Caath, in the tabernacie of the congregation. ‘
16 And to the office of Elealar the formic « of Aaron the priest, pertayneth the ople ® for the light, the lweete incente, the daylye meate offering, and the annoyntyngople, and the duerlight of all the tabernade, and of all that therein is, both un. the lanctuarie, and in all the vellels. thercof. 0
17 Aud the Lorde spake vnto Moyses and Aaron, saping: . ae:
18 Be shall not cut of the tribe of the kinredok the Caathites, from among the. euites: ‘
19 1 thus do vnto them, that they may lpue and not dye: when they go brto*
L wy the

feen

the Le
35 The taptayne and the most auncienr of their house that were of the Einged of"

ices of Numer.

nites and the kinred of the Semeites.
Thele are the kinredes of the Gerlomes

Ulte

g

22 And the summe of them after the number of all the males, front a moneth old and aboue, was counted seuen thoulande and fine hundzed.

shall pitch behinde the tabernacle Welt warde.

24. The taptayne and most auncient of the boule of the Gersonites, shalbe Eliasaph the sonne of Laci.

ean HAH RH A

a nian

son in the tabernacle of the congregation, chalbe the tabernacle and the pauilion, the coucring thereok, and the vaple of the doore of the tabernacle of the tongregation:

26 And the hangynges of the court, and the turtapne ok the doore of the court whiche is rounde about the tabernacle, and the aulter, and the tordes of it for all the seruite thereof.

27 And of Caath, tanie the kinred of the
Amramites, and the kinred of the Jsecharites the kinred of the Hebronites, and the kinred of the Ozielites: These are the kinredes ofthe Caathites.

E 28 And the mumber of allthe males from ada moneth olde and aboue, was evant

thoulande and fire hundred, hauing the

charge ot the lanctuarie.

29 And tht kinred of the chyldren of Ca-

ath, shall pitche on the south syde of the taäbernacle.

30 The taptapne and most auncient of

the hause ofthe kinredokthe Caathites,

shalbe Elilaphan the sonne of Ozʒiel. zl And their charge shalbe the arke, the table, che tandelsticke, and the aulters, f the vessels of the sauctuarie that they nunister in, and the vaple, c whatsoeuer belongeth to the ministration therol.

32 And Eleazar the sonne of Aaron the priest, shalbe captayne ouer all the taptaines of ty Leuites, and haue theo-

CARA „ G „ e

„„ „ „ „ „

23 And the mredes of the Gerfonites

25 And the charge of the chyldren of Ger-

Perari, was Zurlel the fonne of Abt huael: and thele shall pitche onthe nozth.
{poe of the tabernacle. ;
36 And vnder the custodie and charge of: the formes of Merari, shalbe 5 boordeg of the tabernacle, e the barres, pyiters and fockettes therof, and all the veslels. therot, and all that serueth therto: :
37 And the pillers of the tourt rounde about, with their sockets, their pinnes, and their tordes. ;
38 But on the forefront of the tabernacie. tolvarde the call, before the tabernacie: of the congregation eastwarde, chall.
Moyses € Aaron and his sonnes, pitche. and Wapte to kepe the sanctuarie, and to: kepe the chyldren of Israel: And the: straunger that comnieth nye, chalbe. flapne. ‘
39 And the whole sunmie of the Leuites:
Whiche Moyles and Aaron numbzedat the commaundement of the Logdethroughout their kinredes, euen all the. males froma moneth olde and aboue, was ' twentie and two thoulande.
40 And the Lorde sayde vnto Doyles: .
Number all ö first borne that are males among the chyldren of Hirael, from a. moneth olde and aboue, and take the: nuniber of their names. f
41 And thou shalt appoynt the Leuites to me (for Fam the Lorde) for all the: fir borne of the children of Ilrael, and. the tattell ot the Leuites for all the first ee of the cattell of the chyldren of!
: ac * ö £
42 And Mopses numbeed,as the Lorde‘ tommaunded hym, all the first borne ok. the chyldren of Ilrael. .
43 And all the first vorne males, rehearsed by their names, from a moneth olde. and aboue, accordyng to their nuniber, were twentie and two thoulande, two. hundred and threscore and thirtcene.
44 And the Lorde spake vnto Doyles, :

: uerlight of them that wayte bpon the faying: ‘
« fanctnavic, 45 Lake the Lenites kor al the first bone’
33 Andof Merari tame the kinred of the of the chyldren of Israel, and the cat.

Mahelites, and the kinred of the Mu-

sites: Thele are p kinredes of Merari.
34 And the summe of them atccordyng to the number of al the males, from a moneth olde and aboue, was sixe thouland and two hundred.

W fF KB AK

tn N Aan P

tell Of the Leuites for their tattell, ete:
Leuites shalbe inyne: J amthe Lorde.
46 And for the redeeming of the two hundred and threstore and thirteene, which. are mo then the Weuites, in the fir. bone ok the chylozen of Hleact, Take:

ca) Sicles were of two sorteg: the one common, the othe delongyng to the sanctuarle and that of the fanctuaric was Double the wapsh! of. the common. The common licle waped two grotes,andthefanctuaciefictcfoure. The feriptuee in this place, and in the thirtie of

Gxobus,

and Ezechiel four tie and fue, sapethj, that the lanctuarie ficle doth Wap twentie Getahs, whicht 55 Grecians do call Obolus, & Wwe in Engt

Ipthe, an helfepenic, when epglt grotes of our money was an ounct: and the Pebsucg do thinks.

ternc vacl t corncs.

at Obolus doth wer the war ght =

Q

é
‘ Nu. xxiig

ofthe Leuites. uncer. XXXII : *

a ane fine sicles of enery head, after 50 Olthe first borne of the chüdren of I
, Wapnhtof the fanctuaric, the sicle rael toke he this money : Pate ait ie che ontapnpngtibenticgeras. . lande three hundred and three froze and;
94g And geue the money wherewith the kime licles akter pide ol the fanctuarie.
‘ ode numiber of thentis vedeenicd, vnto 51 And Doyles gaue the money of them
Aaron and his sonnes. ‚ that were redeemed, bnto Aaron and d Moyses toke the redemptionmo- his sounes, according to the word of the

4g alt Wok the.
Fnepok them that were redeemed, beyng Torde, euen as the Lorde commaunmo then the Leuites: ded Moyles. 0

The. iii), Chapter.
Che offices of the Leuites.

D the Norde fpake spreade a cloth of blewe fitke, and cover:
Yunto Poyses and Aa- it with a couering of Wadgers ftinnes, <
HEH ol ron saping: and put to the barres therok. ;
Take the summe of 12 And they chall take all the instrumensche chyidzen of Caath tes wherewith they mimnister in the. tts among the fonnes lanttuarie, and puta cloth of blew fitke « of Leui, akter theirkin- ppon them, and touer them with a coredes and houles of their fathers: uering of Wadgers lkynnes, and put‘
3 From thirtie peres and aboue vntill themona barre. i
. fiftic, all that enter into the hoast for to 13 And they shall take away the asches do the Woeke in the tabernacle of the krom the aulter, and spreade a purple tongregation. cloth thereon,
This chalbe the office ol the chyldzen 14. And put vpon it all the vessels thereof. C ol Caath in the tabernacle of the con: that they minister withall, euen the. gregation, about j the most holy. cole pannes, the fleshe hookes, the fire
And when the hoast remoueth, Aa bhouels, the balens, k the other veslelsron and his sonnes shall eome and take okthe aulter: and they shall spreade vpdowne the couering bayle, and wap pon tt a couering of Wadgers fhinnes, ; tht arke ol wytnesle in it: and put to the barres ofit. 5
And chall put thereon a coueryng ok 15 And when Aaron e his fonnes haue
GBadgers skinnes, and shall spreade vp - made an ende of coucring the lanctna-
. Ar e that is altogether of bled rie, and all the vessels of the lanctuarie, lilke, and put in the barres therof. agapust that the hoast renioue, then the.
3% And vpponthe chewe table, they Hall slonnes of Caath chall come in for to.

; sprtade abrode a cloth of blew filke,and beare: but they shall not touche any lors

but thereon the dishes, incenle euppes, lye thyng, left they dye. And this ws the.

and goblets, and pottes to poze with: charge of the fonnes of Caath, in the ta-

and there halbe bread thereon conte bernacle of the congregation. ‘

„„ nually. 16 And to the office of Elealar the sonne

And they shall spreade vpon thema of Aaronthe puest, pertayneth the oyle.

touering ot sarlet, and eoner the lame kor the light, the sweete incense, the day-

With a couering of Wadgers (hinnes, l pe meate offering and the annoyntyng-

and put in the barres thereof, ople, and the ouerlight of all the taber-

And they chall take a cloth of blewe nacle, and ok all that therein is, both in

fitke,and toner the tandelsticke of light, the fanctuarie, aud in all the vellels.

« With bistampes snuffers, and tenlars, thereok. :

and all the oyle vellels whiche they ol- 17 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyles «

‘ cupie about it. 5 and Aaron, saping: .

a And they chall put both it and all the 13 he shall not cut ot the tribt of the kin-

« bellels thereok, within a toueryng ok redok the Caathites, from among the. badgers Chines, and put it bpona Lentes: 5 g . en 210 19 But thus do vnto them, that they map.
And ppon the golden arnter, they Hall lpue and not pa: 1 they go car

Anna naa

¢
‘
‘
¢
¢
¢ c
¢ iy
‘

The Leuites office.

the most holy thinges: let Aaron and his sonnes goin, and appoint them euerxpe one to his office, and to his charge.

20 But let thein not go in, to fee when the holy thinges are folden vp, lest they dye.

D 21 And the Lorde {pate vnto Mopses,

« faying:

22 Take allo the summe of the chyldren

bot Gerfon, throughout the houles of

their fathers, and throughout their kinredes.

23 From thirtie peres olde, and aboue, vntil fiftie peres, shalt thou number them,

al that enter into the aslemblie for to do seruice in the tabernacle of the tongregation.

24. And this is the seruite of the kinred of the Gersonites, to serue and to beare.

25 They shall beare the curtapnes of the tabernacle, and the tabernacle of the congregation, his couering, and the couering of Badgers skinnes that is an
Dye vpon it, and the vayle of the doore

€
€
€

G
€

of the tabernacle of the congregation: -
26 And the curtapnes of the court, and

the vaple that is in the entring in of the gate okthe tourt, whiche is neare the tabernacle, and neare the aulter rounde
About, with the cordes, and al the instrunientes that serue vnto them, c all that is made for them, and lo chal they serue.
27 Al the mouth of Aaron t his fonnes, shal all the seruite of the chyldren of the
Eerlonttes be done, in all their charges and m all their seruiee: and pe chall ap-
: . vnto them all their burdens to
0 epe.

E28 And this is the seruite of the kinred of the chyldren of Gerlon in the tabernacle ofthe cõgregation, and their watche thalbe vnder the hand of Ithamar the sonne of Aaron the priest.

29 Aud thou shalt number the sonnes of
Merart atter their kinredes, and after the houses of their fathers:

30 From thirtie eres olde and aboue, vnto fiftie veres halt thou number them, cuery one that enter into the alsemblie, to do the seruite of the tabernacle of the tongregation.

31 And this is their office and charge, according to all their seruite in the tabernacle of the congregation: The borders of the tabernatle, with the barres, pyllers, and sockettes therok.

32 And the pyllers that are round about the tourt, with their sockettes, pinnes,

nA A N M ana

54 „ „ AHA HA

642 „„ „ „„ „ &

Numer.

and cordes, € wi

all the instrun : of it, for all their Auer And by nate pe Chal vecken the inftrumtentes of their office and charge. .

This is the leruice of the kinredes or the lonnes of Merari, accordyng to all

their office in the tabernacle of the tongregatlon, vnder the hand of Ithamar the sonne of Aaron the priest. :

34. And Mayses and Aaron and the princes ol the multitude, numbred p fonnes ‘ of the Caathites, after their kmredes and houles of their fathers,

35 From thirtie peres olde, and aboue, onto fiftie yeres, all that enter into the. assemblie, to do seruice in the tavernacle of the congregation. ;

36 And the nunibersofthenitlyoughout: their kinredes, Were twothousande, seven hundred, and kiftie. ;

37 This is the number of thekinredes of.
Caath, namely] all that might do fernice « in the tabernacle of the congregation, which Moyses and Aaron did nuniber, atctordyng to the commaundement ok the Lorde by the hande ol Mopses.

38 Allo the numbers of the fonnes ok
Gerlon throughout their kinredes and houles of their fathers: ‘

39 From thirtie peres olde, Eaboue, vnto fiftie peres, all that enter into the al seniblie for to do seruite in the tabernacle of the congregation.

40 And the numbers of them throughout their kinredes, and houles of their: fathers, were two thoulande, fire hundred, and thirtie. f

41 This is the number sf the kinredes. of the formes of Gerson, ol an that dyd seruite in the tabernatle of the tongregation, whiche Moyses and Aaron dyd nuniber, accordyng to the commaundement of the Lorde. ‘

42 And the numbers of the kinredes ol. G the sonnes of Merari throughout their kinredes and houses oftheir lathers :

43 From thirtie peres olde, and vp, vnto. fiftie yeres, all that enter into the alem. blie for the leruite of the tabernatle of the congregation. .

44 And the numbers ofthem after their. kinredes, were three thouland and tiwo i hundzed. N e

45 Thele be the summes of the kinredes. ofthe sonnes of Merari, which Moyles .

t Aarõ nunibred, according to the word of the Lorde, by the handes of Por a

n

¢

Numeri.

bxxV.

And so al the numbers okthe Leuttes, the numbers of them were seuen thou--

‘46 ait 2 f Moyles, Aaron, and the Lordes uu numbered after their kinredes and houcholdes of their fathers:

cgay Fromthirtie peres olde and bp, vnto fiktie veres, euery one that came to do his duetie, office, seruite, and charge in the tabernacle of the congregation. So

12 The lawe of geloulie.

PND the Torde spake
\ onto Moyses, saping:
Commaunde the chile

es
=F
=p har
S ea
S
S

that they defile not their“ tentes, aes; mong which JJ d well.

4 And the children of Ilrael dyd so, and put them out of the boat: euen as the es Lorde spake bnto Moyses, fo dyd the e children of Ilrael.

ees faping: i '6 Speake vnto the children of Plract:
„ When a“ man or woman hall commit any sinne that men conrit, and trespasse agaynst the Lorde: when that perfor schalltrespasle,
8.7 Then they hall knowledge their sinne
« Which they haue done, and let hym rea fore againe the hurt that he hath done, with his printipall, and put the fift part offt more therto, and geue it nto hym
„ whom he hath trespasled agaynst.
But and if the man haue no © kink:

„ man to restore the hurt vnto, let the

S

„ and it chalbe the priestes, beside the
8 Rane ofthe attonement, wherby an
Atkonement shalbe made for hym.

9 be euery heaue offering that is made
‘ he holp thynges of the children of th abe hug b they bring vnto the priest,

And euery mans halowed thynges f ewe hrs ibpalloeuer anyman geueth u Anil i thalbe bis.

ö ttpings Lorde spake vnto Moyles,

J The. v. Chapter.
The knowledgyng of inne. 8 The cleantpng of inne,

9 And the Torde spake vnto Moyles,

b telpasse be made good bntothe Lorde,

sande, fine hundred, and fourestore.
43 Accordyng to the worde of the Lorde dyd (Faron) number them by the bande « of Doyles, euery one attording to their fernice and charge: Thus (were) they ok. that tribe numbed, as the Lorde con ‘ maunded Doyles, a

€
€ we
€
«

12 Speake vnto the chudzen of Ilrael, and fay vnto them: Ik any mans Wyle. go alide, and trespasle agaynst hm,

3 So that another man iye with her flechly, and it be hid from the eyes ok her hul bande, and is kept clole that the is.
Defpled, and there is no witnelle against. her, neither (he taken with the maner,

14 And the spirite of gelousie commeth « bpon hym, fo that he is gelous ouer his.
Wyfe which is defpled : 02 ik the spirite of gelousie come bponhymi,fo that he is
1 ouer his wyke which is vet vn-

ed: 5

che priest, and bring her offeryng with, her, the tenth part of an! Epha ok barly « meale: but let hym put no ople vpon it, nor put frankentence theron, foritis an offeryng of gelousie, an offeryng fora. remembzauntce, causpng the finne to be. thought bpon. ‘

15 Then let the man bring his wyfe vnto

(oe pha contepneth three dusheig. The tenth deale or an pha cons tepneth onlpt, fo muche as fourtic egge elles can compte.
Anhinga mealurt ot

16 And the priest shall bryng her, and set nenn us

her before the Lorde. .
17 And the priest shall* take holy water in an earthen beifcl and of the dust that is in the flooze of the tabernacle, the: priest (hal take it and put it into ß water.
18 And let the pact set the woman before

much as mt, logges, eche logge holdeth ag much as
6. egsheld tan holde. But
Omer, oz Gomet

w
10 allo called
Corus in Las

c tine, conte.

neth the mea-

the Lorde, and vncouer the womans rcerchnee

head, and put the offering of menroztall « |

Ephacs, that
Bas much ag

in her handes, which is the gelousie ol- „hann

¢

feryng: and the priest chall haue bytter a jourciore

and tursed water in his bande.
10 And the priest Mall charge her by an. othe, and say vnto the woman: Il uo man haue len with thee, neither halt. gone aside to vncleannesse without thy « hulbande, then haue thou no harme ok. this bitter and cursed waters. f
20 But and ik thou halt gone alide from thyne hulbande, and art defiled, and. some man Hath lyen with thee beside.

thyne hulbande: 21 Then

6 sbelles can conteine.

Offerinzes.
“21 (Lbenp pret hal charge the woman with an othe of cuvfing,¢ the priest shall fay vnto the woman) the Lorde make thee aetursed and detestable for the othe among the people when the Lord doth) make thy thigh to rot, thy belly well.
22 These curled waters go into the bowels of ther, that they may make thy belly swell, and thy thigh to rotte. And let the woman lap, Amen amen.
23 And let the priest waite these curses in
. abooke, and thall blot them out with
. the bitter waters:
24. Andgeuc the woman thole bitter and tursed waters to drinke, v those tursed and bitter waters may enter into her.
25 And then the priest shall take the gelousie offerpng out of the Womans hande, and wWaue it before the Lode, and bryng it vnto the aulter.
26 And the priest shall take an handfull bf the offerpng for a memoriall, burne

c
« c c

3 He shall seperate hin lelfe from wine and strong drynke, and (hall drynke no bineger of Wine or of strong drinke, nor shall drinkze whatsocuer is presled out of grapes, and {hall cate no freshe grapes, neither pet dried.

amon, 4. As long as his abstinente endureth,

feen: — {halt he cate nothyng that is made of

donna wn her the vine tree, or ot the cornels, or ot the hulke ok the grape. a

And as long as he voweth and is seperated, there shall no rasure tome vpon his head, vntyll his dayes be out in the which he seperateth hym selke vnto the

fons, without zumnitting anp cettapne tyme

oe _ © The.vi. Chapter. 7 .
5 Che la we of the conlecration of the Nazarites. 24 Che blessyng of the people. :
Pil fee LEI MD the Lorde spake tion ol his God is vpon his head,
* 2 Yaz) bnto Mopses, saying: 8 All the dayes of his seperation, he is
2 . Speanke vnto the chu - holy vnto the Lordẽ. =.
. hee den of Ilrael, and lay 9 Andifany man dpe sodenly before him,
„ vyto them:whe either on he be ware, the head ok his tonsccra hb man a woman doth tion Mhalbe defiled: and he fhail chaut aeg i es stperate them felues his head the day of his cleansyng, euen. weh lerer bo doe a vowe of wa Pasarite, to se- the scuenth day (hal he shaueit. a en econ pPerate them selues vuto the Lorde: 1o And the eyght day he chall bryng two
& wypli of per= 1

cf Mazarecs.
Jez the He= ©

ol che werzde of Mazarccg . cömeth, que

sicih feperate. ¢

art loches of his heert growe.

D As long as he seperateth hym elfe vnto the Loewe, he Thal come at no dead body.

7 He shall not malte bynilelfe vncleane dt the death of his father, mother, brother, or sister: betause that the tonlecra-

t

Numert.

27 And when he bath made the Woman

Worde, he shalbe holy, and (hail let the

Offrino. the.

it vpon the aulter, and then make woman drynke the waters:

drynke the waters, if fhe be defiled and haue trespassed agaynst her hulbande. then shall the turled and bytter waters: go into her and her belly shal fwell, and her thigh (hall rotte: and the woman shalbe a turse among her people. g
28 And pk the woman be not defiled, but is cleane, the shall haue no harme, but chall conceaue and beare. .
29 This is the lawe of gelousie, wheng. wpfe goeth alide from her hulbande,. and is defiled: a
30 On when the spirit of gelousie tõmieth vpon a man, and he beyng gelous over’ his Wyte, doth bryng her before p Lord:
And the priest shall do to her accordyng vnto all this lawe, 0
31 And the man shalbe gitiefle, and this. woman chall beare her sinne. D

turtles, 02 two poung pigeons, to the priest, before the doore of the tabernatle ofthe tongregation. ‘

1 And the priek shall offer the one for a linne offeryng, and the other for a burnt: offeryng: and make an attonement {02 | hym as toncernyng that he firmed by . the dead, and thall halo we his head the. sanie day. f ;
1 And he Hatt consecrate vnto the Lond. the tyme of his leperation, efall bans a lanibe ofa pere olde bora treat ov. feryng: but the dapes that were ben, are loft, becaufe his confecvation Was. defiled. ler.
13 This is the lawe of the Paar! a when the tyme of his confecation gt. out, he shalbe brought vnto the oor f the tabernacle of the tongregation ft
14. And he Mall bryng his offeryng 125 the Lowe, an hee sambe of alte g, without blemiche fora burnt ofkerk d

monies.

and a shee lambe ofa age olde Without plenuihe foz a sinne offering, Ea ramme without biennche allo for peace offe-

rynges,
1 0 a basket of vnleauened bread,
Neuen takes ot fine floure mingled with ople, and wakers of vnleauened bead annoynted with opie, wich their meate offerynges and drynne offerynges.
16 And the priest shall bryng them before the Lorde, and offer his sinne offeryng and his burnt ofteryng.
7 And shall prepare the ramme for a pcate offering vnto the Lorde, with the balket of vnleauened bread: and the priest shall make also his meat offeryng and his drynke offeryng. s Andthe Masarite chal shaue the head ol his tonsecration at the doore of the tabernacle of the congregation, and that take the heere of the head of his consetration, and put it in the fire which is vnder the peate olferyng. dg And the priest shall take the sodden shoulder of the ramme, and one vnleanened take out of the bafket, and one

Numeri.

“Tax

bpon the handes of the Pasari ; be hath chauen his confecvation, =

20 And the priest Mail wane them before ; the Lorde: And these holy thynges « chalbe the priestes, with the aue brett « and the heaue MHhouider : and then the
. 155 Deyn Wine, ;

21. This is the lawe of the Pazarite which hath vowed his okerpng bate 0 the Torde top his tonletration, defines ° thole thynges that his hande can get: ateoding tothe vowe which he vowed. euen so he mutt do after the lawe ofhis < al 5 9 ¢
22 And the Tode spake vnto 1 saping: 3
23, Speake vnto Aaron and his sonnes, laying: On this Wyle ye shall blelle the chyldren of Ilrael, and fay vnto them:
24. The Lorde blesle thee and kepethee:
25 The Lode make his face Mine vpon thee, and be mercyfull vnto thee: 6
26 The Lorde lyft vp his countenaunce vponthee, and geue thee peate. ;
27 And they shall put my name vpon the.

chyldzen of Ilrael, and J wpil blesle. Ds

vnleauened walker allo, and put them them, c
{ N 6
¢ The. vij. Chapter. . f 2 Che offerpnig of the lordes and headeg of Itrael. 89 God tpeaketh from the ;
¢ mercie feate to Mopses. <
¢ ¢

ND when Moyles
~ had full fet vp the tabernacle, € annoynted
Hand lanttiftedit, and all
2 F thie instrumentes therol, the aulter also c all

had

Wamnopnted theme fanctified them.
2 Then the printes of Ilrael, heades auer the houles of their fathers (which

were the lordes of the tribes, andouer

them that were numbred) offered,

3 = ie brought their facrifice before the
3 onde lire touered charettes, ⁊ twelue b 15 one charet for two lordes, and
* zone an ore, and they brought them belore the tabernaele.
1 ii the Lorde {pake vnto Woytes,

6 „Taleitotthem, thatt f ) hey may be to
ö man leruite of the tabernacle of the woche Lenau thou {halt genethem
Doug bnto His fice euery man atccor

t
&

the vessels therol: and

6 And Doyles toke the charettes and theoren,tgane them vnto the Leuites.
7 To charettes and fonre oxen he. gaue vnto the sonnes of Gerlon, accordyng vnto their offite. “
8 And fonre chavettes x epght oven he gaue vnto the sonnes of Merari, according vnto their offices, vnder phande of

Ithamar the sonne of Aaron the priest. n ib.

9 Wut vnto the sonnes of Caath he gaue none: betaule the charge of the sanctuarie belonged vnto them, which they dyd beare vpon shoulders.

10 And the princes offered for the dedi 25

catyng of the aulter in the day that it was annoynted, and brought their lees cvifices before the aulter. ;
And the Lorde fayde vnto Moyles:
The princes Chat bring their offerings, . euery day one prince, kor the dedicating of the aulter. :
12 ain fo on the first day dyd Hahesson the sonne of 9 of the tribe ol ; is sacrifice.
Juda, offer his 1 Ad

Il

e

Otterin ges. N umeri. Baan

3 And his offeryng was a seluer charger boule of seuentie ficles, after the sitle of ofan hundred and thirtie fides, afiiuer the sanctuarie, and they were both full. boule ok seuentie sicles after the waiggt ok fine floure mingled with opie fora.
« ofthefanctuaric , and they were both meate offeryng: i
‘ full of fine floure, mingled with ople, 32 A goldenlincente cup of ten sicles, fullot for ameate oflferpng: intense: <
C. 4. Au sincense] cup of ten fides of golde, 33 Apoung bullocke, aranune, d lambe kull of inteuse: ofa pere olde, for a burnt offeryngn:
‘ig A poung bullocke, a ramme, a lambe 34 An hee goate for asinne offeryngn : dka pere olde, for a burnt offeryng: 35 And fo2a peateofferyng two oxen fiue
1 An hee goate for a sinne olferyng: ranmres, fiue hee goates, ¢ fine lambes
17 And for a peace offering, two oxeu, fiue ok one pere olde. This was the offering. rammes, fiue hee goates, c fiuc lambes of Elizur the sonne of Sedeur. of à yere olde. This was the gift of Mae 36 The fifth day, Selumiel the sonne ok. heslon the sonne of Aninadab. Zuri Haddat, captayne of the children

8 The setonde day Nathaniel the sonne ok Simeon, offered: ; |
« Of Zuar, captapne ouer Jlachar, did 37 His gyft was, a siluer charger of an.
© offer: hundred and thirtie sitles, a finer boute-

And he offered for his gykt, afiluer ol leuentie ficles, after the ficte of the.

charger okan hundred and thirtte sicles, lanctuarie, and they were both full of. dA siluer boule of seuentie sicles, after the line floure mingled with opie, lor a: litle of the sanctuarie, both ful of fine meate offeryng: 5
; ae mingled with ople, for a meate ol- 38 A Joldendimeente! cup of ten sicles, full ot keryng: intense: 5
20 An lincense cup of golde ok ten licles, 39 A ponng bullocke, a ramme, a lambe. kullokintenst: of a vere olde, for a burnt offeryng:
Dez Once poũg bullocke, a ramume, a lambe 40 An hee goate for a sinne offeryng: da pere olde, for a burnt offerpng: 4.1 And for apeace offeryng, two oven, fiue
22 And an hee goate for a sinne offeryng: rammes, fue hee goates, fiue lambes:

And sor à peace offering, two oren, tie of avere olde. This was the offeryng raunnes, fine hee goates, fine lambes Gt Selumiel the sonne of Zuri Saddat, of one yere olde. This was the ostering 42 The flirt day, Elialaph the lonne ok.

bol Nathanael the sonne of Znar. Duel, captapne of the children of Gad,

24 The thirde day, Eliab the fonne ok offered: a 6

Helon, taptapne of the children of za 43 His gyft was, a suuer charger of an.

« bGulon, did offer: : hundred and thirtie ficles, a suuer boule:

25 And his gykt was, a suner charger of ok scuentie ficles, after the sicle of the.

« an hundred and thirtie sicles, a fituer fanctuarie, both full of fine floure nun-

‘ boule ok seuentie licles, after theficie ok gled with ople for a meate offervng:

the lanctuaric, and both were full of fine 44 A golden incentej cup often ficies, full.

floure mingied with ople, fora meate ol- — of incenfe: : 4

feryng: 45 A pouug bullocke, a ramme, a lambe.
26 Agoldenlincente cup of tensitles, fullok ola pere olde, for a burnt offervng:
„ tncenfes 46 An hee goate for a sinne offeryng:
2% A poung bullocke, aramme, a lambe 47 And kor apeate offeryng, two oren,. bofa pere olde, for a burnt offeryng: kiue rannmes, fine bee goates, fine:
28 An hee goate fora sinne offeryng: lambes of one pere olde. This was,

29 And for a peace offering, two oxen, five the offeryng of Eliasaph, the lonne ok. rammes, fiue hee goates, fiue lambes ok Duel. ; one pere olde. This was the olferpng 48 The seuenth day, Elilamathe fone. of Eliab the sonne ol Helon. of Amiud, captayne of the children of é
30 The fourth day, Eltzur thelonneof Ephzaim, offered:
Sedeur, taptapne of the chüdzen of 49 And his sacrifite was, a siluer charger
Ruben, dyd offer. of an hundzed and thirtic sitles, 4
31 And his gykt was, a suuer charger liluer boule of seuentie ticles, after we of an hundred and thirtie ficies, afiluer litle of the santtuarie, both 0

ra K

iges. m * ——— bexxvi].

“Fine fonre mingled with ople for a meat a - goateforafinneofferpng: ©
— And kora peace offering, two oxen, fine.
7 on incenfe]cupoftenticles,fulof — rammes, fine hee goates, fine kane

intenle. Oka pere olde. This wasthe offeryng of
2 5 * Apoung bullocke, a ramme, alambe Ahlezer the fonne of Amun Sado

le e ae neee e fey Auhee goate : taptayne of the e

se Aud tb a peace offeryng, two oven, offered rer..

653 . ö M c fue ranuncs, fine hee goates, flue 73 And his offeryng was, a fuer charger
ö andes oa pere olde. This was the ol- ofan hundred and thirtie ti ie fler 5 feryng ok Elilama, the fonne of Anuud. boule of seuentie sicles, after the ficie ok.
64. The epaht dap offered Gamalielthe the lanttuarie, both full of fine flouce «
? *ronne of Pedazur, the captayne of He mingled with ople for a meat offerpng:<
« chlldzenol Panasses . 74. Agolden sincentej cup of ten sitles, full h And his offering was, a filuer charger okmtenle: 5
" pfanbundzed and thirtie fides, afiluer. 75 Apoung bullock, a ramme, alambeok. boule ok seuentie litles, akter 5 siele of the a pere olde for a burnt offeryng: 0 fanctuarie, both full of fine floure mine 7s An hee goate for a sinne offeryng: gled with oyle for a meate offeryng: 7%) And for apeace offering twooren,fiues
6 Agolden lincente cup of tensicles, fullok rannmes ie hee goates, fine lambesok.

„tene one pere olde. This was the offeryng.
5 Apoung bullocke, a ramme, a lambe ok Pagiel the sonne ol Devan. i
“ ofapere olde for a burnt offeryng, 73 The twelfth daye, Ahira the sonne ok.
58 An hee goate for a sinne olferyug: Enan, captaine of the children of Pephy And kor a peate offeryng two oxen fiue thali, offered. .

rammes fine hee goates, fiue lambes of 79 And his offering was, a siluer charger a pere olde. This was the olferpng ok ok an hundred and thirtie sicles, afituer:
Gamaliel the sonne of Pedazur. boule of seuentie fictes, after the fice of.
60 The ninth day, Abidan the sonne of the sanctuarie, both full of fine floure.
Gedeon captayne of the children of mingled with ople fora meate offeryng:-
« Weniamin offered. 30 A golden lincentej cup of ten sicles, full
‘er And his gift was a siluer charger ok an ol intense: : hundred and thirtie sicles, afituerboule 31 Apoung bullocke, a ramme, a lambe ok. of seuentie files, after the sicle of the one pere olde for a burnt offerpngn:· fanctuarie, both full of fine floure min- 32 An hee goate for a sinne offeryng:
Sled with oyle fora meate offeryng: 33 And for a peace offering, two oxen, fiue·
2 A golden lintencej cup ok ten sicles, full rammes fiue hee goates, fiue lambes of.

ok inlence: one pere olde. This was the offeryngof. G
‘8 A young bullocke, a ramme, a lambe Ahira the sonne of Enan. ‘ of one ver olde for a burnt offeryng: 84 This was the dedication ofthe aulter
64 An hee goate for a sinne offeryng: in the day when it was anndynted by.
65 And klor a peate offeryng, two oxen fine the princes of Ilrgel: tweluc chargers .

R «„ 2 K— —

raͤmmes, fine hee goates, fiue lambes of of filuer, twelue siluer boules, twelue one pere olde. This was the offerpng lincenses cuppes of golde. f ol Abidan the forme of Gedeon. 35 Euery charger tontepnyng an hundzed.

66 The tenth dap, Abieser the sonne ok and thirtie ficles of filucr, euerv boule.
F. Ammi Saddai, taptayne ofthe childre fseuentie: And all the siluer vessels con’.
„ OfDanofferen, ' teyned two thonsande ¢ foure bundzcd «
67 And his offeryng was, asiluer charger sitles, after theficleofthefanctuaric.
| an hundred and thirtie fides, aslluer 36 And the golden lincente cuppes Were panne of seuentie ficles after the sicle of twelue, kull of meenfe, contepnpug Cen. gleucmarie both kullokkine floure min- —_ficlesapeeceafterpficieot the lantuakle:
% Ned with oyle fo2 a meate offeryng: lo that all p golde of the cincente} cuppes ht “Solbert (incenfe) cup of ten sicles, full Was an hundeedand twentie sicles. Ke
10 en 37 All the bullockes for the burnt offeae boung bullocke, a ramme, alambe ryng were twelue, the rammestwelue,

ola pere olde kor a burnt ofkerpng: che lambes of a yere olde tele, 1

on — —

‘Ceremonies.

on

Exo.xxv.d.

thew meate offerypuges : and the hee

‘ gates for finne offeryng, twelue.

88 Aud all the oren for the peace offerynges were tweutie and foure, the ranumes sixtie, the hee goates firtic, the lambes of a pere olde sirtie. This
Was the Dedication of the aulter, after that it was annopnted. ;

€
¢
< into seruice, or dimissed.
¢
¢
€
¢
E
€
E

5 And the Torde spake vnto Moyles, saping: a

6 Lake the Leuites from among the chüdren of Israel, and cleanle them.

7 And thus (halt thou do vnto them,

when thou cleansest them: Speinckle

Water of purifiyng vpon them, and let

them shaue all their fleshe, and let them

; wache their clothes, and so make them

c
«<
«
€
€
«
«<
«
«
«
€
«

selues deane.

8 Then let them take a poung bullocke with his nteate offerpng (euen] fine floure nunged with oyle, and another poung bullocke shalt thou take fora sinne offeryng.

9 And thou shalt bryng the Leuites be-
« fore the tabernacle of the tongregation, thou thalt gather the whole multitnde bkthe children ok Jlrael together, lo And bryng the Leuites before the
« ewe, and the childrenof Plract thai put their handes bponthe Teuites.
And Aaron thal waue the Lenites

Numeri.

J The. viii. Chapter.

Che order of the lampes. 4 Che fourme of the candlesticke. and offeryng of the Leuttes, 24 The age of the Leuites when they be receaued

89 And when Moyles was gone in tabernacle ofthe congregatiö to ale:
With hym, he hearde the voyte of one fpeakpng vnto hymkrom of the merge:
(cate that was ppon the arke of wilnesse betweene the two Cherubims and he talked with hym. .

6 Che cleanspng

•«/) „„ „ ann „

before the Lorde for a wane offeryng of the children of Ilrael, that they may. execute the ministration of the serulte of. the Lorde. N
12 And the Teuites thal put their handes vpon the heades of the bullockes: and. thou shalt offer the one for a sinne offeryng, and the other for a burnt offeryng vnto the Lorde that thou mapest matze an attonement fo2 the Teuites. j
13 And thou shalt {et the Leuites before.
Aaron and his sonnes, and wane them for a waue offeryng vnto the Lorde. f
14 And thus thou shalt seperate 5 Le: uites from among the children of Ilrathand the Leuites shalbe mone.
1 Alter that, cha the Leultes go in, to. do the seruice of the tabernacle of the | tongregation: And thon shalt cleanse. them, e waue them fora waue offering:
16 Jor they are geuen and deliuered vn: <¢ to me from among the children of FE: rael for such as open euery wombe, euen for the first borne of all the children « of Israel haue F taken them vnto me. «

i

17 Jo: all the firtt borne of the chüdven gu of Ilrael are mine, both man and beast: tw!

fice the day that J smote every fick. bone in the lande of Egypt, J lanctified f them for my felfe. f
18 And J haue taken the Lenites for all. the first borne of the children of Ilcacl.
19 And haue geuen the Leuites as a gilt : to Aaron and his formes from among the children of Israel, to do the leruice a of the children of Ilrael in the tabernd! cle of the congregation, and to make an attonement kor the children of 1 b that there be no plague among fhe chil’ dren ok Hicact, ifthe children of ‘Blrae' tome nye vnto the fanctuaric. 4
20 And Doyles, and Aaron and ang 5 :

g

J

Numeri. : ba Se J

egation of the children of Blracl, 23 And the Lorde fake bn j oD the Leuites: accozdyug vnto laping: = 4 1 Dovtes,

ail that the Lorde cõmaunded Moyles 24. This is it that belongeth onto the conternyngthe Leuttes, euen so didthe Tenites: From twentie and fiue peres. Nuxxiiiic chlldzen of Ilrael bnto them. N olde and vpwarde, they shall go in to

9% And the Leuites were purified, and wapte vpon the seruiteokthe tabernacle walshed their clothes: And Aaron ofthe congregation. * wanued them as a waue offeryng before 25 And from the age o flftie yeres, they.

the Lorde, and made an attonement fo: shall ceafle waptyng vpon the seruice
Athens to cleanse tient, 6 therot, and chall serue no moze: 8

12 Akter that, went the Leuites in, to do 26 Wut hall minister with their brethren their leruite in the tabernacle of the con- in the tabernacle ok the congregation, < gregation before Aaron and his sonnes: to kepe thynges committed to their

as the Lorde had cõmaunded Moyles charge: but chall do no move feruice, . tonternyng the Le uites, euen so they Thus therkore shalt thou do vnto the

dpd vnto dent. Teuites touchyng their charge, D

monies:

‘
‘
¢

q The. ix. Chapter.
2@he allover, 13 Punishment foz such as kepeth it not. 15 Ol the cloude.

a nanan

N the Lorde lpake And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, i onto Moyles in the faping: 0 0
S wüddernesse of Sinat, 10 Speake vnto the children of Ilrael,-
J in the fir moneth ok and lay: If any man be vncleanẽ by the
E the leconde pere, after reason ot a toarse, or be ina wap farre.

they ' were come out ok distaunt from pou and from pour gene: ,
( Kee AItthe lande of Egypt, rations, he shall kepe the Palloner laying: vnto the Lorde. ‘ a Tek the children of Israel celebrate u The fourteenth dap of the setonde the Passoner at the tyme appopnted moneth at enen let them kepe it: and

„ thervnto: cate it with vnleauened bread, Efodwze .
3 Enenpfourteenth dap of this moneth hearbes. N ‘ at tuen: ye shall kepe it in his season ace 12 Tet them leaue none of it Onto the

tordyng to all the ceremonies ok it, and morning, nor breake any bone of it: But 1 dactording to all the maners therok, hall accordyng to all the ordinaunce of the.“
„ bekepeit. Passouer, let them kepeit. .

4 And Moyles spake vnto the children 13 Wut the ian that is cleane, and is not. C

ok Asrael, that they should celebrate the ina iourney, and pet was negligent to

„ allduer. kepe the Passouer: the same soule shal-

And they kept the Passouer the foure- be cut of from his people, because he. teecuth day of the firt moneth at enen brought not the offeryng of the Lorde.

f inthe wüdernelle of Sinat:accordingto in his dur sealon, that man hall beare
Althat the Lorde tõmaunded Mopfes, his sinne. P
% tuen dyd the children of Jlrael. 14. And if a straunger dwell among pou,

5 And certayne men were dekiled bvypa and Wyll kepe the Palsouer vnto the. dead man that they myght not kepe the Worde: accordyng to the ordinance ok.
0 patfoner the fame day, and they came the Palloner and maner thevof, fo hall :
7 ae Moyses € Aaron the fame day. he do. He Mall haue one lawe both for.
74 hd thote men layde vnto hym, we the straunger, and for hym that was. we dellevbr a Dead man:wherkoreare bonne in the lame lande. c
«an Ste backe that we may not offer 15 And the lame day that thetabernade
1 solkerpng vnto the Lorde in due was reared vp, a cloude couered the eg se
848 And ena the children of Israel- tabernacle, (namely | the tabernatle ok. ty ‘Boyles sayd vnto them: Stande the testimonie: and at euen there Was ‘ ag) wyll heare what the Lorde pon the tabernacle, as tt were the ap « wl commaunde touternyng pou. pearaunce ot fire, vntyll the m i 3

Ceremonies.

16 So it was alwap: the cloude coucred it by day, and the appearaunet of fire by

c nyght.

17 And when the cloude was taken bp

fromthe tabernatle, then the chiden

‘ of Ilrael tourneped : and in the place

where the cloude abode, there the children of Blrael pitched their tentes.

18 At the mouth or the Lorde the chuldrẽ of Israel iourneyed, and at the mouth of the Lorde they pitched: And as long as the cloude abode vpon the tabernacle, they lay styll: . :

19 And when the cloude tarped styll vpon the tabernatle long tynte, the children of
Ilsrael kept the watche of the Lorde, and iourueyed not.

20 And when the cloude abode a fewe dayes vpon the tabernacle, they abode in their tentes, atcordyng to the commaundement of the Lode: and they

c
E c
€
é a c c
C4
é
¢ c c
C4

: e pettes of siluer: of an

R «4

sk LZ J mapett ble them to tall

the congregation together, and when che campe chall iourney. '
And when they shal blowe with them, all the multitude that resort to thee bez fore the doore of the tabernacle of the congregation. |

nA

NM K „„ K „ K K

And it they blowe but one trumpet,

lhen the princes which are heades ouer

« the thoulandes of Israel shall come

vnto thee.

5 Wut il pe blowe an alarme, the hoastes that lye on the cast partes Matt go forwarde.

6 And it ye blowe the alarme the second tyme, the hoast that lpeth on the south fide shall take their iourney: kor they hall blowe an alarme when they take their iournepes.

7 Wut when the congregation is to be gathered together, they Matt blowe

Without an alarme.

8 And the sonnes of Aaron the priestes

{hail blowe with their trumpettes, and

pe shall haue thein as a lawe for euer in

pour generations,

„ „% „ „ „ MA „ K an „ &

“

is ] _-
. N umeri.

¢ The.x. Chapter. |

tourneyped allo at the tommaund 0 ofthesLone, aundement.
21 And when the cloude abode vpon tu tabernacle from euen vnto fie a nyng, e was taken vp in the morznyng, then they iourneyed: Whether it was

bp dap or by nyght that the donde was

taken bp, they ionrneyed. g
22 Or ik the tloude taryed two dayes, o: da moneth, or a pere vpon the tabernacle and remapned theron, the chudren of
Ilrael remapned ttyl and tourneyed: not: And alloone as the cloude was taken vp, they iourneyed. 0
23 At the mouth ofthe Low they rested in the tentes, and at the cõmaundement. of the Lorde they iourneyed, nepyngthe watche of the Horde at the commaundement of the Lord by the hande of Moyses. .

lo Also in the day of pour gladnefle, and. in pour featt dayes, € inthe begynnyng. of yout monethes, pe shall biowe the. trumpettes ouer pour burnt facvifices and peace offerynges, that they may be.

a remembraunce for pou before pour.
God: J am the Torde pour God. f
And it came to passe the twentith day, of the setonde moneth in the setonde. pere, that the donde was taken vp from.

of the tabernatle of the testimone
12 And the chide of Ilrael toke their. iourney out of the desert of Sinai, and. the cloude rested in the wudernelle of: haran. ¢

3 And they firkt tobe their tourney at the. pea of the Torde by the hande of:
Moyles.
14. Inthe fir place went the standerdeok. the hoattof the children or Juda accor’, dyng to their aries: whole captayne
Was Pahasson thesonneok Aminadab.
15 And ouer the hoast of the tribe of We. chitdzen of Jlachar, was Nathanael. the sonne of Zuar. 0
16 And duer the hoat ofthe tribe of the children-

D

, chyldzen of Zabulon, was Eliab the fonnc ol Helon.
And the tabernacle was tal downe,
7 np thefonnes of Gerson and Merari
«Spent foortl bearing the tabernacle,

ug Ad the hoast of Ruben went foorth
© spith their standerd and armes, whole f taptaine was Elizur p sonne ol Sedeur. u And ouer the hoalt of the tribe ok the
„ qhylozen of Simeon, was Dalamiet
« ¢hefonneofSuriSaddat,

10 And duer the hoast ofthe tribe of the
„ chyldzen of Gad, was Elialaph the soune of Duel.

h The Caathites alfo went fo:warde
. and bare the lanctuarie, Ethe other dyd tt by the tabernatle against they tanie.

22 And the standerd of the hoast of the chyldren of Ephraim went foorth accor-

dpugto their armies, whole captapne was Elilama the sonne of Ammind. a; And euer the hoast of the tribe of the sonnes ot Maͤnasse, was Gamaliel the sonne of Pedazur. |

24. And ouer the hoast ol the tribe of the dsonnes of wenianiin, was Abidan the sonne of Gedeon.

2 And the standerd of the hoast of the children of Dan came foorthe gathering

all the hoastes together) throughout

their armies, whole captaine was Ahiezer the sonne of Amimi Saddai.
26 And ouer the hoast ofthe tribe of the chyldren of Aler, was Pagiel the sonne ok Ochzan.

27 And ouer the hoast of the tribe of the chyldren of Pephthali, was Ahira the

erenmpes-. Numeri.

= : Enan. ;
28 Lele are the iourneps of the chyldren of Ilrael throughont cher ae mies, and thus the hoastes remoued.

And Boyles fayde vnto Hobab the

sonneok Raguel the Madtamte, which i

Was Doyles father intae: we go vn-

to the plate of whiche the Lorde fayde, «

A Wyli gene it vou. Come thou thereore with vs, and we wyll do thee good: for the Lorde hath pronnled good vnto
Iltael. :

zo And he aunlwered hym: JIwyl not.

go, but Wy! Depart to mine owne lande and to my kinred.

31 Pe laid: Oh nay, leaue vs not, forthou. knowest our mansions in the wyldernelle, and thou mayest be to vs in fteade « of eyes. 4

32 And ik thou go with bs, looke what. goodnesse the Lorde cheweth vnto vs, the lame wyll we chewe vnto the.

33 And they departed from the mount. ofthe Lorde three dapes iourney, and the arke of the couenaunt of the Lorde: went before them in ÿ three dayes iour-. ney, to search out a resting plate for thẽ.

34 And the cloude of the Lorde was vppon thein by day, when thep Went out.
Of the tampe. ;

c

35 And whens arke went foozth, Mop- pal

ses sayde: Nile vp Lorde, and let thine

enemies be scattered, and let themthat.

hate thee, flee before thee. ;
36 And when the arke rested, he sapde:
Returne O Nord, vnto the many thousandes of Ylracl. ;

q The. x]. Chapter.
Che people murmureth. 4 They delire kleche. They lothe Manna. 1 Che war

uering fapth of Moples.

of the auncientes, and they prophelie.

ners are punished.
Al Se Fy MD When * the people
6% dpd wickedlp, it was
2 a 17 ale in the
E Wek cates of the Torde:
And when the Lorde
[a 2 5 5

Os via SN
{ ie
\ 772

. hearde it, his counte-

Aye e Naunice Was prouoked

0 Wrath and the fire of the Lord burnt

weclathem, and consumed them that tte the vttermost of the hoalt.

16 The Lorde deuideth the buͤrthen of Moyles to leuentie
31 It raignethquaples.

3 The kleshe raue-

burnt among them.

And a number ot people that was a mong them fell a lustyng, and turned them selues, and wept euen as dyd allo the chyldren of Iscael) and sayd: who shall geue vs flethe to cate:

5 We sremeniber the fishe which we did eate in Egypt for naught, t the cudumbers c melons, icekes, onionsct garieck,

6 Wut now our loule is dryed away: for

box.

HE

we tan see nothing els, fauc Darna, - |
7 The Manna was as coriander ede, Exodxvis and to see to lpke © Wedellion. oneal
3 And the people ent about and gate pecan rounde it in nn C 2 fohpte pearlt. a morters,

2 And the people cryed nto Moples: ples:
105 When Mopses madt intertellion

3 A Torde, the fire quenched.
Sel he called the name of the place
AWAY, becaute the five of the Lorde

The people murmure.

morters, and baked it in pannes, and made cakes of it: And the talte of it, was lyke vnto the tafte of freshe ople.

> And when the deawe fell downe vpon
5 a in the nyght, the Manna fell

pon it.

10 And when Moyses hearde the people
Weepe throughout their housholdes, tuery man in the doore of his tent, the wrath of the Lord was kindeled exceedingly, and it greeued Moyses also.

1 And WMoples sapde vnto the Lode:
Wherelore hast thou dealt cruelly with thy fernaunt And wherekore haue F not founde fanour in thy sight, seyng that thou puttest the wayght or all this people vpon me:

12 Haue J conceaued all this pesple- Dez haue J begotten them, that thou shouldest say vnto me, Carp them in thy bosome as a nurse beareth the fuckyng chylde, vnto the lande which thou swarest vnto their fathers:

13 Where shoulde J haue fleshe to geue vnto all this people, whiche weepe before me, saying: Geue vs fleshe that we map cate. |

of 4 Jam not able to beare all this people

alone, seyng it is to heauie for me.

15 Ir thou deale thus with me, kyll me
Iprap thee, it J haue founde faudur in thy sight, ß IJ {ce not my wretchednesse.

Ezec vũi. d. 16 And the Lode sapde vnto Moyles: *
Gather vnto nie threscore and ten men of the elders of Ilrael, which thou knowest that they are the elders ofthepeople € officers ouer them: and thou shalt bryng them vnto the tabernatle of the tongregation, that they map stande

there with Mee:

17 And JJ wpyll come downe, and talke

with thee there, and take of the spirite

which is vpon thee, and put vponthem, and they shall beare the burthen of the people With thee, lett thou be constrapned to beare it alone.

Exodxvic. 13 And say thou vnto the people, We halowed agaynst to morowe, and pe hall cate fleshe: for pour whyning is in the cares of the Lorde, seyng ye sayd, nao
Chall geue vs fleshe to cates we were happy in Egypt: Therckore the Lorde wyll geue pou fleshe, and ye shall cate.

19 He shall not eate one dap nor two, nor fine dayes, neither ten, nor twentie dapes:

20 But euen a moneth long, vntill it tome

Numer.

30 And Moyses gate hym into the hoalt,

The people mum

gut at the nostrels of you, and it shalbe lothlome vnto vou, betaule that ye haue tast the Lorde aside whiche is Among pou, and haue wept before hym, laping: hy came we thus out of Egypt:

21 And Moyles sapde: * Hire hundzed D thouland footemen are there okthe peg: dl ple, among which Jam: And thou hag fayd, J wyll gene them flesh, that they may cate a moneth long.

22 Shall the sheepe e the oren be slapne for them, to finde them: either shall all the fishe of the sea be gathered together for them, to suffise them: g

23 And the Lorde fapde vnto Moyles:
Shall * the Lowes hande be waxed rau. short? Thou shalt fee now whether my
Word shal tome to passe vnto thee or not.

24 And Moyses went out, and tolde the people the faping of the Torde: and gathered the threstore and ten elders of the people, and fet thent rounde about the tabernacle. .

25 AndtheLozd came downe ina cloude, and spake vnto him, and toke of the {pe vite that was bpon him, and gaue it vnto the threscore € ten elders: And when the spirite rested vpon them, they prophelied, and dyd not teasse.

26 Wut there remayned two ok the men in the hoast, the name of the one was
Eldad, and the name of the other Medad: And the spirite rested vpon them,

(and thei were of them that were watt: ten, and went not dut vnto the tabernatle) and they prophesied in the hoalt.

27 And there ran a poung man, and tolde
Moyles, and sapd: Eldad and Medad do prophesie in the hoast.

28 And Joluah the sonne of Nun the ser- ¢ uaunt of Moyses, one of his poung men aunswered, and fapde : My lorde Mopyfes,* forbyd them. ö

29 And Moyses fayd vnto hym: Enniest thou for my fabez woulde God that all the Tordes people could prophesie, and that the Lorde woulde put his {pirite vpon them.

Luk. x. 2

Jocl ig., l. Cor xd

he and the elders ol Ylrael.

3. And there went foorth a wynde from 4 the Lorde, and brought quayles from Ex" the sea, t let them fall about the hoast, tuen a dapes iournep ronnde about on euery fide of the hoast, and they did flee in the 1 0 it were two cubites Hye ouer

arth. the earth so 2H

mis Leprous.

che people stoode vp all that day, anal ebat npg, and all the nert day, and they gathered quaples : And be that gathered litle, gathered ten homers ful: And they spread them abrode for their vle, rounde about the hoast,

B peenc their teeth, ever it was chew-

ed bp, the wrath ok the Lorde was
* N ¢ The. xij. Chapter.

aron and Miriam grudge agapnt Woytes, lepnode and healed at the prayer of Moples.

M Miriam and
Karon spake agapust
Poli Moples because of the women ok Ethiopia
Iwhiche he had taken: kon he had take to wife dne ok Ethiopin.
2 Anothep lapde: Hath the Lorde in deede spoken onlpe throngh Doyles:
Hath he not spoken also by vs? And the
Lorde hearde it. n, ee
„nz (But Moyles was a berp*meeke man, abone all the men ol the earth.)

And the Torde spake at once vnto
Mopses, vnto Aaron, and to Miriam:
Come out pe three vnto the tabernacte ofthe tongregation. And they tame out all three. bind § Al the Lorde came downe in the

priler of the cloude, and stoode in the

booze of the tabernacle, and called Aaron and Miriam. And they went out

both of then. b
6 And he sayde, eare my wordes: If

there be a prophete of the Hordes a-

mong pou, J wyll be knowen of him in

à billion, and wyll speake vnto hym in a dreame.

87 My seruaunt Moyles is not fo, which

isfapthfull in all myne house.
, 8 Autohpm wyll J speake mouth to mouth in a vision, ot in darke speaches

Wing

And Whyle the fleche was vet be-

Numer.

kindled against the people, the Lorde

mote the people wi
* ple with an ertredpng

34 And he called the name of the plate,

The graues of lust : because the buried

the people that lusted there.

35 And the people tone their * iourney krom the graues of lust vnto Hazeroth and abode at Hazeroth.

10 Miriam is strycken with

and similitudes ofthe Loz chan he see:
Wherlore then were pe not afrayde to speake against my seruaunt Moyles:

9 And the Lord was moued vnto Wath agaynst them, and he went his way,

10 And the cloude departed from the ta-

bernatle, and beholde Miriam was become leprous, as it were snowe: And

XC.

Psal. 78 d.

Num c.

i. Par. 26. d.

Aaron looked vpon Miriam, and be-

holde, fhe was leprous.

1 And Aaron {aide vnto Moyses: Alas my Love, J beseche thee put not the sinne vpon vs whiche we hane footith: lye toninntted and sinned.

12 Oh, let her not be as one dead, of whõ the fleshe is halle tonsumed when he tommeth out of his mothers whom.

13 And Doyles cryed vnto the Lorde, saying: Heale her nowe, O God, J bez seche thee.

14. And y Lorde sayde vnto Moyles: Hf her father bad © spit in her fate, Houta
{he not be ashamed seuẽ dapes: Let her be (hut out of the hoast seuen dayes, and after that, let her be reteaued in againe.

And Miriam was shut out of the

hoalt seuen dayes: and the people re- st

moued not, tyll she was brought in a-

gayne,

16 And alfterwarde the people remoned from Hazeroth, and pitched in the wyldernesse of Pharan. 1

I The. xiij. Chapter.

certayne men are tent to learche the lande of Chanaan. 24 Chey bryng of the kruite or the lande. zi Caleb comkorteth the people againk che dilcouraging of

the other spieg.

ND the Lorde {pate
V vnto Mopses saping:
Sende nien out to
5 searche the lande of
Chanaan, whiche J geue vnto the chyldren f. Ikrael: of euery

tribe of their fathers shall pe sende a man, and let them all be suche as are rulers antong them.

3 And Mopses at the commaundement of the Lorde, sent foorth out of the wyldernefle of Haran, suche men as were

ades ol the chyldren of Ilrael
5 0 hechy . Ther

€

a) If htt fa er vpon dileasure shuld pit in her face, she map not presume to come into

moze shall sye not prelume to comte Drito ,

me. 125
Nu. xxill. d.

he people murmure Num eri. 8

4 Their names are thele. Of the tribe ob ok Machi.] 5 uben, Samnna the sonne ok Zacur. 16 These are the names of the men.
5 Okthe tribe of Simeon, Saphat the which Moyses sent to {pie out the land: ©
< formeofiport. And Poyles called the name of Olea
‘6 Okthe tribe df Juda, Caleb the sonne the sonne ol Nun, Josuah. g e “gl 17 And Moyles lent them cas to spie
23:7 Pk the tribe of Jlachar, Igal the out the lande of Chanaan, and ald vnto sonne of Joseph. then: Get pou vp this way southward
Pk the tribe of Ephraim, Olea the that ve map go vp into the hie countreysonne of Nun. w And lee the lande What maner thing
9 Of the tribe of Weniamin, Palti the it is, and the people that dwelleth thersonne of RKaphu. m, whether they be strong or Weake cy:
10 Okthe tribe ol Zabulon, Gaddiel the ther feve or manp: sonmc of Sodi. | 19 And whatthe land is that they dwel
1 Okthe tribe ok Joseph, naniely ok the in, whether it be good or bad, and what tribe of Manasse, Gaddi the forme ok maner of cities they be that they dwell

© Sul. in, whether they dwell in tentes or wal-
12 Ok the tribe of Dan, Anuelthefonne led townes:

The people mam

ok Gemalli. a 20 And what mauer of lande that is, z Ol the tribe ol Aler, Sethur the sonne whether it be fat or leane, and whether of Michael. f there be trees therin or not. Be of good
14. Okthe tribe of Hephthali, Nahabi cdurage, and bryng of the fruite of the the sonne ol Uaphli. lande: And it was about the tyme that

15 Okthe tribe of Gad, Guel the sonne grapes are first rype.

4 me ty, 1 di b
. ah) 3 ans rng ‘it an
1 3 Wei * ; i
So APN !

= I lat 4
, AN ii Ne N 8 5
* e r Sie
1 aT ab tine Hall PAUL at

CTY LAT Ze
Was a ee SO

pi

a * And lo they went vp, and searched out tt vpon a staffe: and they brought) alld the lande from the wildernefleof Zin, okthe ponigranates, and of the figges. bnto Kehob, as nien tome to hemath. 24. And the plate was called the riuer El

22 And they alcended vnto the south, and col, becaule ok p clutter of grapes whiche come vnto Hebron where Ahmnan was the chüldren of Ilrael tut downe chene. and Selai, and Thalmat, the sonnes ok 25 And they turned backe agayne front
Anat. Debron was buylt seuen peres searthing ol ß lande after fourtic daes. befoze Zoan in Egypt. | 26 And they went, and came to Moples

23 And they came vnto the ryuer of El- and Aaron, and vnto all the multitude col, and tut downe there a braunch with okthe chyldren ol Jlrael in the wylderone clouster ol grapes, and twapne bare nelle Pharan to Cades, and huge

E

e murmure.

regation, and che wed them the fruite olthe lande. 5
27 Aid they tolde hym, and sayde: we ame vnto the lande whyther thou fendedlt vs, € lurelp it floweth With milke and honp, and here is of the fruite of it.
28 Mtuerthelesse, the people be strong that dwell im the lande, and the cities are Walled and excerdyng great: and moreouer, we fave the chyldren of

Anat there.

19 The Analechites dwell in the south,

countrey: and the Hethites, and the Jebulites, and the Amorzites dwellin the mountapnes : Ethe Chanaanites dwell by the fea, and by the coast of Jordane.
30 And Caleb stylled the people before
Moyses, saping: Het vs go bp at once,

| Numeri. chem worde, and also vnto all the con- and possesse it, for we be able to ouer-

come teh
Wut the men that went vp with him layde: We be not able to 8215 Anata ie people, fo2 they are stronger then
31 Andthey brought vp an euyll report ok the lande whiche they had kearthed, laping vnto the chitdeen of Pact: The lande whiche we haue gone through to searche it out, is alande that cateth vp the inhabitours therok, and the people that we sawe in it, are men of a great stature.
33 And there we sawe alo giauntes the chyldzen of Anat whiche come of the
JLiauntes: And we seemed in our light as it were grathoppers, and fo we dyd in their fight,

J The. xiiij. Chapter.

Che people murmure agapnst God. 10 And woulde haue stoned Caleb and Joluah.
37 The learchers ol the lande dre. 45 Amalech kplleth the Ilraeliteg.

M all the multitude a okthe people cried out,

Jaron, and the whole congregation layde vnto then: wouide God that we had dyed in the lande ol Egypt, either that We had dyed in this wpldernesse.

3 Wherfore Hath the Lorde brought vs

vnto this lande to fall vpon the [Worde, and that our wyues and our chyldren chould be a pray: Here it not better that
We returne vnto Egypt agayne:

4. And they sapd one to another: Let vs

make à taptapne, and returne vnto E-

gppt agapne.

Then Moyles c Aaron fell c on their

dees bekore al the allemblie of the ton-

: gregation ofthe chyldren of Jlrael. an Josuah the sonne of Nun, and ven of ane of Jephune whiche

mthat ra ten 5 carched the lande, pale vnto al the companic of the

en e
1580 ough to searche lt Sa very good lande. N

Athe Hoy haue a loue to vs, he will

bryng bs into this lande and geue it bs, whiche is such à lande as floweth with mylke and hon y. f

9 Wut in anp Wyle rebell not pe agaynst the Lorde, neither feare the people of thelande, for they are but® bread for vs: Their shielde is departed krom them, and the Lorde is with vs, feare them not therfore.

jo Wut all the congregation bade stone

XC].

Deut. xx a.

(b) we shall“ ca syly ouercome them.

them with stones: And the glory ol the

Torde appeared in the tabernacle of a ai before all the chyldren of Israel.

II And the Lorde fayde vnto Moyles:
Howe long do this people prouoke me, and how long wyll it be per they belcue me, for all the signes which J haue she-
Wed among tiem:

12 J will hnyte them with the pesttlence and destrop them, and wyll matic of thee a greater nation and mightier then

they. l
13 d Moyles sapde buto the Torde:

Thenthe Egyptians shall heare it, (for

thou broughtest this people in thy

nught fromamong them.)
14. And it wylbe tolde to the inhabiters okthis lande also: for they haue hearde lpkewyse, that thou Lorde art among this people, and that thou Worde art
M vy seene

C

‘ The people murmure.

Exo, xiil. c.

standeth oucr them, x that thou goest before then by day tyme in a pyller of a tloude, and in a pyller ol fire by nyght.

15 If thou shalt kyll all this people as they were but one man: then the nations whiche haue hearde the kame of thee, wyll fay:

16 Becaule the Tord is not able to bryng in this people into the lande whiche he sware vnto them, therefore he bath slaine them in the wyldernesse.

17 Aid nowe J beleche thee, let the power of my Lod be great, accordyng as thou hast spoken, faping:

18 The Lorde is long ver he be angrie, and or great mercy, and suffreth iniquitie and sinne, and leaueth no man inno-

cent, and viliteth the vnrighteoulnelle ok the fathers vpon the chyldren, in the thirde and fourth generations.

19 Wc niertyfull I beleche thee vnto the sinne ok this people actordyng vnto thy great niercy, as thou batt forgeuen this people from Egypt, euen vntyll nowe.

20 And the Lorde sayde: J haue forge-

uen it, according to thy request.

Numer . a seeue face to fate, and that thy cloude ou cuen as pe haue spoken in myne

The people Murmy, ee: Alles hatte

29 Pour carkatles shall fall in the wy dernesse: And all pou that Wer tai E throughout pour numbers from twentie yeres and aboue, whiche haue mur-

mured against mie,

30 Shall not come into the lande ouer which J lifted vp myne hand to make pou dwell therin, saue Caleb the lonne
95 Jephune, and Josuah the fonne of

Am.

31 Wut pour chyldzen whiche pe sapde
{houtde be a prap, them J Wyll bryng in, and they thall knowe the lande whiche pe haue refuled.

32 And pour carkasses Mail fall in this wyldernelle. |
33 And pour chyldren shall wander in the wildernesse fourtic veres, and suffer for pour whordome, vntpll pour car: kafies be wasted in the wyldernesse.
34 Akter the number of the dapes in

whiche ve searched out the lande, cuen

fourtie dapes,euery day for a pere shal Ez

ye beare pour vnrighteonsnesse, euen kourtie peres, and pe shall knowe my

2D 21 Wut as truelpas Jliue, all the earth bzeache of promile. shalbe filled with the glory of the Lord. 35 Ithe Lorde haue sayde, that J wyll
22 But all those men Whiche haue seene do tt dnto all this eupll congregation my glozp, aud my miracles whiche J that ave gathered together against me: did in Egypt and in the wudernesse, and For in this wildernesle they shalbe conhaue tempted me nowe this ten tymes, sumed and there they chall dye. and haue not hearkened vnto myvoyce: 36 And the men whiche Moyles (ent to F
23 Shall not fee the lande whiche J searche the lande, and whiche (when
[ware vnto their fathers, neither shall they tame agayne) made all the people
‘ any of them that prouoked me {ee it. to murmure against hym, and brought
Isuc. uli.

24 But mi {eruaunt* Caleb, becanle he had another maner of spirite, (and becaule he bath folowed me vnto the vtmot) hym wyll J bryng into the lande

which he hach walked in, and his seede

shall inherite it.

25 And alfo the Amalechites and Chanaanites, reniapne in the valley: To morowe turne you, and get vou into the e cuen by the way of the red sea.

26 And the Lorde spake vnto Doyles 4

and Aaron, saping:

vp a sclaunder vpon the lande:
37 Euen thole men that dyd bryng vp that sclaunder vpon it as though chad

ben euill, dyed in agreat plague before c

the Lode.

27 hobwe long doth this euyll multitude murmure agaynst me- J haue hearde the murmuringes of the chudren of HE rael with the whiche they murnure agaynst me.

28 Tell them therefore: As truelp as J line fapeth the Lorde, J Wyll do vnto

t vp therefore, for the Lorde is ad pata rthat ye be not layne bez fore pour enemies,

, Forthe Amalechites and the Chana-
9 anites are there befoze you, t yt wyll fall vpon the worde, betaule ye are tur-
„ nea adap from the Lorde, e the Lorde wyll not be with vou.

Numer.

XCII

44 But they presumed obstinatly to go v into the hyll top: Heuerthelater, the arke of the touenaunt ofthe Lorde and
Doyles departed not ont of the hoast.

45 Then the Amalechites and the Chanaanites which dwelt in that hill, tanie

downe, and sniote them, and consumed

them euen anto Horma.

¢ The. xv. Chapter.

Che drinke oficringes ol them that enter into the lande.

30 The punichment of

hym that linneth of arroganie oz pride. 32 DE hym that gathered tickes on the

Sabbath dap.
Ga Mꝰ ͤ the Lorde spake

ine bnto Moyles, faping:

Speake vnto the chit:

deen of Ilrael, and fap vnto them: when ye be tome into the lande
5 of pour habitations, wWhiche J geue vnto pou: 6
3 And Will make an offering by fire vntothe Lode, namely a burnt offering, dnra satrifice to fulfill a vowe, or a free offering, or in your principall feastes, to make a sweete sauour vnto the Lorde,
| ofthe heard, 02 of the flocke:
4 Then let hym that offereth his offeing vnto the Logd, bryng alld a meate offering of a tenth deale of floure, mtn: sitd With the fourth part of an hin of oyle

And the fourth part ol an hin of wine

fora danke offering ait thou prepare

Vith the burnt offering, or any other

offering for one lambe.
6 Onifitbearamme,thou chalt prepare for a meate offering two tenth deales of floure, mingled wich the thirde part kan hin ofoyle.

8.7 And fora diinne offering, thou shalt
‘offer the thirde part of an hin of wine,
9 fora lweete lauour vnto the Lorde.

8 And when thon preparest a bullocke

a fag cuent offering, or for a facrifice to

1 Lone voce or peace offering vnto the

¢
¢

9 cethim bring with a bullocke a meate nung ok theee tenth deales of floure,

Auen With halfe an hin of oyle.

ae ND thou Chait bryng for a deinke offe-

one: me anes of ee an

¢ 0 i

‘Onto ty order ire ot asweete sauour

J 3 5 e Alter this maner shall ttbe done for a

bullocke, oz for a ramme, 02 fo2 alambe, ‘ or à kid f

12 Attording to the number that vr that’ prepare, fo hall ye do to euery one, atcordyng to their number. ‘
All that ave bozne of the countrey, ° that do thele thynges after this mancr, . to offer an offering made by fire of a sweete sauour vnto the Lorde, ;
14. And it a straunger lotourne with pou, & or whosoeuer be among you in pour generations and wyll offer an offering. made by fire of a sweete sauom vnto the Lorde: euen as ye do, so he shall do.
1; One ordinaunce chalbe both kor vou ok. the cõgregation, and alfo for the raunger that dwelleth [with vou: It chalbe an ordinaunte for euer in pour generations: as ye are, so (hall the straunger be befoze the Lorde. .
16 One lawe and one maner Chall {erue, co both for you, and for the straunger cha: solourneth with you. : vA And the Logde spake vnto Woyles, « aping: ‘
18 Speake vnto the chyldren of Jlrael, and fay vnto them: dohen pe be tome -Deutvme) into the land to the which J being pou, ‘
1 Then when pe wyll eaic ofthe bread‘ ol the lande, ye shall offer vp an heane. offering vnto the Lorde. 0
20 Be shall offer vp a cake of the first of. pour dowe foran heaue offering: as pe. ö do the heaue offering of the barne, euen fo ye shall heaue it. ‘in
21 Okthe firkofpour dowe pe shall geue onto the Lowe an heaue offering in our generations. ‘
22 And il ye haue erred, and obicruc not. all these commaundementes which the.
Torde hath spoken vnto Moples,
23 Euen all that the Lorde Hath tone
M iti maunded ¢

Lew.xxiii.b .

The man stoned.

from the [firt day that the Lorde tommaunded Doyles, and hence fozwarde among pour generations.

24 Bfought be committed ignorauntly of the tongregation, al the multitude shall offer a bullocke for a burnt offering, to be a sweete sauour vnto the Lord, with the mieate offering and drinke offering therto attordyng to the inaner, and an hee goate for a sinne offering.

25 And the priest Hall make an attonement for all the multitude of the chyldren of Ilrael, and it halbe forgeuen them, for it is ignoraunce: And they shal bryng their offering, a lacrifite made by fire vnto the Lord e their sinne offering before the Lorde for their ignoraunce.

26 And it shalbe forgeuen vnto all the congregation of the chyldren ol Jlrael, and

puto the straunger that divelleth a-

mong pou, seyng all the people were in ignoraunte.

e diate

wi

a
‘ath VaR URS \

32 And whyle the chyldrẽ of Piraet wer

in the wyldernelle, they founde a man bh — stickes vpon the* Sabath day.

33 And they that kounde hym gathering stickes, brought hym vnto Moyses and
Aaron, and vnto all the congregation.

Lui 24. d. 34. And they put hym in warde, fepng it

Exo. xxi. c.

ser was not declared © what choulde be creed Sobat done to hym. che bee. 35 Andthe Lorde sapde vnto Moyses:

Let the man dye, r let all the multitude

Numer. maunded you by the bande of Mopses, 27

The man fron

If any one soule sinne theough tng: 1. raunte, he Hall bryng a thee 5 Aer F pere olde foz a sinne offering.
28 And the priest shall make an attonement foz the foute that finneth igno- © rauntly, when he finneth by ignoraunte before the Torde to reconcile hym, and that it may be forgeuen hym.
29 And both thou that art borne of the chyldren of Israel, and the strannger that dwelleth among you, hall haue one lawe who fo doth sinne thorowe a rput the toute thatdoth oughte
30 But the loule that doth ought © pre- was, sumptuously, whether he be bone in ate the lande or a straunger, the fame bial a phemeth the Lorde: and that soule a. thalbe cut of from among his people. zi Wecaule he hath despised the worde of the Lode, and Hath broken his comm: maundement, that foule therefore shalbe vtterly tut ot, and his © finne chalbe d ey vppon pit, ae

utile

ot big ine ne.

R I A315
> Ss ., Ur yi as at y) 1 e fl Nader

Ws tee PR A

Ae i

ae I ite} on nt

ö 2 aed :

i

0 tee 4
“ill Ih: Ke. eee ee

vnto Moyles, saping:

Deus g Speake vnto the chyldren of Picacl,

; and byd them, that they * make then fringes in the borders ok their gal mentes throughout their generat ö and put vpon the fringe of che bib

g and Abiram.

ande of blewe silke. ye fringe shalbe vnto poutoloke
4 vpon, that ve may remember all the
Band ementes of the Lorde, and do them: and that pe seeke not after pour owne heart, or pour owne eyes, after the which ve vle to go a whoryng.

Numeri.

4.0 But ye shall remember rather, and do all my conmiaundementes and be holy

vVnto pour God.

4 Jam the Lorde pour God, Whic karg be l 5 the lande of cate od: Ja
W J am the Torde

The. xvj. Chapter.
Che rebellion ot Corah, Dathan, and Abiram. 31 Chep pe riche with

their companie.

ZD Corah the sonne of Plaar, the sonne of Caath, the fonne of
Leut, went a part with Dathan and A-
N bivant, the sonnes of
* — Ellab, On the fonne of Peleth, the sonne of Ruben:

And they role bp before Moyses, with tertayne of the children ol Ilrael, two hundred ¢ fiftie, which were captaynes ofthe multitude, famous in the tongregation, and nien of renoune.

And they gathered them selues together agapnst Moples and Aaron, and fayde vnto them: Be take much vpon pou, lepng all the multitude are holy euery one of them, and the Lorde is az mong them: Why lyft pou pour selues vp aboue the congregation of the Lodz

4 And when Moyles hearde it, he fell vpon his face,

And spake vnto Corah and vnto all his company, savin

n Wyll chewe w
„ and Who oughe bym:and whom hene Healt tause to come neare bnto hy.

— ? 8 ‘
AAT OAS AV GOES

6 This do therfore: Take pou fire

bannes, both Corah € all his companie,

7 And do fire therin, and put incenfe in them before the Lorde to morowe: And the man whom the Lode doth chole, the fame shalbe holy: Be take much bpon vou ye lonnes of Leun.

8 Jud Boyles lapd vnto Corah: Meare
“SPAY pou, ve sonnes of Leut,

9 Seemeth it but a mall thyng vnto
715 that the God of Ilrael hath sepeand ronkrom the multitude of Jlrael,
5 bought you to hym selfe, to do the
5 ca Hii Hb aye of the Lode,

, cfore the tonunister bnto cher cian

d tej r *
16 And Moyses fayde vnto Corah: we

10 De hath taken thee to hym and all thy bretlpen the lonnes of Leui with chee: and seeke ve the office of the pelt allo-

1 For which cause both thou and all thy companie are gatheredtogether againt the Lorde: And What is Aaron that ye murmure agapnst hym:

2 And Doyles sent, and called Dathan and Abiram the sonnes of Eliab:which sayde, we wyll not come vp.

13 Js it a mall thyng, that thou hast bought vs out of the land that floweth with mpike and honie, to kyll vs in the wildernesle: extept thou make thy selle lorde and ruler ouer vs also-

14 Moreouer, thou hast not brought vs €

vnto a lande that floweth with mylke e honie, neither geuen vs inheritaunce of fieldes and vinepardes: Wylt thou put out the eyes of these menz We Wyll not tonie vp.
1g Aud Doyles Wared very angry, and sayde vnto the Lode, Turne not thor ito cher dene thane,
2 5 4 eltcr

“ase ge 15 po fie peer’? od

hou c al thy company before the Lord,
Win thou, thcy,and Aaron, to niorolbe. ad keneeuerg mant his cenler, and put incküfe ehen ae e eng ve before the Lode euerp man hes tenser, euen two hundreth and fiftie censers: thou allo and Aaron, euery one his center.

18 And they toke euery man his center, and put fire in them, and layde intense theron, and stoode in the Boose of the tabernacle of the congregation with
Moyles aud Aaron. g

19 And Corah gathered all the tongregation agaynst them, vnto the doore of the tabernacle of the congregation: And the glorie of the Lorde appeared vnto all the congregation, .

Ie 7 j +4 = el} * yoy we

—— eee

xciij

| he

Dachanand Abiram.

and Aaron, saping:

21 Seperate pour selnes from among this congregation, that I may confume them at once. a

22 And they fell vpon their faces, and layde: O God, the God of spirites of all fieshe, hath not one man finned: Milt thou be wroth with all the multitude-

23 And the Torde fake vnto Popses, saying:

24. Speake vnto the congregation, and fay: Get pou awa from about the tabernacle of Cozah, Dathan, c Abiram.

25 And Moyses role vp, and went vnto
Dathan and Abiram: and the elders of
Israel folowed hym.

26 And he spake vnto the congregation, saping: pt I pray pou from the tentes of these wicked men, and touche nothyng of theirs, lest pe perishe in all their sinnes.

27 And so they gate them from the tabernacle of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram,

Num. xvii a

on euery syde: And Dathan c Abiram

tame out, € stoode in the doore of their tentes, with their wines, their fonues, and their litle children.

28 Aud Doyles sayde: Hereby pe shall knowe that the Lorde hath sent me to do all these workes, for I haue not done them of myne owne mpnde,

29 Il thele men dye the common death
Of all men, or ik they be vilited after the

visitation of all men, then the Lorde

hath not sent me:

Hut andik the Lorde make a h newe

they haue, and they go Downe glue

that these men haue
E 31 And assoo ie 0 * ung; vum. ac b. olle alund hät Was v der them:

brd zz And the cate opened her mouth, and walowed them vp, and their houles, and all che men that were with Cozah,

Aud all their goodes.
And they and all that they had went done alpue vnto the pit, and the earth closed vpon them: and they perished

from among the congregation,

34 Aud all Israel that were about them, fled at the trye of them: And they sayde, lest the earth lwalowe vs vp allo.

35 Aud there tanie out a fire from the

prouoked p Wp

heg Dur

Numer. zo Aud the Worwde spake vnto Maples

iuto the pit: then pe chall vnderstande as he had map lal

Dathanand Abir

Lorde, and consumed the two hn and fiftie men that offered meense. *

36 And the Torde spake vnto Moyles ae vnto Eleazar be l.

37 Speake Onto Eleazar the sonne
Jaron the priest, that: he take vp 75

confers out of the burnyng, and scatter the fire here and there, for they are halowed,

38 The tensers of hele sinnersvagaynst their owne loules: let them male of 22 them brode plates fora coueryng of the dan aulter: Fo2 they offered them belozethe 4
Torde, and therfore they are halowed ar
OF Ata atime vnto the childsen of Israel. a

39 And Eleazar the priest toke the brasen F cenlers, which they that were burnt had offered, and made brode plates for dc ꝰtouerpug of the aulter, oc.

40 To be a remembraunte vnto the 223 children of Ilrael, that no straunger 232,
Which is not of the leede of Aaron, come = neare to offer incense before the Lorde, that he be not lyke vnto Cozah and his tompanie, as the Lorde fayde to hym by the hande of Mopses.

41 But on the mozowe, all the multitude of the children of Israel murmuredagaynst Mopses and Aaron, saping: Pe haue kylled the people of the Lorde.

42 And wh the multitude was gathered agaynst Doyles and Aaron, they loked towarde the tabernacle of the congregation: And beholde, the cloude coucred it, and the glorie of the Lorde appeared.

43 And Maysege daron canic before

> tia ronaregatiot.

ee ao Poyses,

Al

kom among this cougrega
Noli, that I may confume thé quickly.
And they fell vpon their faces. 6
4.6. And Moyses fayd bnto Aaron: Take a tenser, and put fire therin out of the aulter, and powze on incenic, and go quickly vnto the congregation, ¢ make an attonement for them: For there 8 wrath gone out from the Lorde, and there is à plague begunne.
47 And Aaron toke as Moyses tomauat ded hym, and ranne into the midde s pb congregation:and beholde, the plague
Was begunne among the people, and he put on itense, and made an atonement forthe people. aD
43 And Whe he stoode betweene the ts

, rodde.

and them that were alpuc, the plague was staped. —
They that dyed in the plague, were fourteene thouland and seuen hundred, belyde them

Numeri.

that dyed about the con-

Wan of Corah.

50 And Karon went agame vnto Moyses

before the doore of the tabernate of the nn and the plague was

The. xvij. Chapter.
Jarons rodde buddeth and beareth blolsomes, wherby his prielkhod is conkirmed.
7 And Moyses put the roddes belore the 2

2) N D the Lorde spake bnto Mopses, saping:
Speake bntothe chit
Hid deen of Jlrael, and ey take of eucrp one of them a rodde, after

. the houles of their fa-

thers, of all their princes accordyng to the familie of their fathers, euentwelue roddes: and write everp mans name vpon his rodde.

And write Aarons name vpon the rodde of Leui: for euerp rodde shalbe for p head of the house of their fathers.

And put them in the tabernacle of the congregation ; before (the arte] of the teftimonte, where J Wyll declare my elfe vnto pou, |

And the mans rodde whom Jchole, hati blossome: And J wyll make ceasse fromme the grudgynges of the children of Israel, wherby they grudge agaynst

pou.

. 6 AndMoyles spake vnto the children of Ilrael, and all the printes gaue hym d rodde, one rodde for euery printe, actordyng to their fathers houses, cuen twelue roddes: and the rodde of Aaron
Was among their roddes.

Lorde in the tabernacle of witnesle.

8 And on the morowe, Moyses went into the tabernacle of witnelle: and beholde, the rodde of Aaron for the
Houle of Leut was budded, andbrought toozth buddes, bare bloffomes, and rype alniondes.

9 And Mopyses brought out all p roddes from before the Lorde, vnto all the children of Iscael: and they loked vpon them, and toke cuerp man his rodde.

lo And the Lowe fapde vnto Moyses: wWpng Aarons rodde agayne before

the wWitnefle, to be kept for a token

to the rebellious children, and that their murmurpng map ceasse from me, and that they dye not.

Aud (Boyles dyd as the Torde tommaunded hym, euen so dyd he.

Iz And the children of Israel spake vnto
Moyles, laping: Weholde, we are
Walked awap and perished, we all come to naught. s

IY Wholdeuer cometh nyc, or approcheth

II

to the tabernacle of the Lord, shall dye:

Shall we vtterly consume away, and
Dye?

J The. vii Chapter.

Che office ol the Leuites. 5 Che tithes and firk fruites mut be geuen them.

20 Aarons heritage.

d | M the Torde fapde vnto Aaron: Thou c thy sonnes, and thy fa-
M io thers boule with thee, a Thal beare the iniquitie
0 ye, ofthe sanctuarie: And thou and thy sonnes

U beare the iniquitic of

¢
¢
4 f
€

« fot thy fathers hauleh
ö olde thou shalt bing with thee, that they may be ioy-

xcuij

Hebr. ix. ad

ned vnto thee, and minister vnto thee-

but thou and thy sonnes with thee (Hal minister) befoze the tabernacle of wit-

nesle. j .

3 They (hall kepe thy charge, euen the. charge of all the tabernacie: only let < them not conte nye the vessels of the santtuarie and the aulter, that they aud

e also dyt not. i

4. And 1955 shalbe ioyned with thee and kepe the charge ofthe tabernacle of the. congregation for all the fernice of the

tabernacle: «

ra hat ts,

Thered Cowe.

tabernacle: and let no straunger come nye vnto pou.

45 Therfore shall pe kepe the charge of

the lanctuarie, and the charge of the

Laulter, that there fall no moze wath

„ bponthe children of Ilrael:

s Behpolde, Jhauc taken pour beethzen the Leuites from among the childzen of Ilrael, which as a gyft of yours are

ol the tabernatle of the congregation.
Therkore shalt thou c thy sonnes with

3295954 Ha

thynges that pertayne vnto the aulter and within the vayle: And pe shal serue, for I haue geu€ pour priestes office vnto pou as a gift, and therfore p straunger that tommeth nye, must be slayne.

And the Lorde spake bnto Aaron:
Weholde, J haue geuen thee the keping of myne heaue offerynges, of all the halowed thyuges of the children of GWE rael (eter) vnto thee J haue geuen the for the annoyntyng, and to thy sonnes fo2 an ordinaunte for euer.

This thaibe thyne of the most holy thynges (teferued] from the fire lot the aulter.] All their facrifices for all their

s
„ «„ % „ & A K S A „ „„ hk NAA A HA „

W

vpnto me, that halbe niost holy dnto thee, and to thy sonnes.
10 In the molt holy place shalt thou cate tt, and all that are males shall cate of it, let it be holp vnto thee.
Levitvid. (It And this allo is thyne: the heaue offem rpnges oftheir gyktes, throughout alt the waue offerynges of the children of
Israel: IJ haue genen them vnto thee, ft thy lonnes and thy daughters With thee, to be a dutie lor euer: and all that are tleane in thy houle, chall cate of it.
12 Al the fat of the oyle, e al the fat of the ebene wine, cok the wheate, which they hat
« offer vnto the Lode for fir fruites, the same haue J geuen dato thee.
3 And Whatlocuer is first rype in their lande which they bryng vnto the Hod, shalbe thyne, and all that are tleane in thyne boule, (hall cate ofit.
C14. All thinges seperate from the commons vle in Jltael, shalbe thyne.
15 All that breaketh the matrice in all fleshe that men bryng vnto the Lozde, whether it be of men or beastes, shalbe thyne: Meuerthelater, the first bose of man chalt thou redeeme, ethe first borne

Numerl.

geen vnto the Lorde, to do the seruite

thee kepe pour priestes office for all

meate offerpnges, sinne offerynges, or trespasse offerpnges, which they bzyng

The red Com of vneleane beastes Chatt thou redeem —~
16 bole that are to be redcemed, tht 0 thon redeeme from y age of amoneth. accordyng to thyne estunation, Foz the. money of fiue sicles, after the licle of the. santtuarie, which is twentie gerahs.
17 Wut the first borne of a towe, sheepe ,x goate, halt thou not redeeme, for they are holy: therfore thou halt spriuckle their blood vpon the aulter, and chalt burne their fat as a sacrilite made by. fire, for a sweete sauour vnto the Lord.
18 And the fleche of them is thyne, ag Leun the waue brest and the right choulder· these are thyne. f f
15 All the heaue offerynges of holy: thynges which the thüdren of Ilracl offer vntothe Lord, haue J genenthee: e thy sonnes and thy daughters with. thee, to be a duetie for euer: let it be a en falted touenaũt for euer before p Lord, . boch vnto the to thy seede with thee.
20 And p Load spake vnto Aaron: Thou ders, shalt haue no inheritaũce in their lande, Fer neither shalt thou haue any part amõg . them: J am thy part æthy inheritaunte. among the children of Ilrael. f
21 Weholde, J haue geuen the childrenof Leui all the tenth in Ilrael to inherite, for the fernice which they serue in. the tabernacle of the tongregation.
22 Neither mutt the children of Jsracl. hencekoorth come ine p tabernacle of the tongregation, lest they beare sinne, e die.
23 Wut the Lenites thal do p seruite inthe. tabernacle of the congregation, ¢beare . their linne: It shalbe a lawe for euer in pour generations, that among p childs: of Israel they possesse no inheritaunte.
24. Wut the tithes of the childrẽ of Plractwhich they pay as an heaue ofkeryng. vnto the Low, J haue geuenp Leuites. to inherite: and therfore J haue laydt. vnto them, Among the children of Pl. rael ve hall possesse no inheritaunce.
254 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyles, 5 aping :
26 Speake vnto the Leuites,and fap br: fo them: when ye take ofthechildzert of.
Israel the tithes which JJ haue geuen pot of thé for pour inheritaunte, ve (yal take an heaue offering of p fame forthe.
Pode, euenthe tenth part of thattithe.
27 And this pour heaue offeryng shalbe. reckened vnto von, euen as thought. were of the cose of the barne, 02 as the. fulnesle of the wine presle. 5 of

* neve from it, it shalbe counted bnto tl che uites,agifit were y increase of the came 4 flooze,o2 the increale of the wineprelle.
31 And pe chall eate itin att plates, both. pe and pour householdes, for it is pour rewarde for pour seruite in the tabernatle of the congregation. ;
32 And pe thall beave no inne by the. reason of it, when ye haue offered from it the fat of it: neither than ye pollute

E Cowe. Numer.

3 this maner pe shall therfore offer
8 ane offeryng vnto the Lorde, of an pour tithes which ve receaue ol the
„ chlldzen of Ilrael, and pe chall geue
„ therok the Lordes heaue offeryng to
Aaron the pret. 4
19 Ok all vour giftes pe chall offer all the
"goes heaue offeryng, euen all the fat ok the lame, [to wit! the holy thynges

6 Ur pcetone thou Malt fay vnto them:

the holy thynges of the ;
> saben pe haue taken away the fat of it Jfrael, tert dedpe. = * .
ö J The. xix. Chapter, a a 2 Ot the redde Cowe. 11 The lawe of hym that dyeth i . ö
0 allo Coat eousheth any bncleane theng. — * — 10 poem | i e Pe the Lorde spane and remayne bntleane vntilleuen: And.
5 „h vnto Moyses € Aa- tt shalbe vnto the childzen of Ilrael and. my JANES ~ironfaping: vnto the straũger that dwelleth among:
Hf Nt This is the ordi- then, aftatute kor euer. i

„ naunte of the lawe 1
“al KOLA (\ Ae naunte

' WHEN SSs which the Lod hath
; Wars) tommaunded, saping:
© Speake vnto the childzen of Bfrael

any man, shalbe vncleane seuen dayes. ie
12 And he thalt purifie hym selfe with «°°

‘ that they being thee a redde cowe without spot, and Wherin is no blemische, and vppon which neuer tame poke.
And pe shall geue her vnto Eleazar
Rs" the prielt, that he mapbryng her withbut the hoast, and caule her to be slayne
« before bis fate: “
4 And let Eleasar the priest take of her bldod with his finger, and sprinckle it directly before the tabernacle of the tongregation seuen tymes.
And canse the eowe to be burnt in his
„ light, with“ her skinne, fleche, ke blood:

ad the doung of ber hal he burne allo.

And let the priest take Cedar wood, and hysope, and starletl late and catt it in the middes ok the burnyng ofthe cowe.
3: Then let the pret wache his clothes, and h | e (hall bathe his fleshe in water, andthen come into the hoatt; and the
9 buett halbe vncleane vntyll the euen.
5 este that burneth her fhall wache
; i Clothes in water, x bathe his fleshe
„iuwater, and be vncleane bntyll euen.
4 Taman thar is tleane challgather
117 alches of the cowe, and lay them a Kin the hoast in a tleane place, and
1 kept for the multitude of the
9 den of Ylrael * for a water ok sepe-

ation: It S a sume olfcryng. erldie he that gathereth the alches cowe, Hall wache his clothes,

this water the thirde dap, e the seuenth day he shalbe cleane: But if he purific ‘ not hyni selfe the thirde day, then the. seuenth day he shall not be tleane.
13 Whosoeuer toucheth the dead toarse « of any man that is dead, e purgeth not ‘ hum selke, defileth the tabernacle of. the Lode, and that soule chalbe cut of from Ilrael, betause the water of seperation was not sprinckled vpon hym: he shalbe therfore vncleane, his vnkleanesse is pet bpon hym. ‘
14. This is the lawe of aman that dyeth . C in à tent: All that come into the tent, and all that is in the tent, shalbe vntleane seuen dapes. ;
15 And all the beflels that be open, which haue no toueryng bounde vpon them, shalbe vncleane. .
16 And whosoener toucheth one that is. flayne with a sworde in the fieldes, ora.
Dead person, or a bone of a dead man, 02 «
à graue, shalbe vncleane seuen dayes.
17. Therfore, for an vncleane perfor they. shal take ofthe burnt afthes of the inne. offeryng, and runnyng water Mhaibe « put therto in a vessell.

18 And let a cleane perfon*take hysope, . Pf. l. b.

dippe it in the water, and sprinckle it vponthetent, and vpon all the vellels, and onthe perfons that were therin, and vpon hym that touched a bone, or a. slaine person, or a dead body, o 1 5 ö

The water

Ko. Xvüz. 5

19 And the deane person shall sprinckle ppon the vncleane the thirde day and the seuenth day: And the seuenth day he shall purifie hym selke, and wache his clothes, c bathe hym selfe in water, and thalbe cleane at euen.

20 But the man that is vncleane, and pu-

rifieth not him selfe, the lame soule hale -

be tut of from among the congregation: because he hath defiled the lanttuarie of the Torde, and the water of {eperation hath not ben sprinckled bpon hym, ther-

¢ The. xx. Chapter.

Miriam dyeth. 2 Che people murmure. 8 Chey haue water euen out of the roche. 12 Harter a Aron chall not go into the lande of promise. 14 Edom deniech the Araelites paflage through his reaime. 25 Che death of Laron, in

whole rowme Eleazar succeedeth.

ag | ERE AZIM the chuͤdren of
9 Ilrael tame with the

| „ whole multitude into
Nan 34 vd the desert * of in in

ithe first moneth, and n the people avode at
A ades: And there died
Miriam, and was buryed there.
2 But there was no water forthe mul-

titude: and they gathered them selues together agaynst Moyses and Aaron.

3 And the people chode with Doyles, and spake, 1 en God that we had perished when our brethren dyed before the Lorde.

4 Why haue pe brought the congregation of the Lorde into this wildernelle,

that both we and our cattell shoulde

dpe in it-

Wherfkore haue ye made vs to tome vp

out of Egypt, to bryng vs into this euyll

lace, which is no plate of seede, nor of

THCS, NO? vines, nor pomgranates, neither is there any water to drynke-

And Moyses and Aaron went from the prelence of the congregation, vnto the dooze of the tabernacle of the con: gregation, and fel vpon their faces, and the glorie of the Lorde appeared vnto them.

A

x3 7 Andthe Lorde spake dnto Moyses, saping:

8 Tanke the rodde, and gather thou and

thy brother Aaron the congregation

together, and speake vnto the rocke before their eyes, and it Mall geue foorth his water: And thou shalt bryng them water dut or the rocke, to geue the cont:

Numeri.

of fir fore shall he remayne vncleane. —
1 And tt shalbe a perpetuall lawe vnto. them, that he that spunckleth the water col leperation, chall wache his clothes: and he that toutheth the water of lepe-- ration, halbe vntieane vntyll tuen.
22 And whatldeuer the vncleane perlon toucheth, halbe vncleane: Andthe lone that toucheth (the thyng that was touched of the vncleane perton] shyalbe vntleane vntyll euen.

panie drynke, and their beastes also. a

9 And Moyles toke the rodde from before the Lord, as he tommaunded hym.

1o And Moyses and Aaron gathered the congregation together before the rocke, and ( Mopses]j fayde vnto them: Heare pe rebelles, must we fetch vou water out of this rocke-

1 And Moyles lyft vp his hande, and with his rodde he smote the rocke two tymes, and the water came out aboundauntlip, and the multitude dranke, and their beastes also.

11 And the Lorde spake vnto Doyles C and Aaron: Wetaule ve beleued me not, to sanctifie me in the eyes of the children of Israel, therfoze ye chall not bryng
75 D into the lande which

aue geuen them.

13 his isthe water of ftrife ,becaule the children ol Picael stroue wth p Londe, and he was sanctified in them.

14. And WMoples sent mestengers ra,
Cades bnto the kyng of don, thus sayeth thy brother Ilrael: Thon 15. welt all the trauayle that we haue ha t

15 Our fathers went downe into Kane c we haue dwelt in Egypt a long {yn 1 and the Egyptians bered vs and oi fathers. .

16 And when we tryed vnto the 0 he hearde our voyte, and sent an uy 5 and hath fet vs vp out of Egypt: the
. olne ue are 0 n in th

ttermost citie ot thy border-

17 et bs passe F pray thee through tountrey: but We wyll not go 16 the fieldes or vineyardes, neither we

Pfalrth

Id

‘Ze

We wyll go by the kynges Dye

15 ai neither turne vnto the ryght

ande nor tothe left, vntyll we be patt pborders. ong

g And Edom aunlwered hym: Thou

5 alt not go by me, lest J cone out a-

aynst thec with the lworde.

„The children of Israel sayd vnto him, we wyll go by the beaten way: and if and my cattell drynke of thy water, wyll pay for it: I wyll but only (withdut any harme) go though on my fete.

20 He aumswered: Thon hate not go through. And Edom tame out agapnst hym With Me people, and With a

iahtic power.

1 10 thus Edom denied to gene Israel pallage throngh his countrep:wherkore
Ilrael turned away from hym.

1 And the children of Ilrael departed from Cades poh 8 mount
Por, with all the congregation.

3 en the Lorde fpake vnto (Doyles

Numer I. e diynke of the water of the foun:

and Aaron in mount toast of the lande of

02, harde by the
Edom, saping.

24. Aaron shalbe gathered vnto his peo-

ple: for he shall not which J haue gen

mouth at the water of strike.

25 Take Aaron and Elea

aud bryng them vp into mou

26 And cause Aaron to

m ihe lande nto the children of Ilrael, betaule pe . —.— 2

dar his sonne,

nt Hor.

put of his gar-

mentes, aud put them vpon Eleazar his sonne: and Aaron shalbe gathered vnto his people, and shall dye there.

27 And Moyles dyd as the Lorde com: maunded:and they went vp into mount

$02, in the fight of all the nuultitude.

28 And Moyses toke of Aarons clothes, and put them vpon Eleazar his sonne, and Aaron dyed there in the toppe of the mount: And Doyles and Eleazar

came downe ont of the mount.

29 When all p multitude sawe that Aaron

Deut. x. b.

Was dead, they mourned for Aarõ thirtie dayes, all the housholde of Jlcael

Sap The.xxj. Chapter.

1 Ffracl vanquischeth kyng Arad. 6 The firie serpentes styng them. 24 The kynges,
Sehon and Og are ouercome in battap e.

wl

HT LDCS cary A JAN /'\ thn ) 4 S Pe N
15 AN 8 SiR E
Saal FF 5} 5 \
4 i = ¥ J

the Chanamte which dwelt towarde the

3. || fouth, hearde tell that
NYY | PHltacl came by the wap that the spyes had founde out, he

E when kpng Arad

enen nee

N 1
2 E, 12
Tm D 0 1 1 ut a? wt ht secs a et — — ͥ ͤ — —— hk Au 7 0 r D = iD 8 7 8 a ——
N. 2 * 2 1
N cis 5
0 85 z= SE SS ay 1
U = yy e 5 4

‘ Re eee

U I i Age

a = Tt AS yr A py i)
2 e a “tl mS l .

1 7 Ie N

a bow
2 And Pirael bowed: apple elie

FJ wylt vt-

terly destroy their cities.

3 And the

e vnto the

e voyte ok
Irael,

a

Jud id.
Deut. il. a.

Num. xi. a.

j. Cor. x. a.
Sapi. xvi. a.

Exo. vili.b.

3. Reg. iz. b.
Act. vnn. d.

Iohn. iii. b.

4 Reg. 18 a,

Num. z. e.

The brafen Serpent,

Israel, and deliuered them the Chanaauites: And they destroyed them and their cities, aud called the name of the place onna.

4 And 1 Departed frõ mount Hor, by the way of the red sea, to compasse the lande of E dom and the soule of the peo-

ple was fore greeued, betause of ß way.

5 And the people spake agaynst God and

agayn Moyles: Wherefore haue ve

bought vs out of Egypt, for to dye in the wildernesse; for here is neither bread nor water, and our forte lotheth this lyght bread.

6 Wherfoze the Lorde lent fierie serpentes among the people, Which stong

them: and much people of Israel dyed.

7 Therkore the people came to Doyles, c fapd: noe haue sinned, for We haue spoken agaynst the Lordand agapnstthee: make uuertession to the Lord that he

take away the serpentes from vs. And

Moyles made intercession for > people:
3 And the Lorde lapde vnto Mores:

Manke thee a fierie lerpent, and let it vp.

vpon a pole: that as many as are bitten map loke vpon it, and lyue.

9 And Moyses made a lerpent of brasse,

and set it bpon a pole: and when the serpent had bitten any man, he behelde the lerpent ol brasle, and lyued.

lo And the children ok Ilrael departed theute, and pitched in Oboth.

1 Ard they departed from Oboth, and pitchebd at the heapes of Abarim, euen in the wilderuesse which is before Moab, on the east syde.

12 And they remoued thence, and pitches vpon the riuer of Zared.

3 And they Departed thence, and pitched

on the other syde of Arnon, which is in

the wildernelle, and tommeth out of the toastes of the Amorites: for Arnon is the border ol Moab, betweene Moab and the Amorites.

C 14 Wherfore, it halve spoken in the booke

of the Warres of the Lord, what thyng he dyd in the red sea, and in the riuers of Aruon,
15 Aud at the frreame of the riuers, that goeth downe to the dwellpug of Ar, and lyeth vpon the border of Moab.
16 From theutel they returned) vnto Beer:
The sanic is the well Wherof te Lod spake vnto Moyses: Gather the people together, aud JJ Will geue them water.

17 Then Israel fang this song: Spryng

Numeri.

22 Wet nie pale through thy lande, we Nau

Thebrasen Ser

bp well, syng pe vnto it:

18 The puntes digged this well, the ca tapnies of the people diggedit With the lawe geuer, and with their staues. And from the wildernelle they went to genie |

19 And from Mathana to Mahal from Hahaliel to 3 d

20 And krom Wamoth or the valley that is in the flelde of Moab, vnto the topof the hyll that loketh to warde Jelimon.

21 And Hlrael sent meflengers vnto
Sehon kyng of He Amozites, saying:

Wyll not turne into the fieldes or vine- deus, vardes, neither drynke of the waters of the well: but we wyll go along by the kpnges hye wap, vntyll we be pak thy tountrep. j

23 But Sehon woulde geue Jlracl no dev,
Iifence to passe though his countrey: but gathered all his people together, went ont agaynst Israel into the wit: dernelle: And he came to Jaza, and fought agaynst Israel.

24. And Israel smote him in the edge of deri the swolde, x tonquered his lande from b
Arnon vnto Jabok, vnto the children of Anunon: Foz the border of the children of Ammon was strong.

25 And Israel toke all these cities, and dwelt in all the cities of the Amorites in Helbon, and in all the townes that long therto. ;

26 For Helbon was the citie of Sehon the kyng of the Amorites, which fought before agaynst p kyng of the Moabites, and toke all his lande out of his hande, euen vnto Arnon.

27 Wherkore they that speake in prouerbes, sap: Come to hesbon, and let the ciste of Sehon be built and repayred.

28 FJor there is a fire gone out of Helbou, and a flambe from the titie of Sehon, and hath consumed Ar in Moab, and the lordes of Wamoth in Arnon.

29 Mo to thee Moab, O people of CVV mos ve ave vndone: he hath suffered his sonnes to be pursued, e his daughters to be in taptiuitie vnto Sehon the kyng of the Amozites. =

30 Their empire is loft from Helbort vnto Dibon, and we made a wilder nesse euen vnto Mopha, which wv

cheth vnto Medaba. b

31 And thus Ilrael dwelt in the lande d

the Amozites. 0
* 32 An

Deut

EX

Numeri.

aml.

nd Moyles tent to searche out Jae-
* cher toke the townesbelonging

h Warde Walan: And Og the kyng of
Balan came out agaynst them, he and all his people to fight at Edrai.

34. And the Lorde sayde vnto Mopses: feare hym not, for J haue delivered hom into thy hande, and all his people

thevto, x rooted out the 2 were therein. be Amontes *

35 They smote hym therefore, and his

9 The. xxij. Chapter.

Ayng Balac fendeth for Balaam, whole name in the pebrues is written Bileam.

12 God forbyddeth Balaam to curle the Nraelites.

4 way. 23 Balaams afle speaketh.

ae Mdthe children of JE
Ven© Cael Departed and pit:

i ee Moab, on the other

D WGalac allthat Ilrael had done to ß i

5 Amorites.

3 pale che Doabites were fore afrayde

111 people, betause they were manp,

: Pernot yh bah ken With rare of the

4 ig Beaty layde vnto the elders of

vi “inthe * Mowe Chall this tompanie

1 sale Pall that are rounde about bg,

Ad mec licketl vp the grasse ofß fielde.

unge ae the fonne of Ziphor, was
4 he Doavites at that tym.

nt mellengers therefore vnto

ched in the fieldes of

21 The angell Candeth in his

xcvi].

Walaam the sonne of Weor to Pethor, Deut which is by the riuer of the lande of the n bern

chyldren of his folke, to call him, saying:
Bcholde, there is a people come out of
Egypt, and beholde they couer the face

of the earth, Ed Well o ouer against me. sorte

6 Conie nowe e tee Deny e 10 curfe me this people, for they are to mightie fox me, fo peraduenture J myght be able to smyte them, ¢ to driue them out of the lande: Foz I wote that he whom thou blessest, is blessed, and whon thou cursest is cursed.

7 And the elders ol Moab, and the el- a ders of Dadian departed, hauyng the srewarde] of the fouthfaping in their hande: And they came buto Walaam, and tolde hym the wordes of Wala,

8 Pe annlwered them: Tarp here this

N nygh

from int, euen harde dy me.

N

N Balac. Numeri. a i

Balaan

| nyght, and J Wyll bayng vou worde, 23 And when the ate sawe the angettof ——~ euen as the Torde shall fap vnto me. the Lord stand in the way, and hauyn
And the lordes of Moab above with his sworde drawen in his hand, the alle
Walaam. turned aside out ofthe wap, and went

9 And God tame vnto wWalaam, and out into the fielde: And Balaam smote ö sapd: what nien are these with deez the asle, to turne her into the way.

Io And Balaam sapd vnto God: Balac 24 But the angell ofthe Lorde stoode in the sonne of Ziphor kyng of Moab a path betweene the vinepardes, and
Hath sent vnto nie taping: there was a wall on the one syde, and

11 Weholde, there is a people tome out another on the other.

bokeEgppt, and couereth the fate of the 25 And when the alle sawe the angell of caril): Come nowe therefore, and curse the Torde, fhe thrust her {elfe vnto the them for my lake, if so peraduenture J Wall, x crucht Walaams foote agaynst map be able to ouercome them in bate the wall: and he finote her agaync. tale, and to dryue them out, 26 And the angell of the Lord went far:

12 And God said vnto Walaam: Go not ther, x stoode ina narowe place, where thou with them, neither curle the peo- Was no way to turne either to the right ple:for they are blessed. hande, or to the left.

13 Aud Balaam role vp in the mornyng, 27 And when the asse awe the angell of and sayd vnto the lordes of Balat, Get the Hovde, he fell downe vnder Balapou vnto pour lande: forthe Lord wyll am: and Balaam was wroth, æ finote not suffer me to go with pou. the affe with a staffe.

C 14 And the lordes of Moab rose vp, and 28 And the Lowe opened the mouth of E went vnto Walac and fayde: Walaam the alle, and che fayde vnto Walaam: would not come with vs. What haue J done vnto thee, that thou

15 And walat lent againe a greater tom- halt smytten me nowe three tymespanic of lordes, and moze Honourable 29 And Walaam sayd vnto the asse, Bethen they. caule thou batt mocked me: J would al-

16 Whiche canie to Balaam, and tolde fo there were a sworde in niyne hande, hym, Thus lapeth Balacthe sonne of kor euen nowe woulde J kyll thee.
Ziphor: Oh let nothyng let thee, but zo And the asse sayd bnto Walaam: Am come vnto nie: not I thine affe, whiche thou Halt ryd-

17 Foz wyll greatly promote thee vn- den ppon since the first tyme vnto this

“ ko great honour, and wyll do whatso- dap: Was J euer wont to do fo vnto euer thou sayest vnto me: come J pray thee : He sayde, nap. thee, curse this people for my fake. zi And the Tod opened the eyes of Wa-
18 And Balaam aunswered and laid vn- aam, and he saw the angel ok the Lo d
Nuxxiic to the seruauntes of Walac: Hfwalac standing in the wap, haning his [worde woulde geue me his house full of spluer drawen in his hande: He dowed hym and golde, J can not go beyonde the elle therelore, and fell flat on his face. worde ofthe Torde my God, to do lesse 32 And the angell of the Lowe laid vnto or nioze: him: Whertore hak thou smptten thine

19 Mob therefore J pray thee, tarie ye asse hele three times: Weholde, J cane here this nyght, that J may wit what out to Withstande thee, becaufe thrne

the Norde Wyll fay vito me moze. Heart hath declined out of the way be-

20 And God tame buto Walaam by kore me. night, and layde vnto hym: If themen 33 And tht asse saw me, and turned from come to call thee, ryse vp and go with me now three times :or eis if she had not them: but loke what J lap vnto thee, turned fro me, J had lurely Mayne thee, that shalt thou do. N and saued her aliue.

D 21 And Balaam rose vp carly, and sadled 34 Walaam sayde vnto the angell of the

hy his asse c went with the lordes of dab. Torde: J haue sinned, for J wylt not moeromer 22 And the Wath of God was kindled, that thoñ stoodest in the Way agaynst

and damage

che chrid en betaule he went: And the angell of the me: Soe therefore fie displeale ec, mnamere Lorde stoode in the way to be agaynst J wyllturne honie agapne. ker an uc. Dyn, as he rode vpon his asse, and his 35 The angell of the Lorde layde vnto

dier 56d. s Wo seruauntes were With hym. Walaam, Go with the men: but 15

am

: nto thee, that (halt thou speake.
AN Baan went with the lordes

aa when zsalac heard that Walaam was tonie, he went out to meete hym, vnto a titte of Moab, whiche is in the bomderok Arnon eue in the vtmost coat,
And Balat sapd vnto Walaam: Dyd not lende kor thee to call thee? And wherkore tamest thou not vnto me: m not able in deede to promote thee vn-

ondur-
8 AnD Walaam made aunswere vnto

The. xxiij. Chapter.
Balaam causeth Balac to buplde aulters, 9 Balaam blesleth the people.

D Balaam said vnto Walat: Wuylde me
; here senen aulters, € de prepare me here seuen

— walaam sayde: And

Balat and Walaam offred on every aul

ter an ore and ramme.

3 And Balaam said vnto Walat: Stand by thy latrifice, and J Will go, if happly the Lozde will meete me: and Whatsotuer he sheweth nie, J wyll tell thee.
And he went vp hyper. =

4 But God met Walaam, € [Sataan] fapd vnto hym: J haue prepared seuen aulters, and haue offred vpon euery aulter an oxe and a ramme.

Andthe Lorde put a saping in Balaanus mouth, and sayde: Go agayne to

Balat, and sap on this Wyle.

6 And when he went agapne bnto him, lo, he stoode by his burnt facrifice, he and all the lordes of Moab.

7 And he toke vp his parable, and sapd:

Balacthe king of Moab hath brought nie fro Mesopotamia, out of the mountapnes of the east, [faving] Come, curse ae foz my fake, come and delie

8 Hotbe hall J curfe hym, whom God

Mi 2,

bath uot tursed- or howe (hall I defie

Hpi, whom God hath not defied:

9 Forfrom the toppe of the rockes J {ee pert, and from the hylles J beholde imo the people Hail dwell by them

An A not be reckened among

eet © Who can tell the ob, an n dennen the dust of Jacob, and

el Jprar Goo that my toule map dye

Numer.

CAs] oxen c seuen rammes.
And Walac dyd as

ofthe fourth part of Ilra-

wWalat, Lo, Jam tome vndo thee, and can I nowe fay Any thyng at all-The
Warde that God putteth inmy mouth,
3 ve J speake. .

39 And Walaam went with wWalac, and they tanie vnto a citie of Peas

40 And wWalac offered oren and theepe,

and fent [ thereof} to Balaam, and to the

lordes that were with hym.
41 And on the morowe Balac toke Walaam, and brought hym vp into the hye plates of Waal, chat thence he might (ce the vtmost part of the people.

the death ol the righteous, and that my

last ende may be like his. fr

11 AndwWalaclayd vnto Walaam: what
Hatt thou done vnto me- J toke thee to curle myne enemies, and beholde thou hast blessed them altogether.

12 qe aunswered and sayd: Must J not take heede to speake that whiche the lorde Hath put in mp mouth:

13 And Walat sapde vnto hym: Come F pray thee with me vnto another plate,
Whence thou mapest {ee them, and thou

shaͤlt fee but the vtmost part of them,

and shalt not {ee them all: curse them out of that plate for my fake.

14. And he brought bym into a fielde,

where men mpaht {ee farre of, cuen to the toppe of an hyll, and buplt seuen

aulters, and offred an ore and àa ramme

bn euerp aulter. b

15 And he said vnto Balat: Stande here by thy burnt sacrifice, Whple J meete the Lorde ponder.

16 And the Tord met Balaam, and put
à worde in his mouth, and sapd: Go agayne vnto Walat, and fay thus.

17 And when he came to hym, beholde he stoode by his burnt facvifice, and the lordes of Moab with hym. And wWalac
155 buto hym: What hath the Lorde ayde-

18 And he toke vp his parable, and aunswered: Nile vp Bala, cand heave, and hearkẽ vnto me thou sonne of Ziphor.

12 God is not a man that he should le, neither the fonne ofa ma that he Mould repent:chould he fay ¢ not doz or should he speake, and not make it good?

20 Beholde, J haue taken bpon me to

blesle:for he hath blessed, and it is not in

my power to aulter it.
Ni 21 He

XCvlll.

Nu. xxili. c.

Nu. xxii. g

l. Cor. ĩ. b. and. x. .

Bala. Numeri. 3

at De behelde no banitic in Jacob, nor 26 Wut Balaam aunswered and fain pre fa trantgreslionin Jlrael: The Lod to Walat: Tolde not J thee,faying, All his God is with hym, and the toyfull that? Torde speaketh, that J mut doshout of a king is among them. 27 And Balat {aid vnto Walaam Come
Fam te 22, God bought them out ol Egypt, then J prap thee, and J wyll bryng thee vet haue strength as an Unitornt. vnto another place, if at all it wall pleate
23, Jor there is no sorcerie in Jatob, noz God, that thou maystthente curse them gases loothlaping in Ilrael, 0 according to kor my fake. 5 ae —thistimett chalbe fayde of Jacob aud 2g And Walat brought Salaam onto the
Sales in, Ilrael: What hath God wronght?: toppe of Peor, that looketh to warde
Jia pn 24. Beholde the people shall ryse bppas a Jeeiimon. ee, SLAM, and heaue vp him self as a poung 29 And Walaam said vnto Walat: Make
Herber e Lion: He shall not lye downe, “ vntyil mme here seuen aulters, and prepare me renne, s ) c cate ot the pray, and drinke the blood here seuen oxen, and feuenrammnies, acc. ok them that are flayne. 30 And Walacdyd as Walaam had fayo,
25 And Balac sapde vnto Walaam: Met and offered an ore anda ramme on eue-

ther curse them, nor blesse them at all. rie aulter. Do

J The. xxitij. Chapter.

5 Bataan prophetieth of the kyngdome of Ilrael, and of the comming of Chettte,

17 Balac is angrie with Salaam. 20 Che destruction of the Amalebites, and of the enites. f

their bones, and pearce them through
9 Me couched hym selfe, and lay downe Ca as d Lion, and as an elder Lion: who
{hall stirre hym vp? Blesled is he that blesleth thee, and curfed is he that curseth thee.

10 And Walac was woth with Walaan, ande smote his handes together, and osu
Walaͤt sald vnto Walaam: J tent fo2 thee to turse mine enemies, and behold thou

Hhast blessed them this three tymes.

Numag.d 3 And he toke vp his parable and fayd: 11 Therkore nowe get thee quickly vnto

Salaam the sonne of Beor hath fayde, thy plate: I thought that J would pro-

Ca) Heme: And the man whole eyes is open hach mote thee vnto honour, bit lo the Lord

rade: hath kept thee backe from worlhtp.

tenn 4. Me Vath) lapde whiche heareth the 12 walaam aunfwered vnto Walat:

wordes ol God and leety the difionsot Tolde J not thy mellengers whiche the almightie, and falleth downe with thou sendedst vnto me, saying: open eyes. 3 If Walat woulde geue me his houle vu as
5 Howe goodly are thy tentes O Ja: full ot siluer and golde, J tan not passe tob, and thyne habitations O Ilraẽl- the word of the Lom, to do either good
6 Euen as the valleys are they layde az or bad of mine owne minde: Wut What brode, CAS gardens by the riuers fine, the Woyde sapeth, that wyll I speake. 0 erena. Ac the tentes whiche the Looe hath 14. And nowe behold, J go vñto np peo’

Bevery le pitched, aud as cypres trees beside the ple: Come therfore, and J wyll aduer-

Farben chr. Waters. tile thee what this people fhall do to

Haute. 7 The water droppeth out of his buc- thy folke in the latter dayes.

wars e: ket, x his seede shalbe Inmanp waters, 15 And he toke vp his parable and fayd:

Seren and his kung shalhe hier then » Agag, Walaam the sonne ok Weor hath fapde,

suit noble the man whole eye is open, path fayde:

Fee, © Sod brought hym out of Egypt, his 16 He hath lad that heareth the worde-

dba Atvengtl) is as the Unicorne: De thal of God, and hath the knowledge ol tH

malt den Latt the nations his enemies, €gualve most hygh, and beholdeth the bilion the

u. ed pʒince.

ches. che alnightie, Bn that falleth and his sare opened.

Cy ke him, but not nowe, J shall ae beholde bi ont not nigh: There chall come a karre of Jacob, and rpse astepterof Ilrael, € hall“ sinpte the coastes of Möoab, an vndernime all the chyl-

of Seth. sd 18 brd Edom shalbe poslessed, € Stir

hall fall to the poffettion of their enenes, and Ilrael shall do mankullp.
9 Out ol Jacob Chall come he that hat haue donuimon, and fall destroy the remnaunt ol the citte.
20 And when he loked on Amaleck, he toke bp his parable, and laid: Amaleck ts the lirst or the nations, but his latter

N.

il

Numeri.

ende Chall periche vtteriy.
21 And he loked on the Kenites, and toke rts vers and fayde: Strong is place,andt nematode, hou puttest thy
22 Meuerthelesse, the Kenite shalbe rooted out, vntyll Aur take iber.
23 And he toke vp his parable, and sayd:
5 — who shall lyue when God doth

24. The shuppes also shall come out of the ace of fo te Assur, and ubdue Eber, and he hym lelfe l Z rishe at the lat. 2 2

25 And Balaam rose vp, and went and returned to his plate: and Walat allo went his way.

¢ The. xxv. Chapter.

Che people committeth kornication with the daughters of Moab.

hplleth Samet and Cozbi.

A Sittim, and the people began to commit
„ whoredome with the daughters of Moab.
VWhiche called the people vnto the sacrifite oktheir gods: And the people dyd

tate, and bowed downe to their gods.

Aud Alrael coupled hym selfe vnto
Baal“ Peoz, and the indignation of the
« Lowe was kindeled against Ilrael.
4. And the Lorde fayde bnto Moyles:

a Take all the heaves of the people, and-

„ Haug them bp before the Lorde against

wi, the © sunne, that the wath of the

Lordes countenance may be turned albay from Jlrael.

„5 And Doyles sayde vnto the Judges

„aol Israel:ꝰ Euerp one flap his men that were ioyned vnto Baal Peor.

6 And behold, one of the chyldren ok JE ö

vacl tame e bought vnto his brethren a
Madiauttiche woman, euen in the fight

Of Doyles, and in the fight of all the

nuultitude of the children of Jlrael, that wept belore the doore of the tabernacle

0 of the congregation,

87 3 when Phmehes the sonne of E-
: sat the fonne of Aaronthe priest, saw
1. role bp out of the myddes of the

: ay ie, € tobe atanctin in his hande, ud went after the man of Ilrael in-

tothe tent, g thrust them through both

the man of Becael F also the wonian tuen thozowethebelly of her: And the

$ Phinehes

17 God commaundeth to kyll the Madianites.
ND IAlrael abode in

plague teassed frõ the chyldrẽ of Israel.
9 And there dped in the plague twentie and fouve thoulande.

To cont the Lode spake bnto Doyles,

aping:

1 »Phinehes the fonne of Eleazar the sonne of Aaron the priest, path turned myne anger away from the chyldren of

srael, whple he was zelous for my

lake among thé, that J had not consu-

med the chudrẽ ol Ilrael in my ieldusie.

12 Wherfore fap: beholde, J geue vnto hym my couenaunt of peace.

3 And he shall haue it, and his seede ak: ter hym, euen the touenaunt of the priestes office for euer, because he was zelous for his Gods fake, and made an attonement for the chyldren of Ylrael.

14 The name ofthe Wraelite thus kylled, Which was slapne with the Madianitishe woman, was Zamri the sonne of Saln, a Torde of an boule and kinred of Simeon, 2%

15 And the name of the Wandianitithe womã that was flapne, was Cozbi, the daughter of Zur, a head oner the people of his fathers house in Madian.

16 And the Torde paket vnto Moyses, faping:

17 Vexe the Madianites, ¢ sinpte thent:

18 For they trouble pou with their wples, whiche haue begpled pou by decepte in the caule of Peor, x in the tause af their fitter Cozbi, the daughter ofa Lorde of the Madianites, whiche was slayne in

the day of the plague for Peors lake.
P : 1 Pa itj The

eee

XCIX.

i. Cor. x. 4.

Eccle. xlv. f.

i. Mach if,

Mala. ii. a.

C

Num. 3..a.

The Israelites

Num. i. a.

Gen. xlvi. b

I. Par. v. a.

B. 7

Num. xvi. a

Num. xvi. c

MW after the plague,

the Torde spake bnto

Moyles, and vnto E2

leaʒar the sonne of Aa-

ron the prick, saping:
Take the number of
— al the multitude of the chyldren of Ylrael, from twentie peres old and aboue, throughout their fathers houses, all that are able to go to warre in Israel.

3 And Moyles and Eleazar the priest spake vnto them in the fieldes of Moab, by Jordan ouer against Jericho, saying:

4 [Pe hall number the people From twentie

peres € aboue, as the Lorde commaun-

Ded Moyses and the children of Jlrael, when they were tome out of Egypt.

5 MVuben the eldest sonne of Ylrael.

The chyldren of Ruben: Hanoch, of

whom commeth the kinred of the Ha-

nochites: and Pallu, of whom commeth the kinred of the Palluites.

Ok hesron, commeth the kinred of the

hHhelronites: of Charmi, commeth the

Kkinred ot the Charnutes.

Thele are the kinredes of the Knbenites, and they were in number fourtie and three thoufand, seuen hundred and

And the sonnes of Pallu, Eliab.

And the sonnes of Eliab, Memuel,
Dathan, x Abiram. This is that Dathan aud Abiram, which were kamous iu the tongregation, and“ stroue against
Moyses and Aaron in the company of mie when thep stroue agaynst the

de

Jo And the earth opened her mouth, x swalowed them vp: Corah also was in the death of that multitude, what tyme
; the fire consumed two hundred and fitz

NR K „ K K W AN & „ „ „ naa nr #

a K K K „ „„ „

tie men: and they became a signe.

1 MNotwithstanding, the chyldren of Coz rah dyed not.

‘12 And the chyldren of Simeon after their kinredes, were Memuel, of whom tõmeth the kinred of the Penuelites:
Jann, of whom commeththe kinred
« of the Janinites: Jachin, of whom
© conuneth the kinred of the Jachinites.
3 Of Zareh, commeth the kinred of the
Zarehites: And of Saul, commcth the kinred of the Saulites.

N umer_ni.
¢ The .xxvj. Chapter.
2 The chyldren of Ffracl are numbred.

14. These are the kinredes of Simeon. cuen twentie and two thoufande and two hundred. ‘

15 The chyldren of Gad after their kinredes, were Zephon, of whom cometh < the kinred ofthe Zephonites: Maggi of: whom conumeth the kinred of the Haggites: Sunt, of whom commeth the kinved of the Sunites, ;

16 Ok Ozni, commeth the kinred of the:
Osnites: and of Eri, tommeth the kin: red of the Erites. ‘

17 Ol Arod commeth the kinred of the.
Arodites: Of Ariel, commeth the kinred of the Arielltes. :

18 hele are the kinredes of the children of Gad, according to their numbers, fourtie thousande and fiue hundred.

19 The children of Juda, Er and Onan.
And Er and Onan dyed in the lande of cus,
Chanaan. ;

20 But the chyldren of Juda after their
Kinredes, were Sela, of whom tönieth the kinred of the Selanttes: Phares, ol whom commeth the kinred of the
Pharezites: Zareh, ot whom tõ metz. the kinred ofthe Zarehites. ‘

21 And the children of hares, were Hel: ron, of whom commeth the kinred of: the Hesronites: Hamul, of whom commeth the kinred of the Hanmlites.

22 These are the kinredes of Juda after their numbers, threscore and lixteene thousande and fiue hundred. 1

23 The chyldren of Jlachar alter their. kinredes, were Thola, of whom conv: meth the kinred of the Tholaites:
Phuua, of whoni commicth the kinred. ofthe Phunaites.

24 Of Jalub, commeth the kinred of the.
Jalubites: of Simron, commeth the
Rinred ofthe Simvonites. ;

25 These are the kinredes of Plachar a, ter their numbers, threscorẽ and foure . thoufande and three hundred. :

26 The chyldren of Zabulon after their. kinredes, were Sered, of whom com, meth p kinred of the Seredites: Elon, of whom conmeth the kinred of the
Elonites: Jaheliel, of whom tommeth. the kinred of the Jahelelites. .

27 Thele are the kinredes of the Zabu-. lonites after their numbers, threstortc thoufande and fine hundred. 3 The ‘

28 L

“A

their kinredes, Were Manasle and Ea int. |

bhechylden ol Manasse, Machir, ot whom commeth the kinred of the Pachirites: And Machir begat Gilead, and of Gilead connect) the kinred of the

ii a.

Giliadites. o And these are the chyldren of Gilead,
Hie zer, of whom ommeth the kinred of the hiezerites: Helech, of whom commeth the kinred of the Helechites.
And Alriel, of Whom commeth the kinred ofthe Alrielites: and Sechem, okwhom commeth the kinred of the
GSechemites. *
3 Demtda, of hom tommeth the kiaredok the Semmites: and Hepher, of whom tonuneth the kinred of the Hepherites.
33 And! Zalphaad the lonne of Hepher had no sonnes, but daughters: And the names ok the daughters of Zalphaad, were Mahela, Moa, Hagla, Mucha,
34 These are the kinredes of Manasse, aͤnd the number of them fittic and two thonlande and seuen hundred.
35 Thele are the chyldren of Ephraim akter their kinredes: Suthelah, oft whom tommeth the kinred of the Suthelahites: Becher, oft whom commeth the
Kklured or the Wecherites: Thahen, of
+ Whom commeth the kinred ok the
Thahenites.
36 And these are the chyldren of Suthelah: Eran, of whom tommeth the kinred okthe Eramtes.
37 Thele are the kinredes of the children ol Ephrain after their numbers, thirtic
2nd two thoulande and fine hundred.
And thele ave the chyldren of Joleph nter their kmredes.
38 These are the chyldren of weniamin alter their kmredes: Wela, of whom
« Coltimeth the kinred of the Belaites:
Albel of Whom conuneth the kinred of
„ the Albelltes: Ahlram, of whom con meth the kinred of the Ahiramites:
39 Suphan of whom commeth the kinkedok the Suphanutes : Hupham, of bb cane the kinred of Huphamites.
Ap And the chyldren of Wela, were Ard a Wy Maanian, from whente commeth
0 Pe tuted of the Ardites, and of Naa-
Ir A che kinred of the Haanntes.
Thele are the chridze ok Bentamin at:

Růͤ R W K K «K R «„ «4 ww

Numeri.
716 The schyldrenol Joleph throughout ter their kinredes

ix Ri t After their numbers fourtie ¢ fiue thoufande f fire bundeed. 8
42 Thele are the chyldren of Dan after their kinredes: Suham or whom com
Tpedate the h. 0 the Suhamites. oulholdes a big a meena ;
All the kmredes of the Subanrtes<
Were after their 1 . and j foure thoulande, and foure hundred.
44 The thyldren of Aler after their kin redes, were Jeuma, ok whom tömeththe kinred of the Jemmites: esui, ot whom commeth the kinred of the Jesuites: Bria, of whom cometh the hin. redokthe Writes. :
45 The chyldren of Wria, were ever, ok whom commeth the kinred of the Heberites: Malchiel, of whom came the kinred of the Malchielites. j

46 And the daughter of Aler, was talled G
Sarah. *

47 These are the kinredes of Aler after their numbers, fiftic and threethouland and foure hundred. :

43 The children of Pephthali alter their. kinredes, were Jaheziel, of whom came the kinred of the Pahesielites :<
Guni, of whom came the kmred of the
Gunites. J

49 Jezer, ot whom came the kinred of. the Jezerites: Sellem, of whom tamethe kinred of the Sellemites. 5

50 Thele are the kinredes of Pephthali. accordyng to their housholdes, whole. numbers is fourtie and fine thoufande, « and fonre hundred. 5

5 Thele are the munbers of the thildren of Israel, fire hundred thoulande, and a. thoulande, seuen hundred and thirtie.

52 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saying: :

55 Unto these the lande shalbe dewided. to inherite, accordyng to the number ok. ©: names. ‘

54. Lomany thou shalt geue the more inheritaunce, aud to fewe the lesse: to euerie tribe] (hall the inheritaunte be geuen, according to the number thero f.

55 Motwithstanding, the lande shalbe deuided by lot, ⁊ according to the names. of the tribes or their fathers, they Mall, inherite. 4

56 According to the lot Mali the possession thereof be deuided betweene manv. and fewe. .

5 Thele are the nunibers of the Le-.

a N ij nuites

Num. 33.8.
Iosu. ci. d.

relawe

€
«

nites after their kinredes: Gerfon, of whom came the kinred of the Gersonites: Caath, of whom tame the bine red of the Caathites: Merari, of whom tame the kinred of the Merarites.

58 These are the kinredes of the Le-

Exod. vi. d.

Num. il. a.

A J

Nu. xxvi. d. and. 36. a.
Iosu. Xvi. a.

Ag ay men
Dye fop that they are sinneva: forme rcade, died Foz bis linne, an

hab done, dut
Foz that geucrall linne that the peopic ot the Jewes bab comttted, th mormu-

entred not into tie lande of promi,

wren 5

are here taken for B. A. nen. c. & het ig, their matter. to be iudged, to know what he oulde determine, os he did al wapghtie mattets.

~ K HR A R RX *

Ty tin A Ah „ „ A W Ae

uites, the kinred of the Libnites, the

kinred of the Hebronites, the kinred of

the Mahelites, the kinred of the Musites, the kinred of the Corathites, and

Caath begat Amram,

59 And Amrams wyke was calied * Jo-

chebed a daughter of Leni, which was borne vnto Lem in Egypt: And the bare vnto Amram, Aaron, Doyles and Mirian their sister.

60 Aud vnto Aaron were borne Nadab

and Abihu, Eleasar and Ithantar.

61 And Nadab and Abihu dyed when

they offered straunge fire bekore the
TLorde.

62 And after their numbers, they were twentie and three thonsande, all males: Wan from a moneth olde aud aboue: Foz they were not munbred among the chi: « dren ol Israel, because there Was no inheritaunte genen them among the cha- F

dren of Hirael.
63 Abele are the numbers when

ab, fast by richo.

64. And among these there was not a man of them whom Moyses ¢ Aaron tolde the chyldren of Ilrael in the Wyidernelle of Sinal.
65 For the Lorde layde of them: They shall dye in the wyldernesse. And there was not left a nian of them, saue Caleb the fonne ol Jephune, and Joluah the

numbred, when they

sonne of Nun.

J The. xxvij. Chapter.

Che awe of che heritage of the daughters of Jalphaad.

is shewed vnto Moples.

P

Gh <a — N 0

ve PY We 90 8 E

e
: 5 py
Me 8 sonne of Manalle, of

The kinred of Manasse the sonne of Joleph: whole names were Maala, Noha, Hagla, Melcha and Thirza.

Hen tame the daughters of Zalphaad the sonne of Hepher, the sonne of Gilead, the

2 And stode before Moyses and Eleazar

the priest, and befoze the lordes, and all the multitude by the doore of the tabernacle of the congregation, saying:

Our father dyed in the wyldernelle, and“ was not inthe company of them that gathered them (clues together agapust the Horde in the congregation of Corah: but dyed in his owne finne, and had no sonnes.

4 Wherefore thenis the name of our faz

ther taken away from among his kinred, berate he bath no fonnez* Geue vnto vs therefore a possession among the W brethren of our father.

And Moyses brought their cause before the Lorde.

6 Andthe Lopde {pake onto Moyses,

laying.
The daughters of Zalphaad speane ryght: thou thait geue them a pollessi-

foune of Machir, the

12 Che lande of promite

18 In whole steade is appoynted Joluah.

on to inherite among their fathers bye: thren, and shalt turne the inheritaunte

of their father vnto them.

8. And thou shalt speake vnto the chyldeen of Jlrael, saping: If a man dye and haue no sonne, ve hall turne his in:

heritaunte vnto his daughter.

9 If he haue no daughter, pe shall geue

his inheritannce vnto his brethren.

io If he haue also no brethren, ye shall gene his inheritaunte vnto his fathers

brethren.

1 And ik his father haue no brethren, ye hall gene his inherttannce vnto hym that is next to him of his kinred, and he
{hall possesse it: And this halbe vnto the chyldren of Israel a lawe of iudgement, as the Lorde Hath commaunded

Moyles,

n Audthe Torde sapde vnto Moyses:
Get thee vp into this mount Abarin, and beholde the lande whiche J haue

geuen vnto the chyldren of Ilrael:

j And whẽ thou! Hast leene it, thou Malt be © gathered vnto thy people allo, a5

Aaron thy brother was gathered.

14. F02 ype were difobedient vnto my + mouth in the defert of Zin, in the Heyl se ok the congregation, neither dyd ve fa fanctifie me in the waters before then rn eyes: That is, the water of wif 5

{es and lead ar the priest man che ‘ chyldren of Hitael in the playne of ado:

ordane (ouer agapnt] Je-

of hetitag,

i inges· gin the wyldernesse of Zit.
1j orn Moyses spake vnto the Tode,

4th Loyd God ofthe spirites of all fleshe fet a man ouer p congregation,
17 Which may go “out €in before them, and leade them out and in, that the con: egation of the Tord be uot as sheepe
Which haue not a cheephearde.
18 And the Horde fayde vnto “Doyles: ethee Josuah the sonne of Nun, aman in whom is the spirite, and put chyne handes vpon hym, 25
19 And let hym bekore Eleazar the priest, and befoze all the congregation: and
% geue hym atharge in their sight.
Fe yo And put okthy 'praple vpon hinz that

ind
. Hem,

+m as
2 as

8 = MD the Lorde spake

Conmaunde the chile

2 80 6% 2

„ g dren of Israel, and lay e V vnto them: My offe:
E ryng and my bead for

= my facrifices which are made by fire for a sweete lauour, ae thal pe obserue to offer vnto me in their n: Due season.

moog And thou schalt fap vnto them: This

ug

Jap.
E “ alt

„ isthe offerpng made by fire, which pe

cia, Chall offer nto the Lord:two-lambes eas OFA pere olde without spot, day by day fn, fora continuall burnt offeryng. bo 4 One lambe that thou prepare in the mh, NOPE and the other at euen. e And therto the tenth part of an Epha
. Offloure fora meate offerpng, mingled ims, with the fourth part of an win of ec’, begten ople. ö ae It is a dayly burnt offeryng, such as e Was ordayned in the mount Sinai for a
Roc, ‘Weete fanour, a facvifice made by fire pet. buiathe Lorde. 2 a7 And let the danke offering ok the same cense b Z ren’. De the fourth part of an Hin for one
„ lambe, and in the holy place shalt thou
Ne c the wine to be powred bn ger 203 mi, (8 And the other lambe thou chalt offer zx), at euen, after the maner of the meate nx, Olkeryng andthe drynne offeryngof the
Bot, mornyng, thou offer
. Tonde.

he lithe ns

üg bg dere

kora sweete sauour vnto the

Ry,

Numer.

21 And he Hall dande before Eleazar the

vnto Moyses, laping:

a satrifice made by fire, shalt

all the compante of the ildze of HE tacl map be Wichert. e

D

(e) the

priest, which Mati alte counsell fo2 hym after the iudgement of Trini, before the Lode: And accordyng vnto his worde, (hall they go cout and in, both he and all the chudren of Israel with Him, and all the congregation.

22 And Mopses dyd as the Lorde tommaunded him: and he toke Josuah, and

before all the congregation:

23 And put his handes vpon hym, and gaue hym a charge, as the Lone commaunded through the hand of Moyles.

9 | The. xxviij. Chapter.
* ö 2 What mutt be offered on euery least dap.

9 And onthe Sabbath day, two lambes. of a pere olde without spot, and two tenth deales of floure for a meate offeryng mingled with oyle, and the drynke offeryng therto. :
Io This is the burnt offeryng of euery
Sabbath, beside the dayly burnt offeryng, and his drynke offerpng. ;
11 And in the begynnyng of pour mos. nethes, pe (hall offer a burnt offeryng < vnto the Horde: two poung bullockes, and a ramnie, and seuen lambes of a. pere olde withont spot, a
12 And three tenth deales of floure for a. meate offeryng mingled with oyle for one bullocke, and two tenth deales of floure for a meate offeryng mingled.
With ople for one ramme. 6
13 And a tenth deale of floure mingled-
With oyle for a nieate offer yng vnto one lambe, for a burnt offeryng of a sweete. sauour, and a sacrifite made by fire vnto. the Lorde. ‘
14. And their drynke offerynges thaive ‘©. halfe an Hin of wine vnto one bullocke, , and the thirde part of an in of wine. vnto à ramme, andthe fourth part of « an hin vnto a lambe: This is the burnt offeryng of cuerp moneth thoughout: the monethes of the pere: ‘
15 And one hee goate fora sinne offerpng < vnto the Lorde shalbe offered, belies « the dayly burnt offering, and his deinke

Oforc

Act

. vub.

hat ts, of riches iudgeto whõ

hig wil. Some vnderstond by
Urim, cere tuintie, and illuminatton.
(f) By gong out and coin mpng in, 184 me ant enter-

{et hym befoze Eleasar the priest, and pring

offer ng. Exo. xi. e.
16 nd the fourteenth day of the kirst. e moneth, is the Passouer of the Lowe, .Dewrxvic.

And

, Offeringes,

17 And in the fifteenth day of the fame moneth is the feast: seuen dayes tong shall vnleauened bread be eaten.

Leu xi. p18 In the ; first day shalbe an holy con

uocation, ve shall do no maner of seruile
© Woeketherin.

But pe (hall offer a satrifite made by fire, for a burnt offering vnto the Lord, two poung bullockes, one ramme, and seuen lambes ot a pere olde, let them be
Without spot.

20 And let their meate offeryng be of
5 sloure nungled with oyle: three tenth

Beales also shall ve offer for a bullocke,

and two tenth deales for a rannne.
21 One tenth deale (halt thou offer foz euery lambe of the seuen lambes.

to make attonement for vou. 5
23 Be shall offer these beside the burnt

offerpng in the mornyng, which is a continuall burnt sacrifice.

throughout the seuen dayes the flethe of the lacrifite made by fixe, forà sweete fauour vnto the Lorde: And it chalbe

4 „ „ 4 „ „ e

al Md itt the first dap of

xe ithe seuenth moneth
Ca) donner Ave shall haue an holy mee couocation, pe aldo
Lauge thenno ferutle worke:

(b) Of the mca‘ure
Epha.

c Offered in the newe

modnc, or be-

goynnpug of euerp moneth.

FJor it is a day of blo-

wyng the trumpettes buto you. ;

2 And ye chall offer a burnt offeryng

‘

„ fora fivcete sauonr vnto the Lorde, one pPoung bullocke, oue ramme, and senen a

_ lanibes of a pere olde, without blemishe:

And their nieate offering shalbe made

of floure mingled with oyle, thrce tenth deales vnto the bullocke, and two tenth deales vnto the ramme,
4. Aud one tenth deale vnto one lambe, thzoughout the seuen lambes:
5 And an Hee goate for a sinne offeryng, to malte an attonement for von:

a

moneth and his meate offeryng, and besde the dayly burnt offeryng and his meate offeryng, and the dpnke offerynges of the fame, which must be done

IN 2 A

Numert.

22 Aud a hee goate for a sinne offeryng,

24. After this maner pe shall offer

‘6 Westde the burnt offeryng of the ch

done beltde the daylp burnt offerpngand his drynke offeryng. rng.

25 And in the leuenth day ye chall haue.
(wherin} pe thay «

an holy conuocation,

do no seruile worke.
2 Allo in the dap of pour first frites <

when ve bipnganewe meate offeryng

vnto the Lode arcordyng to your S.,
Weekes, ve shall haue an holy cöuocati- 1. on, and pe shal do no ferntle Wworke in it.

U 8 be amn Calg

27 But offer a burnt offering for alweete

fauour vnto the Lorde, two poungz:

bullockes à ramme, and seuen laͤmbes ofa pere olde, ‘
28 With their meate offerynges of loure mingled with ople, three tently deales. onto a bullocke, two tenth deales to a ramme,
29 And one tenth deale vnto a lanibe throughont the seuen lambes, :
30 And an hee goate to make an attonement for pou. ‘
31 This pe shall do, besides the continua‘ burnt offeryng and his meate 1
(andthey shalbe vnto you without
With their denke offerpnges.

J The. xxix. Chapter. ‘ hat mull be offered the eyght tirtt dapes of the feucnith moneth,

accordyng vnto the maner of them, for.
à sauour of sweetnesse, it is alacnifice « made by fire vnto the Lorde. 5

7 And pe shall haue the tenth day of Lara that moneth an Hoty” conuocation, and .©,2% pe (hall bumble pour sonles, and {hall

do no maner worke therin.

8 Bunt pe (hall offer a burnt offerpng B

vnto the Lorde fora sweete fanour, one poung bullocke, a ramme, and fener. lambes of a pere olde, which shalbe vnto pou without blemishe.
9 Their meate offeryng chalbe of floure mingled with ople, three tenth deales. fo a bullocke, and two tently deales to a ranune: :
Jo And a tenth deale vnto euerp lanibe, tlyoughout the seuen lambes: ;
1 And an hee goate for a sinne offerpng, « belide the sinne offeryng of attonement «

t daply burnt offeryng, and the meate : an drynke offerynges that long to the. ante. 0

2 And in the fikteenth day of the scuẽth moneth, ve shall haue an holy conuo-

cation, and do then no feruile 1

ng, pot) .

Oflferin, den

Jam,

; emonlets.

and ye (hail kepe a feast vnto the Lorde seuen dapes long.

43 1 e (yall offer a burnt offeryng fo; g lacritite made by fire fora sweete sauour vnto the Lorde, thirteene poung bullockes, two rammes, and fourteene lambes of pere olde, which shalbe without blemishe.

14 200 their meate offeryng chalbe of ssoure mingled with oyle, three tenth

deales vnto euery one of the thirteene

bullockes, two tenth deales to either of the two rammes,
16 And one tenth deale vnto eche of the fourteene lambes: .
16 And one hee goate for a sinne offering, belide the dayly burnt offeryng, with his meate and drynke offeryng.
/ And the feconde day pe shall offer
„ twelue poung bullockes, two ramnies,
+ fourteene perelyng lambes withont spot.
8 And let their meate offerpnges and diynke offerynges, vnto the bullockes, ranunes, and lambes, be accordyng to the number of them, e alter the maner.
19 And an hee goate for a {inne offeryng, beside the dayly burnt offeryng and his meate and drynke offeryng.
20 And the thirde day ve hall offer a leuen bullockes, two rammes, c fouretene verelyng lambes without spot:
D. And let their meate and drynke offe-
‘ tpnges bute the bullockes, rammes, and lambes, be after the number of them, and atcordyng to the maner.

2 Ard there shalbe offered an hee gate

klor a sinne offerpng, beside the dayly

burnt offeryng, and his meatee drynke
‘ offerpne,

23 Hu the fourth dap, ye Chall offer ten

builockes, two rammes, and fourteene
, berelyng lambes without blemishe.
5 Let their meate c drynke offeringes f 12 the bullockes, rammes, t lambes,
„be accordyng to the number ok them, and after the maner: 5

2 me an hee goate foz a sinne offeryng,
« belide the daply burnt offeryng, k his
„enteate and dryntze offeryng.

s In the fifty dap pe hall offer nine

Numeri.

bullockes, two rammes, and fourteene lambes of one pere olde withont pot:
27 And let their meate and drynke offeringes vnto the bullockes, ranimies, and. lambes, be accordyng to the number of them, and after the maner: :

EN —S ů

Ci.

28 And an hee goate fora inne offeryne,: E

beside the dayly burnt offeryng and hic « meate and drynke offeryng. 4 N.
29 And inthe sirt dap, ye chall offer eyght « bullockes, two rammes, and fourteene. verelyng lambes without spot. ‘
30 And let their meate and drynke offeringes vnto the bullockes, rannnes, and lambes, be accordyng to the number okthem, after the maner: 1
31 And an hee goate for a sinne offeryng, beside the daplp burnt offeryng, and. his meate and drynke olferyng. E
32 Inthe seuenth day, ve that offer leuen bullockes, two rammes, and fonrteene. lambes that are perelpnges withontblemithe, ;
33 And let their meate and drynke offeringes vnto the bullockes, rammes, and lambes, de accordyng totheir number, and after the maner: 6
34. And an he goate for a sinne offeryng, beside the dayly burnt offeryng, and his. meate and drynke offeryng. ‘

35 Inthe eyght day, ve shall haue a so- 5 lempne aslemwdlie, and pe shall do no.

seruile wozke therin: 5 :
36 But ye (hail offer a hurnt offeryng, a. sacrifite made by fire for a weet sauour vnto õ Lorde, one bullocke, one ramme, efeucn yerelyng lambes without spot.
37 Let their meate and dzinke offeringes. vnto the bullocke, ramme, and lanibes, be accordyng to the number, and accordyng to the maner: : 3
38 And an hee goate for a sinne offeryng, beside the dayly burnt offeryng, and his meate and drynke offerpng. s
39 These thynges pe shall do vnto the

f) Your bes

Lorde in pour feattes, belide pour ; (0 you v vowes ¢ freewil offeringes, your burnt , cases.

offerpnges, meate offerynges, drynke offerynges, and peace offerynges.
40 And Moyles tolde the children of l rael all that the Lord cõniaunded hun.

The

Of vowes.

Numeri.

The. xxx. Chapter.

2 Ok vowes when they shalbe kept, and when not.

N Moyles spake vnto the heades of the tribes tonternyng the
5 | thildzen of Israel, say-
75 Vey ing: This is the thyng
„ whichthe Lode hath

= commaunded .
Deusxiid 2 If à man vowe a powe vnto the
Lörde, or sweare an othe to bynde his soule: he Matt not go backe with his worde, but shall fulkyil all that is pro-

ceeded out of his mouth.

3 Ika woman also voswe a vowe vnto the Lorde, e bynde her felfe being in her fathers houle in the tyme of her pouth:

4 And her kather acht her vowe and

bonde which the hath made vpon her soule, æ holde his peace therto: then all her vowes and bondes which the hath made vpõ her soule, Ayal stande in effect.
5 But and ik her father disalowe her the sanie day that he heareth al her vowes and bondes which she hath made vpon her fonte:they shall not be of value, and the Lorde shall forgeue her, because her father W dilalowed her. b

(a) Zoree not to ber vowe.

Howes or pronounced onght out of her lippes, wherwith she bounde her foule:

And her hulbande hearde it, and helde his peace therat the same day he hearde it: then her vowes (hall stande, and her bondes wherwith she bounde her foule hall stande in effect.

3 And ik her hulbande dilalowe her the same dap that he hearde it, then he
{hall make her vowe which the hath vpon her, and the openyng of her lippes

6 If the had an hulbande, when she

wherwith He bounde her soule, o none

effect, and the Lode shall forgeue her.
9 But euerp bole ofa widowe, and ol her that is deuorsed, that they haue bounde their soule withall, chall stande in effect with them.

Ik The vowed in her © husbandes house, or bounde her soule with an othe:
1 And her hul bande hearde it, and helde

his peace conternyng her, x dilalowed

her not:then all her vowes shal stande,

and euerp bonde wherwith the bounde her soule, shall stande.
12 But if her hulbande offanutled them the fame day p he hearde them: then nothyng that proceedeth out of her lippes in vowes and bondes wherwith che bounde her soule, shall stande in effect: for her hulbande hath dilanulled them, and the Lorde Mall korgeue her.

All vowes and othes that binde to
© humble the soule, map her hulbande stablishe or breake. f
14. But tf her hulbande holde his peace

Io

from ™ one day to another, then he sta- €

blissheth all her vowes Ebondes which

the had vpon her: he confirmeth them,

becaule he Helde his peace concernyng

her the fame day that he hearde them.

15 But O if he breake them, after that he hath hearde them, he Mall beare her sinne vi {clfe.

16 hele are the ordinauntes which the
Lord commaunded Moyses betweene a man and his wpke, and betweene the father and his daughter, beyng pet a
Danilell in her fathers house.

q The .xxxj. Chapter.

8 The Madianites are layne,and their cities burnt, Balaam is tlapne. 27 Che

prap is equally deuided. 45 A present geuen ok Jlrael.

ND ͤ the Torde spake

Auenge the children
N of Ilrael of the Ma-

dianttes, c afterwarde halt thou be gathered

3 And Doyles fake vntd the folke, lap-

ming: Harnesse some ok pou vnto warre,

6 >\lpnto Moples, faying:

and let them go vpon the Madianites, f auenge the Lorde of the Madianites.

4. Ok eüͤery tribe a thoulande, throughout all the tribes of Israel, chal pe sende

5 And there were deliuered out ol the thoufandes of Israel, twelue thouland prepared vnto Warre, of euerp tribe a thoulande.

6 And

Of VOws

Cc) Throng imosttfication, by abthineng
0} bodpip ereterte,

‘OF Not ote bet * dap thet he hearcth it.

e) Fry

rei dap that he hearde them,

dian destroyed.

1 Moyses sent thẽ to p warre, euen

a rae of euery tribe, a with them hinees the sonne of Eleazar the priest

tothe warre, and the holy veslels, & the

e trumpets to blowe were in his hande.

dthey warred agaynst the Madia-
5 nites asthe Lod cõömaunded Moyses,

ue all the males.

ang they slue the kynges of Madian among other that were slayne: Hamelpe, Eui, and Nekem, Zur, k Hur, and
Reba: fine kynges of Madian, with
© Waͤlaam the fonne of Beor, whom

zu they liue with the lwordee.. n 9 And the children of Ilrael toke all the i” poner of Madian prisoners, and their chlldren, and spoyled all their cattel, and all their flockes, and all their goodes.

10 And they burnt all their cities wherin they dwelt, and all their goodiy dwellynges, with fire:

un And they toke all the spoyle, and all the bootie, both ol men and beastes.

12 And they brought the taptiues, and that which they had taken, and the spople, vnto Moyles and Eleazar the

pnelt, and vnto the companie of the

children of Jlrael, euen vnto the hoast that were in the fieldes of Moab by
Jordane, ouer agapnst Jericho:

z And Doyles and Eleazar the prielt, and all the lordes of the congregation,
Went ont of the hoast to meete them.

14 And Moyles was angrie with the officers ofthe hoast, with the captapnes ouer thoufandes, and ouer hundredes, which canie from the warre t battaple.

15 And Doyles fapde vnto them: Baue

a pe laued all the W women alpue-

16 Weholde, thele cauled the children of
Israel though the tountel of Walaam,

pen, do tomnmt trespasse agaynst the Lorde

aan. lll the bulinesse of © Peor, and there folowed a plague among the congregation of the Lorde.

vib, 17 Nolbe therfore, slay all the men chile

dren, and kyl the wonien that haue lien

with men flechip. d But all the women children that haue

not lien at men carnallp, kepe alpue

for pour selues. N
9 And pe chall remayne without the
ß alt seuen dayes, all that haue kylled

any person, and all that haue touched

any dead body, and purikie both your selues and your prilon

ers the dap and the feuenth. ‘

~ Numeri.

thirde

20 And purifie all pour raymentes and ite fies be of fkinnes, 0 all Worke eere, an of boa, | Dall aia made
21 And Cleasar the priest sayde vnto the men ol warre Which went to the bat: taple: This is the ordinaũte of che lawe
Which the Lorde cõmaunded Mopfes:
22 As for golde, siluer, brasse, and iron tinne, and lead,

23 And all that may abide the fire. pe that

make it go throngh the fire, and it thal:

D

be cleane : Meuerthelesse it chalbe purified with water of seperation: And all

that suffereth not the fire, ye hall make go through the water: »

24 And wache your clothes the seuenth

dap, and pe shalbe cleane, and after: warde tome into the hoast.

25 And the Lorde {hake vnto Mopses,

faping:

26 Make the summe of the pray that

was taken, both ofthe perfons and of cattell, thou and Eleazar the priest, and the chiefe fathers ol the congregation: .

27 And deuide the pray into two partes, betweene them that toke the warre vpon them and went out to battaple, and all the congregation.

28 And takea tribute vnto the Lorde of the men of warre which went out to battaple:one soule of fine hundred, both of the persons, and of the beefes, and of the alles, and of the sheepe.

29 And pe shall take it of their halfe, and geue it vnto Eleadar the priest, as an heaue offeryng of the Lorde.

30 And or the halfe ofthe children of ar rael thou shalt take one portion of fittic, of the perfons, and of the beefes, of the asses, and of the sheepe, and ofal maner of beastes, and geue them vnto the Lenites which wapte vpon the charge of the tabernatle of the Lozde. N

31 And Moyses and Eleazar the priest, dyd as the Lorde tõmaunded Mopses.

32 And the bootie, and the rest of the pray which the men of warre had taught, was lire hundred thoufande, and three sore and fifteene thoufande sheepe-

33 And three store and twelue thoͤulande of beefes,

34 And three store ¢ one thoulandeafles:

35 And thirtie k two thoulande persons in all, of women that had lyen by no

man.
36 And the halfe, which was ada

E

4 Sin
Madian destroyed.

them that went out to warre, was in

number three hundred thoulande, and

fcucn and thirtie thousande, e fine hundred, sheepe.

37 And the“ Tordes part of the sheepe,

was firehundzed t threescore ¢ fifteene.

E 38 And the beefes were thirtie and fire

5 thonsande, of which the Lordes part

Was threestore and twelue.

39 And the asses were thirtie thoulande and fiue hundred, of which the Lordes part was threescore and one. '

de v 40 And the >perfons were sixteene thouy lande, of which the Lordes part was thirtie and two persons.

41 And Moyses gaue the tribute, which
Was the Lordes heane offerpng, vnto

r) Tyte 10. that portion
Whiche the douldiers gaut to

Numeri.

Madian dettroy, 0

the Leuites which wapted vpor charge of che tabernacle ok the Lowe as the Lorde commaundded Moples.

43 And the officers of thoulandes of the hoast, ð captapnes oner the thoufandes and the captapnes ouer the hundredes came foorth, ;

49 And fayde vnto Moyses: Thy fer: uauntes haue taken the sumnee of the men of warre which are vnder our aucthoritie, and there lacketh not one man 0 a cor Pn

50. We haue therfore brought a prese vnto the Lord what euery mau foun of iewels of golde, bracelets, chaynes, rynges, eare rynges, and spaͤngles, to make an attonement for our soules be:

Eleazar the priest, as the Lorde com: maunded Moyles:

42 And the other halfe of the children of Ysrael which Moyses deuided from the men of warre,

43 (Chat is to wit} the halfe that pertayned vnto the congregation, was three hundred thoulande, and thirtie e leuen thousande, and fine hundred, sheepe:

44. And thirtie and sixe thoulande beefes:

Fe thirtie thoulande alles, and fiue

undred: N
I 46 And sirteene thousande persons.
47 And Moyses toke of the halfe that

fore the Lode.

51 And Moyles and Eleazar the pret, G
1 golde or them, all the wrought

2 E * 7 *

§2 And all the golde of the heane offering that they heaued bp to the Lorde, of the captapnes ouer thoulandes x hundredes, Was sirteene thousande, seuen ee and 1 wit Had ported

53 (Fozthe men of warre had {popted, euery man c for hym feife, ) wate

54 And Doyles and Eleazar the pric a toke the golde of the captaynes oucr the thoufandes € hundredes, and brought

Ok that

was ollotted

to those that

hud not bin at wWarre.

Coupee bertäpned vnto the ehildzen of Israel, tt into the tabernacle of the congregarn. One pontion of fiftie, both ok the persons tion, for a © memoriall of thechildren o 5 and ok the cattell, and gaue them vnto Iltael before the Lorde. auen
N The. xxxij. Chapter.
Co Auben and Gad and to halte the tribe ol Manasleg, ig promiled the pollession beponde Jordane eastwarde. 7 Che Rubenites and the Gadites be rebuned of
| Moptes. 15 Their promites vnto Moples. 8
14 be chüdzec hol Ruben lande meete for cattell, and we ey ker sobs the cone ye] ete cyideen of Gad nauntes haue cattell. bol ites cic] DADAN exeeding great 5 noberforefaid they: Il we haue found a ott Ley) Multitude of cattell: grace in thy light, let this lande be geut a And when they fave bnto thy leruauntes to possesse, c bryng

vs not ouer Jordane.
6 And Moyles layde vnto the chlden of Gad and of Ruben : Shall pour bye thzen go to warre, and pe (hall fit heres,
7 Wherlore discourage pe the heart o the children of Hieael that then shoulde
22 go ay into tbe lande Which the orde hath geuen them: *
Sa- 3 Thus dpd pour fathers when J lent dar“ them from Cades Vrnea to fee e
9 Foz when they went vp enen vnto the riuer of Eschol, and lawe sana

the lande of Jazer,

— the lande of Ellead,

that it was an apt place fo. cattell,

2 The childzenok Kuben, and the chit: dren of Gad, cane t spake vnto Moyses and Eleazar the priest, and vnto the lordes of the congregation, faying:

3 The lande of Ataroth e Dibon, Paser and Menrah, Hesbon and Eleale bam, and Hebo, and Beon:

4 Which countrey the Lorde finote before the congregation of Ilrael, is a age

urneis OF [frael.

couraged the heart of the children of
Aral, hat they should not go into the jande Which the Low hath geuẽ them.
„ And the Hordes wrath was kindled f the lane tyme, and he [ware, saying:
None of the men that came out of
Egypt, fro twentie peres olde Eabouc, shall (ce the lande Which ZI Nvare bn to Abraham, Jlaatc and Jatob, betause theyhaue nor wholly folowevme:
Saue Caleb the fonne of Jephune the Kenelite, and Jolsuah the fonne of
Fun: for they haue constantly folowed the Lorde. hee: ss
; Andthe Lorde was verie angry with srael, aud made them wander in the swildernesse fourtie peres, vntyll all the generation that had done eupll in the fight of the Lorde, were consumned.
¢ 14. And beholde, pe are rysen vp in pour fathers steade, as an intrease of sintull men, to augment the fierce Wrath ol the Lowe towarde Ilrael:

j For if ye turne away from after hym,

he wyll pet agayne leaue the people in

_ the wilaerneffe, » and pe chall destroy

e all this folke.

16 Aud they went neare hym, and layde:
We wyll bullde cheepe koldes here fo2 our sheepe ⁊ for our cattell, and (walled; tities kor our children: ;

17 But we our selues wyl go redy armed

„ bekore the children of Ilrael, vntyll we

haue brought them vnto © their place:
And our childzren shall dwell in the kenled cities, betause of the inhabiters of the lande.

8 We wyll not returne vnto dur Houles, vntyll the chudrenof SHirael haue inherited, euery man his inheritaunce:

19 Meither wyll we inherite with them on vonder lide Jordane forwarde, becaule our inheritaunte is fallen to vs on this side Jordane eastwarde.

20 And Moyles sayde vnto them: Il ye

* Wuyll dothis thyng, and go harnelsed before the Lorde to warre,

DA And will go all of you in harnesse ouer

. Jo rdane before the Low, butil he haue

(alt out his o enemies krom his light,

1 vntyll the lande be subdued before
Bea Ne Lowe: then pe Chall returne and be on pabont finne © before the Lorde and

fore Ilrael, and this lande fhalbe

pour pollession before the Lorde.
23 aan and if ye wyll not do fo, beholde, ve hane fined agaynst the Lorde: and

Numeri.

24. Mole therfore, builde cities kor pour n

N

g ‘ .

be fare co your sinne wyll finde you out. <4) vont chiloren, and foldes for pour do that ye haue poten. —

25 The children of Gad, and the children of Ruben, spake vnto Poples, faping :
Thy seruauntes Wyll do as my Lorde conimaundeth,

26 Dur chldzen, our Wynes, our sheepe, and dur cattell, hall remapne here in the cities of Gilead:

27 But thy seruauntes wyll go all harnelled for the warre, and buto battayle before the Lorde, as my Lorde fayth,

28 And for their fakes, Mopses commaunded Eleazar the priest, ¢ Josuah the sonne of Nun, and the chicfe fathers of the tribes of the children ol Jlrael,

29 And Moyles sapde vnto them: If the children of Gad, and the children ‘of
Ruben wyl go with pousuer Jordane, all armed, to fyght before the Houde, then when the lande is subdued before pou, pe shall gene them the lande of
Gilead to poslesse:

30 But and if they ™ wyll not go ouer with pou in harnesle, they shall haue their poslessions among pou in the lande of Chanaan.

31 And the children of Gad, and the children of Kuben, aunlwered, saying: As
Othe Lowe hath fayde onto thy feruauntes, so wyll we do: : 00

32 Me wyll go harnessed before p Lode an into the lande of Chanaan, that the polsession ok our inheritaunte mapbegeuen vs on this side Jordane.

33 And Moyles gaut vnto the children of
Gad, and to the children of Ruben, and puto halfe the tribe of Manasse the sonne of Joleph, the kyngdome of Sehon kyng of the“ Amorites, and the cy cu kyngdome of Og kyng of Wasan, the danken mus lande with the tities therot, in y coastes and cities of the countrey rounde about, porn srr

34 And the chilozen of Gad built Dibou, mer and Ataroth, and Aroer,

33 And Atoth, Sophan, Jaaler, and
Jogbea, N J

6 Wethnümra, and Wetharan, fenled 3 cities: they built foldes for the sheepe.

And the children 5 Ruben built Hel

bon, Elcale, Kiriathaim

38 Nebo, Waalmecon, and turned their names, and Sibama alfo: and gaue other names vnto the cities which they

builded ° 39 And

pour sinne.

&

lozdan.

) Dauer -,

dwelt on this

made. Jos. 10.

y The tourneis

39 Andthechudren of Machir the sonne

of anasse went to Gilead and toke it,

and put out the Amorites that dwelt

therin.

‘4.0 on Moyses gaue Gilead vnto Machir the sonne ol Manasse, and he dwelt

fs therin. (
: The. xxxiij. Chapter. a r Che fourncis ot Frac are numbred. 52 Chey are commaunded eo Ax i i
2 the Chanaanites. ö ; aor tentes in DaphRka. .
A 1j And they departed from Daphka an ; g lay in Alus. : a ö 14. And they remoued from Alus, and lay:
. % E. x | at* Naphidim, Where was no Water ‘Exod
Ca) Tbe gur & gS 1 for the people to drynke. ;
Dug. „ 5, And they departed from Raphiaim,
2 And Moyses wrote their goyng out vvʒ E pitched in the Wulderneile oF Sinai.

their iourneis, accordyng to the conv maundement ofthe Lorde: euen thele
@) Sadie « are the iourneis of their goyng out,
Seien ef 3 They departed from Rameles tbe
Sede fikteene day ofthefirt moneth, on the fren) « mozowe After the Pallouer: and the opto « khildze ol Ilrael went oute with an hie
Sra oar’ bande in the fight of the Egyptians. ö bord (Fo2 the Egyptians burped all their kiest borne which the Lord had smitten
5 „ among them, and bpon their gods che lern. e io (he Lorde dyd execution.)

: And the chudren of Ilrael remoued from Bameles, and pitched in Sucoth,
Exodxiid« 6 Aud they departed from Sutoth, and

+ pitched their tentes in Etham, which is in the edge of the wildernesse.
7 And they reinoued from Etham, and
Exo. xiia. : klxned agayne duto* Pihairoth, Which i (Sbefore Waal Zephon: and they pitched bekore Migdol.
8 And they departed from zo ihairoth:
Exo. xiuia.. And went though the middes of the
{ca into the wudernesse, and went three

rather dinne ¢ then humane. 1

(e) Their

dapes tourney in the wüderuesse of

Ethan and pitched in Parah.
And they remoued from Marah, and tame vnto Elin, where were twelue kountapnes of water, and threeltore € ten Palme trees, æ they pitched there.
Io And they remoued from Elim, and camped fast by the red fea. u And they remoued from the red lea, and camped in the wildernesse of Zin.
12 Aud they tone their iourney out of the
Wildernelle of Zin, and {et vp their

Exod xvia, c
‘
‘

Exod.xvi.a.

Numeri.

of If

41 And! Pair the sonne of Wana. went and toke the smal totes net Dax and called them Hauoth Fair,

42 And Mobal) went and tone Benath. es and the townes longyng therto, and called it Mobah, after his owne name. io

6 Exod xy
16 And they remoued from the delert of

Olnat, x pitched at the; graues of ut, Nun
7 And they departed from 5 sepulthzesof lust, and lay at Mazeroth. cNumzig
18 And they departed from Hazeroth, « and pitched in Richma. 1
19 And they departed from Vithma, and pitched at Nimon Pharez. ‘
20 And thei departed from Nimon pha-
65, and pitched in Libna. F
21 And they reinoued from ibna, and ¢ pitched at Willa, a
22 And they iourneyed from Vissa, and. pitched in Kehelatha. ;
23 And they went from Kehelatha, and‘ pitched in mount Sepher. :
24. And they remoued from mount Sepher, and lay in arava, f
25 And they remoued from Harada, and‘ pitched in Makeloth. ‘
26 And ihey remoued from Mankeloth, dild lay at Thahath. 5
27 And they departed from Thahath,. aid pitched at ned 0
28 And they remoued from Tharath, and pitched in Mithea. we
29 And they went from Mithca, and pit ched in Hasinona. 4
30 And they departed from Masmona, ‘> and lay at Moleroth. ‘
31 And they departed from Moleroth,. and pitched in Bene Jaakan. 8
32 And they remoned fro Bene Jaakan, and lay at orgadgad. 0
33 And they went from Porgadgad, and. pitched in Jethebatha. .

sof [frael.
. And they remoued from Jethebatha, and lap at Abroua.

35 And they departed from Abrona, and

pat Ezeon gaber. ;

„ And they vemoucd from Ezecon gaber,
1 : and pitched in the *wildernesse of Sin, which is Cades.

. wenn they cemoued from Cades, and

: itched in mount ed which is in the

edge ofthe lande ot Edo. f
4! 5 nd Aaron the priest went vp into mount Porat the coumaundement of

the Hovde, and dyed there, enen in the

fourtieth pere after the chüldzen of HE

‘ sacl were come out ofp lande of Egypt,

and in the kirst day of the fifth moneth.
„ AD Aa Was an hundred and enentic and three veres olde when he

. =e bap — — BB ee eee
— ——— — Cae —

ä ee Se
„

i ee
— — — — —— —

„ a
— 2 —2—— — . —— —
. . = ͤ ee — —
See SS SS ee ———ͤ—j—j—

a

er
PHELIGPOLIS © ave
| PDN

N . * . =
— a n — — . ls sepa — — = —— = Se, —
= we = ag Sad = — * 2
> * a rh > 8 Ss a

¶ Chis Charte seweth the way that the people of Ffract pa

Numer.

2 SS = —

“Ss 4

+ WARRE

ca 2. ANELECHE. -
= . - ~ es

Dped in mount Hoe, 5
4.0 And king Erad the Chanaanite( which dweit in the sonth in the lande of Chanaan) hearde of the conunyng ok the. children of Jlrael: P
4 And they departed" from mount Hog, Num nb and pitched in Zalmona. :
42 And they Departed from Zalmona and pitched in Phunon.
43 And they Departed from did pitched in Oboth.

C
7c

Phunon,“

44. And they departed from Oboth, and

pitched in Jim abarim, in the border of:
Moab . ,
45 And they Departed from Jim abarim,

Mum. xxi. c

and pitched in Dibon Gad. 5
46 And they remoued from Dibon Gad,

and lay in Almon Diblathaum. ‘

ee;
AG NST g

led the space of fourtie

pereg, rom Egypt (through the delertes of Arabia) till they entred into the lande ay
Chanaan. as is mentfoned in the bookies of Crodus, Mumeti, a ee
It conteyneth allo the kourtie and two iourneys or stations, named in Chis ey 95

and three Chapter of Numeri, with the obleruations of the degrees alwell 0 92

longitude, as of the latitude of the places of the sayde iourneys, and allo the 02

of the numbers of them.

¢

‘47 lud thep vemoucd from allmon Dib-
Athaun, and pitched inthe mountaines

of Abarim before Mabo. . arted from the mou,
48 And they dep my pou

tapnes of Abarim, and pitched in the fieldes of Moab, fast by Jordane louer

nena’

4.9 Aud they pitched bp Jordane, from
Numaxya’ Weth Jelimoth, vnto the plapne of
Sittuim in the fieldes of Moab.

50 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyles in the fielde of Moab by Jordane (ouer a gaynst) Jericho, saping: a 51 Speake vnto the childzen of Ilrael, t.vit.a, ouer Jordane (toenterjinto the lande of
Cijanaan,
52 Be hall drpue out all the inhabiters of the lande bekore you, and destrop all their pictures t breake a sunder all their

all their bye places.
5 And pollelle the lande, and dwell ther-

to deuide the lande. 0

——————ů—ů———

A. I N he Ke

H/ the Torde spake 3 vnto Moyles saping:
Commaunde the chu dren of Piraelandfap 9 vnto them: When pe tome into the lande of

2 IIe

8 yn 4
Eran fas Ye

LUSK 0

ak > aor a

C
¢ c
€ c
€ c c
€ c
«
¢ c

Ca) That ts f
Ae lande that fall fall vnto pour inheri-
Ehm e taunte, (euen] the lande ok Chanaan u
Sobich ve den. with her coattes, ö

3 And pour south quarter shalbe from the wildernesse. Z in, along by the toast of Edom, fo that pour fouth quarter

Jofu.xv.a.

(b) Otherwise, che dead
(ca.

eastwarde. N
4 And ket a tompasse from the louth vp to Atrabiin, aud Rechae to Zinna: And

and go out also to Hazʒar Adar, and go along to Az mon.

5 And fet a compasse agayne from A;- coder emed mon, Dito the riuer of Egypt, and

„„ „„ „ „ „ „ „„ 4 4 8 „„

ideen bh all go out at the fea, 14. For the tribe of the childzen ol Ru. Neos!

to be meant: ¢

fome ors And let pour west quarter be the great

mnocoinrs. . fea, let the lame lea be pour welt coast.
(0) Bor, % And this shalbe pour north quarter: abt wett pe bhall tompasse pour border from the
Sinope, ¢ Arcat sea, buso mount doz.

lourneys N umer .

agaynt) Jericho. 54. And pe Chall deuide the inheritaunte

and say vnto them: ohen pe are tome 55 Wut and ik ve wyll not dryue ont the 5 full ic

images of mettall, and plucke downe 56 Morcouer, it wyll tome to paffe, that.

q The. xxxilij. Chapter.

1 Che coastes and bogders of the lande of promise. 17 Certapne men are assigned

pour border, tyll it tome vnto Hemath ..

= Chanaan, this is the 10 And ye hall destribe pour east quarter:

nereth eastwarde. ee reathe vpon the foe of the W falt sea 12 And then go downe along by Bor .

go out frõ the south to Cades Warnea, 13 And Moyles commaunded the cht:

of If

in: for I haue geuen pouthe lande to: enioy it. :

ol the land by lot among pout kinredes. and geue to the moe, the moze inherttaunce, and to the lewer, the lelle me: a rltaunce: And pour inheritaunte shalbe in the tribes of pour fathers, euerymans inherttaunte in the place where: his lot falleth.

inbabiters of the lande befoze pou, then: thofe Which ve let remayne of them. shalbe prickes in pour eyes, and artes: iu pour fides, and Chall dere pou inthe: lande wherin pe dwell. ‘

“$ (hall do vnto pou, as J thought to: do vnto them. 0 *

N K R R NK AA N NAA „ „ „

And from mount Hoe, ye chall describe

t the end or the toast shalbe at Zedada.

And the toast shall reache out to Z. phron, aud go out at Haʒar Enan: This halbe pour north quarter. 8

from Hazar Enan to Scpham. :

And the coat shall go downe krom.
Sephan to Ribla on the east side ol.
Ain: And the fame border shall destend and go out at the side of tye fea of Ce-. che

dane, and leãue at the fait fea: And this. halbe your land, with the toastes therof rounde about.

deen of Jsrael, saying: This is the land. which ve Thal inherite by lot, and which. the Torde commaunded to gene vnto. nine tribes and an halke.

ben accordingto the houcholdes of their. fathers, and the tribe of the children of
Gad accozdpng to their fathers houleholdes, and halle the tribe of Panalle . haue reteaued their inheritaunte.
15 Two

* wo tribes and an halke haue vecea-
0.5 . their inheritaunte on the other

< pf Jodaue, ouer agavnst Jericho eastwarde. ons *
‘ig Aud the Londe Spake buto Mopses,

ing. Ne lay ke are the names of t

a vers

17 buch lande vi 5 which {hall Dewide the lande vuto you:

Eleazar the puest, and Josuah the

sorme of Nun. n
1 18 bad ye chall take also a‘. Loge of
10 ecuerp tribe, when ye dende the lande.
% Thenames ok the menarethese: Ok the tribe of Juda, Caleb the sonne of

0 Skthe tribe ol the thyldren of Simeon, Semuel the sonne ol Anuud.
21 Of the tribe of Benianun, Elidad the sonne of Cislon.

‘or Okthe tribe of the chyldren of Dan, the lorde Bucki, the sonne of Jogll.

Numer.

23. From among the chylozen of Poteph, « for the tribe ofthe ebploaen ‘Bar alle, the Lorde Haniel, the sonne of E phod.

24. Ok the tribe ok the chuldrẽ of Ephraim,

110 lorde Camuel the sonne of Siph-
25, DE the tribe of the fonnes of Zabu--

lon, the lode €lifaphan the donne of.
Pharnach. saphan the sonne of

26 Pf the tribe of the chyldzen of ¢ fa: ont, the lorde Palthiel the af of.

27. Of the tribe of the sonnes of Aer, the. lorde Ahihud the sonne of Salomi.
28 Ok the tribe of the chyldren ol Pephthali, the lorde Pedael, the sonne of;
Ammihud. :
29 Thelt are they whom the Lord com: maͤunded to deusde the inheritaunte vn-

Chanaan.

The. xxxv. Chapter.

2 tanto the Leuites are geuen cities and luburdes. u Che cities ok refuge. 16 Che iawe ot manauellpng. zo Fos one mans wytnelle wall no man be condempned.

vnto * 5 in the
2 Moab 10
D 3 eet ouer again
Jericho, saping:
Co:umaunde p chyldeen of Ilrael, that they geue vnto the Leuites of the © in-

dwell in: And pe thal geue allo vnto the cities ofthe Leuites, suburbes harde by their cities rounde about them.

3 The cities shall they haue to dwell in,

and the suburbes for their cattell, and kor their pollession, ral maner ok beattes oktheirs. ral .

4 And the suburbes ofthe cities whiche ye chall geue vnto the Lemtes, Mall t krom the wall of the citie out:

sien a thoufande tubites rounde

5 And ye chall mealure without the ci

1 ok the east spde, two thoufande cu ae and of the south syde, two thou: a cubites: and of the west side, two
: dann cubites: and of the north fide, fh Tao oukande cubites also, and the titie

albe in the middes: and thefe thalbe

= MD the Tode spake

heritaunte of their poffeffion, * cities to

the suburbes oktheir cities.

6 And from among the cities whiche pe shall geue vnto the Leuttes, there shal be fire cities for refuge, whiche ye halt appopnt (to that intent) that he whiche kplleth, may flee thyther: And to them ve shall adde fourtie and two cities mo.

the chyldren ol Ilrael in the lande ol.

D

Iosu xx. 2.

7 Sbthat all the cities Whiche ve halt x».

geue the Leuttes, map be fourtie and epobt,them (Mall ve geue with their sub-

shalbe out of the poslession of the chyldren of Plracl. They that haue many,
‘ (Hall gene many: but of them that haue ewe, ye Chall take fewe. Euerp one hat geue ol his cities vuto the Leuites, ac toyng to the inheritaunte whiche he

9 And the Lope spake vnto Moyles, saping:

10 Speake vnto the chyldren of Ilrael, and lay vnto them: When pe be come oner Jordane into the lande of Chanaan: —_—

Be Chall appoint pou cities, to be cities

of refuge for pou: that be whiche sleeth

aperfon vnwares, map fice thyther.

DOP j 5 12 And

i

And thele cities whiche ye Hall gene,

Deut. xix a osu. xx.

The cities
Gebers 12 And these cities shalbe vnto von a re gert aun, kuge kroim the 0 auenger ok blood: that
Doo. he Which killeth, dye not, Sutil he and cry we: before the“ ꝰtongregation in tudgentent.
Bucs bur I3. And of thele cities which pe Mal geue,

congregation,
} Denatours and chieft
Judges u the kitie.

Saditcg, and the halfe tribe of Manasses.

Exod.xxi.d

(e) So daun-

gerous, chat a

man map dye thereof.

CH De thet is next to his kin to him chat ig murtherted.

fire cities Mall ye Gane for refuge.

dane, and three in the land of Canaan,
Whiche shalbe cities of refuge.
5 And thee fire cities chalbe a refuge, both forthe chyldren ol Ilrael, and foz the straunger, c for hym that dwelleth

among pou: that all they whiche kyl

any pevfon vnwares, may flee thyther.

16 And if any man smpte another with an instrument ot iron that he dye, then is he à murtherer, and the murtherer hall dye fo: it.

17 If he smpte hym with throwyng a stone, that a man may dye with, and if he dye, he that smote hym is a murtherer: let the same murtherer be llapne therefore. |

18 Or ik he smpte hym with a handweapon of wood that a man map dpe with, then ik he dye, he is à murtherer: let the same murtherer be flaine therfore.

19 The reuenger of blood him selfe shal flay the murtherer: when he meeteth hym, he shall Lap hym.

20 But ik he thrust bpm ok hate, or hurle

at hym by laping of wayte, that he dye,
21 Orsmpte hym with his hande of enmitie that he dye: he that sniote hym shall dye the death, for he is a murthe-

rer: the reuenger of the blood shall lay
Me murtherer when he nieeteth hm.

22 But ik he pulthed hym bnaduifediy, and not ok hate, or tast vpon hym any thing, and not in laying of wapte,

23 D2 any niamer of stone that a man map dye with, and saw him not, and he cauled it to fall vpon hym, and he dye, and was not his enemie, neither fought hym any harme:

24 Thenthe congregation shal iudge betweene the flayer and the reuenger of blood, according to thele lawes.

Numer.
25 And the congregation chall delluer

bonrders ok his citie of refuge,

the hye priest, the layer should returne

of refs

the slayer out of the bande of the rene. ger of blood, and the congregation hay restore hym to the citie of his refuge whyther he was fled: and he chal ablde there vnto the death of tothe hype priest a e. ole be was ainapnted with the poiß f
0 r tae * « : owe
26 But if che layer come Without the nae
3 of bis e Whyther dae K . Au - | A 7
27 And the reuenger of blood finde hyn withont the borders of the citie of his refuge, and the reuenger of blood kyf the slaper, he shalbe gyltlesse:
28 Wetause he fhontde haue bydden in the towne of his refuge butt the death E of the bye priest: and after the death of

vnto the lande of his poslession.

29 Sothese thynges halbe w a lawe of oe iudgement vnto pou, throughout pour aua generations, in al pour dwellinges.

30 Whosd kylleth any person, the Tudge] hall put the murtherer to death tho: rowe wytnesses: but one wytnesse Malt nat testifie agaynst any perfon, to tause

hym to dye, a .

31 Moreouer, ve thal take no retompente foz the lyle of the murtherer whiche is wort to dye: but he shalbe put to

31 And pe Chall take no retompente for him that is fled to the citte ol his refuge, that he choulde tome againe and dwell pelt lande bekore the death of the bye priest. f

33 So pe hall not pollute the lande

whiche ye chan dwell in, kor blood defi lech the lande: and the lande tan not be tlenled of the blood that is Men ther-
1 0 se by the blood of hym that then

34 Defile not therefore the lande whlthe ve shal inhabite, for I am in the middes therof:seuen FZ the Tord dweill among the chyldren of Jlrael.

The

EE ——

sof Zelaphead.

daughter

not be geuen krom one tribe to another.

77 Md the chicte fathers olf the families of the

. 2 SS 2 dame foorth and lpake before Movies, and before the princes the chieke fathers

ofthe chyldren of Jlrael, a
2 And layd: The Lorde commanded y Lorde to geue the land to inherite bylot to the chyldren of Ilrael: and my

Torde was tommaunded by the Tord,

to gene the inherttaunte ol Zelaphead

dur brother, vnto his daughters.

b kthey be marped to any of b sonnes

ol é o the other tribes of the chyldren ol

© Plrael, then Thali their inherttaunce be
* „ taken from the inheritaunte of our fa-

e

thers and shalbe put tothe inheritaunte

of the tribe which they are reteaued in-

to, and fo Chal it be taken from the tot of

dur inhertaunte. 1
4 Ind when the Jubilee of the children ok Paci commetlh, then shall their in-

heritaunte be put vnto the inheritaunce bkthetribe wherinto they are reteaued, and so shall their inheritaunte be taken
‘ albay from the mbheritaunce of the tribe
, ofour fathers.
45 And Moyses tommaunded the hyl den ot Ylrael, accogding to the worde okthe Lorde laying: The tribe of the bonnes of Joleph haue © sayd well. es This therelore noth the Horde tomne niälnde the daughters of Zelaphead,
= ¢ faping: Let them de wyues, to whoni

The. xxxvj. Chapter.

En order kor the mariage of the daughters of Jelaphead. 7 Che inheritaunce could

Joseph,

they them selues thinke best: only tothe. 0 fanulie of the tribe of their 9 05
7 So chall not the inheritannte of the childzen of Ilrael remoue from Aue J tribe: for every one ok the chyldren ok. lrael shall iopne hym lelfe to the incritaunce of the tribe of his fathers.
3 And cuery daughter that pollesleth. any inheritance in any tribe of the. chyldrẽ of Israel, halbe wyfe vnto one. © wricne ok the kinred ok the tribe ok her father, hac that the chyldren of Ylrael may emoy aan. euery man the inheritaunce of his fa-<

ther.
9 Neither ought the inheritaunte to go. from one tribe to another: but enerp: one of the tribes of the chyldren of Jlrael shalbe iopned to his owne inheritaunte. . c
10 And as the Lod tommaunded Mopses, euen so dyd the daughters ol ela-

phead: :

I. For Mahela, Thirza, Hagia, Milcha, and Moa the daughters of Zelaphead, were marped vnto their fathers brothers sonnes. g

12 They were wpues vnto the fanulies. of the fonnes of Manalse the forme ok.
Joleph, and fo their inheritaunte remapned in the tribe of the kinred of< their kather. 5

iz These are the tõmaundementes and. lawes whiche the Lorde tommaunded «(9 ests, by the hande ol Moyles vnto the chyl- ge dren of Ilrael, in the fieldes of Moab, a bas by Pordane [towarde] Jericho. De

¢ The ende of the fourth booke of Moyses.

O ij The

i r te —
ö The lawe

Deuteronomium.

I hefisch bookeof Moyses, called in

the Hebrewe, Elle baddebarim,and in the Latin,

Deutetonomium.

repegt.

The first Chapter. a

14 briete rehearsall of thingesdone bekore from Horeb vnto Cades Barnea. 32 Poptes reproueth the people foz their incredulitie. 44 The Itraelites are ouercome by the Amos

ö . rites, becaule thep fought agapnst the commaundement of the Lorde. a (a A pbese be the Wordes 12 Howe can“ Pury selfe alone, ©peare Front an whiche Doyles fpake pour cumbzaunce, pour charge, e pour Seed
Gente of vnto all Ilrael on “ stryfe that is among you: dame this per the other side Jordan 13 Wryng vou men of wyldome, and ob e in the wyldernesse, in vnderstanding, and expert, accordyng to en“ =| ae ß plapne duer agaynst pour tribes, and J wyll make them ruthe red lea, betweene Pharan x Tho- lers ouer pou. | phel, Laban,paseroth,and Pilahab. 14. And pe aunswered me, layde: That ¢
2 There are eleuen dapes iourney from which phat spoken, is good for vs to do.
Dee oreb, by the way of mount Seir, vn- 15 And lo ont of pour tribes toke the {ets gene e, to Cades Barnca. chiefe men ok wyldome, and that were b= dae dene 3 And it tame to palle in the first day ok expert, and made them rulers oner pou, eres afte doc, the eleuenth moueth, in the kourtie captapnes ouer thoulandes k taptaines *. ere er pere, that Moyses spake vnto the chyl- ¶ouer hundredes, captaines ouer fiftic, roads Ddrenok Pleacl, accordyng vnto an that and taptaines ouer ten, and officers a: dg

repenio,ths dement puto then:

ingreneDeus 4. After he had slayne Sehon the king that ls, the feo cu ebe. bon, e Og king ok Balan whiche dwelt at Astaroth in Edrai.

5 Oythe other fide Jordane in the land

of Moab, began Moyles to declare this

lawe, saping: 5
6 The Torde our God spale bnto vs

(e) In the se- in 9 2 oreb, laying 2 Be haue DWelt long com ome, «= CHOUgHinthismount, |

W 7 Turne vou and take pour iournep, and

go to the mount of the Amozites, and

vnto all the plates nye therebnto, both

vVnto the playne, and hilles, and dales, to

tle south, to the {eas ide, to the lande of

Chanaan, and vnto Libanon, euen vnto the great riuer, the riuer Euphrates.

8 Weholde, J haue let the lande before

Gasxvd. pou: Go in and possesse the land which and xvub. the Tord lware vnto pour fathers, Abraham, Jlahac, and Jacob, to geuc
. vnto them, e to their {eede after then. dune 9 And A spake vuto vou in the fame ner mist. tine, saping: J amt not able to beare

vou my felfe alone.

lo Fozthe Lorde pour God hath multe plied por: fo that pou be this day as the starres of heauen in number.

Wu (The Tord God of pour fathers make voua thoufand times fo many mo as pe

are, and blesle you as he hath pronuled pou.)

the Lord had geuen hym in commaun: -

of the Amorzites 3 dwelt in Hel . an

mong vour tribes.

16 And J charged pour Judges that sanie tyme, saping: Beare the caule of pour brethren, and*{udge vighteoufly biw betweene euery man and his brother, and the straunger that is with hyn.

17 He shall haue no respect ofany person in iudgement, but vou shall heare the ae mall alwell as the great: Bou shall not feare the face of anp man, for the iudge- „n ment W is Gods. And the caule that is sre oa to harde for vou, reterre it vnto me, and
FB wyll heare it.

18 And J comaunded von the fame fea son, all the thinges which ye Mould do.

19 And when we departed krom Porzeb, we went thorow all that great andterrible wyldernesse, as ve haue seene by the way of the mountayne of the Amorites, as the Lorde our God tonunaunded vs: and We came to Cades Barned. qyosa

20 And J sayd vnto vou: Ne are come “oi vnto p monntaine of p Amogites, Which the Lorde our God doth geuc vuto bs.

21 Weholde, the Lorde thy God hath let the lande before thee: go vp and possesse D lt as the Lord God ol thy fathers hat) sapd buto thee: feare not, neither be dil po couraged.

22 And pe tame vnto me euery one, and layde: we wyll lende men belore vs to searche vs out the land, and to bryng DS worde agapne what way we mult go vp by, c vnto what cities we Mall os

yen toe
Path, 2 top ce not che taunlt

deren. Deuteronomium. Covi.

And ene taping pleated me Well: and 36 Baue Caleb the lone ok Jephune, be € ss coke rwelue men of vou, of euerp shall see it, and to n geue che lofi xi. e, fribe oue. laude that he bath troden vpon, and to
Whiche departed € went bd into that his chyldreu, because he hath folowed
+4 ountayne, and tanie vnto the "bailey. the Lowe. g
. Elchol, and learched it out, 37 * Allo the Lode was angry with me Nomxxe
„And folic of the lande in their handes, for pour sakes, saying: Thou aiso chalt 20437-. and brought it vuto vs, and brought vs not go in thyther. wo agapne, aud “fapd: It is a good 38 But Josuah the sonne of Hun which fande whiche the Lorde dur God doth ostandeth before thee, he shal go in thy- bah. geue vs. ther. Entourage hym therkore: for he
16 Motwithstaͤndyng, ve woulde not go shall caule Ilrael to inherite the laude. f vp, but were dilobedient vnto the word 39 Moreoucr, O pour chyldren, which pe Ve we okthe Lorde vour God, layde should be a pay, and pour sonnes ae.
27 And murnured in pour tentes, and whiche in that day had no knowledge
„ laid: Wecaule Pow “ hateth vs, ther- betweene goad and cupll, they shall go
„ Atore hath he brought vs out of the lande m thyther, and vnto them wyll J geue
% bk Egypt, to deliuer vs into the hande ok tt, and they Mall enioy it. me the Amorites, and to destroy vs. 40 But as for vou, turne pour fate, aud
28 Whyther hal we go vp- Our brethzen tanke pour tourney into the wWilderneile, haue diltouraged dür heart faping: "the —cuent by the way ofthe red fea. people is greater and taller then we the 41 Then pe aunlwered and lapde vnto cities are great, and Walled euen vp to me, We haue linned agaynst the Lord: Nuxiiite, heauen, and mozcoucr we haue feene we pl go vp and fight actordmgto Sect what”

the sonnes ofthe. 2inakims there. all thatthe Lorde our God tommaun- einm abe
1 29 Then J layde vnto vou: Dreade not, ded vs. And when ve had gyzde on eue- Shah, 80

nion be aktaide of them. ry man his weapons of warre, re were anne
. 30 The Lorde pour God which goeth redie to go vp into the hyll. that whiche

God cõmaun-

. beloe pon, he Mall fight for vou decor 42 Andthe Lord fayo bato me: Say bu. ng
. dyngto allthat he dyd vnto vou in -- to them go not bp either fight, fo: J dea ou
= gypt before pour eyes: am not among pou: lett pe fail befoze ens
= 3 Andin the wyldernelle, where thou pour euemies. N halt leene howe that the Lord thy Fod 43 And J tolde vouthese thonges Epp

bare thee, euen as a man doth beare his woulde not heare, but disobaped the sonne, in al the way which ve haue gone wonde ok the Lord, and went presump-

un ube abs

by, vntill pe tame vnto this place: tuously vp into the hyll.
32 And yet in this thing ve did not belene 44. And the Amoztes whiche dwelt in the Lode your God. that monntapne, came out against vou,

3 He Went in the wap before vou, to and chaled vou as bees bie to do, and

searche pou out a plate to pitche your deltroyed pouin Seir, euen vnto 102

tentes in,* in fyre by nyght, bp ve niyght ma.

see what way to go, e in a clondebyday. 45 And pe came agayne, and wept before 6
14. And the Lore Hearde the bopce of the Lorde: but the Lorde D would not e

pour wardes Was Wor, and wake, heare pour voyte, nor hearken vnto rate fin
‘ aping: pou. of thete bre2
“il 35 There thatinotoncofthelemen,and 46 And lo ve abode in Caldes along feat? ware rer, bd this frowarde generation, fee that fon, according vnto the tyme that ve ver eg

good lande whiche J ware to geue vbn- mapned betote.

to pour fathers: “

tid

V Vhat victorie Deute ronomium. che Il aclites ha

q The .y. Chapter.

Chat whiche was done from the tpmethep depavecd from Cades Barnea, vnto the bat. taple agaynst the kynges, Sehon and Dg.

1 ben we turned our 13 Nowe ryse bp larde 3 and get poy
Ga) hep thee ace, € toke our tours ouer the vier Zared: and we went e n neß into theo wylder- cduer the riner Zared. en e nelle, euen by the wap 14. Tht space in whiche we came fron kack n. = Mok the red fea, as the Cades Warnea, vntill we were come omountaine ap Lo dde fpakebntome: ver the riuer Zared, Was thirtie and oe , eee tompassed “© eyght peres, vntyll all the generation ann oc mount Heir a long tyme. of the men of warre wert wasted out

2 And the Todd spake vnto me, saping: from among the hoast, as the Lore
Be haue compassed this mountayne [ware vnto then. long tough, turne pou northwarde. 15 Jor in deede the hande of the Lowe
4. Aud warne thou ß people, saping: Be was against them to destroy them kröõ eden
Wen hther. hall go through the V coast ol pour bre- among p ohoast, til they were cdfumen, rote rrp then the chyldren of Elau which dwelt 16 And so it came to pale, that all the mein Deir, and they shalbe akraide ol pou. men ol warre were consumed and dead
Hum. 2. 1. 5 Take ye good heede vnto pour selues krom among the people. therfore: Ve shall not prouoke them for 17 Andthe Tord spake vnto me, saping:
I wyll not geue pou of their lande, no 18 Thou shalt go thorowe Ar, the coatt not so much as a foote breadth, *becaule of Moab, this day:
IJ haue geuen mount Seir vnto Efau 19 And when thou comnest nye vnto the to possesle. chyldren of Ammon, thou shalt not tay
6 Be shall bye meate of them for money, siege vnto thé, nor moue warre against to cate, and pe shall procure water ob them: or J wyll not geue thee of the them for monep, to drinke. lande of the chyldren of Ammon any
W 7 FJor the Torde thy God hath blessed pollession, but FH bane geuen it vnto the thee in all the workes of thy hande, and chyldren ol Toth to possesse.
(e) uneyng ( Rliobeth thy walkyng through this 20 That also was taken for a lande of
Brau, great Wyldernelle this kourtie peres, giauntes, and giauntes dwelt therm in hee ter per ak And the Lode thy God hath ben with olde tyme, whom the Ammonites call Abe leripiuct. thee, so that thou hast lacked nothing. © Zamzummims. me
8 And when we were Departed from 21 Apeople that was great, many, and Kaan our brethren the children of Elau which tall, as the Anakims: Wut the Lode wa e dwelt in Seir, through the wap of the destroped them before them, and they gane

Gen. xxii b

ephams,
. d Wyldernesse from Flath, x from est: sucteeded them in their inheritaunte, fa on Gaber, we turned and went by the and dwelt in their steade: ub

wap of the wyldernesse of Moab. 22 As he dyd for the chyldren ok“ Esau, rs.

ene
Aud the Lorde sayd vnto me: Thou whiche dwell in Heir, for whont he de- : shalt not fight agaynst the Moabites, stroped the Morims before them, aud neither prouoke thein to battaple:for ] they pollesled them, and dwelt in their | wyll not geue thee of their lande to pol- steade vnto this day. | sesse, betause J haue geuen Ar vnto the 3 And the Auims Which dwelt in Hazachyldren ol Loth to poflesse. rim, euen vnto Aʒʒa, the Caphthoums mass gq) Gums, Io Thee Emims dwelt therin in tymes whiche tame out ok Caphthor, destroy- e
Alete past, a people great, many, and tall, as ed them, and dwelt in their steadt. 1 eh) Sante the Anakums, 24. Nile pe vp therefore, i take pour our ark et Sn 1 Whiche also were taken for giauntes neponer the ryuer Arnon:eholde, J dare
Human. Asthe Anakims, whom the Moabites haue geuen into thy hande Schon the tall Emims. Amorite, king of Helbon and his lande:
12 The Horms allo dwelt in Seir before begin to pollelse it, and prouoke ym to tyme, whom the chyldren of Elau cha- battaple.
{ed out, c destroyed them before them, 25 e on to sende the

and dwelt in their steade as Jlrael did feart and dread of thee vpon al nations vnto the lande of his posseslion, whiche that are vnder all 710 heauen, so en : the Lorde gaucthem, they whiche heare speake of thee, ee :

and Sehon.

ble and quake before ther.
And fo J sent messengers out of p wil-
‘ dernes or Kedemoth, vnto Sehon king ot Helbö, with wordes of peace, faying:
27 Let me passe through thy laude, J a, yl go along by the bye way, JWyll neither turne vnto the ryght hande, nor

to the left.

Thou shalt {ell me meate for money, for to eate, € geue me water for money, for to drinke: Only J wyll go through on mpfeete, ö
29 Astheehilozen of Esau, which dwel

in Heir, and the Moabites which dwel e in Ar, dyd vnto me, vntyll J be tome a quer Jordane, into the lande which the ris, Lorde our God geueth vs. . it zo Ut Sehon p kyng of Helbon woulde not let vs pasle by hym: for the Lorde

thy God hardened his spirite, and made

his heart obstinate, becante he woulde deliuer him into thy hande, as it is tome

to passe this day.

31 And the Lord said vnto me: Weholde,
Jhaue begunne to geue Sehon F his

Deuteronomium.

S

lande before thee: begynne and tuberite hislande. A Num. ue.
32 Then both Sehon and all his people P25 came out agavnst vs to fight at Pasa,
33 fone he pu before bs, and and his waste onnes, and all
34. And we toke all his cities the sanie feafon, and fluc the men, hata, and children of all the cities and let nothyng remapne, N
35 ie er por be tbe we cana vnto
„and the le of the ci which we toke. . 24
36 From Aroer which is by the brinke of the riuer of Arnon, and krom the atic that is in the riuer, vnto Gilead, there was not one citie to strong for vs: The
Pode our God deliuered all o vnto vs. 0 Juso
37 Only vnto the lande of the children ok
Ammon thou camest not, nor vnto euery place of theo riuer Jabock, nor c) ee vnto the cities in the mountaynes, no? vnto whatsoeuer the Lorde our God forbad vs.

J The. iij. Chapter.

Thynges that chaunfed trom the victorie of the two kynges, Sehon, and Dg, vnto the insticution of Joluah in Mopfes steade.

Hen we turned, and went vp the wap to
Walan: And Dg the
“Al yng of Walan came
0 out agaynst vs, he and
NEC all his people, to fyght at Edrai.

hym not, for J wyll deliuer hym, and all his people, and his lande, into thy hade, and thon shalt do vnto hym, as chou diddest vnto Sehon kyng of the
Amorites, which dwelt at Helbon.
And so the Lorde our God delinered info our handes Dg allo the kyng of
Galan, and all his folke: And we fmote
Pein vutyll none was left hym alyue.
4 on We toke all his cities the lame i on, neither was there a titie which
7 if Cole not from them, enen threeltore of es thoughout the region of Argob,
Ahe rnadome of Dg in alan.
7 ' thele cities allo were made strong
; a b Dye walles, gates, & barres, belide
5 zalled townes a great meanp,
5 d We biteelp destroyed them as we vd onto Sehon kyng ok Pelbon,

at he Lorde sayde vnto me: Feare

bryngyng to naught all the cities, with men, women, and © chtidren:

7 But all the cattell and the spopie ofthe 25
Cities, we toke for our selues.

8 And thus we toke the fame season out of the hande of two kynges of the Amorites, the land that was on the other fide Jordane, from the riuer of Arnon, vnto mount Hermon:

9 (Which Hermon the Sidons call He rion, and the Amorites tall it Senir)

Io All the cities that lap in the plapne, and all Gilead, and all Walan vnto Seltha and Edrai, cities of the kpugdome of Dg in Balan:

11 For only Da kyngofwWalan, remayned of the vemmannt of the giauntes, „ Theme
Whole bed was a bed of iron: And is it h not yet at Nabbath among 5 chadzen of 4 mss
Ammon: Mine cubites doth the length sm power therof tontayne, and foure cubites the tor spe conbreadth of it, after the cubite or a man. ofen

12 And fo we conquered this lande the ene same tyme, from Aroer which is by the riner of Arnon, onto halfe mount Gilead, vand the cities therof gaue J vnto Pane the Rubenites and Gadites. =f Toucan

VVh at victories

B And the rest of Gilead, and all Basan of the kyngdome of Da, gaut JJ vnto the halke tribe of Manasse: euen all the region of Argob, with all Wasau, which is talled the lande of giauntes.

14. Jair the sonne of Manasse, toke all

C the countrey of Argob, vnto the toastes of Gessuri c Maachati, and called them after his owne name, Balan Hauoth

(d) Tyn the

rE Jair, O bnto this day.

des wüten. 15 And JJ gaue Gilead vnto Machir.

16 And vnto the Rubenites and Gadites
J gaue Gilead onto the riuer of Arnon, halfe the valley aud beponde, euen vnto the riuer © Jabock, which is the border of the children of Ammon:

17 The O playne allo, and Jordane, and the toast therok, from! Cenereth, euen vnto the fea which is in the playne, tuen the falt fea vnder the springes of the hyll, eastwarde. d

Numjud. 18 And Peommaunded you the lane

tyme, laying: The Lorde pour God

e whiche der riideth the
Bunnonetcs fromthe Ge morttesi.
(The desert.
(g Caued ao
Sennczareth: op ehe sea of
Oalnee, oz

bath geuen vou this lande to enioy it: xe

schall go harnessed before pour beethzen the chudren of Israel, all that are meete for the warre. 1

19 Pour wyues only, vour children, and pour cattell (for knowe that pe haue much cattell) shall abyde in pour cities which J haue geuen vou,

20 Uutyll the Lorde haue geuen rest du: to your brethren as well as vnto vou, and vntyll they allo possesse the lande which the Lorde pour God Hath genen them beyonde Jordane: and then Mall

Deuteronomium.

ye returne agapne, euery man vnto possession which J haue geuen Bie :

ar And J counnaunded Josuah hym selfe the lame tyme, saying: Thyne epes

hauc seene all that the Lorde pour God
Hath done buto these two kynges: euen fo Hall he do vnto all kyngdomes whither thou goest. f

22 Be shall not feare them: for the Lode pour God he shall fyght for vou.

23 And J besought the Lorde the fame tyme, saping:

24 O Lorde God, thou hat begunne to shewe thy seruaunt thy greatnesle and thy mightie hande: for where is there a
God in heauen or in carth, that tan do after thy workes, and like to thy power:

25 J pray thee let me go ouer, and {ee the good lande that is beyonde Jordane, that goodly w mountapne, & Libanon.

26 Wut the Lode was angry with me

for pour lakes, and woulde not Heare bad me. And the Lorde sayde vnto me: We content, speake no moze vnto mie or this

matter.

27 Get thee vp into the top of the hyll, e lift bp thyne eyes westwarde, north-
Warde, southwarde, and eastwarde, and beholde it with thyne eyes: forthou shalt not go ouer this Jordane.

27 But charge PFoluah, and encourage hym, and bolden hym: For he Mall go before this people, and he shall deuide vnto the the lande which thou shalt see.

29 And so we abode in the valley ouer agaynst the house of Peor.

¢ The .inj. Chapter. ,

1 Un erhortation to obferue the lawe without addyng therto or diminitchyng. 6 Cheri fandeth our wildome. » we mul teache it to our children. 15 Ho image ought to be made to worship. 2 Threatninges agaynst them that kortake the la we of God. 37 God chole the seede, becaule he loued their kathers. 4; The three cities ok refuge.

21 O we therfore harken e Yael, vnto the o:

ee dmaumtes and lawes

* l which J teache pou, warn lan arn i for to do them, that ee e so ve map lyne, and go bere kate in, k possesse the lande
P which the Lode God ok pour fathers

geueth pon.
Se, 2 t shall put nothyng vnto the wor
Seages dies which J tommaunde pou, neither Mall
N vou take ought from it, that pe may kepe the tõmaundementes of the Lod pour God which J conunaunde pou.

3 Opourepeshauefeenc what ß Lode |

dyd agaynst Baal Peor: for all the men

that folowed o Wäall yeor, the onde

thy God hath deltroped from among you,

4. ut pe that tleaue vnto the Lord pour f, god, are aliue euer one of you this dab. a

5 Weholde J haue taught you od nauntes and lawes, such as the Lolde my God comaunded me, that ye Houl do enen so in the lande whither ve goto possesse it. 0

6 Bepe them therkore and do then, 05

s © dome and vnderthat is © pour wildome gandyng

the Lfracliteshay

D

a]
N UM) 2» 4

0 DE Bex: ah. 0 75 where the

Numayo

Num a4.

ve repeated.

Jas andyng in the syght ofthe people, that
115 may heare all these ordinauntes, and say: Surely it is à wile and vnderstandyng people, it is a great nation.
7 Jo what other nation is so great that gods tome so nye vnto, as the Lore dur God is nye © vnto bs in all thinges as oft as we tall vnto hym- 5 g Bea, and what nation is fo great, that hath ordinauntes x lawes so righteous, as all this lawe which J fet before von this d

Bese

o bepe thy fonie diligently, that thou fox-

get not the thynges which thyne eyes

haue seene, and that they depart not out

of thy heart all the dayes or thy life: but nen thein thy sonnes, E thy sonnes nnes. N om * :

10 Specially the day that thou stoodest

before the Lode thy God in Moreb,

when the Lorde sayd dito me: Gather me the people together, x J wyll make them heare my wordes, that they may learne to feare me all the dapes that

n they thall tyne vpon the earth, and

hat they may teathe their children. e Be tame“ and stoode also vnder the mountayne, and the mountayne aburnt with fire euen vnto the middes of heauen, and there was darknesse, cloudes, and mist. — 1 ;
2 And the Lorde spake vnto you out of the middes of the fire, and pe hearde the d boypte of the wordes: but fawe no simillitude, laue hearde a bopte only.

z And he declared vnto pou his couehaunt which he commaunded vou to do euen ten tommaundementes, which he wrote vpon two tables of stone.

C14 Audthe Lorde commiaunded me that laine season that J shoulde teache you
N ¢ Cite 1 0 pe ought

e lande whyt 0 ane b e
1j Take therkore good heede vnto your

a Clues AS pertapnyng vnto pour foutes,

Akkon pelawe no maner of image inthe

e dap that the Lorde spake vnto you in

8 16 Leto ot the middes of fire)

} est ye marre pour felues, æ niake you
8 b umnage, e picture of any maner ft aue Whether it be the lkenesse of

TI 02 woman.

7 bare likenesle of any maner of beast
90 Son the earth, o2 the likenesle of vmaner kethered foute that fleeth in

thief,

Deuteronomium.

n
Take heede to thy selfe therekore, and

g reel ff 6

18 Or the lkenesle of any maner wore

that creepethon the cattl, or the ithe: nefle of any maner fiche that is in the ae 3 the earth:

19 ea, and lest thou lift vp thyne eyes
Into heauen, and when thon fel che Tob he lunne, the moone, and the stares, with all the hoast of heauen, chouldest be driven to wozchip them, € lerue them, and chouldest warlhip and ferue the thynges, which the Lorde thy* God

hath made to serue all nations vnder the whole heauen.

20 Wut the Lorde Hath taken you, and brought vou out of the® ton furnace, euen ont of Egypt, to be vnto hym a dsc people c inheritaunte, as ye be this dax.

21. Furthermoze, the Lorde was angrp
With me for pour wordes, and sware that J choulde not go oner Jordane, and that J shoulde not go in onto that good lande Which the Lode thy God geueth thee to inheritaunte.

22 Wut I must dye in this lande, and thal

not go ouer Jordane: But pe shall go

ouer, and poslesse that good lande.

Deut. visa.
Sa i 14. 3

Gen. i. b.

23 Lake heede vnto your selues, that ve

forget not » appoyntment of the Lorde pour God which he made with vou,
€ that pe make you no grauen image 4
O02 Iikenefle that the Lorde thy God a hath forbidden thee, 75
24 Forthe Lorde thy God, is a0 consu- 4 myng fire, anda ielous God. g
25 When thou shalt beget children, and 2 thy children beget children, aud Matt . haue remayned long in the lande, pe do an
Wicke dly, c make any manev ol grauen h Kochen image, and worke euyll in the light of nue the Lorde thy God, to prouoke hym to bebe conanger: 1
26 J tall heauen and earth to recorde az d ue gaynit pou this dap, that pe Mall Mostly eee perishe from of ö lande wherbnto pou weve: go oucr Jordane to possesse it: Be shall not prolong pour dapes therin, but (hall vtterlp be destroped:
27 And the Tod shall featter von among e the people, and pe shalbe left fewe in theo; ehen nations whpther the Lode (hall bryng pou.
28 And there pe (hall 5 — gods which are the Worke of mans Hande, wood and stone, 17 neither see, nor heare, nog eate, nor sinell.
29 If from thence thou shalt 5 1 Deu xxxa

t) Most

Moyses repeateth

thou seke hym with all thy heart, and
With all thy soule. 0
T 30 Whenthou art in tribulation, x when all these thynges that be here spoken ok, are tome vpon thee, euen in the latter daes pf thou turne to the Lorde thy
God, e Halt be obedient vnto his boyce:
31 (For the Lode thy God is à mertifull
God) he wyll not korsake thee, neither

Leut. 18g. destrop thee, nor forget the appoynth Seen ment ok thy fathers, Which he“ [ware e. vnto them.

cer che 32 Fo athe of the dapes that are palt,

moe certified

dar lala. God treated man vpon the earth, and lalkej from the one itde of heauen vnto the other, tf euer there came to passe such a great thyng, or whether any such lpke thyng bath ben hearde as this.

33 Ppd euer anp people heave the vopte of God speakyng out of the middes of a fire, as thou hast hearde, and pet lpued-

34 Or hath God assaped to go and take hym à people from among nations, by temptations, by signes, bp Wonders, by
Warre, byannghtie hand, by a! stretehed out arme, t by great sightes, accozdpng vnto all that the Lode pour God dyd vnto you in Egypt before pour epesz

35 Undo thee it was shewed, that thou mightest knowe that the Lod is God, and that there is none other but he.

Psal zs. b.

Exodaix< 36 Out of heauen he made thee heare

his vopte, that he might instruct thee: c vpon earth he shewed thee his great fire, and thou heardest his worde out of the middes ofthe fire.
(o) ↄt ts 37 And because heoned thy fathers, he menemerar, dhose their seede after them, ¢ brought mcierg- thee out in his light with his mightie
Exod. xi. c. power out of* Egy pt,
＋ 38 To thant out nations great and mightier then thou before thee, and to bryng thee in, and to geue thee their lande to inheritaunce, as it is tome to patie this day.
39 Understande therkore this dap, and

Deuteronomium. owe thy God, thon shalt finde hym, ik

which Were before ¢ fince the day that

— —___,- — — — —

consider tt in thine heart, that the Lore

he is God in heauen aboue, and vpon
910 earth beneath, neither is there any other.

40 Thou shalt kepe therefore his ordinaunces and his commaundementes which J commaunde thee this day that it may go well with thee, and wich thy children after thee, and © that thoy 4 mayett prolong thy dapesbdponpearth, mn which the Lorde thy God geueth thee fe 1 for euer. a toma

41 Then Moyses seuered three cittes on sink’,

the other fide Jordane towarde the Soe sunne rysyng: feu bg

42 That he shoulde flee thyther which had kylled his neyghbour vnwares,

c hated hym not in tyme pat, and ther: fore shoulde flee vnto one of the fame cities, and lyue:

43 Pamelp Bezer in the wildernesse, tuen in the playne countrep of the tribe of Ruben; and Namoth in Gilead, of the tribe ol Gad, and Golan in alan, of the tribe of Manasse.

And sothis is the lawe which Moyles 6 et before the children od srael:

45 These are the witnesle, statutes, and 9 ordinauntes, which Moyses tolde the anu

chilozen of Israel after they tame out opya,

ol Egypt,

46 On the other side Jordane, in the valley ouer 91 eh the house of Peor, inthe lande of Sehon king of the Amoese tees at Hesbon, whom
Moyles t the childzen of Israel'smote, N= after they were tome out of Egypt,

AT And possessed his lande, and the lande of Dg kyng ok Walan, two kynges of the Amorttes, which were on the other fide Jordane towarde the sunne riling,

43 From Aroer which is by the bancke of ne riuer Arnon, vnto mount Sion which is Hermon,

49 And all the plapne on the other {ine opel
Jordane eaftibarde,enen vnto the lea vor which is in the playne vnder b springes of the hyll.

The

a ‘ W.
Moyles is the meane bet weene God and the people. o Che lawe is repeated. 2 C
: people are atrapde at Gods vopce. 2 Che Lozde 9 1 that 22 . 4
(eare hym. They mul neither decline to the ryght Ltt 8

ee I 5 r ae
O 2 , 7 cr y Ss Ai ty 8
>, vt? 12

jearne them, and fulfill them in deede.
Lom our God made atouenaunt

with vs in Hor eb.

The Lowe’ made not this couenaunt

fathers, but with vs: enen

pe? wh our with vs, which are all here alpue this

dap.
. 4 The Lorde talked with pou face to fate in the mount, out or the middes of

mit the kire: * ’
5 Andy stoode betweene the Lode and

vou the fame tyme, and shewed vou the

worde of the Lord:or ye were akrayde at the fight of the fire, and went not dp um into the mount, and he sapde: ae pronahe thee out of the lande of Egypt, from the house of bondage.

37 Thou chalt haue none other Gods in

my presente. 5 ice 8 Thou shalt © make thee no grauen me illlage, or amp likenesse of that Which is

in heauen aboue, and that is in earth beneath, and that is in the waters beneath the earth.

„ Thouchalt neither bowe thy elke bn-

to then, nor serue them: for I the Lord thy God, ana ielouse God, bisityng the wickednesse of the fathers vpon the

6 J am the Torde thy God, which N

16 Honour thy father e thy mother, as the Lorde thy God Hath conmiaunoed | thee: that thy dapes may be prolonged, and that it may go well with thee inthe « lande which the Lorde thy God geueth «

a

any worke, Hou nort vsonne, nch dau ter, nor thy man Pritt. the thy mayde;noz Ore, nor thine affe,

nor any of thy cattell, nor the straunger

that is within thy gates: that thy man

seruaunt, and thy mapde, map r
Well as thou. ft + : 1
Remember that thou walt a seruaunt

inthe lande of Egypt, and howe that

the Lorde thy God brought thee ont

thence, though *a mightie bande and

à stretched out arme: For Which caule the Lorde thy God tommaunded thee to kepe the Sabbath dap.

thee.
17 Thou e shalt not flay,

18 Thon shalt not connmit aduterie.

19 Thou (halt not steale.

Thon shalt not beare falle witnesle agaynst thy neyghbour.

21 Thou chalt not lust after thy neygh-

22 These wordes the Lorde spake vnto

children, euen vnto the third and fourth

generation among them that hate me: lo And shewe mertie vpon thoulandes,

among them that loue me, and kepe my

tounmnaundementes.
Thou halt not take the name ofthe
Torde thy God in vayne: for the Lowe

Wyllnot holde him guͤtlesse that tateth

his name in vayne.
15 bude the Sabbath dap, that thou länctifie it as the Lorde thy God hath tommaunded thee, N
"ah Dapes thou Mhalflavour,and do

1 all that thou hast to do: bi 79110 he “fenenth day is the Sabbath he Torde thy God: thou shalt not do

Miia

bours wypfe, thou shalt not couet thy neyghbours boule, his fielde, his ser-

thai

ancoat q outrage against out neighvous

Rom. vii. b.

D

uaunt, or his mayde, his ore, his alle, o:

dught that thy neyghbour hath.

all pour multitude in the mount, out of the middes of the fire, of the tloude, and of the darkenelle, with a great vopte, and w added nothyng: and wrote them

in two tables of stone, and deliuered ie

them vnto me.

And it came to passe, that when pe hearde the voyte out of the moves of the darkenesle (fo2 the mountayne dyd burne with fire) then ye tanie vnto me, with the captaynes of pour tribes, and pour eiders,

24. And pe saydenseholde, the Lozde our

God hath chewed vs his glorie and his a and we hane hearde his voyte out of the middes o the fire: we haue seene this — A talke with man, and he pe .

Howe therkore why shoulde wedpethat this great fire shoulde confinne vs:
HE we heare the boyee of the 5

Exod, xix. d

— F
Moyses re peateth

God any more, we shall dye:

bub 26 For what“ fleshe hath it ben that euer

vere beäͤrde the vopte of the lyuyng God

agen lypkakyng out of the middes of the fire ovens. (as We haut done) and pet dyd tpuez

27 Go thou and heare all that the Lorde

our God sayth, and tell thou buto vs all

N that the Lord our God sapth vnto thee,

odd. xi x. a

and we wyll heare it, and do it.
E28 And the Lode hearde the vopce of pour wordes when pe spake vnto me,

and the Lorde fayde vnto me: Jhaue hearde the vopce of the wordes of this

people, which they haue spoken vnto thee: they haue well sayde all that they

a haue spoken.
Lor. xx iii. b. 29 Oh that there were such an heart in them that they woulde feare me, e kepe all my cOmaundementes al wap, that it

The. vj. Chapter.
An exhortation to feare God and kepe his commaundementes, y hich is to loue hym with all thine heart, 7 The fame mut be taught to the polleritie. 15 Not to tempt God. 25 Righteousnelle is contepned in the la we.

Hele are the töbmaun-

VEN Demétes ordinaunces, and lawes, Which the
Bowe pour God conimaunded me to teache rs pou, that pe might do them inthe lande whi-

ther ye go to possessc it:
Naͤnielp, that thou mightest feare the
020 thy God, c kepe all his ordinaun-

Dent. x. c.

ces and his commiaundementes which

FJ tommaunde thee, thou ¢ thy foune,
€ thy sonnes sonne all the dayes of thy lyle:that thy dayes may be prolonged.
Heare therfore O Jlrael, and take herde that thou do it, that it may go
Well with thee, e that ve may entreale mightily, euen as the Lode God of thy fathers hath promised thee a lande that flolveth with myplke and honie.
4 Heare O Plract, the Lorde our God is Lorde only.
5 And thou shalt loue the Lode thy
God with all thine heart, and with all thy soule, and with all thy mypght.
And these wordes which J com-
— thee this day, shalbe in thine heart:
15 7 Aud thou shalt shewe them vnto thy thildren, and chalt talke of them when thou art at home in thuie houle, and as thou walkest by the wap, € when thou

NW

Deut. xi. d.

Deuteronomsum.
„ mpght go well with

them, and wi their childen for euer dug

30 Go, ànd say vnto them, Get von into pourtentes agayne:

31° But stande thou here by me, and
Wyll tell thee all the tömaundementes. ordinaunces, Elawwes, Which thou chat teache them, that they may do themin the lande which J gene the to pollesse.

32 Lake heedt therfore that pe do in deede as the Hod pour God hath commaunbed vou, and turne not alide, either to 95 the right hande, or to the left: ;

33 Wut Walkie in all the Wapes whichthe «ag
Lorde pour God hath cOmaunded pon, that ve map lyue, and that it map go
Well with vou, andthat ye map prolong. pour dapes in the lande which pe (halt poslesse.

lpest downe, and when thou risest vp.

8 And thou shalt binde them for a ligne vpon thine bande, and they thalbe as krontlettes betweene thine epes,

9 And thou shalt write them vpon the

& postes of thy houle, c vpon thy gates.

Io And when the Lode thy God hath ate brought thee into the lande which he 5, ware vnto thy fathers, Abzaham, ande
Plahac, and Jatob, and shall geue to thee great ¢ goodly cities which thou buildedst not,

Houses full of all maner of goodes which thou filledst not, e Welles digged which thou diggedst not, vinepardes and oline trees which thou plaͤutedlt not, and when thou halt caten kart full:

n Then beware lett thou forget p Lorde which brought thee out of the lande of ..

Egypt from the houle of bondage. 1
3 Thou halt feare the Logde thy God bau

and lerue hym, and chalt E Meare by a

his nanie. o
14 See that pe watke not after straunge ¢

gods, the gods of the nations which are

about pou: Ty
15 (Jor the Lorde thy God is aiclo

God aniong pon) lest the eountenaung

of the Lorde thy God be moued 5

Wrath agaynst chee, and destroy the

from the fate of the earth. ur ws
16 Be hall not tempt the Lotde 50h,

It

ptt
God, as ye dyd in the place of tempta-

tion. j sue pot shall diligently kepe the tommaundementes of the Lord pour God, k his testumonies, and his ordinaunces which he hath commaunded thee:
13 And thou shalt do that which is right c good in the fight of the Torde: that e thou mapelt prolper, x that thou mapett s go m fe poslelle that good lande whithe er the Hobe fare vnto thy fathers, en , To calt out all chyne enemies before thee, as the Lorde hath layde. i 20 Alld when thy fonne alketh thee in
„ tymeto come, saping: What meaneth n thele teftimonics, ordinauntes, and ie lawes, which the Lorde our God hath e CORMMAURDED pouu Then thou chalt fay vnto thy fonne:

Deuteronomium.

We were Pharaos bondmen in Egypt,

and the Lorde bon ht vs out of Egypt. with a mightie Gains 1

(XXII.

22 And the Lorde shewed lignes, and

Wonders, great and cuyll vpon Egypt vpon Pharao, and bpon all ; holde, before our eyes 1

23 And brought vs out from thence, to

bryng bs in and to gene bs the lande which he sware vnto our 3 5

24. And he hath commaunded bs to do al

these ordinauntes, cz to feare the Lome

out God fo Our wealth all the dayes of

our life, as it is come to passe this day. h f saan
25. Moreover, this halbe our righteone: ani aie

neffe before the Lorde our God, pf we sere

take hoede Ekepe al tele commaun: Lit

dementes, as he hath commäunded vs. Stier

e ate reöonted koz iuss.

J The. vij. Chapter.

Che Alraelites may make no couenaunt with the Gentiles, 5 Chey must destrop their wols. 8 Che election dependeth on the free loue ot God. o Che experience of the power of God ought to conkirme vs. 25 To auopde all occation ok idolatrie.

1 SAS] Den the Tordthy God ify Ki halt bryng thee into

SSP laude whither thou f goest to poslesse it, and hath cast ont many nations before thee:

ic 2 And when the Lorde thy God Hath fet them before thee, thou (halt smyte them, and vtterly destroy them, c make na couenaunt with them, nor haue compassion on them. f

Thou (halt make no mariages with them: neither gene thy daughter vnto his fonne, nor take his daughter vnto thy fonne,

+ S02 they wyll deceaue thy fonne, that he should not folowe me, and they Mall letue straunge gods: and then Wyll the wrath ol the Lorde ware hot agaynst
Hee, and destroy thee sodenly.

be ob gilt thus ve thall deale with them:

— ea . cil RA Ne tut downe and bur

images wüh fran ne their grauen

oi thouart an holy people vnto the

ria, 6
Lorde thy God, 'the Lowe thy God

f . all ouerthzowe their aulters, €

Hath cholen thee, to be a spetiall people vnto hym selke, aboue all nations that are bpon the earth.

7 The Lorde dyd not set his loue vpon

vou, nor chose you betause ye were mo W

in munber then any people (fo2 ve were the fewest ol all people :

8 Wutbecaule the Lode loued vou, and

betaule he would kepe the* othe Which Gen Ge he had sworne vnto pour fathers, ther- 8 fore hath the Lorde brought pou out through a nughtie hande, and denuered

you out of the Houle of bondage, ene

from the bande of Pharao kyng of

Egypt.

Understande therfore that the Tord

thy God he is God, and that a true
God, Which kepeth appoyntment and mierty vnto them that lone hym and
Repe his commaundementes; euen throughout athoufande generations:

Exdd. xx. a.

fo And rewardeth them that hate hym

II

to their face, so that he bryngeth them to naught, and doth not dekerre the tyme, but rewardeth hym that hateth hyin belore his face. —
Kepe thoutherfore the tommanndementes, and ordiuaunces, and lawes, f whiche J commaunde thee this dap, that thou do them, 70
12 If ye hearken bnto these lawes, and oblerue t do them:the Lodthy God

(b) Monikesttp, oz in this
Ipte;

t) This cot nenauntd ig. grounded bpd his free grate: therfozcin rez cunpenfing | their ovdedie nee he hath respect to hig mercp,
€ nol lo thew merites.

allo

Precepies

allo Hall kepe vnto thee the appopntment and the mercy wWhiche be fare vnto thy fathers.

3 He wyll loue thee, and blesse thee, and miuiltiplic thee: he wyll allo blesse the fruite of thy wombe, and the fruite of thy lande, thy cone, thy wine, and thine oyle, and the increase of thy kine, and the floekes of thy sheepe, in the lande
Whiche he lware vnto thy fathers to geue thee. —

C 14 Thou shalt be blessed aboue all nations:there shalbe neither man nor woman vnkruitkull among pou, nor any o

pour cattell halbe barren. .

E20. xx 15 Moreouer the Lord wyll “take away krom thee all mauer infirmitics, and

Wyll put none of the cuyll discases of
Egypt (whiche thou knowest) vpon thee: but will sende them vpon allthem that hate thee.

16 Thou shalt tonsume all the nations which eden, thy God hall deliuer thee : thine eye (hall haue no pitie vpon them, neither Malt thou lerne their gods, for that shalbe thy decay. a

17 Ifthou say in thynt heart: thele nations are mo then J, howe can J cast them out:

18 Thon shalt not feare them: but remember what the Torde thy God dyd vnto Pharao and vnto all kgypt.

19 The great temptations which thyne eyes falb, and the signes and Wonders, and the mightie bande, and stretehed

Exodix.a. °

Deut. xx.a.
Tofu, vill, a.

The xlviii. Chapter.

2 God humbleth the Itraelites to trye what they haue in their heart. God chastiseth them as his chyldren. 14 The heart ought not to be proude fo2 Gods benekites. Tie korgetkulnesle ot Gods benekites causeth destruction.

=e et the commaunde-
\ ae! lentes which JJ cone

a. naunde thee this dap,

“9 shal pe kepe foz “© to do them, that pe may line, and multiplie, and go
5 in and pollesse the lande whiche the Lorde ware vnto

pour fathers.

2 Aud thou shalt remember all the way which the Lorde thy God led thee this

presse it by 2

Oueona fourtie peres in the Wildernelle, for to be panne humble thee, eto © proue thee, and to

ee knowe what was in thyne heart, wheut altion. 5

Deuteronomium.

tie God and a terrible.

out arme, whereby the Lorde thy God brought there out:euen fo shall the Loy thy God do vnto all nations of whom thon art akrapde.

20 Moreoner the Lorde thy God Wyll Fors sende hoznets among them, until they wle that are left and hide them selues from w thee be destroyed. Ogee

21 Thou shalt nat feare them: for the sar
Lorde thy God is among pon, a nugh- 5

22 For the Lorde thy God wyll put out these nations before thee by a litle and
à litle:ꝰ thou mayest not consume them So at once, lest the beastes ok the flelde in OE crease vpon thee, Gebe

23 But the Lode thy God chan geue an theim duer before the, and chall deltroy dane them with a mightie de struction, butyl he haue brought them to naught.

24 And he (hall deltuer their binges in- baz to thyne hande, and thou thalt dettroy their name from vnder heauen: There hall no man be able to stande before thee, vntyll thou haue destroped them.

25 The graut images ok their gods shalt thou burne with fire: and couet not the wan golde and siluer that is on them, no: take it vnto thee, lest thou be“ snared aa therein: for it is an abhomination be- . fore the Lorde thy God.

26 Bryng nat ther fore abomination into thine house, lest thou be a curled thing
às it is: but vtterly deficit and abhorre it, for it is a tursed thing.

ther thon wouldest kepe his commaunmeutes, 62 no. Exodx ii
3 He humbled there, and sufkred ther to dans hunger, x fed thee with Mauna, Which neither thou nor thy fathers kneweo am to make thee knolbe that a man dot) not line by bread onlpe: but by euery worde that protceedeth out of the mouth of the Lorde doth a man liue. .
4. Thy rapment wared not olde bee Date the, neither dyd thy foote well thele sco konrtie peres. va thyitte
5 This also shalt thou confider in du 5 heart: that as a man chalet,

‘ pies fonne, euen lo the Lord thy God chaste-

ee. f enberefde shalt thou kepe the commaundementes of the Lorde th 0h,

that thou walke in his Ways 8, m.
Dorthe Lowe thy God bryngeth thee
5 7 into a good lande, A lande in the whiche are riuers of water, and fountames and deapthes that spring out of valleys and

lies: '
92 lande wherin is wheate and barlie, vinepardes, fightrees, € pomgranates, a lande wherein is opie oliue and honie:
A lande wherin thou shalt cate bread without frarcenes, neither halt thou
„ laͤcke any thyng: a land whole stones g re iron, and out of whole hylles thou shalt digge brasse. jo When thou halt eaten“ therfore € filled thy selle, thou shalt blesle the Lorde thy God for the good lande whiche he hath geuen thee. N u Beware that thou forget not the
Lorde thy God that thou wouldest not kepe his tõmaundementes, his lawes, and his ordinauntes, whiche J tommaunde thee this dap:
«1, “pea, and when thou Hatt eaten and

uf

filled thy selfe, and hast built goodly -

houses and dwelt therein:

3 And when thy beastes and thy sheepe are Waren many, and thy fiver and golde is multiplied, and all that thou

Deuteronomium.

hasti — 7
14. Aven beware lest thyne © heart ryle, and thou forget the Lorde thy God,
Whiche brought thee out of the lande of

(xl.

(f) Breaafe mosperitie maketh men

gere and to get God.

Egypt, and from the house o bondage: E

1 And whiche was thy gupde in the great and terrible wyldernelle ‘abet were] kirie serpentes, storpions, and b reek aay water: Wut he

ught out water fo2 thee, eue the rocke ol flint. ‘ r

16 De fed thee in the wyldernesse with
Manna, which thy fathers kuewe not, euen for to humble thee, and to prous

thee, and that he might lo do thee good

at thy latter ende,
Lett thou shouldest fay in thine heart,

mp power and the myght ok myne

one hande hath prepared ine this a- i

boundaunce:

18 But remember the Lorde thy God, for it is he whiche geueth thee power to get substaunce, for to make good the

pronile whiche he fave vnto thy fa

thers, as appeareth this dap. and Walke after straunge gods, and

serue them, and worship them: J testilie
© vnto pou this day, that pe shal surely. ‘a

perishe. |

20 As the nations whiche the Lorde destroyed before pour face, euenso pe shall perishe, betause ye woulde not be obedient vuto the voyte of p Lord pour God.

J The ix. Chapter.

4 God doeth them not good for their owne vighteowfnelle, but £02 his owne take,
Moyses putteth them in remembraunce of their sinnes. 17 Che two tables are broken, 26 Mopses prapeth foz the people.

Eare O Iflrael, thou pallest ouer Jordane this day, to go in aud

55 and mightier then thy elfe, cities great and walled vp to heauen:
Ai people great € tall, euen the thildren
Mee Ainakims, whiche thouknowelt
155 of whom thon Hatt heard fay, who
Vl and befoze the chüdzen of nace dhelnderstande therefore this day, that
Je Lorde thy God is euen he wWhiche

we

fire, he That destro
; pthem, and he thall mes them downe before thy face —0 u shalt catte them Out, and bryng

A possesse nations great

Bort) ouer before thee as a consuningd

i Reg ii. b.
(g) Under

tompzehendeth wildome, dexteritit, diligence,and all other incanes by which inc

gt .
Ch) It att eacchly goons

uenlp,

Deut. iii. d.

(i) enonnce
02 potts.

them to naught quickly, as the Lode -

hath sayde vnto thee.

4. OMpeake notthoumthyne heart, after that the Lorde thy God hath cast them out before the, saying, for my ryghteousnessethe Lode hath bought me in, to possesse this lande: but for the wickednesse of these nations the Lord hath cast them out bekore thee.

5 It is not for thy righteousnesse fake, or fo2 thy right heart, that thou goelt to possesse their lande: But for the wit: kednelle of these nations, the Lord thy
God doth tast them out before thee, cre to perkourme the worde Whiche the
Lord thy 2 1 gy thy fathers,

ahac, and Jacob.
Abraham, J 9 ler

(c) Ft we drlerne not
Wonldiy then geg, muc iesse sptrituall thynges.

Leul xx. d.

tome onsp fro

19 And ik thou forget the Lord thy God, ©

Preceptes.

6 Understand therfore that it is not for thy righteousnes fake, that the TLorde thy God doth geue thee this good lande to possesse it, seyng thou art a © stisnecked people.

5 Remember” ¢ forget not, howe thou

prouokedst the Lode thy God in the

wildernesse, since the day that thou did-

dest depart out of the lande of Egypt,

vntyll pe came vnto this place, pe haue rebelled agaynst the Lode.

Also in Horebꝰ pe prouoked the Lord to anger, fo that the Lorde was wroth with pou euen to haue destroped pou.

9 When Y was gone vp into the mount, to reteaue the tables of stone, the tables of the touenaunt which the Lod made with you, and J abode in the mount fourtie dapes € fourtie nightes, whe 7 neither did cate bread nor Denke water.

lo And the Torde deliuered me two ta-

(t) Ig an vntractable ort

Jegyng of there tues.
„ WD Sinai. 8
XO. x vn. b. and. xxxil. c

Garne oc, bles of stone, witten with the finger ut vo che bt of God, and in them was contapned all enen, the wordes whiche the Lorde laide vnto you inthe mount out ot 5 niddes of fire, in the day when pe came together.
1 And whenthe fourtie dapes and fourtie nightes were ended, the Lorde gauc me the two tables of stone, the tables of

the touenaunt. l a. ae, And the Lod fayde vnto me: Arile, and getthee downe quickly from Hence, for thy people which thou hast brought e of Egypt, haue “marred all: They eungtg ar n: Are turned at once ont of the wape rite Depa which J tommaunded them, and haue

the y dt part diente to god. niade them amoultenimage.

3 Furthermoze, the Lorde spake vnto me, saying: J haue seene this people, and beholde it is a stifnecked people.

ches Lor 14. Let me alone, that A may destroy
0 dards them, c put out the name of them from vengeance. = Der heauen, and J wyll make of thee
à mightie nation,¢ greater then they be.

15 And J turned me, and cane downe

krom the hyll, cuen from the hyll that

burnt with fire, and the two tables of the couenannt were in my handes.

16 And J loked, and beholde ye had fine ned against the Lorde pour God, and had made you a moulten talfe, and had turned at once out of the way whiche the Lorde had commaunded pou.

17 And J toke the two tables, and cast

Ecod. zd. them out ot my two handes, and brake des w ee them before pour eyes.
S om 18 And J fell downe flat before the

Deuteronomium.

Pr ecepie

Tord euen as at the first time, c fourtie bor dayes and fourtic nightes JJ did neither 4! eate bread nO? drinke water, betause

of all pour sinnes which ve sinned in do-

yng wyckedly in the sight of the Lorde

in that ye prouoked hym vnto wrath.

19 (For I was afrapde, that for the wrath and fiertenes wherwith the Lord was moued agaynst pou, he would haue destroped you) But the Lorde heard me at that tyme also.

20 The Torde was verp angry with
Aaron also, cuen to Hane destroped ne hym: and J made interceflion foz Aa- dune ron also the same tynie. i

21 And J toke pour sinne, the calfe which ane ye had made, and burnt hym with fire, daz and stamped hym, and grounde hym

very small euen to dust: and J tast the
Due therof into the brooke that descenbed out of the ™ mount. oh

22 Allo at the burnyng plate, at the place . of temptyng, and at the sepulchres ol lust, pe prouoked the Lorde to anger.

23 Vkewile when the TLorde lent pou from Cades Warnea, saping, go vp and possesse the lande which J haue geuen pou:* vou rebelled against the worde ol the Lorde your God, and neither bele- ö ued him, nor hearkened vnto his vopte.

24. Bou haue ben rebellious vnto the
Lorde lince the day that J knewe pou.

25 And J fell downe flat before the „dan
Torde fourtie dapes c fourtie nightes, se."

as J fell Downe before: for the Lorde dae

sayde, he woulde destrop vou. ars. made intertession therfore vnto tht

Lord, and saypd: O Lod God, destroy

not thy people and thyne inberitaunte oti

whiche thou hak delluered throͤugh toy

great goodnesse, and whiche thou ha brought out of Egypt thorowe a myghtie hande. te

27 © Remember thy seruauntes, Abrä- 1 ham, Asahat, and Jacob, and looke not vnto the stubbernelse of this people, no: to their wickednesse and sinne:

28 Testthe lande whence thou broughtest them, sap, The Lorde is not able to bryng them into the land which he p20" mifed them, and because he hated them, therefore hath he caryed them out [9 flay them in the wypldernefic.

29 Beholde, they are thy people, ¢ bent inheritaunte, whiche thou brought out in thy myghtie power, and in th stretched out arme. The

Num xa

conde tables. D cuteroOnomium. ’ Cxtir *

The. x. Chapter.

e seconde tables put in the arke. 8 Che tribe of Leui is dedicate to the leruice sae tabernacle. 12 what the Lorde requireth of his. 16 Che Aan n of the heart. 17 God regardeth not the perfor, 21 The Lorde is the prapte of Ilrael.

the lame season the at that tyme allo, and the
TLorde layde vnto me: not destroy thee. —— Mould iS hewe thee two tables 1 And the Lorde sayde vnto me: Arise
5°) (Cw Of tonelpke vnto the and go koorth in the iourneys before the
22 | Je | fir, and come vp vn- people, that they may go in and polselle ge. to me into the mount, the lande whiche J ware vnto their
— and make thee an a 10 ae vnko them. rke ok wood. . 12 And no rael, what doth the Lord j nd J wyll wrpte in the tables, the thy God require of thee,* but to feare Dae wordes that were in the fir tables the Torde thy God, and to walke in all whiche thon brakest, and thou shalt put his wapes, to; lone hym, and to lerue Pei vib them inthe arke. the Told thy God with all thyne heart, Mat. ld
And J made an arke of . Sittim and with all thy soule- Iosua. xxii d wood, and hewed two tables of stone“ 1 Manielp, that thou kepe the cõmaunlpke vnto the first, and went vp into the dementes ok the Lorde, and his ordimountapne, haupyng the two tables in naunces whiche J commaunde thee myne hande. ö this day for thy wealth. ö
4. And he wrote in the tables accozding 14. Weholde, heauen and the heauen of to the first wzytyng, the ten commaun- heauens, is the Lordes thy God, and dementes whiche the Lod spake vnto the earth with all that therin is. you in the mount out of the myddes of 15 Potwithstandyng, the Lorde had a the fire, in the day when V pou were ga- delight in thy fathers to loue them, and thered together: and the Horde gaue chosle their seede after them, euen pou them vnto me. 4 * aboue all nations, as thou feet this
„ And JJ Departed, and came Downe day. from the hyll, and put the tables inthe 16 Circumtile therefore the koreskinne () Chat ix; arke Whiche J had made, and there ok pour heart, and be no moze stifnec- unn e they be, as the Lorde commaunded me. ked. ahluthed
„ Andthe chyldren of Ilrael toke their 17 For the Torde pour God, is God of ackern iourney from Beroth ofthe chyldren ot Gods, and Lode of Tordes, a great Gun n . laue Jakan to Mosera, where Aaron dy- God, à mightie and a terrible, whiche Romiid. n ed and was burped, and Eleazer his regardeth no mans perlon, noz taketh Seren sonnc became priest in his steade. rewarde. Fobe di
7 Fromthente they departed vnto Gud- 18 Pe doth right vnto the katherlesse and ivecic. godah: and from Gudgodah to Jethe- wydobe, and loueth the straunger, to bath, a lande whiche hath riuiers ol Wwa- gene hym foode and rayment.
ü. lers. * 1 Voue ye therfore the straunger also: P
The same feafon the Lorde lepera- kor pe were straungers pour selues in ted the tribe of Lem, to beare the are the lande of Egypt.
9 or the couenaunt of the Lorde, and to 20 Thou shalt keare the Lord thy God, peurvie. a stande before the Lorde, and to numister and hym onlp thait thou lerue, to hym Tab
< 110 pen. au to blesse w in his name chalt thou cleaue, and Nveare by his
„ tae ay. — name.
„ herekoze the Leutes haue no 21 Je ls thy prayse, e thy God that hath D xy part nor inheritaunte with their bre- done kor thee thele great and terrible then: but the Lome is their inhert- thinges Whiche thyne eyes haue lene. launce as the Torde thy God hath peo: 22 Thy fathers went downe into Egypt miled them. with threscore and ten perlons: and Gen xivic.
1 une taryed in the mount, euen as nowe the Lorde thy God bath made fe het time, fourtic dapes and four- thee k multiplied thee as the“ starres cw pea nyghtes: and the Lorde hearde me ok heauen. 1
P ij The

tix,
Io

al

Preceptes.

$m The, xj. Chapter.

An exhortation to loue cod and kepe his lawes. 10 The prapfes of Chanaan, 5
18 Co meditate continually the worde of God. 10 Co teache it vnto the chyldren.

25 Blelling and curling.

e | Hercfore thou shalt “

QS Se loue p Lord thy God,

e kkepe his obleruann-

ea) es, bis ordinauntes,

N Fand ck

Ema denientes alwap.

2 now pou this dap,
(fo2 J speane not to pone chyldren which haue neither knowen no; seene) the chastisement of the Lord pour God, his greatnesse, his mightie hande, and his stretched out arme, ö a

3 Mis miracles and his attes whiche he dyd inthe middes of Egypt, euen buto
Pharao the king of Egypt, and vnto all
His lande:

4 And what he dyd vnto the hoast of
Egypt, bnto their horses and charets:* howe he brought the water ok the red fea vpon them as they pursued pou be-

40 Louris 1
¢ frit popnt the true te=

pyng ot the lawe.

Exod. xiiil.f

Hinde, and how the Lord hath bzought

(b) As e

them to naught vnto this day:
5 And what he did vnto you in the wilyour eps de der nelle, vntill ye came bnto this place:
Gop 6 And what he dyd dnto* Pathan and wi Abiram the lonnes of Eliab the fonne of Ruben: Howe the earch opened her mouth and walowed them, with their housholdes e their tentes, and all their substaunce that was in their pollession, in the middes of Hitael. ;

2 7 Doubtlesse, your eyes haue seene al

the great actes of the Lorde whiche he

Dyd. 5 a
8 Therekore Mall ve kepe all the com:

maundementes Whiche Jconunaunde thee this day, that ve niãy © be trong and go in and possesse the lande whyther ye go to possesle it:

And that ye may prolong vour dapes in the lande whiche the Lode [ware vnto pour fathers, to gene vnto them and to their seede, a lande that floweth
With myplke and honte.
Deut. vu d. 10 o the lande whyther thou goestto

possesse it, is not as the lande of Egypt that ye tame out ot, where thou sowedst

(c) Dhvel in

ink indgment sgainst vou 9 fo2 pout

aeons thy leede, and“ wateredst it with thy
Sade keete, as à garden of hearbes.

deb three II But the lande Whyther ve go ouer to bast un possesse it, is a lande that Path hylles

Deuter OhnOmium.

14, J allo wyll geue rayne vnto pour

Pr

ecept

and valleys, and drinketh water of the rayne ofheauen.

12 This lande doth the Lorde thy God care for, and the eyes of the Lorde th
God are alwapes bpor it, from the be: ginning ofthe pere, vnto the ende okthe

pere.

3 It pon Mall hearken therefore onto my tonunaundementes which J com: ae, maunde vou this day, that pe loue the ee
Torde pour God, and serue hym with 2 all pour heart, and with all pour soule: ware

lande in dus sealon the“ firg rapne and C,. the latter, that thou mapest gather in an thy corne, thy wine, and thyne oyle.

15 And J will sende grasse in thy fieldes for thy cattel, that thou mayest cate and

16 Wut beware that vour “ heart de- „ 5,4 ceaue vou not, and pe turne alpde, and a
{crue straunge gods, and worship them: «os:

17 And then the Lorde beyng Wroth a- wan gayntt pou, shut bp the heauen that d. there be no rayne, and that pour lande me pelde not her fruite, and lest pe perishe an quickly from of the good laude whiche the Lorde geueth pou. |

18 Therckore shall pe put bp these mp wordes in your heart € in pour soule,

and binde them kor a ligne vpon pour hande, that they may be as a frontlet betweene pour eyes,

19 And pe shall *teache them pour chyldren, that they may talke ofthem when thou sittest in thyne houle, and when thou walkest by the way, when thou lyest dowue, and when thou rilest vp.

20 Bea, and thou shalt wzyte them vpon the doore postes of thyne houle, and vppon thy gates:

21 That pour dayes may be multiplied, D and the dayes of pour chyldren, in the lande which the Lord lware vnto pour fathers to geue them as long as the dapes of heanen lait vpon the tarth.

22 Fdrikpe kepe all thefe connnaundementes Whiche J commaunde vou, so that ye do them: namely, that ve lolie the Lorde pour God, and Walke in all his wapes, and cleaue vnto hym:

23 Then

Deut vih

Prou. ia.

Deut. vb.

Ptou lia

eptes. Deuter OnOmlum. ations before pout, and pe shalbe the
5 ok great nations, and ok them that are nightier then pour lelues. knowen.
% 24 All the places whereon the soles of sot Login fete (hall treade, albe yours: euen from the wyldernesse, and from
Libanon, and frõ the rer Euphrates, euen vnto the vttermost fea fhal™ your

dast be. a :
> There shall no man be able to stande
4 pheclore vou:for the Lord pour God (halt cast che feare and dread of you vpon all the lande that ye Chall treade vpon, as

coinmmaunde pou this dap, to go after

Hath brought thee into the lande Why-

put the bblessing vpon mount Gari

and the curfe vpon mount Ebal. .
30 Are not thefe mountapnes on the o-

ther fide Jordane, on that part of the

the lande of the Chanaanites, whihe
Dibeilin the playne duer against Gugel

hehath layde vnto you. besyde the groue of Moreh-
« 16 Bcholde, H set bekore vou this day, a zi For ye shall passe ouer Jordane to go bieffing and a curse: m and poslesle the lande whiche the

„ j) Ablesling, tfye obay the commaundementes ofthe Lord pour God which
FJ commaunde pou this dap:

Tode pour God geueth you, and ye
(hall possesse it, and dwell therein. N
32 Lake heede therfore that pe do all the

raunge gods whiche pe haue W not
29 When the Lorde thy God therefore 5 ther thou goest to pollesle it, thou (halt "

23 Anda curse, tf pe wyll not obay the commaundemeutes of the Torde pour

commaundementes and lawes whiche
Pet belore you this day. *

The. xij. Chapter.

Co destroy the idolatrous places. J. 8. Co serue God where he commaundeth. and as he commaundeth, and not as men kantasie. 19 Che Leuites mutt be nourished.
31 Jdolaters burnt their chyldren to their gods. 32 To adde nothing to Gods word,

liue vponthe e

ii, 2 He shall destroy all places wherin the

nations whiche ye shall possesse serued their gods, vpon hye mountapnes, on hylles, and vnder every greene tree.
3. Pon shall ouerthrowe their aulters, d breake their pülers, and burne their groues with fire, and vou Mall hewe

th
Bade

lt

that they haue, and bryng the names of
1 et Veer 10 ph ye
0 not do fo b
5 at Cob: nto the Lope
: Sut pe shall seeke the place which the
Lode pour God shall choose out of all
1 ea tribes, to put his name there, and unk me and thyther thou halt
And thyther ve thal bryng pour burnt
Harries, pour offeringes, your tithes, aud heaue offeringes of pour hande,

dolbne the grauen images of the gods

and the first borne of your kyne, and of pour sheepe.

7 And there pe shall cate © before the

Powe pour God, and pe chall reioyce in all that pe put your bande vnto, both ye and pour housholdes, wherin the Low thy God hath blessed Hee. 8

8 Be shall not do after alt © the thinges

that we do here this day, euery man

What seemeth hym good in his owne

eyes.

9 For pe are not pet cone to rest, and to

the inheritaunte whiche the Lord pour
God geueth vou.

1o Wut when pe go over Jordane, and

dwell in the lande whithe the TLorde pour God hath) geuen pou to inherite, and when he hath geuen pon rest from al pour enemies rounde about, and (hal d well in safetie:

i Then vnto the place which the Lord

pour God hath chofen to pnt his name

there, pe shall bryng all that J com-

maunde vou: namely, pour burnt fa-

tvifices, pour offeringes, pour tithes,

the heaue offering of your hande, aud all pour spetial võwes whiche pe owe vnto the Lode,

bur vowes, pour kreewyll offeringes, 12 And pe (hall h ee the * g 1}

Then Wyll the Loyd cast out al these Sod, but turne out of the Wap whiche E 8

way where the sunne goeth downe. in

) Inthe ace Where the at ae is. 4

88 Uů

thalncuerthelesse thes shuld se rue hym per more purelp in the tano of ana.

Preceptes.

your God, ye and pour sonnes, and pour daughters, pour seruauntes, and your mapdens, and the Lenite that is within pour gates, foralmuche as he
Hal) no part nor inheritaũce with pou.

Take heede that thou offer not thy burnt offeringes in euerp place that thou feel: f 8

Wut iu the place which the Lord shall
Schoole in one of thy tribes, there thou

Deut & b.

and. xvlii. a.

C 4

This was not acconplishes, tyll the
Scinple was
Hui uuntount
Dion.

5 thee.

and eate fleshe in all ih cities, whatloeuer thy soule lusteth a

(b'ctozuvmg

to the abilitic

chat he hath

beende. Whlche he hath genen thee: both the vncleaue and the cleane map eate thernl euen of the Roe bucke, and of the

art, 4

16 Only pe shall not © cate the blood, but poze it vpon the earth as water. '

17 Thon mapest not cate within thy gates the tithe of thy corne, ol thy wine,

Ct) This pros htdition was made, that in;᷑ night learne

to apbozre crucltic. 0

and of thy ople, and the first borne of thy

kine, and of thy sheepe, neither any of thy vowes which thon vowest, nor thy freewill offeringes, 02 heaue offering of thyne hande: a

18 Wut thou must cate them before the

Howe thy God in the plate Wiehe the

Lowe thy God hath chofen, thou and

thy sonne e thy daughter, thy seruaunt,

and thy mayde, and the Lenite that is

Within thy gates: and thou shalt reioyte

before the Lorde thy God, in all that thou puttest thyne hande to.

Io Beware that thou forlake not the Teuite, as long as thou liuest vpon the earth.

20 If when the Lode thy God Mal enlarge thy vorder as he Hath promiled thee, chou lay, I will cate flesh ( betaule thy soule longeth to eate fleshe) thou

Ecclc. vii. a.

mapelt cate fleshe whatsoeuer thy soule

lusteth. N

If the plate whiche the Lorde thy
God hath chofen to put his name there, be to karre fronithee, then thou shalt kil of thy oren and of thy cheepe which the
Lord gath geuen thee, as Bs haue contr maunded thee, and thou fhalt eate in

D 2!

Deuteronomium.

(halt offer thy burnt offeringes, and there thou shalt do al that J cõmaunde

Notwithstanding, thou mapest kyll

er, Vaccordyng to the blessing of the Torde thy God,

and come bnto the place whiche the an

Precene thyne owne citte whatsoeuer thy fp lusteth. N

22 And as the Roe bucke and the Hart is eaten, euen so thou shalt eate them: both the cleane and the vncleane thay eate of them.

23 But be strong, that thou eate not theo blood: foz the blood is the life, and thou fre, mayest not cate the life With the fleche. doe

24. Thou shalt not eate it, but porye it vpon the earth as Water. |

25 Thou shalt not cate tt, that it may go | well with thee, and with thy chyldren | whiche is ryght in the fight of the J
Lorde. 0 |

26 But thy holy Athynges whiche thou g cin, batt, and thy owes, thou halt take, S

Deu: xrg

after thee: But thou (halt do that

Lowe hath chosen.

27 And thou shalt offer thy burnt offe: ringes, both fleshe and blood vpon the aulter of the Lorde thy God: and the blood of thyne offeringes shalbe pow-

red out ppon the aulter of the Lord thy
God, and thou shalt cate the fleshe.

28 Take heede, e heart all thefe wordes ¢ which J commaunde thee, that it may go well with thee, and with thy chyl-
Deen after thee for euer, if thou doest that whiche is good and ryght in the light of the Lorde thy God. i

29 WMhenthe Tord thy God shall destroy the nations before thee whpther thou

gboest to possesse them, and thou fuccee-

dest in their mmheritaunte, and dwellelt in their lande: 30

30 Beware that thou be not taken in v een snare after them, after that they be de- fpste | stroped before thee, and that thou afte not after their gods, saping: Howe do thele nations serue their gods: J Wyll do fo like wise.

31 Nap, thou shalt not do fo vnto the
Lorde thy God: for all abhonunations, and that whiche the Lorde hateth, ihe same haue they done vnto their gods.

32 Jor they haue ™ burned both their fonnes and their daughters with fire bekore their gods. Therefore whatloeuer Ntommaunde vou, take heede de wus, do it? and put thou naught therto, nor >... take ought therckrom.

Deu xx

ghee wa thie promoter of ol gg dt . bann anttttd © tu

oftue
Deut
Tofu ptou

The

tome it.

bill.

tof yn,

dt be:
Hy

The. xiij. Chapter,

The inticers to idolatrie mull be slapne,seeme they neuer to holy, to ne is or frendchip. 12 Or great in multitude or power, N

vou a prophete or a

dreamer of dreames,

and geue thee a ligne, or a wonder.

2 And that ligne o2
— wonder whiche he

path sayde come to passe, and then fay:
Let vs v go after straunge gods ( which thou hast not knowen) and let vs serue them: N
99 not thou vnto the wordes of that prophete 02 dreamer of dreames:
Forthe Lorde thy God proueth vou, to knowe whether pe loue the Lorde pour God with all pour heart and with all pour soule. l

Pe shall walke after the Lorde your
God, and feare him, kepe his tommaundementes, and hearken vnto his voyce, vou shall serue hym e cleaue vnto hym.

5 And that prophete oz dreamer of dreames shal die becanfe he hath spoken to turne pou away from the Lode pour God whiche brought pou out of the laude ol Egypt, and delinered pou outof the houle of bondage, to thrust thee out the way which the Lorde thy
God commaunded thee to walke in) and therefore thou shalt put the euyll away from thee.

6 Ike thy brother, the sonne ok thy mother, or thine owne sonne, or thy daͤughter, or the wyke that lieth in thy bosome, or thy frende whiche is as thyne owne soule vnto thee, entice thee setretelp, laping: Let vs go and serue straunge gods (Which thou hast not knowen, nor

5 petthp fathers)

Audthey be any ofthe gods of the peo-

ple whiche are rounde about pon: whether they be nye vnto thee or farre of fro
Chee, fromthe one ende ok the earth vnto the other:
Thou shalt not tonlent vnto hym nor
Dearken vnto hym, thyne epe thalt not pitle hom, neither thale thou haue cont: pallion on hym, nor kepe hym fecrete:

F there arple among 9

But caule him to be dayne: Thie hande shalbe first vpon hin to kill 12 and then the handes okall the people.
10 And thou shalt stone hym with ones

that he dye: betause he hath gone about to thrust thee away from the Lo thy
God, whiche brought thee out of the lande of Egypt, and fromthe house of bondage. ,

u And all Israel halt heare and feare,

Deu. xvũ b.
(D) Thou

0 „ fhalt east the kirst de dem.

and shall do no more any suche wicked-

nesse, as this is among pou.

12 If thou shalt heave lay in one of thy cities, whiche the Lorde thy God hath geuen thee to dwell in,

3 That certaie men beyng the chudren of Belial, are gone out frd among vou, and haue moued the inhabiters of their titie, saying:let vs go and serue straunge gods, Whiche pe haue not knowen:

14. Then thou must eeke,¢ make searche and enquire diligently: And behold, if it

be true x the thing ok a suretie. that luch abomination is wrought among pou:

15 Then thou shalt smpte the dwellers of that citie with the edge of the [worde, and destroy it btterlp, c all that is therin, and euen the very tattell therok, with the edge ol the lworde:

16 And gather all the spoyle of it into the middes of the streate therof, and burne with fire both the titie and all the spoyle therol euery whyt kor the Lorde thy
God: and it shalbe an heape fo euer,

and shall not be buplt agapne.

17 And ehere shal cleaue naught ol the!

Danined thyng in thyne hande, that the
Torde map turne from the fiercenefle of his wrath, and shew thee mercy, and

haue compaffion on thee, and multiplie

‘thee, as he bath lworne vnto thy fa-

thers,

13 Therekore shalt thou hearken vnto the voyte ofthe Lorde thy God, to kepe all his commaundementes whiche J

C

(e Inthe honour of Hod, shewyng that

(t) Then
(halt saue no art of that

bpopte.

Exod. xix. a

tommaunde thee this day, that thou do

that whiche is ryght in the eyes of the
Torde thy God.

p fi The

Leait x.

Deut. vi

Leuit.d. 2. 3

(b) Hrrebp

was figured

Of meates,

straunger, katherlesse. and wydowe.
CS ECEare the childrẽ of the f, Low pour God:* He ni] Mati not cut pour selues, nor make pou an
N baldnes betwene pour
S Depes for ö dead man.
* For thou art an holye people vnto the Lorde thy God and the Lorde hath chofen thee to be a leue-
Vail people vnto hym elfe, aboue all the

nations that are vpon the earth.

Thou Mhait* cate no maner of abhomination, |
4. These are the beastes which ye hail

b.

J.

a pute Late ok, Oren, Sheepe, and Goates:

@ spiritua urene sse.

Leuit. xi. b.

5 Boe, Wucke, and Bugle, wilde Goate,
Unicorne, wylde Oren and Camoile,

6 And all beastes that cleaue the hoofe, and cleaueth the tlikt into two clawes, and chewethe tud, them pe shall cate.

7 Neuerthelesle, these pe shall not eate
Of them that chewe cud e of them that deuide and cleaue the Hoofe only, the
Camel, the Hare, and the Conie:for they chewethe cud, but deuide not the hooke: therkore they are vncleane vnto pou.

8 And allo the Swine, though he de-

uide the hoofe, pet he cheweth not cud,

therefore is he vncleane vnto pou: ve shall not eate of the fleshe of suche, noz touche the dead tarkasse of them.

Thele pe shall cate ot all that are in the waters: All that haue finnes and scales shall pe cate:

10 And whatsoeuer hath not finnes and stales, of that ye map not cate, but it is vncleane vnto pou.

1 Dall cleane byrdes ye shall cate.

12 But thele are they of whiche pe shall not cate: the Egle, the Goshauke, and

- the Olprap.

13 The Glede, the Rite, and the Uulture after their kinde.

14. And all kinde of Nauens.

is The Estritch, the Pighterowe, the
Cockowe, and the Sparowehauke af ter their kinde.

16 The litle Owle, the great Owle, nor the Kedshanke.

17 The pellicane, the Swanne, nor the
Cormorant. 1

18 The Storke, the Peron in his kinde, the Lapwing, the Wacke.

Deuteronomium.
The. xiiij. Chapter.

Che maners of the gentiles in marking them selues fog the dead, may not be folowed.
4 What meates are cleaneto be eaten, and what not.

21. Be shall eate of nothyng that dyeth

Of mes,

29 Che tithes oz the Leuites,

19 And let euery creeping thing that fleyin vncleane vnto you, and not be eaenok. .
20 But of all tleane foules pe may eate.

alone: Wut thou Malt geue it vnto the D straunger that is in thy citie, that he cate it, or thou mapest fell it vnto a straunger: For thou art an Holy people Or. vnto the Lome thy God. Thou chalt w noted seethe a kid in his mothers mike. Et

22 Thou shalt tythe all the increase of kan thy seede, that the fielde batngeth forth 00 pere by pere. i

23 And thou (halt cate before the Lorde thy God, in the plate whiche he hath daa chosen & where he bath put his name, the tithe of thy come, and of thy wine, and of thyne oyle, and the first borne of thy kine, and of thy sheepe: that thou mapest learne to feare the Lorde thy

24 Ifthe way be to long for thee so that Dau thou art not able to carie it, and tf the place be farre from thee, whiche the
Lorde thy God hath cholen to let his name there, and the Lode thy God
Hath blessed thee:

25 Then halt thou make it in money, „on ad take the monep in thine hande, » and go vnto the place which the Lorde thy God shall cote, N

26 And thou shalt bestowe that money for whatsoeuer thy soule lusteth after, for oxen and sheepe, wine and {trong
Danke and for whatsoeuer thy soule desireth: and thou chalt eate there before the Lorde thy God, and be merit, both thou and thou houlholde. 1

27 And the Leute that is within thy be gates, halt thou not fozsake for he hath, neither part nor inheritaunte with ther.

28 At the ende of three peres thou fhalt bryng foorth all the tythes ok thyne en treale the sanie pere, and lay it bp within thyne owne gates. 1

29 And the Lenite whiche hath no part or nor inheritaunte With thee, hal tome, eee

and the straunger, the fatherlesle, k the sco

widowe Whiche are within thy gates

chall cate and be filled, that che 3.070%

thy God may blesse thee in al pworke

of thyne bande whiche thou doest. The

cui

be offered vnto the Lorde.

T the terme of seuen

A peres, thou shalt make
äafreedome.

And this is the maner of the freedome:
Who so euer“ lendeth et ought with) bis nee
51 his neighbour, may not alke aa gapne (Dat me) he hath lent) of his

neighbour or of his bother, becaule it ts called the Lordes free peres
; pet of a straunger thou mayst call it

„ home agapne: but he that is thy bro-

her, hym dhall thine bande rennt.

at 4 Heuerthelesse, there shalbe no begger

„ among pon: foz the Lorde hall blesse

% thee inthe lande which the Torde thy
God geueth thee for an inheritaunte:

So that thon hearken buto the voyte of the Lord thy God, to obserue and do

all thele commaundementes which J

commaunde thee this day:

6 FJor the Lorde thy God hath blessed thee, as he hath promiled thee, and thou Malt lende vnto manp nations, but thou thy selfe shalt not borowe: And thou shalt raigne ouer manp nations, and they shall not raigne ouer thee.

„ 7 If one of thy“ brethren among voube

5 pooze within any of thy gates in thy

lande which the Lorde thy God geueth thee:thou shalt not Harden thine heart, no shut to thine bande ftom thy poore brother:
8 But thou shalt open thine hande vnto hym, and lende Hymn lulkicient for his

neede which he hath.
“9 Welbare that there be not a wicked thought in thine heart, that thou wouldeft fay, the seuenth vere, the pere of frerdome is at hande: and therfore it greeueth thee to loke on thy poore brother, and genet hym naught, and he then trye vnto the Lode agaynst thee, and it be sinne vntothee:

lo Thou shalt geue hyn, and let it not
Stecue thine heart to geue vnto hym: a that for this thyng the Lorde
‘ie Sait blesse thee in all thy

KES; and i chmne handed. n all that thou putte

elt uu:

N18 b.

1 ig
Jam

. thes ¢ — poozezand therkoze J cömaunde thee,

The lande chan neuer be without

Deuteronomium. m

The. xv. Chapter.

Che pere ol releassyng ol debtes. 5 God blelleth them that kepe his commaunde l
„Co helpe the poore. 1: Che kreedome ol leruauntes. Che kirst borne of the gateklmui

laying, Thou shalt open thine hande

onto thy brother that is needy ¢ pooze

in ene |

12 If thy brother an Hebrne fer hym elfe to thee, or an Hebrue woman, and lerue thee fire peres, in the lenenth pere thou chalt let hym go free from ther.

13 And when thou sendest hym out free from thee, thou shalt not let hym go away emptie:

14. But (halt geue hym ok thy cheepe, ol 8 Ae thy torne, and of thy wine, and geuc Fan e

kites receaued by hig labour.

hym of that wherwith the Lorde thy
God hath blessed ther.

15 And reniember that thou Wat a seruaunt in the lande ol Egypt, and the
Lorde thy God deliuered thee thence: and therfore J tommaunde thee this thyng to day.

16 And if he sap vnto ther, J wpll not Exodxxda

go away from thee: becaute he loueth thee and thine boule, and is well at ease with thee :

iy Then shalt thou take an aule, & naple

his care to the doore therwith, and let hym be thy seruaunt foz euer: And vnto

{by mapde seruaunt thou chalt do like:

ile.

18 And let it not greeue thine eye, when thou lettest him go out free frõ thee, fo:

he bath ben worth a double Hired seruaunt to thee in his seruite fire peres:
And the Lord thy God shall blesse thee in all that thou doest.

19 All the first males that come o thy cattell and of thy sheepe, thou thalt halowe vnto the Lorde thy God: Thou shalt do no worke with the first borne bullocke, noz sheare the first gendred of thy sheepe.

20 Thou Mhait eate it before the Horde thy od pere by pere, in the piace which
42 een choofe, both thou and

phouthotde. |

21 Il there be any blemtthe therin: asi D it be lame, or blynde, or haue any other n er it vnto the Lorde thy God:

22 But shalt cate it within thine owne gates, the vncleane and cleane person
{hal eate it altke, as the Noe cthe Hart.

23 Onlp eate not the blood therok: but pore it bpon the grounde as a

Leu. xxvi. f.

Leu. xxvii. d

IDE Faster, tonpbitfontioe, yand the feat of tabernacles. is what officers

realt dayes. Deuteronomium.
The. xvj. Chapter. ought to be ordepned 21 ye korbidden.

1 Blserue the moneth

rs of newe torne, that n thou mapest offer the em Passouer vnto p̃ Lod bed. 3 thy God: For in the

' moneth when come begynneth to rype, the
\ 5 brought thee out of

Egypt by nyght.
2 Thou shalt therfore offer the Passo-

uer vnto the Lode thy God (of sheepe and orem) in the place which the Lorde chall choose to put his name there.

3 Thon shalt cate no leauened bread
With it: but scuen dayes shalt thou cate vnleauened bread therwith, euen the

out of the lande of Egypt in haste) that thou mapest remember the day when
| thou canieft out ot the lande of Egypt,
| all the dayes of thy lyle. ;

4. [ And there shalde no leauened bread seene in al thy toastes seuen dayes long, neither (hall there remayne any bett of the fleche which thou offerest the fir dap at euen vntyll the mornyng. ‘Ny

5 Thou mapest not offer the Passouer

thy God geueth thee :

6 But in the place which the Lorde thy
God shal choose to {et his name in, there thou shalt offer the Pallouer at enen, about the goyng downe ok the sunne, euen in the season that thou canes ont of Egypt.

7 And thou shalt roste and eate it in the place which the Lome thy God hath cholen, and thou Katt returne on the morowe, and go vnto thy tentes.

3 Sire dapes thou halt cate sweete bread, and the seuenth day shalbe a lolenipne asseniblie befoze the Lorde thy

God: thou shalt do no worke therin.

„ K „ W „ „ „ „ „% „„ „ „ &

0 Hunting? Seuen Weekes Chait thon number

from the nent ¢

ber ole a, vnto thee, and begynnt to number the

d e scuen werkes, when thou begynnest to

put the sitle to the cone:

Altes ia. 10 Alid kept the fcast of weekes vnto the
Torde thy God, with a free wyll offeryngokthine hande, which thou shalt deut vnto the Lord thy God, according dàs the Low thy God hath blessed thee.
I And thou Malt reiopte before the Lord

bread of tribulation (for thou tamest

Within any of thy gates which p Lorde © the feast of weekes, and in the featt of:

a.

Feat day

a anenan

thy God, thou, and thy tonne, thy. daughter, thy seruaunt, and thy mapde ’ ethe Leuite that is within thy gates’. and the straunger, the fatherlesse, and the widdowe that are among You, in the place which the Lorde thy God. hath chosen, to put his name there. i And remember that thou watt a seruaunt in Egypt: and thou hate oblerue. and do these ordinauntes. l
3 Thou shalt also obserne the © frag o- Oe tabernatles seuen dapes after that thon el halt gathered m thy tone k thy wine,
14 And thou shalt reiopte in thy feat, .¢ thou and thy tonne, thy daughter, thy: seruaunt, and thy mapde, the Tenite, the straunger, and the fatherlesle, z the. widdowe, that are within thy gates.
15 Seuen dapes {hale thou kepe a fo: geg lempne feat vnto thy Lorde thy God, in y place which the Lorde Hall choole: for the Lord thy God thal blesse thee in.

All thy kruites, x in all p workes of thine. handes, therfore shalt thou be glad.
16 Threc tymes inthe pere shall all thy Ease

males appeare before the Lorde thy.
God, in the plate which he shall choole:.
In the keast ol vmleauened bread, in wee

tabernatles: And they shal not appeave ‘6 wi before the H ode © emptie. lta

17 Euery man Hall geuc™ accozdyng to e the 955 of his hande, x actordyng to the e bleslyng of the Lorde thy God which he hath geuen ther. N

18 Judges and officers shalt thou make hee in all thy cities which the Lorde

hy God geueth thee throughout thy tribes, and they shall iudge the people
With iust iudgement.

19 Weft not thou the lawe, nor knowbe r. any person, neither take any rewarde: for giftes do blinde the eyes ofthe wile, c peruert the wordes of therighttous,

20 That which is tut and ryght thal

Ee xt

thou folowe, that thou mayst iyuc, aud

entop the lande which the Horde tho e

God geueth thee. ath
21 © Thou shalt plant no groue of an a

trees neare vnto the auiter of the Kd 4

thy God, which thou shalt make pr. 1
22 Zhou chalt {et thee pp no puler; 48

Which the Lorde thy God hateth. Tf a

Deuteronomium:

ples.

J The. xvij. Chapter.

The punichment ok the idolater. Harde controuerties are brought tot and eheiudge. 1 The contempner mule dpe. 1s Che election of the N
16 17 What thynges he ought to auoyde. 18 And what he ought to imbrace.

at 8 N the Lorde thy God no ra = oxe nor sheepe'wherin

% is vlenushe or any
„ 8 i cuyll fauourednesle:
“a for that is an abhonnnation vnto the Lorde

thy God. hte hd i
Ifthere be founde among you within

* sight of the Lorde thy God, in transgressyng his tonuenaunt:
And gone and serued straunge gods,

„ald worshipped them, as the sunne or

moone, or any of the hoast of heauen,
* which J haue not tommaunded:

4 And it is tolde thee, thou hast hearde bb it, then Halt thou enquire diligently:

and ik it be true, ethe thyng of a suretie

15 Me abhomination is wrought in rael: ö

5 Then halt thou bryng koorth that

man or that woman (Which haue conv

mitted that wicked thyng) vnto the gates, and shalt stone them with stones

tyll they dye.

ni 6 Al the mouth of two 02 three wit-

nefles shall he that is worthy of death,

dye: and at the mouth of one witnesse,

let no man dpe.

te The handes of the witnelles shalbe

flirst vpon hint, to kyll him, e after ward
0 the handes © of all the people:and thou halt put the wicked away from thee.

8 If there rile a matter to harde for. b ‘ee in tudgement betweene © blood

and blood, betweene plea and plea, be-

CWeene plague and plague, and the

matters tome to strife within thy gates:

1 5 pi ‘bo 51 „and get thee vp
Ue plate whiche the Lorde t

God hath cholen, , : ~ 2

wa „And comte vnto the priestes the Le-

Sa Altes, and vnto e the indge that shalbe
N:

on 7 Mole dayes, and alke: and they tall
0 Aue the sentente ol indgement.

. Whit thou mutt do accordyng to that

4 a they of that plate (Which the

ae had cholen ) chewe thee, and thou

halt obserue to do accordyng to all that

hon thalt offer vnto

any ok thy gates Which the Lorde thy
„God geneth thee, man oz: woman
% that bath wrought wickednesse in the

ther N — .

It Accordyng to the sentente of the lawe

which they tell thee, chalt Bon do: 00) hatede

N not — eit Which they g ewe thee, neither to the right Fenn nor to the left. ann

12 And that man that wyll do presunp- ; tuoufly, and wyll not bearken puto des berge“

the priest (that standeth there before the an trounce:
Torde thy God to minister) oz vnto the weber. iudge: that man shall dye, and thou
(halt put away cuil from Jsrael.

13 And all the people (hail heare, x feare, and (hall do no moze presumptuoullp.

14. When thon art come vnto the lande
Which the Lorde thy God geueth thee, and eniopest it, and dwellest therin, and ik thou shalt say, I wyll set a king over ness. me, lpke as all the nations that are about me: 8

15 Then thou shalt make hym king ouer thee whom the Lode thy God thall choose: Euen one from among thy brethren shalt thou make kyng oner thee, and thou mapest not let a straunger ouer thee, which is not of thy brethren.

16 „Bult he shall not nuultiplie horses to hym selfe, nor bryng the people agayne „ ess, to Egypt to intrease the number of dane horses: fozasmuch as the Lorde Hath a ban vr fayde vnto pou, ve shall hentefoorth go hen. no more agayne that way.

17 Also he ought not to multiplie wyues to hum selfe, lest his heart turne awap, neither Mall he gather hym filuer and golde to much. |

18 And when he is set vpon the seate of his kingdome, he shall Waite hym out a kopie of this ™ lawe in a booke before the priestes the Teuites: 9

10 And it shalbe with hym, and he ought to reade therin all the dayes of his like, i, that he may learne to feare the Lorde his God, and to kepe all the wordes of this lawe and these ordinaunces, for to do tem:

20 And that his heart arise not about his brethren, and that he turne not from the tommaundement to the right hand or to the left: but that he may prolong his dayes in his kyngdoine he and his chüdren in the middes ol Ilrael.

Reg. 4. d.

sie

QC) Feom the lawes of God.

(m) That is,
Deuteromtü.

1¢

Preceptes.

Bl

Che postion of the Leuites. « OF che Leuite commyng from another place. 9 Co auopde the abhominatton of the Gentiles, 15 Ged wyil not leaue them without
à true prophete. 20 Che talse prophete shalbe slapne. 22 Bowe he map be knowen.

al bt priestes of the Le-

| ay Muttes, & all the tribe of

Nu xe. 95 Leut, * matt haue no

„ * b 72 part norinherttaunte

* with Jfrael: but (halt

„„ cate ö fierte offeringes

| — of the Lorde, and his inheritaunte.

900 yt tight duldet.

Num in. b.

(c) To serue
God with a good Wypll

) Wespdrs
1 u
45 thers goodes, th shall lpue o

Lcuites do.

ie) whihe

sought the gopng betwertne iwo flerg to be a liyndt of yutrip ng.

2 Therkore shall they haue no inhe-

ritaunce among their brethren: but the
Horde he is their inheritaunte, as he hath sayde vnto them. .
And the priestes duetie of the people, and ok them that offer, whether it be

Ww

oxe or cheepe, they must gene vnto the

prick the shoulder, ethe two chekes, and the mawe. a „

The first fruites also of thy torne,
Wine, and oyle, and the first of the fleete of thy sheepe shalt thou geue hym.

5 or the Lorde thy God hath chosen

hym out of all thy tribes, to stande and

to minister in the name of the Lorde, he

and his sonnes for euer.

6 Ika Leuite come out of any of thy cities of all Israel, where he is à soiour-

ner, and come “© with all the lust of his

heart vnto the place which the Lode hath cholen:

He shall minister in the name of the
Wolde his God, as his other brethzen the Leuites do which remayne there before the Lorde.

8 And they (halt haue tyke portions to eate, befide™ that which commeth of the sale of his patrimonte.

9 When thou art come into the lande which the Lorde thy God geueth thee, thou shalt not learne to do after the abbournations of thofe nations.

io Let there not be founde among you any one that maketh his sonne o2 his daughter to go though the fire, o2 that vleth witchtratt, or a regarder of
E or that regardeth the fleeyng of

wles, N u On a sorterer, or a charmer, or that

f D cureronomum.

Precente

coficelietl with {pirites, oz a soothsaper, or that asketh counsaple of the dead.

12 For all that do such thynges, are abhomination vnto the Lorde: and becanfe of these abhommations, the Lorde thy
God doth cast them out before chee,

z Thon halt be perfect therfore inthe © a fight of the Lorde thy God. eon

14 For thele nations which thou shalt E* possesse, hearken vnto regarders of tymes, and vnto sorterers:but the Lo thy God hath not suffered thee so to do.

15 The Torde thy God wyll“ stirre vp vnto thee a prophete among pou, euen 4 of thy brethren like vnto me, vnto hym ve (hall hearken,

16 Attordyng to all that thou desiredst of the Lozde thy God in Horeb in the day of the assembite, when thou fapoett:
Tet me heare the voyte ol my Lorde bade
God no more, nor see this great fire any more, that I dye not. ;

17 And the Lorde sayde vnto me: They haue weil spoken.

18 J wyll raise them vp a prophete from among their brethzen tyke vnto thee, and wyll put my wordes in his mouth, and he shall speake vnto them all that
FJ that tommaunde hym.

19 And whosoeuer wyll not hearken bir to my wordes, which he (hail speake in my name, J wyll require it of hym. be

20 But the prophete which shall presume fi: to speake a worde in my name, which
IJhaue not cõmaunded hy to speake,

02 that speaketh in the name of straũge gods, the fame prophete shall dye.

21 And if thou fay in thine heart: hole chall we knowe the worde which the
Borde hath not spoken- 8

22 Euen Whena prophete speaketh in the

name of the Lord, the thing kolowe a an

not. nor tome to pasle: that is the thyng sanz

which the Lone 15 not spoken, but dan a

Nauurvih

D

the prophete hath spoken it prelünp- row tuously: Thou fhait not therfore be afrapde of hym.

The

zurther.

Deuteronomium.

The. xix. Chapter.

2 Che franchised townes. 14 Not to remoue thy neighbours bondeg. eae punichment of hym that beareth talfe witnelle. 5

hen the Lord thy God hath rooted ont the nations whole lande

ritaunte, and dwellest in their cities and in their houles: |

Ei” seeinthe middes of the kande which

ve Lorde thy God geueth thee to pol sesse it:
„ Thou shalt W prepare the wap, and
. deuide the toastes of thy lande Which the Lorde thy God geueth tice to in-
„ herite, into three partes, that * wholo-
Heuer committer) murther, map flee
„ OPEL.

4 Foz this tause mult the slayer fice thyther, that he may lyue: Who so kylleth his neighbour ignorauntly, and hated hym not in tyme passedz:

And Whe aman goeth vnto the wood with his neighbour to hewe wood, and as his hande fetcheth a stroke with the axe to tut downe the tree, the head slippeth from the helue, and finyteth his neighbour that he dyeth: the fae thall flee vnto one of the fame cities, and lyue: .

s Lett the auenger of the blood folowe alter the slayer whyle his heart is hot, ct onlertaune hym becanle the wapes is

nm long, and slay hym, and pet there is no s (aue c worthy of death in hym, in as pft he hated hym not in tyme

7 Wherkore J tommaunde thee, saping: ue chalt appoynt out three cities for

8 And if the Lorde thy God © enlarge thycoastes (as he hath sworne vnto thy fathers) and geue thee all the lande which he sayde he woulde geue vnto

thy fathers:

9 Thou shalt kepe all these tommaundementes to do them, which J cons
Maunde thee this dap, that thou loue the Lowe thy God, and Walke in his

Thou halt W seperate three cities for

wapes euer: and adde three cities for thee beside thefe cher, 3

10 That innotent blood be not shed in thy lande, Which the Tord thy God geueth thee to inherite, and fo viood come bpon thee.

u But and tf any man hate his neyghbour, and lay awayte for hym, and rpfe agaynst hym, and lupte hyin that he die, e then flecth vnto any of thele tines:

12 The elders of his citie Mati sende and fetch hym thence, and deliner hym into the handes of the auenger of bios, that he may dye.

13 Thine eye shall not {are hym, but thou shalt © put away (the crxe 07) in-

notent blood from Ilrael, that it map on

go well with thee.

14 Thou shalt not remoue th neyghbours™ marke, which they of olde tinic haue {etn thine inveritaunce that thou

~ {halt inherite in the lande which the !

Borde thy God geueth thee to eniop tt.
15 One witnesse Hail not rit agapnst a man for any maner trespasse, or for any

maner sinne, oz fo2 any maner kauit

( Xlx.

f) That the cen of the partic Mapne,

he not unputed vnto thee.

(8) The offia ters 02 ma-
Gtaratcg.

Ch) wplfun

murdet can

not be pared With-

J

out Gods hygh dilplea-
Cure’

(i) Beuenge the innocent blood.

k) Deere: one or landeunde: The verp Paning did indge this ta bt a gteat of

Num 35d.

that he offendethin: but at the month 1.

of two witunesses or of theee witnesses

shall the matter be stablished.

Susa. i. z.
16 * He afalle witnelle vite vp agaynsta

mãn, to actuse hyn of trelpatie:

17 Then both the men which stryue together, shall stande “ before the Lorde, before the priestes and the iudges which fhalbe in those dapes:

18 And the indges shall make diligent

inquisition:and if the witnesse be founde

falle, and that he eer genen kalse witnesse agaynst his brother:

1 Then (hall xe do vnto hym as he had thought to do vnto his brother, € thou shalt put euyll away from the middes of thee.

20 And other chall heare, and feare, and shall hentefoorth commit no moze ang such wickednesse among von..

21 And 9 15 shall Rene töpassion, but lyfe for lyfe, eve tor eve, wothe, handt for hande, foote for foote.

The

) Eod io present where his true minis sters act.

toothe for Exo xi.

Prece ptes.

Hen “thou goest out to battaple agaynst thine

a) Gauyng

ibo ö enemies, x seest horles,
0 A andcharettes, and peo-

n 45 ple, mo then thou, be

Deut.id. not akrapde of them: for the Lorde thy God

is with thee, which brought dee out ol

the lande ol Egypt.

2 And when ve are come nye vnto bat-

taple, ᷣ priest {hall come foorth to speake vnto the people,

3 And shall lay vnto them: Heare O
PHlrael, you are tome this day vnto battaple agapnst pour enemies, let not pour heartes faynt, neither feare, nor be amazed, nor a dread of them:

4. Forthe Lod pour God goeth with vou, to fyght for vou agaynst pour enemies, and to saue pou,

5 And let the officers speake vnto the people, saping: If any man haue built
à newe Houle, and © haue not dedicate it: let hym go and returne to his house, lest he dye in the battayle, and another man dedicate it.

6 And ik any man haue planted a vinevarde, and haue not made it cõmon: let hym go and returne agapne vnto his
Houle, lett he dye in the battayle, and

another make it common.
W 7 And if any man be betrouthed vnto a

Deutag a-. Wye, and haue not taken her: let hym

go and returne agayne vnto his houle, lest he dye in the battayle, and another man take her.

3 And let the officers speake further vnto the people, and fay: Il any man feare and be faynt Hearted, let hym go
F returne vnto his houle, lest he make his bothers heart faynt as well as his.

9 And whenthe officers haue made an ende of speakyng vnto the people, they fhall make captapnes of the armie to gouerne the people.

Io Mhen thou commett nye bnto a titie to kyght agaynst it, offer them peace.

1 And ik they aunlwere thee agayne

Num. xz. b

(b) Sodg
Stace and pawer ig euer xedp to helpe
Pou.

(e) When any toke possession

Iudi. vil. a.

Deut il. c.
(d) Set aloroc thp offer ol peace.

Deuteronomium.

Ther, Chapter.

Che exhortation of the priest when the Atraelites go to battaple. 5 Che erhortation of the office she wyng who Mould go to battayle. 10 Peace mult Fir be proclapmed.
19 The trees that beare fruite mult not be destroped. :

1 rec Pe

peaceably, and open bnto thee, thenlet all the people that is founde therin, be tributaries vnto thee, and serue thee: 0.

12 And if they wyll mate no peace Wilh n thec, but make warre agapnst thee. a thou shalt besiege it. nhalt de

13 And when the Logde thy God hath deliuered it into thine handes, thoy shalt simyte all the males therok with the edge of the lworde:

14 But the women, and the chüdren, and C the cattell, and all that is in the citie and * all the spoyle therof shalt thou take vnto thy selfe, and eate the spoyle of thine enemies, which the Lorde thy God hath geuen thee. N

15 Thus shalt thou do vnto all the tities which are a great way of from thee, ,, 1 which ave not ok the cities of © thele cron nations.

16 But ok the cities of these nations
Which the Lode thy God shall geue thee to inherite, thou shalt saue alyue nothyng that breatheth:

17 But shalt destroy them without re: Dens demption, namely the Hethites, the
Amorites, the Chanaanites, the Pherezites, the Peuttes, and the Jebulites, as the Lode thy God hath commaunded thee:

18 That they teache pou not to do alter all their abbominations which they haue done vnto their Gods, and fo ye al finne agaynst the Lorde pout

od.

1 When thou hast besieged acitie long tymie, and made warre agaynst it to take it, destroy not the trees therok, that thou Wouldest thjnist an are bite them: but eate of them, and cut them not downe to further the in thy siege: xg forthe tree of the fielde wis mans ut 1 5

20 Pulp those trees which thou knowl” 4 to be W pnkruitfull, those shalt thou 1 ian ftroy t cut downe, and make buon c agapnst the citie that maketh ware dea
With thee, vntyll thou subdue it. ae

cof
Tatil put nt eg

The wf

gat

not hang all nyght.

A one be founde slayne
RES in the lande which the
Lo thy God geueth sthee to possesse it, and lpeth in the fielde, and it is not knowen who hath slayne hym:
2 Then thine elders and thy tudges hat come foozth, and mealure vnto the cities that are rounde about hyn that

is flapne: pe
Aud let the elders of that titie which is

next vnto the slayne man, take out of

the droue an heyffer that hath not ben put to labour, nor bath dralwen in the

poke;

4 And let the elders of that cite being the ie hepller bntoa © Hardee rough valley
„ Which is neither eared nozfolven, and rt 5 the heysters necke there in the mes And the priestes the formes of Leut mx (whom the Loyd thy God hath chofen tominifter, and to™ blesse in the name

of the Lorde) Chall tome foorth: and by their worde shall all rife and plague be trped.

6 And all the elders of the titie that come foorth to the slayne man, fhall
Wache their handes ouer the heyffer that is beheaded in the vallep,

3 7, And Matt aunlwere, and lay: Dur handes haue not hed this blood, net ther haue our eyes leene it.

pi 8 WemerafullA owe vnto thy people
1 Ilracl Which thou halt deliuered, and lay no innocent blood vnto thy people

of Ilraeis charge. And the blood chal-

. be forgeuen them. ne 9 eae fo shalt thou put®imnocent blood tram thee, when thou chalt haue done

that which ; b
Lor hich is ryght in the syght of the

lo When thou goest to warre agaynst

5 Gi enemies, and the Lorde Dp

at . od hath deuuered them into thine

} gee thou hast taken thé captine;

10 1 seest among the taptiues a beaufice Woman, and halt a defire vnto
15 hat thou wouldest haue her to thy

R thot
‘ De og

. pe

U

Deuteronomium.
¢ The .xxj. Chapter.

nquilition fox murther. 11 Ot the woman taken in warre. 15 Che em not be chaunged fo? affection. 18 Che dilobedient chive, „he birthright

z The body map

12 Thou shalt bryng her home to thine
Houle, and she shall © i her 0 and {hall pare her naples,

z And put her raymient that che was d. taken in, from her, and let her remayne toe ge wee in thine boule, and © beweepe her ka- rot Sz ther cher mother a moneth long: and 2225 vnn after that chalt thou go in vnto her and token mary her, and fhe chalbe thy wyfe,

14. And if thou haue no fauour vnto her, ane then let her go Whither Nhe lusteth, and daher ne sell her not for money, nor make mar- 3 thaundtze of her, becaule thou halt
© hunibled her. th

I5 If a man haue two wpues, one bee “Sr ocene loued, and another hated, and thephaue Gur: borne hym children, both the loued and re also the hated: Il the first borne be the sonne of the bated:

16 Then when the tyme tommeth that he dealeth his goodes among his children, he map not make the sonne of the beloued first borne, before the sonne
85 the hated, which is in deede the first

dane:

17 But he hall knowe the sonne of the hated for the first borne, and geue hym dowble postion of all that he hath:
For he is the first or his strength, and a
55 hym belongeth the ryght ofthe first e

orne.

18 If any man haue a sonne that is stubbürne and difobedient, that he wyll not hearken vnto the vopte ok his father and voyte of his mother, and they haue chastened hym, and he woulde not hearken vnto them:

19 Then shall his kather and his mother take hyn, and bryng hym out vnto the

elders ok that citic, and vnto the gate e okthat same plate, 6

20 And sap vnto the elders of the citit:
This our forme is stubburne and dilobedient, and wyll not hearken vnto dur voyte, he is a rioter € à drunkarde.

21 And dw all the men of that atic Hatt ftone hym with stones vnto death: And thou {halt put cupll away front thee, and all Ilrael chall heare, and feare.

22 If aman haue tomnutted a trespasle a
Worthy of death, and is put to death a

(e) This de
? Ss thet 5

a Oz as long og the sonne of the hated doth ipue.

Cf) His part shalbe as great as two of the

age.
Exod. xxl. b.

Cin) This deelar eth the greatnes of the offence :
For blasphemern ond tos

death then

pes.

00 get lt, nd thou hangest hym ww on tree.

eames 23 Zis body (hall not remayne all nyght vpon the tree, but thou (halt bury bpm the fame day, fo2 the turse of God is

The. xxij. Chapter.

1 He cõmaundeth to haue care of our neighbours qoodes, Che woman may not weare mans apparell, nor the man the womans. 6 DE the damme e her poung birdes. d why they shoulde haue battlementes. > Mot to mixe diuers kindes tor gether. 3 Ok the wife not being kounde a virgin. 22 The punichmẽt of adulterie.

Hou shalt not {ce thy
Abrothers ore or sheepe

(a) Thai io, not to be soplipng to heipe tn epme ntedt.

(d) Chatltie mult be shewed to thp brothee aswell faret absent, as present.

In lpke maner thalt thou do with his alle, and so shalt thou do with his rapment: and with all lost thynges of

thy brother, which he hath lost and thou hast found, halt thou do likewile,

aud thou mapest not hide it fronithem.
4 Thou shalt not fee thy brothers asse or oxe fall downe by the wap, and withdrare thy selfe from them: but shalt helpe hym to heaue them vp againe.
The woman chall not“ weare that
Whiche parteyneth vnto the man, nei-

Exod, 23. a.

(e) This sbe- 5 cc th, that o-

Rent in natu-

10 wee ther shall a man put on Womans ray-

of persons. ment: For all that do so, are abhomination vnto the Lode thy God.

W 6 If thouchaunce vpon a birdes nett by the Way, in whatsoeuer tree it be, or on the grounde, whether they be poung or egaes, and the damme sittyng vpon the

0 Stan- YOUNG, 02 on the egges: thou™ shalt

deren: not take the damme with the young:

mbes, mute 7 Wlit shalt in any wyse let the damme

ero G0) go, €fatic the young to thee, that thou

bmohim ele. ma pest polper, and prolong thy dapes.

3 When thon bupldest a newe houle,

thou shalt make a battlement on the

roofe, that thou lade not blood vpon

thyne boule if any man fal from thence,

Leitxixd 9 Thon shalt not sowe thy vine parde

Omang With ( diuers seedes: ick the fruite of

pee the leede which thou Halt Cowen, and ung un n the krnite of thy vine yarde, be dekyled.

entre e 10 Thou (halt not plowe with an ore

Deuteronomium.

and 00 :

on hym that is banged: Defite not thou thy lande which the Lorde thy God geueth thee to inherite. 5

and an Wasse together. d

11 Thou shalt not Weare a garment made of Wool © and linnen together.

12 Thou shalt not make thee gardes vp: pon the foure quarters of thy pesture « wherewith thou couerest thy lelfe. 5

3 Ika mantake a wyfe, and when he bath lyen with her, hate her, alt

14 And lay shamefull thynges onto her charge, and bryng bp an cuyll name ¢ vpon her, and lap, J toke this wyke, and when J tame to her J founde her not a mayde: 5

15 Then shall the father ofthe damsell e the mother, bryng foorth the tokens of the daniels birginitie vnto the els ders ol the titie in the gate,

16 And the damlels father shall lay vnto the elders: J gaue mp daughter vnto this man to Wyte, and he hateth her,

17 Aud lo, he lapeth shamekull thpnges vnto her charge, saping, J founde not thy daughter a maͤyde: and pet thele are the tokens of my daughters virginitie. And they shall lpreade the vesture befoze the elders of the citie.

18 And the elders of that atic shall take that man, and chastise hym, f

1 And mcarse hym in an hundred ficles of syluer, and gene them vnto the © fa ther of the daͤmsell, becaule he Hath) wa brought vp an euyl name vpon a maypde fu ee of Ilrael: And fhe shalbe his wyfe, and he may not put her away all his dayes.

20 But and pf the thyng be ok a suretie that the damsell be not founde a virgin:

21 They shall bryng the danifelito the 5 doore of her fathers honse, and the men of that citie Hall stone her with (ones to death, becaule fhe hath wrought folly

m Ilcael to play the whore in her fa thers houle: And fo thou Chait put cur) from among you,

22 If a man be founde lying with a woman that hath a wedded hulband, ther shall both dye, both the man Lead

) aye
©) al the terör

Leuitxx?

e pies

the wyfe, and allo the wyfe: and fo
11 chalt ont awap enill from Jsrael. ka mapde be betrouthed vnto an bul

fell, because she cryed not eng

el in the fielde, and forte her, and lye

her, shall dye alone.
46 Bit puto the damsell thou shalt do no

22 2 „5

U vurstyng, o2 bath his

shal come into the ton-

avant And abaftarde Mail va not come into the congregation ofthe Lorde: no not in the tenth generation he Chall not enter into i the congregation of the Lozde. )

ck a

i ve not tome into the congregation of his the Lobe, no not in the tenth generation, nor they Hall neuer come into the kongregation of the Lode: 1
% + Wecault they met pon not with bead

out of Egypt, and becaufe they hyreda-

u. Dalnst the? Walaam the sonne of Weor

che Lodthy God turned the turse to a blesling vnto thee, betaule the Lordthy
God loued thee, i 4
Thou shalt not seeke their peaceunoe
„ Wealth all thy dayes,for cuer. a 7 Thou shalt not abhorre an © Edoite, for he is thy brother neither shalt

N thofe

leur to
Bb,

(ou wast a straunger in his lande. he chüdren that are begotten of thé,
4 Labonte to the * congregation of the eo: = AOD inthe thirde generation.

Makin u OF

Deuteronomrium.

bath?

One that is hurt by prinie niembers cut ol,

i igregation™ of b Lord.
„ The Anunomtes and the Moabites

n, and water in the wap, when pe tame ihre, f Mesopotamia, to curse

5 Heuerthezelle, the Lorde thy God woulde not hearken vnto Balaam:but

Hou aphorre an Egyptian, becäule

harme, betause there is in the Daniell no tause of death: oras sherman ryleth agantt his neyghbour and slapeth hynt:euen fo is this matter.

27 Fo2 he found her in the fieldes: and the betrouthed damsell crped, € there was no man to succour her.

28 Ifa man finde a mapde that is not

and lpe with

9 When thou goest out with the hoatt

against thyne enenues, kepe thee from all wickednellc.

Io If there be among you any man that is vncleane, by the reafon ok vncleannesse that chaunceth bym by npght: let him go out ot the hoast, and not come in agayne into the hoast.

I But at euen let hym wache hym selfe with water: and then when the sunne is downe, let hym tone into the hoast agapne.

1 Thou halt haue a place aifo without the hoast, whyther thou shalt relort to.

8 Cg. |

(k) Mofinne
Woozthp of
Death.
() The maya
1S no moze

thy of bioine, then be that is asfanitcd and
Murdrcd bp

an other, is gyltie ofthat murder.

Exo. xXil. c.

Leu. x vill. a.

13 And thou shalt haue a paddle staffe

vpon thy Weapon: and when thou wilt cafe thy lelfe, digge ther with, and turne and touer that Which is departed from

et. 1
4 Lorde thy God walketh in the middes ol thyne hoast, to ryd thee, and to {ct thyne enennes before thee:
Therkore shall the plate of thyne hoast be pure, that he see do vneltane thyng in thee, and lo turne him lelke from thee.

Thou shalt not deliner vnto his mar fer, W the seruaunt whiche is estaped from his maister vnto thee.

16, He challdibell with cherfenemamoug . pon, in what place he hym felfe Iketh 3

belt, in one of thy cities Where it is good

for hyin, aud thou shalt not vere hein.
17 There shalbe no whore of the daugh-

ters of Hvac une Whore keper ol the

Tonnes of Ysrael.

Tonnes of J 2 18 Thon

(4) To geuc thee pictozp

against enemleg.

650 Te speaheth this of theaining,

to the truereugion.

ihne

Preceptes

18 Thou shalt neither bryng the hyre of
& whore, nor the pryte of a dogge into

(8) God wyn not be serucd

with de the honse ok the Lorde thy God, in any ner gti maner of vowe:for cut both of themare

abhomination vnto the Lord thy God.
Exo xd 1 Thou shalt not hurt thy brother by

Leut ct psurie ot money, nor hy vsurie of cone, nor by vlurie of any thyng that he may be hurt withall.

ge Were 20 Unto Wa straunger thou mapestlend

Berne che byon vlurie, but not vnto thy brother:

focwists «= that the Tord thy God may blesse thee

teur ame. in all that thou lettest thyne hande to a im lande whyther thou goest to pol elle it.

go we bote 21 When thou hast bowed a vowe vn-

wehen we bon to the Howe thy God, thou halt not

flacke to pay it: or the Lorde thy God

agreablt to bis
Worde.

The. xxiiij. Chapter.
PDeluorcement is permitted. 5 He that is newly marped, is exempted from warre.

6 Ok the pledge. 14 wages must not be retapned. 16 The good mul not be puniched sor the bad. 17 The care ot the straunger, katherlelle, and wydowe.

\)
N

Hen aman bath taken

i à wife and mariedher,

N. if fhe finde no fanour

1 in his eyes, because he

hs Hath spyed fome vn-

YA cleannestu Per: “then

let hym Weapte her a

byll of deuortement, and put it in her hande, and sende her out of his houte:

2 And when she is departed out of his

houle, let her go aud be another mans

Wpfe.
3 And it the seconde hulbande hate her, let him write her allo a letter of denortement, and put it in her hande, and lende her out of his house: Or if the seconde man dye whiche toke her to wpfe,

Her first man whiche sent her awap, map uot take her agayne to be his wyfe after that she is defiled : For that is abhonination in the fight of the Lorde, and w thou shalt not caufe the lande to sinne, whiche the Lode thy God shall geue thee to inherite.

When a man taketh a newe wpfe, he chall not go a Warfare, neither chalbe charged With any businesse: but chalbe free at home one pere, and reiopte with his \oyfe whiche he Hath taken.

No man shall take the neather or the vpper myistone to pledge: for then he chall hurt a mans life.

5 If any man be founde stealing any of his brethren the chyldren of Ylrael, and

b Thon Hate not defple the lande by

thy (pnne.

Deu. xx v. b 5

Exc. xx. d. 8
9 Ander cle he com-

and toolcg with whtche
2 man getteth his lpupng.
O. x xi. b.

Deuteronomium.

and A

wyll sureip require it ołthee, and it thay; be sinne in thee.

22 If thou shalt leaue vowyng, it chalbe no finne in thee.

23 But that whiche is once gone out of thylippes, thou must kepe and do, ac: ® 3), coidyng as thou Hatt bowed vnto the wes:
Lorde thy God ofa freewyll, and as thou hast spoken with thy mouth.

24. When thou commest into thy neigh: bours vineyarde, thou niapest cate gra: pes thy belly ful at thine owne pleasure: but thou (halt put none in thy vessell.

25 Euen so, when thou tommest into thy neighbours corne, thou mapest plucke zun the cares with thyne hande: but thou shalt not moue a sickle vnto thy neyghbours torne.

abuseth hym, or selleth hym: the thiele shall dye, and thou (halt put erull away from the middest of thee. 2

8 Take heede to thy lelfe as concerning the plague of leprosie, that thou obferuc diligently, and pe chall do according to all that the priestes the Leuites shall teache pou: euen as J commaunded them, so pe shall obserue to do.

9 Remember what the Lorde thy God dyd buto* Miriam by the wap, after Nun that ve were come out of Egypt.

10 When thou doest lend thy brother anp „ thing, thou; (halt not go into bis boule ti to fetche a pledge from thence: og

u But (halt stande without, and the da man that borowed it of thee, chall bang w the pledge out ol the doores vnto thee.

H Furtherniore tf it be a poore body, thon
{halt not sleepe with his pledge:

13 Wut Deliver bym the pledge agapue when the sunne goeth downe, that he map sicepe in his owne raiment, x blesse

tice: And it chalbe © righteonulnes bute f. thee before the Lorde thy Lorde. pat

ponte We

14 Lhouthalenot opprefle an hyzed fer uauntthat is needie and poore, whether see he be of thy brethre, or of the straungers y= that are in thy lande within thy gates:

15 Wut shalt geue him his hyre the lame dap, i let not the sunne go Downe ther on, for he is needie, and ther with fultay’ neth his life:lest he crye agamst thee vnto the Lorde, and it be fiune vnde h ,

Leu

The fathers shall not be put to death

- weed cheldren, nor the chyldren forthe

kathers: but euer man shalbe put to

death for his olwne sinnc.

Thou shalt not peruert the ryght ol

"7 che draũger, noe of the katherlesle nor
„ dabea WwpDolbes tapmnent to pledge:

18 But remember that thou walt a ser-

5 uaunt in Egypt, and howe the Lorde

thy God deliuered thee thence: And

therfore J conmnaunde thee to do this

thyng. hen thou tuttest downe thyne har-
* cat thy eld, and halt forgot a sheafe nthe kielde, thou chalt not go agapne to setit: But it shalbe for the straunger,

pit

Deuteronomium.

the fatherlesse, and the wpdowe: tha the Lorde thy God map blesse thee in all the Workes of thyne hande.

20 When thou beatest done thine oliue

tree, thou shalt not search ß boughe agapne, to gather vp that then 1 nt behinde thee: but it chalbe for the straũger the fatherlesse, and the wpdowe.
21 When thou gatherestthe grapes of thy vineparde, thou (halt not gather the
1 195 arty after oe eit leaue them raunger, the kather the wydowe. 1 ; * =
22 And remeinber that thou alfo watt a seruaunt in che lande ol Egypt: ether: fore J cOmaunive thee to do this thing.

J The. xxv. Chapter.

Che beatyng ol the olenders. 5 Co raple vp seede to the kinteman. 1 In w ¢ cate a womans bande mutt be cut ot. j Ol iust waightes and mealures. 1 coor

ftrop the Jmalekites,

A there be strife be-

tweene men, they shall come vnto the lawe,
(land let the Judges geue sentente betwene them: and iustifie the
— righteous, c tondemne the vngodly. ö
2 And ik any man be bngodly, and worthy of strypes, then let the Judge caule
0 10 to lye downe and to be beaten” bex fore his fate, attordyng to his trespalle, bnto a certayvne number.
3 Fourtie stripes he shall gene hym, and not passe: let il he shoulde exceede, and beate hym abdue that wich man stripes, thy brother should appeare delplled and vile before thyne epes.
„ + Thou shalt not moosell the ore that
0 treadeth out the torne.

Ik brethren dwell together, and one of them dye, and haue no chylde, the
0 lyfe of the dead shall not marry withdul Dito a straunger: but his kinlman
« ball go in vnto her, k take her to wife, ald oceupie the rcowme ok his kinsiman.

And the eldest sonne whiche the bea-
00 Chall fueceede in the name of his deuter whiche is dead, that his name
87 Aud bert out of Ilrael. ae. nd tithe man wyll not take his kink
E oman, then let her go vp to the gate te klagte elders, and fay: My kinlinan krkfuleth to stirre © vp vnto his bro-

ther a name in Pract, neither wyll he marry me. ö

8 Then the elders of his atic chall call

“ Oz. gatherest oie 0 oliues.

O, grapes of the wyne.

hym, and tommune with hyn::and ik he

stande and fay, de her:

9 Then hail his kinlwoman come bnto hym in the presence of the elders, and loose his Roe of his foote, and spit in his face, and aunswere, and lap: So hal

it be done vnto that man, that doth not

Opuylde vp his brothers honse.

lo And his name shalbe called in Plract;

the vnchodhouse.

1 It“ when men strine together one with another, the wife ofthe one drawe neare for to ryd her hulbande out of the handes of hym that smyteth hym, and put foorth her hande and take hym by the fecretes:

12 Thou shalt tut of her hande, and let not thyne eye pitie her.

Bu Thou shalt not haue in thy bagge* rn of wayghtes, a great anda mall:

14. Neither shalt thou haue in thine house
Diners measures, a great and a small.

15 But thou shalt haue a right and iust waight, anda perfect and a iust measuͤre halt thou haue: that thy dapes may be lengthed in the lande which the
Borde tyy God geueth thee.

16 For all that do {uch thynges, and all that do buvigbt, 5 anon

e Lorde thy God. 11
* 5 1 8 ij 4 17 Bemenrber

(D) That fo not beget a childe to beare his kintinans name.

(e) his: din unce declareth, that vnshamckaltnesse utd woman is hozeible, and therlore worthe of
{harpe pts © nisyment.

Leui. xix. g.
Mich. vi. c.

C

Preceptes

to thee bythe way, when ye were come out of Egypt.

18 Dowe he met thee by the way, and

Exod. xiii. c. 2 and 3 Ac.
Prouer. il. b

(a) To be called vpon ¢@ wor hipped.

(mote the hyndmost of pou, all that were feeble and came behynde, when thou wast faynted and weerie, and he feared not God. e

he. vj. Chapter.

Hen thou art come intothe lande which the
Lord thy God geueth

dh A hast enioped it, x dwel-
5 ins left therin: |

Lake of the first of all the fruite of the earth, and bryng it out of the lande that the Lode thy God geueth thee, and put it in a baltet, and go vnto the place whiche the Lorde thy God shall chose tofet his name in it.

And thou shalt come vnto the priest that shalbe in those dayes, and lay vnto hym: J knowledge this day vnto the owe thy God, that J am come vnto the countrep whiche the Lorde [ware vnto our fathers for to geue vs.

4 And the priest shall take the basket out

Cb) Mearung
Jacob, revo
Was sctuaunt

Exod. iii. b.

of thyne hande, and let it downe before the aulter of the Lorde thy God.

And thou (ait aunlwere and fap before the Lorde thy God: The Syrians went about to destrop mp father, and he went downe into Egypt, and io loiourned there with a fewe folke, and grewe there ato a nation great, nigh:

tie, and full of people.

6 And the Egyptians bered vs, and

troubled vs, and laded vs with moft truel bondage. N

And when we tryed vnto the Lorde
God ol our fathers, the Lorde hearde dur vopte, and loked on our aduerlitte, labour, and oppression.

Exeo xi e. 8 Andthe Lode brought vs out ot E-

gypt, in a mightie hand, and a stretched out arme, and in great terriblenesse, and signes, and wonders. f

9 And he hath brought vs into this place,

To ace knowolcdge gods benefite

ni

in chen che lande 10 of Chanaan.

and hath geuen vs this lande that floweth with mylke and hony.
And © nowe lo, J haue brought the

VDeuteronomium.
17 Remember What Amalech dyd vn-

Hi thee to inherite, and

- and},
19 Therfkore when the Lome th bath geuen thee ret from all chen ; mies rounde about, in the lande hich the Lord thy God geueth thee to inhe:
‘vite and poffeffe: see that thou put out che vemembeaunce of Amalech from © vnder heauen, and forget not. i bee

first fruites of the lande whiche

O Todd hak geuenme: And thon et it before the Lorde thy God, and
Worthip before the Lorde thy God,

1 And reiopte in all the good thynges whiche the Lorde thy God hath geuen vnto thee and vnto thyne Houle, thoy and the Leute, and the straunger that it among vou.

n When thou hast made an ende of tt thing all the tithes othyne entreale the thirde pere, which is the yere of tithing: thou shalt geue it vnto 1 Teuite, the straunger, the fatherleffe, and the wydowe, that they map cate Within thy
Hates, and fill them selues:

3 „And thou chalt lap before the Nom ag thy God: J haue broughit the halowed pi thinges out of thine houle, and haue ge- oe uen them vnto the Teuite, the straunger, the fatherlesse, and the wydowe,
Atctording to all thy tommaundementes whiche thou hak tommaunded me: J haue not transgressed thy tommaunde-

mentes, nor forgotten them. C

14; Jhaue not eaten therok in my mont © » nyng, nor suffred oughtto perishe tho- a rowe vnclennesse, nor geuenoughtther-

ol for the dead: but haue hearkened vn-

to the vopte of the Lorde mp God, and haue done after all that thon Hatt conv pon maunded me.

15 *Loke downe therkore from thy holy ga habitation, euen from heauen and blesse thy people Ilrael, and the lande which thou hast geuen vs, as thou swarest viv to our fatherssa land that floweth with mylke and honpe. a

16 This day the Tord thy God hath 5 9985 maͤunded thee to do thefe ordinaunct i

and lawes: kepe thou them, e do them, 17
“with all thine heart and all thy donn, far

7. Thu haft fer® vp the L ozo this daß vs

fallt ge

dobethy God eto wallscin bis Wayes,

maundementes, and his lawes, aud to hearken vnto his vopee. >.

And the Lorde hath set the bp this

; dap, to be a feucrall™ people puto hym,

* a he hath promiled the, and that thon

and to kepe his ordinaunces, his con 19 And to m

kepe his commiaundententes: nd to make thee bye abone all nati: dns whithe he hath made, in prapse, in ane e e map-

Oty people vuto the Lord thy lere n b.
God, as he hath apde. ) bp B

The. xxvij Chapter.

2 They are commanded to wepte the la we vpon stone for a remembraunce. 5 Alco

to bupide an aulter. 12 Che blellinges are geuen on mount Ganzim.

linges are genen on mount Ebal.

ö 5

= IJ connaunde you this day in niount ut

plaster. mon 5 And there shalt thou buylde nto the

Tode thy God * an aulter of stones,

And lift vp no iron vpon them. a 6 „ Thou shalt make the aulter of the
“ Logde thy God of whole stones, and offer burnt olferinges thereon vnto the
Lane thy God. i

7 And thou shalt offer peace offeringes,

„ and shalt cate there, and reiopee “before

sm „ the Lorde thy God.

3 And thou hale wryte vpon the stones an We Woes of thts lawe, manikestly

And Doyles and the priestes the Le-
Ales spake vnto all Ilrael, faying:
Lake heede and hearẽ O Israel, this bay thou art become the people of the

dethy God.

lo brhon {halt hearken therfore vnto the
8 . ok the Lorde thy God, and do his tes imaundementes, and his ordinaunes which Jtommaunde theethis dap.

13 The cur.

n And Moyses charged the peo lame dab fa n e wwe a
12. hele (hail Lande vpon mount Ga- pb riʒim fo” blesse the people, when ye are a e ie ouer Jozdane, Simeon, Leut, soe
Juda, Alachar,Joleph x Wenlannn. bes wil z And thele (hall stande vpon mount E

bal tocurfe, Nuben, Gad, Aler, Za- Stang bulon, Dan, Pephthali. haute eaute d

keare God fog his vengedunce, ik they woulde not

14. And the Leuites (hall aunfivere and fay vnto all the men of Ilrael with a loude voyte: i e

15 Curled be the nan that maketh any "od x tarued or moulten image, au abhomination vnto the Lorde, the worke of the handes of the craftesman, and putteth it in a secrete place: and all the people
{hall aunswere and fay, Amen.

16 Curled be he that turleth his father Exo. xxi. b. and his mother: aͤnd all the people shall
Tap, Amen.

17 Cursed be he that remoueth his D. neighbours marke: and all the people
(hall fay, Amen.

18 *Curled be he that maketh the blynde Leu xi to go out of his Way: and all the people shall fay, Amen.

1 Curled be he that hindreth the ryght peo eme of the straunger, fatherlesse and Wid- beer dowe: k all the people shall say, Amen. ae

20 Curled be he that lyeth with his fae den l thers wyfe, and bnhealeth his fathers eer

töuering: and all the people shall fay,
Amen. f 1

21 Cursecd be he p lieth with any mance Leu vie. of beast:æ all the people shal lay, Ainen.

22 Cursed be he that ap With his sister, . vie the daughter ok his father, or p daugh-

ter ot his mother: and al the people Hal fay, Anien. een

23 Curled be he that lieth with his mo- Leu

ther mn lawe: and aͤl the people shall lay,

. Amen. ‘ : : (8) This ore
24. Cursed be he that smpteth his neigh- eve in pour © fecretip: and all the people (halt ofenee bs

cn. : a wi pe Ge fay, Am 2 10 25 Cursed f.

Blessinges.

Luui. xx vt a

Deut. xi. d.

a That ts, thep shalbe
Killed with che

ell.
Deut. xx. a.

(e) For he

Sod, ond chat thou art chosen people.

to flay the soule of innotent blood, and all the people shall sap, Amen.

¢ The. xxviij. Chapter.
Che promiles to them that obay the commaundementes. 15 The threats

ninges to the contrary.

J commaunde thee this dap: the Lorde wyll fet thee on
Hye abouc all nations of the earth.

2 And all thele blessinges shall tome on thee and ouertake thee, if thou shalt hearken vnto the voyce of the Lord thy

God.

3 Blessed shalt thou be in the atic, and blessed in the fielde g

4 Wlessed shalbe the fruite of thy body, and the fruite of thy ms and the fruite of thy cattell, the increase of thy kine, and the flockes of thy sheepe.

5 Blessed shalbe thy balket e thy store.

6 Wlelled halt thou be when thou goest out, e blessed when thou ™ tommest in.
7 The Todd hall geue ouer thyne enemies that ryle agaynst thee, that they map fall before thy face: They tall tome out against thee one wap, and flee before thee seuen wapes.
8 The Log chall txommaunde the biel
{ing vpon thee in thy storehoules, and in

all that thou settest thyne hande to, and

wyll blesse thee in the lande whiche the
Lorde thy God geueth thee.

9 The Lode shall make thee an holy people vnto him (elf, as he bath sworne vnto thee: if thou halt kepe the com:

maundementes of the Lode thy God,

and Walke in his wapes. lo And all nations of the earth shall {ee

that the name ofthe © Torde is called

enon duer thee, and they shalbe afraide of thee.
1 Andthe Lod Hall make thee plente-

dus ingoodes, in the fruite of thy body,

in the fruite of thy cattell, a in the fruite of thy grounde, in the lande whiche the
Lorde lware bnto thy fathers to geue

ee. . mabe Lorde chall open vnto thee his

Deu terOnOImlum.
Eren. 25, Curled be he that taketh a rewarde 26 Curled be he that continueth not in

Cu

all the wordes of this lawe

do t and all the people hall fay. Dem

men.

good treasure, O euen the heauen to 4, . gene rape vnto thy land in due feafon, ms
Eto blesse all thy labours of thy hande: 2
And thou shalt lende vnto many nan: eo ons, but shalt not borowe thy selfe. en

B And the Lorde Hall make thee chie- Dar kest, and not the lowest, and thou shalt Dean be aboue only, and not beneath: ik that

thou hearken vnto the commaundementes ofthe Lorde thy God which q tommaunde thee this dap, to kepe and to do them:

14 And {ee that thou! bow not aside from Darn any of these wordes whiche J com: dn maund thee this day, either to the right hande or to the left, that thou wouldelt go after straunge gods to serue them.

15 Wut and if thou wilt not hearken vn- paix; to the vopte of the Lorde thy God, to kepe and to do all his commaundementes and his ordinauntes whiche J cont: maunde thee this dap, all thefe curses 5 thal come vpon thee and onertake the.

16 Cursed shalt thou be in the citie, and tursed in the fielde.

17 Cursed shalbe thy balket e thy store. ¢

13° Curfed chalbe the fruite of thy body, and the fruite of thy lande, and the infred of thy kine, and the flockes of thy

19 Curled shalt thou be when thou goest in, and turled when thou goest out.

20 The Torde shal sende vpon thee cur-

sing, destruction, and rebuke in all that thou settest thine hand to and that thou doest, vntyll he destrop thee, and bryng thee to naught quickly, betaule of the
Witkednesle of thyne inuentions, and betause thou hast forsaken me. 5

21 The Torde hall make the pestilence cleaue vnto thee, vntyll he haue cont med thee from ok the lande whyther thou goest to eniop it.

22 The Lorde shall smpte thee with lwelling, with fevers, heate, burnpng, and with the fworde, with biasting and muldealve : and they chall folowe the

vntpll thou perishe.
23 And

Lau

res.

— eheauen that is oner thy head
4 5 ale walken the earth that is vnder thee iron.

The Lorde shall turne the rayne of

the lande vnto powder and Duff, euen

tom beanie Chal they come downe vpon thee butill thou be brought to naught.

2% And the Lorde hall caule thee to fall before thine enemies: Thou Chait come out one way agaynst them, and flee seuen wayes before them e chalbe {cattered among al thekungdonies ofp earth.

26 And thy carkafle shalbe meate vnto all maner foules of the ayre, and vnto the bealtes of the earth, and. no man
{hall fray them away.

27 The Lorde wyll impte thee with the

Hoch of Egypt, and the emarodes, cab, aud itche, that thou mapelt not be hea-
Icdtherof,

madnesse, and blyndnesse, and daling of heart.

29 Thou shalt grope at noone dapes as

„ the blinde gropeth in darknesle, x thal

not prosper in thy wapes: Thou shalt

a be oppresled with wong, e be poulled

„ cuerniore, no man Thal succour thee.

xic 0 Thou (halt be betrouthed vnto a

wylfe, and another nian (hail tye with

b her: Thon shalt buylde an honse, and

not dweil therein: thou (halt allo plant a bineparde, and shalt not gather the grapes.

31 Thint oxe shalbe flapne before thine eyes, and thou Malt not cate thereof:

Thyne alle halbe violently taken a: wap cuen before thy face, and {hall not be restored to thee agayne: Thy theepe shalbe geuen vnto thyne enemies, and no man thatt rescue them.

32 Thy formes and thy daughters shall be geuen vnto another nation, and thine eyes shall see it and? dase bpon them all the day long:and there chalbe no might in thyne hande.

d The krutte of thy lande and all thy la-

bours hall anation whiche thou kno-

f elt not, eate:and thou {halt continual-

1 ni violence, and be oppressed

1 that thou thait be cleane belive
DY self fox the fight of chine eyes Which

thou chalt fee,
5 The Lowe chan lmpte thee in the
8 and legges with a milcheuous teh that can not be healed, euen from

fer:

fey
Be.

Veuteronomium.

18 And the Lorde shall finpte thee with

the fole of thy fsote
‘the, yp vnto the top of thy

36 The Wop shall bryng thee and thy

kyng whiche thou shalt let ouer thee vnto a nation whiche neither one 55

thy fathers haue knowen, that there 3

thou mapestserue straunge n oe _— oO

37 And thou chalt be wondred at, fpoke ol, and iested at among al nations whyther the Lorde shall carry thee,

38 Thon shalt carry muche seede out into the kielde, and shalt gather but litle in: for the grashoppers hall destroy it.

39 Thou (halt plant a vineparde and dresse it, but shalt neither drinke of the
Wine, neither gather the grapes: for the wornies shall cate it. „

40 Thou shalt haue oliue trees throughdut al thy toastes, but (halt not annoynt

shall fall downe.

41 Thou halt beget sonnes and daughfers, but shalt not haue them: for they shalbe tarryed away captiue. N

42 All the trees and fruite of thy lande shall o wormes consume.

43 The straunger that is among you, shall elyme aboue thee vp on Dye: and thou shalt come downe beneath alowe.

44 He shall lende thee, and thou chalt not lende hin: he shalbe the head, and thou shalt be the tayie.

45 Moreouer, all these turses shall tome vpon thee, and shall folowe thee, and ouertake thee tyll thou be destroyed:betause thou hearkenedst not vnto the voyte of the Lorde thy God to kepe his commaundementes, and his ordinaunces whiche he commaunded thee.

46 And they shalbe bpon thee fozfignes and wonders e vpon thy {cede for euer.

47 Becaule thou seruedst not the Lorde thy God with ioyfulnesse, and with a good heart, when thou haddest aboundaunce of all thinges. .

48 Therkore shalt thou serue thyne encmie whiche the Lorde shall seude bpon thee, in hunger, and thirst, in nakednes, and in neede of all thyng: and he (hall put a poke of iron vpon thy accke,butyll he haue brought tice to naught.

49 And the Lorde thall bryng a nation vpon thee from a farre, and from the ende of the worlde, as fibyft as an eagle

thy selfe with the ople, for thine oliues 225

e
Cxxills.

Fhe t Le t before they be tipe,

deth oll Kinde of beemtne,
Sohiche are |
Wont to cons fume p lruites of the eaeth ·

E

0 Thon (hat be pmished aftec suche a

Gobs habe is vpon thee,

J Bhatt handle thee merueploud rigozonflp and tenellp.

bed

fleeth, a nation whole tongue thon

Malt not vnderstande:

Quiij 50 Anation

Curfinges.

50 A nation of a shamelesse and cruell, 55 “Lhe Logd wyll sende vntot

an Reg vif 53 And thdu shaͤlt cate the kruite of thine cp) eg. obne body, the flethe of thy sonnes, neden aud orthy daughters which the Tord
Gunter. thy God hath geuen thee, in that straitaue, nelle and siege, wherewith thyne enealem Benn nue shall inclose thee.
Pee 54. Sb that it Hall greene the man (that ests, s tender and exceeding Delicate among ade pon) to loke on his brother, and vpon
F his wpyfe that lieth in his bosome, and

(a She sbalbe lo dexcd with hunger, that fhe shalt thinke it long er her chylde ve bozne, that fhe might cate tt.

tountenaunte, Whiche Mail not regarde the person of the olde, nor haue compalsion on the poung:

51 The fame shall cate the fruite of thy

tattell, and the fruite okthy lande, vntill he haue destroyed thee: and shall leaue thee neither come, wyne, no? oyle, net ther the entrease of thy kine, nor the flockes of thy sheepe, vntyll he haue brought thee to naught:

52 And he Chailkepe thee in, in all the ci-

ties, vntyll he haue tast downe thy bye
Walles and trong holdes, wherin thou trustedst, throughout all the lande: And he Chall besiege thee in al thy cities thorowout all the lande whiche the Lode thy God hath geuen thee.

on the renmaunt of his chyldren which he hath pet lekt,

55 Forfeare ofgeuyng vnto any of them of the fleshe of his chyldren, whom he shall cate: betause he hath nothyng lelt

hym in that straitnesle and siege, wher-

With thine enemie shall besiege thee in all thy cities.

56 Yea, and the woman that is fo tender and delicate, that fhe dare not aduen-

ture to set the sole of her foote bpon the

grounde, for foftuctle and tenderneffc,

{halbe greeued to loke on her hulbande

that lieth in her bolome, e on her sonne, and on her daughter,

57 And on her akterbyrth that is come out from betweene her feete, and her chyldren whiche the shall beare: Foz
When all thinges lacke, che shall cate them setretly, duryng the siege € straitnesse wherewith thyne enemies Mhatl besiege thee in thy cities,

Exolavd. 58 If thou wylt not kepe and do all the

wordes of this lawe that are written in

this booke, and feare this glorious and

fearefull name, The Lorde thy God:

thy seede, great plagues, and

’ Meaning he doe
6e Porcower, he win beyng pponther au =

mot —

thee.

61 And all maner sicknesses, and all maner plagues whiche are not Written in the booke of this lawe, wyll the Lorde a thee vntyll he bryng thee to naught. .

62 And pe chalbe lefte fewe in number, where before ve were as the“ starres og, of heauen in multitude: because thoy wn wouldest not hearken vnto the voyte ol Can the TLorde thy God. |

63 And it shall come to passe, that as the 1
Lord reioyted ouer vou, to do you good, and to multiplie vou: euen so he wall re: ioyte ouer vou, to destroy you, t to bring vou to naught, and pe shalbe wasted krom of the lande whyther thou goest to enioyp it.

64 And the Lord shal scatter thee among all nations, from the one ende of the worlde vnto the other: and there thou shalt serue straunge gods, whiche thou nor thy fathers haue knowen, cuen wood and stone.

65 And among these nations thou shal finde no eale, neither hall the” fole of h ea thy foote haue rest: Wut the Lorde (hat a geue thee there an vnquiet heart, and dasing eyes, and sorowe of minde.

66 And thy life chall hang in doubt before thee, and thou shalt feare both day and nyght, and (halt haue none allt raunce ot thy lyfe, a

67 Inthe niorning thou chalt fap, would
Gdd it were nyght: And at nyght thou halt fay, would God it were mornyng, for feare of thyne heart whiche thou shalt feare, and for the fight of thyne eyes whiche thou shalt see. 5

68 Andthe Lorde (hail bryng thee into
Egppt agayne with Mippes by the «x way whiche F fayde to ther, thou halt see it no more againe: And there ve Wal m be folde vnto pour enemies for bond e men and bondwomen, and no man en
{hall bye pou. 1

The

abs.. D euteronomium. (XXV.
The. xxix. Chapter. 7 ö

2 Che people are erhorted to obserue the commaundementes. 10 The whole people from the hyest to the lo west are comprehended vnder Gods couenaunt. 19 The punichment of hym that klattereth hym telle in his wickednesle. 24 The caule of
Gods wrath agapnst his people.

Hese are the wordes ok 13 Jor to make thee a people vnto hym

11 2 the couenaunt which selke, and that he may be vnto thee a
* the Lorde commaun- God, as he hath sapde vnto thee, and as
5 e ded Doyles to male he hath woe vnto thy fathers, Abra-

5 with the chüdzen of ham, Jlahac, and Jacob.

Cw Piracl in the lande of 14 JI make not this bonde and this othe C

i Moab, belyde the ap - with von oulp: poyntment which he made with them 15 Wut both with hym that standeth

. in 5 here with vs this day before the Lorde a) socanmg

och. Sas

2 And Moyles called all Plracl,efayde — ourGod, and allo with hym that is rer bude.

a vnto thein: he haue seẽne all that the not here with vs this day.

FLeorde did before pour eyes in the lande 16 For ye knowe howe we haue dwelt in

b keEgypt, vnto Pharao and vnto all his the lande ol Egypt, and howe we came scruauntes, and vnto all his lande, through the mypddes of the nations

„%; The great temptations which thine which ye passedby-:

~ epes bane leene, thole great nuratles 17 And pe haue seene their abbominaand wonders: { tions, and their idols, Wood and fone,

we 4 And yet o the Lorde hach not geuen liluer and golde, which were among

% you an heart to perteaue, and eyes to them.

(et and cares to heare, vnto this day. 18 Test there be among vou man or wo-

% And J haue led vou fourtic peres in man, kinrede or tribe, whole heart tur-

z the wüdernesle: and pour clothes are neth away this day from the Lorde

wbt wared olde vpon you, and thy shoe our God, to go and serue the gods of

is not waxed olde vpon thy foote. these nations: and left there be among
„ 6 Ac hane eaten no d bread, nor drunke vou some o roote that beareth gall and au. Ste
„ wine o2 trong drpnke: that ye myght wornewood. stl ey
=s knowe howe that J am the Lorde 19 So that when he heareth the wordes ent is pour God. 5 ofthis othe, he blesle hym selfe in hts eee tc

And pe came vnto this plate, and heart, laing: OF Chali haue peate,

2, Flatter

Sehon the kyng of Helbon, and Dg Wyll walke in the meanpng OF myne ee the kyng of Balan tame out agaynst vs owe heart: to put the drunken to the 45 40 . bnto battayle, and we smote them, thirttic. j the thirti

And toke their lande, and gaue it foz 20 And so the Lorde wyll not consent to when due an inheritaunce vnto the Kubenites be mercifull vnto hym, but then the er han do and Gadites, and to the halfe tribe o Wrath of the Torde and his gelousie ee ites.
Manasse. schall smoke agaynst that man: and all enen.

g? Bepe therfore the wowes of this co- the turses that are written in this booke von, Uenaunt, and do them, that ve may hall lyaht vpon hym, and the Lozde
„ Duderftande all that pe ought to do. shal do dut his name from vnder Heaue, x lo he slande this day euery due of you be- 21 And the Lowe shall seperate hym vnune the w Lorde your Gad: pour cap- to eupll, out of all the tribes of Israel, tapues, vour tribes, your elders, vour attordyng vnto all the curfes of the toau Officers and all the men of Ilrael: uenaunt that are written in the booke i Pour childrẽ allo, your wines, andthe ok this lawe. 4 n traunger that is in thine hoast, from 22 So that the generatid to come of pour ce the G hewer of thy wood, onto the children that halt ryse vp after pou,
115 drawer of thy water: and the straunger that (halt come from
„ Thatthon thoutdett go to theo to- a karre lande {hall fay, when they fee z nenaunt of the Lorde thy God, and the splagues ok that lande, andthe dil evo eto his othhe which the Lorde thy God: eales wherwith the Lorde hath tmite Maketh with thee this day: tenit: .

— — — — — — —

* receptes.

brimstone and salt, and that it is neither sowen, nor beareth, nor any grasse oweth therin, lyke as in the plate ol
5 ouerthrowyng of * Sodome, Gomor,
Adama, and Zeboim, which the Lode ouerthrewe in his Wath and anger. lecc. xxii b. 24 Cuenthen hal all nations say: Wherfore bath the Lord done on this fashion vnto this lande: O hore fierse is this great wrath-
25 And men hall sap:Wetaule they haue forsaken the couenannt of the Lorde
God of their fathers, which he made with them when he brought them out of the lande ot Egypt.

Gen. xix. e.

The. xxx. Chapter.

Mercie shewed when they repent. The Lorde doth circumcise the heart.
All excuse of ignoraunce is taken away. 19 Lyfe and death is fet before them. 20 Che Lorde is their lyfe which obey hem. N

AL

Hen all these wordes
. are come vpon thee, iN the blessyng and the
Y/\ et carte whiche J haue fet before thee, thou
N halt! turne vnto thine heart, among all the nations whyther the Lorde thy God
Hath dryuen thee,
And tome agayne vnto the Lorde thy

Ca) By things png to mpnte doch hig fae uour and big displrasure.

God, and hearken vnto his voyte in all

these thynges that J commaunde thee this day, thou, and thy childzen, with all thine heart, and all thy foute:

And the Lorde thy God w wyll turne thy captiuitie and haue compaffion vpon thee, and wyll turne and fetche thee agapne from all the nations among ee the Lord thy God had scattered

oe,

4 Though thou wat tast onto the er: treme partes of heauen: euen from thence wyll the Lorde thy God gather the, and fromthente will he fetch thee:

5 And the TLorde thy God wyll bryng thee into the lande whiche thy kathers possessed, and thou shalt emoy it: And he wyll shewe thee kindnesse, and multiplie thee aboue thy fathers.

net 6 And the Torde thy God wyll © cir:

cop uber g (unitile thine heart, and the heart of thy

nGicctens. feede, that thou mapelt loue the Lorde thy God, with all thine heart, and all thy soule, that thou mapest lyue.

And the Lorde thy God wyll put all

(b) That io. 3
Wyll chaunge

his pur pose, wyll veconctle hym cite to thee.

W

Deuteronomium.
23 Howe all the lande is burnt vp with 26 Foz they went and lerued straunge

27 And the wrath o
23 And the Lorde tast them out ok their

29 Lhe secretes ok the Lorde dur God © u.

these turles vpon thine enemies and on

8 But thou shalt turne, and hearken 5

o If thou hearken only vnto the bopee

1 * Fo? the commaundement which J ro

12 Ftisnotinbeanen,that thou needest 1
(t) 8055
3 Neither is it heponde ( the sca, that fe

14 But the worde is very nye vnto thee

and laßt

gods, and worshipped thein, gods which they knewe not, and which had geuen them nothyyng, pt the Lorde wared em hot agaynst this lande, to bryng voon
8 “i the turses that ave written in this poke.

lande in anger, wrath, and great in: dignation and cat them into astraunge lande, as this dap beareth witnesse.

are opened vnto bs, and to our childzen see for euer, that we may do all the wordes 92 7 6

of this lawe. 7 iy, tc |

oe that hate thee, and that periecute
. b 8

vnto the voyte of the Lorde, and do all
His commaundementes which J conv maunde thee this dap:

(And the Lode thy God wyll make thee plenteous in al the workes of thine hande, inthe fruite of thy body, andinn the frulte of thy cattell, and in the kruite na of thy lande, for thy wealth: For the snsins
Lorde wyll turne agapne and Greiopce bev ouer theeto do thee good, as he reioy- le ced ouer thy fathers. Crm,

of the Lorde thy God, to kepe his ton maundementes and his ordinaunces which are Written in the booke of this latbe, and it thou turne vnto the Lorde thy God with all thine heart and att thy soule.)

= 5 . e 1 (e) At tõmaunde thee this day, is not hidden 9 5 frown thee, neither farre of. fo. ha

5 7 plapnr, . tõ lap: Who thall go bp fo: vs to hen, ea uen, and bryng it vnto vs, chat we mar ws heare it, and do it:

＋ ch a !
Chou shouldest fay : Dako hall 90 ONE) st che fea for vs, and bryng it vnto VS, chat en
We map heare it, and do it;

euen in thy mouth, and in we bahnt

rations.

od”

Deuteronomium. | Cxxvy. 7

that pe shall surely perithe, and that ye

that thou do it. a a h Weholde J haue fetbefore thee this dap, & lyle and good, death and enyll:
2 16 For Where as J commaunde thee tdzßis dap, to lone the Lorde thy God, to
¢ spalke in his wapes, and to kepe his commaundementes, his ordimauntes, and his lawes, (vt thou to do thou shalt lyue and multiplie, and the Lorde thy
God shall blesse thee 7 he lande whpther thou goest to poslesle it.

17 But and pf thine heart turne away, fo that thou wylt not heave, but (halt go altray and Worship straunge gods, and serue them: '

13 Jpronounte vnto pou allo this day,

J The. xxxj. Chapter. of the acer woes a kigu

2,7 Moples preparyng hym felfe to dye, appoynteth Josuah to rule the people.

hall not prolong pour dapes vpon the lande whyther thou palsest dür Wor dane to go and posselle it.

19 *Feall heauen and earth to recozde Dann this day agaynst you, that I haue set befoze pou, lyłe and death, vlẽllyng and turlyng: Therfore Wchoole lyle, that ., Chatis both thou and thy seede may tyue: ih a

20 Thaͤt thou mapest loue the Low thy See
God, and be obedient to his bopce, and fm br

tleaue vnto hym: For he is thylle, ethe een

length ofthp dapes, tha thou mapest ee sre

Dwell vpon the earth, which the Low bi ee

lware bnto thy fathers, Abraham, erer

Ilahat, and Jatob, to geue them, he,

ↄ he geueth the la we to the Leuites. that they Houtde reade it to the people.
19 God geueth them a fong as a witnesse bet wene hym and them. 2 God confirmeth Joluah. 2° dpoples heweth the that thep wyll rebell after his death.

dd Moyses went and
AVspake thefe wordes vn-

dap, and tan no more
„ go ont and in: Allo the Lode hath flapd vnto me, Zhou halt not go ouer this Jordane.
3 Lhe Lowe thy God he wyll go ouer before thee, and he wyll destrop thele
„ nations befoze thee, and thou shalt pol-
. lelle them: And Joluah he chall go before thee, as the Torde hath sayde.
4 And the Torde shall do vnto them, as a. he dyd to Sehon and Dg kynges of

the Amorites, and vnto the lande of

them whom he destroped.

me „And the Lore chall geue themouer before pour face, that pe may do vnto them actordyng vnto all the cõmaunde-

mentes which J haue chmaunded pou.

6 Plucke vp pour heartes therfoze,and.

be strong, dreade not, nor be afrayde of

dem : forthe Lorde thy God hyn selfe

1 55 go with thee, he shall not fayle
: hee nor forsake thee.

And Mopses called vnto Josuah, and

lapd vnto him in the fight of all Jlrael:

i mag arong ok good courage, for thou
Wh ehe ine the Lord hath lworne vnto their hers to geue them, and thou shalt

geue it them to inherite.

3 And the Lorde he doth go befoze thee, he shalbe with thee, he chall not kayle thee, neither forlake thee:feare not therfore, nor be distomfsyted.

9 And o Moyles wrote this lawe, and % sem deliuered it vnto the priestes the formes ane of Lew which bare the arke of the cen testament of the Lowe, and vnto all God, was not the elders of Piract. bat only ve

Io And Moyses tõmaundedthem saping: nn
Euerp “ seuenth pere, in the solempnitie wehen, of the free pere, euen in the keast of ta- anne bernatles, e

n When all Ilrael is come to appeare me before the Torde thy God in the place saree ve
Which he ath cholen: thou shalt reade ecke, this latwe before all Ilrael, that they er non; map heare it. n opbinarie ex

12 Gather the people together, men, wo- i." men, and children, and the straunger that is within thy gates, that they may heare, and learne, and feare the Lorde pour God, and kepe and oblerue all the wordes of this lawe,

3 And that their chudren which knowe
O nothyng, map heare, and learne to 9 white feare the Lorde pour God, as long AS cet ye lyue in the lande whyther ye go ouer
Jordane to possesse it.

14 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moyses: C

Weholde, thy dayes are tonie that thon mut dpe: Call Joluah therfore, and

stande pe in the tabernacie of the tongregation,

ah dying

gregand that I map geue hima charge.
Ind Mopses and Josuah went e stood

in the tabernacle of the tongregation.
15 And the Lorde appeared in the tabera natle, euen in the puler of the cloude:
Exedy, and the piller of the donde stoode oner

the doore of the tabernacle.

1é And the Torde sapde vnto Moyses:
3 Weholde, thou Malt steepe with thy fa-
N thers, and this people wyll ryse vp, and

Selen G9 a whoryng alter straunge gods of lee the lande Whyther they go, and wyll tps. f2fake mie, and breake the appoyntmẽt

which J haue made with them. 8
17 Aid then my wrath wyll Ware hot against them in that day, ec J Wil forsake

q fn them, wyll hide my fate from them,
Kemeten es nd tljey thalbe consumed, and much
God ese aduerfitie and tribulations shall come see. ppon them, so that then they wyll lay: a c Are not thele troubles tome vpon me,

because God is not with mez

18. And J alfo Wyll surely Hyde away my face in that day, for all the eupis fake
Which they hall haue wrought, in that they are turned vnto straunge gods.

19 Nowe therfore Wate ve this fong for vdu, and teache it the children of Hlrael,

and put it in their mouthes, that this

fong may be mp witnelle agaynst the children of Jlrael.

20 For I Wyll bryng them into the lande which J lware vnto their fathers, that floweth with mplke and honye: and they shall eate, and fli them selues, and
Ware fat, and turne vnto straũge gods, and lerue then, and blaspheme me, and breake my touenaunt. 0

C 21 And when nuich mischieft and tribu-

lation is come bpon them, this fong hall aunswere them as a Witnesle:
F062 it (hall not be forgotten out of the mouthes of their seede: for J knowe

0 Shu testi-
8 zo thé that ace thus pla-

gued for dca pat tyng srom inc.

q The xxxij. Chapter.

Che song of Moples concernyng Gods benelites cowarde the people. 15 And their ingratitude towarde hym. ro Hod menaceth them, 21 And Puste ol the bocat onoß the Gentiles, 4 Moyles commaundeth to teache the la

48 God korewarneth Moples ol his death.

Aare D pe w heauens, bac ZO) land I challpeake, and vnthanhfin-

let the earth heare the
5 wordes of my mouth,

My doctrine Mat drop

as doth the rapne: and

| my speache fhall flowe

as doth the deawe, as the shoure vpon

uclic of this tan lk insensible cople.

Deuteronomium.

pou this day, pe haue ben difobedient lan

writeth 1 : their imagination, which they go abo cuen nowe, before J haue brought

into the lande which Jslware.

22 Moyles therfore wrote this song the
Steal” AUD taught it the chuͤdzen of

tact.

23 And He gaue Joluah the fone of
Huna charge, and sapde: Be bolde 1 and . toe thou chalt bryng the cya: ue. deen of Pirael into che lande whijy ware vnto them: FH wil be with ther.

24 And When Moyses had made an ende of Writing the wordes ol this lawe ing

booke, bntyll he had finithen them,

Moyles commaunded the Luites,

Which bare the arke of the couenaunt of

the Lode, saping:

26 Tanke ye the booke of this lawe, and daun put it in the ® {poe ofthe arke of the to- J fe uenaunt of the Lorde pour God, thatit m, ed be there for a witnesse agaynt Wan thee. frou Gch,

27 Jo Jänowe thy rebeluon“ and thy Sr stiffe necke:whyle J am pet alpue with cans

vnto the Logde, and howe much more after my death;

28 Gather vnto me all the elders of pour d tribes, and pour offiters, that I may speake these wordes in their eares, and call heauen and earth to recorde against

em.
29 For Jam sure, that after my Diath pe will vtterlp be torrupt, and turne from the way Which J haue tommaunded pou: and tribulation wyll tome vpon pou in the latter dapes, betaust pe shall haue Wrought wickednesse in the spght of the Lorde, to prouoke hym throͤugh „e the workes of pour handes. 3
30 And Boyles fpake in the cares of all ju wh the congregation of Blract the wordes of this song, vntyll He had ended them.

we to the children.

the hearbes, and as the droppes Dp" wt the (b) grasse. f the be
3 . For J wyll publithe the name al ge

Lord lstride pe honour vnto Our yy d
4 Perfect is the worke of the mot 109 . tie“ God, for all his wapes are 8 nd 104 ment: He is a God of rue as; ke. wickednesse, righteous ante owardle ni

yfes fong. Deuter onomium. * CxxVI

37 ö Frowardlp haue they done agapnst 18 Ok od that begat 2 one hyni by their dices, not bepug his mndkull, 0 Wait kreten Gob that

45 zum . but a wicked and fro- made thee.

s Do pe sd rewardethe Lom, O foolifhe ag e e enen at fir 8

„ nation and vnwile- Is not he thy fa- sonnes “ and his daughters. 2 Gm Gd

ther that hath bought thee- Bath he 20 And he sayde: J wyit ipo ‘ my kate Gee nat made ther, and oderned hee . fromthem and Wil (ee Whattheir ende ren

Remember the dapes of the worlde albe : chat is palt, confiver the yeres of fo e in ae Ae and a
, manygenerations: Alke thy father, 21 They haue ee curnsacat lal and he Wyll chewe the, thy elders, and which is no god, and p 0 9 > 7
3 When the most hpest deuided to the = poke them with thofe whi D207 Rom, xd. nations their inheritaunce, and when eople, J opt nge eh no he W N of Adam, he foalithé nation. aie put the borders of the nations accor 22 For fire iskindicd in my wrath, and
0 zath,
8 che munber of the chüdren of n ben oh el, a lereaxxce.
9 Forthe Lordes part is his people, and cr eee e
Sand sti pation fist ine
1 unde hym in ö .
VV n. dernelle: He led hym about, he gaue rh lin f kpe. ; jan: 4 8 n As angle that stirreth vp her nest ren pd e Ws ende the teeth 1. andflitteceth ouer her poung, €fpeeae nelle of fecpensesentiebutl r deth her wynges, taketh them, and 25 Withoutforth il el
19 on her wynges: themof their cue ab wühmmthe
In The Torde alone was his kleare: : there was b Beannge god Heh Hymn. women, anthers, MES g; Hecaryed hym vp ko the hygh places men okgrap heades 9 — olthe earth, chat he myght eate the en- 26 J haue lapde wyll fi trease of the fieldes: · Aud he ked hym abrode re dee
With honpe ont ofthe rocke, and With 1 make the remembraunce ople out of the most harde ftone: or them to ceasse from among men: e Britian” mplaenttie of the enen ang Mee wuretice eepe, With kat orthe lambes, andfat chould b ptterlip wi te |
Aranünes und hee goates Wühthekat ouldc b ptterlpy withdrawe thé selues, ren ofthe nioft plente : he and lest they shoulde lay:our hye bande sto. ben ne drr he nal burt 3 fg en andere wier, Se, blood of the grape pure 28 For it is a nation voyde of counsaple, ae
,, 5 Put he that shoulde haue ben bpriaht me is there anp vnderstandyng in
„ when he wared kat, fpurned with his 27 S that they w
Hetle: Thon art well kd, thou art” Goode this, Hat th e
512 chicke, thou art euen laden cher 2 mie —_—— it att ¢ 3 g ° maker, ar Coa autre ae big 30 n, choulde one chafe a thoulande, i bisfatdation, * er nan l bebe flyght, except ye 8 olde hen, and except: Ox, delpue-
Mamgegods 3 with the Lorde had chut them vp: thm ona pouokeDthey hymn, ominati- 31° For their god is not as our God: Our eg vl.
7 Thepoffered sabe - enemies alld them selues are iudges. od: euen to gods whon e 32 Foz their bine is of the vineyarde of
5 tonewegods that en dun — 1 ¢ gi the fieldes a pono om 5 grapes ave grapes of gall, and
Heirtathersfearepnot, - their clusters be bitter. :
: 33 Their

Moyfes dying

and the cruell gail of aspes. .
(2) Ashe 34 Is not this layde in store with nie, td And sealed vp among my trealures-

not that J fo;- get mens fins
. but ree 35

be tone t warde, their feete (hall slyde in due punpshment.
Nin. xn. d.

is at hande, and the thynges that shall tome vpon them, make haste. n. lac. vis. 36 Foz the Lod thal iudge his people,

sung and haut compaffion on his seruaũtes, when he seeththat their power is gone, and that they be ina maner shut vp, or brought to naught and forsaken.

lere. u. 4. 37 And he (hail fay: Where are their

gods, their god in whom they trusted-
$ 38 The fat of whole satrilites they dyd eate, æ dranke the wine oftheir drinke offerynges: let them ryse vp, and helpe you, and be pour protection.
39 See nowe howe that J, Jam God,

Deutiiiif and there is nonebut J: J kyll, and Abarim, bnto mount Hebo, whichis
* Wyll make alyue: J Wounde, and wyll in the lande of Moab, ouer agaynst Je-
Iob. xv. b. heale, neither is there any that tan de- richo, and beholde the lande of Chalyuer out of my bande, naan which he the children of
40 For JJ wyll lift vp myne hande to hea- BPlracttopotfetfe: uen, and wyll say: J lpue euer. so And dpe in the mount whiche thou
41 If J whet the edge of my [worde, goest vnto, and thou chalt be gathered ö and mine hande take holde to do iustite, bnto thy people, as Aaron thy brother von v.
FJ wyl recompente vengeaunte on mine dped in mount Hoz, and was gathered enemies, and wyll rewarde them that buto his people: hate me. : 51 Becaule pe trespassed agaynst me a
42 J wyll make myne arrowes drunze mong the children ol Ilrael at the wa- Nau with blood, and my lworde shal deuour ters ot stryke at Cades in the wilderfleshe, e that for the blood of the layne, nesse of Zin: for pe fanctificd me not and for their taptiuitie, sence the begun; among the children of Ysrael.

. nyng of the wrath of the enenrie. 62 Thou shalt therfore fee the lande ber
© Eres. 43 Opraple ve heathen his people, for he fore thee, and halt not go thyther puto fuse in u Wyll auenge the blood or his seruaũtes, the lande which J geue the chudren of

and Will avenge him ok his aduersaries, Ilrael. N q The. xxxiij. Chapter.
1 Moyses before his death blelleth all the tribes ol Alrael. 25 There is no Hod
Ipke to the God ol Flracl, 20 Moz anp people tyke vnto his. 4
I [HIS (8 the coblesspng 3 And he lone the people, all „ ple vee
Smeg wherwith Mopses0 (aintes alfoare in thy haͤnde-: ＋ 5 eiche mercies the man of Godblessed were smitten to go atter thy feete, and woc otter the childzen of Israel to reteaue ol thy wordes. he- 4
£5 e Ile A | before his death, and 4. Doyles gau bs alawe for an 0 0 ae toy he tn: ape) fapde : rikäunce of the congregation of Jace
2 The Lowe came 5 And he was in Plrael tring, When a couse from Sinai, and rose vp from Heir heades of the people and the tribe unectrthe vnto them, and appeared from mount Jlrael were gathered together. dbe ges e Pharan, & he came with ten thoulande 6 Let Ruben ipue, and not dye, an

of saintes, and in his ryght hand a lawe of fire foz them.

the lawe.

Deuteronomium.
33 Their bine is the popson of dragons, . and Wyll be meveifull vnto his awe

Uengeaunte is myne, and J wyll retyme: Foz the day of their destruttion

Writetha on

a people his lande,

44 And Moyles came and {pake

wWonrdes of this song in cheeares ache 8 people, he ¢ Josuah the sonne of Hun.

45 And Moples spake all these Wordes vnto the ende, to al the people of Israel
46 And fayde vnto then: Set pour Den heartes vnto all the wordes Which teltifie vnto pou this day, and pe thay commaunde them vnto pour chüͤdzren

chat they may obferue and do all the wordes of this lawe.

47 Andlet it not be a vayne worde vnto pou: for in it is pour lple, and through
— . — pe he ihe pour dapes

pier pe go ouer Fox dane to possesst it. * *

48 And the Torde spake vnto Moyses the fame dap, saying: i

49 Get thee bp into this mountayne

fewe in number. :
7 This tame allo happen to Juda ae

pelle rae Deuteronomium. Cxxviy. 4

apde: Heare Lorde the vopce of ve ¢ bryng him vnto his people:his bandes Chalbe good enough korhym vf thou helpe hymagaynst his enemies.
5 3 And vnto Leute sapde: © Thunum
. and Urim shalbe with thee, aud with euer one that is godlp in thee: Thou dpddest proue hym also in the temptate
. on, F striuedst with hym at the waters
: fe. *
N Oe chat hath sayde vnto his father
Fr to his mother (J haue not feene ym)
„and he that knewe not his brethren, gnor knewe his owne children, thole are they that haue obferued thy worde, and shall kepe thy couenaunt.

o They chall teache Jatob thy tudge-

imncutes, and Ilrael thy lave: They
{hall put incenle before thy nose, and the burnt satrifite vpon thine aulter.

„ Wlesse Lorde his first fruites, and accept the worke of his handes: smyte the loynes of the that rise agaynst him, and ok them that hate hym, that they ryse not agayne. f

hn And of Wemannm he sapde: The be-

loued of the Lode schall dwell in safetie vpon hym, and the Torde shall touer hym all the day long, and he halt dwell betweene his shoulders.
3 And of Joseph he sayde: Wlessed of the
„ Lorde is his lande for the fruites of. ex: heauen, through the deawe ¢ springes aa that lye beneath, a 14 And for the lweete fruites of the ine kreale of the sunne, and rype fruites of.
C the moone: ; is Foz the first fruites of the principall mountapnes, and for the fruites that the hylles bryng foorth for euer:
16 And for the fuites of the earth, and fal:
. nelle therof: and for the good wyll of is Bemehat dapettin the buthe chall the
„ blelling come bponthe head of Joseph, and vpon the toppe ol the head of hym
Wehen seperated from among his
17 His fick borne ore hath beautie, and
Dis Howes are as the homes of an
Dteaane, and with them he hall troule the nations together, euen vnto the endes of the worlde: Thelt are allo ten thoulandes of Ephrami, and the thou:

sandes of Manasses.

18 And vnto Zabulon he sayde: Retoyec
Sabulon in thy goyng out, and thou
Isachar in thy tentes.

19 They Chali tall the people vnto the hyll, e there they shall offer offcringes ok righteousnesse: Forthey tall fucke of the aboundaunce of the fea, and of treasure hyd in the sande. 8.

20 And vnto Gad he sapde: Blessed be he
2 ene a ; he dwelleth as © a cy eng

ton that catcheth for a prap the arme gane br with the head. oa Weines

21 Pe loked to hym selke at the beginning,

because there was a portion of the law-
© geuer hid, e he tame with the heades of the people, and exetuted the ryghtedusnesse of the Lorde, and his indge- G Sb. mentes with Ilrael. e
22 And vnto Dan he sayde: Dan wis a ende Su.
Lions whelpe, he thalleape frö Wasan. ( e
23 And vnto Mephthalt he fayde : O mags
Nephthali, satistied with Gods fauour, aden and full with the blessing of the Lorde, possesse thou the welt and the sonth.
24. And to Aser he sayde: Aser shalbe blessed with children, he shalbe acceptable vnto his brethren, and thall app

his foote in oyle.

25 Thy shoes shalbe iron and brasse, and thy strength Hall continue as long as thou lyuest. i

26 There is none lyke vnto the God of

{rael, which though he syt vpon the

eauen [as vpon an horsej pet is he thine
. 7 whole glorie is in the telestiall plates.

27 The eternall God is thy refuge, and e

vnder the armes of the euerlastyng
God shalt thou lyue: He (hall tast out the enemie before thee, and say, destroy

them.

28 Ilrael then shall dwell in saketie and alone, and the fountayne of Jacob fhalbe vpon a lande of corne and wine, and his heauens shall drop the deawe.

29 Happy art thou O Jlrael, who is like vnto thee O people, that art saued in the Lorde which ts the shielde of thy helpe and lworde ol thy glorie-Thine enemies hane lott their strength to thee warde, and thou shalt treade vpon their hye places.

The

euteronomium, Mf

¢ The. xxxiiij. Chapter.

R Aoyfes dyeth.

Moyfes teeth all the lande of Chanaan, she dpeth. & Ffracl weepeth. -Josuah fucceedeth in Mopses roome. 10 The prapte of Moyses.

D * Moyles went ie from the plapne of
Sos’ Boab, bp into mount
‘© Mebo, and vnto the itopofthe@hpll that is bouer agapnst Jericho:
And the Lord shewed

of his sepulchre vnto this day.

7 Moyles was an hundred and twentie peres olde when he dyed: his eye was C wi dymme, nor his natural force ava:

ed.

8 Andthe children of Israel wept for dun
Moyses in the playne of Moab thirte

D

0 , bym all the lande of Glͤead, euen vnto dayes: Ind the dayes of Weepyng and the fludde of Dan 5

mournyng for Moyles were ended.

ame 2 And all Hephthalt, and the lande of 9 And Joluahthesonneof Nun was ful

Ephraim, € Manasse, and all the lande

cba gf Juda, euen vnto the vtmost fea:

mediterra-

fant) 3 And the louth, and the plapne of the

th warde from u

valley of Jericho, the citie of palme treesleuen puto Zoar.

Seni. 4. And the Lorde fayd vnto hym:- This

is the lande which J hare vnto Abraham, Jlahac, and Jacob, saying, J wyll geue it vnto thy seede: J hane canted thee also to {ee it with thine eies,

o And there avole not a prophete sinte D

1 Atcordpng bnto all the miracles and 8

of the spirite of wildome, * fo? Moyses Nuns, had put his handes vpon hym: And the chuldren of Israel were obedient no hym, and dyd as the Lorde commaun-

Ded Moyses.

in Ilrael, lyke vnto Moyles Whom the
TLorde kne we face to fate, Wi

Wonders Which the Lode lent hym to eure

Deut ine. but thou shalt not go ouer thyther. do inthe lande ok Egypt before Pharao
5 So Doyles the seruaunt of the Loy and all his feruauntes, and before al dyed there in the lande ol oab, atcor- his lande, mie Om dyng to the worde of the Lorde. Iz And accordyng to all that mightie . woos 6 And hee“ burped hyni in a valley, in hande, and ail the great fcare Which den“
Sea the lande of Moab, duer agaynst the Moyles: shewed in the syght of all sapere § hoult OF Peor: but * no man knoweth Jlrael. : folatrie = ' ' therby.

ia
The ende ofthe fifth booke of Moyfes, called in the
Hebrue Ellehaddebarim,andinthe Latine

Deuteronomium. n

Ihe feconde part of the Byble con-

teyning these bookes.

The booke of Iosuah. The first booke of the Chronicles.
The booke of the Judges, The feconde booke of the Chronicles,
The booke of Ruth. The first booke of Efdras.

The first booke of Samuel. The seconde booke of Esdras.
The seconde booke of Samuel. The booke of Hester.
The thirde booke of the kinges. The booke of fob.

The fourth booke of the kinges. 2

py charge.

| lofuah. 4
4 hebooke of losuah, vvhomthe
Hebrewes call fehosua. —

The. j. (hapter.
The Lorde incourageth Joluah to inuade the lande of promise. che Lorde promte

(eth to allitt Jotuah tf he ober his wozde. 11 Joluah commaundeth the people to pres pare them felucs to palle ouer Lordane, 1 and exhorteth the Nubenttes to erecute

their charge.

oA hiuaunt ofthe Lord,
5 it tame to passe alo that the Lode

‘ake vnto Josup sonne of Mun,
A oyses“ nunilter,

0 ing:

cay 2 Moples my leruau is dead: owe

therefore arile, go out this Jordane,

cha fi a ehen tech e ic o them the chyldren o

Placido gene. ey

3 All the places that the foles of pour

krete shall treade vpon, haue J geuen

vou, as J fapde vnto Mopses.

ita ref de banon, vnto the great riuer Euphrates, en, Al the lande ok the“ Pethites cuen vnmer to the great fea towarde the gopng ear dowwne of the sun e, Walbe pour coalt,

at There shal not u man be able to with-

Caley

4 Fronthewyloernefle and this Li-

stande thee all the dayes of thy life : Foz.

right bande, nor to thetefte, that thou

matest do wilely in al thatthou takest in

hande.
Let not the booke of this la we de- pan . parte out of thy mouth, but oecupte Se ae thy © minde therein dap night, that sev conus thou maiest obferne and doc accozding sss. to all b is Witten therin: Foz then tate thou make thy way prosperous, and then thou shalt do wifelp.
Haue not Jtömaumded thee, that mne thou shouldelt be strong 5 hardie, 1195 dorngs.

h Stndle and obserue govs lawe, and be

Cure of prospo-

loftuah charge.

tethls was oclapmed.

Nu. x xxii. d

D

(hz S canin the land of tig ef the 8
Amoziteg a
Og king of

ashan.
1) an tesprete of the tint of the Kmoz ils.

at

ay whlch place roas in the plane okmoah ncate vnto
ORGAN,

uerners boufe

ower celitk meancs,

not feare nor be faint yearten: Foz I the
Lorde thy God ain with hee, whyther sotuer thou goest. N

fo Then Josuah commaunded the offi-

ters ok the people, faying:

11 Go thorowe the middes ofthe hoaste,

and tcõinaundte the peopte , saping, Prepare pou bitailes: for alterꝰ thret daies ve (hal passe ouer this Jordant, to go in and enioye the laude, Which the Lode pour God geueth von, to possesse it.

12 And vnta the Kubenites, Gadites, and

halte the tribe of Manasses spake Jofuab saping:

3 Memenbber the worde whiche Woy -

ses the sernaunt of the Lorde connnasĩ-
Bed you, laping: The Lorde pour God
Hath geuen you rest, e hath geuen pou this” lande.

14 Hour wyues, pour children, and pour

cateli hall remaine in the lande which

Moyles gaue pou on this {poe Jor-

dance: but pe shal go before pour brethren armed, all that be men of warre, and

Iosuah.

helpe them:

5. Untill the Lorde haue geuen brethren rest as he bath 2 755 yg

they allo haut obtained the lande wn

che the Lorde pour God geueth chen

And then thal ye returnt vnto the lande

ol vour possession, and enioye it: Whit

lande Moyles the Lordes seruaũt gaue ou on tts side Jordane towarde the unne rysyng.

16 And they aunlwered Josuah sapinge:

Althat thou halt conmnaunded ys ip:
Wel do, and whyther focucr thou sendest vs, we will go. * i

According as We obeyed hoyses in al thinges, fo will we obey thee: only the
Tordethy God be with thec,as he was with Mopses. i

18 And Wholoener he be that doth disobey thymouth, and wil not hearken vn-

to thy wordes in all that thou commas:
Deft him, let hin dye: Duly be strong, and of good courage.

The .ij Chapter.

Joluah sendeth out (ples into Jericho. 4 They be hydden of Rabab. omahab agnisech the God of Itrael to be the hyghest God. 1 Rahab requireth that there be be vogue of her felfe and hers when Jericho is ouercummen. 2x Che fptes do

eturne.

d Josuah 5 sonne okt 5 And about the time ofthe shutting of

Nun lent out of Sittim two nien to sppe seo seretelp, saping: Go, and isbicwethe land, and al-
: so Jericho. And they

went, and * tame into a harlotes house, named Nahab, and lodged there.

And it was tolde the king of Jericho, saping:Beholde, ther tame men in hyther to night, ofthe chudren of Jlrael, to spye out the tountrey. ‘

3 And the king of Jericho sent onto

Nahab, laping: 28 ning foorth the men that are tome to thee, and which are entred into thyne houle: for they be come to searche out all the lande.

And the Woman toke the two men and hyd them, aud fapd thus: In deede there came men vnto me, but JJ wiste not whence they were.

the gate when it was darke, the men
Went out, whpther the men went J
Wote not:folowe pe after them quichlp, lor pe Mall ouertake them.
Wut che had brought them vp tothe
Orooffe of the houle, x hyd them with

the stalkes of flare Which The had lying

abrode bpon the rooffe.

7 And the men pursued after them the

Way to Jordane vnto the fourdes: and affoone as they whiche pursued after wie were gone out, they Hut the gate.

3 And or euer they were afleepe, she

tame vp vnto them vpon the roofte,

And layd vnto the men: J knolbe that the Lorde hath geuen pou the land, tor the™feare of pou is fallen vpd vs, and the inhabitantes ok the lande faint at the presence of pou:

ler xl i

(6) he rod babe ner wis O39 plane, Ott shep ngk
Wald ande

tir bau da

p: Hi
VI. pau b ae of . ln em K

lofuah. = | +

10% before
, gued vp the water of the red fea betoz arith came out of Egypt, and what vou dyd vnto the two Kynges of the Amorites that Were on the other fyoe sorbane, “ehon and Dg, whom btterly destroyed.

Ii aris alone as we had hearde these thynges, our heartes dyd faynt, and there remained no moze courage in aud man at the presente ol pou: For the“

fr Lorde pour God he is the God in hea-

sen aboue, and in earth beneath.

„ Nolbetherkore, J pray von lweare vn-

m3 fo me by the Lorde, that as J Hane shewed vou mercie, ve thall also shewe mertie vnto my fathers houle, and geue me a true token:

3 And that ve Tall laue alyue both my father and my mother, my brethren and my fitters, and all that they haue: and

that pe shall delpuer dur soules from death. :

¢ 14. And the men aunlwered her: Our

n lpues for vou to dye, yt ve vtter not this

me our buspnesse. And when the Lorde

hath geuen vs the lande, we wyll deale mertyfully and truely with thee.

15 And then she let them downe by a torde through a wyndow: for her boule was vpon the towne wall, € che dwelt bpon the towne wall. .¥

16 And he sapde onto them: Get pou in-

to the ©mountaine iefte the pursuers meete pon, and hyde pour selues there thret dayes vntyl the purluers be returned, e then hall ye go pour owne way.

7 And the men lapde vnto her: WWe

ey... ˙ b, F Sst *
Jo: lot haue hearde howe the Lorde wyl be blamelesse ofthis thy oth which

v..

dane is made drpe.

8 eg
. before they Went ouer.
N. Wend after o three dayes, the officers a ent throughout the hoaste,

nd tommaunded the people, fayina: hen ye lee the arke of the teftament

thou Hatt made vs sweare:

18 Behold, when we come into the lande, thou shalt bynde this torde of red threde inthe wyndowe whiche thon dydst let vs downe by: and thou that bryng thy father and thy mother, thy brethren, €
55 tp fathers housholde (even; into thy

ouse.

19 And then whosoeuer doeth go out at the doores of thy Houle into the streate, a

Opis blood shalbe vpon his owne head, (4) Be spalde

and we wyll be gyltlesse: And who soeuer shalbe with thee in the houle, his blood shalbe on dur head pf any mans hande touche hym.

20 And ik thou beter chese our wowes, we wilbe quite of thy oth which thon hast made vs sweare.

21 And she laide: According vnto your wordes, so be it. And she sent thé away,

nd they departed. And she bounde the red torde in the windowe. ö

22 Andthey departed, and came into the mountaine, & there abode three dayes, vntyl the pursuers were returned: And the pursuers fought them throughout all the wap, but founde them nat.

23 And the two men returned, and deltended from the mountaine and palled
/ oner, and came to Josuah the sonne

gyitir
Owns

of hig death.

O2, Scarles tlound,

ch) To wpt, the ryuer

of Mun, and tolde him all that came 3°

vnto them.

24 And they saide bnto Josuah: Trnely the Torde hath delpuered into our handes all the lande, and all the inhabitauntes of the tountrey faint at the prefence of vs.

The ii. Chapter.

;Joluah commeth with the people vnto Jordane.; Che Leuttes do beare the arbe. going before the people. 7 God sheweth by miracles that he is with Joluah, and that he gupdeth the people. 14 Che people goeth ouer Jordane. 16 Che chanel of Foz

of the Lorde pour God, and the priestes that are Leuites bearing it, ve shall depart from pour plate, and go after it.

4 So yet that there shalbe a {pace betweene pou and it, about two thousand tubites by mealure: And ye hall not tome nye vnto it, that ve may know the way by whiche pe mult go: for ye haue not gone this way in tunes past.

5 And Joluah fayde vnto the people:
*Sanctifie pour (clues, 4 to ae ri

U

W.

02, a myle.

Leul. xx. g.
Num. xi. d.

dordane 4

c Euen in the chancll where the streme had runne,

d Hp this zmracle in deuDiwg the waz ocr.

2B

(e) whith shoulbe set op ewelue ftones tn tcricm= draunce of the benefice.

6 And Josuah spake vnto the priestes,

saying: Take vp the arke of the coue-

naunt, and go oner before the people.
And they toke bp the arke of the testament, and went bekore the people.

My alli NN Ya
2 tee Face
Mean Un
2 Hl Bow SAB —
N 125 N

32 1 N
N = = Sa b > N — *
A, Ve se el. . Si Sees 9
E 4 1 9 Py 2 3 N i
PI . 1 — = 2 2 N oh 0 g 117469 25 ‘ i ay 4 8 8

4 i i
17 1 N be reas 7. $ a) = roy 5 ae 5
We ? n N A: d SNE RA: Se 8 4
* S = N
4 N N 5 5 777 otf 7

ES
N

G bak .

2 (i. Sa tse
+A HE A

Y 2
F 2 Mit
Fh h

g And thon shalt cõmaunde P priestes

that beare the arke of the couenaunt, faying: when ye are come to the edge of the waters of Jordant, ve shall Lande ftillin Jordane.

And Josuah {aide vnto the children of
Israel: Come hyther, and heare the wordes of the Lorde pour God.

jo And Josuah layde: Hereby pe shall knowe that the lining God is aniong vou, and that he Will without fayle cak out before pou the Chanaamtes, andthe
Hethithes the Heuites, the Pherezites,

the Gergesites, the Amozites , and the

Jebulites. :

Weholde, the arke of the touenaunt of the ode of all the world, goeth befoze pou into Jordant.

12 Nowe therfore take from among pou
©) twelue men out of the tribes of “Ble rael, out ot euery tribe a man.

13 And alloone as the soles of the feete ol the priestes that beare the arke of the
Lordethe gouernour of all the wonlde, treade in the waters of Jordane, the waters of Jordane shalbe deuided: and

II

lofuah.

Gg the Lord shal do wonders among you, 7 And ß Lord sayd vnto Josuah: This

= en a PLY
MAO Vd wees

** ee
7 : f — —

N git e
N Kd ab

Lordy

day will J beginne to magnific the

the light of all Israel, that Ren kuowe howe that as J was With
Moyles, fo will J be with thee,

; Tofu:

WO it
U

ö

the tables

15 And alldone as they that bare p arke cara e mönbemas,

Wherbe J, el dane sit 5

Bee
4 BAS ple Were al gone ouer

Take pon tbwelue

nien out of the people,

out ok euery tribe a man,
And conmaunde pou them, faping :

Take you hence out of the nuddes of

Jordane (etter) our of the place where

che puestes stoode ina redinesle, twelue

stones, which pe Thali take away with

vou, and leaue them in the“ lodgyng

where pou (hall lodge this nyght)
Then Josuah called the twelue men,

Which he had prepared ok the chyldren

of Israel, out of euery tribe a man.

5 And ea sayde vnto then: Get pou before the arke of the Lode pour
God, enen though the middes of Jordane, and take bp euery man of vou a stone vpon his choulder, accordyng vnto the munber ok the tribes of the chyldrenol Jlrael,

That this may be a signe among pon:

That when pour © chyldren alke their

fathers in tyme to tome, saping, What

meanej these stones With vou-
He niape aunlwere them: howe that the waters of Jordane deruded at the

Rus.

B pid cont: bh,

ont

t Klurg ty hig

ful
BS: bit
Mo our 7

the Lorde , (For when it Went suer

Jordane, the waters of Jordane deni-

ded) And thele stones are become a me-

Ard vuto the chyldren of Jsrael for er.

8 Aud the chyldren ok J sracl dyd euen fo as Josuah commalmded, and toke bp twelue stones out of the nuddes of Jordane as the Lorde lapde vnto

osuah, attordyng to the uumber of the tribes of the chyldren ol Ilrael, and carped them awap with them vnto the

place where they lodged, € layde thein en 9 p the amd set pw ilgal,

in hemtddes of Jordane, in the place

ai ie 1 of 11 testament stoode: a ue the f t chte day. 0 hey tontmued vnto

lofuah.

The . iii. Chapter.

prelenee of the arke of the couenaunt of

And Jolnah {et vp twelue © stones
Where the feete of the priestes whiche

ij.

C welue Tones out ot the chanell be erected for a ligne ot the drying of Jordane.
Che Rubenites, the Gadites, and the halle tribe of Manasse do go before their brethren armed. 19 Jordane commeth agayne, and kyllech the chanel.

Went ouer, .

1 And when all the people were deane passed ouer, the arke of the Lod went duer allo, and the priestes © be fore the people.

The arke of the prieics
Whiche came ouer after cho

133 Euen fourtte thausande prepared faz

theses”

battayl, throngh the piaine of Jericho. 9

14. That day the Lorde magnifico Josuah in the syght ol all Israel: and they feared hym, as they feared Moples all dapes of his lyfe.

15 Andthe Lode hake vnto Josnah, saping:

16 Conunaunde the priestes that beare D the“ arke ofthe testimome to come vp * aut of Jordane. F

17 Josuah therefore commaunded the n priestes, saping: Come pe vp out of Foz: Sh." dane. ohß apl.

18 And when the priestes that bare the avite of the conenaunt of the Torde, were come vp out ofthe nuddes of Jordane, and affoone as the soles of the priestes feete were {et oup drte land, the
Waters of Jordane returned vnto their place, and went ouer all their bankes as they dyd before.

19 And the people came vp ont of For dane the tenth day] of the © first moneth, and pitched in Gilgal, euen in the catt border of the titie Jericho.

20 And the twelue stones Whiche they toke out ol Jordane, dyd Joluah pitch

21 And he spake vnto the chyldren of PL rael, saying: If pour chyldreu alke their fathers in tynie to come, and faye:
What meane hele stones-

22 Be shall shewe pour chyldren, and a say: Israel came ouer this Jordane en drye lande.

Iosuah. ni b

(g) Called
A bib Ot 3. fan, tonteynpng part oe
March and part ot spat.

A4 23 Fer

4 Foy dane.

EXO. x ini. e.

A

(a) The B= mortteg were vn vuty fpoes

where two

ch the fae towar vod.

Losuall. Ii. b.

Exod iii. f.

(b> -Fo2 now they had lelte le dk ahout +0
Toc.

(tc) Silgal
Was fo calied, vecausc they wert there eir cuncised.

d T het could not doit with out daunger, in that trou-

blcsemc vncer -

eain state thep
Were in, in their iournep.

Num. xiiii. f

Num. xili. e.

losuah.

23 Forthe Lode pour God dried vp the
Water of Jordane before you , vntill ve were gone ouer, as 5 Lorde pour God dyd the red sea, which he dried vp be-

the Lorde pour God for euer. fore vs, tyll we were gone over, : . te
— i Pig
The. v. Chapter. a
. The inhabitantes of Chanaan do feare the comming of the Ptraclites, atter that they hearde of the miracles of their God. 2 Ok the seconde circumcision bnderJotuah and wherefore it was. 1 Manna kapleth, and becummeth fcarfe. ; Che angel of the Lorde, who should go bekore the armie of the Jlraelites. dw al the kinges ko they were vncirtumeised: betause
ONG) or ö Amozttes which they circumcised them not by the way, are bevonde Jordane 8 Aud when they had tirtumciled al the L westwarde, aud al the people, they abode in their places in the sikpuges of the Chana- campetyil they were Wholt. altes which were by 9 Andthe Lorde fayde vnto Joluah: the sta, heard Howey This day haue J taken away the os
Wore had dried vp the waters of Jor- chan of Egypt from pou: Wherelorc 5 dane before the chyldren of Ilrael vn- the nan of the lande place is called Gil an ti they were gone ouer, their heartes gal, vnto this day. at fapnted for feare, and there was no 10 And the childzen of Ilrael abode in rie spirite in thein auy moze forthe presenee Gilgal, and helde the feat of Passouer 19 0 ok the children of Ilrael. the fourteenth day of the f nioneth at on
2 That same time the Torde saide vnto euen, in the playnt of Jericho. om
Joluah: Mankt thee sharp knines, aud 1 And they did cate of the corne of the ant
80 to Wagayne and circumitile the chl- lande on the morowe after the Pall: dren of Alrael the seconde tine. ouer sweete cakes and parched connec,
3 And Josuah madehim charpe kmues, in the selke fame dap.

and tirtumcised the chudren of Jlracl nthe © hill of the foreckinnes. cmcised all the people, euen the males that tame out ol Egypt: becaule that al the men of warre died in the wildernes by p wap, alter they tant out of Egypt.
Jor all the people that came out, were cixcumcised: but al the people that were bone in the wildernes by the way after they tame out of Egypt were not“ circumtciled. 3
6 For the chyldren of Jlracl walked fourtie peres in the wildernesse, till al p people of p men ot warre that tame ont

A

of Egypt were confunied, betause they

hearkened not vnto the voyte of the

owe : Unto whom the Torde lware,

that he woulde not shewe them p lande which the Lorde ware vnto their kathers that he wonlde geue vs, euen a

lande that floweth with mylke e hony.

And their children whon he set vp in their steede, them Josuah circumciled,

24. That all the people of p WW

2 FJor the Manna ccassed on the mo-
Andthis is the tause why Josuah cir-

n knowe the hande of the Lone | 255 Wry mighitie tts, and that pe might fate a

thr ne

rowe after they had begun to cate of the corne of che lande, neither had the chyldren of Jsrael Manna any more, but did cate of the kruite ol the lande ol
Chanaan that pere.
3 And when Josuah was nye to Je. D richo, he lift bp his eyes and loked: and behold, there stoode a managaint hun, haning a sworde drawen in his bande:
And Joluah went vnto hin and lapde bute him, Art thou on our syde, or on our adnerfariesz 5
14. Aud he lapde, Mate: but as a taptaiuut | i 9 10 of the hoast of the Word ant J nolbe 7 tome. And Joluah lell on his face to rs earth, and did 0 Worship, and fade wiv vnto hum: What faith my ond vnd en: his struaunt- l 10
1 „And thecaptatne of the Todes het ws. layde vnto Josuah: Do thy hoc gg thy foote , for the place wheron thou Oe standest, is holy. And Josuah did 2

ere, ft

ois doftrayed 4

’

Josuah.

The. / Chapter.

God geueth the citie of Jericho vnto Josuah. 6 Horna with the priestes doth inuade

Icricho. 7 Joluah commaundeth the Kubenites, t fo go before the Arte in armes. 20 Jericho is taken, ig burned. 25 Rahab and her houleholde do dwell among the chyld
26 The builder agayne of Jericho is cursed.

Aut vp and closed, becaulc of the childrẽ of
Iltrael, neither myght aͤny man go out, or in.
And the Lorde sapde

J haue geuen into thypne hande Jericho, and the kyng therol, and the llrong men ok warre. a

5 5 And F che pricltes, and layde bute them: Tale

I 8 W N ei — \
N NDO Jericho was i

vnto Josuah:Wehold,

he Gadites and the Manallites.
22 Rahab is saued. 24 Jericho of tract,

Seen

ranuues hornes before the

Torde.

7 And he sayde vnto the people: o,

and compasse the citie, ⁊ let hym that is harnesled go before) arke of the Lord.
8 And when Joluah had spoken vnto p people, the seuen priestes bare the leuen trumpets of ranunes Homes, aud went loorth before the arke of the Lorde, and blewe with the trumpets: and the arke
7 the couenaunt of the Lorde folowed hem. 5
9 And the men ok armes went before the priestes that blewe wich the trumpets: t the Y gatheryng hoast tanie after the arke as they Went, and blewe with trumpets. N
Jo And Josuah had commaunded the people, laping: He shall not Mout, no: make any noyse with pour vopte, neither shall any worde proccede out of pour mouth vntyll the day J byd you shout, then (hail pe shout.

11 And lo the arte of the Lorde com-

(0) This ts chiefly meant

p the Rubeniteg, Gadites, and half the tribe of
Manassch.

(e) Meaning the reare
Warde, wherin was the
Ganvard of 5 trpbe ok Dan.
Mum x.

C

palled the titie, and went about it once: , 7% .

and they returned into the hoast, and lodged there. . q

11 And Joluah role early in the mz: nyng, and the priestes toke vp the 15

(a) She tribe deen. vez

ge With the diowpug ofthe teumpettes. gathered by

What socuer was te(t of

Ch) Welpoes susty dap once, to: the
(pace of sixe

Condempned vitertp i0 be destroped.

Iosuah. il. a

Leui xxvii,
Num. xxi. a

Deut. xin. d. yo ut all the spluer, golde, vesselles of

brasse and tron, shalbe W consecrate vn-

t Man and beat hepug de tcoped, and all other thinacs that could not by fire be moulten and ttanslozmed : all metals ate fo recrusd to the Lozdes pic, that ther should neuet

de conacreed

to amp priuate bie. a

Deut. vn. d.

(a) Bp tas kyng that rohich was cũmaunded to de destroped.

Fericho i defrayed.

of the Lorde.

133 And feuen priestes bare seuen trumpettes of rammes hornes, and went before the arke of the Lode: and goyng, blewe with Me trumpettes. And the meu ok armes went before them: but the gatheryng hoast cane after the ache of the Lorde, whiche went before

14. Aud the seconde daye they passed the cific once, and returned againe into the hoast: and so they dyd fire dapes.

5 And when the seuenth day came, they rose carly seuen] with the dawnpug of the day, €conmpafled the eitie after the same maner ™ fenen tymes: only that day they con pasled the citie scuẽ tinies.

16 And at the seueuth tpnie when the prestes blew with the triunpettes, Josuah fapde bute the people: Showt, for the Lowe hath genen pou the citie.

17 Aud the atic shalbe ©? aceurscb and al that are therin, puto the Lode: snipe
Naͤhab the harlot shal line, and all that are with her in the boule , becaule she* hyd the messengers that we lent.

18 And in any wyle be ye ware of the ac-

cuefed thinges, lest pe make your selues

atcursed, x take ot the accurled thynges, and make the hoast of Ilracl accursed, and trouble it.

to the Lorde, and all Hall come into his treasurie.

20 And the people sholwted, and blewe with trumpettes: And when the people heard the found of the trumpe, they showted with a great showt, and the

Achan vlurpeth of the Churche iewels. 2 Li is learched. 4 The people of Aismpteth
Gtrael. 6 Josuah weepeth before the Lorde. 7 Joluah complapneth before the Loide that Pract is ouercommen. 15 God commaundeth the theefe of the Churche goodes to be burnt. what thynges Achan had conueyed or hole which ougut to haue ben

uche 25 Achan ig stoned, and all his goodes are burnt kor stealyng of the Churche

goodeg.

A 1

The. vij. Chapter.

Sa di, 5 sonne of Zareth, okthe tribe of Juda,

toke of the forbydden thyng: And the 3

Weath of the Lorde Wared hot against

lofuah.

wall fell dowue flat, fo that the went vp into p citie, eue ry man ragt “| before hym, and *toke the citie : 2 Me, 5
21 And they btterly destroyed all that was in the citie,both zen aud woman. D

Go into the harlottes houle, and bryn out thence the woman and all tbat the

Tofu

out all her kynred, e put them © wü = ale

93 Oty

thep put bnto p treasure of the Paule (oxey

Jericho. |
26 And Joluah sware at that tine, fay: ing: Curled be the man before the Lod

of it.

27 Aid so the Lode was with Josuah, and his fame Was noysed throughout all landes.

EI .

viewed Ai, de “
And returned to Josuah, and ny vnto him, Let not all the people 99 7

of le

b let as it were two or three thou-

f kunde men go vp, and smyte Ai: and make not all the people to labour thyther, for they are but fewe.

And lo there went vp thyther of the, people about a thee thoulande men, and they fied befoze the men of Ai.

5 And the men ol 2 mote of them
=” ppon a thietic and fire men: fo2 they chalet them from before the gate euen n pnto Sebarini, and smote them in the a. goyng downt: voherkore the heartes of the people for feare melted away lyke
D Water. N 1 0 ale 6 And Joluah w rent his clothes, & fell
% tothe carth bpd his face before the arke eo okthe Norde vntill the cuentide, he and the elders ok Ilrael and put earth vpon e their heades. 1 ern 7. And Joluah lapde: Alas, O Lorde

God, Wherkore hak thou brought this

people duer Jordane, to deliver vz into the hande ok the Amorttes, to destroye vs: Would to God we had ben content, and dwelt on the othere? fide Jordane.
% 8 Oh Torde what hall J fay, when
© Ilrael turneth their backes before their ur Lnenies- g gn ? Surelp the Chanaanites, and all the inhabitauntes ofthe lande (hal heave of it, and {hall tonspire against vs, and deftroy the name of vs dut of the worlde:
And what wilt thou do bnto thy mighme kie H nament jo, And the Lorde sayde vnto Josuah:
% Get thee vp, Wherkore liest thou thus z, bpon thy faces re I Ilrael hath sinned, and they haue transgressed myne appointment which
Itommaunded them: kor they haut taken ofthe excommunicate thinges, and haue also stolen, and dillembled allo „ C put them vnto their owne stuftfe.
2 And therfore is it that the children of srael tan not stande before their ene-
MNCS, but shal turne their backes before their enemies, becaule they be extommunitate: Meither will J be with you aup more except ve desttoy the excomi MUutcate from among vou. zz Cip [therfoxe) and fanctifie the people, re fay: Sanctifie pour felucs againtt gel forso sapde the Lode God ai rael, there is a dampned thyng aan ug ou, O Jlrael: and therfore pe
Wu. le stande against your enennes, vnell pe haue put the dampned thing

TSIusIl.

fromm among von.

14. Lo morowe morning therkore pe Mat: be broughtaccording to pour tribes: And the tribe which the Lorde d talteth, that

VI.

(i) Tht maner of taking as some indge

come According to the kinredes therok: em

And the kiured which the Looe shall finde giltie, shall tome by housholdes:
And the Goutholde which the Lorde shal finde fanttic hall come ma by man.

15 And he that is kounde with the atcurfed thing, halbe burnt with lire, he, and all that he hath, becaule he hath crant: gressed the coue nannt ofthe Lom, and wrought follie in Isracli.

16 And d Josuah rose vp early in the morning, and brought Ilrael by their tribes e the tribe of Juda was caught.

17 And he brought the kinredes ol Juda, and toke the kinred of the Zarchites:
And he brought the kinredok the Zarehites man by mã e Zabdi was taught.

18 And he brought his housholde man by

tim and Tynmim, other say it wag bp lots es.

N

man, € Adan the sonne ol Charmi, the

sonne of Zabot,p sonne of Zared of the

tribe of Juda, Was caught.

And Josuah sayde vnto Achan: My sonne, J beseche thee geue glorie to che
Lorde God of Pirael, and “make con fession vnto hun, and shewe me what thou hast done, hyde it not from me.

20 And Achan aulwered Josnah, x sayd:
Of a trueth J haue finned againk the
Torde Godot Israel, and thus æ thus haue Jdone.

21. Isawe among the spoples a goodly babionifhe garment, and two hun-

dred sicles of siluer, and a tonge of golde

offiftic sicles Wayghte , and J toueted them, and toke them: and beholde they lye hyd in the earth in the middestofnp tent, and the siluer is ther vnder.

22 And so Josuah lene mellegers: which
Whethey ranne vnto his tent, beholde they were hyd in his tent, and the siluer ther vnder.

23 Therfore they toke them out ot the middest of his tent, and brought them vnto Josuah, and vnto all the chuden of Hiract, and laycd tijem out! betorc the Lode.

24. And Joluah toke Achan the sonne of
Zareth and the siluer, and the garnet, and theronge of gold, and hissonnes,

and his danghters, e his oren, and his a alses, his sheepe, his tent, and al that ad

he had:and al Mlracl with hum brought them vnto the valley of chor.
25 And

(k) God ig plozhicd when the tructh 18 tonlessed.

G

H That is bee kore the erke or the Lozbe.

(im Some eabewordge others a piase and some a rodde.

A 18 ftoned.

losuah.

fi eae ja

TRS i * ae Hil A” 2
6 Dor E Adi 22 g 0 0 Nr / 20 |
NSS Ae a alo
. a U 0 U ai

Nes
W N

I
N

Ht . . Soe

fo what sharp indgment and gtecuous punyshment thet

onghtronaue, krouble thee this day. And all Ilrael eonee wude stoned hym With stones, and burned
Deuten: them With fire, and duerwhelmed
„ them with stones.

The .viij .

= = gee
SS) Sa

j i rit 0 e
AN
A
1 N ih f bt

N *

26 And they tast vpon hym a great heape of stones vnto this day: And lothe Lon turned from the wrath of his indigna-

tion. And the name of the place is called the valley of Achor vnto this day.

Chapter.

God geueth the citie ol Ht into the handes of Fotuah, 3 Joluah his armic beyng
{etter in arape, goeth to At, 15 Josuah fapneth a runnyng away, 1s God geueth counsell vnto Josuah hym selke, what he hach to do. 20 Ai is letten on kire. 21
Che people of Ai is lapne. 2 Che kyng of At beyng attached, is brought vnto
Fofuah, twelue thoulande tlapne. 27 Che pray is deinded. 29 Che kyng of At is
Hanged. zo An aulter of fone is built, in the which Deuteronomium is infcrts bed. 34 Josuah blesseth the people or Arael.

ND the Lorde fayde az \vuto Josuah: Feare
™ (not, neither be thou
0 faint Hearted: Take all
Isthe men of warre with thee, and vp, e get thee
* to Ai. eholde, J haue geuen into thy Une the kyng of Ai, and his people, his citie, and his lande:
And thou shalt do to Ai and her kyng, as thou dyddest bnto* Jericho and her king. Heuerthelesse, the spoyle c tattell thereof, Hall ve take vnto your selues:
Thou shalt lpe in Wayte agaynst the citie, onthe ® backside thereof.

And fo Josuah arose, and all the men of warre, to go vp agaynst Ai: And
Josuah chose out thirtie thousande rong men and valiaunt, and ent them

A

Deut. vu. c.

Iosuah.vi. d.
Deut. xx. c.

(a) meanyng on the wed
(poe.

away by nyght:

4 And he commaunded them, faying:
Weholde, ye shall lye in wayte agaynst the towne on the backfide thereof: Go
Bee verie farve front the citie, but be all redie:

5 And J, and al the people that are with me, Wyll approche vnto the titie: And when they tome out against vs, as they dyd at the first tyme, then wyll we fice before then:

6 For they wyll come ont after vs tyll we haue bronght them out of the cific.
For they wyll fay, They flee before vs,

(o) Thay, heben trouble.

as at the first tyme : and we will flee be- 5

fore them.

In the meane tyme thal ve ryse vo from lying in wapte, and deftroy the citie: for the Lorde pour God wii ger

ction of At °

t into pour hande.

3 am yt haue taken the atic, ve

{hall let it on fire: Accordyng to the con

maundement of the Torde shall ve do.
Beholde, J haue charged pou,

Joluah therfore sent them foorth, and they went to lye in wapte, and abode betweene Wethel ct At, on the westlyde of the titie of Ai: But Jolnah lodged that nyght among the people.

YS ig And Joluah role bp early in the mor nyng, and numbred the people c went vp, he and the elders of Ilrael before the people, against Al. f

1 And all the men of warre that were with hin, went vp, x drue npe, and came agaynst che citie, and pitched on the

A

aint, ro

betweene them and i. n And he toke vpon a fiue thousande

ane Mert, and © fet them to lye in wapte be-

e tpweene Bethel and Al, on the westlpde

ach

bol the ctie.

2 B Auothe prople fet all the hoast that was onthe northspde agapnst the citte, c the lycrs in wapte on the west, against the titie: And Joluah walked the fame nyght inthe myddes of the valley.

14. And wen the kyng of Ai saweit, they halted and role vp early, and the men of the titie vent out agayust Israel to bat: tayle, heand all his people at a tyme appoynted, euen before the playne: and bp notthat there were lpers in wapte agaynst hun on the backlyde of the cite,

hm 15 Ad Julnah Kall Beeacl Gas beaten

n belore them, fledde by the way of the

u, Wildernisse. .

16 And al the people ofthe towne were called tozether, to folowe after them:
And they kolowed after Joluah, and were Daven away from the citie.

17 And there was not aman left in Ai and in Bethel, that went not out after
80 ub ai the titie open, and

OWed afte Ilrael.
13 And the Lorde fayde vnto Josuah:
Stretch oit 5 speare that is in thine
„hand towarde Ai, fo? J will geue it inm (0 thy hand. und Jofliah stretched out che peare tiat he had in his hand, tois Warde the tlie. .

And the bers in warte arofe quick-
Font ok thet place, and ran alloone as
3 osuah hadstretched out his hande:
18 Hey ented into the citie, and toke

AND hageedund fet the citie on kpre.

lofuah.

northsyde of Ai: and there was a valley

Vij.

20 And When the men of At loned backe alter them, they fawe the finoke of the

cifte altend bp to heauen and they had

no place to flee either this way or that: and the people that fled to the wit: dernes, turned backe Againe vpon the folowers.

2 And when Josuah æ all Israel sawe that the pers in waite had taken the ci: lie, and that the smoke of it alcended 8
912 turned againe and slue the men E

i.

22 And the other ilsued ont of the citie
Against them, and fo were they in the middest ol Israel:for these were on the one side of then, and the rest on the other side. And they laide bpon them, so that they let none o them eltape, noz remaine:

23 And the kyng of Al they toke allue, and brought hun to Joluah.

24. And when Jlraeshad made an ende ol slapeng alsthe inhabitantes of Al in the lielde of the wudernelse where they chased them, and when they were all fallen on the edge of the [worde, until they were wasted, all the Ilraelites returned Dito Al, and snote it with the ane,

edge ofthe [worde. cite Soe Hos

25 And al that fell that day, both vf men fe ceo ayia

and women, Were twelne thoulande, e dra euen all the men of Ai. fo

26 Foz Folualy pincked not his hande backe againe which be stretched out vpõ the speare vntil, he had vtterly destroyed al the enhabitours of Ai. F

2 “Onelp the cattell and the spoile of the citie, Iscael toke vnto them felues , ace coding vnto the word of the Lorde,
Whiche he connmaunded Fouad.

28 And Joluah let Aton fixe, and made it an heape for W euer, ⁊ a wildernesle, euenj vnto this Ly

29 And the king of Ai he hanged on a tree, vntill euen: And assoone as the sunne was downe, Joluah conunaun-
Ded that G they should take p carkasse downe of the tree, and cast it at the entring of the gate ofthe citie, aud laye theron a great heape of stones, (chat remaineth vnto this day. a

30 Then Josuah“ buylt an aulter vnto the Lorde God of Ylrael un mount

Ebal,

31 As Moyles the seruaunt of the Zod commanded the chyldzen of Brac, and as it is written in he“booke Mate

Oz: brper

Deu. vii. a.

tred.

Nu. xxxi d.
Deut. x x. c.

ch That te coulbeneuerbe buylt again,

i Icrordi

ag it was com inadunded bp the lawe.
Deu. 21d.
Iosu. vu. d.

De. xxvli. a.

De. xxvt· a.

The Gabaonites.

lawe of Doyles, an aulter of whole stones, ouer which no man hath lyft an iron: And they latrifited theron burnt satrikices vnto the Lorde, and offered peace offerynges.

ments, 32 And he wrote there vpon the stones a

the summe of tye law, which summe is contepned in che ten cOmaun=
Demecntcs.

rehcarfal of the lawe of Moyles, and
Wyote it in the presente of the chyldren of Ilrael.

G 33 And all Jlrael and the elders therof, and their officers eiudges, stoode part on this {poe the arke, and part on that syde, betore the priestes that were Hes uites whiche bare thearkeot the coucnauntofthe Lowe, alwell the straunger, as they that were bozne among

The. ix. Chapter.

Certaine kynges are gathered against Jotuah. 2 The Gabaonites do guylefully require peace of Joluah. 21 The Gabaonites are made ministers in cute

tyng wood, and beryng of water.

AI Fe 4 | PD When al p kinges
Beenie. 88 9 that dwell beyonde
. 9875 Jordane in the hylles

and valleps- E along
* (3) vp all the coastes of
ORs Z e great fea, ouer

pum.

(c) Betaust they were all

Worten.

feete, and their rayment was olde: and all their prouision of bread was dryed vp, and hored.
6 And they tame vnto Josuah into the hoast to Gilgal, and fapde vnto him and vnto all the men of Ilrael, We be come from a far countrep:and nowe make ye agreement with vs. a
And the men of Firact sapde vnto the
Heuite: It may be thou dwellest amg vs, i d then howe tan J make peace

with theez
3 And they lapde vnto Josuah: We are

lofuah.

10 And all that he did to the tuo kinges w

The Galan,

them: halle of the ouer against m

Gartzim, c halfe of them ouer — A

mount Ebal, as Doyles the seruaunt

ofthe Lorde had tommaunded before 2°

ee they chdulde biefle the people of
Ci. j

34 Afterwarde he read all the wordes or the lawe, the bleslinges, and tursinges attordyng to all that is wiitten in the booke of the lawe.

35 And there was not one Wopde of ay that Doples tommaunded, which Josuah read not before all the tongrega- en tion of Hfracl, alwel the “Women and 25 chyldren, as the straungers that were 23 conucrfaunt among them. f

thy seruauntes. And Joluah fayde vn-
10 them againe: What are pe, : whente tome pez

9 They aunswered him: Fron a btry farre toũtrey thy seruauntes ire come, for the name W of the Lorde hy God: ge for we haue hearde the kame of him, k b all that he did in Egypte, abe

rch ges,
Nu

of p Amorites that were beporde Jor dane, Sehon king of Helbon, and Og king of Wald, which were at Astaroth.
I Wherfore dur elders and all the enhabitours of our tountrey {pike to bs, faying: Take bitailes with viu to scrue by the way, and go meete then and fay vnto them, We are pour seruaũtes: And now make pe a touenaunt of pratt
With vs. .
This our foode of beat We toke : with vs out of our houses wWyot,p Daye we Departed to come vrto pou: 50 nowe beholde, it is dried dp, wid Hore.
13 And these bottelles of mune whiche we filled, were neve, and se they be rent:
And these dur garmenes and hoe are worne for oldenesse, by the reason me ofthe exteeding long iouneyz - „
14 And the men toke ofthye © pitayle®, 920 c counfeled not with thunouth of the fs
Torde. | 1 5 td
15 And Foluah made peice which Oe 920 and niãde a couenaunt vith change bs they shulde be sulfered o line: als ö

16 5255 at the ende of three dayes, after they had made a league with them, theyhearde that they were their neighbours, æ that they dwell among them.
17 And the chilozen of Ilrael toke their ctornep, and came vnto their eities the titre dap: and their cities were Gibeon, and Caphira, Beroth, and Kiriath-

acini,

18 And the children of Jlrael flue them not, betause the princes of the congregation had sworne vnto them by the Lord
God of Ilrael:and all the multitude mourned agaynst the princes.

0 19 Wut all the printes layde vnto all the

„ congregation: We haue [Worne vnto

zt them by the Lorde God of Plracl, and therfoze We may not hurt them.

the
10 But this we Wyll do to them, We wyll let them line, lest wrath be vpon vs betause of the othe which we ware vnto them. '

200 the painces laid vnto them againe,
Let them liue, aud hewe wood, e drawe water vnto all the congregation, (and ther dd) as the printes sayde vnto ther,

De When Adontse-
Z~\(swildec kyng of Hierusa-

beg eal

fale ent bn and v ie Hoham king of Hebron,

wwe may limite Gibeon: for they haue eat ity Fofual, and With the
: r

toluah. printes ofthe congregation [ware vnto 22 And Joluah called foz them, c talked

I The. x. Ch apter.

with them, and sapde, Wherkore haue pe beguiled vs, saying, we dwell farre from pou: when ye dwell among vs:

23 And no be are pe cursed, and there Mal not ceasse to be of vou bondmen, aud hewers of wood, & drawers of water for the W houle of my God.

24. And they aunlwered Joluah, x sapd,
It was tolde thy seruauntes how that the Lorde thy God had commaunded his seruaunt Moyses to geue vou all the lande, and to destroy all the inhabitours therof ont of pour fight, and therfore
We were exceedyng fore afrayde for our liues at the presence of pou, and haue done this thing.

25 And beholde, we are in thyne hande: as it scemeth good and right in thyne eyes to do vnto vs, so do.

26 And euen so did he vnto them, and rid them out of the hande of the chyldren of
Ilrael, that they slue them not.

27 And Josuah made them that same dap Hewers of wood, and drawers of water for the congregation and for the
O aulter of God, vnto this day, in the place whiche he shoulde choole

I fiue binges make warre against Gibeon. whom Fotuah dilcomkiteth. 11 The Lorde rapned hapiestones and ue manp. Che funne standeth at Josuahs praper. 26 The kiue kinges are hanged. 29 Manp mo hinges and cities are destroped.

chidren of Jlrael.

Therkore the fine kinges of the Amorites, the king of Hierusalem, the king of
Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachis, and the king of Eglon, gaz thered them lelues together, and went vp, they with all their hoastes, and besieged Gibeon, t made Warre against it.

And the men of Gibeon fent vnto Josuah to the boat in Gügal, faying:
Withdrawe not thy hande from thy ser-

uauntes, come vp to bs quickly, and saue vs, and helpe vs: for all the kinges of the Amorites which dwell in the mountaynes are gathered together vagaynst. vs

And so Josuah ascended from Gilgal, he and all the people of warre With him, and all the men ok might.

3 And the Horde fayde puto Josnah,
Feave them not: for J haue deliuered them into thine bande, neither that any of them stande agaynst thee.

9 Josuah

A

Iii.

Ch) whithe the tas bernacle vnto

vnto thr tyne

of Solomon and after that tye temple at
Wiceu‘alrm,

Deut. vu. 4.

N

i That is, fox lacrifices

the sacri 8

(ca) Astoone

as thou make a lcagne with the chyl-
Dien of God

bpbhp rrgenerati-

on: thou shalt br fure eo haue thr Wiched chudren of the
Worlde in thy toppe.

9 Juosuah therfore came vnto them sodapnlp, and went vp from Giigal all nyght.

10 And the Torde troubled them before
Israel, and flue them with a great laughter at Gibeon, and chaled them along the wap that goeth vp to wWethoron, and simote them to Aʒeka and
Makeda. N

1 And as they fled from before Ilrael, and were in the going Downe to Bethoron, the TLorde cast downe great stones krom heauen vpon them vntpll Aseka, and they dyed: there were mo dead

ene with Haplefones, then they were
He whom the children of Ifrael flue with
Feen Me fworne.

valle lo. 2 Then spake Josuah to the Lorde tn

the dap when the Horde deliuered the
Aniontes before the children of Jlrael, c he layd inthe fight of Ilrael,“ Sunne, ftande thou styll vpon Gibeon, and thou
Moone in the valley of Aialon.
C 3 And the sunne abode, and the moone stoode styll, vntyll the people auenged them selues vpon their enemies. Js

Eccle. xlvi. a
Ef. 18. d.

Oem not this written in the booke of © the elchtren : kightedous: So the funnel Cay jabone in

the middest of heauen, aud hasted not to go downe by the spate of a whole day.
14 And there was no dap like that before

tudge, it meaneth Mopses dooke, cu

the Thaldee tert etadeth, the booke of

zi
* * > N = oh a ‘ > 1 a at 2 ar 8 8 i U * = . ay 8 N 1
1 42 = : — Fala) — - eS 2 anal 1 P 0
7 10 . 7 5 ae 5 . |
7 ‘ t 1 4 Vets il 15
“Uo anal or i i 05 N \ = (a sil oH.
„ — i i. i} 1 0 = qi 8 eke ,
| 112 * | malty iH 14 8 aN “4 00 i ONG N 9. tue

lofuah.

it or after it, that the Lorde hearde the

boyce of a man: for the Lode fought

for Ilrael. l weet

15, And Josuah returned and all Jirgel es with him, nto the cane to Gugal.

16 But the fiue kinges fled, and were hyd in a taue at Makeda.

17 And it was tolde Josuah (ot one) fay: ing, The fine kinges are founde hyding caue which is at Makeda.

13 And Josuah sapd, Noule great stones vpon the mouth of the taue, and fet men by it, for to kepe it:

19 And and pe not styll, but folowe after D pour enemies, € limite all the hindmost, and suffer them not to enter into their cities: for the Lode pour God hath deliuered them into pour hande.

20 And when Josuah and the childrenof
Israel had made an ende of slaying them with an exceedyng great laugh: ter, tyll they were wasted:the rest that e of them, entred into walled cities:

21 And all the people returned to the hoast to Josuah at Makeda in peace, neither dyd any man moue his tongue agapnt the thildren of Ylrael.

22 Then sapde Josuah, Open the mouth of the caue, and bryng out thele five kinges vnto me outof the taue.

r
. ö
“|| *

i

Hello e. ä chy went with him: Come neare, €

n feete vpõ the Y neckes of thele kinges. And thep came neare and put

% their feete bpon the neckes of them.

„ 7 And Joluah layd vnto them, Pe shall

% not keate, nor be faynt hearted: but be

n strong, and plucke vp pour heartes, for

n thus chall the Lorde do to al pour ene-

n les against whom ye fight.

f 26 And then Josuah smote them, and slewe them, and hanged them on fiue trees: And they Hanged thit vponthe trees vntill the euening.

27 And at the goyng downeofthe sunne,

D Joluah gaue commaundement: And they toke them downe ok the trees, and cast them into the cane wberin they had ben hyd, and laped great stones in the caues mouth, which remapne] vntil this

Daye.

28 And that same day Josuah toke Makeda, and fnote it with the edge of the sworde, e the king therot also destroped he vtterly, with al the soules that were therin, and let none remayne: And he dyd to the king of Makeda, as he dyd

id vnto the king ol Jericho. 4

29 Then Josuah went from Makedaand all Isracl with hun, vnto Libna and fought agaynst Libna.

30 And the Lode deliuered it e the king therof into the hande of Israel: and he smote it with the edge ofthe sword, and all the soules that were therin: He let none vemapne in it, but dyd vnto the
J 0 ag he did vnto the king of

ericho.

En And Josuah departed front Libna, and all Israel with him onto Lachis, and besieged it, and assaulted it.

32 And the Lorde deliuered Lachis into the hande ol Jlrael, which tone it the setonde day, and finote it with the edge ofthe lworde, e all the soules that were therin: doing attording to all, as he had done to the citie of Libna. ö

3 Then Horam king of Geler tame vp to helpe Lachis: And Joluah sinote

L

tue? ie

xxi d.

fe

ery

Jofuah.

him and his people, vntill none remapned of him. a

34. And from Lachis Josuah departed vnto €gion , and all Israel with hum:

and thep besieged it, qnd allaulted it.

25 And toke it the same day, and {note it F with the edge of the sworde: e al the fou les that were therin he Utterly destroyed the same dap, according to all that he he had done to Lachis.

26 And Josuah departed vp from Eglon, and all Israel with him, vnto Hebron:
And they fought against it.

37 And when they had taken it, they
{mote it With the edge of the s woe, e the king therol, and au the townes that parteined to it, and all the soules that were therin, and he left none remayning: but dyd actording to all, as he had done to Eglon, and destroyed it vtterlp, and all the soules that were therin.

38. And Jolsuah returned, and all Jlracl
With Hin to Dabir, fought againtt it.

39 And wWhenhehadtakenit, the king therof, and all the townes that partey-
Ded therto, they {mote them with the edge ol the sworde, e vtterly destroyed all the soules that were therin, neither let he any remayne: Euen as he dyd to
Hebron, so he dyd to Dabir and the king therok, as he had done allo to Libnd and her king.

4° Josuah therfore finote al the hi tountreyes, and the south countreyes, t the vallepes, and the downes, and al their

G

Ringes, and let none remapne of them, Deuten.

but vtteriy destroyed all that breathed, as the Lode God of Israel commaun: ded,

And Josuah hinote them srom Canes
Barnea vnto Alah, and all the countrey

ok olan euen vnto Gibeon.

42 And all thele kinges and their lande dyd Josuah take at bone time :becaule ae Gorol Piraci fought for PE rael. Hf ‘_

43 And Josuah and all Israel returned {a Soheretie
Dnto the hoast that was in Giigal.

In one batteil.

there to geue chankeg .fo2

W I The their victozie,

0 inges whom Fofuah lo suah. 2
70 ‘
The. xi. Chapter.

1 Certaine hinges are gathered again Josuah. God deltuereth all the kinges vnto
Fotuah, which had conspired against him. 7 Joluah killeth the Heures, the gebu. ktites, and the rest. 10 Che citie ot Boz istmitten, 14 Che Ilraelites do deuide the prape bet weene them. 15 Joluah fulkillech al tholethinges which Moples commaun-.

for jifracl,pct Kies don, and to the king of / AndloPofuah tame, and all the men 10 er e he unron, tothe king ok warré with him againt them by kr
Gaston 18) Bee nae Jof Achsaph, the waters of Peroni, and sodenlpfell.

ded him. 9 Che Heuite. 20 God hardeneth the enemies heartes. 21 The Enachimg

kliled.

00 . g
Id 1 N
* oi or 7 A fal NIN Vr
IN SLAY a7 aes fe a Sh
> Nath ‘© ea iy" oA 5 bast ye — i =. 0 * a
4 117 Nd when ad king to morow about this time will J deli en | [ek Bot Hazo2 had Hearde uer them all slapne before Israel: thou >...
3. Sy [tole thinges, he sent thalt™ hough their horses, and burne 22,

\Jto Jobab king of Ma-

0 g
8 02 r
* D yy 2

epee wick, 2 And vnto the kinges that were by the

the moe it

menen de Oath in the mountapnes and playnes 3 And the Lorde deliuered them into exge in tobwarde the louthlide of Ceneroth, ex the hande of Ilrael, and they {mote ere en in the lowe countreys, and in the box them, and chaled them vnto great St me

gellteg call it the lake of
Geniczareth.

the [caof a= 3 luiee, and the scaoł Ttbe-

this.

Genen ok ilpah: les, and burnt their charettes with fire. for ben And they came out r all their hoastes 10 And Josuah at that time turned back,
PMicewlatent.

ders of Dor westwarde,
And vnto the Chanaamtes both by east and west, and vnto the Amorzites,

Hethites, Pherezites, and Jebusites in

the mountaines, and vnto the Heuites that were vnder Hermon in the lande

with them, a multitude of folke, euen as the sande that is on the lea shore, in a great number, with horles aud charettes exteeding many.

And all these kinges met together, and came e pitched together at the waters of Merom, for to fight against Pract,

6 And the Lom sapde vnto Joluah, We not afrapde at the presente of them: for

to the ditd

their chaͤrettes with fire.

Wart

vpon them.

nified ue
Waters el! cor ding (0
Come, Bunt pitts.

bon, e buto Mileephormnain , Edw to the valley of Mispah Whiche ts eastward:and lmote them, vntill they had none remaining ofthem. :

9 And Fouad dyd onto them as the
Lorde bad him: he houghed their jor

and toke Hazor, e Iniote the king ther of with the worde: And Hazor before tite was the head of all those kins’ domes. ˖
11 And they {note all the © soules tha

were therin with ö edge of the won,
Dtterly destroping al, and nothing th breathed, was let remaine: And burnt Mazor with fire. 12 215

Sone
Coan chunren.

l the cities of those kinges , and n fihekunges ol them did Josuah take, and fmote them with the edge of the sworde, and btterlp destroyed them, as
Moyses the seruaunt ofthe Lord conv maunded. a zut Ilrael burnt none of the cities
Be. still in their ꝰstrength, laue
Haʒor only that Josuah burnt. 1 et 4. And all the spople of the sayde cities € the tattel, the children of Ilrael caught vnto them selues :: ut! cuery mã they fmote with the edge of the word, butt! they wa neither left y dught that ha 9
Aike Ade commaunded Moyles hisleruaunt, fo did Moples comaunde
Josuah, and euen fo did Jolsuah: so chat he nunisched no worde of all that the Lorde commannded Moyles,

if -
§

jie herr pfitus snot

mal,

bb. 15

ya.

les, and al the south countrey, and
15 lande of Gosan, and the lowe tountrep, ⁊ the plapne, and the“ mountayne ot Israel, and the lowe tountrey ofthe fame:

goeth bp to Seir, vnto Waal Gad in the valley of Libanon, vnder mount Herz mon: And all the kinges ol the lame he

sczese are the kinges of che lande which the

i
Bar Woe ’ i) dy

Sehon king of the Amorites, that
. Adelt in Pelbon, and ruled from Aroer,

_ Wich is beside the riuer ok Arnon, and
. fromm the muddle of the viner, and from
. Dalfe Gilead vnto the river Jabok,

* An is inthe border ofthe chdren of

Aumion:
45 git ftom the playne onto the fea of
1 eneroth eastward, and vnto the sea ot
4 the blaine, euen the lalt fea eastward,

Wap to Beth Jesimoth, and from

5 peut vnder the springes of © Pil-

C 16 Aud so Josuah toke all that lande of

7 Elen from the mount alan, that

toke, and smote them, and slewe them.

The. xii. (hapter. .
Che rehearfall of the hinges, which were mitten of the Itraelites beyonde Jordane. 4

13 Josuah made warre long time with those kinges:

19 either was there any titie that made peace with the children ok Ilrael, saue thole Hethites that inhabited Gibcon, and therkore all other they coke with battayle:

20 Jor it came of the Lorde, whiche dyd
Harden their heartes that they should come against Ilrael in batten, and that they choulde destroy them vtterly, and shelb them no merey: but to being them
8 naught, as the Lorde tommaunded

es

And that same season tame rpg K destroped the Anakims out ofthe moũtapnes:as out of Hebron, Dabir, Anab, and out of al the niountaynes of Juda, and ont of an the mountaynes of Ilra-

el: And Josnah vestroyed them btterip, with their cities.

22 There was not one Anakim left in the lande ofthe childzen of Ilrael: only in Alah, Gath, and Aldod, there remapyned of them.

23 And Joluah toke the whole lande, actording to all that the Lorde sayde vnto
Moyses, aud Josuah gaue it fora polsession vnto Pfrael* actording to their partes and tribes:and the lande rested krom warre.

a

And the coatt of Og king of Basan, which was of ther renmnaunt of the giauntes, and dwelt at Astharoth, and.
Coat: ‘
5 And raigned in mount Harmon, and :

in Saltah, and in al Balan, vnto the. border of He Gessurites, and the Mathathites and halke mount Gilead, bnto ‘ the borders of Sehon king of Helbon.

Moyses the seruaunt of the Lorde, and the children of Pfracl smote them,

Tofu ix. a.

i. Sa. Xvi. 2,

Nu. x vi. f.

Deu. ill. c.

and Doyles the seruaunt of the Lord . Nam xxie gane their land foz a poslessien vnto the. N ae
Rubenites, Gadites, and the halle tribe. ane

of Manasses.

c Ios. xi. b.

7 Thele are the kinges of the tountrey Devin. which Josnah and the children of Jz:

rael suiote on this fide Jordane weit « warde, from Waal Gad, whiche is in. the valley of Libanon, euen vnto the. mount“ Halak, that goeth vp to Seir: whiche lande pot gaue 1 7 .

2 é

Chop

De uifion of

u O2 1
Aßdotb.

lo su. vi. a.
Tofu.yui.a.

Iosu. viii a.

Ca) After that the cnemics are ouctcoine.

e Hebz. Shih

O.

c Hebr. Nea

rah.

the tribesof Ilrael to poffetle,to cuery man his part, ö
8 Ju the vpperlande and neather land, in the plaines, and in! the hil fides inthe wildernesse € southe countrey the He z thites the Amozites,p Chanaanites,the
Pheresites, ) Heuites, ethe Pebulites.
9 »The king of Jericho, was one: the king of Ai which is beside Bethel, one: io The king of hierusalem, one: the king ok Hebron, one: n The king of Jarmuth, one: the king ok Lachis, one: —
2 The king ok Eglon, one: the king of
. Gazer, one: . iz The lung ok Dabir, one: the king of
Gader, one:
14 The ing of Morma, one: the king of
Arad, one: N
‘is The king ok Libna, one: the king of

a

‘
‘
E t
€
4“

E
6“

—— PD suah was olde, and
J ltrickenin peres, and
Der he Lorde fayde vito

him: Thou art olde, ud stricken in peres, and there remaincth

5 pet exceeding muche

lande to bew possessed.

2 This is the lande that pet remaineth: all the regions of the Philistines, and al
Gessuri:

3 From Mllus which ts“ vpon Egypt,

. buto the borders of Accaron north-

« Ward, which land is counted vnto Cha-

« namie, enen fine lordeshippes of the

Philistmes, the Aathites Aldothites,

Altalonttes, Gethites, Accaromtes, and

the Enites.

4 And from the south, al the lande of the

¢
&

Chanaanites, and the “ caue that is befide the Sidonians, euen vnto Aphak x to the borders of the Ainorites.

5 And the lande ofthe Gwlites, and all
Libanon towarde the simne riling, from the plame of Gad vnder mount

W. Dermö, Dutila man come to Hamath:

(b Read chap.
II. b.

(6 All the inhabitours of the bil tountrey from Libané vnto the © Misrephoth-
: mam, and all the Sidontans Will J

fofuah. —_

20 The king of Simon Meron, onesthe-

The, xiii. Chapter.

Che Lode commaundeth Joluah to deuide the lande that remaineth vnto the Fe. raclites. n; Polsession is not geuen vnto the tribe ol Leus. is Che possesston of the children of Ruben. 22 Baalam is put to death. 24 The pollession o€ the tribe ol Gad.
20 Che pollelliou of the halte tribe of Manalle.

the lag
Bp — 8 — 3
16 The king of Makeda, one: the pine. of Bethel, one: 2 ung
17 The kingok Taphuha; one: the king.
Them of Aphen, on +
18 he king ot Aphek, one: the king ar en ‘ *
19 The king of Madon, one: the king ar
Halor ont: bebe.

. . e f

21 je king of Thanach, one: the king

e . 0

22 The kingot Redes, one: the king of.
Jokneam of Carmel, one: ? 4

23 Abhe*hing of Dorin the coittrey of Dopp,‘
154 the king of the nations ok Guͤgal, ne: . - 1

24. The king of Thirʒa, one:althekingestogether thirtie and one.

E K K „„ „„ „ „ HH HK

tast out krom before the children of l ral: only see that thou in any wile deuide it by lot vnto the Ilraelites to inherite, as J haue connnaunded the.
7 Nowe therfore deuide this lande to: inherite vnto the nine tribes, and the. halfe tribe of Manasles. f
8 Foz with that other, the Kubenites ¢: the Gadites haue reccaued their inheritauncee which Moyles gaue them. Da beyonde Jordane castwarde, euen as
Moyses the seruaunt of the Hod gaue them: 5
From Aroer that lieth on the bein of „ the riuer Arnon, and fromthe atic that. ts in the nuddest of the ryuer, c all the plame of Medeba vnto Dibon: ‘¢
10 And al the cities of Schon king of the,
Amorites, which raigned in Hesbon,

euen vnto the border of the chüldren ol.
Ammon:

¢

Ky

y

tion of the tribes

lofuah. —

cnertclelse, the chudren of Pact 24. And Woyles qauc inheritaunce puto B

5 0 Gelurites and the
© Kerpelied not the Gelurites and th

0. Gnchathlues: Wut the Gesurites and
. the Machathites dwell among the Ble raentes euen vntill this day.
14 Oneiy once the tribe of Leuthe gane
5 none inheritaunce: but the facrifices of the £020 God of Israel is their w inhe-
„ ritaunte, as he lapde vnto then.

MPopyles gaue vnto the tribe of the chil-

1 dren of Kuben inheritaunce, according

to their kinredes: :

16 e their coast was from Arder that

e lyethonthe baucke of the riuer Amnon,

and from the titie that is in the middelt

ptkthe riner and all the playne which is by Medeba:
1 dn {th all their townes that lye
“inthe plapne: Dibon and the hill plates
‘of aal, and the houle of Baalnieon,
8 And Sah, and Kedemoth, and

Mephaath.

9 anti Sabamath, and Zarath
EZahar, inthe mount ok the valley,

Go The house ol Peor, and the fpatnges

“ ofthe hilles, and Wethpheor, and Alh-
© Doth Pilgah, and Besiesimoth:

And al che cities ol the plane , and all the kingdome of Sehon king of the 2

morites, Which raigned in Hesbon,

which Moples smote, wich the lordes
„ Of Dadian, Eul, Bekem, Zur, and

Hur, ⁊ Beba the whiche were dukes of

Schon, dwelling in the countrey.

2 And Salaam also the sonne of Beor the soothlaper did the childrẽ of Jlrael
, flap With the lworde among other of a, them that were slapne.

23 And the vader ef the children of Ruz

ben, was Jordane, With the countrey

that lieth theron. This Was the inheritaunee of the children of Ruben after

their kinredes, cities, and villages per-

« fepning therto.

¢
‘

x
Mdthele are the conn: treis which the childrt of Ilrael inherited

naan,“ which Eleaser che priest, and Josuah the sonne of Pim, and

EE:

The. xiii . Chapter. |

Che lande ol Chanaan was deuided among the nine tribes and the halle. 6 Caleb 5

requixeth the heritage that was promiled him. 13 Hebron was geuen him. ‘
¢

Siu the lande of Cha-

che auntient heades of the tribes of

the tribe of Gad, euen vnto the childzen: ot Gad he gaue by their wide, f
25 And their coastes were Jaʒer, and al’ the cities of Gilead and halle the lande ofthe chitdeen of Ammon vnto Aroer: that lieth before Rabba, ;
26 And from Helbon vnto Namath,
Milpeh, and Wetonim:and from ga hanaim vnto the borders of Dabir.
27 And in the valley they had Wetharam,
Bethtimra, Socoth, and Zaphon, the. rest of the kyngdome of Sehon kugok-
Helbon, vnto Jordane and the coastes

that lie theron, euen vnto the edge of the « eur 17

fea of Cenereth, on the other fide Jor- Wand dane eastwarde. 9
28 This is the inheritaunte of the children of Gad, after their kinredes, their cities, and villages. ‘
29 And Doyles gaue injeritaurice nto ‘ the halle tribe ol Manalles: And this. was the possession of the halfe tribe of
Manasses by their kinredes. 5
30 Their coast was from Mahanaint, euen all Walan and all the kungdome ol
Making ol alan, and all the townes of Jair which lie in Balan, euen three-
{coze tities. | :
And Halfe Gilead, Astaroth, c Edzat, : cities offthe kingdome of Dg in Wasan, which pertayne vnto the children of « Nuxxxii.g
Maͤchir the lonne of Manasses, euen to dana the one halfe of the children of Machir r by their kinredes. ‘
32 Thele are the heritages which Moyses did distribute in the fieldes of Moab on the other fide Jordane, ouer agaynst.
Jericho castwarde. 5 ‘
But vnto the tribe of Leui, Doyles « gaut none inheritaunce: for the Lorde bci.
God of Israel is their inheritaunte as he sapde vnto them. ‘

the children of Jlrael distributed to them: ö t

u. x vill. c.

2 Wp lot they reteaued their possessions, Nu. xxvi. f.

as the Lord commaunded by the hand. & s ol Moyles to geue vuto the nine tribes, « and vnto the halse tribe. , : (ay The Nude
3 Jor Moyses had geuẽ inheritaunte vn ver dale to two tribes e an halfe, on the other ane
25 3 syde

The denifion

lpde Jordane: Wut vnto the Teuites he gane none inheritaunce among the.
4 Torthe children of Joseph were two

tribes, Manasses and Ephraim: And therfore they gaue no parte vnto the
Leuites in the land, saue cities to Well in, with the suburbes of the fame, for their beastes and cattel.

W KM FR WA K M HK

Nu xxxv. a. 5

tuen fo the children of Israel dyd, When they deuided the lande.

And the children of Juda came vnto
Joluah in Gilgal: And Caleb the sonne of Jephune the Kenelite fayde vnto hin: Thou wottest what p Lorde layd vnto Mopsles the man of God about d which was. (dme and thee in Cades Waͤrned.

EN

K „ W X HK

gate. 7 Fourtie peres olde was II whe Morhmguizd, les the seruaunt of the Lorde sent me

from Cades wWarnea to espie out the land: and J brought him worde againe euen as it was in myne hearte.

Meuerthelelle, my brethrẽ that went vp with me, diftouraged the hearte of the people: And J folowed the Lode my God.

And Moyses ware the fame day, faying: The lande wheron thy feete haue troden, halbe thyne inheritaunte and thy childrens for euer, because thou batt lolowed the Lorde my God.

t) That is the 8 other Ipies thac were c sent with him.

M M K R K N K K A „ K „ „ *

A ie at His was the lot of the
< tribe of the children of
Nu.33.¢ 7 rN Juda by theickinreds,
Neuen to the border of
5 Sedo in the wüder-
(a) The E= nesse of * Zin southber warde, euen from the cen ener blimost parte ofthe south coatt,

Aud their louth coast was from the briuke of the fate fea, from aw wrocke that leaneth southwarde.

Aud it went out to the southlide towarde p goyng vp to Maale Acrabim,
. € Went along to Zin, and afcended bp bon the southside bnto Cades Warnea: and went along to Pezron, and went vp to Adar, and fet a compafle to Karcaa.

the land, o d c rockc o capt . that qoeth in 3 to the seaa.

losuah.

As the Lord conunaunded Mopses:

The xy. (hapter.

Che lotte or portion ok Ephraim, 10 The Chanaanttes.

Of the},
10 And behold, the Lorde hath kept e aliue as he sapde this . arta fp ea peres, cuen lence the Lorde fpatie tiie. worde vnto Moyses, whyle the chudzen of en on. ate 7 Wildernesfe: : non „Jam this da .

2 * —.— MS dar fourlior.

u And pet am as strong at this time a:
1 was when Doyles sent nie ole owe strong J was then, so strongan:

‘J nove, epther for Warre, oz for go-‘ny, uernment. «soon
12 Nowe therfore geue me this mountaine wherof the lorde {pake in that dap.
(fo2thou heardest in that day, howe the.
Anakims were there, and the cities 0 great and Walled,) If the Loewy be with me, and J shalbe able to dryue a them out, as the Lorde fayde, cn
B pa fount wee AND gare: aleb the tonne of Pephune, He-‘

bron to inherite. 4 4
14, And Hebron therfore became the in- hn heritaunte of Caleb 5 sonne of Jephune. the Renesite, vnto this day: betaule he.

ss conttantip the Lozde God ol.
15 And the name of Hebzon was called: ban in old time, Kiriath Arba whichlarba).
Was a great nian among the Enckims: .
And the lande cealled from warre.

ö

¢
¢
¢

4. From thente went it along to Asmon, s and reached vnto the riuer of Egypt x e the ende of that coast was on the Westside: This is their south coat. Le

5 Their east coastis the lalt sea cuen vn as to p ende of Jordane: And their border aon in the north quarter, was from the. {ce
Jordan the fea and fromthe ende of. 15

ne. a

6 “And the fame border went bp to Beth! hagla and went along by the nosthlideof Wetharabah, and bp from thence to. the stone of ohen S forme of Ruben. sir

7 And againe, the fame border went bp. sx to Debir from the valley of Achor, and. so northwarde, turning towarde Gil

I, vp lo gal, that lieth * * ger ou.

fon of the lande. losuah.

5 min, which is ofthe south side of 19 Who aunswered: eue me a bleslin „ Ozfen f ape iver And the fame border went korthou haft geuen mea fouth lande 1 bppto the waters of the fountapne of the eue me allo springes of water. And he b funne, and ended at the well of Rogel. gaue her springes of water, boch aboue
Peo And then went vy to the valley of the and bencat g. sonne ok Hennom, euen vnto thefouty 20 This is the inheritaunte of the tribe spde ol Jebusi, the fame is Hicrufa- of the childzen of Juda by their kinlem: Aud then went bp to the toppe redes. st g
„ok the hyll that lpeth before the bale 21 And the vtmolt cities of the tribe of ey of hennom westwarde, and bythe thechildrenol Juda, towarde p coastes.

the valley of the giauntes north- of Edom southwarde, were Babseel. eee ay Eder, and Jagu r. a,

9 d then it tompasseth from the top 22 Ama, Dlimonah, and Adadah, okthe hill nto the fountame of the wa- 25 Kedes aso, and Jethnan, : ter of Nephthoah and goeth out ofthe 24. Ziph, Telem, and Waloth, ,
‘ cities of mount Ephron, and deaveth 25 Hazo2, Badathah, Karioth, Hesron, to Baala, which is“ Kiriathlarini. Which is azor, ö . vs, o And then it tompasseth from Waala 26 Amam, Shema, and Moladah,
„ westward vnto niount Seir, and then 27 n, and Weth-

f * :

E

goeth along vnto the side of mount Ja. p 5 ö
C. rim, which is Chelalon on the northüde, 28 Hazarsual, Beerlabe, and Baziothia, and tcommeth downe to Bethlames, 29 Waala, Jim, and Aʒem, < and goeth to Thmmah). 30 Eltholad, Cecil, and Horma, :
And goeth out againe vnto the fpdeof - 31 Zikelag, Medemenah, and Sen-
Akaron norchward: And then draaweth senn a. — to Secron, and goeth along to mount 32 Habaoth, Seihim, Ain, and Nimon:«
Baala, and stretcheth vnto Jabneel: all the ates are twentie and nine, wich and the endes ok the coastes leaue at the their villages. ;
« Welt - gs 33 AnD tnt the lowe countrey they Had:
‘12 And the Well border was the great Esthaol, Zarcah, and Asenah, :
© fea and the fame toast was the coast of 34 Zanoah, Engannim, Thaphuah, and. the children of Juda round about, in Enam: e : their kiuredes. 35 Jarmuth, Adulam, Socoh, and Azeiz And vnto Caleb the sonne ol Jephune ka h ‘
„ did Josuah geue a parte among the 36 Saarem, Adithaim, Gederah, k Gedchildrẽ of Juda, according to the mouth dcrothaim: fourteene cite with their wig, okthe Loade,cucn* Ririatharba ol the billages. father of Enac, Whiche citie is Ebron. 37 Zenan, Hadazah, and Magdalgad, din ., And Caleb 0 droue thence the thece 38 Delean, Mispeh, and Jektheel,
„ bones ok Euac, Sesat, and Abanan, 39 Tachis, Baztath, and Eglon, e, and Lhalniat which were the sonnes 40 Chabbon, Lehaniam, and Cethlis, me OfEna .. 4 Gederoth, Wethdagon, Naamah, €-
AS And he went vp thente, to the inhabt- Makedah: sixteene cities with their. n, tours of Dabir:and the name of PDabir villages. ; teas, l the old time Mas ziriath Sephar. 4.2 Lcbnah, Ether, and Alan, ‘
1e And Calcb sapde: He that smpteth 43 Jephthah, Asnah, and Nezib, .
Birlath Hephar, x taketh it, to him wil 44 Keilah, Achzib, and Marelah: nunc.
„ J gene Achlah my daughter to wyfe. cities, with their villages. ; wel 7 And Othniel the sonne of Kenez, the 45 Akron With her towues and dilla-;
%. bother of Caleb toke it: And he gaue ges. : ‘ him Aclah his daughter to wife. 46 From Akron euen vnto the fea, all. G
2.18 And as she went in vnto him, she mo- that lieth about Aldod, with their dit.
4 15 hum to astze of her father a fielde: ages. 5
. i che alighted ok her alle. And Ca- 47 Aldod with her townes and dillages, ; sc Mave vnto her what apleth the: Aan with her tones ¢ Dilages, gine id it N a . f N 4

a

— ——[ ö . = — —-—
Fucdlas portion.

Gun the o riuer ot & gypt, and the great sea

, Was their toast.

48 And in the mountaines, they had

Samir, Jathir, and Socoh.

49 Danah, and Kariah Sennah, which

ts Dabir,

50 Anab, Esthemoh , and Anin,

51 Gosen, Holon, and Giloh, a leuen az

ties With their villages.

51 Arab, Dumah, and Esean,

53 Janum, Geththaphuah, æ Aphecah:

F Humtah , e Vixiatharbe (which

Pla. xi d is Hebron) t Sior, nine cities with their
Villages.

55 Maon, Carmel, Ziph, and Jutah,

56 Jesrael, Jukadan, and Zanoah

57 Cain, Gabaah, and Thanmah: ten

fi

ce „ „„ % „ „ „„ „„ „ „„ „„ „*

OW den of Joseph fell

fro Pordane by Periz

cho, vnto the water of

Fericho eastwarde, €

to the wildernesse that

8 goeth vp frd Jericho throughout mount Bethel.

2 And goeth out fos Bethel to Tuz, and runneth along vnto the borders of
Archiataroth:

a And goeth downe againe westward
Seuef e d. kuen to the toast ol Japhleti, and vnto
Fele dh, the toast of Wethhozon the neather, € eremmeots 0 Gazer, and the endes oktheir toastes eaodunt. leaue at the west lea.

4 And fo the children of Joseph, Dana

W. fes, & Ephrain tone their inheritaunte.

5 And the border ok the chilozen of E-

phraim was by their kynreds. Their border on the east side was, Ataroth

Adar, euen vnto Bethhoron the vpper.

6 a }

(a) 10318 6 thought to be

tic at C ende of inount «

che ig alto na-

„ K a M U * „ „ „ #

„ „ „„ „„ „ *

lofuah. —

¢ The.xvy. Chapter.
Che lot or part of Ephraim, io The Chanaanttes dwelled among them.
Md the lot ot the hie 6 And went out westwarde to Pach-

The. xij . Chapter.

1. Che portion of the halte tribe of Manasse. z. Salphaad is geuen foz a possession to his daughters. 3 Chanaanites are tributaries vnto the 3 craeuites.4. Che sonnes ol
Joseph. Manasle, and Ephraim, do require a larger posseslion.

Ephraim Poni cities with their villages. :

58 Palhul, Wethszur,and Gedo?
55 Maavath,wWeehanoth and Eltheton. pets 929 5 e *

60 Kariah Waal, whithe is & ;
Jarim, and Rabba ; two tities wil.
OF ee ao 0.
61 In the wildernesse they had rabah, Meddin, and euch .
62 Mebane the titie ok Halte r En ee

gaddi : lpre cities With their bitlages .
63 Meuerthelesse,ꝰ Jebulites that wer. the inbabitaunts of Hierusalẽ, could not the chudzen ol Juda“ cast out: But. 1. the Jebusites dwell with the chudren ws of Juda at ppierulalem vnto thisdape. t's

Judt z

‘
¢
‘4

methath on the northside, and returneth tastward vnto Thaanath Sito: c past it on the cathode vnto Jonoah.
And went downe from Jonoah to:
Atharoth and Paarath and came to.
Jericho, and went out at Jordane.
8 And their border went from Thaphuah westward vnto the riuer Nanah, and the endes were the west la.
This is the inheritaunte of the tribe of. the childzen of Ephraim by their kynredes My. , ;
9 Audthe seperate tities forthe chitoze: of E Hraini, were among 5 inheritatice: of the chudren of Manalles, cuen the.
Cities with their vulages. a
Io And they draue not ont the Chanaa: nites that dwelt in Gaʒer: but the Chanaanites dwelt among the Ephraites buto this dap, and serue vnder tribute.

a nr a fF „„ „„ „ H

of Gilead: now becaufe he was anal, oftharre he had Gilead and alan. 0%
2 This is the possession of the! restol. oye the childzen ol Manasses by their BUY ere reds: (Hamelp] of the chitozen of A, bieser, the chüdren of Hele the dl. dren ok Ariel, the chüdren of Sich ge

the ' children of Hepher, the childzen f 1 Seimdarfonthele Were the mate chit dren of Manasles, the fonne of Joleph id., bpthelr kinredes. |
| But Selaphead the fonne of Hepher, the lonne of Giliad, p sonne of Machtr,

1 via. 4

put daughters, whole names are thele,

and before Josuah the sonne of Nun, e before the Lordes saping: The Low commaunded Mopyles to geue vs an enheritaunte among our Wbecthren.
And therfore according to the commaundement of the Torde, he gaue them an enheritaunte among the bees thren oftheir father. And there fel ten

Imeng

Our

of Gilead and wWalan , whiche were on the other fide Jordane.

6 weeaule the daughters of Manalles dpdenherite among his sonnes: And
Manalles other sonnes had the lande ok Gilead. —

Aud the coatte of Manasses was from
Aser to Machmathaͤth that lieth before
Sichem, and went along on the right hande, euen vnto the inhabitantes of
Entaphuah, lll
And che lande of Thaphuah belonged ng. to Panalles: which Thaphuah is beide the border ol Manalles, beide the bodder of the children of Ephraim. ant.? And the coatte descended vnto the
% riuer Canah southwarde, euen to the ritter: Thele cities of Ephraim, are a2 mong 5 cities of Manasles. The coaste of Manasses went allo on the northide to the riuer, and the endes of it go but ac the sea: =e. |
Fim, lO So that pfouth partained to Eph2aim, co < €the north to Manasles, € the fea ts his e border: And they met together in! Aler northwarde, e in Jlachar eastwarde.

E
é
¢
‘

‘
€ a t t

Nd the whole congre-
O°! gation of the chüdzen
NY, lof Ilracl canie together at Silo, and fet vp the tabernacle of the congregation there, af: ter the land was in fub-

N Se 9

lofuah.

the sonne of Panalses had no sonnes:
Mahala, Mod, Hagia, Melcha, and
Thirla.

Which tame before Elealar the priest,

portions to Manasles, beside the lande

The. xpiii. Chapter.

Cher arefente certapne, who should appointe lande kor leuen tribes betweene the lonnes ol Joseph.and quda. n The postion ofthe children ol Beniamin. 1; Luza, which is allo called Bethel. 14 Cariath Baal.

And Manasses had in Jlachar and in
Aler, Wethsean & her ibn iblean and her townes, and the nbabsours: of Dor, with the townes pertaining to « the same, and the inhaditours of Endor with the townes ot the fame, and the inhabitours of Thaanach with: her townes, and the inhabitours ok.

Magedo with the townes ok the lame, enen thee countreps. ©) Car at the

12 Pet the children of Manasses coulde {Mer

® not overcome those cities: but the Senn
Chanaanttes presumed to dwell in the. ae same lande. dne

13 Heuerthelesse, assoone as the children

of Ilrael were wared strong, they put. the Chanaanites vnder tribute, but expelled them not. a 8

IA. And the children of Joseph spake vnto Joluah, laping: Why hast thou geuẽ me bnt one lotte and one portion to in- | pee seyng J am a great people „and 0 t

orasmuche as the Lowe hath w blelled. Funn me hytherto 465

15 And Josuah aũlwered them: Pf thou be much people, then get thee vp to the: wood [countreyjand prepare lor thy selle theremthe lande of the Pherezites and 5 ging
“ofthe Giauntes , pkuiount Ephraun eg be to narowe for thee. en dene

16 And the childzen of Joleph sayd, The. S hill is not pnough for vs: And all ß Cha- eh naanites that dwelin the love countre b haue charettes of iron, and fo haue they. that inhabite Wethlean c the townes of the lame, and they also that dwell in the valley of Jezreel. ‘

17 And Jaluah fapde vnto the house of

Foleph, Ephraim, æ Manalses: Be be.

niuch people, and haue great power,

8 and shall not therfore haue one lotte.

18 Therkore the hyll halbe yours, and:

ve shall tut downe the wood that is in

it: and the endes of it chalbe pours, pf. pe tast out the Chananaites which haue iron charettes, and are very strong.

na W NR X „

tection before them.
2 Andthere remained among the children of PHaclfenen tribes Which had. g chu

not vet receaued their enheritauncte. Sman 5
3 And Josuah fapde vnto the chüldren . ne of Iscdel: Howe long are pe fo slacke. Den... to tomie and possesse the lande .

d

Deuifion of

the Lord God of pour fathers hath geen pou- f

4 Etue out from among vou for cuery tribe thzee men, that J may sende them: and that they map ryfe , and Walke

(e That io in. to ten partes, to euer ꝑ tribe onc.

come againe to mme.

seuen partes: And (Juda shall abide in their coast on the south, and the boule of

FJoseph shall stande in their coastes on

x3 the north.)
Vuen partes, and bayng the description hyther to me: and F Mati calt lottes for pou here before the Lord dur God.

That ts,
Before the ark «

aie ung. 7 Sut the Leuites haue no part among vou, for the priesthood of the Lorde is their inheritaunte: And Gad and Rue ben, and halke the tribe ok Manalses,
Jouxrb . haue reteaucd their inheritaunte be-

pond Jordan caltward, which Moyles the leruaunt of the Lord gaue them.
3 And the men arole, and went their

Went to destribe the lande, saping: Depart, and go through the lande, and de-
Kode nt Sto, Regt:

9 And the men departed ,and walked through the lande, and delstribed it by cities into seuen partes in a booke, and returned to Josuah into p hoast at Silo.
0 Aud osuah cast © lottes for them in

Cf) To auoive dissention, end that cucrp ima shonld be contet with gods appointment.

duüuded the lande vnto the chuͤdren of
Ilstael, to eche their poztion.
And the lot of the tribe o the children ol Bentanun came vp accozding to their klnredes: And the coast of their lot tame
« betweene the children ol Juda, and the children of Josep ß.
C And their north coat was from Jordane, € went vp to the fine of Jericho on the north fide, and went vp through the mountaines westwarde, and they ended at the wildernesse of Wethanen. z And went from thente toward Tus,
© mento the south side of Luz (the fame

is Bethel) e destended againe to A-
=, prow . 2 e of Epa: the south fine ofp neather Wethhoron. del was , 14. And the toast turneth thence, c com-

the tribe k“ cniamin.

lofwah.

through the lande, and distribute it actordyng to the © inberitaunce therok, &

5 Aludletthem dende it vnto them into end okthe hyll that lyeth betore the val

gy a ont lep ofthe fonneof Hennom, euen inthe.
Deltribe ye the lande therfore into se-

downe to the well of Kogel,

wape: And Josuah charged them that

And goeth along to the syde of weth-. tribe it, ald come, againe to me, that Z g 5

may here calt lottes for vou before the

20 And Jordane kepeth

— Hilo before the Lode: c there Josuah .
21. Thele were the cities ofthe tribes ol

their kinredes:

2 n, Samaraim, and we, t ¢

taroth Adar, vnto the hyll that lyeth on

a the lays passeth the torner of the fea soutl ; cuen from the hyll that eth betes
Wethhoron fouth ward and goeth out. at e ( ee nee Da: rind a citte of the childrẽ of Juda: This.

is the west quarter. N ye
15 And the south coast goeth from the‘ ende of Airiathiarum, and goeth out! westwarde, and thence it turneth to the well ok waters of Rephthoah, „ 0,
16 And commeth dowue agame to the-

valley of the giauntes northwarde,

and deftendeth into the valley of hen-

nom beside Jebuli southward, goeth - Or ing alem.

17 And tonwasleth from the north, and. d dooeth koorth to En shemesh, and de- n, paͤrteth from thence to the places of. eh.
SGeltloth, whiche are towarde the:

going vp vnto Adomnum: and gocth.

do wne to Me" stone of Wohan the lonne anz

c Nuben. 9 f

And then goeth along toward the. lde ol the plaine northward, and goeth done into the fieldes. ;

hagla northwarde, and endureth the. poynt of the falt fea nozth therefrom, seuenj at the fouth ende of Jordaue: ra
This is the south coast. N 1 in this coat on the cast l'rde: And this is the inheri taunte of the chyldren of Bemanun by. their coastes rounde about, throughout: their kinredes. . the chyldren of Wenanun theonghout: ericho, Bethhagla, and the plaine of Calis. ;

23 Auim, Parah, and Ophrah, ;
24. Haamonat, Ophni, € Gaba, taut

cities with their villages. ;
25 Gabaon, Ramah, Becroth, ‘
26 Milspeh, Chephirah, and Mosah,
27 Recem, Jarephel, and Tharela, .
28 Sela, Eleph, and Jebusi (Which is .
Dierusalem) Sibath, and Ciriath, four cos = teene cities with their vulages. Thie ees is the inheritaunce of the chyidzen ok Seis

Weilanun throughout their kinredes. 4

é
é

o 7 . J The’

of the tribes.

portion

46. The pollession of Josuah.

Md the secdd lot came
Fo) lout to Simeon, euen
We kor the tribe of the chillinge of Simeon by
ANA chee kinreds: And
Icheir inberitatice was inthe © middes of the

„ „ „ „ „ „ „ „ K 4 Fenn e&

¢

INS ps p10 c c

that dr £085 2 ca Wlerlabe, Sabe, and Moladah,
"3 Hazozsual, Walah, and Aem,
4 Eltholad, Bethul, and Hozmah,

Fzetsulah,

‘¢ Wethlebaoth, ¢ Saruhen, thirteene

tities with their vulages.
„„ Ain, Nemmon, Ether, € Alan, foure
B. atties with their villages.

3 And therto all the villages that were

rounde about these cities euen to Walasah Beer, and Namath southward.
This is the inheritaunce of the tribe of
„the childzen of Simeon throughout their kinredes.
9 Out okthelot okthe children of Jnda, cane the inheritaunce of the children of

XR „

one Juda Was to much for them, and rin’ therfore the childzen of Simeon had rina, their inheritaunce in the inberitaunce
Moonee okthem.
‘Io Andthe third lot arose kor the childrẽ ol Zabulon throughout their kynreds:
And the coattes of their inheritaunte
Gere (ole to Sarid. ia And went bp westward euen to
Maralah, and reached to Dabbaseth, f came thence to the riuer that lyeth be-
„ fore Pokneant,
A And turned from Sarid eastward toward the sunne risyng vnto the border
C. ok Chilloth Thabor, e then goeth out
‘ to Dabereth, and goeth bp to Japhia.
(3 Aud from thence goeth along castward to Gethah wepbher , to Itthah
Bazin, and goeth to Nemman, and turneth to Peah:
4. And tompalleth it on the north fide ene to Hannathon, and endeth in the va-
Icy ok Jephthahel, ml Batath, Mahalol, Simeon, Jedalah, ande) Bethlehem: twelue cities

ofuah.

The. xix. Chapter.
2. The lot of Simeon. 10. Jabulon. 40, The pollession of the tribe ok Dan.

‘ Simeon: or the part ofthe children of

aew A BHAA

With their villages. .
16 This is the inheritaunte of the chile: been of Zabulonthroughout their kynredes and thele are the cities with their vlllages. :
17 And the fourth lot canie out to Isachar, euen for the chudrenol Jlachãr by « a was Get : nd their coat was Pelraclah , Ca: « suloth, aud Sunem, "2 ‘
19 Hapharaim, Sion, and Anabarath, «
20 Harabith, Rision, and Abes, :
21 Rameth, Enganim, Enhadah, and!
Wand tha coat ceacheth to
22 coatt reacheth to Hpaboz,t‘
Sahazimah, and Bethlames: and endeth at Jordane, spxteene citics with their villages. i
23 This is the inheritaunte of the tribe of the children of Hlachar by their kinreds: and thele are the cities with their billages, ;
24. And p fpfth lot tame out for the tribe. of the chůdren of Aler by their kinreds.
25 And their coast was Helkath, Pali,
Geten, and Achfap, :
26 Alamelech, Amaad, and Mileal: and. kame to Carniel westwarde, and to DE « hor TLibanath. ;
27 And turneth toward the sunne riling 4 to Bethdagon, and commeth to © Za- bene went bulon, and to the vallep of Jephthahel, . Sus. towarde the north fide of Bethemek x pat and goeth out on the lefte fine of. abu

28 And to hebron, Nohob, Bammon, and KRanah, euen vnto great Sidon.

29 And then the coat turneth to Ra-

mah Eto the strong citie of © Zor, and we was

turneth to Hozah, e endeth at the sea, by: Nang ane

the possession of Achʒibah, the ea,
Amah alfo, and Aphek, and Rolob:.

1 25 and two cities with their vil-

ages. ‘

This is the inheritaunce ofthe chil: «

Deen of Aker by their kinreds: thele

are the tities with their villages. ;

32 And the syrth lot came out to the childen of Rephthallccuen) to the chüdze or-
Nephth ali by their Kinredes. 5. e

33 And their coat was from Heleph, © e Senn and from Elon to Zacnamm, b Din

The denifion

Mekeb, and Jabneel, euen to Lakum, and doth go ont at Jordane.

34. And then the coat turneth westward

to Aslanoth Thabor, ¢ then goeth out

> from thence to Hukokah, and reacheth

to Zabulonon the south side, and goeth

to Aser on the weit fide, and to Juda

5 sere Jordane toward the funne ri-

3 png, :

And their rong cities are Ziddim, weinrche ths 7 lake o? Gen:

nezereth had
Hig name.

36 Adamah, Namah, and Hazor,
37 Kedes, Ebrai, and Enhasor,
„38 Jeron, Magdalel, Horem, Wethanah and © Bethlaͤmes, ninteene cities With their vullages.

This is the inheritaunce of the tribe

Ther wer 5

tinte cities of

in ad one 39

e. „ kxynredes: thele allo art the cities and their villages.

40 And the seuenth lot tame out kor the tribe of the children of Dan by their kinredes.

41 And the coat of their inheritaunte

> Was, Zaraay, Esthaol,“ Irsemes,

42 Saclabin, Aialon, Jethlah, 5

„43 Elon, and Thenmathah, and Akron,

44 Elthckeh, Gibbethon, and Waalath,

45 Jehud, Gauebarat, e Gathrimon,

46 Meierton, and Arecon, wich the bor-

T de deuson of the lande to the 5 chpldzen of Israel, that ts to

n wWpt, by Mopses vnto two tri-
] ves and an halte on the farther spde of the rpucr Bozbane tko: Nl

1 THEMED: 775
. AL . et to the other 5 —.— x SAN
SAGA] tribes on the ypther lpde b 23
= Tela. ee e N,
Maks. Me “5 1 oe at W *
N | 8

SIMEON = ia

lofuah, ~ i

Ter, Hamiath, Raccath,e” Cenereth, -

of the children of Nephthali by their

T

Of the lang

der that lyeth before © Japho.
47 And the coastes of wech of Dan C went out from them: And the chit been of Dan Went bp to ™ tpahe against de
Telem and tobe it, and finote it thigh 5 SEE edge of the lworde, e couquered it, and 20, dwelt therin, and called it * Dan, after ra the name of Dan their father. 4 nate |
48 Lhisis the inhcritaunte of the tribe of the childrẽ of Dan intheyr kinredes:- thele allo are the cities, with their bia.’

ges.
49 vohen they had made an ende of deuiding the lande by her coattes, the chi dren ot Ylrael gaue an inheritaunce to”
Josuah the sonne of Nun amongthe:
50 Alrtording to the worde of the Lone’ they gaue hym the titie whiche heat: ked, euen Thimnath Serah in mount
5 ae he buylt the citie,¢ dwelt, herin. N
51 Chelcarethe inheritauntes whiche-
Eleasar the priest, c Josuah the sonne, of Nun, and the auncient fathers of the: tribes of the children of Israel deuided by lot in Silo befoze the Lorde at the doore of the tabernacle of the tongregation: and so they made an ende ok deui-, dyng the tountrey. >

Anz

e N MOVNT, LIBAN: hg n hue I OY

TA LI* 7)

Pr OFARABIAL 5
JE STONYE;

r

frage.

7 And their names.

= He Lorde alfo fake

i onto Josuah, saping: i Speake to the children of Ilrael, and faye: “Appoint out fro
Jamodg vou cities of re-

¢
C
‘
‘
¢ c

That the slear that kylleth any perfor

C
é tf
Cc
¢
U

. And he that doth fice vnto one of thofe

« f

tant wy
S
Sa
D or
Ss har J et es ss oS ber

he map dwell among them.

And ik the auenger of blood folow after him, they shall not deliuer the fear into his hand: betaule he finote his friend ignorauntlp, and hated him not before typme.

6 And He Chall dwell in the sayd citie vntyl he stande bekoze the congregation in

¢

c

losuah.
The. xx. (bapter.
2. The Lord commauudeth Josuah to appoint cities of refuge. The ble cherof.

The .xxj. Chapter.

5 M „ „

Wiudgement, *o2 vntpll the death of:

the bye pret that chall be in thole. sucess”
Dapes : for then shall the flear returne,

and come vnto his owne citie, and vnto : Nau his owne Houle, and vnto the citie from. whence he fled. 0

7 And they fauctificd Redes in Galilce ‘25

in mount Nephthali, € Sichẽ in mount.
Ephraim, and Biviatharba (which is
Hebron / in the mountapne ol Juda.
8 And on the other spde Jordaͤne ouer against Jericho eastward, they appoynfed Wezer in the wildernelle vpen the. playne, out of the tribe of Kuben, and
Va moth in Gilead out of the tribe of.
Gad, and Golan in Balan out ofthe .. tribe of Manasses. .

Xv.

Thetis,

out ot j baite

9 Thele were the cities appointed fozalt steven the chüldren of Ilrael, €foz the frau:

ger that soionrned among them, that‘ whosoeuer kylled any perlon ignoraũtlp, the same might flee thyther, c should not dye by the hand of the auenger of. blood, vntil he stoode before the © congregation.

ges

a fF AR M ®

‘ 41 The cities geuen to the Leuttes. in number eight and lourtie. 43. Che Lord accor· |

‘ ding to his promile gaue the children of Alrael rest. < a! LESS Sag Md then came the prin- [on, and ont of the tribe of Wenianun,
J. * roe icipall fathers of ß Le- thirteenc cities. . ne m (ultes vnto Eleazar the 5 And the rest of the children of Caath «

e priest, and vnto Joluai ah the fonne of spun, ¢
: py [bata the auntient faz
Athers that were ouer p tides of the chüdren ol Hira:
And spake vnto the at Silo in the lande of Chanaan, saping: The Lorde cont: maunded by Doples to geue vs citics to dwell in, with the {uburbes thereof for our catell.
3 And the chudren of Ilrael gaue vnto
ö the Leuttes , out of their inheritaunte
* Fide biappug of the Lord, thefe cities a Aowing with their suburbes. pees 7 gine the lot came out for the kynred of
Pes, OM Caathites: the chuͤdren of Aabe. tes De pelt Which were of the Lent:
F. mi had geuen them by lot out of the
« MOC ok Jnda, out of the tribe of Sime-

v.

had by lot, out of the kynredes of the. tribe of Ephraim, out ot p tribe of Dan, and out of the halle tribe of Manasles, ten tities. b 5

6 And the childgen ol Gerson had by lot out of the kynredes of the tribe of Jlachar, and out ofthe tribe ol Aler, x ont of. the tribe of Pephthali, and out of the: other halfe tribe of Manalses in Wa-. fan, thirteene cities. *
And the chide of Merari by their kinredes, had out of the tribe of Kuben, €. out of the tribe ol Gad, and out of the: tribe of Zabulon, twelue cities. :

8 And the children of Pract gaue by lot vnto the Leuites thele cities with their. suburbes, as the Lord tommaunded by. the hand of Moyles. b
And they gaue out of the tribe ol the. children

d The Jud:

to Declace causc.

Deuision of

chudren of Juda, and out of the tribe 26. All the cities forthe other kynredes

of the childzen of Himeon, these cities bp nanie. 5 lo Which the children of Aaron being of the kynredes of the Caathites, and of the childrẽ of Leu, obtained: (for theirs

Was the first lotte.) 1

dn Andthey gaue them Niriath Arba of the father of Enac (which is Hebron / in the hyll countrey of Juda, with the suburbes of the fante rounde about it.

12 But the lande that pertapned to the bout. Huge. lte ànd the villages therof , gaue they to Caleb the sonne of Jephune, to be

his possession. z And thus they gaue to the childre of Aaron the priest, a citie to the which the fslaper myght fice , euen Hebron with her luburbes, and Libna with her sub-

C. urbes,
14 And Jathir with her suburbes, and
Estemoa with he suburbes:
15 Holon with her suburbes, Dabir with her suburbes: |
6 Ain with her suburbes, Juttah with her suburbes, Wethlauies with her luburbes: nine cities out of those two
7 And out ot the tribe ol Wenannn they gaue Gibeon with her suburbes, Gabae with her suburbes,
18 Anatoth wich her suburbes, Annen with her suburbes foure cities.
19 All thele cities of the children of Aaron
« parteltes were thirttene cities with their
« fuburbes,
20 And the kynredes of the children of
« Caath that were Leuites, that is to fay,
. the other childreu of Caath had cities geuen them kor their lot out of the tribe
Teuteg oni. Of Eplhatin.
P21 Forthey gaue them the cite that the llear might fice vnto, Sichem with her fsuburbes in mount Ephraum, and Gazer with her suburbes.
22 And Cibʒaum with her suburbes, and
Wethhoron with her suburbes, foure
23 And out of ö tribe of Dan, Elthec with
; ih suburbes, Gabethon with her sub-
Urbes. a
24. And Aials with her suburbes, Gathremon with her suburbes foure tities.
25 And out of the W halfe tribe of Maz nales, Thanach with her fuburbes , €
‘ Gathrenion with her fuburbes , two

d The suburb es wcte thousande cu-

bitcs fromthj
Walt of the ti: f 12 nude

Jos.xtiii.

c That ts that werte no prictes, but

(d) whicke dwelled in
CThanaan.

cities.

the lan d

Of the children of Caath, were th‘ their suburbes. — — .
27 And vnto che Childe of Gevfon, which. were of the Kynvedes ol the Wenites ; they gane out of the other hatte tribe of:
Manasses, the citie of refuge fo2 5 dear ‘
Golan Satan with her suburdes, z. e with her luburbes Ayo‘ cities. ; ‘
28 And out of the tribe of Plachar. Nin. on with her suburbes 1155 91 with her suburbes: ö
29 And Jarmuth with her suburbes enganit with her fuburbes, koure ck es. i
30 And out of the tribe of Aler, Hilal
1 Vee suburbes, Abdõ with her suburbes. :
3 Helcath with her fiburbes,andRohop: with her suburbes, fourt titles.
32 And out ok the tribe of Pephthall the: titie for the slear to flee vnto, Kedes in
Salilce with her suburbes, Pantothdoz. with her suburbes, and Carthan with: her suburbes, three cities. f
33 Allthe tities of ß Gersonites throughouttheir kynredes, were thirteene ck ties With their kuburbes, a
34 And vnto the other kynredes of the F childreu of Merari co the rest of the Le- wrens uites, they gane out of the tribe of Zar thes bulon, Jecnam with her suburbes, and «Foes
Cartha with her suburbes. eet
35 Dinmah with her suburbes, and Pa ae halal with her suburbes, foure cities. “ots
36 And out or the tribe ol Kube, weser. hh with her suburbes, and Jahala with. her suburbes, „h
37 Kedinoth with her suburbes, andche- ma pbaath With her suburbes, koure Ci. 4 e
, : „J
38 And out of the tribe of Gad, they gaue the citic for the slear to fice vnto, Ra. moth in Gilead with her suburbes, and:
Mahanaim with her suburbesʒ,
Hel bon with suburbes, and Jascr with her suburbes, koure cities in all.
40 So that all the cities of the childreu. G of Merari thoughout their kinredes -
Which were the rest of the kynredes of ‘ig Shs we Teuites, Were by thew lot twelue ca
2 e
41 Aud all the cities that the Teutes-
Had, among the polleslion of the chile drenof Isracl, were. rive. with Hew rows suburbes.

not ttOl? of the tribes.

. > tities lay euery one seue-
A _ seat 4 their suburbes rounde about them throughout althe said 5
„ And the Lorde gane vnto Ilrael all
. +e lande Which He ware to geue vnto their kathers: And they tonquered it, k
1 erin.

N * aD tpe Lord gaue them rest rounde

lofuah.

— XV}, about, aceording to all that he sware vnto their fathers: and there stoode nota: man of all their enennes before them:
The Tode also delivered all their enemies into their handes.

45 There staped nothing ol al the good thinges which the Lord had sayd buto ‘

p boule of Israel, but all tame to pafle, « 2

¢

Jolu. 13.

The. xxi. Chapter.

— Gad, and the halft tribe of Manalles are (ent againeto their pollessions. o. Chey
* bi en aclker 0 a memorial. iy, Che Flraclites reproue them, 21 Their aunt were lor

dekence ol the lame.

hen © Josuah called the Nubenites, thea-
(2 dites, e the halfe tribe ok Panasles,
And sayd vnto thent:
He haue kept all that
' = Mopses the seruaũt of es the Lord tcõmaunded pou, and haue m © obepedittp bopee in all that J comaun-
3 He haue not lefte pour brethren ok a long season vnto this dap, but haue kept the connnaundement of the Lorde pour God. g f
4 And nowthat the Lorde hath geuen rest vnto pour brethren as he promised them: therkore returne pe, and go vnto pour tentes, and vnto the lande of pour possession, which Moyses the seruaunt ok the Lordꝰ gaue you on the other five ob Jordane. f
5 Sutin ary Wyle take diligent heede, to
. do b tommaundement c Hawe which n Boyles the seruaunt of the Lord charn Led pou: that pe loue the Lorde pour
Mer GOD, and Walke in all his wapes, and n Repebis commaundements, and cleaue
„ vnto him, and serue him with alt pour
, beartes, and all pour soules. ks. And so Josuah w blesled them, ¢ {ent

them away: And they l a tentes, l hey went vnto their

7 Unto the one halfe of the tribe of Daz

8 pall Moyses gaue possession in Baan: dt onto the other halfe thereof gaue
0 oluah, among their brethren on this poe Jordane westwarde. And Pokal

leut them away allo bute their tentes,

1 and blesled them, an fayde vnto them: Returne with
’ uch riches vnto pour tentes,and with
8 1 multitude of cattell, with lyluer
Golde, with bralle, and iron, and

with niuch rapment, and deulde the spople of pour enemies with pour © 0 Pye brethren. 512

9. And the children of Kuden, the childrẽ of Gad, e the balfe tribe of Manasses returned, and Departed front the chit: dren of Israel out of Silo, which is in the lande of Chanaan, to go onto the countrey of Gilead, to the lande of their possession, which they had obtapned, according to the Word of the Horde by the hand of Mopses.

lo And when they came vnto the borders of Jordane that are in the land ol Chanaan, there the children of Ruben, the chuldren of Gad, and the halfe tribe ol
Manasses buylt © there an aulter by 1
Jordane, e that a great aulter to sce to. =

1 Whenthe children of Jsrael hearde * sape, beholde the childzen of Kuben, the children ol Gad, and the halle tribe of Manasses, haue buylt an aulter in p forefront ot the lande ot Chanaan in the borders of Jordane, at the paflage of the children of Hitact:

12 when the children of Pfraci hearde ol C it, the whole congregation of the children of Israel gathered them together at Silo, to make battell against them.

3 And the children of Pitaci sent vnto a man de the childrenol Kuben and to the chil: e dar dren ol Gad, and to the halle tribe of a
Manasles into the lade of Gilead, Phi- ne nehes the sonne of Eleazar the priet, ear

aor their 5 eg and possessions. *
Num. 31, d,
1. Reg. 30. f.

bp Chanaan.

to fall away
14 And with hum ten lordes, of cuery neon. Det. cheele houle a lorde, throughout all the tribes of Israel, which were heades of their fathers housholdes among the thoulandes of Jsrael. |
15. And they went buto the childzen of „„
Ruben, and to the children of Gad, and to the children of the halle tribe of Manasses, vnto the lande of Gilead nt they

. en and ad

D

Nu. xxv.

th) fhe res proach of that
Wickednes doth sticke dy vs fil though aft er punishmeni dy death
Of 24. theufand Hoos:
Wzath was pactfied.
Num. 25. c.

(t) Is wane ting che Irke ok the Lorde, and hig aulter

(g) To vse

rebcll agapnst
God. 1. Dam.

E

@ Higni fis! rng that, vf inanp susteted foz one

mans fault, for che Fault of

manp all syuld sutct.

tri 0 ict hun punisy vs, € rtuenge tt.

gn) Fall ae ap fro tras rengton.

they spake with them, saying:

16 Thus sap the whole congregation of the Lorde: What tranlgrellion ts this, that ye haue tranlsgresled agapnst the
God of Israel, to turne away this day

from the Lord, in that ye haue buylded vou an aulter for to rebell this dap against the Lord: ;

17 Hsthe* wicked deede of Peor tolitle for vs, wherol we are not pet W cleansed vnto this day, and there was a plague in the congregation of the Lorde-

18 Be allo are turned away this day from the Lorde: And seyng ve rebell to daye against the Lorde, it wyll come to passe that to morowe he shalbe wroth With all the tongregation of Jlrael.

19 Motwithstandyng, pf pe thynke that

the lande of pour poffeffion is © vn-

cleane, then tome ouer vnto the lande of the possession ofthe Lorde, wherein the Lordes tabernacle dwelleth, and take possession among vs: But rebell

not against the Lorde, nor rebell against

vs, to buylde you any other aulter, saue the aulter ofthe Lorde our God.
20 Opd not Achan the sonne of Zareth trespasse greeuouslie in the attursed thyng, and Wath fell on all the tongregation of Israel? and this man alone
Y perished not in his wickednes.
Then the chyldren ol Kuben, and the chyldren ol Gad, and the halfe tribe of
Manasses aunswered, and lapde vnto ge oucr the thoulandes of JE rael:

22 The Torde God ok gods, the Torde

God ol gods knoweth, and also Ilracl
{hall knowe, pf it be to rebell oz to transgresse against the Lorde, then thou ode saue vs not this day.

23 O els yl we haue buplt vs an aulter to turne from folowyng the Lorde, or to offer theron burnt offeryng or meate offeryng, or to offer peare offerynges theron, let ß Lo hun lelle require it.

24. And yk we bane not rather done it foe feart of this thyng, faying, In tyme to tome pour chyldren myght fay vnto durs: What haue pou to do with the
TLorde God of Pfraci z

25 The Lorde hath) made Jordane a border betweene vs and pou pe childen of Ruben and of Gad, ye haue no part therfore in the Lorde: and fo shall pour children make our children ™ ceasse from fearyng the TLorde.

26 Therforze we saide, we wyll make b an aulter, not for burnt offerin 3 faccifice n

Priges fhouty

(q) Bis naunt f bd

We perteaue that the Lard is 1 ri vs, betause pe haue not done this trel an

34. And the chidzen of Kuben, and the children ok Gad, called the aultert edo it shalbe a witnes betweene vs, that the
Torde is God. The

nings, tf they forlake him. a i Md it came to passe, a-

Yong season after that
: 4 the Torde had geuen

92 rest vnto Hlract from

al their enemies round stricken in age.

about, that Josuah
Wared olde, and was
2 And Josuah called forall Israel, and for their elders, their heades, their iudges, and officers and sayd vnto them: J amolde and stricken in age,
3 And ye haue seene all that the Lorde pout God hath done vnto all thele nati: anes ons before yon, howthe Lorde pour
God him lelkhath fought for you.

4 Weholde, J haue deuided vnto you by lot these nations that remayne, to be an inherttaunce for pour tribes, euen front

ordaue, with all the nations that J haue deltroped, euen vnto the great fea westward.

a5 And the Lorde pour God Hhalerpel we them before vou, t tast them from out

lande, as the Lord pour God hath fayd

vnto ou. :

6 Go to therfore ,and be of a good coutage that ve take heede and do all that

„b. i Whitten in the booke of the lawe of bald Doyles, *that ye bowe not alide there:

% ktom tothe right hande or to the left.

Neither company with these nations via. that is with them that are left with am Poll neither make mention ol che name

i. them , neither ferue them, noz bowe vour selues bnto them. a
8 But sticke fast vnto the Lowe pour.
God, as pe haue done vnto this dap.
So shall the Loo tast out before you cat nations and mightie, as no man

ol Joleph are buried. 3: Eleazar dieth. d Josuah gathered
N.. Vall tribes of Israel to Sichem, and called
ES for the elders of Hira

indges, and officers , t they presented them

The. xxlii. Chapter,

qosuah erhorteth the people, that they iopne not them Clues to the Gentiles.
„ 1075 name not their idoles. 14 Che promise ik they feare God. hat tyieat

of your sight, and pe chall conquer their

olther gods, nor h caule to [Weare by

hath ben able to stand f ert , e before vou hy-

Io One man of vou chall chase a thou- Leu. 26. b.

land: fon the Lorde pour God he figh- Pen tech fo2 you, as he hath promnuieo pon.

1 Lake good heede therfore vnto pour

selues, that ye loue the Low pour God.

Iz Els, if ye go backe and tleaue vnto the

rest of these nations that remaine with vou, Chall make mariages with them, and go in bnto them, and they to vou:

13 Be ye sure that the Lorde your God

will no more cat out all thele nations

from before you: but they shalbe snares ko g and trappes vnto vou, and feourges Nan ¥s in pour fides e thornes inponr eyes, mae.” ©
Dntill pe pevithe from of this good land aeg
Whiche the Lorde pour God hath ge: pan ae, nen pou, lo the cause of

14. And behold this day do F enter into -

the way of all the wosld, and ye knowe 65 3 d. th al pour heartes and in al pour foutes, te dr that * nothyng bath kayled ok all the 1 good thinges whiche the Wore vour
God pronused you, but all are comic to pape 2 vou, and nothing hath fapled

jcrof.

. Therfore, as al good thinges are come

vpon pou, Wwhiche the TLorde pour God promised vou: fo Chall the Lorne bring vpon pou all eupil, vntill he haue destroyed you frõ of this good land which the Lorde pour God hath geuen vou.

(t) Be

Is When ye haue O tranlgrelled the ap- Ken

tupli can come

pointmet ofthe Lord pour God Which sxe eder,

be comniaunded pon, and haue gone E Groves erued straunge goddes, e bowed your .

selues to them: then shall the wrath of

the Lorde Ware whot vpon pou, and ye

shall perishe quitklie from of the good E

lande Which he hath geuen pou.

T he.xxitt. (hapter.
Joluah rehearseth Gods benekites. 14 Ind erhorteth the people to feare God.
25 The league renued bet weene God and the people. 26Fotuah dieth. 32 The bones

selues d hefore God. N
2 And Josuah sayde vnto al the people, S e

Thus sayth the Lorde God of Hlrael: 200 fale

Hour fathers dwelt onthe other fide of Sichen.

the wd fludde in olde time, euen Thare 0 Euphyas

the father ol Abraham and of Machor, e.

and serued straunge goddes. n
. C1 And

Fofuah exhorteth

krom the other fide of the fludde, and

brought him thoughout all the lande or 15 And pk it seeme euyll vnto you to serue

Chanaan, and multiplied his seede, and

0 N *gauc hun Jlahat.

Genxxi'd 4. And J gaue vnto Jlahat, Jacob and

Gen. zs. b. Esau, and J gaue vnto Elau mount

Gen leb. Steir, to poslesle it: Wut * Jacob and
Exo inc. his children went downe into Egypt.

Een. vn. 5 pent Moyles also and Aaron, and

de.. & K J plagued Egypt, and when J had fo

doue among them „IJ brought pou out.

Exo xi. f. 6 And J brought pour fathers out of.

Egypt: and as they came vnto the sea, the Egyptians folowed after pour kathers with charettes and horsmen vnto the red sea.
Exo. xi. e. And when they cryed vnto the Lod,
W the Tord put darcknesse betweene pou and the Egyptians, and brought the sea vponthem, Ecouered them, and pour eyes haut seene what J haue done to the Egyptians: and pe dwelt in thee

Cogan Wuldernesse afong season.
Namoxd 8 And I brought pou into the lande of

the Amorites, which dweit on the other fyde Jordane: And thep fought with vou, and J gate them into pour hande, that pe might conquer their countrep , and I destroied them from out of pour

sight. .
Nu. xxii. a. 9

Deu. xxili. a

king of Moab, arose t warred against
Iscael, and sent and called Walaam the fone of 25¢02 for to turse pou:

Jo Wut J woulde not hearken vnto Walaam, c therfore he rather blessed you:

and so J deliuered pon out of his hand.

11 And pe went ouer Jordane, and camt vnto Jericho:and the men of Jericho fought against vou, the Amorzites, Pherezites, Chanaanites, Hethites, Gergesites, heuites, and Jebulites, & J deliuered them into pour hande.

Exoxxiif 12 And J sent * hornettes before you,

he whiche catte them out of pour fight,

tuen the two kinges of the Amorites: but not with pour owue lworde, or with your owne bowe.

13 And J Hane geuen pou a lande in which pe dyd no labour, c titics which ve buplt not, e Which ve dwell in: vine-

C pardes also and olpue trees whiche pe
D hee, planted not, and Whereok pe do cate,

the true vse of

Soden 14 Howe therfore feare the Lorde, and

fires to learne

(e) Mot in open ficloc but by efending of

their atics.

thertp lau: leruehim in perkectnesse and trueth, and hun. put away the goddes whiche pour fa-

lofuah. —
N -
3 And F toke pour father Abraham thers serued on the other side of P fludde ‘

Then Walan the fonne of Ziphoz

22 And Foluah sapde vnto the people:

the P

and in Egypt, and serue pe the I.

O20¢,

the Lorde, then chole pou this day wn pou wil serue, whether p goddes wh pour fathers serued (that were on the other fide of the fludde either p goddes of the Amorites, in whole land ye dwel:
As for me and my houle, Wwe ut ferye the Lorde. Peis
16 The people aunlwered and sayd: God forbyd, that we shouid forsake the Lord and serue straunge goddes. 2
For the Lorde our God, heit is that an broughtvs ¢ our fathers out ofthe land vu of Egypt, æ from the houle of bondage, and whiche did those great nuracles in dur sight, and preserued vs in al the way that we went, and among al the people which we came thorowe.
18 Andthe Lod did tast out before vs all the people, enen the Amorites whiche dwelt in the lande: And therfore wil we allo serue the Lord, lor he is our God. I wn
19 And Josuah sapde vnto the people, de
Pe tan not serue the Lord:for he is an . holy God, and a ielous God, and cannot a beare pour iniquite and sinne. a?
20 Al pe forsake the Lorde and serue straunge goddes, ! he will turne and do vou euill, and confunie pou , after that he hath done pou good. i f
21 And the people fayde vnto Joluah: D
May, but we Will{erue the Lorde.

chu
PF all the
10210 mg
$0 From one tbs pa ticn any bound tg

lofxxind

He are witnesles Pagaink your felues, sere that ve haue chosen pou the Tode to wes
5 — bin. And they layde: we are Wel? e nclics, * „doch ea

23 Then put awayssarde hen the Avattge ae goddes whithe are among pou, 4 bolbe m ee heartes vnto the Lorde God of e
Israel. ; a:

24 The people sayde vnto Josuah: The
Lode our God Will we lerue, and his voyte will we obey.

à great fone, and pitched it on aur t the sayde plate, euen vnder an oke tha

orde whiche he fpake with bs,
* halbe therkore a Witn esse vnto pou, left pe demie pout God.

28 And so Josuah let the people depart, euery man vnto his inheritaunte.

29 And after these thinges it came to palle, that Josuah the fonne of Nun, the seruaunt of the Lorde died, being an hundreth and ten peres old.

30 And they buryed him in the countrey of his inberitaunce, euen in Thanmath
Serah, whiche is in mount Ephraim, on the northside of the hill of Gaas.

i i And Ilrael serued the Lorde wall the
+” papesof Josuah, and all the dapes of

lofuah.

the elders that ouer lyued Josuah, and
Whiche had knowne all the workes of

the Lorde that he had done for Israel.

32 Andthe bones ok Joleph Whiche the loan aur

childrẽ ol Israel brought out ot Egypt,

buried they in Sichem, in a parcell of

ground whiche Jacob bought of the

fonnes of Hemor the father ok Sichem

for an hundreth peetes ol suluer, and it

0 Ja we inheritaunte ofthe chüdren
33, And Eleazar the sonne of Aaron died,

whom they buried in a hill that pertay-

ned to Phinehes his sonne, whichchün

Was geuen him in mount Epheam,

C2

J The ende of the booke of Iofuah whom the
Hebrues call lehosuah.

(a By the

indgement of
Arun. Ex. 18.
Wughtiemattero ougyt not

kirst imuocation of Gov.

whole in; herunante was stattt among the te we ol Juda attczding to
Jacobs propaelte . ene.
9. D.
. As if J were one of
«he inhechitours of the lande thc t une to shee vy lot.

» M, the 5 bord of Becel.

truce him fit.

Le. xxiill. c.

(e Al this withmetht pa-

Z time,
Bild is here scokca ot᷑ by wap ot tepetion.

Ihe booke of Iudges, calledin the

Hebrue Soplitim, and in Latin Fudicum.

q The fyrst Chapter.

AAkter Josuah was dead,

Juda was contitute captapne. 6donibezek is tanen.

14 Che request of Ychlah. 16 Che children or Reni. 19 The Chanaanites are made

tributaries, but not destroped.

SERS Ster the death of
Josuah, it came to

> al

With Hin.

And Juda went vp, and the Lord deliuered the Chanaanites and Pherezites into their handes: And they flue ol them m Beek ten thoulande men.
And they found Adonibezek in Bezek:
And they fought against him, and due the Chanaanites and Pherezites.

But Adonibezek fled, and they fols-
Wed after hym, caught hyn, and © cut of his thonibes and his great toes.

And Adonibezek layde, Thee store and ten kinges hauing their thombes
€ great toes tut ot, gathered their meate vnder nip table: As J haue done, fo
God hath dont to me agapne. And they brought hint to Hicrulalem, and there he died.

(The childrẽ of Juda hade fought a gant Hierusalem, and had taken it, and limiteen it with the edge of the [word, €
{et the cite on fire.)

Akterward the chuͤdren of Juda went downe to fightagainst the Chanaamtes that dwelt in the inountayne € towarde the louth, ⁊ in the lowe courtrey,

Jo And Juda went against the Chanaa-

nitts that bwelt in Hebron, whiche before tinie was called Kiriath Arba, €

ßpasse that the childre of Ilrael Gal

flue © Sefat, Abiman and TLhatnai, cz,
And from thence they craton * be

habitauntes of Dabir, Whose name in 2 olde tune was called Ririathsepher.

12 And Caleb sayd: He that smiterh Ji- bun riathlepher, and taketh it, to him Wil geue Achsah my danghter to wyfe.

13 And Ochoniel the sonne of Benes Calebs pounger brother toke it: to whom

he gane Achlah his daughter to wp.

14 When she came to him, she c ounsapled 0 him to alke or her father a Heide: And zun then He@nghted ol her asst / and Caleb sayde vnto her, What Wilt thou:

15 She aunlwered vnto hu m, Gtut me a blessing:for thou hast geu en me asouthward land, geue ine also f pringes of water. And Caleb gaue hey springes, both aboue and beneath. 0

16 And the chudrẽ ofthe. © Renite Moy- a
{cs kather in lawe, wen t vp out of the cl oes tie ol: paulme trees wi th the chudienok dass
Juda, into the wilder nesse of Juda, that lieth in the sonth of Arad, aud they
Went and dwelt among he people.

17, And Juda went with} Simeor his brother, and they flue the Chanaanttes that inhabited Zephath, and vtterly de- vu firoyed it, and called th ie name of the a citie Horma. „

18 Aud allo Inda tore? {sab wih We n coafies therof c Alkalon With b coastcs u therok, and Akaron with the coattts © therok. 4 d

19 And the Lorde was with Juda, 15 he conquered the mount. unestburte 5 not dryue out the inhabi taunte- oft 95 valleyes, betaule dep ha d charettes en iron. as „

20 And they gane Hebron vn to Caled, 95
Moyles fayde: And he ex; relied then the three sonnes ek nak. undd not

21 And the thildren of Went mul dad cat out the Jebusites that erb i

Mierulälen but the Jebul tes he

With the chudren of Weniam. n

rulalem vnto this day. Aud

II

one of the

Hon of the people.

in like maner they that were of ae ouse ot Joleph went vp to* wethel, and the Lorde was with them.
23 And the boule of Joseph searched out
Bethel, Whiche before tinie was called

Uu.
: d the spyes lawe a man conic ont of sire t ie sayd vnto him: Shewe vs we pray thee the way into the citte , and we will shewe thee mercy.

25 And when he had shewed them the way into the citie, they smote it with the edge of the . el i the man and

5 housholde go free.

ate man went into the land ofthe
Hethites, and buylt a titie and called the nanie thcrol A is the name

0 vnto this day.
. ee did Manafles expell Weth-
, sean with her tones, Thanach with
„ her townes, the inhabitours of Do
„ With her townes, the inhabitours ol
0 Jeblaam with her townes, neither the
« imbabitours of Magiddo with her townes:but the Chanaanites were bolde to dell inthe lande.
“gti it came to passe, that affoone as e. Ifrael was waxed nightie, they put the Chanaamites to tribute, and expelled then not wholly. N
% In lyke maner d E phraim expelled
„ nodthe Chanaanttes that dwelt in Gaz
. zer: but the Chanaanttes dwelt illu

ludges. :

@azer among them. ;
30, Neither dyd Zabulon expell the inhabitours of Ketron, neither the inhabitours of Mahalol: but the Chanaanites dwelt among them and became tributaries. ;
31 Meither did Aer tast out the inhabltours of Acho, neither the inhabitours of Zidon, and of Ahalab, Aczib, æ Helbah, Aphek, nor of Kohob: ‘
32 Wut the Aserites dwelt among the:
Chanaanites the tnhabitonrs oF the. lande: for they dyd not dryue them out.
33 Meither dyd Pephthalim dryue ont‘ the inhabitours ok ethlames, northeinhabitours of Wethanath: but dweltamongestthe Chanaanites the inhabttours ol the lande. Neuerthelesle, the. mhabitours of Bethlames and of Wethaͤnath became tributaries vnto them.
34. And the Amorites droue the children: »

Dt ii

of Dan into the mountapne, and lufke- “ted thems

red them not to come downe to the: valley. ‘

35 And the Amoxtes were content to- F

dwell in mount Heres in Aialon, and in:
Salabim: And the hande of Josephhi ae fo that they became tributaries. !

36 And the coat of the Amorites Was!

rabia in

from the goyng bpto Atrabüm, krom -g.

the rocke vp warde.

Hebe Se-
$ Jah, which fige

niticth a rock.

The. ij. (bapter.

Che Angel rebuketh the people, becaule they had made peace with the Chanaae nites. 1 Che Itraelites fel to idolatrie atter Josuahs death. 14 Thep are deltucred

into the enemies handes. olaters to remapne among them.
N dthe wangel of the
OS) | Lorde came vp from
Gilgal to Wochim, and sapde: I made vou to go out of Egipt, æ haue bought pou vnto the lande whiche F ware vnto pour fathers: And F fayoe, J will neuer breake myne appopntment that
„ Imade with pou,

2. And pe allo Cail make no couenaunt
With the inhabitours of this lande, but
(hall breake Downe their anlters: Peuerthelesle, ye haue not hearkened vnto

Nip voyce: why haue ve this done? uc 3 Wherkore JJ haue iyke wyle determi-
Ned, that J Will not aast them out before vou: but they thalbe as thornes vnto

16 God deliuereth them by Judges. rr Hy God luffred

vou, and their goddes shalbe a snare vnto pow,

4 And when the angel of the Lord fake these wordes vnto all the children of HE ràel, the people cryed out and wept:

5 And called the name ofthe sayd place peg c offered satrifites vnto the

orde.

"2, wes

ping.
6 Audwhe Josnahc had sent the people fase

albay,the children of Ilrael went euery man into his inherifaunte to poslesle the lande.

And the people serued the Lozde all 5

the dayes of Josuah, c allthe dayes of the elders that outlyued Josuah, e had seene al the great workes of the Lorde that he dyd for Ylrael.
3 And Joluah the lonne of Nun the ser-
‘ C 3 uaund

XXIIII. 8·˙

“The sinue

lo. xu. . ant of the Lorde! died, when he was an hundreth and ten peres olde:
9 Whom they buried in the toastes of his inheritaunte leuen) in Thinmath Ohe-
Fan ie, kes in mount Ephraim, onthe northside ch of the bil Gaas, denen 10 And cuen so all that generation were dernde put vuto their fathers: and there arose maubemene. Another generation after them, which neither knewe the Lode, nor pet the wo kes whiche he had done for Ilrael.
11 And then the chuͤdren of Ilrael dyd wickedly in the light of the ode, and serued o aalim,
12 And forsoke the Lod God of their fathers, whiche brought them out ok the lande of Egypt, and folowed straunge goddes, cucnofthe goddes ok the natidus that were rounde abont them, and bowed them selues vnto them, and angred the Lorde:
3 Thep forsoke the Torde, and serued bebe d, Waal and Astharoth. fourme of 14. And the Wrath of the Lord waxed hot

(e Oz Serah
Ics 24... 5.
Tignified the

That is all manct of oleg.

the wende, agaynst Ylracl, and he delinered them into the handes ofraneners , that spoyled them * solde them into the handes
Ela. la. of their enemies rounde about them, fo

that they had no power any longer to stande before their enenues.

15 Wut wohtherloeuer they went out, the hand of the Lord was sore against them, euen as the Lod promifed them, and as he [ware vnto them: And he punished them foe.

Neuerthelelle the Lorde rapled bp iudges, which deliuered them out ofthe handes of their oppressers.

17 And yet for all that they woulde not

The bens gran

The. ij. (hapter.

Che Chanaanites were tefetotrye Jtrael. Othontel delfuereth Ffracl, 21 Ahud killeth king Eglon. 23 Sanmgar killeth the Philistines. 53 —

Hele are the nations

\ | AU hwbiehe the Torde left,
What he might pone i Hleael by them: (euen as manp of Piract as s had not knowen atthe
SS warresofChanaan:
2 Onelp for the learning of the generations ofthe childzé of Ilrael that he also night teach them Warre , onely such as before kneswe nothing therol.)
Okthole whom helett, there were fiue lordes of the Philistines, and all the

(ay what heipe of Sod attopned. what polticic x what vallaunteg

as bf

theem.

ludges.

Mlle bearken vnto their indges: but rather went a whoring after straunge godde and bowed chem selues vnto them an turned quickly out ot the way, wi 5 their Ae h 1 obeping the cg. Eee maundementes ofthe Lowe; tne dyd not fo. e aur they mg
18 And when the Lorde rayled them vp ebe

ludges, he Was With the iudge, and de- mes

t
Rs]

liuered them out of the handes of their a

enemies all the dayes of the iudge:(for

the Lord had conpassion ouer their fo:

rowinges, whiche they had by the rea-

5 ae that oppressed them e vered m:

19 Bet for allthat, * assoone as the: was dead, they returned, and oh wol then their fathers,in folowing frannge goddes to serue them e worchip them: and teassed not from their owne inuentions, nor from their malitious way.

20 And the heath of the Lorde was moued against Israel, and he sayde: we: tause this people hath trãlgressed myne appopntment whiche J tommaunded their fathers , and haue not bearkened vnto my voyte:

21 J will hentcefoorth not tast out before D them one man of the nations whiche
Josuah left when he dyed:

22 That theongh them J map prroue on
Ifsrael, whether they wil kepe the way e of the Lorde, and walke therin as their zaun fathers dyd, or not.

23 And sd the Torde left thole nations, and droue them not out inmediatlp, neiee them into the hande ol

Tuddi,

Out o ei |

Chanaanttes, and the Sidonites, r the
Peuttes that dwelt in mount Libanon, euen from mount Waal Hermon, vnto one come to Hamath.
4. Chole remayned to prone Jlrael by, and to wyt whether they would hear’ ken vnto the commaundementes of the dersben 80 he 20e their fa ers by the hande ol Moyses. N

5 And the chuͤdren of Ilrael dwelt a mong thechanaanttes, Bethites, Amo-

- rites, Pherezites, Deuites, and Jebu-

| el.

And toke the daughters ol them to be
„ their wines € gaue their owudaugha. ters to their sonnes, and serued their

. DoCS; —
3 Find the chilozen of srael did wickediyinthefight ofthe Lorde and forgat the Lorde their God, aud serued Waa-

% lim and Astheroth.
«> Therkore the Lorde was angry with
* ° fcact and he lolde them into the handes ol Chulan Nilathaum king of Mesopotamta: andthe chüdren of Ilrael serued Chulau Nilathaim eyght peres,

„ And whenthe childzen of Piracl crped vnto the Lorde, the Lorde stirred vp a sauer to the children of Ilrael, e saued them, euen Othomel the sonne ol Kenes, Calebs pounger brother. 0

Jo And © the spirite of the Horde came

. ppon hun, and he tudged Plracl,e went ont to warre: And the Lorde deliuered
% Chulan Vilatham bing of Mesopotania into his hande, and his hande preuayled against Chufan Nilathaun.

And the land had rest fourtic peres: aud Othomel the sonne of Kenes died.

2 And the chudren of JIsrael agqapne

un tommmtted wickednes in the sight of

% the Lerde: And the Lorde Ostreng-

% thed Eglon the king of the Moabites,

we AQAINE the children of Ilrael, because they had committed Wickednes befoze the Lorde.

And this Eglon] gathered bnto him thechildzen of Anmon, and the Amalekites, and Went and smote Israel, aud pollesled the titie ol Paulnie trees.

14 And fo the children of Hlrael serued
Colon the king of Moab. xvii. peres.

5 But When they tryed vnto the Lod,

the Lord tiered them vpa sauer, Ahud the lonne of Gera the sonne of Gemini,
“i a man lame of his right bande: and

by hun the chudren of Ilrael sent a
29 And they flue of the Moabites the

present Into Eglon the king of Moab.
16 But Ahnd made him a dagger with
No edges, of a tubite length, aud he did cob i his rapmẽt vpon his right

17 And raritd the present vuto Eglon che fang n (And Eglon was a very
8 a When He had peefented the prez
9 helentthe people that bare it away: ut he hum leite turned agayne ( from

ludges.

N.

the place of grauen images, that was by Gilgal) and sayde: J haue a letret errande vnto thee, O king. which fayoe:
Kepe scilence. And all that stoode before hym, went out from him.

20 And Ahud tame vnto him, and in a D sommer parler whiche he had, late he him selfe alone: and Ahud sayd, J haue
à meslage vnto thee from God. And he arose out of his seate.

21 And Ahud put foortl his left hande,
E toke the dagger froni his right thygh, and thrust it into his belly.

22 And the halte went in after the blade: and the fatte cloled the halt, fo that he might not drawe the dagger out of his belly, but the dyrt tame out.

23 Then Ahud gat him out into the porche, and (hut the doores of the parler vpon him, and locked them.

24. When he was gone out, his seruaun-

tes came: And when they lawe that the doors of the parler were locked, they lapde, Sueriy hecw couereth his fete in g Fe

his fommier chamber. niente

25 And they taried till they were ashamed , and seyng he opened not the doores of the parler, they toke a key and opened them: Aud beholde, their Lode was fallen downe dead onthe earth.

26 And Ahud estaped whyle they taried and was gone beponde, to the plate of the grauen images, and estaped into
Seirath.

27 And when he was come, he blewe a Num. xa trumpet in mount Ephraim: And the childrẽ ol Ilrael went downe with hum froin the hill, and he went before them.

28 And he sapde vnto them, folowe me: for the Lorde hath deliuered your ene: © mies the Moabites into pour hande.

And they descended after him, and toke the passages of Jordane toward Moab, and suffe red not a man to passe ouer.

same tune vpon a ten thousande men, which were all fatte, r men ok warre, gend and there scaped not a nian. ites

zo So Moab was subdued that day vn-

der the hande ol Israel: Andthe laude had rest fourestore peres.

) Likeas the

stronge ! kind zi After him was Samgar the sorme of ere bel

Anath, whithe flue ofthe Philistines za. five hundred men with an ore goade, ene and deliuered Israel also. G

God nuracu-

loullpipil gous

Virtozie.
The

Deborahs victorie.

(a this was one of the roftcrstic of Jabiawho.n Jofuoh dic. Jol.
11 b.nswe hapur recoue-

redurength to

reuenge.

d Which Wis by Josus dea royed: bat after cccouc= rep g haylded

Tudl. v. b.

c: It snould
Eppcarc that
(hi nad done this message vndo him as to: e, ano ic we callceh vpen him for the fume alore the
.die multitude.

1 Flracl tine, and are geuen into the handes of Fabie. and exhorteth Baran to deliuer the people. 1s Silara fleet.

Jacl. b

2 a Mdthe children of HE
(oe rael began agapne to do wickedip in p fight

4 Wofthe Loy, when A

tite.

And the samt Debora dwelt vnder a pauhne tree, betweene Kamath c wee thel, inmount Ephraum: nd the chit dren of Ysracl caine vp to her for iudgment.

And she sent, and called Warak the sonne cf Abinoam, out of Bedes Mephthai, and sayd vnto hun: Hath not the
Fone God of Ilracl “ tommaunded, saping: Go, and drawe toward niount
Thador, and take with thee ten thouland men of the chudren ol Hephtha-

ludges.

T he. iii. Chapter.

3 And wWarak lad vnto her, © HE thou 15 f

9 She lapd:J will surelp go with thee, raid

10 And Barak called Zabulon c Meph-

4 Deborah iudgeth Tract,
17 And is killed by

lin, and of the children of Zabulon-

7 And will bring vnto thee tothe ri uer fon, Silara 5 captayne of warre, vnto Jabin, with his charettes and his people, and will deliver him into thyne handes. '

Posh

wilt go with me, J will go: wut andif es thou Witt not toine With me , J wil yes not go. Font

but this tourney that thoͤutakest, Mall mrs not be fo2 thyne Honour : sor the Tode a chall sell Sifara into the hande of awe see" man. And Debora arose and went with
Warak to Kedes.

thalum to Kedes, and led after hum ten thoulande men: aud Debora Went YP
With him. 6

u (But Haber the Mente which asg. . the chilazé ol Hobab, the father in lawe ol Moyles, remoued from the Kei es, „ and pitched his tent oo vntill the payee cy of Zaanaim, whiche is by Kedes.) 1 55

12 And they Merwe Sifara, that BUM ve, the fonne of Abindam was gene by 93 71 mount Thabor. ie 15

B And Silara gathered together al 0 1 25 charettes, euen nine hundreth charette

‘

iron, € all the people that Were with bum kom of Harofeth of the gentiues, vnto the ryuer of Zaifon.

44 And Debora fayd vnto Warak: Up,

cHAtnthis is the day in which the Lorbe

Hath deliuered Sifara into thyne hand:
Jsnot the Lorde gone out befoze thee

Andlo Barak went downe fro mount

Thabor, and ten thoufande men after

him. ' nt the Lorde destroyed Sifara and
" Als chavettes,and all his hoaste with the edge of the [worde , befoze Warak: fo that Sisara lpghted downe of his
N charet, and fled alway on his feete.

s+ 16 But wWarak kolowed after the charettes and after the hoast, enen vnto
Haroleth of the gentiles : And allthe hoastof Silara fell vponthe edge of the

sworde, and there was not a man left,
17 Howwebeit Silara fled awap on his lecte to the tent of Jael the Wife of

. betweene Jabin the king of Hazor, and
„the houlhouide of Haber the Kemte.)
18 And Fael went out to meete Silara, a. Ad layd vnto him: Turne in um lorde,
1 turne into me, feare not. And whan he had turned in vnto her into her tent, she touered him with a mantell.

a Frank the fonne of Abi-

mG Aes, noam lange the lame

dap, saping: :

Sof Praylt pe the Load,

1G NAGY for the aucnapna of

: = eaiivacl santo) ie people that betansc fo wilting,

Hare O pe binges hearken O yt pri

ces: J, euen 00 will syng vnto the Lod,

J Will prapse the Tord God of Hiracl.

Stic, whan thou departedst ont of the thet 1 ent cavil trembled, and rapned, the
Dioypeo water: „the cloudes allo na, 5 Tape hie gl et. befoe the

UCN E “Sina before p p God of Ilracl. : e
1 9 An che dayes of* Saingar the sonne nath in che dayes ol Jael, the bye

Haber the Renite ( foz there was peace

ih 4. Lorde, whan thon wentest out ok

Aves were W vnoctupled, and the tra-

XX].

19 And he fapd vnto her: Gene me Fy theca litle water to dincke, 0 15 thirstie. And che opened * a boitie of e , AND gaue him duncke ¢ touered Indiv

20 And agapne he layd vnto her: ö in the doore ol the tent, a hin 57 ure poe a and enquere of thee

hether ther be any nian he i halt say, uaye. Per thon

21 Then Jael Dabers wyfe, toke a naple D of the tent, e an hammer in her hande. and went softly vnto hun, and smote 5 naple into the temples of his head, and fastened it into the ground ( for he dum: bred sore, and was Wery) and lo he died.

22 And beholde, as Barak folowed after
Silara, Jael tame out to mcete hun, r lam vnto him: Come, aud J will chewe thee the man whom thou sekest. Ind

when he came m to her tent, behold Dis lara lay dead, and the nayle was in his temples.

23 And fo God breught Jabin the kyng of Chanaan into subiection that dap belore the children ol Ysrael.

24 Andthe hand of the children of Fe racl prospered, and preuayled against

abin the kyng of Chanaan, vnti they ad destroped Jabin king ol Chanaan.

The. v. Chapter.

1, The song and thankelgeuing ol Deborah and Barah after the bictorie.

J Debora came vp, which came bpa® „e

Socaith ol her

8 They chole new goddes and then had & seo

9 My heart louech the gouerners of Il mea racl, and them that are willyng among a

the O drawers of water ceassed, there och wg

shall they speake of the righteousnes of cams cene

the Lorde, his righteonsnesse in his bre n

fenfed townes in Israel: Then shalthe e ene

people of the Hozde go DOWN to the au ez,

gates. ¢ to endaũger
12 Up

Vorn.

ludges.

12 Up Debora vp, get thee bp, and fing a fong: Arise Waͤrat, and leade W thy

that their mightie men made.
23 Curfe pe the eitie of Meros (sapd the

Sen, capfinitie captiue, thou sonne of Abi angelo the Lord curse the inhabitants chemise stmt nam. therol: becaule they tame not to heipe epoue. 13 Then shall they that remapne, haue

C

Ch) Snthis feckeppng vp or th: inurumonrs of this victczie, sue degvnneth
Wit) her selle, og atoott of phraun, and calleth there

dontinion of the proudest of the people:
The Tod hath geuen me donunion ouer the mightie.

14 Put ol Ephraim was there a roote of them agaynst Amelek, and after thee

© Beinanin among thy people: Out of
Machir came rulers, and out of Zabulon they that handell the penne of the
Writer. N

15 And of Plachar there Were princes with Debora, and Pfachar, and also

the Lord, to helpe the Low againftthe mi

uche z wpfe of Hab

24. Jael the wpfe of Haber the Reni

halbe blesled aboue other b ee fed Hall the be aboue other women in the tent. F

25 He asked Water and she gave him mylke, the bought foorth butter in a lordly dysche.

26 She put her hande to the naple,¢ her ryght hande to the smpthes hanmier: with the hanuner sniote che Sisara, r

, Dalat, he was lenk on foote into the — note his head wounded hun, and ie vallep:for the ditions of Kuben were! pearled his temples. the St great “rhoughtes of heart. 27 Hevolbed him dowye at her feete, he

then {cluts to

Ycbara. end

he prope

eth here ok the

Saul en

ae tae *
Wherok 1. Sa.

16 Why abodelt thou among the (heepe foldes, to heart the bleatinges of the flockes-fo2 the diuisions of Kuben, were great thonghtes of heart.

17 Ollead allo abode beyonde Foz

fell downe, and lay styll: At her feete he bowed him selfe, e fell. And Whe he had sunke downe, he lay there destroyed.
28 The mother ot Siara loked out at a wyndowe, and cryed thorowe the tat: ©

euer dane: and why doth Dan remayne in telle: why is his charret so long acom:

mnarucpicd shyppes-; Aler tötinned on the feathoze, myng - Why tarp the wheeles ok his

Troe so f ALD taried in His decayed w plates. charettes:

the 1 18 [But) the people ol Zabulon haue ieo- 29 Al the wyle ladyes aunlwered her pea
And pe

came to hetpe, and thet feze thou Ruven canst gaute no

parde their lyues euen vnto the death, ipke as dyd ephthalun in the Hye plates of the sielde.

19 8 her owne Wordes aunlwered her etre, :

30 Surely they haue found, they deuide

ONG we 19 The kynges came and fought, then the spoples, enery man bath a damlell of, a0 dez kought ö kynges of Chanaan in Tha- ortwo: Siara Hath a prap of divers ballen che nach by the Waters of Megiddo, and dcouloured garmentes, euen A pray of cree =. WANN money. : rapnient dped with fuftoey colours, and bie ee 20 They fought from heauen, euen the that are made of nedle worke: rapment
Sean Sebs laͤrres in their tourses fought agaynst of diuers colours and of nedle Worke enn f ilara. onboth lydes, which is mecte for hun
21 The ryutr of Bison [wept them a- thats chiefe in distribueimg ok ß fpoples. Sti
= way that auntient rpuer the ryuer i- 31 So periche all thine enenues O LO: frase, son: O my soule, thou hast marched va- But they that loue him, let then bt as dee liauntlp. ph sunne whan he ryseth in his myght. o
22 Then were the horse hoofesfinittena: And the lande had rest fourtic veres. funder by the meanes of the praunsings i —
The. vj. Chapter.
1. F{racl is oppresled of the Madianites kor their wichedneg. 4. Gedeon is lent to be their deliuerer. /. He alked a ligne. 3
A1 d the children of PE 2 And the hand ol Madian preuapled a
: Wirael committees ® Wie gainst Istacl:æ © because ofthe aor ae
Ca) Special yw ikeonefletuthe spght of antes, p children of Ilrael made ther ae becker ape. the Lowe : And the dennes in the mountapnes and caues, pan Tode Deltuered them and strong holdes. state into the handes of ; And When Ilcael Had sowere rength.,

then came bp the Madianites 10

Amalechites, and they of the can

Madian seuen peres. a and

ame vp agaynst them,
4 Aud ptched their tentes against them, and destroyed the encreale ok the earth. euen tyll thou come vnto Aʒah, & left no sultenaunce for Ylrael, neither cheepe,

or asse: *
5 Foithep went vp, they and their cattet, and came with their tentes as a multi tude of gralshopers, fo that both they and allo their camels were without number: And they entred into the land stroy it. N

Bit 6 10 so was Ilrael exceedinglpinwoueryshed w in the fight of the Madia-

nites and cried vnto the Corde.
5 7 And when the © children of Ilrael cried bnto the Lord, because of the Ma-

„ —-Dianuites, * n 3 The Lorde {ent vnto them a prophet,

ie the 8

wllich fayd vnto them, Thus layth the
Tate Gad of Ilrael: I fet pou from
Egypt, æ brought vou out of the house of bondage.

9 And J rpd von out ofthe hande of the ep t out ofthe hand of all that oppressed pou, and cast them out before pou, and gaue pou their land:

jo And J fayd vnto ou: Jamthe Lord

pour God, feave not the goddes of the
Amozites in Whole lan de you dwell:
But vou haue not obeyed my voyte.

1 And the angel of the Lorde came and fate Dunder an Oke which was in Ephrah, that partepned vnto Joas the father of the Elrites: And his sonne
Gedeon threshed wheat by the wyne

presse, to hyde it from the Madianites.

2 And the angel of the Lode appeared

. vnto him, aud fatd vnto him: The TLord

ot ks with Mee, thou mightie man.

Di.

re my Lord, fee Lorde be with vs, why
18 all this tonie vpon vs: Bea, € where be all his miratles which our fathers tolde vs of, and fayd: Syd not the Lod
¢ bryng vs out of Egypt! But nowe the
Tod hath forsaken vs, and deltuered er bs into the handes of the Madianites. es 1d, And the ce Low loked vpon hun, and
, layde: Go hence in this thy © nught, tes GUND thou chalt deuiuer Piracl out of the
15 115 ofthe Hadianstes: haue not A
15 And he aunswered him: Oh Wore,
Wherrbith chall J laue Ilraei-zZehold np kinred is pode in Manasles, and 7 ani litle in my fathers house.

Wacht
; Qtes

tho of me,

e And Gedeon aunswered him: © Db -

16 The Lor sapd puto him: I Will be with thee, € thou (hate BR So
DiANifes,as they were but one man.
And he aunlwered him: Oh „pf haue founde grace in thy syght, than fhew mea asigne, that itis thou that

talkest with nie: 0 Gedeon te

18 Departe not hence J prap thee vntyll .
J come vntothee, e tyll J bryng myne . offring, and haue fet it before thee, And

gaine.

I9 And Gedeon went in, and made redy a kyd, and lweete takes of anch Epha of floure, and put it with the fleshe in a

and prelented it.

20 And the angel of God sayd vnto him:
Hake the flesh and the fiveete cakes, lay them vpon this rocke, and powze out the broth. And he dyd fo.

21 Then the angel of the Lod put fooztl) Y

the end of the staffe that he helde in his hande, and touched the fle che and the lweete takes, and there arose vp fire out of the rocke, and confined the flesh and the lweete takes: But the angel of the Lord departed out of his fight.

22 And when Gedeon perceaued that tt was an angel of the Lorde, he sapde:
Alas, D Lorde God, haue J therfore

{cence an angel of the Lorde face to face, 4%
Iud. i;. d.

that J chould dye:

23 And the Lorde fayd vnto him: Peace
5 vnto thee, feare not, thou Mat not

pe.

24. Then Gedeon made an aulter there vnto the Lod, and called it, The Low of peate. And vnto this Day it is vet in
Ephrath, that partepneth vnto the father of the Elrites.

25 And the same nyght the LTorde sayde vnto him: Take thy fathers poung bul-

locke, Ean other bullocke of. vii. peres 4, gia merac

t'ie g to be

olde, and ©.deftroy the aulter of Baal

groue that is by it: ace
26 And make an aulter vnto the Lord ve thy God bpon the top of this rocke «

ina convenient plate, and take the le- ben n bande.

coud bullocke, aud offer burnt lacrilite vpõ the wood of the groue which thou shalt cut downe.
27 Then Gedeon toke ten men ol his seruauntes, x did as the Lord bad hun:
But becaule he feared to do it be
D2

teth a ligne:

he sapd: J will tary vntyll thou tome a- ORC OME fignes, isto

be belened
Without signe.

(k) A measure of dive thynbalket and put the broth ma pot aud e

brought it out vnto hun vnder cheüe,

3. Reg 18.f.

that thy father hath and cut downe the essen,

then the delp-

G eden

of the citic, he dyd it by nyght.
28 And when the men of the titie arose tarly in the mornpng, beholde the aulter of Baal was broken, & the groue cut downe that was by it, and the” setonde bullocke offered vpon the aulter

(m) whiche
Was of seuen

Set tee that Was inade. :

Dane 29 And they layde one to another: who hath done this thing? And whan they

ö enquered and alked they layd: Gedeon

ö sonne of Joas hath done this thing.
30 Then the nien of the titie fapde vnto

Jods, Bring out thy sonne, that he may

dye: betause he hath destroyed the aul-

ter of Baal, and cut downe the groue

that was by it. ;

31 And Joas fayd vnto al that stoode by hun: Will ye pleade Baals cause:or Will pe saue him: He that will contende for hum, let him dye or the morning. Ik he ve a Ged, let huͤn pleade for himlelfe agaynst him that Hath caste downe his aulter.

32 And from that dap, was Gedeon called Jerobaal: becaule his father had sapd, Let Baal pleade for Hinilelfe, becaufe he hath broken Downe his aulter.

32 All the Madianites therfore, and the

by the hyll of Morch in the valley.
2 And the Todd layd vnto Gedeon: The people that are with thee, are to many

ludges.’ | for his fathers housholde and the men inthe valley of Pefraci:

Geen,

34 Wut the spirite of the Lorde came bp: pon Gedeon, and He blewe atrumpet and e Abiezer was ioyned With hum

35 And he sent mellengers throughout al 9 05
Manasses, which allo was ioyned Witl amt him, and he fent meflengers pute Azar
Zabulon, and Mephthalim, and they cane to meete them. N 5

36 And Gedeon sapd vnto God: HF thou wilt saue Ifrael by nne hand, as thou hast layd:

37 Beholde, I wl put a flecce of wool in the treashing place: And ik the dewe come onthe fleece onelp, and it be drye vpon all the earth besyde, then Mat be sure that thou wilt laue Jlrael by my hand, as thou saydest.

38 Aud it caine so to passe: or he rose vp carly on the morowe, e thrust the fleece together, and wrong the dewe therout, and kylled a bowle of water.

39 And Gedeon sayde agayne bnto God:
Bt not angry with nie, that J speake once more, for J Wil proue onec agapue by the fleece. Let it be drye onely vpon the fleece, and dewe vpon al the ground.

40 And God dyd fo that fame nyght: For it Was drye bpon the fleece only, x there

With thee:the sanie hal not go.

5 So he brought downe the people bute the water: And the Lord {ard vnto Ge-
Deon, As many as lappe 5 water with

Amalekites, and they or the east, were was dewe on all the grounde. gathered together, e went and pytched
He. vii. (hapter.
1, The Lord commaundeth Gedeon to fend away a great parte of his companie, 22, The
Modianites are discomkited by a wonderous fozt,25, Oreb and Zeeb are Haine,
A1 zen Jerobaallwho thousande r there above ten thoulande. eral ENG is Gedeon) andaillp 4. And the Lord layd vnto Gedeon: The e people 5 were with people are pet to many , bryng them
5 1 hin, role vp early, k downe vnto the water, and J Will trye ele pptehed belpde the them onto thee there. And of whom J wel of Harad:sothat lay vnto thee, this Mal go with thee:the
— the hoaste ol thecha- famethalgo with thee. And of whom dianites were on the northsyde ol them soeuer J lay vnto thee, this shal notgo
Feen ee handes elt Alraci make their vaunt pur hen et Agalinist me, and saye: Myne owne hand oo hath saued me.
3 Nowe therfore make a proclamation in
Deut ex. b. the cares of people, and save: If any wMabch3g man dread oz be afeard, let him returne

and Depart early from mount Gilead,
And there returned of the people xxu.

for me to geue ; Madianites into their r

their tongues as a dogge lappeth, them put by them selues, andi to do thein that os kneele downe bpon their knees £0.»

6 And the number of them that put their handes to their mouthes and lapped, were three hundred men: But all pren naunt ofp people kneeled downe ther

runes to dryncke Water. j 210 the Lorde sayd vnto Gedeon: Wy q ree hundred men that tapped

these th

igi 0
MA

( pS n .

g apr 2
Sah ee if q

: 25 3 ey — 8 an
2 pee — — si 5 =
7 i i * 7
I *
N — — — Inn. 4 2
FT N h tt
Ae amie 0
Eq:
U

talles with then, and their trumpettes:
And he {ent all the rest of Ilrael, euery man vnto his tent, and retapned thole

Madian was beneath him in a valley.
9 And the fame nyght the Lode layde

vnto hin: Arple, get thee downe vnto

the hoast, for I haue delpucred it into chyne hand. *

AN

ABS bs 27 :

Bago || 5)

le

* J i Mm

Mt At
N

Ig w

Be 5 2
G

ace es
12 1 en bn *

Will Y laue you, anddelfuer the Ma- 3 They therfo

. Sena ä
4 QD =~ ai lef AC A): . SRR 2 i
WY Es FERN CAE Y Pe = | qlee coil aaa
725 ALi, " 0 0 - 2 ae pas Soa ‘ual N Zi 1 inte rie fr OY bah Le U Miri ss: 5

N n e ee ee

. Ties a II 70 ‘ih ’

dianites into thyne hande: And let ait

the o other people go e ’ bis plat, people go euerp man dnto ,,

i Tang

Hun * e
|: | Rees

10 But and ik thou keare to go downe, then go thou and Phara thy ladde dowue to the hoast.

three hundreth men: And the hoast of 11 And thou thait hearken what they

fay, and fo (hall thine handes be strong to go downe vnto ß hoast. Then went he downe e Phara his ladde vnto the outsyde ol the men ok arnies that were in the boat, ,

a 2 ö —4 Al jth
* 2 5 Wan. 5 — A

myn i * A m } f .

Wh arma

rT rs
12 And

Tale i i

J {

q
N. l ed
U 1 K 5 *

„ tedat two e ok the people toke vit- ite

Gedeon.

12 And the Madianites, the Amalekites, and all they of the east, lay along in the valley Iykea multitude of grashoppers, and their camelles were without nunibre, cucn as the lande by the fea syde in multitude. f

Iz And when Gedeon was come, behold, there was a man that tolde a decane vnto his neyghbour, and sapd: Wehold,
I Dreamed a dreame, and me thought that a take of barley bread tumbled into the hoast of Madian, and came vnto a tent, and smote it that it fell, and ouerturned it that the tent lay along.

C 14 And his kelowe aunswered and sapd:

This is nothing els saue the Moozde of

Gedeon p sonne of Jdas, aman of PE

rael: for into his hande hath God deli-

uered Madian, and all the hoast.

15 When Gedeon heard the telling of the dreãme, ⁊ the interpretation of the fame, he e , and returned vnto the hoast of Ilrael, and sapde: Up, for the
Horde Hath) deliuered into your hande the hoast of Madian.

16 And he deuided the thee hundred men into three companies , and gaue euery

Nds e.

man a trumpet in his hande, with enmptie pytchers, and fanipes therin.
17 And sapde vnto them, Hoke on me,

and do lpkewyse: that when F come to the syde ofthe hoast, euen as J do, so do ou pat

18 When J blowe with a trumpet and all that are with ine, blowe ye with trumpettes also on euery syde of the hoast, and fay: For the Lord, and for Gedeon.

19 So Gedeon and the hundred men that were with him, tame vnto the out-

signikic that the whole bica tozie came of bpia.

J Te. pijj. (hapter.

Ephraim mirmureth againck Gedeon. 2 who appeateth them. 4 He palleth Jordane.
16 1 reuengeth hym selle on them of Sucoth aud hen el 27 ger mäbeth an erhob, which was the caule ol idolatrie. 30 Pk Gedeons lonnes, and or his death.

6] IAD the men ol Ephraum said vnto him: Why
V hast chou serued vs s thus, that thou calledst ey N bs not, when thou
S dwentest to fyght with
81 the Madianites : And shoemte, they chode with hum tharpelp. mousthenche 2 And he sayde vnto them: What deede our!“ haue J done lpke vnto pours 2 Fs not the w gleaning of grapes of Ephra-

(ch) whiche hance slapne

Dich t Feb. b This last

one kame.

~~ Tudges.

— . aS — = =

Hell syde of the hoast in the begynn mypddle watche, e rapled· vp che wach men: And te ome bith tere trum pettes , € brake the pytthers that werin their handes. Wers that wre

20 And the three companies blewe With trumpettes, E brake the pytchers, and helde the lampes in their left handes and the trumpettes in their right td blowe withal: And they cryed, The fwordeof the Lorde, and of Geneon, |

21 And they stoode vll, euery mann his place rounde about the hoast: And all 9 the hoast ranne, and erped and fled.

22 And the Chzee hundzeth biewe with 30 ae trumpettes and the Logde let cuery sre,

mans worde vppon his neyghbour stom throughout allthe boat: and the hoalt was
* te ie cee 15 al and

o the edge of the plapne of Mehol vnto Tabbath. . —

23 And themen of IJlrael being gathered together out of Hephthalim, of Aler,
And ok all Manasses, folowed after the

Madianites. .

24. And Gedeon sent messengers vnto al mount Ephraim, saping: Come downe againstthe Padianii-s,and take befor , themthe “ waters vnto Wethbarath, snes and to Fodane , Then allthe men of we
Ephraim gathered together, & toke the waters vntozBethbarath, eto Jozdane. pa

25 And they toke two d printes of the Pa khn dianites, Ored and Zeb: and flue Oreb vponthe rocke Oreb, and Zebatthe vate wine presse of Zeb, and folowed after ws
Madian: and brought the heades of e
Oreb and Zeb to Gedeon on the other spde Jordane.

im, better then the binetage of Abiezer-
3 God hath delpuercd into pour handes the lordes of Dadian , Oreb and Zev:
And what was JJ able to do lpke as vdu haue done : And then their fpivites a from of him, when he had sayde

a

4 And Gedeon tame to Jordane to palse ouer, he € the three hündred men that
Were with him Weerp, and vet folowed

the hate.
: 5 And

d vnto 5 men of © Sutoth:
5 Sang ou , takes of becad bnto
; people that tolow me,fo2 they be kayn-
5 15 that J may folowe after Zebah,
: aud Zalmana, Kynges of Spm
And the lores of Sucoth fayde: Aire the handes ol Zebah and Zalmana at

now in thyne handes, that we should

vnto thyne arinic:
1 Geben de 2 Therlore when the
Jord hath deliuered Zebah and Zali mana into mine hande, J will teare the fflelche of pou With the thornes of the
5 wildernes, and with brpers.

s And be went bp thenee to Phanuel, x

e vnto them lykewyse: And pment
U Pham n him, as did the nof Sucoth.

9 Ad he sayd also vnto the men ok Phannel vohen J come agapne ! in peace,
J will breaße downe this tore.

o cbah c Zalmana were in Carcoz, and their hoastes with them, vpon a fifteene thoufande men, which were

all that were let of all the hoastes of them of the east: Foz there was flaine an hundred and twentie thoufande men that drewe swordes.

1 And Gedeon went thorowe them that dwelt in tabernatles on the east syde ol
Hobah and Jegbahah, and smote the

hoaste: for the hoaste dyd talt no pe-

rplles. '

n And whan Zebah and Zalmana fled, he folowed after them, and toke p two kynges of Madian , Scbah and Talmana, and diftonifited all the hoaste.

3 And Gedeon the sonne of Joas, retur-

ned from battel alore the sunne Was vp,

14 And taught a ladde of the men of Suz

C tl) e enquired of hun: And he wrote

Dim ok the lordes and elders of Sucoth threelcore and seuenteene men.

fy And he tanie vnto the men ofSucoth; - and layd: Beholde Zebah and Zal-
Mana, with which ye dyd cast me in the

teeth, saying: Are the handes of Zebah and Zalmana alredp in thyne hande, that we chould geue bread bute thy kaͤyntie mene
16 And he toke the elders of the citic, and thormes of the wildernelle, and brpers, themed teare the menof Sutoth with

7, And he brake downe the torre of is Ybanuel, ¢ flue che men of the etic nO then layde he vnto Zebah and

ludges.

22 Then the men of Israel sayde vnto

XXIIII.
Zalniana: What mauer of men were they whom ye slue at Thabor z And they aunlwerrd: The ipkenelle of thee and them ts al one, euẽ after the fachion ofthe children ol a kyng.

19 And he layd, They were my brethren, euen my © mothers chudren: As truly as the Lord lineth ir ve had laued their 1 Kan lyues, I would not flay you. me foFeienge

20 And he fayde bnto Jether his edeset sonue, Up and flay them. Wut the ladde drue not his sworde: for he feared , ve: tause he was yet young.

21 Then Scbah and Zalmana sapde:

Ryle thou, and fall vpon vs: kor as 0 tp

the man is, so is his strength. Aud Ge- en
Deon arose, and flue Zebah and Zale anten mana, and toke away the ornamentes ocker that were on their tamels neckes. erthatthen

Or that they thought it difhonour to be

Gedeon: Raigne chou ouer vs, both aber. thou, thy sonne, and thy Wsonnes lonne, for Hou hast deliuered vs out of ß hand ) ces, of Madian. rn
23 And Gedeon sayd vnto them: J wyll not raigne otter pou , neither shall niy childe raigne ouer pou: but the Lorde chall © raigne ouer you, a er
24. And agapne Gedeon laid vnto them: aden
J Would desire a vequett of pon, euen zuin . that pou Would gene me euery man the par wee
*earinges of his pray, Fo2 thep had gol- man den caringes, betaule they were YE see”
25 And they aͤunlwered: We will gyue them. And they lpreada mantell, and dyd tast therin euery man the carynges or his pray. i
26 And the wayght of; golden earinges that he required, was athoufand and seuen hundred sicles of golde, bespde chapnes and iewelles, and purple rayment that was on the kynges of Madian, and bespde the chaynes that were about their camels neckes.
27 And Gedeon made an™ Ephod ther- ones, of, and put it in his cite Ephrah: And all Sage srael went a whoryng after it in the exes me plate, which thing betame a ruyne vnto Gedeon and to his house.
28 Thus was Madian brought lowe before the children ol Ilrael, fo that they lyft vp their heades no more: And the toumtrep was in quietnes fourtie peres in the dayes ol Gedeon.
29 And Jerobaal p sonne of aa and dwelt in his owne Houle,

30 And

Gedeon.

(a) The oevire of soutramtit

blood that ig founde in his
Wap, as 2 woolft denouteth lambes.

7 And when they tolde it to Joatham,

ludges.

30 And Gedeon had threescore and ten sonnes of his body begotten: for he had many wpues. 1

31 And his töcubine that was in Sichem bare him a sonne also, whole name he called Abimelech.

32 And Gedeon the sonne of Joas dyped

in a good age, and was burped in the sepulchre of Joas his father, euen in Ephrah, that parteyned bute the father ofthe Esrites.

33 But alloone as Gedeon was drad, the

The. ix. Chapter.

1, Abimelech vlurpeth the kyngdome, and putteth his brethren to death. 7. Joatham propoleth a parable. 23, atred betweene Ibimelech, and the Sichemites. 26. Gaal confpireth agaynst hem, and is ouercome. 53. Abimelech is wounded to death by a woman.

SFY imelech the sonne of
= | Ferobaal Went to Si
Ischem buto his moe Hers brethren, € come

muned with them, € with all the kynrede of the house of his mo-

thers father, saping:
Saye Y pray pou, in the eares of all the nien ok Sichem, whether is better for pou, that all the fonnes of Jerobaal,
(which ave threelcore and ten perfons ) raigne oner pon: either that one raigne ouer pon: Nemember that J am of pour bone, and of pour fleshe.
Aud his mothers brethren {pate of him in the andiente of all the nien of Stchem all thele wordes „ their heartes were moued to folow Abimelech: Foz they sayde, He is our brother.
4 And they gaue Him theecfeore and ten peetes of siluer out of the house of Waal
Werith, wherwith Abunelech hyred bayne and light persons, which went with hym.
And he went vnto his kathers houle at
Ephzah, and c flue his brethren, the sounes of Jerobaal, beyng threelcorc € ten persons, vpon one stone: Notwithstandyng, vet Joathanithe poungest fonne of Jerobàal estaped, for he hyd hym selle.

Aud all the men of Sichem gathered

together; and al the house of Mello, and

tame and made Abimelech kyng in che

e „where the stone was in Si

chem. i

he

A

children of Ilrael turned awa We a Whapng after Saalnn, anden touenannt with Baal to be their God.
34. And the ebildeen of Bteaei thon not onthe Lorde their God, which had delluered them out of the handes ofa their enemies on euerp syde: 2 either Y shewed they merty on the lag house of Jerobaal C otherwyte called ban
Gedeon, atcording to all the goodnes s
Which he had chewed vnto Piracy, ~ si
Wy,

J

he went and stoode in the top of mount
Gartz im, and lykt vp his voyce, e cryed, and sayd buto them: Mearken vnto nie you men of Sithein, that God may hearken vnto pou,

8 The trees went foorth to annopnt a kyng ouer them, and fayde puto the OM
Olyue tree: Kaigne thou duer vs. ian

9. But the Olpue tree fapd vnto them: wa
Should J lcane my fatnefle wherwith z by nie they honour God and man t 4 to be promoted ouer the trees: a

Io And the trees sayd to the figge tree: 140
Come thou, and be kyng over vs. n

n The figge tree aunswered them: should i

j forlake my fiveetnes,, and my good v4

ruite , and go to be promoted ouerthe ssid

‘trees:

12 Ahenlayde the trees vnto the vine:

Come thou and be kyng ouer vs.

z The vine layde vnto them: Should J leaue inp wine wherby Jchcare voi) ¢- od and man, and go to be promoted duer the trees: aas

14 Then sadd all the trees vnto the bryer: a
Conte thou and raigne oucr vs. cit

1j And the bayer fayde vnto the trees: I! er it be true that ye will annopnt mic kung s-* duer pou, then tome and put pour tri vnder my shadow : Jf no, the fr tome out of the bryer x walte the Cedar 1h trees of Libanon. 8

16 Mowe therfore, if pe do truely and bi. corruptly to make e ee if pe haue dealte well with Perovaalé

his houle, and haue done vito hun

cording to the deferuing of his bande
( Foz euen mp father kought you

yng it

a

6. e

ou, and aduentured his life, and ridde you out ofthe bande of Madian.

13 And pe ave rylen bp agaynst my fae thers honse this day, and haue slayne his children, beyng threescore k ten per-

sones vpon one stone, and haue made A-

mclech the fonne of his mapde fer - naunt kung ouer the menok Sichem because he is pour brother.)

19 Ikye then haue dealt truely and pureip with Jerobaal and with his boufe this day, then reioyte ye with Abmielech, and let hun reioyte with pou,

20 But it vou haue not dealt truely, then let a fire teme our of Abimelech, ce tonfume the men ol Sichem, xthe houtt of
Mello:and let there come outa fire fro among the men ok Sichem, cout of the ponte ol Mello, c tonsume Abimelech.

1 And Joatham ran away and stedde, and went to Beer, and dwelt there, foz feare of Abimelech his brother.

22 When Abimelech had raigned three

peres ouer Jlrael, 1

23 Gov® señt an euyll spirite betweene

Abimelech, e the men ok Sichem: and

m fthecitesins of Sichem brake their pro-

nile to Abimelech,

store and ten sonnes of Jerobaal might tome on him, and that God inight lay

24. That the witkednes done to the three

XXV.

lech out of Way. 7
AbiMelech : ae ee par again

ake tht arto coe Make thine boat greater, A
30 p e rea pe ruler of the citie
é des of Gaa
Obed he was wroth. 1

3 And sent niessengers vnto Abinielech priuyly, saping: Behold, Gaal the sonne of Obed and his brethren be come to
Sichem, and beholde they fortific the citie àgaynst thee,

32 Now therfore vp by night, thou and the people that is with thee, and lye in wayte in the fielde.

33 And rife early in the morning assone as the sunne is vp, and fall vpon the citie:
And ik he e the people that is with hym tome out against thee, do to hym what thine handes shalbe able.

34 And Abimelech rose vp, and all the people that were with him, by night, and they layde awayte against Sichem in foure tompamies. ;

35 And Gaal the sonne of Obed went out, 7 and stoode in the entringof the gate of the titie: And Avimelech rose vp, andthe folke that were with hun, from lying in wapte.

36 And when Gaal sawe ß people he fayd to Zebiil: Beholde, there tome people do wne from the top of the mountaines.

And Zebul sapd vnto him: The sha- ay women dow of the hylles sceine men bnto thee. macken a
37 And Gaal aunswered agayne, x sapd: beweg

the blood of them vnto Abimelech their brother, which flue them, and vpon the other menof Sichem Which apded

he made afo2s

han in the killing of his brethren.

25 And the titeʒins ol Sichem let men to lap awapte for hym in the toppe ot the mountapnes, which men robbed al that canie along the way by them: And it was tolde Abimelech.

26 And Gaal the fonne of Obed tame
With his brethren, and they gat them to
Sichem: and the men ol Sichem put thew confidence in him.

7 And they went out into the fieldes, and gathered in their grapes, Etrode them, aud made mery, E went into the hoult of their god, and dyd eate and drinke,

q and cursed Abimelech.

28 alnd Gaal the forme ol Obed fayde:
What ts Abunelech-k what is Sichem,

that we choude lerue him Is he not the sonne of Jerobaal: & Zebul is his
1 Sexue such as come ok Hemdr
Sttthae we shoulde ferue hint

node God this people were vnder

Pande, then would J tale Abime-

ather of Sichem: for what reason

See, there tome folke downe by p nud- sents

dle of the land c anothertompanp come along by the playne of che charmars.

38 Then sapd Zebul vnto him: wohere is nowe thy mouth that said, what felowe is Abimelech that we should rue him-
Is not this the people that thou hast de spyled : Go out now e fight with che.

39 And Gaal went out before the citezins of Sichem e konght with Abimelech.

40 And Abimelech chaled him, that he fled before him, and maup Were ouerthrowen e Wounded, euen vnto the entring of the gate.

41 And Abimelech dwelt at Arumah: and Zebu! thrust out Gaal c his brethiẽ that they shouide not dwell in Sichem.

42 And on the morow the people wet out into the fielde: And they told Abimelech. G

4 And he toke the people, æ denided them into three cõpantes, æ layd awayte nthe fielde, and loked, and behold the people were conie out of the cific, and he ran

vpon them and smote them.
_~ Di 44 And

fr eA bimelech. lud ges r A bine

m | Then Went Abi 0 Ther
And Abimelech and the companions 50 Then wen imelech to Thebe
Tthat were with him, rushed forward, x besieged it and tokeit. 55

stoode in the entring ok the gate of the ci si But there was a strong towre Within tie: and the two other companions ran the titie, and thyther ranme all the men vpon all the people that were in the and women, and all the chieke that were fieldes, and stue them 5 In the citie,and fhut it to them and Gate
45 And when Abinetech had fonght ae them bp to the toppe of the towye, gaint the titie al that day, he toke it, and 52 And Abtineleck came vnto the towze, flucthe people that was therin, and de- and fought agavnst it and went harde
Thu tt ftroped the titie, and fovea“ faite init. vnto the doore of p towre to set it onfrc. buten 46 And when all the men ok the towre ok 53 And atertapne woman'tast a peece ok * au dier Sithem heard that they entred into an a mylstone bponhis head, & all to brake a Shan ot holde of the house ofthe god Berith. his brapne panne. ebe h / And it was told Abimelech, that all 54 Then Abunelech called hastylp pat ches the men of the towze ok Sichem were the poung manthat bare his harnelle, gathered together. and fapde vnto hun: Drawe thy Nore
43 And Abimeleh gat him to monnt Zel- and klea me, that men lay not of me, x mon, both he c all the people that were woman fluc him: And his lad thrust with hun, x tone arxes with him, and ut hün thorowe, and he died, downe bolwes of trees e toke them and 55 And when the men of Jlrael {awe bare them on his shulder, efayde vnt that Abimelech was dead, they departhe folne that were with hym: what ye ted tuery man vnto his owne bout, haue seene me do, speede pour lelues, x 56 Thus God rendred the wickeduesse , do lykewyst as J haue done. ol Abunelech which he dyd vnto his fr an
49 And al the men that were among the ther, in lleyng his lenentie brethrieu. es people, cut dowue bowes, and folowed 57 And therto all the wickednelle of the tom
Abunelech, and put them into the hold, menof Sichem, dpd God bepag vpon wr and set the holde a fire by them: so that their heades: And vpon them came the z al the men ol the towre ol Sichem died „ curse ol Joatham the forme of Jerd- ge allo, vpon a thoulande mene Women. baal. tit

_ © The.x. (bapter.

2 Chola died. 5 Jair also died. 17 Che Firaclites are punithed kor their Cinnes, 10 They crpe vnto God, 16 And he hath pitie on them.

ter Abimelech, there tht Low, and serued Waalim and Alle
Za \arofe to defende Il- roth, and the gods of Siria, the gods ,
~ |rael Thola the sonne of Sidon, and the gods of Moab, the of Phuah the sonne sf gods okthe children ok Ammon, and the
N Dodo, a man of Isa- gods of the Philistines, and forsoke the char, whiche dwelt in Tordt, and lerued not hin.

’

* Samir in mount E- 7 And the Lord was woth with Blew a
Oban prim. el, and he solde them into the handes ned, 2 And he indged Ilrael twentie x thee ofthe Philistines, andento the handes

veres , c died, e was buried in Samir. ofthe chüdren of Ammon.

3 And akter hun arose Jair a Gilea- 3 which from that pere koorth pilde and

dite, and indged Jlraeltwintie and two opprelled the chudzen ok Plcacl v3)" .,

peres, | | teene peres, al that were on the other e ne And he had thirtie sonnes that rode on ide Jordane nthe lande of the Wid’ vi; mene of thirtie Alle coltes, and they had rites whithe is in Gilead. * auboncam khjirtie cities, which are called auoth 9 Moreouer, ö chüdren of Ammon went e Jair vnto this dap, and are in the lande ouer Jordane to fight agaynst Juba,

Sar del. dk Gilead, Beniann hai,

Bart. Deut. a : : ‘ ut 7 and tl ¢ house of Eb J}

hp. j. 5 And Fair died, and was buried in Ca- so that Israel 105 cumbred. 10 nion. 10 And the chüͤdren of Jlrael trped pn

s And the children ok Jlrael wrought b Tord, saying: we hãue firmed agai

Wickednesse pet agapne inthelight of thee, for We haue forfaken our 55d

Sod, and haue carued zam. „ 15 Andthe chndren ol Ilracl sayde onto or l 8 And the Lorde sapde vnto Mecha: the Nord: we haue fine; do chou vnte i ee ge ac h ufrem va whatkdeuer pleale thee, deuner bs
„the Egiptians and from the Amontes, onelp we pray thee this dag. krom the childzen of Ammon, and from 16 And they put awaythe straunge gods the Philistines: a from them, k serued the Lov : And his
2 The Sidonitesarfo and the Amale- soule had pitte onthe nierte of Ilrael. kites the Maonites dyd oppresle vou, 17 Then the children of Annnon gatheand pe cryed to me, and J delluered you red together e pitchedin Gllead: And

out oktheir hands. the children of Ilrael gathered them
; And for all'that, pe haue forsaken me together, and pitched in bah. — and lerued straunge gods, wherfort J 18 And the people and lordes of Gitedd 5

will helpe vou no moze. 1 slapde eche to other: wholoeuer will be-

14 Go and erye vnto the gods whiche ve ginue the batteil agaynst the chuͤdren haue cholen, and let them saue vou inte ol Aminon, thefame shalbe head duer tyme ol vour tribulation. all teinbabttauntes of Gilead gat,
. | PO Mahal wei AE sis ais

The xi. Chapter We Cette e ae

> ephthah beyng chaled away by his brethren, was alter made captayne outer Aral. zo Pemahetharathe vowe. 32 He vanauisheth the IAmmonites,;ꝰ Ind facrificeeh his datighter according to his vowe. a . N Few

; ; Reine

(8p ec eetooese ©

seh all * Ur > 2 od 8 — * 2 1 N 3
2 5 ETT {* 10 — 4 4% 5 eT ‘ uy. * + “Myer * 900 0 e eb e a Yer i d

0 = W

J ae | 0 8 0 1 ui ry RE N y NN eee *

We N
* tt 18 85 N 1 III

sa] LD there was one And there gathered pote men to Jeph-
Nn Jephthaha Glleadite, thah, aud went out with hun. 115
Ns astrong man, the sonne 4 Aud in protesse of time, the children .!“

o make
= : inuafions bpd

: aK N ok an harlot - of Amn „ the enemies
27 f ae ° ion made warre agaynst Hl: of the people
5 N Aud Gilead begat rael. neee

xi Jephthah: And Giz 5 And when the chüdren of Anmnon de.

5 ——"leads wyfe bare him fought thus agaynst Ilrael, the ciders .
Br. aes bith When they were come to of Gilead went to fet Jephtbah out OF d cov em e Pine aoe Jephthah, and laid vnto the lande ol Tob, e

Vint: meas i -
Fat, ou shait not inherite in our fa- 6 And sapde vnto him: Come, aud be aal

„ f a Grabau zor thou art the fonne ofa our captapne that we may ficht With) eee ben Jeppebat fed from his hr 5 ephena * be ewers of f
U 8 . 15 O2E2 e red the elders of unn of thurn and diweit in the lande of Cob: 7 eee 12 5 J Gilead; ton

Lephthah.

*Hebr.In peace.

C gapne bnto the king of the chuͤdren of

Deut. ii. b.

Gilead: Opyd not ye hate me. expell me out of my fathers boule « howe then tome pou buito mie nowe in time of pour tribulation:

8 And the elders of Gilead sapde vnto

Jephthah: Therkore we turne agapne to thee nowe, that thou mapest go with vs, s᷑ fight againk the chidren of Amimon, and be dur head oner all the inhabitauntes of Gilead.

And Jephthah sapde vntothe elders of Gilead: It ye bring me home againe to fight againtt the children of Ammon, then pkthe Lorde delluer them bekore

Io me, shall I be pour Head: a
And the elpersof Gilead sayd to Jephthah: The Lorde be witnesse betivecne

vs, it we do not atcording to thy wordes ·

nn Then Jephthah went with the elders of Gilead, and p people made hym

head r taptapne ouerthem: And Jeph-

thal rehearsed al his Wordes before the
Borde in Mispah.

12 And Jephthah {ent meflengers bute -

the king of the children of Ammon, saping: What hat thou to do with me, that thou art come again to fight in my lande „ wy
13 The king of the children of Ammon

aunswered vnto p messengers of Jephthah: Because Israel toke away ny

lande when they came out of Egypt, euen from Arnon vnto Jabok, and vnto

Jordane: Nowe therfore restore thost

landes agapne! with faire meanes.
14 And Jephthah sent meflengers a-

Ammon, .
15 And sapd vnto him thus sayth Jeph-

thal) :* Israel toke not away the laude

of Moab, nor the lande of the children of
Ammon.

16 But when BPirack cane vp frd Egypt, and Walked thorowe the wildernelle, euen vnto p red sea, they tame to Cades:

17 Aud Israel sent meslengers onto the king of Edo, saying, Let me J prape thee go thorow thy lande: Wut the king of Edõ would not agree therto. And in lyke maner they sent vnto the king of
Moab: but he woulde not tonsent. And
Ilrael abode stil in Cades.

18 And then they went along thorowe

the wildernesse, and commpalled the land

ol Edom, e the land of Moab, and came along by the cal spde ok the land of Moab, and pitched on the other lide of Ar-

ludges.

26 All the whyle Jlraecl dwelt in Hesbon 115

27 Wherfore Jhaue not spnned agayust

non and woulde not come Within the coastof Moab: fo Arnon was the border of Moab. 5
10 And then Ifrael sent niessengers py. to Schon king of the Amorzites, c kin of Hesbon, and sayde vnto him: Let vs passe we pray thee thorow thy land py: to our owne tountrey. N
20 But Sehon conlented not to Piracy that he choulde go thozowe his toalt: but gathered all his people together rx pitched in Pala, € fought wih Ilrael.
21 And the Lorde God of Hiracideline: > red Sehon r all his folke into the han: des ol Israel, and they finote them: So
Picaciimote them, and pollesled allthe land of the Aniorites the inhabitauntes bk that tountrep.
22 And they possessed al the coastes ok the
Amorzites from Arnon vuto Jabol , e from the wildernesse vnto Jordane.
23 So nowe, seyng the Lord God of Ilrael hath cast out the Amorites before pe people Israel, shouldest thou poleit?
2 Map, but what people Camos thy God dryueth out, that lande possesse thou:
Euen so whatsoeuer nation the Lord on.

thinibe tt pou h
Taght torte land, thy belencd es

not stryue with Jlrael and kigljt against =~,
7 righttd and her townes , in Aroer and her tow: ys nes , and in all the tities that be along bp
ð toastes of Arnon threc hundred peres: lee did ye not retouer them in all that paces

thee, but chou doest me wrong to Warte against me: The Hog therfore whüche is a iudge, beiudge this day betiwecne the children of Hiraet, and the child of Ammon. 0 f
23 Howbeit, the king of the chad ol ¢
Ammon hearkened not vnto the Wo des of Jephthah, which he lent hin d gez
29 Then the" fpivite of the Lord calne boo ,
Jephthah and he patter ouer to cf. cs lead eto Manasses, and canit to 5 t pal) that lieth in Gilead, e from then vnto the chudren of Ammon. op go And Jephthah bowed a pore ditt
Lorde, x fayd: If thou hate oeltuct children of Ammon into my b Then

fene

that thing th b of dome ol 55 Houle against ne, whe
4 come home in peace from the chudien of Ammon, halbe the Lordes, and

4 will offer it vp fora burnt offering.
And fo Jephthah went vnto the chil-
7 dren of Ammon to fight agaynst them, and the Lorde deliuered them into his

es. 5 bad he smote them from Aroer tyll thou conic to Meunnith, cuen twentie ct ties, and fo foorth to the plapne ok the pineyardes with an exceeding great slanghter: And thus the childre of Am mon ae sae vnder, before the

idren of Jlrael. Lat

3 Apen Jepbehah ame to Misphah vnto his houlc, see, his daughter canie out on agapiit hin with © tinibeelles and bu: dalinces, which was his onely chylde: so tar he had neither sonne

E no daughter. ö r And when helawe her, he W rent his i, clotes,efapde: Alas my daughter, thou
= att brought me lowe, c art dne ok them
' chattroubleth me: For J haue opened my mouth vnto the Lode and cannot

at conmieth out of

go backe. ü
36 And the sayde vnto hun: Hpfather, il thou haue opened thy mouth vnt the
Logve then do with) nie attording to it that proteeded out okthy niouth, for as much as the Lorde hath auenged thee ol thyne enemies 5 children ok Ammon.
37 And the sayd vnto her father, Do this much for nie: Let me alone two monethes, that J may go to the monntapnes and be wayle my virginite, J bau and my felowes. famcin Af
38: And he lapd, go. And he sent her away wen d two monethes : And so fhe went with w. her tompanious, c lamented her mapdenhead vpon the mountaynes,
39 And alter the ende of two monethes,
(he turned agayne vnto her father, whiche dyd with her according to his vowe whiche he had bowed, € the had
Rnowne no man: And it grewe to a cu-
(tome in Israel, e é
40 The daughters of Plract tame pere by pere to lait the daughter of Jephthah the Gicadite , foure dayes in a pere. *

I Tube. xii. (hapter.
6 Fephthah killeth two and kourtie thoulande Ephraimites. 8 Akter Jephthah tue

ceedeth Ibzan. u Elon. And Abdon.

A Md the men okephraun gathered them sel-
Ines together, € went

ry, - V le 8 Ne
2 . fight Wagainst the chila, Dien ol Anion, and dyddest not call vs ah t go with thee z we will therfore burne i. thine houle vpon thee with fire.

2 And Jephthah fapde vnto them, tp people were at great stryfe with the chuldren ol Ammon: And when J called pou ,pe deliuered me not out of their handes.

3 And when J fae that pe deliuered

mie not, © J put np lyfe in my handes,

and went bponthe children of Ammon, and the Tode deliuered them into my handes: Wherfore then are ye come vpbon me nowe, to light agamst me-
4 Jeyhthah therfore gathered together

al the men ok Gilead, and fought with

we Ephraites. And the men of Gilead ae the Ephrattes, betause they fayd : e Glleadites are but runneagates of

Ephraum, among the Ephraites and the
Manaslites. ö

5 Moreouer the men of Gilead toke the passages of Jordane before the Ephrai-

tes: And When those Ephraites that

were escaped aid, Let me go ouer:then

the men of Gilead fayde vnto hym, Art

thou an Ephraite: If he sayde, nav:

Then sapde they vnto hun: Then fay, —
OSchluboleth. And he sayde, Sibbo- moa ace leth:lor he contde not so proͤnounce. And then they toke him, and due him at the passages of Jordane: And there were ouerthrowen at that tinie of the
Ephraites fourtie and two thonlande.

7 Aud Jephthah iudged Flracl fir peres, then died Jephthah the Gileadite, and

was buried in lone ok p cities of Gilead.

8 After this man, iudged Pfracl one
Ibzan of Bethlehem.

9 And he had thirtie sonnes and thirtie daughters, whom he sent out, aud toke in thirtie daughters froin abrode for his nac sounes. And when Ib zan had iudged ond obe
Ilrael seuen pere, 1

Jo He died, & Was buried at Bethlehem. sow.

D 3 Akt

On

er

Saimfon.

II

e

Alter Hint, Elona Zabulonite iudged
Israel ten peres.

12 And Elion the Zabulonite died x was

buried in Aialon, in the countrey of Zabulon. .

13 After him, Abdon the sonne ok Hellel, a

Pharathonite, indged Jlrael.

14 And he had fourtie sonnes, and thirtie

x 1
„Pebz Added to commit.
Iud. 2 b. 3 b.
4. 1.6.2 10.2.

The. xiii. Chapter. :

ofthe Philistines. The angel appearet to Manoahs wife, The angell commaundeth pprareth

1 Jtrael for their wickednesse is oppressed
24 The birth of Samlon. fo 6 EF) IND the chudrenof Be

NS rael “began agayne to tönntte wickednesse

and the Lorde deluered them into the handes of the Philistines

we

fonrtie peres.

2 Andthere was a man in Zaraah of

(a Meaning he should halte au pectliar cals ung to lerue
Goo m, le parat rom the common ozdze of men.

the kinred of Dan, named Mandah, whole wife was barren, and bare not.

Aud the angell or the od appeared vnto the woman, e fayde vnto her: Weholde, nowe thou art barren, k bearest not, but thou shalt tonccaue, and beare a sorme.

And nowe therfore beware; that Hou .

duinke no wyne, nor {rong drinke, neither eate amd vncle ane thin:

For lo, thou shalt conceauc and beare a sonne, And ther may nob rasor come on his head, for pladde thalbe a Nazarite Dito God euen from his byrth: And he shal beginne to saue Israel outot the handes of the Philistines.

6 Then the wife tame, € tolde her hul-

O, wonder full.

bande, saping: A man ot God tame vnto

int, and the fashionofhim was ipie the fashion of an angell of God, ctecdmg fearful: But JJ alked him not whence he was, neither tolde he me his name:
But layde vnto me, vehold, thou shalt be With childe and beare a sonne, c now dzinke no wyne noz strong drinke, neither cate any vncleane thing, for the ladde shalbe an abstayner to God, euen krom his byrth to the day of his death.
Then Manoah made intertession to the Lorde, and layde: J praythee nw
Lorde, let the man of God whiche thou sendedst, come agayne vnto vs, x teache vs what we Hal do vnto the ladde whẽ
He is borne.

“recs

5 iN va inthe fight or the lord,

— tnuompppl —

Si neucibes, that rode on threlto alle coltes: And when Abdonthe aum . of Hellel the Pharathonite had iud ie
Ilrael eight pets, loge
15 He died, c was burped in Pharath. in the lande of Ephraim, in cem the Amalekites. ;

him to facrifice vnco the Lozde,

9 And God heard the bopeeof: and the angel of God came 5 5 to the wife as the late in the felde: but
Manoah her hulsbãd was not with her.

Jo And the wife made haste, aud ranner chewed her hulbande, T fayde vnto hirn behold, the man appeared vnto me that tame vnto me to dap. oar

n And Mandah avote € went after his 1
Wife, and tame to the man, and layne . vnto hin: Art thou the nad that spanest ba vnto the woman; And he sapde: Fam,

12 Mangah sapde, Howe let thy laying *

tome to passe: Howe shall we order the childe, and do Drto ime

13 And the ang ell olthe Lod sayd vnto
Mandoah: The woman must absteyne from all thet J ae vnto her:

14 She mem cate oł nothing that cimeth

of the me tree, nog deinke wine oz a

strong orinke, nor cate any vuckcane %

tis forbo bp

thing: but must obserue allthat J bad .

her.

15 Manoah fayde buts the angell of the
Powe: J pray thee let vs retaynt the
_ haue made redy a tipd before

1s And the angel ofthe Lozd layde nto
Manoah: Though thou make uv a bide, J Wil not cate of thy bread: And! thou wut offer a burnt offering , (00, rox, mint offer it vnto the Lorde. For gd u noah Witt not that it was au angell ol the Lorde.

17 And Manoah sayde agayne vnto the angell of the Lord: What is thy name, that when thy laying is come to pal
We map do thee Worshippe- ;

18 And the angel ok the Lorde lapde vn, to him: Whpalliestthou thus after mir nate, which is secrete- tba

And fo Manoah toke a kyd, wit 1 meat offring, and offred it vpon a aio

ao

~ Mages. - XXVIII.

puto the Lozde: And the angel did lp dye, betause we haue seene God. wonderousiy, Manoah and his wife 23 But his wyfe fapde vnto him: vf the
„ sokpug vpon. Lord Would kyl bs he would not haue ...,
© 0 b And whe the flambe tame vp toward w reteaàued a burut offering and a meate cs eto re heauen from the aulter the angellok —offeringofourhandes neither woulde sen. cys the Lowe alcended vp in the flambe of he haue shewed vs al these thinges, nog ore the aulter: And Maudah aud his wyfe woulde nowe haue tolde vs any uche. h bar loked vpon it, and fell on their fates vn- 4 And the wyle bare a sonne, and called wr rh n to the grounde. his nanie Samfon: And b ladde grewe, ws u(Butthe angel ok the Lord did no mme — andthe Lande blefled hun. appeare vnto Mandah and his wpfe:) 25 And the spirite ofthe Horde began to
And then Manoah knewe that it was strengthen him in the hoast of Dan, |. Sore an angel of the Lorde, betweene Zaraah and Esthaol. Wes.
2 And lapd onto his wyfe: We shal suref The. xiiii. Chapter.
2 Samlon detireth to haue a wyle of the Philistines. 6 He lilletha Lion. 12 He piopoundeth a riddle. 19 He killeth thirtie. 20 His wpke korsaneth him and taketh

another,
CF. hy as re Ne
1 ‘ ae mC A FN CN A.C ri
* 2 ty ie te 0 8 i ren 15 : 1 r 9055 i i} oo ¢ oty 2 —— — — at) * — . on on 1
7 TAR r 4S tT N 3 A * 7 Gish my? cee ev eve 2747 f ae . ve ee AN 2 1 9 ST my 1 1 1
Hk eet HAN ene: 1 „ 7 | BY Beil 7 we ) He e Ut anlar ere. NG Co 8 a k N M
4 Amon went downe to 4 Wut his father and mother W wist daes

Thanmath , and sawe not that it was the Lordes doyng, and woerteobra womã in Thamnath that he fought an otcasion against the / cs of the daughters of the Philistines:lorat that tine the Philisti- anne
Phllistines: nes raigned ouer Jlrael.

S And he came vp, and 5 Then went Samfon and his father a kee told bis father and bis his mother downe to Thannath, and
Tuer laid: I haut sene a woman in came to the vinepardes of Thanmath: dai f hanmath ok the daughters ofthe Phi- and beholde, a poung Lion roared
5 Ther nowe “gene me her to Wyle. vpon him. 1
1 tobi deter and mother sapd vn- 6 And the spirite of the Low came bpo , den. m be Is there neuer a woman a- him, and he tare him as he would haue sb de
Rh a daughters of thy brethren, x rent a kydde, and pet had nothing ur his ha 90 aoa My people, but that thou mult bande:netther tolde his father aud nio-
Bay Phil vee ofthe vncircumtiled ther what he had done.

ng mes: And Samlon fayd vnto his 7 And he went downe, talked with the 28

ai Gene me this woman , foz she woman, whithe seemed well fauoured aleth me well. in the fight of Damon.
D 4. 8 And

lS —

Samfons riddle.

: 8 Amd within a short {pace after, as he wet thyther againe to take her to wife, he turned out of the way to fee the carkasse of the Lion: And belolde there was aswarme of bees and honp in the tarkasse of the Lion.

And he toke therof in his handes, and went eating, and came to his father and

N.

mother, and gaue them allo, and they

did eate: But he tolde not them that he had taken the bony out of the tarkasse ofthe Lion. : lo And fo his father went downe dnto bath m.: the woman, and Samfon madethere a rpage. featt:fo2 fo dled the pounge men to do.
I And whéethep lawe him, they brought thirtie companions to be with hin.
12 And Salon sapd vnto then „J Will nowe put foorth a riddle vnto pou: c pt

pou tan detlare it me within leuen dayes of the feast, and linde itout, J wul geue pouthirtie® sheetes, i thirtie chaunge

de Linnen vled to be
Wozne, ag we ll in the

of garmentes:

nach de 13 But and ik von can not declare it me. le.
19 And the spirite of the Lord came von him and he went downe to© Askalon, oy, aͤnd flue thirtie men of them, and spoy- tt

then (hal ye geue me thirtie sheetes and
(f) To wwe are

at fea stes end soleinnt daicg.

they aunlwered him: Put foorth thy

riddle that we may heare itt.

C And he sayd vnto them: Dut of the cater tanie meate, and out of the strong tame sweetnesse. And they toulde not in three dayes expounde the riddle.

15 And whethelwseuenth dap was come, they fayd vnto Samsons Wyle: Flatter

g Of the wWecke, Watch was the fourth dap of the ical,

4 Samson tyech kirebrandes to the fore taples. 6 Che philillines burnt his father in lawe and his wife. ij with the iawe bone of an alle he killeth a thoutand men.
19 Dut ofa great tooth in the ia we, God gaue him water.

Ut withma while af- 4. And Samson went out, and taught

ter, euen in the time of wheat haruest, Safon

ey,

Z| ES vulted his wife with a
(a) Khat tm J 5 2 75 4 kyo faping: Wi@go f emp ift. in to my Wyfe into the

chaumber. But her father woulde not suffer him to go in.

2 And her father sapde, I thought that tliou haddest ated her, e therfore gaue
Iher to thy companion : Is not her pounger sister fayzer then fhe: Lake

her J pray thee, in steade of the other.
3 Sanison sayde vnto hym: Nowe am
OSE J niore O blamelesse then the Philisti-

eth umi.

pleasure.

ludges. wer

16 And Sanrlons wyfe wept before him

the leuenth day, before the funne went downe: what is sweeter then hony-and

thirtie chaunge of © garmentes. And led them, gaue chaunge ot garmentes see vnto them which expounded the riddle:
And he was wroth, and went bp to his
20 Wut Sanifons wpfe was geuen to one ok his tompanions that he had ta

9 De. v. (hapier. b

6 Then the Philistines sayd: Who bath

nes, and therfore will J do them dil-

Sam thynebufband that he may dec the riddle lest we burne thee and thp a

thers houle with fire: Haue ye ca hyther, to make vs begger s (Sit pais

ONS tre

and sayd, Surely thou hatest me and ip; uest me not: for thou batt put foorth g riddle vnto the children of my fotke and
Hatt not tolde it me. And he sayde dary her: Beholde, J haue not tolde it my fa-
~~ and my mother, and (halt J telltt ie ie 5
And Sanions Wyte Wept before him seuen dapes, whyle the feast lasted: And the seuenth day he told her, betaule the lay so sore vpõ him. And che tolde the riddle to the children of her folke.
And the men of the citie sayd vnto him

what is stronger then a Lion: Then sayd he vnto them: f pe had not plowed with my hepffer, ye had not founde vey out my riddle, Mate

ahn

fathers house.

ken vnto hin.

three hundred fores,¢ tobe firebrandes, and turned them faple to taple, and put a firebrand in the middes betweene tibo

ered: anz 18

nes tame dp and d burnt her and her ese

aug

losuah.

N h J

W M "

A
E
N 1 1
* W i, i} iT i} o gi | 117 ail
2 8 U
} ~ v * 9 4
! We F. & d
7 N N 1) SUX
W. 1 tet
1 N i 2 Fits
N ey 8 i } i e ii 12
1 v *
8 fr Ne
2 \\
65 MI ‘aX r iy N
5 K
2 nat :
Fie Sey f V ae M
3 pl 1
NN

i"
Mi

NU tii
Us is

Ay

7 110 11 RAY |
At il} lar 1 te 2

„ NM a ee a) Ait) fae” We
5 aN , 015 N. U . I A ai N
: y aa ra oases: STe 2 2 G SS | < i 1 y = W
= eA a ual 5 4 :
= als U Mut un. 11101 a e! 4 bi

And Samfon laid vnto them: Though |
5 pe haue done this, petwil Jbe auen- went tothe toppe ok the rocke Etam ged of pou, and then J will ceasse. sayde to Samson: Wottest thou not
8 And he note theni legge and thygh that the Philistmes are rulers ouer bs: with a myghtte plague, and then he wherkore then hast thou done thus vnva € Dibeltin the toppeofthe rocke to bs; he aunswered them: As they dyd am. = at . r
Then the philistines tame vp, and 12 And they sayd vnto him agapne: we pytched in Juda, and canped in Lehi. are tome to byndethee and to deliner lo And the m̃en ol Juda sayde: Why are thee into ß hande ol the Philistines. And ve come bp vnto vs: They aunlwered: Sanin said vnto them: Sweare vnto
To bynde Samfon are we come vpe me, that ye chal not fal vpon me your to do to hym, as he hath done to vs. selues. 8

ff
} IES

Fac * 0

2 i max 8 iz
AY
N i)
N

d whom god had appointed to be their pez

puerer from the poke ok the
Phil ame

but we will bynde thee, c v delpuer thee vnto their handes: but we wyll not kyll thee. And they bounde hym with two new cordes, and brought him from the rocke. —"
14.. And when he tame to Lebt, the Philistines showted agaynst him: And the spirite of the Lord came vpon him, and the tordes that were vpon his armes, betame as flare that was burnt with fire, lor the bandes loosed from of his handes.

C

date: 15 And he foundea “© newe iawe bone ir des of an Alle, put foorth his hande, and

taught it, and ue a thousande men therwith. mn

16 And Samson fayde : with the tare of an Asse, heapes vpon heapes: with the tae of an Alle haue J slayne a

The. xyj. Chapter.

1. Sanrfoncarieth away the gates of Tah. 18. Ye was deceaued by Delila. zo. He pulleth downe the houle vpon the Philistines, and pet with them, .

1 hen went Samson to
A a N bere VY |]
As zah, and lawe there
Jan harlot, and went in
2 xy (i BA bnto her.
2 Ge | And it was tolde

MES, [the Azathites, faping:

=— Santon is come hpther. And they went about, and lapde a
Wapte for hym there all nyght in the gate of the atic, and were {tpl all the

e

e
C

— eee Il | ee
SENIOR ce RINT ox :

f ivy 271 rr 5 N 2 e
N ie ot, ö 95 a * i} { i ATA
“alt is Ty A Ua Lu ra maar . — 0 n i)

ludges.
) 13 They annMwered him, faping : No, thoulande men. —

D
Lo i

Lanse

17 And when he had tett speakyng he caft away the iawe bone out of his hande, and called the place © Namath

Lehi. thei
18 And he was sore a thyrst, and called on aii the Lord, and layde: Thou hast genen this great bictorp in the hande ok thy leruaunt;: and nowe J mutt dye fo, thirst, and fall into the handes of the py: cirtumtised.

19 But God brake a great tooth that waz in the iawe, € there came Water therout, and When he had drunke, his hpi: rite tame agayne , t he Was refrethen: wherkore the name thereof was called vnto this day, The well of the caller on: which came ot the ia we.

20 And he indged Jlrael in the dapes of the Philistines, twentie peres.

nyght, saying: In the mornyng whan it is dap, We Hall kyll hym.

3 And Samson toke his rest tyll nipdnyght, and arose at mydnyght, and toke the doores of the gate ok the citte and the two postes, and rent them of with the barre and all, and put them vppon his shonlders, and caryed them dpto the top of an hyll, that is before He-

zr0n. — a

A N
I el

yaa, & nq (a

on

af
N *
U

d after this, he loued a woman by

ae ryuer of Dozeks, Whole name was u ila.

ae whom came the lordes of the
Phuistines, and sayde vnto her: eve
{pane him, and fee wherm his great strenght lyeth, and by What meanes we may duertome hin, that we may bynde hüt, and punishe hym: and euery one of vs hall gene thee a leuen hundred file uer lynges.
6 and Dalila layde to Samion: Oh tell me where thy great strength lyeth, and how thou myghtett be bounde and bronght under.

Aut m 5 mta-

IL

B
1 binde me With seuen greene Wythes

that were neuer dryed, Ichalbe weatie, and be as an other nian. +

3 And then the lordes of the Philistines bronght her senuen wythes that were yet greene ⁊ neuer dryed, and che bound hymtherwit h. g

9 (Voiwithstanding He had men lying in wapte with her in the chaunbre):

And she sad vnto him, The Philistines

be vpon thee Samson. And immediatly he brake the tordes, as a stryng of towe breaketh whenit fealeth fire. And so his streugth was not knowen.

10 And Dalila sapde vnto Samson: See, thou hast mocked me, and tolde mie lies:
Now therkoze tell ine wherwith thou myghtest be bounde. b

n he aunswered her: BE they bynde me

with uewe ropes that neuer were octu-

N 7 5 i

ey 1 UMA CL HAN i

2 ~ 125 Ne |
U

Aj

tell 2 i HH f
. if
0 i 7
N ye

a

i>
N

fi : ——

Samson aunswered vnto her: f they

pied, I hall be anoeee weake, and be as ano-
12 Dalila therfore toke newe ro es, an bounde hun therwith, and 25 itp him, The philistines be pps thee Same son. And there were ipers of wapte in the chamber.) And he brake them krom ok his armes, as they had ben but a threade. .
13 And Dalilafapde nto Samfon, Hy: therto thou hast beguyled me, and tolde nie lyes: Bet tell iie Howe thou myghtest be bounde. He sayde vnto her: pF thou plattest the seuen lockes of my head with the threades ofthe wooffe.
14. And she fastened it with a pynne, and fayde buts hun: The Phnlistines be € bpdtheeSamfon, And he awaked out of his sleepe, and went away with the pynne ofthe Webbe and the Wooffe.
15 And she sapde vnto him agapne: How caust thou faye © JJ loue thee, when thyne heart is not Wich me: Thou hast co 6a, mocked me this three tymes, and halt ande oe 1. me wherin thy great strengeh werden, pet h. : leltue t.
16 And as fhe laye vpon hym with her dane
Worbes, continually vexpug of hun His W soule was entumbred euẽ vnto p death. rte
17 And so he tolde her all his heart, a fain me, vnto her: There neuer came rasor vpon . myne head, for J haue ben a Maszaz rife bnto God, euen from my mothers wombe: Therfore when JJ am shauen, my strength will go fromme, EY Cail
Ware Weake and be lyke all (other men.

a
K Chi)

ron.

18 And when Dalila farbe that he had tolde her all his heart, she sent and called for the lordes of the Philistines, faying: Come vp pet this once, for he hath shewed me all his hearte. Then p lordes of the Philistines came vp vnto her, and brought the money in their handes.

19 And she made hym fleepe vpon her knees, and she fent for a man, and he dyd shaue of the seuen lockes of his head , € began to vexe him, and his strength! was gone fromhun.

20 And the fayne , The Philistines be vponthee Samson. And he awoke out ok his lleepe, and sapde: J will go out now as at other tymes before, € hake my selfe. And he wilt not that the Lord
Was departed from hym.

21 But the Phulistines toke hym, and put out his eyes, aud brought hun downe to Aʒʒ ah, aud bounde him with letters of brasse: and he dyd grynde in the pri-

fon house.

21 Polbbeit the heere of his head began eam to growe agayne after that he was rest d be bhauen. 8
23 Thenthe lordes of the Philistines ga-

thered them together, for to offer a solempne offring vnto Dagon their God, and to reiopce: For they sayd, Our God
Hath deliuered Samson our enennie into our handes.

24 And when the people sawe him, they praysed their God: for they sayde, Our
God hath delpuered into our handes our enemie, and destroper of our countrey, whiche slue manye of vs.

25 And whentheir heartes were merp, they sayde: Send for: Sanlon, that he

(©, Nat fay thc losse of pis heare, but fos the conte m t or the odr nance of God.

reconcitianes to God.

The. xvii. Chapter,

3. Ancahs mother accorditg to her bowe made her tonne two ddole e made his tonne a priest tor his idoles. 10. Ind alter he hired a Leuite. * :

1— bere was a man of

a We Fe mount €pheaint, naz
A med icah.

2 ey 7 And he fayde onto

Dee bis mother: The fe-

Ae, MNS) ven Hundeed © finer:

(a) Sicltgol 8 ——
Splact. lynges that Were faz ken from thee, about which thou cursedst, and spakest it in myne eares, behoid the spluer is with me, J toke it away. And his mother layd: Blelled ve tijcu my lonne , in the Lorde,

ludges. =

map make vs laugh.
Santon out of the 11 anke a 5 played before them: and they fet h be betweene the ppllers. bin
26 And Sanison lapde vnto the ladtl led hym by the hande: Set meg 5
Ratoeth bpon, nd tat nel
¢ 50 n a a . hat Y may ieaneeg
27 And the Houle was full of women, and there were all the long. the Philistines: And there were v on women that bchede iwhyle Sun men, chelde le e : y Yple Samson
28 And Sanlon called Onto the Lone gn and sapde: O Lorde God J pray cher * thyncke vpon me, and strengthen me 5 beleche thee at this tyme onelpe S E
God, that J may be at once avenge okthe Philistines for my two eyes, “by
22 And Samfon caughethe two middle 1. pyilers on which the house stoode any on which it was borne vp the one in his ryght hande, and the other in his lelt.
30 And Samson sapde: My foule that dye with the Philistines, and bolbed them with all his myght, and the house fell vpon the lordes and bpon ail the people that were therin: And lo y dead
Which he fine at his death, were mo then they which he flue in his lpfe.
3 And then his brethren c all the honse of his father came downe, and toke him vp, and brought hym, and buryed hym betweene Zarah and Esthaol, in the burping plate of Manoah his father:
And he iudged Ilrael twentie peres.

3 And when he had restozed the lellen hundreth spluerlpnges to his mother, his mother sayde: J had deditatedthe splner vnto the Lorde of myne hande forthee my sonne, that thou Mouldc! make a grauen and moulten u, ood
Mow therfoze J will geue it ther a wwe gayne, vnd .

4 And when he restored the money hunhis mother, his mother toke two) be dreth syluerlynges, and gaue Ua en founder, which made therof a g. 10

ic lol.

ö moutten image, and it was in the hoult
Mitah. ö

mn 990 man Mitah had an Houle of oddes, and made an © Ephod and

g Thtraphim, and conlecrated one of

n tis lonnes, which became his prieste.

In those dayes there was no Ryng in srael, but euery man dyd that Which

was good in his owne eyes.

Bethlehem Juda, ok the kynred of Jubt
| sotourned there. !
3 And the man Departed out of the citie
7 he toulde fyndẽ la conuentent place]: And he came to mount E phraum, to the house bol Micah as he iourneped.

thd 9 And Micah lapde vnto him Wheme

ludges.

And there was a young nian out ok
¥ da, Which poung man was a Leute, € -

of Wethlehem Juda, to go dwell where

tömest thou: The Leuite aunlwered
95 0 f “as een Juda, and
N 5 (e) In deen Dee Sa Eee
10 And Micah sapde agapne vnto hynt: 22
Dwell with me, and be ynto wie A fa. san ta ther anda prieste, and J will gene thee Siehe ten spluerlynges by pere, two gar- van be mentes and thy meate and dwucke. mse
25 the pete Wer tt, , *
II . n v Leute was “? content to well o For the with the man, and was vnto hymas weet one of his owne sonnes. a
12 And Bical conlecrated the Leuite, & Sawn” the young man became his priest, and Bes
Was in the boule of Micah. ratty 23

thynke chep pl

3 Then lapde Mica): Pow F amifure ews.

that the Lord will be v good vnto me, zor feing J haue a Leuite to my prieste.

The.xvitt. Chapter

2, Che children of Dan fend men to tearche the land. n. Chen come the sir hundreth

and take the gods and the priest ot Micah aware. 27. They destrop Laig. 28, They

bupld it agapne. zo. Ind let vp idolatrie.

N thole dapes there was o no kyng in JE
5 „and in thole
Se dapes the tribe ot Dan
JP bught them an inhewe rritaunce to dwell in: n For vnto that tyne all their injeritaunce had not fallen vnto them among the tribe ol Jlrael.
And the chudren of Dan sent of their lipnted fpue actiue men in feates of
Warre out of their coastes, euen out of
Zaraah ck Esthaol, to viewe the lande and learche it out, and lade vnto them:
Go, and searche out the lande. Which whan they tame to mount Ephralni, cher hi theboute of Micah, they longed

And when they were in the Houle of

A1 Dre
Ve 1

e Mitah, they knewe © the voyte ok the

„ paoung man the Lente: And when they turned in thyther, they sayde vnto him:
1 bought thee thyther- What maz
108 been in this plate: and what batt

4 ao he aunswered them: Thus an dal dealeth Mitah with me, and pen red me, and Jam betonic his

And they layd vnto h :

vm agapne: Alke counsell now of God „that we map

knowe whether the way which we go halbe prousperous, or no. GE
6 And the priest sapde vnto them: © Go pil anden in peate, for the Lorde guydeth pour woche. way which ve go. , don where
Then the fpue men departed „e tame u en to Lais, and lawe the people that were dannen therin, owe they dwelt tarelesle, after z the maner of the Sidons styll, € without tastyng of perils, and that no man h made made any trouble in the lande, or vsur- em ath. ped any dominion:but were farre from mod. the Sldons, and had no bulpnesse with other men.
8 And they cauie agapne vnto their brethren to Zaraah and Esthaol, and their brethren sayde vnto them: What haue ye done:
9 And they aunfivered : Aryle, that we may go vp agaynst them, for we haue seene the lande, surely a very good one:
And do pe syt styll- We not flouthfull to go and entre to possesse the lande.
10 Jf pe will go, ve shall come vnto a people that casteth no perils, and it is à betp large tountrey, which God hath geuen into your handes: It is allo a place which doch lacke nothing that is in the worde. N n And there departed thence of the kynredok the Danites, cuen out of ee

eA icah

and Esthaol, fire hundred men appoyntted with instrumentes of warre.
12 And they went vp, and pytched in Tv

riath iarum, whiche is in Juda: Wher-

fore they called the place, Mahaneh
Dan, dnto this day, and it is on p back-

syde ol Kiriath tarim.
3 And they went thence vnto mount Ephraim, tame vnto the house ol Mitah.
C Then aunlwered the fine men that went to spye out the countrep of Lais, and saide vnto their brethren: Wot ye not that there is in thefe boules an E-

pon; Theraphim, and a grauen and a

mounten iniage- Howe therfore Wconsider what ye haue to do. , —

15 And they turned thytherwarde, and tant to the house of the young man the
Leuitt, cuen vnto the house of Micah, and saluted byt peateablie.

16 And the sire hundred nien girded with
Weapons of warre, which wert of the children of Dan, stoodt by the entryng

ok okthe gate.

) for tt

forve cipedtent chat we fhoutor take them away to out one bie.

© Hues ry And the fine men that went to spye out nen atthe the lande, went in thyther, € © toke the ahi der- raue image e thecphod Theraphim, berp andor Ad the moulten image: (And the priest

ckcawop, - ktoode in the entryng of the gate With meen" the fice hundred men that were appointed With weapons ol warre. ss .,

18 Whyplie the other went into Micahs

house, and let the tarued image, the E-

phod, Theraphim, and the moulten

mage: Then fade the priest vnto them, what do pe- 4 rec

(Oden bere- 19 They aunswered hym: Polde thy rod dez Pate, lapthine hande vpon thy mouth,

and come with vs, to be our father and priest: Is it better for thee to be a priest

honout, noz hig owne he: nette: but al! his cate was fo his belly. a ° priest vnto a tribe op kynred in Israel-
And the priestes hearte Y Was glad, and toke the Ephod, and Theraphun,

Co) with his idolg unit: 20

rege ofthe and the grauen mage, and went e in
Tode. the nuddest ol the people.

D 21 Andthey turned and departed, and put the chudren, the catell, and their other

The. xix. Chapter. 5
10 Df the Leuite whore wyfe was villanoully kplled in Gibea.

o in thoie dayeg,

when there was no
S kypng in Ilrael, a ter-

e tapne Teuite fotour-
Inyng on the lyde of mount Ephzaim, toke to wpfe a concubine

ludges.

buto the boufe of one man, then to be a

substaunte before then.
22 Aud Whẽ they were a good way the house of Mitah, the men that in the houles neare eme 8 gathered together, x fi thuldren of Dan:

their faces x {aid vnto Mitah:vohat av. leth thee, that thou makest an Wat
24. And he sayd: Vt haue taken adap itt goddes which J made, and allo p price and go pour wapes: and what hane
FJ moze 7 How then faye pe buto me Oe
Tohat apleth thes . 7 Ns
25 And the children of Dan fad vnto him: Pe
Let not thy bopee be hearde among me vs, leit)” augrye felowes runne bpon dr thee e thou lose thy lyfe, with the lpues <2 ol all thyne houshode. re
26 And so the children of Dan went their wapes: And when Mitah fare that they were to strong for hym, he turned and went backe vnto his houfe,
27 And they toke the © thinges which 9.
Micah had made, and the puest which a he had, and tame vnto Lats, euen vnto 2
à people that were at rest and without mystrust, aud smott them with the edge 2. ol the [word, e burnt the citic with frre.
28 And there was no man to hespe be- € tause Lais was farre from Sidon, they had no menlyng with any other ox man: And it was inthe valley thatlpeth ese by Bethrehob. Mie: Sy me
29 And they buylt them there a titie, and dwelttherin, xe talled it Dan after the name ok Dan their father, whlch Was borne vnto Israel: Mowbeit, the name ol the citie Was Lais at begynnyng.
30 And the chyldren of Dan let them vp the grauen image: And Jonathanthe sonne of Gerlom, the forme of Manalses, and his sonnes, were the priciest oes

the tribe of Dan, batyl the Day af the ° sve: taptiuitie ot the land. d

zt. And they set them vp the tarued image which Preah made, all the while that the houle ol God was in Silo.

out of Bethlehem Inda.
2 And his OMAN eae the whore be him, and went awaye from hin dale her fathers house to Bethlehem Juda and there continued koure monethes. fe wa
3 And her hul bande arole, and went an Ja

ter her, to fpeate krendiy vnto heran

ites fe.

in her agapne, haupng his lad pe pan, aum a couple of asses: nd fhe

bronght hym bnto her fathers house, c

whee the father of the daumolell sawe

hym, he reiopced of his comnipng.

And his father in lawwe, the damosels father, retavned byur, and he abode with hym three dapes and fo they dyd cate and drinke, aud lodged there

The fourth day whan they arole early

f inthe mozupng, the man stoode vp to depart. And the damolels father fapde vnto his sonne in law: Comfort thyne htart with a morsell of bread, and then

our wap.

6 A they fate downe, and dyd cate and princke both ok them together. And the damolels kather sapde vnto the man:
Be content J peay thee, and tarp all nyght, and let thyne heart be mery.

B 7 And when the man stoode reop to depart, his father in lawe compened hym: therfore he returned, and farped all nyght there. f

8 Aan be ro vp early the kyfth dapto departe, and the Damofels father laid:
Comforte thyne 0 hearte J pray thee,
And they taped vntyll after dday: and they dyd cate both of them together.

9 en When the man arole to Depart with his concubine and his lad, his father in lawe the damosels father, sayd vnto hym: Behold nowe, the day goeth fat away, and draweth towarde cucn,

pray vou tary all night: Wehold the unne goeth to rest, lodge here, that thyne hearte may be mery: and to inorowe get pou early vpon pour wape, ms, that thou mapest get thee to thy tent. lo Meuerthelatere the man woulde not

; tary , but arose and departed , and tame

as farre as Jebus (which is wierulalem) and his two alles laden, and his concubine with hym.

1 And when they were kast by Jebus, the day was fore spent, and the young man fayde vnto his maister: Come J pap thee, and let vs turne in into this id Jebulites, and lodge al night

a 12 Dis maister auuswered hun: we wyll

not turne into a Y straunge atic that are

not ok the chudren of Israel, we will go mex: (OOD to Gibea.

am 3 Aud he fayd vnto his lad: Go forwarde

And let vs drawe neare to one of thele

Ihe dey

" OE
: den tts

es

XXXIIII. places to lodge all nyght, either in Gi bea, bm ams nber met

14. And they went fozwarde bpon their C
Wap, and the sunne went downe boon them when they were fatt by Gibea, which belongeth to them ofemamm.

15 And they turned thytherwarde to go in, and lodge all uyght in Gibea: And
When he came, he lat him downe in a strrate of the citie, for there was no man that toke them into his houle to lodg-

png. "02 gathes

16 And behold, there tame an olde man dd stem. from his worke, out ok the fielde at euẽ, which was alfo of monnterphraun and dwelt as a straunger in Gibea: Wut the ) epee v, men of the plate, were the children of © Sa
Jemin. l f

17 And when he had lyft vp his eyes, he sawe a wayfaryng man in the streate of the title: And the olde man sayde, vohp-

a goest thou; and Whence comniest ou-

18 He aunswered hym: we come from

Wethlehem Juda towarde the lyde of mount Epbeain, from thence am J: aud J went to Wethlehem Juda, and „c go nowe to the houle of the Lorne, en and there is no man that reteaueth mie N

19 Me haue strawe and prouender for our asses, and bread and wyne foz me and thy handmapde, and foz the lad that is
With thy seruaunt: e we lacke nothing.

20 The olde man sayd: Peace be with thee, all that thou lackest thalt thou fynde with nie: Only abyde not in the a nyght!.

21 And so ho brought hin into his house, 2 and gaue fodder vnto the Alles: and they wasshed their fecte, and dyd eate and drynke. 6a shchz. len

22 And as they were makyng their „eln heartes mery, beholde, the men ofthe mus, geue citie which were wicked, beset the , house rounde about, and thrust at the bare doore, € spake to the man of the house, c the olde man, saying: Wing foorth the ve ors man that tame into thyne boule , that e ore we may knowe him. e

23 And this man the maister of the Houle ae Fe went out and fayd vnto then: Oh nap of Goo, ne: my brethren, do not so wickedlp, seyug reneormane that this mau is come into mne Houle, tromosen sv: do not fo bumectea thyng. cy Thats,

24 Wehold, here is my daughter a mag den, and this mans concubine , N J

0}, Lee,
£00d comfort.

De Leuites.

Ywyll bryug out nowe vuto pou, and
©) humble them, c do with them what

ehe. do not so abhominable a thing.

25 But the men woulde not hearken to hym : And the man tobe his concubine, and brought her out vnto them, whiche knewe her, and abuled her al the night, enen vnto the mornyng: and when the day began to spryng, they let her go.

26 And then came the woman in the dawnyng of the Day, and fell downe at the

Te. xx. Chapter.

1 Che Ilraelites alslemble in Mispah, to whom the Leutte declareth his won lende for them that aya che vilianie. 25 Che Ilraelites are twyle 11 lin 2 100 a

00 Ded. doore of the mans houle where her lod bande dul was, tyll it was dav.
2 Aud her Lorde avofe vp in the morning, and opened the doores ofthe Houle, and went dut to go his wap: and beholde length get the victorie.
11 een all the chyldren of
Ofex-b, „Ilrael went out, and
; the congregation was e gathered together as one nian, euen frem
5 5 93 Dan to wWeerleba, with

the lande of Gilead, vn-

to the Lords in Mispah.
2 And there aslembled the chicfe men of all the people, (andi of all the tribes of
Ilrael, in the congregation of the peo-

ludges.

seemeth pou good: but vnto this man

the woman, euen his concubi long before the doore of the hoh 4 her handes bpon the threcholde. 8
28 And he o fayde vnto her, Tip, and! bsbegopng: But the auntwerey ys,
Lbenthe mantoke her vp Dpdan all. eo |
Eltoode vp gate bpm vnto his pe.
2% And whehhe was cone into his hond C3 he toke aknpfe, and caught his Cotte: 88 bine and deutded her in pectes, Withthe bones, into twelue partes, and sent her
W Are of Jlrael.
30 And all that {awe it, sayde: was no suche deede done 05 Eng er the childrẽ ol Ilrael came out of Egypt vntothis day. Consider the matter take aduilement, and fay pour myndes.

ple of God, foure hundred thousande

footemen that drewe swordes.

3 (Morbthe chyldren of Weniamin heard that the chyidren of Ilrael were gont bp to Wifpah) Then fapde the chr ges dren ok Hiraci : Tell vs howe this wikednes is commicted- d

4 And the Leute the womans hulbar?

that was flayne, aunfibered and lad 5

I came into Gibea that is in meme:

With my concubine, to lodge all m

min 1S deftr oy ed.

nien of Gibea role against me,

dawbeleche houle rounde about vpon

meby night, € thought to haue Layne

mer and my toncubyne haue they forced, that she is dead.

6 And JJ tobe mp concubine, c tut her in

peetes, and sent her throughout all the

itrepokthe inheritaunte of Hirael: ps cher haue committed abbomination and villaute in Israel.

67% Beholde ye are all chuldzen of Ylrael,
4 gene pour aduice and connfel herein.
And all the people arose as one man, faping: There (hal not a manok vs goto his tent neither turne ito his boute.

% 9 But this chalbe it that we will do to

„ Gidea:iwe will go vp by lot against it:

10 And we will take ten men ok the hundred throughout all the tribes of Ilrael, and an hundred of the thoulande and athonsand out of ten thoufand , to fetch vitale for the people , that they may do when they tome to Gibed Weniannn according to all the abhomination that they haue wrought in Israel.

u And so all the men of Ilrael gathered together against the citie, kupt together as one man. a

2 And the tribes of Ilrael sent men thorowe all the tribe of Wemamin, saping:

% What wickednesse is this that is tom

iz mitted among pou?

Nowe therfore deliuer bs the men, thole children of belial whiche are in
Gibea, that we map flea them, and put
Wabbap euill from Israel.

Neuerthelater, the children of Weniamin would O not hearkẽ vnto the voyte ok ther brethren the chudren of Israel:
But the children of Wenianin gathered thẽ selues together out of the cities vnto Gibea, to tome out and fight agayust the children of Ilrael.

; And the children of Wenianin were numbred at that time out of the cities, twentie €fire thonsand men that drewe

odes , bespde the inhabitauntes of

Gibea which were numbred seuen hun-

dred cholen men.

16 And among all thele folke were stuen hundred cholen men beyng left handed,

hicht euery one toulde slyng stones at

an heere breadth, and not mille. a

17 a the children of Israel beside Wen-
: ae Were numbred foure hundred

houland men that drewe lwordes and

us dorrg

Att

t mes. brn 4

ludges.

3 XXXIII
. poral 1 4 of warre.
13 And the childzen of Ilrael arose, and kot vp to rhe houte of God and alked of God. faping: O Whiche of bs {hall go

Wht pa

U bp kirst tothe battelagatattehe chüdzen (3 chon:

9 fo much

of Wenlannn- And the Lorde fayo: Juda shall begin. ee byo: Ju

19 And the children of Ilrael stoode bp carly, and tamped againt Gidea,

victo

finde t

e

(t) That ts, the tudernacie wheein § arke of God

wos, o then

ol thar numver a strength. that thep athe no edunceu of
God fo2 the

he’ herefore

20 And the men of Ilrael went out to der der

battell against Wemamin, and themen of Ilrael put thé selues in aray to fight againtt them, beside Gibea.

21 And the children of Benianun came out of Gibea, and destroyed downe to ch ground of the Ylraelites that day

twentie and two thoufand men.

22 Andthe people the men of Hieael plucked vp their heartes, and fet their battel againe in arap, in the lame place where they dyd the first day.

23 (And the children of Israel went vp, and wept before the Torde vnto tuen, and asked ofthe Lord saying: hal we go àgayne to battell against the chudren of Weniannn our brethrẽ: And the Lord sayde: Go vp against them.)

24. Andthe children ol Israel tame neare against the children ol Beniaminthe seconde day.

25 And the children of Wentanun went a gainst them out of Gibea the seconde dap, and destroped to the tarth of the childrẽ of Israel once againe eyghteene thoufand men that drewe swordes euerie man of them. N

26 Then al the children of Ilrael, and all the people, went vp and came vnto the house of God, and Wept, and late there beforethe Lord, and fatted the fante day vnto enen, and offered burnt offerynges and peace offerynges before the
Lowe.

27 And the chideen of Ilrael alked the
HL 07d: (102 there was the arke of the appopntinentofGod,in thole dayes:

28 And Phinehes the fonne of Eleazar,

Se That is, erned inthe

the sonne of Aaron c stoode before itat er

that time) saping: Shal J get me bp to go out any more to battell against the childzen of Wenianun mp beetheen, 02
Thal H ceale: The Lorde sayde: Go bp, for to morow J wil deltuer them into pour handes.

29 And Ilrael set lyers awayte round about Gibea.

El 30 And

The battell

E zo Mudthe children of Ilrael went bp againt the childrẽ of Beniamin the third

time, t᷑ put them selues in arap against

Gibea, as twyse before.

31 And the chil dren of Geniamm came out against the people, x were drawenawap from the citie, e they began to finite of people, dead as twise before, by two hye wapes in the fielde (ol whiche one goeth vp to the house of god, e the other to Gibea)vpon a thirtie men ok Pract,

(Aid the childrenof Beniaunn lapde:

They are fallen before vs, as at the first.

But the children ol Ilrael sapd: Let vs

Ree and plucke them awap from the ci-

tie, vnto the hye Wayes.) *
And all the men of Ylrael role vp out

of their plate, c put them {eines in aray at Waal Thamar: And lykewpse the liers in wapte of Ilrael canie foorth out of their plates, euen out ofthe medowes that were about Gibea,

34. And came against Gibea ten thouland cholen men out ofall Israel, and there
Was a lore battel: But o they wilt not that euyll was neare them.

35, Andthe Lom plagued wWenianrin before Israel, and the children of Jsracl destroped of the wWentanutes the fame
Day twentie and fyue thsufand and an hundred nien, that drue [wordes euerie one ofthem.

By the poilicte of the chudren of

o wit the Beulain ten.

( They knewe not that god z idgement was at hand to derope them.

F 36 And the children of Beniamin sawe

that they were put to p stricken downe: for the men of J lrael ™ gaue plate to p
Wemanntes, because they trusted vnto the lyers in wayt which they had layde beside Gibea.
37 And the lyers in wapyte halted, ¢ brake foorth against Gibea,¢ the embushment drewe them lelues along, and smote all the citie with the edge of the sworde.
38 And an appopntinent had the men of oe ee the lyers in wapt, that they honld make a great flambe | and) smoke ryse vp ont ol the citie.
39 And when the men ok Ilrael retired

m) Rette ed to drawe thé after.

, wade along found.
With 2 trum

per.

The. xxi. Chapter.

2 Che Ilraelites tweare that they wil not mary their Daughters to the Bentamites. em ot Jabes Gilead, and geue their virgins to the Beniamites.

1 Md the men ok Ira
D 1 INSP bre in asia,
8 NN opunderbercharnone del. „ok vs gene his daugh- 3
S| ter vnto any of Wemiamin to wile. a And the people came

ludges.

with Benin ’ in p battell, Beniamin began ~ | dead of the children of Firacy ante thivtic perlons and sapde: Surely th 1 de are stricken Downe belore vs, aSinthe : first — — 5 — —

40 But whenthere began to aryse the citie a flambe as a pile of fine the Weniamites loked backe, k behold the flambe of the whole citie began to attende vp to heauen.

41 When the men of Braet also turned
Wagapne, the men of Beniamin Were ere abashed, for they sawe that eupll app: a ched them: i

42 And therfore they turned their backes before the inen of Israel, onto the way that leadeth to the wilddernesse, but the battel onertoke them: And bespde that, they which came out okthe
Citic destroied the in the middle of thé, %

3 And thus they tompassed the wen: m™ ianutes about, and chased them at eG nuha, and ouerranne them, euen ouer a: gainst Gibea on the cast syde.

44. And there were slapne of Beniamin epabteene thouland men, whiche were men of warre. ü

45 And they turned ¢ sled to the wyldernes ward, x vnto the rocke of Ninnnon: and they gleaned byß wapok therest gang of them, fiue thousande men: e pursued ag alter them, vntyll they came to Gdom, & and flue two thouland nien of them.

46 So that al that were layne that fame | day of Wemanunc were twentie ¢ kyue eas thoufand men that dzue [wordes, Which aa were all men of warre: nal

47 Pnelp sixe hundred nien turned and fled to the wuͤdernes, vnto the rocke of Rimmon, and abode in the rocke of
Nünmon foure monethes. 91

48 Andthe men of Jlraecl turned backe againe vnto the childzen of Wemamm, and finote them with the edge of the sword in the cities both man e beast and al that came to hande, and fer on fyze al 225 therities that they toulde tome by. ses

to the boule of God, and abode there, euen, before God, x lift vp their pope, and wept fore, 10
And layde: O Lorde Good of aa a why ts this come to passe in Pray that there shoulde be this day one tei lacking in Ilrael- d

y Gilead.

d on the morowe the people role vp cae aa made there an ® auiter , and offered burnt offeringes and peace

igheamong al the tribes of Ilrael, that

c Lorde:for they had made a great ache fet tin Him that came not vp to the Lord to Milpah, laping: De hall

irely dre... .

* 1400 che children of Ilrael“ had pitie d on Weniamin their brethren, and layde: fe. There is one tribe cut of from Ylrael
{ bay 2 ae “wy

okthem that they may haue Wines: We dane {pore by the Lorde, that we wyl not gene thé of our daughters to wines.
3 And they sapde: Is there any of the tribes ok Israel, that came not vp to

rf

Hee Milpah to the Lord-And behold, there

ud

tame none ok Jabes Gilead vnto the hoaste and tongregation.

9 Forthe people Were viewed, and beholde there were none ok the inhabitauntes ol Jabes Gilead there.

me fo pos if

. kbbelue thoufand nien ofthe strongelt,

c and tommaundedthem, saping: Go, and

. linpte the inhabitauntes ol Jabes Gilead with the edge of the [Worde, both women and childzen.

vtterlp destrop all the males, aud al the women that haue lyen by men. 5
12 And they found among the inhabitaũtes of Jabes Gilead foure hundred danioselles, virgins, ö had knowne no man, by lyeng with any male: And they brought them vnto the hoast to Silo,
Whiche ts in the lande of Chanaan. z And the whole congregation {ent and n: Ofpake with the children of Weniamin m that were in the rocke of Künmon,

wo and talled peaceably vnto them.

me 14. And Weniamin came againe at that
C time and they gaue them wpues which

e they had faned alyue of the womanok

bi, ae Gilead: Wut they F sukfised them

not.

ludges.

XXXIIII.
15 And the people were sorp for Benta -

inges. cad chechuden of Israel fapd: oho fate not vp with the congregation vn-

g day: : en a i
57 nae (hall we do vnto the renimaune -

10 And the congregation fent thyther

mnie li And this is it that ye shall do: pe shall

min, betaule that the Lord had made a breache inthe tribes of Ilrael. .

16 And thenthe elders ok the tongrega-

tion, sapd: What shall we do to the rent: naunt of them to get them wines: seyng all the women of Weniamin are destroyed-

17 And they sayde: There must pean PET inheritaunte kor them that beeestaped of br h
Wemanin that a tribe be not destroped wine:

inberitaunce of Jacob.

out of Hfeaet.

18 Howbeit, we may not geue thé wyues of our daughters. For the children of
Keb had sworne, saying: Curled be
Je that geueth a wyfe to Benianun.

19 Then they lapde: Behold, thereis a feast of) Lorde perely in Suso, which is on the northside of Bethel, x on the cast lide ofthe way that gocth from Bethel to Sichem, and south from Libanon.

20. Thertore they tonimaunded the chil-

dren ol Wenian tin, saying: Go, and lpe in wapte in the vinepardes. ' 75

21 And when ve see that the daughters of

Silo tome out to daunce in daunces, thẽ tome pe out of the vineyardes ⁊ catche vou euery mana lyfe of the daughters of Silo, t go to the lande of Wemamin.

2 And when their fathers or brethren tome vnto vs to complayne, we wül fap vnto them, Paue pitie on vs for their sakes: because we reserued not to eche man his wpfe in tyme of warre, neither haue pe geuen vnto them, that pe chould sinne at this tine.

23. And the children of Weniamin did euẽ fo, and toke them wpues according to the numbre of them that daticed, whom they taught: and they went, and returned vnto their inheritaunee, and repayred the cities, and dwelt in them.
24 And the children of Bfract departed thence at that tyme, c Went euery man to his tribe, and to his kinred, and went out from thente euerp man to his inheritaunce. ‘ : N ö
25 Inthose dayes there was no king in 114 nb. srael: but euery man dyd that whiche & e. emed right in his owne oe *

The ende of the booke of Judges, called

inthe Hebrue So phtim.

Elimelech.

A, 2 *
T tame to passe
“Heb. lud. that whe the iudged, =o) WY ges ruled, there
Ca) Cher te. ela dearth inthe ane land, catertein man of Wethle-
000 Fn the wesc Ye Juda went en / forte fotourne in hen (athe the countrey ol be Sebu. Mbdab, He and his wyke, and his two sonnes. 5 N .
2 “CLbhcnameoftheman was Elimelech, and the name of his wyle Naomi, and the names of his two sonnes were
Mahlon and Chilion, Ephraites out ok
Wethlehem Juda: And whe they tame a the lande of Moab, they continued hert.
3 And Elimelech Maomies Hulbande died, and (he remayned with her two en dome

4. Whiche toke them wyues, O Moabitefles, of the Moabites: the ones name dees Was Orpha, and the others Ruth: And
Epil cue. they dwelled there about a ten peres.
N 5 And Mahlon € Chilton died allo euen both of thein, and the woman was lekt

CRaet ( destitute of her two fonnes and of her die Fehde hül band. N siuroton- 6 Then the arole with her daughters

che the chyldien uk men do louc so much.

trey of Moab:for she had hearde fay in a ornare ee 10 5 , Jove that the ited his people, and ge them bread, a “ey
7 Wherfore she departed out of the place where fhe was, and her two daughters in lawe with her: And they went on er ae to returne vnto the lande ol their mother, howe drart

u ip *
Spee, de 8 And Naomi fatd vnto her two daughi te rs in lawe, Go k returne eche of pou vnto pour mothers house: ethe Lode deale as kindlp with pou, as pe haue dealt with the.) dead, and with me:
And the Lord gene vou, that vou map bd kvynde rest, either ok vou in the house ol
Bench, noe her hulbande. And when she kysled eam thep lift vp their bopee and Wept, lo And sapde vnto her: Surcip we Will returne with thee vnto thy folke.

(e) Dtdaring bp rour Bhyndnessc to nie

or them nowe thse chep are 9 dead.

grtrable to
Sods urlts tution.

Ruth.
I hebookcof Ruth.

The fyrst Chapter.

1 Elimelech goeth with his wyle and children into the lande ot Moab. z And his sonnes dye. 19 Naomi and Ruth come to Bethlehem.

13 Mould pe tary after them, til they were bf age: oz woulde ye for them so long re-

in lawe and returned from the coun-

u And Maomifayde, Turne againe my daughters: for what caule will you go with mez Are there any moe children in my wombe, to be pour hul bandes:

12 Turne againe my daughters, go pour wap, for J am to olde to haue an hulbande: And ik J fayd, J haue hope, if toke a man also this night, peat thongh
IJ had alredy borne sonnes: f

frayne from taking ol hushandes? Not fo my daughters: for it greeueth me muche for pour sakes, that the hand of! rs the Lorde is goncout@againkme. Oe
Aud they litt vp their voyces, E wept ne againe:and Orphac killed her mother susnys in lawe, but Ruth abode stul by her. hy ehy
15 And Maomtfaid: Ste, thy sister in law dean is gone backe againe vnto her people, | t vnto her gods:returne thou after her.
16 And Ruth aunswered: Entreat me not to leaue thee, and to returne from after thee:fo2 whyther thou goest, J will go
Allso, where thou dwellest, there J wil dwell: Thy people shalbe my people, and thy god my god: N
17 Where thou diest, there will J die, and there wyl J be buried: The Todd do fo to ine and more also, if ought but death depart thee and me. ö
18 When she sawethat she was stedfaltly minded to go with her, the left speaking vnto her.
19 And so they wẽt both, bnti they came to Bethlehẽ: And whe they were tome to Bethlehem, it was Onoplen of then ga thozow all the eitie, and they sarde: 5 sexs,

tat nil not this Maomi- ban
20 And she annfwered them: Cal me not 1
* Maomi: but tall nie Mara, for the al *p, mughtie hath made me beric bitter.
21 J went out full, and the Lorde bath x bought me hone agapne emptic: 29)” then tall pe me Paomi,feping, the Lo hath hunbled me, e the alnughtie ha brought me vnto aduersite- „ Ohe
23. And io Naomi with Ruth the Por Coe” bitesse her daughter in lawe, returned ie ont ok the countrey of Moab, and can ois to Wethlehẽ, in the beginning ol 65 J lie haruest. The

eter - - — 8 1

The. ii. Chapter.

Ruth gathered corne in the tieldes of Booz. 15 Che gentilnes ol Booz toward her.

Nd Maonreshulbad
W hadacwkinsman, a ma
„of power and wealth which was Jof the kinred of Elinielech, named 23003.
And Ruth the Moapite sse sayd vnto Maonn: Let me nowe go to the fielde, E gather eares of corne after any man in whole fight J finde grate. And she layde vnto her: Go my ughter. 8 band he went, and came to the fielde, and gathered after the reapers: and fo it was, thatthe fanie fielde parteyned vnto 25003 , Whithe was of the kinred of Elinielech. j 2
And beholde, Wooz came from Wethlehem, and fapde vnto the reapers: The
Lorde be with pou. And they aunswered hint: The Torde blesse thee.
Then sapde 25003 vnto his poung man that stode by the reapers: Whole damosel is this: ;

N

zen 5

Ih Bas b. 6 reapers àunlwered, and lapd: It is the
Moabitishe damosel, that came with
Naonu out ofthe countrey of Moab,
55 And the lapde vnto vs, J pzay von

let me gleane and gather after the rea-

pers, amongst the sheaues: and fo the tame, and hath continued euen kromthe morning vnto nowe, saue that che taried alitle in the house.

8 Then lapd 800; vnto Muth: Dearest

thou my daughter -Go to no other fielde to gather, neither go from hente, but abyde here by my mapdens.

Let thyne eyes be on the fielde that they do reape, e go thou arter the [may dens; | Baue J not charged the young
Ne. men, that they shall do thee no hurten Peover, when thou art a

vnto the vellels e danke of that which the laddes haue drawen. lo Then she kell on her face, and bowed ber felfe to the ground, and layde diz to hun owe is it that J haue founde met grate in thyne eyes, ethat thou shoulae. delt knowe me, feng J ant an az es llaumt:
I And Booz aunswered and sayde vnto bott Zulis tolde g chewed me that thou
Jat done vnto thy mother in law fence

That ig, toto 9 herve

And the poung man that stode by the

thyrst, go

the death of chyne hulvand: howe thou halt let thy father and thy e ant the land where thou Walt borne, and art tome vnto a people which thou knewel not in time passed.
1. The Lord quyte thy worke and a full reward be geuen thee of the Lo God e, of Ilrael, vnder whole © winges thou nacht rer art come to trust. de oe
3 Then the sapde: Let me finde fauour in thy fight my lord thou that hat comforted me, and spok en“ tomfortably pn: Uebe. To to thy mapde, whiche yet am not tyke be vnto one of thy maydens, ˖ a
14. 25003 fapde buto her agayne: At the C meale tynie tome thou hyther, and eate of the bread, and dyp thy morsel in the vneger. And Nhe fat besyde the reapers: and he reached her parched come, e Me Gy ne dyd cate, and was suffised er left! part: Mere
15 And when the was rylen vp to gather, 25903 tõmaunded his poung nien, laying: Let her gather euen among the cheaues, and rebuke her not.
16 And leaue her some of the sheaues for fhe nonce, and let it lye, that (he may gather it vp, and rebune her not.

g Bp fordidding her.

17. And so she gathered in the fielde vn-

til euen, and threched that she had gaz
Hered, and it was in measure vpon an
Epha of barlye. Exo, xvig.

18 And (he toke it vp, and went into the titie: and when her mother in lawe had seene what she had gathered, che plucked out also, c gaue to her that he had reserued when she had eaten enough.

19 And her mother in lawe fayde vnto her: Where hast thon gathered to day: - and where wroughtest thou; blessed be he that knewe thee. And che shewed her mother in lawe howe she had wrought
With him, and sayde: The mans name
With whom J wrought to day (528003.

20 And Naomi said vnto her daughter inlawe:zlessed be be of the Lord for he a ceailetl not todo * good to the lyuing € *°°"* to the™dead. And Mao fapdagayne weber are vnto her: The manisnye vnto vs, and soo the of our affinttie. goad to t)cte

21 And Buth the Moabitesse fapd:he sayd vious osc vnto me also, Thou shalt be with my poung ien, vntil they haue ended al mp haruest.

E 3 22 N

Boor.

iv Meaning that fhe would prouide het of an

thee in any other kielde.

The. iii. Chapter. 4
1Haomi geueth Ruth councel. s She lleepeth at Booz feete. i he acknowledgeth

him felfe to be her kinleman.

Hen Maoni Her mother in lawe sapde vnto her: Mp daughter, hal J not seke © rest for thee, p thou mapelt

bend N prosper-

might lac And is not 25003 our ar Whole maydens thou
4 wast-Bcholde, he winnoweth barlie to

barne.

10 he sayde:lessed be thou in the Lord mp daughter, for thouhast shewed more

~ Ruth.

22 And Naomi aunlwered vnto Ruth 23 And so she kept her bythe mayd her daughter in lawe: It is beltmy daughter that thou go dut with his maydens, that they tome not against

of Boos, to gather, vnto the ende of barlpe haruest and of wheate haruest also
EdWwelt with her mother inlawe.

goodnesse inthe latter ende, then at the beginning, inalmuche as thou foloyedst not poung men, whether they were poore or riche.

And nowe my daughter feare not, J ¢ will do to the all that thou requirest: fo; all the citie of my people doth know, that thou arta woman of vertue.

12 Audit is true that J am of thy next kinne, howbeit there is one nier then J.

3 Tarp this night, and when mornnig ape is tonte i he wilcdperkourme the part bers of a kinsman vnto thee, it is good let wes. him do the kinsmaus part: but ik he ben wyl not do the kinsmans part, then wy y do the duetie of a kinsman, as the
Lode liueth: l eepe vntil the morning.

14. And she lay at his feete vntill the miozning: and she arose vp before one toulde knowe another. And he sayde: Let no man knowe that there came anp woman into the floore.

15 And he sapde againe: Wang the man- > tel that thou hast vpon thee , k holdelt.

And when He held it, he mette in fire measures ofbaripe, and layde it onher:
And che gat her into the citie.

16 And when she tame in, to her mother in lawe, she sapde: Who art thon, my daughter; And (he tolde her all that the man had done to her,

17 And sayde: These fire meafures of bar we gaue he me, and sapde: Thon shalt cs come emptie vnto thy mother in

a b. 1 ‘

18 Then sapde she: My daughter, fit fill bntil thouknowe howe the matter Will fall: for the man will not be in vet, DN n he haue kinished the thing this fame

p.

The

Ruth.

Chapter.

E
XVI.

Booz tpeabeth to Euths nert hinfeman touching her mariage, 7 che aunclent eu

stome in Pract. 10 Boor marieth Ruch, of whom he begetteth Dbev.

e uit. neration of Pharez. hen went Wooz vp to
. “9 the gate, and fat him

holde, the kinsnan of which oozspake, came
8 iby , vnto whom, he
N fayde: © Jo, suche one, come fit downe here. And he turned, € sat downe. a a : .
And he toke ten men ok the elders ol

e

50% they lat downe.

7 pide he layd vnto the kinsinan: Paomi that is tome agapne out of the countrey of Moab, will {ei a partell of lande, which was our brother Elimelechs.

4 Aud J thought to do thee to wyt, and

byd the bye it before thee inhabitauntes

and elders of my people. Ik thou wilt redeeme it, redeeme it: but ce ifthou wilt not redeenie it then tell me, chat J may knowe: For there is none to redeeme it, lane thou, and I next thee. And the other aunlwered: J will redeeme it.

ab art ck the

5 Then sapd Woos: what day thou biest

the fielde ofthe hande of Madmi, thou

must vpe it allo of Ruth the Moabite

the Wyte of the dead, to stirre vp the

name of the dead vpon his © inheri-

taunce. .
6 The kinsman aunlwered: J cannot

redeeme it, for marring of mne owne inheritaunce: redeeme thou my right to thee, for J tannot redeeme it.

Molbe this was the maner of olde time in Pract concerning redeeming €
Chaunging, for to stablishe al thing: that aman mutt plucke of his choe, € geue it his neyghbour: And this was ature
„ „ witnelle in Braet, :
3 Therfore the kinsman fayde to 28005,

Bpe it thou:and fo drue of his tho.
And Booz layde vnto the elders and bnto all the people: Be are witnesles this day, that J haue bought all that
Was Elimelechs, and all that was Chipin and Pabalons, ofthe bande of

In his lamit

Mbeare n that

be ult,
N.

qT he ende of the

downe there: ahd be-

e, the eitle, and faid lit ye downe here. And

18 The ges

10 And mojseouer, Ruth the Moabite the wyle of Mahal, haue J purchaled to be my wyfe to stirre vp the name ot the dead vpon his inherttaunce, that the name olthe dead be not put out fra among his brethren, and from the gate ok his place:pe are Witnelles this dap. co ofthe

1 And all the people that Were in the de. gate, and the elders, sapde, We are witnesles: The Lord make the womã that is come into thyne honse, ipke Nahel

and Tea, whiche twayne dyd buplde the houle ol Israel: that thou mayelt do worthyly in Ephrata, and be fae genus mous in Bethlehem. den urs tos

12 Thy house be like the house of hares
(whom Thamar bare vnto Juda) euẽ or the seede whiche the Lord chall geue thee of this poung woman.

13, And so 25003 toke Ruth, and che was

his wyke: And when he went in buco her, the Lorde gaue, that the tonceaued and bare a sonne.

14. And the women lapde vnto Naomi:
Blessed be the Lorde, the whiche hat! not left thee this day without a kinkman, and his name Hhalbe tontinued in
Ilrael.

15 And that chall bang thy lyfe agayne, and cherishe thyne olde age: For thy daughter in lawe whiche loueth thee,
Hath borne vnto him and the is better

tao thee then seuen sonnes.

16 And Naonn toke the child x layed it in her lappe, and betame nurle vnto it.
17 And the women her neyghbours gaue it à name, saying: There is a child borne to Naomi, c called it Obed: the fame is the father of Ilai, the father of Damd.

18 These are the generations of phares,
Phares begat Hezron,

19 dab beat Mam, Nam begat ane nadab, a

20 Aminadab begat Naasson, Maasson begat Salmon, ö

21 N begat 25003 , Booz begat D

ed,
22 Obed begat Jlal, Ptai n

hem arc doth one.

C

eanth on 5 —

Bens. 1. Samuel. 88 ng
I he first booke of Samuel, called he firft booke of the kinges. — — =
J Ihe first Chapter. iche aenealogte ot Elkana father of Samuel. 2 His two wiues. Hanna was baren and praped to the Lorde. is Her aunfwere to Eli. 20 Samuel is borne.
24 She doeth dedicate him to the Lorde. } wf
A1 DO OF OO RODS, Dg Dre was a ble okthyne Handmapde and remembre
Nem an of oneok me, and not forget thyne hand mapde e 6 the two Ra- but geue vnto thyne handmayde a man ae e mathaim Zo- chllde, J will genie him vnto the Lone nein mou 8. | phim, of mont. all the dayes of his lyle, and there that ae ephzamm, na- noralo: come vpon his head. learned men med Elana, 12 And as the contmucd praying before. abe sche sonne of the Tord, Eli marked her mouth. eee Man oel 3 For Hanna spake in her hearte, c her
2022 onne of Eliz. lippes did but moue onelp, but her voyte hu, the sonne of Thohu, the sonne ot Was not hearde, e therfore Eli thought
„once . Süph,anEphrathite: . she had ben dun ken. f mi a 2 Which had tivo wpues, the one tal- 14 And Eli sayde vnto her: Howe long € ane ebe led Hanna, e the other PHenenna : And wilt thou be drunken: Put awap from camcintye Phenenna had children, but Hanna had thee the wine that thou hast. on

bediene no childzen. 175

been ad 3 And this num went bp out of his titie

hats be euery pere, to worsljip and to facvifice

ceatleth, and were the two sonnes of Eli, Hophm and Phiehes, the Lordes priestes.

4 And it fel on a dap, that Elkana offered, and gaue to Phenenna his wyfe, and to

t wo in one fle she, and no moze. Gen. 2. d

all her sonnes and daughters, portions.

5 But vuto Danna he gauea © worthy portion:for he toned anna, the Lorde had made her barren. N *
And her eneunes Phenenna Hered her sore, forasmuche as she vpbrayded her, betause the Lord had made her barren.
(And so dyd he peve by pere) and as oft as fhe Wet vp to the Den ofthe Hod, thus (He vexed her, thatthe wept, and dyd not cate. a

(e) To cheare

er, fo he knee 18 che was [070 knl, because fhe 6 was barren.

3 Then lapde Elkana her hulband to her: anna why wepest thou-and why cate thou not: and why is thine hearte

troubled: Am not J better to thee then ten H sonnes:

d Ect this

then

childzen.

postes of the temple of the Lobe. )

10 And she was troubled in her minde,

and prayed vnto the Lord, c wept fore,
1 And voweda vowe, and sayd: O Lord ol hoastes, ik thou wilt loke on the trou-

vntothe Lom okhoastes in Silo, where

18 She laid: Let thyne handmayde finde

„ 9 So Hanna role vp after that they had 8 en aten aid drunke in Silo. (And Eli the poor wur priest fate vpon a stoole by one of the

22 Meuertheletfe, Danna wet not vp. bin ex

15 Hanna aunswered, and sayde, Notso “ my Lod: Jama woman ofa sorow- 0; ful hearte, I haue drunke neither wine she 4 nor strong drincke, bnt haue polwred out

16 ni soule before the Lordee: gn,

Count not thine haudmapde faz a 5 wicked woman: for out of the aboun- 5, daunce of my heaupnesse € griefe, haue
I {poken hytherto. 5

17 Eliaunswered her againe and fayde:
Go in ptate, the God of Israel graunt thee thy petition that thou halt alkedof

Ggrate in thy light. And fo the woman „ went her wap, and dyd cate, and lobed wel" no more sad. 5

19 And they vole vp early, c worchipped before the Lorde, and then returned ¢ tame to their boule to Namath: And when Elkana knewe Danna his WY, . the Lorde Hremembred her. beg

20 For in protesse of time it tame to palle, that she conceaued, and bare a fone, ¢ called his name Samuel, (caring: Bt“ . caule I haue alked him ofthe Lorde. ga

21 And the man (s Eikana and all his sary. houle, went vp to offer vnto the Kode the perelp lacrifite, and also his vowe. ce fayde vnto her hulband: J will cacy vn si) till the lad be weaned, and then 7 ae N

wig of Hanna.

g hym, that he may appeare before a. Mod ad there abyde for euer.

23 Hana her hul band aunlwered her:
Do what seemeth thee belt, tary at

home vntyll thou Hatt weaned him, and

HI belcche the Lord to make good his

- faying. And sothe woman abode, and

rd gaue her fonne sucke, vntyll The weaned

eeu

I. Ninges.

pyr. ; ‘ + om — 9
2 24. And when che had weaned hym dhe oO ole hym with her, with thee bullockes, and an Epha of floure , and a

XXXVI]. 5 child was young,

24. Andthey slue a bulloke, an Heb.
W be r
26 And dhe fayd: Oh my Lorde, as thy
FE an that sto e thee he Z ; ing vnto the Lorde. N

27 FJor this lad J prayed, and the Lorde eben me my desyre whithe J ale
12 Wen
28 And therfore J haue geuen him vnto the Lod, as long 7 lineth he shalbe

zende f f allt hy euen to the Lorde e W moispun- 0 Weanin
50. hottle ok Wine, and brought Pym vnto geuen tothe Torde. And he o worsyip- Sia i te houle o the Lorde in ilo, andthe. — ped the Lorde there. A Sate pew ‘The.ii.Chapter: ; oe fo of Hanna. n. Che tonnes of Cli, wicked. z. Che newe cultome of e
‘ gibt es es ministreth befoze the Lozde . 20, Eli blesseth Clkana and 5 N
Wyfe. . Eli reproueth his sonnes. . God sendeth a prophete to Eli. 31. Eli is mee naced kor not chastuyng his childzen. yale :
, ed Hanna prayed, € 9 He wpll eo kepethe leete of his laintes, ere af Ze \fapde: Myne heart re- and the wicked shall kepe stilence in r ftopceth in the Torde, darknelle, and in his owne myght Hat ye „Wand nwne © horne is no man be strong. 1
472 | Na exalted in the Lode: 10 The logdes aduerlaries shal be de-
Et ee ap mouth is © ywypde flropedofhym, eoutofheauen halve jon open ouer myne ene- thunder vpon them: The Lode (hall th mies, for I reioyte in thy laluation. iudge the endes of the worlde, and Thal

2 There is none holy as the Lorde: foz without thee is nothing, neit her is there any of strength as is our God.

3 Talke no mioze proudly , let not arro-

gancie come out of pour mouthes: for

the Lorde is a God of knowledge, and his purposes come to passe.
4 The bowe with the mightie men are

broken, and they that were weake haue

gyrde then lelues with strength. fom 5 They that were full, haue hyred out ane khem lelues for © bread, and they that were hungry, O teasse, tyll the barren hath borne seuen, and che that had many childzen,ts Waren feeble, aes The Lord kylleth and maketh alpuc, bupngeth downe to the graue ¢ fetcheth bp agayne.
57 The Low maketh poore, and maketh ber. get lowe, and heaueth vp on

d Ye rapseth vp the poore out of the dust,

n AND lykteth vp the beggar from the

dounghyll, to setthemamong © prin-

a afl to make therm inherite the leate

ans 0 ll be polices 6. the earth are
8, and he hat

pponthen he bath fet the worlde

. Howe before Eli the priest.

gyue myght vnto his king, and exalt the horne ot his annopnted.

H And Elkana went to Namath to his houle, and the lad dyd minifter vnto the

(g Tecording to the appomt-

; 5 t
12 But the sonnes of Eli were children of ann nde
Belial, and Rnewe not the Lord. ae ene
13 And the priestes custonie toward the v people was, that whensoeuer anp man (ents, offered any offring, p priestes lad tanie wb whyle the fleshe was a seethyng, and a fleshhoke with three teeth in his hande:
14 And Maul it into the panne, kettle, cal: dren, or pot: and“ all that the fleshe-
Hoke brought vp, that the priest toe t02 gan hym self: And lo they dyd vnto all the aon
Afeaclltes thatcanne thyther to Silo. Len r
15 Bea, and thereto before they burnt the Herder eee
O fat, the priestes lad tame and layde to N the man that offered, Geue fleshe, that dsc
J mapiroste it forthe priest: for he Wyll bac bin of, not haue soddẽ fleshe ofthee, but rawe. * 0s.
16 And yf any man sayde vnto hym, Let oz, ae. them burne the fat according to the cu- 2 stome, and then take as much as thyne da mach hearte w desireth: Then he Would aun- ante lwere hym , Bea, thon shalt geue it nie rb. nowe:and thou wilt not, PvP tae feu it wi

Samuel,

it With violence, —

17 And the sinne of the poung men was very great before the Lord:or men abhorred the offering of the Lord.

18 But the chide Samuel ministred be-

(n) Seing the horrible abuse thetto

D phod.

19 Moreouer, his mother made hima

litle coate , and brought it to hun from yere to pere, when fhe came vp with

her hulband to offer the perely sacri- ple-

fice.
20 And Eu blessed Elkana and his wife,

and said: The Lorde geue thee seede ol

00 Arbing a: omic to serue the Lorde, ¢

this woman, forthe © petition that the mecors,s atkenofthe Lord. And they went vnto bun to the their owne home.

de. 21 Andthe Wore vilited Hanna, fo that

she tonteaued, and bare three sonnes, x

two daughters: And the childe Samu-

el grew before the Lode.

Eli was very olde, and heard all that his sonnes did onto Ilrael, e how they lay with the women that wayted at the pone of the tabernacle of the congregation.

23 And he laide vnto them: Why do ye such thinges: Foz of all these people J heare euill reportes of pou.

24 Oh, nay my fonnes: Foz it is no good report that J heave, how that pe make the Lordes people to trespasse.

25 Ik one man finne against another, the Judge shall iudge it: But ika man sinne against the Lord, who will be his

ees ein e seruice of the 22
Tonde.

When, © Daplemane Notwithstandiug, they ingg cen pal: hearkened not vnto the voyee of their fafresonomarth ther, betause the Lorde would flap the,

ber h ne 26 (The childe Samuel profited c grew,

beiprimtbis Aid was in fauour both with the Lod
Kur ena and allo with men.)

C shat taketh awape 8 sinnes of the Worldt.

27 And there came a man of God vnto
Lowe: Dyd not J plapnelp appeare vnto the house of thy father, When they

were in Egypt in Pharaos Youle: cy chats, 28 And J chole ! him out of al the tribes
Sion cei of Asrael to be my priest, for to offer vppon mine aulter, and to burne intenle,

fore the Lorde, girded with a linnen E-

Eli, aud lapde vnto hym, thus faith the

And to weare an Ephod before me: eee cotterpnges made by fire o yl.
Deen of Prac, > . kthe chr
29 Wherkore treade ye downe mp fa: cvifice and mine offering which J © cs maunded in the tabernacle, and hone:

cut u

shame. fi wa, .
31 Wehold, the dayes conic, that J wyit ;, tut of thine warme, and the Welch 1 fathers house, that there shall not be an olde man in Hine boule,
3 And thou (halt tee thine enemie in the habitation (ofthe Lozde} and in all the wealth which (60d) shall geue Jlrael, and there shall not be an olde man in thynt house fo2 euer. 6
Neuerthelesse, J wyll not destroy euery one that conte of thee from mine aulte r, to make thine eyes to faple, and to make thine heart sorowfull: And all they that be multiplied in thine houle,“ shall dye © when they be} men. oy ben
34 Andthis shalbe a signe vnto thee, that ane shaltonie vponthytwo sonnes Dophni | and Phinehes: euen in one day ther schall dye both. a Y Sue
35 And J wyll stirre nie vp a W fapthfull a priest, 5 Mall do accozding tomp heart oper and minde, and J wu bullde him asure cr
Houle , and he (hall walke befoze mine annoynted foz euer.
36 And all that are left in thyne houle, shall tome and crouch to him for a pete pf fiiner and a morsell of bread, and 110 sape put me (J pray thee) in one oftite or other among p priestes, that J mar eate à morsell of bread.

i Reg ar.

The

times.
Samuel to Eli.

Lom as pretious
8 inthose dayes, neither was there any open

fion.
19 2 d as at that tyme Eli lay in his ©
, place, his eyes began to ware dynnne that he coulde notice,

And yer the lampe of God went out,
Sanmel lapde hym downe to sleepe in the temple of the £020, wherethe arke of God Was.

4 Andthe Lopde called Samuel, And he aunlwered, J am here.

5 And he ran vnto Eli, and sapde: Here am J, for thou calledst mie. And he laid,
Itãlled thee not, go agaiue and ficepe.
And he went, and lapde hym downe to lleepe.

6 Ad the Lorde called once againe,

amucl, And Samuel avole and went

to Elt, and sayde: J am here, for thou diddest call me. And he aunswered: FJ ae thee not mp lonne, go againe and

eepe. a

bc 3

cai» neither was the worde of the Lorde vet

is Opened vnto hym. ogy

8 And the Horde went to, and called
Samuelthe thirde tyme. And he arofe and went to Eli, and saide: J am here,

forthou hast called me. And Eli percea-

ued that the Lord had called the chulde.
9 Therefoze Eli fayde vuto Sammel:

Go and fleepe, and yk he tall thee, then fay: Speake Torde, for thy seruaunt heareth thee. So Samuel went, aud llept in his place.

lo Audthe Lowe came, and stoode aud called as before, Samuel, Samuel.
Then Samuel aunlwered: Speake,

D Samuel {pate
Al butoall Ilrael: And
Israel went out az

Io battell, and pitched bespde the Eben czer,

I. Ringes.

= » qT he. ij. Chapter.

ere was no manikest vilion in the tyme ok Eli. 4 Che L onde calle 8 aner. 11A cheweth what Hall come vpon Eli a his houle. 18 Che — 0 “taint

Sanmel “ knewe not pet the Torde,

gainst the Philistines

XXXVIII. A

- fo2 thy seruaunt heareth.

1 And the Tode saide to Sanmel: Weboine, J wyll do a thing in Jsrael that
. i of as many as heareth it

1 Juthat dap, I wyll raylevpagaint eee"
Eli all thynges whiche J haue spoken ana concernyng his houle: When J begyn, sie anden
FH wpyll afo mate an ende. done e

3 Jhaue tolde hym that J wyllindge un Suns his house for euer, for the Wickednesle kern
Which he knoweth: Foz wh the peopie) Nes üg. cursed his sonnes kor 5 fame wickednesse] he hath not torrected them.

14 And therfore J haue sworne vnto the
Houle of Eli, that the wickednesse of
Elies Houle Mali not be purged with faz tvifice nor offeryng for euer.

15 Samuel slept vntyl the mornyng, and opened the doores of the house of the
Torde: and Hanruel feared to there
Eli the vision.

16 Then Eli talled Samuel, and sapde:
Samuel, my fonne, And he aunlwered:

Here am J.

17 He Haide: Mhat is that the Lord hath
{aids bate thee z J pray thee hyde it not fromme: *© Goddofoto thee, emoze dude allo, i thon hyde any thpng from me of ane all that he sapde vnto thee. e

18 And Samuel tolde hym euerpwhpt, erz. and hyd nothyng from hym. And he fatde It is the Lord, let hym do what D seemeth hom good.

19 And Sqaunuel grewe, and the Lorde
Was with hym, and lekt none of his
Wordes“ vnperfourmed. delete

20 And all Israel, from Dan to wWeerle: ba, Wpyst that fapthfull Sanmel was the Tordes prophete.

21 And the Lowe appeared againe in
Silo: for the Lorde opened hun selfe to
Sannnel in Silo, though the worde of the Lorde.

The. 1iij. Chapter. io The arke ok the Lorde is talen. 11 Eli and his chyldren dye.

and the Philistines pitched in Aphet,
2 Aud put them selues in aray against
Ilrael: and when they ioyued the batfell, Ilrael was sinptten downe before the Phililtines, and the Philistines flue of the arme in the fielde about a foure thoulande

The arke of the Lorde

Cb) Hamact as it is ol fom affirmed, cons sulted with the Lord before thun was taken in hand, and foz thate aule thet aske this que-
Gin,

hi 9

° 0
THT?

IL 0

Ai oa

And when te arkt of the appoynt-

ment of the Lode caine into the hoast, all Israel showted a mightie showte, so that the earth rang againe.

And when the Philistines heard the

noyse of the showte, they saide: hat nehes, were dead.

meaneth the lounde of this mightie showte inthe hoast of the Ebrues : And they vnderstode howe that the arke of

the Lorde was tome into the hoast.

7 Andthe Philisbines were afralsde, and

) Belore ae fought agamst men, 4 now God is come to fight

fade: God is come into the hoast. And they laid againe:™ nao vnto vs, for it was neuer lo before this.

again. 8 0 vnto vs, who {hall deliuer vs out

Cc) Foz in the

rea sea in the

woldernes the

Ecgyptians

were destrop-

eu which was? the last of all

his plagues.

Iudl. xiu a

of the hand of thefe mightie goddesz these are the goddes that finote the Egyptians with many plagues in the wildernes. |

Bt strong and quite pour selues tyke men, O pe Phllistines, that ve be no leruaunts vnto the Ebrues, as they haue ben to pou: We ofa manly corage therfore and fight.

ght } jo And the Philistines fought and Ilra-

el was snutten downe, and fled cuery man into his tent: And there was an

the two formes of Eli, *Hophnt € PVE lg

12. And there ran a man ok weniamin © out of the arinte, and came to Silothe. lame day with his clothes w rent, and cn earth vpon his head. ae

And when he tame, lo, Eli sat vpon a Se" stoole by the way fide, wayting: for his heart feared for the arke of God. Aud oi, whenthe man came into the citie, and daa tolde it, all the titie trped. “

14. And when Eli heard the noyle ofthe trying, he saide: What meaneth this noyse of the tumult- And the man came in hastylp, and tolde E lw.

1 Eli Was. xcbiit. peres olde, x his light es failed, him that he could not tee.

16 And the man fand vnto Eli: Jamhe that came out of the arme, c fied this

dap out ofthe hoalt. And he laid: What thing is done my sonne- .

17 The mellenger aun wered and {aid

Ilrael is fled before the ae

I. Samuel. XXXIX.

H ben a great slaughter a- were dead che dowed her lelfe, and trapee dhe people, auth two sonnes uapled kor her paynes came vpon her.
50 pnt and Phinehes are dead, and 20 And about the tyme ot her death, the the arke of God is taken. 7 women that stoode about her, saide vnnd when he made mentton of the to her: Feare not, for thou hak borne a J

e cke of God, Eli fell from ok his stoole sonne. Wut the aun wered not, nor re- Ne backward bythe fide of the gate, and gardedit. Gers

„ bas Onecke bake and he dyed: Forhe 21 Aud fhe named the chine Itha- lte
* * ö ; DS"? bod, saping: The glorie is de fr oe

. spas an olde man and heauy, ande dod laping: The gone is deparkedkrö
. indged Ilrael fourtie peres: n Ilrael, Coccaule the arke of God was

e „„ And his daughter in lawe PHinches faken, aud betause of her father in lawe

un 5 wyfe was With chüde, and nye the! and her hulband.) 7

n pirth: And when che heard the tidinges 22 And fhe faide againe: The giorieis

72 that the arke ok God Was taken, aud gone from Jlrael, for the arke of God

that her kather in law and her hulband ts taken.

: f we .
* 61 AS . 5 N Te. v. Chapter.

2 Che P ‘littines bipng the arke into thehoule of Dagon. 6 The men of Aldod are plagued. 8 Che ark is carped into Gath, and after to Acron.

D the Philistines the next morning, beholde, Dagon was stoke the arke of God, kallen vpon his face on the grounde beand caryed it from the kore the avkeof the Torde, and his
Eben ezer vnto AE head and his two handes tut of vpon
1 tthethrzecholde, that onelp the stumpe cf
“I pea the Philistines Dagon was left to him. K
— one the arke of God, F And therkore is it, that the priestes ot mee the house ole) Daz Dagon, neither anp man that com“ weve. gon and let it by Wagon. meth into Dagons Houle, © treade not a
3 And when they ok Aldod were vp in on the threcholde of Dagon in Aldo d.. at. the next daye in the mornyng, beholde, vnto this day. a a Dagon Was fallen vpon his kate ou 6 Wut the hand of the Lorde was heaau the earth before the arke of the Lode: uie vpon them ok Aldad, and he destror-

And they tone Dagon, and set hum in edthem, and smote them with enie-
Werd Aldod, and all the coastes thereof,

50 4 — i 155 1
5 1 W. e Hl 4)
LM ssi. e

qj

PII 1985 . wed
N e

by ity cee

d

“i

ANS ALANA
AN N
SASS
N

- pou hau

"The arke of the Lorde

And when the men of Aldod sawe that it was so, they sarde: The arke of the God 8 thal not abide here

yt

With vs, for his hand is sore vpon vs, € vpon © Dagon our God.

They lent therfore, and gathered all the lordes of the Philistines vnto them,

(e) This is a hinsentable

Dee bone, and latde: What chall we do with the. ther al the lordes of the Byuith 1 edge ni arke of the God of Ilrael? They aun- (aide: Send ™ away —— the Sole be kern. [bered: Let the arke ol the God ot Il- God of Jlrael, to go agayne to bis Reg rael be taryed about vnto Gath. And owe place ;that it slea vs not, and our 3 they caried the arke ol the God of JIl- people. Foz there Was a destruction E racl avout, t. and death thorowout all the titie, and w
9 And when they had tarped it about, the hand ol God was exteeding fore ar tin the hand of the Lode was agaynst the erde f e Shel lage) * titie with a very great destructlon, and 12 And the men that dyed not, were mut he smote the men ok the citie both mall ten with the emerodes: And the crye of and great, and they had emerodes in the titie went vp to heauen. their secrete partes. f 5
2 he. pi. (hapt er.
Che time that the arne was with the philistines. which they tent againe with a gikt 12. It commeth to Bethlames. 1. Che PInrhEines offer golden emerodes. 19. Che Beth. lames are Arenen Cor lobing inte 2 5 ty 4 e * i 1 aye . 1
I Pedthe arke of the nedtheir heartes: Which when he
1 ond was m the coun- wzought wonderkullie among them, f x itrepofthe Philistines didtheyp not let the people go, and th ae ifeuen monethes. Departed: —
2 And the Philistines 7 Now therfore, make a newe tart, and

called fo2 the priestes
3 Ae Sand. the soothsayers, saying: What (hall we do with the arke of the Lows Tell vs wherewith we shall lende it home againe:
They lapde: If vou send away the arke ofthe God of Ilrael, send it not emptie: but rewarde it with sinne

Ca) Forge

chez ric ie awap feo Arrael.

offeryng, and then pe chall be whole,

and it shall be knowen to vou, Why his hand departeth not from von.
Then layd they: And what Mhalbe the sinne offering , which we chall rewarde him with: Thep aunfwered:
Firte golden emerodes, and fine golden mpte, actordyng tothe munber of the printes of p Philistines: Foz one plague was on por all, and on pour printes.
5 Wherkore ve hall make images ipke dre, to pour emerodes, images like to pour ung Fe,: inte that torrupt the land, and pe (hall

his mightic hand, and pet cute of

(O ere they are foretd to

tj we, that he may take his hand kromok auen grate to con

niert and woz-

roi ok pour land.
6 OWherkore do pe harden pour heartes, as the Egyptians and Pharao harde-

1. Kinges. —

geue gore vnto the God of Ilrael,

du, and from of pour goddes, and

10 Therfore they {ent the arte
Ataron:and alldone as the ach of 2 cane to Acaron, the Ataronites cy a out, faying: They haue boughtth arke ol the God of Heal to bs, 10 fle vs, and our people. —

n Andfothey lent , and gathered toge-

take two nielche kyne, on whon there 2 hath conte no pocke, and tye the kone to the carte, and being the calues honie kronithem. a
3 Andtake the arke of the Lorde, and lay it vpon the cart, and put the iewels of golde whiche pe rewarde hin with for a sinne offering, in a coffer by the fide thereof, and fend it awaye, that it may

9 And ik pe see that he go vp by the way
_ of his owWne toaste to Wethlames, then
{tis he that did vs this great euill: Il no. Wwe {hall knowe then that it is not ts, his hand that smote vs, but it was a ,
© chaunte that happened vs. a
1o And the men did euen fo: And tokt ae two kyne that gaue nulke, e tyed them a tothe tart, and kept the calues at Homes a n And they lapde the arke of the H020¢ ™ vponthe cart, and the coffer with che niper Of golde, and with the images d their emerodes.
And the kyne toke the strayght war to Bethlames, € went on the strapght
Way: and as they went, lowed, oe turned neither to the ryght hande n. N

ake verwrnet-

et: And the princes of the hi
9 — went akter them, vnto the * porders of Wethlames. az Aud they of Bethlames were ree their wHeate haruestim the vallep Aud they lylt vp their eyes, on arke, and rriopted When they sawe it.
C14 Andthe carte came inte the fielde ol ole Jeholua, a 2Sethlauute And ttoode fl cher. There was allo a great stone:
, and offred the kyne a burnt offring vn-
4 orde. i es
15 615 le Leuites toke downe the arke n ofthe Lorde, and the coffer that was
0 ypith it, wherein the ie wels of golde dere, and put them on the great stone:
And the men ok Bethlames sacrifited burnt facrifice, and offered offcringes the lame day vnto the Lode,
16 And when the kiue princes of the Philittines had seene it, they returned to 2 taron the lame dap. a
7 And these are the golden emerodes
* which the Philistines gaue foe a sinne
= offering to the Lord: foz © Aldod one,

16 Samuel iudgeth Jcrael.

N x Nie mto the boute of 2
D iinadab in the Hyll,

and lanctified Eleazar his sonne, to keepe the arke of the
Tode.

2 And while the are abodem Biri athtarmm the tyme was long, for tt was
CWentie veres: e all the houte ol Ilracl“ lamented after the Howe.

ol Ilrael saping: Ik pe be tome agaynt vnd the Lowe With au pour heartes, chen put away the skraunge gods and
Astaroth from among you, and prede, fare pour heartes vnto the Low, and bub delle him ;onely: Foz he shall ryd pou
Out of the hand of the Phllistines.

a ae e an arot 2

hedthe Lorde onely, ail

heard hun. 8
5 And Samuel lapde: Gather all Isra- 10 Audas Samuel offered eee

I. Samuel.

And Saumel lpane vnto al the house

for Gaza one
Hatn one and fe

the Lorde vnto this day, in the fielde of ehofna the wer} fannee 5

9 And he smote ofthe men of Bethla- ch) For le

mes, betause they Had loked inthe fate ande arkke ok the Lorde, and he dine among v2 the people fiftic thousand and three scorc fou: on: and ten men: And the people lamented, so” betause the Lorde had slaine che people suns. with so great a slaughter.

o Wherkore the men of Bethsames faid:

ho is able to Hand before this holie co Fo hat
Lowe God: And to whom chall he kennen te go from vs- ee

CO by tecta-
21 And they lent mellengers to the inha- ee

bitaunts of Kiriathiarim, saping: The
Philistines haue brought againe the arke of the Lord, come pe downe and let it vp to pou. N

The. vii. Hapter.

1 The arke is brought to Ririathiearim ;. Samuel erhorteth the people to fo2fake their finne, and turne to the Lord. 10, The Philislines light against Ilrael and are ouercome.

(c) For Ht:
| loh was nowe elto © Pispah, and J wyll prape for ahne sit ttines had aͤken thence

and ket vp the arke of 6 And they gathered together to Mil- cheats

pad), and drewe Water, and poured it o auch.

Hlled the Beco tel same day, and sapd there: We haue sin- werner ne ned against the Lowe. And Sammel betone iudged the children ol Ilracl in Mil-

pah.
7 When the 1 1 heard that the „ r

children of Hirai were gathered toge- © ther to Mispah, the paces of the Philistines went vp against Israel: And when the chudren ol Jlcael hard that, they were afrayde of the Philistines.

8 Aud the children of Piract sayd to Sa-

muel:Ccasse not to crye vnto the lord pe xlvi.b. dur God for bs, that he may saue vs bani tearm, out of the hand or the Philistines. hem keines,

9- And Samuel toke a lucking lanibe, she wei

aud offered it altogether fo2 a burnt aue offering vnto the Low, and cryed vnto d one. the Lowe for Ilrael, and the Love

ug,

The people |

f ering, the Philistines came to fight againt Ilrael: But the Lorde thundred a great thunder the same day amongthe Philistines, æ scattered them, that they were slaine before Ilrael.
1 And the men of Ilrael Went out of
Milpah, and pursued the Philistines, k i ChE vntill (ther came} vnder Wethchar.
Fourie, I: And then Samuel toke a stone, and
Cana gun bitched it betweene Milpah ck Shen, daun n Al ld called the name thereof Eben ezer, faptngetpttberto bath the Lorde helped

gant 29 pal) z And so the Phüistines were bought vnder, and they came no more into the coaste of Israei: and the hande of the

The. viii. Chapter.

1 Samuel maketh his sonnes iudges ouer Flracl, who follow not his steps. 5. Che Itraltteg athea fing. 1. Samuel declareth in what state they Hhould be vnder the Bing. 0. Hot with, standing thep athe one Gill and the Lorde willeth Samuel to graunt onto them.

A1 SETS | Hen Samuel was old,
(2) Ster % (SI be made his sonnes me he I wdges ouer Jlrael. e yes 2 } 72 ; The name of his el-

Thi Delt fonne was Ne the

(b> who fas JA eLand the nameofth
Li seconde Abia, and they
„den. were iudges in Beerseba.

(e) Thats. 3 And his sonnes © Walked not in his cep obirucd Wapes, but turned aside after lutre and eum vpe, ' toole relbarde , and peruerted the ryghtueg, and

ae, e

4 Then all the eiders of Ilrael gathered them together, and came to Samuel vnto Ranta, )

And fayd vnto hin: Weholde, thou

Deuts art olde, and thy sonnes walke not in desen. thy wayes: Now therfore make vs a
Ace. xuid Ring to iudge vs, as all other nations

haue]

6 But the thing displeased Samuel
When they laid, geue vs a kung to indge vs: And Samuel prayed vnto the lorde.

7 Andthe Lodde laide vnto Samuel,

W Heare the voyte of the people in all that they say vnto thee: For they haue not cat tice away, but they haue cast me awap, that I Mould not raigne ouer

em.

3 And as thep haue ener done fence J

brought them out of Egypt vnto this.

dap, ànd haue korlaken nie, and serued

other gods, euen so do they vnto thee.

. Kinges.

requir ea kin
Torde was against the Ph hee Pnuudmes ay
1 herto the cities which t ;
Tultines had taken from Meng we i 4 ftozed to Alrael euen from Ataronte
Gath, and the coastes of the fame dyd
Israel deliver out ofthe handesofthe
Fhllistines: And there was peace be-
| f 10 0 0 Amozites. Wore
15 Samuel iudged Jfraei aii t * of his like: Aihe dates
16 And went about pere by pere to Bethel, Gilgal, and Milpah, and iudged
Ilrael in all Hole places.
17 And tame againe to Nama , for there was his houle, and there he magen FE rael also, & there he buyit an © aufler ) a4

vnto the Torde.

9 snow therefore hearken vnto their bopee: howbeit pet testifie vnto them, ¢ chewe them 'the maner of the bing that shall raigne ouer them.

10 And Samuel tolde all the wordes of the Lorde vnto the people that asked
à king of him,

1 And he laid: This shal be the mauer en okthe hing that hall raigne ouer you,’ Me he will take pour sonnes and put thertt auen to his charets, and make his horsemen une of thent,to run before his charet. bt

12 And Will make him of the captates 2e duer thoulandes and ouer fifties, and?! will set them to eare his grounde, and to gather in his haruest, e to make in strumentes of warre, and thinges that serue for his charets.

I And he will take pour daughters, and ¢ make them appotitaries, cookes, and bakers,

4 Aud he shall take vour kleldes and pour vinepardes, and pour best ollue trees, and geue them to his seruauntes.

15 And he shall take the tenth of pour seede, and of pour vine yardes, and geue it to his emuiches, e to his seruauntes.

16 And he Chal take pour men seruauntes, and maide seruauntes, young men, and the chieke ol pour alles, and put them to his worke. t

17 And he hall take the tenth ol von sheepe, and pe (hall be his serualt ß

Deus rte

tause of pour king whiche pe shall haue

cholen pou, e the Lorde wil? not heave 21

5 t that day. | i Hturrthelelle the people woulde not rare the vopte of Samuel, but did fay,
May, not so: But there shalbe a king

bs,
40 That We mar belpke other nations,

T he ix. (Chapter. 5

And pe shall trie out at that time, be-

hat our king may iudge vs, and go ze vs, and fight our battatles,

de when Samuel hearde all zp

of 10 Ww he rehearsed e Lord fayd to zen vnto their vopte, and make thema king. Aud Samuel fad vnto the men of

Ilrael: Go euery man vnto his citic,

a

\ 8

L fechinng his Fathers ates, by the countell of bis feruaunt goeth to Samuel.
‘ 2 5 Prophe scaled Speers. 15 The Lord reuealech to Samuel Saul comming, commaunding to annopnt him king. 22 Samuel bringeth Saul to the feat,

Wenlamin named Eis

oF ithe fonne of © Abiel che sonne of Zeror, p

N 8 sonne of Wechorath,

| the fonne of Aphiah,

— the sonne of a man
„ that was a Jeminte, © mightte in
% power.

1 And the lanie had a sonne called Saul,

a goodly poung man and a faire, so that

among the children ol Hfrael there was none goodlier then he: From the shoulders vpwarde he was hygher then all the other people.

And the alles ok this Cis Sauls father were lost, and Cis sayd to Saul his sonne: Take one okthe laddes with thee, and arise, go and seke the asses.

4 And he went through mount Ephraun, and passed through the lande of Sallla:but they founde them not. Then they went through the lande of Satin, and there they Were not. When they went allo through the land of Jemini, they found them not.

Atthe last, when they were tome to e Me lande of Zuph, Saul sayde to bis lad that was with him: Come let vs

veturne, lest my father leaue caring for che alles, and take thought for vs.

De lapde vnto hin: Behold there is in this titie a man of God, e he is an ho-
Ae man, all that he sayth, commeth

uerlp to pasle: Now then let bs go thy:
Meee 2 he can shewe vs What way

87 1 lapde Saul to his lad: It we te 105 go, What hall we being the manorthe bread is spent in our veslsels, € ere is no other prelent to bring the

here was a man of

man of God: what haue wee
8 Anathhe lad aunlwered Haul agatne, and lapde:ehold J haut found abont cha Oe 7 5 bart of 5 OF siluer, wp, i en obout fine i 8 be man o God, to tell va.
9 (Before tinie in Ilrael when a man went to seke an aunlwere of God, thus

theo Seer: Korhe that is nor called a tene prophete, was in the olde tyme called a din b> nis
S eer, diume splrite,
10 Then lapde Saul to his lad, wel fayd ug ct thee: Come, let vs go. And lo they wet *
125 the citie where the man of God u And as they went their way vp the hil to the citie „they met with damosels that tame out to dae water, and sayd buto thjem: Is there here a Seer
12 And the mapdens aunfivered them, and sapd: pea, beholde he is before pout, wake bat nowe, foz he tame this day to the citte for therisanoffring of the Mia people this day in the hill. offeritig,
B when pe be come into the citic, pe chall finde hun strapghtway ver he go vp to the hil to tate: for 5 people wil not cate
N roine-becaule he Doth (oblelle wer, the oftring., and then eate they that be Tae byddento the feat: Howe therfore get one pou vp, for this day shal ve linde hum. Wanne.
14. And they went vp into the citie: And when they were come into the middes C ol the citic, beholde Hammel tame ont a gaynst them, kor to go vp to the hill.
15 But the Torde had tolde Samuel a his care (a day before Saul came) aping:
16 To morowe this tyme J wyit lende thee a man out of the lande of
Ft Ben-

Samuel.

Weniamin, hin shalt thou ann be captatne ouer my people BPirac he may saue my people out of p handes

Boon thea of the pbilittines : for J haue towed 9 opprettion of ponmp people, and thei ert is tome eme, blito mie. cy

daneben 17 When Samuel therfore sawe Saul: at me. the Lorde aunlwered him: See, this is

the man whom J {pakke to thee ok, this same shall raigne ouer my people.

18 Then went Saul to Samuel in the middle of the gate, and sayd: Tell me J pray thee Where the fears houle is:

19 Sanmel aunhwered Saul and fayd, J ani the fear: Go vp before me vnto the hil, for ve shall eate with nie to day, and to mordowe J willet thee go, and wil tel thee all that is in thyne heart.

20 And as for thyne asses that were loft

That is. al that thou defire ft to

see ge, threcdapesago, care not for them,foz of the boule. baryevotenta thepare kounde: And whole shall the beawtiful thinges of Israel be-Welong antl to thee, and vnto all thy fathers duse:
D 21 Wut Saul aunswered and fayde: Am f not J the sonne ofa Jemmite, of the Samuel. smallest tribe of Ilrael: and my kinred is the lest of all the kinredes of the tribe of Wenianun: Wherkore then speake thou so to nie- Ae
22 And Samuel toke Saul and his lad,
8 The. x. Chapter.
6 Saul is annoynted king by Samuel. God chaungeth Sauls heart, and he prophelieth. 19 Samuel allembleth the people, and shewerh them their linnes. 21 Saul is cholen king bylot. 25 Samuel writeth the kings office. a! TAR OPAL MO CheE Sammel toke geren ee 2 -2\\a beflellof Moyle, and e „Ipowied it vpon his e head, and* killed him, ee 4 and sayd: Hath not the es NG Lom annoynted thee,
Cb) Ehot ts, — ‘tobe captaine ouer his fe ebpinyen Winheritaunte-

5 {ra 15 2 which onip he would pollesse

When thou art departed from me this

20 hie nher Dip, thou (halt finde two men by © Karere pom Hels sepulchze in p border of Bentamin, dagen ne tuen at Zaleʒah, and they wil fay onto dane t n hee asses which thou wẽtest to seke,

Winch teibde gre found: Aud lo, thy father Hath teft

Saane dhe are ok the alles k loroweth for you, der then läping: What shal I do for my sonne-

3 Then halt thou go foorth fröõ thente,
„net. f shͤͤlt come to the “playne of Thabos,

and ther shal meete thee three me going vp to God to Bethel, one carping three

1.Kinges.

24 And the cooke toke vp the choulder ,,

and brought them into the™parie 0 made the lit in the chielest To Ean aon them that were bidden, Whiche were bpona thirtie persons.

23 And Samuel lapde vnto the cookewring foorth the portion which F gane thee and of which J laid vnto thee hepe it with chee.

that which was ( ppon it, and set it be- fee

fore Saul. And Sanrucl sapd: Behold vec that which is left, put it before thee and wa kate: for hytherto hath it ben kept for a thee, saying: Allo J called the people. „,
And fo Saul dyd cate with Sammel k= that dap. f en
25 And When they were tome downe frp k the hyghe piace into the titie, Sanmey me communed with Saul vpon the top

vnde in that 3 tr

Of thy conag
26. And when they arose earelp about the eens
{pring ofthe day, Sanmel called Saul zt vpon the toppe of the house, saping: Up, that I may {end thee away. And Saul arose, and they went out, both he and

27 And when they were tome almost ont ofthe towne, Samuel sapde to Saul:
Bid the lad go before vs (and he went before but stande thou stil a whyle, that o due
I map shewe thee the w worde of God. panna

thet.

e

kiddes, e another carping three loues of bread, c another carping abotel of wine.

4 And they wa lalnte hee and gene thee 6" two loues of bread, which thou Male ce „ teaue oftheir handes.

After that, halt thou tome to the. hl a of God, Wher is the garifon of the PV! trum lltines: And Wherrthou art come Hy ga

ther to the citie, thou shalt meete a con: pante ok prophetes comming powne fra the hyghe plate, with a plalter, ain brell, a pppe, ca harpe betore them, and they shal prophesie.

6 And the lpirite ofthe Lorde wil come vpon the allo, and thon thalt prophsle
With them, e halt be turned into an” ther man. f

7 Ther kfore when thee fignes are comt 13 vnto thee, do what thou halt to do, lo
God is with ee. 3 And

* A 1 8 1 n e SPT op

TOU De He Ses 2), oe 7 J
NHL 233

3 And thou (halt go downe before me to Gilgal, and J also will come downe

bnto thee to facrifice burnt sacrifites, c

to offre peate offringes: Lary for me seuen dapes till J conte to thee, ⁊ shewe thee what thou (halt do. a9 And when he had turned his! backe to go fro Samuel, God gaue hun another
Ohearte, and all those tokens came to palle that lame day. jo And when they came thyther to the hill, beholde, the companie of prophetes niet hun, and b the spirite of God tame de bpon him, x he prophetied among thé. g l And all that knewe him before, when a they lawe that he prophecied among the prophetes, they sapd eche to other: What is this that is tome vnto the sonne of
Cis: Is Saul alfo among the prophetesn And one okthe fame plate aunswered, and sayde: who is their father? And mn theroktame p prouerbe: What is Saul me allo antong the™pophetes: . e And whẽ he had made an ende okpro-
„ Phecping, he came to the hyghe plate.
4. And Sauls bnete fayde vuto him, and a Selene eherne yee pe sayde,
To scke the alles: And When We fawe
C Jane were no where, we came to amuel. j And Hauls vntle sapde: Tell nie, J iw Hee, what Samuel fayd bnto porte
16 Pat aunswered his vncle: He tolde vs
Nlainelp that the alles were kound. But

at

Ax,

Sl I!

1 4 la N os 5 »
2 1 othe
212 ä — — —
— eee i i 2 8 4
.. ä
1 ‘ — — N —
K (|
. 5 1 8 2 a

x i 227775 4 5 We 5 7 3
‘ ! rl : 75 rye 1 — 50 5 \ 2 fac. 2

Ah! De 7 2 12 80 a tow, 9 5 —
U 0 9 W Hate id M 7
4 9 i} |
S 0 2 ina? it J x 2 i
N 5 9 U 8 M 5

Ny . 6 fA as uur en : 105
Cl 0 l fl ‘ > ~4y
1 re U
10 ae
RA Sree =

Ns. 5

e a

ofp kingdome wherok Samuel spake, tolde he him not.

17 And Samuel talled the people together vnto the Lode to Milpah,

18 And sayd vnto the children ol Israel:
Thus sayde the Lorde God of Israel,
Ibrought Ilrael out of Egypt, and deliucred you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the handes of al king: domes that troubled pou.

19 And pe haue this dap tast awap pour
God, who onely deliuereth pou out of at pour aduerlities and tribulations. And pe haue sayd vnto hum: No, but make aking ouer vs. owe therfore stande ye before the Lorde by pour tribes, ⁊ pour thoulandes.

20 And when Samuel had assembled to-

gether all the tribes of Picacl, the tribe of wWeniamin was © taken,

ar When he had assembled together the tribe of Wentamin by their kinredes, the kinred of Matri was taught, and at the last Saul the sonne of Cis was taught:
And when they fought him, he coulde not be founde.

22 Therkore they asked the Lord further, if the man chould pet tome thyther- And the Lord aunsweredaschold he hath

hyd hin selke among the stuffe.

23 And they ranne and fet hin thence, and when he stoode among the people,

e was hygher then any of the people om the shoulders vpwarde.

24 And Sanimel {ard to al pe people: Sce

2 ye

() That tg, kp cating of tot.

D

h Ag though he were vnwo2thp, and vnwulung.

Samuel.

wHeb.Ler showted, and sayd: God“ saue the king. Whose heartes God had touched. theking 25 Then Samuel tolde the people the 27 But the chüldzen of Welial sapd: Howe
. te duetie of the kingdome, c wrote it in Mall he laue vs- And they despiled bim
Sur AOOKC,Andlatdeit vp befoze the Lozd, and, brought him no prelentes: And he 29, and sent all the people away, eucrp aw helde his tongue. aes
> ence Re
The xi. (bapter.
1 Nahas the Immonite warreth against Fabes Gilead. who alketh helpe of the It. raclites. « Saul promileth helpe. The Ammonites are Mapne, 14 The hinge dome is renued. 1 1
4 1 hen “ Mahas p Am- 8 And who he nunibred them in Bezek.
. monte came vp, e be- the schadzen ok Ilrael were three hun-
EW. e eged Jabes n Güe- died thouland men, and the men of Jue ad: Andall the menok däthirtie thou lande. cs ies Jabes lapd vmd Ma ? And theplapd vnto the meslengers sur’
D 8 bas, Make acouenaũt that came: So fay dnto the meu of Jawith vs, and we wulbe bes in Gilead, To morowe by that nme thy sernauntes. l ð sunne be hotte ye shal haue h elpe. And
2 Aud Nahas the Ammonite aunswe- the mellengers tame, and shewed it to
„ them: In this will Jmahe a cone- the meu of Jabes, which were glad.

n bie condt = tion can satiqtic a tprant, and

therfore gods

wrath is not

farce fro him.

(e dod gaue
Dim the lpiritt ok strength. ¢

courage to go

againtk this tant.

d Oc sopneth amuti with im fo2 moze authozittc, for he hint felfe
‘was not prt appzoncd of ab
Hebt. As

one man.

J

sen, And howe there is nonclpke humamong all the people: And all the people

nannt with pou, il may v thrust ont al

pour right eyes, and bring that shame

vpon all Isracl.
3 To whom the elders ol Jabes fayde:

Geut vs seuen dapes respite, that we may lende messengers vnto all p coastes of Hiracl : and then if there be no man to deliuer vs, we Will come out to thee.

Then came the meflengers to Gibea of Saul, and tolde this tydinges in the eares ofthe people: And all the people lift vp their voyces and wept.

And beholde, Saul came folowing the cattell out of the fielde and Saul tapde: what alyeth this people that theiwepe-;
And they tolde him the tydinges of the men of Jabes.

And the spirite af God ocame vpon
Saul when he heard hole tydinges, € he Was exceeding angrie.

And tokt a poke of oxen, ⁊ hewed them

in peeces, and sent them thorowout all the toastes of Israel by the handes of meslengers, faymg:nahofoeuer tömeth not foorth after ꝰ Saul and after Samuel, so shal his oren be serued. And the feare of the Lord fell on the people, and they carte out. with one confent.

in Se .
& ve not him whomthe Horde hath cho-

3 And Hau lapde: There shal no man

14 Then sayde Samucl vnto the people:

— — — ——— — —

man to his housc.
26 And Saul also went home to Gibea and there folowed him a band omen

10 Therfore the men of Jabes layde:
To morowe we will come “ out bn: gern to yon, and pe Mall do with vs all that na plealeth you. ore

IL And onthe morowe Saul put the people in three partes, æ they tame in vpon the hoast in the morning watche, and llue the Ammonites vntul the heateok the day: And they that remayned, were skattered, so that two of them wert not left together. 3

12 And tht people sayd puto Samuel: ae
Who is he that sapde, al Saul raigne gehe euer vs: bring those inen, that we may *

© dye this day: For to dapthe Lorde „5

hath faued Ilrael. beg ds

dun auer
Come, that we may go to Gilgal, andre- n nue the kingdome there.

15 And all the people went to Gugal and made Saul king there before the L070 5 in Gilgal, and there they offred peace wert, offringes before the Lode: And there van
Saul and al the men of Jlrael reiopced exceedingly, |

The

1. Kinges.

or The. xii. Chapter.

XIIII.

Samuel declaring to the people his integritie. rcproueth their ingratitude. 19 God x miracle cautety the people to confelic their sinne. 20 Samuel ex horteth the people

to folo we the Lord. d Sannel fayd vn-

. to al Israel: Beholde,
12 0 N haue! hearkened
2 |S LS Ol onto your vopee in all
5 e Va || that ve sapde vnto me, nd haue made a king
= ouer vou.
2 Nowe therkore, your king walketh be-
0 lorc vou: and Jam olde and graye ut

a Headed, and beholdmplonnes are with pou, r J haue Walked befoze vou from iny childehod vnto this day.

Beholde here Jam, beare retorde of

„ me before the Lorde e before bis an-

s nopnted: hole ore haue J taken 02

an Whole asse haue Jtaken: Whom haue

A petite
A them

Aaron, and that brought your fathers out of the lande ol Egybt.

Lorde, whiche he chewed both ou and ds o vou father s. iq 8 Alter p Jatob was conte into Egypt,
», "he Lom fent Moyses Aaron, which brought pour fathers out of Egypt, and made them dwel in this place.
, And whẽ they forgat the Word their dug God he solde thé into v hand of Sifara en “ captayne of the hoast of Haz oz, ¢ into a. the hande ofthe Philistines, and* into the hand of the king ol Moab, and they fought against them. lo And they tryed vnto the Tord, c layd:
We haue sinned, betaule we haue korlaen the Lord, and haue serued Waalim and alstharoth: Howe therfore deliuer

ae rE

and pour fathers cryed vnto the Tord,

bsontofthe handes of ourenemics and
We will serue thee. ema
1 And p Lord sent Jerobaal, cz; edan, sSanion fil
Jephthah, and Samuel, anddetine: nc n red pou out of the handes of pour ene- Revi. b. mies on euerie fide, and pe dwelled fafe,
12 And kor all that, when pou sawe that
Nahas the king ok the children of Animon cante agaunst vou, ve fayd vnto me:
Mot lo, but a king shall raigne ouer vs: when pet the Lord your God was pour ing.
13 Nowe therfore behold the king whom pe haue chofen,and whom pe haue defi: red:lo,ꝰ Lorde hath let a king ouer pou,
14. If ve will feare the Lorde and serue c him, and heare his voyte, € not disobey the worde of the Lorde, both ye and the king that raigneth over vou, hall fo: Beech lowe the Lord your God. iger tae kye will not hearken vnto the voyte ofthe Lode, but disobey the Lordes mouth, then (hail the hand of the Lord be ppon pou, and one pour fathers. ard
16 J29W also stand, t fee this great thing mat the Logde will do before pour
? 3. , a
17 Js it not nowe wheate hearuest- J will call vnto the Lorde, e he shal sende thunder e rayne, that pe may perteaue and see howe that pour wickednes is s great which ve haue done in the fight ol the Lord in alking you a king. 810 50
13 Ando Samuel called vnto the Lord, fe and the Lorde sent thunder and rapne noes man. the lame dap: And all the people feared the Load and Samuel exceedingly.
19 And al the people sayd vnto Saniuct: rap for thy seruauntes vnto the Lod thy God, that we dye not: for we haue
‘finned in asking vs a king belyde all our other jsinnes.
20 And Sammel fayde vnto the people, feare not ¶ He haut in deede done al this wickednesse, yet depart not from folo- Fe , wing ok the Londe but lerue the Lorde is mec smn with all pour heartes: ferenz
21 Neither turne ye away, for (thers ye go) ene alter vayne thinges, which are not able D to prokite pou, nor deliuer pou, for they are but banitie.) — „
Foz the Lorde Will not foplake his
3 People,

lowe the
Lordt g will.

Ch) In that on haue foze aken him

Saul.

m) Okhis tet metep.
@ not of pour merttes, and

therfore he
Will not kozfake pou,

(a) whyles chesc thinges

(c Niriathiaz- 3 tun, nette

cht arke was.
Chap. fo. a.

ww Thatucrp m

ze pate him elf to warte.

(ewhiche ts eth ei. ond ofthe prophe- 6 tes called Bethaucn , because of the idolatrie comtnitted there.

where the two tribes

I Kinges. people, betause of his great names lat: 24. Therkorze feare vou the Lorde, x lerue him in the trueth, and with all pour w „ thinges ade
Wut and yt pe do wickedip, then May

becaufe it hath pleated the Lorde to make ponc His people.

23 Moeouer, God forbid that J shonlde sinne against the Lod, and teasse prays 25 ing for vou: but J will shewe vou the

good and right Wap.

heartes: t tonsider howe great he hath done foz pou.

pe ptrishe, both ve and your king.

| The. xii. (hapter.

z Che Philistines are fitter of Saul and Jonathan. 4 Saul being difobedient to
Gods commaundement, is che wed ot Samuel that he shal not raigne. 1 Che great fae

uerie wherin the Philistines kept the Itraelites.

ul now had ben king
=N one pere ( he raigned two veres oucr traci.)
8 And Saul chole him
Mithzeethoufand men of
Israel: Two thoufand were with Saul in Michmas and

m fndunt Bethel, and a thoufand With

Jouathan in Gibea Wenianun: and the ret of the people he sent tuery man to his tent.

And Jonathan smote the garifon of

the Philistines that was inthe “ hill,

and it came to the Philistines cares:
And Saul blewe pW trumpet through-
10 al the land, saying: Let the Hebrues heare. .

And all Israel hearde fay hohe that
Saul had destroped a garilon of p Philistines: Wherfore Jlrael was had in abomination with p Pilistines. And the people gathered together after Saul to
Gilgal.

The Philistines allo gathered them selues together to fyght with Jlracl,

thirtie thoufand charettes, e sixe thon-

sand horlemen , with other people lytic

the sand by the seas sidt in nuiltitude, t caine vp, and pitched in Michmas, eat
Warde from Wethauen.

And when the men ok Ylrael sawe it, they were in a strayte (and the people were ina distresse) ⁊ the people hyd the selues in canes, and in holdes, and in rockes, and ün bye plates, and in pittes.

And same of the Hebrues went over

Jordane to go vnto the land of Gad

and Gilead: And Saul was pet in Gil-

gal, and all the people being afrayde, fo-

9 And Saul sapde: Wang a burnt faery

ficc to me, and peace offeringes. And he

offered a burnt facrifice,

19 And assoone as he had made an ende of offering the burnt facvifice , beholde
Sanuel tame, and Saul Went again him, to“ salute him.

HW And Samuel sapde: What hast thou done: Saul sayde: Betause J lave that the people lkattered from me, and that thou tamest not within the dapes appointed, and that the Phulstines gathered them selues together to Michmas:

12 Therkore lapde J, The Philistines shal tome Doone nowe vpon me to Git: gal, and J haue not made supplication

vntothe Tord: J was bolde therfore .

offred a burnt offring.

13 And Sanmel layd to Saul: Thonart betome a foole, thou hast not kept the tommaundenikt of the Lod thy God

thykingdome bpon Jsrael for euer.
14 But nowe, thy kingdome hal not con tinue: The Lorde hath fought hina

Oman after his owne heart, and the ors

Dall *

Tord hath tommaunded hin to becaptayne duer his people, because thou hast not kept that whiche the Lorde commaundedthee. N

15 And Samuctarofle,¢ gate him bp from
Gtigal in Gibea of Benianun sand
Saul mmibzed the people found with hin, and they were about a fire hundred men.

16 And Saul and Jonathan his soume k the people that Were found with then, had their abiding tn Gibea of 5 min: but p Phllistines pitched in Michmas.

17 And there tame out of the hoalt ofthe

Philistines three töpanies to de oye: i tompanie turned vnto the way . leadeth to Ophra vnto p lande 1 0

ch wbb nag
Which he tonnnaüded thee: Foratthis 55 time woulde the Lorde hane stabliched .

0 Z be ae .

th at were Bameh.

Say)

“Heb blesse

him,

than.

to Bethoron: And the thirde cont pan turned to the way of the toast that is stene aboue p valley of Zeboim toward the wildernesse.

1 ere Was no smith founde throughout all the laude of Ilrael:For the Philistines sayde, a 94 make

mswordes or speares.

10 all tlse Ilraelites went downe to

3 the Philistines, to mende cuerp man his share, his mattocke, his axe, c weeding hooke.

Hen on a time Jona-

— 8 a

ee OT > F d
WAS

9 E sapde bnto his pouug ad man that bare his har-
ö 685 nesse: Come, & let vs af go ouer to the Philisti-
— — nes garilon that are ponder on the other syde: and he tolde not his father.
% 2 And Haul taried in the vttermost
4 part of Gibea under a pomegranate tree which is in Migron: and the peo ple that were with him were vpõ a sixe hundred men.
3 And Ahia the sonne of Ahitob, Ichabods brother, the sonne of Phinehesthe sonne of Eli, was the Lordes priett in
4 Olo, and ware an Ephod: And the peo-
% ble wist not that Jonathan was gone. a And in the middes ok the paflage by which Jonathan fought to go guer vnto the Philistines garison, there was a sharpe rocke on the one syde, c a sharpe rocke on the other syde: the one called

The torekront ofthe one leaned north-
Warde towarde Michmas „e the other
Was southward toward Gibea.

6 And Jonathan {apd to the young man that bãre his harnesse: Come, and let vs
G0 Ouct vnto the garison of these vncircumciled, it may be that the Lorde will i With vs: fo2 it is no hardnesse
Mie Loyd to saue either in manie or

87 an bis harnessebearer {aid vnto him,
: : all that is in thyne heart: Go where pleaseth thee, behold J am with ther

/ Rar lt

1. Kinges.
13 And another companies turned the 21 Bet they had a fue for the shares, for

Bozz, and the other Sene. a.

XIIIIl.

the mattockes forthe pickforkes , and D ars Ares, and for to sharpen to goa-

22 And lo in time of battel there was net ther sword nor speare found in the pe andes of any ofthe people that were h va.
With Saul and Jonathan: Wut with ed.

N Papel Jonathan his fone was there und.

23 And the garison ok the Philistines came dut, to go ouer vnto Michmas.

The. æiiii. Chapter.

14 Jonathan and his harne fle bearer put the Philistines to flight. 24 Saul bindeth the people by an othe, not to eate till euening. Che people eate with the blood.
38 Saul would put Jonathan to death. 45 Che people deliuer him.

as thyne heart lusteth.

than the sonne or Saul 3 Then sayd Jonathan: Weholde, we

go over vnto these nien, and thall shewe our selues vnto thein.
9 Bkthey fay on this wyle to vs, Tarie vntil we come to pou: then we wil stand still in our plate, not go vp vnto them. lo But and ik they fay, Come vp vnto vs: then we wil go vp, for the Lorde hath delluered them into dur handes: And an this shalbe a signe vnto vs. r
1 And they both shewed them selues vn- Keyes: to the garison ofthe Philistines. And wo" So. the Philistines fayde: See, the ebzues ehe. conie out of the holes where they had dare, hyd them felues in. D
2 And the men ok the garifon aunswe- vpe red Jonathan t his harnesse bearer, € laura sayd: Cone vp to bs, and we will shewe * don. pou a thing. And Jonathan layde vnto his barneffe bearer: Come vp after mie, forthe Lorde hath deliuered them into the hande of Ylrael. Pa
13, And Jonathan elymed vp bpon Yar heran, des and feete, and his harnessebearer al; parete ter him: And they fell before Jonathan, e. t his harnesse beaver slue the after him.
14 And that fir laughter whiche Jonathan ¢ his harnessebearermade, was vpon a twentie men, within the coum passe as it were about an halfe aker of land which two loren piowe. ain
And there was a feare in the hoast, in toe the field, x among al p people: insonuch ere ber that they that were gone out of the gare H rison to robbe, were afrayde allo , e the bene
Hearth trembled, for the feare that was ane
(ent of God. bing geeat
74 16 And

Saul,

16 And the watchmen of Saul in Gibea
Wenianun, sawe: And behold, the multitude were disconifited x were lnutten as they went. g

17 Then sapd Saul vnto the people that was with him: Searche, and lee who is gone away from vs. And when they had numbred, beholde, Jonathan and his harnesse bearer werẽ not there.

18 And Saul sapd vnto Abia: Bring hyie

rho och GOD was at tine with the children of

Suen Seael

oom en 19 And While Saul talked vnto p prick, bel noten the noyse that was in the hoaste of the cone un. Dhilistines spred farther abrode and ez e. ereased. And Saul sayd onto the priest:

come, Oypithdearbe thyne hande.

sure nowe alke counceik

people that were With him e they came

to the battell, and bebold * cuerp mans

sword was against his felow, and there was a very great dilcomfiture.
Moreouer, the Mebrues that were

with the Philistines before that tyme ,

€ were come with them into all partes

ofthe hoaste, turned to be with the Il-

raelites that were with Saul and Po-

nathan.

21 And all the men of Ysrael also, whiche had hyd thẽ selues in mount Ephrain, affoone as they hearde howe that the
Philistines were fled, they folowed af: ter them in the battel.

23 And so the Lorde faucd JIsrael that day: and the battel continued vuto Gethauen.

24 And when the men of Jlrael were kepte downe With hunger that dap,
Saul charged the people with an oth, saying: o Cursed be the nian that eateth any foode vntill night, 1 J be auenged of myne enemies. And so none of

mioucc tobe the people tasted any sustenaunce.

bangen , 25 And al they of the land tameto a wood,

He bende of where hjonie lay vpon the grounde.

Zweden. 6 And the people came into the wood:

And behold, the honie dropped, and no

man moued his hand to his mouth: fo2

the people feared the “oth.

Iud. vii. f.

(Y Such was his hypocrisie and ar rogan-

Ck) That ts, the cuese ap-

Birte e 2 But Jonathan hearde not whe his faanten: ther charged the people with the oth, frmcsbens Wherkore he put foorth the ende of the f rod that was in his hand, and dipt it in
„beds an honie combe, K put his hande to his feen mouth, and hisPepes receaned fight.

ad hunger. 28 Then aunlwered one of the people,

L Kinges.

30 Holbe muche moze then to day, if the ther the arke of God. (For the arke ol

2 20 Aud Saul iopned him selfe vnto al the

—_ F ONathay and sayde: Thy father made the pe to sweare, saying:Curled be the that eateth any sustenaunte this day. And the people were kaynt. | 10

29 The lapd Jonathan qoy father hat h troubled the lande: Ser howe myne n v, eyes hath reteaued light, becaule Jta- Se" sted a litle of this honie:

people had eaten of the spople of their enemies whiche they found: And had there not ben then a muche greater laughter among the Philistines:

zi And they smote the Philistines that dap, from Michmas to Aialon: Andthe people were exceeding faynt.

32 And the people gat them to the spoyle, and toke sheepe, oren and calues, ¢ flue them on the ground, and the people dyd tate them with the blood.

33 Then mentolde Saul saping:ehold, the people inne against the Lorde, in that they cate with the biood. And he layde, Be haue trespassed: Rowiea® Oz great fone buto me this dap. obe un

34 And Saul sapde againe: Go abrode a neive

fh mong the people, and bid them bing me t euery man his ove and euerp man his sheepe, and lay them here, and eate, and sinne not against the Torde in cating with the blood. And the people brought cuery man his ore in his hande that night, and slue them there.

35 And Saul made an aulter vnto p Tord:
And that was the first aulter that he n made vnto the Lorde. i

36 And Saul layde: Let vs go dowueaf » bis ter the Philistines by night, and spoyle them, vntil it be day in the morning aud let vs not leaue one man ol them. And they layde: Do whatlocuer thau thinkest belt. Then layde the priest: Let vs («ay tome hyther vnto God. .

37 And Sail alken of God: Shall J 90

Done after the Philistines eupitt iiou deliuer them into the handes of Iscacl-
But he aunlwered him not at thattune,
38 And Saul lapde: Let al the“ chiefe ol the people come hythher, and knowe and fee by whom this finne is done this dab.

39 For as the Lorde liueth, Whiche saued

srael, though it be in Jonathan Me onne, he (yal dye the death. But the
Was no man among all the people tha

aunswered him. Pye

40 Then he fayde vnto al Jana u on one spde, and J and Jonata’ n

66 Hebt. carntty

& I. Samuel. XIV.

sorme will be on the other spde. And the 47 And so Saul helde the ting eople faide vnto Saul: What thou douer Ilrael, and fought agate Hie chinkelt belt, thatdo. eneniles on cuery fide against Moab, aoe Al Therfore Saul salde vnto the Lowe gainst the chüdzenok Ammon against ave God of Jlrael, geue a W perfect lot. And Edom, againt the kinges of Z oba, and a San and Jonathan were caught: but — again the Phtlistines: And whyther the people staped free. soeuer he turned hun selfe, he put them
And Saul laid: Cast lot betweene me to the worse.
6 and Jonathan my sonne. And Jona- 48 And he gathered his hoast together, e ben Sau d 10 | a fone ie cate Evid Ilrael en Saul far : out of the handes of thenitl f me what thou halt done. And Bona: them. 5 i ie Len poche than tolde him, and sayde: Itastedali- 49 The sonnes of Saul were, Jona: Del. fle honie with the ende okthe rod that than, Jeslui, and Melchisua: And his was in myne hand, e lo, J must dye. two daughters were thus named, the elder was called Merob, and the poun- (c) Cen ger ichol. chip
50 And the name of Sauls wife, was
Ahinoa, the daughter of Ahumaaz: and ne the name of his chiete taptaine, was Des.
Abner the sonne of Mer, Sauls vntle.
And Cis was Sauls father: € Mer

% nathan.

45 And the people said vnto Saul: Shal
Jonathan dye, Which hath so mightilie peliuered Ilrael? God forbid, As the
Tordlpueth,“ there shall not one heere 51 a ok his head kal to ß ground, for he hath the kather of Abner, was the fone ok
Wrought with God this daye. And so Abiel. the people deliuered Jonathan, that he 52 And there was sore warre against the. dyed not. - °“ssbiitines all p dapes of Haul: And abb

46 And then Saul departed vp from fo- whouildeuer Saul fare to be a Sr

lowing the Philistines: And the Phil- strong mau, and meete foz the warre, he stines went to their owne place. toke him vnto him. N |

The. xv. Chapter.

Saul is commaunded to fay Amateh.o, Pe spareth Agag and the bell thinges. v. Samuel reproueth him. r8. Saul is reiected of the Lorde, and his kingdome geuen to another, z. Sas muel heweth Agag in peeces. 8

— Amuel allo faide vnto ee Saul: The Lord tent me to andyncthee, to be

5 And Saul tame nto a titie of Ania- o, soars lek, and set watch in the brooke. „4 vate.
6 Aud Saul laide vnto the Benites: © Serben
Go, i depart, e get vou downe from a: Fish...

king ouer his people, o-

Auer Israel: ow ther-

fore Hearken thou vnto the voyce of. the

wordes of the Lorde.

2 Thus faith the Lorde of hoastes: J

N Brtanfe pits d thee to

wou, b ert
2 fo obep

mougthe Amalekites, lest J deftrop com vou with them: for pe shewed © ihercic to all the children ok Ilrael, when they (oor were tame out of Egypt. Ind so the Benites cor Jdeparted from among p Amalekites. 00

them good

remember that which Amalek did tro 7 And Saul smote the Amalekttes, ul. “*.
Israel, how they layed waite for them ¶kron Heulla, as thou conmiest to Sur, 23 in the waye as they tame vp from E- that lpeth before Egypt. be 8 And toke Agag the king ofthe Ama:

3 Nowe therfore go, and smyte Ama - loekites alyue, and vtterly deltroycd all ek, and destroye pe all that pertaineth the people with the edge ok the (wore. du cen, vnto them, and haue no tompassion on 6 Wut Saul and the people {pared 00 (e) ægarnst them, w flap both man ek woman, in-

i Agag, the better sheepe, and the fat- „g ae fant and suckling, ore and sheepe, camel

ent ol god m And alle. i

ter oren, and the lambes, and all that? cnc f Was good, & would not destroy them:

dete 4. i And Saul gathered the people toge-

zue, ther, and“ numbred them in Lela,

But al that was foule c naught worth, tw that they destroyed vtterlie.

te ohundred thouland kootemen, and 10 Then tame the word of the Lord div nthouland men of Juda. to Samuel, saping: 4 i il

. xy. d.

payed, st cryed vnto the Lod all night.

12 And whẽ Samuel role carly to mecte
Saul in the morning, it was tolde Sanivel t hat Saul was come to Carmel, and beholde, he hath made hun there a place, and is returned, and Departed ard gone downe to Gilgal.

13 And Samuel came to Saul, € Haul

(6) Therc to
Offer vp sattific e for the victozit gotten.

Lorde: JJ bane fulfilled the comaundement or the Low. 5

14 Samuel sapde: What meaneth then the bleating of the sheepe in mine eares

(g This is the manee of hynocrites,e
When they fofowe there one deulsts

Nike
: heare-

15 Saul aunswered, They haue brought

them from the Amalekites: For the

comtmaundentéts,

people spared the beft ofthe sheepe, and

ok the oxen, to sacrifite them vnto the
Lorde thy God, and the renmaunt haue we destroped vtterlie.

16 Samuel said to Saul: Let me tell thee what the Lowe hath {aide to nie this night. And he sayd vnto him: saye on.

ch) Ar 17 Samuel said: When thou Walk li-

kr lle in thyne owne fight, Walk thou not

and the Lorde annopnted thee kyng

ouer Jsrael- 8

D 18 Andthe Logde {ent thee on a iourney, aud said: Go, and vtterly destroy whole sinners the Amalekites, € fight against them vntyll thou destroy them.

19 And wherkore hast thou not hearkened vnto the voyte of the Lorde: but hast turned to the praye, and hast done
2 9 which is wicked in the syght ofthe

OWE?

20 And Saul sapde vnto Samuel: Bea,
I haue hearkened vnto the voyte of the
TLorde, and hane gone the way which the Lord lent me vnto, ⁊ haue brought
Agag the kyng of Amalek, and haue destroyed the Amalckites.

21 But the people toke of p {pople Mheepe, oxen, and the chiefest of the thynges whiche shoulde haue ben destroped, to offer buto the Lord thy God in Gilgal.

22 And Samuel sapde: hath the Lorde as great pleafure in burnt satrifites and

* offerynges, as when the voyte of the a Lorde is obeyed: Beholde, to obcy, is better then lacrifice: and to hearken, is

tribe of Bentami.

said vnto hun, Wlessed be thou in the

and the lolwing of the oxen which J

made the head ofthe tribes of Jlrael,

For 0 rebellion 18 as the {inne of
Witchcraft, and stubbernnesse ! be Exedy
Wickednes oF idolatrie: 2Secaule me” e batt et Une, oe Of the Lorde

herekoe he ath catt away thee ai? ms from being king. er allo 1 8 8
24, And Saul fayde vnto Sammel, J bnd

28 And Samuel lapde vnto hym: The f

(1) Thetig to Dani,

guyle, nor repent: for he is notaman 9"

Who mates

with me, that thy God.

31 And fo Samuel turned agame, aud folowed Saul: and Saul Wozrlhipped the Lorde. N

32 Then sapde Samuel: W ryng vou hy- G ther to me Agag, the kyng of the AmalIckites. And Agag tame vnto hynm dilicatelp, and Agag fayde : Trutly the oor o bitternesse of death is past. ban gs nt

33 And HSamuctfayde : As thy worde scares hath made women chyldlesle, fo Mall sso thy mother be chyldlesse aboue other ax.
Women. And Samuel hewed Agag in peeces before the Lorde in Gugal.

34 And then * Samuel departed to g
Rama, and Saul went Howie to his house to Gibea Saul. „ber Stee

z; And Samuel came no moze 10 ser ac
Saul, vntyll the dap of his 1 chr
Meuerthelesle Samuel mourucd (0!
Saul: and the Lorde repented that he had made Saul kyng oucr Ir The

I. Samuel. XIVI.
The. xvi. (hapter.

wel

amuel is reproued of God. and is fent to annoynt Dauid. y. God regardeth the heart. no spirite of the Lorde commeth vpon Dauid. 4. Che wicked spirite is tent vpon Saul.
19. Saul lendeth kor Dauid.

— D 1 . an = 0 us . ; 2 f) i fea anil N . W Fiaaa \
Jens SY ROSS

a=

CP ge Aa wi 1% ! e reel Ot Rl
Dia gen tne
8 8 Aid

En

Ihe Torde lapd vnto 6 And when they were come, he loked « Tes
Samuel: Dolbe long on Eliab, c lalde: Surelpe the Lozdes n te wilt thou mourne fo: © annopnted is before him. Se
Saul, o seing J haue 7 But the Lorde sayde vnto Samuel: 5 tast him away from Tohke not on his fashion, or on 5 height
SAG] raiguing over Israele ol his stature, because J haue refused
Fill thyne home him: Foz (God seeth not as man seeth. an With oyntment, and conie, that J may For man loketh on the outward appea-
F lend thee to Jlai the Bethlemite: fo: YF rannte, but the Lorde beholdeth the
. prouided nie a king among his heart.
, ounes, as 8 pa 2 And Samuel sayd: How tan J go- him come before Samuel, and he layd: ms 1002 if Saul heare it, he will kul me. Meither hath the Lorde cholen this.
4 The Lord aunswered: Take an heyfer 9 Then Ila made Sania come, and zi With thee and faye: Jam come to he layd: Meither yet hath the Lorbe a oller to the Loge, chosen him. | pad And call Plaito the offering, and J 10. Againe Plaimade seuen okhis tonnes n Will shewe thee what thou chalt do: to come before Samuel, and Samuel es And thou shalt annopnt vnto ne him lapyd bnto Bla: The Lorde hath choee whom J name vnto the. ö fen none of these.
. 4 And so Sanuel did as the Lord bade mu And Sanmel sapde vnto Plat: Are him, and tame to Bethlehem: and the heare all thy chudren: he sayde: There e of the towne were G astonyed is pet alitle one behind, that kepeth the better
9 Us comming and aide: Commest „öscheepe. And Samuel (aro vnto Flat, fei. ws. der 5 Peaccabip: ; Sende and fet him: for we will not spt Zan at, fer 5 aunlwered:zgea J am tome to ok- downe, tul he be come hyther.
’ Eine the Lorde: Sanctifie pour 12 And he lent, and brought him in: And
Xud, a S, and come with me to the offt- he was ruddie, and ofan erecilét beaw- Genc f. ii And he fanctified Jsai and his tie, and wel fauoured in light. And the es, aud bade them to che offering. Torde said, Aryse c aunoynt hun: rt
' 4 f 9

LTetake hud

Ch) wherebp he cro‘pered in ail that he tokt in hand.

Dauid is

this ishe.

; Therefore Samuel toke the home

With the annoyntnient, and annoynted him in themiddes of his brethren. And the W spirite of the Lorde came bpon
Daud from that dape fozwarde:
And Samuel rose vp, and went to Nama.

C4 But the spirite of the Lorde departed

(i) To bere the minde of
Haul, With the angapiye of an cuill ton: suitce, Wherebp blacke eclzer and pte fiers uigendzed,

O Eljes
Dauinta.

* Dz ofthe
Oke.

(s) That iu defwee ne the t Wo tampes.

(b) I inanof tpuc cibiecs « wa wonder in

isacnbite and a handbeeadth moze then

iw 7 wondtr.
(t) That is
156. Ub. . ounces akte: halle en ounce the siele, and

o. files

from Saul, and an euill spirite cent) of the Word vexed hun.

And Sauls leruauntes said vnto him:

Weholde, an eunll spirite Ment) of God vexeth thee. N

16 Wet dur Lorde therefore tommaunde

thy leruauntes (that are befoze thee)

to seeke a man that is a tunnyng play-

er with an harpe: that when the cuil spirite of God tommieth vpon thee, he may play with his hande, x thou shalt be ealed.

7 Saul sayd vnto his seruauntes: Pro-

wide me a man then that can play well, and bring him to me.

18 The aunl wered one of his seruauntes

together, and pytched in the valley of

The .xvit.Chapter.

Che Philistines make warre againtt Jcracl. 0. Goliath dekieth Itrael. ). Bauidis ent to his brethren. 4. The strength and boldenesse of Dauid. 4. Che Lord saueth not by lword nor lpeare. o. Dauid killeth Goliath, and the Philistines klee. 7

He Philistines gathe-
FAN ved their hoast to bat-
1 Nyoey itaple, and came toge-

SJ

ae in the toasteok Danunimm
And Saul e the menok. Ilracl came

Elah, and put them selues in battaile arap, to meete the Philistines.

And the Philistines stoode on a moun-

taine on the one spde, and Ilrael stoode

»

Zyt anioũ-

to 18 lib.
3. quertets.

on a mountaine on the other syde, and there was a valley betweene them.

And there tame a man betweene the ch hoth, out of the tentes of the Phili-
{tines named Goliath, of Gath: fire cubites andahandbecadth long:

And had an helniet of brasle vpon his head, and a coate of male about hun.
And the weight of his coate of mayle,
Was fiuethouland © sicles of brasse.

And he had bootes of brasse bpon his iegges, and a shielde ol bralle vpon his

and laid: Beholde, J haue seene of Jlai the Bethlehemite, that ane ; vpon inftrumentes.ano is trong, bale aunt, and a man of warre, and prudent in doing offeates, and weil made, and the Lorde is with him.
19 Wherekore Saul lent messengers py. to IJlai, aud sald: Sende me Daniy th sonue, which is with the sheepe. 4
20 And Flat tocke an alle [laden] with bread, and a flacket of wine, and a kyd. coat! arth m them by Dauid his forme Into wee" aul. 1 ; : Ang
21 And“ PDauid came to Saul, and 15 stoode belore hun, and he loued hin dea perp well, Ee was made his harnesse e, bearer. eds
22 And Haul sent to Jlal, aping: Let we
Daud nowe remain with me , forhe m hath founde faudur in my light. inane,
23 And so when the euill) spirite of Goadd cane vpon Saul, Dauid toke an harpe and played with his hand:and fo Saul was wrefreshed, e did amende, and the euyll spirite departed from him.

(m deneslte io bis

choulders.

„ And the hakt ok his speare waslykea > weauers beame, and his speare head waped sire hundred ficles ok iron: And one bearing a Mhielde went before him.

3 And he stoode and tryed agaunst the

hoast of Israel, and sayde vnto them
Why are pe come to {et pour battaile in array: am not J a Philistine, and pon fernauntes to Saul-choose poua man for you, and let hm come done C0 IC.
And it he be able to lyght with mee to kill nie, then will we be pour seruauntes: Wut if J can ouereome yi ¢ beate him then thal pe be our feruantes and serue vs. .

or, And the Phülistine layde: J delle the

hoast of Plrael this day, geue nie a inan, that we niay fight together. e

n When Saul and all Plract heard u thole wordes of p Philistme, they werk un

discouraged, and greatly Wafraide . a c.

u Dawid was the forme ofan Ephra“ 95,0 thite ok Wethlehem Juda, named Ps one's
Which had epght lonnes, Ethis meg a was taken foz an olde man in the dae

0 oft.

— — . 7§7ßrṽ——7·ß;1,iq¼ .

I. amuel. 21

— . 2 = ie *
R AD res ee
0 Ls 7 E. Fes

5 e a f i

gt 9 ite ——— fe 5 1 oN N
, ee , ed fc Fac 70 W

**. N FA mms e 99 ae wie 1 7 — 1

of Saul. | ch. And the Meee eldest sonnes of Flat went, and folowed Saul to the battell: And the names of his three sonnes that went to battaile, were: Eliab the eldest, and the next Abinadab, and the thyrd Sanima: as
14 And Dauid was theleatte? And the three eldest, went after Saul.
5 Danidalfo went, and departed from ms Saul, to feede his fathers sheepe at un Wethlehem. —
16 And the Philistine came foorth in the

ma kourtie dapes.
7 And Plat fayd vnto Dausd his sonne: be Take for thy brethren an Epha of
=» lhls partched torne, Ethele ten loaues, ah and runne to the hoast to thy brethren. may 18 And cacy thele ten freche cheeses vn-
« lo the captaync, and loke howe thy brea then fare, and fet out their © pledge.
? And Saul and they and all themen ix OF Pltael were in the valley of Elah, lyghtyng with the Philistines.
20 And Dad role vp early in p morning, and left the sheepe with a keper, k toke,

Nour.

bun, and tanie within the compare of
Wedoat: And the hoalt went out m array, and Thouted in the battaile.

21 FOr Alrael and the Philistnes had
05 1. lelues in array arne against

* And Daud let the thinges which he

Mogg and cucning , and continued

d and went as Jsai had commaunded

bare, vnder the handes of the keper of the veslels, aud ran into the hoast, and came, and saluted his brethren. 7

And as he talked with them, behold, there stodde a man in the nuddes (Golt-

ath the Phulistine by name, ol Gath out gs a0e0 of che arme of the Philistines, x spake da..

 fuch wordes: and Daud heard it.
24. And all the people of Jsrael, when they sawe the man, ranne away from him, and were sore akrayde.
25 And euery man of Ylrael said: Hawe ve not this man that commeth vp: cuen

him that kuleth hun, will the king geue great ritches, and will gene hun his daughter thereto, yea and make his fa- en sthers houlce free in Jlrael. ma.
26 And Dauid spake top men that stoode E by, and sayd: What shall be done to the mau that killeth this Philistine, and taketh awaye the Thane from Jsracle
And what is this vnarcumcised Philttstine, that he shoulde rcuile the boat of the liuing God:
27 And the people aunlwered him(alter this maner) saying: So lhall it be done to the man that killeth hun.
28 And Eliab his clock brother heard when he fpake vnto the men, and Eliab was angrye with Dauid, x sayde: vohy tarnest thou downe hyther- and with whom Hatt thouleft those fewe sheepe in the wudernes: J kno thy pride and

the malie of thyne heart, that ee an
: i

to reuile Sfract is he cone: And to porsy..

taxes. paps

nowe done: is there not a“ cause-

30 And he Departed from him into the
Sirenen e presente ok another, and spake ok the a ce ame maner: and the people aunlwered

ena. him againe, as befoze. . zu And they that heard the wordes whith Dautd spake, rehearsed them before Saul, which taused him to be fet.
32 And Daudd fayde to Saul: Let no

mans heart faple him because of bim:
Thy seruaunt will go, and fight with

ponder Philistine.

% Donde 33 And Saul sapde to Dauid againe:

bout to perfezme p Wozd oy God, ind me tion of his spuut, is tem-

Thou art not able to go against pon: der Philistine, to fight with hun: Foz bebte thou art but a childe, but he is a mau ot dun ee Waͤrre euen from his pouth. ; ieren 5 4 Dauld aunlwered vnto Haul: Thy gerd col Kleruaunt kept his fathers sheepe, ether
Laden. b. tanie a lion and like mwile a beare, and
J togke a sheepe out of the flocke:
And JJ went out after hun, and {mote him, and toke it out of his niouth: And
WHE he arose against me, I caught him
1 the bearde, aud finote hin, and fue
In.

36 And fo thy seruaunte flue both the

lion, and the beare! And trulie this vn-

circunicised Philistine shalbe as one of them, seing he bath rayled on the boat of the liupng God.

37 And Dauid {pake moreouer: The
Ford that deliuered mne out of the hand okthe lion, and out of the hande ofthe beare, he shal deliuer me allo out of the hand of this Phtliltme. And Saul sapd vnto Dauid: 0 Go, and the Torde
[chalij be with thee.

38 And Saul put his rapment vpon Dauid, and put an helmet of bralle vpon ie head, and put acoate of maple vpon

hun.

39 And gyded Daud with his owne sword vpon his rayment, and he affayed to go, and betause he neuer proued it,

Daind laide vnto Saul: J cannot go with thele for J haue not vied my selle thereto. And Dauid put them okhim,

( et 40 And toke his d staffe in his hand, and

eee g chole him fiue finoth stones out ofa

0 brooke, and put them in a shepheardes

(m) Fog by thefe ex=

bagge which he had that is in a levippe,

and his sling was in his hande, and he went to the Philistine.
41 And the Philistine tame and drewe

I. Samuel. 8

E come downe to see the battel. neare again Dawd, and the manchat |

bas bal. 29 And Daud sayde: And what haue J bare the shielde Went before hrm,

l Gol

2 And when the Philistine lo t sawe Danid, he dildapned Men it
Was but poung,ruddie € ofa conily fare
43. And the Phiittine fayd vnto Daun.
Am Ja dogge, that thou commeg to | me with) staues And the Philistine © Herden

P tag.

tursed Dawid in p name ok his goddes n
44 Andthe Philistine sapde a 8 diane.
Come to me and J wyllgeue thy flethe vn vntathe koules oftheayze , and to the 8 i pent At 4 aug .

45 Then sapde Dauid to the Philistmne
Thou commest to me wichen nm fpearc, æ a shielde: But J come tothe in the name ofthe Lord of hoastes, the
God of the hoast of Israel, whom thou
Haft rayled vpon. beg

46 © This day thal the Lorde coke thee ban into my hand, and J chall smite tijec,¢ fee take thyne head fronithee, E will geue ae the carkases of the hoatt of the Phil Ber

fines this dape buto the foutes of the tes apre, Eto the beastes of the earth, that all they which be in the worlde maye knolbve that there is a God in Jlrael:

47 Andall this congregation shal know that the Lorde saueth not with wow, G t speare (For the battaile is Tordes) and he (hall gene pou into our andes.

48 And when the Philistine arose to

tome and drawe nye to Dauid, Dauid

jon kight against the Phi-
(tine,

4.9 And Danid put his hand in his bagge, and toke out à fone, and slaug it, and sinote the Philistine in his korehead, that the fone suncke into his forehead, i, and he fell groueling to the eart᷑ hy.

50 And fo Dauid ouertame the Philistine with a fling and a stone, and snute the
Phlulistine, € flue hun, euen when Ds ud had no sword in his hand.

51 But Dauld ran and stoode vpon the
Philistine, and toke his lword, and o7ue
{tout of his sheathe ellue hin, and cut 14% ol his head therewith, And when the
Philistines sawe that their dampion was dead, they fled.

52 And the men of Jlrael and of Jure arose, and showted, and folowes afte f the Phlistines, vntill they cane to Ye

vallep, and vnto the gates ol i
And the Philistines fell downe wo 15 ded by the way to Saaraim, euen vn
Gath, and Acaron. A1

And the children of Ilrael returned

led their tentes.

and Dau toke the head of the Phi-
, Alfie, and brought it to Pierulalem, put he put his armour in his tent. eng 55 When Saul lawe Dauid go foorth a-

„ galnst the Phülltme he fayd pute Ab,
„ ner the taptame of his hoast: Abner,“ ie whole sonne is this poungman: Abner
„ aunswered: As thy foule liueth (O

n de-

I. Samuel.

XIVIII.

king) J cannot tell. ö

3 om chaling alter thepbilittines,and 56. And the king fapde : Enquire thou

Whole sonne the voungling is.

57 And Whe Dawd was returned from the laughter of the Philistine, Abner toke him, e brought him before Saul, a the head of the Phillstine in his

58 And Saul fayde to him: whole sonne art thou, thou poung nian: Dauid aunswered: J am the sonne or thy seruaunt
Plat the Bethlehemite.

The xviii. (Hapter.

Che amitie oł Jonathan and Dauid. g. Saul enuieth Dauid foz the prayse that the women gaue him. fl. Saul would haue slaine Dauid. 17. He promileth him Merab to wife,
' but geueth him Michol. 7. Dauid deliuereth to Saul two hundred koreckinnes or the
Philistines. 5. Saul feareth Dauid, seeing that the Lord is with him.

Nd WHE he had made an end of speaking vnto Saul, the soule of

; Jonachan was knit
Wasdith the soule of Daz
Dud, and Jonathan loued him as his owne

soule.

2 And Saul toke him that dape, and woulde let him go no more home to his fathers house.

3 Thien Jonathan and Dauid made a touenaunt, becaule he loued him as his

dcowune sdule.

4 And Jonathan put ofthe robe that was bpon him, and gaue it to Daud, and thereto his garmentes, euen to his dung and to his bowe, and to his gyr-

5 And Dauid went out whptherldeuer
Saul fent hun, and behaued Hin selfe wWplelp: And Saul set hym ouer his men of warre, and he was accepted in the fight ok all the people, Ein the fight of Sauls seruauntes. *
And as they caine againe when Daz ud was returned from the laughter of the © Philistine, the women came
12 ot ofall cities of Israel, finging and
; beugte meete king Saul, with tin
2 Wels, with top, and With [ inctrumentes en, “Ol mulicte, sige 7 ai the women ov aunlwered one a aa i intheir play, andfayde:* Saul seer = DAC) laine his choufand, and Dauid
- beaten pple,
305 aul was exceeding © woth, aud the saying dilplealed him and he

tet is, pu pered

e do-

an

To wute

layd: They haue altribed vnto Daud ten thousand, e to me but à thousande: and what can he more haue, laue the kingdome: 5
9 Wherkore Saul had an eye on Dan from that dap forwarde. &
10 And on the morow, the euyll spirite sent of God tame vpon Saul, and he 2» se!
S prophesied in the middes ofp Houle: eu: tone
Aud Danid played with his hand, like verse, as at other tymes: æ there was a iaue- men hee lyn in Sauls hand. hac nepther
1 And Saul toke the tauelpn, and apd: benen.
J wilt nayle Dauid to the wall with it. And Daud auoyded out of his presente two times.

Db

“12 And Saul was akrayde of Dauld, be-

cause the Lorde was With him, € was departed from Saul. 0 z Therefore Saul put hinnkrom him, 0 pose and made him a o taptaine ouer a thou- eher sand, and he went dut and in before “ „ e the people. : n dag
14 And Danid behaued him selfe wilelp van in all his wapes, and the Lorde was r. with him. Cras big bu
15 Wherefore When Saul sawe that he wah rose ene exceeding Wile, he was akrapde wr of him.
16 But all Israel and Juda toned Dae uid, betaule he went dut and in bekore them.
17, And Saul fayde to Dauid: Weholde my eldest daughter Merob, her JJ will eue thee to wife: Onely be a vallaunt onne vnto me, k fight the Lordes bat taples. For Saul thought: Mine hand shall not be vpon him, but the ai =

Saul

the Philistines shalbe vpon him.

18 And Dauid aunswered Saul: vohat am J: and what is my lyfe or the kynred of 7 father in Ilrael, that J should be sonne in lawe to the king

19 Hobbbeit, when the time was come that Merob Sauls daughter shoulde haue ben genen to Dauid, she was geuc

Ge un — hto Adela Meholathite, to wife.
Dan te do bbbeit, Michol Sauls daughter lodeahatrhe 20 ued Dauid:and they shewed Saul, and

rxquest of the

Gebionites. the thing pleased him. n 2 And Saul sapde: J will geue him her
=D that (he may be a {rare to him, and that

the hand of the Philistines may be a gaint him. Wherefore Saul fayde to
Daud: Thou halt this dap be mp sonne in lawein the one ofthe twayne.

22 And Saul cõmaunded his seruautes to conte with Daudd secretelp, t to fay:
Wehold, the king bath a fauour to thee, and all his seruaũtes loue thee: be now therefore the binges sonne in lawe.

23 And Sauls seruauntes spake those wordes un the cares of Dauid. And Da-

I. Samucl.

2g And Saul sayde, This wile tha

5 faye to Dauid: The king raven
Other dowey, but foran hinds fo;-- fhinnes ofthe phuistines to be auenged of the kynges enemies. But Daul thought to make Dawd fait into the handes of the Philistines. ;

26 And when his seruauntes tolde Dawid thefe wordes, 0 it pleated Dauid . e wel to be the kinges fonne iulawe: And oe. the dapes were not expired. 7

27 Afterward Dauid arose with his men, and went and fluc of the Phil fines tiwo hundred men, and Maud brought their foretkinnes, and they Ses gaue then Wholly to the kung, that he c ek 2 75 i dan sonne in lawe:,

eretore Saul gaue Hin Dichol his;

daughter to Wife. r

28 And Saul law and vnderstoode how that the Lode was with Dawid, and that Michol his saughter ioued him:

29 And he was the moze™ afrayde of ren
Daud, and Saul became alwap Da- daa
UIDs enenne. W

eB ig

30 The Lordes of the Philistines vled

to go foorth, and whẽ they Went foorth
Daud behaued him seike moze wplelp then all the seruauntes of Saul, o that his name was much set bp.

The .xix. Chapter.

Jonathan declareth to Band the wicked purpote of Haul. n. Michol his wile laueth him. is. Dauid commeth to Samuel. 3. Che spixite ot prophetie commeth on Saul.

CRB eanin 4 derer, uid laid: V senieth it to pou a light thing dach ebe to be a kinges sonne in lawe-; seeing that cob ng. J am a poore man, and of final reputation. 7
24 And the seruauntes brought Saul word againe, saping: Ot this maner
Aol Au spake to Fonatha eden e bis sonne, and to all his aa IRS 15 leruauntes, that they to open ttts= Se [ould “Rill Dautd,*
K 2 Wut Jonathã Sauls
5 8 sonne had a great faour to Dauid, & Jo-
Regis. nathan tolde Dautd, {aying, Saus imp

N and stande by mp father in the fielde where thou art, and

. seruaunt, against Daud: fo2 be bath

laughter, and they fled from hym.

not ünned against thee, and his workes 9 And the euyl spirite or the odr en

ia Sy, 38 2
A 4 2

* aN oe a)

%, O plaped with his hand. -

5 30 And Haul entended to smyte Dawid to the wall with the iauelyn: But he ryd him felfe out of Sauls presence, as he smote the speare into the walle: And
Daum fled ¢ was faved the lame night.

n Saul alfo sent meflengers vnto Dauids house, to watch Hint, and to flap him in the morming: And Michol Daz uids Wyfe tolde it him, saymg: If thon saue not thy selfe this night, to morowe thou shalt be Mayne.

n And fo * Michal let Dauio downe

u througha windowe: and he went and

n. fled, and was saued.

© B And Mithol toke an image, aud lapde it

in the bed, e put a pillowe stuffed with g dates heere vnder the head of it, aud couered it with a cloth. =

Ci. And when Saul leut messengers to

fetche Daud, che faid, he is licke.

to see Daum, saping: wring him to me bed and all, that J may flap hun.

m, behold there lay an image in the bed.
With a pulowe of goates heere vnder the head of it.

battthou mocked me so, and {ent awap
Wine enemic,that he is eltaped: Michol

I. Linges.

7 N45 5 N 5 115 N N N
1 = N . N N
= =] : D
= aot es if +3 x * PP, aa 8 i
"ey SS jean wis PPS: i Nen
. N — 5 — i ‘oe Hy 4 a | eS See a rte 0
= 2 2 pak >
+. NN
— — — ämä2ᷓ— Ia
2 I.
9 % ‘ if

1; And Saul sent the messengers againe

16 And when the m̃essengers were tom

7 And Saul sapde vnto Mithol : Why

Nx ee

“Hy
Dit
Mh

let nie G0,02 els Y will Ril thee.
18 And so Daud fled, and estaped, z tame to Samuel to Kania, and tolde him all that Sanl had done to him: And he and
Samuel went and dwelt me PAG). „t. wn a
19 And one tolde Haut laying: Beholde, (oo wre |
Daudd is at Haioth in Kama. kann and
20 And Saul sent mellengers to fet Dae . uid: And when they fave a conipany of prophetes prophecying, t Samuel fan ding as wappoynted ouer them, the [pre g Cane ws tite ol God fell bpon the meslengers of tmornicra:
Saul, and they Wprophetied to. rr n
21 And when it was tolde Saul, he lent wers other messengers, and tijep prophetied Sung lpkhewpse. And Saul sent messengers a. vet agame the third time, and they prophecied also. , D
2 Then went he him selfe to Rama, and tame to a great well that is in Sechu, and he alůed and sapde: Where are Samuei € Daum: And one sayd: Geholde, they be at Paioth in Kama.

23 And he went thyther cuen to Naioth u cpo mee

taht the

in Rama, and the spirite of God tate pete op the vpon him allo, and he Went prophecying beben. until he came to Paioth m Rana.
24 And he stript of his clothes € prophecied before Samuel in phe mance, and fell uaked al that day and all tharm aht:
And therokit is that they say, J aul allo among the prophetes-
GI The

Fonathans frindsbip.

pone z c <= . am J faultie-
5 what is the finne that

J haue committed before thy father,

that he seketh my lyfe-

He layde vnto hin: God forbid, thou
{halt not dye: Behold, my father wil do nothing either great or final but that he will! shewe it me: And howe should my father hyde this thing from me- he will not do it.

And Dauid sware againe, and sayde:
Thy father knoweth that J haue konnd grace in thyne eyes, € therfore he thinketh, Jonathan shall not knowe it, lest he be lorp: And in verp deede, euen as the Lorde lpueth, and as thy soule liveth, there is but a steppe betweene

me and death.

Then sapde Jonathan vnto Danid:
Whatsoener thy soule! desireth, that J will do vnto thee.

5 And Daudd sapd vnto Jonathan: Weholde, to morowe is the beginning of the moneth, and J Mould fit with the king at meate: But let me go, that J map hide mp selfe in the fieldes vnto the thirde day at euen.

6 If thy father speake of me, then sap:
Dauid alked leaue of me, that he might go to Bethlehem to his owne citie, for me = holden a perely feast for all the

inred.

t

e Heb. Re. ueale it in inyne cate.

ea That ts,

J ein in great d aung et oi death.

“Heb. fayth

(b) Ind cher= foʒe a solemne fcast, and iolemne sactikislongtn

chetto.
Nun. 8, b.

And ik he fay it is well done, then 172 |

seruaunt (hal haue peace: But and if be angry, then be sure that wickednelle is vtterly concluded of him.

8 And then thou that Hee merep vnto thy sernaunt kor thou batt ioyned thy seruaunt into a couenant ot the Lod

(e Becausc it consisted in

be in nie iniquitie, slap nie thy selfe: for wor shouldest thou bring me to thy faher:

9 And Jonathan aunswered, God kepe that from thee: Foz if I knewe that
Wicke dnesse Were™ concluded of my fathere to tome vpon thee, woulde not J

telitthee- a:

10 Then fayd Daud to Jonathan: who

that u was confirmed, oł doth parties by an oth in the name of the Lozde.

That he wert lullp de-

L. Ringes.
The. xx. ¶ Dapter. —

Junathan comlorteth auid. ; Cheyrenue their league. 3 Saul would haue kit. led Jonathan. 38 Jonathan aduertiteth Sauid by three arrowes, of his fathers fury, |

un And Jonathan fayde vnto Daun;

with thee: Notwithstandyng, ik there

Dau

Chall tell mez howe [hall J tnowe ifthp father aunswere thee cruellp-

Come and let vs go out into the flelde.
And they went out both of them into the fielde. *

12 And Jonathan sayde vnto Daum: O
Lowe God of Ilrael, when F haue groped my fathers mynd as this tine to morowe, or Within these thee dayes, and ikit ve wel With Dauid, and Ithen sende not vnto thee , and Mew it thee;

z The Lord do so! and muche moze py: ote to Jonathan, But if my father haue ans plcalure to do thee eupll, J will here thee also, and fend thee a wap, that thou mapest go in peace , and the Torde be mien thee, as he hath ben with mp fa: ther. ' '

14 And (I reauire) not whiles J tiue , fo: C
J dout not] but thou wilt shewe me the mertie of the Los , that J die not:

15 But J require] that thou cut not ofthy mercy from mp houle for euer, no not whenthe Tod hath destroped the enemies of Dauid, every one from the fate of the earth. ö

16 And fo Jonathan made a bonde with the boule of Dauid, (faring: Let the
102d require it at the handes of Dautds enemies.

17 And Jonathan lware againe vnto
Dautd, becaule he loued him ( Foz he loued him as his owne soule)

18 Then sapde Jonathan to Dauid: Lo morowe is the first day of the moone, and thou shalt be misled, betause the. oy! place where thou watt wont to fit, hall be emptie.

19 Therfore thou shalt hyde thy Leif the dayes, then j thou (halt go Downe auick-

the plate where thou

allchr. Y

eve
20 And JJ wa shoote three arowes ontht e

à marke,

21 And J wil sende a lad, aud byd ing 1 2 seke the arrowes. And it J lar pa 9 lad, See, the arrowes are on this 1 15 thee bing them: then come thou fo- 47 peace and no hurt, as the Lorde la 9

22 But and it J lay dato the lad, be

4 — a = OO ee

jon Dawid : | I. Ka nges. 2 .

rows are beyond thee, go thy wap, sat i the Loide bath sent thee away. am 2; And as touching this which thou and a Jhaue spoken, behold the Lorde be bea Speene thee and me kor euer.

24 And so Dautd hid hum selke in the

elde: And when the newe moone was ne the king late him downe to cate

meate. sa no the king fate as at other times
* nis seate, euen vpon his feate by the wall: And Jonathan arose, aud
Abner late by Hauls syde and Dauids lace was emptie.

1 Kenerthelelle, Saul layde nothing at ali that day: Fo he thought. Some en thing hath befallen him,“ though he

an were tleane.
0 27 But on the morowe, whiche was the fecond day of the newe nioone, Dauids lace was emptie againe: And Saul

fayde vnto Jonathan his sonne, voher-

a fore tommech not that sonne ok? IJsai to

a ineate, neither yesterday nor to Day:

28 And Jonathan aunlwered vnto Saul:
Dautd alked litente of me to go to
Bethlehem.

29 For he sayd: Let me go J pray the, for our kinred doth hold an offering in the titie, and my brother hath sent kor me: and therfore if J haue found fauour in thyne eyes, let me go J pray thee, and fee my brethren. This is the caule that he tommeth not vnto the kinges table.

30 Then was Saul angry with Jona-

than, and layd vnto him: Thou bonne

eee Of the wicked rebellious woman, do

m not J knowe that thou hast cholen the sonne of Flat vnto thyne owne rebuke, and eu the rebuke and shame of thy mother-

31 For as long as the sonne of Plat liueth vpon the earth, thou (halt not be stabliched, noryet thy kingdome: voherfore

n no we send and fet him vnto me, for he is

wi” the childe ok Wdeath. 8

Achis,

fi

— 4 Hen came Dad to
FEV © Mod to Ahimelech tei] He priest, and Ahimelech Was aftonicd at

at! He meeting of Daud, d sapd vnto him: why

— — el

man with thec-

art thou alone and no

32 And Jonathan aunfwered nto Saul his father, and sayde to him: Wherkore should he dye what hath he done-
33 And Saul lift vp a speare to hit him, wherby Jonathan wit weil that it
Was btterly determined of his father to slap Dauid.
34 And so Jonathan arose from the table in a great anger, and did eate no meate the seconde dap of the moneth: for he
Was sory for Datiid , betaule his father had done him shame. 5
35 Onthe next moztung Jonathan went F out into the fielde, at p time appoynted wehe cori with Dauid, and a litle lad with hun. ter ve
36 And he layde vnto his boy: Runne, and seke out myne arrowes whiche J shote. And as the bop ran, he shot an arrole beyond him. .
37 And when the lad was tome to the plate whyther Jonathan had thot the arrowe, Jonathan cryed after the lad, layd: Is not the arrowe beyond there
38 And Jonathan cried after the lad agane: Make speede, haste, c stand not asp nec
Mt. And Jonathans lad gathered vp e e the arrowes, and came to his maister. Wa
39 But the lad wist nothing of the matter, wand. only Jonathan an Dauid wist it. re
40 And Jonathan gaue his w instru- hu ea mttes vnto the lad that was with him, 9": and fayd vnto hum: Go, and tarry theut to the towne.
4.1 And assoone as the lad was gone, Dauid avofe out of a place that was towarde the south, ¢ felon his face to the ground, e bowed him selfe three times,
Aud they killed either other, and wept a together, so long till Dauid erceeded, us
42 And Jonathan sayd to Dauid, Go in eace: And the thinges which we haue
Jorne both of vs in p name of the lord, saping, the Lord be betweene thee a me, and betweene thy fede e myne: let them stand for euer. And he arose, x departed:
And Jonathan went into the towne.

Te. xxi. Chapter.

Dauid flecth to Mob to Ahimelech the prick. ote gettethok him the she wbread to
ö fatiffie bis hungre. 7 Doeg Sauls leruaunt was present. io Dauid kleeth to king iz and there fatneth him telle mad.

2 And Dautd said to Ahimelech the priest:
The king hath commaunded me a cere taine thing and hath sayd vnto me, Let no man know wher about J send thee, and what J haue commaunded thee:
And J haue appoynted my fernauntes to suche and luche plates.

G 2 3 Nobbe

„ ͤ —

s ay 770
1 I. Nin ges
0 a
* ‘
* N * ee 55 ‘ ö 4 5 * S U. is 4 a 4: 72 & Sere S } 8 5 = ‘ al 44
N ‘ 1 ay
4 3 ty th MANN Aa 970 3 ö
[Wy « I . — e N fi 4 * 8 7
M 0 i
U r N Lal 2 0 t- i
! Ly g 7 Tr Nay by 0 7 0 a

Reg 16. b. der thyne hand,*geuc me kyue loaues of

if the poung inẽ haue kept them felucs , There is none to that, geue it me.

spetially from women. Io And Daudd arole, c fled the fame day
5 Dand aunlwered the priest, and land — fromthe prefence of Haul, and went wer vnto him: Okatrueth, women hath ben to Achis the king of Gath. 2

separated frõ vs this two or three Days 11 And the seruauntes of Achis lapde vn

wens, inte J tame out the“ vesselsof the to him: Jsnot this Daud the king ol

* pound men were holy: Powebeit, this the land Dyd they not fing vnto hun in way is vnpure, and howe muche more dannses saping: Saul hath flapne his shall there be holines in the vellell- thouland, and Paudd his ten thouland:

6 And so the priest gaue him halowed 12. And Dauid put thole wordes into a bread: fo there was none other bread his heart e was sore akrayde of Achis were there, sane the shew bread that was ta- the king of Gath. ryote wo ken from bekore the od, to put frethe 1 And he chaunged his speache before bread there the day that it was taken them, and fained him selfe mad in their away. Handes and © scrabled on the doozes ol eset,
5 7 (And there was there the fame day a the gate, and let his spettell fall dolbne

tertaine man ot the seruaũtes of Saul, pon his beard. C

che bse Oabpoing before p Lozd named Poeg, 14 Then lad Achis vnto his derum.

foxc ihe ark. an Edomite, the chietest of Sauls To, ve see that this man is belyde h at heardmen.) feife , Wherkore then haue pe brug

3 And Maud sayd vnto Ahimelech: Js hin to me- ö t pe

not here vnder thyne hand either speare 15 aue J neede of mad men tha ibe 4 or fivorde 2 for J haue neither bought haue broüght this felowe to Phan pe 800 my sword nor m harnelle with me. be- mad man in my prelente- Shall DY ns cause the kinges bulines required halte. come into my houle-

yo.

‘ Th e ya?

joss

l.

i. Linges.

The. xxit. Chapter.

uid hideth him telle in acaue. 2 Many that were in trouble came bnto hem.
„Boeg acculeth Ahimelech. 18 Saul causeth the priests to be dlapne. 20 .

elcapeth.

FBO Auid therfore departed
* — A thence, x escaped to the

FS carte 0 Adullam: nave e his brethren also c his kathers houle heard it, they went downe thy-

fo Whiche alked councel of the Lorde for.
Him, and gaue him vittaples, and the sword of Goliath the Philistine allo.

11 Theu the king {ent and called for Ahimelech the priestthe lonne of Ahttob, f all his fathers house (tbat is to tape] the

palettes that were in Mob: And they ane came all to the king. etthehoute ef
12 AndHaulfayde: Weave nowe thou meso

fonne of Ahitob. De aunfwered: ere | wane”

Fe ue

And there gathered vnto him all me

, that Were in combeaunce,andin det, and troubled in their mindes, e he became a

captayne duer them: And there were

with him vpon a foure hundred men.
And Dauid went thence to Mispah in lun the land of o Moab, and sapde vnto the
= ing of Moab: Let my father and my i mother (J pray thee) come foorth vnto you, till Tanowe what God wyl do foz

am, my lorde.

3 And Saul sapde vnto him: wohy haue pe tonspired agaynst me, thou, and the fonne of Ilat, in that thou hast geuen him vittãyle, and a lworde, and halt alked councel of God for him, ö he shoulde aryse against mie, and lye in Waite for me
[as appearech] this day:

igt ¢

nrdt a
U Gaul,

14 Abinielech aunfivered the king, and E sayde: Who is fo faithfull among all thy seruauntes, as Dauid, and therto the kinges sonne in lawe: and gocth at thy bidding, and is had in Honour in thyne house- .
15 Maue Ithis day begun fir st to alue nen councell of God for Hime That be farre e.

me. 2
4 Andhe@beought them before the king

of Moab: and they dwelt with him all van the whyle that Dauid kept him selfe in
, thecwholde. d. 5 And the prophete Gad sayde vnto Dawid: Abyde not in the hold, but depart e go into the land of Juda. Then Dauid
Departed, x came into the forest Hareth.

6 And Saul hearde that Dauid was discouered, and also the men that were
With hun: and Saul lat in Gibea vnder
à treem Rama, hauing his speare in his du „ and all his mien stoode abont him.

5 And Saul sapde vnto his seruauntes intro khat stoode about him, Heare J pray
. poupefonnes of Jemini: will p sonne

of Plat geue euery one of you fieldes and
Dinepardes, and make vou all captaines duer thousandes and ouer hundredes,

8 That ve haue also conspired agaynst

me. c there is none that telleth me that

my sonne hath made a conenaunt with the sonne of Plat, and there is none of vou? is sorp for nie; or sheweth me that my fonne hath stirred vp my seruaunt tu lpe in wapte agaynst melas appeareth this day-

9 Thenaunlwered Doeg the Edonute which was appoynted by 5 seruauntes of Saul) and lapd: I sawe the sonne of

lat, when he came to Pov to Ahimelech the sonne of Ahitob,

from me: Let not the king impute any thing vnto his seruaũt, nor to all p houle of my father : For thy seruaunt knewe nothing of all this either lesse or moze.

16 The king sayde, Thou shalt surely die
Ahunelech, thou, e al thy fathers honse.

17 And the king layde vnto the footemen that stoode about him: Turne, and flay the priestes ofthe Lorde: both becaule their hand is with Dauid, and becaufe they knewe when Danid fled, and she-

Wed it not to me. But the seruauntes ol the king™ would not moue their hades oes ee: to fal bpon the priestes of the Lorde.

18 And the king fapde to Ddeg: Turne thou, x fall vpon the priestes. And Doeg the Edomite turned, and ranne vpon

the priestes, € Aue that fame day fourescore and fine perfons that did weare alinnen Ephod. ;

19 And Mob the citte ofp priestes, sinote he with the edge of the sword both men and women, children and sucklinges, oxen and asses, sheepe, with the edge of the sworde.

20 And

fheabe innotent blood.

Samuel,

the sonne of Ahitob, named Abiathar, estaped, and fled to Dauid.
21 And Abiathar herbed Danid Howe

that Daul had Mayne p Lordes priestes.

22 And Daudd sapde vnto Abiathar: J

Witt it the lame dap, when Doeg the

I Kinges. ="
N10
20 And one of the sonnes of Ahimelech Edonute was there, that he would tei

Saul: and Jam cause of the dea

all the persons of thy fathers pout 4
23 Albyde thou with me, and feare not:

Tor he that seketh my lpfe, he Thali letze

pe: allo, With me thon Male be in safe-

garde.

The. xxiii. (hapter.

Dauid chateth the Philistines from Reila. Dauid departeth krom Reila, and remap. neth in the wyldernelle of Fiph. 16 Jonathan comkorteth Dauid. 28 Sauls enterprife

is broken in purfupng Dauid.

hen they tolde Daud,
N 8 saying: Bcholde, che e Phulltnes fight a -

(aw! teh was
Berea gaint “© Fela , and old g. f. Zhi (pople the barnes,
2 Yess! Therfeze Dauid alz
— HED countcllof the lord, faping: Shal J go and fnryte these Philistines: And the Lod aunswered vnto
Dauid: Go, and sinite He Philistines, and saue Keila. a
Aud Dauids men laid vnto him, See, in dea We be akrapde here w in Juda: howe oaths «= Mud) more then if we come to Keila bete Against the hoast of the Philistines: borders a:

Theu Daudd alked countctl of the
Lowe agayne. And the Torde aunswered hun, aud sayd: Aryse, and go downe to Keila, for J will deltuer the Philistines into thyne hande.

5 And fo Daud and his men went to
Aeila, and fought with the Philistines, and bought away their tattell, æ sinote thein with a great slaughter, and fo
Daudd saued p inhabitauntes of Keila.

6 And when Abiathar the sonne of Ahimelech sled to Dauid to Keila, he brought an Ephod with him in his

aba hände.

puethooam> 7 Ad it was tolde Saul that Dauid

the Ephod

Gapnitoue encauecs.

t So that
Saul was

See Was tome to Keila: And Saul fayde, kranfeng God hath Deltucred him into mypue

doih io Dauid

hande:or he is shut in, now that he is tome into a towue that Hath gates and barres.

8 And Saul called all the people together to warre, for to go dowune to Keila, and to besiege Dauid and his men.

9 And Daum haning knowledge that
Saul imagined mischieke agaynst hum,

eaten lapde to Abiathar the prielt: Being gore the Cpyon,

Saul is about to come to Keila to de-

10 Then sayde Dauid: O Torde God or
Ifsrael, thy seruaunt hath hearde that

{trope the titie for my fake:

1 Will the lordes of Keila deliuer me into his hande? And will Saul cone downe, as thyseruaunt hath hearde. G
Lode God of Ilrael: I belech ther tell thy seruaunt. And the Lorde sayde:

He wil come downe.

12 Then sapde Dauid: will the lordes of
Keila deliuer nie and the men that art with ine into the hand of Saul: And the
Lorde sayde: They wu delmer thee vp.

3 Then Daud, e his men, whiche were bpon a fice hundred, arose and departed out of Keila, and went whyther they er cuulde: And it was tolde Saul that Da w uid was fled from Keila, and he let the! iourney alonc.

14 Daud abode in the wüdernesse in strong holdes, and remained ina moun- C tayne in the wildernesse of Ziph: And
Saul sought him euery day, but God
Odelinered hum not into his hande. ca

15 And Danid sawethat Saul was tome e out to seke his lyfe: And Dawid was cane in the wildernesse of = iph inthe wood. prt th

16 And Jonathan Sauls sonnt arose and
Went to Daud into the wood, and tom or forted his ꝰ hande in God, 19

17 And sayd onto him: Feare not, sor the »».6 hand of Saul my father Mall not finde sv thee, e thou Malt be king oncr Glracl, and J Mall be next puto thee: and that doeth Saul n father knoe.

18 And they made a bond both of them together before the Lorde: And Dawud taried still in the wood, and Jonathan went to his house.

19 Then tanie the Ziphites to Saul 10
Gibea, saping: Doth not Dauid hyde hum selfe fast by vs in strong holdes, in

the wood in the hill of Hachtla, on the g, right side of Pelion: ft soe wit
Mowe therfore) king, thou niapel %

come Downe according to all the lune thy soule, and our part shalbe to un

nite the kinges hande. 5
1 hand Saul sapde Blessed are ye in the
+ Tord, for ve haue compaffion on me:

12 GOP pray pou and prepare pet better,

no we and see where his © foote hath hen a who Hath {rene hum there: for it is
„tolde me that he is very subtylll.

23 See therfore, and know al the lurking places where he hydeth hun selfe, and tomt ve againe to me with 5 certaintie, and J wil go with vou: And ykhe be in

i the d lande, 0 Will scarche hun out i throughout al ethoufandes of Juda.

24. And they avofc,and went to Ziph before Saul: Wut Dauid e hts men were in the wildernesle of Maon, in the plaine that is on the right hande of Je-

on.

„ -6 also and his men went to seke him: And they told Daud, wherktore he

I. Kinges.

ä — —

came dobne vnto a rocke, and abode in

lil.

the wildernesse of o) ghaon: And when ice
Saul heard that, he folowed after Da: roger Supe.

utd in the wildernesse of aon.

26 And Haul and his men went on the one syde of the mountayne, and Dauld his men on the other spde or the moun: taine: And Dauid made hatte to get frõ the presente of Saul. For Saul men, tompassed Dauid and his men round about, to take them. ö

27 But ther tame à meslenger to Saul, saping: alte thee and come, for the Philistines haue inuaded the lande.

28 Wherkore Saul returned from persecuting Dauid, and went against the
Philtstines: And therfore they called that place, Sela Hanmahlekoth. And

Pauid went thence, and delt in strong wagen

holdes at Engadt.

The. xxiiii. (bapter. d in a caue, spareth Saul. io he Hheweth to Saul his innocencte. 18 Haul ace e kault. . 22 He cauleth Dauid to weave vnto him to be fauourable to his.

Hen Saul was

D 2

a NS fi come againe fro

NEIL GP | folowing after 5

VXN OPhilistines, there

e were which told

im, saping:We-

hold, Dauid is in

| the wildernesse of te Engadi.

. 2 Then Saul tobe threethonland chofen men out ot all Israel, and went to {eke
Dautd and his men in the heyght of the

har of rockes where wilde goates remapne.

vice 3 And he came to the sheepe toates by the fact, wap, where there was ataue, & Saul chs went in to! do his easement: And Da-
Wd and his men remapned in the in-
Ward partes of the taue.
4. And the men of Daud fayd vnto him:
Dee the dap is come, of which the Lord layde vnto thee, Wehold J wil deliver thyne enenne into thyne hand, and thou
{halt do to hum as it thall seeme good in thy light. Then Dauid arolt, and cut of the lappe of Sauts garment priuilp.
5 And afterwarde Danis heart smote him, becaule he had cut of the lap of auls garnient, a |

‘ thr in

d 5 a dete alan
2 ton,
Na

Repe me from doyng that thing vnto

Mp maister the lordes aumopnted to lay

ble bande vpon hun, feing he is the annoynted of the Lorde.

Loe conn. ee § And he lapd vnto his men: The Lorde-

7 And so Dauid kept ok his seruauntes

with these wordes, and {uffred then

not to rile against Saul: But Saul rose vp out of the taue, and went away.

3 Daudd also arose afterward, and went out ofthe taue, and tryed after Saul, faping: My Lorde king. And when
Saul loked behind him, Daud stowpedl with) his fate to the earth, and bowed him selfe. P

9 And Dandd sayde to Saul: naherfore geuest thou an eare to mens Wordes that fay , beholde Dauid seketh euyll againt thee-

Io Behold this day thyneepes haue seene howe thatthe Lord hath deliuered thee this day into myne hande inthe caue:
And fone bad nie kuͤl thee, but J had tompassion on thee, and sapd: J will not lay mne handes on my niaiffer, for he is the Lordes annopnted.

i And moreouer my father, beholde and
(ce pet the lap of thy garment in my hand: Pualmuch as J killed thee not when J cutofthe lap of thy garment, vnderstand therfore , € {ee that there is neither euyll nor Wickednefle in mie, and that J haue not finned against ther:
And pet thou huntelt alter my soule to
; take it e

12 Lhe Lorde be tudge betweene thee and me, e the Lorde auenge me ok thee: but mne hande be not vpon thee.

G 4 3 Attor

and his

E

0 That is,

eanse th
Shep deuiden them selucg.

Oi, Che wprouerbe of an aàunciem man,

a Hebr.

13 According as the “olde prouerbe sapeth,

wickednesse proteedeth frö the wicked:

But niyne hande be not vpon tier.

14 After whom tis the king of Israel tome outs After whom dock thou pursuc-
After a dead dog, aud after a flea.

15 The Torde therfore be indge, t iudge betweene thee ct me, and see ẽ pleade mp

tause, x auenge me out of thyne bande.

ludge. 16 When Dauid had made an ende of

© Dan bucrcommeth
Saul, dy rendring good foʒ eupl, and coni= muting the vengtannce to
God.

(a) Thrt ts,
Rniong his owe Bynted.

(b) Manon 2
Carinel, wrrr citica in the tribe ok Fis da. Carmel ths mounkaine was in Sale let.

“Heb. afke him in my naine of peace.

speaking these wordes to Saul, Saul

sayde: Is this thy vopte my sonne Da-

nid: And Saul lift vp his vopce, and wept,

17 And sayde to Daud, Thou art moze righteous then J: for thou Halk rewarded me with good, where as ‘J haue rewardedthee with eupll.

18 Aud thou hast shewed this dap, howe that thou hast dealt wel with me: for-

Te. xxv. Chapter. 1

1 Samuel dieth. 3 Nabal and Ibigail. 33 The Lord killeth Mabal, 4 Abigail and
Ahinoam Dauids wyues. 44 Michol is geuen to Phalti.

d' Samuel died and all the Ilraelites ga-

7 SS thered tõgether, and
SONS

lamented him, and bu-

Ms a Di 98 his 11

re POyhouse at Rama. And

ea Sa Daud arose, & Went doswne tothe wüldernesse of Pharan.

2 And ther was a man ind aon, whole possession was in Carmel, and the man was exceeding mightie , and had three thoufande sheepe t a thousand goates: was {hearing his sheepe in Carmel. ;

3 The nanie ofthe man was Mabal and the name of his wpfe was Abigail, and fhe was a Woman of a singuler Wwyledome, and beautikull: Wut the man was thurlishe, and of shrewde conditions, € was of the kinred of Caleb.

4 And Daudd hearde inthe wildernesle, that Nabal did sheare his sheepe.

And Dandd lent out ten young men, and sayd vnto them: Get pou vp to Carmel, and goto Mabal, and“ greete him in mp name.

6 And ye shal sap: So mapest thou lyue, peace be to thee,peace be to thyne house, and peace be vnto all that thou halt.

Weholde J haue hearde fay that thou batt (hearers: Nowe, thy shepheardes

Ringes.

22 And Dauid sware vnto Saul, t Saul

almuch as when the Lorde had e me in thyne handes, thon mlledst un

not.
19 Foz who shall finde his enenne, and let im depart into ac good Wap - Wher- ent orc the Lord reward thee With good 8 fos that thou halt done vnto me this ip. j .
20 And nowe beholde , J wote wel that thou chalt be king, e that the kingdome of Pirael thalbe stabliched in thyne

hande: by the D

21 Swere nowe therkore vnto me
Tode, that thou chalt not destrop my feede alter me, and that thou shalt not put ny nanie out of my fathers boule,

went Wome: But Daudd and his men gat them vp vnto the holde.

were with vs, € we did them no spite, Goc

neither was there ought missing vnto unn them al the while they were in Carmel:

8 Alke the zaddes, e they will shewthee: %
Wherfore let these poung men finde fa- %, uour in thyne eyes (for we tome in A me

dod“ sealon) æ gene J pray thee what dan deuer comuneth to thyne hande vnto eaten thy seruauntes, and to thy sonne Daud. 9 pie

9 And when Daudds young wien came, ovr they told abal all those Wordes in the *. name of Dauid: and helde their peace.

Io And Pabal aunswered Dauids seruauntes, and satd: ho is Daiud-and «eae who is 5 sonne of Plate There is plentie wn, of seruauntes now a dapes that beeake vsscu awap euerp man from his maister. e

n Shal Ithen take my bread, my water, dai. and nip flethe that J haue killed for m shearers, and geucit vnto mien whom
J Wot not Whence they bez

12 And fo Danids seruauntes turned their way, and went againe, and came and tolde him all those sapinges.

13 And Dauid lapd vnto his men: Girde euery man his lword about hin. they girded euery man his siword 155

him, and Danid was girded with his sword: And there folowed Dauid ce a foure hundred men, and two hunde abode by the stuffe. But

C

sland of bigail :

Tate to

Il.

But one of the laddes tolde Abigail 26 Now therefore mp lorde, as the Low

14 0 abals wyfe Jfaying: Weholde, Dauid

aut melleugers bata our maifter out

ofthe wildernese to salute him: and he

donthem. : . tand yet the men were very good — vnto vs. and dyd vs no displealure, neither nulled we any thyng as long as we were conuersaunt with them When

6% we were in the fieldes.

eg They were a wall vnto vs both by

night el ts . a ae wi we were

them keping .

000 therefore take heede / fee what

thou shalt do:for surelie eupli will tome

vpon our maister and al his houcholde, for he is — Wicked, that a man can not eake to him.

9 18 hen “ibigal made hate, and tooke two hundred “loaves, and two bottels ok wine, and kiue sheepe redie dresled, and kiue mealures of parched corne, and an hundred * fratles of reasynges, and two hundred cakes of fygges, e laded rs them on alles,

x 19 And lapde vnto het poung men: Go before me, veholde J come after you,
But the tolde Her Hulband Jabal nothing thereof. a 8

20 And as she rode on her asse, the cam priuylie downe the syde ofthe hill, and behold Daind and his men came downe against her, and she met then.

A. And Dauid faide: Surelie in vapne haue I kept all that this felow hath in

ie widernes lo that nothing was nut:

fed of all that pertapned vnto him: and he ath quite me euill for good.

22 So and more also do God vnto the enemies of Danid if J leaue of all that bettapne to him by the dawnyng ot the

„dap, any that o pylleth against the wall.
23, And When Abigail fave Daud, he sa Dated and lyghted of her affe, and fell befoze Dauid on her face, and bowed her elfe to the grounde,

64. And fell at his feete, and sapde: Let this iniquitie be counted myne n lord, pe let thyne handmaide J pape thee
Ineake in thyne “audience, e heare the

bodes of thy handmapd. er not mylorde I pray thee regarde this wicked man Pabal: For as his dane lots he: Habal ts his name, e
15 is with hun: But J thyne hand: on dlawe not the poung men of my

‘be whom thou lendedst.

art 1 shec p inet pbs

lyueth, and as thy soule liueth, cuen the sLoade that hath withholden thee from eprrtizittig toi %ed) blood and saued thee thyne hand: So nove, J pray God See that thyne enemies, e they that intende to domp lorde euyll, map be as Mabal.
27 Aud now this» biefling which thyne „an mn haudmayd hath brought onto my lord, let it be geuen buto the poung menthat kolowe iny lorde.
28 J prape thee forgeue the trespasse of thyne handmapd: forthe Torde will Cw What is, make mplord ature house, betause my 24 ou" lorde fighteth the battailes of the Tord, u. aer and there could none euill be found in thee in all thy dayes. a
29 And yet a & man hath rysen to perse- Oc, cute thee, and to seeke thy foule: but the 2 foule of my Lorde Chall be bound w in n the bundel ofthe lpuyng With the Lown ween be thy God, and the foules of thy enemies Landon
(hall God cast out, euen as out ofthe Ves? middle of a slyng. 1
30 And when the Lorde shall haue done to my lord al the good that he hath pro: F mysed thee, and Chall haue made thee ruler ouer Jlrael:
31 Then (hall it be no griefe punto thee, nor offence ol mynde bnto my lorde, that thou batt not shed blood causelesse, and that nw lord bath not auenged him selfe: Wut when the Lorde shall haue dealt well with my lord, then thinke on thyne handmapde.
32 And Dard latd to Abigail: lessed be the Lord God of Ilrael, which sent thee this day to meete me. g
33 Elessed is thy saying, and blested art thou which halt kept me this day from tomnung to Hed blood, z from auengeing up felfe with nwne owne hande.
34 -F02 in very deede, as the Lorde God ol Ylraei lpueth, which hath kept me backe from hurting thee: extept thou haddest hasted and met me, surely there hadde not ben left vnto Mabal by the dalbnyng of the dap, any that pylleth agatntt the wall.
35 And fo Pauld reteaued of her hande that which he had brought him, and sayde vnto her: Go vp in peace to thyne G house, beholde J haue heard thy vopce, aud haue graunted thy petition.
36 And Abigall came to Habal, and beholde, he held a feast in his houle tyke the feat of a king, and Mabals Apt

drunken: Wherfore she tolde “> ini nothyng neither lesse nor moze, vntyll the morowe niornyng. 8

F 37 But in the morning when the wine

was gone out of Nabal, his wyfe tolde himthese wordes, and his hrart dyed
Within him and he became as a tone.
38 And vponaten dapes akter, the Lod finote Nabal, that he dyed.

39 And when Daudd heard that Nabal was dead, he sayd: Blessed be the Lord that hath indged p cause ol mp rebuke ofthe hand of Pabal, c bath kept his leruaunt from euill:or the Lord hath retompented the wickednes ok Nabal vpon his owne head. And Dauid sent to conimune with Abigail, to take her

amu E |. was mery within hym, for he was very ** ——

and ) ; .

er d when the seruauntes ol D

were tome to Abigal to Carmel, thee
{pate vnto her, faping: Damn sent vs vnto thee, to take thec to his wyfe. And she arole, € boibed her selfe on her face to the earth, and salde: Beholde, let thy e be a seruaunt, to wache the

eete ofthe seruauntes of my lorde.
41 And Abigail hasted and avole, e gate her vpon an Alle, with fine damolels of

hers that went at her feete, and the “se went alter the meflengers of Vaude 5 ahn.

became his wple.

42 Daudd also toke Ahinoam of Jezrael, and they were both his wyues.

43 wut Saul had geuen“ Michol hig
Daughter, Dauids wpke, to fonne of Lais, which was of Gallim.

q The.xxvi.(bapter.

Dauid was dilcouered vnto Saul by the Jiphttes. u. Bauid taketh away Sauls — fpeare,and a cruse of water that foode at his head. 21. Saul conkelleth his linne.

i
H if

f
W
4 U

Ths * N
‘i Nig

Againe vnto Saul to

Gibea, saying: Doth

not Daud hide hin

selfe in the huͤl of Ha-

ee chilla, Which is before
Jesimon:

> Saul arose, q went downe to the wil-

dernes of Ziph, hauing three thousand

chosen men of Israel with him, for to
{eke Dawid inthe wildernesse of Ziph.

z And Saul pitched mthe hil of Hachilta,

which is before Jesimon bythe way

N 2
Map,

b — 0

p ik: 7 10 un A

HE Ziphites tame a-

8 ASS a) d ~ 2
— het — = — 0 .
71 N ee 4 i! (ih eS — ee

r,
V. bees > ae .
5 ft NWR * Vipphses ¢ a
‘| ’

ide: Wut Daud dwelt in the wilder-

nelle, and he sawe that Saul tame atter

him into the wildernesse:

4 Dawid therefore fent out spies, c bn derstoode that Saul was come in ver

5 AndDautdarole, c came tothe 5 where Saul had pitched: & Dau 15 held the place where Saul lap si 0 the sonne of Per which was * 4 captayne:for Saul lay in the fort, kt. people pytched rounde about 9% T0 en

halti the .

Then aunlwered Daund, and spake

’ Sahimelech the Hethite, and to Abily the sonne of Zaruta,¢ brother to Joab, frying : Who Wyll go Downe with me to Saul to the hoast- Aud Abilai saide:

Wyll go downe with thee.

3 7 Andso Dauid and Abifai tame Downe
37 tothe people bpmight, and behold Saul um. lap lleepyng Within the fort, and his

speare stacke inp grounde at his head:

put Avner and the people lap rounde

out hym. N

8 Then tribe Abilai to Dautd, God

hath closed thyne enenue into thyne

hand thys day: Nowe J pray ther let

me finite him once with my speare to

a the carth, x J will not“ snnte hum the n sctond tyme. j

lag And Daudd {aide to Abisal, Destroye

the Lordes annopnted, and be giltleslejo And Dandd lapd furthermore: As the
Lorde lyueth, the Lorde shall smpte him or his day Chall tome to dye, or he shall delcend into battaile, and perishe. i The Lorde kepe me from laying myne hand vpon the Lowes annoputed: Wut J praye thee take thou nove the speare that is at his head, and the truse of water, and let vs go. :
And so Dauid toke the {peare and the truse of water from Sauls head, and they gat them away, and no man sawe

a they were all afleepe ; betaule the“
1 Tordte had sent a dead sleepe vpon thé. ez Then Dauid went oner to the other lyde, and stoode on the toppe of an hill a
1 5 5 (a great space being betweene hem: 8

bun Abner the fonne of Mer, faying: “ Heaz

bo restthon not Abners Abner aunswered aud sayd: Who art thou that cryest to the king- 5

„And Dauid fapde to Abner: Art not

<< {oua® man-and who is lpke to tice in Israel- Wherelore then hast thou hothept thy lorde the king? For there tante one of the folke in to destroye the king thy lorde.

s Itis not wen done of thee: As the

mx hun not: For who tan lape his handon

it, nor marked it, neither awaked: Foz -

Cl4 And Maud tryed to the people, and to

Torde lpueth, pe are worthy to dye, d becaule pe haue not kept ae des fl annoynted: And nowe fee kinges speare is, and the crule of wae ter that was at his head.

17 Aud Saul knew Daus voyte, and sapd: Is this thy voyee my sonne Da- f

wd: And Dauid layde: Itis np voyce my lorde, O king.

18 And he lapde: wherelore doth my lorde thus persetute his seruaunt;: for what haue J done 202 what euyll is in myne hand:

cs

POS =

g. Xx. f. cor,

fonnes of

Where the death.

8.24. d.

19 More therefore J prape thee; let S

my lorde the king heare the wordes of

his seruaunt: If the Lorde haue tiv: .. -

red thee vp against me, w let him smell the fauour of a sacrifite: But and if they be the O children of men, curled are they it before the Lorde, for they haue cast nie tee

let the work that thou ha in hande, de accepted bes

hat ig, e

d be
Lorde. hat haue dthee vp

dut this dap from abidpng in the inhe- r ritaunee of the Lorde, © saying: Go, thou moet
U

serue other goddes.

20 Now therefore let not my blood fall to the earth before the fate ofthe Lorde:
For the king of Jsrael is come out to secke a flea, as When one doth hunt a partridge in the mountapues.

21 Then saide Saul, J haue finned:
Come agapne my fone Dauid, for J
Will do thee no moze harme, betcause my

arne wozdg,

soule was precious in thyne eyes this (@ ween

dap: Weholde, J hatte played the foole, eae and haue erred exceedinly. .

22 And Dauid aunlwered and said: Beholde the kinges speare, let one of the voung men come ouer and fet it.

23 The Lode rewarde every man ac:

cording to his righteoulnes , and fapthfulnesle: For the TLorde delluered thee into my hand this dap, but J would not lay mine hand vponthe Lordes annoynted.

24. And behold, like as thy life was much set by this Dap in myne eyes: so be mp lyke set by in the eyes ofthe Lorde, that he deliner me out of all tribulation.

25 Then Saul saide to Dauid: Wlessed art thou my sonne Dauid,fo2 thou shalt do great thinges and preuailc. And so
Daud went his wap, and Saul turned to his plate agapne.

qThe

lauomp Ipfe dap.

Dauid fleeth

2 Wautid fleeth to Achts king ot Gath. who geueth him Fiklag. 8. Dauid de certapne of the Phintkines, v. Achts is decedued by Daud, 2 2 stropeth

heart, J shall perishe
0 Done dap by the hand of
Saul: therefore is
, \lchere nothing better

for me, then to flee and saue my self in the land of the Philistines, and Saul Malt teasse and secke meno moze in all the coastes dk Israel, and so Mal J escape out ot his hand.

And Dauid arofe, and he and the fire hundred men that were with him, went vnto Achis the sonne of Maoch, king of Gath.

And Dauid dwelt with Achis at
Gath, both he and his nien, euery man with his housholde, and Maud with his two wiues, Ahinoam the Jezrahelite, aud Abigail Mabals wyke the
Carmelite,

W 4. And it was tolde Haul that Daud was fled to Gath, aud he fought no moze for Hint. ,

And Daud sayde vnto Achis: BFF haue no w founde grace in thyne eyes, let them geue mea place in some towne in p countrep, that J map dwell there: For why Mould thy seruaunt dwell in the head citie of the kingdome with thee:

Then Achis gaue him W iklag that

ney

‘wo

A

(a) That is, let thpne offi= cers appopnt mica place.

A

Lhe xxviii. Chapter.

2 Wauid hath the chiele charge prompted about Achis.s, Saul contulteth with a wltch, and the cauleth him to speane with Samuel. 18. no ho declareth his ruine.

Nd in those dayes, the
Philistines gathered

thou (halt go out with me to battaple, thou and the men that are with thee. g |
And Dauidfaydeto Adis: Surelie thou shalt know¾e What thy leruaunt can do. And Achis {aid to Dauid: Then
I will make ther keper ofp head for

cuer.
3 Samuel was then dead, and all PE

J. Jamucl. 7
T he .xxvit. Chapter. i

ayd to Dauid, Be sure

to feb

fame day, for which caule zikia
> Sper: a) tapneth vnto the ckinges o dich ch Map. dein Juda bnto a
Andthe tyme that Dauid dwelt in che Smee countrey of the Philistines, was foure b. x8 monethes, and certaine dayes, une
$ And Dauid and his men went vp and is inuaded the Gesurites the Gerzites z the Amalekites: Fo2 thole natios were from the beginnyng the inhabitauntes of the lande, as men go to Sur, vnto the land of Egypt.
9.And Dauid smote the lande, ¢ lett ner: ther man nor woman alyue, and droue away the sheepe, the oren, the alles, ca: melles, and clothes, and returned, and tame to Achis. lo And Achis saide: Where haue pe ben
à rouing this day: And Dauid aunhhe: red: Against the south of Juda, and against the south of thec Jerameelltes, und against the south of the W Remes. =... n And Dauid faucd neither man nog fate
Woman alpue to bring to Gath, faping: g, left they should tell on vs, laying, fo dyd e
Dauid, and so Will be his maner all the 9
Whyle he dwelleth in the countrey of true the Philistines.
12 And Achis beleued Dauld, saping: He hath made his people wired vtterlp to abhorre him, Etberefoze he shalbe wy seruaunt for euer.

rael had lamented him, and buried him in Rama his owne titie: And Daud Yad ( n, put away the sorterers, and the sooth- osc: layers out of the land. **
4. And the Philistines gathered tose’ ther, and came, and pytched in Sure
And Saul gathered all Ilraecl together, and they pytched in Gilboa.
And when Saul sawe the hoast beit
Philistines, he was afrapde, x his Hea was sore astonied. ethe
6 And when Saul alked councellokt:
Torde, the Lode aunfwered hun 10 5 neither by dreames , nor by Urim, pet by prophetes. „ Thun

< en sayd Saul vnto His seruaũtes:

“ 1 ath a familike me a woman that hath erbte that Imap go to her, andaske

okher. And his seruauntes fayd to him:

Beholde, there is a woman that bath a

fanulier spirite at Endor.

3 And Sau chaunged him selle, and put

er rayment, and then went hee

auen wich him, and they came to

the woman bp npaht and he fayde: 2

ray thee toniecture vnto me by the fa

miller ipirite, € bring me him vp whom chall name vnto thee.

And the woman faide vnto him: Wepaine thou knowett what Saul hath

pone how he bath destroped the sorteeo the foothfapers out of the land: Wherkore then lapest thou a {hare lor my soule, to tause me to diese

jo And Saul sware to her by the Lord,

saping: As the Lorde lyueth there chall no harme tome to thee for this thyng.

11 Then aide the woman: Whom Mall
IJ fetch vp vnko thee s He aunswered: wang me Dp Samuel.

n Whenthe woman sawe Sammel, the cryed with a loude boyce , and spake to
Saul saying: why balk thou deceaued me: fog thou art Saul. .

ez And the king laide vnto her: We not aag. krayd: what sawest thou: The woman n {aide vnto Saul: Jlawe gods alcen-

ding bp out of the earth. An
14 He saide vnto her againe: what fachion is he of: She aunlwered: There cõmeth bp an olde man with a mantel vpon him. And Saul perceaued that it m was Samuel, and he stowped with in 1 face to the ground, and bowed him

elfe.

15 And Samuel lad to Saul: Why hast thou vnquieted me, to make me be bought bps Saul aunswered: Jam sore entumbred, for p Philistines make warre against me, and God is departed from me, and aunlwereth me no moze, neither by prophets, nor by dreames:

. And therefore J haue called thee, that

en thou mapest tell me what J (hall do.

Ne Theu lade Sammelsnaberefoze doelt
Pore “ a

iis n,

* * Samuel.

thou aske of me, while the Lord is gone kromthee and is become thyne enemie-
17 Leulic the Lord hath done to o him, eyemee euen as he spake bymp hand: For the “Bee,
Torde hath rent the kingdome out of thyne hand, and geuen it thy nepahbour Dauid. 2 a
13 Betaule thou obeyedst not the voyee of the Lode, nor exerntedst his fierce
Wrath vpon the Amalekites, therefore hath the Lord done this vnto thee this

dap. u
19 And moreouer, the od will deliuer D
Pract with thee into the handes of the
Philistines:? To morrowe shalt thou and thy sonnes be With me, and the () car l
Torde shall geue the hoast of Israel in- 23" to the handes of the Philistines.
20 Then Saul fell straightwayp all along on the earth, and was fore © ae (Frc, frapde becaufe of the wordes of Sa- ce muel. And there was no strength in ane hint: for he had eaten no bread all the dap, nor all the night.
21 Andthe woman came bnto Saul, ¢ sawe that he was sore troubled,¢ layde vnto him: Ste, thyne handmapde hath ,.,, obeped thy voyce, c 0 haue put my 7 foutein ip hand, and haue hearkened Posen” vnto thy wordes which thou sapedst daz. vnto me.
22 Nobbe therefore J pray thee hearken thou allo vnto the boyte of thyne handmapde, and let me set a morlell of bread before thee that thou mapest eate, and get thee strength, ethen go on thy tour-

nep. 5

23 Herefuled and sapde: J will not eate.
But his seruauntes and the woman together compelled him, and he hearkened vnto their vopte: And fo he arofe from the earth, and fat on a bed.

24. The woman had a kat calfe in the house, and the hasted and killed it, and tooke floure and kneded it, and did bake vnleauened bread thereok:

25 And brought them before Saul, and before his seruauntes: And when they
Had eaten, they stoode bp, i went away the lame night.

The

— — —— — _ — —— —

Dauid is.

I, Samuel,

. The.sxexix. Chapter. .

4 The princes of the Philistines caute Dauid to be sent f ous again Alrael, becaute ther mittrufted him. — vm dame 4
IMD the Philistines were 6 Then Achis talled Da ie. —

gathered together with vnto him: As the Lorde Würth er

75 . — F a,
(ey

A1

all their armies in A-

batt ben honest, and good lg

me ; > n

„ Ve 2 sphec:and the Ilraeuttes when thou“ wentet ou and iw OTe

founsaunic. | dete [> Ipptehed vy Ain, which me in the hoalt, neither haue J kounde ea
, Os esu Jezrael. , Cceuvll With thee fence thou cariettto me aß i

5 And the princes ok bnto this dap: euerthelelle the“ pam wage

des- the Phutstines went foorth by hun- ces fauour thee not. — th.

ce deovng dreds and thoulandes: Wut Pauid and 7 Wherelore nowe returne, and go n a

mene. his men tame behinde with Achis. 0 ö

The lapd the princes of the Philistines, what do thele Ebrues there : Achis sald

S

and g peate, that thou dilspleale not the printe re biene. n he printes 8

8 And Dautd lapde vnto Achis: Aud

could betgape 5 vs.

41 Sees

vnto the princes ofthe Philistines: Js not this Daud, the seruaunt of Saul

the king of Hlract which Hath ben with me thelt dayes, or these peres, and J

haue found no fault in hun, sinte he feil

vnto nie, vnto this dap:
4 And the printes of the Philistines were wroth with hym, and the printes of the hilistines sapde vnto hym: Make this elowe returne, that he map go agate to his place which thou hast appoynted hyin, and let hym not go downe with vs to battaple, left in the battaple he be an aduerfaric to vs: For wherewith

shoulde he obtapne the fanour of his

maister: choulde it not be with the heades of thele men:

Is not this Dauid, to whom they fang in daunces, saping: Saul flue his thoulande, z Dauid his ten thonlande:

9 Achis au

what haue J done- what hat thou

founde in thy seruaunt Pr Teak 159

haue ben with thee vnto this day, that

I may not go fight against the enemies

ok my lorde the king:

ered and fapd to Dauld:

BE oe that thou art ™ good in my Gams” ight, as an angel of God: Motwith- a. standing, the printes of the Philistines haue sapde, Let him not go vp with vs

to battaile.

10 Wherefore now ryse vp earlie in the

morning with thy miaitters seruaũtes o

that are come to thee: and WHE ve be vp da

earlie, alsoont as pe haue lpght, de-

parte, i
And so Dauid c his men role vp ear-

lie, to depart in the morning, and to re-

turne into the land ok the Philistines:

And the Phuͤlstines wet vp to Jezracl.

q The.xxx.(hapter.

The Amalchites burne Fiblag. 5, Dauids two wiues are taken priloners. 6. The people would fone him. 8. He athed councell of the Lorde, and purluing his enemies, recouereth the prap. a4. He deuideth it equallx. 26. And lendeth part to his krendes.

Ut when Dandd and
0 bis men were come to
E Zulag the third dap, ethe Amalekites had fel ees) unaded bppon the a Ze} (outh , euen vnto Ztk-
3 lag, and hade sinitten
⁊iklag, and burnt it with fyre.
2 Amd had taken the women that were therein priloners, both small and great:

but slue not a nian, saue carrped them

awap, and went their wapes.

6 And Dauid was in great cumbraunce

So Dauid and his men tame to the titie, and beholde it was burnt wit) fpre:and their wiues, their lonnes, and their daughters were taken prisoners.

Then Wauid € the people that Wert with him, lift vp their voyces and wept, vntul they could weepe no more.

And Dauids two wives were taken priloners allo, Ahinoamthe Jesrahelte, and Abigan the wyfe ol Pabal the
Carmelite,

Jo:

nds yictory

c people entended to stone Hun,
Fone te heartes ofall p people were pered euery man for his formes and for

to him in the Lorde his God, cad a faye to Abtathar the priest Ahimelechs lonne: pray thee, bring me the Ephod. And biathar brought the
Ephod to Daud,
3 And Dauid alked tountel at the Lord, saping: Shall F follow after thts tom

auntwered hun: Folowe, for thou shalt suerlie duertake them, and retouer

10 9 0 Dauid and the sixe hundred men

. that were With him, went and came to

the ryuer Welor, where a parte of them

ode.

10 Wau Dauid and foure hundred nien folowed: ( For two hundred abode behinde, being to weery to go ouer the ry: uer Welor) —

u And they founde an Egyptian in the

e sielde, and brought him to Dauid,“ and

gg”

ter to denke.

12 And gaue him a kewe fygges, and two cutters of reasinges: And when he had eaten, his spirite caine againe to him:
For he had eaten no bead nor druncke any water in three dapes and theee nightes.

B And Dauid laid vnto him: To whom belongest thou; and Whenee art thou-
He layd: J am a poung man of Egypt, and seruaunt to an Anialekite, and my maister left me, betaule three dapes a gone J fell sicke.

14 We tame a roupng vpon the south of
Chretus, and vpon the (coal) belonging to Juda, and toward the south of Caleb, and we burnt Ziklag with kyre.

15 And Daudd faide to him: Canst thou

e, bung me to this company: And he said:

e Sweare vnto me by God, that thou

cum, wilt neither kuͤl me, nor deliuer me in-

<2, do the handes of my maister, and J will se bung thee to this company.

16 And when he had brought him thy: ther beholde they laye {tattered abrode vpon all the earth cating, and drpnking, a daunting, becante of al the great
91055 that the had carried away out
Othe land of the Phillstines, and out ol

e land of Juda.
And Dawid lapde vpon them krom

I. Samuel.

his daughters: Wut Dauid toke a good

pany : shall JYouertake them: And he

gaue him bread, € he did eate, and wa-

IVI.

the twylight, euen vnto the euening

of the next moro we: so that there eftaz

ped not a man of them, sane foure hun-

dred young men which rode vpon cane

mels, and fled.

18 And Dan retouered all that the Amalekites had tarryed away, and Daz uid rescued his two wpues:

19 So that there was nothing lacking to them, suiall or great, sonne or daughter, or of the spoyle of all that they had D taken awap, Waudd recouered thent all.

20 And Daud tooke all the shecpe, and the oren, and they Deane them Leflore ceywnieh the his cattaile andfaide: This is Dauds rb tena

pray. auld From

2 And Daud came to the two hundred Vie men, that were to weery for to folowe Ses.
Dautd, whom they had made also to abyde at the rpuer Wesor: And they tanie to meete Dauid € the people that were with hun: And when Danw came to the people, he saluted them.

22 Then aunswered all the wicked and the vnthryftes of the men that went with Daud, and laide: Betause they went not with vs, therkore wil we geue them none of the prap that we haue retouered: But let cuery man take his wike and his children, those let them catry awap and departe.

23 Then sayd Dauid: Be shall not do fo my brethren with that which the Lord
Hath geuen vs, who hath preserued vs, and delpuered the company that came against vs, into our handes.

24 Foz Who will hearkẽ vnto pou in this matter: Wut as his parte is that goeth downe and fighteth, so shall his parte be that tarryeth by the ftuffe: they (hail parte alpke.

25 And so from that day forward , was E that niade a statute and lawe in Ilcael, vnto this day, 8

26 When Dauid therefore tame to Zik- daß Kon, lag, he sent of the pray vnto the elders anne of Juda and to his friendes, saying: fewest.
See, there is a 1 8 75 pou of the *. spople of the enenites ofthe Lorde.

27 Helentto them of Bethel, to them of souch Ramoth, to them of Jathir,

28 To them of Aroer, to them of Dec phamoth,to them of Esthema,

29 Tothem of Rachal, to them ofthe cities of Jerahmeel, to them of the tities of the Kenites,

30 To them of Horma, to them ae

ge tes

waͤrdeth them

2 pe 3 of Saul J. \ samuel

Oz, Maine.

Oz hit bitn.

Iud. ix. g.

&) Neere to
Sen.

and hic

N

e

alhan, to them of Athach, all places Where Daud and a
31 To themthat are in Hebron, aud to were wont to haunt. den
; ‘Teh .xxxi. Chapter. —

4 Saul killeth him selke. 6. His children are slaine in the battaile.ir. Che men of Jabes tooke downe his bodie which was hanged on the wall. .

. oF 4 \
N. 1

— —— — re

eee ifr 1 2 fot ete —
AMS ye

ct 4 yf p A
WY my a ae

0 Ai e nf

4 fought against Isracl:
Oland the men of Ilrael fled away from the
Phllistines, and fell dowWne « Wounded in

mount Gilboa.

Abinadab, xc Melchisua, Sauls sonnes.

3 And when the battaule went sore against Saul, the archers with bowes found hun, and he was fore aftayoe of the archers. jo Sh,

Thẽ said Saul vnto his harnesse bearer, Draw out thy [Word, a thrust me through therewith:lest the vncircumtifed tome and thrust me thoough mocke me. And his harnesse beaver Wolde not, for he was sore afrayd:Therefore Saul toke a sword, and fell vpon it.

5 And when his harnesse bearer lawe that Saul was dead, he fell lpkewile vpon his sword and dyed with hun.

6 And so Saul dyed, k his three sonnes, and his harnesse bearer, and al his men that fame day together.

7 And when the men of Ilrael, that were on the other syde ofthe “ valley,

J The end of the first booke of Samuel, or first booke of Kinges.

naan

D D* 333% oy ay 8

fr, v a 2 — * n D 2p H pS 15 2 Q
A FOP 1.
§ . 4 t h ; NESS, 4
( Ng J r I 1 By
1 „ Re ae in ti f e : Err 1
. affe f Gee r My ot Wrest: f “UO D SLE

MD the Phmiltines

yy \
BOW
4 ME ie i

e\ ioe 3

N

Uran

and oo they of the ofherfpne Jordaine, Ci

Delt in them.

“7° > $ Onthe morow whenthepbiittines ...
2 And the Philistines preassed fore vpon ö
Saul t his lonnes, ¢ flue Jonathan, x

were come to spoyle them that were slame, they founde Saul and his thrce sonnes lying in mount Gilbon.
And they cut of his head, and stripped him out ok his har nesse, c sent into the land of Philistines on euery syde, that they should pupliche it in the temple of 3m their idolles, and among the people. mun.
10 And they laped vp his harnelle in the b
Houle of Astaroth: but they hanged dp ni his body on the wall of Bethsan. eas u Wghenthe nbabitauntes of „ Jabes , in Gllead heard thereok, what the PU ae liftines had done to Saul: d
12 They arole, as many as were strong sont nen, and went all night, Etoke the bo- ch die of Saul, € the bodies of his founes, from the wall ol Wethlan, andcanic to
Jabes, “ and burnt them there. z And toke their bones ¢ buryed 9 1 vnder a tree at Jabes, x faüted (uel oxen. da yes. * of cal

lere l

2. Ringes.

Ihe feconde booke of Samuel,

otherwyse called the seconde booke of the kinges.

The fyrst Chapter.

an

was tolde Dauid ok Sauls death. 15 He cauteth him to be llayne that brough
25 7 5 19 He lamented the death of Saul and Jonathan. .

Mg ene in bert lanitns

Bre (emt)

a DiDobeyfaunce, =

aa Paulin ode bnto himabbence tõmest thou? He layde vnto him: Out ofthe hoast of Pract Jam efcaped.

4 And Dãnid layde vnto him: And what is doue J prapthee: tell me. He sapde:
The peo pie is led from the battell, and many of the people are ouerthrowen and dead, and Saul and Jonathan his

sionne are dead allo.

5 And Daudd sapd vnto the poung man that tolde it him: Howe knowest thou that Saul and Jonathan his sonnt be dead:

6 The poung man that tolde him, aunz

„ lwered: „As Frame bnadurledly to

„ mount Giboa , beholde Saul leaned

gen phpon his speare: and lo, the charettes

and horsemen kolowed hard after him.

57 And when he loked backe, he sawe me,

1 J. me. And Jaunkwered:here my. .

Ng 8 And he sayde vnto me: Who art thon:

ee pj aunihvered him: Jam an Ama-

oka ite,

n,? Helapde vnto me agayne: J pray thee

come vpon me, and flea nie: For anguyshe is come vpon me, becaule my life hen, „ pet whole in nie.

10 And so J stoode vpon him, and five

him, and betaule J was lure that he

SOY Fterthe death ol
Saul, when Damid was returned

AU Ne) oe Bites and had ben

two dates in Züklag: g

„ Weholde, there

toulde not line after that he had fallen
Itoke the trowne that Was vpon his head, and the braselet that was on his arme, and haue brought them hyther vnto my lorde.

n Then Dauid toke holde on his clothes,

and rent them, and so did all the men Nes 27 that were with him.

12 And they mourned, and wept, and faz fied vntil euen for Sau and Jonathan his sonne, x for the people of the Lorde, and for the house of Israel, betause they were ouerthrowen With the worde.

13 And Daud sayd vnto the young man that brought him thele tidings: nahence art thou: He aunlwered: J am the sonne ok an aliaunt, an Amakeltte.

14. And Dauid sayde vnto him: Howe is C

it that thou Watt not afrayde to lay thyne hande on the lordes annoynted, to destroy him:

15 And Maud called one ot his poung mé,

and sayd: Go to, and fall vpon him. And he {mote him, that he died.

16 Then {aid Pau vnto him, Thy blood be vpon thyne owne head: For thyne cry tee owne mouth hath teltified against thee, tor hun de: faying , J haue flapne the lordes an- thy doco be noynted. peeve.

13 1 he bad them teache the children of gage
Vy

rightcous:) » Dp, Rather
19 S noble Firael,be is laine bponthy Saftes hie places: howe are the mightie ouerthrowen- —
20 Tell it not in Gath, norpublishe it in the streates of Alkaton : left the daughters of the Phllistines reiopce, and lett the daughters of the vncircumeiled tri-

upd.
Pb HI 21 Be

Danid.

21 He mountapnes of Gilboa , vpon you be neither deawe nor raine nor ficldes of offeringes:or there the shield of the

(a) Let thelt ferric ncldes a barren and uo fruite to offer to the

Lede. Saul, as though he had not ben annoynted with opie, a

22 The bowe of Jonathan neuer turned backe, neither did the sword of Saul returne cinptic frõ the blood of the flapne, and front the fat of the nughtie. |

23 Saul and Jonathan were lonely and pleafaunt in their lyues, and in their deathes they were not deuided: They were swykter then Egles, and stronger

The. ii. Chapter.

4 Dauid is annopnted king in Hebron. 9 Abner maketh Itboleth king ouer Ilrael.
15 The battell of the seruauntes of Dauid and Icboleth. 32 Che burtal of Alahel.

Fter this, Dauid wal-

(a) By the . ihe ;

meanes of the A ked countel at the 1020,

ede EST NAN saping: Shall F go bp

E phod, a 0 N : 111

e e eo ays 1 b a

2 Dam. f.c Juda: And the Lorde
— (He) apd vnto him: Go bp.

hae ther (hall J goz He aunswered: Cinto eee ebro. : i
2 And lo Dauid went thyther with his

Abigau Mabals wyke the Carmelite.
3 And the men that were with him did Dauid carp vp also euery man with

(c) In th tune of hig persecution.

his housholde: And they dwelt in the

tolwnes ok Hebron. N
4 And the men ok Juda tame, and there they annoynted Daud kyng ouer the
Houle of Juda: And they tolde Dauid, saping, It is the men of Jabes Gilead that buried Saul.
5 And Daudd lent messengers vnto the

mien of Jabes Gilead, and sapde vnto

them: Blessed are pe vnto the lord, that

pe haue shewed suche kindnesse vnto

pour lord Saul, and haue buried hun.
And nowe the Torde shewe nercy

OMe. ande wtrueth vnto pou: And will do leben: pou allo suche kindnes, as pe haue done weren: in this thing:

been 7 Therkore nowe let pour handes be

charged to txccute Sods woll, by recom=

strong, and! play ve the men: For pour

bet e pf the houle ol Juda haue annoynted

mercp. 8

“HebBeye ine king ouer them.

the chuldren 8g Wit Abner the sonne of er that was

or lkrengen. captapne of Sauls hoaste, toke Ilboseth the sonne of Saul, and broͤught him

mightie is cast downe, the shielde of .

And Dauid laid: vohp-

two wpues, Ahinoam the Jesraelite, c

15 Thenthere arose € went ouer twelue

maister Saul is dead, and they that are

then eau 72

24 Be daughters of Israel weepe
Saul, which clothed pdu in feaviet wich ; pleafures,and banged omamentes of 22> golde vpon pour apparel. —

25 Howe were the mightie slapne in the middest of the battel-O Jonathan thou wast slayne in thyne hye plates.

26 190 is me for thee my brother Jonathan, very kinde Hatt thou ben vito me:
Thy loue to me was wonderful, palfing the loue of? women.

27 D how are the mightie ouerthrowen, da

and the weapons ok warre destropede ha

ein

fo h Mahanaim,

io And Jsboseth Sauis fonne was four: Bae tie yeres olde when he began to raigne Mi", ouer Israel, and raigned two peres: n
Wut the house of Juda folowed Da- =". wid,

11 (And the time whiche Daud raigned in Hebron ouer the house of Juda, was seuen peres and fire monethes.)

12 And Abner the sonne of Mer, and the seruauntes of Ilboseth the lonne of
Saul Wet out of Mahanam to Gibeen

13 And Joab the fonne of Zara, and the seruauntes of Dawd, went out aud met one another by the poole ol Gibeon: And they fate downe, the one on the one side of the poole, and the other on the other side.

14 And Abner sayde to Joab: Lettie G, young men nowe arple, and play be. rere, es And Joab sapde: Let theim seve,

aryse.

our fight

of weniantin by numbre, which pertay ned to Isboleth the sonne of Saul, and twelue of the seruauntes ol Daumd. „
16 And euery one caught his felowe by? be head, e thrust his word in his felowes Aae
Ofineand fo they fell downe together pet wherefore the place was called Pel- 12 — kath haszurim, which is in Gideon. „ e
7, And there was an erteedingcrnelin ors battel that sanie day: Fo2 Abner aud ! 5 ia men of Jlrael fell befoze the seruaun oe

. a of Dauid. 18 And

2. Ni nges.

here were three fonnts of Zars uathere: Joab „Abilal, and Alaͤhel:
And Alahel was as light of foote asa

oe. and Aae kolowed after Abner, and
4 in goyng he turned neither to the right hande nor to the left, from Abner.
20 Then Abner loked behynd him, and sayde: Art thou Afabel: De aunlwered:

Bed. g

sayd: Turne thee either to the

x abt bande or the left, and catche one of

a the pong men, and take thee his wea-

pons. But Alahel woulde not Depart

from him.

bner layd agapne to Alahel De-

wf a. 1 me: Wherkone chould J snute

E™ thee tothe grounde, and not be able to

holde bp my fate to Joab thy brother z

23 Porebeit when he woulde in no wyle

depart, Abner with the hynder ende of

u. the lpeare finote hun vnder the“ tpfe

* tibbe, that the speare came out behinde

„ him, that he kell downe en the lame

plate, and died there: And as many as

tanie to the place where Alahel fell downe and died, stoode fl,

24 Joab also and Abisai pursued after
Abner: And the sunne went downe when they were come to the hil Amma, that lyeth before Giah, by the Way ofthe wildernesse of Gibeon.

25 And the children of wWenlamin gathe-

redthemlelues together after Abner,

IVIII. were on a heape, and stoode on the top ok an hill. :

26 Then Abner called to Joab and said:

Shall the word denonr for cuer-
Anowest thou not, that it wu be bitter: an n

ende of muce

nesse in the latter ende-Howe long then wenns.

Mall it be yer thou bid the people re-

turne from folowing their brethren-

27 And Joab sapde: As God lpueth, if thou haddest not spoken, suerly euen in the morning the people had departed A euery one from persetuting his brother,

28 And fo Joab blewe a trumpet, and all the people stoode still, and pursued after E,
Ilrael uo more, neither fought they any more.

29 And Abner and his men waited all that night through the playne, c went u duer Jordane, ⁊ past through all Beth- delt. horon, till they came to Maͤhanain:.

30 And Joab returned from perlecuting
Abner, and when he had gathered all the people together, there lacked ol Da: uids seruaũtes nineteene men, x Alahel.

31 But the seruauntes of Daum had fmit-

ten ol Beniamin and of Abners men, lo

died Bee hundred and threescore men ied.

And they toke vp Alahel, and buried him in the sepulchre ok his father, which
Was in Bethlehem: And Joab and his men went all night, and the day arose to them at Hebron.

The. iii. (hapter.

Long Wwarre betweene the houles of Saul and aud. 2 Che chilozen of Dauid in
Hebron, 12 Abnerturneth to Dauid. 27 Joab killeth him.

Ahere was then © tong warre betweene the
A house of Saul, and the i Houle of Daud: Wut
F SAM DAUD wared ströger and stronger, andthe
Hhoulsec ok Sau wared
Weaker and Weaker,
2 And vnto Dau were children borne in hebron: his eldest sonne also was Ant
„, non of Ahindam the Jesraelite: wo 3 Lhe feconde,¢heleav of Abigail the ute ok Naval the Carmelite:the third, blalom the fonne of Maacha the daughter of Lhaimai, the king of

Gessur: f
4. The fourth, Adonia the sonne of Hag:
1 0 kyft, Sephatia the sonne of % ttal:
5 And the lirt Jethream, by Egla Daz uids wyfe: These were bome to Dauid in‘? Hebron. g

tweene the boule ol Saul and the houle
Saul.

pha, the daughter of Abia: And Ilbo- Cu

seth sayd to Abner, wherfore halt thou

gone in vnto my ta ag concubines

8 Then oS

(n) Sal we

(c) within the

6 And whyle there was warre be- be ned oner Ju.

of Dauid, Abner ! held bp the houle of 4 r tified him

7 And Saul had a concubine named Nil- (elle for the

Daud.

8 Then was Abner very wroth for the wordes of Isboseth, and sayde: Am J

aden Oa dogges head, whiche again Juda bogen do shew mercie this day buto the Houle bete, ok Saul thy father, and to his brethzen kachers hol: llld kreudes, haue not deltuered thee

into the bande of Danid: and thou fyn-
1 me this day for this womane
9 So do God to Abner and more allo, except as the Lorde hath {ome to Dauid, euen so will IJ do to him,

To bring the kingdome fro the Houle of Saul, that the throne of Dauid may be ftabiyed over Ifrael and oner Juda, cuen from Dan to Geerseba.

nn And he toulde geue Abner neuer 4

N aunswere, betause he feared

him.

12 Aud Abuer sent messengers to Daum secretly, saying: hole is the land: Who should allo sap, Make a bond with me, and beholde my hande is with thee, to bring all Israel vnto thee.

13 He sapde: Well, J will make a bonde

with the: Wut one thing J require of thee, that is, that thou see not my fate, except thou first bring Michol Sauts

daughter, when thou cõniest to fee ue.

C14 Amd Dauid sent messengers to Ilboseth Sauls sonne, saying: Deliner me my Wife Michol, whiche H maried foz an hundred foreskinnes ofp Philistines.

15 And Isvoleth (ent, and tobe her from her hulband Phalti the sonne of Tais.

16 And her hulband went with her, and tame Weeping behinde her til they tanie to Wahurim. Thensapde Abner onto him, Go and returne. And he returned.

17 And Abner had communication with the elders of Ysrael, saping: Be sought for Dauid in tines past, that he might

bt pour king:

18 Nowe then do it:for the Lorde hath spoken of Dauid saping: By the hande of my seruaunt Dauid J Will fauciny

= people Israel out of the handes of the
Philisnines, and out ok the hande of alt their enemies.

12 And Abner spake in the cares of Benianun: and afterward Abner went to

Fer made en spealte in the © cares of Dauid in hes
Eben len: bron all that Israel was content wu

eth to {pcake fo. k who cha-
— the 20

Rinagbdoine be=
55 of Saul

and the whole do house of Wemamin.
And so Abner came to Dauid to He: bron, hauing twentie men with. him c

2. Kin ges. Wem

22. And behold, the seruauntes of Dany cb,

r.
29 Vet the blood fall onthe head of Ba

Dawd made him e the men that were

Aby

with hinia feast. c

21 And Abner fayde vnto Danio: J wil

vp. ¢ go gather all Israel vnto mp lorde

the king, that they may make an ay,

poyntinent with thee, and that ah

mapyest raigne ouer all that thyne heart

desireth. And when Dauid had let Abner depart, he went in peace.

and Jdab came from the C tampe, and (sor, brought a great prap with them :( Wut were
Abner was not with Daum in Hebron. kor he had fent him away to depart in peace.)

23 When Joab and al the hoast that was with Hint were tome, uien tolde Joab faping: Abner the sonne of Her came to the king, and he hath sent him away that he is gone in peace.

24 Then Poad came to the king and lad: hat hast thou done: Wehold, Ab- v ner tame vnto thee, and why halk thou a sent him awap, and he is qupte gone:

25 Thou knowest Abner the sonne of
Ner, for he tame to deteaue che, and to knowe thy outgoyng and ingoyng, and to knowe all that thou doest.

26 And when Joab was come out from
Damd, he sent mellengers after Abner, which brought hun againe from the well of Hira, vnknowing to Daud.

27 And when Abner was come agate to ebron, Joad toke him alyde in the gate to speake with hini peaccably, aud *o.0 finote hun vnder the kyft ribbe, that he died for the blood of Alahel his brother, »

28 And when akterwarde it came to Da uids eare, he sapde: J and ny kingbome n are Ogiltleffe befo2e the Lord for cuer ae oe blood of Abner the sanne esr

ab and on all his fathers house, that the house of Joab be neuer without one o other thãt hath running issues orlebet or that leaneth ona staffe, or that dot) fall on the l word, oz that lacketh bread.

30 (So Joab se Abilal his brother Me Cia
Abner, because be had flapne their bs; vt ther Alahel at Gibeon in battell.) 1 *

31 And Danid sapde to Joab and Aut the people that were with him: 9 your clothes, and put on lackctoth al „ mourne © before Abner. And king Da res uid him seite folowed the beer’.

32 And when they buried Abnerin Y

The! d wept bron, the kung lt vp his vopct, bed

N . = ea 1 — - 8 ybelpde the lepulchre of Abner and al the le wept.

Au the King lamented once Abner and i sapde: Died Abner as ac foole dietha Thyhandes were not bounde nor thy ae 4 eteboouatt into fetters of brasse: but as a man falleth befoze wickedchildzen, fo fellest thou. And allthey that were of or the people, Wept pet moze duer hun.

aud Weate meate whyle it was pet day DAUD sware, laping: So do God

Uu, mons ag (2

ip ban

rg purials ought els tyll the sunne be downe.

36 ad all the people wist it, and it plealed

ne 3j And When all the people came to caule

to mie and moze also, if taste bread oz

themzas whatsdeuer t e king did tea sed all the people. poss e

37 Foz all the prople and all. Israel vnder-

stoode that dap, howt kinges deede that A
Ver was slapne.

at it was not the ner the sonne of

38 And the king said vnto his seruauntes:

Knolbe pe not howe that there is a

prince and a great man fallen this day in
Israel-

39 And J am this day tender and newly

aunoyuced King , and thele men the fonnes of Zaruia be to hard for me:
The Lorde rewarde the doer of euylt, attording to His wickednesse.

T he. titt. Chapter.

sBaanah and Kechab May Flbotcth che sonne of Saul.

them to the llapne.

NN when Hants © sonne hearde that Abner was dead in He =

A ge Kes || bon, his handes were
M

elites were afrapde.
And Sauls fone had two me that were taptaines of bandes, the one called Waanah, e the other Kechab, the fonnes of Kimmon a 2werothite, of the chudren of Weniamin: (fo? wWeroth was reckened to Bemamin, ann And these Berothites Aedto™ Githapsu im, aud soiourned there vntul this day) b 4. And Jonathan Sauls sonne had a bonnethat was lame on his feete, and
Was fiue peres olde when the tydinges tame of Saul E Jonathan out of Jelrael: And his nurle toke hym vp, and fled away, and ag {he made hatte to fice, the chylde fell, and began to halt, and his name was Miphiboseth.
And the lonnes of Binimon the Werochite Rechaband Baanah, went and derne in the heate of the dap to the houle a (whiche slept on a bed at

6 And behold, they tame into e middes of the houle, as though chere woulde haue ketched wheate and Rechab and woaguah his bother finote him vnder th e, and fled

eh:

Poe cite ath wag

efpft ribb :
7 Forwbenthep tame into the house, he

h feeble, e al the Ilra-

Dauid commaunded

flepton his bed in his bed chamber, and they smote him and flue him, k behcaded him, and toke his head, x gat them

2. Kinges. i a lix, .

Albay through the plaine all the night. on wa-

And they brought the head of Isboleth vnto Dantd to Hebron, and sapde to the king: Wehold, there is the head ol Ilboseth Sauls sonne thyne enemie Whiche fought after thy lyfe and the Lorde
Hath anenged m lorde the kyng this day of Saul and of his seede.

And Dauid aunswered Vechab and
Waanah his brother p sonnes of Nunmon the Berothite, and laid vnto them:
As the Lorde lyueth, whiche hath deliuere dm soule out ofall aduerfites:

Io When one tolde me c sapde that Saul

II

was dead (thynking to haue bronght good tydinges ) J caught hum, and llue him in Ziklag: whiche thought that woulde haue geuen hima rewarde for his tydinges bringing:

Molbe much moze when wicked men haue slapne à righteous person in his owne houle and vpon his bed: Spal J not nowe therfore require his blood of pour hande , e take vou fromthe earth-

12 And Dauid eommaunded his young

der nelle.

The tudgement of che wicked blinded with ambitton and co

men, and they slue them, and cut of their zarsen

h faree

handes and feete, and hanged them vp fom the duer the poole in Hebron: But they toke sovip. Son:

the head of Ilboseth, € buried it inthe sepulchre o n

which the one ludgeth woz - the thankes

und rewarde: the other lud-

The geth wozthy dea

th.

ED anid ;

3 Dauid is made king ouer all Itrael. counsel oł the Lorde. r0 And ouercomm den came all the tri-
1 Pet bes of Jsrael to Da-
„uiid vnto Hebron, and
SANT sayde thus: Weholde, we are thp@bone, and
TW f thy flefhe.

i. Dar. x. a.

(@ Weare thp
Einred and mo ntare

J. 2 And in time past whe
Saul Was our king, thou leddest Israel in and out: and the Lord hath sayd to thee, thon shalt feede my people Jsrael, t thou shalt be a taptayne ouer Israel.

3 And lo all the elders of Israel came to

les te. the“ king to Hebron, and king Dauid

ches, made a touenaunt with them in hebon mting the = bekore the Torde: and they annoinreife, tor de ted Daud king ouer Jsrael.

debe Stim 4 Daudd was thirtie yeres olde when he

aes. began to raigne, and he ratgued four-

tte kikl peres. ' .

was mon- 5 Mu Hebron he raigned ouer Juda seuen peres and sixe monethes: and in Hierusaleni he raigned thirtie and three peres ouer all Israel and Juda.

6 The king allo and his men went to
Mierulalem vnto the Jebulites the inhabitauntes of the lande, whiche spake vnto Dauid, laying:Exte pt thou take a-
Way the blinde and the lanie, thou hale not tornec in hyther: Foz they said, Thou

W art not able to tome in hyther.
7 Meuerthelesse, Dauid toke the strong hold of Sion:the sanie is the attic of Daz uid.

3 Aud Danuid sapde the fame day: Whosoeuer supteth the Jebulites, and getre th vp to the gutters ofthe houles, and simyteth the lame and the blinde, hated of Dauid soule, [A will preterre hin.
Whertore they said: The blinde and the lanic shal not comet into that house.

And so Daud dwelt in the towre, and called it the atic of Dantd , and buplt round about it, froni Milo æ inward.

1o Aud Dawid prospered and grewe, and p Lord God of hoastes was with him.

11 And Hiram king of Tyre sent messengers to Maui, and Cedar trees, æcarpenters, and masons fo2 Wailes: and they buplt Dauid an Houle.

12 And Maud perceaued that the Low had stablished him king ouer Israel, € that he had exalted his kingdouie foz

2. Kin ges.

The. v. (hapter.
7 pebe nine forte of Sto,
E

10 He alketh

the philitines twile.

his people Israels fake.

3 And Wauid take him mo concubines and wpues out of Hierufatem, after he
Was tome from ebron, and nio lonnes
E daughters were pet borne to Dany,

14. And these be the names of the sonnes 2 that were borne vnto him in Hierusa- bung lem: Samua, Hobab, Mathan, & Solomon, .

15 Abhar also and Elisua, Mepheg and
Japhia

16 Elilama, Eliada, and Eliphelet.

17 But when the Philistines hearde that they had annopnted Dauid king ouer
Israel, they taine all vp tofeke Da: ore, did: And alloone as Dauid heardeokit, he gat him to an holde. nae,

18 And when the Philistines came, they ee them feluesinthe valley of Raz phaim. 1 5

19 Aud Dauid asked tounsel of the Lord, gage saping: Shall J go bp to che Phuli- va. stines: wilt thou deliuer them into my handes: And the Lorde aunlwered dir to Dauid:Go bp, for F will doubtlesse de liuer the Philistines into thy handes.

20 And Daud came to Waal Perazim, and smote them there, and sapde: The
Lorde Hath deuided myne enemies afunder before me, as waters be denied asunder: And therefore he called the name ok that place Waal Perazim. c

2 And there they left their iniages and a
Daudd and his men burnt them.

22 Andthe Philistines came pet againe, and layde them selues in the valley of
Rephain,

(yeti sunes from Geba, vntill thou come 10 4,

The vi. Chapter.

che arke brought tort ol the houte of Tbinadab. 7 us3ahisGriken, and dieth.

Sauid daunceth belore it.

EFIGAine Dauid gathe-

3 0 Waal of Juda, to fet away from
5 thence the arke of God, whole name ts called by the name of the lord of hoastes that dwelleth vpon it betweene the cherubuns.

ox mathi-

newe tart, e brought it out of the houle of Abinadab that was in Glbea: And

n Uzzaand Ahio the sonnes of Abinadab im = ppaucthenewWwe carte. g
And when they brought the arke of
God out ot the house of Abinadab that
Was at Gibea , Ahio went before the

arke. N
And Daudd and all the houle of Ilrael plaped before the lord on sundry instrumentes made of Cedar wood, with harpes, plalteries, timbrelles, hoznettes, and simbals.
6 And when thep tame to Pachons thresshing floore, UAZ a put his hand to the arke ol God, t helde it, lor the oren
5 UNd chake it. u And the Lord was wroth with Mzza, a, And God smote him in the fame plate fo2 his fault, and there he died before the arke ol God.

the Love had smitten Cassa: And he called the name of the place Perez
Vz da, vntill this dap. f

9 And Dautd was then afratde of the
Torde, and sayd: Howe shall the arke of the Lord come to me-

Atkeof the Lorde vnto hun into the ci: dan tie ot Dauid: but Daudd taried it into vai. khe house ol Obed Edom, a Gethite.

inthe house of Oed Edom the Gethite thiee monethes: and the Lorde blelled

. Obed Edom and all his housholde.
5 a one tolde ling Daud howe that he Lorde had blefica the houle of D-

3 Andthepputthe arlie of God bpot a

8 And Dauid was dilpleased, betause

lo And fo Dawid woulde not bring the

Nee Andthe arke of the Lorde continued

16 And is therfoze delpised ol his wyfe Michol.

bed Edom, and all that parteyned vnto im, because of the arke ol God. And aud went, and ( brought the arke of Hen
God from the house of Pbed Edom , Xt into the titie of Daud with gladnes.

B And when they that bare the arne oak

the Lorde, had gone fire paces , he oflered an oxe and a fat beak.
4. And Dawud daunted before the Lorde with all his might, e was girded with © a linnenc) Ephod. Laren te
15 So Daudd and all the houle of Israel dann. brought the arke of the Lozde wity chowting and trumpet blowing.
16 And as p arke olthe Lord tame into the citie of Dauid, Michol Sauls daughter loked through a windowe, and lawe king Dauid spring and daunce before the Lord and the defpyles hum in her dn hdd

Chat had bp heart. tt ba
17 And when they brought in the arke of ales.

the Lord, they fet it in his place, enen in a gh. the middes of the tabernacte that Dauid had pitched for it: and Dauid offered burnt offeringes € peace offeringes before the Lorde.
18 And affoone as Dauid had made an ende of offering burnt offeringes and peace offeringes, he blessed the people in the nanie ofthe Lorde ol hoastes,
19 And gaue among all the kolke, enen among the whole multitude of Ilrael, alwel to the women as men, tocuery - one a cake of bread, t à peete offlesshe, and a flacked ol wine: And fo al the people departed euerp one to his houle: That fo
20 Then Daud returned to™blefle his vans housholde, and Michol the daughter of ores
Saul tame out to meete Dauid, ¢ fayd:
O howe glorious was the king of BE rael this day, whiche was vncouered to day in the eyes of the maydens ok his
1 „as à foole vncouereth him i elle: ‘ . t) whofe
21 And Daud sapd vnto Pichol: It was ear wa beforethe® TLorde, whiche thosẽ me ra- eben n. ther then thy father and all his boule, and tommaunded me to be ruler oucr all the people of the Lorde, euen ouer srael, and therefore will Y play beore the TLorde:
21 And

Daud.

22 And will yet be more vyle then fo, and
Will be meeke in mync one fight: and of the very fame mayde feruauntes which thou hast spoken of, chall I be

Je. vii. Chapter.

2 Dauid woulde buyloe God an houte, but is forbidden by the prophet Pathan.
§ God putteth Dauid in minde ok his benelites. 12 He promiseth continuaunce of

his kingdome and posteritie.

A
I [PQS Fterward when the ee king late in his house,
1 EX. aM ete How had geuen
Ay eum rest round absut e rom all his enennes,
4 +4 The king sayde vnto
8 — Nathan the prophete:
Bcholde, 5 Givell nowe in an house of
Cedar trees, but the arke of God dwel-
Somes leth Within the turtapnes. nech h“ 3 Ad Nathan fapde to the king: Go, and fee. do all that is in thync heart, foz the od is With ther.
4 Aud the samne night the worde of the Lorde tame vnto Pathan , faying:
5 Go and tell my sernaunt Dama, thus sapeth the Lowe: shalt thou bnytde
0 png, le an houst to dwell inbine eigene 6 Jo: J haue not dwelt in any housc, fence cael th the time that J brought the chudren of

bermated hen J sratl out of Egypt, vnto this dap: but aue walked in a tent and tabernacle.

W 7 Inalthe places wherm J Hance wal-

Bed with all the chudrẽ of Isracl, spane

J one worde with any of p tribes of HE

rad, when J commaunded the mdges]

to feede my people Ilrael saping, vohy

build pe not me an house of Cedar trees:

8 Now therkore, so fap vnto my seruaunt

Dauid:thus sapeth the lord of hoaltes,

J toke thee from the sheepe coate as

thou watt solowing sheepe, that thon

mig htest be ruler ouer my people over

Ilcacl.

And J was with thee in all that thou
Wentest to, and hauc destroped ait thyne enemies out of thy sight c haue made thee a great name, lpke vnto the
1 of the great men that are in the carth.

10 (Allo J Will appoynt a plate for up

io)

Cr) Both outs
Hurd. as the
D ulstun ss: u ward. as
Saul and his haue

(d) or hp noble actes. ⁊ tic lartzenes

be F: people Ilrael, and Will plant it, that

they may dwell in a place of their owne,
(ede mo: d mdue no more: neither shall wicked met peopic trouble them anp niore, as before wine ns init,

ke re and obe- II diente.

And fence the time that J let indges

ouer niy people of Isracl ) And J Will

Ringes. —

Du;

a ee :
23 Therfore Michol the daughter of gy,

had no childe vnto the aul

death. be dar OF her .

hy
7 core

geur thee rest from all thyne enemies:
Aud the Lorde telleth thee that hems d make thee an Houle. -
12 And when thy dapes be fulfilled thon
{haltfleepe With thy fathers and J wil fet vp thy leede after thee, whiche fhatt proceede out of thy body, and wull slablyshe his kingdome. i
31 He Chall bupid houle an for my name
J wil ctablpshe the theone of his king. ti 10 hier ˖
I Will be his lather, and he shalbe m könne Ir he sinne, J Will chen vi 0 with the rode of men, and With the wi plagues ofthe chudrenof men. a
15 Wut mp niercy shall not depart away from him, as J toke it from Saul, who
J put away before thee. —
16 And thyne Houle, and thy kingdome shall be stablished for tuer before thee, tuen schyes throne shalbe stablished for cur. P (g Th
17 According to all these wordes and at: Se cording to all this vision, so dyd Mathan aan speake vnto Dauid. 1
18 Then went king Dard in and fet hun downe before the Lord, and lapde: who am J, O Lowe God: and what is ny houle that thou batt brought nie dy ther toe ete, te
19 And this was pet a small thing in thy s fight O Lode God: but thou hast spoken aifo ofthy seruauntes houle for d great whyle: but! doth this appertayne , to man, O Torde God: mn
20 And what tan Dauld fap moze dat thee- for thou Lorde God knowest th scruaunt. 4
21 Euen for thy mordes fake, Taco to thyne owne heart, halt thou dont 4 2 thefe Mun wee to ete then knoben vnto thy seruaunt.
22 Wherfort thou art great, O Aer
God:for there is none like thee, neit 0 8 is there any God befines thee 1 0 1 ding to al that we haue heard with cares.

0 of mau?

23 And

And what one people in the earth is pete people pc“ sracl, whole God went and redeemted them £0 yypnr telfe, that they myght be his people, and that hempght make hyma name, and do for you “? grrat thynges and ferrible for thy lande, O Woyde lcuen for thy people * which thou redermeost to thee out of Egypt euenj from the “? nations their gods. ee cyon hast ꝰ ordeyned thy people
Ilrael to be thy people for euer, and chou Lorde art become their God.
25 And nowe Torde God, the worde that thou batt spoken concernyng thy seruaunt and his Houle, niake it good for euer, and do as thou hast saide:

2 Zfract.

Bra xiii d.
\ n
Fer. ti-
3 “mi? thett
Orth

i titct ion.

26 And let thy name be macnificd for

euer of men that Mail fay, The Lode

4 : 2, Samuel.

1 he her apt 2 Wa : and

e oute ot thy leruaunt Daud be ete ae thee.

27 xO ou, O Looe oc hoastes, God of Pract, hat tolde in the eare of thy Hb seruaunt, saping, J wyll bupide thee RE. an house: And therefore hath thy fer: un r naunt kounde in his heart to pray this prayer vnto thee,

28 Therefore nowe Lode God (thou

art God and thy wordes be true, thon Deuxsiii.e

that bak tolde this goodnes vnto thy seruaunt) 1

29 Therekore nowe let it please thee to blesle the boule of thy leruaunt, that it may continue for euer befoze thee: foz thou Lode God hast spoken it, and with thy blessyng let the boule of thy seruaunt be blesled for euer.

¶ The. viii. Chapter.

Dauid ouercommeth the Philistines and other straunge nations, and maketh them tributaries to Ffracl.

9910 emmh.

2) Sothat e pared no mest tribute,

hand of the Phili-

= hues.

pure. 2 And he sinote the Moabites, and measured them with a lyne, and cast them done to the grounde, euen with two lynes measured he them, to put them to death, and with one full torde to kepe them alyue: And fo betame the Boaz
* — — seruauntes, and brought

Daud sinote allo Hadarczer p sonne of Nehob king of Zoba, as he went to
— his border at the ryuer Phe-

4 Aud Dauid tokt of his, a thousand and seuen hundred horsemen, and destroped all the charets and twentie thouland footemen: but reserued an hundred charets of them. a

5 And whenthe Sprians of Damalcon came to succour Hadarezer king of
Toba, Dawid luc of the Sprians two and twentie thouland nien.

6 And put souldiers in Spria Damal-

See

Ww

*D1 tmlarge

on Eusates,

Or hogheo the 555 +

™ haretg,

Ou Tta-

Peng, bon Andthe Syrians became feruatites eee I aud and” brought giftes: and the

tag faucd Daud, in all that he went

7 And Dawud toke the shieldes of golde 5 that belonged to the seruanntes of Ha- (e) athe
— € brought them to© Hierusa- g. ent. 5

8 And out ol Beta and Werothat, cities of Hadareser, did Dau bryng exceeding nich brassme.

9 ohen Thoi king of Hamath heard how Dauid had finitten all the hoast of
Hadarezer, am

10, Thoisent Joran his lonne vnto hing g
Dauld, to lälute him, and to blesle him, ade pe. because he had feught against hadarezer, and beaten hun( kor Thoi had great
Warre with Hadaͤrezer) And (Foran) 4 Phe in brought with hum veslels of suner, vel- bs band. sels of golde and beffets of bralle.

1 Which wale king Daund vid dedicate vnto the Lorde, with the fituer e golde that he had deditate of al nations which he subdued. ö

12 Ok Syria, of the Moabites, c of the 0 Sn.

children of Ammon, of the Philistines, C and of hamalek and of the spoyle olha-
Dareser sonne ol Rehob king of Zoba.
13 And Dawd gat hum a name after that he returned z had fmitten of the Sy: kxtans in the valley of salt rbitt. thousand inen. 4
14. And he put a garison in Edom, euen Nu. xxiiiid throughout all E dom put he souldiers, and all they of E dom becanie PDauids seruauntes: And the Lorde kept Dawid a Whpatwener

l. Par. xix a.

D aud

amucl.

Dau

whatsoeuer he toke in hand.
1 And Dard raigned oner all Ilrael,
(Cd) he gaue

ira zecitere

in contronerles, by tight and equitie.

n Reg. xx d

vnto all his people.

16 And Joab the sonne of Zaruia was duer the hoast, c Jeholaphat the sonne of Ahilud was recorder.

9 »D 7 wp ter ot cron elcs.

and exetuted W iudgement and iustice

7 And Sadoc the sonne of Ahitob, and

Ahinelech the sonne of Abtathar the priestes, € Saraiah was the iri

18 AndwWanaiabu the sonne of Fehona and the“ Cherethites, and the Phele- teen
9 55 and Dau ds sonnes, Were chief dare rulers. i

wert raat bing ne

The. ix. (hapter.

9 Dauid restoreth all the landes of Saul to Miphiboleth the sonne ol Jonathan.
10. He appoynted Fiba to see to the prolite of his landes.

r ND Dauid sapde: Js there pet any man lelt of p house of Saul: For

he I wil chewe hinrinerdound inp A lice for (a) Jonathans

Iake. f And there was ofthe

houscholde of Saul, a seruaunt whole name was Ziba, and when they had called him vnto Dauid, the king saide puto him: Art thou Ziba: He said: Thy seruaunt is he.

3 And the king faide: Rematneth there yet any inan ofthe boule of Saul, whõ

@) Kb s J uiap Merwe the mertit of God vpbud nanu dn: Ziba aunflbered the king: Jonabene ed. than bath pet a lonne, which is lame on tt Kez un. b. hig keete.

4 The hung laid vnto him: where ts he-
Ziba fade vnto the king: Behold, he is

G leg. Inthe boule of Mathir the sonne of © ib r, Anttel ok Lodeber. N
Pras § Then king Dauid fent, x ket hun out
* of the boule ol Machir the sonne of A-

miel of Lodeber.

6 Now When ꝙiphiboseth the sonne ot
Jonathan p sonne of Saul was come vnto Danid he fell on his face, and dyd reuerente: And Dauid laide, Miphiboseth: He aunlwercd: Beholde thy sernaunt. ; |

Wauid lade vnto him: Feare not, kor

W
7 I will furcite shewe thee kinduesse for

The. x. Chapter.

4 Che melssengers ol Dauid are dillanoully entreated o€ the hing of Ammon.
Job is sent against the Immonites.

Then saide Dauid: will Melve kindnetic

Jonathan thy fathers fake, and . restore thee all the fieldes of anit. ; father, e thou (halt cate bread on myne owne table tontinuallp.
8 And he bowed hun selke, and Layne:
What is thy seruaunt, that thou shoul-
. loke vpon such add dead dogge as 2% lun: e.
9 Then the king talled to Ziba Hanis seruaunt, and {aid vnto him: J haue ge: uen bnto thy miaifters sonne all that 0 parteyned to Saul and to all his hore, ae
1o Thou therefore, and thy sonnes, and thy seruauntes, chall tyll the land for hun, € bring in, that thy maisters fonne map haue foode to eate: Wut Miphiboseth thy maisters sonne shall eate bread alwap bpon my table. For Z iba had fifteene lonnes, e twentie sernauntes.
1 Then saide Ziba vnto the king: Acco ding to all that mp Lorde the king bath tommaunded his seruaunt, fo shall thy (o chan seruaunt do, that Miphiboseth may orn, eate (asthe king fatoe) vpon my table, as Pari, ont ot the kinges sonnes. .
11 Miphiboseth had a sonne that was young named Micha:and al that dwelt in the boule of Ziba, were seruauntes vnto Miphiboseth. N
3 And Miphiboleth dwelt in Hierulirlein, for he dyd cate continually at the g. sii, kinges table, and was laure on both his feete.

a) This
(oat 10

ther: And Dauids leruauntes came in sore, to the land ofthe chudren oft Anion: 5, ra 15
3 And the princes ok the chüdren ot gn

mon fayde bnto Hanov their lorde:

on that Dauid doth honorz
* a Iie cha he Hath sent comfoz-
2 tours to thee- Hath not Pauid rather

seruauntes vnto thee, to searche bal, and to {pie it out, and to ouer-

N Hanon * 8 5 ae

: and shaued of theo j

pet oirheirbeardes,keut of their garmetes

* in the middle, euen hard to the but-

tockes of them, and sent them away. ohen thep tolde it vnto Mauid, he sent to mecte them (kor tHcy were Hy exceedingly achamed) and the king said:
Taty at Jericho vntill pour bearbes be growen, and then returne. f

6 And when the children ot Ammon sawe that they! stancke inthe fight of
Dau, they lent e hyred the Spriaus of the houle of Nehob, and the Syrians

gl Toba. xx. thouland footemen, and ol king Maacha a thoufand nien, and ol
Istob twelue thousand men. .

And when Dautd heard okit, he sent
Jdab and all the hoalt of strong men.

g And the children of Ammon tame out, and put their armie in arap at the entring in or the gate: and the Syztans ol
Zoba, of Rehob, Istob, and Maacha, were by them selues in the fielde.

Whẽ Joab sawe that the front of the battaile was against him befoze and behinde, he those of all the Hoyle of Ilrael and put them in aray agai the Sy-

rowe tt?
Hr apecetore

Wdeda-

into the hand of Avifai his broöther, that he might put them in aray against

rians. ö
10 Andthe rest okthe people he delsuered

2. Jamuel.

ger then J, thou shalt helpe me: But ik the childzen ol Ammon be to strong for thee, J Will come and fuccour thee.

12 > Therefore quite thee lyke a man, and let vs be vallaunt for our people and for the cities of our God: Andthe Torde do that which is good in his owne eyes.

1 And Joab proceeded foorth, e the peo- C ple that was with hin to fight agaimst the Spatans: bu they fled before him.

14. And when th chitdeen of Ammon sawe that the Syrians were fied, then fled they also beore Abisai, and entred into the citie: 2nd fo Joab returned froin the childzenak Annnon, and came

1 510 Hierulalem. N

And WHE the Sprtaus saw that they were suntten before Isracl, thep gathered them together.

16 And Hadarezer sent, and brought out the Syrlans that were bepond the

lil!

Sz, Ea-

ryuer, and they came to Helam: € Zoe e.

ba the captayne of the hoast ol Hadaresev went hefore them. ;

17 And when it was shewed Daud, he gathered al Plraci together, € palled ouer Jordane, and came to elam: And the Spans let them selues in arap against Dauid, and fought with him.

Meaning

c e greatest parte.

18 And the Sprians fled before Pleat, cy dc

wer

and Daud destropeded seuen hundred charets of the Sprians, ¢ fourtic thou-

pen tnal

e the chle-

fest and not

cir all, ko

he och

land hozsemen, and fmote Zoba the kenden

chern. oktheir hoält, Which ald dyed 4e
19 And when all the kinges that were seruauntes to Hadareʒer, law that they fel before Israel, they made peate with
Israel, and serued them: and fo the

char

the chudren of Anon. Shzpzrans keared to helpe the chudren
If And he fade: If the Syrians be stron- of Annnon any more.
¶ The.xi. Chapter.

27 Daud marrpeth Bethlabe.

AND it tame to passe that after the pere was

8 expired, in the time“ e when kinges go foorth alto battatle, Daud fent
Joab € his fernatites with him, and all JE destroyed the thildreñ of

Tael, which
Ammon, x besieged Rabba: Wut Da:

ud tarped still at Herusalem.

Che citie Rabba is belieged. 4. Dauld committeth adultry. 1 Arias is slaine.

and.

ho. xix.d. ot souldiets which wert in. 70 0.

tts.

2 And in an euening tyde, Dauid arose waer out of his bend, and walked bpon the cet acatrce

roofe of the kinges palace,and from the coo

„A Wag
Sides

roole he sawe à woman washing her Grp ane.

lelfe, and the woman was verp beaut: full to loke bvpon.

3 And Daind sent to enquire what woman it should be: And one faide, Is not this Bethlabe the daughter of Clan,

and Iopfe to Urias the Hethite- 1
N g 4

Exo.

U. A.

Dauid

¥ »
Ul J
é,

A bea gad 77
. LN

by i rh +‘ = iB 110 | * 2
0 man ane
Bs 3
0 85 Sy ai} 1 4 7.
Ti ie
: “ae + FS es,

e e q

“tae 2 ofeoes ete i Ny oy BP 4 0 mann
105 ALT Ge. i pare mn 3 teal la ee ni

4 And Daud fent meflengers, and toke her away: And fhe came in vnto Him,” and he lay with her (and fe was purificd from her vntlennelle) and returned vnto her house.

5 And the woman conteaued, and lent ae © ¢olde Dautd,¢ sapde: J am with childe. g

6 Aud Dandd sent to Joab, saping: Send

me Urias the Hethite. And Joab sent

Vrias to Daud.

And Whe Urias was tome vnto him,
Damd demaunded or him howe Joab did, and how the people fared, and how the warre prospered-

Leu. x vili. c.

(>) Fearing eG she (ould de stoned ac-

coding to the lawe.

Ome 8 And Danio lapde to Urtas: © Go ces do wuc to thy houle, € wache thy feete.

faulg.

And Urias Departed out of the kinges dace, and there folowed hun a present

om the king. —
9 Wut Urias slept at the doore ofp hinges

palace, with all the seruauntes ot his

lorde, and went not downe to his houle.

10 Which when they had tolde Dauid,

saping, Urias went not downe vnto his house:Dauid lasde vnto Urias, Camest thot not from thy iournep- why diddest
Roi not go downe then vnto thyne houle-

i arias aunswered Daud: Lec arke, c Ilrael, aud Juda dwell in pauiions, and my lorde Joab and the leruauntes of my lorde abyde in the open fieldes, and shall J then go into nne house to cate, and drinte, € lye With my Wyte:

2. Samuel.

me S|

A ay
. 8 WN :

five |
5 COS

7 of i 755 .

ee 05 =<. 4 8 ait * * * N
0 25 teu

1 Die, iM

Ber

oe, alles

* fat my F

th 2 ie

Nu 0
E ‘ :
‘Le N

Wy thy lyfe, and by the lyle of thy foute;
I well not do this thing.

12 And Danid salde vnto Urias: Tarp here this day allo, and to morow J wit let thee departe. And so Urias abode in
Hierulalem that dap, and the morow.

13 Aud when Daudd had called him, he did eate and drinke before him, and he e made hin“ dzunke: And at euen he an went out to lye on his touch with p ser- 5 naũtes of his lorde, but went not Downe to his house. e N

14 On the morowe Dauid mrote aletter to Joab; and sent it by the hand of
Urias. 8 enn

15 And he wrote thus in the letter: Put en pe Urias in the forefront of the sharper ag battaile, and come pe backe from hun, e be; that he mape be smytten, and dye. nude

16 So when Joab besieged the citic, he w assigned Urĩias vnto a plate where he

wist that strong nien wert.

17 And the men ofthe titie tame out, and fought with Joab: And there were tertapne ouerthrowen of the people of the seruauntes of Dauid: c Urias the YC thite dyed also. 8

183. Then Joab lent, and tolde Dauid all the thinges conterning the warre:

19 And charged the meflenger, fayttts:
When thou hast made an ende of telling the matters ofthe warre vnto the king:

20 If the kinges anger aryse, and he fay
Dito thee, wherkore approched ye lo 4 vnto the citie when pe did fight — 5

H Reg g

e wallwho inate Abiniclech forme of Fez

ee rubesheth: Did nota woman tala i rulreofamylcone vpon him from of the wall, and he dyed in Thebes- why went ve nye the Wall Then fay thou:
Thy seruaunt Urias the Hethite is

dead also. . othe meffenger went € tanie and ie Damd all that Joab had sent

g 0 * aA spain che meffengee faibe puto Dauid:
The men preuatled against vs, Eeame ie. out vnto vs into the fielde, we Sa al fued them, euen vnto the entring ok the

ate:
| 5 And the shooters shotte from the

2 Jamuel. ye not that ther would hurle and shoote

ban walles vpon thy seruauntes, and fome
10 the kinges seruauntes be dead, and

tt 15 seruaunt Urias the Hethite is dead

25 And Daudd {aide vnto the meffenger,

thus shalt thon faye onto Joab: Let

not that thing trouble thee, for p sword deudureth “ one as well as another: ee
Make thy battayle moze teong against the titie to ouerthrowe it, r encourage

thou hum.

26 And when the wyfe of Urias heard

that her hulband was dead, (he mourned for him. .

27 And when the mourning was past,

Daudd lent and fet her to his houle, and she became his Wyte, and bare hima sonne: But this thing that Daub dpd,

00 displeased tge Lode. as wsseuil
= in the eyes q The .xtt. (hapt er. of the Lord.

V Dauid reproued by Nathan. conkelleth his linne. 8 Che childe conceaued in adultry. dyeth. 4 Solomon is borme. 26 Rabba is tahen.ʒi The citezins are

greeuoullpe puniched.

Mdthe Todd sent Ma than vnto Dauid, and he tame vnto him, and
A tolde him: There were
| ‘ON two men in one citie,
* ener

poore.
2 The rich man Had exceeding many sheepe and oren:

3 But the poore had nothing saue one

litle heepe, which he had bought and nouryshed vp: And it grew bp with him and with his children also, and did cate of his owne meate, and drancke of his owne cuppe, & llept in his bosome,

and was vnto hum as his daughter.
And there tame a straunger vnto the rich man, and be“ {pared to take of his owne cheepe and of his owne oren to drelle for p straunger that was tome vnto him: But toke the poore mans sheepe, and dresled it forthe man that was come to hun. N clay) And Dauld was execeding wroth
With the man, and laide to Nathan: 218
Bai. Le Lorde lyueth, the man that bath a one this thing is the childe of death. us bade Mhalrettoze the tambe* foure folde,
D did this thyng and had no

7 And Nathan faide to D autd, Thou atthe man: Thus faith the Lord 805

n 4 ps tefufe

al de. the st 0

of Israclꝰ, J annoynted thee king ouer
2 N ryd thee out ofthe hand of au 5 7

i Reg xvig

8 Jgaue thee thy maisters house, and O72

kingdome.

thy matters © wpues into thy bo-

some, and gaue thee the houle ol Isra- ee

el and of Juda, and might(if that had an me

ben to litie) haue geuen thee fo muche e

more. Sa
Wherefore then Halt thou despiled the a.

tonnnaundement of the Torde to do

euill in his fight: Thou hak kid Arias

the Hethite with the lword, e halt taken

his wyke to thy woke, and halt slaine oeh

Han with the [word ofthe children of ener e

Aummon. ö gods enemies.

10 Now therefore, the sword shall neuer

12 For thou diddest it setretly: but J wil

Depart from thyne houle, becaule thou hat despiled me, and taken the wyfe of
UVrias the Hethite to be thy wpke.

Wherefore thus saith the Lorde:Beholde, J will stirre vp euil against thee, , euen out of thyne owne houle, and Wyll Peis take thy wyues before thyne eyes, and geue them vnto thy neyghbour, and he chall ive with thy wyues in the fight of this “© sunne. ce) Meaning

opendie as at noone dapes.

do this thing before al Ilrael, and in the open sunne lyght.

~B. And Danitd faide vnto Pathan: * BP reel

haue famed agaunst the Lord. And oa

CA Because thoa tat vn-

geb dne lidt dye. 85 nente, 14 Dowbeit, becaufe in dong this deede bude, thou hast geuen b enennes of the Lod

(g In saping that the Lord hath appopn= ted a wicked

man to taigae 15 auer bis pcopic.

sickened fore.

Mom 16 Dad therefore besought God forthe

to his priuie chamber.

childe, and fasted, and went in, c lape all night vpon the earth. 5
17 And the elders ok his houle arofe and went to him, to take him vp from the tarth: ut he would not, neither did he cate meate with them.
13 And ehe seuenth day the childe dyed; and the lernauntes of Daud feared to tell him that the childe was dead: Foz they laid, beholde, while the childe was
— pet alyuc We spake vnto hym, and he
Would not hearkẽ vnto our voyte: how
Will he then! vexe him selfe, tf we tell him that the childe is deade
19 Wut Daudd seing his feruautes whilpering, perceaued that the childe was

* Docuill.

dead: Daud said vnto his seruauntes,

Is the chude dead: They laide: ets dead.

20 And Daudd arose from the earth, and washed and annoynted him selfe, and chaunged his appareil, ànd came into the house of the #020, and worshipped: and afterward came to his owne Houle;
᷑ bad that they Mould fet bread before him, and he dyd eate. 8

(one, 21 Then laid his“ seruauntes vnto him:

deen ar coe Io hat thing is this that thou hast done-

Thou vidoe fat e weepe for the childe

Wile it was alpue, c aslsoone às it was

dead, thou diddest ryle vp d eate mate.

teates ot the faithriull.

ued him,

25 And had sent by the hand of o than the prophet: therekore ™ he called u his name“ Jedidia, of the Lopes pe: V2"

Nix QD Tec

ung Dany,

halle. Fu
26 Then Joab fought against Rabba

of the childzen of Amnion, and toke “0,

the citie ol the kingdome. Cece
27 And Joab lent meslengers to Darin

laying:? J haue fought against Rabba

and hauẽ taken the title of waters.

28 MowW therefore gather the rest of the

people together, and besiege the citie, that thou mayst take it: lett J take it, ¢ it be called after my name.

29 And Daud gathered al the people to: acter. went agamst Gabba, aud be-

ie ged it, and toke it.
30 And he toke their kinges crowne from n ol his head e which wayed acw talent of e

Golde, g in it were precious stones) and agen it was fet on Dauids head, aud he rhe ih brought away the spoyle of the citic, in ws cet ding great abundaunte.

31 And Hecarped away the people that
Was therein, x put them“ under sawes, (© en and under tron harrowes, and vnder ons ares of tron, t thrust them into the tyle- ae kyll: thus dyd he with all the cities ofthe chudzen of Ammon. And fo Da uid and al the people returned vnto Hierusalem.

¶ The xiii. Chapter.

14 Amnon Dauids donne defileth his filter Thamar. io Thamar is comforted by her brother Ablalom. : Abfatom theretore killeth Amnon,

41 Fter this, fo it was that
XN Abfalom the sonne of
GS e IBS Dau had a fayre ie zom fier Fay fe VR iter, named“ Thamar, aan e, aS whom Anmonß fonne a bp fa 8 of Dauid loned.

2 | And he was fo fore vexed, that he fell pele for his sister

Ind thet
Thamar: for he hasa® virgin, and g he thought it bardfoz him to do any puts thing to her. Abend
3 But Annon had a frende called Jo nadab, the sonne of Simah, Dauds brother: And Jonadab was a very fu tile man.
4 And he sald vnto him: How commct

2. samuel.

non b hou being the kinges sonne, art ihn donne from day to day: Wylt thou not tell mic? Ammon aunswered him: Jloue Thamar my brother Abi 4 cr. 7 het ia faine vnto hun, Lay thee r doöwne on thy bed, and make thy selle
% sicke: And when thy father is tome to ie seethee, sape bnto hin: J pray these let
, my fitter Thamar conte, and geuc me e smeate, and drelleit in my syght, that J
| may fee it, and eate it of her hand.
6 And so Anmon lape downe, and made

him selle icke: And When the king was

ome to fee him, Anmon fatde vnto the xing: pap theclet Thamar my fitter come, and mabe me a toople of cakes

saying: Go now to thy brother Amnõs houle, and dresse him meate. g So Thamar went to her brother
Anions house, he was taped downe:

And che tobe flour and kneaded it and

made takes in His fight, and dyd bake

him.

io Aud Amnon lalde vnto Thamar:
Bring the meate into the chamber that
I map eate of thyne hand. And Thamar toke p takes Which she had made, and brought them into the chamber to
Amnon her brother:

u And whẽ che had let them before him to eate, he tone her, and laide vnto her:
Come pe with me iu filter. 5

2 And she aunswered him: ay my bro-

ther, do not forte me, for there hath no

luch thing ben done in Ilrael: Do not
N thouthis folly, 9
* eee whyther shall J tause my
| 118 to go- And thou Malt be as one
Ot the koales in Israel: Now therefore, fi war thee {peake vnto the king, and
14 Ne wl not Dente me vnto thee,
2 Howbeit, he would not hearken vnto
8 vopce: but being stronger then he,
0 Aud uber and lay with her.
Bu xvii, 85 soulben Amnon hated her exceeding: aoa tbe hatred Wherewith he haz wh Jet was greater then the loue with ich he before loued her: And Amnon

inmp light, that J map cate of her hand. * f --
87 Then Danid sent home to Thamar,

8 Lilli saide vnto her: Up, and get thee hence,

16 She auntwered him, There is no „7 wih tause: This cuill that thou puttest me a-
Way is greater thenthe other that thou

diddest vnto me. Neuerthelesse. he would not heare her: parte, 5

17 But called his boye that serued him, la.

and saide: ut awap this woman fron me, and bolt the doore after her.

18 And che had a garment of h diuers e

colours bpon her: for with such wer the m hinges daughters (that were pirgins) r appareled. Then his seruaunt bought en

her out, and locked the dooze alter her. WW

19 And Thamar toke and put aches on

her head, and rent her garment ok diners colours that was on her, e laped her hand on her head, and so went, and as the went, crped.

20 And Ablalom her brother lade vnto

her: ath Amnon thy brother ben with theez Now pet be (ill my sister, he is thy brother, let not this thing greeue thyne heart. And lo Thamar remapned desolate in her brother Absalonis house.

21 But when king Daud heard of all

thele thinges, he was very wroth.

22. And Ablaloin sapde vnto his brother
Anon neither good oz bad: Porbeit,

Alblalom Hated Ammon, because he had

fozced his sister Thamar.

23 And after the tyine oftwo peres, Ab- , nn

salom had“ sheepe shearers in the *. playne of Haʒor belive Ephraim, x bade all the binges lonnes.

24. And cane tothe king, and lade: We-

holde, thy seruaunt hath sheepe shearers, J pray thee that the king with his . seruauntes come to thy seruaunt.

25 The king aunswered Ablalom: May inp sonne, J pray thee let vs not go all, lest we be chargeable vnto thee. And
Absalom lape fore vpon him: howbeit nd. he wonld not go, but blessed him.

26 Then fade Ablalom: but J pray thee
{hati not my bother Anion go with (3) Pra. vs: And the king aunlwered hun: what mrt agen needeth it that he go with thee: beate bate

27 But Ablalom made such instannce, that he let Amnon k all the binges children go with him. N

28 sow had Ablalom tommaunded his voung men, saping: Marke when Amnons™ heart is merp with Wine, and g chend; when J bid pou smpte Anmon:then ke tae 4 3

him, and feare not: haue not Pbidden

pour be bolde therkore, e play the Nd

| Dauid

29 And the leruauntes of Absalom dyd bnto Amnon euen as Absalom had tommaunded: And al the kinges sonnes arose, and euerv man gat him vp vpon his mule, and fied,

30 And whyle they were pet in the wap, tydinges tame to Dauid, faying: Ablafom hath flaine all the kinges fonnes,

iReoip, _, Wdtherets none left alyue.

(teen 31 Then the king arose, €*tare his gar-

gene am znientes, and lay along on the“ eqrth: and all his seruauntes stoode by with their tlothes rent.

32 And Jonadab the sonne ol Simeach
Dauids brother, aunswered, and fapde:
Wet not my lorde suppose that they haue flaine all the poung men ok the

* kings sonnes, but Amnon onelpis dead:
8 Foz that hath ben determined in Ablalomsminde, fince he forced his fitter
Thamar.

Now therefore, let not my lode the king “take the thing fo greeuouslp, to thinne that all the binges sonnes are

Oz, take it to ne ho 33

¢ Lhe xiiu. (Dapter.

2 Ablalom is reconciled to his father by the tubtiltie ol Joab.24 Abfatons may not (ee the hinges face.25 Che beautie of Absalom.ʒo He causeth Joabs corne to be burnt, and is brought to his fathers presence.

Dav b forme ok Zaruia perceaued that the
F kynges “ Heart was toward Ablalom:
And he sentto Thekoa, and fet thence a
Wyle woman, x sapde vnto her: IJ pray thee faine thy selfe to be a miouruer, and put on mourning apparell, and Wannoynt not thy felt with dyle, but be as a woman that had long tyme mourned for the dead:
3 And conie tothe king, and speake on this maner vnto hym (And fo r

(a) That the
Aung fauozed bliin,

Cb) In token of mourning,

seeme checeful

“Cbreput taught her what Che chould fap ae mouth. And when the woman of Thekoa spake with the king, the fell on her face to the grounde, and did obeylaunte, and
Ebre. aue. fayde: Helpe, O king.
The king {aid vnto her: What ayleth thee- She aunlwered: Jam in deede a
“Ebrea ce wydow, aud mpucHulband is dead.

And thy hande mayde had © two sonnes, and they two fonght together

wydow wom. 6

An.
Ce) Under

hebben the lielde, where was no man to go
Sonne bet weene theni, but the one smote the
Volalont.

other, and slue him.

2. Samuel.

Af

dead, foz Aninon onely is de i
34. Wut Abfelomfled- 2nd} youigma ri thatheptthe watch, If vp his eyes.
15 1 a tame much

ay ol the hi W inde hin. De Bat ide be toa

35 sell joe 2 buto the king, Beholde, the kinges fonnes come:

Wen said, so it is. Als thp

36 And assoone as he had left {pear beholde the kinges lonnes ame eh vp their voytces, and wept: The king ala 8 all his seruauntes wept exceeding-

p sorce. *

37 Wut Ablalom escaped, and went to ©
Thalmai the fonne of Ammihur in of Gelur: And Daud mourned for hig sonne euery dap. a

38 And so Ablalom estaped, and went to
Gelur, and was there three peres. :

39 And king Danid “delivedtogo foorth vnto Ablalom: Foz Where as Ainnon
Was dead, he was comtorted ouer him.

re

Betty theo of tha *

mal C hg

7 And beholde, the whole kindred is ri- % sen against thy handmapd, ¢ they said:
Delpner hym that {mote his brother, that We map kill him forthe foute of ose his brother whom he Aue, we will de- e stroy the heyre also: And so they shall aur quenche my sparkle Which is lekt, and sacs shall not leaue to my Hulband neither! name nor issue vpon the earth.

And the king sayde vnto the woman:
Go home to thyne house, J wyll geue a charge for thee.

And the woman ok Thekoa lade bn «ose to the king: My lorde O king, His? vous

trefpaffe be on me and on mp fathers jones
Houle: and the king and his throne be na giltlesse. aed m
Jo And the king saide: If any man sap a. ought vnto thee, bring him to me, aud he hall “ hurt thee no moze. touch.
1 Then {aide the: J prap thee let the king remember the Lord thy God that thou wouldest not suffer many reuengers of blood to destroy, lest they lr my sonne. And he aunfwered: Asthe nes
Tordelyueth, there Chal not one here of thy sonne fall to the earth. n The

Deu xix ic

W

4 oman sapde: Let thyne hand-
1 zy etbeae one wordt vnto my lode theking. And he layde: Da 2 *

z The Woman sapd-voherkozet e
10 thoubothought uche a thin! against the
=: people of Gad: F02 the king doth speake
3 this thing as one which is faultie, that hessoulde not fet home againe his baean ware as wa-
C isrcplk on the ground which cannot be gathered vp aganne: Meither doth
God spare any person, vet both he appopnt © meanes that his banished be

not vtterly expelled from him.

Nowe therfore Jam come to speake

tah

„ bdecauleqthey that be of p people hance

made me akrayd: And thy Handmapoe

they

e ft mapbe that the king Will pecfourme the request or his handmapde.

16 And the king shall heave his handmapde to deliner her out of the hand ol the mau that wonlde haue destroped me, and also my sonne ont of the inheritaunte of Gd. r

17 And thyne handmade sapde: The worde of my lord the king Chall now be.

kt eccomfortable:or mp lord the king is as

= bad: Therkore the Lorde thy God be with thee.

18 Thenthe king aunlwered, and sapde bnto the woman: Hyde not from me BF prap thee p thing that J shall alke thee.
And the woman laydẽ: Let my lord the

„, klng owe speake.

Reo h And the king layd: Is not the hand

aof Joab with thee in all this matter z

The woman aunswered, and layde: As thy loule iueth my lorde the King, J wil nat turne to the right hande nor to the left fromought that my lorde the king hath spolkk: fo: cuen thy sernaunt Joab

Ocmouth ofthpne handmayde:
: > pare a neh y
. aunge the fourme of fpeach, hat! thy setuaunt J dab done this 1 my lorde is Wyse, decording to the wildome ofan angel ol God, to vnderstande all
,, itiges that are in the earth.
> “rainy the hing fayd onto Yoab:wehoww,
+ a baue done this thuig: Go Ewing he Vouuig man Ablalomagame.

2. Ringes.

of this thing vnto the ny lord the king,

fayd, How will J speake vnto the king,

an H angel of God, in hearing ol good x

bad mie, and he put all thele wordes m to the intent that J shoulde o

Ixv.

22 And Joab fell to the ground on his fate, and bowed him selfe, and thanked Hieb. the king: And Joab fapo, Now thy ser- Bs" uaunt knoweth, that Fane kounde grace in thy fight my lorde O king, in that the king hath fulfiten the request

bl his seruaunt. a

23 Andso Joabarole, andwent to Gelur, and bought Absalom to Hierulaleni.

24. And the king sayde: Let hini turne ta his owne houle, e not lee my face, And fo Absalõ returned to his owne houle, and sawe not the kinges fate.

25 But in al Israel there was none to be so muche 1 as Absalom for beautlerlrom > sole of his foote to the toppeot his head, there was noblemifhe in him.

26 And when he polled his head ( forat enery peres ende he polled it, becaule the heere was heaup on him thertore he ö polled it) he Weighedthe heere of his 0 head at tibo hundzeth ™ fictes , after 2M the hinges wapght. rn

27 And Ablation had three sonnes borne Wess him, and one daughter named Thamar, Whiche Wasa fapze woman to loke vpon. a 8

28 Do Ablalom dwelt two peres in Mierulalem, and sawe not the kinges fate. E

Therkore Ablalom sent ko: Joab to

haue sent him to the king, but he would

not come to him: And When he sent a-

gane, he would not tonie.

30 Therlore he sayde vnto his seruauntes:
Behold, Joab hath a fleld by my place, dead oel.
Ehe bath barlpe therin: Go, eletit Venen am onfpyre. And Ablaloms seruauntes fet wl deu it on fire. . beautiful bp

31 Then Joab arose, and tame to Ablalom vntõ his houle, and fayd vnto him:
Wherkore hane thy {eruauntes burnt mp fielde with fires f

32 And Ablalõ duuswered Joab:chold,

J sent for thee, desiring thee to tome, becaufe I Woulde haue sent thee to the klug, fo: to say, Wherfore am J come ftom Gelure It had ben better for me to haue ben there still: Nowe therfore

would J see the kinges fate: And if ther ei anne be any v trespasse in me, let hyn kil me. res
33 And lo Joab came to the king, and bityenoer. tolve him: which when he had sent for saci.
Ablalom, he came to the king, and fel to ier auen the ground on his face beforc hun, and the king kissed Absalom.
Bt

The

Absalom. x \

The. xv. Chapter. —

Che practifes of ⁊blalom to alpire to the kingdome. 14 atid and his seruaunteg fle.

2. Ringes. o~

31 Dallidg praper. 34 Husai is sent to Absalom to difcourte his countell.

7 Stet Se mre pared him charettes € horles , and fiftie men to runne before him.
And Ablalom role vp
ö earip, and stoode in the
= place of the entring m ofthe gate: And euerp man that had

hun.

dard. e: — any” matter and came to the king for iudgement, him did Ablalom cal vnto hin, and sapde: Ol what citie art thou: dens. Me aunlwered: Thy seruaimt is of one notpng of | of the tribes of Istael.

what citie or place he mas. 5

And Ablalom fard vnto him: See, thy matters are good and righteous , but there sno man ( deputed of the king to heare thee.

Ablalom lapde moreouer: Oh, that J were made iudge in the land, that euery

d; Thus the enuions can
Depzauc and condemne fos negligence ¢ vmulticc „ htin 4

our man which Hath any plea and matter in both comméd the late, might come to me, and that J might do hint iustice.

5 And when anp man came we to hun, and dyd him obeylaunte, he put foorth
| . ae toke him to him, and kil-

ed him. f 4

6 And on this maner dyd Ablalom to al
I srael thãt came to the king for iudge-

cmp ment: fo Absalom fale the heartes of

the men of Jlrael. minfele “7 And after d fourtie peres, Ablalon {aid kran te ene Pilto the king: I pay thee let me go to

ratte Hebron, e pap my vowe which J haue ol anne - vobed vnto the Lorde:

23 g Forthy seruaunt vowed a vowe( when

I was in Gesur in Siria ) saping: Il the

Lorde Thal bring me agame in deede to
Pierulalem, J wil lerue the Torde.

9 And the king laid vnto him: Go in peace.
And fo he arole, and went to Hebron.

10 But Ablalom Lent {pies throughout all the tribes of Plrael faying : Alldone as ye heare the voyce of the trumpet blow, ve chall say, Ablalom raigneth in Hebrõ.

u And with Absalom went two hundred men out of Hierusalem, that were“ talled: And they went with pure Heartes,

0 not knowing of any thing.

sou 12 And Ablalomi sent for Ahithophel the

Gilonite Dauids tounseller, fro his ci-

e Ny colour of religion he
Innteth akter ehe kingdoine

vnd bpd to his fealk in
Webpoxr.

tie Gilo, while he offered satrikites and

there was wrought strong treason: Fo;

10 people went and incre aled with Abalom.

13 And ther tame a meflenger to Daud, and sapde: The heartes of the men ot
Ilrael are turned after Absalom.

14 And Dauid faid vnto all his seruaũtes ¢ that were with him at Hierusalem: Up, that we may fice , for we chall not eis „ estape from Ablalom: Make speede peg to departe, lest he come fodenly ecatche un vs, and bring euyll vpon bs, and finpte a . the titie with the edge othe Moyne, an

15 And the kinges seruauntes fayd vnto za him: -Beholde, thy leruauntes are redy to do whatsoener my lord the king shall
“appoynt. | 15

16 And the king departed and al his houl coe holde at his feete: And the king left vows ten tontubines to kepe the house.

17 Andthe king went foorth and all the

people at his feete, and taried in a plate ce, that was n farre of. fam

18 And al his seruauntes went about him: and all the Cerethites, and all the Phelethites, and all the Gethites, euen lire ays ic hundred men whiche were tome akter bu fe. hun from Geth, went bekore the king.

19 Then layde the king to Ithal the Ge thite:woherkore tonnnest thou with vs-
Returne and abyde with the king, fo? thouarta straunger, depart therfore to thy place.

20. Thou tamest pesterdap, and chould vnqutet thee to day to go With bs? wil go whyther J tan: Tyerfoje ve?

. turne thou, cary againe thy “pretlyzen: smal

Merty and trueth be with chee. rer

21 And that aunhwered the king, ¢ aid: -
As the Lom lpueth, and as iny lord the king lpueth, in what plate my lorde the king thalbe, whether in death 02 lle, euen there also Wil thy seruaunt be.

22 And Dauid lad to Ithal: Comethen,

and go forward. And Ithalthe Sti

Went foorth, and ali his men, and a

the children that were with him. ba
And all the countrep Wepte 1

wid.
ö cee all the people went ouer:
111 also him selfe passed ouer the brooke Cedron, and all the people went ouer towarde the wape that leadeth

to the wuͤdernesse.

24. And lo Sadoc allo and all the Leuites

th him, a ware the arke of the
Esa eopntmcat of God, and thep let
% done the arke of God, and Abiathar
% went vp, vntill the people were all n come duer, out of the titie. 8

25 And the king fayde vnto Sadot,e arp the arke of God againe into the cite: t shall finde fauour in the eyes of the
Lorde, he will bring nie againe, e (ewe

ine both it, and the tabernacle therof.
26 But ik he thus say, J haue no lust vnto
«a thee: beholde here am J, let hyin do with me what semeth good in his eyes.
% 27 The king sayde also vnto Sadocthe a pelt: Art not thou a Sear-Heturne into the citie in peace, and take pour two

gi; dunkel

sonnes with you, Ahimaaz thy sonne,

ud Jonathan the sonne of Abiathar.

| ae wil tary in the fieldes of the

E wuͤdernelle, vntil there come soine word

from vou to be tolde mme. —

29 Sadoc therfore and Abiathar caried

the arke of God againe to Hierusalem, and they taried there.

30 And Dawid went vpon mount Driuet,

and wept as he went vp, and had his

e head onered, x went barefoote: And

n all the people that was with him, had

2 Kinges.

XVI. cucty man his head couered: ca went vp, they wept. e
31 Andonetolde Daud, faping: Ahithophel is one of them that haue confpired
With Ablalom. And Dauid fayde :
Lorde F pray thee turne the®rounten Sr of Ahithophel inta foolichnes. n
32 When Daud was come to the toppe of settee the mount, be Worthipped God: and be- ee holde, Hulat the Arachite came against Area
Hint, with his coate torne, and hauing ure earth vpon his head. *
33 Unto whom Daud layde: Ik thou go with me, thou shalt be a burthen vnto fire
34. But if thou returne to the cite and say vnto Ablalom, J will be thy seruaunt
O king: as Jhaue thus long ben thy fathers seruãunt so am J nowe thy sernaunt, thou mapest for mp sake destroy 2 ey the countel of Ahithophel. „
35 And hast thou not there with thee Haz tomy coindoc and Abiathar the preltes z therfore wolle whatsdeuer thou Chait here out of the kings house, thou shalt chewe to Sadoc and Abiathar the priestes.
36 And behold, they haue there with them Ff their two sonnes, Ahinigaz Sadocs sonne, and bythema tan heare.
37 And lo Husat Dauids freende went to the titie, and Ablalom entred into ierusalem. N

onathan Abiathars sonne: o shal ve sende me all that ve

The. xvi. Chapter .

Che inkidelitte of I iba.

Sime curteth Dauld.

16 Mutat commech to Abtalom

at The countell of Ihithophel kor the concubines,

Al ar ar
* As “5 i D
U,

Olf phiboletch mette him with a coople of asses
— — Adled, c bpon them bo hundredioues of bread, c one hundoed lunches or relinges and an hun-
: Ch of dried figges, €a bottel of wyne, ai che king fayde vnto Ziba: What panel. thou with these? And Ziba
3 They be Ales for the kinges of hold to ryde on AND bread and fruit
10 de Young mento Cate andibine,that

YAS

baiitke,

Legt

be faynt in the wuͤdernesse niay

3 And the king sayde:vohere is thy matters sonne? Ziba aunswered vnto the king, Bchold he tarieth still at Hierusalem: For he sayde, This Day shall the house of Ilrael restore me the kingdome of m father.
4 Then lapd the king to Ziba:Wehold, thyne are all that pertayned vnto Miphiboseth. And Ziba sayde: J huinbly beteche ther that I may finde grace in ek thy light my lorde S king. 5
5 And when king Dad came to 2wWa- eme iw ona hurim be holde, thence tame out a man ribeof Ber of the kinred of the house ol Saul, naz . med Semei the sonne ol Gera, and he came out cursing.
2 6 And

Husai

6 And he taststones at Dautd andatall

the sernauntes ot Daud: And all the

people and al the men of warre were on
Ther is.

ben his right hande, and on his left. bin. And thus sapd Semei when he tursed: ice Man Come foorth, tome foorth thou “bloodelne, fyeder,and thou man of Weual.
* The Lom hath brought vpon thee all

chan the blood of the houte of Saul, in ofthe beat of Whole steade thou hak raigned, and the
Tb ano I orde Hath deliuered the kingdone im peng Da tg the Hande of Ablalom thy fonne: And

to the laine.

beholde, thou art come to thy nulchieke, betause thou art a bloodsheder.

9 Then fapde Abilal the lonne of Zarula bnto the king: Why doth this dead dogge cure my lord the king: let nie go nowe, and take of the head of him.

io And the king layde: What haue J to

do With pou ve sonnes of Zaruia-for he

(e) Dauld

{cle that this

Wag the id= gement of

od [02 is

finns ano

thrcfoze hum II vieth hun

setie to hig

rod.

turleth euen betaule the Lord hath! bidden him curse Daud: Who dare then lay, Wherlore batt thou done so- 8
And Dauid fayde to Abilai, and to all his seruaũtes, Wehold my sonne which tame ok mpne one bowels, seketh mylpfe: how much moze then may this fonne of Jemini do ite Suffre hun to curle, forthe Lorde hath bidden him.
12 It may be that the Torde wil loke on cb On mipne“afflictiou, and Opo me good foz myne eye. his turling this day. e ene 3 And as Dauid and his men went by kon aue, the way, Semei went along on the ei hilles lde ouer agalnst hun Etursed as he Went, and threwe stones at him, and cast dufte. ;
¢ + And the king and all that were with

2. Kinges.

difscmbley

hin came weerp, and rekreche ' io oe f en ein

15 And Absalom Fal the people tl 1 Sh, ot Israel came to Sicriltalgu alta Ahl gp 15 with wa a

16 d assoone as Husai the Ara
Daurds frend, was come vnto Atle
Hulai sapde vnto Absalom: God saue the king,! God laue the king. 5

17 And Ablalom fayde to Hulaj: Is this d aia the kindnesse tothy rende Whywen- Rue test thou not with hime Sab

18 Hulai aunswered vnto Ablalomm, Hay not fo: Wut whom the Lorde and this people and all the men of Israel choose his wil J be, with him wu F dwell,

19 And! mioreouer, vnto whom thal JJ do «ay, leruice : not to his forme And as J Was ban feruaunt bekore thy father, fo will J before thee. 1

20 Then spake Ablalom to Ahithophel:
Geue counlel what we shall do.

2 Aud Ahithophel laid vnto Ablalom: adh
Get thee in vnto thy fathers cocubines He whiche he hath lett to kepe the house, es and all Irael hal heare that thou art f abhorred of thy father: then chall the ae

hädesokal that are with thee, be trong, se

22 And fo they spread Ablalom a tent vpon 6 the toppeok the house, and Ablalom sais went in vnto his fathers concubines in the sight of all Jsrael.

23 And the countel of Ahithophel whiche he tounseled in thole dapes , was asa man had astzed counsel Wat the oratlcok Oz
Godreuen lo was all the tounsel of Ahl ga thophel, both with Dauid aud with
Ablalom.

Je. xpii. ( Hapter.

7 Ahithophels countel is ouerthzowen by Hutat. 14 Che Lorde had to ordeined. 19 Che priestes lonnes are hid in the wel. 22 Dauid goeth ouer Jordane. 2; Ahithophel hangeth

Hithophel also {aid vnto Ablalom: Let me ri choole out now twelue thousand men, and J
Wil vp and folowe al-

(a) g though he would tap,

cyooit.

(b) Beaning
Wauw.

all the people shalbe in peace.

him belle. 27 They bring vittaples to Dauid.

4 And the laping pleased Ablalom wel 2 10 and al the elders of Ilrael. eso A
5 Chenlayde Ablatom:cat nowe Hula or the Arachite allo, and let vs heare WAC an wyse what he sapth. 8
6 When Hula Was come to Ablalom, Ablalom spake vnto hum, saying: Ahitho phel hath geuen such counsel: bal We md do after his saping, or no: tell thou.
Hulaf auntiwered vnto Ablatom: The ,; tounsel that Ahithophel ath geuen i not good at this time.
8 For lapde Hula, thou unowest thy father k his men howe that they be strong men, and they be chaled in their mme

evo of!

are euen as a Beare robbed of her whepes in the fielde: Thy father is a man allo prattised in warre, and wil not odge with the people. n Wehold he is hydnoweinsome taue, bf im lome other place: And though some of his men be ouerthrowen at the firlt brunt, pet they that heare it, will fay: The people that foloweth Ablalom, be“ put to the worse. o And he allo that is valiaunt whole
. cart is asp heart of a Liö, hal! heink et and kaynt:For all Israel knoweth, that thy tather is a nughtie man and they ne Which be With him are “Mout men.
1 Therfore my coantell is that al Peraet ee he gathered vnto thee fro Dan to Beerfeba, as the sande of the sea in nunibre, and that thou go to battayle in thyne owne person. N i, Jor io hall we come vpon him in one place or other where we thal kinde him, and we wil fal vpon him, euen as thicke as the deawe kalleth on p ground: And okalthe men that are with him, we shal not leaue him one. , iz Poreouer, if he be gotten into a towue, then (hall al the men of Ylrael bing ropes to that titie, and we will drawe it into the riuer, vntil ther be not one small
€ ftone founde there.
4 And Absalom and all the men ol Ilrael sayde: The counsel of Hulai the Arachite, is better then the counfell of Ahithophel. For it was euen the Lordes san Determination to destrop the“ good air konnsell of Ahithophel, that the Lode eat might bzing eupll bpon Ablalom. g 15 Then lapde dulai vnto Sadoc € Abia
„bhar the priestes: Ok this ⁊ that maner a did Ahithophel and the elders of Piraci countel Ablalom, and thus ¢ thus haue
Itounsayled. |
16 Nowe therfore {end quickly, & chewe
Daud, saying: Tarie not this night in p lieldes of the wildernesse, but get thee

ti, Che bet

is,
Inden

che people that are with him.
7 Now Jonathan and Ahimaaz above by the Well Rogel: (for they might not e seene to come into the citie) and a
Wench went and© told them: And they
1g Went and chewed king Dauid. daldenertgelelle a lad sawe them, and
1055 it to Absalom: ut they went both f gem away quickly, t came to a mans
Dole in Wahurim, which had a well its

de rt er

2. Kinges.

ouer, left the king be denoured, e all

vil.

his parde, intot

daun, ) he whithe they went

19 And the wpfe toke and spreada coz: uerlet ouer the Welles mout i Nad tee 9. and the thing was

20 And when Ablaloms seruauntes cam to the Wyte to the honse, they lapder

Where is Ahumaas € Jonathan- The

woman aunswered the: They be gone

duer the brooke of water. And whẽ they

had sought them, and coulde not finde

them, they returned to Hierulalem.

And alloone as they were departed, 2D the other tame out of the wel and went

and tolde king Dauid, and fayde buto

hin: Tip, and get pou quickly over the

water, for w suche counsel hath Ahitho-

phel geuen against vou. 1

22 Then Dauld arose, and all the peope that were with bint, t they were tone ouer Jordane by that it was day: fo e that there lacked not one of them that We”
Was not tonie ouer Jordane. panp baden

23 And when Ahithophel sawe that his tounsel was not folowed, he sadled his
Alse, and arose and gate him home to his owune house, and to his owne citie,

E put his houcholde in order, and han- gene dad ged him selkr, and died and was buried ae in the sepulchre of his father. ren

24. Then Daum came to Pahanaum, aue
And Ablalom passed once Jordane, he un de and all the men of Jsrael wich him. ae

25 And Ablalom made Aniala captame of Stee" the hoast in fede of Joab: which Ama- w. fa, was a mans fonne named Jethra an Ilraeltte that went into Abigail the daughter of Mahas, sister to Zaruia Ves,
Joabs mother. pa

26 So Picael and Ablalom pitched in the land of Gilead.

27 And when Dauld was come to Pahanaim, Sobi the sonne of Pahas, out of Gabba of the children of Ammon, €
Machir the sonne ol Anuniel out of Lodeber, and Warsellat the Gilcadite out of Kogelim,

28 OW ught beddes, basens, earthen bel sels, wheat and barly, floure ¢ parched torne, beanes, lentiles, c parched pulle,

29 ony, butter, sheepe, t cheese ol kyne, for Dauid and for the people that were with hum, to rate: or they sayde, The people is hungry, weerp, and thirstie, in che wildernelle.

) God by then luccouruig the necelfitic of his fatthfuil lerua unt in his trouble and allliction.

B 3 T he

PE LE)

2 —— = 1 93 Een ce 77 * 1

2 12 evan 0 i F y 1 ile N i f * 0 2 AN
Sh eo) 19: 1 tt

= Bu NN 1 — wy’ 8 hs

ND Daud numbred
2 the people that were

6 4 with him, and let cap:

tapnes of thoufandes and ok hundredes o-

the third part of the people vnder the
Hande of Joab, and the third part vnder the hand of Abilai the forme of Zaruia Joabs brother, and the other third part vnder the hand of Ithai the Gethite: And the king said vnto the people,
J will go with poumpy felfe allo.

And the people aunswered, Thou Hale not go foorth: for if we flee away, they wil not cave for vs, neither shal they regard vs, though halle of vs were slaine: but thou“ art nowe worth ten thousande of vs, voherlore itis better that thou sutccour vs out of the citic.

4 Andthe king lapde vntothein: What

We

Ca) Sionifts ing that a h eur co be so deere vnto bis people. that thep will rather lofe their tues ought fat king stoode by the gate syde, and all the teme pnto hn people came out by hundredes, and by

thousandes.

5 And the king tonnnaunded Joab, and
Abilai, aud Ithai, saping: Intreate the young man Ablalom gently for mp fake. And all the people hearde that the king gaue all the captaynes charge con-

The xvi. Chapter.

2 Dauiid deuldeth his armie into three partes. 9 Ablalom is hanged, dayne, and call in
à pit. 3 Dauid lamenteth the death ol Ablalom. 8 ;

seemeth pou best, that wil J do. Andthe

terning Ablalom.

6 And so the people Wet out into the fielde agai Israel (and the battel was in the wood of Ephraim)

7 Wherethe people of Hlracl were Maine gane before the feruauntes of Daud: ¢ there tone”
Was a great slaughter that day, euenol ane twentie thoulande men. oo

8 Hor the battell was (tattered ouer al the countrey: And the wood deuoured mo people that day, then dyd the sword.

9 And Ablalom mette the seruauntes ol
Daud ryding vpon a mule, whiche a ried him vnder the thycke bowes ok a great oke, and his head was caughtol theoke, and he was © likt vp betweene e the heauen and the earth: andthe mule wan that was vnder him, went away. ame

Jo And one that lawe it, tolde Joab , fay wise +2 ing: Weholde, J sawe Abfalom Hause ros in anoke. 1

n And Joab sapd vnto the man that told him: Ik thou diddest lee him, why did
Deft not thou there finttc him to the ground, and J would haue geuen ther ten sitles of siũer, and a gyrdle-

12 The man sayd puto Jdab: Though D e should reccaue a thonsande fittes 1 vpon ms uer in myne hande, pet woulde 4 A stretche out myne hand againtty ue:

(b So called, beearde the
Ephramites

Men.

: Foz we heard with our cares sae the king charged thee, € Abilai, aud Ithat, saying: Weware that nonz touche the poung man Ablalom.

Moreduer, fF had done it, I shoulde haue done agam̃st mine owne lyfe: for there is no matter hyd front the bing, peag thou thy felfe wonldest haue ben against nic. *

¢14 Then saydte Joab, J map not stand thus tarying with thee: And he tobe three dartes in his bande e thrust them though Absalom whyle he was vet
, alpuo in the nuddes ok the ole. ic And ten leruauntes that bare Joabs weapons, turned and smote Ablalom, and fluc hin.

16 And Joab blem the trumpet, and the people returned from folowing Ilrael: for Foab held backe the peopte.

% 17 And they toke Ablalom, and cast him

a into a great pyt in the wood, and layed

a ainightie great heape of flones vpon
„ hin: And all Ilrael fled eucry one to their tentes. a
3 Amd this Ablalom pet in his lyfe time toke and reared vp a piler, whiche is in the kinges Dale: For he sayd, J haue no

0 sonne to kepe my name in remem-

braunce, and he called the piller after

his owne name, and it is called vnto this dap Absaloms place.

Then lsapd Ahimaaz the sonne of az dot: Let me runne nowe and beare the king tydinges, how that the Lod hath

mee. Diudged him qupte of the hande of his u enemies, g
<* 20 And Joab lapd vnto him: Thon art

ond the

Ms od poulhed lng

ui hones g digs

ve nd man to beare Ondinges to dap, thou

e halt beare tydinges andther time: but si to day thou shalt beare none, becaule

the kinges fonne is dead. a
D Then sapd Joab to Chusi: So and tell the kyng what thou hast seene. And aap bowed him selfe vnto Joab, and

¢ 4 -
1 nee — 0 fonne of Sa agame to SFoab:nahat ay thee
{FZ allo rammt aer Gun — . —
And Joab layde: Wherfore wilt thou runne my sonne, seyng that thou batt no tydinges to brings

- 3 Bet What ik J runne: he fata vnto Hints

2. Ringes.

IXVIIl
Runne . Then Ahimaaz ranne hy the wap ol the plapne, ¢ came before Chult.

24. And Dawid fate betweene the two gates : And the watchman went Up eswertem to the roofe ouer the gate vnto the wal, net Bar and lift vp his eyes and lawe, k beholde n. there tame a man runnyug alone.

25 And the watchman crped e tolde the king. And the king fayd: If he be alone, there Vis tydinges in his mouth, And run. he he came a pate, and drewe neare. dug.

26 And the warchman {awe another man running and the Watchman called
Duta the porter, and fapd: cholo there commeth another man running alone.
And the king sapd: he is also a tydinges bunger.

27 And the watchman sayde: Me thin keth the running of the fozmoft is lyhe the running of Ahunaas the fenne of
Sadoc. The lung sapde: Heis aqood. dona nian, and commeth with good tidinges. tis tociee,

28 And Ahunaaz called e lad vnto p wing, ge" peace be with thee: And he fell downe tothe cart j bpd his face before the king, and sayd: lelled be the Lord thy God, aan which hath shut bp the ine that lift vp . their handes against iny lorde the lung.

29. Ind the kung layd: Is the young nian

Absallom safe: Ahimaas aunswered:
When Joab sent the kinges sernaunt,

ec eb. I fea

the running

To wit

and me ihp e leruaunt, J lave a great cc, tumult, but J Wote not what it was. ..

30 And the king sapde vuto him: Turne alide, and stand here. And he turned a side, and stoode styll.

31 And behold, Chusi came also, and sapd: b
Typdinges imp lorde the king. for the dinges:

Lord hath ! deliuered thee this day out. pe Pande ofal them that role aganst ze. cc. j 3 - & 0

32 And the king sayde vnto Chusi: Jethe N young man Ablalom safe: Chun zun- » swered: The enennes of my lorde the king, and all that ryse against thee todo thee hurt, be as that poung man is.

33 And the king was c mdued, and wunt gar bp to the chamber ouer the gate, aun tome, roure wept: and as he went, thus he sayde, L vis ncherie my forne Absalom, my fonne, my fone “e.
Ablalom: woulde God F had died for thec, O Ablalom iny fonne, nip fore.

‘J 4 The

N

Danids returne. 2. Nin ges.

Dauids returne

The. xix. (Hapter.
Joab encourageth the king. 8 Dauid is restored. 3 Simet is pardoned. 24 Mi. phiboleth meeteth the hing, Barzelai departeth. 4:9 krael striueth with Zuda.

A1 Mett was told Joab, bobeholde the king Wee-

peth, € mourneth for

Absalom. a

. And the “bictozte of

that Dap was turned

j “Hebr Sal. 2
Uatton or deliucrauce.

the people: for the people heard say that dap Howe p king sorolwed for his sonne.
3 Andthe people went that dap into the citie by stealth, as people confounded to tonuey then selues when they flee in
8g they do battell. . thatmourne, 4, Wut the king hd his face, and tryed with aloude voyte: O my fonne Ablaflodm, O Ablalom my fonne my sonne. ann. Wahn. 5 And Joab tame into the houle to the f king, and sayd: Thou halk shamed this day the faces of all thy seruaũtes, which this day haue saued thy life, c the lines of thy sonnes, and of thy daughters , € the liues of thy wyues, and of thy toncubines,
In that thou louest thyne enemies, and hatest thy frendes: For thou hast declaj red this day, that thou regardest neicus ther thy princes nor seruauntes: And this day JJ do perteaue, that if Ablaom had lyued, and all we had died this
“HebrBea dap, that had“ pleased thee well. right m 7 Nolbe therfore vp. and tome ont, and thyneeyes, speake . cõfortably vnto thy seruauntes:
“HebTo Dorp sweare by the Lode, except thou cof lome out, there Will not tary one man
With thee this night, and that wilbe
Avorse dito thee, then all the euptt that koͤl on thee from thy youth vnto this
Hote. ‘ ater 8 Then the king arole, and late in the“
1 gat: And they tolde vnto all the people, sayng, beholde the king doth ht in the ga E, and all the people came before the

Em: For Israel had fled, euery man to

his tent.

who hn 9 And alp people were at o strife throughechte clit all the tribes of Israel, saping: The bug. king laued vs out of the hand of our enemies, c he deliunered vs out of the hande of the Philistines, and nowe he is fled out of the lande for Ablalom:
Jo Wut Absalom whom we annoputed duer vs, is dead in battell: Therefore,
Why are ye lo still, that pe bring not the king agapne-

into mourning vnto al

it And king Dauid sent to Sadoc e Ay. a athar the puestes, faying: Speake vnto vee the elders of Juda and fay:wabp are ye revise bebinde to bang the king againe to his 4 house( seyng that such tydinges is came from all Israel vnto the king euen to his house:) ö

12 Ve are mp brethren my bones and my fleshe: Wherkore then are ye the iat that bryng the king aganne: 1

i And fay ye to Amasa: Artthounot on bone and of mp fleshe- God do so tome and more allo if thou be nos taptayne ol the hoast to me for euer in the © rdome daa,

dk Joab,” wee bli ts

14. And he bowed the heartes of au the 1 5

men ok Buda, euen as the heart of one f. man, fo that they fent (this word] tothe bath | king: Betuene thou With all thy fer- suas, nauntes. * ere

15 So the king returned, and came to For.
Dane: And Juda tame to Gilgat for to go to meete the king, and to conuey hum duer Jordane. igiohobe

16 Ando Sinitithe fonne of Gera the Kee? somme of Jennm, Whiche was of Bahurim, hasted and came downe With the menof Juda to meete king Dauid.

17 And there were a thouland men ok
Bemamin with hin, and Ziba the seruaunt ot the house of Sanl and his fol teene formes and twentie feruauntes

with a „and thep went oucr Jor-

dane bekore the king. —

18 And there went oucr a boate to carie ouer the kinges housholde, and to do hun pleasure: And Simei the sonne ol
Gera fel before the king as he was tomie
Hirer Jorzdane,

19 And sayde vnto the king: Wet not my lorde impute wickednes vnto me, nor rc membrethe thinges that thy seruaunt 9 dyd Wwickedip when mplord the king eee
Departed out of Hierulale, that the kung 00 should take it to his heart. ra 20

20 Fox thy seruaunt doch knowe Howe tr that J haue done amisle: And therfore at behold, Jam the fir ft this day of all te or house of PFoleph, that am tome dolbne at to meete my lorde the king. „ge.

21 ut Abilai the forme of Zaruta aun cone

fWwered,andfayd: Shall not Sinn 97 un

for this, because he cursed the Todes gen annopnted-
22 And

OF Prato,

cn af ht croc , i Cane

plat
Ad Damd sayde: What haue Ito do weth von ve lonnes of Zaria: For

this Day pe be aduersaries buto nie:

hall there any man dye this day in
1 Do not J knowe that J am chis dap kyng ouer Ilrael-

2; Andtherkore the kyng sayde vnto Se.
"net, Thou shalt not dye: and the kyng

the forme of Saul cane downe to niecte the kyng, aud had

[ware vnto hym.
24 And Miphiboleth

neither walhed his feete, nor dressed his bre bear de, nor w washed his clothes, from

opt kante agaime in peace. aa 25 And Whenhe was come to Hieru-
= lalem and met the king, the king layde n pnto him: Wherkort wentest not thou
E with me Miphiboleth: N

26 He aunlwered: My lorde O king, my

sernaunt deccaued me: For thy ser-

sadled to ryde thereon, for to go to the king: because thy seruaunt is lanie.

27 And ht hath acculed thy seruaunt vnto my lorde the king, and my lorde the king is as an © angell of God: do ther-

fore what seemeth! good in thine eyes.

28 Fo2 all u fathers boule were but dead men before my lorde the king, and yet diddest thon put thy seruannt among thé that dyd cate at thyne owne table: What right therefore haue J pet focrpe any more Onto the king:

29 And the king said vnto him: why sptakot thon any moze of thy matters: J haue saide, Thou and Ziba deuide the

, landes betweene you. f

Sack 30 And Miphiboseth sayd vnto the king:

cou pea, let hun take all, forsomuch as mip

lord p king is come againe in peate vnto his owne houle.
31 And Barzellai p Gileadite came downe from Roglun, and went ouer Jordaue el the king, to conduct hun over Jozi *

32 Barsetlat was a very aged man, euen foure {tore peres olde, and prouided the king of fuftcnaunce while be lave at
Pahanaum:for he was aman of very great substaunce.

33 ae laid vnto W e

g nic, Will fee | me in Amide elias

34 And wWarsellat aide vnto the king:

tile for
Fl. dome aach all
That U, dure. unthpe

escrudls, brad

PDamd
Heul tn ag jig
Stem

2. Samuel.

n the tynie the kyng departed, vntyll he

uaunt saide, J would haue myne alle

Pow long haue F to
90 vp with the king vnto Hierusaleim-
35 Jaunthis day foüre score peres olde: a can J deserne betweene good oz euyll:
Hath thy seruaunt any tatte in that he cateth or dzmlieth- Can he heare any more the vopce of syngyng men and women: wherkore the Mould thy seruaunt be pet a burthen vnto my lord the king-

36 Thy seruaunt will go a ktle way once
Jordane with the king: x why wylthe
King reconwpentce it nie with luch are-
Warde:-

37 O let thy leruaunt turne vacke agapne, that I map dye in nne owne
Cific, and be buryedj in the graue of my

a thuld “ bere. how d

XV

many dayes are the veres of my lyfe?

father ⁊ of my mother: Beholde, here C=) e
IS tiv seruaumt Chunhau let hun go ¢™

With um lorde the king, and do to hun what schall please the.

38 And the king aunlwered: Chimham
(hall go with me, and F will do to Hin that thou shalt be content wih: And what soeuer thou shalt require of me, that same will F do for thee,

39 And al che people went duer Jordane: and WHE the kuig was tome duer Jordane, he killed Barz ellal, x blessed hun, co Went backe againe vnto his oivne plate.

Oz chnse.

u Oz, bad hun karcweil.

40 And then the king went to Gilgal x
Chiniham went with him: And al the

people of Juda, conduct d the king, and allo halle the people of frac.

41 And beholde, allthe men of Bleact !

tame tothe king, c laide vnto the king:
Why Hane cur brethren the men of Faure da stolen thee away, and hauc breught the king and his houcholde and all Daz
LDS men with him ouer Jordane-

42 And all the men of Juda aunswered the men of Jlracl, Wecaule the king is neare of kinne to vs: Wherelort be ye augry for this matter: Haue we eaten of the kinges cofte o2 haue We taken au Depbese

43 Aid the men ol Jlrael aunlwered the

men ok Juda, and laide: We haue ten.

partes in the king, and haue thereto more ryght to Dauid then pe: why then did ye despile vs, that our aduile chould not be first had, in restoring our king-
And the wordes of the men ol Juda were fiercer thẽ the wordes of the men of Ilracl.

¢ The

(t) which

hadteken

pare wich the ing.

— —— EEE

2 Ailleth

. Samue

A. maf;

The. xx. Chapter. ee

1 Seba rapseth Icrael against Wauid,1oFoab hilleth Amata traiteroutly,
22 The head of Seba is deliuered to Joab. ; Dauids chiele officers,

A1 ca) where the tate tribes eontended ag uni Zu» ba

„z wicked man.

i Hen there came

5 D thither a ter-
A) taine man of

named

N

ble a trumpet, and laid: we haue no part in Daud, neither haue We in-
Herttaunte in the fonne of Pai: euerp man to histentes, O Ylrael. 7
2 And so euery inan of Israel went frã
Dauid, and folowed Seba the fonne of wWichat: But the men of Juda claue fast mito their king from Jordane to hierualent,

Je mint, be

Ce) Mtaning tic forlocrs

clock bother.
W 5 And there went ont alter hin Joabs men, and the Cerethites, and the Phelcthites, and all the mightyest men: And they departed ont of Hiernsalem to falow after Seba the sonne of Bichri.
3 And when Mey Were at 5 great stone in Gtbeon, Aniala went before them:

Oden. And Foabs © garment that he had az tb boilt hun, was girde vnto him he had dhe warts. gyrded thereon a sword, which was ioyned fait to his loynes in a Meath, that as he went it fell sometinie out.
9 And Yoab saide to Amala: Art thon
“Fore. in “Healey my others And Joab tone
E Amala by 5 beard with the right hand,
Praga. tO Rille him.

10 But Amasa toke no heede tothe that was in Joabs hand: for Gane he smote him in the fyft crybbe e lhed out his bowels to the grounde, and
“ thautt at hun no more, e he dyed: So Eh
Foad and Abilat his brother folowey eon after Seba the sonne of wrelyrt, Rot hi

n And one of Joabs men stoode byhim and salde: He that beareth any fauour to Joab or good will to Dad, let Hun go after Joab, | i

12 And Anata wallowed in blood in the nuddes of the way: And when the man sawe that all the people stoo de thi, he remoued Amala out of the way into the kielde, and tast a doth vpou him, betause he law that euery one that tame C by him stoode still.

3 And alloone as he was remoued out of the wap, al the people went after Joab, to folow after Seba the sonne ot
Bichri.

14. And he went thorow all the tribes ol
Ilrael, vnto Abel, and to Wethmaacha, and all the places of Werinr And they gathered together, and went alter him.

15 And they came and besieged him in A bel, neare to Bethmaachãa: And they call vp a bancke against the cite, and the 10 people therof stoode onthe ramper, and 4 all the people that was with Joab,“ at down thrust at the wall to ouerthrowert.

16 Then tryeda wyse woman out ok the citte heave, heave, I pray you say vnto

| Joab: Conic hither that J may speake

with these.

17 When Joab was come onto her, the woman lade; Art thou Poabs He aun-
Hyered:Fambe, She lade vnto him:
Heare the wordes of thyne handmapd.

And he aunswered: J do heare. he

18 Then lhe spake thus: They false in a the olde tyme faying, They Maud alke er
OF Abel: And so haue they continued. ant

19 Jamo one of them that are peaccable sr, c faithful in Ifracl, and thou goest a ente bout to destrop ascitic, and a mother 1
Ilrael: Why wilt thou deuour the inheritaunte ofthe Lorde-

20 And Joab aunfwered and sayd: God

forbyd, God forbid it me that JJ should

eicher deuour, or destroy.

at The matter is not fo: Wut a man of moimt

ü egit

rep2aims (Seba the fore of
Bahn by name) path lwkt vp his hand

against the king, euen against Daud:

2 v bs hun onely,¢ J wyll depart kouthe ate. And the Woman laid vucon pascholD, his head thalbe thro-

wen to thee ouer the Wall.

against the Philistines.

hunger in the dapes of
Daud three peres“
Atogether: And Dautd
“I enquired ofp Lorde.

Soe:

Awered: It is for Saul, e aͤndthe boul of blood, betause he fluc zes the* Gibeonites. ö
% Andthe bing called the Gibeomtes,

onites were not of the* children of BE rael, but a renmaunt of the Amorites, and the childeen of Ilrael [ware vnto thei: And Saul fought to flay them foraseate that he had to the childzen ol
Iltael and ol Juda.)
3, Wherekore Pauid faide vnto the Gibeonites :® What fhall I do for vou, wherewith halt J make the attonement, that ve may blesse p inheritaunce ofthe Torde-
4 The Gibeonites aunswered him: we

BS:

tarp due firs d.

nor ol his house, neither is it dur mind

a thatthon shouldest RO any nian in

esti, kal. De saide: What vou shall say, that

dull do for pou.

They aunlwered the king: The man wat tonsumed vs, and imagined to
Mi rene eee

maining i of Jltael aini Een the toastes

8.5 lcetteuen men ofhis™ fonnes be deli-

oe il ae Duto vs, æ we will hang them vp

Glen 1 9 1 5 1 of Sani

od did choole. And the kin ade: J wil geue them vou. —

king.

23 Jdab was ouer all the hoast of Ilrael, and Wanata the sonne of Jehoida was ouer the Cerethites c Phelethites.

IDE N there was an 7

And the Lorde aun-

and salde vnto them: (Now the Gibe-
| lai the Meholathite.

will haue no siluer nor golde of Saul

ab returned to Hicrulatem, vnto the

And Aduram was oner the tribute, and Jehosaphat the fonne of Ahitud,

a the woman went vnto all —_—sWasrecozder.
2 A ED her wiledome, and 25 Seua was scribe and Sadoe and a. chey trate of the head of Seba p fone biathar were the priestes. ee ol Wichrt, and cast it outto Joab: And 26 And Jra the Jairite Was ® chiefe ae mice ce. he biewa trumpet-Tther retyred from bout Dauid. f the citie euer nan to his tent: And Joq Lhe .xxi.(hapter.

1Chree deare peres.9 The vengeaunce of the tines of Haul, lighteth on his seuen lonnes, which are hanged. iy Foure great battailes, which Dauid had

Wut the king had com passion on De W phiboscth the sonne of Jonathan the lonne of Saul, because of the Hodes oth that was betweene them, enen betweene Dauid ek Jonathan the sonne of Saul.

8 Wut the king toke the two sonnes ol

Vilpha the daughter of Ata whom the bare vnto Saul, euen Armoniand Miphiboseth, and the fine sonnes of Michol the daughter of Saul, whom 0 end, che bare to Adriel the forme of Barzel- e ownehbzought
And he delinered them vnto ö handes nes of the Gibeonites, Which hanged them er acer. in the hill before the Lorde: And they “Pe fell ail seuen together, and Were Laine xr in the dayes of haruest, euen in the“ „de, first dayes, and in the beginning ol bar- wach com lye haruest. neth parte ot

Marche, and

10 And Wippha the daughter of Zia toke p'”

® sackcloth, & Hanged it vp for her vp- he on the rocke (ene) fromthe beguming ea of haruest, vntill © water dropped vpon eder them out ok heauen, c suffered neither Gt the byrdes olthe ayre to lyght on them weh come by day, nor beastes of p fielde by night. we vier

n And it was tolde Dawid what Nalpha a.

the daughter ol Nia the concubine ol
Saul, had done.

1 And Dauid went and toke the boucs

of Saul and of Jonathan his sonne, from the cite zins of Jabes in Gilead,
Which had stolen them from the streate of Bethlan Where the Philistines had
Hanged them, whẽ the Philistines had

lane Saul in Güboa:
13 And he brought thente the 1 of

a DRM,

ö Dauid

then that were hanged.
14. And the bones of HSaule Jonathan his sonne buryed they in the tduntrep of
Wemamin, in Zela, in the sepulchze of
Cis his father: And when they had per-
Seck. fourmed al that the king tonnnaunded, kg, God was then at one with the land. tnpmimes 15 Morzeouer, ö Philistines had yet warre bees Againe With Plracl, and Dauid went land. owne and his seruauntes with him, c ought against the Philistines: And Daz uid waxed faintie.
16 And Jesbi benob one of the sonnes of the glauntes (the iron of whole speare

cau fo tone waped three hundred “ ficles of brasse) ker a hi and he being gyrded with a new Nyoyn, u Rega, thought to haue laine Dauid,

17 Wut Abisalthe sonne of Zaruia suctoured him e sniote the Philistine, and killed hun. Theu the leruauntes of Daz uid bare vnto hin saying: Thou shalt
GO no moze ont with vs to battaile, that

2. Jamuel.

brgsei Guy
Saul, and the bones of Jonathan his thou quenche not the py ht of Israos oom sonne, and they gathered the bones ok 18 And pet after this, Were w E Alrael. oes

fc gn 7 = =
— : “ — *

; pat ds Abate ecéP= talle With the dhnultmes ate Gob any see then Sibbechal the Pulathite que @ Oe
Saph which was oneofp formes of the ee.
Man tyste Was another b ie

19 An nother ba * ian,
Gob withthe Dhiitines where nan the sonne of Paere Demin azze

aft Fe ba ot e ftaffe of whole speare wa t Ban seaioeatersdatean, e

20 And there was pet another v in Geth, wher was Fang eon ature, and had on euery hand fire fin: gers, Eon euerp foote fire toes, fouree twentie in nuniber, and was bome aif of the kindred of the giauntes in Geth.

21 And when he defped Ilrael, Jonathan the forme ol Simeã the brother of
Dauld fluc him. ;

22 Thele foure were borne tothe giaunt in Geth, and dyed by the hand of Dauid, ¢ by the handes of his seruauntes.

Daum gr hne ,

J The xxii. Chapter.

2 Dauid after his victories praptech God. s
44 he propheciech of the reiection of the J

8 NM Dato spake the bein YG ltwornes of this © fong dance 5 vnto the ove what
Een a, ay i| time the Lorde had de-

hand of al his enemies, and out of the hand of

2 And he laide: The Lorde is my rocke,

and mp castell and my delpuerer.

God is np strength, in him will J trust: he is my shielde, and the horne dt my faluation, ni hie towre, and my refuge, my sauiour, thou batt faned me krom wong.

Pla.xviila. 4 J will tall on the Lorde which is peaple Worthy: and so shall Ibe saued from nine enemies.

Sn, ge- 5 J or the panges of death tlosed me a-

* tl the fludesof" Belial put mein

eure.

The sorowes of hell compassed me about, the snares of death ouertoke me. N
7 In my tribulation did J tall vppon

the Lorde, and crye to my God: and he dyd heare my voyte out of his temple, and in crye (did enter into his eares.

* Oi, rocke. 3

a 6
'* Dp gtaure,

W

The anger of God toward the wicked.

ewes, and vocation of the Gentileg.

8 The carth trembled and quaked: the foundations of heauen moued ¢ shooke when he was angry.

9 Onioke went out at his nosthryls, € g. consunung fyre out of his mouth:coles aa: were kindled thereat. f

Io And he bowed heauen ¢ tame downe:
125 there was darkenelse vnder his

eete.

11 And he rode vpon Cherub and did fice: ue was feene vppon the winges of the

nde.

Iz He made darknes a tabernacle rounde about hin: with waters gathered toge-C ther in thicke tloudes.

3 Through the brightnes of his presente were the coles of fpze kindled. costs,

14. The Lorde thundzed from heauen: nd

t hethat is mot hie, put out his DOPE. bea
15 Hethot arralbes And scattered them: a
[to wit} yghtring e ouerthrew them. Y
16 The chanels ofthe fea appeared:and the foundanids of the world were scent, by the reafon of ß rebnking ofthe L020, and through the biatting of the beat) offisnofthyls, ”
17 He sent from abone and toke mc: h drelb me out of many waters. 18 He

ids fONS ene mered nie from my mightie ene
5 1 from them that hated ine: for cp wereto trong forme. .
Di When they bad Spreuented me in the ve dye of mp talanutie: the Lorde staped e me vp. . sa he brought me out into roomth: ni peuineeed nie, betaule he had a fanour vnto nie. N e Lorde rewarded me actording
21% mp righteoulnelle: acco dug to the purenes of my hands he retompenled
Chou art

me. 57 *

4 22 Fo: J hauckeptthe wayes of p Lord: a a = 80 1 wickedly agapust my God.
23 For all his lawes Were in mp fight: € his ltatutes, J did not depart therefrö.
24 In his light allo haue J ben vpright: ad haue kept me from myne owne ini-

quitte. oe

And the Lowe did to me againe ac:

od 1 my righteoulnesse:euen after my purenes in his eye sight. 5

e 26 With the godly chou chalt be godlie:

and with the yan that is vpright, thou

(halt be vpright.
27 Wüh the pure thou shalt be pure: and

pabercbp

' meme,

Theis felfe“ froward.

emt 28 And the poore people thou wilt laue:

‘nto but thyne eyes are vpon the proude, to bring them downe.

29 Fo thou art my lyght, O Lorde: and the Lorde Chall ight my darkenesse.

30 For by thee I shall breake through ar hoast of men: and by my God wyll J
{pring ouer a wall. a

31 God is vntorrupt in his way, the
Word of the Lord is tryed in the fyre: he is à shielde to all them that trust in him.

32 Jor who is a God saue the Lord: and who is mightie saue our God-

F 33 God strengthneth mie in battaile: e ryddeththe way cleare before me.

34. He maketh my feete lyke W hyndes
1 setteth me vpon my hie pla-

35 Heteacheth my handes to light: that euen a bowe of fteelcis broken with myne armes.

ut mer

VSwypkt
Ravopde all
Wage,

2. Saul”

with the froward thou wilt Merwe thy

36 Thou hat geuenme the shielde of thy faluation: and with thy loning meke: nesle thou doest multiplie ine.

37 Thou hast enlarged my steps onder me:and my legges (hall not faile me.

38 Jhaue folowed vpon myne enemies, and destroyed them: and turned not againe, vntul J had tonsumed them.

39 J haue Walled them, and wounded

them, that they Mal not be able to aryst: pea, they shall all vnder mp feete, 4 G

40 Thou Halt gyrded me about wi might to battaple:and theni that rose a gant nie, hast thou subdued vnder me.

41 And thou Hatt geuen me the neckes of myne enemies: that J might destroye them that hate mie. a

42 They loked about, but there was none to saue them: leuen vnto the Lorde, but he heard them not. f

43 Then did J beate them as small as the dust of the earth: J did stampe them as the clay of the streate, and did spreade them abrode.

44 Thou also hast deliuered me from the distention of my people, thon hast kept me to be an head ouer nations: the people which J knew not, do serue me.

45 Straunge chuͤdrec dislemble with me: (0 free mp power to faine ond pros

46 Straunge children wil shrinke away: tte nenen

obedience

at the hearing of the eare, they obey mie.

and they shall be smytten with feare in vn their priuie thamber.

47 Let the Lord lyue, and blessed be my strength: magnified be God (euer) the force of my saluation. 4

48 It is God that geueth me (power) to reuenge me: c bringeth Downe the people vnder me.

49 He deliuereth me from mpne eneniies, thou allo hast lyft me on hie from them that rose against me: thou Hatt delyucred me from the wicked man.

50 And therefore J wyll prayse thee O ode among the nations: and wyll fing vnto thy namie.

51 He is the towre of saluation for his king, and dealeth mercpfullp with his annoynted: even with Dauid, and with his seede for euermore.

heart.

The

ia 8

against ihtir

— 7 ¥

2. Samuel.

q The. xxiii. (hapter.

Che last wordes of Dauid. s Che wicked thall be plucked vp as thornes.
8 The names and factes of his mighty men. 5 He desireth water, z would

Dauids worthies not drinke. e 1 (SSE hese allo be the co last pake ae he WOR 7 BAY [wordes of Dauid: Da-

dad made the
Plalmes.

was ordapned the ans noynted of the God of
— — Jacob and the sweete
Plalmist of Isracl, sayde:
2 The spirite of the Lorde fake by me,

eres and his word was in my tongue. che wender 3 The God of Plcael spake to me, even donn mir. the most nughtie of Ilrael sayde: A ru-

ler ouer men being uff, ruling in p feare of God: 3 *
4 And as the morning lyght when the sunne is vp, a morning in Which are no tloudes, i so sbal my house be, but not] as

the gralle of the earth is by bryahtnelse

and rapne.
5 Jor so shal not my house be with God:

ii Reg vn. e. F or he hath made with me an euerlasting couenaunt, perfect and lurein all
. poyntes:aànd this is truly all my health,

that he wit «= MUD all my despre,“ that it growe, but not make it Not A grasse.

growe-Mea- 6 Wut the vngodly man, shall be as a

grolte uh, thoztie cieaue plutkt vp, which can not continueth be taken With handes: g a. 7 But the man that shall touche them, and faleth inulst be Defenced with iron, or with the

away.

shatt ofa speare, and they {halve burnt

With fire in the fame place.
WS These be the names of the nughtie men whom Dawid had: One that fate

im the feate of wisedome, being chiefest

couantel, among the princes, was Adino of Est,

he sluc eyght hundred at one tyme.

9 Alter hun was Eliazar the forme of

Dodo the sonne of Ahohi, one of the

wd oaunger thret worthies with Dau, which de-

oreheriens fped the Philistines that were there ga-

cen thered . to battatle, when the deen de men of Ilrael were gone vp.

ere fo pe arõse and layed on the Philistines,

tune wee Piitill his hand was weerp, and Oclaue

drang. uto the lword: And the Lode gaue

great victorp the fame day, and the people returned after him, only to spople.
11 After him was Sannna the sonne of
Age the Hararite: € the Philistines gachered together belpde a towne, where

1 And lade, The Lorde forbyd that J fe

was a partellof land full of ientits and the people fled from the phitittines:
12 But he stoode np nuddest of the gromd and Defended tt, e siue the Phmlhineg: and the Lorde gaue great vittozie. „
3 Thee three (which were of the thy. tie chiele captaincs Went downe to Da. ind in the haruest tyme vnto the cane A. dullam:and the hoast of the Philistmes pytched in the valley of giauntes.
And Dautd was then in an houlde,

and the souldiers ofPpbiliftines were

in Bethlehem. ai ee
15 And Daud longed, x salde: Oh that ve
FJ had ofthe water that is in the welb y the gate of Bethlehem for to duke.
16 And the three nughtie brake through the hoast of the Philistines, a drue water out of the well of Bethlehem that was by the gate, and toke and brought it to Dauid: Meuerthelesse he would not drinke thereof, but powzed it vnto h sve,

the Lorde tne tos

cade

should do fo: Is not this the vicod of» the men that went in ieoperdie of they: lpues: c therefore he would not danke it And thele thinges did these thee mightie men.
18 Abisai the bother of Joab the sonne n Reg u; of Zaruia, was chiefe ainong the three, t he lyft vp his speare against three hundred, “and fluc them had the nanie a « roi. mong the thee: f D
19 For he was most excellent of the three, and was their taptapne: Molwbeit he attayned not vnto (the fire three. N
20 And wWanatah the fonne of Jehoida the sonne ofa mightie man, valiaunt in actes, of Kabzeel, slue two frig men of Moab: he went downe also, and siue a lion in the middest of a pit in tune olf snowe. :
21 And he flue an Egyptian’ a goodly a bigge man, and the Egyptian had a ” re speare in his hand: ut he went downe a to him With a staffe, and plucked the cv speare out ofthe Egyptians hand, and flue him with his owne speare.
22 These thinges did Banatah 5 forme of Jehoida, and had the nanie 2

Oven gree re

past

2 tat Haun made him ok his tounlel.
„ Alahel the brother of
N hel bine cih man ja the Parodite, Elica the
Wie hel ihe Paltite, Ira the fonne of

e Thetoite: i e of Anathoth, ) Mebunnai ß

55. ite: N cen an Ahohite, Maharai the
9 etophathite:

2 75 9 775 of Waanah an Hetophatite, thai the sonne of Kiba out of
Gibea of the childzen of Wentamin:

29 Banaiah the Pirathonite, Deddai of

the ryuer ol Gaas:

IMuUuel.

W

mart

30 Ablalbon the Arbathite, Almauet the Warhumite: ? r 5
31 dane ek the sonnes of

Jasen, Jonath

32 Hamma the Hararite, Ahiam 5 sonne

of Sarar an Pararite
33 Eliphelet p sonne of Aalbai the sonne of Maachathi, Eltam the sonne of Ahithophel the Gllonite: :
34. Hesvai the Carmelite, Paaraithe Ar-

bite.

35 Boal the sonne of Nathan of Zoba,
Bani the Gadite:

36 Zelecthe Ammonite, Haharai the Werothite which was the harnesse bearer of Joab the fonne of Zarnig:

37 Ira the Jethzite, Gared p Jethute:

38 : riathe Hethite: thirtie and seuen in

All.

qT he.xxii Chapter.

1 aud cauleth the people tobe numbred. 10 He repenteth and chooleth to tall into Gods handes. lence.

= rd agapne the Lorde

das wroth act HE

ef) cael, and“ he moued
[Daud agaynst them,

Elli that he sapde:“ Go

number Plracl c Ju-

Da.

2 For the king fayde to Poab the captaine of the hoatt which Was with him:
Go thou abrode now throughout al the

_, tribes ot Ilrael, euen from Dan to e

ge erseba, and number pe the people, that

u J nmap knowe the number of them.

man 3 And Joab {aide vnto the king: The

ion L orde thy God encrease the people an

a hundreth kolde mo then they be, e that

the eyes ol my lorde the king may {ee it:

And what is the tause that my lorde the king hath a lust to this thyng-

4 Motwithstanding, the kinges word preuapled agapnst Joab e against the captaines of the hoatt: And Joab e the captapnes of the hoalt, went dut front the prelenee ofthe king, to number the people of Israel.

5 Andtheppalled ouer Jozdane, epits ched in Aroer on the right syde of the tilie that lyeth in the myddest of the va-

; ley of Gad, and toward Jazer. gad then thep came rg Gilead, and to

de land Tahtim hodschi, ¢ from thẽte they tame to Dan Jaan, and about to

barer.

Din
Ander bu,

15 Deuentie thouland perishe with the pets.

Sidon. 5
And came to the strong hould of Lyre, and to all the cities of the Heuites and of the Chauaanites: € then went out to the south of Juda, enen to Beerseba.

8 And so when they had ben abrode throughout all the land, they returned

to hierusalem after the end of nine monethes and twentie dapes.

9 And Joab deliuered the number and sunnne of the people buto the king, and there were in Jlrael eyght hundred thoufand men of might that drewe
Nwordes: and the men of Juda were fiue hundred thouland men.

10 And Daudds heart smote him, after that he had numbred the people: And
Danid {aide vnto the Lord, J haue sinned exceedingip in that J haue done:

And nowe J beleche thee Lord take awap the trelpasse ol thy seruaunt, for J a haue done very foolifyly.

11 And when Dauid was vp in the mor- „ whom ning, the word of the Lorde came vnto 440 fer the prophet Gad Danids fear faping: en

11 Go and lap vnto Dauid, thus lapth Co) ons the Lorde: FH offer thee three thpnges, ah choole thee which of thein J chall do ae vnto thee. fourth pert,

13 So Gad tame to Daud, and chewed bu him, and faid vnto him: Wylt thou haue tee reve
© Suen peres hunger to mene 1

J

2. S

Dauids repentaunce.

before thyne enemies, they folowyng thee: or that there be three dayes pestilente in thy land: Now therefore aduise thee, and lee what aunswere J hail geue to him that sent me.

CA And Daud laide vnto Gad, Jam in
& wonderfull strayte: Wet vs fall now into the hand of the Lore (for much is his merep) and let me not fall into the hand of man.

15 And so the Torde sent a pestilente in

Ilrael, from the morning vnto the time appoynted: And there Dyed of the peo-

(t) From the

ge pie krom Dan to Beerseba feuentic thousand men. ö

16 And when the angel stretched out his

hand vpon Hierusalem to destrop it, the

owe repented him ok the enill, e saide

to the angel that destroped the people: t is now sufficient, holde thyne hand. nd the angell of the Lord Was by the threshing plate of Areuna the Jebulite.
17 And Dauid spake vnto the Torde, when he law the angell that smote the eople, and salde: Lo, it is I that haue inned, and that haue done wickedlie:
Wut these sheepe, what haue they done-
Tet thyne hand H me, and against mp fathers house.
18 And Gad tame the fame day to Dauld, aud said vnto him: Go vp and reare an aulter vnto the Lorde in the threshing floore of © Areuna the Jebusite.

W

Called ate
Drnan.
6. Cho. 22. c.

D

land: 02 Wilt thou flee three monethes

pray thee be against

10 Aud Daudd according to che sapingok
The end of the fecond booke of Samuel, otherwyfe called the second

33 Dauidm pen
Gad, went vp as th ov p Sthe Tode commayy

20 And Areuna loked and sawe te and his seruauntes cornu tow a him: and Areuna went but, and bo b ed hum selfe before the king on Ns te bpor the grou. ace

12 And Areuna sapde: yo er lord the king tome to his Kae uid annfvered: To bye the threthin pore 2 ties, ane 1 make an aulter —

d, that the pla krom the people. ö due map realte

22 And Areuna faide vnto any: nip lorde the king take and offer w at seemeth him good in his eyes: Weholde bars be = toy buent facefice ap cha:

4 e other inftrumentes ie entes of the

232 e ihmges did Areuna agg @ wre king geue vnto the king, k lad mozeouer = vnto the king: The TLorde thy God at de tept thee. Dane

24. And the king faide vnto Arena: ot so, but J will bye it oftheeat a prite, and
Wil not offer lacrifite vnto the Lon my
Sodol the which doth cof me nathug.
And fo Dauid bought the thresshing floozc and the oxen for fiftie sicles ok ose: siluer. : ‘ eur i

25 Ind Dauid buylt there an aulter onto sae the Korde andofkered burnt facvifices, e

and peace offeringes: And fo the Tonde rc

Was intreated for the land, and the reh!

plague teassed from Jsrael. E

doole of the Kinges.

‘ 5 ra ae?
‘ ’
5 R.

M.

2. Kinges.

he thirde booke of the kinges, after

the reckening of the Latiniftes: which thirde booke and the fourth alfo,is but one with the Hebrues,

E. vy. | q1 CESS Vos MD king Danid
. ine © olpe ard at Kony) fieicken in peres,

so that whẽ they

toueredhim with

V llothes, he caught

nd heate. wWherekore his

V seruauntes sapde

vnto him: Let there be lought for my

an lord the king a voung virgyn, to stande belore the king and to cherishe him, and let her lye in thy bolome, that my lorde the king may get heate.
And so they sought for a fatre damolell throughout al the coattes of Ilrael, and fkounde one Abilag a Sunamite, and ie brought her to the king.
4 And the damolell was exceeding fatre, and cherished the king, and nunistred to him: ut the king knewe her not. ia, 5 And Adoma the sonne of Haggith exalted him selfe, saying: J wilbe king. And he gat him charettes and horsemen, and fpftic men to runne belore him.

* And his father for his time would not dilplease hini, to fay why halt thou done foz2ind he was a very goodly man: and ae bare him next after Abla-

7 And he toke tounsell at Joab the sonne

ve ok Zarula, and at Abiãthar the priest:

in and they helped forward Adonia: vain, 8 Gut Dadoc the priest, Wanalah the sonne ok Jeholada „Mathan the prophete, Semei, and Kei, and the men
Of might which were with Dau, they
Were not with Adonia.
9 And Adonia facrificen cheepe, and oren,

fs | 8
: EL eS A i F g 8 a
7 me W
H 8 =
BGM

We done

hiche is by the well ol Rogel, and caledallhis brethren the kinges fonnes,
AUD all the men of Juda the kinges ser-

aud kat tattel, bp the stone of Zoheleth,

The firft Chapter.

ilag kepeth Dauid in his ertreme age. 5 Ddonta blurpeth the binadome. . oe. fomton armopneed king. so Adonis kledto che aulter. 8 *

uauntes: ' fo Wut Nathan the prophete, and Wanalah, and the mightie men and Solomon his brother he called not. |

Wherkore Nathan spake vnto Wethsabe the mother of Solomon , faying:
Hak thou not hearde that Adouta the sonne of aggith doth raigne, and Da-
UiD our lorde knoweth it not:
12 Nowe therfore tome, and J will geue

thee tounsell howe to laue thyne owne

I

Ipfe ,and the ipfe of thy sonne Solomon. fr

13 Go and get thee in vnto king Daud ,¢ fay vnto him: Diddest not thoumy lorde
O king, Iweare vnto thy handmapde, saping, Assuredliy Solomon thy lonne chall raigne after me, and he chall sit
1198 my [cate : why is then Adonia

n S alone: oz, DBelomoh}.

For Bras fa will bes op thy

sonne and thee

il he raigne.

ing:
14 Weholde Whyte thou yet talkelt there E.

with the king, J wil come in alter thee, and tonfirme thy wordes.
15 And Bethlabe Went in vnto the king

into the chamber: And the king was ve-

xy olde, and Abilag the Sunamite ministred vnto the king.

16 And Wethlabe stouped æ made obey-

launte vnto the king: And the king lapd,
What is thy matter:

17 She aunlwered: My lorde, thon swarest by the Lorde thy God bnto thine handniapde [Caving] Alluredly
Solomon thy sonne (hall raigne after me, and he shall sit vpon my seate.

13 And beholde, nowe is Adonia king, f 5 thou mp lord the king knowelt

not.

19 And he hath offered oven, kat cattel, and many theepe , and hath called all the sonnes of the king, and Abiathar the priest and Joab the captayne of the ae eee thy seruaunt bath

e not bydden.
5 3 1. R 1 20 And

ring suche

thunges as

2 Kan ges. Sim,

ra ne thccdke Waiana e e aa
20 And nowe my lorde O king, theeyes hotada ,ethp feruaunt Solomon, h

9 DD 21 For els when my lorde the king (hall

Galberers-” 22 And lo whyle (he pet talked with the

nerg, and cond mned to

deupas 23 And they told the king, saying:Wehold,

traigressours

ce H eb. Lee the king
Radon lyue.

Meaning

suche as were of hig garde.

DN. 1 37
DT

ay er
8 0 SNe 1 > wis) ES

be nogealled. done at
27 Is this thing done of nry 1020 the king and thou batt not shewed it vnto thy é seruaunt who should fiton the seate of U my lode the king after hun: mth
28 Then king Dauid aunswered e fayp; fe
Cal me Wethlabe. And dhe came into the l binges presente, and stoode before him, .
29 And the king [ware, saying: As the
Lord lyueth that hath ryd my soule out ofall fais bun zo Euen as J ware vnto thee by the H
God of Israel, saping, Assuredly a. mon thy sonne shal raigne after mee he fal fit vpon my seate for me: so wil J certeinly do this day.
31 Then Wethsabe bowed on her face to the earth, and dyd reuerente vnto the king, x lapde: J pray God that my lorde king Dauid may lyue for euer.

32 And king Dauid sapde: Call me Sa-

dot the priest, and Nathan the prophet, and Wanatah the fonne of Jehoiada.
Aud they tame before the king.

NN f r 9 ;

5 Tl W ) mais
Nie a 15 114 hy 0 1
Ys 8 * tina 100 ¢ bai tt 0 0 ;

with vou the “feruauntes of pour lord, fet Solomõ my soune vpon myne one mule, and carp him downe to Gihon:
34. Aid let Sadoc the priest and Pathan the prophet annoynt him there king over Ilrael: And blowe pe with trumpettes, say, God saue king Solomon.
35 Andthen ve Hall tome vp alter him, that he may come and lit vpõ my seate,

for he shalbe king in my steade: and . aa haue tommaunded him to be captayn’ duer Israel and Juda.

36 And Wanaiah the lonne of Jeholada

aunswered the king, and sayde, Anmien.
And the Lord God of my lorde the king fay fo to.

37 And as the Lome Hath ben with ur lord the king, eu fo be he with Bold

d makehis seate greater tt en the
Pg my lord king Dauids Hath ben.
438 And lo Sadoc the priest, and Hathan the prophet, and Banaiah the sonne of

ehotada, and the Cerethites and Phesethites went downe, and set Solomon vpon king Dautds mule, and brought

ihon.
W the priest toke an horne of ple cut of the tabernacle, c annopnted Solomon: And they blew the trum: pettes, and al the people sapde: God laue

olomon.

4 moa the people tame vp after him, pyping with pypes and refopling great: ly, fo 1 1 1 carth rang with the

nde ol them.

* Adonia and al the ghestes that he had called vnto him, hearde it euen as they had made an ende of eating. And when Joab hearde the sounde of the trumpet, he sayde: What meaneth this noyse and bprore in the citie-

42 And as he pet spake, beholde Jonathan the donne of Abiathar the priest tame, and Adonia laid vnto him: Come in, for thou art a valiant man, and bringeft good tydinges. i

43 Ad Jonathan aunswered and sayde to Adonia: Ueryly our lorde king Daz uid hath made Solomon king.

44 And the king hath sent with him Sa-

dot the priest and Pathan the prophet,

the Cerethites, and the Phelethites, k they haue set hun vpõ the Kinges ume.

and Semet. 10 The death of Dauid.

N N d.

dre, c he charged Solomon his sonne, sap-
N ing: : :

He dapes of Daud

{ = bea wo, Hong therfore, F chewe thy leike a man. a Depethou the watch ofthe Lore thy od that thou walke in his wapyes, and
EPC his statutes, and his preteptes, his aabgementes, and his testimonies zeuen it is witten in the lawe of Mopses:

3. Ringes.

and Wanalah the sonne of Jehoiada, x

drew nie that he shoulld

= A go che way of al
7 tth , be thon ©

IXXIIII.

Gihon. And they came vp from thence d reloyted, that the titie did sounde againe:
And that is the nople , that pe haue a a 3
46 And Solomon sitteth on the seate of the kingdome. ahanche (cate
4-7 And moreouer, the kinges seruauntes ore me tameto“ bleffe our lorde king Dad, ae en faying:God make the name of Solomo moze honorable then thy name, r malte his seate greater then thy seate And De ge

the king bowed him selfe vpon the bed. Lee an

4 And thus sayd the king: Blefled be che
Tord God of Istael, which hath made ae we ou mp seate this day, myne eye cyng it.

49 And he er that were with % donta were akrapde, and role vp, x Went tuery man his wap.

50 And Adonta fearing the prelente ol
Solomon, arose, and Went and taught hold on the hornes of the aulter.

51 And one tolde Solomon, saping: wee hold, Adonia feareth king Solomon:

forlo he hath· taught hold on the homes Exodxxib

ofthe aulter, saping: Let king Solomon sweare vnto me this day that he wil not flay his sernauut with the ford,

52 And Holoms said: It he wi shew hin selfe a worthy ma, ther chal not an heer of hym fal to the earth: Wut e ik wicked: nesle be founde in him, he shall aye,

$3 And so king Solomon sent, and they brought him from the aulter, and he tame and did obeysaunce vnto king Solomon: And Solomon sayde vnto hint,

6 45 And Sadot the priest d Nathan the Geer thee to thyne houle. prophete, haue annopnted him king in
The ii. Chapter .

1 NaUuld erhorteth Solomon, and geueth charge as concerning Joab, Warsellat, j i 7 Adonta aclech Abisag to wyfe. 25 He is fapne, 35 Sadoc was plated in Abiathars roome.

that thou mayst prosper in all that thou doest, and in euery thing that thou med-
4 That the Logde also may make good
Kis worde which he spake vnto me, fay ing: If thy children take heede to their
Wap, that Hey walke before me in trueth, with all their heartes, a with al

their soules, thou shalt not(saith he) ve 1. Ne. be. 4.

without a man on the seate of Jsracl.

5 *Mozeouer, thou wottest holve Foab i Reg i the sonne of Zaruia ferned me, and aud.

What he did to the two taptaynes of the

K 2 hoastes

Bees

Solomon.

hoastes of Piraet,vuto Abner the sonne of Mer, and vnto Amafa the sonne of
Jether, whom he slue, and ched blood in time of prate (euen as it had ben in warre ) t put the blood of warre vpon his girdle that was about his lopnes,
= in his Toes that were on his eete. '

6 Deale with him therefore according to thy witdome., and bring not his hooze

2 head downe to the grane in peace. iRexixf , Wut shewe kindnes vnto the sonnes
25 of Barʒellai p Gileadite, that they may tate at thy table: For they tanie to nie
Whe F fled from Absalom thy brother.
3 And behold, thou hast with thee Semeithe sonne of Gera the sonne of Je-

i. Re. xvi. b.

mini of Wahurim, whithe tursed nie

with an horrible curle, in the day when
J went to Mahanaim: Wut he came to meete me at Jordane, t Y sware to
Hin by the Lord, saping: I Wil not flay thee With the lworde.

9 Wut thou shalt not count him as vngiltie: For thou art a man of wildome, and knowest what thou oughtest to do vnto him, his hoore Head shalt thou

zing to the graue with blood.

10 And so Maud flept with his fathers, and was buried in the citie of Dauid.

1 And the dapes whiche Maud raigned vpon Jlrael were fourtie peres : seuen peres raigned he in Hebron, e thirtie and three eres raigned he in Hierusalem.

12 Then sate Solomon vpon the seate of
Daud his father, and his kingdoiue was stablished mightyly.

13 Aud Adonda the sonne of Haggith tame to Wethlabe the mother of Solomon,

Act. ii. c.

i. Pa. xxix. f

it. Ne. x vi. b.
And he sayde, peaceably.
C14 ve fayde moreoner: J haue somwhat to fay vnto thee. She sayd: Sap on.
15 And he sapd: Thou knowest that the kingdome was nne, c that all Jlrael set their faces one, that J shoulde

raigne: howbeit, the kingdome is turned awap, and geuento my brother: for

it is appoynted him of the Torde.

16 And nowe J alke a petition of thee, deny me nat. Aud fhe fayde vnto him:
Sapon.

17 Aud he said: Speake J pray thee, vnto

Solomõ the king(for he wil not fay thee nay) that he geue nie Abilag the Sue —

4 2 Ringes.

j | TT r ee
I

and (he sayde: Cömest thou peaccablpz:

- Soloman namite to wpke. a

13 And Bethlabe lapd: wel, J Wil speaue for thee vnto the king. 3

19 Bethsabe therfore went vnto king Solomon, to speake vnto him for Adonia:
And the king role vp to meete her, aud bowed him selke vnto her, and late hym dowue on his fate, € there was afeate fet for the kinges mother, e the late on his right syde.

20 Then she sapd: FJ desire a litie petition of thee, IJ pray thee fay me not nay. And the king fayd vnto her: Alke on, my mio: ther, for J will not fap thee nap.

21 She sapde: Wet Abilag the Suna-D ae geuen to Adonia thy bother to

ple.

22 And king Solomon aunlwered and sayde vnto his mother: vohy doest thou aske Abisag the Sunamite for Adonta: afte for hin the kingdome also: forhe is myne elder brother, and hath for him g
Abiathar the priest, and Joab the sonne ga of Zaruia. fanny

23 Then king Solomon (ware by the v=,
Lord, saping: God do so and so to me, tf es
Adonia haue not spoken this worde against his ownelpfe. ' .

24 Mode therefore, asthe Tordelyueth ,. whiche bath ordepned me, and
{et me onthe seate of Dauid my father, and made me an house as he promiled,

Adonia shall dye this day. N

25 And king Solonion sent by the hande of Banaiah the foune of Jehoiada, and he smote him that he died.

26 And dito Adiathar the priest sayd the king: Get chee to Anatoth onto thine owne fieldes, kor thou art worthy of death: but J will not at this tinte bill thee, betaule thou barest the arke of the
Torde God before Dauid my father, and betaule thou hast suffered with nix father in all his afflictions. , bree

27 G And so Solomon put away Abid vere thar from beyng prlelt vnto the LO s that he might fulfill the wordes of the
Lord Which he pale ouer the boule o

im Silo. 8

28 Then tydinges tante allo to Toabeler |,

pont bad turned after Adontä, thous) e turned not after Ablalom) and Joab

fied vnto the tabernacle of the ao

and taught holde on the hornes of We

aulter. N

29 And

in.

6E *

tes e

Prag

29 And ii was told king Solomon howe

dab fled vnto the tabernacle of che be, AND beholde he is by the aulter: Then Solomon fent Wanaiah the sonne eee lag Go and

on him. fal n Bani came to the tabernatle ofthe Lowe, andfayde vnto him:
Thus sapeth the king, Come out. And he lapde: May, but J wil dye euen here.
And Banatia brought the king Word

againe, saving: Thus sapde Joab, and 4

unlwered me. dad the king sayde vnto him, © Do enen as he hath sayd: mite him, e burie hun, that thou mayest take away the blood which Joab shed tauselesse, from me, and from the boule ol my kather.

3. Andthe Lorde (hail being his blood

pon his owne head: for he smote two

men righteouser and better then he, and

ethein with the sworde, my father ae not — therof,cuen Abner the sonue ol Ner taptayne ot the hoast of Ilrael, and Amala the sonne of Jether taptayne ok the hoast of Juda.

33 Their blood that therfore returne vpon the head of Joab, € onthe head of his seede for euer: ut vpon Dauid,¢ vpon his {eed, E vpon his houte,¢ bpd his teat chall there be peace foz euer of the Lord.

34. So wWanalah the sonne of Jehoiada went vp, c he fel pon him and flue him, and 5 him in his Houle in the wilt dernesse.

35 Andthe king put Wanaiah the sonne ok Jehoiada in his toome ouer 5 boat, and put Sado the priest in the roome of Abiathar.

$36 And the king sent and called Semet,

c layde vnto him: Buylde thee an houle indierufalen and dwel there, x see that thou go not fo orth thente any Whyther.
37 For be thou sure, that the day that thou goest out, and passest ouer the riuer of

3. Kinges. T

IV.

Cedron, thou shalt dye that da and tl blood shalbe bpon thyne 65 head. od
38 And Demet fayde vnto the king, This fapingis GOOD: As my lorde pking hath fapde, fo Will thy seruaunt do. And Sec: mei dwelt in Hieculatem many a day,
39 And it chaunted after He peres that two of the seruauntes of Semei ranne away dnto Achis sonne of Maacha king of Geth: And they told Semei, saying, Behold, thy feruauntes be in Geth.
And Semei stoode vp, and favien
His alle, and gat hun to Gethto Athis co ene to seke his seruauntes: And Semei Wet mane pm
8 brought his seruauntes againe from w. e

ipfe,

41 And it was tolde Solomon hawethat

emei had gone from Pierusalem to
Geth, and was tome againe.

42 And the king sent e called Semei, and said vnto him: Did J not charge thee by the Lorde with an oth, e testilied puto thee, saying: We sure, that whensdeuer thou goest out & walkest abroade any whyther, thou shalt bye the death: And thousavdest vnto me: It is good tyduiges that J haue heard.

43 Why then hast thou not kept the oth of the Lorde, and the commaundenient that I charged thee withall- _

44 The king layde mozeouer to Semei: Ne. xvid.
Thourenienirest all the wickednesle which thyne heart knowech, and that thou diddest to Dauid my kather: the
Torde also Natl being thy wickednesle vpon thyne owne head:

45 And king Solomon hate blessed, and the seate ol Dauid stabliched before the Lorde for euer.

46 So the king commaunded Wanatah the sonne of Jehsiada:which wentout, and smote him that he died: And the kingdome was stabliched in the bande of Solomon. |

G

B 3 The

Solomon.

(a) Wethiehé,

Cb)rwhere aulters were appoynted before the temple was buplt, to offee onto the Lozd.

ii. Par. i. a.

K

inges. 8

i 5 The iii. Chapter. W

Solomon taketh heroes daughter to wyse. 7 Che Lorbappeareth to him and geuee
= ong abe pleading of the two harlottes, and Solomons lentence therin, :

<A 5
. 2 A
A a 22 “= 2
9 4 2 »
9 To mn 5 > at =
1 15 Ras 307 2 a 0 720149 * 5 AS 5
5 8 alte HEM reat sen! 7 7 8
8 x¢ ace . 2a A 2
— 5 os * : =] 2
— 2 8 . oe
¢ * Pia, =! 4 : n 7
. am eed ae =— =—— 19 { 4 2
. nn — 1 . * Ay —
. ‘ J 5 — 2 il 1 N *
17 — — 8 0 * = x — 0 bs
72 sala i ain

ie eet neon
FP he ent:

tie with Pharao king of Egypt, c toke Pha-

A eitie of Dauid, vntil he had made an ende of buylding his owne houlc, and the houle or the Lode, andthe wall of Hierusalem roundabont. N

2 Onelp the people lacrificed in W hygh

places, because there was no houle built. vnto the name ol the Lorde vntill thole
Dapes,

3 And Solomonioned the Torde, walking in the ordinaunces of Dawa his father: fauc onely that he lacrificed and offered intense vpon aulters in hygh places. ;

4. And the king went to Gibcon,to offer there , for that was the foeciall hygh plate: Aud a thoulande burnt offcinges dyd Solomon offer vpon that aulter.

5 And in Gibeon the Torde appeared to
Solomon ina dreame by night, and
God layd: Alke what thou wut, that J mu geuc it thee.

6 And Solomon sapde: Thou Hatt shewed vnto thy seruaũt Dauid my father

great mercie, When he Wallied befoze

tee in trueth, in righteousnelle, and in

705 rags daughter, and brought her into the

8 And thy seruaunt is in t e middest of

12 Bchold, J haue done according to th

and in.

thy people which thou hast cholen: and verplpthe people are fo manp, that they tannot be told nor nübred for multitude.

‘9 Gene" therfore thy seruaunt an vader’ sen.

fanding heart to iudge thy people that
Imap difcerne betweene good a bar vor
Foz Who is able to indge this the lo toss

nightie a people?

10 And this pleaten the Lordewellthat

Solomon had defired this thing,

u And God laydt vnto hun: Thon Hat

not asked fo2 thy {rife long lyfe, neuher hast alued riches for thy selfe, nor Ha alked the lyfe ol thy enemies , bin se | alked for thy selfe vnderstanding e ducretion in iudgement:

Wordes, 15 J haue geuen ther a wre tt an vnderstanding heart, fo that dee was none lykt thee bekore cheeeneiste after thee (hai any arple lyke i 90

yon.

aue also geuen thee that which

‘pot Bat not alked, euen rychesse and

ponour, fo ther 4 2 no king lyke thee all thy dapes.

dai wilt walke in my wapes,

85 110 kepe myne ordmaunces and imp com-

maundenientes, as thy father Dauid

dyd walke, J will lengthen thy dapes.

When Solomon awoke, “ beholde it

was a dreame: And he tame to Hieru-

t xv. a

gree 15 ed had

1 stem and stoode before the arke of the ib

duenaunt of the Lorde, c offred burnt einige and peate offringes and made a keast to all his seruauntes.

16 Then came there two women that

were harlottes, vnto the king, ¢ stoode c him. N

1 31 ise one woman lapde: Oh my lorde, J and this woman dwell in one house, and 5 ne 0 of a childe,

With her in the houle:

15 andthethnde day after that J was deliuered, she was deliuered allo: and we were together, e no straunger with vs inthe houle, saue we two. N

9. Aud this Wines childe died in the night, for she smothered it.

20 And she rose at nidnight and toke my

sonne from my syde while thyne hand-

mapde slept, and lade it in her bolome, and put her dead childe in my bosome.
And when J role in the mornyng to geue my chylde sucke, beholde it was dead: But when JJ had loked vpon it

D

Md so king Solomon

0 on was king ouer all Il-
JON

805 And thefe were his ey ‘a lordes: Azariahu the donne of Sadoe the

ö priest.

Euhoreph and Ahiah the fonnes of
Olla, scribes: Jeholaphat the sonne of
Ahilud, the recörder.

4 Wanaiah the sonne ol Jehoiada was ge duller the hoast: Sadoc ande Abtathar
Weve the puestes.

And Azariahu the sonne of Pathan

aa. das Ouer the offiters: And Zabud the

one ol Pathan was a priest, p kinges

COnipanion

and Ahllar was steward of b houchold:

3. Ringes.

inthe morning, beholde, it was not m sonne which I dyd beare. ‘

22 And the other woman sayd: It is not fo, but ny sonne liueth, and thy sonne is dead. And che fapdeagame: Ho, but thy fonne is dead, and my sonne is alpue.
And thus they pleaded before the king.

23 Then sapde the king: The one sayth, this that is alpue is ny sonne, and the
Dead is thyne: And the other sayth, nay: but thy sonne is the dead, and the liluing
Childers myne. 4

24. And the king fayde: © Wing me a Coe rate
Solomon.

sworde. And they brought out a [Worde before the kings

25 Andthe king sayde: Deude the liuing child in two, and geue the one halle to the one, aud the other to the other.

26 Then spake the woman whole their ulng childe was, vnto the king (fo2 her bowelles yerned vpon her sonne) and lapde : J besech thee my lordẽ geue her the lining chulde, and in no Wyle flay it: Wut the other sayde, Let it be neither. myne nor thyne, but deuide it. ö

27 Then the king aunlwered and fayde:
*Geue her the liuing chide, and slay it not, for she is the mother tijerof.

28 And all they of Ilrael hearde of the iudgement which the king had iudged, and feared the king: kor they sawe that

the wyldome of God was in him to do

A 2

iustice.

The. iii. Chapter.

2 The princes and rulers vnder Solomon. 22 Che puruepaunre lor his bittailes. number ok his horses. 3: His bookes and writings.

And Adoniram the sonne of Abda was Reg. vid

26 The

ouer the tributes.

7 And Solomon had twelue offiters ouer all Israel, which / prouided vittaples forthe king and his houshold: eche man his moneth in a pere, made prouilion for netessarie thinges.

8 And these are their names:the sonne of
Hur in mount Ephraim,
9 The sonne of Dekar in Makaz and in
Saalbin, and Wethlames, Elon, and

Bethhanan. N

1o The sonne ok Hesed in Aruboth, to whom partepned Socho and all the land of Hepher.

11 The sonne of Abinadab in all the vez gion of Dor, whiche had Tapheth the daughter of Solomon to wpke.

K 4 Waana

W

Ixxvi. N

Luk vi. a

E

Solomon.

Thaanach and Megiddo, and ouer all
Bethlan, whiche is by Zarthana beneath Jeʒzrael, fro Bethlan to p plaine of Mehola, euen vnto the place that is ouer against Jecmeani.

13 The lonne of Gaber had Ramoth Gr lead, and his were the townes of Jair the sonne of Manasle which are in Gilead: and vnder hun was the region of
Argob whiche is in Balan threestore great cities with walles. and barres of

brasse. 1
€ 14. Ahinadab the sonne of doiddo had Ma-

henaim. N
15 Ahimaaz was in Rephthalim and he toke Wasmath the daughter of Dolomon to Wpke. f
16 aana the sonne of Husai was in Aser and in Aloth.
17 Jchosaphat the sonne of Paruah was in IJsachar. g
13 0 b the sonne of Ela was in Wenamin.
19 aber the sonne of Uri was in the countrey of Gilead, the land ok Sehon king ofthe Amorites, and of Dg king ol
Walan, x was officer alone in the lande.
20 And Juda and Israel were many leuenj asthe sande of the fea in numbre, cating druicking, and making mery.
Genxvd, 21 And Solomon raigned ouer all king-
Praten domes fromthe riuer vnto the lande of
25 the DHiliftines, seuen vnto the border of
Egypt: and they brought presentes, and serued Solomon al the dayes of his life.
„Cnrstbe 22, And Solomons bread fo: one Day was
Aan w thirtie quarters of manchet owe, &
70 bull. threescort quarters of meale:
23 Ten stalled oxen, and twentie out of the pastures, and a hundred sheepe, belive

hartes, buckes, and wilde goates , and

capons, 8
24 For he ruled in all the region on the

Die. v. Chapter.

1 Hiram sendeth to Solomon, and Solomon to him, purpoling to buploe che houte of
God. He prepareth llulle kor the buploing. 13 The number of the women.

0 Hiraking of Tyre

NN tent his leruauntes

EX e \eS|| Dnto Solomon(fo2 he had hearde that they
N had annoynted him king in the roome of his father) * Fo2 bird

3. Ringes.

Iz Waana the sonne of Ahilud was ouer other syde Euphrates, from *

fab to As3a, ouer althe kinges oro ther {poe the ruer: And pean with all his seruauntes on euery — N

25, And Juda and Ilrael diwelt withoye 22 feare, euerp man vnder his vine and bn der his figgetree from Danto weerfeha ip 1 of Solomon.

26 And Solomon had fourtiet Deer stalles of horses for charcttes 4 an 1 thoufande horsemen.

27 And the officers prouded vtttayle foy king Solomon and fo allthat tame ont of ey 295 — king 0 chan table euery man his moneth, fo that 2 ked mate UW : Poa 5

28 Warly also and strawe for the ho and mules brought they — ae where the officers were , euerp manin his THI. . Mn

9 And God gaue Solomon wysdome keer and vnderstanding exceeding much and
à large heart, euen as the sand that is on the sea shore. —

30 And Solomons wyldome extelled the wysedome of all the children of the east tountrep, and al the wildome of Egypt.

31 For he was wiser then al men yea then.
Echan the Ezrahite, and Heman, Chat col, and Dardathe sonnes of Mahol:
And his name was spoken of through: out all nations on euery spde. a

32 And Solomon spake three thonlande 4 prouerbes : And His songes were a 1

thoulande and fit. 1

33 Aud he spake of trees, euen from the
Cedar tree that groweth in Libanon, vnto the Isope that spungeth out of the wall: Pe spake also of beastes, of foules, of wormes, and okkishes. 5

34. And there came of all nations to heare the wyldome of Solomon, and from all kinges of the earth, Which had heard ol his wyldome. ö

was euer a louer of Dad. 0 1
2 And Solonion sent to Hiram, lar? w ing: bird a Thouknoweg hore that Damo He
, facher could not bupto an houle Dato 5 name of the Horde his God for

warres which were about Hint i

og 2. Kinges.

spde, unden . put them vnder

‘ es of his feete.
2 now che Londe my God hath genen me rest on euery spde, lo that there is neither aduerkarie no cuill to relist.
„And beholde, J am determined to

* paid an Youle vnto b name of the Lod mp@od,as the Lord spake vnto Daud my father, faying: Thy fonne whom

FZ wil set vpon thy seatt for thee, he Mal build an houfe vnto my name.

6 Nobwtherefore conunaund thou that they hewe nie Cedar trees out of Libanon, my feruaiites Walbe with thyne, and vnto thee wyll J geue the hyre kor thy leruauntes, accozdpng to all such thinges as thou shalt appoynt:for thou

knowest that there are not among vs

that can Tayl to hewe tymber, lyke vnto
3 7 05 And it came to passe, when Hiram
„heard ß wordes ok Solomö he reiopsed
„ greatly, x lad: zrlesled be the Lord thts

tts,

pl!

me puilde wi

=" © syle fonne oner this mighte people.

thou lentest tome fo2,¢ wylactompusbe all thy delpre concerning tymber of Cedar trees and firre.
9° My seruauntes (hall bring them from
Libanon to the sca, and J wyl tonuey them by fea in flootes vnto the place that thou thatt Mew me, and Wil caule them to be dilcharged there, and thou shalt reteaue them: and thou shalt do

me a plealure againe, ik thou numster

foode for mpne Houle,

day, which bath geuen vnto Dauid a

33 And hiram sent to Solomon, saping:
FY haue considered the thinges which

10 Aud so Hiram gaue Solomon Cedar trees and firre trees according to all his

despre.

11 And Solomon gave Hiram twentie thoufand quarters of wheate fo2 foode to his housholde, and twentie buts of pure oyle: Thus much gaue Solomon

to Hiram pere by pere.

12 And the Lode gaue Solomon wiledome as he prompleo him: And there

was peace betweene Hiram and Solo-
1 € they two were confedered togeer.

13 And king Solomon rapsed a summe out of Ylrael, and the summe was thirtie thouland men:

14 Whom he sent to Libanon, ten thonsand a moneth by tourse: fo that when they had ben one moneth in Libanon, they abode two monethes at home:

C

And Adoniram was over the summe. . n

15 And Solomon had threelcore and ten thoufand that bare burdens, and foure score thouland mafons in the mountaines::

16 Belides the lordes whom Solomon appopnted to ouersee the worke, euen three thousand e three hundred, which ruled the people Ca them that wrought in the woe. 5

17 And the king commaunded them to being great stones, costly stones, hewed stones, for the toundatiõ of the house.

18 And Solonions mafons, and the mafons of Hiram did hewe them, and the stone squarers: And fo they prepared

both tymber and stones forthe bunding

ok the house.

¢ The pi. (hapter. -

iche buploing of the temple,and the kourme thereok. 12 Che prompte okthe

Lorde to Solomon.

ND it came to passe,
O\ lithat in the foure hune dred € fourestore 1 e akter the childrẽ ot HE rael were come out of the land of Egypt, and in the fourth yere of the rayne of Solomon vpon Hicael, x inthe moneth zit, which is the lecond moneth, he began to build the house of the Lorde. :

2 Andthe house which king Solomon

7 forthe Lorde, Was thrcelcore cu? les long, and twentie cubites broade,

and thirtie tubites hie. vi

3 And he made a porche before the ten ple ol the house, Which was twentie tubites long, after 5 breadth of the houle, and ten cubites brode, (even) in the fore front of the house.

4 And in the houle he made, wWindowes, ene

broade without, and narow within. Sehne the
5 Andby the wall ofthe houle he made ea chambers round about ever) in the soe en.

Walles of the houfe round about the ° temple t the quier: and he made chambers round about. N

6 The ncathermolst chamber Wan

IXVII

Solomons temple.

i Reg . vii. b.

LE
S sf
Tuer 22
1 ‘pi Be = ef 1 * 5 = nate : , =|
N i 3 i 2 2 94
1 4 F
Pa 1 =a
* i Ns uh

tubites broade, thenuddle was fire ar bites broade, t the third was seuen cubites broade: For without in the wall of the boule he niade restes round about that (the beames of the chambers) shoulde not be fattened inp walles of the houle.
7 And theboule was built of fone,

made perfect alredpe before it was

brought thyther: fo that there was net ther hammer nor axe, either any toole of iron heard in the house while it was in buplding.

3 The doore of the middle chamber was in the ryght {poe ol the houle: and men went vp with wine ding stapres into the middle chamber, and out of the middle into the third.

9 And so he built the house, and finithen

it: and he roofed the Houle vaultly with

beames of Cedar tymber. fo And then he bullt chambers to all the temple fiue tubites heyght, e they were

ioyned to the house with beames ol Ce-

Dar.

And He word of the Lorde tame to
Solomon, saping:

12 Conterning the Houle which thou art in building, if thou wilt walke in myne ordinaunces, and execute my lawes, and kepe all mp commaundementes to walke in them: then wyll J make good vnto thee my promise* Which J pronipled Daudd thy father:

Exo. xx. b. 13 And J Will dweil among the children

of Plrael, and will not forlake my peos

ie 7

a

e

nnen nap!

ple Israel.

14 Solomon therefore built the houte, ¢ and finished it.

15 And seeled the walles of the Houle with: in with boordes of Cedar tree: euen frõ the pauement of the houle nto the roofe did he seele the walles ofit within with Cedar tree: and boorded the floore ol the house with planckes of firre.

16 And he bullded twentie cubites in the fpdes of the quier of the temple both floore c walles wich boordes of Cedar: and dressed it within the feeret plate of the temple, euen in the most poly.

17 But the houfe, that is the temple before it, was fourtie cubites (long.

18 And the Cedar of the boule within, was carued with knoppes, and grauen with flowres: € all was Cedar tunber, so that no stone was sene.

16 And the quier that was within the temple he prepared to {et there the artic ot the appoyntment of the Lorde.

20 And the quier before was twentitẽ av bites long, c twentie cubites in breadth, and twentie cubites in height: And he touered it with pure golde, and boorded the aulter with Cedar. tly

21 So Solomon couered the houst wit 5 in with pure golde: And he made gol :
1 5 5 runne ie the quier, which)
Nad touered with golde. '

22 Aud the whole houle he dure

with golde vntil he had ended it: al a she aulter that was in the quiet he. de

Dts

with golde. ’

an nt te quier he made two

dead Cherubim ol Dine tree ten cubites

Dem e. 4 i

: % sine teS long was a wing ofthe

ont Cage fie tubites long was a

wing ok the other Cherub: fo that from

the vttermost part ok one wing, vnto

the pttermost part ok the other, were

n cubites. N : . a

25 Ad the other Cherub was ten tubites

hie allo: lo that both the Cherubs

= were okone mealure, and one sise:

16 For the height o the one Cherub was ten tubites, and fo was it of the other.

27 And he put the Cherubs within the in-

„ ier houle:“ And the Cherubs stretthed

gut their winges, lo that the one wing

ol the one touched the one Wall, and the

one Wing ok the other touched the o-

ther wall: And the other two winges

okthem touched one another in the middest of the boule. nnd

28 And he onerlayde the Cherubs with

about, he made figures of tarued e leeled Wore: das namely) pictures of Cherubs x paulme trees, x grauen flowres, both Within in the quier] and without in the temple.] N ;

30. And the floore ol the boule he coucred

houle thirteene peres, and finished it all.
And he built 5 house

— x

long and fittic cubites broade, andthirtie eubites hie: And it stoode Hyon foure f rowes of Cedar pillers, and Cedar beames were layde bpon the pillers.

ou the beames that lape onthe pillers ellen. xl. beames in fifteene roles.
‘4 And there were windowes in thece kowes andthe windowes were one a-
Jatust another three folde.
3 — al the doores with the syde postes
‘ Sienna ae foure square, aher three fate, S one against ano

3. Kinges.

29 Aldd in all the walles of ß house round

lin the wood Libanon, an hundred tubites

And the roofe was Cedar aboue vp-

with golde, (both] withen inthe queer e out in the n *
31 And in the entering of the ;
OC o02¢5 us ‘Dine 450 per € two ostes te fauare K rs We postes Were

31 The two Doors alld Were of oliue tree.
E he graued them with dri Behe rubs and paulme trees and grauen flowzes, Ecouered them with golive, k lapde thinne plates ok golde vpon the
Cherubs and paulme trees. E

33 And so made he forthe doore of the teri: ple, postes of Oliue tree foure sqnare.

34 The two doores were of firre tree, and either doore with foulding leaues.

35 And he graued thereon Cheruds, pauline trees, c tarued flowres: and touered the carued Worke with golde linelie waeought. „

36 And he bullt the inner tourt with three rowes of hewed fone, and one cows of
Ce dar wood.

37 In the fourth yere was the foundatton of the house ol the Lorde layde, euen in the moneth Zit. 1

38 Aud inthe leuenth pere, in the moneth

Wul (which is the eyght nioneti) was the Houle full finished throughout a}

Apzl.

* @ctos ber,

the partes thereof, according to al the

fathion okit: And fo was he seuen peres in building tt. a

¢ The vii. Ch apter. :
1 The buylding of the houles of Solomon.
Hiram in the peeces which he made kor the temple.

15 The excellent wozkeman Hip of

6 And he made a poche by the pillers

that bare vp the houle] fiftie cubites long, and thirtie cubites broade, and the porche was before thofe and the other pillers: for there was a thicke tree let. befoze them. —
7 Then he made a porche to lie ¢ iudge in, euen ã porche ol iudgmẽt, fected with.
Cedar throughout all the panementes .
8 And his houle wherein he dwelt had. an other hall, more inwärd then the. porche, oflpke worke: And then Solom made an house for Pharaos daughter (whom he had taken to wyfe) pe. ese
Lato the fathion of the porche. ä

And all thele were ofthe pelt ones, «

Hewedafter a measure and lawed with: cree,

fatbes within and without, from the des voin

foundation bnto the beames that lape aden

aboue, alter the mealure, and euen fo cee

on the out lyde toward the great it bb.
10 Ando

Solomons house

Exo. .A.

Lere. 11. e.

Me 1 i | ul! U if Au Ab i. Issn ft 1010 | 110

10 And the foundation was lapde vpon rich stones, and that berp great Tones, whereoksome were ten cubites, and soine eyght cubites.

And abonc were riche stones, squared after atertapne rule, and tonered with
Cedar.

2 And the great tourt round about, was with three rowes ol hewed stones, and one rowe ol Cedar planckes, after the maner of the inner court of the houfe
5 N and of the porche ol the emple.

z And king Solomon sent and fet one

Hiram out of Tyre,

4 A widowes forme of ö tribe of Heph-

thalim, his father being a man of Tyre:

Which Hiram was a craftesman in

brasse, ful ot wisedome, vnderstanding,

and cunning, to worke all maner of wWorke in bralle: And he tame to king

Solomon, and wrought all his wozke.

5 Forhetast“ two pillers ok brasse of

epyghteene cubites hie a peece: ¢ a string

oktwelue cubites did tompasse either of them about.

16 And he made two pommels ok moul-

tenbrasse, (alter the fathion of a crowne, ) to set on the toppes ol the pillers: The

eight of the one head peece tontapned ue cubites, and the height of the other head peete tontayned fiue cubites allo.

17 De made networke, c wzpthen Wworke like chaines for the pommels vpon the

head peeces that were on the top ofthe

e

‘ e e

M „ R M A

ee „„ „„ „% „

K „ 1

{vs

Ce i

q yi 2 77 72 8

ire: N ey
On IGS ‘ a ,

10 7 5 f aan

ers: euen feuencrowes) vpon the one ead peete, and seuen vpon the other.
And so he made the pillers, and two rowes of pomegranets rounde about in the one networke to couer the pom; mels that were vpon the top: and this. he did also, for the other head peete.
19 And the pommiels that were on the top. of the pillers, were after lillie worke in the porche foure tubites. „ ¥
20 And the pommels vpon the two pillers. had allo abouc ouer againt the middest.
Within the networke: pomegranets) and vpon the setond head peece were there. two hundred pomegranets in two). rowes round about. ;
21 And he let vp the pillers inthe pared ; of the temple: And when he had let vp. the right piller, he talled the name ther of Jachin: and when he had fet by the. lefepilter, he called the name thereok-
Boas. — ;
22 And vpon the top of the palers (were! lillfe Wozke: ¢ fo was the Workmantyip . of the pillers finished. .
23 And he made a moniten lauatone ten. tubites wide from brim to bum, round in tompasle, and fine cubites hie: And 1 string of thirtie cubites did compalse li
24. And vnder the brim of it there lage é knoppes round about, ten in one — 8 and thei compaffed the lauatorie round about: And the knoppes were cast wich. it in two rowes when if was 5 Aud

Wen
5 Abu

Aa
\ i

it 5

Rand three toward the east:and the laua-

torie stoode vpon them, and al their hire der partes were in ward.
26 It was an hand breadth thicke, and the brym was wrought lye the brym bka cup with flowees of lilies, and it
« contained two thouland battes.
27 And he made ten feete of beaffe:
5 foure cubites long, and foure cubites broade a peece, and three cubites hie.
28 And the wozke ofthefeete was on
C. this maner: They had sides, and the des were betweene theledges.
29 Andon the sides that were betweene the ledges, were lions oren, and Cherubs: and like wile vpẽ the ledges that

f were aboue: and beneath the lions and

Oven, were tertayne additions made of
„ thynne worke, ie Sees

hig 0 1 vnder euery foote were foure zasen wheeles, and boodes of bralle: and inthe foure comers thereof vnder

ielauatozte, were vnderletters moulch at the side of euery addition.

10 unddle ofit, and abone one cubite: utthe stalke thereof was round akter

che worle of the foote,a cudit i e a halfe:
Do bpon the stalke were granings ae heir bands, foure sauare and not

wp vnder the sydes were foure
Vbhecles, and the axeltrees ioyned fast

St „And the stallte of the tanatozic wasin

to the bottome, and the height ol euerp ·

the foure corners of one foote, e the vn- F dersetters were ofp very bottome selfe.
35 And in the height ol the bottome was. there a romide compalle of halle a cnbite hie: and in that height of the bottonie chere proceeded both ledges and. sydes out ot the fame. ‘
36 Fo2 in the boordes ofthe ledges and on the sydes, be had grauen pictures ol
Cherubuns, lions, panime trees, one. by another rounde about.
37 Thus made he the ten feete after. this maner: and they had all one fathi-« onof cafting, one meature, and one syse.
38 Then made he ten lauers of brasse, one lauer contapning fourtie battes:and. cuery lauer was foure cubites, € vponeuerp one ot the ten feete, he put ont. lauer. N 3
39 And he put kiue of thole feete on the. ryaht syde or the honse, and other fie « on the left: and he let the lauatorie on the. right syde of the Houle eastward, and. toward the south. ‘
40. And Hiram made pots, shouels, and : G balsas, € fo finished all the Woke that he made king Solomon for the boule, bk the Lorde: ‘
41 Thatis to fay, tivo pillers, pA ‘

Plaue, N Ringes. | —

G

A 1

Par. v.a.

SS,

N 8 N n

Nee N 8 Relay, Me an 1 2

<4 aoe
. ; ax

4 LF

aN

i

Found head peetes that were to be {et on the toppes of the two pillers.

42 And foure pundzed pomegranates for

the two networkes, euen two rowes of poniegranates in one networke to couer the two head peetes that Were to be set on the toppes of the pillers:

43 And the ten feetc, and ten lauers on the feete:

ee lauatorie, and twelue oxen vnder

45 And pottes shouels, and basons: And all these vessels which Hiram made to king Soloms for the boule of the Lord, were ok bught brasse.

46 In the plapne of Jordane did the king dcast them leuen in the thicke tlaye, betweene Socoh and Zarthan. 8
47 And Solomon left ali the vessels (on. wared) betause they were fo exceeding
: Many, neither founde they out the

ay) 2288 22 N

waight of the brasse. 0
48 And so Solomon made al the vessels that partepned vnto the boule ofthe:
Lorde , the golden aulter, and the golden table wheron the Mew bread was:.
49 And fiue tandelstickes for the ryght. side, and fine for the left before the quier, « of pure golde, with flowzes, lampes, and snuffers of golde. 8 J
50 And bowles, flat peeees, basons, spoones, c mafours, of pure golde: and. hyndges made he ok golde, both forthe p Ooreg of the quier the place most holy, and for the doores of the temple also.
5 And lo was ended all the worke that « king Solomon made foz the boule of:

the Lowe: And Solomon brought in irasis

the thinges which Daud his lather.
Had deditated, even the fituer, golde,

and vessels, and lapde them vp among.

the treasures of the boule ofthe Lord. 5

J Tie. viii. Chapter.

4 Che arke is borne into the temple, 10 J cloude filleth the temple,

j Che hing blelleth the people.

Men“ Solomon gathei
Key

el, c al the heads of the tribes, and them that were captapnes aniõg ithe fathers of the chil:

red the elders of Isra-

being bp the arke of the appoputment ze of — — put ok the citie of Daud, which is Sion.

2 And all the men ok Jsrael aaa vnto king Solomon to the featt 19 20 ee ah 4g poy Ethanun, which n.

the seuenth moneth.

3 And al che elders of Jlrael were ton

cpreftestooke bp the arke, ad cher bare the arke of the Lorde, thetabernatle of the tongregation and all the holp veslels that Were in the tabernatle: those dyd the priestes and the leuites beare.
And king Solomon and all the con: kegation of Ilrael that were allembled buco Han and went with hum before the arke, did offer sheepe and oren, that could not be tolde nor numbzred for multitude.

6 And fa the priestes brought the arke of the appopntment ofthe 020 buto his place euen into the quier of tie tenple and place most holy, vnder the winges ok the Cherubs: .

7 For the Cherubs stretched out their

5 winges ouer the place of the arke, and couered both it and alfo the staues therok ahie vpon it. ö

g And they drew outthe staues, that the endes okthem might appeare out of the holy plate within the quier, but they were not leene without, and there they haue ben vnto this day. *

9 And there was nothing in the arke

„ h saue the two tables of stone, which
Moyles put there at Horeb, np which we tables) the Lowe made an appoynt-
„ ment with the children of Israel when
. he brought them out of the lande of Erien ; : 8 o Anditfortuned that when the priestes
„ were come out of the holy plate, the en’ - Cloudefilled the boule of the Lorde,
0 U That the priestes could not stand and
„ nunister betause of the cloude: for the glory of the
: okthe Lorde. n Then spake Solomon: The Torde“
4 aca he would dwell in the Darke ch Jhaue built thee an Houle to dwell in. an babitation foz thee to abyde in for

35 And the king turned his face, and diel: ed all the congregation of Israel: and
1 congregation ot Ilrael stoode

Aud he laide: Wlessed be the Lorde ll of Ilrael, which fake with his
Weh buto Dard my father, vc bath

. Sohle hand fulfilled it, sayinng:
17 , the day that J bronght my peo-
8 act out of Egypt, Ichole no ti-
90 1 all the tribes of Jsraci to build an e, that my name might be therein:

ü e.

Lorde had filed the houle

Wut J haue cholen* Maud to be cuter ouer my people of Jsrael.

17 Miber aan 4 hie 1 5 of Daund my

u houle for then the Lorde God of Jsrael: n

18 And the Lorde faide vnto Dauid my father: whereas it was in thyne heart to build an Houle vnto my name, thou diddest well that thon wast so minded:

19 Meuerthelesle, thou Halt not build the houle:but thy sonne that shall tome out D of thy loynes, he shall build the houle vnto np nanie,

20 And the Lode Hath made good his
Word that he spake, and J am rysen vp in the roome of Dauid my father, and sit on the seate of Ilrael, as the Lorde prompsed, and haue built an house fog the name of the TLorde God of Pfraci:

21 And J haue prepared therein a place for the arke, wherein is the touenannt of the Lorde which he made with our fathers when he brought them out of the lande of Egypt. a

22 Solomon stoode bekore the aulter of the Lorde in the sight of all the tongregation of Ilrael, and stretched out his handes toward heauen, and sayde:

23 * Lod God of Ylracl, there is no God like thee in heauen aboue, or in the earth bencath, thou that kepest touenaunt t mercy for thy seruauntes that walke before thee with all their heart. 4

24 Thou that hastkept with thy leruaũt
Dauid my father that thou promisedst him: Thou spakest also with thy mouth and Halt fulfilled it with thyne hand, as it is come to passe this dap.

25 Therfore now Lode God of Pract,

keepe with thy seruaunt Dauid my far E

ther that thon pronnsedst hum, laying, bes.

Thou (halt not be without a man in my sight to syt on the seate of Israel: fo that thy childrẽ take heede to their way, that they walke before me, as thou halt

Walked in mp fight.

26 And now O God of Ffraci, let thy word be verified which thou spakecit vnto thy leruaunt Dauid my father.

27 Wyll God in deede dwell onthe earth kalen

Beholde, the heauens and heauens of all heauens are not able to contapue thee: and how Mould then this house do it that J haut builded- |

28 Hauethon therefore refpect bnto the praper of thy seruaunt, and to his supplication O Lorde my God, to heare

prayer which thy sernaunt the trye and prayer which t Raden

n. Reg. via

il. Pat. vi. d.

Solomon.

prayeth before thee this dap:

29 That thyne eyes map be open toward this bouse nyght and day, euen to-
Ward this place, of which thou haste said, My name hal be there: That thou mapst hearken vnto the praper which thy seruaunt prapeth in this place,

30 And regarde thou the supplitation of thy seruaunt and of thy people Firael when they pray in this plate: and heare thou in heauen thy dwelling place, and when thou hearest haue mercy.

i. Par. yd. 31 Il any man trespasse against his neyghbour, c there go an off) betweene them, and the one tompelthe other, and tome, [wearing before thyne aulter in this house:

32 Then hearken thou in heauen, and

do and wage thy seruauntes, that thou condemne the vngodlp, to bring his way vpon his head: and iustifie the righteous, to geue him atcording to his righteousnesse.

When thy people Ilrael be put to the
Worle before the enenue, betause they haue finned against thee, € afterwarde turne againe to thee, and knowledge vnto thy name, and pray and make supplication vnto thee in this houle:

34 Then heare thou in heauen, to be mercifull vnto the sinne of thy people Israel, and bring them againe vnto the land

which thou gauest vnto their fathers.

in Reg a. 35 If heauen be shut vp, and there be no rapne, because they haue finned against thee: pet if they pray in this plate, and knowledge vnto thy name, and turne from their sinne through thy scourging of them: ö

36 Then heare thou in heauen, and be mercyfull vnto the sinnes of thy seruauntes, and of thy people Jlrael, that thou shewe them a good Way to walke in, and geue rapne vpon the lande that a hast geuen to thy people to inhe-

37 Ifthere be inthe lande dearth, or pestilence, drouth, vlasting, grashopper, or taterpiller:or iftheir enemie besiege thé in the lande of their cities, or whatloe-

uer plague or sickenesse chaunte,

8 enen hiation

soeuer be made o 2 man, ofall thy people Israel, Which chall knowledge tuery man the plague of his owne heart, and stretch foosth his handes toward this houfe: care thou then in heauen, euen in thy

Deu. xxx. a. 33

Esa. lvi. c.

F 39

Zbinges.

Sone, dwelling place, and be mercyfull and and geue euern man according to his
Tapes euen asthouthatonelp knowes his heart (for thou onetp knowesth heartes ok all the chudzen or men:) ae Fee uh le n j J uest vnto our fathers. thou ga,
41 And likewyse ik a straunger that is not of thy people Israel, come out o d los.! farre countrey for thy names lane.
42 To they shal heare of thygreatnam. es ofthp 151 1 5 € of thy stretched out arme) and Chall come i 9229 N n
43 (Cherkore heave thon in heauent dwelling place, æ do all that the Ara ger calleth to thee for: that all natlons ofthe earth map knowe thy name, and feart thee as do thy people Israel, and
Filed dn un ree 15 name(s called vpon in this house which Jh bullded. 7 tei
44. If thy people go out to battell against their enenne whythersoeuer thou thait fend them, and thal pray vnto the Lon 4 toward the Way ofthe citie which thou
Hak chosen, and (toward the houle that
IJhaue built for thy name: 6
4-5 Heare thou in heauen their prayer and “2p, ns supplitatton, and iudge their cause. vn

watt,

46 If they sinne againt ther (kozthereis n

no man that finneth not ethan be an-

gry with them, and delpuer them into the hand of their enemies, fo that they cary them away prisoners, vnto the lande of their enemies whether karre or neare:
47 Het if they turne againe vnto their heartes in the lande ok them that cary ed them awap captines, & returne and pray vnto thee in the lande of their cue mies saping, we haue finned, we haue done wickely, and haue conunittcd bi
Jodlypnesse:
48 And so turne agayne Hnto ther with all their heart and all their soule inthe laude of their enennes which led then N awap taptiue, and pray vnto the, ‘ ward) the way ok their land which 090 gauest vnto their fathers, and (et, the titie which thou hast chosen, and. ward) the houlse which J haue built for
Avene how their *prayerau?
49 Then heare thou their 10 supplication in heauen thy dwelleng 1 plate, and iudge their taule:

50 And be mercpkull vnto thy pep

efinued against thee , and vnto all

cher iniquittes wherbythey haue done

wickedly against ther, e get thou them

the kauour of thofe whiche led them a-

Way tüptiue, that theyniay haue com: sion on them.

i be they be thy people, and thyne inhe-

5 ritaunte, Whiche thou broughtest out of

Egypt. enen from the middest of the for-

n. ek thyne eyes be open vnto the praper of thy seruaunt, and vnto the prayer ol thy people Plrael,*to hearken vnto them in all that they tall for vnto

thee. f forthou d ddest seperate them from ai 1009 0 che nations of the earth to be thync owue inheritannce, as thou sapdelt by the hande of Moples thy sernaunt, When thou broughtest our fathers out ol Egypt O Lorde God.
And when Solomon had made an ende ok praying all this prayer and supplication vnto the Torde, he arose krom belore the aulter ofthe Lorde, We from kneling on his knees, e kromstretching ol his handes vp to heauen,
35 And stoode r blessed all the tongregatid of Ilrael, with a loude voyce saping:
36 Blelled bethe Lorde that hach geuen rest vnto his people Plrael according to al that he promiled: there bath not fayled one worde of all the good promile which he pronuled by the hand of Moyles his leruaunt. g
$7 The Lorde our God be with vs, as he was With our fathers , and forlake vs not, neither leaue vs:
Wut that he may bowe our heartes biz to him, that we may walke in all his
Wapes, & kepe his tommaundenientes,

N.

tommaunded our fathers,

DS) | bad* finiched the buylding okthe houle of the
To: de, and the kinges palace, and all that he
Hab indismindee bas appoynted to make:

> The Lozde appeared to Solomonthe

2. Kinges.

his statutes, and his lawes whiche Hee

55 And these my wordes whiche Jhaue prayed before the Lorde, be 19 100 the
Lorde our God day and night, that he dekende the caule of his seruaunt and the caufe ok his people Israel, what thing loeuer chaunte at any time:

60 That al nations ofp tarth mapknowe that the Lord is God, and none but he.

or Let pour heart therfore be perfect with the Tord our God, that pe Walken his

IXXXI.

statutes, and kepe his commaunde-

mentes, as this day.
62 And the king and al Ilrael with him offered offeringes before the Lorde.

63 And Solomon offered a sacrifice ok

‘peace offringes whiche he offered bre M „M,

to the Lorde (to wit) twentie and two thousande oxen, and an hundred and twentie thoulande sheepe: And fo the
Ring and all the children of Hirack dedicated the Donte of the Lordẽ.

64. The lame day dyd the king halowe the middle of the court that was befor the houle of the Lord: for there he offe: red burnt offeringes, meate offeringes, and the fat of the peate offeringes: betause the brasen aulter that was before

the Lorde, was to litle to receaue the

burnt offringes, meate offeringes, and the fat of the peace offeringes.

65 And Solomon helde that lame time an hye feast, and all Israel with hin a verie great congregation , enen from the entring in okt hemath vnto the riuer of
Egypt before the Lorde our God © fez

ven dayes, and seuen dapes, euen foure- 18 0

teene dapes. 4

66 And the eyght day he lent the people away, & they blessed the king, and went vnto their tentes, iopous and with glad heart, betause of alithe goodnesle that the Lorde had done for Pauid his seruaunt, and for Ilrael his people.

The ix ; Chapter.

Che Lorde appeareth the teconde time to Solomon. 11 Solomon geueth cities to Hiram. r0 Che Chanaanites become tributaries. 26 He sendeth koorth Hippes Foz golde.

D When Solomon

setond tinie, as he appeared vnto him at ibeon

Gi „

3 And} Lord land vnto him, Jhaue heard thy prayer e thy intercellion that thou
Hatt made before nie: Foz I haue halo-
Wed this houle, which thou halt built to put nip namie 1251 a 11 al

0 8 car ja E er ¢ U
F mpne hearte 75 4 0 4 And

apes for the

ebication,

nd seuen Fog he feat,

Solomon.

4 And it thou wilt walke before me,as
Dauid thy father walked, in purenes of heart and in righteonsnes, to do all that
JJ haue tommaunded thee, and Wilt
Repe my statutes, and my lawes:

5 Then will J stabliche the seate ot thy kingdome vpon Jfrael kor euer, as J promised to Dauid thy father, laping:
Thou shalt not be without a ma vpon the seate of hee!

6 Wut and if pe and pour children turne away from uie, and will not kepe my tonunaundementes and my statutes whiche J haue fet before vou, but go and seruẽ other gods, & worship them:

7 Then p99 3 weede Israel out of the lande lis haue geuen them, and

this boule which J haue halowed* for my name, wil I cat out ok my fight, and Pract shalde a prouerbe anda fable among all nations,
3 And this houle shalbe taken away:sd that euery one that passeth by it, shalbe nour, altonied, and (hall hysse, and they shall sap: Why hath the Lord done thus vnto this lande, and to this house-

And they shal aunlwere: Wecause they

foxfolte the Lode their God, whiche

In. Re. il. a.

W

Ne. 21 a. cr. vu. b.

Some

tcabe: when tyis houle 10 in great ho-

Deu. xxix. d
Icr. x xu. b. c

brought their fathers out of the land ot

Egypt, and haue taken hold vpon other gods, and haue worshipped them, and seruedthem: therfore hath the Lode brought vpon them all this tupll.

And it fortuned, that at the ende of twentie peres when Solomon had finished the buylding of the two houles, that is to wyte. the Houle of the Lorde and the kinges palace,

1 (And Hiram the king of Tyre brought
Solomon timbre of Cedar, & firre trees, golde, and whatsoeuer he desired) Then
Solomon gaue Hiram twentie cities in the lande of Galilee.

12 Aud Hiram came out from Wyre to see the cities whiche Solomon had geuen hym, and they pleated him not.

L Par.8.a. JO

ü. Reg. v. b.

13 And he sayde: what cities are these

which thou hak geuen me my brother:
And he called them the lande ol barren vnto this dax. mt

C 14 Aud Hiram sent the king fice score talentes of gold.

15 (And this is the summe whiche king
Solornon rapled for a tribute when he buylded the houle ofthe Lorde, and his owue house, and Millo, and the wall of
Pierulalem, and Mazoz, and Megeddo,

3 Kinges.

an Shen ( i

16 For Pharao king of Egypt we

and toke Gazer and burn t with fur and flue the Chanaanites that dwelts the citie, and gaue it fora present vnto his daughter, Solomons wpfe.

17 And Solomon buylt Gazer ¢ Beth-

horon the neather,

13 And Waalath and Thamar in the we: dernesse in the lande:

19 And all the treasure cities that Solomon had, and cities for his charettes and cities for his horsemen, and all that
Solomon desired, and woulde bupld in
Hierusalem, in Libanon, and in allthe lande of his dominion?ꝰ 5

20 And al the people that were left of the
Amorites, Hethites Pherezites, Heuites and Jebusites, whiche were not ol the childzen of Hiraet,

21 Their children that were left after them d in the lande, whonthe children of Pt rael also were not able to destrop:those dyd Solomon con pell to ying tribute, vnto this day.

22 But of the children of Ilrael dyd So-

lomon“ make no bondmen: But they Le

were men ok warre, his ministers, his lordes, his captaynes, and rulers ok his charettes, and his horsenien.

23 Andthese were the lordes that were fet ouer Solomons Wworke (ever) fine hundred were they and fiktie, and they ruled the people that wrought p work.

24. And Pharaos daughter came dp out of the titie of Dautd, vnto her howe
Which Solomon had buylt fog her: and then dyd he also buylde Millo.

25 And thrple a pere did Solomon offt burnt offtinges & peace offringes bpon

the aulter Whiche he buplt vnto the

Lode, and he burnt intense vponty’

aulter that was belore the Lord and z

he finished the houle. af
And king Solomon made a 16 0

chippes in Az on Gaver, whichts pole
Eloth on the brinke of the red fea, i lande of Edom. ehs

27 And Hiram sent by chippe allo ii

seruauntes, that were chipmen an te knowledge of the fea, with the uanntes of Solomon: tfrom 135
28 And they came to Ophir audler tz thence foure hundred and wenn gg fe tto Bild ee lentes of golde, and bought 2
Solomon. val

aes

The

The. x. Chapter .

Che aueene of aba commeth to heare the wyldome of Solomon. 13 Hig ropall

throne. zi His power and magnikicence.

e Mdthe*queene ok Ha-
Ween Noe ba hearing the fame of
Solomon concerning
A thenande ofthe Lord)

harde questions.

2 SS And she came to Hierulalem with a verie great trapne, with camels that bare sweete odours, and gold exteeding much, e precious stones:

And she came to Solonion, and connmu-

ned with him ofal that was inherheart.
3. And Solomon declared buto her all her questions, so that there was not one

thing hyd from the king whiche he er -

bounded not vnto her.

4 And the queene of Saba considered al
Solomons wyldome, c the houle that he had buplded,

And the meate of his table, and the sit-

ting of his seruauntes, the order of his

nunisters € their apparell, e his drinke, and his burnt facritices that he offred in the houle ok the Lorde: andthe was

5 Aol ud che fayde vnto the king: It was a a Word that J heardein mpne owne
AND Of thy fayinges, Eofthy wildome.
7 Holbert J beleued it not, til J came.

5 * 8 f : oS 4
1 yaa G fii (i 5 4 e

— 8 0 ¥ f
Be emit Brac eth body : i .
0 A fds 3 1
4 (Fe E 4 2 ac
. RS
9 Nit APES
> SR *

c lawe it with myne eyes: And beholde, 15 the one halfe was not tolde me: for thy wyldome and profperitic exceedeth the fame which J hearde of thee.

tameto proue him with 3 Happy are thy meu, and happy are

these thy seruauntes whithe stand euer before thee, and heare thy wyldome.

9 Bllelled be the Lorde thy God, whiche

loued thee, to fet thee on the (cate of BE

rael, becaule the Lode loued Jlrael

for euer made thee king to do equite Ge and righteonsnes. bon ze

Shon he ges tuctl) a iwpfe

10 And fhe gaͤue the king fire store talen- .

tes ol golde, and of lweete odours extee- Ke ding much, and precious stones: There

came no more suche aboundaunte ot

sWeete odours, as the queene of Saba

gaue to king Solonion.

n The nauie also of the shippes of Hi-

ram (that caried golde from Ophir) Res brought lykewyse great plentie of Al

muge trees, and pretious stones from .
Ophir.

12 And the king made of the Almuge

trees pillers for the boule of the Lorde and for the kinges palace, and made harpes and plalteries for fingers: Ther tanie no more suche Almuge trees, nor

were any more seene vnto this dax.
N 9 B And

Solomon.

Z oF AD i] 4

50 N 9 . 3 . *
Z 0 2 4
U, l „ ned a Alle. l fo nem fine fer

a we

ET

SS Le
N N

WAN

2 ‘es,
$567

f,
Oe by a?

ao

XY

SS

rq
4 »
%
N $

ry f

S

N aa

ö } hs

— Ty

fe

aie

De dt

7. eer 7 B

13 And king Solonton gaue vnto the queene of Saba according to all her desire Whatlocucr she asked, besides that he gaue her of a free wil with his owne hande: And so she returned vnto her owne count rep, both fhe and her sernauntes.

€ 14. The waight of golde that tame to Solomon in one pere, Was fire hundred theescore and fire talentes of golde,

15 Belpdes that he had of marchauntes, and of the marchaundises of the spices, and of all the kinges of Arabia, c of the lordes ofthe countrey.

16 And king Solomon made two hundred targettes of beaten golde: fire hundred sicles of golde went to a target.

17 And he made thee hundred shieldes of beaten golde:three pounde of gold went to one shielde, and the king put them in the house ofthe wood of Libanon.

18 And the king made a great seate of iuorie, and couered it with the best golde.

19 And the seate had fire steppes, and the toppeof the scate was rounde behinde, ct there were pommrelles on either syde on the place of the seate, and two lions stoode besyde the pommelles.

20 And there stoode twelue lions on the steppes, fire on a spde: There Was none lyke worke seene in any kingdome.

Deu xvn d. 21 And al king Solomons drinking vel-

sels were of golde, and lykewyse all the vessels of the boule of the wood of Ti-

z. Reg 17. a.

2. Ringes.

u

nme
3 — Pa mA TUG mmi be <b

ia
N

eme

„ een n

K N
Kl oN. oe” 72 2
— An

iy =
= e ts 1 =

ae,

V
8 r

i

N
D —

AUA wil 5 2 : te

banat eee of der spine And as for

iluer, it was nothing worth int

mre 4 0

22 Forthe kinges nauie of shippes went onthe sea vnto Tharsis wih che naule of Hirauis shippes: euen oute in three peres went the nauie to Tharlis, and bought golde and siluer, Elephantes teeth, apes, and pecockes.

23 And so king Solomon exceeded al the udn kinges of the earth both in ryches and
Wpldome.

24 And allthe worlde resorted to Solomon, to heare his wyldome which God had put in his heart: 1

25 And brought him euerp man his present, vessels offiluer, x veffels of golde, rapment, harnesse, and sweete odours, and horles, and mules, pere by pere.

26 And Solomon gathered together charettes and horsemen:and he had athouande and foure hundred charettes, and twelue thoufande horsemen, whom he bestowed in the charet cities, and With the king at Hierulalem. |

27 And the king made filuer in Pierusalem as plenteous as stones, and Cedar as plenteous as the wilde feage trees that growe aboundauntlyinthe feldes,

28 Allo Solomon had hozles brought out of Egypt, and fine linnen:the binges é marchauntes receaued the linnen lor a prite. 6

25 Acharet ame ppoutaf cgrpt af ft

1. bu d

A

Pan e : . . — — —
3. iges. XXXIII. sicles of suluer, that is one horse the binges of Sivia did they ding them ba hundned and fiftic: Andenenfo dut though their handes. — fo: al the kinges of the Pethites, and {oz

Ty. xi. Chapter. , | |

Sa a eee —

mon.

mon hath a thoutand wyues and concubines, whiche bryng him to dolatrie.
15680 vaptetl ppaduerfariesagainthim. 43 he dieth. :

Ut king Solomolo- poyntment, and my statutes whiche J sy RA ed map outlandishe tommaunded thee, J wil rent the king-
OM EN women, e the daugh- dome fronithee, and will Neue it to thy
Biter of Pharao, and leruaunt. wonien of the Moa- 12 Notwithstanding, in thy dayes J will bites, Ammomtes, E- not doit, betausc of Dauid thy father: donmites, Z idomtes, t but wil take it frõ the hand of thy sonne.
Pethites: . 13 Powbeit, J will not tale away all the zen
2 Wher as pet concerning thelenations, kingdome: But will geue one tribe to wan the Lorde layd vnto the chůdren ol Il thy lonne, vecaule of Dawid my seruaũt, dar we pth rzel: Go not ve into them, nor let them and becaule ok Hierulalem whiche FJ trent tome into, els Will they turne your haue cholen. bee heartes after their gods: Heuerthelelle, 14 And the Lorde stirred vp an aduerla- C
Solomon dlaue vnto them in lou. rie onto Solomon, euen one Hadad an md. 3 And * he had seuen hundred queenes, Edomite ofthe kinges leede, whiche mn. and three hundred toncubines: and his was in Edom. ee Wynes turned away his heart. 15 Foz when Maud was in Edom, and
4 Forit came to passe when Solomon Joab the captapne of the hoast was was olde, his wyues turned his heart gone vp to burie them that were slaine, after other gods: and his heart was not he smote all the men chüdren in Edom: sus: perfect with the Lord his God, as was 16 ( For sixe monethes dyd Joa remayne min te heart ol Dauid his father. fthere, and all Israel, tul he had destroy-
«5 Jo: Solomon folowed Astaroch the ed allthemen chüdren of Edam.) ale god okthe Zidons, and Miltom the ab- 17 And this Hadad fled, and tertaine omea hominatton of the Ammonites. ther Edomites ok his fathers fernatites uy 6 And Solomon wronght wickednesse wich hym, to come into Egypt, Hadad bu. lu the sight of the Lome, and folowed bepng yet a litle childe. rs net the Lorde perfectly, as dpd Daud 18 And they avofe out of Madian e came von, Hes father. : to Paran, and toke men with them out
Bue. 7 Ibr then dyd Solomon buylde an hye ol Paran, and came to Egypt vnto Phaplace for Chamos the abhomination o raso king ol Egypt, whiche gaue him an
. Moabim the hill that is vefore Pierula- houle, and appoynted him vittalles, and ae: Tem, ebuto Moloch the abomiuation gaue him lande. dee okthechüdzen of Ammon. 19 And Hadad gat great fauour in the eee 8 And lpkewyle dyd he for all his out - light of Pharao, fo that he gaue him to en landiche wyues, which vurnt cense and wyfe the sister of his owne wyle, euen
| offered vnto their gods. the syster ot Thahpenes the queene. de? And the Lorde was angry with Solos 20 And the liter of Thahpenes bare hun mon, because his heart was turned fro Genubath his sonne, whd Thahpenes the Lord God ok Israel· which had ap- norished in Pharaos house: And Genupeared vnto hint twyle, bath was with Pharaos housholde a lo And gaue him a charge concerning mong the fonnes ok harad. N this thyng, that he choulde not folowe 21 And When Hadad hearde in Egypt >
Other gods: ut he kept not that which that Dauid Was lapde tofleepe With
1 the Lorde tommaunded hun. his fathers, c that Joab the captayne
Wherfoze the Lorde lapde vnto Solo- of the hoaste was dead also, he sapde wan : Jorasmuche as this is done ok to Pharao: Hee me depart, that J hee, and thou hak not keptmypneap: map go to myne owne countrep.
＋ 3 22 Pharao

Solomon.

22 Pharao sapde vnto him: What Hatt thou lacked here with me, that thou wouldestthus go to thyne owne countrey : hte aunlwered, Pothing:howbeit, let me go.

23 And God stirred him vp another aduerlarie, one Nezon the lonne ol Eliada,

whiche fled from his lorde Hadadezer

king of Zoba: .

24 And he gathered men vnto him, and became captayne ouer the companic when Dawid fluc them: And they went to Damasco, and dwelt there, and raigned in Damaltco. s

25 Therkore was he an aduerlarie to Ilrael all the dapes of Salomon, and this was the nuschiefe, in that Hadad dyd abhorre Ilrael and raigned over

Syria,

26 Aud Jeroboam the forme of Pabat, an
Ephrãthite of Zareda (whole mother was called Zeruah, whiche was a wpdowe) and he Solomons seruaunt, pft vp his hande against the king.

27 But this was the tause that he lift vp his hande against the king: Solomon buylt Mello, and mended the broken places of the titie of Mauid his father.

23 Andthis lelowe Jerobdam was a
E man ofstrength e courage: And Solo-

mon sawethe young man that he was able to do the worke, he made him ruler aE all the charge of the house of Jocpy.

29 Anditchaunced at that season that
Jeroboam went out of Jerulalem, and the prophete Ahia the Silonite niet hun by the way, hauing a newe mantel
— they two Were alone in che

elde.

Ahia caught the newe mantel that
Was on him, e rent it in twelue peeces,

31 And sapd to Jeroboam, Take thee ten peeces: For thus sayth the Lode God of Israel, Wehold, J Will rent the king: dome out of the handes of Solomon, and will geue ten tribes to the.

i. Pal. vile. 32 “AUD he Thal haue one for my seruaunt
Danids lake, and for Pierusalem, the citie which J haue cholen out of all the

tribes ol Hivacl : |

33 Betause they haue forlaken mie e haue

3. Ringes.

36 And puto his sonne will

worshipped Astharoth the god
Zidons, and Chamos tama of ch
Moabites c Miltom the god ofthe chi dien ok Ammon, € haue not Walked iy

b . n me my pleasure, my fa. utes, and my lawes, as dyd Daun nie og 9 a5. 3 y Daud dig

34 ill not take the whole kingd out of his hand: But 7 Will mate hun thiele all his lyke long for Dauid my seruauntes fake whom F hole:because he kept my commaundementes and my statutes:

35 Wut J will take the kingdome out of 52, : his fonnes hande, and Will gene it bnto Pa

thee, euen ten tribes of it: eue one

tribe, that Dauid my serua 1 1 { alight alwap before me in hierulalem, the citie which J haue cholen me to put my namethere.

37 And ZH will take thee, and thou shalt raigne according to all that thy soule desireth, and shalt be king ouer Jlrael.

38 And ik thou hearken vnto all that y

commaunde thee, and wilt walke in my
Waypes, and do that is right in mp light, that thou kepe niy statutes and mycommaͤundementes as Dawid my seruaunt dyd, then will J be with thee, and buyld thee a sure house, as J buplt for my ser-
1 Dauid, and Will geue Jlrael bu: tothee:

39 And JJ Wall for this Collence whiche So- 6 a

lomon Hath committed] vexe the stede ol
Dauid, but nor foz euer.
40 Solomon fought therfore to kil Je: roboam, and Feroboam avofe and fied into Egypt, vnto Silat king of Egypt, and continued there in Egypt vntill the

death ol Solonion.

41 The rest of the wordes that concern
Solomon, and all that he dyd, and his
Wyldome, are they not witten inthe booke ofthe wordes of Solomon

42 The tyme that Solomon raigned in
Hierusalem vpon al Jsrael was fourte veres.

43 And Solomon slept with his fathers,

and was buried in the titie ol Vaud bie father: and Rehoboam his sonne vals ned in his steade. The

hn,

10 boam.

roboam maketh golden calues.
Nd' Behoboant went to Sicht: for all Jlrael were come to Sichem, to make him king.
EN And when Jeroboam
1 | the fonne of Nabat
LS , 2 7 . 15 rig gypt, heard of it: for he fled to Egyp fanithepfenceofking Seluna an

3 199 sent, and talled him: and Je-

A roboain and all the congregation of Br ng tanie, t spake vnto Nehoboaim, aying: N

4 Thy kathermade our pocke greeuous,

nowe therfore make thou the greenous

seruite ok thy father and his sore pocke i he 1 vs, lighter, and we will serue thee.

And he sayde vnto thent : Depart pet for the space of three dayes, and then tome againe to nie. And the people de-

6 And king Nehoboam toke countel With the olde men that stoode before Solouion his father, while he pet lyued, and

fayd: What tounsel geue ve, that J may

haue matter to aunlwere this people
57 And they fayd vnto him: If thou be a d seruaunt vnto this people this dap, and folowe their mindes, and aunswere them, et speake kinde wordes to them, they will be thy seruauntes for euer.

8 But he forsoke the counlell that the old meu had geuen hin, and called vnto his counses young men, that were growẽ

vy with him and wapted on him,

And he sayde vnto them: What counsell gele pe, that we may aunswere this people: for they haue tonnnuned with ie, faping: Make the porke whiche thy father did put bpon bs, lighter.

o Andd poung men that were growen op with hum, spake vnto hum, saying:
Thus halt thou speake vnto this peo-

ple that haue layd vnto thee, thy father

made our pocke heauy, but mate thouit
1 e thus shalt thou fay vn-

: aa then my father Was in the loynes. ud nowe where as my father did lade
Pout € put a greeuous pocke vpon you,
J will make it heauier: y father path chaltised you With roddes, but J Will

3 N. nges. {
Thexit « Chapter ’

joam sucteedeth Solomon. 8 Ge refuleth the countet ot the auncien Te.
. raigneth ouer Itrael. 21 God commaundeth Rehoboam not to fight. a Gee

Vlitle finger shalbe waygh-

bexxilll *

toreett pou wich stourges.

n. And fo Jerobdam and aii the tame to Kchoboam chethirde dar ng the king had appoynted saping, Come to me againe the thirde dax.

13 And the king aunfivercd the people churlishlp, and left the old mens counsel that they gaue hint: “a

14. And {pake to them after the tounsel of C the young men, saying: My father made pour pocke greeuous, and J Wil make

it greeuouser: My father alfo chachled
You with roddes, but J will chatite vou with stourges.

15 And the king hearkened not onto the people: for it was the ordinaunte of
God, chat he might perfourme his saye l. Re. xi. f.
Wg whiche the Lord spake by Abia the ae vnto Jeroboam the lonne of

16 And so when all Ilrael sawe that the king regarded them not > the people auniwered the king with thele wordes, " faping : What portion haue we in Da- hse uld: we haue no inheritaunce in the | sonne of Plat: * Lo pour tentes O ü para. d. rael, nowe fee to thyne owne houle Sa-
1 fo Pract departed bnto their tentes.

17 Powebeit, ouer the chilozenof Jlracl
Which dwelt in the cities of Juda, dyd
Behoboam raigne still. f

13. The king Nehoboam sent Aduram the reteauer of the tribute, and all they of Hlracl stoned hun to death: But king
Kehoboam made speede to get him vp to his charet, and to fice to Hierusalem.

10 And they of Jlrael rebelled again the

house of Danid,buto this day.

20 And when al Jlrael heard that Jeroboam was come againe they sent, and called him vntothe multitude, and made him king ouer al Israel:and there was no tribe that folowed the boule of Dauid, but Juda onely, 4

21 And When Rehoboam was come to . p ia.
Hierulateni,be gathered all the housc of puna, with the tribe ofaSeniamin,an

hundred and fourescore thoufande of thosenmen which were good warriours, to light against the house of HE rael, aud to bring the kingdome againe to Reloboam thesonue of So-

lomon.
4 22 And

Ieroboani

e The prophet of God.

maia the manof God, sapung:

23 Speake vnto Rehoboamebe lonne of
Solomon king of Juda, c vnto all the house of Juda and Wenlanun, eto the remnaunt of the people, saping:

24 Thus sapeth the Lowe, Be shall not go vp, nor pet fight against pour brethren the children of Iscael:returne cuery man to his Houle, forthis thing is my doyng. They hearkened therfore to the

wonrde of the Lorde and returned to de-

part, according to the word ofthe Hod.

25 Then Feroboam buylt Sichem in mount Ep̃hraini and dwelt therin: and

ludond. went krom thence, and buylt Penuel.
26 And Jeroboam thought in his heart: nowe fhali the kingdome returne to the house of Dard. wende 277 Wo; if this people go vp and do satri-

baun ges litt inthe house of the Lorde at Hierulaa lem, then chall the heart of this people turne againe vnto their lorde Webhoboam king of Juda, and fo shal they kill

me, and go againe to Nehoboam kingol

Tobia! 28 Wherupon the king toke countel, and | bebe made two talues of golde, and sapd vn- burnt incense.
Me. xiii. Chapter. r Feroboamtigrepeebended of the prophete. 4 Bis hand drieth vp. 15 Che prophete is fepuced, 24 Ind is hilled ok a lion. 3 The obstinacie of Jeroboàm. —
1 Md behold, ther canie em prophete INC} Aman of God ont of |
YEN Ves Buda bythe worde ok not pull it in againe to hun. the lozd, vnto Wethel: and Jeroboam stoode bpthe aulter to put intense.
2 And he eried against the aulter in the

Ww tw
S ay
S
N

4 And when the king hearde the saying ofthe man of God whiche had cryed against the aulter in Bethel, he stretched

out his hande from the aulter, saping,

D 22 And the worde ok God tame vnto Se- to them, It is muche for

maketh caly A

pou to go vpto

Mierusalem: Wehold O Israel, these r.

are thy goddes which brought the oant of the lande ot Egypt.

29 And he let theonein Wethel, and the other (et he in Dan. 988

30 And this thing turned to finne : fo? the people went ( betause of the one as farre as Dan.

31 And he made an houle of Hill aulters.

“and made priestes of the Io welt of the u.
Pon” which were not of the sonnes ok ii pie eui.

32 And Jeroboam made a featk the fpe: teene day ol the eyght moneth, lpke vnto the feast that is in Juda, and offered on the aulter: And fo did he in Bethel to offer vnto the talues that he had made:
And he put in Bethel the priestes of the hill aulters which he had made.

3 And he went vp to the aulter to burne incenfe whiche he had made in Bethel the fpfteene day of the eyght moneth, tuen in the moneth whiche he had imagined of his owne hearte: and made a solemne feast vnto the children ok Ff: rael, and offered vpon the aulter, and

Holde him: And his hand which he put foorth against him dried vp, e he coulde

5 The aulter allo claue asunder, and the ashes fell out from the aulter, according to the token which the man of God had geuen by the worde of the Torde.

s And the king aunlwered, and {ayo bund . the man ol God: Oh pray vnto the ber:
Lorde thy God, and make intertession 40 for me, that my haude may be restorerme agamne. And the ma of God besought the Lod, and the kinges hand was tv stored againe, and became as it Wash

12 — „

And the king fayde vnto the man of 5 q God: Come home with me, thatthou mapest dine, and J will geue ther ate

8 And the man of God lade dno 1

king: Ir thou wouldelt geuemie Dae

thyne houte J Will not go in with 05 neither will J cate bread, nor dan

water in this plate: „ fil

ham.

fo was it charged me through the fon ofthe Lord faying: cate no bread nor Denke water, nor turne agapne by the same way that thou tamest. go And so he went another wap, and re-

turned not by the way that he tame to

el. |

I! per there dwelt au olde prophet in
Bethel, and his sonnes tame and tolde him al the workes that the man ok God had done that day in Bethel, and the wordes which he had spoken vnto the king tolde they their father allo.

u Andtheir father sayde vnto them:

What way went he: And his fonnes

shewed him what way the man of God

went which came from Juda.

And hefaide vnto his sonnes: Saddle me the alle. Which when they had sadled he gat him bp thereon,

14. And went alter the man of God, and founde hint lytting vnder a tree, and he said vnto hun: Art thou the man of God that tamest from Juda :? And he layde,

ani. N

15 fe fapde vnto him: Conie Hoste with me, and eate bread.

16 He aunlwered: J map not returne with thee, to go in With thee: neither wyl J cate bread, or drinke water with thee in this plate.

17 Jor it was saide to nie in the word ol the Lord: Thou shalt eate no bread, nor drinke water there, nor turne againe to go by the wap that thou tamest.

18 He salde vnto Hint: J am a prophet also as well as thou, and an angell spake

cn

vnto me in the word ofthe TLorde, say-

ing: Bryng him againe with thee into thync houle, that he may cate bread, € dziuke water. And he lyed vnto him.
1 And so he went againe with hum, and
D W N in his house, and drancke
20 And lt kortuned that as they sat at the table, the word of the Lorde tame vnto
1 De prophet that brought him againe:
And he erped vnto the man of God that canie lrom Juda, faying, Thus
{nith the Low: Because thou hat dilobeped the mouth of the Lorde, and hast

not kept the tommaundement which the Lorde thy God commaunded thee:

22 Wut tamest backe againe, and hast eaten b2ead, æ Dauncke Water in the place bun end the which the Lorde did fap
1 othee, Thou chalt eate no bread, nor

eyncke no water: thy tarkalse shall not

— r ²˙—— ĩ ͤ]:e ] ˙uʒ ] %

rs Kinges.

conte vnto the fepuichze of thy fathers,
23, And loit tame to patie 5 wheuhe

had eaten bread, and druͤncke, he ladled

Hin the alle, to wit, to the prophet who he had brought againe.

24. And when he was gone, » a lion Reset met him by the Wap, and slue him: and hier of cb

his carkasse Was ctast in the way,

affe stoode thereby, and the lan 1

by the corse also. pect
25 And men that passed by sawe the car:

casse cast in the way, e the lion standing :

by the carcasle:and they tame and tolde

1 0 e where the olde prophet

26 And when the prophet that brought him backe againe fromthe wap heard thereof he fapd : It is the man oͤf God, he was difobedient onto the word ol the Lorde, and therefore the Lord hath deliuered him vnto the lion, which hath rent hun e slaine hin actording to the
‘aba ofthe Lorde which he spake vn-

o hum.

27 And he spake to his sonnes, faying:
Sadle me an asse: And they sadled him.

28 And he went, and founde his body cast in the way, and the asse and the lion stoode by the corle, and the lion had not eaten the cartasse, nor hurt the asse.

29 And the prophet toke vp the body ol the man of God, and layde it vpon the alle, and brought it againe: and the olde prophet tame to the citic to lament, and to burie hin.

30 And he lapde his body in his owne

graue, and then lamented ouer him (Car.

ing] Alag my brother. we -

And when he had burped him, He F spake to his sonnes, saying: ohen Jam dead, fee that pe burie me in the lepulchre wherein the man of God is buried: layt my bones belide his bones.

32 or the saying which he cryed at the word of the Lorde against the aulter in wethel and against all the houles of hie plates which are in the cities of Sar marie, shall tome to passe. a

33 Powbeit, for ali that Jeroboam conuerted not from his wicked wap: but turned backe, and made of the lowestol the people priestes of the hie plates: Aud „e,

batie accozs"

$003), is in mot daun-

3¹

and he became priest of the hie places.
34. And this thing turned to linne vnto the houle of Jeroboam euen to destroy him, and to bring hin to naught from ofthe face of the earth. 0

ili Reg. 23.

ing his ding to Godg

d

Who fo pleased him, he ‘filled his hand, catty

T that time Abia the oF fonne of Jeroboam fel icke.
And Jeroboam saide ealonto his wpke: Ap
Asprap thee, and disgulse thy selke, that thou be not knowen to be the wyfe of Jeroboam:and get thee to Silo, for there is Ahia the prophet which tolde me* that Z

should be king ouer this people.

3 And take with thee ten loaues, and cracknelles, and a cruse of hony, and go to him, that he map tell thee what Halt

betonic of the chile.

4 And Jeroboams wyke did so, and arole, and went to Silo, and came to the houle of Ahia: Wut Ahla could not fee, for his eyes were Waren dumme for age.

5 And the Torde saide vnto Ahia: Be-

7 rf

Ni. Reg. xi. f.

holde, the wyle ol Jeroboam commeth

to aske a thing of thee for her sonne, fo2 he is sicke: But thus € thus shalt thou faye vnto her. And Whe she came in, che fayned her selfe to be an other woman.

6 Wut when Abia heard the sounde of her feete as she tame in at the doore, he sayd: Come in thou wyke e why fapnest thou thy selfe so to be anothers J am sent to thee [to Heh thee} heaupthynges.

W 7 Go, tell Jeroboam, thus lapth the
Torde God of Ilrael: (It repenteth me) forasiniuch as Jexalted chee from among the people, and made thee prince duer my people Israel, ne

83 J did vent the kingdome away from the houle of Daum, kt gaue it thee: Me-
üerthelesse, thou batt not ben as my

in. Reg · xii.e

seruaunt Daud, which kept nw commaundementes, and folowed me with

all his heart, to do that onely which was right in myne eve s
9 Wut hast done euil aboue al that were before thee: For thou hast gone ⁊ made thee other gods, and nioulten images, to prouoke me, and hak tast me behinde thy backe: N N
10 Therefore beholde, J wyll being euill

vpon the boule of Jeroboam, and wyll eroboam euen hun

roote out from J im iResxvd. that pylleth against the wall, and hint

nu *nahofocucr of Jeroboams house dle in the towne, him shall the 1 a agp hg olth ge in 924 challthe

dule Ayre cate: for the
941 pea — 5 eH Ve

12 Up therkore € get thee to thyne owie house: Beholde, when thy fogte enteet 0 into the citie the childe shall dye,

B And all they of Israel shall mourne

kfor him, and burie hin: Foz he onelp of
Jeroboam (hal come to the fepuichze, because inhim there is found goodnesle toward the Lord God of Israelin the

house ol Jeroboaa mmm.

14. Moreouer, the Lord shal stirre hin vp a king ouer Plrael which shall destroy the boule of Jeroboam in that day:
But what is it nowe '

15 For the Torde thalt{mypte Jlrael as when a reede is shaken in the water, k he shall weede Jsrael out of this good lande which he gaue to their fathers,

c shall statter them bepond the ryuer, et because they haue made them groues, and angred the Lorde. N

16 And he shall geue Ilrael vp betaule ok the sinnes of Jerodoam, Which did

~fiune,and made Jlrael to sume.

17 And Jeroboam̃s wyfe arose, and departed and tame to Thirzah: ck When she came tothe thressholde of the docze, the childe Was dead.

18 And al Israel buried him, and lametv ting him, according to the word ofthe D
Lode Which he spake by the handeot his seruaunt Ahia the prophet.

19. And the rest or the wordes that con terne Jeroboam, how he warred and how he raigned, beholde they are e ten in the boone of the cronicles of th kinges of Jlraecl. 1

20 And the Dayes which Jeroboen ye ned, were tio and twentic pores: fa when he was layed alleepe with his vf thers, Madab his fonne raigned in his

steade.
1 olomon
21 em the sonne of een b

saned in Juda: and Behodoam Was munen veres olde when he began to raigne, € he raigned scuenteene peres in Hierulalem, the atte — 4.5 the aL onde did thoole out of all the tribesor
Ilratl, to put his naire there: Dis mothers name was Naama, an Ainmo-

„Ind Juda wzought wickednesse in

ahrofthe Lorde, and angred him e then their fathers dyd intheir sinnes which they sumed.
23. For they allo made them hie places, images, and groues on euery hie hill, and vnder euerp thicke tree.

ain the lande, and they did according

rt che abhommationsofehe nations

Which the Lord cat out before the chilpen of Isracl. u

25 And st koztuned, that in the fift vere of

E king Rehoboam, Silat king of Egypt

cane vp againt Hierusalem:
26 And toke away the tveafures of the houle ofthe Lorde, and the treasures ol

Jeroboam. 28 Baala killeth Padab.

F the eighteenth pere ok king SHeroboant

i raigned Abiam duer
Thrree peres raigned ehem ierulalem: and his mothers name was Waacha, the us daughter of Abilalom.
3 And he waltzed in all the sinnes or his father which he had done belore him,
„ id his heart was not perfect mith the
TLuorde his God, as the heart ol Wauid wean
4 Neuerthele
= sane 10 lle for Dausds fake did the e Vlexulalem, that he {et vp his sonne ak: ter hun, and stablished Dernlglemn:
5 Becaule Dauid did that which was rah inthe fight of the Lord, and tur:
Bea. 10 from nothing that he commannded
1 the the Daves oF his lpke laue onely che matter of Urias the Hethite. jae there was warre betweene Reee and Jeroboam, as long as he

3. Ringes. > lxxxvi,

"= And there was a tewes ok male chil-

the fonne of Nabat,

iS God gene him w a lyght m

the kings house, e spopled all that was to be had: And hetoke away all the m. Reg. d.
Aae of golde which Solomon had

27 In whole steade king Nehoboaam made brasen shieldes, and une them onto the handes (ot the keping] of the taptaynes of the garde, which wayted atthe doore ofthe kinges Houle,
28 And when the king went into the house of the Lorde, they ok the garde bare them, € brought them againe into the garde chamber.
29 The rest ok the wordes that concerne
Nehoboam, and all that he did, are they not Written inthe bodke of the cron orn tles of the hinges of Juda- ale the
30 And there Was Warre betweene Rez semen hoboam and Jeroboam all thetr lpues. n zi And Vehoboam flept with his fathers, and was burped bespde his fa: thers in the citie of Maud: ais mothers name was Maama, an Animontte. And
Abiam his sonne ratgned in his steade.

The xv. Chapter.

14biam raigneth ouer Juda. Ata succeedeth in his roome. 16 The battel betweene Ala and Baala. 24 Jehosaphat succeedeth Ala, 25 Nadab succeedeth

‘

7 The rest ot the wordes that concerne
Ablaim, and all that he did, are they not % written in the booke of the cronitles of. thekinges ol Juda : And there was
Warre betweene Ablam e Jeroboam.

8 And Abiam flept with his fathers, ¢ they buried hin in the atte of Dau: and Ala his sonne raigned in his steade.

9 In the twentith pere of Jeroboam king of Israel raigned Asa duer Juda.

10 Fourtie € one peres raigned he in hie: rusalem:and bis@mothers name was
Maatha, the daughter of Abilalom.

1 And Ala did (that leemed ryght in the ee ofthe Lode, as did Dauid his father. g

12 And he toke away the male stewes out of the lande, and put away all the Nez abhominableidols that his fathers had . made. a

3 And he put done * Maacha his wur rp or mother from bearing rule, betause she „. had made an idoll in a groue: And Ala ¢ destroyed her idoll, and burnt it by the brooke Cedron.

14 But the hie places were not put

dowue:

I. Pa. xiiil. a.

(e) Standmother.

j Ieroboam. In SCS. Teralban,

© pone: Meuerchelesse Ala his heart DED, are they not written in the vooke o

G ect. Was perkett with the Lorde all his the cromicles of the kinges of Juda

aer s: Dapes. NMeuerthelesle, in his olde age he wag

unc. 15 He brought in the holp beflels of his dileased in his keete. father, and that he had dedicate vnto 24. And Ala Mlept with his fathers ¢ was the houle of the Lord, golde, and suuer, buried befive his fathers in the citie of and iewels. Daud his father: And * Jehosaphat

16 And there was warre betweene Ala, his sonne raigned in his steade.

t Waal king of Ilrael all their dayes. 25 And Nadab the sonne of Jeroboam iParxvia. I7 And wWaala Ring of Ilrael went bp began to raigne vpon Ilraes the second E

against Juda, and built Bama, so that pere ol Ala king ok Jüda, and raigned

he woulde let none go out or in to Asa bpon Ilrael two eres.

king of Juda. 26 And he did euill in ß light of the Lord,

18 Then Ala toke al the suluer and golde walking in ß way of his father, ein his that was left in the treasures of the inne wherewith he made Jlrael inne. house of the Lorde, and the trealures 27 And aala the fonne of Abia, Which of the kinges houle and dellueredthem was ok the houle ol Plachar, contpiren vnto the handes ok his sernauntes, and agalnst him, and Waasa {note him at

„Re king Ala sent them to Wenhadad the Süibbethon, lohich is a citie of the phe sonne of Tabrimon the sonne ol hezlon tines ( for Madab and al Ilrael laped king ol pra that dwelt at Damasco, liege to Gibbethon) saying: ; 28 Euen in the third vere of Afakingof

1 There is a bonde betweene me ether. Inda, dd Baala flay him and raigned betweene mp father and thy father :and in his steade. beholde J haue sent vnto thee a present 29 And it fortuned that when he was u N. of suuer and golde, that thou tome and king, he smote all the house of Itrobobreake the bonde that thou hast with am, and he left him naught that brea-
Waala king of Ysrael, that he may de- thed, vntill he had put him cleane out, part from ine. according vnto the fayingofthe Lorde

20 Oo Wenhadad hearkened vnto king which he spake by his feruauntAbta
Alfa, e sent the captaynes ok the hoastes the Selonite: , i ; which he had, against the cities of Gl zo Wetanle of the sinnes of Jeroboam, rael, and smote Hion, and Dan, and A- rae De finnedand made Israel ¢ bel, eth Maatah and all (tbe region or! inne, when he with his prouocation an-
Ceneroth, with all the lande ol Neph- gred the Lowe God of Israel. thall. 31 The rest ol the wordes that concerne

21 And when wWaala heard thereof, he Nadab, and all that he did, art they not left building of Rama, and dwelt m Witten in the booke ofthe croniciesof

Thirza. the kinges ol Israen- N

- gc- 22 Thenking Ala made aproclamation 32 And there was warre betweene Ala

an A throughout all Juda, that none should eE25aala king ok Pract all their dapes.

be excused: And so they tone the stones 3; So inthe third pere of Ala king of Jur ok Kamah and the tymnber wherewith da, began Baala the forme of Abia to
Waala had builded, and king Ala built raigne ouer all Israel in Thirza, twen-
With them the hill of Wemanun and tie and foure yeres. .
Milpah. 34. And he did that which is euill in the

23 The renmaunt of all the wordes that ag der the Lorde, walking in the way toncerne Ala, and all his might, and all of Jeroboam, and in his finne, Where that he did, and the tities which he buil- with he made Jlracl to firme. The

34 Jericho is built againe.

— ben the worde of the

ode came to Jehu

eon) he ‘ the sonne of Hanant a-

ey PAG gainst zWaasa, saping:

VAN 4 1 Forasmuch as Jex-

alted thee out of the

— Diuste, and made thee

captapne ouer my people Israel, and thou hast walked in the Way of Jeroboani, and hal made my people Ilrael to line, to anger nie with their sinnes:

Beholde, J will roote out the posteritie of Baalã, and the posteritie of his house:and will make thy house lyke the

houle of Jeroboã the sonne of Nabat.

4 That man of Baala which dyeth in

de the citie,bim chall the dogges eate: and that man of hin which dyeth in the fieldes, chall the foules of the ayre eate.

5 The restokthe wordes that concerne wWaala, and what he did, k his power, are they not wutten in the booke ofthe tronicles of the kinges of Ilrael e

6 And so Baala slept with his fathers, and was buried in Thirza, and Ela his sonne raigned in his strade.

7 And by the hande ofthe prophet Jehu the sonne of hanant, came the worde ok the Logd against Waala, and against his house, t againtt all the wicked nelle that he did in the sight ok the Lowe, in angryng Hin with the Worke of his owne handes, that he chould be like the

Houle of Jeroboam, and betault ye kil: eg He bi. en, The twentie e firey pere of Ala king of Juda, began Ela the forme of Waald

to raigne ouer Ilrael in 0 peres. = 5

„And his leruaunt Zimri( which
1 captapne of halle his charets) tonbiredagainst him as he was in Thirwalter 5 Was druncken in the
2 cae rza, eward of his houle in
10, Alld Zimri tame, and finote him and tien bmmcherente feuenthy pere et king of Juda, and raàigned in his

u, And it fortuned th
N at when he was bunten lat on his (cate, he an al the of Baasa, not leaning thereof one

3 Ringes.

The. xvi. Chapter.
1 Ok Baala. 6 Ela. » Fimri. 16 Amri. zi Ichab marpeth Jezebel.

to pysse against a wall: we kinlekolkes and kreendes alte pei

2 And thus did Zunrt destroy all the
Houle of Wala, according to the worde ofthe Lorde, which he take against
5918 by the hande of phe

xxvii.

phet,
3 For all the sinnes of Waala and sinnes C

of Ela his sonne which they sinned and made Plcacl to sinne and angre the

80 God of Hfrael with their vantie 0 ,

14 The rest of the wordes that concerne
Ela x all that he did, are they not wit: ten in the booke ofthe tronteles ok the kinges of Israel- :

15 Inthe twentie e leuenth pere ol Ala
King ol Juda, did Zimri raigne seuen daes in Thirʒa:æ the people Was then in the hoastbesiegung Gibbethon, a citte of the Philistines.

16 And the people in the hoast heardlone] faye, Zimrthath conspired, and slayne the king: Wherekore all they of Asrael made Amri the taptayne ofthe hoast, king oner Ilcael that lame day, eüen in the hoast.

17 And Amri departed vp from Gibbethon, and all Ilrael with him, and they

besieged Thirza.

18 And when Zimri fare that the eitie must needes be taken, he went into the palace of the kinges house, W and burnt him lelfe c the kinges house with fyre, and so dyed

19 For his sinnes which he finned, in doing that Which is euill in the fight of the
Lorde, and in walking in the waye of
Jeroboam, and in his finnes which he did, and in that he made Plrael to sinne.

20 The rest ot the wordes that tonterne
Zinwi,¢ He treason that he wrought, are they not written in the booke ofthe tronicles of the kinges of Israel:

21 Then were the people of Pitacl dei
Ded into two partes: for halke the people folowed Thibm the foune of Ginath, d bin king: and the other halle olowed Amri.

22 Wut the people that folowed Ami, preuayled againtt the people that folo-
Wed Thibni the fonne of Ginath: ay

(b) The ende orate

D

Afi. fo Thibm dped, and Amrit raigned.

23 In the thirtieand one pere of Ala

king of Juda, began Amrito raigne ouer Israel twelue peres: Sire peres raigned he in Thirza.

24 He bought the hill Schomron of one
Schemar kor two talents of siluer, and buylt in the hill, and talled the name of the titie Which he buyit, after the name ol Schemar, which had ven owner of the hill Schomron. 5

25 Wut Amri wrought that which is euil in the eyes of the Lorde, and did Worle then all that were before hum.

26 For he walked in all the way of Jeroboam the sonne of Nabat, and in his sinnes, that made Israel sinne, to anger the Lode God of Israel with their vantties. b

2 The rest of the wordes that toncerne
Amti, c al that he did, and his strength that he shewed, are they not wzitten in the booke ofthe cronictes of thekinges of Ilrael- |

E 28 And so Aniri flept with his fathers, and was buried in Haniaria, € Ahab his sounne raigned in his steade.

29 Inthe thirtie and eyght pere of Ala

U Pr F marta,

q The xvi. Chapter,

Elias forewarneth of the famine to come. 4 he is led ok rauens. ae igfent to Farphath, where ple.

Md Elias ß Thelbite, which was ofthe inha-
AN biters of Gilead, sapde puto Ahab :* As the
ULowe God of Plract
‘dyueth, before whom
Istande, there shalbe neither deawe noz rayne thele peres, but àctording to mp worde.
2 And the worde of the Lorde tame vnto him, faping: N
3 Get thee hence t turne thee eastward, and hide thy lelfe in the brooke Cherith, that is, it that lpeth before Jordanc.
4 Thou shalt drinlie of the ryuer, and J haue tonunaunded the rauens to feede thee there. |
5 And so he went, and did according vnto the word of the Lorde: kor he Went, and dwelt by the brooke Cherith that cay Sed dach is bekore Jordane.
Diane fee 6 And the rauens brought him bead san atthes — AND fleshe in the moznuig, and lkewyse

Crtremiiteg.

A

Mi. Reg. 18. c.

Deusib. [CSRS

g =

31 - For it seemed vnto him but a light oe.

he restoreth his hoastelle sonne to

king of Juda, began Ahab the f

Ari to raigne ouer J krael, athe lan

Ahab the fonne ol Ainri raigned duer

Ilrael in Saniaria twentie and two

peres. .

30 And Ahab the sonne of Amri did cuit in the fight ofthe Lode aboue all that

Were before him. f .

thing to walke in the sinnes of Jerobo- “2: am the sonne of Pada Heron Je bel also the daughter ol Ethbaa king ofthe Sidomtes to wyfe, and * Went ine and serued Baal, and worshipped hunn.
32 And he reared vp an aulter for Baal in the temple of Waal which he had builded in Schomron:
33 And Ahab made a groue, and proteeded kurther in angring the Lorde God of Ilrael then all the kinges of Jlrael F that were before him. —
34. In his dayes did Piel ol Wethel bund
Jericho: He lapde the foundationtherof in Abiram his eldest sonne, and let vp the gates thereok in his voungest sonne
Segub, according vnto the won of the
Lorde which he spake by Josuah the vu sonne of Mun. —

bread and fleshe in the evening: and he draucke of the broo ne.
And it chaunted after a while that the brooke drped vp, betaule there fell no rãpne vpon the earth.
8 Andthe wordokthe Lowe tame vnto hün, saping: 8 i
Ap, and get thee to Zarphath, which Le. is in Sidon, and dwell there: z scholde,
J haue conunaunded a wydowthere to sustaine the.
10 So he arole, and went to Zarphath: and When he tame to the gate of the a tic, beholde the Widow was there gathering ofstickes: And he talled to ber, and sald:· fet me J pray thee a litle WA? 14 ter in a vessel, that J may duncke.
1 And as she was going to fet it, he tryed after her, and lalde:bryng me J prab thee a morlell of bread allo in thyne
_ She layde: As the Konde cn
God lyueth, J haue no bread rede a fin

tuen an alle ople ina cruse: And beholde, am gathering two stickes, for to go in and drelse it fog nie and iy sonne, that we may eate it, and dye.
And Elias faide vnto her, Feare not, o. and do as thou hast saide: but make inethereoka litle cake kirlt ofall, ¢ bung it vnto e afterward make for thee thy sonne. . :
Forth faith) the Lord God of Hlraci: Che meale in the barrel fall not be
‘atten, neither Chal the oyle in the truse be minished, until the Lorde haue sent rapne vpon the tarth. vi And she went, and did as Elias fayde:
And Che and he, and her Youle, did eate a good spac ee. N
16 And the meale wasted not out of the barrell, neither was the oyle spent out of the trule, accordingto the word of the

a)

Elias.

7 And alter thele thinges, it happened that the fonne ol the wyke of the Houle fel icke, € his sicknesse was fo sore that there was no breath left in him.

18 And the fard vnto Elias: What haue J to do with thee O thou man of God-

Fer protesse of many dayes, the word of the
NBA || Low came to Cliasin the third pere, saping: j Go shewe thy felfe vn-
Atto Ahab, and* J wyll sende rapne vpon the

earth. : |
2 And Elias went to shewe him selle vnto Ahab:and there was a great famith:

ment in Saniaria,

the gouernour ok his houle: (and Obadia feared God greatly, .

4+ For when Jezabel destroyed the prophets of the Lord, Opadia toke an hundied prophets, and hid them by fiftie in fone? aud prouided bread and water

forthem.)

tothe lande, vnto all fountaines of water and vnto all brookes, ff happyiy we may finde gralle to saue the horles and

3. Nunges.

Handful o meale im a barrel, &

Lorde which he spake by the hande ol

And Ahab called Obadta, which was

5 And Ahad fae vnto Obadia: Go in-

Art thou tome vnto me to call my inn

R y linne

againe to remem

ct braunte, and to flay my

19 Me laide vnto her: geue me thy sonne :
And he toke him ont eherlap, e ats D hun bp into a lokt where he abode, and lapde him vpon his owne bed:

20 And called vnto the Lorde, and fare:
D Lorde my God, hat thou punished allo this wydow with whom dwell as a straunger, € halt slame her sonne 2

21 And he ktretched him elke vpon the Reine

childe three tymes, and talled vnto

Torde, and {aide : O Lorde my G05 pray thee let this childes soule tome in: to him againe. b

22 And the Lord heard the voyte of Elias,
Ethe foute of the chitde came into hima: gaine, and he reumed.

23 And Elias toke the boye, and brought him downe out of the chamber into the house, and deliuered him vnto his moane Elias saide, Behold, thy sonne

24. And the woman laid vnto Elias: Now

Anno we that thou art a man of God,

and that the worde of the Lorde in thy mouth, is true.

The xvii. Chapters

Elias is tent to Ahab. ij Obadia hideth an hundred prophetes, 4o Elias hilleth all Baals prophetes. 4 He obtapneth rarne.

mules aliue, and that we destroy not come of the beastes.

6 And so thep deuided the lande betweene them to walke through it: Ahab went one wap by him selke, and O-

badia Went another way by him selfe.

47 Andit chaunted that as Obadia was 28 in the wap, beholde Elias met him, and he knew Him, and fell on his face, and saide: Art not thou n lorde Elias:

3 And he aunswered him, Jam he: Go, and tel thy lorde, beholde, Elias is here.

6 He saide: hat haue J sinned, that thou wouldest delpuer thy seruaunt tn?

to the hande of Ahab, to slay mes

10 As the Lowe thy God liveth, there is no nation or kingdome, whyther my lord hath not sent to seeke thee:
And when they lade, he is not there: he toke an ofl) 1 the ben and nation when he found thee not.

It And MOND thou lapelt, Go, and tell thy lorde that Elias is here. n

Elias. 3. Ringes.

byte f

SO

U * <r Sy
. PD

ie <n”
I " 00

12 And assoone as I am gone from thee, the spirite ofthe Lorde (hall tarrie thee into some plate that J do not knowe, and fo when J come and tell Ahab, and he can not finde thee, he Mall flay me:
Wut J thy seruaunt feare the Love from n pouth vp.

C13 Was tt not tolde my lorde what J

did, when Jezabel slue the prophets of

the Lorde: how FJ hid an hundred men of the Lordes prophets, kiftie men in one taue, and fiftie in another, and prouided them of bread and water:

14 And thou fayelt,Go thou now ¢ shewe thy lorde, beholde Elias is here :that he map flay me.

15 And Elias saide: As the Torde of hoastes llueth before whom J stand,

I wyll shewe my felfe vnto him this

dap.
16 So Obadia went to meete Ahab, and tolde hun: And Ahab went to mecte E-

as.
17 And it fortuned that when Ahab sawe

Elias, he saide vuto Hint; Art thon he that troubleth Israel- 8
18 He aunswered: It is not JF that haue

Co) thems troubled Plraei,bue™ thou and thy faz
Doves thers hoüle in that ye haue forlaken the

üben tonmmundements of the Lozde,¢ thou

Soda tau. Halt folowed Waal.
19 Now therefore send, and gather to me all Israel vnto mount Carmel, and the
7 prophets of Baal *foure hundred and
ü Reg aa. fiftie, and the prophets of the (idols

0 f ir} i) + 1. *
Pree Ore J NN i in (i
; e = 0

Elia,

E

e

2 =i 2 —
= Fae ä

= 2. fz —

— . — — —ê. | il 1 Si i \ ube 08 0 57 e . a) N N rae Dom onl! ue A as 5 2 nl ö

il | = Aa ane 1

ps 1 1 0 1
BN Rites | il
Xia a

groues foure hundred, Which eate at
Jezabels table.

20 So Ahab sent vnto all the children ok
Ilracl, and gathered the prophets together vnto mount Carmel.

21 And Ellas came vnto all the people, and said: how long halt pe betibeene (ses two opinions: Ykthe Lorde be God, fo- n, lowe him: but if wWaal be be, then ga ak ae ter him. And the peopleauntWered hum aan not one worde. es

22 Then saide Ellas vnto the people a. „ . gaine j J onelp remapne a prophete of vam the Lorde: but Waals prophets are hen, foure hundred and fiftie.

23 Let them therefore geue bs two oxen, and let them choole the one, e cut hym x in peetes, and lay him on wood and put no fire vnder: and J wyll drelse the other ore, and laye him on wood, c wyll put no syre vnder. ö

24 And call ye on the name ot your gods,

4 JJ wyl call on the name of the Lorde: and then the God that aunlwereth by

fire, let hun be God. And all the people g

aunlwered and faide, It is wel poke.

25 And Elias fare bnto the prophets of.
Waal: Choole pon an oxe, ¢ dresse hun first, for ye are many: tall on the name ol pour gods, but put no fire vnder.

26 And they toke the one ore that he dyd gene them, and they dresled it, and Cal? dlatk vis ied on the name of Waal from mois to ndone, saying, O Waal hearc vs. ut there was no vopte, nor one Werk

were: And they lept vpon the aulter that they had made.
And at noone Ellas mocked then and
“tape: Crye lowde, for he is A GOD , peraduenture he is talking , or occupied in

folowing vp

2 28 f e
€ sclues as their mance was with kues ere the blood folowed on the.

was palled, they prophesied vntil me time af the euening facrifice: But there was neither vopte, nor one to att wert, not any that regard ed them.

And he repaired the aulter of the Lord that was broken. f zi And Elias toke twelue stones, accor ding to the number ol the twelue tribes okthe lonnes of Jatob, vnto whom the wo okthe Tode came,faping:* Jlrael shalbe thy nanie. a

32 And with the stones he ntade an aulter

in the nanie of the Lorde: And he made

adtitch about the aulter, as great as would corteyne two measures of seede.

33. And he put the wood in order and hewed the ore in peeces, and layed him on the wood, and laid: Fill foure barrels with water, and powre it on the burnt facrifice,and on the wood.

34 And he sapde: Do lo agame. And they dyd lo the setonde time. And he sayde againe:Doit the thirde time . And they dpd it the thirde time: e

And the water ran round abont the aul

ter, a he filled the pitte with water allo.
F 36 And it kortuned, that when they Mould offer the euenung latrifite, Eltas the prophete tame, and fapde: Lorde God of Abiaham, Plabac,and of Ilrael, it chalbe knowen this day that thou art the God in Ilrael, Althat (am] thy fernaunt,

11. e

1 Glias fleing from Jezabel, is nourisbed b to annoynt Hazael, Jehu, and Elila.

vel all that Elias had

flapne al the prophetes
With the lworde.

messenger vnto Elias,

4 Kinges.

29 And tt chaunced , that when mid-

d Elias (ad vnto all the folke: Come
9 rat And all the people came to hun:

Nd Ahab tolde Jeza--
4 done, and how he had

Then Jezabel sent a

Ixxxix, and that JJ hane done 8 a ene an. these thinges

37 Mes Lord, heare mie, that thi people map knowe that thou act i
Torde God, and khat thou hat turned their heart agame nowe at the last.

38 “And the fire of the Lop fel and confit: med the burnt latrifite, and the wood. 14 v 4. and the stones and the duste and ucked F< vp the water oa Was in the pit. 8

39 And when all the people sawe it, they fell on their faces aud fayde: The Lox he is God, the Lorde he ts God.

40 And Ellas sayd vnto then: Take the prophetes of Baal, and let not one ok them estape. And they toke them, and
Elias brought them vnto the brooke
Bilon,and due them there. n fae

4t And Elias lapde vnto Ahab: Get thee wan. - vp, cate and drinke: for there is a sounde

okmuch rayne. fin.

42 And so Ahab went vp to eate and to drinke, and Elias went vp to the top of
Carmel, and he lapde him lelfe flat ppd
Le canta put his face betweene his

4 And sayde to his seruaunt: Go vp. peay thee) and lone to warde the way of the fea, And he went vp, and loued, and sayde: There is nothing. And againe he sayde: Go againe seuen tines.

44 And it fortuncd that at the leuenth time, he sayde: Beholde there aryseth a litte clonde of the fea lyke a mans hand.
He sayde: Go, and fay vnto Ahab, Make fast (thy charet and get thee downe, that the rayne stoppe thee not.

45 And it came to pale that in the meane whyple the heauen was blacke With tloudes and winde, € there was a great rapne: And Ahab gat vp, and came to
Jezrahel.

46 And the hande ofthe Lozde was on
Elias, and he girded vp his loynes and
2 975 befoze Ahab, till he tame to Jezrabel.

The xix. Chapter. ; pthe angel ol God. 15 he is commaunded

faping: So and so let the gods do to les fe. me, ik J make not thy soule lylke one ot theirs by to morowe this tinie.

3 When he lawe that, he arost, and went for his life and came to Beerleba in Juda, and left his sernaunt there.

gj: 4, Wut

I. xl vl
Machua. i. a.

(DEU, 11

Elias.

3 Kinges.

Wut he him selfe went a dayes tourney his fate with his mantle

Jona. ilit. e.
Danjel. xii.

Exo 34. d.

Mat. and.

Rom. xi. a.

Ec. xlvill. a.

{nto the wildernesse, and tame and lat

Downe vnder a Jumper tree, aud desired for his soule that he might dye, and sayde: It is nowe enough O Tode, take my soule, for J am not better then my fathers,

5 And as he lay and slept vnder the Juper tret:vehold an angel touched hin, and fapde vnto him: dip, and cate.

6 Aud when he loked about him, beholde there Was a take baken on the coales, and a vessell of water at his head: And

he dydeate and drinke, and lapde him

downe againe to sleepe. b
And the angel of the Lord came againe the setonde time, and touched him, and sapde: Up, and cate , for thou hast peta
ꝗxcat iournep.
3 And hearole, and dyd eate and dinke, tt walked in the streugth of that meate

vnto Horeb the mount of God.
9 When he tame thyther vnto a taue, he
Lodged therein al night: And behold the word of the Lord came to hin, and sayd vnto him: What doest thou here Elias-
10 Aid he aunlwWered , Jhaue ben ielous for the Lorde God of hoastes fake: Foz the children of Ilrael haut forsaken thy tonenannt, *beoken done thpne aul-

ters, and flapne thy prophetes with

the sword: and FJ oneiy am left, andthey
{cle my lyfe to take it away.

1 And he sayd: Come out and stand bpon p mount belore the Lorde. And behold, the Lorde went by, ea mightie strong winde that rent the mountapnes and brake the rockes before the Lode , but the Lord was not in the winde: And al ter the winde, came an earthquake , but the owe was not in the earthquake:

11 And after the carthquake came lire, but the Lorde was not in the fire: And after the fire, tanie a small itt voyte.

Iz And when Elias hearde, he touered

The. xx. Chapter.
1 Hamarta is besieged. i; Che Lord promileth the victorie to Shabby a prophet. Che king

of Ffracl made peace with Benhadad and is reproued thertoze by the prophete.

i MD Wenhadad the king of Spna gathe-
RAN red all his hoast together, bauing thictic €
ORG) \ two binges With him,
SEIN and horses and chaz rets: and went vp and besieged Samaria, x warred against it.

14. And he aunswered: J haue ben ielous

aͤulters, and slayne thy prophetes With

15 And the Lord sayde vnto him: Go, and

16 And Jehu sonne of Nimfi thait thou 1 Bes 44. annoypnt king ouer Israel: And Ella

17 And it (halt come to pale, that whola
*fourtic dapes and fourtle nightes, cuen

18 And thertoj J ' haue left me seuen thou- gon

19 So he departed thence, c found Elila

20 And he lelt the oven, and ranne after

21 And when he went backe agatne from

3 Thy filuer x thy gold is myne z the fay’
4 And the king of Jlraelaimswered and

and Went o and stoode in the entring in of the ant
And beholde, there tame a voyte vnto hin fad: What dock thou here Elias:

foz the Lorde God of hoastes fake, betause the children of Piract haue fo}: faken thy touenaunt , ca downe thyne

the [worde: and J onely ant lekt, x they seke my lyfe to take it away. ether

turne thy way to the wildernesle puto
Damalto: € When thou commek there annopnt’Hasael king ouer Spa:

4 Res. 3b.

the sonne of Saphat of Abel Meholah

Malt thou annoynt to be prophete in thy roome.

escapeth the worde of Hazael him that
Jechu slay: e if any man stape the Nvogd of Jehu, him shall Elia put to death.

lande in Ilrael, ol whiche neuer man
@powed his knees vnto Waal, norkil- w sed him with his mouth. pita the sonne of Saphat plowing, ebauing twelue pocke of oxen vekore him, and he with the twelue: And Elias went by hin, and cast his mantle vpon him.

Elias, and sayde: Let me I pray thee Lu kysse my father and my mother, kthen

J will kolowethee. He sayde vnto hun:

Go backe againe, for what is it that F haue done to thee-

him, he toke a touple of oxen, and fluc them, and dressed the fleshe with the in strumentes ok the oren, and gaue vnto the people, and they dyd eate: And then he arose and went after Elias, aud nunistred vnto Hin.

Aud he fent messengers to Ahab king of Ilrael into the citie, and fayde vnto him, thus saith Wenhadad.

reltok thy wines Kokthychüdtöbe mint,

sald: Hy lord king, atcording to thy saring, Jam thyne and all that D Hane

3. Kinges. 8

anhalt 5 ° :
5; And when the meflengers came az after them alld he munbred alithepeo:

ane. they fapd, thus fapty Benhadad: atic) as J haue sent vnto thee, faying, Thou (halt veltuer me thy fiver and thy golde, and thy wyues, and thy

n:
6 s wil therkore fend my seruauntes vnfo thee to morowe this tine: and they chall learche thyne boule, ethe houses ok thy seruauntes, and whatlocuer is plealaunt in thyne epes, they shall take it in their handes, and bung it awap.
„Then the king of H{rael sent for all the elders ofthe land, and laid: Take heede ray pou, and sce howe this felowe gocth about nulchlefe: For he sent vnto me kor my wines, for my chüdren lor my liluer, and for ny golde, and J denyed

him not.

3 And all the elders and all the people said: Hearken not vnto han, nor content.

Wherlore he layde vnto the mellengers ok Benhadad: Tell my lord the king, all that thou dyddest fend for to thy sernaũt at the lirst tune, that J Will do: but this thing I may not do. And the meslengers Departed, and brought aunlwere againe. Lore

io Andwenhadad lent vnto him againe, and sayde: Thus and thus do the gods onto me, tf the dustcol Samaria be enough for al the people thatfolowe me,

lo take euery man an handfull.

n And the king ol Jlrael aunswered, and fayd: Tell hin let not hun that putteth on his harnesse boast hun lelfe, as he that putteth it ol.

le And it fortuned, that when Wenhadad hearde that tyoinges, as he was with the kinges Drinking within the pauillons, and he faide vnto this seruauntes,
Put pour selues in order. And they let chemlelues in aray against the citie.

; And beholde, there came a prophete vnte Ahab king of Israel, saying, thus lapeth the Lord: Hast thou fene all this
Great multitude-beholde, J will deliuer qinto thpne hand this daß, e thou shalt

tu 0 that Jam the Lorde,

Hus sayth the Lorde, euen by the serwauntes ofthe gouernours of p chyres.

Helapd againe who shallorder the bat-

laple: And he aunswered: Tho
7 Thou. is a he munbred the feruauntes of the awo plone ol the shyres, k they were hundred and thirtie and tivo: And

ud Ahab sayd: oy whom: He sayde:

ple ot the chüldrer 1 : toute ren of Mrael — seuen
16 And they went out atnoone: *
Hadad dyd drinkt till he was 2 the panlinons, both he and the kinges: euẽ thirtie ¢ two kinges that! Sloe him
17 And the sernauntes ol che gouernours of the shyres went out fir, and zzenhadad lent out, æ they shewed bin, faping:
There are men come out of Samaria,
13 He sayde: Whether they be come out for peate, take them alyut: or whether
2 tome out to fight, take them pet

19 And so those young men of the gouerhours of the shyres came out of the titie, andthehoattafter them:

20 And they fluc enery one his enemie that came in his wap:] and the Syrians
{cd , e they of Ilrael folowed after the:
Aud Benhadad the king of Spria staped ona horse, with his horsemen.

21 Anothe kingolPlrael wend ont, and D smote the horses and charettes, e with a great laughter ue he the Syzians,

22 (And there came a prophete to the king of Israel, and laid vnto hum: So foorth, and play the man, be wyse, € take heede what thou doest: for when the yere is gone about, the king ol Spria will come vp against thee.) 5

23 And the seruauntes of the king of Spria sapde bnto him: The gods of the hilles are their gods, and therefore they had the better ol vs: but let vs fight againstthem in the plapue, ande lor what ye wi we shall haue the better of them.

24 And this do: Take the kinges away every man out of his plate, ⁊ put dunes iu their rdames:

25 And dothou number thee an hoast, lyne the hoast that thou hast loft, such poles and suche charets, and we will fight a-

gainst them inthe plane, and thou shalt fee vs get the better ol the. And he hearkened buto their voyte, and dyd euenso.

26 And it fortuned that alter the pere was gone about, Wenhadad numbred the
Syrians, and went vp to Aphet to fight against Israel.

27 Andthe thudren of Ilrael were numbred, € with their whole number went they against them, and the children of
Picacl pitched befoze them lykt iwo sitle dockes of kiddes: but the Spans

filled the tountrey. 2 23 A

Ss

2. Kinges.

Benhadad.

Benhadad

Neen Se Rene errr

(a Hes alive

E28

And there tame a man of God and

fayd vnto the king of Piracl, thus sapth 35 And there was a certayne man of the ¢ children of the prophetes, whithe lapde

the Lorde: Betaule the Syrians haue fayd,the Lorde is but God ol the hilles, and not God of the valleys:therfore wil
FP delluer all this great multitude into thyne hande and pe shall knowe that J am the Lorde. euro ye
29 And they pitched one ouer against ie other leuen dayes: and it came to pauc, that in the seuenth day the battaile was

topned, and the chüdzen ol Ilrael ue

of the Sprians an hundzed thoulande footenten in one day. a 5
30 Wut the rest fled to Apher into the citte,

and there fella wall vpon twentie and

seuen thoulande of the men that were lekt: And Benhadad fled, and came into the citie, from chamber to chamber.

31 And his seruauntes laid vnto Him: Behold, we haue heard fay that the kinges of the Houle of Jlracl are mercpfun kinges: We will therkore put sacktloth a-

bout dur lopnes, and ropes about our

heades, and go outto the king of Ilrael, if happyly he will fave thylpfe.

32 And fo they girded lackcloth about their lopnes, ⁊ put ropes about their heades, and came to the bing of Ilrael and said:
Thy leruaunt Benhadad fayth, J pray thee let me lyue. He sayde: Is he vet alyuc: he is my brother. tease

33 And p nen tokethat word foz good lucke and hastyly caught it out of his mouth, and sayd: Nea thy brother Wenhadad.
He layde: Go, being him hyther. And
Senhadad came ont vnto him, and he taused him to tome bp into the caret.

34. And he laid vnto him: Theccities which my father tone from thy father , JJ wil reftoze agayne , and thon (halt make streates fo2 thee in Damalto, as uty father dyd in Samaria: And J wil make

an appoputment with thee, k send the away. And lo he made an appopntiient

With him, and sent him awap.

vnto his neyghbour in the Wordof t
Lord:Smpte me J pray thee. And che man woulde not smpte hin.

36 Then sapyd he bnto him: Betaule thou

hat not hearkened vnto the vopte of the

Lorde: beholde, assoone as thouart departed frõ ine, a lion shal lay thee. And

it came to passe, that assoone as he was Reg ne

Departed from him, a lion found hi and flue him. l kound hun,

37 Then he kounde another man, æ lapde: *

Smpte me J pray thee. And the ma finote hin, so that in smpting 1 ded him. 9 .
38 So the prophete went foorth, e wapted for the king by the wap, and put hin

selke out of knowledge with ashes

whiche he laped vpon his face.

39 And when the king tame by, he cryed vnto the king, and sayde: Thy sernaunt wet out in the middes of the battel, and behold there went away a man, whom another man brought vnto me, & sayde,
Kepe this man: and ik he be myssed or iost, thy lyfe shall go for his, or els thou shalt papa talent of siluer.

40 And as thy seruaunt had here ethere to do, he was gone. And the king of Hl rael sapde vnto him: Euen do hall thy iudgement be, as thou batt defined it thy felfe. 5

41 And hehasted, toke the ashes away G

from his fate, and the king ol Ilrael

knewe him that he was ofp prophetes.

42 And he sayde vnto him; Thus lavth the Lorde: Betaule thou hast let go out of thy bande aman that is in mp curse, thy lpke chall go for his lyke, and thy people for his people. 7

43 Andthebing of Ilrael went to his house wayward and in displeasure, and tame to Samaria, N

he. xxi Chapter . s Fesabel commaundeth to kill Naboth for the binepard that he refute to fell to Thab.

' ihe. wü.

19 Ellas reproueth Ahab, and he repenteth.

ter thele thinges, it
J schaunted, that Raboth
Systhe Jezraelite had a

vine pard in Jesrahel,
\iibard bp the palace of
Ahab king of Sama-

2 And

rid.
Ahab spake vnto Paboth, fay:

ing: *Geue nie thy vineyarde that map make mea gardẽ of hearbe- there of betaule ttlyeth fo nye my Houle Aud
FJ wil geue thee fo it a better vimeyarde then it is: or rather ik it pleale Hees
J will geue thee the worth of it in ni

aboth sayd to Ahab: The Lord a forbid that 11 me, that J fhould geuc ee mberitaiice of my fathers Da thee.
And Ahab tame into the house heauy
1 and cuyll apapde betause of the worde whiche Haboth the Jeraclirr Had tpoken to hin, for he had sapde: J will not

e chers 12915 lapde hin done vpon his bed, and turned away his late, and

woulde cate no bread.
But Jezabel his wpfe tante to him, and layde vnto him Why is thy spirite so wapward that thou catest no bread-
And hefayd vnto her: Foz J spake vnto Nabsththe v eʒraclite, and {aid vnto im, Gtue me thy vineparde for money: Dr els ilit pleale thee IJ will geue

auntwered: J will not gene ther my

neparde.

and Jezabel his Wyte fayde vnto Hin:
Hoest thou nowe gonerne the kingdome of Ilrael-vp, and cate bread, and let thyne heart at rest: J wil geue thee n pb bineyarde of Paboth the Jezraelite.
3 And lo fhe Wrote a letter in Ahabs name, and sealed it with his seale, and fent the letter vnto the elders, and to the nobles that were in his citie dwei-

ling with Paboth.
9 And she wrote in the letter, faying:
Protclapme achfast, and set Naboth on

4 ppe among the people:

aims 0 And let two vnthuftes before him, to unpar bare witnesse against hint, saping, ning, Thou dyddest blalpheme God and the

te

him to death.

pe n Andes the men ok his citie, euen the el-

sx” ders and gouernours whiche dwelt in

nvm s titie, dyd as Jezabel had {ent vnto zu them; and as it Was wzitten in the let-

8 ter whlche Che had lent vnto them.

n They protlapmeda fast, and fer Naboth among the chiele of the people.

3 And there tame in two men the chil: dren ok Belial, and fate before him: And the two) vnthriftie persons witnessed
Again Maboth in the presente of the people, saping: Maboth dyd blafphenie

de *. 5

Out ok the title, x toned him with stones, hat he died. ein Andthenthey lent to Jezabel, laping: i oats is stoned to death, dit foztuned, when Jezabel hearde

3. Kinges.

e mberitaunce of my faz -

thee another) bineparde for it. And he

king: And then tarie him out, and stone

God and the king. And they taried him

ca

that Haboth was stoned to death, che
15 1 to Ahab: Wp, and tale polleillon of the bineparde of Mavoth the Jezraelite, whiche he denied to geut By monep:for Maboth is not alyue, but dead.

16 And when Ahab hearde that Paboth was dead, he stoode vp to go dowuc to

the vineyarde of aboth the Jezrac-

lite, and to take poffeffion of it, a

And the worde of the Lorde tame vn-

to Elias the Thelbite, saping:

18 Gp, and go downeto meete Ahab king of Ilrael, whiche is in Samaria:
Weholde he is in the vineparde of Ha- 0
Niet er he is gone downe to pot: esle it. i

19 And therfore Male thor fay vnto him, thus sayth the Lorde: Hast thou killed c allo gotten possession: And thou shalt speake vnto him, saying, thus layththe
Tord: Jn the place were dogges licked the blood of Maboth, shall dogges liclie euen thy blood also.

Reg anf.

20 And Ahab fayde to Elias: Hast thou

founde me, Othou mpne enemie: He aunswered: J haue founde ther, forthou
Hatt {old thy selfe to worke wickednesse

in the sight of the Lorde.

21 WBehold, J will bring eupll pon thee,

E wil make cleaue riddaunce of thy po-

steritie, and wil; destroy fro Ahab, (cue) ep

himthatniaketh water againstthe wal. 4. Reg . b.

ah 105 that is shut vp, c left behind in rael.

22 And will make thyne houle tyke the
Hoult of Jeroboam the sonne of Nabat, ⁊ lpke the houle of Waala the lonne of Ahia, for the prouotation wherwith elk Hatt provoked, and made Ilraelto pine,

23 And of Jeʒabel spake the Lord faying:
The doͤgges shall eate Jezabel by the wall of Pesvabel, 0

sce. i. b. . ni Ke. ix. b.

24. And he that dieth of Ahab inp towne, ke xinic

hint hall dogges eate:and he that dieth . in the fielde, hum Malthe fowies of fhe “°° ayre tate.

25 Wut there was none phe Ahab, which

dyd euen {ell him selfe to worke wickednelle inthe sight ok the Lorde, and that betaule Jezaͤbel his Wyle pricked hym forwarde. W
26 He dyd extceeding abhonunablie in ko- Na loibing foule idols, actozding o all thinges as dydthe Ammontes 05 the Lorde talt out before the thüldreno

Ilrael. 99 3 27 And

3. Kin ges.

— e so hanna ... —
27 And it fortuned, that whẽ Ahab heard 29 Seestthon

ad

Gengy g. kholse wordes, he rent his clothes, and put sackcloth about his flesh, and fasted,

„Or, Hotte And lay in lacktloth et went bare foote.

lie. in toben of

irourmng. 28 And the Worde of the Lorde came to

Elia the Thelbpte, saping:

howe Ahab humble selte befoze nie: betause he fo e him selke before me, J wil not being that euil in his dapes: but in his sonnes dayes
Will J bring cuplt vpon his houte, |

Te. xxii. Chapter.

Jeholaphat and Ahab tight against theking of Spria, j Michea sheweth the king what chal. be the luccesse ol their interprise. 24 Jedekta the kalle prophet smitech him. 34 Ahab is flapne,
40 Ahazia his Conne succeedeth. 41 The raigne ol Fcholaphat, 5 and Joram his lonne.

Hdtheycötinuedthree peres without warre

f

* 172 Ne
SW) Be,
INES a 8

1. Par. 18a.

racl.

Ano" in the third pere dyd Jeholaphat the rr Ss hing of Juda come downe to the king of Ylraecl.

3 (And the ling of Jlrãel sayde vnto his seruauntes: Know ye not that Ramoth lin] Gilead is ours, and we fit Mill aud talit it not out of the hande of the king of Syria:)

4. And he lapde vnto Jeholaphat: nore thon tome With me to battaple against
Ramothcis Gilead 2 And Jchosaphat

4 Regza. sayde vnto the king of Ilrael: Jam as thou art, my people as thy people, and my horses as thy horles.

5 And IJcholaphat lapde vnto the king

Anon eur ol Ilrael: Allie countel I pray thet at

mari the worde ol the Lorde to day.

abc. e 6 And then the king ol Jlrael gathered

Reg ib c. the prophetes together, vpon * & foure hundred men, x layde vntothem: Shall
IJ. go against Namoth (in) Gilead to battayic,o2 shall I let it alone: And they sayde, Go vp:forthe Lorde shall deliuer it into the handes of the king.

And Jeholaphat sayd: Is there here

B neuer a prophete of the Lord moe, that

we might inquire of hint

3 And the king of Jsrael sayde vnto Jehosaphat: There is pet one man (Oichea the sonne of Jula) by whom we may altze counsell of the Lode: But FI
Hate him, for he Doth not prophecie good vnto me, but euyll. And Jeholaphat sayde: Yet not the ling fay fo.

9 Then the king of Plraci called a chan berlapne, æ sayde: Fet Michea the fonne of Jimla hyther at once.

10 And the king of Plracl, and Jehola-

betweene Syriae Hl

phat the king of Juda, late eyther in his seate, and their apparell on them, ina voyde place besyde the entring in ofthe gate of Samaria, and all the prophetes prophecied before them.

i And Zedekia the sonne of Chanaana made hornes ofiron, and lapde, thus sayth the Lord: with these chornes iy are thou pushe the Sprians, vntill thou haue made an ende of them.

Iz And all the prophetes prophetied euen so, laying: Go bp to Kamothsin Gilcad, and prosper:for the Lode Mall deluer it into the kinges bande. . N

13 And the messenger that was gone to cal Michea, spake vnto him, faying:28eholde, the wordes of p prophetes speake good vnto the king wich one mouth:

Wet thy worde therefore J pray tice, be lyke the worde of cuery one of them, to speake that whiche is good.

14 And ichea layde: As the Lorde C lpueth, Whatloeuer the Lord sayth vnto me, that will J {peake. ae

15 And so he came to the king, € the king aten sayd vnto him: Michea, ought we to go an against Namothlin Gilead to battaple, om. or to be stile ye aunswered to hum: o, O, and prolper, the Lorde Chall deliner it ae into the hande of the king. :

16 And the king layde vnto him: So and so manp times do J charge thee that thou tell me nothing but that whiche i

true, in the name ofthe Lorde.

17 He sayd: J saw all them of Jlrael feat: tered bpon the huͤles, as sheepe that haue not a sheephearde. And the Tode

sayde: Thele haut no maister, let tuerr man returne to his house in peace.

13 (And the king of Pract fayde ys
Jeholaphat: Syd J not tell thee, tha

he woulde prophetie no good bute me, but eupll:) N
19 And

ps

Mae

4 ; Tipe

; Ritu t — * phi
. r q DR
: 5 e e
N Na ee Pei
5 if — * 8 0
Nr, LAY wi ’ yaa u. H f i
5 J ;

23 Snowe therefore beholde the Lode
Hath put alping spirite in the mouth of all these thy prophetes, andthe Lorde bath spoken eupll to warde thee,

24 But Z edekla the sonne of Chanaana went to e {mote Michea on the cheke, and sayde: when went the spirite of the
Lorde from me, to speake nto thee-

25 And Michea lapde:z8ehold, thou shalt lee in that day when thou shalt go from chamber to chamber to hyde thee,

26 And the king of Hleacl sapde: Take

thea and cary hun vnto Amon the douerner ok the titie, and vnto Joas the
2) ts tonne,

u lap: Thus fapeth ö king: put this n in the prilon houle, and few him fin bread of afAiction,and with water

28 Are nem J returne in peace.
: Deane bea faye: Ikthoureturne in
Andhesz on hath not spoken by me.
* eto. e Marken pe people euery

9 Andlo the king of Ilrael, and Jehola-

a tertayn sptrite, and stoode before the Lorne. cm

— eal of a m

ATT |
+ RRA
W

Bs

~ phat the king of Juda, went vp to Raz mothlin Gilead,

30 And the king of Ilrael sayde vnto Jeholaphat: IJ wil chaunge my apparetl, and Willenter into the battel, but put thou on thyne appareil. And the king of

20 chaunged him elke, and went to al teil. i

31 But the king of Syria tonnnaunded the thirtie and two taptapnes that had rule ouer his charettes, saping: Fight neither with small nor great, laue onely against the king of Ilracl.

32 And when the captapnes of the chaz rets saw Jeholaphat, they sapd: Surely it is the king of Ilrael. And they turned to fight againũt him: And Jeholaphat tryed.

33 And so it tame to passe, that when the taptaynes of the charettes sawe that he
9175 ay 115 king of Jlrael, theyturned

acke from him.

34 And a certayne man drewe abowe ignozantly, c fmote the king of Pleaet vetweene the ribbes and his harnesle:
Wherkore he fayd vnto the diner of his tharettes, Turne thy 1 cary nie ouroftbepoat kn 3 Aud

— Aha} :

35 (And the battel enerealed that day: and tenle pet in the high places. the king stoode still in his tharet against 44 And Jehosaphat made peace with

GS the Spriaus) and died at cuen: And the the king ot Ilrael.

blood rau out of the wounde into the 45 The rest ofthe wordes that tonterne middes ok thetharet : . Jaeholaphat, æthe might that he ble.

36 Audther wet a proclamation thzough- Fhowe he warred, are they not wutten dut the hoast about the goyng downe of in the beoke ok the cronicles of the the sunne, saying: Euery man to his ti- kinges of Judatie, and to his owne tountre. 46 And the remnaunt of the stewes of the

37 So the king died, and was brought to males which remayned in the dayes of
Samaria, and they buried the king in his father Ala, he put deauc out ofthe
Saämaria. lande ö

38 And one wached the charet in the 47 There was then no king in Edom. orn. poole of Samaria, c the dogges licked the deputie was king. b 16 vp his blood:and they Wathed his ar- 48 And Jeholaphat made shippes in the dane mour, according vnto the worde ol the lea, to come though Tharsis to Ophir

Juda, ery
Joucr-

Horde whiche he spake. : forgolde, but they went not: fo; the 5
39 The rest okthe Wordes that concerne shippes brake at Eston Gaber. amber,

Ahab and all that he did, and the iuorie 49 Then layd Ahazia the sonne of Ahab
Houle whiche he made, and all the tities onto Jeholaphat: Let imp seruaũtes go that he buylded, are they not witten in With thy seruauntes in the chippes. But thebooke ofthe cronicles ol thekinges Jcholaphat woulde not. ok Ilrael- | 50 And Jeholaphat dyd sleepe With his
40 And so Ahab flept with his fathers, E fathers; c was buried with his fathers
Aha ia his sonne raigned in his steade. in the citie ol Dauid his father: And Jei. Par. xx. e. . Jeholaphat the sonne ol Ala began horam his sonne ratgned in his steade. to raigne vpon Juda in the fourth vere 5 Ahazia the sonne of Ahab began to of Ahab king of Ylracl. : raigne ouer Israel in Samaria the le:
42 And Jeholaphat wasthirticandfine nenteenth pere of Jehosaphat king of peres old when he began to raigne, and Juda, e raigned two peres ouer Ilcael. raigned twentie and fine peres in Hie- 52 But he did euyl in the light ofthe Lo, rulalemhis mothers name was Au- and Walked in the way ok his father, € ba the daughter of Suhl. in the way of his mother , in the way
43 And he walked in all the wapes of Ala of Jeroboam the foune of Rabat, his father, and bowed not therefrom, whiche made Jlrael to synne. but dyd that whiche was right in the 5; FJor he serued Baal, x worshipped him, eyes of the Lorde: Meuerthelesse the and prouoked the Lorde God of Ilrael high places were not taken out of the vnto Wath , according vnto all that his
Wap: for the people offred and burnt in- kather had done.

The ende ofthe third booke of the kinges after the reckening of the Latitnnistes, which the Hebrues call the first booke of the kinges.

oe

Oey sata ait N in:
E. ia 7.
2 Thazia b by Elias. wit
6 TIER n

ceedeth him.

ben Moab rez
SN beled against
S || Hiact , alter
( O itl)
Ahab.
N in 1 2 And Ahaʒia

A

in SD

ber that aria, and while

he had

he was in his sickenesse, he lent meslen-

gers and saide vnto them: Go, and enquire ol-Weelzebub the god of Ekrom, ae I shall rvecouer of (is uty dicafe. |
But the angell of the Lorde spake to
Elias the Thesbite: Arise, and go vp az

{The God
A tg: lo cal: b. other fo

ada Jainst the messengers ok the king of deen. Samaria and fap vnto them: Js there n. ndt a God in Jlrael, that ve go to alee cle lounsel at Beelzebub the God of Eka kum

4 Wherefore thus faith the Torde:
Thou halt not conie downe frõ the bed on which thou art gone vp, but shalt die the death. And Elias depaͤrted. ;

5 And when the mellengers turned

backe againe vnto him, he fade vnto them: hy are ye now tome againe-

They aunswered hun: There came a mau vp against vs, and layde vnto vs:
Go, € turne againe vnto the king that
{ent you, and fa the Lorde: J

s there not a God in JE racl, that thou sendest to enqupre of steldebud the God of Ekrom: Therepe thou shalt not come downe from
Jebedon which thou art gone bp, but
37 N the death.
U. nd he fain vnto them: What maner
4 man was that which came vp and
Ct vou and tolde you thefe wordes; esl thep auntwered him: It was an lea man,) and girt with a girdell of her about his loynes. And he laide:

Meh b

The fait Chapiters.

ya fall falleth fiche. and consulteth with Beelzebub. to The captaines ouer kiktie were tent to Elias. whereof tw b fire from beaten by bis Prager, 17 Ahaitadreth. and deheram bis bother fue,

e death ok

ve vnto hin, thus faith .

fter

re

ot cad N
1 2 E < { 1.0 NG N. . -~V 1 nem MN eae 371
＋ ne 5 8 1 —
Ane RUSE C..

z he is reproued two were burnt

297 che 71

Iltis Elias the Thesbite“
9 Thenthe king tent onto him a

. tayne duer fiftte, with his

which came to him (and beholde he lat

on the top of an hill) And he spake vnto him, Thou manok God, the king hath saide: come downune.

10 Elias aunswered and sa taine ouer the fiftie: It
God et fyre tome Downe from t tonsume thee e thy fiktie. ) And there caine fyre from heauen, and confumed hun and his fiktie. a

1 Againe allo he sent vnto him an other captaine ouer fistie, with his iftie: And he spake and faide vnto hum, O man of God, thus bath the king fade: Make

haste, and come downe.

12 Elias aunswered e saide vnto them:
If Ibea man ok God, let fpre come downe from heauen, and consume thee and thy fiftie. And there came kyre of
God from heauen, and confinned him and his fiktie.

cape ftte men:

ide to the cap-

heauen

A be n inan of (b) The

threatningeg
Of godg proree aie ef-
Cttaallaz gatust che wiched.

13 And the king pet againe sent the ©

third captaine ouer filtie, with his feftie

men: And the third captaine ouer fistie went vp, and tame and fell on his knees before Elias, and besought him, i layde vnto hun: Oh man of God, J pray thee let my ipfe and the lyfe of the fiftic thy seruauntes be precious in thy sight.

14; Beholde, there tame kyre downe from heauen, and burnt vp the two fore captaines ouer fiftie with their fikties:therfore let np lyfe now be precious iu thy

sight.
15 And the angell of the TLorde laide bn-

to Ellas: Go Downe With him, and oc (0 coven.

not afrayde of him. And he arole, and went downe with him vnto the king.
16 And he saide vnto him, thus saith the
Lowe: Forzasuuich as thou haft tent messengers to alne counfell at Weelzebub the god of Ekrom, as though there

Bod in Ilrael, whole word had ben no God in J | 1555

dencth bis ns

nisters to do their icssage.

thou mightest seeke after: br og thou
{halt not come downe of t

which thou art gone vp, but (halt dye the death. — *

ry And so he dyed attording to the worde

ofthe Lorde which Eltas had spoken:

And Jehozam (his brother! began to

king of Juda, betause he
13 The rest ofthe wordes

Ahaʒia, what thinges he dyd are not written in the booke of the tro

of the kinges of Israel:

We. J. Cite.

raigne in his steade, in the fecond he bed on Jehoram the forme of Jeh

8 Eltas deuideth the waters with his clone. 1 he ig taken vp into heauen ij Elisa taketh his cloke and deuideth Jordane. 20 The bitter and venemous waters are healed. 2; Che children that mocke Elila, are rent in peeces with

beares.

N

XN

8 — . a a ‘< tae’ — are 8

fy
(i hams aly

COU TT,
Sa AiR ewe Anvethe A
Ss: N
M
Athy I Sty vi * byt

1 Ila N fart

A!
Oene. v. c. pes, ( A WV
* z, Elile- 2 U

Elisa: Tarp here J prape thee, for the

Lorde hath sent me to Bethel. Elisa

iRegasd. saide vnto him: As the Lorde lpueth,

and as thy soule liueth, I will not leaue

thee. And they came downe to Bethel,

revert: 3 (And the children of the prophetes that

brochen. Were at Bethel came out to Elila, and

Mista: lade vnto hum: knowest thou not how

worde. that the Lord wyll take away thy mat

N ster from thy head this dap: He saide: J a knowe it allo, holde pou pour peace.

4. And Elia saide vnto hint Elisa, tary

ere I praye thee, for the Lorde hath

ent me to Jericho. He laide: As the

SOE = 8 WN
N : . i nh

. + BIN
NH OF inure A St a

N 46 Cyr x oe ity ; , TR 5 *
N ‘ , A, Ar anit Bue N

ee eZ

„ N N ee eee ere

Horde lyueth, and as thy

soule lpueth,

J will not leaue thee. And lo they tanie

to Jericho.

5 “it the children ofthe prophetes that were at Jericho came to Elila, and laid vnto him: Knowest thon not, that the

Lorde wil take away thy

niaister from

thy head this day: Pe aunlwered: J know it also, holde pe pour peace.

6 And Elias said vnto htm: Tarp FJ prap thee here, lor the Lorde hath sent moto
Jordane. He saide: As the Lord uct),
Tas thy soule lpueth, J wyll not leave thee. And so thty two Went together.

7 And fiftit men ok the sonnes the pid phetes came e stoode on the other {poe
A farre of: and they two stoode by Jor-

dane.

3 And Ellas toke his mantel, e abt

it together, and smote the they were Denided parte

waters, u, one Wi e

ereof hat no sonne. ey nities

— Kinges.
Fish 5 8 8 and part the other, sothat chey two hath taken him vp, and cal hun vpon

toner through the drpe lande.
1 And it fortuned, that alldoue as they were ouer, Elias saide vnto Ella: Alke

what {hal do for thee, per J be taken

apkromthee. And Elila laide: Y dap eee ct thy spirite be double vpon

me. dhe said, Thou hast asked an hard
1 ing Veuerihelelle thou see me Whe

Jam taken away from thee,thou halt

ue it so: vf thou do not, it shall not be.

‘Tl a it dne that as they went wal-

king and talking: beholde, there appea-

reda charet of fpre, and horles ol fyre, e

parted them both asunder, and cklias

ent bp through the whorle winde into

heauen.

„ And Elila sawe, and cryed: D my fr

. ther, O mp father, the charet of Pract,

and the horsementhereok. And he sawe

hun no moze: and he toke his owue clothes, and rent them in two peetes.

eo tfthe tn,

Ch he toke vp allo the mantell of Ellas
22 So the waters were healed vnto this

that fell from hin, and went backe az gaine, and stoode by Jordanes syde.

14 Aud toke the mantel of Elias that fel from him, and smote the waters, € he sald: navere is the Lod God of Elias, s he him selke; And when he had smitten the waters, they parted this waye and that waye: and Elila went ouer.

15 And whenthe childrẽ of he prophetes
Which were at Jericho fave him krom a karre, thep sayde, The spirite of Elias doth rest on Ellla: And they tame to
110 hint and fel to the grounde before

m,

16 And laide vnto him: See, now there be

with thy seruauntes kiltie strong men,

some mountame, orinto fore vallep.

And he saide: Ne shall send none.

17, And when they laye vpon him

18 And when they tame a

he was alhamed, he lam: Send They

tpll

sent therefore fiftic mien, Which forge

him thece dapes, but found him not.

Satine to him

Which tarped at ZF ericho)he sarde vnto them: Did J not lape onto ou that pe

fhoutd not go-

And the men ofthe citie sade vnto E- D lila: behalde fir, the dwelling ofthis citie ts pleasaunt, as thou thy selfe seest: but the water is naught, e the grounde

barren.

20 he sade: Bring me a new cruse, and put salt therein. And they brought it to

Him.

2 And he went vnto the spring of the

waters, and cat the salt in thyther, saide, tins faith the Lord: J haue

and hea-

led these waters, there Hall not come
Hencefoorth either death or barennelle.

Day, According to the saying of Ellas,

which he spake.

And he went vp krom thente vnto
Wethel: And as he was going vp the wap, there came litte chüdren ont or the titie, and mocked him, e lande vnto hun:
Go vp thou balde head, go vp thou

balde head.

24. And he turned backe, and loked on them, and curled them in the name of

the Lorde: And there tame two

shee

brares out of the Wood, and tare fourtie

and two childzen ofthem.

25 And He went from thence to mount
Carmel, and from thence he turned as

letthẽ go we praxthee e seeke thy mai- gaine to Samaria. fer spf happly the spirite of the Lorde |
J The iii. Chapter.

Che raigne of gehoram. 6 He and Jeholaphat go to warre against Moab which rebelled. uckllla repzouech him, 17 and geueth their hoack water. 24 Che Moe abites are ouercome, 27 Cheir king sacrificꝰth his sonne. 5

w Jehoram the
Seal

wronght cuit in the light of the ode, but not lyke his tanher ann wie

his mother:for he put away the iniages

of Baal that his father had made.

Neuerthelesse, he cleaued bute the sinnes of Peroboam the sonne of Na-

bat which made Pfraei to sinne,
Departed not therefrom.

and

And Mesa king of Moab was a lorde
2 ot n rendered vnto the king ol

Ilrael an hundred thouland lam

aud

xen *

J
Moab.

and an hundzed thoufand$ rammes with the wooll.

Wut when Ahab was dead, it fortuned that the king of Moab rebelled against the king of Israel.

6 And king Jehoram went out of Samaria the same season, and nuntbecd all

Israel:
7 And went, c sent to Jehosaphat the
S “ ping of Juda faying: The king of Mo-

ab bath rebelled against me, wilt thou

tome With me against Moab in battell?

He aunswered, J will tome vp: for as
10 am so art thou: and as my people be,

o are thy people: thy horses, as myne.

8 And he saide: What way hall we go

vp: And he aunfibered: The way

rough the wildernesse of Edom.

9 And oct ead toke his iournep, aud the king ol Juda, and the king of Edom: And when they had compat: fed the way seuen dapes, they had no water forthe hoast, and kor the cattaple that folowed them.

Io And the king of Ilrael saide: Alas, the
Lorde hath called these three kinges together, to delluer them ouer into the hande ol Moab.

11 But Jcholaphat sald: Is there not here a prophete of the Lorde, that we ape cuquire of the Lod by hin: And one of the king of Jlraels seruanntes aunswered and salde: Here is Elisa the

sonne of Saphat, which powred water

ou the handes of Elias.

12 And Jehosaphat saide: The Word of the Lorde is with him. And so the king of Israel, & Jehosaphat, and the king of Edom went downe to him.

13 And Elias saide buto the king of JE racl: What haue JJ to do with thee-
Get thee to the prophetes of thy kather,
€ to the prophetes ot thy mother. And the king of Israel {aide vnto him, Oh nape: for the Lorde hath called these three kinges together, to deliuer them into the hand ol Moab.

14. And Elias saide: As the Lorne of

hoastes liueth, in whole fight J stande, andit were not that J regarde the prefence of Hebolaphat the king of Juda,
J would™ not loke towarde thee,noz vet see thee.

creme, 15 Wut now bryng me a minstrell. And when the minstrell plaped, the hand of

the Torde came vpon him:
16 And he sapde, thus saith the Torde:

4.Kinges.

Make this valley full of ditches:

17 For thus saith the Lorde: He hay fee neither Wpndenoz rapne, pet the valley
Chall dc {tiled with water, that e maye

dune, both ve, and pour beattes,¢ pour
Andithis s pet but asi

18 And this is pet but a small thing in fight of the Losde, foxatinuch as he i geue ouer the Moabites also into pour haudes.

19 And pe shal snute every strong towne: and euery goodly citie, aud Chal fell cue? ry plealaunt tree, and ftop cuery Welt of D water, and marre euery good platte of dt 19 7 stones.

20 And in the morning when the meat offering was offered, behoide, there tame Water by the way of Edom, and the tuntrey was filled with water.

21 And when al the Moabites heard that

the kinges Were come vp to fightagainst them, they gathered all that was able to put on harnesle, and stoode inthe border of the lande:

22 And they were vp earlie in the mo:

ning, and the sunne Aone vpon the water, that the Moabites {are the water
à farre of as red as blood.

23 And they saide, This is the blood of slaughter: The kinges are slaine, ⁊ one haue smitten another: Now therckore
Moab get thee to the spoyle.

24 And when they canie to the hoast ot
Ilrael, thje Ilraclites stoode vp e smote the Moabites, fo that they fied before them: but they folowed vpon them and smote Moab, 1

25 And they ouerthrew the cities and on tuety good parceil of lande cast cuery man his stone, and flled it, ⁊ they stopt all the welles of water, and feld allthe good trees, onciy in Firharaleth left they the stones thereok: howbeit they went about it with Minges,t linoteit.

26 And when the king of Boab law that the battaile Was to lore for him, he toke
With hint seuen hundred mien Mat dew p sword, to haue gone througheeuen bu tothe king of Edom:but they could not.

27 And then he toke his eldest soune that should haue raigned in his steade, and

offered him for a burnt offering vpon a the wall: And there was great indig ae

tion against Ysracl, and they departed D

from him, and returned to their olbnc keln.

lande.

© The

fe 7

aod

ovinereateth the oyle to the poore wydowe by Elila. che Sunamite a tonne at gods hand. 28 noho dying.

4Kinges.

The. iiij. (hapiter.

12 He obtapneth ko
32 he raileth him 0 J

gaine, 40 He maketh lweete the potage. 41 And multiplieth the loaueg.

fl yes Fs ne | : | ‘ .
U 2

Up

l

UTR AAD

Naa e

LI

ie

Zs

rh

ASTI:

OY fire Ries
" nig 8 8 Dé
— dead, € thou knowest

that thy seruaunt did keare the Lozde:
And the treditor is tome to fet my two fonnes to be his bondmen.

2 Elisa latde vnto her: Tell me what J shall do for there What hast thou in thyne houle : She laide: Thyne handemade Hath nothing at all in the houle, laue a pitcher with dyle.

3 He aide vnto her: Go, and borow vel ne 18 1 0 55 them that are) Without,

zurn ot all thy neighbours emptie vel-
(eis and that not a ewe: 1

4 And when thou art tome in, hon shalt

den hut the doore after thee and after tl
"AN th (oy 4
=a HUES, and powre out into © all rae
1 0 di N fet asyde that which is full. a ache went from him, and chut the
0 de after her e after her lonnes: And

A eh to her, e fhe powred out. elle Ain to passe, that when the
Won ere ful, she laid vnto her sonne:
7 SMe pet a vellel. And he faid vnto

STINE
PERSE

the rest.

3 And it kell on a dap, that Elila came to
Sunem, where was a great woman, that toke him in for to eate bread: And so it tanie to passe, that from that tyme foorth (as oft as he tame that way) he turned in thyther to eate bread.

9 And sht faide vnto her husband: We-

holde, J perceaue that this is an holy

man of God which passeth by vs continually.

10 Vet vs make him a litle chamber —

pray thee, with walles, e let vs set him there a bed, and a table, and a stoole, and a tandelsticke: that he may turne in thyther when he tommeth to vs.

1 And it fortuned on a day that he carte been turned into the chamber, k lay therein,

12 And {aide to Gehezi his seruaunt: Call this Sunamite. And when he called her, che preleuted her selle before hun.

3 And againe he said buto him: Tel her, beholde thou halt ben careful 92 15

— <_< = ay

Elifa.

Elif

anne. With allchts care,“ What ch wenom ber away. And the man of Cod fapde-

Uauntes of
God are not e

3 denefiteg tceaucd.

do for thee- Wouldest thou be spoken for to the king, or to the taptapne ot the hoast-She aunswered: I dwell among mpne olbnie people.

14. And he laid againe: What is to be done for her: Gehezi aunswered: Ueryly he hath no childe, and her husband is olde,

15 And he said: Call her. And when he had called her, she stoode in the doore.

16 And he salde: At this tyme appoynted, according to the tyme of lyke, thou
Mate imbrate a sonne. And che said: Oh nap my lorde thou man of God, do not lye vnto thyne handmapde.

17 And the wyfe conceaued, and bare a

Ge. x vil. b.

sonne that fame season that €lifa had

de vnto her, acording to the tyme of

ly C.

z 18 And when the chide was growen, it

C fellona day that he went out to his father, and to the reapers,

19 And he {ard vnto his father: Dy head, nip head. And he laide to a lad: Carp

hun to his mother.

20 And when he had taken Hint bronght him to his mot her, he fate on her knees till noone, and then dped.

at And she went vp, and laide him on the bed ol the man of God, ¢ shut (the doore vpon hun, and went out,

22 And called vnto her husband, x layde:
Send wich nie J pray thee one of the poung men, and one ofthe asses: for J will runne to the man of God, and tonie againe.

23 And he salde: vwoherekore wylt thou go to him: leing that to day is neither newe moone nor sabbath day. And the aunlwered: All chalbe well.

24. Then she ladled an asse, and saide eo her seruaunt: Dryue and go forwarde, ty not for mie to get vp, except I byt

ee. x.

25 And lo he went, and came vnto the nian of God to mount Carmel: And it fortuned, that when che man of God sawe her farre of, he saide to Gehezi his seruaunt: Beholde, vonder is the
Sunanute: ie:

26 Kunme therefore to meete her, € faye vnto her: Js all well with thee, with thy husvand, and with the lad: And the aunswered: All is Well.

27 And when the tame to the man of God vp to the hill, fhe caught hun by the feete: But Gehezi went to her, to thrust

Let her alone, for her soule is ver
Within her, and the Lode hath hidit from me, and hath not tolde it me.

28 Then she fatde: Did J defive a lone

ol mp Lorde? did J not require thee that thou shouldest not deceaue me-

29 Chenvelaide to Gehezi: * Girde vp ile, thy loynes, and take mp staffe in thyne

hande, and go thy way: If thou meete La any mau-salute him not: And ik any la- C2 lute the, aunlwere hin not agatne: Ind de lay my staffe vpon the face of the chude. B="

30 And the mother of the childe fad: As su the Lose lvueth, and as thy fouteiy: ueth, J wyll not leaue thee. And he a: rose, and folowed her.

31 Gebest went before them, and layed ¢ the stafte bpon the face of the chude, but ther was neither voyce nor any feeling:
Wherfore he Went againe to meete hin, and tolde hin, laping: The childe is not awaked.

32 And when Etifa was come into the house, behold the childe was dead, and layde vpon his bed.

33 He Went in therefore, x shut the doore bpon themtwapne, e prayed vnto the
Looe, *

34 And went vp, and laye vpon the lad, 1. Regn and put his mouth on his mouth, c his pes vpon his epes, € his handes vpon his handes, € When he lo laye vpon the chude, the Sethe of the childe Yared
Warme.

35 And he went agatne, and Walked once vp and done in the house, e then went bp, c layde him selfe vpon him againt:

Aud then the childe gafped scuẽ tines, „e and opened his eyes.

36 And he called Gehezi, and fatde: Call for this Sunamite, So be talled her: which when (he was tonie in vnto Hint, he saide vnto her: Take thy sonne.

37. Therkore she went in, and fell at his feete, and bowed her selle to the ground, F and toke vp her sonne, and went out.

38 Elila tame agatne to Gilgal, and there was a dearth in the lande, and the chit dren of the prophetes dwelt with him:
And he fatde vnto his feruaunt, Seta great pot on (the free) and mabe potage for the children of the prophetes.

39 And one went out into the ficlde to ga ther hearbes, and kounda wylde rue and gathered therof 19 e his lap ful, and tame and chred then 5

Lu. v..

4Kinges. XCVI.

if

Au:

a

fache pot of pottage: for they kne wut

not. they dant: abit oztuned, that when they

of the pottage, they cryed out and
115 000 n of God, there is death in the pot. And they could not cate ther-

of. 5 8 zut he saide: being meale. And he cast ite a pot, and be saide: Fill for the ptople, that they may cate, And there was no moze Harine in the pot.
There came à man front Baal Sali-

a and brought the man ol God bread of

owred out for the men to

the first fruites, euen twentic loaues or
Aub hen u eares 1 torne in the hulte.
Geuc vnto th t

hp K 0 the people that
4 And his minister aunswered: von
{hall J {et this before an hundred an,
He laid againe, Geue it vnto the people,

that they map cate: For thus falth the tohn

Torde, They shall eate, and tl ene f of oS

44 And so heset itbefore them, and they did eate, and left ower acrogbing to the
Word of the Lode.

4 De. v. Chapter.

1Paaman the Sprian is healed of his leprolie. 16 Elila rekuleth his giktes.

27 Gehezi is strißen with
Naaman. f

the hoast of the king of

Spa, was a great

| Alinta, and honorable in

NF ithe sight of his maister,

5 A decause that by him

ö the Torde had geuen health vnto Sprid:Hhe was alfo a mightie man, c expert in warre (but he was

a leaper.

2 And the Syrians had gone out by tompaules, € had brought out of the tountrey of Ilrael a litle mapde, € she was with Naamans wpke.

And she saide vnto her lady: J would to God mp lorde were with the prophet that is in Samaria, for he would

delyuer him okhis leprosie. 1

4 And heey went in, and tolde his lorde, faytng: Thus and thus saide the mayd that is ofthe lande of Jlrael. 5

5 And the king ol xda lade: Go thy

wap thither, and J wyll send a letter

vuto the king of Hltacl. And he depar-

ted, and toke with him ten talentes of

lilüer, and fire thouland peetes ok golde,

: aud tenthaunges of rapmentes,
2b brought the letter tothe king of
Birne fontepning this tenour. How,
1 ah thts letter is tome vnto thee, beholde J haue therewith sent Naaman ny serüaunt to thee, ride him ok his leprosie.
1 se fortuned, that when the king of
115 el had red the letter, he rent his hes, and faide: * Am J God, that
Ould dap, and make alpue: For he

Aaman captapne of

«ll

that thou mayest

lepzofie, because he toke money and rayment of

doth fend to me that J chould delyuer a man from his leprofie:naheretoze confiver Ipray you, e fee how he secketh
à quarell agaiust me. *

8 Which when Elila the man of God had heard how that the king of Ilrael had rent his clothes, he sent to the king, laping:wherlore hast thou rent thy clo: thes! Let him come now to me, and he
Jie r that there is a prophet in

ta * . . i

9 And so Naaman came with his horses and with his charets, and stoode at the doore of the house of Elisa. —

10 And Elisa sent a messeuger vnto him,

saping: Go, and walhe thee in Jordane

seuen tymes, and thy flethe Matt come

Se to thee, and thou shalt be clean: ed. . ,

Wut Naaman Was wroth, and went away, and saide: Beholde, Ithought with my selke, he would surely come out, and stande and tall on the namic of the Lord his god, e put his hand on the plate, that he may heale the leprosie.

12 Are not Abana and Pharphar riuerof Damalto, better then all the waters of Hlcacle PF I wache me also in them, shãl I not be tleansed- And fo he turned hum, and departed with dilpleasure.

B And his seruauntes came, and commmined with him, and saide: Father, if the prophet had byd thee do some great thing, oughtest thou not to haue Done tt:
How much rather then when he lalth to thee, washe, and be clcane-

14. Then went he dowue, ¢ walhed 15

C

„VI. 2. U

Luk ii. e.

Or. res

» U
Wardt.

selfe seuen tymes in Jordane, according to the saying of the man of God, and his fleshe tame againe lyke vnto the fleshe of a litle childe,* and he was tleansed.

God, he and al his tompanp and stoode befort him, and salde: BWehold, J know nolwe that there is no God in all the worlde, but in Israel: Now therfore “J pray thee take a blessing of thy sernaunt-

in. Re. xvia 16 But he aide: As the lorde lyueth be-

Ca) The mophet did not approue his act, dut after the common ot speache byd him farewell.

männer

fore whom J stande, J wyll reteaue none: And when the other Would haue tonstrayned hin to reteaue it, he would not. i

© iy And Haaman salde: Shall there not

be geut to thy seruaunt as much of this earth as two mules may beare-For thy seruaunt wyll hentefoorth offer neither burnt facrifice nor offering vnto any other God, saue vnto the Lorde.

13 But herein the Lorde be mercpfull to thy seruaunt, that when my matter goeth into the boule of Rinmion kor to vorshp there, and leaneth on my hand, and J bowe my selke in the house of
Rinimon: when J do bowe downe FJ fay in the housc of Künnion, the Lorde be mercyfull vnto thy seruaunt betause of this thing.

19 Unto whom he faide:“ Go in peate.
And when he was Departed from hun as it wert a furlong of grounde,

20 Gehezithe seruaunt of Elila the man of God, sald: Weholde, my niaister Hath
{pared Haaman this Sprtan, that he would not receaue at his bande thole thinges that he offered: As the Lorde

N 4.Kinges. 0

15 And he turned againe to the man ok

lyueth, J wyll runne after hir

f — ip — bim, @ take

21 And lo Gebesttolowwed Naaman: when Maaman saw him running “a hun, be light downe from the charet to mecte hun, and fatde:* Is all welle!

22 Heaunlwered, All is Well: Weholde my malster bath sent me, saying: Ste there be come to me even nore from mount Ephraim two poung men Of the children of the prophetes:Gene them J E prap thet one talent offitner, and two thaunge ol garmentes.

23 And Maaman sald: with a good wal. take two talentes: And he tonstrained
Him, c bounde two talentes offiiucrin two bagges, with two chaunge of gar: meutes, and laide them vpon two of hig seruauntes, to beare them before him.

24. And when he tanie to the lower plate he tobe l them} from their hand, and be: stowed s chem in the house, and he lettht men go, and they Departed, :

25 But he went in and stoode before his maister: And Elifa said vnto him, whete commest thou Gehezl: Pe saide: Thy seruaunt went no whpther.

26 But he fatde vnto him: W went not en myne heart (with chee} when the man een

turned againe from his charet to niecete ther: Is it now a tyme to reteaue monep, to receaue garmentes, olpue trees, vnieyardes, cheepe, and oxen, men seruauntes, and mapde seruauntes.

27 Te leprosie therefore of Maaman cen shal cleaue vnto thee and vnto thy seede a for tuer. And he went out from his

presence a leper as White as snowe.

IUS.TES 11

The . (hapter.

6 lila maketh ston to wimme abone the water. 8 He dilcloleth the king ol Syrias counsel to the hing of Itrael. ; noho fending certaine to take him. were kept fate in
Samaria. 24 Samarla is besieged and endureth extreme famine,

N N aN
9 0 1 l

Whobetes saide vnto Ell-
G. Weholde we pray
Iithee, the place where we dwen with thee is to litle for vs: 8

3 And ont saide: Be content J pray thee, and come with thy seruauntes. And he

he thildren of the pro:

aunfivered: J wyll come.

4 And so he went with them: And when they tanie to Jordane, they cut dawne
Wodd. f

5 Butit fortuned, that as one was kelling down ofa tree, the are head fell in to the water: And he erped, and lalde,
Alas maister, it was lent nie. it

And the man of God farde: nofyerct |
(te And he Hered him the place: Aud he tut downe a sticke, and cast it in thy

i | e iron did ther, and immediatly th dwynnmt.

pil swymme. yo ot .
Sher de he: Take it vp. And he
57 Frachten hi hand ad toke it vp.
, king of Spria warred against srael, and toke counsell with his serfauntes, and lade: In such and such a ate shalbe my campe. .
And the man of God sent vnto the king of Pirael, saping: Beware that thou not ouer to — a place, for there the fang are lurkyng.

10 Thertche the king o Ilrael sent to the plate which the man ol God tolde him and warned him of, Wand saued bin selle frown it, not once, nor twyse.

aut’ l And the heart of the king of Syria was troubled foz this thing, and he called for his leruauntes, and said vnto them: il ye not chewe me, whiche of our men
(betrapetly me to the king of Ilrael-

N. And one ok his seruauntes fayde, None my lorde O king: Wut Eltla the prophet that is in Ilrael, telleth the king ol He rael, pea euen the wordes that thou speakest in thy priuie chamber.

iz He layde: Oo, and [pie where he is, that

map sende and fet him. And one told him, saping:Wehold, he is in Dothan.

C1 Therekore sent he thyther horses and charets, and a mightie hoast: and they eee night, and con passed the citie about.

15 And when the seruaunt of the man of
God role vp early to go cut: beholde, there was an hoast rounde about the towne with horses c charets: And his seruaunt sapde vnto him, Alas matter,

ban; What hall we do-

Iẽs He aunswered, Feare not:lor they that withthem.

17 And Elisa praped and sapd: Lord J bez sech thee open his eyes that he may fee.
Aud the Lorde opened the eyes of the poung man, and he loked: and beholde che mountapne was full of horles, and charets of fire round about Ella.

18 And when they cane downe to hint,
Ellapraped vnto the Lord, and lapde:
Dupte this people J pray thee With ulcndnelle And he fniote them with
0 0 actording to the worde of

9 And Ella sapd vnto them: This isnot
10 . wap, neither is this the towne: koeme, & J will bung pou to the man

cei 0
“PIX, ¢,

4. Kinges.

be with vs, are mo then they that be

XCVII.

whom pe feke . x P mae , But he led them to Sa:

20 Butt it fortuned that when the were tome to Damaria, Elila fave: Lowe, open their eyes that they may fee. And
— eyes, and they

3 Weret
: 5 ie . 2 eae

21 And the king of Israel sayde vnto elifa when he sawe chem: cy father
Ismpte them, chall J sinpte them:

22 And he aunlwered, Thou thait not lmpte them: Wut finpte tote that thou halt taken with thine owne lworde, and with thyne owne bowe: But rather set bread and water belore them, that they
Nilay cate c drinke, æ go to their matter,

23 And he prepared à great rekettion for them, and when they had eaten and drunke, he fent them away, e they went

to their maister: And fo the souldiours ae tame no more into the lande of rael.

24. Alter this it chaunced, that Benhadad king of Spria gathered al his hoast and went vp, and besieged Samaria.

25 Wut there was a great dearth in Sa:

maria:and beholde, they besieged it, vntill an asses head was {old fo2 fourescore suluer pente, and the fourth part of a® r. cab of doues doung for fiue peetes of sil- ed:

ned it in ehe liege for lach

uer.
26 And as the king of Ilrael was gopng „. vpon the wal, there crped a woman bnto him, saping: Help me my lord O king.
27 He layde: If the Lorde do not suceour thee wher with can J helpe thee z with the barne, or with the wine presse:
28 And the king lapde vnto her: what ¢
Wilt thou: She aunlwered: Ponder wonran sapd vnto me, Weng thy sonnc, that we may eate him to dap, and we
Will eate myne to morowe. P
29 And so we dressed my sonne, and dyd 5.1 18 f. cate him: And J sayde to her the other Tub. dap, bring thy fone, that we may cate him: And che hath hyd her sonne.
30 And it taine to passe, that when the king hearde the Wordes of the woman, he reut his tlothes, and went vy on the tba
Wall, and the people loked, and beholde fg gta he had a sackcloth vnder © vpon his tio N fleshe. .
Then he sapd: God do so z moze alld to swroccces f thet 15 dead of Elila the sonne ol Sa- u woe

: i ini tl is dap. titre they will can anden J 0 be Mine

- fate by him) And the king sent a man of his maisters feete behynde him:

head we tirtumspect when the mellen Tordeger tonnneth, and (hut the doore, and he vit. Chapter. - &
1 Elita prophecieth plentie of bittaple and other thingsto Samaria. 6 The Sprians run awap and haue no man folowing them. The prince that woulde not beleue the worde of Elisa is troden to death. ö

re

* it “=i 8 * Ls 8 NN J WC 4 — 4 _Y) * 2
Ree . hen, Ven N % 2 ul q 2 ( 05 sz AT eT ‘Lele.
Th N Id da | fi N Le { 0 i =~" Pe’ DP
, Nea 12 ne 2 EP Rip bY 1 | 177 K N 0 os ty ; 65 0 5 Me ok .
"| March b eilt all- Pd 4
A. , 5 1 ’
Ay 7

r Ml is a Thy awh

as
A 1 hen Elisa satde: Heare dye also . Morbe therfore come, and let
Ege pe the wordofthe lord, vs kall vpon the hoast of the Syrians:
3 3 Dy thus sayth the Lode: If they laue our tines, we hatlipue: HE

; J) 7Lo mozowehistime they kal vs then ace Wedean.

\; 0 wall Ja bushell of fyne 5 And they role vp in the twplight to ne, e flowze (be colde) for a go to the hoast of the Sprians: And sicle, aud two bushels when they were come to the vtmaost of barlpe for a ficte in the gate of Sa part ot the hoast of Sypzia, behold there maria. was no man chere.

2 Thenatertapne lomde(on whose hand 6 Forthe Lode had made the hoattof

the king leaued) aunswered the man ok the Spzans to heare a nopse of cha-.

God, and sayde: Weholde ifthe Lorde rets, ca noyse ot horses, æ the noyse ska would make windowes mheaue, might great hoast: Insomuch that they lapde this faying come to passe- he sapde: Be- dne to another, Lo, the king of Plracl
Hold, thon shalt see it with thyne pes, hath hyred against vs the kinges of the

Esa. via.

but shalt not cate therof. Hethites, and the kinges ol the Cory’ .

3 And there were foure leperous men at tlans, to come vpon vs.

the entring in of the gate: And they sayd 7 Wherkore they arofe, and ficd in the 2

one to another, Why sit we here vntill twplight, and lekt their tentes, their

5 : 4) Eh we dpe- porses, and their alles, and the fielde anz

4 Il we fay, we will enter into the cite: Which they had pitched euen as it was,

o gt ele, the ar ce

behold, the dearth is in the titie, and we Oand fled foz their lpues. bene,

chaldis therm ld ik we it tn here, we s And when thele lepers came torheedse

alt FF

| XCVIII.

raelites that ar we w

— — e consumed ) and we wil

14. They toke therfore the horses of two charets,andeewingientatier che po ofthe Syrians, saping: So, and see.

15 And they went after them euen vnto
Jordane, and lo, all the wap was full ot clothes, and vellels, which the Syrians had catt from them in their haste: And
— e > AD tolde the

16 And the people went out, and popled the tentes of the Syrians: Ando tt came to passe that a bushell of kyne flowze was solde for a ficle , and two buchelles

dast, they went into a tent, and r and drinke, and taried thence silner, and golde, and rapinent, x went and
Pit:aud tame againe and entred into another tent, and taried thence also, and went and hyd it.

Then lapde one to another: woe do not well this day forasmuche as it is a day to bung good tydinges, and we holde gur peace. He We tarie till the Day tight, some mifehicfe wil come vpon vs: Now therfore come , that we may go and tell the hinges houcholde. fo And so they tame, and called vnto the porter ol the citie and told them, saping:

C

ecame tothe pavilions of the Sy- ol barlpe fo a sitle, *accogding to the 4 ci and see there was no man there, wonrde ofthe Torde. = a neither voyte of man, but horses c asses 17 And the king appoynted that lorde (on tped, and the tentes were euen as ther whole hand he leaned) to be at the gate: 1

And the people o trode vpon him in the g cen gate, and he dyed according to the word Gear" of the man of God whiche he fayde mn

were wont to be. N n And lo the man called vnto the porters, and they told the kinges honse within.

F
\

12 And the king arole in the night,efayde puto his seruauntes: J wil shewe pou nowe what the Syrians haue done duto vs: They knowe that we be hungrie,

and therefoze are they gone out ol the

pauilions to hyde them felucs in the fielde, saying: when they tome out of the citie, We Tall catche them alpue, and get uin to the citie. iz And one of his seruauntes aunlwered, and layde: et men take J pray vou fyue of the horses that remapne and are left in the multitude: ( Weholde they are tuen as all the multitude of Jlrael that are left in the titie: Weholdel 10 are cuen as ali the multitude of the Be

when the king came downe to him.

18 And so came the thing to passe, that the man of God had spoken to the king fay: ing: Two buthels of barlpe for a sicle, and a buchell of fpne flowre for another halbe to morowe this tyme in the gate of Samaria.

Whervnto that lorde aunswered the man of God, and lapde: Pea and if the Torde made windowes in heauen, might it come to passe: And he fapd:25¢- holde, thou shalt {ee it with thyne cyes,

and shalt not eate thereof,

26 And tuen so chaunced it vnto him: For the people trode vpon him in the gate, and he dyed,

The. viii. Chapter .

1 Clifa prophecied vnto the Sunamite the dearth of seuen peres. u he prophectech to Bazael that he halbe king of Sprid. 15 He raigneth after Benhadad. 16 LJoram raigneth ouer Juda.
20 Edom kalleth from Juda. Ohoziah luccedeech Joram.

DoT NF Hen {pake* Elisa vnto
FC the woman (whole cov WAS sonne he had reftozed to lyfe againe) saping:
Ip, and go thon and
ZC NOG thyne ee nD

—"tourne where so euer thou canst: Ror the Lord hath talled fo2

a dearth, and the fame chall tome vpon

ande leuen peres.
: there ee Womanarole, and dpd alter both lig of the man of God, and went che and her houchold e loiourned

in the land of the Philistines seuẽ peres.
3 Adat the seuen peres ende, it fortuned that the woman came againe out of the land of the Philistines, and went out to tall vpou the king for her hoult and foher lande. '
And the king talked with Gehezi the seruaunt ofthe man of God, saping: Tel me J pap thee al the great deedes that ella bath done.
5 He OEE Kina howe he had restored a dead body to lyfe againc: but inthe

1 nie the woman Whole lonne be meane time ti py 7 5

4 Re. 7a.

s

“4.Kinges.

had raysed vp againe, cryed to the king 16 The fyft pere of Joram the fo

for her house, and for her land: And Ge - Ahab king of Bead Jehepharne

hei sayde, My lorde O king, this is the also king of Juda, Joramthe fonne of

woman, and this is her sonne whom Peholaphat king of Juda began to

Elisa raysed bp againe. raigne.
> 6 And when the king altzed the woman, 17 *Lirtic and two peres olde Was he.

che tolde hin: And lo the king dellueres when he began to raigne, and he raig- erde her a chamberlapne, saping, Nestore ned eyght peres in Hierulalem.

thou vnto her all that are hers and all beate these kruites ot the fielde, fence the day ende that che lekt the land, vnto this tynie.

kalle helden 7 And Eltla tame to Damalton, & Ben-

18 And He Walked in the wapes of the kinges of Ilrael, as they that wercok the boule of Ahab: for the daughter of
Ahab was his wyfe, and he dyd eupll in

(a) The Bing cauled that to

Merwe hadad the king of Spzia was spcke:

Reg. 19. c.

5 25 And one tolde hum, saying, The man of ae ö 9

Reg. ina 8 And the king layd vnto Dazael:“ Take

a present in thyne hande, and go mecte

the man of God, that thou mayest in

quire of the Lord by him, faping: Spal
FJ retouer of this dilease-

And fo Haʒael went to meete him, and toke the present with him, and of euery good thing of Damascon, euen as much

N

s fourtie tamels coulde beare: € tame

and presented him (elfe before him, and said: Thy sonne Benhadad king of Spria hath sent nie to thee, saping:Shal J retouer of this disease-
10 And Elisa fapde vnto him: Go, and lay
Peeing not dye of that piftate, pet he oulde dpe d the hande of JJ
Haza e

beit, the Lorde hath shewed me that he

chall surelp dye.

He loked vpon him stedkastlie, vntill he

was ashamed: e the man ot God wept.

12 And Hazael sapde: Why weepeth my lorde; he aunswered: For I knowe the cnyl thinges that thou shalt do vnto the children of Ilrael: for their strong cities shalt thou set on fire, aͤnd their poung

mellenger.

men shalt thou flap with the sword, and

shalt dashe out the braynes of their suck-
Ang chüldren, and al to teare their women
With chide,

13 But Hazael sapd:wohat is thy seruaunt
à dogge, that v shoulde do this great thing- And Elilaaunswered: The Lod hath shewed me that thou shalt be king of Syria.

€ 14 And so he departed from Elisa c tame to his maister: which sayd to him, What fayde Elifatothee: He aunswertd: He tolde mie, that thou shouldest retouer.

15 And ou the morowe it fortuned, that he toke a thycke cloth, and dipt it in water, and o spreadit on his face: € he died, and

Hazel raigned in his steade.

(t Hazaci vn-

vnto him, Thou shalt h recouer: owe:

the sight of the Loe, |

19 And the Lord woulde not destroy Juda land that) because of Dauid his leruaunt, as he pronused him, to gruehun. alwaya light among his chudren. e

In those dayes E dom rebelled from. 1 vnder the hand of Juda: forthey made 5 f cg It g. them a king oftheir owne. cS i. Pat. Aua

210 Joram wẽt to Zair, he æ al his chaz rettes with hum: And he rose bynight,

and sinote the Edomites which conipal-

sed him in with the taptapnes of his

ne and the people fled into their entes. a

22 But Edom rebelled, fo that he woulde D not be vnder the hande of Juda vnto this day: Then Libnah rebelled that sanie time. .

23 The rest of the wordes that concerne
Jorani, and al that he dyd, are they not written in the booke of the cronicles of the kinges ol Juda? N

24. And Pozanr rested with his fathers, and was buried bespde his fathers in pu the citie ol Dauid: And Ahaʒiahu his sonne raigned in his steade.

25 In the twelkth pere of Joram the sonne of Ahab king of Hlcael, dyd Abas
ʒlahu the fonne of Joram king ol Juda begin to raigne.

26 Two and twentie peres old was Ahasiahu when he began to raigne, aud he raigned one pere in Mierulalem: and his mothers name was Athaliahu, the daughter of Omri king of Pfrael.

27 But he walked in the way or the boule of Ahab, and dyd euyll in the fight ofthe
Lordeseuen) as dyd the houle of Ahab:

1120 is the lonne mia ofthe youl of Ahab. .

28 And he went with Joram the sonne e ol Ahab, to warre against Pasacl bing of Spria in Ranoth Gilead, aud the
Syrians Wounded Jozam. 29 And

“ging Joram went back agameto —- 5aclkingofSpya : Ind Ahaztahnt te peal niestael of the woundes lonne of Joram king of Hue went

iche the Sprians had geuenhunat dawnets lee Jozam the foune of Aha eed) when he fought against ha- in Jesrahel, betaule he was sicke there,

>» | The ix. Chapter. - gehu is made king oF Itracl. 24 Ind killech Joramthe king therok. 25 and aya:

a i 0 jah. other wyle called Dehostas the king of Juda. 3 And cauleth Jezabel to be zen ofa windowe, and the dogges dyd cate her. 2 *

fest 29

\ my dhe, * joie 1 { il! ¢ f ey b
1 Fee Ve
Lee Nt 10 eal li Aves 1 1 08 Ae i

Nd Elila che prophete arose, and went into the houle; and he

72 a faydbntobin:*Gpoe Ilrael, J haue wannoynted thee to be
N V bpthploynes and tale king ouer the people ofthe Lorde, cues . . y ©) this bore of ople in ouer srael. (a Thisan:

thyne hand, eget hee 7 Thou shalt smpte the boule of Ahab wriinses:” to Kamothcin Gilead. 2 thy maister, that J map auenge the ann.

2 And when thou conmest thyther, lone blood ok my seruauntes the prophetes, ase wher is Jehu the sonneol Jeholaphat ethe blood of all the seruauntes of the eue che sonnẽ ol Nimsi, and go to him, and Lord ok the hande of Jczabel: We make him arise vp from among his bre- 3 For the whole houlc of Ahab fhallbe %. thren, x carp him to a secrete chamber. destroped, and“ J will destrop from A-

3 Then take the boxe ok oyle, and powre hab (even) hym that maketh water a-
Kon his head, and say, thus laith the gainst the wal, and hum that is prysoned
Lod, J haue annoynted ther to be king and korlaken in Ilrael: auer Alrael: And then open the dooze, 9 And J wil make the houle of Ahab, like

ill. Ne. x xi. f.

And flee, without any tarping. the Houle of Jeroboam the sonne of
4 And fo the seruaunt ofthe prophete gat Nabat and linie the house of Waala the hun to Namoth Gilead: sonne of Ahia.

ind when he came im beholde, the cap- 10 And as fo; Pesabel,* the dogges Mall renne
1 of the hoast were Wie toge: eate her in the fielde of Jezrahel, and ber: And he lapde, J haue an errandto there shalbe none to burie her. And he
6 A captapne, 5 opened the doore, and ficd. 1
5 d Jehu layd: Unto whithe of al vs: 11 Ichu tame out to the leruauntes of hts
5 dard: Lothee, O captapne. And he lonrd, and one a py

Febu.

: ; 4.[Kinges. 3 2
Wherkoze came this madde felowe to 22 Andtt fortuned, that When Joram

thee; And he sayd vnto them: e knowe

what maner okmanit is, and what his commumication is. f

12 They said vnto him again: It is notso,

tell vs. He said: Thus t thus spake heto

me, saying, thus {ath the Lord: J haue

anuopnted thee to be king ouer Jlrael.

;, Thenthey hasted and toke euery man

his garment, and put it under hin on

the toppe of the staires, and blewe with

trunpettes, saying: Jehu is king.

¢ 14 And so Jchu the lonne of Jeholaphat

the sonne of Mimi, couspired against
Jozaum( Joramkept Namoth Gilead, he and al Ysrael, betause of Hazael king of Syria:

¢Reviliss 15 Aid "hing Joram returned to be hea-

led in Jezraͤhel ofthe woundes which the Sprians had geuen him whenhe fought with Haʒael king of Spriã) And
Jehun sapde: Il it be pour nuindes, then let no man Depart and efcape out of the citie, to go and tell in Jesrahel.

16 So Ichu gat vp [into a charet c went to Jeʒrahel where Joram lap: and A-
Hazlahuking of Juda was tome downe thyther to fee Joram.

17 And the Watchman that stoode on the towre in Jeʒrahel, spied the companic of Jehn as he tanie, aud sayde: J lee a coimpame. And Jorain saypde: Take an
Horsnian, and send to meete them, that be may alke whether it be peace,

18 And so there went one on horsbacke to

meete him, and lapde: Thus sayth the

kiuig:is it peace: And Jehu sapd: What
Halk thou to do with peace: turne thee behind me. And the watchman told, laping: The messenger cante to them but he commeth not againe.

19 Thenhe sent out another on horsbacke,

whiche came to thein, and sayde: Thus

faptl the king: is it peate- Jehn ann-
[Wered: What Hatt thou to do With peace : turnt thee behynd me.

20 Audthe Watchman tolde, saping: He tame to them also, and commeth not againe: And the driuing, is ke the driuing ol Jehn the sonne of Ninisi: lor he driueth the charct as he were mad.

Du. And Jozam fayde: Male rep. And the charet was made redy . And Jo-

rain king of Israel, and Abastahu king of Juda, went out eyther of them in his chaͤret against Jehu, and met him in the fielde ol Maboch the Jezrahelite.

sawe Jehu, he sayd: Is it peace Fei,
He aunlwered: what peace ‘outer be, so long asthe whordoms of thy mo: ther Jezabel and her wytchcraktes are

so great-
And Joram turned his hande „and
There is

fled, and sapde to Ahaʒiahu: falstjood O Ahasiahu,

24. And Jchu toke a bow in his hande and smote Jorambetweene the armes
€ the arrowe went through his heart, and he fell Downe dat in his charet.

25 Then laid Jehu to Widkar a captapne:
Lake (im) and cat him in the platof the ground of Maboth the Jezraheltte:
For J remember that when Je thou rode together after Ahab his kather 4

the Lorde layed this heaup burthen bpon him: |

26 Jhaue seene pesterday the blood of

Maboth e the blood of his sonnes, sapde the Lord:and I wil quite it thee in this ground sapththe Lord. Mowe therfore take (bum) and cast hun in the plat of ground, aecording to ß wordok the Lord.

27 Witt when Ahaziahu the king of Juda sawethis, he fled by the way of the garden heute: And Jehu folowed after hun, and sapde, Siiyte him allo inthe charet, at the goyng vp to Gur by Jebe he fled to Megiddo, and ther

ied.

28 And his seruauntes carped him ina e charet to hierusalem , and buried him there in his sepulchze with his fathers in the titie of Dauid.

29 And in the eleuenth pere of Joram the sonne of Ahab, began Aßhasiahn to raigne ouer Juda.

30. And when Jehu was tome to Jezrahel, Jezabel hearde of it, e payntedher face , and tired her head, and loked out at a wyndowe.

31 And as Jehuentred at the gate, she sayd: ad maister-

Zimri peace which slue his ee
: ereauin cat

9 franc no gerd
32 And he likt vp his eyes to the windowe, za

and sãyde: hois of my five, who; And there loked ont to him two o2 thc chamberlaynes. ,
33 And hefapd: Throwe her done. 80 they threwe her downe,¢ her bloodoat shed toward the wall, and towarde th horses:and he troade her vnder 5
34. And when he was come in, lite tate and drinke, c sapd: Go and vi 25

ou ponder curfed treature, and

inte her: bor she is a kinges daughter.

35 And so when they tame to burie her, ey founde no moze of her then the full, and the feete, and the palmies of

andes. henkel ey tame againe, and tolde

pe sf

Hab had threescore € ten sonnes in Samaria: And Jehu wrote

letters, and sentto Sa-

Ft

SV

g
5 N

brought vp Ahabs children, saying:

3 Mowe when this letter tommieth to pou (ye that haue with vou pour maisters lomes ye haue with pou both tha: rets and horses, a strong titie haue pe als so, and harnesle) *

3 Loke Which of pour maisters fonnes is

fathers seate, and light for pour lordes house.

Wut they were exceedingly afrapde, € sapde: See, two kinges Were not able to stande before him: howe Mail we then be able to stande- :

5 And he that was gouernour of Ahabs house, e he that ruled the titie, the elders

Me are thy seruauntes, c Will do all that thou shalt byd vs, we wil make no man

king: therefore do thon what seemeth good in thyne eyes. a

laping: Ik ye be mpne, and wil hearken vnto mp vopte, then take the heaves of

and come to me to Jezrahel by to morowe this time: (And the hinges fonnes

ie which bought them bp.)

87 And when the letter tame to them they toke the kinges chtldren, and flue then, euen threelcore and ten persons, c laped thelr heades in bastzettes, and {ent them to — Jezrahel.

d there tame a messenger, and told pin, faying: They haue brought the ay es of the kinges founes. And he

Let them lay them on two heapes

4. Kinges,

er i him: And sine This isthe worde of

He. x.

ehu cauleth the seuentie sonnes of Dhabto be Mayne. i and atter th ko
115 two ol Ahaziahs brethzen. 25 He killeth allo all the prieũes of Baal. "y Aire

best and most meete, and set him on his

allo, the tutours, sent to Jehu, saping:

6 Thenhe wrote another letter to them, the men that are pour maisters sonnes,

were threelcoze and ten perlons, and 8 they were with the great men or theci-

the Loe whiche he spake by the f | of bts leruaunt Ellas the Thee“ fap: g: In the fielde of Jezrahel shall 1 Reg alf.

dogges cate the flethe of Jezabe
37 And so the tarkasseo esabe Was
1 Jestabel on — earth in the
8 8 2 8 no lay, This is Fesavel, * müht

Vapter .

in the entring in of the gate nom Jin OF the gate, vntill the

And whenit was day, he went out, an stoode, and sayde to al the folte , Pede righteous: Wehold, J tonspired againtt np maister, and slue hum: Wut who Aue all thele-

lo Tkarne here that there hall fall vnto the earth nothing of the worde of the
Tode, Whiche he spake concerning the boule of Ahab + Foz the Horde hath brought to passe p thinges that he spake by the hande of his seruaunt; Ellas.

n And so Jehu slue all that remapned of ut the house of Ahab in Jezrahel, and all that were great with him, and his kinlfollies, and his priestes, so that he lel na: thing of hun remapne.

IZ And he arose, c departed, and tame to
Sandaria: And when Jehu was in the wap of the Houle where the Meepheardes dyd sheare their sherpe,

13 Hemet with the brethren of Ahaziahn

king ol Juda, and sayde: What are pe-
They aunlswered: The brethren of Ahaziahu are we, and go downe to fainte the thildren of the king tof the queene.

14. And he said: Lake them alpue. hom © when they had taken them alpne, they fluc them at the wel whiche was beside the house where the sheepe are shoren, euen two and fourtie men, neither lelt he any or then.

15 And when he was departedthente, he

met with Jehonadab the sonne of Ree lun. thab comming against hin, and he blelfed him sayde to hun: Js thync heart right, as myne heart is true with thine:
And Jehonadab aunswered: Hea that it is. Then geue me thyne hand. And when he had geuen him his hande, he toke him vp to him into the charet,

16 And fayde: Come with nie, aud lee the

ʒeale that J haue forthe Lord. and lo

they made hum ride in his charet.
And when he tanie 5 Samaria, he

17 flue

fluc al that remained vnto Ahab in Haz maria, till he had wiped him out, accoztording to the saying of the Hod which he spake to Elias.

18 And Jehu gathered all the people to-

Atether, and fayd vnto them: * Ahab ser-

IRevig. UedezBaal a litle, but Jehu Mall serue
Gen ne. Him niore.

cle Bion, 19 Now therfore call vnto me all the pro-

mans: phetes of Waal, all such as serue him,

and al his prices, e let none be lacking:

For J haue a great lacrifice to do to

Waal, e therefore wholdeuer is nulsed he

shall not tyne. Wut Jehu dyd it foe a sut-

teltie, to the intent that he might destroy the seruauntes of Waal.

20 And Jehu lapde: Proclayme an holy conuocation fo2 Baal. And they proclapmed it. i

21 And Jehu sent vnto all Piracl, and al

the seruauntes of Baal cane, that there

Was not a man left behind that tame

not: And they tanie into the house of

Waal, and the house of Gaal was dull

from one ende to another.

And he sayde vnto him that was the keper ofthe vestrie: Bring koorth garmentes for all the seruauntes of Baal.
And he brought then ont garnientes.
23 Aud when Jehu went with Jehona-

Dab the forme of Nechab into the houle

of Baal, he sayd vnto the seruauntes of

Baal: Searche, x loke that ther be here

with vou none of the seruauntes of the

Tord, but the seruauntes of Baal only.
24 And when they went in to offer faz

cvifice and burnt offring, Jehu appoyn-

ted foure score men without, and lapde:

If any of d men whom J haue brought

D

vnder pour handes estape, he that let-

lech hun go, shall dye forhim.

25 And it fortuned that affoone as he had made an ende of offring the burnt satrifice, Jehn layd tothe men ol warre and to the captapnes: Go in, and flay them,

let none tome out. And they smote them

es. .
Feby with the edge of the fod: And then

of warre ¢ the taptapnes cast rtd —

c Went to the citie of the temple ol Baal

26 And fet the images outst the temple

of Baal, and burnt them.

27 And they brake the image of Waal, and brake the house of Baal, ⁊ made a dralt house of it vnto this day.

254 ae fo Jehu destroyed Baal out of E

rael. .

29 But fromthe sinnes ol Jeroboam the sonne of Nabat whiche made Jlrael to sinne, Jehu departed not from them neither from the golden talues that Were in Bethel and in Dan. —

30 And the Lorde sayde vnto Jehu: Wecaule thou hastdone right wel, in being: ing to pafle the thing that is right in myne eyes, and hast done vnto the house of Ahab according to all thinges that are in myne heart, therefore shall thy; children vnto the fourth generation + Ka fit on the seate ol Ysrael.

31 But Jehu cared not for this, to walke in the lawe of the Lode God of Jsrael with all his heart: for he departed not from the sinnes of Jeroboam whiche made Israel to sinne.

32 Inthose dayes the Torde began to cut
Israel short, and Hazael (rote then in 4 Kg. all the toastes of Israel,

33 From Jordane castward, euen all the land of Gilead, the Gadites, the Nubenites, and them that were ol Manalles, from Aroer (which is by the river Arnon) euen Gilead and Waͤlan.

34. The restof the wordes that conterne
Jehu, and al that he did, x al his power, are they not written in the booke of the tronicles of the kinges of Jlrqel:

35 And Jehu llept with his fathers and they büryed him in Samaria c Jchoahas his fonne raignedin his steade.

36 And the time that Jehu raigned vpon

Israel in Samaria ,is twentie c evght

peres. a

The .xi Chapter.

1 Athalia putteth to death all the inges connes except Foas the tonne of Oholiah. 4 Foas isappoynted king. 15 Jevotada cauleth Athalia to be layne. 17 He maketh a couenaunt be-

tweene God and the people. 8 Baal and his prielles a re destroped.

Md Athalia 5 mother of Ahaziahu, when fhe

V | fa that her sonne was dead, fhe arole, and de-
A roped all the kinges

feede.
Wut Jehosaba the

daughter of king Joram and spstet of Ahaziahu, tone Ydas the sonne of Ahaziahu, and fale him from autos the kinges fonnes that were flayne, aN his nurse with him inthe bedde Sate ber: and hyd him from Athalia, that)

was not flapne, 2

And he Was with her hyd in the houle

sie shai 7 Athalia dyd ique ouer the lande.

ad the seuenth pere Jehotada sent and fet the rulers duer hundredes, with the taptapnes and them ok the garde and toke them to him into the house o the Lone, e made a bonde with them, end toke an oth of them in the house of che Lorde, and shewed them the kinges fone. .

And he commaunded them, saping,
This is it that ye must do: One third

onthe Sabbath day, shall keepe the watch ofthe kinges houle:

6 And auother third part (hal keepe the gate of Sur: And another third part shall keepe the gate Which is behinde them of the garde: aud fo Hall pe keepe the watch of the boule of Mellah.

57 Aud two partes of pou, that is al that go ont on the Sabbath day, shall keepe the watch of the houle of the Lorde about the king.

3 And pe thal compasse the king round about, ⁊ euery man shall haue his weapon in his hand: And whosoeuer cont

meth within ranges, let him be Taine:
And fee that pe be with the king as he goeth out and in. a

9 Andthe captapnes ouer the hundredes

iht. dd atcording to all thinges that“ Jchotoke cuery man his men that were to come in on the Sabbath day, with them that should go out on the Sabbath, and canic to Jehoiada the priest.

to And to the taptaynes ouer hundredes, did the priest geue king Dawids speares

u And they ol the garde ftoode,and enery man had his Weapon in his hande rounde about the king, from the ryght coer of the temple to the left, along by the aulter and the temple.

Iz And he brought dut the binges fonne,

. and put the trowne vpon hin, and dely-
Lans Uered him“ he witnesse, c made him

4. Kinges.

part of you, whole ductie is to come in

fada the priest tonmmaunded: and they

and shieldes, that were in the temple.

Nd king, annoynted hin: And they capt.

hun bandes, and laide: God saue the
13 * And when Athalia heard the noyse of u asu the running of the people, i 1 C the people into the temple of the Love,
14 “And whe che looked, behold, the king denne stoode by a piller as the mauer was € dureh the fingers € the trunipets by the king N and all the people of the land relopled, and blew with trumpets; And Athalia fan deb tiothes coped, trealon, trea:

15 Wut Jehoinda the priest tommaun-
Ded the captatues of the hundredes that had the rule of the hoast, and laine vnto them: Paue her foorth of the ranges ¢ il any folowe her, BU him with the sword. For the priest had laide:she may not be flaine in the house of the Lorde.

16 And they layde handes on her, till she tame into the way by the which the horses went in to the binges palace and there was fhe slafne. —

17* And Fehotada made a bond betweene pay. | the Lorde andthe king and the people, that they should be the Lordes people, and also betweene the king and the peo-

ple.

18 And allthe people ofthe lande went into the boule of Baal, and destroyed it, his aulters alfo, and his images brake they dowue lustplie, id slue Mathan the priest of Waal before the aulters:
And the priest set watch ouer the boule ofthe Norde. mith One

16 And toke the rulers ouer hundredes, D the captaines and them of the gard, aud all the people of the lande, aud they brought the king fromthe house of the

LTorde, and came by the way of the gate ok them of the gard to the kings palace, and he sat hun downe on the fate ot the kinges. : » }

20 And all the people ofthe lande reioyted, and the titie was in quiet: And they flue Athalia with the Myozd , befide the hinges palate. ,

21 Seuen ptres olde was Jehoas when he began to raigne, —

De

q The. xit .Chapter.

bis seruaunteg.

d Jehoas began to raigne in the seuenth pere of Jehu, fouretie peres raigned he in
Hlerusalem : his nio-

Athers name was Ze-

blah of Beerseba.

2 Andhe did that which was good in the sight ofthe Lorde, as longas Je-

(a) So iong ds ruiers

Potada the priest enfourmed him. gucercee 3 Wut the high places were not taken anitesot = wap: for the people offred and burnt inbrate. tenle pet vponthe high plates.

4 And Jehoas sapde to the priestes: All the siluer of the deditate thinges that be brought to the house of the Lode, that is, the money ot then that were numbred, the money that euery man is set at, and all the money that cucry man with a willing heart geueth and bryngech into the houle of the Lorde:

5 Vet the priestes take it to them, euery man ofhis acquapntaunce, to repapre the broken places of the house wherefoener anp decape is founde.

6 And so it came to passe, that vnto the three and twentith pere ol king Jehoas, the priestes had mended nothing that was detayed in the temple.

25 7 Then king Jehoas called foz Jeholada the priest, and the other priestes, and saide vnto them: w hp repaire ye not the broken places of the temples Mow therfore, see that pe receaue no moze money of pour atquapntaunce, except pe deliuerit to repaire the tentple Withall.

8 And the priestes consented to receaue

no more money of the people, except to

—— the decaped places of the temple. * f
9 But Jehoiada the prick tone a chest, and bored a hole in the lyd of it, and {ct it besyde the aulter, on the right syde as euery man tommeth into the temple ot the Lorde, and the priestes that kept the vessels put therein all the money that was brought into the boule of the

ode.
10 And it kortuned, that when they sawe ther was much money in the chest, the hinges scribe t the bye priest came vp,

nt. Reg. 21.

s ehoas maketh prouition kor the repairin

of Spria by a present from comming Again péeristalen,

or the temple. 16 Be Capeth the kin
20 He is baled 1 two of

und tolde the money that was foun
2 de of the Lorde, and put it — 5 N
¢ * :

ANd they gaue the money feate the handes of thein that E worke, and that had the ouersight ofthe

houle ofthe Lorde: and they bioughtit dut tothe tarpenters and bunders that wrought vpon the house of the Lorde

u And to malons, and hewers or stone:
And they bonght timber and free stone

to repaire the detcape in the house of the
TL orde, and to al that went out to mend the temple.

3. Howveit, there was not made for the ¢
Houle ofthe Lorde bowles of fituer, instrumentes of muficke, bafons, trumpets, or aup vessels of golde, or vessels of siluer, of the money that was brought into the house of the Lode.

14. But they gaue that to the workemen,
1 —. there with the houle of the

15 Moreouer, they retkened not with the men into whole handes they Delivered that money to be bestowed on Workmé: fo2 they did their busines faithfully:

16 Mowbtit, trespasse money, and sinne money, was not brought into the boule of the Lorde, for it was the pnestes.

17 Then came Hazael king of Spyria dp, and fought against Geth, and toler:
And Ha zael {et his fate to go bp to Hes rulalem. .

18 And Jehoas hing of Juda, toe all the halowed thinges that Jeholaphat,
Jehorani c haz iahu his fathers kinges of Juda had dedicate, and that he him selle had dedicated, and al the gold that was founde in the treatures ok the
Houle of the Lorde and in the kinges houle, and sent it to Daz ael king ol DY” ria. & so he departed from Hierulalem. Y

15 The remnaunt of the wordes that concerne Jehoas, and all that bedyd, are they not Written in the booke of the tronicles of the binges of Huda? 7

20 And his owne feruauntes arose, eo
Wpoughetreafon, and aue Jehoa the houle Milo, when he caine DOW!

chozabad thefonne of Homer his seranuntes, lmote him, and he dyed: And

4. Kinges.

citic of Danid, and Amaziahu hist raiguned in his steade. iahu his tonne

The .xiij. (hapter.

ehoahaz the fonne ol Jehu is delyuerod into the handes of the Sprtang. ae prapeth bnto God and is delpuered. 9 Joas his lonne ra 5 17 5 steade. 24. Hazael dyeth. 26 Elita dyeth.

the thece e twentith pere of Joas the sonne

He) of Ahasiahu king of
Juda, Jehoahas the

e peres.
2 ye he wrought that which was cuil

in the sight ol the Lorde, and kolowed chens of Jeroboam the sonme of
Nabat which made Ilrael to sinne, and departed not therkroin. ö

And the Lorde was angry with Pe racl, and delpuered them into the hand of Hazael king of Syria, ⁊᷑ into the hand of Benhadad the sonne of asael all their dayes.

4 And Jehoahaz befonght the Lor, x the Lorde heard him: For he considered thetrouble ol Ilrael, wherewith the king of Spria troubled them.

(And the Lord gaue Plraci a deliuerer, so that they Went out from vnder the subiection of the Syrians: And the children of I lrael dwelt in their tentes as befoze tym.

6 Neuerthelelle, they Departed not from the sinnes of the house of Jeroboam
Which made Plraeifinne, but walked

inthem: And there remapned an idols
Nroue still also in Samaria.)

57 Neither did he leane of the people to
Jehoahaz but kiftie horlemen, ten thavets, and ten thoufand footemen: * fo2 theking of Spria destroyed them, and made them lyke thresshed dust.

Thereof the Wordes that toncerne

Jehoahaz and all that he dyd, and his

power, are they not writtẽ in the booke

ofthe eronteles of the kinges ok Jlrael-

Aud Jehoahaz flept with his fathers, and they burped him in Samaria, and

ope His tonne ner in his steade.

a king epee and seuenth pere of Jo-

dune of Jehoahaz to raigne ouer PE

Fact in Samaria teen pes. 2

Ude vith

Juda, began Jehoas the

Ir And did that which is eunl in the si of the Lorde, and departed not front thefiimes of Jeroboam the foune of
Mabat that made Pfracl fine: for he
Walked therein.

12 The remnaunt of the wordes that eonterne Joas, and all that he did and his polwer wherewith he fought against
Amaziahu king of Juda, are they not
Written in the booke of the cronitles of the kinges of Israel-

13, Aud Joas flept with his fathers, and
Jerobdam fat vpon his seate: And Joas Was burped in Samaria among the kinges of Ilrael.

14. When Elila was fallen sicke of his fick: nesse whereof he dyed, Joas the king of Israel came downe vnto him, and
Wept before hum, and saide:“ O imp fae ther, my father, the charet of Jsrael, ¢ the horsemen ofthe fame.

15 Elisa saide vnto hin:: Take bowe and arrowes. And he toke vnto hun bowe and arrowes. N f

16 And he laide to the king of Jlrael: Put thyne hand vpon the bowe. And he put his hand vponit: And Elila put his handes vpon the künges handes,

17 And said: Open a windowe castward.

And when he had opened it, Elisa fapd: shoote. And he shot: And he lade, The

(Il.

8 1 Jozachar the sonne of Semaath, and they burped hun with his fathers in the

C

ill. Reg ii e.

arrowe of health of the Lode, and the

arrowe of health against Spe: Jo: thou shalt finpte Syria in Apeeci, tell thou haue made an ende of them.

18 And he saide: Take the arrowes. And he tolle them: And he laid vnto the king of Ilrael, Smpte the grounde. And he finete thrile, and eeassed. i

19 And the man of God was angry with
Hint, and saide: Thou shoulbest haue sinitten fine or fire tymes, and then thou haddest finptten Spata tall thou haddest mabeanendof ech shalt smyte Spria but thrile.

20 And foelifa oped, r they buried hun: amd the souldiers ol the Moabites cant into the lande the lame pere. aun

Ca) Other rrabc the pere

kolowing. whtch bei a-

grectih nuh we Hcuguc.

eA maxiabu.

4. Ringes. 5
21 And u chaunted as fome of them were tast he them krom him as pet. a

burying a man, and spyed the souldiers, 24 Sohasacl the king of Sp2ia open, g

they caftp man into the lepulchre of Elila: And when the man was roulled

done, and touched the bones of Elila,. 25 And Jehoas the sonne of

he reuiued, and stoode vpon his feete.

22 But Hasact king of Sprta vexed Jlraelallthe dayes of Jehoahaz.

23 And the Torde had mercie on them, and pitted them, and had respect vnto them, becaule of his appoyntment made
With Abahani, Jsahac, and Jacob, and would not destropy them, neither

wWenhadad his sonne raigned in n steade. = eho
Wentagaine, and toke out o celan of Benhadad the sonne ok azaecl, the tities which he had taken away out oe the hande ol Jehoahas his father in warre: Jor thee times did Joas beate
Dini, and restored the cities vnto Jlrgel againe. N

4 The xilii. Chapter.

1 Xmaszialu che king of Juda putteth to death them that tlue his kather. And after (myteth Edom. 15 Joas dpeth, and Jeroboam his fonne succeedeth him,

and after him raigneth Jacharia.

— H) E second yere of Jo-

%s as, sonne of Jehodhaz king of Ysrael, raigned

Amaztiahu the sonne of

Joas king of Juda.

csp) “He was twentie and

— fiue yeres olde when

he began to raigne, and raigned twentic and nyne yeres in Hierulalem: and his mothers name was Jehoadan, of
Hilerusaleni.

3 And he did that which is good in the fight ofthe Lorde, pet not lyke Dawid his father: but did according to all thinges as Joas his father did.

4 Neither Were the high places taken a
Way: Jor as pet the people did satrifice and burnt incense on the high plates.

5 And assoone as the kingdome was set-

fl. Par. 25. a. 2

Int. Re. xil. d

He slue his seruauntes which had killed the king his father.

6 Wut the children of thole murtherers he stuc t, actording vnto it that is wüten in the boone of the law of Moy: ses, Where the Lode conmnaunded, sayiug: Let not the fathers dye for the children, nor let the chudren be staine for the fathers: but let enery man be put

25 todcath for his owne sume.

Deu. 24. b.

iParasc 7 e slue of Edom in the fale valley ten

thoufand, and toke the tastell on the rockt in the fare battaile, and talled the name of it Joktheel vnto this dag.

8 Then Anasiahu sent messengers to
Jehoasthe sonne of Jehoahaz sonne of Jehu king of Ilrael, saping: Come,
H let vs fee eche other.

Ca) Let vs sient and trre

{Cop dattailt.

6 And Jehoas the king of Jsrael sent to

l leloa.

Amaziahu king of Juda, saping: Did mae

not a thistle that is in Libanon, send to a Cedar tree that is in Libanon, saping:
Geue thy daughter to my sonne to wife
And the Wilde beast that was in Libage went and trode downe the thylt e. g . .

10 Thou hat snnitten Edom thyne heart
Hath made thee proude: Emope this glorp, € tarry at home: wohy doest thou prouoke to mischiefe, that thou shoul-

dest be ouerthrowen t Juda with theee

No But Amaʒiahu would not heare: And
Ichoas king of Ilrael went vp and he and Amasziahu king of Juda, sawe either other at Bethlames, which is in

dat And Juda was put to the worse beled in his hande, bit tanie to passe, that

fore Hlracl, and they fled enery man to their tentes.

13 And Ichoas king of Ilrael tobe 2 maziahu king of Juda the sonne of Jehoas the sonne of Ahaʒiahu at Wethlames, and came to Hierulalem a brake downe the wall of Hierusalem fromthe

ate of Ephraim, to the corner gatt,

ee hundred cubites.

14. And he tone all the golde and siluek,

and all the vessels that were founde in the house of the Lorde, and in the trea

fures of the kinges houle: and the chi -

dren tote he to be his wardes, and returned to Samaria againe. a
15. The rest of the actes of Jehoas won he did, and his power, c how he kough
With Aniastahu king of Inda, are 7 5 not written in the booke of the tronic ;

gm.

e kinges of Israele-

16 1295 Jeboas fiept with his fathers, and Was buried at Samana among the hinges of Plract, t Jeroboam his sonne raigned in his steade.

17 Amaziahu the fonne of Joas king of

da, liued after the death of Jehoas dune of Pevoahas king of Ilrael fit: cperes.

18 ean the remnaunt ofthe wordes that concerne Antaziahu, are they not Watt ten in the booke of the cronies of the hinges of Juda: |

D 19 But they conspired treason against him in hierulalem: And when he fled to Lachis, they sent after hum to Lachis, and flute himthere.

20 And they brought him on horses, and he was buried at Hierulalem with his fathers in the titie of Dauid.

Josa gy And all the people ol Juda toke Asa-

ria( which was sirteene peres olde) aud made him king foz his father Amazia-

bu. .
De built Elath, and bought it againe to Juda after that the king was lapde to test withbisfathers,

23 In the fifteenth pere of Amaziahu the lonne ol Joas king of Juda, was
Jeroboam the sonne ok Joas made king ouer Ilrael in Samaria, and raigned fourtie and one peres:

a

Alt. xi. b 227

4. Kinges.

24. And Wrought that which was cuillin the fight ol the Lorde, neither turned ant be bun on K m erobo-

e o i
Ae e > * 9

25 He restored the coattof Israel from the entring ol hemath oe the fea of the wildernesle, according tothe worde E

the Lorde God ok Istael which he spake by the bande of his seruaunt Jo- Jonas la, nas the sonne ot Amithai the prophete, which was of Geth Hepher: ;

26 For the Logde sawe howe that theat: fliction of Israel was exteeding bytter, insomuch that the prisoned and the for: saken were at au ende, and there was none to helpe Jsrael.

27 And the Torde faide not that he md

would put out the name ol Plracl from vnder heauen: but he helped them by
90 1 of Jeroboam the fonne of
28 The rest okthe wordes that concerne ne and all that he did, and his ength, and howe he fought in the
Warres, a howe he restored Damaston t Hemath to Juda in Israel, are they not witten in the booke ok the cronicies ofthe kinges of Hitacl-
29 And Jeroboam slept with His fathers, euen with the kinges of Jlrael, c Zacharia his sonne raigned in his steade.

q The. xv. Chapter.

11zaria the king of Juda becommeth aleaper. 5 Ot Jotham. 10 Sallum.
14 Menahem. 23 Pecahta. jousstabu. 3 Jotham. 38 Phas.

uenth pere of Jero-
0 boam king of Fi frac,

= a) Hthe twentie and fe

n began Waria fonne
MWiof Amasta king of

© Juda to raigne.

— ers)

Sirteene peres olde

was he when he was made king, and he raigned two and fiftie peres in Pierus lalem and his mothers name Was Jechollahu ol hierulalem.

3 And he did that which was right in thefight ofthe Lorde, according to all thinges as did his father Amaziahu.

4 Dave that the high places were not brad: Forthe people offered and

nt ntense still on the high places.

5 16 ndthe Lomdesmote the king and he

es Aeaper vnto the day okhis death, nd dweit in aseuerall Houle at liber-

be yi a

tle: and Hotham the kinges fonne gouerned the palace, and iudged the people of the lande.

6 The restof the wordes that tonterne
Asaria, and all that he did, are they not written in the booke of the tronicles ol the kinges of Juda:

7 And so Asaria slept with his fathers, 25 and they buryed hum wich his fathers in the titie of Dauid, and Jotham his sonne raigned in his steade.

3 Inthe thirtie and eyght pere of 250° tia king of Juda, did Zacharia the fonne of Ferovoami raigne bpon Ilraclin Samaria fire monethes:

9 And wrought that which was eulen the light ok the Lome, as did his fathers: And turned not away kromthe lines ol Jeroboam the lonne of Nabat which made Ilrael to . ath

Menahem.

spired against him, and smote him inthe sight of the people, and killed him, and rãigned in his steade.

1 The rest of the wordes that concerne
Zatharia, beholde they are written in the booke of the cronicies of the kinges of Ilrael. *

12 This is also the worde ofthe Torde which be spake vnto Jehu, saping:
Thy sonnes shall fit on the seate of PE rael inthe fourth generation after thee.
And so it tame to passe.

Ci; Sallum the sonne of Jabes beganto raigne in the thirtie and ninth pere of
CUis3tah king of Juda, and he raigned a moneth in Samaria.

14. Fo2 Menahem the fonne of Gadi went vp from Thirza, c came to Sa-

uu. Ne. u. c.

maria, and finote Sallum the fonne of

Jabes in Samaria, and slue him, and raigned in his steade.

1 The restokthe wordes that toncerne

Sallum, and the treason which he con:

sptred, beholde they are written in the

June ol the cronicles of the kinges of racl, 1 i

16 The same time Menahem destroyed
Thiphslah, and all that were therein, € the toastes therof from Thirza: And becaule they opened not to him, he de it, and ript vp al the women with

chlülde.

17 The thirtie and ninth pere of Asaria king of Juda began Menahem the soune of Gadi to raigne vpon Jlrael ten peres in Samaria, 5

18 And he ddd eull in the fight of the Lod, and turned not awap al his dayes fron the sume of Jeroboam the sonne of Nabat which made Jlrael to sinne.

19 And Phul the King of Allpria came vpon the lande: And Menahem gaue
Phul a thouland talentes of filuer, that
His hand might be with Him e stablishe the kingdonie in his hande.

20 And Menahem made a proclamation for the money in Israel, that all men of fubftaunce should geue the king of Asspria fiftic sicles of fiinerapeece: And fo the king of Assyria turned backe againe, and tarped not there in the lande.

21 The rest ot the wordes that concerne
Menahem, and all that he did, are they not wztten in the booke of the tronicles of the kinges of Israel:

22 And Menahem slept with his fathers,

4.Kinges. -

10 And Sallum the sonne of Jadbes con:

and Pecahia his sonne did raigne m bis
¢ D
Inthe fiktith vert of Asavia kin

Juda, began Pecahia the sonne ofepe

nahem to raigne over Israel in Sama-

tia oie a ——

24 And did tha ich Was cuil fight of the Lorde, and left not alta the sinnesol Peroboam the fonne of
Nabat which made Ilraecl sinne.

25 But Petah the sonne of Krmaliahn which wasa captaine of His, tonspired against him, & smote him in Samaria tuen in the place of the kinges pout with Argob and Aria, and with hyn
Were fiftte men of the Gileadttes: and he killed hum, aud raigned in his roome.

26 The rest ofthe wordes that tonterne
Pecahla, € all that he did, beheld they are witten in the booke of the tronitles of the kinges ol Asrael.

27 Inthe kiltie and two pere of Asarta king of Juda, began Pecah the sonue of Nemaliahu to raigne oner Israel in
Samaria twentie peres:

28 And did euill in the light ofthe Torde, and turned not awap from the sinnes of Jeroboam the sonne of Mabat that made Jlrael inne.

29 In the dapes of Pecah king of JE rael, came Thiglath Pelesar king of Alsyrid, & toke Bion, Abel Weth maacha,

anoay, Wedes, Hazorz, Gilead, Galilee, and all the lande of Mephthall, and tarryed them away to Affpaa,

zo And Hosea the sonne of Ela, tonspired treason against Petah the sonne of
Kemaliahn, and smote him, x slue him,
€ raigned in his steade in the twentith pere of Hotham the forme of Uszʒiah.

zi The restokthe wordes thatconcerne
Pecah, and al that he did, behold they F are written in the bookc ofthe tronicles ofthe kinges of Ilrael.

32 The setond pere of ecab the sonne of Kemaliahu king of Ilcael, began
Jothamthe sonneof Usziah king of
Juda to raignc.

33 Fine and tiwentie veres olde was he when he began to raigue, and he ralgned lirteene peres in Hierulalem: Dis mothers name was Jerua, the daughter ol Zadot. -

And he did that which is right th the light of the Lode: euen nd to all as did his father Uzziah, lo di he.

G

35 But

Tut the high plates Werenotputar 37 (In tbole dayes the Lorde be gan

35 cai te people offercdandDburntin lende into Juda, Resin the king at Sy. dente ltülin the high places he built the ria k Prkabthe one ot Memallahu.) higher Dooze ok the houlc ok the Lorde, 38 And Jotham slept with his fathers,

The restokthe wordes that conterne and Was buried with his fathers in the

otham, and all that he did, are they citie ol Damd his father, and Ahaz his

not Written in the book of the cronities slonne raigned in his steade. ofthe kinges of Suda:

© The xvi. Chapter.

Ahaz king of Juda confecrateth his tonne in fire. 5 Hierusalem is beficged;
„ Wamaltcon is taken. and Resin slaine. 14dolatrie. 10 The death ol A haz.
20 Hezechia succeedeth him.

he fenenteenth pere ok to him: Foz the king of Assyria went vp
: Petah the sonne ot Re- again Damascõ, and when he had ta-
GSK I maliabu (king or gtrael! ken it, he tarryed the people away to e Abas the sonne ok Kir, and slue Nezin.
Jothamkingof Juda 10 And king Abas went to Damatton, to beganto raigne. mecte Thiglath Peleser king of Allp-
Twentie peres olde ria: And when king Ahaz sawe an aulwas he when he was made king, and ter that was at Pamascon, he fent to ratgned sirteene yeres in Bicrulalem ex Ulrlathe prielt, the paterne of the aulter did not that which was right in the cies and the falhion okit, and all the workeofthe Lowe his God, ipke Dauid his mandhip thereof. | . father: 1 And Aefathe priest made an aulter, in
But walked in the wap or the kinges “all poyntes lyke to the paterne which ol Ilrael, yea and made his sonnes to king Ahaz had sent from Pamascon, egothrough the fire after the abhomina- uen so did Uria ß priest make it against tions ofthe heathen whom the Lowe king Ahas came from Damaston. tast out before the children of Jlrael. 2 And so when the king was come from
4 And he offred and burnt intenle in the Damalton, he lawe the aulter: and the high places, and on the hilles, and vn- king went to it, and offred thereon: der euerp thicke tree. 3 And he burnt his burnt offring, and a, 5 Then Rein king ol Syria, and pe- his meate osfring, e powred his deincke cab sonne of Kemaliahn king of PE offring, and sprinckled the blood ok his racl, tanie vp to Pierusalem to fight: peace offringes belide the aulter,
And they fought againt Ahaz, but 14. And by the brasen aulter which was could not duertome him. before the TLorde, and set it without
6 At the same tynie Kein king ol Hy- the temple betweene the aulter and the ria brought Elath againe to Spria, and temple of the Lorde, and put it on the
PO He Jewes thente: And the Sy- northlyde okthe aulter. z ans came to Elath, and dwelt therein 15 And king Taz conmmunded Uria

ami.

(t) There is no prince so wicked, but he spall finde flatterers and falfe ministerg to serue his turne.

vnto this day. the priest , lade: Upon the great aul-

87 D0 Abas sent messengers to Thig- ter, {et on fire inthe morning the burnt ath Beleter king of Allpua, faping: offing, and in the euen the meate offeaun thy seruaunt and thy sonne, come vp ring, and the kinges burnt lacrilite, and and deliuer nie dut ol the hande ofthe his meate offring, with the burnt offe-

ming ok Syria, and out of the hande ok, ring okalithe people of the lande, and

the ung of Ilrael, which rile vpa- their meate offring, and their dpinke of:
00. 8 oe : 6 kringes and powre thereby al the blood e, that 1 Ahaʒ toke the fuer and golde okthe burnt offring, and all the blood ol
. Jod as kounde in the honse ofthe the latrilite: and the brasen aulter wyll ea 1 in the trealures ofthe kinges J comte and see.

ae ent a rewarde to the king ok 16 And Uria the priest did attording to al das ain thet thinges as king apas commaunded he kung ol Alspria tonlented bn: him. in

Hofea.

ti. Re.vii.d,

17 And king Ahas brake the sydes of the botomes, and toke the lauer from of them c toke downethe lauatorie from

of the bralen oxen that were vnder it,

and put it vpon a pauement ofstones.

4. Kinges.

19 The rest of the wordes that tonterne

of Asspria.

Ahaß what he did are they not write in the booke ofthe cronitles ot ere kinges of Juda: 2

18 And the vaple for the Sabbath that ep ip 9 the house, ＋ the ; nges entrie without, turned he to the ticofDanid, c Hezekia his f : pouse ot the Lorde, for feare otf the king ned in his steade. bis sonne raig:

J The. xvii. Chapter.

20 And Abas slept with his father
Was buried with his fathers m —

§ Hosea king ol Ilrael is taken. 4 Ind he and al his realme brought to the Pope rians n for their idolatrie. 24 Lions destrop the Assyrians that dwelt in Sa. maria. 29 Euerp one worshipped the god ol his nation, J contrarp to the commaundement ot God. ö ;

4); UI UAE * hoa aia ia

go gh 2 7 ine xy
We SAV ANN AiR i
10 Ail or 2
. b hls CRS
I 4 it
2 W

* ep ET TT ee ee 7
PA PA hay Ki N
1 We N

U U 5
AN

G12 008 F YRS OCH #40 60e9

7 ‘2 6 wy 7 iy »' 5 pe Aa
10 i r gett Be 54 } Si

e he yor yt 8 1 M ff ‘i aa |
A1 N the twellth pere of in the prplon houle.
Abas king of Juda, 5 And then the king of Asspua tame bp ag began Hosea the sonne throughout all the lande, and gat vp aof Elah to raigne in gainst Samaria, and belieged it thrre
Saniaria vpon Jlsra- peres. 5 —
2 ae n nine peres: 6 Inthe muth pere of Holea, the hing wes
3 And did that which of Assyria toke Samaria, and carrycd
Was euill in the sight of the Lorde, but Ilrael awap vnto Assprta, t put them not as the binges of Israel that were in Hala e in Habor by the ryuer of Goza bag be fore hun. and in the cities of the! Medes. eee
And Salnanalar king of Asspria 7 For it came to passe, that the chüdien wees, caine vp against him, and Hosea became of Israel sinned against the ord with cope, DiS seruaunt, and gaue hum presentes. God which had brought thensouto

the land of Egypt, from under the hand of Pharao king of Egypt, and fare other gods. gl
3 And they walked in the ceremonie the heathen whom the Torde cast

in the before the chudren of J sracl, Aileen 5)

4. And the king of Aflpria fonnde treasou in Polea: for he had sent niessengers to So king of Egppt, and brought no

resent vnto the king of Asspria from pere to pere: and therefore the king of
Assyria Mut him vp, and bounde hun

sceremonies Which the kinges of Ylracl

had made. ; —— the chudren of Alrael went abon g Abwerbol thinges that were not wel fromthe Lorde their God: And they buylt them bya places in all their cities, both in the towres where they kept watch, and allo inthe strongtownes:
10 And they made thé image st grones in enery bye hill, x vnder euer thicke tree. u And there they burnt intent in all the hygh places, as did the heathen whom the Lord caryed away bekore thenvand wrought 1 thinges to anger the ode withall:
12 ort they serued most bile idols, wherof the Lorde had layd vnto them: Be hall do no such thing. te 1; Andthe Lorde testified in Ilrael and in Juda by all the prophetes and by all the sears, saying: Turne from pour
Wicked wayes and kepe my tommaun-

bb dal dementes and my statutes, according to

all the law which FH comimaunded pour

fathers, and which J ent to you by my scruauntes the prophetes.

14 Mothwithfanding they woulde not ni, heare, but rather hardened their abs lleckes, lpke to the stubburnelle of their
® fathers, that dyd not beleue in the

Jig got

An tollowe mikes, 15 eq i

nt

Alt.

is And the Lorde was exceeding Woot!) ach nel put them out ok his sight,
. Boneh Waslelthut the tribe of Ju-

h Hcuerthelesle, Juda also kept not the

a Som andemeiues ofthe Lowe their he, but Walkicd inthe teremonies of
PTAC whiche they made.

N
Wrad

CV.

20 Andthe Loo cat ofall the {eee of l

e
Mes ot lpoplers vnti

tast them out of bis tight —

21 For™He cut of Ysrael from the house S

of Daud, and made them aking, enen Göre.

Jeroboam the sonne of Rabat: a
Jerobaant drewe Plrael away — they shoulde not folo we the Lorde. and
18 ati + great finne,

22 = Fozthechildzen of Plcaet walzed i all the sinnes of Jeroboam whiche md dpd, and Departed nottherkrom,

23 Gunhilthe Lord put Ilrael away out of hissight, as he had lãyd by all his sernauntes the prophetes: And fo was FE rael taried away out oftheir owne land to Assyria enen vnto this day. J

24. And the king of Allyria brought men from Wabplon, from ꝰCutha, frõ Aua, from amath, and from Sepharnaim, ee n and put them in the cities of Samaria tae in steede ol the children ol Israel:

the cities therof,

25 Anditfortuned, that at the beginning

of their dwelling there, they feared not the Lorde, and the Lorde tent lions among them, which slue them.

26 Wherkore they spake to the king of AL spria, saying: The nations which thou hast transtated t put inthe cities of Samaria knowe not the lawe of the God ofthe lande: therefore he hath sent lions bpon them, and behold they flay them, becaufe they knowe not the nianer of
Worelhipping the God of the lande.

27 Thenthe king of Apia tommaun-

ded, laying: Carp thyther one of the

priestes whom ye brought thente, and let hym go and dwell there, and teache then the kashton how to serue the God

of the tountrep. E

And then one of the priestes whom they had carted from Samaria, tame and dwelt in Bethel, and taught then howe they shoulde feare the Lode.

29 Howebeit euery nation made them gods of their owue, and put them in the houles ok the hygh places Whiche the dent e ichen e nation in their tities wherin they ,

30 The menof Wabplon made Sototh
Benoth, ethe men of Cuth made Nergal, ethe men ok hamath made Alimd,

31 The Auites made ee Ae

N ps) thats : And the Hep 10 1 their

whom incise

and tien is made they possessed Samaria, and dwelt in .

„ ee

Fe~ekia, © | 4. Kin SCs.

Hezekig,

their childzen in fire for Adramelech and 36 But keare the Lorde w “en

tel
Ainamielech the gods of Sepharuaim. pou out of the land of ae witha

32 And so they feared the Lowe, x made power ka stretched out arme hi them priestes ofthe basist ofthem, which and to him vow, and to bim bo fren ‘ facvififed for thein in the houles of the 37 The statutes, ordinauntes, laweayy comecn bhpgh places. commaundement whiche he wrote foz
Sed es 33 Aud soco they feared the Lord, and ser- pou, fee that ye be Diligent to do for ener: es ued their owne gods, alter the maner ok monre, and keare not any other gods. the people whom they taryed thente. 38 And the appopntment that J haue
34 And vnto this bap they do alter the made with pou fee pe forget not, and olde maner:and neither feare God, nei- feare none other gods: ther do after their ordinaunces and cu- 3 Wut the Lord pour God pe thal frare stomes, and after the lawe e tonnnaum- Ehe shall deltuer pou out of the handes
Gen zr e. ement which the Lorde commaunded of all pour enemies. the children of Jacob, whom he called 40 Hobbebeit, they dyd not hearken, but
Israel. 1 b did after their olde custonie.
Id u B. 35 And the Torde made an appopntment 41 And so these nations feared the Low, lete. x. a with them, and tharged them faving ; and serued their images allo, like as did
Ftare none other gods, nor bowe pour their children and their childzens chit: selues to the in, nor serue them, nor lacrt- dren: Euen as dpd their fathers, foro fice to them: they vnto this dag. ‘al

The.xviit. Chapter.

4 Hesthia hing ol Juda putteth downe the brates serpent; and dekropeth the idols.
Dand profpereth. 1 Ilrael is caried away captiue.ʒo The blasphemie of Sennacherib.

Mthe thirde pere ok the king ok Allpria, and serued hin not.
Hosca sonne of Ela 8 He smote the Philistines euen vnto Assa king of JYlrael, ittanie Fthe coastes therok, both castels where to passe that Hezelia they kept watches, and strong tities.

As sonne of Ahas king 9 Aud in the fourth pere of king Hezefolk Juda did raigne. kia, (whiche was the seuenth pere of
— Twentie and fypue Hosca sonne ot Ela king of Ilrael)it for res olde was he when he began to tuned that Salmanasar king of Afly-

raigne, and raignedtwentie and nine ria came vp again Samaria, and beveres in hierusaleni: his mothers name liegedit. also was Abi, ᷣ daughter ot Zacharia, 10 And after thret peres they toke it:cuen
3 And he dyd that whiche is right in the in the sixth pere of Hezekta (that 450 sight of the Lord, atcording to al as did sap the nynth pere of Holea king of Hl
‘oat, Daund his father. rael) Samaria was wonne.

Geb end 4 eM put away the high places, ehrake 11 And the king of Allyria dyd cary alvay he chu the images, and tut downe the groues, Ilrael vnto Alysia, c put them in Ha-
Naarn ac, And all to brake the“ bralen serpent that lah and in Pabor by thermer of Gozan,

Moyses had made: or vnto those dayes and inthe cities ofthe Medes: 0 the children of Pract dyd buͤrne satri- 12 Wecause they woulde not hearnen un. fice to it: and he called it Nehustan. to the voyte of the Lord their God 115
5 He trusted inthe Lowe God of Ilrael, trantgressed his appopntment- and 10 d that after hun was none lpkt him as that Mopses the leruauntof ere 1. mong all the kinges of Inda, neither ctonnnaunded: and would neither Ye were there any such before him. them, nor do them. kling 22
6 Jor he clane to the Lorde, and departed i Therlozeinthe fourtecnth pero Ese ,

z.Paxxix.f

wee 5 Fedde 48 not from him:dut kept his ctommaunde- Pezekia, did Sennacherib unge Alter kae

ae the Lode tommaunded 75 Aae vp = bl ae trong cities

Mopses. Of Juda, and tone then, ¢

2 7 And the Lorde was with him, so that 1+ Aud esehia bing of ind ane € he prospered in all thinges whiche He king of Allpria to Lacs, at and all toke in hande: Aud he rebelled agaust haue offended: depart from me, that

22 N — a chou puttest on me that will J diane. an te king of Allpria appoynted buto Hesekia king of Juda three hundred talentes of siluer, and thirtieta-

of golde. me gil
. wpesebia gaue him all the filuer that Was founde in the boule of the
Zoe, Ein the treasures ofthe binges

se. f N
16 Mithe lame season dyd Hesekta rentol the doors ok the temple of the Torde and the pillers (Whiche the fayde Hesekia king of Juda had couered ouerjand gaue them to the king of Aifpzia.
17 And the king of Aslyria ente Thara than, and Nablaris eRablakel) from
Läthis, to king Heschia with a great hoast against Hierulalem: And they went vp, and came to Dierufalem, and werben and stoode by the conduite ofthe vpper poole, whiche is in the way okthe fullers fielde. .
18 And when they had called to the king, there came out to them“ Eliakim the
_ fonneof Elkia, which was stewarde of the houshold, and Sobna the stribe, and
Joah the sonne of Alaph, the recorder.
19 And Nablakeh sapd vnto them: Tell pe
Hezekla J prap pdu, thus fayth the great King, euen the king of Asspria: what confidence is this that thou batt:

pe 1%

bib.

r0 Thou thinkest surely J haue eloquẽce,

but tounsell and strength are for the
Warre: On whom then dock thou trust, d dchat thou rebellest against mez vi 2. Dbest thou trust to the staffe ok this nue broken reede Egypt, on Which ika man leane, st will go into his hande, € pearse it: Cuen fois Pharad king ol Egypt vnto all that trust on hym.

Tode our God: Is not that he whole
„ Ppah places and whole auiters Pezekia cas halh put downe-and hath fayd to Ju-

fence fone this anit in Hi

— er here in Hierulalem.

br, 23 2 0 55 therlore J pray thee geue ho-
HAges to mp lordẽ the king of Allyra, nod Will deliver thee two thoulande
| theme thou be able to fet ryders vpon

% Yhythinkest thou scorne at the pre-

fence of one of the least Dukes of my

masters fernauntes, and trustesd to E-

. charets and horlmenthe pi le am J come nowe without
GING Of the Lorde to this plate, to

4. Kinges.

tone 22. If ve fap vnto me, we trust in the

e a and plerulalem, pe thall Worchip be-

V .

destroy ite The Low se n to this lande, and deltro hie —

26 And Cliabini the sonne ok Helkia, and
Dobna,t Joah, fayde vnto Rablakeh:

. Speake J pray thee to thy feruauntes inthe Sprianslangnage(tor we vuderstande it) and talke not with vs in the

elves tongue in the cares of this peo: ple that are on the wall.

27 And Kablakeh sapde vnto themhath np maister fent me to thy maister and tec, to speake thele woes Hath he not lent me betause of themen Which ft on the wall, that they may cate their wich u t drinke their owne pisse

28 And lo Nablakeh stoode, e tryed with E. alowde voyte in the Jewes lauguage, and spake, faying: Meare the wordes of ae Btug,cuen of the king of Al-

29. Thus lapth he king: Let not Hezellin beguile vou, for he shal not be able to deliier pou out oł myne bande:

30 Melther let Hezekia make pou to trust

_ tithe Lovde, laping, The Lorde Hat surely deliver vs, ⁊ this titie shall not be geuen ouer into the hande of the king of
Asspria. .

31, Mearken not vnto hesckia: For thus

sapth the king of Assyria, Deale kindely
With me, and tome out to nie, and then cate cuery man ok his owne vine, and of his obne figge tree, and drincke euery nan of the water of his owne Well,

32 Till J tome, and fet vou to as good a lande as ours is, a lande of corne and wine, a lande ol bread and binepardes, a lande of oyle, of olyne trees, and of ony, that ve may liue, and not dye: And hearken not vnto Heschia, for he begulleth pou saping: The Lorde Mall deliuer vs.

33 Hath euerpone ok the gods okthe na- Pd.

tions deliuered his land out ot the hand of the king of Allyria?

34 Where is the god of Hamath, col Arphad- and where is the god of Hepharuam, ena, and Jua: Opd they deliuer
Samaria out of mpne hande-

35 And what god is aͤmong al the gods of the nations, that hath deliueredhis land F

36 But the people held their peace, aud ung aunlibered not him a word-lor the king oo. J
Had commaunded, saping: Auuswere

1 Ot.
Dyan r D2 37 Then

out of myne hande- Shall the Lorde era at delluer Pierulalenrout of mpne haude- an secs

Hecelia.

Esa 37. c.

2. Dar. 32, d.

3 Then Ellakim the sonne of Helkia, of Asaph the retorder, tame to Here wüich was the steward of the houshold, with their clothes rent, and ‘ove and Sobna the {eribe,ePoah the sonne the wordes of Nablakeh. 72
The xix. Chapter.

4 Kin es.

God promiteth Itai victorie to Hezekia , j Che angel ofthe Lord killeth an hundreth and ieee andfiue thouland men of the Adyzians. 3 Sennacherib is killed ok his owne
8 5 ‘

onnes. i fae 8 in whomthoutrutkelt faying: Pierula-

AC When king Dezekia
A hearde it, he rent his

clothes, æ put on sacke, e tanie into the“ house lor the Horde, —

which was the steward of the houshold,

and Sobna the scribe, and the elders of the priestes clothed in satke, to Wai the prophete, the fonne of Amoz.

3 And they sayd vnto him thus sayth Hezekia: This day is a dap of tribulation,¢ of rebuke and blasphemie: For the cyt: dren are tonie to the byrth, and there is no strength to be deliuered.

4. Peraduenture the Torde thy God will heare al the wordes of Rablakeh, whõ the king of Aslyria his matter hath sent

to rayle onthe lpuing God, e to rebune

him with wordes which the Lode thy
God hath hearde: And lift thou vp thy praper for the remmaunt that are left.

5 So the fernauntes of king Hezekia cane to Hfat, f 6

6 And Jlaisapde nto them, So shall ye fay to pour maister: Thus sayth the
Tode, Be not afrayde of the wordes which thou hast heard, with which the voung men of the king of Asspria haue rapled on me.

W 7 wWebolde „J will put hym in another

mynde, and he hail heart tydinges and fo returne to his owne land, and F wil bang to passe, that he shall fall vpon the wordeb enen in his owne land. ö

8 And Vabsakeh went backe againe, and founde the hing of Asspra fighting a gaint Libna: for he had hearde howe

that he was departed from TLachis.

9 And when he hearde men fay of Thirhalka king of the blacke Mores, Behold he is come out to fight against thee: he
Departed, and sent messengers vnto hezella, saying. a

10 Thus speane to Hesekta king of Juda. saying: Let not thy God deteane thee

lem shall not be deliuered into the oe of un uin 9 h
11 Weholde, thou hast hearde whatt kinges of Asspria haue done i 17 landes, how they haue dtteriy dettroy: ed them: And (halt thou elcape-
12 aue the gods of the heathen delluered them, whiche myne anncestours haue destroyed: As Goʒan, and Haran, and
Reseph,and the children of Eden which were in Thelallar- N

13 Where ist be king of Pamath, and the

I king of Arphad, the king of thecitte of
Sepharuaim, and of ena and Juaz
14. And Hezekia receaued the letter of the hand of the messengers, and readit: And
Hesckia Went vp into the house of the
1 „And layde it abode befoze the orde.

15 And hezekia prayed before the Lord, aun

and lapd: O Lod God of Ilrael Which dwellest betweene p Cherubs, thou art
God alone ouer al the kingdomes of the earth, thou hast made heauen ¢€ carth.

16 Torde bosbe downe thyne eare, and heare: Open Lorde thyne eyes (Ibelech thee, and see: and Heare the wordes of Sennacherib whiche hath sent (this man to rapyle on the lpning God.

17 Oka trueth Lode, the kinges of Ally

tie haue destroped nations and theic

andes,

13 And haue fet fire on their gods: Forthey were no gods, but the woke of the

handes of man, euen of wood and stone:

and they destroped them.
19 Mowe therkore O Loy our God J be? sech thee, saue thou vs out of his panne, that all the kingdomes ofthe earth 0 e that thou onelp art the Lo:

God. |
20 And Pat the sonne of Amos 1 5
Hesehia.faping, Thus fapththe 4g
God of Israel: That whiche thou 1 prayed me concerning Sennacher king of Assprla, I haue bearbett. Ts

(8) Ft iste trut refugee

succout ia sil

Conde bp caret pret

j efore the worde that the

7 Ehists term: © The pirgin,

„ Torde hath fal ain

. Suen the Daughter of Sion hachde bt:
=! pp thec and laughed thee to feozne [

— ton bing of Adysta. the daughter of

Hlerulalem bath shaken her head at

thee.

D „ *mhom hattthou rapled ons € whom pred + a hon blalphemede Agalnct whom
„ haltthou exalted thy vopte and ipfted

pp thyne 1 so byez Euen against the iy of Ilrael.

* spe pane of thy meffengers thou halt rayled onthe Lond, and {atd: With the multinde ofmy charets Jam come vp to the toppes ol the mountapnes, eulen along by the fines of Libanon, and
F wyll cut downe thehye Cedar trees and the lustie firre trees therof: and 7 wyll go mto the lodging ok his bozders, and into the Wood of his Carmel.

24 J haue digged and druncke straunge waters: € With the steppe of my goyng
Wil I drye al the water pooles that are belieged.

25 Halt thou not heard howe J haue 022 deyned such a thing a great Whyle ago, and haue prepared it krom the beginning e And shall J not nowe being it foorth, that it map deftroy and bring strong eities into halk heapes of stones-

9 26 Andthe inhabiters of them shalbe

oflitle power, and faint hearted, and nm tonkounded, and shalbe lyke the grasse

ofthe field, or greene hearbe, oras the

Hay on the toppes of the houses, 2 as i 11 that is vnripe € lnutten with a ng. N

27 Inknowe thy dwelling thy tomming

out and thy goyng in, and thy kurie a gainst me.

26 And betaule thon ragest against nie,

éthy tumult is come vp to mpne eares,

Jwyll put my Hooke in thy nostrels,

aud Mp byt in thy lippes, and will bring

4. Ringes.

thee backe agalne th tamest. 8 he fame way thou

29 Aud this shalbe a signe vnto thee
Heschia: He shall cate this satel fut hinges as grow of themfctues and the nert pere {uch as come bp of thote that did growe of their owne accorde, and the thirde pere sowe ye and reape, plant vinepardes, and eate the krutestherok.

30 And it that is estaped and left of the daughter of Juda, chall yet againe tale rooting downe warde, and beare fruite vpwarde. f

31 For out of Hierusalem shall go a rem:

naunt, and a nuniber that that eftape out ot moũt Sion: The seate orthe lord ok hoastes (hal bang this thing to palle.

32 Wherefore thus laith the Lord concer: ning the king of Asspria: he Malt not

tonie to this titie, nor shoote an arrowe into it, nor come before it with shielde, nor cast a banke against it.

33 But shall go backe againe the way he tame, and chall not come into this titie,
{ath the Lorde.

34. FO J wyll defend this titie, to saue it, for myne owne lake, and for Danid my G seruauntes sanle. a

35 And it tame to passe, that the selfe same night the angel of the Lorde Went out, and finote in the hoast of the Assprians an hundred fourescoze € fiue thousand:
And when the remnaunt were vp early

in the morning, beholde they were all dead toarses. ,

36 „And so Sennacherib king of Allpria auoyded and Departed, € went againe

and dwelt at Pintue.

37 And it fortuned, that as he was in a

‘temple Wo2hipping Milroch his God,
Adramelech ck Sarelar his ownesonnes

© smote him with the sworde: And Gab

they escaped into the lande of Armenia, mente 90, and Alarhaddon his sonne raigned in ar

his steade.

Thie. xx. Chapie r.
Hezekia is licke, and receaueth the figne ot his health. iz He receaueth re wardes ol

Berodach.
Manalle his tonne raigneth in his tteade,

x Bout that time was
[ke Hescbia licke vnto the
2 Ildeath: And the p20-
SEP? Wiss phete Hat the fonne
728 ON of Amos tame to him, and sapde vnto him,
Thus faith the Lord:

3 cheweth his treatures, and is reprehended of Flat; 22 He dieth, and

Put thyne houchold in oder, fo: thou alt dye, and not lpue. 1

2 210 Hezekla turned his late to the wal, and praped vnto the Lorde, faying:
Jbeseche thee, O Lorde, remember

g noi how J haue walled before theein

erfect heart, haue trueth and with a y 85 heart, 7 —

— — te,

cvll.

Tobi. ĩ d.

a.

done that whiche is good in thy light.
And Hezekia Wept loze.

And it fortuned that afore Elal was gone out into p middle of the court, the
Word of the Lode caine to him, saping:

5 Lurne againe, and tell Hezekia the taptapne of mp people, thus faith the
Lorde God of Dauid thy father: F

(a) Bod ta

Race piapce haue heard thy praper, and seene thy chene. kkares, and beholde J wpll heale thee,

sothat on the thirde day thou shalt go vp into the houst of the Lorde.

6 And J will adde vnto thy dayes pet fikteene veres c J Wyll delluer thee Ethis
Citic out of the hand ofp king of Allpria, ke will dekend this citie, for myne owne fake,¢ for Dauid my seruauntes fake.

C 7 And Efat said: Take a lumpe of dryed figges . And they tolle and laped it on the sore, aud he retouered.

8 And Hesekia lalde vnto Efat: What halbe the signe that the Lode wpll heale me, and that J Mal go vp into the
Houle of the Lorde the third day:

9 Elai aunswered: This ligne halt thou haue of the Lord, that the Lod will do that he hath {poken + * Shall the shadowe go forwarde ten Degrees z 02 go backe againe ten degrees:

10 Mesckiaaunhwered: it is a light thing for the shadowe to go downe ten degrees, J desire notsthat: but let the shadowe go backwarde ten degrees.

1 Aud Etat the prophete called vnto the

Ecc · xlviii. c.

Ec lviuic. TLord, ' and he brought the shadow ten degrees backwarde, by Whiche it had gone dowue in the dpall of Ahas.

Egle. 12 The lame scalon Werodach Baladan

the sonne ol Waladan king ok Wabylon,

sent letters and apreleut vnto Hesckia:

for he had bearde howe that Heßzckia
Was sicke.

The. xxj. Chapter.

Shing Manasse restoreth idolatrie. 16 And vleth great crueltle. is he dieth, and Amon his konne succeedeth, z who is killed ofhis owne seruauntes. 26 Alter him raigneth Josia.

Anasse was twelue
N HAI peres old when he bez

LPar. ;;. 2. e FAN fo raigue and rai-
„ aned kpftie and fine

2 And he did euil in the light ofthe Lov,
| cuen after the abhommations of the

Hx #

13 And Hezekia was glad of the shewed them all his krralure olle ln ner, golde, odours, prcioNsopntnent all the boule of his armorp, and all that was found in his trealures: There was nothing in his houle € in all his eating, that Hezekla shewed them not.

14. And Elat the prophete came vnto d king Heʒekla, and saide vnto hin: what
{aide these mene and from whente came they to thee z And Hezekia salde: They be come front a karre tountrep, cuen from Wabylon.

15, And he faide AQaine: What haue they
{rene in thy boule: Pezekia aunlsbered:
All } thinges that are in my houle haue they seene: there is nothing among uw treasures that J haue not shewedihe.

16 And Efailaide vnto Hezekia: Heare the worde of the Lorde,

17 Webholde the dayes come, chat all that is in thyhouse, and whatsoeuer thy fa: thers haue layde vp in store duto this
Day, halbe tarped into Wabplon: and «rer, nothing chalbe left saich the Horde, stews

18 And of thy sonnes that shall proceede out of thee, and which thou shalt beget,

{hall they take awap, and they chalbe chamberlapnes in the palace of the king of Wabplon.

1 And Hezekla saide vnto Flat:“ Weck osm come be the worde ok the Lozde Which tn thou hast lpoken. And he faide: Shall a there not be peace x trueth in iy dapes.

20 The remnaunt of the wordes that conterne Hezekia, and all his power, aud howe he made a poole and a conduite,
€ brought water into the citic, are they not witten in the bookie ofthe cronicles

of the kinges ol Juda x- b

21 And Hesebia slept with his father F 1
Manalle his sonne raigned in his steade.

955 5 ae out be- »

ore the children of Alrael.

3 Jo he went and built vp the pad places“ Whiche Pezekla his kater erz 1 destroped, and he reared vp au i * pics fo? Baal, and made (Doll groucs as 1
Ahab king of Israel, and wondered all the hoast of heauen, and ie them. 4 mi

wx eg xv
At. XvIA.

eg ix a.

a anal:

serulalem wyll J put mp name.
2 he buylt aulters for all the hoast of heauen (ever) in two tourtes of the

house of the Torde.

And he offred his owne fonne in fire,

dgaue heede vnto witchtraft and sozoe, and mayntapned Workers with
Ipirltes, and tellers of fortunes, and wrought much wickednesse in the light ok the Lorde to anger hum.

And he put an image of a groue that he had made ceuen] in the temple, of whiche the Lode had sapde to Dauid
4 Solomon his sonne: In this boule and in Hierusalem whiche J haue chosen out ok all tribes of Ylrael, wyll J put mp name for euer.

Neither wyll J make the feete of HE racl mone any moze out of the lande whiche J gaue their fathers: fo that they will oblerue and do al that Jhaue tommaunded them, and according to al the law that my seruaunt Moyses conv maunded them. 5

But they hearkened not: and Manasse led them out of the waye, to do more

wickedly then dyd the Heathen people

whomthe Lorde destroped before the chyldren of Jlrael. 5

10 And the Loyd (pake by his seruaunts

the prophetes, saying: il Wecaule anale king of Juda hath
Done suche abhominations, and Hath)

wrought moze wickedly then all the A:

morites whiche were before hym dpd, and hath made Juda linne allo with his idols: ö
In Thertore thus faith the Low God ol
Ilrael: Weholde, J wyll bryng luche cupll bpon Hicrufalem and Juda, that tone heareth of it, both his cares (hat

, And Jwyll stretche ouer Pierulalem

he fquaring line ok Samaria „and

Jide of the house of Ahab: And

Wyll wype out Hierulalem, as a man wppeth a diche, and when he hath wypedit, turneth it vplide downe.

And J wyll leaue the © remnaunt of

| 4. Kin ges. mine inheritaunte, and deliuer them in-

And he buplt auiters in the house of
5 the Lord, of which the Lord sayd: In

to the hande of their enentics. a shalbe robbed Tal the abuer fe and spoyled of all their

15 Euen betause they haue done ny wh aher e angred me, antethe
| gt unt tay. hers tame out of Egypt,

Ie And Manasle shed innotent blood er-
Ceding much, till he replenished u lalem from torner to cozner, besyde his linne wherwith he made Judato line and to da euyll in the light ok the Loz,

17 The rest of the wordes that concerne
Manasse, and all that he dyd, aud his sinne that he finned, are they not writ: ten in the booke of the Chronicles ok the kynges ol Juda: :

18 And Manasse slept with his fathers: and was buryed in the garden of his owne house, euen in the garden of Us:
5 ol Amon his sonne raigued in his

19 Amon was twentie and two yeres olde when he began to raigne, and he ralgned two peres in Pierulalem: His mothers name allo was Melsullemeth the daughter ol Harus of Jotba.

20 And he dyd euyll in the fight of the

Torde, as his father Manasse dyd:

21. And Walked in all the way that his father Walked in, and lerued the idols that his father serued, and worshipped them — >

22 And he forsoke the Lorde God of his fathers, and Walked not in the way of the Lode, —

23 And the seruauntes of Amon consptred against hym, and flue the kyng in his owne house.

24. And the people of the lande fluc all them that had tonspired against kyng
Amon, and the people made Folia his sonne kyng in his steade.

25 The restofthe wordes that tonterne
Amon what thinges he dyd, are they not written in the booke of the Chromtles of the kinges of Juda;

26 And they bůͤrped him in the sepulchre in the garden of Usa, and Josia his sonne raigned in his steade.

O 4 The

CVI

2. Para. ; d.

Fofia. 4. Kin Ses. . 7
The. xxij. (hapter. jofia repapreth the temple. 3 Helkia lindeth the booke of the lawe, and causeth: e to — 2 abe Aber es Hulda Webern to enquire che Roles Weit a
A — A lia was bei
I eS aht peres had hearde the wordesof the e A Owe olde when he began to the lawe, he rent his elotijes, booke of
7 Asi catgne,andHeraigned 12 And the kyng tommaunded Delkiq -
Sy) tDittic € one peres in the prielt, and Ahikam the sonne of Sa:
Hlerulalem: His mor phan, and Achbor the fonne of Michathers name also was la, and Saphan the lcribe, and Asahia a
Jedida the daughter seruaunt ok the kynges, faying: of Adaia of Boztath. Go pe and enqute of the Lorde fo) ler. a
2 Pe did that which is right in the fight me, and for the people, and kor all Guay, ofthe Lorde, x Walked in all the wapes concerning the wordes of this boone of Dauid hig father, and vowed neither that is founde: For great ls the wrath to the right hande orto the lelft. = of the Lorde that is kindled against bo, rgb. 3 And it tame to palse, that in the eygh- betaule our fathers haue not hearkzeteenth pere of the raigne ol king Josia, ned vnto the wordes of this booke, to the king leut Saphan the sonne of Aʒa- do According vnto all that whiche tg lia the foune of Mesulain the scribe to Weitten therin for bs, the house of the Lorde, saying: IA. So helkia the hye priest and Ahikam, ¢
Res ub. 4. Go bp to Helkia the hye priest, that Achbor, aud Haphan, and Alahia, went
Be map summe the siluer Whiche is bnito Hulda the prophetisse the wyfe of brought into the Houle of the Lorde, Sallum the lonne of Thikua the sonne
Which the kepers olthe poche haue ga- ok Harhas keper ok the Wardrope: thered of the people: (which prophetisse dweltin hierulalem
5 Aud let them deliver it into the hande of them that do the wozke, and that haue the ouersight of the houle of the
TLord:and let them geue it to them that
Worke in the houle of the Lorde, to repaive the decayed plates of the temple,
6 Euen bnto Carpenters and Malons, and Workers vpon the walles, and for to bye t the temple,

7 Howbeit, let no reckenyng be made

with them of the money that is deliuered into their bande, kor their vse is to deale fapthfully.

8 'And Heltsta the Hye prie l sayde vnto

Saphan the seribe: J Hane founde

the booke of the law in che boute of the

Lowe, And Helkia gaue the booke to

Saphan, aud he read init.

And Saphan the scribe came to the

King, and brought hym worde agapne,

and sayd: Thy seruauutes haue gathe-

red the money that was founde in the temple, and haue deliuered it vnto them

that do the worke, and that haue the o-

uersight of the houle of the Lorde,

Io And Saphan the scribe shewed the fing saying, Helkia the priest Hath deliuered mea booke: Aud Saphan read un it before the kyng.

1 And it lortuned, that when the kyng

W

pinber and free stone, to repaire

in the Houle of doctrine:) and they tommuned with her.

15. And she aunlwered them: thus faith the Tord God of Ilrael, Tell the man that sent pou to nie,

16 Thus saith the Lord:Behold, J wyl bryng euill vpon this plate, and on the inhabiters thereof, euen all the wordes ofthe booke whiche the kyng of Juda hath read:

17 Wetaule they haue forsaken me, and haue burnt incense vnto other gods, to anger me with all the workes of their handes: mp Wath also shalbe lindled against this plate, and (atl not be quenched.

18 Wut to the kyng of Juda whiche (ent von to aske countell of the #020, so of ve sap: Thus laith the Lorde God o
Ilrael, as touching the wordes whithe ye haue hearde: d

9 GBccaule thyne heart dyd © melt, at

betause thou batt humbled thy selfe be *

fore me the Lorde, when thou heardest what J spake agatntt this place, and gaint the inbabiters okthe lame, ho 4 that they shoulde be destroyed and 1 cursed, and hast rent thy clothes a wept before ine, of that also haue heard faith the Londe: 2 ssepotde

de therfore J wyll reteaue thee nh kathers, and thou fait be put into thy graue in peace, and thine eyes

tonne Jehoachim was made kyng. |

wei 1 ent, and there gathe-
N red onto him all the e elders of

pp into the houle of the
Lorde, with all the men of 2 uda, and all the inhabitours of Hiern alem, with the priestes, and prophetes, and all the prople both malt aud great: And he via, kfadin the cares of them“ allthe woes of the coucnaunt which was kounde in
N the houle of the Torde. inh the king Goode by a piller r made
0 aun before the Lorde, that they
0 aud Walke after the Lorde, and kepe
Me ye naundementes, his witnesles, and His statutes, with all their heart

Doses of the faydea ppoyntment, that were Witten in the foresapde —.—

And all tl popntinene peapie contented to the ap-

x 5 vA Ao
Ne = — 4, Be =o me 1 4 ey *
N SE ES dh 7 95 . £4 =
N 2 2 . — * 2 nt - 2 i 4) F 3 3
\ 7 eee 7
Na * N x
N N W 5 f ah 1
0 NY 8 hee = = 15 K : ~
0 5 N 8 N N 4 iy Heid 2 1 2

uda and ot
And the kyng went

and all their loule, and make good the

spall not fee all the eupss Which J Wyll bring bpon this plate. Ande ty bro t the kyng worde agapne. ae

Tie\xxhy. ¶ Bap: | ian

Folia readeth the lawe befoze the people. he maketh a couenaunt wit oe. ae put downe the tools, after he had kylled the priestes. che peth Pallouer. 24 He destropeth the cuniurers. a zo And his forme Jehoaha; raigneth in his steade. 33 After he was talen, hig

22 Bek
29 He was kplled in 8

eect on W N

ND then* the kyng 4 OAndthe king commannded Helehia

the bye priest, and the inkeriour pyiettes, and the kepers of the ornamentes, to bryng out of the temple of the Lode all the vessels that were made for Waal, for the (Doll groues, and for all the hoast of heauen: And he burnt them Without
Hierulalentin the fieldes of Cedron, and carped the althes of them into Bethel.

5 And he put downe the ministers cot
Baal] whom the kynges of Juda had lounded to burne incenfe in the * hygh places and cities of Juda that were rounde about Hierufatem, e also them that burnt incense vnto Waal, to the sunne, to the moone, to the planets, and to all the hoast of heauen.

6 And he brought out the groue froin the temple of the Lorde without Pierafalem vnto the brooke Cedron, and burnt it there at the brooke Cedzon, and stampe it to powder, and cast the dull therof vpon the graues of the children

of the people. 7 And

(a) Bpng
Pofta zclonls fie puegeth the temple of
God, and destroptth ol the montunentes of idolatrye and fupcetti:

tion.
“Oz, Doce kepers.

W 8 And he brought all the prettes out ok

(a) Josia thought not meete that those priestea
Whiche had ferucd idolg, should be ministerg in the temple of

oD,
Teec, vin d.

3. Reg i d.
(c) mount nut wos tull of idols.

3. Reg n. a.

a

male stewes that were by the house of the Torzde, where the women woue hangynges for the idoll groue.

the cities of Juda, and defiled the high

places where the priestes had buͤrnt in-

tense, euen from Geba to wWeerfeba, and destroyed the hygh places of. the gates that were in the entryng in of the gate of Josua p gouernour of the titie,

which Were as a man goeth in j on the

left bande of the gate of the titie.

9 Neuerthelelle, the priestes of the high ä

plates came not vp to the aulter of the
Lore in Pierusalem, laue onely they did cate of the sweete bread among their brethren.

jo And he defilea*Lhopheth which is in the valley of the childzen of Hinnom, betaule no man shoulde offer his sonne or his daughter in fire to Moloch.

11 He put Downe the hozses that the kynges of Juda had geuen to the sunne, at the entryng in of the houle of the
Torde, bythe chaumber of Pathannielech the chaumberlayne, which was ruler of the suburbes, and burut the charets of the sunne with fire.

12 And the aulters that were on the top of the parlour of Ahaz which the hinges of Juda had made, and the aul ters which Manasse had made in the

two courtes of the house of the Torde,

dyd the kyng breake Downe, and ranne thente, and tast the dust ol them into the broolte Cedron. vs F
13 And the high places that were before
Hierusalem, on the ryght bande of the mount“ Oltuet, which Solomonthe hing of Ilrael had butloed for Astaroth the idol ol the Zidons, and for Chamos

the idol ol the Moabites, and for Mu-

chonthe abominable idol of the chit: dren of Ammon those the king defiled:

14. And brake the images, and cut downe the mol groues, and fplled their places
With the bones of men. =

15 Moreouer, *the aulter that was at
Bethel, the high plates made by Jeroboa the foune of Mavat which made
Ilrael sinne, both the aulter and also the high plates he brake downe, and burnt the high places, and stampt it to powder, and burnt the idol groue.

16 And as Josia turned him selle, he spyed the graues that were in the mount,

»

Inge
7 And he brake downe the celles of the

18 And he layde, let him be:

S.

and sent and fet the bones ont of th graues, and burnt them bpon the aulter, to pollute it, accozbpng to the worde of the Lorde that the man of God proclapmed* which tolde the fame wondes.

7 Then he lapde: what title is that chat;
I lecz And the men of the citic tolde him: It is the sepulchze ok the man of

God, which tame fron Juda, and tolde the lelke fame thynges that tion hast done to the aulter of Wethel.

fee that man mouc his bones. And so histone

were laued with the bones ora prophet that came out of Samaria,

19 And all the houses of the hyghplates in the cities ol Samaria, which the king of Ilrael had made to anger (the Loe withall ) those Jolia put out of the wap, and dpd to them accordyng to all the actes that he had done in Bethel.

20. And he sacrikited all the priestes of the hygh places that were there, euen bpon the aulters, and burnt mens bones bp: onthem, and returned to Pierulalem.

21 And the kyng commaunded all the B people, laying: Kepe the featt of Pak souer vnto the Lorde pour God, as it 12. is Witten in the booke of this couenaunt.

22 There was no Passouer holden lyke bw

that from the dapes ok the tudges that

indged Pirael, and in all the dayes of ok Aub of Ilrael and of the hynges

of Juda.

23 Inthe eyghteenth pere of king Folia,
Was this Passouer holden to the TLorde in Hierusalem.

24. And therto workers with spirites and foothlapers, images, idols, and all the abhonunations that were spyed in the laude ol Juda and in ierufalem, thole did Folia put out of the way, to per fourme the wordes of the lawe, 0 Pia were witten in the booke that A Peu. a chia the priest founde in the houle of the
Torde. na be-

25 Dyke vnto him was there no king + E fore him that turned to the Howe ma all his heart, with all his soule, ie all his might, actordyng to all the — r any such as he.

26 Aottbithftandyng, the Lende fue’? not from the fiercenelle of his 170 4
Weath wherewith he was angry ©

gaynst Juda, vecante of all the prow 17

N. i
EN sions that Manasse had prouaked him withall. ia . the Lorde saide: J Wpll put
4 15 all out ofmysight, as J haue done away Ilrael, and wyll cast of this citte Bierulalem which J haue chofen, and the ponte of whicht J laide, y name (hall be there.
¢ 13 The restob che wordes that concerne
Josia, and all that he did, are they not
Witten Wale of the tronicles of he kinges of Pudaz 5

5 gnbis ayes Phärag echo wttg of
Egypt went bp against the king of At fyna tothe river of Eupheates: And king Jolla went agamst him, and was slainẽ of him at Megiddo when he had

scene Hint. —

30 And his seruauntes cartped him dead from Megiddo, and brought him to
Hierulalem, € buried hin in his owne sepulchze: And the people of the lande tolte Jchoahaz the sonne ol Jolla, and annopnted him, and made hun king in his lathers steade. ..

zi Jehoahaz Was twentie Ethzee peres olde when he began to raigne, and raigned three monethes in Hierulalem: His mothers name also was Hamiel, the daughter ol Jeremia ok Libna.

and all Judaes. 9 Jehoakim raigneth.
Babplon. 17 Jedekia is made king.
N N his dapes tanie
Nabuchodonozor king ok abylon pp, 8k Jee hoahim betame his eernaunt three peres:
5 ay tide 1 5 and rebelled against him.
2 ain he Lox sent again him bandes olthe Chaldees, and bandes ok the Syel k bandes of the Moabites, and lg of the Aminonites: and fent whe Agalnst Juda to destroy it, accoz:
0 210 10 f of the Lorde whiche ph es his leruauntes the prouelpat the bidding ok the Bode ade innes
{Combing fo all that ye oa”
— a tHe innocent blood that he shed, led Pierulalem with innocent

4. Kin ges.

32 And he did ein in the fight ofthe Lor atcording to al thinges as his fathere
5 10 0 1 hinges as hig fathers

33 And Pharao Mecho put him in donde at Nibla tuthelande of Auna white he raigned in Dicrufatem,and put the lande to a tribute of anbundzen tatents
N a a of golde,

34 And Pharao Mecho made etigk: thefonne of Josia king in the ot
Josia his father, and turned his name to Jehoakim and toke Jchoahaz a: wap: whiche when he came to Egypt, dyed there. „

35 And Jehoakim gane the Muer and the golde to Pharao, e taxed the lande, to geue the money according to the com: maundement ok Pharao: requiring of every man according to their habilitie siluer and golde, euen of the people of the lande, to geue vnto Pharao Necho.

36 Jehoakim was twentie c kiue peres
Olde when he began to raigne, and he raigned a leuen peres in Hierusalemihhig mothers name also was Zebnda, the daughter of Pedaia of Kuna.

37 And he did that which was euul in the fight of the Lord, according to al things as his fathers had done.

We. xxiiij. Chapter.

Jehoakim made tubiect to Nabuchodonozor rebelleth. 3 Che cause of his rutite

ij he and his people are cart ed vnto

blood : and the Lorde woulde not be re-
. conciled.

5 Therest ok the wordes that conterne

Jehoakim, and all that he did, are they not written in the booltc of the crontcleof the kinges of Juda:

6 And so Feboakim © slept with his

fathers; and * Jehoachm his foun’ «

raigued in his steude.
7 And the king of Egypt came no more but of his lande: For the bing of Wabyion had taken from the ryuer of Egypt vnto the ryuer of Euphratts, all that pertayned to the king of Egyptt.

Jehoachin was eighteene peres o:0¢ when he began to raigne, and raigned in Hiernsalein thace monethes: His ln hers name allo was Nehusta the daughter of Elnathan of ptevufaler.
9 And he did that which was eull in the

fight of the Lorde, according to all ve -

CX.

(a) Not that he was burped Gith hig fathers, £07 he

warb Baby lon. Tere. 22.

eee his father had done.
10 * In that time tame the seruauntes of PRabuchodonozor king of Babylon bp again Hierusalem, & the citie was besieged. J
II And Mabuchodono ʒor the king of Wa-

bylon tame against the citie, and his seruauntes did besiege it.

Dani. i. a.

11 And Jehoachin the king ol Juda,

Hester. li. a.

© came out to the king of Wabylon, he
0 That ts,

and his mother, his seruauntes, his lordes, and his chamberlaynes: and the king of Babylon toke him in the Height
Kantel. pere ok his ratgne.

mn? 13 And he tarrped out thence al the trea-

€ peelded im felfe vnto im.

4. Re. xx.e. furesofihe boule of the Lorde, and the treasure of the kinges house, and brake
C all the veslels of golde which Solomon

king of Jlrael had made in the temple of the Lorde, as the Lorde had saide.
14. And he carrycd away all Hierusalem,

and al the lordes, and all the strong men

of warre, euen tea thouland, into captiultie, and all the craftesmen, c kepers, pean none remaining laue the poore tonimon da, ang people of the lande. hast

meninordes 15 And he carrped away Jehoachin to

cani pe.

) The Mors

{tgnificth

countavoarg, men

»

The. xxv. Chapter.

1 Hicrutalem is betieged of Pabuchodonozor, and tanen. / Che sonnes ot Jedekia ave slaine befoge are his eyes:and after his owne eyes put out. 21 Juda is brought to

Babplion. 25 Gedolia is Maine. 27 Jehoachin is exalted.

Cite
100 Wn 8 55 0
9 g . 7 27
Ny ‘

Mit fortuned, “ that
Ier 39. a. inthe ninth pere of his
1 raigne, the tenth day fol the tenth moneth,
Nabuchodonosor king
‘of Wabplon came, he
2 Fe all his hoast, against
Hlerulalem, and pitched against it, and made engins against it on euerp fine.
And the citie was besieged vnto the eleuenth pere of king Zede nia.
Andthe ninth day of the moneth, there was fo great hunger in the atic, that there was no bread forthe people ok the lande.
Aud the citie was broken vp, and al the men okarmes (led) vp night by a
Way through a gate which is] petweene two walles by the kinges garden (the
Chaldees lying about the titie:) and the king went the wap toward the playnt.
And the souldiers of the Chaldees fos lowed after the king, and toke him in the playne ol Jericho: and all his army

Exs. li. d. 3

Ghaclach ,

Wabplon, and the kinges mot 7

the kinges wyues, his chamberte an

them that were mightie in the lande. thole carrped he awap into captinitie’ from Hierusalem to Babylon. ‘

16 And all the actiue menok warre euen seuen thoufand, and craktelmen, and porters athouländ all that were ftrong 58 andaptko warre did the king ofzabrlon bring to Wabylon captiue.

17 * And the king of Wabplon made Mathanta bis fathers brother king mpig “4
. — and chaunged his name to ze:

ia.

18 Zedektia was twentie and one peres Rt olde when he began to raigne, anv he raighed aleuen peres in Hierusalem his mothers name allo was Hamital, the danghter of Jeremia of Libna,

19 And he did eulll in the sight of the
Torde, actording to all as Jehoachin

20 For the wrath of the Lorde was mos ned against Hierulalem cc Juda, vntpll

he tast them out of his fight: And Ze- n

2 5 rebelled against the king of Wa. ze

plon. 1

fo Baba.

were scattered away from him.

6 Sothey toke the king, and brought hun to (Mabuchodono3oz) the king of 0a bylon to Nibla, where they gaue ludgement vpon hin.

7 And they flucthe sonnes of Zeackia before his eyes, and he put out the eyes S of Zedekia, and kettered him wit) chapnes, and caryed Him to Babp-

3 And the leuenth vay of the fifth LM neth (which isthe nineteenth pose of king Nabuchodonosor hing of Wa 10 jon) came Pebularadan aferuaunt che ing of Sabplon, e cbicte captayt ol the men ok warre, vnto dunn

9 And burnt the house ofthe seer ; the binges house, and all the ee
1 and all great houles he with fire. 1

10 ? And all the souldiers of the . 7 that were with the chiele me the the men ok warre, brake do lined
Walles of Hierulalem rounde a 1 ut

sarod : |
, it Bult the rest of the people that were lelt in the eitie,

tokthe common people, did Haawer the thieke taptapne of the

warre tarry away.
12 950 fe taptaine of the souldiers left of

the pode ok the land to drelse the vines

and to tyll the grounde.

Revit b- B
C . . and the brasen iauatorie that Was in the

_ houle ofthe Lorde; did the Chaldees

bieake, t tarrped all the brasse of thers to Wabplon. Fy ue

And the pots, chouels, instrumentes
4 fateh pace, and all the velsels ol bralle that they ministred in, toke

thepa wap,

45. And chere pannes, and bafons:and such thinges as were of golde and of flluer, thein toke the chiefe: captayne

away:

16 Euentwo pillers, one lauatonle, and

sthesockets whith Solomon had made forthe houleofthe Lorde: The brasse

of al these beffels was Without waight.

The height ol the one piller was eight-

teene tubites, and the ponimel thereof:

Was brasle: and the height of the pont:

mel was with wzeathen Woke three

cubites,€ pomegranates vpon the pommel rounde about all ot brasse: And of

the same fathion was the second piller,

With a weather worne.
8 Andthe chiefe taptayne of the men of
Warre take Saraia the chieke priest, and
Zephontah the highett priest laue one,
D. and the thzee kepers ofthe holy things: layne that had the ouersight of the men ok ware, efine men of them that were
1 the kinges prelente which were
—.— in the citie, and hum that was bonne captaine of the hoast which

raat threelcore men ok the people

e men ok warrre, toke thele, and

Ribla

I QThe ende of the fourth booke of the Kinges.

2 Linge „ Ree
4 Ringes |
21 Aud the mg ok Babylon sniote them,

and them that were fled tothe bing of Babylon, With the rem-

sony the pillers of brasse that were in she Houle ofthe Horde, and the fockets, |

19 And out of the etic he toke a chamber: .

out the people ofthe lande to
10 ; lande that were founde in the ci: oft the Hebularadanthe chiefe taptaine
10 2 to the king of abylon

and flue them at Nibla in the lande of
Hamath: And so Buda *
4 100 sib hl ane ane
22 Hobebeit, there remayned peopies the lande ol ada, whom sBabuchobn nosor king of Wabplon left, t made Gedallathe sonne ol Ahikani the fonne of
Saphan ruler duer them.
And all the captaynes of the sonldlers,
Eother men, heard that the king of waz bplon had made Gedalla gouernour, and there tame to Gedalia to gtzpah
Pimact 5 sonne of Pathania Johan: nan the sonne of Karea, Harata the sonne of Thanhumeth the Metopha: tite, and Jaasania the sonneok Maachati, they and their nien. 5
24. And Gedalia sware to them and to the men whom they had with them, and laide vnto them: Feare not ye betaule pe are the seruauntes of the Chal- nn

he

ces.“

king ol Wabylon, and ve shall be well.
25 But it chauncedin the seuenth moneth, that Ismael the sonne of Hathania the sonne ol Elilama of the kinges blood, tame, and ten men with him, and smote
Gedalla that he dyed: and so did he the
Jewes and the Chaldees that were with him at Mtzpah. *
26 And all the people both {niatl € great, and the taptapnes of Warre, arose and tame to Egypt:sor they Were afrayde of the Chaldees. 9 sme
2-7 frowithtading, pet in the seuen e thirtith ere after Jehoachin king ol Juda was tarryed awap, the seuen and twentith dap of the twelfth moneth emi merodach king of Wabplon the same pere that he degan to raigne, did lylt ppthe head of Jehoachinking of Juda out of prplon.

28 And spake kindelpto him, and fet his

seate aboue the feate ol the binges that were with him in Wabyion,

29 And chaunged his pryson garmentes, te he did oe fe bread befoze hin al the Dapeso ple. Nee

30 Dis 1 was a continuall portion that Was alligned him or the king, cue ry day a certaine as long as he lyned.

The

GJ.

a, be pe asrapde of setuaũtes

dees: dwell inthe lande, and feruethe zr e

Juda.

a: Dam, Seth,
Gene v. a. ‘ ; Enos.
. FN halehel, Ja.
‘ Neel /f as Aca Vatvel, Pv
: 18 red. a
3 = Henoh, Wee
0 Ne thulalah, La-
“a GENT - fered mech.
6 L Noah, Sem,
‘ Han, and Ja-
. rae pheth. 2
5 *The sonnes of Japheth: Gomer,
Geuec x. a. Magog, Madai, Jauan, and Thubal,
Mesech, and Thiras. 7 s The lonnes of Gomer: Alchenaz, Re.
„ phath, and Thog arma.
8.7 And the fonnes of Jauan: Ella, and

a

I. Chronicles.

‘> The fitt booke ofthe C

in Latine Verba dierum: or after the Grekes „Faralipomenon:

hronicles, ca

which the Hebrues call Dibre Haiamiin, and recken both the boołes but for one.

0 ate — * 8 N a } 12 1 df 655 7 * 5
Te first Chapter. oy

AI che genealogie ot Adam and Poa ontill Abraham. 27 Ind krom Abraham vnto Esau. 35 His children. J Ringes and Dunes came ol him. **

Tharsis, Citint, and Dodauim.

8 il

„ «rat, Phut, and Chanaan. -

9 Thie sonnes of Chus: Seba, and han la, Sabbetha, and Raama: and Sab-

ba, and Dedan. -
1o Aud Chus begat Nimrod: and he began to be nuightie vpon the earth.
‘Hn Mtisraimbegat Tudim, and Avani,
Tahabim, and Haphthuun,

«

iz Phathrulim, aud Callum, of whirh tanie the Philistines and the Caphtho-

. rites, 7 7
Ce Chanaanbegat Z don his clock sonne, and Heth.

iA Jebusi also, and Amort, and Girgaki,
15 Meui, Arahi,and Dini, ö
16 And Aruadi, Zamari, and Hemathi.
7 The sonnes of Sem: Elam, and AL fur, Arphacsad, Lud, and Aram, c Us,
« Hil and Gether, and Melech.

18 Arphaclad begat Selah, and Selah
„ begat Eber.
19 And vnto Eber were borne two sonnes: the name ofthe one was Peleg, becaufe that in his dayes the land was deuided, ald his brothers name was Joktan.

22 Chal, and Abimael, and Seba
23; And Ophtir, Hauila and Jobab:

25 Eber, Peleg, Rehn.
26 Serug, Mahor, Thera,

The fonnes ok ham: Chus, and Mtz-

theca, And the sonnes of Raama: ee

named 4 0
N 11 { „

ae

: oT Ste 1811 x . :
20 Joktan begat Almodad, and Haleyy «. _
Hazermaneth, and Jcrah, oO), d

a1 Havozam also and Wat, and Dikla, <

24. All these were the sonnes ol Joktan:
Sem, Arphaclad, Selah, 222 el.

27. Abani otherwwyse called Abraham. E
28 n
Mattes? e SP e

29 And these are their generations: the. Cr eldest sonne of Ilmael was Mabaloth,

then Kedar, Adbeel, and Mibsam.

30 Milma, and Dumah, Massa, Hadad,,

and Thema, 1 nd.

31 Jetur, Naphis, and Redma: These. are the sonnes of Ilmael..

32 The childzen ok Ketura Abrahauis. concubine, the bare Zimram, Joklan;
Medan, Midian, Jilbok, and Suah.
The children of Joklan: Seba, and De-

2 Dam, hh

33 Thechildren ol Midian:Epha ande. K phar, Henoch, Abida, and Eldaa: All. Cees these are the childzen of Betura.: .

34 And so Abraham begat Plahac. The. sonnes of Jlahjat:sau and srael.

35 The sonnes of Efan:* Eliphas, Achu- c el, Jehus, Jaelam, and Korah :.

36 The childzenof Elphaz: Theman, .
Dinar, Zephi, and Gatham, Benas,
Cinnina,andAmalekh.. 9

37 7 1 chüͤdren — oe rah, Samma, and Gt za.

38 he fonnes of Seir: Lotan, oval, : ce 0

wa

“> zibeon and ina, Difon, Ezer, and Dr.

fan, — . WL.
39 The children of Lotan: Bont aud er man:and Thinma was Lotaue ging i
40 The children ol Sobab aan YE . path, Ebal, Sephi, and Onam. The. formes of Zibeon: Ata and un. The:
41 And the sonnes ol Ana: Dison, be?

bonnes of tlxan, and

) Cheran. f The lonnes of Eser: Wilhan aenan, 8

and Hakan. The sonnes of Dion: Us,

‘ Aram. ,
: Thele are the binges that raigned in
4 the land okckddom, bekore any king raig-

„ nedouer the children of Israel: Bela, n ie forme of Weor, andthe name of his

‘ tie was Dinhaba.
4 Aud ela Dped,and Fobad the forme ok Zerah of Bozra raigned in his

‘ de. i and when Jobab also was dead, Hue

0 sam okthe lande ofp Themanites raig-

ned in his steade.

‘46 And when Hufam was dead, Hadad s thefounc ok edad, which finote Midian inthe fielde of goab, raigued in his seade: and the name of his citie was A-

+ ith.
‘47 So Hadad dyed, and Sama of Male

ratpele are the sonnes of
Ilrael: Ruben, Simeon, Leu, Juda, Ylachar, and Zabulon,

e min, Pephthali, Gad,
1 and Aler.
The sonnes of Inda: Er, Onan, and
. Dela Thele tine were dome onto hun a of ® Wath Sua py Chanaanttesle. And
Er the eldest sonne of Juda was eutl in the sight of the Lose, and he flue him.
Miia, 4 And Thamar his daughter in lawe
: bare him Phares, and Zara: and id all the sonnes of Juda were fine, -
144 oe fonnes of Pharez: ez ron, and
The sonnes ol Zara: Zimrt, Ethan,

heman, Chalcho a: Whi
8. were ftde in all. 1, and Dara: which

Mra j ae, 7 And the lonnes of Charmi,“ Achan,

(that troubled Ir y |
: 8 del, tranigressing in
’ chechnng that wasdalnpned- .
5 Abe fonnes ol Ethan: Asaria,
Aim allo of Hesron that were ab CHelnday, Din: Jerameel, Nam, and i. minded ees Anaad, and A-
0 ¢ *
5 chadsen ot Jude allon a lorde of the

And Kaallon begat Salma, and Sal-

I. Chronicles.
Difon: Hamran, Elban, Je-

The .ij. Chapter.
2 The genealogie of Juda, vnto Ilai the kather ol Dauid.

Dan, Joseph, Wenia-

rekaà raigned in his steade. 6
48 And Sanna dyed and Saul of Rehobot bp the ryuer syde, raigned in his

e °
49 And when Saul was dead, Waall 85 nantefonne of Aebbo;eaigned ins

50 And As aalhanan dyed, g Hadad raig-

ned in his steade: and the name of his.
Citic was Phat, and his wyues a
Was Mehetabel tie daughter of qa: ‘ tred the daughter of Mesahab. ;
5 Hadad dyed alfo. And there were vukes « in Edom: Duke Thinma, Duke Allah,“
Duke Jetheth,
52 Duke Aholibama, Duke Ela, Duke:

Pinon, ‘
-§3 Duke Benas, Duke Leman Duke

Mibsar,

$4 Duke Magdiel Dune Fram, Thele. g

are the Dukes ol Edom.

ma begat Wa.
12 Boaz begat Obed, and Obed begat
Isai. 8
13 And Ilai begat his clock sonne Elie, C

„„ © „% „ „ „ „ „„

naa the third, a e the fourth, and Radar the. f. a

Ds ‘

15 Ozem thesixt, and Dauid the seuenth:

16 Mole sisters were Zeruia and Abi-

gail. The fonnes of Zeruia: Abilai, Joab, and Asacl three.

75 And Abigail bare Anaza, the father nee

of which Amaza, was Jether au Zemaclite. N

18 And Caleb the lonne ok Hezron begat
Aluba, of his Wyfe Aluba and Jertoth, whole sonnes are these: Jaler, Sobab, and Ardon.

1 And when Aluba was dead Caleb toke Euphrata, whieh bare hun Hur. D

20 And bur begat Uri, and Uribegat. **

Wezalecl. 0
21 Ikterward came Hezron to the daughter of Machtr the father of Glleab, and toke her when he n ea: peres olde: and she bare him Segub. :
22 And Pennb begat Pair, which we thret and twentie citics in the lande of:

Gilead.
23 And he ouertame Geslur and Aae f

xl:

ab, and Aminadab the second, and Sis. Rex

. Par. ii. a.

the townes of air, from them (which townes therof, euen threestore townes:

father of Gilead. |

24 And after that Hesron was dead at
Caleb in Euphrata, Abia Esroms wyfe bare him Ashur the father of Thekoa.

E25 And the founes of Perabmeel the el-

dest sonne ol hezron, Were: Ban the el
* Delt, una, Oren, Oden and Ahia.
26 Ad Herahuieel had pet another Wyfe
« named Atara, which was the mother of Onan.

27 And the sonnes of Kam the eldest

sionne of Jerahmeel, were: Maas, Ja-

J.37 And Zabad begat Aphlal, and Iph-

nin, aud char. .
28 The sonnes of Onam were: Sammat, and Jada. The sonnes of Sane mai: Madab, and Abilur.

29 Aud the Wyfe of Abilur was called
Abihail, and Me bare him Ahban, and
» Molid.

‘30 The sonnes of Madab: Seled, and
„ Appain. And Seled dyed without chil
« Deen,

zl The sonne ofAppaim, Heli: And the sonne ol Jesi, Selan: And the fonne ok Sesan, Ahlai.

32 And the founes of Jada the brother ok Samal, Jether e Jonathan: And
« Pether dyed without children. 2
33 The founes of Jonatham: Peleth,
Zsa. These were the sonnes of Jekraähniel.

34 Selsan had no sonnes, but daughters:
And Sesan hada seruaunt that was an Egyptian, named Jarha:

35 To whom he gaue his daughter to
« Wye, and fhe bare him Athat.

36 Aud Athai begat Pathan, and Nathan begat Zabad.

la begat Obe

38 Obed begat Jehu, and Jehn begat
„ Asaria.

39 Azaͤria begat Helez, and Helez begat
Elala.

40 Elasa begat Sifamal, and Stsamat
‘ begat Salluun.

I. Chronicles.

dwelt in them] and Renath and the

All these were the sonnes ol Machir the

41 Sallumdegat Pecamia, 1 gat 15 Seramnta de:
42_ The forncs of Caleb the mother ar
Jerahmeel: Mela his clock ee woch was 3 of eb and the sonnes of Maresa the fati 4 bon, . be tather Of he-
The sonnes of Hebron: Corah, and en dee 1 Sama. — V.
4 ama begat Naham the fat 4
Herkoam, and Rekent begat ei mai. ; g
45. The fore of Hanunai was Maon:.
And Maon was the father of . N
46 And Epha a concubine of Calebs, bare

Haran, and Mosa, and Gases: Haran

begat Gases,
47 The sonnes of Jahdai, were: Regem,
. Phelet, Epha, c Sa-
48 And Maacha was Calebs contubine, nan he begat Seber and Thirhana: f 0
49 And she bare also Saaph the father. of Madmanna, and Sena the father of:
Machbena, and the father of Gibea:
And Achsa was Calebs daughter.
50 Thele were the fonnes of Caleb the. sonne of Hur the eldest sonne of Ephrata: Sabal the father of Kiriath Jarim, .
51 Salma the father of Wethlehem, and.
Mareph the kather of Weth Gader.
52 And Sobal the father of Kiriath Ja-

rim had fonnes, and he " faethe, „en,

halfe of the countrey of the mansions.
33 The kinredes ok Kiriath Jarim are « these: The Jethrites, the Puthites, the Sumathites, e the Milrahethites:,

And of them cane the Zarathites, and.

the Esthaulites.

54. The sonnes of Salma: Wethlehent, and Metophathi, the glory of thehoule , of Joab, and halle the countrey of the
Manahethites, the Zaraites.

¢
55 The kinredes ofthe” wapters diwelt. .

at Jabes, the Thirathites, the Simea-

thites the Huchathites, Which are the.
Kenites that came of Hemath the for | 4

ther ol the house of Kechab.

The

D ke

. Iosu. xy d.

bz

— - - FF K K 2 „ „ K „

of Daud Whiche were
5 borne vnto hym in Hehe

I bron: p eldest, Ammon
5 CS) of Ahmoam the Bel
Carntelitesse:

raelitesse: the seconde,
Daniel of Abigail the
1 The thirde Abfalom the fonne of Maacha, the daughter of Thalmai king of
Gesur:the fourth, Adonia the sonne of
Haggith: . J
3 The kikt, Sephatia of Abital: the sixt,
Jethream, by Egla his wpe,
4. Thele lire wer borne vnto him in Hebon, and there he raigned seuen peres and sire mouethes: and in Hierulasem he raigned thirtie and three peres. tore 5 “Aud Hele were borne vnto him in Hieriisalem: Sima, Sobab, Mathan, and
Solomon, fonre,ofBbath{ua the daughter ok Ammiel,
6 Ibhar allo and Elilama, Eliphelet,
5.7 Moga, Pepheg, and Jephia,
8 Elllama, Eliada, and Eliphelet: nine lim number.) j
9These ave all the fonnes of Dauid,beide the fonnes of the concubines: and
Thantar was their litter. to Solomons sonne was Reboboam, whole sonne was Avia, and Ala was
, his lone and Jeholaphac his fonne,

é

u Whole sonne was Jorant, e his lonne

f Was Ahazia, and Idas was his fonne,
2 Aniazta his sontse, Aʒariah his fonne,

‘ Che genealogie of the fonnes of Juda.

e sonnes of Juda:
* Phares , Hesron,

4 And Reaiathe lonne ok Sobal begat Ja-

hath, and Jahath begat Abumat and Laz

had: and there
Sorath re are the kinredes of the

Andthese w

eʒrahel, F Ma, and Idbas: and the
, phuni.

A

I. Chronicles. q Lhe ij. Chapter.
1 The genealogie of Dauid. and ot his potteritic vnto the tonnes of otia,
Hese were the lonnes

f The. ij. Chapter.

Ok Achur. o Ol Jabes and his prayer.

1 Ok Chelub. 24 and Simeon: their habitationg, 38and conquestes.

oe | Charmi, Hur, Sobal.

and Jotham his sonne, :

; Abas Washisfonne,pesckiahis tonne,

ps „ his fonne, :
14. And Anton was his f a. e J dune, and Jolia. C
15 And the sonnes of Josig: wer 5
‘sem ee x 9 0 fecond Helier ‘
Kim, the thirde Zedekia, and F
Saitum. etait
16 The fonnes of Jehoakun, were, Jetomah his sonne and Z edetziah hissonne.
17 The sonne of Feconiah: Allir, and Sa-« lathiel his sonne. 4
18 Malchiram also and Pedaia, Sen:
Jar, Jecamia, Hosama, and Pedabia.
19 The sonnes of Pedaia, were: Zorobabel, aud Hemel: The lonnes of Zorobabel, Mesullam, Hananta, and Selomith their lister: ‘
20 And Hasubah, Ohel, Werechia, Pasadla, and Julabheled, fiue in number.]

21 The fonnes of Hanania: Pelatia, and!

Jelata: Whole fonne was Repiaia, ‘ and his sonne Arnau, c his sonne was.
Obadia, and his soune Sechanta.

22 The sonne of Sechania was, Semata, and the lonnes ot Semata, Were: Pattus, Igal, Wartaly, Meariah, and Saphat, sixe.

23 And the sonnes of Heariah, were: E-
Honat, iz ciah, and Azricam, the.

24. And the sonnes of Elionai, were: Hodauiahu, Eliasib, Pelaiah, Accub, Johanam, Dalaia, and Anan, seuen.

&
‘

Ephratha the father ol Wethlehem.
5 And Achur the father of Thekoa had. two Wyues: Helah, and Maarah. ‘
6 And Naarah bare him Ahulam, He pher, Themen, and Ahasthari: These. were the sonnes of Paarah. 2
7 And the sonnes of Helab, were: Zereth, Jezoar, and Ethnan. ‘
8 And Cos begat Anob, aud Zobeba and. the kinred of Aharhel the sonne of Pa , rum. :
9 And Jabes was moze honozable then. his biethren: And his mother called. his name Jabes, faying:becaule J bare:

1 1 C. i hum with sorolw 5 10 And.

W „„ „ „ „

, | ci * ° ~] — — ~ '
. Fuda. I, hr onicies.
J 2
10 And Paves called on the God of Ht was Misma. 8

racl, saping: If thou wylt blesse me in 26 Andthe fonne of Mila was Hamuel.

‘ deede, and enlarge my coastes, and shalt let thyne bande be with me, and wylt kepe ine krom euill that it hurt me not.
And God graunted hin his desire.

n Chelub the brother of Huah begat Mehir, which was the father of Esthon.
<12 And Esthon begat wWeth rapha and Pa leha, c Thehinna the father of the citte ok Nahas: thele are the men of Kecha.

Ces The sonnes of Kenas: Debuiel, and

D

Oeng8. g.

„Sara: And the foune of Othniel
Wag, Hathath.

‘14. Aud Meonathl begat Ophrah: And

Seraia begat Joab the father of the vallepokeraftes men, to called) becaule they were craktes men.

1 And the lonnes of Caleb the fone of
„ Jephune were, Fru, Ela, and Maam:
And the fonnes of Ela was Kenas.
16 And the fonnes of Jehalcel, were,
« Zipb,and Ziphah, Thiria and Alarel. and the sonues of Esra: were, Jether,
Mered, Epher, and Jalon: and he begat ghtriani, and Sammat, and Jilbah the kather of Esthemoa.

183 And his wyfe Jehudin bare Jered

the father of Gedoz, and eber the fa-

ther of Socho, and Jecuthtel the father of Zanoal), And thele are the lonnes of
Wethiah p daughter of Pharao, which
Mercd tolte,

19 The sounes of the Wife of Hodia the sifer of Maham p father of Kenah, were

Cue Esthemoia the Maachathite.

20 The lonnes of Sinton, were: Am-

mon, and Biund, Benhanan, and Thi-

lon: And the sonnes of Jilsi, were: Zo-

heth , and Benzohcth.

21 »The sonnes of Selah the sonne of
Juda, were: Er the father ol Lecha, €
„ Laada the kather of Marcela, andthe hinredes okthe houcholdes ofthem that wrought linnen in the house of Albea.

22 And Foktin and the men of Choze-

bah, and Joas, and Saraph whiche had the dominionin Moab, and Jasubt ehem: these also are wordes of olde.
23 Thele were potters, and dwelt there among trees and hedges, nye vuto the
Bing, becanse of bis worklic.
24 The fonnes of Simeon were: Hemnel, Jamin, Jarib, Serah, and San:
25 Whole sonne was Sallum, and the
« founcofhim was Mibsam, e his sonne

and his sonne was Zachur, x the sonne ok him was Semehi. the lone.

27 Semeht had lixteene sonnes and fire

Daughters: But his brethren had not E many childzen, neither was all the kinred of them lyke to the chuldren of Juda in multitude. g
28 And they dwelt at Beerseba, Molada. and at Bazar Sual, 2
29 At Buha, at E ʒem, and at Tholad,
30 At Bathucl, at Morma, x at Ziklag, zt At Wethmarcaboth, Haser, Sulim, at.
Wethbirei, Fat Saaramm: Lhele were their cities vnto the raigne or Daud.
3 And their billages Were: Etan, x Ain,
Rimmon, Tochen, x Alan, fue townes -
33 And all their villages that were round. about the faine cities, vnto Waal. This is the habitation of them, and their ge- ¢ nealogte: :
34. Mosobab, anb Jamlech, and Jola the forme of Amafia,
35 And Joel, and Jehu the fonne of Jove W sonne of Sarala, the sonne of. iel. é
36 And Elioenat,and Jaakoba, Jsohata,. and Asalah, Adicl, Isiniel, and wWenara,‘
And Ziza the lonne ok Siphi, the. sonne of Allon, the sonne ot Jedaia, the. sonne of Zimri, the sonne of Semala.
38 These are famous captaineg in their kinredes, setting vp greatly the Houle ol. their kathers. 5
39 And they went to the entring in of Gedor, euen vnto the eastside ofthe bailey, to seeke pasture fo2 their sheepe: \
40 And they founde fat pasture and good, aud a Wide lande, quiet and kruitefull:. forthey of Ham had dwelt there before.
41 And these now afore written by name came in the dayes of Hezekia king of.
Juda, and smote thetentes ofthem aud. the habitations that were found there. and destroyed them vtterlp puto this. day, and dwelt in ther roomes: becalle. ther was pasture there for their Mecve
42 And fone ofthechudzenok med went to mount Heir, cuen fine umd men, hauing for their captaines, POAT tuia, Peavia Rephata,and Cisse, he. sounes of Isi: ites
43° And smote the restokthe Amalen 4 that Were eltaped and they dwelt ter: bito this dap. Th e

He sonnes of Ruben, the eldest sonne of Pe rael ( forasimuch as he

was the eldest, e had dekled bts fathers

Abedde, his birthzight was genen vnto the

«6 Weera his sonne, whom Thiglath Pilneler king ol Allprta taried away:for he was a great lozde among the Wube-

7 And when his brethzen in their kinredes reckened the genealogie of their

generations, Jeiel and Zachariah

were the chieke

s And Waal the tonne of san , the forne

ok Sema the sonne of Joel, dwelt in A-

« roct, e so foorth vnto Nebo, and Waal-

meon.

And eastwarde he inhabited vnto the

entring in ofthe wudernesse, from the river Euphrates:for they had much cate tel in the land of Gilead.

io And in the dayes of Saul, they warred

with the Agarites, whiche were ouer-

N the tener ed and they bie

F es thoughout all the ea

„land of Gllgal. aoe b

n Ardthe chüldren of Gad dwelt ouce

„ Againtt them in the land ok Balan, even

— ä — 4 —

‘

bite Salcha:

2 And in Balan Johel was the chicfett gid Saphamte next: then Janat, and

And their brethren ofthe Honda holde of aut fathers Were Michael, qpefullam,
, nen. Jorai, Jahtan, Zia, Eber, fez

I Chronicles. *

They. Chapter.

eth right taken from Ruben and geuen to the sonnes ot Fofeph, ans
Rey aa and Gad. z Ind of the halle tribe ob anal. pb Che genea

14. Thelt are the chudren of Abi ‘ sonne ok Huri, the fonne N a * ar tbefonne of Michael, .

COE Vemat, the sonne Ze do, the sonne of Buz: We ‘

15 oe ie pt pee the sonne ok.

{ captapne of the housholde.

oftheir fathers. . eh .
And they dwelt in Gilead in Galan.

and in her townes, and in an the sub-

urbes of Saron and in their borders.

17. And thele were reckened by linredes. inthe dapes of Jotham king of Juda, and inthe dayes ol Jeroboam lung ok.
Ilrael. 0 :

18 The sonnes of Kuben, and ok Gad, and ok halle the tribe of Manasle, were fighting men, and hable to beare shielde and.
Abode , and to shoote with bowe, exercifed in warre, euen foure and fourtie « thouland, seuen hundred and threescore, that went ont to the warre. .

19 Andthey fought with the Hagarites, . with Jetur, Mephis, aud Nodab. ‘

20 And they Were Helped (of the Lorde) againt them, and the Hagarites Were deliuered into their hande, and lo were all. that were with them: For they eryedto
God in the battaple, and he heardthem, becaule they put their trust in him. :

21 And they toke of their cattell e of their. 2p tamels, fiftie thonlande aud two hun-
Dred, and fiftie thousande feepe , and two thoulande alles, and of the fortes . ol men an hundred thoulande. 0

22 And there fell many wounded becanle the warre was ol God: And they diwelt in their steades, vntill the time that they. were taryed away. a

23 Andthe children ok the halle tribe ok:
Manasse dwelt in the lande, from Bafan vnto Waal Hermon, and Senn aud vnto mount Hermon: (fo2) they were. groben to a great multitude. ‘

24 And these were the heades of the: housholdes of their fathers : Epher, and Heli, Eliel, and Asriel, Percta, « and odauta , and Jahdiel, Heong; men and baliaunt , amous men, and. heades of the houlholdes of their fa-

“a

2 I Chronicles. 5 vtransgressed against the God riteof Thiglath Piluefer king of Aly:

25 And the

: of cher father g, and went a whoringak- ria, and caried them awap:euen the Kuter the gods of the people ok the lande benites the Gadites, and the halke tribe whom God destroyed before them. of Manasse, and brought them vnto-
26 And the God of Israel Mrred vp the Hala), Pabor, Hara, andtotheriner: spirite ot hulking ol Allpria, x the spi- Golan, vnto this dax.

The . vi. Chapter.

ro Che genealogic or the konnes ok Leui. 31 Their order in the minillerie of the tabers nacle. 49 Jaton and his sonnes prieues. 54.57. Their habitation.

He sonnes of Teui:
Gersom, Caath, aud

— eee —

na A W W M m en a

emma, 7

Gen. xlvi. b

aA ARR K „ A ARR AH

Merari.

The sonnes of Caz ath: Amram, Bsahar, Hebron, x Uriel.
— The childrẽ of Amrain: Aaron, Moyses, & Miriam. The sonnes allo of Aaron: Madab, Abihu,
Eltcazar, and Ithamar.

4 Eltaʒar begãt Phinches, Phinehes begat Abilua.
5 Ablilua begat Wok, Woki begat Uzzi,
‘6, Ussibegat Zarahia, Zarahia begat
„ Meräloth, seul
7 Meraioth begat Amaria, and Amaria
„ begat Ahitob,
8. Ahitob begat Zadoc, and Zadoc begat
Ahunaas,
9 Ahimaaz begat Azaria:and Aʒaria begat Johonan,
‘jo Johonanbegat Azaria, whiche mint’ stred in the temple that Solomon buplt in Hitrulalem.

cz

21 And his fonne Joah, and his sonne Iddo, and his sonne Zerah, and his lonne
Peathrat, ‘

22 The fonnesofCaath: Aminadab, ande his sonne Rorah, and his sonne Allir,

23 And his soune Eltana, and his lonne-
Ebialaph, and his sonne Assir, .

24. And Thahath was his sonne, and UNriel his sonne, and Nzʒia his sonne, and
Saul was his sonne. .

25 The sonnes of Elcana: Amalai and A. himoth. . 4

26 And Eltang: The sonnes ok Eltana,
Zophai, whole sonne was Mahath,

27 And his sonne Eliab, and Jeroham his sonne, and Elcana his fonne, 4

28 And the sonnes of Samuel: the eldest .
Ualni, and Avia, E

29 The sonnes of Merari: Mahali c his. sonne Libni, and his sonne Suͤnhi, and his sonne 33a, j

30 And his fonne Simba, and His fone ,
Paggia, and his fonne Alata.

* „ Az aria begat Amaria, Amaria begat 31 And these be they whom Dauid let for
Ahttob, to sing in the houle ol the Lorde, after
12 Ahitobbegat Zadoc, and Zadot begat that the arke had rest. „
. Sallum, 32 And they ministred before the dweiling «

gkeore. 13 Dallunrbegat* Helkta, and Pelkia be- plate ofthe tabernacle of thecongrega’< 45 gat Azaria. tion With linging, vntill Solomon had

A Reg e. . I. Azaria begat Sarala, and Saraia be- bupylt the houle of the Looe in Bierula-

get Jchosedech,

C. And Pebhoscdech departed when the

Exod. vi. c.

Lorde tarped away Juda and Hterufalem by the hand of Nabuchodonoser.
16 The sonnes of Leu: Gersom, Caath, and Merari.

Aud these be the uames of the fonnes ok Gersom: ibm, and Simhi.

d Andthe sonnes ok Caath were: Amram, Jzahar, ebron, and Css,

<9 The sonnes of Merari: Mahali, and
Maulsi:and these are the kinredes of Le-

lem: and then they wayted on their okfites, according to the order ofthem. «
33 These are they that wayted with err, chudzen, of the formes of Caath He . man a singer, whiche was the sonne ol.
Joel, the forme of Hanzel, eae
34 The sonne of eicana,the tonne o e roham, the sonne of Eliel, the donne ot ws

Thoab, a. elonne of Zuph, thesonne of Elac,

f ibe sonne of Mahath, p sorme ofan a
36 The lonne ok Eltana, the sonne o x

ui concerning their fathers. the foune ol Maria, the foune ot Ze
20 The fonne of Gerfom was Libni, phania. — © whole sonne was Jahath, chis ferme 37 The

II ey

— path the fonne of Af.
‘¢ of Tha a 2 .
37 ante konne ok Ebialaph , the fonne of
Bona), „the fonne of
; ne of sahar > the

38 G oe bt Len, the sonne of ee stoode on his
0 other Alaph stoo

a > aia “i Afaph was the sonne ok Warachla, the fonne of Sinha,

40 The sonne of Michael; the sonne of a ssaata the sonne of Melchia, =
41 Lhe sonne of Athan the sonne of Zaz rah the fonne of Adaia, all
42 1 of +) eel of Zun-
5 ( onne o >

hg for of Jahath, the sonne of
‘+ seefom, the forme of Leut. ö
5 44 Andtheir brethren the sonnes af Merari stoode on the left hand, euen Ethan the sonne of 1 sonne of Abdi, the
0 ne ol Maluch,

4 helene of Haʒabia, the sonne of A-
© masia,thefonne of Helkia,

46 The sonne of Amst, the sonne ok Banthe lonne ol Samer,

47 The sonne of Mahlt, the sonne of Muft, the sonue of Merari, the fonne of
„ Teut.

48 Their brethren allo the Leuites were

appoynted vuto all maner of seruice ok

the tabernatle of the houle of od.

4 But Aaron and his formes burnt ir te nse vpon the aulter ok burut offering, and on the aulter of inceule Cand were appopnted for all that was to do in the place most holy, and to make an attonement for them of Ilrael, according to all that Doyles the seruaunt of God had comniaunded. 1

50 Thlle are the fonnes ok Aaron: Elea-
Far his sonne, whole fonne was Phinthes, and his fonne Abisua,

S „ „ „ „ „

St And his sonne Woeti, whole sonne was

57 And the sonne of him Maraioth, and his sonne Amaria, and the lonne of him a e

And Zadoc his sonne, and Ahimaa his sonne. e Ne
54. And thele are the pwelling plates of f dem Hougont their townes k toastes,
_ Men ofthe sonnes of Aaron thoughout

„ Gs3i,andhisfonne Zerahiah,

ra, + Delktinecdes ofthe Caathites: for fothe

e lot fell forthem.

55, And they gane them“ Hebron in the

land ok Juda, andt rounde about it. he suburbes thereot

56. But the fieldes ofthe titie and the vilages pertapning thereto, they gaue to
Caleb the sonne of Jephune. .

57 And to the sonnes of Aaron they gaue ; G the cities of refuge, euen Hebron and
Libna with their suburbes, Jathir and
Esthemoa with their suburbes: ‘

58 And hien with her suburbes, and Dabir with her suburbes, ‘

55 Alan aud her suburbes, Wethlemes! and her suburbes. ;

60 And out of the tribe of weniamin, Geba and her suburbes, Alemeth and her suburbes, Anathoth and her suburbes:. all their cities throughout their bine: redes were thirteene. 0

61 And vnto the sonnes of Caath the remnaunt of the kyurede of the tribe, were cities geuen out of the halfe tribe ol Manasse by lot, cuen ten cities. :

62 And the fonnes of Gerlom throughout their kinredes, had out ofthe tribe ol Ilachar, out of the tribe of Aler x out of the tribe ol Pephthali, and out ofthe ‘ tribe Manasseim Baan, thirteene cities.

63 And vnto the sonues of Merari were geuen by lot throughout their kinredes
Gut of the tribe of Ruben, and out of the: tribe of Gad, and out of the tribe of Za- ; bulon, twelue cities. /

64. And the childzen of Ilrael gaue the.
Tenites cities with their suburbes,

65 And that by lot, out of the tribe of the ; childzenof Juda, and out of the tribe ol. the children of Simeon, and out of the. tribe of the childzen of 2Sentamin ,thete«

cities, Whiche they called by their names. :

66 And they (that were) of the kinredes ol the lonnes of Caath, had cities ¢ their coastes out of the tribe ol Ephraun. oe ax.

67 And they gaue vnto them cities okrefuge: Sichem in mount Ephraim and her suburbes, Gaser and her suburbes,

68 Jocimeam and her suburbes, Bethhoron and her suburbes, .

69 Aialon ànd her suburbes, Geth Nimmon and her suburbes. ‘

7o And out of the halle tribe of Manaffe, «
Auer and her suburbes, and wileatli.

and her suburbes, for the kinred of the renmaunt ofthe sonnes of Caath. ‘ a1 Andvnto the sonnes of Gersom wert. geuen out of the kinred of the halke. tribe ol Manasse: Golon in alan and. her suburbes, and Astharoth aud her

suburbes. Pp; 7x Out

* Reg 24 4

ö

Ffachar .

72 Out ok the tribe of Plachar , Kedes, i, and her uuburbes, Dabrath and her fsuburbes,

‘73 Namoth allo and her suburbes, IW nem and her Suburbes.

74. And but of Aser, Malal and her sub-
. urbes, Abdon and her suburbes,

75 Hukock and her luburbes, Nehob and her luburbes. ;
76 Out of the tribe of Hephthall, Kedes in Galileg and her suburbes, Pam: non and her suburbes, Kiriathaun and her suburbes.

‘2-7 And vnto the rest of the childzen of

C4

Perari were geuen out of the tribe ol

5 b : The vii. Chapter. .

2 Che genealogie of Iachar. Beniamin. ; ephthali. 14 Manasses. . ’

‘ * 20 Ephraim. v And Ter, 5 ris ‘
M6 7 e sonnes of Jlachar: nealogie and generations, e taptapnes-

Lola hua, Jasub,

S| Siniwon, foure.
And p fonnes of Tho-
Ke, la: si, Vephala,

a nant

— dam, and Sehumel, which were heades in the housholdesof their fathers Of Thola (ther were nnen of might in their generations, * Whole number was in the dates of Dauid two t twentie thousande and fire hundzed.
The sonues of Usst: Fsrabta. The sonnes of Hsrahia, Michael, Obadia,
Joel, e Jeliah, fine men, all captapnes.
4. And with them in their generations after the houshold of their fathers, were lixe and thirtie thoulande souldiers and
© valiaunt men of warre: Foz they had many wynes and sonnes. l
5 And their brethren among all the kinredes of Jlachar were vallaunt men ok
Warre, recltened in all by their genealogies fourescore and (cucu thoufaͤnde. ther, and Jediel, thee.
W. 57 The sonnes ofzGela:zbon, Uzi, U; - ziel, Jerumoth ,¢ Pri, siue heades ol the
‘ pouthold of their fathers, mien of might, and were reclenened by their gencalogies twentie aud two thouland and thirtie and foure.

Wwe

"an K „ K „ K se AR AK AH

The sonnes of Wecher:Zemira, Joas,
Elie zer, Elionai, Diet, Jeremoth, Abia, Auathoth, aud Alamath: All thele are the children of Becher.

9 And the number or them after their ge-

I. Chronicles.

Jeriel, Jamal, Jeb-

The lonnesj of Bemanun: Wela, We:

Beniamin.

Zabulon, Ninimonand her suburbes,
Thabor and her suburbes. .
78 And on theother syde Jordane by Jericho, euen on the east syde of Jordane, were geuen them out of the tribe ol Nuben, Bezer in the wüdernesse with her suburbes, Jahzah with her suburbes,
59 KRedemoth allo with her luburbes:
Mephaath with her suburbes. ;
30 Put ot the tribe of Gad, Ramothi tn);
Gilead wich her Suburbes, Mahanaim with her suburbes, 5
31 Helbon with her suburbes, and Jazer with her fuburbes. 0 N

of the housholdes oftheir fathers, men’ of might Cwereltventic thoulande and: two hundred. mi |

Io The sonnes of Jediel: Wuhan. The. founes of Wilhan: Jeus, Wenlamin,

Ehud, and Chanaana, Zethan, Tharsis, and Ahisahar. re

1 All these are the fonnes of Jedlel aun: « tient heades and men ok Warre, leuenteene thoulande and two hundzed, thatwent out harnessed to battaple. Cs,

12 And Suppim and Puppim were the. childzen of Ir: and the Husites were « the children ol her. .

3 The lonnes of Pephthali: Jahziel,
Gun, Jezer, and Sallum, the children Cen xexh of Wilha. * 7

14 The sonnes ol Manasse: Asriel, whom ¢ his Wife bare vnto him: Wut Arannah.
His contubine bare Machir the kather. of Gilead. .

15 And Machir tobe wyues kor Huppim, « and Suppun: And the name or his lter. was Maacha, and the name of an other ae pm el “ari * and Zelo-. phahad had daughters. N .

16 And Maatha the wyfe of Pachie bart.

a sonnt, and called his naue 7 . and the name of his brother was 0 res, aud his sonnes were Alam, au
Recent. These.

17 The sonnes of Ulam: Gedam. 90 8 are the fonnes of Gilead, the foane ™-
Machir, the fonne of Manasse: d

18 And his fitter Molecath bare Jew:
Abieser, and Mahelah. 1 Aldd-

„ = — gam

Besant

e And the sonnes of Senuda, were: A
Jf re Helhent, Lich, and Aham.

70 The fonues of Ephraim : Suthalah. whole foune was Bered and Thahah his sonne, and his sonne Eladah, and

Thahah his sonne,
A Davao his sonne, and Suthelah

* "pis sonne, and Eser, and lead: And the

men ok Gath that were bone in that lande, flue them, betause they were
‘ome Downe to take awap their cat-

5 ell. . . .
1 And Ephralm their father mourned

maupa dap, and his brethren tame to comfort hym.

j And when he went in to his wyke, she

tonteaued and bare him a sonne, and he dtalled the name of tt Beria, becaule it went euyll with his housholde.

24 And his daughter was Heera, which

buplt Bethhoron the neather and allo the vpper, and UA zan Seera,

25 And Vaphah was his sonne: whofe sonne was Neleph, and Thelah, whole soumne was Thaham,

26 And his sonne Ladan, and his sonne
Auunhud, and his sonne Elilama,

27 And his sonne Nun, and his fonne
Jonah.

Their possessions and habitations
Wasin Wethel, and the townes that lougedtherto, and vnto the east of Maeram, and on the Welk fide of Gaz er with the towues thereof, Sichem and the towunes (hereof, Adaia and the townes

G˙ẽ28

S „ „ «„ „ „ 4

E Eniamin begat wWela

[ex

his eldest fonne, Asbel the setonde, and Aha-
5 athe , hy, J2ovah the fourth, €
AGI) Raphah the fifeh.
3 And the fonnes of i Sela Were: Adar, Gera, Abihud,

4 Abisna, Haaman, and Ahoha,

J Jura Sephuphan,and Puram.

1 Nd these are the sonnes ol Ehnd, and
, tele are auncient heades amongthe itr

habiters of Geba and
| cena they taried them
7 Naaman, Abia and Gera, which ee

ta tatpedt and Abie a war, and begat ci,

The. viii. (Hapter.

a Che sonnes of Beniamin. And race of Saul.

2 ‘
29 And a long bythe borders of the chyl-
Den of Manasse, Bethlean and wy townes, Thaanach and her townes. «
Megiddo aud her townes, and Do?! and her townes: In thole dwelt the: chyldzen ol Joseph the forme of Jlrael.“
30 The sonues of Aler: Jimna, Jesua.
Isui, aud Weria, and Serah their lister.“ zi The sonnes of Weria, Heber, and elchiel, whiche is the father ok ZStrlalt .
32. And Heber begat Japhlet, Somer,“
Hotham, and Sua Was their sister.

CV

33 The sonnes of Japhlet, Pasah, Bin J

hal, and Asuah: These are the chyldzen of Japhlet. 1
34 The sonnes of Semer: Abi, Nohga,
Jehubba, and Aram. ;
35 And the sonnes ok his brother Helene
Zophah, Junna, Seles, and Amal.
36 The sommes of Zopha:Suah, Harne-

pher, Dual, Beri, and Jimrah. 0
37 Bezer, Hod, Samia, Silla, Jethran,

38 The lonnes of Jether: Jephune, pilpa, and Ara. a
39 re

eʒia. .

40 All these were the chyldren of Aler, and heades ok their fathers Houle, noble men, and mightie head captapnes:.
The number thoughout the genealogie of them that were aptto the warre and battell, Was tweutie and fixe thousande men. é

c
¢
é

3 And he begat Saharaim in the kielde. of Moab, after he had sent thein away.
Husim allo, x Baarah were his wines.

9 And he begat of Hodes his wyfe, Jobab, and Zibia, Dela, aud Malcham,

10 Jeuz, and Sachia, and Mirma:These.

Were his sonnes and) auncient fathers. .
And ol Husim he begat Ahitob, aud.

Elpaal. c

u The sonnes ok Elpaal, were: Eber.
Milaham, and Samed, whiche buplt.
Ono, Lod, and the townes therof .

13 Weria and Sema were auncicnt fa « thers among the inhabiters of Atalon, and they draut away the inhabtters of.
Geth .

ind Ai t, and Jerlmoth,

14 And als, Saft red oe

II

vr er

16 Michael, and Jispa, and Joha, the

bonnes ok Weria.

17 Zebadia, Mesullam, Hezeki, z Heber,

18 Hhuevatatlo and Je sliah, and Jobab

the fonnes of Elpaal. ö

1 Jakim, and Zitri, and Sabo,

20 Ellenat, Zülthat, and Eliel,

21 Adala, and Berata, and Zimreth the sounnes ol Simhi.

22 Jispan, Eber, aud Eliel,

33 Abdon, and Titri, and Hanan,

24 Hanania, Elam, and Anathothia,

225 Jephdeta, and Phenuel, the sonnes of

Sadat.
26 And Hamserat, Seharia, aud Atha-

427 Jaresiah, Elia, aud Zichzi, the sonnes

of Jeroham.

D 28 Thele were aunttent fathers and tap-

Esdras.

tapnes in their binvenes, e thele dwelt

in hierulalem. — f
29 And at Gideon dwelt Abi Gibeon, whole wpfe was called Maacah. .
30 Aud his eldest sonne was Abdon, then Zub, Cis, Baal, and Nadab,

zi Gedo, Ahio, and Zacher.

32 And hkloth begat Suͤnea: And thele

11,18, and ok their offices.

Nd so all Israel munbred by kinredes, beholde chepare witten
Wem the booke of the
( 2 ipnges of Hfracl and ol Juda, and were cae
“——rped awap to Wabp-

lon for their transgression:

2. Euenthe olde inhabiters that dwelt in their owne polleslions and cities, the
Israelites, the Priestes, Leuites, and
Haäthenei. e

And in hitrulalem dwelt of he chyldren of Juda, of the chyldren of Wenlamin, and of the chudzen ol Ephraim and
Manasse:

4 Althaithe sonne of Anuhud the fonne of Ott, the fonne ok Imri, the lonne of Went, ok the chyldren of Pharez the sonne of Juda,

5 And ok Silont: Afata the eldest, and

his sonnes.

And ok the lonnes of Zerah: Jehuel,

« €thete brethren sire hundred eninetic.

The ix ( hapter.
IX Flrael and Juda numbzed. 10 Ok the priestes and Leuites.

and Re,

allo dwelt with their brethren in Hieru-

Ci Zebadia, Arad, and Ader,

falent ouer against them.
3; Face begat Cis, and Cis begat Saul.

and Saul begat Jehonathan, alti URevix, |

N
34 And the sonne of Jehonathan was! qperibbaal,e WDeribbant begat ieh.

35 And the fonnes of Prah were piton. F

Melech, Tharea, and Ahas,

36 And Ahas begat Jehotada: And e-

holada begat Alemeth, Almaneth, and
Zlimri: Zimri begat Mosa. :

37 Moa begat wWinea whole sonne was.

Kapha, and his sonne was Elala, ano: his fonne Azel. :
38 And Azel had fire fonnes, who. names are hele: Elritam, Woch, HE: mael, Searta, Obadla, and Hanan: All thele were the sonnes of Ase1, c
39 And the sonnes of Efek his brother, were: Clam his eldest, Pens the leconde, and Eliphelet the thirde.
4.0 And the sonnes of Tam were nightie men and strong archers, and had. many sonnes, and sonnes fonnes, an:

hundred and fiftie. All thele are ol the.

sonnes ol Weniam.

W K „ „ K „ „

7 And ofthe sonnes of Wentamin: Halu the sonne of Mesullam, the fonne of hodauia, the sonne of Senua. <

8 And Fibneia the sonne of Perahar:«
And Ela the sonne of Uzi the sonne ol.
Michi: And Mesullam the lonne of.
Sephatia the foucof Kehuel the soune, of Jibnia. g ‘

9 And their brethren according to their. kinredes, nine hundred fiftie and lire
All these Were paincipalt men and aun cient in the houlholdes of their fathcrs.

10 Andof the priestes: Pedata, Pehora rib and Jachun, :

1 Azariã the forme of Helkia, the sonne, of Mesullam, the fonne of ada 0h sonne of Maraioth, the lonne of Ahitob: the chiefett in the boule of God. *

12 And Adaiah the sonne of Ae the fonne ol Phachur, the fonne of 1010 . chia: and Maasi the lonne of Adiel, fal sonne of Ichezrah, the fonne N ö lam the sonne ol Mesillamith, the donne

of Inner. 1 And

ite,

„ —~STw GUS

ir brethren which were heads eee 7 u joute oles of their faof the aunctent h

‘ thers, athoufande seuen hundred and

„ shzecfcore, actme men for the Worke of

the seruice of the house of God.

“14 And of the Leuites: Semeia the sonne

oO sepafun, the sonne of Alricam, the sonne

of Halabia ok the lonnes of Merari.

15 And Bacbakar Heres, and Galat:

And Mathania the sonne of Micah, the

fonmne ot Zitri, the fonne of Alaph.

6 And Obadia the sonne of Semeta, the

sonne of Galal, the sonne of Jduthun:

And Berechia the sonne of Aa, the

sonne of Elcana, that dwelt in the billie

ges ofthe Hetophathites.

17 The porters were, Sallum, Aceub,

Talmon, and Ahiman, and their brother: Sallum was the chieke.

18 For they watched hitherto, enen bnto

the kynges gate castwarde by courte,

„the chüdren ol Leut.

“9 And Sallum the lonne of Core, the

bonne of Abialaph, the sonne of Corah,

and his brethren the Corathites of the houle ok their father, had their businesse and offite to kepe the porches of the tabernacle: and their fathers beyng ouer theboatt of the Lorde, kept the ente-

. rng.

20 And Phinehes the fonne of Eleazar wag their foreguide, and the Lord was
With hin.

Dt And Zacharia the sonne of Meselemia kept the watche before the doore of the tabernacle of the tongregatiou.

22 All thele were chofen men to kepe the

threlsholdes, euen two hundred and

« fibeluccand throughont all the genealo-

lie were they numbred in their villages:

18 And them did Daum and Samuel the

ae (car institute, betause of their fidelitie.

23 So they and their children had the

duerlyght of the gates of the house of

the Conde, euen ok the tabernacle, to

‘ ae

‘aug (24 In foure quarters did they kepe the

a Wü the east, welt, north, and

ix c.

403, by pen,

‘4 t

r da. }

2 And their brethzen remapned in the
; fonte and came after seuen ate rom tynie to tyme with them.

26 onthe Leuttes which had the duers r 5 12 pais and treasures of the
Were vnde | ol foure notable porters. a on

27 And they tape rounde about the house

CXVI}] of God, because the kepyng therof perteyned to them,anothey had theilt. to open it cuerymorznyng.

nen 2 pel had the rule of · e png velle b ; inandoutbptale. °° en.
29 Sonic ok them were appoynten to ouersee the vellels, and al the ornaments of che fancttiavic, and the flowze, wine, oyle, frankentenle, and weete odours.
Ind tertapne of the lounes of the! priestes made oyntmentes of the sweete odours. ‘
31 And Mathathia one of the Deuttes, ‘
(which was the eldest sonne of Sallum the Corathite) had the ouersyght of the thynges that were made in the frping « panne. ;
32 And other of their brethren the sonnes of Cahath had the ouersight of the. eee e ath. :

Sabb
33 These ave the syngers, euen auneient
‘fathers of the Leuites, which dwelt in seperate chaumbers, and Were free ; for they had to doe in the tenple both day and nyght. F
34. These were auntient fathers of the.
Teuites in their generations, ¢ dweltat Hierusalem. ‘
35 And in Gibeon dwelt the father of Gibeon, Jehiel: whole wyfe was called
Maacha. :
36 His eldest sonne was Abdon, then-
Zur, Cis, Baal, Mer, and Madab, ‘
37 Gedor, Ahio, Zacharia, and Mikloth. 5
38 And Mikloth begat Simcam: And, they alfo dwelt with their brethzen at.
Pierusalem, euen harde by them. ‘

39 And Mer begat Cis, and*Cis begat Reg

Saul, and Saul begat Jehonathan,,
Malchisua, Abinadab, aud Esbaal.
40 And the sonne of Jehonathan, was
Meribbaal: And Meribbaal begat
Mitah. ;
41 And the sonnes of Mitcah, were: Pithon, Melech and Thahrea. ‘
41 And Abas begat Paha, Jahra begat «
Alameth, and Afinaueth, and Zimri:
Ziniri begat Mosa, ;
43 WMosabegat Binea, whose sonne was.
Rephata,and his sonne Was Elala, and his sonne Ase. f
44 And Azei had fire formes, whole. names are these: Asricam, Bochzu,.
Pimacl, Searia, Dbadla, and Hanan.

Thele ave the sonnes of Azel. “4

Mul.

) Iudi. ix.

ND the Phllistines
«yc fought agapnst Israfel, * and the men of
Ilrael fled before the
Philistines, and were iouerthzowen &€ wounded in mount Gilboa.

2 And the Philistines folowed after

Saul and his sonnes, and the Phi-

listines smote Jonathan and Abi-

7 1 and Malchisua the fonnes of aul.

3 And the battaple went fore agaynst

Saul, and the archers founde him, and he was Wounded of shooters.

4 Then sapde Saul to his harnesse bea

rer: Dale thy Node, aud thrist me

though therwith, that these vncirtum-

tiled tome not and do ine shame. Wut his harnesse bearer woulde not, fo2 he feared exceedyngly: So Saul taught a lworde and fell vpon it.

5 And when his harnesse bearer far that

Saul was dead, he fell on a sworde also, and Dyed,

6 And thus Saul and his three sonnes,

and all they ot his honse dyed together.

2 7 And when all the men of Ysrael that

were in the valley, sawe howe they fled, aud that Saul & his founes were dead, they forsoke their tites, and ran away: and the Phikkstines tame, aud dwelt in

I. Chronicles.
The. x. Chapter.

Che battaple of Saul agaynst the philittines. lonnes also, i; The caufe of Saules death.

„„

4Jn which he dyeth. Ind his

them.
8 And it kortuned, that on the morowe

when the Philistines came tp stripthe

dead bodyes, they founde Sa fonnes ouerthrowen in mee ene’

And When they had stript him the toke his head and his harnesle, and fent them into the lande of the Philistines rounde about to chewe them unto their idols, and to the people.

ther nus au ht byte ehe Dont

and le { femple™of Dagon. b bis Deadin tye

™ ab beaebe all cher te Ponal c

the Philisti
—. to et a d

12 They aàrose all the strongest of the and ket away the body of Dann the bodies of his sonnes, and bronght them to Paves and buried the bones of then vnder an oke in Jabes, and fatten feucy dapes.

13 So Saul Dyed for his trespasse that he trespassed agaynst the Lorde, in that he kept not the worde of the Lorde, and in that he fought and altzed counsaple
5 à woman that wrought with alpe rite:

14. And alted not of the Lorde, and ther: fore he fluc him, and turned the king: dome vnto Daudd the fonne of Jlai.

The. xj. (hapter.

After the death of Saul Dauid is annoynted in Hebron. 5 Che Jebulites rebell agapnst Dauid, from whom he taketh the towre of Sion, 6 Joab is made caps

tapne. 10 His valiaunt men.

Ihen all IJsrael gathered them selues to Daz

„Judd bnto Hebzon, * faysing:

3 Therfkore came all the elders of Hl
Yael to the kyng to Hebron, and Dauid

made a touenannt with them in Hebron before the Lode: And they annoynted
Dauid king ouer Bfracl* accozdyng ko the worde of the Torde, by the handt of
Sammel.

4 And Dauid and all Plrael went to
Hicrusalem( which is Jebus, whereaf a the ae the inhabiters o the lande.

5 And the inhabiters of J ebus farbe
Dauid: Thou commest not in Dot
Neuerthelelle, Dau wan the calte 0
Sion: Whithe is called the citie
Dauid. 6 And

(a) Thee of the Bye tithnes.

l. Reg. xi

id
And Daud *fayde: Wholoener sinp-
N ih the Jebulstes kirk, shalbe the prindpall taßtaync, aud a 1020¢. So Joab the sonne ol pi — 4 vp, and nade the ehicte captayne. wan Hand Dubele tute calten css
5 and therelore they called it the citie ot

10. — , a
3 Aud he built the ditie oneuery fyde,

euen krom Ballo round about: and Joab repaired the rest ofthe citie.

Aud Dauid prospered c waxedgreat,
8 athe Lorde of hoattes was with hun.
10 These are the principall men of power whom Daud had, and that claue to n hl in his kingdoine with all Ilrael to make hum king according to the word

ofthe Lorde ouer Israel.
And this is the number of He mightie

men whom Dauid had: Jolobeam the

sonne of Hachmon the chiefe among thirtie:he lift vp his speare against three

hundzed, and Wounded (them gat one

me. N „

12 later him was Elcazar his vncles sonne an Ahothite, which was one of the three mightiest: .

iz He was with Dauid at Paldamnum, aud there the Philistines were gathered together to battaile: And there was thert ã parcell of grounde full of barly,
1 the people fled before the Philiines. a 4

14 And they stept koorth into the mid-

dest of the fielde, and saued it, and fluc

the Philistines, andthe Lorde gaue a

great victorie. _

1j And the three of the thirtie chiefe captaynes Went to a rocke to Dauid, into the caue Adullam: And the hoast of the
1 abode in the valley of Ke-

t Int,

16 And when Dauid was in the holde, the Philistines watch was at Bethlehem that same tyme.

And Dau longed, and lapde: Oh ze (hat one woulde geue me drnme of the water okthe well that is at the gate at

u ane ud the thace brake through the hoast sb Philistines, and drewe er out
0 be Wel that Was byß gate at Bethcheuvandtoke it and brought it to Dabur ecuerthelelse, Dauid woulde not
Lone of it, but rather offered it to the

And fayd; my God lorbyd it me that gz

iad ve

I. Chronicles.

shoulde dothis thing: Shall J deute D the blood of thele men, that ane put their lines in teoperdic + fo, With) the 9 cae is

leoperdie of their lines they bronghtit: waere

kor the Which

therefore he would not dune it. thep wenterce this did thefe thece . il. And ee

20 And Abisal the brother of Foay, he alfo was taptapne among three: Fo he lyft bp his speare againt three hundred and Wounded them, and had anaune among the three: ’

21 Beaamong three, he was more honovable then the two, sor he was their cap: tapne: Holbbeit, he attapned not tothe
(Ev) thee,

22 wWanaia p sonne of Fehotada, the sonne ofa verp strong man, which had done many actes, of Cabscel: be slne two strong (lions) of Moab, æ went downe and flue a lion in a pit in time of snowe.

23 And he slue an Egyptian, whole sta-

ture was euen kinc cubites long, and in

the Egyptians hand was aspeare lyke
à weauers beame: And the other went downe to him with a walter, & plucked the speare out of the Egyptians hand, and fluc him With his owne speare.

24 Such thinges did Wanaia the sonne of Jehoiada, and had the name among the three mightiest, ‘

25 And was Honoable among thüirtte: ¢ but attapned not vnto the (ft) three: a Dauld made himok his coun:

a g. 5

26 The other men of armes were these:
Alahel the brother of Joab, Elhanan his vncles sonne, of Bethlehem:

o Some ctade men.

27 Samoth the Harodite, elez the Pe-

lonite,

28 Ira the sonne of Ickes the Thekoite,
Abieser the Anatothite,

29 Sibbetal the Hulathite, Plat the Aho-

hite,

30 Maharai the Mepthophathite, Heled
0 fonne of Waana the Rethopha- I thite, :

31 Ithai the lonne of Ribatof Gibea that pertapued to the children of wentas min, Benaia the Phirathomte,

3 Hural ok the riuers of Gaas, Abiel the
Arbathite,

33 Azmaueth the Waharumite, Ellhaba the Salabontte. .

34 The lonnes of Hassem the Gezontte:
Jonathan the sonne ol Sage an Hara-

tite, ’
35 Ahiam the lonne of Hacarthe “i

vun

Dauid.

cos ce an terrihic.

rie, Eliphal the forme of Ur.
36 Hepher the Mecherathite, Ahia the

Pelonite,

37 Hezro the Carmelite, Maari the soune of €sbai,

38 Joel the brother of Pathan, Mibhar the sonne of Hagari,

39 Telet the Annnonite, Naharai a werothite the beaver of the Harnesse of
Joab the sonne of Zaruta,

40 oa the Jethrite, and Gareb a Jeth-

¢ *

4 Uria the Hethite, and Zahad the sonue of Ahlat, f

He. xii. Chapter

1upbhat they were that went with Dauid when he fled from Saul. —

— bese are thep that

came to Daud to Zik-
Nag while he pet kept

hin selfe dofe becante
Jof Saul the sonne of
Cis: and they were berp strong helpers in

They were weaponed with bowes, and tould hurle stones with the right hand and with the left, and shoote arrowes out of a bowe, € were of Sauls brethren, euen of BWeniamin.

The chiefest were Ahiezer, and Joas the sonnes of Simaa à Gibeonite, and
Jeziel and Pelet the sonnes of Asmaeth, Beratah and Jehu of Anathoth.

And Ilmaia a Gibeonite, a mightie man among thirtie and niore then the thirtie:Jerennah, Jehaziel, Jehonan, and Josabad of Gedor. :

Eleulat, Jerimoth, Bealia, Semaria, aud Seaphatia, the Haraphites.

6 Eltana, Jesia, Aʒarael, Joezer, Jolel badleh the l erde dela and Zebadiah the sonnes o
* FJeroam of Gedor.
3 And of the Gadites there seperated

D ‘

Ww

themselues fone vnto Pauid into the

houlde ofthe wildernesle, men ok might and men apt for the warre, e that toulde handle shielde and speare, whofe faces were lpke the faces of lions, and they were as swyft as the Mocs in the mountapnes.

9 SEpter the fir, Obdia the feconde, and

Ellab the third,
10 e the fourth, Jeremia the ch.

I. Chront

cles.

42 Adina the sonne of Sila a Kuben

& captaine of the Rubenites ae
| — bia, and thictie
43 Hanan the sonne of Daa ; saphat a Mithanite, — rab, and Id:
44 Uszia an Astherathite, Sama q Je-

hiel the sonnes of Hothan an Aroertte:
45 Jediel the sonne of Zimwi, 8 his brother a Thosaite, 2 d Joha
46 Eliel a Hahauite,Peribat and Josaia the sonnes ol Elnaam, and Jirhmag
Moabite,
4 3 —— Obed, and Jaliel a Peso-

bad

t 2

I Atthai the sirt, Eliel the seuenth,
11 Johanan the eight, Elsabad the

ninth, h,

13 Jeremia the tenth, and Machbanai the eleuenth, os

14. These were of the formes of Gad and
Were taptaines ouer the men of warre: one of the least coulde resist an hundred, and the greatest a thouland.

15 hele are they that went duer Jor: C dane in the fir moneth when he had nch filled ouer all bis banckes, and they put to flight all them ofthe valley both toward the eat and welt.

16 And there came of the children ol Ben-

ann € Juda to the houlde vnto Dv uid. N

17 And Dauidd went out to meete them, and aunlwered, and sapd vnto them: Il ye be tome peaceably vnto me, to helpe me, myne heart shalbe knit vnto pou: but and if vou come to betrape me to mpne aduersaries, feeing there is no wickednes in myne handes, the Godot. dur fathers loke thereon and rebuke it.

18 And thefpirite came vpon Amalat .

which Was the chieke among thirtie e an faide: Thyne are we Dauid and on thy all fide thou sonne of Jsai: Peace, ae i be vnto thee, epeace be to thy Helpers, — for thy Godis thyne helpe. ne i mid reteaued them e made them heade of companies of the men of warre. a
19 And there fell some of Manalle to? ¥ uid, when he came with the tay ie ie against Saul to battatle, * but they pie pedtheninot: For thctordesofther listines toke aduisement, and rat 119 bi
Way again, saping: he will fa malltr

aul to the ieoperdie of our

maister @

„ Hshewent to Ziklag, there fel to him

lle Adna, Jozadad, Jediel, chat, p3abad,Elihu,and Zilthat, hrades of the thoulandes that were of
229 21 nd ther holpe Dauld againtt the e dauers: For they were all mightie men zu ef ware and taptapnes inthe hoalt.
22 Forat that tyne there tame one orother to Dawid day by dap £0 helpe him, vnutil it was à great hoast, like the hoast

N d.

E vert this is the number of the chicfe captapnes that were prepared to battalle, aud came to Dauld to Hebron, to turne the kingdome of Haul to him, actording to the word of the Torde.

24 The children of Juda that bare schield and ipeare, were fire thoufand eight hundred, redie prepared to the warre.

25 Oe the thildzen ol Simeon, men of might to warre. vil. M. Cone hundred.

26 Skthe thildren of Leu, foure thousand arid sire hundred.

27 And Icholada was the chiefe of them vote ok (0 Aaron, and with hun three thougn, land ano seuen hundred. da 28 And Zadoc a poung man, stroug and

valiaunt, and of his fathers housholde, twentie and two captaines.

59 Andofthe children of Wentanrin the

" pothen of Saul,thzee thousand: And a great part of them did vnto that tynie folowe the houle of Saul.

30 And ok the chudren of Ephraim, twentie thouland and eight hundred, nightie men of warre, and famous men in the houshoulde oftheir fathers.

zi Andof the halfe tribe of Manasse, eyghteene thousand, which were ap-

because he toucheth it.

d Daudd counfaited with the captapnes of thousandes and hundredes, and with al the
Tordes, ae sayde vnto 1 ho ongregation o erat Hit Cerme a 9905 € to be of but Bout God, we wil lend abrode ur brethren that are let in all the

I. Chronicles. cxix.

pointed by nanie to tome and m 2 ae and make Da

32 And okthe children of Isachar, whi
Were nien that had . of the tpines, to knowe what Jirael
W ANE es

: ix beet at their wyll. : yen 21

33 And of Zabulon which went out to battaile, expert in warre and in all in 9 strumentes of warre, fiftie thousand, which coulde fet the battaile im arrape, they were not of double heart.

34. And of Pephthali a thousand captaines, and with them with Hielve and speare thirtie and seuen thouland.

35 And ok Dan a inbattapie, twenfie c eyght thoufand and fire hundred. G

36 And ok Aler that went out to the warre and kept the forefront ofthe battaile fourtie thoufand, - f

37 And ofthe otherspde ef Jordane, or the
Rubenites, and Gadites, and of the halfe tribe of Manasse, with all mauner of instrumentes ok warre, an hun-

Ded and twentie thousand.

38 © All hele were men of warre, keping the forefront ofthe battelland) with per- Seeg fecte heart tame to Hebron to make De- handed toe uid king ouer all Ilrael: And all the rest aten u of Israel was of one accozde to make an
Daud king. .

39 Andthere they were With Dauid thee dapes cating c drinking: for their brethren had prepared for thein.

40 Moreouer, they that were nye them, enen vnto Jlachar, Zabulon, c Mephthali, brought bread on alles, cammels, mules, & oxen, æ meate, floibec, figges, realinges, wine, x ople, oxen, and theepe aan For there was ioy in JHE rael.

J Te. xiij. Chapter.
7 Che arke is broughtagaine from Rartathiarim to hierutalem, 9 Ula dreth

lande of Pirael, and with them allo to the priesses and TLeuites Which are in
19 5 p to gather themtogeher vnto vs: =
3. And we will bring againe the @arke of gere dur God to vs: for We regarded it not in end the dapes of Saul.
4. And alt the congregatton Was content that he should do fo:fozthe thing seemed good in the eyes or all the people. Pi

entering of Hemath,to bring the arke of

the Lorde from Niriathiarim.

6 And Daund went vp and all Ysrael to an high place towarde Niriathiarün, that was in Juda to fet thence the arke of the Lode God that dwelleth betweene the Cherubs, Where his name

q is called on. n

2 7 And thep carrped the arke of God in a

nee carte ont ofthe house of Abinadab: and Bʒʒa and his brother guided the carte.

8 And Daudd and all Ilrael played before the arke of God with all their might, with singing and harpes, plalteries, aud tymbrels, and cymbales, and truinpettes.

9 And when thep came vnto the thzel-
Ming flooze of Chidon, Uissa put foorth

The. xsiii. Chapter.

I. Chronicles.

= id
5 So Daun gathered all Jsrael toge- his hande to holde the ———
Deda. ther from! Sthor in Egypt, vnto the en Crumbled. AE arke, for Hee:

n And Dauid Was out of quiet because W

Day

10 And the Lorde was wroth wi abe e ach an er N cause 7 ; fore God. there he dped be- 5

the Lorde had rent a rent in he called the name of that place che ren N ting of Gang — et dap.

12 And Dauid was a rũyde Of God that dap, saping: how hat J bun N ien auf 1 5

13 And o Daud brought nott home — ae of Vaud be tarryed it into the house of Obed aout, ts Edom

14 And the arke of God remapned wit
Obed Edom, euen in his houle, tie monethes: And the Tode blesledthe house ot Obed Edom x all that he had.

2 Piram sendeth wood and workemen to Dauid. 4 Che names of his ehildren.
8 14 By the counsell ot God he goeth againsk the Philistines and ouereommeth

them, 15 God kighteth kor him.

— O D> Pitam the king of
| ae 7 Lyre sent mefleugers

to Dawid, and tiniber

Hal Cedar trees, with

yy mafons and carpéters,

to builde him an house.

And Dauid pertea-

ued that the Lorde had confirmed him

king vpon Ifrael, æ that his kingdome was lift vp on hie betause of his peomemancte ble Alrael:

Bit, 3 eee rusalem, and begat mo sonnes and daughters. N

4 These are the names of his children, which were borne vnto him at Hierulalem: Samua, Sobab, Nathan, ¢ Solomon, 8 1

5 Jibhär, Elisua and Eliphalet,
6 Noga, Pepheg, and Japhia,
B77 Elisama, Beeliada, and Eliphalet.

3 And when the Philistines heard that
Dautd was annopnted king vpon all

srael, all the Phillstines went vp to ceke Daud: And Dauid heard of it, k went out against them.

9 Andthe phlilistines tame in, and spread them lelues through the valley ol Ke-

nee phain. envi? 10 And Dauld w astzed tounsalle at God, ware.

saying: Shall J go against the Hi: stines? and wut thou deliuer them into myne hand-
II And the Lode saide vnto him: go bp, for I wil deltuer them into thyne hand.
And fo they tame vp to Waal Perazim, and Dauid smote themthere, and Dauid lade: God Hath dewded mye enemies with nne hand, as a man would deuide water, and therefore they called the name of that plate Gaal Perazun.
And when they had lefe their gods there, Dauld gaue a tommaundement, and they were burnt with fire. 0
13 And the Phiustines tame together a gaine, and russhed into the valley.
14 And Maud alted agame at God: And
God said to him, Go not vp alter them, but turne albay from them that thou
W vpon them ouer again tie © peretrees. 1
15 and when thou hearest asbundo s be in the toppes of the peretrees, then gd ei" out to battaile: fox God Is gone fortl) 10 fore thee, to snipte the hoalt ol the Ph listines. aun-
16 Dautd therfore did as God conn are ded him and thep fmose the pe pbiliftines, from Gibeon to Sa d

tyed but ofthe Leuites: orthem hath the Lordchosen to beare the arke of the
Lorde, and to minister vnto hin for e-

uer. a
And Daud gathered all Ilrael toge-

ther to hierulalem, to fetche the arise of

the Lorde vnto his place which he had

ordayned for it. é,

4 And Daud brought together the cha wen of Aaron and the Leuites,

Ok the sonnes of Caath, was Uriel the chiefe, o his brethren there wert an hundred and twentie.

6 Ok the children ol Merart, Alaia the chiefe, and of his brethren two hundred and tibentic,

7 Okthe sonnes of Gersont, Joel the chicfe, and of his brethren an hundred and thirtie.

8 Ok the chüdren of Eltzaphan, Semaia
1 2 and of his brethren two hun-

Ok the sonnes of Hebron, Eliel the chieke, and of his brethren fourestore. :

lo Ob the sonnes ol Ussiel, Aminadab che chiefe, and ok his brethren an hundied and twelue.

u And Dauld called Zadot and Abiase bref, and the Leuites, Ul;
Al, 3 | 7

ined, Hoel, Semaia,Etiel, and A

> aihd fatde vnto them: Be that are the
Palneipall fathers of the bs Yo fee

that ye be holy wi : ve may ang With your brethzen, that

Ilrael vnto haue prepared fo2 it.

2102, becaule ve were not there at the

Bangs nee Mads rent a
>> e fou

befathion ough ttobe ght him not as

the plate that Z

¢

in the arke ofthe LTorde

16 And Dauid spake to the chiefe heades ofthe Leuites, that they choulde appoynt tertaine of their brethren to sing with instrumentes of mulicke, pfalteries, harpes, and tymbales, that they might make a sounde, and to ling on hie
With ioykulnesse.

17 And the Leultes appopnted Heman the sonne ol Joel, ano of his brethzen,
Alfaph the sonne of Werechia,and of the sonnes of Derariand of their brethren,
Ethanthe sonne of Cusaiahn.

18 And with them their brethren of the

setond degree, Zacharia, Wen, Jaziel,

Semiramoth, Jehiel, Unni, Eliab, Be-

nalabu, Maasiah, Mathathiahu, Eli-

phalehu, Mikniahu, Obed Edom, and

Jeiel, porters. N
So Heman, Alaph, and Ethan the

singers, made a sounde With cpmdales

ok brasse.

20 And Zacharia, Aziel, Hemiramoth,
Jehiel, Um, Eliab, Maasiahu, and wWanatahu, played with pfalteries, on an Alamoth.

21 Mathathiahu, Eliphalehn, Mikuiahu, Obed Edom, Aciel, and Asiahu, played bpon harpes an epght aboue, with courage.

22 And Chenaniahu the chiele ok the Leuites was maister of the song: for he taught other to fing, betcanse he was a manokonderstanding.

23 Berethia and Elcana kept the doore of the arke.

24. And Sebaniahn, Jeholaphat, Matha nael, Amasai, Zachariahn, Wangtahn and Eliezer the puestes did blowe with trumpettes beforethe arke of God: And
Mbed Edom and Jehin Were kepers

he arke. of the doore ofth 25 And

I9

SS K— „ —
I. Chronicles. l. , — 7
: fame ol Dauid went out into tions feare him. lade, and the Lorde made allna-
The xy. Chapter.
Vaud prepareth an hoast tor the arhe. 4 Che number and order of the Leuites. i are cholen oue among them. They bein t 1
19 be Pad dauncing before dabei ofiis Wee ehe. e
MND Maud made him 14 So the prlestes and the Leultes (ane:
A bouses in the citie ok tilied them selues, to fet the arke of the j Daud, and prepareda Torde God of Jlrael.
5 Hiplace for the arke ok 15 And the children of the Leultes bare
Mod, and pitched for it the arke of God vpon their chouders
„Sa tent. ö with staues thereon, as Doyles tons
2. Then Danid fayre: maunded According to che worde okthe
The arke ok God ought not to be tar- Torde.

Ky

( wot cal nr.

lala. s

D.

R. Reg. vi e.

t

n. Reg · vi. b.

W 7

Pfalme. cv.

anid :

I. Chronicles.

25 And Daudand the elders of Jlrael, aud the captaynes onerthoulandes, ment to et the arke of the appoyntmeẽt of the Lorde out of the houle of Obed
Edom with gladnesse.

26 Aid when God helped the Teuites

that bare the arke of the appoyntmient

of the Lode, they offered seuen oxen, and leuen rammes. N

27 And Daudd had on hima linnen gar-

ment, lpke as had allo all the Leurtes that bare the arke, e so had the singers and Chenania the ruler ok the songe,

ok the Tordes kouenaunt

Daz ö

with the singers: and Dauid ha hint an Ephod of linnen. 5

28 And al they of Jsrael brought the arke

d with show-

king and blowing of the shawme, and trumpettes, making a nople with cymbales, plalteries, and harpes.

29 Aud as the arke ol the appoyntment of the Node came into the citie of Dauiy,
Michol the daughter of Saul lockyng ont at a windowe, sawe king Dany

daunsing and playing, andthe despiled

him in her heart.

The j. Chapter.

Che arße being placed they offer facrifices. qmauid ordaineth Maph and his brtinen to mimister before the Lorde. 8 He appoynteth a notable plalme to be

long in prapse of the Lorde.

SSE O they brought in the crueokSod, and let it in the middest of the
„ tent that Dauid pite ched foztt: And they
9 2 OO) offred burnt satrifites

— and peate offeringes before God.

2 And when Dad had made an ende of

offring the burnt offeinges and peate

offringes, he blessed the people in the name ofthe Lode.

3 And he dealt to all Hfracl both man and woman, atrackmell of bread, and a good peete ot lleshe, and a flacket of wine.

4 And he appoynted tertaine of the Leultes to minister before the arke of the

CLorde, and to repeate, æ to thanke and prayse the Lode God of IYsracl.

5 And Afaph was the chiefe, and nexte to him Zacharia, Jeiel, Semiramoth,
Hebel, Bathathia, Eliab, Benaia, Obed Edom, E Jeiel, With instruments, plalteries, c harpes: Wut Asaph made
à sounde with cymbales.

6 Wanala and Jahaziel priestes blewe with trumpettes continuallp before the arke of the coucnannt of God.

And that lame time Dauid opp appopnt chiefely to thanke the Lorde by
Alaph and his brethren.

8 *Confelle pou lit) vnto God, call vpon his name: cause the people to bnderstande his deusses.

9 ing bnto him, sing pfalmes vnto him: talke pou ofall his wonderous
Wozkes.

10 Glorp pe in his holy name: let the heart of them reiopte that do {eeke God.

1 Secke God and his strength: sceke his face euermore.

12 Remember themarueplous wozkes that he hath done: his Wonders, and the tudgementes of his mouth,

13 O pe leede of Abraham his feruannt, ve his chofen children of Jacob: heis
God our Torde, his iudgements are in all the earth.

14. He hath ben mindfull alwapes of his couenaunt(foz he prompsed a wordetoa thousand generations:) euen of bis touenaunt that he made with Abraham, and ol his othe vnto . Jsahac. 2

15 And he appoynted the lame vnto Jatob for a law: and to Ilrael for an euerlasting conenaunt. ae

16 Saying, vnto thee J wyllgcuethe (8 lande off Chanaan: the “lot ot pour iy %
Yeritaunce. werent

17 Laven they were a fewe men ta num poco ber, and had ben straungers but alittle vr while in it: and when they went from fuseds one nation to another, krom one kingdome to another people,

18 he suffred no man to do them wrong: „pe yea he reproued euen kinges for their den fakes, J

19 199 15 not myne . aud ttt? Y

umph not duer my prophetes. . N
Hing bnto che Loe all the earth: psame 9

and chewe from dap to dap his falua

tion. g
Tell is story among the heather,

his wonderfull deedes among all na

ons. 22 JO?

 Jitheh,
16 Iaacob.

i
3 eat is the Lorde, and worthy to a 14 51 exteedingly: he is to be fea: red aboue all gods. 5 vote 26 Jo all the gods ol the people are bu en, idols: but the Lorde made heauen.
Praple and Honour are in his presente: strength and gladnesse are in his place.
28. Alltribe vnto the Lord ye kinredes of
¥ people, Alleribe to the Lode glozy and

dontinion.

25 Alltribe bnto the Horde the glory due

o his name, bryng facrifices, and aa before him, and worchip the Hod in his glorious fanctuarte.

30 Let all the earth feare him: surely the
Wolde shalbe fable and not moue.

a Tetthe heauens reiopte, and let the earth be glad, and let men tell among

the nations that the Lorde is Kyng.

3. Net the lea rore t the fulnesse therof: let the feldes reiopte, e al that is therin.

3 Then shall the trees of the wood re-

ipte at the presence of the Lord, betaule he commeth to iudge the earth.

34 Dacue thankes buto the Lord, fo he is good, for his merty endureth euer:

35 And lay pe, laue vs O God our faluation, gather vs together, and deliuer vs

geue thankes to thy holy nanie, and triunph in the prayse of the.

36 Blelsed be the Lord God of Pirael for euer and euer: let al people fap Amen, and prayse the Lorde.

MD it kortuned, that
When Dauid dwelt in his boule, he fapde to
NMathan the prophete:

: of Cedar tree, but the

—arke of the Lozdes co-

uenaunt remayneth pudercurtaines.

2 ality We vnto Daud: Do tat is ne

With thee, hyne heart, for God is

And the fame night, it kortuned that a worde of God cate to Pathan sap-

+ Goand tell Daum my fecuaune,thus me an houle to dwell in:

I. Chronicles.
37 And so he left there before the arkeof

frontaniong the heathen, that we max

Lo, J dwel in*an houle

Uh the Lorde, Thou chalt not buplde

the Lordes touenaunt Ala is bre-

thren, to minister before ae ae

nuallp, Cin Cuche thinges as were to be done]
3 21 m be

3 nd Obed Edom and his brethren threescore and eyght, ee 2 the sonne of Jeduthun, and Hola, were appoynted to be posters.

39 And Zadocthe priest and his brethren the priestes were before the tabernacle of the Lorde, in the hye plate that was

dt Gibeon, a

40 To offer burnt offeringes vnto the
Lorde bpon the burnt offering aulter perpetually, in the morning and ene: hing according to all that which ts wiitten in the lawe of the Lorde whiche he tommaunded Jlrael.

41 And with them were Heman and Fez duthun, and other that were chofen,
Whole names were expreslsed to gene thankes to the Lorde, That his merep lasteth euer. "

42 And with them did Heman and Jeduthun fing with the trumpets and eymbales, making a sweete melodte with instrumeutes of. muficke and godlye songues: And the sonnes of Jeduthun were porters.

43 And all the people departed euery mau to his house, and Dauid returned to blesse his house.

The. xvij. Chapter,

3 David is forbidden to buplde an house vnto the Lorde. 12 Christe is promifed onder the figure ok Solomon. 18 Dauid geueth thankes, 2; and prapeth vnto God.

5 For J haue dwelt in no Houle sinte the
Day that J brought out the chyldren of srael, vnto this dap: but haue gone rom tent to tent, and from one habitation to another.

6 And wherelocuer J haue walked
With all Israel, spake J euer one word to any of the indges of Isracl, whom J tommaunded to feede inp people, saping: vohy haue pe not buylt me an boule of Cedar tree:

5 Mopwe therefore thus shalt thou fay vnto my feruannt Daud, thus fatty the Lorde of hoastes: Itoke thee fromm the cheepe coate, and from folowing the sheepe, that bor een be tape

» people : tapne ouer my p 50 a nd

J

CXX] :

anid,

focucr thou balk walked, and hauc weeded out all thine enemies out of thy fight, and haue made thee aname tyke the name of the greatest men that are in the tarth. i

9 And J haue omapneda place tor my people Pirael, and made it kalt, fo that nowe they may dwel in their plate, and mount no moze: neither shall the chyldren ok wickednesse bere them any noe as at the beguming. 8

to And sinte the tyme that N tommaͤunded iudges to be oner my people PE rael, J haue subdued all thine enemies: and J tolde thee that the Lord woulde buyide thee an houle.

111 This allo shal come to pasle:when thy dayes be expired that thou mutt go bu-

to thy fathers, J Wyl rayse bp thy seede

alter thee, whüthe chalbe of thy sonnes, and J wyll stabliche his kyngdonie.

12 He hall buylde me an Houle, and J wyl stablishe his seate for euer.

z J wylbe his father, and he shalbe my sonne, and J wyll not take my mercy away from hym, as J toke it from hym

that was bekore thee. 5

14. But J wyll stabliche hym in myne houle and my kingdome kor euer, and his leate shalbe sure foz cuermore.

15 Attcording to all these wordes, and at-

tording to al this vilion, did Mathan tell king Dauid.

16 And Daudd the king came and fate before the Lord, ind sayd: hat am J O
4020 God, and what is mine houchold, that thou batt promoted me thus farce:

17 And pet this seemed litte in thine eyes,
O God: but thou hast also spoken of thy seruauntes house for a great whyle to tome, and hast looked vpon me as vppon a manofhpe degree, O Lom God.

I. Chronicles. 8
$ And J haut ben wich thee whyther 1s what Hall Dawid delice moze of thee

for the honour of thy leruaunt:

thou hast unowen thy 5 1
19 O Tod, for thy seruauntes lake, euen

accozding to thyne owne heart, hag

thou done al this magnifitente, to chem

all great thinges.

20 Load there is none like thee neither ig there any God laut thou, according to all that we haue heard with our cares,

21 MPozeoucr, what nation on the earth is like thy people Israel, to whom Gop hath bouchfated to tome and redeeme them to be his owne people, and to

make thee a name ok extellencie aud ter-

riblenes, with casting out nations from

befoze the people, whom thou hast del-

uered ont of Egypt N

22 Thy people of Ysrael dyddest thou make thyne owne people for euer, and thou becamest their God.

23 Therekore nowe Lorde, let the thing

that thou batt spoken concerning thy

seruannt and his houlc, be true for ener,

that thou Lord do as thou hat lade:
24 Tect it conie to pale, that thy name

map be magnified for euer, that it map

be sayde, The Lorde of hoastes ts the
God of Ilrael, euen the God ol Ylrael, and the house of Dauid thy feruaunt endureth table before thee.

25 Jor thou O my God, hast tolde thy seruaunt that thou wylt buylde hun an house, and therefore thy seruannt hath founde in his heart to prap before tice.

26 And nowe Torde, thou art God, and halt pronused this goodnefle vnto thy seruaunt.

27 Nowe therfore let it be thy pleasure to biesse the boule of thy {ernaunt, that it may continue befoze thee for cuer: F02
Won thou bleflelt O Lordc, the lame is blessed for euer.

5 The. xviy.Chapter.
Che battell of Dauid againtk the Philistines. Ind against Moab,; Joba,

Aram. 1 And Edom.

Seth and the townes that“ longed thereto out of the handes of
2 And he {mote Moab, andthe Moa-

payde hym tribute.

3 And Dauid smote Hadare zer klug of
Zoba vnto Hanath, as he went to fi bite his dominion by the riuer Euphates.
4 And Dauid toke from hym a thow fand charets,and fenen thoufand porte: men, and tihenticthoufande footcinet, and lamed all the charet horses, and tt serued of them an hundred charets.

5 And whenthe Spatans of Pamaston

ing of 2058, came to helpe Padareser king ald

Danid

Dau due of the Sprians twentie and thoufande.

: 6 te put souldiers in SOpria Da-

matron, and the Sprians became Da-

ids seruauntes, and brought him tri:

t he went to.
A a toke the shieldes of golde that were on the seruauntes of Hadareʒer, and brought them to Hierusalem.

3 And krom Tebhath, and from Chun, ce

ties of Hadarez ar, brought Dautd exteeding much bralse, wherlbith Solomon made the brasen lauatorie, the pillers, and the veslels of brasse.

9 And when Thou king of hemath heard how VDauid had beatenal the strength ol Hadare zer kiug ol Zoba,

He sent Hadoram histone to king Dauld, to make peate With him, k to blesle hin, betause he had fought against Hadare zer, and beaten him (for Thou had warre with Hadareser and (Yadozam bought ) all maner of te wels of golde, (it uer, and brasle, with him.

evi. due.

ub

n 10
Ing J.,

A Fter this, it chaunced thatꝰ Nahas the king
T ok the children of Am; mon dped, c his sonne raigned in his steade.
And Dautd lapde: will shewe kindunefie nto anon the sonne ok Nahas, betause his father dealt kindly with mie.
And Dauidfent messeugers to comfort him ouer the death ok his father: And the seruauntes ol Dauid tame into the lande ok the children of Ammon to Panon, to tomkort hin. :
But the lordes of a thüldren of Ammon sapd to Manon: Thinkest thouthat
Danid doeth honour thy father in thy

tk Are not his seruauntes come to
3 catch to loke, and elpie ont the land-
Ne + „„Wherekoze Manon tone Daulds fer?

nantes, and ochaued them, and cut ok

d
Bacay

eit niet heir coates ha a chen ae by their buctocties, b
5 ane there went tertayne and told Dath 10 the men were serued: And the menen to meete them (kor the men ade: inglpacpamed)andthehung
Tarp at Jericho until pour

I. Chronic

bute: And the Lom preserued Dauid in

light, that he hath lent comforters buto

les. CXXI :

II And king Dawod dedicated them vnto the Lord, with the filuer and golde that he brought fro all nations, from E dom, frõ Moab, from p chuldren of Anmon, front the pbilittines and from Amclet.

Iz And Abilat the sonne of Zaruta flue of the Edomites in the fait valley eyghteene thoulande,

13 And put souldiers in Edom, and all the
Edonmtes became Daudd leruauntes:
Thus the Lorde kept Dawid in all that he toke in hande.

14. And Dauldraigned ouer all Israel,
AND exetuted iudgement and righteout ¢ nesse among all his people.

15. And Poab the sonne of Zaruia was duer the hoast, c Jeholaphat the lonne of Ahilud recozder:

16 And Zadot the sonne of Ahitob and
Abimelech the sonne of Ablathar were the priestes, and Saula was scribe,

17 And wWanatahu the fonne of Jehoinda was ouer the Crethites and the Phele-

thites: and the sonnes of Dawid were next vnto the king.

The xix. Chapter. ;

4 Banon hing of the children of Ammon doeth great iniuries to the feruauttes of Bas uld, 6 He prepareth an armie against Dauid, 15 and is overcome.

beardes be growen, and then returne.

6 And when the children of Ammon law that they stanke in the fight of Daud,
Hanon and the children of Animon sent a thousande talentes of siluer to hyre thein tharets and horsmen out of Mesopotania and out of Spria Maacha, and out of Zoba. ’

7 And they hyred thirtie and two thoufande chaͤrets, and the king of Maacha and his people: which tame and pitched before Medeba: And the children of An mon gathered them selues together fro their cities, and tame to battaple.

8 And when Daudd hearde of it, he leut
Joab and all the hoast of trong nien.

9 And the children ol Animon canie out, and put them selues in arap to battayle beforce the gate of the titie: Aud p binges that were come, kept them by them selues backe in the fielde.

10 When Joab alfo law that the frunt of thebattaple was against him before and behind, he chole outof al the olen men of J srael, and put them in aray against theSypuans,

n And the rest off people he delluered vnto the hand bra

aid .

dren of Ammon. a
Du And he sapde: Ik the Sprians be to strong for me, thou shalt succour me, and if the chudren ok Annnon preuaple against ther, J will helpe thee.

13. Plucke vp thyne heart, and let vs play the men kor dur peoples fake, and for the cities of our God: and the Lord (hall do that which is good in his one fight.

14.. So Foab and the people that were with hin:, drue nye before the Syzrians
— the battayle: and they fled before
Dim. f

15 And when the children of Ammon faw that the Spyrians were fled, they ran a wap like wise before Abisai his brother,

and gat them into the cite + and Joab

cane to Hierusalem.

were put to the Worle before Ilrael,

I. Chronicles. put them selues in aray against the chile hep lent mellengers

16 And when the Sprans saw that they

0 and fet out the Sprians that were beyond the —
Sophach the taptapne of the hoast of
Hadaͤrezer went before them.

17 And it was told Dauid: and he gathered all Ilrael, and went together duer
Jordane, and tame and set vpon them: and when panndad put hym felfe in arap again the Sprians, the with hun. Mans cher fonts

18 But the Spzians fled before Isracl. and Dad destropedof the Syrians feuen thouland charets and fourtic thon: land footemen, and killed Sophach the captayneofthe hoast.

19 And when the lernauntes of Hadareder sawe that they were put to ß worle before them of Hlrael, they made peace with Dauid , e became his seruauntes:
Neither would the Syrians helpe the children of Anunon any more.

The. xx. Chapter.

1 Rabbadellroyend. Che Ammonites tormented. are thrile ouercome with their giantes.

MD it came to passe,
Y | that. after the pere was

that kinges go out a warrekare) Boab carped out the armie cf the hoast, and*deftroyed the tountrey ok the children of Ammon, and tame and besieged Kabba, and destroped it: But Dauid taried at Dierusalem whyle Joab smote Nabba and destroped it. 5

BRexi-g 2 And Dawid toke the crowne of their

king from of his head, and founde that it had the wayght of a talent of golde, and there Were pretious ones in it, and it was set vpon Dauids head: And he brought also exceeding much spoyle ont ok the titie. nl

3 And he brought ont the people that were

in it, and tormented them with fawes and harrowes ol iron, and wih other sharpe instrumentes, and so dealt Daz utd with all the cities of the chudren ol

Ig

Ammnion: And Daudd and all the people

expired (about p tinie

4 Che philttines

kame againe to Hierusalem. :

4 Alter this, it fortuned that chere ardse warre at Gaser with the Philistines : at which time Sobokai the hulathite slue
Sippal that was ofthe chüdren ol Ne- Ci

ham, and they were subdued.

5 And there was battaple agapne with the Dhiliftines, & Elhanan the sonne of
Par flue Lahemi the brother of Goliah the Gethite, whole speare was lyke
à we auers beame.

6 And there chaunted pet againe warre

at Geth, where as was a man of a great

stature, with twentie and foure fingers and toes, fire on euery hand, and fire on entry foote, and was the sonne ol Ra

7 Wut when he delyed Ilrael, Jehana- 55 ond “i feed Dinca Dauths byother slue hint...

s Khele Were vonne vnto Naphah at
Geth, and were duerthzowen mathe hande of Dauid and in the hande ol his fernauntes wees Sanit :

Tis, MSOawN - ty

3 4 lsd
— — The
Bei, of dmek . nny n 5

2 weir? s+ .

and eu,

Day id *

Hauid causeth the people tobe numbred. 14 And there dye teuentie

thoulande men of the pellilence.

Md Satan stoode bp

against Ylrael, and

„ prouoked Dauid to number Blract.

And Daud layde to
Jdoab and to the rusers of the people: Go ve and number Ilrael trom Beerle-

bato Dan: cc bring it to me, that J may uno we the number of Hen.

And Joab aunlwered: The Lorde make his people an Hundzed tinies fo many mo as they be: But my lorde. O king , are they not all my lordes fer: uauntes:whythen Doth mplord require this thing: why will my lorde be a caule ok w trespalse to Plraciz ö

4 Neuerthelesse the kinges Word preuapbe led against Joab: And Joab departed, von bot and Walked theoughout alithem of PE ve, vac and tame to ievufalem againe,

eat 5 And gaue the summeok the number of om „ the people vnto Dauld: And all they of

Ilrael were a thousande thouland and

an hundred thoufande men that drue sworde: aud Juda was foure Hundzed threcstore and ten thoulande men that
Duzue sworde.
6 Wit the Leuites and Weniamin tounted he not among them: For the kinges
Word was abhonnnable to Joab.
S 7 And the Lowe was dilplealed with this thing and smote Ilrael.

8 And Danidfapde vnto God: Jhane limned exceedingly in doyng this thing:
And nowe J besech thee, do away the
Wicke dnesle of thyleruaunt, for J haue done very foolyshly.

9 And the Lord spake vnto Gad Dauids
(ear pe

10 Go, and tell Dauid, saping thus fayth the Low, I gene thee the choyle olthree thinges: choole the one of them that J map do vnto thee.

And Gad tante to Danid, and sayd vn-
5 bit, thus layth the Lorde: Choole

12 Eypther three peres kamichment orthree monethesto be destroped before thyne
‘Duerlaviess F that the lworde of thyne

a may guertake thee :o2 els the
152 by ofthe Lord and peftdenice in the ande three daes, andticangellof the

rpantd of

ed Ut’ mhhug the lt ports delaule

yy

into the ty, Exo. 30.

Lowe destroying throu coastes of Jie h nate abu h selfe, what worde J that bring againe to him that sent me. i

13 And Dauid layde vnto Gad, J amin an exceeding strayte: Let me fall nowe into the hande of the Torde(forpalling great are his mercies but let me not kal into the hand of men.

14. So the Lorde sent pestilente bpon Il-C rael:and there were ouerthrowen of He rael threescore and ten thousande nien.

15 And God sent the angell into Hierulalem to destroy it: And as he was about to destrop, the Lorde behelde, and had compassion on the euyll, efayde to the angel that destroyed: tis enough, let nowe thyne hand teasse. And the angel . Lorde stoode by the threshing floore of Ornanthe Jcbusite.

16 And Daudd lift vp his eyes, and sawe the angell of the Lorde stand betweene the earth and heauen, hauing a drawen

sword in his hand, stretched out toward
Hierusalem: Then Dauid and the elders ol Jlrael whiche were clothed in sacke, fell vpon their faces,

17 And Dauid sapde vnto God: Js it not
Ithat commaunded the people to be numbred: It is J that haue finned and done euyll in deede: and what haue. thele sheepe done! Let thyne hande O
Pode my God be on me, and on my faz thers hoult: but not on thy people, that they shoulde be punished.

18 And the angell ofthe Lod connmnaun-
Ded Gad to say to Dauid, that Dauid shoulde go vp and set bp an aulter puto the Lorde in the threching floore of Ornan the Jebusite.

19 And Dandd went bp according to the faying of Gad whiche he spake in the name of the Lode.

20 And Ornan turned about, and saw the angell, and his foure sonnes were with e ite N : But Oruan
Was threshing wheate.

21 And a5 Palld came to Ornau, Ornan loked and sawe Danid , and went out ofthe threlhing flooze,and bowed hym
{elfe to Dautd with) his face to the

grounde. 2 3 22 And

I. Chronicles.

And Dawid sapde to Danan: Geue mie the plate of the threshing floore, that ZF map buplde an aulter therin vnto the

. lord: Thou Malt geue it me for as much

monepas it is worth, that We plague map teasse from the people.
23 And Ornan sayd vnto Dauid: Lake it
) to thee and let my lorde the king do that which seemeth good in his eyes: To, J geuc ther oxen alfo for burnt facrifices, aud treching instrumentes for wood, € wheate for meate offring, J geue it all.
24. And king Dauid sayde to Ornan: Mot so, but I Will bye it for as much money as it is worth:or J will not take that whiche is thyne for the Lorde, nor offer burnt offringes without coast.
25 And so Danid gauc to Dynan for that plate sicles of golde fire hundred by wapght.

26 And Dautd buplt there an aulte the Lorde, and offred burnt offcinges and peace offringes and called vpon the
Tode and he hearde him from heauen in kire vpon the aulter of burnt offring.
27th e ee spoken to
3 : is 0 da 2
1020 cheathe ft 0 ad againe in
28 At that tine when Dauid fare ¢
15 fee SADT 15 ee 925 4 ying floor rnan the Jebusi vled to oster there: n
29 Jor the tabernatle ofthe Lomde which
Moyles made in the wüdernesse, Ethe. aulter of burnt offring, were atthat tea: son in the hill of Gibeon:
30 And Daud coulde not go before tt, to alte tounsell at God, for he was afrapde of the lword of the angel of the Lorde.

The . xxii. Chapter.

2 Dawid prepareth things necessarie kor the buylding of the temple. 6 He commaundeth his sonne Solomon to buyide the temple of the Lorde, which thing he him selle was forbidden

Md Daudd laid: This is the boule of the lord
N at God, cthis is the aul

S

ter for the burnt of fring of Israel.

: And Danid com-

maunded to gather to-

out wapght,

4 And Cedar trees without number: Foz the Zidons and they ol Tyre brought much Cedar wood to Daud.

5 And Danidfapde: Solomon my sonne
1S poung and tender, and the boule that is to be buylded for the Lowe must be magnificall, excellent, and of great fame and dignitie throughout all countreps:

/ FH wil therfore make osdinaunces for it.
And fo Danid prepared many thinges before his death.

6 And he called Solomon his sonne, and charged him to buylde an house for the
Lowe God of Ilrael.

And Dauid lapde to Solomon: My fonne, J thought as it was) in myne heart to buplde an houle vnto the name

n. Reg. vii. b. qi
11. Reg. va.

to do. 9 Under the kigure of Solomon, Christ is peomifed, .

of the Lode my God:

8 But the word of the Word came to nie, saying: Thou hast (hed much blood and hast made great battaples: thou {halt therelore not buylde an Houle vnto my name, fozthou Hak shed much blood bpon the earth in my sight.

9 Wehold, a sonne is borne to thee, andhe halbe a man of reff, for J wil geue him rest from all his enemies rounde about:
For his name is Solomon, e I wil send rest and peace vpon IJsrael in his dayes.

jo He shall buylde an house foz my name, and he chalbe my sonne, and J wiibe his father, and J wil establishe the seate of his kingdonit vpon Israel for euer.

1 Nowe therfoze my lonne the Lorde be with thec, and prolper thee, and thou chalt buylde an houle to the Lordt thy
God, as he hath layde of thee.

12 And the Lord shall geue thee sos and bnderitanding, and chall geue at tommaundenientes foz Ilrael 3 : pe mapst kepe the lawẽdkthe £0 thy God.

iz F02 then thou Male proper euen 2 72 thou takest heede and fulfüllest th 12 tutes and lawes which the Lorde ah 9 gcd Moyses with for frac: plu aD thyne hearte therfore, ¢ be strong, 9not, nor be distouraged. ne C

i w pouertie ha

14 Wehold, actording to ny Jalle

I. Chronicles

CxxXIIl

uid ö
— the boule of tht of Jlrael to hel
Jalso prev pa helpe Solomon his sonne,

de, an hundred thoulande talentes ofgulde, and athousande thoulande ta-

leutes of liluer: and as for brasse c iron,

an not be nũbred, (for it is very much) ad haue prepared timber and stone, and thou maplt prouide moze thereto.

1 Moreover, thou hast workemen wich

thee inow, and malons, and carpenters, to wozke in fone and 1 2 men that be attiue for euery woke.

16 And of golde, siluer, brasse, c iron, there is no number: Up theretoze, and be doing, and the Lorde shalbe with thee,

17 And Dau commaunded al the lordes

18 Js not the Lord pour God wit on: and Hath he not geuen pou rest 2 fide for he hath geuen the inhabitours of the lande into my hand, and the land is subdued before the Lorde, and before his people.

19 Nowe therefore let pour heartes and pour soules to seke the Lord your God:
Up, and builde pe the temple of the

| Lord God, to being the arke of the couenaunt ofthe Lorde and the holy vessels ol God into the Youle fo built for the name of the Lorde.

The xxii. Chapter.

1 Dauid being olde, ordaineth Solomon king.

3 He causeth the Leuites to be numbred.

4 and alligneth them to their offices, 13 Aaron and his lonnes are kor the hie priestes.

14 The lonnes of Mopses.

O when Danid was olde and full of dapes, he made Solomon his sonne king ouer
Ilrael.
5 And then he gathe-
— red together all the lordes of Ilrael, with the priestes and the Leuttes.
3 Andthe Leuttes were numbred from the age ok thirtie perts and aboue: and the unmber and lunnne of them was thirtte and eyght thoulande men.
4. Ok which twentie and foure thouland
Pere let to further the worke of the house of the Lorde: and sixe thoulande
« Were officers and iudges.
5 Foure thouland were porters, foure thouland prayled the Lorde with suth inltrumentes as was made to praple
Withall.
And fo Dautd put An order among

D

them, deuiding them in partes: Okthe

. Hilden or Leut, Gerlon, Caath, and
© Pevari, : ch e

‘7 Okthe Gersonites u and
8. Hu es was Laadan, an

8 Thelonnes of Laadan the chlefe was
8 chlel,Zethan, and Joel three. N
8 he sonnes ot Semet: Sclomith, az
„ Athan Paran tee. Thele were the
5 untlent kathers of Laadan. l f a the sonnes of Semel, were, Ja
: were Ald Deus, 2 Werta: thele foure
2 And Be tines or Semel, i.
; Reams oat Was the chiefe, Z iza the a c but Jeus, and Beria had not

many fonnes, therfore they were in one. reckening accozding to their fathers: houcholde, reckened foz one auntlent houscholde. ;
12 The sonnes of Caath: Amram, J3a-. har, Mebron, and Asstel, foure. 9

13 The sonnes of Amram: Aaron, and ode
Moples: And Aaron was feparated to‘ i. Par. vi. a.

haue the rule of the holy thinges in the. plate most holp, he ⁊ hissonnes fo2 euer, and to burne incense before the Torde, and to minister vnto him, e to blesse in his name for euer. 3
14. Moyles also the man of God, and his ate were named with the tribe of . eui. 0
15 The sonnes of Moyses:Gersõ, æ Elieʒ er,
16 Ok the fonnes of Gerlom, Sebuel Was the chieke. 5
17 The sonnes of Eliezer, Nehabla the. chiefe: And Eliezer had none other sonnes, but the sonnes of Rehabta were verie many. | :
5 fonnes of Mahar, Selonuth the. chiefe.

ahaziel the

first, Amaria the feconde, ; durth.

thirde, and Jecmaani the

19 The sonnes ot Hebron, ae the:

20 The fonnes of Us iel: Micha the first,

and Jesia the setonde. N =
21 The lonnes of Merari: Mahli, ¢ Muli.
The sonnes of Mahl Eleazar and Cis.
22 And Eleazar dyed, and had no sonnes, but daughters: 10 their brethren the 5 sonnes of Cis toke them. j
23 The Fun d e i: Mahlt, Eder, and it ke. a ¢

Jeremoth, thz Da 24 These

Danid i

Jj

€
€
E
€

eat

Leuit.xvia.

E

the housholde of their fathers, euen the

auntient of the fathers accogding to

their offites, and after the number and summe of the names of them that dyd the worke in the seruice of the house of the Lod, from the age of twentie peres and aboue.

25 And Daudd fade: The Low God of

Ilrael hath geuen rest vnto his people, that they map dwell in Hierulalem for euer.

26 That the Teultes also shoulde nowe

no more beare the tabernacle, and al the vessels for the seruite thereof.

Dauid, the Teuites were numbed from twentie peres and aboue.

28 And their office was vnder the hande

of the sonnes of Aaron for the leruite of the houfe of the Lorde in the courtes

The xxiiij. Chapter.
Dauid alligneth offices onto the sonnes of Daron,

1 Hele are the deuisions of the sonnes of Aarõ.
The sonnes of Aaron:
“A Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithaniar.

Nadab alfo and A-

= bihu dyed before their father, e had no children: But Eleazar,

. € Ithamar exccuted the priestes office,

And Daud ordred them onthis maner:
Zadoc of the fonnes of Eleazar, and Ahimelet okthe sonnes of Ithamars were) according to their offices in their unt stration.

4 And there were mo auncient men

founde among the fonnes of Elcazar, then the sonnes of Ithamar. And thus were they ordred tͤgether: Among the sonnes of Eleazar there were sixteene rulers atcording to the housholde of their kathers, x eyght among the fonnes

of Ithamar according to the housholde

of their fathers.

And thus were they put in order by lot

the one fort from the other: and so were

there rulers in the sanctuarie € lordes

before God, as Well of the sonnes of E-

leazar, as ofthe sonnes of Ithamar.
Ind Semela the sonne ol Pathangel

Wrote them before the king € the lordes,

€before Zadoc the priest and Ahumelec the lonne of Abiathar, andbefoze the

I. Chronicles.
24 These are the children of Leui after

16 The nynteenth to
17 The twentie and one to

Danig

and celles, and in the puntping of al bo: «

ly thinges, and in uice of the honse of Go
29 Inthe chewbread, in the fine flowze in! the meate offting,in p waters of werte bread, in the frying panne, in the gredyron, and inallmaner ok mealures ¢ file:
30 152 to fan eneep uy inthe morning. nie and praple the Lorde, , like wyse at euen: 1 ‘
And to offer all burnt satrifites vnto the Lord, in the Sabbathes, in the new moones, and on the fealtfull dapes, by; number & custome continually as they. were tommaunded, bekoze the Lord.

27 Fozaccozding to the last wordes of 32 And that they chould wapte on the ta-

bernacle of the congregation, e on the. holy place, and on the sonnes of Aaron their brethren, in the fernice of the houle ofthe Lorde.

K K W K&K „

auncient fathers ok the priestes and,
Teuites, one principalt housholde being reserued for Eleazar, and one for «

Ithamar. f

7 Andthe kirst lot fell to Jehotarib, aud a the seconde to Jedaia,

8 The third to Harim, and the
Sehorim,

9 The kikth to Melchia, and the firth to.

llamin, 5 lo The seuenth to Pakes, and the eyght to“ Abt

b a

fourthto

7 PL n The nynth to Jesua, and the tenth to
Secania

12 The eleuenth to Eliasib, e the twelfth, to Jakin, 5
13 The thirteenth to Huppa,and the fourteenth to Jesebeab, .
14 The frftenth to Büga, and the firtenth to Immer, . *
1 The seuententh to Hezir, a the erghtteenth to Aphles,

kwentie to Jehestzel ‘
Jeh 8 Jathin, and.

the twentie and two to Gamul, 8

18 Thetwentte and three to aan, . and the twentie e koure to Maasiahu.

19 hele are the ordinaunces of then in. the scribe, ol the kinred ofthe Leuites,

é : . the their offices when they came into 3 pout of the lorde, according to cen he ner vnder Aaron their Rade 15 15 lord God of srael had tõ 10 Thee

the — of the ler-

ul i.

pethabia, and the. *

I. Chronicles. XV.

: erest ofthe sonnes ol Leut, are 27 The fonnesof Merari by Faasia u, e pelt Olthelonnes of ameam, Suba- weno, Soham, Zatur, and Port. ; :
„ elkokthe lonnes of Sabuel, Jehedlahu. >< sPablicame Eleazar, and he had no:

a e sonnes of Nehabta, the fick Je- N b .
9 7 29 Ol Cis: the sonnes ol Cis, Jerahe-
4 Ok the Jezaharttes Selomoth: Ok nmteel. a

f es allo of Sclomoth Jahath. zo The lonnes ol Muli, Mahl, Eder, and. th snnes Jertahuhe liel, Amarti- Jerinioth: Thel“ aer the children of,

u.

f ahu the letond, Pabastel the third, and the Teuttes, after the houcholde ok
Jekamcam the fourth. their kathers. ‘
24 Ok the sonnes of Usziel, Micha: Ok 31 Andthele tast lottes next to their brethe lonnes ol cha, Samir. thren the sonnes of Aaaron in the pre-

25 The brother ol Micha was Issia: Ok lente ot Dauid the king, € Zadot, and.
0 the sonues allo of Issia, Zechariahu. Ahinrelec, and the auntient fathersof:
16 The lounes of Merart, were Mahl, the priestes & Leuttes, euenthe puntiand Muli: The sonnes ol Jaazlahu, 112 fathers befoze their vounger bre-
Weuo. 0 zen.

The xxv. Chapter.
The lingers are appoptited with their places and lottes.

Md lo Dauid and the executed the seruite in the Houle of God captaynes of the hoast at the kinges commaundement. : appopnted out to do 7 And the multitude of them with their. fernice the fonnes of brethrẽ that were instrutt in the fonges: 5
Asaph, and Hheman, € ok the Torde, even all that were cun-
Jeduthun , whiche ning, were two hundred kourstore and,
{hould prophecle with eyght. ‘ harpes, plaltertes, and cymbales: And 3 Andthey * caltlottes among them p. nd there was a multitnde ok the men that lelues how they shonld walte, al wel fo2<
Were appoynted to the seruice and un- (the simall as for the great, for the scol-

© nitration: | ler aswell as for the schoolemaister.

2 OF the Comes of Asaph, Zacur,Jo: And the first lot in Alaph kell to Jo-

;seph, Rathanta, and Alarela that way? seph, the {econde to Gedaliahu, with

ted on Afaph whiche prophecied ace his brethzen and fonnes, Whiche men. ktording to the tommaundement ofthe werc twelue. i

N
&

a] f

CH]
Puy 3 ö
E a SWZ,

nn : ͤK«ͤ „„ „ ͤũꝶ „ ͤũ ⅛i—2u fae # &

fing, 1o The third fell to Zacur with his:
3 Okt Jeduthun: the lonnes ok Jedu- lonnes and brethren, being tweiue perthun, Gedeliahu. Zeri, Jesaiahu,ala- bons. :

„ biabu, aud Pathathiähu, fire, vnder 11 The fourth to Jort with his fonnest,
„ thebandes ok thelr father Jeduthun, and byethzen, twelne perlons. . hiche prophecled with a harpe, fo to 11 The fifth to Hathaniahu with his:
„ Leue thankes c prapses vuto the Lod. sonnes and brethren, twelue persons.
4 Ok heman:the fonnes of hemau, Buc- 3 The fict to Wuttiahu with his sonnes.
+ tabu, atthantahu, Uszlel, Zebuel, and bzethicn, twelue perlons. .
„ Jerunoth, Panantah, Panaut,Eikatha, 14. The leuenth to Jelrarela with bis.
; 10 ddalthtNomantht, Eser, Jolbeka- sonnes and bzethren twelue perlons-
„ LMalothiHothic,and Pahastoth. 15, The eyghr to Jelaabn with his.
. bee Were the sonnes of Henman, sonnes and brethen, twelue persons.
‘ of Neh was p kinges sear in the wordes 16 The ninth to Wachaiahu with his.
5 Ane tolylt vp the home (of the regal sonnes and brethzen, twelue persous. ;

ie Kaan God gaue to heman foure- 17 The tench to Semei with his sonnes.
6 Mei ssid three daughters. and brethren, twelue persons. a aher cleallo were at the hand oktheir 18 The eleuenth to Azarecl with bis.
Wit cr fitiging in the Houle of the Lord, sonnes and brethren, twelne perfons, ben Pbates, pfattertes, and harpes, ? The twelkth to Hazabia with his.

hen Alaph, Jeduthun, and Heman sonnes and brethren, twelue e 1

—_ had —

20 The thirteenth to Subael with his

fonnes and brethren twelue persons.
The fourteenth), to Mathathlahu

with his sonnes and brethren, twelue

persons. —

22 The fifteenth to Jeremoth with his sonnes and brethren, twelue persons.

«
«
€
«

23 The firteenth to Hanauiahu with his

« fortes and brethren, twelue persons.
‘24 The seuenteenth to Jelbekala with

his sonnes e brethren, twelue persons.

25 The eyghteenth to Hanant with his sonnes and brethren, twelue persons.
26 The nineteenth to Malothi with his sonnes and brethren, twelue persons.

20 and ouer the treature,

1 bbescare the dentlions sf the posters. Among

| Sethe Corethites, Meleleaviniabu, the fonne of

2 « CSP Alaph. ?

2 — And the fonnes of

Meselemiahu were thele: Zachariabu the eldest, Jedihel the second, Zebadiahuthe third, and Jahntel the fourth,

3 = Elam the fifth, Jehohanan the firt, and Eiloenai the seuenth.

4 The sonnes of Obed Edom, Semeta the eldest, Jehosabad the second, Joah the third, Satar the fourth, and az thanael the fifth,
5 Amnuel the firth, Issachar the seuenth,

Peulthai the eight, for God blessed him.
6 And vnto Semeia his sonne, were
« fonnes bone, that ruled in the house of
‘ a4 father: fog they were men of
© might.

Bi7 The sonnes of Semeia, Oebni, Rez phael, Obed, And Elzabad, and his brethen Were strong men, Elihu and Samachiahu.

“3 Allthese were of the children of Obed

Edom: they and their children, and their brethren, actiue men, and of strength to do seruite, euen threescore € two of Obed Edom.

9 And Mestlemiahu had sonnes and brethren, attiue men, epghteene.

io The sonnes of Hola of the children of Merart, Simri the chiefe, though he was not the eldest, pet his sather set him inthe chiekest plate:

1 Helktabu the setond, Tebaliahu the

c c
C c
€ c c c
‘6 c c
€ c
«
¢
¢

„ „% K » NN

27 The twenteeth

The. xxvi. Chapter. ;
Che porters of the temple are ordayned enery man to the gate which he would keepe, ;

Bore of the chudren ot

0 „

to Eliatha wi * sounes and hnethzen, abel ree Oe c
28. Le twenticand one to Hote with
Hee Annie and brethren, twelue per-
2s The twentle x two to Seoaitht with’
15 sonnes and brethren, twe ye ins x | Ly lue per-
30 The twentte and three to Mahazioth. with his sonnes and Hethren, He
Nahe tie and f
31 The twentte and foure to Romamehi‘
Ezer with his sonnes and pene: twelue perlons. 9

¢

third, and Zechariahun the fourth: att. the sonnes and brethren of Hola were thirteene. a

12 Among these was deuided the office: ok the portership, that they shoulde be. auncient nien, to wapte with their brethren, whenthey nunistred in the house of the Lorde. ;

13 And hey tast lottes betweene the great and small, after the housholde oftheir. C fathers, lor euery gate. 0

14 Andthe lot on the eastlyde fell pon
Selemiahn: And kor Zachariahu his. foune (which was a Wyle counsailour). thep tast lottes, and his lot tame out to-. ward the north. 3

15 And Obed Edoms lot fell to the fouth: f
And kor his fonnes fell the houles ol! ꝰ e
Aluppim. e

16 Foz Shuppim and Bola towarde the. west, with the gate Shallecheth by the. paucd streete that goeth bpwarde, one watch being ouer against an other.

17 In the cast were lire Leuites, and (0° ward the north foure a dap, toward the fouth fourea day, and to warde Asuppim two and two. 0 n

18 In c Parbar towarde the weft MW ohics at the going bp, and two m Pharbar. Ps K

19 These are the deuilions of the porter" aniong the 11975 af Bored, é among. the sonnes ol Merari. 2

20 Pan ofthe Lenites, Ahlah had 165 Of 9 uerlight ol the trealures ok the hon lie
God, E ok the trealures of the dedicart thinges. ;

21 A ronserumg the sonnes 19 9
Whiche were the chuldren of the nite

U fal the mM

3 of Laadan, came auncient faz chers, enen of Laadanthere tame Gerand Jehieli. .
12 aie aes of Jehieli, Zetham, and
Jotl his brother, which were ouer the freafures of the house of the Lorde.
13 Pkthe Amcamites allo aud Brava:
0 rites, Hebronites, and Ozielites.
2 And Subael the sonne of Gersom the
Tone of Moyses, (was ga ruler duer the

atures.

E as 920 of his brethrenthe sonnes of Elitzer Was Naähabiahu, whole lonne as Jelatahu, whole sonne was Joram, wbale denne Was Zichzi, whole
© foune was Selounth.

26 Which Selonuth e his brethren were

guer all the trealures of the Dedicate

„ thinges, Which Dautd the king, and the

f

‘ e

auncient fathers, the captapnes ouer thoulandes and hundredes, and the taptaynes of the hoast had dedicated,
17 Out ok the spoples wonne in battasses, they did dedicate to mapnetapue the

HE children of Ilrael,

X tent, paunctent heads and captapnes of thoulandes and hundredes,

uers courses, which tame in and went aut moneth by moneth, throughout all the monethes ok the pere: And in euerp caurse were twentie and foure thou: thouland.

Duer the fick tourse for the first mo-

Zabdiel, and in his tourse were twentie and foure thouland.

50 6 the chiekest of all the taptaynes ol che hoast for the first moneth, was of the chüdren of Phares.

4 Mere the courte of the setond moneth,
2 Dodai an Ahohite, e in his courte
. — oe 9 Chis helper:] and
0 4 i 0 thoutange ere twentie and foure

The chiefe taptapne of the third hoast

tar

— p i 2 a!

q The xxvij. Chapter.
Ob the princes and rulers that ministred vnto the hing.

Slafter the numberof

neth, was Jasoboam the fonne of

Had dedicated, and whesoeuer had de- “ dicated any thing, it Was ee the. hand of HSelomith and of his brethren. .
29 Pk the Psabavites was Chenamahuand his so nnes appoynted to the bulynelle © withoutfoorth duer Ilrael:for. they were officers and iudges. eee
30 And of the Hebronites, Halabiahu and benen his brethren, nien of actiuitie, a thousand ‘ and seuen hundred, were offiters among them of Brack beyond Jordane weit: ward, in al buspnesle belonging to God, and ferutee of the king. :
31 Among the Hebronttes was Jediathe chic kest, euen a prince among the Hebro- 4 nites and fathers ol his kinred: And in the fourtith pere of the kingdome of‘
Dauid, they Were fought foz,and there were founde among them nienofacte « uitic at Jaʒer in Gilead. 8
32 And his brethren were men of actimtie, euen two thoufand and seuen hundred auntlent fathers: whom king Dauid made rulers ouer the Nubenites, «
Gadites, and ouer the halfe tribe of.
Manasse, for euery matter pertapning. to God, and foz the kinges buspnesse.

é

for the third moneth, was Banatahn N. the sonne of Jehoiada the hie priest, and in his course Were twentie and foure ‘ thonland. g
6 This is that Banaiahu which was. most mightie among thirtie, and aboue « thirtie: And in his part was Aintzabadhis sonne. F
7 The fourth captapne for the fourth. moneth, was Alaelthe brother ol Jo-. 5 ab, and Zabadaia his sonne after hun, and in his course were twentie & four‘ thousand. 6 ‘
8 The fifty taptapne for the fifth moneth, was Sanihut the Jezrahite, aud in his courle were twentie and foure, thousand. ‘
„The lixt captapne for the firtmonetd, « was Ira the sonne or Ickes a Whee: « pa si lag courte were twentie and foure thoufand. :
Io The — 5 captayne for the scuenth nioneth, was Helez the Pelomte ok the chuldren of Ephraim, and in his course. were tiwentte aud foure thouland, The

Druid. i The eyght capta vue for the eyght moneth, was Schbechai an Hulathite of
Rkypuredeok Zarhi, t in his tourse were tueuntie and foure chouland.

‘iz The muth captayne for the ninth mo-

nech, was Abiczer an Anathothite of the sonnes of Jemini, and in his course were twentie and foure thousand.

z The tenth captayne for the tently moneth, was Maharai the Metophatite of the Zarahites, t in his courte were twentie and foure thousand.

14 The eleuench taptapne for the eleuenth moneth, was Banaia the Pirathonite ot the childrenof Ephraim, and in his course were twentie and foure

_ thoufand. 4

15 The twelfth captayne for the twelfth

moneth, was Heldalthe Metophatite

of Othomicl, and in his tcourse were twentie and foure thouland.

1s And the rulers ouer the tribes of Jsrael were these: Ainong the Kubenttes, was Eliezer the sonne of Zichzi: A-

mong the Simeonites allo, was Saphathiahu the foune of Maacha.

17 Among the Teuites, Halabia the

sonne of Remuei: Among the Aaro-

ulies, Zadok.
JS Among them of Juda, Elihu ok the
« bretizen of Dauid: Among them ok
Assachar, Omri the sonne of Michael.
De Among them of Zabulon, Jesimalahu the sonne of Obadiahu: Aniong thé of
Mephthali, Jerimoth p sonne of Asriel.
20 Among the children of Ephraim, Hosea the sonne of Aʒariahu: In the halle tribe also of Manasse, Joel the sonne of

CAR A AH

n AR M

K „% K K M K A & HR „

21 Okthe halfe tribe of Manasse in Gile-

ad, Jiddo the sonne of Zachariahu: Among them of Bemamin, Paafiel the sonue of Abner. ,

22 Among themof Dan, Asarel the sonne

of Jeroham. Lhele are the lordes of the tribes of Israel.

23 But Danid toke not the number of

¢

€

¢

them vnder twentie yeres, ber :

Lorde faide he would eneeate J

lpke buto the starres of the faye, ‘

24. And Joabthe sonne of Zarniae. (Pa gan to nünwer: but he finithed it not becaule that there fell Wrath fo it againg
Ilrael, neither was the number put in-

ko the cronicles ofking Daun, ;

25 Duce the kinges treatures was ys.-. maueth the sonne of Adiel: And ouer © the trealures of the fleldes in the cities and villages, and castels, was Jehong. than the sonne of Uʒsiahu. 0

* fhe jee — . in the fieldes

Jrounde, was Esri the | forme buen : “s che.

27 And the ouersight of the vineyardes had Semelthe Namathite: Duct thee enerease also of the binepardes, eoucr‘ the winelellers, was Sabdithe Zaphonite.

28 And duer the oline trees and nunberie trees that were in the valleyes, Was.
Waal Hanan the Gederite: And ouer the treasure of oyle, was Joas. 0

29 Puer the oxen that fed in Haron, was
Setrai the Saronite: And ouer the oren that Were in the vallepes, was Saphat the sonne of Adlai. a

30 Duer the tammels, Obil the Pinae: « lite: And ouer the alles, was Jehdeiahu the Meronothite. ‘

31 Ouer the sheepe was Paes the hagerite: All these were the rulers of the « F substaunte of king Dauid. ö

32 And Jehonathan Daudds vncle, a.

manokcounsell and of vnderstanding, was a ftribe, and Jehiel the forme of «sun,
Hachmom was with ö kinges sonnes bse. instructing them.] 5

33 And Ahitophel was of the kinges. tounsell: And Husai the Arachite was the kinges companion. ‘

34. And next to Ahitophel was Jeholada, the sonne of Wanaiahu, and Abiathar:. and the captapne ofthe kinges Warte, was Joab. ö

The. xxviii. Chapter.

Because Dauid was forbidden to builde the temple, he willeth Solomon and the people to perkourme it. 8 Exhorting him to feare the Lorde.

ND Daud gathered
5 all the lordes of Isra-

el, the lozdes of the
JE OX

tribes, the lozdes of

the companies that ministred to the king by courte , p captaines

ouer the thousandes and ouer the hun dredes, € the lordes that had the one fight ouer all the fubftaunice and po A fion of Dauid, ¢ of his fonnes, with - 4 f chamberlapnes, al the nughtie and 75 liaunt, and all actiue mien, vnto Hieru

lem. 1 And

| i Onrenles.| e pid. ; . — CXXVI] —
And ting Daind stosde vp vpon his tate:
8 feete, and saydt: Heare mie nip brethren 1 Andthe example of all that he had in and my people, J had mmpneheart his minde for the tourtes of the haule of be- (9 bullde an house ok relt, forthe avkcof the Tode, and for all the celles rounde the touenauntokthe Lowe, and forthe about, for the treasures of the houlc of footestoole ot our God, and had inade God, and for the treasures ofthe dediredie forthe building 5 tate thingesr
3 Wut God laide vnto me: thou shalt 13 Foz the deussions ofthe priestes and ane nt bnelde an houle for mynante, be- Leuttes that wapted by tourt, and for C tauile thou hast ben a niandk warre, and Athe workemanch that cyomd serue
Hatt shed blood. 2 forthe house ofthe Lorde, and kor all
Moredcuer the Lorde God of Israel the vellels that shoulde serue in the
*chofe me before all the houle of my fa- houle ofthe Torde: ns, ther, to be king ouer Piractfozrener:for 14. Foz goloe,and for the waight of goine, in Juda would he choofe a captaine,¢ forall vellels of sundy minittrations, ofthe houleholde of Juda is the Houle kor all maner ok beffels of fuer in ol mp kather, x among the sonnes ofmy Waight, a foz all veslels whatsoener father he had a lust to me to make me purpole they serued vnto: king ouer all Ilrael. 15 The waight of golde for the tandel-
And ofall my sonnes (forthe Torde stickes, and the golde fo: their lampes, hath genen me many sonnes) he hath With the waight for cuerp candelstiche cholen Solomon my fore, to sit vpon and kor the lampes thereok: And fo2 che the (cate of the kingdome ok the Lorde tandelstickes Of tiluce bp waight, boch in Israel. for the tandelsticke r allo fo2 her lampes, ani. 6 And he lalde vnto me: Solomon thy according to the dinerlitie ok the vlc of

sonne he shall builde me an houle and courtes: I haue chosen him to be mp sonne, and J will be his father.

Br J wyll stablishe his kingdome fo2 euct, it he wyll be strong to do my tommiumbementes and nip lawes, as it

goeth this dap. -_

3. MoWetherefore in the fight ofall PFE raelthe congregation of the Lorde, and intheandience of our God, keepe and seeke for allthe tommaundementes of

euery candelsticke. 9
And by wapght che gavel golde for the tables of shelwe bread, euen kor cuery ta
— and like wyse siluer kor the tables of luer.

17 And pure golde for the fleshehookes,

the Lowe pour God, that ye may enioy

à good lande, and leane inheritance fo? pour children alter pon for euer.
9 And thou Solomon my soune knowe

thou the God ok thy father, and serue

him with a pure heart and with a wyllug minde: Foz the Lord searchethal heaktes, and vnderstaͤndeth all thet magiations okthoughtes: And ik hon eee him, he wyll be founde of thee: but

Maviie,

f hou foslake him, he Wyll cad ther or

faonrcuer.
0 Tanke herde now, for the Lo ie . roe hath
Ean vee el him anhoule ofa ema We trong therefore eplay
And Dauid gan l te pater Sane Solomon his fonne
CSthatlongedthereto, ofthe storehat vpper chambers, bre par?
, and ok the Houle o the mercie

tuppes, and Drinking pots: and (pure) golde in wayght for basons, euen for enery bafou: and likewylt filuer by
Waight, for euery bason of liluer.

And forthe aulter of intense, pure golde by waight, and golde for tie patterne ofthe charret ol the Cherubs that stretched ont their winges and couered the arke of the touenaunt of the Lorde.

All Che fade was geuen me“ by werting or the hande of the Lorde, Which made me vnderstand al the workemanship ok the patterne.

20. And Dariid ald to Solomon his foune:

of the porche, and of the

in wyledome kor any mauer of on

be strong e of good courage, ¢ do manfullye, feare nat nor be faint hearted, fo2 p lord God, euen in God, is with thee, ehe Mall not kalle thee, no forfatie thee, vntill thou hast finiched alp worte that must serue kor the houle ofthe Horne.

Bcholde, the priestes aud Leuites art, deünded in companies forall mance of seruite that pertayneth to the houle of
God, they ate with thee foz all maner of workmanship, and fo are al that excel

thou

Exodus. v.

I. Chronicles.

thou hast allo the princes and all the

geuety thanses Co

D Daudd the king aide vnto all the con-

rey |gregation: God bath i wolpecially chosen Solomon nm fone which

Nis pet voung k tender, the Worke is great:

Moreouer, J Hane prepared with all my might for the boule of mp God, golde for vessels of golde, siluer for them of silner, brasse for thinges of brasle, iron forthinges of ron, c Wood for thynges of wood, and onix stones, and stones to be set, glistering stones, and of diuers

* Some
Gegen = colours, g àl maner of precious stones,
€ marble stones in great aboundaunce.
3 And because J hane lust to the house of my God, J haue ot myne one pro-
: per good of golde and filucr which J

haue geuen tothe boule of mp God,

b beside all that J haue prepared kor the holp boule,

4 Euen three thonsand talentes of golde of Ophir, and seuen thouland talentes of tried filuer, to ouer lape the walles of

the house withall.

5 The golde foz thinges of golde, siluer foz them ofsuuer, and for all maner of
Worke by the handes of artificers: And

gal bang Wholoener is wylling, map this day

feiere O eonlecrate his hande vnto the Lorde. gosta, 6 And lo the auntient fathers and the toxedercrs. lordes ok the tribes of Hlrael, the tap-

(a) not onclp lcbe-

uokcb others. rs tapnes of thoulandes and hundredes, teh: With the lordes that were rulers ouer eiche Lein. the kinges worke, were willing,

God, fiue thouland talentes of golde, and ten thoufand peetes oc golde,] and ten thousand talentes of siluer, æ epghtteene thouland talentes of brasse, and obne hundred thoufand talentes of iron.

3 And they with whom preclous stones were founde, gaue them to the treasure ofthe house ofthe Lod by the hand of
Jehiel the Gerfontte.

And the people reiopted when they were so wylling to geue their goodes, and with a perfect heart thep offered

q The. xxix. Chapter.

not be for man, but

2 7 And gaue for the seruice of the house of f

people Who ly at thy commaundement.

z Che offering of Dauid and okthe princes lor the building of the temple. io aud the Lorde. o He exhorteth the people to do the same, 22 Solo. mon is created king 25 Dauid dyeth, and Solomon his sonne raigneth in his deade.

Wylingly to the Lod: And Dausd the king reioyced With great gladnesse.

10 And Dawdlefle the Lorde before. all the congregation, and sayde: Blelsedbe thou Lorde God of Ifrael, our father from euer and for cnet,

u Thyne O Torde is greatnesse, and power, glorp, victorie, and prapse: forall that is in heauen and in earth is thyne, and thyne is che kingdome O Lopne, and thou excellest aboue all, euen as the head of all. 5

12 And richesse and honour tomeokthee, and thou raignest ouer all, and in thyne hande is power € strength, and in thyne hand it is to make great and to geue strength vnto all.

13 And nowe our God we thanke thee, C and prayse thy glorious name.

14 But who am J and what is my people: that we should enforce ourfeines to geue these thinges so wilingly? Wut all thinges come of thee, x ol that which we receaued at thyne hand, we haue geuen thee. f

15 o we be but straungers before thee, G! and soiourners, as were al our fathers:

Our dapes on the earth also are but as a * shadowe, and there is none abiding. ü.

16 O Torde dur God, all this tuffe that we haue prepared to builde thee au
Houle for thy Holy name, conunett of thyne hand, and is all thyne.

17 J ot also my God that thou tryest che heartes, and hast plealure in bnkaynednesle, z in the vntaonednelle of mypne heart Jhaue wyllingly offered al these thinges: And now haue J teene thy people Which are kounde here to of

fer vnto thee Wyllynglp, and with gladnesse. — Ce) conta

18 O owe God of Abraham, Plahac, nes andofPlcaclour fathers, weepe tye ve, for euet᷑ in the defire of the thoughtes o pv the heart of thy people, E prepare thett 5 heartes vnto there. 1

19 And geue vnto Solomon my on perfect heart, to keepe thy conunaindmentes, thy testimonies, thy tabu and to do all, and bunde the houle, the which J haue made prouttion. And

I. Chronicles. 1
2 — ˙ . z uid fap 1 elues 7
—~ 2° argponoe bette tie #.070¢ VE GOD. 1 Solomon, > and were bnder il the congregatt g e Lowe magni tt a all pottyercfatHees,qmbbowen en dane th the aht of ait en of e downe their ie worchtpped dane a 10 glorious a kingde an i N ? ng had be y
1 ther thep offered offerynges bntothe rag. ene
Lorde: Aud on the mozowe after the 26 And so Pauld the sonne of Flat raigsayd day, they offered burnt offerpnges ned ouer all Ilrael. . vnto the Lorde, euen a thousand young 27 And the {pace that he raigned ouer YE oren a thonlande rammes and athou- rael was fourtie peres: Seuen peres lande cheepe, with their denke offe- raigned he in Hebron, and thirtie and rynges: Many faccifices offered they three peres raigned he in Hierulalem. for all Israel, 28 And he dyed in a good age, ful of dapes-
22 And did eate € drinke before the Lord riches, and Honour: and Solomon the same day with great gladnesse: And his sonne raigued in his steade. they made Solomon the sonne oft Da- 29 The attes ol Daun the king first and nid king the setond tyme, and annointed last, beholde they are Witten in the him pance before the Powe, and Za booke of Samuel the ear, and in the dot to be the bye prielt. booke of Mathan the prophete, and in ay ar wis, 23 And Solomonlate onthe seate ol the the booke of Gad the fear: Haatben and
Tord, and was kyng in steade of Daud 30 With all his kyngdome, and power, Jo. his kather, and prospered: and all they and tymes that went ouer him, e over of Hirael obeyed Hint. all Plrael, and over all the Bingdomes
24. Ind all the lordes and men of power, oktht earth. f and all the lonnes ol kyng Dauid, sub-

$4) The ende of the first booke of the Chronicles, otherwise called the firft booke of Paralipomenon.

’

3.Reg 3 a.

Or, greats ter.

3. Reg. q. a.
I. Par. 21. d.

Exod. 3s.

2 Reg Ga.

Exod. 38. a.

Reg 3.c.

Sa pl. ix a.
3-Reg 3 a.

3 Rcs 3a.

Solomon.

2. Chronic
I he seconde booke of the Chronicl

CS.

Solon,

es,

which in the Hebrue is one with the first.

I ¢ The firft (hapter.
6 Che offeryng ok Solomon at Gibeon, s He prapeth vnto God to geue him wildome, rt which he geueth him, and moze. 14 The number of his charettes and horleg,

ij and ok his riches,

Nd Solomon the fonne of

ie) <P Ay!
N Dauid wared
(a) Hae rong in his

Wap ok
Se VA hingbome, and

N
= Shim, and mage
Imitied him ta dignitie.

taynes oucr thoufandes, to the cap-

tapnes ouer hundredes, to the iudges, and to euerp officer in all Israel, and to the auntient fathers.

Aud so Solomon and all the tongregation with him went to the hye place

that was at Gibco: for there was the tabernacle of the congregation of God,
*whiche Boyles the seruaunt of the
Lorde made in the wildernesse.

4 But the arke of God“ had. Dauid brought from Kiriathiarun, into the place which Dawid had prepared therefore: Foz he had pitched a tent for it at
Micrulalem. ;

5 Moreoner,the brasen aulter*that Besaicel the sonne of Uri the sonne of Hur had made, was there before the tabernacle of the Lorde: And Solomon and the tongregation went to visite it.

6 And Solomon gat vp there before the

Lorde, to the brasen aulter that was bez

fore the tabernacle of the congregation,

andꝰ offered a thoufand burnt facrifices vpon it.

And the same nyght did God appeare vnto Solomon, and laid vnto him: Alke what JJ shall geue thee. a
3 And Solomon fade vnto God: Thou

hast shewed great mertie vnto Dauid my father, andꝰ hast made me to raigne in his steade.

9 Nowe therefore, O Lowe God, let thy promise whiche thon madest vnto
Dawid my father, be true: Jor thou

the Lorde his
God was with

| | And Solomon spake vnto all Ilrael, to the tap?

Hatt made me king ouer a people whi
15 eRe the dust of the earth in 15

10 Wherkore geue me nowe wiledome and knowledge, that J map be adic to
© go in and out before this people: fo eee kan iudge this people that is fo

H And God sapde to Solomon: Wecaule this was in thyne heart, and becaule thou batt not asked trealure and riches, and honour, ethe lines of thine enemies, neither vet long lyke, but hast alked wisedome and knowledge kor thy selfe, to iudge my people ouer which J haue made thee kyng:

12 Wildome and knowledge is graunted vnto thee, and J wil geue thee trealure. and riches, and glorie: fo that among the kynges that haue ben before thee, or a tice, none was oz chalbe lyle

hee. a

13 And so Solomon came from the high ¢ plate that was at Gibeon to Hierulalem from the tabernacle of the cougregation, and ratgned oner Jlrael.

14 And Solomon gathered charets and horsemen: and he had a thoulande and foure hundred charets, r twelue thou sande horsemen, whom he bestowed in the charet cities, and with the kyng at
Hierusalem.

15 And the kyng made siluer and golde at Hierulalem as plenteous as ftoncs, and Cedar trees made he as plentie as the Mulberp trees that growe in the valleys. it

16 Allo Solomon had Vozles brouge out of Egypt fine linnen: The kinge receaued the fine linnen

or a prite.

17 They camre also and brought out Se gypt a charet fo: fire hund ed pete n filuer, enen an hole fo an hunde al fiftie: And fo brought they born forthe the kyngesol the Fethites and aide. kynges of Syria, by their on 0 56

(4) Ghat 3
Map gon chere.

Nez zb.

Cb) That is, tobrreumgey ok ehrt ent: tg.

in. Reg. xd.

ii leg. a.

ND Solonion deter:

mined to buylde an

boule foz the name of the Lord, and an boule ko his kingdome.

a And Solomon tolde

== cut threestore and ten thousande men to beare burthens, and fourestore thousand men to hewe stones in the mountapne, and w ehree thouland and fire hundred to ouersee them.

And Solomon sent to Hiram the king of Lyre, saying: As thou diddest deale
With Daund my father, x diddest sende him Cedar wood to build him an house to dwell in ceuen fo deale with me:)

4 SBehold J builde an Houle for the name of the Lode my God, to offer vnto him holp thinges, x to burne sweete incense, and to let shelwe bread befoze Hint conte nuallpe , to offer burnt facvifices of the
Wong and euenung on the Sabbath dayes, in the firste day of euery nee mooie, and in the solempne keastes of the Lorde our God: kor it is an ordinaunte to Ge coutinnallp kept of Jlrael.

5 And thze house which J bude shalbe
1915 for great is our God aboue all

6 Wut who is houle when that heauen and heauenabone all heauens ts not able to receaue bin, what am J then that chould bald biman boutez nap, but euen to burnelatvifice before hum [all this bulldpng be.) ende ine nowe therfore a cunnyng ian that can worke in golde and siluer, inbeaffe and iron, in purple, crpmosin, pelowe filke, æ that can skyll to graue with the kunning men tyat are with me in Jnda and Hlerusalem, whom Daud my father dyd prepare.

8 dende me also Cedar trees, pine trees, and‘ aiguinetrees, ont of Libanon:
15 5 Wot that thy fernauntes can fart

hewe timber in Libanon:and behold
Mp men shalbe With thine,

hat they vi hee — timber e-

Ds fo, e which Jam de-

renne to buude, aloe ag

a

It ig raden dal snen of

cere and carte g.

leg. v.a.

geg y b.

Dtherg beck

t) Some

¢ The. ij. Chapter.

enumber of Solomons workiemen to bullde the temple, Solo ian the lyng ol CTyrus kor wood and workemen. e unnon tendeth to

able to builde him an.

— 2 broniicleg

CxXxlx.

the cutters and hewers ok timber, haue geuen twentie thonland quarters of beaten wheate, and twentte thoufand quarters of barlpe, and twentie thoulande battes of Wine, and twentie thou: lande battes of oyle.

n And Hiram ß king ol Tyre aunswered in writyng, Which he lent to Solomon:
Wetause the Lorde bath loued his peo: ple, therefore hath he made thee kyng ouer them.

Iz And Hiram sapd moreoner: W lesled be the Lorde God of Israel which made heauen ct earth, ¢ that hath geuen Dautd the king a wife sonne, and one that
Hath distretion, prudence, and onder: standing to build an houlc for the Lord, and à pallace for his kingdome,

iz And nowe J dane sent à wile man, and a man ok vnderstandyng, whom my lather Hiram dpd ble:

14. The sonne of a woman of the daughters of Dan, and his father was a man

C
J. Reg. 5. b.

of Tyre, x he can lkyll to Worke in golde

and siluer, in brasse and iron, in fone and timber, in purple and pelowe filke, in fine white and erpmosin, and can graue sundry maner of grauinges, and to finde out diners maner of subtyll worke that shalbe {ct before him, with thy tunnyng men, and with the cunnyng men of mp lorde Danid thy kather.

15 Mobe therfore, the wheate and barlye, ole and wine, which mp lorde hath spoken of, let him lende vnto his ler-
Uauntes:

16 And we wyll cut wood in Libanon as much as thou shalt neede, and wil bring it to thee in Motes by fea to Japho, from whence thou mapest tarythem to
Hicrulalen.

17 And Solomon numbred all the straungers that were in the lande of Ilrael, after the number of them whom hisfather Pauid had numbred: And they were founde an hundred fiftie and three thousande, and fice hundred.

18. And he let threescore and ten thoufand to beare burthens, and foureltore thonsande to hewe stones in the mountayne, and thece thousande ¢ sire hundred oft

e people a worke. ters to set the peop R 1 10

N Oz, Utolet colour.

Solomon.

2. Chronicles.

The. ij. Chapter. 7

Che temple of the Lorde, and the porche are builded, with other thinge therto belongyng. g hother thinges

1 5 de e began i 0 talentes.

5 to builde the boule ok 9 And the wayght of the nayles

50 che Lorne at Hiernla« Was fiftie {icles : and he 0 4
Alem in mount Moria vpper chaumbers with golde. ) where the Lorde ape 10 And in the houle mok holy he made bos,

a) which ie e mountamt

ed . : fo baat facri- ipeared bnto Dad two Cherubuns of image worke a = his father, euen in the chlldeen and oueviayed thentbith gute

iParxia, plate that Dauld prepared in the threl- i And the winges of the Cherub schyng floore of Oman the Jebusite. twentie tubites long 195 Teme
Aadsvif. 2 Aud he*began to buylde wt thefeconde was fiue cubites, rrachyng to the walt
Resa. Day of the setonde moneth, the fourth ok the house: and the other wyng was pere ok his raigne. „Uke wile fine cubites, reachyng to the
3 And tieese are the patternes whereby yng of the other Cherub.
Solomon was instruct to bulde che 12 And euen so the one wyng of the other

Houle of God: The length was threet- Cherub was kine tubites reachingtothe

stort tubites after the olde measure, and Wall of the Houle: and the other Wyng

the breadth twentie cubites. was fine cubites also, and reached to the
And the porche that was before the wyng of the other Cherub,

length in the front, accordyng to the 13 Sothat the winges of thesaid Cherubs breadth of the houle, was twentie tu: were stretched ont twentie cubites: bites, and the heyght was an hundzeed and they stodde on their feete, and loved and twentie tubites: and he ouerlayed in war des. . it ou the inner fide with pure golds. 14 And he made afozehangyng at yetow 95
And the greater houlc he seeled with sülke, purple, tryniolin, and fine white e « dan firre tree, which he dutrlayrd with the tauled the pictures of Cherubs to be best golde, aud graued therto pauline brodred theron. N trees and thapnes. 15 And he made before the Houle tivo pil:
6 Andbeonerlapenthe Houle with pre- lers of thivtic and fiae cubits high, and cious stone beautifully: And the golde the head that was aboue onthe top of
> was golde of Paruaim. euery one ol them was flue cubites.
7 The houle (Jay) the beames, postes, 16 And he made chapnes ok wzrathen
Walles, and doores therof, ouerlaped e Worke forthe quier, and put chemonthe
ö with golde, and graued Cherabs on the heades of the pillers: and made an hund een we 175 Wen and put themen
3 And he made the Houle mot holp: the chaynes.
Whole length was twentie tubites ine 17 And he reared dp the pilicrs bean to the breadth or the boule, e the breath temple, one on the right bande, au at therof was also twentie cubites:and he other on the left: and called the tye ouerlaped it with good golde, euen with Jachin, and the lekt Boas.

The it]. Chapter

Che aulter of brasse. 2 The lauatorie. 6 The caldrong.
‘ i 7 The candlestickes. ac.

ine of thirtie

1 Nd he made an aulter and fie cubites hye: and a tine of 7
- (WAZA ok dalle, twentie ca dcuvites dpd compalle kira dkorn, bttes long andtwentie 3 And vnder it was the nde about: cuvites broade, andten which dyd compalle it ao alle the

Ui cubites bye. with ten cubites dyd ther wihere wer
8 eae And he tast a brasen lauatorie rounde about, aud twert catt

iu Reg N aauatonie of ten tubtes two rowes of garen which

frombrymto bum rounde incompalle, ipke molten worke. 4 And

2. Chronicles.

uon.

t stoode alfa vpon twelue Oren: e towarde the north, three to-
Warde the welt three toward the tout), and three toward the east: and the laude rove Was let vponthem „and all their backes were to warde the lauatorie.

And the thyckestok it was an haͤnde beadth, ard the bapm litte the bermoka cuppe, With fioures of lilies and it rece ae ued and helde thee thoulande battes.

: 6 And he made ten lauers and put fue on ens he right hand, and kiue onthe let to
Wache and clense iu them such thinges

as they offered fo2 a burntoffring: Wut

the great lauatorie was for the priestes

ashe in. rr

oe be made ten tandelstickes of gold, actording to the patterne that was geuẽ

ok them, and put them min the temple, fine

on the right bande, and fine on the left.

3 And he made allo ten tables, and put them inthe temple fine onthe right fide, and fue on the left : And he made an hundred balens of golde. 5

9 And he made the tourt okthe priestes, and the great court, and doores to it, and ouerlayde the doores of them with bralle. ö

10 And he set the great lauatorie on the

right side ol the east ende, ouer against the south.

1 And Hiram made pottes, shouels, and balens, x kinished the worke that he was appoputed to make foz king Solonion in the house of God.

1 The two pillers, and the bowles, and the pommels on the toppe of the two

pillers, and the two wreathes to couer the two bowles of the pommels whiche
Were on the toppeof the pillers,

j And foure hundred pomegranates on the two wreathes:two rowes of pomegranates onone wreath to touer the two bowles of the pomels.

14. And he made two hottomes, and la- C uers made he bpon the bottomes .

15 The great lauatorie, and twelne oxen buber it.

16 Pottes allo chouels and flechhokes: and „ all these vellels dyd whiram his father cus Sal. make to king Solomon forthe house of bette sl

the Lod, ok bright brasse.

ced him, and
17 Inthe playne ot Jordane did the king ae"

talt them, euen in the clay grounde that is betweene Socoth and Taredatha.

18 And Solomon made al these vessels in great aboundaunte: forthe weyght of brasse toulde not be reckened.

19 And Solomon made al the veslels that were for the houle of God, the golden aulter also, ethe tables to let the there bread vpon.

20 Mdeouer, the candelstickes with their lampes, to burne after the maner before the quier, and that of precious golde.

2 And the floures, and the lanpes, and D the snoffers made he ok golde, and that perfect golde.

22 Andthe drelling kuyues, bafens, badete
{poones, and tensers of pure golde: And here inen

the doore ok the temple, and the inner mac doores within the place most holy, and

— nce — of the temple were gilted.

The. . Chapter.

PSs ee | MD fo alt the worke

that Solomon made

rl inthe boule of the lord

Was kiniched: And So-
J lomon bought in all

— 5 8 “ef

| uld his father had de-

mated, wu the suer and golde, and al

a lewels, and put them among the

Ld 1 of the house of God.

hen Solomon“ gathered the elders

1 Che things dedicated by Dauid, are put in the temple. 2 Che arke is brought into the temple. ao hat was within it. n They ting prayse to the Lorde.

of Jsrael together, and all the heades of the tribes and auncient kathers ok the thildren of Jlrael, vnto Hierusalem, to bring the arke of the touenaunt of the
Tordt out of the citie of Dauid, Whiche iss in Sion.

3 Wherekore all the men ol Ilrael resorted vnto the king in the feast, euen in the
Sseuenth moneth.

I ites toke bp the arke. the Leuites pty ay 5 Ao

CXXX,

OSHep-
4 And all the elders of Israel tanie, and tember.

Olonton .

5 And theprctes e the TLenites brought away the arke ol the tabernatle of congregatiõ, æ al the holy vessels that were in the tabevnacic, and they bare them.

6 And king Solomon t all the congregation ot 3 that were assembled vnto him bekore the arke, offered sheepe and oxen, so manp that they coulde not be

tolde nor numbred for nuntitude.

N And the priestes brought the arke of the appopntment of the Lorde vnto his plate, euen into the quier of the temple within the plate molt holy, and set it vnder the wynges of the Cherubs, .

8 So that the Cheruds stretched out their

wynges ouer the place of the arke, and

the Cherubs couered both the arke and her barres abouc on hype.

9 And the barres of the arke were fo long, that the beades of the barres were
5 seene without the arke withinthe quier, but not without: and there the arke re-
* mapned vnto this day.

Re wü f. 10. Wut there was nothing in the arke aue the two tables which Maples put therin at Horeb, when the Lord made a touenannt with the childreu of Jlrael

The. vi. Chapter.

3 Solomon blesseththe people. 4 he foz thole that Mall prap in the temple.

Hen Solomon fayde:
The Tod Hath spod ken, Howe that he wil
(Ai dwell in the dares

iS fgg 55 i N cloude.
2 And JM haue buplt
ö thee an house of habitation for thee, and a plate fo2 thy dwelling for euer. 6

3 And the king turned his face and blelled the whole tongregation of Jlrael, eal the tongregation of Israel stoode.

4 And he lapde ns lesled be the Lord God of Israel, which hath with his handes fulfuled it that he spake with his mouth

to mp father Dauid, laping:

iRegviia. 5 Dlnte the day that J brought my peo-

iu. Re. iii b

ill. Re. vill. b.

citie among all the tribes of Ilrael to morte, bliplde an house in, that my name might be there, neither chose J any man to be a ruler ouer mip people Jsrael: iParvid 6 Sauing that J haue cholen Hierusa-

aud and. lem, that my nam̃e might be there, and

2. Chronicles.

prapseth che Lorde. 14 He prapeth vnto God

ple aut of the lande of Egypt, I chole no

Ee

Soloman

after they were come out ol E
11 And it fortuned, that when the 95
_ Abete comic out of the holy place (for all the priestes that were pzelent, were fane tified and did not then wayte by courte)
12 That both the Leuites and the singers vuder Alaph, Heman,and Jeduthun'
Were appobnted to laundry offices with their children and brethren, and werearaped in fyne whyte, hauing cymbales plältertes and harpes, and foodeat the at 1 7 a 75 1 „and by them an red an entie priesle with trunpets: aa oot z And the trumpet blowers and the fin: gers so agreed, that it seemed bnt one bopee in prapsing thanking the Lorde:
And whenthey lift vp their vopce with the trumpets, cymbales, and other instrumentes of musicke, and when they prapsed the Lord, How that he is good, and that his mercie lasteth euer: the
Houle of God was filled with a cloude,
14. So that the priestes coulde not endure to minister by the reason of the clonde:
For the mate stie ofthe Lorde had filed the houle of God.

a

haue cholen Dauid to be ouer my peo?

ple Ilrael. B uid my father to buylde an boule for pb, the name of the Lorde God of Pract,

8 The Lorde lapde to Dauid my father:
Forasmuch as it was in thyne heart to buylde an Houle for my name thou didbea well that thou thoughtest in thyne

eart. i

9 Notwithstanding, thou Malt not buyld the house:but thy fonne which is protet-

Ded out of thy loynes, he Mall buylde an house for np nanie. 5

10 The Lorde therefore hath made 90 his faving that he hath spoken: ald A am rysen vp in the roome of Damdn C father, and am let on the feate of 1 Mi racl,asthe Lorde promised, and an
. — forthe namie of the ©
God of Jlrael. b

I And in ĩt haue F put the arke ute — is thercouenaunt of the Lorde a Gele made with the chudren of ah 1

non.

Lowe in the presence of all the con-

the stretched out

gregation of Ysrael, and

es:
Kew Solomonhad made a brasen

old of tyue tubites long, and kyue antes probe, and three ol heyght, aud had let it in the middes ok the great tourte, and vpon it he stoo de and kneeled downe vpon his knees before al the congregation ok Ilrael, and sretched out his handes töwarde heauen)
Aud ere is no god like thee in heauen and cart), which kepest couenaunt ¢ shewest mertie vnto thy seruauntes that walke before thee With al their heartes.

15 Thon whiche hastkept wich chpfernaunt Daud my father the thinges that thou promisedst him thou lapdest it
With thy mouth, c hast fulfilled it with thyne haͤndes als it is to lee this day.

16 And nowe Lorde God of Ilrael, kepe with thy seruaunt Dawid mp father the thinges that thou promiledst him, layfig , Thou shalt in my sight not be without a man that shall fit vpon the seate of Jlrael, so that thy children take heede to their wapes to walke in my lawe, as thou hast walked before me.

17 And nowe Tord God of Ilrael, let thy saying be true whiche thou spakest vnto thy seruaunt Dauld.

18 (And wil God in verie deede dwel with men on earth: Weholde, heauen and heauen aboue all heauens do not contapne thee, Hove much lesse the boule
Which J haue buylded-)

9 Vet it be thy pleasure therfore to turne to the praper of thy seruaunt and to his suppliration O Lozde my God, to hearken vnto the boyte and payer whiche thy seruaunt prapeth before thee,

r0 And let thyne eyes be open towarde this houle day € night, our this plate wherokthou halt layde that thou woul: rh te thyname there. to hearken vnto the Prayer whiche chr seruaunt prapeth

in this pl d Hearken vnto the prapers of thy fers
Uaunt and of thy people Israel, which heare thou J

C

: ey bray in this place: ab out or thy dwellingplace, euen out dk
Iraner be mertifull.

dan sinne against his nepghbour,
11 take an oth agaynst hym and make
Dun tolweare, and they both come be-

2. Chronicles.
1 Ind the king ttoode before the auiterof kore thyne aulter in this houle:

sayde: O Lorde God of Ilrael,

23 Then heare thou from heauen, and do and tudge thy seruauntes, that thou re-

c .

Warde the vngodip e recompence hum

his way vpon his head, and iustilie the righteous, and geue him actording to his righteousnes.

24. Andik thy people Ilrael be put to the worse befoze the enemie, becaufe they haue sinned against thee: Bet il 15 turne € geue thankes vnto thy name, and make intercession, and pray before thee in this house: '

25 Then heare thou krom heaven,anove :

mertiful vnto the fie of thy people HE rael, and bryng them againe vnto the lande which thou gauest to them and to their fathers, a

26 When heaven ts thut vp, and therebe Dawx.b: norapne- becanfe they haue linneda-

gaint thee: pet if they pray in this place, and contesse thy name, and repent from
— sinne for the which thou chastenest hem:
27 Then heare thou in heauen, and be mertiful vnto the sinne of thy seruauntes

€ ok thy people Israel, and gupde thon

them into the good wap to walke in, and send rapne vpon thy lande whiche thou hast geuen vnto thy people for an inberitaunce,
28 And ik ther be dearth in the tand,o2 pe: stilence, corruption, or blasting of corne, grashoppers, or caterpillers, or that their

tnennes besiege them in the cities of one

their land, or whatsoeuer plage or sickenelle it be:

29 Then what lupplications and prayers soeuer shalbe made of any man and of all thy people Ilrael, which shall know every man his owne foze, and his owne griefe, € shall stretche out their handes

tolwarde this boule:

30 Thou shalt heare from heauen, euen

from thy dwelling place, and Malt be

merciłull, and geue euery man According vnto all his wapes, euen as thou doest know euery mans heart: (for thou only 1 the beartesof the childzen of men,

That they may feare thee c walke in thy wapes as long as they liue, in pland

Which thou gauest vnto our fathers.

and of their

galeg.

d Sod only

b

no weth the cart of men.

„A. „ Reg 8.
32 Mortouer, the straunger Whiche is lohn ene not of thy people Israel , tf he come us wuf.

from a farre lande for thy great names lake, and thy mightic 9 ; werd
4 ‘

2. Chronicles.

stretched outarme: If they tome J lap,

and pray in this houst:
33 Thon Malt heare from heauen, enen from thy dwelling place, and shalt do
According to all that the straunger calleth to thee fo: That all people of the earth may knowe thy name, and feare thee as doth thy people Jsrael, and that they may knowe how that in this houle whiche J haue buylt, thy name is called

pon

J 34. Ht thy people go out to warre against their enenies bythe Wap that thou

shalt sende them, and they pray to thee

Deutold. lu the way towarde this citie whiche thou bhatt chosen, euen toward echte boule which F haue buplt for thy name:

35 Then heare thon from heauen their supplitation and praper, and helpe them in their right.

36 If they sinne against thee (as! there is no mau but he doth finne) aud thou be angry with them, and deliuer them ouer before their enemies, and they take them

and tarie them awap captiues vnto a

lande farre o2neare: N
37 Pet if they repent in their heart in
. the lande where they be in captiuitt:,

4 N The vit ry 4 1
1 The fire consumeth the facrifice. r The glorie oł the Lorde lilleth the temple. 1e he rech his praper. 17 and promiseth to exalt him and his throne. i

wnt}

AN 8
3 Reg of.
Leull ix. d.

ur Re. vin. g.

N

=a

d' when Solomon

had made an ende of

De praping, there tame

Ver A Downe fite from hea-

S/OYTO\ \A | uen, and consumed the

— W >] burnt okkring and the

——— facrifices: t the house

was filled with the glorie of the Lorde,

2 And the priestes toulde not go into the

houlc ok the Lowe, betaule the glorie

of the Lod had filled the lozdes Houle.

3 And when al the chudren of Hfraci saw

Howe the fire and the glorie of the Lod

tame downe vponthe house, thep felt

dowrne flat vpon their faces to the earth

vpon the pauement, and worchipped and

N ü tonfessed vnto the lord, That he is gratious, aud that his mercie lasteth euer.

4 And the king and all the people offered satrikices beforc the Lor de.

5 And king Solomon offered a satrifite ol

twentie and two thoulande oxen, and an

| Hundred and twentie thoulande sheepe:

and so the king and all the people dedi-

tated the boule of God. |

— — eee

§ oon,

aud turn: aud pray vnto thee mthelany —— oftheir captluutie faving, noe haue fin: ned, we haue Done euyil and wirkedly:
38 And turne againe to thee with all eh:

heart and all their soule in the

their taptiuitie where they hepe then 5 in bondage, and so pray calbarde their land whiche thou gauelf vnto their fy: thers euen toward the citie which thou batt cholen, e toward the honte whiche
J haue buplt fo: mpname::

39 Then heare thou from heauen, even from thy dwelling place, their supplication and their praper, and mage their tause, and be mereifull vnto thy people which haue sinned against thee,

40 ow my God, let thine eyes be open: and thynd eares attent vnto the prayer that is made in this plate. 6

41 Mobe vp; O Lode God into thy (ace resting place , thou and the arke of thy mn" strength:O Lorde God, let thy prtettes be clothed with health, x let thy sainctes reioyte in goodnessGG.

42D Lom God, turne not away the face

of thpne@annopnted ; remember the orm mercies whiche thou Halk promised to sen
Dauid thy seruaunt.

Chapter.

6 And the priestes wapted on their offi tes, ⁊ the Teuites had the instrumentes of musicke of the Lord, which king Dv wid had made to confefle vnto the 1070, that his mertie lasteth euer, Daud prabfing God by thé: And the priestes bicw with trumpettes before them, and all they of Hfracl stoode.
7 Morcoũer, Solomon halowed the mid dle ok the court that was vefore 15 18 houle of the Lorde, forthere he offered burnt offringes: ethefatot the peace Ov fringes, becaule the beafenaulter n. By
Solomon had made, was not able i ceaue the burnt offringes, and theme offringes, and the fat. A
3 _Soatte fame time Solomon 5 feat ok seuen dapes andalther 0 a otis rael With him, an exteeding gree mol dene gregation, euen fromthe ente;
Hamath vnto the riuer ol Ende au af?
9 And mn the eyght day they is ‘tion of femblie : Korthep kept the Oe cen the aulter seuen dapes, E thele ‘

1 Mich. i

on. nb the three and twentie dayol the
1 euch Umoneh he let the people deart into their tentes glad and mery in heart, for the qoodnefle that the Lorde ad shewed . 5 to Solomon, o Ilrael his people.

gira. Il ad d Solomon finished the boule of
“ the Lorde, and che kinges house:and alt that came in his heark to make in the houseofthe Lorde ze in his owne houle,

Went prolperoussy forwarde.

1 And the Lorde appeared to Solomon by night, and {apd to him: J haue heard thy petition, and haue cholen this plate

mai. for my selle to be an houle of lacrifice.

z If J hut vp heauen that there be no rayne , o2if Jtommaund the locustes

to deuour the lande, or il J lende pesti-

lente among ny people: 7)
14. And if they that are ofmy people, a mong whom my nanie is called vpon, do humble them selues, and make intertession, and seke my presence, and turns from their wicked wayes: then will heare from heauen, and be mercifull to

their sinne, and will heale their lande. j And krom hentekoorth myne eyes (hal: be open, and myne eares attent vnto the

. praper that is made in this place.

aria 16 And therfore nowe ? IJ haue chosen and fanctified this boule that my name may

be there for euer: and myne epes and

myne heart shalbe there perpetually.

Md it fortuned, that akter otwentie peres, when Solomon had buplt the house of the
Lorde and his owne
| Sap oa
2 that am e buple the cities

wat dtràm gaue dym , and put ok the

children of Ilrael in them. : :

, ba and fteenathed it.
. 0 N he buplt Thadmor in the wüderaw the store cities which
5 mel he buylt Wethhoron the vpper, a Sethhoron the neather, strong ct:
. au baun walles, gates, and barres:
Solon, and althe store cities that
Volomon had, and allthe charet cities,

2. Chronic

„ And Solomon went to pamath Zo-

les.

17, And if thou wilt walke before nie, as
Dauid thy father walked, to do all that
0 haue tommaunded thee, and shaltob-

rue iny statutes and my lawes:

18 Then Will F stablich

Kingdome, according

be ruler in Jsrael.

ethe seate of thy

as I made the coz nenaunt wich Daud n

Thou shalt not be without a man to n Nez

cxxij.

and xx. a.

I9 ut and ik ye turne away, and forsae my statutes € my tommaundementes which J haue let before you, and thait go and serue other gods, and worchip

them:

20 Then will J plucke them vp by the rootes, dut of my lande whiche J haue geuen them, and this house whiche J haue sanctified for ny name, will Peak dut o my fight, and will make it to bea prouerbe and a iest aniong all nations.

21 Aud this house whithe is most high, shalbe an astonishement to euery one that palleth by, and shal say: why ath De xxix. the Lorde dealt on this kachion with ii. Reb. this lande, and with this houle-

22 And they shal aunlwere: wWeeaule they forsoke the Lorde God of their fathers

Ier. xxii. c.

which brought them out of the lande o
Egypt, and caught holde on other gods,

and worshipped then, and serned them: euen therefore bath he brought all this

cuyll vpon them.

1 The. viii. Chapter.
2 The cities that Solomon buplt. + peoplet
1 His facvifices, 17 He sendeth to Ophir. and the cities of the horsmen, and euery pleasaunt place thas Solomon had iat alem c Libanon, and throughout all the land ofhis dominion.

to buyld in Hieru

hat were made tributarie dnto him

7 And all the people that were left ofthe 23

Hethites, Amorites, Pherezites, euites

and Jebusites, whiche were not of the

children of Israel,

8 Wut were the children ol them whiche were lekt after them in the lande, and were not consumed of the children of He rael, them dpd Solomon make to pay

tribute, vutill this da

Ye.

9 But of the chudren of Pfcacl dyd Solomon make no bondemen for his worke: but they were men of warre, and rulers, and great lordes with hun, and taptaynes dutr his charets and horle-

nien.

R 4

Io Aud

Jo And king Solomons officers that ouer-
{ave and ruled the people, Were two hundred and fiftic.

nu And Solomon brought the daughter of Pharao out of the citic of Dauld, into the house that be had buylded for her:
Forhe saypde, My wpfe (hall not dwel

in tht houle of Dauid king of Jlrael , for

it is holy, becaule that the arke of the
Lorde is come vnto it.

12 Then Solomon offred burnt offringes vnto the Torde on the aulter of the agin » Whiche he had buple befoze the porche:

13 Doyng euery thing in his due time, and offering accozding to the commaundemét of Doples,in the Sabbathes, new moones, and solempne feastes, thece times in the pere, (chat is to lap) in the keast of fivecte beead , in the keast ot weekes, and in the feast of tabernacles.

14 And Solomon set the sortes of priestes to their offices as Daud his father had ordered them, and the Leuites in their

Ex. xxiii. c.
Deut. xvi. c.

The ix

1.9. The queene of Saba commeth to fee Solomon, and bringeth giktes. 12 His perelp reuenues. jo Che time ot his raigne. 31 His death.

A1 Rd when the queene
. of Saba hearde of the rb. fame of Solomon, the

. AN came to prone him in nS Lf hard questions at Hie-
A rusalem, with a verie
— great comipame , with spices, and plentie ot golde, aud pretious stones: And when fe was come to Solomon, che commua —— hin of all that she had in her

2 And Solomon foyled her all her questions:and there was not one Word hyd from Solomon, which he tolde her not.

And when the queene of Saba had seene the wildome of Solomon, and the
Houle that he had bupit,

4 And the meate okhis table, the fitting of his seruauntes, and the staͤnding of his wapters, their apparell, his butlars, their apparell, his gopng vp by the
WhHiche he went into the houle of Lod: there was no more spirite in her.

5 And she lapde to the king: The saying
Which J hearde in myne owne lande of

Oz. dito sacxilices Which he oftred in the house of the ho; be.

2.Chronicles.

. Chapter .

i FF

Solomon

watches, forto pzaple and mimister wo fore the priestes day by day, ante ters by tourse at cuery gate: *fo2 so han ib.
Dauidthe man of God commaunded
15 And they omitted not the commannyement of the King vnto the priettes and
Lcuites , concerning anp maner of thing, and concerning the trealures
16 Foz Solomon made prouition fo the charges, from the kirst day that the foundation of the houle of the Lorne
Was laped, till it Was finiched, that the houle of the Lode was perfect.
17 Then went king Solomon to Ezion
Gaber, and to Eloth at the sea side in the
: 15 7 nul
18 And Hiram {out hym by the handes his seruauntes, shippes, and ann that had knowledge of the sea:and they
Went with the seruauntes of Solomon to Ophir and tarped thence foure hundred and fyftle talentes ol golde, and brought it to king Solomon.

thyne actes and of thy wildome, is true.

6 J beleued not the wordes of them, vntill J came and nne epes had leene it:
And beholde, the one halte of thy wyldome was not tolde me: for thou excec-
Deft the fame that J hearde.

Happy are thy meñ, and happy are thele thy leruauntes which stand vefoze thee ~ alibay,andhearethy wyldomme.

3 wWlefled be the Lorde thy God, whiche had lust to thee, to let thee ching Jon his feate, that thou mightest be king fo2 ut
Lord thy God: becaule thy God ouetd
Ilrael Cand hath delpte] to make them continue euer, therefore made he 9 7 king over them, to do right and equi 0

9 And che gaue the king an hunde 5 7 twentle talentes of golde, and ol o V exceeding great aboundaunce, and 105 cious stones:neither was ther and 111 1 fuch 9 as the queenc ol Saba g king Solonion.

10 And the seruauntes of spicar ano fernauntes of Solomon Wasp 1115 gold from POphir, brought allo 28 wood and precious tones. u And

on.

dthe king made ol che Algunie

a be unpzesinthe house ok the Lorde

and in the kinges palace e harpes, and

les for singers: And there was pfaitertes for ling

none uch wood feene befoze in the land

da.
12 . nd king Solomon gane to the at heathen, besides that which the
. 0 fap brought Dito the king: And fo the n turned and went away to her owne
% lande with her seruauntes. az The waight of golde that came to So-
C lonton in one pere, threeltore and fire talentes of golde:

14 Welives that which chapmen e marchauntes brought: and all the kinges ok
Arabia and rulers of that tountrey brought golde and liluer to Solomon.

15. And king Solonion made two hundred tarkets ol beaten golde: and sixe hundred files ol beaten golde were spẽt vpon one target.

16 And three hundred shieldes made he of beaten golde, € one shielde cost thee hundred peeces ol golde: and the king put theni in the boule that was in the forest of Libanon.

17 And the king made a great seate of puory, € ouerlayde it with pure golde.

18 And there were fire steys to ti: feate, with a footestoole of golde fastened to the scate: and pomnrels on eche spde ol the sitting plate, and two lions standing by the ponunels. f

19 And twelue lions stoode on the one side aud on the other vpon the fice steppes:

lo that there was no such worke made

in any kingdome. a 5
20 And all the dunking vessels of king

Solomon were ok golde, and al the vel-

us ofthe houle that was inthe forct

aig 55 os estas golde: for
As counted nothing Worth in

the dayes of Solomon. N

4 Che rigour of Rehoboam.

N

„

N RAG

Weg : ain the sonne of Nabat which was sled into Egypt from

2. Chronicles.

queene ol Saba euer ple asant thing

was fire hundred

XXX]

21 Forthe kinges shippes went to Tharsis with the leruauntes orte three peres onte came the shippes to
Tharlis, and brought golde, suluer, puorie, and apes, and petockes.

22 And king Solomon palled all the
8 the earth, in rithesse ¢ wyle-

one.

23 And all the kinges of the earth sought the prelente of Solomon, to heare his
9 that God had put in his

eart.

24. And they brought euery man his present, vessels offiner, e vesleis ok goine, rapment, harnesse, spises, horses, and mules, and whatsoeuer might be gotten pere by pere.

25 And Solomon had fourethoufand stalles for horses, and charrettes, and twelue thonsand horsemen: whom he bestowed inthe charet cities, and lome were) with the king at Hierulalem.

26 And he raigned ouer all the kinges that were from Euphrates, vnto the lande ofthe Philistines, and to the bozder of Egypt.

27 And the king made siluer in Hierusalem as plenteous as stones, and Cedar trees as plenteous as p Mulberie trees that growe inthe valleys: 5

28 And they brought vnto Solomon hor ses, out of Egypt, and out of all landes.

mon first and last, are they not witten in the sayings of Pathan the prophete, and in the prophetie ol Abiah the Sllonite, and in the bifions of Bodo the fear ol visions against Jerobdam the sonne of Pabat- 4

30 And Solomon raigned in Hierusalem vpon all Ysrael fouretie peres.

31 And Solomon slept with his fathers: and they buried him in the titie ol Dauid his father, € Rehoboam his sonne raigned in his steade.

J The. x. Chapter.
13 he foloweth lewde countell. 16 Che people rebell.

the prefence of Solomon the king) heard it, he returned out of Egypt.
3 And they sent and called him: And so
Jeroboam and all they of Ilrael, ante and tommuned with Nehöboan, fay-

ing: $8 al
4. Thy father layde agrecuons poke vpx 8 2 therefore remit thou anne

iii Reg. x. d. r

iii Re. iii. d.

iii. Reg. x. d.

The restok the actes of king Solo- 1 Reg vig

Rebobown, 2. Chr Onicles. 2 Rea

he = eo a a Ä
Whatofthe greeuous seruice of thy fa- 12 And so Jeroboam and | father, Kol his heaup poke that he put came to Rehoboam the see people

dpon vs, and We wyll serue thee. the king bade, saying, C b as
5 And he saide to them: Come againe mne the third dar. rin ny AGALie to
Onto me after three dapes. And the peo- 13 And the kung aunlwered them truelip: C ple departed, and king Weboboans left the conmlale
6 And king Kehoboam counlailed with ok the aged men, 11 the elders that had stande before Solo- 14 And aunsweredthem After the annie monbisfatheribhiehepetipued, and okthe voung men, saying: My father he lade: what counlälle geue pe me, to made pour yoke greeuous, and J w ll aunswere this people agalne- Ade thereto: mp father chaltised poy
2 7 And thep tolde him, saying: Ikthou with whyppes, but J Wpil chastile poy be kinde to this people, aud shewe thy With scourges. F selfe lowlie to them, and speake loupng 15 And fo the king hearkened not pio wordes to them, they wyll be thyser- the people: but the octalion came ot uauntes for cuer. God, that the Lode night make god
8 Wut he left the counsaile which theel- his laying ; Which he fpatic by the hand der. ders gaue him, and toke tounsaile with of Ahiathe Sitonite to Peroboant the the young men that were growen vs lonnt ok Habat. 8 a with him, ande“ that stoode in his pre: 16 And when all they of Isrgel saw that
Fade lente. 0 the king woulde not agree vnto them, kaw. 9 And he lalde vntothem: what aduise the people aunswered the king, saping: geue pe, that we may aunswere this What portion haue wein Danid- Foy people, which haue communed with we haue no inheritaunce in the lonne ol me, faping, Abate somewhat of the Ila: Euery man to his tent oh Ilrael, u kene poke which thy father did put vpon vs: and nowe Daud, fee to thynẽ olbne ro And the poung men that were grow- houle. And lo all Ilrael gat thento en vp with him, spake vnto hun, fay: their tentes: * ing, Thus halt thou aunswere the 7 So that Rehovoam ratgned ouer no. eople that speake ta thee, saping: Thy ni ok the childzen ok Jfrael then dwelt D ather made our poke heaup, but mahe inch ies of Juda. thou it somewhat lighter for vs: Thus 18 Then king Rehoboan also sent Hahalt thou say vnto the, My litle finger, duram that was ruler ouer the tribute, chalbe heauier then my tathers loynes. and the chuͤdrenot Israel stoned hin m Jo where my father put a heaur with stones, that he dyed ut king Re: poke vpon you, J will put moze to your hoboam made speede to get hun bp to poke: My father thastised you with his charet, to flee to Hierusalem. whyppts, but J wyil chastise pou with 19 And they ol Israel rebelled agains frourges, 7 = the houle of Dauid vnto this day.

(a The. J. Chapter.

il Reg xi e

4 Rehobosm is torbidden to tight againit Jeroboam. 5 Cities which he built. ai He hath eyghteene wyueg. and threescore concubines, and by them eyght and twentiefonnes, and thzeetcoze daughters. * *

dd when Rehoboam Solomon king of Juda, c to all them was cone to Hierusa- ok Israel that are in Juda and Wena’ lem, he gathered of mm, and sa n: 15 the houle o Judaand 4. Thus lalth the Lord, Be hall nat a0 |
[KS Nai wBentamin, nine {coe pp nor fight against pour bethren z bund cholen inen kurne euerp man to hishoute, lothe of warre, to fight a- thing is done of me. And they 295 gaint Ilrael, æ to bung the kingdome che wordes of the Lorde, and returned againeto Kehoboam. fromgoingagaint Jeroboam. em;
2 Andthe worde of the Loe tame to 5 And Rehoboam ddbeit in Hierulalen,

Semiahuthe man of God, saying: and built strong cities in Juda. 1
$ Speake vnto Nehoboam che sonne ok 6 Pe built vp Bethleheni, eer cha,

oa
7 — ir, Socho, and Adullam,
8 Gath, and Maresa, and Ziph,
9 Adurahim, Lachts, and Asecah,
„ Zorad, Aialou, and Hebron, Which is in Juda and wentamin strong cities. nd he repaired the strong holdes,

and put captapnes in them, and stoie of 51

pittatle and wine, and ople:

12. And in all cities he put schieldes and

ares t made them exceeding ftrong, fang Juda and Wentanun on his
Owe 7 * 5 r ¢ 1

de. ae j MW
1. 200 the puestes and the Teuttes that

were in all Istael, relorted to him dut

all their coastes. 15

4 J che Leuttes left their suburbes,

and their possession, and came to Juda

and Hicrulalem: For Jeroboam and his formes had talt them out from nuniftring onto the Lorde.

And He ordapned high plates, foz the“ deus, and kor the talues which he had made.

16 And alter the Leuites, there went out all the tribes of Israel, luth as submitted their heartes to leeke the Lord God

ol Iltael, and canie to Mierulalem to offer vnto thers.

Nad.

1 exilg, 15
0 rung

2. Chronicles.

him prestes for the

the Lorde God of their fa-

cxxxIl

17 And so they strengthed the kingdome of Juda, e made Achoboam the forne
2 peres long:

' hey Walked i w of Dauid E . 3 er

13 And Rehoboam toke him Mahalath he the daughter of Jerunoth the sonne of w
Daudd to wpfe, and Abihan the daughter of Eliab the sonne ol Ja.

19 Which bare him children, Jens, Sa- E

maria, and Zahamn.

20 And after her he toke* Maatcha the daughter of Ablolon, which bare hun
Abia, Atthat,Zisa,and Sclonnth.

21 And Rehoboam loued Maacha the daughter of Absolõ aboue al his wpues and tontubines: kor he toke cyghterne wpues and threescoze tontubines, and begat twentie and eyght sonnes ¢ threestore daughters. oh *

22 And Rehovoam made Asia the

fonne of Maacha, the chiefe ruler among his brethren: for he thought to make him bing,

23 And he plaped wplelie, and stattered „ ones all his children throughout al the toun- h be. trpes of Juda and Benianun vnto euery {trong citie, nd he gaue them aboundaunte of vittaile, and obtapned many

it. Reg xv a

4 rhe. xii. Chapter.

Agehoboam fortaketh the Lorde. and is punityed by Sesac. 6 Seme fa repro

ueth him. 6 He humbleth him fete.

God sendeth him succour. 5 Selac ta-

ficth his trealures. 13 his raigne and death. s A bia his fonne fucceedeth him.

MD it tame to palle,

that when Kehoboam

A pad stabliched the king.

Ywopome € became nugh-

tie, he forsooke the law

N 3 > ae ee alt ae rael With hun.

f i 2 *And it fortuned, that in the fifth pere

ok king Nehoboam, Sesat the king ol

Egypt tame vp against Hierulalem, be-

ue tbe had tranlgreflen against the

. AS

W Yorhe

th2eelcoze thouland horsemen: 2
And the nd, people wer without number that came beat with hun out ol Egypt, Lubin, © Suez

= 1 ae on — Modes.
= e toke the strong cities in Juda,
— — enen "tte me Semeia the prophete to
Vehoboam and to the Bones of Ju-

With twelue hundred charettes, and

da that were gathered together within

Hierusalem for Selat, and saide vnto

them: Thus faith the Lorde, de haue

left me, and therefore haue J allo © left ceyzonnence pou in the handes ok Secfar, bund oe baue

6 Whereupon the lordes of Jsracl and ar.“ the klug humbled theniselues, and laid:

The Lorde is righteous.

7 And when the Lorde saw that they submitted them selues, the worde of the
Lorde tame to Semeia, saping: They submit them selues, therekore J wyl not destroye them, but J wyll deler them somewhat, and my wrath shall not be powred out vpon hierusalem by the hand of Sefac.

8 Peuerthelefle, they shalbe his fer: uauntes: to knowe what differente is betweene W mplferute and the seruite 0 s ok the kingdomes of the worlde. win bare

9 And fo Hclas king of Egypt came to ace.

ü Hierusalem

Nele,, 2 . Ch r

Hierulalem, € toke away the treasures of the house of the Lorde, and the treafires ofthe kinges house, he toke euen all: and he carryed away the shieldes of golde which Solomon made.

Reg. x.2. IO

i made shieldes of brasse, and conmutted them to the handes ofthe chiefe of the garde, e that kept the entraunce of the
Ringes boule.

u And it tant to passe, that when the

king entred into the house of the LTorde,

the garde tame and ket them, € brought

them againe vnto the gard chamber.
And when he hunibled hintelfe, the

Math of the Lorde turned from him,

that he woulde not destrop altogether:

and in Juda all was well.

13 And so king Kehoboam wared nughtie, c raigned in ierulalem: And Neho-

¶ The. x

Abia maketh warre against Jeroboam, 4 he cheweth the bccation. 12 He trulleth in the Lorde, and ouercommech Jeroboam. 21 Ok his wyues and children. '

FE eyghteenth pere of king Jeroboam * bez gan Abia to raigne oner Juda.

> veres in Hierusalem:
(His mothers nanie also was Michatahu, the daughter of Uriel of Gibea:) And ther was warre betweene Abia and Jeroboam.

(Called other roy st
Thblalon.

the armie of baliaunt men of warre, euẽ koure hundred thonfand chofen men:
And Jeroboam fee him lelfe in aray to fight agaynst hym with eyght hundred

thouland pickt men, which were strong,

and mien okarmes.

4 And Abia stoode vp vpon Zemaraim, an hill which is in mount Ephraim, and
1 — 4 me thou Jeroboam and al

rael.

5 Do not pouknowe how that the Lo

God ol Asrael gane the kingdome over

then of Ysracl to Dauid for euer, even

to hin and to his sonnes, with a fat: ted couenaunt-

And Jeroboauithe sonne of Nabat the seruaunt of Solomon ol Dauid is risen vp, and hath rebelled against his lorde.

7 And there gathered to him lewde men, the children of Belial, and preuai-

dy with a mut ytr-

tuall. 6

In steade of which, king Rehoboam

And Abia fet the battatle in arap with

the sonne

nicles. 1＋ boa Was fi — one and fourtie pere N when he began to raigne, aud he ~ 5 ned seuenterne peres m herulalem th, citic which the Horde Had cholenont af
. the — = — mile to put his name
And his mothers name r 7
— df — — . e,
14. And he did cuill, because hey not his heart to seeke che ld he
15 Theactes allo of Rehoboam fiestand laft,ave they not wWpitten inthe fapinges of Scmeta the prophete, r of Foo the fear, which noted the genealogic: And there was warre alway vetweene Ne. hoboam and Jeroboaam. 1
16 And Kehoboam slept with his Fy. thers, and was buried inthe titie of Da-
— — his sonne raigned in his

üer

Mh. Chapter.

led again Rehoboam the sonne of Ho? lomon, when Rehoboam was poung a and tender Hearted, and contd not Hand enon. before them.
8 And now pe lap, that ve be able to preuailc against the kingdome of the Lod, which is in the hande of the sonnes of
Dauid, and pe be a great multitude, and haue the golden calues which Jcrobo- u am made pou for gods.
6 And haue ye not cast out the priestes ol a. the Lorde the sonnes of Aaron andthe
Teuites, and haue made vou priclies after the maner of the nations okother landes: fo that wholoener conn
€ tonsetrateth his hande with a pouug boxe and seuen rannnes, the lame may be a priest ofthem that are no gods.
10 Wut we belong vnto the Horde out
God whom we haue not korsaken and the prielstes are the sounes of — 1
Which minister vnto the Lorde, and th
Leuites wapte vpon their office. ity
11 They burne vnto the Tode — morning and euening burnt fact! : rH and fibcete intense: the shewe wae * they in oder bpona pure table a rye pare the canpelftice of golde wit!
Jampes of the fame to burne ran the euk: And truiy we kept the watch bun. od our God,but pe haue klang rap-
12, And beholde, God him elfe sor ayn,

2. Chronicles. CxxXV. d his priestes blowe with the laughter of them: There fel owne aan ates ae trie alarum against ‘wounded of Ilrael fine hundred thoun vol.. O pe children of Ilrael, fight not a- fand chosen nien. galnstthe Lorde God ofyour fathers: 18 And fo the chüdrenof Ilrael were od it wyll not prolper with you. bought pnder at that time, k the chitci. Wut for all that, Jeroboam conuaped dien ol Juda preuavled, W becaule they ere
4 men priuply about, to tome behinde the: leaned vnto the Lorde God of their faz ve and lo they were befoie Juda, aud the ters. ° lapers in wapte were behinde them. 19 And Abia folowed after Jeroboam, D
14. And When they of Juda loked about, and toke cities from him, Bethel with beholde the battatle was before and be- the townes belonging thereto, Jelana
Hinde, and they tryed vnto the Horde, with the townes that belonged thereto, and thepzcttes blewe with the trun- and Ephron with her townes. pettes, 20 And Jeroboam retouered no strength iz Andthe men ol Judagaue a howte: agalne in the dapes ol Abia: And the
And as the men ok Inda showted, it Tode plagued him, and he dyed. came to passe that God smote Jerobo- 21 Wut Abia Waced mightie, and maryam and all Jlrael before Abia and Ju- ed foureteene wines, and begattwentie da. Tale andtwo fonnes, and ficteene daugh-
16 And the children ol Hiracl fled before ters. e
Juda, and God delpuered them into 22 The rest of the actes ol Abia, his matheir hande. N ners and his sayinges, are written in
7 And Abia and his people siue a great the story of the prophete Fondo.

The. xiia) . Chapter.

hit.

O Abia slept with his we haue fought the Lode our God,
Ikathers, and they burp- we haue sought him, and he hath genen ed him in the citie ol vs rest on euerpside. And so they built,
Dantd, and“ Ala his and it profpered with them.

kalt, R\ifonne raigned in his 8 And Ala had an arnne ok menthat
Ylacade, in whole dayes bare shieldes and speares out of Juda the lande was in qmet- three hundred thousand e out of zBentanelle ten yeres. nunthat bare shieldes e drewe bowes ea 2 And? Ala did that was good e right two hundred and konrescore thonsand: inthe eyes ofthe Lorde his God. all thele were valiaunt men.

3 Fon he toke away straunge aulters 9 And there tame dut againstthein Zaaude high places, aud brane downe rah the blacke Mortian with an hoast of pn
. Hetmages, and tut dowue the groues: ten hundred thouland, € three hundred
4 be tonunaunded Juda to seeke the charettes, Ecame as farre as Maresa.
: orde Godof their fathers, and to do 10 And Ala went out before him, and they a ta the lawe and tommaunde- ioyned the battalle in the valley of Zc-
2 nk bi 5 phata, belide Maresa.
OFF heput away out ok all the cities 11 And Ala cryed vnto the Lorde his ati 7 the high plates e the unages: God, and lade: Lorde, it is no harde Rex. a 210 deni Was quiet before him. thing with thee to helpe with many 02
115 petit strong tities in Juda, bes them that haue no power: Helpe bs
1 ‘ ae was in rest, and he had therfore O Torde our God, for we trust had — uthole peres: for the Lorde tothee, aum inthy name we go agaiutl
7 There hun relt. this multitude: Thou art the Lord our
8 bude tt ee be tate vnto Juda: letvs God, and no man fhallprerratte agacntt
Walles ie 0 g makẽ about them thee. theland owzes, gates, and barres,foz 12 Sothe Lord smote the blacke Moores eis pet in rest belore vs: betausfe bekore Ala and Buda, and 5

Ae

Moores ied, 8 2
Iʒ And Ala e the people that was with him, folowed after them vnto Gerar: And the blacke Moores hoast was ouerthrowen, that there was none of them left, but were destroyed before the Low and before his hoast: And they taryed awap a mightie great pray.

nicles.

14. And they smote all

the cities bout Gerar, for the feare ofthe 5 d

nde a:

came vpon them: And they spopled I the cities, a there was extecdind eb all spoyle in them. — wy
15 They smote allo the tentes Of cattalle, und tarbed awap plentic of sheepe aud camels, and returned to hrierulalent.

+ De. xv. Chapter.

Che exhortation ot Lara s Ata purgeth his countrey of idolatrie. ir He tacri. kileth with the people. 14 They sweare together to serue the Lorde. 16 He depoleth

his mother for her idolatrie.

MD the pirite of God came on Azaria the sonne of Dbed, -

And he went out to meete Asa, and said vnto him: Heare me Ala,

N o's
= / a N jefe

lemin, the Lorde is with you, while pe be with him: and when pe seeke him, he wyll be founde of pou: and againe when pe forfake him, he allo wyll forfake you.

Nowe kor a long season Ilrael hath ben without the true God, and with:

out priestes to teache, and without law.

4 Aud when anp man in his trouble did turne vnto the Lode God of Pfracl and fought hun, he Was found okthem.

And in that tine there was no peace to Dim that did go out and in, but great sedilion was there among all the taba: biters of the earth. N

And nation was destroyed of nation, and cific of citie: for God did moue all aduersitte among them.

B 7 lap pe therelore the men, and let not

pour haͤndes slacke:for pour worke shal be rewarded.
8 And when Ala heard those wordes, and the propheciecꝰ of Asaria the sonne of Obed the prophete, he toke courage, and put away the abhonunable idols out of all the lande of Juda and Beniamin, and out ofthe cities which he wan in mount Ephratm, and renued the aulter of the Lorde that was before the porche ofthe Lorde.

And he gathered al Juda and Weniamin, and the straungers with them, out of Ephraim, Manalse, € Simeon: Foz there fell manp to him out of Hlraet,

and al Juda and Wen-

when they lawe that the Lord his God
Was with him. a

10 So they aflembled together at Hie: rulalé the > third moneth the fifteenth sy, pere of the raigne of Ala.

11 And they offered vnto the Lope the lame time of the spoyle which they had brought, senen hundzed oxen, and lenen thoufand theepe. ©

12 Andthep made acouenannt to lecke the Lorde God of their fathers, with all their heart, and all their soule.

3 And whosoeuer woulde not seeke the
Lowe Goo of Israel, 0 shoulde dye for C , it, whether he Were small or great, man wee
02 woman. — Dc

14 And they lware vnto the Lorde with
à loude vopce, showting and blowing with trumpettes and shawmes.

15 And all they in Juda ceiopeed at the

_ off: for they had lworne vnto the Lod
With all their heart, e songht him with all their lust, and he was found of them:
And the Lorde gaue them rest rounde about on euer spde. 3

16 And bing Ala put Maacha his nd ane ther out ol autthoritie, becaute she had made an abhommable tol in agroue:

And Ala broke downe her idol, ¢ Hany ped it, c burnt it at the brooke Cedron.

17 Wut al the high places were not tan away out of Hfract, though the heart of Asa was perfect ali his dapes. “a

18 And he brought into the houte of 155 ; the thinges that his father had ne cate, and that he him felfe had deditale euen siluer, and golde, and ie wels. me

19 And there was no moze warre b ne Hu the * thirtie and fiue vere of the raign e of Ala. 5

sy The

zin.

— Me the thirtie and firth
( verc ol the raigne of
Ala, came * waala
LAN king of Jfrael against foo) ee Juda, aud buplt Na-
De ma to thintent that he
— — ee aed let none palse in to Ala king of Juda.

2 210 Ala fet ont golde and filuer out ol the trealures of the boule of the Lorde, andlout of the kinges house, and sent to
Benhadad king of Spria that dwelt at
Darmielet, and sayde:

2 There ig a confederation betweene me and thee, betweene my father and thyne: beholde J haue lent thee fuer and golde, that thou wilt come ¢ breake
~ thpne appointment with Waasa king ok Ilrael, that he may depart from me.
4. And Wenhadad graunted vnto king
Ala, and sent the taptaines of his armics to the cities of Isracl: and they smote Jion, Dan, and Abelmaim, and all the strong cities of Mephthali.

And when Waala heard this, he left ane of Rama, and let his wozke teasse.

da, and carted away the stones and tümber of Rama wherewith wWaala was a building, and he bunt therwith Geba and Mispah.

7 Atthat tyme Hanani the fear tame to
Ala king of Juda, and sayde vnto him:
Recause thou batt trusted in the king of Syria, and not rather put thy trust in

ore: th (ache to ag

i his munitions and men ol warre.

d Jehosaphat his

bonne ralgned in his

teade, and preuapled a Ilrael.

. And he put soundiers
W - i = 1 15 85 N 7
* ok Juda, and fet ruler in the lande of Juda, and in the cities ol

2. Chronicles.

De. xyj. Chapter.

8 6. And then Ala the king toke all Ju-

1 feare of Baala king of Icrael, maketh a couenaunt with Benhadad king of
Ala for 5 he is reproued by the prophete. io whom he putteth in prplon. 2 BE pucecch his erucinehe phiticions. i his death.

the Lord thy God, therfore is the hoatk of the king of Syria escaped out of thine bande. |

8 Yad not the blacke Moores and Tubini an exteeding great hoast, with manye charettes and horsemen : And pet becaufe thou trustedst in the Lorde, he deliuered them into thyne hande.

9 Jo the epes ofthe Lorde beholde alt

xxx I.

i. Par- xiui. c

the earth, to strengthen thẽ that are ot

perfect hearttoward him: Perein thou
Hat done foolishly, and therefore from
Hencefoorth thou halt haue warre.

10 And lo Ala was wroth with the fear, and put him into a W prilon houle, for he was dilpleased with hym betausc of this thing: And Ala destroyed (certaine) ok the people the same season.

11 And beholde, thele deedes of Ala first and last, are written in the booke of the kinges of Juda and Jlrael.

12 And Ala in thethirne and ninth vere of his raigne fell sicke in his feete, and that bis disease continued very long:
And “in his sickenesse he sought not the
TLorde, but phisitions.

13 And Ala slept with his fathers, and
Dyed in the fourtie and one pere of his raigne.

14 And they buryed hym in his owne fez

pulchre which he had made for himselle in the titie of Dauid, and lapde hym in the bed which he had filled with diners kindes of fpices, € lweete odours made by the traft of the appothecaries: and burnt very much {pice about him.

The. xvij. Chapter.

Jeholaphat trusting in the Lorde, prolpereth inrichelse and hondur. 6 He abolicheth idolatrie, 7 and cauleth the people to be taught. 11 he receaueth tribute of straungers.

Ephraim whiche Ala his kather had wonne.

3 Andthe Lorde was with Jeholaphat, betcause he walked in the olde wapes ok his father Dauld, and foughe not Baalim, ü

4 But songht the Lorde God of his father, and Walked in his commannde:

5 mentes

Cen. xxxi. d

(b) The pros phete of Goa punithed, fog
{peaking his

meflage,

€

Eccle.33,a;

Febosiphut.

5 Andthe Lorde stablished the kyngdome in his hande, k all they that were in Juda brought him prefentes, lo that he had aboundaunce ok richesle and honour. a

6 And he ipft bp his heart onto the wapes of he Lorde, and he put downe pet moze of the high places and groues

dut of Juda. ö

W 7 Inthe third yere ok his raigne he sent to his lordes euento Benhail, Obadta,
Zacharia, Mathauel, and to Mithaiahu, that they shoulde x teache in the cifies of Juda:

And with them he sent TLeuites, euen
Semeiahn, Pethanahn, Zebadiahu,

La) Ichosahat lent viz tours abrode tnto the conn- 8 to fee

ry

religton re-

ae: Alael,Scuüramoth, Jehonathan, 2:
- pontabu, Tobiahn, and Lob adonia-

hu, and with them Elisama, and Fez

horam priestes. b

9 Andthey taught in Juda and had the

bodke of the lawe of God with them, and went about throughout all the cities of Juda, and taught the people.

10 And the feare of the Lode fell vpon all the kingdomes of the landes that were rounde about Juda, and they fonght not against Jeholaphat.

1 And some ot the Philistines bought
Jeholaphat gyftes, and tribute liluer,

and therto the Arabians brought hym

9 The. xviii.

2. Chronicles. 1

990%

meutes, and not after the doynges of cattayle, enen scuen thou, 2
Ilrael. ö hundred ranunes, and len thunder

dleuen thousau egoates, te

at prolpered, and

and seuen hundred he

12 ane ebotaph grew vp an hie: and he bupst; e ap cities 1118 m Jide

3 Aud he had great substaunde in the e ties ol Juda: but the meno? ena a ltrongestduldters were in hierulglem

14. Andthele are the offites or them E the honle of their fathers: the captammeg ds oucr thoufandes in Juda, Anm the capraine, and wich him of fighting men thzec hundred thoulande.

as Jehoha-

15 sp me to his hande w nan a captainc, and with him na hundred and fourescore choctende

16 And next him was Amazia the sonne of Zichzi, Which of his owne good will offered hymn felfe vnto the Lorde, and with him two hundred thouland mightie men of warre.

17 And ofthe chyldren of Beniamin, Eli ada a man of might, and with hyntarmed men with bowe and chielde two hundzed thoulande.

18 And next hym was Jeholabad, and with hym an hundred and kourestoze thousande, that were prepared foz the
Warre.

19 These wapted on the kyng, belides thole whiche the king put in the strong tities throughout all Juda.

Chapter.

igeholaphat maketh affinitie with Ahab. 10 Foure hundreth prophetes counsell
Ahab to go Co warre. Michea is against them. 2; Zedekia smiteth him. 2 The

king puttcey him in prilon. 29 The effect of hig prophecie

A1 fing DD Jeholaphat had
N aboũdaunte ok richesse
8 N and Honour, and iopoF ned atinitte with A-

hab.

peres he went downe to Ahab to Samaria: And Ahab fine

ni. Reg. 22.a. 2

the people that he had with hym, and entreated hym to go vp with hym vnto
Vanioth (in) Gilead. *
And Ahab king of Firact sayde one
Jehosaphat king of Juda: Wylt thou

go with ine to Ramoth (in) Gilead:

And he haunlwered him: J will be as

thou, and mp people shall be as thyne land we wyll go) with ther to the warre.

many Cheepe and oxen for hyim and ko:

4 And Jehosaphat layde vnto the king of Asrael: Seeke tounsell J pray thee at the word of the Lord this sanie day,

5 Therkore the king of Alrael gathered together of prophetes foure hundzed

men, lapd vnto chen Hall We gor

Vamoth ci} Gilead to fight, 02 dend

I ttasse: And they lapd: Go vpe Go chall deliner it into the kinges bande. F

6 Wut Jeholaphat lapde Psthere ige here neuer a prophete wore of 1)
Lordes, that we might alte ol bye 10

7 And the king of Jlrael said bulo 3 ö 0

läaphat: There ss petone man ui hae

we may alte the Borde: but J a

him, for he neuer prophecleth me or,

but alway enpll, and the fame 1 bs chea the fonne of Jemla. And J spat

f phat.

et not the king lay lo.
10 a Ilrael called one of his
5 chamberlapnes And fayd: Fete) hyther ank Michea the sonne of Jemla. de zd the king of Jlrael and Jeholag hat king ol Juda, late epther of them ou his leate in cheir apparell, in a threlching tloore belide the gate of Samaria, gal the praphetes prophecled before the. fo And one Zedekia the lonne of Chanage. na had madt byurhoznes ol iron, and thou shalt pushe Spria , vntill they be bronght to naught. 5
1 And all the prophetes prophecied euen lo, saying, Go vp to Namoth in) Gilead, eit (hall prosper with thee:for the Lord fall deliuer it into the hand ofthe king.
And the niessenger that went to tall ichea, {patie to hym, saying:Weholde, the Wordes of the prophetes speake good to the king with one affent : let thy
Wordes therfore J pray thee be like one or theirs, that thou speake that whiche is pleafaunt, tz And Michea sapde: As the Lorde: ueth, euen what nip God sapth, that wil
J speake.
64 And when he was come to the king, the king layd vnto him: Michea, should we goto Ramoth (0) Gilead to fight, or leaue of: And he layd: Go vp, c al shalbe bn they shalbe deliuered into pour ande.
15 And the king layde to hym: So and fo many times do J charge thee that thou lay nothing but the trueth to me in the name ok the Lode,

rael {tattered in che mountapnes, as cheepe that haue no sheephard: And the
Lorde sayde, T hese haue no maister, letthem returne cuerp mantherefore to his house in peate.

17 And the king of Hlrael said vnto Jeho-

Hepzorhe-

Aw the
Ht Grout mperied.g burn.

not prophecie good buto me, but euylleng ful he layd againe, Therkore heare pe n the word of the Lord: J aw the Loz
When 1855 as all the tompanie

ode on his ri

‘ is a his right bande and n the Lozd sapd: Ho That deteaue
900 king of Jlrael, that he may go vp abe wuerthrowne at Ramothlein Gt; hi 10 5 due lapde this, a nother that. othere cane out a spirite „ F stoode

2. Chronicles.

sayde, thus sayth the Lorde: with thete

16 Then he lapd: J did {ee all them of FE -

laphat: Did F nof tel thee, that he would

before the Lorde, and sayde: J will de-

teaue hym. And the Lorde fa hym, Gherin- he Lorde sayde vnto

21. And he lade: I will go out and be ao

CX¥XW].

lylng spirite in the mouth of alt his pro- eee

phetes. And the Lowlayd, Thou shalt

leue 5 tructh,
God lender

deteaue him, and chait preuaple:go out, aneh thc should beleue

aud do euen fo,

22 And nowe therfore vehold the Lorde
Hath put a lying spirite in the of (all thelt thy prophetes, ethe Lorde hach spoken euyll against thee,

23 And edekia the lonne of Chanaana went to, and smote Michea vpon the checke, and layde: By what way went the sprrite of the Love from me » to speake with thee-

24. And Michea sayd: Behold thon shalt
{ee the day when thou shalt go from chamber to chãber, for to hide thy lelke.

25 And the king of Ilrael sapd: Take ye
Michea, and bring him to Amon the gon ok the citie, Eto Joas the kinges

onne.

26 And ye shall say, thus sayth the king:

ut this felowe in the prilon houle, and

cede hym with bread of affliction and

water ok trouble, Dnt J come againe in peace, J

27 And Mithea laid: If thou tome againe in peate, then hath not the Lod spoken by me. And he layde: Hearken to pe people euery one ot vou.

28 Andis the king of Jlrael and Jehola-

phat the kiug of Juda, went bp to Kamoh mj Guead.

29 And the hing of Hfrael fapde vnto Fee hosaphat, J mustchaunge me when 7 go to the battell: but see that thon haue thyne owe apparel vpon thee. And the king of Israel thaunged hum selfe, aud they came to the battell.

30 Wut the king of Spria had tommann-

ded the captapnes of the charets that

were with him, saping: Sec that ye

fight not agamnst mall or great; laue a-

gainst the king of Israel only.

31 And When the captapnes of the charets sawe Jeholaphat, they sayde, It is the king of Israel: And therkore they cont palled about him to fight. But Pebolaphat cried out, t the Lod helped hym,

the mouthes ka.

D

lieg. 2. Thel. 2. un Ke. xxu. d

xii. d. xn. c.

and God thaled thein away from him. U e
32 For it tame to passe, that when the caps eres ben.

tapnes of the charets perteaued that it was not the king of Ylracl, they turned

aine from him.
* , S1 33 And

2. Chronicles.

Febofapbat. n
7 of: 7 22
33 And a tertayne man drewabow with 34. And the dattell merea ö

„Oragto- Age : fed thatd
Oz, igno- A . ; Ar dap: stip. all his night, and smote the king of PE Howbeit the king of Ilr 1 f rael betweene the ioyntes of his haber: tharet. to Gand an agu ae gin, he sayde to his charetman: Turne ans vntill enen: and about thetimeat (OW, thyne hande, that thou mapest tarie me the lunne goyng downe, he oped ot ase out ok the hoast, fo: J ant Wounded. 1 d
’ eanteglich, q The .xix. Chapter.
Teter Jehosaphat was rebuked by the prophete, he calleth againe the peopl af the Aan 5 He appoyntech iudges andminifers, and epporteth thers 60 eave on
A1 N D Jeholaphat the be ppon vou, and take heede j el iking of Juda came [the thing that pleaterh 1285 ken her n home againe in peate no vnrighteousnes with the Lorde our to Pierusaleim. God, that he shoulde haue any respett Ronis,
2 And Jehu the sonne of persons, or take rewardes. Acteaxh

Sof Banani the fear

= ==" pet out to meete him, and sayd to king Jeholaphat:Wouldest thou helpe the vngodly, and loue them that hate the Lord: Therfore is wrath tome Dowie vponthee from beforze the

HOE:

5 Meuertheleffe, there are some good attes founde in thee, in that thou batt hewen dowue the groues out of the lande, and hast prepared thyne heart to
{cke God.

4 And Icholaphat dwelt at Hierusalem, and turned and went out to the people from Beerseba to mount Ephraim, and

Were, bought them agame vnto the TLorde

mere ge of God oftheir fathers.

Heimer And he letiudges tthe lande through-

tii the strong cities of Juda, citie by title: N
6 And lapde to the iudges, Take heede what pe do:fo2 pe exetute not the iudgementes of man, but ok God, whiche is eie bith vou in the tudgement. ben de un, 7 Wherkore now let the keare ofthe Lord

and es punishe pou if pou do tontraris.

(t) He visited all his coun-

3 Mozcoucr, in Bierulalem dpd Jehola-

phat let of the Leuites, æ of the priestes, and of the auncient fathers, ouer Ilraei in the iudgement and caule ofthe Los:
And they returned againe to Hicrulle,

9 And he charged them ,faying, Thus

Chal pe do in the feare of the Lord fapthfully, and with a pure heart:

10 What tause sdeuer tome to pouof pour

brethren that dwell in their titles, betibeene blood and blood, betweene aw
Ecommaundement betweene statutes and ordinauntes: pe shall warne them that they trefpaffe not against the Lord, and fo wrath come vpon vou and pour brethren: Thus do, x pe Hall not otfend.

11 And behold, Amaria the bye priest sa

mong vou in all matters of the Bode, and Zebadia the sonne of Hlinacl,atuler of the Youle ok Juda for alt the hinges matters: There be offteevs ofthe
Teuites allo before pou, Take courage to poutherfoze, and be doyng mar e! and the Lorde shalbe with fue) as be good.

The. xx. Chapter.

zJehosaphat and the people pray bnto the Lorde. 22 The marueplous victorie that the Lorde gaue hym against his enemies. 30 Hig raigne and actes.

ter this also, it fortu-

ned that the chilozen of
Moab and the chudren
Ammon, & withthem

2 And there tame some that told Jehola-

phat, saping: There tommeth a great multitude against thee from the other

of Juda, to make intertt

bes fide of the sea, and out of Spit, and hold they be is Halalon Thamar, which is Engadi.

200 Jebel pst feared, aud fet hym

10 Hale ok the ae eto ibn .
A nttes came againct Je- kalting througyou N * ee holaphat to battell. ther

in Juda ga

4 And they that were in 1 of te the selues together toa econ a0 1 wag

a 0 5 0 é 10

ffiont 5 1

TLord: And they came out ofalt

Coll,

ght . 2. Chronicles. nid Jeh And Jeholaphat stoode betweenethe with vou: feare not norlet pour heartes

congregation of Juda € Hierusalem in

thehoule ofp Lord bekorethe newrourt,

And lapd: O Word God of our fathers, e auunbethon Godin heauen, and raignest not thou on all the kingdomes of the

aud might, and there ts no man that is

able to withstande thee: | el tothe our God, whiche diddest

6 tast out the inhabiters of this lande be-

fore tb people Hicael,e gauest it to the

eof Abrahãm thy louer for euer:
3 210 they dwelt therin, and haue buylt the a tẽple therin for thy naue faping:
9 Ikeuvll tome ppon vs as the sword of ae isugement, peltilente o2 hunger: then, tf we ftande bekore this houle in thy prez fence (fo2 thy name is in this houle) and trye vnto 15 in our tribulation, heare

hou, and helpe.

7 and be beholde the thildren of Ar mon and Moab, and mount Seir, by

whom thou wouldest not let them ok

srael go when they tame out of the andt of Egypt, but they departed krom them, and destroped them not:

1 See howe thep rewarde vs, to come for to tast vs out of thy possession whithe thou hast geuen vs to inherite.

12 Dour God, wilt thou not iudge themfor we haue no might against this great compante that tommeth against vs: neither wote we what to do, but our

5 epe sw he bnto thee.

ma 3 And all Juda stoode before the Lorde, e With their poung ones, their Wares and dan. their childzen.

14. And there was Pahasiel the sonne of

€ FZacharia the fore ofwanata,thefonne
Of Jchiel, the sonne of Matthanta, a Telte, ok the fonnes of Alaph, x vpon hym lame the spirite of the Lorde euen in the nuddes of the congregation:

5 And he lapd, Hearken all Juda, and pe inhabiters of hierulalem, and thou king
Icholaphat, thus lapth the Lorde vn-
5 vol: Be not afrapd nor faynt hearted

Preaton of this great multitude:for the

5 Atell is not pours, but Gods.

6 £0 morow go pe downe against them:

behold they come vp by the tlift of Ziʒ,

aud pe Chali finde themat the ende ofthe buen befoze the wildernelle of Jeruel ullhlbal not neede to fight in this bata ut teppe forth and and, and be-

ethe helpe ol the Lorde whiche is

Heathen, and in thyne hande is power

xxviij fayle you O pe of Juda and of Hie-

rulalem: To morolbe go out against themfor the Lord wiive with uae

18 And PFeholaphatbowen his face to o Wang the earth, and all Juda and the inhabt- dne e biters of Hierufatent kel bekoze the Losd, de Kade

WozMhipping the Lowe,

19 And the Leuites ofthe chudren ol the

Caathites, of the childzen of the Corahites, stoode bp to prapse the Lorde
God of Ilrael with a loud vopte on hie.

20 And when they arole early in the mor ning, they gat them out vnto the wilder: nesse of Thekoa, and as they went out,
Jeholaphat stoode and ayd, Heare me
O Juda, and pe inhabiters of Hierusalem: Put pour trust inthe Lorde pour
God, that pe map be founde fapthfull:
Geue tredence to his prophetes, and so shall pe prosper. a

21 When he had confulted with the peo- D ple, and {et some to fing vnto the Lorde, and to prayse him in the beautie of poe nesse, and to go out before the arne, and to sap, Prapse the Lorde, for his mercie lasteth euer.

22 And when they began to shout and to prayse the Lord layde ambushementes againt the childrenok Ammon, Moab, and mount Seir, whiche were come agaimst Juda: And they were ouerthowen with strokes amongthẽselues.

23 Foz the children of Ammon and Moab, rose against the inhabiters of mount
Seir, and they llue and destroped them:
And when they had made an end of the inhabiters of Seir, cuerp one helped to destrop another among them felues.

24 And when Juda tame towarde Milpal) in the wuͤdernesse, they loked vnto the multitude: and beholde, they were dead tartasses fallen to the earth, and none efeaped.

25 And When PFehofaphat and his people came to take awap the spople of them, they founde among them aboundaunte of goods, rapment, pleasaunt ie wels, which they toke for them selnes, moze then they could carp away: fo that they Were three dapes in gathering of the spoyle, it was so nuch. N

26 And the fourth day they assembled in

the valley of blesüng, for there they) © Serr blesled the Lord: And therfore they cal: bre

led the nanie SDE bane place the valley vnto this day. ol ble ssing, ur 1 5

27 And so all the men of Juda and Hierulalẽ returned with Jeholaphat their head , foz to go agame to Mierusalem with gladnesst: forthe Lord had made

theun to reiopte oner their enemies.

E 28 Andthey tame to Pierusalem with

plwKalters ànd harpes, ꝶ shawmes, tuen

vnto the honse of the Torde. :
29- And the feare ol God felt on the ting: donies of all landes, when they had heard that the Lorde fought against the enemies of Israel. N
30 And so the realme of Jeholaphat was in trauquilitie, and his God gaut him krkestoneuerp side. ‘> ¥
Re. xi 31 And Icholaphat raigned vpon Juda, and was thirtie e fine peves olde when he began to raigne, ⁊ he raigned twentie and fiue peres in Hierulalem: And his mothers name was Asuba the daughter of Silhi.

The. xxt. Chapter.

Jeholaphat dieth. 1 Jehoram succedeth him. 4 which killeth his brethren. che was brought to idolatrie. n and seducech the people. 16 he is oppresled ob the pht-

32 And He walked in the Way of Ala his kather, aud bowed not cherkrom, dopng listines. 18 His milerable ende.
A 1 Ehosaphat also * slept in Reg. ting. With his fathers, and

was buried with his
Ss ‘| fathers inthe atic of
05 Dautd: and Jchozam his sonne rãigned in
—— his steade. g
2 Andhe had brethzen whiche were the lonues of Jeholaphat, Asaria, Je-
Hiel, Zatharid, Aʒariahu, Michael, and

RE
ANG

Sephatiahu: All these are the sonnes of

Pebolaphat king of Juda. ae 3 And their father qgaue thẽ many great

* Oi, Pia

tious, : l ciall substaunte, with strong cities in
Juda: but the kingdome gaue he to Je-

Hhoraun for he was the eldest.

4 And Jehoram vole vp against the king: dome ok his father, and preuayled, and tue all his brethren with the [worde, and diners of the lordes of Braet.

Besse. 5 Achoram was thirtie and two peres

olde when he began to raigne, and he raigned eyght yeres in hierusalem.

3 6 And he walked in the way ofthe kinges

of Hlract like as dyd the Houle of Ahab, gross tn a bad 15 daughter of ae to

Piers «=— Mic: and He wrought eupll in the eyes

sm okthe Tode. * .

Tud.ix a.

2. Chronicles.

> Datopne himiselke with Ahasiahuriigoe

giftes of gold and fituer and other spe-

Feboray, the
33 Hovbeit the high plates were nott e e nto the G ie Rot ch OD ab chat
34. The rest of the artes of Jeholfirst and last, behold they 12 Wan 4 inong the sapinges of Jehu the lonnt of
Hanani which noted them in the boote of the kinges of Plract,
35 Akter this did Jehosaphat king of Ju: K

that which was ri ht in the {i
* — bas right in the light of

Ilrael, Whole mind wasto do wickedlp.

36 Mt coupled him lelfe with hun, to make
{hippes to go to Tharsis: And they made the shippes in Eʒion Gaber.

37 And Eliezer the sonne ol Dodauah ol
Mavela prophesied against Feholaphat, faying: Berause thou hast ' toyned thy ,., felfe With Ahastabu, plod Hath broken we thy wozkes. Andthe chippes were broke eeu: that they were notable to goto Tharlis. site

7 Howwbeit the Tord woulde not destrop xg the house ol Dauid, betause of the coue- waeis naunt that he had made with Dauid, m. as he pronused to gene a light to hym n and to his sonnes foz euer.

8 Inhis dapes the Edonutes rebelled
When they were vnder the donunion ol
Juda, and made them selues a king.

9 And Jehoram went foorth with his lordes, and all his charets were with him: and he rose vp by night, and smott the Edomites, which tompassed himin, and the taptapnes of the tharets.

Io But Edom rebelled Hill, so thatther
Woulde not be vnder the hande of Juda vnto this day: That fame time allo 155
Tibna depart from being bude 5 hande vetaule he had forlaken the Lond
God of his fathers. che

u Moredouer, he made high plates in 15 mountapnes of Juda, x canned theo 15 biters of Hierusalem to commit 12 0 . tion and pronoked Audalto onen kom

12 And there came a writing to hun 5
Elia the prophete, saping, Tuner; ‘Sm the 3.020 God of Dauld tpg es tause thou hastnot walked in the the of Jeholaphat thy father , and into
Wapes of Ala king of Pada: 8 Bu

i. Re ve
Jeg. ug
4. Reg Be

uedst in the wapes of the
4 gungen of Jack, and hast made Juda and the pellets of hierulalem to goa whoring lpkte to the whordome ol che poute of Ahab, and batt slayne thy brethreu, euen thy n Whiche
: etter then thou: :

I iL tae a great plague wyl the
Lorde finite thy folke, thy children, thy wyues, and all thy goodes:
1j And thou Malt sukfer great papne, cuen apifeate of thy bowels, vntil thy guttes fall out, by reason or thy licknes day by

dap. 5

d so the Lord stirred bp against Je-

1 10 5 che spirite of the Philistines, and

the Arabians that were belpde the blacke Moores.

of

N 2 fl
Cam

Hd the inhabiters ol hierusalem made A

. SAE . had slaine all his eldest sonnes: And so

g ug.

6 fax
In his

tag Athaliahu,p daughter © of Amri.

boufe

Nd he Walked after their tounsel, and ent ‘aa fonne a Ahab

to fight against Mas acl and Syziaat Namoch fen Gilead:
64 whe Syrians smote Jehoram.

110 returned to be healed in Pesvabanat Vauoundes whiche Were genen tl kind eee DE he konght with Ha-
5 10 of Syria: and Ahaʒiahu the

Ot Jehozam king ol Juda, went

7 And they tame vp into Juda, and wa-
"ted 25 taricd away all the substaunce

hronicles.

that was found inthe kinges house, and

his sonnes, and his wyues:fo that there

babes wil ' —— lekt him, saue Jeho-
. as the

bs kee he poungest among

18 And after all these thinges the Lorde note him in his bowels wit 5 rable disease. *
19 And it tanie to passe, that in protesse of time euen after the ende ol two peres, his guttes fell out in his sicknes, and so he died of very enti diseases: And they made no burning for him, lpke the bur: ning of his fathers.
20 When he began to raigne he was thirtie and two peres olde, and raigned in gHilerusalem eyght peres, and liued ret: chedly: howbeit they buried him in the itte Of Danid, but not among the lepulthres of the kinges.

Due xxij Chapter.

tha iahu raigneth after Jehoram. s Febubing of Ffrael HNeth Ahazia u. io Atha · liebe 1 8 tb death all the hinges linage. 1 Joas escapeth. 8 5

d obne to lee Jehoram fF sonne of Ahab at Jezrahel, because he was diseased.

7 And it tame of God that Abastahu B shoulde be dispised for His conning to
Jehoram: for when he was come, he went out with Jehoram against Jehu the sonne of Pini, whom p Lord had

annolnted to destrop the house of Ahab. Rein

8 And so it tame to passe, that whẽ Jehu was exetuting iustice vpon the honse ol hab, and had founde the lordes of Jus da and the sonnes of the brethren ot Ahaʒiahu that wayted on Abasiahu, he fluc them.

And he fought Ahaʒlahu:e they taught him Where he was hid in Samaria, c brought hun to Jehu, e when they had flapne him, they burped him: betause faidthey he isthe fonne of Jeholaphat,
Which sought the Lorde with all his heart: And the house of Ahaziahu had no power to kepe still the kingdome.

oh

Re. ix f.

fo But When Athaliahu the mother of ii: reo ix.

Ahazlahu sawe that her forme was

dead, she arose and © 0 15 garden
0 chere

kluges seede in the kinred o of Juda.
11 And Jehosabeth the daughter of the

be mak the and

¢ cro so

that fhoulde ne titic to tone,

e

king toke Joas the sonne of Ahaziahu, wave ane

and fate him from among the kinges wn. sonnes 1 Syate 4 55 1 7 banat his nurse ma priuie chamber:

D 3 Jeho-

Jehosabeth the daughter of king Je-
Horam the wyfe of Jehoiada the priest, aud the sister of Ahaʒiahn hid him from
Athaliahu, that he was not slapne.

— — <= — — — =
2. Chronicles.

12. Aud fo he Wns with thembydt houfeof Goo fire peres: and ahn raigned ouer the lande.

The. xxiij. Chapter.

Fons the forme of Ahazia is made king. Athaliahu is put to death. ot Baal is destroped. 19 Jehoiada appopnteth ministers in the temple.

Hd in ö leuenth pere

aly
4 Reg u. Pehotada being bolde,

St

1b i toe the capfaines of
VS A hundredes, Asariah
2 8 Oltthe sonne ol Jehoram,
BAG c Ilinael the sonne of

—Jaehohanan, . Asarias hu the sonne ok Obed, Maasiahu the sonne of Adalahu, e Elilaphat ihe sonne bl Zichvi,g made a bonde with them.
2 And they went about in Juda, and gaz thered the Leuites out of all the cities of Juda, e the aunctent fathers dll

(8) Meaning 8 enn kal, and they tanie to Pierusalem.
3 And all the congregation made a bonde with the king in the house of God, and he fatde vnto them: Bcholde, the kinges
. fonne must raigne, as the Lorde hath unge. (aide okthe chiidzen of Dana,

20.6. ch. e. 4 This is it thertore that ve shal do: The and. cb. khirde part ot pou shall on the Sabbath come to the priestes, Tenites, & kepers

of the porche s, :

5 And another thirde part shalbe by the

kinges house, and another thirde part

{haibe at the gate of the koundation: and al the people shalbe in the courtes ofthe boule ofthe Lor de.
6 But there shal none tome into p boule oftie Lorde, sane the priestes and they

Ex. xxvii. b.

that minitter vnto the Leuites, they

shall go in, for they are holy: but all the people (hal kepe the watch of the Lord.
W 7 And the Teuites shali compasle the klug round abont, and euery man hall haue his weapon in his hand: and what other man soeuer doth tome into the housesot᷑ the Lode he shalbe slapne: and

let them be with the king when he com-

meth in, and when he goeth out. '
8 Andtht Leutics and all Juda didaccording to al thinges that Jehoiada the prlelt had commaunded, and toke euery man his menthat came in on the Sabbath, with them that went out on the
Sabbath dap:neither did Jehoiadathe priest let the tompanies depart,
9 Aud PHehotada the prtest delluered to

17 Che teumple

the captapnes of hundredes, f eaves chieldes, and bucklers, that bab 115 tepned to king Danid, and were in the house of God. ö

lo And he let all the people (euery manga:

bing his weapon in his hande from the right fide of the temple to the lefe ide of the temple, along by the aulter and the tenwle, rounde about the king. a

u And they brought out the kinges lone, and put vpon him the crowite, and the Dane

testünome, and made hun king:and Je-

Hotada and his sonnes annoputed him, and laide, God saue the king.

12 When Athaliahu heard the noyse of the people running, and payfing the king, che came to the people into the
Houle of the Lode. 1

TB And the lobed; and beholde the king

stoode in his plate at the entringin aud „g vn the lordes and the trunipettes were by the king, and all the people of the lande reiopted, blowing withtrumpettes, and the fingers were with instrumentes ok mulicke, and such as could fing prayse:
But Athaliahu rent her clothes, and

f vines hae e - ineo tf

14 And Jehoiada the priest w

the taptaynes of hundredes that were gouernours of the hoatt, and lade bunte them, Paue her foorth of the ranges : „en whoso foloweth her, let him be Hane ovat
With the sword. For the werk e .
Hep thats not flap her in the houle ol the Lorde. ns (ils

15° And they layde handes onhereill + was tome to che entring of eo “a gate 1 the kinges houle, and the t ey ue er. a . & ü. ext

16* And Jehotada made a bond Ait eee ; him and al the people and the king, they choulde be the Towes people. ge

17 And all the people went tothe 10 5 DIS coset
Waal, and© deftropedit, aud barg, Cis auliters and his mages and due aul than the prielt of aal before th ters.

13 And

2. Chronicles. cxl. olada put the vfficers for the Dre des, and all the nobles, and the go-

18. And Heb dofthe he Lord vnder the han uernours ofthe people, and all the folk
9 1 0 TLeuites 's Daum haddt okthe lande, and caufed the king 0 cats
Feibuced them in the houle ok the Tod dobbne out of the Houle of the Lode, to offer burnt offringes vnto the Hod, and they caine though the hye gate ins gg it is written in the lave of Boyles, to the kinges boule, k let the king vpon with reiopting and singing, as it was or- the leate or the kingdome. deyned by Dauid. 21 Andal the people of the land reioyced,
0 And he let potters by the gates of the and the citie was in tranqulutie after youte of the Lord that none which was that they had flapne Athallahu with bncicane in any thing shoulde enter in. the sworde. ö
20 And he toke the captapnes of Dun:
J Lhe xxiijj. Chapter. |
' epaireth the houte ofthe Lorde. 17 After the death ol gehoiad ate, wpe foneth to death Facharta tHe prop hete. f 25 que ig üs or owneseruauntes. 27 After him raigneth Amaziahu.

Mas was seuen peres

olde when he began to

aigne, x“ he raigned

fourtie peres in Hierufalent : His mothers name alfo was Zibia of Beerleba.

2 And Joas dyd that which was right in the fight ofthe Lode all the dayes of
0 Jehoiada the priest.

3 And Pebotada toke him two wpues,

and he begat sonnes and daughters.
4. And it chaunced after this, that Joas ae minded to renue the Houle of the orde.
§ And he gathered together the priestes und the Leuites, and {aide to them: Go out vnto the tities ol Juda, and gather

the seruannt of God set vpon Hiraet the wüldernesse. 8
10 pial ie tore And al 1 people reiop-
5 zought in, & tast into the chest putlltt was full. ii u And it fortuned, that at the lame tune they brought in the chest vnto them whiche were inthe kinges bulinelle by the hand ofthe Leuites, and when they fave that there was much monep, the kinges {cribe, and one appoynted by the
Dye priest, came, and emptied the chest, and Coke it, and taried it to his plate az gapne. Thus they dyd day by dap, and gathered much money.
Iz And the king and Jeholada gaue it to such as dyd the labour and Worke in the
Houle of the Lorde, and hyred malons

Arto was
Ahh cour and qd:

ma hun b endeckt

ok all Ilrael money to repaire the houle

of your God front pere to pere, and lee

chat pe halte the thing: Howebeit the
„Ecuites were lacke,

ue © “ind tie king called Jehoiada that was

waer the Ochlekest, z lalde vnto him: Whyre-

quurest thou not ofthe Leuites to bring

10 aut ot Juda and Hierulalem the tol-

ettionof money, according to the com-

gleht dement of Doyles the fernaunt

3 sbe ttode aud ol the congregation of

. forthe tabernacle of witnelleae Wicked Athaliahu Eber children e bp the Houle of God, and all the

Woxxx. b

thinges that were Dedicate for the house

ok che lord, did the |

2 DID they bestow fo2 Waalim.

70 at the kinges tommaundement

15 made achest, and setit Without at

note Ofte houle of the Lorde:

„e, DAR dee protlamation through Buz

a, Dae Hlernsal ing i

Ar nent em to bring in to the Low gration ok money that Doyles

Sib,

and carperitersts repaire the houle of the Lorde, and so dyd the artificers in iron and brasse to mende the houscok the Lorde. ¢

B And fo the workmen Wrought, and the
Woke mended though their handes: and they made the Houle of God asit ought to be, and strengthed it.

14. And when they had finished it, they bronght the rest ofthe money vefore the king and Jehoiada, and therwith were made deficls for the house of the Lozde, enen beflets to minister withall, land to „ ay

serue for burnt olfringes / chargers and t805,03 boales

spoones, vessels of golde and suuer: And they offred burnt olfringes in the boule of the Lord tontinnally all the dayes of
Jehoiada. a

15 Wut Jehoiada waxed olde, aud dyed full of dayes: for an hundred and thirtie peres olde was he when he died.

S 4 16 And

‘ 4. Reg. i4 d.

16 Aud they buried hin in the citie of Daz uid among the kinges, betaule he dealt wen wich Israel, and with God and

with his house.

17 And after the death of Jehoiada, tame the lordes of Juda and made obepfaunce to the king: And the king hearke ned vnto them.

18 And so they lekt the houfe of the Lord
God of their fathers, and serned grones and idolcs, and then came the wath of
God vpon Juda and Hierusalem for this their trespates fake.

D jo And he kent prophetes to them, to bring thẽ againe vnto the lord, ethey testified vntothem: but they would not heare.

20 Anb the spirite of God tame vpon Zacharia the sonne of Hchotada the prielt,
Which stoode by the people, and said vntothem, thus sayth God: Why trans-

} gresse ve the tommaundementes ofthe

Borde, that ve cannot prosper- Foz betaust ve haue forsaken the TLorde, he also hath forsaken vou.

21* And they tonspired against him, Wand stoned him with stones at the cõmaundementofthe king, euen in the court of the houle of the Lorde.

22 And so Joas the king remembred not p kindnelle which Jehoiada his father had done to him, but flue his sonne: And
When he died, he laide, The Lorde loke

(e) which were Hattie: ters and idorater.

Mat xxii.d
(dJ dolaterg art cuee cruci.

2. Chronicles.

A marist,

bean iwer require it. N

23 And when the pere was out, it fortuned that the hoast of Spria cael gaint Him, e they cane again Juda and Dicrulalem, and destroped all the lordes of the people from among the people, and {ene all the spople ofthem vuto the king to Damaston.

24. Fo the Sprians came with asmall company of men, and the Lorde delluered a very great hoast into their hande, betause they had forlaken the lorde God of their kathers: And they gane fentenee agalust Joas.

25, And When they were departed from ¢ hin they left hun in great dileales: and 480 his owne seruauntes conspired aganst hin kor the blood ofthe children of Pee e hotada the priest, and flue him orshis Wlan bed, and he died: and they buried hin in „. the titie of Dauid, but not in the lepulchres of the kinges.

26 Aud these are they that touspiredagaint him: Zabad the fonne of S¢ meath an Ammonite, € Peholavad the sonne of Simrith a Poabite.

27 © And his lonnes, & the sunmie ofthe „ taxe that was raked in his time andthe u repairing of the boule of God, beholde they are writtẽ in the storie ol the booke of the kinges: And Amaziahu his sonne raigned in his steade.

The .xxy. Chapter.

3 Amasia putteth them to death which Aue his father. 10 he tendeth backe them of Ffract, n He onercommeth the Edomites. 14 He lalleth to idolatrie. 17 Ind Joas king of Iirael

We Maziahu was twen-
LOM) | tie and fine peres olde ewyen he began to

“Stl LaAIQne, and he raigned twentie € nine peres a in' Hierulalẽ: His mo-
~— thers name was Jeann .
(a) Beanies 2 nd he did that which is right inthe his eect — yout mot with a perfect he har his im- * keene, 3 Andalloone as he was setled in pking: dome, He fluc his seruauntes that had killed the king his father.
4 But he flue not their children vetaule it is written thus in the lawe and booke of

Daigc Moyles, Where the Lode commaun-
4. Reg b Ded faping:* The fathers chall not dye
Irene kor the thildzen, neither chall the chu-

, deen dye for the fathers, but euery man
Tall dpe for his owne finne.
5 And Amasztahbu gathered Juda toge-

ouercommeth Amasztavu. 27 He is slapne by a contpiracie.

ther, and made them captapnes oller thoulandes and ouer hundzcdes, Accor” ding to the houles of their fathers thoughout all Juda and Wemaunt-
And he munbred them from twentie veres olde and aboue, and foundanicrs them three hundred thoufande che 10 men, able to go to battell, and that con

j ve
6 De hired alfo an hundred thoulan trong fighting men out of Jlrael to an

iS

fracl tome with thee: for the Loden ot wih aifeatl 0 wit With al the chit dren ol Ephraim. ve

3 Wut if He wilt needes be meu tome on, and take the battatle in ) and God hall make thee fall be 05 enemie: Jor God hath power to 0 and to tast downe. 9 And

4 — salde to the man of ziahu laide
9 Jain spat al weDo then forte bi died talentes which J haue 1 5 hehoalt of Alrael: The man o God
1 ulwered: The atid 2 an to geue ethen they be. che RAD separated them, (to wil) the armie that Was conte to bim cut ok Ephrain t go home againe:
Whercfore they were exceeding weoth with Juda, E returned home in great anger. . u toke heart, and caried
‘ A ape and went to the falt valit lep, and * tote of the children ol Sete uland. n other ten thousand did the Hil: pen of Juda take alyue, c caried them vnto the top of a rocke, and tast them downe from 10 of the rotke, that they all to burst.
C, 15 the sonldiers of the Warmte which a Amaziahn lent away that they shoulde not go with his people to battaile, fell vpon the cities of Juda from Samaria puto Wethron, aud finote three thoufad of thent and toke much spople.
14. And it chaunced after that Amazʒiahu was tome from the slaughter ofthe E-

domites, he brought the gods ol the thil-

dren ol Seir, and set them vp to be his gods, and bowed him selfe befoze them, and burned incense vnto them.

15 Wherkore the Lorde was wroth with
Aniazʒiahu, efent vnto him a prophete, which laide vnto him: Why hastthou fought the gods ok the people which

Ram Were not able to © deliuer their owne

me” people out of thyne hande-

e 16 And it chaunted, that as ö prophete tal-

countels Cealse, why wylt thou be beaten And the prophete tealled, and laid:
Jam sure that God is minded to deltrop thee, becaule thou hast done this,

ub. an dagreest not vnto mp countell,
17 Then Anasiahu king of Juda toke
Abutle, and sent to Joas the sonne of n 1 of Jehu king of

’ 19;

a a ae, ome, that we may fee
18 und Poas king of PHlrael sentto Amazahn king ok Juda, laping: Athiltle

ked with him, the king laide bnto hin: a
Haue nien made thee of the kinges

2. Chronicles.

that is in Libanon, sent to a Cedar tree of Libanon, saping, ter to in sonne to Wife: And there came a wylde Dea of Libanon, and trove dolbne the thistile.

19 Thousapest: Loe, thou vat sinttten the
Edonntes, € thpne heart maketh thee proude to glorisie thy selse: Mow there: fore byde at home, Whydsek hoy protloke bute enil, Matthoumaph perithe, both thou and Juda with thee.

20 Wut Amazlahn woulde not hearnen to hun: for it came of God, evento delpuer thein into the bande of their enemies, because they fought tounsel at the gods of Edom.

21 And so Joas the king of Ilrael came vp, and they fal either other, both he and Aimaʒiahu king of Juda, at Bethsames which is in Judã.
And Juda was put to the worse vez

fore Israel, and they fled every man to

his tent.

23 And Joas the kingof Ilrael toke 2 mazilahu king of Juda the forme of Foz as pe tonne of Peboahas at Wethla-

mes, and brought him to Hierusalem, and tare the wall of hierusalem (from the gate of Ephraim, vnto the gate that pie duer against it) foure hundred cuz

ites.

24. And he toke away allo all the golde and siluer, and all the iewels that were founde in the Youle ol God with Obed
Edom, and the treafures of the binges
Houle, and the young wardes, and returned to Samaria.

25 And Amaziahu the sonne of Joas king of Juda, lpued after the deal of Joas fonne ok Jehoahaz lung of Pirael fil teene peres.

26 The rest ofthe actes ok Amaziahu first and last, are they not written in the booke of thekinges of Juda and Ye rael:

27 And after the time that Amaziahu did

cxl 7

* Geue thy daugh- J Nee,

D

E

turne away from the Lorde, they cone 4 Res f.

spired treason against him in hierulalem: and when he was fled to Lachis, they sent to Lachis after bint, and flue him there:

28 And brought him vp with horles, and

buried hin with his kathers in the ti- Tul.

tie ol Juda. «The

ae

hronicles.

eee Wie ae

he. xxyj. ( Vapter.

iin. Re. xv.

Pp

; i, Re xii.b

14 Nzzia obeping the Lorde, prospereth in his enterprites, vlurpeththe priestes office. 10 Che Lorde plagueth him. out ot the temple, and exclude him out or the Lordes hour

successour.

fi, ——

Hen all the people of

Juda toke Uszia,

Which was * sixteene

peres olde, c made him

king in the roome of his kather Amaziahu.

— Ande built Eloth, and brought it againe to Juda, after that the king was layde to sleepe with
His fathers.

3 Sirtcene peres olde was Uzzia when he beganto raigne, and he raigned fiftie and tibo peres in Hierulalem: is mothers name allo was Jecholia, of Hterusalem. N

And he did that which was right in the light ol the Lorde, according to all as did his father Amasiahu.

5 And cit came to passe that] he fought
God vin the dayes of Zachariahu, who had vnderstanding in the visions of god:
And as long as he fought the Torde,
God made him to prolper.

6 And he went to battaile against the
Philistines, and brake downe the wall of Geth, and the wall ol Jabne, and the wall of Aldod, c built cities about AE
DOD and among the Philistines.

B75 And God holpe hum against the Phi-

listines and against the Arabians that dwelt in Gur baal and hamehunim.
And the Ammonites gaue tribute to
Via, € his name spread abrode cuen to the entring in of Egypt: for he played the man exceedingly. ö
9 Aporcouer, Cis3ta built towres in Hie-

rulalem by the corner gate, and by the

valley gate, and at the turning of the

wall, and made them strong.

10 And he built towres in the wildernesse, and digged many welles : Foz he had much cattatle in the vallepes c playnes, plownen and vinedreslers in the mountaines and in Charmel:kor he loued bul: bandrp.

And Ussia had an hoast of fighting men, that went out to warre in the armie, attording to the number of their of fice, vnder the hande of Jeiel the stribe, and Maastahu the ruler, and vnder the

16 He wareth proude |
20 Che priestes detue aim
» 3 His burial, and his

pandc ol Pauaniahu, whit che kinges Tones, h was Out oF

12 And the whole nuniber of the aunti-

ent fathers and of the me ö were two thousand 0 fire rele 5
; And vnder the hande of themwasthe arnue of the men ol warre, euen the © hundred and seuenthonland, and fine hundred that made warre wit!

5 i ith the power ofan armie, helping the kingae eee

14. And Assia prouided them throu all the hence en 15 haberginnes, vowes, and slinges forto cast stones.
15 Andhe made fubtill engins in Hierusalem, which he inuented and layed on the towres and corners, to shoote arrowes and great stones withall: And his nanie spread farre abrode, because he had prepared to him lelle marueylous strength. j *
16 But in his strength His heart arose waite to his destruttion: Foz he transgressed aue again the Lorde his God, and went en into the temple ofthe ode to burne intenle vpon the aulter ofincense.
17 And Azariahu the priest went inatter him, and with him foureltore priestes ot the Lorde, that were valiaunt men:
And thep stoode by Uszia the king, and saide vnto hun: It partepneth not to thee Us ʒia to burne intense vnto the
Lorde, but to the priestes the chudren ol
Aaron, that are tonletrated for to ole „ 1. incenfe: Come therfore out of the (ane al tuarie, for thou batt trespalled, and it ls babe no worchip to thee before the Londe Bes
God. : 190 50 b
19 And Ussta was wroth, & had intenle rapa in his handeto burne it: and lo whee bf — bab indignation agaittl the priegge .
* the leprasie sprang in bis get head before the priestes tn cheug an 5 the Lorde, euen belide the inccule

ter. N ent withal
And Azariahu the chiete priest, wit! rothe other priestes, loked vpon ri ng beholde he was betonte a 1 88 ee fozehead, and they bered hun OF

; e te
Was faine 10 go out, beestiiet

BL had finpeten Hun 1% .

And Uszia the king tontinued a le-

7 er vnto the dap ok his death, e dwelt

tof the houle ok the Lorde: and

Noche his sonne Had the gouernaũte

ple or the laude. 1

9 Ahaz his lonne raigneth in his eave,

Otham was fiue and twentie peres olde when“ he began to raigne, and heraigned sirteene peres in Mie-

5 name also was Jerufa, the

daughter of Zadot.

the light ok the Lorde , in all poyntes as did his father Cissta, laue that he came est, not into the“ temple of the Torde:and wit the peoplt did yet Wickedsy.

the Lorde, and on the wall (where the
Houle of ordinaũte was) he built much.
4 Mortcouer, he built cities in the mountatnes of Juda, and in the wood conntrey he bullt castels and towres.
5 he kought with the king of the thildren of Ammon, and preualled against them:

Haz was! twentie pere olde when he began to raigne, and raigned six-

done = fight o
5 5 stehe Dai, f the TLorde, as rhe } binges Of Peace in the tapes of the mages fo waalim:

. Coffered intenle in the valley ol the

Mam Hiunon, and burnt big chr

eDeathen when Anden ok eL

etoze the chyldzen of rael. aa

Fuerail in an house being a leper and

Arye kinges Houle, and tunged the peo-

rusalein: his mothers

2 And he did that whiche was right in

n “ebunit the hie gate ofthe temple. ok

lrael, and made moulten

22 Ehe rest ok the attes of ia ʒ la first and

last, did Jlal the pro

ao We 5. ee
23 Aud lo UMszla slept with his fathers,

and they buryed him with his kathers fur the kleide of the burtall whiche was besibe the sepulchres of the kinges: fo2 they faide, he is a leper: And Jotham his sonne raigned in his steade.

Dye. xxvij. Chapter.

Jotham raigneth, and ouercommeth the Tmmonites, . s His resane and death.

And the children of Ammon gaue him the lame yere an hundred talentes or fit: uer, t ten thousand quarters of whcate, and ten thouland of barlpe: So much did the children of Ammon geue hun the fecond pere, and the third allo.

6 Do Jotham became nightie, bes gore er

tause be directed his wap bekoze the
Lorde his God. a

The rest of the artes of Jotham, and teins:

all his warres, and his tönuersation, oe B they are witten in the booke of the kinges of Ysrael and Juda.

8 He was twentie and fine peres olde when he began to raigne, and ra:gned sixteene peres in Hierulalem.

9 And Jothan slept with his fathers; and they bur ed him in the atic or Daz
. — aN Ahaz his sonne raigned in his

eade. 1 —

E.

The. xxviij. hapter.

1 Abas an dolater is geuen into the handes of the Syrians and the king of Brack. -
9 Che prophet reproueth the Ilraelites crueltie. is Juda is molested with enemies,
I Ahaz increaleth his idolatrie. 25 His death, and fuccellour.

4 He offred allo and burnt incende in the high places, and on mountapnes, and vnder enerp greene tree.

uered hun into the hande of the kyng ot the Sprians, whiche beat hym, and catied away a great multitude of his captine, and brought them to Damaston:
And he was delluered into the hande of the kyng of Ilrael, whiche smote hym with a great laughter. N
6 Foz Pekah the sonne of Nemaliahu slue m Juda an hundred and twentie thonfand in one day, Which Were all fighting men:and that becaute theyhad forsaken the Lord God of their d
é

fapleth them

cometho? God, ho nener

ete

tene peres in Derula- 5 herefoze the Lorde his God delle es
Atem and he did not that |
Whiche is right in the

(8) Au victo-

rie commeth af Sid.

C B And saide vnto them, Bring not in the

And Zichn a mightie man of Ephraim, siue Maasiahu the kinges sonne, and
Alrita the gouernour of the house, and
Eltana that was next to the king.

8 And the children ol Ilrael toke priloners of their brethren two hundred thoufand women, fonnes, and daughters, and taryed away much spople ot thein, and brought the spoyle to Samaria.

9 But there was a prophet of the Tordes
Whole nanie was Obed: and he went out before the hoast that tame to Samaria, and said vnto them: Wehold, betause the Lode God of pour fathers is wroth with Juda, he hath Deltuered them into pour hande, and pe haue llaine them with cruelnesse, that reacheth vp to heauen.

10 And nowe pe purpose to keepe under the children of Juda and Hierulalem, and to make thein bondmen and bondwomen: And do pe not lade pour lelues

with sinne in the light of the Lord pour
God: g

1 Now heare me therkore, and delpuer the captiues againe whiche ve haue taken of pour brethren: kor els shall the great Wrath of God be vpon pou,

12 Wherlore tertaine ofthe heads of the children of Ephraun, as Asariabu the sonne of Jehohanan, Werechiahu the fonne of Mesillemoth, and Pebeshiabu
Pfonne of Sallum, c Amafa the sonne of Hadlat, stoode vp againkthemthat tame fromthe warre,

captiues Dither : foz where as we

haue offended toward God alredy, ve

entende to adde more to our sinnes and

trespasse: Foz our trespasse is great al-

redie, and there is a fierte wrath against
5 Hlracl. 0 15 5
14 And vpon that, the men ok armes left

the captiues and the spople before the

lordes and all the congregation:

15 And the men that were nowe rehearsed by name, rose vp, and toke the prisoners, and with the spople clothed all that were naked among them, € araped them, e shooed them, and gaue them to eate and to dzinke, and annopnted them, and tarryed al that were feeble of them vpon asses, e brought them to Jeritho the citie of Paulme trees, to their brethren:and thenthey returned to Sa-

hronicles. —

ne 4 8

16 that fame time did kin

vnto che kinges of the Aft a
5 them. 1

17 And the Edomites came a slue some of Juda, and coven — taptiues. 2

18 Andthe Phllistines inuaded the cities in the lowe countrey, and towarde the south of Juda: And toke Bethlames and Alalon, and Gederoth, and Sochg with the townes longing thereto and
Thümna with the townes of the kme
Glinso and the townes thereof, and ae 0 tn,

19 Foz the Torde brought Juda lowe, betause of Abas king of Juda, Whiche DF

made Juda naked, etransgressed (oye against the Lode.

20 And Thilgath ptinefer king of the AE spriaus tame bpon him, and troubied him rather then strengthed him.

21 Jor Ahas toke away a portion out ot the house ofthe Lorde, and out ofthe kinges Houle and out of the lordes hous ses, and gaue vnto the king ok the Aly: riàns: and pet it helped hum not

22 And in the very time ok his tribulation, did king Abas trespasse pet more against the Lorde. 7

23 For he offered vnto the gods ofthem of Damascon, which“ beat him: and ien he laid, Betaule the gods of the kinges of Spria helpe them, therekore wyll offer to them, that they may helpe me also: ut they Were his destruction, and

the destructton ok all Piract, :

24. And Ahaz gathered together the velsels of the house of God, € brake theim, and! (hut vy the doores of the houleol „„ the Lorde, and made him aulters in nv. euery torner of Hicrufalent,

25 And in all the cities ol Juda hewave high places to burne incenle vnto other gods, and angred the Lorde God of his fathers. 8

26 The rest ot his actes, and his at first and last, beholde they are Watte, in the booke of the kinges ol Juda an

srael. 5 aud

27 And Ahaz flept with his fathers, “it they buried him in the citie of mee ty: lem: but brought hin wot bute 1 15 pulchnes ofthe hinges of Ira apt.
Hesebia his lonne raigued in bis

The

Reh

2 Chronicles.

J The. xxix. Chapter.

cxliy.

; weschia repatreth the temple, and aduertiseth the Leuites of the corruption ok reli.

ion. 12 The Leuites prepare the temple. in the temple.

eEzekia began to raigne
Awhen he was flue and
Atwentie peres olde, and
Ihe raigned nine € twentie peres in Hierulalem:

And his mothers name
— was Abia, the daughter of Zachartah

u.
„ Andhe did that which was right in the light ofthe Lorde, in all poyntes as dd Dauld his father. mst 3 he opened the“ doozes ofthe houle ee” ofthe Lore in the kirst vere and fii ger monech of his raigne, and repaired

Achat tm. f E

a 4 an he brought in the priestes and the

* LToeuites, and gathered them together

into the east streate, i

5 And laide vnto them: Heare me pe Leuites, and now be fanctificdD and halow the honse of the Lorde God of pour faz thers, bring lilthynesse out of the holy

_ place.

6 Forour fathers haue trespalled, and dont euill in the eyes of the Lorde our
God, and haue forsaken hin, and turned away their faces from the habitati-
0 eien turned their backes

nit.

And belide that, they haue shut vp the doors of the porche, and quenched the lanipes and haue neither burut incenfe,

place vnto the God of Ilracl.

8 Oherekore the wrath of the Lorde

Tt ARs
7 iel tell,

We st Cong
+ brought thenito trouble to be wondred on, to be hissedat, euen as ye sec with

pour epes. |
9 Forloc, our fathers were ouerthrothe [word, and our fonnes,

wen With

pur Daughters and our wyues were ca-
8 2 aay captiuc for the fame caule.
6 nd now it is in mpne heart to make reel charhe With the Low God of PE
„that he may turne | indiguation rom bs. rn

NOW therefore m

y sonnes, be not neg:
11 : forthe Lorde * hath cholen pou aide before hun, and kor to minister

and lerue him, and to burne intenle.

Gais,

14 And okthe sonnes of Heman,

nor offered burnt offringes in the holpß

kellon Juda c Hierulalem, and hehath

20 The hinges and his princes sacritice

2j Che Leuites ling prapses. 3 The oblation of the people.

1 Then the Leuites arose, Mahath the sonne ol Amalai, and J gaathb me
Azariahu of the chilozen ok the Caathites: And ol the fonnes of Perari,
Eis the sonne of Abdi, and Aʒarlahu the sonne of Jahalelel: And ofp sonnes of the Gersonites, Joah the fonne of
Simma and Eden the sonne of Joah:

13 And ok the sonnes of Elizaphan, Sin ri and Jehtel: And of the lonnes of C saph, Zechariahu and Hema

chiel, and Smet: And of the founes of Jeduthun, Semala and Uisstel.

15 And thep gathered their brethren, and purified them felues, and came according to the commaundement ofche king and the wordes of the Lord for to clense the house of the Lorde:

16 And the priestes went into the inner partes of the house of the Lord to clenle it, and broͤught out all the vnclennesle that they founde in the temple ol the
Lorde, into the court of the boule ofthe
Lorde: And the Ltuites tobe it, to carp it out into the broont Cedon.

They began the first dap ok the first moneth to purifie, and the eyght day of the moneth tame they to the porche ol the Lorde: So they sanctified the house ofthe Lorde in eyght dapes, and in the lirttenth day of the first moneth they made an end. 8

18 And they went in to Hezekla the king, and faide: We haue denfedall the boule ofthe Lorde, the aulter of burnt offrung

with all his vessels and the Mew bread , resus.

table with all his apparell:

And all the beflets which king Ahaz did cast alide, when he raigned, tranlgressed, them we haue prepared aud fanctified, and beholde they are before the aulter of the Lorde.

20 And Hezekia the king rose earlye, and gathered the lordes of the cine, and went vp to the houle of the Lorde.

21 And they brought seuen oren, scuen rammes, leuen sheepe, and seuen hee goates to be a firme offring for the king dome, kor the fanctuary, and fo2 Juda:

ded the priestes the
And he commaunded the vi St

fonnes of Aaron, to offer them onthe aulter of the Lorde.

es 22 And they fluc the oren,and the priettes unk e: kkteaued the blood and™ spunckled it deem hefe on the aulter: like wyse when they had

the sheepe, and they sprinckled the blood vpon the aulter.

23 And then they brought foorth the hee goates for the sinne offering before the
Ring and the congregation, æ put their

handes vpon them.

24 And the prieltes slue them, and with the blood of them they tlenled the aut: ter, to make fanffaction for all Israel: kor the king tõmaunded that the burnt offering and the sinne offering choulde

de made for all Israel.

25 And set the Leuttes in the house of the

Torde with cymbales, plalteries, and harpes, atctording to the tommaundement of Dantd and of Gad the kinges fear,and Nathan the prophete: Jor so
Was the commaundement of the Lod though the hande of his prophetes.
E 26 Andthe Teuttes stoode, hauing the tr f strumentes of Dauid: and the priestes helde the trumpettes.

27 And Hesekla commaunded to offer the burnt offring vpon the aulter: And when pe buent offtung began, the fong of the Lorde began also, and the trun pettes, with the instrumentes that were
9 1 0 by the hand ol Dauid king of

rac .

28 And all the congregation worchipped, finging a song, and blowyng with the trumpettes, and all this (continued) pn: till the burnt offring was finithed.

29 And when they had made an end of

LPar. xx v.

9 The xxx. Chapter.

1 Cheheping ofthe palsouer by che binges commaundement. 6 He erhorteth Pract
18 He prapech lor the people. 24 His oblation and the prin-

to turne to the Lorde. ces. 27 The Leuites blesse the people.

D Hexekta {ent to all
Ilrael and Juda, and
> (W20te letters to E-

LS) IS 5

e bnto the Lode God of

2 And the king helde a counfell with his

flaine the ranunes, they sprinckled the blood vpon the aulter: They due also

offering, the king and ali

ent wich hun, bowed wem iel . werent ; > AND eg

30 And hezekia the king an f spake to the Leultes roprapte ets with the wordes of Daurd t of Af tk ihe car: And they auh

Jladnetle, and the other pe webe W

31 ind Hesekia aunswered, and aud,
Now ye haue consecrated our henne to the Lozde: go to therefore and bryn

the sacrifices and thanke Offeringes fits the houle of the Lorde. Andthe congregation brought in the satrifices g thank offeringes, and burnt offcinges asm ny as were of a freeliberall heart.

32 And the number ofthe burnt Offtinges N bo the congregation brought, wag threestore and ten Oren, an hundred ere alee ae f

the burnt ofterm
TLorde. .

33 And there were dedicated fige hundred oxen, and three thousand sheeße.

34 And the priestes were to fewe to flay al the burnt offringes: but their brethzen the Lenites did helpe them, till they had ended the Worke, x until the prieftes
Were fanctified: For the Leuttes were purer Hearted to be sanctified, then the priestes.

35 And therto 5 burnt offringes were many, With the fat of the peaceoffringes, he drinke offringes, that belong tothe burnt offring: And fo theleruite parteyauen. be boule of the Lorde, was fl nifben.

36 And Hesebiareioyecd,and all the people, that God had made the folke fo rea dle, e that the thing was fo soone done.

lodes and al thecongeeaationofie rulalem, ' to kepe the feast of palsouer .
(nthe™ second moneth: N . ee
For they coulde not kepe itat that z time, because the priestes were not [ant 2, ified luffictenklp, neither was the peo ple gathered together to Pierulaic 1
4. And the thing pleased the lung and the congregation.

b it shoulde be
5 And they decreed that ayn

2. Chronicles.

2 med throughout al Israel from deeetleba to Dan, that they shoulde
10 jecholde the feat of paffouer vnto
1 F910 God of Pleacl at Hierufatent:
Forthey bad not done it of a great sea-

85 run th letters ofthe
2 oftes went wi
5 100 ad his lordes throughout all scacl aud Juda, and at the ba dement of te Hing they lade: Ve chilf rae
0 ra of Abraham, Plabac, and srael, and he Will returne tothe remjaunt that are estaped of pou out ofthe hande ofthe kinges of the Aiffpatans.

55 Andbe not ve like pour fathers and vonr brethren; Which trespassed against the Lorde God of their fathers , Which gaue them bp to be Deflroyed , AS pe fee.

3 And nodbe be not pe stiffe necked like as were pour fathers: but yeelbe pour selnes vnlo the Lord, and enter into His holp plate whithe he hath fanctified fo cuer, and lerue the Lord pour God, and the kertenesse of his wrach shal turne a-
Way krom yon.

9 Forikye turnt againe vnto the Lorde, then shall pour brethren and pour children finde tompassion in the prefence of them that toke thenicaptiue , and they fhall tomie againe vnto this lande: Jor the Lorde pour God is gratious and mercifull, and wil not turne away his face from pou, it pe tonuert vnto hym.

lo And so the postes went from citie to ct tie in the lande of Ephraim and Manalse, euen vnto Z abulow : but they laughed them to scorne, and mocked them.

u Neuerthelesse, pet diners of Aler, Manasle, and of Zabulon, submitted them lelues, and tame to Hierulalem. ö

2 And the hande of God was in Juda, ald he gaue them one heart to do the tomnaundement ok the king and of
5 me rr ding to the worde of the

3 And there assembled to Hierusalem

Mightie great congregation „ to holde
15 N oklweete bread in the {econde

moneth.
Toad 14 And they arose, aud remoued the*aulthe bat Were in Hierusalem: And all
0 gulters fo2 incenfe dyd they awap, cal them into the brooke Cedron.
1 ib flue Paslouer the fonre-
Y Day of the feconde moneth: And

much people, and there was present a

the priestes and Leuttes whiche were

“athamed fanctified them elues, and eng mongormthe burnt offtinges into the aher,

houle of the Lorde.

16 And they stoode in their office alter“ their mance and according to the lawe of Boyles the man of God: And the priestes {patti ckled the blood, whiche they receaued of the hande of the Leuites,

17 For there were many in the congregation that were not sancttfied, and there: fore the Leuites had the charge of the killing of the Passouer for enery one that was not cleane, to fanctifie him vn-

18 For maupofthe people, and very maz hy out ol Ephraim, Manasse, Jlachar, and Zabulon, were not clensed, and pet dyd eate Passouer against the lawe appoynted: Wut hezekia prayed fo2 them, sayiug, The good Lord be mercikull towarde euerp one

19 That prepareth his heart to seeke the
Lowe God, the Godok his fathers: though he be notsclensed accordingto the purification of the fanctuarte.

20 And the Lode hearde hezekia, and healed the people.

21 And the children of Ilrael that were present at Bierulalem, held the feast ol D sweete bread seuen dapes, With great gladnes: and the Lenites € the priestes praysed the Lorde day by dap, lingyng with loude instrumentes bnto the lord.

22 And hHezekia spake comfortably vnto all the. Leuites that had good Buowledgec to fing onto the Lorde; and they dyd cate throughout that fea seuen dapes long, and offered peace offringes, rie thanked the Lorde God of their fa

23 And the whole alemblp toke countell to do fo other seuen dapes: c they helde thofe seuen dapes With gladuesse:

24 Jor hezekia king of Juda, dyd geue to the congregation athoulandyoung

oren, and leuen thoulande sheepe: And bete

the lordes gaue out to the congregatton irc:

athoufand oren, ⁊ ten thoufande sheepe, gene.

and a great number of the priestes were sauctified.
25 And al the congregation ol Juda, with the priestes c Lenites, and all the tongregation that came out of Israel, e the straungers that tame out of the land of
Israel, e that dwelt in J b dne was great
26 And there gr 18859

a cxliij.

nes ol tht pcos

Mierusalem:or since the time of Solo-

mon the sonne of Dauid king of Ffract, there was no suchlior in Hierusalem.

27 And the priestes and the Teuites a

ie

(a That is.

in the temple

Sohere thep 3 assembicd.

5 Nu. xxvill. b

(b) The tythes and first fruiteg fkor the mam-
| tenaunce of the pices and Lcattes, 5

————ů — *

The. xxxj. Chapter.

Che people destroy olatrie, 2 Hezekia appoynteth prickes and Leuttes. g and prouideth tor their lypupng. 6 Be ordapneth ouerleers to distribute

to euerp one his portion.

MD when all thele thinges were finished, all tbey of Jlrael that e were present in the et:
. N aue de e ee

UE and bräke the images, pez” aud cut downe the idoll groues, and all to brakt the hygh places and * aulters throughout all Juz da and Bemamin, in Ephraim allo and
Manafie, vntil they had vtterly destroyed them all: And all the children of PE racl returned euery man to his poslellions, and to their owne cities.

And Hezekia appoynted sundry tompanies of the priestes and Leuttes after the diuersitie of their ministrations, euery man according to his office both priestes and Ltuites, for the burnt offering and peace offringes, to minister and to gene thankes and prapse in the gates of the@hoakt of the Lorde.

And the kinges portion of his substaunce that he gaue, were Bayly burnt offringes in the morning and euening, and burnt offeringes lor the Sabbath daes, newe moones, c solempe feastes, accordingꝰ as it is written in the lawe of the Lorde. g

4 And he bade the people that dwelt in

Hierusalem, to geue aw parte to the priestes and Lenites, that they might substaneially applic them selues to the lave ofthe Torde.
Andaffoone as the binges tommaunde ment tame abrode, the childzen of PE rael brought abdoũdaunce of first fruites, of torne, Wine, ople, hony, and of all maz ner of frustes of the fielde, € the tythes of all maner of thinges brought they in plenteoussy.

Andthe children of Israel and Juda that dwelt in the cities ot Juda, they allo brought in the tythes ol oren and cheepe, x other holy tythes which were

tonlecrate vnto the Lorde their God

ronicles.

9 And Hesebia questioned with the

rose, and blessed the people: and voyte Was heardlot the Lone on ne

payer came vp vnto he . dwelling plate. beauen his Hop

they dpd offer and broughtet

beg aht them all by

7 In the thirde moneth, they beganto B lap the heapes in maner of A ee ˖ on, and kmished them in the leuenth moneth.

3 And when Hezekia and the loses tame and sawe the heapes, they blesled the Lorde, and his people Ilrael.

prtestes and the Leuites concerning the heapes. g

10 And Asaria the chiefe priest ok the house of Zadoc, aunswered hym and lapde: Since the people began tobryng the heaue offringes into the boule of the
Lorde, we allo haue had mough to fr cate, there remapned so much: kor the mz owe Hath biefled his people, and this heape is lett.

n And hezekla bade prepare the chart, .2.% bers in the house of the Lod: And they did prepare them,

12 And carped in the fir kruites, the tythes, and the dedicate thinges faythfully: ouer which Chonaniahuthe Le uite had the rule, aud Scmiei his brother next to hym: ;

z And Pebicl,Asariabu, Pabath Asa, el, Jerimoth, Josabad, Eliel, Jesmachiahu, Mahath, and Wanaiahu, Were duerleers ozdapned bp Chonauiabnand Semeihis brother was an officer of hezekia the king, and Asaviayu was the ruler of the boule of God.

14 And Cozethe fonne of Imma 105
Teutte, and pozter of the eat Door’, 5 the ouersight ofthe thinges that 1 offered of a kree will bnto God eu : geuen in maner feneraily puto 1
PLozde,and duer the thinges molt ha 15

15 And under his hande were n ; nianiin, Jetua,Scmetabu, amen ae and Sechaniahu tn the kities 0 119 piiestes (appoynted] of their one at geue to their brethren their portion +,

2. Chronicles.

cxlv.

— ellto the small as to the great. owen,

Felide their generation, beyng males,

a mn cee peresold and vpwarde, euen

puto cuery one that entereth into the ponte okthe Lord, they chould geue dar by day, for their minitration , and for thetegening attendaunce, and for their diuers waytinges by course,

17 Both to the generation of the priestes and Leultes throughout the houcholde oktheir kathers from twentie peres and aboue, to wapte when their courses

5 N
18 And to the familles of all their babes,
Wpues, sonnes and daughters through all the congregation: For vpon the fidelilie ol them were the holy thinges be-

AFter that theledeedes

were kapthfullp done,

* Sennacherib king of

the Asspriaus tame,

and entredinto Juda,

NS c compassed thestrong

min. — cities, and thought to

diinne them for him selfe.

2 And so when Hezekta sawe that Sennachersb was come, amd that he was purpoled to fight against Bierusalem,

3 He toke counscll with his lordes and men ok might, to stop the water of the fountapnes without the citie: And they

dpd helpe him. „

4 Fo2 there gathered many of the people together and stopt all the welles, and the broke that ran through the middes oftheland faying:nahy thall the binges
0 Whe Aubläns tome and finde much

bp the wall where it was broken „and wee odmaunke vpon the towres, and
0 Cother wall without, and repaired
‘ Moin the cite of Dauid „ and made
5 Naty dartes and (hicldes. ö N eee captaynes of warre ouer the b In e, and gathered them together to a in the large streete of the gate of the n spake gentylly to them, saping: a ep your heartes and be strong:

t afcapde no; discouraged for the

And hezenla went to lustyy, and buylt

19 And to the ehilazen of Aaron the prlestes whiche were in ee a suburbes of their cities, citie by citie, the men Whole names Were expressed afoze, shoulde geue portlons, even to all the males amongthe priestes, and to all

the Teultes, according to their number.

20 And ofthis maner did Hezekiathzoughout all Juda: € Wrought it that is good, pe al true before the Lorde his

od. ö

21 And in al the workes that he began, fo D serulte of the houle of God, for the lawe,
€ fo? the commaundementes , he fought his God: and that did he with all his heart, and prospered. a

Te. xxxii. Chapter.

1Sennacherib inuadech Juda. 3 Hezekta prepareth for the warre. > He erhorteth the people to put their trust inthe Lorde, Sennachertb blalphemeth God. r0 Hee , zehiaprapeth. 21 The angell destropeth the Allprians, and the hing is llapne. as Hezekta is not thankekull eo ward che Lorde. 3 His death.

king ofthe Assyrtans, æ forall the mute

titude that he bath with hyni : *foz Reg

there be mo with vs then with hym.

3 With him is an arme offlesh: but with 1er.

vs is the Lord our God for to helpe vs, aud to fight our battayles. And the people toke a courage through the wordes of Hezekia kiug of Juda.

9 Alter this did Sennacherib king of the
Assyriaus fend of his seruauntes to Hierulalem (but he him selfe remapned befide Lachis hauing all his power with
Hin) vnto Hezekia king of Juda, and oe all Juda that were at Hierulalem, aplng,

lo Thus faith Sennacherib king of the

Assyrians: wherin do pe trust O pe that 4-Rezs,

dwellin Pierusalem which is besieged-
11 Doth not Hezekia entice pou to geue ouer pour selues vnto death, hunger, aud thirst, saying: The Lod our God fhatt ryd vs out ofthe hand of the king of the
Assprians:
12 Hath not the fame Hezekia put Downe ) Fee

his hye places and his Waulters t corte herne maunded Judaand hierusalem, laying, mie

religion, snd

ne shall worchip before one aulter, and wat. burne intense vpon the same-

3 Knowe pe not what F and my fathers haue done vnto the people of all landes:
Were the gods of the people of other landes, able 02 1 to {auc their

andes out of my hande- *
ö 0 T1 14 Which

4. Reg. i8.c.

his people out of my hande- And (hall pour God be able to Deliner vou out ot mp bande 2 0

15 Wherkore nowe let not Hezekia deteaue vou, nor persuade pou of this fassion, no: pet beleue him: For as no god among all nations and kingdomes, Was able to rid his people out of my hand aud out ok the hand or my kathers: owe much lesle

{hall pour gods be able to kepe vou out

of mp hande- 8
16 And pet mothinges did his seruauntes

speake against the Lode God, and a-

gaint his seruaunt Hezekia.

17 And Sennacherib allo wrote a letter to rayie on the Lord God of Israel, and spake against bim, faping: As the gods of the nations of lother) landes haue not ben able todeliuer their people out of my hande:euen fo shal not the God of Heze-

Ria Deliver his people out of my hande.

13 And they cried with a loude boyce in the
Jewes speach vnto the people of Hiekulalem that were on the wall, tofeare them, and to make them faynt hearted, and that they might so take the citie. to And they {pake against the God ol hierufalent, as against the gods of the nations ok the carth, (whiche were J the workes of the handes of men.

20 aut Heschiathebing, andthe prophet

opine 8 Elai the sonne of Amospzaped against malieroubles gly blatphemie, and cried vp to heauen.
Y 21 And the Lord sent an angel, Which destroyed all the men of Warre and the

lordes aud Want ofthe hoast of the

king of the Allprians, that he turned his

kate againe wich chame towarde his

owne lande: And when he was come into the houle of his god, they that came

4-Regw-g

ok his owue body fue him there with

the sworde.
22 Aud so the Lorde faned Hesekia and the inhabiters ok Bierulalem out of the hand of Sennacherib the king ofthe Al syrians, and from the hande ofall other, and mapntayned them on euery fide.
And many brought offeringes vuto the

Poweto Hierulalem, and presentes to

Heschia king of Juda: fo that be was

2. Chronicles.

— . ð enen anaanifirn nee ke
14 Which ok all the gods of those nations magnified in the fight |
C that mp fathers destroped, could dener ght of all nations

1 me

24 uthose dapes Pezekia was sicke

eee

m, and
1 miratle. chewedhim

25 Wut Hezekia dyd not againe vn actording to it that he had chewed hone

kor his heart arose, æ there tame wiath
* —— vpon Juda and hieru-

26 Notwithstanding Hesekta submt

hin selke after that his heart was 750 vp, he and the inhabiters of Mierulalem: and the wrath of the Lorde tame not vpon them intht dapes of Hezekia.

27 And Hesckia Had exceeding much riches and Honour: And he gat himtreasures of siluer and gold, pretious stones, and spites, shieldes, and ok all maner plealaunt iewels:

28 And made store houses for the frultes E of torne, fo wint and ople, and stalles for all maner of beastes, and foldes foz
Teepe. - . 8

29 And he made him cities had of sherpe and oxen great aboundaunte: For God had geuen him lubstaunte exceeding much.

30 This fame Hesebia stopped the vpper
Water springes of OGihon, and brought Gasen them downe to the well five of the citie 370, of Dauid: And Hezekia prospered in all bis workes.

zi And when the princes ol Babylon sent vnto him ambaffadours , to enqure of the wonder that chaunced in the lande, God lekt him, to trye hin and deo that all that was in his heart might be ue knowen. a ae

32 The rest ok the deedes of Hetzel aum his goodnes, beholde they are walken inthe viston ol Elaithe prophet thefonne
3 Amoz, aire * of the kinges d

uda and Ilrael. ö
33 And Hesekia llept with his kacher 5 they buried Hymn in the molt wor late of the sepulchres of the ounee auid, and all Juda and the habt : of hlerulalem öpd hum worhip are
Death: and Maͤnalse his donne raignes in his steade. The

owne feruauntes lay.

Anasse was twelue

peres olde * When he

began to raigne, and he

178 ratgned fiftie and fiue
%% veres in Hierusalem:

Vig % But dpd euyll in the

— sight of the Lorde, like vnto the abhonunatlons of the heathen whomthe Lord cal ont before the chit:

dren of Jlrgel. *

3 For he went to, and buylt the high plates whlche Hezekla his father had broken downe : And he reared bp aulters foz
Baalim, and made groues, and worshipped all the hoast ofheauen, and serued them.

4 And he buylt aulters in the house of the
Lorde, where as the Lord pet had sapd,

reid, In Hierusalẽ Mat my name be for euer.

r 5 And he buylded aulters fo2 all the hoass

e gfheauen, in the two tourtes ol ß boule

ofthe Lorde. i

6 And he burnt his children in fire in the valley of the sonne ol Hinnon: He was a sorterer, he regarded the crying of bitdes, vledinchauntmentes, and maputapned Workers with spirites and {ears ok flortunes, and wrought much euyll in the light of the Lorde to anger hym

8 withall.

7 _ And he put the tarued image and an ol whiche he had made, in the boule of
Gad: Ok which houle, God had sayd to
Daud and to Solomon his lonne, In this house and in Hiernlalem whiche J

haue cholen afore all the tribes of Jlra-

a g el wil J put ny nanie foz euer.

, © Neither will J make the foote of Be

iu, kaelto remoue any moze out ot the land

whiche J haue ordeyned for pour fas thers, prlo be that they Wil be diligent

and do all that J haue commaunded mena 5 — and erte 037

e hande ol Woyles.

f oe fo Panasse made * a the in-

1 ye of Dierufatemtoerre and to do

Beers inthe heathen whomthe Lord io And ee ee one the thudzen of Ifrael. x ton, we Word fpake™to Mana le and garde 3 : but they woulde not rez

gez id

2. Chronicles. cxlxj.
The. xxxiti. Chapter.
Manasses an idolater. 9 He cauleth Juda to erre. 1. He is ledaway pritoner into wae

apeth to the Lorde and is deliuered. is Heaboliheth tdolatrie, 15 and datt bp oie religion. 20 He dieth, and Amon his tonne lucceedeth, 24 whom his

un Wherkore the Lod brought vpon them the captapnes of the hoastofthe king of the Assprlans, whiche toke Manasle in holde, and bounde him with chapnes, and caried him to Wabplon. ‘

12 And when he was in tribulation he be-

fought the Lord his God, and humbled

him selfe exceedingip before the God of

his fathers, :
13 And made intertession to him: and God 8 was wintreated of him, and hearde his ga ue

prayer, and brought him agatne to Hie- n.

rusalem into his kingdome: and then

a knewe that the Lode was

D - 5

od.

14 After this he buylt a wall without the C titie of Dauid on the welt fine of Gion, . in the valley, as they tame to the fishe gate, and round about Ophel, x brought it Dp of a very great heyght, and put tapeen een all the strong cities of

uda.

15 And he toke away straunge gods and images out of the house of God, and all par n the aulters that he had buplt in the *. mount of the house of God and Hierulalem, and tast them out ofthe titie.

16 And he prepared the aulter of the Lord, and sacrifiled thereon peace offeringes and thanke offeringes, and charged Juda to serue the Lorde God ol Israel.

17 Meuerthelesse, the people dyd offer iil in the high plates, howbeit vnto the
Lorde ther God only.

18 The rest ot the attes of Manasse, and his prayer vnto his God, c the wordes ok the sears that spake to him in the name of the Lorde Godof Ffrael, behold they are: witten zin the sayinges ol the kinges of Israel.

19 And his prayer, and howe that he was hearde, and all his sinnes, and his trespasse, and the plates where he made high plates and fet vp groues and images before he was meckened, beholde csecanz they are written among the fayinges of dar denden the sears. Lund. ae vo

20 And Manasse slept with his fathers, ge oon t they buried hun in his one honse, e and Ainon his sonne raigned in his ae roome. hoate,

22 21 Amon

when he began to raigne, and raigned two peres in Hierusalem.

22 But he did eull in the sightokthe Lod, lake as dyd Manasle his father: for Amon facrififed to all the tarued images whiche Manasse his father had made, and serued them.

23 And submitted not him selfe before the
Howe , as Manalse his father had

The. xxxiiii. Chapter. —

1Gofia dellropeth the idoleg. s and restoreth the temple. 14 The booke of the lawe is
2 He fendeth to Hulda the prophetisse lor countell, God heareth his
Rayer, zi he maketh a couenaunt with od. 1

kounde.

aly

— i Pilla was eyght peres
Row 2 olde when he began to e raigne, and he raig-
ANU neat Pierufalen hie
85 tie and one peres.
Sy And he dyd that whiche was right in the fight of the Lord, and walked m the
Wayes of Daum his father, and bowed neither to the right hand nor to the left.
3 Inthe eyght pere of his raigne, when he was pet a childe, he began to {eke alter the God of Damd his father: And in the twellth pere he began to purge Juda ct Hierulalem fromthe high plates,

K. Reg. 11 a.

2. Chronicles.
| 21 Amon was two and twentie peres old meekened him selfe: but ena F

24. And his owne seruauntes tonspi against him, and flue hint in higonire

25 Bur the people ofthe lande Aue al them

E

groues, carued images, and images ok

4 Andthep brake downe the aulters of
Waalim euen in his o presence:and other images that were in greater honour then they, he taused to be destroped: And the groues, carued images, and images of metall he brake: and made dust cf them, and strowed it vpon the graues of them that had offered vnto then:

5 And he burntthe bones of the priestes vpon the aulters of them, and tlensed
Juda and Hierusalein: —

6 And cuen so dwhe in the tities of Manasse, Ephraim, Simeon, onto Pephthall, and in the Wilderneffe of them

°

a Be woulde ce the reformatten with dis oon: cyesg

W konnde about, 4 cee 7 He plucked alunder thec' aulters e the en groucs , did beate the (mages t stampe canacta them to powder, and cut downe all the

e.. ddoles throughout all the lande of Pla:

el, and returned to Hierulalem againe.

3 In the eyghtenth pere ok his raigne, when he had purged the lande and the
Rega. temple, he lent Saphan the lonne of

1 Euento mafons and carpenters gaue

1 And the men did the worze faythiully: oft

13 And ouer the beavers ol burthens ard

{cd greatly, Amon trespaß

Houle.

that had conspired against king Amon: and the fame people of the lande made
Josia his sonne king in his roome.

Azaliahu, and Maasiah the gouernour of the citie, and Joah the fonne of Joahaz the recorder, to repaire the Houle of the Lode his God. a
Aud whenthep came to Helkiah th hie priest, they deliuered the money that was brought into the house of God, whiche the Teuites that kept the entryes had gathered of the hand ot Manasse and Ephraim, and ok all that pet remayned in Israel, and ok all Juda and Bemamm, and they returuedto
Pierusaleeem.
Andthey put it in the handes of the wormen that had the onerfight of the house of the Lorde, they gaue it to the labourers that wrought in the house of the Lorde, torepaire and mende the house. ö

they it, to get hewed stone, x tünber fo2 tonples and for beames of the houles
Which p binges ok Juda had destroped. pains

Andthe duerlears of them to courage them forward, were Jahath and Obadiahn Neues of the children of wh ri:and Secharia and Melullam © the children of the Caathites, and 1715 the Teultes, whiche all could lll ol! strumentes of musicke.

ouer all that wrought in

nep that was bought into the Howe e the Lorde, Helkia the prielt f bookie of the law of the Lorde

2.Chronicles..

1 red and layd to az
Aud ee eae found the booke hau the stribe: Jh 55 am inthe houle ofthe Lord. And okthe law inte h han baun Happen anno the bone ache
15 5 pale the king wordagaine, wing: All that was commited to thy seruaumtes, that do they. i
Avorn antec ogee ie money that was founde in the ho the Lord, and Hane Delivered it into the handes ok the onecfears of the Work, and to the handes of the emed
18 And then Saphan the lcribe the the king, saying, Helkia the priest hath geuen My ae and Saphan read in
ö t king.
10 400 farted that when the king had a heard the wordes of the lawe, berare pie his clothes: N sini? og And the king tommaunded Helkia and
Ahikam the sonne of Saphan and Abdon the sonne of Micah, and Saphan the seribe, and Alaa a seruaunt of the
Hinges, faying: . a1 Go and enauire of the Lord for me and for them that are left in JIsrael and Juda, concerning the wordes ofthe booke thatisfounde: Foz great isthe wrath of the Lord that is fallen bpon vs, becaule our kathers haue not kept the Worde of the eyes do after all that is witten in this booke,

22 And Helkia and they that the king had
(appornted! went to Hulda a prophetissc, the wyle of Sallum, the fonne of Thecuath, the sonne of Halra, keper of the
Wardrope (for fhe dwelt in Hierulalem within the letonde wall: ) c fo they com: mined with her. a

23 Ohe aunlwered them, Thus layth the
Lode God of Ilrael: Tell ye the man that sent yon to me,

24. Euen thus fapth the Lordenseholde,
J Will being euyll vpon this plate, and
Pponthe inhabiters thereok, euen althe which ie ate Written in the booke

a

n 1 ie rcad bekore the king haredame they haue forlanen me, and n dulce vntoother gods, to anger

tall maner wozkes of their
Nudes: therfore is my Wath fet ou five

W

190 this plate, and (yall not be quen-

26 And as for the king of Juda which fent

pou to enquire ofthe Lord fo that ye fap vnto hun: thus fapth the Lorde Gov of
Giftacl, concerning the wordes whiche thou hast hearde.

27 Wekause thyne heart didcomelt, and

thou diddest meeke thy leife before God whenthon heardest his Wordes again this plate, and against the inhabiters thereof, and humbledst thy lelke before me, and tarest thy clothes, and weepedst before me:that haue J heard allo, fayth the Lode.

28 Scholo, J wil take thee to thy fathers,

and thou shalt be put in thy graue in peate, and thyne epes shall not lee ailthe mischiefe that J will being vpon this

place, and vpon the inhabiters of the

same. And they brought the king worde againe. 5

29 Then the king lent and gathered toge-

ther all the elders of Juda and Hierusalem: r a

30 Aid the king went vp into the Houle of

the Lorde, and all the men of F uda, and themhabiters of hierusalem,, and the priestes and Leuites, and all the people great and (nal and the king did reade in their caves all the wordes of the bodke of the touenauntthat was founde in the boule of the Lorde.

zt And the king stoode at his standing, and

made a couenaunt before the Lode, to folowe the Lowe, and to kepe his conv maundementes, his witnesse, and his statutes, with all his heart, and wih al his soule, and to fulfill the wordes of the appoyntment witten in the sayd booke.

32° And he fet in their roome all them that

were founde in Hierufalem and Bemamin: and the inhabiters of hierusnlem

cxlvl je

(e The ende of gods thretninges is foʒ our repentaunce.

E

4. Reg 22.

DID atcording to the couenaunt of the

Lorde God of their fathers,

33 And Josia put away all maner of ab-

hommations out of all landes that parteyned to the children of Jsrael, aud brought in all that were founde in Jlrael, to worship and to serue the Lorde their God: And they turned not aside

rom after the Lorde Godot their fathers, as long as he liued.

Gs 3 The

_ 2.Chronic

les.

The. xxxv. Chapter.

1 golia kepeth the palsouer. 2 He tetteth koorth gods leruice. the king ol Egypt, and dieth. 24 The people bewaple him.

At MD Josia Heloe* the a (feat ot] passouer vnto
> the Lode in Hierula-

lemi, € they fluc pasl-

A loner in the fourteenth

day of the first nioneth.

And he set the priestes in their offices , and ayded them in the seruite of the house of the Lorde,

3 And sapd vnto the Leuites that taught all Hleael, and were sanctikied vnto the
Lorde: Put the holy arke in the boule
Whiche Solomon the foune of Dauid

king of Jlrael dyd buylde, it shalbe no moze a burden bpon pour shoulders:
But now lerue the Lord pour God, aud

| his people Jsrael:

4. And prepare pour selues by pour auntient housholdes, and companies, according to the writing of Dauid king of FE

rael, and the writing ol Solomon his

sonue:

+ And Cand in the holy place, atcordingto the deuision of the auncient housholdes of pour brethren the children of the people, and aster the deuilion of the auntient housholdes of the Leuites:

6 Kill pasiouer, and sanctilie pour selues,
€ prepare pour brethren, that they may do atccording to the word of the Lord by the hande ol Mopfes. 5

25 7 And Folia gaue to the people flockes of sheepe and kiddes all for pasloner,
| and for al that were present, thirtie thoulande by tale, and thace thoulande oxen: and thele were euen of the kinges substaunte.
8 And his lordes gaue willingly both vntothe people and to the priestes, and vnto the Leuttes: Helkia allo, Zacharta, and Jehiel, rulers of the house of God,
| gaue vuto the priestes for paslouer offeringes two thousande and fire hundred sheepe, and three hundred oxen.
Conania, and Semeiahu, æ Nathanael his brethren, c Hasabiah, and Jehiel, and Josabad, rulers of the Leuites,
; gane vnto the Heuites pallouer offe - ringes seuen) fine thoufande sheepe and kiue hundred oxen. 8
10 And so the seruite was prepared, and

de LI ptran prousion soz 9 the mmisttrie.

20 He fightech againk

the priestes stoode in cheir plates,
Teuites in their diltinet 1 ti the kinges tommaundement: ;

n And they flue passouer, and the pretteg sprinckled the blood with their hande and the Leuites pulled of the tines or the beastes. )

12 And they fet away the burnt offeringes, to geue them vnto the people that were deuided be auncient honses, and that they choulde offer vnto the Hoye, like
*as is written in the booke of Doyles:
And fo dyd they with the oxen also.

13. And 'thep dresled the pallouer with gan fire, as the maner was: And the other deditate beastes sodde they in pottes, caldrons, and pannes, and deuided them among all the people.

14 And after ward they made redy forthem
{clues and fog the priestes:for the priestes C the children of Aaron were buficd in of: fring ol burnt offringes and the fat bn: till night: therfore the Lenites prepared for thein selues and for the priestes the sonnes of Aaron.

15 And the singers the thildren of Alaph stoodein their standing, "according to the nt tommaundement of Dautd,and Alaph,
Heman, and Jeduthim the kinges“ hen sear: and the porters wayted at euer gate, and night not depart from their seruite: inp 5 drethzen the Leuites prepared for them.

16 And so all the seruite of the Word was pre pared the fame day, to offer pall duer, and to offer burnt offeringes vpon the aulter ofthe Lord according to che tommaundement ofking Holla, — 1

17 And the chanzenof Plrael that wer present, zept the pallosierthe fame tint, and the featt of sweet bread leuen Daye

18 And there was no paffouet 5 te that kept in Israei from the dee ‘
Samuel the prophete, neither Ageourr hinges of Ilaelholde luch a pages and

feattas dpd Folia, and the puede hat
Teuites andall Juda and Pca men prelent, and the inhabikers o

ru alem. 2

19 This pattouer was holden nthe ces teenth pere or the raigne of Jol after

Leut ia

2.Chronicles.

‘y

Alter allthis when Jolia had prepa-
29 ache tene „echo king of Egypt came vp to kight against Charcauus befine Euphrates: and Josia went out a-

gainst bint. iche sent mellengers to hym, and
1 aud What haue Ito do with thee thou king of Juda: We not thou againtt thy lelfe this day, kor my Warre is az galnst auother ponte, and God bad me make halt: Leauc of therfore € meddle not With God Which is with me lest he

thee. i Heututhelelse Folia would not turne
“pis face kcom pint, but rather toke adpe dulce to fight with hom, and hearkened so not puta the wordes of Mecho out ofthe mouth 4 God, 855 tame to fight in the valley of Mageddo.

23 2 tbe thaoter’ shot dartes at king
Josia: Andthe king lade to his sernauntes, Carte me aap for I am sore

ep uf.

iy

bone Oe e cutmie.

$y, chaun-

ae

24. Nis seruauntes therefore had hym out of that charet, and put him in another charet that they had: And when they had brought hum to Hierulalem, he died, and was buried in the sepulchze of his

exlvi lf.

fathers:* And all Juda and Hierulalem Zachaxiia,

mourned for Folia,

25 And Jeremia lamented Folia, and all singing men and finging Women mourned for Josias in their lamentations to this day, and made the lame lamentations an ordinaunce in Israel: and

veholde they are Written in the lamen ?

tations.

26 The rest of the actes of Folia and his goodnes( whiche he did] folowing tthe
Waiting of the lawe of the Lorde,

27 And his fapinges firk and last, behold they are Waitten in the booke of the kinges of Ilrael and Juda.

The. xxxvi. Chapter.

1Ffter golia raigneth Jehoahaz. 4 After Jehoahaz Jehoiacim. 3 Biter hym Jehoiacin
Alter him Zedenia. 14, 17. in whole time all the people were caried away to Babylon, fo: contemning the admonitions ofthe prophetes. 22 And were rekozed againe the seuentith

dere akter, by hing Cyrus.

d' the people of the lande toke Jehoahaz
„A the sonne of Jolia, and madehym king in his fathers steade in Pierulalem.
— — And Jchoahas was twentie & three yeres olde when he began to raigne, and he raigned three monethes in Hierulalenn.
And the king of Egypt put him downe at Hierulalem, and nierced the lande in au hundreth talentes of filuer , ind ata
4 21 of goide, and theking of Egypt made Eliakim us brother king vpon Juda and Hieruane turned his name to Jehoia-
! and Necho toke Fehoahas his broger, and caried Hint td Egypt. ehoiacun was twentie and fiue peres
25 te he began to raigne , e he raigdd ; CUT peres in Dicrufatem, and he
6 Ae qtlithe light of he How his God.
Ange aun came bp Mabuchodonoloz two abylon, and bounde hym with
%) Thebaune Sto cary him to Babplon.
Nhung" Nabuchodouoloz allo caried

Ip tone 3

a,

bf tie beffels ofthe honse of the Lord to 5

Babylon, and put them in his temple at
Baäbplon.

8 The restof the actes of Jehoiacim, and his abominations which he did, Wand that which was found vpon him, behold they are wzitten in the booke of the kluges of Israeland Juda: and Jehoiactu his sonne raigned in his steade.

9 And Jchoiacin was eyght peres olde when he began to raͤigne., and he taigned three monethes and ten dapes in
Hierusalem, and dyd euyll in the light of the Lorde.

lo And when the pere was ont, king Mabuchodonolor sent and fet him to Wabp-
Jon with the goodly veslels of the boule of the Lorde, and made Zedekia his fathers brother king ouer Juda and Hicrulalem.

(a he meas neth the markes offs0s latric. Whiche were sounde printed in his body when he was dead.

u Tedekia was one aud tWventic peres en e old when hebeganthe raigue, and raig- .

Ned aleuen peresin Pierulalem.

12 And he dyd euylinthe fight ofthe L020 his God, and humbled not him selfe before Perera the prophete, at themouth

the Lorde.
* * T4 z; And

: Tre 58 5

13 And he rebelled against king Mabuchodonosor, which had reteaued an oth of him by God: but he was stiknecked, and to hard Hearted to turne vnto the Lod
God of Jlracl.

14 Morcouer, all the chicfe of the patettes and the people trespalled wonderfully

* after all maner of abominations of the

) Heathen , and polluted the boule of the
—— which he had halowed in hieru-

alem.

15 And the Torde God of their fathers fent to them by his messengers, rising vp betimes, and lending: for he had com passion on his people, ànd on his dwelling plate.

16 But they mocked the mellengers of
God, and despiled his Wordes, and mil-

dled his prophetes, vntill the wrath of

the Lorde arose against his people, and

till there was no remedie. 5

4. Reg. 25.4. 1-7 And fo" he brought vpon them the king of Chaldee, which fluc their poung men with the sword in their holy tenple, and
{pared neither poung man, mayden, old man, nor him that stowped for age: He gaue them all into his bande.

13 And all the vessels of the house of God, both great and finall ,and the treasures of the Houle ofthe Lorde, and the treasures of the king, and of his lordes: alt

these taryed he to Babylon. b
19, And they burntthe Houle of God, and brake downe the walok hiernlalem and burnt ae palates hereof with fire and droped all the goodly sewele tt on g 2
20 And the rest that had escape sword, caried heto Wabplon: Wherether
Were bondmen ane his children, vntill the time that Perfia had the empire:
21 To fulfill the worde of the Lord'vythe mouth of Jeremta, vntil the lande had her pleasure okher Sabbathes: forag long as she lay desolate, she kept Sabbath, vntu threeltore and ten peres were fulfuled.
22 And the first pere of Cyrus king of an
Persia iohenthe worde of the Lorde n
*fpoken by the mouth of Jeremia was w füuched) the Lorde stirred vp the spirite en of Cyrus king of Persia, that he made a a proclamation thoughout all his king: dome, and that by wzpting, saping:
23 Thus sapth Cyrus king ok Persia, All the kingdomes of the earth bath the
Lorde God of heauen geuen me, x hath tharged me to buplde hym an houle in
Pierusalem, that is in Juda: woherfore whosocuer is among pou ok all his people, the Lorde his God be with him, and let hym go vp.

ler. xxyh

The ende of the seconde booke of the Chronicles.

I Esdras. E.
I he first booke of Esdras.

Lhe firft (Chapter. 7

Cprus fendeth againe the people that was in captiuitie, sand restoreththem their holy vessels. 2

Hthe kfirst pere ok Juda and Benlamin, and the puestes

* Cpzus king ok and Teuites, and all they whole spirite
Persia (that the God had raysed to go vp and to builde worde ol the Lord the hoult of the Lorde Which is at Hr
{poten * by the rulalem.

mouthofPerenia 6 And all they that were about them;

b i
Vas

The Lode God of heauen hach geuen rulalem, and had put in the houle okhis int all the kingdomes ofthe earth, and God.
Hath commaunded me to build hun an 8 Those did Cyrus the king of persia houle at hierusalem, which is in Juda. byyng foorth by the hande of Michrida-
3 VPholotuer nowe among pon is of his tes the trealurer, c numbred them vnto people, the Lord his God be with hun, Selbazer the printe of Juda. and let hin go vp to Hierulalem in Ju- And this is ihe number of them: thir: da, and builde the houle of the Lode tie chargers of golde, a thousand char-
God ok Ilrael, he is the God that is at gers of siluer twentie and nine knives:
Mierulalem. 0 Thirtie balons of golde, and of other
4 And whosoeuer remapneth yet in ann luer basons foure hundred r ten: and maner of place where he is astraunger, of other vessels a thousand. let the men of that plate helpe hun with uu Al the vellels ok golde and siluer were liluer and golde, with good and tattale, line thouland and foure hundred: All befide that which they willingly offer thele did Selbazer carp albap With
5 the houle of God that is at hierula- them that came bp out ok the taptiuitie
Nt,

of Wabplon, vnto Hierusalem.
Then gat vp the printipall fathers of
The. . (Dapter.
Che number of them that returned krom the captiuitie

Hhese are the chudren ok rael: che proumce, that went; The childrenof Pharos, two thous vp out of the taptiuitie, sand an hundred seuentie and two.
5 whom Nabuchodono- 4. The chüdren of Sephatia, three har: am, WAY sor the king of Baby- dred seuentie and two. on bad caried away 5 The schüdren ok Arath, seuen hundred againe vnto xy Dito Babplon: € cane seuentie and fine , 0 eueryo ute pierulalem and into Juda 6 The chiidren ofthe captaine of h oab,
2 Ih ne vnto his citie, of the children of Jesua and Joab, tig tener pepe ne with Zozobabeicare two thouland eyght bundzed and
ReVelata eer Wehemiah, Sacaiay, twelve,
Vigna Mepardochal Zs llan hilpar The children of Elam, a thousand tiwo number Pin and. This is the hundred fiftie and foure. or the men ok the people ol PE s The chidren of Zathu, nine a

| I. E{dras. * and fourctie and fine. fiftie and two. ia

C

E

The childrenof Zaccat seuen hundred

and chzeestore.

10 The children of want, fire hundred fouretie and two. 8

n The children of Webai, fire hundred

tweutie and thee.

12 The children ok Afgad, a thoufand

two hundred twentie and two.

‘3 The childrenof Adonicam, fire hun-

died sixtie and sice.

ii. The childrẽ of Beguai, two thouland

fkittie and fire.

5 The children of Adin, foure hundred

fliktie and foure.

16 The children of Ater of Heschia, nine-

17 Thechildzen of wWesal, three hundred

twentie and there.

18 The children of Jora, an hundred and

* twelue. : 8

19 The children of halum, two hundzed twentie and three.

20 The thildren of Gebbar, ninetie c fine.

21 Ae thildren ok Wethlehem, an hun-

dxed i wentie and three.

22 The men of Petopha, fiktie and fire,

23 The men ok Anathoth, an hundred

« fibentic and eyght.

24. The children of Asmaueth, fouretie

and two.

25 The children ol Kiriathtarim, euen the children of Cephira and Beeroth, scuen

* Hundzed kouretie and three.

26 The children of Harama and Geba,

fire hundzed twentie and one.

27 The men of Michmas, an hundred

twentie and two. ;

38 The men of Bethel and Hay, two

Jhundredtwentie aud three.

29 Lhe children of Nebo, fiftie and two.

zo The children of Magbis, an hundred

fittie and sixe.

‘31 The childre or the other Elam, a thou-

fand two hundred fiftie and foure,

The childzen of Havin chree hundred

ee
F. and twentic.

3; The childzen of Lodhadid and Ono,

seuen hundred twentie and fiue.

34. The childrt of Jericho, three hundred

fFfouretit and fiue.

35 The children of Senaa, three thou-

sand fire hundred and thirtie.

36 The priestes: of the children of Jedaia ofthe house of Jesua, nine hundred se-

uentie andthree.

37 The children of Immer, a thouland

38 The chuldren ol phachur, at ; : two hundred fouretie i ee 1
39 The chüdren of Arun, a thouland

oe Seeds
40 The Leuites: the chilozen of Jesug childzen of podauia,

ECadmicl, of the seuentie and foure. d

41 The singers: the thildrenok Alaph an

hundred twentie and eyght. 3

42 The children of the dooze kepers, the. childzen of Sallum, the children ok Ater the childrenof Talmon, the childzren ol Accub the thildren of Hatita, the children of Sobai, altogether an hundred

thirtie and nine. 0

43 The Methinims:the children of Ziha, the chuͤdren of Alupha, the chudrenof.
Tabaoth, f

44, The thüüdnenok Ceros the chudrendk.

Olaa, the children of Padon, ;
45 The chuͤdren of Lebana, the children. of Hagaba, the childzen of Attub, ‘
46 The children of Hagab, the childeenof:
Semlat the childzen of Hanan, G
47 The children of Giddel, the childrenok.
Gahar, the chtlozen of Reata, ‘
48 The chuͤdren ol Kazm, the children of:
Hetoda, the thildren of Galan, ¢
49 The chudren of Usza, the children of
Paleah, the children of wWelat, i
50 The chudren of Ana, the children ol.
Mehunim the children ol Pephulim,
51 The childzen of Watbuc, the children. of Hatupa, the children of Harhur, :
52 The children of Wastuth, the children. of Mehida, the children of Hara,
5 The childzen of Bartos, the children of Silara, the chudren of Thamah,
54 The chuͤdren of Peziah, the children; of Hatipha. .
55 The chüͤdren ok Solomons feruatites,« the chitdeen of Sotal, the childzcn of:
Sophereth, the chudren of Peruda, .
56 The childzen of Jaala, the childrenot.
Darcon,the children ol Giddel, 14
55 The childzen of Sephatiah, the te dren of Hattil, the chudren of Pochereth.
Hazbaim, the chudren of Amt. f.
58 All the Pethmims, and the childzen dl
Solomons scruauntes, were altoge“ ther three hundred ninetie and two. ah.
55 And thele went vp from Thelmel Le and from Theiharsa, Cherub Adr dit and Inmier: but they coulde nr 9 5 terne their fathers house de their lebe whether they wert of Piracl. 60 The

chüldzen of Delata, the children of
6 atte children of Peto da, five huntie and two.
; ar anb ofthe chudren of the priestes: the
„ chüldzen of pabata, the children of Ac-
< ¢q3,the thudrẽ of a5ersillat, which toke one of the daughters of wersillat the
Glleadite to Wyte, and was called after their name. 2

6 Thele fought their euidence among them that had the regetter of birth, and were not founde therein,therefoze were

they put krom the presthood.
63 And Hathirlatha fad buto them that they (hold not cate of the most Holy, till there role Dp a prielt (to weave) Crim

and Thunnnim.

or8 c.

64 The whole congregation together,

Was kouretie € two thonsand, three hundred and threestore:
65 Belide their seruauntes and mapdens, of whom there were seuen thoufand these hundred thirtie and seuen: And

The. iii. Hapter.

I. Efdras.

there were among them two hundred singing men and women.

6e Pia exe seuen hundred

their 7 yee i Sk kiue, nn

67 And their Camels foure hundred thirtie and fine: their Alles fire bnd seuen hundred and twentie.

68 And tertaine ofthe chiefe fathers, when they came to the houfe of the
Lorde at Hierusalem, they offred them selues wylling for the house ok God, to set it vp in his place:

69 And gaue golde after their habllitie, vnto the trealure of the worke, euen threestore and one thouland peetes, and fine thousand pounde offituer, and an hundred priestes garmentes.

70 0 the priestes, and the Lenites and tertaine of the people, and the fingers, and the posters, and the Methinims dwelt in their cities, and all Israel in their tities.

1 Chep builde the aulter of God. 6 Chey offer to the Lorde. 7 They prepare for

the temple, ni and fing vnto the Lorde.

d when the senenth n moneth came, andthe
% schildrè of Israel were
(CP renee now in their cities, the
Os 2 people came together

Alba. J

euen as one man to

—— Hierufalem,

2 And there stoode bp Jesua the fonne of Joledet, and his brethren the priestes, and Zorobabel the sonne of Salathiel and his brethzen, and builded the aulter

o the God ok Jfrael, to offer hurut offe-

ringes thereon, as it is written in the law of Moyses the man ol God. ?
And the aulter let they vpon his sot-
Kets: for there was a fearefulnesse adoe them, becaule of the people of el countries, therefore they offered
Biv meninges thecon vnto the lorde, in ; andateurumg. ges 'in the moaning

i 85 they helde the featt of tabernalatrifices dayly, accord

» Atco2din *

ber at cuftome, day by 20 1 f 0 A they offered dayly burnt aor ges allo, and in the new moones, saten but feat dayes that were conmed Dito the Lord, and for all them

Dy butz. 3

as it is Witten, and offered burnt

which did of their owne free wyll offer vnto the Lode.

6 From the firk day of the seuenth moneth began they to offer burnt facrifices vnto the Low: enen when the foundation of the temple of the Lorde was not vet layde.

They gaue money also vnto the masons and carpenters, and meate and drincke, and ople vnto them of Sidon and of Lyre, to being the Cedar timber from Libanus by fea bnto Poppa, ac-

cording to the graunt that they had of

Cyrus the king of Persia.

g In the second pere ok their comming vnto the house of God at Hierulalem in the setond moneth, began Zorobabel the sonne of Salathiel, and Jesua the sonne of Joledet, and the remnauntof their brethren, the priestes and Leuites, aud all they that were come out of the

taptiuitie vnto Miernsalem:and appopn-

ted the Leuites krom twentie peres olde and aboue, to see that the worke of the
Houle of the Lorde went forwarde.

9 And Felua stoode with his formes and brethren, and Cadmiel with his sonnes ethe chüdren ok Juda together, to {ct

torwarde the workmen of the ei 55

cx.

Oz, wozkeen,

| God, euen the childrẽ of Henadad, with

their children, and their brethren the Le-

uites. ime

lo And When the builders layed the

foundation of the temple of the Lozde, they appopnted the priestes in their
Arape with trumpettes, and the Leuites the children of Alaph with tym-

Oz, Appa: rell.

maner of Dauid king ol Ylrael.
1 And they fang together when they gaue prapse and thankes vnto the lozde,
Becaule he is gratious, and betause his mertie endureth for euer vpon Ylrael:

l. Pat. xvi. b

© Aras.

bales, to prayse the Lode after the

Aud all the people showted ip peayling the Torde, vetaule the können tion of the house of the Low was lapo,

12 Panp alfo of the prieltes e Leultes aug

chieke kathers and auncient men Which had seene the first house, when thefoun-
1 50 f ae before their eyes, wept with a loude voyte, and many aloude with ioy : dchewied ¢
3 So that the people toulde not discerne the top full founde ¢ gladnesse, from the noyle of the Weeping among the peo: ple: foz the people showted with a londe crpe,and the noyse Was heard karre ol.

The. . (hapter.

The building of the templeis hindred, and how. u Letters to Artarerxes,

and the auntwere. K

1 N Ut * the aduersaries
8 . 60 a aft

A ii. Ed g. of Juda and wWenia:

U

We min; Heard that the

N Tu children of the taptiui-

tie builded the temple

2 Seat onto the Lorde God

ok gel:

N 2 And they tame to Zorobabel and to the principall fathers, and saide vnto them: We wyll builde with pou for we

lecke the Lorde your God as ye do and

We haue done satrifice vnto him since

4 the time of Alor Hadon the king of AE mn Reg surꝰ which brought vs vp hither.

3 And Sorobabel, and Jesua, and the

other auncient fathers of Ilrael, layde

„Or t is vnto them: It tan not be, that vou and ber da bste. We together choulde bulde the house vnto our God: kor we our selues Wyll
Huilde alone vnto the Lorde our God of
1 Esdia. Ilrael, as Cyrus the king of Persia

hath commaunded vs.

4. And it came to passe, that the folke of the lande difconraged the people of Juz
Da, c troubled them as they were building: ;

5 And hyred counlellers against them, to hinder their deuice as long as Cyrus

the king of Persta liued, vntil the raigne of Darius king of Persia.

6 And in the raigne of Ahasucrus, euen at the beginning of his raigne, Wrote they vnto him a complaynt against the imhabiters ol Juda and Hierufatem,

B And in the dapes of Artaxerxes, Wrote
Mithudath, Tabel, and the other of his tounsell, vnto Artaxerxes the king of
Persia with faire wordes: And the wrt

ting of the letter was in the Sprians speache, and interpreted in the langnage of the Syrians; — - n
S$ - Rehumtbhe recorder, and Samsaithe ftribe wrote a letter from Hierusalen 2 to Artaxerxes the king, as it soloweth.

9 Then Kehum the retorzder, and San

fat the scribe, and other ok their compa: np, thepok Dina, of Apharlath, ok
Tharpelai, of Persia, of Arache, of Ba- « 9,2. bylon, of Susan, of Deha, of Elan, ™™

10. And other of the people* whom the . great € noble Asnappar bronght ouer, and set in the cities of Samaria, and other that are nowe beyond the water, and Cheeneth.

n. This is the copic of the letter that they sent vnto king Artarerces: Thy cruauntes, and the men that are nolwe

eyond the water, and Cheeneth.

12. Be it knowen vnto the king that the
Hewes which came vp from thec to bs,

are come vnto Hterusalem, acitte seditious and froward, and builbe tor : fame, amb fet vp te waltesthorens & lay the fonndations. Pik +o

13 —— knowen now vnto the hung that 0
(Fthiscitie be bulded, aud the warne made vp againe, then shal not tor eng

1 tribute, and el a the binge
2ofite shall incurre Damege.

14 And now in the meane eu me 1155 baue destroped the temple, aud war, e no longer fee the kinges Dita fu therefore sent we out allo and cer ed theking, 7

15 That it may be saught in thebaoke the evonictes of thy progemtouks, f

70 pi palit
1 WE wee

gu finde inthe booke ofthe

fo (alt 120 pecceaue that this citie is

cronicles, a

tious an
100 andes, AND that they cause other

: and among then to rebell of olde: an J pat sanie cause was this cite destrop-

16 acherfore do we certifie the king, that

A

his citie be builded againe, and the wales thereof made vo, thou halt pereafter haue no portion beyond the

er.
When sent the king an aunlibere vnto
Kehum the recorder and SHamilat the scribe, and to the other of their compa: mons that dwell in Samaria, and onto the other that were beyond the water in Selam and Cheeth.

g The letter which ye lent vnto vs, hath

ben openlp read before me.

ter 4 haue commaunded to make searche, nd it is found that this citic of olde Hath made inlurrection against hinges, and that rebelllon and {edition

d uopsome vnto the kinges

Hath ben commutted therein.

There haue ben mightie kinges allo at Mierulalem, which haue raigned duer all countreps beyond the water: and toule, tribute, and custome was geuen vnto them, f

21 Gene pe nowe therefore tommaunde-

ment, that the fame men be forbidden, and that the citie be not bullded againe, till J haue geuen another commaundement.

22 Lake heede now that pe be not negtiz

gent to do this: for why should the king

haue harme there though:

23 Nowe when the copie of king Artaxerxes letter was read before Kehum e
Sumlai the scribe, and their companyz ons, they went vp in all the haste to
Hierulalem vnto the Jewes, and fox bad them with violence and power.

24 Then cealled the worke ol the houle of God at Hierulalem, and continued lo vnto the setond pere ol Darius king of
Perlia.

q The v. Chapter.

Aggeus and Jachari do prophecie. ; Ihe worke of the temple goeth korward, contrary to the minde ot Thathanai ois letters to Darius.

He prophetes Aggeus, and Zacharithe sonne of Iddo, prophecied vnto the Jewes that were in Inda and hierulalem in the name of the God of Ilracl, enc

2 U

. iS 2 5 Wee 1
VDnto them. 5 sa 2 Then gat vp Zorobabel the sonne

of Salathicl, and Jesua the fonne of
Joledec, and began to bullde the house of God at Hierufalein: and with them
Were the prophetes of God, which helped them. : |
At che faite time came to them Tha-

thanat which was captaine beyond the

contpe ne, Stbarbusanat, and their
Anons, and laide thus Dato them:
Who Hath 5 405

this houle x to make vp thele walles-

4 Then laide we vnto them after this

Matter: what are the names of the nien that make this building- ;

But the eye of their God was bpon

the elders ofthe Jelbes, that they could

Not tause them td keasse, tii the matter

Was brought to Darin
S: and then the aunltbered vp letters thereunto. 5

connnaunded pou to bulde

6 This is the copie of the letter that

E

Thathanai which was captapne be-

pond the water, ¢ Stharbusanat,¢ the counsailours of Apharlath which were beyond the water, sent vnto king Dari-

us. —
7 And the matter that they sent vnto B

Him, was wultten thus within the let

ter: Unto Darius the king, all peace.

8 We it knowen vnto the king that we
Went into the proninte of Jurie to the houle ot the great God, which is builded with mightie great stones, and beames are lapde in the walles, and the worke goeth fast foortl handes. .

9 Then alked we the elders, and salde bnto them as it foloweth: Who com-

and prospereth in their

maunded von to bullde this house, and

to make vp the walles thereof: |
10 We asked their names alfo, that we might certifie thee and write the names of the men that were their rulers.

wut they aunlwered vs with hele

L .
Wordes, and lade: We are the ser-

uauntes of him that is Godofheauen

and earth, and builve the boule that was builded of olde and many ia

csij.

I. Efdras. -

. ago, which the great king of PHfrael —.— by name, whom he made tapaine, 1

biulded, audfet vp.

Iz But after our fathers had prouoked

An Re. 4 b.

C

1 EIdra. i. d.

A 1

the God of heauen vnto wath, he gaue them ouer into the bande of Nabuchodonosor the king of Wabplon t of the Chaldees, which bake downe this house, and caried the people awap taptine vnto Babylon.

3 * wut in the first yere of Cprus the king

of Babylon, the lame king Cyrus gaue commaundement tonteruing this boule of God, that it shoulde be built againe.

14 And the vessels of golde and siluer ot

the boule of God which Nabuchodonofoz toke out ot the tentple that was at ierulalem, and brought them into the temple at Babplon:those did Cyrus the hing take out of the temple at Wabplon,
*and they Were delluered vnto one Sal-

15 And faide vnto him: Lake thele por sels, and go thy way, and fet then 1 7 teniple that is at dierulalem, and let the house of God be builded in his plate.

16 Then camethe fame Sal bazar, and laped the foundation ofthe houte of
God which is at Hierulalem: sere that time also vntill nowe hath it ben in building, and de it not finished.

17 Sow therefore iit please the king tee there be searche made in the kinges librarte which is there at Wabylon, whether it haue ben king Cyrus tommaundement that this temple of God at hierulalem choulde be brülded: and let the king fend his nunde concerning the same matter.

q The vi, Chapter. .

It the commaundement of Darius king of pertia after the temple was builded and dedicate, the children ol Ilrael kepe the keaste of vnleuened bread.

Hen cOmaunded king
S § Darius: t they made
CNA e searche in the librarie, i enc in the plate where ee e thep laped vp the treacS) 14 i) Isure at Babplon:

8 AuAndthere was found ina coffer in the palace that is in the prouinte of the Medes, a volume: and therein was it thus witten as a memo: ria * ‘

In the first pere of king Cprus, gaue the fame king Cyrus conmmaundement conterning the Houle of God at Hierusalem, that the fame house chould be bull ded in the place where they offer the faz crifices, € to ioyne the walles together ok threestore tubites heyght, and threefroze cubites breadth.

4. Thee rowes of rough stones, and one

rowe of newe timber: and the erpences shalbe geuen of the kinges houle.

5 And let the golde and siluer vessels of

the house of God, which Nabuthodonosor toke dut ofthe temple at Pierusalem and brought vnto Babplon, be rez stored, and brought againe vnto the temple at Hierusaleni to their place in the house of God.

6 Now therefore thou Thathanattap-

taine bepond the water, € Stharbuzanai, and pour counsallers, and Apherle-

chei which are beyond the water, get pe away from them. 8

7 Bet the woke ofthe honse ok this
God alone, that the captaine of the ene and their elders may bullde the

oule of God in his place.

3 J haue commaunded what pe hall do to the elders of Juda for the building of the houle or God, that ofthe kinges goodes, even of the tribute bepond the water, foorthwith expentes be geuen vnto the men, that they be not

t euen, that what man loeuer hebe tha

altere this Word, there (hall aes be taken from his houle, and {et Poul he shalbe banged thereon, ae lame chalbe made a dounghall foz the lane

thing.

12 Ad che Godthatserhienan gern destrop all kinges amm penn breabe to their hande to aulter an done

| I. Efdras.

0 the house of God which is at
Doan Darius haue made a detree, that this be done with speede. a
Then Lhathanaithe captaine Cotebe
7 countrep) beyond the Water, c Stharpusanat, with their tounsatlours, acto:- ding to that which king Darius had font, so they did speedylytheir diligence.
44 Alp theelders of the elves builded, ald they paotpered though the propheeying of Aggeus the prophete and Sachari the sonne ol Iddo, and they builded, and they finished it attording to the

C

tommaundement ofthe Godot Israel,

and after the commaundement of Cyrus and Darius e Artaxerxes, Ringes

erfia.

15 an this houle was finiched the third day ok the moneth Adar, euen in the sirt pere of the raigne of king Darius.

s the Leuttes, andthe other thüldzen of

the taptinitie, helde the dedication of this

house of God with toy:

17 And offered at the dedication of this house of God an hundred oren, two hũdred ramnies, fonre hüdred lambes: and foz the veconciting of atl Yfrael

The . vis.

“map the chttoz€ of Jlrael the priestes,

twelue hee goates actording to the number ok the tribes of Ilrael: —

18 And let the priestes in their sundzy

courses and the Leuites in their diuers offices, to minister vnto God at Hierusalein, as it is Witten in the booke ol
Mopyses.

19 And the children ofthe taptiuitie held

Paffouer vpon the foureteenth dap o the first moneth. —
20 For the priestes and Leuites were pu: D tified all together, e killed Paffouer fo all the children of the taptiuitie, and for
1100 — 5 the priestes, and for them

elues.

21 And the children of Plrael which were come againe out of captinitic, and all such as had seperated them selues vnto thein from the filthineffe of the hea then or the lande, to seeke the Lorde
God ol Israel, did cate, )

22 And helde the keast of vnleauened bread seuen dapes with ioy: For the
TLorde had made them glad, and turnedthe heart of the king of Aslur vnto them, to strengthen their handes in the
Worke of the Houle of God, euen the
God of Israel.

(Dapter.

ythe commaundentene of the king, Etozagand his companions come to hieru-

salem. 27 He geueth chankes to God.

N r mal ther was in the raigne
N of Artaxerxes king of

i nne x Ae ib so) fonne o aria, the connc ok Helkta ,
2 The sonne ok Sallum, the sonne of

Zadoc the sonne of Ahitob,
The sonne of Amaria, the sonne of A
4 favia,the sonne of Mereioth,

3,efonne of Bucct,

5 The fonne of Abilua, the sonne of

hinehes, the fonne of Elealar, the a sonne of Aaron the chieke priest.

pplon, and was a perfect scribe nthe

him al that he required, aceo attordingto the ae N the Torde his God which was

7 And there Went vp tertalne or the chit:

RR paris, one Eldras the
‘It fo

The forme of Zerata,thefoune of Cs:

Thts €foras allo went bp from Wa-
C

lab of Dopfes* which the L de God
At Alrael did gene: And the king gaue

dren of Ilrael, of the priestes, leuites, singers, porters, and of the Rethininis vnto hierusalem, in the seuenth pere of 23 king Artaxerxes.

8 And he came to hlerusalem in the fisch moneth, euen in the seuenth pere ofthe

king.

9 Jon bpon the first day of the first moneth, began ve to go vp from wabplar: and on the first day of the fifth moneth came he to Hierusalem, according to the et hand or his God that was bpor
N Im. *

10 For Esdras prepared his heart to seeke the law of the Lorde, and to do it, and to teache the preteptes and iudgementes

in Jlrael.

u And this is the copte of the letter that king Artaxerxes gane vnto Eldras the prielt, and feribe, Which was a witer of the wordes and commaundementes of the Lorde, and of his statutes ouer PE

rael. 0 { t

Eldras the priest and fertbe of the law of

the God ol heauen, peace and falutation.

¢ 3 AJhaue commaunded that all they of

the people of Hiraci, and of the priestes

and TLeuites in ny realme, which are

N minded ok their owne good wyll to go e: bp to hierusalem, go with thee:

14 And therfore art thou sent of the king

and of his seuen counfatiers, to vilite

Juda and Hierusalem, according to the

1a ot thy God, which is in thy hande:

Ip And that thou shouldest take with thee siluer and golde which the king and his countailers offer of their owne good wyll vnto the God of Israel, whole baz bitation is at hierusalem:

16 And all the fituer and golde that thou tant finde in al the countrey of Wabpion, with it that the people offer of their

~ pine good wyll, and the priestes geue
Wyllingly for the house of their God whtch isathierulalent: ~

© 3, pea: once,

17 That thou mapst bye diligently with

the same money, oxen, rammes, and lambes, with their meate offringes and
Danke offringes e thou shalt offer them vpon the aulter of the boule of your
God which is at Hierusalem.

18 And looke what lpketh ee and thy

b rethrento do with the remmnaumtosthe siluer and golde, that do after the wyll of pour God. . Pa
19 And the vellels that are geuen thee forthe ministration in the hoult of thy
God, thole deliuer thou bekore God at
Pierusalem. 5
20 And whatloeuer thing moze shalbe

D

nedefull sor the house of thy God which is netestarp for to spend, thou chalt re-

teaue the charges out ok the binges treafure Houle. 1

21 J king Artaxerxes haue tommaun-

ded all the treasures beyond the Water, that loke what soeuer Eldras the priest and scribe in the law ol the God of hea-

I. EIdras.

uen requireth of you, et speedylie, ou, that ve fulfülche

22 Until an hundred talentes ok nner and till an hundred quarters of ben and till an hundzed battes of wine, ang

tl an hundzed? battes of opie, ¢ falt ph al pe — Fh

23. Whatloeuer allo isbythe ep „ 10 de ment of the God ol bebe lame be Done without any delay forthe
‘Houle of the God of heauen, that he be not wroth agatnst the realnie, ¢againg the king and his children.

24. And we tertifie pou, that pe haue no aucthoritie to require taxing and cy:
{foie and perely rentes, vpon aup ofthe ee 0 Ringers posters, Ne-

inums, and munsters in the honk

25 And thou Eldras, after the wysdome of thy God that is in thyne hande, fet iudges and arbitrers(by mp ancthoritie to iudge all the people that is beyond the water, euen all such as know the law ol thy God: and them that knowe it not, thole see that pe teathe.

26 And wWholoeuce Wyll not fulfill the lawe ofthy God, and the lunges lawe, let him haue his iudgement without de-

lap, whether it be bnto death, orto be rooted out, or to be condempned in

doodes, or to be put in prison.

27 Wlelled be the Lode God ol our fa- 1 falt, thers, which so had inspired the kinges heart, to garnishe the boule of the Lord that is at Hierusalem:

28 And hath enclined mertie vnto mein the prelente of the king and his tounlailers, and before all the kinges high estates: And J was comfortedeuen as the bande ok the Lord my God was vp. ou me, and fo gathered ZF the heades al
Israel together, that they might go vp with me. Ty

J The. viii. aper.

1 Che number of them that returned to Hierutalem with Eldrag. 2 He causeth them to fad. 24 He admonitheth the prieltes of their duetie.

iiE(dvine | . I hese are now the prin-

Oz, genealogte-

and tN is the regithem that went

pylon, what time as king Artaxerxes raig-

2. Dfthe chüdzenol Phinehes Gerlom ofthe chüdren ok Ithamar, Daniel: of the children of Dauid,Hattus: 5

3 Okthe children ok Zechama, a the chilozen of Pharos, Zachart 55 fie him Were numbred an hundreda

tie men. . fh,
4 Or the chüdrẽ of the captaine de 10

élioenat the fonne of Zerahia, & With
| o hundred men.

porthe chlden of Zechanta the sonne b of Fahahel, and with hin thece hun-

6 Olthechndnen of Adin, Abed the fonne

the children of Elam, Plat the sonne

4 1 2 with hym seuentie men.

Bes POkthe children of Saphatla, Zebadia

the sonne of Michael, and with hym efcoze men.

9 rptthechibzen of Joab, Obadta the sonne wee with him two hun-

d and eyghteene men,

10 ot the chitoyen of Selonith, the fonne pt and With hym an hundred

and threescore men.

n Of the children of Webat, Zachart the

sonne of Beba, and with bpm twentie and epght men.

2 Okthe children of Algad, Johanan the sonne of Hakatan, and with hym an hundred and ten nien.

iz Ok the children of Adonicam that were the last, whofe names are these: Eliphe-

¢ let, Jehtel, and Samatah, € with them threescore nien.

14 Dithechildzen of Wiguat, Uthal,

and Zabud, e wich them seuentie men,
1 And J gathered them together by the water that runneth tolvarde Ahaua, and there abodt we three dayes: And J loked among the people andthepriestes,
115 * there none of the thildren ot eu 0 is Then sent J to Elieʒer, to Ariel, Semeld, Elnachan, Jarib, Elnathan „Mathan, Zachavia, and to Melullam, the rulers, and to Jolarib and Elnathan,
Which were menok vnderstanding.
And to those gau FJ commanndement onto Iddo the chiefcat Casphia, and told them what they shonld fay bute Iddo Eto his brethrenthe ethintns at atypia, that they shoulde
Cane the ministers of the house of our
God to tome vnto vs.
5 Nd through the good hande of our ob ppon vs, they brought vs a very ple man krom among the chudren of
3 short the sonne of Leut the sonne of
9 and Sarabia with his sonnes o Juha brechen, euen epahteene, chimera chen init him Hai ofthe g „Wi 1 and their sonntes tibentie. bis l

bina |
Reg 7

L EId

of Jonathan, and with hym fiftie nien.

Tas.

20 And of the Pethinems whom Dauid and the printes gaue to mintster vnto the Keultes, two hundzed and twentte nate binn which at were named by

2 And euen there at the water beside Ahaua Yproclapmeda fast, that we might humble our selues before our God, and seke ol hym a right Wap forbs and foz dur children, and for all our substaunte.

22. For IJ was ashamed to require ofthe - king fouldiers and horsemen, to helpe vs against the enenne in the wap: for we had spoken vnto the king, saping:
The hande ol our God is vpon all them that sene him in goodnesle „c his power and wrath is against all them that forfake hym.

23 So we fasted, and besought our God fog this, and he was entreated of ye,

24. And I toke out twelue of the chiele priestes, Sarabia, and Hasabia, and ten of their brethren with them,

25 And waped themthe fuͤner and golde, and vessels that were Appoynted for the
Houle of our God, Whiche the king and his tonsaylers, and his lordes, and al HL rael that were there at hand, had geen together.

26 And J waped vnto their hande fire hundred and fiftie talentes of siluer, and in fituer veslels an hundred talentes, and in golde an hundred talentes:

27 Twentie basons of gold ofa thoufand drammes, and two coltly vellels of good brasse, as titare as golde.

28 And J sayde vnto them: He are consetrate vnto the Tord, like as the vessels are holy also:and the gold and fituer are geuen ofa good wu vnto the Lord God of pour fathers.

29 Watch ye, and kepe them: kor pe shall wap them downe before the chiefe priestes, and Leuites, and auncient far thers of Israel at Hierulalem, en the treasuries of the houte of the Lorde.

30 Then toke the priestes and Weuttes the Wayed filuer and golde, and vellels, to being it to Hierusalem vnto the hoult

ok our God. i

31 And we brake bp from the water of
Ahaua on the twelfth day of the firlt moneth, to go bnto Hierusalem: and the hande ofour God was vpon vs, and delinered vs from the hande of the enemies, and of such as layed wayte for vs

e air 32 And

32 And we tame to Hierulalem, anda- 35 And the chitdzen ofthe tap

34 Accoding to the number and weyght

vii. 4.
Deut 1 a

Tofu.23.¢.
Id. in a.

3.Esd 8 c.

Oz, fat

dent ast o-

nich,

On, altos nico.

mE °°” ———— 1111

I. Esdras. ,

bode there three dayes.

But on the fourth day was the siluer and gold and vessels wayed in the boule ol our God by the hande of Meremoth the sonne of Gizia the priest, and with hun was Elcazar the fonne of Phinehes, and with them was Jolabad the sonne of Jesua, and Moadia the sonne of
Bennoi the Leuites.

of euery one, was the wayght all witten vp at the fame time.

tiui were come out ofcaptiuitie ofttepbee

offringes vnto the God of

twelue bullockes fo2 all Itrael e

and lire raimmes , feuentie and feuen

gt hee 1 fo2 finnerote. urnt offe

Lorde. oes

36 And they delluered the kinges commi

sion vnto the kinges officers, and to the
W that were beponde the waer: And they promoted the people

the houfe of God. A

The. ix. Chapter.

1 Eldrag complapneth on the people that had turned them selues from God, and mas ried with the gentiles, 5 He praxeth vnto God.

Hen these thinges were done, therulers tame to me, and 5 5 : The people of Israel, and
Thi the piestes & Teuites are not separated from

the people of the

landes, as touching their abhominations:namelp of the Chanaanites, Hethites Pherezites, Jebulites, Auunonites, Moabites, Egpptians, and Amo-

rites.

xo they haue taken the daughters of the same to them felues and to their sonnes, and the holy seede is mixed with tic nations of the landes, e the hand ol the princes and rulers hath ben printipall in the trespasle.

3 And when Jheard this saying, Jrent

my clothes and my garment, € pluckt of the heere of my head € of ny beard, and” fate mourning.

And there refozted puto me all such as feared the wordes of the God of Plraet, betause of the tranlgression of the (people ok the taptiuitie: And JJ fat’ mourning vntill the euening latrifite.

And about the cucning latrifice J arole vp from my heauinesse, and rent my clothes and my rayment, and fell vpon my knees, and spread out my handes vnto the Lorde my God,

And sayde: My God, J am athamed, and dare not lift bp myne epes onto chee my God: for our wickednesses ave growen ouer dur head, and our trelpasse is waxed great vnto the heauen.

7 Since the time ok our fathers haue
B we ben in great trespalle vnto this day,

*and becaule of our wickednesses haue we and our kinges and our priestes ben deliuered into the hande of the kingesof the nations, vnto the sworde, into captiuitie, into a spoyle, and into confufion ot fate, as it is to see this day.

3 And nowe foza litte {pace grace bath

ben shewed krom the Lorde our God in caufing a remnaunt to estape, and in ges uing vs anaple in his Poly plate, that our
God map light our eyes, and geue vs a litle lyfe to take breath in our bondage:

Foz we were bondmen, and pet our
God hath not forsaken vs in our bons dage, but hath euclined mercle vnto vs in the fight of the king of Persia, to geue bs lyfe to set vp the house of our
God and to redresse the desolation ther o, and to geue vs a wall in Juda and
Hierulalem.

10 And nowe O our God, what (hall we

fay after this: for we haue forsaken thy

tommaundementes,

u Whiche thou halt commaunded by tho

seruauntes the prophetes, saying: The lande buto which pe go to pollesse. a an vncleane lande, becaule of the 5 thinelle of the people of the liner
Whiche with their abomination haue made it full of vncleannelse on cul?

tp

syde rs 4 Deut ye
12*Lberfore shal i not geue your Dausly .

onnes, and their paugy

ters vnto their sonnes,

ters shall ye not take vnto pour

nor seke their peace and wealth fo? 5 Deu

that ve may be strong and »emop tt
5 ae ok the lande, and that 10 15 pour tchildren may haue the inheri

of it fo: euermore. 13 A

Deu xvid
2,Para b.
9. Reg ag

e

that all these thinges are n 58 Fee of 1 — at deedes and great trespasses F dong. ba thouour God hat taped bs rom 1 3 beneath mee ue „ and hast gedeli 2
I nude we returne to breake thy commanndementes , and fopne in a nitie with the people ok thele abhomina

tions: wouldest not thou be angry to: wardes vs tht thou hadst tonsumed vs, so that there should be no remnaunt, noz anyelcapings

15 O Lorde God of Ifracl thou art righteous, for we remãyne vet tstaped, as it ts to fee this day: Weholde allo, in thy presence are we in our trespasses, ⁊ bez caule of it niay We not Gand befoze thee.

The.x. Chapter.
Che people repent and turne, and put away their fraunge wyues.

d when Eldras e payed after this ma ner, and knowledged, wept, and lap before

= ot. Ilrael a very great

congregation, of men and women, and

one : aud the people wept very
Ore,

2 And Sechania the sonne of Jehiel, one of the children of Klam, aunswered, and sapde vnto Esdras: Me haue trespalled against one God, c hance taken straunge

Wpues of the people of the lande: Het

nowe there is hope in Ilrael concerning this thing.

3 Jo nowe We will make a couenaàunt with our God, and put away ail the
Wires and such as are borne of them, actording to the tounsel of the Lorde: and
We Wil be in the feare of the tcommaundementes of our God, that we may do actording to the lawe.

4 Getthee pp, kor this matter belongeth vnto thee, we allo will be with thee: bz

of good contfogt therfore and do it.

Then role Eldras, and tone an oth of ty chiefe priestes aud Lenites , and of to this worde: And they [ware.

5 And ckldras role bp frombefore the

ouse ol God, and Went into the cham-

ero? Johananthe lonne of Eltalib:

and when he came thyther, he dyd cate

no bread, noz dronke Water:for he monrned, betause of the transgression of the

 _ People that had ben in captluitie.

7 70 they cauled a proclamation to go

f dongpout Pudae wicrutatem vnto al

Nem oF the cͤptümtie, that they shoulde

gather the rufalem : mn selues together vnto Hie-

am of

ix a 5

the house of God, there resorted vnto Hyin out

sracl that they should do according

8 And that whosdeuer tame not within three dapes, attording to the deulce of the rulers and elders all his substaunte should be sorfapted, and he shoul dbe put dut from the tongregation of theniot the captinitie, —

9 Then all the men of Juda and wWentamin gathered them selues together bn:
Hic rusalem within three dayes, euen the twentith day of the nynth moneth: c all the people fate in the streete of the house of God, and trembled, becaule of this matter, and forthe rayne.

10 And Esdras the priest stoode vp, and fayd vnto them: Ne haue tranlgressed cc haue taken straunge wyues, to make the trespasse of Pract pet moze.

1 Conkesse now therfore vnto the Low
God of our fathers, and do his pleasure: and separate pour selues from the people of the lande, and from the straunge
Wpues. * )

12. And all the congregation aunswered,

nd layde with a loude voyce: It shalbe o, and we will do as thou hast sapde.

iz. Wut the people are maup, and it is a

raynp Weather, x the people are to faynt to tary withont in the streete, neither is this a worke of one day or two: for we haue offended very sore inthis thing.

14 Let our rulers stande therefore in all the congregation, and let al them which haue taken straunge wpues in our tities come at the time appopnted, and let the elders of euerp titie and their iudges be with them till the fierce Wrath of our
God foz this matter be turned from vs

15 I en were appopnted Jonathan the foie of Alahel, and Jahasia the sonne of Thecua ouer this matter: & Melullam and Sabathai the Weuites helped

sai N 2 16 And

i.

>? Deute. vn

Iud. iii. a.

"D2, gene
Praple.

vz, we are many that haue offcuded in this ching.

16 And the chudren of the captiuitic dyd euen so: And Eldras the priest, and the auntient heads through the house of their fathers, all men of great fame, leparated 297 selues, æ sate them downe in the first day ofthe tenth moneth to cxauune the matter.

17 And vntüͤl the firk day of the first moneth they were kiniching the vulinelle, re al the men that hadtak en straunge

pues.

18 And among the children ok the priestes there were men found that had taken straunge Wines namely among the children of Jesua the forme of Joledet, and of his brethren, Maasia, and Eliezer,
Jarib, and Gedalta. ö

19 And they gaue their handes that they woulde put away their wines: and they that had trespalled; gaue a ramme for their trespasle.

20 And among the children ok Immer:

Hänant, and Zebadia.

D 21 Aniong the chilozen of Harim: Maasia,
Elia, Stmeia, Jehiel, and Cssiab.

22 Aniongthe children of Pachur: Elioenal, ge, Nethamel, Jolabad, and Elalah.

23 Among the Leuttes: Josabad, Semel, and Celaia ( Whiche fame is Celitah)
Phathalah, Juda, and Eliezer.

24 Among the fingers also, Eliasib: And amongthe porters, Sellum, and Telem, and Uri. .

25 And of Ilrael: Among the children of
Pharos, Remeia , Jelia, Welchia,

Wi

26 AMinong the chudren of lam: ꝙathania, Zacharia, Jehiel, Abdi Jerimomm am in ; = b v Jerunoth,

27 Among the children ol Zatthu:lioenat, Eliasib, Mathania, Jerimoth, 23. bad, and Aztza. 45 cb Za.

28 Among the children of Webal: Jehohanan, Hananta , Zabbai, and Athalai.

29 Among the chuͤdren of wWani Melullam, Malluch, Adatah, Jalub, Saat and Jeramoth.

30 Among the childzen of the captayne of
Moab: Adna, Chelal, Benaia, Maasia
Mathanta, Wesalel, Bennul e Manalle.

31 Among the childzen of Hari: Eliezer,

Isitah, Melchlta, Semeia, and Simeon,

32 Benlamin, Malluch, and Semariah.

33 Amongthe chudren ol Halunt: atthe: nat, Mathatha, Z abad, Eliphelet, Pe: remat, Manasse, aud Semei.

34 Among the children of Bani: Maadal,
Amram, and el,

35 Wanea, Badaia, Cheliau,

36 UMamah, Maremoth, Eliasib,

37 Mathaniah, Mathanai, Pali,

38 Wart, Bennui, and Demet,

39 Selemia, Nathan, Adatah,

40 Machnadebal, Dalat, aral,

41 Asarel, Selemiahu, and Semariap,

42 Sallum, Amarta, and Joseph.

43 Among the childzenof Hebo, ehiel,
Mathathia, Zabad, Zabina, Jadau,
Jotl, and Wanaia.

47 Ali these had taken straunge wyues, and among the fame there Were fome that had childzen by the wpues.

d

Mlanun, Elie zer, Melchia, € Banalah. f

he seconde booke of Esdras, other
ä wyse called the booke of Nehemia. ee
The firft Chapter. 1

Hehemia bewapleth the calamitie ol Hierulalem. s Be contetleth the linnes oF the people, and prapety God foz them. 0 * g

He wordes of Pehemia the sonne

3 and J alued them jorbe the

ewes dyd that were delluered and e.

of Hachalia. In the moneth Chi-
„ lileu, in the twentie pere, as J was in the castell at

. Sufan,
2 = Came Hanant, one ok my brethren, he and the men of

—.— on — en „and howe

went at Hierusalem.

3 And they lapde vnto me: The ect naunt that are lee of the taptluttle 5 in the lande, are in great affitetion s

rebubse :* the Wall ok hierulalemal 5

broken downe, and the gates ther

are burnt with fire.

4 And

ta

pat vl be

and wept, and mourned cer-
Sn and fatted and payed bez
God ol hedien .
OID fypbe: D Pode God ol heauen,

i thou great anp tertible Cod “thourhat

epelt couenaunt and miercie for them

that loue thee € obleruc thy commaun-

dementes:

6 Let thyne cares hearken E beleche

ee. and let thyne eyes be open ; that thee, ao peace) prayer of thy leruaune, Whiehe IJ pray nowe before thee day and night foz the children of Istael

v feruauntes ; and knowledge the finnes of the children of Ilrael which we haue sinned against thee: Jand mp kathers house haue finned,

we haue greeuously finned against thee, and haue not kept thy commaundementes, statutes, and iudgeinentes,
Whiche thou commaundedst thy seruaunt Moyles.

cdx.

1 And when Jhearde thele wordes, Jes A beseche thee can to rementbpaunce

the worde that thou coimmaundedst thy seruaunt Boyles, and lapdest, Be Will

transgresle, and J will fatter poua- Dennie brode among the nation:

But ik veturne vnte me, and kepe my commaundementes, dothem: though ve were cast out buto the vttermost part ok heauen, pet wil J gather you from thence , and wil being you buto the chere. 2 haue chosen to fet imp name

10 Thepare thy seruauntes and thy peo-

ple, whom thou baltdelineren through thy great power, and in thy mightie

hande. „ „ „„
I O Tode Pbelech the, iet thyne eare

hearken to the prayer of thy seruaunt, and fo the prayer of thy leruauntes, whole desire is to feare thy name: and

let thy seruaunt prosper this day, and

graunt bint mertie in the fight of this man. For J was the kinges butler.

The. ii. Chapter.

1 Deter Hehemia had obteviicd ietters of Arta

and buploed the wales,

T anie topasse, that

in the moneth Milan din the twentich pere ol king Arthaxerxes,
1 the wine stoode befoze

0 ts) <<a] bin:and J toke bp the
— wine, and gauc it vnto the king: And J had not ben before heauy in his prefetice,

2 Andthe king lapde vnto nie: vohplokest

thou o ladly, leyng thou art not licke-
Itis nothing els but that thou art heauy hearted. And J was fore alrayde,

And lapde vnto the king, God laue the

lng foz euer: Howe chouide J not loke fably, when the citie and place of my fathers bürlals lye waste, and the gates therol are consumed with fires

4 And the king layde vnto me: What is

then thy requett: I made my pra er allo to the Godot cali

5 Ind layd vnto the king: If it please the

king and if thy seruaunt haue tounde faz ir la thy light, ende me puto Juda nto the titie of my fathers buriaites, ot 51 map ue it.
Ching lapd vnto me(the queene his wyfe fitting by Dim: owe long thal

rerres, the came ko hierulalem,

thy iourney continue „ and when Wilt thou come againe : And it plealed the
Bing to seude me, and J set him atune,

7 And sapde vnto the king: It it pleale B

the king, iet hym geue nie letters to the captapues whiche are béponde the water, that they may conuay nie ouer, till
I come into Juda:

8 And letters vnto Alaph the lorde of the

kinges wood, that he may gene me tint ber to make beanies for the gates ot the palace which is harde by the houle, and forthe walles of the citie, and forthe
Houle that J shall enter into. And the king gaue me according to the hande ok

mp God which was gogd vpon me.

And when J tame to the captaynes bepoude the water „ J gaue them the kinges letters: And the king had sent captaynes of the armie and horlemen with me. i

10 Sanqballat allo the Horonite, and To-

dia a seruaunt the Ammortite hearde of it, e it greeued thein sore, that chere was tome à man which sought the wealth of the thildren of Jsrael.

uu And J came to Hierulalem; and was

there three dapes. nh a : V z 12 And

12 And J gat me vp in the night season, and a fewe men with me, neither tolde
Jam man what God had geuͤen me in

the valley port.

16 And the rulers knewe not whyther J

went or what J dyd: neither dyd J as pet tel it vnto the Jewes to the priestes, to the noble nien, to the rulers, and to the other that laboured in the Worke.

The iii. Chapter.

Che number of them that buplaed the walles.

D Eliasib the Hye priest gat him vp With his brethrẽ the priestes, jan they buplded the sheepe gate: they re-

| pawed it, and set bp the

doores of it: euen vnto the towre Mea repaired thepit, and vnto the towre of hhananeel.

2 Ntxt vnto him also buylded the men ol

Jericho: And beside him buylded Sa-

chur the sonne of Anni. 5

Wut the fishe port did the children of Al-

naa buylb, which also layed the beames

therof, and fet on the doores, lockes, and barres of it.

And next vnto them buplded Mere-

moth the sonne of UAzia, the fonne of ha-

kos:and next vnto them buplded Melullam the soune of Berachia, the sonne of

Melelabel: and next vnto them buylded

Zadot the sonne ol BWaana.

5 And next vnto hym buplded they of
Thekoa: But the great men that were among them put not their neckes to the

‘ Worle of their Lozde.

ler. xxx g.
Zach. xiin.

WwW

rane fF „ „ „ „ K re AH A K 74 HH

E „„ „ „„

The olde gate buylded Jehoiada the

17 After warde sapde F onto them: e the miserie that he in pe lato , falem lyeth Wake , and howe the gates thereof are burnt with fire: come there: oe 1 ang i Dp the wall of

and tha A bee n

1 en Jtolde them ofthe hand o
God that it was 16 f onte 5 al the kinges wordes that he had spoken and Duplbe. Andrey Mert

Andthey strengthe
N pauls 3 . eiprotier

19 Wu en Sanaballat the ozone: and Lobia the fernaunt an Ammon and Gelem the Arabian hearde it, they laughed bs to storne, x despised vs, and sapde: What is this that ye do: Will ye fall away from the kings - 2

20 Then aunswered F them, and lapde:
The God of heauen, heit is that hath graunted vs prosperitie, and we his fer: uauntes will get vp and buylde: As for vou, ve haue no portion, nor right, nog remembzaunte in Hierusalem.

S

sonne of Paseah, e Mesullam the sonne of Besodia, they layed the beanies thero {et on the doozes, lockes, e bares: ofit. 5

Next vnto them buplded Melatiah of zz
Gibeon, and Jadon of Merona, nien ok.
Gibeon and of Mispah, vnto the throne of the duke l which was} beyond the riuer.

3 ext vnto him buylded Cisstel the sonne of harhaiah ofthe goldelmpthes: Mert. vnto hym alfo buplded Hanantad the - sonne of Harakahim, and they repaired:
Hierulalem vnto the brode wall. g

9 NMerxt vnto them buylded Raphatad' the 1 of 11 „the ruler of the halle.

art ot Hierulalem. - ‘

10 gert nts him buyloed J edala the sonne of Harumaph ouer ägalust De houle: ie 15 den buylded Da 5 tus the sonne of Hasabnia. f

II 5 Melchia the sonne of arin a
Hatubthe foune of the captayne 0 55 . ab 9 77 in „ al

owre beside the fornates. ae

* Pent e buylded Sallun 17 «gt sonne of Pallohes, the ruler of iy ie 19 1 part ot hierusalem, be e The

2. Esdras. | cly}. 7

lley gate buylded Hanun, aud
1 ajectesite bk Zanoa: Thepbupldedit, aud fet on the doores, lockes and barres thereof, and al par cubites on the
; to the doung port. i 1 Suthe bande port buylded Melchiah ep the sonne of Nechab, the ruler of the fourth part or Beth acharem: herepai-
‘ ecb it au Es Onte DOMES ee ee thereat.
6 BSulthe wel gate repaired Salium the
: sonne ok Cholholah, the ruler of the fourth part of Mispah: He buplded it,

¢
€ c

oueredit, and fet on the doozes, rarkes aud barres thereof: and the wall vnto the poole Siloah by the kinges garden, and vnto the steppes that go downe from the citie ot Dauid. s Alter him buylded Pehemiah the sonne ok Albok the ruler o the halle parte of
© wWethsur , vntill the other fide ouer az gainst the sepulchres of Dauid , and to the poole that was repaired, and vnto the house ofthe mightie.
1 Alter hin buylded the Leuttes, Rehum the sonne of Bam: and next vnto him buyloed Halabia the ruler of the halle part of Keilah in his quarter. lS After him buplded their brethren Baua the sonne of Henadad the ruler of the halle part of Keilah.
‘19 And after him buylded Ezʒer the sonne ol Jelua the ruler of Mispah the other
« peece, harde ouer against the goyng vp tothe house of ordinaunee (tyat was) in the comer.
20 Againe, after him brake foorth Baruch the sonne of Zachai of indignation, and repaͤired the other peece from the tur: ning corner, vnto the doore of the Houle
D. of Clasib the hie pret. |
Alter him allo buylded Merimoth the sonne of Una, the lonne of Hattos, the other peete, from the doore of the houle of
: Elialib, euen as long as the house of Eli-

Mi ees ö ;
22 Alter him buylded the priestes, the menof theplayne. ay * ‘
23 Alter him buplded wenianinand Hasub ouer against their houle: and alter. him Wrought Afaria the fonne of Maa-

fia the sonne ol Anania by his house

24. Alter hym allo buplded Benn the sonne of Henadad the other pecte, from ‘ the boule of Azarta vnto the turning: ok. the wall and vnto the comer, <

25 Alter hin buylded Pala the sonne of «
Usai, ouer against the comer and the ‘ high towre whiche lyeth out ouer from thekinges houle, that was beside the. tourt of the prison: After him Phadalathe sonne of Pharos. 8 5

25 As for the Pethimms they dwelt in‘ the strong hold vnto the water gate to-. ward the east, and to the towre that lpethout. :

27 Alter him buylded they of Thenua 8 the other peece oner against the great. tolbze that lyeth outwarde , date the-
Wallof the strong holde. :

28 But from aboue the horse gate foorth buylded the priestes, tuery one ouer a: « gainst his house. é

29 And after them buplded Zadoc the sonne ol Immer ouer against his honse:
After Him buylded allo Semeia ponne. of Sechania the keper of the east gate.

30 Alter him buylded Hanania the lonne ok Selena, and Hänun the fonne of:
Zalaph the sirt, the other peece: And al ter him buplded Mesullam the fonne ok
Barachia ouer against his store house.

31 Alter him buylded Melchia the goidfinithes sonne onto the houle of the ithinims aud ol the marchauntes, cuer against the gate Mephkad, and tothe

_ parlour inthe torner. d

32 And betweene the parlour of the corner bnto the sheepegate, bnylded the goldesnuthes, and the marchauntes. ‘

The. ilii. Chapter.

2The buplding of erutalem is hindred, 1. But God breaketh their enterprile. 17 Che
Jeweg buͤylde with one hande and holde their weapon in the other.

| Cit when Sanaballat
A hearde that we buplded the wall, he was
Weothin him selte, and toke great indignation, and mocked the

E Jewes:
* And lapde before his brethren and the

souldiers of Samaria : what dothele unpotent Jewes- will thecheathen lukfer them: hal they offer; shal they perfourme it in one day- shal they make the stones whole againe that are brought io

dust and brent- 1
3 And Tobiah the Anunonite was belide
Cl 4 bun

E

1 3! em the ff ioz tif e tiem sclucs.

Os, for a

N

ika fort go bp , he (hail breake downe their stonp wall.

4 care O thou dur God, for we are def pised, turne their shame vpon their owue head, € geue them ouer into des-

piling in the lande of their taptiuttie.

2. Esdras. hum and lapde: Though they buyld, pet 5 Couer not their wickednelle, and let not

their sinne be put out in thy prelence rfor

they haue prouoked the bupiders.

6 And so buylded we the wall, and it fopned whole together vnto the valle heyght hereof: Andthe people Were

U

l 97
N WN 2 e N n
; ¥ My 2 *
‘ U

salem were made vp, e that the beaches began to be stopped, they were very
Wroth,

8 Aud confpired ali together to tome and fight against Hierusalem, and to make an hinderaunce therin.

9 Meuerthelesle, we made our praper vn-

to our God, and set watchmen by them

day and night, betause okthem.

10 And Juda sayde: The strength of the bearers is feeble, and there is pet much more morter, and we are not able to buylde on the wall.

And dur aduersaries sapde: They chall not knowe, neither see, till we come in the nuddes among them, and slapthem, and cause the worke to teasse.

12 Wut when the Jewes which dweit befide them, came, they told vs as good as ten times, that in all plates where ye go vnto, they are appoynted to fal vpon vs.

3 Therekore set Ithe people after their kinredes, with their swordes, speares, and bowes, beneath in the lowe plates bchinde the wal vponthe toppes of the

one vnto his labour.
16 And from that time foorth, the halle part ot the young men dyd the labour and the other halte part of them Var. the speares, chieldes, bowes ,and bre 1
Menta eee aad the boule ol Juda.
17 They which buylded onthe wall and

C

ii. Esdib andix,f,

they that bare burthens, and thole that

laded them, with one hande did euerx one his Worke, and with the other helde
8 Weapon.

18 Foreuery one that buplded bat sWord girded by his thingl) , and 191115 ded they: And he that biewe the ö pet was belide me. 19 And

; ide
19 And a and to the other people:

vnto the principall men,

the starres came foorth.

22 And at the lame time laid

lers, e Into the
0 he wakels great and large, k we are people: Let every one with 15 lernalt seperated vpon the wall one farre from lodge within Derufalem, that in the
D aquother. 1 night sealon we map watch, and labour
20 Lobe in what plate therefore ve heare onthe day time. the nople ok the trumpet, resozt pethi- 23 As for mie and my brethren, my serther vnto vs, aud dur God shall fight uauntes, and the men of the watch exile fz vs: Which folowed me, we put neuer okour
1 And we wil be labouring in the worke. clothes, laue onelp becaute of the wal
And the halke part or them helde their ching. | speares krom the morning spring, tyll
J The. v. Chapter. le are oppressed and in neceslitie. 7 Nehemia remedieth it. 15 he tooke
111 theporcion of others that had ruled befoze, lett he shoulde Hai the ait F
Ay d there arole a great Then held they their peace, and coulde a A tomplaynt ofthe peo- linde nothing to aunfwere. a0 Ispie and their wyuesa- 9° And (Mebemia) saide, It is not good e gaint their brethre the chat ve do: Ought pe not to walke in the e Bewes. keare ot our God, betause of the rebuke
2 e Josthere were some ofthe heathen that are our enemies: s that saide, Pur sonnes 10 J and my brethren, and my leruauntes, and daughters and we are very many: do lende them money and torne: J pray

therefore wyll we take corne for them,

that we may eate and liue.

3 Some allo there were that lame: Let vs set our landes, vineyardes, and hou-
55 0 pledge, and take vp corne in the

earth.

4. But lome there were that faive: oe

haue borowed money kor the kinges tribute, and that vpon our landes k vine-

pardes.
5 And now our fleche is as the fleche of dur brethren, and our children as their children: and loe we being into lubiettion our sonnes and our daughters as leruauntes, and lome ok our daughters are subdued vnto bondage alredle, and benen ren den, 0 dur handes to ndother men! *

landes and vinepardes. ee

And when J heard their complaynt

and such Wordes
87 Une Des it displealed me fore.

n Jadutled io in my mindert at

rebuked the tounsellers and Weste

ab fate vnto them: Euery one of vou
Apeth great burdens vpon his brother.

nd J brou ta gr 5 : gainit theme great congregation a

And laide vnto bilitic haue red ewes,
Heathen agatne,

d abut 55
6 dur brethren the
Which were solde Huto the
And wyll pon fell pour beetle and shallthey be lolde vnto vs:

vou let vs leaue of this burden.

II Therefore this fame day J prap you see that pe restore them their landes a: galne, their vineyardes, olyue gardens, and their houles, and rennt the hundred parte of the money, of the torne, rat and ople that pe haue exacted of

hem.

12 Then laide theyrwe wyll restore then

againe, æ wyll require nothing of them,

and wyll do as thou hak spoken. And J

called the priestes, and tooke an oth of

them that they should do so.

And Jchodke my lappe and laide:
God shake out euerp man after the faine maner fromm his houle x tabourc that maintaineth not this worde, euen thus be he shaken out, and vopde. And all the congregation saide, Amen, and praysed the Lorde: And the people did according to this pronuse.

14 And from the time foorth that the king committed vnto me to be taptayne ok them that were in the lande of Juda, tuen from the tiventic pere, vnto the thirtie & two pere ofking Artaxerxes, that is twelue peres, J With my brethrt lined not ol such sustinaunce as was ge-

uento a captapne.

15 Foz the olde captaynes that were before me, had ben chargeable vnto the people, and had talen or them u

and their seruauntes had oppressed the canse of the feare of God.

dat ra-

b een 16. Wut laboured also in the worke
Bmewate ppoun the wall, and we bought no lande:

and all my seruauntes came thither together vuto the Woke,

. 17 Morcouer, there were at my table an

hundred and fiktie of the Jewes and ru-

lers, which came vnto me from among

Ze E{d ras.
1 wine, belide fouretie sicles of suner, yea the heathenthat are about vs.

people: But so did not J, and that be-

18 And there was prepared for me an Ore and fire cholen sheepe, and bee
Were prepared for nie: and euer once i ten dapes wine kor all in aboundaner:
Bet required not J the” lining ola CAPs “Oni tapne, fog the bondage was grecuous vnto the people.

19 Thinke vpon me my God vnto the ür belt, according to al that J haue done for this people.

The. /. (hapter.

sPehemisa auntwereth With great wyldome and zeale to his aduertarie. u he is

not discouraged by the kalle prophetes.

DD when Sanaballat, Tobia, and Gesem the Arabian, and the other of dur enemies, heard that Jhad buil-
N ded the wall, and that
— — there were no mo gappes therein: howebeit at the lame time had J not hanged the doores vpon the gates.)
2 Sanaballat and Gelem sent vnto me, saping: Come, that we may mecte e take countel together inthe villages that are in the plapne of the titie Ono. Meuerthelesse they thought to do me euill. N
And JJ {ene meflengers vnto them, saying: J haue a great businesse to do, and J can not come downe:wohy chould the worke teasse, whilest J leaue it and come downe to pon:
4 Howbeit, they sent vnto me as good as foure times after the same maner: And
Igaut them the fame aunlwere.
5 Then lent Sanaballat his seruaunt againe vnto nie the fift time, with an open letter in his hande,
6 Wherein was Written: It is tolde the heathen, and Gesem hath faide it, that thou and the Jewes thinke to rebel: fo2 the which caule thou buldest the wall, that thou mayst be their king, according to these wordes:

37 And hall ordayned the prophetes to pecache of thee at Hierulalem, and to fay, He is king ol Juda. And now shall this come tothe kinges cares: come now therefore, and let vs take dur tounsell together.

8 And J sent vnto him, laping: There is no such thing done as thou sapest, foz thou fainest them out ol thyne owne

5 Ay

heart.

9 Foz they were all nunded to make vs akrayde, saping, They Mall withdrawe their handes fromtheir wozue, thatit chall not be finiched: Nowe therefore strengthen thou my hande.

10 And J came nto the houle of Semaa the sonne of Delaia, the sonne of Mehetabcel, æ he had Mut him selle within, and laide: Let vs come together in the
Youle of God, enen vnto the middestok the temple, e hut the doores of the temple, for they wyll tome to flay thee, pea cuen in the night wyll they come to put thee to death.

I And JJ saide: should any such man as
Iflee- ho is, that being as J am wyll go into the temple to saue his life: wit not go in.

12 And lot, J perceaued that God hath not sent him, but that he pronounced this prophetie against me: For Tobid and Sanaballat had hired him foz money.

13 Therkore was he hyred, that throngh © feare I Mould fo do, c sinne, eee might oe an euill report of me to tap to my charge.

14 pp God, thinke thou vpon 11815 and Sanaballat accozding Run alle their workes, and on the war ge 1
Moadia, and the other prophetes th
Would haue put me in feare. „ on the

15 And the wall was finished ith & e and 1 aaa mon lul, in kiktie and two *

16 And when all dur cvenics 1 5 thereof, all the heathen that ware fapbs were akrard and their erhatthis led them: For they perteaued th worke came of our God, 7 And

at the fame time were there ma-

Tayak techie of Juda whole letters

wente vnto Tobia, and againe from bia vnto them.

18 50 there were many in Juda that

were lworne vnto him: lor he was the

sonne in lawe of Sethania, the sonne of

Arah, and his sonne W had

the daughter ol Me ullam the lonne

of Warachia,

19 Aiud they spake good of him before me, and tolde him my wordes: and Cobia sent letters to put me in feare.

q The. vii. Chapter.

alter the wallonce bunded is che watch appopnted. sher that returned

from the captiuitie are numbred.

Dw when the wail was builded, J hanged on the doores al:

> Pilgers , and Teuites, were appoynted: a And J tommaun-
‘ped my brother Panam, and Pananta the ‘ruler ofthe castle at Hierusalem,
(for he was a faithfull man, and feared
God more then did many other)
And fade dato them: Let not the gates ol Hterusalem be opened vntil the sunne be whot: and while they stand by,

iw
Mihs palace,

let them shut the doores k barre them.

And we appoynted certaine citesins of
Hierusalem to be watchmen, enerp one

to lieepe his watch, and euery one to be ouer against his house.

4. As lor the citie, it was large of roome, and great, but the people were fewe
2 and the houles were not buil-

ed.

And God gaue me in myne heart that

. J gathered together the principal men,

aye and the offiters e the people, to num-

e ber them: and J founde a register of the number of them * which came bp befoxe and founde witten therein,

6 Lele are the fonnes of the lande that went vp from the captiuitie that was carted awa „whom Mabuchodonalor the king of Babylon had brought awap, and came againe to Hierulalem

5 au duda euerp one vnto hig citie,

a hey Which came with Zorobabel ethele: Jesua, Mehemia, Alariad, alla, Mabamani,@Bardochee, el ch Delpevath Begual, Pahum,and
7 nah. This is the number of the ue of the people of Ilrael:

1 se tilbren of Pharaos, were two

0 21 and anhundred leuentte and two. de chüdzen of Saphatia, thzee hun-

dam 4

Yat the nt !

Dros
«

re

fo,and the posters, fine

dred seuentie and two.
The children of Arah, sire hundred

1 The chlldren ofthe taptayne of Moab among the children ol Jesua ck Joab, pie thonfand eyght hundred and eighteene :

12 The chidren ol Elam a thouland two hundred fiftre and sfonre. ¢
13 The children of Zathua, eyght hun-

dred fouretie and fiue. C.
14. The children of Zachat, seuen hun-
Deed and threescore. ‘

15 The children of Wannut, fire hundred fouretie and eyght. .
16 The thildren of Webat, sixe hundred

twentie and eyght. N 0
17 The children of Algad, two thousand three hundred twentie and two. ‘
18 The children ol Adonitam, fire hun-
Deed threescore and seuen. ‘
19 The children of 2eguat, two thoufand threestore and seuen. :

20 The children of Adin, sixe hundred. 5 fiftie and fine. rs
21 The children of Ater of Pezekta, ninetie and eyght. a
22 The chuͤdren of Halem,thzee hundred twentie and eyght. ‘
23 The chidzen of wesat, three hundzed ‘ twentie and foure. ;
24 The children ol Hariph, anhundzcd< and twelue. 8
1 thildren of Gibeon, ninetie and fiue. ‘
26 The men of Bethlehem and Hethophah, an hundred fourescore and eyght.
27 The men of Anathoth, an hundred.

twentie and eyght. 6
28 The men of Bethasmaneth, fouretie: and two. :

29 The menof Kariathiarum, Cephira,s - and wWeeroth, seuen hundzed fouretie. and three ‘

sii 30 The

2. EIdras.

30. The mend Mama and Geva, fice of Sllera, the chudzen of Zhamah —

hundred twentie and one.

zi The men ok Michnias, an hundred twentit and two.

32 The men ok Wethel and At, an hundred twentie and three.

033 ö 1 men ok the other Mebo fiftie and

o.

34. The childrẽ of the other Elam athou-
F. band two hundred kiktie and foure,
35 The childzen ol Harim, three hundred and twentie. 3
36 The childen of Jericho, three hun-
. Dred fourtie and fine.
37 The chüdren of Lodhadid and Ono, seuen hündred twentit and one. .
38 The children of Henaa, three thou-
(and nine hundred and thirtie.
39 The priestes: The children of Jeda-
« fa,ofthe houle ok Jesua, nine hundred
(euentie and thee.
40 The chudren of Immer, athouland fittie and two.
41 The children of Phashur, a thouland two hundred fourtte and fener.
42 The children ok Harim, athouland
Wand seuenteene.
4; The Lenites : The children of Jesua ok Cad miel and of the children of odiah, seuentie and foure. ;
44 The lingers: Lhe children of Alaph, an hundred fourtie and eyght.
45 The porters: The childre of Sallum, the children ok Ater, the children of Talmon, the children ol Accub, the chudnken ok Hatita, the thildren of Sobai,
. altogether an hundred thirtie Eepght.
46 The Nethinims :Lhe children of St
G. ha tthe chuͤdren of Hasupha, the children
‘ of Tebbaoth,

4. The chudrenof Ceros, the children of

Sila, the chudzenolpphadon,
48 The tchuͤdren of Lebanah, the children bot hagaba, the children ol Salmai,
49 The thildren of Hanan, the children ol
Giddel, the children of Gaher,
50 The thildren of Kcaiah, the children ol
Belin, the children of Petodah,
51 The children of Gaszan, the thildren
« Of Usʒa, the children of Phasea,
52 The chüldren of wWelai, the thudren of
Mceunim, the children of Mephussin,
“53 The children ok wWacbuc, the chudren
„ok Hacupha, the children of Harhur,
54. The childzen of Wallith, the widen ok Sehida the children of Haria,

55 The children of Bartos, the children

56 The chüldren of Pesiah, tl nen! of Hatipha, . man
57 The childrẽ of Hotdmions seruaũteg. the chüdren of Sotat, the chlldrengk
55. Ehe Ch ent Piel ech ; e childzen of Paala, He chüldren of
Darcon the chüd nn of Stove, =
59 Lhe ehildzen of Hephatiath, the chudie of Mattil, the chüdren of phochereth of Sabaun, the children of Amon, ;

50 All thele Methinims and the ehüdren.

of Solonions seruauntes, Were thee: hundred ninetie and two. ‘

61 And these went vpalso from Thel mela: Lyctharfa, Cherub, Addon, and

mmer: but they could not shewtheir athers house, nor their seede, andthat. they were of Ilrael. i

62 The childgen ol Dalatah, the children of Lobia, and the chilogen of Pecoda,fire hundzed fourtie and two.

63 And of the priestes: the children of Ha: . baiah, the childgen of Haccos, the childrẽ of Barzillai, which toke one of ß daughters of Barz illai the Gileadite to wyte,‘

and was named akter their name.

64. These fought their waiting in the register ol their generation but they were not founde:therfore they were put from the priesthood. .

65 And Athirlatha saide vnto them that they shoulde not eate ok the most hold tyll there tame vp a priest which should were Urim and Thummum.

66 And fo the whole congregation together, was fourtie and two thoulande three hundred and threelcore,

67 Belide their seruauntes and maydens, of whom there were seuen thouland theee hundred thirtie and seuen: And they had two hundred fourtie and fiue

ingiug men and wonien. a

68 Their horses seuen hundred 1 00 and fire: and their Mules two hunde fourtic and fiue: tie

69 The Camels foure Hundred tht 1 and fine: ite aan seuen und? andtwentie Alles.

o And certaine of the ancient father gaue bnto the worke: Athirlatha g of „e to the trealure a thousand pecce 115 i golde, 5178 bafons, eae Garces

thirtie priestes garmentes.

1 And lonie of the chiefe fathers enn puto the treasure of the wall guland shoufand peetes of gold, two than d

2. EIdras.

and tivo hundred pounde of filuer, ters, and the fingers, andthe other of

d the other people gauc twentie oled peeces of golde, and two thousard pound of filuer, and threestore and seuen priestes garmentes.
73 And the prieltes and Leuites, the por-

Te. vi).

the people, and the Hethiniins and all
Israel, dwelt in their cities: And whẽ the seuenth moneth tame „the children of Ilrael were in their tities.

“Chapter.

2 Eldras gathereth together the people, and readeth to ehem the law. 12 Chep re. iopce in Itrael Coz the knowledge or the word ol God. 15 They keep the featte of

tabernacles or boothes, ©
1 Md all the people ga-
A 5 thered them selues to-
Ih e gether as one man, in ran eA the streete that was l G before the water gate,
„hand they laide puto
5 Esdras the stribe, that pant, he shondd fetch v the booke of the law of

Mopies, which the Lode commaundeb to Jlrael.

2. And Eldras the priest brought the law befoze the congregation both of men c women, and all that could vnderstand did hearken vnto it vpon the first day ol the seuenth moneth.

3 And he read therein in the streete that was before the water gate, from the morning vntill the noone day, before menand women that did hearken to it:

and the eares ok all the people were in-

lined vnto the booke of the law.

4. And Eldras the scribe stoode vpon a pulpet ot wood which they had niade forthe preaching, and belide him stoode
Pathathia, Sema, € Anaiah, Tiriah,
Helkia,æ Maaseiah on his right hande: aud ou his left hand stoode Pedala, hi

Aale elchta, T Halun, Halabadana,

Sachati and Melullam.
3 ae Eldras opened the booke before the peopte,(fo2 he stoode aboue al the

people. and when he opened! btopletionne pp. . opebentt, al the

6 And Eldras praysed the Lorde the

dena God: And all the people aunlweand et Aine letting bp their handes, ped the eee fetus and worchiptalling d ö

8 “Ws ta Ne grounde. eer eee ca, Want, Serebiah, Jamin,

ig dean adden kla Cegozabad, Hanan, Pelaeinen Epi stoode in their plate. and the people

8 And they read in the booke or the lawe ol God distinttly· and gaue the sense and canted them to vnderstand the reading.

And Hehenua which ts Athirlatha, and Eldras the priest and stribe, and the
Leuites that caused the people to take heede, said vnto al the people, This day is holy vnto the Lozde pour God be not pe sorv.and weepe not: For all the people wept when they heard the wordes of the lawe.

10 And he saide vnto them: * Go pour mE.

wap andeate the fat, and drinke the fYwcete, and fend part vnto them allo that haue not prepared foz them selues, for this day is holy vnto our Lorde:be not pe sorp therefore, for the iop ofthe
Lorde is pour strength.

TL And the Leuites stilled all the people,

and faide: Holde pour peace, for the day is holy, be not sad therelore.

12 And all the people went their way to cate, and to Danke, Eto sende part vnto other, and to make great mirth, betause they had vnderstand the wordes that were declared vnto them.

13 And on the next day were gathered to: gether the chieke fathers among all the people, and the priestes and leuites. vnto
Esdras the seribe, that they might bn: derstand the wordes of the law.

14. And they founde witten in the lawe
* which the Lode had commaunded

should dwell in boothes in the feast of the seuench moneth:

15 And that they should cant it to be Des tlared and protlaymed in all their cities, and throughout Hierulalem, saping: Go foorth vnto the mount and fetch Olyue braũches, Pine braunches, Mprtel braunches Palme braunches, & braunches of the thicke tree, to make boothes. as it is Written.

16 And so the people went n n

€

by Mopfes, that the chudzen of Piracl ut

8 7 Thouart, O

one vpon the roofe of his house, and in their tourtes, and in the tourtes of the house of God, and in the streete e water gate, and in the streete of the port of Ephraim.

7 And all the congregation of them that were come againe out of the captiuttie, made boothes, e sat vnder the boothes: for sinte the time of Josua the sonne of

of Israel done so: And there w
— gladnesse. : - — nd euery day from the first day vn

the last, read Eldras in the Dooke ofthe lawe of God: And seuen dapes held they the feaste, and on the eyght dap they gathered together, According vnto the maner.

q The ix Chapter.

Che peopierepent,and foxfake their slraunge wyuts. che Leuites erhort them to prapse God, o declaring his wonders, 26 and their ingratitude, zo and Gods

great mercies toward them.

N the twentie and fourth day ofthis mo-
A) neth tame the children ok Israel together az
Mex) gaine, With * kfasting. and sackeclothes, and tarth vpon them,
2 And they that were ofthe seede of Pita: el, were separated from all the straunge children, and stoode g knowledged their finnes,¢ the wickednes oftheir fathers:
And stoode vp in their place, e read in the booke of the law of the Lorde their
God foure times on the dap, and they knolwledged and worschipped the Lod their God foure tinies on the dap.
4 Then stoode vp vpon the stapres of the
Teuites, Jesua, want, Cadnriel, Sabanlah, Wunni, Serebiah, Wan and Chanant, and crped loude vnto the Lozde their God:
5 Andthe Teuites, Jesua, and Cadniel, Want, and Palabra, Serebiah, and
Hodid, Sebanta, and Phathahla, sapde:
Stand vp, and praple the Lode pour
God for euer, and let thankes be geuẽ vnto the name of thy glorp, which excelleth all thankes geuing and prayse.
6 Thou art Lorde alone, thou hast made heauen and the heauen ok all heauens with ail their hoast, the earth and all thinges that are therein, the fea r all that is therin e thou preseruest them al, the hdast of heauen worschippeth thee,
Torde, the God that
Hatt thosen Abraham, and broughtest hum out of Ur in Chaldea, and called st him Abraham:
8 And foundelt his heart faithful before thee, & madest a couenaunt with him, to geue vnto his seede the lande of

the Chanaanites, Hethites, Amorites,
Pherezites, Jebusites, and Gergesites, and Hak made good thy wordes: for thou art righteous,

cthemand made Tem vodthes, euerr Sum vnto this day Had notthechibreii —

And hat cousidered the miserie of bon

dur fathers in Egypt, and heard their tonplapnt by the red sea:

10 And shewed tokens and wonders vp-

n

on Pharao and all his seruauntes, aud on all the people ok his lande: Foz thon knowest that they were presumptuous and cruell against them: and so madest thou tire a nanie as it is this day.

And the red sea diddest thou deusde in

funder before them, fo that they went an, through the unddest of thesea dave .

shod: and their persecuters threwest thou into the deepe, as a stone in the mightie waters:

12 And leddest them on the day time ina

Exo.xvits
15 And ganestthembread fromheauen Exo xin d

tloudie piller, and on the night season in un 11 85 to 10 them light in the way (hat they went.

5 Thou 52 downe allo ppon C mount Sinat, and spakest bnto th krom heauen, and gauett them right iudgenientes, 11 nce good tommaundementes an

And detlaredst vnto them thy holy
Sabbath and commaundcdsttgen ehe ceptes, ordinaunces, and lates, by y hande of Moyses thy feruaunt:

whenthey were bungrp, and bog test koorth water for them out ofthe rocke when they were th 9 5 in prompsedst them that they shou sh and take poslession of the lande 11 which thou haddest lyfe vp thvne 0 for to geue them.

oud
16 But they and dur fathers were pia

them Exo. xlx. A

ardnetked, fo that they folowed aa commaundementes:
7 And 1 not obey, neither were no ! blech: but hardened their neckes, and had in their heades to returne to their bondage by their rebellion: But thou O God ok mercles, gracious, and full okcompassion, of long luffering. and of great mertie, vet forsookest them not.
13 Moreouer . when they had made them a moulten calfe, and saide . This is thy
God that brought thee out ofthe lande ok Egypt, and did blasphemies:
Dio Bet lorlookest thou them not in the wildernesse, acrording to thy great merties: And the cloudy piller departed not from them on the day tune to leade thẽ the way, neither the piller or fire in the night sealon, to shewe them light in the
Way by which they Mould go. a
20 Aud thou gauest thein thy good spirite to enfourme them, and withheldest not thy Manna from their mouth, and gaz
110 them water When they were thirir

Bo xlib.

xvid.

10 vil d.

u Fourtie peres long did thon feede them inthe wildernelsse, so that they lacked nothing: their clothes waxed not olde, and their feete swelled not.
And thou gauest them kingdomes and nations, and scatteredst them into torners: so theppossessedꝰ the lande of
Sehon and the lande of the king of hea peel and the lande of Og king of Wa-
23 And their children multipliedst thou asthe starres of heauen, and broughtelt them into the lande whereok thou addelt spoken to their fathers, that
Een go into it, and haue it in pol-

4 And the chadzen went in. and possel-
15 the lande, and thou subduedst be:
Qe them the inhabiters of the lande, uten the Chanaanites and gauest them
Ae their handes, with their
1 and the people of the lande, that
Womo bt do with them what they

And they wanne their strong cities
ND 1 lande, and toke pollellion of
99987 that were full ofall maner of
0 Welles digged out, vinepards,
17 gardens e many fruiteful trees: ae fre bid cate, and were filled and be-

e fat, and lived in plealure through

Du. vii h. me

wn xxi f.

de ii

hts
Ms,

2. Efdras.

the wonders that thou did?

thy great goodnesse. ;

26 Meuerthelesse, thep were disobedient. and rebelled again thee, and cast thy law behinde their backes x * flue their

prophetes. Which exhorted them car: ga

nestly that they might bung them a rial vnto thee and did great blaspheites, 7

27 Therefore thou gauest them ouer in-

to the hand of their enemies that vered them: And in the time of their trouble whẽ they tryed vnto thee thou heardest them from heaven, and though thy great niertie thou gauest them fantours which helped them out ok the hande of their enennes.

28 But when they came to ree, they tur: ned backe againe to do euill before thee: therefore leftest thou them in the hande of their enemies, fo that they had the
Donon over them: And when they conuerted, c cryed vnto thee, thou heardest them krom heauen, and many times Dat thou deuuered them atcording to thy great merete,

in. Reg. c b
Oz, whit
ꝑotested a= mong them to turne them to thee.

29 And teltifiedst vnto them, that thou

mightest bring them againe vnto thy lawe: Motwithstanding. they were proude, and hearkened not vnto thy commaundenientes, but sinned in thy lawes.* which if a man do. he hall lyue in them: and turned the Moulder away,
1 were stiffenecked, and would not eare.

30 Het manp peres diddest thou korbeare them, and testiliedst vnto them through thy spirite, euen by the handot thy prophetes, and pet would they not heare: therefore gauest thouthem in: to the hand of the nations ofthe landes.

31. And for thy great mercies sake, chon
Hatt not vtterly consumed them neither korsaken them: for thou art agratious and mercifull God.

32 Mob therfore our God, thou great
God mightie and terrible, thou that kepest touenaunt and mercie, regarde not litle al the trauaile that hath come vnto vs, and our kinges, our princes. our priestes. our prophetes. and our fathers, and all the people sinee the time of the kinges of Assur. vnto this day.

33 And truely thou art iust in althat thou bat brought vpon vs, for thou halt done right: As kor vs, we haue ben vngodlp,

34 And our binges, aud our prin eee, our priesteg, and our fathers, haue not Ahr

n, note. tedst.

e gainst thy ludgementeg.

Leus.x VII, a

Oz. protestedst.

n. Esd. i b.

2. HEIdras.² a thy lawe, nor regarded thy tommaun- co out fathers to care the kruites and

. dementes, and thy earnest exhortatiane = ons, where with thou hast exhorted

them.

them,

35 Aud they haue not lerued thee in their kingdome, and in thy great goodnesse that thon gauest them, and in the large and plentecus lande which thou gaz uest bekore them, aud haue not tonuerted front their wicked workes.

36 Weholde, we are in bondage this dap. and so is the lande that thou gauest vn-

“Ds, kattt.

| He sealers were, Pehemiah (that is) Athirlatha the sonne of hachaliah, and Sedecias,
Seraiay , Azariah,
Irmeiah,
Pashur, Amariah,

2 PZ 8

a

9 The Teuites were, Jesua the sonne ol Azaniah, Wennnt among the children ok henadad, and Cadmiel.
Jo And their brethren, Scbantah, Podi-
« fal) ,Celita Pelaiah, anan. en Picha, Rebhob,Halabiah,
12 Tacthur, Serebiah, Sebamah,
213 Hodiah, Want, Beninu.
14 The heads of the people were, Pharos the captapne of Moab, Elam, Zatthu, Gant,
15 Wunnt. Azgad, Bebat.
16 Adoniiah, Biguai. Adin,
7 Ater, Hisctah, Azur.
18 Hoditalh. alumni, Besai,
19 Pariph, Anathoth Nebat,
20 Magpias, Mesullam, Hezir.
21 Mesesabel. Sado, Jaddua,
22 Phelatia Hanan, Anaata,
23 Holca, Hanania, asub.
24. Halohes, Phaleha, Sobek,
25 Rebum, halebna Maasia.
26 Abia Aanan, and Anan.
Ds 27 Malluch-Harim. and Waana:
28 And the other people the priestes Les ultes, porters, singers, Nethinims and allthey that had separated them selues

gooduesse thereof. be baronet beholde there are we
37. And great is the increase of it vn kinges whom thou hast let ouer hd caule ofour sinnes, and they haue domi: pa 11 a Bani and cattatle, enen pil Dem selues: and i aa e W
3 o becaule of all this mak
Ture conenaunt and write it, 2 5 tes, leuites, and priestes, seale vntoit.

The. x. aper.

Che names ok them that sealed the couenaunt bet weene God and the people.

from the people of the landes vnto the law of God, with their wyues their sonnes, and their daughters, as many as could vnderstand, 9

29 And their lordes that had rule of thé, receaued it for their brethren: And they tame to sweare, € to binde them selues

with an oth to walke in gods lawe, which was geuen by Moyses the seruaunt of God, and that they would obserue and do according vnto all the com: maundementes, iudgementes and statutes ot the Lorde our God:

Joel f

30 * And that we woulde not geue our Davi.

daughters vnto the people ok the lande, neither to take their daughters for our sonnes.

31 And if the people okthe land brought an

ware on the Sabbath, and all maner vitailes to fell, that we would not take it of them on the Sabbath and on the.

CU xx v..

Leui. holy dayes, and that we would let the seuenth pere be kree, and the debtes of euery person.

And Wwe decreed a statute vpon dur selues, to gene verely the third part ol a ficleto the ministration in the houle 0 dur God, e
33 To the chewe bread to the daply meate

offering, to the dayly burnt offering, 5 the Sabbathes, of the new Moonc : and feaste dayes, and to the winde that were fanctified, & to the ss of attonement,to reconfile Jlcael nec al, and to all the bufines in the houle oi our God.

34 And we cast the lot among the Ni
Leultes, and the people, for theo 0 the of the wood to be brought bre 1 houlse of our God from pere (0 patie ter the houles of our father, ght

are pient at tones appoynted poche aulter 999 7 Lode God, as it

N itten in the lalbe: and fobsing the first frites of our land,
‘ and the firstlinges ok our kruites of all

trees vert by vert vnto the house of the

Tode. thew wohl rstborne of our sonnes, and aur (as it is written in the law) and the firsklünges of our oren and of our fheepe , whiche we shoulde bring to the houle of our God unte the priestes

that minister in the house of our God.
And that we choulde being the first frultes ok our dough and our Heaue ofscringes, and the tes ot all maner of trees, o wine allo and of oyle, vnto che fa pjlestes to the chestes of

inthe cities of Juda.
S| Md tHe rulers of the
Wr he) people Divelt at Hleru-
+ 2 salem: The other peo-
18 Alle allo cal lottes,
2 = || that jt, fen one part should go to hie
— rusalem into the holy cltie to dwell, and nyne partes to be in

the cities. N
2 And the people thanked all the men
Chat were Willing to dwel at Hierulalk.
3 Thelscare the heades of the prouinte that dwelt in Hierulalem, and in the citics of Juda, tuerp one in his pollel-

lion, and in thtir cities: they of Ifsrael, the prestes, Teuites, the Rethinims,

4. Andat hierulalem owwelt tertayne of chechüdren of Juda, and of Bentamm:
Dithe children ol Juda, Athaiah, the dune ol UN ʒ sia, the sonne of Zacharia, the sonne of Amaia. the lonne of Saz

nf haves,

nd Paatia the sonne of Waruch, the
1 Chol Hola, the sonne of Data,
Be the et Abala , the lone of Jola-
:; Aer lonne of Zatharia, the fonne of s Allthese weretl
1 hat e a thildren of Phares nen. chte lte and epg ht vattaunt

r

7 Tbete are the children ok Weniamun:

the house or

ethechildzen of Solomons sernauntes.

Phatia,the forme of Mahalaleel, of the

lerulalem, euen foure

lx}. our God, andthe tythes of our lande vnto the Leuttes, that the Wewres might haue the tythes in all che sat our nunistrattoͤn. ;

38 And the prielt the sonne of Aaron hat: be wich the Leuttes when the Leustes take tythes: so that the Leutes ay bring vp the tythes of their tythes vnto the houle of dur God to the fore houles and to the treasure houses.

39 For the children ok Ysrael and the children ok Lent’ shall bring vp the heane offeringes of the torne, wine, and oyle, ar biito the store houses, there as are the veslels of the santtuarie and the priestes that nunister, and the porters and fine gers, and we will not foglake the House of our God.

The. xi. Chapter. sito dwelled in Hierulatens after it was buplded. 21 And who

Satu the sonne ok Mesullam, the fonite of Jord, the sonne ol Pedaia, the sonne of Colaia, the sonne of Masia, the sonne of Ithtel, the sonne of lat.

3 And after hym Gabal, Sellai, nine han: dred and twentie and eyghht.

9 And Joel the wnne of Zichzi had the ouersight or them: and Juda the sonne

of Senua was the second ouer the citic. Lae lo Ok the priestes: Pedatah tise sonne of

Joiarib, Jachin, n Saraiah the fonne of Helkia, the sonne of Mesullam, the sonne ol Zadot, the fonne of Meraioth, the sonne of Achitob, was chieke in the boule ok God,
12 And their brethren that dyd the worke in the temple, epght hundred and twentie and two: And Adaia the fonné of croham, the sonne of Pelaliah, the onne of Ami, the sonne or Zachari, the sonne of Phashur, the sonne of Malchia,
13 And his brethren chiefe among the fathers, two hundred and fourtie ¢ two:
And Amatat the sonne of Azrael, the sonne of Ahalat, the sonne ot Moltlemoth, the sonne of Immer, C
14 And their bretheen valiaunt men, an hundred and twentie and eyght: Aud their onerfear was Zabbdlel a sonne ot one ofthe great men.

IS Okthe Leuites: Semeia the solnieok p..

16 Ant rit atha 3 5 J N : i) ic

fight of the dutwarde businelle of the house of God.

17 And Mathania, the fonne of Micha, the sonne of Zabdi, the sonne ol Alaph,
Was the principall to begin the thankesgeuing and prayer: and Wacbucia the leconde among his brethren, and Abda the sonne of Sammua, the sonne of Gaz

lal, the sonne of Jeduthunn.
18 All the TLeuttes in the holy atic, were

two hundred foure score and foure.

bes ig And the porters Atcub and Talmon,

and their brethren that kept the portes, were an hundred and seuentie and two.
20 As for the residue of Israel, of the priestes and Leuites, they were in althe cities of Juda, euerp one in his inheriwe taäunte. a : —
21 And the Hethinims dwelt in Ophel, and Ziha and Gispa Were fet oner the
Methininis. *
22 The ouersear ofthe Leuites at Hierusalem was Uzi, the sonne of Wani, the foune of Pafabia , the sonne of Matthania, the fonne of Micha: Df the children of Alaph, fingers were ouer the bulines in the house of God: —
23 Forit was the kinges counnaundement concerning them that the singers Mould deale fapthfully cuery dap, as Was actording.

The xii. Chapter.

chieke of the Lenites , had the ouer- 24. And Pathata the ldnne ot @eledaca

of the children of “ray the sonne of

Inda, was next the king in ar matters ehen hinges

concerning the people.

25 And inthe villages intheir landes some

of the chidren of Juda that were wih dut in the townes of their land dwelt a
Biriath arba, andinthe willages therok: and in Pibon and in the villages therok, and at Jetabʒeel and in the pi: lages therofz A 5
26 At Jesua, Moladath, Bethphalet:
Rg villages Doon :
23: kKlag, and Poconah, an villages therof: 0 5 12
29 And at En rimmon, Zarah, Jerimuth,

30 Zonda, Odollan, e in their villages,

at Lachis, and in the fleldes therok: at
Aseka, and in the villages thereok, and they dwelt from BWeerleba vnto the val: ley of Hinnom.

31 The children also ok wWeniamin from
Geba, dwelt at Machmas, Aia, Bethel, and in their villages,

32 And at Anathoth, Hob, Ananiah,

33 4302, Ramah, Gethaim

34. Hadid, Zebolm, Peballath,

35 ha , and Ono, in the carpenters bat

ep. 2
36 And the Leuites had poslession both in Juda and in Weniamin.

Che priestes and Leuttes, whiche came with Jorobabel vnto Pierutalem are num

bred. 27 and the wall is dedicated.
Hele are the priestes

lathiel: and with Je-

ua, Sarata, Jeremia,

—— and Eldras,

2 Amarxia, Malluch, Hattus,

3 Sechania, Rehmn, Merimoth,

4. Iddo, Genthon, Abia,

5 Mianun, Madata, Welga,

6 Semaia, Jotarib, Hedaia,

7 Salu, Amok, Helkia, and Jedata:
These were the heades among the priestes and their brethren in the dapes of Jesua.

3 The Neuites were these: Jesua, Wennul, Cadmtel, Sarebia, Juda, and Ma-

thania, whiche was once Lehe alle Jot thankelgeuung, he and his brethen. xg
9 Watbutio, and anni, anid thet bie thren, were about them in the watcher
10 Jesua begat Joakim, a 25 begat Elialib, and liasib begat Jo 8 is
1 e aud Jon than begat Jaddua. |
12 Juthe babes of Joakim werb thee che chieke fathers among the dere
11055 Saraia, Marala: vnder mi, Hananta: iz Under Eldras, esullam: nder Ama ria, Jehoanan: .
14. Under Milito, Jonathan: vnder ® bania, Joseph:

15 Under oun, dna:vnder Paraloth
Pelka:

16 Under

In the tone of Suat; Weerseba, poy

16 Under Ido, Zatharic: vnder Genefullan — dae Abi Zehn nder Minlanin,
17 nd Poadia, Pütal: en
18 Ae ae an emata, Jehonathau: ,
19 1 Joilarib, Mathenai:bnder Jai i:
„einde Selat, Vella : under Amok,

D 21 cornet helchta, Balabila : under Faz daia, Mathanael. f ’

22 Andin the time of Cliahb, Joiada, Johanan, and Jadua, were the chiefe faz thers among the Leuttes € the puestes
Witten, in the raligne of Darius the
Perlian. ;

23 The children of Leut the printipall far thers, Were Weitten in the tronicles, vntill the time ot Jonathan the lonne of
Elialib. ö

24. And thele were the chiefe among the
Leultes:hasabia, Serebia, and Jesua the sonne ol Cadnuel, and their brẽthren intheir presente, to geue prayse and thankes,accozding as Daum the man of
God had ordepned it, one watch ouer az gaint another.

25 Mathanta, Bacbhukia, Obadia, Mesullam, Talnion, and Actub, were posters
‘Inthe watch at the thresholdes of the gates. -

701, Shout

01, Reagihcmard,

26 Abele were in the dapes of Jdiakhim

the sonne ol Jesua, the sonne of Jolt-

det, and in the dayes ok Pehemia the

faptapne, cot the priest Esdras the scribe.

27 Andin the dedication of the wall at
Hiernlalen they sought the Leuites ont

ofall their places that they might be brought to Hierusalem, to kepe the dedi:

now, kation and gladnelle with thantelgedeu, Ainges, ¢ singing, With tyimbales, plalterles, and harpes.

E 28 Andthe children of the singers gathered them selues together from euery

ibe, ont ok the plapne countrep about

lerulalem, and from the bi f

°° Ftom the houle of Sagal, and out ok theconntreys ol Seba, and Almaueth.

„and the pueltes and Leut . tified & ¢ elutes were puaud chr wal. be people, the gates,

3 And J hrought tl Jude he printes ol Juda bpon the Wall, and appoynted twogeent

2.EIdras.

heil.

qupers olmen to geue thankes, whiche lent on the right hande of the wall to:
Warde the doung gate.

32 And akter them Went Hosaia, and halfe of the princes ol Juda,

33 And Afaria,efdras and Melullam,

34, Huda, Wentamm, Sensela e Jeremi,

35 And tertapne of the pnestes chudren, with trumpettes: namely Zacharie the foline of Jonathan, the sonne of Se: meia, the sonne of Mathanta the sonne of Michaia, the sonne ol Zattur, the sonne ol Asaph, f

36 And his hiethzen, emetg, Alarael,
Hclalat, Sualal, Maai, Nathanael and

uda, and Hanant, with the musitall inunientes of Dauid the man ok God:
And Eldras the lcribe went before them.

37 And belide the wel gate, they went vp duer against them vpon the fteppes of the citic of Dauid at the goyng bp of the
Wall, beponde the boule of Dauld, vnto the water gate eastwarde.

38 The other quyer of them that gaue thaukes Went ouer against them, and
JJ after them, and the bate part of the people ppon the wall beyond the fox: - nace gate, vntill the brode wall, ö

39 And beyonde the port of Ephraum and beponde the old gate, beyonde the fishe gate, and the toe of Panancel, ethe towre of Mea, euen butothe theepe gate and they stoode stül in the puson gate. o. er:

40 And so stoode the two qupers of them dad. that gaue thankes in the boule of God, and J, the halfe of the rulers wü me.

41 And the priestes, namely Eliakim,
Maasia, Mimamin, Michala, Elionat,
Zachart, c Hanania, with trumpettes:

42 And Maasia, Senieia, Eleaser, W331;

J thobanan, Deledialy Elam, c Eser:
And the fingers lange onde, hauing
Jelrahiah lor their onerstar.

43_ And the fame day they offered great G satrifites, and reiopted: for God had ge? uen them great glaͤdnesle, so that both the wiues € children were iopkull, ⁊ the nurth ok Pierulalẽ was hearde farce ol.

44 At the same time were the men appoynted ouer the trealure houles, wherju were the heaue offeringes, the fil linges, and the ohh at they shoulde gather them outof the fieldes about the cities, to distribute them vnto the piettes and Lenttes according to the lawe:for Juda was glad of the priestes
AND Teultes that lerued.

2 45 And

1. Par. 23.3.

Nam. 23 4.

2 7 And J gat knowledge ofthe euyll that

AL ie SeRH
~ [Pisa bog A

45 And there stoode and wapted vponthe

i * 2. Esdras. = *

vnto God.

office of their God, whiche is a pure ol- 47 In the time of Zorobabel and Re e:

fice, both the fingers and posters, after

the connnaundement of Damd, and ok

Solomon his sonne: 5
46 For in the time of Dauid and Alaph,

ok olde were the chieke lingers tounded

the songes of praple and thankelgeuing

The. xiii. Chapter.

Che lawe is read. Chep separate trom them all Craungers,. them that breathe the Sabbath. zo In ordinaunce to serue God,

Md that day dyd they

8 readin the booke of
8 8 MPoyses in the audi-
„ente ol the people, and therein was kounde

is 4

i

shoulde neuer come into the congregation of God,

2 Betausethey met not the thudren of PE rael with bread and water, but hired
Walaam against them that he Mould curfe them: and our God turned the curse into a blessing.

3 Nowe when they had hearde the law, they separated from Ilrael euery one that had mixt him selfe therin.

4. And before this had the pret Ellafib the ouersight of the treasurie of the
Houle of onr God , and he was kynlman vnto Lobta,

And had made hyma great chamber,

and there had they akore time layed the offringes krankencence, vessels, and the tythes of cozne, wine, and oyle attording to the commaundementes geuen to the

Teuites fingers and porters, and the

heaue offringes of the priestes. ö

6 But in all this time was not Jat Prez

rulalem: for inthe two and thirtte pere

of Artaxerxes king of Wabplon, came

Into the king, æ after certayne dayes

Obtapned J utente ok the king to come to Hierusalem.

Ellasib dyd for Lobia , in that he had made hym a chamber in the court ok the house of God,

8 And it greeued me sore: therefore F cast foorth all the vessels of the honse of Xo: bia out ofthe chamber: f

9 And commaunded them to clenle the anibers, and thyther brought Jagalne the veslels of the house of God,
With the meate offring, and the intenle.

nua, did all they of Picael gene po 4

vnto the fingers and porters 4 8 his portion: and they gaue tythes onto the Leuites e the Leuites cane tythes againe vnto the children ol Aaron,

ij Hehemia teproueth

lo And Jperceaued that the ortlons of the Tenites had not ben genen fie, and that euery one was fied to his land, euenthe Leuttes and fingers that ere: tuted the wozge.

n Then reproued I the rulerg, and sayd:
Why is the houle of God foxfakens And
IJ gathered them together, and set them in their place. —

12 Hyenbzonghtall Juda the tythes ol alts and wine, and oyle, onto the trea: ure. 1

13 And J made treasures ouer the treafure eũen Selemlah the priest, and Za: dot the scribe, and ofthe Leuites, Phadaia:and vnder their hand was Hanan the sonne of Zacur, the fonne of Mathama :for they were counted fapthful, and their office was to distribute (the pon tions) vnto their brethren.

14 Thinke vpon me O my God herein, ¢

and wype not out my mercte that J ar.

haue she wed on the house of my God,

and on the offices therof. .
15 And the same time sawe Fin Juda some treading wine presses on the Sabvath, and bringing in cheues, and which laded asses allo With wine, grapes, and kigges, and all burthens, and ma them into Hiernsalem vpon the oe bath dap: And F rebuked them earn 0 ly ebene dap that they solde the bit? taples

16 There dwelt men of Tyre allo 1227 in, which brought fit anbalt mane 0 ware, and loldeonthe sabbath em the chuldre of Huda, euen in Pera ;

17 Then reproued F the rulers ont fayd vnto thent:nabat eupl thing A ay that pe do, e breake the Sabbath 5

18 Dpd not pour fathers euen thu pon our God brought all this plague the vs, and vpon thtscitice m e that 2 wrath moze pet vpon Isracl, in breake the Sabbath: 10 Aud

nthe portes of Hierulalem be-
" bee Davie in the euening befoze the Sabbath, to fut thegates, and arged that they Toul not be opened til after the Sabbath:

and lone of my seruauntes set I atthe

8, that there shoulde no burthen be galt in on the Sabbath day.
20 Then remapned the chapmen and marchauntes orice 02 tiple ouer night without Hierulalem with all maner of

wares.

en reproued I them fore , andfapde

oa 8 chem why tary pe all night about the wall- If ve do it once againe, J will

lay handes bpon pou: Fromthattune foorth tame they no more on the Sab-

t > 4

12 4053 sald vnto the Leuites, that they shonsd clense them lelues, and that they shoulde conte and kepe the gates, to hajoive the Sabboth dap: Thinke vpon me O my God concerning this also, and spare me, according to thy great mertie.

23 Inthole dayes also sawe J Jewes that marted wyues of Aldod, of Ammon, and of Moab,

24. And their childzen spake halfe in the
{peach of Asdod, and could not speake in

the Jewes language, but attording to zi And to offer the wood at times appopnted, and the fickfruites: Thin le

the language of the one people and ol the other people.

Then boobs ek Efdras, otherwyse

commaunded to shut

25 Then F reproued them, and cursed

them, and fmote certapne men ok them, and made them bare: and toke an oth of theinby God, Be halt not gene your daughters vnto their sonnes „ neither hail pe take their daughters vnto pour sonnes, or for pour selues.

26 Dpd not Solomon the king of Ilrael ii Reg

sinne by thefe thinges z and pet among

many heathen was there no king like

him, which was deare vnto his God
€ God made hym king ouer all Ilrael: men caused him to linne.

27 Shall we then obep vnto vou to do el this great eupll, and to transgresse against our God, and marie straunge wpues: N '

28 And one ofthe hiner of Jeholada the sonne ol Ellasib the bye priest, was the sonne in law of Sanabailat the Horonite:vut I chased him from me.

29D my God, thinke thou vpon then that defile the presthod, and the touenaunt of the presthod and ofthe Leuites.

30 Thus clensed I them from all such as
Were outlandishe, and appoynted the tourses of the priestes and Leuites, eue-

kp one in his office: a

thou vpon nie O my God for 5 belt.

called the booke of Nehemia.

and “pet neuertheilesse outlandiche wo- m Ree «iz

hc booke of Ether,”

The firft Chapter.

Bing Ahatuerugs maketh a ropall feat. io Wherebnto the queene wrallht wil not come -
19 fo which caule the is diuorced. 20 Che kinges decree touching the preeminence of man,

that inthe dapes ok Ahaluerus ,
Weer (this geste bl tus whiche raig-
Jb Ey ned from India
8 as) onto Ethiopla, a h ouer an hundzed and twentie and seuen prouintes) 6
2 Euen intholse dayes when the king Ahasuerus fate on his seate ropall, which was in Sulaͤnthe chieke citie:
3 Inthe third pere ok his raigne, he made

ã feast vnto all his princes c seruauntes:

and the mightie nien of Perlia and Media, the captaynes also and rulers of his tountreps were bekore hym. N

4 And he shewed the richesse and glorie of his kingdome, and the glorious worhip of his greatnesle many dayes long,
Ceuen] an hundzed and kourescoze dapes. 1 |

5 And When thele dapes were expired, the king made a feast vnto al the people that
Were in Sulanthe chiefe citte, both vnto great ¢ mall, seuen dapes long, in the
15 0 the garden by the kinges pa-

ace.

6 Where there hanged white, greene, and yelowe clothes, fastened with cordes of finefiike and purple, in filuer ringes, vpon pillers of marble stones: The
“benches alfo were of golde and siluer

f made bpona paucment of “greene,

eyecare, White, pelowe, and blacke marble.

biewe cer. 7 And they dranke in vessels ol gold, and

W thaunged vessel after vessel, and royal wine in aboundaunce according to the power of the king.

8 And the drinking was by an order, none might compell: for fo the king had appoynted to all the officers of his houle, that they shoulde do according to euery mans pleafure,

Oz, blewoet,
02 violte colaured clochze

© Da, beddes oz tables.

T came to patfe .

eee e men in the palace 2

ues 5 in the palace of Aba
10 And on the seuenth day when the kin was mery alter the wine he n
Ded Hehuma, Wistha, Harbona, wig

; tha, Abagthan, Zethar, and Charchas,

the senen chamberlayns that did lerulce in the prelence of king Abatuerns, n To fetch the queene Mastht with the erowue regall into the kinges prelence, that he might shewe the people t princes her fairenesse:for (he was beautifull.
12 But the queene Gah would not come at the kinges worde by his chamber:

lapnes: Then was the king berp woth,

and his indignation kindled in hym.

133 And the king spake to the Wyle men which knewe the times (for fo was the
Ringes nianer towardes all that ünewe the lawe and the iudgementes:

14 And the next vnto hym were, Carsena, Sethar, Admata, Thersis, Mares,
Marlena, and Memuchan, the seuen

rinces of Perfia and Media, whiche awe the hinges face, and fate the first in thekingdome.)

15 What, chall we do vnto the queene Tla-
{tht actording to the lawe, vecaute the dyd not according to the worde of the king Abaluerus whiche he conmaun-

ded by His chamberlapnes-

16 And Hemuchan aunswered before the king e the princes: The queene ath hath not onelp dont eupll against the king , but also against all the e and against all the people that arc! all the prouintes of king Abaluerug an

7 Foz this decde of the queen hat come abrode bnto all women, so ae they Chall despile their hut The before their eyes, and fall fay Ualtht king Ahasuerus commaunded bm the queene to be bought in before YEN but che woulde not come. 18 Aud

a

al the printesses in Persia and
2 Sidel perle this day vnto al the

i nes when they heare ofthis
5 mean thus shal there arise

eoft nur delpefulnesse and wath.

19 Ik it pleale the king, let there go

a tommanndement from hym, and

ve Written actording to the lawes uche Perlians and Dedlans, and not

robe tranlgrelled that Clatthi come no

moze before king Ahaluerus, and let the

king geue her royal estate vnto an other

etter then she. .
0 en this tommaundement of

~ ter

rye ung which halbe made, s pubüiched ;

The. ii. Chapter.”

the queene is put away ·certeyne young mapdes are brought to the king. 14 Esther
Raitt hing, and is made queene. 22 Mardocheus dilcloseth vnto the Eng tholethat

woulde betray hem.

A SS Itter thele actes, when

l Res) / 90 the displealure of king

a aN He! Ahaluerus Was nove

poner: I = oe. alaped, he thought

her.
2 Then layde thekinges seruauntes that minustred vnto hym: Let there be faire poung virgins fought for the king,

And let the king appopnt officers in all the prouinces of his empire, that they should bring together al the faire young

womens buylding, vnder the hande ol
Hegu the kinges chamberlayne that
A — „to geue them their
“apparcil: a a
4. And that the mayden which pleased the king shauld be queene in Clattbis steede.
And this pleased the king, and he did fo.

O thin beta

tayne Herve, whole name was Mar-
Dotheus, the lone of Jar, the sonne ol
7 » the lonne ol Eis, a mano Je-
Which was taryed away from Hieru-

Meg Le,
Ju. ail. a.

nla the king of Juda Was led awa whom Nabuchodonolo tl o
B Babplontarpedthence: 1

US Dntles daughter: for he had neither er no: mother, andthe was a faire as cautifull mayden, whom
US (when her father e mother Were

virgius vnto Sulan the head citie to the

{ale with che captiuitie, when Jeko-

bpon Uasthi, x what he had done, x what
Was decreed against

5 In the atic ol Sulan there Was ater-

Mardo-

vil. throughout all his empire Whiche is

great, all women chall holde their Dut bandes in Honour both among great

21 Thls laping pleased the king and the princes, and the king did
Worde of@emucan ro ital aia

22 Foz he lent letters foorth into all the binges prouintes, ita euery lande accor: 8 ding to the wepting therof, and to euer people alter their language, that euery mau choulde be lorde in his owne houle: and this to be publithed after the lan:

Juage of his people. N

dead) receaued for his owne daughter.

3. So when the kinges commaundement and tominission was published, and maz. ny mapdens were brought together into the titie ol Sufan vnder the hand of Hegal, Esther was brought also vnto the kinges house vnder the hande of Megai the keper of the women.

And the mayden plealed hym, andthe

kuounde fauour in his sight: and he can-
{ed ornamentes tobe geuen her speedplv, and such thinges as belonged to her, and appoynted her seuen comely map: - - dens out of the kinges house, r fauou- . red both her and her gentlewomen singularly in the boule of the women.

Jo But Esther shewed not her people and a her kinred: for Mardocheus had charged her that she shoulde not tell it.

11 And PMardocheus walked euery day bekore the court ok the womens house, that he might knowe howe Esther did,

and What shoulde become ok her.

12 And when the appoynted time of enery mapden came that fhe shonlde go in to the king Ahasuerus, after that she had ben twelue monethes according to the mauer or the women kor fo werethe dapes of their purifitation accomplisled, fire monethes with oyle ofnurre, and fire monethes with lweete odoures, and in the purifipug ofthe women:

W

7d Venorherpadalixehatis ether) 13 And thus wentthe mapdens dato the

king) whatsdener she requured, that mult be geuen her to go with her out of the Womens buplding vnto the kinges

alate. _"
4 j ¥4 14 In

Ox, her thinges for puruicatror,

Gaue charge

to her, and to her mayden, ol the best in the

Esther.

E

ay

niorowe she returned into the seconde house ofthe wonien abpding vnder the hande of Saalgas the kinges chamberlayne, which kept the concubines: And

she tame in vnto the king no more, ex-

tept it pleased the king to haue her, and that fhe were called by name.

Nobe whenthe tourse tame of Esther

the daughter of Abihail, the vncle of
Mardocheus (which had receaued her as his owne daughter) that che choulde tome in vnto the king, che desired nothing but what Hegai the binges chant berlapne the keper of the women fade:
And Esther found favour in the fight of all them that loked vpon her.
16 And Esther was taken vnto king Ahasuerus into his house ropall, in the tenth moneth (which is the moneth Tebeth) in the seuenth pere ol his raigne.

And the king loued Esther aboue all the women and she found grace and fauour in his fight moze then all the virgins, lo that he fet the trowne of the kingdome vpon her head, and made her queent in steede ol Mastht. N

all his princes and fernaunte

featt was becaule of Esther, an cau the prouintes to be in quietnesse, t gaue giltes, as became the ropaltie of a king.
19 And wheuthe virgins were gathered

14 JInthe euening che went, and onthe 13 And the king made a great feast vnd —

together the setonde time, Mardocheus

fate in the kinges gate.
20 And as vet had not esther chewed her kinred ¢ her people, accozdingas Mardacheus had biddenher: for Esther dyd alter the worde Of Mardocheus like ag it she had ben pet vnderhis gouernaunce.

21 At the fame time (whyle Mardocheus D

fate inthe binges gate ) two of ß kinges thamberlapues, Bigthan and Theres, which kept the doore, were wroth, and sought to lap their handes on the king
Ahalsuerus: ö

22 Whereof allo Mardocheus gat knowledge, and tolde it vnto queene Ether, aud Esther tertified the king therok in
Mardotheus name.

23 And when inquilition was made, it was founde so, and they were both
Hanged on tree: and it was wutten in the Chronicles before the king.

T he iii. Chapter.

1 Baman akter he was eralted , obteined of the king that all the Jewes shoulde be put to death because Mardocheus had not done him worship as other had.

Ster these actes, dyd king Ahasuerus prove mote Paman the sonne
O of Amadatha the A-
Il gagtte, and set hym on hie, and set his seate a-

fon
N
S rad s tw in d
Ss
S x

Mardocheus bowed not the knee, neither dyd hym reuerente.
Then the kinges seruauntes whiche were in the kinges gate sald vnto Mardocheus: Why tranlgreslest thou the klnges tommaundement- 8
4 And though they spake thts dayly vnto hym, pet woulde he not heare them, therfore they tolde haman, that they might see howe Mardocheus matters woulde stande, for he had tolde them that he was a Jelbe.

5 And when Haman sawe that Mardo-

u boue alt the princes

theus bowed not the knee vnto him, nor dyd reuerence vnto hymn, he was full of indignation,

6 And thought it to litle to lay handes onely on Mardocheus, foz they had shewed him the nation of Mardocheus: wherelore he fought to destroy all the
Jewes that were throughout the whole empire ok Ahasuerus, and that were of the nation of Mardocheus. 8

In the firstmoneth( that is, the monet)
Ailan / in the twelfth pere ol king Ahasuerus, they cast Phur, that is alot, be fore aman from day to dap, and from moneth to moneth to the twelfth moneth, that is, the moneth Adar.

3 And Haman fapde nto king Ahasuerus: There is here a people rf tred abrode, and difpearted amonga 5 people in all the prouinces of 4 — empire, and their lawes are oe from all people, and do not alter tbe hinges lalbes , therefore it is a A
Binges profite to suffer them alter maner. „ Jr

¢ pleate the bing, let it be Weitten

: arenes may be destroyed: and fo wyll

wape dolvne ten thouland talents of

luer bythe handes ol them that haue

the charge of this bulines, to bring it into the kinges trealurie.

And the kung tobe. is ring from his

3 hand, € gaue it bnto Haman the sonne

of Almadatha the Agagite, the Jewes

encmie. Ah . '
And the king faide vnto Haman: Let dhelllerbechne, € do with that people as it pleaseth ther...

n Then were the hinges scribes called on thethicteenth day of the fir moneth, ¢ there was Wettten attording as Haman commaunded vnto all the kinges offi-

ters, and to the taptaynes that were o-

tier euery prouinte, and to the rulers ol tuery people in the tountryes on euerp side actording to the Writing therok, and to euerp nation after their language, in

q Te. iii.

the name of ting Ahasuerus was it waten and {eaten with the kinges ring. el And the letters Were fent by poltes into all the kinges prouinces, to rote out, to kill, and to destroy all Jewes both poung and olde, children and women in one dap(namelr! vpon the thirteenth dap of the twelkth moneth( which is the moneth Adar) c to spople thẽ as a prap.
14. This was the summe of the wating, that there should be a commaundement geuen in al prouimtes, and publiched vnto all people, that they should be redy against the same day.
15 And the postes Went in all the hatte according to the kinges commaundement, and in Sulan the chiefe citie was the tommaundement deuised: And the king and Haman sate and dranke when in the meane time the titie ok Sulan
Was dilquieted,

Chapter. |

saardochyous geueth the queene knowledge of the cruell decree ol the king again the Jewes. 16 She wylleth that eher pray Coz her. 4 a

Hen Mardocheus per-

teaued all that was

A done, he rent his clo-

Y thes and put on sacke-
Ty] cloth with affhes, and

went out into the mid-

—dest ok the citie, and erped loude and lanientablp,

2 And tame before the kinges gate: but he might not enter within the kinges
Me, because he had sackcloth on.

3 And in all proumtes, countries and plakes, as farre as the kinges worde ¢ cont: maundement extented, chere was great lamentatiö among the Jewes, fatting, weeping, and mourning, and many lap inlatkeclothes and in alches.

oe Esthers maydens and her any

erlapnes, tame and told it her: Then

the qu ö and twee queene exceedinglp attonied,

rom him: But nottake them, * Daa eg would

pet called €fther Pathach one of the er, and gaue him acommaunde-

ment vnto Pardocheus t o know what lt was wherefozehn did ee .

3 9 o Pathach went foorth to ardo-

e lent rayment that Mardochei aulde put on, and lap the sackeloth

thamberlames which stoode be-

cheus, vnto the streete of the citie which was before the kinges gate:

5 And Pardocheus tolde him of althat 2

had come vnto him, ofp summe of filner that Haman had pzonuled to wape downe into the kinges treasurie, betause of the Jewes ik he would destroy them.

8 And he gaue him the copie ofthe kinges tommaundement that was deulled at
Sulan to destrop them, that he might
Herve it vnto Esther, and to speake to her, and charge her that she should go tn vnto the king, e mabe her prayer and supplitation vnto him for her people.

9 And when Hathach came in, he tolde
Esther the wordes of Mardocheus.

10 And againe & sther spake vnto Hathach and tommmañded him to fap vnto Mardochens:

1 All the kinges seruauntes, e the people in the prouintes of the king knowe, that whosoeuer conimeth Within the tourte vnto the king, whether it be nian

‘oz woman, Which is not called, the tömaundement is, that the same Mail dye, except the king holde out the golden septer vnto him, for then he shall lyue: As lor me, I haute not ben called to tome in vnto the king now this thirtie Dayes.

12 And they certified Wardochne a

u

Ot, there is a lawe of his. :

~ Efther. nt

Esthers wordes. this aunswere: ——. z And Pardochensbadlayagainebns 16 Go thou thy wap, and gather togeto Esther: Thinke not With thylelle ther all the Jewes that are founde at

that thou shalt estape in the kinges Sulan, and fast ve for nie, that pe tate

house moze then all the Jewes. a not and drinke not in three dapes nei-

14. Foz if thou holdest thy peate at this ther day nor night, J and my mapdens

gtd e time, then shall the Jewes haue heipe Wyll falt lnewyle: and o wyll J gop,

̃ and deliueraunte out ot an other place, to the king, Which thing pet is contrary

aud thou and thy fathers boule halbe to the commaundement: andif Y pe.

destroyed: And who knoweth whether rishe, J perishe. b 5

ren thou art come to the kingdome for 17 So Mardocheus went his way, and

uch eee. this canfes lake: 1 did according to al that Esther had com -
15 Eskher bad them geue Mardocheus maunded him. :

q The v. Chapter. ;
¢ we * . .
1 Efther entreth into the hing, and biddeth him and Haman to a keaste. i Hamat prepareth a gallous sor Mardocheus. N

e e
. 42 El 5 105 4 an, an 880 e i 7a 8 K
0 oi Mes Sp cll * * . of
U t 1 2 2 * e : = Pe Sed * .

* °. 7 RT Ser N 705 * N r e g a N

0 ene

r E N W ae 45 iQ * FEN | i Sho Mes _% 7 i | d , iis belli iow lt ont nr 8 1 ff ) N Ni i
> I 5d on the third datt — Wy lt thou queene Efther and whatre-

came to passe, that Est- quirest thou: (ackej enen the halfe ol the

her put on her royall empire, and it chalbe geuen thee.

4 And Esther aunswered: Jfiitpleale the king, let the king and aman come

this day vnto the banket that J haue

prepared for him.

5 And the king lade: Caule Maman to make haste, that he may do as Ether hath aide. So the king and Yamal tame to the banket that Esther had pre-

6 And the king faive vnto Esther at the banket of wine: What is thy petition, 25

So Esther stept foorth and touched the that it may be geuen theca water

top of the ftepter. quirest thou Ik it be euen the halle oi

Then lade the kung vnto her: What the enpire, it hall e done. 1 Then

naunfivereD Esther, and sald: My den, and ail the thinges wherem tl
7 Anon and desire is, 7 5 king had promoted him fo w and

P aue founde grate in the sight ot how that he had let him aboue thepns „ing, annititpleatetbekingtogeuc kes and lernauntes ofthe king.

10 mypetition, and cofulfiliny tequett, 12 Haman salde moreouer: Bed, Esther thenlet the king and Daman come to the queene did let no man come in with the banket that J shall prepare forthẽ: the king vnto the bancket that she had and so wyl J do to mozowe, as the king prepared, except me:and to morowe am hath lade. . bidden vnto her allo with the king.

en went Haman kfoorth the lame 3 Wut in all this am J not satilfied, as
? dap lopfull and mer in his wunde: Wut long as Pee Mardocheus the Jewe C when the fame aman sawe Mardo- sitting at the kinges gate. cheus in the hinges gate, that he stoode 14. Then saide Zares his wyle and all not vp no: moued for him, he was fulof his kriendes vnto him: Let them make indignation at Mardocheus. a galous of fiftie cubttes hie, and tome: o Neuerthelesle, Pamian refrained him robbe speake thou vnto the king that feife, and when he came home he sent Mardocheus map be hanged thereon: and called for his friendes and Zares then go thou in meryly with the king his ple. *. vnto the banket. And Haman was well u And Haman tolde them of the glory of content withall, and tauled the galous

his rtithes, and the multitude ok his chile to be made.

Je. vi. (Dapter.

Che king turneth ouer the chronicles, and kindeth the fidelitic of Mardocheus; voand commaundeth Haman tocaule Mardocheus ko be had in honour.

n 1 i " 5 i]
Fey
N i

i

N. ay) eee
5 inal

N

ite 7 10
N — i nf 3 8
Hj “ar int a ka
* (a N 5 } | x
N g e
Imi ih ao i * ik
— i
AI n : = Ela
BS fl

Te

N VE ie

Ss e
= sl : ee 1 at DN a oe
N He

ane 7

r

—— LETC

*° d U ay Ui A
I ay! T 1 . .
Hin tia? ky ne — 0 i 7 70 ill} 1 !

SN he fame night tounde na e Theres the binges two chamber’

1 12 commaunded to (oughtto laye handes on king Ahalue-

e being the chronicles tus.

8 GaN and ftozies: and they 3 And the king fade: what honour and bere read before the dignttie Hath ben geuen to Mardoche-

‘sin 2 Then it ing. us therfore? Then {aide the kinges {ers

Pardoch Was founde witten howe nauͤtes that nunistred buto hun: There

. eus had tolde that Bigtha- ts nothing at all done for him. 4 Am

not the king leepe, and lapnes which kept the thzecholdes, . 6,

a

court: (for Haman was come into the tourt without before the kinges house, that he might speake vnto the king to hang Mardocheus on the tree that he had prepared for him.)

5 And the kinges seruauntes laide vnto him: Weholde, Haman Kandeth inthe
. the king saide: let him come n. a

6 And when haman tame in, the king saide vnto him: What shalbe done vnto the man whom the king would faine

bring vnto worshtp- ( Haman thought in

his heart: Whom desireth the king to being vnto worship moze then me-

W 7 And Hantian aunswered the king: Lee the man whom the king pleafeth to bring vnto worship, de brought hither,

8 That he map be araped with the royall garmentes which the king bieth to
Weare, and the horle that the king rydeth vpon, and that the crowne ropall map be set vpon his head:

9 And let this rayment and horse be delmered vnder the hande ok one ofthe
Ringes most noble printes, that they

may aray the man withal whom the

King is disposed to bring to honour, and

carp him vpon the horse through the

streete of the atic, and proclapme bekore

him, Thus shall it be done to the man

Esther. whon the bing pleaseth to bring to ho-

4 And the ning fade: 1800 is inthe

nour.

10 And the king lade to Haman: Make

haste, and take as thou hat saide the rapinent and the hort, and do tuenlo vnto Mardocheus the Jewe that fir: teth before the kinges gate, and let ng: thing laile ofall that thou batt spoken.

11 Then toke Haman the rapment and

the horse, and araped Mardocheus a brought him onboxlebacketizough tte streete of the titie, and proctapmien before hin, Euen this shallit be done vnto the man whon the king is disposed to honour, ;

12 And Mardocheus came againe to the

kinges gate: but Haman gat him home in ede haste mourning, and his head tonered,

13 And tolde Zares his wyse and all his

friendes euery thing that had befallen him. Then faide his wile men and Zares his wyfe vnto him: Il it be Mardocheus of the seede of the Jewes, before whõ thou halt begun to fall, thou shalt not preuaile against him, but shalt surely fall before hin.

14. And whyle they were pet talking with

him, came the kinges chamberlapnes,
& caused haman to make halt to tome mo the banket that Esther had prepared. a

¢ Lhe. vij. Chapter.

3 The queene biddeth the wing and Haman againe, and prapeth kor her telte and her people, 5 She accufeth Daman, and he is hanged on the galous which he had

prepared for Mardocheuß.
A Nd the bmg and pa-

He the queene Elt-
AR Sy er.
And the king laide a-
Z gaine vnto Esther on the setonde dap at the baucket ol wine: What is thy petition queene Esther, that it map be geuen thee : And what requirest thou: it it be per to the halfe of the empire, it shalbe one.
And Esther the queene aunlwered, and salde: HEF haue found grace in thy fight O king, and ik it pleale the king, then graunt me my lpke at mp defire, and my people for mip petitions fake.
4 Jor we are solde J and mp people to be destroyed, to be faine, and to perishe:

Ww

And Would God that we were solde to be bondmen and vondwomen, then would J holde my tongue: although the enemie toulde not recompente the kinges losse.

5 The king Ahaluerus aunlwered and

salde vnto queene Esther: Who is bes
And where is he, that dare prelume in his minde to do after that maner-

6 And Esther saide: the enemie and ad

€

uerfarie is this wicked Haman. Then

Haman was erteedingly afrapoe before the king and the queene.

And the king arole krom the bancket q and from the Wine in his dilplealure. S

and went into the palate garden:

Haman stoode vp, and besought et,
Esther tor his lyfe: for he saw that
Wasa mischiele prepared for him Min

gat the king came againe out

ardẽ into the place where cee aue wine: Maman By lapdt un ppon the bed that Esther fate vp-
5 Then saide the king: wil he forte the
. allo before ie in the boule: As foone as tha worde went out ofthe
Runes mouth, they toue red Hamans

9 an Harbona one of the chauber-

Esther.

he had made for

clxiy. '

laynes that stoode before the king, fain:

Weholde, chere standeth vet ag fon

Mamans de ates pe, e

rdocheus, that spake good for the king. Then the ki

lalde, Hang him there. . 15 0

10 So they hanged Haman on the ga-

lous that he had made for Mardoche-
Pr Then was the binges wrath pace

De. viii. Chapter.

Atter the death ol haman was Wardocheus evalted, 14 Comkortable letters are

ent vnto che Jewes.

bt fame dap did king
10 e Ahaluerus geue the

d Jewes enemie bnto

„ aueene eather , and:

NEES) es Mardocheus tame be:

J foe the king: kor Esther tolde what he was vnto her.

1 .Andthe king toke of his ring which

he had taken from Haman, and gaue it

vnto Mardocheus. And Esther sette
Mardocheus ouer the house of Haman.
3 And Ether (pake pet moze before the king, and fel downe at his feete weping, and befought him that he would put awap the wickednesse of Haman the Az

gagite, and hig denite that he had ima-

ned against the Jewes.

4 And the king heid out the golden stepler toward Either. Then role Esther, and stode before the king,

And lade: tit pleale the king, and il
Jhaut founde grace in his light, and it lt be acceptable before the kung, and pleale hum, then let it be Writtẽ, that the

letters of the deule of Haman the lonne ol Hamadatha the Agagite map

5 oie Agate, Which letters he wrote

thoy the Jewes which are in all

the kinges proüintes.

at (hail ¢ can one

housle of aman the

For how tan J luer and let r i g euill ch of Aae ee

keth you, in the kinges name, and seale it
With the kinges ring: For the writinges that were Witten in the kinges name, and sealed with the kinges ring, durst no man dilanul. —
Then were the kinges scribes called at the fame time, euen in the thirde moneth (that is the moneth Stuan) onthe three and twentie dap thereof , and it was Wiitten accozding to all as Mardotheus tommaũded vnto the Peres, and to the printes, to the debuties and taptapnes in the prouintes which are from India vnto Ethiopia, namelp an
Hundzed twentie and seuen prouintes, vnto euery proumte according to the
Waiting thereof, and vnto euery people after their speach, and to the Jewes actording to their writing and language.

io And he wrote in the king Ahasaerus

name, € sealed it with the binges ring, and by postes that rode bpon horses, and swyft young Mules, sent he the
Writinges, | 1 —

Wherin the king graunted the Jewes in What cities soeuer they were, to gather themlelues together, and to stand for their lyfe, and foz to roote out, to flap . and to destroy all the power of the people and prouinte that woulde trouble them, both chudren and women, and to spople their goodes:

12 Upon one dap in all the prouuntes of
7 And the ki kung Abalnerus, namely bpon the tht
5. gurne ci ang Ahaluerus fate vnto teenth dap al the tweltth monet, ewe: Teer and to Pardocheus the Which ts the month Adar. ow

iht houf eholde, J haue geuen Esther 1; The sunime of the writing Was, Jo anged AY Danan, whomtbephaue: there shouldt bea connnaundement ae band ponbonarree, becault be lapde nen maliand every pzouince,and pare went pelt ees: | ched among alt people. and that the

ME ve allo ko the Jewes as tt ly: Jewes hond berebyagatnstthat vat,

eare and lok ucatiofnty kindred. e vpon the destruc-

A

Efther.

to auenge them selues on their enentics. led and was glad. ~— —

14 and fo the postes that rode bpon the lwpft Holes and Mules, made haste with ali spcede to execute the kinges
Word: andthe commaundement was deulsed in Sulan the chiele titie.

15 Aud Mardocheus went out from the kiug iu royall appareli, ot velowe and
White, E with a great crowne of golde, being araped with a garment of silke and purple:and the citie of Sulan reiop-

On, bine.

On. fun

den.

16 And vuto the Hewes there was toine light and gladnesse oy and Worthip.
17 In ali prouinces and cities into What places soeuer the kinges word and con: maundement reached, there was top and mirth, a feaste and good dapes among the Jewes: insomuch that many ofthe people inp lande became Jeweg. fo thefeare ofthe Jewes came vpon hem. 3

The. ix. (hapter..

14 The tenlonneg ot Haman are hanged. 17 Che Jewes kepe a keaste in remente

Ac the commaundement of the kung, the Jewes put their aduertarieg to death.

braunce of their deliueraunce.
> A, Je the twelfth moneth a E74] (that is the moneth Adar) vpö the thirteenth
2 NS dap of the lame, when the kinges worde and
S41] cominaundement dane
; neare to be put in execation, in the dap that the enemies of the Jewes hoped to haue power ouer thẽ, it turned toͤntrarp: for the Jewes had rule ouer tijem that hated them.
2 Foz then gathered the Jewes together in their cities within ali the prouinces ok king Ahasuerus, to lay hande on such as Woulde do them eull, and no man could withstand them: for the feare - of them was come oner all people.
3 And ail the rulers in the proumtes, and princes, and deputtes and officers of the
Ring pronioted the Jewes:for the feare of Mardocheus came vpon them.
4 Jo Mardochens Was great in the
Kinges house, t the reporte of him was noysed in ail the prouinces: fo2 this man es Wared greater and grea: er. 8
5 Thus the Jewes {mote all their enemies with the stroke of the fod, and laughter, and destruction, æ did what they would vnto their enemies.
6 And at Sulan the chiele atte slue the
Jewes, € destroped five hundred men,
MS 7 oath me Pharsandatha, Dalphon, hatha,
8 Phoratha, Adalia, Aridatha,
9 eee. and Gaz daͤtha,
10 The ten sonnes of Haman the sonne ofhamadata the enenue ofthe Jewes: e at but on his goodes they laped no

handes. :

I At the fame time was the king certified of the number of thole that were flaine in the titie of Sulan.

12. And the king fatde vnto queene Ef:

her: The Jewes haue slaine and de-

stroped fiue hundred nien in the citie ol

Sulan, and the ten sonnes ol Haman:

What haue they done (thinkestthouj ino-

ther landes of the king And what is

thy petition, that it map be geuen theeor what requixest thon more to be done-
Esther aunlwered: Hf it pieale the C king, let hini suffer the Jewes which are in Susan, to niorow alfo to do according buto this dapes decree, that they map hang Hamans ten sonnes vpon

the tree. f

14 And the king charged to do so:and the decree was deuiled at Sulan, and they
Hanged Hamans ten sonnes.

15 Foz the Jewes that were in Sulan gathered them (clues together, vpon the fourteenth day of the moneth Adar, and flue three hundred men at Suslan: but on their goodes thep layed no handes. .

16 As for the other Jewes that were in the kinges proumces, they caine together and stoode for their tines, Had relt froin their enemies, ¢ fluc of their enemies leuentie and fiue thouland: howbeit tmp layed no handes ontheir

odes.

17 Lachs they did on the thirteenth day at the moneth Adar, c on the fourtecnty dap of the fame moncth rested a which oye they held with feasting a gladnesse. g

18 But the Jewes that were at ue

tame together both on the thirteenth rea fame they rested
| day ofthe same ther ite that day with feasting ¢ glad-

nesse. erefore the Jewesthat dwelt
¢” vie bilages and önwalled townes, rip the fourteenth dar of the moneth dar with gladnesse and feãsting, and

kept holp Day, and euerp one sent prea-

vnto his neighbour. .
‘ 19 audochens wrote these wordes, and sent letters vnto all the Jewes chat wert in ali the prouinces ol king Abalnerus boch mie and farce: * oy That ther chould make a lawe aniong thẽ selues, teenth dap of the moneth Adar, perelp. u As the dapes whereinthe Jewes tame to rest from their enemies, and as amoneth wherein their paine was turnedto toy and their sorowe into a iopful dap: and that in thole dayes they chould male feastes and gladnesse, and one to
ö lend giktes vnto another, and to distripbute bnto the poore.
N iF And ee Jewes Wan to 5 as hey had begunne, and as Mardochens had atten vnto them:
234. Becanle Haman the sonne of Hamadatha the Agagite all the Jewes enemie, had deuised against the Jewes
Hee piss 5 tree caused ur( that is a lot) for to toni But ßen eee me betaretDe me bekore e dee by letters that
0 Aae den ene. e Tien an be turned vpfnnes howto be banged on the 1 d er the which caule they talled these ate Phurim, betause of the nameof een becaule of all the wordes of had fe a ng, and what they chemfelues e what had come vnto them:

Esther.

on the kourteenth: andonthe

holde the kourteenth c fil-

CIXVIII.
27 And the Jewes qrdayned and tokeit vponthemand their seede, and pponal fuch as toyned them lelues vnto them, that they would not mille but oblerue
55 were an A

i en and b

ne en

2 at these dayes are ta be remem: bred and to be kept of chülders chldzen among al kinredes in all landes and titles: In these dapes ol Phurm which are not to be ouerslipt amongp Jewes, andthe memortall of them ought not to periche krom their seede.

29 And queene Esther the daughter of A-

. bihatle Mardocheus the Jewe, wrote with all aucthoritie to confirme this {e-

cond writing of Phurim.
And he lent the letters vnto all the

Jewes, to the hundred twentle and se-

ten provinces of the empire of Ahasue-

rus, with wordes of peate and trueth :

31 To confirme thele dapes of Phurim in their time appopnted, according as
Mardocheus the Jewe and Esther the queene had appoynted them: and they bound their foule and their feede to faz sting and praper.

32 And the decree of Esther confirmed these wordes ol Phurim, and was writ- R ten in the booke. —— *

33 And the king Ahaluerus laped tribute vpon the land, e vpon the ies or the sea.

34. And all the actes of his power and of his might,¢the declaration of the digni-

tte ok Mardochens wherwith the king

magnified him, be thep not Wzittenm the bookes of f chronicles or the binges or Medes and Persia:

35 Jor Mardocheus the Jewe, was the second next vnto king Abaluerus, and great among the Peles, and accepted among the multitude of his brethzen, as one that seeketh the wealth of his peas

le, and speaketh peaceably for all his eede. a |

$a The ende of the booke of Efther,

5 Ca) Mus is 6 tegtonntare

Hua the fonne of Tram, fo that he built two cititg thert, Damaseos, and
Thraconste.

gentile, dts elavint hereby that God hath his. cuctt a= mong the heat

en.
(e) Huttcnea att tecited, to sycce bis great paz trence in loft
Sityem,and that riches nre cht bicl= finn of Gop, art not call ts un that victh them uth. Let not r. ches be aca to. npted cutil, tor they art geuen to good me; Let not them he atseatetcd high
©2 crcellene, for thep ort
Fggcuen to eulll minen, thep art taken from
Secu mento trpe thereon’ feoin cupi iuẽ to lagut thé,
Hebiue

phrole,chil-

- TA Dung,
Caldcano, I-
Dumcans, as
Others.
(t) To theiwe eyt toncozd: 3 horhersie az mite of Fobs chidzé, which allo nens an

t) That ia. yẽ Wylled ths to be f. b 8 anctified, in abstalning frõ canal appttited, and chtwrd hoc t ould behave them sciues holplit and d loder ue in their banguctteg. (90 Here is Hobs tcuigion and feare of Goo knowene the faery vat of be ern ene. 1

ee

fob.
| | I he bookeof ob. or

The farft Chapter.

Che holines, riches, and tare of Job loz his children; u Sate n hath pete

missten to tempt him, i hetempteth him b and his children. 20 his faith and patience,

9210 N i 758 {14 1 * 1 n

N

Ke

N the lande of
* Hus there was a man whofe name
„was Job, € the
* same Was a perkect and tut man,

5% lone that feared
God and eschued

euill.
2 And he had seuen founes and three daughters.
3 Dis @fubltaunee also was seuen thouland cheepe, and three thonfand camels,
_ fiue hundred poke of oren, and fiue hundred shee alles, and a very great houle-

holde: so that he was one of the most

untipall“ men amo pe 1 7 9 9 5 ng all them of the

4 And his sonnes went and banquetted

intheir houses euery one his dap, and sent for their three listers to eate and dunke with them.

5 And when the dayes oftheir banquet:

ting were gone about, Job sent c and santtified them, and gat vp early and © offered for euery one a burnt offring:
For Job sade, It map be that mp

ND ee x 1 Ls ae ee . 6 y
ö
8 Ace lL

Alt N

y
Op

are

1 Wut lape thpne han

p taking awap his tubslaunce,

d now ppon hin,

and touche all that he hath, and he Mall

wturse thee to thy fate.

b) Tire:

baut iu, Ut

God. w y ö

somenme {ie

ben (op te t

ging fathtt.
(a) Pod al-

Beth the ques evan not that he wap igre,

ing lion, let:
15 whom de map dmoute. a yt, Op edjs-

8 cl

ae Tode fatde vnto Satau: — camels , and aue cart
. ‘at that he hath be in thy pow- pea and Layne th f aried them away,

4s J. 0 p leruauntes with the pe rey pponhün lelke fee that thoulay worde: and J only a sap ae a se panna a0 tue tfoosth lone cote the | n ii
2 e presente o OG „18 hple he was pet spea

ee wand ona tertapne day, when his came an other andlaßde Thy nes

werc eating and and thy daugl 5 i mute wine m their eldest brothers as in their ewe baer use N

There tame amessenger bitte Job, 19 And behold there tame any Uti

I anatayer The oren were plowing and wind from bepond the wͤdernelfe 5

thealleskerding belive ther: fmote thefoure comers of the houle

And the Sabees carne violentlp, and whiche fell pon thy children and they

3 yr they haue llayne are dead: l ep

fo,” eouethemalbay, peathey yu e dead:and J am gotten away alone
% ¢hpfernauntes with the edge of the totell thee. , 9
Fis foram Pontyam estaped alone to 20 Then Job staode vp, and- rent his de clothes ; e shaued his head, felldowne Lee e

al xe 0

6 uohile he was pet (peaking, there came ppon the ground, wozchipped, thm rai

another, and sayde: The fire of Godis 21 And fayde: Maked tanie J out of niy ar fallcukrom heauen, aud hath brent vp others wombe, e naked chan F turne pn thy litepe and leruauntes, and tonsu- khypther agame: The Torde gane the med them: and J only am eftaped a 3£.020 hath taken away, bleffen be the lone to tell the. e nameofthe Lode, hedge
17 And whylehe was pet speaking there 22 In wallthese thinges dyd Job notok- LAr" lame auother, and sayde: The Cadees kende, nor charged God foolithip. made out their bandes, and kel vpon the i

\ The. ii. Chapter :

satan hath pernnidion to ablict Job, 9 his welktempkkth him to fortake God.

his thzee iriendeg vilite hm. ; 2. | o on a dap the an je Mal cacke thee to thy face.

children of God came 6 And the be e el and stoode befoze the he is in thyne hand, dut lane his lpfe. 1
Torde and Satan 7 So went Satan foorth from the pre: Ge came Allo among the, lente okthe Lorde, and smote Job With ern
3 ay 10 = befoze the sore byles, fromthe fole of his foote bu: bene
2 Audthe Lore rai vnto Satan: 8 es tcharde to strape S
=, Froin Whence ab bee e toke a potsharde to scrapehym: .
Ba aunty fommettthous Satan and he fat downe among the althes. ay Gone aa Lorde, AnD sayd: J haue 9 Then sapd his wpfe butobin:© Doek waive
. about the lande, walked fhorow spon ene ast in thy perfectnesse- ena
4 . a kürte od, and dpe. 9 N ngoblp wift.
4 pat yt node faye vnto Satan: 10 Wut he fayde vnto her, hon tpeakelt „ i obeh nie? eluibeves ny fernaunt uke a foolish woman: Haliwe @receane She n
„ inthee arth = e is ones vnto hym goodatthehandeof God „ AND not re- 20e seca’ methat fearech perkeet aud a iust man- teaue criplls In ali these thinges did not beth then,
Econtinneti full and elchueth eil, Job sinne With his lippes. ch fbr a: though thou ne vprightnelle al- n sOWe when Jobs three feiendes an
Be de deltroy bn ine agalnst hyn, heard of all the trouble that tanie bpon nge.
4, And Batau aun uthout kanse--- hum, they tame euery one frd his olwue aner
5 Sime fo» 15 ed the Hod, and platelnamelp)Eliphas the Themanite, da en
, w geuc al that O2lkinne , pea a man Wiidad the Subite , and Zophad the e
„ Batlapehyne pane Je bath for hisllfe. Maamatbite: forthep were agreedto- arne
Ne, and touch once fe a nowe vpon hym, gether to tome to shewe their tompal zem. enen JUS bone and his feshe, ion vpon hun, and to comfort hyn. wef a

te ede be LOM Of hts cy = 4 i 9 5
Munich body to touched an ee une lines, and bodyco in patlenct.rathet then patiently to fuer dig 2 J 12 0 Hunt.
Jexiqpe fayth the deu, touch hun on hip own kinn, and tion Malt let that

es

o fx.

Ly face Curie thee,

bf, they kuew him not: then they tryed and wept, and euery one of them rent

his clothes, and sprinckled dust vpon

ante. To. their heades“! in the ayre.

vrardes tile

heauen.

a) That is. alter that {c= nen dapes
Wers kullp kinished.

Prawn Gand the night in the Whiche it was cut imo u. fapd, There is a man childe tonceaued. bete en 4. The lalne dap becturnedto) darknelle, ce e and not regarded of God from aboue, g a neither let the light hne vpon itt ber bars 5 ut let it be stapned with darknesse and

vccause he

ae nee the chadowe of death , let theldimmen baader dann. (loude fall vponit. whiche may make
See, it terrible as a most bitter day.

ebnen he 6 Let the Darke storme ouertome that

inthe fete, a after a 3

oud vis night, and let it not be topned vnto the

So, ayes of the pere, nor counted in the number ol the monethes.
5 Desolate be that night, and without gladnesse. g
8 Let them chat turse the day, and that be redy to rayse vp mourning, geue it allo their turse. nie % 9 Tetthe starres of that night bedunme
„„ thorobwe darkenesse of ft , let it loke for
Obe de- light, but haue none, neither let it fee tinefpeachs, the dawning of the dap:

the ere lites

olige mem 10 Betault tt shut not vp the doores of my

mothers wonibe, nor hyd sorowe from
N myne eyes.
11 [Alas why died J not in the birth: why

1 dyd not J perishe assoone as J tame ont off mp mothers wombe-

12 Why let they mie vpon their knees- why

gane they int sucke With their brestes:

. red, and lapde: |
Qe 0 Leto the day pertthe wWherin Y was borne,

„ = s * 1 P * ot

5 These

n So whenthep it vp cherweptsafarre 1; Thep fate them downe dy him alto

vpon the grounde seuen dapes e seuen nightes, and none spake a worde vnto him: for they sawe that his gveefe was ber great. i

The. iii. Chapter.

Job complaynech and curleth the dap of his byrth. 11 He defireth to dpe, ag though

13 Then chou nowe haue lyen , « shoulde Hauclieptandbenatrett, ~~

14. Lyke as the binges and“fores ok the ien

earth which haue buylded them selues
“fpectall places, a 5 14. dl

15 Or as the printes that haue had golde, and their houles full of siluer:

16 Oriwhy was not Phyd , as a thing vorne out of tune, either] as poung chil: dren Which neuer sawe the light: Dat

17 There“ must the wicked ceafle from ss: their tyramme, and there such as labou- nr, red valiauntly be at rest: den

1d There the“ prifoners rest together, unge

they heave no moze the boyce of the op: ie

: pressour: Lg

19 Hhereavefnalrand great, and the ser- Haren uaunt (is) free from his maister. ng

20 Wherekore is the light geuen to hyn aus that is in milerie: c lyfe vnto them that ue
Hauc heaup heartes: *. ba

at Whiche long for death and finde it not, an. though they search more foz it than for treasure :

22 Which reioyte exceedingly, and be glad when they can finde the graue,

23 From whom their endes are hyd, and consealed by God-

24 For my sighes tome before J eate, and my roringes are po wid out like the water: 2 , apucrltsits

25 Fo2the thing that © J feared is tone an vpon me, and the thing that J was a ts krapde ol is happened vnto nes guet.

26 Mas J not happp- wad I not Maur neflez Was J not in rest- And no tonumeth such intserie vpon ine. |

(a) Ehn d

vate

se i wert

of lob.
The. iili. Chapter.
Jobis reprehended ol impatiencte, 7 and vniustice,

of his owne ri ghteousneg.

2d Eliphas the Thehee auntivercd , €

4 1 IX N a

sayde:

% | with thee, wilt thou be

discontent: Wut who can withhold him selfe from speaking-

zeholde, thou hast ben an instructer of
Ans t halt strenghtned the > wWweerp

. andes:
27 4 Ehr wordes haue let vp him that was
% falling, thou hast refreshed the weake ge kuees. 5 lum But © nolve itis come vponthee, a andthou art greeued: it toucheth thee, and thou art troubled.

6 Vas not thy feare according to thy hope

and the perlettnesle of thy wayes accor-

i ding to thy expectation-

me Conder Ypray thee who euer peri-

a
Sinn i
At: ie te

Ry

Si

bs,
Sint

n The lion pevitheth for lake of pray,

The sy. Chapter.

12 Cliphas theweth the difference betweene the children of God and the wicked. z Che
Gods power who destropeth the wicked, and deliuereth his.

thet bepng an innocent : 02 when were the godly destroped-

von 8 Foras I haue proued by experience,

they that plow iniquitie e sow wretchednelle, reape the lame.

smn, 9 Dith the blast of God they periche, with

the breath or his nostrels are they conlumed away,

0 The roring okthe lion, and the voyce

ofthe lion , and the teeth ok the lions whelpes are pulled out. 1

kal ok the wicked.

7) Rye pray thee, it

oN (S| here be aup that will

e aunlwere thee, Eloke

ye pepe i of the y

: As for the foolish leth hi ma, Wzahtkulnesse kil-
N Hauri enuie slayeth the ignorant. was berge my selke when the foobeepe rooted, ande

chien. r zen were without prof eritie, ce ce Weve faye in the gate; and

5 bis hauen man td delluer them. athe: ruest was eaten of the hungrie, om among the thormes, and the

liaded thy t
OE aig gu him and

aeg of the cities.

If we assay to come

— Wyldome.

cA

"7 and of the pretumption

ole ghost, faping that that which he weill nowe declare, ts not humapne resson, dut as

Ethe lions whelpes are stattered abrode.
12 But wheras a thing was Ohyd from
1955 ut mpne cave Hath reteaued a litle be on
5 m kroin god.
. Jnthe rhoughtes and ulsons of the en night when fleepe commeth on men, felt
14 Feave came ppon me Edzead, Which ehe made all my bones to shake. Atte
1 The winde palled by before my pre: Nusse sence / and made the heeres of my flethe We anne to stande vp. em oH
16 He stoode thereon and POwewe not nne his kate, an image there was defoe aste myne epes, and in the stilnelle hearde J mda aw
à bopce. 6 Ohre
17 Shall oman be moze tust then God weaverrgus a hall a man be purer then his ma: ere
18 Weholde, he founde not trueth in his leruauntes, and inc his angels there was folly: gen
19 Holde much moze in themthat dwel in ce mae houles of clay and whose foundation ee is but dust which (hall be consumed as „e wt it were with a moth- N Fightcous fo
20 They shalbe {mitten from the mor- Site ning vnto the euening: pea they w thatt Won he perishe for euer, when no man regar- n deth them. aecaltogetyer
21 Js not their ropaltie gone away with themethey hall dye truely , and not in

ment to

proue Job an tupll man, because od plaguen hm: or tle Cod afflicted mmo-

vnperfect and fooltshe.

(1) Deaning mang body which 18 nothing but duk and clap.
(in) This

daungers and nuserieg in the lame.

= mang }

(n) D thurstie drunke vp their labour: It is sorte aue earth that bringeth koorth int enn m

? (c) Declaring
6 Meither comumeth sorowe out of the Heer ground: Jagnenonsto
7 But man is borne vnto labour, © like as ce the sparkes fire vp [out olthe hot coles. ern hn
8 Wut“ woulde alke counsell at the en poo 11 55 515 oon. ond mans offence,
9 Ww iche dot great t inge 1 i cheable, rand des Without nuniber. Stine 0 i
10 He geueth rayne vpon the earth, and e powreth water vpon the streetes, 1 i To set vp them that be of lolwe degree, 0 F

and that thole which are in heaunelle 1

crau
Goo fi

may be exalted to saluation.

od lay gt i : Clips,’ i ö ö ibithe iudgement cont wbe done n he ace n ecued not ine id fee his pʒospetitic. d That 8, by pi 2 2 12 15 ¢ —

centes,carwal

Thebooke

12 he destropeth the denites ok the sub- death, and when it is wary 2

tyll, so that their handes are not able
ö to n that which they do enterprile.
13 He tompasseth the wile in their owne craktinesse, Emaketh foolishe the coun:
{cll of the wicked. wets, 14. Thep runne into darknesse by fapre

kanne day and grope at the noone day as in
. the night.

bed. 15 But he deliuereth the“ poore from the ee, worde, from their tieatninges', and aco fromthe violence ok the mightie.

ia che lest. 16 Me is the hope ofthe poore, the mouth

of the wicked shalbe stopped.

17 Behold, blessed is the man whom God corretteth, therefore rekuse not thou the thastening ofthe almightie:

18 For he maketh a wounde and he healetl): he smiteth, and his hande maketh

geen Flu the seuenth there Mall no euil tome and cht le to thee.

ea | 20 In hunger he shall saue thee from rung, thot of a thptarts and troubles god ul deliuer ther, 2 bzing ther to rest as in the stuenth dap.

A1 (CaaS az. a ee and lapde:
2 | Be [O D that my conv
Braning 722 Bs plapnt were cA) truely
Ries dre ere WSEY I waped, and my punichbone gebn. ment lapde inthe baa launces together:

3 Fd nove it woulde be heauier then the sande ot the lea: and this is the caule, that my wordes faple me.

4. Foz che arrowes ok the almightie are

bpon me , the poplon therof hath

drunke vp my spirite, and the terrible“ feares ot God are fet against me.

Doth the! wild alle rore when he hath

grasse: or loweththe ore when he hath

fodder(tnough)

6 What which is dufanerte, ™ shall it be eaten without falt? or is there any taste in the Whyte ol an egge-

7 The thinges that sometime J might not awap withal, are nowe mpmeate

for very sorowe. N

Othat I might haue my desire, and that God woulde graunt me the thing that J long foe:

b Declertn

e, fro :

power of the worde. Ade

21 Thon halt be hyd from the scourge of the tongue, & when desteuction com: meth thou Malt not neede to feare,

22. In destruction and dearth tion Mai be merp, and shalt not be atrapde of the beastes of the earth. ö

23 For the O stones of the land chalbe con: federate with tice , and the beastes of the kielde shalbe at peate with ther. a

24. And thou shalt knowe that thy dwel- wage ling plate shalbe in rest, and thou chalt visite thy habitation, æ halt not sinne. Cn)

25 Thou halt lee also that thyseede Nhat sam" be great, and thy posteritie as the grasle soa vpon the earth. _ gran

26 Thou (halt tome also to thy graue in a tame full age like a cone sheate cut d owne in due season. 8

27 Lo, this we our {eles haue proued by expetiente, and euen thus it is: Pearken thou to it also, that thou mapest take heede to thy selle. 8

Adee

haue Gey om
N

The. vi. Chapter.

Job auntwereth that his payne is more greeuous then his fault, se wicheth death. 14 He complapneth ot his kriendes.

9 Othat God would begin and smite me, that he would let his hand go and take me tleane away: 2

io Then choulde J haue forme comfort, pea J woulde delive hum in up papne d er that he would not spare, fo: J wil not rah, beagaink the wordes ofthe holpone. nee

u Foz what powre haue J toendure- tai, i
And what is inyne end, “that my louie daa

might be patient: ann iz Js my strength the strength of ones: Ore or is my fleshe ol brasse- darein

peare aal.
13 Pstt not so that there is in me no helpc- gane
F that inp lubstaunte is taken from me“ e
14. He that is in tribulation, ought to be e comforted of his nepghbour: but the or feare of the almightie is cleane ae a
15 Mypne owne drethzen pale ouer OY ’o.ne meas the Water brooke Kas theuvag e flowing of waters, whiche do haltiy 99 aver,

awap,

16 Whiche are blackish be reason of te a n 55 1 a 11 4

v7 Whic enthep rub

i tu when the heate commeth ie they fayle out of their place. 5

=o depart from the courte of their bre ine chanell to other plates, they ae runne in Dayne and peritlye.

1 Theman conside-
* at went to

% age and they that went to Sa-

4 ba wapted for them.

x zut they were confounded in their it Phot, 9975 came thyther and were af * ai

au

ips JT

d.
1 20 25 aes such truely are ye, nowe that ve g my milerie ve are alravde.
22 Did Poelire pouto bring vnto nie, or togeuẽ me any of pour substaunte-
33 To deliner me krom the enemies hand, orto laue me from the hande of the ty: intes- l
14 Taache me, and J will Hold my tong: and wherim J haue erred, caule me to

clxxy. , vnderstande.

25 How strong are the wordes of trueth- *
190 1 ok pou tan rebuke 02 vende

26, Dope imagine to reprone™ wordes. LES that the tatke of the atic b wee as the winde- ? oe yee lerne fonds

27 Be fall pon the fatherlesse „and digge zue a pit to ouerthrowe pour obne rende. le

28 And therfore be content, a one now pen me, and J will not lye beloze your ne ae

U 0 ‘ re pet

29 Turne J pray pou, “be indifferent ae ludges:turne agapne, and pe chall lee werde mpne vngiltinesle, whether there be anp none ini vnrighteoulnes m nip tongue, oz bapne we
Wordes in my mouth.

The. vit. Chapter.

ae Job He weeh the shortnesse and miserie of mans ipfe.
I oe Dthernotanappoyn- Jhall his place knowe him any more. =, a NG ted time to man vpon u Therkore (b wit not fare my mouth, ere,

earth: Are not his

<A dapes also like the

dapes of an™ hired seruannt:

: F02 like as a bonde

struaunt deliveth the shadowe, and as

an hyreling woulde fayne haue the re-

warde ok his worke:

Euen fo haue J laboured whole monethes long in dayne, and many atarefull night haue J tolde.

e When Plapde me done to sleepe, J dae lapde, O when han J arile-and O meaba firing the enening, Jam euen full with a ie to and fro vnto the dawning of

Baton be math u in’ (9

1 dultofthe earth: my fhinue is withered

oe 6 Dy dapes palle ouer more spedyly then chuttle, and are fpent With-

qBeaning
Bet fits cai b teoxt

Aer prclung,¢

hall no moze

Beaand theepe that! ath f eene me, shal lee me nomozes für thou fatten

pre Ve bponme, J cometo naught,

a keene ne eye

ming odo ethat goeth downe to the

. ul tome no mo
5 ae Dp,
No turne agate into his Houle neither

27 © Otemember that my lpfe is but a

but J willspeake in the trouble of my Bees, spirite, and mule in the bitternelle of my dane
Mende. . mil seleeg
12 Am Ja fea ora whale fich, that thou a a kepest mec lo in prfonz une
13 When Jsap, My bed chal comfort me, n
I Hall haue lome refrething by talking ee to my selfe vpon my touch: wd e

no mightie crcature, able to

14 Then fearest thou mec with dreames, aut aug
E makest me so afrayde through bifions, quer ores

15 That mp foule witheth rather to periche deen and die, then my bones to remapne. enen gde

Is Heanlee no remedy, J Chall tine no suns n10z0:™d) {pare me then, for my dapes i hene 2

are but vanitie. afficton cons
17 Poa is man that thou doest magni: d fie hum: and that thou settestthy heart 29723 vpon bin z gee me ore
18 Thou visitest him early and euerp day, A euery moment doest thoutrie him. ee
19 Why eu goest thou not fro me, nor lettest ue me alone, so long till J map Malowe g wan.
Done my spyttle- keene
20 Jchaue offended, what hal J do been vñto the, O thou preleruer ot men- hy wr pere. hast thou set mecasa markejagaint thee, o that am a burden to my selfe-;

= | 21 Why doest thon not pardon miy trela? aie donde tonlämed and vauilhed

passes, and take away mpneiniquitic:
Behold, nowe mut JJ fleepe in ihe dult, 8 and ik thon sekest me to morolwe in the gaveord.

moaning, "J Mhatnot ge, The

Thebocke
The . viii. Chapter.

Bildad sheweththat Job is alinner,becaule God punitheth the wicked

and pzeferucth the good.

hen aunswered Wil-
Ndadthe Suhite, c said:
5 Howe long wilt thon talke of suth thinges: howe long shall the e wordes of thy mouth
. be as a mightie wind-
3 Doth God parnert the thing that is lawfull : or doth the almightie destroy the thing that is right:

Su J. Foz seyngthat © thy sonnes sinned a

psn ot Asainst hin, did not he lend them into the bre a, Place ok their iniquitle-

aßen 5 HE thou wouldest nowe reforte vnto

God be times, and make thy praper to the almightie, N
6 If thou wouldest liue a pure and godly lifes chonlde he not awake vp vnto thee inimediatlp, and make the habitation of chy righteousnesse prosperous:
7 In so much that wherin so euer thou haddest litle alore, thou shouldest haue wheres nobbe great aboundaunce. hslerings 8 Enquire J pray thee wok the former age, teottetes find earch diligently among their fa-
The e, thers: larelp bane, g (Foz bet are but of pelterday, and conti: dene deen der not that our dapes vpon earth are but a shadowe.)

space to te= pent.

toritie, Where

Henomne 20 Yhall not they shew thee, and tel thee,

n May ac rushe be greene without moyst- ©) a, nelle oz may the grasse growe with- n dut water: „ dane

12 Mo, but whüste it is nowe in his green- La

90 85 BU atgucth,
Jod . ald tf hes

Ge mar:

14 His confidence shalbe destroyed and oun his trust shalbe a Algdecb tet: = sein Se
15 He shalleane vpon his honse, but it thay ame" not stande:he shall holde him kast byit, e, pet shall it not endure. pee
16 95 greeneltree | before the sunne x n ooteth foorth the braunches ouer his ane“ garden. N gang
17 The rootes thertok are wrapped about , the fountapne, and are kolden about the den“ boule of stones. He“
18 HE any plucke it from his place, and it r dente, saying, J haue not seene thee: an.
19 Wehold it Will reiopce by this meanes, Gee if it may growe in another mould. Gn
20 Weholde, God will not cast away a evsi. vertuous man, neither wil he helpe the aug bagovly. Se
21 Thp mouth chall be fill With laughing, wave and thy lippes with gladnesse. ra
22 They allo that hate thee shalbe clo- soca ut thed with hame, e the Dwelling ofthe ren vngodlp (hail come to naught. 15 55

De. ix. Chapter.

Job declareth the mightie power of God, and that mans

benen pen and gladlp tonfesle che fame, and buena vtter the wordes of their heart-

and og

Medowe

vaͤnishech.

(e) Bnnftoe= righteoulnes is nothing.

testo Cits 4 phad ond Bil- ——

dodsozations, I J aN | Obauntivered, and

“4 e

confeffing LUD {a de mans tulttee, 2
. 8 Ikhowe it is fo of
Siehe er 2 atruech:Forhow may eo Ainan_compared) vnto
2) State, 3 God ve tultified z abletoaun: 3 Ihe Wil argue with hum, he cannot aunswere hyn one thing ol a thonlande. i

4 dt is wyse in heart and mightie in f strength: who hath ben fearce against
Sen. hey DYN, and hath prolpered- * ieder. 5 de translateth the nountaynes, or euer mevemoe hep ve aware it is he that ouerthrow-

(e) H tre fotoweth ehe in-

eththem in his wrath. ae

He remoueth the earth out of her plate, that the pillers therof Make withall.

7 He tonunaundeth the sunne, and tery” seth not:he clofeth vp the starres as vnder a signet.

8 He hym elke alone spreadeth out tut heauens, and goeth vpon the waneso the sen. N othe W.

9 He maketh the waynes of heauen. a ge
0 10 ewer * and the lecrt ra

laces of the sonth. pect eit

10 De Doth great thinges d vnscarcheable, pea and Wonders without numbe 10

Yh, diigo

Dypnen he goeth by wie, J Hat not
1 ph und when he passeth, J Matt

= notperceauc yi. hay 9

iv stie to take away, wh

Sn hun ecto it? or who will fay

puto hynt, what doelt thouod wul not withdraw his anger, an

he most nightie helpes do stowpe vn-

2 ° pun much lesse Hall aunlwere

a him: o: howe shoulde J finde out my

g with yim .

5 Mer tougd I were righteous, pet might J not geue hun one Wozdagaine, vut mekelp submit mp selke to hym as

iudge. N
16 "Ht pap called vpon hym, and he had qunsswered me, Wpet woulde J not beleue that he hearde mix vopte: n, vy Wetroubleth me fo with the tempest, ts and woundeth me out or meafure with: fot: but a taufe, amr g He will not suffer me to take my breathy, but filleth me with bitternesse.

9 Il. men will fpeatie) of strength, lo he is ftrong:if[ men will speage of iudgenient, who shall bang nie in to pleadez

20 HF will iustikie my selfe, myne owne mouth Mall tondempne me: if J wul put tooth my selle kor) a perfect man, he
(hall prone me a wicked doer. =

2 For though J be an innocent and my
Na cleave, yet am J Weery of my pie

22 This is one pont, and therefore 7 mage deltroreth both the perfect and ngodly, .

23 And though he slay sodaymp with the

Smits
1 tilt ech 0

of lo

stourge pet Will e lau ha e : 2 ment afte mace 1 oe
24. As fox the wonde itis geuen duer into the bande of the wicked, and he chall touer the faces of the ludges

therok: ik not here ishe, oz who is he

that can shewe the contrarie-

25 My dapes are more wpft then a run-

ner, they are gone e haue seen te 9) eno gocd

26 They are palled away as the chippes

that be good vnder saple, æ as the eg that fleeth to the pray. — i
27 Jf J say, J Will korget my complayning, J Will ceasse from my Wath and comfort mp selfe: N

CIxXy] ]

28 Thenam Jakrapde of al my sorowes,

for J knowe that thou wilt not indge me innocent. 8

29 HEF be wicked, why thenMrabaur J ween dad lad, If

in Dayne:

fer , and make mpne handes neuer so! cleane at the well:

»

30 If J Wache my (ele with fnowe wa: wer aes

ed and

5 why tac

riest thoa so long to thrug

Vet {halt thon dippe me in the nie, fee

ande mine owne clothes shal defile me. Pig in bainee

32 Fore that J mutt geue aunlw

2, plunge ere vn- metnthe pit,

teand wich whom J go to the lawe, is a

not a man as Jam:
33 Meither is there anp dayesman to lay his hande betweene we.
34 Vt hym take his rodde away from me, pea let hyni make me no more afrayde of hin, *

35 And then hall J aunlwere hym with: out any fcare: but betause J am not fo,
J holde me still.

to

Me. x. Chapter.

Job is weery of his lle, and fetteth out his kragilikie befoze God. hem to stap his hande. 22 4 delertption of death.

J soule is cut of

ma e though Jlpue, J n t l 4 J l

n N 4 & cOplapnte against
. %% He my selfe, and will
. 963 7 2 K a of 1 e „ % very heaumesse et 2 ee), ol my soule.

et, ih ) Ah atl 1
850d J will lay vnto e gst Odo not condenwne mie, but

ewe me w e Ulth ines herefoze thou contendest fo

8 Thmnkeltthoutt welldone to opprelle

20H detireth

righteousneg

ze God be nothin,

but asa det ird cloth.

(c wilt chow heipe the

wic ed, and

mez to tast me of beyng the workes of Kut

That 18,

thy handes 2 andto@niapntayne the chens

counfeilof the vngodip-

ant doest thou
4 Hast thou flechy epes:or doest thou a loke as a man loketh- e K.
5 On are thy dapes as the dayes of 0 a maneand thy peres as mans peres - g
6 That thou makelt fuck inquilition for fue

my wickednes, and searchest out my sinne-

ron

eas man:?

Mont to ber merciful, nnd

7 55 Job:
5 Whereas thou knowest“ whether J Feen echall do wickedlpor no, aud that none es

tion.

uer me out ofthyne hande. tan deliuer me 5 4

Bepelt one late in offlics

ned me altogether rounde about, wilt thou then destroy mez
9 Remenber J belech tice that thou madest me as the moulde of the earth, and shalt being me into dust againe.
1o Hast thou not powred me as it were nulke e turned me to truddes like cheesen Thon hast couered ine with skinne and fleshe, and iopned me together with bones and sinnowes.
12 Thou hast graunted me life, and done

3 meruap-

soul ozkeg in mans creas tion.

me good: and thy visitation hath prefers

ued my spirite.

3 Thou hast hyd these thinges in thyne heart cret! J am fure that thou remembrest this thing. f
14 If I dpd sinne, thou haddest an eye
C puts me, and Halt not pronounce me in-

notent from mpneoffence.
15 Ik Jhaue done wickedlp, wo is me therefore: If J haue done righteoullp, yet dare I not litt vp my head, fo full

atis

e

The booke
Men e 8 Thy handes haue made me, e falhio- nulerie. ————

O) Thats, N N
* ain Jok confufion, and see myne owne m 8 .

16 And let it inerease, bunte me as a lio returne and Mew thy felfe macnaplone vpon me.

17 Thou bungest freshe witnesse against me, and thy wrath increalestthon bpon me: Divers and many are the plagues that Jamin,

18 Wherkoze hak thon brought me out of the wombe: O that J that no eye had seene me,

19 And that J were as though J had not

U
O5.
7 suey’ l.

had perished and

ben but brought from the wom̃be tothe

graue. .

20 Are not myp dapes fewe- Let himthen leaue of fro nie, and let me a lone, that may comfort my selfe alitie,

ax Akoze J gocthyther trom whence} Naty not turne againe , euento the lande ol

darknesse aud chadowe of death:

21 Bea a lande as darke as darknesse it

{clfe , and into the shadowe ok death

where is none oder, but the light is

there as darknesse.

The. xi. Chapter.

1Jobvis vntullly reprehended of Sophar. „God is incomprehenkible. 14 Be is mets cifull to the repentaunt. 8 Cheir a urautice that live godlie.

A1 ben aunfiveredD So-
AGGIE phar the Naamahie, and sayde:

20 Shoulde not (ve that
* 920 mabeth many Wordes bethat eh whe © be aunfivercd z bathe tye ~~ HPhoulde he that baz
Ti bleth much be tonunended therin-

3 Shoulde thy lies make men holde their peace, and when thou mockest (others) challno man make thee ashamed:
1 hne ge- 4. For thou hast sapde, © np doctrine is
Pio, pure, and Jam cleane in thyne epes.

to Jobschata
03D

de 5 But that God woulde speake, and qt ophat gocth about

open his lippes against thee:
6 That he might shewe thee the setretes of wyldome, Howe thou batt deserued

able to do- deeper then the hel, how wilt thou then knowe it-

9 The mealure ofit is longer thenthe earth ,and broder thenthe sea.

16 Though he turne all thinges dplyoe downe, close them in, gather them toge-
? ey a Will turne hym from his purpoles

1 For tt is he that@knowerh vapne men, be seeth n also, shoulde

e not then confider itz

12 Bet bayne man would be wolte bangt man lnewe borne is lpke a wude alles

coulte. >.

n a r Eye ea and

littedt, vp thpne pandes toward

hym: yy

14. PE thou wouldest put awap the WF kednes whiche thou hast in me 95 e vngodlinelle dwell in kh

ouse:

15 Then mightest thou lift Dp died without thame , ¢ then shoulde

be sure and haue no neede to feats, hen

D

B

t Hor ont ie out inant appearanntls ee

e be ge gh che heart. woh i

t then paint md ber
{carb to 1

cuyll. m moze to doll,

ct) Hoch
Se

t gut: ts ot

dase tepent.

uA pte .

atted With atrenche. mightest thou lye downe and

: joulbetttl ou forget thy miiecie, | as comp i Eben er moi DDO, then bpon 19 Then

ag.

Ehen chould thy lpfe be as cleare as — gue chould make suite puto thee:

be as the morning. * {ly all faile, and the chal not escape: aud fox. en mgheclt hon be beide betaue their hope Myatbe fopawe of minve. there is hope, and take thy rest quietiy- , 1

| a The. xij. (hapter.

ccuteth his kriendes ok ignoraunce. > He declareth the might and power
160d 17 and how he chaungech the courte of thinges. :

Job aunlwered, € foreknowledge,

wa

Then no doubt ve who can set it vp againes pf he chut a are the men“ alone, thing, who wyll open it? ;

and wyldome chall pe- 15 Weholde, if he withholde the waters, a oy] vithe with pou, they drye vp: pie let then go, they deut J haue vnder- strop the earth. N standing alwell as pe, and am not infe- 16 with him is strength and wysdome:

thinges- ued are his.
Jam as one mocked ok his neighbour, 17 he tarieth awap the wple men asit

e waters that runne by. none to make thee akrapde, pea many i enoane Day, thou chouldest Aine 20 Astor the epes of the vngodly they

GY EX lade: 14. Weholde if he breake downe a thing, d dene

moueth that

nothing fs

comparable to gods power. og can preuatle gaint
é

a

rior to yon: ca who knoweth not these both the deteauer and he that is detea-

e Who calleth vpon God, che heareth were a spoyle, and bringeth the iudges

hit: © The iust € the vpright is laugh- out of their wittes. E nace, edto stozne. 18 He taketh away the subiection of the haa 5 Being as alight despiled inthe heartes people from their kinges, and girdeth mia bk the riche, and as one redy to fall. their lopnes with a bonde. dla s The houles of robbers are in wealth 19 He leadeth away the great men into ue, and prolperitie, and they that malictoul- captiuitie, and turneth the nightie vppon lit meddle against God dwell without fide downe. | wun care, in thole thinges that God hath“ 20 He stoppeth the mouth of them that e geucntrichely with his hände. sdpweahke trueth, e disapopnteth the aged mit 7, Alte the cattaule, 0 and they chall en! oktheir reason. 4 nen’ fourmethee:the foules ok the apze, and 21 He powreth contempt vpon prinees, ben khep hall tell hee. and mahketh the strength of the mightie woe 8 % Drthe entreale of the earth, andit weake. — a fall chew thee: or the fiches of thefta, 22 Toke what lpeth hid in darkenesse eite ald thep chall certifie the. hedeclareth it opensp, and the very shasii, „What is he but he knoweth that the dowe of death bengeth he to light. mnt handeotthe Lome made allthese?: 23 He both increalerh the people and debu, © In whole hande is the soule ok eue- stropeth them, he maketh them to mul: a Tiling thing, and the breath or all tipite, and diminicheth them.

nde. 2g4. He taketh away the hearte of them
N eat not the eares pleatureinheas that be heades of ö people ofthe carth,
8. chatten mouth intating the thing and cauleth them to wander in the wi

en att eaterh dernelle out of the way

~ ‘tan 2 ’ aaa F ray ; >. , ;
80 rome tite perfonsthere is wyse- z They gropeintije barke 15 5 125
Se eä, With Can understanding. and he maketh them

S tree! od ts wyldome and dzunzen man.

mas (Cen no ath itis he that hath tounsell and N f

ty ebe ean eee anne ap the meate is tryed by the taste, end hotfome coanfatle by hearing of tt. cx) Ths aunswert to HA The

BY olde men by expecience grows wele, pet it lo nothing in refrert of gods wpledome,

it.

ebooke e

The. xiii. Chapter.

Job compareth his knowledge with the experience ok his kriendes. 16 The

O, W all (thisihaue J seene with mine eye,

and vnderstande it. what ve knowe, that sanie do J know allo, neither am J inkerior vnto von. j
3 Meuerthelelse, Jtalke with the al-
ö nnghtie, and my desire is to commune

with God. :
4 As kor pou, pe are Workmaifters of
@ erat, pes, and © pnprolitable phisitians altoerte, Ketber.

Woulde God ye kept © pour tongue, for then might pe be take n for Wife nien.
How heare my reasoning, and ponder the argument of my lippes.
7 Wyll you speake wickedlie for gods

Udekence and talke deceitfullp for his
(cause:) 6

reale it with 6

our lpes and taleg to trou: ble me.

(c) Tor the foole holding
5185 peace, is counted wpie, es fatty So-

edreine to re it, but ather to en-

dona. 8 Wyll ve accept the perlon of him or sia: Anal wpyll pe contende fo2 Godpura 9 Shall that heipe you when he talleth

pouto reckening: For as one nian indcketh an other, so do pe mocke him.

10 He shall punishe pou, and reproue pou, ik pe do secretly accept any person.

in chat pe bez

lare gode incr but beause pou

lene a Care

all and humaine rustice

age k 11 Shall not his excellencie make ou atongs, ve krapyde: Shall not his terrible feare fall bene , Won yous wus ca aue 12 Pour“ remembzaunee is tyke vnto a miciojie of sparke, and pour bodies lyke the claye,
= 13 Holde pour tongues for my fake, that
Gene J allo na speake, and my sorowe chal-

lore vexed and tohnented, ag

be the lesse.

mos £4. 18 herefore do JJ beare my fleche in my teeth, aud put n loule in mne 13

tcare mp ach h inp ect

48) ‘Thatis, to let my lpke

handes:

bsc, 1 An that is © borne of
1 woman, Hath but a chort tinte to lpue, and

Vis full ot miserie.
Siz de scommeth vp, and l ce = is cut downe lite a
= —floure: He ficeth as it

heard with mine eare,

penitent shalbe failed, andthebppocrite condempned. r0 he prapeth onto
God that he would not handle him rigorouclp. i

15 Lo, though he slay me, vet wyl J tut 2 in hun: but J wyll reprouc mynẽ wapes in his sight. e
16 He shalbe my saluatson: for there may

no“ hypocrite conte before him. meg

17 Heare diligently my wondes, and pon: Bez der my fayinges with poureares, Gn uo

13 Weholde, now haue J preparcomy wees. iudgement, and knowe that J Mhatbe ar founde w righteous. Nn

What is he that wyllabgo to lawe d dtp me: if J now holde iny © tongue w pe.

20 Meuerthelesse, w. graunt me two dn n. thinges, and then wyll J not hide my wee selle from thee: 1
21 Withdrawe thyne hande from me, and gst let not the fearefull dreade of thee malte met” me afrapdee. bee
22 Then tall, and J wyllaunswere: oz ines,
05 me speake, and geue me then an aun- and.
23 How many are mp mildeedes and aa e sinnes: let me knowe my trandgressi- e ons and offences. „ Le e
24. Mherefore hidest thau thy fate, and dec, holdest me forthyne exemicz

25 Wylt thou breake a leafe driuen to and
Bed wilt thou pursue the drye stub-
2 ate —

26 For thou lapest charply to mp charge,

95 punishest me for the sinnes of iu ö

vou 5 ae * ‘ “te . ne ,
27 Theu puttest myfeete allo inthe 9 stockes, and lokest narowly vnto all ng 25. pathes, and makest the punt thereoat in the heeles of my feet: 7
And F agarottenthingdoconine

wap, at a garment that is motheaten,

kucred from two thuges:

6. De. xiiii. Chapter...

1 Fob detcribeth the chortnes and miterie of the ipfe of man. 14 Hope lustaineth the godly. 22 The condition of mans lpke. a

were a (hao and neuer tontinnech in one state. ' . ah
3 Dbest thou © open thyne eyes Vv 5 such one, and bringe st me into thy (dg 1 ment: — 7 fount
4 Who can make it cleane that commeth bee i of an vncleane thing; no bobye. i The

0 chem ih a

an

vane dayes ol man lurely are deternn- 14. May a dcad manf ne againe bi 5 TU ye number ok his monethes are Dapes of my wer wyll A iat Hi ul wien onelp vnto thee, thou halt mp chaunging shall come.

oynted hun his bondes which he 15 Thou shalt G call (me) and Wa 9 155

auto beyonde. aunlwere thee," despile not chen the 5
Go feont hun, that he may rest vntil! workc ol thyne owne handes. 05170 his day conte Which he loketh kor, ne 16 Foz now thou® number all mp go- ena

lreling doth. N inges, and genet no de wegn ae 7 Far i a tret be cut downe, there iso fmne. lap vnto my a

pe some hope pet that it wyil sproute and 17 Myne iniquitie is sealed vp as it were abe

11 ote foorth the bzaunchesagane. nnä bagge, and thou addest punichement! an. he 3 *yryough the roote of tt be waren olde, vnto my wickednesse. f : * 5

en and khe locke thereof be dead in the 18 The mountames fal away at the tat,

ae grounde: | the rockes are remoued dut ok ther

en het When it getteth the sent or water, place.

men, it Wyll budde and being foorth bowes, 19 The waters pearse through the very ‘
Cee Ipkeasatree that is planted. stones by litie c litle, the foodes Wache

bem 10. But as for man, when he is dead peri- away the grauell and earth: fo shalt ee ” syed, and confumed a wap, What becom- thou destroy the hope of man.

met or hum 20 Thou preuapiest Mil agamst him, so
1 As the waters passe from the lea, and that he passeth away: thou chaungest asthe flood detapeth and drpeth vp: his estate and putteit him from there. or er.

u So man after heis asleepe ryleth not, 21 And whether his children come to he hall not wake tyll the heauens be worship Ono, he can not tell: And if they no niore, nor rife out of his sleepe. be men ok iowe degree, he knoweth not.

13 O that thou wouldest hide me inte 22 But whll his flethe is vpon him it graue, kReepe me steret vntyl thy wia mut haue lorowe: and his soule chall were pat, and to appoynt me a time mourne within him.

The. xv. Chapter,

1 Cliphas reprehendeth Job becaute he alcribeth wyldome and purenes to him lelle. 6 He delcribetg the curle that falleth on the wicked, reckoning
Job to be one of that number.

A
1 en aunlwered Eli- 3 Hatt thou heard the secret counlellok
92 phaz the Themantte, God: and doest thon restraine wyldome 3
2 and saide: to thee- ;
2/| Dballa wyle mans 9 what knowest thou, that we knowe
J aunswere be as the not: And what vnderstandest thou, but winde, and fill a mans we can the lame- N
— 8 beliy as it were with 10 with vs are both olde and aged men, ca cen He winde of the ealt- pea such as haue liued longer thenthy

ade, 6 Dail he reproue With a worde that father. eon nothing worth, e speake the thinges um Thinkest thou it a small thing ofthe
9 (ch can do no good- ee tonsolations of God: with thee is a ly-

const, 7 Durelp thou halt 5

un cast ol feare, and re- ing worde.

an g beam prayer before Gd. 1 Why Doth thyne oo heart so bewitche „ abnemn mouth setteth forth thyne thee + And wherefore winckelt thou 7

„ she tonale, leeing thou halt cholen With thyne epes, © puff bps a"

ihe ¢ qe pleat the craktie. 13 That thy minde is so © pufte bp a des

Nea, cher andnot Ane month tondempneth gainst God, and lettest such wordes go daa

4 ‘pea, thyne owne lippes dut ok thy month: m e nan creagainlcher. 5 14 Whats man that he could be tleane? u a a cee 1 man that euer and he T *
. yee O2 atk tl by he might be vightcous:

thehus Pow ee 15 Wehodde he Wee ae

Pa — —— —

[he booke

© yea, the very heauens are not tleane in —_a fliffe necke fighteth he agatntt him.

his sight: a 27 Where as he Y couereth his face wi
N 16 "Hold 9019 more then an abhominable katnesle, and maketh his body welle thn and vyle man, Which drincketh wicked? king. amen nesse like water. 28 Hherefore shall his dwelling be cw in e
17 J will tel the, heare me, and J will desolate cities, and in houses Which no Gre,
@ewns MO therve thee that Pf Hane seene: man inhabiteth, but are become hrapes unn

übte 10 18 Which Wyle men haue tolde, and haue ok stoncs. bare
Sade not hid chat which they reteaued krom 29 He” shall not be riche, neither thay BB. fache thepr fathers: his substaunte continue, neither chal the krete cules 19 Unto whom alone the earth was geuk, prolperitie thereof be prolonged vpon 229s, mx men and no straunger went among them. earth. ee nene. 20 The c dugodly soroweth all the 30 Pe Mall neuer depart out ol darke- talon

Beichte dapes Of his lle as it were a woman nelle, the flame © (hal drpe vp his ban , det anch with chuͤde, and the numberofate thes, with the blast ol ß mouth (ot God) ies invecde the §=— CANNES peresishbnknoWwen. . chall he be taken away. b wee

m, shalde

lente. v do 21 A careful sounde is euer in his cares, 31 He beleeueth not that he erreth in va- an. dn dens and when he is in peace, the deftroper nmitie, and yet vanitie shalbe his recom-
60 ew: hall come vpon him. pence, |

fee, 22 He beleueth neuer to be delluered Pout 32 He shal periche afore his time be wome oem, dae ok darknesle: kor the lworde is alwayes out, and his” braunche fhall not be ann

Andwyng any on ollpzing

ee, before his eyes. greene. | a een, 23 Pe Wandreth abrode forbread where 33 He chalbe plucked of as an vntimelp

baren och it is, knowing that the day of darke- grape krom the vine, and chall let his ein nelle is redie at his hande. floure fall as the oliue doth.

fa 24 Trouble and anguiche wil make him 34 Foz the congregation of Hypocrites

. afrayde, and tompasse him about, as is chalbe desolate, and the kire Mall ton-

ahing in the middest of an armie. fame the houles of such as are greedie
25 Jor he hath stretched out his hande a to reteaàue giktes.

gaint God, and armed him lelfe against 35 He conceaucth traualle, and beareth the almightie. vanitie, and their body bringeth foorth
2s He runneth proudly vpon him, & with discepte.

The .xvj. (hipter.

¥ Fob moued by the importunacie of his friendes, 7 counteth in what extremitic he ig, v and taketh God witnes of his innocence, 19
(tn Goo

2 Ol aunlwered, € not keasse: And © though J holde my dare
Ne saideee tongue, what am J eased- vane K

2 iN 7 ©) . Hhaueoktimes 7 Wut now that (God hath 1 10 ene PTAC eee heard such thinges: uersitie, thou hast troubled al my con’ rg

eat nulerable ge- regation. ct,
2 : of my gr
000 ber of comfort 3 f And that thou haft filled me with dane are pe all the sort wiinckles my fleche is retorde, and ne es re Sant cyof you. leanenesse ryleth bp against me and
Shan not vanne beareth witnes thereokin my fate. wordes tome pet to an ende? D2 what 9 His Wrath hath torne (me he hateth maketh thee bolde fo to aunlwere- me, e gnacheth vpon me with his teeth: wo ve 4 J coulde speake as ye do also: but myne enemie loketh fiercely vpon me e en. WOuld God that pour e foule werein with his eyes. 8 tee? my soules steade, then could J frame 10 Thep haue opened their mouthes *
Wordes koz vou, and shake nix head at wide bpoume, and © smitten me bpon gerne
Pou: , the cheeke dilpitefuilp, they gather the aa
5Jchounlde comfort pou with my mouth, selues together againstme. been
€ releasse your paine with the talking n God hath chut me vp with the p (a) eon of niplippes. ip, and Delivered me (neg tbe handes h
6 Forall my wordes my sorowe wyll okthe wicked. 24

then tomfozt yim.

Gordes, |

in wealth, but he Hath brought n mut nonght: he hath taken nie by the

arke for him felfe. marchers tompasse me rounde a-
44% Bs aut, he Woundeth my varies, and doth n gotlpare, my bowels hath he powred pponthe grounde.

ath geuen me one wounde vpon

ae 11 and is fallen vpon me lyke a

1 21 sorved a latkecloth vpon my fiinne, and wallowed mp head in the

16 15 face is withered with weeping,

N breath is torrupt, my dapes are shorteued, J am harde at deathes

Juen 5 oe © “ Froward men thy are with me, and myne

my suretie in thy fight: what is he that n klolbweth who wyll promile for niee 4 For thou Halk withholden their
4 hbeartes © from bnderftanding, therecr fore shalt thou not let (event) vp on hie. ina’ 5 He that speaketh slatterie to his kriend, be De epes ok his childzen Malt fayle, bc he Hath made me a byworde of the oe Where as afore J was their brent, i e 7 Pyne epe is dime for verp heauioy 110 and all my strength is lyke a shabay 19 N none, 3 Vertuous men therefore Chall well

ok pour wordes-
Marke well, and then we wpll

3 Phe speake.
Wherfoze are we chmee as beastes,

17 Howbeit necke, he hath all to shaken me, and let

J The. xvii. Chapter.

ob faith that he conlumeth away, and yet doth pactently abyde it. 10 he exhor-
Ah his kriendes to repentaunce, 3 (ewing that he loketh but kor death.

epe must tontinue in

clxxy.

Ein mpne 7 Ewe {hadorwe of death. ere is no“? wicked i) And thernphandes, but“ my praper is 12 2 mete a
13 D earth rouer not thou my blood, and we let“? my crying linde no roome. Babe be
19 For lo, my witnesle is in heauen, and 2 he that knoweth me is in the height. de wens
2% on bann gent me many Wozdes We %,
9 mpne eye God do rccod teares vnto God. EDOM aut 8
21 Othata body might pleate with God, as one man doth with an other:
22 Bet the number of my peres is come, and the way that J mutt go is at hand, 1 from Whence JJ Mall nocturne againe,

pocrisic.
(1) Ho plac to be hyd, but

nocẽt, thonaty man blame nie.

marta bez the innocent shal take part against the hypocrite. 220
9 The righteous allo wp kepe his f
Wap, and he that hath cdeane handes aiuetcDof wyll euer be stronger and stronger. a

wicked are,

10 As for al pou, turne vou and get du ges.

Wing tyat the wit ails ore pinisned fox

hence J pray pou sceing I can not finde one wyse man among pon. An
11 Mp dapes are past, and my counfailes Sen and thoughtes of up heart are bank e, e oo
2 © Chaunging the night into day and zan the light approching into darkenesle. (Sog,
3 Though Jtarp neuer fo much, pet ame the graue is my boule, c J haue made Sn". my bed in the daͤrke. neon
14 J saide to torruption, thou art my fa- ae a ther, and to the wormes, vou are imp ache mother and in sister. 1
15 0 here is then now my hope: or who wren. bath tonsidered the thing that JJ inke

for: These shall go downe with me into

the pit, and lye with me in the dust. 2 q The. xviii. Chapter. oy int ta,
3 1 Bildad rehearseth the paines of the vnkaithtull and wicked. a
I 5 : 2 peration sor
Hen aunlwered and reputed lo vple in pour iht. ee züldad the Sue 4. he destropeth him lelfe with hisan acer,
— Il Bite and lalde: ger: Shall the earth be lorfakteh eue Ke e when wyll ve ftoneremoned out of his place“ becaule ena n n make an endes? okthec- ih On

to the ende ol

ta, the light ol thc vngodlp halbe derer

on an aie of his fire Hall an e

Tae nhisdwel- Sean

6 Che light shall be bee 10 we at 10 a ling, and his candle shall be p with

“The

ce = N

booke

with him. 15 Other men shall dwell in his Donte,

(That ts, he Mall noe attaine ta that
Swhichhe desiret ij. for al his wer and
! might shalbe tak en awap bp hunger.
(e) Meamng, the vngodut
Malbe the lt uction o the sttengtho is own (h

def

The steppes ok his strength shalbe restrapned, and his owne counfarte Mail caft him downe: N

3 Fo2 his feete are taken (as it were in the net e he walketh vpon the snares.

9 The grinne shall take him by the heele, and it Hal catche him that is thirstie of blood.

io The snare is layde for him in the grounde, and a pitfall in the wap.

11 Fearekulnesse shall make him afraide a cuery fide, and (hall driue hum to his cete. f

Baris of ts 12 Hunger fhatbe His strength, and de-

his pastetitit
Thalbc fubrect to most grecnous diltaseg,
(That is,

a cruc dilcase, fone takt it foʒ death that commeth be-,

a (n) That is, more then neede. Foz the number of thein, ig the number of consummotion oʒ fink

bs though
* dar, what haue pou to do with that, the tault us mpne, and not

pourg.

(co Chat ts,
J cannot goe from thef: mp efhictions.

(d) Thati ofinpriches and fubtad
(3 That is, desstoped mp chidzen. fez

childerg
HDICn,

as it i intht prontrbeg.

struction shalbe redye at his side. cy J Mall cate the strength or his owne lhinne, euen the © first borne ot death Hall eate his strength.
14 His hope shalbe rooted out of his dwelling, and (hall bung him to the ging of feare.

and it shalbe none of his, and by thall be scattered vpon his babltanon
16 His rootes shalbe dryed vp beneath. atid aboue Mall his braunchebe tut owe. . (3) hey
17 Pis remembraunte Chait yori wa from theearth, and he cal 1 15 emg name in the streete. a Rite,
1s Thep Ahalldetue hun from the night we into darkenelfe, and chatte Himeleane meen out ofthe worlde. mane
19 He shall neither haue chudren nor kan kinffolkes among his people, no noza- en ny posteritie in his dwellinges. ae,
20 They that toit after hun, chalbe a: x2, stonyed at his dap, and they that go 88, before chalbe afraybee. d
21 Such are now the dwelunges ofthe ane wlcked, and this is the plate ofhimthat knoweth not God.

and Jam gone: my hope Hath he taken awap asa tree pluckt vp by the

"Os bus done.

His Wrath is kindled against me, he taketh me as though J were his ent:
(6; That ls

. . k. 9
2 © His men ok warre come together, sikuiga
Which made their way ouer me, and be-

The xix, (Chapter.
Job reproueth his friendes, ij and reciteth his miteries and greuous patties,
15 He assuret h him lelle of the generall relurrection. i Ob aunswered,
8 SF) and saide:
2 A Dow tong wpyll roote.
S = ve vexe mpfoule, u
3 7 and trouble ine
Ae 3 with wordes- mie, ey PA Feed
Sas haue ye reproched me, and are not az

ut haue laughed me to scorne.

4. Be it that J haue erred in deede, myne errour then remaineth with my selfe.

5 But ik pe wyll aduaunece pour selues a gainst me, and rebuke me for the shame that is come vpon me:

6 now this then, that it is God which
Hath onerthrowẽ me, and hath compat sed ine with his net.

7 If Yconplainc of the violence that is done vnto me, IJ cannot be heard: and il
FJ crye, there is no sentence geuen with

me.

He hath hedged vp my wap that © tan not pasle, and he hath let darkenelle inmppathes.

theageae 9 He hath spoyled mec of myne honour,

gi taken the crowne away from my head.
10 Pe hath destroped me on euerp fide

sieged my dwelling rounde about.
13 He hath put my brethren farre away krom me, and mne atquaintaunce are alfo become straungers vnto me.
14 Myne owne kinsckolkes haue fozsaken me, and my best acquainted haue forgotten me. ote
1 The seruauntes and mapdens of i myne owne Houle toke me foz a frau ger, and Jam beconie as an aliaunt in their sight.
16 Peatled my seruaunt, and he gaue me
5 cee (no though) Y praped hum ith my mouth.
17 Pyne owne wpfe might not Ahe my breath, though J praped her for the thildzen sake ol myne owne bodb. d
18 Bea, the young men despiled me, a when FJ role they spake cuill bpon 00 5
19 All my most fannliers abhored 15 5 and they whom J loued best, are 1 5

Un tha ae mp aon.

te of c=

damen.

1 Sttanse

elde und:

tener ( ns

| thirthought)
Sephari:

Krupted hie

tet,

| bought bos

fed ns baue,

Licht Sod
Rept) fant but the teptntuant

shit (panes tee aicayle

dim aen lung tou:

thet hun, and

Ratha It de-
Md h bͤldge

ls ganr te tunleste

cone,
(hZouhaz

Windy

Sift,

20 W as lll i

D with n When Wirk

15 ae Te cleaueth to my skinne o my liehe, onelp there is let me che kanne about inpterth. — aue pitie vpon mie, haute pitie Doon me, O ve my W for the bande of d hach touched me. arr 95 ye petlernte me as Cod [dot] ald are not latiltied with ni fleshe-

00 O that mp wordes were now weit: ten, that they were put in a booke,
And grauen with an tron penne in leade, oi in stone, to continue.

25 For Jamsure “ that up redeemer

huzth and he tall rapse b at the la: dap them that lye in the dul. *
7 fe mp fkinne the destroy this bodp, pet tha
I fee God in my sieche: ae ad ae
27 Whom FH mp selfe hall lee, and nipne eyes (hall beholde, and none other fo2

me, though mp rates are conlumed within me,

28 But pe fatde, why is he persetutede and N

there was a deepe matter in me.
29 0 But beware of the [worde: forthe

word wylbe auenged ok wickednesle, .

and be sure that there isa indgement.

The. xx. (hapter.

Sophar sheweth that the wicked and the couetous Mail haue a short ende,

az though kor a time they kloriche.

Hen anuuswered Sophar the Maamathite, aud (ADC:

; Jor the same tause do c my thoughtes cont:

10 : and therefore , make atte,
J haue sufficientlp heard the@checking of my reprooke, therefore the spirite of f 1 vnderstanding cauleth me to aunere.

6 Though he be magmlied vp to the

heauen, fo that his head to the cloudes: at his Head reacheth br

. e Wall vanishe asa dreame, fo that aero moe bekounde, and hal paͤlle
5 apas a vision in the night. fie that the eye which lawe him betine Jal haue no moze fight of him, and a: erate halt know hun no morc. they beet shalbt faine to agree with

E b
* ergehen bis handes shall restore

oepleasures duch his pones are “ full
ö 722 ut now {l 1

lkednelle wasOfpecte inhis
5 en Seb sweett in hi

pelt me to aunswere,

13 That he fauoured, that would he not forsake, but kept it close in his throte.
14 The bread that he did eate, is turned eo

the@poyfon of serpentes within his 5

bodpe.

15 The riches that he deuoured chau he parbreakc againe: for God shall dae them out of his belly.

19 Pc shall sucke the “gall of ferpentes,

and the adders tongue Hall lap him:

17 So that he shall no moze fee the © ry-

ters and brookes of honp and butter.
13 The thing he bath laboured foz; shall he restore, and ™ shalt not cate of it:

great trauaile shall he make for riches, ©

but he shall not enioy them.

16. And why: he hath oppresled the podrt, i it and not helped them: houses hah he ob

spoyled, and not biulded them.

20 weeanle he could not percraue when his belly was well, through his greedie

desire he shall not eseape.

fi
21 There “ shall none ok his meate bt ve left, therekore shall no man lolte fo: his

goodes.

22 When he had plenteousnesse of euery thing, yet was he poore, though he was helped on euery side.

23 Andit Mail come to passe, that wherewith he purpoled to fell his belly, Go
Mall potbee the furie of his wraththeron, and shall canfe his indignation to raigne vpon him, and vpon hisnicate.

24 Me Mail flee from the trou weapon,

Tand the bowe of stecle fall strike dun
“though.

ms nero Tal on lb

suer aude güstering wor

dut ol the quer, aud ag 1970 30

there wieked endeudur tone placc zu, pet
God wpll hercafter eenlidet him, and be reuenged ok the eupll.

(30 Tht btefz ling of the

ic bed ig tt ned into curieg, wißerdy that which to ocherg is lwoeere foode, to them it nate popsan.
(h Be Matt recceu e curs ng. Ind here pli gotten geodeg are lilicned to the serpentes gall, sor So: pyar fallelp thought

YThet ler,
Ue shall want obs blesüng,

\ hig hepzes and exccuterg shall gape ut vamc.

through 15 gall of him: fo feare shall

) That s. tome ppon him.

end herr 26 All darknelle halbe hid iu their secrete

e ebe, plates, an vnkindled fire fal tonsume hum: aud loke what remaineth in his

bananen o House, it halbe destroyed. a5

te bee, 27 The heauen hal~dectare his wicked-

began, nelle, and the earth shall take part az

that Mall not
Aa

tgeth Job loz that his niendeg and

thinges hurt= tot

niuch that chep blaspheme God. 15

Wicked.

Ob aunlwered, and fade:

[DO heare diligently emp wozdes, and that
0% chalbe in steede of pour
| confolations,

Suiter_ me that J

map speake, and when J haue lpoken

co? pou.
(Y Chat ig.
Becpe filence.
(e Job pro-

pede nech agate

this disputation:- nabich ifit Were so,
KHeulde notmy ppirite then be in fore trouble- e
5 Macke mel well] and be abathed, and
0 lay pout hande vpon pour mouth.
FO2 when F consider (niz tele) I am alrapde, and ny flethe is nutten with

lung to con: 6
Keane the senteces befort which are

true: but

Mee 7 10hereloze © do wicked men line, eee come to their olde age, and increase in

rlchesse- N - erde, 8 Their chüldren lpue in their light, and their generation befoze their eyes.
9 Their houses are safe from all feare, and the rod of God is not bpon them.
10 Their bullocke gendreth and that not dut of time, their cowe calueth and is not vnkruitkull. n They lende foorth their children by flockes, e their sonnes cleave the) dauncc.

harpes, and reioyte in the lounde of the
Dans, —
13 They (pend their dayes in wealthines,

d Hot being aged

ah long but fedainely they go downe to the tech, raue.

mi ete, 4 They fay alfo vnto Goo: © Go from ut by the

wicktdnene Pg, We Defive not the knowledge of thy

er: wäpes.

pen” 15 Who is the almightie that We chould serue han: And What profite should we

haue il we should pray vnto hun

16. , there is vtterly no goodnesse in

he booke

18 Dea, thep chalbe cuen as met 4 Js t ko: ch mans fake that J make

12 They heave with them tabrets and

gaint hin. 3 %

28 The subscaunte that he bath in his houte, halbe taken away and perishe

in the day ol the Lordes wrath,

This is the postion that the wicked man thal haue of God, and the heritage that he may loke forok God, because of his wordes.

J The. xxt Chapter.

Job declareth how the proĩperitie ot the wicked maketh them proude, into
16 Cheir destruction is at hande. 2; None ought to be iudged wicked kor akkliction, neither good kor prolperit ie.

their hande, therefore wyil J not haue to do wich the counfaite of the vngodly. , Tht
17 How oft shallthe “candell of the wie: ward
Keo be put out, and their destructlon wan. come vpon theme O what sorowe hart
God gene them kor their part in his wath: hay belore the winde, and as chaffe that the storme tavieth away.
10 God wyll lay vp the sorowe of the fa: ther fo his chuldren: e when he relwardeth him, he shall know it.
20 Their owne miferic shal they fee with their eyes, and dzinke of the fearefull
Wath ofthe alinightie. N
21, Foz what tareth he for his houle after dagen his death, when the © number ok his Wee monethes is cut short- ihrem
22 Seeing God hath the highest power af all, who can teache him any know: edge?
23 Mue dypeth in his full strength, be- spec, ing in all eale and prosperitie, ü,
24. dts breastes are full of nuiske, and his ane bones runne full of mavoive. ei arte
25 Another dyeth in the bitternes of his wnt foule,and neuer eateth with plealure. h
26 They Chali Meepe both alplke in the ro earth, and the wonmes Ayall couer acer them. he ee
27 Weholde © Pknorw what pe thinke, 4 peaand the subtiltie that ve imagine a 5 gainst me. * been
28 Nor pe fay where is the peintes pa. ene, latez and where is the dwelling of the e vngodlip- men
29 Paue pe not alted them that go by the
Ways Doubtiesse pe cannot denie their tokens,
30 That the wicked is kept vnto e of deftruction, and the vugodly halbe ebe dar ore e

pare declare his way to his face: who wurewarde him korthat he doth: e = W u he be brought to His graue, and Ach the flpmiie bailey be [wet men alfo must folowe

l

arc,
Tt 2Eli

OMEliphas the Themamte gauc aun s swere, and sapde:

Map a man be prof:

b W 2 : euisomp N * 4
505 7 5 oy table vnto God, as he e 12 — that ts wile may be pro-

fitable vnto hlin selfe-
3 Js it anp aduauntage to the almightie chat thou art righteous- 07 hall it proite him that thou makest thy wapes perfects |
4 Js he akrapde to reproue thee, and to
Rep forth with thee into mbgemient: nse 5 Js not thy wickednesle great , and miso thy bugratious Deedes innumerablecom 6 Forthou“ hasttaken the pledge from rae thy brother for naught, and robbed the ee, naked oktheir clothing. now 7 Tosuch as were weerp, Hat thou geuen cre no water to drinke, e hast withdrawen
Rah. brcad fromthe hungrie. casa 9 But the mightie man had the earth, and tren be that was in auttoritie dwelt in it. mony 9 Thou hast lent e away empeen die the fatherlesle were en.

hep are

OUD God know: thedarke clones tan he tudge through

14 Luthe, the cloudes cone
; r him that he
1 Ee and he walketh onthe top
10 bog marked the wap of the wold,
5 whi Wicked men haue walked? che were tut downe out of time,

of lob.

1 Chapter.

firmech that Job is punithed foz his tinnes. s he acculeth him ot vnmercikulnelle, 98 that he denied gods prouidence. 21 he exhorteth hym to repentaunce. 3

clxxvi}. him as there are innumerad : fore him. table gone be-

34. Howe bayne thenis the comfort that

pe geue me, seyng faschood r in all Pour dunfiwerest —

and whole © foundation was as ouer flowing rpuer.

17 Whiche sapd vnto God, Gafcom vs: and alked what the almightie toulde do

an h hute, vnsure and vnstable.

korthem-
18 he filled their houses with good things: but the counsell ol the vngodiy be farre from me.
19 The righteous sawe it and were glad, and the innocent laughed then to lcorne.
20 Js our substaunte hewen downe As d eas foz the remnaunt ofthem the fire bath de pee: tonsunied. : ChoCliphas
Thereforereconcile thee vnto God, we and be at peate:so shall au thinges prof Saye pere with thee right well. N ane
22 Reccaue J pray thee the lawe at his *
75 ,and lap vp his wordes in thyne eart. 8
23 For ił thou wilt turne to the alinightie, thou shalt be buyld vp, and put all vnrighteousnes from thy dweiung.
24 Thou chalt lap vp golde Cas plentpful] as the dust, and the golde of Ophir as the flyntes or the riuecs.
25 Bea almightie God his owne selfe shalbe thy delente, and thou shalt haue plentie of filuer.
26 Then shalt thou haue thy delite in the almightie, and lift vp thy face vnto God.
27 Then shalt thou make thy praper bez to hum, and he shall heare thee, and thou | ore
Malt “kepe thy pronuses.

| 28 Thou that allo decree a thing, and he 0 Ther.
3 eutthon therfore fay , Tushe, howe -

Mali establishe it vnto thee , and the“ . # light shall Mine in thy wapes.

29 Whenc tte wicked he cast downe, thou shalt fay, Jam liłted bp:and God shall saue the bumble person.

30 The innotent Mat deliner the Plande: 1
Mit shalbe preserued by the purenelle of e thyne handes. ‘si

Bightcous are.

Ze i The

Thebooke

The xxiii. Chapter. ;

ob affirmeth that he both knoweth and feareth the power and sentente ol the
‘iat. jo und chat he is not puniched only for his sinnes.

; ae Ob aunswered, ¢ (aid:
1 2 Iwan Though uy talke be

# 4 this dap in bitter-
. nesle, and my plague
Fab een be, % greater then my gronet, 2 ning.

3 f G that J™ might db know him, and linde bint , and that J
2 might come before his seate: bead 4. J Woulde pleade my taule before hym,

and fill my mouth with argumentes:
5 Iwoulde knowe what aunswere he

Woulde geue me, and vnderstande what

he woulde say vnto mee.

6 Will he pleade against me with his great power: No, but he will make me the stronger.

There the righteous might dispute with him, so shoulde J be deliuered for euer from my iudge.

8 Wehold, though J go forwarde J find him not: If J go backwarde, J can get no knowledge o hym:

9 If Igoonthe lelt side where he doth his Worzke, Y can not attapne vnto Him:

es hun, where
She, oz where might J fund him, to pleade mp cause de-

loze zum.

deth him selfe that J can not ses hym.
10 But as for my wap, he kuoweth it, and es me, that as the gold J may come dorth.
1 My koote doth kepe his path, his hie way haue J holden, and will not go 5 8 fo 77

of it. Enn
12 J Will not fozsake the tommaundement tony of his lippes, J haue esteemed the dae, wordes of his mouth moze then mne appoynted foode.
31 He is still at one poynt, ande) who can ne turne him: he doth as him listeth, and ee, bringeth to passe What he will. fal.
14 He perfourmeth the thing that is ap: an poynted for me, and many fuch thinges Feo", both) he. a Appopnitd
15 This is the tause that 3

prelente, so that when b thane
J do keane hig

the almightie putteth me in keare. 08

mübechlt co

Agalne, lk J goon the right live, he hy- bc.
Care
. | ae
„ 3 end of my
The. xxiiii. Chapter. brs
1 Job deferibety che wickednelle ormen, and heweth what cure belongech to che wicked. u how all thinges are gouerned by gods prouidence, and the destruction of the wicked.

„ ce) Thulb,
1 S<o Onlideringe thenthat times to spoyle: Bea the very“ wilder- H dor ech ob ere is no time hyd nelle ministreth foode for ther e tele wa

e epveritcom the almightie, children. ö

how happeneth it that they which know him

cording to wWorldly wit in mãskecble nas

| 1 do not regarde his ane n oe
2 Fo2 fome men remoue the lande-

that Sod conidncth not the tune g.

t . cur-

ca ctneltie of ic

markes, robbe menof their cattell, and feede of the fame:

3 hey driue away the alle of the father: lesse, and take the Wpdowesore fora pledge:

hyde them (eines together.
5 Webhoide,asiilveales tn the desert do they foorth to their worke, & ryse be-

4 They tanse the poore to turne out off the way, so that the poore of the earch

6 Chey reape the come fielde thatisnct their owne, and let the bincparde okthe vngodly alone. —

7 They cause the naked to lodge without garment, and without couering inthe colde. a

3 They are wet with the chowzes © the mountapnes, and embrate the voce for want ofà couering.

5 Thep plucke the fatherlesse from the

brest, and take the pledge front poore. ' «
10 They let hym go naked withou thing, and haue taken away the kale ok the hungrie. u The

efayne to labour in their
: THe pues, ara and to reade in their oyle 1 elles ald vet to lutker shite. vw out ol the titie crye vnto the Lord

= with fighing, the soules of the layne alcompe they are tonuerlaunt among g they are tonuer lau v= sare al)O2E the light, they know not his way, to2 continue in his pathes.
The murtherer rpleth early and bt lech the poore and nerdy, and in the night is as a thiele-

Mepeof the adulterer wapteth

e 4 1 7 barkeit efapth, There hall be ug eye lee me:rand disgutleth his kate.

ae lo ehe | 1 gen 16 In the dare they digge 8

; houles whiche they marked fo hem

seiues in the day time: they knowe not

the tight.

: norning is to them euen as the
G wowof neath : if one knowthem, they are in theterrours of the chadowe

f dea ‘ —
15 a a ongable is lwytt bpon the water:

pet God regardeth not their

their portion chalbe tursed in the carth.
5 — Ppa not beholde the way of che
19 Ag the drpe grounde and heate o tonsume the fnowye waters: fo Malt the graue the sinners.

line vncoz rerted in tlg

shalbe fiveeteto the wormes, he halbe en.

no idee remembied, L his wichednelfe ane

fhe pu ted at all.

chalbe broken as a tree. 8

21 He hath oppressed the barten that tan not beare, and vnto the wydow hath he done no good.

22 Hecb drue the mightie after hym with his power, and when he was gotten vp Pose, no man was lure of lyfe. wilo

23 And though they gane him to be in lake ungen e tie, pet his eyes are vpon their wapes.

24 They are exalted for a litle, but (ortiz) are gone, brought to pouertte, and taken out of the wap, pea and vtterip pluckt of, as the cares of corne.

25 Sst not loz Who will then reproue me as Alper, and fap that my wodes are nothing worth-

ene
When thep haue plagu

(h) Then J lde net, none oi pou con teprout me,

The.xxv . Chapter.

Bildad proueth that no man is cleane nor without sinne Before God.

God, be lustifledorhow tan he be cleane (ce ne

q woildt, pttat

20 Hhepitifull man chall forget hynt he e de,

ö

a, — (ee ayde: that is bone ofa woman: erga 1 ieee ae AD Is there power 5 Weholde themoone Mypneth nothing tro.”
Bie Sed and keare with hima- in comparilon to him, and the starres bare
, bea aE un e are Beane SDE at (liu Se rar peace Atttiig in his 6 f . ge Dyabne ice e, . en “cozruption , and the lonne of man ee he
Stan, 3 Js there any number of his armes, which is but a worme-

a and ppon whom chal not his light arile e

bus. Me nett ty

ney 2767.2. 30 2 L „

tua . The.xxvi. Chapter e

EE

Ovauntwered and fapdes 3 hö hast thou hel-

out strength : sauest
11 19 70 a that hath no frength z ct 3 Where isthe tounsayle that thou chor
. geue hum which Hath no wildomeine chewed the way ok right lp-

+ Xo whom hat thou fpoken thele

SED

Vy | pedeHini thatts with-

Job Hietweey that man tan not belpe God, and proueth tt by his miracles.

Wordes: who made the breath to come

out of thy mouthe cheng
5 Ware not dead thinges shapen on- tate

der the waters, and thinges by the wa- ‘on ters fide? ‘3 * N hem e
6 Spe is naked before him, and the berp mete ave eee tt selle can not be bydoutof vie Sts is fight. mrt pa un be senpeth ont the north over the ei euiptie place, and pangeth the earth e Kin nn

hingen. vpon nothing. 24 8 He bowir of,

mailestie,
Sp) tch ate the h
8g.
(t) That to.

edden hath pulero

at igh: order ot

the Hebzutg
Or

alf lic Rong ove

| o gttcuous

thatmenudgt

me only by dut warde fhewe to be
Spicwed.
(t) That is,

a0 long ao f EI fk the

(e) Ot m lozmet life

past

ec lint 18, becaust ther repzehenocd int vn worthy-
Ip, thep tathet might be actompted wick cb. and toc plagne
Phat light on them, and be ryd from nit. g) what tunpleth it a mantl he gapne all the
Worzld, g lost his owne
Soule 7
(h) we hane

bdy. Bod
Doth here vg.
Cy Shehppas crite neuher

Oz, bande.

neng, ouercth from Io

d long as tht dlde· cndu-

Feat u Theo very pillers of heauen tremble

vnder heauen.

5 God forzbpd that

t the cloude is not broken vnder them.

9 He holdeth backe the fate of his throͤne, 13

and spreadeth his donde before it.

night tome to an ende. and quake at his reproole.

saz he lillleth the fea with his power, and

deth al things
De. xxvii. Chapter.

Che constancie and perlectnesse of Job. Che reward or the wicked

and ofthe tirauntes.

MD Job proteeded
5 and went foorth in his
| parable faying, ’

As God lpueth hath ta -

— —nient and the almightie that hath w vexed my minde:

3 Whple nip breath is inme, Hand the

winde that God hath geuen me is in my nostrels, ini

my tongue ali speake no disceite. chould graunt pour taule to be right: As for me, vntill mne end come will o JJ neuer go fro mpne innocentie. — ‘

r 6 Pyrighteous dealing kepe FBfatt,

Which J will not forsake: mp Heart hai not reprone me of my dapes.

7 Therkore h mpne eneinte chalbe founde

as the vngodly, and he that taketh part against me, as the vnrighteous.
8 Foz what hope hath the hypocrite

though he haue great good if God take -

away his soule:

wulo God heare his crye, when trou-

bie tommeth vpon him

10 ath he such pleasure and delite in the alinightic, “that he dare alwap call bpon God: * te

He hath compatled the waters with tertayne boundes, dnitill the day and 14

i Oehold, all ye pour selues haue feene

em —

5 Wa 90 4 IN ste,
Hts spirite bath garnithed the Cae Pau, uens, æ his hand bath made the my abe a. ke d serpent. N e e bruce
To, this is now a® short summe of his dne, wapes: but Hobe litle a portion heare van we dkhym e who can vnderstande the Fun, thunder of his po were daa
; ete 0 LOT. SAH 10% N 0
‘ 532390 . ee

2 + Comparito
3 ther 1

Pew, ute is layde by ou, and Aa
Poor blinsneg wlll cot pers
* tolts
That o,
Onip the

tt thy then do pe thus vanishe in ba: nitie

13 Saping: This is the portion that the wicked haue of God, and the heritage that tyrauntes hall receaue ok the ab sn’
Athen A i A b c Wan

14. It he get many children, they Chall pes dan ser rilhe With the lworde, and his bottertte * shall haue scarcenesse of bread,

5 15 Dis remnaunt chalbe buried in death,
4 My lippes shall talke of no vanitie, and

and his widowes shall not weepe.
16 Though hecwheape vp siluer as the ent dust, and prepare rayment as the clap: Anu
17 De map well prepare it, but the godiy daten chall put it on, and the innocent tail 1 deale out the moneßp. Feen,
18 HeMbuplodeth his houle as the moth, € v2 asa booth that the watchman maketh. caunation:

19 When the riche man fleepeth, he shall e N

not be gathered (to his tatzers Ithey oßened their eyes, and he was gone. % che
20 Terrour taketh holde vpon hym as n

à water fludde, and the tempest ltealeth him awap in the night se alson. Cp) hats,

21 Aw vehement east winde carpeth him Ran

Hence, and he departeth: a storme hurleth him out ol his plate. an
22 God shal tast vpon him, and not {pare, dean ee, though he woulde fapne flee out or his ar

the tunes

blown den
N ter dtaͤth

hande. 1 4 a — ;
23 Then clap men their handes at hym, and hisse at him out of his place.

Tl

weäkt, oft

“a ~
8 He byndeth the water in his doudes, though his wyldome fupteth he the

streete: The nthe

ny scate in th <<

pare

— et le. t in m
= Ys archeab is not 1
I.. ae vnse Dye ich me. er th tha her 14 eafi t be go e bou „ Denies
1 8. — ee W . — Sinai
Job thee — 4 — ip n Bg ts a aught is 15 mat * 112 Saphir et Doh
Iller is pere gol 5 a lee Uchaube wie 55
90 hiv wh ed #20 nix er. chzista fhatve Tome wet od 2 alten 7 m 80 benen igen 5 e ea . trpe re yr unde, e- be va either ober e zal no; 1 jas! Whe he gro d to m No, n Won e of Coy e pre- facet Bb
45 toft foluc bed i7 all vn of fu mad — dae, eco Fon c u ate be e a on tones f j fo . — — — chau not be ae ae 2 mse — — maa bis: cath cha lued an
1155 : : nelle at e groun and th 18 ofthe 117 ober 10 aint vere n it Ke , 22 ioust as ither e. : And aes, ll. * arke cot Dar 2 tou 13) op eith old er d
25 7 ge ale 2 Ahe malt e C+. am ie’ ende: sie tone sto babe mates a e E. equ inges, foea DDC ndt hyg the bene fbn fall m vit.
15 oe the flu 1 — 5 place 0 calles of thes s ue
15 had h » bepng eth unh isthe 1. = We ha a es Bea 1 ant a tee a Beate 1 5 ie — ce ae daher ft fa ee ai. ei Od vnd pla 22 arde seeth nde 8 vn die, gead, and al a de. e he od e e atts ma 1 esof tt fis gol _ vue aoe 0 i:
5 “ik fone arte sane nt, 2 ee LONE s and me ene £ and ti e hã alke F an inde
1 p here is vultur help on wo auen. ed th he ra he
* 0 8 w th. e vp t hee wap . 03 t { th ne / Gen the in bbe bishambeD the ere sgn i : 0 tele en th rt 8 2 ¢ mai ed he 8 are g 0 her tte out ke sur he the clave rani pest dw Onn nd 8. lo hen fo? Ide ie ue an here ret. 85 f 1 ay en bebe
8 ON en otkes 1 er, th ehe the ¢ bath fo e 9 [ dome r byth kthe r th it. = er: fee het knew fare ll dag stot the taynes out ol eye see ey don 5 thund vd he and 20 Tg ke cuy gate 5%, fe pas ean ye bein 15 ae 155 to forsa 1 1255 pease ID 8 5 flu f d er, to! le, due
255 at is the ing : an 0 d vn don dn 8 ate Wh deth he th de: r. An Toy diente bin. ne bin aud th oun wg? 8 cis ing. cate of ae seat ca ne 7 is babee anil ae fee of pote D inthe '
2 — „ derts tye foun cx. Oe 2 bis en Jwas e 0 1 eris che *. C f. 7. n. fe: eel ly no j eith > xxx epa i he u
88 0 ae ae e 25 te of ebe im de with 8 re
, ande of the ennie e bre t ftoo night wa de a 5 aner at Lott pater man —. equite, A8 | when G ughtt stoo sone Fo focus CH) Bhan | S e Nad + poung en the nn uer we 1 a atone saben | hen r fon ae iar a 125 ob p in hi me, es onie to ewe
2 : Daina ae me, sre a ben ne ees dann. re E N w le, sayin were yes Wh and w le: the ga en J * te V Dee ithe bate — riuers el . en
INS W was d cen ben en 8
1 2) when eM head, dhe und
: Yt if be an
8 thine fame lle: me: High t fa ¢ henhis 1 atte 10 e darkn ert, 3 10 en Jwe rough th e Mining euenth mate

‘The booke gene 8 Lhepoung men saw me and hidthem teeth. — —

deen selues, and thecw aged arose, and stoode 18 Then J sapde, J Chait die in

ae p. and J hall multiplie my da fad ie 9 heco puntes left of their talking, and fande. 3 — cat tome oe laped their handtotheivmouth: 19) For my™roote was spread out by the ,

mien 10 The nughtie kept Mill their vopce, and water side: and the“ deawe lap bpon sees’ bee hne their tongue cleaued to the roofe of ther um torne. ati, the great mouth. 20 Myne honour encreased moe and wen,

oe" nobentheearebeardme,stbiellenmie:€ — moze , Emp bow was euer the Grog. cok",
: 8 Nite he!

den e when the eve sawe me, ft gaue witnelle ger in my hande.

tue founsee to nie: 21 Unto me men gaue care, me thepre- et
Crowle 12 40: Je delnered the pooze when he garded and wih stilente they taried fo; ho ty
Somaooe kkped and the katherlesle, and hvm that mp counseil. Wi wa,

widowes heart ts reiopte and gaped bpon me, as sthe grounds doeh Nan
14 And why: Jput vpon ms righteoul- toretceaueathe latter shoure. 1

nee nelle Which couered meas d garment, 24. dohen Plaughed,they beleueditnot,

poocandiud= and equitie was my crowne. i} the light of mp countenaunte would
Fance 15 J was an epe to the blinde, and a foote they not put out.
> totbelame, e. 25 When Jagreed vnto their way J bete pg. 16 J was a father to the poore:and when Was thechiefe, and sate ag a king with bez. J unewe not the cause, J sought it out his arme abont him and when they
. diligentlp. fi F. Ot, ! 7 i 2 were in heauinesle, J Was their com: iyerpamite. 3.7 JJ brake Meares of the vnrighte- fogtour, nr.

ous inan, and pluckt the spoyle out of his i

2 fe ~ ata slant «aalea.* e alt 10 sadn st ssc lose

fet ed

2 a

id ; 1 1 no
Job complayneth that he is contemnedof the mos contemptible, 11,21. becaufe k Ent

his aduerlitie and atliction. z eat is the houle of all sheshe.

Wye: ore

bun he dere Had none to helpe hymn.. 22 After my woordes they replled not, fab a?

poco oor 3 The blelling of him that was redyto and my talke Doppeddponthem, —” Sime perishe tame vᷣpon me, and J cauled the 23 They wwapted for me as fo2 the raine: n

The 5 XXX ° Chapter . a diasenis and 8

AI At nowe they that 6 Their“ dwelling was in the tleltes ieee bete e (ea) wa ave pounger then ol brookes, vea in che caues and dennes vier,
Feen. 27 Haut me in deriston: og theearth. ben mi
"only, 8 bere 84 pes euen they whole 7 Among the busches Went they about coos ban h Jt fathers woͤuldhaue crping, and vnder the thomes they ga. , a A, thought {rome to haue thered them selues together. u nine re

thein to pzout them. ’

ss sp cattell,

fet with the doggesok 8 They were the chüdzen of fooles and si vruyllapnes, which are more bite then the iret

at aut meaturs,

(They now * g 5

beige me, 2. F02 wherto might the strength of ; earth. 7) — ob e i penne
Aeon their handes haue feruedme ¢ forzthe How am FH their long, eam beconie an

mac kite was but lost among them. their pesting stocke. ine

N f f l — pnd ben, beiten 3 FopDerpOmiferie and hunger they sled 10 Theß abhorre me and flee farre from ae

bee e rible and waste,

reth

n Betaule God hath loosed nip torde

a into the wildernesse, a darke plate, hoz’ me, and stapne my fate with spittle. Fee

that Jahn 5

a 0
Fe 4 Plucking bp nettles among the and humbledme- they haue looled the ee

ugleb hin,

and spewet) - NCATE. OL IGS 10711

kleene bullhes, and the tumper rootes kor theirr Obndle befoze me.

vntu their fas

daa after a thiefe wapes of their deltruction. or

ag nd

ung aue
. f u Upon mpôhright hande rplethe ven ar
Sune 5 And when thep were drpuen foorth, men againtt me , they haue hurt MY aan

ant, rout de

ROOT “TOR re 5 . g i e fate e nien erped alter then as it had ben ak. fete, treading bpon me as wpon the pee

fo ealpe for them to do me tmnt they needed no man to help

ge sem. it had ben the
* Ivponme, asit h 5
Walen of waters, and tame in heapes to destroy me. ber
1 Feare is turned vpon me, and t hey purf fue my soule as the wind and my health passeth awap asa cloude. ge 6 Therkoze is my soule now potbred ont vpon me, and 5 en my trouble e taken hold bpon me.
2 55 vones are pearsed through in the

1 ane niarred
13 My mpathes haue they cle : t

nd my fineives take no 3 a eee 27 Dy bobbels seethe in me withont rest,

rest. the vehementie ol sorowe is my
1 Py! haere whiche compafletiy me about as the toller of my coote.
. he hath talt me into the mpre, and J no am betonte like asches and dust. a, gowhen” J erie vnto thee thon doest not heaͤre me: and though J stande befoze thec yet thou regardest ine not. ms oy 1 Thon art betome imyne eneinie, and
Reed, With thy violent hande thou takest part
} against nie.
22 In times past thou diddest w fet me vp onhye to be caried as it were aboue the wynde, (but nowe hast thou geuen mea

ae aa
23 Sure Jam that thon wilt bryng me vnto death, euen tothe wlodgt n is due Muto all men ba. 2 ee J
24. Not withstanding, thou wilt not zue“ stretch out thyne hand against him that K is in the graue: hal men erie out againtt ee hun that is in destruttion- =
25 Dpd not J weepe with hym that was in trouble-Had not my soule compaffion bpon the poore-
26 Het neuerthelesse, whereas toked for good, euyll came vnto nte:€ where Jene
3 19 kor light, there tame darke- they, Sate we esse i

for the dayes of mp trouble are come vpon me.
28 J went mourning without heate , J stoode vy inthe congregation, a ocom- Sade teme muned with them tabic, anb ip
29 Wut nowe Jam a brother of dragons, nz and a felowẽ of Estriches. cally 1 conte
30 My (kinnebponine is Cturned] to (0 Pagen eee „aud my bones are brent with Ser kate. Oye trouble
13 hy harpeis turned to mourning, and my owgans into the vopte ok them that weepe.

De. xxxi. Chapter.

Job reciteth he innocentie of his liuing. and number of his vertues, which declareth what oughtto be the {pte of the kapthtull. i

Made a“ couenaunt with myne eyes: why then thould J toke
, || Dpona map den-

Qual Tar] te

meat’ 4 Doth not he lee my wayes, and tell all

Rly gopnges
% si 5 a3 haue walked indꝰvanitie, or if my en lee haue runne to dilte aue:

an, © Wet me be wapedin an e gaben an euen balaunce that God map see mpne iunocentie. g
7 weht lp steppe ath turned out of the
1 ak np ne Heart walked after myne ed lf anp blot haue cleaued to my

8 Then hau J towe , and an other eate:

pea my" posteritie halbe cleane rooted ee. du

9 um heart haue ben deteaued by a
Woman, orzif J haue lapde wapte at my neyghbours doore: 8

10 Then let mp wife grinde vnto an o- e br. man, and let other men lye with mes bron

er. N (He hough N

n Forthis is a wickednesle, and sinne that ren ock

is worthy to be punished: a

(e) Let her de a do nde

ted, ptt gods plague will

12 Bea a fire that vtter ly should conlunne ease

and roote out all my intrease. b
;. HE I euer thought storue to do right x e vnto mp leruauntes c mapdens, when ee, they had any matter against me: of mp rea
14 When Goo wilt sit in indgement, 2 en what hall J do- e when he willbilite Fete me, what aunswere Hal J geue him: gen
15 He that fashtoned nie in my mothers Avtebere, wombe, made he not him also-were we en not both Hapen a like in our mothers aan bodie 8? 2 a

=z 4 16 It substaun. e,

or haue caulen the tyes of the wydow to wapte in vapne: omens, 17 If J haue eaten my“ morsell alone,

bn enn that p fatherlesse hath not eaten therok: bh dtn 18 (For Front my pouth it hath growen vp

and toldosoceo.

with me as With a father, and from my

mothers wombe J haue ben guyde to

the (wrdowe))
19 HE J haue stene any perishe for want of clothing, or any poore for lake of rap-

| ment: 14

20 It his lopnes haue not blessed me, becãule he was warmed with the flerte of iny sheepe:

CY Fa haut lift vp mine hand against the katherlesle, when lawe that J might helpe hun inthe gate: ' d

22 Thenlet myne arne fall fro my shoulder, and myne arme holes be broken from the bone.

23 Fo; H haue euer feared the vengeaunce and punishment of God, and lünewe very

wellthat]. J was not able to beare his burthen. — 5

24 Haie J put my trust in goldes or haue
IJ sapde to the Wedge of golde, thou art mp confidences f >

25 Haue J retopeed because my power

was greãt, and because my bande gat fo er tye much: nd per 26 Dpyd J euer greatly regarde the“ V rytong dane fing of the sunne - or had J the goyng downe ok the moone in great reputa-

of moont, he incaneth the

16 HF denied the poore ok their delire, 28 (That Were a wickednelle Wort

Here end the wordes of Iob.

be punished:for then should 19 5

nyed the God that is 9 baue De:

2 baue J euer reiopted at the hurt of mpneeneuneroz was J euer glad that any harme happened dnto him ( Oy no

30 Incuer luffred mp mouth to sinne by

g alten to bis foule. i

3 he men ot myne owne Hone: holde lay, woho chall let v ‘ belly full of his fleshe- —

32 The straunger dyd not lodge in the streete, but J opened my doores nto him that went by the wap.

33, auc Phept setrete my inne, aud hyd HE" myue iniquitie, as Adam dyd- fe

34 Though J coulde haue made aleard « a agreat W mültitnde, petthe most con- 28%

temptible of the families dyd feare me: i 1

endes and
Tireb,

fo FH keptieilence ,and n) eam nna 25 te, and went not out of Ba

ther tare

he at N bt hs
35 O that J had oue which woulde heare fee” me: beholde mypfigne in the Whiche the mc’. almightie shal aunkwere korine, though 92% be that is my contrarie partie hath ae
Written a booke against nie. 1
36 Pet will J take it vpon my ochoulder, a ct as a garlande binde it about my head. z
37 Jwill tell hym the number of my wes" goinges, e go vnto him as to a prinec. 5 86
38 But ik cale be that my lande v erpe a- b i gainst me, orthat the® forowes thereof ci. make any complapnt:: the
39 If Jhaͤue eaten the feuites thecof bu ue apeb for, pea tf J haue grecued the hs

soules of the maisters therof: (h dag
40 Then let thystles growe in steede of bas, mp Wheate, and cockle for nip baripe. fer ,

tuen focus iht labourers:

1 Clihu reproueth them of folly. . s Age maketh not a man wife,

er

3 And with Jobs thee friendes hewas angry allo? becaule they had founde ne reafonable aunswere, and pet condentp? ned Job.

crane thet tiou- . bn, 27 Path nwheart medled priuply with
He any disteite? or did J euer kisse myne conunmd d 3 2 a wen eee pbne hande- Soe hande? N eienr
„ Then ee but the spirite ot God. *
1 MD thele three men ceal
' len 2 . > n 7 bed toaunswere Job,
1 „ becaule he held hin eee, elke arighteous man.

But Elihuthe fonne
Wof Barachel thewwu-
Zikt, of the kinred of
Kam, was very fore displealed at Job,
Bue he called hym selle iust before

oz the bro-

ther of Ybrabam, oz os u the Caldees paraphras
Abram.

d

4 Nowe taried Elchu, till they had ended
W e ob for why? they were elder then he.

5 Sowhen Elihu sawe that tele th men were not able to make were, he was milcontent. Ther

The t m oung, and pe be men

5 Me 1 atrapde and durst not elbe koõrth my mynde.

9 07 Jthought thus within my selfe:

te srt domnmett old men to speake, and the aged to teaehe wylveme. n
3 Euerp man no doubt hath a niynde, bu ttis the inspiration of the almightie that vnderstanding. - et sity enavenotalibay ple, neither
: doth euery aged man vnderstande the thing that is lawfull: ™ 1
10 Kherefore J lay,heare me, and J wil ewe pou allo nne vnderstanding. u For when Jhad wapted till pe made an end ok yout talking and hearde pour
Wyldome, what argumentes pe made in pour communication, -

11 Bea when J had diligently pondred

what pe faydẽ, J found not one ol vou
Neri good argument against
Job that directly tould niake auniwere bnto his wordes,

iz Lest pe (ould lay: We haue found out

6 él uche tonne of Barachel e Bolte unwered and sapde: Con-

Wifdome Gon thal cast h mdowne, ' and no man. — Sone tee
14. Be bath not fpoken vnto me, and J wil evrene . not aunswere hym as ye haue done. er vine
15 Forthey were so abached, that they toulde not take aunswere, oz speake hen Jh :
16 When Jhad wapted (kor they spake not, Me stoode still and auntivered no more:)
7 Then aunlwered J in my turne, and

shewed une opinion. 5
18 For Jamfullof matter, and Hele o 0e rite within me compelleth me.

19 Weholde, mybellpisas the wine, Coehat ts,

whiche bath no vent, ke the newe vot- Fcaksine tels that bruste. eee
20 (Cherlore) will Ispeake, that J may mne iste haue a vent: Will open ny lippes, and a. ont make aunswere. : tracheal
21 Jwill Dregarde no maner ok perfon, mse 8 no man will Ispare. bine Wee
22 Fop if J woulde go about to“ please e men, J knowe not howe soone my may e nen ker Would take me away. '

fucked man tust.

The. xxxiii. Chapter.

Elshu acctifeth Job of ignoraunce. ta He shewethtdat God hath diuers meanes to instruct man and to drawe hym from einne. 19, He aftlicteth man and sodenip deliuereth hym,
6 Man bepng deltuered, geueth thankes to God.

e berekore heare my
RQ OA Ai wordes G Job, and
8 A hearken vnto all that

I Will fay:

tongue bath spoken in

2 $ Ikthou canst then gene me aunswere
Prepare thy selke and stande before me ate to fate.

Tt thoy
(iim 6 Iehoive, before God J am euenas

for I am fatyioned ofche ame node. e euen

Beholde, my terrour Mali not feare hee, neither sha
9905 there shall my hande be heaup

Now hall thou spoken in m pne eares,
E Jpaue heard the vopte of thy wordes:

Wehold, J haue now opened my mouth, my

15 In dreames and visions ofthe righ

9 Jam tieane without any fault. Jam

innocent, there ts no wicke dnesse in me.

10 But lo, he hath piked a quarell again me, and taketh nie for his enemie.

At He Hath put my foote in the stockes and

looketh narowipe vnto all my pathes.
12 Behold, in this hast thon not done tight,
I wil make aunlwere vnto thee, that
God is greater then man.
13 And why doest thou then striue against
Hinifoz he shall not geue the attomptes ofall his wordes.
14 For God speaketh Wonte or twise, and ge vee pet man vnderstandeth it not. e

men,
> by lieepe, og

When flumbzing commeth bpon men en that they fall alleepe in their beddes, amone

16 He roundeth them in the eares, and (cas j leth their torrection:

7 That he may withdrawe man from eee ge,
: at e, rit pices

18 Andkepe his foule from the graue, and ae d his life from the sworde. a plagues,

2 5 io De

vpon his bedde, He lapeth sore punithe-
| ment vpon his bones: a: 7 e 20 So that his M yfe may away with no

ebene bread, and his soule abhorreth to eate

(mtenaumce. aAllp dayntie meat: fete e. or Ju so much that his vodp is tleane

beth eo: p le-

which belore were not seene.

w. 22 His loule draweth vnto the gra
NTICTS. @ his tpfeto death. Roe 17 pe

bee 23 MOW yk there be a mellenger one adare gebs n mong athousande, ent for to speake vn-
Boris be to man, and to Mew him the right way: chites ont o

24. Then the Tord is mercikull vnto him,
: and lapth, He (halve deliuered, that he

sufficiently retoncled.

Che beug 25 Then (hat his fleche be as freshe as a chiides, and shal returne asin the dapes

ol ie body, 1s the diesung of

Gov, ¢

of his youth 1
26 He {hall pray vuto God, aud he will be

tates „

—1 e|

confunicd awap, and his bones appeare ue; and

fall not downeto the graue: for Jam

OO ke

19 He schasteneth hym with fickeneffe .

righteously, c tt hath done nie no gad.
28 Bea he Yath detiucred my foulefron, Hes ee andewmy lpfe shallsee the Fare. ight . ¥ e Chay
29 To all thele worketh God alwap with me
¥ an: Cor UN EHC ng

„

the
PSY.) theta,

man: or

30 That he bung backe his loule from

the graue to the light, veathe ligt thetvumgs hier aero

31 Marke Wel D Job, and veavemesdorn

thee still and Y will speale. 3 gung eA eae eae ease
5 7 ö to bete 4 to sustifie the. indeed — dat
34 Ifthou hast nothing, then heare me, and hold thy tongue, and J chall teache thee wyldome. F571 Pe ,

The. xxxiiii. Chapter. 2

Elihu chargeth Job that he calleth him belle righteous. 12 He sheweth that God is tuk in iudgementes. 24 God destroyeth the mightie. zo By him the hypocrite raigneth.

A

LTihu proceeding in his aunswere, sayde:
9 E = Heare my wordes
I | D perwile men, bear: ae haue vnderstanding: n For the care discerneth
Wordes, and the mouth tasteth the meates. —
4 As foiudgement, let vs leke it out a-

mong our selues, that we may knowe what is good. .

1 J

(Here En: 2 du pzoneth

that God can

ond crcatoz of all.

b) Let vs
{can the cause by tea: foning in eg der ol aht.

(e) That is. he hath not

ö dus, and God hathe taken away my

becken e illdge ment. N i

the eR “ 6 In my right J choulde be a lyer: my

a 3 is incurable without my ae, ° :

„ 7 where is there such a one as Job, that ee © ODpiniseth bp feomefulneffelike water

neo he bear

the scomefull 8 teproles of iht mocketg.

Which goeth in the companie of wicked doers, and walketh with vngodly men:

So Fore hath sayde, It profiteth a man

nothing that he shoulde walke with
God. a lo Therkore hearken bnto nie pe that haue vnderstanding: karre be it from
God that he shoulde meddle with wicliednelle, ⁊ karre be it from the almightie

ken vnto me pe that

5 (And whr: Job hath sapd, am righte- * *
Noe 15 All fie che shall come tonanghe at once,

that he shoulde meddle with vnrightebus dealing.

un FJor he (hall rewarde man after his

workes, and caule euerp man to finde

actording to his wapes.

1 Sure it is that God wil not do wickedly, neither wyll the almightie paruert iudgement.

13 Who ruleth the earth but he: or who hath placed the whole world:

14. It he let his heart vpon (man) and ga —

brian hym selke his spirite andhis

breath,

and all men chall turne againe vnta dust. : a
16 If thou nowe haue baderfanding,
E 8 say 5 and hearken to the 12 bopre of my Wordes: ere,
17. Way be be aculer that louelh 1 172 tight: or map he 3 ig a very inno- nica tent man do bngodly? et
13, Is it reason that thou chouldest on sini the king, Thou art wicked, or tho ae vngodlp, and that befoze the pane ons
19 God haͤth no respett vnto the p 10 che eee ok the lordly, and regar dete peal g riche more then the poore: Foz ther bee isan the worke of his handes.

© twinckling ofan eye shall they
1 ai at midnight when the people and the tirantes rage then (pall they peri e,¢ be taken awap without handes.
Foz his eves lobe vpon the wapes ol man, and he leeth all his gonges.
6 22 Thereis no darkenksle uoz shadowe of death that can hide the wicked doers from him.

fee 2; For God wl not lay vnon man noze

ber. e an th e hall destrop the mightie without f 5 and shall set other in their “> steede. bel aed

Las » The bngodip doth he punithe openly, e 27 Betause they tourned backe from hin, pew, and Would not tonsider all his wayes:

vote of the “> poore to tome vnto hun,. and now he heareth the complaint of such as are in trouble.

29 Whenhe geueth quietnesse, who tan

end brmtrclfull handlu .

Ilchtm.

The xp. Chapter.

C XXII. make trouble: and when he hydeth his fate, who can beholde hime whether it

be bpon nations, or bpd one mau onely:

30 Betaule the hypocrite doth raigne, betause the people are sfnared.

31, Surelp ok God onelp it tan be saide, J haue pardoned, J wyll not destrop.

32 HEH auc gone amiffe,enfourme thon me: HEPhauc. onewyong, J Wyll

33 Wyll he perfourmte the thing thronc thee : lor thon hast reproued his rk ment, thou also Hat thyne owne minde, and not J: But speake on what thou knowest.

34. Let men of vnderstanding tel me, and let a Wyle man hearken vnto me.

35 Job hath not spoken ok knowledge, neither were his wordes actozding to wyldome. e *

(ni) Gta:

1 net
36 D™ father, let Job be well tryed, Por
28 Julomuth that they haue tauled the 9

betaust he bath aunlwered for Wicked dae ce

desireth God
8 enen ee
37 Peaaboue his sinne he doth wickedly, hebe triunpheth among bs, and multtpii- e ehr te eth his wordes agaist God. A
W ende.

the end

6 Netther doth godlines profite, of vngodlines hurt God, but man. is che wicked |

crpe vnto God, and are noc heard.

euer and faide:
Thinkest thou it right
* that thou sapest, Jam moe righteous then
God
Foz thou sapest: what

Hea ho 4 see ; ¢ akcbnto theheanen and beholde d th me the tloudes which are hyer

b to
= at oe chou halt finned w |

oe? done against him: Akthpne Ade

oube righteons, what geuest

Se, thou him: oz w c, tyne baude hat wyll he receaue of

Nene a hy witkednesle m
1 dar Own. thor e ay hurt) Aman as

man.

f manp, w at imee 7 teh hat batt thon done vnto hime.

Natt, and thy ri dur che one oe oe ote (maß

Lu spake moreo- They which are oppressed erye out bp- e

defore, that
God seemed not to haue

on the multitude, pea they crye out for the power of the inightie: ne ee
10 Wut none sapth, Where is God that rs made nie- and that geueth vs otcali- hne on to praise him in the night- Gao

u Which teacheth vs moze the the beatles we ctucoof the earth, and geueth vs more wyl- feet hat,
12 If any such complaine, no mange- es ueth aunlwere, and that because ofthe na Bop re trust in hum.
"D2 songes.
13 F702 God wyll not heave banitie, neither ems. wyll the almightie regarde it. 2 wylt not regarde it: pet iudgement is fi. ee
God Houtd
15 But now betause his anger hath not bg n
M pilited, neither talled men to actonpt dae wer be
— because God
16 Therefore doth Job open his mouth uten but in vaine, e he maketh many wordes e

dome thenthe foules of heauen. cute of thele
Wickednesse of proude tirauntes. tad
God heaͤreth
14. Although thou sapest (to God) thou warne her th. before him, trust thou in hin. 125 according to with great extremitie: Sin without knowledge.

The

« : — 5
The. xxxvi. (bapter.

1 Elthu sbeweth the power ok God. 6 and his tullice, v and wherefore he punt. firth. j Che propertie of the wicked. *

A Lihuatlo protee- straite place, into a brode plac ay SY) ded, and farde: which there is iran ene
Holde thee Mit thy table quiet replenished with kat-
\ a litie, æ J hat nesse. a A

AS A shew thee what 17 sPeuverthelefle,© chou halttommen- emg

é

aue pet to dedthe iudgement of the vngodl mr
A b : p, and wa peake on gods euen such a iudgement k sentence Mare nz

: behalfe. chou suffer. Mal sie

= ty

Ipwyll open vn- 18 And seeing there is h wrath with God bn, to thee pet farce beware Ieft he take thee away in thy higher knowledge, and wil alcribe righ- wealth, c all that thou hast to redeenie

teousnesle bnto ny maker. thee tan not deliuer thee. ez

And truely my wordes Hal not be 5 Thinkest thon that he wyll regarde se

mere value, sceing he is with thee that is ' thy riches- he thall not care for golde, 2

Fame ‘perfect in knowledge. nor for all them that extell in strength. tu

gure 5 Wcholde, the great God calteth away 20 . Spend not the night in tarefun man

Wien no nnn, fo he hum selke is “ nughtie nm thoughtes how he destropeth lonie, and bea

kad, power and wyldome. eta

Sn 6 Asforthe vngodly he thall not prez 21 Wut beware that thon turnt not aside data. rd there serue him, but thall heipe the poore to —sto Wickednefle and sinne, which hither: ra, gun. f

(c) bath ne, the righteous, but as kinges thal they

ase hn. be in their throne, he shal stablish them sawe geuer ashe: re for euer, and they shalbe exalted. 23 Who wyll reproue him of his Way: mente
3 But ik they be lapde in chapnes, oz who wil say vnto him, Thou halt doue ae bounde with the bondes of trouble, Wong: 1155 erties 9 Then wyll he hey themiheir 24. Remember that thon do magmie e keen Worke, € their finnes Which haue ouer- his worke which men do pralle, dan
Hane „come them. 25 All men lee it, yea men do beholde it a is:

che ane. 10 He with punishing and nurturing ok farre ok. them roundeth theminthe cares, war- 26 Beholde , so great is God that he palneth them to leaue of from their wu- eth dur knowledge, “ neither tan che a tan kednesle, and to amende. number of his veres be searched Out. acute u Ik they now wyll take heede eferue 27 Sometime he restrapneth the rape, e
Him, they shal weare out their dayes in and againe he sendeth rayne by his = prosperitie, and their peres in plealure. tloudes: |
12 Wut ik they wil nothearken,thep hal 28 Which rayne the clondes dodoppe, age: Jo thzough the Node, and perishe o: and let fall aboundantly vpon men.. ae era, Luer they be aware. 29 Who tan consider the“ Ipreadingt? dut dane ae 1 As for hppocriles in heart, they Mall ok his clounes,the coucringes ois bar e beanies, fort hape vp Wath (kor them teiues for they bernatle- ont bee e (all not bpon him, though they be his zo Behold he doth ttretel) bistight OP
Abe, — Patlonets. ee itt and touerech the bottome of fe oo enconuten. 14. Thus shal their forte periche in foo 31 Foz by these gouerneth he pot eat fulnes. lichnes, andthetvipfe among the fom:- and geueth them abundance 0 Mat catours. 32 Wilhthe cloudes he hydeth the ie
6 The pooze shall He deliver out orhts and at his connmaundement it been g atkliction, and rounde them in the care out: loudes whenthey be in trouble. 33 Which daching vpon the next ;

1 cò& Euen lo would he take theeoutofthe ~ thew tokens of wraͤth. me

J The. xxxvij. Chapter.

u proueth that the vnsearcherable wyldome of Hod is manifet by his workes, x 1 1 10 ethunderg, o the tnowe, the whirle winde. u and the rayne.

Teothis also my heart 13 vahether it be forpunichment, or for is astonled, and moued his lande, orto do good to them that

n
ING Eee

out of his place. feeke hum. a
Heare ) then the 14 Hearken vnto this O Job stand siti, sounde of his vopte, x and confider the wonderous workes of the noyse that goetl God. b ut ofhis mouth. 15 Dt thou know when God dispoled faba , He diretteth it vnder the whole hea- theme k tauled theo light okhis cloudes . ner e a uen, and his light vnto the endes or the to shine- ming.

16 Hak thon knowen the varietie of the tloudes, and the wonderous workes of hun which is perfect in knowledge:
17 And how thy clothes are warme, i 9 70 the lande is stil through the sonth inde-
18 Past thou helped him to spreade ont the heauens which are strong and bright as a loking glasse-
19 Teache vs what we hall frye vnto hin: for we are vumecte to frame dur auge talke because of Cb darkenesse. n
20 Shall it be tolde him what Player ahne
Shall man speake when He thalbe de- e stroyed? 1
21 Jor men fee not the light that shineth in the cioudes: but the winde passeth and cleanteth them. .
22 The faire weather commeth out of the north, the prayse thereof is to God whois terrible.
23 Itis the almightie, we tan not finde

olde. | . rong bopte foloweth tt: for his glocal * + ong maiestie geueth a thũder clappe, €
“ he wull not stay Whe his boyte is heard.
„ God thundreth marueplousiy with his vopte, great thinges Doth he which we er tan not comprehend. — came ¢ Hecommaundeth the now anditfalte“ leth vpon earth: he geueth the rayne a mane charge, and the chowres haue their toon ütrength and kall downe.

aer 7 Wilß the force of the rayne he shutteth be, men vp, that all nien may kuowe his iene Wows.

Raho 8 The beastes creepe into their dennes,

dert klein
Datone at

him out: he is extellent in power and ludgement, and aboundaunt in tustice: he astlitteth nat. 4

24. Tet men therefore ™ feare hum: for e there shall no man see him that is Jopie~ in his owne conceit, e (OY Futetring

“by this. that the coutd not ecnecane

gode wenderfull Wozkeg. mh csse h: vnscarche ble wyldome.

(c) That ig, compaften the

euer he wcommaundeth them vpon the whole wozlde. 4 Poe

9 The. xxxviif. Chapter.

vt {peaketh to Fob and declareth the weakenes of man in the confideration of his creas es, by whole excellencie the power, iustice, and prouidence of the creator is znowen.

hben aunswered the
ö Lowe vnto Job out ofthe © whirie winde, and saide:
What is he that © a darkeneth his coun: ont knowledge: ale by Wordes with:

Girde vp thy “lopnes ipke a man: for

Zi ; earth fateh

FH Wyi queftion with the, see thou geue ren me a dirett aunlwere. Sen err a

foundations of the carth-Tell plapne- ea

tae;
FAG
ö SS

pl he e

Z
= i.

7 Where wast thou when the monimg starres praysed ine together, and all the children of God reioyted triunphantly-

„ 8 who” chut the {ea with doozes, when

eit brabe foorth as out of the wombe-

s 9 When J made the cloudes (to be} a co-

kante as d ie ring for it, and 0 swadled it with

Na though the darkte:

Senden 10 When J gaue it mptommaundenient,

mg, mahing doores and barres for it,

coeur at Saying, Hitherto {halt thou come, bat

no further: and here (halt thou lape doe thy proude and hie waues.

12 Hast thou geut the morning his charge sinte thy dayes, and shewed the day
{pring his place

wit!

Lo. 13 Thattt might take holde of the torners ofthe earth, and that the vngodly
0 bog iinght be Hakenoutefit.

the pngodlp

trust in eheit 14. ey They are fashioned as 18 the clay

dae hong pe With the leale, and all stand vp as a garment. 5

15 The vngodlp Mall be dilapointed of

dure long, pet thep shalbe ag wenhe ax

lap, und ag a
Jarment halt

eie thjeix light, and the arme ok the proude
Abe: bhalbe broten. '

Feen, ks “Camel thou ener into the! grounde beate OF tHe fea, or walkedst in the lowe torlegten ners ok the deepe-

dee none. 17) Haue the gates of death ben opened vn-

enges that are visible

to ther: or ba thou seene the doores of the shadolbe of deathcherte. 18 Dat thou allo perceaued how brove br da- the date thou halt knowledge of
5 alll this:

tome * ,
1 Then shewe me the Way where light
5 ede where is the plate of darkenesle-
20 That thou shouldest receaue it in the boundes thereof, and know the pathes to their houses.

21 Rnewest thou akore thou wast borne

E How olde thou shouldestve-

Grgmene 22 »Wentest thou euer into the treasures

welpen ok the snow, o hast thou seene the setrete

plates of the haple,

23 Which J haue prepared against the time of tronble, against the time of bat: taile and warce:

24. By what Wap is the light parted: and into what land breaketh the east winde;

le kretes.

25 Who deuideth the waters in chanels:o2 who maketh a way 91 lightentg and thunder, ve

26 To caufe it to rapne on the earth wher no mants and in the wüdernesle where none inhabitethe a

27 To satisfie the desolate and waske grounde, and to cause the budde ofthe hearbe to spring foorth.

28 Whots the W father ok the rayne:or « who Hath) begotten the droppes ol ths Keen deawe: i the mana

29 Out of whole wombe tame the pre,”
Who hath gendrtd the tolduesse of the 5 00,
That the waters are hidde a =

30 ers are Hidde as with)

* . AND lye tongealed aboue the ta

31 Wylt thou hinder the lweete influentes of the seuen starres: or loose the bandts of Orion: mm

32 Cant thou being foorth Mazʒaroth in their time: cant thou also guide Arctu-

rus with his lonnes- 8
Kno best thou the course ok heauen,

that thou mayest fet bp © theo won.

naunce thereot vpon the earth:

34 Moreouer, canti thou lift vp thy voyte to the cloudes, that they may pole downe a great rapne bponthee- ö

35 Canst thou send the lightuiges alfo, that they may go their wap, and be obedient vnto thee, saying, To hert are we:

36 Who hath put wyldome in the repnes-

or who hath geuen the heart vnder-

standing- . the tloudes in wyl- “i

Who numdbzet Wy vo dome- who slilleth the vehement “WA cose, ters of the heauen- ay

38 Zo caule the earth to grow into hard- e nelle, k the clots to cleaue fast together: e
39 Hylt chon hunt the prap fog the lion: mst oz fill the appetite of the lions whelpes, c
40 Whenthey couche in their plates, aud 1 5 tarie in the conert to lye in wapte- 1
4 Who prouideth meate for the Spat te when his voung ones erye vnto So ee and flec about fo2 lacke of meate- oes

The .xxxix. (Chapter.

nine e mre d. nnen eren det enen aad foe ve rhe bountie and prouldence ol God, which ertendzth euen to bealles ge —
1 Che Mr occaciont to put hts contibencein God. a * Wen OAD ab

Home wonchenmne be rode mac er, wooden with <x whẽ the wylde goates sonie wilde beaste. broken with g. ee

being foot their 16. So harde is the vnto her youn: Ae

(| young aniong the tto- § as though they were not bees. aren serine sone N nye rockes 02 lap- oureth in valne Wlthont anp feare. dene mst elt thou wapte when 17, And that becaule God hath taken Fang: ::? ape thebindes vie tocaluee wyldonie fromber, k hath not geuen be heuer’

th idr , S bro

n Canst thou number the monethes that her understanding. Beten cs the can ther go With young: o: knowest thou 18 when her time is that he fleeth bpon erh che ume whentper bingkoonhe . hee, the careth neither for the poste no; wit

„ Theplpe dolpne, ther calue their cherypder. Fa young ones, and they are dellueredok 19 W halt thougeuẽ the horie his strength, eeuc d their krauade and pam... . doulkarned himtoneptozagionfip: ?: e,

4. Bet thet poung ones grow bp, and 20 Canst thon mate him akrapde as a mort ware fatte through good feeding with grachopper- whereas ene nen Cee dome: Then go ooh and returne not ing thar he makerbisfearcfal,
“Sea meetin gota hel

„oo letteth the wylde alle to go free: ©“ Hooffes of his feete,be reioyteth chere-

who loofeth the bondes of the wylde fh is teete he reioyteth chere

mules - Be meete the harnest men.

25 But when the trumpettes make most 8 bang

vnlco ne in the korowe, to make hinn 28 Commeth tt through. thy wyldone (h) Shotts,
Be eae Aieth toward the ee
9,07 commit thy labour bntobime 27 Doth the Egle mount bp, an cnt bur Dato Hit „and make nun thou betene him that he wyin isnetton bye at thp comaundement:
JJ MUP 28, Deabrosrdindonpsockes anvil. i 5 ee leth pon the bye toppes of motitaines:
3 ‘perce Pon the Fate totes txt the 29 From whente he Tenet Dis prape, che Etithes winges and thers vnto alts karre about with his eyes.
14. For she lean 5 1 30% vdung ones also sucke vp blood:
Denen her egges inthe earth, and where anp dead bodylyeth, there

1 f 8
Ehe rememndzeth not thatthey mabt f
A we

q The

Oieduer the Lorde
\{pake vnto Job, and

4 almightie wyl chasten,

E drontend with hun
. Should not he which
Genen Fob ne th with God, geue him an aunoffence, and were: * . ne 3 . aunswered the Lorde, path reppe aping: g gde 4. Bceholde, Jam vple, what Hall J aunswere thee, (theretoze! J Wpll lape ny hande vpon ny mou.
5 Pnte haue Yspoken, bnt J wyll faye no niore: pea twpfe, but J Wyl procecde no further. * a
6 Then aunlwered the Lowe bnto
Job out of the whirle winde, and lalde:

5 Girde vp thy loynes now lyke a man: baeaning, J wyll demaunde or thee, aud make lac thou aunlibere. bin fafemt, 8 Wylt thou disanul nip iudgementca en v: dd wylt thou tondempne me, that thou iam. Iltapst be righteouses N.

, 9 AI sthy power then ipke the power of God: maketh thy vopte a sounde as his doth- 4
10 Decke thy leife now with erceliencic - bawde And matette, and arape thy feife with
Nonne be autie and glorp: 1 ain te So. 11 Cat abrode the indignation ok thy
Wath, and beholde euerp one that is proude, and abase hin:

12 Tokt on euerp one that is arrogant, wy ance, And bing him lowe, E deltroy the wie caufe them t@ ked int ele place: dhe weck. 13 Jide them in the dust together, and to-
Soden ene: lex their fates in fecrete: poeamoarees 1. Then wpll J confetle vnto thee allo,

in thynt owne rengch. chow comparest

fi

with God.
) The Hea
“Behemoth treth an
Duphant, d c alieo foʒ id hugenesst, by the which

ul yp be vndiritond che
Dewill,

that © thyne owne right hande (hail

saue thee.

Weholde the beate™ ehemoth, wys

J made with thee, which eateth hape

asanore: :

16 to hob his strength is in his lopnes, and what power he hath inthen ot

J The. xl Chapter.

2 Pow weake mans power is. being compared to the worhes ol God. 10 whose power appeareth in the creation and gouerning ol the great beastes. n

Shall he whom the

17 28320 Se ng.»

„When he Wl he hoeaner

17 When he Wyll, he lpreadeth out his tayle lyke ã Cedar tree, all his sin ebenes eue Ee

18 His bones are lyle pipes of bia his bones are lyke staues of con *

ip He isthechiefe of the Wapes of God, he that made him wyl make histo to approche vnto himn.

20 Surely the mountaines bing hm foorth grasse, where all the beattesof the fielde take their pastue.

2t He resteth him in the chade, inthe touerte of the reede and kennes.

22 The trees couce him with their tha: dowe, and the wyllowes of the brooke tompasse him abont.

23 Beholde, he dzinketh bp whole ryuers and feareth not, he thinketh that ag drawe vp Jordane into his mouth. S

24. He taketh it with his eyes, and pet the (sr, hunter putteth® a bridle into his nose, tes

25 Cant thou dzawe out Teuiathan aa,
With an hook, or bindt his tongue With ssw:
à torde- 0 4

26 Canst thou put a hooke in the nole ol

hun, oi boze his iawe though with a
“naulez — — o

27 yl he make many faire wordes wid thee ctbinket thou) op flatter thee-

28. Wyll he make acouenaunt With thee:

‘o2 Wilt thou take him for a leruaunt for tener 8

29 Wylt thou take thy pastime with him

as wich a bird, Win chou bude hit

thy mapdens-

D Ther ch tompaulons map de

en ena oz (halle be par ot mong the marchauntes? „ Wurd 5

31 Canttt oufil the balket with his fin: 1

orthe fiche panier with his head-

3 , ad
32 Tape thpne hande pon hin dame eae wean
33 Weholde his hope a bin one perithe enenat the übt ol me

power, which nothing can revit,

DD man is fo fierte
ER N that dare stirre hun bp: ete INN 9 Ny,

Who ts able to stande beforeme:
Oz who Hath geuen

hande, that J may rez warde him againe : All thinges vnder heauen are myne. *
3 Jwyll not keepe secrete his great ftrength his power, nor his tomelp proportion. ;

ment: or who hall come to him with a

double brpdledytu,

bare
Rohe

900 for he hath horrible teeth round aout, — N
6 His {tales are as it were strong shleldes, so fastened together as ik tcp
Were sealed: a
7 One is so iopned to another, that no aàpre can come in: *
Bea, one hangeth fo bpon another, ¢ fticket so together, that they tan not aos, be {nndzed,

may ? 1S neesinges make a glittering like

= fre, and his tyes Ipke the morning
55 b
1 Out ol his mouth go torches, and warkes of fire leape one i
1 Tae aa ot his or a ded a lpke as out of an hotte seethi pot, or caldron. 5 ee

2 Dis breath maketh the coles burne
1 Md the lambe goeth out of his mouth. si In his necke ther remaineth strength,

Hen Job aun: wered the Lord, and saide:

J know that thou Hatt power ouer all thinges, aa 0 15 0

bought hid bntothee

me any thyng afore-

Who can distouer the fate or his gar- hi

5 Who & thall open the doores ol his

CTX

| q The li. Chapter. TT
By the greatnesse ofthismontter Leulathan, God sbeweth his greatnes and his

and nothing is to labourous for him.
14. The members ok his body are iopned
(fo strait one to another. and cleaue fo fast together, that he tannot be moued.
15 His © heart is as hard as a stone, and as fast as the stythie that the smyth smiteth vpon. . .
1s When He goeth the mightieareafraive, and feare troubleth them.
17 Il any man drawe out a sword at him, it hall not hurt him: there may neither speare, iaueling, noz brestplaͤte abide m. .

18 He setteth almuch by tron as by a strawe, and asmuch by brasse as by a rotten sticke.

19 He starteth not away from him that bendeth the bowe: eas for ding stones he tareth asmuch for stouble as for thé.

20 He tounteth the dartes no better then a strawe, he laugheth hini to scorne that shaketh the speare. f

21. Sharpe tones are vnder him lpke

potcheardes, and he ly eth vpon charpe thinges as bpon the sokt niyze. pile ye
22 He makech the deepe to boyle ipke a e pot, and Kirreth the fea together spke aan en an opntment. font, thet tbe

23 Me maketh the path to be seent after bape him, and he maketh the deepe to seeme ata
All arte bpon the

24. Upon earth there is no power tyke vnto his: for he ts fo made that he fea: reth not.

25 He beholdeth all the hye thinges, he is à king ouer all the chudren ok pride,

Ce) Satan ta tailed hard ot heart, becauise he is vnmerfull creel, and bntreate> ble. =
Ox, the neathet mile
Core.

ye

F.
1 5 ge kpelh vpon it t hont

Ee despith all. and in proudest of all.

ais The. xlij. Chapter.

ache repentaunce of Fob, 9 He prapeth tor his krlende goodes ave relfozchdoüte bn 1155 * th 2 big 85

1 and his

3 Jor who can keepe his owne tonnsaile fo fecvete but it shalbe knowen- Therefore haue J spokenthat J bnderstoode not, euen the thinges that are to wonderfull for me, and passe myne vnderstanding.

4 D©bearken thou vnto me also, and coos let me speake: aunlwere vnto the thing sree. that H wyll athe thee. ＋*

—- Seat
| Che booke :
5 J haue heard of thee by the hearing twyse as much as he had ate.

(c He fave him not but bp hig wordt, witch is the act and

image of Bov, as Christe.

okthe eare, but nowe mne cpe Lect) thee.
6 5 naberefore J gene mynt one lelfe the blame, and take repentannee in the ek duls and asshes. : neomsthn 7 Pow When the Horde had spoken e thele wordes vnto Job, it came to passe

Sele that the Lorde faide to Eliphas the n Themantte: J“ am displealed with
N thee, and thy two friendes: for pe haue not spoken of me the thyng that is

(oe Tod right, lyke as my © seruaunt Job hath

Fate ot done. 8 5 total. 3 Therefore take pou now feuenoren,
(o Nn AND seuen rammes and go © to my serbsgroat | aunt Job, and offer vp foz pour selues
1 a burnt offring, and my seruaunt Job dur anten hall prap foz you: him wyll F accept,
J bert him: And not deale with por after pour foo-
* lishnelle, in that ye haue not spoken of

me the thing which is right, lyke as my

seruaunt Job hath donc.

9 So Elphasthe Themantte, and Wildad the Suhite, and Sophar the Naamathite, went and did actording as the
Lorde tommaunded them: the Lorde also accepted the perlon of Job,

o Andthe Lowe W tourned the captiuitie of Job when he prayed for his friendes: Pea the TLorde gaue Job

i pee t
918 * bis troubles and plagues.

The ende of the booke of lob. *

1 And then tanie there onto hm ch his brethren, all his sisters, + ae 15

AUD AU they baden that had ben of his atquaintaunte (0 J, d de foze, and did cate bread With him in hig «2 houle, and had compassion on han 5 Stiga comforted hum over all trouble thatthe Bx onde had brought bpon him z cuery fe man allo gaue hima tertaine summeo k money, and a ie well of golde. N
So the Lope blessed the lac dapeg ok un dar moze then the first: for he had durteene thouland sheepe, sixe thouland camels, a thoufand poke dkoxen and athonsand che asse ss.

3 he had seuen sonnes allo, and thee daughters.

14. The first daughter called heco Jem: secre ma, the setond W Festa, and the third ae
0 Rerenhapuch. f wating

15 In al the land were no women found ye" lo faire as the daughters of Job: and der their father gaue them inheritaunte a mong their brethren. ' :

16 Alter this liued Jod an hundred and fourtte eres: so that he fate his chi
Den, and his childrens chüdren into the ta fourth generation. dub,

17 And so Job dped, being olde, and ol pn"
à pertect age. 1

Ihe thirde part of the Bible contayning these books,

The Pfalter. The prouerbes.

Ecclesiastes. Cantica canticorum.
> The Prophetes.
Esal. Ionas.
Ieremi. Micheas.
Ezechiel. Nahum.
Daniel. Habacuc.
Osee. Sophoni.
Joel, Aggeus.
Amos. Zachari.

Abdi. Malachi.

ogue of faint Basill the great a ypon the Pfalmes.

AVID that notable Ving and 2 opbete, aman singnlerl chofen of almightie God after his owne be.trts being sucued both with the knowledee of 5 4 and with theknowledae of bam felfe , and being throughly exerci fed in the whole fate hi , the experience of tive world:vetreth his Sundry «ffections Cas bis occafions feruedhim) 1 15 life with of pfalines a Looke fet out with diners i ines, but founding tllro one thing. The Hebrics 115 i es

hillim D997 d MSAD TDD ie bok of / fdr and bymses The a ans toyrtsse it bythe name of amuficsdl insir nent Ladfuicou so called. Our cz ya
Teth it a booke of pfalunes (As bes diftiple Peter doth thefaine.) Some intitulith it, libe . plationum, siue soliloquiorum: 4 booke of contemplationt or scerete me e ee she godly spc let h folstarily Ind alone to almightse God: A booke of holy seripturer na dou 5 whereby fortable in cothinesbighm misterie, and profornde jn fenfe: but yer familicr and read 118 ha flanded of the true clnisten heart. To the diligent vsing of which booke, the boly Ap fle i e vdr. by graue iduisementono lesse then in tywo of hin epi ifllesexhortcrb vs, Hing in the one 11 i worcle of Chrifte dwell in you icht, in all nyfdone ( thercof) teaching and adrnonifvine ‘ Ale in almet and bynes ind Jpirituall fongess finging with grace in hour heurtes a 8 admontion fo scrious onght not to be contcinpned . No sorasimueh asthe vfeof t ie 105 ; Ay fpeciall peculiar grace 17 all other partes of, scripture, thercfore it ouglht of all other chief 5 aN cficemed,and duclyto be vfed, as enernorę in the Church of Cod, aswellof the olde peepleof 165 ‘

C of the new people of the chrisliuus, it bath ben in moft frequent vse und reuerence. e 1 rde from God ab une (. is necefJary ier inssriiction) 13 expreffeed by thedeteriminstion of the holy eboff, tothe in 1257 ercof (an ont oft flore houfe of sbisiehe for the sonle) petusia remedies, cnery one of vs far our e insrniti a ine great and many finncs. Now wheras the propheres haste dotPrine proper to them selues, and the Lockes of vo haue bis peculiar fourme of tcacling, and the proucrbiall bookes han their fetter all. nde of .

“ ~~.

2 x 9 . mer of feriptres fer ihr 7. all ni p bud. out
Sach n i Ca. once xi teh

th faye thegoncrnartnce of Hes it teacheth what org it to be done: and to be flort sit # a common store / onse of all good doctriue, which dy iftrsbute nat: & hg n peculiar tohin fel fir ic hesteth not only oldef cftived woundes of tbe soule, but alfo can geue quicke remedie ta {uc 5 as be newly made, It sl ih and comforterlythat member whichis fieke and corrupts and profermeth that which ss whale und founde, it pluckerh w bythe rootes (as inch as ir pussi ble) all such e ill affections as do raigne fo tirannitally in the whole course of nens He, which effect st worketh sit wore miha gecube dese lation, instiling pleafsuntly into ein heurte all fober haneflic. For where sts the holy ghoste percenued that mankinde was baraly trayned ta v ner andi hut we be vary negligent in thinges concerning the true lyfe in deede, by resfon of olir inclination to warldly pleasurrs auddeleClations: What hati beinuemed? He bath mixt In brs fourme of dochinethe delet? stion of muficke, to the intent thut the commoditic of the dotirine wight setretiy fleate intows, whyle on cares be touched with the pleafanntneffe of the melodie, Euen much lyke as expert Phifitions vse to do, when they mimicry their biter pstions to file cbstdrens lo] ti ty fhonlde abhorve their bealth for the bitter nes of their indes, for rhe most part they annoynt the brinkes of the cuppes with bor,
And for this ende be thefe swrete and harmonious fonges deuised for vm thas fuch ts be childveneither by azey or children by inaners, fhoulde in dted bane their soules wholcsunsy inglraGedstbough for the time they feeme but to fing onely. Fur / her more, we foe commonly that they which be of the vn gar people, or ofrucde and grosse mature, can mt redysie bsare awayand eye in minde the graue preceptes of the A, pofttes or Prophetess where yet the denine pfalmes they fing at hom in their houfessand abrode they can recor de then. And certai neiy, though t man were nencr fofuricafly raging in ive and worth, yet affoane as be hearcrb she fwecte tunes of the psalmes, firaight way ts be affwaged of his fury,and muft depart more quiet in minde by reafen of the melorlys7 he ale is che reff of the soule. the rot l of peer. it fillt andpascifierh the raging bellowes of the minde, for it doth isswage and molifie that irefull power and paffion of the foule, it inducer chafhitie where r ai gned wantonneffes it ni ilerh amitie where was difcorde,it Kaitteth friends together, it rersurncth enemies foun visic tguine. For who can long repute ti mis an enemieswith whon he ioynerb bim felfein Hfting vp his voyce to God in prayer 2 So thar the fong of the plahue avirketschariticswhich is the greatest rresfure of all goodnesse thus can be, deuising by this enduccment of concord finging, the ute and bande of vnitte foray ning the people together aster the fimilirnee of a quyer in their vuitic of Vnging. The pselme it an jntrodu€fion to beginners, it is a furtlerer to them which go warde to vertucyit in to the 5c mena fable foundation to reff ont 18 the swecte vate, the only motit h of 1 of Chrsfle the Cl urch. The pale dah cheare the fesf]full day the better to veioyee, it wir lieth that fame heauineffe whichis beauinesse to Goll warele: For the psaline ts able topleic ie out tesres of am m ins heart though it be nener fo flony hureie. O wyfe and mar ti ylolus deuife of our heuuenty febooleinas ter, who conde inuent that we fboulde both ple un / hy fing and therewith profitably lcurne, whereby wholsome dofrine might be the deeper priatcd in vs: forthat which swith violence and frees lined of vs, 13 not wout to abide long: but that which entreth into vs with pleasure, and by louing grace, it continue h the Lager in our hen tes it fhcketh the
Safler in out mensories « Now as for the matter and content of the pfalme, what in there but thet a mat may lcarue it there? Is mot there to be learned the yaliauntnes of fortstude, therighteonfnes of iuslice? the fobernes of temperasince? the per fection of prudence the forrme of penatnnce the meafure of pacacuces
Yes and what focucy founderhto vert ue or perfection is it not there taught? In the psalme ss comtayned absolute di uinitie, both prophccie of Chr es comme
In the fiefhe, the threatfull warni nges of the indecment, the bopeoforr ryfig againe, the feave of Gods punistunentes, the prounyfes of r Hg soys the ree
Lation of all mifteries: all thefe be lad and couched vy in the psalter bakes as 7 05 great treafinre bo ufe , all ics a ich booke the proplete Dawa framed moff aptly (umeug many inflywmentes of muficke) to gte with the instrument called the Vfalterje: fronifying thereby (ats cin uche) eg. of God to come from abouc by the inspiratiem of the holy ohoft. For this only insirti ment of allother y base the caufe of brs soundt from brs vppar f, e a 5
Harpe or the {ute by their wreftes haue their faande comming forth ont of the lower part of theme but the Pfalterie put foorth the fwrertnes of bes har meme melodie from the f per partsteaching vs thereby that we sron ld fet our whole fludie and meditationin heaucnly hinges alone, andnot by the fcetenesse of the tunes to be borne downe to the fenfuarll affections and deseckations of the flefhe.

¶ Saint Austen. vith the mode

\
F Tie fweete tunes O Lord wherto thy holy scriptures geue fo linely a grace, vhen they be song v d abide of expert men, I do confeile that they do somw hat delectably stirre me: bur yet not for that! would dwell and! 0 stil chere, but for that my minde might ryse vpward to godly affection and heauenly denotion. Notwichttindings v 5 feele this in my selse, that the melodie moueth me more then the matter of che dittie which is song: J confesse tlent offend mortally therein. Gu
X OW letthe gentle reader haue this chriftian confideration within him felfe, that though he fAindeth the pla A ilo this translation folowing, not fo to founde agreeably to his eares in his wonted wordes and phrafes,as ie alate med with: yet let lumi not be to much offended with the worke,which was wrought for his oe com moditic at es note
And if he be learned, let him correct the worde or sentence (which may diflike him) with the better, and whet 1 ryseth eicher of good wyll and charitie, either of enuie and contention not purely, yet his reprehension „if it e 10 che finding out of the truetli, suall not be repelled with griefe, but applauded to in gladnesse, that Christe may ed pray se: To wliom with the father and the holy spirite, be all glory and pray se for cucr, Amen.

ine hissaes mat by them ait } 175 ; . : . : : :
© Ln of Be / salinti cou prthe heie in it selfe the whole caminadlit ie of all their docsrines aforcfaide, for it prophecteth of thinges to come, it veoneth the biflo~
7 e olf?

rate voyde

Act NI

Luk ax,

Act i,

Ephey,
Col in.

Basil.

oli. an

de fell. CP?

3 rs
Morning Pray™

Che fick only hacht ok God. 43

pet his ende is very milerable and weetched.

a

ty

iit el

2 I a 1

¥ if
0 A I.
* an
4 i
3 13 ö
3 =a) ea | i * se:
7 48-4 s

N *
Ali |

I of e. y j
<4 ¢ ;
\ 8 ‘ =
SS 1 shy ma:

¢ The argument of the firft pfalme.

plalme feemety to be a preface vnto the residue. he true lelicitie in this worlde. whole delight is
{oz the vngodiy man, although he seeme kor a

the counseu ok the vngodip: nor standeth

the finners in the cougres

righteous: and t schall perishe.

of Dauid.

It declarech that the iust man wholly in practiting the lawe tyme to prosper and do kloriqhe,

Tessed is the man that walketh not in

in the way of sinners, nor sitteth in the seate of the scorue full. * ut his delight (18) in the lawe of God: and in God his lawe exercileth him elke day and night. a a 0
And he halbe lpke a tree planted “by Adee the waters syde, that bryngech foorth her waer. fruite in due sealon: aud Whole ieafe wpthereth not, for whatsoeuer he doth Wit
Chall prosper. l
As for] the vngodly (it is] not so (with them: hut they Lare like the chatte which the winde scattereth ab ode.
Therekore the vngodly shall not (be able to} “ftande in the iudgement: neither ation ok the

(a) Folowin dis vocation, ,

ct Shall not, rise. :
0 4 E.

righteous.
Foz God“ knoweth the wap of the g ens he way of the vngodly

The argument of the. ij. psalme.

¶ Allconspiracies of the Gentiles, Jeweg. Princes, Mag strates and Ringes against
Chrisle, be but altogether vayne, kor God Hath marueplouup appointed hym Lorde and king ouer al people, to the otter conlulion oc his aduerkaries. In erhortatton to Linges and Judges for to be learned, for to serue God, and for to receaue his konne Christe:

For happp are they that trust in hym.

a! W dothe Heathen fo furioufiy rage together: and why do the people imagine a vapne thing:

2 The kpuges of the earth stande bp: aud the rulers take counlell together against god, and against his annointed.

{)% (a) bande,

alunder: an N frombs. ud call away their codes

7 Jwyn declare the decree, God layde

vuto me : thou art my sonne, this day
J haue begotteuthee.

8 Desire of me, and J wyll geue thee z

the heathen for thyne inheritaunce: and the vttermost partes of the earth foz thy possession.

et vs breake stay they) their bondes 9 Thou shalt bruise them with a rod

of iron: and breake them in peeces like
à potters vessell.

49 He that dwenech in heauen wyll 10 Wherfore be vou nowe wel aduled O
Hauch them to come: the Lorde Wyll pe kinger: be pou learned ve chat are haue them in derifion, iudges of the earth. N b n wyll he {peake vnto them in 1 Serue ye God in feare: and reioyte ye iS el: and he wyll astonie them wWitha trembling.
. ng teace in his sore displeasure. 12 Risse ye the sonne lest that he be as oat weht shi Ying! enen J haue annointed grpe, and lo} pe perilhe Ckrom) the“ babes hene
Si Jmpkyng: vpon my holy Hyllof Wap, fis wrath be neuer fo litte kmd-
‘on, led: blelled are all they that put their

trust in bre ( The

ij)

BE thei day The Pfalmes. — Morning pas

The argument of the. iij. psalme

¶ Dauid maruapling at the great number ok his enemies, catteth vpon Bod kor helpe.
He putteth his trust in God and therfore he keareth not his aduerlaries, but he ree
5 toyceth at the luccelle that God geueth vnto hym.

q A pfalme of Dauid when he fled from the face of Absalom his sonne.
2. Samu. cap. 1j. &. 16.

A1 God howe are myne enemies in- 5 J lapde me dowue and slept: m do ryle vp again role vp agayne, for God fülte nn 1
Nate me. 6 JJ wyll not be akrapde of ten thon:

f Many fay of o my foule: there is no {andes of the people:that haue set (them laluation kor it in God. Slab. selues] àgainst me rounde about.

But thou God art a buckler for me: 7 Arile vp O God, laue thou ine O my fing thou art my worchsp, and the lifter bp Torde: forthou Hatt {mitten all myne line de, ok mp head. enemies vpon the cheeke bone, thou
5 cant ee 4 JJ dpd call bpon God with np bopee, hat broken the teeth of the vngodlp.

and he hearde unde o his holy byl. 8 Salnuation is of God: thy blelling is

Selah. b vpon thy people. Selah. eee - Th the. iiii salme nldered. Ihe argument ot the. 1. plaim |

OU wis he ¶ Nauid at the rebellion of his sonne Ablalom crpeth to God foz helpe. He reproueth

de whom the the chiele doers of his aduerfarics, and exhorteth them to repent. He is glad that

a they haue plentie of victuals and other neceflaries, leyng that he him selke is allu- 1 iam cher to be long red of God his kauour. be acertarns

of hym Sctfc, : immun d der- To the Ochiefe musition on© Neginoth,a psalme of Dauid. a

ecilent in mu- ordepned in

n mera fe ee, 1 | be me when JJ call O Gooof ber, and be styll. Scl. fyi, mn my righteousnelle: thou batt set 5 Oker the latrifite of righteoulnesse: De

licall mam:

(0) Ee ge: me at libertie when J was in di and put vour trust in God. b

cee krelle. 6 There be manp that fay, who wpll ade rome. 2 O pe sonnes ol men, how long wrt shewe vs gane] good: God likt thou be Oa

@ Sede pe go about to brig] my glory to conkuli- ppthe light of thy countcnaunce vpon dee
; on: ye loue banitic, ve fecke after tyes. ps. 7 art ee
Selah. 7 Thou hast put gladnesse in myhcark: e

3 Jor ye must know that God hath cho- inte the time that their torne and wine

sen to him selke a godly (man]: God wyl uncreased. | sere

heare when F call vnto hym. 3 Jwyll lap me dowue in peace a peach

we ye angry, but finne not: commune take my rest: kor thou God ouly make ne

With pour one heart in pour chaum- me to dwell in safetie. f bt ehoagh thr
The argument of the. v. psalme. mal
’ a good dne
; € Dauid aflicted with enemies, requireth God to heare his prayers, to guibebiin.an OF destroy wicked flattering rebels, trulting molt alluredly that the godlp chall be oF UP
OS notabte Defended and blelsed.

Sace fe f ¶ To the chiefe musition vpon ONehiloth, a psalme of Danid. atm fue t hath ne
1 Eut care vnto my wordes O God: 4 For thou art the Horde tha 0 nopeof bss vnderstande thou my pensifnesse. pleafure in wickednelle: neither a
2 Hearken thou vnto che boyceof anp eupll dwell With chee. n not lande my trying my kyng and my Lorde: for Suche as be foolishe, al workers of vntothee Y wil matte my prayer. in thy fight thou patella
Thou chalt heare my vopte betymes iniquitie. jake a
© S0: Pwylleariy in the moming 6 Thou walt veftroy tert blood
Direct (a pfaper)vnto thee, and J wyll ipe: God wyll abhorre oh locke (for helpe from thee. 3 thirstie and deceiptfull mau. 7 As

dhe Plalmes. a ifm

nie J Wylleome into thyue cast them out int
* i sO in the multütude of thy vuagodlinesle, fo.

he multitude of their they haue rebelled dem.

1 i WO hum- agäainst thee. nye aul ep: and in thy feare J wül dh yeaultera. me wp elke inch rue bolp temple, u Alnd all they that trust in the wyll re- er lan

ade me D God in thy righteoul (oper, they Wyll triuniph for ener, “bee ben nowsot neff berate of myne enemics: male kale thou defendek them: and they oo minde,

say playue before my face. that loue thy name, Wyll be ioyfull tt zwe
10 9 oa 11015 1S In“ their month, thee. 2 touching 1
J their inwwarde partes are very Wicked? 12 Jorthou O God wylt blesse the righ: ang. nelle: their throte is an open sepulchrze, (cous: and thou wylt compatle hyma- 4

the flatter with their tongue. bout with bencvolente, as with a weber

eltroy thou them O TLord, let them shielde. one ug their owne counfaties:

The argument of the. vj. psalme.

them.

f

¶ Pausd befecheth Hod of his mercy to mitigate the affliccionts whiche he kelt in his body and foule,to this ende, that he in this lyte might prayte God: Ind forlomuch as he allureth him felfe that Godhath hearde his prayer, he pronouncech that his enemies shall be put to shame. —

To the chiefe musition on Neginoth vpon Ocyght, a psalme of Dauid.

6d rebuke me not in 6 Jam weerie of my groning: J wache
J lthine indignation: net my bed euery nyght, and J Water my a en

V ther chasten me in thy coutche with my teares. bad wzath. 7 Mine epe is almost put out through 2% haue merey on me O grieke: and worne ont through all mine
God, fo: Jam weanke: enemies. N
=D God heale me, for 8 Awap from me all workers of iniqui-

my bones be bery sore. tie: for God hath hearde the voyte of
Sy soule allo is greatly troubled: but mp Weeping.

O God howe long all J be in this cale -) 9 God hath hearde mp petition: God
4 Turne thee O God, and deliuer mw Wyll reteaue my praper.

soule: Oh laue me for thy mercies lake. 10 All mpne enemies shalbe confounded
§ Jor in death no man remembreth thee: and fore bered: they shalbe turned

hing graue who can acknowledge 5 shalbe put to lhame sodainthee- pe.

O Etthet the tatttoment of

The argument of e plalme.

C Dauid prayeth God to deliuer him from such as do perlecute him to death for that he is innocent and hath delerued no suche thing at their handes: comlorting him telle therkore in God, he threatneth destruction to his enemies.

si Osiggaion of Dauid,whiche he fong vnto God in the busines of Chus, the O0 Siggaton onne of Iemini. 8 a bn afong, after

41 OSodme TLord, in thee J haue pnt had peace with mie: andlit) J hauecnot] Beers

my trust: saue me from all them delinered hym that is without a caule ens.

that do perlecute ine, and delluer mpne aduerlarte-

: Lalkane (Chendlet mipne euemie perlecute un e

tine: tlt a Tionsealonech onmy fouteandtake me: pea, let hym“ put nie „een. a cateth it in peetes, hauyng no to death, and lay mpue Honour in the der boote.

M

dust. Selah. . :
85 ö ei mp Lom ik Ji haue done aup 6 Arile O God in thy wrath and CHAN G speve
* 5 bthing: ovifthere beanp wicked: thou vp agapnst the rage of mne ener ede emu handes. mies: stirre thou for met acco:ding Ito the ccoshetings

Jpaue done eupll onto hym that indgement whiche) thou dat ne Jiu

A (ity) 2 és Commaũg ded +

Th

Moneth the. i. day.

1 people comic about thee: for their fakes

berg therfore place thy selfe on! high.

at 8 God wyll iudge the people: geue thou

5 sentence with nie O God atctording to my righteousmnesle, and according to mp

ö perfection (that is) within me.

9 My desire is, that h wickednesse of the vngodly may come to an ende: and that thou wouldelt alsist the iust, who art the tryer of heartes and of reynes, O most righteous L orde. *

10 My buckler is with God: who preserueth them that be vpright in hrart.
1 The Torde isa righteous iudge: and the Lorde is prouoked to anger euery
Day. fthe wicked wyll not turne He wyll
Whet his worde: bende his bowe, and

The argument of the. viij. pfalme.

¶ Dauid setteth koorth the magniticencte of Godacknowledged of babes and abiecteg ofthis world: he maruaplech at Gods workes. and at the great exceeding loue of God to man, who is exalted to that excellencie, that he is Lorde ouer all thinges in this

worlde.

J To the chiefe mulition ypon © Gittith, a psalme of Dauid.

A1 O God dur Torde, howe excellent is thy name in all the earth! for that thou hast fet thy glory aboue the

2 Put ot the mouth of very babes and sucklinges thou batt layde the foundation of thy strength for thyne aduersaries sake: that thou mightest styll the

enemie and the auenger. 8

Jor J will tonsider thy heauens, euen the workes of thy fingers: the moone and the starres whiche thou halt ordapned.

4 What is man that thou art myndfull

of him: and the sonne of man that thou

* J The argument of che. ix. psalme.

aa Ri prapleth God fo2 the victorie that he had obtayned ouer his enemies, attribu belecheth Godto continue he map continually set foorch his praples.

To the chicfe mufition at the death of © Labben,a psalme of Dauid. 5105

kßyng it whollp to God: He

Wyle prayse God e wih all mne we Heart I wyl re-

ueplous workes.

if “1 JJ Wyll be glad
DOW € vetopce in thee:
I wyll fing pfal-
— mes vnto thy

e Plalmes.
= 4 And lo thail the congregation of the haue it ina redmelle (to tpoote)

| 5 YA ate all thy mar-
HS

all

ayer,

Evening 8

3 Pe hath prepared hym instru ok death: he hath Ordapned 1
1 agaynst them hat be perlecu-

14 Scholde, he Wyll be int € |

„ A milchiefe, fo: he Hath contcaued a in, de N bour: but pet he Mall be broughttobed a. ofafaltebood, 1

1j He Hath made a graue and diggedit: 22 but he hym selfe Wyll fall ane an 15 W
Whiche he hath made. Mae

16 Fo: his labour shall come vpon his tre
‘olbnehead: and his wickednelle hall el his 1 pate.

17 vll prayse God ateordyng to his «ey, ryghteousnelse: c J wyl ing pf me vnto the name of the most high God.

I Knot ment, oy tnt.

v

visitest hym-
Thou hast made hym somthyng inleriour to angels: thou hastcrownẽd him 8
With glory and worchip. a
6 Thou makest hymto haue dominion of the workes of thy handes: and thou hast put all thinges Cin subsection) vnder his feete, —
All cheepe and oxen, c also the beattes ok the fielde: the foules ok the apre, amd the fishe of the (ea, and Whatloeuer 1 0 swymmeth in the seas. the len
8 D Gdd dur Logde: howe excellent great is thy name in all the cart:

his metcp to warde hym, that
(O Home re returned mes. perished at

name, O thou most hpest.

3 FJor that myne enemies a
EE : are fallen and thy presente.

4 Morthat thou batt geucn gan in my ryght and caule: thou ADS? gelt right, halt sit in the throne ment. 5 Thou

¢ The argument of the. xitj. Psalme

Da

i plapneth that God seemeth to sorget hym in bemalt his praper, and declareth his trust to be in

his afflictions,
God.

To tlie chiefe mufition, a Pfalme of Dauid.

long wylt thou forget me O

4 Hopfen cler howe long wilt thou hyde thy face from me- f owe long hall I {eke © countayle in my soule, and be so vered in mine heart cuery Dap? n long {hall npne eneiumph ouer me: 6

1 UA and heare me O God my Lorde: lighten nue epes, lest that

b

a

FZ lleepe in death.
Test myne cnemie fay, uapled agapnst hym: |

4 J haue pre-

est they that

trouble me reioyte yk J choulde w be re- Cb) Be eemoe moued. N Dignitie and

Wut Jrepose my trust in thy merce, and mp heart is iopfull in thy faluation:
IJ Well syng to God, becaule he hath rewarded me. Pe

4 The argument of the. xiiij. Psalme.

Dauld setteth foorth the opprellion of the people in h

is tyme, the regarde of God

ouching mens behauiour, the mockes of the wicked against thẽ that put their ruin ob an the ioy of the godly after they be deliuercd out of thraldome.

To the chiefe mus tion, a Psalme of Dauid.

The foole hath sapde in his heart there is no God: they haue torrupted (them felues} and done an abho-

imnable Woke, there is not one that doth good. ——_

2 God loked downe from Heauen vpon the children ol men: to {ee pf there were auy that did vnderstande and sseke after the Lorde.

ut thep are all gone outof the wap, they art altogether become abhomina-
10 there is none that doth good, no

e.

8 4 Do not all the workers of iniquitic.

The argument of the. xv. Psalme.

The prophete teache placed in heauen.

now, denouryng my people as though they deuoured bread: that they „call g. an not bpon God:

5 Hereafter they thalbe taken with a grcat feare: for the Lorde isinthege: neration of the righteous. bis

6 As for nowe pe make a mocke at the counfaple of the poore: becaule he reposeth his trust in God.

7 Who shall geue saluation vnto Pfeaci: out of Sion:

8 Daven God will deliner his people out of capeiuitic (then) wyll Jatob reioyte, and Hltaci be glad.

papers of them that

@

th what behaurours the people of God ought to haue,

Chat they may truelp be of his Church in this Ipfe, and after warde be

„ God, who hall
. dwell in thy ta-
Vi vernacle- who ambAt\ VS chall ret vppon
5 es thy holy hyll-

n Euen he that
ANS ARS N eG

a eve an 15
: corrupt life: an on both che thyng at is iuft, an
3 Tike henne from bis hegt. ungue: ne backebpteth not wich his

nar Doth any euil to his felowe,

noe rapicth a slaunder vpon his neyghour. ö
4 He that dispiseth in his eyes the repro- B bate: and honoureth them that feare od

God.
5 He that hathsworne to his owne hurt: and pet wyll not! go from his oth.
6 Pe that geueth not his money bpon vplurit: nor taketh rewarde agaynst the innocent. |
7 he that doth these thynges : shall neuer at any tyme“ be remoued. om bis
Dignitie, ~

The

“ Chaunge,

(a) f rom his good t

Moneth the fit day.

iudgement.

A 1 Pi me O Torde: for J haue reposed my trust in thee.

2 Thou hast sapde (O my loulej vnto

God, thou art my Love: my weldoing
, can do} thee no good. an Los wen 3 But all mp™ delyght issto do good) vnbein god bo the saintes that are in the earth: and becden. vnto such as extell in vertue. :
4. As for them that runne (after) another
(Gad) they shall haue great trouble: J wyll not offer their drynke offerpnges of blood, neither wyll J make mention ot their names within my lyppes.
O God, thou thy selfe art the portion of myne inheritaunte and ok my cup: thou wylt mayntayne my lot. 7
« Cordes 6 My“ lot is fallen vnto me in a pleasaũt

that meafured myne iuheritauce.

face at the dap of relurrection.

at ie thou O Godofiuttice, be at:

eave bnto mp praper, notlproceeding) out of fayned lyppes. f

2 Let indgement come foosth for me from thy face: and let thine eyes loke vpon equitte.

3 Thou Hatt prouedinpne heart, thou hast vilited (1) in the nyght season: thou hat tryed me, and founde no wickednelse. for] J purpoled that nothyng thoulde

bebe c stape my mouth. ehrntiong As touchyng [other] mens Workes:

another.

through the wordes of thy lyppes J haue Kept me from the way ot w the bene. Violent.

wes, I” § O holde thou bp my goynges in thy

t pathes: that my footesteppes slyp not.
IJ call vpon thee O God, fo? thou wilt

heare me: incline thine care to me,
Hearken vnto my Wordes.

7 Shewe thy marueplous louyng

~ ThePfalmes. one
The argument of the. xvj psalme. —

Dauid expresseth lyuelp the confinence, tru, gladnesse. and other luch affececs of the children of God in praying to God, in contellpng hym selke to be an vnprofitable scruaunt, in declarpng that he bath nothyng to do with such as trust

in any other laue onlp in God, in takyng God to be his inheritaunce, in ace unowledgyng that God wyll instruct hym. laue hym from kallpng mate hym glad. rapte hym krom death, and set hym on his ryght hande at the dap of

The golden psalme of Dauid.

Theargument of the. xvii. psalme.

Dauid prayeth God to delpuer hym krom his enemies, which were many, migheie, and cruell. e taketh God kor a witnelle of his innocencie, trustyng to fee his

A prayer of Dauid.

tentiue vnto my tomplapnt: geue

ning Pr ayer

grounde:] I haue) a goodly heritage. .
7 J wyll prapse God who gane me 5 tounsaple: my © reines aifo vo instrutt 23.5 me in the nyght season. ae
8 Jhaue let God alwapes before me: uach for he is on my ryght hande, sthertore) J d de
Mali not © be remoued. mec
Wherlore my heartisglad:mygloyy Oem reiopteth, my flethe allo shall rest ing om” seturitie. 8 ut
1o Foz thou wylt not leaue my soule m 0 „ ;,, hell: neither wylt thou suffer thyne te 0 holy one to fee corruption. e
Thou Wyle caule me to knowe the ge path of lyfe: in thy presente is the ful- wg

(e) Sn mann

il
Ly 13 55 nesse of iop, and at thy right hand there . be pleasures for euermore.

kindnelle: thou that art the saulour ot them that trust in thee, from such as ryle vp agaynst thy ryght bande.
3 Baepe me as the apple ok an eye, hyde % me vnder the shado we of thy Wynges: frown the face of the bugodly that 90 about to destroy me, rom) mypne cue mies that one rounde about to ke Away mp soule. 1 0, Ff
9 They haue e incloled Item selues) in Cee their one tats with oe mouth they a speake proude thynge
10 hey haue nowe conmassed Ue > every {pe where our wa ic n toote With i yee to ouerthoW, dolbne onthe grounde. ö
His Ane be ipke a lions sake greedy to take a pray: aud as aul whel elurkyng in lecrete placcs 9
12 Arpfe O Gon, pzeuent his con nm malte hym to bowe: delpuer 1 155 soule from the vngodly

I

- TI he Pfalmes.

ayng prayer
I4. Whose

VI.

children haue aboundaunte: c they leaue enough of that they haue om men, fror remapnyng to their babes.

che wunde whole portion (is in this 15 But as forme F will beholde thy fate

l alter thou) me O God from men
B which be) thy © hande:krom men, from a in ryghteousnesse:

shalbe Catithi
When Jawakke bp akter tt aie

ie whole bellyes thou fyllest with thy
| — er thy lpkenesse.

prulie cercature J,

9 The argument of the. xvii i Pfalme

d declareth that he wyll at all tymes trust in God and call vpon hym for Hetpe, es God hath with his mightie arme and wonderfull meanes Millers ah from cruell enemies, which dyd let vpon hym ipke fiendes of hell. He imputeth this Gods sauour to wardes hym to proceede ol that he loued Gods Worde, ryght dealpng. and honest companie. Thus encouraged with Gods pretence and ayde he maketh lure count, not only to ouerrunne and destroy his ene mies and rebelleg: but alto to subdue vnto hym other nations of the heathen, that God amongt them alfo may be prapsed. f ~
To the chiefe mufition the feruaunt of God, and of Dauid who spake vnto God the wordes of rhis fong in the day that God deliuered him from the hande ofall his enemies, and from the hande of Saul:
And he sayde.

Wyll entirely lone ther u His cloudes, haplestones, and coles
O God my strength, ol kire: fell downe before hym alter
God is my stony rocke lyghtnong.

t my fortresse, and nw 12 God allo thundred out of heauen: and delpuerer: my Torde, the molt hyghest made his vopte to

my tastell in Whom J
Wyll trust, my buckler, bhe hore of mp saluation, mp refuge.
2 Jwyll call vpon God, who is most

worthy to be prayled: fo J chall be fafe from myne enemies.

3 The“ panges ol death haue compassed mie about: and the outragiousnes of the

wicked haut astonyed me with feare.

4 Tht “ panges of a graue haue compalsed me about: the snares of death duertoke me.

Bult in this my distrelle I dyd call vppon God, and J made my tomplaynt vntaomp Lowe: he hearde my vopte dut of his temple, and my crpe tame bez foebisfare,euen puto his cares.

6 Che carth trenbied and quaked: the berp foundations of the hylles tottered aud shocke, betaule he Was Wroth.

7 0 nhis anger a smoke altended Dp: au fire out of his mouth dyd cofume, z Weucry cole therok dyd let a fire.
8 ned heauens also, and be ie and it was darke vnder en bpon the Cherub, and he dyd liche wynde eeyng vpon the wynges lo Fg) hui 4 a bistervete piace he dyd put darke-

85 ee
Dou, hr eg his pauilion rounde about
Meloudes of ¢

de,

put darknesse of waters he ayre.

sounde, hayleftones, and toles of fire.

3 He shot out his arrowes and stattered then he cast foorth much lyghtnynges, and destroped them. f

14 And the bottonies of waters appeared, and the foundations of the rounde
Worlde were discouered at thy chidyng.
O God: at the blast of the breath of thine anger. ö

15 He bath sent downe from aboue to fetch ine: he hath taken me out of many
0 Waters.

16 He hath delinered me from my strong enemie:and krom them which hate me, for they were to tout for nie.

17 They preuented nie in the day of my n but God was vnto me a sure

ap.

18 He brought me allo foorth into a plate of libertie:he bought me foorth, betause he had a fauour vnto me.

19 God rewarded int after ny righteons dealyng: accordyng to the tieannesst ot mpue handes he retonpensed nie.

20 Betaule J had kept the wapes of
God: and had not wickedly shronke from my God.

C

(a) Great daungers and perill

21 For all his lawes were before me: and x,

J reiected none ok his connnaundementes fromm ine. f

22 And J was sounde ¢ pure tobardes hym: and J was weery lek J shoulde

with my wickednesse. offende hym with my 4

neth the. ii. day.

ter my righteous dealpng: and accozdyng to my cleannesse of my handes in his syght.

24. With the holy thou wylt be holy: with
à perfect man thou wylt be perfect,

25 wath the cleane thou wylt be cleane: and with the frowarde thou wylt be

| frowarde.

26 For thou hak saued the people oppresfed: and thou batt brought downe the hygh lokes of the proude.

27 Thon also hak lyghtened my tandell:
God my Torde hath made ny darknesse to be lyght.

28 Por in thee J haue oilcomfitcd an hoast of men: and with the helpe of my
Lowe J haue stipped ouer the wall.

29 The wap of the Lorde is a perfect way, the Worde of God is tryed in the

fire: he is a shielde vnto all them that

) Hath turd mpne ade uersitie into

Mosperitit.

(c) J haue
@alplp ouercome wall'd tomnes and

put their trust in hym.
E 30 FJor who is a Lorde beides God: or
1 7 hath anp strength besides aur orde:

steele.

34. Thou hast geuen me the shielde of thy saluation: thy ryght hande allo bath helde me vp, and through thy great gentlenesse J haue increased.

35 Thon hast made me roonith inough

15 to go on: so that my feete haue not ppt.

36 J haue purfued mpne enemies and onertaken them:neither dyd F returne backe vntyll Y had destroped them.

Ihe Plalmes. > j Cr,
23 Therfore hath God rewarded me af- 37 Ismote them downe, and thep ar

Euenyne p

not able to aryse: the ae a fy aa mp fect v aug faßt lach

38 Thou Yall gyrded wie witl bree

ne vnder me wl vp n i o hauerplen

39 you halt geuen mie myne enemies neckes: and J haue dest that hated 15 ORES them

4% Thep tryed, but there was naue o saue them: they tryed vnto God, but he dyd not heart them.

41 A dyd beat them to powder, une vnto dust in a wynde: Jhaue brought them as lowe as durt in the streates.

42 Thon hast deliuered me from edition of the people, and thou batt made me head of the heathen: a people whom ZF haue not knowen lerueth me, alloone as thep hearde ol me. they obeyedme.

43 Children of ac straunger haue made — a lie vnto me:the heartes of the chudren of a straunger Hath fapled them, and they feared in their (frong) holoes,

44 God lyueth, and he Lis) my strength

most worthy of blisse: and the Lorde of mp saluation ought to be magnifico.

45 Itis Godthat hath genen me power G to take Canengeaunce: and he hath sub- com dued the people vnder nie. gs

46 It is he that is the aucthour of my deliuerie from mne enemies: and he hath set me vp aboue them that role a gaynst nie, he hath ridde me from the wicked man.

47 Foz this caule J wyll acknowledge thee O God among the gentilcs: and syng plalmes vnto thy name.

48 Who hath wonderful oft delinered his kyng: and he hath done mercifully vnto Dauid his annopnted, and bute his seede for euer more.

The

‘ ray el
Yorn P ;

lde heauens deaA clare the glorie of

[ ry} a} f p 7
PINOY SR
7 e VW
NW {5 “ae Sy
U I. 8 8 8 |
‘ ; y IN 0

a day: and a night teacheth knowe-

e unto anyght.

3 os language, no wordes, uo voyte of

mr "theirs is hearde: pet their founde

gocth into all landes, and their wordes into the endes of the worlde.

4 In them he hath fet a tabernacte for the sunne: Which commeth foorth as a budegrome out of his chamber, and retoyteth as a giaunt to runne his courte,

His lettyng foorth is from the vtmost part ok heauen, and his tirenite vnto the vtmost part therok: and there is nothing byd from his heat.

6 The lame of God is perfect, conuerting

thelonle:the testimonte of God is Wsure, and geueth wildome vnto the simple.

ohn d.

ges prayers, to receaue his Cacrifices,

2 Dam. io. AND, 1. Par. io. where was

ie thoufande charioteg.

ben at (422 heare thee in the day of trou: ble: thename of the Lorde ol Ja-
2 cob dekende the.
5 et him sende thee helpe from the an HALE and apde thee out of Sion. en remember all thy offeringes:
Wee ce into asches thy burnt lacri-
4 Ltt hun graunt thee t
50 eartes deitecanb accomplitheall tho deine te 0 reiopte in thy saluation, and ph in the name oF Our Lode: foz

Vitperfourmne all thy petitions,

The Plalmes.

The argument of the. xix. pfalme.

orie wherby he map be finowen, appearcth sulkictently in all his worke A

n Wwe earth: but cfpectally to his chi Idren in his holy worde, which

therfoze ought to be ol more value and commendation then

thynges. pon consideration hercof, Dauid conkelleth his fecrete ANd presumptuous sinnes, he craueth pardon and mercie at Gods handes.

To the chiefe musition, a pfalme of Dauid.

all other worlatp

7 The statutes of God reioyce the heart: the commaundement of God is pure, and geueth light vnto the eyes.

8 The teace of God is sintere, endureth

for euer: the iudgementes of Godare trueth, they be iust in all poyntes.

Thep are moze to be delired then golde yea then much fine golde:theyare alfo lweeter then hony and the hony tombe.

10 Moreouer, by them thy seruaunt is well aduertised: and in kepyng of them there
(Sa great Vrewarde.

1 Who can knowe his owne © errours-

Oh cleanse thou me from thole that A

am not petite ot.

Bepe thy seruaunt also from o prestunptuons (tinnes) tet them not ralgne duer me: so J shall be perfect e voyde froin all haynous offence,

3 Let the wordes of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart ve atceptable in thy light O God: my strength and my redeemer.

The argument of the, xx. psalme.
Per people settyngforwarde to battaple agapnst wicked enemies,

besecheth God to heare the

and to geue hym the victorie, wherok they allure them felues, in that they put their whole trust in God, and in no worldly korce or tiyng, ag their enemies do. Chis battaple is thought to be that which was agayntt the Ammonites.

= deskroyed fourtie thoulande hazsemen, and leuentie

To the chiefe musition, Oa psalme of Dauid.

6 save I knowe that God Wyll saue his annopnted, he wyll heare him from his heauenly sanctuarie: there is salua-
1 the mightineffe of his right

ande.

7 Some put their trut in chariotes, and some in horses: but we wyll remember the name of God onr Lorde.

8 They shalbe made to bowe and fall: but we {hall arise, and stande vpright.

9 Sane thon O God: that the king may heare vs in the day when we call.

The

are right, and B

) Beoms moditte that folotocth tie ende.

(e) Done by tgnozaunce,

Gee nglp and infolentip,

The 7 Imes. Moryng

eth the. iii. day.

Ihe argumentof the. xxi. psalme.

@ Che people reiopceth and geueth thanlies to God, in reheartyng the victorie that Dauid

their king had gotten, and in attributyng it only to God. J good king 18 a blelspng of
God, and the ende of all wicked men is wretched.

ase To the chiefe musition, Oa pfalme of Dauid.

fier the vie- 1 1 :

en“ 1 HE kyng ought to relopce in thy 8 Thine hande wyll finde ont
. 7 T teengty Sede and he oughtto de enemies: thy right hande wyll ken
(a) rine txteedyng glad of thy falnation. them that hate thee.

(a) W
Pourstge 2 Thou hast geuen him his heartes de- Thon wut make them likea sbi» lite: and hast not denied him the request kfurnate in tyme of thy kurie: Gobi of his lippes. Selah. destroy them inhis wrath and lire chall
3 - F02 thou Hak preuented hum with® tonsume them. good bleslinges: and hast set a crowne 10 Thou wilt roote their frutte out of the of pure golde vpon his head. earth: and their seede from among the
4. Me alued life of thee, and thon gauest chiüldren of men. g him long dapes:euen for euer and euer. 11 Foz they intended milchiele agaynst
5 His honour is great through thy fale thee, and imagined a craftie denice: (but) nation: thou hast layde glorie and great they toulde not (bring it to passe.] worship vpon him. N 12 Therkore thou wilt put themto“ fight: %
6 Foz thou ha placed him to be bie (and) direct thine arrowes agapust nip singes for euer: and hast made him glad their faces. dinge with the ioy ol thy tountenaunce. 13 We thou exalted O God actordyng to
7 Wecause the king trusteth in God, and thine owne nught: fo we wyll ling, and in the mertte ok the molt highest:he that with plalmes we Wpll praple thy not miscarie. pober. g
The argunment of the. xxij. psalme.
¶ Maid first in the figure of Christe as one forsaken, crpech to God the father, btteryng his crosse, afiliction, humblenesse, and mockes geuen of the people, gouernours. and prielles.
Secondarily he prapeth kor his deliuerie, that he may prapte God in the Church. and incite

other to put their trust in him in aduerlitie. Lat of all, he reiopceth that his lungdome walbe extended to the vttermost partes of the worlde.

To the chiefe mufition of the mornyng O hinde, a psalme of Dauid.

Ch) wi igt ol that which

I 5119 God, my God, why mp mothers wonibe: thou tauledst me haft thou forsaken me? to trust in thee, sutkpng my mothers why) art thou lo farre breastes. ö e tromempheaith, and 10 J haue ben left vnto thee euer sinte J
„rom the wordes ok was borne:thou art my God tuen from f 8 imp“complapnt: my mothers wombe. N
“toring. 2 O mp God J erpe u Ogo not far frd me, for trouble is harde

all the day tyme, and in the night lealon,

and J teasse not:but thou hearest not.

3 And yet thou most holp: littest to reteaue the o prapers of Jlrael.

4 Pur fathers hoped in thee: they trusted in thee, æthou didst deliuer them.

5 Thep called vpon thee, and they were helped: they did put their trust in thee, and they were not confounded,

6 But as forme Pama Woe and no man: a very frozne ok men, and an outtast ot the people.

All they that see me, laugh me to scorne: they do make a mowe, and nod their head (at me.)

8 (Saping he rekerrethralito God, oking that God) Wyll deliuer him (and) restue him: for he delighteth only in him.

9 GBut thou art he that tokest me out of

(a) Such as contarne the mapses of
* od.

at hande: and there is none to helpe me.

12 Many oxen are come about me: fat bulies) of Bashan close me in on euere spde.

15 They gape vpon me with their
Nai as it Were a rampyng auda roryng lion.

14 Jam as lit were into water relolued and all my bones are out of iopnt: 5 C heart alfo is like ware melted in the middest of my bowels. 1

15 Mystrengthis dried pplikea patchen 15 emp tongue cleaueth to mp gun — andthou hast brought me into the. d 2 55 of death. the *

16 Foz dogges are come about . : allemble of the wicked lay siege ag 5 10 me: they haue pearted my 9 1 5 my feete, J may tell all my 5 Ther

: ayhS prayer.

5 nde staring ¢ galing bpon me:

1 my garmentes among thent, at they tast lottes vpon neo vesture.

“4 ut be not thou karre from me O

8 God: thou art my strength, make halte

ie.
1 Wa my soule from the lworde:

y
Delpu
* a dearlyng from the dogges
+ 00 tS.
20 ane me fron: the Lions mouth; delyuer me from the hornes of the cornes.
* 9 wyl declare thy name vnto mp ae, hikthren: J wyll prayle thee in the middest ol the congregation.

m!
U fot

Re

{rom ean repavinig) praple pe God pe that feare bi ae : gloritie hym all pe of the feede of
1 Jatob, and staude in awe of hym all pe jot öthe scede ol Ilrael.

z Forhehath not dispised nor abhorred the affliction of the pooze: be hath not hyo his face from hym but he hearde hym when he cryed vnto hyn.

14. My prayse halbe ok thee in the great

au

ance. nom? an goers a ctich l

J he Pflalmes.

congregation : J wyll perfourme my ut inthe tpgbt of them that feare

25 The poore shall cate, and be fatiffied : they that fecke after God shall prayse hym, por heart shall lyue for euer.

26 All the endes of the worlde shall remember them lelues and be turned vnto God: and all the kinredes of the nations shall worshyp before thy fate.

27 For the kingdom is Gods: and he is D

the gouernour ouer the nations.

28 All such as be“ fat vpon the earth fhall cate and worshyp:all they that go downe lin) to the Dult Hall knele before hym, although © he preserued not his obne lyfe.

29 The posteritie Hatt serue hym: they
(halbe counted vnto the Lorde“? for a generation.

30 They wyll tome and declare his righ:

teousnesse vnto a people that shalbe sv

borne: for he hath done it.

¢ The argument of the. Xii Psalme.

Dauid relemblyng God to a sbeephearde and hym selle to a sheepe, declareth that all commodit ies, plentie, quietnesse and prolperitie, ensueth them that be fully pers swaded of Gods prouidence: kor God feedetiy, nozitheth, delendeth. and gouerneth thofe that put their whotl trust in hym alter a moze ample fot then any sheepe-

hearde doth his sheepe.

@ A pfalme of Dauid.

t (;* is my sheephearde, therfore x can lacke nothyng: he wyll caule me to repose my selfe in pasture full of grasse, and he wyll leade me vnto

talme waters.

dene e auh into the es ot righao 00 e “a ough J walke through the ae ofthe shadowe of death, J wyll kare no eupil: for thou art With me,

thy rodde and thy staffe be the thynges that do comfozt me.

4 Thou wylt prepare a table before me in the pretence of myne aduerfarics: thou Hatt annopnted my head with ople,and my cup shalbe brymme full.

5 Truelp feltciticand mertie shal folowe me all the dayes of my Ipfe: and J wyll
9 0 in the boule of God for a long pre,

The

(D Rich men
(hall sacritice vnto Gon, and cate at the Lozdeg

table.

(e) Bithougl
Chute was content to dye, and Wa

put to deach: pet the dead

shall Bnows 7

p 5
(3) Son hath n

en th
Declare.

Moneth the. v. day.

nameth the kyng of glorie.

c they that dwell

Sit therttu.

For he hath laide

the foundation of

: it vpou the scas: and he hath let it

sure bpon the siuddes.

or Who hall ryse bp in his holy plate
4 (Euen he that hathj cleane handes, and a pure heart: that bath not o tanen his soule in vayue, nor lworne disteiptkullp.
He shall reteaue a blessyng from God: and ryghteousnesse from the Lorde of

(a) In dopng
“Mot good but enpli, for man bath his soult to do good. 4

he Plalmes.

* The argument of the. xxilij. Psalme. N

@ Maui declareth that although all the earth and all the inhabitours theror do n. ; taynetoGod, yet that he bath cholen most efpeciallp the Herofdo pee fuch as wyll che God and lyue vertuoullp, allo delireth to builde a temple, for to place

3 Who shal asceude into the hyll of God-

Morn

mount Sion: So must d well in that blesled d 0 therin the arke of God, whiche he

q A pfalme of Dauid.

A 1 He earth is cods his laluation. 8
Mornyng and all that ther- 6 This is the generation ot them that prayer. in is: the worlde, seke hym: euen of 2

then tl face in] Jacob. Selah. hat (che thy
7 DLyft bp pour heades © Dye gates

yng Prayer

() Rhee ig

and be ye llt bp pe euerlastyng does: Mens

aud the kyng of glorie hattenterin, | ™

8 wo is this kyng of glorezit is God BE both strong e mightic, it is God mighfie in battayle. *

9 Tyft bp pour heades O ve gates) and be pou lyft bp pe euerlastyng DONS: and the kyng of glorie chall enter in.

10 Who ts this kyng of glorie: enen the
God of hostes, he is the kyng of glozie,

Clan.

tint,

fi
Fircg

d

wrde rt wont

sit men and tadg

cd

The argument of the.xxv.Pfalme. .

¶ Dausd afflicted with enemieg a feclyng the great burden ol inne, namelp of his youth: prapeth God partly to delyuer hym, partly to teache hym and to pardon his offences, He ketteth forth the infinite goodnelle and kellcitie which is allured to all them that teare God. Finally, he con ellech that all his trust is in God.

Tyft vp my soule vnto thee O God, trueth: vnto such as kepe his couenannt

Al
| I put mi trust un thee my Lorde: let me not be confounded, neither let mpne enennes triumph oner me.

2 Bea, let not all them that hope in thee be put to shame: let them be put to shame who without a canse do trayterousip tranlgresse.

3 Male me to knowe thy wayes O
God, and teathe me thy pathes: leade me foorth in thy trueth and teache me, for thou art the Lorde of my saluation,
J haue wapted for thee al the dap long.

4. Call to remembraunce O Goo thy tender mercies a thy louyng kindnelle: foz they haue ben fo2 euer.

5 Oh remember not thou the linnes and offences of my pouth: but actordyng to thy mercie cucn of thy goodnelle O
God remember me.

6 Gratious and ryghteous is God: therfore Ye wyll teache sinners in the way.

7 Pt wyll guide the meke in indgement: and teache the humble his way.

8 All the pathes of God are mertie and

and his testimonies.

9 Pardon thou therfore for thy name fake O God my Wickednesse: forit is bery great.

lo What man is he that feareth God:
God j wyll teache hymn in the Way that he Mati choose.

11 His sonle shall W rest all nyght at! cast: garen

and his seede Chall inherite the lande.

90 and 0
11 Thecwletrete of God is among thei frie

that feare hym: knowen vnto them his couenaumt. ot

1; Myne epes be alwayrs (turned) bn a
God: for he wyll take my feete out d the net.

14 Turn thy face vnto me, aud Da C mercie bpon me: for JJ am desolate a in milerie. 9 te

15 Lhe sorowes of myne heart ae args O bryng thou ute out o distrelle. 4

16 Hoke thon bpon mpne apuertiticr vpon my labour: and forgeuc nic

sinne. 17 Cousider

and he wyll make e

migerics of our redemp-

paunit of fn

t

ek

rs

1 rer.
Yorn pr ay , myne enemics, for they do

Eule and they beare a tirannous

e gain soule and deliuer me, lest

4 m iy trust in ther.

Ihe Plalmes. _—

The argument of the. xxvj. psalme.
¶ Nauid offereth his cause tor the whiche he was pertecucen,

19 Let tutegritic and vprighteons dealing mr nie fafe: for J haue wapted

after th
20. Pod redeeme Piracl:out or all bis : abuerhittes,. | ess a es 2. 1 22 fir ig to be iudged or God, pros

testing his innocencie: partly in that he serued Bod with purenes of heart, and bps

of life, frequenting his temple, and bling his ceremonies: partly alto in ate ated all company ofeuitt men whatloeuer thep were. r Of. Dauid. 6

7 That in a-

jou me O God, for J haue a! Luan perfection: mp trust dad hach benin GoD therfore) 3 hal
1 nemme me D God and proue me: tiyeoutiny reynes and ny heart.
3 Foz thytouing kindnes is before mine eppes: and J Wyll walke in thy trueth.
4 Phaue not sit in company With vayne persotis: neither haue J entred Conce ac, quaintauice) With dissemblers.
5 Phaue hated the congregation of the
» Walitions: and J wyll not fit amongst thebngadly.
6 Jhaue walshed my handes in inno-
A cence: aud (lo) J haue 0 gone about ex thlne aulter O God.

publique conkesston J x. myght heare: and let foorth all thy Ina vy
Wonderous workes. fof confeth aa

8 O God, J haue loued the habitation

ol thine house: and the plate“ where thine honour dwelleth.

9 O gather not nip soule with sin-

ners: normplite with bloodie men.

In whole handes is wickednes: and their right hande is full of gyftes.

n But as for me J wyll Walke in mp perfection: O redeeme mie, and be mercykull vnto me.

1 My foote standeth vpon a™ playne
(Grounde: therfore} F wyll blesse God in the congregations.

on for to

heare.

“Of thetze bernacle ot thy glory. c) i
0 poe J

0 @chreta,
2 am fafc and ure through ter heiße.

al ¢ The aroument of the. xxvij. psalme. ö

C Che prophete confelseth his boldnes. courage, and no feare

ac all that he had through

God in ertreame and perilous daungers: Betore al thinges. he requireth that he map

come into the temple with the godlp, for to facrifice, and to alfo most earnestiy foz heipe at Gods hande, being of all other forsanen.

W d is mp lyght and a = af falnation, whom then a CAG shall I feare z God is

When the malitious
Approchedneare vnto me for to eate vp

ye eee: une enemies and foes stum-

bedand felt

3 , Though an hoast of men were layde beampengaunt me, vet shall not mine banrtbeafrade and though there role b. bare againtt me, (pet] I wyll put

„ Inne this,.

Aue Defired one thyng of God,

aue oute agapne J wyll carneftlp

0 ae chen that J may dwell in the

beholde gad all the dapes of my like, to

~ ketten ehe bea iulnes of Gop,and to

deb ir inhi ou the tune

hy
Ay

Stemple, of aduersitie he Chall

prapse God. He prapeth hide me in his tabernatle: yea in the letrete (place) of his panilion he shall hide me, and let me vp vpon a rocke of fone,

6 And nowe he shall lift vp my head az boue mine enenties rounde about me: therkore J wyll offer in his tabernacle a faccifice of great) top, J Wyll fing 99 and prayse God with pfainies,

7 Searken vnto my bopee O god (when
I crye s onto the: haue merey vpon me 2S and heare me.

8 My heart hath lapde vnto thee caccoz-

* cording to this thy commaundement] seeke
7 iy face: thy face O God wyll J

ecke. a

9 Dbide not thou thy face from nie, nor

catt thy seruannt away in a displeasure:

thou batt ben my succour, leaue me not,

neither forsalte ine O Lorde of my fate vation,

10 Fozmy father e de me:

d take me vp. and God did t. 100 u Leathe

The

Moneth the. v. day.

leade me in a right path, betause of mine tnemies.

12 Deliuer nie not into mint aduersaries
“Handes : kor there are false witnesses rylen vp against me, and such as speakt
Wrong. N ° ;

 Soute.

¶ The prophete turning his face Cowardes wicked to whom vengeaunce

Al Hto thee J crye O God n
# Rocke. 8 not as though thou were deale at me: “lek t thou holdest thy peace, I become like them that go downe into the graue. a”
2 Meare the voyte ofiny humble petitions when J crpe vnto thee: when FH holde a mp handes towarde thy holy

plate where thy arne 15. R
3 Tale me not away with the vngodpe, and with the workers of iniquitic:
Whiche speake of peace to their neighbours but milchieke is in their heartes.
4 Bewarde them actordyng to their
Deedes: and according to the Wickednes

of their owne inuentions.

Lest peraduenture thou holdest thy peace from me, and I become.

41 A Ttribute vnto God O ye formes of printes: attribute vnto God glory and strength.

2 Geue to God glozy (due) vnto his name: worchip God With holy Honour,
Theo voyte of God is aboue waters: it is the Lorde of glory that thundreth, it is God that ruleth the lea, co) apightle 4. The boyce of God is ™ with power:
* the voyte of God is with honour,

5 The bopee of God breaketh the Cedar tram: pea God breaketh the Cedars of
Tibänus

6 And he maketh them to fhip like a calfe: Libanus alfo and Sivion like

() That is, 3 thunder.

5 Fon feart. n grtatthũder g, billes letme to be thaken.

(d) It ia
Hul, called atlo
Hermon.

5 Betompence them alter the woke ok their handes: pay them home that

Pfsalmes.

Eue nin 8 prayer

ger thy way S God: and 1; If Jhad not belened verpip red
1 Teathe me thy way O God: and 13 Af Jhad not belened verrip to see

goodnes of God in the la

une tte fie ba rete —
14 Attende thou [therfore] vpon G

ofa good tonrage, and he will 2

an heart: (Itar) attende thou vpon

The argument of cherer vin pitifes —

the arke of God, delireth that his prapers i map be hearde, that God would fuccour him, and not Cuffer him to be oppresled of the is due: he thanketh and prapleth God fo2 his deliuerte.

they bane painters — or they geue not their nunde to by: derstande the doynges of God and ihe ‘ worke of his handes: (theretoze} he wyll bkeake them downe, and not buyide
Sete be God f wWlefled be God: for he Hath heard the boyce of mine humble Peg *
8 God is my strength and mp chielde, my heart hath trusted in hint and Jam helped: therefoze my heart laippeth or io, and in my song J wyll prayse C

hym.
9 God 18 0 their strength: and the ganz strength that saueth his annopnted.

Of the

10 O laue thy people, and geue thy blel- 1 fing vnto thine inheritaunte:keede them a. and exalt them for euermore.

The argument of the. xxx, psalme.

¶ Che prophete exhorteth princes and rulers ok this worde to acknowledge Gods glory and power, whiche appeareth even in thundring. rayne and tempestes.

à poung vnitorne.

7 The boyce of God ee flambes of fire: the voyte of God ma’ s
Keth the wyloerneffe to tremble, 602 5; maketh the wyldernelle of Caves to

trenbble. ö

8 The vopte of God maketh hure tast their calfe, and maketh woe.

* be are : 1 — setteth

oorth his glory in his compe.

God sitteth in the flud: and God wil! sit king kor euer. is peo“ &

10, God Wyll geue strength vnto h) in 0 fe ple: God Wyll blesfe his people aie peate. fen

The

ce casteth olit (¢)

“The a 1 he Fialmes. 7
: The argument of the. xxx. psalme. 7
Hauid delivered krom his enemies, voth thanketh and alto prapteth God, and inciteth

other to do the lame, because Gods difpleature lasteth not long. He thought bis prot.

eritie

woulde haue cont inned styll. but vilited with lieknes and aduersitie, erpeth Foz

1 8 crefoze. ge Aaa tr endhicheis a fong of the O dedication of the house of Dauid. a py yoylleraltthee O 6 And in mp prosperitie I fue’ zi God, for thou hast neuer hauc a fal:thou Sch d. 2 ot eralted nie: and nes hadst made my © hyll fo strong. —

halt not made my 7 (Peuerkhelelle when] thou dydst turne zune

15 gkoes to triunpho- thy face, J was troubled: then] | cry- garoiene a ner me. ed vuto tice O God, then made I my ane”

; ‘) DGoomy Lord humble prapers to thee my Lorde. fe Beryedontothee: 8 (Baring what profite is there in my ;

Jand thon bhatt hea-

le. hon God hast raysed vp my foute

from the graue: thou Hatt preserued my ile krom them that go downe into p pit.

4 Sing plalmes vnto od ye his saintes: and make pour tonfe lion vnto the V remembraunce of his holynes.
For ã litle short times palleth in his anger, a like is Tpente) in his good wyll: at euening Weeping Chall “ begin the night, but top tommeth in the morning.

bee Crd meters, et sa meso 5 tg,

herbs mid

41 Hthee O God J haue put my trust, let me neuer be confounded: deliuer me in thy righteousnes.

2 Boe dowͤne Hine care to me, make halt to deliner me: be vnto me a strong rockt and a house of defente, that thou mayest saue me.

3 For thou art my strong rocke and fortreffe: enen fo: thy name fake conduct me, and direct me. =

+ Kae me out of the net that they haue
5 10 foz ine: for thou art my

5 Bnto thyhande J commende my (pt:
In p {pt
Vite + loi thou Hatt redeemed nie D

blood when F go downe to the pit-chal the Dult “ geue thankes vnto thee z o7 chall it declare thy trueth-

9 gheare me O God, and haue mercy bps pon me: O God be thou my helper.

lo [And toorthwithj thou hak turned my mourning into dauncing: thou bat put of my facketoth, and gyrded me with gladnes.

1 Therkore myglozp shal fing psalmes onto tijec and not ceasse: O God iny
Lorde J wyll peaple thee for euer.

The argument of the.xxxj.pfalme.
¶ Dauid brought into that distresse that he had no hope to escape, cryeth to God: he com. mendech him lelle wholly to him, he deelareth the complaintes, lorowes, and afllictions whiche he felt in that daungerous time. he prapeth fo2 helpe. he wisheth conkuli · onto wicked liers, he rebearfeth what good thinges God hath prepared lor them that feare him and put their tru in him he thanketh od lor his goodnes towardes him. he exhorteth all men to loue God, and that continuallp.
It is thaaghs that this plalme pertapneth ta the stozie. 1. Sam. 23. :

@ Tothe chiefe musition, a pfalme of Dauid.

feete in a large roome.

9 Haue mercy vpon me O Gon, for J am in distresse: mine eye, m soule, and mp belly be consumed for very heauinesse.

fo For mplife is wasted with sorow, and mine cares With mourng:mpstrength

fapleth me because of mine 0 tniquitie, and my bones art putrified.

1 J became a reprofe among al mine enemies, but espetially among my neighbours: and they of mine acquaintaunce were afraide of me, and they that dyd fee me without, conueyed them felucs quickly fro me.

Codthe Lorde of trueth. 12 J became cleane forgotten as a dead nen Dated them that obserue fue man ont of minde: J became like a broin ron vanities: and my tru hath ken vessell.

8 7 webe glad and reio ‘ ing ki oper in thy lodegundnes : for that thou batt confi:

13 Jor J haue hearde the billanic of the multitude, and feare was on eucry side
(me): whyle they tonspired together a

ed my trouble. and hath ell to
* nowen my gainst me, (and) toke their come
4 a abuerlities, take away my life. f hand Be not (hut me bp into the 14 But my hope hath ben in thee O God: or the enemie: (bue) halt let my

aue sayd thou art im Lorde. dd W (i) » 15 OP

te Conlesse «

(d) Fin et mp ropaltit and digmtie.

6 Confeffe.

7%

(a) Catatnts tics wheres

with he Wag

vnnished fog his finne.

Moneth the. vj. day.

Th © P f al mes. Enening pay,

@) wri 3 15 My time is in thy hande, deliuer nie 20 Thou hydest them px
Ke 1? from the hande of mine enemies: and owe presenee cont the rae ieee from then that persecute nic. men: thou kepest them secretip cas Call]
16 Caule thy countenaunce to shine bp- tabernatle from the tree of ton "ly pon thy seruaunt: saue me for thy mer- 21 Blessed be God: for he hath thet cee ties sake. me marucplous great kindnes in & 8 ae apie ea coat mug ane a © fry haue called vpon thee: let the vngod- 22 And when J fled with a lye be put to conkuston, and be put to si? Jam cast 10 of the abt 9 n ton lence in the graue. neuerthelesse, thou heardest the vo
18 Het the lying lippes be put to scllente: ol my prayer when J cryed vnto tbe which speake again p righteous gree- 23 Loue God all ye his saintes: fo: God uous thinges with disdame e tontempt. prclerueth them that are faythfull and
Guibert 19 Howe plentifull is thy“ goodnes rewardeth moft abonndauntlip the © Op which thou hast layde vp for them that proude doer. rea feare theescand whiche} thou atk ““pee- 24. All ve that put your trust in God be 5 pared for them that put thetr trust in eofa good courage: and he wyll com: thee belore the sonnes of men. ort pour heart. 5
The argument of the. xxxij. psalme.
¶ Dauid teacheth mans felicitie to contist in the korgeuenes of his tines, when God sine puteth them not onto him that conkelseth them from the bottome ok his heart vntay. nedip without all hypocrisie. He exhorteth the wicked to haue a sense and feeling of

their sinnes, and to putting their trust in God, hall obtapne mercy.
JA wyse © instruction of Dauid. i

&V Vorked

| © 2 dortrine not of teason,

6 5 the great v water fluddes tl 1
Bet. 5 is couered. tome nye hym. S they that not a
2 WK @ Rah! Wietedispmandu 7 Thou art my refuge, thou Wyle pre- Gator to Whom God impu- lerue me from trouble: thou wyit cone: 8
8 teth no vnrighteoul- passe me about with longes of detine-
Fe he nes: it in whole spirit there is no oguile. rannce. Selah.
Boome 3 Jo whple Jhelde nwo tongue: mp 3 Frill geue thee wile instructions aud baten bones confined away through my N teach theein the way wherinthou thalt

but of God & ol his Church 1 onlp. 8

Tessed is he whofe wickednes is korgeuen: and whole finne

N

daply roaring.

4 Forthy hande is heauie bpon ine day and night: and my moysture is like the drouth in sommer. Selah.

5 (CTherlore] I haue made knowen my faultes vnto thee, and my righteousnes haue J not hid: J sayd J Will tonfesse my wickednes vnto God, and thou for-
Sanett the vnrighteousnes of my sinne.

clan.

6 Jor this shall euerp one that is godly

make his prayer vnto thee in the time u dr
When thou mapest be founde 0 that in ee

go: t J wil“ guyde thee with mine eye. «coun

9 We pe not lyke a horse (oz) Ike amule whiche haue no vnderstandung: whole mouthes must be holden with bit and brydle, lest they fall vpon thee.

lo Great plagues remaine for the vngodlp: but who fo putteth his trust in God, mercy imbrateth him on euerp fide.

Jo We glad in God, e reioyte O pe righteous: be ioytull allo all yc that be vpright of heart. *

e argument of the. Xxiij. psalme.
¶ Daud exhorteth all men to prayse God, in calling to remembraunce his goodnes . trueth. promises, power, and prouidence, for whattoeuer he faieth or promisetij, he perkourmeth it.
Gods power appeareth by thinges created, his prouidence in dicapopntyng mens deuises.
God seeth and knoweth al thinges, and taketh care of all, God deltuereth thote that scare him and is their ade and buckler in all distreltes.
1 1 kee in God O pe righteous: fo: ry worke of his done in fayth prayse betommeth well the tuft, 5 Pe loueth righteousnes c indgement 1
2 Confessesit to god with the harpe: the earth is ful ofthe” goodnes of an eren singplalmes vnto hym With the viall, «6 y the worde of God are thelyeant pat and With Hheinftrumentoftenttringes, — made: and all the hoastes of them
3 Sing vnto him a new song: do it cun-

the breath of his mouth). 2 b ningly, make alweete noyse with pour 7 be gatherelh the waters ol the fea to. 55 mulicall instrumentes alowde.

8 gether as it were vpon an heat: a
4 ForthewordotGodrisrightiandeuc: layeth vp the dee as trealures. 5

Tot is

— Ihe Plames. ening prayer

cath feare God: let all awl in the worlde stande in

im. 1
90 helbabe and it was: he commaũ-
4 ded, and it Was brought to passe. a
God beingeth the countell of the Hea-
4 then to uaught: and maketh the deni: is okthe people to be of none effect, he countaple of God shall endure fo cuer: and the thoughtes of his heart fronigenevation to generation.

Blesled is the nation that bath God

W abe their Lorde: that people hath he choseu to be an inherttaunte for him.

God looketh Downe from heauen, and bcholdeth all the chyldren of men 3 . the place where heresteth: he eyeth di-

gently euery dweller on the earth. ue 14 He fathioneth their heartes © toge-

ther:be vnderstandeth al their Workes.

Is king te not saued by the multitude C ok an hoast: a man of cat myght escapeth not by much strength.

16 A horse for to saue is? vanitie: and he can Deliuer none by his great strength.

17 Beholde, the eye of God is vpon thein that feare hym: and bpon them chat
Wapteth after his merey.

18 Lo deliver their soules from death: and to preserue their tines in Odearth.

19 Our soule wapteth after God: he is our ayde aud shielde.

20 Fox our heart Hai reioyte in hin betause we haue put our trust in his holy

2 name, 9 „

21 Let thy louing kindnes O gad be vpitd bs: like as we haue put our trutt uthee.

“Falfhoody thatis, a horfe decea. ueth thofe l that looke 7 to be saued by him.

N Ade

The argument of the. xxxiiii. psalme.

uid letter h soorch the erceeding goodnes of God towardes the innocent and tust, and
8 Aohadge thole that worchty bpm, keare hym and trust in hym: or God heareth them whenloeuer they call byon hym in their necellitie. he is pretent with them in helping, delivering and delending them. Agapne, he ordereth Co seuerelp the wicked, that he bungeth them to delolation, that no remembraunce be lett once or them.

Jof Dauid when he chaunged his behauiour before O Abimelech,whiche droue

bine · him away, and he de parted.

1 [wu alway blesse God: his prayse
A Ichall euer be in my mouth.
2 My soule Hal glory in God:the humble (hall heave thevof and be glad.
3 Magnifie God with me: and let vs eralt his name (all) together.
4 Carefully I fought God, r he hearde uses he deltuered me out ok all my
* 3 %

5 Letthemturne their epes on him and make speede to come bnto hym: and their faces chall not be achamed.

6 (lol this fame poore man hath crped: aud God hath

8 „ bemout ok all his troubles.
7 The angeil of God campeth rounde

em.
8 priate and fee how gratious Godis: f f Dis the man that trusteth in hun.
“att God ye that be his {tutes : for pe that feare hin latke nothing.

8 ing Lions do lacke and suffer hunan hey Whiche seeke God, hall qin Matter of thing that is good.

ile: ebe chyldren and hearken buto

nial 4 lilteache yon the fare of God. at man is he that listeth to liue:

About them 8 noe

hearde hym, and saued

Land) woulde fayne {ce good dayes.

3 Kaepe thy tongue from euill: and thy lippes that they speake no guyle.

14 Eschewe euill e do good: seeke peace and ensue it. C.

15 The eyes ot God ate) ouer the righ: teous: and his eares (are open] vnto their prapers.

16 The countenaunce of God is against them that do euill: to roote out the remembraunte ofthem from ofthe tarth.

17 The righteous crye, and God heareth then: and deliuereth them out of all their troubles.

18 God is nye vuto then that are of a contrite heart: and faucth such as be of bur ar, an humble spirite. Fe de bee

19 Great are the troubles of the righteous : but God delinereth him out of all.

20 Ye kepeth all his bones: so that no one of them is broken.

ar Malite shal put the vngodly to death: and they that hate the righteous, shalbe 25 brought to naught. g

22 God redeemeth the soules of his seruauntes:aud al they that put their trust in him, shall not be brought to naught.

The

(a) whofe hearted be an

S (ij)

Moneth the.vy.day.

his righteoulnesse and innocencie.

bon a shielde € buckler: and stande vp to helpe me.

3 wzpng foorth the speare, and stop (the way] against them that persecute me: fay vnto my forte, Jam thy laluation.

Let them be confounded and put to
Chae that lreke after my foule: let them be turned backe and brought to cOfnfion that imagine mifchicte for me.

5 Let them be as dust before the winde: and let the angell of God scatter (them.)

6 Let their wap be darke and slipperie: t let the angell of God persecute them.

For without a caule they haue priuily layde for nie a “pit (ult) of their nettes: without a cause they haue made a dig-

e png bnto mp soule.

8 Teta sodapne deltruction come vpon hym vnawares: and his net that he
Hath lapde prümly catch hym {elfe, let bim fall uito it with (his owne] destruction.

9 [andj my soule shalbe topfull in God:

' it shall reioyce in his ialuation.
(o Atta 10 All my bones chall sap, God who is eing. lpke vnto thee Whiche deliuerelt the poore from hym that is to strong foz hun: pea the poore and him that is in milerie, from him that spoyleth him.
1 False witnesse did rife vp: they lapde thinges to my charge that J know not.
12 They rewarded me euill for good: to the great disconifort of my soule.
13 Meuerthelesse, when they were sicke
10 did put on sackcloth: IJ afflicted my oule With fasting, and my prayer W rez turned into myne owne bosome.
14 Hhept them company wherlocuer they went, as though they had ben my krende or brother: J went heauplp, as one that mourned kor his mother.

ce Pit of their net.

(bo) I preped themes K

Qnoulde for

mite One

c. c eie
Suerte

eres, * van

s- *

rning Prayer

¢ The argument of the. xxxv. pfalme.

Datisd defireth God to be his tudge and defence against his enemies, who wi

catife geuen of his part, like crueli hypocrites, paratites, and kiatker madame 70 and do allthat they can for to put him to death. He declareth his hope, conkidente ante ioy that he hath in God, of apde,detence,and deliuerie: fo2 the whiche : geue him thantics,not only by him selle, but alfo by tuch other as hau

q Of Dauid.

he promiteth to e Ap regarde of

15 But in mine“ aduersitie tl ö and gathered them wich a 10 Fi. very? ablectes came together against «in. me, per J wyst they ™ rented me a able; peetes and tealled not. on
16 With hypotrites, scoffers, and para: oe they gnathed vpon me with their

17 Tome hove long wylt thou

au ges, and my“ dearli 3
Tons whelpes. ‘ sn lil A ae

18 DoF wyll conkesle it vnto thee in a 7!" great tougregation: J will prapse thee they cee aurong muche people.

19 O let not in decetpefull enemies tri: umph ouer me: let them not winke pa an epe, that hate me without a taule.

20 Foz they speake not peace: but they imagine deteiptkull Wordes agapnst them that (liue] quietip in the lande.

21 They wid vpon me With their mon- ¢ thes: andilaid this is Well, this is wel, «sto dur eye hath © feene. ona

22 Thon halt seene (this! O God, holde not thy tongue (ther: go not farre from me O Torde.

23 Stirre thou and awake O my God and mp Lorde: to tudge my cause and n e b 1 ape e in

24. Judge nie according to thy rightedulnẽlle G God my Logde: and let then not triumph ouer me. 1

25 Tetthem not fap in their heart, ait! as we Woulde haue it: neither let them fay, we haue deuoured hym.

26 Let them be put to contulion € thane
Call) together that reioyte at md 5 ble: let them be clothe with reo 1 anid bifhonour that exalt then feln against me. N

27 et them triumph with mam and reiopte that be delighted with 15 righteoulnesle: let them fay ait in biesled be God pice 0 e a:

¢ ““protperitie o .

Meet a tongue shalbe tang he

vighteoulnesse: and of thy pear’

pelired,

9 ic Ahn to

our foul

————“—“A—s( hee ladies:

2 ef.
Morning *

The argument of the. xxxvj. psalme.

Aud delertbeth the wickednelle and wretched ende of them that teare not Gad: And
1115 great goodnes of God towardes all creatures. He delireth his mercy and de»

kence againtt — wicked

ednes ofthe vngodly spea-
41 14 the nnddelt of np heart: that there is no feare of the Lorde iS eyes. bee flat th him selfe in his owe
2 hr. böthat his iniquttie s found war tred. ö
The woes ok his mouth are vnrighteous and kull of deteipt: he bath left ol tobchaue him lelke wilelp eto do good. je tmagiretl) muifchiefe vpon his bed,
4 efettetly him felfe in no good wap: net ther doth he abhorre anp thing ö is erul.
Thy mercy O God reatheth vnto or) heauen: cand) thy ) faythfuines vnto
: etloudes.
Thy righteoutnes is like the mountaynes of © God: thy iidgementes are agreat deapth, thou lauest both man and beast O God.

lorsaketh them or their leede.

Af Bet not thy selfe be-
75 caule of the vngodlp:
V

ee
Foz they that foone be tut downe like the

gralle: and be withered euen as the
Hteene hearbe. p 5

pew 3 acre thy trattin Gob, ard be bos
N 2 1 (a i Muth. ell in the land, and! feede

neither be thou enuious against the eupll doers.

g wrote thy hartes velire.
Ominit thy way vnto God: and put

6 Dethall make thy ri .
. v righteoulnesse a
77 its eae as the light: and thy“
87 5 esas the noonetpde.

ae Thee fill in Goo, and wayte pa:
Din ho war tat Pane 1 be

oth prosper, at the man that doch abbominations:

eau of from teach, and let go Dif

q OF Danid. b

4 Delight thou allo in God: and he (hall.

thy tr it oe am hem, and he chall bryng it

To the chiefe musition, seruaunt to the God of Dauid.

7 Howextellent is thy merty O Worn: ee

therefore the chyldren of men chall put their trust vnder the chadowe of thy
Winges.

3 They shalbe laced with the“ plen- Farnesse

teoulnesse ot thy houle: and thou shalt gene them drinke ont of the riner of thy delicates. :

9 Foz with thee is the fountaine ofipfe: and in thy light Halt we lee light. .

Io ) continue foorth thy louing kindnesse vnto them that knowe thee: and © thy righteoulnes vnto them that are of an vpright heart. .

1 MDletnot the foote of pryde reache vnto me: and let not the bande of the vngodly make me to nioue (out of my place]

Iz There be the workers ofiniquitie fallen: they are tast downe, and (hail not be able to rise vp.

¢ The argument of the .xxxvij.pfalme.

¶ Nauid comforteth the godly, that they be not offended at the prolperttie of the wic fied, or withdzawen therby from godlynes, as though God had no regarde ok iustice, innocencie, and vpright dealing. when they fee commonly the wort fort of men to haue the world at their wyll, abounding in health. riches and aucthoritie. He Mes weth that the condition ol the godlyand the vngodly be diuers. and how that God at the last rooteth out those that do euill, not withstanding all their posteritie, and delendeth thole that put their trust inhim. God guydech the kapthkull, and neuer

pleasure: fret not thy selfe, lest thou be moued “to do cuil.

9 FJor the malitious doers shalbe rooted out: and they that patiently wapte af ter God, they shall inherite the lande.

Jo Loo at them pet a litle whyle, and the vngodlp shalbe cleane gone: thou shalt looke after his plate, and he shall not be there

1 But the meeke spirited shall poslesse the tarth: and shalbe delighted in the aboundaunce of peace,

12 The bngodly busieth his head ca againt the lust: and gnacheth vpon hint with his teeth.

iz The Torde shall laugh hun to storne:

for he seeth that his day is comming. oc

14. The vngodlp haue drawen out the sr. sworde, and haue bended their bowe: to tast downe the poore and needie, and to slay such as be of right conuersation.

15 But he sworde (hal go thozow their owne heart: their bow shalbe broken. -

16 A small thing that the righteous hath:

is better theng great riches ol ö vngodly.

(esse ws Fa

Ge oo eee slfe,

6 Only for to do oulll.

That is,
| most preaous of

j tubes.

Moneth the. vij. day.

broken: and God vpholdeth the righte-

ous.

18 God knoweth the dayes of them that be perfect: and their inheritaunce shall endure for euer.

19 They shall not be tonfounded in the perilous tyme: and in the dapes of dearth they shall haue inough.

20 As for the vngodly they shall perishe, and the enemies of God shall consume as the fat of lambes: pea, euen with the smokt they Mall vanishe away.

21 The vngodip boroweth and papeth not agayne: but the righteous geueth mercifullp and liberallp.

22 Suche as be blessed of God shall polsesse the lande: and they that be turled of hym, shalbe rooted out.

23 The pathes of man is diretted by
God: and his Way pleaseth.

24 Though he fall, he Mall not be vudone: for God vpholdeth him wich his hande. 5

25 Jhaue bena poung chylde, and nolwe
Jam olde: and vet awe J neuer the righteous forsaken, nor his seede beg: png bread.

26 Tht righteous is euer mercifull and lendeth: and his seede is blesled.

27 Flee from euill c do good: and dwell for euer.

23 Jor Godloueth iudgement, he forlaeth not his laintes: they are preserued for cuermore, but the seede of the vngodlye shalbe rooted vp.

The argument of the. xxXXViii. psalme.

¶ Vaud greeudullp tice, belecheth God to turne away his wrath from hym and to helpe bpm: He complapneth of his afflictions, ofthe greeuoutnes of his difcate, of the great burden of his sinnes, and of the vnkapthlulnes of his frendes. clareth his trust in God. Finatty, he cheweth that beyng chaltened of God, he forget: teth not what he fuffercthy, wherfoze, how long, with how much torment, and what

helpe he receaued at Gods hande.

qj A pfalme of Dauid to Oreduce in remembraunce.

Ebuke me not O
God in thyne anger: neither chattenmeinthyhea-

WI uie displeasure.

%. sor thyne ar-
0 ei sticke gt
SS Ime: and thy
2 . bande prelleth me

5 fore.
3 There is no helath in my flesh through

The Pfalmes.

| 17 Fon the armes ofthe vngodly shalbe 29 The righteous thal inh

Euening Prayer.

e

— dern bot for euer. cite the land: D

30 The mouth ok the righteous is erercifed in wysdome: and his — 5 1
3 of 1 e

31 he lathe ot his God is in hi : therfore his feete shall not ied oe:

zi The vngodip kppeth the righteous: and sceketh location to slap hym.

33 God wyll not leaue him in his hande: nor suffer hyntto be condenmed when he is het —

34 Wapte thou on God t kepe his w and he wyll promote tice, that cha mapest possesse the lande: when the yr: godly halbe cut of, thou shalt see it.

35 Imp sdelfe haue seene che vngodly in great power: and flozithing lyke a greent bay tree.

36 And He“ vaͤnisched awap, fo that he H could be no more seene: J soughthym, avayandi but he toulde no where be founde. kv.

37 Marke hym that is perfect, and be E holde him that is iust: for the ende of fuche à man is peace.

38 As for Wicked tranlgressours, they halbe destroyed call} together: and the
© ende of the vngodly shalbe rooted vp ar atthe last.

39 Wut saluation of the righteous con: meth of God: Whiche is allo their strength in time of trouble.

4.0 And God wyll apde them and deliner them, he wyl deliuer them from the vngodip: and he wyll laue them, becaule they put their trust in him.

He allo de-

Hanes

finne. thy difpleature: neither is there anp tel in my bones by reafor of my fine. N
4. Jor my manpfolde wickedues ts nen ouer my head: and like a for burthei is to heauie for me to beate. F
5 My woundes stinke and are torrupt: through my foolishnes. *.
6 Jam become crooked, and am 11 at pe ond downe: J go amour all the dap tong. n f
7 Formptoynes are fied with ‘eal

janyng prayer.

rt is no whole part in mp body.
400 An ecble and force sulitten: J haue rored for the very disquietnesse of my heart. awn thou knowest all niy desire:an
A om mgistoe yD from there. pheart panteth, my strength hath l fayled me: and the lyght of myne eyes ig gone from me.
I Yop louers and my neygbours dyd stande on the other syde lokpng vpon ny plague: and my kinsmen stoode a

»

1 5 allo that fought after my lyle lapde ares for me andthey that went

about to do nie euvll, talked of wickednesse, and imagined deceipt all the day

olg. 9 . 2 5

B 25 oem, as one deafe J woulde not

heart: and (3 was) as one that is dumbe who) coulde not open his mouth.

Cig Jbecame enen as a manthat heareth

not: and who hath no replies in his

The Plalmes. | -_ ae

mai : Te

15 F702 onthee O God JJ haue wapted:

thou shalt aunfwere 02 me O Lowe my God. 22

16 For J layde (heare me} lest that they choulde triumph on me: Who auaunce
[them selues) greatly agaynst me when my foote doth slyp. bs

17 Betause Jam disposed to a haltyng: and niy soro we is euer in my spght.

18 Wetanse J tonkesse my wickednesse: and am sorp for my sinne.

19 But myne enennes lpuyng C without papne) are mightie: € they that hate me wrongfully are intrealed innumber.

20 They allo that rewarde euyl for good are agaynst me: becaule J folowethe

thyng that is good. .

21. Forsake nie not O God: D my Torde be not thou farre fro me.

22 Halte thee to helpe me:

rm

The argument of the.xxxix.Pfalme.

At [ Savdecto mp telfe} J Wyll take heede to my wayes, that J offende not in lip tongue: J wyll kepe my mouth

With

pol

Dngodly is in my syght.

2 Abetame dumde though silence, J elde mp peace front fpeakpng of good
Wopdes : but the moze was my sorowe re ae ;

3 Dy leart was ho ithin me, and we hotte within me, and

kyndled: and at the last | mptongue. 2 —

* 4 O God make me to knowe mine ende,

andthe number of my dapes: that J un be certified howe long J haue to

* 28ebolO thou haltmade imp dapes asi

alt made my dapes asit
Wer

Genen gend breadth long, e mine age

6 Au nian is all together; panitie, Selah.

dale d man walketh in a vayne tha:

5 ttuelp he Cand all his) do disquiet

Ante

dun

aSit were With a byydell, whylestthe

Was thus musyng the fire

nothing befoze thee: truely

€ Dard signttieth that in the anguiche ok his ticknesse he woulde haue btfered no worde, lest be should speane amisse in the prelence of the vngodly. e desireth to knowe the ende ot his lyle . which is but chort, and banitie, He prapeth alfo that his sinnes map be pardoned, and that his afflictions map be diminished.

q To the chiefe musition O Ieduthun, a psalme of Dauid.

chem flues in vayne: he heapeth bp

riches,⁊ can not tel who shal! ble them.
7 And nowe Lord what wapte F afterz truely my hope is euen in ther.
8 Delpuer me krom all nw offences: and make me not a rebuke vnto the foolishe.
9 J betame duinbe, and opened not ny mouth :fer Vit was thy doyng.

10 Take thy plague away from me: J

am euen consumedby the meanes of thp heaup hande.

Thou doest chasten man, rebukyng him for sinne: thou as a moth doest tonfume his ercelientic , for in very deede euery man is but vanitie. Selah.
12 Headre my praper O God, and gene eares to mp trying, holde not thy peate at um teares: for Jama straũger with thee, and a soiourũer as all nw fathers
09 f ea une that I may re-
13 pare me a litle, ap. coucriny strength: before J go bence, and be no more [seene. ) Th i / Ine

O Lorde my ,

Gather.

ca) Thon pu-

nubep me with licknesse.

neh che. viij. day.

for Godg helpe agaynst his enemies.

To the chiefe musition, a psalme of Dauid.

1 | Wapted patiently vpon God, and he
A Lentlined vnto meshis eare]: and heard

„Pit of “ppt, out of the dirtie mite : and tet potent, mp fecte bponarorke, and directed my

Love.
4 Many shall fee it, and feare: and (halt put their trust in God.

5 Blelled is the man that Hath fet his

hope in God: and turned not vnto the

The Pfalmes.

Ihe argument of the. xl. pfalme.

¶ Dauid commendeth hyghly Gods goodnesse, for that he hearet ; their trust in hym · and delpuerech them out of all perities and e cm miseth to geue hym selle hereafter whollp to fet koorth Gods glorie, and piapeth

Mornyng Praye

10 J haue not hyd thy ryghteo within my heart: my talkhng es of thy trueth and of thy faluation,

11 dp in thy louyng mer-

: fromt j son — he great tongre-

12 Withdrawe not thou thy mertie me O God: let thy ida —

and thy trueth alway prelerue me,

13 For innumerable troubles are come about me, my finnes haue taken luch

holde vpon me that Jam not able to

loke vp: pea they ate mo in number then the heeres of mp head, e mp heart

a“

1 proude, and to such as decline to les. hath fapled me. N
6 O God um Low, great are thy won- 14 O God let it be thy plealure to deliuer derdus workes which thou halt done: me: make halte O God to helpe me.
“thoughes fr none tan tonnt in order thy“ benefites 15 Let them be ashamed and confounded ¢ towarde vs, pEPF woulde detlare them together that seke after my soule to deand speake of them, they shoulde be mo stroy it: let them be dryuen backwarde then Jam able to expresse. & be put to rebuke that wyshe me cuyll.
7 Thou wouldest haue no satrifite or of- 16 Tet them be delolate in vecompence
@ Ct bn. ferpng, but thou hast © opened nyne oktheir shame: that fay vnto me, “fpe ng eramvetve eares: thou hast not required burnt ol- pon thee, kye vpon ther. fc kerynges and latrifite for sinne. 17 Tet all those that secke thee be glad an
GO mero 8 ThenflaydeP,loPPamcome:inthe and sopkull in thee: and let such as loue ce
Reuse “bookeof thy lawe tt is witten of me thy faluation, fay alway God be mag: thebooke, that J choulde kulfpll thy wyll O my nitled. : |
God, Fam content to do it, peathy 18 As for me J am afflicted and needpe, latte lawe is within the middest ok mp“ brest. but God caveth for me: thou art mp
9 Jhaue detlared thy righteoulnes ina apde and delpuerer, O my God make great tongregatiõ:lo J wil not rekraune no long tarping. my lippes O God thou knowest (it.) f
Ihe argument of the. xlj. psalme.
Wand sheweth that they be happy who haue pitie on the afflicted. He re-
£ hearleth his hee mane in ine nelle be God. He complapmett of tar - ned friendes,and at the malictoumed{e ol his enemies. ö
4% To the chiefe mufition,a psalme of Dauid.
5 - : th
1 Lessed is he that ton- God wyll comfort hym when herve
Bren ädereth Ppoore: God ficke bpon his bed: thou e
Bayer . UY AVE) Wyll delpuer hym in turne dpfide dolbne all his the tynie of trouble. licknelle. J :
Ie full vnto me
*in the 72 Pe, . God wyll prelerue 4 Jsayde, O God be tram guned aper day phym chepe hum allue: heale my fonle, for J haue n
— he halbe blessed vpon gapnst thee. kme: whe the earth, and (thou O God) wylt not de- 5 Mpne enemies speake euch 4 u Soule. Liner hum into the wyll o his enennes. hall he dye, and his name pern, ut

Bult pl cany of chem came to vilite nie, e hespakt“ vamtte: his heart tonceaued en pngodlpnelle Within hpmlelke-Ewhen n he lame fooeth a does he vttered it.
„ Ill they that bated me whafpered to-
* ether: they imagined euvl agaynst me.
(Chepfarde; sonie“ great nnschiefe is las jyghted vpon hym: and he that lyeth sicke on his bed, Hall ryse vp no moze, 4
9 Bea besides this, euen myne owne frlende whom J trufted ; which dyd
Aldoeate of my bread, bath wicked err

much agaynst me.
10 Gad tene meceiul vnto me O rewarde them. e Hat u By this J knowe thon kauouredst me: in that mpneenenie doth not triunph agapnst me.
12 And when J am inmp“ best case, thou <Pereaion vpholdest me: and thou wylt set me before thy fate for euer.
13 Blessed be God the Lorde ok Israel: worlde without ende, Amen, Amen,

The argument of the. xlii. Psalme.

¶ Laud drynen out or his resime, declareth his loro we of mynde, for that he coulde not retort vnto Gods temple, ano licpe there the holy keastes. He complapneth that one aflliction commety on anothers necke. Allo he complayneth of the reproches and mockes that he tusteyned of the wicked. Pe comkorteth hym felfe in the con

fidence that he hath in God.

Tek berg

At Lobe as the Hart brayeth for water brookes: fo panteth imp soule after thee O God.

2 My loule is a thirst for the Torde, pea tuen for the lpuyng Torde: when hall
1 tome to appeare before the fate of the

ode?

3 My teares haue ben my nieate day and nyght: whyle they dayly fay vnto

me where is (Mowe thy God.

4 And J powred out of me my very heart, remembryng this howe that befoxe tyme Jhaue passed with a great

tito, Ullnber, bringyng thé vnto the boule of the Lord: with a voyce of top c prayse, with a company that kept holy day.

5 hy art thou fo discouraged O my soule, t why art thou fo vnquiet Within

4 merattende thou vpon the Lorde, for HF

ai. Will yet acknowledge him only to be“a

=. prclent saluation.

. 6 Wp Torde, my foute is discouraged

within me: berause J remember chee

To the chiefe musition a wile instructionOof the sonnes of Corach.

from the lande of Jordane, and from the litle hyll hermonim.

7 One deepe calleth another at the nopse B of thy water pypes: all thy waues and stormes are gone ouer me.

8 God wyll graunt his louing kindnesse on the day tyme: and in the nyght seafon J wyll syng ol hym, and make my praper vnto the Lorde of my lpfe.

9 J wyll fay vnto the Lorde of my strength: why balk thou forgotten me, why go J thus heauply through the oppression of myne enenne:

Io It was as asworde in my bones, « vvitha when myne enennes dpd tast me in the em teeth: in saying dayly vnto me, where gene. is nowe thy Horde mies.

n Why art thou fo distouraged O my soule, ⁊ why art thou fo vnquiet within me: attende thou bpon the Lorde, for
I wil vet acknowledge hum“ to be only „ett

* my peelentfaluation, and my Lorde. count.

naunce.

The argument of the. xliij. Psalme.

Che prophete prayeth to be delyuered from his enemies, to haue his heart illuminated. and to be restored home agayne, that he may prayle God his Lorde in his sanctuarie,

in whom he putteth all his trult.

| Udge me O Lowe, and debate my
Hufe With an bmnaturall people: oh
3 from the deceipttull and
2 Forthou art the ro d of my strength: whphactthou veiect me, and why go

thus heauyly though the oppression ol myne enemie.

3 Sende foorth thy light and thy trueth: that they may leãde me and direct me vnto thy holy hyll x to thy tabernaeles.

4 And J wyll go vnto the N 15 A

a

Moneth the. ix. day.

c gladnesse: and vpon the harpe FJ will acknowledge thee D Howe my Tord.
5 Why art thou fo distouraged O my

¶ Che prophete rehearleth Gods benelites belo wed vpon the fathers, brought out of Egypt, and planted in Chanaan. He complapneth of the calamitie that the people of God fuffered through the crueltie of the heather. Lal ofall, he prayeth
God to awake, to arple, and to delpuer them kor his mercies Cake,

Oo be song at [E haue hearde
Mornyng 5 is j with dur cares prayer. O Torde:our fa-
J thers haue tolde vs what workes thou hast done in their daies in the olde tyme.
2 Howe thou hast driuen out the heathen with thy hande
Wenn and plantede o them in: howe thon halt
(> ue destroyed the nations e placed then, atherg.

3 Jor they gat not the lande in poslession through their owne l[worde: neither

Was it their owne arme that laued the.

the lyght of thy countenaunce:becaule thou hadsta fauour vnto them.
5 Thou art my kyng O Torde: tom-
| maunde that Jacob be saued.
6 Through thee we wyll ! ouerthrowe dur enemies: and in thy name we Wyll
0 W vnder that ryse vp agaynst

5 Feor q wyll not trust in iy bowe: and it is not my sworde that can saue me.

8 Burt it is thou that fanclt vs from our enemies: and thou puttest them to cow fufion that hate vs.

9 We make our boast ot God all the day

long: and we Wyil toulesse thy name for euer. Selah.

Io Wut nobe thou art farre of, and thou

| puttest vs to confufion : neither goest thou foozth with our armies,

1 Thou niakest bs to turne away back: warde from the enemie: fo that they which hate vs, do malte vs a spoyle vnto them.

12 Thou halk delyuered vs as theepe to

0 4 Wut thy ryght hande, and thine arme,

e Pfalmes. 7
Lorde „keuen vnto the Lorde of mp top sonle, c why art thou so vn |

The argument of the. xliiii. psalme.

q To the chiefe musition, a wife instruction O of the sonnes of Cotach.

Mornyng Praye
Wet With; me: attende thou vpon the Loner
* Hbyll ver acknowledge ppm (ee be

only ty peelent saluation, € my Home, {Tee

+ ON of

be eaten: and thon hast srattered vs among the heatl en.

z Thou hast solde thy people fornaught: and thou hast taken no money lorthem.
14 Thou hast made vs a rebuke to dur C neighbours:to be laughed to storne and had in derision of them that are rounde
15 Thou hast made bs tobe) fable a worn mong the heathen: and to be uch] that the people shake their head at vs.

16 My confufion is daplp before me, and the fame of my fate touereth me: for
(to heare] the vopte of the flaunderer t blasphemer, and for to fee the enemie and the auenger.

17 (And though) all this be tome vpon vs:
[vet] we do uot forget thee, noz chewe dur selues to be false in thy couenaunt.

18 Our heart is not turned backe, neither our steppes be detlined out ok thy pathes: no not when thou Hat smitten

Do inthe place of dragons, and touered vs with the shadowe of death.

19 Il we had forgotten the name of our
Lorde, and holden vp dur handes 5 any straunge god: Woulde not 60 searche it pe a oe knoweth the very setretes of the heart.

20 For thy fake alfo are we kylled all the D day long: and pa tounted as shetp appoynted to be flapne. n

21 Wiler vp O Lorde, why slepelt ha awake e be not absent from a 55 15
Wherfore hydest thou thy 155 10 5 forgettest our mniferic and 77 0 tothe

22 Foz bur sdule is brought lee ne.
Dutt: our belly cleaueth vnto f R. deeme

23 Aryse vp thou our id e vs:for thy louyng kindnelle :

The

' er. onyng P ray

here in this plalme.

To the chiefe musition (on the instrument) Sofannim(to be song of

he Plalmes.
$ The argument of the. xlv. pfalme. ete indefcribyng here the beautie, eloquence, frength, power. cuccelle.
Core ration of fulfice, aboundaumce of riches, and maiestie of kyng Solomon.

th his wife and children: letteth foorth Fetus Christe and chuche, whole eternal fingbome agaynst linne, death, and hell, is notabip kigured

his efpoute the

the) children of Corach.A fong of love, geuyng wile instructtions.

heart is endityng of a good mat-
1 Mores wyll Dedicate my workes puto the king, my tongue is as the

ne of a redy Weiter.

2 bon art fayrer then the children of men, full of grace are thy lippes:because the Lorde Hath blesled thee for euer.

3 Girde thee with thy lworde vpon thy thygh O thon most mightie: (that is
With thy glorie and thy matestie.

4 Prosper thou with thy malestie, ryde on the worde of trueth and of attitetion for ryghteoulnesle fake: and thy ryght hande shall teache thee terrible thynges. N

Thyne arrowes are sharpe: a people the kynges-enemies shall submit in heart them selues vnto thee.

6 Thy throne O Lode endureth for tuer and ener: the scepter of ryghteoulnefle is the scepter of thy kyngdome.

5 7 Thou hast loued iustite and bated vngodlynesse: Wherfore the Lorde enen thy Lorde hath annoynted thee with the oyle of gladneffe moze then thy felowes.

8 All thy garmentes smell of Myrre,
Aloes, aud Callia, out of the monie paz ae : Wherby they haue made thee

Bynges daughters are amongst thy

Honourable women: vpon thy ryghht hande standeth the queene Waben of golde of © Ophir.

Io Hearken O daughter and tonlider, encline thine eare: forget allo thine owne people and thy fathers house.

1 So shall the kyng haue plealure in thy beautie: for he is thy Lorde, and woz: thip thou hym. 5

12 And the daughter of Lyre chall tome with a present: the riche among the people chall make their earnest prayer befoze thee.

3 The kynges daughter is all glozious ande > her clothyng is of wrought golde.

14. She shalbe brought vnto the kyng in rayment of needle worke: the virgins that folowe her and her company that: be brought vnto ther.

15 With (oy and gladnesse halt they be n (and hal enter into the kinges palace.

16 In steade of thy fathers, thou that haue children: whom thou mayst make painees in all landes.

17 JI wyll remember thy name from one generation vnto another: therfoze shall the people! prayse thee worlde Without ende.

The argument of the. xlvj. Psalme.

€ The prophete acknowledgeth God to haue deliuered Hicrutatem Co notably out of perilles, that they all haue a caule to conceaue a full hope not fo2 to feare any ads uerlitie in tyme to come. He exhorteth other to beholde che great workes of Cod, and tutneth his tpeache to his aduertaries.

q To the chiefe musition, a song (to be song) of the children of Corach

vpon Alamoth.

A1 [Be Lovers our refu a ge c strength: f Ia very ealply“fonnde in trou-

2 Therko checarth 005 we wyll not feare though

Nell: and though the mountapnes

hake at the surges of the lame. Selah.
Yet) the fludde by his rpuers shall

make glad the citie of God: the holy lace of the tabernacles of the mott

ghest.
5 "Gob iste mpoeober: helfe

a) Doble ts

ought to be the Jlande in

e welt coat, of late founde by Chistopher Columdo: fro whence

ot this dop is brought mot

fine golbe. 4

€

tc Confeffe.

moneth the.ix.day.

helpeher,andthatryghtcarly. —

6 The heathen make much a do, and the kyngdomes are moued: but (God! shewed his voyte, and the earth melted

away.

W 7 The God of hoastes is with vs: the
7 Lorde of Jacob is our refuge. Sclah. bre belle 3 Otome Hither and veholde the Workes
Marans of God: what G diltruttions he hat clotations.

brought vpon the carth.

The argument of the. xlvij. psalme.

ö ¶ Che prophete inciteth the kapthkull to prayse God with all kynde of melody, kor that he tubducth their enemies vnder them. He allo declareth that the heathen with their princes Mall receaue che tayth.

To the chiefe mufition,a psalme (to be long) of the children of Corach.

aA Tap pour handes all

Euening Sky ve people:makea noite

prayer. at 1 vnto the Lorde with
2 , atoyfull voce.

Fo God is hygh and
A Iterrible:heis the great king vpõ all the earth.
3 He wyll subdue the people vnder vs:

| and the nations vnder our feete.
4 He hathcholen for vs our inheritaunce: the glorie ol Jacob whõ he toned. clan.

5 The Torde astendeth in a triumph:

¢ The argument of rhe. xlviii. Psalme.

¶ che prophete magnifieth the maiestie of God foz his goodnesse, benefites, fapth, and wondertull defence to wardeg his Churche, which he commendech vnder the name of the citie of God, of mount Sion, of the holy hyll, and palaces of the north (poe.

q A fong,the pfalme O of the children of Corach.

O To de ong

4 I Gs is God, and hyghly to be

praysed: in the citie of our Torde,

his holy hyll.

2 The hyll of Sion is fapre in situation, and the toy of the whole earth: vponthe north syde lyeth p citie of the great king.

3 God is well kno wen in her palaces: as

à most sure refuge.

@ aoe 4 For lo kinges did assemble, and passe

ö sidatem, by together: they them selues fatbe it,

* Ipkelvple they maruepled, they were

altonyed with feare, and sodenly in haste they were gone away.

5 A feave came there vpon them and

sorowe: as bpon a woman in her chide

“Thats. 6. Thou didst breake the shippes of “the fea: through the east wynde.

7 Tyhke as we haue hearde, fo haue we

The Pflalmes.

che tan not be remoned:the Lorde wyll 9 He maketh warres to c

Euenyng Prayer easse res : 1 b? aad! the bolwe, hie eth the speare in funder, and burneth en in the fire. *
Io Be styll then, and knowe that the Lorde: I wyll be exalted un
190 e J Wyll be exalted in the u The God of hoastes is with vs: t
Lorde of Jatob is“ our aie Scat fot

to vt.

land God with the sonnde of atrumpet.
6 Syng plalmes to the Lorde, syng plalmes:syng plalnies to our Bug 8 psalmes.
7 For the Lorde is kyng ol all the earth:
* syng plalmes call vou that haue] supll.
8 God raigneth ouer the heathen: God sitteth vpon his Holy thzone,
9 The princes of the people are aslembled together (foz to be) the people of if
God of Abraham:fo2 the shieldes of the carth be Gods, who is hyghly exalted,

ene in the titie of God ok hoastes nthe titie of our Lorde, God vpholdeth the fame for euer. Selah.
8 O Lorde we haue wayted: for thy 5 louyng kindnesse in the myddest of thy temple. at
9 PD Lore, accodyngto thpuame, 4 thy praple vnto the worldes ende thy ryght hande is full ok iultlce. a;
Io Mount Sion chall reiopce aud tf be daughters ok Juda shaͤlbe glad: becanse of thy tudgementes.
. Conpalle about Sion, and a about her: and tell the torres 115
Marke well her bülwarkes, f 115 her hygh wanes that pe may t our posteritie.
13 l 10 this God is our God for Ae 15 tuer:he wyll be dur guide vnto The

The Plalmes.

mayng prayer

The argument of the. xlix. psalme.

eprophete speakpng to the poore andriche, declareth what a banitic it is fo
0 115 5 hig trust in worldly goodeg and though them to become stout and An ant: fog that they can neitheir delpuer any man from trouble, calamitie, sicknesse, kinne, death, and dilpleasure of God: neither can any man allure them to Hp felfe, or to his children kor any tyme ol continuaunsese.

To the chiefe musition, a psalme O of the children of Coracli.

bt lens . 8

are this all pe people: geue eare 1 Meuerthelesle, man tan not abyde ¢ x! Hapechat pivell inthe worde. cfucb) Honour : he is but Ipke Dato fen be

“Ms well lowe as high:riche and brutte beastes that perifje. hencuct fo

a poore,one With another. Iz This their Way is their koolllhnesle: ue

ss My mouth chall vtter wildome: the pet their poltermit prapse their laying, wren he

Ho? omeations of mne heart (well beeng den. g Luan

bocfth Enorwledge. 3 They chalbe put into a graue (dead) ag auen al

4 Frwy encline myne eare to a parable: a cheepe, death shall feede on them: but sige

wyll open imp darke lentence vpon a — the rpghtcous Mall haue Dominionof sees

arpe. = thein in the moznpng, their beautie mouth, char
Wherkore shoulde J feare in eupll chall consume away, hell wall receaue eee

dayes the v wickednesle ol my herles them from their Ponte. W010

then would compalle me round about. 14 But God Wyll delpuer my soule from chen heir
There be some that put their trust in the“ place of hell: for be Wyll receaue = in

me. elan.

that they

their goodes: and boast them selues in : Wee

the nnultitude ok their riches. 15 Be not thou akrapde though one be e

7 But no man at all can redeeme his made riche: or pf the glorie of his houle an

5 prother:nar geue a raunsome vnto God be entreased. & foolif he for hym. . 16 For he (hall carp nothyng away with ek he.

8 For the redemption of their soule ts hym when he dpeth: neither shall his ccway oe

, bery costiy, and mutt be let alone fo: pompe kolo we after hym. lyfe.

wax ener: pea though he lyue long and see 17 Foz whyle he “Ipued he counted him a

mixes not the graue. ö selfe an happy man: and so long as thou „The pang

9 Fon he seeth that wyse men dye: and doest Well vnto thy selfe, men Wyll of eu. that the koole and ignoraunt perishe to- speake good ok thee. ee gether, and leaue their riches for other. 18 Wut he Mal folowe the generations of pute.

lo And vet they thynke that their houles his fathers: and shall neuer see lyght. (Reser chall continue lor euer, and that their 19 A man is in an honourable state, but a! sera diellpng places chall endure from one he wyll not vuderstande it: he is lle eue generation to another:stherkore they tall herein vnto bruite bealtes that perishe. e

landes after their dwne names. worthnesse o
N 5 bro Pad. and
The argument of the. L. Psalme. .

Ide.

€ The poophete bryngeth in God to call to iudgement heauen earth. and all the worlde, declaryng that he is not ryghtly worchypped ol them who offer laerikices without farth,and who pretendyng religion in wordes and countenaunces, leade a lyfe cleane contrary. Che true worchip of God conlisteth in ollerpng vnto hym praples in prolpe-
Niele, and callpng vpon his name in aduerlitie, and wir hall, in leadyng a good con-
Uerfation of ipte.

‘A pfalme O of Asaph.

He mok mightic hath the Lode appeared in perfect
Loewe Goohath beautie. fpoken:andealled 3 Our Torde commeth, and he Wyll the earth from not 0 kepe stilente: there goeth before Goren
Iltbe rysyng vp ok hym a tonsumpng fire, and a mightie the sunne, bnto teimpest is sturred rounde about bym. the goyng downe 4. He calleth from aboue the heauen aud therof. the earth:that he may urdge his people.
Out ok Sion: 5 Gather my sautes together vnte 0

The Pfalmes. Mornyng pa

- thofe that haue made a couenaunt with glorifie me. 9

Moneth the. x. day.

me with sacrifice.

6 And the heauens shall declare his
75 breonsnelle: for God is iudge hym

elke lan.
% 7 Heare O mp people, and J wil speake:
Imp lelke wyll testifie vnto thee O PE racl, Jamthe Torde, euen thy Lorde.
N 3 IJ wyll not reproue thee becaule of thy sacritfices, or for thy burnt offerynges:

(for that they be not) alway befoze nie.

9. J Wyll take no-bullocke out of thy

hause: nor goates out of thy foldes.

q 10 Foz all the beastes of the forest are myne: and fo are the tattel vponathou-
| fande hylles.

1 J nowe all the foules bpon the

mduntapnes: and the Wylde bealtes of

#4 Myne,or

with me.

the fielde are at my tommaundement.

a that is therin.
13g Thinkest thou that J will eate bulles l leshe: and drynke the blood of goates-
14 Pfler vnto God prapse: and pay thy

C vowes vnto the most hyghest.
15 And call vpon me in the tyme of trou: ble: J wyll heare thee, and thou shalt

12 If J be hungry, J wyll not tell thee: c for the whole worlde is myne, and all

16 Wut the Torde sapd vnto the v
Why dock thou preache mp Aer takett my touenaunt m thy mouth:
17, Sepng that thou hatett disaplne any halt cast my wordes behynde thee
18 When thou lawest a thiefe, thou dydst tonsent vnto hym: and thou hag ber partaker with the adulterers, ede
9 i tongue th ehe neti — ae
20 du sättest and spakedst agg thy brother: pea and batt flaunbeeet
. thine owne mothers sonne.
1 These thynges hast thou done and
© helde my oe „thou chonghten 9 that J am euen uch a one as thou thy a ait hehe dr pet thee, and pil let foorth in order befo eyes (all that thou halt done.) x apine

22 Consider this J pray you, pe that fo

get the Lorde: lest I plucke pou awap, and there be none to delpuer pou.

23 malo fo offereth vnto me thankes and prayse, he honoureth me: and to hym that ordereth his tonuersation ryght.
Wyll shewe the saluation of God.

$ The argument of the. Ij. psalme. =

¶ Dausd ackno wledgyng his great offence incommittpng adulterie, belecheth moll bumblp God of his great mercie to pardon his sinnes: partly that Gods promises map appeare true, who hath promiled pardon to all them that from the bottome
Of their heart do confelle their kaultes: partly allo that he myght lyue to bullde the walleg and temple of Hierusalem, where Sacrifices of rightcoutnes mull be offcred,

Bath shaba

A 1 un mercle on me O Torde accozdyng to thy loupng kindnesse: actordyng vnto the multitudes of thy
~ mercies wype out my wickednesse.
2 mathe me throughly from mpne iniquitie: and clenfe me from my sinne.

3 Jor J do acknowledge my wicked-

nesse: and my sinue is euer befo2e me.
4 Agapnst thee, only agaynst thee
~ haue finned and done this euyll in thy

r sight:that thou mightest bew wiustified in thy saying, and founde pure when thou
Or, when “art iudged.

deuwget 5 Beholde, J was mgendred in iniquitie: and in sinne my mother conteaued nie,
6 Neuerthelelsse, lo thou requirest trueth in the inwarde partes ol me :e stherkorc] pete thou wylt make me learne wilsdome forth be in the letrete (part of mne heart.]

To the chicfe musition, a psalme of Dauid when the prophete Nathan came vnto hym after he was gone in to“ Bethfabe. ii. Samuel. xi

Purge thou me with hyssop and J 8

J shalbe tleane : washe thou me, and
{halve whyter then snowe.

8 Page thou me to heare tome) toy and gladnesle: let the bones reioyte Which thou halt bronen. n, and

9 Turne thy fate from my sinnes: an wype out all my mildeedes. 9

Io Make thou vnto me a cleane herne
Lorde: and renue thou a ryght spi wWitl in me.: A

1 Cal me not awap from thy perle and take not thy holy spirite fromm 1

un. Geue me agapne the comfort 0 fett saluation: and conficnre me With a
Wylipyug spirite. seg puto

n Then wyll Pteache thy wat an

i the Wicked a finners chalbt con uerted vnto tice. ~ 1 Deuts

ne rayer. rll GP .
Helmer me from blood D Lorde, the

14 ode of my faluatton: and my tongue l fing with a topfull noyse of thy

ulli lippes: and de open thon my lippes
1 bei ‘hall fet foorth thy prayse. te thou desirest no lacrilite, cis J
F wont geue it thee: thou delightest not

offering. raue for God is a“ miortified spiell.

Th e Plalmes. 4

vite: O Lorne thou Wylt not delpise a mortified and an humbie heart.

18 25¢ thou benefittall puto Dion, acco: ding to thy gratious good Wyll: buplde thou the Walles of Hierulalem.

9 Then shalt thon be plealed with the satrifites of righteousnes, wich burnt offeringes and oblations: then wyll
1 offer poung bullockes vpon thyne

aulter.

The argument of the. ij. psalme.

nuepeth againtt Borg, and deferibeth his and all other miccheuous mens
( Wan ang fa ME the godly peruling, be more incited to put their whole

conkidence in God, and to papfe God.

q To the chiefe musition, a wyse instruction of Dauid, when Doeg the Edo-

mite came to Saul and tolde him, saying:

Achimelek. I. Sam. 21. N
11 Hy boastest thy self thou tiraunt
\ of milchiefe : the goodnes of
God daply endureth.

2 Thy tongue imagineth wickednes: and deteaueth like a sharpe raser.

3 Thou hast loued vngratiousnes moze then goodnes: and to talke of falchood more then of righteoulnes. Sclah.

4 Thou halt loued to speake all wordes that map do hurt: O thou deceiptkull tongue.

§ Thertore the Toy wyll destrop thee fopener: he wyll take thee and plucke

thee out of thy dwelling, and roote thee

out of the lande of the living. Selah.
6 The righteous allo shall fee this: and

Dauid is come to the house of

ber wyll be afraide and laugh hym to

corne.

7 (Saping) lo this is the man that put not the Lorde (to be} his strength: but trusted vnto the multitude of his riches, ap strengthed hin felfe in his wickednesse.

3 As for me J am lyke a greene oline tree in the house ol the Lorde: my trust is inthe tender mercy of the Lorde fo3 euer and euer.

9 FP will alway confesse it puto that thon bal” done it: and Wypll hope in thy name, for it is good in the sight of thy saintes.

ee, for

The argument of the. liii. psalme.

€ Haudd declareth the originall roote, with the kruites and punichment of the wicked, how they opprelle crueli the people of God, whom neuerthelelse God by his prouidence deten. deth and wyn delluer krom che bloodie handes of the wicked, whole vngodlpnes he des

telteth alwapes.

To the chiefe musition vpon Mahalah, a wise instruction of Dauid.

1 Same He fosie bath sayde in rs AGE 22) bis heart there is no oy Meany God: they haue coz ey (Ges ) rupted them selnes, x

haue made their wickednes abhominable, he is not that doeth

good.
F un be Lorde looted downe from hea-

ther er een of nien: to fee tf t

Butt they dyd All go out of the wa b, they dyd altogether“ become abhoun-

e there was allo
Nod no not one. one that would do

4._ Wyllnot the workers ok iniquitic bu: derstande, cating bp inp people (as they rated bread: that they do not call bpon God:

5 They shalbe greatly there afraide where no tause of feare is: forthe Lord
Ipll breake the bones of hym that befiegeth thee, thon Wylt put (them) to

- Chane, because the Lorde hath despifed them,

6 Whois he that wyll geue saluation
Into Ilracl out of Sion: when the
LO wyll reduce his people ont of taptiuitie, Jatob wyll reioyce, and Jlracl wpll be glad. ö

C1 J The

(a) Co the wicked, and to ihe godlp.

‘The Pf: al mes. Euenyng a f The argument of the. lit. psalme. —

¶ Daud brought into marueplous daunger through the treaton of Fiphims, who were

counterfapted Itraelites, calleth earnedly vpon God: trom whom receauing fuccour

| be thanketh him with a free beart,achnowledaing the benekite. 0

q To the chiefe musition vpon Neginoth, a wy fe instruction of Dauid, when the
Ziphims came and sayd vnto Saul, hath not Dauid hyd him selfe amongst vs:
1. Sam. 23. &. 26.

1 S Aue me O Torde for thy name lake: mudge me actordyng to thy mightie power.

2 Htare my praper O Lord: and hear-

ken vnto the wordes of my mouth.

3 Foz straungers are rysen vp against

me: and tirauntes whiche haue not the

Lode before their eyes, seeke after my

1 soule. Selah.

Wehold, God is an apde vnto me: the

Lorde is with them that vpholde mip

The argument of the. Iv. pfalme.

„

Moneth the. x. day.

soule.
5 Me Wyll rewarde ™ euyll onto mine Ox enemies: destrop thou tt A to thytrueth. 1 0 hem accozding as
6 J Wyilllacrifice vnto thee with a true
Wyllyng heart: J wyll conkesle thy nanie O God,becaule it is good.
7 For he Hath deliuered me out of ay ny trouble: and mine epe bath seene
Cauengaunce] ppon mine enemies,

ce) Chat ioue me, taking my

¶ Dauid desireth God to heare his prapers, he declareth his grieles and affltctions, he wisheth auengment ok his enemies, who pretending krendship and kamiliaritie, craltply fecketh his dichonour . Finally. he she weth what comtort he hath taken, in that
God wyll helpe him, and destroy his aduertaries. a

To the chiefe mufition vpon Neginoth,a wife instruction of Dauid.

A1 Geen geue eare vnto my praper: 1 Dalicetsin the nudst ol it: disceipt and and hide not thy elfe from my pez guple go not out ok her streates.

tition. 12. Truelp he was not mine enemie that

> Take heede vnto me, and heare me: hath done me this dishonour, for then

J tan not choose but mourne in my IJ coulde haue borne it: neither was he

praper, and make a noyse. one that seemed to hate me that dyd

3 Deliuer me) krom the voyte ofthe ene- magnitie hym felfe against me, for then

The face.

mie, and from the present affliction of the wicked: for they are minded to do me mischiele, and ave fet malitioufly against me.

4 Myheart trembleth within me: and the feare ol death is fallen vpon nie.

5 FJearekulnes and trembling are come vpon me: and an horrible dread hath duerwhelmed me.

6 And J sapde, O that J had wynges lit a doue: fo2 then woulde J flee a-
Wap, and be at rest.

6 7 Lo, then wonlde J fleeing get nie awap karre ot: and reinapne in the wyldernesle. Selah.

3 Then woulde J make hak to efcape: from the stormie Wynde, land from the tempest.

9 Delroy their tongues O Torde, and deuide them): for J haue seene opprelsion and strile in the titie.

10 Thep do compafie it day and night

To mo-
An

labour, are in the midst of it.

within the walles: nufchiefe also and

FJ Woulde haue hyo my selfe from hun.

13 Wut it was euen thon whom J csteemed as my selfe: my gupde, and myne owne familier companion. 0

14. Me delighted greatly to conferre dur setretes together: we walked deuoutle in the joule of God lelowe lyke.

13 Net death fodainly come dpon them, let them go downe quicke into hell: 5
Wickednes is in their dwellinges an among them. f

16 As for nie J wyll crye bnto the Lord: and God wpll aue me. . and at

17 In the euening and morning an af

pray, and atm 7 instantly: and he Wyll heare my 11 00

13 He hath redeemed my foule 4 10 11 peace frõ the battaple that was ag

irn dez

flict them, Sela: forsomut

. no «HES in them, and 0? that ther do not feart God.

e layde his handes vpon such as be

utnaunt. for:
: ordes] of his mouth Were to
5 derthen bunter, ct warre was in his heart: h rid ta nd yet be they very lwordes.
25 Patty burthen vpon God, and he

wpll vpholde thee: he wyll not suffer

thankes therelore.

d de E inereifull vnto
N 685 me D Tode: foz
Moning = SS 7 man goeth about

playel.

8 to deuour me, he daply kyghtyng,
[ex Go) PA oppeefferl) me.

577 WMDypne enemies
1c AY are daply in bande
N to lwalowe me bp: for they be many that fight against me,

O thou most highest.

3 (Meuerthelelle} at all times as J am afraidt: I put my whole trust in the.

4 Jun the Lod J Wyll prayse his word:

ainthe Lorde J haue put mytrust, and

J wyll not keare what lel can do vnto

3 5 Cy wordes daply put me to fozow:

ond as all that they do imagine, is to do me abe cull

They flocke together, they kepe them sclues close: they marke my steppes,

all men.

1 De mereifull vnto me O Lorde, be a Beall vnto me: for my soule trusteth in thee, and vnder the shadowe

tlranny be oucrpast.

cen vntothe Lord that wil perkourme

. 5 Pn Which F hane in 1 — me Pil sende from heauen, and laue de the reproofe of him that woulde ken den ie pp, Selah; the Lorde Wyll e loorth his mertie and trueth.

The Pilalmes.

Oe eat with him: and he beabe his co-

is owes Were mother then

To the chicfe mufition as concerning theG) dumbe doue in a fate cou ntrey the 9 golden psalme of Dauid, when the Philistines toke him in Geth. 1 Sam. 21.

ofthy wynges wyll J trust, vntyll this
2 Jwpl cal onto the most high Lorde:

at àup time the righteous to mone.

N headlong into the pit ol dellrut-

23 (And as ko) then: thou O Lorde wit

24 The bloodthirstie and deteiptlull

men (hal not tine out halfe their dayes:

neuerthelesse J wyll put my full trust 8 in thee.

The argument ofthe. lvi. Psalme.

¶ pauid prapeth to God. complaining greatly of the bnreatonablenes of his enemies. and withing their correction. He fetteth foozch tis confidence that he hath in Gods rouidence, whereby he allureth him felfe fos to be deliuered, and promileth to geue

Da

nib cong to big

that they may lye iu wayte for np soule. Shan e

dh en he we
7 Shall they eftape (02 their Wicked- Ee cs nes: O Tordt in thy displealure tast ner a
Downe headlong this people. iet
3 Thau hak numbred mp flittinges, moe dune thou halt put my teares in thy botkell: Lag ne
Care] not these thinges noted] in thy eu eher booke: N gelten
9 Whensloeuer J call vpon thee, then annere hall myne enemies be put to flight this une
I know, for the Lode“ is on my fide. 11
Jo Inthe Lord J wyll prayse the word:
In God JJ wyll prapse the worde.
Ir Inthe Lowde J put my trust: J Wyll not be afraide What man can do vnto me. -
12 O Torde, thy vowes be vpon me: Frm, vnto thee wyll J geue thankes € praile. hn
3 For thou hast delluered my soule from Fw death, and my feete from falling: that
Imap walke befoze the Lorde in the light of the liuing.

The argument of the. vii. Pfalme.

¶ Dautd being in great perill, as in the mouth ol Lions, maketh his prayer to God, and delireth verp earnestly his helpe, promiling to confelle him and his benefites amongtt en. b

J To the chicfe mufition (to be song iphe vnto the long beginning) destroy not a golden psalme of Dauid, when he fied from Saul into W 5 ;

4 My soule is among Lions, and I lpe among thole that are fet on fire: among the chüdzen of men whole teeth are speares and arrowes, and their tongue
à sharpe lword.

5 Exalt typ selfe O God aboue the heaven: thy ology is aboue all the cart h.

6 They haue prepared a net for my fecte, .
“that some man might presse downe bone my soule: they haue digged a pit before b me, and are fallen into the nudst ok it °

them selues. Sclab.
N C 7 Dy :

Mon ‘The Plalmes.
9 e 5 For thou O Lode hast hearde my) 7 he shall Dwell before the Some ß

vowes: and hast geuen an heritage vnto those that feare thy name.

6 Thou wilt adde dapes vnto the kings dayes: and his peres shalbe a generation and a generation.

To the chiefe mufition vpon Iudethun, a psalme of Dauid.

| ding to his workes.

, At pees sony PB loule truly onae os lp“ stapeth bpon
Morning 10 the Lorde: for o

C bimcommethmy

g faluation.
Halt? he onlye is my
0 enn ne fa:
AY NS uing belpe: he is my refuge,fothat
J can not be re-

y

moued greatlp.
3 Howe long wyll pe imagine mifchiefe agalnst euery man: pe chalbe slayne all the fort of pou: (ve shalbe] aga tottering
Wall, Cand like] a broken“ hedge.
4 They deuile only howe to thrust him from his promotion: they delight in a le, they blesse with their mouth, and curte with their heart. Sclah.
Neuerthelelse] O mp sdule, stap thou only vponthe Lorde: for my confidence is inhim. b

VVall.

The argument of che. xiij. psalme.

¶ Nauid beyng in a detert as banithed out of his countrey . prapeth to God that he map re. turne to heare his word amongett his people in the fanctuary. He confellech that Gods goodnes palleth all thinges and ingendreth top in euery heart. He tettech forth his ad. uerfarics wylynes and milchielnes, telling them belorehande, that fuche dellruction as they would worke vnto him, hall fall vpon their owne selues.

q A psalme of Dauid when he was in the wyldernesse of luda. I. Sam. 2j. &. 24.

21 O Lorde thou art my Lorde: early in the morning J do lecke thee.

2 Oy soule thirsteth for thee: my fiethe allo longeth after thee in a baren and drye lande (where) no water is.

3 (Co see thee euen sosas] Jhaue seene thee in the fanctuary : that IJ might beholde thy power and glorp.

4 For thy louing kindnes is better then lite sit teltej: my lippes shall prayse thee,

5 Aslong as J line J wyil blesse thee

The argument of the. Ixij. psalme.

¶ Nauid declareth that in God he putteth his whole trakl, and that his aduerta ,
Lifing mischiele, hall therby wozke their owne destruction. He declareth 110 50 trust vnto man, aucthoritie cpople riches or goodes is but vanttie: Only God hath power and good wyll to helpe in all necellities, who wyll rewarde euery one accozs

Mornyng pray,

euer: O appoynt thy toning in foe

ing plal . name: that J aa ee e

map d fonrme my vöwes. dar per:

6 De only is my rotke and my fauing helpe: he is my refuge, fo tha not beremansh. = ae Xo

7 In the Torde is my health and my 25 glory: my trust is in the Lordethe for: tresse of my forte.

8 O pe people, put pour trust in hom alwap: polbre out pour heartes before 3s hin kor the Lorde is our hope. Selah. 0

9 As forthe chyldren or men, they be on ive but vanitie, the chyldren of lordes be but a lye: vpon the wayghtes they (be) altogether (lighter) then banitie in lelle.

10 O trust not in wrong dealing and spoyling: geue not pour selues vnto vanitie, if riches encrease, fet not pour heart pon them.)

u The Lov spake it once, cout] J haue
Hearde tt twise, that power and merch en belongeth to thee O Torde God: fo} au thou rewardest cuery man atcording to his worke.

ontiis mane: and benen wyll .

ch lpft vp my handes. N

6 ay fonlets latilfied euen as it ern with mary andfatnes: and myn prapfeth chee with topfull linen um

ey haue not remembred thee 4 bed: and thought vpon thee when . was Waking: erther-

3 Because thou hat benm helper: is we bnder the hadowe OF chr wong do Jreiopte. „ S

aunyng prayer” — The 5 salmes. XX.
; My soule cleaueth fat vnto thee: thy = ™ portion fo Fores, 8 —

right hande hath vpholden me.

10 Aud they (tbat) feeke my soule to op-

clit j: (hall go vnder the earth.
11 wae one of them shalbe killed with the edge ofa sworde: and they shalbe a

fhal cate them

2 wutthe king shal reioyte in the Lord, renew e

all thein that speake a lpe, shalbe stopped. *

¢

t) That proc fesse hym in ipfe and Icarning.

The argument of the. Ixiiii. psalme. auid maketh his praper to God againk the cratt ie, malitious, and kalte tongues of q 15 aduerlaries, who wrongkullp had acculed hym. he che weth their naughtie na» . cure, and howe the destruction ok luche chalbe to Gods glorp: foz the godly seyng it,

shall prapse God and be glad.

To the chiefe musition, a psalme of Dauid.

| | Lode heare my boyee in iny prap-

ö WE peeferne my life from feare of

the enemie.

2 hyde me from the secrete (countaptes) ok the malitious: front the confprracte of the Workers of iniquitie.

3 Who haue whet their tongue lpke a sword: who haue drawne their arrow, euen a bitter worde.

4 That they map priuily shoote at hym which is perfect: they do {odentp shoote at hym and feare not.

Thep courage them felucs in mischiefe: and eõmune among them lelues
Dow they may lay snares, and fay, who shall see them: .

They learche out howe to do wrong,

they put in practife fully that they haue diligently searched out: pea euen the secretes and bottome ol euery one of their

7 Wutthe Lorde wyll sodenly shoote at 28 them with altwytt arrowe: their pla- * gues shal be sapparaunt

8 Bea they shall cause their owne © 0 ene tongues to be a meanes for to destrop ge a thẽ lelues: insomuch that Who fo feeth er an them, chal desire to fee awaplkrom them] Wen.

9 And all men that fee it shall fay, this
Hath God done: for they (hall well per:

tedue that it is his worke.

The righteous wyll reioyte in God, and put his trust in bpm: and all thep that be vpright hearted wylbe glad.

The argument of the. Ixv. psalme.

Torde “thou wylt be
Ircatly prapsed in Si-

eon: and vnto thee shal bowes be perfourmed
LKhouthat hearesta

xy ul Paper: vnto thee shall

jm {he come. mildecdes haue preuapled az du Meretfull vnto our ssions.

D .
> bed un thp court, and we chalbe latil

bern OF thy holy tem ple. td mars ll heare bs Dopng wonder: dor pees" rigpteoulnes O Lore dee ee t > n dwwellfarre of at the fea coal. es

Thou visitest the earth, and thou ma-

¶ Dauid lettech foozth the exceeding goodnes of God, partly in that he hath appoynted to be worchipped at Sion, to heare chote that make their prapers vnto him to korgeue them their linnes, and to endue his people wich many tpirituall graces and gypktes:
Partly alfo in that he maketh che ground truitfull, repleniching it with cattell, corne, and all kinde of kruites, atwell in detertes and hilles, ag in valleps.

To the chiefe musition, the psalme of Dauid, a song.

6 Thou art he who in his strength setleth fast the monntaines: and is gyrded about with power.

7 Who stilleth the raging of the lea, and the noyse of his waues: and the vprore of the people. N

3 Thep also that dwel in the vtmost par-

tes (ot theearth be afrayde at thysignes: thou makest them reioyte at the going foorth of the morning and euenpng. Gg anche e sunne and

Belt it ouerflowne, thon enrichest it **. greatly: the riuer of God is full of waz ter, thou preparest their torne, for fo thou ozdapnest it.

10 Thou waterest her forowes, thou breakest downe her hillockes: thou malic it soft wich the drops of rayne,

aud blellest the meveale ofik.

1 Thou crowuest the pere with thy

C (iii) goodnes:

(t) Great riurg de

(d) Thouordapnest the carth to brug foozth cozne.

c A ctue of fouldiers.

‘The Plalmes.

‘Stepps, goodnes:andthy“cloudesdropfatues, 13 The downes be cover

oneth the. xii. day.

Euening Prayer

b ed with
12 They drop vpon the dwellinges of the (heepe: the valleys stande thicke Wi
Wyldernesle: and hilles be compafled corne (co that) they chowte ctor ith with top. alfo fin. they showte (to2 iop) and
| The argument of the. xvj. psalme.

0 ¶ Che prophete Dauid calleth pon all men to praple God for his wonderfull power, decla · red not only in the olde time in drping the red fea that the children of Ilrael might elcape
Pharaos handes : but also nowe foz fauing his people krom their enemies, and from ple 5 urna of their dayes. He alto inciteth other to be thankelull vnto God rough his example.
5 To the chiefe musition, a song (Whiche is) a psalme.

I Etlare vou ioyfull bnto the Lorde of Thou broughtest vs into the :
A Di peok] the earth: fing plalmes and layde trouble vpon our Weng 4 vnto the glozy of his name, geue 1 Thou sutteredst men to ride ouer our glorp to his matestie. i heades: we went through fire and wa-
2 Sap vnto the Lorde, oh howe won- ter, and (vet) thou broughtest vs out in: derfull art thou in thy workes: thorow to a“ plealaunt (place.) the greatnes of thy power thyne ene- 12 15 wyll go into thy house with burnt gener mies shalbe founde “ liers vnto thee. offeringes: and J wyll pay thee my derbe 3 Jon all (ther of the wozlde Malt Woz vowes whiche J promiled with my
N Chip thee, aud sing plalmes vnto thee: lippes, and spake with my mouth when they (hall fing plalnies vnto thy holy J was in trouble. name. Selah. 3. J wyll offer vnto thee fat burnt faci: C
4 Connie hither and beholde the wozkes kices, wich the incenle of rammes: J ofthe Lode: howe wonderkull he is in will offer bullockes and goates. Selah. his doing towarde the chyldren or men. 14. O tome hither, c hearken: and J wil
5 He turneth the lea into drye lande, so tell all you that feare the Lorde, what that they went thorowe the water on he hath done for my foule. foote : there dyd we reioyte in hin. 15 J called vnto hym with my mouth:
6 qe ruleth with his power for euer, his and 2 exalted him with ury tongue. eyes beholdeth the genties: such as ve 16 If J had inclined vnto wickednes iu rebels shal not tome to promotion. Scl. n heart, the Lorde woulde not haue
O e people blesse pour Lorde: and hearde me: but the Lorde hath hearde make the voyte of his praise to be heard. mme, e considered the vopte of my prayer.
3 Who prelcrueth dur loule in lift: and 17 Wlelled be the Lorde which hath not suffercth not our feete to flip. reiected my paper: nor turned his mer
9 Forthou O Tord hast proued vs: thou tpye from me. hast tryed vs, like as filuer is trped.

VVated.

The argument of the. lxvii, pfalme.

¶ Che prophete in the name of the people of Atrael, belecheth God of his fausourr and mercp that his commaundementes may be publithed to the whole world: fo that by that meanes God might be prapled, and all people blesled.

To the chiefe musition vpon Neginoth,a pfalme ( whiche ig) a fong.

my 1 Phe Lordbemercpfullonto vs and kor thou wylt iudge the people, and 9. 5 i Tote bg: (and) caule the light of his pau the gentlles vpon the earth, al

cotitenaunce to shine bpon bs, Selah. tording to equitic. Selah. 8 Lom ctl

2 That thy way may be knowen vpon 5 The people will peaple “thee O the earth: thy lalnation among all naz ali the people wyll“ peaple thee. ber tions. . 6 (Chen thallthe earth bays e wil

4 Confesse. 3 8 Wyll the peapte 4 bene w thee increase 1 * out £0?
¢¢Confeffe. orde: pea all the people wyll“ eue vs his bictting. he
7 prayse the. > n 7 he Lorne wil blesse benen.
4 The Gentiles will reiopte e triumph: endes of the worlde shall feat The

mnyng prayer.

the great toy of the godly,

~ teri

¢ The argument of the. lxviij Psalme.

uid ter Come notable victorte thankech God, who is and hath ben throngh his

hae 1 power a prelent helpe and comfort to the afflicted, to orphang. andes

and pifoners that fit in dartinefle, whoalfo ouerthroweth with his mightie arme all wickednelle and his agapnetapers, and maketh them his tubtectes oz euer, to

To the chiefe mufitionsa pfalme of Dauid, which is a song.

Reale the Lorde

J woulde arple,bis

ih enenues Woulde

be scattered: and they that hate

I hrm woudde flee

krom his face.
BP y Lyke as the

EZ fmoke vanisheth,

“i Co)] wylt thou

caufe them; to vanishe away: aud lyke

as water melteth at the fire, Co Wyll

the st perishe at the peelence of e Lorde.

3 * therpabteous mutt be glad, aud

rtiopte before the Lorde: they shall not

stande styll for myrth.

4 Syng bnto the Lorde, fyng plalmes vnto his name: magnifie hym that rideth vpon the heauens as it were vp-

u on an horse in his name euerlastyng,

n and reiopce before his fate. '

vcr 5 We Wafather of the fatherlesse, and

pok the ndge of widdowes: (de is the Lord re in his holy habitation,

biet © he is the Lord that maketh thole that

n OLE alone to haue a familie: and

fon bipngeth puloners out of the stockes.

e 7 But rebelles did inhabite a dryc ground]
O Lope, when thou wentest foorth before the people: when thou wentelt though the wyldernesle. Selab.

The earth thoke, and the heauens dopped at the presente of the Lorde:
Chen Sinai it felfe schokej at the prelente chche ko de Loreof Pitacl,

9 enen Lore pdt canfe rayne to rs at Hy gations plealure: and when tine inbevitaunce was weerp, thou

10 Uh beacten it.

: me ee of lle there:for thou O ah poi hy goodnesse prepare

4 e Lode gaue the worde: great

5 1 5 pe company okthe“ preachers.

1 f N e dyd ie : halle denied the thoy masse an

hough pe haue lyen among the

poftes: pet shall ve be as the wynges of
à doue that is couered with suner, and hath her tethers as pelo we as golde.

14 When the almightic scattered kynges C 0 in it: it was as Whyte as Inowe in 3" .

„Salmon. en

15 As the hyll ol -Wasan, so is Gods hill: ee tuen an hygh hyll, as the hyll of alan.

19 Why skyp vou fo pe high hylles : this is the Lordes hyll in the Which it pleaseth hym to dwell, pea God wyll abyde in it

or euer. 1

17 The charettes of p Lorde are twentie thoulande, euen thoulandes of angels:
5 11 Pode is antong them in holy

nat, 4 '

18 Thou wenst vp on high, thou hast led

* kaptiuitie captiue, thon batt receaued gyltes for men: pea ener (for Iehole that be dilobedient, that God the Howe myght dwell among them. 8

19 Blessed be the Lorde who day by day polbreth his benelites] vpon vs: and is

God ok our saluation. Selah.

20 The Lode is our Lode for to saue

* Ds: and all maner of wayes for death d hn pertayneth to God the Lorde. rae a

21 God wyll wounde the head of his ene- soo. mies: and the heary scalpe of hym who goeth on styll in his wickednelle. D

22 The Lorde hath sapde, J wyll bryng my people j agayne out from Balan: J
Wyll bryng them] agayne out from the deepe of the sen. 8

23 That thy kootes land the tongue ofthy

dogges: may be made redde in the blood of the enemles by his meanes.

24 They do well {ee O Lorde thy gopnges : thy goynges in the sanctuaric my Lorde and kyng.

25 The fingers go bekore, the nunstrelles folowe after: in the myddest are the damselles playing with the tinibrelles.

26 In the congregations they do blesse the Lorde: the God ofthe °° founitapne of Israel. 2 „„

27 There is litle Weniamun their ruler, dd ele the princes ot Jehudatheir “ counsell: ante th ep uin tes of Zabulon andithe saa ouerdohelme.

(e) Progenic:

~ Moneth che. xiii. day. of MNepthali.
28 Thy Lord hath ordepned thystrength: establishe the thing O Lorde that thou hak wrought in vs.

29 Fo: thy temple fake at Hicrufatent: kynges Wyll bryng presentes vnto thee.
30 put to rebuke the companic of fpeare
E men, a multitude ok bulles amongest
«Cus of the “people lyke vnto calues: Contpil) thepeopk. that they brought vnder foote [come]
With peeces of fuer (for eribute, | scatter

the people that delpght in warre.
“Emballa- 3 Then shal“ printes come ont of Egypt:
1 Ethiopia in all hatte shall stretch out

The argument of the. Ixix. Psalme.

‘The Plalmes, *

Eucning aye)
Ver banbes te eave. :
32 Sing vnto the? 020 O pe kingdo ofthe earth: Ws
. iy O syng plalmes puto the
33 Who rpdeth vpon the“ mog + pon eternall heauens: lo he iene hat nughtie boyce in his voyte. tem
4 ar oe 15 9 tobemigh: his ouer Israe in the cloudes. Watte niht
35 O Torde thon art terrible out of thy mat and Heenath burn his penn
Ath Onto his ö
Blelled be the Love, A pet

¶ Dauid as in a figure setteth toosth lyuely Christes paflion, declaryng withall, that
Gods people shalbe saued, and his enemies destroped. soz he complapneth very vehe-
-mentlp of his greeuous afflictions, humbly requestyng to be delyuered of them. he wisheth eupll tuccesse and a wretched ende vnto his aduerlaries, he reioyceth and prapleth God, and calleth vpon heauen and earth to do the fame, Finally, he prophe-

cieth of the prosperitie of Christes Churche.
Sosanim ( palme) of Dauid.

O Brmatleas q To the chiefe mufition vpon O indrument. Aue me © Lorde : for
Euenyng 0 Waters haue entred rayer. 8 , in vnto my soule. ee. 2 Jam ouer the head

In deepe mye where tt Y fete no grounde: J plunge in deepe waters

where the streame ouerwhelmeth nie.

Jam Weery of trying, my throte is

drye: my spght fapleth me through the

long attendaunce that J haue genen vpon my Torde.

4 Chey that hate me without a taule are mo then the heeres of my head: they that are myne enemies and woulde de-
{troy me guͤtlesse are mightic, J payde them the thynges that J neuer toke.

God thou knowest my folly: and my

faultes are not hyd from thee.

6 Let not them that trust in thee O
Lorde God of hoastes, be for my cause alhamed: let not thole that seke thee, be theougl me confounded O Lode of Hfracl.

7 Forthy fake haue J suffered reprofe,

W shame hath couered my fate: J am be-

tome a straunger vnto my brethrẽ, euen an aliaunt vnto my mothers children.

8 Nor the zeale ot thine house hath euen eaten nie: and the rebukes of them that rebuked thee, are fallen vpon me.

9 And J weptschactenyng ny soule with fastyng: and that was turned to my reproofe.

lo Also J put on sackcloth for my garment: and they iested at me.

e

1 Thep that fit in the gate speake a: gapnst me: and they that drynke trong drynke (make) songes (bpon me.

12 But (A matze) my praper vnto thee
God in an aceeptable tyme: heare me
O Lod in the multitude of thy mercte, attording to the trueth of thy faluation.

13 Takt nie out of the mpre, that J fincke not: oh let me be delpuered fromthem that hate me, e out of the deepe waters.

14. Let not the Water fludde drowne me, C neither let the deepe lwalowe me dp: ¢

let not the ppt shut her mouth vponme.

15 Heare me O God, for thy louyng kindnesse is tomtorztable:turne thee vnto me actordyng vnto the multitude of thy mercies. :

16 And Hyde not thy face from thy ler uaunt, fo: Jam in trouble: O halte ther cand} heare me. 1

17 Draw nigh vnto mysoule r redcemen for mpne enentics fake oh redeeme ni.

13 Thou hast knolben my reproole, my fhame,and my dilhonour: myne aͤduersaries are all in thy syght. 8.

19 Keproofe hath broke lp heart Apr 105

am full of heauinesle: J eee ome to haue pitie on me, but there fot been for 9 ort ton me, but J coulde fynde none. ;

20 They gaue me for meate, gail fo a and when ZF 5 thirstie, they gau vineger to drynke.

23 be At their table be as a mate 10 0 1 them: and insteade of La gion. „e. peace let it bea meanes of de 122 Act ba

pening prayer.

and euer bowe downe their lopnes.
1 aie out thine indignation bai them: and let thy wrathfun difpleature take holde of them. a
Let their habitation be desolate: and

Ait uo man diwell in their tabernacles.

25 Foz they persetute hym whom thou halt sutterrandthey talke of the griele o them whom thou halt wounded,

26 Let them fall from one wickednesse to another: and let them not enter into thy ryghteousnesfe.

9 27 Het them be wpped ont of the booke ofthe lyuyng: and not to be Written among the ryahteous .
23 As for me J am afflicted and in bea: uinesle:thy farting helpe O Torde“ shal defende me.

ob on hyghe

11 Aste thee O Torde to delpuer me: make haste to helpe me O God.
2 Let them be ashamed and confounded that {eke after my loule: let them be turned backwarde and be put

to tontusion that wishe me euyll.
Let them be returned backwarde: foz a rewarde of their shampng (C other]

d Which fay, “there, there.

Nowe in his olde

N thee O God J f haue put mp trust, let me neuer be put
Asto confusion: ridde me and Deliver me in thy ryghteoul-
\ nelle, incline thine
4 1 5 vnto me, and its — ue me.

2 15 won my trong holde whervnto
Sad avallbay resort: thou halt © geuen ol to laue me, fo? thou art my

ot defence, and my caltell.

r ——

The Plalmes.
2 Let their eyes be biynded chat thepsee 29 JJ wyll praylt the name of the Torde

with a song: andinaanific m wi solemne tonlession. e

30 And it wyll pleale God: better then a

bullocke that hath homes and hoofes,

31 The humble wyll tonsider 105 and be glad, {uch as seke after God: and pour soule shall lyue.

32 FO? God heareth the poore:æ dispileth not his prisoners.

3 Let heauen and earth prayse hynnthe sea and allthat moueth therin.

34. For the Lorde wyll saue Sion, and buillde the cities ol Jehuda: that men map DWel there and haue it in pote,

35 The posteritie allo of his seruauntes shall inherite it: and they that loue his name shall dwel therin. |

$ The argument of the. xx. psalme.

auid defireth God to helpe hym wich all fpeede, and to tanke abengeaunce of his a He allo discribeth the top of the godlp, who leeth hym delpuͤered.

To the chiefe musition (a palme) of Dauid, to reduce in remembraunce.

4. Wut let all those that fete thee be ioyfull and glad in thee: and let all such as delight in thy saluation fap alway, the
Lorde be magnified.

5 As for me J am poore and in milerie,
Hatten thee vnto me O Lode: thou art

my apde and n delpuerer, O God make no long tarping.

q The argument of the. Ixxj. Psalme.

€ The prophete beyng allured ol Gods apde, defireth to be delyuered o€ his wicked and crucil enemies, agapnt whole malice he complapneth belore the face or God. Ind korsomuch as euen krom his pouth he hath put his trust in God: he prayeth that in hi age he be hearde and helped. to the intent that God may be prayled for his deltueraunce. noherkore, after he hath vetered his enemies thoughtes, and hophecied of their destruction: he layth that he wil go to warre, trustyng in the power of God, who before tyme hath restored hym out of kundrp afflictions and temptations, vnto a better tate and condition then euer he had before,

3 Delpuer me O my Lorde out of the hande of the vngodiy: out of the hande of the vnryghtedus and cruell man.

4. Jor thou Lorde God art the thyng

that J long for: thon art my hope euen

from my pouth.

5 Though thee haue Jben mayntayned euer sinee J was borne: thou art he that toke me out of my mothers wombe, my praile shalbe alwapofthee.

9 Pam become as it were a monster vnto many: but my sure trust is inther.

7 Oh let my mouth be fylled: a 0 4

ap

ily.

Moneth the. xiiii. day.

25 8 Cast nie not away in the tyne of age: forsake me not when my strength fayleth nie.

9 FJor mpne enemies speake against me: and they that lay awapte for my foule’ take their tounsaple together.

lo They fay, the Lorde hath forlaken
9 55 : do pou persecute hym and take

vm, for there is none to delyuer hym.

n Go not farre from me O Lode: hatte thee O my Lorde to helpe me.

12 Wet then be confounded, let them be brought to naught that are agaynst my soule: let them be couered with Mame and dichondour that seke to do me eupll.

13 As for me J wpll patiently wapte alway: and J wyll praple thee moze and

monre.

14 My mouth Chall dayly speake of thy ryghteonsnelle and fatnation ; for J knowe no ende therok.

15 J wyll go foorth in the © strength of

the Lode God: land J wyll only make mention of thy ryghteousnesse.

% K not not the number.
(b) To bate tapte.

my youth: and hytherto J can well dedare thy wonderous workes.
17 Wherkoßt whylest J am olde and am

1 God geue vnto the kyng thy“
A iudgementes: and thy ryghteoussz nesse vnto the kynges sonne.

me. : 2 (Chen) he wyll iudge thy people accozdyng vnto iustice: and thy alklicted actordyng to equitie.

3 The mountaynes alfo and hylles: shall bryng peate to the people by the meanes of ryghteousnesle.

He Wyll iudge the afflicted amongst the people: he wyll {auc the chudren of the poore, and subdue the oppzeffour.

5 Thep wyll feare thee as long as the sunne and moone b en one generation to another.

6 Me Wyll come downe lyke the rayne into a fleece of wooll: euen as the droppes that water the earth.

ge . 7 In his dayes the ryghtedus wyll florilhe: and there shalbe aboundaunce of

(a) Geue

Judge · ment.

Coe alla-

deth to the

tmiratle of toto

Ihe Pfalmes. gg prayse and glorie all the day long. gray headed: O Lorde forsake me not

16 Thou O God hak taught me from

The argument of the. lxxij.Pfalme.

@ Che prophete in the name of the whole Church prapeth that the kyngdome promiled vnto hym may come, which is the kyngdome of Felus Christe. He declareth that then there shalbe peace, the number of the tuft Mall increase, fo that all nations halbe subfect vnto hym. He letteth foorth the affection of the people to warde their kyng · a the aboundaunce of all thinges in his kingdome, lo that his name Mall endure kor euer.

2 OF Solomon,

Mornyng prayer,

vntyll J haue shewed t 8 this) generation, and r pourra them tbat ave pe font cane

18 Aud unte AlhaueJexccedynglp erar, ted O Lorde thy evabteontietiy 15 great thynges are they that thon hast done, O Lorde who is ipke puto thee.

19 Which Hatt made me to feete man great troubles and aduersities: pet returnyng thou Hatt reuyned me, peace: turuyng thou hast cauled me to tome out from the bottome of the earth.

20 Thon hast brought me to greater honour then J had before: Sthou returnyng Dat comforted me on euery syde.

21 Therkore J Wyll conlesse puto thee thy trueth O Lorde, playing vpon an instrument ok mulicke: vnto thee J wyl syng plalmes vpon the harpe O thoy most holy (God) of Jiract,

22. My lyppes wyll be iopfull when FJ syng vnto thee: and so wyll ni fouie which thou hast redeemed.

23 My tongue allo shal talke of thy righteousnesse all the day long: for they are confounded and brought vnto shame that {eke to do me eupyll.

D

peace so long as the moone endureth.
8 His dominton allo Mhalbe from the oul
{ea to the other: and krom the fludde vnto the ende of the earth. fe
„ Chey that dwel in the wude che en enemies ) licke the dust. at
Io The kyng of Tharlis and of 17 ne
Jes shall offer prefentes : the e, ous of -Sheba € Seba Mall bung ae 11 5
II e eee ee gine tions wyll do hym seruice.
12. For he wel delpuer the poor 91 55 he tryeth: and the alfltted aud 0 that hath no helper. .
13 De ~Dyt Ay tompassion pan e ¢ poort and 1 1 he wyll p the soules ofthe poore . u
14 90 Wpll delpder their ou 1055
Deceipt and opprellion: and the

jpenyng prayer. in his spdht.
Is * ae ae he wyll geue “to the woh K pooze of the golde of Sheba : and he wyll peay ae for hym, and dayly bicite .

40 Dmfül of torne shall (be to wed in the earth vpon the toppe of hylles: and the kruite thevof Mall make a noyse ivke Libanus, and {hall florishe in the citie lye gralle vpon the earth.

17 His name shall endure for euer, his

ö The Plaln

name shalbe spread abrode to the world
5 tong dale bn chall shyne: all naa effed in by: call hym blessed. ee
18 Wlesled be God the Lorde: the Lorde of Ylrael which only doth wonderous thynges.
19 And blessed be the nanie of his maiestie for euer: and all the earth chalbe kylled
With his matestie. Amen, Amen.

Here endeth the prayers of Dauid the sonne of Isai.

The argument of the. Nxiii. psalme.

€ Che prophete for the comfort of the Goodly, bttereth what offences spryng of the prol· peritle of the wicked declarpng withall that they haue a wretched ende, and that the ende of such as be afflicted in this worlde for ryghteousnesle is happy: although that he knoweth not the caule of the affliction of the one, or the prolperitie of the other. He setteth koorth the pryde of the vngodlx, and the goodnelle and pronidence

of God to wardes hym at all tymes.

q A psalme of © Afaph.

Ogorelong

a! (<a
. I

Fucnyng 2

prayer

Rucly the Wonde ts very good vnto BPfra-
Fox | el: vnto such as haue a tleanc heart. a] AS Neuerthelesse, my ckeeete were almost gone from me: my steppes had almost slypt.
3 For J enuied at the cafe of the koolishe:
Isawe the wicked flo we) in all kynde
Opa Df prosperitie.

une 4 Jor there be noc bondes of death that de, (an holde them: and the galaries of their houles be strong. .
They come in no miffoztune lyke other folke: neither are they plagued

lyke other men. a
And this is the canse that pride com: passe them rounde about: and crueltte

touerech them as a garment. res 7 Their eyes stande out kor katnelle: and in the togitations of their heartes do ©

e pasle fromthem.
Beit make other dislolute, they
“ion PCAC oppression With imurte: they
1 talke“ prondelp and presumptuoulip.
‘i on they stretch foorth their mouth to the heauen: and heir tongue den toe through the worde.
Abe tf Therforel God!] his people turneth dere wiber:aud chert is drawen vnto them hoe n And un l (euppe.]

hey fay, howe choulde God per-

eaue itrist 5 byghest- here knowledge in the mot

12 Lo these vngodly and fortunate in the
Worlde: do possesse riches.
13 Truely J haue cleansed my heart in

bayne: and wasshed my handes in

innotentic.

14 All the day long J haue ben scourged: and “ chastened euery mornyng.

15 If I choulde fay that J woulde indge after this sort: lo then J choulde tondempne the generation of thy children.

16 Therkore I considered hole J might vnderstande this: but it was to paynefull in myne eyes.

17 Untyll I went vnto the lanctuarie of
God: and vnderstood the ende of them.

18 Lructp thou doest {et them in slippery places: and castest them downe headlong for to be destroyed.

19 Oh howe be they brought to a destruction euen vpon a lodapne: they faynt, they tonsuine away fo2 very dread.

20 They be as a dreame toa man after he is once waked: O Torde thou Wylt tcause their image to be dispised in the citie. 4

21 Ueryly thus was my heart iuflamed: thus was my repnes pricked.

22 Oo foolishe was J and voyde of vn derstanding: I was euen a bruite beak before these

23 Heuerthelesle Jam alway with thee: for thou Hatt holden me by my ryght hande. ö

24. Thou hast guyde me with thy coun-

* faple:and after that non recratt dn ab

C

c My core tection in the mor-

nyng.

(e) heit hotur, dignttic.

citimatton, aucthozitie
6 soule at the resurr cction.

Monetheche. iii. day. The Pfal ö

Sprayer with glorie. N a loote from the 2 lily
N 25 mohombaue Pinheauenbutthee-and destropelt euerp oll an kerle: thoy

— besides thee. 28 Wut it is good for m
26 My fleshe and my heart fapleth: burt vnto God: 1 5 0 mt eat
God is the strength of my heart, and thee O Lorde God that may dec in my portion for euer. all thy workes. at
27 Foz lo, thep that kepe them selues 8

The argument of Fhe. lage psalme.

¶ Che prophete in the name of the people of Ftract complapneth of their afflicti that they be ag forsaned of God: howe that their temple is let a lire, and raed aneh worde of God aboliched. He discribeth the iniurieg, crueltie, outragioulnesse, and blalphemies of the enemies. e humbly prayeth that thele calamities may haue an ende,

| that iust punichment ¢ auengeaunte may be taken of the enemies, and that the be defended for his couenaunt Cake, as his fathers were commpng out 2 =

A wife instruction (to be song) of Asaph.

A ©) TLorde Wherfore dost thou forsake
Smoketh. vs altogether: Wwhevrfoze “ breaketh foorth thy anger agaynst the

sheepe of thy pafture.

2 Vemember thy congregation, thou
Hatt poslest it nowe a long tynie: thou
Hatt redeemed the rodde of thine inheritaunte, euen mount Sion wherein thou dwellest.

3 Lyft vp thy fecte for to destroy vtterly euery cnenie : which hath done eupll in thy lanctuarie.

4. Thyne aduersaries roare in the myd-

dest of thy congregations: and let vp

their banners for fignes lot bictozie. ]
5 He that hewed tymber afore out of
* thicke woddes for to builde the temple:] was esteemed as one offerpyng a prelent lto God) aboue.

Ca) As landes be meafuccd bp toddeg & pole s:so God
As with a rod meafurcd
Jurie out of

all the worlde

6 Wut nove they breake downe into

peeces all the carued wonke therof: with aces and hammers,

They haue {et fire on thy holy plates: they haue defiled the dwellyng place of thy name (caltyng it downej to the groũd.

3 Bea they sayde in their heartes tet vs make hauocke of them altogether:thus haue they burnt vp all the houles of
God in the lande.

9 We lee not dur enslignes, there is not one prophete more: no not one is there po vs that vnderstandeth our case. 2

10 O Torde hail the aduerlarte do this dichonour continually: Mall the enemie

blaspheme thy name foz euern Why withdzawest thou thy hande, yea

“How long a bs

thy right hande-consumec them drawing) it out of thy bosome.
12 Truely God is my kyng ofolde: who
. faluation in the myddest of the
133 Thou didst deuide the fea through thy power: thou brakest the heades ofthe E
Dragons in the waters. eee
14. Thou smotest the heanes of entre %, than in peetes: and gauest w hym to be Pee meate kor the people in wudernelsse. c
15 Thou broughtest out fountaynes and pha
Waters out of the harde rockes: thou wa dyddest drye vp mightie waters. sito»
16 The day is thine, E thenyghtisthine: an thou halt prepäred the light the lune. csi
17 Thou hak set all the borders of che 4 earth: thou hast ordeyned summer aud aue wynter. „ Sone
18 Remember this O God, the enemie peer, bath dishonoured: and the koolishe peo sun ple bath blasphemed thy name. ae
19 O Deliver not the soule of thy turtle anion doue vnto a wylde bealk: forget not the congregation of the poore for euer. .
20 Loke vponthe couenaunt: foz Dat 4 nesse of the earth hath replenilshe houses with iniquitie. 1
21 O let not the sin pie goaway alam 0 but ict the afflicted e needy geue piaY bnto thy name. 1
22 Aue Told mayntayne thine owrt caule: remember the dilhonen n. the foolishe man doth) vnto thee 0 75
23 Forget not the vote of thine nete the the mutteryng of them that hate afcendeth bp continually.

The

The Plalmes.

¢ The argument of the. Ixxv.Pfalme.

he prophete prayleth God · and letteth koorth the duetie ok a good prince, who muk
60 we Mitr iustice and cquitic, purge the earth trom corruptnelle Waun en i piefle the wicked, and aduaunce the godly through the great power of God, q

q To the chiefe musition, O deftroy not; the pfalme Oof Afaph, a fong.

E do conkesse it speake (not] with a stiffe necke. vnto thee O lord, 6 Wecause promotion conmeth neither we do conkesse it: kront the east nor from the west: nor for thy wonde- pet kroin the “ south. rons wozkes do 7 For God is the indge: it is he that pute << Deters declare thy name teth downe one, and letteth vp another. B to be at hande. 8 For in the hande of God there is a tup,
When J Hall and the wine is reddentt is full nnxt, and take tynie fyt fo: he pobreth out the fanie. the purpole: J yl indge accordyng 9 Wut the vngodly ol the earth do wing vnto rpght. ont: and drynke the dregges therof,

The cath wasteth and all the inga- 10 As fox me J Wyll euer set foorth in bitours therok: J haue vpholded the Wondesl the Löde]: I wyll fing psalmes ppllours ofit. Selah. to the Godof Jacob,

Ilapd vnto fooles deale not so madly: 11 And J wll breake alt the homes of

h ftothe vngodly- set not vp pour horne. the vngodly: but the hornes of the
Set not vp dur horne an high; Cand! ryghteous thatbe eralted.

, Tele. ning pra)

¢ The argument of the. Ixxvj. Psalme.

¶ Che prophete prapleth the countrey of Juric, for that God and his wyll was knowen in it, tor that allo that there God had geuen a notable victorie, as declarpng him selte to be the defendour ol Hierutalem. Pe letteth koorth the terrible iudgement a power of God agapnst wicked enemies. Finally, he exhorteth all Alraelites to the true wordhyppyng of God.

@ To rhe chiefe mufition in Neginoth, the pfalme of Afaph, a song.
2 1 Jurie is God knowen: his name who may stande in thy syght when

is great in Israel. thou sbegynnest) to be angry-
2 At Shalem is his tabernatle: and 3 Thon caulest chy iudgement to be z his dwellyng in Sion. hearde from heauen: then the earth

3 There he brake the arrowes of the tremdleth, and is styll. bowe: the shielde, the lwozde, and the when God arileth to indgement: and
_ battayle, Selah. to helpe all the afflicted vpon the earth.
„ 4 Thon art Honourable: and ok moze Selen e bpullaunte then the mountapnes of 10 The keartenesse of man shall“ turne «confit e to thy prapse:s and] the remnaunt of the wer.
5 The hygh couragious stomackes are keartenesle thou wylt restrayne.
Ene che ird chep haue liept their slepe: and mm Make vowes vnto God pour Loz0¢,
1 fs vallaunt souldiours toulde not 0 F perkourme them all pe that be rounde
6 Meet owne Handes, . about hym: bryng prelentes vnto hym the toy rebuke O God of Jacob: both that is dreadkull. |
Den, na eae and horse be bought to 12 He abateth the spirite of princes: he crt. gabe.
\ taht. is dreadfull to the kynges of the earth. 1 the

rape, that

Thou, euen thou art dreadkull: and be caketh

from them.

The

¶ Che prophete vttereth in a lamentation, wonderfull cogitations of ted dt penliue heart,. almost brought into delperation: but consideryng the manikol argument of Gods power and goodnesse. declared to hym and to U as
© sn intros palt, he taketh good courage, and trusteth of Gods helpe. sient of id= q To the chiefe mufition vpon © Ieduthun, a pfalme of Asaph.
41 A | B voyte was vnto the Lorde, and
VIItrped: my vopte was vnto the
Lord, and he hearkened vnto me.
2 Inthe tyme ok my trouble Jsought mynde. binder the Torde: my hande all the nyght © cemeatee — CACHED c tealled not, my soule refuled

OTobe fong

’

Moneth che xiiii. day.

plachynganb comfort.

3 called to remembraunce God, and

Was dilsquieted: J conferred with

my felfe, and my spirite Was Wrapped in penstueneile. Seah.

4 Thou dpdst kepe the watche of mine eies: was amaled € toulde not speake.

5 J dpd thynke bpon the dapes pak: and on the peres of the olde worlde.

6 J called to remembraunte my plalme, foug on the muficall instrument in the nyght tyme: Jtommuned with mpne o wne heart, c learched out my spirites.

B 7 What, wyll the Lorde forlake me kor cucrabyli he be no moze intreated to be fauourables

3 Is his mertie cleane gone for euer: and is his pronule made from one generatiõ to another, conie biterly to an ende.

9 ath God forgotten to be gratiousand will he shut vp his louing kindnesse in displealure: Selah.

Fee men 10 And J sapde, W this is my death: but

maprecs. the ryght hande of the mot hyghest

(map graunt) me peres.

(b) J contbe mot {cape

¢ The argument of the. Ixxvitj.Pfalme.

¶ Che prophete moueth his people to geue diligent eare vnto hym vtteryng the wonders full benekites ol God to the Lewes, euen luch as were cõmonipknowen amongt them, and were to be declared of fathers onto their children in all generations by the com maundement of God, to the intent that they be not as their forefathers were, rebelles and Cubburie agapnst God and his worde. Foz which caule they had euyll Cuccelie in battarle and were atfliceed wich fundsp calamities: pet they feelyug the (mart of afflte tion made acountenaunce as though they fought God, the foxtaliptig their tines and klepng to Gods mercie, wherkore God gau the arcke to 10
Philillines as forlatipng the Alraelites becaute they greued hym with hyll alters u
Images, God allo refuted the tribe or Ephraim, and chote the tribe or Juda, appopntung
Fauld a sbeephearde keppng theepe, kor to be kyng ol his people.

A wise instruction O of Asaph.

jasc EAE my lawe O my

0 people: enclpne pour

| scares vnto the wordes
=< bt of my month.

NS a J Wyll open my

— mouth in a parable: J

Wyll declare harde

‘The Plalmes. a The argument ofthe. Ixxvil. plalme.

$a) The argument ofthe. i psalme.

19 Thy wap is in the sea, and thy pathes

M ornyng pr ae,

a loroweull afflic. is fathers in tyme

1 A dpd call to remẽbraunte the w of God almightie: forz che wonder done a great whyle a goe caine into my

12 Hallo gaue my (ev to mute ofa
Workes: and J talked of all thy ae

13, Thy way C Lorde is in potynette: who is so great a God as the Lorde-

14. Thou art y God that doth wonder: thou halt made thy power knowen among the people.

15 Thou hast redeemed thy people with almightie) arme: the sonnes of Jacob, and Joseph. Selah,

16 The waters sawe thee O God, the gare waters sawe thee, they Wfeared: yea a
916 depthes of them moued out of their plate.

17 Thicke tlondes powred downerayne, thinne cloudes gaue a noyse: and thine c arrowes went abrode into al corners.

18 The sounde ok thy thunder was rounde about thelcky: the lightnynges shone through the wonlde, the earth quaked and trembled.

Cari wolt boy,

i oe

in the great waters: and thy kootesteppes are not knowen.

20 Thon dydst leade thy fheepe : by the hande o
Aaron.

people lpke
Mopfes and

but it was hypocritically. not

sentences of the olde tyme pall,
3 Whic we haue Hearde and an pz and fur as our fathers hauf an their
We wyll not Hyde them (OM h in chüldren: nay We wyll {ct sa
Wozdes to the generation 12 ape and prapses of God, and his wonderial

II workes that be Path done.
1700 rend aftatute in Jacob, and aue Israel à lawe: in the whiche he

rchildr

their chi den. 2 utent the posteritie choulde aue k, 200) chilozen whiche shalbe pone: that they shoulde ryse vp and dedare it to their chudren. r tn
7 That they shoulde put their 185 5 ö eee,

¢ >

140 Chat they be not as their forefa-

thers were a rebellions and a mutable

eneration: a generation that 18

not their heart aright, and whole spirite

fleaued not stedkastly vnto God.
9 (Lite as the chiidren of Ephraim, which beyng harnelled a carying bowes: turned their backes inthe day of battayle. 8

o They kept not the couenaunt of God: and they woulde not walke in his law.

n But they forgat his workes: and his wonders Which he had shewed them.

n arueylous (hinges dyd he in the fight ofthete fathers:in the land ok Egypt, in

the fielde“ ol Zoan.

He deusded the sea and let them go thorowe i he made the waters to stande as on an heape.

14. Inthe day time also he led them with a a all the night though with alight okfire.

ls he tloued the harde rockes in the wilbernes:¢ gaue them drinke therok, as it had ben out o the great deepe waters.

16 He brought running streames out ofa linie rockt: and tauled waters to guche done, like as out of riuers.

17 Hetfop all this they finned still against

m? fo that they prouoked the most byabett in the wüͤdernelle.

8 And they temped god in their heartes:

fan eingmtate kor their duct.

> Thepspane against God: they laid, can

OD pmpare a table in the wildernelleey e, he hath smptten the fronte

i end Waters haue gushed out, and but mes haue flowed out aboundantip: ut tan he llkewile gene bread „ tan he

du onde fethe fox bis peoples

1 God heardelthem, he was

Here gones was ndled in Jatob:and
Jae. p heaup displcasure against

2 Betaule the on p beleued notin the Lord:
23 ano their trust in his 1 5
? hetommaunded the tloudes az

comniaunded dur forefathers to teache

The Psalmes. —

XXV.

boue:and opened the doores of heauen.

24. He raigned downe. Manna also vpon «Man.

them, that they choulde eate:

and gauc them torne front heauen.

25 (So man dyd cate the breadof! angels: “or, pring

he fent them meate mough.

26 Me remoued the cal Winde from vnder the heauen: and through his power he brought in the south winde.

27 Je rained fleshe vpon them as thycke as dust: and fethered foules like as the sande of the fea.

28 Me let it fall among their tentes: eue rounde about their pauilions. ;

29 Do they dyd cate and were wel filles, for he gaue them their owne defive: neuerthelesse they were not alienated from their lust.

30 Wut Whyle the meate was pet in their mouthes, the heauy wrath of God came vpon them, and slue the weithpest of them: and made the cholen men ol Jlrael to stoupe.

31 FOZ all this they finned still: and beleued not his wonderous workes.

32 Therlore their dayes dyd he ronsume in banitic: E their peres in a short (trou E bloug) time.

33 When he luc them, they sought hym: they repented them, and made God their morninges worke.

34 And they remembz2ed that the Lowe °°”

was their rocke: e that the Lode most hyghest was their redeemer.

35 Neuerthelesse they dyd but flatter him with their mouth: and they made hym
à lye with their tongue.

36 For their heart was not vpright with hin neither continued they fapthfull in his couenaunt.

37 Pet for all that he beyng most merci: ful:cleane pardoned ali their mildeedes, and destroyed them not.

38 Bea many a tyme he dyd much for to represse his anger: and neuer woulde suffer his whole rage to breake out.

39 Jor he tonsidered that they were but fleshe, and that they were euen a winde that passeth away ¢ cõmeth not againc.

40 Holb oft dyd they prouoke hym in the
Wildernes:¢ greened hym in the defect:

41 They turned backe and tempted the

Lorde sand prescribed o boundes to the C2 decbrag

omnipotent.

most holy God jof Isracl.

42 Aber choughtrötofhs hande:in the day when he redeemed them fromthe enemie.

e had wrought his miracles
43 Howe) hi > (1 10

Stoan.

r ᷣͤ r -—-—-—

Moneth the xv. day.

in Egypt: and his wonders in the fielde of Zoan.

44 For heturned into blood their rivers € fluddes:fo that they might not drinke.

45 He sent aniongst them all kind of flyes
Who dyd cate them: and krogges who destroped them.

46 He gaue their fruites vnto the taterpiller: st their labour to the grashopper.

47 Pe destroyed their vines with haple stones:and their wilde figge trees with the harde frost. ö

43 He smote their cattell also with haplestones: and their flockes with thunder voltes.

49 He cast vpon them the rage of his furic, anger, dildayne, and trouble: by len-
Ding loorth euill angels amongst them.

50 He made away to his indignatiõ, c {paz red not their foule from death: he gaue their lpfe to be subiect to the pestilence.

51 Aud he linote all the first bone of E-

gypt: the first fruites of Pconcupifeence

in the pauilions of Cham.

Wut as for his owne people, he led them foorth like sheepe: and conducted them throͤugh the wildernesse like a flocke of cattell.

5 He brought them out fafelp that they shomde not feare: and ouerwhelmed their enemies with the lea.

54 And bronght them within the borders of his! lanctuarie: euen to this® moun

r oec. tapne Which his right hand purchaled.

ter Chamaan, 5 5 de dpd calt out the heathen allo before

buen. n. them: he tauled their land to be deuided among the for an heritage, t made the tribes of Ilrael to dwell in their tentes.

56 Menerthelesse, they tenpted and dilpleated the mot hyghest Lorde: & kept not his testimmonies.

ge) D:

strength,

intaning the

firit borne.

( Egyp: 52 was named of

che lonnc or

Chan.

(e) Dz hoip

n argument of the Ixxix. psalme.

Che prophete in the name ofthe Jcraelites greatly alkltcted, lamenteth at the deltruction of the temple, and ol the citie of Hierulalem done by the Heathen, andat the laughter of his people. He prayeth God atwell to take vengeaunce of the enemies in turning his dilpleature on them, as to pardon hym and his cher manytolde linnes foz his names lane, that they might praple him fo2 euer.
. A pfalme of Asaph.

Tod, erben pie
ZS tome into thyne inhe-
= SS J ritaunce: they haue defiled thy holy temple, they haue made Hieru-
8 salt an heape (of tones)

a They haue geuen the
_ Dead bodies of thy seruauntes to be nieate vnto the fouies ot the apre: and

Morning prayer.

The Plalmes.

Evening,

57 They turned backeld went astray like their Fonctathone wep started afide like a bowe that te

58 Forthey'stirred hym to auger wir “The their bygh places and prouoked ine ieloulie with their carned ünageg Bt

50 waben the Lorde bearde this hey, wethe tone fore düplcalhregt ans

comm 125 Ye ae 1 tabernarte 1

4 nilion wherin

mongle ait Ded betta

61 e deliuered his forct into captinitier and his glorie into the enemies a 105 8

62 He gane allo his people ouer tos [won 228 and was wroth with his inheritaunte. 1

63 Fire consumed his young menrand his maydens were not“ marped. 0

64 His priestes were flapne With the a sworde: and his wydowes made nolauf

65 But the Lorde awaked as though he had slept: like a giaunt making a 15 phant noyle after wine. .

66 He smote his enemies in the hynder parts: st put them to a perpetual tame,

67 Pe refused the tabernatle of Joleph: and ole not the tribe of Ephram.

68 But he chose the tribe of Juda: euen the hill of Sion which he loued.

69 And there he buylded his temple on high: and layde the foundation okit like a grounde euer to continue.

70 qt chose also Dauid his seruaunt:and

toke hym away frointhe theepefoldes.
As he was folowing the elves great

with poung be toke hym: that he might

fecde Jatob his people, and Yael his

inheritaunce. N

72 So he fed them according to the lim plititie of his heart: and guided them by the diltretion of his handes.

Schad

the flethe of thy laintes buto the beattes

of the lande. t
3 They bane theo theie blood lien 15 b

on euery syde of Hierulalem: an

is none to burie then. gur
4 We are become an open (ame wenn

neyghbours: a very scorne um 95

vnto them that are rounde 4 5 0 God

50d, howe long Wyit thou be an-
171 hail 100 ielousie burne lyke fire uer- N
6 ie pubscontebine indignation bponthe
Heathen that haue not knowen thee : and vpon the kingdomes that haue not cd vpon thy name.

on sat haue deuoured Jacob: and

* 7 icyne watte his dwelling pace.
O remember not againt bs sinnes that be past, with all speede lot thy ten-

der mercy preuent vs: for We are

ought very lowe.
. bs O Lord of our saluation for the glory of thy name: deliner vs, and

be mercpfull vnto dur finnes for thy

names fake, io Vherelore do the Heathen lay, where

Is nowe their God: letthe vengeaunce

of thy seruauntes blood that ts shed, be

rise b. amangltthe Heathen in

n Tetthe sorowfull fighing of the prisoners come before thee, accordyng vnto the greatnes of thy power: prelerue thou thofe that Care appopnted to Dye,

12 And re warde thoudurneighvours feuen folde into their holome: thetr blalphemie wherewith they haue blasphemedthee O God.

3 So we who be thy people and sheepe of thy pasture wyll confeffe thee foz euer: and we wyll alway fet foorth in wordes thy prapse, from generation to generation.

The argument of the. Xxx. pfalme.

€ Che prophete earnestly prapeth God foz to deliuer his people of Icrael out of affliction wherein they were wrapped. He recitech the benefites done vnto them, in bringing

them out ol Cgppe,as a vine of God to be planted in the holp lande. destruction ol Hierulalem, deliring that it map be reedttied.

He lamenteth tije

. qj To the chiefe mufition,vpon Sosannim Eduth, a psalme O of Afaph.

Lare O thon shephearde of Ilra-

ue nis chou that leadest Joleph ipke a

sheepe: and thou that littest vpon

doe cberübans, shew thy gratious preente

2 Velore Ephraim, wentamin, and
Manasses: stirre vp thy strength, and come for to saue vs.

3 Turne bs agayne O Lore: shewe thelight ok thy countenaunce, and we shalbe saued.

4 O God, Lorde ofhoastes: howe long

el “be angry at the praper of ple-

5, Lhoufeedett them with the bread ol teures: and geuest them plenteoully teares to drinke.

„Tou halt made vs a ltrife vnto our ln: and our enemies laugh vs

Cot: thou didst and planted tp cast out the Heathen,

Thon mane roome before it: thou

cauledst it to ta ; 15 ledthelande“ ne rodte, and it hath fi

0 The bittes were touered with her sha-

dowe: and “goodly high Cedar trees . The Cewith her bowes. 85 1

I She stretched out her braunches vn-
. fea: and her bowes pnts the © ©) Sopris

12 Why batt thou then broken downe her hedge: that all they whiche go by plucke of her grapes

3 The wylde bore out of the wood rooteth it vp: and the wylde beast of the fielde deuoureth it.

14. Turne thee agapne thou God of C hoastes I pray thee : loke downe from heauen, beholde and vilite this vine and vine parde that thy ryght hande hath planted, and the poung braunche which thou hast fortffied © fo, thy selte.

IS It is brent with fire and cut downe: they Chall perishe at the rebuke of thy tountenaunce.

is Letthy™ hande be vpon the man © ente, okthoriahthande: and ppon the lonne Ke ofman whom thou halt kontified fox eue thyne owne felfe,

17 And fo we wyll not go backe from thee: 1 reuiue vs, and we wyll call bpon thy name.

18 = Part 2 agapne O God, Lorde of hoastes: shewe the light of thy countenaunce, and we shalbe saued.

The

(c) Co thy top.

D (ih)

The Plalmes.

The argument of the.lxxxj.pfalme.

Moneth the.xvi.day.

Morning Prayer,

¶ Che prophete exhorteth the mintsters of the Churche and all other, to fet foorth Gods
| ™ prapfes with all finde of muticke, accosbing to his ozdinaunice geuen tothe Alrselttes:
God declareth his benelites to his people in deliuering them out of the thraldome of
Cappt. He declareth allo chat they ould ealyly haue cubdued 19 0 enemies, and haue their groundes and lieldes very kruitfull, it they had not ben dilobedient onto him. le Peng To the chiefe musition vpon Gittith, O of Afaph.
A ng we merplp vnto the Torde our Ikthou wylt hearken bnto me, t
, Sirenat : make a chearefull nopfe = all be no straunge God in eee vnto the Lode of Jatob. ther thalt thou geue worchip to any
Ann: 2 Take the pfalterie: bayng hyther other Londe beside me. 1 iene ng the tabret, the merie harpe, with the 10 Jam God thy Lorde which brought
| iute. - thee out of the land of Egypt: open thy
| Wlowe pp the trumpet in the newe mouth Wpde, and IJ wyll fill it. moone, euen in the time appointed: and u Wut mo pe le wonlde not heare my vpon our folempne feast day. vopce: and Ilrael would not ober me.
4 For chis was made a statute for Il. 12 So J gane them vp vnto the wicked rael: and a lawe ofthe God of Jacob. cogitations ok their owne heartes: and
| 5 This he ordapnedin Joleph fora te- I DID let them kolowe their owne ima-
[ stimonie, when he tame dut of the lande ginations. —
Feo vero ok Egypt: (where! JHcardeatongue 13 Othat nw people woulde haue Year ecm (whiche! Y Enewe nat. kened vnto nie: O that Jsrael had war ~ hicomenn ¢ Heated his shoulder froin the bur- ked in my wapes.

motion, ond

geln , then: and his handes cealled from ma: 14 J shonld soone haue tamed their eneenim king pottes. nes: and turned myne hande against dae. Thon talledst byon me in troubles, their aduersaries. 5 N e and J deliuered the: J hearde thee 15 The haters of God choulde haueben e
. out ok the middest of a thunder, I pro- founde fiers: and d their time Mould a, ae: uud khee allo at the waters of rifle. haue enduredkoreuer. . e
, Sclah. 16 He woulde haue fed them allo wirg des
Fung 3 (Chen 3 fayd) heare O my people: and the kinest wheate flowre: and J would 0e
JI wyll geue thee a charge O Israel in haue fatiffied thee with home ut olthe potefting vnto thee. sionie rocke. | |

: The argument of the. baxxij. pfalme.

@ Che prophete admonicheth all tudges and magitrates of their ductic,taping that God kitteth in the midst or then. Pe reproueththem for bniust iudgementes, and erhon tech them to do iustice, pea vnto the poore, vnto wydowes, and Co che katherlelle: for they mutt dye and make accompt ok their doynges al well as other howe great in auc thoritie loeuer they be. Cherloze confidering che great imiquttic commonlpok tudges and magillrates, he humbly delirech God him lelte to minister iultice here in earth.

gatid to moge or lle a death. us of God, and

Oo be song f Apfalme Oof Asaph. “tt
3 11 Odd standeth in the» 5 They knowe nothyns, they bnder-

5 Un eongregation of God: stande nothing: they walke on sty e bemdgethinthemidst darnnelle T wherforejall thekoundatons .

the oft ite of 1 eo of God. oftieearthbe“outofcourle. an igs Howe tong wyl he 6 J haut lade pe are gods : HDT.

| gene Wrong iudge- arechylozenof che most highell. |,
(b) Beare mentandaceeptthe 7 Wut ye hall oye Ibe a6 ae ono. Dae 90 penn selues fat
3 Judge ryght vnto the poore andfa: ipke as other dog the cherlelle: dilpatch according to iulttte 8 Arile O God, and ne. peace suche as be afflicted and in neteslitie. earth : fox thou thalt take
4 Deliver the poore and outtast: laue to thine inheritaunte. them from the hande of the vngodly. g The

J he Pialmes.

The argument of the. Nxxiij. psalme.

€

Churche. and tor them.

N ¢ e not thy tongue O Lorde:
41 7 55 not styll icilente, refraine not thy — O Torde.

For beholde, i fhe: aud ey that hate thee, haue

ted vp their bead. urhe haue DUE shrewde tounsell
” againtt thy people: and thep haue confulted against thyne, whom thou! de-

thyne enemies male an

ophete in the name of the Churche, moueth God not to culler any longer the out. bandes ofa great number ol enemies, whole endcuours be ont pe kor to delroy the the name of the chyldren of God: wherekore he witheth iu punichment

¶ Asong, the psalme of O Afaph.

dian: as bnto Sisera, as vnto Jabin a the brooke Kishon. J

Io Whiche perished at Ein Doz: and became as the doung of the earth.

11 Make them, their printes, cand nl their taptaynes:lpke Oreb, and lpke Zeeb, and lyke Salmunna.

Iz Whiche sayd, let vs take to our selues: the houles of God in possession.

XXVII.

fendest. — 3 Omp Torde, make them lyke vnto a
1 They haue laid tome, and let vs roote wheele: and as thaffe before the winde. them out, that theybe no more a people: 14. Tpke as a fire that burneth vp the C and that the naine ol Israel may be no wood: and as the flambe that tonsumore inremembraunce. meththe mountapnes. «
5 Forthey haue conspired all in one 15 Perlecute them euen fo with thy tem: minde: e are confederate against thee. pest: and make them afrapde with thy ;
6 -LyepauilionsofEponvand the FE —ttozme. : maclites: of Moab, and Hagerites, 16 Make Thame to appeare in their faces:
5 Gebal and Annmon, and Amalet: the that they may fecke thy name O God.
„„ Phllistines With the inhabitauntes of 17 Net them be conkounded and astonied
“Tyre, pu wdith feare euer moze t moze: let them kb. 3 Allur also isiopned vnto them they be put to shanie, and perishe.
E. were a great ayde to theo chyldren ok 18 And let them knowe that thou in thy er Lol. Sclah. naine“ God eternall art only: O thou “ tchoua

e But do thou vnto them, as vnto Di the most highest ouer all the earth.

The argument of the. bxxxiii j. pfalme.

¶ Che prophete like a vertuous prince openeth the finguler affection of his heart towarde the houle ol God. beyng lory that he can not come thyther through the troublethat he was oppressed. He alfirmeth them to be most happy who map be at the publique leruice in the Churche kor to prayse God. he requireth Gods mercy and fauour, that he may
5 hare to Hierulalem foz to set Cooseh his prayse: fos he that puttech his trust in God

pp. 1 b

To the chiefe musition vpon Gittith,a psalme of the fonnes of Corach.

HOW amiable are thy dwellinges: attept it for acfapec pleataunt] Well. thou God of hoastes- 7 They wyl set forward fro a stoute ©, =

ey
Wyll not be

2 My soule hath a desire and along- courage to a stoute courage: that the ung der ing to enter into the courtes of God: God ok Gods may be feene of them in wet dae go.

np heart and my flech leapeth with iop kor to goto chellanng Lobe 5 ball he probe hath founde her an hi and the lwallowe a nett: where
Heuplap her voung:euenthy aulters
PF God of hdastes, my king e my Lord.
‘ 7 7 are they that dwell in thy eee Dey Wil be alwap prapsyng
„Vlelledis that man whole strengt e lehr) wapes are in 1 17

They tourneyin ok 8 g through the vate
(at then eee When euery testerne

is filled with water) do

Sion.
8 O God Torde of hoastes heare my prayers gene carve O God of Jacob. clan. °

9 Wceholde O Tode our chielde: aud loke vpon the kate of thyne annointed.

10 Jor one day in thy courtes, is better then athoulande leis where): Jhadra-

ther! be a doore keper in the Houle of inp nae then to dwell in Large) tabernacles of vngodlynes.

HI For God be owes a sunne and a shielde: God geueth grace and worship, he withholdeth no good thyng from

them that liue in aux perfection.
D ty 12

ce Kepe the tlires holde.

Moneth the. xvi. day.

that be iuttified by Chae,

A1 God, thou art become gracious bre to thy land: thou hast brought Jacob agayne home out of capttuitie.
2 Thou haͤst forgeuen the wickednes of thy people: and couered all their sinnes.

clan.

3 Thou hast taken awa — 9 sure: and turned thy lelfe from thy

Wzathkull indignation.

4 Turne vs O God of our saluation: and let thyne anger teasse from vs.

5 Welt thou be displeased at vs foz euer: and wylt thou stretche out thy wath from one generation to another,

6 Wylt thou not turne agapne and rez her bs: that thy people may reioyte in

hee- 5

and graunt vs thy faluation,

y Dw downe thine eave O God, and

I
A
Morning prayer,

Y am poore and in nuler ie. 5

Imp 1 for: J

am holy: my God

f 55 Y saue thy seruaunt

that putteth his trust in thee,

3 We mercikull vnto me O God: for J do tall dayly bpon thee.

4 Coimort the soule ol thy seruaunt: for vnto thee OTord do J lit vp my soule.

5 Forthou Torde art good and gratious: and ok great merep vnto all them that call vpon thee.

6 Geue eare O God vnto my prayer: and be attentiue bute the voyte of my
Humble petitions.

7 Jtall vpon thee inthe day of my trou: ble: for thou hearest me.

ä N :

| ‘The Pfalmes. *
Spr
12 O God okhoastes: blessed is the man that putteth his trust meer, Feat.

The argument of the. xxxv. psalme.

¶ Che prophete maketh a publique praper vnto God, thanking hym and prapfina r ie that be hath fozgeucn the people their linnes. He prophelieth of the conmungoß 105 bp whom iustice, peace, glorp, prosperitie, and faluation commeth,

To the chiefe mufition, a psalme of thc fonnesof Comte

7 Shew bs thy loulng kindnes O God: N

The argumentof the. xxxvj. pfalme.

€ Dauid beyng fore afflicted, calleth earnettip to God foz helpe, complapning of the mit cheuous dealinges of hig enemies. Be praiseth God for his manifologoodnes and power aboue all gods of the Heather, prophesiyng that all nations chall worhip ppm.
910 ge c 93 map be taught of God, and deliuered from his enemies, that he map

q A prayer of Dauid. heare me: for can do as thou doest.

Preserue thou

u Teache me thy way D God, and J

— N
Eueni

the kruiteg of eee

8 Jwyll hearken what Gone faith : for he enen peace 17 8 people €to his faintes, that they turne not agayne to foll p. don
Jo truelp his saluation is nye them P that feare him: insomuch that dd Glog do c dwelleth in our earth. bende
10 Mercy and trueth are met together: enn al and peace haue kissedseche un Trueth chan bud out of the earth:
- and tyghteoutnes shall looke downe from heauen. 1 —.—
12 Bea, God shall geue all that is good: and our earth Chal gene her encrealt.
3 (æœuerr man] (hall cause righteoulnes to go before hin: and he hall direct his steppes in the way.

8 Among the gods there is none like br: 8 to thee O Lorde: there is not one that

9 All nations whom thou Hak made, shall come and wWorship thee O Lorde: and chall glozifie thy name. 5

10 Foz thou art great and doest wonderous thinges: thouart God aloue.

wyll Walke in thy trueth: make my gars “a one with thyne, that it may care thy name. ‘ |
12 J wyll acknowledge thee O il trip God with all my heart: and J we glovificthynamefozeucr, d ne:
13 For great is thy mercy toward Et and thou bat deimered my soule © the lowest part of) hell. aun
14 O God, the proude are rplen age me: atompanie of outragious len packes haue fought after my 1 , haue not fet thee belore their er 10 But

forning prayer.
But thou O Lorde art a God full of
1 a paflion and merep :long “per thou

be angry, plenteous tn goodues and

trueth.

Jong of

16 Turne thy face vnto me, and haue

ey vyon me: geue thy strength vn-
15 seruaunt, and helpe the sonne of

The Plalmes.

XXVIIj.

thine handniapde.

17 Shewe fome good token of thy fauour towardes me, that they Whiche hate ine may fee it and be ashamed: be-

caufe thou God halt helped me, and touiforted me.

Ihe argument of the.Ixxxvij.pfalme.

¶ Che prophete commendeth Sion the citie of God, of the holy religion that ts in it, ok tge

sitation. of the great loue that God beareth to it,

ol the noble actes done in it, and in ae

uauncing it aboue all the bingdomes of the earth. q A pfalme,the fong of the sonnes of Cotach.

D loueth the gates of Sion
1 Gan then all the dwellynges of.
Jatob: Sin her foundations are

onthe holy hilles.
2 deep eccelleut thinges are spoken of thee: O thou citie of God, Selah.
3) Pipl make mention amongst thole mai. that knowe me, ol Egypt and Wabylon : behold also of Palestina and Tyre, with Ethiopia, (and it walbe kapde] suche

q The argument of the. lxxxviij.pfalme,

Ca) here thalbe sounde

aman ts borne there.
4. Butof Sion it shalbe reported, that ade
Dery many be borne in her: and the most a highest hun felfe Chait establishe her. e
5 God wyll nuniber in the register of

that shalbe the people: euerp one that is bone fam" there, Selah. ; é 8 5
5 And the fingers alwell as the plapers ae there or instrumentes:pea al myfountaines { ate in thee, .
W

¶ Che prophete alter a most lamentable Foz, destreth God to Beare his prapers. He com ·

plapneth of his great calamities and ertreme perilles, wherin he was wrapt by licknes. bp Ieoperdée of death. and by the losse of bis frendeg, as one fo2faken of God. and with»

dut al comfort, he is loth to die, for that then he can not prayte God with the kapthtul.

1A fong,the psalme of the fonnes of Corach, to the chiefe mufition vpon
Mahalath Leannoth, a wise instruction of Heman the Ezrahite,

11 (Osodche Torde of my laluation, J

crpe day and night before thee: let

ip praver enter into thy prefence, tncline Wes cate vnto my trying.

> Fonmpfoule is full of miserie: and my life toucheth the graue.

3 Jam counted as one oft bone vnto the pit: and become a man that hath no strength.

4 am free among the dead: like such
AS beyng kylled lye in a graue, whom thou remembrest no more, and are tut a ay from thy hande. —
6 Thou hastlayde me in the lowest pit:

c darknes and lu deepenes.

em that go

ere

hyne indy ö
3 115 'Dignation lore presleth me:

tl omni. dal bered me witty all thp

set halt put away myne accuatn: taunte farre kro me, and mae 775 to be

abhored ok them: tot act ooh ew am hut vp, J can

By fight kapleth through my afflict |

am nowe

2 But buto thee do J ecpe O God: aud

on O God: Jhaue called dayly bpon thee, haue stretched out nine handes vnto thee. 5
9 @MWyltthou worke a miracle amongst the deadeor shal the dead rife vp againe
Land) acknowledge thee- Selah. . e
10 Shall thy louing kindnes be talken .: te of in the graue ? or thy kaythfulnes in
Destruction-
I Shall thy wonderons workes be knowen inthe darke- and thy righteousnes in the lande of © forgetfulnes:

e be lapde in it.
Mp paper commeth early in the mor- hermes ning before thee. ae
133 O God, why abhorrest thou my soule: and (WH Hide! thou thy face from me-
14 Jam in nuserie, J labour euen from my pouth With the panges of death: J haue suffered thy terrours, and J am styll in doubt.
15 Thyne . ban urn me: and thy terrours har ‘
* D ity 16 They

. Moneth the. xvii. day. The P salmes. Evening pay
„ .

16 They came rounde about me darly 17 Thou hast put a wap farre fr tyke water: and tonpasled me altoge- mp fkrende and neighbour: cehou page. ther on eutry (ype. tine acquaintaunte “out of fight,

The argument of the. Ixxxix. pfalme. nate

nesse.
Che prophete prayteth the inspeakable goodnes of God, lor the couenaunt made to hin a q to the elect people of God for euer. Be praplech his 5515 power, goodnes, 15 falle. . he declareth what promile God hath made to hym of his kingdome and posleritie. pe complapneth of the great spoyling of hes kingdome, and or his people. He deurelh God for his couenauntes lane, to deliuer hym out of affliction, vpon the conlideration that mang

like is verp tort.

A yl fing alwayes of
Eucning the mercy of God: prayer. wich my mouth J

2 — F0or
“Be bay shall for euer? endure: thou halt estape! vp. blished thy trueth in the heauens.

J haute made a couenaunt wich my cholen: I haue sworne vnto Dauid my seruaunt.

I wyll establishe thy seede for euer:

and buylde vp thy throne from generation to generation. Selah.

5 O God, the very heauens shall con fesse thy wonderous workes: and thy trueth in the congregation of faintes.

6 Fo who is he in the cloudes that thal matche God: land who) is like vnto God amougst the children gods:

W 7 God is very terrible in the assemblie of faintes: and to be feared aboue al them that are about him.

8 O God, Lorde of hoastes, who is like vnto thee a most mightie Torde: and thy trueth is on euerp fide thee.

The pride 9 Thou rulest the“ ragyng of the fea:
115 her waues aryle, thou delapest em.

10 Thou hast brought Egypt in so bad a cafe as ifit were Wounded: thou Hatt stattered thpne enemies abrode With thy mightie arme.

1 The heauens are thine, the earth allo is thine: thou hast layde the foundation ok the rounde worlde, and ok all the plentie that is therin.

C 12 Thou hast made the north and the south: Tabor and Hermon do reiopte in thy name.

3 Thou hast a mightie arme: thy hand is strong, and thy right hand is exalted.

14 Justice and indgenient is the foundation of thy throne: mercp and trueth shall go befoec thy face.

15 Blessed is the people that knoweth a

A wyse instruction of Ethan the Ezrachite.

trlunphant nopse: O God, they shal walke in the light of thy unftent e ae
Is They Chall make them (clues meric Se"

daylp in thy name: and in thy righte- eure oufnes they thal exalt them Kues aun,

17 Forthou art the glory of their strength: ane and in thy louing kindnes thou wylt ! Fan lift vp our hornes. Swan

13 Fozour shielde is of God:and our king is ol the mot holy of Israel.

19 Thon hast spoken fomtimes in vill ons vnto thy faintes : and 1 haue added apde vpon the mightie,

haue exalted one cholé out ok the peopse.

20 J haue founde Dauid my leruaunt:
I haue annopnted him with mpne hoipe ople. 1

21 Therforc mp hande halbe alsured Lave. om as and mine arme chall streng- 2

en hym. 2

22 The enemie Chal not be able to do him violente: the sonne of wickednesse fall not afflict hom.

23 J wyll breake into peeces his focs before his i : und owertiowe them that hate hym. ö

24 My truech allo and mymerty fhaibe
With hym: and in my name thall his

arnt be exalted. l ee sud

55 J wyll let allo “his dommuton in . 9 fea: and his right hande in the fluddts.

26 He shall make inuocatton puto 1 : faving) thou art my father O my God, and my “ fortresle of faluation. 1

27 And J will make him my first a. inbigher fate then wingesoftherh e

23 Hp mercy wyll J kee foren fan moze: and my cducnaunt shal stan with hym. ¢

29 Histeede allo wyll J make 0 1215 fo euer: and his throne as che Da

eauen.

30 Wut ik his chyldzen forsale MY 52 and walk not in mpindgemen gt u breake my ee and kept tommaundementes, ions

1 Bal tyen vikte their erage,

1 enyng prayer. with a rodde: and their wickednesse stripes. ea eucethetelle my Apen kyndnesse
; wyll not take vtterly krom hym: J n bbpl? not breake my promise with hym̃. a , J wyll not diolate np touenaunt no?
5 alter the thyng that is gone out of my

Mh har sworne once by my holynesse: lee hat J Wyll not speake an vntrueth de vnto Daud. 3

iu xg pisteede Chall endure to euer: and his

throne (halbe as the funne before me.

en, 36 (And) as the moone which Mail con-

, n eee sbalbe a faithful

, Witnesse in heauen. Selah. _

37 But thon halt abhorred e forsakẽ thine

: ànnoynted: € art sore displeased at him.

„38 Thou hast broken the couenaunt of thy seruaunt: thou Hatt dilgrated his crolwne, (catyng icon the grounde.

39 Thou hast ouerthrowẽ all his walles: and broken downe his strong holdes.
40 All they that go by the way spoyle hym: he is betome a rebuke vnto his

neyghbours.

41 Thou hast exalted the ryght hande of his enemies: and made all his aduersaries to reiopte.

42 Thou hat turned the harde edge of

Ihe Plames ye

his lworde: and thou hat not lifted him bp in the battayle.

43 Thou hast brought his (onoble estate ge e to an ende: and batt cat his throne . done to the grounde.

44 Thon hast shortened the dayes of his pouth: and thou batt couered him with a God he wel

45 OD Holve long wylt thou hyde G thy selfe : for euer: shall thy wrath Ave lyke fire:

46 Remember what J am, howe chort up tpme ts of lyfe: Wherfore halt thou 0 treated in’ vayne all the sonnes o men: nene

47 What man is he that lyueth and thal Lade e. not te death: can he delyuer his ote aua soule from the hande ok helle Sela. b.

48 Lorde where are become thy former
Olde louyng kyndnesses: which] thou dydst sweare punto Dauid by thy fayth
(that thou wouldest perkourme.)

49 Remember O Lorde the dishonour

* of thy leruauntes: J beare in my bofomie (the diconour of) all people that be nughtie.

50 Who beyng thine enennes O God do

dishonour: who do dishonour the foot-

steppes of © thine annopntend. Aae Side
5 Wlelled be God Foz euermoze: fo be it, dun, ur and so be it. e

i folofoe,,

¢ The argument of the. xc. Psalme.

@ In this praper he setteth fooreh the euerlaltong diuinitie of God and his wonderkull prouidence towardes his people. Chere is alfo a iamentation of the breuitte ¢ milerie ol this prelent lyle, the caute wherol is our linnes. For God difpleated with our wie keduesse . caufeth our dapes of this lyle to be both short and miferable, which thyng he that contidereth, yould be incited therdy ro de wile, Moreouer . there iga petition that
God woulde haue pitie of his people, in recompensing the calamitics of this like wich

felicitie in the worlde to come, sorowlull seruauntes.

and fo by that meanes he chall make merp his

JA prayer of Moyses the man of God.

Orde thou Hatt ben our habitati-
/ on: from one ge-
, neration to another generation.

moũtapnes were
U brought foorth, 02
REIS — te i a he worlde were iain Hon art God both from euer-
20 95 and allo vntyll euerlastyng.
: 1 tu man most miserable ald 0 Quit : thou lapelt also, O pe
. : nokmen returne poy into duft.
8 bathoulande peres in thy lyght are

Wefore the

but as pestarday that is past: and as a watch in the nyght. 1
5 Thou mankest them to flowe away, they are a sleepe:they be in the morning as an hearbe that groweth. “Chane
6 In the mozmpng it flozisheth and groweth vp: in the enenpng it is cut « chaundowne and Wptheren. 1
7 F02 we be consumed tlough thy dil- 2
—— i —— we are astonyed through thy wrathsull indignation.
8 Thou hast fet our nuldeedes before thee: and our fines wherof we be not priuie, in the lyght ofthy coumtenaunce.
9 FJor all our dayes do pe + 1
: ur pere ger we wende d y Awo

| a nech che. xviii. day.

10 The dapes of our peres be in all thzee- 14 Replenitye vs early in the mo

a worde. store yeres and tenne, and yf through
. strength lot nature) men come to foure
® Pomms stdrt peres: pet is their“ tolttic but © lafee bol and cate, vca moreouer it passeth
Aken n hafte from vs, and we fice from it.
Groncmeo, 11 Who regardeth the force of thy wrathfarce, fo2 cucn there after as a man keareth

thee, fo ¶teeleth he) thy displeasure.

12 Make vs to knowe fo our dayes, that we number them: and we wyll frame a heart onto; wildome.

1 Turne agapne O God (what, for euer wyilt thou be angry: and be gratious vn-

The argument of the. xci. psalme.

(che prophete declareth che confidence, trutt, fafenetle, fecuritie, and contentation ot mynde, that they haue who depende wholp of Gods gouernment a protection, tuep be without daunger in all aduertitie, no calamitie can hurt them, God inightilp prefers uech them in all afflictions and temptations. He promiseth those that zno we hym. loue bpm, and honour hym, in callyng vpon hym foz helpe in their neede . that they

aht to honour. they Hall haue long lyte in this worlde, and alter this lyle, they shalbe faucd both bodp and foule,

halbe hearde, deliuered, brou

I Holdeuer sitteth vnder the couer

a W ofthe most highest:he thal abide

f under the shadome of the alnuchtie.

2 J wyll fap vnto God, thon art my hope and inp fortresse: my Torde, in whom JJ wyll trust.

3 Jor he wyll delpuer thee from the snare of the hunter: and from the nopsonie pestilence. |

4 He wyll couer thee vnder his wynges, g thou thatt be fafe vnder his fethers: his faythfulnesse shalbe thy shielde and buckler.

5 Thou shalt not be afrayde of any ter: roux of the nyght: nor of any arrowe that fleeth by dap,

6 Mor of any pestulente that walketh in the darknesse:nor of any deadly fyt that

destroyeth at hygh noone,
Athousande tall fal beide thee, and ten thoulande at thy ryght hande: but it shall not tome nygh thee.
8 Thou only with thine eyes thait beholde: fee the rewarde of the vngodly.

The Plalthes.

15 He hall call vpon me, aud iby

Mornyng Player to thy seruauntes.

with thy mercie: and we Wyll we
1 toy, and be glad all the Davenet *

15 Make bs merp actordyngtot e bang OTH W125 vs : a dyng to the peres wherin
5 ’ we be —

16 Let thy worke appeare in thy seruduntes:and thy glozy in their ead

17 And let the giortious matestie of the
Torde our God be vpon bs: and prosper thou the worke of our handes vpon bs,
O prosper thou our handy wozke.

9 For thou O God art n hope: thou batt fet thine habitation very hygh.

10 There shall no euyll lyght on thee: neither shall anp plague come nye thy dwellyng. |

1 Foz he wyll gene his angels charge ouer thee: to kepe thee in all thy wapes.

12 Thep wyll beare thee in their handes: that thou hurt not thy foote agaynst a

ne.
13 Thon shalt {et thy foote vppon the i Lion and Adder: the voung Lion and

the Dragon thou shalt treade vnder thy feete.

14 Wetause he hath {et greatly His lane 8 vpon me, therfoze wyll J deliuer her.
I wyll fet hyn bp out of all daunger, becaufe he hath knowen uy name.

in

eave hym: pea J am with hym e wyll deliuer hym, and bryng hym to honour. lung Ut
16 J wyll satiffie hym with a . al wyll caufe hym to fee uty lalu

tion.
The

salbc destroped, and the godly Mall pro ch ipfe, is to be planted in the houle o

is A good thyng to confesse vnto a 1885 5 to {yng plalmes vnto thy name O thou most hyghest.

2 To let koorth in wordes thy louyng kyndnesse early in the mornyng: and thy trueth in the nyght season.

3 Upon an instrument of ten strynges, and vpon the Lute: vpon the Harpe with a solemne sounde.

4 Forthou God hast made me glad thorowe thy workes: J do reiopte in the
Workes ol thy handes.

thy thoughtes are very depe.
6 An bnwile man doth not eonsider this: and a foole Doth not vnderstande it.

3 7 wWwherasthe vngodly do bud bp greene asthe grasse, and wheras all workers of iniquitit do florishe: that they prot: withtandpng) chalbe destroped kor euer

and euer.
But thou O God:art the molt highert

Od raigneth, he is clothed with a glorious

77 5 N
7085 =. N
7 GON 8

x

th made the

wonde kan not be moued. Wee a ie

2 Cure ince the wonde pegan t pthrone
Dath ben fee fue : thouart 25755

Oafilict the: them noe, f.

Cain the wicked

God the Lop oflalHau ; engeaunte:

ng Lode of catty auengeaunce ewe thy ratorioug matettie, | :

¢ The argument of the.xcij.Pfalme.

seemeth that the prophete made this plalme to be song vnto the people p on the a 3 abbath dapes, fo2 to stitrre them vp the better to no we ot, and to chte Gop in 15 workes. He commendeth the settyng foorth of Gods prapyse in mulicall indrumenteg.
He relopceth much and wondereth at Gods workes. But the koole vnderstandeth not that the wicked, be they neuer lo klortunate, hall come to a wretched ende. fo2 the wicked er. Che greatest kelicitie that the int hath in
God, there continuallp for to prapse hym.

q A Pfalme, the song for the sabbath day.

O God howe glorious are thy workes-

„maiestie, God is clo-
Hed with strength: he

8 0 delrop all them that oppresse the innocent.

for euermore.

9 For lo, thine enemies O God, lo thine enemies chall perishe: e all the Workers of wickednesse halbe destroyed.

Jo But my horne chalbe exalted lpke the horne ol an vnicorme: for Jan annopnted with excellent oyle.

11 And myne eye shall see those that lye in wapte for me:myne eare hall heare the malitious perfons that rife vp agapnst me- 2

12 The ryghteous shall floriche lyke a paulme tree: and shall spread abroade

linke a Cedar in Libanns.

3 Such as be planted in the boule of C
0 : shall flozithe in the tourtes of our
Orde N

14. They shall styll bryng foorth fruite in

their age:they thatve fat and flonishyng.

15 Foz to set foosth in wordes that Godis

vpright:he is my rocke, and no iniquitie is in hyn.

The argument ofthe. xcili. plalme.

€ The prophete prapfech the mightinelle of the maiestie of god, which is declared from the beginning ol the world: partly by the wonderful continuaunce of creatures made in it, and partip by testilipng his wyll, cõmaundementes, and holynelle to his people.

lastyng.

3 The fluddes are risen O God, the ae che lylt bp their nople : the fluddes haue lyft bp their waues. be

4 God which is on high, ts moze puissaũt then the noyse of many waters: then the nughtie waues of the fea,

5 Thy testimonies are most certayue: holynesse is an ornament to thine poule
O God in all tymes.

« 5 be prophete calleth vpon cod earnettly fo2 to take abengeaunce of the wicked who rarinp, 73 t them ot soolichnelle. in that they thynke aud lay that God seeth
1 puttiypng them, he Malt caute the good to lyue bprightlp, who fpndetis no apde ae

2 WeeraltenD thouindge ofthe world: and rewarde the proude after their de-

seruyng. O God

Moneth the. xviii. day.
3 O God howe long shall the vngodly:

howe long shall the vngodly triumph?

4 All such as be workers of iniquitie:they babble, they prate stoutlp, they make boastes of them selues.

5 They oppresse thy people O God:and they affltct thine heritage.

6 They murther the wyddowe and the straunger : put the fatherlesse to death.

5 7 And they fay, tuche the Lorde seeth it not: neither Doth the God of Jacob vnderstande it.

8 Understande pe vnwyse among the people: O yt fooles, when wyll pe be weil aduised-

9 He that hath planted the eare, shall he not heare: pf he shapeth the eye, halt
Boe that ehateneth the beathen, han

Io He that t eth the heathen, sha not he punithe: it is he that teacheth man knowledge. ö

1 God knoweth the thoughtes of man: that they are but banitic,

12 Wlessed is the man O Lorde, whom

thou wylt chasten: and whom thou wylt instruct in thy lawe.

Quiet 13° That thou mapest geue hym! patiencte in tyme ol aduersitie: vntyll the pyt be

from euyll
** digged vp for the vngodliy.

aor

The argument of AP, pfalme.

¶ che prophete tirrech vp mens heartes both to prapte God for that he is che mighttelt kyng, maker of this worde: and allo to worch

is our cheephearde, and we be his sheepe. He alfo aduertileth all men to geue eare ta
Gods bopce, and without delap to be obedient vnto his wyll, lest after the example ol

Hi W fathers, they beyng dellitute of Gods lauour, neuer come to eternal nd rest.

Mornyng I

S prayer. — VN

Sa

2 Orme let vs syng
J bnto God: let vs make an heartie rciopsyng with a loude vopce vnto the rocke of our

eh) Let bs make r speede to come before his face With a tonfesfion: let vs exprefle vnto hym outwardliy a heartie

gladnesse with syngyng of plalmes.

N 3 Jor God is a great Lode: and a great

kyng aboue all gods.
4 “Subisbanve ce althe nee comers the earth: and the hygh toppes of hylles be his alfo, *
5 The lea is his, and he made it: and his handes fachioned the dzpe lande.

The P es ,

S Prayer

Euenyn

14 For God wyll not reiett His : neither Wil he forsake his inbjecitaumes F
15 or togement halbe reduced vnd tustite: and after it shall all such as be ns vpryght of heart (be iudged.) or)
16 DObo will ryle bp with me agapnstthe 8 malicious: 02 who Wyll take ppartg SS gaynst Workers of wickednelle- 80 .
* 10 : ad —. — — 15 apde vnto me: pled much but my s
3 in In gee Ge
18 Wut when JJ fayde my foote pag VKe" slypped:thy mẽrey D God helde meh a n the multttude of my cogitations
Front the bottome of mi heart:thy con: kortes dyd recreate my soule.
20 Shall the seate of wickednesle haue any thyng to do with thee:whichcleate maketh wrong to be enacted for alaw: «Vv
21 Thepflocke together agapnstthe ue u of the ryghteous: and condemne the tr: nocent blood.
22 But God is to me a

the .

refuge: and ny
Torde (5 the rocke of my confinence.
23 And he wyll recompence them their

wicke dnesse, and destrop them in thtir dwne malice: God dur Torde wyll de: strop them.

God with all humblenelle, sor that he

6 Come, et vs worchyp aud fall owe: let 5 kneele before the fate of God out maker. .

' the B.

7 Forhe is dur Lorde: aud earc te cess be his ba his pasture, and the“ Merve os of his hande.

8 To day pf ve wyll heare his Ont *
Harden not pour heaͤrtes as in thety 9 5 ee, E bt the day of tempts f. tion in the wildernelle. 19

9 Wheẽ pour fathers tempted mo pte me: vea atter they had seene mp vat

10 Fourtie peres long was 11 this
With that generation: and J 5 pat people erreth in eat and ther '

* „ 6. 1 4

iI ne Doon 3 fare in a watt mi
“that they fhoulde not enter my rest. The

The Pfalmes. | P q The argument of the. xcvi. Psalme.

ophete molt earnestip moueth not only the Itraelttes: but allo all nations

4 ad 15 the worlde, to prayse God, to glorilie God, to worshyp God, and to fet

foorth his workes. e prophecieth allo of the tyme or Cheittes commpng, and or his krngdome and gouernment.

u vnto God a newe song:sing name: bryng an offeryng, aud a1 Jfebto Sodallcdherbe in che earth. hes courtes. —
Syng ve vnto God and blesse his 9 Worshyp vou God in the malestle of
- aum toorth in wordes from day to Parte itt baton ok his face alt is faluation. . a bay a his glorzy amongst the heath: 10 Set it foosth in Wordes among the and his Wonderous actes amongst all heathen that God raigneth: and that thepeople. the worlde is {et of a sure foundation, it
4 For God is great and worthy of all hall not be remoued, he wyll iudge the papte : he is more to be feared then all people accozdprag to cquitie, gods. l 1 The heauens thal reioyce, and the C
As la all the gods ok the heathen they earth be glad:the fea shall make a noyle pe but; woles: and it is God that made and all that is therin. theheauens. 12 The fielde shalbe ioykull and all that
Honour and matettie be bekore hom: ds in it: then Chall all the trees of the pbiber and excellentnelle be in his lant- Wodd reioyte befoze the kate of God. tuarie. . 1 Foz Hecommeth, foz he commeth to
57 Gene dito God O pe kamilies of He — tudge the earth: he will tudge the world people: geue vnto God glorie € power. accordyng to iustice, and the people ac
8 Geue dito God glorie (due! vnto his ctordyng to his trueth.

Ihe argument of the: xcvii. psalme.

¶ Che prophete setteth koorth the glorte of God, and his power agapnsk the vngodlip
Gentlles, who therby, as Gods people be comforted, fo they be confounded beyng worshippers of images. He allo exhorteth such as loue God, to flee from sinne, to prapse God, and to be mery.

«

1 9 raigneth, the earth shalbe worshyp hym. N
10 the multitude of the Jles 8 Sion hearde oft, and reioyted: and albe glad ctherof. the daughters of Juda be glad, because
2 Cioudes and thicke darknesse are ol thy indgementes O God, rounde about hy: iustice and indge- For thou art a God hygher then all ment are 8 ok his throne. (that are in) the earth: thou art exalted
3 Therr gaeth a fire bekore his face: and karre aboue all gods. burneth his enemies on euery syde. Io Bon that loue God, hate the thyng
4 155 lightninges gaue a lyght vnto the which is euyll: he prelerueth the soules
Ade earth lawe it and trembled. ok his faintes, he wyll delyuer them
5 abe hylles melted lyke ware atthe krom the hande ofthe vngodip.
10 ence of God: at the prelente of the n There is sowen ã lyght for the rygh-
, Thel of the whole earth. teous: and gladnesle for such as be vpx ‘Deanens haue declared his iustiee: ryght ok heart. N
3 Cann the people haue seene his glorie. 12 Reioyte in God O pe ryghteous: and
5 10 dunded be all they that do seruite . prapse (pom at the remembraunce of conte in 5 images: and that do glorie his polpnesse.
NOS, but D © gods, pou ali (hall

The

Moneth the.xix. day.

I dg vnto God a newe n long: fo2 be hath done player TH" || Marueplous thynges.
2 SSS rANGS|| with his owne right
28 sles hande and with his

4 He hath holy arme: be “Hath
. —giotten to hym selfe the

victorit.

3 God hath declared his saluation: he
Hath openip shewed his iustice in the syght of the heathen.

4 He hath reniembred his mercie and trueth towarde the house of Israel: and all the endes of the worlde haue seene the fatnation of our Torde.

Shewe pour lelues iopfuit vnto God all pe in j the earth: make a iolp nopse,

The argument of the. xcix. psalme.

¶ Che prophete setteth koorth the exceedyng kauour ol God towardes the Alrgelttes, in that he raigned moll mightily oner them, defended them, dwelled amongst them, and most gently hearde them and their fathers callpng vpon hym kor helpe in their neede. to the great dilcouragement of their aduertarieg. noberfoze he wylleth all to prayle

God, and to worsbyp God.

a! OD raigneth, the people be in a rage: he fitteth (betweene) the Cherubinis, the earth quaketh.

2 God is great in Sion: and high aboue all people.

3 They Hall “ prayse thy name great
€ dreadtuli: (for it is holy, and a kynges

* power (Chat) loueth iudgement.

4. Thou hast ordepnedrau thynges) aren: dyng to equitie: thou hast caused iudgement and iustice to be in Jacob.

5 Magnilie God our Lode: and kneele aha befoze his footttoole, for it is

p.

ec Confeffe.

Ce) Although he be a mightie kytg, pet he vfeth no
Grannic.

¢ The argument of the C. pfalme.

¶ Che prophete moueth all the people of Bod to frequent Gods temple, and to come Oe

é op, seruyng. praplyng, and thankyng bpm.foz tha only 18 the Ged that hath made vs, and fo qraetone thine we shalbe partaberg of his be-

ther cheartully with all kynde of nelites and goodnesse kor euer.

71 1 Be Letovhuttin Gov authatvemthe earth:serue God with gladnelsse, and

10 befoze his face With a iopfull noyse.

2 We pe lure that God is the Lorde, it is

‘The Pfsalmes.

The argument of the. xcviij. Psalme.

¶ Che prophete calleth vpon all men, and alfo vpon the earth a water, and v 0 is in them, to prayse God wich longes . psalmes, a instrumentes ot maliche erpzeshint all kinde of mirth foz the finguiar benetites that he had bestowed vpon the J g

q A pfalme.

JA pfalme for to O confeffe.

Waclites,

reioyte vou chearkully, æ syng pf
6 Re uren vnto Sob coed
: ppon an har th the founde ofa pt as and With 47
7 wong er nal Wie} eee 8.
: With trum founde of (haters. ettes and e
8 111 85 0 make a noyse, and that ig ithinit: the rounde worlde, j
Merge e
9 Let the fluddes clappe their handes: and let the hylles be iopfull attoacthes before the face of God. . J
10 Foz he commeth to iudge the earth: he
Wpll iudge the worlde actordyng to tufkice,¢ the people accordyng to cquitic,

6 Moyles e Aaron among his priestes, and Samuel among such as call vpon his name: Ithete] called vpon God, and he hearde them. a

7 He spake vnto them out ol the doudy 4 pylier : for they kept his testinionies,

and the lawe (that) he gaue them.

8 O God our Lord thou heardest them,
O Lorde thou didst fozbeare then and thou tokest auengement kor their obne a Dour Torde, aud kneelt

? agnifie God ou , downe before his holy hyll: for God our Lorde is holy.

| we dur

he that hath made bs, and nol ene

ies baer his people and the Mer?

of his pasture. 4

1 7 pout way into his ce acisebus thankelgeuyng, and into h w

TE

yng prayer. ro
Wich pravle : “be thankkull vnto hym

e his nanse. ~,
40 C05 i gratious, his miercie ts

— Se

$ The argument ofthe. cj. psalme.

orth the duetie of a good ruler: declareth that in his gouernment

5 ppd be wl acknowledge Gods benefites ¢ go odnesse. He whit sud to pprightlp, to do no w2ong,o2eupll, nor to beare any malice at ali in his

ree tn employ hym lelke most zelourlie to conkounde the wicked, andto promote

aui bry

the godly and vertuous.

ing of mertie and iudgement: Z a! | le vnto thee O God pfalnies. wyll endeuour my selfe to be fully

; instrutted in the way of perfectneffe:

whenthon wpiteveome vnto me, J wil go bp and done in the middest of my
N house in the perkectnesse of iny heart.

J wyll neuer let before myne eyes any
“peuiltithe thyng: J wyll detest to do the Worke ok tranfgreffours, it hat take no holde of me.

4 J frowarde heart shall depart from me: Iwyll not once knowe [any j cupll.

Jul destroy him who priuily slaun-

¢ The argument of the.cii. Palme.

epiophete deltreth God to heare bpm, vtteryng his godiy affect and great griele fo2

$ 00 A ol the people ol God edefolation of the cftie ol Sion. We letteth koorth the reproches and outragious behaniours of sor it. He witheth that the people map return edilied, chat Gods glorie may therin be let
God, allureth hym lelle that God wyll per

chüdren of his people thatl lyue for euer.

q A pfalme of Dauid.

enerlactyng: and his trueth Cendureth! from generation to generation.

rt:

dereth his neighbour: J Wyll not suffer hym who hath a proũde lone and a great stomacke.

6 1 eyes shalbe vpõ 119 in ibe lanbe

as haue a true meanyng, that theyma Hite fit with me:be that leadetha®pertne mney lyfe shall minister bnto me. dane

7 There shallno decetpsfuliperfon haue gon cons anp feate in my houle: he that telleth ““ lpes Tail not tary long in my syght.

8 J Wyll euery niozupng destroy all the vngodly in the lande that I may roote out from the citie of God ail Workers of
Wickednesse.

the enemies, and his alllictton of mynde

e home agapne, and that Sion map be res koorth. And he contideryng the eternitie ol lourme his promiseg, in grauntyng that the

q A prayer of the afflicted when he was ouerwhelmed, and when he did powre out his petition before the face of God. “a

Eeare mp prayer
A God: and let ay my crying come in vnto thee,

Hyde not thy face rom me in 5 dap of mp distresle:

here vnto me, heare me
Orly tutheday that Jcall.
} JQ Mp dayes are confumed away like count and my bones are burnt bp as ugh they Were a frebrande. cent is mutten downe and wyeae re becaule FJ did forget
Though the no
: ple of my gronyng:
ö Sana (tate tleaue to my flethe,

und Uke an Owle that is in
; watch, and am as it were

encline thine eare

Colne lpke a Pellitane of the

a sparrowe that sitteth atone bpon the
Houle toppe.

7 Myne enemies vente me all the day 25 long: and they that are in a rage against

me co make their oth by me. (2) ateng

8 Jo: J haue eaten alshes as it were e bead, and mingled my drynke with mar dee
Weeppng, “ becaule of thine indignation e and Wrath: for thou hast set me bp, and aa on thes 3 cast nie downe. 1

My dapes fade away lyke a shadowe: and J am wythered tye gralle. 801

10 But thou O God endurest for euer: “ Sut. and thy remembraunte throughont all generations. 8

11 Thou wylt aryse vp, thou wylt haue compassion vpon Sion: foz it is 15

that thou haue mercie pon her, for the tyme appoynted is come.

12 For 199 feruauntes be ane « They pi. towarde her stones: audit en .

— a

Moneth the. xx. day.

‘The Pfalmes.

a

ng Pray

Morny

them to see her in the duff.

13 And the heathen wyll feare thy name
O God: and all the kynges of the earth thy glorious maiestie.
For God wyll buylde vp Sion: to be seene in his glorious maiestie.
15 He wWyll regarde the praper of the
* “humble deftitute of all helpe: and he
* wyll not dispile their prayer.
16 This shalbe written for thole that come after:and the people which shalbe borne, hall prayse the Lorde.
Foz he hath loked downe from his high lanctuarie: out ot heauen did God veholde the earth. f
18 That he might heave the mourninges ol such as be “in taptluitie: and delyuer rp the G children ok death.
* 19 That they may declare p name of God

C14

cc Bounde.

20 Mhen people were gathered to melden = on God: he afflin

ength in the wap,

u 0 b, he shoztened wut J fay, mp God take D

Albay in the middest of myne 1 5 Gy

foz thy veres, they endure throughout

0 e

22 Thon halt bekoze tyne layde the foun: dation of the earth: and the heaueng are the worke of thy handes.

23 They shall perishe, but thou wylt re: mayne styll: they all Hall ware olde ag pu e en, aa vesture thou

sple chaunge them, and they 0 cba W

24. But thou art, and thp peres can not faple: the childzen of thy seruauntes
Thal dwell and their seede halbe mapnteyned in thy syght.

in Sion: and his prayse at Pierulalent,
The argument of the .ciit. pfalme.

¶ The prophete slirreth vp hym kelle and all that ig within hym. to blesse God for fuch benelites as both he hym lelke and all the Ilraelites haue at his handes receaued, in that he pardoneth their linne redeemeth them from death, and maketh his holy wyll zno wen vnto them, beyng men miserable and ol a short lle. Finalip. he calleth vpon

angels and all sorteg of men with all their power to blesse God, who

heauen and earth.
A 1 B God O my soule: and all that is Within me (peavle] His Holy name. lesse God O my foute: and forget

not all his benefites.
3 Who forgeueth all thy wickednesse:

and healeth all thine infirmities.
Who redeemeth thy lyfe from destruction: (and) crowneth thee with merce and ee 8
5 Who latilfieth thy mouth with good
(O an Se thpuges: causyng thy youth lyke an“ warb Egles to be renued. au bende 6 od exetuteth iustite aud iudgement: kauen en = flo? all them that are oppressed with e Wong. pintdac. 7 Me made his ayes knowen bnto he Moyles: his workes vnto the children of Jsrael. ;
8 God is full of conipaffion and pitie: loth to be angry, andexicedyng great in mertie.

He vleth not to tontinue in chvdyng: neither referucth he (bis anger) for euer.
Jo Me dealeth not With) vs accozdpng to

our linnes: nor rewardeth vs According to dur wickednessc.

He chyde ch not to the ende.

II

uayleth to them that feare hym.

12 (Lobe howe farre distaunt the east is

Foz actordyng to the hyghnesse of heauen aboue the tarth: his mertie pre-

is kyng ol 80

fromthe Welt: fo farre a sunder setteth he our linnes from vs.
3 Bea lyke as a father pitteth bis own! chudren: euen fo is God mertilull vnto them that feare hym. N
14 Jor he knoweth wherol we be made: ¢ he remembreth that we are but Dutt.
15 The dapes of man are as (Henares) of an hearbe: he florisheth as a fowre in the kielde. *
16 Jor the winde pasleth ouer it, and itts no moze dene): and the place therot
17 Wut the niercikull goodnesse of God endureth kor euer and euer, vpon welk that feare hym: and his righteculnelle vpon childers children. us
13 Euen vpon such as kepe his 1 naunt: and thinke vpon his comma dementes to do them. N
19 God hath prepared hisseate im peau and his kyngdome ruleth ouer all.

(b) Z ret tennet he whtkte &

g in
22 Wlesse God all pouhis wozkts cue places of his dominion: O nie fort

blesse thou God.

. ‘ er.

Ihe Plalmes.

The argument of the.citij.pfalme,

eth God the creatour and gouernour of all thinges. vy whole proui cow worpebral hach the bie of the apre cloudes, angelg, earth, pilles, valleps, bend,

dence man d

dine, trees lune, moone dar nyght, and fea,

An soule blesse thou
God: O God my Low thou art become exceeding great, thou batt

sestie. J
1E 19 is dur
ö were with a garment: sprea-

tat othe heauens like a curtapne.

Who“ seeleth his vpper chaumbers
With waters: and maketh the cloudes his tharriot, and walketh vpon the wynges of the wynde. 8

He maketh his angels spirites: and

is miuisters a flaming fire.

oe 4

on

i foundations: that it tan neuer moue at

n utp tyme. 5

6 6 Thou coueredst it with the“ deepe,

ax Ipke a5 With a garment: the waters stande vpon the hilles.

7 Atthy rebuke they flee: atthe noyse of

thy thunder they bluster Done apace,

d The hilles mount aloft: and the * leys lettle downe beneath vnto t he
15 mean thou hast layde a foundation foz them.

9 Thou hast fet them their boundes which they Hall not passe: neither hall they returne agayne to couer the earth.

lo Who allo cauleth the springes which
Bh vp n the hilles:to flowe into

erluers. ‘

u Al beastes of the fielde drinke therok: aud the Wylde alles quench their third.

u The foules of the ayre haue their habitation nigh onto them: finging out of

u ebene he ple kun ah

es from aboue: thecarth is repleuiched with the kruite ol thy workes. 0 *
0 it Decaufeth gratte to growe for cattell: j erates tozthe vie of man.

IS 5 pat he may bapng “foosth foode out

% gabe earth: both wine that maketh
15 the heart of man, and oyle to malie
1175 due achearekull countenaunce, e

ves The to trengthen mans heart.
7 He trees of God be satiffied: cuen a pf ed ars of Libanus which he hath

I
7 Wher the birdes mate their neftes:

he hath layde the earth sure bpon her

in the kyrre trees the storne buyldeth.

18 The high hilles are a refuge for goates: and so are the stonie rockes for conics,

19 Me hath made the moone for tertayne sealons: and the sunne knoweth his gopug downe.

20 Thou mankest darknes anditis night: wherein all the beastes of the lorrest do go abrode. 6

21 The Lions do roare after a prap:and in seeking their meate of God.

22 When the sunne arileth, they retoyle backe: and lay them Downe to vee in their dennes.

23 Man goeth foorth to his worke: and to do his seruice vntyll the cuening,

24 O God howe manpfolde are thy
Workes:thou hak made them al in wildone, the earth is ful of thy ryches.

25 Hos the lea it elfe large and wyde in compasse: wherein are thinges creeping innumerable, both small and great beastes. :

26 There go the chippes, and there is that Leutathan: whom thou hast made to take his pastume therin.

27 hele waypte all vpon thee: that thou der

mapest geue them mate in! due sealon.

23 Whenthou geuest it them, they gather it: and when thou openest thyne hand, they are filled with that which is good.

29 When thou hydest thy face, they are troubled: when thou takest away their spirite, they Dye, and are turned agayne to their dust.

zo When thou sendest out thy spirite, they be recreated: and thou reutuest the face ol thecarth.

31. The gloridus maiestie of God thal eu: dure for tuer: God Wyll reiopee in his
Workes,

32 Ye beholdeth the earth, eit trembleth: he toucheth the hilles, and they finoke.

33 J wyll syng vnto God as long as J live: will fing plalmes vuto my Lord so long as J shall be.

34 My meditations of hym shalbe bery plealaunt: for all my toy shalbe in God.

35 As for linners they shalbe confined out ofthe earth: and the vngodly chall tome to an ende, blesse thou God O inp soule, (and prayle pou the Lorde. a E /)

XXXIII.

D

“V Vide of

handes.

(0) Acwhele or a ballan, a beast that is king of the fea for his greats esse and strength: he appear eth aa bose the top of the sea ag

mountapne.
“ Their time,

E

— — — 2 = —— —

beck the. xxi. day.

The Pfalmes.

Morning Praye
The argumentof the. cv. psalme.
© Che prophete exhorteth all men to acknowledge God. to call vpon God kor helpe

and to preache God: but elpeciallp he moueththe Itraelites to remember t made to their forefathers, Abraham, Flahac, a Jacob, and alto the benctites tha ed on them aboue all other nations. soz God had cuch care of them beyng pilgr lands that he would not tuffer anyonce to touch them pea he rebuked kinges fo
) he preserued them in kamine and other aduerlitie, as Joseph was tolde into Egypt, but it good cuceesse. The entring of the children of Ffract into appt is tet toorth and wh it had a vnto them whyles they were there. Like wile their iopkull Departing out of Egypt, their do by the way in the wyldernesle, and at length their entring into the lande of promile Where Gon placed them that they hhouta kepe his commaundementes, is most amply declared. n

ES Dnfele pou lit)
N \ buto God, call vppon his name: dale the people to

% , Deuiles,
Sing vnto hym, sing plalnies vnto

him: talke pou of

all his wonderous Workes,

all the earth.

he hath ben mindkull alwapes of his touenaunt ( kor he pronuled a worde to a thoufande generations: )euen of his couenaunt that he made with Abraham,

“Shithchak. andof his othe bnto “ Ilaac.

Hacob. 8 And he appointed the fame vnto“ Jacob fora law: and to Jsrael for an euerlasting couenaunt.

9 Saying, vnto thee J wyll gene the

Kenaan. lande of; Chanaan:the“ lot of your ins

q ee heritaunte.

düster 10 When they were a fewe men in num-

ber, and had ben straungers but a title whyle in it: and when they went from one nation to another, krom one king-
N dome to another people.

inheritances were mea-

sured.

Deen 11 Pe suffred no man to do them wrong:
= pea he reproued euen kynges for their sakes.
11 Touche not nine annoynted: and triumph not ouer my prophetes.
13 Moreoner he called for a famine vpon

ele bree the lande: and“ he made all maner of ey tate foode to fayle.

14 Wut he had sent a man before them: euen Holepl), who was folde to be a bonde seruaunt.

wy” pnderitande his

24. He lent darknes, e it was darke: and

30 Me spake the worde, and the grachob-

to seeke God, miles that God t he had bellow. imeg in korraine rtheix sanes, and

at happened

15 Whole feete they dyd hurt ¢ stockes: the iron entveD into his al 5

* wash ihr ame that bis caufe

Ithe wo expen pm, ade of the Larne nae

17 e king sent and caused hym to b let go: pea the printe of the rat aie

seman ect

I e him Torde okhis hou: ruler ofall his fnbttanmee is a

19 That he might enfourme his princes

actordingto his minde: and teache his ‘Inti senatours wyldome. ace

20 Praclatlo came into Egypt:æ Jacob webe
Was a straunger in the lande ol Cham. g

21 And he entreased his people excecdinglve: and made them stronger then their enemies.

22 Whole heart fo turned that they ha- d tedhis people: and dealt fubtily with his seruauntes. — s g

23 [Then] he sent Moyses his seruaunt, and Aaron whom he had cholen: they did their meflage, workyng his fignes among them, and wonders in the lande of Cham.

terpzctiben
Of Bhatng ditame.

© they went notkrom his wordes.
25 He turned their waters into blood: and flue their fiche. .
26 Their lande brought foorth krogges: pea euen in their kinges chaumbers.
27 He spake the worde, and therecanit 4
1 755 a 1 5 flyes: Land! pte in all their quarters. ö
28 He gane them haplestones fo2 rayne:
Cand flambesoffire in their ande. .
29 He smote their vines also efigge tram and he deltroyed the trees that were their coastes.

pain

komm nde inent, chat gung rothe,

able. pers came: €caterpilicrs imnumcrabl
31 And they did cate vp all the drag at their lande: and deuoured the tru their grounde. . 5
32 De finote al the first borne in theic lar 922 euen the first fruites of all their ene tupistence. 33 He

wing pave the

otigl tthem foorth with silda De ae was not one fee-

16 1 in their tribes. 7 bew glad at their departing:for

. COT ec imptten With dradolthem.

1 ont a cloude to be a toueriug:
35 1 geue light in the night season.

he (people) ceqtured aud he brought
36 aayles: aud he filled them with the

f heauen. a ce the rocke of stone and the

waters flowed out: fo that streames

mes.

ranne in drye places, i
38 F02 He pe bat holy worde:
(poker puto Abrahan his seruaunt.
39 And he brought foostly his people With
Be Diseboten wich a topfat
40 And he gaue them the landes of the
Heathen, and they toke to inheritaunce the labours of the people.
41 To the intent that they shoulde kepe his statutes: and obserue his lawes.
Prayse ve the Lorde.

The argument of the. cvi. psalme

Che prophete txhortech all men Co prapse God, and to do iustly. He maketh his praper, ac nowleaging his owne linnes. and the sinnes of the lorelathers of the Jlraelites, who not considering the great benelites of God, rebelled against God at the red lea. After warde in the wyldernes they did tempt God. Core, Dathan, and A biram conspiring against Moyles and Aaron, were twalowed vp of the earth. Chey worchipped a calle made of golde. Chey

murmured againt them that bie wed the land of promife, abhorring to heare or it. Chey sacrififea to Baal Peor. Chey grudged at God kor lache ol water. Finally. when theycame to the hol lande. they committed idolatrie, and al finde of wickedneg ok lie, so that they were geuen bp vnto their enemies handes, but God most mercpkulip deliuered them for his pra ·

mife fake.

268 5 god, kor he is gratious:

2 Who can expresse the

1 „ vallaunt actes of God: who can publithe abrode all his praple? N

Blesled are they that kepe iudgement:

and do tuftice at all times.

4 Rememberime O God attording to the fauour that thou bearest vnto thy people: O visite me with thy saluation.

That J map {ee the felicitie of thy cholen, that J may reioyte at the gladnes of thy people: and that J map glovie with thyne iuheritaunte.

6 We haue finned with our fathers: w haue done amisse and dealt wickedlp.

$7 Our lathers did not well conlider thy wonders in Egypt, neither did they re-

member thy manifolde great goodnes:

but they rebelle n a ted at the sea, euen at the
Neuerthielesse, he laued them for his

names sake: that he m i power to be W —＋ nae 90 0 = 1 it was
ö ed them through the

0 p aathionga wyldernelle. 7 a hesaued them from the bande of he aS hated them: x redeemed them

meee hande of the enenne.

aucem ye . the waters them left remapung e

Then belened they his wordes: and

N q Prayfe ye the Lorde.
Onkesse vou lit) vnto

fong “papfe vnto him.

3 But within a very short whyle they forgat his Workes: they wonlde not wapte for his tounsell.

14. And they were taken with a great lust in the wyldernelle: and they tempted
God in the delert.

15 And he gaue them their delire: and fenticannes withal into their soule.

16 They cnuted also at Moyses in the tentes: (and at Aaron the {aint of God.

17 So the earth opened and [lwalowed bp Dathan: and couered the company of Abiram.

18 And the fire was kindled in their tompany: the flanibe brent bp the vngodly.

19 Thep made a ealfe in “ Horeb: and
Worschipped the moulten unage.

20 Thusthey turned their glorp: into the similitude of a calfe that eateth hay.

21 They forgat God their sauiour, who

XXXII].

“His prafe

2) Th onlde not suffer God to rule then.

C

(b) De men

ina consump-

tion through

euuhumours, e

so they not estecining
Manna from heauen. Were not led, but de stroped o

tonged to cate of.

(t) To their lpuc bodpeg.
% Choreb.

(d) Their god, who was a glory and an oznament to them.

had done fo great thynges in Egypt: D

wonderous Wornes in p land of Cham,
Candi terrible thinges at che red fea.

22 Mherkore he appointed to destroypthem

had not Doyles his chofen stand in the
© breache before hym: to turne away his Wath ful indignation, lest he should destroy them.

23 Beatheythonght frome of the lande most to be desired: they gaue no credite vnto his Worde.

24 But they murmured in their tentes:

they would not hearken vnto the voyte
. of God.

25 Then lift he vp his hand against them,

to gene them an ouerthrowe in the Wil-
* E (ij) dernesse:

e) Mopseg

dode bekoze
God in his anger, as men do itande *

cache of a
8 Wall battered, for dekence ok it.

ming ed.

Moneth the. xxi. day.

dernesse: to geue their seede an onerthrowe aniongst the nations, and to statter thein in sundry landes.

26 They ioyned them selues vnto Waal
Peor: thep also did cate of the latrifites

bese te H ofthe dead. —
Houten. 27 And they prouoked the (Loe) vnto anger With their owne inuentions: and
3 à plague fell mightily amongst them. nec 28 Then stoode vp! Phinehes, he exetcus-ted tustite: and fo the plaque ceassed.
29 And that was imputed vnto hym foz righteousnesse: in generation and generatton for euermo oe.
30 They allo prouoked God) at the waͤ-
Alba. ters of“ strike: and all was not well with Moyles for their lales.
Owes 31 For they had caulede an alteration to g end be ok his pirite: lo that he spane vnaddee go. Ulle dly with his lippes. .
Ban aner 32 Mortouer, they destroyed not the Hea-
Was wont. then: as God connnaunded chem.

33 Wit they were mingled amongst the

Heathen: and learned their wozkes.

‘34. Julomuch that they dpa seruice vnto

their idols: whiche Were to thé a snare.

35 Peathey sacrifised their sonnes: and their daughters bnto deuils.

36 And they Mhed innocent blood, euen

the blood of their sonnes and of their

daughters: whomthep facrififea buto

the idols of Chanaan, and the lande

The Plalmes.

44 Bea he made all those that led them

. Euening pape,
Was defiled with blood.
37 Thus were they stayned with obnie wonkes: and went a whore © with their owne inuentions, 'bng
38 Therkore was the wrath of God Rtn:
Deledagaintt His peopte: mfonuuch that he abhorred his owne inheritaunce
5 And he aue them auer intothe hand of the Heathen: and they that dyd hate ee lordes ouer them.
40 Their enemies opprelled them: and brought them into {ubie deen ction vnder
41 Mana time dyd God deliver them but they“ rebelled Cagaing bem) tony “Made na, their olbne “< innentions: and were wee bought downe for their wickednes. 0
42 Neuerthelelle, he did beholde them in their aduersitte: in geuing eare to ther conplaint. 5
43 And he remenibred his couenaunt: and W repented, according to the multi: Nene tude of his mercles. Shai geutth de xt dur teptn-

away captine : to pitie them.
45 Saue vs O God our Torde, and gather vs from among the Heathen: that we may geue thankes to thy holp Ca name, and glory ot thy prapse
46 Blessed be God the Lord of Ilrael frõ
World to world without end: and let all people sap, so be it. Prayse pe the Loyd.

The argument of the. cvii. psalme.

¶ Che prophete erhorteth all men to prayte God, and to thanke God for ie is he that helpeth them in all distrelles when they crre vnto him. He prouideth houles and cities for them
* that eis would wander as vagabondes in wyldernelle. He fatillieth the hungry and the i thurstie. He setteth at libertie priloners and captives. He healeth the fiche and difeatea.
N f He comlorteth and helpeth thofe that be in ieoperdie of feas, He maketh a truitkull lande
Vat ren. ¢a barren grounde kruitfull. He bringeth princes to lo we estate. a letteth bp the poore in honour. t thele things the godlp reiopteth. a the mouth of the wicked is flopped,

AES Pnkesse pou lit]
Mornyng 7 A Duto God: for he rer. 1 lA ) isaeanions, ann
„ his merey endu-

e reth for euer.

: i
2 e Tet luch as God se odd redemespeake:
A — whom he hath re-

deemed kroin the hande of ye enemie.

3 Aud whom he gathered out of the

landes:from the cat andfromthe welt, fromthe north and fromthe“ south.

4 Chey went astrayont of the way in solltarines and in Wildernes, and found

c Sea, for it was ou the south part of Iurie.

no titie to dwell in: they Were hungry

and thirstie, their soule fainted in them.
5 And they try vnto god in their trouble:
Who deliuereth them krö their dilttelle.

„

6 And he leadeth them foorth by the right way: that they might go to the citie inhabited. 5

O that men would confesse vnto God his louyng kindnesse: and his naruerlous actes (done j to the chyidren of miei.

8 FJor he satisfiech the greedie soule:and fületh the hungry soule with goodnes.

9 Suche as fit in darknesse and in the shadowe of death: beyng falt bounde in nuserie and iron. 3

10 Betaulfe they“ went from the wanne ofthe Lorde: and lightiy regarded th tounsayle of the mosthighest. tho:

n Therkore he humblen their heart a rowe heauines 9 the rn. there is none to helpe 1

12 Ad they ery vnto god in their tT
Who delnereth the dutoktheir di, 70

00 Difobed ently «hand gtd.

0 ang prayer . = = 7 macth them ont of darknelle
K Foot che —— of death: and braleth their bondes in sunder. 8
Othat men would tontesse bute God: e 4 glouing kindnes and hismarueplous
) ctes done) to the chyldren ok men.

Fon he breaketh the gates of brasse:

, fntec) the barres of iron in funder. polity men are plagued for their mit cheuous wapes: ¢ for their wickednes.
V Their soult abhorreth all maner of nieate: and they be euen harde at

Spoor.

18 1210 they trye vnto God in their trouble: who deliuereth them out of their

distrellc.
9 Hefenvetl) his worde c healeth them: and he maketh them to feape fate from ct their Deozruptnes.

ae 20 O that men would tonkesle vnto God:

Fo his louing kindnes and his marneplous artes done) to the chyldren of men.

u And that they would offer (vnto him) satrikites o“ thankes geuing: and {ct foortl in wodes his Wozkes with a foyfuti nopse. 3

9 2 Such as go downe to the fea in chips

and folowe their bufines in great waters: they see the workes of God, and his wonders in the deepe.

23 Jo; he commaundeth and causeth a stozniie winde to arise: and he lifteth bp on high his wanes, ;

24. (Chen they alcende bp to heauen, and tome downe agapne to the deepe: fo
925 oe foule melteth away through

e. e '

25 They reele to and kro, and theydo stac-

ker like a drunken man: and their wyl-

dome kayleth them.
26 And they cry buto god in their trouble: who delmereththeontok their distcelle.

Al fe heart is red
„ N redye O s RA ae MG Lode: J wyil fing e
„ 0 e Deayle thee in singing h of pfaimes, pea my

, Wi and harpe: Imp lelfe
. gurke mevight early inp morning. tienen Maple thee D God among ve people: J Wyll fing plalmes vnto

The Pfalmes.

27 For he maketh the storme to teasse: that the waues cberokare still. 2

wise ey * . they are at where they Woülde be. 3

29 O that men would tonkesse vnto god: his loupng kyndnes and meruaplous actes done] to the chyldren of men.

30 And that they would exalt hum in the

congregation ot the people: and praple

him in the conlistorie of the aged.

31 He turneth C fluddes into a wudernes: and waterspringes into a drye grounde.

32 Helmaketh qa fruitfull grounde barren: for the wickednes of them that dwell therein. .

33 (Contrary ye reduteth a wyldernes in: to a standing water: and a drye ground into water springes.

34. And he setteth there the hungry: and they buylde thema citie to dwell in.

35 And they sowe their lande and plant vinepaͤrdes: and they pelde (onto them)
“aboundant store of fruites.

36 Me blesseth them, fo that they multiplie exceedingly: and he suffereth not their cattle to detrease.

7 Wut (when they do fail from God.) they

are diminished e brought low:throngh oppression, calaimitie, € griefe of minde.
38 He bringeth princes into contempt: e

he niakeththem to wander ina wilder:

nesse where there is no wapat all.

39 Bet he exalteth the poore out of miserie: and geueth him houcholdes equal to flockes ot cattell.

aboue the bea: lens [be] aboue all the earth.

6 That thy beloued may be deltuered:

saue [me] with thy right bande, and kaͤre thou mme.
* E (iH) 7 The

XXXV.

Oy

cc Fruites at

inctease,

Plone the.xxit.day. Th e Pf. nc i x—_—s

U ening pra f N
5 7 The Torde hath spoken this in his 1o Who wyll leade me into the st :
* holynes (whereof J wyll reioyte:) J tic Who wyll bring me amo Sonn 4

Wyll deuide Sichem, and measure the mm Halt not thon remoued bs fro valley of Sucoth. thence; and wylt not thou O Lowe “4
3 Gilead (haibe myne, and Manasses out With our hoastes: 90 shalbe mune: Ephraim also shalbe the 12 Geue vs ayde against trouble: for th strength of my head, and Juda my law = fauing Velpe ol man is but“ dayne, ‘ 0 gener. B Though the Lord: wyn we do baz
9 Moab shalbe my washpot: ouer €- liaunt actes: for he hum selke wil treade
Ganese dome J wyll tast my hoe, o pon Phi- do wne our enenies. a fred. llstea J Wyll triumph. f
The argument of the. cix. psalme.
@ Dauid greeuoully complapneth before the face ol God of his enemies malice and craft,
He witheth onto them the Horrible vengeaunce of Goo, vttering the caute why he so wpsheth. He requireth Gods helpe in his great milerie, to this ende, that both his

enemies might well perceaue that his helpe commeth from Gods hande, and allo that he him lelle might prayle God therkore. ; <li

To the chiefe muftion,a pfalme of Dauid.

A Heng thy tongue: O thon the 15 Let them be alway before God: that ¢
Lorde of ny prapse. | he may roote out the memorial of them
2 _ Foz the mouth of the bngodly kom the earth. andthe mouth of the deceiptfull is ope- 16 Wetause that he remembred not to do ned vpon me: they haue spoken against gaod: but he persecuted the afflicted me with a false tongue. and poore man, and hym Whole heart
3 Andthey haue compassed ine about was broken with sorow, that he night
With hatefull wordes: and fought a- take his life feoni hym. gaint nie withovt a caule. 17. His delight was in curling, and it chal
4. For the loue that J bare bnto them, happen vnto him: he loued not biel: ge they are become mine aduersaries: but ing, therforcit bath ben farre frõ him. a
Ga) ate J geue my (clfe vnto prayer. 18 Heclotheahpmieife with curling, as *.
5 Thus haue they rewarded me eupll. with his garnient: and it hath entred for good: and hatred for niy good wyll. uo his bowels like water, and like oyle
6 Set thou au bngodly man to be ruler into his bones. ouer hin: aud let Satan stande at his 19 Wetit be vnto hym as the garment right hande e that he is wrapt in: and as the gyrdle
W 7 when senteuce is geuen vpon hym, let thathe is alwap gyrded withall. hun be condemned: and let his prayer 20 Let this © rewarde be from God on cw neu: ble turned into W smne. one, to mpne aduerfaries: any vnto tholc prisoner 8 Tect hjis dayes be fewe: and tet ano- that speake euill against my soule. sopoumedis. ther talie his office, 21 But thou O God iy Lode, do vnto Y
9 - Lethts chyldren be fatherlesse: and me according Vio thy name: for fivecte his wyfe a wydowe. * th mer. , „„
10 Let his children be bagaboundes and 22 Peliner nie, for truely J am afklicted: go à Begging: and let them seene code and J am poore, and ny heart is wounmnths. lit of their ꝰꝰ barren groundes. ded Within nie. . u Let the extortioner bryng into his 23 J passe away hike a bading chadowe: snare all that he hath: and let straun- and JJ am drpuen front place to plate gers spople his labour. lIyke the grashopper. i un Let there be no man to Hebe hym 24 Dp bucegarerbeatic though kaltng e aup gentieues: nozto haue compallion any fleshe is H dryed bp for want of fat- sinister vpon his fatherlesse chudren. nesse. z Let his posteritie come to destruction: 25 Jan betome allo a reproche dnt f audin the nert geueration let his name them: te vpon me (and) fcr

be cleane put out. 7 (hake their head. 0
14. Let the wycke dues of his fathers be 26 Helpe ine O my Torde: oh laue in had in reimembraunte in the fight ok according to thy mercy. che
Sod: and let not the fine ol his mo- 27 And let the know How that thts te

ther be wypedawap, + bande: € atthouD God hal, rey

The Plalines.

rle, but thou wylt blesse: 30 As for me J will greatiy prayse Contesle.
28 panes ragainftmejbutietthem with my mouth : and 9 wyll mate onfounded, and thy seruaunt wyll hm among the multitude. .
—— A zi FOr he wyll stande at the right hande
1 — mine aduerlaries be clothed with) okthe poore:to laue him from the wind- (0 cotuue wagner cet them conerthe selues with ges ok his loule. . 4 .
Heron cõkusion, as with agarment. wudges, t I Theargumentof the. ex. psalme. i eth of Christe, detcribing most euldently both his natureg his price.
4005 ree an Mere ouerall bis enemies. N a fe
¶ Apfalme of Dauid.
Od lapd vnto the deawe ot thy byrth is to thee from
Imp Borde: fit the wombe cas) fromthe moming, thou on my right 4 God sware and he wyll not repent: B
INI? Hande, vntyll J thou art a priest fog euer after the order make thpne ene- ok Melchiledec. mies thy foote- 5 The Lode at thy right hande: wyll
N stoole. wounde euen kinges in the day ok his fas God wyll sende Math.
. the stepter of 6 he wyll iudge the Heathen: he wyll a his power out of kill euerp place with dead bodyes, he
Sion: rule thou in the midst of thyne W hn the head of a great coun: enemies. Trey. : eet, O Thy people wyll be bery wyllyng 7 Me wyll dzinke of the [wyft running ae inthe time cot hewing) thy mot migh- brooke in the wap: therfoze he wylllikt
= # tie polver with a beautifull holynes: pp his head. 5

Ihe argument of the. cxi. psalme
¶ The prophete prapleth God, he rehearseth the wonderous workes that God mindkull ol his promise) dyd to the chyldren of Irrael, bringing them out ol Egypt to pollesse N the lande ol promise for an inheritaunce. He declareth allo that the high wyldome of man is to feare God. a
Prayse ye the Lorde.

11 | ut e prapse God with my whole _ force of his wozkes: in geuing them the a. I heart: in the congregation and assem- inheritaunte of the Heathen. blie ofvighteous men. 7 The workes ok his handes are bert: W
2 Great are the workes of God: sought tie and iudgement: all his commaundedut of all them that haue plealure ther- mentes are e true. Cb) Certaine in. 8 They be fet sure for euer and euer: n his worke is glory and matestie: and they are done in trueth and equitie. his righteoulnes endureth for euer. 9 He did sende redemption vnto his peo-
4 Themerciful and gratious God: hath ple: he bath tommaunded his couesolefta remembraunte of his meruapyW- naunt (to be] for euer, Holy and terrible lous workes. is his name. N
5. he hath geuen meate vnto them that yo The beginning ok wyldome is the on him: he wyll euer be mpnotullof kfeare of God: all they haue a good vn-
, his touenaunt. derstanding that do his commaunde-
He hath declared vnto his people the ments the praise of it endureth for euer.

Che propreter The argument of the.cxit.pfalme
Lophete setteth fooreh the teucitie re warde, and properties or them that keare
Godand worthip him: tuche b brigodip feeth with bis great grieke.
Prayse ye the Lorde.
1 Bhenedtsthemanthatkeareth Sd 3 Wiches and plenteoulnes shalbe in his mann est t in his come. 997 and his righteonsnes endureth
’ U ‘ 02 euer. s 4 . 1 ; 2 om leede halbe mightie vpon the 4 There w arileth vp light in the dark- ae, dwel pee generation of them that nes: vnto them that deale vpeightly he asl brightly, halbe blelled. is mercikul, and louing, and righteous.
; E (iitj) 5 Agood

Moneth the. xxiii. day. ‘The P {: almes.

Mornin 8 praye,
A good man is mercyfull and lendeth: keart: vntyll he seeth camischse
* hewellgupde his wondes Wich aifere: ppon his enennes-. ch otal tion. 9 «© He hath distributed abrode, he path
6 Fonhe shalbe neuer moued: and the geuen to the pore: his righte cunts righteous shall be had in an euerlasting mapneth for euer, his who ze th albeer: remembraunce. 1 alted with glorv. const
W 7 he wyll not be afralde of any euyll ti- 10 The vngodly chan see it, and it in binges: his heart is feted, he beleueth greeue hym, he wyll gnathe with his in God. teethe and consume awap: the defire of
8 Mis heart is strengthened, he will not the vngodly shall perishe.

The argument of the. cxiij. psalme.

¶ Che Prophete exhorteth all men to prapse God in conlideration ol his proutdence in heauen and earth who promoteth the poore man to honour, and maketh the barren woman a merie mother. q Prayfe ye the Lorde.

aA} Perg God ye seruauntes: prayse ve humbleth him selfe to beholde the thinthe name of God. ges that are in heauen and in earth-
2 Wlelled be the nameok God: from s Pe rapleth vp the simple out of the this tine foorth kor cuermore. dust: and lyfteth vp the poore from the B
3 The name ok God is to be prapsed: dounghyll. from the rising vpof the sunne, vnto the 7 For to make him sit with the printes: goyng downe of the fame. euen with the princes of his people.
4. God is high aboue all Heathen: and 8 Pe maketh the barren Woman to kepe his glory abouc the heauens. Houle: and to be atopful mother of chit:
Who is like vnto God our Low that dren. Prayse pe the Torde. dwelleth on hygh aboue all: and pet

The argument of che. xi. psalme.

@ Che prophete declareth the comming and deliuerie ol the chyldren of Flraet out of
Egypt, he declareth also the miracles worked kor that purpole, 3

hen Piracl came out 5 What apleth thee O thou fea that
Aok Egypt: e the house thou fleddest- and thou Jordane that of Jacob from among thou walt driuen backe- . the“ barbarous peor 6 . Bemountaines What carted] pouthat B ple, pe skipped lpke ranimes: and pe litle
Juda was his holy- hilles like poung lambesnelle: and Jlrael his 7 Tremble thou earth at the prelence of

Ca) A people
Hauing a aunge tonguc to,the 2 ewes.

dominion. N the Lorde: at the presence of the Lordt
3 The sea sawe that and fled: Jordane of Jacob. ; was driuen backe. 8 Whiche turned the harde rocke into a
4. The mountaynes skypped tyke landing water: and the flint stone into e the litle hilles like poung aspringing well of waters. an 2 5 : *
The argument of the. cxv. psalme.

¶ Che prophete wicheth all glory to be geuen vnto God, and not vnto man. He letteth

foorth the difference bet wirt the living God and idols. He exhorteth al the people and

ae to put their whole trutt in God, by that meanes they and theirs shalbe foz euer
U 5 * ’ he

A 1 Eue praise not vnto vs O God, not 3 Truely dur Lorde is in heauen
Goat bs,butbntothyname:forthy hath done whatsoeuer plealed e louing mercy, and for thy truethes 4 Their idols are siluer and gold:

Me. the workes of mens handes. Pact:

2 woberforethaithe Heathen say:where 5 They haue amouel and spea
Snowe their God- a they haͤue eyes and tec not. Ther

They haue eares and heare not: hep

es and sinell not.
Ther baue handes and handle not,
5 Jshep haue keete and Walke not :and they piter no lounde out of their thzotes,
They that make them are lyke vnto

l them: enerx one that putteth his trust

n them. ö ieee gtcael trust thou in God: he is their apde and their shielde. 8 o Pe houle of Aaron trust pou in God: heis their ayde and theix shielde.
Pe that feare God, trult pe in God: he ts their ayde and their shielde.

» edTevs: he pl blelle the Houle of HE

IR Haue loned: bez
J canle God hath

b hearde my vopce land mp prapers.
Wecaule he hath
Jenclined his eare
(i Ne vnto nie: therfore

wey 2 Iwpll call vpon e hym as long as

The snares of death tompasled me raunde about: and the paynes of hell take holde on nie.

4 Jlounde angulshe and heauinesse, but

called bpon the name of God: taping]
O God,F beleche thee deliner my lonle

5 Gtatious is God and roghteous: our

7 mercikull. '

gardeth the simple: J was baught to the 2

ine he extremitie, and he pre eturne O ny soule vnto thy rest: fo
God hath rewarded thee, us ton Reer hast deliuered my
105 om death: myne eyes front ares, and mp keete from fallyng.

4 Prayse God all 140

* Ops alive “nate prapse
% his merelful kyndnelle is

The Pfalmes.

pach ben myndfull of vs he wyll

rael. he wyll blesle the house of Aaron.
He wyll blesse those t the mall with cher 7 e
14. God wyllenereale you more and moze:
5 pig) nebitie Pout Childe,
2 ed of God: whi heauen and pi od Mende
16 G 105 whehe te Beauen (3 kap] is
: geuen the earth vnto the childreu of men. b
17 Thee dead prayse not thee O Lorde: neither all they that go downe into the
[place] of scilente.
18 Wut we wpll prayse the Lord: from this tyme foorth for euermore. Prayse pve the TLozde.

The argument of the.cxvi. psalme.

¶ Che prophete sapth that he mul nedes loue God, kor that he heard hym and delivered

hym out of wonderkulertreme afflictions of death and heil. He acknowledgeth the

bencfites of God, and that he can geue no re warde kor them but bare thankes when bheis in the congregation, and in worchyppyng hym all the apes of his lyke.

9 J wyll walke before the face of God: in the lande of the lyuyng. —

lo J belened, therfore J wyll speake:
FA sore afflicted, insomuch that J

aid in my rashnesse euery man is a lper.

II What re warde hal J geue vnto God: for all the benefites that be hath done vnto me-

Iz J wyll take the W tuppe of saluation: and J wyll call vpon the name of God.

33 J Wyll pay mp vowes nowe vnto
God: in the peefence of all his people.

14 The death of his saintes: is precious

in the eyes of God.

15 It is enen fo O God, for Fam thy sernaunt and the sonne of thy hauden : thou batt loosed my bondes in under.

16 JJ wyll offer vnto thee the facrifice of thankesgenyng: and J Wp! call vpon the name of God. 7

17 I wpyll pay my bowes vnto God in the sight ol all his people: in the tourtes of Gods Houle, euen in the myddest of thee O Hierulalem. Prapse pe the
Lorde.

Sa The argument of the. cxvij. psalme.

N me Pophete erhozteth the Gentiles to prayle God, for that he bath extended his die Dpon them in Chrilte, al well as bpon the Jewes.

: and euer moze and more towarde bs: an the trueth of God endureth for euer.

Prayse pe the Lorde. The

XXXVII.

C

(a) God dweileth in heaaen, and nedeth not the earth for his

vle.

(b) The dead prayseth not
God foz the beuefites powzed Daplp vpon tle erth for them: as they that be alpuc do, oz
Ought to do.

(a) That
God hath de-
Hiuered me out ok troubles.

Cb) cup, in token of my delmeraunce.

Moneth the. xxiiii. day.

A 1 Conkesse vou s it) vnto God, for he is gratious: and his mercie endureth for euer.

2 Tet Ilrael nowe conlesse: that his mertie endureth for euer.

3 Tet the boule of Aaron nowe confesse: that his merece endureth for euer.

4 Let them nowe that feare God: confelle that his mertie endureth for euer.

5 A called vpon the Torde beyng in distresle: and the Lorde hath hearde me at large.

6 God is with me: J wyll not frare what man can do vnto me.

8 7 God is with me amongst them that ayde me: (thertore] I (hall fee (my delire vpon them that hate me.

3 It is better to trust in God: then to put any confidence in nian.

9 Itis better to trust in God: then to put any confidence in princes.

10 All uations compassed me rounde about: (but 3 trusted in the name of God that J Moulde destrop them.

11 They kept me in on euery (pode, they kept me in J fay on euery syde: (but trusted) in p name of God that J shoulde destroy them.

11 They swarined about mie lpke bees, and they be extinguished as the fire made j of thornes: (for 3 trusted) in the name ot God tm should destrop the.

13 Thou hast thrust fore at me, that J might fall: but God dyd ayde me

C 14 The Lorde is my strength and my fong: and he is betome my saluation.

15 The voyce of à iopfull noyse æ of laluation is in the dwellynges of the ryghteous: (faring the ryght hande of God

ss” Fon

¢ The argument of the.cxix. Pfalme.
¶ che prophete in this golden pralme, exprelleth his earnest mynde inflamed with a selous delire of Gods lawe: kor that it is the light of man ¢ of all his doynges . it geueth allo pets fect wifdome and Eclicitie to such as oblerue them, wherkore he delireth God to open 05 epes ok his heart, that he map knowe. bnderitande, learne, and in ipke erprelle bisholy commaundementes. He vttereth his great griele. in that be feeth them trantgrelled and
Aleph.

contemned of the worst fort of men.

Gea Telled ave hole that
Be || be perfect in the way:

wWalkyng in the lawe

9 of God.

r 1 Vlessed are they that

kepe His testimomes:

they seke hym with

| [De

‘The Plalmes.

The argument of the. cxviij. Psalme. —

¶ Hauid woulde haue God praysed and thanhed . sor that by his meanes onty he was deliuered from extreme perilles. and made kyng ol that people, who with their kyng had alittle befoze persecuted hym. reiect hym. and droue hym out of the realme. wylleth the priestes to facrifice in remembraunce therok.

Mornyng Prayer,

Be

bryngeth mightie thynges to passe. eee od bryn i

14 alm to passe. 6

yall NOt (48 vet dye, but I chal liue:

a J wyll detlare the woßhes of the

18 The Tode hath greatly chattene me: but he hath not n —

19 Open ine the gates of ryghteoulsnesse,
FJ wyll enter in by them: that J map
“ gene thankes vnto the Lorde.

20 This is the gate of God: the ryghteous {hall enter in by it.

21 JYwyll“thanke thee forthat thouhast „Cat heard me:and art become my saluation. D

22 The fame fone Which the buylders refused: is betome the head stone of the corner.

23 This was the dopng ol God: and it is marueplous in our epes.

24 This is the day whiche God hath made: we wyll reiopte and be glad mit.

25 O God J pray thee nowe sauecbs ):
God J pray thee nowe geues vs) prosperous lutcesse.

26 wlefled be he that tommeth in the name of God: we do blesse you out ot the house of God.

27 It is the Lod God who hath geuen vs lyght: bynde a sacrifice with codes vnto the homes of the aulter. }

23 Thou art my Lorde, and J Wyllconfelle it vnto thee: thou art my £0700 and J wyll mägnille thee. 3

29 O donkelle pou cit) nto God, for ba gratious: and his mercie endureth to: « f. euer.

© Coasesi

ep their whole heart. 5
3 Truelp they walne in his waves who do no wickednesse. t we
4 Thou hast geuen charge: OF ante shoulde diligently kepe thy com dementes. —
5 J wishe chat ny wapes were DIET

take then no shame: when
: ff regande vnto all thy tommaunde-

4 i plconteft it) vnto thee with an

erby (hall a poung man reat W buertcbistay-enentngubing itaccozdyng to thy worde.
2 Jhaue sought thee with my whole heart:suffer me not to swarue from thy commaundementes.

Jhaue hyd thy wordes within my heart: for this ende, that I shoulde not linne agapnst thee,

Blesscd art thou O God: teache me

The PR

Imes.

learned the tuagementes of thy rygh-

teonsnesse.

3 „J wyll kepe thy statutes: wherkore forsake me not ko anp long tyme, ‘

Beth

thy statutes.

XXXVIII.

nyng prays
| 115 aepethp fatates. vpryght heart: when J chall haue

5 J haue declared with my pppes: all 5

the mudgementes of thy mouth.
6 Jam delighted in the Wapokt

hy testi-

Mauies: as in all maner of riches,

7 FP Wy"! fudy thy commaundementes:

and J wyll consider thy wapes.

8 My delyght thaive in thy statutes:and

I wyll not forges thy worde.

Gimel. proude and tursed: who do erre from

At peor seruaunt, let me lyue: and J wyll kepe thy worde.

Open thou nipne epes:and J will beholde the wonderous thynges of thy lalbe.

Jama straunger vpon earth: hyde not thy commaundementes from me.

4 My sonle fapnteth:for the very feruent delire that it hath alwape vnto thy sudgemeutes.

5 hou halk rebuked thole that be

41 M. soule cc cleaueth to the dust: relg Wogen me accordyng to thy lode.

2 Jhaue made a declaration to thec of ty Wayes, and thou heardest me: O keache me thy statutes.

3. Gake me to vnderstande the way ol thy commaundementes: and J Wyll geue my (elée to the meditation of thy

a wonderous workes,

Yi] tbe wap of thy

statutes: and wyll kepe it puto the ende.

Geue ine vnderstanding, & Y wil x ; J yl abivea
Lith mp whole ae Wyll kepe it

fi ethevinis my delpght.

Leave me = dementes: far Pe path OF thy tömaun-

thy conimaundementes,

6 Withdrawe from me reproche and con: 5 tempt: for that J haue kept thy tet:

monies.

7 Hea princes dyd syt and speake agaynst me: but thy seruaunt did geue hym lelke to the meditation of thy statutes.

3 Bea thy testimonies are my delyght:

and my“ counsaplers.

Daleth nesse:tomlort thou me actordyng to thy
Worde.

cc Men of my coune say le.

5 Lakefrom me the way of falshood: € 5
Witlafe me worthy to haue thy lawe.

6 J haus cholen the wap of trueth: c J

Hane lapde thy iudgementes before nic,

7 Jhaue tuck tast vnto thy testimonies:

O God conlounde nie not.

8 J wyll runne the way of thy com-

my heart at libertie.

maundementes: when thou shalt lee y loutemetteth away kor bery heau- 1

He

4 Encline myne heart vnto thy testimo- B

nies: and not to touetousnesse.

J 5 Turne away mpne eyes, lett they be-

holde! vanitie: caufe me to lpuc in thy Rage

Wap.

doynges,

6 Make thy worde moze “euident bnto e Toarife, thysernaunt: who is geuen to thy feare,

7 Lake away the reproche that Jam
Afvaide of: for thy iudgemẽtes are good,

3 Behold F hauc toueted after thy come maundenientes: caule me to lyue in thy

ryghteousnesse.

Vau

Moneth the. xxv. day. 1 he Pfalmes. Vlornyng praye

11 Etthy louing mertie also tome vnto for euer and euer. me O God: euen thy saluation, al- 5 And J wyll walke in ac large stopt:
A tordyng to thy worde. for I seke thy connnaundementes. G

2 And J Chall aunswere to hym that 6 bd ah also speake of thy tetimonieg 8 layeth (ehr) worde to me for a reproche: bekore kinges: r J will not be achamed 5 for in thy worde J haue put my trust. 7 And my delyght chalbe in thy com:

3 ake not the Worde of trueth vtterly maundementes: which J haue loued. out ol my mouth: for np hope is intho 3 And J wyll lpft vp my handes vnto tudgementes. thy tommaundementes Which J haue

4 And J wyll alway kepe thy lawe: yea loued: Emp study chalbe in thy llatutes.

ö Zain
A1 jae myndfull of thy promise made my nelle. ae. vnto thy leruaunt: wherin thou hast 5 An extreme bunaturall heat hath at taused inte to put mp trust. layled me. betaule of the vngodip: Who d

2 That same is my tonikort in my afflit- transgresle thy lawe.

tion: foz thy worde maketh nie to lyue. 6 Thy statutes haue ben my qsonges: in
The proude haue had me exteedingly the house of my pilgrimages.

in derilion: pet J haue not thanked 7 J haue thought vpon thy name O

krom thy lawe. God in the nyght season: and J haue
(or} J called to remembraunce thy kept thy lawe.

{udgementes from the begynnyng of 8 This tame to passe for me: betause

the worlde O God: and so Jtomforted J kept thy tommaundementes. Na

Heth fic.

al 12 art my portion O God: J their snares: but J haue not forgotten haue purposed to kepe thy lawe. thy larbe.

2 I made mpne humble petition to 6 J wyll ryse at midnight to confesse me zz thy fate with my whole heart: be mer- buto thee: betause of thy ryghteous cifull vnto nie attording vnto thy word. iudgementes.

3 Phaucconhdered mine owne wapes: 7 J am a toimpanton of all them that and J haue turned my leete vnto thy keare thee: and kepe thy tommaundetestimonies. mentes.

4 J made hate and J made no delay: 8 The earth O God is replenished with fo2 to kepe thy tommaundementes. thy louyng kyndnelle: O teache me the

© eS ©The bugodly haue tangled me in statutes.

vngodip haue

7 caught me. Teth.

A1 God thou halt dealt grattounye 5 The proude haue forged a falle tale

O With thy leruaunt: atcording vnto agaynst me: but J wyll kepe thy tomthy Warde. maundementes With my whole heark. 33

(O Chet 2, Tearue me theco good taste e tunning: 6 Their heart is as fat as brawne: but

late. for: J haue beleued thy commaunde- my delpght hath ben in thylawe.

mentes. 7 It is good for nie that Tam Mann

Wefore J felt affuction swarued out into milerte: by that meanes J Wa

ofthe wãy:but nowe Pkepethy word. learne thy statutes. or

4. Thou art good and beneficial: teache 8 The latoe of 5 mouthls der dauer

me thy statutes. to me:then thoulandes of golde e lutte

Prayer.

Iod a
4 es Ahr handes haue made betause J haue geuen earnelt atten
Euenyng = ae me and kachionedme: — DaUMCe Dnto thy wonde.

tes
Iigeue me vnderstan- know God that chy ogee ding and J will learne ; ee tustite:and that thou batt caultd me
Aschptömaündementes. ryghtkullp to be afflicted. mundnelle
They that frare thee, 4 Jbeleche the let thy outs ny a
“(halt {ee me, e reiopte: be a meanes to comt̃ort me: 10

ag praper orde polen vnto thy seruaunt.

—— pitfall mercies conte vnto m y that J may lyue: for thy lawe is nip

delyght. F
‘et the proude be confounded,fo2 they
5 vane fal reported me: but J wyll

Ann aph

IS foute hath faynted after thy lala1 Mur

nation: J geue earnest attẽdaunte

ne eyes haue fapnted after thy
4 wüde Hie lap, when wut thou

nie. :

40 un become like a bottel changed in the oke: vet J do not forget thy tlutes. 5 Ve : othe manp are the dayes of thy sernaunt- when wilt thou geue iudgement

agaynst them that perlecute me-
„ O God: thy worde endureth fo euer

A” Oaheauen. rit i
Thy tructh sappearethj to euery

generation: hou balk layde the founda-

Honorthe carth, and it Call continue,
KAltthenges coutinue this day detordrug ta hine ordinaunce:for all thinges be thy seruauntes.
& J hende ener not ben in thy lawe: choulde haue perilhed in myne affliction.
Juvyll neuer forget thy commaunde-

Ihe Pfalmes. -

rig

oe 2 —

xxxix.

study thy commaundemcutes,

et {uch as keare thee and knowe thy

moni 15 eturnẽ vnto me. —

3 Let myne heart erfettlyc tet in thy statutes:that Abe notachamed. “4

„ 0 9

5 The proude haue digged res foo me: which is ca thing noe one agp
6 All thy commaundementes are t trueth it felfe : they wrongkullp persetute me, O be thou my apde.
7 They had almost made an ende of me ppon the earth: but J forsolke not thy conimaundementeg. a 5
8 Make me to lyue atcordyng to thy „Vicken piette : and I wyll kepe the testunonies ol thy mouth. '

Lamed wi

mentes: for through them thou hast remued me. N 5 0

6 Jam thine, saue me: for IJhaue diligently “ studied thy tonunãundementes ouer. d

7 When the vngodip layde wayte for me to destroy me: J endeuoured my selfe to vnderstande thy testimonies.

8 Flee an ende ok euery thing be it neuer so perfect: but thy tommaundenent is ch excecdyng large.

pita) cc Searched.

(8) Infumte, ö

Mem

＋Owe greatip do Ploue thy lawe-
4 Hag at 209 foue thy ta
2 Thou hat made me Wyler then mipne enenries dementes: fo2 they are euer with me.
Jam able to geue better inftruction ena they that were my teachers: fo lesinonies are my study.

au made to vnderstande more then

aged can: betause Z maundementes. Dept thy com

by worde is a scandeil vnto my fete: and a lyght butomp pathes,
J haue made an
J gabe ich z Wil ratifie)for to kepe thy tulte iudgentes.

mentes.

though thy tommaun- .

4 Let

5 Jhaue restrapned my feete from euery eupll way:that I may kepe thy worde.

PH bane not Hunted from thy iudgementes : for thou didst teache me,

Howe sweete are thy wordes vnto my throte: truely (they be kweeter) then hon is to my mouth. ;

Through thy commaundementes J get vnderstandyng: therfore PH Wate ali wapes of falfhood,

Nun =" - 1

3 Jam troubled aboue measure:quicken

nie O God accordyng vnto thy Worde.

the freewyll offerynges of my mouth please thee O God: and teache 8 me thy indgementes.

5 Oy soule is M in my hande: yet eae

J do not forget thy lawe. rw

6 We vngodly haue lade a snare fo:

me: but pet J Nvarucd not N at

Moneéth the.xxvi.day. lhe E salmes. Mornyng pray l. tommaundementes. 8 haue applped mpne heart fo: to

7 J haue clapmed thy testimonies as kulkyll thy statutes:euen to the mil heritage for euer: for they are the Wende. 2 he wonldes very top of myne heart.

Samech

1 | pate hygh sudtile devices: and J do 5 Polde thou me vp and J chalbe fare. at Lock thy lawe. and J Will loke lady by 5 ae fea
2 Thou art my refuge and mp shield: alwayes. J My 2
J geue carnest attendaunte vnto thy 6 Thon hast troden onder foote au them
Worde. that go astrap from thy statutes: fo,

3 Anoyde from me pe malicioussperlons:] their crafty deuice is but falchood. and J wyll kepe the tommaundemen- 7 Thou hast dispatched out of the wap. “Thong tes ol my Lode. all the bugodly of the earth lynie drosle: warn
4. Strengthen me in thy worde and J therkore J loue thy testtmonies. . shall lyue: and make me not ashamed 8 My fleche trembleth for feare of thee: of my hope. and J am akrapde of thy iudgementes. a Ain
A 1 | Rave executed iudgement and iustite: 5 Jam thy seruaunt, graunt me bnderwherfore] leaue me not to such as do tandyng: that J may knowe thy tet: 5 offer ine Wong. monies. ; N.

2 For thpowne goodnesle sake take thy 6 It is tyme for sme) to do for Gong 98 seruaunt vnto thy protettion: let not the taule: for they haue brought thy lawe eve proude oppresse inte with wrong. almost to nothyng.

3 Myne epes haue faynted with lokyng 7 Therfore J lone thy commaundefor thy saluation: and for the worde of mentes:aboue golde and precious fone. thy rpghteoulnesse.] 8 Therkore J take all thy commaunde-

Deale with thy seruaunt accordyng nientes euerp one ot them to be ryght: vnto thy owne louyng kyndnelle: and F EF btterip hate all wapes of falshood. teache me thy statutes.

Pe

yt Te testimonies (contayne} wonder- 5 Direct my steppes in thy worde: and z full thinges: therkore doth my soule „ fo Hall no wickednesse haue Dominion kepe them. 5 duer me. —

5 2 Thee lirst entering ok thy wordes wil 6 Redeeme me from the kraudutent
Thedoore illuminate:geupng önderstanding euen dealpng of men: and J wyll kepe thy vnto the simple. tommaundementes.
3 Jopened my mouth and panted: fox 7 Make the lyght of thy countenaunte bate a great affection to thy com: shyne vpon thy leruaunt: and teache me maundementes. thy statutes. iv
4., Loke thou vpon me and be mertifull 3 Vyuers of waters gulhe out of mpne vnto nie: as thou vfest to do vnto thoe eyes: betause men kepe not thy lawe. that loue thy name. Te
Sade

At O God: thou art iust and vpryght in 5 one ken and of no reputation: dert) a

thy indgementes. o not forget thytõmaundemente 1

Thou Yat commaunded the 6 Thy ryghteoulnesse is an eue kae. 5 sustice and the veritie ok thy testimonies: righteoulnelle: ¢ thy lawe is the ae to be obserued) very strapghtly. 7 Trxouble and grieke haue taken sas :

3 My zeale hath tonsumed me: because ppon me: pet thy commaundeme mpne aduersaries Hane forgotten thy be my delyght. monies wopddes. s The riahteoulnesse of thotca g ande

4 Thy worde is purified to the vtter- [is enerlastyngenake me to bnder

moft: and thy seruaunt loueth it. them) and J chall lpuc. Coph

ec ghee

aue called with mp ey whole heart, heare me O God: F wyll u kepe thy statutes.
= | HY haue called vpon gthee, saue me: and J
Wyll kepe thy testi-

pa preuented (other) in the daw-

ny fo?

FJ gee earnest attendaunce vnto andes. N
4 10 — eyes haue preuented the nyght

The Pfalmes.

Coph

J 5 ap, and I tryed vnto thee: ere ae 8 As concernyng thy

6 „* watches: that my udp mia ne whet in thy wordes. We vmight be wholy

5 Peaͤre my voyee accordyng to thy loz 2%

ning kindnesse make me toy ue
After thy iudgementes. ee

They that mynde to do an att of nulchielenesse, do drawe nye Dito me: they are farre from thy lawe.

7 Wut thou art nye at hande O God: and all thy comaundementes be trueth.

testimonies: J

haue knowen long fince that thou halt

made them to last for euer.

Refh

olde myne affliction € deliuer me:
1 Bre IJhaue not forgotten thy lawe.

> Dekende thou np tause t redeenie me: make me to lyue accordyng vnto thy worde.

Saluation is farre from the vngodlp:

for they study not thy statutes.

4 Thy mercies be mantfolde O God: make ine to liue accordyng to thy iudgementes. *.

There be many that do persecute me

“As >

11 Pümes haue persecuted me without alaule: but my heart hath stoode in ni abe ofthy wWornes,
1 Jamas gad of thy worde: as he that
 — fyndeth a great bootie,
That Which is kalle J hate and abhowe: but thy lalve J vo loue.
4 J do papse thee feuen tymes euery
1 1 loue or the iudgementes of thy

They that loue thy lawe shall haue

and be myne aduersaries: pet J do not
Warue from thy testimontes.

6 J lade tranigreffours, and J was grecued at the heart: becaule they kept not thy lawe.

7 Beholde howe F loue thy commaun-

dementes: quicken me D God accordyng to thy louyng kindnesse.

8 The, beginning of thy wow is trueth:

and all the iudgementes of thy ryghteoulnesse endure for euermore.

Shin

XXXX.

“¢ Head,

great“ prosperitie: and w nothpng thatl „ Peace

offende then,
6 Torde, J haue wayted after thy salua-

tion: and J haue done thy commaun- W

dementes.

7 My foule hath kept thy testimonies:

and J haue loued them exteedyngly.

8 J hane kept thy tonunaundementes

and testimonies: for all my Waves are before thee.

Tau

1 Et nptrye O God approche neare
Dk thy fate: make me to vnder-
101 leuerpthyng! ccordyng vnto

3 un fapplication tome belore thee: er nie accordyng to thy worde. tapes fhall powze out thy prayse:

vi hen thoy Dat taught methy statutes.

4 Dy tongue hall {yng of thy worde:for

al aun enn maundenientes are ryghte-

5 Let thyne hande be redie fo to ayde me: for I haue cholen thy commaundepene hy fatuation O

6 AJ haue longed for thy fatuation

Godrand thy lawe is my whole delight

7 Let mp soule lpue, and it hall prapse

thee: and thy uͤdgementes shalbe an
Apen gane stray lyke a lost sheepe:
8 aue gone astray ly : oh seke out thy seruaunt, for J Pauc not forgotten thy tommaundementes.

The

(b) No ads uersitie oz perturbation
Of mpnde.

(t) Thon

KRnowest alt

that J do | this lyle.

W

— SS

Monech the.xxvit.day.

high degrees 1 and dignitieg.

troubie J called vpon God: and he hearde me.
Deltuer my soule
| MGod fron falle
CC ilpppes : €froma deceiptful tongue.

Mornyng prayer.

teiptfull tongue vnto theez what good bryngeth it thee-

¢ The argument of the.cxxj.Pfalme.

€ The prophete liftech vp his epes vnto heauen. from whence he most certapnelp loketh for ade at all tymes. He allureth all other that God careth, dekendeth, gouerneth, and pros uideth for thole that flee onto the Lorde kor succour in their necelsitie.

q A fong of high degrees.

A1 [sa lift vp mne eyes vnto the hilles: krom Whence my helpe shall come,
2 Py heipe commeth from God: who hath made heanen and earth.
He Wyll not suffer thy footeto mout: he wyll not fleepe that kepeth thee.
4 Wcholde, he that kepeth Jlrael: wyll neither slumber noe fleepe.
5 God hym elle is thy keper: God is thy

(a) Cod weil 3 wot fuckee thee to go where thou shalt take aup hurt.

¢ The argument of the. exxii. psalme.

¶ Wautd declareth the toy ol the people goyng v let loorth, and iustice in courtes ministred:

ritie to the citie.

A fong of high degrees of Dauid.

I | Was glad when they layde vnto me:
A We wyll go into the Houle of God.

2 Pur feete Hall stande in thy gates:

O Hierusalem.

3 Ylerulalen is bulded: ag a etic that is

wen vnited together in it lelfe.

4. For the tribes do go vp thyther, euen the tribes of the Lorde: (which is a testimonie vnto Jlrael for to praple the

naue of God. —

The Plalmes.

¢ The argument of the. cxx. Pfalme.

Che prophete tequesleth God fo: to deliuer him from duch as do maliciousl slaunder him
€ wich fale reportes. oz by their meanes he elleemeth his life led with the Almaelites and with the barbarous people of Arabia, and not with Gods people.

A song of high O degrees.
Hen J was in 4

What doth a de- 7

Mornyng pray

acy wen Rae a e ong m :) Wit
CS Eimer ie B Junger
5 Wo be vnto me that am constraynen be tonuersaunt in o Melech: ne (0 2a dwell among the tentes ol Cedar. u
6 My soule hath dwelt long: with hym that hateth peace.
FJ cam aman) of peace: but because do speake therok, they (prepare) them felucs to battaple.

“Defence bpon thy ryght hande. 4 n

6 The sunne shal not hurt thee by day: 5 neither the moone by nyght.

7 God wyll preserue thee from all cuil: he wyll preserue thy soule.

3 God Wyll preserue thy goyng out and thy tommpng in: from this tyme koorth lo euermore.

to Hierutalem where true religton was or which cautes he wicheth great prospe -

indgement: euen the feate of the house of Maud. 5 5
6 Ries fay the 17 of 1 they yall prosper that loue the.
7 peace be within thy Wales: and plenteousnesse within thy palaces. 1
$ Foz mp brethren and 7 1 5
2 J wyll wyche peace (eo be] Wey nthec,
9 Bla betause of the Houle of com
Low: J wyll procure to do thee good

5 Foz there is ordeyned the seate for
ö The argument of the cxxiii. psalme.

¶ Che prophete declareth that the godiy delpited ol such as be riche, proude, and scomtull: do lolie tor helpe only at Gods hande alter a most humble fort.

JA song of high degrees. vnto the

1 | Lyft vp mpue eyes vnto thee: who and as the eyes of a mappen our ces

% Idwellest in heanen. handeof her nralltreflezeuen aye
2 Weholde, as the eyes of seruauntes warte) vpon God our Tode

(loke} vnto the hande of their maisters, haue mertie vpon vs. ; pane

wa

The Plalmes.

4 r. ning praye — a mercy vpon vs O God, haue 4 Pur soule is filled with the frome
+ ae opon bs: iar we haue fiferdd “ Leprofeot the wealthy: and wih the enough ol dispite. dilpitefulnes of the proude.

The argument of the. cxxiiij. Psalme.
| a cknowledgeth that he and his people had ben vtterly destroyed throu
| N Wan ol enemies, ik God had not ben on their tide with his Pele ab the
2 A fong of high degrees, of Dauid.
God hin selfe had not ben ok our 4 Then the waters of the proude: had

a five Plcacl inay now fay: it God him flowed over our soule. e selk had not ben ok our ide when men 3 But blesled be God, whiche hath not role vp against geuen bs ouer for a pray vnto their

vs, en they had [walowed bs bp a quicke: when their wrath was so inflaagainst vw.
; Me henthe waters had drowned vs: che running streame had flowed ouer dur soule.

teeth.

6 Our soule is escaped, euen as a byrde out of the {nave of the fouler: the fare is broken, and we be eftaped,

Hath made heauen and earth.

The argument of the. cxxv. psalme.

Js Hlerulalem is strongly defended with mountapnes, fo Goddefendeth his people in all aduerlities and saueth them from daungerg: but they that turne them felues from godipnes, pall runne headlong into all finde of wickednes.

@ A song of high degrees.

41 They that put their trust in God cde not rest vpon the lot ok the righteous: not be remoned (but) must stande to wickednes. 5 , fforeuet, 4. Be beneficiall O Gon: vnto thote that
2 As fo; Hierusalem, hilles be rounde be good and vpright in their heart. about it: and God is rounde about his And such as do wander in their owne people from this tyne foorth for euer- e peruersnes, those God will caule © to nnn. 5 walke With the workers of wickednes: os 3 Forthe™ stepter of the vngodly Mall —_—(fo] peace (halve) vpon Frac.

bok

The argument of the. cxxvj. psalme.

€ Che prophete declareth that the deliucraunce of the people of God out of captiuitie. chalbe very iopfull vnto them selues, and marueplous vnto all other nations. e pia peth God to continue his goodnes dayly moze and moze to his people. l

2 5 q A song of high degrees.

7 Our helpe is inthe nanie ol God: who

Hen God shall caule them of Sion that

were led into captiultie for to returne:we shalbe as men that © drea-

sa

Se math be filled with a laughter: and
Rh

hen chall suche as be amongst the tinnen fay: God hath ponent great ens to palle, that he myght do fo2

(Latin

; “Sy au sore &

1 2 a
; wae . 427 1 [jar | lie

4 God Hath brought great thinges to passe fo2 vs: we be made meric.

5 Male vs O God that be led into captiuitie: for to returne as riners into the south. 1

6 They that sowe in teares: shallreape th

in ioy.

7 He that goeth foorth on his way, and wepyng brareth pretious seede: hall doubtlelle returmng, conie againe With a 1500 noyse, bryngyng his sheaues with hym. ö

Ske
Pid

The
Cuba. he

”

W

te Crokedn

efle.
(b) God wel make hppoctites to be
K

can, ad watcx ru

Euenin

Moneth the. xxvii. day. The falmes. spre
The argument of the. cxxvii. psalme. 8 *

¶ Che prophete allirmeth that all care; endeuour. and diligence ol buplding, working re. seruing. and watching, is vapne, except withal God buyldeth.reserueth and watcheth.
For God ok his meere goodnes geueth chyldren to his weibeloued, he delendeth their ci. ties, and prouideth vnto them victuals when they be kast a sleepe.

A song of high degrees (made) for Solomon.
A 1 FGO wyll not bnylde the houle, God: and the frutte of the wonde igg g my labour in vayne that buylde it: rewarde. if God kepe not the title, the watch- 4 Like as arrowes be in the hande of B man waketh in vapne. the strong: euen so are the chyldzen of
2 (Asi it is à vayne thing for you that ve pouth. make alte to ryst bp carly, that vpe 5 Happy is the man that hath fͤled his e make delapes to take rest, eatyng the qulucr with them: they chall not pea: momen, bzead of sozowes: cuen so he geueth chamed when they speake with their

| avons ( lcepe to his welbeloued. enenues in the gate. de 3 Weholde, chyldren be the inheritage ok tha ie The argument of the cxxviti.pfalme.
A llept. Oz cls 4 rum that feare God and walke in his wapes, be bleed and happy. heir wyle, f fh afc 815 farniliethall prolper with all kinde of kelicitie. I ale ' q A fong of high degrees. ee Her blesled whatloeuer he be that ches: rounde about thy table. feareth God: walking inhis waies. 5 Weholde, for thus shall the man be
22 For thou shalt cate the labours blelled: that feareth God. ok thine handes: thon Malt be happy, 6 God wyll blesse thee out ol Sion: and and (ait) chall go Well with thee. 5 thou shalt {ee Hierufatent in prosperitie
3 Thy wpke shalbe as a fruitfull vine: all the dapes of thy lyfe. pon the fides of thyne house. 7 Beathou halt tee thy chylders chyl-

4 Thy chpidren (calbe like oline bzeaun- dren: and peace vpon Israel.
* The argument of the. cxxix. psalme.

( Che prophete acknowledgeth that Tract map glorp, in that through the helpe of God
1115 enemies enter prises could not preuaple against them. Che wicked aloe lodainp deftroped,

q A song of high degrees.

A1 1 Leim nom fay: they haue trou- to turne backe from it. an 15 bicd me often krom mp poutl) vp. 6 1 all be as the gralse growing
2 Thep haue troubied me okten from ppon the houle toppes: whiche withemy pouth vp: but they haue notpreuay- reth alore that it be shot foorth (to his led against me. 5 growth.)
3 The plowemen plowed vpon my 7 whereok the mower fylleth not his backe: they made long forrowes. hande: neither he that byndeth bp the
4 But God who is iust: hath cut a pee- sheaues his armes full.
4 Cordes. ees the snaxres of the vngodly. 3 And they which go by, fay not fo nut)
5 Allthey that beave an cuyll wyll to as the blelling ok God be vpon you: we
Sion: shalbe confounded, and be made blelle pou in e name ot God.

The argument of the. cxxx. psalme.

¶ The prophete in extreme calamitle. calleth vpon God for remission of kinnes, and for deliicraunce. He erhorteth al people to trust in God, fo; that he is alwaxes a mercytull redeemer, and can eatplp deliuer from finne, death, and hell.

q Afong of high degrees. fre
| ue called ne cari : puto p: Vt of the deepe onde Male 2 Letthine greg ate mp vopce. * n 4 * 8 5 A

¢
‘@

: 1 DAI ; —
— The P almes. |

hou God wplt marke whatis watchmen do afterthe moming: Blay
3 le amt O Torde who can abide more then watchmen do after meme 3

j co mnmyng. ite ksinne with thee: cael ought . x sop there is pardon o 7 Di ght to trust in God, for there as derbe ape be keared. t merty with God: and there is iw aue wayted ko: God, my foule teousnes of redemption With hum.

apted (for hem: and J haue re- 8 And he wyll redeeme Ilrael: kr and my eeu m ots worde. all his finnes, een
; P pp foule tiderh moze after God, then

The argument of the. cxxxj. psalme.

( Fauderhozteth the people br his erample to modeltie and humitie, and to pr- t their trust in God. . Te oh av A fong of high degrees (made) of Dauid.

11 oc Fannothyshmynded, “YJ — Keptitlovee like a chylde that is wea-
Nee haue no proude lokes: J haue not ned from his mother: pea my foute ig ba pled to walke in greater ge waigh- Within me as aweaned chylde. fer matters then Fought to do. 3 O Alrael repose thou thy trust in God:
2 Nay J haue restrapned nw loule, and krom̃ this time foorth fo2 euermoze.

The argument of che. ij. palme. )

€ Che prophete delireth God toremember hym and his great affection to warde religtort, andto buylde a temple kor his arke. He kapeth it was declared onto hym that Dion shoulde be the Houle of God. Dauids petit ion when he brought the arke thyther. God promsseth how that autos (cede Hal raigne after him kor eũer il they kepe his lawes. and that he wyll blesle the cicie ol Sion, and the inhabitauntes chervof, with all kynde

ok felicitie. :
A song of high degrees.

God be mindkull 9 Tet thy priestes be clothed with righok Daud: with teoulnes: and let thy faintes make a
% all his afflittion. sopfull nopse. ä a

„ Who swore 10 For thy leruaunt Dauids lake: turne onto God: who not away [font] the fate of thyne aw
% maden vowe vn- noynted. c
N 8 AN) to the most migh- uu God hath sworne foz a trüeth puto

Stiel lone) of Ja- Dauid, and he wyl not go from it: J e tob. wyll place vpon thy throne fone ok the

3 [ aping] J wyll fruite of thy body. ö not enter into the tabernacle ok my 12 Ikthy chylozen wyll kepe my toue-

Houle: norget v into my bed. nmnaunt and mp testimonies whiche

2 I Wyll not fh er myne eyes to slepe: wyll teache them: their chyldren allo

Hoe mne epe liddes to llumber. hall sit vpon thy throne for euermore.

ü eons en the 99 04 13 Jor God bath chofen 5 be in] 05
Odd: an habitation for the mo e Hada desire that it might be an baby mightic Lorde dk Hach. LY . oh d 4 *

E ic : tation for hym. 5 ha ie giite, We Heardeitto beat E- 14. This (is tapetly hej my rest for euer: aes 88 we founde it in the fieldes of a a YWyll dwell, for J haue a debets ee Oe live tost. |
Pe ql fat ae 90 into his tabernatle: and 15 J Wyllavoundauntly powre my blel-

8 faatetamte on dur knees befoze His ges bpon her victuals: and J wyll

- satistie her poore with bread. 8 man d Gonctortoconity into thy ve? 16 J wyllcloche her puedes wich © tale g gg freee: thou and the arke of thy nation: and her faintes tall make an here er ength. on erxtceeding foyfnil noyse. 00
0 { F (ij) 17 J \vytl other.

The Pfalmes.

17 J Will make there the horne of Daud 18 tõ bud vp: J Wyll ordayne a light for mine annopnted.

Moneth the. xxviii. day.

Morning Prayer
J wyll dothe his ene : :
. chame:but Hisccowne Chat Hopper

pon hym selke.

The argument of the. cxxxiii. Pfalme.

¶ Dauid declareth howe acceptable a thing ts brotherly loue and concorde, both to God and man. '
Asong of high degrees (made) of Dauid.

N holde Howe good and howe plea- bpon the lkprtes of his garmentes. at Faak is:that brethren dwel 3 (It is allo) like vnto the deawe aher. » together in diutic, - mon: whiche falteth Downe vpon the
2 (At is lpne vnto a pretious opntment hyllof Sion. Ce
(vowred) vpon the head, which runneteh 4 For God hath tommaunded his bleldowne vpon the beard, euen vpon Aa: ling: Cad) like euerlasting (to be) Where
N rons beard: which allo runneth downe is Cluche concorde. —

The argument of the. cxxxilli. pfalme.

¶ Che prophete erhorteth thote that do watche all night in the houle ot God, to likt vy their handes, and to prayse God. The Priestes and Leuites of duetie watched all night bycourle in the temple, as it appeareth. Leuit. viii. .

q A fong of high degrees.

A 1 Be bone blesse God all pe the ser- blesse God.

uauntes of God: who in the npght 3 God who made heanen and earth: tyme remayne in the house ol God. blesse thee out ol Sion.
Tylt vp pour “ holy handes: and N N

„ Handesof 2

hohyncz.

The argument of tlie. cxxxv. psalme.

¶ Che prophete exhorteth all them to prayse God who come to the temple, kor that God hath cholen Jacob to be his inheritaunce, and allo foz that he is able to do what he wyll in heauen, earth, and sea. He rehearleth the workeg that God did, in deliuering

them out ol Egypt, and in bryngyng them into the lande or Chanaan. As foz the gods ol the Heathen, they be but golde and filucr, 50 ; Ss

2 1 Fu ve the Lode, prayse ve the nanie of God: prayse it ve seruaimtes ot God. |

2 Ne that stande in the Houle of God: in the tourtes of the houle of our Loyd,

3 Pzrayse pethe Torde, for God is gratis dus: fing psalmes vnto his name, kor it is plealaunt. ty

4 Foz the Lowehath chosen Pacob vnto hym selfe: and Ilrael for his owne poslession.

5 FJor JJ knowe that God is great: and

that our Torde is aboue all gods.

6 God doth Whatsoeuer plealeth hym in heauen and in earth: in the fea, and in all deepe plates.

He causeth cloudes to astende from the lo west part of the earth: he maketh it to lighten when it rapneth, he bringeth wyndes out ok his treasure houles.

“Fromman 8 e smote the first borne of Egypt: “at vnto beast. Mell of beast as of man.

9 Ne sent tokens and Wonders into the

10 He finote many nations: and flue

mydst of thee O Egypt: against Pha-
LAO and all his seruanntes. 5

mightie kinges. 45 n Sihon king of the Amorites, and Ds the king of Washan: and all the bing domes of Chanaan. oe
12 And he gane their lande for an inheritaunte: euen foz an heritaunte to DE rael his people. 1
1 Thy naune O God endureth for euer: there wil be a remembraunce of thee
God, from one generation to another.
14. For Gov wyll iudge his people: on C he Wüllbe pacified cheng difpleated) with his seruauntes. f°
1j As korthe idols of the Heathen th if avebutfiluer and golde: the worke mens handes. 1 .
16 They haue a mouth and fpeake for: they haue eyes but they fee not. ee
17 They haue cares and they Peete pea there is no breath in wel g The y

‘The Plalmes.

ning prayer. ' —
5 chat make them accipke vnto 20 Wlesle God pe the houle of Leul: pe

s The andseuerp one that putteth his that fcare God, blesse God. pee he f 21 Blelled be God out of Sion: who
* jesle God ve the Houle ol Plracl: Dwelleth at Pierulalem. Praple pe the
19 url God pe the houle of Aaron. Tode.

The argument of the. cxxxvi. psalme.

‘ ophete exhorteth men to praple God. al well for all hinges created bp hym, ag
Sezen belles peu besto wed vpon the chyldren of Jlraei, in delivering them outot Egypt, and in bringing them into the lande ol Chanaan. He doch intinuate allo. that God is not prapsed worthplp. except we acknowledge that all his beneliteg

roceede of his Free and mecre goodnes, and not ok our defcrtes,

the Tord, for he is gratious: and his mercle sendurethj for euer. e Confesse pou dit] vnto the God of Gods: for his niercy endu-

he fo euer.
12 Te tte vou (it) vnto the Lorde of pa” Ff ones: fog his mercy endureth kor

er.

4 8000 onlye doth great wonders: for his merty endureth for euer.

Who by his excellent wyldome made the heauens: foz his mercy endureth for euer.

6 Who layde ont the earth aboue the waters: fo2 his mercp endureth foz euer.

5 7 Who hath made great lightes: for his mercy endureth for euery.

8 The lunne to rule in the dap: kor his mercy endureth for euer.

9 Tht moone t the starres to gonerne
1 Henight :for his mercy endurech for

b.

o Who smote Egypt with their first bome: for his merep endureth kor euer. u And brought out Ilracl from among
‘hem: for bis mercy endureth for euer.
With annghtie hande anda stretched

A a 2 HS mercp endureth for

Onkesle von te) vnto iz Who deuided the red sea in partes: o?

his merty endureth for euer.

14. And made Ilrael to passe through the mydst of it: for his merep endureth for euer.

15 De duerthzewe Pharao and his hoast in the red fea: for his mercy endureth foz ener.

16 Who led his people through the wyl-
5 for his mercy endureth for

uer.

17 Who smote great hinges: for his mercv endureth for euer.

18 And he fluc mightie kynges: for his mercp endureth for euer. 24

19 Sihonking of the Amozites: for his mercy endureth foz euer.

20 And Og the king of Wachan: kor his mercp endureth forener.

21 And he gaue away their lande for an heritage: foz his mercy endureth for euer.

22 Foran heritage vnto Jlrael his seruaunt: fo2 his mercy endureth for euer.

23 Who remembred vs when we were brought lowe: for his mercy endureth foz euer.

24. And he deliuered bs from dur aduersaries: for his mercy endureth for euer.

25 Who geueth foode bnto al“ creatures: for his mercy endureth fo euer.

26 Conkesse yoncitinnto the Lord ofheauen: for his merey endureth fo2 euer.

The argument of the.cxxxvij.pfalme.
Che prophete declareth the great griełe and lamentation ok the children ok Ffract, ko:

that the
190 they (beyng led

pitfoners vnto Babylon) were provoked to ling as they vled

Sat Son. He protesteth that he can not korget Hierulalem. He prayeth God to piopinter the Adumites. who malitioudly incented their enemies againtk them. He

hophelieth of the deckruction of Babplon.

ua | BP the waters of Babylon we set

one there: allo weremembred Sion. — 5

2 We hanged vp our harpes ou the Sa

lou trees: in the mydst of it, orthere they that led vs away cap-
9 F (ij) fluc

€

D

& All fler he

(a) Of Hiss

bylon.

‘The

Moneth the xi. day.

song: and (for) dur waplynges mprth,

5 falivick.

Euening p

tiue required of vs fome matter ofa pea if I preferre not thee O Hierufg-

(taping) fing vs one of the longes of

Sion.

4 [weauntwered) howe tan we fing one of the songes of God: iu another lande besides our owne-

5 If J forget thee O Hrerufalens: let my right hande forget(ber cunning. }

6 Let mp tongue cleaue to the roofe of my mouth if I do not remember thee:

* aboue ber hech myprth

7 Remember the chyldzen of E

the dap of Hierusalem: they tapos downe with it, downe With it, euen to & the grounde. ay

8 O daughter of Wab lye Walked: Happy tha wardeth thee as thou

9 Blelled hall he best weth thy litie childre

plon who mu
Ube be that =
Dak serued vs. hat taketh ethos nagainst the stone.

The argument of the. cxxxviij. psalme.

¶ Dauid thanketh God for his goodnes to wardes bpm, in that he dyd heare hym in ad. uerlitie,. and deliuered hym trom His enemies, whereby he trusteth in time to come in

all distrelles to be helped.
A J wopil geue thankes vnto thee O eee ie. God With my whole heart: J wyll
Wem fing plalmes vnto thee before the @

wham a ecrs

: gods. ice at- 2 J Wyll make my lowe obeysaunte to-
2 Warve thy holy temple: and J wpll prayse thy holyname in vefpect of thy loung kindues and trueth.
Jor thou Halt niagnified thy nante: and thy worde aboue all thinges.

4 JInthe dap (ot myne aduerlitie] J cat led vpon thee, and thou heardest me: thou enduedst my soule moze and moze
With strength.

5 All the kinges of the earth Will prayse thee O God: for they haue hearde the

gq OF Dauid.

wordes of thy mouth.

6 Bea they Wyll fing of the wapes of
God : for great is the glory of God.

7 Foz though God be on high: pet he z will haue respect vnto the lowiy, and he wyll knowe the proude a farre of.

8 PEW Chall walke in the nudst of trou: ble, thou wylt make me to lpue: thou wylt stretche foorth thyne hande vpon the furtoufnes of mine enemies, and thy right hande shall laue me.

9 God wyll finishe that he hath begun by me: O God thy louing kindnes endureth for euer, thou wylt not forsake the workes of thyne one andes.

The argument of the. cxxxix. palme.

¶ Dauid faltip accused, calleth to witnesse of his innocencie God, who knoweth bpm

throughly and vnto whom nothing is vnknowen of that is sapd. done. or thought, out ot whole handes he can not efcapein any place. Finallp, he pronounceth that he

55 70 wicked, to the intent that he may declare that he Hath nothing to do them. j

q To the chiefe musition, a pfalme of Dauid.

scarched me to the quicke: ann
{thou batt kno-
4 Wer me,
Thou knowest my downe fitting
J € uune vprling:

Prayer.

: dest my though: tes long before they be.

3 Thon ton pallest about my path, and my tourney Into all coastes: and thou vsest all my wayes.

4 Forthere is not a word in n tongue: but beholde, thou O Torde knowest it

GOD thou hast

thou vnderstan-

altogether
5 Thou hast fachtoned me behinde and „ bekoze: and lapde thyne hande vpon sx

6 The unowledge that (thou halt) of me
VPhyther tan J go from thx ye ö
— 3 fiee away from ; ; eee art there also. qegot te mo

fF take „ the wyn
0 2215 (go co} pwvell mtbe pttermost
10 Euen

part of the fea,

57¹7
Chis funn? pan

ays prayer.

en there also thy bande shall leade

* a Ho ryght bande shal holde me. end yk J lay peraduenture the dark-

u ae shalkcouer me: and the night chal-

or me,

1 Weihe darknesse shall not darken

“any thing from thee, and the night shal-

be as liahtlome as the dap: darknesse and ipghteto thee] ave both alike.

wy Tathou halt my repnes in thy pol f efor: thou didst couer me in my mothers wombe. ö c J wyll tonfesse it vnto thee, for that abb are to be dreaded, J am made after a marueplous lort: thy
Workes be niarueplous, and that my soule knoweth ryght well.

j The lubstaunce of my bodp) was not hyd krom thee: when J was made in setrete and fathioned with distinct

„ members in my mothers wombe. e 16 Thyne eyes dyd lee me™ when J
„. was most inperkect: and in thy booke im were written euery day Of them wherin the partes of my body were shãped, and no one ok them were knowen vnto thee,

he argument of the cxl. pfalme.

The Paames xh.

towardes me O Gon: howe great be —
: 3 17 of 11 1 intrealed- mel
I go about to count them, J fynde nab that they are mo in —— Mall 8 only | fande: and yet whyle Jam Wakpng J Vehhswit am styll Ne Gayle d
19 Jor truely thou Wyle da prourdence,
* Wicked man: andthe blood Hythe nee thy eon
(to whom J euer fap] depart ye krom me. cores.
20 Who do speake buto thee in guplekull D maner: (Chou art D Godjeraited in vayne to thyne enemies.
21 Do not Yhate them O God that hate theez and am not J greened with thole that ryse vp agapnst thee: i
22 Bea J hate them “fromthe bottome «yyis., of myne heart: euen as though they perfect hawere myne enemies. pee
23 Seaͤrche me to the quicke O Lorde, — and knowe thou mne heart: proue me and knowe thou my thoughtes.

24. And loke well f there be any way of

peruersenesse in me: andlthen leade me in the way H ol the worlde. Gee wap of all men is to dpe, euen
{rom the bes gprnpng of

the wozldt.

¶ Dauid prapeth God most earnestly to deliver hym from his enemies, who with their llaunderous tongues, kalle accufations, and craftic fetches, sene all maner of wayes howe to dedroy bpm, wheras pet in deede they cannot put in execution their malice,

but by Gods perinission.

q To the chiefe musition, a psalme of Dauid.

41 Depuer me O God from the eupll

man: and preserue me from © the outragious man.

+ Who in heart imagine mischiekes:and

setlonvarde to warre euer :
| é y day.
} biber haue shärpened their tongue pke aserpent: Anders poyson is vnder iieirlyppes. Sclah. * tiny 4 1 nie O God from the handes ol tiie Ngodly: preferue me from © the
Aglons man, who haue demiled to
ZO rap feete (frome, - om
* he proude haue lapde a mnare for ae, stat rah net abroade with
Ih 10 e e * hie ue lapde vnto God, thon art in ites v
D Gay ere the boyee of my prayers

7 Dione God the st hey rength of my lal-
Nations thou halt couered my bead in

the day of battayle.

8 Graunt not vnto the vngodly (bis) desires O God: bryng not to passe his mischeuous iniagination (let) they shoulde be made to proude. Selah. /

Let the labour of his owne lippe couer him: (who is) head of them that compasse nie about.

Io tet hotte coales be burnyng vpon them: he wyll cast them downe into the fire into Deepe pittes, that they may nenev ryle bp agayne.

1 A man kull of tongue can not prosper vpon the earth:euyll shall hunt the outragious perfon to duerthrowe hym.

12 Jam sure that God will dispatche the tause of the afflicted: and he wyll geue ludgement for the needy.

3 Truely the ryghteous wyll confelse it vnto thy name: they that deale vprightip Mail dwell belore thy face.

The

Moneththe.xxix.day. The Plalmes. | Mornyng Prayer

| The argument of the.cxlj. pfalme 1 —

¶ Dauid humbly decireth God that his prayer may be fo acceptable onto hym. as t he had inade a sacrilice in the tempie. He prapeth God to prelerue hym in worde and deede from

all enyit that he kalt into no tnare of his enemies: kor he had rather be reproued of the

godlp, then to be honoured of the wicked.

q A pfalme of Dauid.

41 O God J call vpon thee, haste thee vnto nie: geue eare vnto my vopte whylest J trye vuto thee.
2 Let my praper be directed before thy face las) an incense: let the liftyng bp of myne handes [be] an euenyng lacrifite.
3 Set à watch O God before my mouth: and kepe the doore of my lyppes.
4 Inline not myne Heart to any euyll thyng, wherby J mpght commit any vngodliy act With men that be Workers of iniquitie:and et me not eate of their delitates.
5 J wpyshe that the rpghteons woulde finite me and reproue me: for it is loving kyndnesse. a
6 6 Wut let not pretious baulmes breake myne head: for as vet euen my praper is

VM Vorłees of wickednesse.

(a) Let me

t be seduced

speritie be.

The argument of the cxlij. psalme.
¶ David expresseth the prayer that he made to God when he lay hyd in the caue.

1. Samuel. 24. He vttereth his great anquithe that he was in, so that he had
N trust in nothyng els laue in God who is all his inheritaunte.
J The wile instruction of Dauid, a prayer when he was in the eaue.
As Eryped vnto God with man that woulde knowe me: J hadno
: ‘ 2 mip voyte: euen vnto plate to flee vnto, and no man cared foz
God J dyd make ny mp foule. 5 f * 0 supplication. 5 Irtrped vnto thee O God, and sayde:
Bs Pporvzeedout before thou art mp hope and my postion in the
6 Ahis face mp cogitati- lande of the lyuyng.
N ons: and 7 made a de- 6 Consider my complapnt, for J am claration of my trouble bekore his fate. brought very lowe:deliuer me from my
3 When my lpirite was ouerwheimed perlecutours, for they are to strong for

within me, thou knewest my path: in the way wherin J walked they haue priuily layde a snare for me.
4 When JJ loked vpon my ryght hande and lawel rounde about me jthere was no

The argument of the cxliii. psalme.
¶ Dauid delireth God to heare his prayer tor his mercie and qoodnetle fake, because no man can befounde ryghteous belore hym. He vttereth his soro we, requireth to be deliuered from his enemies, agaynst whom he maketh his praper. q A psalme of Dauid.

21 Hee my praper O God, geue care vnto my desire: hearken vnto me for thy trueth fake, for thy ryghte-

dusnesse fake.
2 And enter not into iudgement with thy seruaunt: for in thy spght no man

agaynst their wickednesse.

7 Hettheir indges be thrult dowucheadlong from“ a rocke: then they wyll <5, heart my wordes, for theybelweete. ke

8 Dur bones le scattered vpon the graues mouth: lyke as when one bzeaketh and heweths. wood wpon the earth.

9 For mpne epes loke vnto thee O God the Lorde: in thee is my trust, cast not
* soule * lor me.]

10 Bepeme fromthe“ snare which they. haue layde foorth for me: and trom 5 trappes of thein that be Workers of 2 iniquitie.

Is Tet the vngodlp fall together into their owne nettes: but let me in the meane season alwapes eftape (them)

me.
5 Wiyng my soule out of prilon, that J may prapse thy name: the potente al compasse me rounde about, beta e

ou Haft (thus) rewarded me.

lyuyng tan be iultifled.

ef the enemie bath) perkecun t

sonle, he hath mitten my ipic de pack

the grounde: he bath layde nic us 125

nesse as men that haue ben lane eid
4 And mp spirite is ouerwhelint 0

ung prayers“ | i unt: and my heart is desolate in the midst of me.. rot remiembraunte the tyme long j 15 J nut vpon euerp act of thine, F reece my study on the worke of thy le des vnto che foorth mne handes j ape fou as athirstie tande(satperh} e. Selah.
1 speede, hearken onto me O
80 God, my spirite Wareth faynt: Hyde dot thy kate krom me,for J am lyke bnto them that go downe into the ppt.
3 Caule nie to heart of thy louyng kindnesse betymes in the mornyng: for in ee is my trust. : )
9 pak me to knowe the way that J

The Plalmes .

ae

„

; Daa ge Walkse in kor J lyfe bp my soule fie 5

10 Delyuer me O God from myne ene: C

mies. I hyde my sesfe with thee.

I. Teache me to do the thyng that pleaeth the, for thou art my Torde: let thy good spirite leade me koorth vnto the

lande ot une ih 2

12 For thy names lake D God thou wit taule nie to lyue: and for thy righteoulnesse fake thou wilt bryng my foule out of trouble

B And of thy goodnesse thou wylt restrayne myne enemies: and destrop all them that be aduerlartes to my foute,

707 J am thy seruaunt.

Le Ce es
The argument of the. cxliij. Palme.

auid acknowledgeth it to
N15 hath his fubiectes obedient vnto hym.

vnto hym- a man to be esteemed ol no bature. He
Serie and that his people may kloriche with all hy

J. of Dauid.

rocke: who teacheth my handes

) and my forteeffe ;

Paes yD only deliuerer:my buckler, in hyn J hane ptt np tent,
Wholuboueth mp people onder me,
O God, what is man that thou doest
Knolbe bpm What is the fonne of man that thou doest thynne of hym-

Pan is lpke“ a thyng of naught: his ae be Iphe a shadowe that palleth

5 dünn tens D Govan tome
* Couche the mountapnes and cherche. i Pout terribteiahtinges and nit: pot out thpne avrowes and
Confame then, 17 N <page
87 erie downe Hine hand from aboue: altre e and take me ont of the great
Sang from the hande ok the chuͤdren
8 get deuotion then Jam. hel ole mouth bttere
Weit ryght hande s

ty 4

th vanttie: and

Teslsedbe Godmy

nprekuge, and mp

feare ~

à ryght hande ok

proceede oniy of God that he hath ouercome his enemies, f

maruepleth that God is fo beneficiatl delireth God btterly to banquithe hig nde ob felicitie.

He

we

kalthdds ? en em ee

9 O Lorde Iwyll syng a newe fong biz to thee: and J wyll syng plalmes bnto thee vpon a Lute, cand vponj an instrument of ten strynges. *

Io Who geueth “ bictorie vnto kynges: C who redeemeth Daud h from perpll ot the sworde.

n Kedeenie me and deliuer me from the hande ok the children ok an other de-

- Motion then Jam: whole mouth vtte-

reth bauthe, and their ryght hande is a ryght handt ok kalshood. ‘
11 That our sonnes may growe bp in theit youth as poung plantes: that our daughters may be as corners (Gones } grauen after the fathion as a palace is.
That the corners of our houles may be kylled, veeldyng foorth all maner ol stoore: that our tattell may bring foot thoulandes, vea)ten thoulandes in our streates. a 3
14. That dur oren may be strongsto labour that there be no decay: no leadyng into
< -captinitie, and no toinplaynyng in our streates. f >?

15 Happy are the people that be in luch a e

people who haue

e

tale: blessed is the
God for their Love.
— 2 8 — 1221 a iy The

NIV.

is feruaunt Saluation;

Moneth the.xxx.day.

fo, euer, he apdeth the oppressed and a

O @ pfaime

See, 1 Lee magnifie thee D Lod my king:
1 1 and J Wyll blesse thy name kor euer

at and euer. |

2 J wyll blesse thee euery day: and J
Wyll prayse thy name for euer and euer.

Go
Daur

zaysed: and his greatnefle tan not be carched out.

4 One generation shal pratse thy workes vnto another: and they hall declare thy nightie power.

5 Hrbyll {et foorch in wordes the glo-

thy wonderous workes.

6 J wyll also declare thy greatnesse : fo

terrible actes. ae.

They Mall vtter out of their mouth a memoriall of thyne aboundaunt kyndnesse: and they shall syng of thy rygh-

teousuesse. * f

3 SGod ts gratious and mercikull: loth to

be angry, and great in louing kindnesse.

9 God is good vnto euer man: and his neercie is ouer all his Workes. a
10 All thy workes shall confesse it vnto thee O God: and thy faintes shall blesle

W 7

nn Sod the creatour of all thinges. the 1 feeder of the hungry. the deliuerer of prilo straungers, fatherlesle, and widdowes. ay Put. ethe Lod, prayle thou God
O my toute, whplest J tyne J wyll

vnto ny TLorde so long as J halbe.

2 Put not pour trust in princes cnorj in the sonne of man: in whom there is no faluation. ne *

3 Mis spirite Hall depart out of hym, he shall turne agayne to his earth: at that day all his thoughtes hall perishe.

~ 4 Blessed is he buto whom the God of is Lorde. Wer.“

5 Who made heauen and earth, the fea and all that therin is:who maintepneth

‘The Plalmes.

he argument of the cxlv. pfaline.

¶ NLauid setteth foorth to be talked and (ong ol all ages the wonderous workes of God wherin is declared his goodnefle, — Heal power. and prouidence. 8

cted. He feedeth all creatures. Be is iust and

mercifull in all his workes, Be is present with thole that can vpon him and feare him: fuch he heareth and faucth, wheras he destropeth the wicked.

¶ O The prayfe of Dauid. :

3 Great is God and moft worthy to be
14. God ppholdeth all such as fall: and C

rious maiestie of thy extellentuesse: and

that men Matt speake of the forte of thy

thee. 1 — 3
II Ther thal shewe the glare ofthy king:

The argument of the. cxlvi. pfalme,

C The prophete vttereth hes great delire to praple God, he withdraweth men

puttyng their trust in princes, pronouncyng that man to be happy who trulleth euer ot rpabt to thole that tulfer wrong. the ners out ot captiuitie, and the delendour of

prapse God: J wyll syng plalmes

acob is an apde: his trust is in God

God raigneth

dome: and talke of thy power.
2 That they may make knowen to the childzen of men his manifolde power: c the glorious malestie of his kingdom.
13 Thy kingdome is an euerlasting Bing: dome: and thy dominion eudurety throughout all ages.

lykteth vp all those that be b daumen, e
15 The eyes of all Wapte vpon thee: and thon geuest them their meate in due ue. oe 1 0 ‘ tyme,
16 Zu openest thyne bande: and thou satisfiest the desire of euery thing ium,
17 God is righteous in all his wapes: and bholr in all his workes. 8
18 God is npe vnto all them that call bpon hym: vnto all such as call vpon hym in truet ng. 225
Io He wyll fulfpll the desire ol them that seen ktftare hym:he will allo heare their crye, and he wyll laue then. |
20 God preserueth all thole that lone hin: but he wyll bring to nothyng such as be vngodl x. ö a
21 My mouth thall speake the prayse of
God: and all fleche thail blesse his holy

name for euer and euer.

krom

- the trueth kor euer. :

6 Who executeth iudgement for thole 3 that ave oppresled with wrong: who geueth foode to the hungry. ;

7 God looseth thole that be bounde: Go geueth syght to the blynde. . cal

3 God rapleth them vp that are falling:

God loueth the ryghteous. 3

9 God taketh strangers into his cult — he relecueth the fathericile and “a wWiddowe: as for the Way of the bus lye he turneth it vplyde Downe. fot

1o God thy TLorde thal rage Sage to the worldes ende: thronghout a nerations. Prapse pe the Lorde. The

yng prayer.

The Plalmes,

The argument of the cxlvij. psalme. exhorteth the children ol Ilrael to prayle God. lor that by hym they were

che 1 put of captiuitie. He declareth ©

great power. wildome, and good-

bro ich appeareth in all his workes and benefites, but etpecialty in that he had tet

nelle, wh loorth b. 95
= Bayle pe the Torde,

or it isa good thyng:
4 sing plalnies vnto our
Torde, kor it is à plea-
Me saunt thing, (his praile ts to be desired.

Lorde, 1
§ Who touereth the heaut with tloudes: who prepareth rayne for the earth, who mäketh grasse to growe bppon the monntapnes.
9 Hegeucth vnto cattell their foode: seuen) vnto Rauens which tall for it. io He hath no plealure in the strength of

y Moyles his lawe and commaundementes.

an horse: he delighteth noti
Aten HD Pe

God delyghteth in them that keare him: [and] in them that put their e ed 5 4 n
12 Praple God erulalem:prayse

Torde O Sion. **
I3 For He maketh fast the varres of thy eue he blelleth thy chuldzen within ge.
14. He maketh peace in thy borders: he fylleth thee with! good core.
15 Me fendeth foorth his commaundeuient bpon the earth: his Word runneth verylwiftlp.

16 He geueth {nore (fo whyte) as yoo:

he stattereth the hoare frost like alshes.
17 he tasteth foozth his ple lpke frag: meutes: who is able to abide his frost-
18 ht sendeth foorth his worde and melteth them: he bloweth with his winde, and the waters flowe.
19 He declareth his worde vnto Jatob: his statutes ¢ ordinauntes vnto Ilrael.
20 He hath not dealt fo with euery nation:

neither haue they the knowledge of his

iudgementes. Prayse ye the Lorde.

The argument of the cxlviij. psalme.
C Che prophete calleth vpon all creatures which be in heauen or earth to prapse God:

b itthe

11 PBavte yethe Lorbe, prayse ye God

Out of heauen: prayfe pe hym on

: pad ae ads

ble hyn all pe his angels: le. mal pe his hal-. par

8 Fase pe pm lune and moone:praile

7 HALL pe starres that geue] lyght.

i ve oe veDymallye“Hheanens: and eee tbat be aboue the heauens.
* in ot prayse the name of

Were reatere ommaunded, aud they

i — 90 chem sure for euer and elo be bid chemalabe which

zaple ye God fro :
‘agonsandaltdeepes, See)

ut ote vpon the people of God, who haue greater caule geuen them foz todo er. ‘ Ye .

3 Fire and haple, snowe and vapours: stornuie wynde fulfplipng his worde.

9 Mountapnes and all hylles: fruitfull

trees and all Cedars,

10 Wekastes and all tattell: wormes and fethered foules.

I Rynges ok the earth and all people: printes and all iudges of the earth.

12 Boung men and mapdens, olde men with children, shoulde prayse the name of God: for his name only is most excellent, and his maiestie aboue earth and heauen. .

I He hath eralted the hore of his people: the prayse of all his saintes, euen of the children of Ilrael, a people that ts most nye vnto him. Prayse ye the Lord.

The

et The faty

oneth the. xxx. day. The PE almes. Euenyng Prayer

45 ¢ The argument of the. cxlix. Psalme. _ i a

pophete erhorteth the children of Ilrael to erpretie a ioy towardes God bp

a eta hym · by syngyng vnto hym and by playing on mulicall instrumentes.

parelp tor that God is pleased with them, partly allo for that God hath geuen them a victorie ouer the heathen their enemies.

Al PRayle pe the Lorde, spng vnto God beddes.
“Hisprayte P ee e,, 6 Tbe hygppromotions of the Lone zz
** in the congregation of laintes. chalbe in their mouth: and a two edged
2 Iltrael shoulde reiopte in his maker: ([worde in their handes. the chfldzen of Sion thoulde be iopfull 7 That they map take auengement of in their kyng. the heathen: and correction of the na-
3 They choulde prayse his name in a tlons. daunce: they shoulde ling plalmes vnto 3 That they may bynde their kynges in hym bpon a tabret and a harpe. thapnes: and their nobles Withtron
4 For God hath a pleasure in his people: ketters. he wyll beautifie the afflicted with lal- 9 That they may exetute the tudgement nation. prescribed: this honour shalbe to all
See” 5 The saintes shalbe iopful with glory: his laintes. Praple pe the Lorde, doe they chal exprelle a iopfull nople in their

The argument of the. cl. pfalme,

Che prophete exhorteth generally all lyuyng creatures to prapte the mightinelle and
9 1 G00. Be wölleth men to do it with instrumentes of musicke.

11 DBapse ve the Lorde, prapse ve the daunte:prayse ve him bpon the stringes a Pr de rere ae rons and vpon the Organes.

in the firmament ot his power. 5 Prapse pe hym vpon the well tuned een 2 Praple ye hym in his strength: prayle Cimbales : prayle pe hym vpon the eens. =» pe bpm in his excellent greatnelle. loude Cimbales.

3 Prapse pe hym in the sounde of a 6 Euerp thyng that draweth breath: trumpet: praple pe hym vpon a Lute cught to prayle the Lorde. Prapst ye and an Harpe. the Torde.

4 Prapse pe hym with a tabret and a

I — B.
P | $y The ende of the pfalter.
— 4 — —— ——— —

1 ¶ Numerus secundum Hebreos.

. dominum cum tri. J. Deus deorum, ex iii.] Feee nunc benedicite. vi. Magnus domains. a | Adtedomine leuaui, Viti. Deus in nomine. . quam bonum. li. Itiserere mei deus. i.
> uiii. Ad tc domige clamaut. Ix. Deus repulifti, 15 F 1vi. Milercte mei deus. Il. cxxhl. | Ad te leuaui. hai. Deus deus meus ad te, \ eh Eripe ine domine- sche hiiferere mei deus. iii. ri. Affe ite domiau. Ixvii. Deus milercatur. xlv. EruSanit cor. IXxXIIx. Materccordias. ttl
Ixxviil, | Attendite popute, Tus. Deus in adintomium. cxly. raltabo te deus. ci. Milericordiam cr ludic .
Alix, Audite hec unine r. IXVII. Deus iudicium. XXX. Exaltaba te domines exxxil. | Memento domine. i. Deatus vir. lan, Deus venerunt. lv. Exaudi deus oratio. vil. | Noh zmillari., li. He ad quorum. Ixanti. Deus stetit. 8 Ri. Exaudi deus ac preca. i Nonat dco subĩtecta. aii. catus qu intel. hooat, | Deus quis similis. Iii. Ex audi deus ofatio. mtam. lvl. Notus in luda exiis Neatus vir qui. xamt. | Deus vinonum. xvu. Exnudi de mine ĩusticiam. ae Non nobis domine aux. Bean immaculat. cu. Deus laude m. 3X. Exaudintte dominus, cini. | Nifi quia deminus. cxxvill. | Beati omnes qui. cevte | Dilext,quoniams , xt. | Expedtans expcctaui. 0 doininus xdifi. viii, Benedicam ilominun, noni. Daligain te. 15 Ii. Exultate deo, 5 —
„av. Ke nedwasü. e | Dit Dominus domino. Lili. Exultate justi. xhii, | Omaes g chi. Renedicite omnia. i. den. | Dixit infipiens. i. vin. Exurgac deus. eviii, Paratum cor. cini. Bencdiclie omni. ii. — P ante Ixvli. Fundaments eins. f, Quatre freimverunt. chu. neucdictus dominus, * Dini ¢ 1 jam, e ee damien 7 Guemadmodum xai. Bonum eft confiteri, 8 ne 4 vi. In conueiten des. 11. Quid gloriatit. i
. Cantate domino. i. vi. Donune nc in furore, f. cy In 191 1 5 i. | Quam * .
Ati. Cantate doniine. ii. w uͥvüi.] Domine ne in furore, ii, cxiill. an We trae], é ar. | Quy Si te exlix, Cantate domino. uty vi Dornine deus mtus, in te. ud. ai 555 speraui / nil. Quam di Cee iu.
Aix. Clic narrant. viii. Donne dominus nailer, Ixvi. 15 2 4 eo. Aci. Qui . ae ix. Confitebor. i. xv, Domine quis habitabit. C. 19 5 a cv. . confi lac domine. xi. Cousitebor. 11. NI. Domive in virtute. xv. 18 ca . 211 Salaum ge exxrviji} Confitebor. ui. avi] Domine deus falutis, xl. ude me cus. heii. Sivcre vague: |
Ixxy, | Confitebimur. ts Donune ictigium, NI. Iudica me denne. Saluum m
K. svi. Confitenuas domino. ii. feaxrie Demint non efl eral, clyj. Lauda anims mea. vi. Super fumipa.

cvii. Conlitemiai domino. ni f exxxix. | Domine e Vasti. cxvlii. | Confitemini domino. ii. | ext. Domine clamaui. ci. Constemtni damn v. chi. Downe eaudi. xvi. Conserua mc. Nun.
Gui. Ureclidi, propter. hu. Cum inuucatem. mova. | Deminusillemnato,
Cant, De profundis, ac. axii, Deus deus meva, CVI

uli Deus aunbus. GMA,
Sr | Dausnoherssfugium,

cxlyii. Lauda Hitzusalem. Te decet ly maus. cu iii. Laudate pneti. xv. , '

vii. Laudate deminum omnes. | v. Verbames. ,
Dominus repit we.

id domine.
XXI. Le uaui oculos, 93 vt quid ni. Domini eft terra.

cxxii. Lxtatus Jum. 15755 cxanv, Laudate ne men. Ii vr e cxlvan, Laudate dceminum. laxvit. | ¥9°

. ' xultemus. exlyuj. Laudate demig. de celis. zcv, 9 mea ad dom. Ln,

Dominus tcpaauit, decoik.
Dominus tegnault ezul.

Domugus seguawit,uaica.

j | A - :; hax, unt. ev, Conte mini domino. I. di. Domine exautli. lexi. In te domine iptraui, non aa Sept expugnauct!
Laudzig demipum zu. cli.

. HC prouerbes
2 ok Solonion the fonne of w/t. Daud, king
RS} of Hlract:
To lcarne
Ni wildonie and a instruction, € to percecaue
Elthe wordes of

derstanding,

j 70 reteaue the instruttion of wyldome, iustite, iudgement, and equitie:

4 To geue wyt buto the sumple, e that the young men might haue knowledge and bnderstanding.

5 The wyse man wyll geue care, and wyll come by moze wyldome, and he that is endued with vnderstanding, shall attayne vnto Cwele) countfelies,

6 To bnderstande a parable, and the interpretation thereof, the wordes of the

Vuyle . and their darke speaches.
57 Thefeare of the Lorde is the begin: a ling of knowledge: but fooles dispile arb. Wyldome and instruction. : s Byloune heare thy fathers doctrine,
= . ffolakenotthe lawe of thy mother:
9 Feathey shalbe at. eneveate of grace a tbo bead, and cas) a chayne about

cke.

ah lo

cht not vnto them.

u Ik they tay, come with vs, let vs lay wapte for blood, and lurke priuilp for theinnatent wilhont a ante,

un Let bs* swallowe them bp lyke the

graue quicke and Whole, as thole that

do done into the pit:
Me Hall we finde an maner of tolliy i Ealing oe Houle With spoyles: ot am 3

” a tad Ong vs, and let vs
One, waltze not thou with them
4 1 th sate from their Wass ;

runn | bathe ed 9150 c to — are ut dag in vayne, the nette is layde

of Solomon.

Ihe prouerbes of Solomon.
¢ The first Chapter.

d ble or the worde ol God. 7D the feare of God and knowledge of ae. to wemap not content to the intianges of sinners, 9 piapneth that che is contemned. 14 Che punisbment of them that contemne her.

My sonne if sinners entite thee ton-

20 yl dome com.

foorth before the byrdes eyes:

18 Sothese lay Wayte for the blood of then and lye privity for their liues.

19 Suche (are) the wayes of euery one that is greedie of gayne, who taketh a-
Way the lyfe of the owner therok.

zo Wysdome crpeth without, and putteth foorth her boyte in the streates:

21 She talleth before the congregation in the open gates, and shesweth her wordes thorowe the citic saying:

22 O pe chyldren, howe long will pe loue chyldishnes- howe long Wyll the storners delite in scorning, and the vnwyse hate knowledge-

23 O turne vou at my correttion: lo J wyll expresse my minde vnto you, and make pou vnderstande my wordes.

24. Wecause J haue called, and pe refufed, I haue stretthed out my hand, and no nian regarded: N

25 Wut all iy countels haue pe dilpiled, and set my torrettion at naught:

26 Therefore wyll J allo laugh at pour destruction and mocke pon, when the thing that ye feare commeth bpon pou,

27 Ellen when the thing that pe be a fraide of, falleth in sodeniy like a storme, E aud pour nuserie lpke a tempest, yea when trouble and heanines commeth

ppon you.

28 Then shall they tall vpon me, but J wyllnot aunlwere: they shall seeke ie

Pro. vi. a

D

Esay. læv. b.
Lere. vu a.

carl, but they shall not finde me:

29 And that becaule they hated knowledge, and did not chole the feare of the
Lode, |

30 They woulde none of my tounlaple,

but dispised all my correction. 0

31 Therfore Hall they eate ol the feuite of their owne Way, and be filled with their owne inuentions.

32 Fox the turning away of the vnwyse shall fap them, and the prolperitie of fooles {hall destroy them.

33 Wut whoso hearkzeneth vnto ine, Hal vo dwell safely, and be sure from any feare ok eupll. f

G I The

Lie bs

¢ The. ii. Chapter.

inppfoome exhorteth to obay her. She teacheth the keare of God. 6 She is ge. uen ok God. 10 She preleruethtrom wicheones,

h sonne, ifthou Wylt lreteaue my wondes, and lape vp mp con maundementes with-

in thee,
That thou wylt en-
— cline thpne eares vnto wyldome, applye thyne heart then to vnderstanding.
3 FJor ikthou cryest after wyldome, and tryest for knowledge: f thou leekest for her as for filuer, and searchest for her as for treasures:
5 Chen Chale thou vnderstand the feare a the Lorde, and finde the knowledge of God.

dus: and dekendeth them that walke vprightip,

3 That they may kepe the right path: and he preleructh the way of luche as do serue hym with god lpnesse.

9 Then shalt thou vnderstande righteousnesse, and iudgement, and equitie, pea aud euery good path.

10 When wyldouie entreth into thyne

heart, and thy soule deliteth in know-

ledge:

11 Then shall tounsell prefer vnderstanding Matt bebe che, Lead
11 That thou mapest be detineren from the eupll wap, and from the man that speaketh frowarde thinges:
13 e the Wapes of righ: nesse, to walke in th f an 1 tea
14 Whiche reioyte in doyng nau delite in the wickeduelle of the 2 5 4
15 Whole wapes are crooked, and they frowarde in their pathes.
16 That thou mapest be delsuered allo iNN woman, and from is not thyne owne, whiche geucth [weete odes, ae

Bede. 6 For the Norde genet wyloome, out 17 Forlaketh the hulbande of her pouth

andvic okhis mouth commet) knowledge and E korgetteth the coucnaunt of her God.

15 i b vnderstanding. : 18 J 02 her house 1s enclined bnto death,
He stirreth bp health foz the righte- and her paͤthes vnto hell.

19 All they that go in vnto her, tome not agapne, neither take they holde of the
Yay of life. =

20 Therefoze walke thou in the wapol suche as be vertuous, æ kepe the pathes

ok the righteous.
21 For the tuft hall dwell in the lande, i they that be perfect, shall remaine init.
22 But the vngodly chall be cut of from the earth: and the wicked doers shalbe rooted out of it. * |

The. iii. Chapter.
Che worde of God geueth lpfe. 5 Trust in God. 7 Feare bpm, 9 Honour hym.

n Suffer his correction. chall fucceede well.

22 To them that kolowe the worde or God, all thinges

5 Put thy trust in God with all thyne

a

1 N fonne, forget not
N A thou mplawe, but see Heart:¢ leane not vnto thyne owne Wit.
„ that thyne heart kepke 6 In all thy wapes acknowledge put,
Imp commaundenien- and he shall order thy gopuges. . tes: We not Wyle in thyne owne tonceibt:
. Forthey hal prolong but keare the Lorde, and depart from 1

W the dapes and peres of thy life, and bryng thee peace. e
3 et merty and faythkulnes neuer go
. aad binde them about thy necke,
7 wipte them in the tables of thyne eart:
4 So halt thou finde fauour and good vnderstanding in the sight of God and men. 8 -

eupll: WI: Rom xi
8 So chall thy nauell be whole, and OS thy bones strong. fale sl
Honour the Lore wich thy dan Per
Ae an with the firstlinges of alt poss thpueencreafe: Be Exo
10 50 fhalt thy barnes be filed 10 Erpienteousnes, and thy presses shall ouer with Nvcete Wine. u Gr

1 u Tode neither fapnt when thou art

of hym: : da whon the Lorde loueth, him he pork E chalteneth, and pet deliteth in hint euen

as a father in his owne sonne.

well is hpin that kindeth wyldome,

vnderstaͤndyng:
1811 chr acebaunil ok it, is better then the marchaundileokluluer, and the gapne therok lis better then golde.
»Sheis moze worth then pretious tones: and all the thinges that thou cault delire, are not to be compared vn-

opm pecvighthanbe s long like, and in

er let hande riches and honour.
17 her Wapes are pleasaunt wayes, and allher pathes are peaceable.

„ 18 Shots a kree of lyfe to them that lay
Fphulde vpon her: and blesled is he that btpeth her last. —

9 With wyldome Hath the Lorde lapde the foundation ofthe carth and thorow

aris. 1

vnderstanding bath he stabliched the

heauens. 8 '

20 Thozow his knowledge the deapthes are broken bp, and the cloudes droppe downe the deawe.

d u Pylonne let not these thinges depart feom thyne eyes; but kepe wyldome and vnderstandinz:

22 So thep Hail be lpke vnto thy loule, and grace vnto thy mouth.

23 Then shalt thou walke sakely in thy wap, and thy foote Hatt not stumble.

— J The. ij. Chapter.

Of Solomon. sonne rekuse not the chasteuung ot 24 Ikthou sleepest, thou shalt not be a: Proud

fraide: but shalt take thy rest. a ben f hprest, and sleepe

25 wi ee not be afraide of any so-

dane feare, neither fox the violent
155 9. in of the vngodiy when tt com:
26 Fon the Lordethall tanoeby thy five,
€kepe thy foote that thou be not taken,
27 xatthdzarb no good thyng from them

that haue nede, so long as thyne hande

is able to do it.

28 Sap not vnto thy neyghbour, go thy ¢

Way and come agapne, and to morowe
Wyil J geue thee: where as thou hat nowe to geue hym.

29 Jntende no hurt against thy neyghbotte, seing he hopeth to dwell in rest by thee. i N

30 Striue not with any man without a i om hath done thee no

arnie.

31 Folowe not a wicked man and chole Prout.

none of his ayes:
32 Forthe Tod abhorreth the froward:

but his counsaple is among the righ- ore.

teous.
33 The curse of the Lord is in the house of the vngodly:vbut he blesleth the dwellinges ofthe righteous, —
34. As for the storntull, doth he not laug them to froze: but he geueth grace vnto the lowly. >’ |

35. The wyle Hall haue Honour in pol-

feffion: but shanie is the promotion that footes (hall haue. 4

ttaptoome and her kruites ought to be fearched. 14 Che wap of the wicked mut be rekused. 20 By the worde of God, the heart, eyes, and courte of like must be guyded.

we Sr Care O pe chyldren a
Ai fatherly inftruction, c take good heede, that

pe may learne vnderstanding.

For J Hane geuen ae
à goo 2 fake not pempiawe d dottrine, fo?

3 ae myleite was map fathees

Bei Soe nd tenderly belouedofiny mth * e tauabeme allo and fayde vnto me,
5 vue heart receaue my wordes,

epe nip ton chat inte eee and thou

5 Get ther wyldome, and get thee vn-

derstanding: forget not the wordes ol my mouth, and sheinke not from them.

6 Forsake her not, and the Mhall pre-

* thee, loue her, andthe shall kepe thee. .

7 The chieke popnt of wyldome, is to 23

poslesse wyldome: and before all thy goodes to get thee vnderstanding.

t

3 Make much okher, and she Mall pro- Deuxxvid

mote thee, pea if thou embrate her, she shall bryng thee vnto honour:

9 She chal brautifle thy head with manytolde grates, and garmihe thee with

a e of glozp. crown 965 00 to one

Psal. i. 2. and. xx vil. a

“2, nowedge.

Prou il. b. and, vi. a.

10 Heare mp sonne, and receaue my wordes, and the peres of thy life shalbe

manp. :
1 J haue shewed thee the way of pl

ponte, led thee into the right pathes.
12 So that if thou goest in them, there

hall no straitnesse hinder thee:t when

ou runnest, thou shalt notfall.

3 Lake last holde ol doctrine, and let her not go: kepe her, for she is thy life.

14. Come not in the pathe of the vngodlpe, and walke not in the way of the
Wicked: | n

15 Abhorre it and go not therein, depart aside, and pale duer by it.

16 For thep sleepe not extept they haue done mischiefe:and sleepe is taken from them, vntyll they haue done harme.

17 For they cate the bread of wickednes, and drinke the wine of robberie.

18 The pach ok the righteous shineth,

as the light that is euer bryghter and bryghter vnto the perfect day. =

19 Wut the way of the vngodly {Sag darkenesse, they knowe not wne he fal en i HEADED

20 My sonne marke my worde encline thyne care vnto my 3

21, Het them not depart fromm thine eyes

thyne heart:

22 Forthey are life bnto thofe that finde

them, and health onto ati

23 baal heart with for out of it issueth lyfe.

24 Put away from thee a frowarde

mouth, and let the lippes of slaunder h. karre from thee. 4 e

their bodyes.

25 Tet thyne eyes beholde that thyng thyne eye uddes

that is right, and let loke straight before thee,

26 Ponder the path ok thy feete, and let

all thy Wapes be ordred aright. gane ant e e nor Clete: but wihholdet foote from euyll. ae

The, y.Chapter. *

zhordome korbidden, 9 and prodigalitie. ij he wylleth a man to l e on his la-
＋ N to helpe others. 13 To louẽ his w eee pute on bista wichednes.

bowe chyne care vnto
. ps prudente: at thou mapest regarde good countclt, and that thy lippes may kepe knowledge. '

3 For the lippesofa straunge woman are à dropping honp combe, and her throte is more glistering then ople:

Wut at the tatte she is as bitter as

Wormewood, and as tharpe as a two

edged siworde.

5 Her keete go dowue vnto death, and her steppes pearte thorowe vnto hell.

6 Perchaunte thou 1 onder the path of her lyfe: fo vnstedkast are her wapes that thou cant not know them.

7 Ptare me nowe therefore O pe chyidren, and Depart not froni the woes of mp mouth,

8 Rape thy wap farre from her e come not nigh the doores of her house.

9 That thou geue not thy honour vnto other, and thy peres to the truell:

10 That other men de not filled with thy

Y fonne geue heede onto my wildome, and

ple. 22 The wicked taken in their owne

vertues, and that thy not in a straunge house.
Bea, that thou mourne not at the last, when thou hast spent thy bodye and lustie youth, and then sa z
12 Alas, why hated J nurtures why did my heart dispise correction:

II

13 Wherefore was not J obedient vnto

the vopte ol nip teachers, and hearkened not vnto them that enkourmed nie:
14 J was come almost into all uusfoz tune, in the middest of the multitude and congregation.
15 © Drinke of the water of thyne owne
Well, and ofthe riners that runne outo thyne owne spring.

16 Let thy welles flowe out abrode that

there map be riuers of waters in the streates: N 7

17 Wut let them be onlpe thyne ownt, and not straungers with thee. 0

18 Waiter — . 2 be gia

hthe wyfe ofthy pouth.

19 Let her be as the loupng Hinde and plealaunt Roe : let her breastes ana? satistie 0 55 and holde thee tuer co tent with her loue. 70 Why

but kepe them euen in the mddest of D

all duligence,

labours tome

f nt dun

Dearyiy

Deut yd. and. Md

C

fr
Cour.
2 fille v

Sople, ext de.
22 aye

thou my sonne haue pieant — woman, and embrace ebolome ofa ftraunger? sep every mans Wapes are open in
+ U taint of the Lord, aud he pondereth

all theit goynges.

ful

onforfaretics. 6 Che slouthfull and sluggishe is stirred to worke. 12 He dale nature of the wicked. 16 The thinges that God hateth. 2e Co obferuc

the worde ol God. 24 Co klee adulterie.

I sonne if thou be

e unetie ko thy neygh-

pot 10 Vee bor, and halt fatte-

exe ned thpne hande fo;
P| VHA another man:

va. 2 (wa Thon art bounde

— With thine owne wordes and taten with thine owne speach.

Therkore my sonne do this, and thou halt be discharged: When thou art tome into thy neyghbours daunger, go chywayes then soone, humble thy felfe,

ditour.) ;

4 Let not thyne eyes leepe, nor thyne tye uddes fluniber, ö

5 Saue thy selk as a Doe from the hand of the chünter) and as a byrde from the hande of the fouler.

6 Go to the enimet thou sluggarde, con-

87 * bath no guyde, nor ouerseer, nor ruler,
8 Bet in the sommer fhe prouideth her

, bhermithe Harnett, d? Hole long wylt thou fleepe thou

dut ok thy sleepe: a

daa o "Bea fleepe on (Hal a litle, Aumber a lifle, kolde thyne handes together pet a

ule that thou mayest sleepe:

u So chall pouertie come onto thee as dne that trauayleth by the way, and netellitie une a weaponed man.

n An vngodip perlon, a wicked man,
„ Wah wich atrowarde mouth.

3 120 wih his ate his eyes, he toke-

15 Ain . he teacheth with

c 14, de is cher imagining nuschiele and

wia es in his Heart, and cauleth

: Therefore syall his destruttion tome

22 The wichednes of the vngodiy hall

8 ¢ The. vi. Chapter. é

and with thy krendes intreate Coby cre· ar Type them contintally in thyne heart,

sider her wayes, and learne tobe Wyle:
23 * For the commaundement is a lanmeate, and gathereth her foode toge-

lluggiche man: When wylt thon aryse

tatche him selfe and with the snares ok
His cYone sinne shall he be trapped.

23 He shall dye without amendement, rn one — great foolishnes he tall go

hastyly vpon hym, fodainly (hall he be all to broken, and not be healed.

16 These sixe thinges doth the Torde ae and the seuenth he vtterly abhorreth:

17 A proude loke, a lying tongue, handes that shed innocent blood,

18 An heart that goeth about wicked imagtnations,“ feete that be swyft in running to nulchieke,

19 Akalle Witnefle that bungeth by lyes, ater, that soweth dilcogde among

zethien.

20 My sonne, kepe thy fathers tommaundement, and forsake not the lawe of thy mother:

Prou. xl. c

Plal hi-. rou . i. a.

and bynde them about thy necke.

22 That shall leade thee When thou goeft preseruethee when thou art alleepe, and when thou awakest talke wich thee.

Pfal.cxix:d 7 terne, and the lawe a light: pea chaste- ~ ning and nurture is the way of life:

24. That they may kepe thee from! the eupll woman, and from the flattering tongne of the straunge woman.

25 Tust not after her beautie in thyne heart, tet thou be taken with her fapze lokes.

26 Wy an harlot ca man is brought) to beg his bread, and a woman wyll hunte foz the pretious life of man.

27 Map a man take fire in his bosome, and his clothes not be brent-

28 Or can one go pon hotte coales, and his feete not be brent: f

29 Eulen ld, wholdeuer goeth in to his neyghbours wife and toucheth her, can not be vngiltie. N

30 2 en do not btterly despise a thick that stealeth to satisfie his soule, When

ie:
Matt unter G (ty) 31 But

Prou. v.a. and. vita.

Sap. xxii. a.

31 But ik he may be gotten, he restoreth agapne seuen tymes as muche, 02 els he maketh recompente with all the good of his house.

32 Bit whoso toimnuitteth adultrie with a wontan, lacketh vnderstanding: and

he that doth it, destropeth his olbne dule.

The Prouerbes —ĩ

33 He getteth him selfe a plague and Dit

honour, and his reproche N put out: che cha neuer be

34. Forthe ieloulte and wrath oftheman

wyll not be entreated,
35 No though thou wouldest offer m

great gyftes to make amendes not reteauethem. we wel

J The. vij. Chapter.

An exhortation to wyldome, and to the worde ol God. 5 vabiche wyll preserue vs lrom the harlot. Whole maners are difcribed,

Y sonne kepe my

Deut vi. b. words, and lap vp nip

and. xl. a.

ster: and call vnderstanding thy kinsecwoman:

5 That they map kepe thee from the straunge woman, and from the forraine woman which geueth sweete wordes.

6 For at the windowe of my Houle F loked though the windowe.

7 And bchelde among the sinple people aud among the chyldren a poung man voyde of wyt,

8 Gopng ouer the streate by the torner inthe wap towarde her house

9 Jnthe twylight of the euening, when it began nowe to be night and darke:

10 And behold there met hyma woman with open tokens of an Harlot, onlye

her heart was hid:

1 She was full of loude wordes and redye to dallie, Whole feete toulde not abide in the house:

12 Nobe is fhe without, nowe in the streates, and lyeth in wapte at euerp corner. a

13 She taught hym and killed him, and was nat ashanied, saping:

14 IJ hada vole of peate offeringes to pdp, and this day FJ perkourme it:

Pro. ii. l).
And. XI. a.

Eccle. ix. A.

15 Therekore tanie J foorth to meete thee, that I might seeke thy face :

haue J founde thee. tp face,and

haue deckt mp bed with coueringes

of tapessarte, and clothes ok Egypt.

17 My bed haue J made to 1 of
Mprre, Aloes, and Cinamon,

18 Comelet vs take our fill of tone vntyll the morning, and let vs solate our selues with the pleasures ofloue.

19 Forthe good manis not at home, he is gone farre of,

20 He hath taken the bagge of money with hym, and wyll returne at the ap: pointed solempne featt.

21 Thus with many lweete wordes the D ouertame him, and With her flattering lippes he entiled hym.

22 Sodainlp he folowed her, as it were an oxe led to the slaughter, and lykt as it were a foole ( that iaugheth) when he goeth to the stockes to be punished,

23 So long tpl she had wounded his lyuer with her dart: lyke as if a byrde hasted to the snare, not knowing that the perill of his life lieti ther bpon. N

24 Heare me now therfore O my chylde, and marke the wordes of my mouth:

25 Let not thyne heart wander in her wapes, and be not thou dercaned in her pathes.

26 FJor manp one hath Me wounded and tast downe, yea manp a strong man hath ben faine by the meanes ol her. 5

27 Her honse is the Wap vnto Hell, an 5 bryng men downe into the chaumber of death.

The

1 iP

Oth not * wyldome
Nerpez Doth not vnder-
Istanding put foorthher
2 pope?

She standeth in the
Mtopok high places, by the wap in the place ol

thes: N
Wehe pet at the gates of the titie, at che entrye ol the doores : t is vou O pe men (faith che) whom
4 Feall, vnto the chyldzen of men do J sylt bp u bopee,
Take heede vnto knowledge O pe ta noraunt, be pe wile in heart O pe fooles. s Geue care, for J Wyll speake ol great matters, and open my lippes to tell thinges that be right: g

37 Foz u mouth shall be talking of the ee and my lippes abhorre vngodlynesse.

8 zülthe wordes of mp mouth are ria: teous there is no frowardnes nor falsehood in them. .

They are all playne to suche as wpll vnderstande, and right to them that finde knowledge.

lo Reteaue mp doctrine and not filuer, and knowledge rather then fine golde:

u *Fo2 wyldome is moze worth then pretious stones, pea all thinges that
55 au delire, may not be compared

dit,

u Jwyldome dwell with tounsell, and
12 out knowledge and vnderstan-

B The feare of the Lorde abhorreth
Wickeones, pryde, dildayne, and the eull bay, and amouth that speaketh Wie-

ReOthinges J vtterlp abhorre.

¢ cum IS mine, and direction, Jam na h Three haue strength.

na me kin ine

1 e tust law va 2 a

ive princes beare

tien onndgetheearth rule, and noble th

Prodi d

Jam louing puto those thatl : one me: heed) that feebe me early, tall

8 Richesand honour ur are with me, pea
8 tae riches and rightroulnes 5 o kruite is better then golde and

ot Solomon.
Phe. viii. Chapter.

me declareth her ercellencie. un Riches, ij Power. 2: Eternitie.
„ heerhorterh all o laue and lolo we her. Be

peetions tones and mine encrease no
Worth then fine fuer, ‘i

20 J wyll gupde thee in the wap of righ: tedulnes, and in the midst of the pathes of iudgement:

21 That J mape stabliche taunte of them that loue ine, and en create their treasuce.

22, The Lorde him lelke had ine in pol spar b.

{effion in the begunung of his wapes, or euer he began his workes aforetime.

23 J haue ben ordapned from cuerlasting, and from the beginning or euer the carth was made.

24. When J was borne there were neither depthes nor springes of water.

25 Bckore the foundations of the mountaines were layde: pea befoze all hilles, was J borne:

26 The earth, and all that is vpon the earth was not pet made, no not the dust it selfe.

27 *Fo2 when he made the heauens, J

was present, when he compafled the deapthes about: a

28 When he hanged the dondes aboue, when he fattened the springes of the deepe:

29 When he shut the (ea within certaine boundes, that the waters should not go duer their markes that he commaun-
Ded: when he layde the foundations of

the earth, a

30 J was with him ordring all thinges,

deltting dayly and reiopsyng al way be-

fore hym.

B As for the rounde compasse of this worlde J make it topfull: for my delite is to be ãmong the chyldren of men.

31 Therefore hearken vnto me: O ye chyldren, blesseb are they that kepe my
Wayes,

33 P gene eare bnto nurture, be wple, and refuse it not: Blessed is the man that heareth me, watching dayly at nix
991155 any geuing attendaunte at the

ostes of my doores.

34 755 Wholo findeth mie, findeth life, and shall obtame fauour of the Lorde ..

35 Wut Whold offendeth agamnst me, hurteth his owne soule: and they that hate me, are the louers of death.

6 Ci) ke

the inhe- D

Eccle

24. b.

Sap. ix. b.

E

Gene. i. d.
Iob xxvi. a. and. 37 a.
Psal. cu. h.

“Dp, ag urisher.

of God. i; The conditions ok an harlot.

ss Mlbome hath buylded
(ber boute, and hewen

ö out leuen pillers:
She hath kylled her
A victuals, polbeed ont
A herwürr, and prepared

5 her table:
3 Shc hath sent foorth her maydens to crye vpon the highelt place of the title,

4. Who so is without knowledge, let him tome hither: And to the vnwilte (he fatd,

5 W tonie on pour way, cate my bzead, and drinke mp wine (whiche] J haue powred out for vou.

6 Forlake foolishnes, and pe Mall lpue: and see that ye go in the wap of vnderstandyng.

W 7 Whoso reproueth a stoznefull perlon, getteth hum selle dishonour:and he that a the vngodly, stapneth hym

elle.

8 Voeproue not a scorner, lest he owe thee euyll will: but rebuke a wysle man, and he wyll loue thee.

9 Geuc a discrete man but an occalion, and he wyll be the Wyler: teache a righ-

— ES ua ple * foune maketh

Treasures that are

e wickedly gotten, pro-

fite nothing: but righteonlnelle deliue-

reth from death.

Pag. 3 The Torde wyll not let the soule of

the righteous suffer hunger: but he taheth away the richesse of the vngodly.

4. An dle hande maketh poore: but a quicke labouring bande maketh riche.

5 Who lo gathereth in sonnner is wyse: but he that is sluggishe in haruest, briugeth hym seile to confusion.

6 Wleslinges are bpon the head of the righteous:and the mouth ofthe vngod-

. ly kepeth milchiefe in secrete.

i. Y Tht memoraall of the tut shall haue

Prou. xi. a. 2

Eccle. v. b. Rar <2 AS

J The. ix. Chapter. :
2 yldome calleth all to her feat. Che scorner wyll not be corrected. ia Che feare

The. x. Chapter.

¶ In this chapter and all that kolo we vnto the thirteeth the wife man exhorteth by df» uerg fentences, which he calleth parableg, to folowe vertue a flee vice, and sheweth al fo what prolfite commeth of wildome, and what hinderaunce proceedeth of koolichnes.

teous man, and he wpi daa * pul entreale in lo The feare ofthe TLordetst ning of wildome:and the fmolblone Pas’, holy thinges, is vnderstanding. Prot
I Jo thozowwe me thy dapes Mhalbepio- * ee Of thy life chall be
12 If thou be wile, thy wyldome tha thy (elfe good but i thou thinker tan
_ thevof,it shalbe thine owne harme.
B eave ane Woman fuil of des, and fuche a one a ene , 5 s hath no
14. Sittech at the doore of her bout, inthe hye places of the citic, au he
15 To call {uel as go by, and that walke straight in their ayes,
16 Who fo is ignoraunt scareth che) let hym come hyther: and to the vnwyle the faith,
17 Stolen waters are lweete, k the bread that is priuily eaten, bath a good taste.
18 And he doth not conlider that they are but dead whiche be there, and that her ghestes are in the deepe of hell.

à good repozt: but the nainc ok the bu: C godly shall stincke. .
8 Awyle man wyll receaue warning: a but a prating foole shalbe punished. pa
9 Moe that walketh vprightlp, Walketh surely: but wholo goeth a wrong Way, shalbe know en. Peck. 7d
10 *He that winketh with his eye, wyll caule sorowe: but he that path a foolithe mouth, shalbe beaten. . n The mouth ofa righteous man 1s a well of like: but the mouch of the vngodly kepeth milchicfe in setrete. | pei
12 Hatred stirreth bp strifes: but lout (07 ca uereth the multitude of sinnes.
3 In the lppes ofhümthat hath buderftanding, a man shall finde wpldcn t but the rod belongeth to the backe the foolishe. en
14 Wyle nien lap vp knowledge bt 5 mouth of the foolith is nye del The

7 iche mans goodes are his steong re a ote their owne pouertie feareth

ch 7 endeth
“ne labonr of the rightedusctendeth) e ate: but the fruites of the bugodly,

C. on ture kepeth the way of lyfe : but

Nye that reluleth tobe nurtured, detea-

hn lelke. —
1 a spe that hydeth Hatred with lying

afoole. —— ae ,
9 “phere much babblyng is there mutt

his lippes, is wyse. ' ehe tongue of the iust man is as aa tried liluet: but the heart of the vngodly

= igathyngofnaught. an
9 1 Lhe lippes of the ryghteous feede a
Whole nialtitude: but fooles Mati Dye in their owne folliee
1 The blellyng of the Lorde maketh iche: and bryngeth no sorowe of heart
33 Abe doth Wickedly, and maketh but a sport of it: but wildome ruleth the

man that hath vnderstandyng.

14 Thething that the vngodly is akraide

NH

xb.

Md Wayaht pleafeth him.

Where pryde is, there

shame alfo and con

e Ifusion: but wheras is

lolbtinefic, there is wildome.

The innocent dealyng of the tlt chall leade them: but the wickednesse of the
1 shalbe their owne deftrne-

geaunte: but ryghteoulnelle delineretl from death. n

Adereth his wap: dut the vngodly Mall
Was owe wiekennette. * ieiateducnelleok che ug wau de-
„ thee but the wicked halbe taken
5 When ane bagoblynette ** den an vngodly man dpeth, his fopetsgone: the confidence “of riches
0 perishe. montaberdus shalbe delpuered out in his e the vngodiy Mail come

a,

of Solomon.

g, and he that speaketh llaunder,

needes be offence: and he that refray-

32 Th

owe: but a true

ui 4 WMiches helpe not in the day of veun-

„The ryghteonlnelle ok the nmmocent

of, shall tome v teous shall haue their desire.

25 As the tempest, fo palleth away the vngodiy and is not: but the ryghteous remayneth five for euer.

26 As Dineger is to the teeth, eas snioke is vnto the eyes: euen so is a sluggishe person to them that sendeth him foot),

27 The feare of the Lorde maketh along

- Ipfesbut the peres of the bugonly thatbe chortened.

shalbe turned to gladnesse: but the hope of the vngodly shall perishe.

29 The way ofthe Lord geueth courage onto the. godly: but it is a feare for wicked doers.

30 »The ryghteous shall neuer be duer-

throwen: but the vngodly shall not vez nayne in the lande.

31 The mouthokthe tut wyll be talking

of wildome: but the tongue of the frowarde fall be cut out.

e lippes of the ryghteous vtter that which is acceptable: but the mouth of the vngodlp (speaketh] krowarde thynges. N

The xi. Chapter,
é st :

9 Tht dissembler with his mouth hurteth his neighbour: but theough knowledge shall the iust be deliuered.

fo When it goeth well with the ryghteous the citie is merp: and when the daz

godlp perishe there is gladnesse.

1 In the bleispng of the ryghteous the titie is exalted: but it is ouerthrowen by the mouth of the wicked.

12 A foole slaundereth his neyghbour: but a Wife man holdeth his peace.

3 »A dissemblyng person wpll discouer

priuie thynges: but he that is of a fayth-

full heart wyll kepe counsaple.

14 Where no countayle is, there the peo-

ple detap: but wheras many are that

can geue tounsaple, there is wealth.

15 He that is suretie fora straunger thall smart for it: and he that hateth suretityp is sure.

16 Agratious woman getteth hondur: but the strong inen attayne riches.

7 *He that is mertifull, doth hym selfe a benelite: but who fo hurteth his ueyghbour is a tiraunt. 0

18 The vngodip worketh deteiptfull workes: but he that soweth eee

pon bpm: but the rygh-

Pfal. exxv.a

Pfal, . c.

Oz, perisbe

Prou 14. d.

Prou. xc.

C
2. Reg. iz. a.
© Of, fall.

PDrou. vi. a,

a) That 10, uch an be of a flout courage and can abide labour.
Plal. 37. e.

19 Tyke as ryghteousnesse bringeth lyfe: euen fo to cleaue vnto cupll, bryngeth death.

20 Tht Lorde abhorreth them that be ol a torrupt heart: but he bath pleasure in them that are of an vndekiled conuersa-

tion * 8
D ar Though hand be ioyned in hande, pet be dend tlje Wicked fall not estape: but the seede e geen ok the ryghteous shalbe preserued. bannen: 22 A faire woman without dilcrete ma erden re? Ipke a ryng of golde in a wines noute.
23 The desire ot the ryghteous is acceptable: but the hope of the vngodly is indignation. *
24 Some man geueth out his goodes and is the richer: but the niggarde hauyng
{nough, wyll depart from nothyng, and vet is euer inponertie.
25 *He that is liberall in geupng, Matt

“Dz, to altogether good

U. Cor. ix- b.

The .xij. Chapter.

Ho fo loueth correction

lonech knowledge: but he that hateth to be re-

proued is a foole.

A good man is accep:
1 table vnto the Lorde:

but the wicked iniagluer wyll he tondenpne.

3 Aman can not endure in vngodlinesse: but the roote ol the ryghteous shall not be mowed,

conor: 4. A hul wikely woman isa trowne vn-

. to her husbande: but the that behaueth

her selfe vnhonestlp, is as corruntion in his bones. N

5 The thoughtes of the ryghteous are ryght: but the imaginations of the vngodly are deceptkull.

6 The talkyng of the vngodly is howe they may lay wapte for blood: but the mouth of the righteous will delmer thé,

W 7 God duerturneth the sestate or tye} Wit-

Pal ked and they stande not: but the houle

of the ryghteous (hall stande.
8 Aman shalbe commended ko: his wit dome: but a foole shalbe dispiled.

9 he that is dispised and is pet his owne

man, is“ better then the glozious that

lacketh bread. .

Aryghteous man regardeth the lyfe of his cattell: but the bugodiy haue truell heartes.

Backe xd. II e that tylleth his lande, Mall haue

D. connfaples.

Ca) Sobes

hare thee shat

other men

ntap e

prapse thre,

then chou thy 10 elle.

P — ? -
Ihe Prouerbes
- nesse (hati reteaue a sure rewarde. haue plentie: and he that w

shalbe Watered allo hymn feif — re
26 Who so hoordeth bp his come, halbe k=
——s the pau butbleftpng e pon his head that Faun

foode. chat genetp 1220

27 He that searcheth for goon on fyndeth fauour: but who fo scheih r milchleke, it atl happen vnto hym.

28 He that trusteth in his riches Mary haue a fall: but* the ryghteous thal florishe as the greene leafec. -

29 Who fo maketh difqutemeffe in his erkenne Te Ce n ae heritage: and the foote chalbe se to the wise. . *

30 The frutte of the ryghteous is atree

. of lifesand he that winneth mens toutes is wife,

31 Ik the ryghteous be recompensed 9 bpon earth: howe much moze then the vngodly and the sinner-

lenteousnesse of bread: but he that oloweth idlenesse is a verp foole.

12 The desire of the vngodly is a net of eupls: but the roote of the ryghteous bryngeth foorth fruite.

13 The wicked falleth into the {nave thorowe the malice of his one mouth: but the tut hall escape out of all peril.

14. Man halve satistied with good C thinges:by the fruite of his mouth, and after the workes of his handes hall he be rewarded. al

15 The wap of a foote is strapght in his owe eyes: but he that hearkeneth vue to counsayle is wile. 5

16 A foole btteretlh his wrath in all the halte: but a dilcrete man couereth his one Manic. d

17 Aint man wyll tell the trueth 5 chewe the thyng that is ryght: bu false witnesse deteaueth. *

18 Aflaunderons perfor pricketh yee
* : but a Wile mans tongue wholsome.

19 The lippe of trueth shalbe cable OY euer: but a dissemblyng tongue ll chaunged.

20 D Pelkipt is in the heart of chende wee euyll: but to the connlay

cace shalbe toy. ;

21 There Mall — aduersitie dune 1 the tut: but the vngodlp Mal with milerie. 72 The

lippes:

a bhorreth lyin
Ehr Zowe aby e hym.

bn they that deale truelp plea

„ A diltrete man doth hyde knowledge:

D 23 the heart of fooles blabderh out ii sse * tigen hande shall beare rule: but se idle halbe vnder tribute.
Heauinesle distourageth the heart of
1b 25 man: but a good worde maketh it glad

The .xup. Chapter? ehr

= waite sonne (wil hearken]
Ito his fathers war-
Vuyng: but he that is
> scorne ful wil not heare
7%. when he is reproued.

4 oo Ofthe fruite of a wile

- ; hans ben e mau eate good thynges: but the wicke chall ate of the fruite of the tranfarelfours .

3 ie that kepeth his mouth, kepeth bis wic: but who fo rachlpe openeth his lippes, desttopeth hym selfe.

The fluggarde woulde kayne haue and tan not get (bis delire:] but the foule of the diligent (hall haue plentit.

5 Aryghteous man abhorrech lyes: but the vugodip chameth hym selke, and is put to scilence. 5

6 Nyghteousnesse kepeth the wmocent in the Way: but vngodlinesse Doth ouerthrowe the sinner.

87 Some men make them lelues riche though they haue nothyng: agapne, fone male them lelues poore hauyng
» Arcat riches. 2

8 with goodes a man redeenieth his e _ lifesand the pooze wyll not be reproued. ex The lyght of the ryghteous maketh

e Copfull: but“ the tandesl of the vngodlp dee halbe put out. a

slo Among the proude there is euer strife:

but with the Well adiuled is wildome. i warn gotten goodes are loone spent:

ut they that be gathered together

with the hande, chall enereale.

un Pope dekerred greeueth the heart: but

be the dere cOnictl it is a tree of life.

Ble women vpholde
{SI their house: but a foolishe wyfe plucketh it

i} Downe,

he that walketh vp-
Iryahtliyt, feareth the
Tode: but he that

bol Solomon.

E f
26 e ryghteons excelieth his neyghbour: but the way deteane ne felines + rhea
27 The detiptfull man chan not rostt that he toke in huntyng: but the riches of the iust man is of great value.
28 In the Way of ryghteoulnesse there is lite: in the lame way there is no death.

i Tim. vi. b.
Hebr. ul. a.

3 Who so dispileth the worde, hall pe: rishe for the fame: but he that feareth the commaundement, Hall haue the rewarde.

14 The lawe of the wise is a well of life, to anoyde from the lnares of death.

15 Good vnderstandyng geucth fauour: but harde is the way of the dispilers.

16 A wise man doth all thynges with r but à foole wyll declare his

0 E. ; 25

17 An vugodliy meflenger kalleth into mischiefe: but à fapthfull embassadour is as health.

18 He that thinketh storne to be relourmed, tommeth topouertie and fhante: but who so regardeth correction, shall come to Honour. .

19 When a defire is brought to passe, it deliteth the foule : but kooles count it abomination to depart from eupll.

20 He that goeth in the tompame of wile men, Halve wiles but who fo is a come panion of fooles, shalbe afflicted.

21 Milchiefe foloweth vpon finners: but D the righteous shal haut a good reward.

22 He that is vertuous leaueth au heri- n taunte vnto his chuͤders children, 'the b e riches of p sinner is layde vp forthe iust. ene

23 There is plentcousnesse of foode in anner a the fleldes of the pooze: but the fielde ape not well ordered, is without fruite. Pele xx

24. He that spareth the rodde, hateth his Hb xi. b. fonne : but who fo loueth hym, chalteneth hym betymes. f „ pf

25 The righteous eateth and is satissied:

but the belly of the vngodly hath neuer enough.

C '

The .xinj. Chapter,

turneth hym felfe from his wapes, dilpiseth hym.

3 In the mouth of the foolishe is he merce
Hrodde of pryde: but the lippes of the 1
Wyle wyll prescrue them. a ue

4 Where no oxen are, there the cribbe is demea.

emptie: but much encrease ee nop Binks

5 Akatthkull witnesse will not dillenible: butt a false retorde wyll make a le.

6 A stornkull body seketh wil dome, ano fyndeth it not: but knowledge is casie

vnto hyn that wyll vnderstande.

W 5 Get thee from afoolifhe man, when thou perteauest not in hym the lippes of knowledge.

3 The wildome of the tircumspett man, is to vnderstande his way: but the foolishnesse ol the vndwise, deteaueth.

„Ol, che. 9 Fooles make but a sport of sinne: but there is a fauourable loue among the ryghteous.

io The heart knoweth his owne soules

bitternesse: and the straunger shall not

be partaker of his oy.

n The houle ofthe vngodlp thalbe ouerthrowen: but the tabernatle of the righteous (hall florishe.

n There isa way which feemeth right vnto a man: but the ende therof are the wayes ok death.

13 The heart is sorowfull euen in laughter, and the ende of mprth is heaulnesse.

14 A backe llpdyng heart shalbe fylled with his owne wayes: but à good man
Khali depart from hym.

15 An ignoraunt body beltueth enerp worde: but who fo hath vnderstanding,

N loketh well to his goynges.

16 A Wyle man feareth, and departeth from cupll: but the foole is angry, and tonunteth pi selfe sure.

17 An vnpatient nian dealeth foolishlp:

but he that is well aduised, is Hated
[of the koole.)

18 The ignozaunt haue foolishnesse in

N possession: but the wyle are trowned

With knowledge.

yo The euyll shall bowe them selues bez fore the good: and the vngodiy shall
Wapte at the gates of the ryghtedus.

20 The poort is hated euen of his owne neyghbours: but the riche bath many

Prou. villa.

Prou. x vl. d.
Deut va.

EOi. Iv. b.

C

The. xv.
A1 Solt auulwere ap-
Preaxxv.c 2 peaseth wrath: bit

rough wonrdes stirre

foolithe month it babbleth out nothyng but foolishnesse.

The Prouerbes the toyle of the ore. frendes. ea,

12 Who so dilpileth his neighbour, fring :

but blelled is he that hath pute of he D

poore.

22 Without donbt they erre that
— 1 — — b 0 2 — rate

, buto suc mertie and trueth. Malt Happen

23 In euerp labour there is fome profite: but bayne wordes bryng foorth onelp penurie.

24. Rithes art as a trowne vnto the wife but the ignozaunce of fooles is bery foolifyneffe.

25 A fapthfull witnesse delinereth foutes: but a deceiptfull witnesse bryngeth foorth lyes.

26 In the feare of the Lord is an assured
1 : and his children are vnder a fure defence.

27 The feare of the Lode is a well of ipfe, to anopde the snares of death.

28 In the multitude of people is the kynges honour: but the detay of the people is the tonfusion of the printe.

29 He that is patient hath much vnderstanding:but he that is soone difpleaten, exalteth foolishnesse.

30 Anierp heart is the lyke ok the body:

but enuie tonsumeth away the bones.

*He that doth a poore man wrong, blasphemeth his maker: but who fo honoureth him, bath pltie on the poore.

32 The vngodlp ts cast away Ne

mniquitie: but the ryghteous hath a good hope, euen in death.

33 Wildoime resteth in the heart ol hym

that hath vnderstandyng, and it shalbe knowen among them that are vnlearned. N

34. Righteoulnesse setteth vpthe people: but the facvifice of the heathen is sinnefull. 1

35 A dilcrete seruaunt is a pleasure bute the kyng: but his wrath is agaynst hy that doth dichonour hom.

Chapter.

late,

3 The eyes of the Lorde in euerb p

beholdeth both the good and the oe
4 A Wholfome tongue ts atcec af

2 thefeotwaronctte erat Dor

ad the spirite. Au.
5 A foole Difpiterh pts fathers cower:

but he that taketh heede when 0 buder-

proued, chall haue the ror

standpng. The

Run.

E

Prox xib fat, Xxx

pt, b

„Om a cb unt d * va

« 0.04 hymn ome

nic ol the ryghteous is full of b ites ut inthe * fruites of the vnodly there is trouble.

90d ropes ok the Wile do sowe know-
Dede peat of the fooliche do

edge: but che
48 or ore abhorreth the facrifice of

4 ttons i acceptable vnto hym.

* The way of the vngodly is an abho-

nimation vnto the Lorde: but who fo

oweth righteonsnesle, him he loueth.
10 W is greeuous vnto hym that forlaketh the wap: and who fo hateth correction shall dyve.
« n Hell and destruction are befoze the e gore: howe much moze heartes ok the thildren of men: ne h Alcornekull body loueth not one that rebuketh STs : neither wyll he come vnto the ple, ab B A mnery heart maketh a chearkull heart the mynde is heauy. e. The heart of hym that hath vnder-
115 of footes is fed with foolisynelle. *
1s All the dapes ol the poore are milehen 2 quiet heart is a continuali tat, ve, e 16. Better is a litte With the feare of the
Torde:then great treasire, and trouble therwith. l 1.
17 Better is a dynner of hearbes with loue, then a fat ore with euyll wyll.
18 An angry man stirreth vp strife: but he that is patient stylleth dilcorde.

NI.

xu

io The way ofa slouthfull man is as an hedge of thomes: but the way of the

ryghteous is plapne.

The xy; .

an may wel purpole

Asthe tongue conimeth ofthe Looe,

SS
Ney „ his wapes to becicane: wit the Lorde that ludgeth the

3 “Committ thy wo
Mes vnto the Torde: cent prosper. bisodne lag rh made all thpnges for
Day of ratty, pea, the vngodly forthe

of Solomon.

4 the bugodly: but the prayer of the righ-

then the

cuntenaunte: but by the sorowe ok the

standyng doth {eke knowledge: bnt the

a thyng in his heart: but the aunfibere ok

Aman thynketh all

20 A wyse sonne maketh a glad father:
> but afoolithe man aifpifeth b 1
21 Foolishnesse is top to hint that is destitute okknowledge:but a man of önder-

standyng walketh vprightl vp.

22 Thoughtes without counlaple chall on to pi be 5 men are

hat can geue good eounsayle, there is stedfastnesse. er ‘a

23 A iopkull thing it is to a man WHE his tounsaple is folowed: and howe good is a worde spoken in season.

24 The way of |
Wile,thataman beneath.

25, The Torde wyll breake downe the
Houle of the proude: but he Chall male fast the borders of the wydowe.

26 The Torde abhorreth the imaginattons of the wicked: but the wordes of the pure are pleafaunt, 8

27 The greedy couetous man rooteth vp

his owne house: but who so hateth re-

wardes shall lyue. a

his mother.

Oz, top ts to a man inthe

unswerte of

hu mouth.

fe is on hygh to the » Sy ue houlde beware of et ei ten

28 The heart of the ryghteons studyeth E

his aunfiverc afore: but the wicked mans mouth spueth ont mischiele.

29 The Lorde ts farre from the vngodip:

but he heareth the payer of the ryghteous. f

30 The tlearnes ot the eye! reioyseth the

heart, æ a good name feedeth the bones.

The cave that hearkeneth to the refourination of lpfe, chall dwell among the wyle.

(a) The chtarfulnesse of the countenaunce glabdeth other men.

32 He that rekuseth to be vefourmed, dil-

piseth his owne soule: but he that subnutteth him selke to correction, is wyle.
33 The keart of the Lorde is the ryght

goeth before Honour.

Chapter.

5 The Lorde abhorreth all such as be of

a pronde heart: and though hande be fopned in hande, pet they matt not be

vnpunished. ;

6 With mertie and faythfulnesse linnes be forgenen: and by the feare of the
Borde enyll is eschewed.

7 When a mans wayes pleat the Lord, he maketh his verpeneinies to be his frendes. >."

3 Wetter it is to haue a litle with ryghteonsnesse, then great rentes wrongfully gotten.

stience of wildome, and lowlpnesse

A man deuileth a way in his Wen Prou . xix e.

goynges. N

Io When the prophecle is in the tippes of the kyng, his mouth shall not go wrong in iudgement.

TLordes judgement: all the wayghtes of the vagge are his worke.

„igen (2 Wolcked Doers are an abhomination

Pen bene ko the kyng, for a kynges {tate shdulde

art ebd. be holden vp with ryghteoulneffe.

e, 3 Nyghteous lippes are pleafaunt vnto

gms fynges; and them that speaketh the trueth Hall he loue.

C 14 The kinges displeasure is a messenger
1 death: but a wise man wyll pantie gym.

15 The chearkull tountenaunte of the kyng is life: and his louyng fauour is as acloude of the latter rapne.

Prou, vil. a. 16 To haue wildome in possession, is better then to haue golde:and to get vnderstandyng, is rather to be thosen then to haue siluer. a

17 The path of the ryghteous is to eschewe euyll, and who lo loketh well to his wapes, kepeth his owne foule.

18 Pryde goeth before destruction, and an hygh mynde before the fall.
19 Wetter it is to be of humble mynde with the lowlp, thẽ to deuide the spoples

With the proude.

20 Desist handleth a matter wilely ob-

Phal.ii.d. teyneth good: and ö blessed is he that

putteth his trust in the Lode.

D 21 Doho so is wyse in heart, Kalbe called prudent: aud the lweetneslse of his

e Etter is a drpe morsell with quietnesle, then a oule full of fat offe-

f 0 ryng with strife.

„ 2 dh A dilcrete seruaunt

bend lewde sonne, and "Mat

Sage haut heritage with the brethren.

Sm. 3 As liluer is tryed in the fire, and golde

Pet. l b. in the furnate: fo doth the Lorde proue the heartes.

4 Awichked body geueth heede to falle lippes, and a lper geueth cave to a deteiptfull tongue.

Prouxiiid 5 Who fo scozneth the poore, blasphe-

lobxxxic. meth his maler: and he that is glad at
(another mans) hurt, Mall not be bn: punished.

he Prouerbes but it is the Lorde that ordereth bis lippes encrealeth learnyng. 1

Prouxia, Ii A true wayght and ballaunce are the

The .xvij. Chapter.

chan haue rule ouer a

22 Understandyng is a wellof! hym that hath it: as for the bance of fooles it is but foolishnesse. 8 alp, ae teeth learn clp, and muniltreth learn babe 7 ung vnto
24. Sap wordes are an honp combe.g rekrelshyng of the mynde, and health
= aoa Dealel of
25 There is a wap that menthpnketo bar, be ryght: but the ende therok! ay ae , 1 eadeth Eu. inh
26 A troublous soule dilqutetetl rudy felfe, for her owne mouth hath on 8 her therto. 5 : Bihan
27 An vngodly perfor stirreth vp eupll, r and in his lippes he is as an hotte bur-

nyng fyre.

28 A krowarde body rauleth strile:and he that is a blabbe of his tongue maketh deulsion among printes.

29 A wicked man begupleth his neygh- € bour, and leadeth hym into the Way that is not good:

30 He shutteth his eyes to deulle milchiefe:
1 moueth his lippes to bryng euyll to passe.

31 Age isa trowne ol worshyp, yt it be founde in the way of ryghteousnesse.

32 A patient man is better thẽ one strong: and he that tan rule hym selle, is moze worth then he that wynneth a citie.

33 The lottes are calt into the lappe: but the orderyng therof standeth all in the

6 Childers children are a trowne ofthe aged, and the fathers are the honour o the children. 8
7 Syeache of aucthoritie becommcth ips a 929 aie alping mouth en beseemeth a printe.
8 2 gylt is as a precious stone bute by that hath it: but vnto whom foeuer | turneth it maketh hym vnwile. 90 b. ate
9 who so couereth a fault, proclirr 69 8 joue: but he that dilcloleth it, vember) 1 very frendes. mau, ee
10 One reproole moze feareth a wile „Ws then an hundred stripes doth 4 ne. e. ison n A seditious perfon fekctl) alts “ 4 and fi weet nieslenger shalbe len gaynst hym. .
1 It were better to mecte aher ed

robbed of her WhHelpes, then afoole tongue, shal fall into mulchiele.

aeng in his foolichnelle. 21, De that begetteth a foole, begettet ie afb vewwacpetly eull fo: good, euil! his sorowe: and the father — fbole 1 bss 8 gyaiinot depart front Dis house. tan haue no iop.

5 myng of strife is, as whena 22 Amerp heart make a lustit age: but Prow.xiid,
€ 1 antl an illue foz water: ther- alorowkull mynde drpethj bp e. docd heath. fore leaue of before the contention be 23 The bugodly taketh gyktes ont ofthe co cvs is medled with. . bosome, to Wrest the Wapes of iudge- bziulue.
The Loge hateth as well hym that ment. 0
: lulttieth the vngodlip: as hym that ton- 24. Wildome renee ) in the fate ol hyn ede ocmpneth the innotent- ‘en that bath vnderstandyng: but the eyes
6 Wherto hath a foole trralure in his olkooles wander tlyzoughout al andes. bande tobpe wil dome, feyng he bath 25, Anm vndllcrete donne sa grleke vato pe!

erto- his father: and an heauinesfe vnto his are na eee that alwap loueth and mother. b e
7inaduerlütie a man tall knowe who is 26 Certaynlyto tondempne the iust is not hisbrother. f good: noz to ftrike the goucrnours
_ 4g Who lo peomileth by the haude and which iudge ryghtiy.

sfuretie for his neighbour, hetsakoole. 27 Awyle man vleth fewe wordes, and bebt
» hethatdelghteth infinne,loucth trek: aman ok vnderstandyngisofa patient: and who fo setteth his Dooze to Hye, fpicite. secketh destruction. * 28 Bea, a bery foole when he holdeth oli so Who fo hath a fro warde heart, obtey- his tongue is counted wyse: and he that neth no good: and he that hath a double stoppeth his lippes is esteemed prudent.

The. xviij. Chapter.

Ho fo hath an earnest and is in safegarde. desire (to wisdome] he 1 The riche mans goodes are his strong will sequester him selle titie, and as an hygh wall in his owne
Ito seke it, and occupie tonteipt.
II bun selfe in all stedkast- 12 Wefore destruction the heart ok a man
A nesse efounde doctrine is proude: and before Honour goeth
2 ’ A foole bath no Dez = Humiilitte, lyght in vnderstandyng: but only to vt- Iz he that geueth fentence in a matter Eedtexib, ter the fansies of his owne heart. before he heare tt, the fame to hym is
3 When the bngodty commeth, then kollie and shame. : comnitcth allo dildapne: and with the 14. Agood stomacke beareth out licknelle: ¢
Wan tounneth shame and 0 mynde beyng ficke, who Malt
: eale it:
4 The wordes ol acwitej mans mouth 15 A wyse heart poslesseth knowledge, are lpke deepe waters: and the wellok Faprudent eare teeketh vnderstanding. bad wudomeis ipke a full streame. 16 A mans gpft maketh an open wap, to
5 fe Shot good to regarde the person bryng hym before great men. . a vngo dip, to ouerthrowe the righ: 17 The ryghteous declareth his owne
: Fon tbgement, tause first bynrfteife, and his neyghbour and ban lippes tome with brawlyng, dtounmeth, and trpeth hym. K fand prouoketh vnto stripes. 18 The lot tauseth variaunte to teasse: tien a mouth is his owne destrur- and parteth the nughtie a funder. ownelt his lippes are the inare for his 1 Biethren beyng at bariaunce are een harder to be wonne then a strong citie, 5
110 des! ofa slaunderer are vers and their contentions are like the barre fernt and go through bute the in: okacastell. 1
9 e ok the body. 20 A maus bellp shalbe fatilfied with the the Both is flouthfull in his labour, is kruite ok his owne month, and with the o The er of bym that is a walter. enerease of his lippes Mall he be fylled. caltell 0 Of the Lowe tis a strong 21 Death and lpfe are in the instrument e,
» tHe ryghteous runneth vnto it, okthe tongue, and they that ue

A

eate the kruite therof.

Peoxxiiic 22 WH fo fyndeth a wyke, kyndeth a good chyng: and reteaueth fauour of the Lorde.

23 The poore prapeth meekelp: but the

4 1 Etter“ is the poore
Prow. 28.2. ia pay" that ttueth godly, then he that abuleth his
I suppes, and is a foole.
2 The desire without

e dilcretion is not good: but las] a man Which hasteth with his feete offendeth.

3 Tht koolishnesse of man paruerteth his way: and his heart fretteth agaynst the Lorde.

4 Viches niaketh many frendes: but the

poore is separated from his neighbour.

A falle Witnesse hall not be vnpunished: and he that speaketh lyes Hatt not escape.

The multitude hangeth vpon great men: aud cuerp man kauoureth hym that geueth rewardes. '

All the brethren of the poore do hate hym, pea his owne frendes withdrawe them selues from hym: and he that geueth credence to wordes, getteth nothyng.

3 Pe that is wile loueth his owne soule, andlepeth buderanding, that he may prosper. i

9 A kalse witnesse Mall not be vnpuulched: and he that speaketh tyes fall perishe.

10 Plcasure is not seemelp for a foole: much lesse for a bondman to haue rule of priuces.

In A wife man tan put ok displeasure, and it is his honour to let some faultes passe.

12 The obne displeasure is lyke the roaryngoka Lion: but his fauour ts lyke the deawe vpon the grasse.

13 An vudiscrete lonne is the heauinesse of his father, and a brawlyng wpfe is lpke the top of an house wherthrough it is euer droppyng.

14. Houle and riches may a man haue by the heritage of his eiders: but? a diltrete woman is the gylt of the Lorde.

Deu. xix a. 5

= D3, itherall 6 men shal want

Prou 28. d.
Psal. cn. a.

Pro. xvil. d.
Pro. x vit. b.

Pro. xvill, d.

“The Prouerbes —

The. xix. Chapter,

i ane —— my

24. A man that wyll haue fre

shewe hym selfe krendly: and . — frende which is nearer then abrother

15 Slouthfulnesse brpngeth fleepe a foute accuttomed with craft and ae 1 v erate, dan

16 Who so kepeth the tommau kepeth his owne soule: but helhar e gardeth not his wayes, chall dye.

17 He that bath pitie vpon the poore lendeth vnto the Lorde: and tote What
8 out, it chalbe papde hymn

18 Chalten thy foune while there ls hope: and let not thy soule spare for his crping.

15 Aman of great wrath all fuffer pumihinent: and though thou conce) delyuer bpm, thou mut do it agayne.

20 O geue care vnto good counfaple,and be content to be refourmed, that thou mapest be wyse in the latter dayes.

at There are many deutses in a mans pe heart: neuerthelesle, the countayie of the Lorde shall stande.

22 It is à mans worshyp to do good:and
à poore man is better then a lper.

23 The feare of the Lord ( bringeth a man) to lyfe:and he hall rest the whole night in plenteousnesse without vilitation of any plague. pawfb

24. A slouthfull man chutteth his haͤnde into his un and Nien not take payne to put it to his mouth. J

25 If thou finptet a scornefull perfon, . the ignoraunt (hall take better Hecde: and pf thou reprduelt one that hath vnderstandyng, he wyll be the wyser. „n

26 He that hurteth his father orshutleth out his mother, is a shamefull and an vnworthy sonne. 8

27 My sdune heare no moze the doctrine that leadeth thee vnto errours from the Wordes of vnderstandyng. 5

23 A wicked Witneffe mockelh WoT ment: and the month of the vugodle 1

deuoureth wickednesse. the

29 Judgementes are ordepned Bie scorne full, and stripes for fooles bate?

The

Onder
PIT hee gspne,

en

Ine maketh a man to
» A (| be stornefull, € strong dunke tansech a man to be vnquiet: who so
An delighteth therin {hat not be Wyle.
— pape f ig of a Lion, who fo prosas the roaring m sffenbethy a:

37 The chyldren ofthe lust man which

* waldech bprightip, halbe blessed after nt, |

g 2 kyng that sitteth in the throne of

his locke. . m9 Who tan sap, I haue made my heart tleane, J am pure from (my) firnez

ner ol measures, both these are abhomination vnto the Lorde.

1 Achylde is knowen by his conuersa-
2 workes be pure and

1 The eare to heare, the eye to fee: the
Lode hath made them both.

3 Louenot sleepe, lest thou come bnto pouertle:but open thyne eyes, that thou mapest haue bread inough.

14. It is naught, it is naught (faith he

Ome hau whenhe tommeth 5

beg nh 5 e, then he boasteth (

j There is golde, and a multitude of

The. xx. Chapter.

20 Who fo turseth

ludgement, chaleth away all euyll with

to Litho mauer of wayghtes or two ma-

pretlous stones:but the lippes of know: ledge are a precious iewell.

16 Take his garment that is surette for N

à straunger: and take a pied e of hyt for the vnknowensake. 5 me
17 Annan liketh the bread that is gotten

Prou. ix a. ¢ and. xxvu. b.

with deceipt: but at the last his month

shalbe filled with grauell.

18 Thorowe counsale, the thinges that men deuile are made strong: and with good adnise take warre in hande.

19 The traftie veteiptfull be wrapeth te: crete counsaple: therefore meddle not
With bym that flattereth with his lips.

his father and mo-

ther, his light shalbe put ont in the depth of darknesle.

21 The heritage that commeth batty:
Ive at the first, shall not be blelled at the ende.

22 Sap not thou, J wyll recompence eupll: but put thy trust in the Lorde, and he shall deliuer thee.

23 Dluers walghtes are an abhomination vnto the Lord, and a false balaunte is not good. a

24 The Lorde ordereth euery mans goinges: how can a man then vnderstand his owne wap -

25 It is a snare for a man to deuour that
Whithe is holy, and after the vowe to make inquirie.

26 A wyse kyng disperseth the vngodlp,

and bringeth the wheele ouer them.

27 The lanterne of the Lorde is the breath of man, learching all the inwarde partes of the body.

28 Mercy and trueth preserueth the king, and with louing kindnes his seate is holden vp.

29 The strength of poung men is their
Wordchip, and a gray head is an honour bute the aged.

30 Wlewe woundes dziue awap euypll,

Exod. x xi.
Leul. xx. b.

Deut. 3 c i Reg. xv a

Math.v.e.
Rom.xii.c.

D

Pro. xxiill. d

Iere. x. d.

i. Reg. xv. c.

Piovseixh

and stripes in the inwarde partes of

the bodp.

q The

A (RSL De" hyngesheartis in
Regis ee [aX the hand of the Zor, hola) Ic! lyke as are the riuers

455 lof water, he maye

turne it Whyther fo-

euer he wyll.

a — Euerp mans wap seemeth right in his owne eyes: but the
Torde pondereth the heart.

To do righteousnes and indgement, is more acceptable to the Torde then latrifite. *

An high looke, a proude heart, and the plowing ol the vngodly is firme. ©
5 The deulses of one that is diligent,

bring plenteousnesse: but he that is vn-

adulsed, tommeth vnto pouertie.

6 To hoorde vp riches With a 1 1991 full tongue, is vanitie tolled to and fro okthem that secke death. ö

The robberies ol the vngodly thalbe their owne deftruction: for they wyll not do the thing that is right.

W 8 The wap ofthe bngodly is frowarde

and straunge: but of the pure man his worke is right. a

Mich vi. b. 3

Dr, and

che tight of 1 the Wicked,

oz, the wozkts
15 the vngod-
F

houle toppe, then with a brawling wo-

man ina wide houle.
10 The soule ok the vngodlp wisheth euyll, and his neighbour findeth no fauour in his eyes. a

Whenthe scornekull is punished, the ignoraunt take the better heede: and when the wile is instructed, he wyll receaue vnderstanding. N

Prox. xix. d II

retl) the boule of the wicked, and for
Miexviid 13 ho fo stoppeth his eaves at Aaa ing of the pooze, he fhall crpe hym felfe

and not be hearde.

14. A prinie rewarde patifieth displea-

, Mires and a gyft in the bolome (dtinleth) furiousnesse. ö

15 The inst delighteth in doing the thing that is right: but destruction shalbe to the workers ol wickednesse.

I TheProuerbes

J The. xxj. Chapter.

23 Who fo kepeth his mouth and his p. u

dose 9 . Its better to dwellin a toner onthe:

12 The vig teate man wylelp confide: their wickednelle (Sod) ouerthzoweth

e ge

17 be that Dat) 9 in Dankett an des, Wallnothe “pr.

e

tust.

1 It is better to dwell in the wyldernesle, then with a chydyng and ah 25 * grye woman. i

zo Ina hile mans Houle there is a great trealure and oyle: buta fooliche body spendeth bp all.

21 Who fo foloweth righteoulnesse and merty,findeth both like, righteoulnelle, and honour. 88

22 A Wyle man staleth the citie of the mightie, æ ouerthroweth the strength wherein they trusted. a

tongue, the same kepeth his foute from > troubles. «a WW

24. He that is proude and arrogant, is cal: led a scorner, whiche mis Wrath wor
Beth prefumiptuoutly,

25 The desire of the slouthfull kplleth him: for his handes wyll not labour.

26 He toueteth greedylp all dap long: oe the righteous geueth and spareth not. :

27 The lacvifice of the vngodly is abhomination: howe muche moze When „ they offer the thing that is gotten wuh a wickednesses 8

28 A alle witnesse chall perishe: but s pa good} man speaketh tonstantiy what he

th hearde. —

29 An bngolp man hardeneth his face: but the tuft refourmeth his obne eh

30 Thereis no wyldome, there end pnt vnderstanding, there is no tounlaple a. gainst the Lorde. che page

1 The hore is prepared again OF Novas

; pap atbattaple ze but the Lore geucih vse

bictozie,

The

be desired then great
A i riches : aud louing fa-

» | woe (ts better then siluer and golde.

The riche and poore

== 1505 r the

eis the maker of ent all.

Awple man seeth the plague, and hypeth hym lelke: but the foolishe go on sull, and are punished.

By humllitie and the feave of the ore, ccommeth) riches, Honour, and

5 lens and snares are in the way okthe frowarde: but he that doth kepe his loule, wyll flee farce fromthe,

6 Tcache a chylde what way he should go: fo: he shall not leaue it when he is

olde.
37 The ryche ruleth the poore, and the horolber is seruaunt to the lender.

§ hethat soweth wickednes shal reape wickednes: and the rodde OF His anger shall fayle. ö

sig chethat hath a bountifull eye, halbe blelled: for he geueth ol his bread to the poore.

to Cat out the scorneful nan, and fo shal strife go out with hyn: pea variaunte and {launder sh all ceasse.

u Who lo loneth cleannes of heart, for he grate of his lippes the kyng halbe

his tende.

2 The eyes of the Lord preserut knowledge:and he duerthroweth the wordes ofthe tranlgrellours.

8B The flouthfull body faith there is a nt 2 han might be slaine in the

: 1 Themouth of straunge women is a be pit: Wherein he kalleth that the

Oude tS angrye wWithall,

5 Footthuesis bounde in the heart of

Hen thou sittest to cate with a noble man, consider Diligently what lis set before thee.

. Mealure thyne ap-
Abettte ik it be gredyly

28 Thon shalt not remoue the auncient

the chylde: and the rodde or torrection shall driue it awap.

16 Who lo Doth a poore man wrong, to C increase his owne criches) and geueth onto the ryche, at the tat commeth to pouertie hym selfe.

17 owe downethyne care, and heare the wordesofthe Wile: applic thy mind vnto my doctrine:

18 Jor it is a pleafaunt thing if thon kepe them in thyne heart, and order them in thy lippes:

19 That thou mayett put thy trust in the
Lowe, J haue Mherwed'thee this day

the thing that thon knowest. ioe

20 Daue not J warned thee very oft Erne
With counsaple and learning, .

21 That I might make thee knowe the trueth, that thou with the veritie nughth. aunswere them that sende vnto thee:

22 Robuotthe poore, because he is poore: and oppreite not the {imple in iudgement:

23. Fozthe Torde him selke wyll oefende their tanle, and do violence nto them that haue bled violente.

24. Manke no frendship with an angrye 7
Wylkull man, and walke not with the 4 furious:

25 Lelkthoulearne his wapes, and vez teaue hurt to thy soule. .

26 We not thou one of them that binde their hande vpon pron ile, and are luretie for waightie tauses:

27 Jop ikthon hast nothing to pay, they pal take away thy bed from vnder thee.

D

Ptou. vi a. and. xi. b.
XXXVILC,
“Dz, detteg

“Dz. why canich thou hyn to take.

Pro.xxita lande marke, whiche thy fore elders Deut haue set.
29 Seest thou not that they which be diz

ligent in their businesse stande before

kinges ,t not among the simple people:

The. xxiij. Chapter,

set. g

3 Be not desirous ok his daintle meates, for meate begyleth and deceaueth.

4. Take not ouer great tranayle to be riche, beware of suche a purpole.

9 ( 5 Wylt

Iere.xvii b. ecle. 27. a.

. >... — — —

Wylt thou fet thyne eye vpon the

I. Tun. vi. b.

Jor riches make them selues wynges, and take their flight lyke an Egle into the ayre.

6 Eate thou not the bread of hym that hath auc o euyll epe: neither desire thou his daintie meate.

For as though he thought it in his heart, he saith, cate and dainke: where as his heart is not with thee.

8 The niorsels that thou Halk eaten chalt thou parbreake, and loole thofc lweete wordes.

9 Tell nothing into the eares of a foole:

for he wyll despise the wyldome of thy

wordes.

Nemoue not the olde lande marke, and come not Within the fielde of the fatherlesse: 2
I Foz their redeemer is mightie, euen

he shall defend their caule against thee.

12 Applye thyne heart vnto corzrection, and thyne cave to the wordes of knowledge.

3 »Withholde not torrection from the chylde: fog ik thon beatest hym With the rodde, he shall not dye thereof:

C 14 Ikthou smpte hym with the rodde,

©) from F thou shalt deliuer his soule from hell.

15 My sonne ik thy heart receaue wyldome wip heart also shall reiopte:

16 Pea my rapnes shalbe verp glad, if thylippes speake the thing that is right.

17 Wet not thyne heart be ielous to fo-
Lowe fiuners, but kepe thee styll in the feare ofthe Lorde all the day long:

18 Jor veryly there is an ende, and thy patient abiding Mall not be cut of,

19 My fone geue cave and be wyle, and
{et straight thyne heart in the wap Col

N the Lorde.]

Proaxxic. 20 Kept not company with wine bibbers, and riotous caters of fleshe:

6) Meaniug je cnuion

d couetous

Prou xi. d.
Deut. 27. c.

Prou. xiil. d.
Eccle. 30. a.

Prou. 24. a. c

6 The. xxilij. Chapter.

E *not thou enuious to folomw wicked men, and desire not to be a-

A 1
Pro. xi d and. xxiiu. c

A Foz their heart imagineth to do hurt, and their lippes talke mit

* chieke. N
3 Thorowe wysdome is an houle buyt-

The Prouerbes nnn

thing which sodenly vanicheth away?

2 Purchale trueth, wyldome, nurture

21. Jor suche as be drunkardes tours hall come to pouertie — K that is geuen to muche fleepe, chall with a ragged coate. 4

22 Gene care vnto thy father that be thee, and defpile not thy mo ＋ she isolde. be mother When

D

and vnderstanding, and fell themnot.

24 The father of the righteous thay greatly reiopce: and he that begetteth a Wyle chylde, hall haue toy of hym.

25 [Do bo that] thy father and mother may be glad of thee, and that fhe that bare thee map reiopee.

26 My sonne gene me thyne heart, and let thyne eyes haue plealure in my
Wapes:

27 For An Whore is a deepe graue, anda on straunge woman is a narowe pit.

28 She speth in wapte as kor a pray, and intreaseth the transgreslours anongtt men.

29 Who hath wo: who hath sorowe- who hath strife- who hath brawling- and „ who hath woundes without a caulez

30 Or who hach red eyes euen they

that be euer at the wine c seeke extelle.

Tooke not thou vpon the wine howe

red it is, and what a colour it geueth in

the glassme

32 It goeth downe lweetelp, but at the last it byteth like a serpent, and stingeth
Wehre epesch 1 holde straunge 1s“

33 Thypne epes chall beholde re, women, and thyne heart shall beter p=" lewde thinges: ;

34 Bea thou (halt be as though thoulay et in the middelt ofthe (ea,o2 slepest by pon the top of the matte of a ftv.

35 They haue beaten me (chalt thou tr! and J was not icke, they haue len me, and J kelt it not: When J am 10 0
Wakened, J wu go to the daiubke again.

ie seit’ let bp. 88
DED, k with vnderstanding ts it let üb.
4 Thdrosbe dilerrtion fyall te ya
7 be pin with all coftly and p aunt riches.
5 mite man isceuersftrong: yeaa of vnderstanding merealeth Arc cles be
6 For With diltretion mutt 5 taken in hand: and where 5 ig healt) that tan geue tounfalle the, Woldouie

of Solomon.

Wyldome is to bye athyng for a foote:

5 sorhe dare not open his niouth in the

gale. nat imagineth milthiele, mape e that imagineth müchiete,
: rfl N called au vngratious perlon.

The witked thought of the foolishe

(g lune: and the stornefull is an abhomination vnto men. b ,

se o OPFthoube fapnt in the day of aduerfitic,thy strengtij ts mall.

Deliver them that are drawen vnto death, aud ceasse bis to preserue them are led to be slayne: .

1 Agkihou wylt fay, beholde J knewe

not of it: Doth not he that pondereth

the heart confider it? And he that kepeth thy foule, knoweth he it not:
Shalt not he alfo recompence every man according to His Workes-

3 Mylonne, eate thou hony because it is good, 9 1 ony combe, for it is weete vnto thy month:

0 S0 he the knowledge of yf: dome be vnto thy soule when thou Hatt found it: and there shalbe hope, and thy hope shall not be cut of, :

is Lape no pinie wapte (O wicked man) again the Houle of the rightedus and spoyle not his resting plate. l 16 Fbr a tust man falleth seuen tymes, and ryleth bp agayne: but the vngodlp fall into mischiete. N vis 17 Reiopte not thou at the fall of thyne enenuie, aud let not thyne heart be glad when he stumbleth: N
8 Testthe Lorde when he feeth it be angry, and turue his Wrath from hym
(onto the.)
19 Frtt not thy selfe because ok the malivhs neither be enuious at the wic-

‘a, 20 Forthe wicked Hatt haue no poste-

nile and? the candle of the vn odly shalbe put out. oy

amis ptt

Ul

21 My tonne; feave thou the Lorde and the kyng, and kepe no company with them that sude backe trom hig leare:]

22 Forr their destruction shall rile sodainlye: aud who knoweth the aduersitie that pice — ‘trom them both.

q Thefearealfor e fayinges of th L.

23 It is not goodto bautevefpect of anp

person in iudgement.

24 He that saith to the vngodiy thou art righteous, hym Mall the people turse, pea the tomminaltie halt abhorre him:

25 Wut they that rebuke (the ongodty) ln them doth God delight, and a rych dick: suig shall tome vpon chem.

26 Euery man shall kisse his lippes that geueth a good aunswere.

27 Make redie thy worke that is With-
Out, and looke well vuto that whiche thou Hatt in the fielde: and then buylde thyne house. N

28 We not a false witnesse against thy neighbour, and speake no kalsehood
With thy lippes.

29 Sap not, J wyll handle hym euen as

Prou. xX. A.
« 4

Oz, ol them both.

Pro. xviii. b

he hath dealt with me: and wyll re- E

warde euerp man according to his deedes. N

30 J Went by the fielde ofthe slouthfull, and by the vine parde of the foolilhe man:

31 And lo, it was all couered with nettles, and stoode full of thornes, and the stone wall was broken downe.

32 This F (ae, and consdered it wel:
I looked vpon it, and toke it fora warning.

33 Bea steepe on styll J tar) a litle, dun ber a litte, folde thy handes together pet aà litle:

34 So shall pouertie come vnto thee as one that trauapleth by the way, and necellitie ipke a weaponed man.

The v. Chapter,

Y Thefe are also parables of Solomon, which the men of Ezekia king of Iuda copied out.

ez) is the glory of God

cokepe a thing fecrete:

Sͤsbut the kpnges ho-

ye Wer: to searche out

The heauen is bye,

the carth is deepe: and the fringes heart is vnsearcheable. |

3 ake the drosse from the siluer, and there shalbe a vessell for the finer,

4. Lake away the bugodly from the kpng : and Oe * shalbe stablished with righteousnesse.

eS iy ees

O, he nian, :

Prow.xii.b.

Prou.vi.a.

‘The Proue rbes

5 Put not foorth thy selfe inthe prelence ofthe king, and preasse not into the plate ot great nien:

6 For better is it, that it be sapde bute thee, come vp hyther: then thou to be put lower in the presente of the prince whom thou seest with thyne eyes.

7 We not hastie to go to lawe: left haplye thou knowest not what to do When thy neighbour hath confounded thee.

3 Handle thy matter with thy neigh: bour himselfe, and distouer not thy letrete to another: ö

9 Lest he that heareth it put thee to schame, and thy infamie do not ceasse.

10 A wodde spoken in due feafon, is lyke

apples of golde in a graued worke of file

uer.

1 Who fo reproueth a wyse man that

haath an obe dient eare, is as a golden carring, and an ornament of fine golde.

12 Agthe colde of snowe in the tyme of
Harriett: fo is a fapthtfull meffenger to them that endebpym, kor he rekrescheth his markers uipnde. ,

13 Whoso maketh great boastes and geuctlh nothing, is Ipke eloudes and winde without rayne.

C 14, With pactence Sa prince pacified, and

"D2, of kalle
(1 beralitte.

des » wlth a fofte tongue ts * rigozoufneffe
Prou.xv.a. broken. ' 1 3
Gees. 15 If thou findest honie, cate fo muche

as is suffitient for thee:lest thou be ouer full, and parbreake it out agapne.
16 Withdrawe thy foote from thy neigh-

M1 kt as snowe is (not
( meete) in sonimer and rayne in haruest: cuen fois worchip vnsceine-
5 ity fo2 a foole.
2 As the byde and the
—— swalowe take their flight aud fice here aud there: fo the turse that is geuen in dayne, Mall not light vpon a mau.
Place b 3 Vnto the horse belongeth a whip, to

the alle a brydle:and a rod to the fooles acke.
4 Geut not the foole an aunswere after

pours housene

The be werie of thee 4 fo hate thee, ‘ thee, and

17, Whoso beareth falle witnesse agalnst

his ucighbour, he is a ver 97 sworde, and a sharpe arrobe. eu, a

18 The confidence that is put in an vnfavthfull man in tyine of trouble, is like

A bzoken tooth, and a Aiding foote,

19 Who fo taketh away a mans gar-

ment inthe colde weather, is like bine- „e er bpon lime. or lpke hymn that singeth *. th to an dane , ? ö

20 If thyne enemte hunger, feede g if he thirst, geue him drintke: Deu, *

21 For so shalt thou heape coles of fire D

vypon his head, and the Lorde chall rewarde thee. f

22 Tht nortchwinde drpueth away the rayne: euen so Doth an angry countenaunte a backbiters tongue.

23 It is better to sit in a tormer vpon the av house toppe, then with a brawung woman in a wide house.

24 Good newes front a straunge coun:
Hh, are as colde water to a thlrstie

dulce. ö

25 Arighteous nian fallpug downe before the vngodlp, is like a troubled wel, and a spring that is corrupted.

26 As it is not good to eate to muche honye, fo curiouslpto searche the glory of heauenlp thinges, is not tommendable.

27 He that tan not rule him lelfe, is like
A citie whiche is broken downe and hath no walles.

u Of, bis
(pits,

¢ The. xxvj. Chapter.

a foolichnes, lest thou become like Liv

to him. g

5 But make the foole an aunfbere to bis foolishnelle, left he be Wyle in hs olbne conceipt. 4

6 [As he that] cutteth of (his eee 1 fecte endamageth humseife: lo doth he that coumutteth a meffage to Abe,

Like as in a lame man his legges ; pa dun : a fo is a parable doles mouth. ——

g He that letteth a foole mhpe diene that is euen as ia man would by tone ina sling.

ie 1 cn bt 1 f.

gab Den
9 Ab = dere l dus.

-of Solomon.

hose in the bande of a drun-
‘ ea 5 aparablein a fooles mouth.
The magbtie that kourmed al thinges,

h A pardetl the fooles ¢ transgreslours:
Ake aS the dogge turneth agapne

: ‘eth his koolichnes agayne afvethe.
1 chen feefta man that is wile in his oldne dance there is more hope in a

foole then in hmm. berge doutijfull saith, there is a lion inche wav, and alion in the nuddest of reates. os J
! tye as tHeDoore turneth about bpon che hyuges: euen fo doth the flouthfull

walter lm selke in his bed.

wt is The flouthfull body thzusteth his nes” pande into his bofome, and it greeueth hym to put it agapne to his mouth.
16 The Muggarde thinketh him feife winm ltt then leuen men that lit and teache.
% Who fo goth) by and medleth with

aa B

ketha dogge by the eares. N
18 Ashe that kayneth bun ele mad, ca-

daͤrtes: — 1 v So doth a dillembler with his neigh-

Ake not thy boatt of i to morowe: * for thou
A V. day map bzing foorth.
Op) et another man
"KGS praple thee, and not thyne owne mouth,

3 ae i Heante, and tbe Lane
: but a fooles Wath is heauier then them both. ee

nesse is a very : wabdeenr: bes bit whots able

s Fapthkull are the woundes ofa loner:
* lu the kylles of an enemie are cruell.

doimbe: but v ; dan edu onto hym that is hungrye,
3 ehen htelcderke. oT imes fli that onttseth 85 me s iche aby

Saulnre and lwecte intense make the

f

other mens strike: he is like one that ta-

steth firebrandes, deadly arrowes and

yea other folkes, and not thyne owne lippes.

4 Muathis a eruell thing; and furidul-

5 bee rebuke, is better then fecvete -

De that is full, abhorrech an honye

cm

ohis owne vomite : euen so afoole be-

20 Where no wood is, there the fire go-

bour, and saith, am not J n pots

eth out: euen so where the talevearer | istaken awap chere the ttrife tealleth.

21 As toles kindle heate, and wood the kd. cin b fire: euen fo doth a brawlüng kelowe D stirre bp variaunce. > ccnbee an

22 A talebearers wordes ave tyke * men that trike with hammers, and they pearse the inwarde partes ur the body.

temious. e
„Pz. ag flatteringeg.

2 Wurntag lippes and a wicked heart,

ave lke a botthardetouered wih fituer

20 le. 2 2 shalt 3 12

24. An eneniie wyll dislemble With his hebe and lapeth bp deteipt in his eave, rt... f

25 Wut when he speaketh kayre, belcue hym not: for there are seuen abbot:

"D2, manp.

—matilons in his heart.

26 Hatred maye be couered by dereipt: but the malite thevof shalbe shewed before the whole congregation.

27 Who so diggeth vp a pit, shal fall ther- Kue b. in: and he that rolleth vp a stone, it wyl Rb returne vpon hym.

28 A lping tongue hateth the afflicted:

te The. xxvii. Chapter. — 1

and a flattering mouth wozketh mil chiefe. a

heart merie: fo sweete is that krende that geueth countell froin the heart.

Io Thpne owne frende and thy fathers frende fee thou forsake not, and go not into thy brothers house in tyme of thy trouble: lor better is a frende at hand, on?" then a brother karre ot.

1 My forme be Wyle, and make nie a glad heart, that J may make aunswere vbuto mp rebukers.

12 A wyse man seing the plague, wyll hide Hymn selfe: as for fooles they go on styll and suffer harine.

3 Take his garment that is suretie for prousce. a straunger, and take a pledge of hym C for the vnknowen fake, 8

14. He that is to hastie to praise his neigh- ane dere, bour abgue mealure, shalbe taken as suing eavesn one that geueth hym aneupli report. « dee en

1 Abrawling woman and the roofeof 15e the houle droppingina raynie day, may an
Well be compared together.

16 Pe that stilleth her, stilteth the winde, and stoppeth the smeil of the oyntment

in his hande. in his J) (iti) 17 Like

Prou, xxii.

a
E oa

D, fharpe the counte:

fo Doth one man * comfort another.

13 Wholo kepeth his figge tree, shall cate the fruites thereof: fo he that wayteth vpon his maister, (yall tome to honour.

19 Like as in one water there appeare

diuers fates: euen so diuers men haue

diners heartes. *
20 hell and destruttion are neuer full: kedle ia. euen fo * the eyes ol men tan nener be
Eecle. xiiiiaa satistied. „„ e zd 21 As is the fining pot for the filuer, and the furnate for golde: so is aman tryed

by the mouth of hun that prayseth him.

22 Though thou shouldest brap a foole

with a pestel in a morter like furmentie

¢ The.xxviij. Chapter.

he bugodly fleeth
N l when no man purlueth him: but the righ-

tcous are bolde as a
Lion, f

Leui. xxvi. c

— the lande, the printe is oft thaunged: but thorowe a man of

vnderstanding and wyldome, a realnie endureth long.

z, men.

3 Pune pooze man opprefling another

Oz, foode.

by violence, is like à raging rayne that

destropeth the krulte.

4. Thep that korsake the lawe, prapse

the vngodly: but luch as keye the lawe are greened at them. a

5 Wicked men vnderstande not iudgement: but they that {eeke the Lord, vnderstande all thinges. —

6 SBetter is he that walnketh in his vprightnes: then he that peruͤertet h bis wapes, and is riche. 1

i. Cor. il. d.

Pro. xix. a.

“D3, fecdtth gluttong.

vnderstanding: but he that is a come

panion of riotous men, chameth his ka-

ther. * 5

8 Hethatby blurle and vniust gapnes

gathereth riches: he shall lay thein iu

froze for a mau that will pitic the poore.

9 ehe that turneth away his care from

hearing the lawe, his prayer halbe abhoininable. f

10 Mho lo tauseth the righteous to goa:

strap by au euill wap, Mall fall into his

owue pit: but the tule shall haue the

good in possession.
1 The riche man thinketh hym selfe to

Pro. i. b.

6 ‘The Prouerbes
17 Like as one iron whettech another, tore; pet Wyll not his foollsh nes gg > :

26 The lambes (halt clothe thee, and for

38 F02 the wickednes ol .

16. Where the prinee is without bnder-

iy Hethat by violente shed

„ Who lo kepeth fhe lawe, is a chylde of

from Nun —

23 Be thon diligent to knowe the stat of thy cattell thy felfe, and lo
Waage — — PORE Well o

24.-F702 riches abMeth not alwap and en; cone

25 LG Vay groweth, the grasse commeth vp, and hearbes are ga * the mountaynes. Vathered in the goates thou shalt Hane money

thyhulband y. — pie i

27 Thou halt haue goates mute tnongh

to feede thee to vpholde thy houcholde and to sustayne thy maydens.

be Wile: but the poore that hath vnderstandyng can perteaue hym well c= mnougg. 17

12 When righteous men do reiopte, there ga is great glory: but when the Wicked Pov: tome vp, the man is tryed.

3 He that hydeth his finnes, shall not vb n prosper: but wholo knowledgeththem Pe and forsaketh them, chall haue mertv.

14. Well is hym that standeth alway in C

~ ale: as fo2 vm that hardeneth his heart, he shall fall into muschiefe.

15 As a roaring Lion and an hungrye
Weare, so is an vngodly printe ouer the poore people.

standing, there is great oppression and wrong: but ifhe hãtetch touetoulnes, he hall long raigne. — | jeth ANP mans o. blood, chalbe a runnagate vnto his graue, and no man chalbe able to luv tour hyn. a By, be
18 Wholo leadeth an innocent life, Hale Per be faued: but he that goeth frowarde wapes, chall once hane a fall. b. Peg
19 “He that kolleth his lande all YAU ber plenteoufnes of bread: but he that 4 joweth idle perlons, Mall haue pont ? tle inough. with “a
20 A fapthfull man chalbe folled face nose bieffinges, and he that mateth Halte pres to be riche, hall not be vngvltie. fag
21 To haue refpect of perlons 1100 ment}is not good , fo chatman nen wrong, yea tuen for a peeteo been
22 Me that wyll be riche all to soone . a

l Solomon.

cuyll eye: and confidercth not that inthe Lorde Marve well fed.
1 26 De that trusteth in his owue heart is
9 2j He that folowyng mp preceptes rebu- _ Afoole: but he that dealeth Wilely shal-
B nttha man, (all fpnde moze fauout at be fate. . bttelali chen he that fiatterethhom. 27 “He that geneth ho lo robbeth his father and mo-
2 er, and layth it is no sinne: the fame: isthe tompanion ok a destroper.
* 15 he thatis of aproude stomacke stirreth ppttrife: but he that putteth his trust

li.

aouertie chall come vpon hym.

vnto the poore Matt il. Core b. not lacke: but he that 15842 his 0 1 from them, shall hane many a curse. ;

28 When the vngodly are come vp men proursh are fayne to hide them selues: but when N

they perishe, the ryghteous encreale.

Ith 4
E

8 ' ; ala f 5
The. xxix. Chapter.
Bue 147 1 . al —

c that is stifnecked iudgeth the poore, Chall continue sure and wyll not be rekour- fo euermore. .
Amed, chall sovapnly be 15 The rodde and correttion geueth wil C destroyed without dome: but a childe left to his one will, e e shame.

any helpe. bsept
When the ryghteons 16 When the vngodlp are multipleed,
— are in autthozitie the wickednesse enerealeth: but the ryghpeople do reioyte: but When the wicked teous shall see their fall. beare rule the people mourn. 17 Nurture thy sonne with correction,
; Who ld loueth wildome, maketh his and thou shalt be at rest: yea, he Mall do a fatheraglad man: but he that kepeth Mec good at thine heart. a companie with harlottes, spendeth 18 When the worde of God is not preaaway that he hath, 2 Oe ched, the people perishe:but well is hym
4. With true) iudgement the kyng sta- that kepeth the lawe. ie blischeth the lande: but pf he bea man ro <2 (tubbourne) (eruaunt wyll not be the that oppresse the people with gathe- better kor wordes : for though he be rynges, he turneth it vplide downe. derstande, pet will he not regarde them. hoo flattereth his neighbour, layeth 20. Seest thou a man that is hatte to a net for his fete. speake vnaduisedly- there is moze hope
é The finneof the wicked is his owne ma foole then li hym. * suare: but the ryghteous doth syng and 21 He that delieatelp bryngeth vphis ser- D eio pe. nau from a chylde, chall make hym
8 7 Therighteons considereth the tause oy his maister at sengt z. ad de the pode: but the vngodib regardeth 22 An angry man stirreth vp strife, and * de buderstand ng. ßhhe that beareth eupll will in his myndte
8. Stomnekull ngen beyng a citie uto a doth much eu yl. 7
Hark but wife men turne away Wrath. 23 on pryde commeth a fall: but a pers em
7 Mawile man tontendeth wirhaldole: lol spixite bryngeth great worshyp. »=.
.. Whether he be angry or laugh, there is 24 Who so is partner with a thiefe,
Nore, Se CLG res et hateth ‘ns owne soule: he heareth

they, lo Lpedloonthirttic hate the righteous: blasphenmie and telleth itnotfoorth. “ta
2 e eke heetoute. 25 He that keareth men chall hauen fall: bil ade pttereth al his monde at oute: bit Who fo putteth his true tn the
Wade dee man kepeth it intpll alter Lorde, is without daunger. .

26 Maͤup there be that letze the peintes

Ahn. Thee are
"pore and the lender meete to-
. cherten the Lorde Ipabteneth boch
14. Th 1 — — - .
The fate or ehebyng that “faithfully

* Dapiince delight in pes, all His fer: vngodl r.

faudur: but euery mans indgement

tomniech from the Lorde. .
27 The righteous abhorrech the bugod-

we: and the wicked hateth hyni that is

Weer.
Me e e The

. @ THE wordes of Agur, the sonne of lake:
1 And the prophetie thatthe same man spake vnto Ithiel, euen vnto Ithiel and Uchal. .
‘ | Uirely Jam more fooj lie then any man,

ae | verftandpng.
Incuer learned wile
Dome, nor had know-

R R „ „

4 Oho Hath tlymed vp into heauen, and
9 ome downe from thencez who hath

ters in a garnient? who Hath establis-

is his name, and what is his sonnes naine, yk thou tanst tell-
Psal. xix. e.

trust in hyn.

Deut. ci. a. G
‘ 05 he reproue thee, and thou be founde a par. *

denie me them not before J dpe:
8 Vemoue karre fro me vanttie and lyes,

„ Oiercdt mt with soode « tonuenient lo:

only graunt me a netessary lyuyng: c& peradnenture J beyng full,

Excod. v. a.
Deut. vin. c.

lobxxd. tie fall to stealyng, and forlwere the name of my God. —

hurt. ;
There is a generation that curleth

mother. 8

sed krom their filthmmesse.
„when 3 There is à generation that hath a
— 1 loke, and Doth ca vp their eye
« |pones. 5
C14 There is a generation whole teeth are as bodes, and their chawes as
„ knypues, to deuour the pooze from of the earth, e the needy from among men.
15 The horsc leache hath two daughters

and haue no mans vn-

ledge of holy thynges.

holden the wpnde kalt in his hande? who hath gathered together the washeo all the endes of the worlde: what
»Euery Worde of God is pure: he is a chielde bnto all them that put their

Put chon nothyng vnto his wordes,
7 Two thinges haue I re ulredofthee, geue nie neither ponertie nor riches,

« fhoulde denie thee, and say, Who is the
Lorde: or beyug oppressed with pouer-

o Accule not a seruaunt vnto his maister, lest he spealte enyll of thee, and thou be their father, and doth not blelle their

12 There is a generation that thynke them selues cleane, and pet is not tiean-

The Prouerbes

The. Xxx.

che purenese of the worde of God, and what we ought to reauire ol Sd. with certapne wonderfull thynges that are in this wor lde.

Chapter.

31 "sy

crying: bipng hpther, beyna hyther:
There be three thynges cher desen. latiltted, pea foure thynges fapth neuer

hoe:
16 The graue, the barren womde anv the‘

of a hip in the middest of thesea andthe:

wickeduesse.

eS

ted, and the fourth map it not abyde.

22 A seruaunt that beareth rule, afoole<

that is full fedde,

23 A fpiteful woman when che is maried, . and an handmapde that is heire to her.

thynges in the earth

maistresse.
24. These be foure

21 For three chynges the earth is dilgult-

the which are very litle, dut in Wilde.

they exceede the wyse:

25. The emmets are lbut)a weake peo,

ple, * which pet gather their mieate lu prs

the sommer:

26, The conics are but a feeble dur

make their bozoughes among rockes: .

ue not a "guide,
27 The grachoppers haue feat 3

pet go they foorth together by he a
28 The sppder laboureth With her. handes, and is in kynges palaces.
29 There be three thynges that go

yea foure are tomely in gopng. 90 g.
30. A lion wbiche is strongel ght.

bealtes, and chunneth not at the your

of any: .
1 A graphounde strong in the hein

ppm manatee. g

whom no man aryseth vp. gu-
32 Ir thou hast done footie when a

of Solomon.

m hyc estate, or pf thou halt taken butter, and he that rubbeth his nol, nag pl, then lay thine hande maketh it bleede: Euen so he 1 2 forpou thy mouth. teth Wrath, bringeth foorth strike.

3 Who fo chirneth mylke bringeth foorth f

The .xxxj. Chapter,
3 Be exhorteth to chastitie and iustice, io Ind cheweth the condiciong ok a wile and worthy woman. ell —

THEwordes of king <®)Lamuel, and the lesson planteth a vineparde. a iat his mother taught him. 17 She girdeth her lopnes with strength,
＋ Hat my fonnes what and fortifieth her armes. the sonne of np body: 18 And pf the perteane that her hulwiteaud what O my deare rie doth good, her candell gocth not out beloued sonne- bynpght. a
I Seue not ounce thy 19 She lapeth her fingers to the spindle, strength ee wapes vnto Fher hande taketh holde of the distaffe. rT Women, which are the 20 She openeth her hande tothe poore, destruttton euen of kpnges. pea the stretcheth foorth her handes to
4 OLauuel, it is not fo: kynges, it is uch as haue neede. not J tap] fo: kynges to drynke wine, 21 She keareth not that the colde of nor princes strong drynke. wWuynter hall hurt her housholde, for all
5 uel they by dznkyng forget the her houcholdr folkes are clothed with ae and peruert the indgement ofkall tcarlet.

= ¢ Gelle strong drynke vnto luch as are her tlothyng is white luke and purple. redy to perishe, and wine Onto thole 23 Her hulbande is much set by in the that mourne: N gates, when he sitteth among the rulers
7 That they may drynke it, and forget okthe lande. their unlerie and aduerlitie. 24 She maketh cloth of luke, and lelleth
8 Be thon an aduotate for the dumbe, tit: and deliuereth girdles vnto the marto speaße in the cause of all such as be chaunt. * lutcourlesse in this tranlitorie Worlde. 25 Strength and honour is her clothing,
Open thy mouth, dekende the thong and in the latter day Me Chall reioyte. thatisiatulland ryght, and the cause 26 She openeth her mouth with wit: ofthe pooze and helpelelle. dome, and in her tongue is the lawe of lo Who fo fyndeth an honest fapthfull grace.
Woman, he is nuch moze Worth then 27 She loketh well to the wapes of her peartes, Tr houcholde: and cateth not her bread
I Theheart of her hulbande may safely With idlenesse. tut in her, so that he shall fal mto no 28 Her children arile vp e tall her blessed: duertie. and her hulbande Hall make much of er

E. ben

e n Dye wyll do hym good, aud not eull ;

. . ue daes ol her lpfe. 2% Maup daughters there be that gather

2 17 Octupteth wool and flare, and riches together: but thou goest avouc aebureth gladip with her handes. them all.

14. Ohe is like a 1 es Wes
¢ a marchauntes ship, that 30 As for fanour it is deceiptiull,ebeau
— byngeth her bittayies roma gere- is a vapne thyng: but a woman that dente eim the nyght lealon, to pro. keareth the Lode, fhalvepraylcd.

meate ko her houlholde, and foode zi Gene her of the krume of her handes:

10 me mapdens. and let her owne workes prayse her in ad lüse ldereth lande, and bpeth t: the gates.
Ith the frnite of her handes she A. P C

The ende of the,prouerbes of Solomon.

Pa

D

a “pome mens thildren. ; 22 Ohe maneth her felfe faire ornamktes,

Oz, knowe

D2, prapse her.

78 Thebooke of the

maundementes.

wildome is but folife and griefe.

de wordes of the al a ah 1 ee 5 1
3. of Dauid kyng fe oman ) yi of pierusalem. e en 11. 2 17 8 All is but are i most Dayne vanilen end the tie saich the preaese hat cher, all is most s. vayne (J cap] and

He mouecth dy fre reasong that true (ch citit ID not to be put in any
Sooplbly thing.
(bo) Theurit reafonts, tar - nothyng con be attapne d in thus lift without labour e

605 Mans t ig tut

but plapne vanitie.
3 Foz What els hath a man of all the

ther tommeth: but the earth abtoett

stpll.

5 The sunne arpleth, the sunne goeth downe, and returneth to his place, that

che ad he map there ryle bp agapne.

deten 6 The wynde goeth towarde the south

rand turuech vnto the north, fetcheth his

pet nenen at tompasse, Whirleth about, and goeth foorth, and returneth agapne to his circuites from whence he dyd come.

7 All fluddes runne into the fea, and pet is the fea it selfe not fylled: Foz lobe vnto what place the waters runne, thence they tome to flowe agapne.

W 8 All thinges are fo harde to be knowen, that no man can expresle them: The epe is not fatiffied with sight, the eare is not fylled with hearyng.

9 The thyng that hath ben, conmieth to passe agayne, and the thyng that hath ben done, chalbe done agapne:
Fi) is no newe thyng vnder the

unne.

at engen 10 Is there any thyng wherok it may

ane br et. Pf sayde, lo this is newe-kor it was long

the last.

(503 Meither -
Bronointt

moz Any othee seiente, is ptekettip nowen th this left.

(c) 4 Man im thig 1115 18 so delirons to

that he 18 nc nee latiflitd

Ecclesiastes. b

p reacher, Othervvise called Ecclefiaftes, which is Solomon the king.

€ For Solomon is called in scripture by three lundep names: Che one. Solomon, that tg, the malier of peace. The leconde Ididã that is belowed of God. Che thirde Ecclesiastes, that is.a preacher, teachpng that truẽ and eter nall felicitte conlisteth not in any worldly wit. dome or aboundaunceè of riches, o in carnall pleasure, which all be but vayne and tranti. torie: but he proucth that true felieitie contisteth in a whole loynyng our lelues to God by pure religion, that is, with a sincere kayth and the leare of God obferupng his com.

I be first Chapter.
2 All thynges in this worlde are full of banitie and or none induraunce. „ An mang

labour that he taketh vnder the funnies |
One generation passeth away, ano: -

bg in the tymes that haue ben before

ue The thyng that is past is out of re: membraunte: euen fo the thyuges that are for to conie, shal no moze be thought bpon among them that cone after,

12 pm felfe the preacher was kyng of
Ilrael at Hierulatem,

13 And dpd applie my mynde to leke out ¢ c searche for knowledge of all thynges that are done vnder heauen: © Such , 10 trauapie and labour Hath God geuen a

- Dnto the chüldzen of men, to ereceife „ them selues therin. in

14 Thus haue JJ considered all these wm thynges that come to passe vnder the sours sunne: and lo, they are all but Danie va and vexation ot mynde. ine

15 The croked cannot be made feaight , no? the imperfection of thynges cau be 195 nunibred. e

16 J tommumned with mpue owne heart, ene faying : lo J am come to great estate, bee and haue gotten moze wildome then alt abe they that haue ben befoze me in Picru- ms

alem. 8

17 Bea, n heart had great experiente

795 ne knowledge: for 6
F applied my mynde, that J naht knoe what were wifoome ad DE derstandyng, what were errour 155 foolichnesle: and J perteaued that thy
Was alfo but a eration of nude. ots

13 For Where much wuldomets ihr. 5 allo great trauaple and Ditch and the moze knowledge a man hach, the more is his care.

The

of the preacher.
The. ij. Cl

Ileasures, fumptuous buildynges, riches and pollesstong, are but vanitie. 14 The cael the foole haue both one ende touchyng che bob death. oe

Hen fayde FW thus in my heart: Nowe go
IK ito, FH will take myne
Jease, and bane good
Deldapes: But lo, that

NA

; Insomuch that © ZB faide vnto the man genen to laughter, thou art mad: and to mirth, what doest

me «tote

; a oF thought in my heart to gene my

sate fete vnto wine, and agapne to apply

, my mypnde vnto wildome, and to com-

ve bchende koolishnesle: vntyll the tyme

ce that among all the thynges Which are vuder the lunne, J myght fee what were best for men to do so long as they
| liuebuderDeauen, rer made gorgious fatve workes: J

n
> ot sofort ok

ee’ pardes. J 8 and Jmade me orthardes and gardens

te of pent and planted trees in them ei ofall maner of fruites.

Bees af: swe Megreenc and kruitkull trees withall.
7 Jbonght leruauntes and mapdens,

and hadagreat houcholde: As kor cattel aud sheepe, J had moze lubstaunte of them then all they that were before me

n Hierulalem.

8 Jgathered together liluer and golde, and the chicfe trealnres of kynges and landes: J haue prouided me men finggers and delites of man kaptiu

9 (tow was greater and in moze wor-
10 then all ip predetessours in Hierua enn For wildome remapned with

ie Andloke whatsdeuer in y
. yne eyes deane let them haue it: and wherin fin up heart delited or had any pleamp 10 withhelde it not kromit: Thus oa velopted in al that J did, and

u But en p portion ok all mp trauayle that au en Neonlderedall the woes the lath bandes had wrought, aud all all was beat J had taken therin : 10 but vänttie and veration of

the sonnes of men, as a wo-
1 kaptiue, and women taken

„ bullded my houses, and planted vine-

I made pooles of water, to water

women fingers, and the

bal]
. vÄ——2

jàpter.

wude, aud nothing ok anp value onder

the sunne.

O Then ee Ute to tonsider wil- 0 Sd hn, dome errour, and foolichnessec ko: what nnn is he among men that myght be com: © pared to nic the kyng in sueh womes:

3 And JJ fale that wisdome extellethh waeren footidhnente,asfarve as tight both dark affection, nesse.

14. Fo à wise man Hath his eyes in his C head, but the foole goeth in darknelle:
I perteaued also that they both had one ende. i

15, Hhenthoughe Jin my mynde, yf it 1 happen vnto the foote as it doth) vnto me, what needeth me then to labour any moze for wildome: So JJ coulessed
Within my heart that this allo was but banitie.

16 Foz the wise are euer as litle in rememmaunte as the fooliche: for the daes „ ne. shall come when all chalbe forgotten: Nhe n
45 Wile man dyeth as well as the dole.

17 Thus began F to be weery of my life, insonuich that JJ toulde away with nothyng that is done vnder the sunne: for all was but vanitie aud veration of mynde.

18 mea J Was weery of mp labour which a e
IJhad taken vnder the lunne, because the tel,
I choulde be fayne to leaue them bato we. another man thal: conuneth after me:

19 And who knoweth whether he shal- ( o be a Wife man or a foole: And yet Malt ware en

he be lorde of all my laboures Which FB fe

With such Wil dome haue taken bnder ans

the sunne: This is allo a vayne thyng. benin

20 So J turned nie to rekrayne wy Shoo wee mynde krom all such trauaple as J tobe her ges

vnder the simne,

his kyng: aug

(t) Thee both suffer uke aduer tee this Wer ag totichnn c tozruption ol the body. they dpe both) aiphe.

eyther good or eu

21 Forsomuch as a man shoulde weery

hym lelle with wildome, with vnderstandyng and oportunitie, and pet be fayne to leaue his labours vuto another that neuer sweat foz them: This ls allo a bayue thyng, and great imiserie.

22 Foz What gettetha man of all the labonr and e of his mynde that he taketh vnder the lune

23 l dene sorowe, and disquiet-

nesse all the dapes of his been ae

The booke

| that his heart tan not rest in the nyght: that is good before hym, Wildo

pases 24. Js it not better then for a man to
* blesspng

ol Hod to obs teen rychen honelrlp: fos ie uo lelle bles-

derstandyng, and gladueffe : but vnto the finner he geueth weerinelle that he may gather and heape together che thyng that afterwarde chalbe geuen buto hym whom ic plealeth God: This is nowe a vapne thyng, pea a very pie quietnesse and vexation of mynde.

All thynges haue their tyme. 14 The workes of God are perfect, and caufe vs to feare

z Foz ali that a man eateth æ dzynketh, pea whatsocuer aman emopeth of all his labour:that fame is a gyft of God.

m lelte to ; E pau ae The. ij. Chapter, pet not bappp

herebp.

bpm. 17 God Hall iudge both the iust an bniust. e ats

e Ny yd] tpme pe 1 e t RG A bader the heauẽ Hath ae 2 his tonuenient sealon. ching: 1. 2

re

There is a tyme to

be borne, and a tyme to a dpe: there is a tyme

to plant, and a tyme to plucke vp the thyng that is planted.

3 A tpme to slap, and a tyme to make whole: atpme to breake DoWne, anda tyme to builde bp.

4 Atpme to weepe, and a tyme to laugh:
à tyme to mourne, æ a tyme to Dance.

5 Atpyme to tast awap stones, and atyme to gather stones together: A tyme to imbrate, and a tyme to refrapne from lunbracyng. a

6 Atpme to Wynne, and a tyme to lole:
A tyme to spare, and a tyme to spende.

W 7 Atpme to cut in peeces, and a tyme to sowe together: A tyme to kepe {titence, and a tyme to speahe.

3 Atpyme to loue, and a tyme to hate: A tyme of warre, and a tyme of peace,

9 What hath a man els that doth any thpug, but Weerinesse and labour:

had 10 “ Foz AS touchyng the trauayle and cher ma karre kulnesse which God hath geuen vndad a. to men, J lee that he hath geuen it beten take them to be exertiled in it. roraion,to 11 All this Hath he ordeyned marueilous bn denne goodly, to euerp thyng his Duc tpuie: starco. He Hath planted ignorannte allo in the heartes of men, that they shoulde not tomprehende the ground of his wozkhes which he doth from the begynnyng to the ende.

2 Os J perceaued that in those thinges there is nothyng better kor a man then to be mer, and to do Well as long as he lyueth.

tellarie thinges to be bone in DUE cyme,
Oder, and utcalure.

14 J tonsidered also that whatsocuer ¢
God doth), it tontinueth for euer: And that nothyng can be put vnto it, nor taken from it, € that God doth it to the intent that men shoulde feare hym.

15 The thyng that hath ben, is nowe: Ke. and the thyng that is for to come, hath ben afore time:for God restoreth againe the thyng that was past.

16 Moreouer, J sawe vnder the sunne vngodlynes in the steade of iudgement,

e miquitie in Heade of righteoulnesse.

17 Then thought Jin my mynde, Cod
(hail leparate tie ryghteous from the vngodly: and then thalbe the tyme and iudgement of all counsaples € wonkes.

18 Jtommuned with myne own heart allo concernpng the children ok men,
Howe God hath chofen them, and pet letteth them appeare as though ther were beastes. cel

12 ©FFoz it happeneth vnto men ds it Gra doth vnto beastes, enen one connition bt 5 vnto them both: as the one dpeth : tore dyeth the other, yea they haue both one wn. maner of breath: fo that in chien be hath no preeminence abone a boat, but cay, uai are all sudued vnto vanttie.. g they a

20 They go all buto one plate: ford 25 10 be all o dust, so Tall they all turne OW"

Wherkore J perteaue that ther a tn nee foz aman then t oon. a full in his labour, fo2 chatte be i et
Wut who wyll beyng nt 0 thyng that chall tome after pits The

kyng that is a koole.

O Iturned me, and

*confidered all the vio-

lent wrong that is

Oe |] Done vnder the sunne:

and behold the teares

auf Offuch as were opprel-

— sed, and there was no

man to tomfort them, or that woulde

deliuer and defende them from the biolente of their oppressours.

1 Wherfore J indged those that are

dtad, to be moze happy then those that

be alyue: wit,

% 3 OPeahpnrehatts pet vnborne, to be

som better at cate then they both: betause he

sq seeth not the nulerable workes that are done vnder the sunne.

4 OAgapue, J sawe that all trauayle and diligence of labour that euery man

e takethin bande, was done of ennie a-

ent gaynst his nepghbour: This is also a

payne thing, and a beration of mynde. we The foole foldeth his handes toge-

a ther, and eateth vp his owne fleshe.

6 One hand full capch he) is better with tet, then both the handes full with labour and trauayle of mynde.

5 7 Poreouer J turned me, and beholde

vet auother vanitie vnder the sunne:
There is one man, no mo but hym

felfe alone, hauyng neither childe nor hrothet, vet is there no ende of his tareful trauaple, his eyes can not be latillied

e — f 5

N

=x N

The iii. Chapter.

innocent are oppressed. 4 Meng labours are full of abute and pa is neceslarie. ; J poung man pooze and wise 1s

banitie. ang to be prelerred belore an ole

thyng.

9 Therfore two are vetter then one for they may Well entoy the profite of their labour: For vf one ofthem fall, his tonipanion hetpeth hym vp agayne.

fo Bult wo is hynn that is alone: fo; rf he fal, he hath not another to helpe him vp.

u Agapne when two sleepe together they are warme: but howe cana body be warme alone:

Iz One map be ouereome, but two may uiake resistaunce: A three folde gableis not lightly broken.

3 A poore childe beyng wile, is better then an olde king that doteth, and can not beware in tyme to tome.

14 “Some one commeth out of puson, and is made akyng:and another whith is boʒue in the kyngdome, commeth vnto pouertie.

15 And J perteaued that au men lyuyng onder the sunne go with the seconde childe that shall stande vp in the steade of the other. i

16 As for the people that haue ben before

hym and that come after hym, they are > 0

innunerable, and they that come after hym spall not reioyte of hym: This is also à vapne thyng, and vexation of mynde.
17 When thou tommest into the houle of
God, kepe thy foote and drawe nyc, that God which is at hande may heare

aid not pay.

wer to pe mouth to caule thy bin.
5 Suffer not thy b we

SS

Ili}.

>) tue U kae oth comfortabi

necessarie mang lple

eg

{ppl not tta ceaue adie on.

Gen. xii. 5.
. Reg. 18. c.

(e) Sen sede rather to plefe

bpm that talk fucceede into the place of

oth orcupi

the pzelen

(On :
The pto

ple wilo 1 0

be long plea-

sed with hym

that accupiei the place of 9 hanont.

wich riches: [vet tapeh he not) fo whom that thou geue not the! wofferynges of owe dit do J take fuch tvauaples Foz Whole kfooles: for they knowe naught but to 0 pleature do J thus consunie away my do eupll. ro ot lle: This ts allo a payne and milerable ee
The. v. Chapter. am.
Pot to fpeake lightly. chiekip in God matters. o Che couetous can neuer haue enough. ucheladcurerg lere derte 3 Man when he dpeth taketh nothyng with hym. b Colpue iopkullg and with a contented mynde, is the gpft of God.
Je not hallp with wWordes are, there men niay heare thy mouth, and letnot kooles. o thie heakeipene gr 3 If thou make a vowe buto 1 B sthyng rachiy before not slacke to perfourme it: As #3 — Barucvie,.
God: Foz God is in lish vowes he hath no pleasure * pent: (v) we coght heauen, aud thou vp- yf thou proimse any thyng pay! he no fe ane
Jon eartl therfore let 4 3foz better is it that thou make 32 be fewe. bowwe, then that thou shouldest promist Sa he

te

fieshe for to finne, neither fap thou before the angell that it is thy ignoraunce:

mete bor then God wyll be angry at thy eee bopce, and destroy all the Yoozke of

1, thyne handes.

6 And why: wheras are many dreames and many wordes, there are also diners wu: banities:but loke that thou feare God.

7 If thou seest the poore to be oppressed, and wrongfullp dealt withall, fo that

edited: due

e ej uitie and right of the lawe ts wrested in the lande, marueyle not thou at such en athyng:for he that is hygher then the ene hpghest regardeth, and there be hygher era we then they. a

enen, 8 The intreale of r vpholdeth ene all thyng: pea the kyng hym leike is lend, mapnkepned by hulbandrp.

9 Me that loneth monep, wyll neuer be satilsied with money:and he that loueth

riches shalbe without the krutte therok:
This is also a vapne thyng.

io Mheras much riches is, there are many allo that spende themawap: And what pleasure moze hath he that pollesleth their, faupng that he may loke vpon them with his eyes:

i A labouryng man fleepeth sweetly whether it be litle or much that he eateth: but the aboundaunce of the riche
Wyhl not suffer hym to fleepe.

r en 2 et is there a sore plague whith J

toad mu.

The. vj. Chapter.
Che miterable estate of hym to whom God hath geuen riches, and not the grace

to bfe them.

ea vnder the lunne, and it

mi geueth a man riches,
NG 28 2) coodes,and honour, o that be wanteth nothyngof all that his heart can desire, and pet God geneth hym not leaue to entoy the lame, but another man spendeth them: This is a vapne thyng and anuleradle plague.
2 Ik a man beget a hundred chudren,

go eme ANDI pus many peres, fo that his dapes

wen dy wan: Are manp in munber, and pet can not tenen: eniop his good, neither be buryed: as

n ee, — £02 hym J lap, that vntymelp birth is

monary, Vekter then he.

99045 3 Jo; he commeth tonanght,efpendeth

ether kynde er oflcuce.

his tyine in darknesse, and his name is

Ihe bool

Here is pet a plagne

haue seene vnder the funne (Mamet riches kept to the hurt of : ie 0 poffetfion: Dine tbat bath
13 For oft tymes they perishe w great milerie and one ad pe haue a childe it getteth nothyng.
14. Typke as he came naked out of ig Lobid mothers — Io goeth he thyther den agapne, and carpeth notl
8 of — labour. - is is a miserable plague,t
Si e
: vm then that he E
— 1 the — Bat he hath ta
16 All the dapes of his lyfe allo he eate in the darke, with great — ae nelle, sicknesse, and sorolbe. fa
17 Therfore nie thynke it a better anda fairer thyng, a man to eate and drynke, e and to be rekresched of all his labour Tee that he taketh vnder the sunne, all the aue daves of his lyfe which God geueth ez hymrfor this is his portion. 5
18 For vnto whont soeuer God genety ee. « riches, goodes, and power, he geneth tt oh hym to emop tt,to take it for bis portion, ™ and to be refrefihed of his labour: this is the gyft of God.
19 For he thinketh not much Hobe long he shall lyue, foralmuch as God fpllet) bis heart with gladnesse.

dnn

‘Baek 5 seeth not the une, and

4 Mozeoner he seethn 6

Rater velt then the other.

5 me though he Ipned two hound peres, pet hath he no good pte: Com * not all to one places 9 9225 a

6 All the labour that a man table regi fo2 him felfe, and yet his desire is neuer mo
* 3 17 9 ie r ben

oz what hath the wire the foole- What helpeth it the Pes 15
1 Maye ay to walke with fo ae before the lyuyng- nee

8 Oe frabtoftheeve isbrs ‘ then that the fonte house itte ao 92 5 desires ol the lust: Dowbelt t) elle of Fer a vapne thyng, and a disquietu

mpnde. namtd 1.
„ The thyng that bath ben, is oy,

and knowen that it is cuen man hanke neither may he go to lawe ih him that 15 mightier then he.
Mam thinges there be that encveafe
K panitie, and What hath a man ets:

a

piuers preceptes to folowe that whiche is good, and to auopde the contrary.

— Good name is moze
N eA =~ Worth then precious wy oypntment: We the day
* MWokdeath, is better the the dap of bprth.

1 0 ; N
* 2 It is better to go

into an house of mour-

ning, then into a banketting houle: Foz

there is the ende of all men, and he that
1s liuing taketh it to heart.

n; OGranitic is better then to laugh:foz

. hen the countenaunte is heauie, the

, heartis reflourmed.

4 The heart of the wile is in the mourrung boule: but the heart of the foolishe ls in the house of mprth.

15 Itls better to gene eare to the chattening of a wyle man, then to heare the songue of fooles: j

6 Forthe laughyng of fooles is like the

cracking of thornes vnder a pot: and

that is but a vayne thing.

7 The wyle man hateth wrong dea-

ling, and abhorreth the heart that coucteth rewardes.

Better is it to tonsider the ende of a thing then the beginning: The patient of spirite is better then the hye nunded.

Be not hastylp angrie in thy minde:
Worb resteth in the bolome of

65 Sap not thou, vohat is the cause m atthedayes of the old time were betve UU then thep that be nowe- kor that n were no Wyle question. .
„ „„yldome With inherttaunte is good, bet better is it with them that without
1. CACC map beholde the sunne: a: Wyldame dekendeth alwell as onep, and the excellent knowledge €
0 ome et lyfe vnto hym that on.

mst 10

batbit in porte

lider the Worke ol God how that
= no man can mak A scraig non ethe thing G straight,
5 whhehe maketh pone —

of the preacher.

The. vij. Chapter.

It Foz who knoweth what ts good foz man ling in the dapes of his vapne pdt arma wham hal bag who

man what chall happen after hym vnder the sunne- —

14 We well thetyme ol prosperitie, and remember the tyme of milkortune: for C
God doth so temper the one and the oree, thata man can finde nothing (5) outro
2 man can

8 fault with
15 All thinges hane J conlidered in the Sr tine of nip vanitie: that the © sust man perisheth for his righteoulnesse fake, d the vngodly llueth in his wickednesse.
16 O Therkore be thou neither to righte- 5 oe noz ouer wyle, that thou perilhe e not. 5 * chinges canta
17 We neither to dnvighteous allo nop S tokvolishe lectthondte before thy time. svn,
18 It is good for thee to™ take holde ol fa this, and not to let that go out of thy ant“ hande: For he that feareth God, com: S32. meth foorth with them all. (h Depa

tieounteo pue

* 3 to cath.¢ spare

the wicked

tne
19 Wyfdome gencth moze courage bnto Hem eg then ten nightie men of the g

20. For there is not one iust vpon earth that doth good, and sinneth not. P
21 Lake no heede vnto euerp word that lch d. is spoken, left thou heare thy seruaunt curse thee:for thyne owne heart knoweth that thou thy selk also batt ofttinres spoken euyll by other men.

22 All thele thinges haue J proued in wyldome, for J thought to be wyfe, but (he went farther fro me then Me vba was before : yea aud fo deepe, that J night not reache vnto her.

23 Japplied my minde aifo vuto knowledge, and to seeke and searche out ft ence, wyldome, and vnderstanding, to knowe the foolishnesse of the vngodlp, and the errour of doting fooles.

24. And JJ founde that*awomants bitt proud terer then death, the whiche bath cat abrode her heart as a net that men lithe with, and her handes are chaynes:
© ho fo pleaseth God shall escape from her, but the sinuer Wyll be tauen

with her. J 00 25 Weholde

lil. Ne. viii. c.
Ii. Par. vj. g

(WS chrewde womm 18 taptd only bp the grace of
God.

«at

25 Bcholde (fatty the preacher thts haue
I diligently searched out and proued:
One thing must be considered With another, that a man may come by know-

Rare begat WED as pet J seeke, and a
5 ‘ b

J The. viij. Chapter.

2 Co obep princes and magiskrates. 17 Che workes of God passe mans knowledge.

Hots wise- who hath knowledge to make

ee an aunlwere: 2A “©
Too. 55 Ie ve yaa 1

ö yi] Beth his face to Mine: he. 4 but vnshamefastnes

- putteth it dut of fa:
„ uour. 5 N
2 Kepe the kpnges commaundenient,

namely for the oth that thou hast made

vnto God for the same.

e not hastie to go out of his fight, and fee thou continue in no eupll thing: for whatsoeuer it plealeth hym, that doth he.

4 Like as when aking geueth a charge,

hs tonnnaundement is mightie: Euen i who may fay vnto him, what doest

thonu:-

Lamia. 5 Who so kepeththe tommaundement, shall feele no harme: but a Wyle mans heart ditterneth the tyme and iudgement.

6 Jo euerpthing wpll haue oportunttie àud iudgement: and this is the thing that maketh men full of earefulnesse and sorowe.

And why: aman knoweth not what is fo2 to tome: for who can tell hym whenit shalbe-

3 Meither is there any man that Hath

ober ouer the spirite to kepe styll the pirite, nor to haue any power in the tyme of death, noz that tan make an ende of the battayle, neither map vngodlyneste deliuer them that meddle
Withall.

9 All these thinges haue JJ considered, and applied inp mpude vnto cucrp
Worke that is vnder the lunne, howe one man hath lordship vpon another to

(b) withdiaw 3 not thy keile lghtlp from

the kpnges obedience.

Iob. xi. b.

W 7

Kn een e his owne harme. twrmestots 10 FO J haue seene often the vngodly

wicked rulers b at 18

brought to their graues, and pet they haue returned into the ate agayne:and

the vngodip hath ben prapled after dar

variall.

The booke

76 Among a hp me men J ha dunde one: but“ not one w mong all. —

27 Lothis onlpe haue J founde, that

ue
&

God made man iust and right: v put cra

they fought many inuention * 4275
N dan

© came from the place ok hol Oe

whiche in the atic Were e autet 8

memorte, as were thole aͤlso that liued r well: This is also a vapne thing.

I © wWecaule nowe that euyll workes art not haltylp punithen, the heart of stare ue Sect hym felfe ouer vnto Wie: Wag

12 Because an euyll perfon offendeth an
Hundzed tymes, and Goddeferreth ge: ving hym long lite, therefore am J ture that it chall go well with them that feare God, whiche haue hym before their eyes.

13 Againe, as for the vngodly it chall not be well with him, neither shall he prolong his dapes: but euen as a shadowe, fo shall he be that feareth not God.

14 Pet is there a vanitie vpon earth: €
There be iust men vnto whomit happeneth as though they had the Workes of the vngodly: Againe, there be vngodlv, with whom it goeth as though they had the workes of the righteous: This haue J called allo a vayne thing.

15 Therfore Jcommende gladnesle betause a man hath no better thing vnder the sunne, then to eate and dpinke, and . to be meric : for that all he haue of e his labour, al the dapes ok his lile which ae
God geucth bpm vnder the sunne.

16 And so J applied my minde to {carne
Wyldome, and to knowe the crauayle that is in the wonde, and that of 3 afathion,that J suffred not mine eye to fleepe neither day nor night. of

17 I vnderttoove of all the wozke 4
God, but it is not poslible fond be attayne vnto the Workes that arc . puder the fume: and though i vit stowe his labour to seekt them 0 can he not reach vnto then pen n a wyle man would vndertaßke a them, pet Matt he not finde then

q The

of the preacher.

The. ix. Chapter, „

0 outwarde thing can man know whom God loueth or hatet - Po oF ect his ende. 19 Myl dome excelleth strength. 2 —

Or all thele thinges purposed in my mynde to feeke out:

t

1. that knoweth eyther loue or hate,

ao butallchmnges are befoze them.

eur appeneth vnto one as vnto anoh 2 It happ !

ther, it goeth with the righteous as
With the bngodly, „with the good and cleane,as With the vncleane, with hym that offeretl),asivitl humthat offereth not: like as it goeth with the bertuons, fo gocth it alfo with the sinner: as it happeneth vnto the pariured, so happeeth it all to hym that is afrayde to be forsworne. :

3 Among all thinges that tome to pale vnder the sunne, this is a milerie, that it haͤppeneth vnto all alike: This is the taule allo that the heartes ot men are full of wickednesle, and madde foolishnesse is in their heartes as long as they liue, vntyll they dye.

4 And why: as long as a man ltueth, he hath an hope: forza quicke © dogge

„(ap they is better then a dead lion.

a) Foz they that be lining knowe that

we Hep shall dye: but they © that be dead

knowe nothing, neither deserue they

a moze, for their memoriall is forgot:

Alo their loue, and their hatred, and their ene is nowe perished, neither haue they any moze paͤrt in the worlde inalltbatis Done vnder the lune.
: Go thou thy wap then, eate thy
75 With toy, e drinke thy wine with
Lern Deatt,toz thy wonnes pleale god: by garmentes be alwapes white,
Ade thy head lacke no oyntment.
5 ethy felfe to liue ioyfully with thy
10 Ile dum thou louest all the dayes of ble whiche is but vayne, that God

rkg; de mya

geueth thee vuder the funue all the bapes of thy banitic: for that is thy por: tion in this life of al thy labour and trauayle that thou takest vnder the sunne.

9 Whatsocuer thou takest in hande to

do, that do with al thy power: for in the graue that thou goest © onto, there is neither worke, counlaple, knowledge, nor wysdome.

lo So JJ turned me bnto other thinges vnder the sunne, e J fatbe that in running it helpeth not rd be swift, in battell it helpeth not to be strong, to feeding it helpeth not to be Wyle, to riches it helpeth not to bea man of muche vnderstanding, to be had in fauour it helpeth not to be canning: but that all lieth in tyme and fortune.

1 Fora manknoweth not his tyme: but like as the fishes are taken with the angle, and as the byrdes are caught with the snare: euen fo are men taken in the perillous time, when it tommeth sodaynly vpon thein.

12 This wysdome haue J (eene allo vn-

te sunne, and me thought it a great

ing:

13 There was a litle citte and a few men within it: so there cane a great kyng and besteged it, and made great bul-
Warkes against it.

14 And in the citie there was founde a pooze man, but he was Wyle, whiche with his wyldome deltuered the eitie, vet was there no body that had any rel pect to such a sunple man.

15 Then sapd J, wyldome is better then strength: Meuerthelesse, a siniple mans wyldonie is despised, and his wordes are not hearde.

16 A wyse mans tounsayle that is folowed in scilente, is karre aboue the trying ofa taptaine among fooles.

17 Foz wyldome is better then Harz nesse: but one sinner alone destropeth muche goodnesle.

J ( q The

= xv}.

Y There ig no tyme of worbing, of tcpentaunce alter chip tite.

(g Thus the wicked worlds linges are pez ccaued, attriting to foz > tune the which
Ig ordered by the Cecrete prouldence ol god. for that theres warde accozding to mens doingeg is not in this life, dut e hiellp in the

Ld

like to come.
(h prapse of wyse men,

C

Or, hearde.

Supi. vl. a. i. Reg. xvii. e ii. Re. xx ü, c.

kynges and princes,

Dead flye doth torrupt lweete opntment, and
NY, manketh it to stinke:

9 Euen so oft tymes he that hath ben had in

N sestimation for iy

dome and Honour, is abhorred becaufe of a litle foolishnesse.

8 2 HAwyse mans heart is vpon his right

bed e, Hande, but a fooles heart bpon his left.

e 3 Afoole wyll shewe him selle when he

der goeth by the way, yet thinketh he that euery nian doth as fooliship as him selt.

A Ita principall spirite be geuen thee to beare rule, be not negligent then in thine office: for he that can take cure of hum ele, auopdeth great offences.

5 Another plaque is there whiche J haue seene vnder the sunne, namelp, the ignoraunte that is commonly among princes: in that à foole sitteth in great dignitie, and the viche are {et downe

Wes footew,
Rom. xil. b.

geen, benen. bee 6 J haue feene leruauntes ride bpon catch. horses, and princes gopng vpon their

fete as it were seruauites.
W 7 But he that diggeth vp a pitte, Matt poids — falltherin pin selte: and who fo breaccrn heth Downe the hedge, a serpent Malt bytebynt. = g
3 Who fo remalleth stones, chall haue trauaple Withall: aud he that heweth wood, shalpe hurt therwith.

Ihe booke
The. x. Chapter. —

Che difference of koolichnes and wyldome. 10 A sclaunderer is lite a serpent that can not be charmed. 15 Ok koolishe kynges and riotous princes. 16 Ind of good

gapne, and that with might: Suen 4.
Doth Wifdome folowe dulgene en “
10 at backbiter is na better then a serpent that stingeth without hitting,
1 The Wordes out of a Wyle mans mouth are gratious: but the lippes of a foole wyll destroy him felfe, z
0 at worde of hi is starke madnesse. e
13 Al foole is full of wordes, and a man
15 aes 91 then un shall cone to pale: pil then warne hym of itt hall folowe after hym- en
14. The labour of the w foolishe is gree- ¢ uous vnto them, Whyle they know not ore howe to go into the citie. a

15 Wo be onto thee O thou lande, whole wier

kyng © is but a chylde, and whole pain: G. tes are early at their bankettes. ona
16 But well is thee O thou lande, whole kyng is come of nobles, and whole printes eate in due leason for netessitie, and not for lust.

17 Thorowe flonthfulnele the balkes fall downe, and thorowe idle handes it rayneth in at the house.

18 Meate maketh men to laugh, and wine maketh them merie: but vnto pa cits monepare all thinges obedient.

19 Mishe the king no euil in thy thought, or and speake no Hurt of the riche in thy a priuie chaumber: for a byrde of the apze ne

And manerß. and vopde of grace cart)

9 Whey al iron is blunt and the popnt {hall betray thy voyte, and with her fe-
Kapern lk Harpened,“ tt mlt be whet a- thers shall fhe bewray thy wordes.
„ The. xj. Chapter.
—- ;Tobeliberalltothe pooze. 4 Pot to doubt of Gods prouidence. 5 Al worldly

prosperitie is but vanitie. God wyll iudge all.

Ap thy bread vpon
787 wette faces, and fo
Soy | Thaltthon finde it after
1 many dapes.
Geue part seuẽ days,
K allo vpon the eyght: for thou knowest not

(a) Beubt- J rall to the

pooze, though

it seeme to be

c

Nen
(b Disttibute 2 thy alm:g to anv that laue neede, without ecipect of pera

Coro. n chall coine vpon earth.
Vece de. 3 When the cloudes are full, they powre

eth. in that swal he be sudged at the latter dap of zudgement.

the south or nozth, in what place soeutr it fall, there it lieth. 5 alt
4. He that regardeth the winde, © not lobe: and he that hath velpect bu the cloudes chall not reape. che
5 Mode like as thou knowest Dan
Way of the spirite, nor howe the 1 do growe in the wombe of her 00 t
With chylde: Euen sothon bug, 1. the workes of God, which is the matter or all. 6 cealle

„

, ot thou therefore with thy

6 oa ne thy seede, whether it he pe e morning o2 in the enemng: for dba bnwelt nor Whether his od that

challprolper, and ik they both take, itis

the betler

5 thingis it forthe eyes to looke vpon the

8 “ata man lyue many peres, and be glad in them all, let hym remember the

J The. xij. Chapter. desire

Co thinke on God in youth, and not to delerre tyll age. „The toule returnechto

of the preacher,

n Khelihtis fete, and a plealannt

~ Ixviy.

eee 1 shalbe ma-
0 t toloweth: Al tin ule be but vanitie. pees
9 We glad then (O thon voung man) in thy pouth, and let thy heart be merie in thy young dapes, folowe the wayes of thyne owne heart, and the lust of thyne eyes, but be thou sure that God fac
Mall bryng thee into indgement foz all es thele thinges. . . 5 thou tement-

der alwapeg
é e the counte

9 74 Sod fo; the

ment

„

God. A mildome is the gylt of God, and conlisteth in fearing hym, and beptng his

commaundementes.

Ut away displealure
Ss out of thine heart, and

remoue cuill from thy

body: foz chyldhood

and vouth is but vanitie.

1 Remember thy maker the fooner in thy youth, or ener the dayes of aduersitle tome, and oz the peres drawe nye when thou shalt fay,
IJhaue not pleasure in them:

Before the sunne, the light, the moone, and starres be darkened, and or the tloudes turne agayne alter the rayne:

4 when the kepers of the boule chall tremble, and when the © strong men

u shal bowe then selues, when thernnlners stand styll decause they be fo fewe,

ns and when the fight of the windowes shall ware dumme: 4 a

5 Whenthe“ doores inthe streetes Mal: be shut, and whenthe“ voyte of the mil-

, ner halbe lapde downe, when men shall ryle vp at the vopte ol the byrde, and when all the © daughters of muice halbe brought lowe: l

e Whenmen Mail keare Win Hye places,

th 7.50 (hal passe: becanfe man goeth to long Home, and the mourners go

NN
Line,

and beafraibe © inthe ttecetes, when a 1 Almonde tree hati florishe and be
Aenwith the gracho per, and when

about the ( streetes.

7 Or euer the siluer lace be taken a-
Way, and or the © golden well be bro- 7
Ren: Or the pot be broken at the ©
Welland the® wheele baokenbpon the wer
“ testerne. 5

8 Then shall the dust be turned agayne onto earth from Whence it came, and Che hear the date hall returne vnto God who gaue it. ö

9 Allis but vanttie (saith the preather) all is but playne vanitie. *

10 The preacher was yet moze wyle, and

taught the people knowledge, he gaue

good heede, songht out the ground, and let foot many parables: is diligente was to finde out acceptable wordes,

right scripture, the wordes of trueth. Hebrun e

II For 'the wordes of the wyle are like prickes and nayles that go thorowe, of the Hauctoures of gatheringes (which] ) due are geuen of one shephearde: fours ot de

21 Therefore beware my sonne of that man ben dottrine that is beside this: for to malte

Aamtnting the dead.
(v) The mas rowe in the

Eccle. i. a.

men, becaufe

-- Many bookes, it is an endlesse worke, war

sort of mien in their booke.

and to muche studie weerieth the body.

3 Let vs heare the tonclusion of all

thinges, Feare God, and kepe his con maundementes: foz that toncheth all men. For God Mail iudge all workes and setrete thinges, whether they be good or euyll. :

J (i)

J The ende of the booke of the preacher, otherwise called Ecclesiastes.

Thefon gue

The Ballet of Ballettes of Sol

That he would
N 6 kisse me with the

ai kisses of his

mouth: fo thy oe loue is moze plea-
LS

x J faunt 59 b ane
„and that becaule

S of the good and pleafaunt sauour

ol thy most preci-

ous baulmes. denne: 2 Thy name is a [weet smelling oyntfoosth bp ment when it is Med foorth, therkore do

preaching.

Cehemp> the mapdens loue thee. tir bare’ 3 Drarbe thou mee (onto thee) we wen pureinbeart: “ runne after thee. The kyng bath

@ rue bzought me into his“ pzinte chaumdeten n bers: We wplbe glad and reiobte in midertes. thee, we thinke moze of thyloue thenol
Wine: they that be righteous loue thee. e 4 0 Jam blacke (O pe daughters ok baten, Dierülalen) but vet“ fapze and well
G, favoured, like as the tentes of the Cedae Darenes, and as the hanginges of Do of Chziste. lomon. j

5 Marueple not at me that J am fo blacke, fo: why-the funne hath 0 05

ppon ine: my mothers chyldzen haue euyll wyll at me, they made me the keptkerokthe bineyardes, but mine owne x Dineyarde haue J not kept.

called in Latin, Canticum Canticorum.

Omon,

The first Chapter. . '

Che familier cathe and misticall communication ok the fpirituall ioue bet weene
115 2 and his Churche. o Che domesticall enemies that perlecute the urche.

6 Tell me O thou whom my fone loueth, where thou keedest the 185

where thou makelt them ett at the noone Dap: for why shall J be like hym

that goeth Wrong about the flockes of thy couipanions;

7 If thou knowe not thy selfe (O thou 2 fapzest among women) then go thy wap foorth after the footesteppes of wee, the sheepe, and fecde thy goates belyde sui’ the shepheardes tentes. 9

8 Unto* the oat of Pharaos charets b haue J compared thee, O mploue.

9 Thy checkes and thy necke is beautifull as the turtles, and hanged with spanges and goodly iewels, a neckband of golde wyll we make thee, with sluer buttons.

1o hen the king sitteth at the table, he

shall smeli my Rardus: a bundell of 4,

mprre is my lone vnto me, he Wyll [pe bag an

betwirt my brestes: a clutter of Cam- we phire in the vineyardes of Engaddi is

my loue vnto me, 19
Oh howe kapre art thou my loue, c

Oh howe fapre art thous thou bat

doues eyes. O howe fapre art thou ny

beloueu, howe well fauoured art thou:

12 Dur bedis dect with flowres, thelerlinges of dur Houle are of Cedar tree, and our trolle iopntes of Cipresle.

II

The. ij. Chapter.

as

Che Churche dedireth to rett vuder the tyadowe of Chritte, 8 She heareth his

vopce. 14 She is compared to the doue.

Anm the role of the
GH, fielde, and lulie of the

e valleps,

„ As the lillie among the thoes: fo

cia) Cbpitte e 2 enemico.

4 daughters.

o l ke as the apple trec among the trees of the wood: fo is my beloued among the sonnes.

Tye loue
K. the Church 3 towarde
Chziste.

ij And the enemies to the lores. 0
My delight is to fit vnder his DVM sre dowwe, for His krulte is werte vnto mp e

t ote. TEU |. 2
: me into his Wine feller,

He bringeth us his banner spread ouer me, Whithe is his loue. .

6 YSctabont me tuppes of wine come me with apples, for J am sicke 4 3

Dis left Bande vei9 pnoee ny

and his right bande Mall 5 aya

: my charge vou (O pe daughters of

fe S lem) by the roesand hindes of
5 pica ae ve waz not vy mp lone, nortouche her, toll (he be content her

We

fife. thinke J heare the boyte of my
9 lo, there commeth he hopping onthe moumtaines, and Icaping ouer the litle hilles. o Pybeloued is Ipke a roc 02 a voung we park: beholde he standeth behinde our wall, he looketh in © at the windowe, and peepeth thorowe the grate, mest My beloued aunlwered and layd vntome: O stande bp my loue, imp beauvets, gifull,and gö to thyne one: fozlo the e inter is nowe palt, the rayne is away and gone. 5 ö yee 1, The flowres are tome dp in the field, the tyunt ok the byrdes singing is come, and the bopee of the turtle doue is

V

rt un

Nin boxe
‘tal

liueraunce out of the wpldernelie,

( nj ‘
GG A night in my bed

— ey
I sought hom whom

Wy =
Tages

not.
J will get vpcthoughe

F go abont the citie, in the wayes in all the streates wyll J feeke hym whom my soule loueth: but when J fought him J founde hinn not.

3 The watchmen allo that go aboutthe
Uitte, founde mecto whom J kapde] Halbe ed hym whom my foule loneth-
10 awhen J was alittle past them, pea Whom my soule loueth: ea Gotten holde vpon hym, and Wy
; et hun go, butpll J bryng him into

mothers houle, and into her chaumed 5 5 bare me. arge vou O pe daughters of
Denes e wteuch her l not vp my lone,

Ok Solomon

J The. ij :

Che Churche defireth to be 5 inseparably to Christe her hucbande.

che be content her sell.

1 0 eme.

3 The kfigge tree byngeth foorth her figges, and the vines bea f

f 3 15 a 0 fintelt, ied

4 nde vp then and ror mp beautifull, Cand come Jr ap done, out of the taues of the rotkes, ont of the holes of the wall, O let me tee thy countenaunce and heare thy voyte:
Foz sweete is thy voyce, and kapre ts thy

face.
15 Get vs oo the fores, pea the title fores

that hurt the vines: for our vines

1 aher
16 My loue is mine, æ I am his, whiehe

feedeth among the lillies Dural het

breake, and till the shadowes be gone:
17 W Come agapne O my beloued, and

be lpke as a roe or a poung hart bpon

the wyde mountaines.

Chapter.

6 Her dee

6 Who ls this that commeth vp out ok the wyldernesse like vapours of smoke, as it were a smell of myrre, frankensente, and all maner spites of the Apothetarie- ö

7 Weholde, about ™ Solomons bed- ~

steede there staude threescore valiaunt, of the mot mightie in Israel: They

holde Nvozdes cucry one, and are ex: 8

pert in warre.
3 QEnery man allo hath his foe vp-

5 thigh, betaule of feare in the g
5 Fpug Solomon had made him selfe

d pallace of the wood of Libanus, the

pillers are of finer, the couering of golde, the seate of purple, the grounde is pleafauntly paued with loue fo2 the daughters of Hicrufatem,

10 Gb foorth © O ye daughters of Sion) and beholde king Solomon in the crowne wherewith his mother crowned him inthe day of his mariage, aud in the dapofthe gladnesse of his heart.

J city)

q The

IxVIIl.

(R Supprerfe

the heretken g. hen

nt the beginnin

they peeche fsife doctrine.

00 whe

urch prayeth Chate to be a present heide aͤlwoteg in tyme ol necoe,

(e) Bp this 1 io vnder ston-

dzen of Tiras el, whiche in the wyldernta did folow
Chulste.

(0) By Solomons bedsteede, is bas derstanded the temple ot

sword, that io bp the Worde. uerp man must
Icarne the

wWord ol God. bp the whiche he shalbe dekended in the tune of temps tation.“

" Dome reade, the pauement of gold e, the coz ben ol puts

e.

(f) ye that te ofthe number ol the fapthtul

ulld the
PICUY CTE.

t) The two
Meastes fig- 5 milie the tw testamenteg

f

Cay The gate dtu fi

(t) Bp the derne ace 27 4

The fongue

et ee

¢ The. iiij. Chapter.

Che praples of the Churche. She is without blemiche in his light. The loue

ol Christe towardes her.

Howe fapre art thou mw louc, howe fapze
: art thou- thou batt? doues eyes, beside that
‘I whieh lpeth hid with-
,in: Thyheerie lockes

N are lpke the wooll of a flocke of goates that be shorne vpon mount Gtlead.

Thy teeth are like a flocke (of beepe! of the fame bignesse whiche went vy from the washing place, where euer v one beareth two twinnes, and not one vnkruitfull among them.

Thy lippes are lpke a role coloured ribande, thy wordes are louelp, thy cheeles are like a peete of a pomegranate within thyne heeres.

Thy necke is line the towre ol Dauid buylded with costly stones, lying out on the fines wherevpon there hange a thousande shieldes: pea all the weapons ok the giauntes.

Thy two breastes art lpke two twinnes of young Noes, whicht fecde among roles.

6 Othat J might go to the mountaine

of myrre, and to the Hit of frankencente, til the day breake, and til the chadowes be past awap.

7 Thouart all fapre (O my louc) and

no spot is there in thee.

3 Conte to me from Libanus (O my

spouse) tome to me front Tibanus:

looke from the top of Amana fr

copofsan ant eta, fon and from

9 190 1 91 — he mountaines

9 ou Halt (with loue] bewit / heart O my fitter my spouse, A aba B be witehed my heart with one of thyne eyes, and with one chayne of thpnecke.

10 O howe fayre are thy breastes, my ster my {ponte 2 Thy breastes are moje pleafaunt then wine, and the smell of thyne dyntmentes palleth all spiees.

1 Thy lippes, O my spoulsc, drop as the Gre honp tombe, pea mplke and honp is vn Se der thy tongue, and the smell of thy gar: cls mentes is like the fell of Libanus.

12 “A garden well locked is my sister my e spoule: a garden well locked, and alen cus.” led Well.

13 The fruites that are planted in thee, are lykt a very paradise of pomegranates with Nocete kruites, as Camphire, Mardus, ¢ Saffron, Calamus,
Sinamom, with all [weete tinelipng trees, Myre, Alocs, and all the best
{pyces, a well ok gardens, a well ol liung waters which runne downe froin
Libanus.

14 Op thou norzth winde, coine thou coven south winde and biowe vpon mp gar“ g, den, that the mel therol map be carped oun on euerp fide: pea that my beloued may st tome into his garden, and eate ok the 1 weete fruites (that growe therein.) f

. pipet al

The. v. Chapter.

1 Chrisle calleth his churche to the participation of all

his ereatures, 2 She

Heateth his vopce. 6 She conkelleth her nakednes. 10 She praplech Christe

her hulbande.
Se 0 Ain tome into my
SN
(E

garden, O mp sister, my spousc, J haue gathered nip Mprre with my spite: J

rie O ve beloued.

2 Jan a sleepe, but mp heart ts Wa-

oe haue cate hony with

mp hony tombe, J haue drunke my Wine With my mike:
Eate O ve krendes, drinke and be me-

king J heare the voyte of mu beloned when he knocketh, laing, Open! 15
O my fitter, mploue, mp doue NY yo ung: for my head is full of Deal, che the pee of my heere are full o nyght doppes. haue put of my coate, howe can J dö tt on agapue: I haue wach e: feete, holde (ha I fyle them age hole
My loue put in his hande at tan e. and my heart was moucd A J to00e

of Solomon.

pone vp to open vnto ny beloued, al 15 handes diopped with pre. athe pre ranne Downe mp fingers

e locke.
Me pen vnto my beloucd, but he was departed and gone his way: How

um, but J coulde not finde him:

J ccd pon dom, Auuerthelell he gau me no aunlwert.
So the watchmen that went about the atic, founde me, {mote me, and wounded me: vea they that kept the

ters or Hiernsalem, pf ve kynde my be-

joued. that pe tell hym howe that Nam

sicke fo2 loue.

What maner ok mau is thy loue abotte other loners, O thou kaurest among omens Or what can thy loue do more then other louers, that thou

chargest vs fo straytly- — nto Iss for my loue, he is whyte and red
. coloured, a goodly person among tenne

Aten an de

[y}] Departed, and we wyll eke hym with thee-

g % My loue is gone

vce’ donc into his garden buto the lweete

a smellyng beddes, that he may refreshe hyun selke in the garden x gather lilies.

Sp loue is myne, and Jam his, which feedeth among the tities,

(He place Thirʒa, thon art faire as Hiealem, feavefull as an armie of men a Lacher banners. 2 e they sennmwap thine eyes from me, for
. 115 haue {et me on fires Thy heery es are lyke a flocke of goates shorne

a Per Demount of Gilead, erde teeth ave lyke a flotke of chorne
* Which go out of the waschyng a eee eucry one bearetl) among 1 not one vnkruittfull

7 Thy cheekes are lle a peete of a pointes

whẽ be spake, my heart was gonc: %

14. His lippes are lyke lilies that droppe ¢ walles toke away my kerchaffe from

5 charge vou therfore O ve daugh- 15 His body is as the pure uidzie, dect

(alem, fuch a one is my loue.

4 Thou are beautifull O myloue as is

lxlx.

ee

n His head is as the most fine golde, the

lockes of his heere are bulshed e blacke

12 HIS tyes are as the cpes of dones b the water brookes as though they were Walled with mymke, and are et
Ipke pearles in golde. mapa Dp th

B His cheekes are ipke a garden bed, fu bel,
Wherin the Apothecaries plant all maner of sweete thynges.

ssweete sinellyng Pyzre: his handes art
Ipke golde tpnges, haupng inclosed the precious stone of Thars is.

douer with Saphires: His legges are as the ae Marble {et vpon sockettes of golde. T> &

16 15 fate is as Libanus: and as the

beautie of the Cedar trees. *

17 The wordes of his mouth are sweete: pea he is altogether louely: Such a one is my lone O pe daughters of Hieru-

5 The. vi. Chapter. 1
F . ‘
Che Church allureth her telfe of the loue of Chrille.; Che peaples of the Church. *
8 She is but one and vndekiled.
A bbyther is thy loue granate within thy lockes of heere. gone then O thon 3 There are threescore gueenes, foure-
65 A tatrest aniong women- froze wiues, and daniselles without 0 Tac
Fa whypcher is thy loue number. bud

God, à diners orders ond degrees thers in

(t) Diners

pet ticulet

Chneches

dilperled,

makecth bute 1

one catholikt i

9 One is my done, one is my dearlyng:
She is the only beloued of her mother,. and deare vnto her that bare her: ohen the daughters sawe her, they layde fhe
Was blessed, yea the queenes c wines praysed her. f

Io Mhat is she this that loketh foorth as the moruyng, kaire as the moone, cleare as the lunne, and fearkull as an arme ok men with their banners: ea

ir OF Went downe into the nut garden ch von to fee what grewe by the brakes, and abe to loke pf the vineyarde florished, or pt aden bet

the pomegranates were not foorth. wege

12 JI knewe not that my soule had made

nie the charpot of the people that be vnder tribute.

1 Turne agapne turne agapne Othou perfect one, turne agapne turne agape and we wyll loke vpon thee: Bavat Will pe see inthe“ Sulamite- She is tyke men ot warre singing ina en

3 le

(e) Dulamte, that ig, Hierusalem, the
Which Was
Shalem, that

sligniketh peace.

Thefon gue

* The. vij. Chapter. ——

Che beautie of the Churche in all her members. 10 She is allured ok Chpittes

loue to warde her.

eA wowe pleafaunt are thy treadpnges with

daughter: the topntes
| / of thy thighes are like a faire tewell, which is wrought by acunnypng

155 of Gods rozbe € heouenip destreg.

(e) The two tellomenteg tömeth from

od, and ther 5

ough water pooles that are in Helebon, be-
@ eh fide the port of Bathrabbim, thy nofe magtvotes is lplie the towze ok Libanus, Which ie week loketh towarde Damaltus.
Gehe ge 6 That head that standeth vpon thee is z good and Ilie Carmel: andthe heere of thy head

an {Slike purple, and like a byng dwellyng

prince that ots
Yipee fand=
Beto aboue, ipke a wotchman to defend the boop.

(bh) The
Churche doch encr eale, the rope is pref sed und peries

thy shoes, thou princes

thy breastes lyke the grapes.

9 5 ume; J be ee Dp into the

ce, and take holde of hi

ee

10 “Thy breastes also shalbe as the wne clusters, the smell of thy nosethzll 2 as the smell of apples. soe lu sae

n And thy rooffe of thy mouth tyke the 8.
99 my, whieh e my belt er eloued. pleasaunt for his lippes ja basket ache

12 Jam my beloueds, and he Hail turne

hym bnto me.
13 O tome on m loue, we wyll go foorth into the fielde, and take our lodgpugin © che villages.
14. In the mornyng wyll we go kee the vine parde, we Wyll fee pf the vine be Hare
{prong foorth, vt the grapes be growen Se" and yk the pomegranates be shot out.
15 There will J gene ther my brestes: bes the Mandragozas geue their [weete some smell, and belpde our doches are all f. maner of plealaunt fruites both newe wer and olde, which J haue kept foe thee O mp beloued.

x
&

The. viij. Chapter.

Che Church wyll be taught by Christe.; She is vpholden by hym. 6 Che behement loue wherwith Christe louelh her. 11 She is the vine that bryngech koorth kruite to

the spirituail Solomon, which is Fetus Christe.
That might finde

cheese without and kisse
Ni thee, whom Jloue as mp brother whiche
Y suckt my mothers
Mt beeltes, and that thou
Malt not be disptled,

the tneagnatic on ol Chiiste.

2 J wyll leade thee and bryng thee into

my mothers Youle, that thou myghtest teache me, and that A myght geue thee depute of the spited wine, and of the swWeete fappe of my pomegranates, ie. 3 His left hande shalbe vnder my head, ae, and his ryght bande shall inibrace nie. ie lem ot: 4. I charge pon O ye daughters of Hieocean nd klilalem that ve wake not vp mp loue, pe touche her, tyll the be content her

tro presumpelle.
5 What is she this that cometh vp from

Cant. Al. a.

on ig vrospt-

the wWildernefle, and leaneth vpon her

loue:) I Wake thee vp among the apple

trees where thy mother conceaucd

thee, at thy mother (3 tar) brought ee into the worlde.

6 OD fet me as a leale vpon thine heart, . and as a seale vpon thine arme: f pin be as the death, as the hell. )

7 Her toales are toales of fire,anda birt vehement flambe (ol the Lorde!: {ot 7 many waters are not able to dur lone, neither may the streames we it: Bea yf a man woulde geue a aide good of his houte for lou, he Mou” «:

ount it nothyng. Segen

8 e Hur liter ts but young and 1 1 ad prestes: what Chall We do fo: dur Un ees.

when lhe shalbe spoken for? 9 Ff pas

of Solomon.
OP che bea wall, we Halt bulden —_thoufande peeces of fituer.

, dobdbe, We chall falten her with boordes lyght: thou ( Solomon) n founde faudur in

che fruite therof shoulde geue byma smellpng mountapnes.
A. If

The ende of the ballet of ballettes of Solomon,called in

latine (anticum (anticorum.

quer bunbarke thervpon: pf che bea 12 My dineparde whichis mne, is inm

Y Kaen

ME haue asntico she

yovt. OD let me heare thy voyce, chat m
1 Solomon hath a vineparde at Waal- —_ companions map hearken to the! lame. 8 pamon: and this bineparde delmered 14. d) get the away nm one and bea he brrothe Repers, thateuery one o: a roc 07 a poung bart bponthefweete *

edar tree. A Dthoulande, and the kepers two hun- dir 8; af am a wall, and my brestes Ipke dred, which bepe the frulte. > inte sie toes, then was Jas one that hath 3 Thon that oweitet in the gardens, sero

E fat
Ihe bookc of the prophete Efai,

— The firft Chapter. „ het: at

2 The prophete accufeth the tinnes ofthe people: namely of ingratekuln lle a fa
11 falchlese feruice of God, 24 and Heweth God ji Aubburnete, unte they repent. „ 24 and sheweth Gods terrible e agarnd them

Eth Yas

A per bilionof Ela tor pe are euer fallyng awap: euerp v sonne ok Amos, head is dileased, and euery heart heavy: which he fave 6 From the fole of the foote vnto the vpon Juda and head there is nothyng sounde mit: but!
Pierulalenvinthe Woundes, blapnes, and putrifipng fore:
SAR pes of Usiae they haue not ben salued, neither Weayen & Joathan, Aha; ped bp, neither molified with the ova’ r and Jehezektah, ment. | hinges of Juda. 7 Pour lande is walked, pouraticesare 8
2 Heare O heauens, and hearken O burnt vp, straungers deuour your earth: kor the Lode hath spoken, J lande bekoze pour face, and it ts made

haue nonshed and brought vp children, deldlate, as it were the deltruction ot

rr enemies cits the tyme of an 91 7
: 8 And the daughter ok Sion shalbe

N The ore hath nmowen his owner, and ent in atentyate, Iwke along’

the alle his maisters tribe: but Itrael in a garden of Cucumbers, Iphe a be-
Hath not knowen, mp people hach lieged titie. geuen no heede. 9 Except the Lore of hoastes had left
4 Ahsiunckull nation, apeople laden wit) vs asmall vemmannt, we shoulde halle miquitie, a seede of the wicked, corrupt ben as Sodoma, e lpke prito Gomora. chilozen: they haue forlanen the Lorde, 10 eave the worde of the Lord pe lange they haue pronoked the holy one ol JE of Sodom, and hearken vnto the lad rael Unto anger, they ave gone back - ok dur God thon people of Sone warde. un Whyotker ve fo many facriftee . —
5 Why Monide ye be stricken any more- wyll the Lorde say- J an full 5 .

The prophecie

meres of Weathers, eof the

bn or er beastes, J haue no

plcalure in the blood of bnllockes,

4 fambes, and goates.

be 1, When pe come to appeare before me

pox gradyng in my courtes, who hath required this at peur haudes: ,

Offer me no mo oblations, for it is but

. loft labour: incenfe is an abhominable

thyng buto me, B may not wav with

‘our newe moones, pour sabbathes

efolempne meetpuges, pour solempne alsemblies are wicked.

cu J hate your newe moones and appoputed kraltes euen from mp very

heart, they make me weerp, J can not

byde them.

55 A holde out pour handes, J wyll turne myne eyes from von: and though pe make many prayers, vet A wyll heare nothyng at all, seyng pour handes are full of blood.

16 Walhe pou, make pou cleane,put away pour cupll thoughtes out of my syght: teasse from doyng of eupll,

7 Learneto do Well, applie pour selues to cquitie, deliuer the oppresled, helpe the latherlesse to his ryght, let the widdowes tomplaynt tome before pou:

8 And then go to, saith the Lorde, let bs talke together: though your finnes be as redas scarlet, they shalbe as whyte as snawe: and thongh they were lylte purple, they shalbe as Whyte as wooll.

19 If pe be wyllyng and obedient, ve Mat cate the good of the lande:

d r0 But yk ye be obstinate and rebellious, ye shalbe deuoured with the l[worde:for the mouth of the Lord hath spokendit.]

41 Hobe happeneth it then that the righ-

teous citie which was full of equitie

er den be elt in it 7

errs, „but nowe mur

22 Thy siluer is turned to dr wine nuxt with water. —

23 Thy pances are wicked, and conpamions of theeues: they lone gyftes alto: gether, and gape for rewardes: As for the fatherlesse they helpe hym not to his ryght, neither Wyll they teethe widdoes caules tome before them.

24. Therkore faith the Lorde God of hoastes, the mightic one of Ilrael: Ah
I must cafe me of mine eneinies, and auenge me of mine aduerlarie::

25 And JJ shall lay my hande vponthee, and purely purge away thy drosse, and take away all thy tinne: :

26 And fet thy indges agayne as they were fometpine, and thy senatours as they were from the begynnyng: and then thou shalt be called the ryghtcous titie, the faythfull citie.

27 Sion shalbe redeenied with equitle,

and her conucrtes with righteousnesse.

28 Wut the tranlgrellours, aud the vngodly, and such as forsake the Lorde,

chall altogether be vtterly destroped.

29 FJor ve shalbe confounded kor the trees
Which ve haue desired: and pe chalbe gshamed of the gardens that pe haue thou.

30 For pe shalbe as a tree whole leaues
Are fallen away, and as à garden that
Hath no niopstnesse. g

31 And the very strong one (of your idols halbe as towe, and the maker ok it as a sparke (of fire) and they Hal both burne together, and no man quenche them.

The. ij. Chapter,

4 prophecie of Christe and his kyngdome. 12 Pryde, couctoutnelle, superslition, and idolatrie are reproued. 17 Gods terrible iudgement agapntt thele.

NN a) A that €fat the fonne of
Amos sawe bpon Ju-

PEAY ba and Hierufatem.
And [this] Chall come
—— de ibe 11 es: the hyll of the nh Houfe chalbe prepared in the
Weber ay the motntaynes, and chalbe
Mall yo octt tbe hylles, and all nations

pieatte vnto hym.

da multttude of people hall go,

he selfe fame worde

speakyng (thus one to another] come, let vs ascende to the hyll of the Lorde, to the houle of the God of Jacob, and he
Wyll instruct bs of his wayes, and we
Wyll walke in his pathes: for out of
Sion (hail tome a lawe, and the worde of the Lorde from Hierulalem:

4 And hall geue sentence among the
Heathen, and chall rekourme the multitude of people: they Mall breakte their fibopdes alfo into mattockes, and thelr

le sithes: And one people speares to malie {ith l

IXI.

ther, neither (hall they learne to fyght from thentefoorth.

5 Come pe O house of Jatob, and let vs
Watke in the lyght ofthe Lode:

6 For thou hast forsaken thy people the house ot Hacob,becaule they be replenied (with evils) from the east, and with sorterers lyke the Philistines, and

pert in straunge children they thynke them

monn lelues to haue enough.

dean ge Their lande is full of siluer and golde,

(0% The
8 * B
Hod forsaketh
Dd sp t 7 spolotrit, hta-

N t superstition, cos

sure: their lande is also full of horles, and no ende is there of their charrettes.

8 Their lande allo is. full of vapne gods, and before the worke of their owne handes they haue bowed them selues, pea cucn before the thyng that their owue fingers haue made.

9 There uneeleth the man, there falleth the man Downe l before them:] therkore forgeue them not.

lo Get thee into the rocke, and hyde thee in the grounde kor feare of the Lorde, and for the glorie of his maiestie.

il The high lookes of man shalbe brought lowe, and the hautinesse of men shalbe bowed downe: and the Lorde alone shalbe exalted in that day.

12 For the day of the Love of hoastes
Walbe] pon all the proude, loftie. and vpon all that is exalted, and he shalbe brought lowe:

* neither is there any ende of their trea-

i

of Esai.
(hall not lyft vp a weapon agaynst ano- 13 And vpon all high and stout C

trees of Libanus, and byo dar

ofasafan, f pon all the okeg

14 And vpon all the
** NG all the ah wee €

15 And vpon euerp high to a nc 10 : * We, and vpon

16 And ppon all the shippes of and bpon all pictures pleafaces

17 And the pride of man thalbe brought downe, and the loktinelle of men shalbe made lobe, and the Lorde alone hare exalted in that dap:

18 ; 5 foz the idols he hall vtterlyabo-

De: a

19 And they shall treepe into holes stone, and into canes of the — 7 10 feave of the Lorde, and for the glorle of his maiestie, when he arileth to destroy
(the wicked ones ok the earth.

20 In the leife fame day shall man cat away his gods of siluer, and his gods ok golde, into the holes of Mowies and
Warckes, Which he neuerthelesse had made to hym selfe to honour them.

21 And thep shall treepe into the ciftes ofthe rockes, and into the toppes ok the harde stones fo. feare of the Lorde, and for the glorie of his maiestie, when he
Ae to destrop (the wicked ones of the earth.

22 Ceasse therfore from man in whole nosethrilles there is breath: for wherin is he to be acconipted of:

The. ij. Chapter.

Che milchieles that God lendeeh on common weales foz the contempt ol his worde.
14 The couetousnelsle of rulers reproued. is Che proude nicenelle ot women punisbed

to their sbame.

Or lo, the Lode God lokhoalstes doth take away from pierusalem
Aland Juda all naner e lokstap, all tay of meate ard depnke,

‘oe

2 The captapne and the souldiour, the indge and the prophete,

ee the ( prudent and the aged man, meen 3 The taptapne of fiftie € the honorablc, en, the senatour, the tunnyng artificer, and

the eloquent oratour.

4 And J shall geue children to be their printes, and babes shall rule ouer them.
5 And the people shall eche one of them biolently oppresse another, and euery one agaynst his nepghbour: The bop

come,

Mali presume agaynst the elder, and the perfon of lowe Degree agayult the bo norable. .
6 Pea one shall take a friende o 10 f owne kinrede by the bofome, and Me thou Halt clothyng, thon shalt be 7 head, and fay this ruine with OY ande. - Jen
5 Then chall he [weare and fay, vate not helpe pou: there is neither epo mi dor her in my houlc, make! ruler of the people. i
8 Foz Hierusalem and Juda mug and because that both their ee 0 counfayles are agapntt the As vai to prouoke the prelente of his mal anger. „ Their

= ne pery tountenaunte belbzapetl)
He jee ep declare their owne finnes
Sccluesias Sodonie they pide it not: o be to theic owne foutes, for they haue rewarded euyll vnto thennselues.

“ay to the ryghteous that it shall go ri well with dem: foz they shall eate the

ut wo be vnto the wicked, for it shal-

" 1 5 with hymikor he shalbe rewarded alter his owne workes.

u Chüldren are extortioners of n people,

and women rule ouer them: O np peo-

t

daltes. a

16 encore the Lord hath said, seing the daughters of Sion are waxen pronde,

z walke with stretched foozth neckes, and wanton lokes, goyng and trippyng

nicelp, and tinckelyng with their fete:

17 Therfore Halt the Lorde shaue the heades of the daughters of Sion, and shall distouer their futhmesse.

18 In that day shallthe Lord take away the gorgiousnesse of the attire about their fete, g the taules, andthe rounde tires (alter the tachion ot the moone.)

19 The sweete perfumes, and the bratelettes, and the mufflers,

20 The bonnettes, and the flopped, aud the head bandes, and the tablettes, and the earynges,

And rynges, and noe iewels:

22 The costiy apparell, and the vayles, and the wimples, e the crispyng pinnes,

23 And the glalles, and the fine linnen, and the hoodes, and the lawnes.

24. And in steade of good simell there shalbe stincke, and in steade ol their girdle
à rent, and for well {et heere there shalbe baldnesse, in steade ol a stomacher a sacke cloth, & cunne burnyng lor beautie.

25 Thy men thal perithe with the sword, and thy baltaunt souldiours in the bat: taple (O Hierulalem.) :

26 And her gates Hall movrne and be-

waple: and (he beyng defolate, Hall {pe

bpon the grounde.

The. iiij. Chapter.
Che milerle of the lubburne.; A promile of Gods kauour to the relidue.

M that day, seuen wo-
0 nen shall take holde
% ok one man saping:we

| Sewyn finde our selues

Eu
: fo) Ja ae

th name, to fake our
_ thamefutt reproofe 4 — vs.]

de 2 „ In that dap chall the budde of the

Tode be beautifull and glorious, and f 2 krute of the earth chalbe excellent
Tatton them that are efeaped

j Aen (hall eye remnauntin Slon and
Delp ane at Hierusalem be called
Ys (namely) all such as are witten

among the lpuyng in Hierulalem,

4 “After that the Lorde hath wacht away the futhinesse of the daughters of Sion, and hath purged the blood out from hierulalem in the {pirite of iudgement and in the spirite of fire.

And vpon all the dwellynges of the hylles of Sion, and vpon her congregations, the Lord shall treatt a cloude and smoke by dap, and the chynyng of a

flamyng fire by night:kor al the glorie „ n

shalbe preserued. 10

6 And there chalbe a tabernatle fo2 a ce shadowe in the day time from the heat, eafafe plate and refuge from weather and rapne.

The

€ temptatuoug

of Ela.
The. v. Chapter, —

IDE Christe and his vineparde, s with an erecration of ANlctoufnesle, i dzunkennesle, 19 and contempt of Gods worde.

Oe wyll I syng my le beloued kriende, a long fo nip friende touching his bineyard: My beloued friende hatha vine-
Pe in a berp frutte-
: Iplenteous grounde.
This he hedged, and gathered out the stones from it, and plauted it with the choysest vine: In the middest of it bullded he a towre, also made a wine presse therin: @and he loked that it shoulde bring hin grapes, and it brought foozth wylde grapes. f

3 Nowe Deitesen of Hierulalem, and man of Juda, iudge J pray thee betwixt mie and my vineparde:

4 What moze conlde haue ben done for it, that I haue not done? Wherkoze then hath it geuen wylde grapes, where J loked to haue had grapes of itz

$ Well, nowe J Mail tell you howe J will do with niy vineparde: J Will taße the hedge from it, that it may perishe, aud brealte downe the wall therot, that it map be troden vnder koote.

6 Jwyll lay it waste, it shall neither be digged nor tut, but beare thormes and buers: J wyll also forbyd the cloudes that they Mall not rayne vpon it.

x5 7. As fo2 the vineparde of the Lorde of

hoastes, it is the house of Ilrael: and the man ol Juda, the plant of his pleasure: Ok thele he loked for equitie, but set there is oppression for ryghteoulnesst, and lo it is a trying.

8 Wo vnto them that ioyne one house to another, and bring one lande sonigh bnto another, that there is no mort place:

yll ye be placed alone in the myddest ok the earth-

9CThese thynges are in the eaves of the
Torde of hoattes: of a trueth great and faire houses shalbt Without any dweller in them.

10 And tenne acres ok vines (hall gene but a quart, and thirtie busshels of leede shall geue but au Epha.

Wo be puto chem that rile vp earlp to folowt drunktennesse, continuyng vntyll nyght, tyll they be fet on fire With wine,

12 In their frastes are harpes and lutes,

wv

tabrettes and pipes, and wine: but th regarde not the Worke of the Ton 15 contiver not the operattö of hs haudes

; Therkore commeth my folke into rap: tinttie, becaule they haue na pnderlianbung i gS glozie re anntiheD With

. ett multitude d ® Oe
With tied un

14. Therkore gapeth Hell and openet

her mouth marueilous wpde, that their
Alorie, multitude, and wealth, with such as reioyte in her, may destende into t.

15 Thus hath man a kall and is voy bt lowe, and the hygh loke of the proude shalbe lapde downe.

1s But the Torde of hoastes shalbe erat: ted in iudgement, and God that is holy is lanctified in ryghteousnesle.

17 Then shall the theepe eate as they were wont, and the riche mens landes
Nasen lapde waste Chall straungers

euour.

Suche
€

18 Wo be vnto them that drawe wicked:

neffe with cordes of vanitie, and sinne as it were with a tart rope.

12 Which ble to speake on this maner,
Let hym make speede and halen his worke, that we map fee it: let the cout saple of the holy one of Plract tomie and drawe nye, that we map knodweit.

20 Wo be pnto them that call euyll good, and good euyll, which make darknesle lyght, and lyght darknesse, that malt sowre sweete, and siweete sowre.

21 Wo bt vnto them that are wise n their Y dwne syght, and thynke then sclues to hane vnderstandyng.

22 Wo be vnto them that are stroug tt fuppeout wine, and expert men to le vp drunkennesse. 14

23 Wo be vnto then that geue nen, with the vngodip fog rewardes, but be denipne the iult caule of the ryghle 10

24 Therfoze, lpke as five licketh 9 ; strawe, and as the flambe at 4 the stubble:euen fo their roote sha al corruption, and their bloffoure pane vanishe away lpke dust: for ys 1 att away the tarve of the Horr hoastes, — — the worde holy one of Jsrael. onde

25 Hherforets the weath of the Tey

mit his people, and bath ie go 15 hande vpon them, hehath lmitten them: and the Dulles
7 srenble, and their carkales dyd ipe
8 be ein the open streetes: and in al this teat of Gad etait 55 teassed, but

i retched ou .
Wa he thal geue a token to a people
3 ofa farre countrey, and shall biffe vnto chem from the ende of the earth : and beholde, they (yall come hastyly with

speedt. 0 chall not be one faynt nor feee them, no not a sluggishe nor

ol Furie,

the pere that kyng

Sy, Dstah dped, J sawe

allo the Torde sitting

a ppon an high and glo-

rious seate, and his

S trapne filled the temple.

2 And about hyn stoode Seraphims, whereok one had fire winges, with twapne eche touered his face, with benen. his feete, and with twayne did

b fle.

3 Theyperped also eche one to another on this maner, Holy, holy, holy is the
Lojde of hoastes: the whole earth is full of his lazy,

4 And the lintels of the doore cheekes moued at his crping, and the boule was kull of simoke.

5 Then sayd J, moo is me, for J am lost, in as much as Jama man ok bucleane lippes, and dwell aniong people that bath vntleane lippes allo: for nune eyes pane rene the kyng the Boyde of

6 bicben ewe one of the Seraphims nto me, hauing a hote cole in his hand, bichehe had taken from the aulter lch the tongues,

And lapde it bpon my mouth, and

of Ef:

al.

nor loose the latchet of his thor.

28 His arrowes ate sharpe, and all his bowes bent: his hozle hoofes are as flint and his cart wheeles like a whyrle winde.

29. Dis crpe is as it were ofa Lion, and he roreth tyke Lions whelpes: they chall roare and hantche vpon the pray, and no man Mall recouer it, nor get it from them.

30. Inthat day he shalbe fo fierce vpon him as the raging of the sea: then one

shall beholde the lande, and lo darke-

ble among nesse and sorow, and the light is darkegecpic perlon: there hall not one ok ned in the heauens therok. shem put ol his gyrdle from his lopnes,

The. vj. Chapter.

Esai sawe the glory of the Lorde. 9 And was sent to prophecie the delolation

fayde: To, (this) hath touched thy ©

(t The lande

ol Judas sbalde duerwhel-

med with mie serable alice tion.

(4) Gods (ae cramentes ate

lippes, and thine vnrighteousnelle Ayale rete

be taken abay, and thy sinne forgenen.

3 Alo J hearde the voyce of the Lorde on this maner: whom and who wyll be our meslenger- Then
I sayde, Here am J, sende me.

9 And he sapd, Go and tell this people:
Heare in deede, pet vnderstande not, pe
{hall plapnelp fee, and pet perceaue not.

io Hardenthe heart of this people, stop their eares, and (hut their eyes: lest they see with their eyes, heare with their cares, and vnderstande with their heartes, and conuert and be healed.

1: Theu spake J, Lord, howe long: He aunlwered, vntill the cities be vrteriy wasted without inhabiters, and the houses without men, and tyll the lande be allo viterly desolate.

12 Forthe Lorde Kail put the men farre a wap, and (there walbe) great waste in the middest of the lande.

3 Het init shall fucceede ten kinges and it shall returne and be afterwarde wasted: But) as the Teple tree and the
Ohe in the fall ok their leaues haue pet the sappe remayning in them, (evento) the holp seede shalbe the staytherol.

K (Y The

rt fignes, dut with the ligne end the word, the matter figs ts exhl-

all J sende, da

nified, : bited to the kapchkull.

q The. vi]. Chapter,

The Sprians moue battaple again€ Hierufalem, 14 J virgin shall beare a chplde

of Jotham, Whhiche was the sonne of st

tonspired against thee,

6 Saping, we wyll go bp against Ju-

da, vexe them, and bryng them vnder

vs, and set a kyng there, euen the fone of Label:

Thus laith the Lowe God thereto,
It shal not fo go foorth, neither so tone to passe.

3 Porthe head citie of the Syrians ts
Damascus, but the head of Damascus is Basin: And after thecltore and fine veres Mall Ephraim be no moze a peo-

I

W 7

ple.
9 And the head of Ephraim is Dama-

ria, but the head of Samaria is Bomelies fone: if pe beleue not, lurelp pe hal not be establiched.

10 Moreouer, God fpake agayne buto
Ahas, saping:

n Wequive to thy selfe a token of the owe thy God, Whetherit be towarde the depthbencath, ortowardtheheight aboue.

Iz Then laid Abas, I Will reqnire none, neither wyll J tempt the Lorde.

13 The prophete aunswered. peof the honle of Dawid — ah Deate inough for you that pe be grecuons bn

shall tonceaue and beare a sl fy at oa bis ae Eule “ail

15 Butter aud honpe Hall he cate, vn he knowe to refule the ol
1 9008 He cupll and choot

16 For or euer the chylde come to : ledge to eschewe the euil and ad good, the lande that thou fo abjorrce shalbe desolate ofboth her kynges.

17 The Lord also shall sende a tyme bp:

on thee, vpon thy people, and bponthy fathers house, such as neuer came since
J ba . N F pag from a, namely thorowe the
Allplan. pty he kyng of the

18 For at the sanie tyme Chall the Lorne hisse for the flyes that are about the water of Egypt, and for the bees in the
Assprians lande:

9 These Mall come and shall light allin the desolate valleys, in the holes ok
118 and vpon all thornie and bushie p ces. ,

20 At the fame time sha the Lor Hane d

the heere of the head, and the fecte, gente and the bearde cleane of, with the valor gan that he chall hyre beyonde the waters: 8 namely with the king of the Aslyraus.

21 At the lame time shal a man nurrishe r
à poung cowe, and two sheepe.

22 Then becaule of the aboundannce of mylke that they gene he Malt cate but ter:so that euery one Which remayneth inthe lande shall cate butter and houp.

23 At tht lame tine al vinepardes wher’ in there shalbe athouland vines worth a thoulande siluerlinges, shalbe turned to bryers and thornes. N

24 They hall come into the lande doi y arrolves and bowes, : lande Chall become bryers and thorn.

with the mattocke, there Mall not eat ppon them any feare of brpers 1 thomes: but the cattell halbe din

thyther, and the sheepe thal feede

Shy The

Of Efai.

The. viij. Chapter. che deliueraunce of the lande br Emmanuel. 14 Che tome of offencesat whiche

manp hall ftumbte.

Dreouer the Borde
GIF, @ifapde vnto me, Take
A thee a great roule, and wppte in it as men do
A VAS [ail With a pen: make hac
Vy stie speede to rob, and
ö haste to the spoyle.
And J called vnto me kaythfull witnelses io recorde, Uriah the priest, and
Zatharlah the fone of Barachiah.
After that went J vnto the prophetille, aud she tonteãued e bare a sonne:
Then layde the Lord to nie, Geue him insnante, a speedie robber, an hatte spopler. p
F02 Why, oz euer the chylde thall haue knowledge to crye my father and mother, shall the riches of Damastus and the spoyle of Samaria be taken a-
Way before the kyng ofthe Assprians.

The Lorde spake alfo vnto me a gayne, saping:

6 Forslomuche as this people refuleth the styll running water of Silo, and put their delight in Kazin and Nonielies sonne:

8 7 Beholde, the Lod shall bryng mightie and great fluddes of water vpon then, namely the king of the Assprians
With all his power, whiche hall timbe vo bpon all is fluddes, and runne ouer allhis baukes,

8 And shall breake in vpon Juda, he
Mall flawe and pasle thorowe, tyli he tome bp to the necke thereof: he Mall fill allo the widenelle of thy lande with

wynges O Emmanuel.

„ greake downe O pe people, and ye

rn date broken downe, hearken to all pe

ee Of farce counteeys: mutter you, and
| ps shalbe broken downe, prepare pou, we pon halbe tome in peetes. ake pour connfell together, pet Mall our counfell come to naught: deternine the matter vet shall it not prosper:

la Godis with bs. 5

a beide Lorde spake thus to me in a

that le bophesie, Wand warned me

should not walke in the way of
'S people, laping: *

12 Be shall not speane ( wordes j of conspiratte in all thinges, when this people shall fap conspiracie: feare them not neither be afraide of them.

13 Wut sauctifie the Lorde of hoastes, tet him be your feare and dread.

14 Jor he shalbe the holy plate to fle to, C
And stone to stumble at, the roche to fall vpou a snare and net to both the houses of Israel, and the inhabitours of Hierulalem:

15 And many among them shall stumble, and fall, and be broken, yea they shalbe snared and taken.

16 Binde bp the testimonie, seale the law in my dilciples.

xi

17 And J wyll wapte vpon the Lorde chez.

that hideth his face from the house ok

Jacob, and J wyll loke for hun.

18 But lo, as for me and the chyldren whiche the Lorde hath geuen me, we are to be a token and a wonder in Jlraelfrom the Lorde of hoattes, whiche dwelleth vpon the hill of Sion.

19 And ik they fay vnto you, Alke counfayte at the Soothlayers, witches,
Charmers, and Conturers: then make them this aunkwere.] Is there a people any where that alketh not counsayle at his God? shoulde men ruane vutd the dead for the liuing- |

20 Get thee to the sawe, © and the testl- D

monie: and ik they speake not after this Gen geh
Yorde, there is no light in them. 100 ate,

21 And they Hall wander thozowe this “ese lande hardly besteade and hungry, aud en

when they luffer hunger, they wll be ont of pacience, and curle their king and their God, and (hall lone vpwarde and downe warde to the earth,

22 And beholde there is trouble aud darknesse, Dyninefle is rounde abont bin, ⁊ he shalbe deinen into darknelse.

23 Menerthelesse, the darnnesse Mati not be suche as was in her veratton, when at the first he tightly afflicted the lande
Zabulon, and the lande of Mephthalt, and afterwarde dyd moze greeuouslp afflict her by the way of the fea bepond
Jordane in Galllee of the heathen.

(ij) The

no light.

| The prophecie :

The. ix. Chapte r.

he prophecieth of chrittes natiuitie and dominion.

HE people that walked in darknesse, haue seene a great light: As for them that dwell in the lande of the shadowe ok death, bpon

them hath the light shined.

Thou hast multiplied the people, and not increased their lop: they reioyte before thee, enen as men male merie in haruest, and they be iopfull as men that do deuide the spople (alter the victorie.)

Foz thou hast broken the poke of his burthen, the staffe of his Moulder, and the rod ok his opprellour, as in the day of Madiau.

And truely euerp battaple that the warrier maketh, is dont with confuled noyse: and defiling their garmentes with blood but this battayle halbe with burning and tonsuming of fire.

5 Forvntobsa thylde ts boznc, and vnto vs a sonne is geuen, vpõ his choulder doth the rule ipe, and he is called with his owne name wonderkull, the

gence of counsell, the mightic God, the

euerlasting father, the printe of peace.

6 He shall malte no ende to encreale the rule Epeace, aud (hail sit vpon the seate of Dauid, and in his kingdome, to order the same, and to stablishe it with equitte and righteousnesle from hence foorth
- for enermoze: This chall the zealc ok the Norde of hoastes being to passe.

W 7 The Tode lent a worde into Jacob,

the same is come into Ilrael.

8 And all the people of Ephratm shall nnowe, and they that dwell in Samaria that fay with pryde and high stomarches (on this manner, }

9 The tyle Worke is fallen downe, but we Wyil buylde it With squared stones: the Mulberie timber is broken, but we
(hail let it bp agayne with Cedar.

lo But the Torde Mall strengthen the enemies of Nazin, aud iopne his aduer-

saries together against him. mu The Spilans before, and the pyqe stines behinde, and (hall deuour Ira: el with open mouth: After all this is not the wrath of the Lorde ceassed but yet his hande stretched out styll.

11 For the people turneth not vnto hym that chastiseth them, neither do they secke the Lorde of hoastes.

3 Thertfore hath the Lope rooted out of Israel both head and tayle, bough and reede in one dap.

14. By the head, is vnderstande the senatour and honourable man, and by the tayle, the prophete that preached lyes.

15 Jor the guides of this people are deteauers, and those that be gouerned are vtterlp loft,

16 Therefore shall the Lorde haue no pleasure in their poung men, neither haue pitie of their fatherlesse and wydowes: for they are altogether hypocrites and wicked, and al their mouthes speake folly: After all this is not the
Lordes wrath ceassed, but pet his hand is stretched out styll. D

17. For vngodlpnesse burneth as a fire,

and chan deuour brpers and thornes, and it {hall burne as in the thicket of a wood, and (the wicked) Aduaunce them selues, as the smoke is caryed vd.

18 Thorowe the wrath of the Lorde of hoastes is the lande full of darknesscand the people be confined as it were oe fire: no man doch spare his 0207

A

19 But he robbeth on the right haudt, and doth famithe, he eateth an the lelt hande, and he (hall not haue tough. tuery man chall eate the fleche ol his owue arme.

20 Manalles (Wall eate) Ephraim, and
Ephraim Manasses, and they both 15 gether chall eate Juda: Alter all th 5 is not the Lordes Wrath called, bu pet his hande stretthed out styll.

be

= of Esai. IxxV

a

The. x. Chapter.

1 he threatneth the opprellours of the poore, 1 Ind prophecieth against

Sennachertb.

„ O be vnto them that na Vmake vpnrighteous
I lawes, and that tau-

their right, and nip seelie people robbed of iudgement, that wydowes map be theit pray, and that they may rob the katherlesle. N 8
What wyll pe do in the tyme of vilitation, and when destruction Hail tome from karre; to whom wyll pe runne fo? helpt? and where wyll vou leaue pour

lorp:

4 : That when J withdrawe my hand, pe tome not among the prpsoners, nor sye among the dead: After all this doth not the wrath of the Lode teasse, but pet is his hande stretched out styll.

5 O Allur whiche art the staffe of my
Wrath, in whole hand is the rod of mine indignation, a

6 J wyll sende hym among thole hy-

potritishe people: among the people

that haue deserued my diffanour wyll lende hym, that he vtterlp rob them,

pople them, and treade them downe lpke the myre in the streete. a
57 Holbber, his meaning is not fo, nei-

ther thinketh his heart on chis kachion:

But he imagineth howe he map roote
P out and destroy muche people.
Fox he faith, Are not my peinces all kynges- 33

9 eps Chalno as casie to winne, as härthamis : Is it harder to conquer kamathethen Arphad- or is it lighter ni, tone Damalcus, then Sama-

1 ubo ap) J were able to winne their anna, hit of the idolaters and
Samara“ dat not Pierulalem and

' \ "
1 era not do vnto Hierulalem and

er images, ag aud her olg. dpd Dato Samaria

N Wherekoze it chall tome to passe, that

alloone as the Lorde hath perfourmed his Whole worke bpon the hill of Sion and pierusalem, then wyl F bifite the fruite ol the stoute heart of thekyng of
Alspria with his proude lookes.

13 For he standech thus in his owne con: teipt, This do I thorowe the power of mpne owne hande, t thorowe my wy dome: fox Jam aufer am he that remone the landes of the people, J rob their treasure, and haue pulled Bowne the inhabitauntes like a valiaunt man.

14. My hand hath found out the strength C

ofthe people as it were a nest: and like as egges that were lapde here and

there, are gathered together, fo do gather all tountreps, and there was

none (lo bolde) as to moue the winge, that dare open his mouth, oronte whit

per. ;

15 Shall the are boat tt selfe against him that heweth therwith: or thai the fave make any bragging against hym that

ruleth it? That were euen lpke as if

the rod did exalt it selfe against him that

blareth it, oras though the staffe should magnilie it selfe (as who lay] it were no wood.

16 Hherefore shall the Lorde the God of hoastes sende among his fatlinges leanenesse, aud burne bp his glorp as it were with a fire. *

17 And the light of Israel shalbe that fire, and his holy one shalbe the flambe: and it Hail kindle and burne vp his thomes and bryers in one da.

18 Ya all the glorp of his Wooddes and fieldes shalbe consumed with body and foulc, and they shalbe as an hoast of men, whole standard bearer fapleth.

19. The trees aifo of his wood whiche remayne shalbe of such a number that a chylde map tell them.

20 After that day shall the remnaunt of

Ilcael, and suche as are escaped out of the Houle of Jatob, seeke no moe coinfort at him that {mote then but vnkaynedly shall they trust vnto the Lorde,

the holy one of Jlrael. bebe h a The

= : ’
. Taz The remnaunt, euen the posteritie of

a) Chiiste mibe bone ol the setdt of

Esai.

Th

Jatob, Mall tonuert vnto God the nughtie one.

22 Foz though thy people O Ilrael be as the sande of the fea, pet (hal the rent

naunt of them conuert vnto him: The deereed tonsumption ouerfloweth with righteousnesle.

23 And therefore the Lorde of hoastes shall perkettiy fulfill the thing that he hath determined in the nuddest of the
Whole worlde.

24. Thtrefore thus saith the Lorde God

ol hoastes: Thou my people that dwel-

lest in Sion, benotafratde for the king

of the Assirians: he shall smpte thee

with a rod, and {hall lykt vp his staffe

against thee, as the Egyptians dyd sometune.

25 ut beep foone after shall mp Wrath

and indignation be fulfilled in the destruction of them:

26 Moreouer, the Lorde of hoastes shall stirre vp a scourge kor him, like as was the laughter of Madian vpõ the rocke
Oreb, and as the destruction of the
Egyptians when he lyfted vp his rod

at

COR — ND there Sl came a lprig tooth of the

Ss’ | stemue of Esat, and aC roote.

Ja poung Moote fall eA The spirite of the

W

Lord wyldome and understanding, the spirite ofcounfaticand strength, the {ptrite of knowledge and of the feare of the

orde,
And chall make hym of deepe ludgement in the feare of God: For he shall not geue fentence after the thing that
Moc before his eyes, neither reproue after the hearing ok his caves;
4 But with righteousnesle Hal he tudge

the poore, and with equitie Malt he rekourme the fimple ok the worlde, and he
Chall smpte the worlde with the rod

v

e prop

The. xj.

growe out ok his

shan rest vpon hint, the spirite ok

hecie pvphpon the lea.

27 Then shal his burthen be ta wee dee necke, pea the same poke
95 W ok the built 1 85
28 He thal come to Jiath and go throw towarde Migron, at Michn
; clap 5 bb he 3 8 mas shall
29 They Hall go ouer the foorde shalbe their resting place, ama thas be afraide, Gidea Saul that lee away i deere Kachel one
P ala tho Ss
1 0 5 — * N “
31 Madmena {hall tremble fos keare the citisens of Gabim are manip, site
32 Met (hall he resnaine at Mob that day: after that shall he lyft vp his hande a: gaint the mount of the daughter Si: on the hyll ol Hiernsalem. |
33 But lee, the Lord God of hoattes shall breake downe the bough with feare, he shall hewe downe the proudt, and kell the high minded.
34. The thickets alfo of the wood shall he roote out with iron, and Libanus
Thall haue a fall thorowe the mightit.

Chapter.

Ahe prophecleth of the nat iuitie ok Chile, and ok his people. ¢ Okt ereilt
A tlrael. 1o And of the kaptl of the heathen ar gentle. 1 ia * ene

of his mouth, and with the breath of .

his mouth shall he flay the vngodly. ene
5 Vightedulnesse halbe the gyzdle ok

. Histopnes, and kapthkulnesse the sve
Ding vp ot his rapnes.

6 The Woolfe wal dwell with the
Lambe, and the Leoparde Mall lye downe by the Gdate: Wullockes, L. ons, and Cattell, hall kepe coupaupto-
Ban fo that a litte chylde shall leade

rr.

7 The Cowe and the Weare Mall fecde 8 together, and their ponng ones chall le together: the Lion fall eate strawt,
Ipke the Dre or the Cowe. ail

g The chyloe whyle he ticket © 0 haue adelive to the lerpentes uel, an 30
When he is Weaned, he Malt put h hande into the Cockatrice eric. her

9. Soman hall do euill vnto au 1 no man hall destroy another in a belt

E tout of
E

Chpitte aro of

ben

g holynes: for the earth shalny arte knowledge of the Lode: cuen as the fea Hower) ouer with wa-

tet. j in that day shall the gentiles en:

1 e the roote of Jesse, whiche chalbe fet vp for a token vnto the people, and his rest shalbe glozions,

u Atthe same time (hall the Lord take in hande agapne to Tecoucr the reninaunt ok his people, Whiche halbe teft allue from the Allirians, Egpptlans,
Arabians, Mozians Clamites, Chaldees, Antiochians, Efron the Plandes

ofthe (ca,

u And he thall set vp a token among the gentiies, and gather together the dilpearled of Jlrael, vea and the dutcastes ot Juda from the foure torners of the

Woblde. 6 *
B The hatred of Cphzaim allo and ene:

mutes of Juda shalbe cleanc rooted out:
Ephraim shall beare none euyll wyll to
Juda, c Juda Mall not vere Ephrain.

14 Wut they both together chall flee vp- C pon the shonlders of the Philistines towarde the Well, and lpople them together that dwell to warde the cat: The
Idumites and the Moabites shal come nder their handes, and the Amonites shalbe obedlent vnto them.

15 The Tord alsoshal cleaue the tongnes

© of the Egyptians fea, and with his nughtie winde shall he lpft vp his hand fee

duer Nilus, and shall lmyte his seuen 1: fea dat

hindeeeth the

streames, and make nien go ouer dzpe vatase.

shod. ' ! ;

16 And thus shall there be a way fo? his people that remapneth from the Aslirians,lpke as it happened to the Ilraelites what tynie they departed ont of the lande ol Egypt. 5

ites Cie =

4 Che tong of the Churche kor the obtapning of the victorie and ouercomming

of the worlde.

D in that dap thou
Ichalt fay, O Lode
AA, wyll prapse thee, fo thou wast difpieaten at
0 Vey .me: but refrapne thou
E trom thy Wrath, and

Ttcnikort me.
2 Beholde, God is m saluation, in whõ
9 Wyll trust and not be akrapde: foz e Lode God is my strength ande mr song, he allo is become my faluation.
3 Therlore with top shall pe drawe wa-

ter out of the welles of saluation:

4 And then shall ve sap: Geue thankes vnto the Lorde, tall vpon his name, declave his workes among the people, kepe them in remembzaunte, for his name is excellent. =

O fing prayles vnto the Lorde, for he hath done great thinges, as it is knowen in all the worlde.

6 Crpe out, and sing thou that dwellest in Sion: for greatis the holy one of JE rael in the nuddest okthee.

J The. xij. Chapter.

be pio

ofthe people. pee’ his is thecoburthen of
We GBabplon, whiche Esai

the sonne of Amos did

see. N
Lift op the banner vp-

— In 195 155 hyll, call vnto thé, Waͤgge your dine meer map go into the gates

Jbaue commaunded my lanctified, J

ecletl the deltruction of Babylon, the captiviitie and the comming agapne

haue also called my baliaunt ones, iop-

ing in my honour to execute np wrath.

4 There is a noyse of a multitude in the

mountaynes, lyke as of a great people,

a rushing as though the kingdomes of

the nations tame together : the Lorde

of hoastes muftretl his armpe to bate taple.

5 bey coe oli bellen, enen che

the ende of th 5
* K (iiij) Lorde

pe prophecie
Tode hym elfe with the ministers of orrchaled Doe, and as a shcepe that no d

his wrath, to destroy the whole lande.
6 ii pe, for the day ok the Lord is

at hande, and (hall come as a destroyer

from the alnughtie.
5 Therefore hall all handes be letten downe, and all mens heartes shall melt

W awap.

8 They Mall stande in feare, tarekulnes and sorowe shall tome vpon them, and they (hal haue payne, as a woman that trauapleth with chylde: One shalbe abathed of another, and their faces Hal burne like the flame of fire.

-9 Weholde, the day of the Lorde shall

tome terribly and full of indignation,

furic c wrath, to make the lande waste,

and to roote out the sinners therof,

10 Jdr the starres and planettes of heauen shali not geue their light, the sunne halbe darkened in the rising, and the moone shall not chine with her light.

u And J wyll visite the wickednesse of the wollde, and the sinnes of the vngodlpe. The high stomakes of the proude
Wyll J take aay, and will lap downe the boasting of the tiraunt.

12 JI wyll make a man dearer then fine

gold, aud a man to be moze Worth then

à golden wedge of Ophir.

13 Therfore J wyll hake the heauens, and the earth shaͤll remoue out of her plate in the Wath of the Torde of

hoattes, and in the dap of his fearefull

indignation. * 2

14. And (Babylon) chalbe as an Hunted |

man taketh bp: Euery man fhaii tur to bts owne people, and fice “4 to pisowbne 15 — a ehe one te
15 Wholo is founde shalbe thot thao, and whoso taketh their part, habe de stroyed with the sworde.
16 Their chyldren shalbe flayne before

their eves their boule spoyled, and their

17 Foꝝ lo, I Hall bring vp the Medes a-

gait them, whiche that sie — siluer, nor be destrous ofgolde:

18 With bowes shall they destroy the young nien, and haue no pitie on wo: men with chylde, and their faces chall not spare the chyldren.

19 And Babylon that glory ofkingdomes, and beautie of the Chaldees Honour shalbe deftroped, cucn as God destroyed Sodomie and Gomor.

20 It Mall not endure for euer, neither

hall there be any moze dwelling there from generation to generation: The
Arabians hall pitche no tentes there, neither chall the sheepheardes make their foldes there any more.
21 But feavefull wylde beastes shall lve

there, and the houles shalbe ful ofgreat -

Owles, Estriches chall dwell there, and Apes shall daunce there.

22. Wylde cattes chall trye in the palaces, and dragons shalbe in the plealaunt houses: And as for Wabplons : tynie it

is at bande, and her dayes shall not be

prolonged.

j The. xiiij. Chapter. al” .

1 Che returne of the people krom captiuitie. the prolperitie of the people of God. and
Affliction of their enemies. I Che pryde of Babplon. *

) pei nevepfull vnto Ja-

cob, and will pet chole

| vil Plraclagaine, and let

AN aK them in their owne

„land, straungers shall

i cleaue and get them to the house of Jatob.

2 The people shall take them and tarry

them home to their owne land: and the

house of Ilsrael shall possesse them in

the lande of the Lord, that they may be

seruaunts and handmaydes: and they

fhall take those prysoners whole cap:

Ut the Torde wylbe

tines they had ben before, and rule thost

that had oppresled them.
3 When the Lorne nowe shall bzyng thee to rest from thy trauaple, keare,

and harde bondage that thou watt la-

den withall! Nane
4 Then shalt thou ple this matt: vpon the kyng of Wabplon, a fay
Howe bapnesesiie thatthe trite 0 . leaueth ot: Is the golden tribute con to an endee
5 The Lorde hath broken the Ade of the vngodly, and the rod of the lo

We, a wuice

ch when he is wroth, siniteth the
: as wic continuall strokes, and in wath raigneth ouer the heathen, Who pepertecutetl) without compassion.
B And therfore the whole worlde is
‘ nowe at rest and quictneffe , and men
5 02 io A : 7
3 pe chen the Firre trees and Cedars. of Libauns reiopte at thy fall, saping:
Holbe that thou art layde downe there cone no mo vp to hewe downe vs. eil also beneath trembleth to meete hte at thy tommyng, and for thy fake hath raylcd his dead, all mightie men and pentes of the earth, all kynges ofthe earth stande vp from their {eates, o That ey may all aunlwere and speake Dito thee, Art thou become
Weake also as we: Art thou become lpke vnto vs: ö u Thy pompe and thy pride is lapde downe into the pit, and lo is the melodie of thy instrumentes. Wormes be layde vnder thee x wormes be thy toueryng. n Hole art thou fallen from heauen O
Lucifer, thou faire mornyng chylde-

the grounde, which oid weaken the natious: 4 0
C3 For thou sapdest in thine heart, J
Wyll clymbe vp into heauen, and exalt my throne abone beside the starres of
Hod, J wyll fit allo bpon the mount of che congregatlon towarde the Hozth.
14 Jwyfll cipmbe bp aboue the cloudes, and wyll be ipke the hyghest of all. j, Bet thou thalt be brought downe to thedeepe of hell, to the fines ok the lake.

faving: Js this the man that brought
Alllandes in feare, and mad ‘one domes afrapde- mye 5: kyng-
7 jo thisbe tbat made the worlde in a
Tree Walle, and lade the cities to the
Ota de- Which let not his puloners go

One in his owne Hout nere
1 e with worchip.
8 att catt out of eby graue luke omen sbonnna-le braunche, like as
LOWE With ie eee that are shot tho-

S ol the deepe, aga dead
20 Pye ats teoen vnder fett. art not buried With them: euen

HoWe Hak thon gotten a fall euen to

16 They that lee thee hall narowly lokke . bpon thee, and thinke in them selnes,

6 abt ürnges of the nations lpe euery

the
(0 chr ftones g {worre, and go Downe

N 8 — —

of Esal.

dxxvit.

because that thou hat wasted thy lande

_ destroped thy people: The generation

of the wicked shalbe out of memorie

for euer.

21 Let there a way be fought to destroy

their children that be in their kathers

wickednesse, that they come not vp

agapne to possesse the lande, and fyil the worlde full of enemies.

22 J wyll stande vp agaynst them faith

the Lorde of hoastes, and roote out the name and remnaunt, sonne and sonnes sonne of Babylon faith the Lorde.

23 Jwyll geue it to the Otters, and wyll make water puddels of it, and J wpll
{iveepe them out with the befome of destruction faith the Lorde of hoastes.

24 The Lorde of hoastes hath [worne an othe, saping: It hall come to pale as J haue determined, and chalbe fulfylled as J haue denied,

25 So that Asspria hall I destroy in my E

lande, and vpon my mountaynes wil J treade hym vnder foote, wherthrough his poke shall come from them, and his burthen halbe taken krom their

shoulder.

26 This deulle hath God taken through the whole worlde, and this is his hande stretched out ouer all people.

27 For yt the Lord of hoastes determine
Athyng, who ts able to disanull ite And ik he stretch foorth his hande, who may returne it agapne- gs

28 The lame pere that kyng Abas dyed, was this burthen:

29 Reiopte not thou whole Palestina, becaule the rod of him that beateth thee is broken: for out of the serpentes roote there Mall come an Adder, and his fruite Malbec fierie fleeyng worme.

30 But the first borne of the poore shalbe fed, and the simple shall dwen in satetie:
Thy roote alfo wyll J destroy with hunger. and it (hall lay the remnaunt.

31 Mourne thou porte, weepe thou citie, for, O whole lande of Palestina, thou art layd waste:for there shal come from

the north a smoke, that not one alone may abide at honie in his times. ;

31 What (hall one then aunswere the meslengers of the Gentiles: Foz the
Lorde hath ttablithed Sion, and the

poore of his people that be therein shall put their trust in it.

q The

IJ pg pf fee —

a f and obftt=

pentaune moued bp the prcachyng of ge dg wo tall repent
When is

rophecie |

„
* The. xv. Chapter. N

2 prophecie agapnst Moab.

His is the burthen bpon Moab: Ar of Moab was destroped c ouerthrowen in the nyght season, Bir allo in Mogab was destroped and perished in the nyght.

2 Moab went vp tothe idols house, euen

The care- 2

7dr. 3

to Dibon to the hygh places to weepe: for Neba and Moab fhall mourne for
Meda, All their heades were balde, and all their beardes shauen.

In her streetes are they girded about
With sacktloth: In all the toppes of her houses and streẽtes shalbe nothyng but mournyng and weepyng.
Helbon and Eleale (hall erpe, that their vote shalbe hearde vnto Jahaz: and therfore the armed souldidurs also of
Moab shall bleate out and trye fo2 very sorowe of their myndes.

Mo shall my heart be for Moabs fake,

they (hall flee vnto the citle ol Soar:
Which is lyke a falre young bullonee of three pere olde, for they shall ait go vp to TLuith weepyng: euen fo by the way towarde Hozonaim they Halt make lamentation fo2 their btter dettruction,
For the Waters of Minwim shalbe dryed bp, by reason wherof the grate is withered, the hearbes dettroped and > the greene thynges gone.

Therkore the goodes that remapneth

in Moab, and the riches therok, they chall carp to the brooke of Wyllosbes.

8 Jor the trye went oner the whole

lande of Moab, vnto Eglati and vnto weer Elin was there nothyng bu mournypng. J

9 Wecaule the waters of Dimon were

full of blood, J wyll adde moze vpon
Dimon: and lions vpon the remnaunt of the lande, and on them that are escaped from Moab.

ö The. xvj. Chapter.
Che dellruction of Moab,

ende the lorde of the
N | wonde a lambe from sthe rocke that lpeth towarde the desert, vnto the hyl of the daughter
— Sion.

For as for the daughters of Moab they (halve as a trembling birde that is put out of her neste: for they Mall cary them vnto Arnon,

Gather your counsell, come together in iudgement, cover vs with pour cha-
DOW Inthe midday as the nyght doth hyde the chaled, and belbray not them that are fled.

Tet my persecuted people dwell

aniong pon, Moab be thou their refuge

against the destroyer:for the aduerfarte is brought to naught, the robber is vn-
N the tiraunt is wasted out of the

ande. |

5 And inmerscie Hall the seate be prepa:

red, and he shall lit vpon it in the trueth in the tabernacle of Danid iudging and sekyng indgement, and makpng hatte vnto ryghteousnesse.
6 We haue hearde of the pride of Moab, he is very proude, presumptuous, ar-

rogant, and full of mdignation, and vapne are his lpes.

7 Therkoze hall Moab make lamen B

tation becaule of the Moabites (chat chalbe layne] pea they Mail waple altogether: becanle of the foundations of the citie that is made of bricke shall pt complapne, event pe laue people that art left only behynde.

3 Forthe vines of Helbon are cut owne:

as forthe bine ol Sibma, the lorde 9 the heathen haue broken downe og paincipall braunches, they ark n . tuen vnto Jaʒzer, they went on em
Dering bnto the wildernesle, her ‘Lewes braunches Were throwen downs they went ouer the sea. 3

Therfore wyll J mourne for 550 i and foz the bincofDibma,J my 1 5 my teares vpon thee O Hela
Eleale :for the erpe of thyne enen a fallen bpon thy sommer fruites, vpon thy haruest.

10 The nurth and cheare is taken away

i in the out of the 15 55 1 25 and in the binepardes there sha 0
5 The treader Chall treade out ni

wine in their prelles, the fous sila

Of Esai.

re haue J layde downe.
1 OP saute (att rumble
, like an Harpe fo Moabs fake, e mine inwarde partes for the cities fake that is made ol bricke.

z seene that Moab shalbe made Weerp
1 ar his bpllechappelles, he shall come to

on Damascus: Be-

holde Damastus is

taken away to be no fe per ee ee aloe an heape of bzoken

i a tones.

2 The waste cities ol Aroer shalbe foldes foz cartel which shall tye there, and there shalbe none to fray thein away.

3 Ephraim alfo shall no moze be strong, and Damalcus halt no longer be a

Byngvomie,and the remmaunt of Syria. thalbe as the glozie of the chuldren of:

Arrael faith the Lorde of hoastes.
4 Andin that day it chall come to passe,

that the glorie of Jatob shalbe made

berp thinne, and the fatnesse ok his fleche Mall ware lean .

And he (halve as one that gathereth

b come in haruest, euen lpke bpm whole arme reapeth the eares of come:

He halbe also lpke hym that gathereth

eates of tome inthe valley of Rephaim.
% © Home gatheryng in deede Chall there
Cleft nit, euen as in the thakpne ofan

line tree there remayne two or three

artes in the toppe of the bppermott

a h de
N ther 5 ä

Tome God of Beal. 7 — 1

7 Ott halititan kurne agayne to hig

matter, and his eyes chall spect tothe holy one of Plc 5 pane *

* As forthe autters

Which a

it

. | F

cs ‘ean tt (hall come to pate, that when it pestemipleto pray, O but he cha not be

q The. ij Chapter.

A prophecie agapntt Damalcus.

His is the burthen vp-

re his owne

avi

3 So then this is the saying that the
Torde hath spoken concernyn mite that tpnie. i Boa
14 But nowe the Lorde hath spoken, apg: Bu tase veces, tohich shalbe as the yeres ok an hi dseruaunt, that the glorie of Moab be turned into contempt thoughout all his multitude, which is very great: and that which remapneth shalbe very small and feeble.

Dr.

handy worke he chal not regarde them, and the thynges that his fingers hath made, as groues and images, thole Mat he not cat his eye vnto.

9 Jn that day chall their strong eities be as the foxfaken shrubbes € brãunches, which they left betause of the childrẽ ol
Plcacl, and the lande shalbe delolate.

10. Betause thou hak forgotten the God of thy saluation, and hast not ben myndfull ok thy strong rocke: therfoze shalt thou set pleafaunt plantes, and shalt graffe the braunche of another mans

ine.

5 J The

ei

SS

| The prophecie

An erhortatton to the Ethiopians and the countreys nygh adioynyng to them.
Che vocation ok the Gentiles.

donde of deawe in the heate of haruest.

5 Fozatoze the haruest whe the braunch is growen, there chall come ripe kruite of the floure: and he (hal cut downe the ineveale with sithes, and the beaunches fhall he take awap with hookes.

6 Thus shall they be left together vnt d the loules of the mountatnes and tothe S beastes of the earth: for in sommer the birdes (hall remayne vpon it, and euery beast of the lande shalbe vpon it in wpnter. 7

7 In that tyme chall there a present be brought vnto the Lord of hoaltes, euen
à people that is scattered abrode and

which is beponde the oy waters of Ethlopta,
E Sendyng meslengers by the sea, euen in vessels ol reedes ouer the water, Get vou hence pe speedy meflengers toa natton that is {cattered abrode, and robbed of that they had, a fearekull people from their begynnyng hytherto, a nation troden downe bp litle and litle, whole lande the fluddes haue spoyled.
All the inhabitours of the worlde, and

(Peta:

indwellers of the earth, loke vp whẽ ye setteth vp a token in the monntapnes, and hearken when he bloweth with

robbed of that they had, that fame people which haue ben fearkull from their begynnyng hyptherto, a nation troden

the trumpe.

Foz fo the Lorde fapde vnto me (as fo: me] J wyll take my ref, and loke vpon the matter in my Habitation, lyke a kaire heate after the rapne, and lyke a

downe by litle and litle, whole lande the fluddes haue spopled, to the plate of the name of the Lode of hoastes, euen to the mount Sion. ——

The. xix. Chapter. 5
1 De prophectech agaynst Egypt, 18 and the bocation of the Geneiles to Christe.

He burthen of Egypt. 5 The waters ofthe fea Mall faple ard
>) Beholde, the Lorde the riuer chall decreale and be drped vp. rideth vpon a fibift 6 The waters chalbe drawen out, the
N cloude,and chan tome riuers ok Egypt thalbe emptied e dre into Egypt, and the pp, the reedes and flagges shalbe cut
ADS wols of Egypt chall downe. a the 5
. tremble at the presenee 7 The grasse inthe river and by 6 of hym, and the heart of Egypt Mail rivers bancke, and all that grobweth quake in the nuiddest of her. the riner, chall wither awap, and be
2 And J yt (ct the Eqvptians one brought to naught. | agapnt another, fo that one bother 83 The filthers allo Myall mourue, 115 chall kyght agaynst another, and one allthey that cat angle into the wa 4 neighbour againt another, ctticagaint chall make lamentation: aud ther 1 citie, and realm against realme. lap foorth their net beside the wa
3 The niynde also ot Egypt shalbe cleunne halbe rooted out. e in flate
Without counlaple Within it lelfe, and 9 Moreduer, they that worke is 55 the deute that they take WAZ denroy: and make fine workes chalbe con open and they chall {eke counfapie at mols ded, and so Mall they that wean’ and at sorterers, at Workers with spi- workes. enbe derites, and at soothsapers. jo Jor their open workes Hal eue ondes
4 And the Egyptiaus wyn JJ gene ouer stroped, and all they that mabe P

into the bande of a maruaplous cruell and flues fozfithe Mail tome to nal lozde, and a mightle kyng Mall haue 1 Wut por foolishe princes 60 ole wi
Dowanion ouer ther, faith the Tode wile coimlavlers ol Pharat we lay ye
God ok hoastes. | ts turned to foolishnesse, hole po

of Efai.

nto Pharao, Jam come of Wife men aud of auntient kinges-
Where are thy Wile men: Het them
4 tell thee they can, what the Lorde of hoastes bath Denied ppon Egypt. he princes of Zoan are become föoles, the prinees of Noph are de-

caued, they haue deceaued Egypt, euen they that were taken for the chicte stay N

Ein cbemmdest ok it hath the Loz é

t weed the spirite of wickednesse: and

they haue deceaued Egypt in scuerp
Worke therof, euen as à dzunken man staggereth in his vonnite.
16 Neither shall the“ head or tayle, the
Li hjiaunche o2 reede, be able to do any.
2 wonke in Egypt.
Et 16 Inthat dap Chall Egypt be lyke vnto e Women: It chalbe akrapde and stande eee ill rare at the motion ol the hande of the Lorde of hoastes which he shaketh ouer it. iy And Egypt shalbe afraide of the lande of Juda: fo that euery one that maketh mention of it halbe afraide therat, betause of the counsayle of the Lorde of hoattes Which he deuiled for it.
13 In that dap shall fiue cities in the lalide of Egypt speake the language of
Chanaan, and sweare by the Torde ol

hoastes: the citie of desolation shalbe

called one of them.

5 In that day shall the aulter of the

Torde be in the niddest of the lande of
Egypt, and this title belide it vnto the r 8
20 And it shalbe a token and a witnesse vnto the Lorde of hostes in the lande of
Egypt: For they hal trie vnto the Ho becaule of such as trondle them, and he shall sende them a lauiour aud a great nian to delpuer them. f
21 Aud the Lorde shalbe knowen in E-
. Gppt, and the Egyptinus chall knowe the Torde in that day, and do sacrilice and oblation: pea they shall vowe a bowe vnto the Lord, and perkourme it.
22 The Torde also halt {mite Egypt foze, and heale them agayne: and they shalbe converted vnto the Lorde, and

he (halbe intreated of them, and chall

heale then. N

23 Inthat day shall there be a common wap out of Egypt into Asspria, and
Assyria shall come tuto Egypt, æ Egypt into Allyria:so that the Egyptians and

the Alspuans shall serue the Lorde

together.

24. In that dap shal the nation of Jsrael be the thirde with Egypt and Allyria: and they shalbe blessed in the middest of the lande,

25 Which lande the Lorde of hoastes hath blessed, faping : blessed is my people of Egypt, Aslur allo is the worke of my handes, and Jlrael is mine inheritaunte.

The. xx. Chapter.

Nthe pere that Tharao) 555 than came vnto Aldod

ZB) RSS ole) and taken it:
2 at the lame tyme spake the Lorde by se Dane of Elai the lonne ol Amos, fronts Go and take of the fackelotl) a tp loynes, and put ok thy choc
4 NtDp foote. And he dyd fo, walkyng
10 97 barefoote, e Lode sayde. ‘i dun Ein Ire poe, Lyke as my fer

barckoote fo) Afigne and wonder thzec

Walked naked and

Agaynct Egypt and Ethiopia.

peres bpon Egypt and Ethiopia:

4 Euen so shall the kyng of Assyria take away out of Egppt and Ethiopia, children and olde men naked and barefoote, with their lopnes vncouered, to the great shame of Egypt.

They shalbe brought in feare also, and be ashaͤmed of Ethiopia their hope, x ot
Egypt wherin they are wont to glozte.

And they that dwell in the lame Ille shall say in that day, Beholde such is our hope, whpther shall we flee for helpe, that we may be delyuered lrom the kyng of Allyria- And Howe hall we escape-

AM

N

The

IxxIx.

D

Agaynst Babplon, Jdumea, and Trabia.

de burthen of the And beholde here commeth ac
MON Ovwatte fea, Euen as of men, With two borlemen, 57 the stormie weather aunlwered and sapd, Babylon is fallen oui palleth through at the it is fallen, and all the images of her
A noone dap from the gods hath he {mitten downe vnto the i wudernesle, fo chall it grounde. mm comefromebeterrible 1 Thou art he whom J mut threshe, lande. and thou belongest to my corne floure:
2 Agreeuous vision was shewed vnto This that J hearde of the Lordeof me: let one decetptfull offendour tome hoastes the God ok Ilrael, haue J agaynst another, and one destroyer a- (chewed vnto vou. gaynst another: Up Clam, lay siege 1 The burthen of Duma. He calleth to thou of Media, all their gronyng haue me out ok Seir: watchman what halt
J lapde downe. thou espied by nyght- Watchman what
3 Therlore are my lopnes fylled With halt thou espied by nyghtsozolbe, heauinclle hath taken holde 12 The watchman layde, The morupng vpon me as the panges of a woman dconuneth, and fo doth the nyght: Il ye that is trauaplpng: 4t made nie stoupe wyll alke me any question, then alte it: when IJ heard it, and it dered me when returue and come agapne.
IJ saweit. 3 The burthen concernpng Arabia. In C
My heart panted, fearekulnesse tame the wooddes of Arabia (hall ve tary all vpon me: the nyght ol my voluptuoul- nyght euen in the streetes of Dedanim. nesse hath he turned agaynst me into 14 The inhabitours ok the lande of feare. 5 Thema brought foorth water to hym
5 Whyle they garnished the table, the that was thirstie, they preuentedbyin watchiman loked: and whyle J was that was fled away With their bread. eatyng and drynkyng, it was sapde, bp 15 Jor betause of Wordes they are be-
Ye captaynes, tale pon to pour shielde. come fugitiue, Euen for the drawen
6 For thus hath the Lorde sayde vnto (worde, and for the bent bolbe, and beme. G and set a watchman to tel what caule of the greeuousnelle of warre. he leeth. 16 For thus Hath the Lorde sayde vnto
W 7 And he lave a charret which two me: There is pet a pere, actordyng to the horlemen fat vpon, with the caviage of veres of an hired seruaunt, and all the an Alle, and the cariage ola Camel: So glorte of Cedar Chall faple. he loked, and toke diligent heede. 17 And the number of them that Mall
8 And he eryed, a lion, my Hore J escape from the bowes, halbe minished stande continually vpon the watche by the mightie chüldren of Cedar:foz the

towie inthe dap tyme, and am appoyn- Torde God of Pirael hath spoken it. ted to kepe my Watch euerp nyght. a

(The wate
(cr is Baz, bpion oz
Chaldce.

The xxij. Chapter
A prophecie agaynst Pierutalem.

He burthen of the ch with the lworde, noz dead in battaple. vallepot vision. voöhat 3 All thy captapnes are fugitiue 1177 hat thon to do here, ther, the archers baue taken to nde that thou clymbest to sloners: All they J lay that are fo and
N che houle toppes- in thee are in caͤptiuitie together,

„e Thouthat art ful of they also that fled favre of. e and tumultuoulnes, thou 4. Therfore lapde J, Let me ator {yall troublefome and proude citie: Thy J wpll make lamentation: Jott Label flapne men are neither put to death not be able to contfort me ven uc ae

a) Hierusam is meant

the valle
4 vifion. f

deltrüction of the daughter of my peo-

ple. 5 .

this is a day ok trouble, of ruine,

f aaa pefteuction, that the Lorde the

God of hoastes Wyll bryng to passe in

the valley of pifion, breakyng downe che citic, and crying vnto mountapnes.

Elani bare the quiuer with a charret

of footmen and horlemen, and the atic

of Air shewed the shielde open.

of charrettes, and the horsemen set their faces directly to warde the gate.
3 And m that day dyd the cnemie take away the couer of Inda, and then didit u thou loke towarde the“ armour of the
2 houle of the forest. ond pe Hane seene allo the broken places ofthe titie of Dauid, howe that they are
Many, and ve gathered together the waters of the lower poole.
10 As for the honses of Hierulalem ve haͤue numbred them, and the houfes haue pe broken downe, to make the
Wall trong, b l Apit allo haue ye made betweene the two walles for the waters of the olde u podle, Of haue not regardedthe maker nin kherok, neither had respett Duto hym n khat fashioned it long ago. ay (2 And in that day dyd the Lorde God ok hoastes tall men vnto weepyng and mournyng, to baldnesse and girdyng about with sacktloth.
3 And beholde they haue iop and gladin, nelle flaping oren, aud kyllyng sheepe, cb kaͤtpng fleshe, and drynkyng wine: Tet
Ae drynke, kor to mozorve we
C14. Audit came to the cares ol the Lorde okhoaltes, This iniquitie hall not be purged from pou tyll pe dye, saith the f Londe God of hoastes. . | y Srbus faith the Lord God of hoastes: et pe onto xonder trealurer euen vnto

al. is 7

1 o n mug
Robin, oe Noa iT 1 md
Shia,

Olf al.

3 Thy chieke valley also was full of

16 What hast thou to do here- and whom hat thou here-that thou shouldest here
Hebe thee out a sepulchree, as it Were one that heweth hym ont a lepulchree on Hye, or that graueth an habitation for hym selfe on an harde rocke-

17 Beholde O thou man, the Lorde that cacy thee away into captiuitie, and chall surelp concer thee with tonkusion.

18 The Torde shal turne thee oner like a ball with his handes (and Halt sende thee] into à farre countrey: there shalt thou dye, and there in steaͤde of the charrets

sof thy pompe, shall the Youle of thy ode haue confufion.

19 J wyll driue thee from thy place, and mi of thy dwellyng shal be ouerthrowe

hee.

20 And in that day shall J call my seruaunt Eliakim the fonne of Helkia:

21 And with thy garmentes wpll J clothe hym, and with thy girdle wl ZB strength hym: thy power also wyll F commit into his bande, and he shalbe a father of such as dwell in Hierulalem, and in the boule of Juda.

22 And the key of the houle of Danid wyll J lay bpon his shoulder:so that he shall open and no man shut, he shall hut and no man open. he

23 And J wyll fatten hym as a nayle in
à suce plate, and he shalbe the glorious seate of his fathers boule.

24 Moreouer, all generations and posterities Hall hang vpon him all the glorie of their fathers house, all vellels both great and small, and all instrumentes of measure and mulicke.

25 In that day faith the Lord of hoastes, chan the naple that is fattened in the sure place, Depart and be broken, and fall: and the burthen that was vpon it fhalve pluckt away, for fo the Lorde hath spoken. .

The. xxiij Chapter.

f he burthen of Typre. e Bourne pe chippes of
„ Tharsis, for there tommeth {uch destruction, that pe chall not ane an house to enter and that there

Th

a into: abe no traffize out of the lande of

A prophecie agapntt Tprus, i7 and a promise that it shalbe restored agarne.

Cittim, they haue knowledge of this plague. .

2 We styll ye that dwell in the Ille, che marchauntes of Zidon, x such as paffe ouer the lea haue made thee plentedus.

3 The corne that groweth by the great waters of Alus, and the fruites of the riuer were her vittayles, {0 ole

IxXx.
* Sebna, which is che ruler ofthe houle. EGA! is

D

Job.xii.b.
Apoc . ii. h.

became a tommon mart of the nations.

vere 4 We alhamed thou Zidon:forthe fea,

caahet euen the strength of the fea bath spoken

Nan Sus faping, J haue not trauapled noz

brought foorth children, nor norished vp

L poung men, 02 brought bp virgins.

5 wWhentidinges commeth to the Egyptians, they shalbe sory for the rumour of Lyre. ;

6 Get pouto Tharsis, mourne pou that

dwell in the Ille.

B 7 Js not this that glorious citte of pours
Which hath ven of olde antiquities her owne feete (hall cary her foorth to be a foturner into a farre tountrev.

8 Who hath oeutld this agaynst Tyre that crowneth her selfe- whole marchauntes are princes, t whole factours

üs e arc honorable in the Wolde.

Dumetl g Eulen the Lorde ok hoastes hath de-

ceacoat. uifed this, to put downe the pride of all such as be glorious, and to miniche all them that be proude vpon the earth.

10 Get thee out of thy lande like ã flndde vnto the daughter of Tharlis, for thou batt no more strength.

He that {mote the kyngdomes together, holdeth out his bande ouer the fea: euen the Lord him selle hath geuen a commaundement agapnst the lame conunon place of marchaundise, that

t een her

they shall dtterly destrop the myght

therok.

The prophecie

Iz And he sayde: Make no more
O virgin thou daughter Zt ae shalt be bronght Downe: Up, get thee duer vnto Cittim, where neuerthelesst
3 9010 no rest. ‘

13 Webholde, this people tame not
Chaldees, but Allur made them re with great chippes: They set vp the ftrong holdes therok, and dettroped his palaces: and he brought it in decay.

14. Mourne pe thippes ol Tharlis, fo: € pour strength is brought downe.

15 And in that day shal Lyre be forgotten seuentie veres, attordyng to the eres ol one bing: after the ende ofthc facie peres (hall Tyre fing as doth an harlot.

16 Take an harpe and go about the citic thou harlot that Hatt ben forgotten, make sweete melodie, fing mo fonges? that thou mapest be had in remembraunte.

17 Aud after the ende of the seuentie peres shall the Lorde visite Lyre, and che shall conuert vnto her rewarde, and

all tommit fornication with all the kyngdomes of the earth that are in the worlde.

18 Their occupying also e their rewarde shalbe holy onto the TLorde: their gapnes (hall not be layde vp nor kept in store, but it shalbe theirs that dwell befoze the Lorde, that they may eate inough, and haue clothyng luffitent.

The. xxiiij. Chapter. 1

A prophecie of tribulation to come vpon the worlde becaule of linne.

N

ö Eholde, the Lod maz

eth t th watt es eth the earth watte

4 The carth is fozy and tonsunieth awap, the worlde is feeble € perisheth,

5 Tho earth allo is become bnprofitable vnder the inhabitours therok, which haue tranforeffed the lawes, chaunged the ene broken the euerlastyng touenaunt.

s Therkore hath the turse tonsumed the 5 earth, and they that dwell therin 102 fallen into trefpatte: naberfore the iu 0 4 bitours of the earth are periched 10 g drought, and fewe men are left behin 80

The wine fapleth, the dine hath 75 myght, all they that haue ben mery heart are come to mournyng. lade

3 The mprith of tabrzettes 18 ne downe, the nopfe of such as J 15

merp is ceasled, the top at the harp at an ende.

ne witl che paoude people of the earth art tome 9 They dhalldrpnke no mon Wir’ wil)

to naught.

er to mirth, Grong drynke shalbe beer

at driuke it. ft

Wehe citie of vanitie is broken downe,

se cuery haule is shut vp, that no man may come in. N

"a the streetes is there a crying be-

18 It wyll come to

aaule or wine, all cheare is vaniched a-

way the mprth of the lande ts gone.
1 Mathe titie is left defolation, and the rate is nutten with destructton.
Forin the middes of the lande, euen
1 j among the people, it shall toine to passe ag at the shaking of olines, and as the grapes are when the wine haruest is

done. .
€ 14. Chey Hall Ut vp their vopte, and make a metic noyse: and in magnifiyng ofthe Lorde Hall they crye out of the
Wel. te 1 j Wherekore praple ve the Lorde in the balleps, euen the name of the Lode
God of Ilrael in the Pies of the lea.

16, Fromthe vttermost part of the earth haue we hearde prayses and myrth, becaule of the righteous: and J lapde, J knowe athing in secrete, J knowe a thing in letrete, wo is me: the tranlgrelsdurs haue offended, the transgreslours haue greeuoully olfended.

17 Fearefulnesle, the pit, and the snare ave bponthee, O thou that dwellest on

the cart.

passe, that whosoeuer escapeth the feare kull noyse, Chall fall into the pit, and he that commetly bp out of the pit, chalbe taken with the snare: for the windowes from on high are open, and the foundations of the
—— are pan

The carth is vtterlp broken downe, the earth hath a sore ruine, the earth quaketh exceedingly: by

20 The earth Hhallrecte to and fro ike a D

e

drunkarde, and chalbe remoned lyke a tent, and the iniquitie thereof thatve heauie vpon it, it shall fall, and not rile bpagapne. i

21 And in that day Chall the Lorde vilite

the hoast aboue that is on hye, and the 1 pind of the worlde that are bpon the 6 earth. —

22 And they shalbe gathered together

as they that be in pryson, and they shal-

be shut vp in warde, and after many

dapes (hall they be vilited. 8
The moone halbe abashed, and the Tun

sunne ashamed, when the Lode of

hoastes shal raigne in mount Sion and

in Hiernfaicin with worship, and in the

fight of suche as shalbe of his counsell.

The. xxv. Chapte r.

& thankes geuing to God kor his workes.

e hou art mp Lode my
B God, J wytl magnifie

8 halt brought

Wonderful thinges to th pale, actording to
“OMe olde countels truely c fapthfuup.

Ma 2 tones and brought a str i
5 ong toswvne into thon oe babttation of straungers hast be no Citic, neither Mall it
Therrton Une, ee
Clove shall the nughtie people lane Slory bnto ther the alle of che va-
Fot Heathen chal feare the. pon wou halt bena strength vuto the
Eta lccour ko: the needie in his
ADO Use again eul Weather,
Evang ne che heate: ko the bialt
— Ang men is like a storme that cae

Hou batt made a titie a heape of

steth downe a wall.

Pike as the heate ina dzpe place waz stech all thinges: fo shalt thou suppresse the nople of aliantes, the heate (is abated) with the shadawe of the cloude,
(even fo hall God) all wage the noyle of

’ the cruel tirauntes.

And in this mountaine Hal*the Zod OB of hoastes make vnto all people a feast LTi.

of plenteous and delitate thinges, euen

of most plealaunt and daintie disches.
And in this inountaine shall the Lord destroy the touering that all people are
Wrapped in, and the hanging that is spread vpon all nations. G
As kfor death he hath destroyed it for Aoi, tuer, and the Lorde God Mall wype and

away teares from all faces, and the re- Cv

buke of his people shall he take away out ot all the earth, for fo the Lorde

hath sayde. er ris 5 And

‘The prophecie

9 Ind in that day it chalbe sayde, lo this 1 And he shall stretche out his

is dur God, we haue wapted kor hym,

ande ¢ the middes of them, as he tbat nde tn

Epen. e gnd he shall laue vs, this is the Lorde nieth casteth out his hands to wimme: whom we haue hoped, we wyll be and with the strength of his hanes mericandretopce in the faluation that (hall he bring downe their prpde. 1 commeth) of hynn. 1 The strong holde allo and defence or
10 Jor in this mountatne chall the hande thy walles hath he ouerthrowne and okthe Lorde teasse, and Moab fhalbe cast downe, and brought them to the threched vnder hym, euen as strawe is groundef euen vnto duslt. troden to doung on the dounghill. r ie! The. xxvi. Chapter. en 1 9491755
14 song of deliueraunee ol the people. *
1 that day Mall this but doth wickedly in the earth, where
A long be fong in the nothing ought to be done but that landof Juda, we haue which is righteous : he Hall not fee the
Pro. x vii. . a strong citie, salua- 4, glorp of the Lorde. ver
Zacha.iia.

tion hal God appotut

<=" bulwarkes. )
2 ,*Dpenpethe gates, that the righte-

ous people whiche kepeth the trueth map enter inn. :

Pfacxvii.b

3 «Bp an alluredpurpose wylt thou pre-

serue perfect* peace, betaule they put their trust in thee. Aw

4 Put ye pour trust alway in the Loyd: for in the Lode God there is strength for euermore.

Rom. v.a.

For he hath broͤught downe the high minded citizens: as fo2 the proude citie

FElai. xxv. a.

he hath brought it lowe, euen to the

ground shall he tast it downe, and baing -

it vnto bust. f
6 The foote, euen the foote of the poore,

and the steppes of suche as be in netessi-

tie shall treade it downe.

7 The path of equitie wylt thou graunt vnto the iust (O thou most righteous) thou shalt order the path of hym that is righteous. 4

3 Bea inthe way of thy tudgementes,
O Tord, haue we put our trust in thee: thy namie also and the remembraunte

Prou. vi. a.
Tere. x. d.

okthee, is the thing khat dur ddule lon-

geth for. a
9 My soule lath longed for thee all the
Dla. ‘Might, aud with my spirite whiche is and cri. Plchin nie wyll JJ {eeke thee early in the mozning: Foz when thy indgementes are in the earth, the inhabiters of 111 Worlde Mall learne righteoulnesle.
10 Shall the vngodly man be faudured, which hath nor learned righteoulnelle,

insteede of walles and

18 We haue ben With chpide and luffren

Lowe, When thy hande is lyfe vp to strike, they fee tt not: but they chall fee it, and be confounded with the zeale ok the people, and the fire that consumeth thyne enemies shall deuour them.

n Lode bnto vs thou chalt prousde

peace: for thou also Hat Wrought all dur workes in vs.
3 O Tord dur God, other lordes beslde Pr thee hath subdued vs: but we wyll be mind full only of thee and ol thy name.
14 The dead wyll not line, they that be out of life will not ryse agapne, therfore hast thou visited and rooted them out, C and destroped all the memorie of them.
15 Thou hast intreased the people, O
Lorde, thou hast intreased the people, thou art glonious, thou halt lent pa farre of vnto all the coastes of the earth. 0 ] „
16 Tode, in trouble haue they bilited Lams
Ser powred out Bag renee whe thy thastening was vpon . 17
17 Like as a woman with chylde that 4 draweth hye towardes her trauaylets sorie and erpeth in her paynes: euen 10 haue we ben in thy fight O Tode. nl paine, as though we had bought fort) winde: for there is no saluatton 5 5 earth, neither do the inbabiters o 0 worlde submit them selues.

pi 0. vid
Thy dead men chall tue, euenas ud e

body shall they rife againe: Awake a fing ye that ower in dul on thy dean ts enen ag the deawe o ede bn the earth (hall cattout them th

der her. ö 20 gone

my people, enter thou into thy
5 Aber, as (hut thy doores about
.. — thee,"btde thy elle fo alitle bpie, vn-
All the indignation be ouerpast. ain gy For beholde, the Lorde is comming

00 Mthat dap the Tord with his lore great, and nughtie [Wozde,
Malt visite © *Leutaz than the fugitive ser-
) pent,cuen Leuiathan

= that crooked ferpeut, and he (hall slap the dragon that is in
« the sed. ü g r 7 Enthat day fe that ve fing af the ton-
=s gregation whith is the bineparde that buingeth koorth the belt wine:

Enen Ithe Lode do kepe it, in due seasons Hall water it: and lest the enemie do it any harme, J wyll both night and day preserue it.

4 There is no displealure in me, eis when the bineparde bringeth me foorth

role it by warre, and burne it vp toge-

ther.

ben 5 Net it take holde of my ww strength,

ci, and it chalbe at one with me, euen at

ma olle hall it be with me.

mae” 6 The daes are comming that Jacob

5 bhall take roote, Ilrael shalbe greene and floriche, and the word shalbe filled
With fruite,

7 Hath be fnitten hym as fore as he did the other that fmote hym: D2 ts he slayne with so sore a slaughter as they that slue hum: :

Thou wyit punithe it in the braun-

of Esal.

J The. xxvij. Chapter.
1H prophecie of the comming of Christe, and deltruction of idolatrie.

brpers and thornes J woulde go tho-

Out of his plate, to visite the wickednesse of suche as dwell bpon earth: the earth also shall biftlofe her bloods, and
1190 po more hide them that are slayne

ches, pet not beyonde measure:for in the day that the ealt winde bloweth foze, t taketh away the fruites, n

9 By this meanes therfore Hail the int: gw,

alfifctiony, es,

quitic of Jacob be purged, and this is mene 86

all the frutte(namelp | the taking away bunch of his finne, if he make all the stones of — the aulter of idols as chalke stones that

are beaten in funder, that their groues and images ryle not vp agapnc.
10 Els shall the 1 citte be desolate, ¢

and the habitation sorsaken and left like
à wildernesse: there shall the Calfe feede, and there chall he lye, and cate vp the graffes therot.

11 When the braunches of it are drye, N they are broken of, c the women come and let them on fice: fo tt isa people of pan b. no vnderstanding, aud therkoze he that made them Mati not fauour them, and he that created them shall geue them no grace.

Iz And in that day shall the Lorde make
à threshing, from the middest of the riz ver Euphrates, vnto the riuer of Egypt, and pe chyldren of Pitacl shalbe gathered together one to another,

j Inthat day shall the great trumpe be blowne, fo that they which were loft in the lande of Aslyria, and they that were baniched in the lande of Egypt, hall come and worship the Lorde in the hotye mount of Hierusalem.

The. xxviij. Chapter.
Againlk the pride ol Ephraim, 9 and againtt kalle priestes and preachers,

O be vnto the

/ crowne of pryde,

E great pompe is
Dy as 9 85 we tadeth awap vpball on the head ol the
Alley of fuche as be in wealth, and are

ouerladen with wine.

2 Wehold, there tommeth a behement mManxvic and sore day from the Lord, like an vnmeasurable hayle and perillous tent pelt, euen like the force of mightie and
Horrible waters that biolently beareth dobbne all thinges.

3 The crowne ofthe pryde of the drunken Ephracmites shalbe troden vnder

koote: f
L (ij) 4 90

The prophecie

So that the floure of his kaprenesse people whithe is at hierusalem. |

_ + snd beautic whiche is in the head of the

valley of fatnesse, shall fade away as

. Doth an bntimely ripe figge before haruest: whiche when a nian espieth, be loketh pon it, and whyle it is pet in his hande he eateth it bp,

5 In that day chal the Lord of hoaltes bethe crowne of glozy and diamonde of beautie vnto the reüdue of his peo-

ple.
6 He wylbe also a spirite ok perfect

ö knowledge to him that sitteth in iudge-

ment, and strength vnto them that turne away the battaple to the gate cof the enemies.

B But they are out ol the way by reafon ok Wine, pea farre out of the way are they thorowe strong drinke: The

priest allo and the prophete are gone a

stray by the meanes of strong drinke,

they are drunken With wine, they go a-

misse thorowe strong drinke, they fayle

in prophetiyng, and (tumble in indge-

ment. N

Jor all tables ace full of vomit and filthynesle, that no place is cleane.

Whont then Mall fuche one teache knowledge: and whom shall He make to vnderstande the thing that he heareth : for they are as ignoraunt as young chyldren that are taken kromthe milke, and are weaned. 1

Jor they that be suche, mutt take at: ter one lelson, another lesson, * after one tommaundement, another commaundement, for one rule, another rule, after one instruction, another in-

g, there a litle, and there a

tle.

1 For he that speaketh vnto this people, is euen as one that vleth rudenefle of speache, and a straunge language.

12 Ik any man fay vnts them, lo, this is the rest wherewith ye may eale hym that is weerie, this is the rekreshing:

\ they wyll not hearken.

Cor eite 13 Therfkore hati the wordof the Lo be vnto them, leslon vpon lellon, commaundement Dpon tommaundement,

rule vpon rule, instruction vpon instruc-

tion, there a litle, and there a litle: that they may go on and fall backwarde, be bruled, tangled, and snared.

14 Wherfore heare the word ok the Tord

ve mockers, pe that haue rule of this

ai: hi. e.

E Hai. x. a.
Mat. xxül.a

15 Wccaule pe haue lapd, We!
à couenaunt with death, aud wich hel are we at agreement: and though there go foorth a sore plague, it hall not tome ito vs, for we Hane made kalle-
Hood our refuge, and vnder vanitie are

w Thert bust

16 erkore thus saith the Lorde

Weholde, J lay in Sion for a 1 ona stone, euen a tryed stone, a preciou corner fone, a sure foundation: who lo beleueth, let bpm not be to w hattic, (2) wien

17 Judgement allo wyll J lape to the 882 rule, and rightedusnesle tothe balaunce. Taka lo that the Hayle Mall [Wweepe away e a Pout bayne mur amen ge

Auie place of pour refuge pet
Iwaterstunne one 1 (eka

13 Andehus the couenaunt thatpemane Mme with death, chalbe DianulleD. and ot dun, agreement that pe niade with hell (hail an ar

not stand, pea when the fore plague go: sear:

eth foorth, pe chalbe troden downe vn- wa der it. in vapne.

19 From the tyme that it goeth foorth it shall take pou away: for earip in the mozning euery Day, pea both day and night shall it go thorowe, and when the noyse thereok is perteaued, it shall gender beration, ;

20 Forthe bed is narrowe and not large, and the couering fo small that a man D tan not winde him selke (onder it.

21 or the Lod Mall stand as in mount . ut
Perazim, and halbe wroth like as in nes. the valley Gibeon, that he map do his 14
Worke, his straunge worke, and bryng to passe his acte, his straunge acte.

22 Nowe therefore see that ye be no moc-

kers, lest pour purushment increale: 302

FP hearde of the Lorde of hoattes, that

there chall come a short ende vpon the

whole earth.

Heare pe then, and hearken vnto my bopee, confiner and ponder my

speache.

24 Doth not the hulbandman plowe ui the dap, andopeneth and peeaketh) t) clottes of his grounde, that be m y

owe?
25 When he hath made it ple
"ye not ipreade abzode the fitch fis sowe tomin, and cast in wheate 2 rye sure, and the appomted barlye an in their place: 46 G00

i instruct hym to haue discre-

5 15 iS God wyll teache hym.
5 Forfitehes Chall not be threshed with n paccolve neither Mhall a cart wheele

the fiiches are beaten out with a staffe,

min with a rodde. oe uch efeede that bread is made ot, is

Daudd dwelt in: Go on from pere to pere,

; and let the lambes be

\ADOSR || flapnie,

= — J wyll lap siege vnto Ariel, so that there shalbe heaunesse and sorowe in it: and it shalbe vnto me euen an aulter of slaughter.

3 A will besiege thee rounde about, and fight against thee thorowe a bulwarke, and wyll reare vp diches against thee.

4 Thou shalt be brought downe, and

halt speake out of the ground, and thy speache chall go lowe out of the ult:

$ Thy vopce also shall tome out of the

grounde lyke the boyte of a Witehe, and

bun talkyng all whifper out of the
Ult:

§ Moreouer, the noyse ot the straunge enemies shalbe like thinne dust, and the multttude of tirauntes chalbe as drye strawe that can not tar: euen sodenly aud in haste shall their blast go.
Thou halt he vilited of the Lorde of hoalles with thunder, earthquake, and with a great nople, with storme and kumwelttand with the flambe of acon: unung fire,
8 7 And the multitude of all nations that
1. 9 tagainst Artel, chalbe as a dreame he 1 by night: euen fo shall they be
Abe tharre against it, and strong end lege bntolt ome it, and that lay any
Intontiuston it shalbe euen as when na are man dreameth that he is caenand when he awaketh his fone is
10 ethth as whena thirstie man dreaiy belt he is drinking, and when he
"Ct, he is pet fatnte, and his foule

thzethed, thongh it be notalway a thie:

Mou 15 iE 55 wheele nut be er it, lest he grinde it wi

his teeth. be g 1

be brought thorolbe the tomin: but 29 This also commeth of the Lorde of

hoastes, Which Moketh with wonder: full wyldome, and bzingeth extellent
Workes to passe.

The. xxix. Chapter.

iD prophecie against Hierulalem, j and against the vayne traditions ol men.

O bnto thee O Ariel
Ariel, thou citie that

bath appetite: euen so Mall the multe tude of all nations that fighteth against mount Sion.

. 9 Ponder thele thinges once in pour

mindes, and Wonder: Blinded are they

them selues, and the blinde guides of other: They are drunken, but not with wine: they are vnstable, but not thozow

rong drinke.

10 Forthe Lorde hath couered you with allumbring spirite, and hath cloled your eyes: pour prophetes allo and rulers that choulde fee, them hath he conc: red. N

n And the vision of all the prophetes is become bnto pon as the wordes of a booke that is fealed bp, whiche men deliuer to one that is learned, saying,
Meade thou init: and he fatty, J can not, for it is sealed.

Iz And the boske is geuen to him that is not learned, saying, Reade thou in tt: and he faith, Jam not learned.

13 Therfore thus hath the Lorde sapd: C
Forsomuche as this people when they Math. v. be in trouble, do honour me with their Marviia. mouth and with their lippes, but their heart is farce fro me, and the feare whiche they haue vnto me proceedeth of a tommaundement that is taught of men:

14 Therefore wyll J do marueples a mong this people, enen marucplous 1 thinges (3 fy) anda wonder: Foz the ae. wyldome of their wyse men shall pes rishe, and the vnderstanding ol their
Wittie nien Mall hyde it selfe. ö

15 Wo vnto them that kepe setrete their thoughtes, to hide their counfelt from the Lorde, and to do their wozkes in darknelle, laying: Who seeth vs and Faulen

tt DS? zee 8 ne h, e Doubtlele

Math. xv. d.

Esai. vi. b.

Esai. vin. b.

4 Reg i8. d.
Iexe. xv. b.
Exeix xx. 2.

‘Lhe prophecie

C16 Doubtlesse your destruction is in ves made haste early to vnrighteoumeffe

putation as the potters clay Aud both the worke fay of hym that made tt, he made not me: And doth an carthen vessell fay ol hym that fachioned it, he had no vnderstanding-

1 Js it not harde at hande that Tiba-

nus shalbe turned into a low fielde, and that the lowe fielde shalbe taken as the wood:

18 And in that ap (hall deafe men heare the wordes of the booke, and the eyes ofthe blynde Mall fee, euen out of the tloude, and out of darknesse. f

19 The meeke spirited also shall be mez rie in the Lorde, and the poore among them that be lowly Mall reiopte in the holy one of Heal: f

20 Jor he that dyd violence is brought to naught, and the ftognefull man is confined, and they rooted out chat

21 Making a man to sinne in 0 and that tobe him in a mare Wü — proued them in the open plate, and they that haue turned the taule of the righent to in al g

22 eretoze thus faith the Lo the boule of Jatob, euen thus Cath be that redeemed Abraham: Jacob chall
— aha be confounded, nor his fare pale.

23 Wut when he seeth his chyldren
Worke of my handes in 15 mddeg e hym they shall fanctifie my name, and prapse the holy one of Jatob, and feate the God of Ilrael.

24. They also that haue ben of an erronious spirite Mall conte to vnderstan-
Ding, and they that haue ben scornefull shall learne doctrine, |

The. xxx. Chapter.

: Against them chat fortake the counlell of God, and cleaue to the countlell of men,
Che prophete also threatneth the remnaunt of the people, that alter the delteuc-

tion of Hierusalem went into Egypt.

Las for thole disobedient chyldzen faith the
Lowe, that thep will take counfell and not of me, that they Wpll

take a secrete aduice

3 And not out of my spi-

rite, and therefoze adde they sinne vnto sinne.

2 Euen they that walke to go downe into Egypt, and haue alked no question at my mouth, but feeke strength in the might of Pharao, and trust in the shadove of Egypt.

3 Therekore shall the strength of Pharao be pour tonfusion, and the trust in the shadowe of Egynt pour fame,

4 For his captaynes were at Zoan, and his embaladours came vnto Hanes,

They were alhamed of the people that toulde do them no good, and that might not helpe thein nor shewe them aup profit, but wert their confufion and rebuke.

6 The burthen of the beastes of the

olde lion, the viper and firie serpent that fleeth againi them that vpon toltes beart their riches, and vpou ca mels their treasures, to a people that can do them no good. 5

Jor vapne and nothing worth hall the helpe ol the Egyptians be: There- z fore haue J erped nto hHierulalem, they Mali haue strength inough if they
Wyll settle their mindes in quietnesle.

3 Mowe therefore go thy wap, aud
Write this before them in a table, and i, note it in a booke: that it may finally remaine and be kept styll for euer.

9 Torthis is an obstinate people, and dillembling chyldren, chyldren that rer rea kule to heart the lawe of the Torde.

10 For they fay vnto the fers, fee not, and to them that be cleave of iudgement, lobe not out right thinges lo 5 but speake fapre wordes vnto vs, 10 out errours. ut

u Getyouout of this way, Depart daf of this path, and turne the holy out
Ilrael fron vs. of

sduth. In a land of trouble eanguithe, 12 Wherefore thus faith the holy 95

froin whente shall come the young and

Israel: Wecause pour Hearty ind

Ela xlüt ‘

reer IxxxIII of Ela. ence tort, Get chee hence. and becanfe pou evutt ee hall Son iedatte te cedures
115 chte worn oe. 44 iudge- 23 seede, that thou 0 b of the agam eng deaung nee therin: ithall aud bread of tt ery plenin wrong r confidence the eke withall Ibe fat and very b i mat an ae allye haue a LL an ons fu si Allo hau typ cattell u Therfoze uction and fall, offome — teous: in rge paltures. for your pet falleth betause imeth be led in la 5 lykewyse and the young hye wal b. whole weak core oi? festhat ea the Wplhe te puged a hurt thereat ts ch who wußte unde an 12 85 tayne ce ae. abi dhe eee a Kn
C ther so that inthe to fetch lire in, d hyll Chall there he day of the helpe, fo ade one sheuer okthepit. an es of waters in 1 toes E ee ee l cin feet oa when the ial oz to take ath the Lorde ntaunte reat 5 e shalge i in rest fall pe halbe vou 2 ight o haue si, 1 0 Pane as u there- ete ate ene belie,
Pax ut pe . nch shine 8 the sore o ftrength, bi , asm bindeth vp k
*. t we wy henthe Lode he stroke o to. de, $20, bu | wh d healeth th haue lapde- efore tha eople, an
16 f. I holes, fat bp vpon 1 wou. kthe Lorde tomine se wach ee Cael ee 27 eho, the Bane oft prelence ts fo
„and! utarre, an byde: hi urs be t the rebuke tte, thatno mat fon, and his e perlecuto sande shall flee at t. echallye hotte, re full of indignation, e 1) * A thou tie rebube of fin bpon lppes a $a tonsuming fire. ewe: olone, and a as à {hip mast bp tongue is as a ehement flud ol el te asa beaten 28 Dis bey ab as to the ie 17
Dun tause von ter, tha fift away the N a bape
73 vtatbecetaye Doth peng ne bpon fue of Dan he talbes of the peon the awe to waptesthat hem at he may haue the dle ol errour in the ta 8 pcan mhenhe 1. ade Sean ve shall sing lyke att bn isthe A ni you 1 Benda ee hope in Wpphenthe n en of 1595 nient, Ble r on andat and ye 00 one commieth pall 19 0 ;
19 Rice people remaine e heaui- 110 che 1 of the 1 M left bug chene e 5 mol i br he Gur e d nesse: but a on thee, at nothe and tha 5 hne bete be thal deus thee ze ous ene che lane
When he he- ? clare his te, EWith the flat Z
. mance the Lorde geue ** a rible anlunug dn e with ame ate eric er aud the a nin fo dung, bit) athotire. A Aas, ueviitte, thy rayne chalbe ait fee thy kenn, f the Lowe fant, but thyne eyes thal ni nn HOE en. wür fe
4 pre, fait heave the 31 chall' Allr be 1 5
Mae 1 Peg and He tdoth beatebeDnbe other men 51 87 Le tbat w ie Bele ae bi 22 ant er De ge fe Tobe thal tine a alive neither to the rig bad ban wn ka ettes aun
: l
Beta del he coun oe ap bay, tetas
Pour filuer images, and h nelle Aahkeagennlt his beat 33 Foz u idols, enen as filth u fight ag (tii) pour golde 5 And tho 2 shalt thou put them alway:

ä— l — ——bũꝶh́— 9 0—™ . *
* =. Wie prophecie

. For the fire o hell is ordayned from ning Whereof is fire and mu

che woo :
Matxxv., 33 the beginning, yea euen forthe kyng is The breath ofthe Lorde whicheis ige it prepared: This hath the ove fet in

a riner ofbatinttone doth kindle it. the deepe, and made it wide, the bur- *
N The. xxxi. Chapter.

1 He curteth them that torsake God, and feeke kor the helpe of men.

O be vnto them that go downe into Egypt for helpe, and trust in horses, and put their
Ty confidence in charrets vbecaule they be many,
— Aa md in Hoelemen bez tause they be lustie and strong: but they regarde not the holp one of Jlrael, and they alke no question at the
Torde. 5
2 And he neuerthelesse is wile, and will plague the wicked, and goeth not from his worde, he wyll ar ple against the housholde or the frowarde, and against the helpe ok eupll doers. a

3 Mode the Egyptians are men an

the multitude of shepheardes trye out vpon Hint, neither be abathed fo. allthe heape of them: fo shall the Lorde of hoastes tome Downe to fight for mount
Sion, and dekende his hyll.

5 Like as the byrdes flutter about their nestes, so shall the Lorde of hoastes, band

kepe, saue, dekende, and deliuer Hierusalem. 5

6 Therekore O pe chyldren of Jscael, turne againe vnto him whom you haue ofttinies forsaken. ö a

7 Jorin that dapeuerp man (hail cat 3 out his idols of siluer, and his idols of b golde, whiche pe haue made with pour olbne handes vnto pour sinne.

8 *Assur also shalbe Mayne with the ray.

not God, and their horses fleshe, and not spirite: And affoone as the Lord strettheth out his hande, then shall the heler fall and he that shoulde haue ben an they (hail altogether be deoped.

4 Forthus hath the Lose spoken vn-

sworde, not with a mans (worde, neither shal the sworde of any man deudur hym, and he chall flee from the laugh: ter, and his choise young men shalbe Di tomtited.

9 He shall go for feare to his strong

holdes, and his printes fail flee from

Apocva. to me: Tyne as the lion and lions his standerd laith the Lord, whole fire
Genxlix.b welpe roareth vpon the peay that he ls in Sion, and his foznate in Hierula-
Hath gotten, and is not akraide thougg lem.
J The. Ri Chapter.
Che conditions of good rulers and officers,
„ (:
1 holde, a kyng Mall 4 The heart of the vnwpse tall a
A souerne after the rue tapne to knowledge, and the vuperket

ok righteousnelse, and the printes shall rule
Nfatcording to the bats f launce of equttie.

And that man shalbe vnto men as a Defence for the winde, and as a refuge for the tempest, lpke as
à rpuer of water ina thirstie place, and
12 2 of a great rocke in a drye

ande.

3 The epes ok the seeing shall not be ; )
DEIN, and the eares ot them that heare 7 The weapons of the churlish

hati take diligent heede.

tongue Chali speake plapnely and distinctly.

5 Then chan the foclishe nigarde be

no moze called gentle, noz the churle lr berall.

6 Wutthe nigarde wyll speale nigard

i and we, and his heart wyll Worke cuyll.an” play the hppotrite, and imagine e if

- minations againf God, to Maye hungry leane, and to withholde

krom the thirstie. e art

that
‘ye

eupli,be deuileth noplome deuiles, 0

beguyle the pooze with deceipt-

Dyes dea tueu there as he should

geucfentence with the pode...

Wut the liberall perfon imagineth honest thynges, and commeth vp fo2 lüberalitie vnto proniotion.

Up be riche and idle women, hearken vnto my voyte, pe carelesse daughters marke my wordes.

Many yeres and daes hall ve be brought in keare O pe carelesse women: forthe vintage shall faple, and the haruest Mall not cone.

i Be abalhed you that lyue in aboundance, tremble pou that lyue tarelelle, alt ol pour raynient, make pour lelues bare, and put lacktloth about vou.

u Foras the inkantes weepe when their mothers teates are dryed vp: lo thall you weepe for pour faire fieldes and kruitfull vinepardes.

3 My peoples fielde Hall bryng thornes and thistles: and fo shall it be in euery houle of voluptuoulnesse, and in euery titie that reiopceth.

14 The palaces allo shalbe brokeẽ, and the

mib.

e

greatly occupied cities desolate: The

towzes and bulwarkes Chall become

ai * Nair ö where wylde tir pleasure, a

eer na tur, b nd cheepe

15 Unto the tyme that the spirite be pobred vpon vs from and that the wildernesse be a kruitful fielde, and the plenteous fielde be reckened for a wood.

16 Then {hall equitic dwellinthe delert, and righteoulnesse in a fruitkull lande.

17 And the worke of righteousnesse

fhaibe peace, and her fruite rest and

quietnesse for euer.

And my people (hail dwel in the

innes of peace, and in sure dwellpnges,

infafe plates of tonifort.

19 And whenthe hapyle falleth, it Matt fall in the wood, and the citie shalbe let lowe in the valley.

20 O howe happy shall pe be when ye shall safelp sowe pour seede beside all

Ixxxv. :

C

Rom. v. a.

Ierc. xxxili.

Waters, and dryue thyther the feete of

pour oxen and affes.

The. xxxiij. Chapter.
1 Threatnyng agayntt the Allpriang. 20 A destruction of them that Mall tee the Lorde.

Vere D to thee that
| e destropest when
2 thou wast not breakest p league whert as none hath woken it
8 mate 155 a en thou shalt pale defteoving, thou thy feife Chait be fom bese e an, a e league, they breake it to thee. ae hau Torde haue mertie vpon vs, we gh ne aud ate a atiy, and" etyme of routine nd our health in tonfule noyse the people fled and ee people fled, anereh e exaltyng the heathen wert

which Ae spaples shalbe gathered,

eng ok ruchus, and | zand the multitude
10 fi es chalbe as Locuttes running

The Lorde is exalted for it is he that

mib.
Leut.

i x1, ab vll.

destroped, thou

e pours, as are the gathe-

dwelleth on hye, he hath kylled Sion with iudgement and rygteoulnesse.

6 And asure stablishyng of thy tymes, chalbe strength, health, wildonie, and knowledge: and the bery feare of the
Lorde shalbe the trealure of it.

7 Weholde the meslengers Mall erpe without: and the embafladours of peace (hail weepe bitterly.

3 Their streetes are waste, there wal-

keth no man therin: God hath broken

the appopntment, the cities are cast awap, and men are nothyng regarded.

The desolate earth is in heauinesse,
Pibanus is shamed and hewen downe,

Saron is like a wildernesse, Wasan and

Charmel are {poyled of their fruites.

10 And therfore faith the Lorde, J wyll bp nowe, eae wyll J be aduaunted, nowe wyll JJ be exalted.

u Be shall conceaue stubble, and beare strawe: and pole spirite shalbe the fire, that it may tonsume pon. b

12 And the people shalbe burnt like lime, and as thornes burnt that are hewen of

nthe fire. and cast in th 3 Node

Iere. v..

Howe J haue done, and tonsider my power pe that are at hande.

C 14 The linners at Slon are afcayde, a sodapne fearekulnesse is come vpon the hypotrites: What is he among vs fap

they that shal dwell by the confimipng fire? Which of vs map abyde the euerlasting heate

Phil. xiin. a. 15

He that leadeth a godly life, and speaketh the trueth, he that abhozreth

and. xxii. a.

gaynes by violence and deceipt, he that

kepeth his hande that he touche no re-

warde, which stoppeth his eares that

he heare no coimlaple agaynst the inno-

cent blood, which holdeth downe his tyes that he fee no euyll:

16 Pe it is that shall dwell on hye, whole sakegarde shalbe in a bulwarke of rotkes:to hym shalbe geuen meate, and his waters Hall not fayle.

17 Thine eyes shall lee the kyng in his glorie, cuen the kyng of the farre tountreys {halt they fee,

18 Thinc heart studied kor feare thinking thus: What Malt then become of the stribe: of the receauer of our money what of bym that taxed our fairelt

i. Cor.. a.

The prophecie

| z Mowehcarkentoyethatarcfarceof houles-

19 There shalt thou not lee a truel of a straunge tongue, to haue fo Duffie alanguage that it map not be vnderstanded, neither fo straunge a speache but it shalbe perceaued. :

20 TLoke vpon Sion the head titie of our folempne keastes: thyne eyes chall fre
Hierusalem that glozious habitation
“the tabernacle that neuer chall re l., move, Whole nayles Hal neuer be taken 5 out worlde without ende, whole cordes euery one (hall neuer corrupt.

21 Foz the glorious malestie of the Lowe D
(hall there be present among vs ag g place where faire brode rivers and streames are, through the which Hatt neither galley rowe nor great ship layle.

22 For the Lorde is our indge, the Lord ab is dur lawe gener the Lord is our king, and he hym selle shalbe dur samonr.

23 Thy tacklyng ts tooled, therfore it can not make falt the matt, nor spread the saple: then there is dealed great spoyle, pea lame men runne after the pray.

24. There lyeth no man that saith, Jam sicke: but all eupll is taken away from the people that dwell there.

The. xxxiiij. Chapter.

Che last destruction of the finagoge, in which the kingdome and priesthood of the people was translated to the Church and congregation ol Chrilte.

Die pe Heathen and

ez heare, take heede pon

2 10 people: hearken thou

bed aut earth and all that is

Ves we therin , thou rounde

S conpasse and all that
~~ Dibelleth thervpon.

2 Fo the Lorde is angry With all peo-

ple, & his displeasure is kindled agayutt

stroped them, and delpuered them to the flaughter. : .

all the multitude of them, be hath de-

the people which J haue turled.

6 And the Lozdes Worde shalbe full of blood, and be rusty with the fatnelle and blood of lambes and goates, with the fatnesse of the kidneys of weathers.
For the Lord shall kyil a great offering in Wozra, and a great slaughter in the lande of Idumea. f

There (halt the vnttornes fall Wit 95 them and the bulles with the giauntes, and their lande Chatbe throughip folic

with blood, and their grounde corrupt

3 So that their slayne chalbe cast out with fatnesse. Ohare and their bodyes ttincke, that cuen the 8 Fozitistheday of Gods vengenundt, ba

very hylles shalbe wet with the blood ol them.

4 All the starres of heauen Mail waste, and the Heauens Malt kolde together lpke a roll, and all the starres therof
Wall fall, whe as the leaues fart from the vines and figge trees.

5 For my horde Mhalbe bathed in heanen, and chall immiedtatly come downe to indgement vpon Idumea, and vpon m

and the pere of retompente for the re e ucnge o Sion, ch dale
And his fades chalbe turnedto nie 4 and his earth to brinistone, and ther with Mail the lande be kindled. 55
10 So that it shall not be muenchen 5 nor nyght, but snioke euermore an 0 foorth lpe waste: and no man (ha through it for euer.

euer. cat
Wut Pellitanes, Stokes llc

of Esai. E

Aivies, and Ravens shall haue it in her lodgpng. g poffeffion and drbell therm: for God 15 There thalithe Owie make her nett,
(hall lpreade out the une of desolation bullde be there at home, g bryng forth) pon it, and the stones of emptineffe. her poung ones: there (hall the Kytes
1 per nobles call tall and there is no come together eche one to his lyne. kyngdome: and all her princes shalbe 16 Seke through the booke ofthe Lorde nothyng. and reade it: there Chait none of tyete cz Thomes shall growe in their palaces, thynges be left out, there chall not one nettles kx thistles in their strong holdes, nor such lyke faple : fo2 his mouth comthat the dragons map haue their pleas maundeth, and that fame doth his {pisure therin, and that they map be a rite gather together, or fulkyll. court for Estriches. 17 Ot hath cast the lot for them, and to
14 There shall straunge vilures x mon- thole beastes hath his hande dewnedit sterous beastes meete one another, and by the line: therkore thole Gall poslelle the wylde kepe company together: tt foz euer, krom generation to generathere (hall the Hania lpe and haue tion shall they dwell therin.

J The. xxxv. Chapter.
Ok the tyme and kyngdome of Chile,

Tit O the desert x wi- Hart, ethe dumbe maus tongue shall
0 Pe dernesse shall vetopee, geue thankes: *foz in the wudernelle the waste ground hall there chall welles spryng, and fluddes ,, |, be glad and florishe as ok water in the desert. e
% Ny the Wate. 7 The drye grounde (hal turne to rivers, xvi.
She shall florishe and the thirstie to sprynges of water: pleasauntiy aud be ioy- wheras dragons dwelt afore, there shal B full, and euer be geuing thankes moze growe fwecte flowres e greene rusches. and moze: Foz the glorie of Libanus, 3 There chalbe foote pathes € connor the beautie of Charmel and Saron ttrectes, this shalbe called the holy way: chalbe geuen her: These shall knoe no vutleane person fall go through it, the honour of the Lorde, e the maiestie for the Lorde hym felfe halt go With
. ofour God. them that wap, and the wayfaprer nor
3 3 “And therfore © strength the weake ignoraunt Mall not erre.
Brit Handes,andcomifort the feeble knees. 9 There shalbe no lion, x no rauishyng pine + Day vnto them that are ofa fcarfulln beastes shall come therin nor be there, een heart, be or good cheare and feare not, but men redeemed hall go there free d beholde pour God commeth to take and lale. f. vengeaunte, and pou shall see the rez 10 And the redeemed ofthe Lorde J fay un warde that God geueth: God conimeth shall conuert and come to Sion with dale his owne selke, and Wpll delpuer pou, thankelgeuyng: euerlastyng toy shall
Then shall the eyes of the blynde be they haue, pleasure and gladnesse tha! vahtened, and the cares of the deaffe be among them, and as for all sorowe opened. and heaumesse it Hall vaniche.

Pal. viii. a.

S

a eT
N f

Rae

ee

led Sg —
„N

ö Then chan the lame men leape as an
The. xxxvj. Chapter. .
' Dierufalem is befieged by Sennacherib in the tyme of kyng Hezekiüs.

M* the foureteenth 2 And the kyng of the Aliprians sent pere of king Hezekias Vablakeh from Lachis towarde Piekame Sennacherib rulalendagaynst Bezekias with anexkyng ofthe Allyians teedyng hoast, which let hym by the dowue, to lap siege conduite of the ouce poole iM the way
5 bnto all the strong that goeth through the fullers lande. tities of Juda, to ton- 3 And so there came foorth vnto hy

Eliakim Helklas sonne, the chiele one

quer them.

the householde. Sobna the scribe, and

Foal Alaphs fonne the lecretarit:

4 And Rablakeh fapde vnto them, Tell
Hezekla that the great kyng faith thus vnto hyn: What presunption is this that thou trustest vnto-

5 J sapde surelp that thou trustest in vayne wordes, when counfayle and strength are necessarie to battaple: but nowe wherto trustest thou, that thou rebellest agaynst mes

SKeg. ig. b. (Lo, thou puttest thy trust in a broken

Facing. stälfe of reede (Imeane) Egypt, which

he that leaneth vpon, it goeth into his hande and Mhooteth it through: tuen so is Pharao the kyng of Egypt vnto all them that trust in hym.

7 But it thou wouldest fap vnto me, we trust in the Lorde our God: Is not he that God whole hygh places € aulters
Hezekia tone downe, and commaunded

uda and Hierusalem to worship only

efore this aulter-

8 Nowe therfore deliuer hostages that thou rebell no more agapnst np Torde the kyng of the Assprians, and J Wyll geue thee two thoufande horses pf thou be able to fet men vpon them.

9 Howe darest thou relist the power of the smallest printe that my Lorde hath: howe darest thou trust in the charrets and horlemen of Egypt

10 Moreouer, thinkest thou that Jam come bp hyther to destrop this lande without the Lodes wyll- The ZL ode fayd vnto me, Go bp agaynst this lande and destrop it.

u Thensapd Eliakim, Sobna, & Joah, vnto Rablakch: Speake to vs thy seruauntes we pray tice in the Sprians language, for we vnderstande it well, and speake not to vs in the Jewes tongue, left the folke heare which lpeth vpon the wall. 5

W 12 Then aunlwered Nablakeh: Hath

my matter (ent me to speake this only to thy maister and thee- hath he not sent me to them allo that tye vpon the wall: that they map be tompelled to

Fal. xxii. a.

tate their owne dunge, aud owne fale with say deute thee
13 Aud Nablakeh stoode thffe,

with a loude and crped

vopte in the J

geueth pou warnyng.

4 wrneseaue pon, Corte tek to al vou. iin a

15 Moprequer, let not esekta come; pou in the Lorde when he faith, The
Torde without doubt shall defende ps. and chall not gene duer this citic inte the handes of the king of the Allprans.

16 Prarken not to Pezekia, for thus saith the kyng of Alspria: Obtayne my fauour, encline to me, lo may euerp man emop his vinepardes and figge trees, and drynke the water of his cesterne:

17 Unto the tyme that J come my belle, and bryng vou into a lande that is lyke pour owne, wherin is wheate e wine, which is both sowen with seede and planted with vine pardes.

18 Tet not Hezekia deceaue pou, when C he faith vnto pou, the Lorde (hail de-

liner vs: Myght the gods of the gen- r

tiles kepe euerp mans lande from the power of the kyng of the Alsprlans-

19 Where is the god of Hemath and Arphad: where is the god of Sepharnaim: and who is able to Defende Samaria out of mp bande:

20 Or which of all the gods of thele landes hath deliuered their counttey ont of my power; Is the Lord in deede able to Deliver Bierulalem from my hande-

21 Unto this Hesckias messengers helde their tongues, and aunfivered not one worde: for the kyng had chargedthem that they should gene him no aunswere.

22 So tame Eliakim Helktas sonne the chiefe ouer the householde, Sobua ae
{cvibe, and Foah Afaphes sonne 7 5 tratarie vñto Hesekta with it ot thes, and tolde hym the worde
Nabsakeh.

The

sonnes.

HEM Hezekia
Fhearde that, he rent his clothes,
And put on lackcloth, and went into the temple ok the Lorde.
8 But he sent Eliathe chtefe oucr the honseholde, Sobna the scribe, with the eldest priestes clothed in! sacke, vnto the prophete Elal the fonne of
Amos,
And they layde vnto hym, Thus lath
Hesehia: This is the day of trouble, of plague, and ol blasp henne: for the chit

there is uo power to bryng them foorth.

4 The Lorde thy God no doubt) hath well considered the wordes of Kablakeh, whom his lorde king of the Assprlans hath font to de fie and blafpheme the lyuyng God, with luch wordes as the Lorde thy God hath hearde ryght

woell: and therkoze lykt vp thy prayer

for theremnaunt that pet are left.

So the seruauntes of the kyng ese: kla came to Efai,

And cla gaue them this aunlwere:
Say thus bnto pour lorde, Thus faith the Lord: We not afraide of the wordes that thou batt hearde, Wherwith the
Ryng of the Alspnans feruauntes haue blalphemed me.

ab? Beholde, J wyll rapse vp a wynde

Agaynst him c he chall heare a rumour,
12 be chall go agayne into his coun: f ey, there wpll J destropy hym with so g Vesbode in his owne lande. ere when Nablakeh returned, he
15 0 the kyngok Allyria laying siege the ibnas: for he had vnderstandyng he was departed from Tachis.

NO there came arumour that Thafai kyng of Ethiopia was come whew Warre agapnst hym: and be 10 the king of Altyria hearde that, ia 4 other meflengers to kyng heze-

a 5 ich this tommaundement.
Let thus to Hezekla kyng of Juda: wont Y God deteaue thee in whom
Bopest, and lapelt, lerulalem hall

of Efai.

The. xxxvij. Chapter.

dren are come to the place of birth, but

ezekta humbleth hym telfe befoze the Lorde. 35 Che armie of Senna erib
! 1 0 the angell of the Lorde, 38 and he hym selle is kylled ok his aie

not be geuen into the handes o kung ot Alpa. andes OF the

11 Jos lo, thou knowest well howe the kynges of Assyria haue handled all the landes that they haue subuerted: and hopest thou to escape:

12 Were the people ot the gentiles whom my progenitours conquered, deliuered at anp tyne through their gods- * as namely) Golan, Haran, Nezeph, and the children of Eden, which were at
Thalallar :

3 Where is the king of hemath and the king ol Arphad, and the king of the citie
Sepharuaim, Ena, and Aua:

14. Nowe when Hezekia had receancd the letter ol the meflengers,and read it, he went vp into the house of the Lorde, and opened the letter before the Lorde,

15 And Hezekia prayed vnto the Lorde on this maner.] N

16 O Torde of hoastes, thou God of JE rael, which dwellest vpon Cherubuͤn, thou art the God that only is God of all the kingdomes of che world, for thou only Hatt created heauen and earth.

17 Entline thine care Lode and con: sider, open thine eyes Lorde and see, and ponder all the wordes of Sennacherib, which bath lent his embaflage to blaspheme the lyuyng God.

18 It is true O Torde that the kynges

IXXXVII.

3. Reg. ty. a.

C

Exo.xxy.e

Gen, i. a.

Baruc. i. c.

of Allpria haue conquered all kyng-

domes and landes,

19 And cast their gods in the fire: foz those were no gods, but the workes of mens handes, ok wood or stone, therfore haue they destroyed them.

20 Nowe therfore deliuer vs O Hod our

God from the handes of Sennacherib,

that all the kyngdomes of the earth

map knowe that thou ontp art the

Pode. : ‘
Then Elai the sonne of Amos sent

vnto Hezekia, saying, Thus saith the

Lowe God of Pract: Wheras thou

halt made thy prayer vnto me as tou-

ching Sennacherib the king of Asspria,

22 This is the aunfivere that the Lode
Hath geuen conternyng hym: Difpifeo

art thou and mocked O daughter

aken his head at thee
Sion, he hath Haken Y 2

a

Zach. ii. b.
Mat. xxv. d.
Act. ix c.

dalighter of Hierusalem.

af 1 du Sennacherib,d whom hak

thou delied and blasphemed- Agaynst

whom hast thou lifted vp thy vopte, and exalted thy proude lokes: euen agaynst the holy one of Ylrael.

D 24 Thon with thy seruauntes batt blalphemed the Lorde, and thus holdest thou of thy selfe: J wyll coner the Hye mountaynes and spdes of Tibanus with my horleinen, and there wpll J tut downe the hye Cedar trees, and the fayzett Firre trees: J wyll bp in the heyght of it, and into the chtefett of his tymber woods.

25 Ik there be no water, J wyll graue and drynke: and as foz Waters ok defence, J wyll drye them vp with the keete of myne hoast.

26 Dea, halt thon not hearde what J haue taken in hande and brought to passe of olde tyme: That fame wp J do nowe also, and waste, destroy, and bryng strong cities vnto heapes of stones. b

27 Jor their inhabitours shalbe like lame men brought in feare and confounded: they chalbe lpke grasse and greene hearbes in the fielde, tyke the hay vpon
Houle toppes, that wythereth before it be growen vd.

23 Jknowe thy wapes, thy going foorth, and thy counnpng home, pea and thy maduesse agaynst nie.

E 29 Therkore thy kuriousnesse agaynst me, and thy pride is tome before me, J wyll put my ryng in thy nose, and my bridle bit in the iawes of thee, and turne thee about enen the fame way thou caniest.

3 J wyll geucthee allo this token lO

The. xxxviij. Chapter.

| Heschia is fiche vnto death, 5 but is vet reuiued by the Lorde, and lyueth lilteene peres after: 10 for which benelite he geueth thankes.

A 1 I Wout this tyme was
#Regaoa Hesekia ficke vnto
2. ax. 34-f. >

Set thyne boule in order, fo2 thou must dye, and shalt not escape.

2 Then hezekia turned his fate toward the wall, and prayed vnto the Lorde,

The prophecie

Hesehta this pere shalt thon e groweth ok it {clfe, an the kunde per that which spryngeth agayne of the lame, Ein the thirde pere ye Hatt solbe and reape, pea pe fall plant vinevardes, and ie fruites therof,

zi And such of the Houle of Juda as are escaped shall come together, and the

remnaunt chall take roote beneath and

b a Went aboue.

or the escaped Mall go out of 5 salem, and the renmaunt from th mount Son: and this chall the zealeof the Lorde of hoastes bryng to palle.

3; Therkore thus faith the Londe con: ternyng the kyng of the Allyrians: He
Hall not come into this citic, and thait shoote no arrowe into it, there hati no shielde hurt it, neither shall they cat
Ditches about it.

34 The fame way he came he shall re- z turne, and not come at this citie, saith the Lorde. 5

35 And J wyll kepe and (aue this ate
(fateh he j fo2 myne owne and for mp seruaunt Dauids lake.

36 Thus the angell ol the Torde went ga foorth, and fluc of the Allyrtans hoaste fat an hundred kourestoze and fiue thou? ames sande: and when men arose vp early in the mornyng, beholde they were layne, and all lap full of dead bodyes.

37 Oo Sennacherib the kyng of the
Aflprtans brake bp € dwelt at Hintue.

38 Akterwarde it chaunted as he prayed in the temple of Nesroch his God, that
Adramalech and Sarazer his owne sonnes flue hym with the lworde, aud fled into the lande of Armenia: and ee his forne raigned in his

eede.

3 And lapde: Remember O Lcd 2 beseche thee, that J haue warne fore ther in krueth and a stepkal aun
€ haue done the thyng that is ple to thee. And Hesetsia wept lore.

4 Then layde God vnto Ela,

Go and {peake vuto Seki et
Tord Godot Damodehy father Be thee this worde, J haue peat 5 praper, and conlidered thy 155 sb holde J Wyll put fikteene veres m f

g fes . bnd deiner thee and the citte also kronithe hande of the kyng of Allpzta: wyl dekende the cite,
Ard take thee this tokenokthe Lord, that he wyll do it as he hath fpoken. ~
Beholde, J wyl returne the shadowe of Abas Diall that nowe is lapde out

with the sunne, and being it ten degrees backlwarde: So the sunne turned ten

vs 3

stended afore. .
4 % thankelgeuyng which Bezelkia kyng

- of Juda wrote, when he had ben siche

and was recouer ed.
10 J thought J shoulde haue gone te

the gates or hell when myne age was

shoztened, and haue Wanted the residue 4

ofnw pere. SS S u JJ spake within my lelke, J wyll neuer vilite the Lordel the Lorde J lap in this lpke: I Wyll neuer see man among the dwellers ol the woldee. n Pyne age is folden together c taken away from me ipke a sheepheardes totage, I haue hewen ok my lyke by my

finnes, lpke as a weauer cutteth of his

Webbe: He wyll with pinyng ficknefle

make an ende of me, pea he pli make

an ende of me in one dag.

bh Iz J thought J woulde haue lpued vnipll the morowe, but he brused my bones lyke a lion: and in one day thou
Wylt make an ende of me. 2

64. Then chattered J lpke aswallowe, and lyke a trane, and mourned Ipkea

of Esai.

degrees backwarde, the which he was

done, J lift vp mine eyes into the

hepght. O Tode (apne Imp sieknelse

kepeth me downe, cafe thon nie.

15 ar mn sap: The Lopde hath made a promise to me, yea and he hym
155 ath ie inn it: I shall there-

2¢ fo lon pue remember this bitternesle of my lyfe. osm

16 O Lorde, to all thole that chan lyue

hereafter, pea to all men that it be

knowen, that cuen in thole peres J

haue a iopłull lyfe, and that it was thou

that cauledst nie to fleepe agapne, thou

Hatt geuen lyfe to nie.

17 Wcholde, bitter as gall was my pen siuenesse, fo sore longed J for health, and it was thy pleafure to deliuer my ipfe from the filthy pit: for thou it is S
Love that hat tast all my sinnes behynde thy backe.

18 Jor hell prapleth not thee, death doth, not magntfie thee: they that go downe into the graue prayle not thy trueth:

19 Wut the lyuyng, vea the lyuyng know-

IXXXVIII.

ec

Psal. vi. a.
Ixx vill. b.

cxv. b.

ledge thee, as J do this dap: the father

telleth his childzen of thy faythfulnesse.

20 To heale me it isthe Lordes Worke, and we will sing my songes in the Houle of the Lorde all the Dayes of our lyfe.

21 And Efat sapde: Take a platter of ligges, and lay it vpon the foze, fo shall it be whole. f

22 Then lapd Hesekla:D what a miracle is this, that I shall go vp into the houle ofthe Tode. al

The. xxxix. Chapter. hezekia is reproued ol Eta, becaule he be wed his treature vnto the

emballadourg of Babylon.

T. the sanie tyme Me-

! aN 5 rodach Waladan, Wa-
N
(ON

SS

: and presentes to Hezethas 925 e
F e 1 ees tecoucred a 07 1 uh P thera ee Was glad therof, and offite them the houle of his treasures
5 Hi and golde, of spites, and rotes, tdb lous oples, t all that was in his ee ae And treasure houles: there
Ay (ath ae ben 8 Hezekias houle, but he let them lee b. Wee

% ladans sonne kyng ok

3 Then came Elai the prophete to king
Hezekia, and sapde vnto hom: What haue the men layde, and from whence tanie they vnto thee: Hezekia aunswwered, They tame outof à farre countrey vnto nie, out ol Babplon.

4 Elai sapde, what haue they loked bpon in thyhoule-Hezekia aunfwered, All that is in my house haue they leene, and

there is nothyng in my trealure but A
‘Herbed it them. ”

5 Thenlapde clai vnto Peseta : Cin

derstande the worde of the Lorde of

Luk. i. g.

hoastes: ;

~sseholoe, the tyme wyll come that

teuerp thyng which is in thyne si 5

4. Reg. 24.

Ihe

layde Dp in store vntyll this day, (halbe taryed to Wabplon, and nothing left behynde, thus faith the Lorde,

Bea and part of thy sonnes that thall

tome of thee, æ whom thou shalt beget, shalbe caryed hence, and become gelded

The. xl. Chapter. both

pro hecie

333. —ͤů ˙˖r·r5—‚Q—¶Q ———k— .
. and all that thy progenitours haue chamberlapnes in the kyng of Baby

, tang 0 N en layde Hezekla to ela 1 the worde of God which thou 500 — me. He fayd moreouer, peace and faythfulnesle in my tyme.

fry

goes

Che commpng of saint John Waptitt, 9 The preparation of the Bpotties. ,

Che callyng of the Gentiles.

her, that her trauaple

is at an ende, that her offence is par

doned, that she hath reteaued at the
Loves hande {ufficient correction for all her sinnes.

Nia 3 A doyte crieth in wildernesle:orepare
Luk hi. a. the way of the Lorde, make strapght

aa the path of our God in the delert. e 4. All baileys shalbe exalted, and euery niountayne and hyll lapde lowe: what
Io is ctoked shalbe made strayght, and

the rough shalbe made plapne.

5 For the glorie of the Lorde shall ap-

b peare, forall fleshe hall at once fee that the mouth of the Lorde Hath spoken it.

6 The same vopte spake: Nowe trye.
And the prophete aͤunlwered, What
Chant J erye- That all edhe is grasse,

. and that all the goodlinesse therof is as

Licobii.c. the floure of the ficlde,

i Peay 7, The grasse is withered, the floure falleth alway, for the breath of the Lord bloweth vpon them: of a trueth the people are grasse. g

3 The gratle withereth, and the floure fadeth away: pet the worde of our elan b God endureth for euer.

bela 9 Go pp vnto the bye hyll O Sion thon

hacob ib. that bryngest good tidinges, lplt vp thy

voyce with power O thou 2
Pierulalem, pft vp with Hou preacher

out feare, ef
Huto the cities of Juda: Beholde sous

Beholde pour

God,

10 Weholde p Lorde God (hat tome with power, and shall of him selfe beare rule
With his arme: beholde his rewarde with hym, and his Workes befoze hym.

u He shall feede his flocke like an heard-

man, he shall gather the lambes toge-

fbher with his arme, and tary them in his bosome, and (halt kyndlp intreate thofe that beare poung.

11 Who hath mealured the waters in

his fits who hath mealured heauen

ded all the earth ol the wonde in three

measures: who hath wayed the moun-

tapnes and hylles in a ballaunee-

13 Who Hath directed the spirite of the
Lorde: oz Who gauc

and shewedhym :

4. Whois of his tounsaple, and geueth C hym vnderstandyng, and hath taught hym the path of iudgement: Who taught hym cunnyng, and opened to hym the way of vnderstandyng-

15 Beholde, all people are in comparison of hym as a droppe of a bucket full, and are counted as the leak thyng that the ballaunce wapeth: pea and the Illes he taketh vp as a verp litle thyus. .

16 Tibanus ts not sufficient to milter fire to his offeryng, and all the brastes therof are not inough fo2 one sacrifite.

17 All people in comparifon of hym are

4 a xi reckened as nothyng: yf they be tom ve

pared with hym, lelle then nothyng, and as it that is not. .
1s To whom then Wpll pe ken God!
02 what linulitude will ye {et vp to Hint
1 Shall the caruer mabe hymacarued image: and chall the goldelnuth couer hym with golde, oz cast hym unte 4 fourme of filner plates: nat
20 Mozeover,fhat ee image maker tha the poore man which is disposed ae haue some thyng to fee vp alfo,feeke 4 5 and choole atreethat isnot ratte,” caruc thereont an image that mou notz 10
21 Rnowe ye nothyng-hearde n of lte bath it not ben preached bu at

O2 there shalbe

with his spaͤnne, and hath tomprehen-

hym counsaple, sps ine om xb.

e beginning: haue pe not ben enn of this by the foundation of rth:
1 tis be that sittethj bpou the circle of dye world, whole inhabiters area com parilon or him] but as grashoppers: *he sprcadeth out the heauens as a coucrug, he stretcheth them out s a tent to piped in.
He briugeth

princes to nothing, and the indges of the cari) as though they were not.

24 So that ol them it may be sayde, they be not planted nor foibne agapne, net ther their stacke rooted agapne in the earth: for assdone as he bioweth vpon them, they Wither and fade away lyke che strawe ma whirle winde.

25 To whom nowe will pe liken me, and whom chall J be tyke, faith the holy one a

26 Vlft bp pour eyes on high, and consider who Hath made chole thinges which conte out by so great heapes, and

id i

il exlvita

E styll pou Jlandes
% ich eee and hearken puto me: let the people lap their
D kKrength together, let them tome hither, and then shew their caule:
We Wilt go to the lawe

together.
Pee 2 Who raysed vp the int man krom the eau kalt, and called hyurts go foa2th z Who ger (all downe the people, and fubsuead the

e kyuges before hin that he may teow ean hein al to the ground with his tworde,
Sieg ald {latter thein lyne stubble wich his daes bodbe.

n be kolowerh vpon them, and goeth ae jake ip him lelke, e that in a way where

before his foote had not troden,
4 Who bath made and created these

tia, tons fromthebegümung,

5 rom the beginning, “enen J the

en. eid Whiche am the dert, and with
Al.

5 mit Alles sawe and din feare and the
Ys Otc earth were abached, drewe ie and came hither. 1
5 900 an helped his neighbour, and aeg to his brother, be strong.

Dingess cucu he that talled the genera-

1s nothing bid from the greatnelle of his power, strength, and might,

27 Howe map then Jacob thinke, or may
Asrael fay, My wayes are hid from the

-. Lod, and my God knoweth not of my

Ae

2 uo west thou not, or batt thoy

hearde that the tuerlasting an . che
Lorde whiche made all the torners of the earth, is neither Weerte nor kainteand that his wyldome can not be comprehended:

29 It is he that geueth strength vnto the weerie, and power bnto the faint,

30 Children are weerit and kaint, and the strongest men fall:

31 But bnto them that hane their trust tithe Lorde, Mhall strength be increafed: Egles Winges. Mali growe bpon

them, when they runne they shall not
Eat Whenthey go they Hallnotbe eerie,

The. xl}. Chapter.
2 Of the goodnesse and mercy of God to warde the people.

lox he talleth them al by their namesrthere

Tere.xvii.d.

7 The carpenter comforted the gold- xs

sinith, and the goldsmith the hanuner-

man, saping, sowder wyll do very well

in it: and they kastened it with naples, that it shoulde not de moaned,

8 But thou Jlracl art imp sernaunt, thou Jacob whom J haue tholẽ, thou art the (cede oF Abraham mp deloued.

\o

endes of the earth: for JJ talled thee euen from among the glorious men of it, and sayd vnto thee, Thou art my ser-

Haunt, J haue chosen thee, and not cast

tte away. f

10 V unt afraide, for Jam with thee:

Melt not away as ware, for I am thy

God to strength thee, helpe thee, and

kepe chee with the right bande of mip

righteoulnesse.

Beholde, all thep that relistthee Mail tome to tonfusion and shanie, and thine adnerlaries shalbe destroyed = brought to naught.

12 So that who so seeketh after them, hall not finde them, thy destroyers shan periche: and fo shall they that vndertake to make battaple agauist thee be as that is not, x as a thing ofuanght.

M (50 13 Foz

it

Thon art he whom J ted from the

Esal. xliii N

strengthen thy right bande, euen 31 that kay vnto thee, Feare not, J wyll helpe thee. a
C 4 went afraide thou litle Wore Ja. cob, and thou despised Ilracl: fo2 I wil helpe thee saith the Lorde, and the holy

one of Ilrael thy redeemer. 8
15 Btholde, J wuͤl make thee a treading y cart and a newe latte that thou mapest

threshe and grinde the mountaines, and bring the hilles to powder. i
16 Thon (hate fanne them, aud the winde shall carrie themawap, and the whtrie
Winde {hall scatter thein: but thou Hatt rtioyce inthe Lorde, and halt deught in the holy one of Hlrael.
Gene cri V7 hen the thirstte and poore lecke

Water and finde none, and When their tongue is drye ok thirst, J geue it them faith the Love, Ithe God of Jlraecl forsane them not.

Efi.xxvb. 18 J bryng koorth fluddes in the hüles,

c xlüüls. and wellts in the plapne kieldes: FB turne the wildernesle to riuers, and the drye lande to tonduites of water.

19 J plant in the waste grounde trees of
Cedar, Boxe, Mprre, and Oliues, and in the drie J let Firre trees, Elmes, and

Hawthornes together. :

20 Allthis do J, that they altogether may fee and marke, perteane with their heartes and confiver that the hande of the Lorde maketh these thinges, and that the haly one of Jlrael bringeth then to palle.

21 Stande at pour tanle faith the Lor, f bryng foorth pour strongest gronnde, faith theyng ok Jacob.

22 Tet them bring koorth their gods, and let their gods tel vs what (hall chaunte

Te prophecie z Fo J the Horde thy God wyll hereakter, yea let thein Mewe vs the

23 Either shewe vs thinges fo

25 Meuerthelesse

thinges that are past what the y
Want ee th om vnto be Atte may take them to heart, an

them hereakter. d Enowwe

and tell bs what Mall be dont heregk-

ter, fo shall we know that ye ee 75

do lomething cuher good 02 bad, o wp}

hg knowledge the fame, and tell out.

24. Bcholde pe are gods of naught, and

pour making is of naught: pea abhonible isthe man that hath cholen Pe 4

„IJ haue Wakedbpone :

20 conte, D

al. xlii

from the north, and he shall tome from .

the cast, he shal call bpon my name and
{hall treade vpon princes as bpon clay, and as the potter treadeth downe the mire.

26 Who detlared this from the begin:

ning, and we Will knowehym: o2 fcom the olde times, and we wil confeffe and fay that heis righteous: but there is none that sheweth or declareth any thing, there is none allo that heareth pour Wordes. N

27 The first is he that shall fay to Sion,

beholde, beholde, they are present: and to Hierulalem it felfe wyll J geue an euangelist.

28 But when J conlider, there is not a

man among them, nor any that can geuecounfaple, nor that when J exanune them that can aunlwere one wWorde.

29 Jo Wicked are they, and vapne, with

the thinges allo that they take in hand, pea their images are but winde ald vapne thinges.

¢ The. xlij. Chapter.

The comming ok Christe.

11 e Ehold ' this is my ser-
Math iu d. N uaunt vpon whom F
Nil. xvii, a Altane, ip clect in whõ

mp soule is patified:

7 BA J Hane geuen my {pt l vite vpon him, that he

may shewe koorth indgement among the gentiles.

2 Me shall not be an duterper, nor lift vp his voyte, his voyte shall not be hearde

inthe streetes. 15
And a brooled reede shall he 1 bicake, and the simoking flare Mall 0 not quench: but fapthfully and true y

shall be gene iudgement.

4 He shall not ve pensiue no: carefull,

that he may restore righteoulnelle 1 to the earth: and the gentiles allo ly loke for his lawes.

5 Jol

of Eat,

Fo) thus faith God the Lorde vuto

* ees he that made the heauens

and spread them abrdadt, and let foorth

che carth with her inereale, whiche ge-

’ neth breath vnto the people that is mit,

and spirite to them that dwell therein,

6 Ithe Lorde hauc called thee in vighteöulnesle, and wyll holde thee by the hande, aud wyll allo defende thec,and geue chee fora touenaunt ok the people,

u. bo be the* light of the gentiles.

7 Thatthon mapelt open the eyes of

Aub. the blinde, let out the priloners from

their bondes, and them that sit in dark-

gelle out ok the dungeon house.
3 Euen Jam the Lord, and this is my gis nante: and my glory wyll J gene to none other, neither mine honour to gra-

uen mages. „ .

9 Bceholde olde thinges are come to pasle, and newe thinges do J declare,

and o2 ener they tome J tell vou ol *

5 { em. bi ‘ „
10 n n the Lorde a newe song ol thankelgeung, blowe out his prapse fromthe ende of the worlde: they that be vpon the sea, and all that is therein prapse hym, the Piles and they that

Dibell iu them. ae tt Let the wildernesse with the cities lift bp her voyte, the townes alfo that they of Cedar dwell in: let them be

glad that fit vpon rockes of stone, and

let them crpe downe from the high mountaines, a

tz Altribing glory vnto the Lorde, and magnifiyng hym among the gentiles.

Tn The Tode (halt conie foorth tyke a

aunt, and take a stomacke to hun like

aftethe man of warre: he shali roare

aud crye, and ouertome his enemies. ere 4, J bane long holden mp peace (Laith

de de Lorde) c J haue ben styll and rekrat-

Rueda. ned my selfe, but now J Wyll trie like a

Du trauapling woman, and at once Wyll

Saß J deltroyand deuo ur.

ate 5 J Wyll make waste both mountain

dale, oe bill, and dape vp euery greene thing

nce that groweth theron: J Wyll drye vp bs

the fluddes to become Jlandes, and

drinke vp the riuers.

16 JJ wyll bryng the blinde into a streete that they know not, and leade them in-

toa koote path that they are ignoraunt in: J Hail make darknelle light bekore them, and the thing that is crooked to be straight: These things haue J done vnto them, and not forfaken them.

17 They are fallen backe, pea and let them be ashamed carnestip that hope

inidols, and fay to the moulten unages, pe are dur gods.

18 Beare O pe deafe men, and sharpen

vonr epes to {ee O pe blinde.

19 Who is blinde but my seruannt: or so deale as my meflenger whom F fent vnto them: for who is fo blinde as the perfect man, and fo blinde as the Lords

sernaunt -

20. Thou hast seene much, and kepest nothing: the eares are open, and no man

heareth. f

at The Torde is mevepfult vnto them

for his righteousnesse fake, that his

word might be magnified and praysed:
22 Wut the people them selues is robbed

Esai. xlii: i b.

Math. xv. b. cb) Bothe eruaunt, messenger, and the erkect man, e meaneth the Jeweg & there priestes.
Soho ongi;t or
Mbother pcoa= le to haue had knowledge, ond id haut serued
God perfectly,

and troden vnder the foote, chapned in

Dungeons, and they all F fay, are shut into prison houses: they be caryed a-
Way captiue, and nd man Both look them: they be troden onder loote, and no man doth labour to bryng them a gayne.

23 But who is he among pou that pondereth this, that considereth it, and ta-
Ret it for a warning in tyme to come;

24 Who gaue Jacob to be troden vnder foote, and Ilrael to be spoyled: Did not the Lorde: Betause we haue finned against hym, and haue had no delight to
Walke in his wapes, neither ben obedient vnto his lawe:

25 Therfore he hath powred vpon hym his wzathkfull displeasure and strong battayle, aud hath fired hym on cucry side, yet wyll he not vnderstand: he bur-
15 bem bp, pet sinketh it not into his

car ö N

: M (ij) The

Deut. 28 b.
(e) Ygrre-

Sy it is peach ed.
EA. Xnlil. d.

Baruc i. d.
Tob. iii. a.
Dani. ix. a.

7 Dania.

iii. Re. xvñ c
Esai. xli.b. eut. vi. a.

and. xx vi. d.

‘The prophecie

God promileth to fende his Christe whiche Mall deltuer his people. De fo ge. bar's

that made thee O Janed thee O

| for J haue redeemed thee, J haue called thee by thy name, thou art mine owne.
If thou goest thorow p water, J wypl be with thee, the strong fluddes shal not ouerwhelme thee: and if thou Walkest thorowe the fire, it Mall not burne thee,

Exod. xiii.c 2

t the flambe shal not kindle vponthee:
3 For Jamthe Tord thy God, the holye one of Israel thy fautours J gaue

Egypt for thy deliueraunte, the Ethiopiàns and the Sabees for thee:

Wetanse thou wast deare in my sight,

and becaule J {et by fee and loued thee: J wyl gene over all men for thee, and delluer vp all people fo2 thy lake.

Sucha, 5 enen With there, J will

Machvii> przpng thy leede froin the east, and gaz ther thee together from the welt.

6 J wyll lap to the north, let go, and to the south kepe not backe: but bring me my sonnes from farre, and my daughters from the endes of the worlde.

7 Panmelp) all those that be called after

my name: Foz them haue JJ created,

fathtoned and made for nune honour.

Wing foorth that people whiche is blinde and pet Hath eyes, whiche are deale although they haue cares.

In all nations conie in one and be gathered together, whiche among them hall declare suche thinges, and tell vs the things that are pat let them bring their witnelle, so that they be iust:els let them heare, and sap, it is truet g. io Bou are my witnelles faith the Lo,

and my seruaunt whom J haue cho-

fen: therefore be certified, aud gene me

faythfull evedence and confider® that J

am he before whom there was neuer

any god, neither shalbe any alter me.

Ober xb. 11. Iain, enen Jamthe only Lord, and

beside mie there is no lauiour.

pn Jgaue warning. J made whole, J taught pou when there was no straunge god among pou: and this rez corde mustye beare me pour lelues, faith the Lorde, that Jan God.

B And tuen he am F who was from the beginning, and there is none that can take any thing out ol my hande: J do

Efai.xxix.d
Nida

Luk.xiiiic. . 38

Ephe inc. 9

Esai. xlini. b.
Apoci.b.

ohn. x. f.

cob, and he that fachto-
Ilrael faith thus: *feare not,

path tu the nughtie waters

the woe, and who shalbe able to tetit

14. Thus faith the Lorde the bone °
Sicael pour redeemer: “for pour fake J Efi haue sent to Wabyls,¢ brought it down: al they are fugitine with the Chalores>
Whole sorowfull trie is in their chippes. haue made Ilrael, and ani your kyng.

16 Thus laith the Tode, euen he tha Tofuriie malteth awap in the Mea, and a fogte bnd

17 Itis he whiche beingeth foorth tl

charrets and horses the hoadt and pow-

er ot warre, that they may fall together and neuer rile, and be extinct; Ipke ag

ne ol the

wap in the desert and riuers of water in the wyldernessũsseGGe. f Bithios

20 The wilde beastes Hall worchip ine, aa the dragous and the poung Estriches: ata, for I thatl geue Water in the wylder- Paiva nelle, and streanies in the delert, that r they niay gene drinke to my people
Whom F chote.. e

a1 This people haue J made for mp self, > and they hall shewe foorth my prayse.

22 Fo thou Jatob wouldest not tall vp pon ine, but thou haddest an vnlust towarde me O Ysrael.

23. Thon gauest me not thy beastes for « burnt offerings, neither diddest honour me with sacrifites: J haue not ben v chargeable vnto thee in offeringes, nei lame ther greeuous in intens e.

24 Thou boughtest me no deare spite with thy money, neither powredst the fat of thy facvifices pon me: but thou hast laden me with thy fianes,and wer ried nic with thy vngodlynesse.

25 Where as J pet, euen J aum he onlpe that tor my owne kelues fake do ewe thine offences, and forget thy sinnes 10 that J wyll neuer thinke vpon we

26 Put mie now in remempzaunte ef 10 wyl reason together, x Mew what hast for thee to make thee vightcou 110

27 Thy first father offended (ore, a thy rulers haue finned again ue the

de tri go

Plax ler. xxx

Num

1 C antes of the kanttuarie, J dpd che atob, and gaue Jlrael into reproolt,

— — ome

of Esai.

| : ¢ The. sdiiij. Chapter, |

5 chritte promifeth to deliver bis Churche, without anp ber delertes.

OD heare nowe O Bac e cob my feruaunt, and
AH | Picael whom J haue

chosen.

Foz thus faith the
¶Torde that made thee, fassioned thee, and hel-

WAS

ped thee euen from thy mothers

wambe: We notafratde O Pacob my
Ache thou righteous whom J aue cholen: 3
ü. 3 9 075 {hall powre water vpon the
= pppe grunde, and riuers vpon the thirand fhies* I Chall powre my spirite vponthy fee de and my blessing vpon thy stocke:
4 They Chall growe together lyke as the grasle, and as the willowes by the
Waters fie.

5 One shal lap, Jamthe Todes: another shall tall hym selfe after the name of Jatob: the thirde Mail lubleribe
With his hande buto the Horde, and

geue hym leile vnder the name of Il

rael. .
6 Thus hath the Lorde spoken, euen the kyng of Israel, and his redeemer nis the Torde of hoastes: J am the firtt
. 05 last, and besides me there is no

a 7 Il any be like me, let hym tall loorth s the thing palt, and openly there it, and

lay it playne before me, what bath chaunced fincee J appointed the people

okthe worlde, and what thalbefhortip, .

drabhat Chal tome to pasle (in tyme long to come) let them shewe thele thinges-

3 Benotavathen nor afraide : for haue not J euer tolde pou hitherto and war-
Kenda pe can beare me recorde pour ues: is there any God except me, re maker, that I chould not know

, 2500 karuers ot images are but vapne,

a the carued images that they loue

1 ‘bet no good: they must beare re-

ober ah 1 that seeing they tan

* eu 180 z onderstande, they shalbe o dare then make a god, or fashithing, wage that is profitable tor fi

e tt * :
Seholde, all the kelowehip of them

must be brought to confulion, « t

all the workemasters of unte Bere they (hal all be gathered together, they shall stand, tremble, and ve tonkounded one with another.

11 The smith maketh an axe, and tem: pereth it with hotte coates, and fachioneth it with hammers, and worketh it with all the itrength of his armes, pea sometime he is fainte foz verp hunger, and sothirstie that he hach no more power.

33 The carpenter o2 image caruer taketh mealure of the timber, and spreadeth foorth his line, he marketh it with some colour he plapneth it, he ruleth it, and squareth it, and maketh it after the mage ok a man, and according to the beautie of a nian, that it may stande in the house.

14. Moreouer, he goeth out to hewe C
Cedar trees, he bringeth home Elmes and Okes, and taking a bolde courage, he seeketh out the be timber of the wood: he him lelfe hath planted a pine tree, whiehe the rayne hath lwelled,

is Which wood serueth for men to burne:
Ok this he taketh and warmeth hym felfe withall, be maketh a fire of it to bakebread, aud maketh also a god therof to honour it, and a grauen image to kneele before it. N f

16 One peete he bnrueth in the fire, with another he rosteth fleshe, that he may eate roste his belly full: with the thirde e warmeth him felfe, and fatty, Aha,
Jam well warmed, J haue ben at the

ire.

17 And ofthe residue he maketh hym a god, and grauen image for him selfe: he kneeleth before it, he worchippeth it, he

zapeth vnto it, and saith, Delluer me, or chou art ni god.

18 Het men neither tonsider nor vnderstande, betause their eyes be stopped that they can not see, and their heartes that they tan not perceaue.

19 They ponder not in their mindes, kor they haue neither knowledge nor vnderstanding to thinke thus: J haue brent one peecte in the fire, J haue ba-
Bed bread wich the coales thereof, 7

gp (ii) baue

Esai. xli. c.

and J : an abhominable idoll, and fall downe before a rotten peece of wood.

20 Thus doth he but tole his labour, and his heart whithe is deceaued doth turne hym alide, so that none of them tan haue a free tonsciente to thinke, Do not ‘Herre:

ꝓ 21 Cönsider this O Jatob and Ilrael, for thou art my seruaunt: made thee that thou mightest serue me, O Brack forget me not.

Ela. lid. 22 As for thyne offences J haue driuen them away lyke the cloudes, and thy linnes as the mist: Turne thee agapne puto me, for I haue redeemed thee,

23 Be glad ye heauens, for the Lorde hath dealt graclousip with his people, let ail that is here beneath vpon the earth be iopfull: retopce pe mountaines and woods, with all the trees thereof, for the Lorde hath redeemed Jacob, and wyll shewe his glory vpon Jlrael.

The. xlv.

The prophecie . haue rosted flethe withall, andeatenit: 24. Thus salth the Torde thy redeemer

wyll nowe of the residue make

N an he Ba . mothers wombe: JJ the Lo thinges my selfe alone, J lp tone out the heauens, and J only abrode the earth by my own
25 J destroy the tokens of make the foothfapers fo the Wife J turne them b make their cunning fool
26 He doth set vp

e selfe. witches and wih og As fo ack warde, an the vn oat ott K rpole of hi 2 uaunt, and kulfilleth the tounlalle ofl meflengers concerning Pierufatem, he saith it chalbe inhabit : ties of Juda they
1 a I Will repapre their decayed plates. it
27 He laith to the deapth, be nape, and J
Wyll drye vp water fluddes.
28 He laith of Cyrus, he is my heard-

shalbe buylded a:

hee krom thy

all ade haue lalde

ed, and of the ce

heardman, so that he Mall fulfill att thinges

after my wyll: He saith also of Perulalem it shalbe buylded, and of the ten: ple, it shalbe kalt grounded.

Chapter.

Che deliueraunce of the people by Cpruz. 20 The comming of Christe, and the

calling of the gentiles.

us faith the Lorde

Whpnto Cyprus his an-

i.Efdr. ia. ons before hym: *
Graces that wyl lool the loynes akne. wyl openthe gates bema face, and the gates shall not be ut.

W

IJ wyll go before thee, and make the crooked straigth: J hall breake the brasen dodres, and burl the iron barres. c

IJ Mall geue thee hid treasures and the thing whiche is setretly kept: that thou mapest know that J am the Low
God of Pract whiehe haue cailed thee

by thy name. é
Gene a. 4. *FO2Hacob my seruauntes fake, and for Israel my cholen, J talled thee by thy name, and ordapued thee or ener thou knewest me. a

Jamthe Lod, and there is none other, for without me there is no God:

J haue prepared thee oz euer thou

We

El. lig. 5

Iere. i. a.

Rnewest me.

#

6 Therkore they Mhalt knowe from the rising of the sunne, onto the gopng downe of the fame, that all is nothing without me: for Jam the Lode, and there is els none. b t ts I that : treated light and darknelle, I make peace and trouble: pea euen J the Lode do all hele thinges.
8 Be heauens from aboue drop downe, and let the doudes rayne righteoulnesse: the earth open it selle, let laluation and righteousnesle growe foorth, let ft bryng them foorth together: I the
Borde haue created him.
Wo be vnto hym that striue his maker let the potcherde Heine with the pottheroes of the earth: Haleth tor clay to the potter, What makest thau-
02, thy Worke is not perfectly done. fa
10 Wo be vnto hym that fateth to his 5 ther, what begettest thou? and to h mother, what bearest thou- oly n Thus satth the Lande, euen the 5 0 one and maker of Ilrael: Altze n iy thinges for to come toncermas ace sonnes, and put me in cementbee

; a Es. as touching the worzes aun ha

“ea

Gene. ia.
Iudit ix b.

th with gave
Jere, xvii and. xixc.
Rom yx.
Eccle nb.

Ol Esal. f

haue made the earth, Nr J haue not spoken secretip, neither =!»

1 uin on it: with my handes haue J in darke places of the earth: J lade * fpread kot! heauen and geuena com- not in vapne to the seede ol Jacob lecke maundenient fo all the hoast thereof. me: Jan the Lode, whiche when J

cha wale hyu bp with righte- —speake, do declare the thing that is

5 dlneile, aud order all his wayes: He rightedus and true. ote
(hail buplociy eitie and let out my pr 20 Gather vou and come together drawe soners, and that neither for gyftes no: nigh hither pou that estaped of the peorelwardes lait the Lorde ol hoastess ple : they haue no vnderstanding that Foitxiii<

¢ 14; Thus faith the Lorde, The oceupi- let bp the stockes of their idols, and Bruce. ers ok Egypt, the marchauntes of the pray vnto a god that can not helpe
Ethiopians and Sabees, chall come them. N . puto thee with tribute, they halbe 21 Drawe nye, come hyther, and let them D thyne, they shall folowe thee, and go alke counlaile one at another, and thew with chaines vpon their feete, they koorth what is he that told this before. shall fall downe before thee, and make. oz who spakc of it euer since the begin-
‘fupplication vnto thee: for God with- ning: haue not J the Torde done tt: out whom there is none other God, “Without whoni there is none other EGixivis. shalbe with ther. — VSod, the true God and sautour, and
„ j O hoe profounde art thou O God, there is els none but J. thou God and lauiour of Israele 22 And therfore turne pou vnto me, all rast b
16 Coufounded are they all and put to pe endes ok the earth, that ye may be dishonour, thei are gone hence together slaued: for J am God, and there is els with shame, euen the makers of ina none. — J f ges. N 2180
17 But Jlrael shalbe saued in the Lord f with au euerlasting faluation: pe Mhall and that may no man turne: but all Rom. nb not tome to shame nor confufion wornd knees Chall bowe vnto me, and all P. without ende. pimp name —
18. Forthus saith the Lorde, Euen he 24 Saying: veryly in the Lowe is my thattreatedheauen, the God that made righteonmnesse and strength, to hym the earth a fassioned it, and let it fozrth, (hall nien come: but all they that thinke he dyd not make it kor naught, but to be storne of him shalbe tonkounded inhabited, euen J the Lozde, without 25 And the whole seede of Ilcael halbe whomthere is none other. iiustified, and glory in the Tordee.

. See a n vi. Chap ter a
'Goolatric is reproued. z Che health that commeth by chile is prophetien, —-.

. eis fallen, abs I wyl aiso nosithe vou, beare por, aud ia . vig Ne broken downe, whofe (aue pour. .

images were a bur- 5 whom wpll pe make mie tyke, 02 to Exodxxa
Athen kor the beastes whom wyll pe make meequall o2 cont N and cattell, to ouerlade pare me, that I shoulde be like hunthem, and to make 6 Tanke out sisuer and gold out of pour g.
. them weerte. purses, and wapit, and hyre a golde- 3
2 They are funke downe and fallen to- sinith to make a god of it, that men may debe; lor they may not eale them of kneele downe and worchp it:
Det bürthen, therfore um they goin: 7 "Bet mut he be taken on mens Hout oo n.
Otapttuitie, “st ders and borne, and set in his plate, that Barucvie.
5 Dearken vnto me O boule Jacob, he may stande, and not moue out of his
Dall pe that remarne pet of the houle place: And it one erye vuto hym, he ge
5 rael, whom J hane borne from’ ueth no aunlwere, and delmereth not un mothers wombe, and bought the man that tauerh vpon hym from ken dy from pour bprth. his trouble. bitoponee F Whiche Mall beare pou 8 Conliver this ne, be alhamed: age: f u, to pour own . ge: Fane made yo goin 115 “ait ae

i
U

Th

sinte the beginning of the worlde, that
Jam God, and that there is els no
God, yea and that there is nothing like vnto me. lo In the beginning of athing Jchewe
ö thẽ ende therok, e J tell before thinges that are not pet tome to passe: My deulle standeth ftedfattip stablished, and
I fulfill all my pleasure. ue tall a byrdè out of the calf, and the

J The. xlvij.
Che worde of the Lorde againtt Babylon.

UZ as for thee O daughter, thou virgin
GWabplon, fit thou
A downe in the dust, fit

es no thzane D thou a — daughter of Caldea, for thou shalt no more be talled tender and plealaunt. nne
Wzypug foorth the querne and grinde meale, vutrusse thy bropdred heere, put of thy shdes, make bare thy knees, and
Wade thorolbe the water riuers.
Thy filthynesse shalbe difcoucred, and thy pnuities shalbe seene: for J wil auenge me okthee, and wyll shewe no mercytothee, as I do to other men.

r rar
N
„ oN
Ly

N ‘Gent ad =
2 Fach N
, I 7
\ *

N ap!

Eze.xvi.d. 3
Naum. il il. a.

4. Our redeemer is called the Lorde ok

hoastes the holy one of Jsrael.
5 Sit htt holde thy tongue, get thee in:

. to some Darke comer O daughter Cat >

dea: for thou shalt no moze be called

lady of kyngdomes. ‘

6 J was so wroth with my people, that

I puniched myne inheritaunce, and

prou xb. Sane them into thy power, neuerthe-

lere. lb. llesse thou chewedst them no mercy, but

euen the very aged of them diddeltthou opprresse right fore with the poke.

5 7, And thou choughtest thus: J chalbe

lady for euer, and befive all that, thou

Hatt not regarded these thinges, neither

remembzed What Was the ende ofthat

cttie Mierusalem. ~~ g, Meare noe therefore thou delicate one that sittest so tarelesle, and speakest thus in thyne heart, J am alone, and without me is there none, J shal neuer be widowe nor desolate agapne.
9 And pet both these thinges shal tome

Fal. xx. b.
Apo. xvui. c

to thee bpon one dap, in the twincke-

ave fi -, 5 t

9 Remember the changes that ave pat

vpõ the ground, thert

n Nowe go to thy tomurers, and ta che

14. Weholde, they chalbe lpue strawe,

hecle

man by whom my counlayte thane ane filled out of straunge ‘mnt pee = haue spoken fo weil J wing to pan: alsoone as Ithinke to ewe a thing
I doit. 0 el on ee tes 5

12 Heare me O pe that are o an hye stomacke but farre from righteoulsmesse:

13 J chall bryng foorth my righteouk nelle it is not farre, and my health hay not tarp long abap: Ywyfllap health in Sion, and in Ilrael my glo ov.

* „„

od XVI. .

Chapter.

lng of an epe, namely, widowhood and desolation they mightylp fall bpon d thee, forthe multitude of thy Witches,
Ap Lo the great heape of thy coninio Jor thou Hak trusted in thy wickednesse, and halt kad, Ma man fecth me: thine owne wildome and cunning hath
Deccaued thee, in that thou hast fayd in thyne heart, J am alone, and without me there is none.

u Hherefore Hall trouble come vpon thee, and thou shalt not knowe from wheuce it Mati arise: Mischiefe shall fat. bpon Hee, which thou chalt not be able to put ok, a sodapne beter deiteuction
Ahalleomne vpon thee oz euer thou be

Efairxixys

ware.

multitude of thy witthes With whom thou bat weerped thy selfe from thy

Werne

che.

3. Thou hast hitherto had many cour: K fayles ol then: So let the heauen ga-
‘fers, and the beholders of starres and moone prophetes, come on now aud deluer thee, pea and let them Merb when theft new thinges shal come vponthce.

whiche ik it be Kindeled with bre ut ) man inap rid it for the vehemencle 9 the flanibe, and pet it geueth no finders
* re, man by; nor cleave five to it v. rine ine 0 * N
15 allen r with wohon thar weeried thy fe and thusace thy non thauntes that haue ben with thee f
‘thy youth : euerp one bath talc, 15 ont way, and none ok then a fende thee.
* The

b.

Abt.

UH!

ah

4 of Fai; ata

Ihe. xlviij. Chapter:

a’

a

wv 1

hypocrilie of the Je wes is reproued. The Lorde alone w Nol
Wolde which bath cholen vs, Elbe

his owne fake.

Eare this O thou
Sliboufe of Jatob, pe that are called by the name of. Hitael; € are

fer

J

8 iY A -<O¥
(LD), GL) with Juda: whiche
. 8 swearẽ by the nanie of the Lorde, and beare witnesse by the
God ol Israel, but not with trueth and rpght. 12 TET LE een eee
1 — they are named ok the Holy titie, and are grounded vpon the God of HE rael, whole name is the Lode of hoaste s.. * hat J haue shewed you euer sinte the begynnyng, haue 7

3 The thynges t

II

tome out ot one stoche

20 and which kuccoureth vs kor fire of afflittion. E

And that ouly kor myne owne fake, yea* euen for myne owue fate wyll do this: orels what dishonour woulde they do to my name: surely J wyll not geue my glorie vnto another.

2 Hearnen vnto me O Jatob, and Fe

rael whom J haue called: Jam eũen he that is, Ham the first and the last.

3 My hande hath layde the foundation

ok the earth, and my ryght hande hath spanned ouer the heauens: affoone as
I tall them, they stande together.

14 Gather you altogether and hearken:

not brought them to passe immediatly

as they tame out of my mouth, and dedared them, and they are come ;
4. Holbbeit J knowe that thou art obllnate, and that thy necke hath an iron lino we, and that thy browe is ol brasse.

§ euerthelesse, J haue euer linte the begynnyng shewed thee of thynges for

15 Imp selfe alone, euen

wohich of ponder gods hath declared this: The Lorde hath a loue vnto him, and he (hal perfonrme his wyll against wWabel, and declare his the Chaldees. 8 We
IJ haue tolde vou this, I dyd tall him and bryng him foorth, and he chall make his tourney prosperous. 6

16 Cone to me and heare this: aue J

lo tome, and declared them vnto thee. :

or euer th fy if, my carued or molten image hat shewed it. dary 0 ; s Thou heardest it before, and beholde it is tome to
(clues chewe foortl) ortonfellethe fame:
Fut as fo: me, Itolde thee before at the begynuyng n which thou k

ey. came to passe: that thou

N ne west not ol,
0 inp some done of olde tyme, Wwherof
— e heardest. before they were beholde J knewe of them.
Dorcouer,th at neither haue ben op malt itiousi talled thee. thy mothe

; vite needle, for np names fake FZ honours fak

holde as siluer, x

ewe and feevete thynges

ouldest not fay, myne idoll Hath done

17 And thus saith the L passe: And shall not ye pour

lo passe, that thou tanstnot lap,

spoken any thyng darkly finee the begynnyng: From the tyme that this thyng begpuneth Jam there: Wherefore the Lode God and his spirite hath sent me. 7 Sarl» orde God thy redeemer, the holy one of Israel: Jam the Lorde thy God which teache thee
* mofitable thynges, and leade thee the wap that thou shouldest go.

18 Othat thou hadst regarded my com-

maundenientes, then had chy wealthynesse ben as the water streame, and thy ryghteoulnesse as the waues flowyng in the sea: t

19: Thy seede alfo had ben ipke as the

fande in the (ca, and the kruite of thy body lyke the grauell stones therol: His natne shoulde not be rooted out, nor destroped befoze me.

Esai. xli. a ace b.

xii. xu. b.

ake t

porver agatnit 1

Rom. vii. B. i Tim. b.

Tit ii. b.

Deu. xxviii.

20 G away from Babylon, flee from feen the Chaldees, withamery voyte speake E.

Jacob.
21 They suffred no

of this, declare it abrode, and go foorth into the ende of the worde fay: The
Borde hath redeemed his seruaunt

thirst, he led them

the wüͤdernelse, and caused the
* 5 Waters

The

out of the rocke: he claue the rocke ander and the water gutted out.

Exo. xvii b.
Num. xx. b.

prophecie
. ͤ ⁵—vnœQ . ae *
Waters toflowe out vnto them from 22 As for the vngodlp,

thep | peace, faith the Lode, Dee haut no kahüc

¢ The. xlix. Chapter.
6 chride wall gather together all nations be they neuer so karre o.

people from farre:
The Lod Hath called mi from my birth, and made mention of my

Fsai lic. 2
Eph. vr c.

me in his quiner as a good arrowe,

3 And sayde vnto me: Thou art my ser-
7 Israel, J wyll be Honoured in thee.

4 Then J aunswered: J haue lot my labour, J haue {pent my strength in payne: Meuerthelesse, J wyll commit my cause and my worke vnto the Lorde my God. a

5 And nove {aids the Lorde, even he that fashioned me from my mothers wombe to be his seruaunt, that J may bryng Jatob agapne vnto hym, albeit
Plcael wyll not be gathered vnto hyn agayne, pet in Gods fight shall J be glorious, my God shalbe uty strength.

6 And he sapde: It is but a small thyng that thou art my seruaunt to fet vp the

oh. x vii. b.

kiuredes of Jacob, and to restore the

Flat lib. Destruction of Israel: Foz J bane

bee. made theethelpghtof the gentlles, that
XC.

of the wonde.

W 7 Moreouer, thus salth the Lorde the redeemer and holy one of Ilrael, conteruyng the abhorred ¢ difpifed among

the gentiles, the seruaunt of them that

beare rule, kynges and princes shall {ee and arise, and worchip becaufe of the
Lode that is faythfuil, and betause of
5 holy one of Israel that hath chofen

thec. a iCorvia. 8 And thus laith the Lorde: In the
3 tyme accepted hane J hearde thee, and
‚ in the day of saluation haue J helped thee: J wyll preserue thee, and make thee to be the attonement of the people, that thou mapest helpe vp the earth
Againe, and possesse againe the desolate

Flal.xlü. 2.

[ eE Illes hearken vnto ety me, and take heede pe

name from my mo-

thou mayest be my health vnto the ende

— 5 N 87
9 That thon mapest fay vnto the py: 2.4 soners, go foorth, and to them thie 175 in darkuesle, come into the lpght: they shall feede thee in the bye Wapes, and get their pasture in all hype places. lo They Hall neither hunger nor thirst, . heate nor sunne Mati not hurt them: fa ?: he that fauoureth them shall leade them, and geue them drynke of the
Well sprynges. (Wes #: . n J wyll make wapes vpon all my mountapnes, and niz footpathes shalbe

exalted, )

11 And beholde, these Mall come from farre, lo, some from the north and welt, some from the lande of Sints ( which is in the south. =~

133 Keiopte pe heauens, and fing prayses Fb thou earth, talke of top pe hylles: fo
God hath comforted his people, € wyll haue mercie vpon his that be in trouble.

14 But Ston fapde: God hath forlaken 9, me, and my Lorde Hath forgotten me.

15 Will a woman forget her owne infant, and not pitie the lonne of her olvne wombe: And though they do forget, vet wyll J not forget thee. 4

16 Beholde, J haue written thee vp bpon iy handes, thy walles are euer in my syght.

17 They make haste who buildeth thee vp agaiue:as for those that onerthrolwe thee and make thee walte, they shall depart from thee. t

13. "Life vp thine eyes and loke abou thee , all these gather them together and tome to theẽ: As truely as J sa faith the Lorde, thou shalt put n bpon thee as an apparell, and 9e them to thee as a bilde doth en, 4

1 Ag for thy lande that pech deloleh, wasted, and destroyed, tt ae nd rowe for them that thai dwell in f 5 they that woulde Denoure thee, th

albe farre away.

20 Then thy chüdren whom the woe

{hall being foorth, Chall fay in thine ee
This place is to narowe, geue P that I map haue roome. A Then

Gen. xv.
Fsai. XI. A

(halt thou thinke by thy felfe, uo bach begotten me thele, seeyng B aun barren and alone, q captiue and an guttalt: and who Hath noriched them pp for me: J am desolate and alone, but from whente come thele ¢
2 And therfore thus faith the Lorde
4 God: Beholde, J wyll stretch out my hande bnto the gentiles, and let bp my token to the people, they chall bryng

Dal

r Moulders, )

23 70 nge shalbe thy nursyng fr
0 ripe: They shall fall before thee with their faces flat vpon the earth, fick vp the dust of thy feete: that thou

of Esal.

thee thy sonnes in their lappes, and cacy thy daughters vnto thee vpon

and queenes shalbe thy nurspyng

mapest knowe Howe that I am the

XCIIII.

Lorde, and that who fo putteth their Romixd.

trust in me shau not be confounded,
247 one 177 b da taken from the
7 albfull pr he taker - 7 rat prisloner from
25 But thus faith the Lorde: The prisoners shalbe taken from the 5
., the spoyle shalde recouered from the vlolent.for I wyll mayntepne thy caule agapnst thine aduersaries, and J Wyll saue thy sonnes. “ll
26 And J wyll feede thine enemies with
(hetrolbne fleshe, c make them drunken
With their owne blood, as with lweete wine: And all fleshe Mall knowe O
Jatob that Panrthe Torde thy faut our, thy noble redeemer.

The. L. Chapter.

1 Che Jewes are reproued, and allo called.

Hus saith the Lowe:
AGG 5) A] *Davere is the bul of
1 0 OX | pour niothers deuorte-

. 5 ment whom J lent e awape oz who is the

E Mpsurer to whom J

— folde poz Beholde,

Save ve lbe, and be-

tause of pour tranlgreslion is pour mo-

therfopfaken, .
2 Jor Why woulde no man receaue me when Jcanie? and when FH called, no

fhortencd that it myght not helpe- oz haue J not power to deltuer- lo, at a worde J drynke vp the lea, x of water fluddes J mate drpe lande: fo that foe want of water the filhe torrupt and dye for thirste. ö

As for heauen F clothe it with darknelle and put as it wert a sacke vponit.
„ 7% The Lowe God bath geuen me a dl learned tongue, fo that J tan aint them that are troubled, ‘yea
Me in due sealon:he wakeneth mine ae bp betymes in the mornyng, beinte eae ce
( ure, that I m L
$f As ‘hooting san *
E Lorde God hath opened myne fale, and J haue not gapnelapde ner

man gaue me aunlwere- Is my hande

withdrawen my selfe.

6 Wut J offred inp backe bnto the smiters, and my cheekes to the mppers: turned not my fate from chame and spittinges. *

7 And the Lode God shall helpe me, therfore Mall I not be conkounded: J haue therfore hardened my face lyke a flint stone, fo2 Jain fare that JJ chall not tome to conkusion.

3 Pe is at hande that instifieth me, who wyll then go with me to lawe- Wet vs stande together, pf there be any that will realon with mez let hym tome here foorth to me.

Mat. æxvi. g

Luk. xx.c.

Psal. Iv. a.

Heb xiũ. a. 1

9 . Weholde the Lode God wyll helpe gen n

me, what is he the that tan tondempne

me: lo, they all Chall ware olde lyke a prt ci.s.

cloth, the moth shall eate them vp.

jo Therfore who so feareth the Lorde among pou, let hym heare the vopee of his seruaunt: Who so walketh in darknesse and no lyght shyneth vpon hym, let hym put bis tru in the name of the
Lorde, and holde hym by his God.

u But take heede, pe all kindle a fire,

and stirre bp the toales: walke on in the glisteryng of your owne fire, and in the coales that ye haue kindled: This cone meth vnto pou from my bande amet) that pe shall sleepe in sorolbt.

The

ii. Pet. iii. b.

rOpheclie

The lj. Chapter:

1 Contolation and comłort is promiled vnto the fapthkull.

al i Earken vnto me pe
8 that holde of ryghteg ousnesse, and pe that
= seeke the Lorde: take
Ah beede to p stone wherout ye are hewen, and
3 to the graue wherout pe are digged. a
Genxxia. 2 Gonlider Abrahani pour father, and
Semi. Sara that bare vou, how that? I called

treased hym.

3 Therkore Hall the Lorde comfort
Sion, and repapze all her decay, mahkyng her delert as a paradise, and her wildernesse as the garden of the
Lowe: Mirth and top shalbe founde there, thankelgeuyng and the vopte of

prapse.

4 Haue respect vnto me then O my people both 2170 t lowe, and lay thine care vnto me: *foz a lawe and an ordinaunce shall go foorth fro me, to lyghten the gentiles.

5 It is harde by that my health and iny

Flai. ia.

rpghteousuesse hall go foorth, and the

people shalbe ordered with mine arme: the tlandes (that is the gentiles] shall hope in me, aud put their trust in myne arme.

6 Tyft vp pour eyes towarde heauen, and lokte vpon the earth beneath: *foz the heauens Nall vanishe away lpke smoke, and the carth shal Ware olde like
à garment, and thep that dwell therein shall pericht in pe maner: Wut my faluation (hall endure for euer, and my ryghteoulnesle (hall not teasle.

Plal. cn. d.
Mat. 24. c.
N. Pet. ait.

Ptarken vnto me ye that haue knowledge in ryghteoulnesse, thou people

lere. ,., that bearest my lawe in thyne heart: e *feare not the reuilynges of men, be not

afrapde of their blasphenues.

8 *Foz wormes and niothes chan eate them vp lyke cloth aud wooll: but my ryghteousnesse hall endure fo? euer, and my sauyng healch krom generation to generation.

9 wake vp, wake vp, and be strong O thou arme of the Lorde, wake vp, ipke une past, euer, and sinte the world

egan.

Ebd. 10 Art not thou the same arme that hatt

Exo ute. Wounded the proude, and heilen the

Psal. ci. b.

hym alone, and blelled hym, and en-

dragon in peeces: Art not thou ö fame which halt dryed bo de gone, tat the delten een

. „ UI elluered! : though a nyght go

u Therkore the redeemed of the Lorde
{hall turne agapne, æ come with toy bn: to Dion, “continual toy shalbe on their
2 ee gladnesse shalbe

m, and sorowe and w flee from them. o hat

n Bea J, (euen! J am he that in att ic, thynges geueth you confolation: What art thou then that fearest a mortall man c the chide of man, which goeth ,,. away as doth the flourc: 2 0

13 And forgettest the Lorde that made thee, that spread out the heauens, and layde the foundation of the earth: but thou art euer afrapde for the spght of thyne oppressour, which is redy to do harme: where is the Wath of the op: pressour:

14. The exile maketh haste to be looked, ¢ that he dye not in prison, aud that his

bread fayle hym not.

15 Jamthe Tod thy God that deuide Meviis the sea, c his waues chall rage, whole r name is the Lorde of hoastes.

16 J haue put my wordes in thy mouth, and haue Defended thee in the shadowe of my hande, that J may plant the heauens, c lay the foundation of the carth, and lay vnto Sion: thouart my people.

17 Awake, awake, and stande vp O Hie tulalem, thou that from the hande ol 11 the Lorde halt drunken out the cup ok 1. his wrath, thou that hast supped of and fucked out the lumbryng cuppe to the bottome.

18 #02 among all the sonnes whom he hath begotten, there is not one pe may holde it vp, and not one to leade by the hande ok all the lonnes that he hath norished. 4

10, Voth thele thinges are happened SY to thee, but Who is sorp fort: pea 4 ftruction, Wastyng, hunger, and sworde, but who wyll comfort thee- the

20 Dy sonnes lpe conikortlesse 115 head of euery streete like a tak? et the

and are full of the terrible wrath 35

TLorde, and puntchnient of thy 115 and
And therkore thou mera nen

i. Edi

i. Pet. id.

fui $94

of Efai.

XCV.

foorth thou shalt neuer drinke it moze:
23 But J wil put it into their hande that

Se

this: N . b us laith the Lorde, thy Lorde and trouble thee, which haue spoken tot
1 1 the dekendour of his people: Be- —foule, Stoupe vowne, that we may 9 aloe, J wyll take the lumbzyng cup — ouer thee, make thy body euen with the gut ok his hande, euen the cup with the grounde, and as the streete to go vpon. naggesofmp wrath, thatfeombentes ea
* ama! ~-@Thes lij. Chapter. „. 0 vdieo “J

Aon chyne honest rap:
Hsment O. Pterulglem, thou holy cities: ‘for

there shall no vncirne person tome sya fate n a

the dust, avife and

— in

uy mame ener styll th the Lordde.
But that my peopte may knowe my name, I ny lelfe w̃
3, dap Beholde here am J.

Bi, howe beautifull are the emb
Ute dapmeth peate- that bryngeth the good
Hundre. and preacheth health, and bbuto Sion, Thy God ls the kyng.

the keete of affadour that bryngeth the

Nut

fkrom this tynie foozth

vil fpeake in that

from the mountayne and pro-

he 1, cae fyi :

ees

le, he hath deliuered

seene the sauyng health.

of our God.

n Awap, away, get vou out from hente, E Conia

and touche no vncleaue thong: Go out

from among such, and be cleane that

beare the vessell of the Lorde.
12 For pe shall not estape by runnyng, nor by fleeyng away: but 'the Lode hall Exo.xiiid, go bekore pou, and the God of Jlcael
(hall gather pon together. *
13 Beholde np seruaunt sha peroussp, therfore Mat he be magnitied eraited and greatly honoured.
14 Tpke as the multitude (hall wonder vpon hym, becaule his face shalbe fo defournied ahd not as mans face, his beautie like no man: Ffir
15 Enen lo shall the multitude ofthe gen- Kom ye. tiles speake of him, and kynges Mall
(hut their mouthes before hym: for they haue leene that which was not tolde to thein, and haue vnderstande that wherot they had not hearde.

Ideale prol- nne ts
_ exiled Gods
5 seruaunt fox his office fake, which heers ercised in the tyme of bis abafpng hym felfe in the kleshe.

Fla, li. c.

T)hbe. liij. Chapter.

e propherjerh euident
Nit who hath * geuen tredente vnto our e, Preaching-or to whom
NVasts the arme of the
Torde knowen-
. een a Oe the Torde like as
Abdiauuche, and as a voote in a dope

ly of the pallion of our fauiour Fetus Christe.

grounde, he bath neither beautte no:

fauour: when we loke vpon hynz there Eil

1 1 kairenesse, we shall haue no

lust vnto lyn.
Me is witpileD and abhorred ok men, pony,

he is such a man as bath good expe- f

rience of lorowes and infirmities : We

haue reckened hym lo vile, that we bpp

our faces from hon.
Matwiib. 4, Howbeit, he only Hath taken on him e our infirmitie, and borne our papnes:
Bet we dyd iudge hymas though he were plagued, and cast downe of God.
5 *noberas he Cnotwithstandyng) was wounded for our offences, and (mitten
4 foz our wickednesle: for the payne of
| our punichment was lapde vpon hym, and with his stripes are we healed.
As for vs we are all gone astray lyke shetpe, euery one hath turned his owne
Way: but the Lord hath throwen vpon hum all our finnes. ee cd
He {uffered violence, and was evyil: intreated, and dyd not open his mouth:
* Ie shalbe led as a sheepe to be slapne, pet (hall he be as styll as a lambe before the shearer, aud not open his mouth.

Cr. de.

Psal. no. g. 6

lere. xi. d.
Mat. 27. b.
Add. viu. d.
II. Cor. v. c.

he taken, and his generation who can

coo oo Declares for he Was cut of from the grounde of the lyupng, which punilh-

ment dyd go vpon hym foz the trans-

grelsion of my people. eM, 4

The ih. Chapter.

Ofthe great dominion of Christe. The indignation of Gov endureth but a hort fpace, but his mercie iseuerlattpng, .

Gala. vii. d.

e glad nowe* thon
Luk. xiii.

reiopte, syng, and be
3\mery thou that art not with chuͤde: kor the de-
8 solate hath mo child

. then the marped wyfe saith the Lorde.

2 Make thy tent wyder, and [preade
Out the hanginges ok thine Habitation:
{pave not, lay foorth thy wardes, and make fast thy stakes : f

3 Foz thou Chait be multiplied on the ryght syde and ou the left, and thy seede
(hall haue the gentitesin pollession, and
Dwell in the delolate cities.

4 Feare not, for thou halt not be confounded: be not ashamed, for thou shait

) not come to confusion: Bea thou shalt forget the shame of thy youth and halt not remember the dishonour of thy widowhead.

5 Pon he that made thee halve thy becln, Tode and husbande (whole name is bra, the Lord of hoastes) and thy redeemer

halbe eueuthe holy one of Jlrael, the
Torde of the whole worlde.

5 | ; The pro hecie p 9 His graue was geuen hym w

g From the prison and tudgement was

baren that bearest not,

ctondempned, and with the rene ae Mat yo

at his death, *Wheras he did neuer bia. lence nor vnright, neither Bath there Werk ben any dilteptkuinelle in his mouth. lo Het hach it pleated the Lord to limite bpm With infirmitte, that when head rn miade his soule an ofkeryng forfinne, he
. beat olche Lend hel pine une deute of the Lorde hall prosper ; pant, g Hall prolper in his
11 Olk the trauaple and labour of hi foute chan he lee chefructe belt, 8
My righteous seruaunt Hail with his done knowledge iustifie the multitude, forhe: shall beare their sinnes.
12 Therkoze wyll J geue hym among the great ones his part, and he shall deuide the spoyle with the mightte, becaule he geueth ouer his soule to death, and is teckencd among the tranlgrel ,,. fours: which neuerthelesle hath taken Lal away the sinnes of the multitude, and made intercession for the nuldoers.

6 FJor the Tode hath called thee beyng as adesolate sozowkull woman, and as apoung wyfe that was forlaken faith. thy God.

5 »Alitle while haue J kozsaken thee: 8

but With great mercikulnesse (Mall E Wee take thee bp vnto nie.

3 When F was angry H bya my face

front thee foz a litle season: but through

euerlastyng goodnesse haue J pardo? ned thee faith the Lorde thy kedbemen
And this is vnto me as the water Ol Cech

Noc: for like as J haue fworne that F

woll not beyng the water of Hoca ,

moze bpon the worde: o haue J ids

fore that J wyll neuer be angry

with thee, nor reproue thee. 1

lo

10 The mountapnes chall rem, the hylles hall fall downe: but ied uyng kyndnelle (hall not mou, 5 5 bonde of my peace shall not fall do fal fromitice,faith the Lorde thy mcr! louer. |

n Webholve,thou poore, bexed z dilpied, eri
F wyll make thy walles of ftones,¢ thy foundation of
12. Thy Windowes of Chyital,

Of Ef l.

fine cleave stone, and all thy borders f reafaunt tones.
„ „ *Epy childzen (halbe all taught of pie God, and J wyll geue thee plenteoulfpeace. * :
105 kyghieoulnelle shalt thou be rounded, be karrt fromoppression: fo which tt her 10 hinderaunte, for it shall not je nye thee.
49 whole gathereth together Lagaynst thee, doch it) Without mie, and who fo within the doth ioyne together against

hou needest not be afrapde,

thee, hall surelp fall.
16 Beholde, IJ make the smith that blo-

eth the toales in the fire, ¢ he maketh

a Weapon after his handy worke: J make alto the waster to destroy.
17 But all the weapons that are made a-

XCVI.

gainst chee chall not prolper: and as for u r all tongues that shal resist ther in iudge- Ack. nu.

ment, thou thalt ouertome them, and

tondempne them: This is the heritage

of the Lordes seruauntes, and their

e commeth of me faith the orde.

The lv. Chapter.

An erhortation and comfort to t

of the worde of God.

Ome to the waters all ye that be thirstie, and pe that haue no monep, come, bye, that pe map haue to eate:
Come, bye Wine and mplle without any money or money Worth.
2 wwherfore do ye lay out any money fog the thyng that feedeth not, and spende

cog i
Az
N

as

a labour about the thyng that latil-

ict) you not: aut hearken rather vnto

mt, aud pe shal cate of the best, and pour foule hall haue her plealure in plentedusnesse.

Encline your eares and conte vnto me,

. fake heede 3 lap] and pour soule shall
51 11 ee niake an bene
{ l 7 a sof Dau, h vou, euen the fire mer eholde, J gaue hym kor a witnesse along the an for à printe t᷑ a teacher bute the people.

5 Lo,thou chalt tan an vnunowen peo-
155 aud a people that had no knowae of thee shall runne vnto thee, bebal C OF the Lorde thy God and the ihe one of Ilrael Which glorikieth

t ocke the Lore whyle! ; ple he map be ae aud tall vpon hym whyle 15 is

a Let the vngodlp man forlakke his

he people, 9 The fruite and prolite

owne wapes, and the vnrighteous his owue imaginations, and turne agayne vnto the Lorde, fo shall he be mercifull

vnto hym: and to our God, *fo2 he is Pat. cn.

very redy to forgeue.

8 Jos thus laith p Lord: My thoughtes

are not pour thoughtes, € pour Wapes are not my wapes.

9 Wut as farre às the heauens are hyper

then the cart): fo farre do my wapes

exceede pours, x mpthoughtes pours.
And lyke as the rayne and snowe commeth downe from heauen, and returneth not thyther agayne, but watereth the earth, maketh it fruitfull and greene, that it may gene torne vnto the lower, and bread to hym that cateth:

11 So the worde allo that tommeth out of my mouth shall not turne agapne vopde vnto me, but shall acconplishe my wyll, and prosper in the thing wherto J fende it.

12 And so shall pe go foorth With ioy, and be led witch peace: The mountapnes and hylles Chall fpng with you for toy, and all the trees of the fielde (hal tlappe their handes. .

B Yor thornes, there (hall growe Firre trees, and the Myrre tree in the steede of bryers: And this shalbe done to the prayle of the Lode, and fo? an cuersastyng token that fhall not be taken away.

he

„i. xv. d.

W

Deut. 32. a“

b.

Deu. xx iii.

Sapi il. b.

lohn. c

Yoh. viu. c.

Mut xü. d.

The prophecie

The.Ivj. CHp ter.

An erhortation to iudgement and rightcoutnefic, and tothe f ivituall hepyng of the Sabbath. 10 Agaynst sheepheardes that deuour their kloche.

Hus laith the Lode,
Nepe cquitic, and do right: for my faupng
5 8 health shal tome (hort pe, and my righteoul? a9 9 neffe shalbe opened.
Wlessed is the man that doth this, and the mans childe

Which keepeth the fame: He that ta-

keth heede that he vnhalowe not the
Sabbath (that is he that krepeth him felfe that he do no eil. 8
Then shall not the straunger whiche tleaueth to the Lorde, say, Alas the

Lowe hath shut me cleane out from

his people: SMeither chall the gelded

man sap, Lo J am a dzpe tree.

we

d .
8 . J |
The 0 Brion
* N. vy <a
! > é A. Sa |

Fo thustuchtbe Lorde vnto the gelocdtyatkepech mp Sabbath, (names ive} that holdeth greatly of the thyng that pleafetl me, and kepeth my coue-

naunt:

Tinto them wyll J gene in my Houfeholde and within my walles, a better heritage and name then yk they had ben called sonnes and daughters: Y wyll geue them an euerlastyng naue chat chall not perishe.

Agayne, the straungers that sticke to the Lorde to ferue hym, and to loue his naue, and to be his seruauntes,

and all they which kepe they that they vnhalowe dog the abe’ namely that they fulkyll my couenaunt:

7 Them will J bring to my holy moun- 8 tayne, æ make them toyfull in my house of prayer: their burnt offerynges and lacrifites Chalbe acceptey vpon myne aulter: *foz my house Halve called an house of prayer foz all people. ae,

8 Thus faith the Lorde God Which Mens. gathereth together the stattered or ye rael: wyll bryng pet an other congregation to hym.

9 Come all ve beastes of the fielde. that ve may deuoure all the beastes of the
Wood.

to * Foz his watchmen are all blynde, lad they haue altogether no bnderftanding, they are all dunibe dogges not beyng able to barke, they are sleepp, dugatfhe are they and le snortyng. .

1 They are shamelesse dogges that be neuer latisfied: The sheepheardes allo in like mauer haue no vnderstandyng, but cuery man turneth his owne wap, Id tuery one after his owne couetousnelle

1 Come (fay they) J wyll fetche Wine,
Sapial.

be drunken: and do to morowe lphe as to Day, pea and much moze.

J The. lvij. Chapter.

The good men are tater awap. z the wicked ones take plealure in idolatrie.

de ryghteous pe-
Leith eth and no man vez
; SSref-joaretD i in his heart: good godly people are

4 Wherm take ye pour pleafurez vpon

whom gape ye with pour mouth, and

bleare out your fonguc Are pe not chile

the godly receaue comfoze, the wicked doth perishe.

dien of tranfgreffion, and a feede of dil lumulatiou- n
5 'Be make pour fire vnder the Obl, Poe

stone. Lait.
6 Thy part chalbe with the stonp rockes Daw

by the river, pea enen thele shalbeth sy

part: Fo2 there thou halt porbecd mica 25

€ drynke offeryng vnto then: Should

„Thou hast made thy ved vpon bye mountapnes, thou wentelt bp inen ard there thou alt slayne facrifice halt bears

of Esai.

me, when thou Wentest vp

ain ae thy ben wider, and With

b thot idols Ha thou made a coue-

naunt, and jouedst their touches where

est them. ö

pan e straight to kinges with

> spi and diuers opnkmentes (that c

„ dhouhalk leut thy niellengers karre of, and yet act thou kalen into the pit.

„ Thouart werte kor the multitude of

chyne slbne wapes, yet apdelt thoune-

er there is no hope: Thou halt had

1 the lie that thy haͤndes Wrought, and

fhevefose thou art tarelesle.

u Fo: whom wyplt thou be abached 0²

eure, seing thou Halt broken typ pro-

une, and reniembrest not mie, neither

halt ine in thyne heart- Thiuliest thou

dat J allo wyll holde my peace as a foretime, that thon kearest ine not:

12 Bea verply J wyll declare thy goodnesse and thy Workes, but they shall not profite thee. .

z When thou eryest, let thy chosen heape

delluer thee: but the winde Mall blowe

then foorth, and vanitie chal take them all away: euerthelesle they that put their trust in me, shall inherite the land, and haue my Holy hill in possession. ne 14. And therefore thus he faith: make lapne, make playne, and clenfe the

eete, take vp the stumbling blockes

out of the wap of my people.

15 Forthus saith the hye and excellent, C euen he that dwelleth in euerlastingnesse, whole name is the holy one: 4 dwell Hye aboue and in the anctuarie, and with him also that is of a contrite and humble lpirite do J dwell, that Z may heale atronbled minde, and acon: trite heart.

16 Foz I hyde not euer, and am not wroth without ende: but the blasting goeth from me, and is included in the body, and J made the brrath.

17 Jam wroth with hym for his couetousnesse, I mite hym, J hide me and am angrie, and he turneth Hinilelfe and
19 thee bythe way of his owne

cart.

Psal. l. b.
Esai. Ixvi. 2.

Psal. cii. a.

Tere. in. c.

18 Jhaue seene his wayes, and J heale

Hy, Jleade him, and restore to hym comktort, and to thole that were sorie for

hym.

19 J make the fruttes of thankesgeuing, that he may fay, peace, peace,* vnto the that are farre ot, and to them that are nye fatth the Lorde, J mate hym whole. nn .

20 Wut the wicked ave lyke the raging fea that tan not rest, whole water fometh with the mire and grauell.

21 Elen fo the wicked haue no peace,

Luk. xv. a.

Epheii.c.

Efai.xleiid

The. lviij. Chapter.

Che Lorde (by the mouth of the prophete) reproueth the people For their fastinges.

2 Whiche were full of hypocritie.

i, F Vye“ nowe as loude ina, (| 8 N as thou tanst, leaue
Gee e | not of lift vp thy bopee
2 like a Crumpet, € shew
SA ell My people their offencae) 30 W ne of
1 tob their sinnes.
A weder seeke me dayly, and Wyll eoplecher Wayes, euen ag it were a fig bat DyD eight, and had not for” alten ae Hatutes of their God: they me toncerning right tudgement,

and wyll be nye vnto God.
3 “*nobercfore fast we (cap they) and Marhixd.'

thou scest it not- we put our Tues

to straitnesse, and thou regardest it not-

Weholde, when pe fast, pour lust re- Fr b.

mapneth Hill, for pe do no lesse violence

to your detters: lo, pe fast to strife and debate, and to smite with your fist without nerty: Nowe ve shall not fast

thus, that dur voyte might be hearde

aboue.
ROD 5 Thinke

Th

Zach. vil. a.
. a inan shoulde chasten hym selfe for a

dap: and to hang downe his head like a bulrushe, and to lye vpon the earth in an heerie cloth: Should that be called fasting or a day that pleaseththe Lord-

> 6 Doth not this fatting rather pleate-
Datxys ine, That thou *lofle the wicked bands, that thou take of the oner heaute bur-

thens, that thou let the oppressed go free, and breale all maner of poke:
W 7 To deale thy bread to the hungrle, a and to bring the poze wandering home ked that thou couer Hpi, and hide not thy lelke from thy neighbour, and delpile not thyne owne fleshes
Lok xid. 3 Then Chall thy light breake foozth as the morning, and thy health flozithe right shortlp: righteousnesse Mall go

before thee, and the glorp of the Lorde

hall embrace thee.

*Thenifthou callest, the Lorde chall auns were chee, il thou tryest, he Chall fay here J am: pea it thou laped away from thee thy burthens, and holdelethy fingers, and teallest from vngracious talking:

Zach. vis: 10 If thou hast compalsion vpon the
Mathvb ~ Hhungrie, and rekreshest the troubled

Prou. xxl. b. 9

e prophecie
Think yethisfattpleateth me, that —foule: then hall thy light h

into thy houfes when thou seest the na-

the darknelle, and thy darkn be as the noone dap. arknelle that:

and latisfie the desire ol thyne heart in

the tyme of drought, and fill thy bones

With mary: Thou shalt be like a watred garden,“ and like the Waren ok water that neuer leaueth running.

12 Then the plates that haue euer ben waste, halbe builded okthee, there chalt thon lap à foundation for manp kin: redes: Thou shalt be called the mauer vp of the breache, and the buylder g: gapne ofthe way to dwell in.

3 Bea tf thou turne thy feete from the |

abbath, fo that thou do not the thing whiche plealeth thy selle in my holy dap, AND thou tall the plealaunt, holy, and glorious fabbath of the Lorde, and

that thon geue hym the honour , so that

thou do not after thyne owne imagma-

tion, neither seeke thyne owne wyll, nor

speake thyne owne wordes:

14. Then shalt thou haue thy pleatare in

the Lozde, and J wyll tarp thee hye abouc the earth, and feedethee lbith the heritage of Jatob thy father: for the

Lordes owne mouth hach fo promi-

sed.

J The. lix. Chapter,

Che Lorde is mightie to laue, and redie to heare our requestes. 12 our sinnes are the caufe why God heareth not vs, neither graunteth our requettes.

Eholde, 'the Lowes

A 1 oR hande is not fo shorte-

Esai. I. a.
Nume. 5c. a.

nesle.
4 Yo man regardeth righteoulnesle,
1 and no man iudgech truely: euery man

hopeth in vapne things, and magimnelh deceipt, conceaueth weerinesse, aud bringeth foorth euill.

5 They breede cockatrice egges, and

teth of their egges, dyeth: but il 10

treade bpon them, there tommeth DP

a serpent. a

6 Their Webbe maketh no col, 7 they may not touer them wich the 5 of bours: their deedes are the pere er and the worke of rob

ntheir handes.

„ Their keete runne to cuyll, auer make hafte to shed innocent blos it counlels are wicked countcls, De

and deltruttion are in their War, 1

The Lode shall euer be thy gupde.

8 Fail

weaue the spiders webbe, Who so e

Lohn ib

and lex 4

Tob.xvd. plil vb

Prowl: plal d.

aud xi

Romi

peate they know not,

3 Ba te omnes is 110 att theit

10 are lo crooked, that wholocuer veth therein knoweth of no peace. ;
Aud this is the causc that e quitie ts fo

? fire krom bs, aud that righteoulnetie connneth not nic vs: We lobe fozlight,

, poitis darknesle: for the morning thine,

ee, we walke in the Darke.

„e grope lyke the blinde vpon the

„pal, we grope euen as one that Hath none eyes, We stumble at the noone pay as though it were tolbarde night, inthe falling places, Ipke men that are halfe dead.

n We roare all like beares, and mourne friltitke doues: we looke foz equitie, but there is none: for health, but it is farre from vs.

u For our offentes are many befoze thee,and our sinnes testifie against vs: yealbe mult eonkesse that we offende, and knowledge that we do amisle,

3 (Namely) transgresse and dissemble againt the Lorde, and fall away from our God, dling presumpteous and trayterous imaginations, and casting falle matters in our heartes.

q+ And therefore is equitte gone aside,

and righteousnesle staͤndeth karre ok,
'ttueth is fallen downe in the streete, and the thing that is playne aud open, may not be shewed.

ly Pathe trueth is taken away, and he that reframeth hym selke from eupll, mutt be spoyled: When the Lorde lawe

of Efai.

this it displealed hym fore that there was no equitie.

1s Pe sawe also that there was no man righteous, and he wonbred that there was no manto helpe hym: wherefore he helde hym by his owne power, and he sustayned hym by his owne righte-
＋ ea ‘anteoulttl

17 He put righteousnesse vpon hym for Ephevis. a brest plate, he fet the helniet ar Dealt — vpon his head: He put on Wrath in the steade of clothing, and toke lelousie about him for a tlobe. ö

18 Euen as when a man goeth foorth
Weathfullp to retonipenee his enemies, and to be auenged of his aduerfaries, he wyll recompence and rewarde the
Jlandes. g

19 Ley shall feare the name of the
Lorde from the riling of the sunne, and his maiestie vnto the going downe of the lame, for he shall tame as a violent water streame which the winde of the
Lorde hath moued.

20 ut puto Sion there shall come a re- Romxia. deemer, and vnto them in Jacob that P a.

turne from wickednelle, faith the Lord,

21 J Wyll make this couenaunt with them faith the Lord:) My spirite that ls bpot thee, and the wordes whiche J haue put in thy mouth, chall neuer go out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy childers chyldren, from this time foorth foz euermore, Worlde without ende, saith the Lorde.

The. Ix. Chapter.

14 consolation and contort to hierutalem. ; Che Churche tg gathered toe ther among the gentiles by preaching ofthe golpell, 16 and aboundeth w

all good thinges,

„ rutalem) for thy light conmmeth, and the glorie of the Lord is risen moron thee, 1 o: lo, whple the
7 5 € cloude couereth the earth thee li erable, the Lorde that shewe ther. bt, AND his glory halbe feene in

The gentites shall tome to thy light,

faa

th

c kinges to the brightnesle that spring-

eth foorth bpon thee, Rise.
4. “Lift vp thyne eyes, and loke rounde G

about thee: all these gather them

selues and come to thee, thy sonnes shall

come vnto thee from farre, and thy

daughters shall gather them selues to

thee on enery fide.
5 Then thou shalt see this and be glori-

ons, thou shalt maruayle exceedingly,

and thyne heart shalbe opened: when

the aboundaunce of the sea shalbe con-

N (ij) uerted

Pfal.lxxii.d

Nach üb.

. O.

uerted vnto thee that is) When the riches of the gentiles shall tome vnto

thee.

6 he multitude of camets shall couer thee, the dromedarles of Madian and
Epha: all they of Saba Mall come,

bringing gold and incenfe, and chewing the peayle of the Lorde.
All the cattell of Cedar chalbe gathe-

88 „red puto thee, the rammes of Habai-

Hebr. xili. b.

Esal. Iii. d.

Apoc.xxid

oth han serue thee to be offred acceptabite vpon mine aulter, and the boule of my glozy wyll J garnishe. N

3 But what are thele that flee here like the cloudes, and as the doues fleing to their windowes-

9 Che Illes allo shall wapte for me, and speciallp the chippes of Lharlis, that they may bryng thy fonnes from karre, and their suluer and their golde with them, vnto the nameok the Lorde

thy God, vnto the holy one of Jsrael

that hath glorisied thee.

Straungers Mall buylde vp thy walles, and their kynges Hall do thee fernice: for whe J was angrie, ZF {mote
0 and of my mercy J pardoned thee,

11 Thy gates shall stande open still both dap and nig and neuer be shut, that the hoast o the gentiles may tonie, and oat their kynges may be bought bnto thee.

12 Forcuery people and kingdome that serueth not jee, shall perishe, and be destroped With biter destruction.

13 The glop of Libanus (hail come vnto thee, the Firre trees; Woxes, and Cedars together, to garnishe the place of mp sanctuarie: fo: J wyll gloafic the plate of my feete.

14 Moreouer, those shall tome kneeling vnto thee that haue bered thee, and all

The prophecie

they that despised thee chall far at thy foote: Thou shalt be ale te cite of the Lorde, Sion (the citiejof ti holy mi ae ve

15 Wecaule thou hast ben forsak hated, fo that no man went dae oe 0 c n

; u ou pofterities, e

16 Thau chalt sucke the miltze ok the gentiles, and kinges breastes shall feede thee: and thou halt knowe that I the
Torde am thy sauiour and redecmer he e 15 of sa ;

17 For brasse, wyll J gene thee go and fo2 tron, filuer: kor 595 alt and for stones iron: J wyllturne thyne oppzeflion into peace, and thyne exactious into righteousnelle.

18 Uiolente and rovberie shall neuer be hearde of in thy lande, neither harme and destruttion within thp borders: thy walles shalbe called health, and thy gates the prayse of God.

19 The sunne shall neuer be thy day Apoenia

light, and the light of the moone shall neuer thine vnto thee: but the Lorde
Hin selfe shalbe thyne euerlasting light, and thy God shalbe thy glorp.

20 Typ sunne Hall neuer go done, and thy mooue shall not be hid: for the
Bove hym selfe Thalbe thyne euerlafing light, and thy sorowfull dapes shalbe ended.

21 Thy people shalbe all righteous and possesse the lande euer, the floure of my planting,the worke of np hands Wherof J wpyll reiopce.

22 Lise paungest and least Mall grows into a chonlande, and the simplest into a strong people: FJ the Lorde hall holt
Wve biptig this thing to palle in his

pnie.

The. j. Chapter.
1 He prophesieth that Christe chalbe annoynted and fent to preache.

coe ! spirite of the Lord

Lom Hath annopnted me, and lent me to

780 preache good tidinges

vuto the poore, that

s vpon me: ko: the

— — ncht binde vp the
Wounded heartes, that J might breache deliuerauncc to the taptiue, and

open the prison to thé that are bounde
That J might declare the accepta pere okthe Lorde, and the dap o (abt bengeaunee of our God: that Jue comfort all them that are in beau 5
3 That J might geue vnto chem. 2 mourne in Sion, that I might ge full sayjbeautie in steede of allhes, 11 19 opntment foz sighing, pleasaun mene

€

EG; Xlxg.

D

Apo Ni

a called trees of righteousnelle,

aplanting of the Lorde for hym to te

sopte in. 2 ei.
(hall buylde the long rough bel, and let vp the olde defert: ey thall repapre the waste places, aud luche as haue ben boyoe throughout many generations.
Straungers {halt stande and feede gur cattell, and the auauntes Walbe pour plowmen and dreslers of pour

6 uu peshalbe named the priestes of
„ dhe Londe, and men chall call pou the
„ ftruauntes of dur God: pe Malt eniop the goodes or the gentiles, and triumph in their substaunte.
"For pour great reproole vou thal haue doudie toy, and for Thame hail they haue top of their portion : for they shall haue double pollellion in their lande, and euerlalting toy shalbe with them.

ot Fal.

an heauie minde, that they 8 For the Lorde whiche loue right 2

and hate robberie (though it were offered me) shall make their Workes full of favthfulnesse, and mate an euerlasting couenaunt with them.

Their seede also and their generation shalbe knowen among the gentiles, and among the people: all they that see them, chall knowe that they are the hye blessed seede of the Lorde.

10 And therekore J am toyfull in the Lauenb.
TLorde, and my foule reiopceth in God: Pl. 8.
For he hath put vpon me the garment RTC Mb.

ot saluation, and couered me with the mantic of righteousnesse: Meshal decke me lyke a bridegrome, and as a bride that hath her apparell vpon her.

1 Foz like as the ground bringeth foorth her fruite, and as the garden shooteth foorth seede: fo shall the Lorde God tause righteousnesse and praple to flootithe koorth befoze all the heathen.

The. Ixij. Chapter.

1B prophecie of the comming of Chrilte.

1 FO Sions fake wpll f 0 ANE 993 not holde my
1 tongue, and foz Pieruekalems fake J wyll not ceasse, vntill their righteousnesse breake

5 ——= foo2xth as the shining

tight, and their faluation as a burning lampe.

2 Then shall the gentiles fee thy righ-

tedulnesse, and all kynges thy glory:

0 un 19 95 babe md

* whithe the mouth of the Lorde

3 Thou shalt be a trowne in the hande ofthe Lorde, and a glorious garlande inthe hande of thy Gd.
4. Fromebistyme foorth thou shalt neer be called the forlalken, and thy lande
. io moze be called the wildernesse:
— shalt be called, My pleasure ther her, and thy lande shalbe called
7 ae Woman: for the Lorde lomating thy land halbe ioyned in

Na "
And iyke as a young man taketh a

6 J haue fet

virgin to mariage ,fo {hal thy sonnes be maried vnto thee: and as a bridegrome is glad of his bride, fo Hall thy God reiopce ouer thee, Oe a
Watchmes bpon thy
Walles O Hierufalem, which thatl net ther teasse day nor night to preache the
Lorde: and pe allo that remember the
Lorde, pe shall not kepe him tlose,
5 Hon lcaue to speake of him, until pie: B rulalem be set vp, and made the prayle ot the worlde. N 5
3 The Loade hath lworne by his right and and by his strong arne, that from ente foorth he wyll not gene thy cozne to be meate for thyne enemies, uor thy vine wherein thou hast laboured, to be drinke for the straungers.
But they that haue gathered in the corne, shall cate it, and geue thankes to the Lorde: and they that haue borne in the bine, hall danke it in the court ol my santtuarie. 8
10. Go pou, go pon thorowe the gates, make tleaue the Das 199 00 artes make playne, make pone? ch path,

Esai. 34. b.

II

it, and fet out a token kor the people.

Beholde, the Lorde proclaymeth vnto the endes of the Wolde, tell the daughter Sion, See thy sauiour com-

meth, beholde he baingeth his retrom-

The. lxiij. Chapter. |

Ol the redemption promiled to the people.

Alhat is he this

NY (¢

EAL thes from Wolrat Bets honou-
„ srcabwe arraped,

' and conimet) in

—mightyly with

his power: J ain he that teacheth righ-

teousnesse, and am or power to helpe.

2 Wherefore then is thy clothing red,

and thy rapment like his that treadeth in the wine presse-

FY hauctroden the presse my felfe a-

tone, and of all people there is not one with me: Thus wyll J treade them downe in my wrath, and fee my feete vpon them in mypue indignation, and their blood shal be sprong vpon my clothes, and fo wyll J stapne all my rapment. *

4 *Foz the day of vengeaunee is aslig-

ned (rmy heart, and the vere when my

people shalbe delinered is tome.

5 Jloked about me, and there was no

rs

6 And thus wpll J treade Downe the

maͤnto chewe me any helpe, J marue pled that no man helde me vp: Then
Pbelde me by myne owne arme, and
Nip feruentnesle sustapned me. f

people m my wrach, and vathe them in my displeasuxe, and bpon the earth will

Pay their sttength.

B 7 J wpyll declare the goodnelle of the

Fxod. xv. a.
EHal. xil. a.

Exod. xiii. xm. d. 24 c.

Torde peñ and the prayle of the Lorde for all that he bath genen vs, for the

great good that he hath done for Ilra-

tL whiche he hach geuen them of his

‘pybnte fauour and acrozding to the multitude of Pistorting kindueffes,

3 For he sayde, These no doubt are my

people, and no shzinking chyldren: and

fo was he their fantour.

9 Jun their troubles, he was allo trou-

The prephecie path, and take away the stones out ok pence with ym, and his worke 90 be-

3 bym. —_ ;
12 Foz thepwhomthe Lorde denn f chalbe called the b holy r i for thee, thon halt be named the greare tye octupied, and not the forfaken citie.

ry

bled With them, and the angel went foorth from his prelente Delton them: of very loue and kindnelle that he had vnto them, he redeemed them, he hath borne them and caried them bp euer fince the Worlde began. N
Io But after they prouoked hym to
Wath and vexed his holp spirite, he was their enemie, and fought againk them hym selfe. >
1 Bet remembred Plrael the olde time, of Mopses and his people, saping: where is he that brought them from the water of the lea,“ with them that g feede his sheepe: Where is he thathath Pans geuen his holy spirite among theme
12 He led them by the right hande of
Moyses With his glorious arme, deulding the water before them, herby he gat him selle an euerlasting name. Wy
3 he led them in the deepe as an horle C is led in the playne, that they shoulde not stumble. f r
14 Asa tame beak goeth in the fielde, and the spirite of God geueth hymn rest: thus (O God) hak thou led thy 9 ple, to make thy felfe nn glorious na
Withall. 1
15 Toke downe then krom heauenand pe beholde from the dwelling place of thy fanetuarie and thy glorie: Pole 18 It that thy gelousie, thy strength, the mul titude of thy mercies, and thy lowing kindnesle wyll not be intreated of bee
16 Bet art thou“ dur father: lo: Abd la ham knoweth vs not, neither is | e adus
Acquainted With vs: but thon Lale art our father and redeemet, and hy

nanicts euerlasting. 121 N
Aenne 9 c

g
17 O Torde, wherefore} 5 out ok the wap- * wherefore ba feat hardened dur heartes that we 15 thee not? We at one with vs agapaen 8 thy seruauntes fake, and for the g ration of thpue heritage. 18 Thy

. 1 — — m

77 cople haue had but a litle i an by aetna in possession, fo.
112 enemies haue troden downe thy

poly place.

19 And we were thyne from the begin: ning, when thou wat not their Torde, for they haue not called vpon thy name.

The. Ixiiij. Chapter.

te (birder the perfor of the Jewes) be wapleth their exile and banichbee e Wan into is like a cloth defiled. f

That thou wouldest

ANNs) dleaue the heauens m

„under c come downe,

that the mountaines

might melt awap at thy presente:

2 — Linke as at an hotte fire, and (that the malttious might bople away) as the water doth vpon the fire: whereby thy name might be knowen among thyne enennes, and that the gentiles might tremble bekore thee.

3 When thou wroughtest wonderous straunge wozkes, We looked not foz them: thon cameft downe, and the hilles melted at thy presence.

4 For sinee the beginning of the worlde it hath not ben hearde 02 perteaued,

u “neither Hath any epe leene another
God belide thee, Whiche doest fo muche forthem that put their trust in thee.

Thon helpest hym that doth right with chearekulnesle, and them that thinke vpon thee in thy wapes: but lo, thou halt ben angrie, kor we offended, and haue ben euer in sinne, though the

b wWorlde hath tleaued to them, pet hall

u, We be saued. 5

6 We are allas an bueleane thing, and all our righteousnesse are as filthy ragges: we fal euerpchone as the leafe,

lor our sinnes cary vs away lpke the winde.

There is no man that calleth vpon M5 thy name that standeth vp to take hold by tice: therefore hidest thou thy fate from vs, and consumest vs, decause of dur sinnes. 5

8 Wut nowe, O Torde, thou father of durs, we are thy tlap, and thou art our potter, and we all are the worke of thy handes.

9 We not to sore displeased O TLord, and kepe not our offences to long in thy rez membraunte: but tonsider that we all are thy people.

Io The cities of thy sanctuarie tye waste,
Dionisa wildernesse, and Hierusalem a desert.

II Our hoh houle whiche is our pean: tie where our fathers prapled the, is bent vp: pea, all our tommodities and pleasures are wasted away.

Iz Dayle thou not be intreated O Lorde, forall this wylt thou holde thy peate, and scourge vs fo lore-

Rom ix. c.

Psa. lxxix. a
Iere. x. d.

Mich. iii. c.

: The. xv. Chapter.

Che reiecting of the Jewes . and the calling of the heather,

Mey leeke me, that hi-

therto haue not afked
A for ine, they finde me, that hitherto haue not i sought ine: J hiue saide, J am Vers, J of am here, Jam dunde
1 0 Mople that neuer called spon my

aon thus long haue J auer Holden
Out mine handes to an biet peo-

ple that go not the right wap, but after their owne imagination:

3 To a people that is euer defiyng me

to my face, they make their oblations in gardens, and their smoke bpon
*aulters of bricke.

4 They lurke among the groues, and lye in the dennes all night: they cate Tan swines fleshe, and vntleaue broth is in Teure. their vessels.

N wy

Deut. ini. a. and. x lil. b.

Exod. xx. d.

5 HF

5 Ffthouconunel nye them, they lay, touche me not, for J am holper then thou: All these men when Jamangryp, shalbe turned to smoke and fire that fail burne for euer.

6 Beholde, it is written bekore my kate, and shall not be forgotten, but recont

Mat. xx vi. d

b pented: ; J shall rewarde it them into
Ferch. d their bofome.
W 7 Imeane) pour mildeedes, and the

mildeedes ok pour fathers together

saith the Lord, which haue made their

smokes vpon the mountaines and blasphemed me vpon the hilles: therekore

Wyll IJ nieasure their olde Deedes into

their bolone agapne.

Rom ib. 8 Mopeouer, thus faith the Tord: Like as when newe wine is kounde in the clutter, and one faith, Tole it not, fo2 there is bielling therein: euen so wyll
FH do also for my seruauntes fakes, that
I wyll not destroy them all. a

9 Wut J will take a seede out of Jacob, and out ol Juda one, to take possession of my hill: My chosen shall possesse it,

and mp seruauntes shall dwell there.

to Saron shalbe a shecpefolde, and the valley of Achor Hall gene the falling for the cattell of my people that seeke after me.

n ut as for you, ve ave they that haue forsaken the Lorde, and forgotten my holy hyll: ve haue fet vp an aulter vnto
Jupiter, and geuen riche drinke offeringes vnto the planets:

12 Therfoze wyll J nuniber pou to the sworde, that pe shalbe destroped altogether: for that when J called, no man gaue ine aunlwere, When J lpake, ye hearkened not vnto me, but dyd wickednesse before mine eyes, and chole the

thinges that picafed nie not. 1

3 Therekore thus satth the Lod God:

Iii. Re. xix. e om. ix. c.

Tofue.vii.

Prou · i. c. lere. vii. b.

Beholde, mp seruauntes Mall cate, but

pe shall haue hunger: beholde, my seruauntes thal drinke, but pe Mall suffer thirst: beholde, my seruauntes shalbe merie, but pe Thalbe confounded:

14. Beholde, n seruauntes hall retopee for very quietnesse of heart: but pe that crye fo2 sorowe of heart, and tomplaine fo2 vexation of minde.

The prophecie

15 Hour name hall pe leaue f u my cholen: fox Goo the Ton € yall flay pon, and tall hi by a nae, ber mnuntes
16 Who so reiopteth vpon e a reiopte in the true God, pe 10 ee on fiveareth vpon earth, shall Iweare in bt he gotten and taken aie ht. a away outof
17 Fo lo, I Hall make a newe hall neuer be thought v keptinnundee. n, naß
18 But the Lobe faith] We glad and euermoze reiopte for the things that J chall do: To why beholde, J chall mane a
111 Hierulsalem, and his people ioy:
19 Dea, I my selfe will reioyte with hierusalem, and be glad with my people:
“and the vopte of Weeping and way- Arocss, ling Mall not be hearde in her from thencefoorth. 8 -
20 There (hail neither be chylde nor olde man that haue not their full dayes: but when the chylde commeth to an hundred peres olde it shal dye, and if he that is an hundred peres of age do wrong, he shalbe tursed. r 1
21 They shall buylde houles and dwell D in them, they (hall plant vincpardes Po and cate the fruite of them.
22 They thall not buylde and another poslesse, they shall not plant and another eate: but the life of my people mal’ Ge be like a tree, and mine elett (hall enioy lee styll the worke of their handes.
23 They (hall not labour in vapne, nor beget with trouble: for they are the Dye blelled seede of the Lorde, and their fruites with them.
24. And it chalbe, that or euer they call, J hail aunswere them, whyle they are petbut canting Howe to lpeake, J Mal
25 The woolfe and the lambe chatte Ef toether-and the llon Wall ente harr: the dullocke, bnt earth chalbe the ee Gent pentes meate: There shal no man 119 no? slax auother in al my poly hub, the Lozre.
N The

. Conic u. Cor 1

ii Pet g
Apo

God dwelleth not in temples made by mans hande. He dicpileth tacrikices done without mercie and kayth. 5 God comkorteth them that are troubled for his tate. 23 Among the christen the Sabbath is continuail,

pus faith the Lorde:
N id Ny Mf heauen is my seate,
4 at and the earth is my bh Aye 1

footstoole:v here shall nowe the houle stande that pe wyll builde vn-
= to me: And where shalbe the plate that J Wylt dwell in:
2 As for these thynges, my bande hath made them all, and they are all created yh Laith the Lozde: which of them Malt ams J then vegarde: Euen hym that is poore and of a lowly troubled spirite, and standeth in awe of np wordes.
3 Jo Who so slayeth an ore (for me, doth me so great dichonour] as he that killeth a man: He that killeth a sheepe for me
% unetcheth a dogge: He that bryngeth dn, memeate offerpnges, offereth swynes blood, who so maketh mea memozial of

AS

intense, prayleth the thyng that is vn-

ryght: Bet take they such wapes in
Hande, and their soule delpghteth in these abhominations. bit 4 Therfore wyll J allo haue pleasure in laughyng them to storne, x the thyng that they feare will I being vpon them: hi For when F called, no man gaue aun-
„ Nbeve, when J spake, they woulde not heare: but did wickednelle bekore mine eyes, and chose the thynges that dit pleated nie. N

5 ate the worde of God all ve that ere the thyng which he speaketh: bur brethren that hate vou and catt
15 out for my name fake, fay , The ode is heyndus agaynst vs: but ou

all see hym 1 contour in top, when they chalbe

, Then shalbe hearde a great noyse

ithe ritie and the temple, the vopce a e Lome, that wyll rewarde and aa lp enemies:

when a Wife bringeth foorth

Othe uud euer she fitter tbe payne

tah lrth g anguithe of the trauayle.

Doth euer heard or lawe such thinges: ance gvounde beare in one dap- 02

Tana fr pie bome all at once, as Sion

e bonnes, in chüde birth and bare her

a

Rand 9 4
„ For thus faith the Lorne: Am Jhe

that maketh other to beare, and beare not my selfe- Am not J he that beareth and maketh barren, faith thy Gonz

10 Reioyte with Hierulalem and be glad

with her all ye that loue her, be topfull Wr;

with her all ve that mourne for her.

n Fo; pe shall sucke comfort out or her

breastes, and be satisfied: Be shall tatte, and haue delpte in the beyghtnefle of her glorie.

12 For thus faith the Lorde:Beholde. J wyll let peace into her lpke a Water fludde, and the glory of the heathen like
à flowing streame: Then (hati pe sucke, ye shalbe borne vpon her sydes, and be topfull vpon her knees.

13 Jor lyke as a chylde is comforted of his mother: so shall I comfort yon, and pe shalbe comforted m Piernlalem.

14 And when pe see this, pour heart Hall ¢ reiopce, and pour bones (hall floriche pro lyke an hearbe: Thus shall the bande Fzechs7a.

ofthe Lorde be knowen among his seruauntes, and his indignation among his enemies.

15 Jop beholde the Lorde shall come with fire, and his charret shalbe lyke a whirle wynde:that he may recompence his bengeaunce in his Wrath, and his indignation with the flambe of fire.

16 For the Horde shall iudge all fleshe with the fire and with his lworde, and there shalbe a great number slapne of the Lorde.

17 Such as haue made them selues holy and cleane in the gardens, and thote that haue eaten lwines fleshe mice, and other abhominations, chalbe taken away together faith the Lorde.

18 For J do knowe their workes and thoughtes, and J wyll come to gather all people and tongues: then they tall come and fee my glorie.

19 Unto them shall JJ gene a token, and sende certayne of the that be deliuered among the genttles, into Cilicta, Affricg. and Lydia, where men can handle bowes, into Italie, and also Greene

lande: The Illes farce of that haue Blaise not Hearne (peake of me, and haue not 1

seene my glorie, Malt preache my prarse

among the ge 20 And

a The prop! ecie —
D2 And tall bayuig all your brethren for fatt stablished by me, faith the Lore: fp

an offeryng vnto the Lorde ont of all Hatt your seede e your name cong

the people, vpon horses, charettes, and 23 And it Mail come to pate, that ron horllitters, vpon mules and cartes, to moone to his moone, from Sabbath to

ö Hierusalem np holy hil {ath the Low: his Sabbath, ali fleshe chall come to

ipkeasthe chudren of Hlrael bryng the Worlhip before me, faith the Lorde,

offerpng incieane deflels to the boule 24. And they chall go fooztl and icke pp-

of the Torde. on the tarions of them that haue trance nin 21 And J shal take out certapne ofthem gresled agaynst me: for their wormes zun
1 Pet. n. h. for to be priestes and Leultes, saith the shall not dye, neither Mail their fire be 4

mata. Onde. quenched, and all flee Malt
22 Jor lpke as the newe Heaven and the then. e hall abhanre newe earth which J wyll make, (halbe 3
ö $ The ende of the booke of the prophete Esai.

skate

Ihe booke of the prophete leremie.

Uy Titec A 2 34 i Koo

5 — eee gr CTT Nr eee e N 0 eee
5 ye 5 * UM — N i il a

Seen a

rn
~ | ene,

BSS ~¥)

4 A’); 4 *
Ni ae . ai Ne
é

ary

— Yo same he
N

N.

4 Fite firft Chapter.

iche Cocke of geremie and in what tyme he prophyected, s Be exculeth him felfe and woulde refute the olftce of a prophete, becaute he is young and bnerpert, § Be is taught of the Lone and becommeth bolve, 11 God opes neth vnto bym, that the deltruction of the Jewes by the Babylonians isathande, i7 Jeremie is commaunded to speake the worde of God vnto the Je wes without feare,

ay! eee are the fermons dliah the sonne of Amon kyng o

0 5 . Uda in the. xiij. yere ol his raigne: 1

sok Helktah the puest, 3 And lo duryng vuto the tyme of ther 1

one of themthat dwelt akim the fonncof Josiah king ok. rae lie. v. at Anathoth inthe Land butyl the. r pere of Zedekiad 42 lande of Benlannn, sonne of Josiah kyng of Juda 5
When the Losde had ended, When Pterulalem Was kalten

Iete. xi a. kirst spoken with hym in the tyme of Neuen in the fifth moneth. 4 The

of leremic.

The worde of the Lorde spake thus

nie. “a
§ e IJ fashioned thee in thy mo-
. dthers ivonibe, Ydpd Buolwe thee: and

9} euer thou Walt bone, J lanttikied

thee, and ordeyned thee to be a prophete

othe people. N ait 6 pay sayde J: O Lorde God, J can

q cake, for J am pet but young.
7 oD the one aunlwered me thus:
5 Hay not lo, Jam to poung: 'kor thou shalt go to ali that J hall sende thee pita, and whatldeuer Jcommaunde hee, that hale thou lpeate.
Ve not akrayde of their fates: for J

am with thee to deliuer thee, faith the

ode.

7 9 er with that the Lorde stretched gut his hande and touched my mouth: andthe fame Lorde sayde vnto me, Beholde, I put my wordes in thy mouth.

to And beholde, this day do Jet thee ouer the people and kyngdomes, that

thon mapest roote out, breake of, defroy, and make waste, and that thou mapest builde bp and plant.

1 After this the Lorde spake vnto me, saying: Jerenne, what seest thou: And
% Jlayd, I see arod of an Almond tree. rr 12 Then layde the Lorde vnto me: thou

hast seene ryght, for J wyll make haste

inte {peedply bpon my worde to performe 10 inex. 3 It happened akterwarde that the

N The. ij. Chapter.
2 God rehearteth his benekites done vnto the Je wegs. 8 Agapné priestes and

Cll.

c

Lorde spake to me agapne, and sayde: what {cet thou; and J layde: do see
‘ . pot, lokpng from out of the 0b. xli b. c oo STM Stator:
14 Then lapde the Lorne onto mer Out © of the north chall come a plague vpon . all the dwellers of the lande. '

15 For lo, J wyll call all the kinredes of bec is,

the kingvomes of the north, faity the
Torde: and they shall come, and euery one shall set his seate in the gates of wie: rusalem, and in all their walles rounde about, and in all cities ol Juda.

16 And theough them Mall J declare

ny iudgement, bpd all the wickednesse

of thole men that haue forsaken me,

that haue burnt incense vnto straunge

gods, and worchipped the workes of

their owne handes.

17 And therfore girde vp thy loynes, Ezciiia. arise, and tell them all that J geue thee in commaundement : Feare them not, left I destroy thee before them. i

18 Jor beholde, this day do J make thee Lc a strong fensed towne, an iron pyller, Th anda brasen wall, agaynst the Whole lande, agaynst the kinges and mightie men of Juda, agaynst the priestes and people of the lande. 2 *

19 They hall fight agapult thee, but they (hail not be able to duercome thee:: for J am with thee to deliuer thee, faith the Lorde. F

f

propheteg o2 preachers that contempne and difpife God. 2 The Fewes are deltroped becaute thep fozloke God, and because they ranne a whore

buntpng after idols. a =>, Dacouer,the worde of the Torde came vnto a ine,faping:

Go thy wap, trye in the eaves of Pierusalem, and fay, Thus

faith the Lorde: J rez

wunder thee,
Td, and the laue of thy defponfyng,
W thou folowend me through the ernelle in an vntylled lande. i 141 Was an halowed thyng vnto
4 onde and was his first fruites: bende, nulfort tithe g. 1 80 fait fall vpon them,

* Deare theefoye che worde of he Lord

h the kindnesse of thy

they that deuour Gülben shall of: a

D thon houle of Jatob, and all the ge: nerations of the boule of Hiract, 3
5 Thus laith the Lorde, What vnfaithfulnesse founde your fathers in me, that they went so farre away fro me, fallyng to lightnesse, and beyng so vayne?s
6 They thought not in their heartes, ; where is the Lord that bronght bs out a of the lande of Egypt that led vs tho- Pro,. rowe the Wildernefle,thzough adclerte rough lande, through a drye and deadly lande, pea a lande that no man had gone through, and wherin no man had dwelt: 8
7 And when J had brought pou into à D. %. pleafauut fertile lande, that pe myght

enioy the fruites €all the eb

my lande, and brought mine heritage to abhomination.

W 8 Thc pricttes them lelues fapde not,
Where is the Low: They that had the lawe in their handes knee me not, the sheepheardes offended agaynst me, the prophetes did prophetie in
Baal, and folowed such thinges as that bryng them no prolite.

9 Wherfore H ant conftrapyned, faith the
Ho2de, pet agapue to contende in indge-

U ment with pou, and with pour chilbers childzen. 3 lo Go into the Illes of Cethim, and loke

Well: sende vnto Cedar, take diligent heede, and fee whether {uch thynges be done there,
1 Whether the gentiles them selues haue chaunged their gods Which pet are no gods in Deedez but mp people hath

e: chaunged their c honour foz a thyng e that may not helpe them.
Shinckom 12 Be altonished O pe heauens be afraide a and abashed at luch a thyng, saith the
. Torde. :
13. Foz my people Hath done two euils:
. they haue forsaken me the well of the leer. Water oklpfe, and digged them pittes,
Exodinid peda vile and broken pittes that can holde no water. a
14. Js PHlraclabonde seruaunt, or one o the honcholde-why is he thẽ lo spopled:
15 Thep rore and erpe vpon him as lions.
Esal. ia. they haue made his lande waste: his

cities ax so burnt vp, that there is no man dihellyng in them:
16 Peathe children of Moph c Taphnes hall tratke their tcrowne. lerxxxiia, 17 Coinmeth not this vnto thee becanfe thou hast forsaken the Lorde thy God, euen when he led thee by the way
18 And What Hatt thon nowe to do inthe streete of Egypt, to drynke water out ol

(b) Cod res eth the

ucth ¢

Peon © Milusy Either what makest thou in sete the wap to Asspria, to drynke water ol
Sand gt. the fludde-

tuaandthe 19 Thine owue Wickednefle (hall rethacense. proue Chee, aud thy turnyng away (hall geri ao tondenpne thee: that thou mapest
Simi kuowe and vnderstand howe euyll and da ben hurtlull a thyng it is, that thon batt foz-

to haur recone cited thein

faken the Lorde thy God, and hast not

dhe doe keared me, laith the Lorde God of
Ener. hoastes.

Ef Iva. 20 J haue euer broken thy poke of olde,
2 d.

and burst thy bondes, vet sapest thou:

~The prophecie =

| ofthe lame: ye went koorth and defled J wyll no moze transgresse:

Harlot thou runnest about Doonan leet

hylles, and among all greene

21 Wheras J planted thee a ae amd Wholly a right leede: howe art thou turned then into a bitter vnkruitfull and straunge grape- j

22 (Peaandthat fo fore) that though thou washe thee with utrus, and makes elfe to sauour with that sweete finet: lyng hearbe of Borith: pet in my light thou art stapned with thy wickednesle faith the Lorde thy God. ‘

23 Howe fayelt thou nowe, Fam not vneleane, and J haue not folowed wa: alim: Loke vpon thine owne wayes in che balleys what thou halt done: iv
Thou art like a Noite dromedarie that Esivi:. era ber ay | Fatxnt,

24. And thy wantonnesse is lyke a wyl
Asse that vleth the wüdernelle, on that snuffeth and bloweth at her wyll:

Who tan tame her: All they that lecke her, shall not faple but fynde her in her moneth.

25 Rape thy foote from nakednesse, and thy throte from thirst, and thou thinkest in thy selke:tushe, J Wil take no sorowe, fo: J haue loued the“ straungers, and ©o» them wyll J folowe. erin

26 Lybe as atheeke that is taken With ems the deede eommeth to shame: euen so is ee the houle of Ilrael come to confulion, a n, the tommon people, their kynges and amc rulers, their priestes and prophetes. oe

27 Jor they lay to a stocke, Thou art uip Penne father to a stone, Thou hast begotten ea

mie; * pea they haue turned their backe ee

vpon me, and not their kate: but nthe snr tyme ok their trouble, when they lap, en stande vp and helpe bs: ae
J chall auntwere them] Where ate noibe thy gods that thon halt made thee: bid them stande vp, and helpe the: in the time of thy neede:* Forloke holbe fere.xi: manp cities thou hast O Juda, so naue gods hast thou also. awe

29 Wherkoze then wyll pe goto Me
Witi) 0 ae Morde. fiance

aynst me, faith the .

30 Itis but lost labour that Almut 1111 childzen, fo2 they reteaue not wy 0 eth v. tion: pour owne kwosde delt . pour prophetes, pe a deudurb n ‘

zi Oh generation, hearken bn are a
Worde of he Horde: Am FJ ves sraelwüdernesle vnto the peopic of Ira

(e) The pus

of Jeremie.

de that hath nolpght: Wherfore 35 Bet darest thou sap, J am without
Mun people then, We are lordes, we kinne and] güͤtlesse, Tulhe, his with wyll come no moe vnto thee: can not conte vpon me: eholde, J wyll
Doth a mayde forget her rayment, o: reason With thee, betaule thou darest
2 hne her fomachers but my people lap, J haue not offended,

Hath forgotten me a very long whyle. 36 Why gaddest thou so much hither and
Why beautiliest thou thy wapes so thither, to chaunge thy wayes:for thou hyelp, to obtepne kauour therthzough- (halt be confounded alwell of Egypt as

éhecfoze allo hast thou taught wicked? thon wast of the Assprians. nelle through thy wayes. 37 Bea thou shalt go thy wayfromthem, ub 4 Upon thy wynges is found the blond and smite thine handes together vpon m ol poore and innocent people, whom thy head, becarife the Lorde hati bring u. thou didst not fyndetcommersEvoles: that confidence and hope of thine to but thou flue the prophetes for repro- naught, e thou shalt not prosper withal.

upug all these thynges.

The. ii. Chapter.

1300 beyng mercifull.calleth to repentaunce his people which he had korlaken fo2 their whoredome with idols. 20 He erhosteth Ffrael vnto repentaunce, promilyng them sheepheardes that shoulde haue the true knowledge of God.
23 Che returne ol Flrael vnto God conkessyng their offerce.

A Ommonlp' when a done: hoe fhe Hath runne bp vpon all
5 man putteth away his the hylles, and among all thicke trees, swpfke, and fhe goeth and there played the harlot:

from hym € marpeth 7 Hatt thou scene also when the had W

eswith another, then the done all this, howe J sapde vnto her,

sauestion is: shoulde he that He shoulde turne agapne vnto me,

resort vnto her any and pet she is not returued- Juda that Exe b more after that: (Is not that lande vukatchfull fitter of hers also sawe this:

ag then deliled and vnkleane-) Wut as lo: 3 Mamelp, that after Jhad well {eene

™ thtethou hat played the Harlot with the adulterte ol the hunckyng harlot many loners, pet turne agayne to me, Ilrael, I put her away, and gaue her Reg

lach the Lode. à byll of deuorcement: For ail this, her

2 Life vp thine eyes to the hygh places, — bnfatthfull filter Juda was not ashaand loke where thou hak not ben de- med, but Went backe and plaved the filed: Thou halt Wayted for them inte Whore. ‘ strettes, and as a murtherer in the wi 9 Bea and the wantonnesse of her dernelse, through thy Whoredome and whoredome Hath defpled the whole shamekull blasphemies is the lande de- lande: For Tye hath cõmitted fornication

„ klled. with stones and stockes.

This is the caule that the rayne and 10 Meuerthellle, her wnfaithfull fitter f enenyng deawe Hath cealled: Thon Juda ts not' turned vnto me agayne Ozeeva. halt gotten thee an Whores forehead, With her whole heart, but faignedlye

and wylt not be ashamed. faith the Lode,
4 Wyltthou not heralter say vnto me, O n And the Lorde sayde vnto me, The kae. mb satherethouart hethat hack brought backllyder Ilrael, is moze righteous
Ie bp, and led me from my pouth- theuthe vnkaithfull Juda.
10 uod continue his wrath fo euere 12 Aud therfore go pzeach these wordes thee he kene our kaultes in meniote to totbardethe north, and lap: Thou di a tide: Menerthelefie, thou speakest obedient Pfrael, turne agapne laith the wan bordes but thou art euer dong Torde, and J wll not bang mp wrath
Ole and Worle to the vtmolt of thy —vppon pon: for Jam nicreifull lach the

13 The. Hovde, and F wyll 1 alway“ beare pm,

xt Ode sayde also vnto me in the displeasure agapust thee:

5 ue of Foliab the kyng, Patt 9205 3 Wut on this condition that thou know

eue What that revellion Bact hath thygreat blasphenue, namelp that 1

Ihe prophecie

hast bafaith fully forlaken the Lord thy
God, and hast made thy selfe partaker of straunge gods vnder all greene trees, and halt had no wyll to heare my voyte, saith the Lorde.

14. O pe dilobedient childrẽ, turne againe faith the Lorde, and J wyll be macyed with you: for J wyll take one out of the titie, and two out of one generation
8 among pou, and bryng pou into

ion,

15 And wyll geue pou heardmen after myne owut mynde, which Matt feede you with learnpng and wildome.

16 Moreduer, when ye be entreased and multiplied in the lande, then faith the
Torde, there Mall no moze boast be made of the arke of the Lordes testament: No man Mall thinke vpon it, neither shall any man make mention of it: kor from thentekoorth it shall neither be visited, neither shall such thyng be done any mort.

Gili, 1 Then hall Hierulalem be talled the

Bowes seate, and all Heathen halbe gathered vnto it for the name of the
Lordes fake which shalbe set vp at Hierusalem: And from that tyme foorth they shall folowe no more the imagination of their owue frowarde heart.

18 Then those that be of the houle of

bs Juda, shal go vnto the house of Piract, at. vili. D.

Tere. v. b.
Esal. Ivnli. a.

Land they Matt tome together out of the

north, into the same lande

cit 19 15 fathers. chat Pane
19 aue thought thus: howe

take thee to be my childzen, aum genen

pleasaunt lande for thine heritage, yea

ae e

Call nit father, and che

eee chene noe
20 Trüelp, lpke as a woman fayier

hulbande, fo are ye vnkalt full Unt r

O pe boule of Piracl, faith the Lorde.

21. The vopte of the thitvren of Blea D

was hearde on bye, Weeppug and vay: |

lyng: for that they haue defiled tl

Wap, and forgotten God their 1
22 O pe dilobedient chuͤdren, turne agatne.

10 Chall J Yeate pont bariturnpages,

nto thee, for tho

A eee ae
23 Truelp, in dayne is health hopes fo

from the hylles, be they neuer lo Ha:

but the health of Piract standeth vpon God our Lorde,

only Orte. xu a.
Act. h. . hreva

24. Conkusion hath devoured our fathers 1

labour from our pouth vp, pea their Durie:

cheepe and bullockes, their fonnes and
Daughters,
25 So do we allo sleepe in our confufion,

Batuc i b. lerexittia

and shame couereth bs:*foz Wee our fa: 0. thers from our youth vp vnto this day kale haue finned agaynst the Lord our God, laue,

and haue not obeped the vopte of the 4

ode our God.

The iii. Chapter.

¢ Che true repentaunce or returnpng to Gon, 4 he exhorteth to the circumcilion of the heart. 5 Che destruction of Furie is prophecied Foz the malice

of their heartes.

Ilrael, pf thou wylt turne thee, then turne vnto me, faith p Lod:
Ii and pf thou Wyle put

US }'| aay thine abhomi-

San as |

fight, thou shalt not be moued.

2 And chalt weare, The Lord ipueth, in trueth, in equitie, and righteousnesse, and all people shalbe fortunable and ioykull in hym. a

3 Foz thus {arth the Torde to all Juda and Hierusalem: lowe your lande, and sowe not among the thornes.

We circunicised in the Lode and cut away the forelkpnue of pour heartes all pe of Juda, and all the indwellers

Iere. va
XiLa,

nations out ok my

of hierusalem: that myne indignation breake not out Ipke fire, and kindle, lo that no man may queuche it, betaule of the wickednelle of pour imaginations.

Preach in Juda and Hierulalem, crpe

ont and {peake, blowe the trumpettes

in the lande, crye that cuerp man may beare, and lay, Gather vou together, and We wyll go into strong cities.

6 Set vpthe token in Sion, fpceve yo and make no tarying: Tor I wyll OATS
19915 1 and à great destructio

rom the north.

7 FJor 5 spopler of the gentiles broken bp from his place asa lion ri ok his denne: that he map male’ lande waste, and destroy the citles, that no man may dwell Mein. Wher-

sdix cb.

fl

lere. ib

rfore girde pour felucs about

55 wahlt, mourne and Weepe: for

the ndrawen from vs.

005 lame tyme faith the Lord, the

i heart ofthe kyng € ofthe princes chalbe

one, the priestes halbe astonissjed, and

chepiophetes Halbe fore akrapde.

eir ues? | ' | :
I When (hall it be sayde to the people

hye places of the wildernesse tomnieth ther to fannie nor to cleanse.
2 Alter that, shall there come vnto me a

wyll J alfo geue fentence vpon them.

j Jor lo, he arileth like a cloude, and his

„ chäaͤrrets are like a stormie wynde, his

„ holes are [Wikter then the Egle: Wo

puto vs, for we are destroped.

u 14 O hierulalenn, Wache thine heart

5 feom wickednesse, that thou mayest be

helped: Poe long (hall thy dayne thoughtes remayne with thee-

(6 For a vopte from Dan and from the hill of Ephraim speaketh out, and telleth of a destructlon.

16 Remember the heathen, and geue
Hierulalem warning, and preache vnto her, that Watchers duer her are tonimyng from karre countries, they haue cryed out against the cities ok Juda.

17 And they haue belet her about in euery place, lpke as the watchmen in

che fielde:- For they haue prouoked me to Wrath, faith thea ope. vs Se
8 Thy apes and thy thoughtes haue bought thee vnto this, fuch is thine
4 One wickednesse and dilobediente: ot because it is a bitter thyng, it hath nicken (hee to the heart.
1 40 my bellp, ah my belly Chale thou ae Dowets mp heart so sore:my heart
15 Heth within nie, J tan not be ttyll,
15 J haue hearde the crying of the
10 Theettes and peales of warre. hep crye murther bpon murther,

Mie,

whole lande chall perithe: Imme-

Diatly my tentes Were delt tentes were destroyẽd, and ip Danginges in the twämektleng of

bol leremie.

fearekull wath of the Lorde is not

Then fayde J: Oh Lorde God, halt

5 sparepereceaed this people and Hierüsalent, faving, "Pe chall haue peate: und node the lworde goeth through and Herulalem, Astrong winde in the

through the way of my people, but nei-

ssrong wynde from those places, e then

an eye.

21. Howe long shall J {ee the tokens of D>

wirre and bears the nople ofthe trum pettes ::: N
22 [Meuertheletle, this chall come vpon them.

~ *becaufe my people ts become koolishe, B.

al. v. ruc. ili. b.

and bath not knowen me: they are Ozeciiti.

the thildren of koolichnesse, and Without any discretion: To do euyll, they haue Wit inough: but to do well, they hane no wildom. ö

23 Jhane loked vpon the earth, and fee it was alte and vopde: 0

warde heauen, and it had no shine.

24 J behelde the mountapnes, and lo, they trembled, and all the hylles were in a feare. nee

25 J loked about me, and there was no

I ldkedto-

bodyrand all the birdes of the apre were

away. a : 7 ,
26 J marked well, and the plowed fielde

Was become Wale; pea all their cittes

were broken downe at the presence of

the Tord and indignation of his wrath.

27 For thus hath the Lorde laide: The whole lande shalbe delolate not then haue done. ;

28 And therfore Mall the earth mourne, and the heanen be sorie aboue: foz the thyng that J haue spoken to the prophetes, purposed, and taken vpon me to do, chall not repent me, and J Wyll not go from it. =

29 The whole lande hall fice for the E

noyse of horsemen and bowmen, they
(hail runne into dennes, into wooddes, and climbe vp the stonye rockes: all the cities shalbe voyde, and no inan dwel-
30 What wylt thou nowe do, thou being

destroyed? * Foz thongh thou clothest 1c

thy felfe with scarlet, and deckest thee

With golde, though thou payntest thy 4 Reg f.

fate With colours nowe, pet chalt thou trimnie thy felfe in vapne: For those that hitherto haue ben thy louers, shall abhorre thee, and go about to flay thee.
31 FOr J heare a noyle tyke as it Wert of
A wondan trauaplyng, ¢ one labouryng of her firstchilde, Enenthe voyte of the daughter Sion, that casteth ont her armes, and sowneth, saping: Ah, wos me, howe fore vexed and faynt (s my heart for feare of the murtherers-

The

: In Furie is there no righteous or faithfull man founde, either amongll the people or the rulers.for whole lake the Lorde shoulde (pare the citie. 15 wher, fore Furic is destroped of the Allpuians. eet

alem, beholde and ee, seeke through her streetes also within, pf ve tan kynde one man

that doth equall and
A > Epat, or seketh for the trueth, and J chall spare that citie, faith the Lor de.

2 or though they tan say, the Lorde

lyueth:pet they sweare to deceaue.

3 Wheras thou (O Torde) lokest only vpon faith and trueth: Thou hast scourged them, but they toke no repentaunte,

thou batt corrected them for amendement, but they refused thy torrection, they made their faces harder then a stone, and woulde not amende. N

4 Therkore I thought in my felfe: peraduenture they ave so simple ¢ foolishe

that they vnderstande nothyng of the ea Wap, and indgementes of their
0 . 0 a 8

Deut d. 5 Therfore will J go vnto their heades and rulers, and talke with them, if they knowe the way of the Lord, and iudgemeutes of their God: But thele (in tyke mance) haue broken the poke, and burst the bondes in sunder.

Deut d. 6 M herfore a lion ont of the wood hath

hurt them, and a woolke in the euenyng

hall Hestroy them, the Leoparde doth

lye lurkpng by their cities, to teare m

peetes all them that tome therout: for

their offences are multiplied, and their departyng away is enereafed.

W 7 Shouide J then for all this haue

Sophon.i.2. , korsaken me, and fwoene by them that are no gods. and albeit that J fed them to the full, pet they fall to adũlterie, and haunt harlottes houses.

8 In the desire of vntleanlp tnt they are betone tyke the stoned horse,-euery man nepeth at his neighbours wife,

9 Shoulde FH uot correct this, faith the
Lowe: shoulde J not be auenged of cucry people that is lpke vnto this?

10 Cunibe bp vpon their walles, beate them downe, and“ destrop them not
—— 5 take away their battlementes,

were tte? betàule they are not the lordes.

Oped: but to atem naunt of the prople rehem God did rescrut thot his whole dureh Won not vtterly pericht, although but a ewe did remapne faithful. ’

Eze.xxii.b.

Tere.ix.a.

Ca) These
E

——— — le prophecie — —

The. v. Chapter.

mercie vpon thee: Tip children haue

1 For dnfaithfully hath the house of Ht rael and Juda forsaken me, faith dhe
Th : cise

12 They haue denied the Dope and rde fayde, It is not he (tbat loleth feed 1
"tute, there Catt no missortune conte le

bppou vs, we shall see neither worde yo) dae bange > — —

; As forthe warning of the prophetes land“

tit is but wynde, yea there 85 17 the 1 worde of God in them? fuck thynges shall happen vnto them selues.

14. Wherfore thus saith the Lorde Godot ¢ hoaltes, Wecaule pe speake such wordes, beholde, *the wordes that are in thy raus mouth wyll J turue to fire, and make the people to be wood, that the fire may consume them. eT ee

15 Lo, J wyll bryng a people vpon pon from farre, O house of Ilrael, fateh the
TLorde, a mightie people, an olde people,
à people Whole speache thou knowest

iat, neither vnderstandest what they ap. b |

16 Their arrowes are sodapue death, pea they them selues be very glauntes.

17 This people shall eate vp thy fruite and thy meate, pea they Chall deuour thy lonnes e thy daughters, thy sheepe and thy bullockes, they Malt cate bp thy grapes and figges: 2s for thy trong

and well defenfed cities wherin thou didst trust, they Mall bryng to pouertie, and that through the sworde.

18. Meuerthelelle, J wyll not then haue ea done With pou, saith the Lorde.

19 But if they fay, wherfore doth the
Lorde our God all this vnto vs: Then aunlwere them: becaule that lpne a5 6, pe haue forsaken me, x ferued straunge gods in your lande, euen fo shal yt lerue straungers out of pour lande. 6

20 preach this vnto the house ol Jatob, and tryt it out in Juda, and fay thus 4

21 Heare this thou dolilhe and vndisereot a people, “ye haue eyes but ve fee not, u caves haue pe but pe heare not. Avil

22 Feare yt not mie, saith the nd, 1 pe not tremble at iy prelence- „a onbynde the fea with the lande oo 0 5 tinuall decree, so that it can not pal

: . et can il boundes:for though it ragt, Len ng,

Deut uc.
Baraca,

lob and. 18.

of Ieremie.

ug. and though the waues therok haue gotten with kalchood and deteipt: bolwel det may they not go auer. Hereof cometh their great snbstaunte

But this people bath a false and ob- and riches,

23 stinate heart, they are departed and 28 Hereof are they kat and welthy, and one away fro nie. are moze mischieuous then any other:
They thinke not in their heartes, O they minister not the lawe, they make
: let bs feare the Lord our God, Whoge- no ende of the fatherlesle caule yca and ueth vs raine early and late when nede they prosper: yet they tudge not the is. Whlche kepeth euer hill the haruest pode according to equitie. ie fo? vs perelp. N 29 Should J not punishe these thinges md g
% »Heuerthesle, pour nuldeedes haue —faith the Lozdez chould not J be auen-
1 Vaud thele krom you, and vour ünnes ged ok all suche people as these bebaue robbed pou of good thinges. 30 Porrible and grecuous thinges are
5 Foramong my people are found wicl- done in the lande.

“aeppertons, that pauily lay snares and zi The prophetes teache falselp, andthe wapte for men, to take them and de- preachers reteaue giftes, and my ped- a troy them. : : ple “Hath plealure therein: what Wyll Oc

27 And like as anette is kull of bprdes,so tome thereof at the lalt. Romi. are their houles full ol that Which they

Esai.i.c.

The. vj. Chapter.

Che linnes lor whiche Hierulalem is afflict. iowncircumcifedeares, ; couetoutnefle, 14 deceipt. zo The Lord reiecteth the lacriłices of the Jewes. 22 The comming

of the Babplonians is prophecied againe.
NN Y lem, ye strong chyldreẽ are euer there in my sight.
FN 0 of Weniamm, blowe 8 Amende ther (Ohierulalem) lek J 5 by the trumpettes ve withdrawe mp heart from thee, and
( Thecuites, set vpa to- make ther desolate, and thy lande allo,
Ni 28 ken vnto Bethcaran: that no man dwell init. fora plague t a great 9 For thus laich the Lorde of hoastes: milerie appeareth out from the north. The residue ot Israei shalbe gathered
2 Jwyll icken the daughter Sion to a as the remnaunt ot grapes: and cherefaire and tender woman, and to her kore turne thyne hande agayne inte the ne bhall come the @ shepheardes with baltict like the grape gatherer. sth

[me ont of Hiernfae ishearde in her, sorowe and woundes

e — their flockes. Jo Wut bnto whom Hall J speake-
= > FThertentes shallrhey pitche rounde whom Mall J warne that he may take eu abont her, and euerp one Chall feede in heede- Their cares are fo vncirtumci- dr plate. fed, that they may not heare: beholde, ae e.
4 g Make battaple against her (wall ther hep take the worde of God but fo d andecb, l arple, let bs go vp whyle it is vet storne, and haue no lust therto. day: Alas the dap goeth awap, and the 11 Andeherefore J am fo fall of thyne hight chadowes kalldowne. indignation O Torde, that J may tut: tile, let vs go bp by night, and de: ker no lenger, but {hed it out vpon the oy her strong holdes. . chyldren that are without, and bpon all
5 thus Hath the Lorde of hoastes poung men: pea the man mut be taken ann unded, Hewe downe her trees, puloner with the wife, and the aged
Ith by dultparkes againtt Piernsa Wh the creeple. e che tyme is tome that this cite 2 Their houles with their landes and
90 be uniched, for in her is all mal- wines Malbe turned into straungers: umelle. a for J wyll stretche out mine hand vpon
1 dad Conduite spouteth ont wa- the inhabitours of this lande, faith the lle: S he lpouteth out her wickeb-

Torde. elle: Robbene and vnrightroul d l a e eoulnesse 13 Jor fromthe leak to the n B Fol. lei abt 0 D Y hang Tete. vui. h.

hang all vpon couetousnesse: and from the prophete vnto the prielt, they go a bout falshood and lpes.

Iecvin 14 And belide that, they heale the hurt
Eee vb. of my people with [weete wordes, fay

€ ing, Peate, peace: when there is uo peace at all.
15 Were they ashamed when they had committed abhomination: Trulp nap, ac. vic. they be past shame, and therefore they

{hail tall among the slayne: and in the houre when J Mall vilite them, they fhalbe brought downe faith the Lorde.
16 Thus faith the Lorde, Go into the

that God spake vnto
Jeremie, saping:
Stande under the gate of the Tordes
Mhoule, c crye out thele
Wordes there with a

de ere. vn. b. 2 7 and. x xvl. a.

loude voyce, and lay, Heare the wordof 5

the Lorde all pe of Juda, that go in at this doore to Worship the Lode:
3 Thus faith the Lowe of hoastes, the

The prophecie

one neighbour Hall perishe wi A
Der ee the with ang:
22 Thus fa e Torde: We er m me a beople earn north, and a great people shala the 25 ofthe earth. setrom
23 With bowes and with dartes they be weaponed, it is a rough ve fearce people, e an vnmercifull people: their boyce roareth line the lea chel ride vpon horles well appointed to the battaile agalnst thee O daughter Sion.
24 The fame of them haue we hearde dur armes are keeble, © heautnelle and 4

4 streetes, conlider and make inquilition lorowe is come vpon bs, as vpon a wo- & forthe olde wap, and if it be the good man trauapling with chylde. * and right way, then go therein, that pe 25 Let no man go foorth into the fielde, tim may finde rest for pour soules: but they let no man come bpon the Hye streete: lap, we wyll not walke therin. for the sworde and keare of the enemie

17 Moreouer, J wylset watehmen ouer is on euerp fide. vou, and therefore take heede vnto the 26 Wherkore gyrde a sackcloth about thee voyte of the trumpet: but they fay, we Othou daughter of my people, {prin
Wyll not take heede. kle thy selfe with athes: * mourne and
18 Ytare therekore ve gentiles, and thou weepe bitterly as bponthypne onlpe betongregation shalt now what J haue loued sonne, forthe destroper Mall so-
Dewifen for then. dainly fall vpon vs.
19 Jpecare thou earth allo: behold, J wyll 27 Thee haue J {ec for a strong towre lere; allse a plague to come vpon this peo- (O thou prophete) and a well fenced wall ple, euen the fruite of their owne imagi- among my people, to seeke out and to nations, for that they haue not ben obe- trye their wapes. 5 dient vnto mp wordes and to my lawe, 28 Forthep are all stubborne apostates vn a but abhorred them. and fallen wap, Walking deteiptkully, n
Fi ib. 20 Wherekoze“bryng pe me intenle from they are cleane brasse and iron, for they
Tere.vii.e. Saba, and fivecte smelling talamuns hurt and destroy euerp man. from karre conntreys? W your burnt 29 The bellowes are brent iu the five the
Genes, bofferinges dilplease me, and J reiopte leade is not moulten, the melter mel-
S be, not in pour latrifites. teth in vapne, forthe euill is not taken geen 21 And therefore thus faith the Lorde: abap kroimthem. tape md Beholde, J Wyll lay stumbling blockes 30 Wherefore do they call them naughwelk nude. among this people, and there chall fall tie silner, because the Torde hath calt at them the father with the chyldren. them out. b —
The. vij. Chapter.
Jeremie is commaunded to ewe vnto the people the worde of God. which trusteth in the out warde seruice ol the temple. j Che euils that hall happen to the Lewes kor the delptling of their prophetes. 21 Sacritices doth not the Lord chiellx reauire of the Je weg, but that they Moulde obap his worde. 1 “ lie
A1 bese are the wordes God of Pleael : Amende pour wayes lere. vii

an pout countels, and J wyll let vou dwell in this plate. 174
4 Trust not in falle lying words, unte
Pere is the temple of the Lon, gem the shee the Lord, here (stye

le ot the Lorde: 10
ö But rather in deede amende va Exe nil wapes and counfels,* and spout 1 betibict a man and his news j ppt

ot leremie.

> not the straunger, the fa-

Helle jt the widowe, {hed not inwent blood in this pace cleaue not to straunge gods to pour owne destruc-

n : Lin this wyll J let pou dwel
7 site, pes the land that J gauc afore me to pour fathers for euer.
3 But take heede, ye trult in lying tales, that begulle von and do you no good.
“gor When ye haue stollen murthered, f cgonunitted adultrie and perlurie, when ye haue offered vnto Baal, folowing straunge and vnkuowen gods: shall ve bnpunished- a
10 Wer an pe and stande before me in this houle (whiche bath my name geuen vnto it) and say, tushe, we ace ablolued quite, though we haue done all these abhommations. n What, thinke pou this houle that beareth mp name, is a denne of thicues:
And pet Flee what pou thinke, faith oi, the Lode, i 101 to mp place in Silo, * Wherebnto
J gaue mp name aforetyme, and looke
„ well what FJ did to the fame place for the wickednelle of my people of Ilrael.
3 And now leing ye haue done all thele deedes faith the Lorde, and I mp felfe tole vp euer betimes to warne vou and to commune with vou, pet would ye not i 1 ine, * I called, ye would not aun-
1 ere:

fx.

tx. 14. Therefore, euen as Jhaue done vn-
C to Silo, fo wyll J do to this house that np name is geuen vnto, and that pou ut pour trust in, pea vnto the plate that haue geuen to pou and pour fathers:
. „And J thal thzust yon out of my fight, as J haue cal out all pour brethren

aay, „, the whole seede of Ephralm. due 16 Therfore thou Chait not pray for this
Mane, people, thou Chait neither geue thankes no bid praper for them: make thou no intercesston fog them, kor in no wife will heare thee.

7 Hecltthon not what they do in the ci-
11 Uda, and in the Greetes of hiee, 18 2 alerts

ch. Thecholdzen gather tikes, the fapreskiubletbe fire, the womẽ kneade lt dougb to bake cakes for the queene ugs bute powre out drinke oft ra A

me vnto Wrath, unge gods, to prouo

h Howbeit they hurt not me faith the

Tord but rather confounde and shame them selues.

20 And therefore thus faith the Lorde
God Beholde, my wrath and indignation shalbe powred out vpon this place, vpon men and cattell, bpon trees in the fielde, and fruite okthe lande: and it moat burne, so that no man may quench

t 4 3

21 Thus faith the Lorde of hoattes the zp
God of Israel: Heape vp your burnt’ Ela offeringes with pour sacrtfites, and eate the fleshe.

22 Fo when J brought pour fathers Dear. dut of Egypt, I spake no worde but Fu. them of burnt offeringes and facvifices:

23 Wut this J conunaunded them, saping, Hearken and obay my vopte, and Exod. ix a.
I halbe pour God, and ye thalbe my people, so that ye walke in al the wayes whiche Jhaue commaunded pou, that ve may prosper.

24. Wut they were not obedient, they in- 2h via. dined not their eares there vnto: but went after their owne tmaginations, and alter the motions of their owne wirked heart, and so turned thein selues aay, and converted not vnto me.

25 And this haue they done from the tyme that vonr fathers came out of
Egypt, vnto this day: Meuertheleslse, . ,
I lent vnto vou all my seruauntes the e. prophetes, I vole bp early, and sent you cli.

26 Bet woulde they not hearken noz ofler me their eares, but were obftinate, and worse then their fathers.

27 And thou shalt nowe speake all these
Wordes vnto them, but they shall not heare thee: thou chalt trye vpon them, but they shall not aunswere thee.

28 Therefore Halt thou fay vnto them,
Thisis the people that neither heareth the voyte of the Lorde their God, nor reteaueth his correction: fapthfulnesse 1 and trueth is cleane rooted out of their mouth.

29 WMherelore tut of thine heere, O hie- Ezechv.a. tufalem, and cast it awap, take Dp a complaint on bye: for the Lorde batlycat away and forlaken the people that he is displeased withall.

30 For the chyldren of Juda haue done F euyll in nip fight,faich the Lorde: they lere cid haue fet vp their abhominations in the house that bath my name, and haue defiled it:

* 31 They

O (11)

4g

Deut. iii. c.

31 They haue also buplded an aulter at

Deutz »Topheth, whiche is in the valley of
Balente. the chplozen of Hennom, that they
Helene, nicht burne their sonnes and daugh-

ters in fire: whiche J neuer commaundedthem, neither tame it euer in my

thought. .
32 And therkore beholde the dapes (hall come (faith the Lode) that it Mall no

of the chyldren of hennom, but the vallere xis e. lep gf laughter: for in Topheth they

The. vij. Chapter. —

Che destruction ofthe Fewes. 4 Che Lorde moueth the people to amendement, ~~ rechening vp their linnes. 10 he reprehendeth the lying doctrine ol the prophetes

and priestes.

T the lame tyme faith ithe Lorde, the bones ofthe kinges of Jnda, the bones of his prin-
‘ices, the bones of the preachers and pro-
— phetes, vea and the bones ok the citizens of Hierulalem, halbe brought out of their graues,

moone, x all the Heauenlp hoast, whon they loued, whom they serued, whom they ranne after, whom they foughe and worchipped: they Chall neither be gathered together nor buried, but shall lye as dunge vpon the earth. ol

And all they that remaine of this wickel eneration, shal delice rather to die then to line, wherloeuer they remaine, and where as I scatter them, faith the
Worde of hoastes.

Thus shait thou fay vnto them also:
Thus laith the Lorde, Do mien fall fo, that they arise not vp againe : or if HE rael repent, wyll not God turne againe to them:
5 Wherelozt then ls this people of Hie-

rusalem gone so farre backe, that they

turne not againe: They are euer the longer the moze obstinate, and wyll not

be conuerted. f
6 Fo2HVauclohed and considered, but

there is no man that {peake

Luk. : All. c 3

pentaunte for his sinne, that wyll fo mche fay what haue ZB done z but eue-

rie man turneth to his owue courte, lie

a fierte horse headlong to the battaile.

The prophecie

more be called Lopheth, or the ale

And layde again the *funne, the

à good
Worde, (here is no man that taketh re-

shall be buried, becaule the 5 haue no be las 9 * e Wall eis

33 Peathe dead bodpes of this shalbe eaten vp of the foules i chem. and Wylde beastes of the earth, and n pos 7 fray 9 45 awap. 34

4 And as foz the voyte of mi ö gladnelle ge doe ch d a hii A rulalem, the vopte of the bvegeony ng and ok the bride, B wpu make them ceaffe: for the lande shalbe deldlate.

lere. vi
> dad

Q

7 The Stoke in the ayre knoweth his 3 appointed tpme, the Turtle doue, the
Swallowe and the Crane conlider the tyme of their trauaple:* but my people g
Wyll uot knowe the tyme of the punisyinent of the Lorde. l

3 Howe dare pe sap then, we are Wyle,

we haue the lawe of the Lorde among

vs: Truelp in vapne Hath he prepared

his penne, and vainelp haue the writers
Therefore shall the wyse be tonkoun-

ded, they shalbe afraide and taken: for

lo, * they bane cast out the Worde of the pa

Tode, what wildome can then be a Pen

mong them: 3

10 Wherkore J wyl geue their wines vn-

to aliauntes, and their fields to destroy-

ers: For fromthe lowest vnto the hy- k

eft they folowe filthy lutre, and from

the prophete vnto the prtett ther deale

all with lies. f Ef. c.
Heuerthelesle, they heale the hurt ot eau

mp people bery llenderiy,saying peate, k

peate: where there is no peãte at all. 4

12 Fpt for shame, howe abbonnitiay thinges do they; and pet they be not 4 fhamed, yea they knowe of no u 1
*naberetore in the tyme of their bilita 1 * on they shal fal among the dead boot aud be ouerthrowne, faith) the HOD’.

3 Moreouer, J wyll conlume 1450 5 ; deede (fatth the Horde) fo that 0) chall not be one grape byon che neee neither one figge vpon the ee che and the leaues chalbe pluckt o 3a thing that J haue geuen them, taken krom then. 14 hr

II

of leremie.

| along we the time: Let bs ga-
¢ begehren together, and go into the strong citie, there shall we be in rest: fox the Lorde our God Hath put vs to scileute, and genen vs water nurt With gall to drinke, betaule we haue sinned

inst hynt.
4 1 sia forpeate, and we fare not hebetter, we wapted for the tyme of health, and lo, here is nothing but trou-

ble. — enoyse or his horses is heard from oa the whole lande is afraide at the are conic in, and haue deuoured the lande, withall that is in it, the eitics, and

thole that dwell therm.

wid ) Mozeduer, J Wyll lende cockatvites and serpentes among pou (whiche wyl not be charmed) and they shall bite vou,

neighing of his strong horles: for they

faith the Lorde. ‘

J woulde haue had comfort against lorowe: but sorowe is come vpon me, and heauinesse bereth my heart.

19 Jor lo, the voyte of the crying of my people is hearde, (tor feare of them that

come] from à farre countrey: Is not the
Lord in Sion 25 not her king in her-
Wherefore then haue they greeued me
(Mall che Lozde lar] With their images, and koolishe straunge fathions of akorraine god- 5

20 The haruestis gone, the sommer hach an ende, and we are not helped.

21 1 am sore bered, betaule of the hurt

of my people, J am heauie and a-

balhed: 1

22 Is there not triatle at Gilead: Js there no philitiõ there; why then is not the health of inp people retouered-

The. ix. Chapter.

Che complaint and bewayling of the propbete, z the malice of the people. 24 In the knowledge of God ought we onlpe to reiopce. 26 Che vncircumcitton ol the

heart.

head water inough, and a wel ok teares for mine epes, that I map weepe night and day
AS! for the flaughter of my people?
2 Woulde God that J had a cottage some where farre from folke, that J

might leaue my people and go from

them, forthey be all adulterers and a thanking sort.

3 They bend their tongues like bowes to shoote out lyes, they ware strong vppon earth: As for the trueth they may nothing away withall in the worde, fo they go from one wickednes to ano-
Tone Weil not knowe me, faith the

4 “Hea, one must kepe hym selfe from

7 mother, no man may fately trust his

mndeth another one nei eguine neighbour begui-

leth another, 5 ‘

Hea, one diffembletly with anofVer,

* AND they deale with no trueth: They ene practised their tongues to lye, and

s Thadegt papnes to do nnlchieke. g houlsittestmthe middes ofa deceipt-

Ull people, Which for very dissembling

faltheony
Lorde, byll not knowe me, faith the

Whe bother : for one brother bnder-

hoastes: webolde, J wyll melt them

and trye them: kor What schoulde F cis

do to mp people-

Their tongues are like charpe ar: rowes to speake deceipt: with their mouth they speake peateablie to their

n but priuilie they lay wayte

or hym.

9 Should J not punishe them for these thinges, faith the Lorde : or shoulde ZF exon aucuged of any suche people a3 this:; >

to Upon the mountaines wyl J take vp

d lamentation and a sorowfull trye, and
à mourning vpon the faire plates ofthe wildernesse: Raumely, howe they are fo beent vp, that no man goeth there any more, vea à man Mall not heare one beast crye there: byrdes and cattell are all goue from thence.

II * wyl make Hierulalem also an heape

of stones, e a den ol venemous wormes: and I wyll make the cities of Juda fo
Waste, that no man (hall dwel therin.
12 What man is so wile as to vnderstand this? to whom hath the Lorde spoken by month, that he may (ewe this, and lay: O thou lande, why perishest thon so- wherlore art thou so brent bp, and like a wildernesse that no man go-

owe? n ED (i) pea

who“ wyll gene mp 7 Wherefore thus faith the Lore of 23

Prou. xi:

Dlal. xv

Iere. v. b.

Psa. Ixxix. 2
Michl. ili c.

The prophecie

13 Hea the Lowe hym felfe tolde the may learne pour daughters to mourne

same vnto them that forsoke his lawe, and kept not the thing that he gaue them in commaundement, neither lued thereafter: .

C 14 But folowed the wickednesle of their
Datis2. olbne heartes, € serued straunge gods
às their forefathers taught them.

15 Lerefore thus faith the Lorde of hoastes, the God of Ilrael: Beholde,
IJ wyll feede this people with Worme-
Wood, and geue them gall to dzinke.
Deuxxiih. 16 J Wyll st

atter them also among the

and that euery one may te : neighbour to make lamentation 3
(Mamely thus} Death is ciming p in at our windowes he is come into aur D houles, to destroy the thylde befoze the doore, and the poung manin the streete
27. wut tell thou plapneip, thus lath the .
Lord: The dead bodpes of men thay lye vpon the ground as the dunge bpon the flelde, and as the handknll after the mower, and there Chalbe no man to tale them vs. ) ‘

lere. yig and yu d.

deexxiic heäthen, whom neither they nor their 23. Thus saith the Lorde: Let not the fathers haue knowen: and J wyll wise man reiopte in his wisdome, noz send a fworde among them to persetute the strong man in his strength, neither them, vntyll J bring them to naught. the riche man in his riches :

17 Moreover, thus faith the Lorde of 24 But who so wyll reiopte, iet hym re- ¢,,, hoastes: Beware of the vengeaunte loypte inthis, that he vnderstandeth and c that hangeth ouer pou, and call fo: noweth me, that J am the Lope oo x« mourning Wines, and lende foz wyle whiche do mercy, equitie, and rightewomen, that they come shortly, ousnesse vpon the earth: *therfore haue n

18 And ling a mourning long ok vs, that J plealure in luthe thinges, lauh the sexi. the teares map fall out of our eyes, and Tonde. * Ofeesibs that our eye liddes may gushe out of 25 Weholde the time commeth faith the
Water. g Tord) that J will visite all them whose

19 For there is a lamentable noyse heard forelkinne is vncircunciled, and the irof Sion: O howe are we lo foze de- cumtised, 1 stroped: O howe are we fo pitioully 26 The Egyptians, the Jewes the Edotonkounded- e must forlake dur owne mites, the Ammonites, the Poabites, naturall countrep, and we are shut out and the shauen Madtanites that dwel 1 of dur owne lodginges. 8 in the wildernesse: foz all the gentkles lau

20 Bet heare the worde of the Lorde are all vncirtumtiled in the fleche, but Romie
(Ope women) and let pour caves vee all the house of Ylrael are vncircumcigarde the wordes ol his mouth: that pe sed in the heart.

The. x. Chapter.
2 Che consteslations of the starres are not to be feared. J Ok the weakenelle of idols and of the power ol God, 21 Ok euill curates. f N
A1 Eare the worde of the mers that it moue not.
He Top chat he peakelh ; It Uandeth as fife as che Pane
VS lynto thee, D thon tree, it can neither speake noz go one ae n houle of Israel. foote, but must be borne: We not pe d beit
2 Thus laith the Lord: kraide okluche, for they can do neither
Efiixlvitc. pe shal not learne after good nor euill. the maner of the hea- Wut there is none lytze vn thee O then, and ye shall not be afraide for the Torde, and great is the name ok thy Apocx tokens of heauen: for the heathen are power. a afratde of suche. 7 Who would not feare thee, O king”
3 Peaallehccnitomesandlawesofthe the gentiles for thyne is the donne
Enixiiih, Jentiles are nothing but vanitle: They foramong allthe wile men of the gel

hewe downe a tree in the wood with the handes of the workeman, and fachion it with the axe.
4 Thep couer it ouer With golde o siluer, they kasten it with nales and ham-

é

tiles, and in all their kingdomes, b 5 is none that may be likened vnto the e
3 They are altogether brutishen ig the ene
Wile in this one thing: wood a teaching of vanttie. „ Since ie ca purplt and pa mat van.

faith iht 83

tet wb sport tobe

de gernisbed with golde and filuer,and clothed tun tap: do be lap Sens dockts, pet tcache ther nothing

of Leremie.

Ter is brought out of Tharsis, and
* beaten t plates, and gold from Ophir, za worke that is made With te haͤnde

* ptfthe craktesman, and they are clothed with pelo we fillke and starlet: all thele are the work ofcunning men.

„ Wült the Lorde is a true God, a lung
God, and an eue rlasting kyng: ik he be wroth, the earth chaketh, all the gentiles map not abide his indignation.

As for their gods] thus shall vou fap tothem, they are no gods that made neither heauen nor earth, therfore Hall they perilhe from the earth, and front all thinges vnder heauen.

n But Tas fo our God] he made the

n earth with his power, and with his

wüdome doth he oder the whole compatte of the worlde, with his dilteetion Hath he spread out the hea-

uens. f =. z At his voyte the waters gathered towai, Itther in the ayre, he draweth vp the tloudes from the bttermott partes of the earth, he turneth lightning to raine,

and bringeth foorth the windes out ok

their treasures.

14 His wildome maketh all men footes, and confounded be casters of images: forthat they tast, is but a bayne thing,

aud hath no like. N N

uy 5 The vapne eraktesmen with their

mic. worrzkes that they in their vanitie haue made, (hall perishe one with another in time of visitation.

luch: but it is he that hath made all thinges, and Ilrael is the rod of his inheritaunte: the Lorde ok hoastes is his name. N N

16 Neuctthelefle, Jacobs portion is none

17 Gather vp thy Wares out of the land, thou that art in the strong place.

18 For thus faith the Lorde: beholde, Z
Wpil now throwe as with a (tone sling, the inhabiters of this land at this onte, aud J Wyll being trouble vpon them, that they hall proue true the wordes that J haue {poten by the prophetes.

19 Alas howe am J hurt: alas howe paynefull are my scourges vnto me: for
FJ conlider this sorowe by my selfe, and
I must suffer it.

20 My tabernacle is destroped, and all

mp cordes are broken, my chyldren are

gone fro me, c can no where be founde:
Nobbe haue J none to spreade out my tent, nor to set vp my hanginges.

21 oz the heardmen are become kooliche, and they haue not foughe the

Lorde: therefore haue they dealt vn- 5
Wilely with their cattell, and all are

stattered abrode. |
22 Weholde, the noyse is harde at hande, and great sedition out of the north, to

and a dwelling place for dragons.

23 Mobbe Iknowe (O Woyd) that it is not in mans power to order his owne wapes, or to rule his owe steppes and goinges. a ö N

24 Therefore chasten thou me O Lov, but with fauour, ? and not in thywrath, lest thou being me btterly to naught.

25 Pobbre out thyne indignation vpon the gentiles that kuowe thee not, and vponthe people that call not vpon thy name, and that because they haue con: sumed, deuoured, and destroped Jacob and haue made his habitation Waste.

The. xj. Chapter.

A curte to them that obay not the worde of Gods prontife, 10 Che people of Juda kolo wing the tteppes of their katherg, worshippeth straunge gods. 15 The Lord laich
Chat he wyll not heare the Je wes, and korbiddeth allo Jeremie to pray fo2 them.

His is a sermõ which the Lorde tommann-

— = speake vnto the men of Juda, and to all them that dwell

at Hierusalem,

3 And sap vnto them, Thus laith the
Low God or Iscael: Cursed be euery one that is not obedient vnto the words of this couenaunt, ö

4 Whiche J commaunded bnto pour fathers, what time as Ibrought them out of Egypt from the iron furnace, say-

O (iii ing:

are blulde, and fo destropeth the locke

make the cities of Juda a wildernesse,

Prou. xx. b.

Pfal. vi. a

XXI. c. vill. e.

Esai. lxiiii. b.
Psa. lx xix. a ccle. 3j. a.

cre. Xx xx. c. and. l. b.

Deut, xxvi!, and. 28. b.
Gala. iii. b,

The prophecie

Fred ing: Be obedient vnto my vopte, and so: and loke howe many Crectes there

do according to ali that J commannde vou, so shall pe be my people, and J will be your God:

And wyll kepe my promise that ZB haue fore vnto pour fathers, (name iyeithat J woulde gene them a lande whiche fsoweth with milke and honte, as pe lee it is come to pale vnto this dap. Then aunswered J and fayde,
N let it be euen so Lorde as thou apelt,

6 Then the Lord sayd vnto me againe:
Prenche this m the cities of Juda, and rounde about Hierulalem, c ap: Heare the wordes of this couenaunt, and kepe them.

For IJ haue diligently exhorted your

= ber tuer since the tyme that J brought chem out ofthe lande ol Egypt

vnto this day, J gauc them warning be

times, saying: hearken vnto mp bopte.

Gene. xv. e. 5
Xxxvl. a. and. xxvil. c

Tere x. b. 3 me, nor encliue their eares vnto me: but folowed the wicked imaginations of their owne heartes, and therefore J

haue brought vpon them al the wordes

of this couenaunt that J gaue them to kepe, which thepcnotwirhltandingz] haue not kept.

And the Lowe sapde onto nie: it is founde out that whole Jlrael and all
1 tities of Hierusalem are gone

acke. N

to They haue turned them selues to the blasphemies oc their forefathers, which had no lust to heare my Wordes: Even
Ipkewyse haue thefe allo folowed straunge gods, and worshipped them:
The house of Israel and Juda haue broken my coucnaunt whiche J made with their fathers. 5

11 Therekore, thus saith the Lorde: beholde, I will send a plague vpon them, whiche they shall not be able to escape: and they Hall crye vnto me, and J wyl not heare them.

12 Then shall the townes of Juda, and the citizens of terufatem go and call

Zach. vu. b.

Deut 35. c. ie vpon their gods vnto whom they made their oblations: but they shall not be able to helpe them in tyme of ere. il. %.

their tronble.
13 Jor as manp tities as thou hast, O
Juda, so many gods hast thou had al-

euerthelelle, they would not obey

be in thee (O Hierusalem) fj shamekul aulters Hane pe rbb aue
(3 fav) to offer vpon them vnto Baal. C
14 Therkore pray not thou for this peg. w ple, byd neither prapse noz prayer fo; theut :fo2 though they tre vnto me in their trouble, yet wil J not heare them.
1j, What part Hath my beldued in tiny houle seing he Hath Workedabhontina: Aces tion, serunng many gods: The holy lleche offeringes in the teuple are gone from thee(D Juda and thou when thoy halt done capil ake thy boast olit. l
16 The Lord called thee a greene oline Merve tree, a faire one, a kruitekull one, 2good- °° lye one: but with great clamour hath the enemie {et fire bpon it, € the braunches of it are destroped. *
17 Forthe Lorde of hoastes that planted thee, hath deutled a plague for thee
(O thou houle of Hirael and Juda)for the euyll that ve haue done to prouoke ihe wrath, in that pe dyd serulce to
Hal. a
18 This (O Lorde) haue 2 learned of thee and vnderstande it: kor thou hat shewed me their imaginations. kad
19 But J am as a mecke lambe, an ore D that is carped away to be flayne, not knowing that they had deuised suche a Kaen tounsell against me (laping.] e Wyll destrop his meate with wood, and dic him out ok the lande of the lining, that his name chall neuer be though vpon. frees
20 Therkore J wyll beleche thee nowe aims
(O Lorde of hoastes) then righleous iudge, thou that tryest the raynes and the heartes, let me see thee auenged of them: kor vnto thee haue J connntted

my tause. Fi

21 The Lowe therfore spake thus of the

tittʒens of Anathoth that fought to lap uo me, saying: Preache not vnto bsiuthe name of the Torde, or cls thou Hatt dye of our handes: af

22 Thus (Fear) spake the Lowe hoastes:Weholde, J will vilit you,ya voung ine shal perishe with thee 4 yout aus 117 2 7 daughters vtterlp dye ol hunger,

23 Sotbatuone chall remaine: lo; 1 thecitisens of Anathoth well yee
à plague euen the pere of there tion. n

of leremie.
The xij. Chapter.

Che prophete marucpleth greatly at the prolperitie of the wicked, although

he conkelse God to be righteous. The Je wes are korlaken of the Lord. 10 e

speabeth agaynst curates. and preachers that seduce the people. 14 Che Lord threatneth destruction vnto the nations that bordered vpon Jurie, which troubled and vered it. — : ,

they growe, and bryng foortiy fruite: man regardeth it.

El

Efailviic. 7
Esa. v.a.

they boat nuch of thee, yet art thon 12 The destroyers tome ouer the bowers faͤrre from their © raynes. inthe desert euery way: for the lworde me: 3 But thou Lorde to whom Jam well. of the Torde doth eonsume from the knowen, thou that hast lene and proued one ende of the lande to the other, and

my heart,“ take then awap, like as a no fleshe hath rest.

flocke is tarved to the slaughter boule, 13 They haue lowen wheate, and reaped C
_ Eappoput them korthe dapof laughter. thornes, they haue taken heritage in
4. hobbe long Hall the lande inourne, possession, but it doth them no good: and all the hearbes of the fielde perishe and they were achamed ok pour kruites, for the wickednesse of them that dwell beraule of the great wrath of the Tord. therin: The cattell and the birdes are 14. Thus faith the Lord vpon all mip cupl

gone, pet lap they, tushe, God wyll not neighbours that lay bande on mine bez bee, destroy vs vtterivyg. vitage which J haue possessed, euen my

foe 5 Seyng thou art weerp in runnyng people of Ffracl: Weholde, J wyll

plucke them (namely Ilrael] out of their

runne with Doles: In a peateable sure lande, and put dut the Houle of Juda

lande thou mayest be lake: but howe krom among them. Deu iii e. pit thou do in the furious pride of 15 And when JJ haue rooted them out, 150 1 9
Jordane- Will de at one with them agayne, aud “""”

6 Ton thy brethren and thy kinrede haue wWyn haue mertie vpon them, ard 11115
Acogether dilpiled thee, and tryed out bryng them agayne cuery man to his

“x, pon thee altogether: Welcue them olbne heritage, and into his lande. not though they speake faire wordes to 16 And pr they namely that trouble my peo» che, ple wyll learne the wapes of them to

8 7 As fo mec I tar I haut forsaken nine sweare bympname, the Torde lyueth,

dune dwellyng place and lekt nine he- Ipke as they learned my people 0 tage: my lpfe allo that J loue so well, kweare by Baal, then {halt they be built

haue I geuen into the hãndes of upne among my people:
E s ech

17 But yk they wyll not obey, then wyll

Vie heritage is betome vnto me as J roote out the lame folke, and destroy

allon in the wood: it er
2 ib cryed out vpon. them, salth the Lorde. ine, therfore haue J fozlaken it. — 5

The

Mat.xxii.b.

——— a | eee
Th 8 pro hecie

— — The x. Chapter.

Che dellruction of the Jewes is peefigured, and their sparsyng abrode. rinohy
Ilraei was receaued to be the people of God, and why they were korsagen.

Hus fatth the Lorde
NE Slpnto me: Go thy way

not be wet.

2 7 Then J got me a girdle actordyng to the conimaunde-

ment of the Lorde, and put it about my

lopnes.

3 After this, the letonde tyme the Lorde

spake vnto me agapne.

4 Take the girdle that thou Hatt prepared and put about thee, and get thee vp, and go vnto Euphrates, and
Hyde it there ma hole of the rocke.

5 So went J, and hyd it at Euphrates, asthe Lorde tconmmaunded me.

6 And it happened long after this, that the Lorde spake vnto me: Up, and get thee to Euphrates, € ketche the girdle

from thence, which J commaunded

thee to hyde there. N

5 Then went J to Euphrates, c digged vp, and teke the girdle from the place
Where F had hid it: and beholde, the girdle Was torrupt, so that it was profitable for nothyng. 1

8 Then sayde the Lorde vnto me,

9 Thus saith the Lorde, Euen fo wyll
FJ corrupt the pade of Juda, and the
Dye mynde of Hierulalem.

leeviic. 10 This people is a wicked people, thep

ine Wyll not heare my worde, they kolowe the wicked imaginations of their owne
Heart, and hang vpon straunge gods, them they serue and worship, and therfoze they shalbe as this breeche that serueth for nothyng.

11 For as siraptip as a girdle lpeth vpon a mans loynes, fo straytly dyd bynde the whole honse of Israel, and the whole Houle of Juda vnto me faith

Deut ii, the Logde: that they myght be my anda people, that they might haue a glorions

name, that they nught be in hondur:but they Woulde not obey me.

11 Therfore lay this riddle before them, and lay, Thus fatch the Lorde God of
Ilrael: Enery pot Mhalve kylled with
Wine. And they shall fay vnto thee,
Thinkest thou we knowe not that euer pot shalbe fylled with wine z

18 Tell the kyng and the queene, Humble

z Then shalt thou fay vnto them faith the Lorde: Beholde J a all the inhabitours ok this fande with drunkennelle, the kynges that {yt vpon
Dauids stoole, the priestes propheres with all that dwell at Hierufalem.
14 And J wyll {et them one agayntt ang: ther, yea the fathers against the fonnes L faith the Lorde: J Wyll not pardon them, Y wyll not {pare them, nor haue pitie vbpon them: but destroy them.
15 Weave, geue eare, take not disdayne at it: foz it is the Lorde hym selfe that speaketh. oe 3
Honour the Lode pour God or he take his light from you, and or ener pour keete Humble in darekneffe at the hyll:lest when pon loke for the lyght, he turne it into the shadowe and darcknesse ok death. i
17 But il pe wyll not heare me that geue ou secrete warnyng, Jwyll mourne from my whole heart fo2 pour stubburnneste: Piteduslp wyll J Weepe, 1e and the teares Mall guthe ont of mine. the. epes, for the Lordes flocke shalbe carted, wap taptine. ö

pour selues, sit pou downe lolve, for pour dignitie shalbe throwen dolbne, and the trowne of pour glorie Hall fall from pour head.

15 The cities towarde the lonth Malbe fut bp, and no man all open them:

all Juda Chalbe carped away captiue, fo that none Mall remapne.

20 Tpft vp pour epes, aud beholdt them that tome from the north, where l- the flocke [O thou lande] that was genen le and where are thy fat and riche

cepe:

21 i whom wile shou make thy wor D igs when the eneniie Hall come vpon the 5 Ke for thou hast taught them thy lelke- a made them maisters ouer thee S 1 not sorowe foe 5 5 1 ona wor man trauaplyng with childe-

22 And (Fehon wouter then fay in pp heart, waherfore come thele thun wt on mez Euen for the multttude 191 5 blasphemies fhall thy hynder P and thy feete be diltouered.

his
23 Map aman of Inde haun,

aue, and the tat of the mountayne her

of Ieremie. . —

pour trust in deteiptkull thinges.

ted fo, may ve that be exertised in 26 Therfore Hall Pturne thy clothes ozciib. .

tuyll, do 80

od: e hertore wyll J (catter them like as 27 Thy adulteries, thy neyg

che frubble that is taken away wich the fonth wynde. As 4

5 This shalbe pour portion and the portion ok your mealure wherwith pe shalbe rewaͤrded of mic faith) the Lorde, becdauuse ve haue forgotten me, and put

ouer thy head, and dilcouer thy shame.

inges, thy chanzefull whoredome on the hylles in the fieldes, and thy abhominations

haue J seene: wo be vnto thee (O Hie-

rulalem) Wyle thou neuer be clenled any moze: O; When chall that bee

„ it ere xiiij. Chapter. : ne:

* 10 the dearth at thoutoe come in Jurie. Che praper oł the people athyng mercieè ok the Lorde. ie Che bnifaithtull people are not hearde. 12 Ok praper, fallyng- and of kalle prophetes that leduce the peopffe.

che wed vnto Feremte tonteruyng the dearth ok the kruites.

Juda hath mourned,

his gates are desolate,

they are brought to heauinesle, euen vnto the grounde, and

the tryt of Hierulalem goeth vp. f

3 The Tordes (ent their seruauntes to fetche water, and when they came to

the welles, they did finde no Water, but karted their veslels home emptie: they be ashanred and confounded, and touer

their heades. — mib 4. Foz the grounde is drped, betause there commeth no rayne vpon it: the plowmen allo be achamed and cover their heades.
5 Po hynde allo forsoke the young enue that be brought foorth in the lelde, becaufe there Was no grasle.

The wylde alles did stande in the bye places, and drewe in their winde Ike

he Dragons, their eyes did faple foz

ant ok grasse.

87 Doubtlesle our owne witkednesse

doth rewarde vs: but Lo
5 de do thou

bang, to thy uame, though dur
: nlgrelsion and sinnes be many, aud
Ryu thee haue we sinned.

b. e 3 “FOr thou art the tomfort and helpe

s UO Alracl in the tyme ok trouble: Why a dube as a raunger in the lande,

00 5 one that goeth his tourney, and

* 0 in only to remayne fora night: wie wylt thou make thy felfe a ant e, AND as it were a giannt that
‘tn not helpe- But thou O Wore

he middest of vs and thy name

Stalled Dpon of vs, forfake bs not.

5 no : : | ro He worde ofthe Lode 10 Thus hath the Lorde layne vnto his

people, seyng they haue had such a lust to Wander abrode, and haue not refrapned their fecte: therfore the Lorde hath no pleasure in them, but he wyll nowe bring againe to remembraunte all their mildeedes, and punishe all their hnnes.

Rea cuen thus sayde the Lode vnto

me: Thou shalt not pray to do this 0%, people good. =
12 For though they fat, J wyll not heare their prayers, and though they offer burnt offeringes and fatvifices, pet wyll not J accept them: for J wyilt destroy them with the Nvozde, hunger, and pestilente. i —
13 Then aunswered J: O Lode God, the prophetes fay vnto them, Tushe, tere, . ye shall neede tofeare no sworde, and Sophonic. no hunger shall come vpon you: but the lr
Lorde shall geue vou sure rest in this x. plate. 4
14. And the Lorde fayde vnto me, The C peophetes preach lpes in my nanie, wheras J haue not sent thein, neither 10 . gaue Ithem any charge, neither did J peake bnto them:pet they preache vnto pou falle visions, charming, vanitie, and deteiptkulnesse of their owne heart.
15 Therkore thus saith the Lorde: As for thole prophetes that preache in my name, whom Jneuerthelesse haue not lent, and thatfap, Tushe, there shali no sworde nor hunger be in this laude: with [worde and with hunger Mall Z. hi. those prophetes perishe.

16 And the people to whom they preache

albe caft out of Hierulalem, dye of
Batic and be slayne with the forde, and there shalbe no man to burpthem, lere i both they and their wiues, their 1 n

S |
, and their baughters: for thus wyll ) and there comet

Thread, and.ii.e.

Yere.viitc.

Jere. vu. d. xl. C xilli. b.
Exc. x illi. e.

Exe. v. c.

lete. x vi. a.

4 Reg. 27.2.

poure their wickednesse vpon them.
17 This Kale thou fay allo vnto them ine eyes shall weepe withont teas-

{png day and nyght: for my people Hat: - be destroyed with great harme, and

shall perishe with a great plague.

13 For pf go into the fielde, to, it lpeth

all full of lapne men: It J come into the titie, lo, they be all famished of hunger: pea their prophetes also and
11 0 5 shalbe led into an vnünowen ande. „*
19 Hast theu then viterlp korsaken Juda-
Doest thou lo abhortre Sion: Wherkore
Hatt thou fo plagued vs, that We tan

be healed no moze: We loked for pete,
The. xv. Chapter.

che Lorde wyll not heare Moyles or Daron pf they prav for the people, but wyll wrappe them in many miferics, Che caute ot luch great mileries.

us spake the Torde

onto me, Though
Movyses and Samuel stoode before ine, pet
8 haue J no heart to this people: driue them
Awap, that ep map

go out of in fight.

2 And pk they lap vnto thee, whyther
Mail we go: then tell them, The Lode geueth yon this annlwere: Some bnto death, fone to the Mode, some to hunger, sonie into taptiuttie.

3 Foz J wyll bryng foure plagues bpon them, faith the Lorde: The sWorde thal flay them, the dogges shall teare them in peeces, 'the foules of the apze and beastes of the carth shall eate them vp, aud destrop them. ;

4. J wyll {eatter them about alfo in all kingdomes and landes to be plagued, betause of * Manasses the sonne of hesebta kyug of Juda, kor the thynges that he did in Hierusalem.

5 Who shall then haue pitie vpon thee
O Pierusalem- Who chalve sorie for thee- Dz who Mall make intertession to obtayne peace for thee-

6 Seing thou goest from me, and ture nest backwarde, faith the Torde: therfore I dyd stretcht out myne hande az gainst thee to destroy thee, and J haue
— fone for thee so long that J am

kerie. 1651 — 24

h no good, for t tyme ok health, and lo here is! be but trouble. ? s notheyng

20 We knowledge (O Lorne). mildeedes, and the sinnes a om fn thers: fo2 we haue offended thee,

21 Calt vs not of( O Lord) for thy names fake, forget not thy louyng kindnelle duerthrowe not the throne ok thine honour, breake not the touenaunt that eon 1 made with vs. N

22 Are there any among the gods of

gentiles that fende rayne, a geue a auen

_, Show2es from heauen- Art not thou et

thy elfe our Lorde God: We wylltrust ez

in the, for thou doest all thele thynges. Neat

khn, xlixg
(8) The ten, le at Hir alrm g tally tde Cate of
Soda

My beeault be bos prea

7 Jhaue stattred them abrode with the 1 kanne of euer fide of the land, J haue ler i
Wasted my people and destroped them, pet they haue had no lust to turne from their owne wapes. f
IJ haue made their widowes mo in number then the sandes of the sea, vpon the mothers of their children oyu J bryng a destroper in the noone day:
*fodaynly and vnawares did J leude
à feare vpon their cities.
She that hath borne fenen children, hath none, her heart is full of sor oe: the sunne doth fayte her in the clcare cs dap, (he is conkounded and fantic for very heauinesse: As for thofethat te mayne, J wyll delluer them buto the sworde before their cuennes, faut) che
Worde. 4 1 te
10 O mother, alas that thou euer DOU sere beare me, a brawler and rebüker of the
Whole lande: though J neuer iene 5 aera vpon blurie, yet all men spea euyll vpon me. a u And the Lord aunswered me. ange 10 1 thy tenmaunt shall haue. nm meat de
Coie not J to thee when oud mie one trouble,eelpetier when eiten Bees opprelleth thee z : ean
12 ath rte hurt another- gh ee metall that tommeth krom the nen) Jr another: ol) ill xvi & i; As kor thy riches and treat J . gene them out into a pra

i. Tess ya

niouep,

t

eid,
Ne.

the lWorde

RV. 2.

money, but because of all thy sinnes that

of leremie. . ox

Ire my plagues then fo great that they

u halt done in all thy coastes. may neuer be healed: Wylt thou be as
; 1750 F wyll bryng thee with thine one that is false, and isa 5 that kenemtes into à lande that thou knowest falleth, and can not continues

not: for the fire that is uindled in myne 19 Upon thele wordes, thus layde the

indignation {hall burne pou vp.

O Loe thon knowest, therfore remember me, aud vilite me, reuenge me ofmy perlecutours i take nie not krom this like in the tyme ol thine anger, thou znowest that for thy fake J suffer re-

) 1 When J had founde thy wordes J 20

did tate them vp greedyly, they haue made my heart iopfull and glad: for thy name was called vpon me O Lorde
God ok hoastes.

17, Idwell not among the stozners, nei-

ther is my delight therin: but J dwell 21

alone becaule of thy hande, for thou hast lylled me with bitternefle.
8 Shall my heauinelse endure for euer-

Tode vnto me, Ik thou wylt turne agayne, J Mall {ct thee in my seruite, and pf thou wylt take out that is precious from the vile, thon shalt be euen as myne owne inouth: they teexxia.

the thynges

Mall convert vnto thee, but turne not

thou vnto them.

And fo shall J make thee a strong brasen wall agaynt this people, they shall fyght agaynst thee, but they halt not preuaple: for I mp felfe wyll be
With thee, to helpe thee and deliver thee, faith the Lode:

And J will rid thee out of the handes of the wicked, and deliuer thee out ol the handes ol tirauntes.

Iere. i. c.

q The. xvj. Chapter.

ie prophecieth the miterie ofthe Je wes. 2 he sheweth that che worthtpppng ok images and the contempt of Gods la we, is caute of their miferte. 13 He prophe-

cieth the captiuitie of Babplon, and their
15 The callyng of the gentiles.

Du sapde the Lore 7
7 vnto me:

Thou shalt take thee no wife, uor beget chileden in this place.
£ We Foz of the children

That ave borne in this plate, of their mothers that haue borne ail bg Epete fathers that 1

min ; the Lone. his lande, thus saith

4 Thep chall dye an horrible death, no an shall weepe fo? them, noz bury a but they Mhallipe as dunge vpon

de curth: they (hail perishe through shald hunger, and their bodyes halbe nnate kor the kowles ofthe ayze, and beastes of the earth.

5 85 thus saith the Lorde, Go not thou f 9 05 Heute ot mournyng nor come to
1 and weepe for them: for J fat) alien mp peace from this people mere Lomde, pea my favour and nip

V

a Cel

N 1585 ay * 5 |

¢

Io

And in this lande hall they dye olde

and shall not be buryed: no tippe o2 chaue hy selke for them.

beweepe them, no man hall

deliueraunce front thence agapne.

They shall not wryng their handes 2 in mournyng Wile on their dead one to comfort another: one shall not offer another the cup of confolation, to forget their heauinesse for their father and mother. 40

Thon Malt not go into their feast . cor xv b. house, to sit downe to cate o2 drynke with them: f

Foz thus saith the Loade of hoasteg the God of Ilrael: 2eholde, J Hatt ls take away but of thts plate the boyce ok mirth and gladnesse, the voytce of the bridegrome and ot the bride, vea and that in pour dayes, that pe may lec it.

Nowe when thou shewest this people all these wordes, and they lay vnto thee 3 *zaberfoze Hath the L020 deuiled Iere. v. d, all this great plague for vs: 02 what is the offence and sinne that we haue done agaynst the Lorde our God-

Then make thouthenn this aunstbere:
Betaule pour fathers haue forlaken Pur. me, faith the Lorde, and haue Walked lere. vi b. akter straunge gods, whom they honoured and worshipped: but me haue they forsaken, aud haue not kept my

pene, 2 And

mies haue exteeded the wickednesse of

ö pyour fathers: for euery one of you hath folowed the frowarde and eupll timaginatlons of his owne heart, and is not obedient vnto me.

Deut abc. 13 Therfore wyll J cat vou out of this lande, into a landẽ that ve and pour fathers knowe not: and there thall ve ferue straunge gods dap and uyght, there wyll I thee pou no faudur.

C 14 Beholde therfore laith the Lorde the

lere xi. D dupes are come that it fall no moze be sayd: The Lorde liueth which brought

the chuldren of Ilrael out of the laude of

Egypt:

15 Wut it chalbe sapde, The Lorde liueth chat brought the chüldzen of Preaek from the north, and from all landes where he had {eattered them: for J wyl bryng them agayne into the lande that J gaue their fathers.

16 Beholde, salth the Lozde, J Wyll sende out nianp fisshers to take them,

and alter that wyll J sende out many

Mat- ni. c.

The. xvij. Chapter.

Che frowardnesse of the Jewes. 5 Curled be those that put their confidence in man, and thole blelled that trust in od. Mans heart is wicked. 10 God is the searcher ok the heart. 3 The liupng waters are kortanen. 21 The halowyng of the Sabbath

is commaunded. eh jj tribe of Juda) is witten
7 in the table of pour heartes, and grauen so vpon the edges of pour aulters with a penne ok iron, and with an

N

Adamant clawe:

2 That as the fathers thinke vpon their

cChildren, fo thinke you also vpon pour

aulters, wooddes, thicke trees, hye hylles, mountaynes, and fieldes.

lere xv. 3 Wherkoze, J wyll make my mount xx.b. that standeth in the fielde, all pour substaunce and treasure to be spopled, for the great sinne that ye haue done vpon pour bye places thoughout au the

coattes of our lande.

4 He shalbe tast out also from the heritage that J gaue you: and J Wyll subdue por vnder the heauie bondage of pour enemies, in a lande that pe knowe not: for pe haue ministred fire to mine

indignation, which Mall burne euer- 10

moe.

The propheclie

Ieevid, 12 And pe with pour shamefull blasphe- hunters, to hunt them out krom

17 Jo mine eves behold all their wayes

18 But first wyll H suffitiently rewarde

20 Hobe can à man make those his gods,
21 And therfore J wyll once teach them,

Our sinne [O pe of the 5 Thus saith the Lorde, Cursed be the palin

6 Me halbe like the heath that groweth

7 Oblesled is the man that putteth his Rut

3 For he chalbe as a tree that isplanted da,

mountapnes and hylles, and o 5 caues of tone. ut Of the

and they tan not be hyd fro my face-ney? ther tan their wicked derdes be kept tlole out of my sight.

their Hamefal blasphemies and si becaufe they haue defiled my lande 0 with their Hinckyng cavions and their e abhonnnations, Wherwith they haue oa" filled mine heritage. wa
O Lorde nip strength, my power aud eee refuge in tyme of trouble: the gentiles S22 shall tome vnto thee from the endes of dan the wonlde, and lap, Gerply dur fathers 5 haue cleaned vnto lyes, their idols are ron we

but bapne and vnprokitable. ¢ which are not able to be gods:

faith the Lorde, J wyll shewe them mp hande and myp polber,andthey shall knowe that my name is the Lorde,

man that putteth his trust in man, and E that taketh fleshe for his arme, and he andxinns
Whole heart departeth from the Word. Fe

in wildernesse: As for the good thyng that is for to come, he shall not fee it, but
Dibell in a drye place of the wudernesse, in a salt and vnoctupied lande.

trutt inthe Lorde, and whole hope is . in the Lorde hym selfe. 1

Prou. x. bythe water fine, Which ipreadeth ou! the roote vnto moyfineffe, whom 0 heate can not harme when it tomme 5 but his teafe halbe greene: And Tie there growe but litle fruite beau * drouth, pet is he not carefull, but DF uer leaueth of to bryng foorth es "ge
Among all thynges, man hat 1 85 mot eee cotta ann e 0 o shall then knowe it- aid me auen 155 Lorde searche ed Apo grounde or the heart, x trye the ra and

of Ieremie.

carp rewarde enerp man atcordyng to
5 wis tvayes, and actordyng to the fruite

4 orkes. he partrich mabethanelt of egges, u rich che layed not: he tommeth bp vi
+ ches but not righteoufly, in the middest of his life nut he leane them bebpnde vm, x at the lat be founde a very foole.

u But thou (O Torde) whole throne is mot glortous, extellent, and of most antiguttle, why! dwellest in the place of

ly rest:

15 art the comfort of Jlcael, all

dep that fozsake thee halbe confoun-

ped, all they that do Depart from thee

a shalde witten in earth: *foz they haue

% folsaken the Lorde the very condutte of u the waters oklpfe.

14 Heale me O Lorde, and F chalbe whole: saue thou me, c J halbe laued: for thou art my prayle.

j Beholde, these men lay vnto me, where is the worde of the Lorde: let it come nolbe.

16 Wheras J neuerthelesse obediently folowed thee as a sheephearde, g haue

not vntalled taken this office bpon me, this knowelt thou well: mp wordes

also were ryght vefoze thee.
17 Benot thou terrible vnto me O Loyd: dns, lar thou art he in whom J hope when
Jam m peril.

8 Let mp perfecutours be confounded, but not nie: let them be afrayde, and not me: Thou shalt bryng vpon them the tyme of plague, and chalt destroy them right fore, '

1h Thns hath the Lorde sapde vnto me,

Go and stande vnder the gate where-

ö z

Jann the people and the kynges ot

UDA go out and in, pea vnder all the gales of Hierulalem,

20 And lap vnto them, Peare the worde ofthe Loyde ye kynges of Juda, and

all thou people of Juda, and all the

citesins of Hierulalem, that go throu this gate. i ee

(xll.

21 Thus the Lorde cõmaundeth, Take Exod.33.4. heede fo2 pour lynes that pe cary no Daub.

burthen vpon you in the Sabbath, to bop it through the gates of Hierualem.

22 Be (hall beare no burthen also ont ot :

pour houses in the Sabbath, you shall do no labour therin: but halowe the oe “as Itommaunded pour fa

23 Howbeit they obeyed nie not, neither hearkened they vnto me: but were obstinate t Qubburne, and neither obeyed me, nor receaued my correction.

24. Meherthelesse, vf ye wpll heare me saich the Lorde, and beare no burthen into the citie through this gate vponthe
Sabbath, vl ve wyll halowe the Sabbath, so that e do no wozke therin:

25 Then (hall there go through the gates of this citie kynges and princes that thal lit vpon the throne ol Dad, they shalbe carped vpon charrettes, and ride bpon hoͤrses, both they ee their printes: pea whole Juda and all the citez ins of
Hierulalen hall go here through, and this citte shall euer be inhabited.

26 There Malt come men allo from the cities ol Juda from about Hierulalem, and from the lande of wWeniamin, from the plaine fieldes, from the moũtapnes, and from the wildernesse, which shall bryng burnt offerynges, sacrifites, oblations, and incenfe, and offer vp thankelgeuyng in the houle of the Lorde.

27 But pf ye Wyll not be obedient vnto me to halowe the Sabbath, fo that ye
Wyll beare pour burthens through the gates of Hierulalem vpon the Sabbath: then Malt J let fire vpon the gates of Hierulalem, and it (hall burne bp the houses of Hiernlalem, and no man shalbe able to quenche it.

¢ The. xviij. Chapter.
God beweth vy the example of a potter. that it ts in his power to deltroy the difpifersot
B wonde- and to heipe Wen agate when thep amende. 18 The conspiracie of the Jewes agapnst Jeremie, 19 His praper agapntt his aduerkaries.

1 — dis is another com-

2 5 mumtcation that God sip had with Jeremie,

1 Ue Hsaping:
8067555 edo downe
A ito the potters houle, e there chal J tell hee

more of my mynde,.

3 Nowe when JJ came to the potters honse, J aan hym makyng his
Worke vpon a whcele.

4 The vessell that the potter made ol clap, brake among his handes: So he begänaneibe, and made another bucht

¢

Exod.xx.d.

- a

The prophecie

actordpng to his mynde. to go into a wap not pfed to
5 Then sapde the Lorde thus vnto me: lo iust men.) to be troden

Tabb. 6 Pap not J do with pou as this pot-
Rona c. ter doth O pe house of Jlrael laith the
) f Boner Beholde pe house of Israel, pe are in my hande, euen as the lapis in

the potters hande.

Fate, 7 When Jtake in hande to roote out,

to destrop, or to waste away any people
OrRpngdome: len 3 If that people agapnst whom J

Hane thus deuiled, conuert from their wickednessle, J repent of the plague that J deuiled to bryng bpon theni. iRegave, 9 Agapne, when JJ take in hande to builde or to plant a people or a Apngdome:
10 If the fame people do euyll before me and heave not mp vopte, J repent ofthe good that J haue deuised kor them.

11 Speake nowe therfore vnto whole

70 uda, and to them that dwell at Hieru-

alem, thus laith the Lorde, Weholde

Jam deuispng a plagne for vou, and am

takyng athyng in bande agapnst vou:

*therkore let euerp man turne from

his eupll wap, and take vpon von the

thyng that is good and ryght.

Iercaciüa. 12 But thep sapde, No niore of this, we
Wyll folowe our owne imaginations, and do euerp man accordpng to the wiltulnesse of his owne mynde.

13 Therkore thus saith the Lode, Alke among the heathen pf any man haue hearde such horrible thynges, as the

ö mayden Ilrael hath done?

a awe 14 xoyilaman fozsake the snowe of Li-

treme mab: banus, which tommeth from the rocke

of the fielde: Or shall the colde flowyng

Jore. xxv A. and.xxxv,¢
Jonas. iu. b.

Serge Waters that conmeth from another bag ebe plate be forlanen:

rer 15 Wut my people Hath forgotten me,

fowicarrt, they haue made facrifice in vapne, and

prone. e their prophetes make them fall in their

born, Wa pes from the auncient pathes, and

n f

16 Wherethrough they hau their lande into an euctlattyng n j tau ep, sa

5 herbp, lhalbe let ir
Wen abated and mdse

17 With au cast wynde wyll them bekore their enemies: 5 their destruction commeth, J Wil turne my backe vpon them, but not my face

18 Thensapd they Come, iet bs imagine kann somethyng agapnst this Jerenne: for the priestes Thali not be dettitute of the latbe neither Chall the wile men be destitute of counsaple, noz the prophetes destitute of the worde of God: Come and let bs finite hym with the tongue, and let vs not marke all his Wordes.

5 Consider me O Lorde, and heare the wee Hs tty enemies.

20 Shall they retonpente eupll for good: p for they haue digged a pit fa? my Toute: th
Remember howe that J stoode before Merz tice to speake good for them, and to turne away thy wrath from them.

21. Therkore, let their chitdzen dye of hunger, and let them be oppressed with Paar the lworve: Let thew wes be robbed l of their children, and become widowes, let their hulbandes be flapne, let their poung men be kplled with the horde in the fielde. |

22 thet the noyse be hearde out of their houses when thou bryngest the murtherer sodaynlp vpon them: *foz they ler haue digged a pit to take me, and layde
{nares for my feete.

23 Bet Tode thou knowest all their counlaple, that they haue deulsed to flay me, forgeue not their wickednelle, and let not their finnes be put out of thy fight, but let them be iudged before thee as giltie: this do thou bnto them ine the tyme of thine indignation.

The. xix. Chapter. —
He prophecteth the destruction of Hierulalem, kor the contempt and dilpsiyng

ol the worde of God.

priestes,

Hus fayde the Lowe:
Go thy wap and bupe thee an earthen pit: cher, and bryng foorth

the senatours € chiefe

Unto the valley oft he

chitdzen of hennom, which weth witb ont the east gate, and chewe them ther the Wordes that F thalt tell ther “ve the

3 And say thus bnto chem, ne gud . worde of the Lorde pe hinges ot thus and pe titezins of Hierusalent, God of. faith the Lorde of hoastes the Flath

scael: Weholde, 2 Wpil bryng suche

vpon this place, that the cares

a plague bpol ty) 1 8

okall that hearc it shall glove:

And that betaule they haue forsaken

+ ine and vnhalowed this plate, and haue offered in tt Duta straunge gods, whom neither they, their fathers, nor the kynges of Juda haue ünowen: they pane filled this place allo with the blood of innocentes.

And they haue {et vp an aulter vnto
Baal, to burne their thildren fora burnt olfring vnto Waal, whiche JJ neither a commaunded nor charged them, neither thought once thervpon.

s Weholde therfore the time connneth

(faith the Lozbe) that this place (hail

no more be called Thopheth, nor the valley of the chyldren of Pennom, but the valley of laughter.

5 7 Jop in this place wyll Y boyng to

naught the counsaple of Juda and hie-

rusalem, and kyll them downe with the

lworde before their enemies: and J

wyll deltuer them into the handes of

them that seeke their liues, and their dead carkalles will J geue to be meate for the foules of the apre, € the beastes

ol the fielde.

3 And J will make this citie fo desolate and delpised, that whosoeuer goeth thereby shalbe abashed, and ic vpon

anilb her, because of ali her plagues.

ab. 9 J will feede them also with the firth of their sonnes and their daughters,
"pea euery one Mall eate vp another in

ia 5

Lt.

Ref,

ec. lc uf

“OF | Gli emie.

the belieging x straytnesfe wherewith their enemies (that tecke their tines) Hall a ae in.

Io And the pitcher shalt thou breake in
1 ok the men that goeth with

11 And fap vnto them, Thus laith the

Ci

Lorde of hoastes: Euen lo wyll I de- lere via.

stroy this people and kitie, as a man breaketh an earthen veslell that can not

be made whole agayne: in Thopheth lere vid.

shall they be buried, for they Hall haue none other place.

12 Thus wyll J do vnto this place allo gr

faith the Lorde, and to them that del therin, pea J wyll make this atic as
Thopheth.

z Forthe houses of Hierusalem, and the houles of the kynges of Juda chalbe deliled line as Thopheth, and so shal al the houles in Whole roofes they did lacvifice vuto all the hoast of heauen, and
— 5 deinke offerings vnto straunge gods. 5

14 Andso Jeremie tame from Thopheth where the Lorde had sent hym to prophesie, and stoode in the tourt of the Houle of the Lorde, and spake to all the people, a

15 Thus laith the Lorde of hoastes the
God ol Ilrael: Beholde, J will bryng bpon this citic, and vpon eucry towne about it, all the plagues that J haue

deuised against them, *becaule they brave,

haue ben obstmate, and would not obay mp warninges.

(The. xx. Chapter.

> Jeremie is (mitten and calt into prplon foz preaching of the worde ol God. ; he plophecieth the captiuit ie of Babylon. 7 He complar neth that he isa mocking
Rocke for the worde of God. 9 Be 18 compelled by the spirite to preache the worde.

— benphashurthe
Jf Jéfiiprct the sonne of Emmer, chiele

HANG 14: in thehoule okthe
TAK yey Lode, hearde
AVA VEEN Pevemte preache

BA FA tele wordes [fo
MAO Ke edkastlp] a "pe {mote Jeme, and put hym in the prison thãt is
1 he hye gate of Seniamnin towardes
Mpoule of the Lo de. ze next dap folowing Phachur bought Jeremie out of the 115 ae

gaynt: Then saide Heremie vnto hum,
The Lorde shall call thee no moze
Phashur (that is excellent and increating) but Magor that is kearekull and akraide] euery where.

Foz thus {ath the Lowe: Beholde,
I wil make thee afraide, euen thy lelfe, and all that fauour thee, which Mall perishe with the sworde oftheir enemies, enen before thy fate, and J wyll geue whole Juda into the hands of the ling of Babylon, whiche Hall cary some vnto Babylon pxfonces, and flay lone
With the siworde. 8

(0 5 Poreouer

. Keg xx. e 5
Tere. xv. c.
Ind. x vi. a.

ol God, who tan not deceaue no; be becraurd.

Iere. vl. b.

qb) he cs and
Ache as were

ik thep coulae finde bpm to
Halt in any thing, where
Tozcthet might atcule hym to thebpng.

lob. x. c.

nian.

8 Jon since J began to preache, J cryed

out against violencle, and exclamied ae gainst oppression: for the whiche taule they cast the worde of the Lorde in my teeth, to mp reproche continually,

9 mige IJ thought from heute-

foorth not to speake of Hpi, norz to preache any more in his name: but the
Worde of the Lorde was a very burning fire in my heart and in my bones, whiche when J woulde haue stopped,
I might not.

Veryly J hearde the euplil reportes of many, tercour was on euerp fide ok me: complapne vpon hym fay they, and We wyll tell his tale: Bea all mpne owne tompanions, and suche as were tonnersaunt with me, lay in wayte foz nip baiting, saping: peraduenture he wylbe deceaued, and fo Halt we pre-

The. xx. Chapter.

5 He prophecieth that Jedekias shalbe taken, and the citie burned.

Hele arethe wordes that the lord
I {pate vnto

19) ES) ry 2

Jerenic, what time as kyng Zedeqj Bias fent vnto him Phashur the sonne of Melchias, € Sophonias the sonne of Maasias priest, saping:

2 Alke counsayle at the Lorde (we prap thee) on our behalfe, for Nabuchodonozorthe king of Babylon besiegeth vs: if

The prophecie

nayle against hyni, and ve eon 11 2 auenged of
Wut the Torde stoode by me niightle giaunt, therefore un rene tours fell and coulde do nothing: they: chalbe soze confounded, for they baie done bniwifelp, hep shall haue an euerlasting chame, which shau neuer be fo:
W. An nowe O Tode of yo;

12 And nowe orde ok hoaste trict the righteous, Which known d rapnes and the very heartes, let me see them puniched: for vnto thee J haue detlared my cause.

B Sing vnto the Tord and prayse hymn: for he hath delinered the louie of the
— 19 krom the hande ok the vio-

ent. 5

14. Curled be the day wherein J was Toh borne, vnhappy be the day wherein my tec x, mother brought mie foorth. ente

15 Curled be the man that brought my father the tidinges to make hym gain, saying, Thou batt begotten a sonne:

16 Let it happen vnto that man, as to the cities whiche the Lorde turned bpsidedowne and repented not: Let hym heare crying in the mogning, aud we at noone day lamientable howling, ae

1 affettu

17 Why sluest thou not me alsoonc as 1 5 came out of my mothers wombe: 02 une that my mother had ben my graue her tele felfe, that the byrth nught not haue ran tome out, vut remayned stuͤl in her? ane

18 Wherekore tame J foorth of my mo- au thers wombe: to hãue experience of la- . bour and sorowe, and to leade imp lyfe

with shame-

II

(¢) heme odly men in ometmes u-

FID away

With the bas

the Lorde (peraduenture) Wyll deale
With bs according to his marnaylous power, and take hym from bs. j
3 Then spake Jerenue: Geuc Zedechias this aunswere. frac:
4 Thus faith the Low God ol Pra .
Weholde, J wyll turne backe the 15 4 ponsthat pe haue in pout handen 4 with pe fight against the king of Wie lon and the Chaldees, whiche be 9 vou rounde about the walles, nem wyll bryng them together into th dest of this titie. 5 And

my selfe will fight agaiust you
§ wan nettete bed hände, aud with a mightie le great displeasure ble wrath: 5 aa wyl finite them that dwell in e ghisdlte, bea both nien and cattell Chalk dye ofa great pestileuce.

A zutafter this (faith the Lorde) J
= 7 chälldelluer Zedemnas kyng of Buda, a and his fecuauntes, his people, aud such agare cltaped in the eitie from the pesttlente, worde, and hunger, into the power of Nabuthodondsor kung of Wabpjon, pea into the handes ok their enemies, into the handes of thole that foowe vpon their lives, Whiche Mail ute them with the lworde they shall not pitie them, they shal not {pare them, they {hall haue no mercy vpon them.

And vnto this people thou shalt fay,
„ chu laith the Lorde: Weholde, J lay bon: bekorc you the way of life and death.
Brit 9 Wholo abideth in the citte, shall perilhe either with the lworde, with hunger, or pestilenee: but wholo goeth out to holde on the Chaldees part that befiege it, he shall laue his ipfe, and (halt

~ of leremice.

Io

XIII]
Winne his sonle foz a pray. - 1
* For Y haue set my kate against this sv ertic (laith the Lorde) to plague it, and to do it no good: it must be geuen into

the hande of the kyng of Bab plon, and be brent with fire.

ul ale (Ons: Se 2 the

da lap thus: eave the worde o
Lowe:

12 O thou boule of Daum, thus faith

the Lowe: Minister rightedoulnelle Fe. and that soone, deltuer the opprelled Foes from biolent power,“ or euer nip terete Irena. ble wrath breake out Ipke a fire and

burne, so thar no man may quenche it

betause of the wickednesse of pour ina: ginations.

z Wehold faith the Lord, J wyll come krelvin

vpon thee that dwellest in the valleys, N rockes, and fieldes and lay, tuche, wee Perr
Will make bs afraide- o: Who wil conte u n b. into our houses:

and. xxii1e.

14 ‘ane Wyll bilite pou faith the Lord, ore

becaute of the wickednesse of pour inventions, and wyll kindle suche a fire in pour wood, as shall tonlume all that is about pou. =

0 ¶ The. xxij. Chapter,

he exhorteth the kyng of Juda to iudgement and righteguknelle. 9 why Dieruta. lem is brought into captiustie. 1 The death of Sellum the lonne of Josua is pro-

phecied.

us faith the
== Tod: Go downe

the kyng of Ju-
Eda, and fpeake

He there these wor-
2 7 bes, :
And sap: Heare

the worde of the

Lode thou king of Juda that sittest in the kyngly seate of Dauid, thou and thy leruauntes, and thy people that goeth in and out at theie gates.

3 Thus the Lord cömaundeth: Repe
Chittle and righteonsnelle, deliuer the lanteelled from the power of the bloent do not greene nor opprelle the

aunger, the katherlesse, nog the wi-

owe, and shed no in lood in this piace 0 notent b

A

Bi ie. rent.

a

‘into the house ok

4 And it pe kepe thele thinges faythful-

le, then shall there come in at the doore ol this house, kinges to sit vpson Wauids seate, they shalbe taried in charrets, and ride bpon horses, both they and their seruauntes, and their people.

But ifye wyll not be obedient vnto theie commanndementes, *Biweare 10 by mine owne selfe, aich the 2. ord, this Hebrevi.b honse shalbe waste.

6 For thus hath the Lorde {poten bo-

pon the kynges of Juda: Thou Gilead art brio me the head of Lihanus:
Shall I not make thee fo waste as the cities that no man d well in

75 I wyll prepare a destroper with his

Weapons for thee, to hewe downe thy especiall Cedar trees, and to tast them

in the fire.

P (ij) 8 And

‘The prophecie

S And all the people that go by this ci- rupt, and be cast without the gates of

Den.xxix d

Denaxixd tie, fluall fpealsc onc to another Wher-

fore Hath the Lorde done thus vnto this noble citic:

Then (hail it be aunlwered: Wetause they haue broken the couenaunt of tHe
Horde their God, and haue worshipped and lerued straunge Gods.

Mourne not ouer the dead, and be not

wo for them: but be forte for hyn that departeth awap, for he connneth not agayne, and seeth his natiue conntrey no more. u Forthus fateh the Lorde as touching
Seilum the sonne of Josias kyng of
Juda, whiche raigned after his father:
Whenhe ls caried out of this plate, he hall neuer tome hyther agayne.

Jor he shall dye in the place wherevnto he is led taptiue, and Mall fee this lande no moe. N

o Worth hym that bupldeth his house with vnrightedulnesse, and his parlours with the good that he hath gotten by violence, which neuer recompenceth his neighbours labour, no: papeth hym his hyre:

C 14 Who thinketh in hym selfe, J Wyll buylde mea wyde Houle and gozgious

Deu. xxix. d

il. Re. ix. b.
4. Re. xxilib

Il. Par. vil. d.

4. Reg. 23 c.

ii, Par. ill. e.

Efi vc. 1

Agge. i. a.

parlours, who tauseth windowes to

be hewentherin, and the seelinges and ioystes maketh he ol Cedar, and painteth them with Sinoper.

15 Thinkest thou to raigne nowe that thou batt inclosed thy selke with Cedar:

Did not thy father cate and drinke and prosper well, as long as he dealt with

equitie and righteoulnelle-

16 Pea, When he heiped the oppressed and poore to their right, then prolpered he well: From whence came this, but onlpe because he knewe me, faith the
Tode:

17 Meuerthelesse, as for thyne eyes and thyne heart they loke vpon conetoul nesse, to shed innocent blood, to do
Wong and violence.

dad, 18. And therekore thus faith the Lorde lexxxvid Addinst Jehoakim the sonne of Josias kyng of Juda: They {hail not mourne for hym las they ble to do Alas brother, alas fitter: neither shall they lay vnto him, Alas sir, alas for that noble prince.
9 But as an asse shall he be buried, tor-

Wende b

20 Clünbe vp the hyll of Zi

thou daughter Sion] ft spite La pon satan, ccye from allpattes:: foray
125 louers 1 destroped.

21 J gave thee warming whyle
Walt pet in prosperitie: but than tbe
F Wwyll not heare: And this maner hag thou bled from thy youth, that thoy wouldest neuer heave my voyte.

22. All thy heardmen chalbe deinen with the winde, and thy darlinges chalbe catyped awap into capttuitie: then shalt thou be brought to shame and contufi: on, because of all thy wickednes.

23 Thou that dwellest vpon Tibanus, and makest thy nest in the Cedar trees,

O howe litle shalt thou be regarded whenthyslorowe and panges tome vp- f ponthee, as vpon a woman trauayung we with chytdez lere xib.

24. As trnely as J linie faith the Lore, “> though Conantas the sonne of Je- lend hoahim kyng of Juda were the fignet v nt myright hande, pet wyll J pincke

25 And Y wyll gene thee into the Hande of them that seeke thy life, and into the

power of them that thou fearest, even

into the power of Pabuchodonozor the

kyng of Babylon, and into the power bk the Chaldees.

26 Moreouer, J wyll sende thee and thy E mother that bare thee into a Mraunge lande where pe were not bozue, and there hall ve dye.

27 But as foz the lande that ve wyll defire to returne vnto, ye Mall neuer tome at it agapue.

28 This man Conanias shalbe tyke au image robbed and tome in peeccs, aud like a vellell wherein there is no plea’ sure: Wherefore both he and his fecde adh awap, and cast into a an that they knowe not.

29 Othou earth, earth, earth, heare the

worde of the Lorde, te this
Thus faith the Tode, wan pe

man deshtute of chpldren faz 10 p

ritte (hall this man haue all hie g habe

neyther chall any of his leede 70 11

pie a8 to fit vpon the feate of +l

and to beare rule any more in Ju .

1€

= ol leremie.

CXV

The. xxiij. Chapter.

i He speaketh agairtt euill curates that maße hauocke of the klocke of the Lond. Ok

erlion of the remnaunt ol the Jewes to the kapth. The true lhephearde Christe is prophecied. 9 Igainst kalle prophetes.

comming of the hen a pro»

reacheth the worde of God, God conuerteth the heartes of the hearers. poe Bin prophetes that preache lies onder the name ol God. 32 The miracles of kalle prophetes. a

II htardes that de-
4% trop and statter lmp flocks, faith

WA VEG y Baberefore this is the saping of
2 the Lord God of
— IJsrael conterning the shepheardes that feede my ptople, Be scatter and thrust out my flocke, and loke not bpon them: therefore nowe Wyll J vilite the wickednesse of pour imaginations, faith the
Love.
3 And J wyll gather together the remnaunt of my flocke from all landes that had Driven them vnto, and will bing em agayne to their koldes, that they may grove and intrease.

4 J wuyll tet shepheardes also ouer them, whiche shali feede them: they shall no moze feare and dread, and there shall none of them be loste, faith the
Lode.

5 Bcholde, the tyme commeth faith

the Lobe, that J wyll rayle bp the

righteous braͤunche of Dauid,* Whiche yng fat beare rule, and he thal pol: per with wildome, and Mal fet vp equiia righteoulnesse agapne in the

bene 6 In his tyme shall Juda be faucd, and Ilrael chan dweil Without feare:

E Nxil c

thi xia,

aid ral oon is the nate that they thall cuen jghtebi bulneffe. the Lolde our right

57 Andtherekore beholde the time tommeth (ath the Lore, that it chalbe no
Dee fayde, the Lorde eth whiche

ought the chyldzen of Ilrael out of sae of Egypt:

the Lorde hiucth which brought

loorth and led the seede st toe odie of

Ilrael out of the north lande, and from all tountreys where J had stattred then: and they thal dwel in their owne lande agayne.

9 My heart breaketh in my body, be-

caͤuse of the falle prophetes all my bones thake, Jam become like a drunken man that by the reafon of wine can take nd rest, for very feare of the Lorde and his holy wordes.

10 Wetaulc the lande is full of adulterers, and thorowe (wearing it mourneth, and the pleasaunt pastures of the desert are dryed vp: pea the way that men take is wicked, and their power is nothing right. .

1 Foz the prophetes and the priestes them selues are polluted hypocrites, and their wickednelsse haue J founde in my hoult, faith the Torde.

12 Wherekore their Way shalbe flipperic C in the darknelle, wherein they may stacker and fall: fo2 J wyil bryng a plague bpon them, euen the pere of their bititation faith the Lode,

3 PH haue seeue kolly among the prophetes of Samaria, that preached foz
Waal, and decraued mp people of FE rael.

14 J haue feene allo among the prophetesot hierulalem foule adultrie, and presumptuous lyes: they take the most chaniekull inen by the hande, flattering them, o that they tan not returne from their wickednes: all thele with their citizeus are vnto me as Sodom, and as the inhabitours of Gomorre.

15 Therekore thus faity the Lorde of hoastes concerning these prophetes: Ire ab.
Beholde, J wyll feede thein with
Wozmewood, and make them dzinke the water of gall: Foz from the prophetes of Hierulalem is hypocrisie come into all the lande.

P (iy)

Tere, xiiii. a.

16 And

C 16 And therfore the Lore of hoastes ge-

eee yet vou this warning: Heare not the s sornes of the prophetes that preache vnto pou and deteaue pou, truelp they teache pou vanitie: for they speake the meaning of their owne heart, and not

out of the mouth of the Lode. lei. 17 Thep say dntothenithat delpise me, a The Horne hath spoken it, tushe, ve
Phone. shäll prosper right well: and vnto all

them that walke after the lust of their

owne hrart, they fay, tushe, there Mall.

no nulfortune happen pou.

18 For who hath litten in the countayle of eee hath hearde and vnderstande what he is about to doz
Who hath marked his deuice, and hearde it?

19 Beholde, the stornue weather of the
Lorde (that is his indignation, hall go foorth, and a violeut whirlewinde Mall fall downe vpon the head of the bu: godly.

20 And the wrath ofthe Lorde shall not turne agapne, vntill he perkourme and fulfill the thought of his heart: and in the latter dayes pe shall knowe his meaning. .

21 J haue not sent these prophetes (larch the Lode] and pet thep ranne, J haue not spoken to them, and pet thep preached.

22 Wut it they had continued in my tounsayle, they had opened to nip people my
Wordes, and they had turned ny peo-

ple fromthetr eupll wapes, aud wicked
ümaginations. N

23 Am J then God that seeth but the thing whiche is uye at hande, and not that is favre of {atch the Lorde-

24 May any man hide hum selke so, that
J Mall not fee hym faith the Lordedo not J fulfill heauen and earth faith the Lorde-

25 Jhaue hearde well inough what the prophetes fay that preache lyes in my name, saping, J haue dreamed, J haue dreanied.

26 Howe long wyll this continue in the prophetes heart to tell lies, and preache the traftie subtiltie of their owne heart:

27 Whose purpose is with the dreames that euerp one tell, to make my people forgetiny name, as their fathers dyd

When Waal tame vp.
28 The prophete that hath a dreanie, let

leite. xxx. d.

Iere. xxx. d.

D

Iere. x uli. b.

Psal. 39. a.
Exech. vui.b

Psal. 129. a.
Amos. ix.a.

Esal. lx xi. a.
Act. vii. f. and vii. b.

The prophecie —

hyn tell it, and he that vnde

Ip worde, let hym Merwe it a b er ig

for What hath caffe aniheatetony en

3 faith the Lorde- 9

29 Is not my worde like a fire ty
TLorde: and like an hammer thers 5 * el 15 ithe 145 *

30 herefore thus faith the . ae 3 Pl non he a

orde priuili
155 nia a

31 Beholde, here am J saith the i

are peake, and to fay, ’ bar barr it. Inn car. The

32 Weholde, here am J lath the Lorde. against thote propheles rere ne phecle lying dreames, and detcaue my people with their banities and incon: fant deuites, vet I neuer sent nor cons: maunded them: hep hall do this people no good at all, faith the Lorde.

33 Ak this people, eyther any prophete or priest aske thee, and lay: What is the pburthen ofthe Lod: Thau shalt fay ews vnto them: what burthen- J wyll fox: gen sake pou laith the Lorde. malen

34. And the prophete prieit, orpeople that dun vseth this tearme, The burthenof the une ae n Wyll J vilite, and his house rapa alto. : + bagels

35 But thus hall pe fay euerp one to fate, another, and euerp man to his brother: 7 what aunlwere hath the Lorde geurn:

02 what is the Tordes tconunaundement:

36 And as for the burthen ofthe Lode, pe (hall speake no moze of it, for euery mans owne Worde is his burthen: betause pe haue altred the wordes of the pa God, the Lorde of hoastes, our

od.
Thus chan euery man lay to the p20
7phetes: What aunfivere bath the
2925 geuentheez or what faith the orde:

38 And not onte to name the burthen of the Lorde. Therekore thus faith ve
Tod: Forafmuth as pt haue vied tht terme (the burthen of the Lon when as J notwithstanding fent buto vo ;

and korbad pou to speake of the Lolde burthen: att

39 weholde therefore, B wyll ther vp as a burthen, and wyl cast you 5 al:

offrom my prelente, ea and the citie

of leremie.

aue pou and pour fathers: ean ul bryng vou to an enerlasting

confufion, and into a fl ante that that nener be forgotten, : —

J The. xxitij. Chapter.

ion of the two panniers of kiggeg. s Che fir bition tignitieth that part ol
7 shoulde be brought agapne from taptiuitie. 8 The keronde, that gedechrgg and the rest or the people shoulde be destroped.

He Lowe Mew: ed me a bifion:

f AO stode two maundes ol figges bez kore the temple of the Lode, after that Mabuchodonozar kyng of
Babylon had led away taptiue Jechonas the lonne ok Jehoakim kyng of
Juda, the mightie men also of Juda, with the workemasters and cunning men of Hierusalem vnto Wabplon.

2 Inthe one maunde were very good ligges, euen like thole that be first ripe: inthe other maunde were very naughtie figges, whiche might not be eaten they Were so eupll.

3 Then lapd the Lord vnto mie: hat

int leelt thou Peremice Jlapde, ligges, whereot some be very good, and fome fo cuyll that no man may eate them.

4 Then came the worde of the Lode vnto me, after this maner:

5 Thus faith the Lorde the God of
Prac, Like as thou knowelt the good gges: so shall Fknowe the men led

abap, whom J haue sent out of this plate into the lande of the Chaldees fo?

eholde, there

their prolite: 4
6 And J wyll fet nune eyes vpon them forthe belt, for J wyll bryng them agane into this lande, J wyll buplde them bp, and not breake them downe,

J pun plant them and not roote them out.

CXV

7 And J wyll seve them an heart to 285 knowe howe that J am the Lore: 5

They shalbe my people, and J Wylibe x

ce, xxx. d. xxuf.

their God: fog they chall retürne vnto .

me with their whole heart.

8 And line as thou knowestthe naugh- Kare

tie figges whiche may not be eaten they are so eupll: euen fo wyll J, faith the
Torde, caule Zedechias the kyng of
Juda, yea and all his princes, and the residue of Pierulalem that rematne duer in this lande, and them allo that dwel in Egypt, to be vexed and plagi. 2d in all kyngdomes and landes.

And J wyll make them to be ar re- pale

proke, à common byworde, a laughing Buca.

stocke and shame in al the places where
I chall scatter them. a

I wyll sende the lworde, hunger, and pestilence among them, butpll J haue tleane consumed them out of the lande
1 1 J gaue vnto them and their faz thers.

fo

The. xxv. Chapter.

Jeremie prophecieth that they halbe in captiuitie threscore and ten peres, because they contemned and delpiled the worde Of God. to He sheweth that alter the thre
Ore and ten peres,the Babplonians choulde be defroped. 14 The destruction of all

Dermonthat was ge-
DY \(G uen vnto Jereinie vp-

NG:
8 pon all the people of
Juda, in the fourth pere of Jehoakim the
18 lonne of Josias kyng theff df Juda (that was in
Ut pere of Pabuchodonosor kyng
‘ plan. ich fermion Fevenue the zophete
Wa vnto all the people of Janda, and all the inhabitours of Hierusalem, on

nations is prophecied. 4 Be moueth the priestes of the nations to wapling.

this maner.

3 From the thirteenth pere of Josias the fonne of Amon kyng of Fuda vnto this present day (that is eien twentie and three peres) the worde of the Lord

hath ben conumtted vnto me, and Jer ce fo J haue spoken vnto you, J haue 1 rilen vp early, I haue geuen vou Ware *.

ning in feafon: but pe woulde not heare me.

4 Though the Tord hath sent his ser- Parc.

all the prophetes vnto you in
- 2 cil) {cafon

” *

not encline pour cares to heare.

i from his euull Way, and from pour Wit

ked imaginations, and fo {hall pe dwell

for euer in the lande that the Lord promiled por and pour forefathers.

6 And gonotafter straunge gods, serue them not, worship them not, and anger me not with the wones of vour owne handes, then wyll Ynot punishe pou,

Heuerthelesse, pe woulde not heare

8 fl nic faith) the Lorde, but haue prouoked me to anger With the workes of pour handes, to your great harme.

3 Wherelore thus laich the Horde of

* hoastes: Bttaule pe haue not hearkened vnto my worde, :

9 40, J wyllfende out and call fo2 all the people that dwell in the north faith the Lorde, and wyll prepare Ha-

Efai.xa. buchodonozar the kung of * Wabplon

lere, ip leruaunt, and wyll bryng them bppon this lande, aud vpon all that dwell therin, and vpon all the people that are about them, and Wypll bticrly roote them out: J wyll make them amaled, a mockage, and a coutinuall desert.

n 2° »Morzeouer, J Wyll take from them

nb. the voyte of gladnesse and solace, the voyte okthe budegrome and the bride, the noyle ol the mulstones, and the light ofthe creficts.

n And this whole lande Hall become a wildernesle and astomished: and these nations shal serue the king of Babplon

threltore peres and teu. ate, 1 Whenthethrelcore and ten peres are
I. „. expired, I wu wifite all the wickednesle andaxixb Of the kyug ot Babylon and his people
Nang. laith the Lorde, yea and the lande of
* the Chaldees and wyll make it a perpesual wildernelle,

1 And wyll fulfül all my wordes vpon that lande whiche J haue deuiled against it: pea ali that is written in this
Doole, whiche Jcremie hath prophetieb ok all people.

14 Sd that they allo shalbe subdned vn-

to Duers nations and great kynges,
501K * for il recompente them according their becedes and Workes of their

Owne haudes. b

5 For thus hath the Lorde God of FL

raci spoken vuto me: take this wine

he prophecie feafon, pet would ve not obap ye would cup ok indignation fro mp hande that ¢

He lapde: Turne againe euery man J lende thee, for to drinke of tt, Whom bara

thou mapest cause all people to

16 That When they haue dung J

of, they may be madde and out of r

-Wittes, when the lworde tonnneththat
I wyll sende among them.

17 Then toke J the cuppe from the
Fänge reh 1110 WI all people to

inke thereok vnto whomt had eh 11 t e

18 Burt first the citic of Hierusalem all the cities of Juda, their kinges 0 princes, to make them desolate, àmaled desoiled, and hilled at, and cucten, accoy: ding as it is come to passe this daz :

19 Hea and Pharao the kyng of Egypt, his seruauntes, his princes, and his peo: ple altogether one With another:

20 And all kinges ofthe lande of bus all kinges of the Philistines lande, Altalon, Aza), Accaron, and the reumaunt of Aldod, —

21 The Edomites, the Moabites, and the Ammomtes, 5

22 All the kinges of Tyrus and Sidon,

vonde the fea,

23 Dedan, Thema, Bus, and all them

that dwell in the vttermost partes of the worlde, N

24. All the kinges of Arabia, and genes rally) all the kinges that dwell in the desert, i

25 All the kinges of Zinti al the kinges of Elam, all the kinges ofthe Medes,

26 All the kinges towarde che not), whether they be farre ornye, euery one against his neighbour, yea and all the kyngdomes that are vpon tye whole earth: and the kyng of Sclach chall druke allo after then.

27 Therlore sap thou vnto them, This is the tommaundement ok the Torde

okhoastes the God of Jlrael: Dine

and be drunken, spewe and fall, Ue 17 neuer avife, and that thorowe 1 worde whiche J wyll lende among

pou. | 5

23 But p they wyll not receaue the 10 of thy bande, and drynke it, : nales them, thus doth the Lorde of a 115 threaten pou, Drynke it pou hall,

that shortlp- e the citie fre ,

Eze x

t En that my name is geuen vnto, pit en Kone

29 Jo lo, JJ begyn to plagu

D the kinges of the Illes that are be-

Pia t b

eu that JJ will leans you vnpunished-

worde vpon all the inhabitours of the euch, ait the Lorde of hoastes. e 30 Lherlore tell them all thefe wordes,

hearde from his holy Habitation, with agreat noyse Chal he trie from his court regall: he Mall geue a great vopte like the grape gatherers, and the founde therok halbe hearde buto the endes of the worlde. 9

x For the Lorde hath a tudgement to gene vpon all people, and wyll holde bis court of iustice with all flethe, and
W the vngodly to the lworde, faith the Lorde. :

32 10 thus faith the Loe ok hoastes,
*Beholoe,a miferable plague Call go froni one people to another and a great stormie water Mail arile from all the cudes of the rarth.

_ bontrarp to tie Wpll of God.

N the begynnyng of

625 EN ‘he raigne of Jehoa-
40 enn the fonne of Jo-
4 Wee 2

tanie this worde fromm

8 court of the Lordes
Houie,¢ speake vnto althem which(out

ok the aitie ol Juda) tome to do worchiß in the Lordes Houle, all the wordes

that Jcommaunde thee to lay: *toke
(at thonkepe not one worde backt. 5
3 (HE peraduenture they Wyll hearken ald kurne euery man front his wicked thay, "hat Imap allo repent ok the

Rr wWI .

les lub.

Plague which J haue determined to

bryuig Spun them, betaule of their wicbed muentlons )) a
7 And atter this
Peake ito them, Thus faith the i corte wpll not obey me, to Walke
Alewes which J haue geuen you, nend to heare the sbordes of my serbunte the prophetes whom JJ lent end Pou, risyng vp tymelp, and styll
MENS, pet you haue not hearkened:

of leremie.

1 chall not go quite: fo: hy: J eall for -

play vnto them: The Lorde hall
4 we fem aboue, and his bopee chalbe

3 And the lame dap Matt the Loyd him
J The. xxvj. Chapter.

2 geremie moueth the people to amendement. He is taken ok the prophetes and prlelles, and brought to iudgement. 23 Arias the prophete is kylled of Jehoakim,

Ayifas kpng of Juda,

maner chalt thou

selfe flay them from one ende of the earth to another: there shal no mone be made foz any of them, none gathered pp, none buryed: but chall lye as dunge vpon the grounde.

34 Mourne O pe sheepheardes and erye, sprinckle pour selues With alches O ye rammes of the flocke: for the tyme of pour slaughter and breache is fulfylled, and pe lhall fall Ipke veslels that were mich fet by.

35 The sheepheardes shall haue no way to flee, and the ranimes of the flocke hall not escape.

36 Then shall the cheepheardes trye horribly, and the ranimes of the flocke hall mourne: fo2 the Lorde hath confumed their pasture,

37 And their best fieldes tye dead, betaule of the horrible Wrath of the Lorde.

38 They haue forsaken their foldes like as alion: for their lande is waste bez cause of the spoylers furious crueltie,

aͤndok his fearefull indignation.

6 | Then wyll J do to this houle as | ler. vi. a.

did vnto Silo, and wyll make this citie

to be abhorred of all the people of the

earth. |

And the priestes, the prophetes, and 3 all the people hearde Jeremie preache thele wordes in the house of the Lorde.

8 Nawe when he had spoken out all the wordes that the Lode tommaun-

ded hym to preache vnto the people, then the priestes the prophetes, and all the people toke holde vpon hym, and sapde, Thou shalt dye:

9 Howe darest thou be fo bolde as to fay inthe name of the Lord, it shall happen to this house as it did vnto Silo, and this citie shalbe fo waste that no man may dwell therin-

10 And when all the people were gathered about Jeremie in che Houle of the
Lorde, the princes of Juda hearde of | this rumour, and they tame foone out of the kynges palace into the house of the Norde, and late them dowue before ther newe doore of the Lorde.

n Then {pake the priestes and the pro- J. phetes vnto the rulers, and es 1

Psal. cxlii.a.

4. Neg 16. g

aire

people thele wordes,
Worthy to dye: for he Hath gaynst this cite, as pe pour
Hearde with pour cares.

2 Then sapde Jeremie vnto the rulers and to all the people, The Torde hath sent me to preathe agaynst this out, and agaynst this title, all the wordes that ye haue hearde.

13 Therkort ameude pour wapes, and pour adutlementes and be obedient vnto the voyte of the Lorde pour God, so shall the Lone repent ok the plague that he hath deuiled agaynst pou.

C 14 sole as for me Jam in pour handes,

do with nie as youthinke expedient and

good:

15 But this Mall ye knowe vl ve put me to death, pe shall make pour selues, this citie, and all the inhabitours therol giltic of innocent blood: Foz this is ofa trueth, that the Lorde bath fent me vnto vou, to speake all these wordes in pour eares.

16 Then lapde the rulers and the people vnto the priestes and prophetes: This man map not be condempned to death,

Lolli. x. x..
Mat. xvi.g.

reached aclues haue

Mat. xxllii.c

for he hath preached vnto bs in the

name of the Lorde our God.

17 The elders also of the lande stoode bp, and sayde thus vnto all the people.

18 Micheas the Morasthite, which was a prophete vnder Ezekias kyng ol Ju-
Da, spale to all the people of Juda, thus faith the Lorde of hoastes, Sion chalbe plowed like a fielde, ierulalem

Micki. a.

Mich. ii. c.

rophecie
This man is

19 Did Ezekias the kyng of Jud

chalbe an heape of stones, and th of the Howes houle shalbe tune bl an bye wood. ‘ halbe turned to

all the people of Juda put | a and

death for this: No berply: bu en feared the Lord, and made chei ae buli vnto hym, forthe which caute allo the
Lorde repented ok the plague that he ential dene e me dee there lam a3 toh — = se
20 There was a prophete also that prea- Gi sin ched stilly in the name of He Tame sin called Trias the lonne of Semaiah eee of Hiriathtariin : this nian alla preg: d ched agaynst this title andagapntt this wea lande, atcording to all as Jeremie faith. g
21 Howe When* Jehoakim the king with sors all the estates and printes had hearde Mow his Wordes, the kyng went about to flap hin: When Urias perceauedthat, he was afrayde and fled, and departed into Egypt. N
22 Then Jehoakim the kyng sent fer uauntes into the lande of Egypt (name -
Ive) Elnathan the fonne of Achbor, and tertapue men with hym into Egypt:

23 Which ketched Urias out of Egypt,

and brought him vnto king Jehoakim, that slue hym with the sworde, and tast his dead body into the tommon peoples graue.

24. Wut Ahikam the sonne of Sapbare helped hierenne, that he came not into the handes ok the people to be flapne.

The. xxvij. Chapter. ' *

Jeremie at the commaundement ot the Lorde fendeth bondes to the kyng of Juda. and to the other kynges that were nye, wherby they are monished to become lub · tectes vnto Pabuchodonodor. 9 He warneth the people, and the kinges, and rulers,

that they beleue not kalle prophetes.

N the begynnyng of

Ache raigne ok Jehoa-
Akin the fonne of Jo-

fias kyng of Juda, tame this worde vnto
Jeremie from the
Lode, which fpake

thus vnto me:

2 Make thee bondes and chaynes, and put them about thy necke,

3 And sende them to the kyng of Edom, to the kyng of Moab, to the kyng of
Ammon, to the kyng of Tyrus, and to the kyng of Sidon, and that by the

messengers which Chall come to Hier? salem, vnto Tedckiah the kong of
Juda: b N
4 And bd them fap vnto their malsters,
Thus faith the Lorde ok hoartes, the
God of Ilracl, fpeake thus vnto pour maisters: fl
$ Jam he that made the earth, 0 men, and the tattell that are 1 grounde With my great volver eng
1990 out Aa and haue geuen it vn om it pleased me. ade xa,
6 And 5 Wyll JJ deliuer all the usin landes into the powẽr of Habu bunte

Deu.

ʒor the
1 the brastes allo of the fielde all J geue hym, to do bpm seruite.
And all the people fal feruc him, and his lonne, and his childers chüdzen, vntoll the tyme of the lame lande be come, and his tpine allo: yea maup people and great kynges chall lerue hym.

g Porcouer, that people and kyngdome which wyl not serue Rabuchodonozon, ethat wyll not put their neckes vnder the poke of the kyng of Wabplon: the fame people wyll J vilite with the fipozve, with hunger and pestilence, pntyll J haue coulumed them in his handes, faith the Lo:de.

nne 9 And therkore kolo we not pour proisch pheteg, loothlapers, expounders of dieames, charmers, c witches, which fay vnto von, Be shal not serue the kyng of Babplon. * to For they preache vou lyes, to bring pou farre from pour lande, € that I myght tat pou out, and de stroy pon.

u But the people that put their neckes vnder the poke of the kung of Babplon and serue hym, thole wyll J tet rez mapne styll in their owne lande, latth the Lorde, and they shall occupie it and
Dibell therin. |

bee XY

lib

2 All these thynges tolde J Zedeklah

edc.

the kyug of Jnda, and layde: Hut pour neckes vnder the poke of che kyng of
Babylon, and lerue him and his people, that pe may tine, —

B Why wylt thou and thy people perishe
With) the Abode, with hunger, with pestilence, lke as the Lord hath deviled fo; all people that wyll not serue the kyng of Babplon-

14 Therkoze gene no eare vnto thole piophetes that tell pou, Ne Mall not scrue the kyng of Wabplon: kor they breathe poulpes,

en e.

of ler Cre. kyng of Babplon “yp ser- 15 Meither haue J sent them latth the C

Torde: howbeit they are bolde falfly to prophetie in mp name, that Jmpghe the looner driue vou out, and that pe myght perishe, with your preachers.

16 IJ speake to the puestes allo, and to all this people: Thus faith the Lorde,
Heare not the Wordes of pour prophetes that preache vnto pou, and lap,
Weholde, the vessels of the Lowes house Hall shortly be brought hyther agayne from Babylon: for they prophetie lpes vnto pou.

17 -Heare thein not, but serue the kyng ot
Wäbplou, that pe may lpue: Wherkore
Weill pe make this citie to be destroped-

18 But yk they be true prophetes in very deede, and yr the worde of the Lorde be committed buto them, then let them pray the Lod of hoastes, that the remnaunt of the ornamentes which are in the boule ol the Lorde ein the boule of

the kyng ol Juda, and at Hierulalem,

be not taryed to Wabylon also.
19 For thus bath the Lorde of hoastes

XVIII.

Tete. 28. a.

spoken concerning the pillers, the lauer,

the seate, and the refione of the orna-

meutes that pet remapue in this titie,

20 Mhich Mabuchodonosor the kyng ol ö

Waäbpion toke not when he carped away Jethonias the sonne of Jehoakin kpng ol Juda, with all the polwer of Juda ¢ Hierulalem, vnto Babylon captuie. . rm

21 Pea thus hath the Lorde of hoastes the God of Flract spoken, as touthyng the relidue of the ornamentes of the
Hordes Houle, ofthe kyng of Juda his

houle, and of Biertilalem:

22 They shalbe carped vnto Babplon, and there chall they remapne vntpll ZH vilite them, faith the Lorde: then Wpll
I bryng them hyther agapne.

J The. xxviij. Chapter. K

Che kalle prophecie of Hanantas the prophete. i: Jeremie the wech that the prophecie of Hananias is kalte, by che example okthe other propheteg. ij he being inspired of the

Lorde, reproueth Hananias propheciyng his death.

D it tame to passe e the same pere, euen in

Y kyng of Juda, in the fourth pere, the ift moneth, that hhananias

Fo Se

an

thefonne of Aur the prophete of Gr beon spake to me in the boule of the
Powe, inthe pretence of the priestes, and of all the people, and fayoe :

2 Thus faith the Lorde of hoattes the
God ok Ilrael: I haue broken the poke of the kyng of Wabylon, at

4. Reg 24. c.

4. Reg. 25.0.

i. Fsd. i. b.

The prophecie

eS Laan ae 8
And alter two peres wyll J bryng necke, and brake it: ——

lere xxviic 3

agayne into this place all che ornamen-

15 atthe owes house, that Nabucho-

donozor kyng of Babylon carped away

from this place vnto Babylon,

4 Bea J wyllbrong agapne Jechontas the sonne of Jehdakim the kyng of
Juda hym selke, with all the puloners of Juda that are carted vnto Wabplon, euen into this place, faith the Lorde: for
J wyll breake the poke of the kyng of
Wäbplon.

5 Then the prophete Jerenne gare

aunlwere buto the prophete Hanantas

before all the priestes, aud before all the people that were prelent in the hoult of the Lode.

And the prophete Pevenrte fayde,
Amen, the Lorde do that, and graunt the thyng which thou halt prophecied, that he may bryng agapne all the ornamentes ok the Lordes Houle, and reftoze all the prisoners from Babylon into this place.

Peuerthelesse, hearken thou also what J wyll sap, that thou and all the people map heare.

3 The prophetes that were before vs in

tyme past, which prophetied of warre,

Op trouble, or pestilence,

9 Either of peace bpon many nations and great kyngdomes, were proned by this (yf God hath sent them in very
Deede) when the thyng tame to palle which the prophete tolde before.

Michiiic. 6

W 7

Neu. x vi. d

In And with that sapde Bananas the people might heare, thus 9551 —
TLorde spoken, Euen so wyll D breake the yoke of sPabuchodonos0; kyng of
Babylon from the necke of all nations pta and that within this two pere. And lothe prophete Jeremie went his way

n Nowe after that Panantas the pro:

phete had taken the chapne from the

prophete Jeremies necke and broken it

the wordeok the Lorde tame vnto the

prophete Peremie, saping:
Go and tell Hananias these woes

Thus saith the Lord: thou hak broken

the thapne of wood, but in steade of

wood thou shalt make chaynes of iron.

14. Foz thus faith the Lorde of hoastes the God of Israel: J wyll put a yoke ol iron vpon the necke of all this people, that they may serue Mabuchodonoʒor the kyng of Babylon, yea and so shall they do: and J wpll geue hym the beastes of the fielde.

15 Then sapde the prophete Jeremie vnto the prophete Hananias:*Heare me e
Hanantas, The Torde hath not sent thee, but thou bryngest this people into

akalse beliefe.

16 And therfore thus faith the Lorde:
Beholde, J wyll sende thee out of the lande, and Within a pere thou thalt dye, betaule thou hast falsely spoken agaynst the Lorde.

17 So Hananias dped the fame pere in

€

lo. And Hananias the prophete toke the the seuenth moneth. tchayne from the prophete Jeremies
The. xxix. Chapter.

Che pille of Jeremie sent vnto them that were in captiuitie in Babplon. 10 He prophecieth their returne trom the captiuitie after leuentie peres. 16 He prophecieth the destruction of the king and ol the people that remapned in Hierulalem. 21 Pe threat; neth two prophetes that seduced the people. 25 The death of Semeiah the Nehe-

lamite is prophecied.

See | Hele are the wordes of
SRE the booke that Jeremie the prophete fent from Hierusalem vnto the puloners, the senatours, priestes, prophetes, and all the people, whom Naduchodonosor had led from
Hierulalem vnto Wabplon,

A 1

2 Alter that tyme that kyng Jechontas

and his queene, his chamberlapnes, the princes of Juda and Hierusalem, the

Workimaisters of Hierulalem, were departed thyther. j
3 Which booke Elalah the foune of 11 phan, € Gamariah the sonne of He ; did beare, whom Zedeklas the ont 4
Juda lent vnto wabylon to Hab f
Donoso? the kyng of Babploh. 1 were the wordes of hieremies me the
4 Thus hath the Lorde of hong 5
God of Jfrael spoken, vnto allt alem soners that were fled from Hieru to Babplon: Bulle

: of leremie.

sasuitoc pou houses to Dwell therin,

yt 3 ant ou gardens, that pou may enioy che kruttes therok. |
Tale pou wiues to beare you sonnes and daughters prouide wines for pour

* sonnes, and hulbandes foz your daugh-

ters, that they may get sonnes g daughters: and that ye may multiplie there, and decrease not. —

8 Senke alter the peace and prolperitie of a the citie Wherin ve be puloners, and i” pfap vnto the Lorde for it: for in the

ate therok Chall pour peace be.
3 Foz thus laith the Lorde ol Hoattes e the God of Ilrgel, Let not thete pro-

e phetes and foothfapers that be among you deteaue vou, and beleue not pour one dreames:

Jo: why: they preache pou lyes in my rane, and J haue not sent them, faith the Lorde.

„ to But thus laith the Lorde, When pe bub. haue kulkylled seuentie peres at Wabpon, J will bring pou home, and of mine

one goodnesse J wyll carp pou hither agayne into this place.

i For Pknowe what J haue deulsed forpou,faith the Lorde: My thoughtes are to geue pou peace, and not trouble, and to geue pou an ende as pou wishe and hope to haue.

Dei 12 Pe shaͤll trye vnto me, ye Chall go and e call bpon me, and J wyll heare pou.

at B e shall seke me and kynde me, yea yl lo bethat you leke me with pour whole

cart,
¢4 J

re xi» 9

Wyll be founde of you, faith the
Tond, and Will deliuer pou out of pzifon, and gather you together agayne out of all places wherin J haue stattered vou lach the Lorde, and Wyll bryng vou
Mayne to the fame place krom whence

cauled you to be taried away captine.

Wut where as ye lay that God hath

is Then dp prophetes at Wabplon, ne Hus hath the Lorde spoken to the
00 that sitteth in the throne of Dauid, a to all the people that dwell inthis pon teur bserhren'that are gone with

15 1 f captinitie:

% hosts Jeb fpeaketh the Norde of
Wo sea Weholde J wyll fende a
1 0 e, hunger, and peftitence vpon cine Wpll make them lpke vnbitter that may not be eaten for

ud

And J wyll perternte them with the

CXlx.

lworde, with hunger, and peftitence, J
Wyll deliuer them vp to be vexed of all kyngdomes, to be curled, abhorred, bia 8 b and put to tonfusion

e Among whom J hau stattered them: ene

9 And that because they haue not ben obedient onto my conmanndementes faith the Lord, which J sent vnto them by my seruauntes the prophetes: J stoode vp early and (ent vnte them, but they woulde not heare, salth the Lorde.

20 Stare therfore the worde of the Lon all pe prfoners whom JJ tent from

PMierulalemto Wabplon. ö

21 Thus hath the Lorde of hoastes the D
God of Ilrael spoken of Ahab the sonne of Colaiah, and of Zedekiah the fonne of Maasiah, which prophecte lyes vnto vou in my name: Weholde, J wyll deliuer them into the hande of Mabuchodonoʒor the kyng ol Babplon, that he map flay them before pour eyes.

22 And all the prisoners of Juda that are in Babylon, shall take this tearme of tursyng, and lay: Nowe God do vnto thee as he did vnto Zedekiah r Ahab,
. the kyng ol Babylon rosted in the tire:

23 Wetaule they finned shamefully in FE racl, for they haue not only defiled their neighbours wines, but alfo preathed lying wordes in my name, which J haue not commaunded them: This J testifie and assure, faith the Lorde.

24. But as for Semeiah the Mehelamite, thou shalt speake vnto hym:

25 Thus faith the Lorde ol hoastes the
God of Jlrael, Betause thou hast tent letters in thine owne name vnto all the people that is at Hierulalem, and to
Sophontah the fonne of Maaliah the priest, pea e sent then to all the priestes, wherin thou writest thus buts hym:

26 The Torde hath ordepned thee to be

pret in the steade of Jeholada the bene. priest. that thou shouldest be chiefe inthe *

boule of the Lorde aboue all prophetes and preachers, and that thou mightest fet them vpon the pyllorp, o2 in the stockes:

27 Holve happeneth it then that thou halt not reproued Hierenne ol Auathoth, which neuer leaueth of his prophetipn

J. 5
28 And belide all this, he hath sent vs leres

bito Wabplon, and tolde vs r * plapnely

Iere. x xv. a. and. xliiii. a.

a ie ;

Ihe pr nelp that our captiuitie Mail long hat we Mould builbe vs houles

play endure,t to dweltherin, a that we may eni

29 Which letter read, and let Jerenne heare it.

zo Then cane the worde of the Lorde vnto Jeremie, saping:

op the fruites therok.
Sophonias the pret

zi Sende worde to all them that be in

captinitic, on this maner, Thus hath the Lorde spoken concerning Semeiah

The. xxx. Chapter.

1 Che returne ot the people is slinnekull. 16 The destruct

mele are the Wordes that the Lord sheweth vnto Jerenne, saping:
Thus saiththe Lorne
God of Jlrael: Woite
5 SAlpp diligently all the
4 Modes that J haue

spoken vnto thee in a booke.

Foz lo, the tyme tommeth faith the
Bonde, that J wyll bayng agapue the priloners of my people of Ilrael and Juda faith the Lorde: for ) wyll restore them vnto the lande that FJ gaue to their fathers, and they Chall haue it in possession. ;

4. Agapne, these wordes spake the Lord tonternpyng Jlrael and Juda,
5 Thus saiththe Lorde, Oe haue heard

à terrible erpe, keare and disquictnesle.
6 Fo what eis doth this signific that J

see : (Namely) that all strong men mite

euery man his hande vpon his lopnes, as à woman in the payne of her trauaylt: Who euer lawe a man trauaple
With chides Euqutre therafter and lee, pea all their faces are marueylous pale.
W 7 Alas for this day, which ts fo dreadfull that none may be likeued vnto it, and alas for the tyme of Jacobs trouble, from the which he thal pet be deliuered.
3 Jor in that day faith the Lorde of hoastes, J wyll take his poke from of thy necke, and breake thy bondes, and straungers hall no woze haue dont:

mon ouer them: f

Tere. x ili. b.

ksta their Lorde, and fo “Dawid their kyng

Whom F wyll rapse vp vnto them. lere leigt 10 And as for thee O my seruannt Jacob, feare not faith the Lorde, and be

nd to plant vs gardens,

the prophete

ok the people from Babplon.

9 But they Chall do feruice vnto God

ophecie

the Hehelamite: Wecaulc that 5
115 ae Seas ae mn ae million, and brougl

ae bpe : ¢ zong me YOU into a
32 erkore thus the Lorde doth tertit you, Beholde, J Wyll visite Senay the Nehelamite and his seede, fo that none of his (hall remapne among this people, and none of them Mat fee the
Tah the L rde for Detathoen es

: for he hat ‘

falsely of the Lorde. i — ie

lere 23 .

God by his chattenpng weweth that ion ol the enemies of Arael. .

not akrapde O Blvacl: Foz lo, J wyll

helpe thee allo from farre, and thy seede

fromthe lande of their taptiuitie: And

Jacob shall turne àgayne, he shalbe in

test, and haue a prosperous lyfe, and no

man (hall make hym afrapde:

For J am with thee to helpe thee, faith the Lorde: And though J Mat As vestrop all the people among whom F haue scattered thee, vet wyll Juot destroy thee, but cozrect thee, aud that b
With deltretion: for J Wyll not dtterly destrop thee. eT)

11 Therfore thus faith the Love, Thy

brolinges are perilous, æ thy woundes

redy to cast thee into sicknesse.

There is no man to meddle with thy - cane, or to lay platter vpon thee, 02 to bynde vp thy woundes to heale thee.

14. All thylouers haut forgotten ther, and C care not hyng for theesfo2 J haue geuen ther a truell stroke, and chastened ther roughly, and that kor the muttitudc of thy nuldeedes: for thy umes haue had the ouer hande. *

15 Why makest thou mone kozthyharnte-
In deede thou art lore wounded and in seopardie: but fo2 the multitude of 1 mv 905 and sinnes J haue done th

ntot ee. fe. Ve.

16 And therfore all they that ut ond thee, chalbe devoured, and all chines mies shalbe led into taptiuitie: all t that make thee watte, halbe ae 1 themlelues, and all thole that rob the
Wyll J make alfo to be robbed.

17 Joi J Wyll gene thee the

apne, and mate thy wound culled aith the Lorde, betault cer thee, as one cate away and

II

Exod z.

ahum.1.d

e-

lers. xi

of leremie.

— Sion b carde eer is (he whom no man det ©.
18 15 chs faith the Lorde, webotde FH wyllbrpng agäyne the capttuitie of Jaobs tentes, auddefende his dwellyng late: the citie shalbe builded in her olde estate, and the houles Hall haue their ryght foundation.

9 And out of them thal go thankelgeuing aud the vopte of iop: J Wyll nuutiplie them, and they shal not be tee, J chall endue them with honour, and no man shall subdue them. *
20 Their children chalbe as akorctyme,

pe

my syght: and all thole that bere them u A captapne allo shall tome of them,

fara,

T the fanre tyme, salth

Euen so ail the Lorde nowe alfo appeare vnto me from farre (and fap) *¥
9 115 With an cucrlatting loue, ther-

my merce

mb pinerce J haue drawen thee

+ Y wyll repayre thee agayne O thou
Paughtee of Mrael, that thou mapest
1% alt and sure: thou (halt take thy
1 zettes agapne, and go koorth with

hem that leade the daunte: th 0 0 {ait plant vines agapne vpon

Nhe of Samaria, and the grape

erers (hall plant, and commonly

0 *. okit.

02 the dayes shal come when the inten bpon the monnt of Ephraaral ttye, *2ivife, let vs go vp vnde
1 to our Lorde God.

wü thus faith the Lorde, Neiopte

110 themeske betause of Jacob, crye he head of the gentiles, speake

and their congregation shall continue in

and a peince Mall spryng out from the

middest of thein, hym wyll I chalenge

to my selke, and he Chall tomie vnto me:

*F02 what is he that geueth ouer his

heart to come vnto me aith the Lorde-
22 He shalbe my people allo, and J wyll be your God. vn

23 Weholde, on the other spde chall the = wrath of the Lorde breake out 88 55 stormie water, as a mpghtie whirle

wynde, and Hail fall vpon the heades of the vngodly.

24 The terrible displeasure ok the Torde
Malt not leaue of, vntyll he haue done

and perkourmed the intent of his heart,

CXX.

ere. xxill· e.

which tn the latter dapes pe chall vn- Iere. xxiii e.

derstande.

The. xxxj. Chapter.

he prophecieth that the people ol Arael shalbe restored agayne nto their prolperitie.
1S Co be turned from tinne is the gykt of God. 27 The birth of Christe is prophecied.

vo All the wicked chall dye in their wickednesse. 31 The newe kestament and couenaunt is prophecied. 3 The Christians are taught and instruct ok the Lorde. 34 Our sinnes thatl fo be reuutted, that they shall not once be thought vpon. 5 God promilech that he wyll cat ol the Jewes. 38 Che buildyng agayne of Hierusalem.

out, syng and fay, O Lorde saue thy

people the remnaunt of Israel.
8 Weholde, J wyll bryng them agayne from out ok the north lande, and gather them from the endes of the Worlde, with the blynde t lame that are among them, with the women that be great with chylde, e such as be allo deliuered: and the companie of them that come agayne shalbe great.

They Mall cote weepyng, and with mercikull pitie Will J bing them hither agapne: Willleade them to the riuers ok water in a strayght way where they

shall not stumble: For Jam Israels deur.ss.a: father, and Ephraim is my first borne. Gen. li

10 Heare the worde of the Lorde O pe geutiles, preache in the Illes that lye karre of, and fap: He that hath scattered
Israel, Mall gather hym together agapne, and shall kepe hym as a sheephearde doth his flocke. ö —

n For the Lorde hath redeemed Jacob, and ridde hym krom the hande ok the violent.

11 Aud they shall tome and refoyce bpon the hyll of Sion, and shall haue plentedulnesse of goodes, which the Lorde shall geue them, Bamely)wheate, wine, ople, poung sheepe, aud calues: and their

foule halbe asa well Watered *

4 Phe

Ye... an

* for they shali no moze be hungry.

i Then chan the mapde rclopte u the daunte, vea both voung and olde folkes: for J Wyll turne their sorowe into gladnesse, and wylltomfort them krom their sorowes, and make them iopkull.

C4 Jwyll powze plentedusnelse vpon the heartes of the priestes, and my people shalbe fatiffied with my goodnesse, saith the Lorde.

Jeri. 15 Thus laith the Lorde, The bayer of

Mathie, heautnelle, weeppng, and lamentation

Was hearde on Hye, euen of Kachel

mournyng fog her children, aud woulde

not be tom lorted betause they were not.

16 Wut nowe {atth the Lorde, leaue of

from wecpyng and crying, wiehholde

thine eyes kromteares: for thy labour

chalbe rewarded faith the Lorde, and

they shall tome agapne out of the lande of their euennes.

17 Bea cuen thy posteritte Hatt haue consolation in this faith the Lorde, that thy children shal come agayne into their olbue lande. i

18 Moreouer, J hearde Ephraim that
Was led awap captiue complapne on this maner: O Lorde thou hast torrect me, e thychastenpng haue J reteaued as an vntamed talfe, conuert thou me and J (halve conuerted:kor thou art my
JLorde God.

12 Bea afloone as thou turnest me, J shall rekourme my lelke, and when J vnderstande, JJ Chall finite bpon inp thygh: Foz verply J haue comnutted

shamekull thynges: fo2 J haue borue the reprooke aud tonkusion of nip youth,

20 Uponthis conplapne J thought thus by my selfe: Is not Ephraim uty Deare fonne: Is he not the chitde with whom
Jhaue had all my mirth and pastime-
Foz since the tyne that H kirst comuned with hym, J haut hym euer in remembraunce: Meroe my heart drineth me vnto hym, gladly and iouyngly wyll haue mercie vpon him, faith the Lode.

21 Mate thy selfe markes, {et vp heapes ok stone, set thine heart vpon the Way that thou didst Walks, aud turne againe
O thon daughter of Yfracl, turne a: gayne to these cities of thine.

22 Hoe long Wilt thou go astrap D thou shunkyng daughter-for the Lorde Wyll
Wownkcanewethypng vpon earth: A woman chall compasse a man.

23 Fo thus faith the Lorde ot hoastes

Exe. xx. c.

Ihre. v. c.
Zachal. a.

Gen. 48. d.

D

rophecie 6 ü the God ol Ilrael: It wyl come therto

that when J Hane bronght : of captiuitie, these Wodes e peat la the lande and in his cities, The Hop blelse thee O thou dwellyng plate of vrpghteoulnetle, O thon holp hyn,

75 1 1 eh DWell Juda and att her cities, the sherpheardes ,
Se An p aD hul-

25 For J chall feede the hun : and refreshe all faynt 9 toute, a

26 When Jhearde this, I tame agapne to my selfe, J {aloe like as J had ben
Waked ont of a lweete sletpe.

27 Beholde faith the Lorde, the dapes come that I wyll sowe the house of HE rael and the house of Juda with men and with cattell. g .

23 ca it hall come therto, that like as Dec;
J haue gone about in tymes past to hne roote them out, to scatter them, tobreadbe them downe, to destroy them, e chatten them: euen lo wyll J allo go diligently about to builde them vp agapne, and to plant them faith the Lorde.

29 Then Mall it no moze be sapde, The kl

fathers bane eaten a forbee grape, and

the childrens teeth are {et oncdge:

For euery one Mall dye foz his one E mildeedes:so that who so cateth alorbze grape, his teeth shalbe fet on edge. 6 zi Beholde the dapes wyll tome (iE) Hewi

the Torde, that J wpll make a nelwe

couenaunt with the houle of Jscacl, and the honse ol Juda:

32 Mot alter che touenaunt that Amade

With their fathers, when J toke then

by the bande and led them ove of the

lande of Egypt, which coucnaunt ther brake, yea cuen when Jas anhulbande had rule our them farth the POD . fr

“wut this shalbe the concnaunt that
J wyll make with the houle of Ilten
After thole ayes faith the Lorde : J wyll plant my lake in the inwar partes of them, and Witte it in the 4 41 ie and Wyll be their God, .

they shalbe my people.

34 And from chencekoonth shall no fr teäche his neighbour o7 bis both” and sap, Knoswe the Tode: 5 a i chal all knowe me kroimthelewer wyll the hyelt, faith the Horde + iu treuer forgene their mildeedes, and Wylltr: remember their sinnes anp MO re g

35 Thus latth the Londe WHI) se, oo fannie to be alpght for the dar, Jol

nd th mon whiche nwueth the fea, fo that

naht, f fierce, his des thereof ware klerce,
: ape Londe of hoastes.

a gut ol my sight, saich the Lord:
0 allthektrdc oF rde neuer ceatle; but away be a people before me.

ehheauen abone can not be measu-

a a the foundations of the earth

bentath map not be fought out: so Will

Galfonot catt out the Whole scede of

feacl for that they haue committed fit the Lorde. .

SAZSA pele wordes {pate the
Loe onto Jeremie e, e inthe tenth pere ot Zee 89890

i whiche was the eyghe oe teenth pere of Nabnoe chodono302,

2 What tynie as the kyng of Babplons
Heal lapde iege vnto Hierulalem: but

Jerenne the prophete lay bonnde inthe

kourt of the pryson, whiche was in the kyng of Judaes house ,
3 Where Zedekias the kyng of Juda

taustd hym to be layde, betause he had

brophetied on this maner: Thus faity the Lorde, Seholde, F Wyll deliver this citie into the handes of the kyng of

J NAS Oy eben he eng 5
Zedeksas the kyng of Juda,
: Mae nde Able W gets: but surely he shall tome into the handes ok the king of Babylon, whiche hall fpeake with hum mouth to mouth,

vii
Nila,

_, Done ol them chall tooke: in
‘past seen the hall tooke another in

5. Baum Zedebias shalbe caryed bnto ih abylon, and there {halt he be bntyll
Civic that villte hym faith the
Wee A 1 — takest in hande to aot e nor piper. haldees, thou shalt

6 And Jerenue latde; Thus hath the

of leremie.

e starres to shine in the. 38

“gposcouer, thus laith the Lord, Hike 40

deklas king of Juda,

to estape the Chal-

Beholde, the dayes come faith the
Lorde, that the citie of the Lorde shalbe enlarged, from the towre of Hanaz neel, vnto the gate of the comer wall.

6 Lil as this ordinaunte (hall neuer 30 Fromthence ig the right mealure

de taken before her vnto the hyll toppe

of 1. and {hall come about Git
And the whole valley ofthe acavrarkasses, and of the alshes, and all the fieldes, vnto the brooke of Cedron, and vnto the comer of the horse gate tos
Warde the eal, it chalbe holy onto the onde, and {hall neuer be broken noz cat downe any more.

¢ The. xxxii. Chapter.

Jeremie is cast into pevion, becaute he prophecied that the citie choulde be taken ot the pug of Babplon. 2 the lielde that Jeremie bought at the commaundement ofthe Lorde. is fignitied that the people Mould come agapne to their owne pollellion.
#8 The people of God are his seruauntes.and he is their Lorde. 40 To feare God, ig
Gods gytt, to the entent that sinnes may be eiche wed. 2

Torde spoken vnto me:

7 Weholde, Hananeel the sonne of Sellum thine vncles lonne, Chall come vnto thee, and require thee to redeeme the lande that lyeth in Anathoth vnto thy
{cife:* for by reason of kinred it is thy right to redeemeit and bye it out.

8 And Hanancel myne vncles sonne came to me in the court of the pryson,
According to the word of the Lord, and layde vnto me: Bye my lande J pray thee, that liech in Anathoth in the countrey ol Wenlamin, for by heritage thou halt right to loose it out for thy selfe, therfore redeeme it. Then J perteaued that this was the tõmãaundement the Lorde: l

CH

11. Esd. iii. a.
Zac. xxl. b

Iere b.

Lent. xxv.d

Nu xx lil. a.

and. xxxVIA
Ruth. III. a.

9 And lo Ybought the lande from Ha-

naeel ol Anathoth myne vncles lonne, and wayed hym there the ntoney, euen seuen sicles, and ten spluer pence:

10 And J writ it in a booke, and sealed it, and toke witnesses, and wayed hym there the monep vponthe waightes.

1. So Jtoke the euidence wich the topie, When it was ozderly sealed, and
Ad J ga he cuidente to Baruch

12 And J gaue the euidenc the sonne ol Periah, the sonne of Maasiah, in the light of hananeel my cofin, and in che prelente of the wilnelles that

be named in the enidence, and before all
Q the

cy

at were -the

the Jewes th tourt of the pryson. Nr m tz Jcharged Waruch allo before them,

faping: ane

C14 Ah LOW of hoastes, the God of Hr racl commiaundeth thee] to take this
* sealed euidente with the topie, and to lay it in the earthen befell, that it may long continue. a
For the Wore of hoastes the God of frael hath determined, that houses,
Ides, and vineyardes Mhalbe pollel-

sed agapne in this lande.
16 Node when JJ had deliuered the eutdente vnto Bacuch the sonne of Pert

ah, J befought the Lorde,saving:

Gene ia. 17 G Torde God, tt is thou that Hatt

Iere. x. b.

pobwer and hye arme, and thing hid from thee. 1
Exodsga 18 Thou shewest mercy bpon thousandes, thou retompenlest the wicked-

nelle of the fathers into the bolome or

the chyldren that tome after them.
19 Thou art the great and mightie God,

Whole name is the Lode of hoastes,

greatin tounsel, and excellent in worke, thyue epes looke vpon all the wapes

Rom il a. of mens chyldren, to rewarde euery one after his way, and attording to the
. kruites ot his inuentions. xod. vii.

vnto the. xv

per. wonders in the lande of Egypt, as we

{ee this day, vpon the people of Jlrael, and vpon thole men, to make thy name
20 great, as it is tone to passe this day.

21 Thou hast ought thy people of JE rael out of thelande of Egypt, with to-
Kens, with Wonders; With a mightie
Hande, with a stretched out arme, and
With great terriblenesle:

22. And Halk geuenthem this lande, like 1

as thou haddest promised vnto their fathers (namely) that thon wouldest geue them a lande that floweth with mylke and honpe. a ‘

Judisnin. 23 Nowe when they came therein and ä

VI. vill.

Esther v. b.

possessedit, they folowed not thy vopce,

that thou commaundedt them to do, that haue they not done, and therefore come all these plagues vpon them.

24. Weholde, there are bulwarkes made nowe again this citie to take it, and it
Walbe wonne of the Chaldees that beliege it with lworde, with hunger, and

&

reby in the

ul the meane sealon the titie is delluered

made heauen and earth with thy great there is no-

20 Thou halt done great tokens and

and walked not in thy lawe: but all

35 They haue buylded hye places ko

death: and looke what thoy Han
8 Feth chan dome vpn “
02 10 nges are pz 5
2 4 present vnto
25 Pet lapest thou vnto me O 10 de
God, and commaundel me that shall bye a peete of land vnto my fle imoney and take Witnerles thereto:and yet

into the power of the Chaldees.

26 Then came the wonde of the Loe onto Jeremie, saping:

27 webholde, Jainthe Lorde God or all
1 s there any thing then to harde

28 Lherefoze thus faith the Lorde: beholde, I Mall deliuer this title into the

power of the Chaldees, and into the power of Habuchodonozor the king of
Wabplon, they shall take it:

29 Jos the Chaldees shall come and winne this citic and fet fire vpon it, and burne it, with the gorgious houleg, in

whole parlours they haue made sacrtfice vnto Waal, and powred drinke offesringes vnto straunge gods, to prouoke

me vnto wzath .

30 «Foz the chyldren of Ilrael and the tchyldren of Juda haue only ben doyng
Witkednefle before me from their youth vp, they haue ben only provoking me to
Wath with the workes of their owne handes, saith the Lorde. 5

31° For What hath this citie ben els, but a prouoking of my wrath euer fince the day that thei builded it, vnto this huure

wherein A cast it out of my fight:

32 Weraule of the great blasphemies of the children of Jlrael and Juda, which they haue donc toprouoke ine pen they their kynges, their princes, thelt priestes, their prophetes, the men of
Juda, and the citizens of Hierusalem: -;

33° When J stoode vp early and taught them, and instructed them, they. tu’ ned their vackes to me, and not their faces . +9

34 They woulde not heare to de rene „r med and torrect: but fet their tools n the house that is halowed tome name, to defile it.

E

Tere, Xxy. xxxix c.

ere. ib.

Waal in the valley of the chyldzen »
Hennom to cause their sonnes aC ters to pafle thozowctire) in the 1 ok Moloch, whiche J neuer con 110

neither tame it euer iu imp ne att man Juda sinne with such nation.
1 olde therefore thus hath the
: God of Hlract spoken concer: ning this titie, whiche as pe pour selues conkeste, halbe deliuercd into the banbe
Frye Kyng of Wabplon, (when it is wore) With the Aworde, with hunger, th pestilence. ant nd FJ wyll gather them togethtt from all landes, wherein 2 oe stattred thein in m wrath in fearefull aud grtat Difpleafure, and wyll bipng them agapne puto this plate, where they fall dwell sakelp:
38 And tes 1115 my people, and J it. 39 d F wpll geue them oue heart
Hast N ndone way, that they may feare me al

ir chyldren after them may prolper. we 40 5 1 Wyll set vp an euerlasting coueuaunt with them (namely) that J wyll neuer cealse to do them good, and that J wpll put my keare in their

Oreouer, the worde of

the Lorde tame vnto
Jerenne againe* wHe
Ihe was pet bounde in

beds,
Revd 3

tome to fight against the Chaldees, and
105 art filled with the dead tarkalles
Amen, om JJ haue slapne in my

ath and dilplealure, when J turned

che dayes of their lyfe: that they and

the tourt of the priison.

heartes, fo that they shall not runne a: wap from nie.

41 “Pea J wyll haue a lust and pleasure to do them good, and faithfully to plant them in this land with mp whole heart and with my whole soule.

42 Forthus lath the Lowe, Like as haue brought all this great plague vppon this people: euen fo wyll J allo bryng vpon them all the good that F haue proinised them.

43 And men shall haue their pollessions in this lande, wherok pe say nowe, that it shall neither be inhabited of the people, nor of tattell, but be deliuered into the handes of the Chaldees:

44 Bea lande shalbe bought for money, and euidentes made ther vpon, and sealed before witnesses in the countrey of
Weniaunn, and rounde about Hierulalem, in the cities of Juda, in the cities that are bpon the mountapnes, and them that lye beneath, yea and in the cities that are in the south: for J Wyll bryng their prysoners hyther agapne, faith the Lorde.

q The. xxxiti. Chapter,

Che prophete is moniched of the 1.020, to prap kor the deliueraunce of the people. whiche the Lorde promileth. s God forgeueth tinnes, and doch graciously to the people kor his owne reno wme. j Ok the byrch ol Christe. ro The kyngdome of
Christe in the Churche Hall neuer be ended.

my fate from this citic, betause of al her

wickednesse.

6 Bcholde saith the Lode, J wyll repaire and heale their woundes, and make them whole: J wyll open them the large treasure of peace and trueth,

And wyll returne the captiuitie of
Juda and Israel, and wyll let them vp agapne as they were before:

* Front all mifoeedes wherein they offended again ine, J wyll cenle them: and all their blasphennes which they haue done against me when they an me not, J wyll forgeue them.

And this shall get ine a name, A prayse and Honour among all the people of the earth, whiche chall heare all the good that J wyll shewe vnto them, yea they shalbe afraide and astonied at all the good deedes and benelites that J wyll do for them.

90 00 10 Moreduer,

Deut 30. b. ere. xxl. c

Terex iid,

The prophecie

10 Moreouer, thus sath the Lorde: In ud man neuer want one to fit pon tie

this plate ( wherok pe fap thatit chalbe a wildernesse, wherein neither people nor cattie shall dwell) in lpke maner in the cities ot Juda and in the streetes of
Hierulalem (which allo shalbe fo voyde
D there, Ne i!
1 Shall the hoyce of gladnesse be heard

agapne, the boyce of the bridegrome

bela, dof tHe bude, the vopre orthem that
_ for he is louing, and his mercy endureth for euer, and the voyte of them that of fer vp gyftes in the boule ofthe Lorde:

for JJ Wyll restore the captinitic of this

lande as it was afore, saith the Lorde.

12 Thus saith the Lorde of hoastes, It shan come pet therto, that in this lande whiche is voyde from men and cattle, and in all the cities of the lande, there shalbe fet vp shepheardes cottages: to rest their flo tes.

13 Inthe cities vpon the mountapnes, and in the cities that lpe vpon the plaine, and in the ettics of the south, in the lande of Weniamin, and rounde about Hierulalem, and in the cities of
Juda shall the sheepe passe agayne vnder the hande of him that telleth them,

C satth the Lode.

Jeexxiia, 14. Weholde, the tyme tommeth faith the Lorde, that H Will perfourmethat good thing whiche J haue promiled vnto the house of Jsrael, and vnto the
Houle of Juda.

15 In thole dapes, and at the fame tyme,

IJ wyll bryng foorth vnto Danid the braunche of righteoulnesse, and he Mall
5 e and rightedusnesse in the ande.
16 In those dapes shall Juda be saued,
And Hierulalem Matt dell safe: and this shalbe her name, Gon our righ: tedusnesse. 1
Forthus the Lode pronuleth, Das

Esa. xxxii. d i. Reg. vii. c.
(8) This name hath
Bod gcuen to
Shniste, and

Doch properlp 27
Urlong to hym
None:but here

is attrwu-

fev vnto the 12

Thurche, fo: — f°

that Bod the = father hath ef=

Cponfed Thyzist

ig fone unto

the Churche,

ano hath en:

Dowed her ah all chat
8 hw.

hati sing, Prayse the Loyd of hoastes,

thzanc of the house of Piraci:

18 Meither Hall the prekesany pee

urn inges, to kindle t

offceinges, he meate oe 0 w f x %

19 And the worde of the Lor cay ; to Jeremie, after this maner. ="

20 Thus faith the Lorde: May the couenaunt whiche J haue made With

choulde not be day and night! ea Pin PER re ME
21 Then may my couenaunt also be bro-

ken whiche J made with Dania my

to raigne in his throne: so Matt allo the neste s and Teuites neuer kayle, but eue mee ete,
22 Jor like as the starres of heauen may not be numbred, neither the sande of the

fea measured: fo wyll J. multiple the

seede of Dauid my seruaunt, and the
Teuites my minis teres.
23 Moreouer, the worzde of the Lorde came to Jeremie, saping:
24 Considerest thou not what this people speaketh: Two kinredes (lap ther] had the Lode chofen, and those lame two hath he cast away: for fo they haue delpiled n people, and they reputed them as though they were no peo-

leuites

and to prepare the faci:

day and wight be broken, that there

D

leruaunt, and so he not to haue a sonne

l pet. i a.

Gene.xyh,

and. xxxiig

ple.
25 Therelore thus laith the Lord, HF

haue made no coucnaunt with day and night, and geuen no statute vnto heauen and earth: ö

26 Then wil Jalso cast away the seede of Jacob and Dauid my seruaunt, lo that J wyll take no prince out ok his

seede to rule the posteritie ol Abraaham,

Ilaat, and Jatob: but pet J will turne
ãgapne theix captiuitie, and be merchfull vnto then. I.

4 The

, of leremie. c

The. xxxiiij. Chapter.

spe theatneth that the citie,and the king Zedebias allo Mhalbe geuen into the pandes ofthe kyng of Babplon 11 he rebüketh them that brought (uche of chew brethren into captiuitie, as were pardoned to go at their libertie,

Dele are the wor-

9 71 when Sedektas was agreed with att
| des whiche the the people at Pierusalem, that there W a I Tord spake vnto cshoulde be proclapmed a*libertic: Face
Jereule, what 9 So that euerp man should let his ser- Hacc. men „ tpme as Rabu- uaunt and handmapde go kree, Hebrue

chodonozor the

oF king of Babplon,
— ‘

Seyi Sj! and all his hoast,
| and all the kyngdomes that were vnder his power, and all his people fought agamtt Dierulalem and all the cities therot.

2 Thus saith the Lorde God of Israel, Go and {peake to Zedekias the king ol Juda, and tell hym, the Lorde fen: beth ther this worde: beholde,“ J wyll deliuer this atic into the hande of the kyng ok Wabplon, he Mall burne it
With fire, .

3 And thou Mhalt not escape his handes, but shalbe taken prisoner, and

deliuered into his power: Thou Malt

looke the kyng of Babylon inthe face,

and he shall speake to thee mouth to

ion and then Malt thou go to Ban.

4 Pet heare the worde of the Lorde, O
Zedekias thou kyng of Juda, thus faith the Lorde vnto thee, Thou Matt not be layne with the lworde,

But thalt dye in peace: Andas thy forefathers the kynges, thy © progenitours were brent, fo Malt thoube brent

Torde: fo2 thus haue JJ determi: mat te e ee n saide Jeremie the prophete all thefe wordes vnto den bn of
Juda in Hicrusalem,
Whattpme as the byng of Wabplons roa belieged Pierulalem, and the and munt ok the cities nameiy) Lachis then whiche pet remapned of
5 steong defenten cities of Juda.
‘pa Gate the wordes that che Torde e bnto Perenue the prophete,

also and in thy mourning they thal lay,

and Hebruesse, and no Jewe holde his brother as a bondman.

10 Nowe as thep had consented, all the punces and all the people whiche had

gathered bnio this agreement, that cuerp man choulde fet at lidertie his

bondseruaunt and bondwoman, and no

longer to holde them bounde: euen so they were obedient, and let thein go rte.

u Wut aftertharde they repented, and toke agapne the seruauntes and handmapdens whom they had let go free, and fo made them bonde agayne.

11 FJor whiche caule, the Worde of the
Powe came vnto Jeremie from the owe hym selfe, saping:

13 Thus laith the Lode God of Isra-

el: IJ made a coucnaunt with pour Pager, fathers when J brought them out of

the lande of Egypt, out ok the boule of bondage, saping:

14 When lenen peres are out, euery C man shall let his bought seruaunt an
Pebrue go free, if he haue serned hym fire peres: but pour fathers obayed me not and hearkened not vnto me.

15 As lor pou ye were nowe turned, and dyd right before me, in that pe protlapmed cuery man to let his neighbour go free, and in that pe made a couenaunt

bekore nie in the temple that beareth my name.

16 But yet pe turned pour (clues againe, and blasphemed my name, in this, that tuerp manhath required his seruaunt and handemapde agapne whom pe had let go quite and free, and compel led them to lerne yen agayne, and to be bondmen and bond women.

17 And therfore thus laith the Lord: Ne
N iij) haue

haue not obaped nie, euery man to protlaime freedome vnto his brother and neighbour: Wherefore Y wyll tall pou vnto freedome, faith the Torde, euen vnto the sworde, to the pestilente, and to hunger, and will make pou to be pla-

gued in all kyngdomes of the earth.

18 Bea those men that haue broken my touenaunt, and not kept the wordes of the appointment whiche they made be-

Genexvd. bbre me, when they heed the calfe in

li. Reg. x · e. 2

We

two, and when they went thorolbe the two halkes therof,. f

19 The princes of Juda, the princes of
Hierulalem, the gelded ink, the priestes, and all the people of the lande, whithe
‘peat thorowe the two sydes of the kalte:

A q¢ The. xxxv. Chapter,

Ihe prophecie

20 Those men will J geue into the pod

er of their enemies, and into okthem that folowe vpon their llües:

Pa 8 3 pt shalbe meate ktfor the foules ofthe apre and

the klelde. al baden

his printes, J wyll deliver ther ; the power of their enemies, 21 160 that desire to flap them, and into the bande of the kyng of Wäbplons hoat
“Wiche nowe is departed from pou.

22 But thorowe my commaundement
(forth the Lord) they Halt tome againe before this citie, they shall fight against it, Winne it, and burne it: Moreouer, J wyll lay the cities of Juda fo Wate, that no man Mall dwell therin,

1 He propoundeth the obedience ol the Rechabiteg, and therby confoundeth the pryde ofthe Jewes. 6 Che commaundement of Jonadab the father of the Rechabites.
17 He threatneth punichment vnto the rebellious Lewes. 19 He promiseth prolperitie bnto the Rechabites fo; their obedience, a a Ai

de wordes which the

e oe spake vnto Je-

renne, in the raigne of

e e Jehoakim the lonne

es dk Holias kyng of Juda, are these:

— SPo vnto the houle*of

the Nechabites, and call them out, and

bryng them tothe house of the Lode, into some commodious plate, and geue them wine to drinke.

hn ie Jaʒantah the fonne of

Jerenue, the tonne of Habvasiniah, and

his brethren and all his sonnes, and the

whole houcholde of the Nechabites,

4. And bought them into the boule of the Loyd, into the clofet of the chyldren of Hanan the sonne of Jegedaliah the man ok God, whiche Was by the tlolet of the printes that is abone the tlolet of
Maasiah the foune of Sellum, whiehe is the treasurer.

5 And bekore the sonnes ofthe kinred of the Mechabites J let pottes full of wine, and cuppes, and lapde vnto them,
Dainke Wine:

6 Wut they sapde, We Wyil dzinke no
Wine: for Jonadab the tonne of Wee

chab dur father tommaunded bs, fay: ing: Be and pour lonnes Mhall neuer

to the powthe handeg

e Pry
Of Brewis

21 As for Zedebias the king of Juda and

lere.

deinke wine, buplde Houles, sowe no un

seede, plant no vines,

7 Bea pe shall haue no vineyardes:but z

for al pour tyme pe chall dwel in tentes, that ye may liue long in the land wherin ye be straͤungers.

$ Thus haue We obaped the commaun-
Dement of Jonadab the fonne of Nechab our father in al that he bath charged vs, and fo we drinne no wine al our life long, we ne dur wiues, our sonnes and our daughters,

Neither buylde We any houle to dwel therein: we haue allo among vs neither vineyardes, nor tome lande to foe: 5

10 Wut we dwell intentes we dude an

do according unto all that Jonada our father tonnnaunded vs. ‘

n But nowe that Habucbopouc he the kyng of Babylon tame vp into be lande, We lapde, Come, let vs go £0 os rulalem, that we may efcape the ha of the Chaldees and the Allprlans: fo We Dell nowe at Hierulalem. d

1 Then tame the woĩde of the bnto Jeremte, taping: 3 Thus

€

15 ü. va.

„

14 The

of leremie.

us faith the Lorde of hoastes, the anal: Go and tell the men of uda, and the inhabitdurs of Hierusasen: Wyll ye not be refourmed to obay my wordes, faith) the Torde: wordes whiche Jonadab the sonne of Nethab tommaunded his souncs, that they shonlde danke no wine, are fast surely kept, for vnto this

day they danke no wine, but obap their

ers commaundement: but as foz
BY Jhaue stande bp early, J-haue
(poken vnto vou, and geuen pou earnest
Warning, and pet haue ye not ben obeent vnto me.

15 ea haue sent my seruauntes al the prophetes vnto vou, J role vp early, and lent you worde, laying: O turne vou nowe enery man from his Wicked way, aniende your liues, and go not af: ter straunge gods to worship them that

ye may continue in the lande whiche 1

haue geuen vnto pou and pour fathers: but ye woulde neither heare me nor folowe me.

sonne, haue stedfastip kept their fathers tommaundement that he gane them: but this people is not obedient vnto me,

17. And therfore thus faith the Lorde of

hoastes, the God of Iscacl: Weholde,
J Wyll bryng vpon Juda, and bpow cucry one that diwelleth in hierulalem, all the trouble that J haue deuled a: gaint them: For IJ haue spoken vnto them, but they woulde not folowe, J haue called vnto them, neuerthelelle they woulde gene me no aunswere.

18 Jeremie also spake vnto the honse-

holde of the Kechabites, Thus Carthy the Lord of hoastes the God of Ylrael: forasmuche as ye haue obaped the com: maundement of Jonadab pour father, and kept all his preceptes, and done according to all that he bath bidden:

19 Therekore thus faith the Lorde of

hoastes the God Ilrael: Jonadab the sonne of Rechab thal not faue, but haut one out of his flocke to stande al way before nie.

The. xxxvj. Chapter.

Baruch wrpteth (as Jeremie enditeth) the bookie of the curtes against Juda and
Ilrael 9 He is tent with the booke vnto the people, and readeth it belore them all.
14 he is called betoze the rulers, and readeth it bekore them allo. 20 Che rulers ewe vnto the kyng the wordes of the booze. 23 Jehudi taketh the booke andrea deth a litle of it,. and casteth it into the kire. 25 There is another written at the com,

maͤundement of the Lorde.

the fourth pere of
Jehoakim the fonne

Juda, came the worde of the Lorde vnto Jeremie, saping:

8 Take a booke, and
Waite therein all the wordes that J haue spoken to thee against Ilrael, 2: gaint Juda, and against all che people, krom the tyme that J began to cake in 999 inthe raigne of Jolias, onto

3 That when the house of Juda he et of the plague whiche Jhaue deni-
5 kor them, they may peraduenture
1 euery man from his wicked wap, ine map forgeue their offences and

+ Then dyd Jerenue tall Baruch the kenne ol Meriah, and Waruch Wrote

the booke at the mouth of Jeremie,

ARS al

Hea-

of Josias the kyng of

7 Peradnenture they wyll pray nice

3 So Warnchthe sonne of Meriah, dyd

all the wordes of the Lorde whiche he had spoken onto hyn.

5 And Jeremie commaunded waz

ruch, sayiug: J am in prilon, fo that J map not come into the house of the
Torde:

26 BCherefore go thou thither, and reade

the booke that thou hast written at ny monthcnamelp)the wordes of the Lord, and reade them in the Lordes Houle vpon the “ fasting day, that the people,
Whole Juda, and al they that tome out of the cities may heare.

CXXIII
16 The chyldren ol Jonadab Rechabs

2 eS

Prou. i. c.
Esal. xlv. b.

Iere. vis b.

Ier.xxxill. c.

(a) when Fez hoahlim the
Ryng of Duda hearde that the kyng o
Babylon hig arme Mags comming to beliege Hie rulalem, he appointed a solzuine nnd
Ab Hique fast th

lo al the peo-
Bes pe, commaunding

them

lye before the face of the Lorde, and a ebm

turne euery one from his wicked wap: for great is the wrath and difpleature that the Lorde bath taken against this people.

the temple at the tyme appointed, and there to make their humble prapers vnto
God for proce cr his fattour, ag the mantr ot S

attording to all that Jereune the pro- ner ane

phete commaunded hym, reading the ace
Q tty)

in falthfull res

dg peos
3 in all diekresseg

Word 25 pciltaunce,

The prophecie

Wornes ofthe Lorde out ok the booke chaumber of Elsama the fer

mihe Lordes houle.
Ad this was done in the fich vere ol

= ehoakim thetonne of Josias kyng of
Tofu. iii a. em the ninth moneth, when it

lere. xxvi. a.

Was commaunded that all the people of Hiernlalem shoulde fat before the
Powe, and they allo that were come fro the cities ol Juda vnto Hierulalem: jo Then read Wãruth the wordes of Jerenne out ok the booke withinthe boule of the Lorde, out ofthe trealurit of Gamariah the forme of Saphan the scribe, which is belde the hyer loft of the new

Danze of the Lordes houle, that all the

people might heare.

n Now when Micheas the sonne of Ga-

mariah, the sonne of Saphan, heard all the wordes ol the lord out of the booke,

12 He went downuc to the kynges palace into the stribes chaumbers forthere all the printes were fet, Elisama the scribe,
Palatah the sonne of Hemei, Elnathan the forme of Achboz, Gamariah the sonne of Saphan, Zedekias the sonne of Hananias, with all the princes.

1 And Micheas tolde them all the wordes that he hearde Baruch reade out of the booke befoze the people.

14 Then all the printes sent Jehudi the sonne of Pathaniah the forme ok Selemah, the sonne of Chusi, vnto Baruch, saying: Take in thine hande the booke whereout thou hast read before all the ptople, x come. So Baruch the sonne of Neriah toke the booke in his hande, and tame vnto them. N

15 And they sapd vnto him: Sit downe

dad reade the booke, that we may heare also: So Baruch read that they night heare. ;

16 Mowee Wijcnthey had hearde all the wordes, they were abathed one vpon another, andlayde vnto Waruch: We will tertifie the king of al these wordes.

17 And they examined Baruch, fayina:
Tell vs, howe diddest thou weite all these wordes ont or his mouth:

18 Then Waruch aunswered them: he spake all these wordes vnto me with his month, and J wrote them in the booke.

19 Then sapd the punces vnto Baruch:
Go thy wap, hide thee with Jeremie, fo that no nian knowe where pe be.

20 And thep went in to the kyng to the tourt (but they kept the booke in the

tb tolde the kpng all the wordes, 5

u tent J

21 So the kyng sent Jehudi to fe

the booke: which he brought ont ae sama the {tribes chaumber, and Jee a 7 king and allthe prince iche were about hym nu heart. m |

22° Solve the kyng late in the winter houle (for it was in the ninth moneth) and there was a fire before hym.

23 And when Pehudi had read three or foure leaues therok, he tut the booke in peeces with a penknife, and * castit into the fire vpon the harth, vntill the booke
Was al brent in the fire vpon the harth.

24 Bet no man was abashed therof, nor rent his clothes, neither the byng hym felfe nor his sernauntes, though they hearde all these wordes.

25 Meuerthelesse, Elnathan, Dalatah, and Gamariah vesought the kyng that he woulde not burne the booke: not withstanding, the kyng woulde not heare them:

26 But commaunded Jerahmel the fonne ok Amelech, Saraiah the fonne of Ezriel, and Selemiah the forme of
Abdeel, to lay handes vpon Baruch the stribe, and vpon Jeremie the prophete: but the Lorde kept them out of fight.

27 Mdwe alter that the kyng had brent the booke, and the sermons Which Baruth wrote at the month of Jerenne, the worde ol the Lorde tame vnto Jeremie, savingn: 1

28, Take another booke, and waite in tt all the kozelapde sermons that Werk
Witten in the first booke whiche Jehoakim the kyng of Juda Hath breut.

29 And tell Jehoakim the kyng of 10 da, thus faith the Lorde: Thon ha brent the vooke, and thoughtest within

thy selke, vohy batt thou wartten chern that the kyng of Wabplon {hall 1 and make this lande Waste, fo that 15 chall make both people and tattell to out ol it :

D

° , sd

i Mach. übe

30 Therefore thus the Lorde faith OF pegstd

ehoakin the kyng of Jude
‘pall none of his generation fit 1 8 throne of Dawid, his dead coaelt a be cast out, that the heate of 0 95 and the krost of the night mar tonw en

on hym. f
31 Pea I wyll vilite the wickednelle 0

hyin,

uda: There lere xc

of leremie.

of his seede, and of his leruauntes:
Warder, all the euptt that J haue pwimiled theim though they hearde ine not, yl J brpng vpon them, vpon the inhabitours of Mierusalem, and vpon

an. hen toke Jeremie another booke

and gaue it Baruch the scribe the sonne of Neriah, which wrote therin out of the mouth of Hieremie, all the fermions that were in the first booke which Jehoakim the kyng of Juda did burne: and there were added vnto them many mo sermons, lykt vnto the former.

J The. xxxvij. Chapter.

1 aebchia tucceedeth Conomah, z he sendeth vnto Jeremie to pray for hym. 12 Jeremie oyng into the lande of Benlamin is talen, j he is beaten and put in prilon, v he

is delluered by kyng Zedekia.

Edekia the fonne of
Josiah“ which was
„made kyng through

MNabuchodonozor king of Wabplon, raigned in the lande of Juda, in the stead of Cononialy the sonne of Jehoakim.

2 But neither he, nor his seruauntes, nor the people in his lande, woulde obey the
Wordes of the Lorde which he spake

pbppthe prophete Jeremie.

; Muerthelesse, Zedekia the king fent
Jehucall the fonne ok Selemiah, and
Sophontah the sonne of Maasiah the pricit, to the prophete Jeremie, laying:
© pay thou vnto the Lorde our God

2 8. i

4 Nowe Jerenne Walked free among the people at that tyme, and was not put in prison as pet.

fers

and fight agaynst this citie, Winne it,

dae though pe had na 1 yne the whole alt of the Chaldees that beliege you,

and that none remapned of them but
Wounded men, pet shoulde they stande vp and {et fire vpon this citie.

1 Nowe When the hoast of the Chaldees
Was broken vp from Hierulaleim foz keare of the Egyptians armie,

Ir Jeremie went out of Pierusalem to-
Warde the lande of Wemamin, to get hym trom among the people.

B And when he came vnder Wenianuns port, there was a porter called Jeriah,

the sonne of Selemiah the forme of Haz ler ib.

naniah, which fell vpon hym, and toke hym, saying: Thy mynde is to runne to the Chaldees.

14 Then sapde Jeremie, It is not fo, J go not to the Chainecs: Neuerthelelle, ©
Jeriah Worlde not veleue hym, but brought Jeremie bounde before the

Is Wherkoze the printes were angry with Jeremie, €{nrote hym, and lapde hym m̃ prison in the boule of Jonathan the serihe: kor they had made that houle the prison. Ta

16 Thus was hieremie put into a dungeon and prilon, and so lap there a long tyme. 5 : |

17 Then Sedekta the kyng lent for him, Tere. 38 .

and called hym, and alked hym quietly in his owne Houle, faying: Thinkest thou this busmesse l that nowe is in hande commeth of the Torde- Jeremie annlwered, Nea that it doth: and thou
(sayde he) shalt be deliuered into the kung of Wabplons power. —

18 Mortoner, Jerenne faye onto king
Zedekia, What haue offended agaynst thee, agaynst toy cruauntes, 02 agaynst this people, that ve haue put me in prison: e

1 Where are pour prophetes which 1. vie.

ied vnto pou, and fayde, haue prophec Thel

CxXl. 4

°

„ 2 rr
‘The prophecte *
7 That heking of Babplonfhouidenot 21 Then Zedekla tommaunded to pu

ö t
. tome agaynst you and this lande- Jeremie in the fore entrie of the
20 And therfore heare nowe Omy Lode and dayly to be geuen 415 ashe of the kyng, letmyppeayerbeaceeptedbe- bread ol the bakers ftreete,bntptt ay the lore ther, and sende mie no more intoche bead in the eitie was eaten vp: Thus

house of Jonathan the stribe, that J Jeremie remapned in the for
N doe not there. 1 the prilon. * arte of
The. xXxviij. Chapter.

By the motion ok the rulers, Jeremie is put into a dungeon. 14 At the request os
Abedmelech the chaumberlapne, the kyng commaundeth Jeremie to be brought loorth of the dungeon. 17 Jeremie sheweth the kyng ho we he myght efcape death.

4 allo shall Winne it. vnto the prophete Jeremie:O put thele
4 Then saide the printes vnto the kong, ragges and cloutes vnder thine arme
Orr, we beleche pou let this man be put holes betwirt them and the cordes: to death: for thus he diltourageth the And Jeremie did lo. 5 bandes of the souldiours that be inthis 1; Ss they drewe vp Jeremie with citie, and the handes of all the people, tordes, e toke hym out of the dungeon: when he speaketh such wordes vnto and he remayned in the fore entrie of them: This man laboureth not fo: the prifon. . peace of the people, but mischtefe. 14 Then Zedekia the kyng lente cauled tees
5 edekia the kyng aunlwered, and pte the prophete to be called buto lapde, Lo, he is in your handes: for the vm into the thirde entrie that is inthe kyng may demie pou nothyng. houle of the Lorde, and the kyng lapde
6 Then toke they Jerenne and cat him bnto Jeremie:-J wyllalke thee fone into che dungeon ok Pelchahthe lonne What, but hyde nothyng krone. of Amelech-that dwelt in the fore entrie 15 Then Jerenne aunswered eden of the prifon, and they let downe Je- YF J be plapne vnto thee, thou vi temie with coardes into a dungeon, aufe nie to {utter death a FF genet where there was no water, but mire: tonnsaple, thou wylt not folowe me
I So Jeremie stack fat in the mire. 16 So the kyng swore an

Tere.xxine. 3

C

Aphatiah the sonne

ot Pathan, Gedaliah the sonne of Pashur,
We \ Jutal the sonne of Hee
% emiah, e pathur the sonne of Melchia, perccauedthe Wordes that
Jeremie had spoken vnto all the people, namely, on this maner.

Ieexxib. 2 Thns faith the Lorde, Who fo re-

and. xxvii. a

mapneth in this ctitie, hall perishe either with the sworde, with hunger, or with pestilente: but who fo falleth vnto the
Chaldees shal eltape, winning his soule for a prap, and shall lyue.
For thus saith the Lorde, This citie no doubt mut be deliuered into the power ol the kyng ol Babplon, and he

x 7 Mowe when Abedmelech the Wortan beyng a chaumberlapne in the kynges court, vnderstoode that they had tast
Jeremie into the dungeon,

8 He went out of the kynges houle, and

9 Hy Lorde the kyng, where as thele men meddle with Jeremie the pro: phete, they do hym wrong ( Namelp in that they haue put hym in prfon, there to dye for hunger: fo2 there is no more bread in the citie.

10 Then the kyng commaunded Abedmelech the Mortan, and sapde, Lake from hente thirtie men whom thou
Wilt, and drawe vp Jerenut the prophete out of the dungeon before he dye.

um So Abedmelech toke the men with hym, and went to the house of the king, and there vnder the trealurie he gat olde ragges and worne cloutes, and let them downe by a corde into the dun-

geon to Jeremie.

12. And Abedmelech the Morian sapde

Jeremie, faying: As the Horde tue .

that made vs these soules, andes

flay thee, nor gene thee into the ha

or them that ke after thy et. d. i |
17 Then fayde Jeremie buto ites the Ear

spake tothe king, which then fate vnder Thus faith the Lorde of poallts © the port of Seria, thele wordes. Sod of Hirael : PE cafe be that wol

ab 9 5 ene yi” . i oy eT
7 r 81 A 1 pay E Bal 2

“nts ee eee at (1

Ne . x . ile ate i pe

Ves eck “ti |

N
1. E E Sey 4
: 8 =i SE Spee
N 8 . NN Berths
* UM 8 y Hy! BAY as in ii 7
ö W 8
J. 1 070 qf } 2 teal
VA) e

them. 1 haue talked with thee, and come vnto h And Zedekia sad vnto Jeremie: Jam thee, saping: O speake, what sayde the

afrayde for the Jewes that are flẽd vn- kyng to thee, hyde it not from vs, and

to the Chaldees, lest J come into their we Wyll not put thee to death: tell vs

handes, e lo they to haue me in derision. (we pray thee) what sayde the kyng to
20 But Jeremie aunlwered, No, they thee- ; —

chall not betray thee: O hearken vnto 26 See thon geue them this aunlwere:

the vopce ol the Lorde I beseche thee, J haue humblip besought the kyng that

Which J speanke vnto thee, so shalt thou he wyll let me lye no moze in Jehona-

d be well, and laue thy lyfe: b

21 But pk thou wylt not go foozth, the 27 Then came all the princes vnto Je-

Lorde hath tolde me this plapnelp,
22 Weholde, all the women that are left them alter the maner as the kyng bad

M the kyng of Judas houte, thalbe by. Then they helde their peace and

led foot) vnto the kyng of Babplons sekhym alone : for they perteaued no-

0 mnces: andthep (hall fay, thou art de- thyng. nne,

eaued and themen in whom thou didst 28 Oo Jeremie abode styll in the fore kr

alettiy feen bane gotten thee vnder, entrie 1 the prion, vntyll the day that

4 4 e tall in the mi one ierulalem was wonne.

their way from tees ga

q The

ö Ihe prophecie *
N The. xxxix. Chapter. |
Habuchodonozor beltegeth Hterulalem. 4 Fedebia fleeth, 5 he is taken of the Chaldeeg,

is lonnes are tlapne, 7 his eyes are thrust out, u Jeremie is prouided koz. 15 Abed
10 is deliuered from captiuitie, becaufe of the conlidence that he had in God. W

1 ODwe' when the titie ot were in the titie, and such as were to

. ), Se R\ Zivicrufatemwastaken to hym, and whatloeuer was lekt oft

** (kor in the ninth pere of tonimon fort, Pabusaradan the chiefe
Zedekiaà kyngof Ju- captayne tarped them to wWabyion,

da, the tenth moneth, to Wut Nabuzaradan the chiefe tapta
Y i Nabuchodono- let the rastall people and thole that aa
302 the kyng of Babp- nothyng, dwell styll in the lande of Julon and all his hoast, and besieged Hie- da, and gaue them vinepardes and rulalem, and foughtagaynstit, torne fieldes at the same tyme.

2 And inthe eleuenth pere of Zedekia, 1 Nabuchodonosor also the kyng of Bain the fourth moneth, the ninth dayok bylon, gaue Nabuzaradan the chicfe the moneth, he brake into the citie) captapne a charge concerning Percinic,

3 Then all the princes of the kyng ok —faying: wWabylon tame in and late them downe 12 Take and cherishe hym, and make vnder the port: Meregel, Sarezer, much of him see thou do hun no harme,
Samgarnebo, Sarfachim, Nabsaris, but entreate hym after his owne desire.
Neregel, Sarezer, Rabmag, with all 13 So Nabuzaradan the chiefe captapne, the other printes ol the king ol Babylõ. Mabuzarban, Nabsares, Meregal, Da

legt. 4. And when Zedekia the kyng of Jue reser, Rabmag, and all the kyng of ba with his souldiers sawe them, hen Wabplons lordes, sent for Jeremie, they fled and departed out olf the citie bo 14 And caufed hym to be fet out of the ¢ nyght through the kynges garden, and fore entrie ofthe prison, and comnutted 144 through the port that is betweene the hym vnto Gedaliah the sonne ol Abe two walles, and so the kyng went to- kam, the sonne of Saphan, that he

warde the wilder ne fle: shouide cary hym home: and so he sae,
5 Wut the Chaldees hoast folowed fast dwelt among the people. after them, and toke Zedekia in the 15 Nowe When Jeremie lay vet bounde

fielde of bicricho, and brought hym pri- in the fore entrie of the prilon, the worde soner to Pabuchodono zo the kyng ok okthe Hozde tame vnto hynt, faying:
Wabplon, vnto Reblath, that lpeth in 16 Go and tell Abedmelech the Ponan, the lande of Hemath, where he gaue thus faith the Lorde ok hoastes the iudgement vpon hym. God of Ilrael: webolde, the truell and
6 So the kyng of Babylon caused the sharpe plague that J haue deviled for children ol Zedekia and all the nobles this titie Wyll J being vpon them that of Juda to be llapne before his face at thou chalt {ec it:
Reblath, 17 But J wyll deliuer thee in that dar
And niade Zedebias eyes to be put laith the Lorde, & thou {halt not cone
| out, and bounde him with two chanes, in the handes of thole men whom and fent hym to Babylon. fshon kearest: 10
Fee 3, Porrouer, the Chainees burnt bptbe 18 Foz doubtlesse J wyll saue chow ged. kuynges palate, with the other houlesdk that thou shalt not perishe with 10 the people aud brate downe the walles [worde: but thy Ipfe chalbe faucd, Ae of Hierufatem. ; that becanfe thou hast put thy tru
As for the remnauut or the people that me, saith the Lorde.

The

of | creme. N
The. xl. Chapter.

eremie hath licence to go whyther he wyll, z he dwelleth with the people that apnerh ak Hierusalem, ouer whom Gedalial ruleth. 14 Johanan prope cieth death vnto Gedaliah. f —

bis is the worde that wert not led taptine to Wabplon, qyould the Lode spake vnto be vnder his turildictlon:
„Jeremie, when sae 8 Thep cane to Gedaliah onto Mispa,
%% busaradan the chiefñe (Pamelp! Ilmacl the fonne of Nathacaptapne had let hom mah, Johanan and Jonathan the
E gotlree from Namath, sonnes of Careah, Savead che fonne of wbhpther he had led Thanehumeth the sonnes sf Ephalthe hyui bolinde aniong all the priloners Metophatite, Jezamah the lonne of that were caryed krom Hierulalem and Paachati, with their ckompantons.
Juda bnto Babylon. 9 And Gedaliah the lonne of Ahicam,
2 Thechiefe taptaine talled for Jeremie, the lonne of Haphan, sware vnto them and fayde vnto hym, The Lorde thy and their felowes in this maner: We 4 Rege.
Godspake mightily belore ol the miser not afrapde to lerue the Chaldees, dwel vpon this place. inthe lande, and do the king of Wabplon
Nowe the Lorde hath sent it and per- serulce, so fait ye prospertr. fourmed it as he bath pronused: for ve 10 Seholde J dwell at Mispa, to be an haue sinned agaynst the Lord, and hane officer in the Chaldees behalfe, and to not ben obedient vnto his voyte, ther- latistie such as come to vs: therfore gafore tommeth this plague vpon pou. ther wine, corne, and oyle, c kepe them
4 Weholdt, JJ loose He. bandes from im pour ware houles, and dwell in pour thy haudes this day: y thou wilt nowe cities that pe haue in kepyng. go wich me vnto Wabplon, vpthen, ko: n Bea all the Jewes allo that dwelt in
I wyll see to thee, aud prouide kor thee: Moab, vnder the Ammomtes, Idubut yr thou wylt not go with me to Ba- mea, and in all the countreys, When
„ bplon, then remapne here: Beholde all they hearde that the kyng of Babylon the lande is at thy wyll, toke where had made Gedaltah the fonne of Alte thou thinkest conuement and good foz tam the sonne of Saphan, gonernour ther to abyde, there dwell. vpon all them that were left in Juda:
5 Fo as pet he was not gone bathe 12 All the Hewes (J car) returned out of agayne to Gedaliah: therfore hefayde all plates where they were fled vnto, to him, Go backt to Gedallah the sonne and came into the lande of Juda to Geof Abicam, the fonne of Saphan, dalla) vnto Milpa, and gathered wine
. hom the kyng of Wabplon hath and other fruites, and that very much. made gouernoür duer the cities ol Ju- 13 Mortouer, Johanan the sonne of Caz « da, and dwell with hym among the real, ànd all the taptapnes of the hoast people, oz remayne where foeuer it that were ltattered on euery {poe in the bleate Wee, Do the chiefe captayne lande, came to Gedaliah to Mispa, and gaue hum his ecpences with arewarae, —_ fayde bnto hyn: eet
„ let hyin go. I. Bnowpesd thou not that wWaalis the C
Peet went Jeremie vnto Gedaliah kyng of the Ammonites hath sent HE che anne of Ahicam to Mispa, æ dweit macl the sonne of Hathamah to flay were With hym among the people that thee: But Gedaliah the sonnt of Aht-
Ve left in the lande. : cam belened them uot. : of Abe whethe taptapnes orthe hoast 15 Then lapde Johanan the sonne of
W ata, which with their kelowes Careah vnto Gedaltah in Mispa these re stattered abrode on euery syde in Wonrdes secretely, Let me go J pray be ande, vnderstoode that the kyng the, and J Wyll flay Plnael the sonne fon lan had made Gedaliah the ok Pathaniay, fo khat no body wall awe o. Ahitam gonernour in the. kndwe it: noberforc wyll Hekyll thee, oe and that man, Wyle, and ehylde, that all the Jewes which reloet vnto hand the voce men in the lande that thee myght be scattered, and the rem-

naunt

naunt in Juda perishe.
16 And Gedaliah the sonne of Ahicam sayde to Johanan the fonne of Careah,

The. lj. Chapter.
2Almacl kyileth Gedatiah guiletully, and many other with hom. u Lohanan

koloweth after Ftmael.
11 Ut in the feuenth mo-
Reg ga. neth, it happened that

4 aa ay A
. Fam NIE
7 4 ‘7
K
As.
1755 U

A 2 — =)

the kyng, Et .

daliah the forne of Ahicam to Mispa,

and they did eate together in Mispa.

And Jlniael the sonne of Hathantah,
With (hole ten men that were with him, start vp, and {mote Gedaliah the fonne of Ahltam the sonne of Saphan with the Worde, and flue hom whom the king of Babylon had made a gouernour of the lande.

Ilmael allo flue all the Jewes that
Were with Gedaliah at Mispa, and all the Chaldees that he founde there
Waptyng vpon hym, and thole that were able to kyght he Ane with hym.

4 The next day after that he had slayne
Gedaliah, the matter was pet dw unowen:

5 And there came certapne men from
Sithem, from Silo, and Samaria, to the naniber of fourescore, which had shauen their beardes, rent their clothes,

We

and were all heauie, bryugyng meate

offerynges and intense in their handes, to offer it in the house ofthe Lorde.
6 And 1 180 the fonne of Mathaniah
Went tooth of Milpa“ weepyng, to meete them: Nowe when he met them, he sayde, Go pour way to Gedaliah the fonne of Ahicam.
7 And when they came in the middest of the citle, Ismiael the forme of Nathaniah, wich them that were with hym, flue them euen at the middest of the pit.
8 Among hele fourescore menthere were ten that sayde vnto Ismael: Oh flay vs not, for we haue pet a great treasure in the fielde, of wheate, barly, oyle, and houy: So he sparedthem and siue them not with their brethren. eg ige. Nowe the pit wherin Ilmarl did cast the dead bodyes of the men whom he fluc betause of Gedaltah, had kyng Ala

‘ el. xu. c.

1B

Thon shalt not do tt: for the lyes that thou fapett of Bina ¥ ate but

cauledto be made for feare of

the kyng ol Ilrael, and thelamne pene

Piniael fyll With Layne inen.

As fo2 the renmaunt of the people, the kvnges daughters, and all the people that were left at Mispa, vpon wham
Mabuzaradan the chlefe captayne had made Gedallah the sonne of Ahicam gouernour, Ismael the fonne of Na: thaniah catyed them away puloners towarde the Ammonites.

i But when Johanan the fonne of Careal, and all they which had ben cap: taynes ouer the kinges hoast with him, hearde of all the wickednesse that PE mael the sonne of Rathantah had done:

12 They toke their companions, x went C= out for to sfpght with Ilmael the forme ev of Nathantah, and founde hym by che great waters that are at Gibeon.

33 Mowe when all the people whom

finaelled captiue, sawe Johanan the onne of Careah, and all the other caps taynes of the hoast, they were glad.

14 So all the people that Jsimael had ¢ carted away from Mispa, Were brought agayne: and when they returned, they came to Johanan the fonne of Careah.

15 Wut Phmaelthe sonne of Nathantah fled from Johanan with cyght cow panions,and Went to the Anunomtes.

16 Then Johanan the fone of Careah, and all the captapnes of the hoast that were with hym, toke all the remnaunt ofthe people, whom Jlmael chern of Nathaniah had led awap when a had flapne Gedallah the sonne of 125 cam, whom they allo had rege from hym, fightyng men- women A chudren, and gelded men, whonther

4 Reg, XV. C

- wr © ed Ce grease
Tas 37 US Mis ae a of at 5

alate donne of Pliah, came, with all the people frõ she least vnto the most,

1 EnAund sapde vnto Jeremie the prophete: O heare dur petition, that thou mapest prap fo: vs vnto the
Hove thy God, Namely for all the remnaunt, Wherol there be ewe of vs lett ok man, as thou seest vz:
3 That the Lorde thy God may shewe bs a way to go in, and tell vs what we

4 Chen Jeremie the prophete lapde vu-

shoulde do

to them: J hane hearde pou, beholde, J a N
16 The sworde that pe feared, shall ouer- erexlic

wpll prap vnto God pour Torde as pe haue required me: and loke what aunlwere the Lorde geueth, J chall tertikle you therok, and kepe nothyng backe lane eee
And they sapde vnto Jerenne, The
Torde be a true and farthfull witnelle betlbirt vs, that we wyll do all that the
Torde thy God commiaundeth vs.
6 Whether it be good or euyll, we wpll

„

Kit
1 d

hearken bnto the vopte ok the Lorde -

God, to whom we lende thee, chat we may pofper when we Hane kolowed the boyte okthe Lorde our God.

87 and alter ten dapes came the worde

ofthe Lorde vnto Peremite,
Then caued he Johanan the konne of

Lareah, and all the captapnes of the

beople that were with hymn, pea and al

„Aenne en emo
. nto them: 11

Tode Gob of hen Spun ath the

fa me to lap

0 beme hynn: ath pour prapers be

b. to

ee bp, € not breake you downe,
1 . plant you anonotroote you ont:

si dat J haue done to vyon.

1 Fare not the Kyna ok xabyii i e Kyng Of Babylon of se rar ye Mande in athe, O benot ac i 2 1 hirn, faith the Lord: foz J wyll yout Jvouts belpe you; and Deliuer
+ yy dis bande. % W .
+ Pellpardon pou, J wyll haue mr

dale, vnto whom ve
St ve tpl owelt inthis lande, J cha

bent as concerning the trouble

captapnes atte countaple ¶ Jeremte what they ought to do. w Jeremie admonithet
ü che eunaunt ofthe people not to go into Egrpt. 0

tie bpon pou, and tause hym to pitie pon,

And bryng vou agapne into pour owne

lande.

13 Neuerthelesle, pt ve purpole not to dell in this lande, noz to folowe the voyte of the Lorde pour God:

14 Wut wyll fap thus, we wyll not dwell C

heeare, but go into Egypt, where we

hall neither fee warre, heare the noyle of the trumpe, nor Cuffer hunger, there wpll we dwell: * *,

15 Wherkore heare nowe the worde ofthe

Torde O pe remnannt of Juda, Thus I *

faith the Lorde of hoastes the God of
Israel: It ye be Wholly purposed to go tito Egppt, and to dwell there as straung ers,

take vou in Egypt: and the hunger wherot ve be here afrayde, chall hang vpon pou, and folowe vou into Egypt, and there shall pe de.

17 And aͤll they that of {et purpole vnder-

take to go into &gypt to soiourne there, shall perishe with the sworde, with hunger, and pestilente, not one of them shall remapne, there Mall none estape the plague that J wyll bryng vpon

18 For thus saith the Lorde of hoastes the God of Ilrael, Lpke as mp wrath and indignation is moued agaynst the inhabitours of Hierulalem:so shall my dilpleasure be kindled agapnst pou also yf pe go into Egypt, and there ye shalbe teuiled, abhorred, brought to shame and tonfuston, and as for this place pe shall neuer see it moe.

I9 The Lorde forbiddeth vou ( O ve rem

naunt ot Juda)that ve shall not go into

Egypt: and forget not that J haue warned pou earnestiy this day.

ye {ent me vnto the Lorde pour God, and sapde, O pray thou the Lorde our
God for vs, and loke what aunswere the Lorde our God geueth thee, that

1 vsagapne, and we chall do therifter :

2 Nowe haue J cheweb and declared puto pou, but ye haue not obeyed the

orde pour God, for the voyte of the Lorde y whk

cxxVIII.

20 Foz pe haue dissembled with me: fo: 1 ch

Which taufe he hath (ent me to pou.

Deutsse. 22 obe therfore “be fure that pe chall

Iere xlii. a.

Iexe. xl c.

perishe with the [worde, wiih hunger.

and pestilence, euen in the fan where pour lust is to go and dwell. r

The. xliij. Chapter. a g ohanan carpet the remnaunt of the people into Egypt contrary to the mynde

of Jcremie. 8 Jeremie prophecieth the dellruction or Egypt.

8 sunto the people, which

f KS ro declare the Horde

VES oh heir God hadlent him c them, euen all these wordes (F far)

2 Azariah the sonne of Dfatah,and Jo-
Hanan the lonne of Careah, with all the

stubburne pecfons, sapd vnto Jeremie,
Thon lpest, the Lorde our God hach not (ent thee to speake vnto vs, that we schoulde not go into Egypt, and dwell,

there:
Wut Baruch the sonne of Periah pro-

uoketh thee agaynst bs, that he myght

bryng bs into the captiuttie of the Chal-

dees, that they mpght flap vs, and carp vs away pusoners vnto Babplon.

4. 0 Johanan the sonne ok Careah, and all the taptaynes of the hoast, and all the people, folowed not the commaundement of the Lorzde, (namely) to dwell in the lande ol Juda: .

Wut Johanan the sonne of Cariah,

ae

and all the taptaines ofthe hoast, taried

away all the renmaunt of Juda that were come together agapne krom all the heathen, among whom they had ben (cattered, to dwell in the lande of

uda,
6 Men, Women, childzen, the kynges daughters, all tholethat Mabusaradan the chiefe taptayne had lekt with Geda-

Swe when Jerenue had ended all wordes of the Lorde his God

liah the sonne of Ahskam, the sonne
Savane aye soa al e Jeremie, Baruch the si
Neriah, a
7 ain ioe moe not obedient vnto the commaundement 3 of God. Thus tame they to Thaphns

8 And in Thaphnis the worde of the
Torde happened bnto Pevenie,fayings

9 Take great stones in thine hande and hyde them in the bricke wall vnder the dooze of Pharaos house in Thaphnis, that all the men of Juda map see,

10 And sap nto them, Thus salth the

Torde of hoastes the God of Ilrael:

eholde, J will sende and tall for $242 I ne

buchodono302 the kyng of Babylon my feruaunt, and Wyll let his seate vpon thefe stones that J haue hyd, and he
Kall spreade his tent oner them.

. u And when he tommeth, be chall finite 4

the land of Egypt, some With daughter, some with banishment, and sonie with the sworde. ith, J. a ae 5

12 - He Mall fet fire vpon the temple of the
Egyptians gods, and burne them dp, and take them selues prifoners: Wore. ouer, he chall arap bpm selfe with the lande ol Egypt, phe as a shecphearde putteth on his coate, and Mall depart his way from thente in peace.

3 The ppllers allo of the teuiple of the sunne that is in Egypt (hall he breane in peeces, and burne the temples of the
Egyptians gods. a: *

The. xliiij. Chapter. 55 UH

he reproueth the people kor their Jdolatrie. 1 Chey that cet l

of the Lozde ate chaslened. phecied. j

t by the threatnyng

26 The dettruction of Egypt and the Jewes ther in, is p70"

PND Hi fs) the worde that 2 Thus lalth the Lore of hoaltes the

Nae

od of pe haue keene alle
G Pract, ¥ asso ppon h. .
¢ cities of 4110 fo that this day they are delolate al

v
And that betause of the great ante mies, which they tonmuted (OPP

ne into Egypt: fo: they were

of leremie.

anger, in that they went
Cae facrifice and worchip vuto qraunge gods, Whom neither they, noz eno pour fathers haue knowen. hewbelt J ent vnto them my tee:
Tununtes all the prophetes, I role bp
. (qtly, I lent vnto them and gaue them warning, O do no suche abhominable thinges, and thinges that J hate.
But they would not kolo we norhearken to turue from their wicked nelle,

eto do no nioze facrifice vnto straunge

gods. 8 erefoze, myne indignation and
‘ aay ivas kindled, and it brent bp the cities of Juda, with the streetes of Hierufatcin, fo that they were made wate and desolate, as it is come to pale this dap.
Aolbetherfore thus faith the Lode of hoastes the God of Ilrael: Howe happeneth it that pe do fo great enyll vnto pour owne foules, thus to destroy the men and woman, chyldren and babes of Juda, fo that none of pou is left:

8 Beraule pe prouoke me to wrath with

the workes or your owne hands, when ye offer vnto straunge gods inthe lande

ol Egypt where as pe be gone to dwell, that ye might btterly perishe, and that pe nüighebe reuled and chamekullp intreated of all nations:

O haue pe nawe forgotten the wit-
El duesse of pour forefathers, the Wie hednesle of the kynges of Juda and their wines, the Wicke dnesse that ye pour selues and pour wiues haue done in the lande of Juda, and in the streetes

ol Hierulalemm

fo Bet are ye not sorie this dap, ye feare not. neither walke pe in my late, and my commaundementes that I haue geuen vnto vou and pour foretathers.

u | Therelore thus fath-the Lore of cakes the God of Israel: I am sted-

ally aduiled and determined to punish

N bon and to roote out all Juda.

$ for the remnaunt ol Juda that
Dübel went into Egypt there to
0 115 J Wil take them, and they ee ali be destroyed, in the lande of adm (halt they perishe, beyng tonsuos a tHe worde and with hun-
102 from the leat vnto the most

they Chall periche with the lworoe and with hunger: Moreouer, they shalbe reuiled, abhozred, chamed, and confounded,

11 FO J wyll vilite them that dwell in
Egypt, as I haue visited Hlerulaleim,

With the [Worde, with hunger, and
With pestilente.

CXXIX

Ezech. 39.4.

14, Sothat none of the remnaunt of Juz *

da whiche are gone to dwell in Egppt, shalbe left to come againe into the land of Juda, although they thinie to tome thyther agayne and to diwell there: for none (hall come agapne but liche as are fled away.

15 Then all the men whithe knewe that their wiues had offred bnto straunge gods, and a great fort of wines that stoode there, pea and all the people

that dweit there in Egypt in the citie ok

1 aunswered Jeremie and

aide:

16 As for the wordes that thou hast spoken vnto vs in the nanie ok the Tode,
We wyll in no wile heave then:

17 But whatsoeuer goeth ont of our owne mouth, that wyll we do, we wyll do satrifite, and offer oblatious vnto the
Nicene okheauen, like as We and our forclathers, our kinges and our heades haue done in the tities of Juda, and in the streetes of hiernlaleni for then had we plenteoulnelle of vitailes, then were
We in peolperitie, and no misfoztune came vpon bs:

18 But since we left to offer and to do

sacrifice vnto the Queene ol heauen, we

haue had starsenesse of all thinges, and perishe with the lworde and hunger.
(Lat of all) when we (women) dyd lacrilite and offred vnto the Queene ot heauen: dyd we make her cakes and powre vnto her drinke offeringes to do her seruite, without our huͤlbandes

Wplles-

20 Then saide Jerenue vnto all the people, to the ien, to the women, and to all the folke whiche had geuen hym that aunlwere:

21 Ypd not the Lorde remember the sacrifites that ye, pour forefathers, vour kynges and rulers, with all the people, haue offred in the cities of Juda, in the streetes of hs ang) 1 he

dered this in his minde-
N Gf) : 22 Insomuch

Iere. vi b.

i. Mach. i. b.

D 22 Jnlomuche that the Lode might no lande of Egypt: Weholde, J haue c en xxii

longer luffer the wickednesse of pour inuentions, and the abhominable thinges whiche ye dyd: Is not pour lande delsolate and voyde, yea and abhorted, so that no nian dwelleth therein any more, as it is tome to passe this day?
Re. xvilb. 23 Did not all this happen vnto von, bez lere ie ue càlise pe made suche sacrifite, and finned de,, aͤgainstthe Lozd: e haue not folowed his vopte, to walke in his law, in his orwmauntes and statutes: yea this is the cause that all nusfortune happened vnto pou, as it is come to paffe this
Day,

24. Moreouer, Jeremie spake dnto al the people, and to al the women: Heare the
Worde of the Lorde all Juda that be in the lande ol Egypt.

25 Thus faith the Lorde of hoastes the god of Israel, Be and pour wines haue spoken with pour owne mouth the thing that ye haue fulfilled in deede,
“yea thus haue ve sapde: We wyll not fayle, but perkourme the vowes that

Efai i. 2.

lere. x lilli. c.

we haue vowed, we Wpll do sacrifice,

and powre out Drinke offeringes to the
Quceue ol heauen: Purposelp wyll pe fet vp your owne meaninges, and perkourme pour vowes.

26 And there fore heare the worde of the
Lozvde all Juda, that dwell in the

swozne by my great name ty
Lorde, that my name that ar de de hearsed thorowe any mang mouth of
Juda in allthe lande of Egypt, tot,
3 rae Auweg r,

27 J PWyl watch to plaguet not for their wealth: nd au che nen 2 ok Juda that be in the lande of Egynt e shall perishe with the [ worde, aud With hunger, vntil they be vtterly destroped

28, Neue thelelle chole that fied adap for the Nvozde, shall come againe out of
Egypt into the land of Juda, but there shalbe very fewe of them: and all the remnaunt ot Juda that are gone into
Egypt there to dwen, hail knolbe
Whole words shalbe found true, theics
Takt this lo: atok |

29 Lake this for atoken, that J wytl pr: site you in this place saith tie Love and that ve may knowe howe that without doubt wyl perfourme my purpose vpon pou, to puuishe pou.

30 Weholde faith che Lorde, J wyll ae:

luer Pharao Hophzea kyng of Egypt,

into the handes of his enennes that seeke after his Ipfe: euen as J gaue 4g zedebias the kyng of Juda into the handes of Mabuchodonozor kyng of
Wabplon his enemie, whiche fought at ter his life.

The. xlv. Chapter.

2 Baruch is reproued ol Jeremie.

hee are the wordes
5 that Jeremie the prooh pphete spake vnto Wa-

ma booke at themouth

of Jerenne, in the fourth pere ol Je-

hoabinithe sonne of Josias kyng of

hade de God of Pleac ode God ol Plrae

ben thee, O Baruch: ne ;

Vv

(When thou walt wertyng! wo is me, the
Torde hath geuen me papne for my

A *

Insomuch as thou thoughtest thus

trauayle, J haue weeried my lelke with fighing, and haue founde no rest:

4. Therelore tell hym O Jeremie, that the Lord saith thus: Weholde che thing that J haue buplded, wyll J bzeake downe agayne, and roote out thethng a JJ haue planted, yea this whole

nde:

5 And seekestthon pet promotion 15 5 7 on fozit, and) pefire it not, foz 4 100 .

ryng a nuserable plague vpon a cosh faith the Lore: but thy tpfe brug geue thee for a pray in all plates why thersoeuer thou goelt.
The

Olf leremie.

The. xlvi. Chapter.

1 he prophecleth the deltructlon ol Egypt. 27 Deliueraunce is promited to Itrael.

Eare folowe the wordes of the- Torde to the prophete Jeremie,
Which he spake against
Aycatt) the gentiles.
These Wordes fololwing preached he to * the
Egyptians, concerning the boat of harao echo kyng of Egypt, when he was in Charchamis belide the wa-

oponasozthe kyng ok Babylon fine oa inthe fourth pere of Jehoakim the forme ol Polias kyng of Juda.

3 Make redy buckler and iclde, and

go foorth to fight.

4 Harnesse pour horses, and set pour

stlues vpon them, fet pour fallets falt

on, bryng foorth speares, scoure pour swordes, and put on vour brestplates.

5 But alas, howe happeneth it that J

{ee you fo afraide: iby fhainke pe backe - Their worthyes are slapne, yea they runne lo fast away that none of them looketh bebinde bpm: kearekulnelle is fallen vpon euerp one of them faith the Lorde.

6 The lightest of foote (hall not flee awap, aud the worthyes (hal not escape: towarde the north by the water ol Eu-

pPßhrates they apd stumble and fall.

5 7 But what is he this that swelleth vp
45 it were a fludde, roaring and raging lyke the streanies of water-

It is Egypt that ryseth vp lpke the fludde,and casteth out the waters with fo great nopse: And he laide, J wyll go vp and wyll couer the earth, J wyll de-

Reoy the citie with them that are ther:

9 Get pou vp pe horses, roule foorth ve

charets comefoorth wonhpes, pe E-
Wasbtan pe Libyansiwith pour buck-
5 ers ye Lydians With pour bowes.

But this dap of the Lorde God ok

Caltes, is a day of vengeaunte, that he map auenge him of his enemies: The
. — Chall deuour, it chalbe satilfied
Gd athed intheir blood, for the Lord

of Poattes thatt haue a apne offe-

ter of Euphrates, what tyme as Habu-

ring towarde the nozth, by the w of Euphrates. — tates
11 Go vp vnto Gilead, and bryng triacl
O virgin thou daughter ot rr: but in vayne {halt thou go to surgerie, for thy wounde fall not be stopped.
12 The Heathen haue hearde of thy chanme, and the lande is full ok thy confusion, for one strong man did stumble vpon another, and they are fallen both together. ;

13 These are the wordes that the Lord lab

spake to the prophete Jeremie, conterning the conning of Mabuchodonoʒor the kyng ol Wabplon, whiche was lent to destroy the lande of Egypt:

14 Preache out thorowe the lande of
Egypt, and taule it to be proclaymed at
Migdol, Noph, and Thaphnis, and

C

fap; stande styll, make thee redpe, fo:

the 1 shall tonsume thee rounde

about.

15 Hote happeneth it that thy mightie worthyes are fallen: why stoode they not fast: euen betaule the Lorde thrult them downe.

16 The llaughter was great, for one fell euer still bpon another: and they layde,
Up, let vs go agayne to our owne people, and to our owne naturall tountrep, from the cruel lworde. g

17 They dyd trye euen there, Pharao the kyng of Egypt is a kyng of troublesomnesle: he hath ouerpast the appointed tyme. ö

18 As J line (saith the kyng whole name is the Lorde of hoastes) fo surely as Thabor standeth among the mountapnes, and Char mel in the sea:euen fo asluredly shall this milchieke come (vy · pon Egypt.)

19 Othou daughter of Egypt, make redye thy geare to flit: for Moph shalbe voyde and defolate, so that no man Mat dwell therein.

20 The lande of Egypt is lyke a goodly fatre calfe: but destructton shall tome out ofthe north (3 fav) it tommeth.

21 Her Waged fouldiers that be with her art lyke fat calues, they alfo Mall fice

N (ij away

Esai.xlrül. S

eS ee — ˙— x

N prophecie

E

23 And they shall cut downe her wood Jacob, feare not thou O Ilrael: fo | ©
Gee 1 the Lorde, they chalbe nuumera- 0, J Wyl helpe thee from taree, and de ol ee ble: for they shalbe mo in number then thy seede front the lande of their cape:
Sabin the grachoppers,so that no man chalbe itie: Jacob allo chan come againe and
Bunte wand. ple to teil them. wei 0, n, 11. be in rest, he Mall prosper, and no man
24 The daughter ol Egypt is conkoun- shall do hym harme.
DD, and deliuered into the handes ok 28 Feare thou not (O Jatob my ker: the people ol the nog. nalint) lalth the Lorde for J am wi
25 Thus salth the Lode ol hoastes the thee, and wpll destrop all nations x
God of Jlrael: Weholde, J wy visite mong whom JJ haue scattered thee: that restlesse people ol Alexandzia. neuerthelesse J wyll not consume thee; harao, c Egypt, vea both their gods but chasten thee and correct thee, pea and their binges, euen Pharoa aud all and that Wich dilcretion, neither Wyll them that put their trust in hn: Jytterip destroy ther. vials M Thersdvii. Chapter? dna 2 ö
1 Che worde of the Lorde againt the philigines. | | :
Hele ave the wordes rie shall their handes be, that che Lorne spake 4 At the lanie tyme when he shalbe 5, vnto Jeremie the proz there to destropthe whole lande of the
Yiphete against the Phi- Philstines, he chall make Wate both
Vitittines, “before that Typrus, Sidon, and the residue of their
Pharao {mote (the c!“ aypde: for the Torde wyll destray the e kieol Aah. P ͤhllistines, the renmaunt of the Jleof
2 Thus faith che Lorde: Weholde, Caphtor. — wy there shal waters artle dut ol the north, 5 Baldnesle is tome vpon Asal, Alta: and shall growe to a great fludde, rune (lon is put to stilence, with the rest ol ning ouer econering the lande and all their valleys: Hobe long wylt thou that is therm, the tities and them that teare thy self e
DWel therin: and the men shal trye, k all! 6 Othdulworde ok the TLorde, howe they that dwel in the land chal mourne long wylt thon not ceasse- Turnc a-
3 At the nople and stamping ok their gaine into thy sheath, rest, and leaue ol. strong varbed horses, at the shaking of 7 But how can it teasse, when the Ton their charrets, and at the runwling ok him selke hath geuen it ac arge again the wheeles: the kathers shall not loone Altalon and rapled it vp agatntt the tt to their chyldzen, fo feeble and wer- ties of the sea coatt: r
L. The: xlviij. Chapter. ehe worde ok the Lorne againt the Moabites. r
A1 bus faith the Lowe shame and afraidee e e of bhoatesthe God of 2 Poab can boatt no moe of Pelbonge
Efixva. „ Nyon) Jagel againtt *M90- they haue deulled a multhieke agu ae, ab: wo be to the citic < ‘Core cthall they tap} let vs rote. th tv \Glof Pebo,foritistayne aut, that they may be no moze aniatiol,
Sopfo u b. e walte, brought to con- thou allo Malt be destroped O (ecitte
. ee EON, and Mirta- miena, and the [worde chall porter” ah is baden: Milgab is brought to Mey oi oad et 5 A boy
AG (ur aa

ree hall crve from Poronaim:
3 425 tating and destruttion Malt

come vpon them,

4 K | ed out. —
* is the going vp vnto Linth he arole With lamentation and mourning, and downe towarde Poronaim they htarde a cruel and deadly crpe:
Get pouawap, saue pour lues, and be lykt unto the heath in the wylder-

5 7 on because thon hat trusted in thine owne workes and treasure, thou Malt betanken: Chamos with his priestes and princes Mall go a wap into capti-

ie. oe ‘ 2 ;
3 uhr deltroper {hall come vpon all ci ties, none Mall eltape: The valleys shalbe destroped, and the fieldes shalbe

Bib

Hub.

spoken. —

9 Geue winges vnto Moab, that the get her away speedyly: for her cities shalbe made lo delolate, that no man shall dwell therein.

10 Curled be he that doth the worke of the Lorde fraudulentiy, and cursed be he that liepeth backe his worde from shedopng of blod.

i. Moab hath euer ben riche and earelesle from her pouth vp, the bath ben still setled vpon lies, fhe Was neuer yet putout ok one vellell into another (that la she neuer went away into captiuitie, therefore her talte remayneth, aud her lauour is not pet chaunged. 5

12 But lo, the tyme commeth faith the
Lorde, that F chall sende her trullers

Alb.

her from her dwelling, and enptie her

bellels, and breake her wine pottes.

B And Moa thatbe alhamed of Cha-
Alb lke as Israel was athamed of
Bethel, wherein che put her trust.

14. e herekore da ye thinke thus: we are nuahtie and strong men ok warre-

1j bia as destroped, and her cities went bo her cholen voung men be mene lath the kyng whole name 1s

16 9 Adeof hoastes. Nn orhe debrnetton of Moab tonnneth on a pace, and her kall is at hande.

Sas

xl,

and al pe that inowwe her nanie, say, O ove happeneth it that the ‘trong

ot leremie.

gab is made delolate, her litle ones

layde waste, lpke as the Lorde hath

to trusse her bp, whiche chall remoue

7 Al pe neighbours mourne for her,

dal and the goodiy rodde is thus bro-
N

18 And thou daughter Dibon, come

downe from thy glorp, and lit in thyrlt: for he that destropeth a bp to thee allo, and beeake downe thy strong holdes, e

19 And thon that dwellesd

aud lay, What thing is happened:
20 Oh Moab is tonkounded and oner-

tome: mourne and erpe, teil it out at

Arnon, that Moab is destroped.

21 Fortudgement Hall come vpon the

plapne lande (namely) vpon Polen, and
Jahzah, and vpon Mephaath.

22 And ppon Dibon, dbpon abo, and

Weth Deblathaim,

„

23 Upon Ririathalm, and vpon Weth

Gamul, vpon Beth aon, n
24. And vpon Carioth, vpon Wozra, and

all the cities in the lande of Moab, whe-

ther they lye farre or neare.
25 The home of Moab is finitten
Nu and her arme broken faith the orde. 5 pee

Moab, shalltome

in Aroer get thee to the streete, and looke aboutthee, astke them that are fled and estaped,

Z — AT Tey

CX

C

26 Bake her drunken, for the maguifi: 25

ed her seife aboue the Lorde, that men

map clap their handes at her vonnte,

and thatthe allo scor ue.

27 Diddest not

may be laughed to

thou laugh Jsrael to scorne, as though he had ben taken

(with theft) among thicues: for fo often

asipou makest mention of hym, thou skippest for ioy. *

28 Be Goabites, leaue the titles, and

dwel in rockes af stone, and become like doues that make their nestes in holes.
29 As for Moabs pride we hance hearde okit, she is very hye minded, J knoe her stoutenesse, her boasting, her arro-

gantcie, and the pride of her stomacke,
[fait the Lorde.]

Efai.xvi.b.
Tere, xlix e,

30 Jknowecsaith the Lorde) her indi-

nation, che doth not right, her worde are lyes, and they haue not dealt truel .. *
Therelore wil J mourne for Moab, for whole Moabs fake: my heart hall lament the men of Birchares. f
32 O thon vineparde of Sabamah, BJ wyll weepe for ther as fo: Jazer: thy vlne braunches (hall come buer the fea buto the fea of Paser,the destroyer Hat i N (iy) breake

Ell. xv. d. 37

G Pr opnecie breake into thy haruest and grape ga- Thus shal Moab be alaunhy thering. and had in derision of all chem tha
Myrth and cheare chalbe tabert a- rounde about her.

wap from the fertile klelde, and from

the lande ok Moab: there shalbe no

Aveete wine in the presse, the treader

shal haue no stomacke to crye, yea there

qhalbe none to crye vnto him,

F 34 Whiche akoretyme were hearde from
Hesvou to Eleale, and Jahaz, whiche lykted bp their vopte from Zoar vnto
Horonaim, that bullocke of three pere olde: the Waters allo of Pemrim shalbe dryed vd. a

35 Moreouer, J will make Moab ceasse saith the Lorde, from the offeringes and cenfing that che ath made vnto her gods in hye plates.

36 WMheresore my heart mourneth fo2
Moab like acrowde playing an heaàuie fons, and for the mens fake of Kirchares my heart mourneth allo, euen as a pipe that pipetl) a dolekull song: for their riches which they haue gathered, shalbe destroyed. — |

All heades shalbe Manen, and all

~ beardes clippedof, all handes bounde,

and all loynes gyrded about with sack-

cloth. ; *

38 Upon all the houle toppes and streetes of Moab there shalbe lauren bie mourning: fo: J Wyl becabe Moab ipke ‘an vnprokitable deffell, faith the

TLoide. 7
39 O howe is the deltroped: O howe mourueth thee O howe doth Moab.
Dang downe her head and is achamed-

v

40 *Forthus faith the Lorde: We > the enemie shall come deins wee Ne

Egle, and f ö
8 * nd spreade his winges bpon

dab. vag eee bene ere wen ue i nd ab chalbe made fo vet 4 |
Se the Lobe. 2 13

43 Jtare pit, and snare, chall come vpon r

thee O Moab faith the Lorde.

44 Whoso estapeth the feare, chall fallinto che pit, and whoso getteth out of the benen 9 055 an the snare: for J will

rynga pere of bilitation vpon faith the Lorde. pon Boab,

45 Theythat are able to flee hal ltande

vnder the shadowe of Hesbon, for there
{hall go a fire out of Helbon, and a flambe from Ston, and shall burne vp that proude people of Moab, and the toppe of thofe seditious chyldren.
46 Wo be vnto thee O Moab, thou people of Chamos shalt perishe: pea thy onnes and daughters shalbe led away
47 Bet at the last wyll J bryng Moab out ot taptuntie agayne faith the Tord:
Thus karre is of the plague ol Moab.

a The. ne Chapter.

che word_ of the VLorde againtt the Ammonttes, v against Adumea, 23 Dama'

— his people dwell in his ci-

the tyme cont’ meth faith the Tod, that J wpll bans anople of warre into Kabath of the
Ammonttes, and it chalbe lapde 00 fl delolate heape, and her cities beettt DP, and the Piraelites chalbe londes oe 4 thole that had them in pollelsion ate? f 5 200 mourne, fox Al eh rooted out-of the grounde,

ope]: tHe ceo Mabbah Mall cot

w

de them lelues with fack-

at they wal mourne and runne ahott the wales, for their kyng shalbe led away i pea his priestes and

ees with hym.

: 1 glonestthon in the W valley:

+ pp baley dath flodved atbay D thou rebellions daughter, and thinkest thou that thou art fo fafe by reason of thy trealure, that no man (hall come to

pg fa
1 K
Nünmplat, at

aith the Lorde. ae 1 Un the Cdomites hath the Lord of hoastes spoken on this maner: Js there no more wylsdome in Theman-
Is there no moze good connlaple az mong his peoples Is their wyldome then turned cleaue to naught:

10. Nb
NV

treepe downe into the deepe O ve citi zens ol Dedan: for J wyll bryng defruction vpon Elau, yea andthe day of his bilitation.

thee, thoulde they not leaue some grapes: Ifthe night robbers come vppon tice, choulde they not take fo much ds they thought were inough-

lo But I wyll make Elau bare, and dil-

couer his secretes, fo that he Mail not be able to bybe then: his leede shalbe waz fed away, pea his brethren and his
Neighbours, and he hym felfe chall not belelt behynde. n Thou chalt leaue thy fatherlelle chyldren behynde thee, and J wyll kepe

them and thy wyoowes al take their comfort in me. 0

aol n Jorthus hath the Lord spoken: Benene bolde, they that men thought were vn-

meete to dzinke of the tuppe, haue drunken with the first, and thinkest thou ee be free: Mo no, thou (halt 156 uit no :
| Dual, tee: but thou mu
3 JO Why: F haue worne by my felfe fauth the Torde, that 2B0ʒrah (yall beeme awyddernelle, an open Mame, a

of lerei

3 Get pou hente, turne pour backes,

9. Ikthe grape gatherers tome vpon

e. laughing stocke, and curfing and all her cities shalbe a tontinuall defers,

14. Noz Jam perfectly inlourmed of the
Lorde, that he hath tent a message alredy vnto the heathen: Gather pou together, and go foorth agapnst her, make pou redy to battayle.

15 Foz lo, J wyll make thee but {mait antong the heathen, and litle regarded among men.

16 Thy bye stomacke, and the pryde or thy heart hath deceaned thee, vecaule thou doest dwell in the holes of stonye rockes, and hast the hye mountaynes in pollession: Meuerthelelle, though thy nett were as bye as the Egles, yet
J wyll cal thee downe faith the
Torde.

17 Moreouer, Idumtca shalbe a wyldernesse, wholo goeth by it, shalbe abashed, and wonder at all her miserable plagues.

18 “Like as Sodom, Gomor, and the ci-

ties that lay there about, were turned

I ee
CXXXI

Abd. i a.

Esa. xl viii. b.
Ierc.xlvii d

Iere. xvili.b.
XIx. b. and. l. b.

Gen. ix. e.

vplide downe, faith the Lorde: so hall

no body diwell in Idumea, and no man chall haue his habitation there.

19 Beholde, tyke as the tion, fo halla
Deftroper come vp from the pleafaunt medowes Of Jordane, vnto the strong

dwelling place, x when J haue made

hy quiet, J wyll make hym to flee from her, and all chosen men wyll J fee in arap again her: Who is tyke bnto me: whatis he that wyll striue with me: what theephearde may stande in mp handes:

20 Therefore heare the counsell of the
Lorde that he hath taken vpon Idumea, and his purpole that he hath deni: fed bpon the citisens of Theman: The least of the flocke shall tvapte them, and looke what fapre habitation they haue, they Malt make it waste, and them

21 At the noyse of their fall the cart shall quake, the erpe of their boyce Mat: be hearde vnto the red sea. N

Psal. 37. b.

22 Weholde, ' the enemie shall tome and 1 e.

flee bp hyther lyle as it were an Egle, and spreade his winges vpon Bozrah: then shall the beartes of the worthyes in Edom, be as the heart of a woman trauapling of chylde.

23 Upon Danfascus, Memath, and Ar- EG phad al e they shal Amos 1.

(liij heare

— = ” The prophecie

. ea aT a eee 5 eare cuyll tidinges, they shalbe toed doore barres, but dwell alone.
0 and aH like the sea that can not stand 32 Their camels shalbe a prap, and droues of their tattell driuen Albaye:

U.

D 2% Banasuus shalbe foze afraide, and
{hal fice: trembling commeth vpon her, sorowe and payne hall. ouertake her,

asa woman trauapling of chylde.

25 Wut howe happeneth it that the ka-

Moreouer, those wil F statter towarde

all the wyndes, and to the kar

partes ofthe worlde, pea from all

fides therof will J bryng their eee

tion, faith the Lorde.

mous citie, the citie ofury ioy, is not spa- 33 Haʒor also shalbe a dwelling for drared- gons, and an euerlasting wypldernelle e

26 Her poung men shal fal in the streetes, fo that no body shall dwell there, and

and all her men ok warre shalbe taken no man thal haue there his hablta-

away in that tyme, faith the Lorde of

hoastes. b

27 J wyll kindle a fire in the walles of
Damascus, whiche Mali consume the palate of Benhadad.

23 As for Cedar and the kyngdome of
Hazoz, whom Mabuchodonosorz the kyng of Wabylon smiote, the Lord hath spoken thus vpon them: Arpse, and get pon bp vnto Cedar, and destroy the people towarbe the east.

29 Their tentes and their flockes chall

they take awap, pea their hanginges and their veslels, their camels allo shall they carp away with them: they cai crpe to them, feare is on euery

de.

30 "alte, get vou farce awap, creepe into caues, that pe may dwell there O pein: habiters of Haʒoz faith the Lorde:for

Mabuchodonozor the kung of Babp-

lon baty holden a counfell concerning

pou, andconcduded His Denice against pou.

Arple and get pou bp again ponder ryche and carelefle people faith the ope, Whiche haue neither gates noz

Esal. xxi. c.

tlon.

34. These ave the wordes that the 10 spake to the prophete Jeremie concer nag Elam, in the beginning of the raigne of Zedekias kpng of Juda.

35, Thus faith the Lord of hoattes, awe: holde, J wyl breake the bowe of Elam, their principall strength.

36 And bpon Clam J wyll bryng the foure windes from of heauen, and wyll scatter them a: gaint the fame foure wyndes: and there shalbe no people, but some of Elam chall flee vnto them. ;

37 Foz J wyll tause Elam to be afratde of their enemies, and of them that lecke their liues, and wyll bryng vpon them a misthiefe, euen my wrath faith the

Torde: And J wyll perlecute them with the sworde fo long tyll J haue brought them to naught.

38 J wyll fet my throne in Elam, J wpll destroy both the kyng and princes from thence faith the Lozde : But in protelle of tyme J wyll bryng Elam out ot captiuitie agapne, saith the Lode.

The. I. Chapter.
1 He prophecieth the deltruction of Babylon, and the deliueraunce ol Ilrael, whiche

was in captiuitie.

de Wordes that the

Lodde spake vnto the

prophete Jeremie, co:

ceriing Wabplon and

Ne pe lande of the Chaldees:

Esai. iii. a. — ——

and their images burst in peetes:

3 Por out ok the north there doth come a people against her, which shall iin her lande lo waste that no body 10 dwell therm, neither man nor beast, to? they chall fice and depart from thence.

andxlviia, 2 Preache among the In thole dayes, and at that tyme and lia. gentiles, jet pour boyce be hearde naue lalt Bebe Lande, the apptozen of Alrael

Pewerb. token, erye out, kepe no sellente, but (hall come, they and the chüdren be
Efixiia fay, wabylon is wonne, Wel is con: da, weeping and making haste, and a
* founded, and Merodach is duertome, seenke the Lode their God.

“pea their gods be brought to ame,

5 Ther thallatke spe wap to ion, Me

Ezechns
Al. vin z.

the foure quarters

i Esdia.

of leremie.

all they turne their faces, saying:

une, 159 wyll cleaue to the Lorde

ma touenaunt that neuer shalbe broken.

e 6 My people haue ben aloft *flocke, my but sherphearbes haue deceaued them, and haue made them go astrap vpon the

plies, they haue gone from the mountayneto the litle byl, and forgotten their

folde. — a
All they that came bpon them haue
8 deuoured them, and their enemies said,

e haue made no fault agapnst them, lor they haue displeased the Lorde, (vea euen the Lorde which is] the habitation ol their righteoulnesse, and the hope of their fathers.

g Flee from Babylon, and depart out of the lande of the Chaldees, and be ye as the rammes that go before the flocke.

“ls 9 For lo, J wyll wake vp an hoast of people from the northren lande, x bryng

them vpon Wabplon, these shal lay siege

to st, and winne it: their arrowes shall not misse, like as a cunnyng archer fhooteth not Wong.

10 And the Chaldees chalbe spoyled, and allthcy that spoyle them, shalbe satilfied

faith the Lorde: ue, i Although pe were fo chearfull e glad, to treade Dolbne myne heritage, and kulfylled pour pleasures as the talues in the grasle, and triumphed oner them like bulle s when pe had gotten the victorie i] n Hour mothers chalbe lore confounded, and they that bare you shall come to shame, the chalbe the least fet by among the nations, vopde, wasted, g dryed vp.
3 No man shalbe able to dwell there for the feare of the Torde, but the shalbe whole desolate: all they that go by cds Babylon, Chall stande tpl e be abathed, and Chall wonder at all her plaques.
4, Go koorth in pour aray agaynst Wabyton rounde about all pe that can handle oWes,Moote at her, spare no arrowes: ache bath finned agapnst the Torde. xe out agaynst her rounde about, esyau pelde her selke, her foundations
A fall, and her Walles fhail come be ne, fo it halbe the vengeaunee of
Abend pet: yea vengeaunce chalbe
% deale ve with per. she hath done, so ehpaalt Out the sower from Wabplon,
Nienna handleth the file in haruest: are ol the [worde of the enentic

wb.

the

Mey man chall get hym to his owwne

CXXXIII. people, and euery man shall fice to his owne lande. * 0 y

17 Hlcracl is a scattered flocke, the lions haue dispearsed them: Fk the kyng of the Allpuans deuoured them, alt ofall: Nes this Pabuchodonozor king of wSabylon EO |
Hath bruled all their bones. e

18 Therkore thus faith the Torde of hoastes the God of Ilrael, zzeholde, J wyll visite the kyng of abylon and his kyngdome, as. I haue visited the kyng of the Assprians, 5 Reg l f.

19 And wil bryng Jlrael agapne to his Fax pleafaunt pasture, that he may feede : vpon Charmel and Walan, and be satil- f J fied vpon the mount of Ephraim and
Galaadz. .

20 In thole dayes and at the fame tyme faith the Lorde, pf the offence of Ilrael be fought for, there Mal none be founde, yk men enquire fo2 the sinne ok Juda, there shalbe none: for J wpll be mertifull vnto them whom J suffer to remayne. 5

21 Go downe (O thou auenger] into the enemies lande, and difite them that dwell therin:downe with them, limite D them bpon the backes laith the Lorde, do actordyng to all that J haue commaunded thee.

22 There is gone about the lande a trye ofa slaughter and great murthercnamelpe on this maner —

23 Howe happeneth it that the hammer of the whole worlde is thus broken and brused in funders Howe chaunceth it that Babplon is become & wildernesse among the heathen (on this maner:]

24. Imp selfe haue layde a snare for thee, and thon art taken vnawares, thou art trapped and snared: for why: thou halt contended agaynst the Lode.

25 The Torde hath opened his boule of ordinaunce, and brought foorth the weapons of His wrath: for the thyng that is done in the land of the Chaloees, it is the Lorde of hoastes worke.

26 Come agapnst her, for this is her ende, breake vp her chestes, threshe her as ye threshe come, destroy her that nothyng chalbe left. .

27 Slay all their mightie fouldters, and put them to death: Wo be bnto them, foz the day and tyme of their vilitation is at

e.

poe thpnke) J heare salredyj a crye ol

them that be fled and eltaped out 10 bd

Ihe prophecic lande of Babplon, which shewe in Sion shalbe stollen away.

the vengeaunte of the Lode cur God, the bengeaunce of his temple, (pea a popce of them that crre agapnst Babplon]

29 Call vp all the avebers agaynst Wabylon, pitch pour tentes rounde about her, that none estape, retompente her

Kiels, as dhe Hath delerued, and ättordyng

poh ag Che hath done, fo deale with her a agayne: for (he hath ; fet vp her selfe a-
U. 1 ell. 1. 4.

gapnst the Lorde, agaynst the holy one of Jlrael.

30 Therkoze Catt her young men kall

E downe in the streetes, and all her men

of warre chalbe rooted out in that day

saith the Lode.

zi Weboloe, Jspeake vnto thee O thou proude faith the Lorde God ok hoattes, for thy day (hall come, euen the tyme of thy bisitation. a

32 And the proude (hall tumble and fall,

and no man chall helpe hym vp, J wyll

burne vp his cities With fire, and it shall tonsume all that is rounde about hym.
33 Thus laith the Lorde of hoastes, The

childzen of Ilrael and Juda lulfer vio-

lente together, all they that haue them in captiuttie kepe them fal, and Wyll not let them go.
34 Wut their auenger and redeemer is mightie, whole name is the Lorde of

hoastes, he shall mapnteyne their tause,

he thal make the lande shake, and iudge n that dwell therin, lone with ano» er]

35 The lworde shal come vpon the Chaldees laith the Lorde, vpon them that
DWell in Babylon, vpon their princes, and bpon their wile men.

36 The Nvowe vpon their loothlapers, as

for those they shal become fooles: the
[worde vpon their worthies, fo that they shall stande in keare.

37 The worde vpon their hozsemen

and charrettes, and vpon all the cOmon people that dwell among them, so that they shall all become tyke women: The sworde vpon their trealure, fo that it

The. Ij. Chapter.
- rHowe Babylon Hourde be ouerthrowen. 59 Jere mie geueth his booke to Sparatas.

Hus hath the Lorde
2 fapdes* Wehold, Y wyll

S<iraple vp a perilous

Wynde agaputt Babyon, e her citizens that
I bcare euyl wyll against

n

38 A drought vpon their waters

eben Dt: ei
And de " pa in 5 ‘abteth won:

39 Therkore Mall wylde beastes, . and Cat of nountaynes, and enn dwell therin: for there shall neuer man dwell there, neither Hatt any man haue his habitation there for euermore.

40 Like as God destroyedꝰ Sodome and
Gomorre, with the cities that lay there . about faith the Lorde: fo fall noman dwell there allo, neither hati any man
Hane there his habitation, .

41 Beholde, there chall tome a people from che nozth With a great bonde of al meu, and manp kynges Chall ctande vo from the endes of the earth.

42 They beare bowes and bucklers, truell are they and vnmercikull: their voyte roreth like the ragyng fea, they ryde vpon horses, and come weaponed to fight agaynst thee O Babplon.

43 Assoone as the king of Wabplon heare tell of them, his handes chall ware ¢. feeble sorowe and heauinesse Haticome -
575 him as a woman trauapling with thylde.

44 Beholde, ike as the lion tommeth by : fromthe [wellpng of Jordane buto the teri xixe dennes of Ethan, fo Wyll J dryue them foorth, and make them ruͤnne agapnst her: But whom Hall F choole cur and ordapne to such a thyng: for who is like me: 02 who wil striue Wich me-or what fheephearde may stande agaynst me:

45 Therkore here the counlaple that the
Porde hath geuen vpon Wabplon, and the dete that he bath taken bpouthe lande ofthe Chaldees, The leastamong the people (hall drawe them out, and loke What plealaunt houles they haue,

they chall lay them Waste. i

46 The noyle at the Wynnpng of ay" jon Hall moue the earth, and the eve chalbe hearde aniong the gentiles.

2 1 wyll sende also into Wabyplon fan. ners to fanne her out, and to dene 15
5 : 1 in per dap 5 bot i

albe about her on en + tote
3 Moreouer (the Lorde well fay)

“rte, and to them that aduaunce
* hem lies in their armoure: Ne shall not (pare her voung men, Kyll downe all

po

hs be flapne shall fall downe in

1 che lande of the Chaldees, and the wounded in the streetes.

Ag for Israel and Juda they shall

not be fozsaken of their God of the

Lord of hoastes, yea for the holy one of

id

e heir lande full ok inne. a! 6 Flee away from Wabplon, euery man
= (ale his lpfe, that pe be not rooted out ee" with her wickednesse: for the tyme of mi the Lordes vengeaunce is come, pea pheshall rewarde her agapne.

7 Babplon Hath ben in the Tordes
5 hande a golden cuppe, that maketh all

bind landes drunken: of her wine haue all ea ptople drunken, therkore are they out of their Writes, g But lodaynly is Babplon fallen and
Aaxib. dar plalters for her woundes, yf fhe map peraduenturc be healed agapne.

9 We woulde haue made Wabplon

Whole lap they, but the is not recoucred, therkore wyll we let her alone, and go euery man into his owne countrey: foz her iudgement is tome into heauen and is gone bp to the clondes. to The Torde hath brought foorth our righteoufreffe : and therfore tonie on,
We wyll Herve in Sion the worke of the Lorde dur God. ö
Make sharpe the arrowes, and mulliplie pour shieldes: for the Loge shall rapse bp the spirite of the kyng of the
Medes, whieh hath alre dy a delire to deltroy Babylon: this shaͤlbe the ben: accor, gegunte ok the Lorde, k the vengeaunee wet, Ur his tenple. e Set vp tokens vpon the walles of
= DWabplon, make pour Watch strong, fee
Pour watehmen in arape, pea holde

Rees fo

noite al
Ee nud

fottus bitch and fo dell

Rr righte:

polute watches, and pet for all that shall

e a Oae

a 95 5 char dweneg by the great waeee Don 5 a and the ea a aa

of Ieremie.

Pacis lake haue the Chaldees fplled

destroyed: mourne fo2 her, brpng

26 $0 that neither comer stones shalbe
»D thou that hatt fo great treasure

The Nome of hoaltes Hath sworne

CXXXIIII. number, whiche with a courage shall tre alarum alarum agaynst thee:

15 Bea euen the Torde of hoastes that with his power made the earth, with lere his wildoine prepared the round world, and with his dilcretion spread out the heauens.

16 Assoone as he letteth his voyte be hearde, the waters in the ayre ware

kierte: he draweth vp the cloudes from the endes of the carth, he turneth the lightnynges to rayne, he bryngeth the wyndes out of their setrete plates.

17 [Ik they be esteemed] by their wildome, all men are betome fooles:con founded

bc all the casters of images, forthe thing aun that they make, is but deceipt, and hath N no breath. 2

18 Vapne is it and an erromous worrke,

18 in the tyme of visitation it shall perishe.

19 The portion of Jacob ts none such:but

he that made all thinges whofe name is the Lorde of hoastes, he is the rodde of his enheritaunte. i

20 Thon hast ben mine hammer and

Weapons foz warre: for with thee haue gh gag
I broken the people in peeces and with Beak) into. thee haue J deftroped kpugdomes.

21 Though thee J haue beaten to

powder horse and horsemen, pea the D tharrettes and such as fate vpon them.

22 Though thee J haue broken man and woman, olde and poung, bacheler and mapden.

23 Through thee J Hane destroyed the sheepheard and his flocke, the husbandman and his cattell, the princes and the

24 Therkore wyll J rewarde the citie of
Babplon, and all the inhabitauntes of
Chaldea, with all the euyll which they haue done vnto Sion, pea that ye pour selnes shall {ec it, aich the Lode. a

25 Beholde J come vpon thee thou nopsome Whyll faith the Lorde, thouthat destroyest all landes, J wyll stretch out ny hand ouer thee, and cast thee downe „ from the ftony rockes, and wyll make n thee a burnt hyll,

(D) Babylon

is called an

5b
é vulldinges
Were fo great

taken any more out of thee: but waste me ee and defolate (halt thou lye for euermore P faith the Lorde.

27 Set bpatokenin the lande, blowe the

trumpets among the heathen, prouoke the nations agaynst her, call ie kyng:

he

domes of Ararat, Menni, an agaynst her, fet the paince agaynst her, beyng as great a fort of terrible horses

agaynst her as pf they were graͤchopers.
28 prepare against them the people of the

Medes, with their kynges, printes and all their chiele rulers: yeã and the whole lande that is vnder hym.
29 The lande allo chall Hake and be afrapde When the denice of the Lorde shall tome fooztl) agapnst Wabplon, to

make the lande of Babplon io waste

that no man shal dwel any more therin.

E 30 The worthpes of abylon shall leaue

the battaple andkepe them lelues in strong holdes, their streugth hath failed them, they thatbe lpke women, their dwellyng places shalbe burnt vp, their barres shalbe brolen. N zi One purlenaunt (hall meete another, peñ one poste shall tome by another, to bryng the kyng of Babplon tidinges that his citie is talen on euery syde,
32 The foordes octupled, the fennes burnt vp and the souldiers fore afrayde.

(O cbt en: the God of Jlracl, Lhe daughter of
Fa 6 Wabylon Hath ben in her tyme lyke as a

. threshyng slooze, but shortly Malt her

Harnett conse.

34 Mabuchodonosor the kyng of Wabyion hath deuoured and destroyed me. he
Hath made me an emptic vessell, be
Iwalowed me bp lpke a dzagon, and fplted his belip with my delicates, he hath tast me out. c

35 My lubstaunte wherof he Hath spopled me, and the thyng that was left me which he Path carped awap, crye out az gaint Babylon faith the daughter that dwelleth in Sion, pea and my blood ai agaynst the Chaldees, fatty Hicrus

alem. ‘in

36 Therkoze thustath the Lowe, Be-

holde J wyll dekende thy cause, and anenge thec, J wyll drynke vp her fea, and drpe vp her water sprynges.
Ehre,. 3% abylon (hail betone an heape of stones, a dwellyng place for dragons, a fearefulnesse and wonderpng, and no

man (hall dwell there.

K 38 They Mhail voze together lpke lions, and as the poung lions when they be angry, so shall they bende them selues.

39 In their heate J hall geue them a dinner, and they shalbe Drunken foz toy:

rophecie d Alcanez, :

33 Jo thus laich the Lode of hoastes

then Chall they lleepe an eueria

40 JJ shall cary them downe to be lylie sheepe, lyke Weathers and 2
41 O hole was Scsach wonne: a
Howe was the glozie of the Whole lande taken: hove bappencth it that

heathen:

41 The fea is risen puer abplon x hach

touetred her with her great wanes,
43 Her cities are lapde waste, the lande lpeth vnbuilded and voypde, it is a lande

Where no man dwelleth, and where no

man trauapleth through.

44 Mozeoucr, J pil bilite Bell at Baby- ker. lan, ete thyng that he bath balolwed .. bp, that lame call J plucke out of his

mouth: the gentiles alfo shall runne no more vnto hym, pea and the walles of Wabplon shall fall.

45 Omppeople, come out of 18 Ei lib that every man map laue his lite rom **

the fearfull wrath of the Lorde.

46 Be not kaynt Hearted, and keare not at ' cuerpy rumoure that shalbe hearde in

the lande: for euery pere bryngeth newe

tidiuges, and in the pere folowingnewe

tidinges, and robbyng in the lande, and lorde vpon lorde. 5
477 Audio the tyme commeth that J will vilite the images of Wabplon, and the whole lande chalbe confounded, pea a her llapne chall lye in the middelt
48 Heauen and earth with all that 18

therin Hal reiopte ouer Wäbplon, when

the destropers {hal come vpon her from the north, faith the Lorde.

H

Babylon ts fo wondred at among the

fleepe and neuer wake, saith the Nane lee ity

a,

49 Like as Babylon path beatendowne k

and slayne many out of Ilrael, fo dall there fall many, and be flavne in all her kingdome.

5 Pe hat haue escaped the cone, halle

vou, stande not styl remember the 2-01 afacce of, and rhpue bpon Hicrulalcil,
5 FOr we are ashamed to heare the 5 4 phemies, our faces Were couered ed shame, betause the straunge allaunles tame into the lanctuarie of the neh
52 Wherfore, beholde faith) the Kalte : tyme tommeth that J wyll put tht images of Wabplon, and COU whole lande they Mall mourue aud kal.

5; Though Wabpion clymed ert heauen, and kept her power ue auh 10 chall J lende her destroyer- Lorde.

bp into lr

one erye Cchalbe hearde] from

Babylon, and & great milerie from the lande or the Chaldee ©

When the Lorde destroyeth Babylon, hehe dellech out the high tomacke aud proude boastyng, wherwith they haue ben as Curious as the Wäues of: che great water fluds, and made great crabes with their Wordes: 0
6 For the destropers Mall come vpon her, euen vpon Babplon, Which thall take their worthies, and breake their bowes: for the God of recompense; einen the Lorde Chall suffitientiy retomco then. . ti e ent“ pen alk ehe Lowe J wyll make their prinees their wile nien their chtele rulers, their nobles, and their worthies drunken, lo that they ' hall sleeye an tuerlastpng fleepe and neuer wake: thus saith the kyug whole name is the

Tode of hoastes.

38 Mozeouer, thus salth the Lorde of hoaltcs, The thicke wall of Babplon
Thalbe broken, and her bye gates shalbe burnt bp, e the thyng that the Gentiles

cc the people haue wrought with great trauaple c labour, shall come to naught,

Edekiah was one and
Atwentie peres olde WHE
(he was made king, and raigned eleuen peres in e chiernsalé: his mothers
| Iname was x. ap hs
She Jerenues daughter at

he lined wirke dip before the Lorde

3 cuen as Feryoatiim did: e e

ache rade was angry at Hierusa-

theme Anda. fo jong kpif he had catt

fol free his pzelence: and Zedektah
7 el che png of Babplon. —

nt ue the ninth pere of his raigne, in

ms kenth moneth, the tenth day of the

N 77 A

Hang Oe kita OF rSabplon, with all h
He the ut pion, with all his ieee > fale Before Siertifalem,and be-

of leremie.

nlcheth it happened that Mabuchodo-

Megep
About Ps and made bulwarkes rounde

and be consumed in the fire.
59 This is the charge that Jeremie the prophete gaue buto Saralah the fonne of Heriah, the sonne of Maasiah, when he went towarde abylon with Zede-
‘© fifa the kyng of Juda, in the fourth pere of his raigne: nowe this Saraialy |
Was a peaceable pante,
60 Jerenne ote ina booke al the nulerie that choulde tome vpon Wapplon, pea

and all these sermons that be written

ngapnst Babplon.

61 And gaue Saralah this charge ohen ;

thou commest onto Wabplon, fee that thou reade these Woes, «© |.
62 And lap, O Lord chou art determined to roote out this place, fo that neither people nor tatteli Hall bwell there anp more, but to sye walte for cuert.
63 And when chou halt read out the

booke, bynde a stont to it, and cast it in

the middest of Euphrates, i

64. And fay, Euen cous (yall Babylon

sincke, e be thrust downe with the burthen of trouble that J wyll bryng

vpon her: so that she shall neuer come

bp agayne. Thus karre are the preachynges of Jeremie. .

1 Thie. li. Chapter. i

“i Derepeatech the tanyng of Fedeniah. 4 Hierulalem is taßen of the Chaldees. 10 Jedehias sonneg are kylled befoze his face; and his eyes put out. 5 Che citie is burneb. 4 The tem - ple is spoyled and robbed, 25 They that were lekt in Hierulalem are carped to Babplon.

n Bpng Jehoabim is brought koorth of priton, and ked line a hnng.

5 And this besiegyng of the titie endured me the eleuenth pere of kyng Zedetal) .

6 And in the fourth moneth, the ninth 4. Reg. 20. a.

day of the moneth, there was a great ler. 27.6.

hunger in the citie, that there were no 439+

moze victuals for the people of the lande.
7 So all the souldiers brake awap, and fled out okthe citie by night through the
Way of the port, betweene the two walles by the kynges garden: (Mowe the Chaldees had compassed the citie rounde about) pet went these nien their
Wap Hough the wildernesse.

3 And fo the Chaldees folowed vpon them, and toke Zedektah the kyng il the flelde ol Jericho, when his hoalt was runne from hym. N

9 So they tarped the kyng away prisoner to Reblath, vnto the kyng of Wa-

bylon in the lande of Hemath, f lere zo b.

¢

22 Nowe vpon the ro

E

Reg.. d.

The prophecie

he gaue iudgement vpon hn.

The kyng of Wabplon allo cauled Zedeklas fonnes to be flapne before his face, pea and put all the printes of Juda to death at Neblath.

un Moreouer, he put out the eyes ol Ze:

dekiah, e cauled hym to be bounde with two chapnes, to be taryed vnto Wabplon, and let him lpe in pulontyl he dped.

11 Nowe the tenth day of the fifth mo-

neth, in the nineteenth pere of Nabu-

chodono302 kpng of Babplon, Nabuzaradan the chiefe captapne, and the kyng of Wabplons seruauntes came vnto

Hlerusalem,

Ind burnt vp the houle of the Torde: he burnt vp allo the kynges palace, alt the houles, and all the gorgeous buildinges in hlerulalem.

14 And the whole hoast ok the Chaldees

that were with the chiefe captapne,

brake downe all the walles of Hierusa-

lem rounde about. ö

As forthe poore people, and luch folke as was pet left in the citie, which also
Were kallen to the kyng of Wabplon, pes and what people as pet remapued, Qabusaradan the chieke captayne carped them awap prifoners.

16 Wut the poore people of the conntrep did Nabusaranan the chiefe captapne leaue in the lande, to ottupie the binevardes and fieldes.

17 The Chaldces allo brake the beaten pyllers that were in the house of the
How, yea the seate and the brasen lauer that was in the boule of the Lorde, and und all the mettall of them vnto Ba-

plon.

13 They toke awap allo the chalderns, shouels, flechhokes, sprinklers, spoones, and all the beaten veslels that was occupied in the seruite.

a9 With the balons, cole pannes, sprinklers, pottes, candlestickes, spoones, and tuppes, wherot sonie were of golde, and fonte of suuer.

20 The chiefe captayne toke allo the two pillers, the lauer, the twelne brasen bullockes that stoode vnder the seat' which king Solomon made nthe house of the
Forde: and all the bellels tonteyned so much mettal that it nught not be Waren.

21 Fortuerp piller was eyghteene cubites bye, and the rope that went about it
Was twelue tubites and koure fingers thicke, and rounde.

pe we knoppes. and euerp knoppe was auen

bites Dye, and vpon the Ruoppes hoopes, and pomgranat were
. brafle. STANANES roundabout

23 After this maner were bot fashioned with p oor ges the fee

e, U nge on
Fomine abou — —

24. The chiefe captayne also toke Sarg:

Se eel n m, e the ti
15 5 phe 4

25 He toke out of the titie a chaumberlaine
Which was captaine of the fous and seuen men that were the hinges fer: uauntes, which were founde in the citie: and Sopher a captaine that vseuto muster the men ok warre, with threestore men of the countrey that Were taken in the citie: „ „

26 hele Pabuzaradan the chiefe cap- » taine tobe , and carped them to the king of Babylon vnto Neblath:

27 And the kyng of Babylon causcd them to be put to death at Reblath in the lande of Pemath: And thus Juda was ledde aap captiue out of his owue lande.

28 This is the sunme of the people whom Mabuchodono30; led away cap tine: in the seuenth pere of his raigne he carpyed awap of the Jewes three thoufande twentie and three,

29 In the eyghteenth pere Habuchodo-
110302 carped away from Hierusalem eyght hundred thirtie aud two perfons,

30 In the three and twentic pere of Nabrchovonoso2, Mabusaravanthe chiete captayne toke aay fenen Hundicd fourtic and fine Jewes, puloners. 15 whole summe of the prifoners is fore thoulande and fire hundied. 7

31 In the thirtte and seuenth hau that Jehoakim the beng of Juda ith - tarped awap, in the tue and Aer dap of the twellt moneth, Cull ere dach kyng of Wabplon (the lane that he raigned) gave Jehoa 1 bm urge Juda his pardon, and Ie out of prilon, Inn set

32 And spake loupnglp to 1 — at his throne aboue the Sais ppt
2 — that were W 0
Wäbplon. . of h

33 Ie chaunged allo the clothes pil

of [eremie.

pnlon, pea and did eate with hym all jong. . |
3 ee bad atontinuall lyuyng geuen

hym of the kyng ol Babylon, euery day a tertapne thyng alowed hym, all the dayes ok his like, vntyll he dped.

The ende of the booke of the prophete lereme

The lamentations of the prophete leremie.

The first Chapter.

qt happened after Ilrael was brought into captiuitie and hierusalem destroyed, that Jeremie the prophete late weepyng, and corowkully bewapled Hierulalem, and lighyng and howlyng with an heaup and wokull heart, sapde,

5 teth the title fo desolate, that donietume was
—ĩkull of people-

S owe is the
‘become lyke d
2 widow Which was great a-
— mongnations-
Hobe is (he brought buder tribute that ruled landes:

2 She weepeth lore in the nyght, so that the teares runne downe her cheekes:for amoug all her louers there is none that geueth her any comfort, *pea her next friendes transgresse agaynst her, and ave become her enennes.
Juda went away by realon of the af: flictton and great bondage: she dwelleth among the hrathen, che findeth no rest, all they that perletuted her, toke her in rayte plates [where fhe coulde not efcape. }
4 Chettreetes of Sion mourne, because no man cõmeth no moze to the folempne altes: all her gates are delolate, her
Aeg irren her maydens t sal ( |

beantnetfe. the her selte is in great

ih

5 ba enemies haue ben rulers ouer her, anh be enennes haue prospered, bebird the Lode hath chastened her for
8 ae Wiekednelle: ! her childzen are end aptiue before their enemies.
Ball he beautic of the daughter of St
Narr eee, her painces are become Ipke ae bat fae no pasture, they are
5 away before their enenne, fo that haue no moze power, ;

lig,

Aas) howe sit- 7 Mobe Hierusalem remembred in the

tyme of her miserie and bare estate all her top t pleasure that the bath had in

tymes pat, seyng her people is brought’
Downe vnder the power of their ene-

mies, and there is no man for to helpe

her: her enemies stande lokyng at her,

and laugh her Sabbath dates to scorne.

8 Hierulalem bath finned greeuouslpe, therkore is she tome in Decay : all they that had her in honour dispise her, for they haue seene her filthinesse, pea the sigheth and is ashamed of her felfe.

9 Her lkirtes are defled, he remembred not her last ende, therfore is her fall fo wonderfull, and there is no man to comfort her: O Torde conhoer

Cxxxvl.

„O, and ie turned backwardt.

imp trouble, foz mpne enemie hath the

vpper hande.

lo The enemie hath put his hande to all i

the precious thinges that the had, yea euen befoze her eyes came the heathen in and out of the fanctuarie, * whom thon neuerthelesse Hat forbiddento come within thy congregation.

1 All her people seeke their bread with heauinesse, and loke what precious thyng euery man hath, that geueth he for meate to saue his syfe: Consider O
Torde, and lee howe vile Jam become.

12 Haue ye no regarde all pe that go foreby, beholde ¢ {ee pf there be any sorolwe
Ipke vnto mine, wherwith the Zorde
Hath troubled me in the day of his fearefull wrath.

1 From abone hath he sent downe a fire into iny bones, and it burneth them cruelly: he bath layde a net foz my krete,

and throwen me wyde open, he hath

made

Deut. 23. e.

4. Reg. &. e.
ITreno. ii. c.

mrnade me desolate, fo that I must euer be mournyng.

C 14 The poke ok in transgressions is
Ge bonnde kastto his hande, they are wap-
See. ped (or weithen] and come vp absut my pech thee necke: he bat) caused my streugeh to

fayle, the Lorde hath deliuered me into mu 1 wherount JY cannot qupte my selfe.

The Lowe hath destroped all the a mightie men that were in me, he hath er i pioclapued an appoputes tyme to laughter all my belt men: the Lorde

de chaktn ok 15

Juda, lyne as it were in a winepresse.
16 Therfoze do JJ weepe, and mine epes guilye owt of Water: Foz the tonikort that
Thouide quicken me is farce fro me, my
_ chrdienare drinen away: for why: the enemie hath gotten the vpper bande.
17 Sion casteth out her handes, and there

Iere. iii. c.
Treno, u. c.

Hath lapde the enemies rounde about
Jacob, and Hierusalem is betome abhomination iu the nuddest ol them.

Dana. 18 The Woyde is righteous, for I haue

19 J called for my louers, but ¢

20 Consider( O Torde) home

hath troden downe the daughter ok

The lamentations

prouoked his countenaunce bnto an

D take heede all pe people and canine my heauinesse, mp mapdens and ify young nien are led away into captiuttie

guiled me, for mp priestes and count , ices but they periche enen whylethe, lought for meate to saue their lyues. J

5 an troubled, my wombe is Diquictes sal

out, and within Jam lpke vnto death.

21 They heare my mournyng, but there

is none that wyll comfort me: All m enemies haue hearde of my trouble and are glad therok becaufe thou Hatt done

it: and thou halt brought foorth the time

which thou called, When they allo be lyke vnto me. e

is no man to comfezt her, the Lorde 22 Wet all their wickednesse conte before

thee, and do thou to them as thou hast
Done vnto me for all iy trespafles: for iny sorowe is very great, and imp heart is heaup.

N The ij. Chapter.

A1
Treno il b. Tode darckened the
2 daughter of Sion in
7 9 ee hig Wrath: As for the
TAS N
E Je honour of Braet he

hath catt it downe frõ hhaeauen vnto the earth, and he remembred not his owne-foote-

Pr stoie when he was angry- 0 weren. 2 The Lowe hath cast out all the babe: tations of Jacob without any fauonr, all che strong plates ok the daughter of
Juda Hath he broken in his wrath, and throwen them downe to the grounde, her kiugdome and her punces hath he

prophaned.

3 In the Wiath ol his indignation he

By the footftole ts

©) he Hatt) broken ail thehoone of Israel, he
Greece Hatt) Weehdalvendis right hände from

the enenue, yeaa flambe of fire is kindled in Jacob, and Hath consumed vp all rounde about.

4 He hath bent his bowe like an enenne, he hath fastened his ryght hande as an aduersarie, and euerp thyng that was pleasaunt to see, he bath slayne: he bath

podred out his wrath like a fire intothe » Her gates are suncke do

tabernacle of the daughter ol Sion.

Lag) * howe hath the 5 The Lorde is betome ihe as it were

an enemie, he Hath deuoured Jlrael and all his palaces, pea all his rong holdes hath he destroyed, and fplled the daughter of Juda with much sorowe and heauinelle.

ey be: D

Treng ile

turneth about in me, and Ja hrauitiesse, because 3 am fultot

J vebelied siubburnlp: the sworde hurteth me 1 2 2

* His tabernacle as a garden Hath he teerit

destroped, his solempne meetinges hath he put downe:the Lord Hath brought it so to passe that the hye solempne feattes and Habbathesin Sion are cleane for gotten: in his heauy displealure path he dilpiled the kyng and priestes.

The Lorde hath forlaken his one 5

aulter, and hath abhorred his owne sanctuarte, and hath geuen the W of their towres into the handes 0 tet enemie: their enemies maben gen it the boule of the Lorde, as it had be

a solempne feast day.

s The Tome thoughtto beeatie volbne

the Walles of the daughter of don, he spread out his line, and drewe ye there hande tyll he had destroyed 96 55 fore mourne the turrettes, e the walles fall downe together.

oken an

grdunde, per barres are vol eg

ot leremie.

sinitten in sunder,“ the kyng aud pein:

es are carped awap to the gentiles:

aue neither lawe 102 prophetes,
Aran vision front the Lorde.

o The senatours of the daughter Ston fit bpon the gronnde in scilente, they haue strawed alches vpon their beads, and gyrded them lelues with sackcloth: che mayoens of Pierusalem hang downe their heades to the grounde.

u Mine eyes begin to kaple me through

weeping, my body is dilquieted ny It uer is powred vpon the earth for the

great hurt ok the daughter of my peo-

le, fecing the chyidren and babes dyd wowne in the streetes of the citie.

n Euen when they fake to thelr mos thers, Where is meate and drinke ; for whyle they fo sapde, they fell downe in the streetes ok the citie, like as they had ben woundeb, and some Dyed in their mothers bosome. N

z What shall Flap onto thee, O thou daughter hierusalem: to whom (hal BY likentheez To whom chall J compare thee D thou daughter Sion, to com:

C fortthee withall: thy heart is lpke a maypne sea, who map heale theez
14 Thy prophetes haue looke dout bapne and fooltth thinges fo thee, they haue not shewed thee of thy Wickednesle, to kepe thee from captsuitie: but they haue seene out kor thee burthens of
0 banitie and banishment. m Is All they that go by thee, clappe their handes at thee, biffing and wagging their heades vpon the daughter Hieru-
„ (alem band fap} Js this the citie that men call so faire, wherein the whole iat’ lallde reioptethest 16 All thyne enemies gape vpon thee,
Whilering aud grinding their teeth,

ud. mii.
Dali t. ub
0 xxix.b,
Dewi

Am the man that thorowe the rodde ok his
= Wrath: haue expert aval ence of miferie.

He drone me foorth and led me, pea into daͤrknesse, but not in-

3 Aigaindmess he tu rned, he turnet
1 Mebane daply against 1 ‘
* “PP Ucth and my kkinne hath he made

faping: let vs Denon, fo2 the tyme that we looked kor is come, we haue 141 pe et tt.

17 The Tode hath fulfilled the thin that be was purpoted to do, a fourmed that he had deuised long ago: he hath destroyed and not spared, he hath caused thyne aduersarie to triumph ouer thee, and {et vp the horne of fe ae 0

18 heir heart tryed vnto the Torde
Othou citie ofthe daughter Sion i let thy teares runne downe like a riuer dap

and night, rest not, and let not the ayple of thyne eye leaue ok. 8

19 Stand vp, and make thy praper in the

first watche of the night, powre out thine heart like water before the Lord: luft vp thyne handes for the liues of thy poung chyldren that dye of hunger in the streetes.

20 Beholde O Lede, and consider to D whom thou hast done thus: Shall the women then eate their owne fruite,

enen chyldren of a {panne long: chall the priestes and prophetes be flayne in the lanttuarie of the Lozde-z

21 Poung and olde lpe thorowe the streetes bpon the grounde, my mapdens and young men are Mayne with the sworde, whom thou in the day of thy wrathfull indignation hast put to death, peacuen thou hast put them to death, and not spared thein.

22 My neighbours that are rounde about me Halt thou talled as it were to a feat day, fo that in the day of the lordes wrath none esraped, neither was any left behinde:those that J haue brought bp and nourithed, hath mpne enenite destroped.

The. ij. Chapter.

olde, and my bones hath he brmsed.

5 be bath buylded rounde about me, mp clofed me in with gail and trauaile.

6 he hath set me in darknesse, as they that be dead for euer.

7 he hath so hedged me in, that not get out, and hath layde linkes vpon me.

3 Though Icrye and call pitiouslp, vet heareth he not my prayer,

S 00 9 he

can caute

CXXXVI]

Deut. iii. c

The lamentations.

9 He hath Mopped vp mp wapes with 33 Fon he doth not plague willingsp, and

lere. xx. b.

D

Psal.xvi. a.

foure squared stones, and made ine pathes trooked.

10 He layeth wayte for nie lyke a beare, and as a lion in a hole.

He hath marred my wapes, and brolen me in peetes, he Hath layde me waste altogether.

12 He hath bent hisbobe, and made me as it Were a marke to shoote at.

13 The arrowes of his qutuer hath he shot, euen into my reynes.

14 J am laughed to scorne of all my people, they mabe songues vpon ine all the dap long.

15 Pe hath filled me with bitternesse, and geuen mie worme wood to deinke.

16 He hath mitten my teeth in peeces with stones, and roulled me in the duft.

127 he hath put my soule out of rest, korget all good thinges.

13 Ithought in my selfe, Jam vndone,

there is us hope for me in the Lorde.

19 O remember pet my nilerie and my trouble, the wormewood and the gall.

20 Dea thou Malt remeniber them, foz my soule melteth away in me.

21 Whyle J conlider thele thinges in my heart, 3 get a hope agapne.

22 (Namely it is of the Lordes mercies that we are not vtterlp tonsumed, for truely his pitifull comipaffion bath not teassed.

23 Newe niercpes shall the Lord shewe vpon thee carly in the day springing,
(D Torde) great is thy kapthtulnesse.

24. The Torde is my portion faith my soule therefore wyll J hope in hym.

25 O howe good is the Lord vnto them that put their trust in hym, and to the soule that seeketh alter hym.

26 The good man with stiinesle and paclence, tarpeth for the health of the
Lorde.

27 Phowe good is it fora man to take the poke vpon him from his youth vp-

28 He litteth alone, he holdeth hym ttyl,

because he bath taken (the Lordes poke)

vpon hyn.

29 Pe lapeth his fate vpon the earth, ik there happen to be any hope.

30 Pe offreth his cheeke to the fnpter; he wyll be content with reproffes:

31 Forthe Tord wil not forsake fo2 euer.

Reg b. 32 But though he puntlhe, yet atcor-

ding to the multitude of his merties he reteaàueth to grace agapne.

525 175 are ok men,
34 To treade all the i rg vnder bis tite Pa of che e
5 To mouethe tudgen fore the most highell ent of man *
36 To condenme a man in his caule: the
ZLozd bath not pleafure in fuch ehinges
37 What is he then that faith, there should some thing be done without the
4 Pat olche month of che |
3 mouth of the mo goeth not euyll and Be 5 ahghed
39 en A murmureth the tt:
2 let hym murm owne sinne. : oan
40 Tet bs looke well vpon dur wapes, lab; and remember our lelues, and turne g lag gayne to the Lorde, N
41 Tet vs lift our heartes with our handes vnto the Lorde that is in heauen.
42 We haue ben dillemblers and haue offended, wylt thou therefore not bein: treated:
43 Thou hast touered vs in thy wrath; and persetuted vs: thou batt llapne bs without any fauour.

44. Thou hast hid thy selfe in a clonde, e

that our praper should not go through.

45 Thou hak made vs outcastes, and to be despised among the people.

46 All our enemies gape bpon bs.

47 Ftare and pit is tome vpon vs, yea deteipt and destruction. ‘i

43 Whole riuers of water guihe out of Te mine eyes kor the hurt ol my people:

49 Myne eyes runne and cannot calle, F for there is no ref:

50 O Lorde, when wylt thou looke downe from heanen and tonsider-

st Mine epes breaketh my heart, betaule ok all the daughters of my citie.

52 Mine enemles hunted nie out fharply
Whe a byrde, pea e that without acause.

5; They haue put downe my like into 4 pit, and they haue catt stones vpon me.

54 They haue powred water vpon ui dane then thought J, nowe am J vn

one.

55 J called vpon thy name O Torde out of the deepe pit. hat

56 Thon hack heard my voyee aud yr
15 turned away thyne cares from ighing and crying.

57 Thon hast incipned thy fete DHE, when Pealteddponthee: and pare”. feare not. sg Thun

of leremie. CXXXVI]
Lowe) Hatt mayntayned deuises that they take against me al the
# ante of my soule, and hast redee- day long. . a

ple. 63 Thou fect allo their fitting downe ung ade, thou hast seene my Wong, and their rising vp, they make their
5 tale thou my caule vponthee. songes of nothing but o me.

st well considered howe they 64. Newarde them, O Lorde, accordin
7 a do nie harme, and that all to the workes of their handes. ; thercounfelsarcagaintime, - . 65 Gene them an obftinate heart, euen
61. Thou hast hearde their despiteful thytcurse. wardes O Lorde, pea and all the ima- 66 Persecute them O Lowe with thyne ginatlons against nie: „ ___Mdignatton, and roote them out from
62 The lippes ot mint enemies, and their vnder the heauen

¢ The. ii. Chapter.

Hobe ts the gelde be- are happier then luch as dye of hunger, come so dinime- Powe and periche awap kamiching fo; the is the inost fine golde fruites of the fielde. o sore chaunged: and 10 The women (whiche of nature are the stones of the sanc- pitifull) haue sodden their owe chyltuarie thus scattered dien with their hands, that they night in the corner of euer be their meate in the nulerable destruc- Deut. 28. e.
. ton ofthedaughterof my people. i Rez
2. The chyldren of Sion that were al- 1 The Lozde hath perkourmed his way in honour, and clothed with the. heaute wrath, he hath powred out the molt precious goide: howe are they furtousnesse o his displealure: he hath nowe become lyke the earthen vessels, kindeled a fire in Sion, which hath conwhiche be made with the potters sumed the foundations therok. T hande- ae I Meither the kynges of the earth, nox *
3 The dzagons geue their poung ones all the inhabttours ol the world, would lucke with bare drestes: but the daugh- haue beleued that the enemie and adter ofiny people is ernel, line the Eke: üersarie thoulde haue come in at the ches in the wudernesse. gates of the titie of hierulalem.
4 Thetongues of the fucking chyldzen 13 WMhithe neuerthelesse is come to pate cleaue tothe roofe of their mauthes foz kor the fine of her prophetes, and foz very thyrst: the poung chyldren ale the Wwickeduefle of her priestes, that mice but there is no man that geueth pane hed *innocents blood within ttthem, Ver.
5. Theythat were wont to fare delitate- 14. Iss blinde men went, they stumbling lye perishe in the streetes: they that a- in the streetes, and stapned them felues . fore were brought vp in purple, make With blood, insomuch that the heathen node muche ok donng. woulde in no wyse touche their gareae, The lume ofthe daughter of mp peo- mentes. C e, ple, is become greater then the“ wie- 15 Wut they crped vnto them, flee pe polkednesse of Sodome, that sodaynely luted, awap, get pou hente, touche not:
Was de roped, and not taken with for they arc vucleane and de remoned,
Ae „Handen, d Send ew peathep haue fais among the heathen, bein’ 7 Her“ abstayners were whyter then they shall no moze dwell in this cati>. gz che noweormüke, their colour was 16 The countenaunte of the Lorde hath reshe, red as cozall, their beautie lige baniched them, and Chall neuer tooke ms g e Saphire, ' more bpon them: foz they them selues tea ns ; söutnowe their faces be very blacke, neither regarded the prielles, nor pitied
Oe wiomuche that thou shouldest not their elders. pee them in the streetes: their 17 Wherefore pet our cpes fapled bs,
. ine cleaueth to their bones, it is wi- wh yles we loolted for our vapne helpe,
5 Dea become tite a drye stocke. feng aden ea te people at be fla ˖ sworde, that coulde 5 N
Pre with the sworde, 3) 5 (00 18 They

Gene. ix. a3

The lamentations.

18 They lay so sharpe Wapte fo; bs, that serued among the heathen.

we can not go safe vpon the streetes, for

, our endt is conie, our dapes are fulfil led, our ende is here.

19 Pur persecutours are swifter then

the Eales of the ayre: they folowed vp-

ett without a hing oz geuer-
‘wer,

All to remembraunce

(O Torde) what we haue suffred, consider and see our confafion.: e Our inheritaunce is turned to the straun-

to the aliaunts. . f

We are become carefull and katherlesse, and our mothers are as the wpdowes.

4 We are fayne to dunke our owne water for money, aud our owne wood must we Duy for money.

5 Our neckes are onder perlecution, we are weerp and haue no rest.

6 [Afozetime we peclded our selues to the
Egyptians, [and nowe] to the Alspri-

ans, onlpe that we might haue bead

mough. 5 1

8 7 Pur fathers (which nowe are gone) lere eie. aue sinned, and we mut beare their

Exe. x vill. a. wickednesle.

3 Seruauntes haue the rule ok vs, and no man deltuereth vs ont of their handes. f

9 We mult get our living with the pe-

rill of our lines because of the drouthot the wilderuesle. N : 9

to Pur sninne is as it had ben made blacke in an ouen, fo2 very sore hunger.

gers, and our houses

21. And thou O daughter e dwellesk in thelandot pus, bega gene

; halt be dronken, an

9 wand diger

22 Thy sinnes are wel punished O rn daughter Ston, he Hall not ei ta be taried away: but thy wickednelle
O danahter Edom hall he villte and wyll discouer thy sinnes.

The. v. Chapter.
Che prayer of qeremie.

u The wines are rauished in Sion aud the maydens in the cities of Juda.

12. The princes are hanged vp with the hand ofthe enemies, they haue not spared the olde sage men. 2

3 Thep haue taken young men to grinde, and the boyes fainted vnder the burthens of wood.

14 The elders fie no moze vnder the C gates, and the young men bie no moze playing ot musicke.

15 The iop ok our heart is gone, our me:

uus meeting is turned into mourning. 84
16 The garlande of our head is fallen: alas that euer we finned fo fore.
17 Therefore our heart is full ot Heaul 1. e nesse, and our epes dimme.
18. Wecaule of the hill of Sion that is destroped: insomuch that the fores runne vpon it.

19 But thou O Logde, that remaynett

fcr euer, and thy feate worlde without

ende:

20 wherefore wylt thou styll forget bs, and forsake bs fo tong:

21 O Tord turne thou vs vnto thee, and

fo shall we be turned, renne our daͤves ass in olde tymes: oil

22 But thou Halk banithe bs vtterle, and hast ben displeased at bs.

The ende of the lamentations of leremie.

R,

vv.

2 % thirtith pere in the
D ie Aifourth Cmonech!] ia the e fifty dap of the mo-
<4 05 neth that (I beypng in
E athe middes of the tap-
——dinitie, by the riner i Chebar) the heanens were opened, and pat == FJ lave difions of God: | an 2 Inthe fifth daviofthe moneth, Wipicl) gan, Was the fifth pere of kyng BPaaking
Minne, (äptiuitic,

3 The wordeolthe Lorde came ta e502 chiel the prielt the fonne of Wuzt, in the lande of the Chaldeans by the riner

kui, Chebar, Where the hand ok the Logo

be, Was bponhym.

1 And J lodked, and beholde a© stormie wind came out of the nosh, a great

cloude, and a fire folding it felfe in che

doude and a brightes rounde about it,

and fosrth of the middes therof as the

nesse of foure © beastes (appeared) and

this was their fo iketettes Wan they had the had foure faces, and
The one of them had foure wynges. wee : feete were straight feete, and the their 1 We the sole of talues glistered as the appeatame ocbralse burniched. ial

Fon bnder their wynges vpon all

> And out ofthe muddes therok, the like:

T tame to passe in the

Coloue ot amber out o iddes ok chefire. tof the nddes of

N

the foure comers they had mens han: des: and they foure had their faces and cheir wynges.

9 Their Wynges were iopned one fo another: Whenthep Went they looked not backe, but eche one went straight for warde.

10 Wut (touching) the finrilitude of their fares they foure had the fate ofa man and the face of a lion on the right fine aud tijey foure had the fate of an ore on the left tide, the foure allo had the face

ofan Egle.

uu Thus were their faces, aud their winges were spread dut aboue, fo that two wynges of euery one were ioyned one to another, and two wynges couered euery one of their vodpes. i

12 Euerp one went straight forward: © whyther as the spirite led them, thither thei went, x returned not intheir going.

13 And the fashion of the beastes, their appearaunte was lpke coales of fire, burning like the appearaunte of cresfees, it ran among the bealtes, and the fire gaue a glister, and out of che fire there went lightening.

14 And the bealtes ranme, and returned like lightening.

15 hen J had considered the beastes, beholde a Wheele vpon the earth nye to the beastes, to euerꝰ of the foure before his face.

16 The fashion c worke of the wheeles was lykt the colour of O Tharsis, and oad Cui they

Euer. ger had foure fas

> ces, the face of

à man and ol a n ont tight fide, and the face of abnilocke and

ol an e gle on che let lid.

(0 whythet

their wyll oz

minde as to

() Tha isa

Thu hig.

. fathion €¢ er wokel was jas though tt
151 a cual inp middle of a wheele.

17 When they went, they went vpon

their foure fines: they returned not backe when they went. a

Geske 18 They had ringes, and heyght, and

wheelies, whi-

cht somt cal frakes,

D

(i) He noteth two manct ol
Couctinges,

the one with

20 couer thtir bodpeg.

“Ox,impu-

dent.

Were feareful to bebolde:Ethetr ringes
Were full of eyes rounde about them foure.

19 When the beastes went, the wheeles
Went allo by them: and when the beastes were he from the earth, the wheeles were lykt bp.

20 Wipe socuer the spirite (was] to

go, they went, and thyther was! the

{pirite to go, and the wheeles were lyft

vp before them: for the spirite of the

beastes were in the Wheeles.

When the beastes went, they went, e whentheistoode, they stoode, andwhen they were lifted vp from the earth, the
Wheeles were lifted by before the, for p spirite of b beastes was in the wheeles.
22 And the fimilitude of the firmament

boon the heades of the beastes, Was

lite the colour of christall Wonderful, spread ouer their heades aboue.

winges were stretcht koozth one towardes another, euery one had two coueriug them, ande euerp one had two

foure had one fashion, and their touering them, seuen their b = they iy 5 24. And when they Went, FZ Deavde the

Ae

noyse of their wynges, pn the nopleor

And vnder the kirmament their l

1 25rd

A t

z

ao 4 —
Sates £

great waters, as it had ben thep

the almightie, the voyte of Peach us che nople of an hoalt: when they toane

theylet downe their winges.

25 And there was a nopse krom aboue the firmament that was duer thete heades: When they stoode, thep let downe their wynges.

26 And aboue the kirmament that was duer their heades, there was the fashion of a throne lpke a Saphir ton: and vpon the similitude of the throne bp appearaunce,as the similitude ofa man aboue bpon it. |

27 And J sawe as the appearaunte of amber (andj as the fiintlitude of fire rounde about Within, fron the appearaunice of his lopnes vpward:and from the appearaunte of his loynes downewarde J sawe as the lpkenesse of fire, and brightnesle rounde about it.

28 As the likenesse of a bowe that is in a tloude in a rapnie dap, fo was the appearaunce ok the brightnesse rounde about: this was the appearaunce of the similitude of the glorp of God, c when
J sawe it, J fell vpon my face and
. onto the voyte of one that
Pane e 1

q The. ij. Chapter.
Che prophete is sent to cali the people from their errour.

8 ND then laid he vnto

Andthe spirite entred luto me when he had spoken vnto me, e fet me vpon mpfeete, so that J heard him that spake vnto me.
3 And he lapde vnto me, Thou lonne of nian, J lende thee to the ehildren of JE rael, to à rebellious people which hãue rebelled against nie, both they and their forefathers haue wickedly behaued them selues against me, euen vnto this

4 For thepare childzen ola harde face

and stiffe heart, J do sende thee vnto

them, and thou shalt fay vnto them,
Thus saith the Lorde God.

5 And whether they wyll heare or refue (for they are arebellious house)pet

they may knowe that there hath bena

prophete among them. .

6 And thou sonne ok man keare them not, neither be akraide of their wordes, for“ brpers and thornes are with thee, and thou dock dwell among scorpions: feave not their wordes, nor be abashed b 110 lookes, for they are a rebellious

dulc. —

7 And thau chalt peake my wordes di to them, whether they wyll heare or Fe fuse, for they are rebellious.

8 ‘Therefore thou fonne of man, obay

thon all thinges that J fay vnto thee, and be not thou rebellious lpke the te, beltions houle: open thy mouth, and eate that IJ geue thete. and
9 And when J looked, veholde a hn was fent vnto nie, and lo, in it was roule of a booke. ewas
11 And he opened it before me, andit 4
Written within and without, and iY
Was Written therein, © tamrentasor and mourning, and wo. q The

ag €5t

€

(h) Conde: ting the matfile of God, the foraber nesst ol Ache
@) Tha us, the Lond.

Or, tebe

les.

i, int mertsopits %

n¢
‘om pest mp ooh.

ber
Sees ire ment n 1 yea

The. iii. Chapter.

of Ezechiel. *

ophete beyng fed wich the worde of God, and with the constant botonelle of the ote sent vnto the people that were in capttuitie. +7 Che office ot true preachers,

Fter this said he bnto me: Thou sonne of man, cate whatsoeuer thou kindest, eate this roule, and go thy way and speake vnto the
—— houle ok IJlrael.
1 0 J opened my mouth, and he fed me with this roule.
And he fave vnto me, Thou foune of

a bas in my mouth * weeter then honie.
2 4 And he satde vnto me, Thou sonne of

nun e lippes and harde language art thou

fo He layde morcouer vnto me, Thou sonne or man, all my wordes that J
Chall peake vnto thee, reteaue in thyñe heart, and hearken With thpne eares.

It And go, get thee to the captiuitie, to the chyldien okthy people, and thon chalt speake onto them, and shalt say vnto hem, Thus faith che Lord God, whe-

1 werther will heare, or leaue.

© lBitth that the fpivite toone me vp, and
Azearde behinde me a vopte ofa great

buchung (to wit) 2lelled be the glory of

Choual from his plate.
1 7 bearde) allo the noyle of the winges ibe beastes topning one With anoth ages the vatling of the wheeles at were befor them, cuena noyle of

great rushing.

14 Nowe when the spirite lift me vp aud tooke me away, J went in bitternesle C and furie of my spirite: but the hande of the Lorde vpon me was strong. ;

15 Then J cante to the captiuesin Thelabib that dibelt by the riner Chebar, and J fate where they fate, and J rez mapned there seuen dapes, astomched among them. j

16 Aub when the seuen dapes were erpired, the Lorde saide Dato me,

17. Lhoufonneof man, J haue made

ther a“ watchman onto the Houle of Ezech zb.

Ilrael: therefore thou Male heare the
Worde at inp mouth, and geue them
Warning fromme. 3

18 When J chall fap vnto the wicked,
Thou shjalt surely dpe, and thou geuck not him warning, nor speakest to admoniche the wien ed or his eull wap, and fo to liue:then (hal the fame vngodly man
Dye in his owne vnrighteoulnesse, but his blood wyl J require ot thyne hand.

19 Neuertheleise, if thou geue warning vnto the lbicked, and he pet turne not from his vngodlpnesse and from his wicked wap: he shall dye in his owne wickednesse, but thou hal delivered thy soule.

20 Mobe ik a righteous man go from his p righteousnesse and do thething that is eupll J wyll lay a fumbling blocke before him: and he (hall dye, because thou
Hak not geuen him warning, dye (hal he in his owne sinne, so that his rightebulnesse whiche he hath done, shall not be thought vpon: but his blood will J require at thyne hande.

21 Meuerthelesle, if thou exhortest that righteous that he sinne not, and so the righteous do not sinne: then shall he liue, because he hath reteaued thy warning, and thou hast delluered thy soule.

22 And there came the hand of the Lord bpon me, and he sayd vnto me: Stande
DP, and go into the fielde, that J map there talke with thee.

23 So when J had risen bp, and gone

foorth into the flelde: beholde, the“ glo- Sees rie ofthe Lord staode there like the glo- d rie which I sawe by the riuer Chebar: swyceics.

then fell Jdowne vpon my face,
24 And the spirite canie into me, whiche
ö S (iii fet

clx

‘The prophecie “

set me Dp vpon my keete, and spake bnto (halt be dumbe, and not h

(d) Itiss

ching cebuking ol inne.

therein chiee
Hundred and nineteenc

4 Vnder-
Stande, shall they be.

Cb) which deelated Jolunh. who had now from the
Bie of Jolut in

Cc) Thats,

great plague
‘of God to-
= the pro-

A 5
„ 7

me, and fatd vnto me: Go thy wap, and
(hut thy seife inthyne boule.

25 Beholdt O thou sonne of man, they haue prepared bandes against thee, and they Wyil binde thee with them, and thou (halt not go out among them.

26 And J will make thy tongue cleaue to the roofe of thy mouth, that thou

e as d reprouer vnto them: for they are pu hep ate arebelllong
27 But when F {peake onto thee, J wyl open my mouth, and thou thait fap bn: to them, Thus laith the Lorde Gop: foleaueth of er him ane dorch o leaueth of, let him leaue: fo arebellidus houle. aot

¢The.iiij.Chapter,

liege of the citie of Hierufalem is kignikied. 9 Whe long continuaunce ok the cambhaitie of Arsel. 16 J unger is prophelicdtocometn thecaptiuitie, | °. be

1 AYou sonne of man, take thee a tyle stone

Fand lay it before thee,

the titie Hierusalem,
And lap siege against

— t, and builoe a kozt against it, and cast a mount againsttit: {et

an iron wall, then let thy face towarde it to besiege it, and make an assault against it: this shalbe a token vnto the house of Jsrael.

4 But thou shalt sleepe vpon thy left side, and lay the finne v of the house of
Israel bpon it (according) to the number ofthe dapes chat thou shalt sleepe vpon it, thou shalt beare their iniquitie.

5 Noz J haue lapde vpon thee the peres of their iniquitie according to the num-

ber of the dapes (cuen) tiee hundred

and minctie“ dapes, fo shalt thou beare the iniquitic of the boule of Yfcael. hen thou Hatt fulfilled thele dayes, lye downt agayue and 2775 vpon thy right fide, and beare the finnes of the

Houle of Juda: fourtie dapes haue J

appointed thee, Wa day for a pere seuen

d day fo2 a pere.

7 Therfore fet nowe thy face towarde the liege of Hierulalem, and diltouer thine arme, that thou mapest prophetie againstit. :

8 BWehotd,F will lay chaines vpon thee, that thou (halt not turne thee from one ide to another, till thou hast ended the dapes of thy besieging.

Wherfort take vnto thee wheate var-

pe, beanes, lintils, millot, and fetches, -

and put these together in a vessell, ad make thee loaues of bread thereof, atcording to the number of the dapes that thou mutt lye vpon thy fide, that thou mapest haue bread to eate forthree hun: dred and ninetie dave.

10 And thy meate that thou eatest thait haue a tertaine wayght appointed, cnamelpitwentie fitles euerv dap: x from time to time (halt thou eate therof.

1 Thou shalt drinke also a certaine mealure of water (namely) the sixts part] of an “Hin from tyme to tyme shalt thou E., mf drinke. J

12 Barly cakes halt thou eate, and them (halt thou bake in mans doung o sien

before their eyes. e

And with that sapde the Lord, Euen and

thus shall the chyldren of Ylrael cate w. their defiled bread among the gentiles
Whyther J wpll cast them.

14 Then fapde J, Oh Lorde God: be: € holde, my foule Was pet neuer stapned, for fro my youth vp vnto this houre, J did neuer eate of a dead carkalc, 02 Of that whiche was layne of wylde beastes, neither tame there euer and vncleane fleshe in my mouth.

15 Whervnto he auntwered me: No, J ws
Wyll graunt thee © cowtalins in steede towne, of mans doung, and thou Malt make oes thy bread with them. a

ora

it de
16 And he lade vnto me, Beholdethon cee

EIA. uia· rech v. andi b

sonne of man, J wylt breake the“ falke of bread in — and they 1 0 cate their bread with waight aud w ‘
805 ann al 5 ee i? astonilhment shall they dune,
17 That they may cause a lacke l and water, and be astonted one at quit ther, and be consumed in their in

of Ezechiel.

The, v. Chapter.

igne of the heeres, by which is lignified the destruction of the people, C pe ho the anger of God towarve the people. 175 — ce

Thou sonne of man, take thee then a sharpe
VI knifecnametpsa barbers

Arasour, take that to thee, and tause it to pale bpon thy head and bpon thy beard:

x GS

fhaue aw

9 49996 n “A

2 houthaltburne with fire the thirde part in the middest of the G titie when he dayes of the siege are fulfptied, and

and finite about it with a knife, and the we latthirde part thou shalt scatter in the
, Wynde, and J Wp drawe out a lworde lter them. 7 ie 3 Thou shalt also take therof a fewe in n Muntber,and bynde them in thylappe. b 4 Ok them pet Halt thon take, and cast them into the middest ofthe fire, x burne them in the fire: therot shall a fire come toorth into all the houle ol Asrael.
5 Morcouer, thus saith the Lorde God:.
This lame is Hierulalem, which F fet

* frounde about her.

6 Wut the hath chaunged my indgementes into wickednesse moze then the nations, and my statutes moze then the counttets that are rounde about her: for they hane rekuled my indgementes and imp statutes, and not walked in them.

reed |: Therlore thus faith the Lorde God:

Wiese Foz pour ( multiplying moze then the

soi Lentlles that dwell rounde about you,

ming amd betaule ye haue not walked in my lalbes, neither haue pe kept my ordinaunces, no ye haue not done ateordyng to the iudgementes ok the nations that are rounde about you: 5
Wesderlont thus faith the Lode God, eholde J will also come agaynst thee,
A e Y lap: for in the nuddest of
9 yu execute iudgement in the
5 Au the heathe.
Sion, J Wyll handle thee of such a faas J neuer did before x as J will

n euer do krom that tyme foorth, and

Datbecaute ofall thine abbontinations,

ory

then take thee waight scales and deude

me thou khalt take the other thirde part

mex the nnddest or nations, and countreis

lo For in thee the fathers halbe fapne to 5 cate their owne sonnes, and the sonnes » their owne fathers, J wyll execute iudgement in thee, and the whole remnannt of thee well J statter into all the wyndes.

u Wherkore, as truely as F spue faith the Lorde God, seyng thou hast defited my fanctuarte with all maner of abhonunations, and with all shamefunoke urn 110

12 Foz this tause will J also destropthee,

mine epe shall not bare thee, neither

Wp J haue any pitie. :

3 “Due thirde part within Hee Hall dye of the peffilence and be consumed of hunger, another thirde part shalbe flayne downe rounde about thee with the sworde, the other thirde part that remapneth, wyll J (catter abrode towarde all the wyndes, and draͤwe out a

Iere. xv. b.

sworde after then,
14. Thus wyll F perfourme mine indignation, ⁊ make my wrath to settle vpon them, and J will he™comforted: fo that

E

gaynst them, they shall knowe that J ani the Lorde, which with a fervent geldusie haue spoken it. a
Moreouer, J wyll make thee waste and reuiled among all the heathen that
Dive about thee, in the fight of all them that go by thee. —
16 Sothou shalt be areproche and shame, a chastilement and a wondrpng vnto the nations that are rounde about thee, when J Chall execute iudgementes in thee, in anger t in ath, and in sharpe rebukes, Ithe Lorde haue spokenit:
17 When ZF Moote among then the pe-

rilous“ dartes of hunger, which shalbe Ge) which be re and What socuer wert oc; casiong of

for their destruction, pea therfore shall
I choote them becaule J wyll destroy vou, J wyll entrease hunger vpon you, and * wyll breake pour staffe of bread.
18 Plagues wyll J sende vpon pou, pea and Witked bealtes alfo to spople thee, pestilence and bloodsheddyng shal come vpon thee, and the lworde wyll Y being ouer thee: J the Lorde haue (potter it.

The

famine.

aruch. il. a.

That tx,
When J Hane kulfylled nwne anger a- pee ta
E lat, 1.¢.

Ezech. iii. e.

| ‘The prophecie
The.vj.Chapter.

He eweehthat the people chalbe plagued foz thefinne of idolatrie. 8 he prophecieth the repentaunte ot the remnaunt ol the people, and their deliueraunce. 1 Che de.

et u Thus latth the Lorde God, Smite ores ee Weholde Jseuen J) will bryng a lworde thie handestagether,andstampe wih
Boten bpon pon, and destroy pour yc places, thy feete, and fay, oo worth all the abe nen
Sandes, Pour aulters shalbe destroped, Z vour honinations and wickednelsles of the ren
Saad, üntages of the” sunne broken downe- house of Ilrael: for they thatl fall with waren pour slapne men Wyll J calt dowue be- the worde, with hunger, and with eb. fo your idols. pestilence.

4 Regu c. pour anlters. that are besieged Mall dye of hunger:
6 In all pour dwellyng plates pour cities Thus wyll Platilfic my weathfull ne yalbe deldlate, and the hye places laide pleasure vpon them.
Waste, so that your aulters halbe made 13 And so shall ve knowe that Jam the
Wake aud Defolate, pour idols shalbe Torde, When their flayne men shalbe broken and abolished, and pour images among their idols rounde about their

struction of the lro warde is prophecied.
D the worde of the

A Rey 1 5 Torde tame vnto me, which hath departed from nie, t with
9 TEN oe saying: their eyes that haue gone a Whoryng

2 Thou sonne of manset —after their idols: and they shalbe abhoz-

No.. \\S\ thy face tothe moun- red defoze their owne eyes kor the eullg

taynes of Israel, that thou mapest prophecie agapnst them,

3 And lap, Weare the worde of the Lod
God: D pe mountaynes of Jlrael
Thus hathtihe Lord God spouen to the mountapnes, hylles, riners, c dales,

5 And the dead tarkases of the chilldzen of Asrael wyn F cast before their idols, your bones will Y statter rounde about

of the sunne shalbe cut downe, and pour
Workes quite taken away.
7 Pour slayne men (hall fall among pou: and ye shal knowe that J am the Lond.
3 Pet wyll J leaue aremnaunt, that vou may haus (come) that hall efeape the worde among the nations, when as pe

shalbe scattered through the tountreis. mic
9 Audthepthatekapeofpou Malthinke to Deblathah thzongh all their habt ale, vpon me ainong the Heathen where tations: and they chall undwe that J. sures they shalbe in taptiuitie, vetause J haue am the Torde. Ae

The. vij. Chapter. en re

2 Che ende of all the lande of Itrael hall todapnelp come. r0 Che cause of the destruction wild, w. ee 23 Che prophete is commaunded to Merwe the A Aa the eupls that ave at ze ne

ben broken with their Whoztthe heart

which they haue commited in hen 8 — et
10 And they Chall knowe that Jam the
Lowe, and that J haue not eee
3 ae woulde do this cuil vnto m. a

12 Who fo is farre of chall dye of the pestilente, he that is nye at hande Chall perishe With the [worde, and the other

aulters, vpon euery Hye hyll, and toppes of mountaynes and vnder euery greene tree, and vnder euery thicke oke, (cuen in the places where they dyd oller llweete

14 J wyll stretche mine hande out boon them, and wyll make ? and defolate rom the Wuͤdernelle vn an

He worde of the Lorde came vnto me, saping:
And thou sonne of 3 man, thus lath the
CS Lorde God, an ende is tome vnto the lande of

Ilrael: pea berylp the

ende commeth vpon the foure tormers of the lande. ponthet:
Horde chan the ende tome bool che for J wyll fende my wräth un ; and wyll punishe thee acco ten thme wayes, aud rewarde thee alter a abboniina.ions, 4 Pine

of Ezechiel. 1 exit,

b fpare thee, neither chall eftape, and shalbe in the moun:

4 Pier u . but Bhai thee taynes lyke the tones of the balicys,alt

. 117 thy Waypes, k declare thine they thall mourne, euerp one kor his ae panninations: then fhatl pe knotbe iniquitie.

Esai. xiii. b.

orde. 17 All handes chalbe let downe, and all Let. that Edt es, Lorde God eholde, knees lhalbe weake as the Water. N
ö be (hall come alter another: 18 Abep*thall girde them selues with ana

ib „the ende [Jlar)is fsackcloth, feare hall couer them, chame lees.

: ae it wachen fo thee beholde it is wale ae . and baldnesse vp-

1 on their heades. N

tomcalehn . ir siluer shall they cat foorth in

The c is tome vnto thee 19 Their hi hall! n
See ee brad le is harde bps, piled: 0 rg eet 510 0 the a Ralmpng aetne of the 1 be able to deliuer them in vi day of Ecclev.b.

oo tate tee ics ibe e

Vin E N Te: .

mt : o2tlppoure out mp —fatiffic their foutes,. ;
* dür dugten eeuc mene bellpes therwith, becaule it was a c ere

oldeefiluce

55 oF 8 ure due Iblyng blocke of ther iniquitie. wee wenne 2 bel 565 10 had alfa fee the beautie ct Dis Ox darn” alter thy waves, Aang aod nament in maiestie: but they made Bsr
“epuieepeChalotfpave,tetee Yop images of their abominations and fpl-
Jau pile butrewarde ther alter thy thinesses in it, therlore haue J let it ne es € thine abbominations shalbe karre from them. nto the D nthemnddestokthee:and pe thal unowe ae ed e at siniteth. an ? a holde ie e it 11 the wicked of the earth for to be robbed, hemompngisganefoort), che rodde andther thalt pollute ae Feo hem my g florifheth, pride hath bndded. 22 My face wyll J turn. zen be en Cruelleeis waren to a rode of wicked- feckete place fhalbe defiled: fo burg
E delle none ok them shall remapne, none shall go into it and pollute it. full of
Bi ange ies cc ne of their seede, 23 Make a chapne: fo2 the lande is ul N i ok their riches, not o b 91 ment ot blood and the titie is (i) Chat is,
7 tho lamentation shalbe made forthem. the 7 5 1590 5 a cs th de I The tyme tommeth, the day draweth kuüll ok ertozt wyll apna the most wie-
Brest a ae 5 e 15 wache ehen to take their boufes ethat lelleth let hym not be fozy : i i : .
2 b in posseslion, J wyll make the pomp t cats tuaries Us deuided ae cate te Hee ang 5 "bn yt ome, her a Se
15 their li (d) f . vng: for seeke peace, u they ti ie
E wehenden gee feet nit noche ite a ear all the people, none returned, no man and one nme
Ee ee ee er chen hal by ee awe
Aber ot his life. e Day t ite, pest. 14. They haue blowenthe trumpet, and —_perifhe from the paiett, and counlapfle e made all redy, but none goeth to the een Une, eee
, Nee e n e eee eee
N multitude. nne be ö 5
1s The Nvorde math without, pectilente handes ofthc people in the lande shalbe a hun e dg te bled: J wyll do vnto them after chender Wiehin: lo that whofoisin troubled: wapes, accozayugto their
‘Defielde thatbe apne withthelworde, their owne e pll J iubge then: and he that is in the titie halbe deuou- ole genie knowe that J am the
16 eit hunger and petitence. and they tha
Sut they that flee away from them Topde.

The

ee allem

(Co) Ofemne dation, becaate
At dispiesled

Soda gaule,
Decault it was

effcringes loz 5 ehe ppicits, b thew

sto Wael.

2 In appearaumce of the similttude of God. 3 Ezechiel is bronght to Hierutale qpirite. s Che Lord Heweth the idolatries of the Houle of Asrael, a chielly ol bellen

ND it was in theo sirt

CG, GS pere in the firt (monctt)} in the fife ariof tee
2S a9 (monet), J fate in np

houle, and the elders of

rae fate befoze me,
‘a and the Pande of the
Torde Cod fell there bpou me.

Then J behelde, and lo, there was a
Ikenefie as the appesrannte of fires from the appearaume nf his lopats downewarde, fire: and from his topnes vp warde as the appearaunte of brightnesse, lyde the colour ot ander.

Aud he stretched out the likenesse ol an hande, and tone me by en heerp lotke of my head, and the {pirtic lift ine by betwirt tarch and heauen, and™ brought me in a divine vidon to Hierulalem, indo the entry ofthe inner gate that tyeily ta werde the nosy, Where remapned the mage ok citation tand lof gapnt.

4. And beholde, the glone of the Lore

God of Bleaci was inthe lane plate, leuenjas J bad seene it afoze in the fielde.

And he lapde vuto me, Thou lonne of man, lit bp thine cyes nowe towarde

the north: then lilt J vp mine eyes to-

warde the noch, and beholde norch-
Warde, at the gate ot the aulter ais image of enuattons was jinthe entry.

ae n. 6 And lie sapde furthermoze vnto me,

Thou sonne of man, {eek thou what

these do; seest thouthe great abhhomina-

tions that the houle of Ilraeltommit in this place, to due me krom mp lauctuarie: but turne thee about, and thou shalt see pet greater abhominations.

And with that brought he me to the tourt gate, and when J lobed, beholde there Was a hole in the wall.

83 Then sapde he vnto me, Thon sonne

of man, digge nowe in the wall: and when J digged in the wall, beholde there asa doore.

And he layde vnto me, Go thy way in,

and lone what wicked abhominations they do here.

10 SoF went in and sawe, and beholde

there were almaner of treepingbeastes.

The prophecie
The. viii. Chapter.

14. And with that he brought me to the C

ande abhounnable beastes, and sdols of the boule of Ilrael p all tHe ge onthe wall rounde W ore a dan
There stoode also before the images . threcscore and ten men of the auntientes of the house of Israel, and in the middest of thé stoode Jaaʒautah the foune of Shaphan, with every man his censor in his bande, and the {moke of then
On ae be a tloude.
{2 en sapde he vnto me, Thon f of man, batt thou seene Weib ö entes of the boule of Pract do secretiy euerp one inthe chaumber of hisina: «sow gerle- for they lay, The Torde seeth bs mn em not, the Lorde Hath forsaken the earth. Mrs
13, And he sayde vnto me, Turne the pet dane agapne, and chou shalt fee greater ab: * hominations that they do.

booze of the gate of the Lordes Houle towarde the north, and beholde there fate womnẽ mourning forc Thammuz. Ohi,
15 Chen Svdbhe vntame, Pak thou seene ae this theu sonne of man; turne thee yet e about, aud hon shalt fee greater abho- Se mination schen these are. e
16 And lo he brought me into the inward aa court ofthe Lordes Houle, and beholde ant at the doore of the Lordes boule, be- ehe twirt the porthe and the aulter, there Ont were about twentie and fiue men ier oer turned thetr backes bpon the temple of the Lorde, and their fares towarde che eatt, and these worshipped the lame tastwarde.
And he layde vnto me, Halk thon seene this thou sonne ok man: Thinkeththe
Houle of Pada that it is but atviffeto do these abhominatlons which they da
Here 2 fo; they haue kylled the lande fall of wWickedneffe, and haue returned to 5 0 prouoke me 5 5 e 1 uttyng the braunches to „1 eee
13 0 Tbertor wyl allo do somethyng 5

mimp wrathkul dipplealure, so that "9 1

eye chall not spare then neither w UF ba haue pitie: vta and though ther 15 aI bee mine cares with a loude DoyCe, vet Wo. ire»,
FJ not heare them. Peu

bis
{ean

dns

tl

ft un

a

$7 *

of Ezechiel.

7 The. x. Chapter.

e destruction of the citie. 4 They that cnalbe saued are marked, e Y complaynt ache prophete lor the destruction ol the people. 7 3 3 b

E trped also with a

So Fl
Va

AAcares, saping: Drawe

F neare pe bifttationsof che titie, euern man witha destroping weapon in his handee

» Aud beholde, then came there fire - ;

nien out ok the streete ol the bpper gate towarde the north, and euery man a laughter Weapon in his hande: There was oue amongest them that had on hym lynnen rapment, and a writers“ inckhorne by his syde: these went in and sdoode befpde the bralen aulter.
3 And the glorie of the Lorde of Plract was gone from the Chernb whervpon t was, to the doore of the houle: and he called to the man that had the lynnen rapment bpon hym, and the wiiters inckhorue by his syz de. :
4. Andthe Lorde layde bnto hym, Go

_~ » through the citie, euen through Hlerusa-

lem, e set a marke vpon the forehead-- of them that mourne, and are sorp for all the abhominations that be done therin.

And to the other he sayd, that J might here, Go pe after hym though the citte, and sinite, let your epe spare none, net

ther haue pe any piti:

6° Bpll and destroy both olde men and doung, mapdens, children, and women:

loude vopte in ine ..;

Yuh but as for all those that haue the marke vpon them ee that ve touche them not, began at the auncient men Which were before the boule. e or

Cxlill.

7 And he sapde vnto thein, Defple ye the 28

temple, fyll the courtes with the slapne, then go pour way foorth. So they went out, and flue downe through the citic, ..
8 Nowe when they had done the slaughter, and J pet eltaped, J fell downe bpon imp fate, aud crped,faping: Ah Lorde
God, wylt thou then destroy all the residue of Jlcacl, in powzyng out thy
Wrath bpon Hierusalem- .
Then sayde he vnto me, The wicked: nefle of the boule of a rart and Juda is exteedyng great: so that the lande is full of blood, ¢ the titie full of reuoltyng
[from God for they say, The Lorde hath orsaken the earth, and the Lorde seeth it not. ¢ N

Esai.i.c.

10 As touchyng me also, mine eye fall f

not spare them, neither wyll J haue pitie: but Wyll retompente their apes vpon their heades. | ae n And beholde, the man that had the lynnen rapment vpon hym and the writers inckhorne by his syde, reported the matter, and layde: As thou bat tommaunded me, so haue J done.

The. x. Chapter,

Of the man that tone hotte burnyng coales out of the middle of the wheeles of the Cherubims. 8 J reheartall of the villon of the wheeles, of the bealles, and

of the Cherubims.

A1 ND as J loked, bebah: 5 . ?
N % 75 holde in the * firma: ga ment that was abeue
“a CSI the head of the © Chee td lrubiins, aS it were a

Saphir stone (made! den, ce Wwhethe sinulitude ofa mene wastieneouee them

Apen bake he to hym that had the

n rapment vpon hym, and fade:

Tepe in betwene tl

b he wheeles that are

ful or be Sherub, and take thine hand the Chott coales out from betwene

me SUCTUbENS, and kater then ouer

the titie. And he evept in, that J myghe e

e.
3 owe the Cherubims stoode vpon the ryght syde of the houle when the man Went in, and the coude fylled the inner court.
4. And the glorie of the Lorde remoued from the Cherubinis, and came Dpor the doore of the houle:fo thatthe temple
Was full of cloudes, and the court was full ok the shine ol the Lordes glorie.
5 Bea and the sounde ofthe Cherubinis winges was Mel 19 175 2 at tee
N it had ben the voyt ö lpke as it h alright

almughtie God when he lpeaketh.)

Take fire from the middelt of the
Whecles which were vnder the Cherubins: he Wenk, and stoode vesyde the

5 wheeles. 3 a wail g *
W 7 Then one Cherub reached foorth his hande from betwene the Cherubims puto the fire that was betwene the

Toys oS Le N

Cherubuns and toke therol and gane t

into the handes of hymthat had on the kynnen rapment; which toke it, and
Went out. Bye eer a pin ii
8 And vnder the wynges ofthe Cherubims there appeared che lkenesle ol d

Eee =
9 Jloked also, and behold foure Wheeles belive the Cherubims, one wheele by one Cherub, and another by another
Cherub, and the wheeles Were to loke vpon after the fathion of the pretious ftone* Tharsis.

10 Astouchyng their eee
Were all foure of one fachion) as pf one wheele had ben in another.

u When they went foorth, they went vpon their koure sides, not turnyng backe in their gayng: lor which way the (head of the) first lobed, after it they went, fs that they turned not backe in their

— gopng,

12 And their whole bodpes, their backes, their handes, and wynges, pea and the wheeles aiso were full of eyes rounde about che foure wheeles.

13 And to the wheeles, he trped to them in my hearyng, O wheele,

C 14 Euerp one ot them had foure faces, fo. that the fate of the first was the face of a Cherub, and the face of the seconde the

The. xj. Chapter.

who they were that leduced the people of Flracl. J Tgapntt thete he propbectett ewig them bowe they thalbe difperted abrode. i» Che renuyng of the heart commeth ol God, 21 He threatneth them that ieane vnto their owne countaples.

Orecouer, the spirite lilt
„nie vp, and brought me e onto the east gate of the

Tordes Houle, which
Ilpeth tastwarde: and
Sbeholde, at the entry of

Jaazaniah the sonne of Azur, and

6 Nowe when he had bidden the man 5 that was clothed in lynnen, saying,

the gate were fiue and twentie men, among whom FJ lawe

. faceofa man, and ok the chird of : lion, aud of the foucth the fate

( e. ‘ e

15 And the Cherubins were lykted
This is the beast that J l DD: ria ve Chebar. de Cate ag the

16 Nowe when the Cherubime the wheeles went by them: and when the Cherubuns lykt vp their wynges to mount vp front the earth, the same e e not from befives

jem. Poe WT yo = N

17 Shortly when they stoode, these stoode also, and when they were ukted vp, the chen dor ehe cen ss AMO With ©) ci them: for he (pirite of the beak was mit tu the Wifesless eetes pcos ce cee

e fate ok an

ute tet Sie Chem

Chen the glorie of the Woyoedeparten ="

frontabduc the dodre ofthe temple, and

remapned vpon the Cherubinis.

19 And the Cherubim flackered with their wynges, and lyft them selues vp from the earth, so that J fate when they went, e the wheeies belides them; and they stoode at the doore of the eat gate of the houle of the Love, lo the glorie of the God of Israel was bpon them on hye. e

20 This is thebeatt that I sawe under .. the God of Braet by the riuer of Che- ge bat, and J perceaued that it was the
Cherubinis. ty

21 Euerp one had foure faces, and cuerp one foure Wynges, and vnder their wynges the likeneffe of mens handes.

22 Touchyng the fimilitude of their tountenaunces, they were the bevy fame countenaunces which J lalbe at the riuer Chebar, and the feife lame appearaunces: every one in his gong went strapght forwarde.

eng the sonne of Wanaiahu, the

rulers ot the people.

2 Then sapde he bnto me, Tete on of man, these mien imagine Miene alt, e
Wicked tounlayle take they inte bude ee

3 Saping, It is not neare eto Haan et houles: this (Bierucalem) is the n e dron, and we be the ficthe.

Alt
4. Therlore chalk thou prope age e.

chen,

yea prophecie O fonne of man.
Ind with that fell the spirite of the
5 onde ppou me, and lapde buto nie, eake, thus faith the Lorde: On this mäner haue pe spoken (O pe houle of srael)and JI knowe the imaginations

ur heartes. |
1 15 55 haue pe murthered in this

ne: | |

7 Mr berfone thus faith the Lorde God,

5 The slayne men that ve haue layde on

the grounde in the citie are the. fleche,

r and this titie is the tauldron: ut J Wpll

bug vou out ok it, ve haue feared the

sworde, and J wyll bring a lworde ouer
. pou,aitl) the Lorde God.

of Ezechiel.

cite, and fylled the firectes full of the

cxliill.

karre from the Lorde, for the lande is geuen bs in possession.

16 Therkoze tell them, thus faith the
God: Although J sende them farre of among the gentiles, and scatter them among the nations, pet wyll J be to them as a lithe? sanctuarie in the g Sher landes where they chall come. Wee

17 Tell them allo, thus faith the Lorde pec,
God, J wyll gather you agayne out of een the nations, and bryng vou from the tute. countreis where pe be scattered, and ZB
Wyll geue pou the lande of Ilrael agapue.

18 And they shall come thither, and they
Mall take away all their idols, and all their abhommattons from theute.

on nd J wyll bryng vou out ol the mid- 1 And J wyll geue them one heart, and Ireud. en é aie 12555 115 deliuer you into the J Wyll put a newe spirite within their eS
% handes ok straungers, and wyll execute bowels: that tony heart wyll F take indgementes among pou. dlut of their body, and geuc them a fleshto Pe {hall fall by the lworde, in the box lpe heart,
. dergok © Pract wyll Judge you, and 20 That they map walke in my tompe shall knowe that Jamthe Lorde. maundementes, and kepe mine ordiu This citie shall not be pour cauldzon, naunces and do them, that they may be neither shall pe be the fleshe therin: bnt my people, and I their God. in the borders of Israel wyll J punishe 21 But to the heart of their idols and their vou, a abhominations their heart goeth, their n That ye map knowe that J am the wapes wyll J bryng vpon their owne
Lowen whole tonnnaundementes vpe heades, farth the Lorde God. haue not walked, nor kept my lawes: 22 Alter this did the Cherubims list bp but haue done alter the tustomes okthe their wynges and the wheeles besides smn heathen that tye rounde about you. them, and the glorie ofthe God of HE vc B. Kolbe when F prophetied, o Pheltiag rael was vpontyemonbye. ox the lonne of Banaiahu dyed: then fell 23 So the glorle of the Lorde went bp bre te Idowne vpon my fate, and cryed with krom the unddest of the citte, and stoode ban ä loude bopce, saping, Ah Lorde God, ppon the mount of the citic towarde
% ‘Wyle thou then vtterly deftroy all the the calf.
Ei reumaunt in Ilrael- . 24 And the {pirite coke me vp, x hrought
14. And lo the Worde of the Torde tame me agayne to Chaldea to the captiuitic,
Duto me on this maner. in a vision by the spirite of God: then the
1j Thou sonne of man, thy brethrenseuen vision that J had seene went vp from thy brethren, the men of thy kinrede, me. '
155 all the house ol Ilrael, Wholly are 25 So J spake vnto the cw captines all % at
| bi, Dnto Whom the inhabitauntes of the wordes ol the Lorde which he had cre weer
„ lerulalem haue sapd: Y withdrawe pe (bhewed me. 7
The ij. Chapter.
Che parable of the captiuitie. :o The expolition of the parable; bp which the tak yng ol breed lignilied. 18 An other parable whereby the distrelle of hunger and eo,
Ahe worde ofthe Lowe to see and pet fee not, cares haue they 18 came vnto mengen to heare, and pet heave they not: for ge
Thou sonne okman, thep are a rebellious houst. 1 captiuitie, thou dwellest in the 3 Therkore (O thou sonne of man)“ premiddest of a rebellious parc thee instrumentes to flit wich, e rehoule, which haue eres moue on the day time that they map tee,

<< ll

The pro hecie

from the lworde, hunger, and pestilence

a) That es. n dotst fo

(b} Do not they deride ond mochte
(bp doynge g.
* Or, pros phecie.

t) when the
Lens wall thinde to efs tape by fleeing
A wpileahe dym in my nct. aa Ez *
17. c. und 32. a.

„Or, cooles.

Tne, Ac.

yea ccuen j in their fight chalt thou go from thy place to another place, pf peraduenture they wyll tonsider that they be a rebellious boule,

Thou shalt bryng foorth thine instrumentes as stuffe to flit with by the Day tyme in their fight, and thou thy selfe chalt go foorth alfo at euenyng before their eyes. as they that go foorth to flit.

5 © Digge through the wall in thetr sight, and cary out therby.

6 In their fight halt thou beare bpon thy Mouldicrs, and cary it foorth in the darke:hide thy face that thou see not the earth, for J haue made thee adhere token vnto che boule of Hlcacl.

And J did so
JJ bronght foorth my stuffe by dap as the (tuffe of one that goeth into taptiuitie:and inthe cucning JYdiggedthrough the wall with my haudes, and hrought it kocich in the Darke, and bare it vpon my shouider in their light.

3 And in the mornyng came the worde of the Lorde vnto me, laping:

9 Thou lonne of man, hath not the
Houle of Iltael, the rebellious houle, fayd vnto thee, What doest thou:

10 Then tell them, thus laith the Lorde
God, This“ burden toucheth the prince at Hierulalem, and all the houle of PE rael that dwell among them.

Tell them, J am pour shewe token, lpke as J haue done, fo shall it be done vnto then, they chall go into bondage and captiuitie.

1 Live prince that is among them thal loade his shoulders in the Darke and get hym away, they Mall breakt downe the Wall to cary through by it: he Mall touer his fate, that he see not the ground with his eyes.

13 My net will HO spreade out vpon him, and he chalbe caught in my“ net, and
FJ wpll bryng hym to abylon in the sande of the Chaldees, which he chall not sce, and pet hall he dye there.

14 As fo all his helpers & all his bandes that be about hym, J Wyll statter them towarde all the wyndes, and drawe out a sworde after them.

15 So When YJhaue stattered them among the Heathen and strowed them in the landes, they (hall knowe that Jam the Lode.

16 But J wallleane alitle’number of thé

as I was commaunded,

to tell all their abbominati :

the heathen where they ma meh

may knowe howe that Jamthe noe

17 Mortouer, the worde ok the eae rane bat me. saying: one

13 pou sonne of man, wi
W 1 tow cate eh

ith vnquietnesle c fo ? uy cy ater €lozolbe Mate thou

19 And onto the people of ti speake thou: Thus laith the 50 =e to them that dwell in Hierulalem, aud to the lande of Ilrael: they hall cate their bread with sorowe, and drpnke their water with delolation: pea the lande with the fulnesse theroz shalbe

lapde Wate foz the wickednesle of all tem that dwell therin.

20 And the tities that nowe be well inhabited, halbe voyde, x the lande delolate,
Ade map knowe that J am the

21 Het tame the worde of the Lorde vnto me agayne, saping:

22 Thou sonnt of man, what maner of

prouerbe is that which pe dle in the

lande of PHieael, laying: © The vapes o san

are llackẽ in tömpng, kal visions kaple: e .
Tell them therkoze, thus faith the einen,

Tord God, J wyll make that prouerde micaw

to teasse, and they Call na mort vid it 4s e

a pronerbe in Iscael:but fay vnto them, n

the dapes are at hande, and the efiect ot

euerp vilion. N

24. There thal! no vision be any more in vapne, neither anp flatttring bination within the houle of Biracl:

25 For the Lorde speake it, aud whatsoeuer I Mal speake, it halbe pecfourmed, and not be Maske in commmng any moze, pea cuen in pour dapes O rebels lions boule, wyll Ispeale the thous ebapngit to paste, faith the 20200600.

26 And the worde of the Lorde tanie vn

o me, saping:

27 Webolde thou sonne of man the boule of Jlracl salth con this mance) Ther, fion that he (etl, it wyll be many 1613 oz it tome to pale: it 1s karre OF der casts the tyme that he prophetleth ol. iber

28 Therkore fay thus puto then. fatth the Lorde God, All nad. nat chall no moze be delayed, one WHY
{peake, that fame shall cone to pale fatty the Lorde God.

The

of Ezechiel.

‘ The. xiii. Chapter. 5

xly

raphe worde of the Lorde againtt kalle prophetez, whiche teache the people ty

counsels of their owne heartes.

came vnto me, saping:

¥ 4 a 0 prophetie against those where of Ilrael whiche prophetie, and
: “fap buto them that
4 pophecie out of their owne *heartes, e pere the Worde ok the Horde,
Thus faith the Lord God, Wo be vn-
3 tothole fooliche prophetes that folowe their owne spirit e haue seene nothing.
O Plracl thy prophetes are tyke the f fores in delert places. eon Jo pe haue not and vp in the gappes, roe nor made a hedge for the boule of Bl tant fati to stande in the battayle in the day ofthe Lorde. 7 ;
They haue seene banidie and lying dinination, saping: the Lorde faith it, and the Lorde hath not fent them, and they haue made me hope that they woulde confirme the worde. n haue ye not seene vapne bifions, and
5 spoken false prophecies, when pe fay, the Lorde hach spoken it, whereas F neuer sapde it.
8 Therkore thus saith the Lorde God,
Betaule pe haue spoken vanitie, and haut feene lies: therfore beholde Jam against pou, fattl the Lorde God:
Mine handes thal come vpon the prophetes that see vanities, and deume lies: they shall not be in the tounlell of my people, no: witten in the booke of the houle of Jsrael, neither shal they tome m the lande of Jsrael, that pe may undi howe that Janthe Tord God:
. © And that for becaule they haue deccaned my people, and told them of peace where no peace was: one setteth vp a veg‘ Wall, and they daube it with vntemben DELCO Clay, ö cay". Therkoze tell them wich daube with ite, UCD ZC mozter, that it (hall fall: fo: dune We valcomea great chowwee ofrainc,
F fende hapleltoues to caule it to

and a ‘ ö e Dreake ge Seat storme of winde Chall

nor then be kapd vn i nowe vane Ve vnto pou, Where is
Wiha roster that pe daubed it

Thou sonne of man,

12 Andla, when the wallis fallen, chall

he worde ofthe Loo 1; Therfore thus saich the Lorde God:

IJ wyll tause a stormie Winde to breake but in my wrathfull displealure, fo that in mine anger there Hall tome a mightie showre of raine, and haylestones in my wzath to destrop it. a

14. As fo the wall that ye haue daubed
With vntempered morter, J wil breake it downe, and make it euen with the grounde, fo that the fonndation thero shalbe discouered, and it shall fall: yea and ye pour selues shall perishe in the f niddes therof, and pe fall knowe that
Jamche Torde. a a

15 Thus wyll J perfourme my wrath bponthis wall, and vpon them chat baue daubed it wich “ öntenpred mor- Grune. ter, and then wyl J fay vnto yon, The Zune. him wall is gone, and the daubers of it. foots) ner

16 (Co wit] the prophetes of Jlrael, Meee
Whiche propHecic vnto Pierusalem, and bea

looke out bisions of peace for it, wheras "*

no peace is, saith the Lorde God.

17 Vherekore O thou sonne of man, fet thy face against the dangbters of thy people, whiche prophecie out of their
One heartes, and propheche agaimst them: rei „

18 And fay, thus faith the Wome God: bens
Wo be vnto thein that sowe G pillowes weak: vnder all arme holes, and put lurchifes

euerp man hig

Dpon the heades of euery © stature to unten. hunt soules. Wyll ve huut the soules or en

ches to tenen theit heades,

my people, and geue life to the soules that (come) vnto pou- „ 2
19 And wyll ye pollute ine to my people e lor handfuls ot barly, and for pecces of Ken. bread, to kyll the soules of them that & wens dye not, and promile o life to them chat ang geen lite not, in lying to my people that hea- f rei pour lyes: Ae
20 Wherfore thus faith the Lorde God: (9 sree
Weholde, J wpyll vpon pour pillowes Wage
Wherwich pe hunt the soules, to make Kare ae them fle, and Y wil teare them from fene, pour arnics, and wyll let che soules go, aue pretereo chen 1 soules that pe hunt to make 905 tas them to flee. a enerponesc.
21 Hour kirchifes also wyll JJ teare in „ee e peetes, and deliver my people out of , saving

in Hock

pour haͤndes, so that they shall tome no verena

ccanadle

inore in pour handes to be hunted: and wanne pe thal ecm Jam the Lorde.
~ GJ

that they

the birden

22 Sceing unden.

pp este and teil

might the ate allure

thc sowlerd do a

Seeing that with pour lpes pou dilpin heart of the righteous,

who J haue not dilcomforted: Againe,

forsomuche as pe encourage the hande of the wicked, fo that he may not turne from his Wicked way in promifing

hyn life:

23 Therkore shall ye see no m neither chall pe deulne dlumaldantte

ande, that ve map knowe ain the Torde. 5 bowe

¢ The. xiij. Chapter.

2 Che Lorde denteth his worde to the people kor their sinnes fake, 9 Che detptter of 57 worde doth the Lorde sometyme deceaue by kalle prophetes. 214 como

of them that fed vnto Babylon.
— bere resorted vnto nie
XUicertapne of the elders

* Gs of IJlrael, and late

e e downe by me.
2 (a, Then tame the word
N 22 ofthe Lorde vnto me,

— saping:

3 Thou sonne ok man, these men haue
{et vp their idols in their heartes, and put the stumbling blocke of iniquitie before their face: choulde J then aun: were them at their request-

4 Therelore (peabe vnto them, and fay vnto them, thus laith the Lode God:
Euery man ot the houle of Jsrael that setteth vp his dols in his heart, € putteth the tumbling blocke of his iniqui-

prophete: vnto that man wyll J the
Lom up leife geue aunlwere when he

ange, n multitude barbdeiecum, bk his idols. N N ee 5 Thatthe house of Ilrael map be fra: ashen rkd in their oawne heartes, becaule
. they be cleane gone from me all ok them
Site thorowe their idols. ; ame. 6 Wherelore tell the houle of Ilrael, thus faith the Lome God: Returne
Chen, and “ cause to returne from pour idols, ample and turne pour faces from all pour ab-

Honituations, 2
W 7 Fo 0 man, whether he be of the
Houle of Hicaci, or a straunger that sorourncth in Ylrael, Whithe departeth from me, and setteth vp his idols in his heart, and putteth the fumbling blocke dfhis wickednesse before his fate, and tommeth to a prophete fo2 to astze coun: sell at me through hym : vnto that man
Wyll J the Lorde geue aunswere by mine owne selfe. ö

8 IJwyllset my face against that man,

and wyll make hym to be an example for other, pea and a common byworde, and Wyll roote hym out of inp people, that ye may knowe howe that J am

e a

9 nd ik that prophete be deceg

when he telleth a thing, chen Jthe
Lorde my selle haue deteaued that pro:

phete, and wyll stretche out my hande

bpon hum to destroy him out ormppto-

ple of Ilrael:

10 And they halbe punithed for their

wickednesse, according to the finne of

hym that alketh, chall the linne of the

prophete be:

n That the houle of Israel ve led uo

more from me through errour, and be no niore dekiled in all their transgressions: but that they map be mp people, and IJ their God, faith) the Lorde God.

| 12 And the worde of the Lorde came dn: tie belore his face, and tommeth to the b

to me, saping: -

3 Thou sonne of man, whenthe lande

sinueth against me by comnutting a

trespasse, J wyll stretche out my hande vpon it, and breake their! staffe of bread, and sende dearth vpon them, fo destroy man and beast foorth oi.
14. And though Nbe, Daniel, and Job, thele three men were among them: yet shal they in their righteoulsnesse delluer but their owne foules, faith the Lorde

God. 0
15 Ik Jbryng nopsome beattes into the

laude, and they spoyle it, and it belo De

folate that no man map palle throug) it for beastes, t.
16 Ikthele three men were allo in 15 land: as trueip as J line falchthe 2-08
God, they hall fane neither sonne- ‘a daughters, but be onlye dellueredthe

selues:æ as fo? the land, it halbe wall. Zz

17 Or ik J brynga lworde
“ane, and fay, worde go throug) the lande, lo that J flap downe beast in it, herein
18 And ik thefe three men were 0 eon, as truelp as J tive faith the £0 thep thall deliuer neither 1 f daughters, but only be laued th

a diuinations, fo;
Fd wyll deliuer my people ont af pan
J

that J

Ee

Kins ng

Ezechilith aud

lere. 14.

ae RAY

Of Ezechiel.

ee

= J. AJ ende a peftience into this lande. 22 Seßoldeethere thalbe a cemnannt fa-

e out ip sore indignation bp-
80 Aide so at roote out of it n and bealt,

he Noe, Daniel, and Job were
10 rein, as teuely as J Ilue Lauth the
Lorde God, they shall deliuer neither sonne nor daughter, but laue their

cope soules tu their righteousnelle.
1 Mozeouer thus faith the ode God,
Howe muche moze when J lende my r soure troublous plagues bpon Hierusalem, the [worde, hunger, perilous bealtes, and pestilente, to destrop man

and bealt out of its

hed therein, whiche Mall bryng foozth their sonnes and daughters, beholde, they Chall come foorth vnto pou, and ve shall see their way and their enterprile, and pe chalbe conrfozted concerning the euvll that J haue brought vpon Hierufalem seuen concerningall that IJhaue brought bpon it.

23 They (hall tomfort vou when pe that fee their way and workes: and pe hall knolwe howe that it is not without a tause that J haue done all against Hiea as J dpd, fait the Lope

od.

J The. xv. Chapter.

As the vnprolitable wood ol the vine tree is call into the lire, so faith he that

Hierulalem halbe brent.

de worde of the Lord ame vnto me, saping:
N Thou sonne of man, what commeth of the vine tree. moze then ol euery other tree, ¢ of

Seeing then that it was meete kor no

Worke beyng whole, muche tele may there any thing be made of it when the fire hath consumed and brent it.

f

6 And therelore thus faith the Lorde 25

god, As the bine tree chat is among the trees ofthe forest, which J haue geuen

to the fire to be tonsumed: fo wyll J

geue the inhabitauntes of Pierusalem.
7 And J wyll set my fate against them, they Hall go out from the fire, and pet the fire shall consume them: then shall pe knowe that Jam the Lozve, when J let my fate against them,

betause they haue fo foze offended, faith the Lorde God. .

The. xvj. Chapter.

Che prophete declareth the benelites of God towarde Hierusalem. 15 Hierufalem is reproued of vnkindnesse kor her lornication with rdols. 46 He iustikieth the wickednelle - okother people. in compariton ok the linnes ok Hierulalem. 40 Che caule ofthe abhominations into which the Sodomites fell, so Mercy is promised to the repentaunt,

HSGavpne the word of the
GY)

Torde came Dnto me,

A faping:

ge Dou sonne of man, shewe Hierulalẽ their

abhonnnations,

— And lap, Thus fateh

God vnto Hierusalem: thy

the Lorde
Yabitation and kinred is of the lande of

fe gaan, thy father was an Amskite, thy mother an Hittite.

n the day of thy byrth when thou walt bone, the string ol thy Wel was

q not cut of, thon walt not bathed in wa-

Ah, t lens tg be
Cary

ter to make thee cleane, thou wast not salted with lalt, nor swadled in cloutes.
Ho eye piticd thee to do any of these thinges foz the, for to haue compaflion vpouthee: but thou Walk vtteriy catt out vpon the fielde in contempt of thy person in the day of thy byrth. 8

6 Then tame Jbythee, and sawe ther
Defiled in thpne owne blood, and J said vnto thee when thou wast in thy blood, liue: (euen; when chou watt in thy blood, I sayde vnto chee, line.
Rd caufed thee to multiplie as the bud

* bene TD art gtolben vp, and

Waxen

(e) Thon they dap

And when J make the lande waste, *.

axen great, thou Halt gotten amar-
1 55 plealaunt beautic, thy brestes are fachtoned, chy heert is goodly growen, whereas thou walt naked E bare. g Mowe when J went by thec and looned vpon thee, bebolde, thy tyme was tome, pea seuenj the time to Woo thee: then spread I mp clothes ouer thee to

Lede ud. (ouer thy” dishonestte, pea J made an
Ferre gthe vnto thee, and contracted my selfe crores With thee (faith the Lorde God) and so dare. thou betamest myne owne. 2
Se eee

annomted thee with ople. a
10 JJ ctlothed thee with broldzed wozke, gere and (hod thec with badgers lin, and wur. FJ gyrded thee about with fine linnen, and touered thee With fitke.

1 J dechked thee with costly apparell, J put bralelets bpon thy hands, achapne about thy necke. ö

in And Jput a frontlet vpon thy face, and careringes vpon thpne eares, and a beautiful trowne vpon thyne head.

iz Thus wast thou deckt with golde and siluer, and thy rapnient was of fine linnen, and ol silke, and of broidred wozke:

God eeccaucd

cpe, sauoured

thou didst eate fine floure, honye and

ople, marueplous beautifull Wak thou,

and thou dydst luckply profper into a

Uingdome. —— '
14 And thy name was spread amona the
‘Heathen for thy beautie: for it was perfite though thy beautie whiche J put vpon thee saich the Lode God.

Wut thou hast put thy confidence in thyne owe beautie, and played the
Harlot betause of thy renowne, and hast “ powzed out thy fornitations
With cuerp one that Went by, thou wast his.

C 15

Thee wad none Wola fe vple, wher-

ith thou didst not pots

more s Thon didst take thy garmentes, and
(ener Deckt thy bye plates with © diners coderechvowe, lours, and played the harlot therbpon, beuten they COME not, and it {hall not be.

thinges which 17 The goodly ielwels whiche

plcale the eyes

ö J gane amen de ther of mine owne golde and suũer, halt
OIriome thoutaken and made thee mens tina: wehen dee ges therof, and committed whordome no; shalde, fo .

Bons ag Mergen moose. 18 Thy broidred garmentes bat thou taken, and deckt them therewith: myne dann intense Hak thou fet before hem. 8 *

1 Dy meate whiche J gaue thee, as

fine floure, ople and honp to feede the

The prophecie

23 Alter allthese thy Wickednelles, (yp

withall, that hat thou fee N fora sweete sauour: and eae al
Won God. ji

20 Thou hast taken thyne owne ; and Daughters Hom rhoupan bun J ten vnto nie, and these batt thou offer vp bnto them to be © deuoured: is this but a {niall whordome ok thyne- La

21 And thou halt layne my chylbren. ss and delluered thein, to cat them to A passe (through the kire] for them.

22 And pet in all thyne abhonunatlong and whordomes, thou Dat not remembred the dayes of thy pouth, howe naked and bare thou Watt at that tyne, and walt defited in thyne owne blood.

Wo vnto thee, salth the Lorde God.)

24 Thou hast buylt onto thee an hye place, and hast made thee an hye plate in euery streete. ö + oe

25 Thou hast buplt thyne bye plate at cucryp “ head of the wap, thou halt

made thy brautie to be abhozred, thou « coms hast opened thy feete to euerp one that rd sine by, and multiplied thy Wwhoze-

ome.

26 Thou Yak committed fornication
With the Egyptians, thy neighbours whiche were great in fleshe, and thus Cans hast thou increased thyne whozdome vane ks to anger nic. a

27 Beholde, J did stretche out my hand en

ouer thee, and dyd minilhe thy fore of rich foode, and Delivered thee ouer into the n. wylles of them that hate thee, (euen] sache the daughters ol the Philistines, Which we are ashamed of thyne ablominable ©
Wapes. 1 *

28 Thou hast plated the whore allo with the Assyrians, becaule thou wat inlatiable: pea thou batt (J car) with them played the harlot, and pet hadst thou not inough. ’

29 Thus hast thon furthermore man plied thy fornication from the lande 0
Chanaan vnto the Chaldees, and yet thou wast not satilfied herewith .

30 Howe Weake is thyne heart fait th
Tordt God, feeing thou doest all the ; wWorkes of a prefumptuons whorl woman cad

1 Buylding thy hye plates at the h i of euery way, and makelt thy byt 1 tes in euerp reete: thou halt unde as another Whoze that holdeth of a rewarde. N 32 But

tas a Wpfe that breaneth wer: pe > che a taketh other in steede of her

ufba

 utthougeuckt rewardes vnto all thy routers, æ re wardest them to come onto thecon euery side for chy fornication.
Itis tome to passe with thee in thy
Whoredonies contrary to the bie of ocher women, pea there Hatiy no fuche fonrication ben coninntted after thee: fering that than geuest gpftes vnto o-

therfore thou art contrary,

35 Therelone heare the worde of the
Torde, O thou harlot.

36 Thus faith the Lorde God, Wetaule thou hast / powred oucthy brasle, and
Diftoucred thy filthpnes thorowe thy fornitations with thy lowers, and with all the idols of thyne abhominations, and in the blood of thy chyldren whom thou hast geuen them:

37 Beholde therefore, J wyll gather together all thy“) loners with whom thou hast taken pleafurc, pea. and all them whom thou hast loued, and euery one that thou hatest: J wll J fav) gather them together rounde about against thee, aud wil distouer thy shame before them, that they may (ee all thy filthynesse.

% 38 Moreoner, © F wyll iudge thee as a

breaker of weblöcke and a murtherer,

aid retompente thee thyne owne blood

in wrath and gelotisie. 5

7 J wyll gene thee ouer into their han-

des, and they shal destroy thy hie place,

and breale downe thy hye places, they shall strip thee allo out of thy clothes:
‘thy faire jewels Chall they take krom the, and fo leaue thee naked and bare.

thats.
0 ay poner dy

4° Peathey Hall bryng a company vpon

dhe, whiche Malt tone thee with aes thrust thee through with
1 £5, % j
“rid 41 They Hall *burne bp: thy bouts

with fire, and punishe thee in the sight

or maup women: thus wyll J make

iber tealle from plaping the haͤrlot, so

‘Hac thou fl 4 wardes, alt Seue ont no moze re

= won F make my Ibzath towarde om or elt and ny ieloufie Mhall Depart re thee, and J wilt tealfe, and be an-

. SUP no niore.

3 Dting thou remember not the dapes

of EZechiel.

de. 5 .
5 ates are geuen to all other whores:

44 Beholde, all they that vse common

ther, and no rewarde is geuen thee,

ol thy pouth, but halt fretted me in all thele thinges: beholde therkore, J wyll byng thyne owne wapes vpon thy head faith the od God, so that wöthou Metre shalt not conuntt Canp nore} mischieke Heo wyll punisde thee fo, thor thou (halt nee uer sinne moze

vpon all thyne abhominations.

prouerbes, Maul dle this prouerbe allo agate thee saying: Such a wmother, such a daughter. j

45 Thon art euen thy mothers owne daughter, that hach tast of her husband geen and her chyldren: pea thon art the fitter cours. of thy fitters which forsoke their hul- He Thane, bandes their chyldren: pour mother nd Beben. is An hittite, your father an Amorite.

46 Thyne eldest fitter is Samaria, the and Der danghters that dwell vpon mena, thy left hande: but thy pounger sister . that dwelleth on thy right hande is
Sodorma and her daughters.

47 Het hast thou not walked after their
Wayes, nor done after their abhominations. as à litle and a litle: but in all thy he thou halt ben moze torrupt then

ep.

48 As truelpas J line, faith the Lorde G
God, Sodoma thy lier with her
Daughters haue not done as thou halk done and thy daughters.

(n) Is were the Chan ãanites and the
Mittites, ano other pour pre

49 Behold, the sinnes of thy fitter Hodo-

ma were tyele: Pryde, fuinelse nf sven meate, and avoundaunee of idienesse, rot era. thele thinges had she and her daugh- seus. ters: besides that, they streugthed not agent the hande of the poore and needie. bea so But they were hautie, and committed wirr abhomination befoze mie, therekoze J Saag. toke them away as F sawe good.
51 Meither hath” Samaria done halfe uch wuofthy sinnes, peathou batt exceeded aten them in thpneabbominations and bat ang d . tutified thy listers in all thyne abho- fog minatious whiche thou hast done. 4 Bode
52. Therfkore thou which didsteondemne pu thy fifter, beare thyne owne shame: for | thyne owne offences that thou at comitted more abhominable then they dyd, which in deede are moze righteous then thou art, be thou (J tap) ashamed, and beare the chaniekull rebuke, seeing that thou batt tustified thy fitters.
53 Cherfore J wyll bryng agayne their captiuitie, the captiuitie ot Sodom and her daughters, ethe captiuitie of Samaria and her daughters, and the captiuitie of tip captiuities among them, eh ere
T (ij $4. That vues

The

e prophecie

$4. That thou mapest cake thyne obne bal done, which halt depfsed ¢

tonkulion vpon thee, and be ashamed of all that thou hast done, in that N thou

bo: — att comforted them.

ata 55 And thy liter Sodom and her daughther ondect ters shall returne to their former state, en d - Samara allo ee
J returne to their former tate, thou ap thy Nia fhall returne moa to pour former state. —

sree a 56 Forthy litter Sodom was not“ heard
Shen on bk by thy report in the day of thy pryde, mivsot 57 Bekoze thy wickednesse was“ diltocanes uered, according to the tyme of the relogen. proche ok the daughters ol Aram, and
Hicke bk all the Daughters of the Phillstines dit en. kounde abont her, whiche despile thee
Pate bon all sides.

e. 58 Thou hast borue thy witkednesse and thyne abhomination, salth the Lorde.

59 Foz thus faith the Lowe Goo, J

might by right Deale With thee as thou

inbreabingthecouenaunt: ote —
Arne wyll remember my

coucnaunt With thee in the dates of thp youth and J Wyll establishe vnto thee an euerlasting touenaunt.
6 Then Malt thou remember t

wapes, and be acshamed when thou

Ahalt receaue thy" fitters, both jy op. cry, der and thy younger: and J wyl ne rota them vnto thee for Daughters, but nat wa by thy touenaunt. 4 ee
115 wt ha my couenaune Ble. with thee, that thou mayest kn beta,
Jamthe Lorde, . Acht
63 That thou mapest thinke vpontt, aud be athamed, and neuer open thy Jute mouth any moze for shame of thy selfe, San when J am pacified towarde thee for an all that thou pad done, fateh the Lande sate,
* ä it.

The. xvij. Chapter.

b he worde of ve Lod aN tanie vnto me, saping:
Ne 7 x Thou sonne of man, e et eden t
Weng eS (peakea prouerbe bnto
CL the boule of Jlrael,
3 And lap, Thus lath the Lorde God:

A 1

Fran: There tame a great Egle, with great barb great Winges, pea with a mightie long body,
Anbau ful ol fethers of diuers tolours, vpder him char pon the mount of Libanus, and toke ballen n gp the hyest braunche of a Cedar tre. secon 4 And brake of the top of his twigges, bine a and carped it into the lande ok“ marcy apcening — CHAUNECS, and set it in a citie of mar-
That is chauntes.

Sonn, 5 Pe toke also of the feede ofthe land,
Gongs, and planted it ina kruiteful grounde, he in en bonght it vnto great waters, and fet it

in an open trenche. ö
* 6 Then did it grow, and was a {prea ding vine, but! lowe of stature, Whole braunches turned to warde it, and the rootes of it were vnder it: thus there came of it a vine, and it brought foorth braunches, and (hot foorth buddes.
7 Wut there Was another Egle, a great ont, whiche had great wynges and many fethers: and beholde, the rootes of this vine turned towardes it,

rebdcllagsint
Bapplon, as perfirii

a PA, ef ne Egle.

Eg

whi $e fought succout ogainst Mas

buchopowosop.

Che parable ot the two Egles.

and spread out her braunches towards it, that she might water it by the trenthes of her plantation.

3 It was planted vpon a good sople be: B side great waters, so that it should haue brought out braunches, € borue fruite, and haue ben a goodly bine.

9 Speake thou therfore, thus faith the
Lowe God: Shall this vine prospershail he not pull vp the roates thevof, Nabe and destroy the fruite thercof, and caule n thein to Dayz allthe leanes of her bud 4 hall Wither without great power, oz many people, to plucke it vp by the rootes thereof. i

10 Bchold, it was planted: Hball it prol pertherfores Shall it not be Dyed YP, and withered: when the w east winde ne Bar chall pi it, it hail wither in em trenches where it grewe.

u SPozeouer, the worde of the. Lorde came vnto mie, saping: .

un Sopeatenow tothe rebeltious Houle,
HBunowe pe not what thele thinges + fignitie): Tell them, bebolde, the ed of Babplon is come to Mierulalen i hath taken the © kyng thereof, aum printes Novy and hath led thein him to Babplon. de

3 Pe toke ol the kynges serde, ant ou

0 Ton if
“gocher if
2. It

— of Ezechiel.

aunt with him, and toke au othe
2 555 the W. of the lande toke he ty hun alto.
417 the kyngdome might be holden
¢ 1 fibiection and not lift vp it lelke, but kepe the touenaunt, and stande to it.

1 zut he rebelled against hym, andsent

isembatfadours into Egypt, that he might haue holes and muche people:
Should he prosper: shall he elcape that doch luthe thinges: 02 Chall he breake thecouenaunt and eltapekree-

Is truelp as J liue laith the Lorde
God, he (hail dye at Babplon in the place where the kyng dwelleth that made hymkyng, Whole othe he hath delpiled, and whole coucnaunt he hath

dken. 1 u Kalcher (hall Pharao with his great

gyne hymin the warre, when they
1 5 vp mountes, and buplt a fort to destroy many perlons.

13 Jor seeing he hath despiled the othe and broken the touenaunt, (Wheras he pet gaue his“ bande therevpon) and done all thele thinges, he shall not el-

mn bh (ape. gen 19 Eherlore thus faith the Lorde God,
Ag truely as J liue J wyll bzyng mine othe that he hath despiled, and my couenaunt that be hath broken, vpon his

(Seta be kalte n.

% What meane pe by this cOnion prouerbe that ye bie in the lande

Us Le f Aracl laying: The
121 0 “fathers haue eaten e ‘Oe grapes, and the chyldrens teeth
Ferne, äre let on edge-

b ae 1 9 0 3 line faith the Lorde munen. Ode pe Wali ble this byworde no moze
Sa inBteael, eee

8. + re cpolde all foules are mine, Ipkeas

esoule of the father is mine, so is the wut of thesonne mpne allo: the foute hat sumeth shall dye it selfe.

e: ls la sae 6 Hey

RH Doig

fulland right: c Se hath noe® eaten vpon the pilles,

hoatt and multitude of people, main-

Une, > Sutifaman be tut, and dothat which t:

owne head.

20 J wyll spreade my net vpon hym, Ezcchxiib.

and he shall be caught in my net: and J
Wyli bpughym to Babylon, and enter into (udgement with him there, for the trespalle whiche he bath committed againt me. 8
21 As sor thole that fle from hym, with D all his hoast, they chalbe slayne with the sworde, and the residue chalbe stattred towardes all the windes: and pe eed that J the Lord haue spoenit.
22 Thus laith the Lorde God, J wylk allo take of the top of this hye Cedar, and Wyil set it, and cut of the topof the tender plant thereof, and Wyll plant it vpon an hye hyll and a great. :
(Namely) vpon the hye hyll of Plrack will J plant it, that it map bryng foortly bowes, and geue fruite, and be an excels lent Cedar: and vnder it hall remapne all byrdes, and euery foule shall remaine vnder the chadowe of the braunches thereof.
24. And all the knowe that I the Lorde haue brought downe the Hye tree, and exalted the lowe tree, that J haue dryed vp the greene tree, and made the drpe tree to florishe, euen] J the Lorde that spake it, haue also brought it to pale.

The. xviij. Chapter.

he hath not lift his eyes to the idols of the houle ol Ilrael, neither hath deliled his neighbours wyfe, neither hath come neare a© woman remoued:

7 Meither hath oppressed any man, but hath restored to the detter his pledge: he that path not spoyled any by viotence, bath geuen his bread to the hungry, and hath clothed the naked:

8 And hath not geuen foorth vpon blurie, neither taken any eneveale, he Hath withdrawne his hande from intquitie, and hath exetuted true indgement betweene man and man:

9 And hath walked in my statutes, and kept my iudgementes to deale truelp: this is righteous man, he shall furelp liue, saith the Lorde God.

T (tty) 10 J.

and lia

trees of the fielde (ait

Meaning

@ uche as were fet apart in tyme ot natutall & month -
Ipc diseases, namelpintine ofchp'dbpzth, leproslt, and fuche like, as
L cuit. xx.c.
Esal. Iviil. a.
Mat xxv. e.
Exo. x xi. d.
Leui.xxv.e. eu. xx ill. c
Psal. xv. a.

io It he nowe get a sonne that isa rob-

bet̃ a shedder of blood, and do any one of these thinges: i

11 Thong he do not all thele thinges, but either hath eaten vpon the hüles, or defiled his neighbours wyle:

12 Or hath oppressed the poore and needie, or spopled by violence, 02 Wath not restored the pledge, or hath ipft vp his eyes vnto the idols, or hath committed abomination:

iz. Ox hath geuen foorth bpon blurie, or hath taken encrease: Shall this man

lies he (hati not tue: Seeing he hath

done al these abominations he Mal die the death, his blood shalbe bpon hym.

14 Mowe if this man get a sonne allo, that seeth all his fathers sinnes whiche he hath done, and feareth, neither doth

uche like: ö
15 (Namely) he hath not eaten vpon the hules, he hath not lift vp his eyes to the idols of the houle of Jscael, nor defiled his neighbours wpfe::
16 Neither hath oppressed any, nor hath withholden the pledge, neither Hath
(potted by violence: but hath geuen his bread to the hungry, and hath tonered the naked with a garment: i
17 Neither Hath withdrawen his hande from the afflicted, nog reteaued vlurie nor encreale, (but) Hath executed my iudgementes, and walked in my faz tutes : this man (ail not dye in his fae thers fire, but shall liue without fayte.
18 As for his father, vecause he ath cruelly oppressed and spoyled his brother by violence, and hath not done good among his people, io he dpeth in his obunc sinne. 0

19 And yet say yt, wherfore then should not this sonne beare his fathers sinne-
Wetaule the sonne hath done indgment and righteoulnesle, he hath kept all my statutes and done them: therefore Thali he liue in deede.

20 The same soule that sinneth chall dye,

Deut ice. the sonne shall not beare the fathers
* intquitie, neither shall the father deare

the sonnes iniquitie: the righteoulnesse
. _ dfthe righteous shalbe vpon hym, and the wickednelle of the wicked shalbe vpon him selfe aif.
21 But ifthe vngodly Wyll turne away from all his sinnes that he hath done, and kepe all iny statutes, and do the

Ihe prophecie

thing that is iugdement an doubtlesse he shall liue and nade
22 As for ali bis sinnes t

right, hat he pb b
190 10 nt mentioned bap
: is righteousnesse bath done, he challllue. vie

23 For haue | ofa sinner faith the Lorde
He not line ik he returne wapes-

God: from hig

24. Agapne, if the righteous turne from

his righteonsnesse, and do tniquitie and
{hail do according to all the abominations that the wicked man doth: hati
Helines All the righteousnesle that he
Hath done (hati not be remembred, hut in his transgression that he hath con:

Any plealure in the death |

D

untted, in his sinne that he bath finnen,

in thein he shall dye.

25 And pet pe lap, the way of the Lorde
Is not indifferent. Peare therelore ye house of Israel, is not my way equatiy
02 11 not pour wapes rather vnequall- N .

(0 Fp tree th ian

26 When a righteous man turneth a

way from his righteousnesse, and com: mitteth iniquitie, and dieth in the fame: in his iniquitie whiche he bath commit: ted shall he dye.

27 Agapne, when the wicked turneth a

way from his wicke dnesse that he hath ©

done, and Doth iudgement and right, he chall saue his soule aliue.

28 Becaule he“ seeth, and turneth away

krom all his iniquitie that he hath comnutted, he Hatt surelp liue, and not dye.

29 And F the boule of Ilrael, the
Way of the Torde is not equall. Are

my wapes vnequall O ve house of Fl ratl: are not pour wapes rather vnequall-

30 Therekore J wyll iudge pou, euery man according to his wapes, O ve
Houle of Picael faith the Lorde: veturne and bryng your felues agapne from all pour wickednelle, fo miquitic hall not be pour destruttion. 1

31 Catt away from pou all pour 110 gressions Wherby pe haue transgrelle ; and make pou a newe heart ande ole spirtte: for why wyll ye dye O ve ho

bk Ilrael- ath

32 Seing J hane no leglure tute ed. of hym that dyeth, faith the — — ye bryng agayne your felues then, a thall Ipue. The

ce Confidee reth ot temembre hisiniqui. ties.

of Ezechiel

$m The .xix. Chapter.
Che captiuitie of Jehohas and Jeholahim is tignitied by the lians whelpes, and by the

therof that is present. {
ö hou alfo take vp a lamentation for the ©
POX | princes of Jlracl,
And lap: wherkoze lay thy mother that

— lions: she norished her

young ones among the lions whelpes.

3 One of her whelpes the brought bp,

and it became a lion, it learned to catehe

the pray and to deuour folke.

The W heathen hearde of hymn, aud

caught hym in their snare, and brought

hym in hookes vnto the lande ol Egypt.

Nowe when Che sawe that the had wayted and her hope was lof, she toke another ot her Whelpes and made a lion of hym. 5

6 Which went aniong the lions, and bee tame a fearte lion, learned to catcbe the prap, and to deuour folke,

ant ote 4
Na

i) whieh

their cities Wate, inlomuch that the

were vtterly defolate through the vopte of his roarpng. i

3 Then let the wheathen together on euery {toe of the countrets agaynst him, layde their nettes fog him, and toke hin

fine.

N the “ seuenth pere

Ifthe teuth day of the fift

Amoneth, certayne of

“ithe elders of Blract

x) Weante foz to alke coun-

<A faple at the Lorde, and

2 K late downe before me.

hen came the worde of the Lorde vit me laying: ;

3 neon fonne of man, speake vnto the thier of Ilrael, and fay vnto them, pe AEH the Lode God, Are ye come wyll not ee eS truely 15 line J
Lode cy “4 fought of pon, faith the

+ Wyle thou not (udge them fore of

wy fioneffe among the

3; 7 De destroped their palaces and made
Whole lande and euerp thyng therin

lion. 10 He setteth out the prolperitie of the etic of Bierulalem chat is past, a the milerie

in their pit. 5
9 So they put him in prilon in chaynes, and brought him to the kyng ol Wabplon: they put him in holdes, that his voytce shoulde no moze be hearde vpon the mountapnes of Ilrael.
Io As forthy “mother, she is like a vine

u Aud the had strong roddes for the

cxlix.

Ce) he {pees

ost oc

ol this wicked

out bpon the grounde, the east wynde dryed vp her fruite (her braunches) were broken of € withered, as for the roddes of her strength, the fire tonsumed

them. 0

Dernefle, in a dep and thirstie grounde.
14 And there is a fire gone out of the rodde of her braũches, it bath deuoured

And nome fhe is planted in the wie

D Dettenes e
Sho was the

her frutte, fo that the hach no strong ener de rodde lor a scepter to rule: This is a la- f

mentation, and halbe fo2 a lamentation.

¢ The. xx. Chapter.

Che Lose denieth that he wyll aunc were them when they pray, for the offertce of vntzindnesse which he here obiecteth. z He promileth that his people Mall returne fom captiuitie. 46 By
Hierulalem.

the Forest that shoulde be burnt, is tignified the burning of

man, wylt thou not (udge (them?) cause theni to vnderstande the abhominations of their fathers.

And tell them, thus saith the Lorde
God, In the day when J chole Jlrael, and H lift vp mine hande vpon the seede of the boule ol Jacob, and was knowen

a

vnto them in the lande of Egypt, yea oe when Blife vp mine hande ouce them,

and sayde, Jam the Lozde pour God:
6 Euen in the dap that JJ lift vp mine hande vnto them, to bryng them out of the lande of Egypt into a lande that J had prouided for them, which floweth with mplke and bony, and is plealaunt

among all other landes:

7 Then

(c) This was a manct ot

antiquitie, and is ptt in di uers countr tis vsed.

8 tymantheabhonunatlons of his epes,
E delfile not your selues with the ldols ol
Egypt:sor Jam the Lorde your God.

But theß rebelled against me, and woulde not hearken vnto me, they dyd not tast away euery man the abhominatlons of his epes, neither dyd they forsake the idols of Egypt: then J laid
FJ woulde powze out mine indignatton duer them, and attonplishe my Wath vpon them, yea euen in the middest of the lande of Egypt.

„ And Jwrought for mpnames fake that it shoulde not be polluted befoze the Heathen among whom they Were, to whom JJ was manikestly knowen in bryngyng them foorth of the lande of

Egypt.

fo Nowe when J had cauled them to go out of the lande of Egypt, and brought t the wildernelle:

n J gaue them my statutes, and shewed them my ludgenientes: Which Wholo

Galiii.b. doeth, hall lyue iu them.

Erba, 12 Jgäucthemallo mp Sabbath dapes

h tbbe a token betwirt me and them, and therby to knowe that J am the Torde
Which halowe them.
33 And pet the house of Ylrael rebelled a gapnst me in the wüdernesse, they
Woulde not walke in my statutes, they haue cast away nw iudgementes, which whoso doth shall lyue in them, and my
Sabbath dayes haue they greatly polluted: then J sapde, J Woulde podbze ont mine indignation vpon them, and confiime them in the wuͤdernesse.

14 And J wzought for my names fake, lest it shoulde be defiled before the hea-
1 65 Whole fight J brought them

ut.

15 Bet neuerthelesse J lift vp my hande onto them in the wüldernesse, that J woulde not bring them into the lande
Which J gane them, that floweth with mylke and Pony, and is a pleasure of all landes:

16 And that because they cat away nw

indgementes and walked not in my statutes: but haue defiled my Sabbathes: ene heart was gone after their wols.

17 Neuerthelesse mine eye {pared them, sothat I woulde not destroy them, noz tonsume them in the wüdernesse.

18 Morcouer, J sapde vnto their sonnes

Rom. x a.

Num. d.

C

. —-k — f 1 . —
| I he prophecie *
7 The lad Junto then Cast awapeue- inthe wildernesle, walke not inthe Ga:

tutesof pone fathers, kepe not thei iudgementes, and defile no er ga with their idols. "pour selues et

19 aan the Lod pour God, Wake nm 9

atutes, kepe mp sudgementes dothe Kae

20 Haloive my Sabbathes,kortheyareg meee hid bbb tnd aud you: that pe may 8

nowre howe that J an wan be
Oolwütpll- oe OES

21 otwithstandpng, their fon J belled agaynst me allo, they Wall br D lump statutes, they kept not my iudgementes to fulkyll them, which he that doth shall line in them, they prophanen my Sabbath dapes: and JJ sapde, J
Wonlde powze ont mine indignatien duer them, andacconpliche my wath vponu them in the wildernesse.

22 Heuerthelesse, J withdrewe my hand and wrought for mp names fake, lest it choulde be defiled in the fight of the heathen, before whom JJ had brought them foorth. Pi

23 FHlift bp my hande to them alfo in the

wildernesse, that J would scatter them among the heathen, and strawe them among the nations:

24. Wecause they had not kept my iudgementes, but cast aside my Natutes and broken my Sabbathes, and their epes were after their fathers idols. ;

25 Wherkorc POgane them also statutes © sett that were not good, and iudgementes som,
Wherin they thoulde not lyue. rhe bp

ats,

; em Ect
26 And J defiled them in their owne 5, giftes,in that they! carted all that Ope? wu oxe neth the wombe to palle, that J might se. destroy them, that they might knowe cy ease howe that Jam the Lozde. b e
27 Therforc speake vnto the poule 0 heal pica thou fonne of man, and thou fee? halt lay bnto them, Thus faith ! 5
Hod God: yet in this also pour father bau, ane Ue and grecvuonly tranfgrefled agaynst nit: wat
Tor after J had bought chem Wh ae pe Bren fo2 5 0 57 likted vp ni abe ande to geue it onto them 175 fave enerp hie hil, x all thicke trees 0 aes acrikices, there to ire cust fwanger, the 1

N 1 8.

powred out their wine offerpnge

29 And J layde vnto wem oha bye place whervnto pe ten th this K name of it is called Wamah pay. eee

of Ezechiel.

€ > gel. thus fatth the Lorde God, Arc ve

rare inthe wales of pour fathers,

and conmut ve not Wwhozedome after

their abhomtnations- .

1 Foz when pe offer pour giftes,¢ make

your fonnes to pafle through the fire, pou are polluted with all pour idols vnto this day:shall J aunswere pou when
JJ am atked, O boule of Ilrgele As
IJ line faith the Lorde God, J wyll not
A wught of vou. nee

32 And (that which) commeth into pour mynde (hall not be at all which vou say,
We wyll be as the gentiles, as the kins redes of tountreis, to serue wood and

sione.

3 As truely as J lpue faith the Lorde
God, J mp selfe wyll rule pou with a mightie hande, with a stretched out arme, and with indignation powred out ouer pou, 5

34. And J wyll bryng pou fromthe people, and gather vou out of the tountreis

bbherin ve are scattered, with a mightie hande, with a stretched out arme, and with indignation powred out. me, 35 And J wyll bryng vou into the® wilne, dernesse ofthe people, c there J wyll en be ludged with pou face to face. im 36 Likeas I pleaded with pour fathers eam, in the wildernesse of Egypt: fo wyll J
> ae Deb pou also, faith the Lode

37, Jwyll tause pou to passe vnder the rodde, and J Wyll bryng vou into the

0 bondt ol the couenaunt. ial 38 And J wyll “purge out of: you the rebelles e them that transgresse agalust me, and bryng theni out of the lande of

their habttation: as for the lande of Ilrael they (hall not tome in it, that vou

may knowe howe that Jam the Lord.
9. ais for you D houle of Ifrael, thus th) the Lorde God, Go pou and serue

|, Chery man his idols, seyng that xe obey

Not me: and pollute no more ny holy a with vour giftes and your idols.
- pon my oly hyll, euen bpon the

dcherlore speake vnto the house of PE

cl.
Hye hyll ol Ilrael faith the Lord God, chall all the house of Ilrael, and all that ls in the lande worchip me: and in the fame place wyll J fauour them, x there wyll J require pour heaue olferpnges, and the firstlinges of pour oblaͤtions, with all your Holy thinges.
41 J Wyll accept pour sweete fauour, when F bryng you from the nations, t gather pou together out of the landes wherin ve haue ben stattered, that J chen be halowed in vou before the heãt en. ; . ;
42 And pe hall knowe that Pam the
Lorde, when J (hall bring pou into the lande of Israel, into the lande fo2 the which J lift bp my hande to geue it vnto pour fathers.
43 Thert shall pe tall to rembraunte pour owne wapes, and all pour wozkes wherin pe haue ben defiled, and ve shalbe cut of in pour Wowne fight for all Seen. pour wickednesse that ye haue done. aw
44 And pe shall knowe that J am the wache
Bode, when J deale with pou for my . names sake, and not after pour wicked
Wapes, nor accordyng to pour corrupt
Workes O pe house of Pfrael, faith the
Lode God.
45 Monrcouer, the worde of the Torde cane vnto me, saping: —
46 Thou fonne of man, fet thy kate towarde the wap of Themanah, and drop (thy worde] towarde the ( sonth,

G

and prophetic towarde the korelt of the Ja am south fielde. fos fouth

Cu) That ia, both rong ¢

Th

ad aS an

(n) That oy,

} (a) 20 doc: frinc is tom-

parco toraine,

euen (o here

9 worden art

compared te dp0pprs.

b) That ts,

uch an sleeme to haue an
Outward sheus of tighteo 1 neise bp od seruation of

J cetemoniecx the lame.

ce) uBeonpng thiough all che laude.

2 Wong thou were in extreme ans guithe whtt-

with thy topnes ipould bieakc.

Ce) Wecaale of the great noyse of the ar mit of the
Cyaldeans.

(ty Shaldt as worakc ay water

the forme of
Hod, and in his place.

9) That ts,

the rest ol the ptople.
(ti) To wit,
* nto the arnue of tht
€ A

The prophecie

“Sy The. xxi. Chapter.

ethreatneth the tworde,that is to tax dellructlon to the citie of HieruCalemt, 25 he the
0 5 fa ol king Zedchiah. 23 He is commaunded to prophecie the destruction of the chloe’ of Ammon, 30 ter thetlaugyter of other, at the lak the Lorde threatneth death vnto Pa

buchodonoror hm celfe.

He worde of the Lorde tame vnto me, saping:
Thou fonne of man,

N 10 e tb worde) to warde the
— — Hhholp places, and prophetie agaynst the laude ol lrael.

3 Sap to the lande of Plrael, thus laith the Lorde, Beholde Jam agaiust thee; and wyll drawe mp fwopde out of the cheath, and tut ol from thee both the righteous and the wicked. i

4 Sepyug then that J wyll tut of from thee both the righteous and the wicked: therfore shall mylworde go out of his heath agaynst all fleche from the“ south to the north, a

5 That all fleshe may knowe hoe that
Ithe Lode Hane drawne mplworde out ofthe Heath, and it hall not be put in agapne. *

6 Mourue therfore O thou sonne of

man, pea seuen; with the W brtakyng of
155 lopnes, mourne bitterly in their preente. —

7 And it they lap vnto thee, wherfore mouruest thou- Then tell them, for the
Otidinges that commeth: All heartes
Malt meit, ail handes shalbe letten

downe, all stomackes thal faynt, and all knees shall “ go as water: beholde it

conmmeth, and chalbe brought to pale, faith the Lode God. a
3 Agayne,the worde ofthe Lorde came
- putome,fayina: . a
9 hou sonne of man, prophecie and
{peake, thus saith the Lode God,
Sptake, the Nvorde the lworde is Char: pened and well furvished. —
10 Sharpentd is it to make a great

slaughter, and furbiched that tt map

glitter: Shall we then make mirth- It tontemneth the“ rodde of mpsonnelãs)
Mall other trees.

holde it in the bande: this lwonde is charpened, and furbiched, to geue it into the hande of the aper.

12 Crye and honle lonne of man, for it commeth vpon wp people (it commeth)

19 Thou sonne ot man, appoynt thee two

21 Foz the kyng of Wabplon stoode at the

He hath geuen it to be furbished, to

vpon all the princes of Ilrael: . rours of the sworde pacha mela people, “Inilte therfore thou vpon thy . thrab .. — ~
13 2ecaule it is a trial: and what toit „ contenine the rodde:? It shalbe no mor tiem faith the Lorde. . Sains
14 Pzepheete thou sonne of man, r limite meen thy handes together, c let the worde . be doubled thule, Leuen] the fworde of € the great flanghter, entryng into their wots pattie chaumbers, —

15 To make them faynt at the heartes,

and to multiplie their falles, in all their

gates, Hane I geuen the terrour of the

worbe: Ah it is made bright, and drel-
˙soed for the laughter. 1

16 Get thee one Way o2 other, cither cn gens

beth brio the
Froe1d,geumng it udn he ty

bpon the right hande or vpon the lekt,
Whyther soeuer thy fate turneth. w
17 J will {rite my handes together allo, eo. and make my wrathkull indignation to rest: euen I the Lode haue saydeit.
18 The worde of the Lode tame pet vn to me agapne, laping: bann

and leder de sang ane

Mpapes that the lwordr of the hing cf
Babylon may tome: Woth these wayes shal go ont of one lande, and choote thee a place, at the head of the cttic arts conte it. 9
20 Appoynt a way that the worde mas tomie to warde Nabbath of the Amn? nites, and towarde 0 Juda in the OF yews fenced Hierusalem. on tae c partyng ok the wapes, at the head o Gi the two Wapes , confultyng by wine ge tion, he made his arrowes bright, rm b. 5055 sulted with images, € lookin the mu
22 At his right hande was the 1 OR: saping ko: Hierulalent, to appopnt ca ieorw

tapnes, to open [their] mouth £0 the re

lahtet 4 litt vn With g flatighter and to lift vp their volte Tins. the un to fet battle rammes d“ wi

gaynst the gates, to tast à pulwarke, ne fand)to builde a fort. ga falle dl mare

And it shalbe vnto them a ulnation in their fight, for k made vnto them: but! he ˖ remembzaunce their tiquitt,

23 wothts ehe
Pal call to e to the ze, intent wa

intent they may be taken. s n geesee thus saith the Torde God,
+ soraule pe haue made pour iniquitie to

be remebred in dilcouer png pour tran-

ressions, fo that in all pout workes pour fines might appeare, betause ye are come to remembzauntce, pe chalbe hande.

ee, throwen wyll J put Wit, and it Mall not
2 5 vntyll he come to whom the indgeco ment belongeth, and to whom JJ haue ani geuen it. 3 mere’ 28 And thou O fonne of man, prophecie

and speake, Thus laith the Lorde God

rulers. 29 Che wickednelle of the people.

D reouer the worde of s the ode came buto ente, and fapde,

Thou sonne of man,
Writ thou not iudge, a Wplt thou not iudge inn, this blooddy titie-wylt ey 7 not shewe her all her abhomina-

Andtell them, thus faith the Lode
God, The citie sheddeth blood in the middest okt, that her otyme may tome, and maketh Dols Hagayntt her selle, to

4 5 oe

du HA made thy selfe giltie in the po that thou hast {hed, and defpied

; bee in the idols which thou hast made:

won halt cauled thy ayes to drawe

b aD made the tyme of thy peres to

be enone

e he amackpng in all kaudes. us

tan ot hee
0 d. ht der

all laugh thee to scorne, st gotten thee fo foule a

Weholde the rulers of Istael. eue one inthee (was red) 60 fis power 15

_ thee, they ch at

of Ezechiel.

scons 25
115 , whole day ts conte, euen when * mnie | 30 Shoulde J caule it to returne into his

ether they be nye op farce from

cli.

to the children of Ammon, and to their blasphennie, speake thou: The fibozde, the [worde is drawen foorth alredy to slaughter, and furbished to consume bez tause of the glitteryng: wal
29 Whiles they fee bnto theepanitic, 92 Neuß and devine Alpe vnto thee, to put thee Lz with the neckes of the wicked that be en. llapne, whole Day is come when their intquitie Mail haue an ende. en prophete hic theath: In the place where thou walt neee: created, in the lande of thine pavitation ene wyll Iludge thee: 5 eu a
31 And J wyll powre mine indignation Sen aa vpon thee, and wyll blowe vpon thee in the fire of mp wrath, and deliuer thee into the handes of desperate people, which are stzüfull to destroy. —
32 Thou shalt feede the fire, and thy blood shalbe shed in the lande: thou shalt be put out of remembraunte, for J the Lorde haue spoken it.

é 8 thou wart

The. xxij. Chapter.

The worde ot the Lorde agaynst Hierutalem for mantlanghter, and denying due honour to their fathers and mothers, and other wickednesses. 25 Ok the wicked doctrine of the kalle prophets and priettes, and ok their vnsattable couctoumielle, 27 Che tirannie ot

shed blood. ‘a

7 In hee haue they dispised father and mother, in thee haue they oppressed the straunger, in thee haue they bered the wido we and the fatherlesse. —

3 Thou hatt dispiled my holy thynges, and defiled my Sabbathes.

9 „Kale ttellers arethere inthee to hed „o, sig: blood, in thee are such as eate vpon the thanks hylles, and in thee they tommit abhomination.

lo Juthee they diltouered their fathers Lb. shame, in thee they haue humbled her that was set apart for pollution.

HM Euerp man hath dealt chamefully . „,

With his neighbours wife, and abhonnnably defiled his! daughter in lame, in “Or,fonnes thee bath euery man forced his owne yr. fitter euen his fathers daughter.

12 Bea giftes haue ben receaued in thee

to shed blood, thou hast taken vsurie and entrease, thou hal oppressed thy
U 1. cated and forgotten me, saith the Lode God.
13 Webolde, J haue co smitten my handes Gan vpon thy touetousnesse that thou bal Saanen vied, and vpon the blood which hath eee ben shed in ther. Dengenumce.
14 9s

es . -=
1 g thy heart able to endure: 02 may
| 4 a bandes be strenghthened in the dayes that J Mhal haue to do with thee:
Euen Itht TLorde that speake it, wyll bryng it also to passe.

15 Jwpll scatter thee among the hea-

then, e strawe thee about in the landes,

Seeed: and Wyll cause thy füthinelse to teasse dean: out of thee.

ones 16 Bea and thou halt be thine o owne in maces heritaunte in the fight of the heathen,

ge n that thou mapest knowe that Jam the halt be tert 5
10 thp leite Lowe. . tn. yy Aud the worbe of the Lorde tame br to me, saping:

18 Thousonnè of man the house of Plrael is vnto me as drosse: all they are brasle, tinne iron, and lead in the middest of the furnace, euen drosse of siluer are they.

19 Therkore thus faith the. Lode God,
Foralsmuch as pe all are turned into drosse, therfore beholde J wyll bryng vou together vnto Hierusalem.

20 Dyke as they gather siluer-brasse, iron, tinnt, and lead, into the middest of the furnace, and the fire is blowne there vnder to melt then: euen lo wyll J gather you in mine anger c in my wrath. and let vou remapne (there) and caufe

pere pouto melt. b the coy 21 J wyll bryng you together, and blowe

Gro

ere the fire of my wrath vpon vou, and ve

foo halbe molten in the middest therok.

22 Typke as the siluer is molten in the furnace, so hail ye also be molten therin, that pe may knowe howe that I the
Lord haue powred my wrath vpon pou.

23 And the Worde of the Lorde came vnto me, faping:

24. Thou sonnt of man, tell her art an vncleane lande, Which te rapned vpon in the day of wrath,

25 There isa conlpicacic of her pin: Ska’

Thou > ch is not W a

phetes inthe miodest therok as a rote eae" uon rauenyng his prap, they Demag mo soules, they haue taken the riche and me t pretions thpnges, they haue made her e mam Widolbes inthe middest therok. La,
26 Her priestes haue broken my labbe and - defiled my holy thynges, they put no difference betweene the holpe bubolp neither. dilcerne they betiweene the

tleaue € vncleane: they turne their eye frommy Sabbathes, and 3 amdesled among them. 92

27 Thy rnlers in thee are lyke woolueg anz rauenyng the pay, to thed blood, and Lb
. soules, for their owne touetous ucre.

28 As for her W prophetes, they daube 00 ty with vntempered morter, they lee dane vanities, and diuine lyes unto them, ens faying, The Lorde faith fo: wheras the en
Lorde hath not spoken. en e

29 The people in the lande bled wicked extortion and robberp, thep bere the pooze and needp, and oppresle the . straunger agapnst right.

30 And J sought among them for a man that Woulde make bp the hedge, and debe fet bym selle in the gap befoze nie in the dau landes bebalfe, that I choulde not de- agb strop it: but I coulde fynde none. Ken

31 Therkore haue J pobged out mp eruel 1 e dilpleasure vponñ them, and tonsumed get

them in the kire ok mp wrath: their owne wapes wyll J recompente vpon their heades, saith the Lorde God.

The. xxiii. Chapter.
40 the kornication, that is to Cay,of the idolatrie of Samaria and Hierusalem. onder the name of Tholah and Ahotibah. 1: In comparilon of Samaria, he sbeweth that the fornication 5
Hierutalem is the külthler. 22 The destruction of Hierulalem is prophecied. 35 The adulterte o

1 He Worde of the Lord dane tame vnto nie, faping: clan 2 Thou sonne of mau, ede there were two wo-
. men the daughters of
, cone mother.
! ; And they tomnntted bh fornication in“ Egypt, they played the tianfion 63 harlottes in their youth: there were

their breastes pre ssed, and there they munten dulled the teates of their virginitte.

cat Bat 4 Theconames of them were! Aholah nen u be Soberbpip mene Wreculalem, Where Gods tcuyte was.

both the whores is kounde out. 47 Their destruckion.

5 Abolah played ö harlot' When the Was

the cloce, and Aholtbah her sister, and

A ies

they were mine, and they bare foun

and daughters: thus weretheieng len

Samaria 13 Aholab, and Pierula

Aholibah.

5 nder arp 9

mine, and fhe was let on fire mice a loners the Alsyrians her neighne line, ee

6 Which were clothed with biete were name both captapnes and printes tgosgamen 8. all plealaunt 15 men, and ho- „ rydyng vpon horses. 1

Thus Che committed her andren of with theim (beng) all cholen Ich,

Of Ezechiel.

c with all on whom che doted, ai pefieD her elfe with all their idols.
Zelther left che the fornication that

vouth they lap With her, thep buuled the brestes of her mapdenhead, and powerd their whordome vpon her.
Wherfore J deliuered her into the handes of her louersleuen into p handes

rents, oat HH

f ned,
* heart

dune thers

Jo These diltouered her chame, toke her

sonnes a daughters, and fluc her with e. the llworde, an eupll name had che az news. mong women: for they had executed e luͤdgement vpon her. f Her lister Aholibah lawe this, and destroyed her felfe with inordinate lone morc then he, € with her fornitations,

12 She doted bpd the Assyrians captaines e punces her neighbours, clothed with all maner of gorgious apparel, horsmen riding vpon holes, bepng all pleasaunt poung nien. — 5

and they toke both one Wap.

14. But che encreased styll in whordome:
0 nent ko when che sawe omen paynted vpon the wall, the images of the Chaldees me 30: paynted With vermilon,

ven, 15 And girded with girdles vpon their
Man, lopnes, and with dyed attire vpon their de, heaͤdes, lokyng all lie princes, akter the

stints the lande where they were borne.

eee 16 Asloone as she falbe them, fhe burnt
Be intone bponthem , sent meslengers vn-
Ki to them into the lande ofthe Chaldees.
17 Nowe when the wabplonians came bute her in the bed of loue, they defiled her with their whordome: and so was the polluted with them, and her lust

was abated krom them
8 sind (he difconeved her wyordome and
Udlofed her shame: then my heart fo2-

dee her, ine as my heart Yas gone

ron her fitter allo.

* euerthelelle, the encrealed her

bordome moze, and remembred the

Daves of her poutl h wherin fhe had ae the harlot in the lande of Ego bie e burnt in lust vpon their toncu-
Whole flethe was like the fleshe

of a a | holes ard ther issue lite the ilsne of

„ Tbns thon ya ttcatten to remébeaunee

the küthimelle of thy youth, when thy

5 she vied wich the Egpptlans: for in her

aN bche Allynats bpon whom {he doted.

more thẽ her lister with her fornications.

z Then Jlawe that che was defited;

mings mauer ok the Wabplonians in Chaldea,

clit. teates were brulsed by the Egyptians for the pappes of thy pouty. 1
22. Therfore O Aholibary; thirs faith the
I orde God, J Wyll raise vp thy louers agaynst thee kcom whom thy heart is departed, and gather them together — agaynst thee ou euery spde, '
23 (Namelpj the Babylonians and all the
Chaldees, rulers, wealthy and nughtie men, with allthe AMpetans, all plealant poung men, captapnes and puntes, all valagunt and renowmed, riding vpon
Hes.
24. Lhele Mall come vpon thee with charrettes, Wagons, and wheeles, and reat multitude ok people, with huckier,

lhielde, and helmet they shall beset thee

on euery side: J wyll geue indgement „0. Iwi befoze them, pea they them selues Mall panchment iudge thee accordpng to their owne voto them. iudgement. N
25 J wpll lap mine indignation bpon thee so that they shal deale cruelly with thee: they Chall cut or thy nose and thine cares, and thy remnaunt felt fail by the lworde, they hall carp away thy sonnes and daughters, and the relidue shalbe deuoured by the fire.
26 They thal strip thee ont of thy clothes, and take alvap thy kaire iewels.

27 Thus wyll J make thp witkednesse

to ceasle frointhee, and thy fornitation out of the lande of Egypt: so that thou shalt turne thine epes no moze alter them, and cast thy mynde no more vpon

Egypt. N

28 For thus laith the Lod God, Btholde
IJ wyll delmer thee into the handes of them whom thou hatest, pea euen into the handes of them from whom thine heart is departed.

29 And they Chall deale hatefullp with a thee, and take away all thy labour, c c 21 tre leaue thee naked t bare, and the shame dae which of thy fornications shalbe discouered, ute me. both thy wickednesse a thy whordome. de walt

30 J wyll do thele thynges vnto thec be- a Hames caufe thou batt gone a whoryng after e the heathen, and betause thou art polluted with their idols.

31 Thou hat walked in the wap ol thy fitter, therfore wyll J geue her cuppe in thine hande.

32 Thus laith the Lorde God, Thou shalt drynke of thy fitters cuppe, deepe c large, thou shalt be laughed to storne, and had in derision, becaule ö

a =

: | © drunken-

) @eaning ou Malt be filled with“? dru -

rait 33 Th J ttong shouldt be fo grcat,

that thep

shonide can’t ole

destruction and desolatton, with the cup of thy sister Samaria.

34 Thou shalt drynke it and lucke it out, and thou Matt breake the sheardes thers o, and teare thine owne brestes: lor J haue spoken it, faith the Lorde God.
Therfore thus faith the Lode God,
Foralinuch as thou hak forgotten me,

and tat nie aside behynde thy backe, so

beare nowe thine owne wickednesle and whordome. 9
36 The Lorde sapde mozeoucr bnto nie,
Thou lonne of man, wilt thou not iudge
Aholah and Aholibah- shewe them
ö their abhonlinatlons.
37 (Namely) that they haue broken their

them to theic fences and teason.

E 35

Wedlocke, and blood is in their handes: and with their idols haue they tönutted adulterie, and haue allo caulsed their sonnes whom they bare vnto me, to
Q) hat 8. pälle by the fire to be their incate.
Beds. Goech. 38 Ben and this haue they done vnto me tdi. e. allo, they haue defiled my lanctuarie in the fame dap, and haue prophaned my
Sabbathes.
39 Foz when they had llapne their children for their idols, they caine the lame
Day into my fanctuarie to delile it:and lo thus haue they done in my houle.
40 And howe much moze lis itj that they

b det ent for mento tome from“ farce, vnto comereisto = OI a messenger was fent, and 10
Taube they tamte kor Whom thon didst wache

ulrt ok theit tole

thy selke, and paynted thine epes, and deckedst thee With ornamentes.

* The. xxiiij. Chapter. | |
3 He proueth the firing of Hierulalem by a parable ofa seethyng pot. 16 Che parable

The prophecie — i. 41 Thou sattest bpon a tately bed, anda F

nesse aud lorowe seuen) with the cup ol

eable spread before it, wherv hast let mine insente and Men du dad dier

42 And a noyse ofa mery company aye K and with the men, belide the multttude “ont of the people, were brought men ol Sa. ba out of the delert, which gaue then bratelettes vpon their handes, and beauttfull crownes vpon their heades.

43 And I sayd vnto her that was worne in her adultertes, Nowe shall her forntcations tome to an ende, and che allo.

44 And they went in to her as they go bnto a tommon harlot: even fo went the
(3 fav) to Aholah and Aholibah, thole d 9

45 And the righteous men, they chau iudge the after the maner irs ans Bzc.xvid and after the maner of murtherers:fo2 they are harlottes, and blood is in their handes.

46 Wherflore thus faith the Lorde God,

J wyll bryng a great multitude of people vpon them, and geue then to beftat: tered and spopled:

47 And the multitude shall stone them with stones, and cut them downe with their [wordes, they Mall Map their sonnes and daughters, and burne vp their houses with kire.

48 Thus wyll J tause wickednesse to 4 teasse ont of the lande, that all women masa may be taught, not to do after pour wie: “* kednesse.

49 And so they thal lap pour wickednesle vpon pour owne selues, and the linnes of pour idols {hall pe beare:and pe {hall knowe that J am the Lorde God.

4 (b) Tha i, the cue nas # chicfe men

jerof
0 90h cots

of Ezechiels wyfe beyng dead, which he after expoundeth.

8 ™ * en CENithetenth moneth, th 2 hygh and the. nes fitahs captint= SEP e euerp good peece, the thyg a

gend iY tenth day ok the mo: —Choulner, c kpll it with the chlefe bones. 2 5

Ke. 25. 8. r,
(by aie ofthe Lorde vnto me, 155

aying:

— Ons a yOpng part 2 of December oA 5

and parte 2 = Othou sonne ol man, 6 With that lapde the Lorde God one gegen aan mos Waite the name of this day, ven euen ok maner, Wo undd the bloody aitte, to the te

this present day: for the kyng of Wabylon set hym selfe agapnst Mierulalem this {elfe fanre dap. N 5
3 Shewe the rebellious houle a parable, 7 and speake vnto them, thus faith the
Lowe God: Prepare a © pot, {et it on, and pobre water into it.

nozox besiegtd
Micrufaltm.

(cy wherbey ts n. Mietusolem.

8 That f

9 aumce: J haue let her blood wonahuuh drye rocke, that it shoulde not be couered. thus layth the Lorde God:
9 00 be 110 dnl bloodthirstie citte, oe f whom cuen J my felfe wil make a genie much wood, ande kindle the eae . fire, and steth the flethe, t spice the pot,
Swe so that the very bones shalbe brent. e oreduer, J will let the pot emptie ppathe coales, fo that the brasle thereot map be hot and burnt, and the filthy: nesie of it may be molten in it, and the stum ok it shalbe tonsumed. :
1 he hath weeried her felfe withtabour;

n gta eee wake

the fire her stum [mut be contumed.)
33 q thyfuͤthynesse is wickednesle: bez hu, tae J would haue purged thee, and
73 thou Wast not purged, krom thy filthy-

fophges

rest in ther. '

c. Euen Ithe Lozde haue spokenit: pea it is tome therto all redy that J will do

it J will not go backe, J will not spare,

Iwill not repent: but according to thy

apes and imaginations shall they ™

ludge thee, fapth che Lorde God.

nie, saying:

si, albap from thee the “pleature of thyne
% khpyes with a plague, pet shalt thou neie her mourne no? weepe, neither shal thy em leares run downe.

of the dead, bynde the tyre of thy head bpon thee, and put on thy shoes vpon chyleete, couer not thy lippes, and weate no mans bead,

amel

CAO BY

came vnto me, laying:

2 ix Thou sonne of man,
0 17 fet thy face to ward the ee oS Ammontes, and pro-
O phecie vpon them.

Montes Date the worde of the Tode ih the Lorde God: Forsoeft © haha duer my ects tae ett was polluted, and and of Ilrael because it was and duer the houle of Juda

pet her great stum is not gone of her,

ae nelle thou shalt not be purged any moze, x, tl J haue cauled myne indignation to

1j And the worde of the Lod came vnto gen 4 Thou sonne of man, behold wil tage

Sta 7Pourne in seilens, make no mourning

And say dntothe Ame

of Ezechiel. cli.

ar it might raue wrath to arile and 18 So J lake vuto the people betymes

in the morning, Eat euen my wife dyed: then vpon the next morowe J dpd as
IJ Was commaunded.
19 And the people sayd vnto me: wollt thou not tell vs what this signifieth towarde vs, that thou doest {oz
20 Jaunltberedthem, The word of the <p
Torde came bnto mefaying:
Tell the houle of Ilrael, thus faytly the Lorde God: Beholde, J win pol- n tte tens lute my anttuarie „ euen the glorie of rr pour power, the pleasure of your eyes, e and pour heartes delite: c pour sonnes and daughters whom pe haue lett, hal! fall through the sworde.
22 Like as J haue done, fo Malt ye do also:ye shallnot touer pour lippes, ve thalt cate no mans bread. .
23 And pour tire halbe pon pour heades, and pour fhocs bpon pour feete: pe shali neither mourne nor Weepe, but pe Nail pyne away in pour iniquities, x mourne one towardes another.
24. Thus Ezechiel is pour shewtoken, according to all that he bath done, ve hall do: when it conuneth, then pe chal know that J am the Lorde God.
25 Allo thou sonne of man, Mail it not be in the day when J take krom the their power, the ioy of their honour, the pleasure of their eyes, and the wulting dp ok ene their soules, their sonnes e their daugh- e ee ters, Hi
26 In that day shall come one that is el taped, vnto thee, (Wand being it; to the Webel, hearing olf thyne leaves: Deren
27 In that day shall thy mouth be ope: Beau. ned to hin which is escaped, that thou mayst speake e be no moze dumbe: yea thou shalt be their shewtoken, that they may knowe how that J am the Torde.

' The, xxv. Chapter. '
Che worde of the Lorde bpont the fonnes of Ammon, which reloyced at the fall of Hierulalem. s Against Moab and Heit, against Idumea, againtt the Philistines. :
He worde ofthe Lorde

betause they went into captiuitie:
4 Webholde therfore, J wil deliuer thee to : the people of the Weast, that they may OE, haue thee in possession: these Hail settle e, their palates in thee, and make their arne dwellinges in thee, they shall eate thy tae belles fruite, and drinke vp thy nulde. c cn.
5 As forc abbath, J will make ofit a; Horne fable for tamels, and of the Ammonites oro ere a sheepfolde:and pe shall knowe that J gane, aß thus kart) the Lorde God: Inso e a x 2 2. Reg. 11. d.
3 Gada much

muchasthonhat cappedivtth thyne gement bpon the houle of Jud

handes., and amped with thy feete,pea
15 reiopted ouer the lande of Jlrael with all thy delpite in heart:
7 Wehold therkore J wil stretche out my hande duer thee, and deliner thee to be spopled of the heathen, Erootethee out from among the people, and taule thee to perishe out of the landes: yea J will make thee to be destroped, that thou mapest know that Jamthe Torde.

“Or tikling
| of heart,

8 Thus sapth the Lo. God: Forsomuch

as Moab and Seir do fay, Weholde the houte of Pudaislibeas all gentiles be:

9 Cherfore behold, J will open the fide

of Moab fromthe aties from his cities

(J fav of his frontiers, the pleafares of

the tountrey casnamelp) wethtelimoth,

Waalmeon, and Birtachain:

Unto the chudren ok the east against the Ammonites, aud will geue it into posseslion, so that the Ammonites chall no moze be had in remembraunce a mong the heathen.

u And J will exetute tudgementes vpon
Moab, and they Mall knowe that J am the Lorde. ;

12 Thus sayththe Lorde God: For that
Edom hath done in auenging reuen-

| 92 nd ; stand out ol the next verst 10
J wil opt. gt.

The. xxvi. Chapter.

he prophecieth that Cyzus chalbe ouerthrowen, becaule it reiopced at the distructton ot Hiee risfalem.is The wondring and astonishment of the marchauntes fo2 che detolation of Cyrus.

Md it cante to pasle in the elenenty pere, the kirst dap of the moneth, the wowot the Loe

ö tame vnto me, saping:

Thousonne of man,

—bDecaule that Tyre hath

spoken vpon Hierusalem, Haha, the

bye teat gates of the people is broken, doit is tur-

ibm et ed Dito me, for now that fhe ts destroped, J halbefitten:

3 Thertore thus fapth the Lod God, ehold O Tyre, I Will vpon thee, J Wil raise bp many nations againsttheẽ, like

derte: dg WHC the {ea arileth with his wanes,

min be, 4. Thep (hat breake the walles ol Lyre, me . ECA downe her towzes, J will {erape her dust fro her, c make her a drie rocke.

5 She shalbe for a spreading of nettes in

i apie 1955 poet it, sayth the

ord God, and she shalbe fo

ena ll W e 6 * 3 bikgesthar © der“ daughters that are in the fielde shalbe slayne with the 98 75 they

may knowe how that J am the Lorde.

Vierulalem, shalbe turned to mp agame,
(0p riches nno lame that encreales thus the wicked

a, done great offence and auengen hon

selfe vpon them:

iz Therfore thus sayth the Lon God 9 wil reache out myne hand vpon Edom and destroy man and beast out of u. 3
Will make it Defolate from Theman, e een i

14 An exetute my reuengem vpon E dom by the hande of 5 5 C
Israel they hall do in Edom according to mp Wath and indignation, fo that they shall knowe my vengeaunte, saßth the Lord God.

15 Thus sayth the Lorde God: Foz that the Philistines dyd in bengeaunce , (nas melr) in auenging reuengement, witha auen heart to destrop it kor the old rng enmitte: abe bine

1s Therfore thus faith the Loz God, We- an
Hold J will stretche out my bande our the Phllistines and destroy the © eve: (Dwhiche thites, and tause all the remnaunt ofthe 23"

stea coast to perishe: 9

17 A great bengeaunce Will J take vpon J them, with panithements of my wrath, San that ther map knowe that J am the rr
Tord, when J chal lap my vengeaunte bpon them.

7 For thus sayth the Lord God: Behold,
Will bring vpon Tyrus, Habuthodo- 5 noʒor king ot Wabplon from the north,
A king ol kinges, with horses, charets,
„ „With a multitude, and much people.

8 Thy daughters that arein the field shal he flap with the sword: but aͤgainst thee he shal male bulwarkes, e cast a mount against thee, and lift vp his speare a-

gainst there.

9 He shall let engins of warre belore hym against thy walles, e with his weapons breake downe thy towres.

1o The dust ok his horses shall toner 15 they shalbe fo many: thy walles 115 shake at the nople ol the e
Whecles e chariots, when he thal ite into: thy gatts.as into the entry ola c

zoken Downe.

u Weth the hooles of his horles wen treade downe al thy streetes, 155 athe flay the people with the wow, do one pillers of thy strength Mall fall to the grounde. 1 Thty

ber 8 rchaundise, thy walles shall they bean eowne, and destroy thy houles okplealure, thy stones, thy timber and nuit chall they cast into the mids ol the

water.
Thus will I caule the sounde of thy a hgnesto ceaffe , and the noyse of thy c horpes dall no niore be hearde. wil bring thee into a Dele rocke, thou
(halt be for a spreading of nettes, thou shalt neuer be buyltagaine: for euen ZF the Lord haue spoken it, faith the Lod

xa

their robes, & put oftheir broidred garmentes, pea with trembling Hall they be clothed, they shal sit vpon theground, e, they shalbe astonished at euerpnoment, and be amale dat thee.

They shall mourne fog thee, and fay

hc worde of the Lorde
ARE 5 tame vnto me, saping:
. (Ax D thou fonne of man,
WAVING] takebp a lamentable
‘<<! complaint bpon Lyre,

And fay bnto Lyre that is fituate at the entry ol the sea, Whiche is the mart ol

the people fo: many iles, thus sayth the
Lorde GOD Lyre, thou batt sayde, J aum ok perfite beautie.

4 Thy borders are in the mids of the leas, ban wers haue made perfite thy

a. They haue made all thy ci

852 hy (Hip) bordes of re ees of Shenir, from Libauus

ant they tatten Cedar trees to make

hee mastes

917 the Okes ol walan to make thee iuony antes 5 thy benches of he les of Chitin” bronght ont of

i. Een. linnen With broidred worke out of
0 ae 155 duct thee to be chr
. ke and purple out o
, the lles of Elishah was thy cenerlag, tours of Sidon and Aruad

Vmariners: and thy wile men

n am.
Ale
Alan. ash,

of Ezechiel.
1. They spall rob thy riches, and fhople vnuto thee: How art thou destroyed that

cu 5 wastinbabitedokthe feas,the renow- Genes med citie, Whiche was strong in the fea, aka oe che and her inhavitauntes, Whiche carte cenvseaip,
15 oe keare to be onall that haunted wer.

erin-

18 Now (hall the inhabitours of the aes be aftoni(hedin the day of thy fal: yea the iles that are in the fea chalbe trou: bled at thy departure.

19 Jor thus sapth the Low God: when J make thee a desolate titie, as other citieg be that no man dwell in, and when baing bp the deepe vponthee, that great waters may couer thee:

20 Then wil Jtastthee downe Dntothens that descend into the pit, vnto a peopic of olde time, and let thee in a lande that co wich are is beneath, like the olde rupnes, with them which go downe to the graue „lo that no inan shall dwell moze in thee:

but I wil reserue honour foz theo land ee of the lining: flayed,

21 J will make thee terrors, and thou halt be no more:though thou be sought for, vet Malt thou not be kounde for tuermore, sayth the Lorde God.

he. xxvit. Chapter.

Che prophete is moued to bewayle the defotacion of Cyrus, «2 He letteth out the prayse of Cyrus for the Haunting of marchauntes therto.

O Tyre that were in thee, were thy

shipmaisters.

9 The auncient and wyse men of Gebal 1
Were in thee, thy toppers of chinkes: sims all shippes of the (ea with their chipmen sles th were inthee, to ottuple thy marchaun- ar webe

dile. othe em

10 The perses, Lydians, and phutens ee, were in thy armes, thy men ok warre: “Re. these hãged bp their chieldes € helmets inthee, these let foorth thyne honour.

n They of Aruad were with thyne hoalt „ Sn round about thy walles, and thecopyg- dnl es

rodocta

mentans were thy Watchmen vpon thy Be

tolbres: these hanged vp their quiuers edlen

round about thy walles, they made thy outot the be beautte perfite, pemed litle.

Thepot Tharlis (were) thy marthauntes foz the multitude ofall riches, in siluer, iron, tin, and lead, whiche they brought to thy faires.

13 Jauan, Tubal, and Mesech were thy 15 marchauntes concerning the @ lpues of en, men, and they brought vessels of brasse and for thy marcthaundise. C

14 Theyok the houle of Thogarma brought vnto thee at the time of thy marte, horses, toursers, and mules.

N (ij) 15 They

seemed litle,

ep of Devan were thy marchaunts,

i 45 many fles the marchaundile of thy

piucoznes, handes, € brought thee hornes, teeth, teh OF Clee and hebenus, for presentes.

Suow, g, 16 They of Aram (were thy marchauntes

apcous kar the multitude of thy workes, and Or

a eupiedinthy kapzes With emeraudes,

purple, broidred worke, fine linnen, co-

ral, and pearle.
17 Juda and the land of Ilrael ottupted
With thee, e brought vnto thy markets

f. Hornes of

Ch Thelt . mero ople, and triatle.

be. 1s Damateus allo vsed marchaundile with en. hee in the wine of pelbon, and wypte
Wooll:betause thyne occupying was fo great, and thy wares lo many.

19 Dan, Jauan, Menzal Hane bought vnto tisp markets wrougth tron Caflia, and Calamus were among thy marthaundise.

20 They of Dedan were thy marchauntes in pretious clothes for chariots.

21 Arabia and all the princes of Cedar haue occupied with thee , in Weathers, rammes, and goates: in these were they thy marchanntes.

22 The marthauntes of Seba and Nema haue occupied also with ther, in al chicfe spices, in all pretious stones and golde,
Which they brought vnto thy markets.

23 Haran, Chenne, and Eden, the marchayntes of Seba, Aslpria, and Chelmad were doers with thee:

24. These were thy marchauntes in all fortes cof thinges,) in rapment ot blewe silke, and of broidred worke, and in cof: fers for the riche apparell, whiche were trussed with toardes, and Cedar boorde amongthpy marchaundife.

25 Tht ships of Tharsis were the chiefe of thyne occupping: thus thou watt rez plenished and in great worship, euen in the mids ol the sea.

The. xxviii. Chapter.

Che word of God againk the rea 1 Tprus of his pride, 12 Esechfel the 1 fs 225 g 20 The word of the Lord against Sidon. 25 The Lor miseth that he will gather together the chuͤdren oF Aral. 8 .

to bewaple the bing of Cyrus.

He Worde of the Low came vnto me, saping:
Thou sonne of man,

e tel the prince of Tpre thus sapth the Lore

AL NSS ae Betause thou n“ hast a proude heart, and Hat said, J ama God, J sit in the seate ot God, in the mids of the lea:

(AK cke as
God is falc; in heauen, duen fo Fam aft that none can tome 10 uri me.

Wheat of. Minnith a Wannag, hony,

34 When thon thalt be broken by the

26 Thy rowers haue broughrt great waters, theweast wind We 4 ken thee in the mids of the fra, Ke

27 Thy riches, and thy kayzes, thy mar, a chaundile,hy mariners k shipmasterch calkars and the occupiers of thy maͤrchaundise, and al thy men of warre that are in thee, and all thy multitude that is in the mids ofthee, chall fal in the mids of the sea, inthe day of thy kal.

28 Theo suburbes thal chake at the loude x trie of thy sylpmen. Be dy

29 All that handle the ove, mariners and ee all chipmaisters of the fea, hall cone

dewne from their ships, and stand vpon

the lande.

And they shall tanse their vote to be

heard against thee, and Mall erye bitter:

w, and shall cast butt vpon their heades,

and wallowe in the asches.

3 They chalc' make them selues auld Foz noice, thee, and girde them with sackcioth, aan
Fthey Chal weepe foz thee, with sozowe- an a full heart, and bitter mourning.

32 And they Chall take vpa lamentation for thee in their mourning, and lament ouer thee, what citie is like Tyrus so destroped in the mids of the sea:

33 When thy wares went foorthof the

feas, thon filledst many people: the

kinges of the earth batt thou mabe

tiche , thorowe the multitude of thy

riches and marchaundise.

{eas in the deapthes of the waters, thy marchaundise t all thy multitude that was in the mids of thee call fall.

35 All the inhabitauntes ok the tes shalbe astonted at thee, and all their kinges shalbe sore afrapde, and troubled in their tountenaunte.

36 The marchauntes of the nations hall hisle at thee: thou shalt be a terrour, and a4 halte wneuer be any moze, aes

wes ple ed to bebt. grroped batleuennit perce
Cid. 1].

Tech

wher as thou art but a man, and he 22 0
God, though thou fet thyne heart as de

the heart ok God. fer en
3 Weholde, thou thintzest thpselke We” de beo e that there is no secrete e hyd fromthee. „ tease
4 Wu thy wüdome and thyme bnd. Oe ding thou halt gotten thee great gold. 4. nes, e gathered treasure 9 mitt)"

with thy great wysedome and occupy-

belaule of thy great riches thy heart 18

Wehe de God, rherfoze thus layth the Lord ;

gonimich as thou hast fet thyne heart

as the heart of God:

3 Schold, J will bing straungers bpon

a ther, euen the terrible nations, these shal

praive out their swordes vpon the beau-

glorte. . ; ‘

5 ey shall cast hee downe to the pit, so

N 5 shalt dye the death ol them

that be Mayne in the mins of the fea.

9 wilt thou lay then befoze them that flap thee, Fama God: where as thou art mie wh God, in the handes

them that slap ther.

Dt (halt thou the death of theo vncir-

tunicized inthe andes ok the straun-

gers: fox J haue spoken it, sayth the

Lode God.

n Mozeouer, the worde of the Lord tame bnto me, saping:

n Thau sonne of man, take vp a lamentation vpon the king of Tyre, € tel him, thus layth the Lord God: Thou scalest

vp the summe, full of wyldome, ¢ perenn kite beautie. ‘

= 3 Thou hast ben in the pleasaunt garden

8 gh

ische 10
Ye

heath teh:

manshi

oo, 14 Thouartanbannoynted Cherub, that etety, and Jhauecoset thee cin this
Dignitie, ‘thou Watt vpon the holy mount of God, thou hack walked in the mids
Ofthefones of fire .
IFtom the time of thy creation thou halte ben perkite in the ayes, till Wichednelle was kounde in thee. oo che multitude of thy marchaundile they haue filled the nuds of thee with
„ elie, K thou halte finnea:¥ wülcalt a AS pophane out of the® mount of
00,€ J Will destroy thee O couering

trl.

. tip eh

Thou chalt haue no part among my people.

of Ezechiel.

bing halt thou encrealed thy power, and

tie of thy wyldome, and shall defile thy

chat be in thee, was prepared in the day

Cherub; from the mids of the stones ok

fire.
17- Thy heart was proude in thy beautie, and thorowethy brightnelle thou batt
‘ destropedthy widome: J Wil calt thee done to the grounde, J Will lay thee
9 kinges, that theß may beholde hee.

18 Thou bak deliled thy © fanctification Kent,

with the great wickednesse of thyne Dn: ene

righteous occupying: J wal bung a fire from the middest of thee to consume

thee, and wül make thee to alches vpon

the earth, in the light ok all them that

loke vponthee. —

19 Al they that haue ben acquainted with thee among the heathen shalbe abached
àt thee:thou hast bena terrour, and neuer shalt thou be any moree.

20 And the word ofthe Lorde tame Into me, saping: ae
21 Thou sonne of man, let thy face against D

Sidon, and prophetie vponstt.

22 And lpeake, thus fapth the Lord God:
Beholde O Sidon, J will bponthee, aud J wube glorified in thee: that it

map be knowen howe that J am the
Lord when F chal haue executediudgementes in her. e shalbe sanctified in her.

23 Jo J will sende pettitence and bloodsheding into her ftreetes, and the llapne
{hail fall in the mids of her, by the lwo comnung vpon her on euery fide: e they shall knowe that Jam the Lode...

24. They shalbe no more a pricking thorne

vnto the house of Israel, nor a greeuous thorne of al that ave round about them and despiled them: and they chalknowe that J am the Torde God.

25 Thus sapth the Lorde God: when J gather the houshold of Ilrael together againe from the nations among whom they be stattered, then halt I be sanctified in themmthe sight or the gentiles, and they Hatt dwell in the lande that Z gaue to my seruaunt Jacob.

26 They hal dwell with confidence ther: in, buyld houses and plant vineyardes: pea with conkidence shall they dwell therin, when J haue executed iudgementes vpon all thole that despise thein rounde about: and then shal they know that J am the Lorde their God.

a (ij . The

The prophecie :
The. xxix. Chapter. —
He prophecicth against Pharao, and of the delolation of Egypt. with the lparkling abrode

_ 3 The Lorde promiteth that he will restoze Egppt againe after fourtie
Fees * Sila the vei of king Habuchodonozor kor che labour which he tote a.

the © tenth vere, folate among other waste countre
Nene 8 dponthe tibet bap of and her cities destroped fourtie peres a’ dhe eagne ot. the tenth monet), the mongotherdeltropedeitics:and J will
. 8 Worde of the Bode statter the Egyptians among the atic rp none came vnto me, saping: ons and strawe them thorow the coun:
2 Thou sonne of man, treys. dard ar —set thy face againt 13 Agalne, thus sapth the Lorde God: tines: ut Pharao the king of Egypt, prophetie as whenthe kourtie peres are expired, J lesa, ar galnst him, and againfk the whole lande mae eb ee ad a rhe counters of fous gaine out ofthe nations among whom the wre z Oprah tell him, thus lapth the Lord they were scattered.
See God: Beholde O Pharao thouking ok 14 And J will beingthe captinttic ol E- ¢ crac E€gppt, J will pon thee thou grrat gypt againe, and caufe them to returne fete draͤgon that lyeth in the mids of his tutol the lande of Pathros, the lande ol inthe rem: ktuers, thou that sapst, The riuer is thet habttation, and they shalbe there a
Kownace Nine, J haue made it fo my selfe. small kingdome. OBeanng

caro. 4 J wü put“ hookesinthychawes,and 15 Beart shalbe the fmallett amongother tenn

ach bee? Hang the kiche in thy riuers vpon thy kingdontes, neither Mhalliccrattie selfe tone
Sichen — fuales: akter hat J will deawethee out anp moze aboue thenations:for FJ wilfo —

of thy rivers, ea ãnd all the fife of thy
Alus. riuers shall hang vpon thy (rales duden 5 J will leaue the in the wudernesse, cbothj¢hee and all the fishe of thy riners: thon shalt fall vpon the open fielde, thou shalt not be brought together, nor ga-

which xoag
Wont tohaunt the riet

minishe them, that they Mall no moze Kanns“

rule the nations. ach
16 And they shalbe no moze vnto the Youle za

of Ilracl a trust whiche baingeth their move iniquitie to remembraunce, when they err, shall loke after them:e they thal knoe

cault

pluche thee ¢ cople

that trust in

thec,oucof the

de bac. thered: Jhaue geuenthee for meate to that J am the Lode God. the bealles of the fielde, & to the foules 17. Inthe v twentie and seuenth pere, the cons of the ayze, 8 first day of the flrst moneth, came the mass
6 That all they which Dwell in Egypt word or the Lorde buto me, saving: may know that Janithe Lord, because 18 Thou sonne ok man, Habuchodonczo:
4 Reg se they haue ben a “ftaffe ok rede tothe che bing ol Babylon caused his arme o basa. house ok Ilrael. serue a great leruice against Tyrus:eue-

W 7 When tlgey toke hold ofthee with their

ry head was made balde, e euerp Moule

hand, thou brakest erent all their choul-

der: when they leaned vpon thee, thou

braest and madest all their lopnes to stande c ppight.
8 Therefore thus layth the Lorde God:

Wehold, J wil being a lword bpon thee,
Roots voor d destrop ont okthee both manand beast.

ae 9 Pea the lande ol Egypt chalbe desolate

a and waste, and they Hall knowe that J
. am the Lorde, because he sapde, The ve uer is myne, I my lelke haue made it.

Beholde therefore J will vpon thee and vpon thy riuers, J wul make the land of Egypt btterly Waste and desolate, from the towze of Seueneh vnto the borders of Ethiopia.

Mo foote of man shall passe byit, noz foote ot beast shall passe by it, neither
Mati it be inhabited fourtie peres.

12 J Wil make the land of Egypt to be de-

der bare, pet had neither he nor pts arne any Wages kor Tyrus for he leruite which he (erned agsinst it. 5
19 Therelore thus lapth the Lorde O° b
Behold, J will gene the lande of Egypt vnto Nabuchodonozo the kingol . bylon, that he may take away her nin b titude, and spople her spoyles E take 1 5 pray to pay his boat their wages with all. pt a The tre
20 For the! worke whiche he mene ok e bout it, Jhaue geuen hin the lan 1 sts
Env berate they Wrongbt for me, apth the Lorde God.
21 Ju that day J wul cause the d of 5 the houle of Pirael to bnd fort) mouth
Will gene thee the opening of ty oD : in the mids of them: e they Mall that Jam the Lorde. The

Oyrohen thet tettthcir hurt, they woulde fap no more

e) whiche ome call the tand of the: 11

of Ezechiel.

J he xxx. Chapter. ö

Che destruction of & gypt. and of his cities is bewayled.

Ent. k: Ax b

Feu,
Sm;

I,

de word of the Lode

a) W Thousonne of man

Aes 5 e prophecle, and speake,

1 550 Ay God, howle, wo wort)
: this dap:

AN | caine vnto me, saping: thus sapth the Lorde
Forthe day is neare, the day of the

Zone is at hande, the darke day, the.

tinte of ub nations Malbe, the mano tev shalbe in Ethiopia when the layne shall fall in Egypt: and they shall tae away her multitude, and her foundations chalbe broken downe.
5 Bea Ethtopta, L phia,e Lydia , all their common people, and Chub and all that be tonkederate vnto them, Mal fall with them thorowe the sworde. 1
Thus sayth the Lorde: The maynteiners ofthe lande of Egypt Chall fall, the piydeof her poze shall tome downe: euen from the towre of Seueneh Hal

they fall downe in it with the lwezde,

sayth the Lorde God.

7 Aniong other desolate tountreys they shalbe made desolate, among other waste cities they shalbe wasted.

8 Andthep Mall knowe that Jam the
Tord when J haue let a fire in Egypt, when al her helpers shalbe destroped.

9 Inthat dap shall mellengers go foorth

rom me in ships to make the care lesse
Monaus afrapde, and feare shall tome bpon them, actording to the day of Egypt:for lo it commeth. 5 lo Thus sapth the Lord God, J wil caule
Che multitude of Egypt to cealle by the de of sRabuchodono302 king of Baz

u He, and his people with him, the terrihi nations shalbe brought to dessoy the and: they That dzawe out their [wordes

m

h Jui make their rivers drie and fel the de into the handes ok wicked people:
1 land and all that is therin J will
0 roy tborow the hand of straungers:

6 Lhe we Lowe haue fayde tt. | fears arth the Lorde God, J will ve-
* the Woles, and bang the mages of apr fo anenDd:there (hal no moze be

cc of Egypt, and a fearkulnelle wil

Jlendunto the Egypttans lande.

lworde shall tome vpon E-

v 70 Egypt, x kl the land kull of slaynt

14 As for Path20s, J Un make it delolate, ¢ and kindle a fire in Oa, and J Will c, chard: erecute iudgementes in® #2 5 <b) whitch 8

15 And A Will powze ny Wrathful indig- ae

nation bpon Sinthe strength of Egppt, u. c J will destroy the multitude of Po.

16 And J will kindle a fire in Egypt, Sin shalbe in great heaumesse, Yo shalbe rooted out, and Noph shall haue daply soro le. 1

17 The young men of" Auen, andol phi- g mei befett chall fall by the worde, and these Labs
(attics hall go into taptinitie. lum.

18 At Tehaphnehes the dap shalbe © Gene
Darke, when J breake there the barres save geen of Egypt, and when the pompe of her Ges? power shall teasse in her: a cloude Mall engt d couer her, and her daughters Mail go waren into captiuttic,

19 Thus will Herecute my iudgementes in Egypt, and they Mall knowe Howe that J am the Torde.

20 And in the Veleuenth pere, vpon the le- cute 9 uenth Day of the fir moneth, the worde ed ofthe Lorde tame vnto me, laying: eke

21 Thou sonne of man, J haue Whroken 1 the arme of Pharao king of Egypt: and vedere lo, it Mall not be bounde vp to be healed, See. to put a roller to bynde it, to make it Goo strong to hold the sworde.

22 Therfoze thus sapth the Lorde God:
Weholde, J will vpon Pharao king of
Egypt, and breake his arine that Was strong, but is broken: and J will taulc the woe to kal out ofhis hande.

23 As for the Egyptians, J wiil lcatter them among the nations, and strawe them in the landes about.

24. Againe, I will strengthen the arme of the king of Babylon, and geue hym my won in his hande: but J will beeake
Pharaos armes, and he (yall grone the grodinges of a deadly Wounded man before hom: N

25 Bea J will strengthen the king of Wabplons arme, and the armes of Pharao hall fall downe: and they (hall knowe that Jam the Loe, when y hall“ he, geue n sword into the hand of the king Pon of Babylon, that he may stretch it ont dan ier. vpon the lande of Egypt. Dean a

26 And J will scatter the Egyptian a- Pg ge mong the nations, strowe them inthe be che landes about: and they (bal KnolWwe that mut cealle.

Jam the Torde.

U a) N

1 Dreoner, inthe © ele-

I ae 4 eth | Seg 22, i uenth pere, the firt
Ard. „% dap ofp third moneth,

capiiuitic.

the worde of the Lord tame vnto me, saping,
Thou sonne of man,
0 speane vnto Pharao king of Egypt, and to all his people: whom art thouipke in thy greatnesle-
5 3 Behold, Allur is à Cedar in Libanon,
Hie, With katre braunches, and with thptke whd the Ba-

dploniang ouercame.

d) Mtaning that he tas

t his top was among the thicke bowes.

4 The waters made him great, and the deepe fet him vp on hye, With her rivers running rounde about his plantes, and

Ger gens sent out her litle riuers vnto all the dune er trees ok the flelde. *
. Therelore was he higher then all the

trees ol the fielde, and his bowes were multiplied „ his braunches were long, because of the multitude of the waters, which the deepe sent out.

6 Al foules of the aire made their nestes

in his braunches, buder his bowes did all the beastes of the fielde being foorth their poung, and under his chadowe

dwelt all mightie nations.
Weautikul was he in his greatnesse, and in the length of his braunches: for his

roote stoode beside great waters.

aunts 8 No Cedar tree might hyde hym in the dienen garden Of God, there was no fpare trees

his Wag.

Were not like the bowes of him: all the trees in the garden of God, might not be compared vnto hun in his veautle.

9 10 Him faire with the multitude of his braunches: infomuch that ati the trees in the pleafaunt garden ol God had ente at hym. 15

10 Therekore thus sapth the Lorde God:

forsomuch as he hath lift vp him felfe so

bye, and hath thot vp his top among the thycke bowes, and his heart is lift vp in his hepght:

1 haue therkore delivered hym into the handes of thecomightiest among the heathen:he Hall handle hym, (to in his

(c) Thet to.
Mubuchodo-
M0592 who afz terwarde was the monarche and anlp rules, olthe wozld.

? def

| * The prophecie — a,
The. xxxi. Chapter. ü

z comparilon of the procperitie of Pharao with the prolperitie or the Tlprianz. x He prophecitet a lite destruction to them both. —

chadowing bowes, oka hygh Mature, -

like his braunches, the chestnut trees

„ They alfd went downe to hell With sau

wickednesle haue I tast hym away.

Me

n And straungers haue destroyedhym. euen the terriwle nations, and haue let hymwpon the mountapnes and bpon al valleys haue his bowes fallen, and bis bowes are broken by all the riners of Beg the land: andallthe people of the earth siuee! are Departed krom his shadowe , haue oes forsaken hyᷣ rr. V5
3 Upon his ruine chall all the foules e the apre vemiapne , and all the beallesof the lielde shalbe vpon his braunches.
14 So that none of all the trees by the waters shalbe exalted in their heyght, L nor shoot vp their toppes among the thycke bowes, neither chall their trees stande in their heyght, as many ol them as drinke water: for they are all deliuered Dito death in the neather partes ol the earth, in the mids ofthe childrenok men among them that go downe to the nee . R Dr sf a

pit, .

15 Thus fapth the Lord God: In the day when he went do wne to the graue, 1 taused a lamentation to be made, JO «esau touered the deepe for hym, J restrapned aun yen the fluddes thereok, and the great wa- tant’ ters were staped, Jtaused Libauus to dune n mourne for him, and all the trees or the agen, fielde fainted. ey

16 J made the heathen shake at the sound ox ono ol his fall, when J cal hym downe to a hell with them that defend into the pit: all the extellent trees of Eden, r the belt of Libanus, all that“ dzinke waters, cen shalbe ocomkorted in the neather partes wuss. ofthe earth. thst him buto them that be Mapuc With the e,
Dan, hach were his armel and welt warne vnder his chadowe in the middest of the a nattons.. wa en,

18 To whon™art thon thus like in glo- rancrne rie and in greatnesse among tbetrecg hte
Eden: pet thou shalt be caft Downe i bear

the trees ok Eden vnto the ae rin

partes oftheearth:inthe nuidocltor’ th ose

‘Opnetceameifen Chait thou sleepe rae Ve

them that are layne with the Mor

This is Pharao and all his multitude,

sapth the Lode God. The

R

¢ Ii. Chapter.

Che prophete is commaunded to bewaile Pharao the Ring ok Egppt.

7 s2 the Wtwelkth pere,

41 the kirst dap ofp twelkth ae. 5) moneth, the Worde of
Se the Lorde tame vnto ac me saping: a

7 Thon fonne of man, take bpa lamentation

an u Pharao the king of Egypt, and ant poets thou art © tyke a lion ot me the heathen, and as a Whale fithe in the eit fea: thou dzawest out thy rivers, thou e — © troublest or 1185 pies thy feetc,
Som and stampest in their riuers. N ez Thus laith the Lorde God, J wpyll spreade my nette ouer thee with a great multitude ofpeopte,thele shal make thee tome vp into my net. *
4 FJ wyll leaue thee vpon the lande, and cãst thee vpon the open flelde, and
J wyll cause all the foules of the ayre to

allt dul! birkt.
Cupa g. n

remaine vpon thee, c fill all the beastes

ofthe fielde with thee.

Thy fleth wyll J lay vpon the his, ade vallepes with thy highah elle. ens J wpll © water thyne duerflowing

dan lande with thy blood euen to the mounme” kapues, and the riuers shalbe ful of thee. ae’ 7 When thou art © put dut, J wyll coa lier the heauen, and make his starres

dim: J wyll spreade a cloude ouer the r and the moone shall not geue her

ight,

d Ill the lightes okheauen Wypll I make
Datke foz thee: and bring © darkenesle bpon thy lande, faith the Lorde God.

vane? J Wyll stirre vp to anger the heartes

vt, dl manp people, when J bring thy dehm steuctton among the heathen, and vpon the countries which thou knowest not.

10 Pea J wyll make many people ama-

ern 5 bencsofthe dag el

pat mit.

Ein U b.
Ieledand iy,
Weng.
Spt dune! ere tg deu the albert

led at thee, and their kinges shalbe asto-

Nitheo with feare korthee, when J (hall

t ny {horde to glitter againtt their

ae andthey Mhalbe afrarde at euery

chunt euery man for his owne lpfe, in
1 aok thy kau.

hing of duns auth the Lorne God, The

ab ther: abrlons lworde chal come vp-

* with the bwozdes of the mantic des of the mightie wyll
Dinyte doe thy multitude: they alt

12 He pro phecieth that destruction all come bisto Egypt through che king ak wabs lan .

{halve terrible nattons, c they (aloe: stroy the pompe of Egypt. 125 allthe cn pa menden ee consumed. cer pares
3 Jwyll destrop allo al the beastes ther: Wer. wo. ol fromthe great waters sides, neither hall the forte ol man trouble them any r the hosues ol beastes trouble them.
14 Then wyll J make their waters
© Deepe and caufe their riners to runne
Ipke ( oyle, salth the Lorde God, en
When Y makethe lande of Egypt de- orwerve

waters out of

folate, and when the countrep with all tye Tuer t9,

that is therem chalbe lapde waste, and sours

when ZF smpte ad them which dwell in ee

lt, then chall theyknowe that Jam the benen

Lowe, — 6
16 This is the mourning when they Mat wer

lament her, the daughters of the nate ae

ons shall lament her, they chall make .

the lamentation over Egypt, and ouer

ait ne people thereof, saiththe Lorde

17 Inthe twelfth vere, the fifteenth day of the moneth, came the worde ok the
Torde vuto me, saping: N

18 Thou sonne of man, lament for the multitude of Egypt, and © cat then
Dolbne,cucn them and the daughters of ee. the kamous nations vnto the neather tan partes of the earth, with them that go lte b. downe into the pit. arte

19 Whom doest thou passe in w beautiez go downe and fleepe with the vncir- 1 ie cumcetzed. aan a

20 Among thole that be Maine with the n worde shall they tye : to the sworde is Sere" ” fhe alredte delpuered, drawe her downe and all her multitude. ewe

21 The c mightie worthies thail speake de to her out of the hell, and to her helpers: he they are gone downe and lye vncireum- werte an de tiʒed with then that be slaine with the Kue eis fWo2de: valle at him,

22 Assur is there also with all his compa: + ny, and their graues rounde about him, which were Naine and fell all with the sworde.

23 Whose graues are made in the fide of the pit, and his multitude are rounde a-

bout his graue, to wit all the slaine and fallen by the sworde, which e

(t) The inhabitantce of
Egppt naive lo cleane destroped, that

rophecie, chat they shalbe cat downe.

(m) Bate not

() Chat is,

Ihe prophecie

(tobe iu the lande of the liuing. . vpon their boucs,becaute the terrg:
Cp Nenn. 24 There ts Elam also, with all his their nightie (28) in the lande oF che epee people rounde about his graue: which lpuing.

(q)' They which deing a
Ipue c re a terrour to all the woz!de, now being de d. are befs pifed botl) of the lpaing and the dead.

(r) That 10 * fophus wii beth,

Bee ich dytd not dy erncliDeath, but bp the courte ul nature, and are honozably
Purted wit) their toate ars mont ,and ligne of honour.

(ab Oe the:

nou g and

a cue ouer chem,

and to warn them euer of the daungeig solpich ace at

bande,

0 ou coutmunp to

U

all being Maine ¢ fallen with the lwonde, are gone downe vncirtumeized under the earth, which neuerthelesle some-

time brought ktare into the landeof the

( lpiung: they beare their owne shame, with the other that be gone downe to the graue. a a
25 They haue made his bed in che nudst of the flame, with al his multitude, their graues are rounde about him: all thefe

vncircumttzed, slaine by the [worde, al-

though they tauled their feare lu the lande of the lyuing, pet haue they borne their shame with theyn that go downe to the pit, they are laybe in the midst of them that are staine.

u. 26 There (8 Mesech allo and Tubal,

and their people, æ thrir graues roundt about hin: cele al vncircumcized were slaine with the sworde, becaule aforetune they made the lande of the lyuing akraide.

27 They shall not tpe with the valiaunt (which are) fallen ol the vncircumtized, which are gone downe to the graue wich their Weapons of warre, aud haue lapde their wordes vnder their heades: but their iniquitie chalbe

23 Bea, among the bntircumcized gare thou be destroped, aud lleepe With them that perished through the iworde.

29 There ts Edom with her kinges and princes allo, which with their strength are lapde by thein that were laine With the fivode : pea among the vncircumtcised (hal they fleepe, k With them which pido Sada e

30 LHozeouertyere be al the princes o OTe - north with al the Sldonsans, Wü a ave gone downe With the fame: with their feare and strength they are tome to confuliou, and lye there bnew: cumeized among those that be Maine with the sworde, and beare their owue fhaine with them that be gone downe to the pit. N ; hn

31 Pharao shall see them, and be ™ cone Heat fiorted ouer all his multitude: Pharao u and al his armie walbe] lame With the w sworde, saith the Lorde God. pe
„32 Foz J haue geuen my feare „ in the mere lande of the lyuing: but Pharao and al eo his people halbe lapde among the vn- oe. tirtumcized, and among them that be ee with the sworde, saith the Lorde od. |

The. xxxiii. Chapter.

He setteth out the office of the gouernours and minillers, 14 he strenzthneth them that difpaire. and boldneth them with the promise ok mercie. zo Che worde of the epi the remnaunt of the people, against the mockers of the wordes of the

Gatue, the wozde of the Horde canie vnto sy jie, faping:
We Thou fonne of man, speake to the children of thy people, and tell them: when sende a worde bpon a lande the people of the lande tale a man of their coastes, and fet him to be their!» Watchman:

olle dne 3 Ik when he seeth the lworde come vpdu the lande, he chall blow the trumpet

and warne the people:

4 Then he that heareth the noyse of the trumpet and Wyll not be warned, and the worde tome and take him awap,

his blood shalbe vpon his owue head.

5 For he heard the sounde ofthe trum: pet, and would not be warned, therekoze

mong them: the 5 seen way in his owne sume, but his 19 80 Aale bu wyl J require atthe watchmans hand. Hane

made thee a Watchman buto the Houle Fern

Warne them kromme. wie"
3 HfPlay onto the wicked, thou wen kẽd, thou shalt surely dye: thou bis kest not to admonith the wicked us Kern
Way: that wicked man challppe nut es owne sume, but his blood wyl Area

— k Ezecchiel.

ande. atthy eichtlecle, thou warne the wic-

is way to tourne fromit, and he
— oe not be turned from his way: then Chale dye in his iniquitie, but thou hast delluered thy sonle. 15
1o Therkoze D thou sonne of man, speake vnto the boule ol Plracl, pea fay thus: en Il dur offences and sumes lye ppon vs, meas ind we be tonsumed in them, © Howe oo’ ould we then liue-

ge

, Lade God, I haue no pleasure in the

can 4 5

lame. death or the Wicked, but much rather that the Wicked tourne from his wap, aud lyue: Turne vou, turne vou from pour wicked wayes for why wil ye dye
O pe ofthe house of Ilcael:

12 Therekore thou sonne of man, tell the thuldren ol thy people, the righteoulnes ol the righteous shall not saue hum in the day of his iniquitie: againe, the
Wicke dnes of the wicked shall not ouerthrow him for it in the day that he re-

b kurneth from his wickednes: neither

7 shall the righteous lyue for O it in the

vay that he sinneth.

3 If J lap vnto the righteous, he chall lürelp lpue, and so he trust to his owne righteousnes, and do sinne: then (hall his righteousnes be no more thought bpon, but in his wickednes that he hath done, init he shall dye.

14, Agalne, if I lap onto the wicked, thou shalt surely dye: and so he turne front

Fre xviil.c

fete. his linnes, and & do the thing that is

e

a labwfull and right, feo 5 Insomuch that the fame wicked man

an eueth the pledge againe, restoreth that cn he had take away by robberp, Walketh i INEDe tonmiaundementes of lyfe, and

Sia lyue and not ape, 5
16 None of the sinnes that he bath tom-
Rund chalbe mentioned vnto him: foe u damuchas he doth now the thing that

i 18 auen and right He Mall lpue, its, l), 0 ND pet the chilozen of thy people fay, ape of the Lorde is notequall: re Ribe owne wap is rather vnequall.
8 righteous turneth from his rig eoulnes, and Doth the thing that ts

Wicked, he chall dye therein.

But ik the wicked turne froin his wic-

ednes doing the tl i hing that is lawfull and right, he shall lpue therefore.

ps
Ae et pe fap.the Way of the Lorde is not

cmt n Tell them, as truelp as Jliue saith the

e doth none iniquitie then call he surely

clviiy. equall: O pe house of Alrael, J wpll indge euery one of pou after his Wapes.

21 In the twelfth pere, the fift day of „beam the tenth moneth of dur tapttuitie, net = one which was estaped out of Hierula- aneh. lem. came vnto mne and faid, The citie is suutten. ö

22 Nowe the w hande ofthe Lorde had oz nas ben vpon methe euening afore this eee man which was estaped came vnto me, hela and had opened mp mouth vntin the cwicscte

niorning that he tanie to me: yea, my Wehen

nisters of god can not spcake

mouth was opened, fo that J was no moze dunibe. benen
23 Then tame the worde of he Lorde vn- wagen to me, and saide: eie,
24. Thou sonne of man, these that dwel in the wasted lande of Ilrael talke and fay: Abraham was but one man, and cba he had the lande in possession: nowe are Hex ess
We manp, and the lande is geuen vs to anden posselle allo. Gate
25. And therefore tel them, thus latth the Naur“
Torde God, In the blood haue pe ca- bude Sete ten, vour eyes haue pe lift vp to idols, then ien and haue shed blood: (hal! pe then haue Meret the lande in possession-
26 Be “ leanc bpon your swordes, ye
Worke abbominations, euerpone deft (oa leth his neighbours wyfe: and chall pe lade

not be vod de to him.
A. cut. 17. c. stul to sytd then possesse the lande N
27 Sap thou thus bnto them, thus saith the lorde God: As truely as I liue, they that are in the delolate places (hat fall by the lworde, and him that is vpon the fielde wyll J geue vnto the beastes to be deuoured: andthey that be in the strong holdes and dennes shall dye of the pestilente. .
28. Foz J wyll make the lande fo defolate and Waste, that the * pompe of her g d. strength shall ceasse: the mountapnes of
1 shalbe so waste, that no man hall trauaile thereby.
29 Then {hall they knowe that J ant the Lorde, when J make the land delolate and waste, betause of all their abhominatious that they haue wrought.
30 And thou sonne of man, the children of thy people that talke of thee by the waters and in the doores oftheir houses, and speake one to another euery one to his brother, saping, Come J prape pon, let vs heare what worde is gone foorth from the Lorde:
31 Thep come onto thee as the people bseth to tome, and my people syt “ie

(m) Einspe=

clareth that we sought to deare gods worde with

we fly oneip deltgl thercit to hearcit preacheb, but also in al pointes obcp it: cls we abule the
Worde ta out owne cõdemnat ion, and make ofthe mintsttrs as

ol pastime and 1

plcasure,

a) Bp the heardeg,

he meaneth the king, the magistrates, prlesles, and prorhetes.
(b) ye seckt to c nriche pour (clues by their coinmoditteg, and fo sporle thelt

ches and substau nice.
(c) We describeth the oftce and duetie of n good paftoz, wd onght to
Rowe and succour hig hock, nud nee to be cructtoinardg th ein.

b) Fo; lacht
Gf good gouernment and
Dotttine they verispye.

B

such ze alt and

affection, that

ould not yt

thee, and heare thy wordes, but they do not therafter: for in their mouthes they make a cwiest ofthem, and their heart goech after their touetousnes.
And lo, thou art vnto them as a o te:

fting fong of one that hath a pleasaunt

The. xxxiiij. Chapter.

vopce, and tan sung well: fort thp worbes, teien Devbeare
33 When this commeth to patie N
J meh er hall Hep anowe targa
Hath ben a prophete among then.

2 Tgainst chepheardes that delpile the klocke ok Chulte, and feeke their owne gaine.
Ihe Lorde faith that he wyll bifite his dispearled klocke, and gather them tones

ther. 18 He reproucch the malice of certaine ofthe klocke. true shephearde Christe, and with him peace.

Ndthe Worde of the

faping:

All p2ophecte against the

2 shepheardes of Frac,

prophecie and speake

vnto them: thus saith the Lorde God

vnto the shepheardes, wo be vnto the

Ochepheardes of Jlrael that feede

them lelues: should not the chepheards feede the flockes-

3 Pecate bpthe (fat, ye clothe you with

the wooll the best fed do pe Hay: but the N

flocke do pe not feede.

4 Lie Weake haue ve not strengthened, the sickt haue pe not healed, the brokeu haue pe not bounde together, the dpuen away haue pe not broughtagate, the lost haue ye not sought: but
5 forte and crueltie haue pe ruled

They are scattered without à shephearde, yea all the beastes ofthe fielde deuourthem, and they go astray.

6 My sheepe go wandring vpon al mountaines, aud vpon euery hie hill, pea my floclic is srattered through all the kate of the earth, and there is no man that see-
. n

7 hereforc O pe shephear the worde of the Sais k ee

8 As trucly as Flpue faith the Lode
God, forsomuch as my Teepe are robbed, a deudured okau the Wylde beastes of the fielde, hauing no chepheard, and seeing that my chepheardes sene not my
{heepe, but the shepheardes feede them lelues, and feede not iny sheepe:

9 Therekfore heare the worde of the
Lowe O pe shepheardes, a

lo Thus faith the Lode God: be-

holde, J wyll vpon the shepheardes,

and require mp sheepe from their

Thou sonne ofman,

23 He promiseth the

handes, and make them ceasse from fee:

ding of the Mhecpe, pea the shepheardes

Hail feede them selues no more: for

Iyll © deliner mp sheepe out or thay ,

mouthes, fo that they Matt not deudur dare,

them after thts. eto

n a 115 the orbe God: deo,

vll loke tomy ft felfe, and leeke them out. W

12 Dyke asa shephearde when e hath ben among the flocke, seeketh after the theepe that are scattered abroade:euen fo wyll J secke after my sheepe, and deluer them out of all places where they haue ben stattered, inthe © tloudie and wary daͤrke dap. ’ : . aC. „der of tber

3 J wyll being them out from the people, and gather them together ont of en the landes, J wyl being them into their ss. owne lande, and feede them vpon the mountaines of Jsrael, by the ruers and in all the places of the tountrer.

14 J wyll feede them in right good pa: ¢ tures, and vpon the hie mountaines of
Israel Kati their foldes be: there shall they lye in a good folde, and in a fat paz sture shall they feede, euen vpon the mountaines of Israel.

15 J wyll feede my cheepe and being theitt to their rest, faith the Lorde God.

16 Such as be lost, wyll J seeke: such as are driuen away, wyll I being againe: g “ such as be broken, wyl J binde vp: such ae as be weake, wyll J minke strong: such gore as be fat and trong, those wyll J roote eesti dut, and feede them with wundgement.

17. And as for pon O my theepe,fatth the 45.5%
Lowe God, J Wyll iudge betweene a,

cattatle ᷑ cattañe, betweene the rammes ben ale

and the goates. war

afdictto misent: end this promise

b ppmintettid
18 Seemeth ita mal thing to vou to haue ae N eaten bp the good “pafiure, and to 11 pil treade downe the refiouc of wala sture with pour feete allo; to . 15

0 tbs ful tb? druf i.

O Ezechiel

c

peepe waters, and to trouble the vet al- and fleepe in the woods.

so with vour feetez -

us my sheepe muttbe faine to eate

that pe haue troden downe

wüb pour fete, and to drinke it that ye with pour feete haue defiled.

10 Lherefore thus faith the Lorde God pnto then: Weholde BH (euen} “FH wyll ludge betweene the kat tattaile and the

Lleane cattaile, ps

21 Fozlomuch as with fide and chonider

e haue shoued, and with pour hornes haue puched all the weake, till ve haue stattered them abroade. a

22 J wyll saue my sheepe, so that they shal no moze be spopled, yea J wil iudge betweene tattalle and tattaile.

2 J wyll set vp ouer thema chepheard, and he shall feede them, euen my ser-

2% aun a) Daud, he shall keede them, €

vom he shalbe their chepheard. .

mi 24. And J the Lorde wyll be their God,

and my leruaunt Dauid chalbe their

prnte: euen J the Torde haue spoken

it. an 15 Mozeduer J wyll make a couenaunt ble bk peace with them, & cause cul beastes do keasle ont of the lande: fo that they mint: mp Dell © safelp in the wildernesse,

. Oreouer, the worde of

J 1 che Torde came vnto

ö BS ‘ O

aes

mount * Seir, pro-

— phecteagatntit. .

And fap vnto it, thus faith the Lorde
Fon Beholde O thou mount Seir, J

Vil bpon thee, J wyll reache out der hande duer thee, yea waste and elolate wyll J make thee,

4 a Cities wyll J lape Waste, € thou hall lye bopde, that thou maptt knowe
Daichat Nam the Hovde, }
1 omuch as thou bearest an olde entof AND Hatt put the chüdren of Piracl tineottig eee afte fvozde, in the ee bap aren 9 tie, (when their) ini

retoze as truci sai t pas J lpuc, faith
Deore God, FH wyll prepare thee

26 And J Wyll set them Cas) a blessing euen rounde about my hill, and J wpll tause raineto tome downe in duẽ sealon, landithere shalbe vaine of blessing.
27 And the tree of the fielde shal peelde her frulte, and the earth shall geue her encreate: they shalbe lake incheir lande, and (hall knowe that J am the Lowe, when J haue brokẽ the vondes of their poke, and Delivered them out ofthe handes of those that serued them lelues of them.

28 They shall no moze be spoyled ok the

heathen, nor devoured with the beastes ol the lande: but salelp shall they del, and no nian shall fray them. de ae
29 And J wil raise vp for them a plane Aeberete et ok renoswme, and they shalbe no moze Fre
“ dungd with hunger in the lande, net: „0. ther beare the reproche ofthe heathen zander any moze. ftaruen,
30 Thus shall they vnderstand that J the Norde their God am with them, and that they, euen the boule of Jlrael, are mp people, faith the Lore God:
31 And ye my sheepe, the sheepe of my pasture, are mien: and J am pour God, saith the Lorde God.

J The .xxxv. Chapter.

Che delkructton that chall come on the mount Seir, that is, on the Foumears, becaule thep troubled the people of the Lorde.

bnto blood, pea blood shall folowe vpon thee, extept thou w hate blood, euen cen blood shall persecute thee. cr
7 Thus wyll A make the mount Seir desolate and waste, and eut out from it him that pasleth out, and him that re- 25 turneth: f ö
8 Dis mountaines wyll J fill with his flaine men, thy hils, valleys, and al thy riuers, the slaine with the lworde Mall fall in them. . wie
9 Iwpll make thee a perpetuall wilder- wc nes, fo that thy cities shal not returne: that pe map knowe that J amthe eben
Torde. Juda.
Io And betause thou hast saide, both hele nations, and both these lande must be nipne, and we wyll haue thein xo25 i pofteffton, * whereas the Lorde was there: f g
11 Therefore as truely as J lpuc {aie the Lorde God, JJ wyll euen do atco;- pil
Ding

ad

halt done cru-

The prophecie

Oro Ding to thy 00 Wath, and according to multiplied pour wordes againg nie,

ellp, so shalt thou be cruel-
$p handied.
(6) Shewing that when
God puris fyeth the enemics, the godip ought to con ider that he hath a cace oger them. x so praise his name: and al-

so that the wicked tage ug though there were no
God, till they fecle his

bande to thas destruct ton.

Exe. vl.a.

(a) That is, the Ydumen

(6) That to.

the hillp coua-

b o Juae OU

(c) yen
Mads a mattct
OF talac gu derision to all the World:.

(d) They eprovated wih them frlucs to haut it, and therfore cam with Mabuchodondzoz as ee m foz t purpose. bis

thyne enniyng which thou hak bledin
5 hatred against them: and J wyll make my selfe Vknowenamongst them

when Jhaue iudged thee.

12 Bea and thou halt knowe that FH the
Lorde haue heard all thy blasphemies,

whiche thou Hat spoken against the mountaines of Ilcael, sapnng, They are made waste x geuen vs to Devout.
3 Thus with pour mouthes ye haue made pour boastes again me, yea and

which J haue heard.

14 e — A Tothe ioy ok all the € wy niake
1 ne as thou wast 1

15 And lyke as thou wast glad ber the heritage of the houle of Ysrael was destroyed euen ko wpll I do vnto thee: thou shalt be destroped D mount Heir and all Idumea whollp, and they thai knowe that Jam the Looe,

The. xxxvj. Chapter.

2 He promiseth to deliuer Iltael from the Gentiles, 2: Che benelites done vnto the
Jeweg, are to be afcribed to the mercie or God, not vnto their deleruinges. 26 God reneweth our heartes, that we map walkie in his commaundementes.

AD 2 N

Hou sonne of man
Y | propbecte vnto the mountaines of Israel, and speake, heare the worde of the lord
O pemountaines f Ilrael,
— Thus faith the
Tord God: Wetause pourenemie hath laide vpon pou aha, the © hie places of the worlde are now become ours in polsession:
3 Prophegle therefore and speake, thus saith the Lorde God: For betcaule that they haue made pou delolate, and [Walowed pou bp on euer side, that pe nught be a polleslion vnto the relidue of the gentiles, and pe are taken vp in the
“Tippesand tongues ok men, and tothe ele
Therekoze heare the woweok the
Lorde God, O pe mountaines of Jlrael, thus faith the Lorde God tö the mountames and hils, to the riuers and baileys, to the waste and defolate places, and to the cities that are forsaken,
Which are spoyled and had in derifion on euery fide, among the residue of the heathen:
5 Therekore thus faith the Lowe God:
Surelp in the fire of ny gelousie haue
I spoken against the relidue of the gentiles, and against all Edom, which haue
Vappoynted my lande for their poslellion, Which also reioytedfromtheir whole hrart with a dispitefull stomake, to cast it out for a prap.

6 Prophecie therefore vpon the lande of

Israel, and speake vnto the mountames

and hils, to the rtuers and dales, thus

faith the Lorde God: Wehold, this haue

Ispoken in my geloulie and terrible Ce bum!

Wrath, because pe haue bome the © bate

shame of the beathen: Rocke bm

7 Therefore thus faith the Lode God, 19 8
J haue lyft vp my hande, surcly the Chr heathen that are about pou, hall beare their Mamie, ö :

8 Wut pou, O mountapnes of Ilrael ye hall c shoote out pour braunches, and or bring fodrth pour fruite to my people of dae,
Ilrael:for they are at hande totome. din

9 Beholde JJ come vnto pou, and vnto in pou wyll Jturne my face, that pe may damen be tilled and sowen.

his,eum he destropeth
„ hes tuemitg.

13 Thus faith the lorde God, Forsomuch

edas they fap vnto you, thou art an“ ca- ow ter vp ok men, and à waster of thy peo” scum

ae ore i)
14 Therefore thou thalt cate no 119 1 men, neither destrop thy people AME ae l 2 d: . more, saith the Lorde Go ij Hither

IS cham ue chat thou beare the reproche of epeople any moze, no: tause thy

ee to fall any moze, faith the Lorde

6 ordner, the word of the Lord tame me, saying: b

mo thou fonne of man, when the boule

of Israel dwelt bpon their owne

grounde, they defiled them selues with their owne wapes and imagtnations:- so that in mp fight, their wap was lpke the vncleannes of a remoued woman.

3 Pherfoze J powred my wrathtul dilpleafure vponthem, betause ofthe blood that they had shed in the lande, and be-

cher idols wherewith they had

tause oft deliled it: dy Iltattered them also among the heathen so that they were strawed about in the landes: attord ing to their wapes. € alter their owne inuentions, so did J
Sina. iudge them. iaxd 20 And when they entred vnto the hea then whyther they went, they polluted my holp name, when they saide of them,
Thele are the people of God, are gone en out of his lande. ö a nor 21 Thenspared Imp Holy “™ name,
‘. Whlch the houle of Ilrael had dishonoured among the gentiles where they

1 1 came,

22 Therkore tel the houle of Plract , thus vane laith the Lorde God: J do not this fo2 pour fakes O house of Ilrael, but ko: my holy names fake Which pe dishoa among the heathen where pe

Therefore J wyll halowe my great name againe, which among thegentiles
(8 polluted, for pe pour selues haue dilhonoured it among them: e the gentiles wall know that Jam the Torde latth che Lorde God, When I chalbe sauctilitied in pou befoze pour epes,

1 lo: pou, J wyll take pou from a-
Ong the heathen, and gather poutageher out of all tountreys, and W n

1 into pour owne lande.

Cho hun lt, wohnt 23
Bp fos the
Fetus pat,

bef, cr, 2 15 eben wyll J sprinckle cleane waz
5 ten OU, AND pe shalbe cleane: pea
8 Neude rour vncleannes and from all a 4 oat Wels halt J cleanst por.
410 e heart also wyll J geue you,

ne we fpicite wWyll J put into pon:

— DO Ezechie
— Kalcher rn en men to heare in as for that stony heart J Wyll take it co

the heathẽ any moze: a of your flethe, and geue poua slesyy b

t.

27 JJ wyll genemy sptrite among yon, and caule pou to walke in my tõmaundementes, and pe shall kepe my iudgementes and do them. n

28 And lo pe (hall Dwell in the lande that
J gaue to pour fathers: ¢ pe shalbe my people, and J wil be pour God.

29 J wyll deliner pou from all pour br: tleannes, I Wy! call for the come and

30 J wil multiplie the fruites of the trees and the entrease ol the fielde: lo that ye
{hal receaue no more reproche olhunger among the heathen.

31 Then shall pe remember pour owne wicked wapes, and pour imaginations which were not good: so that pe shalbe
Hirklum in pour owne epes foz pout sinnes and abhominations.

32 Wut J wyl not do this fo2 pour sakes, faith the Lode God, be pe sure ofit: therefore O pe house of Iscael, be ashamed and confounded of pour owne
Wapes.

33 Moreouer, thus laith the Lorde God, what tune as J hal cleanse vou from al pour iniquities, then wil J make the tt ties to be inhabited againe, and the plates that be Decaped shalbe repaired.

34 The desolate lande shalbe tilled againe, which afore time lay waste in the fight ol al them that went by.

35 And thep hal lap, this waste lande was like the garden of Eden: and thele waste and desolate and ruinous cities

The

clx,

Cp Under the adoundaunce

wyll encreale it, and lay no kamine vp- dee he

q) ye that tome to true tepentaunce, and thinke pour feiues vnworthp to be of the number of god g ertatutes, sor pone ingratitude againg him.

tie of the th,

ith ear that as

ny countrey is rich & aboun= dant: but ones

kcty it baten.

The prophecie —

The. X. at aa

e prophecieth the bringing againe of the people being in captiuitie. 15 a ew
Neben of the ten tribes with the two. Deh weth

‘ ath

! 5 li 5 7 Ps tt * i Sas] Me Hhande of the Lorde ded: and as was prophetiyng, there
5 a Me - was vpon me, and ca- en

Was aà noylse, and lo à great motion, fo

ried me out in the spi- that the bones came neare together, rite ot the Lorde, and bone to his bone.

fet me Downe in the 8 Now when J had loked, behold the midst of a plaine fielde pen hold they

had sinowes, t flesh grewe vpon them, that was full ok and aboue they were couered with fain: but there was no breath in them.

Ca) By this bifion he pro-

phetieth that bones 0

Sc 2 And heled me rounde about bythem, 9 Thenlalde he vnto me: Thou sonne daten- and beholde, there were very manp in ok man, prophecie thou towarde the
Bene of cep 95 pen kielde, and lo ther were] very Winde, prophetie c speake to the winde,

dug done N thus faith the Lode God: Come, O cen

e 3 Then laide he vnto me: Thou lonne of thou ae ha the fonre ©yindes, and erie trains man thinkelt thouthele bones may llue blowe bponthele flaine, that they may w dane Agalne- J aunlwered, O TLozde God, lpue. rile reumeinto thou knobwelt. , 10 SOF propheried as he had tommaun- we

ae. 4. And he laide vnto me, Prophetie thou ded me:then tanie the breath into them, in 0 anden dee pon tele bones, e (peake vnto them: and they reteaued lpke, and stoode vp =",
Our bones e bones, heare the worde ok the ppon their feete, a marucilous great ar- ah are dryed, 5 ;

mie. gaut e and our 105 hope 18 5 Thus faith the Lorde God bnto thele I Moreouerl e said vnto me: Thon sonne de 1 0 5 a

ebe. bones: Weholde, J Wyll tause beeathto okn thet bones are the whole Houle struc

enter into vou, that ye may lyue. of haet Behold, they lap, Dur bones Bens
6 J wyll geue vou sinowes, andmake are dryed bp, dur hope is gone, and we fleche groe vpon vou, and touer you are cleane cut of. 1
Ouer with lkinne, € lo geue pou breath, 12 Wherefore prophetie thou, and peak dale
5 way line, and knowethat Jam —pntothem, thus faith the Torde GOV! e
De. be }

8 ¢ Weholde, J wyll open pour graues
7 Do J propheciedas J was tömaun- inp people amb auf pou cote ou

ought ang man tu con? clude bete vb

of Ezechiel.

sepulchres, and bring pou into the uu Israel againe.
0 shal pe know that Jamthe Lord, when Jopen pour graues O my peo
1 ft bung pouont of pour sepulehres.

lb. na 14 | fet you agame in pour vad lune, J wil let pou ag 4 a a lande: and ye Mail knowe that J eyesore haue lapde it, and kulliled it in deede, sayth the Lorde. j The word ok the Lord tame vnto me,

16 Dhonlonne of man, take one sticke, and

ste bpon it, Unto Juda and to the avioyen of Beael biscompantos.Lben takeanother sticke and Wzite vpon it,
Unto Joleph the stocke of Ephraim, k to all the housholde of Ilrael his conilons.

8 hand opne thee them one to another into one sticke: and they shalbe as one in ix ihphande.

0 5 Poly ifthe thildren of thy people speake vnto thee, saping: Wilt thon not (yew bs what thou meanest by these-
5 Thengeue them this aunlwere, thus layth the Lorde God: Weholde, J will lake the“ stocke of Joleph, whiche is in lhe hand of Ephzain, and of the tribes of Jlrael his felowes, and wil put them
Luly him, euen! with the stoeke of Buz da, and make them one stocke, and they shalbe one in my hande. r0 And the stickes Where vpen thou wrytelt, shalt thou haue in thy hand, that they may see. du Andthon halt say vnto them, thus apththe Lorde God: Beholde, J Will take the chüdzen of Ilrael krom among
We heathen vnto whom they be gone, and will gacher them together on euery

1 epopyetes, 21 Che dettruction of bem,

SANE ND the worde of the re N | Lorde came vnto me,
90 A faptng:
Thou sonne of man, ewe 195 arenes si’ Gog, the land of Ma-
Ne Gog, which is the thiefe eagameselech and Eubal: prophe-

8 M againt hun,
7 Gog fe lbUstapth the ome God: O
Mou thieke prince ol Melech and

side, and bring

Papp spirite allo wu F put in pou, and

them againe into thelr owne lande. N

22 Pea J wil make one people of them in the land vpon the mountapnes of Ilsra-

el, and oue king shalbe king to then al: Lau. xc.

they chall no moze be two peoples, net

ther be dewided from hencefoorth into

two kingdomes.

Thep shall also defue them selues no

more with their Doles and abhominati-

ons, and al their wicked dopnges:J wit

laue them out of all their dwelling

places wherin they haue sinned, and

will fo cleanse them, that they Marve np

people, and J wilbe their God. ö

24 Dauid my seruaunt shalbe their king, ka. ub and thepall nau haue one sheepheard hr only: they Mall Walke in my ümdge- Dan ber. mentes, and mp commanndementes
(hail they kepe, and fulfill then.

25. They shall dwell in the lande that J gaue bnto Jatob my seruauut, wheras pour fathers also haue dwelt, peaceuerr) inthe same land thal they, theirchudzen, g their chuͤders chudren dwell for euermoze: and myseruaunt Daum shalbe their prince for euer.

26 Moreouer, J will make a bonde of peace with them, whiche halbe vnto them an euerlasting touenaunt: J wil fe ttle them also and multiplte rhein, nip sanctuarte will J {ee among them for euermorze. N

27 My tabernacle shalbe with them: pea ee God, and they shalbe my people.

28 Thus the heathen also (yal know that
Ithe Lode do fanctifie Pract, when iny santtuarie shalbe among them foz cucrntoze.

The. xxxviii. Chapter.

he propherieth that Gog and Magog Hall come with an appoynted hoast into the land ol pomise. i: Their intent. ) he rehearleth that the comming ol Gog was belore prophecied of

Tubal, beholde, J will vpon thee:
4 And F will turne thee backe, and put hookes in thy thawes, J will bring (bee foorth and all thyne hoast „both horse and horsenien, all armed with all sortes of armour, a great multitude with eee and shieldes, all Handing wordes. 83
They of Paras, of Cush, e Phut, with fene eo themeuen all (hauing) shieldes and hel- he.

mets.
X (i) 6 Gonier

r. xxiii 4s

Be Gomer and all his hoastes, the house 15 Andthouthatt come from thyplate Out

(Gomer ol Togarmaout of the nozth quarters weder: and alshis hoaltes, pea and much peo -

ma the fonne of Gomer, and are thought to be they that inhabite in
Shia minoz.

ple with thee.

„ Therlore prepare thee, let thy selfe in aray with all th? people that are come
1 thee by heapes, t be thou their de-

ente.

8 After many dapes thou (halt be vilued, and in the latter peres thou Malt tome into the lande that hath ben turned and tost with the lworde, and gathered together agame out of many people vpon the mountapnes of Israel, which haue ben alwapes(lubicct to Wake ; but it is brought out of the people, and they dwell all safe.

9 Thou shalt alcend and tome dp like a storme, as a cloude to touer the lande
Malt thou be:thou withal thine hoastes, t a great multitude of people With thee.

to Moreoner, thus sapth the Lorde God:
At the same time shall thinges tome in-

(d) That is, fo inole st ¢ doc

chnrche.
(e) Deaning
Ilrael whieche

ard, do thy minde, lo that thou khalt thinke eie F @) cupll thou ghtes * umphieetcol 11 And say, I Will vp to the lande ol on-

the godlp, who
(che not fo much to foztis fhe tnensfciucs outwardt lozct, as to de-

Walled villages , J will go to them

that be at rest, Whiche dwell safelp, all dwelling without walles, they haue nei-

brad ther barres no: gates:

2 To spoyle the pray, and to take a bootie, to turne thy bande vpon the delolate

places chat are cnowej inhabited, ebpon

that people that is gathered together

Heede krom among the heathen, whiche haue anotver, ue Hobtten eattell and goodes, and dweil in one mall the nnds or the lande.

eee 33 Then shall Haba and Pedan, and the
Goo. marchauntes of Tharlis with all their lions, sap buto thee: Art thou come to

E - fpoyie a prap : halt thou gathered thy ebm: People together to takt a bootie, to tale deren, Abbap siluer and golde, to cary away cat: aalen kel and good and to haue a great pray: duch when 14. Therkore, O thou lonne ok man, thou

aun (halt prophecie and fay vnto Gog, tl ping? „thus
0 sapth the Lod God: Inthat dap when

my people Plcaclowellethy fate, chalt

thou not knowe itz

* „ *
19 For in my ielousie and fire okmpwrath syn"

of the north partes, thou and mucl en ace nennen ae great multitude and a insane,’ acme ee a mightie
16 ea thou shalt tome vpon my peo
Ilrael, as a cloude to wuerthe ae mans thts Malt tome to passe in the © jagger Sa dapes, and J will bring thee vp into uw 55

ut is the co

land, that the heathen may knowe me of 2 when J chalbe 0 sanctified in thec ay 5 85
Gog, before their eyes. | ren
17 Thus sapth the Lorde God: Attnot we

thou he of whom J hant spoken in olde 3°:

and 37.0

time “by the handes of my seruauntes e

declareth her

the prophetes of Jsrael, which prophe- wall tied in those dayes and peres, that 9 eh karre

in mp wrath: bnof haue J spokenit, surelp at that time ther shalbe a great shaking in che lande p of Ilrael.
20 The verp filthes in the sea, the foutes in the ayre the beastes of the fielde, and all that moue and crepe vpon the carth, and all the men that are vpon the earth, shall tremble at my presence: the gan hilles also shalbe turned vplide Done, dau the staires (hall fall, and all walles u chall fall Downe to the grounde. oe
21 J will call for afivorde vpon w hymin ne all mp mountapnes, sapth the Tord aa
God: lo that tuery mans lworde MAE sve wos vpon another. i
22 With pestilente and blood wil F pleade <5 against him : stormie rayne and haplestones, fire and brimstone wil J cauleto rayne bpon hum and all his hoaltes - yea . and vponall that great people that is rr with him. 1 5
23 Thus will be'magnikied, fanctified, and knowen in the eyes of many d ons: and they chall knowe that Jan the Lorde.

The

Of Ezechiel.

The. xxxix. Chapter.

clxiy. 7

1 he sheweth the destruction ol Gog and Magog. u Che graue ot Gog and his boat. 7 He

prop

Z| Herfore O thon fonne of man, prophetie az gain Gog, c speake,

} ‘ * |
VA) DESAI God: Wehold G Gog,
105 (on thou chieke prince at
— PMelech and Tubal, J
2 200 4 wülkurne ther about, and J wil
Gprouoke thee forward, and cause thee to come vp fromm the north partes, and bing thee vp to the mountapnes of HE nto joj igt? W.

wit raed, a; Ag for thy bow, J wil {mite it out ofthy left hande, and caule thyne arrowes to

lall out of thy right hande.
4 Thou with all thyne hoast, and all the people that is with thee, shall fall vpon the mountaynes of Israel: then will J ae geue thee vuto the W flockes of birdes ac" (euen) to all fethered foules and beastes

e ofthe fielde, to be deuoured.

n Thou shalt fal vpon the open fielde: fo2

_, 6 Into Magog, and among thole that fie cee b carclesse inthe“ Jes Will

ins, ccd he wh meng ud

ceed

Ne 7 J will make allo the name ok my holl-
8 nefle to be knowen among my people of
Pact, and J Will not let them pollute mp holy naime any more: but the very heathen allo challknowbe that J am the ben „ Lbid the holpone of Ilrael. ene s Behold it is come, and it is done, lapth e dhe Loe God: this is the day Wherof
„ IJhaue spoken. | e scherthatdweulm the cities of Jlracl, wal go foorth and © fet fire vpon the i sacapons and burne them, hieldes and a aud doe a he ade ar staues u 5 yf n
5 With fre euer tb Dey hal burne them

hy. 10 Sori f ö e Jat Hep (hat eis bring no wood ane fice, neither Hew downe any
10 0 he wood fo With weapons (hal thie! ether fire, they Mall rob thole fpopten ed them, and spoyle those that
Atte ben faptl the Lozde God. te to h, une wil J gence vnto Gog o be buried in Ilrael, enenthe

alley wherethzongy men go towarde

4 57 thus lapth the Tode

Jhaue spoken it, layth the Lorde God.

su e, and they Hall know that J amthe
Lodde. f

ecicth that Gog and his companic shaibe devoured of birdes and beastes. 2; noherfore che ld 0 kIlrael is wasted. 2j Their bringing againe from captiuitie is pronuifed, ö

the east fea: thofe that trauayle therebp,

challꝰ stop their noses, there Nall Gog cocosthe

and all His multttute be buried eit (hate Mee,

bs called the valley of the multitude of bacco og. n

12 Seuen monethes long chan the houle . of Ilrael be burying of them, that they may cleanse the lande.

3 Bea allthe people of the land shal burie them, and they (hall haue a name when
I Halve glorified, sapth the Lord God.

14. Thep hall chole out men to go conti- ¢ tually thozowe the lande, to Pburteas gen they passe throͤugh thofe that remayne an thauive vpon the ground to cleanse it: after the mi, end of seuen monethes, chall they malte Se, their searche. eaves

15 And the trauaylers that passe thorowe "= the land, where they see a mans bone, they shal set vp a token by it, til the dead buriers haue buried it allo in the valley of the multitude of Gog, 7

16 And the name of the citie shalbe called pamonal; thus shall they make the 22 lande cleane. ee

17 And thou sonne of man, thus layth the eh
Tord God: Speake vnto the birdes and all kethered koules, yea and to all the beastes ofthe fielde, Aslemble you together, and come, gather von roundabout to my satritite that J sacrikice fo2 vou, (OE fotemne
(üer) a great lacrilice vpon the moun- ern tapnes ol Ilrael , that ve map eate daun fleshe, and drinke blood. ple aftemiteo:

18 Be shall eate the sleshe of the vallaunt, °°". and drinke the blood of the princes ofthe a Ka e; land, of the rammes, ok the Weathers, of ade, the goates, and of the bullockes, that be oe ven. all fed at Wasan.

19 Be shall eate the fat pour belly full, and drinke blood till ye be drunken of my faz crikice, which J haue facrificed for you,

20 He shall fil you at my table with horles e horse men, with the valiaunt and men of warre, sapth the Howe God.

21 J wil set my glorie atfo among the gentiles , that all the heathen may {cc my iudgement that J haut executed, x my hand whiche Jhaue layde bpon them.

22 And the houle of Plracl shall knowe that Jaimthe Lode their God, from that day, and fo forwarde. —

N X (ij) 23 And

IIe prophcfse —

he pro hecie

23 And the heathen shal know that wher- haue transgressed againt m

e When de and no

And When Jhaue brought them a

asthe house of Pirael was led into capsaute Was fog their 0 wicked-

Ch) Thehta-

thi nelle fake, becaule they offended me:
Berean for the which caule J hyd my face front bethecotone —efyentg belluered them into the haͤndes ther enden ok their enemies, that they might all be
ür bee apne with the [Worde. F want ar 24. According to their vntleanenesse, € ate

cording to their tran{greflions haue J done vnto them, e hid my face frd them.

25 Therekore thus sayth the Lorde God:
Howe Will F being agatne the taptiues of Jacob, and haue merce vpon the
Whole house of Israel, and be telous for my holy names lake,

26 After that they haue borne their Mame, and all their tranlgrellion, wherby they

they dwelt safely in their lan man to feare them:

gaine from among the people, when

haue gathered them together hee

their enemies landes, and am sanceif inthemm the fight of many nations

28 Then chall they knowe that J amt

Lorde their God, which canted them 4 be led into captinitie among the Hea: then, buthaue gathered them againe into their owne land, and not left one of them any more there.

29 Alter that wil I hyde my fate no more

krom them, but Will powre out my fpr: vite bpon the houlse of Jsrael, sapththe
Torde God.

e. xl. Chapter.

Mthe kpue and twen-

A1 | | tie pereofonr captiui-

ah, A tie, in the © beginning feo the begin v4 sokthe pere, the tenth

day of the moneth, that is the fourtenth a ere after the cite was smitten, the {elte fame dap came the
Sines hand okthe Lorde vpon me, & brought tsrobern, mme thyther:
Sete. 2 Euenlnto the land of Ilrael brought he nie in the visions of god, e let me downe vpon a marueplous Hye mountapne, wherevpon there was as it had ben the buylding of a citie towarde the south.
3 Thyther he taried me, and behold there

at t

restoring ofthe cities and or the temple that was eo come, is shewed vnto the prophete.

therof, and mealured the port ofthe gate one cane broade, and the other pot of the gate one tane broade.

E

7 And leuery chamber was one cane long >

aud one cane broade, and betiveene the

thambers were fiut cubites:and the post

of the gate by the porche ol the gate within, was one cane.

8 he mealured also the porche of the gate

Within one cane.
Then mealured he the porche of the

gate eyght cubites: æ the pentises ther- *

dl two cubites and the porche ol the gate
[was unwarde.

io And the chambers ok the gate cal

Ch) whithe

Span an angeln in fourme af a ma, that camt to meafure aut this buplding.

(e) Bp this

Wasa man, whole simulttude was like brasse, whiche had a twisted line of flax in his hand and a cane to measure with: and he stoode inthe doore.

„ & And that man sapde vnto me: Thou

sonne of man, marke well with thyne ©

duden epes, hearkento with thyne eares, and ring othe fatten it in thy heart, whatsoeuer 7 thal
Comey shewe thee: for to the intent that they
Sa ne might be shewed thee therfore art thou phot 0 1 hea , 70 Whatsoeuer thou
Ae d certific the Hout 2 rs, rael therok. e . spcakethok,

was! then

Ager the coms mon cubiteb

5 Wehold, there was a wall on thewout-

fide of the house, rounde about rthe cane

deen tO mealure with that he had in his tie, arb hande, was sixe tubites long by 11515 taincwnies' cudite ka hande weadch: So he meatus

cubtte cont ned cts hand breadth, and this
Bede

red the breadth of the building with one kane, and the heyght with one cane.

che. 2.5 Then came he to the gate which loketh

toward the cast, and Went bp the staires

ward, were three on this side, e three on that side: theythree were of one mea sure, the pentifes had one mealure on this lde, and one mealure on that fide. u After this, he mealured the breadtho the entrie of the gate ten cubites , and thehepaht of the gate thirteene cubits.

12 The spate also before

the chambers

was one cubitecon this tide) and the {pace

one cubite on that fide:

ethe chambers

fice tubites on this five, and fire cubites

on that side.

fe ol
13, He ineasured the gate fromthe rob a chamber to his one roofe the wa of fiue and twentie cubites + doore ag

doore.
14 He made frontes also

bites, (euen) vnto the front ofthe court

rounde about the gate.
15 And from the forefront of t

eentricof

b the gate, vnto the forekront of the gat

Within (were) fiktie cubites.

„ „ of thacelcoze cu. S

oa nthe Fontes within bers, and in the the Meeconndeaboutze fo tn the arches
11 the windowes (went) rounde about muthm , and bpon the frontes were trees.
Ehen bought he me into the outward tourt, where as were chambers , and a

auement made foz the court rounde a-

bout: thirtie thambers were vpon the

ement. et
18 nthe pauement (was | by the fide of

the gates, ouer against the length of the gates:and the pauement( was beneath.

io Thenhe mealured the breadth frõ the

drekront of the lower gate without, vnnet fozcfront of the court within, a pundscth cubites eastwarde and north-

warde.

20 And the gate in the outward tourt that

loked toward the north, mealured he alter the length and breadth therof.

21 And the chambers thevof (were) three on this side, and theee on that fide: and

the krontes therof, and the arches there-

Ups,

of were alter the mealure of the fit gate : the length thereof was filtie tubites, and the breadth fiue and twentie tubites. peter :

a2 And their windowes and their arches
With their paulme trees (were) after the mealure of the gate that loketh toward the east: and the goyng vp vnto it Thad seuen steppes, and the arches thereof were lbefore them. Ss

23 Mudthe gate of the inner courtrtoove): duer againtt the gate to warde the north and toward the east, and he mealured

from gate to gate a hundreth cubites.

24. Alter that he brought me towarde the south, Where there stoode a gate towarde thefouth , and he mealured the

krantes therokand the arches therofaccording to those measures.

25 Andlthere were ipo wes in it, and in the arches therof round about like these bebdowes: the length (was) filtie cuz

1 the breadth fine and twentie cu-

26 Andlthere were) seuen ste es at the gopng bp to it, and the arches thecofbethis toe ane paulme trees, one on the ftontthene other onthat hide, vpon

27 Andl there wag jg gate in ties gate in the inner court
Kander fouth , and be mealured
Nate to gatet owardthefouth , 4

of Eaechicl. mt

othere were narowe windowes in

hundred cubites.
28 So he brought me into the inner court E thorowe the south gate, and he mealured the south gate actording to those measures. 5
29 And the chambersthercot, the frontes therof, and the arches thereof » ALCO2ding to these meafires , and wyndoes mit: and inthe arches thereof round about, fiftie cubites long, and fine: and twentie cubites broade. a
30 And the arches round about( were fue and twentie cubites long, and fine cubites broade. N 1
31 And the arthes therof were) to ward the vtter court, and paulme trees vpon the krontes therof, t the goyng vp to its had cyght steppes. de brought me allo into the inmost court toward the east, and measured the gate according to those measures.

33 And the chambers thereof, and krontes

therof, and the arches therot were ae: cording to these measures, ⁊ there were windowes therin, and in the arches therok round about: it was) filtie tubites long, t flue and twentie cubites broade.
34. And the arches therok were] towarde the vtter court, and paulme trees vpon the frontes thereof on this hve and on that side, e the goyng vp to it had eyght eppes. ö

35 And he brought me to the north gate, r Ff

mealured it according to those mealures.

36 The chambers thereof , the frontes therof, andthe arches therof, andsthere were] windowes therinrounde abont: and the length, was) fiktie tubites, ethe breadth fine and twentie tubites.

37 And the frontes therof were) to warde the beter court, and paulme trees were vpon the krontes therof on this fine, and on that side, and the goyng vp to it had

epght steppes. : 4

38 And a chamber and the entrie thereo? was pnder the frõtes of the gates: there they washed he burnt offeriuges.

tables on this side, and two tables on;

that side, vpon the whithe they flue the dns.

burnt offering, and the sinne offering, and the trespasse offering.

40 And at the fide without the steppes at the entrie ofthe north gate oode two tables, and onthe other side whith was at the porche of the gate (were) two tas bl

i * cap 41 Foure

the inwardeg

39 And in the porche ofthe gate stoode two yess

at was offe-

— — ly
— 6 41 Foure tables were on this side, and kon; the priestes that haue charge to lepe

fonre on that side by the fide of the gate, seuen) eyght tables, wherevpon they slues their facrtfices, | :

42 Andthe foure tables were of hewen

ftone forthe burnt offring, ofa tubite x

a halfe long, and a cubite and a halfe broade, and one tubite hye , where vpon
Were lapde the instrumentes Wherswith oe flue the burnt offring, and the fatrifice. a oe |
43 And within there were hookes one hand breadth (long) fastened rounde a-

bout, and vpon the tables was the offe-

ring fleshe. 14 a
44. And without the inner gate (were) the

chambers of the fingers inthe inwarde court, whiche was at the fide of the

north gate, and their prolpect was to-

warde the louth: and one was at the

fine ofthe caft gate, hauing the prolpect

towarde the north. £.

4.5 And he layde vnto me: This chamber,

whole prolpett is to warde the south cis;

46 And the chamber whofe 5

towarde the nozth cis) tot che pute that haue charge ta kepe the aufter: thele ave the lonnes of Hadot, which of the sonnes of Lem come neare to the
Torde, to minister vnto him. ö

47 So hemeasured the tourt, which had in length a hundred enbites, and abun: dred in breadth, (even) fouretquare :any

the aulter stoode before the houle.

48. And he brought me to the porthe the house, and measured che — *

filie cubites on this fide, and fire cubites ,

on that fide: and the breadthok the gate
Was three cubites on this side, and three cubites on that side.

49 The length ofthe porche was twen- an tie cubites, the breadth eleven cubites, and by steps went men vp to it: by the frontes allo were pillers, one on this side, and another on that fide,

The. xli. Chapter. 443
Che dispolition and deuice ok building againe the temple and of the other thinges

fgherto belonging.

Wes 75 me to the temple, and
A: ; a meafured the. frontes ire cubites broade on d 9 bites broade on the oeee Sew er fide, (which was the breadth ol the tabernacle.

2 The breadth of the doore was ten tu-

bites, and the fines of the doorel were fine cubites on the one fide and fine cubites

] Fter this he brought

they entred the wall whiche was of the
Houle foz the chambers rounde about, that they might be fattened, and not be fastened in the wall of the houle.

7 Ther was an enlarging, anda winding 5 about, mounting fill vpwarde to the thãbers: for the staire of the boule was mounting still vp ward round about the house, therfore the house was larger vpwarde:so they Went bp from the lowest chamber jto the highest by the midst.

onthe other syde, and he measured the length therof fourtie tubites, and the breadth twentie tubites. a

3 Then went he in e measuredthe kront ofthe dooze two cubites: but the doore it selfe was sixe tubites, and the breadth on the other fide of the dooze was seuen tubites.

4 He measured the length theroktwentie cubites, and the breadth twentie tubites bekore the teniple. And he lald vnto me,
This is the most Holy (place.)

5 Ye measured also the wal of the houte lire eubites, and the breadth of a chamber foure cubites round about the houle on enerp side.

6 And the chambers were chamber bpon chamber, three and thirtie in order: and

8 And J law the houte bye round about: the foundatids of the chambers (werde d J ful cane of fire cubitesbp to the arme oe. holes. * 97

9 The thickenesse ofthe wall which was

for the chamber without (was) fine dir bites, andthat whiche remayncd was the plate of the chambers that were within. ‘

10 And betweene the chambers was We et 9 25 n 0 U rounde

out the house on euery fide.

n And the doores ok the chambers aie 2 0 toward the plate that remarne 21 7 doore toward the north, aud anotye ee ward cthelduth the breadthokt) d 1 that remayned was fine cubites r

about. . 12 Holb

(a) Dithe tempie frou this dooze to the nok holp place.

e buplding that was before the
 Pavaeeplace at theend towarde the rwasifeuenitie cubites broade: and the wall of the buplding was iyue cu: bes thicke round about, and the length ninetie cubites. wis
So he mealured the house, which was ahandzed cubites long, and the separate plate aud the buplding with the walles werd a hundred cubites tong allo.

4 The breadth allo of the forefront of

the houle andok the separate place to-
Warde the east, was a hundred cubites.
15 And he inealured the length of the bnylding oner against the leparate place which was behynde it, and the cham-

person the one fide e on the other ide

a hundreth cubites , with the temple within, aud the porches of the tourt.
16 The doore postes, and the narow windowes, e the chambers round about, on

three fides ouer against the doore, seeled

with wood round about, and from the ground vp to the windowes : and the
Windowes them selues were seeled.
17 And trom aboue the doore vnto the
Houle within and without, and vpon cucry wall rounde about within and without, (coke he mealure.

veins, 18 And it was made with “Cherubims

fhauiums ume

mitra

and paulme trees, fo that a paulme tree

was betweene a Cherub and a Cherub,

and euery Cherub had two faces, 5
The. xlii.

of Ezechiel. 4

CX 111) 8

19 So that the face of a man was toward the pauline tree on the one fide, and the face of a lion towarde the paulme tree

on the other side: thus] was it made though all the bonfe ronnde about.

20 From the ground vnto abone the doore

were Cherubims € paulme trees made:

and (thus was the wall of the temple,

21 The postes of the temple were foure squared, and the fachion of the lanctua-

rie was“ appearaunce ipke appea- dn e. raunte. MA cker

kes oF the

27 The aulter of wood was thee bites arte he, and two cubites long: the comers, ofthe n the length, and the walles thereok were 4 ot wood. And he sayd vnto me, This is the table that shalbe before the Lode,

23 The temple andthe holiest ot au had

either ot them two doores. :

24. And the doores had two hdoores Ca Goten pebceeuen two folding doores, two fog een the one doore, and two doozes for the tron e oother. — ‘Vs . ; einer Re

25 And bpon the doores ef the temple, there were made Cherubims t paulme trees, lyke as was made bpon the walles: & thicke beames vpon the forefrout of the porche without.

26 Andlthere were} narow windowes and

paulme trees on the one side and onthe

other fide by the hides of the porche and

bpon the sides ofthe house, and thicke beames. f

Chapter.

1 Df the chambers of the temple foz the priesteg. and the holpthinges.

> Sueragaing the ementic cubites, which
Were kor the inner court, and oner a-
Sati the pauement, which was for the

lter court, (was] chai ainst

thamiber: thrceroivers Pamber 5 _

5 ande the chambers, ther was a

mee place of ten cubites wpde in-

10 the way of one cubite: and their des to warde the north.

And the wall chat was without ouer % against the chambers, towarde the vtter court on the forefront of: the chambers, the length therof was filtie cubits,

8 Forthe length of the chambers that

werre in the better court was kyktie

cubites:and lo, before the teuple was a

hundred cubite sss.
9 And vnder these chambers was the en-

trie from the east, as one goeth vnto

them from the btter tourt.

| T (iy) 10 Fn

a That is, hich exercise the piestes office, as moze fullp 19 dcclared in the next thapter folowing vert. 19.

C

Ezec. ix. a.

Ca) when J prophecicd the destruction of che citie bythe
Chaldcang,

(d) Whiche was depat ted
Seforechap.10 o, and 11. t.

— a Ee
| The prophecie |
10 Inthe thicknesse of the wall of the ptter tourt, but there they shall la

court to warde the east before the separate plate, and befoze the building of the chambers,

1 20 the way before them after the appearaunce of the chambers which were toward the north, as their length, so was their breadth: and all their entries

(were atcording to their fathion, and at?

cording to their doores.
And acco ing to the doores of the

chambers that were toward the fouth,

(was) a dooze in the head of the wap.

seuen] the wap directly before the wall towarde the east, as one entreth.

iz Then layd he vnto me: The chambers toward the north, and the chambers towarde the south, whiche are befoze the separate place, those be holy chambers,

Wherinthe priestes that approche vn-

to the Lowe mult eate the most holy thinges, e there must they lay the mot holy thinges, and the meate offring, aud

finne offering and trespasse offering: fo:

it is a holp plate.
14. When the priestes come therein, they shall not go out ol the holy place into the

The xliii. Chapter.

he seeththe gtorte of God goyng into the temple, from whence ft bad befoze departed.
7 He menclonẽth the idolatrie ot the children of Ftvacl, for the whiche they were consumed naught. 10 he is commaunded to call them againe to repentaunce.

SID he brought me to 7 And he sapd vnto me: O thou sonne ol

Hil the gateceuen) the gate that turneth towarde che east:

And peholde, then

Whole vopce was lpke a great noyse ol waters, and the earth
Was lightened with his glorie.

3. And “According to the appearaunte of the vision which J saw, seuen according to the vision which J sawe © when J tame to destrop the citie: and the vistons

wert like the visions whiche J sawe by the riuer Chebar, æ J felt bpon my face.

4 And the w glorie of the Lorde tame into the boule by the wap of the gate whole prospett is towarde the east.

5 So a wömde toke mie vp, and brought me into the innermer court:and behold, e Was full of the glorie of the

6 And J heard one {peaking vnto me out of the houle e there stoode a man by me,

their garmentes wherin they m me
{oz they ave holy: c (halt Nen n 4 garmentes , and fo shall approche to Sak. those which are fo2 the people. spots

15 Now when he had kiniched the mealu- Pn ringok che Houle within, he led me eee ee. dd

leew t ve.

ronan, i a cafured it

Is He niealured the east fide with the mea-
{uring cane fine hundred —— (ete
With the measuring cane round about.

17 Audhe measured the north hoe fyne hundred canes, (ever) with the meaty: ring cane round about.

18 The south side allo measured he fine hundred tanes, by the measuring tant.

19 He turned about alto qto the westside, and measured fiue hundred canes, vy the

measuring cane.

20 So he measured it by the foure sides: it had a wall round about fyne hundred tanes long, and fine hundzed broade, to make a feparation betweene the“) corms, sanctuarie, and the prophane plate. ert

temple was counted p02 phane.

man, this roonie is my seate æ the place 5 of my foote steppes, wheras J wil wel among the children of Ilrael for euer-

monre:lo that the honse of Plrael shal no moze defile my holy name, neither ther nor their kinges thorowe their who; dome, and thorowe the dead bodies of their O kinges lin their hye places.

3 Albeit they haue {et their thresholdes by ge my threcholdes, and their postes by My + ments, postes, and a wal betwirt nie and them, ah,

pet haue they defiled my holy name trier:

With their abominations thatthephaut aa,
Pace ite 10. Jhaue consumed v them in my wrath.

9 Wut nowe let them put awar r whordome, and the dead bodies of or kinges out of my light, and 7 will d aad zune

10 erkore O thou sonne

thouthe boule of Htrael ils orte they may be achamed of their rauwle

nesle, æ mealure them selues aner therat.

a—, :

of Ezechiel. xv

Andif they be ashamed of all their day wbenit ts made, to offer burnt of: 2

HT sores, then Merb them the fourme of

ule and patterne thereof, the go-
15 but, the comming in, all the maner therof, vea all the ozdinaunces thereof, theligures, and all the lawestheteok, and watte it in their fight, that they may nepe the whole fashlon thereof, and all the ordinauntes thereof, and do them.
This is the late of the house: Upon the top of the mount, shall all the linuts thereof be, rounde about the most holy place: lo, this is the lawe of the house.

3 And these are the meafures of the aulter in tubites: the tubite is a cubite and a hande breadth, the botome cpalbe a cu bite, and the breadth a cubite, t the bozder therof by the edge thereof rounde about ee el this calbe the height of the aulter.

€ 4 at from the bottome bponthe groũd

bnto the lower peece halbe two cubites,

and the breadth one tubite: and krom the litle peete to the great peetes halbe) foure tubites, the breadth one cubite.

1j The aulter was foure tubites hie, and from the aulter vpwarde stoode foure hornes.

16 And the aulter was twelue tubites long, and twelue cubites broade, square
(nthe foure corners thereof,

17 The frame ofthe aulter ( chalbe) four-

teene tnbites long, and fourteene broade in the foure square torners thereof, and the border about it chalbe halfe a cubite, and the bottome thereof (halbe} a tubite
About, and the steps thereok lwalbe eur: ned toward the east. ö

18 Aud he salde vnto me, Thou sonne of man thus faith the Lorde God: These are the ordinaunces of the aulter, in the

feringes thereupon, k to sprinckie blood thereupon.

19 And thou watt geue to the priestes, to the TLeuttes that de ofthe seede of Sa:

dot, and approche vnto me saith the D

Lord God to minister vnto ine, apoung bullocke foz a sinne offering.

20 And thou shalt take of the blood therof, € put it on the foure homes okt, and onthe foure corners of the frame, and bpon the border rounde about: thus
(halt thou cleause it, and purge it.

21 Thou chalt take the buliocke allo of the

finne offering, and burne him in the appoynted place without the fanctuary,

22 The seconde day, take a goate bucke without blemishe fo2 a sinne offering to tleanse the aulter withal, like as it was tleansed with the bullocke.

23 Nobb when thou hast made an ende of tleansing it, then offer a young bullocke without blemishe, and a ramme out ol the flocke without blemiche also.

24. Défer them before the Lorde, and let the priestes tast salt therupon, and geue

them fo vnto the Lorde fo a burnt offe-

ring.

25 Seuen dapes (hate thou prepare eue-

ry Daya goate bucke for sinne, a poung

bullocke and a ramme of the flockt, both without blemishe shall they prepare.

26 Seuen dapes (hall they reconcile and tleanse the aulter, and © ful the place thereof,

27 When these dapes are expired then vponthe eight day elo foorth, the priestes shall make pour burnt offringes, and peate offringes vpon the aulter: fo 7
Wyll accept vou, faith the Lorde God.

The. xliiij. Chapter.

hechewech what doore of the temple is shut. He is commaunded to vpbraide the people with their offence, 9 ho are to be admitted to the ferutce of the temple,

and who to beretuled. the holp place, and alto their office.

me againe to the out:

ward gate ok the sanc-
„ 2 e tuarte on the cast five,
„ 980 N and that was shut. neat ber
= een © shut and not opened, nei-

er chall any man go though it: for

I Iter this, he brought

15 He sheweth what priestes he would haue admitted into

the Lorde God of Israel hath entred by it, and it shalbe thut.

3 It is for the prince, the priute him selfe shal ft in it to cate bread before the lord: he thal enter by the way of the porche of that gate, and Mal go out by the way of the same.

4. Then brought he me toward the north gate before the houst: and as J loked,

beholde

E

(c) D2, cons
(cerate it.

houle of the Lorde, and J fell vpon my

face.

5 So the Lorde (pake vnto me: O thou sonne of man, set thyne heart, and beholde with thyne eyes, and heare with thyne eares al that J lay vnto thee concerning all the ordinauntes of the boule of the Lorde, and all the lawes thercok, and marke well the entring in ok the house, with euery going koorth ol the

sauctnarie. am.
, 6 And thon shalt fap to the rebelllous seuen to the house ol Piracl, thus saith

haue inough of al pour abhominations.

805 brought

Oxon " sayy® ftraungers hauing vntirtumtipincer zed Heartes and vntirtumtized flethe, gseh do be in imp lanctuarie to pollute my mene Hhoule, when ye oller my bead, fat, and
Chang. Dldod, and they haue broken my couenaunt becaule of all pour abbominattons: ! a

enn, 8 And yt haue notkeptthe © ordinaun-

do me atcozding te mp

tes of my holy thinges, and pe haue let kepers to kepe my sanctuarie © for pou.
Therekore thus faith the Lode God:

0 ve
49) In your dace,

Okal the straungers that dwell among

the children of Israel, no straunger vntirtumttzed in heart, nor vncirtumcized in flefhe, shall enter into my sanctuarie. of Wut the Lenites that went backe from me when Jlrael went astrape, which strayed from me after their idols, d that beare their iniquitie: f
And they shalbe ministers in my sanctuarp, and kepe the gates of the house, aud minister in the houle: they shall flay

(e) That ta,

the Leuites
Which had tommitieb tholatric, Wer 11 pnt from their dignitie, ond

could not be receded into

the puelicg

ate, tte burunt okkeringes, and the facrefice cen: kor the people, and they shal tand before ron, but uk them to seruethem.

feruc uithe inferio2 offi= ces, au to watch and to
Kepe $ dozeg.

12 wSecanfe they serned before their idols, and cauicd the houle of Jlrael to fall in-

„Kg. 23. b. : lesen —“yande agatnt them, faith the Lorde
E God, and they shal beare their iniquitie.

3 And they shall not tome ncare vnto me to do the office of a prieste vnto me, neither chall they come neare vnto any of myne holy thinges in the most holy place: but they shall beare their owne hame and abhonunattons which they haue done. 8 .

14. And J wyll make them kepers of the

The prophecie

beholde the glorv ofthe Lorde filled the is Wut the priestes, the Leu N

the Lorde God: O honse of Ilracl, ye
5 7 Seeing pe haue brought into my fance

to miquitie: theretore haue J lift vp my

watch of the Houle foz all the leruite thereok, x lor al that shalbe done therm.

it sonnes of Sadoc that Rept the charge .

of my sanctuarie when the eh

Ilraecl straied from mech 9 Kudie

to do me feruice, to stand before me aud moon to offer meche kat and the blood, fritiy

the Lorde God. “

16 They Chall go into my sanctuarie, and apropthe vnto my table to do me ernie and they hall kepe my charge, .

/ Mow when they go in atthe gatesak the innermer tourt, they Mal pnt on linnen clothes, so that no woollen tome vponthem while they do seruice vnder the gates of the innermer court, and wih m. * 177. :

18 They hall haue linnen bonnets vpou
—4 . — Ler “breeches vpon their lopnes: they Chal not gird t selues in the sweate. 8 *

I9 And when they go foortl into the vtter tourt euen) to the vtter tourt ok the {°°

people, they chall put of the clothes deo

whereinthey haue ministred, and lape alla

them in the chamber of the fanctuaric, °

and put on other apparel and they shal

mie fancttfie the people with their clo- > hes. .

20 They shall noe shaue their heades, noz suffer their here to growe long, but poult their heades one. wn tena

21 Althe prestes that go into the immost Leu tourt Hal drinke no wine.

22. They shall mary no widowe; nellher one that is put from her husband: but a maide of the seede of the house of Isra-
19 190 widowe that hath Hada prick

efore.

23 They chall shewe my people the differente betweene the holy aͤnd vnholp, and caulse them to discerne betwirt the tleane and vncleane.

24 And in tontrouersie they Mall Hand to iudge, and geue sentence after my iudgementes: and my lawes and um statutes

hal they kepe in al my solempuc feastes, and halowe my Sabbathes.
They Mall come at no dead person

75 ith father o:

to Defile them selues: but with kat) mother, foune oz daughter, brother e aren fier, ce Hath bap yetno hulband, e map they be defiled. termed oe

26 And When he is cicanled, there shalbe d reckened vnto him seuen dapes. arte

27 And when he goeth into the facet vnto the inner tourt to nnter ang lanttuarie, he shal being his imne or h

ud

2 Sloppes,

e In the plectsof

(4) Fox that, assent Fe: rom faith was the maner of, e Gentiles,

Leui. ar.

of Ezechi el.

chef

faith the Lorde. — and euerp oblation, (even) all of euer

23 There shalbe to them an inheritaũte, lort of pour oblations shalbethe priestes:

ved enc) I their inheritaunte: but poslesli- ye shall also geue Onto the priestes the on shall ye geue them none in Ilrael, first ol your dongh, that he may tause for am their possession. : the blessingto rettin thyne house.

29 Fa omeate ofecing ume offring, and 315 But the priestes that cate nothing that trelpalle offring shal they eate: € euern is deadibp it tlie} 9, torne of foute 02 of E dedicate thing in Ilrael shalbe theirs, beaste. — — Leu 4

zo And all the first or all the first borne,
Eo. 7 5
Rane. q The.xlv. Chapter. =
1 Out ofall the lande of promife are there feparated foure portions, of which the kirst ig geuen to the priestes and to the temple,the seconde to the Leuites.the third to the citte, the fourth to the prince. An exhortation to the heaves ol Ifrael. 10 Ol inst waightes and mealures. 1; Ok the lirst kruttes. Cahn ben pe deulde the land onofthe citie, from the west comer p the lot fog inheri- Wwestwarde, e krom the east corner casl-
“ ‘| taunce, pe chall offer an warde: and the length chalbe by one of
//\j Ray oblation to the Lode, the postions, from the Welt border vnto
\ A\ fig ADoly™ portion of the the cast border. ’ lande, twentie and tine 3 4 lande shalbe his possession in
* thoufand canes long, Nracl: and my punces shall uo niore ; and ten thouland broade: this shalbe oppresse my people, and the restj of the
Holy in all the borders thereof rounde a- lande chall they geue to the boule of HL bout. a rael according to their tribes. Gebt

2 Okthis part there chau belong vnto 5 Thus laiththe Lorde Goo, Let it that ec heaps the fanctuarte fiue hundred cubites fuffile pou O pe painees of Hflract: leaue refourmnc) ac uin length! with fiue hundred in breadth) oktrueltie and oppression, and execute cerca de“
{quare rounde about: and fiftie cubites indgement and iustite: take away pour ube rounde about for the suburbes. exactions from niy people, saith the ior *

3 and of this mealure halt thou mea: od. Gen burt (namely) ok the length ok twentie oi de chall haue a true Wallaunte, a true Bach ote
Ehue thonsand, and the breadth okten O phah, and a true wath. quate fon thoufand:and init thatbe the lanttuarre u The Ephah and the Bath atvea: oes", and the most holy place. lyke: one Bath shall tontaine the tenth un a 6

4 That holy portion of the lande hall parte of an Homer, and an Ephah the Pee fartepne bute the priestes which do ler- » tenth part ofan Homer: the cqualitte E ace in the lanctuarie, Which come neare thereok chalbe alter the Homer. Leu to lerue the Lorde: and it shalbe vnto 12 The Sicte maketh twentie Gerrahs: Nome g them a place for their houles, and a holy E twentie Sitles, and twentie r fue, Sers place for the sanctuarte. and fifteene Sitles inake a aneh. ae

5 Andinthe tiwentie and fue thouland iz This is the oblation that pe Matt of 22m ngth, and te thouland breadth, hall ker: the lirt part of an Ephah out ofan re e Teuttes that minister in the house Domer ok wheate, and the firt part of sr».
Fate their pollession for twentie cham: an Ephah out of an Homer ok baripe.

6 4 Concerning the ordimannces of tie fion val gene allo bntotheciteapotel / oyle,scuen of the Bathofoyle, re tail tw l fine thouland canes broade, and oller the tenth part ofa Bath out orthe main 35 and kiue thouland long, ouer a- Co:: ten Waͤthes Matbe) a Homer, bez that f he oblation of the holy portion, caule ten Wathes tina homer.

Brag Abe to? the Whole houle of FE 15 Ind one lande from two hundred

7 And laportion chalbe) fo ö
| 2 the painec on attest Onthathoe of a ieoulation
Of the 1 0 portion, and of the poslession chon. ut bekore the oblation of portion, and before the pollelli-

cheepe out ofthe fat pastures ol Ysrael, for a meate offring, burnt offing, and peace offring, to reconcile them, laith the

Lorde God.
16 All the people of the lande shall gene this oblation foz the prince in Israel.
17 Againe,

n prophecie

—̃ ̃ J. ̃˙— . pe Du
17 Againe, it halbe the paces part to moneth, ve Mall

offer burnt olkringes, meate offtinges, and Wine offringes, in the holy dapes, newe moones, Sabbathes, e in all the hie feattes of the house of Ilrael: be that prepare the sinne ofkring mieate offring, burnt offring, and peace offring, to reconcite the house of Hiract.
18 Thus faith the Lorde God: The first

0 day ofthe firkmoneth,thou shalt take
Huhn Apoung bullocke without blenushe, and ae cleante the santtuarie.

5 Sothe priest Chall take of the blood

okthe sinne offring, and put it vponthe

postes of the houle,ebpon the foure cor-

ners ol the frame of the aulter, c vpon

the postes ol the gate ol the inner court,

20 And thus shalt thon do allo the seuenth

day of the moneth for fuch as haue sin-

ned of ignoraunce, or being deteaued, to reconcile the honse withall.

Fronc. 21 Upon the fourteenth day of the fick

Leui xiii.a.
Deu. x vi. a.

haue the pallouer

least of leuen dapes, and oe
Winne ve shall cate
22 Upon the sauie day shal the pat j pare for him selfe and allthepeope

the lande a bullockefoz a sinne offring
23 And in the seuen dapes of the feat he , chall make a burnt offring to the L0d seuen jof seuen bullockes € leu rammes

without blemishe daylp, forseuen dayes and a hee goate dayly fo? afinne offring.
24. And he shall prepare ameate offering ofan Ephah fora bullocke, € an Ephah lor a ramme, and a© Hin okople for an

(OKende
Exo, 29.

Ephah. .
25 In the fenenth l moneth ) in the fifteenth day of the moneth on the kealt, be thait do actording vnto thele for seuen dayes: according to the fiune offering, accozding to the burnt offring, and actording to
9 offring, and according to the ople.

The. xlvj. Chapter.
Che facrifice of the Sabbathes, and of the newe Moones, 8 Chrough which doores

they mutt go in, or come out ok the temple,

bus faith the Horde
God: The gate of the in-

east shalbe Gut the fire

Woking dapes: but in

Cw 9 11 €in the

agen pof the new moone ud the prlnce Mall enter by the wa

ok the porche of the gate wüheu, —

thail stande by the poste of the gate: and

the priestes Hal make his burnt offring,

and his peace offringes, and he Mail

pa hs fhe poner ofthe gate, €

: e gat

ae gate shall not be chut n the lame maner shall the

the lande allo no tee me

the Lorde, at the doore of this gate vp-

onthe Sabbathes, and new moones.

4 The burnt offring that the printe that bring vnto the lorde bpon the Sabbath shalbe lire lambes without blemish and aranunc without blemithe. g

5 Aud the meate offring chalbe an Ephah for a ramme, andthe meate offring for

the lambes a gift of his hande, and a

Hin ok oyle to an Ephah.

bein the day of the new moneth, it hats

Ja young bullocke without blemishe,

(a) hat is, ag much as he
Wpll.

„ 6

and sixelambes, and a ramme allo without blenushe.

ner court towarde the 7 With the butlocke he Mall geuc an 3

Ephah, e with the ramme an Ephah alfo for a meate offring: but to the lambes according as his hande Mal take, and , ain ol oyle to an Ephah. wane
8 And when the peince Hall enter, he
(hall go in by the way ofthe porche of that gate: he Mall go foorth by the wap thereof. ~y
9 Wut when the people of the lande come before the Lorde in the hie solempne featt, as many as come in by the north gate to do Worchip, shal go out againe at the south gate: and they that come inat the south gate, chall go foozth agate at the north gate: there shall none returne by the gate where he tame in, but hall go right foorth ouer on the other poe
10 And the printe he Tali go in the mid of them when they go in, and so tome foorth when they come foorth. 3 n Uponthe solempne cz hie fealt Dare 0 this chalbe the meaͤte offring:an ephay to abullocke, € an Ephah to arama and to the lambes the gift of his hande, and a hin of oyle to an Ephah . ned
12 Mowe when the prince shall es ges free burnt ockring, orpeace © freely

vnto the Lordrone then chal open mee gate that turneth toward the

g, and his peate offeringes, as he
1 5 the Sabbath day: after he shall go foorth, and when he is gone foorth,

e one shall shut the gate.

na puto the Torde of a lambe of one pere without blenuthe, thou shalt do it euerp morning. a
14 Thou shalt prepare a meate offering

foritencrp mornüng, the sixt part of an
Ephah, and the third part of a hin ol ople to mingte with the fine floure: this mate offering shalbe continually by a perpetuall ordinaunte vnto the Lorde.

j Thus thal they prepare the lambe, the meate offering, € ople, euerp niozning, fora tontinuall burnt offering.

16 Moreouer, thus faith the Lorde God:

the printe geue a gift vnto any of his

onnes, the inheritaunte thereof chalbe his sonnes: their possession shalbe by inheritaunte.

17 But ik he geue a gift of his inheritaunte to one of his seruauntes, then it shalbe his to the © pere oklibertie, and then returne to the prince: but the inheritaunce

thereof is his sonnes and shalbe theirs. conn 18 The peince allo” chall take none of ahn. (ht peoples inheritaunte, nor put them

tg,
Ab

(hi azar the prof Fable
U tut. 5. b.

(0) Sat de uten with

AIFterwarde he brought me againe vnto the doore of the Houle, and
— N beholde there gushed
(eS 2 \ out waters from vndeer the threcholde of

tit the house eastwarde: amt, bar the fozefvont of the houle stoode to-
Han Waro the east: € the Waters ran downe hie vnder the right five of the houle,

; 20 lpeth to the aulter southwarde. hen led he me out to the north gate,

aud ledme about by the Way Without

un the btter gate, by the wapthat tur-

Foor eae: and behold, there issued th waters from the right side.

in 9680 when the man that had the line

mealarcn de Went foorth eastward, he

bebe. thouland cubites, and then wought me thzough the waters, the

of Ezechiel.

kalt, and be shal make his burnt offe-

Thou shalt dayly make a burnt offe-

from their pollession: but to his lonnes shall he geue his owne poslession, that my people be not scattered abrode euc: ry man from his possession.

19 And he brought me through the en: traunce at the fine of the gate, to the holychambers of the puestes which stoode toward the north, e beholde, there was
à plate vpon the Wet fine of them.

20 Then laide he vnto me: This is the place where the priestes shall feethe the trespasse and sume olfringes, and bale D the meate offringes:that they neede not beare them into the outward court and to fanctific the people.

21 So he brought me into the vtter tourt,
€ cauled nie to go by the foure comers ok the court: and beholde, in euery tozner of the tourt, there was a tourt. bein

22 In the foure comers of the tourt there ananeon.
Were courtes iopned, of fourtie cubites long, and thirtie broade: thele foure coz ners were or one mealure.

23 And there went a wall rounde about them, seuen) about thofe foure: and vnder the walles there were“ kitchins made rounde about. *

24 Then saide he vnto me: Thele are the tookes houses, where the mimsters ol the boule thall boyle the facrifice of the people,

(e) To caust the peopie to thinke it is lawfull foz them to eate them, and fo fall into a

Raneges.

The. xlvij. Chapter.

Che vilion ot the waters that came out ofthe temple. z The coaltes of the lande ol promile and the deuilion thercofk by tribes,

waters were to the antles.
4 So he measured peta thoulande, and brought me through p waters, the waters were to the knees: petmeasured he a thousand, and brought me throngh, the waters were to the loynes. i
5 Atkter this he mealureda thoulanda- „ gaine, then was it uch aPriver that J 4 0
Might not Wade through it, the waters dannen was risen, c the Waters did MoWe as A cuce atounne riuer that inight not be waded oner.
6 And he saide vnto me: Hast thou seene this O thou sonne of man- and with that he brought me and taused me to returne to the riuer banke againe. (2) Meaning,
7 Now when Jreturned, beholde at ganzer. the bancke ofthe riuer were bery manp e
‘trees on the one fide and on the other. ccs.
8 Then saide he vnto me: These waters floive out toward the catt dn

| The prophecie

ee

runne dobne into the plaine, c come onthe north fide, from the maine fea to:

ndcomkorzta-

a

{) Signisieng that when
God bestow-

boundonce. che nunisterg
Thali by thete
‘preaching zom inany. which
Pere cities at thecogners of the falt oz dead sca.
(00 bey (Hat be hrre ol all sortes, and in as great aboundancc ag in the great sDecan where thep nre
Ne.
Chat ig, the wicked ? ecprobate.
* Or,tor brusies and fores,

Gen 48 d.

Gen. xii b.
Deu 34. a.

(R) Wp the tande of promisc be significth the {pitts tual land. myercof this
Wag a ligure.

into the fea: Which when it touuneth mio the sta, the. waters shalbe hol-

fone.

9 pea, all that liue and moue, whereunto this riuer commieth, chall liuc: and there shalbe a verp great multitude of filhe, betause these waters Ayal tome thither, for they shalbe holsonie: and cuery thing shall liue whyther the riner tommeth.

1 wptisriner Chatl the © fichers stand,

from En gaddi bnto® En Eglaim, and ther sprtade out their nets:for their fithe shalbe actording to their kindes as the

fishe or the w maine sea, exceeding ma-

ny.

Il — the © marishes thereof, and the pits thereok, syal not be made hollome,

they chalbe made falt pits.

2 Wythis riuer vponthe bankes therof on this ide and on that fide (halt grow aul trees formeate, whole leaues (hall not fade, neither shall the fruite thereof fall, but chall being foorth newe fruite attording to his monethes, kor the waters thertok run out of the sanctuarie:

and the fruite thereof shalbe for meate,

and the leaues thereof for meditine.

13 Thus saith the Lorde God: Let this be the border whereby pe shall inherite the jande according to the twelue tribes a Ilrael, Joleph shall haue two poz tions.

14 And“ ye shall inherite it one alwell as an other, concerning the which F lift vp my hande to geue it vnto pour kathers: and this lande shall fall vnto vou for ine

eritaunte.

i)
15 This isthe border of the ™ lande vp-

Ward Hethlon, as men go to Ze

16 (Aamely Mariah, erotha, Saban which ave betweene the borders of pa. maltus, and betweene the bowers of
Hämah, Hasar Patichon, that ipeey vpon the toastes ot Hauran.

17 Thus the borders fromthe fea foozth

thalbe Dasar Enan, the border of Da-

maltus, and the north northwarde, and

the borders of Hamah: this isthe north

18 The east fide chall pe mealure from

Pauran and Damalcus, from Galead and the land of Jsrael by Jordane, and from the border vnto the kast lea: e this is the tast part. f

19 The south fide chalbe toward Teman,

from Thamar to the waters of strife in
Cades, and the riuer to the maine fea: and that is the louth part towarde Teman. 3

20 The west part allo thalbe the great D sea, from the borders tül a man tomie

oner against Mamah: this is the west

part.

21 This lande shall pe part among you according to the tribes of Pirael,

22 And deuide it bp lot to be an heritage for pou, t᷑ forthe straungers that dwell among pou and beget children among vou: for pe shall take them among the chilozen of Ilrael ipke as though they
Were of our owne tountrep, and they shall haue heritage with pou among the chudren of Ylrael.

23 And in what tribe the straunger dwelleth, in the same tribe shall ye geue him his heritage, saith the Lorde God.

¢ The xlviii. Chapter.

Che lots ot the seuen tribes. 9 Che partes ofthe possession of the prielles and of the temple,of the Leuites. ok the citie, and ok the prince, are rehearled. 23 Che lots of the

other tribes. 3 Che gates of the citie.

Hele are p names of the tribes: from the north side to the coast towarde
Hethlon, tül thou

SP: * 4 BY 2
. N ö * 4.

mah and Hazar, eurer
— 0 Damascus nozthward the toast of Hantah, Dan
Hall haue his poztion from the catt

tömest vnto Ha-

quarter vnto the west.

Upon the borders of Dan, from the oe fide vnto the welt, Mali Aler haue his portion.

Upon the borders of Aler, krom ut east part vnto the well, Haul Nephtha haue his portion. N
4 Upon the borders ol ephthall fro"

the ealt quarter vnto the Welt, (hal Ma

nasses haue his portion.

eng, that inthio lor stau kug-

Dowie, ehtte

sho ud be no differente be= twecne Ich
110: Gentle. but that all
Gould be prt tatsera of th inheritaunce in their head
Christe.

5 Gponthe borders of Panalles fe

of Ezechiel.

the cat side vnto the welt, Hall Ephza-
˖ e his portion. ö

A 5 borders of Ephraim, from the cast part vnto the Welt, Mall Ruben auc his portion.

3 — che borders of Kuben, from the

alt quarter vnto the welt, hall Juda

e his portion.

g belponthe borders of Juda, kromthe catt part vnto the Welt part, chalbe the
G offering which they Hall offer of five and twentie thouland (canes brode, and oklength as one ofthe partes, from the cat fine vnto the west side: and the lanttuarie shalbe in the midst okit.

at ? The oblation that pe Halt offer vnto

e the Ford, chalbe fue and twentie thou-

* fand long and ten thouland brode.

jo And lorthese (even) for the palettes shalbe this holy oblation: toward the north fue c twentie thoufand (tong) toward the Welt ten thouland brode, towarde the east ten thousand bro de also, and toward the fouth fiue and twentie thousand long, ¢ the lanctuarie of the Lorde shalbe in the midst thereof.

u This fanctificd portion shalbe the priestes that are of the children of * Sadoc, which haue kept my charge, which went not astray in the errour of the chil-
18 of Jsrael like as the Leuites went astrap.

12 Therekore this oblation of the lande that is offered, shalbe theirs as a thing most holy, hard vpon the borders of the

Leuites.

And duer against the border of the prieftes Chall the Leuites haue fiue and twentte thouland long, e ten thouland brode: all the length shalbe fine r twenie EBoutant, and the breadth ten thou-

14 Of this portion they shall sell nothing, nor make any permutation thereof, no: alienate the first fruites ofthe lande: for it is holy vnto the Lorde.

„Tb ls, b,

pended into grist harter ;

G

€ 33

1; Andthe fiue thoufande that are left

ithe breadth ouer against the fine and kwentie thonland, halbe a prophane pa for the title, for housing, € for subthe ae the citie shalbe in the midst

16 And these chalbe the measures therof:

te 15 ah part fiue hundred and koure a and, and the fouth© part fine hunand foure thouland, and the east

Ba st, kizrert, e

part fine hundred and fourc thouland,

and the Welt part fine hundred ¢foure thouland.

17 The luburbes ofthe citie Hatt haue toward the north two hundred and fiktic, toward the south two hundred and fiftic, toward the east two hundred and fiftie toward the weet allo two hundred and fiftie.

18 And the residue inlength ouer against the oblation of the holy postion, chalbe ten thousand toward the east, and ten thousand toward the west:and it shalbe dueragainst the oblation of the holy pore tion: and the encrease thereof shalbe for their meate that {crue the citte.

1 And they that serue the citie, they shal D

serue it out ofall the tribes of Jlrael.
20 All the oblation shalbe fiue and twentie thoufand © with fiue and twentie thoufand: pe shall offer this oblation foure square, for the fanctuaric, and fo2 the poslession of the titie.

21 Andthe residue shalbe foz the peinte, onthe one fide and on the other ofthe
Holy oblation, and of the possession of the titie ouer against the flue and twentie thousand of the oblation toward the east border: and westward oner against the fine and twentie theuland towarde the Welt border, ouer against Halve the portion for the printe:tihis shalbe the holy oblation, and the boule ofthe lanttuarte shalbe in the nudst thereok.

22 Moreouer, from the possession ofthe
Reunites and the cities poleMan, that which is in the midst chalbe the prnces, betwirt the border of Juda and the border of Weniauun shalbe the princes.

23 Nobbe of the other tribes: fromthe east part buto the Welt, Hall Wenianun haue his portion.

24 Upon the borders of Weniamin, from the east hide vnto the welt, Matt Simeon haue his portion.

25 Uponthe borders of Simeon, from the east hide vnto the welt, shal Jlachar haue his postion.

26 Upon the borders of J sachar, from the east fide vnto the welt, (all Zabulon haue his portion.

27 Upon the borders of Zabulon, from the east part vnto the welt, shall Gad haue his portion.

2891 the borders of Gad at the south
{ioe toward Temanah, the border shalbe from Thamar, vnto the waters of strife to Cades, and to the iner e

i

clxvil

(c) Euerp wap tt shalbe
Gucs twentie thousand.

Cd) So that
Juda was on ihe north fine ofthe princes and
Lcuites poz= ciong. and
Bentamin on t he louth fine.

nety into the maine fea.

29 Thls ls the lande which ve Mal deuide by lot for aninheritattce vnto the tribes of Plract, and these be their portions saith the Lorde God.

30 These be the bondes of the titie, vpon the north part fiue hundred and foure thouland measures.

31 The gates of the citie Chal haue the names of the tribes of BPlraci, three gates ofthe north fide: one gate of Kuben, another of Juda, the third of Leut.

32 Uponthe east fide kiue hundzed and foure thoufand measures, with three

The prophecie

gates: the one of Josepl

Wenannn, the thio eet 1

33 Upon the south fire fiue hundred and foure thousand mealures, with the three gates:the one of Simeon, another of Jfachar, the third of Zabulon. }

34 And bpon the west side, fine hundred and fine thouland niealures, with their three gates allo:the one of Gad, another of Aser, the third of Pephthalt.

35 Thus hal it haue eighteene thouland mealures rounde about: and the name ofthe citie from that time foorth, halbe
The Tozde is there. :

Ihe bocke of the prophete Daniel.

The firft Chapter.
Che prophete sheweth the captiuitie of Jehoachim king of Juda, 4 Ol the chitdrenthat
Were in capttuitie the king commaundeth to choole which of them Mould be taught the

learning and language of the Chaldeans.

They are allowed the kinges keeding. s Was

niel abllaineth from the meate of the king of Babylon.

2 Xt Dah ik. a iti \

Uy RN TN Oo
N58 a FUT | A
1 i Al e a

AY e .
Ae Ay

— ep Ie the third pere ol the raigne of Pez boachin king of
Juda, came Maz

ox Gl DucHodONOsO2 King

of Babplon vnto
Hicrulalem, c bes

(o) Utade, te es. 2 · a le 25 a.

r

— — And the Lope de-

’ iy a we,

eA Wy

3 And the king spake vnto Alphenge re the © chiefe chanwerlatne, that 9 h Kunde should bang hin cevtaine of the child? of

of Plraci,of the hinges seede, andofthe

princes, ingaldes without any blemishe, but
1 SEED studious in al wildome, fulfull fo: knowledge, able to ptter knowledge, e luch as haut liuelinesse in thẽ that they may stand in the kinges glace: & whom they might teache the icarning r thetonng ofthe Chaldeans.
Unto thele the king appoynted a Bayly prouision every day, ok a portion of the hingesmeate, and of the wine which he danke, fo to nozishe them thece peres,

Jptlte

ni te

et.

king.
6 Min chelenowe were certapue of

| lael, aud Aʒarltas.

57 inte thet the chtele chamberlayne e, Laute other names, and called Daniel,
5 Baltassar: Ananias, Sidrach: Misael, a Milach:and Azarias, Abednego.

% 8 Wut Dantel purpoled in his heart that ne” he woulde not befile hym selle with the
, bonton ok che kinges meate, nor wich

berlapne.)
10 And the chiefe chamberlayne sayde vn-

lolute the questid: 10

orde which Cignifieth ag
"BOE tbc wont be the power of the degill.

of Daniel. |

that afterWwarde they might stande bez

the childzen ol Juda. namely Daniel, A-

king. iel, Ananas, Mlgel and Aa-
11 O prone but ten dayes with thy fers uauntes, and let vs haue pulse to cate, and water to dpinke, . ;
3 Then let Our countenauntes be loked bpon before th and the countenaunceg of the children that cate of the portionot the kinges meate: and as thou feett, deale with thy seruauntes. 0
14. So he consented tothem in this mat- © ter, and proued thenttendayes, .
1j And attheend of tet dayes their coun: tenauntes appeared fatrer and fatter dh :

in flethe then all the chlldrens which did r

eate the portion of the kinges meate.

16 Thus Melassar toke a wap the portion

boftheir meate, and the wyne that they shoulde drinke, and gaue them pulse.

17 As for these foure thildren, God gaue them knowledge and bnderftanding in
Hall learning e wyldoine: allo he gaue
Daniel bvnderstanding of all b. and dreames.

(3) S5 toning

Nocrall scten-

fo Daniel, J ant afrayoe of my l0rd the red deri. . king hi he hath appoynted vou pour 20 In all matters of wyldonie and bu: mieate and pour denke: Wherkore chonid derstanding that the King enquired of
Helce pour faces Worle liking then the them, he kounde them ten times better fhringatos ol pour age, x lo ye thal make then all the wyse men and foothfapers mie indaunger my head vnto the king. that were all his realme. „ eh eha u Then Daniel fayde vnto Melassar, 21 And Daniel abode ill vnto theo first be was . wpom che chiege chamberlapne had let vere of king Cyprus, 11
The.ii. Chapter: eee
„Che dreame of Mabuchodonoso?, 2 he calleth vnto him loochtaperg, and requireth ol them mia, oth) the dreame and the interpretati

ng COmmaundeth all the wile men of Babylon to be flapne, 16 Daniel requireth time to

king, and Heweth him his dreame and the interpretation eherof, 44 DE the euerlasting kingdome ot Cheick. 1
5A thecwosecond pere of en came, æ stoode be- 58 the raigne of Nabu- ore the king. ce Shaldtag
A chodonozo , had abu- z Andee bing lade vnto them: Ahaue ssc iit chodonosor a dreanie, N gel uren 8 hrs art yi WYerthozorwe his spi- troubled to knowe the dreame. ae eo
& ic Was troubled e his 4 ee e cant
2 21 Hleepe brake from hin. thekinginthe o Syrians speache, O tongue, but in bien the ang commaunded to cal the king, God saue thy life for euer: Shewe rh oes tes ange loothlapers, ¢ fozeevers, thy b. ten and we thai ban, rs j N 4 8 — many nation ee elende Mew the ung chewe the interpret

* (i The

The king aunswered at 5
Ehaldenns, The thing is gone fro me:

dreame with the interpretation therhoules made a iakes. *

6 yout if pe tel me the dreame puoi terpretation therof, pe fail reteaue 0 me giktes, rewardes, and great honour, therefore nen mete de and the mterpretation therol .. n a 7 They aunfiveredagaine,and laid: The king mutt shewe his te es the dreame, and so ioe we declare the inter metationtherof, or

8 : Then the king aunswered, faytng: J geen e, perceaue ol atrueth that ve would res eren dee ime he time ko lo much as ve lee the eme ti ing is gone fro me. dünn

a

d get

ren d Bh.
“A N — Hig 9 N en W , id fe

es

Ea, 9 ,
Cee

N

a 66 oeoe€
N 8 iY

e. A 7 N
“at ae e a i
Abe! 8 f
2 Hor
N
Nee false NN

N

1 A. aaa "36 Ne

de me ath hae iN 0

Iʒ So the deeree weut foorth, and the wile men were slapne : they fought allo to flay Dantel , with his companions.

14 Then Daniel staped the counsell and
Decree With Arioch the captapne of the kiuges garde, who was gone foorth to put to death the wile men of Babylon.

C

15 He aunlwered and sapde vnto Arioch

the kinges taptayne: why is the lentenee

fo bathe from the king; Then Ariotch

tolde Daniel the matter. 5

16 Upon this went Daniel, and defired

the king that he wonlde gene him lep-
Lure, and that he would shewe the king

the interpzetation.

ered and layde to the
Fye wul not matze me vnderstand the of, pe chall be drawne in pectes, dt vour

seruauntes the

mac eros 9 Therfoz tf ye wil not telinethedzeame, - the matte : S **

this is pont only purpose, pe haue prepa-

pared liyng € corrupt Wordes to speake befozc me, ttl the time bechaunged:therfoze tellme the dreame that may knowe that pe can declare me the interpretation thera kk.
Upon this the Chaldees gaue aunswere before the king, and sayde: There is no

Io

vad

which the king lpeaketh of, peathere is

man bponeatth thatean, tell.the thing x4 neither king; printe, nos lorde, that ener

aper, or Chald ea.
Il Forit is a rare matter that the king re: qutreth

allied süch thinges at a wyle man, footh:

neither is there anp that can certifie the king therof, extept the gods
Whole Dwelling is not with fleche.
Jor the which cause the king was Worth with great indignation e tommaunded to destroy al the wile men at Wabplon.

a'r TH 0 5 we ty 1 i) aie » 2 Ad. 1
. Vd LT AMER f >< U A
Ke Mp Yy eal 1 Se 2
8 * qj „ 1 4 e
8 aa ae NEG dis ay’ e i S 2. 4 8
N he 40 iti 8 a * + a J e i 5 pa „ 4
" Darah te 0 S Fe :
My hh i yes
— eu — a „ ot ;

W.

Li

=e i al
WOME raged oat

eee cant
<= 21 ngwaa ete PETE She 2 tes Mpegs wend awog sn vB on Ms sy pe Te S |

eM

„ * fig ? f
N ZS (em , pu

0 is honse, and
15 0 y Milael,

ü dok
18 That they choulde beleche the Go heauen for grace in this setrete,

i fut
Daniel andhis felowes, with erie

not. 5 led bn
19 Then was the setrete reucat. net i ina duenne ayled the God ol heauen. „The opin
20 Daniel ao aunswered, and in name of God be prapsed for * fo2 wyldome and strengthare

ns,
21 He chaungeth the times and (cal

of Daniel. }

eth albap kinges , he fetteth vp

apie : he geueth wyldome vnto the

wyle, and vnderstanding to thole that vnderstande.
D saperencalechthe deepe e setrete thinges, eknoweth the thing that lleth in darlinesse, for the light dwelleth with him.

23 Ithanke thee and prayse thee O thou
God ol iy fathers, that thou hast genen me wildome and strength , and batt chewed me now the thing that we desired ol thee: for thou Hatt detlared the kinges matter vnto vs.

Upon this went Mantel in vnto Arioch, Whom the king had ordeined to destroy the Wile mien at Babylon: he went and sayde thus buto him, Deltroy not the wyse men of Babylon, but being me befope the hing, and J hall chewe the king the interpretatlon. ;

25 Then Artoch broͤught Daniel before the king in all the halte, and sayde thus bato hun: J haue founde a man among the chidren of Juda that were brought taptiues, that Will Declare vnto the king the interpretation. a

26 Then aunswered the king and layd vnto Daniel, whole name was Waltassar:
Art thou able to shewe me the dreame which J haue leene, and the interpreta-

tion therof- =

27 Daniel aunswered in the presente ol the king, and sayd: As for this fetrete for the whiche the king maketh inquifition, there can neither the men of vnderstanding nor soothsayers, nor the wyle men,
15 gd of deftintes declare it vnto

4 ng: P *

a 8 Buttherets a c God in heauen that aa, keülaleth setretes, te sheweth the king

Mabuchodonoso; what is for to tome in

e Whithe thon halt seene in thyne head bponthy bed, is this.

E Dung, when thou walt in thy bed, houghtes came into thy mynde what ao 1910 ereafter: so he that is the
Anne eries, telleth thee what is
„meflorme this letrete is not lhewed
15 fo, aup wyldome that J haue more iit 1 other ltuing: but onely that ZI and ew the king the interpretation, tha that thou nughtest knowe the

bu 5, hc okchyne obne heart.
* he king sawest, and beholde, there
A great image: this great Dimage

che latter dapes. Thy dreame and that

whose brightnesle was excellent, doode before thee, and the kourme therof was tenet
32 This images head was of fine gold, „, his brest and armes of liluer, his belly tie te and his thighes of bralle. dean Se
53 nS legges were of iron, his feete were a. B. part of iron and part of clay. ane 4
34. Thou beheldest it til atone was tut water e without handes, which {mote thelmage dend ei bpon his feete that were of iron e tlap, ele le
AND brake them to peeces.

„the stonecomt

Then wastbesron ehetlap the bralle, fe

the hiuer and gold broken al together, x became like p chaffe of sommer floozes,
And the winde taryed them awap, that no plate was found for them: the stone that smote the image ‘became a great mountapne, and filled the whole earth.

36 This is the dreame: and now wil we shew before the king what tt meaneth.

37 O king, thou arta king of kinges: for the God of heauẽ hath geuen vnto thee a kingdome, power, strength, eglo2te,

38 And in all plates wherldener the chil: dren ol men dweil, the bealtes of the fistde,and the foules of the aire Bath he
Hcuenintothyhande, and path made 0 kien thee ruler in them all: thou art this c ae head of golde. N gene

39 After thee Mall arife another king- gane ere dome inferior to thee, c another third * Shun klngdome shalbe ofbzatle, whiche chall nas beare ruie ouer all the earth.

40 Thecb fourth kingdome shalbe strong ee as ron: kor as iron breakethin peeces and subdueth all thinges, and as iron bzuiseth all these thinges, cto) shall it breake in peeces and bruise calij.

41 Where as thon lawest the feete r toes, parte of potters clay c partofiron, the
Ringdomte Halbeoenided., but there Asthot ls, shalbe in it ofthe strength of the iron, for Sonett fo much as thou lawestthe trom niict de with the tlay and earth. een

le:the one
42 Andcas the toes ok the fete were part eee okiron and part of clay: co Ayal the king- cherte coe dane be part strong and part broken. agg
43 And Wheras thou sawest iron nurt fas on with clay and earth, they shall nungle he them selues with the. wseede of men and ahn pet not iopne one with another, as iron wa ehen be
Will not be mixt with clay. e
44. Andin the dayes ofthese kinges, shall wal ge ye the God of beauen {et bp aMingDdONIe, 5 ban which shall neuer be destroyed, and this (au Benning
Kingdome Mall not be geuen ouer to „
2 (ij) another

(a) Sewing

{hat the wol

18 not hnorwne

fez an idol so

long as it is

with ß workes man: but Whe

the ctremo-

nico end cus stomeg ate tc titedand vsed, 2 and the con:

kent of the

. made

kor hym.

Ihe prophecie

eople: bnt it Mall brrake and oh chen kingdomes, and it tat stand for euer

there was cut out of the

des widens whiche brake the tron,

mount 3 wae 1 the brasit, the t

1 so the great God hath syewed the king what shall come to passe alter this: This is a true dreame, k the interpretation of it is fare. N

46 Then the king Habuthodonoso: fell

downe vpon his kate, and bowed hym
{rife 1255 Daniel, and commaunded to ordeint orewardes and lweete odours

Mifacy ,and Abednego are acculed

28 Habuchodonoror conkelleth

Nn su * 5
A ee 28 f ee i
1 n Ni

Abuthodonozor ß king

Whiche was thzeestoze cubites hie, and fire cuz
A bites thicke: he let it vp
\ in the plaine ol Dura,

in the prouinte of Wa-

Then Mabuchodonoor the king sent foorth to gather together the dunes, lordes, and nobles, the indges and ollicers, the Deputies, and sherikes, with all the rulers of the prouintes, that they night tome to the dedication of the

the lilue r and gold in

47 The king
Ok a rode pout Godis d God of eH a.

45 iLike as thou farvelt that withont

49 Then Daniel made request to the

e. iii. Chapter.

i image, which be commaundeth to be worchipped. 8 Sidrach,

1 he fing etch bp & gare acculed- ber delpised 11 kinges Brie scar tan

3 to the king. a commaunded to worchip the mage, 16 they retute to do

p ta “tho 25 By belecfe in God they are deliuered trom the fire, g the power of God, alter the lighe or the mirade,

made an image ol gold,

48 Sothe king made Daniel;

4 Then an Herald crpeda loude:

eco gun
5 That whe pe heave the noyle of tl) 1 8

aunkwered Daniela tayo: gods, aud the Lozde of hinges and a yes eee uealer of secretes, seing thou touldest — nina ueale this setrete. :

Sie ar hare ces na man, and gave him many e gre tes tpi he made hym ruler ofall the countreys of Babplon, and the chieke of the ruterg aboue all the wyse men ol Wabplon.

Benen
Aunbition oz fits but ry

mth kt . w lch defers were

king, and he fet Sidrach, Milath, and Abednego ouer the charge of the proninte of Babplon: but Daniel (late Jo in the kinges gate. *

one ol the bingen chick couuscllonta,

image whiche Habuchadonazor the . ing had set vp. gon ote
Meo the pales, losbes, and nobles, the tudges, Kofficers, deputies e Mert e
With ali the rulers of the pounce, da wee thered them together vnto the donne, ern, ting ok the image that ar debe . zor the king hadlet vp, ther nod one ee fore the image whiche srabuc eg, zor had set vp. To poult fa ions, fee ne natto 7 eal tude ar

cen tise

is commaunded sD people, and languages,

et, harpe, hawme, plaltries, dur ad al ma rofinirumentes okmulicke, ve fall downe and worchip that golden inage that Nabuchodonoathe king hath let vp. {
Wholo then falleth not dowue c 022 chippeth, shall euen the fame houre be cattinto the mids of a hot firte kornate.
„Thetlore when all the folke heard the nople of the toznet, trumpet, harpe,
5 shawme, plaltries, and al instrumentes okumlicke, then all the people, nations, and languages fell downe and worchipped the golden image that Habuthodo-

noʒor the king had set vp.

3 Howe were there tertapne men of the
Chaldees, that went euen then, ande tried out an 1 de the Jewes.

% They lpake, and fapde vntd the king ben. Hañduchodonozor: O king, line Foz euer. to Thou O king, hast made a decree, that

A

the cornet, trumpet, harpe, shawme,

of mulicke shall fall downe and worschip the golden image:

ich. eo" my gods no: Worthi |
7 ahip the golden image
, chat Jhaue let voz 2 : ae 15 Nowe therkore be redy when ye heare the found of the comet, trumpet, harpe, awme plaltries, dultimers, and al inwamentes of mulicke, to fal downe and ae the image whithe J haue
1 elo tf pe Worthip it not, pe halbe rt Real into the mids of a hot kan deimate: ko whois that God that
16 SRE you out of my handes7
ACY, Difach, and Abednego aun-

ef Daniel.

tuery man that Hall heare the found of

plaltries, dulcimer, € all instrumentes

CIXXI.

swered the king, and layd: O abuchodono zor we are not carefull to aun- © c swere thee inthis matter: bone ae
17 BGcholde, dur God whom we serue, is Loa pare able to deliuer vs from the hot firte mover” fornace:and he wil deliver vs ont of thy wender hande D king. ar
18 And though he will not, pet chalt thou a s knolbe O king, that we will not serue 0. Fr, | thy gods, nor worchip the golden image ag ee which thou hast fet vp. 1 ae of
19 Then was Mabuchodonosor full of in- Lanvin: dignation, so that the countenaunce of abe waz his face thaunged vpon Sidzach, Mi- us ce sach, and Abednego: therefore he char- M2310 gen and commaunded that they chend do e heate the fornace, one seuen tunes moze 1 then it was wont to be heat. dite map n
20 And he charged the miost valiaunt men denne of warre that were in his arnne, to bind ware.
Sidsach), Difach and Abednego, and to
(ast them into the hot firie fornace.
21 Sothele men were bounde in their coates bofen head attire, with their other garmentes, and cast into the mids of the hot firie foruace.
22 Therekore, because the kinges tommaundement was straite, æ the fornace was extecding hot, the men that put in
Sidrach, Milach, and Abednego, the flamble of the fire destroyed them.
23 And these three men Sidrach, Milach, and Abednego, fel downe in the mids of the hot firie foznace bounde.
24. Then Mabuchodonozor the king was astonied, e rose vp in all haste: he spake vnto his counlel, and sayd, Dyd not we cast three men bounde into the mids of the fire- They aunswered and sayde vnto the king: It is true, O king.
25 He aunlswered x sapde: Lo, F fee foure men loose, walking in the mids of 5 fire, and they haue no hurt: and the foͤurme of the fourth is like thefoune of God. Tn ie.
26 Upon this went Mabuchodonosor baz Anse to the month of the hot firte foznace, ws. he spake also, and fapd: O Sidrach, Milach, and Abednego, ve seruauntesofthe bye God, go foorth, and come hyther.
And fo Sidrach, Milach, x Abednegg tame foorth of the mids of the fire. N
27 Theuthe dukeslordes, and nobles, and the kinges counsel, came together to see thele men, vpon whom the fire had no maner of power in their bodies: in lo mich that the very heere of their
Dead was not burnt, and their clothes
2 (ij) vn-

ire felt vpon them.

26 Then babe Haäbuchodondzoz , and sayde: Blessed be the God of Sidrach,
Milach, and Abednego Which hath sent his angel, and deliuered his seruauntes that put their trust in him, and haue al-

* ‘The pro hecle —— vnchaunged, yea there was no smell 29 Therfore I make a decree, that euer

people nation, language, wh; y any blasphenue againt the Gon grate drach- ilach, and Abednego, chalbe drawen in peeces- and their Hones har, be made atabes:beraule there is no God that can deliuer after this fore,

teredthekinges tommaundement, and 30 So the king promoted Sidrach, i feoparbed their bodies rather then ther fach, and Abednego, in che prollig would serue or worship any God, except Babylon. 5
3 a e The. iit . Chapter. eth againe.s Daniel interpreth (€.29 Nabuchodonoror it put out
Ahe e. rath: wich ales 34 he contesseth the power ol God, and is restored vnto his kingdome. :
I Abuchodonoʒor king, and the light thereok to the endes ol ay
A e onto all peopic natios, the earth. and languages that 12 The leaues therof were fayze, and the
. Nedwelvpon the whole kruite therof much, and in it was meate bine 3 earth, peate be multi- kor all: the beastes ofthe fielde had tha: e bliedamong pou. dowes vonder tt, and the fouesof the
2 * I thonght it good to are dweit in the bowes therol: al fleshe shewe the sigues e marueylous wozkes ked Of it. that the hie God hath wrought bpd me. 13 Jlawe in the vilions of my head vpon
3 O how great are his signes, and howe my bed, and beholde a Watcher and a o wichen mightie are his wonders: his kingdome holy one tame downe fromheauen, an
Cb) Reade

is an Weuerlasting kingdome, e bis dominion is frõ generation to generation.
4 J Mabuchodonosoz beyng at rest in

mp boule and florishing in my palace, ace 5 Salbe ac dzeame, whiche made me a he frayde, and the thoughtes vpon mp bed, fan oft With the viliõs of my head, troubled me. memes 6 Therkore made J a decree, that they shoulde bring all the Wyle men ol Wabylon betore me, that they might declare vnto me the interpretatidõ of the dreame.
W 7 So came the Wyle men, the soothsayers, the Chaldeans, and wilardes:to whom
FA tolde the dreame, but they coulde not

Delve me the interpretation therof.

8 Tlll at the last Daniel came before me
(whole name was wWaltaflar according to the nanie of mp God) which hath the spirite of the holy gods in hym, x befoze
Hint J tolde the dreame, saping:

9 O Baltassar, chou prince ok Wyle men; forsomuch as J knowe that thou hast the spirite of the holy gods, e no letrete troubleth thee: tell me therefore the vilions of iy dreame that J haue seene, andthe interpretation therot.

to Thus were the vilions ok my head
Hpon my bed: And behold, J Caw a tree in the mids ofthe earth andthe hepght therof was great,

1. A great tree and strong, and the heyght therok reached vnto the heauen,

chap. 2. f.

14. And cryed mightily, saying thus: Hew dobne the tree, breake of his braunches, shake ol his leaues, & statter his fruite abroade: that the beastes may get them away from vnder hym, and the foules from his braunches. N

15 Neuerthelesse, leaue the stumpe of his rootes still in the earth, and with a band ok iron and brasse binde it] among the grasse of the fielde, e let it be wet with the deawe of heauen, and let his portion be with the bealtes among the grasse of the fielde. N orwell

16 et his heart be © cyaunged krom re sae mans (nature and let a beastts heart be cn geued vnto hym, and let seuen times be dan passed ouer hym. a

17 This sentente is according to the de were’ erce ofthe Watehers and the vequicll Av cove tording to the word ofthe holy ones: be innic.res tause liuing men Mould

€

poe tate hyghest bath power ouer the kingdon ee of men, and geueth it to whom Au hym, and letteth vp ouer it the bale mong men.

18 This is the dreame that J buchodonozoz haueseene:i ation .
O Baltassar, declare the suterpteen af aeg therof, forfomuch as al the Wyler my kingdome are not able to ve it fon l
What tt meaneth:bnt thou caust do

aft b. che spirike of the Bol gods 15 m b hen

_ — of Daniel. clxxip.

19 ts eld his peace by the spate of one 29 Sd after Wtwelue monethes, the king m ane that oer and his thoughtes troubled. wWalked in the patace of the ada hs Declare ht hum. 0 the king spake and fayde, O Wabylon. | huspiyoe qpaltaltar let neither the dreame nor 30 And the king spake, x lapd: Is not this tov theinterpretatton thereof trouble thee. great Babplon that J haue buylt for wem altallar aunswered, saying: O my the house of the kingdome by the might Mot
Tord, this deeame be tothem thathate of Wi and for the hondur of mp meh, maiestie-

ce the interpretation therof to thyne mona u 5 | 31 Whple thele Wordes were vet in the ebe

anuerl

ete terridle

rlaries. ga „o As kor the tree that thou sawest- Which com Jas great and mightie, whole heyght reached vnto the heauen, and the fight therof through all the world,
1 Whole leaues were fapre, and the fruite
©) therok much, and tu it was meate for all: paver the which the beastes ofthe fielde had their habitation, and vpon whole braunches the foules of the alred it:
22 It is thou, O king, whiche art great and mightie, for thy greatnesse increaeth e reacheth buto the heauen, so doth thy domimion to the endes of the earth.
23 But wheras the king law a watcher, anda holy one that came downe from heauen, and lapd, ewe done the tree, e destropit, pet leaue the stumpe ofthe rootes therof in the earth, and with a band of iron c brasse binde it among the grasse of the fielde , xe let it be wet with the dewe ofthe heauen, and let his portlon be with the beastes ok the fielde, till t h leuen tinies pasle ouer him: gauche 24 This O king is the interpretation, yea ba t ls p berp Decree ol hym that is hyghest blkal, and it toucheth my lord the king. bene 25 Thou halt be cast out from men, and thy dwelling thalbe with the beastes or the sielde: with grasse shalt thou be fed like ho ren, thou must be wet with the deawe ok the heauen, yea leuẽ times hall passe ouer thee, till thou knowe that the hyghest bath power ouer the e ok men, x geueth it to whom

rent 26, Poreouer, where as it was sayd that gane (he stunpe ofthe roote ofthe tree chould dene, be lekt fat: it betokeneth, that thy ee Kingdome chall remayne whole vnto rani Wee, after thou halt learned to knowe
5 2 tbatthe power commeth from heauen. n 27 Loherkore, O king, let my counlel be ac-

e febtable vnto ther, and©byeake of thy

1 sata tes by mertie towarde the pooze:1o, be rnc, ere be a healing of thyne errour.

*8 alll hele thinges touche the king Na-

ines bp rightedulnesle, and thyne ini-

kinges mouth, there kella vopte from de bin co heauen, saping: O king Rabuchodono?-
302,tothee be it spoken, Thy kingdome is departed from thee, 8

32 And thou (halt be east out of mens com: pante , thy dibelling shalbe with the

beastes of the fielde: fo that thou thale

eate grasse like oren, and seuen times shal passe ouer thee, vntu thouknowest that the hyghest bath power vpon the kingdonie of men, and geueth it vnto whom it pleaseth hym.

33 The very fame houre was this matter e fulfilled vpon Mabuchodondozor, fo that he was cast out of mens compatic,¢ did eate grasse ithe oxen, and his body was wet with the deawe ol heauen, till his heeres were growen as Eglesckethers aud his naples like byrdes tlawes.

34 When this time was past, J Madu? oo Shade, chodonozor lift vp mne epes buto hea- nene uen, and mine vnderstanding was resto- yorwrce red vnto me: then gaue Ithankes vnto *.

the bighet 8 magnified € praysed hym that liueth for euermore, whole poiver is an euerlasting power, and his king: donie is from one generatiõ to another.

35 And all they that dwel vpon the earth, ate to be reputed as nothing, and according to his will he worketh in the arune of heauen, among the inhabitonrs of the earth: and there is none that may re-
He his hand, or fay vuto him, what dock thou-

36 At the fame time was mpne buderstanding geuen me againe, and GF was te

stoed ) tothe hondur of my Fingdome, egen mp glorie and my beautie was restored den:

vnto me, mp tounsellers and opzinces den, fought vnto nie, and J was established aer, inmy kingdome, e my glozte was aug- dee mented towarde me. ge
37 Powtherkore J Mabuthodono zo Sooonis mep prapse, and extol, emaguifie the king of anne heauen, whole workes are all trueth c ebener his wayes indgement, and thole that n 0
Walke in pryde he is able to abase. Dosone,
B city) The

allo conkesleth

— °°» TT)... C2...

‘The pro hecie

Balthalar king of Babylon. abutina the vessels of the temple, seeth an hande Wps

Ing -Walthasar made
5 A great feast to a thoudoyle ofbing . sand of his princes, and
Sal aher. dranke wine © befoze

to ere go Mithe thoulande. eg And Walthalar when a he had tasted the wine, e bring hym the golden cen , and liluer vessels, whiche his Gather frat chee Nabuthodonozor had brought from areas the temple in hierulalem, that the king
Gers, and his printes, and his wpues, and his

an b., contübines, nught denke therm.

maoumne 3 So were brought the goldẽ vellels that biobres. they had taken out ok the temple ok the ben em: Tordes house at Hierulalem: and the eh Weng Hing, and his princes, his wyues, and

dhe fe his concubines dzunke in them.
They drunke Wine, € praysed the gods
4 golde, siluer, brasle, iron, wood, and

one.

5 In the verp lame houre there appeared fingers of a mans hande Wepting right

Sehe dee oneragaint the tandlesticke vpon the

in beiten. plaster Of the wall of the kinges palace, and the king sawe the knockles of the hande that wrote. f

6 Then chaunged the king his countenaunte, x his thoughtes troubled hym, so that the ioyntes of his lopnes Were

Heben tooled , and his knees sniote one atno Sor, gaint the other. ths igh Wherfore the king cryed mightply,that lere en, bhey should bang the foorhfayers Chalgeen dees, k wylardes: the king fpake allo to the wile men of Wabplon, & lad, Who fo ran reade this wryting, € shewe me the interpretation thereof, chalbe dothed with purple, and haue a cheyne of golde about his necke, and shalbe the third ru; ler in the kingdone.

8 Upon this tame al the binges wile men, but they toulde neither reade the wrpting hoz hee the king the interpretaion.

Herston? Then Was king Watthafar greatly
Pee, oubled , and his countenaunce was beth chaunged in him, and his puntes were

Jraudmother: of al like lphod

@ Haman great age,

that couid ree

me mdtt the

actes of De triti.

8 Che soothlapers called of the hing, can not expounde the wepting,

j Daniel is called, which readeth it, and interpreteth allo. vo Balthalar beyng llaine,

Darius succedeth in his roome.

astonted.

10 Howthe“queene by reafon ofthe tatke ofthe king e his princes, came into the bauket houle:and the queene spake, aud

sapde, O king, lyue for euer: let not thy thoughtes trouble thee, and let notth
Where be 1 100 0

I ere is a man in thy kingdome t hath the spirite of the holp Gods wah hin: dertandlng do father, lahr, and vnderstanding, Ewyldome, ine the wpledomeok the gods, was founde in hym, Whom the king Nabuchodonozor thy father the king (Flap) thy father made chiefe of the wyse men, footh: we lapers, Chaldeans, and wysardes. daten

12 Betause that such au abonndaunt {pic w vite, bnolbledge , and vnderstanding, to aa expound dreames, to open letretes, eto ane, declare harde doubtes, was kounde in kan him, yea cuen in Dantel whom the king ane named Waltassar: let Daniel be called, aa. e and he thal declare the interpretation.

13 Then was Dantel brought before the king: so the king spake vnto Daniel, and sayde, Art thon that Daniel, whiche art ofthe children of the taptiuitie of Juda, oe my father the king brought ont of Jurie- 5 C

14 J haue hearde of thee, that thou halt the spirite of the holy gods, e that light and vnderstanding, and excellent wyl dome is founde in thee.

tation. os” bY
13 thou king, the most high god gau to abuchodonozor thy one dome and maiestie, and honour, 1 0 al K
19 And kor the maiestie that he gate med rat people, nations, and languages tre de

29}, Bilt iit.

of DANG +

—aredbefoze him: he ue whom he es he lmote whom it pleated him: ine, whom he would he let vp, and

whom bellt he put downe.

no But becaule his heart was loktie, and

strengthened in pride, he was pepoted from his kingly throne, and they toke his glory krom him.

u ht Was drluen dut from the lonnes ok men, his heart was made lpke the bealtes, and his dwelling was with the wüde Alles, they fed hun with gralle ipke Oren, and his body was wet with the deawe of the heauen-tül he knewe that the most hie God bare rule duer the kingdome of men, and that he appoynteth ouer it whom fo euer he pleaseth.

22 And thou his sonne, O Waͤlthalar, halt not submitted thyne heart, though thou kne welt all thele thinges:

2j But halt lit vp thy selfe against the
Tode of heauen, so that the deflels of his houle were brought before thee, that thou and thy printes, with thy wyues and concubines, might dzinke wine thereont: and thou halt praysed the gods of liluer and golde, of halle and iron, ol wood and stone, which neither

his ininde

clxxiiy.

fee, heare, nor vnberstand: As for the
God in whose hande consisteth thy hreath and all thy wapes, thou hast not — glozified him.

24.% Ihen was the knockles ofthe hand e sna sent from him, and hath witten this ordne wetting. fer Hout

25 And this the Writing that he hath writ- fssbeco tor te: MENEC®) MENE,THECEL,VPHARSIN. tbeneamen-

26 snow the interpretation of the thing is Sade eden this: MEN E, God hath numbred thy wrx kingdome, and brought it to an ende. eren

27 THECEL thou art wayed in the balaũte, and art founde wanting.

28 PHERES thy kingdome is deuided and a geuen to the Medes and Perses. Spec

29 Then commaunded Walthalar, and dome. they dothed Daniel with purple, and a chayne of golde about is necke, and made a proclamation concerning him, that be should be the third ruler in the kingdome.

30 The very lame night was Balthasar the king ofthe Chaldees laine.

31 And Darius ot the Medes toke the
RACs being theceltoze Eto peres of age.

2 matter, but also og tome thinke, the one ro figs

nie the ende
‘he king,

YC prus his sonne in lawe
Qouc him this tilcot honour, alchough Cpros in cffect had the dominian.

J The. vi. Chapter.

«Daniel is made ruler ouer the lordes. Che fmagtnation of an act against
Daniel, The proclamation of the act wherot Mantel is accused vnto the kung as a tranigressour. 16 He is put into a denne or lions by the commaundement ok the king. a he is deliuered by kaich in God. 24 Daniels acculers are put 4 bnito the lions to be torne afunder, 26 Darius by the proclamation of a decree,

magnitied the God ol Daniel.

T plealed Pari-
Alus to set ouer his

kingdome a hun-
JN red and twentie

aouernours, which

chould be ouer the whole kingdome.

fet thee printes, ot poem Daniel was one, that the gouerthere might geue accomptes dnto mage and the king shoulde haue no da-

a n this Dantel was preferred a-
Pd buntes and gouerners, for the eof God was plenteous in him: so

that the king was minded to set him

. Whole reaime.
Vberkoze the rulers and gouernours

Aboue these he

fought an ottalion against Daniel Segen. concerning the kingdome, but they sraccsor soo toulde finde none ottasion nor fault: for teers ctoce he was fo faithfull, that there was no arten,“ blame nor fault founde in hun. gan
Then laide thele men, We shall finde o baer none occafion against this Daniel, ex- weaned cept we finde it against him concerning arenen the lawe or his God. sro oe
6 pon this Went the princes and lordes e. together vnto the king, and laide this vnto him: Bing Darius, liue for euer.
7 Al the rulers ofthy kingdome, the officers and gonernours, the counsellers and dukes, haue consulted together to
„ Wake a detree for the king, to establish
* statute, That who fo destreth any petition either of any god or man within thele thirtie dayes, extept of Oe 70

The prophecie |

oe N
8 @

(o Becaufe he woulde not by hit icilence fhew that he eon sented ta this wicked decres,he fet open hw wins dowes io: wird Hierusalem when he praped, both

gods promi-

les to his pto-

ple, when they
Would prap toward that temple: & alfo
Chatothers might sce, chat he woulde nes nee conlent in heart nor deede, foz thele sewe dars, to a thing contras tp to gobs
Nez.

king, he shalbe tast into the lions denne.

8 Now O hing confirme the decree, and

seale the Writing, that it be not chaunged attordingto the lawe of the Medes

and Persians, which altereth not.

9 Wherekoze king Darius fealed the
Writing and Decree, 2

10 Mow when Daniel vnderstoode tha he had scaled the waiting, he went into his housc, aud the © windowes of his chamber towarde icrufatent stoode open, there kneeled he downe vpon his
üntes three times a day, he made his petition, and praysed his God, as he dyd afo2e time.

n Theuthese men allembled and found
Daniel making his petition, and praping vnto his God.

12 o they came to the king, x {pake befoze hum tonterning his comaundement fay: ing: O king, Hatt thou not sealed the detree, that within thirtie dayes Wholo requireth his petition of anp God oz man, but onelp ok thy selfe O king, he shalbe cast into the denne of tions: The king aunswered and {atd, ea itis true,
According to the lawe of the Medes and
Perses that altereth not.

3 Then aunlbered they, and faide vnto

theking: This Daniel which is of the chüdren ofthe captiuitie of Juda, O
King regardeth neither thee nor thy detree that thou hast sraled: but maketh
Dis petition three times a dap.

14 When the king heard thele Wordes, he

ox)

N one 5 5 2 N
1 4 N N po [>i 0 ii
00 / aoe 5 127 i b i mi : nll i I 10 Nen
' * Cr

wits

was fore displeased with him selfe, and set his heart on Daniel to deliuer him, rand he laboured till the fonne went downe, to deliuer him.

15 Then these men allembled vnto the king, and laid vnto him: Knowe this O king, that the lawe of the Medes e Pers
{es (is) that the tommaundement ¢ statute which the king maketh, may not be c altere. ;

16 Then the king tommaunded, and they

t) Thus the
Spiched males tale yl lewes dp conan

bought Daniel, and they tast him into zu

the lions denne. Nowe the king fpake gar

oftunts ¢P:

net
Duto Dame, ¢fatde: Thy God whom seins

thou althay seruest, euen he wyll Deliver

innocentes thereby pte zan

bee. ee
17 And there was brought a stone lalde u

vpon ß mouth ofthe denne, this the king wie

e, no be

fealed with his one ring and With the as

signet of his printes, that the purpolt concerning Daniel Mould not be chaun-

ged. 5 a
18 So the king went into his palate, 1 remapned fatting, neither was there 1 ny instrumentes of muficke brought before hint, ¢ his sleepe went from 60 ‘

1 But betimes in the mapa 1 aK breake of the dap, the king arole,¢ 5 » in all halte vnto the denne of the 0 1 ö

20 ob as he came nye vnto the e 1 erped with a pitious voyte vnto ae pea the king spake and laide buto ruin el: D Daniel, thou seruaũt of 11 a :

God is not thy God whom tour

lions: al wap, able to deliuer thee fror, Then

1 Then Daniel faide vnto the king: O con euer they came at the grounde ok the

rane >" ping, lite for euer. denne. a

, 4, Mp od hath leut his angel, which 25 After this, wrote king Darius vnto al

oat, path (hut the lions monthes, lothat people, nations , e tongues that diwbelt n hey night not hurt me. for mynec vn- in all landes: Peate be multiplied vnto

(fe glttinelle is founde out before him: and vou.

ee, ag korthee O king, J neuer offended 26 My tommaundenient is in all my do-

thee. . minton and kingdome, that men feare

te, 23 Then was the king excee ding glad for and stand in awe of Mantels God: kor he

eee” hin, ctommaunded to take Paniel out ts the liunng God which abideth euer,

een of the denne: So Daniel was brought his kindgome Mhall not kayle, and his

wom Jul ol 5 denne, Eno maner ok hurt was power is euerlasting. 5

ane founde vpon hum, kor he put his trust 27 It is he that delluereth and saueth, he

el in his God. -' BOLH Wonders and marueplous workes

be 24. And as for thole men which had actu- tn heauen and in earth, he bath preler-

woe sed Daniel, the king tommaundedto ued Daniel krom the power okthe lions.

muse bring them, e to tast them into the li- 28 So this Daniel prolpered in the raigne

binn, ons denne, them, their children, e their ok Darius, and in the raigne of Cprus

ence Wyues: lo the lions had the maisterie ok ok Perlia.

be them, and brake all their bones alunder

ar 5 The. vij. Chapter.

gun 12 bition of foure beastes is sbewed vnto Haniel. Che diliots is interpreted of koure

an- Fhingdomes OF the worlde. 27 Ok the euerlasting kingdome of Christe.

i eek are
FS Tee:

A AEE ttt reef e eee S 5 wenn the kirst yere ol Wal- the sea, one divers from an other. sconce
Athalar king of Waby- 4 The first was asa lion, and Had Ez Selen lon:, sawe Daniel a —gles winges: Ibeheld till his Winges ene dreame, e there were Were pluckt from him, and he lifted bp e. visions in his head vp- kromthe earth, x let pon his fete like ace
: sabi bead: which 91 7955 e there was geuen hima mans ende zeame he wrote, E de- heart. i N Singes were
2 pet the summe ih 5 5 Wehold another bea, which was} the agen matin: gy antel spake and saide: Pfaweinmy — fecond,Wwastykea®beare, and stoode e N ate. aon by night, and beholde, the foure ppon the one fide: betwirt his teeth in az
, ar Windes Of Heauen trouve vpon the his mouth he had three ribbes, andit % ° ”
Mad ea, Was salbe vnto hunthus: Arile, cate vp conv gr nd foure great bealtes came vp from much fleshe. Perfens and
ö :

6 Then LO codes.

6 Then Jloked, and beholde, there was an other lyke vnto a“ leopard, this had

Ce) The third ö winges as a foulc, cuen “ foure vpon

monarchie ol

the Macedos :

Cems, the backe : thisbeatt had foure heads, bs and there was power geuen him.

taines, which

5 Atter this Pla in a vision by night, t beholde, the fourth beast was grinime

e and horrible, and maruepious ftrong: it
Heben, had great tron teeth it deuoured ü dempire, Whic

stroyed / stamped the residue vnder his feete, it was vnlike p other beastes that were before it, for it had “ ten hornes.

was ag a mda ec, coulde mot de compared to anp beat, vecause the natuce of none Wag as ble to cxpesst

there came vp among them another lit-

four lie honne, before Whom there were three
Eugen as pf the first hornes pluckt awap: and be-

versc. 24.

ofa man, c a mouth speaking presump-

tuous thinges.

9 J behelde tul the thrones were let vp, t the auncient ok dapes did fit: whose garment was white as snowe, and the

heeres of his head lyke the pure wooll:

his throne was like the firie flambe, and his O wheeles as burning fire.

Need 10 There issued foorth a firie streame, and

scnmeof Went out from before him: a thouland

thoufandes ministred vuto him, and ten thonsand thousandes stoode befoze him: the indgement was let, c the W bookes opened.

Then toke J hecdetherunto,becaute of the voyte of the proude Words which the horne spake: F behelde till the beast
Was ilaine, and his body destroped, and geuen to be brent in the fire.

u As concerningthe other beastes, they

4 had their dominion taken away, but

their lines were prolonged for acertaine time and leason.

¢ 3 J law in villions by night, aud behold

Ch) That to ch a was belozt elmeg.

prnices thrones, to be made so, thot they mi ght be moued and tes moutd the caselict.

(4) Th: 1 ment ot the 11
Gr conuning of Chzille.
When es the fopil of God may plainclp ecucateo dy bis gofpeit..

Gynec there came one in the cdoudes of hea: yet nt uch ke the fonne of man: whith i onbinnans —- ONO the aitcient of dayes, before whom ker wan e they brought him. lad dees 14. And he gaue him dominton e honour, began: AND a Riugdone that al people, nations, and languages should serne him:his dominton is an cuerlasting domimon blondes. which Mail neuer be taken Awap, and his kingdome Hall neuer be destroyed.
15 J Daniel was troubled in my lpirite in the midst of my body, and the bifions of ny eet me atraybe. e é e me vnto c W ont of them that
6 Lee stoode bp, and astzed Him the ee ae er el Hetolde me, me vnderstan g tation of these thinges. —

3 AsPeonhdered the hornes, beholde,

hold, this horne had eyes lyke the epes

17 These great beastes which ares, are foure kinges which Mati ar; 9 the arp high 1
18 Wut the!“ high saintes tha
à kingdome, and possesle a Ahne foz euer, euen for euer and euer.
19 After this, J required to knowe the

i kin chu

Uingdonte Sn

people,

which

3570 any

trueth concerning 5 fourth beat wie te was so vnlpke the other bealtes, anne D :

Hozrible , Whole teeth were of iron
— . — aime Which deucaled roped, and stamped the vnder his keete: - | oak
20 [Hoettred). also (to knowe the trueth]

touching the ten hornes that he had bp: on his head, and this other which canie pp afterwarde, before whole fate there fell downe three, which horne had eyes anda mouth that {pake presumptuous thinges, and loued with a grimmer bie

fagethen bis felowes, see
21 Jbehelde, and the lame home made 1 he

battaile against the fainetes, yea t preuapledagaintthem,

22 Until the auncient of dayes came that the iudgement was geuen to the high fainctes, and till the time tame that the sainctes had the kingdome in poslession.

23 He gaue me this aunswer: That fourth bealt, halbe the fourth kingdome vpon earth, it chalbe vnlike to all the king:
Domes: it Hall deuour, treade downe, and destroy all other landes.

24. The ten hornes, are ten kinges that
(hall avile out of that kingdome after whom there Mall stande vp another, which shalbe vnlike to the fir, and he chall subdue three kinges:

25 And he shall speane wordes against

the highest of all, he shall destroy the

chaunge times and laͤwes: they shalbe geuen into his hande vntill a tune, and times, and the deuiding ofa time.

26 Wut the indgement call sit, and they chall take away his Dominion, to con fume and destroy it vnto the ende.

27 And the kingdome and dominton,¢ the greatnes of the kingdome vnder the

whole heaue, halde geuen to the“ peo Fe

ple ot high lainctes, Whole kingdone is aneuerlatting kingdome, and all poll ers shal serue and obey it. {
28. Hitherto the ende ofthe wares: J
Daniel had many cogitations (wl) tronbicd me, e mp cotttenatice ne ged in me: bunt the wordes JJ kept lil:

mpheart qThe

. Digh fainetes, and thinke that he may e

rl

of Daniel.

J. The. viii. Chapter, ilion ok a ftrife betweene a ramme and a hee goate. 20 Che vnderstanding of the
An the battaile bet weene the king of Perlia, and the king ol the Grecians.

Ythe third pere of the

Lae SO raigne of king Salthapane, Ear, there appeared a oon J vilion vnto me ceuen) gate eel (Ss [ joneo me Daniel, © af: st | (CV eker that Which J) had ot seene in the beginning.

CK
: saw in a vision( and when JJ {arb it, po 4 rai the palace of Susis, Which is
, in the prounte of Elan) and inthe e phon me thought J was by the riuer

Ulai. ene, z Then loked bp and saw, e beholde, there stoõde before the riner a Oramime which had two hornes: and thele two

es omnes were hye, but © one was hyer

ce’ then the other, e the hyest came vp last. pte 4 J law that this ramme pulhed with
Bae” pig hornes against the Welk, against the mess nopth,and against the south: so that no vers Obeattes might and before him, nor not” delend them from his power, but he did same ad hin lifted, and became great.

e, ¢ And as J konsideredbeholde there ae, Came a bee goate from the welt, dane OUCH the whole cart}, and touched not

e the grounde: and this goate had ac
, home appeared betwirt his eves. mon 6 And he came vnto the ramme that ane had the two hornes (whom F hadseene on tandurg by the riuer) and rãnne fiercedan. ly bpon him with his might.

Dinom -

me 7 AND J lawe him drawe npe vnto the

en ramme, being very fierce vpon him, yea bee, He finote the ramme and brake bts an ibo Homes, neither had the ramme fo be, nmlich strength as to stande befoze him: eee, bulk he calt him downe to the grounde, cena (Ode hum onder his keete, e there was fa naue able to deliuer the ramme out ol ea his power.

e 8 Therefore the goate waxed ereeeding
. Steat, a when he Was at the freongelt, ving’ —DiSgteat one was broken: Then ac, Stelb there other fone notable ones
Faint

mthe steade of it, towarde the foure e Windes of the heauen. !

tins >? Ad out

gen litle Cte of one of them tame foorth a ae Dome, which waxed very great en addon louth toward the eal,
Naina 10 cy Ward the © pleafaunt lande.

uen, WHereok it did cat some downe to

per.
13 Upon this, J heard one of the fatnetes

„It grewe vp vnto the hoast orhea-

the grounde, and of the starres allo, and trode them onder koote. pa i Rea, it grewe vp against the (a prince teen

d to abolishe

ofthe hoast, from whom the ch daply swestctaien,

nd to cast

Clacrtelte) was taken awap, and the pla- dennen tes of his sanctuarie taste downe.

12 And power was geuen vnto it ouer

the dayly (tacrifice} for the iniquitie, and it shall O tast downe the trueth to the aan grounde: aud thus shall it do, and prol- machte

time the true doctrine, and

fo cozrupt gobs setuice. t) Dne ct the

speaking, and one of the fainctes spake warn.

Vnto co Palmont, saping: how long shal eon the vilion of the dayly (tacriticey and of bas ene. the intquitie of delolation sendure,] to

geue both the lanctuarie and the power to be troden vnder foste: a e
14 And he aunlwered ine: Unto the anten

sectetes.

euening and the morning, two thonsand mareuder.

that 19, 2300.

and three hundzed: then shal the sanctuarie be cleansed. N
15 sNoW when J Daniel had seene this

dapcg.

Difion and songht for the vnderstanding „nere,

ok it: beholde, there stoode before ine) ce. like the sunilitude of a man. a is And J heard a mans vopte © pee ost,

cMweene the

tweene Mat which tryed, and lade: O d Ae

Gabriel C mabe this man vnderstande oo chs the bifion,

17 So he came and stoode by me: but J was afraide at his comming, aud fell downe bpd my face: Then laid he vnto me, Understand O thou sonne of man: for at the w tine of the ende this vision wen
[chalbe.]

18 Pow as he was {peaking vnto me, J fell in a slumber vpon np fate to the grounde: but he touched nie, and set me vp in mp place. ;

19 And he faide, Beholde, J wy! Herve thee what shalbe in the lalt wath: fo2 in the time appoynted it Malbe fulfilled.

20 The ramme which thou lawest hauing two hornes, is the king of the Medes and Perses,

21 And the goate, is the king of Grecia: and the great horne that is betwirt his eyes, that is the first king.

22 Wut Where as it brake e foure other rose bp in the steade: (it lignisieth, that out of this people kun a

| but not so: : kingdomes, g 23 And

Our dat 10.

Wherebp is vnderstanded
Chrisse the ecucaler ot alt

power to coins munde the engl, declareth thoes

d.
(b) That g. the bifion snhelbe futfits ~ led kererkter in tinte conne-

23 And in the ende oftheir kingdome,

„ when the wicked are come to the full, a

Chet liilig of a© flerce tountenaunce, and

Intiochus.

who should be

impudent

chamcleg, sub-

ilanderat? 24 His power shalbe mightic, but not in
0 o his strength, e he Chall destroy wonderfully, he Hall prosper c practise, and destroy the © mightic and the holy peo-

(b That 0,

vim, ond the
(wep,

(a SOtherwypse called Astiageg.

b) To Cp-
25 led with umdition, wet about War res tn other tountreps, Ethers fore Dartus
Had tye title,

though Cpruo were kung

excellent prophete, pkt be daply encteased in know - liedge by tea ding the
Icriptures.

te thee,

W bnto thee,

vnderstanding harde lententes, chall stand bp.

ple.

25 And through his policie also he shall tause craft to prosper in his handes, he
(hall extoll him selfe in his heart, and in prosperitie he shall destroy manp, c ma-

ny one shalbe put fo death in his thinelle he shall stande vp againg prince of princes, but he chalbe de
Wen he mbc
26 Andthe vision ok the o enen ae the morning, which isDectaren 8 15 ri therfore feale thou vp the vition fopit Wen“
1 f .
27 Uponthis was J Daniel f. that J lay sicke te tante baytg: dun when J role vp, J went about ö kinges bufines, and Was astonied at the vision neuerthelelle, no man onderstoodell.

ee
Ye q stroped

kant

"Sang ¢

„
8% S

The. ix. Chapter.

x Daniel delireth to haue that prefourmed of God, which he hath promiled concerning the returne of the people krom their banichment in Babplon. 15 A true conkellion.
20 Daniels praper is harde. 21 Gabrtel the angel expoundeth onto him the vilion of che tieetcore and ten weebes. 24 Che annopnting of Christe. 3 The bunding againe of Hicrufalcns vnder ehemia.rs The death ol Christe.

Mthe lirst yere ol Daz

rius the fonne of © A-

I hasuerus, which was

Sy ofthe seede of the ghe-

609 des, & was made king

duer the W realme ot the Chaldees,

2 Euen inthe kirst pere ok his raigne, J
Daniel vnderstoode by bookes the mumber of the peres, Wherofthe Lorde
{pale bnto Jerenue the prophete, that he Woulde accomplishe seuentie peres in the delolation of Hierusalem.

3 And Iturned my kate vnto the Loo
God, and sought by praper and supplication, with falting fackctoth,and alshes.

4 Jpraped vnto the Lorde my God, € made my confellton, faying: O Torde
God, great and fearefull, which kepeth toucnaunt and mercie with them that igue hun and kepe his tonmaundeniente:

5 We haue finned and haut committed iniquitie, and haue done Wickedly, pea we haue rebelled, x haue departed from

_ thy prcceptes, c from thy iudgementes.

6 We woulde not obey thy seruauntes the prophetes, that spake in thy name to dur kinges and princes, to our forckathers and to all the people of the lande.

7 O Lode, righteousnesle belongeth

vnto vs open shame, as is tome to passe this day vnto euerp man of Juda, and to them that dwelat Hie: rulalem, vea vnto all Hiracl, whether

5 N N

N

they be karre or nye thronghout all the landes Whither thou halt dauen them, betause of thelr offences that they haue done against thee.

8 Bead Torde, vnto vs, to our kinges t printes, to our foretathers that haue offended thee, belongeth open chame.

9 Unto the Lorde our God pertayneth tompassion and forgenenesle, though we haue rebelled again hum. Ow ete:

10 And we haue not obeyed the o vopte sumtin, of the Lorde dur God, to walke in his so, lawes which he layde befoze vs, by the zn hande of his seruauntes the prophetes. wns

It Bea all Ysrael haue transgressed and gone backe from thy lawe, lo that they haue not hearkened vnto thy boyce: 5 den
Wherefore the © curfe and oth that is , witten in the lawe ok Moyses the ler sore. uaunt ot God, again whom we haue offended, is poured vpon bs.

2 And he hath confirmed his wordes, which he spake against vs and againtt dur iudges that iudged vs, to bring bp-

on vs such a great plague as neuer was eres Deets lykt as it is now tome to passe in Hierulalem.

13 Dea, all this plague as it is written 1 the lawe of Moyles, is come ppon n 5 yet made we not our prayers before t 0 ;
Tonde out God that we might cae naine from en and vndt stand thy trueth. 6

14. Therkoze hath the Loo watchen Oy on the plague, and brought tt vpon

€

ot Daniel. 11 0 XXV]. .

orde dur God is righteous in touched me about the tune of the eue- eocanoc,
5 15 woes which he doth: fo: we. ming ob lation: "= to Serene a0 not hearken vnto his bopee. 22 And be enfourmed me, & talked with ese:

declared there

nd now Lord our God, thou that me, and saide: O Daniel, Jam nowe soure rete:

uentie yeres

15 A ‘ ie, * . 2 5 1 hüte bande halt beonghe come koorth to geuc thee knowledge c tie sexes
1 gaan olthe lande of Egypt to bnderstanding. 2 te ceaitien get thy selke a name, which remapneth 23 At the beginning of thy supplitations, met but ne nis day, we haue irined; we haue done the commaundement came foorth, and doe wabedib. 0 2 7 212 “eof ie Jamcome to shewe thee, korthou art poise, g 16 O Tofde according to all thy righ- greatly beloucd: therefoze vnde rstande ranch

penal fi esethe thee let thyne anger the niatter and eonsider the vision. aer

5 ne — ahr pat be turned alba froni 24 Scuttle Weekes are deternuned ouer eg rot wer chpatticofplecutalem,thp Holy pub koe thy people dt ouer thy holp titte to fmish renne betaule of our ines andforthe wicked: the wickednes, and to seale vp pfinnes, urch ta nelle of our kathers, Hierulalem and thr and to reconcile the imiquttte, Eto bung we ae people are a reproche to all them that in cuerlalsting righteousnes, to seale vp the coining areaboutdse i ht oo. thebifionand prophecie, eto annopnt tem?

17 Nod therefore O our God heare the the mot holy: . . „ meter, paper of thy seruaunt, andbhisinterce 25 Rnowe therkoze and vnderstand that f

den fion: O let thy face! chine ouer thy e krom the going foot) of the com- lege

ln, (anctuarie that lpeth waste, for the“) maudement,to bring againe the (people) put.

3 , . (n) and theke pest Wondes lage. and to builde Hierulalem, vnto Messtah an scenes

a 38 Om God, entline thyne eare e hear:- the peinte there Halve seuen“ Weekes ene, pte W eyes, beholde how wee and threelcoze and two Weekes aud the ere e e delolgted, yea and the itte allo hie) krete ldalde bini agame, and the wall, ieee

; 0 ö oundation of

ts called alter thy name: kor we do not (euen Jin the O strattnes of time. cor e

rooney bielent dur prävers before thee in our 26 Alter these threescore æ two Weekes elne fie olbne righteoulnes, but in thy great Malt Mesliah be Maine, r o not fo hum ene

kin lert ies. gen {elfe: and the people of the prince that en sevens ) O Lode heare, O korgeue Lozde, O. Khaleome, chall destrop the cite and the co ceuins ee Lodeconhder and doit, deker not, (anttuarie, and theende thercok shalbe dare pon. e bozthyne owne laue O my God: because with a fludde, and vnto the ende ol ehe dee
„thy namets talled vpon thy titie k vpon battel it chalbe destroyed vy defolatios. Ceres ue pie. „ 27 Peshall 1 tonfirme — ere inom 20 As J Was pet a speaking at my prapers, with many kor one weeke, and mee ann. ni knowleaging myneownefinnes the imidstof the weeke he fait taule the la- b lasen finnesofmy people Jlracl. viesentng crrlite and the oblation to Peeafic, aud ae

rom the

eee lo myne intertesüͤon befor. the Lord my kor the ® duerspreading of the abhoun- kundirger ts

. . inpit to cht chalet God for the holy hül of my God: nations, he shal mane it delolate, leuen) puticot e u Bea ae was pet ipeatsing in my ‘onttl the cont ee icra ec
: N : 10 mi + A of tis te
Sr Prayer, te man Gabriel oo ee ,, scien, Meee

kt) Aeaning Ctius Meine eee een alt big s ard
1 * both the tem ple and the people wuhogt el futter. aa

The. x. Chapter. 70 ut 05 5

8 , ching the gol-

Chere appeareth vnto Danlel a man clothed in linnen. 1 Which sbeweth him wherfore he was lent. dagen

4755 ned his $20 =

1 | SE @) third perce of and wine there tame none within mip mae e een of deen, wa no, A bw not once auropnt e
1 ve there was chewed vnto mw felfe till tHe whole three weenes o stan aga CO" Dantel, otherwyle cal- dapes were fulfilled. dberrele ba en 0 ed Waitaflar, amat 4 Upon the foure ¢ twentith day He eon

5 SEL eet a ite rue een e ead lide ot that d vege 8 2 ut it is vet a Ong ine Ak! Al CE Cinch oa ian, butoft: he vnderltoode the matter, and F Jlitt bp nwne cyes,and lovee: AMO DE has

Se, perteaned what re lothed in linen, whose neo nomen
Sue the bifion was. holde a man clot h Kue beer ite time, J Daniel mourned edle were girded vp With fine golde ene etpace of three weckes of Bayes. of Uphas. rn 7 ed 3 J ate no pleakaunt brrad, as fo; lech 6 His body was lpnte the tir Tas fone,
. 0 ER 0 + at . n a al st Cod
ö 85 apeming et Hierutarmann . eber baff tere fene eee

The prophecie

his face to loke vpon was lpke lightening, his eyes as lampes of fire, his armes and feete were ipke in colour to pullished brasse, and the vopte of his wordes was tyke the vopte ofa multitude.

7 And J Daniel alone sawe this vision, forthe menthat were with me law not the vision: but a great fearcfuines fell vpon them, so that they fled away and hid them selues.

8 Therekoze

this great vilion, and there remapned no strength in nie: for mp colour was turned in me into corruption, and J retepyned no strength. a

5 Pet heard the vopte of his wordes: and when J heard the vopte of his
Words, J fell astonied bponiny fate and mp face toward the earth.

10 And beholde a hande touched me, whichset me vp vpon my knees, and vpon the paulnies of my handes.

n And he fade vnto me: O Daniel, thou

welbeloued man, take good Yeede to the
Wordes that J lay vnto thee; and stand in thy place: for vnto thee ain J nowe sent. And when he had laid thele words vnto me, I stoode bp trembling.

was left alone, and law

there by the kinges of Persia.

14 And J am tome to shew thee w

Daves: {an weer ung beater
: vll be lon fie ab 1 105 J pet or the nig:

15. Nolbb whẽ he had spokenthele vnto me, J tast downe my hebt grounde, and held my tongue.

16 And beholde, there touched my lippes one very lyke vnto a man: then opened
J my mouth and spake, and fae brito him that stoode betoze me, O ny lorde l creel and 0a are turned out

plate, an aue retepned no strengt h ome.

17 For howe tan the seruaunt of this nv ode, talke with my one beg; such a one? And as for me, straight way there remapned no strength in me, neither is there breath left inme.

18 Then there cane againe and touched ine one lyke the appearaunte ofaman and he strengtheued me:

19 And laide, O man greatly beloued feare not, peace be vnto thee, be strong and of good courage. So when he had spoken vnto me, IJ was strengthened and salde, Speake on my Lode: kor taʒou hast strengthened me.

12 Then laide he vnto ine, Feare not
Daniel: kor lince the first day that thou didst let thyne heart to vnderstand, and

20 Thus lade he: Fnowelk thou where: r fore Jam tome bnto thees now wyll J komad returne to fight with the prince of the dun

to chatten thy elfe belore thy God, thy Perses: assoone as J go foorth,to, the l b) een — OZDES were hearde, and J am come O printe of Greke lalde chall tome. ae bo rage kd thp wordes. 21 Meuerthelesse, I wyl chewthee that G adden 13 Wut the punte ok the kingdome or that is noted inthe stripture of trueth: ae

nbicnce did not onely hin:

Persia withstoode me one and twentie and there is none that helpeth me in d ene

arg, da pes: but Io, Michael one ok the chiefe thele thinges, but © Michacl pour wre eos, babe: be intes came to helpe me, x J remained unte. pedo home baue further 2

raged. tf G dd Th : G h

had not fent JIhe. xi. apter.

me to rcsist .

rc: J prophecte of the hinges of pertia. 3 Ot the kingd " vei. of gupt.and ofthe bone ehereot. is DE eye battalte with ehe ethene ee
Prohte ofthe :

— d inthe first pere of tie king, that shal rule with great doml-
. Darius of Bedia © non, and do what him llt. ak, eect) Da 4 9 5 stoode to comfort 4 And when he thal Hand bp, his king S erte bim and to strength dome chalbe ® proken, ¢ chalbe deuided
Feen a bum. toward the foure windes of the heauen. nene ep And nowe Well JF and not toward his porteritie,noz accor’

shewethee the tructi:
Wehold, there shall stand vp at 000 ne kinges in Persia, but the fourth shalbe rarre richer then they all: and by his 5 streugth € byhis richelsle he shall stirre

ding to his dominion Which be ruled: 9 e foz bis kingdome fhalbe pluckt bp, euen Fade.
; for others besides these. 1
Er. . ; And the (k) king iy font Ohare at 3
Fon Eine n f mightie, and None) of his princes, and 4e ic 05 bp all against the realmeof Greke be thall 1 12 055 him and beart gane, i laude rule: his Dominion chalbe a great donn: Pirin

70 en
“Mirth Eerze
3 Lbemthatt there arif 0 . ban . q — 1 N „ te 1 cons ah ale Az and ae

rid.

ae ti i en of Daniel. .

Me 6

e north for to make an agreement, he shall not retayne the power of

gai ther Mall be continue s the Warme, neither

ait 11 his arnie: but she halbe delluered gard 5

(to death) and they that bought her, and he that begat her, and he that com:

a korted her in thele limes.
15 aah of the budofher™ rootes, thal

ande vp in his steede, whiche shall
* 42 — . arne, and Mall enter into the fortresse of the kyng ok the north, and do with them Las he lit) and shali prenaple. *
And chall also carp captiues into Egypt their gods, wich their moltenimages, with their pretious veslels of siluer

peres then the kyng of the north. me 9 So the kyng of the south shall come into his kpngdome, and Mall returne vas. into his obne lande. . nee 10 Wherfore his sonnes Halbe styrred bb, and Mall gather together a mightie ur great hoast or people, æ one shal come and ouerllowe and paffe through: then shall he turne agayne and be firred bp at his fortresse. a IC Then p king of the south shalbe angry, jen, And Chal tome foorth to fight with hin
=n leuen) With the king of the north, for he hall fet forth a great multitude, e the mmultitude halbe geuen into his bande,

d: my Cell:
N.

brake ian atte) bratty
KUDOS du.
Bits be month the tte

i bp
„ In I ns Bag 3
Slnttp: iene due

Tubing
Mocteite

and their heartes shalbe tifted vp, foz he hall cast downe thoulandes: but he shall not still prenaple. .
For the c kyng of the north Mall rez lurne, and shal {et fodrth a greater mul: titude then afore, and (hall tome foorth
0 (alter certayne veres) with a nightie
,, akute and great riches,
. ae fame ti there chat enna: ande bp again the kyn fouth fe that the Atlan hp ip
(Op people allo Chall exalt them lelues to establiche the bision, but they shal fal.
Othe kyng of the north bp amount, x take the ürong cities:
AND the armes ok the louth fait not reit neither his tholen people, neither
. i thete be anpirength to withstand. e N he When he tonumeth, be tall hanun as be list and no man fal Gand den dankt him: he shall stande in the plea-

4 dernen kaltclo

Nate, Gerd co hice ar pr ta HPN his prophecte. Hi t Il sbedwe

. Edwin wich ge 4 ¢ Churche, arc be the 19 ogo. 2 ele captarne 49copag, Bert not able to wilhltandt

Bhs
Mie tt
Was

and of gold, and he shall continue more

u Then the multitude shalbe proude,

ec seditious chyldrenok

| xxvij.

And in the ende of peres, they chalbe launte lande, whiche by bis hande that 9: uel

weth that he

be tonsumed.

st ‘apned to ether, c the hinges daugh- ö agen zs ec ofthe outh shall come to the kyng 17 Agapne, he chall set Dis face to enter tins, ber e

with the power of his whole kyng- waer es dolne and his confederates With 15 „ dera zee. thus hall he do: and he lhallgeue hm sees tee der Bes ann to destrop dae her

a no on thinges cone
5 0 hym. Ae en bie wie
18 Alter this shall he turne his k Werte bis the iles, and (hall take e ure Teens

u peine Chall caule his chame to light S232 bpon him, belide that, he chan caule his der oc owne chame to turne vpon him selke. dean
19 For he Mal turne his kace toward e md eatesothivowae lande: but he halbe fe

ouerthrowen and fall, and be no moze er. fonnde. f he
Wag to call alt

20 Then Mall stande vp in his place a cares ies, vapler of taxes in the glory of the Binge bade

dome, kater a fewe dayes he chalbe de- an stroyed, neither in wrath nor in battel. er

21. In his steede there shal stande vp a vv boca, otoctas vple perlon, to whom theyshal not geue Sime, Cys the Honour of the kingdome: bnt he 0
Chali come in peaceably and obtaine the wrd

mie into Gees kingdome with flatteries. ce) whereas
22 andthe“? armes shalbe ouerflowed ene with a flud before hym, and shalbe bro- Pucher ed ken, x allo the prince of the couenaunt. reh
23. And after the leage made with him, a he n
He Mall Worke deceiptfully: fo he Mall ese vst come bp, and oucrcome with a fall Sea's people, bach a
24. He (hal enter tito the quiet and plentt- Y hen full prouimte, and he shal do that which encoder bis kathers haue not done, noz his ka- fan thers fathers: he Hall dende among Jan a them the pray, and the spople, and the wa fe substaunce, yea and he chall forecast his ehen deuices against the strong holdesseuen] SE for a tyme. thee arate
25. Allo his power e heart shall he stirre and ag bp with a great armie againk the kyng den be ol the south, the kyng of the fouth Mat: Ae be moued vnto battayle with a great S and a nughtie hoast allo: neuerthelesse e he w Chal not stande, for they shall fore- Seleucaa hig cast deuites against him. Death, e wag
26 Bea they that feedr of the portion of . 4s: his meate, {hal destroy him, and his ar- Ruez mie Hall duerflowe, aud many Mall cenie; fall and be slaine. eie
27 These two kinges hartes shalbe to do Done ih one
As milchiefe, c they Malt talke ol deceipt ee at oue table, but it (hal not prosper, for ipl notontpe vet the ende shalbe at ö tune appointed. rad en
2 28 Then an wa galt. 4p) fei der that boron: Shin AEDES Lacan
(ee) fox Butiocbas came Hoos emt bin en ge = he ang ero hin h) And ce a DIL ee Chub) he ple nip neobrine fpalt takt trace and banktt together, pet in thets heartes chien. uam ah.

(i whiche be fhalleate of the Jewes in fpopling fics rusalem and the cem pit, € this is tolde

then defore, to

mout them to

mocnce.
“he Thie is, the Nsmane power fhall come ogate him: to Puduus Popiitas ambassadout, appointed him to Depart in the Bomancs
Mame, cawhich thing he odap-

ud cough wich geieke: € o tcuenge his

ewes that
* korsokt

the coucnaunt ;

ol the Lozde: irk he was called a galust

) tg this

Was nothing

liniptus, ¢

tupt the puce

ttantie although thep

(a) The ans

trouble at

mang, and

Wichael.

science, kno-

rage, he came sganst the : people of God

J letondt time en) with the

power ol Gon

fo began to coz

seruice of god,
1. Mach. 6.4, d) They that

rcmnupne con-

xtligion.
(t herd he exhozteth the godly to cons

fhouloc perisbe a thoufande euneg and thougheheir miferie endure neuer lo long. ©

Church destitute, so he wpll not deliuct it all at once: but fo helpe, ag they may (tpllicemeto tight onder th? crosse, as he dio in the te ofthe Wachabees, whcrof he provheciech.

Whole courfe of t

Walde in great affliction and

hres tom-

nert that God
Soplt sende his

his lande with great © substaunte, and fet his heart against the Holy couenannt, so (all he do, and returne to his owne lande. 0

29 At the tyme appointed he shall come agapne, and go towarde the south: but the last (all not be as the fick. -

30 For the ships of Chtthim Mall tome against him, therkore heshalbe sorte, and

returne and fret against the holy couenaunt: fo shall he do, he Chall leuen ! vez turne and haue intelligence with them that korsake the holy couenaunt.
And Warmes {hall stande on his part, and they shall pollute the sanctuarie of
© streugth, and shall take away the

dayly [facritice} and they Mall {et vp the
* abhominable delolation. e *

32 And such as wickedly breake the touenaunt, (hall he caufe to sinne by flatterie: but the people that knowe their
God, hail preuayle and prosper.
Thole alfo that haue“ vnderstanding among the people, shallenkourme the multitude, and fo2 a long season thet hall fall with sworde, with fire, with captiuitie, and With the taking away of their goodes. 9911
34 Nosbe when they shall fall, they shal-

be holpen with a title helpe, but nianp

chall cleaue vnto them faynediyx.
35 Bea some of those that haue bnderstanding shall fall, that they may be try-

ed, purified, and made Whyte, tyll the.

tyme be out: for there is a tyme appointed.

36 And a Mkyng shall do what hynn list, he shall exalt and magnikie hym selfe against al that is God, pea he thal speake marneplous thinges against the God
Of Gods, and he shall prosper tpl the
Wrath be fulfilled : for the determinati-

map, fhall deuide the land for gayne;

41 he shall enter also into the piealaunt

As Gor wyll not leawe his x

ut hal *

tluto

theic —
12 Thay
Ve Bed of”
DOW adh,
Shesithey ellceme chen

stones and pleasaunt thinges.

39 Thus (hall he do in the holdes of
Mauzzim with a straunge God whom he shall acknowledge, he chall entreale his glorv. € Hat tause them to rule over

ONE power

about allch

Gods, and

0 Ul. *
Aadee

tence otfeane

40 And at the ende of tyme chall the king Rs. of the font puche at pin, thehing mie of the north Mall come again him lpke lage a whirlewind, With charets, horsemen, We aud With many shytbpes: he hall cutee ate into the konntreps, aud Mall ouerfowe ane and passe thronggg. 0 .

both eg land, and many countreps shalbe ouer- Smeets, throwen: but thele shall escape out of an his hande leuen] Edom and Poab, and dean the thiefe of the thyldren okt Ammon. n

42 he lhall stretehe foorth his hande alfo vpon the tountreps, and the lande of
Egypt tall not escape.

J Wut he Chall haue power over the treasures of golde and of siluer, ¢ oucr

all the pretious thinges of Egypt, and of the Libyans and Ethiopians in his

ted.

tome to his ende, e none

5 ( Wecaule the angels put pose la to chewe che t persecutions ol the Jewes, vnto the comming of Chzilte, ht nowe abet olche „ eet the Bomanes, hleyt he noteth bp the name of a yng, who Wert Without all rellgion, e contemned the true Gon.
(u) So long the trauntes sball prcuaplt, ag God hath appointed to puaishe his people: but he sheweth that ie is but fox a time.

The. xii, Chapter.
2 He prophecieth the returrectton okt g of Daniel. of the dead. The darknesse of the prophecie

+ SA] ILD at that tyme chal
2 e ggichaͤel stande bp,
W LN My | the great prince, which

been of thy people: there shalbe a tyme ok trouble, suche as neuer

standeth for the ep

was sinte there began to bea nation, vnto that fame tyme: and at that a thy people chalbe deliuered euer? be. chat halbe found written inte var the ee
2 Andmanp of them that ficet 15 ;
Dutt or the earth, chal awake, tor rn

euerlasting life, lome to ante ual ar

; ontempt. f
Pie yev tbat be © yple, hall thine as
4 the brightnesse of the firmamenk: and they that o turne manp to righteoulnelle, as the starres for euer and euer,
Blit thou O Daniel hut vp the wordes, and seale the booke till the time

code · po ien

enmut,
Bet

and there, aud knowledge shalbe ensed. a

chen J Daniel looked, and beholde

f there stoode other two, the one on this

uwe
A

ot ant

y 1 ar 00!
, us

| er. . 5 che
6 and cone) sapde vnto the man clothed ase

ofthe riuer, When shal the ende of thele wonders bes

and his left hande onto heauen, and sware by hym that liveth for euer, that lit ball tarx]j fora o tyme, tymes, and a

T.

7 And I hearde the man tlothed in linuen, which was ouer the waters of the riuer, When he held vp his right@band -

— —— — — eee
* fers * 1
; E. 1 fe
1 J ad

halfe: and w

plished to scatter t

hen he Chall haue accom: he power ofthe holy

people, all these thinges

Then J beard t not: then sapde

XVI

shalbe finithen. -

© (hall be the ende ct thete thinges:

And he fride, Go ofthe eude: many (algo about here

kedlp, and none of the fine of the banke of the river, and the vnderstanding, but

other on that five of the banke of the

n innen, whiche was ouer the waters

the wordes are tlosed v the tyme of the ende.
Jo Many shalbe purified, made white,

And tryed: but the wicked chall do wie:

derstande.

alway,

Pandfeated tyll

Witked Mal haue the Wyle chall vn-

And from the tyme t
(facrittce} shalbe taken

hat the v daply and the

abhominable desolation ‘fet bp, there halbe a® thonfande two hundred, and mnetie dapes.

12 Blessed is he that wa meth to the thoufande, and “fine and thirtie dayes.

Wut go thou thy way tyll the ende be, u

for thou sh

The ende of fle prophecie of Danie

Cie

2 (ij)

N,

pteth and come gene

eit, but J vnderstoode W
J, O my Lord, what

thy wap Daniel, for

Frem the bite be bie t by sacriktce shall take awap the
Cactifice and teremontes of the lawe, the destrattlon ot the temple and efs

ets bp

thzee hundzed, se bse

PNG that ehe thalbe
€ pet the

dled a bis Charche,

10 ne alt
1117 ie . .
NN 4 = e 7 6 7 a ~ x ghee fi)
. Lid 6 Oe ly UND CAR ia i te,

HE Worde of rani the Torde x Gf || camebnto sD-
@/ atl fea the sonne of Weeri, *in
7 ! tie dayes of
Al Dsea, Joathan, Abas,

, as, bpnges of
Juda, and in the tyme ol Jeroboam che sonne of Foas kyng of Ilrael.

Leuixxib. 2 When the Lord spakt first vnto Osea.
Sens, he lapd vnto hym:- Go, take vnto thee diene a Wife of foznications,and chploren of hathacutos fornications: for the laude Hath comabi be mitted great kornication (departing from menos the Wolde.

Nane, 3 So he went and toke Gomer the

daughter of Deblatn: whiche conteaued and bare Hin a sonne.

4. And the Torde fayde vnto hym, Call his name Jezrahel: 1 8 Wpll shoztlye auenge the blood of Jezrahel bpon the Houle of Jehu, and Wyll bryng the

The firft Chapter. a

ie. 10 57 4002-0 e *
Che tyme wherein Olea prophecied. 2 The wolatrie of the people. 10 Che cal ling of the gentiles. 11 Christe is the head of all people.

r

E 1
0 ra
Lf Wet ery 2 * 2 *
W 0
CD UTR 2 bear] "

y

Ur ok the houle of Ilrael to an

nde.

5 And inthat dap wpll JJ allo breake .; the bowe of Jlrael, in the valley of
Jezrahel.

6 And she tonceaued agapne, and bare

à daughter: and (tbe Lorde) sayde vnto

hym, Call her name Loruhamah that

18, not obtayning mercy) * for J Wypll uo 4 fee

more haue pitie vpon the boule of HE

rael, but J wyll vtterlp take them away. et J wyll haue mercy bpon th

Houle of Juda, and wu laue them, euen

thorowe the Lorde their God: and wil

not fave them by bowe, [Worde, battell, horses, or horsemen.

8 Mobbe when the had wayned Lor hamah, che conceaned againe, and bare afonue. :

9 Then sapd he, Call his name Loan. mi c that is. not my people): for pc are not my people, therefore J Wyll not be

io Het the number of the chyldren d fal

e Gena xl c
4. Rec

umher be mealured nor tolde: and

Lace poe ae pe are not my people: it (hall be lade Ditto them,” Be ave the cyplozen of dni the lining God. _O .

palbeasthefandofthelea, which 11 where it was layde vnto

— . am *
6 22214 N. 5 * ‘ 5 foe 4
1 „„ 2 „% „„ ty = — — „ „ ae
- “ wes bad ae . « ene: 5 8 52 * hal ef
5 The. ii apter-. ene
11. N
P 2 2 e we
. eye — = *

Then chall the children of Juda and Ezechs7.<. the chyldren of Ilrael be gathered to-
“gether, and appoynt them selues one

head, and they shall tome vp out ol the

— : for great shalbe the day of Bey

Pawel. ee me ae,

4 ae

che people ts called torepentaunce, 5 He shewech their idolaterle. and threat.

neth them, except they repent.

Ell pour brethren that

=a SI ehep are my people,

: and pour sisterne, that they haue obtapned

As for pour mother,

ivi her and reproue her,? fo2 he is not my oe neither am J her hulbande: let her therelore put away her whordome krom her kate, and her adulterie from her brestes: ‘tl

r aęijen as (he came into the worlde, and make her as a wyldernelle, and as a duype lande, and flay her kor thyrlte.

Mad.

nitation. ac lot, and He that bare them dis come to tonkulion: for (he sapde, J wyll go al ter my loners, that geue mme my bread and my water, my Wooll and flare, my oyle and my drinke. 8

Way with thornes, and make a hedge, that the shall not finde her pathes.
7 And though.tye runne after her louers, pet Hall he not ouertake them: line Je shall secke them, but not finde them.

oe tomy first hulbande: for at that tym nowe.

„;bestowed on Waal.
Theresoze wy

pe shall chyde with

5. Let J Grip her naked, and fet her

„Then chall the lay, J wyll go and reit was better with me then

bene > And she dyd not knowe that J gaue ber corne, and wine, and oyle, and muluplied her luer and golde, Which they

returne and take ay my come in the tyme thereol, and

up Wine in the sealon thereok and fet a-

Sapne my wooll and my flare (whiche 4

gaue her) to touer her shame.

lo Aud nowe wyll J dilcouer her
Mame (every in the fight of her louers, ere xi. and no man (hall deliuer her out of my 5
‘Handes, uF 1 *

1. Moreouer, J wyll take away all her myth, her holp dayes, her newe Dave moones, her Sabbathes, and all her solempne feas tes.

12 JJ wyll destroy her vineyardes and figtrees, thereof the sayde: These are mp rewardes that my louers haue genen me, J wpyll make them as a wood, and Wylde bealtes hall eate wem pp. 1 „ % r

1 BH wyll vilite vpon her the dayes of
4 And J wyll haue no pitie bpon her chyldren:· lor they be the thildren of for

Waal wherein che burned incense to inen. hym, and decked her felfe with eare- ad b.

ringes and iewels, the folowed her
5 Their mother hath plaped the har-

Torde. 1

14. Wherefoze beholde, J wpll allure her and bryng her into the wuͤdernesle, and speake frendly vnto her.

louers, and forgate me faith the C

ee. Fromthente wy J geue her her
6 Therefore beholde, J wyll stop thy

bine vardes agapne, ved and the valley vosa. vi. a.
Of Athor fo2 an entry ot hope: and the chall fing there as inthe dayes of her ac. pouth, and. as in the dap when she Ex ce. xv. 3. came vp out ok the lande ol Egypt.

16 And at that day (aich the Tord) thou halt call me, O my hulbande, and halt tall me no more Waal.

17 For J wyll take away thole names of Waal from her mouth, pea the Hall neuer remember their names anp moze. |

18 Then Wyll J make a couenaunt for Leue them, with the beastes of the fielde, with the foules of the ayze, and with euery thing that creepeth bpon the earth: As for bolve, worde, and kan. battayle, “J wyll destroy out of the

v (ty) lande,

lande, and wyll make them to Acepe

safel p.
Exexvib, 19° And J wyll marrp thee vnto mpne
~~ payne felfe foz ener, pea euen to mp selle wyll J marry thee in righteousnes,

in indgement, in loving kindnelle and

1 tyfulnelse allo wyll J marry n fapthfulnette
20 In fay do them whiche were not my

thee vnto my selfe, and thou shalt know the Lorde.

21 Atthe same tyme wyll J shewe uy felfe gratious vnto the heauens faiths

The prophecie |

the Lorde, and the hea

An i . HENS hau heiße

22 d the earth thail helpe the to
Wine, and ople: and the —5
Va wn Dev Malt Hetpe

23 And I wyll fore her form the earth, and wyll haue ning up herthat had notobtapned merep: and ® eople

Wyll say, Thou art my people andther

1. Petz.

omi.

hall lay, Thouart my God.

J 4

9 The. un, Chapter.

Che gewes Halbe call of foz their idolatrie. Alterwarde they hall returne

to the Lofde. -

a hen sapd the Lorde to me: Go pet and loue

Bre xlu. d. 2

la woman beloued ok

her hulbande, and pet dan adultresse, arcozding to the loue of the

chyldren of Jsrael: and pet they haue respect to straunge gods, and loue the
Wine pottes. tt % „

2 » DoF gat her for fifteene siluerlinges, and for an homer and an halfe of bar-

Esal. 28.2.
Amos. vi. a.

lep. **
3 And lade vnto h

DP) Londe O pe chyidzen
CM lof Israel, for the Lord

with the: inhabitaun-
He tes of the lande: for ire athere is no trueth,

Weth another. if)

3 Therkore shall the lande mourne and all they that dwell therein halbe rooted out, the beastes of the flelde, the

fonles ok the ape, and the liches in the

sea, shalbe consumed.
4 Pet let no man rebuke or reproue another, for thy people care) as they that
Dice ae at tontrouersie with the priest.
5 Therelore shalt thou fall m the day

Nlalac i. b.

Lorde towarde the

er: Thou cyalt de
F The, ii. Chapter.

Acomplapnt againt the people, and the prieties of gras | |
Care the worde of the

hath an controuersie

With me a long season, thou tate n play the harlot, thou thait be to no 8 other man, and J wyll be fo vnto thee.

4 Ton the chyldien of Israel Hatt tit a ü pu great whyle without kyng, without
‘prince, without sacrikice, without image, Without Ephod, and without
Therap him

But afterward the chyldren of Plea: el chalbe converted and seeke the LO d their God, and Daud their kyng, and ka in the latter dapes they shall worchip the Lozde,and his loultig kindnelle.

i

tyme, and the prophete with thee in the night, and F wpll bryng thy mother to destruttionn: .

6 My people perishe for lacke of know g. ledge: betcause thou Halt rekused know- ban v. ledge, therfore Wyll P refuse thee allo, fo that thou shalt no moze be my priest:

And forsomuche as thou batt forgotten the lawe of thy God, J Wyll allo forget thecheld ren.

7 The more they mcrealed in mult’ B tude; the more they finned against me, leherkore] wyll I chaunge their honour into s am. ee nn Hoa

8 Thep eate vp the sinnes ol inf da people, and encourage thent in their ste wicke dnesle. e et ee

9 Thus the priest is becoine Ipke ihe Each people: Wherkoze J wyll puniche WOM ke.

or their Wicked Wapes, and en them actording to their owne imagt

tions. . 10 The

of Ofea.

＋ al eate and not haue inough, thep banc bled Whozdome, but fat not prolper, they haue forsaken the oide, and not regarded him.
Whnvam auen and nee Wine, heartalvay, ,
0 9 people alle counsell at their cke, and their staffe teatheth them: forthe spirite of fognitation Hath tauled repent} to go astrap, and they haue tominitted foznitation against their Good.
They make facrtfices vpon the tops of the mountaines, and burne their inteule vpon the hilles, pea vnder the okes, poplars, and elmes, kor there are good chadowes: therfoze pour daughters are betome harlots, and pour spoues haue brolten their wedlocke.
14. Jwyll not punishe pour daughters forbeyng defiled,and pour spoules that

ee i | ey sh

Zand [0 possi

ES 14.

ait l

cher hb. 33

them selues haue medled with harlots,

and satrificed with whoores: but the people that wyl not vnderstande, mult be punished.

became whoozes: seeing the fathers Nu vv..

1; Though thou Jftrael play the harlot, C

pet let not Juda sinne, come not pe vnto
Gilgal, neither go pe

to Wethauen, Regan. d.

neither Wweare pe, The Lorde liueth. Deat=4.

16 Foz Ilrael is rebellions line an vnru-

lye heyffer: nowe the Lorde wyll feede them as a lambe ina large plate.

17 Ephraim lis become) partaker of dols, let hym alone. a

18 Their drunkennesle stinketh, they haue committed whordome: their rulers lone (to fap) with Mamie, Wrpng pe.

19 The winde Hath bounde them vp in her winges, and they shall be ashamed ok their satrifices.

Ihe. v. Chapter.

IAgaintt the prtettes and rulers of Jlrael. 13 The helpe ok man is in vapne.

Be priestes heare this, o take heede O thou

A houcholde of Ylrael, geue care O thou
| Houle of the king, lor
1 tudgentent (is] ag atntt

Lurch vid 3 lb. d bam

bib. — une. Thep Chall come with their Mheepe aal and büllotkes-to seeke the Lorde, but

zen; amoneth therefore shall denour

83 Wlowe with the shawmes at Gibea, and with the trumpet in Ramah, erpe out at Bethauen, after thee O Wentani n. Ws
In the tyme ok the plague shall Ephraini be lapoe walte: in the tribes of
Ilrael haue J shewed the trueth. lo The printes of Juda haue ben tyke thein * that remoue the lande markes: therefore wyll J powre out my wrath vpon them like water.
1 Ephraim is oppressed and broken in

Dani. xix. c. and. xx vil. o

tudgentent, betause he wyllynglp fo-

lowed the tommaundement.
11 Therekore wyll J ve vnto Ephraim asa moth, and to the boule of Juda as
à taterpiller. 5
1 When Ephraim sawe his sicknesse, and Juda his dilease, Ephraim went vnto Assur, and sent vnto kyng Jareb, pet toulde not he helpe pou, nor ease pou dl your papne. 5 —
14 J wyll be vnto Ephraim as a lion, ald as a lions wheipe to the Houle of
Juda: Jseuen] J wyil{pople, and go my away: I wyll take away, and no man shall relcue.
15 J wyll goand returne to my plate, ty they knowledge that they haue fine ned and seeke me. In their aduerfitic they shall early secke nie.

= du ae

4. Reg. xv. b

Ca) That ts, diligently.

Iob. v. b.
Prou x vi. a.
A1
Rom. i d.

7 Nene fines a: 5
: ; r. N01
The = Chapte NGG ON Gly, 2

Allictton cauleth a man toturne to God. che witkednele ottpe prices, |

1°

Sco |Ome,tet vs turne a- = vo zdes Lake, so that thy punig mn
ZH) RN gee to the ne. 4 a Wan ty gD, Se pünuchment t for he hath snutten vs, 6 or J desired mercy, and not lac . ie 75 and ethall Beale bs, fice: and the Bnowlenge of Gay ee Mets
“pe hath bounded vs, then burnt offeringes. tea ad he Chall binde vs 7 Wut enen like as Adam did, fons
. pp agapne. they broken my touenaunt, and fet me Gene ih
After two dayes shall he quicken vs, at naught. nd set me z

in the thirde day he shall rayse vs vp, so 8 _ Gilead isa titie of wicked doers, chan idb tie mein his fab. tie poülnted with bidon. d
Then Chall we haue bnderftanding, And as thecuesc armed wapte for him and endeuour our selues to knowe the that pasleth by the wap: luche ts the
Low: he shal go foorth as the spring ok counlell of the priestes, which with one the day come bnto vs as the rayne, agreed tounseil murther cruellp suche and as the latter rayne vnto the earth. as kept the wulf pea they dare do all
OeEphraim, what hall J do buts vuspeakable milchtefe. N Ps thee: O Juda, howe chall J intreate 10 Porrible thinges haue J seene in the le thee: for ponr goodnesle ts lpke a mor- Hhouse of Ilrael: there is the fomication ning cloude, ¢ like a deawe that goeth of Ephralm, and Israel is defüed,. early away. Bea, and thou Juda kepest an har:
Therkoze haue Feut downe the proz uest fo thy elfe, when J returne the phetes, and let them be flapne fox mw capttuitie of my people. . ff The vij. Chapter.
Or the dices and wantonnelse of the people. 12 Ot their punispment.
Hen J vndertoke to the morning it burneth as a flambe of
4 make Israel whole, fire. avn | i then the vngratioul- 7 They ave altogether as hotte as an g nelle ot Ephram, and ouen, and haue deuodured their owne
%%% the wickednes ol Sa- tudges, all their kinges are fallen, yet is e maria came to light, there none of them that calleth vpon
TT for thei go about With me. a ~
Ipes, therfore the theefe robbeth with: 3 Ephraim Hath mixt him felfe among in, and the spoyler destropeth without. (beathen). people, Ephraim is become
They conlider not in their heartes like a take that no man turneth. that I remember al their wickednelle: 9 Straungers haue deuoured his
Nobbe their owne inuentions haue be- strength, and he regardeth it not: he let them, whiche J lee well inougg. waxeth full of gray heeres, vet wyll he
They make the yng glad with their not knowe it. o wicked nelle, and the princes with their 1o And the pryde of Ilrael testifleth to . een e er his face, vet wyl they not turne to the

4 All these burne in adulterie, as it were Lorde their God, nor seeke hom lor all

an auen that the baker heateth when this. . ;

He Hath lekckneading, tyll the dowe be u 2 àa doue that isbeay, “4 leauened. Lis we og led and bath no heart: nowe (a ehe
(Chisis) the Day ok our kyng, the they bpon the Egyptians, nolw go ther pances haue made hymsicke with bot: tothe Allynans. nb felsof Wine, Death tretched out his 1 Wut Wbyle they be gong Leder 0 hande to storn ers. there J chal spreade my net over them

cen wholes they tye in Wayte, they and dzawe them downe as the foules

haue mare redpe their heart Ipke an oft e ape: and according as they haue
Ouch, their baker lieepeth all night, in —— wp J punithe 0 00

o be vnto them, for they haue fo2gu 5 saken me, they must be destroped, for hey haue set me at naught: Jam he chat path redeemedthem, pet haue they spoken lyes agayustme. ö
They call not vpon mie with their heartes, but le howlyng ppon their beddes: they wyll assemble them selues for torue and wine, but rebel against me.

bel

u. xV.A.
} c.

XX. hkl.

— Et the trumpet to thy e mouth, (Twitty) as an
2 Egle ( chall the enemie come) agaynst the house
N of the Lorde: for they baue broken my * couea —naunt, and transgrel-

feo my lawe. ;

2 Iltael shoulde haue sayde vnto me:
Thou art mp God, we knowe thee.

3 But he hath refuled the thyng that is good, therkore shall the enemie purine him. ale

feo. 4 They haue ordepned kinges, but not

though me, they haue made printes,

id and J knewe it not: of their siluer and

golde haue they made then idols, therfore shall they be destroped.

teil 5 Thy Cale O Samaria hath cast thee

of,foz inp Wzathlull indignation is gone

they be without innocentiee
6 For the calke came krom Pract, the workman made it, therfore tan it be no
God: but euen in peetes Matt the calfe ol
Saͤmaria be brogen.
7 They haue sowen winde, therfoze challthey reape a whirlewinde: it hath

O not thou triumph
IO Asrael, make no
J boastyng duer foyous
/ tbinges as bo the tea
Athen: foz thou batt
CAE committed adulterie a-

„ gap chen rewardes halt thou loued moze

Allthe cone flooz es. e torne flooze and the wine prellt

of Osca.

foorth agayntt then Howe long wyn

no stalke, the bud shall bryng foorth no male: aud if haplie it do, ctraungers

I be. ix. Chapter.
Op the hunger and captiuitie of JItrael.

gaynst thy Gou, who- 4.

1; J haue bounde (vp) and strengthened their arme: yet do they imagine milthiefe agaynst me.

16 They turne them selues, but not to the most hyest, and are become as a brohlen bowe, their “princes halbe flayne with the sworde for the malte of their tongues:this chalbe their derilion in the lande of Egypt.

The. viij. Chapter.
Che deslruction of Juda and Jtrael, becaute of their idolatrie.
8 (halt deuour it vp.

8 Alrael ts devoured, nowe chall they

be among the genttiles as a veslell of no reputation.

9 For thep haue gone vp to Asspria cana ate a8] à Wilde asse solitàrie by him selfe:
Ephraim hath hired louers.

ro And though they haue hired them among the heathen, pet nowe Wyll J gather them, and they (hall begyn to be
Weeryp with the burthen of the king and the printe. N

1 Ephraim hath made many aulters to

do Wickednesse, his aulters (Flr) he

had to his sinne.

J haue Written to them the great thinges of my lawe, but they are tounted asa straunge thing.

13 They sacrifite flethe foz the sacrifite of mine offcringes, t cate it, (but the Low

hath no pleasure in it: nowe wyll he remember their iniquitie, and bisite their sinnes, they Hall returne into

Egypt. |

14 Jor Israel hath forgotten him that made Han, x hath builded faire palates, aud Juda hath encreased trong cities: but J wyll sende a fire into their cities, and it shall tonsume their palaces,

3 Reg. ry. c.

chall not feede them: and the newe wine chall fayle them.

3 They chall not dwell in the Tordes

lande, but Ephraim (hall turne agayne . n into Egypt, and eate ducleanc thinges 1 among the Assprians. ed

They powre out no wine for adzynte offeryng bnto the Lozde, neither shall their slayne offeringes be pleafaunt vnto him, they thatbe vnto them 1

Eze.vi.b.

A1

we he Propheci brcad of mourners, all they that cate then selues to that Came, and

chalbe defiled: foz their bread © for thet soules shall not come into the house of the Lorde.

5 What wyll ve do then in the solempue

dap, and in the feast day of the Lorde-

6 F072 beholde they are gone awap for destruction, (but) Egypt hail gather them, and Memphis (hall bury them: the nettles fait possesle the pleasaunt places) of their suuer, thornes shalbe in their tabernacles.

5 The dapes of vifitation are come, the
Dayes of retompence are come: and then shall Israel knowe that they were
Deceaucd 555 fodolishe, mad, c kranticke prophete: for the multitude ok thine iniquitie (God) hall multiplit eneunes agaynst thee.

3 The watchman of Ephraim was with my Godlbut the prophetelts che snare of a fonler in all his wapyes, and an abhomination inthe boule of his God.

They haue gone to the bottome, they are torrupt as in the dayes ok Gibea: ceherfore he wyll remember their iniquitie, and vilite their sinnes.

10 J founde Ylrael like grapes in the
Wildernesse, x lawe their fathers as the lirst ripe inp kigge tree at her fir feafon: but they went to Baal Peor e seperated

as abhominable as their lover peta

n Ephraim their glorte shall fice alba

like à birde: f02 birth, for wombe any and:

posta nt nd though they bryng v pet J wyll destroy them Defoe es men: Bea Wo shall come to them when
J depart from them. 5

is planted in

33 ‘ Aan Se me thinke) pleasaunt plate, like as is Tyrus: nowe nut fhe bryng her owne chudnn foorth to the manstaper.

14 O Torde geue them: what chalt thon geue them: Geue them an vnkruitkull wolnbe, and drpe breastes.

15 All their wickednesle is done at; Gil gall, there do J abhorre them: for the vngratiousnesse of their owne muentions J Wyll driue them out of my

G

en. 48.1,

Losu. i. d

house, J wyll lone them no moze, forall.

their princes are vnkaithfull.

16 Ephratm is hewen downe their roote is dried vp, so that they shall bryng no moze fruite: pea and though they bryn foorth anp, yet wyll J lay euen the be beloued of their bodp.

17 My God chall cat them away, for ther

haue not ben obedient vnto him, therchen shall they wander among the hea-

he. x. Chapter.
1Agapnk Itrael and his idols. 14 His destruction lor the fame.

e rael liz) an emptic
455 Se) bine, ret] hath it
Sa 7

brought fodrth kruite

+ encreased alwapes: ace tordyng to the goodnesse of their lande they haue made them fatre images.

2 Their heart is deuided, (therfore) shall they node be destroped, (the Lorde) (halt

breake downe their images, he Hatt de-

stroy their aulters.
3 Foz nowe chall they say, We haue no king, because we haue not feared the

for the people therof shall mourne ouer

tt, vea and the priestes allo reiopcedonit

forthe glorie therof, becaule it is depar-

23) (Ny toitfelfe, atcordyng to ted krontit.
6. 9 the multitude of the 6 It shalbe brought to the Asspran fora
—— kruite therof he bath —peelent to the king Jareb: Eplnaim

chall receaue Chane, and Isracl shalbe confounded for his owne imaginations.
7 Samaria with bis bing Hall vaniche awap, as the fome bpon the Water.
3 The hye plates ok Auen where Plrael doth finne halbe destroped thiltles aud

thornes thal growe bpon their anlters:

then shall they fay to the mountavnes,
Eduer bs, eto the hylles, Fall vpon bs.

Luk, xxii
Apo · vic d U
Oe wit tou as os pep a6 8

„ D Ilrael, thou haft finned kram the

„ms IWOdes and What shoulde then a king

be fatth aonite /,

e, doto vs dä pes of Gäbaa: there they oth sre iota 4, Ther haue spoken wandes swearpng the battayle in Gabaa agaynst the chin ker rte aue falsiye in makpnga® couenaunt: thus dren ok imquttie did not touche three (ge
10 ben © 3 groweth as wormewood 10 It is my desire that J shoulde cha 5 cy rnp in the kurrowes ot the fielde. then: and the people shalbe gia e gee, 5 They that dwell in Samaria hall —agapnct them, when ther fall epo cree
Raw token feart betause ofthe Calfe of Wethauen, heir in e

them felues together in t iacrowes.

4 „„
— n —

“ep Ofea.

owes. . * the fruite of lyes, betause thon puttest

1 1a Ephrahm (is as) an hepffer bsed to thy confidence in thine owne Wapes,

1155 delyte in treadyng ont the corne: but and leauest to the multitude of thy fea JJ wyll palle by her faite necke, J strong men.

ah? ; ch) ride ‘ — a U make Ephzatin to ride: Juda 14. There shall growe a sedition anion a hal piowe, cand} Jacob chall beeake = thy people, all thy Grong tities chalbe

st, his cloddes. lapde walte, enen as Salma destroyed

0 * of 5 .
Seren we to pour selnes in righteousnesse, Weth Arbel m the dap ok battayle.
115 N 12 reape the fruites of well doyng, where the mother with the chüdzen

piowe bp pour frelhe lande: for it is were dalshed in peetes.

tome to lecke the Lorde tyll he come 15 Euenso shall Bethel do vnto yon ve-

and rayne righteousnesle bpon you. caule of pour malitious wickednesse:
Fo2 pon haue plowed vugodlmelle, in a morupng Mall the king ok Jlrael

ye haut reaped iniquitie, pon haue eaten be — . ——— ‘

ö The. xj. Chapter.
Che benekites ol the Londe towarde Ilrael. 5 Their ingratitude agaynst him.
=| PEM FPlracl was whither to turne them: for when the

A i} young, I loued hun, Cprophetes)talled them to tihe most hpelt, ed and called my sonne not one vet wonlde geue him his glorie.
Pie out of the lande of 8 Howe Khali J geue thee vp Ephraim-

Egypt. bbowe) hal J deliuer thee Jlrael-howe irg 2 They“ called them chall J make thee asc Adama: howe]
* (but) they went thus shall J let thee as Zeboime mine heart

from theni: they faccificed vnto Baal, is turned Within me, mp repentinges and burned incense to mages. are kindled within me.
Ern. J gaucto Ephzaum one to leade him, J wyll not execute the fiercenelse of
Who choulde beare hum in his armes: mp wrath, J wyl not returne to destrop but they knew not that J healed them. Epheaim: for J am God and not man,
4, Jled them wich cordes ora maneuen! the holy one in the middest of thee, and res, ( With bandes of loue: and J was to J wyll not enter into the titie. in themas he that taketh of the poke from 10 They shall walke after the Lorde, he ig their (bes, and J lapde n mieate to chall rore like a lion: when he (hall roze,
Er. Re oe tthenthe childzen ok the welt shall feare.
§ - He chall no moze returne into Egypt, u They shall feare a as sparowe out of
(ors but hur chalbe his king, becault he Egypt, and as a doue out ofthe lande of
E reluled to tonuerr. Alchur, and J wyll plate them in their ain” 6 Therkoze Mall the [worde fall ou his houses, saith the Lorde. er Cltles, € Mall cousume his © braunches, 12 Ephzaini compalleth me about with ad Deuour them, berause of their owne lpes f the Houle of Ilrael with aeceipt:
4 . but Juda pet culeth with God, and is

cdounlaples. — .
3.7 And ip people hall stande in a doubt kaithkull With the faintes,
. ; The. xii. Chapter. e
* De admonithetly by Jacobs example to trust in God, and not in man.
1 N hrzaim is fed with Juda, and wyll bitte Jatob actordyng

che wynde, e foloweth to his wapes, accordyng to their owne atter the east winde he inuentions wpll he recompence them.

‘Lorde bath a tontrouerlie with kounde hun at Bethel, and ae

clxxxII.

CB) Which were tino of the cittes de-
Broped with
Sodome.
Gen. xix. d.

Deut aga.

9h) Buletd

peo agrecpng eo
Sods worde.

«| Dayly encrealeth lpes 3 He toke his brother by the heele when Geoxxvc

hiss, k destruttion, they be he was pet in his mothers wombe, and
50 — Allbperate With ‘the in Peak De wae 121 aren
1 Aans, their ople He stroue with the uu Gen gd.
, Scatven into Egy f. f e * scone, he wept and prayed to him: he Gash:

— — — — r

— j
—spmake With vs.
5 — the Lorde God ok hoastes, even the Lorde himselfe reinembred him.
6 Therlore turue to thy God, kepe mercic and iudgement, and Hope styll in thy

8 God. 1 al
@ 9 7 heise Chanaan the ballanntes of deaio an delpt are in his bande, he loueth to op-

2 presse. . ACS — 7

“Hemme g And Ephraim hath fayne, “Lathe J
Apoc iitc. am riche, J haue good enough: in all my Workes Mall not one iniquitie be founde wherin J haue offended.

9 het am Ithe Lode thy God from the lande of Egypt, J wyll yet make thee dwell in the tabernacles as in the hye feast dapes.

10 J haue spoken through the prophetes,

he Pro

and haue multiplied vifions finntitudes by the mintlterie ar ee —
13 tc, ne ee the pro: ..

n In Galaad is iniquitic, they are pars. tSbamitie: at Gilgal they hae aun

ficed oren, e their aulters are as Hea 5

inhe fut ner oft flelde.
Jatob fled into the lande of Syria:

and Ifrael ferucd for a wife: and fals,

wife la, ae 65 and ford

3 Wp à prophete the Tode brought them out of Egypt, and byapwplieht masihe 5 e

14 But Ephraum hath prouoked him to displcalure through his ahh

ons, therkore chall his blood be powred bpon Him selke, and the Lorde his Gad

shall rewarde him his blasphemies.

12 N
Gen. Rh

The. xiij. Chapter.

1 Che abhomination ok Ilrael, 9 and caule of their dellruction.

Hen Ephraim spake, there was tremblyng, he was exalted among the Ilraelites: but he

Ms

and is dead.

132 — And nowe they sinne
Feen. moe aud moze, and of their liluer they
Ozaiib haue made them molten images after

8 the tmaginatiõs of their owne brapnes,

(that is very idols, and pet all is nothing
Gwen tie but the Yorke of the craktelman: they dannen n lap one ta another, Whiles they latri-

ch. fice a man let them hiflethe talnes. ne 3 Therkoze they shalbe as the mornyng

We dens kloude, and as the deawe that earlp
Woran, Feta. pälleth a wap, and like as dust that the
Whirlewinde taketh awap from the

floore, and as smoke that goeth out ok the chimney. | >.
Exod xx. . 4, Het J am the Lode thy God (which

brought thee} out of the lande of Egypt;
€ thou shalt knowe no God but meonly, neither is there any sauiour besides me.
5 J did knowe thee inthe wildernesle, in the lande of drought.
6 Wut when they were well ked, and had enough, they wared proude, forgat me.
Therkore wyll J be vnto them as a lion, and as a leoparde in the wapes to the Assyrians. 0
8 JI wpll meete them as a lhe beare that is robbed of her whelpes, and J wyit bzcake that stubburne heart of theirs, there wyll J devour them like ation,

Esal. xliii. b.

Exo. xlui. b.

bath finned in Waal,

12 The wickednesse of Ephraim is bound

nesle, and drye bp his vepne,

pea the Wylde beastes shall teare them.
9 O Jlraecl (thine iniaultie] Hath de- tors, stroyed thee:but in meconl is thy helpe.
Io Jam: where is thy king nolbe that fhoulde helpe thee in all thy cities: Bea and thy iudges of whom thou sapdest,
Geue me a king and princes. „erlegt.
1 Jgaue thee a king in my wath, and m my displeasure J tobe him from thee agayne. 1

together, and his sinne lyeth had.
3 Therfore shall sorowes tome vpon hin as bpona woman that trauapleth: an vndiltrete sonne is he, els woulde henot stande styll at the tyme“ of birth or chi oss, deen. e e AB
14. J wyll redeeme them krom the power ae of the graue, and Deliver then kronm ae death: F death, J wyll be thy death frist
D hell, J wyll bethy styng: vet can J sass, lee no tomfor t. 4
15 Though he grewe among his brethren . the ealt wynde deuen the wynde of the #4.

Borde thall come bp krom the and hee €

he fall

fountapnes shalbe dryed vy leaf .

spoyle the trealure of all veslels.
16 Samaria shalbe made wa is Difobedient vnto her God: beget eriche with the [worde, their e . albe Dalthed in peetes, and in men great with childe shalbe rip

Che destruction of Samaria. 3 He who requireth prapse and thankes,

— ed

ry ia) iw,

‘ . N in 2
= ~ H 2
. vy Aah

OG

the Lowe thy God,
*foz thou batt fallen

wickednesse.

Pld. xxua, ball c.

b The first
A prophecie agaynst the Jewes. 2 kor the miserie that was at hande.

de worde of the
Torde that came

0 to Joel the sonne

of Pethuel. x} Beare pe this you civil elders, & hearken with pour eares
S ae 912 that dwel uthis lande: was ire euer fueh atbyng in pour bapes o:

3 Opes ok pour fathers:

let is thyng tell your children, and
Deh anch d en, (Hewett) kochen chit
Bs eir chi b 4 tie teen arde oeen to (their) posteri
Jat which the caterpiller Hath left a gractopper hath 70 Abe What
Won bath the canker

DOpper left comet eaten, and What the canker

Chyna

SRT

hy + rant

b.
Atht min

te The. xiiii. Chapter,

Ilrael, *veturnebnto -

i Cheough thine owne
Lake thele wordes tothe Lorde, and lay bnto hun, O for-

8 sult: booke af prophete loel

exhoreeth the Ilraelites to turne to God,

roote (hail
Libanus. .
6 his braunches Mat spreade Out abrode, and be as faire as the oliue tree, æ smell as Libanus. -
7 They that welt vnder his shadowe, hall returne a growe vp as the cone,
And florishe as the vine: He hall haue as good aꝰ name as the wine of Libanus,
8 Ephraim (Hal fap) What haue J topo
With idols any mores J haue hearde hini, and loked vpon him > Haun like a

breake out ag the (trees) of

greene lire tree, vpon me is thy fruite

kounde. ¢

9 Who sois wise, syall vnderstande these thinges, and he that is tight inftruct
Wyll regarde thein:for the wayes of the TLorde are righteous, such as be godly wyll Walke in them: as for the
Wicked, they Hall stumdle therin.

SMa pees ds op.

e &C

’
— a ote 1.1120
F 2 . 15 „ a 4 N

Chapter.

He exhorteth the people to praper and fallyng

Worme left the locust hath deuoured.

5 Awake pe drunkardes, k Weepe, howle all pe wine bibbers foz lacke of newe wine: for it is eleane taken away from our mouth.

6 For a nation is come bp bpon mp lande. mightie and without number: his teeth are as the teeth of a lion, and he hath the tawes of a great lion.

cIxxxlIl.

W

u Pz, facets,

Iere. ix. b.

Psal. xvili. c.

7 He hath destroped ny vine, ebarked 25

ny figge tree, he hath pulled it and cat it krom hum, and bath teft bowes therof
Whpte.
8 Lament as a virgin girded with sackcloth, for the husbande of her youth.
The meate offeryng and drinke offeryng is cut of from the house of the
TLorde, the priestes J meane the Lordes minifters niourue.
N ; lo The

— N

10 The kielde is

neth: kor torne is destroped, the newe
Wine is Wed vp, the ople is vtteriy

taken away.

Nn 5 4 0
Nonne

W Ge 12

9 : i *

nr N a) en 2

Ve

wasted, the lande mour- 11

We pe ashamed O pe hufdander homme 9 5 ae 5 fo? 15 and for the barlp: for the har . fielde is perished. baruest of the

7 — E oan 15 3
Na
1 4 i '

1 rake wa . | a

i
N
1 1 Beale
W 2 e Lt

. i N | 1
Nhe ee a oy :

I

yt

12 The wine is dryed vp, and the figge 16 Is not the meate cut of before out tree is decaped, the pomgranate tree, and the paulme, x the apple tree, (euen) all the trees of the fielde are withered bp: for ioy is withered away from the

sonnes of men.

3 Girde pour selues and lament O ve

priestes, howle pe out pe ministers ofthe aulter, come and lpe all night in lackcloth ye seruauntes of my God: for the meate and drynke osferynges are taken. a wap from the house of pour God.

C 14 Protlapme a fast, calla congregation, gather the elders together with jail the inhabitauntes of the lande vnto the house of the Lorde pour God, and trye

vnto the Lorde,

15 Alas for this dap, forthe day of the
Popde is at hande, enen as a destruction from the almightie fhalt it come.

The. ij. Chapter.

1 He prophecieth of the commyng and crueltie of their enemies. 14 In exhortatton to moue them to conuert. is The loue of God to warde his people. N

Lowe vp atrumpet in
Sion, and chowte in

17 The seede is rottẽ vnder their tloddes,

the garners are destroped, the barnes are duerthrowen: for the corne is withered. :

13 Dhowe cattell meurnes the heardes

of beastes are in wofull cafe for lacke ot pasture, and the flockes of sheepe are destroped:

19 Unto thee O Torde Wypll en

feare hath destroyed the frui okthe delert, and the flambe hath burnt vp all the trees of the fielde.

20 The beastes also of the fielde crye out

) che earth tremble: fo:

the day of the Lorde is tome, for it is nye at

vnto thee: for the riuers of waters are dryed bp, and fire hath deuoured bp the

kruitfull plates of the desert.

ande.
93 Darke and glonue dap, à counter blacke day: as the mozpng is as overt the mountapnes( is ee c strong people, like it there me sitet krom the beginning, noz thatve ! for euermore. i , efor

Iplaces

i —

¢ him is a deuouryng fire, and
Abend hun a burnyng flambe: the laude is a8 a pleasaunt garden before hun, and behinne him a waste delert,pea aud ithyng lhallelcape him.

The thew a
1 iis, and like horsemen, fo thall they

rune. . ie plement a phe the nople of charrettes vpon the anes of the mountapnes they chall fui, like the nopse of a flamyng fire

uryng the stubble, (and as a strong deuduryng 109 Beathe Lorde wyll aunswere, and say

6 Belore his face shall the people trem- to his people, Beholde J wyll sende

people prepared to battaple.

ble, the countenaunce ofall folkes Ayal ware blacke jas a pot.

57 They Hail runne like strong men, and
» " dimbe the walles Uke men ok warre: ecucty one shall march on in his way.

aud they (hal not linger in their pathes. g Ho man shall hulk another but euery due shali walke in his path: and if they
{hall fall on the sworde, they shall not be
Wounded.
6 They shall runne to and fro in the title, they (hall runne op € downe bpon the

Wall, they Hall cimibe into the houses,

me! ae enter in at the windowes like aätheele. ö num
0 The earth shall quake before him,

the heauens hall ‘tremble, the sunne

aud the moone shalbe Darke, and the

starres shall withdrawe their shinyng. n And the Lorde Chall geue his voyte

before his hoast, for his campe is excee-

ding great, for he is mightie that execu-

teth his kommaundenient:kor the day of the Lorde is great and verp terrible, aud who tan abide ite

2 ut nove faith p Lord, turue vou buts me with all pour heartes, with fasting,
With weepyng, and with monrnyng.

; And rent your heartes and not your

garmentes, x turue pou vnto the Lorde

nan Cadto he is grations ¢ meccifull,
0 om to anger, and of great goodnesle,

8 dhe wyllrepent hum ok the euyll.
+ MWbo knoweth whether the Lowe

wyureturne and take compallion, and

mene dne behünde humablefling euen; bie olleryng and drpnüe offeryng tz he Lorde pour God:

555 owe bp a trumpet in Sion, pro-

Pine a fast, tall an affemblpe, fanctifie
Gather hallen. a

r the people, gather the elders,

Allembie the chen 8 krbvn babes:

of oel. cb.

ewe ok him is as the shewe orf

— agy

let the bridegrome come foo2th of his chamber, and the bride out ok her tloset.
17 Let the priestes the Lordes ministers weepe betwirt the porche ge the aulter, and let them fay, Spare thy people O
Lord, and geue not ouer thine heritage to reproche, that the heathen houide rule ouer them: Wherfore shoulde they fay amongitthe eathen wherelstheit od: oe eee, — . 0 :
18 And eben} the Lorde wyll be ielous ouer his lande, € wyll {pare his people.

vou cone, and wine, and ople, and Wylt

fatiffic vou ther with, and wyll not geune

vou ouer anp more to be a reproche a-

mong the heathen. N

20 And J wyll remoue farre of from you

the northen C(armie)] and J wpll driue him into a lande barren and desolate, with his face towardes the east sca, and his hinder partes towardes the vtter-

most lea: and his Kinch shall arise, and his torruption shall ascende, becàuse he hath exalted hum selfe to do this..

21 Feare not O thou lande, be glad and D reiopte: for the Lode wyll do great thinges. „ >

22 We not ałrayde pe beastes of the fielde, for the fruitfull places of the desert are greene:for the tree beares her fruite, the kigge tree and the bine peelde their strengt mn. .

23 We glad then ye thüdren of Sion, and

reioyte in the Lode pour God: for he hath geuen you moderate rayne, che

wyll sende downe for pou the rapne, cay x: 140 leuenj the first rayne c the latter rayne, aa deen in the lirstmoneth.) 1 be

24. And the barnes shalbe fylled with menge corne, and the prefies shall ouerflowe bange with wine and ople. 2 190 that

25 And J wWyll restore to pou the peres iunoccaunce which the grachopper, the canker war“
Wornie, the locust, and the caterpiller “““ haue deuoured, my great armie which
IJ sent amongst you, ö

26 And you shall eate in plentie and be faciffied, and fall prayle the name ol the Lorde pour God which hath dealt
Wonderouũ with pou, and my people chall not be ashanied any mor cer

27 And you shall knowe that Tami the middle of Ilrael, and(that) J am the

Lorde pour God, and none but J: and

my people shall neuer be ala a

B 7

Ie Prophecie

25 And it shall tome to passe after this: J. i‘. vpou all 31 The funne shalbe

wyll polvee out my sptrite fle le, and pour fonnes and pour daughters att prophetie, pour olde men chall dreanie dreames, pour poung men shall fee vilions.
29 Allo in those dapes vpon the sernauntes and bpon the handmapdens wyll J powre out mp spirite.
30 And J will shewe wonders in heauen and in carth, blood, and fire, and pillers

Ihe. ij. Chapter.
Of the iudgement of God agayntt the enemieg ol his people.

ID: beholde, in those dayes and in that tinie when BJ Mall bzyng
Stagapne the taptiuitie of Juda ct Hierulalem,
=" FJ Wyit allo gather all

he gentiles, and caule then to come into the valley of “ Jeholaphat, and J will pleade with them there for mp people and heritage Bl rael, which they haue scattered amongst the nations, and haue parted my lande.

WN

and chaunged the boy foz an Harlot, and solde the gyrle foz wine, that they nught drynke.

enen 4. And what haue von to do with me O

Tpre and Sidon, and all the coastes of
Palestine? wyll pe render ine recompence:and if you recompente me, J at lwiftiy and] speedylp returne pour retompence Dpon pour owne heades.

5 Jor pe haue taken mp siluer and my golde, my pltasaunt & pretious thinges, t haue carped them into pour temples.

6 Dou haue solde allo the children of
Juda and the children of Hierulalem to the Gretlans, that vou might send them farre from their owne countrey,

place whither von haue solde them, and

wyll returne pour retompente vpon

pour owne heades.

8 And J wyll sell your sonnes and pour daughters into the handes of the chit: dren of Juda, and they Chali leit them onto the Sabeans, to a nation that dwelleth farre of: for the Lorde bath spoken it.

9 Publishe this thyng among the gentiles, proclapme warre, wake vp the

mightic men, let all the men of warre

j Put in your sithes, for p haruest is ripe:
And thet haue tast lottes for my people,

Beholde, J will rayle them out of that

‘of fmoke. turned inte nelle, and the moone into bod on that great and terrible dayokthe Lon
32 But whosoeuer Hall call o 8 ofthe Lord, halbe fauedsfos three ba be dellueraunce in mount Sign and 1
Pierulalemas the Lor bath promien: aud aue in the remmaunt whom tye
Torde thalteati,

„NN

drawe neare and tome vp. N
Wzeake pour plowe Mares into lwordes, and pour fithes into speares, let the weake lay, J am strong. N u Assemble pour (clues and come all pou
Heathen, and gather pour selues together rounde about, there shall the Lord

tak downe thy nughtle men.

ix Let the heathen arise and tome vp to the valley of Jehosaphat:for there will
J lit to indge all nations rounde about.

Io

tome pe (and) destende, for the © Wine Ors zelle is full, (ees tbe presses oucefiowe: Fee or their wickednelle is multiplied. an

14 D people, people (come) into the valley ¢ offinall iudgenient: foz the day of the
Pogde is at hande in the vallep of final iudgement. ;

15 The sunne and the moone (halve dark ned, and the starres Chall Withdzalbe their light. .

ts The Loyd allo shall rore out of Sion, and out of Hierusalem Mall he geue His vopte, the heauens and the earth {hall

(hake: but the Lorde wyll be the hope
90 his 1 8 an the strength of the thildren of “Birael.

17 So Wal eon nome that Jamthe
Torde pour God dwellpng in d

holy mountayne: then shall erna el d be ae: . 117 Spat re en alle through here any niore.

18 bnd in that day (hall the noua drop downe sweete wine, and the ders chall flowe with mylkze, k allthe an / of Juda (hall runne wich water, aß i

_fotintapne shall come out of eee vot the Lorde, and (hall water the
Sittim, ichalbe

15 Egypt chalbe wate, ard don ars

adefolate wildernelle: for the dont

of Affe.

clxxxv . 8

done to the tchildren ol Juda: betause tion.

they haue shed innotent blood in their

e.
* uda Mal dwel for euermore, and
: hierulalem from generation to genera:

eo allo dente the blood of theme that)

haue not clenfed, and the Ho ddweljethinstonn. he Lord dwet-

Ihe booke of the prophete Amos

= The firft Chapter.

Che condition and fate of Imog, and the time of his prophecie.

Che worde or the

Lorde against Damalcus, the phllistines. Tprus, Idumea, and Ammon,

e n

ih

he rt fe

Gi cite

hie

i 110

NN He wordes of

Amos, Who c) Was among
TS) wal tbe * theep-
„ heardes at
Thecua, whiiche he sawe

ew

J da, andinthe dayes of Jeroboam hesonne of Joas king ol Ilrael, two pere before the earth quake. nd he faye, The Lord chal roare out er, tnt on, and btter his voyte from Hiee Nlemand the dwelling places of the er gpepheardes chall monrne, E the top
3 harniel Matt wyther. 8
| Reon eb the Lor, For othyee Wit
Dwi ys Damateus , and kor fouve
1 not spare her: because they haue hen Glead with iron flales.

chili,

“}, fa: atts

— Ne
Lu — N
It

15 2 at e lin

4. But J will lend a fire into the house of
Haracl, and it Hail deuoure the palaces in Re vic of Benhadad,

5 J will breake also the barres of Damat: cus, and roote out the inhabitoures o. ee fromthe plapne ok Auen, and him that o ve:

holdeth the stepter out ofthe houte of N

Eden, and the people of Spria (hall go . r into captinitte vnto Kir, fapth the Lord.

6 Thus sayth the Lorde, Foz three wirkednesles ot 33a, and for foure J Will „, an: not spare her:becaule they caried away S,
1 into captiuitie to shut them vp wens te

n oni, Uitie.

7 Therlore wil J sende a fire bpon the B
Walles of Asa, whiche shall deuoure , her palates. a

3 And J will cut of the mbhabhtter from
Aldod, and him that holdech the scepter from Alcalon. e turne my hande to Ee: r w ron, ¢ the hinge 9125 F al hall perishe, sapth the Lode God.

b eee

The pro hecie

: vor, 9 Thus lapththe Tode; For thiee wic- man, which Mal deuoure the palaces of

greftons. nednelles of Tyrc, and for foure J Will not spare her: becaufe they hut the whole captiuitie in Edom, and haue not

11 Thus lapth the Tord, Foz three wiekednelles of Edom, and toz foure J wil not spare him: betause he purfued his

cHebcore brother with the lworde, and did catt ees of al pitie, and in his anger fpoyled him egen tontinuallp, and his indignation he kept ges spoyled. ; alwayes. ia
12 Therfore will J fend a fire into The-

Wos ra.

3 Thus faith the Lord, For three , nelles of the childzen of 9 — foure J will not spare them: becaute peat lend tb As with cy

1 ? at the | the gren h laegettete a, oP pe oo

14 Therekore will J kindle a fire in the wee”. walles of Nabbah that ha Wil es her palaces with a great crye in the day of battell, and with a tempest in the dap of the whirlewinde.

15 And their bing Mall go into captiuitie
5 an his printes together, fayth the

de.

The. ii. Chapter.
He prophecieth against Moab, Juda, and Feral.

A1 Hus sapth the Lode,

e Forthree wickednesses
Jof Moab, c for foure
I Wall noe’ {pare him:

© O, turne >\

po hin. Lay! becaufe be burntthe esp! bones of the king of E-

Co Ghats, dom into“ ume.

2 Therkore will J {end a fire into Moab, which shal consume the palates of Carioth, and Boab shall die with tumult, with showting, and with the founde of the trumpet.

And JJ will tut of the iudge out of the nuds therof,and wil May all the princes therof with him, sayth the Lorde.

4 Thus sayth the Lorde, Forthree wir-

kednesses of Juda, and for foure J will not spare hym: betause they haue tast a-
Way the lawe of the Lord, and haue not kept his ordinauntes, and their lies tauled thein toerre, after the which their fathers Walked.
5 Therkore will I send a tire into Juda,
Which Halleonfume the palates dk Ite rusalem: N 1 s Thus lach the Lorde, Foz three witkednesses of Israel, and for foure F wil not spare hom : betaule they solde the righteous for siluer, and the poore fora
0 paire of (hoes. dete. / They gape for breath ouer the head of ortrend ven the poore in the dust ok the earth, e peronna: erk the wap olthe meke: Aman and
“2: romg his kather will go in to one mapde, to dishonour my Holy name.

8 And they lye bpon clothes Layde to , u pledge by euerp aulter: and in the houle tosis of their god „they drinke the wine of .,2.% the tondempned. ; tenes

9 Pet destroped J the Amorite before dn them, whole heyght Was like the height Dru of the Cedar trees, and he was stroug as tht okes: notwithstanding J destroyed his fruite from aboue, and his roote from beneath.

fo Also J brought du vp from the lande of Egypt, led vou fourtie peres thozow the Wildernefic , to pollesle the lande of the Amorites.

u And J raysed vp of pour sonnes for pd. 4 phetẽs, and of pour poung men kor $20? a. sarites: Is it not euenthus, O ve chi
Deen of Jlrael, sayth the Lorde-

11 Wut pe gaue the Nasarites wine (0
191 e 0 ams

ping, Prophecit not.

13 Weholde, Jam presled vnder pou, as a tart is prelfed that is full ol sheaur . ,

14 Therlore the Fight chall periche from „4, che lwikt and the ktrong not an spate 1 5 neither khall the mig

aue his life.

15 Yon he that handleth the bore 115 stande, nor he that is swift ol — 5 tb :

1 55 leite Shatt becher rydeth ole, saue his life. ;

16 And hethatis of mightc ton mongthe strong men, {hat flecawar ked in that dap, fayth the Lorde 4

he

OA

T he. ui. Chapter.

ereproueth the houle of Ftraet of ingratitude, foreche wing gods most iut unishea, ff the lame. Straungers are called to fee the equitieot gods ingementes d. gainst Ilrael.

Eare this worde that

E wh again you O chüldien of Plraelceucn ja-
21 GX] gainst the whole fannlie whiehe J brought
5 ‘yp from the lande of

t, saying: |
‘aa on only haue Iknowen okal the fapan. A nillies ok the earth, therkore J will vilite pou foz all pour iniquities.
Can two walke together, extept they

agreed ippllalion roare in the forett when he path no pray: 02 wil a lions whelpe crye out of his deune „it he haue taken no-

thing-

5 nabe fal in a snare vpon the earth where no fouler 19202 wil he take bp the snare from the earth, and haue taken nothing at all: N l

6 Orshall a trumpet be blowen inthe ci

ones, lle, g the people be not afrapde: oz chall asa there be weuyll in à titie, and the Lorde
"Or Foy, bath not done it: —
57 ‘Surely the 3.020 God wil do nothing, but he reuealeth his secrete vnto his seruauntes the prophetes.
8 The lion hath roared, who wil not be afrayde: The Lode God hath spoken,
, Wo" can but prophecie-

* Ds, who wil not p

The titi.

the Lord pronounceth

lo For they know not to Do right, sapth

> Pyrotlame in the palaces at Aldod aud

unthe palates in the lande of Egypt, and say: Alsemble pour. lelues vpon the mountapnes of Samaria, and beholde the great tumultes in the nuids thereof, and the oppressed in the inids therof:

the Lorde, they store vp violence and robberie in their palaces.
I Therlore thus sapth the Lord God, An adnerfarte (hall Come} euen roand avout the countrey, and shall bring Downe thy strength from thee, and thy Halaces shalbe spoyled. hey
12 Thus sayth the Lorde, As the sheephearde taketh out of the mouth of the lion two legges or a peece of an eare: so shall the chudren of Pfract be taken out that dwell in Samaria, in the corner of
à bed, and in Damastusdas inja couche,
13 Heare and testifie in the house of Jacob, faith the Lord God, the God of hoastes:
14. That in the dap that J shall visite the

Wil also visite the aulters of Wethel, and

the hornes of the aulter halbe brohen 00

of, and fall to the grounde.
15 And J will snute the winter house C

with the fommer houle, and the houses

of puorie shall perishe, and the great

houses shalbe consumed, saith the Lord.

Chapter.

under the name ol fat kyne ot Balan, he inuepeth againskt the gouernours of Sa: maria, and korecheweth their punishement. 4 He laugheth to thozne their idolatrie.
8 he sheweth that not withstanding they had ben plagued with hunger, drought. bla · fing, caterpillers, pestilence, and warre, pet were they not turned vnto God.

4! H Gy care this worde

x Ne oe

maria, which oppresse the poore, €
A 3 9 destroy the needy, which fay to their r a ee tone and let vs drin e.
E e 2 Mön land God hath sworme by his hoelle, that lo, the dayes thal come vpon

vou, that he will take yon away With pen thornes, and pour posteritie with fishe age dee g hookes and

3 And pe Mhall go ont at the breaches.

hookes. euerps Bowe ) forward:and pe Mat cast
Lorne,

4. Come to Bethel, and transgrelle: n to Gilgal , and multiplte transgrel- Ken

1, Ke. x1. uf

fion : and bring pour facrifices in the

moming, and poͤur'tythes after three . 4 a,

peres.

Aa ij 5 And

n, wits

transgressions of Braet vpon hym, J went.

“2, cast

pour selues out ot the palace, fapth the repr:

Oz, intitle.

offer a thankes geuing of leauen,

dab. > SIGE @ proclayme the free offringes:

forthis liketh you O ve children ol HE rael, apth the Lorde God.

6 Therlore haue Jgeuẽ poucteannefle of teeth in all pour cities, x ltarlenesse of bread in all your plates: pet haue ve not

returned vnto me, sapth the TLorde.

c) That is, lache ot᷑ bread and meate.

w 7 And also J haue withholden the rayne

from you When there were pet three

monethes to the haruest, and J caused it to rapne vpon one titie, and haue not taused it to rapne vpon an other citte: one peete was raigned bpon, € the peece
Wherbpon it rapned not, withered.

$ So twosorithzee cities wandred vnto one titie to drinke water, but they were not latisfied: yet haue ye not returned puto me, sapth the Lorde. 9

9 Jhaue smitten you with blasting and milde aw, your great gardens, and pour

Or, cater = piles.

oliue trees, dydthe palmer worzme deuoure:pet haue pe not returned vnto me

Ihe prophecie

vineyardes, and pour figge trees, c pour

sapth the Lorde.

10 Pestilence haue J sent among you after the maner ol Egypt: pour poung men haue I layne with the [worde Fhaue

taken awap pour hozses, and J) pay made the stinke ok pour tentes to come euen vp into pour nostrels: vet haue ye not returned vnto me, sayth the Tome.

u Jhaue ouerthrowen pou, as Gong, fe uerthpewe Sodoma and Gomorra:and tron, pe were as a fire beande pluckt one ol en. the burning: pet haue ve not returned bnto me, lapth the Lorde. dae

12 Therfore thus Will F do vnto thee
Ilrael, cand betause J will do this vnto o c

e to meete thy God O Ib dad.

rael.

For lo, he that fourmeth the moun: tapnes, and createth the winde, and detlareth vnto man what is his thought, , whiche maketh the morning darke: gute nesse, and walketh vpon the hie plates N ofthe earth, the Lorde God okhoastes is his name.

Te. v. Chapter.

Che prophete lamenteth the captiuitie ok Sion. 4 He calleth ko repentaunce. 8 Bedes scribeth the power of God. ia He exhorteth to good workes. 16 He delcribeth the heauie day ofthe Lorde. 21 Ind reiectech their fealk dapes and tacrikices.

5 pe this worde whiche Jlikt bp vpon

pou, ceuen] a lamenta-

tion of the boule of rael.

The virgin Ilrael is

8 kallen, e hal no moze

rile: he is left bpon her lande, and there is none to rayse her vp.

3 For thus sayth the Lode God, The citie which went out by a thouland, chall leaue an hundreth, e that whiche went

foorth by an hundreth, hall leaue ten. to coe houf ol gia 0 —

4 Fox thus sayth the Lom vnto the house

of Ilcael, Deke ve me, and pe shall liue.
5 But leke not Bethel, noz enter into Gilgal, and go not to Weerleba: for Gilgal
{hall go into captiuitte and Bethel chall coe to naught, j
Senke the Lozd,and pe Malt liue: lett he bcake out like fire in the houle of Jo-
(ph and deuoure it, and there be noone.

to quenche it in Wethel. 1

They turne mdgement to worme wood, % and forsake righteousnesse in the earth.

8 He maketh the leuen starres and Orion, and he turnetheothe shadowe of death 6 f into the morning, and he maketh the n
Day Darke as night: he calleth the War sx. ters of the fea, and powreth them out vpon the open earth, the Lorde is his name. 5

9 He strengthneth the destroper againtt the 3 e shall come againt the fortresse. cd

10 They hate him that rebukethe in the ae gate, and they abhorre him that [pea keth vprightlip. 5

u Fozalmuch then as pour treading ie ene vpon the poore, and ye take from i oe burdens of wheate : pe haue DUE . houles of bewen ftone but ye shallugdwell in them: pe haue planted p nit faunt binepardes,but ye shall not d
Wine ok them. 1 For

v gp aflal

get areslions, and pour nughtie sinnes:they
8 ate ade mutehey take rewardes, and they oppresle the pooze in the gate.
Therkore the Wise (hall kepe scilence in that tunt:for it is an euyll time.

4. Deke good and not euill, that ve may

C Mc: fo the Lord God of hoattes shalbe

With pou, as you haue spoken.

15 Hate the euill and loue the good , and oftablithe iudgement in the gate: it may be, that the Lord God of hoastes wilbe mercifull nto the vemmaunt of Joleph.

16 Therkore the Torde God of hoattes

the Lom fayth thus, Mourning halbe

in all streetes, and they Chall fap in al the hye wayes, Alas, alas: and they shall cat the hulbandman to lamentation, and such as tan mourne, to mourning,

And mn all the vines shalbe lamentation: for I will passe through thee fapth the Lorde.

13 wobnto pou that desire the day of the
Lode, what haue ye to do with it: the pay ofthe Lorde is darkenes, and not light.

19 gif à man dyd flee from a lion, and a beare nieete him, e Went into the Houle, and leaned his hand vnto the wal, and a

9}, hal pont. I

=] Dto them that are at ease in Sion, and trust

in the mountapne of
Samaria, which were
[y| famous at the begmning ofthe nations, € the Houle of Israel

den khey better then™ thele ki babe ngdomesa tan of their lande greater then

stretche them f |
. clues vpon their couches,
AND cate the lambes out of the flocke,

of Amos.
2. Faz knowe pour manpfolde tranl- serpent bite hym.

cæxxvij.

20 Shall not the day of the Lorde be darkenesse, and not light; euen darkenesse and no light init. 0

21 J hate, J abhorre pour feast dayes, and

will not “ smell in your solemne at Thats, emblies. k fre ehe

22 Though pe offer me burnt offeringes, , n and meate offeringes, J will not attept them, neither will J regarde the peace offering of pour fat beastes.

23 Take thou away krom me the multitude of thy songues, for J will not heare the melodie of thy violes.

24 And let iudgement run downe as „ jarges ee and righteousnesse as amightte wo 6 riuer.

25 Haue pe offered vnto me facrifices and offringes in the wildernelle fourtie peres, O houle of Jsrael-

26 Wut pe haue borne „ Sictuth pour „ Tier done king, and Chiun vour images, and the eld starre of pour gods, which ve made to arne pour selues. Cue

27 Therfore will J caufe you to go into in tie neh

captiuitie beyonde Damastus, sapth the tousne ae

Lorde, whole name is the God of carne din

hoastes. N

D2, (bine.

Lhe vi. Chapter.

He prophecieth again che princes ol Firact liuing in pleatures, z che Lord tweas — reth that he will bring to patle the thinges chat are purpoted againt Ilrael.

and the talues out ok the stall.
5 hep fing to the sounde of the viole, they inuent to them selues instrumentes ok musicke, line Daud.
6 Thep drinke wine in bowles, and annoynt them selues with chiefe ointmentes:but no man is sorie for the afflic tion ot Josepbh. r
Therfore nowe Mhail they go capttue 2 with the first that gocaptine , and the rechen Heer sorowe of them that stretched them auen ade selnes is at hande. dera
3 The Lorde God hath sworne by hym selfe, lapth the Lorde God ofhoaltes: J abhorre the extellentie of Jacob, and „rn hate his palaces, therfoze Will J deliuer 4 vp the citic, with all that is therm.
9 And ik ee remayne ten men in one ouse, they shall dye. a .
5 i Aa iij 10 And

o And his ducle Mall take hun bp , and f burn 15 to taryout the bones out of the houle, æ Mall lay vnto him that is by thehoes ofthe houle, sthere pet any
With thee: And he thal fay, Bone. Then shal he lay, Hold thy tongue: for we map not remember the name of the Lorde.
11 For behold the Lord tommaundeth, and he will fmyte the great boule with breaches, x the litle houles With tlektes. omer: J Shal horles run bpd the rocke:or Wil

e That is, to somt negh-

our that dwelleth neace nbout.

place among them.

one ploWe there with orene for ye hau turned imdgenient into ank abe ut ok righteousnesse into wormewood. 4
13 Es e n Wemeren br n fay: aue not we gotten vs hones : e ——
14. But behold, J wil rayse vp again anation O house of Jlrael . Aebi
Torde Cod ok hoalles, and they sha akflict pou from the entring ok 6 he-

math, bnto the riuer ofthe wüdernelle ©
The, vii. Chapter. |

God sbeweth certapne bifions , wherby he tignitterh the destructton of the people of
N it kalse acculgtton of Amazta the prick. 12 His evattie countell,14 Che tes

stimonie ot Amos of him selle. 17 His prophecie again Aurasia and of che captiuitie

ol the people.

— dus hath the Lorde
God shewed vnto me, e beholde, he fourmed
E grashoppers in the beyah gtuning of the chooting

. and lo it was inthe lat
( After be ter grobwth, after the kinges mowing.
Publicbscom= 2 And when they hath made an end of

angene: eating the grasse of the lande, then

Ar des lade , O Lorde God, spare J beseche

Ge eho Hall rapse bp Jatob:for he is mal. N

bet, 3 So the Lorde wrepented kor this: it

bene hall not be, lapththe Lorde.

mpparr 4. Thus allo hath the Lord God shewed

vuyto me, and behold, the Lord God tal-

led to iudgement, by fire, € it deuoured

5 the great deepe, and did eate vp a part.

mening” § 5 Then sapde J, O Lorde God, tealle J.

beide. beseche thee: who Mall raylse vp Jacob: for he is mal.

6 So the Lord repented foe this: this alfo shall not be fapth the Lorde God.
W 7 Thus againe he shewed me, e beholde the Lorde stoode vpon a wall [made by line, with a line in his hande.

And the Logd€ sayde vnto me, Amos
What seest thou: And J sayde, Aline.
Then lapd the Torde, Weholde J will let aline in the nuds of my people Israel, and wyll passe by them no moze,
And the hie places of Plaac shalbe de-

lolate, and the temples of {vael shalbe destroped, and J will rife again the

(e Dignilping that thin

swoulde be the 8 last meafaring

hiszudgemtnt no longer.
Oz, sanc-

tuaries, oz bolp ptaccs,

(Secs! bp of p latter growth,

house of Jeroboam with the fone,
Io Then Amazia the priest ol Bethel ent to Jeroboam king of Ylrael, saping: A.

U O5, Pifeg

¢

Paha is,
One co: ner Ae countrep

countrep of the ten ttz.

i let qh t. 4.

mos hath conspired against thee in the mids ofthe houle of Ilrael: the lande ls

not able to beare all his wordes.
11 For thus Amos sayth: Jeroboam shal

die by the lworde, and Jlrael Halve led

away captine out of their owne lande.

Iz Also Amiasiafaydeto Amos, O thou the sear, Go, flee thou awap into the lande of Juda, and there cate thy bzead, and prophecie there. g

13 Wut prophecie no moze at Bethel :torit is the kinges chappell, E it is the kinges tourt. 8

Amazia „ J was no prophete, neither
Was J a pröphetes sonne: but J Was

14 Then aunsiwered Anios, and faydeto €

an heardeman, and a gatherer ol wude

figges.

15 Andthe Lorde toke me as J folowed the flocke, and the Lord sayde vnto me,
Go, prophecie vnto my people Picael,

15 Mot therfore heave thou the word the Lorde: Thou lapest, Prophetie 5
2 pia, Ps Aan nothing gainst the houle of Hiaac.

17 Therfore thus sapth the Lorde, gee
Wyte shalbe an harlot in the title t thy sonnes and thy daughters tha

by the Mode, and thy land shalbe peut

ge! Uu-
Ded by line, and thou shalt die in a po ted land, and Jlrael Mall sureiy go inte taptiuitie foorth of his lande. The

. of Amos. |

The. viii. Chapter.
1 Bya bition of a ballet offommer kruite. thende of the kingdome of Itraelis shewed-

aketh againg the oppressours of the pooge. 9 And delcribeth the bitternelle of
Septen of Ifrael. i And prophecieth of the famine of the worde ot oon

Hus hath the Lore therin: Aud it chall rise bp wholly as a
God shewed vnto me: flood, and it chalbe tast out, ande DOI (Hehe is,
NaN ax and beholde, a baltzet ned, as by the flood of Egypt. fauntes oft
5 hee) offommerfrute. 9 And in that day fayth the Lord God, J word vs
Aly And Pen rde atmos, will euen tause thefunne to go vowne man what seest thou- And at noone, and J wil darken the earth in wah ar or Playde: Abasket of the clenre dap. ©) sr beg lommer fruite. Then layd the Lord vn- 10 And JJ will turne pour feattes into wen erat bo me, The end is come bpon my people mournsmng, and all pour songues into la- rw. n ol Jlrael, I wil passe by them no moze, mentation: and J will being fackecloth 0
3 And the songues of the temple shalbe pon all loynes, and baldnelle bponeuehowlinges in that day lapth the Torde ry head, e J will make it as the mour-
God: many dead bodies shalbe in euern ning ol an only sonne, and the end therplace, they hal cast them foorth with {tt ok as a bitter day. lence. . li Wehold the dayes tome layth the Low
4 heare this, O ve that swallow vp the God, that J will sende a kamine in the poore , that ve may make the needvok land, not a famine of bread, nor thirst for the lande to fayle, water, but of hearing the worde of the
5 Saping, When will the new monethbe Tonde. gone, that we may fell corne :e the Sabs 12 And they Chall wander from sea to fea, bath, that we may set foorth wheate, Ekrom the north enen vnto the cat Hal eue. and make thes Epha small, c the siele they run to and fro to seke the worde ot inne Irkat, kallifie the wayghtes by deceites the Lord, and chall not finde it. met 6 That we map bie the pooze for siluer, 13 Inthat day Chall the fayre birgins, and and the needy for shoes, pea and sell the the young men perishe kor thirst. relule of the wheate- 14 They that swere bythe inne of Saz ester
57 The Lorde hath lworne by the ercel- maria, e that say, Thy God O Dan li- wi ende lencie of Jacob, surely J wil neuer ueth, Ethe maner ok Weerseba lineth, au re

which here he forget any of their workes. euen they Mail fall, and neuer rife by a- un er

8 Shall not the lande tremble for this, gaine. Ghecemon and euerie one mourne that dwelleth b . e ea

ehe ferince of reitgion thers vled.

The. ix. Chapter.

Creatninges against the temple, 5 Che fubuertion of the people. / Chat they be not able

to escape gods iudgementes. 10 He reproued the vnkindenelle of Itrael, I Che restoring of the church is promtled. ä 4 N

Sey) Daw the Torde stan- pp to heauen, thente will J bring them

ding bpon the Waulter, dolbne. ö

and he sapd: mite the 3 And though they hyde them selues in

SAY lintel of the dooze, that the top of Charmel, I wüllearche, and

the postes may Make, take them out thence: and though they

€ cutthem in peeces, be Hyd krom mpfightinthebottomeot |

th euen theheades ok thelea thence will Ff commaunde the? the tobe oe

ei 0 All, and J wil slay the last ofthem ¶serpent, and he shalf bite them. buge e
. 7 (Hthe lworde:he that fleeth of them, 4 And though they go into captluttie be- ™.

a ictficcatay,ana he that elcapeth fore their enemies, thence Wil J com

Adu
Ahnen

8% 2 Zhe cit {hall not be delinered, maunde the sworde Ett hall slay them: wg np hend hep didnt hel hence thal and J will fet myne eyes vpon them for

take them, tl hey tlůne eculll, ano not for good. bem, though they ci ? Aa ity = sAnd

e owe Godof hoastes Malt tanrye the land, and tt Chall melt awap: and all that dwell therin Chall mourne, and it dal rife

gypt. ' ronments ¢ He bupldeth his spheres inthe heauen,
* sl Leet lee of bis globe of clementesonthe earth: be calleth the waters of the {ea and poureth them oul pon the open earth, the Lode is his

W name.

emis, 7 Are pe not as the Ethfopians™bnto me ia i 0 D thildzen of Jsrael, sapth the Tordethe Ethiopt- haue not I bought vy Ilrael out of the ans, 02 black al

14 pet lande of Egypt 2 CF the Philistines krom
Bee: Cappadocia, and the Srzans from

bene litts. Cprene:

3 Behold, the eyes ol the Lorde God are vpon the sinful kingdome, and J wil destroy it cleane out ofthe earth:neuerthelesse, J Wil not vtterly destroy the Houle of Jãtob, sapth the Lorde.

9 Forlo, J will tommaunde, and J will fifte the house of Isracl among allna-

chem tions, like as torne is sifted in a siue: pet bis ade (hall not the leat fone fall vponthe n karth.

Io But all the sinners ol my people Matt

vp whole like a flood, and shalbe drowned as by the flood of E-

die by the word, Which fap,

chall not tome, noz batten fo; 9 euyll

Inthat day will J rayse vp rhe taney. nacle ol Danid that is feller Rane and close bp the breaches thereof and
Will rapse bp his ruines, € J will buyin
~~ pi ons?
12 That they may poslesse the rem of Edom, Kok all the heathen, becaute 0 my name is called vpon them, sapth the tn led.

Open n m at

8 Cale that the plotsman chall touche the gehe

tte of ail halb drop sweete wine, E all the Hales bre ota of my people of Ilrael, and they that a drinke the wine therof, they Matt also i,

t of na

MEME Sows

Lorde that doeth this.
13 Behold the dapes come, faith the Lord, mower and the treader of grapes hym r that soweth seebe, and the mountapnes te a that ahmen shallmelt. iB gan
14. And J Wil bring againe the captinite seers bupld the watt cities and inhabite them: sec: and they shall plante vmepardes, and dat 0 not be comey make gardens, and cate the kruttes of u them. 1 dehed
15 And J Will plant them vpon their au land, and they shal no moze be pulled vp m againe out oftheir lande which J haue = 2 genen them sapth the Lorde thy God.

The booke of the prophets

Abdias.

Against Edom and the trult that they had in richelle.

py 7 l dom : we haue

Sihearde a rumo:

sitcom the IWLorde, tan ambassadour

is sent among the

heathen: arise, and

let vs ryle bp against her to battaple.

2 Behold. J haue made thee smal among the heathen thou art vtterlp despiled.

3 The pride ok thyne heart hath deceaued thee, thouthat dwellest in the clektes ol

the rotkes, whole Habitation 46 bie, that laith in his heart, who Mall bing me downe to the grounde- the

4 Bea though thou cralt thy keien he egle , and make they meta 15 das lye Wil J bzing thee dolbne,

apth the Lorde.

5 cite theeues to ther oprovbesen 4 night - how wast thou bronghtten ther woulde they not haue stollen here had inough: Ik the grape ga tame to thee 5 woulde they no some) grapes: nt.

6. Howe are the thinges of claulou N

6 di

andj his treasures searchedet che men of thy confederacic haue suen thee to the bozders,the men that were at peace with thee haue deceaued thee, and preuailed against thee , ther that eate thy bread haue layd a wounde

vnder thee, there is none vnde rstanding

im. .
8 1 not J in that dap, saide the lord, euen destrop the wife men out ol Edom.

and vnderstanding from the mount o

sau- N :
9 and thy strong men O Theman (hat be afraid: betause euerp one of the moũt ol E sau shalbe cut of by laughter.

For thy erueltie against thy brother
Jatob Mame Hall couer thee, and thou chalt be tut or for euer. u When thou stoodest on the other fide,

in the day that the straungers caried a-

wap his lubstaunte, and straungers entred into his gates, and cast lottes vpon
Hierulalem, euen thou wast as one of them.

H 01 schouldest not haue beholden

16 Ior as ye haue drunke vpon myne ho-

PANDAS.

the eraite wapes to cut of them that choulde cleape, neither shouldest thon haue shutte vy the remnaunt thereofin che dap of aftliction.

Foz the dap of the Lorde is neare vpon alithe heathen: as thou halt done, it halbe Bone to thee, thy rewarde {hall returne vyon typne head.

ip mountaine, fo chall all the heathen reges

drinke continually. yea, thep chal denke and walowe vp, and they chalbe as

though they had not ben. 8

— fs ag 8 That is.
17 But vpon mount Sion shalbe deliue- tber

raunte, and it shalbe holp, and the houle cere scope, of Jacob hal possesse their poslessions.

18 And the Houle of Jacob shalbe a fire, aͤnd the house of Joleph a flamde, and

the houle of Esau as stubble, and they

(hall kindle in them and deuoure them,

and there chalbe no remnaunt ok the

soa of Elau: for the Lorde hath spoen it.

19 And they halt possesse the south fine 27

the day ofthy brother in the day that

he was made a straunger, neither chouldest thou haue reiopted ouer the childrẽ of Juda in the dap of their destruttion, thou shouldest not haue lpoken proudly in the day ok affliction:

Ch; Thou shouldest not haue entred into the gate of my people in the day of their

ofthe mount of lau, and the plaine of the Philistires, and they Hail possesse the fieldes ol Ephraim, andthe fieldes of Samarta, and wWenianun (Hall haue)
Gilead.

20 And the eaptiuitie of his hoast of the

destruction, neither shouldest thou haue

onte loked on their affliction inthe dap of their destructiõ, nor haue lapd handes

21 And thep that (hal fauc shall come

on their substaunte in the Day of their

destruction:

4. Neither shouldest thou haue stand in

Res di prophete lonas.

qThe first Chapter.
Jonas len when he was sent to preache. 4 A tempest ariseth, and he is cate into the

N fea tor his dilobedience.

De worde of the
Londe came vn-
2 to 0 Jonas the

Nonne of Anite

tai, saping: ce Arple, e go to“
2 Miniue that great
— kitie, and crye a

in 85 8 i =
; wickednelle is come vp before ine.

3 And Jonas rote vp to flee into Tharlis from the peefence of the Torde,

children of Hiract, which were among the Chanaanites an pofletic onto Zarephath, and the captinttie of Pierulalem which is in Sepharad, shall pot sesse the cities of the south.

5 ge) Me bp to mount Sion to sudge the mount cre of Elau, and the kingdom chalbe the Sa secre
Loves, gout, ler
4 the defence of a dente bis enemies,
* Messt-

c) It it a has nen fomne in thewhich Pes ter lodged. ct. 10.

(d) It is the nameof a place el ta be

tcilla, fog

there Was a
Great citie ot that nanie,

and went downe to © Poppa, AND een founde a shiy going to Lhariis: tebe n payed his kare, and went downe % de into it, that he might go with them che eee vnto Tharlis from the presence of daete hee the Lode.

fade to stende befoʒe hym: fo

they hiche gainst it: for their 4 But the Lorde sent out a great winde ann

into the lea, and there was a mightte er bee teinpest his prelence.

ise *
N a - ~ —
2 4s D = 7 = —
1 N 3 = 5
(ab i if eS az = 4
Nin 1
= 8 ‘i
Sad *

N

a i Ad Vy * '

i 1

F 00 Die e Nr i tly
15 0 Sean 9

0 aN

tempest in the fea, so that the chippe was in daunger of splitting in funder.
5 Then the marpners were akrapde, and erped euery man vnto his God, and
Cal the Wares that were in the Hippe into the sea, to lighten it ok them: but
Jonas was gone downe into the sides
Of the shippe, k he laye downe sleeping.
6 And the chippe maister tame to him, and laide: What meanest thou ficeperz
Up, and call vpon thy God i fo be that un shine vnto vs, that we perithe not.

7 And they {aide euery one to his felow;
Come iet vs cast lottes:that we may

t) It was the maner of the Gentiles to cost lottes, nnd so to enquitt the tudg

God:

And thty calt lottes: and the lotte fel on Jonas.

ulntes bi lots:

whose tause is this ent tome vpon vs:

135 of ee at

benofin (crips nd he aunswered them: J am an

cae ecbzue, and JJ feare dhe Lone St

1 heauen, which Hath made the sea, and

the drye lande.

lo Then were the men exteedingly az fraide,¢ sarde vnto hun: Why Hat thou
Done this: (for the men knewe that he

tome Finde of lattes art [pos 9

know for whofe cause this eull is on vs.

ment of God: a 5 /
Hauer eu 8 Then saide they vnto him: Tell vs fo: < nocent blood: for thou O Lorde halt

the Grecte .

enquiredde What is thyne occupation: whence calot wh 1 . 85

giant an mest thou-what countrey man art thou,

fled from the prelente of the Lorde, be: tause he had tolde them.) l

1 And they saide vnto him: what that we do vnto thee, that the sea may be caine vnto vs: For the lea wrought and was troublous. 8 .

12 And he saide bnto them, Take me and tast me into the sea, and the fea shalbe calme vnto pou: for I know that for my fake this great tempest is vpon pour.

13 Meuerthelesse, the men alsaped with rowing to bring the shippe to lande, but they could not, because the lea wrought, and was troublous against them.

14 W herfore they tryed bnto the Love, and saide: Me beseche thee O Tord, we beseche thee, let not vs perithe for this mans lpfe, and lay not to our charge in

done as it pleased thee. g
15 Sothep toke vp Jonas, and cast him into the lea, and the lea left raging -
16 And the men fearedthe Lope extec-
Dingly , and offereda lacrifice vnto the
Lowe, and made vowes.

o sccut
00 Toten

4 ce on hen,
17 And the Lorde prepared a great (ie a

entries n

to fwalowWe vp Jonas: 6. Jonas was ae

in the belly of the filhe ther dapes and fae, three nightes. 1

EE

q The.

Jonas is in the kilches belly. z His praper. 1 Pe is deliuered.

DD Jonas praped nto the Torde

laffuction J crped

and he heard me:
8 out of the belly ol hell tryed. J, and thou heardest my

vopce.
3 Thou baddest cat me Downe into the deepe, into the middest of the sea, and the floods compalsed me about: ali thy billowes and wanes passed ouer me.
And J saide: J am cast away out of thy fight, pet Wyll J loke againe toward thyne holy temple.
5 The waters tompassed me euen vnto the soule, the deapth clofed me on euery

Tphe. ii.
2 Jonas is lent againe to Pinlue. 5 Che repentaunce ok the king ot Hin iue.
DD the worde of the

Lode came vnto Jonas the fecond time, faying: a

| Arple, and go to i-

and preache against it

the preachin thee, Ding

Do Jonas arole, and went to Mintue
Mriviigg ACCOIDING to the word of the Word ( Hi-
Grae mie Was a great titie and “© excellent n okthree dayes iourney. )
Br 4 And Jonas began to enter into the ci: mete Kea dapes iournep, and he tryed de lade: able nt gy dayes, c Mintue shalbe de-

Ache,
100 en ok Nlntue beleued God, cloth front the great caeat rn toe aeeatetbof tbemta the

ue Ms 8 d

6 -2ind Worde tame vnto the king ol ME

l Jonas

And salde: In onto the Tozde,

iniue that great citie, which J fpeake vnto

clapmeda tast, and put on sacke-

ij. Chapter.

side, and the weedes were wrapt about my head.

6 J went downe to the bottome of the mountaines, the earth with her barres was about me for euer: pet hast thou brought vp my lyfe from corruption, O
Lorde nip God.

7 When my soule fainted within nie, J

remembred the Torde, and my prayer tame in vuto thee into thy holy temple.

83 Thepthat holde vpon lying vaͤnttie, forsake his niercle.

9 But J wyll sacrifite vnto thee with the boyce of thankefgeuing, and wyll

papthat that J haue vowed: for saluation is of the Torde. 8

lo And the Torde spake vnto the fische. any it tast out Jonas vpon the dzye ande.

Chapter.

niue: which arole from his throne, and put ok his robe, and coucred hun {elfe with fackeloth , e fate downe in asshes.
7 And he caused a tryer to erye, and say through the citie by the counsell of the king € his nobles, Let neither man no: bealt, bullocke nor sheepe-taste ought at all, neither lee de, nor danke water.
8 And let both mane beast put on sackcloth, and erye mightyly vnto God: yea let every man turne from his euill way, and from the wickednesse that is in his i . andes... ee
9 Who can tel whether God wyl turne and be moued with w repentaunte, and turne from his lierte wrath that we perishe not
10 And God sawe their workes, that they turned front their enti he repented of the cuill that he he woulde do vnto them, and did it not.

4 The

® we

W

(b) All that is lping vanitie that a mau inuenteth of him feife to trust in.

Ce) Josephus in the ninth booke of anttquit icg faith, he was cat

ont on the

Morc of the fea Euxmum, which ig not faree from Ba
Ga.

W

(b) God io saide to repent when he both thofe thinges that men do repenting.

Waypes, and coethe enit, hat he lalde gane selke, although noe in his

ont nature,

8 Cuil to our

Che great qooonele ol God toward his creatures,

A1 HD this dilplea-

sed Jonas great-

ca) rð tcause 4 ly aud he Was ( creby he > ; nist 2 angrpe — [within e 5 him selke.]

Gov sehchd. And he prayed beta puto the Torde,

phemed.

and saide: J pray

thee O Hovde, was not this my faying when J was pet in my tountrey- therfore J Hated to flee into Tharsis: For J knewe that thou art a gratious God, and mercikull, long luffering, and of great kindnelle, and repentest thee of cutil.

3 And nowe O Lorde, take J beseche thee my lyle from me: for it is better for me to dye. then to lyue. 8

4. Then laide the Lod, Doest thou wel to be angrp:

5 And Jonas went outof the cite, and

fate him̃ downe on the east fide thereol, and there made him àa boothe, and fate vndet it in the shadowe, till he might {ee what Mhould be done in the citte.
6 And the Lod God prepared a gourd, and made it spring vy ouer Jonas, that

9 The

The iiij. Chapter.

it might be a shadowe ouer his head
Delinee hem from hig guicter Sd g was erceeding glad of the gourde,

7 Wut God prepared a worme, whenthe morning rose the next day, which lmote 5

the gourde, that it withered,

And when the funne role, God prepared a feruent east winde, and the lunne beat vpon the head of Jonas that he fainted: and Withed onto his sonle, that he might dye, and faide, It is better fo; me to dpe, then to lpue.

9 And the Lord saide vnto Jonas: Moest thou well to be fo angry Within thy selte forthe gourdez And he lade: J do well to be angry euen vnto det.

lo Then laide the Lorde, Thou haft had tompassion on the gourde about the
Which thou bestowedst no labour, neither madest it growe: which came vp in
à night, and perished in a night:

u. And chall not J spare Niniue that great titie, in the which are moze then lixscore thonsand persons that knowe not their right hand and their left, and also much caͤttaile- i=

ooke of the prophete ~

ede Micheas.

— The firft Chapter.

Dith dentuction of Bamaria betaule of theft dolatrie.

Ihe worde of
5 the Node
I 0 Bi vnto e MPMicheas the ie re 8 Moralthite
9 5 the Dapes of * e BN Hotham, Az
4 Rey v. a eh 2 — i . has F Hezemies, ee COA) tad, cars
4 Reg is. a. SS — ol Juda > wWylch be sawe concerning Samaria

and Hierusalem.

2 Dare all pe people, marke this well

O earth and allthat therein ts: pealet the Lorde God him selle be wimellie-
Pere pc ceuen] the Lorde from Vt oly temple. | ,
3 Forbeholde,the Lorde Ayal come on of his holy place, and come Downe treade bpon the hie thinges ofp cat 1
4 The mountaines Hal melt vnder r. and the vallepes chall cleaue aud lyke as war (meiteth | before the fire, as the waters runne pownelbar
5 And all this shalbe for the eh a0 of Jacob, and the sinnes okthe atc

ve:

reel: but What is the wickednelfe
Jab is not Samaria: which on ace the hie plates of Juda: is not * Hie-

6 a rherctone J wyll make Samarta an heape of the fielder meete for the plane, fing ok a binepardes her stones wpll
% tumble downe into the vauey, and dildee her image

* all her garmentes shalbe brent in che fire, pea: al her wols wyl IJ destrop:

for thepare gathered out ofthe hyre of

an harlot; and into an harlots hyre ere shal they be turned agane. g Wherekore J wyll mourne and make

lamertatton, dare and naked wyl J go:

J wyll mourne ipke the Dragons, and take sorowe as the Ostriches. 1
9 FJor their wounde ts past remedie it is

tome into Juda, and hath touched the

gate of mp people at Hierulatent alves

lo Declare it not at Gath. neither weepe ye-for the house of Aphra roule thy selle

inthe dust.

O bnto them that imagine iniquitie, and worke wickednesse vpon their beddes: when the mor-

prattise it, because

power. ö
2 And they touet fieldes and take them by violente, and houses, and take them away: fo they oppresse a man and his houle, euen) man and his heritage.
3 Therefore thus faith the Lorde: Be-

Olde, against this houcholde haue -

deuifed a plague, Whereout ve shall not unh pour neckes: pe Chall no moze go
5 puch; forit wyl be a perilous time. ins hat Day Chal this parable be vied, oF ted ctl shalbe made ouer pon is mauer: We be vtterlp delolate,

bow! ctionof mp people ss translated: vnto bs the lande

W wyll he parte
Pathe hath talen from bs:
Jetctore there chalbe no man to Dez

bol Michceas.

11 Thon that dwellest ac Saphir gette

shalbe broken downe,

ning is light they their hande hath J

’ xc}.

thee hence naked with shame: the that
Dwelleth) at Zaanan, cal aft oe (e) Mames foorth in the mourning of Wethezel iche ee en e Chal receaue of you for his Wsan- deer ce ung. 00 Che ung

12 Foz the inhabitaũtes of Maroth wap- oenamen

led for good, but the plague shall come bara from the Torde, euen vnto the gates of
Hierulalem. f

13 O thou“ inhabitaunt of Lachis binde 0 the charette to the lwiftest beat che is a = the beginning of the finne of the daugh- dad n ter ol Sion:foz the transgressions of Fe aden rael were founde in thee, i

14. Abierfoze chalt thou bring presentes to myers
Moresheth Gath: p houles of Achʒib by Zerren

(halbe] as a lye to the kinges of Jlrael. Gis d

15 And as for thee O thou that dwellest at Mare sa, J hail bring a possessioner bpon thee, he shal cone to Adullam, the glory of Iscael.

16 Make thee baulde, and shaue thee Qsreons because ofthytender childzen: mabe auen thee tleane baulde as an Egle, for they somes.

halbe taried away taptiue kromthee.

The. ii. Chapter.

CThreatninges againtt the finturt people. Chey would teache the prophetes to preache.

uide thee thy portion in the tongregation of the Lorde.

6 He (hal not prophecies sav they) to them that prophecie: they shal not prophetie to them, neither shall they take Maine.

7 O thou that art named the houle of
Jatob, is the spirite of the Lorde shortened: are these his Workes: are not my words good vnto him that walketh vprightlp- 5

8 But he that was pesterday my people, is rysen vp on the other sidelas against an enemie: they spople the beawtifull

garment from them that paffe by peateably, as though they returned from the

arre

(a) Tht people toke vpon them to sorbid the propheteg to preec he and rebuke sinne.
(b Bod threateneth he wpl lende no mo prophetes to picache vnto than, which is the greatest plaguc rhat tan ceint to a nation.

9 The women of my people hare ye
Tut out from their pleasaunt houses, and taken away myne excellent giftes from their childern.
10 Up, get pou hence, for here shall ye haue no rest:becausec the lande ig defiled, Ce) Tobing
4 shall destroycrou which vtter destrut- ban tion. ee u Jfamanco walk in the spirite, aud Hever.
Would lye falselyctaring . Y Wyl prophe- wet cie

the god.

se to thee of wine and strong drinke: n Flattering that were aprhete for this people. 0 dee ay J Wyllsurely gather thee Wholly 0 ien Jacob J Wyll furely gather the rem-

naunt of Ilrael, J wyll put them together as the Cheepeof Wosra, as the flocke in the middest of their folde, they

muimes. ;
(e) To make en vniuersall destruttion.
) where was get uplentie of fliccpc,bp rea.

1 he prophecie

{hall make great noyse b smultttudc! enen — realonokthe
13 Theco breaker (halt come v beet et, them, they Mall breake ont, Aug end by the gate, and go out byit: and ther asta’, king W hall go before them, and the 15
TLorde shalbe vpon their heaves, ~~ |

gate, th

ag aner oy LE bat. Fee

% Toter fon ot the good 9 sa wg
5 q The ij. Chapter. 5 f . 8 1 ett Old a
Again the tirannp ot princes and kalle prophetes. Bat
Nd Jsasde, heare vilion, and darkenesle Walbe nto yoy a J pay vou fera diuination: and the sunne shall a
Heads of Jacob, x downe ouer the prophetes, and the day

now tudgements

2 (But! they hate

— che good, and loue

the cuill, they plucke of their lainnes fromchem, and their fle she from their bones.

3 And theyeate also the fleshe of my people, t flay oftheir skinne from them: and they breake their bones, and chop

wa jo —

them in peeces as for the pot, and as

fleshe within the cauldron.

4 Then shall they erpe vnto the Lone, but he wyll not heare them: he Wyll euen hide his face from then at that

time, betause they haue done wickedly

intheir workes.

5 Thus laith the Lorde concerning the ca sacyo, Piophetes that deceaue my people“ and r their folowers, and make
Inne of teli-

peace: but ifa man put not into their mouthes, they prepare warre against

bite them with their teeth, and trye

shalbe Darke ouer them.

7 Then Chall the fears be athamen; and the foothfapers confounded: yea; 3 they shal al couer their lippes, forthey haue none aunswere of God. n

8 Pet notwithstanding, J am full of power by the spirite ofthe Lorde, and of iudgement, and of strength, to declare vnto Jacob his tranlgression, and to
Israel his sinne. 2

9 Hheare this J prap vou pe heades of the boule of Jacob, andpzinces of the
Houle of Pirael: they abhorre iudgement, and pervert all equitie.

io They builde vp Sion with blood, and ») tho
Hierulalem with iniquitie. te

1 (The heades therof indge for rewards, sw, and the priestes thereof teache for hyre, f and the prophetes thereof prophetie £02 male money: pet wyll they leane bpou the
Tod, and fay, Is not the Tordamong vs: no euill can tome vpon vs.) :

12 Hbherefore Mall Sion for pour fake be plowed (asjafielde, ¢Iierufaten {halbean heape, and the mountaine ok the houle as the hie plates of the forelt.

d) They fons

The. iiij. Chapter.

Che calling of the Genttles and conuertion ofthe Jewes.

cot £ Brow Him.

lage why 6 Alertore night batbe) puto you fora

en

an

won e Utin the w tatter

Eye ben ey & N 5 dapes it wyll tome

tio palle that the

N © hill of the Lordes
| l boule shalbe pre-
2 F hparedi the toppe
< iP) J ose mountains,
N and fha

mountapnes oz hill sn 1 fee
Mitäpnes oz hilles, and people eee chan

itude 8

2 Bea, the multitude of the Gentile chall Bate themtbitber, saping ae let vs go vp the to hill of the 07 0 5 tothe houle of the God of Aa, he fhali teache vs his wayes, and wech
Walke in his pathes: kor the la 10905 ome out of eit and the W020

om Hiernfalem, 0
Aud be {hall iudge many peonle m rebuke mightie nations of cher ba treys: lo that of their swordes ) nate

igh Mares, and sythes of their

mate one people shall not lift vp a

5 orde againlt another, pea they Cail

no more learne to tight. |
But euery man thall fit vnder his

vineparde, and vnder his figtree, and no

man shall make them aͤkraide: for the

mouth of the Lorde of hoastes hath it. ‘

lahertore all people wyll walke euery

man in the name of his God: and we

wyll walke in the name of our lord God for euer and euer.

6 Atthe lame time salth the Lorde, wyl
J gather vp the lame and the dutcalt,

5 and such as Jhaue chastened,

And wyll geue a remnaunt vnto the late, and make of the outcatta nightie people: andthe Lorde him elfe chalbe their king vpon the mount Sion, from this time foorth for euermorc.

3 And vnto thee O thon towre of the flocke, thou strong holde of the daughter
Sion, vnto thee shall it tome, euen the lordechip and kingdome to the daughter
Hierusalem. i

It

EXCH].

is there no king inthee z are thy countel: lers perished, that thou art fo payned as à woman in her trauaile-

And now O thou daughter Sion, sorowe and lament as a woman in her trauaue : for nowe mutt thou get thee dut of the citic, e dwelt vpon the plaine fielde: yea vnto Wabylon shalt thou go, but) there thalt thou be delluered, and there the Lod shall redeeme thee front the bande ofthyne enemies.

Mop also are there many people gathered together against thee, laping:
Sion chalbe condempned, and our epe shall loke vpon Sion.

12 Wut they know not the thoughtes of

Why then doest thou erpe and lamente

the Lord, they vnderstand not his coun: fel: for he shall gather them together as the sheaues in the barne. C
Therefore get thee vp, O thou daughter Sion, and threlshe ont the corne: for
J wyil make thy horne iron, and thy hooues brasse, that thon mapst breake tnpecces manp people: their goodes shalt thou consetrate puto the Torde, and their substaunte vnto the ruler of the whole worlde.

q The .v. Chapter.

2 Duo thalt thou

SEA D thou robbers daughter: they g hall lape siege a-
E gainst vs, c snpte

Ne INA el witha rodde vppon the cheeke.
And thou wWethlehem Ephrata art little among the thoulandes of Juda, out of thee shal he comme foorth vñto me which chalbe the
. 1 Ilrael, whole out going

crating ithe beginning, and from
There fore wyll he gene them vp for a
Heaton, vntill the time that che which a beare haue vorne: then hall the
Want of his brethren be conuerted

uto the chudren of Jlrael.
5 vl stande fafte, and geue foode maler engthokthe Londe andm the
800 e of the name ofthe Lorde his and when they be conuerted, he

be robbed thy selfe

‘ 59) thetudgeof Jlra-

Oe the detruction ok hierulalem.

shalbe magnified vnto the farthett partes of the worlde. N
And he shall be our peace: when the
Allirians shall come into dur lande, when he shal treade in dur palatces, then
Chall we raise against him seuen cheepheardes, and eyght pzincipall men.

These (hal subdue the lande of Aur with the sworde, and the lande of Pimrod with their naßed weapons: Thus fhalt he deliner vs from the Assirtan when he commeth within our lande, ap setteth his foote within our bo

ers.

And the remnaunt of Jacob shalbe among the multitude of people as the deawe of the Lord, and as the droppes vpon the grasle, that taryeth for no man and wapteth on no body.

Bea the refioue of Jacob shalbe a mong the gentiles and the multitude of people, as the lion among the beastes of the wood, and as the lions whelpe among the flockes of sheepe: which Whe he gocth though, treadeth downe, 1210

W

The prophecie a reth in pecces, aud there is no man that 12 All witchcraftes wpl J roote ier

and halbe llt vp dpon thyne

can delme

ne
‘ fea all thyne aduerlaries Tall

10 2 it Mall come to passe in that dar faith the Lorde, that J Wyll take thyne horles fronithee, and destroy thy charettes.
11 J wyll breake downesthe tities of thy lande, and ouerthrowe all thy strong holdes.

thyne hande, there shall n t fap aes b E wien her o mo sooth-
3 Thypne idols and thyne image eee n y lelfe vnto tl be „ewades
14. Thy groues wyll J plucke v rootes, and breake downe thy —＋ 4
15 And N wyll execute a vengeaunte in my wrath k indignation vpon the hea: then, such as they haue not heard.

The. vi. Chapter.

An exhortation to heare the iudgement against Alrael being vnfinde.s What mance

of facrifices do please God.

(ithe Lorde sapth: Arise thou, and contend with ithe mountapnes, and let the hilles heare thy vopte.
; Heare O pe mountaines the Lordes quarel, and pe mightie foundations of the earth: for the
ZLoade Hath a quarell againtt his people, and wyll pleade with Ylrael.

3 O mp people what haue J done buto thec: o: wherein haue J arecucd thee: geue me aunswere.

4 Foz I brought thee out of the lande of
Egypt c deliuered thee out of the houle of bondage, and J made Moyles, Aaron, and Miriam to leade thee.

5 Bemember O my people, what Walach the king ol Boab had deuised az gainst thee, and what auntwere that
Walaant the sonne of Beor gaue him, from Sethin vnto Galgal, that ye may unowe the righteoumnelle of the Lorde.

6 Wherewiüh cha J come before the
Torde, and bowe my elke to the hye
God- Shall J come before him with

burnt offeringes, and with ¢ pere olde: : b calues of a

J Earken pe nowe what

7 Hath the Lorde apleature in many

thoulandes of Rammes, oz innunieraple streames ofopte: shall J geue my first borue for myne offences, and the

fruite of my body fo; the fined V tothe sinne of my

3 Heath shewed thee O man what is
GOOD, and what the Lorde requtreth of

thee:cnamely)to do iustly, to loue mercie, and 85 sag” thy elle to walke wit
God. i

9 The Tordes boyce crpeth vnto the citic, and the man that chalbe saued considereth thy name: hearken What is pour rodde, e heave hun that warneth pou.

Io Are not vet the trealures of wickednesse in the house of the wicked, and the scant measure which is abhominable-

1 Should J iuttifie the kalse balauntts, and the bagge of deceitfull weightes-

12 Forthe riche men thereof are fullof

trueltie, and the inhabitantes thereof haue spoken lpes, and haue detettlull tongues in their mouthes.

3 Thereloze J Wyll take in hande to punithe thee, and to make thee delolate, becaule of thy sinnes. „

4 Thou shalt eate, and not hane inough: pea,thou shalt bring thy selfe dolbne 1 the modes of thee, thou shalt fle, a not estape, and thofe that thou woulde laue wy J deliner to the worde. .

15 Thou shalt fore, but not reape, ee halt pretle out Oilucs, but ole yt thou not haue to annoynt thy felfe im . a : 5 0 chalt — sweete mull,

ut shait drincke no wine.

16 Be kepe the ordinauntes ol — — 5 all the customes ok the house 11 1

pe Walke in their tounsels: ther Neth
I make thee waste, and tause thy

A

biters to be hissed at, and pe shall beare

the reproche of my people.
The

Ois nie, Jam become

gleanypng in the har-

fect well: there are no mid

grapes to eate, pet

JA Would JJ fatne with al

mp hearte haue of the

best kruste.
4 2 There is nota godly bpon earth, there

i ã's not one rightedus among men: they al pe in wayte for blood, and euery man hunteth his brother to death.

Vet they say they do wel, when they do eupll: the prince “ afketh ,and the ludge (udgeth) for a rewarde, therfore the great ian speaketh out of the torruptton ot his soule, and so they wrappe

mmr ll Up. ;

e 4, The belt of them is as bryer, and

w, the most righteous of them is (@arper]

then athorne hedge : the day of thy

watchnien, fand] of thy vilitation tommech:then shalbe their confusion.

un 5 Let no man beleeue his friende, nor put

his confidente in his brother: kepe the booze of thy mouth from her that lpeth

inthy bosome. a

the daughter rileth against her mother,

the daughter in law against her mother

in lawe: and a mans foes are euen they

ol his owne houcholde.

57 Neuerthelelle, J wil looke vp vnto the
Lorde , J will patiently abyde God mp faufour:iny God shall heare me.

boi 8 “D thou enemie ok mpne reioyte not at

mp fall for I Mati rife agatne: c though

J it in darkenelle, pet the TLorde is my

ment bponmypcaute ; and fee that J roe abe: then will he bring me koorth mega a J e

of Micheas.

The. vit. Chapter.

asone that goeth a

Forthe sonne dishonoreth his father, '

light. 19 “He shall turne againe, and be mecciful
9 4 Will beare the Wrath ofthe Lord, fo: haue offended bpm till he sit in iudge-
E,

lo’ Sbethatig myne enenne, all lone
Mall loke bon it and be conkounded, which nowe

cxciij 5

complaynt of the Ittle number ot the righteons. Again tue trueth on we
1511 bold with our greatestkrrendes. 1.4 Che profperitic atthe church. al

fayth, Where is the Lorde thy Gode Neg. mynt eyes shall beholde her when she halbe troden downe as the myre in the itreetes. N u Thts is the day thatthy walles chalbe buylt, this day shall dryue farre away the Wdecree. ae un And at that time Mall they come vnto ae e the from Aslur krom the trong eitles, form and front the strong holdes, euen Into Bebra the riuer: from the one lea to theother, and from mountayne to mountapne.
3 Notbithstanding, the land mf be waz sted, betause of them that dwell therin, and for the fruites of their owne imaginations.
14 Therkore keede thy people with thy C. rod, the flocke of thyne heritage whiche
Dibel Defolatein the wood, that they map be fed vpon the mount of Care cw abet the mel, Basan, and Gilead, as afozetime. anner
Ig Maruelous thinges wil Ichewe thee , Seen

Babplon,

Alike as when thou tamest out of the zes

milcas they

lande ol Egypt. did befeze.

16 This shall the heathen see, and be asha- Eo. med for all their power: lo that they shall lap their bande vpon their mouth, Lodz 4 and stoppe their eares.

17 They shal licke the dust like a serpente, Gans. and as the wormes of the earth that tremble in their holes: they shalbe afrayde of the Lorde our God, andthey shall feare thee.

13 Who is such a God as thou, that pardonest wickednesse, and forgeuest the offences of the remnaunt of thyne bert: tage : He kepeth not his Wath for euer:

for his delite is to haue tompassion.

Ierc. ix. d. to vs, he shall put downe our wickednesses, and tast an our sinnes into the bottome of the sea.

20 Thou wilt perfourme to Jatob thy trueth, and thy mercie to Abraham, like ag thou bat sworne puto our kathers in olde tinie.

b

¶ The ende of the prophecie of Micheas.

Ca) The Hiniuiteg wert
(pared. be: caust thep repented at the pe aching of Jonag: but afrerwarbes thep returned totheir forme wic kt dut sse, therfore god thrtateneth
Them vp this
Ppopyese.

Oz, for him

The booke of the prophete an Nahum. —
0 Je firft Chapter. ae

iMabum the Elkoshite.

nengeth and Hath
Wrath in stoze:the Lom auengeth vpon them that trouble hym, and he remembreth his enemies.

The Torde is Lowe to anger, and (alto) of great power, and in no cafe will not acquitel the wicked, the Lordes dealing is with blustring tempest and whtrle

winde, and the cloudes are the dust of

his feete. n
De rebuketh the fea and drpeth it vp, all the riuers allo he maketh drpe: Walan aud Carmel are destroped, the spring at: fo of Libanon is destroped.

5 The mountapnes quake at his power

aud the hilles are resolued: the carth allo burueth at his countenaunce, the
Worlde, and all that dwelleth therin.

7 The Todd is gratious, inthe dap of trouble, and knabbeth

0 God is ielous,
Tek ethe Loreauen: yacth), the Lorde a-

10 F02 whyles thet

Otthedetkruction of the alkrianz and ot the deltueraunte of lcael.

= He burden of © 6 Who can stande before his wrath: 07

who can rise vp before the anger of his countenaunte, his fiertenesse is potb2cd out like fire, pea the vorkes cleaue in peetes at his might.

them that trust in hym.

8 But with an oucccunning flood he wl

destroy her place, aud will pursut his enemies with darkenelle.

9 What imagine pe againttthe Lowe: he makes an btter destruttion: pe Mall not

ed twyse. be troubled twy pames eau ft ther, and Whples they banquet out chet feaftes , they ave deuoured vp ag bevy drie fiubble.

u There came out of thee such as chou 05

eupllagainstthe Hore, fucb as gal wicked tounsellt. be

12 Thus layth the Lorde: Lous) ae

in concorde, and allo many, pet so

ye be cut vowne, and passe: c eons haue afflicted thee (o Bir”
Will J trouble thee no more. 13 ai

a strong holde 8

dnowe J Will 'byeakte of his poke

7 om pon ther, and J will breake thy dondes in sunder.

The Torde also hath geuen a tom-

maundement touching thee that, there

m the house of thy God, I will cut
Aa and molten image, J will

J ye destroyer is tome vp before thy face, kepe thy fozte, fee to the

IT Pa

N *
W
0 8 Kes
7 1 Gs

4 52 S
25 Paps

2122 Forthe Lozd restores againe the glorious estate of Jatob, as

spoylers hath spopled then, and bath wasted their braunches.

3 Lhe thielde of his valtaunt souldiours is died red, his captapnes of warre are clad with scarlet: the charret is (coms palled! with flammig torches inthe day of his expedition, and the firre staues are drenched in poyson. —

4 Thecharrets hal rage in the streetes, they shall make a terrible noyse in the

_ ‘ boade wapes, to loke to likecklaming) kreslets, syooting as lightning.

5 He shall remember his notable foul: dlours, they shal fumble goyng they
{hall halten to the wall, the touering fence is prepared. f

6 The riũer gates are opened, and the pa: lace dissolued.

B 7 Huzabis brought foorth taptiue, made to
Altendrintothe charets her handmapdens

5 Wloodp titie , stuffed

: DEAR theoughout with failehood, with extreme deaung, nor wilbe tay brought from spopling.

2 LiF 8 e a 1 0

f hippe, the noyse o

ratling of wheales „the praunling of

horles, and the iun :
ND k bing of charets: a ozleman likting dp both the glittes

of ahum.

chalbe no moze ofspring o thy name: 7

(allo the glorious estate of Israel: ko:

make it) thy graue, for thou art vile.
15 Behold vpon the mountapnes the feete of him that baingeth good tidinges, that preacheth peate:kepe thy fettinal dapes
D Juda, pape thy vowes:kor the Wic-
Bed| traunt (hal Hereafter palle no moze though thee, he is vecerip tut of,

The. ij. Chapter, -
He delcribeth the victories ofthe Chaldeans agatl the Allpriang.

Allo leading cone another) as in the voyte of doues, knocking vpon their brestes.

8 Bea manp a dap Nlulue was as a ponde full of water, pet ow) Ehey flee,
A pe, stande ye and no man loketh

Ac ° i *

Take your spoyle of finer, take pour

cli

spople of golde, kor there is no endeok

riches: trealure, pashing all treasure. to Hacking, resacking, raling, a dillolued

heart and collifion ofknees, fozow in all

loyues allo, and the faces ok them all as blacke as a pot.

Ir Where is the abiding place of lions, and

the feding plot of lions whelpes bee come, whyther the poung and olde lion had their resort:
€ there was no man to put him in feare.
12 The lion made his praye aboundaunt: ly for his whelpes, and itrangled for his kthelions, and bath filled his dennes
550 prap, and his abyding places with ople

pople.

13 Behold me against thee fayth the Lo of hoastes, x J will burne in lmoke her charets, and the [worde (hall deudure thy lions, J will roote out also from the earth thy spoyling, and the voyte of thy mollengers shalbe hearde no moje,

The. ii. Chapter.
1 Ok the kall ol Miniue. 2 No power can efcape the hande or God.

ring blade ol the sword ¢ allo the Mining speare, many Wounded, many corples, and no end of tartasses, they shallstumble at dead bodies. N

4 wecaule of the ntanpfolde fornication ofthe beautifull Harlot, ful of charines, that selles nattons bythe meaues of her whordome, and the people through her

sbarmiuges. 5 b ~ wby . sHo

there dwelt the lion,

Pel

a Jagalnst meclapth the Tode of

a 1 mn will turne vp thy lkirtes ouer thy kae, and wil shewe the gentiles thy fylth, and kingdomes thy Mame:

6 And will cast vpon thee abominable

fͤth, and wil ae 25 downe, and wil

make thee as vile as doung. d tome to patfe that all that chall behold thee, Mall flee frou thee, and thailfap , Piniue is destroyed, and who is greeued therwith from whence chall J (eke out comfozters for thee:

8 Wurthou count thy selfe better then Alexandria the great, that was scituate àmonges the riuers, compassed round as bout With water, Whole fortresse Was the leas and had her wall from the {eaz

9 Ethiopia and Egpptlwere che! strength, and there Was none end (oF arde,) Phut and Lubim were thy helpers.

10 Motwithttanding the palsed awap,
Ce went into taptiuitie, her children alfo were dalhed in peetes in the top of all the streetes: kor her horrible men they cast lottes, and all her great states ther thapned in ketters.

11 And thoulalto (halt be drunkec wich trou. ple) thou shalt be hyd: thou also shalt
{eke after strength against thine enemie.

12 All thy strong aydes care as jfigge trees with the lirst ripe figges + ik they be slir-

W 7

Sf, mozetuct.

red, they fal into the mout i

iz Wehold thy men(areas Daren eater

the middest of thee, the gates of I

lande halbe (et wyde open to thine e mies, fire bath deuoured thy barreg —

14 Drabee thee water for the siege, trong: C then thy fortes, go into the clay weade the morter, make strong the brickyll

iz, Therethe fire yal deuoure ther h

word shall cut thee of chall deuoure 15
5 ale Gahan ie multiplied as
5 thou be eee

16 ou hast intreased thy mare as the starres offeauen,thelotul be
= 9 fleeth away. K

17 v printes are as grashoppe thy rulers as great ande 115 warme in hedges in cold weather, the sunne arileth and they fle, and the plate where they were is not knowen.

18 Thyp theepheardes O king of Allur flumber, thpnobie men chall dwell in death] thy people is scattered vpon the mountapnes, Fthere is none to gather them together.

19 Thy wound (walt) not be healed, thy

plague is great, all that heare of thee,

tlap their handes: For to whom hat) not thy euil dealing pearsed continually:

Ihe booke of the prophete

Habacuc.
The fuft Chapter.

1 complayne againt t

wicked that pertecute the tut. 6 He Merweth that the

Chaldeansare rapied vp ot che Lorde for the chatlitement ot the Jewes, and delcribeth heir armie. 12 Hecomtorteth the fapthtull, declaring that mata i alfa destrop the Babr-

ting the praple therof to their idoles.

Hechburdẽ which

(| Babacue the pro-

phete dyd fee.

. O Tode howe

long chall J crpe,

5 and thou Wilt not heare: seuen] erye

(a) That ta. the great

calimitic

inch he

n to

come on Ju:
Da, as a most 2 us

rde, whiche tht were not

SSG] ont Dato thee foe tolenc wut not helpe- — **

we

hy Dock thou shew nie iniquitie dn tause me to beholde sorowe- poi one are before me, æ᷑ there are hat rayse vp stryfe and tontention.

lonians, becaute they hall abufe their victorie and become proude and intolent, attribu-

4. Therfore the law is dillolued, tube en ment doth neuer go foorth: for the Wie ked doth tompasse about the righteous, therfore Wrong iudgement proteede

th. if
5 Wehold among the heathen , and te Ae arde, and wonder, and maruepll: for will worke a worke in pour dayes pe
Will not beleue it though it be tolde

pou.

s For io, J rayse vp the chateans, OE bitter and furious nation, Whiche Me, - go vpon the breadth of the land to vat spouse selle the dwelling places that are

theirs. 7 Ther

N N

flee as the Cate batting to meate.
9 They conie all to spople: before their

(, fates shalbe ancoeastwinde, and they ive hall gather the captiuitte as the sande. fina 10 And they shall mocke the kinges, and een the prntes chalbe a {come vnto them:

they shall deride euery strong hold, foz
Bat i they chall gather o dult, and take it. tes acung tt,
\Chaang

ric, tranigreffe,and do Wickedly imputing }

this their power vnto their god.

lk Art not thon of olde, O Lord my God, mp holy one: we shall not dye, O Lod thou batt ordeined them for iudgement, and O God thou halt establiched then

Will stande bpon my watche, and fet me vpon the towre, e will loke, and see what he will sap vuto me, and

— f
YW a

in, d aunlwered me, and laid:
© Waite the vision, and make it plaine vpon

S 25

67 They are terrible and fearful: their

Orn” ludgement and their Dignitte Mall pronen bede of them lelues. 8 a twat § - Their horses alfo are swilfter then the
Hiren leopardes, and are moze fierce thenthe
Un wolues in the *euening, and their horse-
Zrii inen shall come from farre: they chall

Then hall they take a courage, and

dnn E what J shall aunbat 1 . : 6 Wee sno ° buketh me, lwere to him that res

it

RT 80

e, in — N

“ ct =)

for correction, * ere -

3 Thou art of pure eyes, and canst not fee: enyl, thou canst not behold wickednesse: wherkoreschen doest thou lobe bpd the tranlgressours and holdest thy tongue, when the wicked deuoureth the man that is more righteous then he:

14. And maͤkest men as theo fiche ok the CE, sea, and as the treeping thinges that de a haue no ruler ouer them. * N

15 They take vp all with the angle, they tatche it in their net, and gather it in eee bare ohero ther reis pte and are gla

16 Therfore they sacrifice vnto theiranet, hug and burne meenle Onto their parne : be- el

en Hatter tause by them their portion is fat, and ane their meate plenteous. tir exe het and not spare continually to lay Sonne the nations: f Oz, empty.

Jer. xi. a.
Job. xxi. a.

and glorie in
17 Shall they therfore" stretche ont their ne

(g WMeamug th it thes
Hhoulos not.

9 : De. ii. Chapter.
A bvition against piyde, couetousnelse, drünkennesse, and idolatrie

Cad wzite it

g 1 in great ler =

fables that be may run that© rea- te be

deth it. 1 | (0 Te ken

3 Forthe vision ts pet fo an appoynted ae time, but at the lastit shall speahe, aud wri.

not le: though it tarv, Wapker kon ccs ive

hall surelp come , and hall ros fat bor

tta ‘i 0 0 18.0 a
+ “aSebolo,Oherhat”kftesh Bp him leife, bis minde is not ppright in hun: bar the iust shall liue by his faptj. e
Bb iy 5 BEN

(t) He compa

to without whom God

Soll punishe and make him

fi 39990 ftockt to a

the Wolde.
Oz, haut no

(d) Signifi » tng that al the mpogld (hall tyisht the des fruction of firanntcd, and that bp their

thpne heule,

Vt shew-

onto di vnder Cbnite.
(t) Tocman

o Hataàn wert neare

pas roth the proud and couctons

man to f
Diunkard that

rsafonz lenst,

camdeede tbe proude man as) he
: dat tranfareficth by Wine, therfore Mall e not endure, vetaule he hath enlace ged his deslre as the hell ,€ is as death, and tan not be fatifficd , but gathereth vnto him all nations, and heapeth vnto hun all people.
6 Phan not ali these take vp a parable againt him? and a taunting prouerbe againt hin, and lap: Wo he that increaleth that Which is not his how long? and he that tadeth him selfe with thicke

tlap-
7 Shall they not rife bp sodenly that

ate (hall byte ther : and awake that {hall they une” tire thee ,€ thou shalt be their pray: benden: 8 Wetäule thou halt spoyled many na-
Banden. tions, all the remnaunt of the people
* {halt spople thee, betause of mens blood, en And forthe wrongldoneunthe lande, in uin the citie,and vnto all that dwell therin.

Suren, 9 100 he that toueteth an enyll co-
Sec uetousnelle to his houle, that he may fet let. his nett on hie to estape from the power to him that of eupll.

e n 0 Thouhast confulted Mame to thyne un wee obne house, by destroying many people, and ellen F hält sinned agalnst thyne one soule. fine of 1 Jor the Rone chall erye out of the wal,

and the beame out of the timber hall aunswere it. Ante
Oo vnto him that buyldeth a towne

middes of the peres, in the middes of the veres make it knowen, in wrath fa member nierele.

Hina where

ficito wis 3 God commeth from Theman, and ba u de the holy one from mount Paran, Se: dener e lah, his glorie touereth the heauens, and moors the carth is full of his prayse.

Was t gen.

4 AndVis\brightnetle Wasastheliaht:

13 Behold is it not ot the Lord of that the people shall labour ria ‘ rpfire ¢ the people Chall euen Weerp & warn po 5 — vanttie. PP Sone
14. For the earth chalbe Wfüled with tie an unowledge of the glozie ofthe Loe ane the me a ow fea. a,
15 Wo unto imt at geuetl 18 5 Bethy bour drinke, thou wymelkhy heat ber. makests him] drunken allo „ that thou Petey mapest {ce their priuitles. ee
16 Thon art filled With chame for glore. drinke thou also and be made naked: , the cup of the Lordes right hand halve a. turned vnto thee, and chamelfall spupng shalbe for thy glore. f
17 For the trueltie of? Tibanus thall coz Hz uerthee: fo wal the spople ofthe beattes dr which he made akrapde, vetause of hes" mens blood, and foz the Wrong done * in the land, in the citie, and vnto all that ,,S:0% dwell therin. 2
13 What profiteth the image: for the ma-

ker therok hath made it an image and a

teacher oklyes, though he that madett my ao When he maketh dumbe

19 Wo vnto hym that sapth to the wood,
Awake: and to the dumbe stoue, Nile vp, it chall teache (thee:) beholde it is cot lapde oner with gold and suuer, e there

fone tere, 12 °° t tsno breath init. den b With blood, and eretteth a titie by in: 20 But the Lord is in his holp temple:let dg quitie. all the earth keye scllente before hy.
The . iij. Chapter.
A praper for thefapeHlit. be 125 praper ol Dabatut the ohe had hornes (comming! out ol hie gs of a yon al mophete for the ig: handes, and there was the hydingol ee e | SS Ai WOLAUNCES. his power. ya
Aer 2 hee Olo J haue heard 5 Weloze him went the peltilence aud seins, now bp to pesos: 5 ie toales went foogth before his n te roe to 2 srapde: O Torde re- keett. — 7 inom tae, = niuethyrborkeinthe « He stoode, and mealured the earth, he ser"

vehelde, and dislolued the nations, 5 the euerlasting mountapnes were 17 nek and the auanctent ties bows, is wapes are tuerlasting.
7 Foriniquitie J law the tentes of ci Bat fan, cand] thecurtapnes of the lande di vs:
Madian dyd tremble. 3 Was

“yn f0

171 pt atl

rt tlementes grunts the DEE

1 nol

ib ,

bat : iht

5 nip webe

mucin parabens, 7

pot culd Ut gout) ho poferurit.

(5 hr alla bat do the ted uaz Jeldent,

i

lub efehtit cb dienes 8 sturtt bp tit: tng op of thor hendts
(0 Tecon
0 gods COI: maundement lunge Wag dated bp fhe weapons cigedg pros ple whit)

fonaiytin
90 dal, *

«Rey.
Rey 8

ners: o: was thyne anger against the flooves? oz was thy Wrath againtt the fea, that thou diddest ryde h pon thy horlesethy charetsc bought kfaluation.
Zyy™ bow was manpkestly reucaled; and the othes of the tribes were ja sure word. Sela h. thou diddest cleaue the earth with riuers.

o The mountapnes sawe thee and they

trembled, the streame of the water)

patted by, the deepe made a nopse, and

lift vp his handes on Hye. N
The lonne (and moone stoode siill in

(thei habitatlon, Oat the light of thyne

arrowes they went, cand) at the bright

chiniug of thy speares.

pn Thou trodest downe the land in anger: and dyddest threshe the heathen in pifpleature. .

z Thou Wentelt foorth foz the saluation okthy people, (even) fozfaluation with

thyneewannoynted:thou batt wounded

the head ofthe house of the wicked, and diltoueredst the foundations vnto the
Wuecke . Selah.

aur eee Ne ee

there is na faination,bat by Chzist. (n) From the top co the tor thon bal deftropen the enemies,

Ihe booke f the prophete -

Sophonia.

g Was the Lorde angty against thech ri

thyne hozses, vponthe heape of great wales. ern

tudgementeg.

entred into my bones , E Jtreimbled in aten,

cept they «

bour of the oltue hal kavie, k the fiendes tens.

chall pelde no meate: the cheepe halbe e en tut ot from the kolde, and there shalbe wunde no bullocke in the stalles. Connell
18 Wut H Will reioyce in the Low, J will Sess
- top in the God of niy saluation. Libre
19 The Tord God is my strength, he wil andere make my feete like hindesskeete ) he wil ofthe fateh

make me to walke pon my bye places, Kena.

ons prepared.
(t) The chieft singer dpon the inftru= ment eg of musicke shalt baue occatton

ol hig church.
Megioth 3 tune 02 in-
Crumentof minlicke {9 ealltd.

The Jirft Chapter. -
Threatninges again’ Juda and Hierutalem, becaule of their idolatrie.

He Worde ok the
Lord which tame buto Sophoni the sonne of Chu-
| FF) (the sonne of Ge-
)}| Dallas , the fonne of Amariah, the hs A ae e
75 in the time ol Jo-
: pe lonne of Amon king of Juda.
10 will surely destroy all thinges inthe

, and, fapth the Lorne. nee destroy man and beast, J eiten the foules in the ayze, and fall ar in the fea, and great riune chal eon oe wicked and J wil vtterly de-
N men out ot the land, sayth the

JIwu stretch out myne hand Spon Ju-

da and vpon all such as dwell at hierulalem: thus will Jroote out the rem?

naunt of Waal from this place, and the

names of the Kemurins and priestes: 4:Re.n.

5 Beat such as bpon their house toppes Baan
Worship and bolve them lelues vnto the pereva hoast of heauen, whiche lweare by the
Lorde, and by their ePalchom allo: (bat ia.

6 Which start backe fromthe Lorde, and ech n ben seke after the Lorde nor regard algen

pin. N N kell gion.

We still at the presente of the Lorde Zachta.
God, for the day of the Lord is at hand: peà the Lord hath prepared a lacrifite, and called his ghestes therto.

8 And thus thallit happen, in the day of the Lordes lacrifice J will bilite the printes and the kinges children, and al Ney b. such as weare straunge clothing. kraxxueb

Wb uij 9 In

at leape ouer the threcholde fo
1 i 5 whiche fil their lordes Houle
With robberte and kalchood.

10 Atthe lame time fayth the Lord, pare malbe hearde) agreatcrpefromthe fishe porte, and an howling from the seconde porte, and a great destruction krom the

hylles. 8

11 Dolble ye that dwel in the lowe plates, for al the marchaunt people are destroped, and all they that Were laden with siluer, are rooted out.

12 At the same tine will J searche Hier salem with lanternes, and bilite them that continue in their dregges, and sap in their heartes, Tush, the Lode will do neither good no eupll.

iu. Efd: iit a.

ler. v. c.
Deu. xxix, c

caxiie 13 Therfore their goodes shalbe spopled, e amosye, their houles layrd waste: they chall
; buylde houles, and not dwell inthem,

they Mall plante vine pardes, but not
Danke the Wine therok.

— °°» »«+T LQ prochee .
The prophecie
5 In che fame day allo Will J pisite alt 14. Jor the great dapof the Tordetsat

hande, itis harde by, and com Toca pate, euen the bitter voyte ofthe Londa L dap, then Hall the strong man trye out

15 That dapis aday of Wath, avay ot trouble aud heaumelle, aday of deter destruction and mileric,adarke x glowming Day, a Cloudy and {torte day.

16 A dap ot the trumpet and alarum againt the strong cities, and hie towzes.

17 J will bring the people into such vera: tion, that they schall go about like blinde men, betaule they haue sinned againg the Lorde, their biood shalbe powred out as Dull, E their bodies as the myze

18 Peither their liluer nor their gold that: be able to deliner them in that wrothful i day of the Lorde, but the who e lande chalbe tonsumed thorowe the fire of his Pu. ielousie: for he shall soone make cleane en of allthem that owellin the ande.

> The. ii. Chapter.
1 he mouth to returne to God, 5 prophesping vnto the one deffraction,and

tothe other deliueraunce.

gather vou, O nation not Worthy to be lo-

% sued,

Wekore the detree go

bon e ntluded [and ye be) as

chalke that pallech in a day, x before the fearfull Wath of the Lorde come vpon
VOU ,€ before the day ofthe Lordes fore dilplealure come vpon you.

3 Sele the Lorde all pe meeke Hearted bpon earth , petbat Woreke after his tudgement leke righteousnelle,“leke lowlinesse that ye may be defended in the Weothiull Day of the Lowe:

Khaxiiic 7, Jo: Gaza shalbe destroyed, and Alta-

5 aa 15 Ae e walte, they shall tast

zce. xx vc. enoone 7 abe rote bp dap and Attaron

Obnto pou that dwell vpont
* toast, the nation of che herechmenche worde of the Lord chal tome vpon vou
O Chanaanthoudande of the Phili-

Reg xx.a
Jonas. ii. a.
Os, herd.

lies, J will destroy thee , fo that there

hall nd man dwell in thee anys nore.
And as for the sea coast, it Ahatbe heard: mens kotages, and cheepefoldes. N

a= Ather pourfelues,eué 7 Bea it shalbe a portion for such as re- z

mayne of the houle of Juda to feede there vpon, in the houles of Alcalon thal they rest towarde night: for the Lorde their God (hall vilite them, and turne a-
Wap their taptiuitie.

83 AJ haue heard the despite of Moab. 1 andthe blalphennes ofthe chilozent of Pen
Amnion, how they haue chamefullp intreated my people, Emaguified them selues within the borders of their lande.

9 Therekore as Jliue, sapth the Lordok

hoastes the God of Ilratl, Moa shalbe as Sodoma, c Ammonas Gomorra, euen the breeding of nettles, andlalt pittes, eaperpetuall wildernelse: The relidue okmpfollte chal spoyls them, the remnaunt ok my people shall haue then in possession. A tk

10 This hall happen vnto them korthell pryde, betause they haue dealt lo shant?- fully with the Lorde ok hoaltes people and magnitied them selues aboue them.

u The Lozd halve terrible vntotbenn rand destroy all the gods inthe en gl and all che Jes of the Heng

hall worship hym, every man in h

plate. N u Ve

OE op n Be Monans allo Hatt periche with

de. f ehe shall stretch out his hande ouer

th, and destroy Assur: As for Pe
111 be {hail make it desolate, dwe, and

abs ei flockes and all the beastes of the

a ft of it, pellile shall lye in the middest of tt, p
: rats an owles Thal abide in the bpper

ic comlort to the restdue of Ilrael.

8 O to that abhomina-
„bie, filtby, and cruel ce tie

hehearde not the boyce, she reteaued not
VIrozrectton, she trusted

drewe not neare to her God.
Fre, xx c.

Iich. ü b.
Abt ib.

evening, Whiche leaue nothing behinde them til the morowe.

4 Her prophetes are light perfons ævnfapthful nen, her priestes haue polluted the lanctuarie, c haue wrested the law.

But the iust Lord that doth no vnright, was in the middes therok, euery morning chewing them his lawe clearlp, and cealssed not: but the vngodly wilt

not learne to be achamed.

S J haue deltroped the patios. their tolbres are desolate, J haue made their streetes watt, that none chall passe by: chelr cities are dettroped, without man, and without inhabitaunt.

7 Jlapde vnto them, O keare me, and be lent to be refournied, fo their dwel-

ng thoulde not be destroped howe loeche ted them: Wut neuerthelesse, pep role vp early, and corrupted all their wozkes.
Therkoze Wapte pe vpon me, sayth the f Orde, vntill the time that J ryle by to the bray: for J am determined to gate rthepeopse, xto bring thekingdomes
Made that I may poure out myne poder pea all mp wzathfull dilplealure panthem: Foz all the earth chalbe

ani donlunied with 5 es

. the fire of my ieloule.

3 pt then Will J cienke the lippes of the ple, that they map euery one call

honias.

not inthe Loge , the

3 Her rulers within her are as roaring lions, her ludges are as wolues inthe

cxcvij

postes okit, foules shall sing in the wyndowes, and delolation halbe vpon the pottes forthe Cedars are vncouered.

15 This is che proude and carelesle citie that sapd in her heart, J am, and there arco

is els none belides me: O howe is fhe E. b.

made so wast that the beastes lie in her-
Who so goeth by mocketh her, E poynteth at her with his linger.

The . Chapter.

4 Tgainst the gouernours of Hierulalem, sof the calling of all the gentiles.

bponthe name ofthe Lode, and lerue him with one *confent . *

10 From beyonde the riuers of Ethiopia, the daughter ofmy dilspearled prayng vnto me, fail bring me an ockering.

n In that time shaltthon no more be confounded, becaule of all the imaginations
Wherethorowe thou haddest olfended

me: kor' J will take away the proude

Oz, fhonla

boasters of thyne honour krom thee, fo lab.

that thou shalt no moze triumph becaufe of my holy hill.

12 In thee allo will J leaue a smal pooree

simple people, whiche (halt trust in the name ok the Lode,

3 The remnaunt of BPlcael shall do no
Wickednesse, nor speake lpes, neither
{halt there any deceptfull tongue be found in their mouthes: For they shalbe fed, and take their rest, and no man Mall make them afcayde.

14. Reiopce O daughter Sion, be topkull C
O Ilrael: reioyce and be glad from thy
Whole heart O daughter hierulalem,

15 Forthe Lorde Hach taken away thy punisyment, ebath cat out thyne enemies: The king of Ilrael, eueuthe
Lord him selke is with thee, so that thou nedest no moze to feare any nultortune.

16 In that time it shalbe sayde to Hierusalem, Feare not: and to Sion, Let not thyne handes be flacke: f

17 Forthe Lorde thy God inthe unas of thee is mightie, he will saue (thee he wi reiopte ouer thee with ioy, he wil quiet him selle in his loue, he will reiopte ouer thee with gladnesse.

18 Alter a tertayne tine will J gather the afflicted that 1 . a that bare the reproche forit.

19 And behold, in that time will J destroy

250 b all

- ‘The pro nce | — all those that bere tee, will helpe the gaine, & at the fame tune will J gather —

ather vp the taltaway: pea pou: J will get vou a name and a
Ie prayse and honour inal report among all people of the e sel sandes, where they haue ben put to when J turne backe pour taptiultie be: fame. fore pour eyes, sayth the Lorde. 5

20 At the same time will J bang vou a- .

I he booke of the prophete Aggeus.
The first Chapter.

Che time of the prophecle of Hqgeus. 8 An exhortation to buploe the temple aqaine,

ed
MPA Wim, 22
＋ 6 iin 4 7
71 iS whe 256 >
3 N N

0 71 ual — of
S
75 x N A

Zz.

N ‘aes.
7 8 oe: o> E N
11 2 8 ey . , Hor kai
SES he Li AE a 617 7 e Ake EN weer a te . e a — eS = f . AQ 8
7 a .

RR
RB.

R

N

“a —

eS ian

(o) Though

v people transgrelle: pet the prophet is sent to the pzinte,

9 dicing. eIt isa

often thines | ; 5 2 << 3 . hing bein the cect 2 ur Ag neth wages, putteth the Wages into a e
(Seopa kTobäbel'the sonne of Salathiclat Site asien thoastes, Con teeta wag th: ionne +a prince OATES COW nde
2 re eh ae John t e forme of Jo 7 Thus sayth the Lode of} triubsn ledech the Hye pric, laping: Ce) ne

e ede FDispeoptelapth, “ Kbenme mpi take pleafuce init, and 2 WUE Hr:

mri ob ae notte me ka the Lodes houle to —_glopified,fayth the Hovde. . emt an; 9 Deloked fo much, and lo it came to lille „ee
* dencame the worde ofthe Lowe by and when pe broughtit home, I dyn op she

how leukteene the misteri 2 rocth b. rep a of the prophete ggens, blowe pponit: and whyp,fapth the Ko rd Se

had graunte Sic it e; 8: yt oufe that 15 dm fowl?
Faden 4 8 it tine fo pou pour selues to dwel in 115 em ‘eueey man me his 850 ed houses, and this houle lie Walk pis owne house. 2155
10 J

— — tatd —

of Haggeus. ci '

fore vpon pou the heauen is slaped the prophete Haggeus as the Howe „„
; 4 Ain deakbe „c the earth is stayxedfrom their God had kent hun, then the people Werber

ra veelding her increale. dyd fcare before the Lorde.

teats yy And J haue called kor a. drought voon 13 Then Haggeus the” Lordes mellen- tenga, ee the land and pponthe mountapnes and gerllapdinthe Londes mellage vnto the i": 10 eas pponthe corne, & vponthe wine and vp- people, saping: Jan With pou saith war s

ee’ gntheople,and bpon al that the ground the Hovde. -

arene Laorde their God, andthewornesof Lopde ok hoastes their God.
God, ; dal he, , The «it. Chapter. N extant 1 He hheweth that the glorie of the seconde temple tall exceede the kirst. neren — N the twentie and myne, sayth the Lorde of hoastes.
TN

ch odd.
ü 80 moneth) in the seconde be greater then the glore ok the firt

(2) They had
41 three

dal thyt phen a thpee

a Monethinthetibentie ok hoastes.

mata — faping: to the prophete haggeus, sapnig: monttl) pte

ment are net rent foorth, vpon men, x vpon cattel, 14 And the Lowe slirred bp thecwspirite bene gane ma all the done AF tHe hans of Zozobabel the sonne of Halathiel a W son eo. When Zozobabel the fonne of Hala- prince of Juda, and che spirtte of Josug de cus thiel, and Jolua the sonne of Josedech the sonne ol Joledech the hie priest, and!
4 the hve puelt, with all thebremnaunt the spirtte of all the people: t they tame bp oun west’ of the people, hearde the vopte of the and dyd the worke in the houle of the benen

fourth day of the sirt 10 The glorie of the Mfeconde house, shal- O eve i 75 this houte but pere of bing Darius, fapth the Lordeokhoastes: and in this gare
In the w seuenth place will J geue peace, apth the Lorde ber. a

gains re andone day of the n Jnthe twentie and fourth day of the dan mane moneth, came the worde of the Lord by nipnth moneth ta the fecond pere of king (ners een
A the ministerie of the prophete Paggeus, Darius, came the word of the Lord bn-

uleinbged of al
Niltuliecs that

trtifengers, e be faprhful, Diz

fant
Cin) Tht pez

reth them of hig owne

n) Gop ig

our hartes by the pofutr of bis tptriee bolptp to take = in haude and periccttp to fz nishe that wich he coms miaundech.

ipoken, not of

(1) In the firth moneth a

had Aggeus prophetitd un the crane

cara ced wen 3 Sap nowe to Zorobabel the sonne ok 12 Thus sapth the Lor God of hoastes, 0 lan: Salathiel prince of Juda, and to Josuna Alke nowe pe priestes Cconcerneng] the ku ane,

a the fonne of Joledech the hie priest, and lalbe, saping: a to rest of the people, saping: 13 Ifone bear

such care hath
God oucr his,

e holp fleshe in the skurt of emer

far 4 ho ls among you left, whiche sawe his coate, 2 With his slirt do touche the ra e

cot, his houle in her kirst glozie, and hole bread, potage, wine, oyle, or any other bn do pou fee it now- Ig it not in pour eyes meate, chall it be holy; And the priestes

Sat uin comparison of it, as nothings ; auntwered and sapde, Ho. alen 5 Het nowe be or good theare O Zorba: 14. And Haggeus fapd: He

© time Jbledech, and be strong all pe people ot and faide, He shalbe polluted.

ben dhe lande lapth the Lorde, and worke: is Then Haggeus aunswered, and lade: gane, kz J am with vou layth the Lorde of So is this people, and so is this nation
Waden alfes, Wbelore me sapth the Lord, and so ig al ene

ae © According to theo worde that J couez the Worke of their handes:e that Which e maäunted With pou, when pe came out of thep offer there is vncleane.

nut Egppt: and my spirite shall remayne 16 And noweconlider J pray you in your fue Wilh pou, feare pe not. mindes from this dap, and bpward, beda 7 Fos thus sayth the Lorde of hoastes kope there was laped one stone vpon an
‘cn ta litle WhHple, and J will hake other in the houle of the Lore,

ae, dhe heauens, and the earth, and the fea, 7 Before these chinges (were donej when con 8 ND the dete lande: one emma to a heapr of tWentic (mea,
. „And J will moue all nations, and the dures there were but ten: lo wha came to
Shea Delite of ali nations shall come, and J the wpne presse for to drawe ont liftie en Will kl this Houle with glorie, layth the . ( dessels or wyne] ont of the prelle, there e e Tode ok hoastes. were but twentie.

Ih ade (0 E ‘ , ne The siluer is myne, and the golde is 18 Ismote pon with sama eee gene be dare ln there is no cause offeare. (g) There passed. 519. percg after this prophecie, before Cipitte u deawe
Sg te tic, er 95 e wh

ple in comparison of the time sente the creation, the tyme that shasbe befoze the kudgement: . b .
Eb hade Miter Hw tight of Gon, with pe a horse peres is but as one dap. (h) I wyll taufe gecat fare to be: 25 vi eng hn whom denten 0 zt Shite, his baptilinè ascentron. at his comming to 1 100 ans
4 an! & ta thall ches that cauftth this hos ) ue all trtasuteg at mp tommgundemene 4540 not the want of riches th

g à polluted per-
N age bel, lapth the Lord, and be of good con: fon touche any of these, fhaltyenot be

ius {Ot O Jolua thou hye priettfonne of pollutede And the priestes aunswered,

ou.

they ncuer io
Perfect in therr ownecpes, pet to God W Ho knod eth then, tnep ag-

ycare as they ars,

e, and with bayle , in all the
9 — pour handes and pou turned not vnto me, sapth the Londe.

1 Consider nowe in vour mindes from this day, and akore, from the foure and twentie day of the nynth (moneth, ] buto the day that thefoundation of the lordes temple was layde, tonsiderit in pour nindes: N

20 Js the seede pet in the barne as vet the vines, and the figge tree, and the pome-

granate,¢ the ollue tree bath not bronght

foorth: from this day will J blesses ou.) c 21 And Magatne the wore of the Lorde
Deen kaärne vnto Haggei in the foure z twenbaptomanie= tie dap ok the monet), faping:

ople.

9 J he prophecie

22 Speake to Zorobavel the printe of Juda, and say, J will Hake the —

and the earth:

23 And J Will ouerthrow the throne of 1

kingdomes, & J Wildeltroy the strength

ot the kingdom̃es ot the heathen and

will ouerthrowe the charettes and the fitters thereon, and the horle and the riders Wall fall downe everyone by

the sworde of his brother.

24 Inthat dap, faith the Lord ok hoastes,

Will

take thee Zorobabel my ser-

-naunt fonne of Salathiel, fayth the
Lord, e will make thee asa signet:for 7 aue chosen thee, lapth the Lorde of

oastes.

The booke of the prophete

Zacharias.

The firft Chapter.

* he moueth the people to returne to the Lord and efcherwe the wickednelle of their fa thers. 3 He preligureth Chrilte and his Apostles.

weAlrius , came the
I worde of the Lod
—ipnto Zacharias
Ithe sonne of Barachias the fonne of
Addo the prophete,

saping:

2 The Tode hath ben fore displealed with pour forefathers.
3 And lap thou vnto them, thus layth the

Lorde of hoastes: Turne pou bnto me saith the od of hoastes, c I wil turne buto pou, sapth the Lord of hoastes.

Bt pe not like pour forefathers, vnto whom prophetes crped, faying , thus lapth the Lorde of hoastes,

Turne vou from pour euyl wapts, and

Tosi che end ee finaginations: But et.xhiti, a. cp Woulde not heare nor regarde m

fayth the Lorde. Wai

5 What is nowe become ok pour forefa-

thers: i do the prophetes liue for euer:

6 But did not my wordes and statutes

wWhiche Jcommaunded by my fers

uauntes the prophetes take hold of pour

korefathers? and they returned e layde:

Like as the Lorde ok hoastes betermi-

ned to do vnto vs according to our owne

lat. 23 d.

Ter. xx xi c.
Malac. ii. b.

Tere. xliiii a fa. 78. a. 7

Ose. xiii. a.

shapes and imaginations, euen so hath

Vpon the twentie and fourth dap of 23

the eleuenth moneth, (whiche is the

moneth Sebah) inthe letonde pere of

Darlus, came the word of the Lord bir to Zacharias the sonne of Warachtas the konnt of Addo the prophete, faping:

8 Ilawe by night, and behold, there fate
One bpon*ared horse, and stoo de ulld zd un mong the mprre trees that were ma bo- Arr.

tome: and behinde hym were there red, speckled, and Whyte horses

9 Then lapde J,. O my Tode, what are

thefes And che angel that talked with me, layde vnto me: J will cht we thee what these be.

10 And the man that stoode among the

mprre trees aunswered, and sald:These are they whom the Lorde hath sent to go thorowe the world.

n Andthey aunlwered the angel of the

mong t e myrre
Powe that stoode among th bosowe

trees, and lapd: we haue gone t

the World, and veholde all the wand lit?

teth lll, and is carelesle. (were;
12 Thenthe lordes angel gane aun 1 9 and lalde: O lorde of hoattes, allaem wylt thou be vnmercikul to lerulsn

and to the cities of Juda,“ With WHOM 1e.

ek and

thou ball ben difpleaten now hee une Secs.

xxy.Ab · xxix

d len pores? _ ee Torde gauc à louing and a com-

1 able aunlwere vnto the angel that sked with mie. 5

F And the angel that communed with

: me, saide vnto me: Crye thou, a speake,

bus buth the Lorde of hoaltes Jam

erterding telous over Pierulalem and

Is 425 fore displeased at the tarelesse heathen ko: where as J was but a utle augrp, they helped fo: ward the affliction.

16 Lherfore thus faith the Torde: Jwpl ba- fglurne vnto Hierulalem in tender mer-
‘ie so that ny boule halbe builded init,

of Zacharias.

good prosperitie againe, the Torde thal

pet comforte Sion,¢ choole Pierufalem,

18 Then lylt J vp inyne epesandfawe, and bevolde,foure hornes.

19 And J fatde vnto the angel that tal-

ked with me, what be thele he aunswe-

redme, Thele are the homes which Dani. vid.

haue scattered Juda, Israel and Hierulalem.
20 And the Torde shewed me koure car: D penters. wt
21 Then fae J: What wyll these do: he aunswered e laid: These are the homes which haue stattered Funda, so that no man durst lyft bp his head: but these are

as friththe Lorde ol hoastes: yea and the come to fray them awap, and to tac out wes e pne shalbe stretehed vpon Hierulal€. the hornes of the Gentiles which iyft n I Erpe allo and speake thus faith the vp their horne ouer the lande of Juda gone of hoaltes : My cities shalbe in to statter tt abroade.
The. ij. Chapter.

NN Lyfe vp myne eyes az
1 oe

gapne and loked: and beholde a man, with a measure lyne in his
102 hande. J '
§Then fatde J: Whyther goest thou: And he said vnto me: To measure Hierusalem, that J map see how long and how broade it is. — er
And behold, the angel that talked with me, went his wap koorth: Then went there out another angel to meete him,
4 And lalde vnto him, Runne, speake to

this poung man, and fap: Mierusalem

shalbe inhabited without any wall foz the berp multitude of people and cattatle that shalbe therein.

5 Foz Imp selfe, faith the Lorde, wyl be vnto her a wall of fire rounde abont, € wyl be the glory in the middest of her.

6 O get pou koorth, O flee from the land ofthe north, laith the Lorde:kor J haue scattred you into the foure windes of the heauen, faith the Lorde.

De .

ba Ss
02 FSS i 7

Ye)
D

Che rene wing of Hierusalem and Juda.

7 Sauce thy selfe O Sion, thon that dwellest with the daughter of Wabyion:

8 For thus fatththe Lorde of hoastes, 2
After this glory hath he sent me out to

the heathen which spoyled pon: for who lere

fo toucheth pon, shal touche the apple ol his owne epe.

9 . Webholde, J over thein, "10 that they shali be spoyled ok thole which alore serued them: and ye chall knowe that the Torde of hoastes hath sent me.

10 We glad and reiopte O daughter Siz on: for lo,? Jam come todwellinthe middest of thee faith the Lorde.
At the fame time there Chal many hea: then tleane to the lord, e shalbe my people: Thus wyll J dwell in the midvest ok thee, and thou thale knowe that the lordt of hoastes hath sent me ynto thee.

12 The Loade hall haue Puda in pollelsion for his part in the holy lande, and shall choose Hterufalem yet againe.

1; Tet all fleshe be Mil bekore the Lorde: fo2 he is rapsed vp ont of his holy place.

IJ The. ij. Chapter. | estate of chrille vnder the figure ol Joiua the prielt, s a prophecle of Christe.

thou Satan, pea the Lorde that hath tholen ierulalem reproue thee: Is not this abrand taken out of the fire-

3 Now Josua was clothed in vncleane rayment᷑ and stoode before the angel.

4. And he aunswered ¢ fade vnto chose that stoode before him, Take away the foule clothes fro him. And vnto Made

wyll lpkt vp myne hande pale.

Exo. xv. a.

Sopho . a.

The prophecie

: place amongthese that stande here

ade: cholde, J haue taken awap thy ane 980 Eee, ae J men tlothe thee uth chaunge of rapment. wald 5 faine, Let them set a fapre miter bpon his head: So they fet a fapre niiter vpon his head, Eput on clothes vpon him, and the angell ofthe Lorde stoode there.
6 Then the angell of the Lone testified
„irt. pnto Jolua, and spake,

3 7 Thus saith the Lorde of hoastes: thou wylt walke in my wapes, e keepe my watch, thou shalt iudge my house, € kepe my tourtes, and J wyll geue thee

gt

$ PHearveD Folua thou hie preg thy felowes that fit before thee tira’ i are monftruousperfons:bebotD, J wyl bring forth the bzaunche my serüaunt.
Fon lo, the stone that J haue layde be. n fore Folua, vpon one stone shalbe seuen eyes: beholde, J wyll cut out the grauing therok faith the Lode of poattes and J wyll take away thetinne of the lande in one day.
10 In that day Mall euery man call his neighbour vnder the vine, and vnder the figtree, fatth the Lorde o holes.

The. iii. Chapter

A, f adthe angel that tals

s ked with me, cante a-

2) NS] gatne,and Waked ine,

as a man that is rap-
Me ssed out of hts sleepe,

Aud fatde vnto me:

what seest thousand ZI satde: J haue loked, and beholde, a candelsticke all ol golde, wich a boule bpon it, and his seuen lampes therein, t vpon euerp lampe seuen pypes.

3 And "tio olpue trees therebp:one bpon the right fide of the boule, e the other vpon the left fae. i

4 Do J aunswer:d, and spake to the angell that talked Lech me, faping, O my
Torde, what are the le:

$ The angel that talked with me aun-
. a faide Lele me: Rnobest

u not what these bez And J lard ny bes p s

6 De tunswered and lame vnto me: This isthe worde of the Lorde vnto Zorobabel, faping,* Meither through an hoast of men northrough strength: but through my spirite, laith the Lorde of

Hhoastes.

7 What art thou great mountaine before

Apo, xi. a.

Efar xia.

Che vision of the klein

Che bition of the golden candelcticke, and the expolition thereok.

Zorobabel: thou must be made euen, and he shall bring foorth the head stone therok, with chosbtinges, trying, Grace grace vnto it. f

3 Mozxeouer, the Word of the Low tame vnto me, faping: ik

9 The handes of Zorobabel haue lapde the foundation of this house, his hands shal also finithe it: and thon chalt knowe that the Lorde of hoastes hath sent me

vnto pou. : =,
10 Foz who Hath despised the day of small thinges: they (hall reiopte, and (halle. the stone Hof tynne inthe hande ol Zo- as, robabel: these seuen are the eyes of the wan lord, which go through p Whole worlde. . u Then aunswered J, & saide vnto hun:
What are thefe two olpue trees vpon the right a left fide of the candelstickhe-
12 I spake moreduer, and faide vnto him:
What be thefe two olyue braunches
Which through the two golden pypes emptie them selues into the golde-
Iz he aunswered me c lald: Eno west thou C not what thefe be: x J lad, no in lord.
14. Then laid he: Lele are the two eo Aro braunches, that stand with the ruler o the whole earth.

Lia.

he. v. Chapter.

booke, { me of
God. 6 By the pition ok chen efignitping the curte of theeues, and tuch as abule the na

DF turned me lefting and bebolbe shee c, a booke. ee
And he fatde vnto me: what seest thou- J aunlwered: J see a fleeing

booke of twentie cubitesion cubites broade. J, aud ten

the mealure, is lignitied the bringing of Auda to Babylon.

3 Then lade he vnto me, This le the turse that goeth foorth oner the wa earth: for al theeues shalbe indgeda a this booke gal pariured perlons Maly’ idged according to the fame. ne aw

4 And J wil baitig it ooch (arth the ofhoattes,fo that it (hall enter into t i
Houle of the theefc,and into the ye 0 hun that fallely lweareth by mr “ne

— « e
= of Zacharias. chalsremayne in his houie, and con- ture, and chrewe the lupe of a WED) the timber eftones therol. the mouth ofthe ee 1e Or, Ephah
Then the angel that talked withme, 9 Thenlpft J vp mpne eyes and loked, went koozth. and lade vnto me: Wplt vp Fbevolde, there tame out two women, thyne eyes, and fee what is this that g:- aͤndthe Winde was in their winges: kor eth foozth. = they had Winges lpke the winges ofa
6 And Z lard, what is it: He aunlwered: storke, and they lylt vp the mealure be- y erden
„enn This is d meature going out. De aide t wirt the earth and the heauen.
N moreouer: Euẽ thus are they that dwel 10 Then spake J to the angel that talked pponthe whole earth toloke vpon. With me: abyther Wyli thee beare the
Aud behold, there was lylt vp atalent nieasureoflead:and lo, a woman sate in the mid- i And he faide vnto me: Into the land ok mend nett ofthe mralure. * Strinaat to builde it an houle, c it Mat * b. g And he laid, This is vngodlinesle: So be established, x let there vpon her owne he calt her into the middest orthe mea- plate. ö
7 The. vi. Chapter.
By the koure charrets he delcribeth the prosperitie ol konre kingdomes.
5 Ozeouer, turned me, And the worde ofthe Lorde tanie vnlyfting vp myne eyes, to me, saping:
Ee and loked, and behold 10 Tanke of the prisoners that are come
„there came foure char- from Babylon, namely, Heldai, Tobi-
Ol vets out from betwirt ah, e Jdaia: and come thou the fame two hylles which dap, and go bnto the honse of Josiah ail hylles Were of brasse. the sonne ol Zophoma. ion. 2 In the kirst charret were“ red horses, 11 Then take golde and finer, ¢ make
{np letonde charret were blacke hozses, crownes therof, and set them vpon the
3 Jn the third charret were white hor: headok Josua the fonne of Joledech les, in the fourth charret were horses ob the hie priest, dluers colours, and strong. u And {peake vnto him, thus faith the
4 Then spake J, and saide vnto the an- lord ok hoastes: Wehold the man whole 20! gel that talked with me: O TLord, what name is“ the braun „e he shall growe are thele- vp out of his plate, and he* shal bund ban 5. The angel aunswerd e lade onto me: the temple of the Lozde, .
Thele are the foure spirites of the hea- 13 Bea, euen he chal biulde vp the te’ uen, which be cone foorth to stand before of the lord, e he shal beare the par the ruler of all the earth. shal fit bpon the lordes throne,
6 That with the blacke horse went foorth the Domination:* A priest hat
Ute the lande ok the north, r the white vpon his throne, æ a peacea folowed thein, and the speckled horses (halbe betwirt them both.
Went foorth toward the south: 14 And the crowne shalbe to
57 Andthe strong hoses went out, e re- Tobiah, e to Idaia, eto 5 qutred to go and take their iourney ouer of Zophont, for ainemozta the whole earth: And he laide, Get vou ple of the Lorde. 15 hente e go through the worlde: Sothey 15 And such as be karre ofsh
Went thoughout the worlde. build mp temple of the 107’
Then erped he vpon me spake bnto know how thatthe lordo me saping: Beholde, thele that go to- sent me vnto vou: And th ward the north, Ayal (il my wrath in the pale if pe wyll hearken? north tountrep. b the voyte ol the Lorde yrs
¢ The. vij. Chapter. 1
1 Che true fatting. u Che rebellion o the people, is the caufe ol their aß ee I MD inthefourth pere led Calleu, N
Re Koy of king Darius, the 2 vohat tinte as Savale!

7 e
8 J f 4

Sams ys

0% Erh

vnto Tacharia in the fent vnto the house of fourth day ol the ninth before the TLorde: moneth, which is cal- 3 And that they should

wo ok the lorde came lech, and the men that!

— I be prophecie

e renche houfeorche uinghindnes euery man to his brother

estes which were in the houle ot the
10 of poattes, and tothe prophetes, faying: Mould FJ wepe inthe *fifth moneth, rabstayne as J haue done nowe certatne pores?

4. Then came the worde okthe Lorde ol

hoastes vnto me,faying:

5 Speake vnto al the people of the land, and to the priestes, & lay: When ve fastrd and mourned inthe fifth *¢ seuenth moneth now this threestore ¢ ten peres, did pe Falk vnto mez

When pe did eate allo c drincke, did pe

not cate x dyincke foz pour owue selues-

Are not these the wordes which the

Lond spake by his prophetes aforetime,

when Hiernlalem Was pet inhabited €

Weaithy, (He and the tities round about

her, Whe there dwelt men both toward

the louth and in the playne countreys:

3 And the worde ofthe Torde tame vnto Zathari, faying:

9 Thus laith the Lord of hoastes: Exe-

Re. xxv. b.

Jer. xli.a.
„ Reixxv. b.

W 7

Zach. xi. b.
Exo. xx ll. c.

cute true iudgement, chew mercte c lo-

ing kindnes euery man to his bro a o Dothe Wydow, the tatherleft, ihr straungers and poore no Wong and let no man ümagine eutl against his brother in his heart.
1 »Meuerthelellt, they would not taue heede, but turned their backes x stopped lung their eares that they should not heart:

12 Pea, they made their heartes as an Adamant stone, te they Choutd heare the law and wordes Which the Lorne of hoastes lent in his holy spirite by the prophetes aforetime: Wherfore the torn of hoastes was very wroth at them.

13 And thus is it come to passe, that like as he trped, and they would not heare: . euen (o they crped x J would not heare saith the Lord God ok hoastes:

14 But scattred them among al the nati: ons whom they knew not: Thus the land was made so desolate after them, that there trauapled no man in it neither to nor fro: for that plefaunt lande
Was vtterlp lapd waste.

il. Pe- ib.

The. viij. Chapter.

O the word of the lord ok hoastes tame vnto

me, saping:

Thus saith the lorde

of hoastes: J was in

o for her with great wrath.

ith) the Lord: J wyl returne
1, EWpl dwell nthe middest em: sothat Hierulalem shalaithkul and true citie, the hil

of hoastes, an holy Hill. the lord ol hoastes: There
Nene olde women dwel az reetes of hierusalem: pea, itl) staues in their handes

ol the citie allo shalbe ful f Rur damsels playing in

he Lorde of hoastes: If

MS people thinke it to br
Ar epes inthese dayes: ore be vnposlible in my orde of hoastes-
Lorde of hoastes: we:
‘Hiner nip people from he east and west,

hem againe, that they

2 Of the returne of the people vnto Wierufalent, and of the mercie of God toward them.
16 Ol good workes. 20 Che calling of the Gentiles,

map dwel in the middest of Hierulalem:
*thep shalbe my people, and J wyl be lee their God in trueth and rightroulnelle. r
9 Thus laith the Lorde of hoastes: Let pour hands be ftrong pe that now heare thele wordes by the mouth of the prophetes which are in thele dapes, that the foundation ok the boule of the Lord of hoastes is lapde, that the teinple map be builded. |
10 Foz before theledapes neither meuno: Asc tattaile could winne any thing, neither ae might any man tome in and out in relle hen kor trouble: but J let euery man go a mage gainst his neighbour. N dene u Meuerthelesse, J wyl now intreate the bange residue of this people no more a5 afore dane time, faith the Lorde of poattes. ita
12 Forthe seede Chai prolper, the vine fat geue her fruite, the grounde shall geue her encreale, and the heauens (hat gene their deawe, and J hall caule the ate doc this people to haue all thele in ossession. . pei
13 And it (hal come to passe,tharlike s pe g were a ture among the heathen « 10
Houle of Juda and pe houle of J tbe euen lo Wy deliver pou, tha pe, dir be a biefling: feare not, but let poi bandes be strong: 14. For

of Zacharias,

and Thall rentayne im his houle,and con

hen the angel that talked with me,
1455 foorth, and saide vnto me: Tyft vp thyne cyes, and lee what is this that goech forth.

And J laid, what is it; De aunswered:

moreouer: Eu thus are they that dwel vpon che whol earth to loke vpon.
Ind behold, t. re was lyft vp atalent oflead:and lo, a man fate in the middest of the · mea. xe.
And he said, This is vngodunesse: So he cast her into the middest ol the mea-

„EF

oh esdah

8 DO reouer, J turned me, ssweting vp mpne eyes, and loked, and behold
ANN 8 bers on char-
7A YAN] (ayy Vets out from betwixt

eat 15 4 i

two hylles, which

nthe first charret were * red horles, inp setonde charret were blacke horses,
3 In the third charret were white hor-
(es, in the fourth charret were horses of diuers colours, and strong.
4 Then spake J, and saide vnto the an? gel 992 talked witch me: O Lord, what ave thefes lüb, 5 The angel aunswerd & fatde vnto me:
These are the foure spirites of the heauen, which be come foorth to stand before the ruler of all the earth.
6 That with the blacke horle went foorth
Into the lande ofthe north, e the white kolowed them, and the lpeckled holes went foorth toward the fouth:
7 Andthe strong horses went out, e rez quired to go and take their iourney duer

Zahai b.
Apo vi a, 2

the Whole earth: And he faide, Get pou

hente e go through the worde: So they went throughout the worlde.

hen tryed he vpon me e spake vnto me laping: Beholde, thele that go towardthe north, hal ll my wrath in the north countrey.

sume it, with the timber e stones therof.

hylles were of brasse.

lur e, ano theewe the tuinpe ot cad uo the mouth of the meal re. .
9 Then lpkt J

* Of, Ephal

thurt the art and the hauen.

lo Then spake F to the angel that talked

e
I And he laide vnto me: Into the land of
Sinnaar to builde it an ia eit That Ooremr rae alles fet there vpon her owne te.

The. vi. Chapter.
By the foure charrets he delcribeth the protperitie or forre kingdomes.

9 And the wordeof the Lorde tame vnko me, saping: lo Take of the prisoners that are tome from Babylon, namelp, Heldai, Love: ah, k Pdaia: and come thou the fame dap, and go vnto the boule of Josiah the sonne of Zophonia.
1 Then take golde and filuer,e make crownes therot, and set them bpon the head of Josua the sonne of Josedech the hie priest,
12 And speake vnto hin, thus laith the
1020 of hoastes: Wehold the man whole Zacha.iii.t name is the braunche, e he Mail growe vp dut of his place, and he Mat build DP pl u.a. the temple ofthe Lord . z Bea euen he (hal builde vp the temple of the lord, e he Chal beare the prayse:he Apo iin b. shal fit bpon the lordes throne, and haue the Domination:* A priest Male be allo per cy 5, vpon his throne, €a peaceable counsell Eeb vs shalbe betwixt them both. E
14. And the crowne shalbe to Belem, ¢ to
Tobiah, i to Pdala, eto Hen the foune of Zophont, for a memoriall in the temple of the Lorde.
15 And such as be farre of Mali tome, and build inp temple of the lord, that ye may know how thatthe lo: d of hoastes hath
{ent me vnto pou: And this Mal come to passe, if pe wyll hearken diligently vnto the vopte of the Lorde pour God.

q The. vij. Chapter.

D in the fourth pere
OM OF king Darius, the
Wee | Word of the lorde came
Si} Dnto Zacharta in the
+ || fourth ap of the ninth mioneth, which is cai-

A, Che true faking. u Che rebellion of the people, is the caule of their alflictian.

led Caflen,
2 What tinie as Saralar cx Rogommelech, and the men that were with them, sent vnto the honse of God for to pray before the Lode:
3 And that they shoulde speake vnto the priestes

ustes Which were inthe house onde of hoalles, and to the prophetes,

. faying: should J wepe in the “fifth mo-

b. neh, eabltapne as J haue done nowe tertamne veres:

4 Then kante the worde ofthe Lorde of hoastes vnto me, fapmg:

5 Speake vnto al the people of the land, and to the priestes, ⁊ ay: When ye fasted and mourned in the fifth * € seuenth moneth now this threescore € ten peres, did pe fast vnto me: ö

6 ohen pe did eate also ae deincke, did ve not eate e duncke for pour owne felues:

Are not these the wordes which the

Iota. xv. b.

* Low spake by his prophetes aforetinie,

when Hierulalem was pet inhabited k wealthy, she and the cities round about her, whẽ thert dwelt men both toward the fouth and in the playne tonntreys-
8 And the worde of the Lorde came dur to Zachari, faying:
2 9 Thus laith the Lord of hoastes: Exe-

he prophecte

ofthe utughindnes euerp man to bis brother,

13 And thus is it come to passe, that like

Do the wydow, the fatherlesle, the straungers and pooze no wrong, andlet no man imagine cuil against his brother in his heart.
1 * Heuerthelesse, they wonid not take

heede, but turned their bockes ¢ Roppen ber vg

their eares that they (4119 not heave:

12 Bea, they made their artes as an Adamant stone, lest they ould heare the law and wordes Wie) the Lande ii Petib
Hoattes sent in his! v splirite by the prophetes aforetime oherfore the lord of hoastes was very wroth at them.

ay

as he cryed, and they would not heare: . euen so they trped. t J would not heare faith the Lord God ok hoastes:

14 Wut stattred them among al the nat-

ons whom they knew not: Thus the land was made so delolate after them, that there trauapled no man in it neither to nor fro: for that plelaunt lande

Sen. deute true iudgemtent, Melo mercie k lo- was vtterly lapd waste.
The. viij. Chapter. * |
2 Ok the returne of the people vnto Hierulalem and of the mercie of God toward them.
A 16 Ok good workes, 20 Che calling of the Gentiles. a FJ Orthelordoftbetord map dwel in the middest of Hierufater:

| of hoastes came vnto me saping:
Thus faith the lorde of hoastes: J was in.
Jorcat teloulte for Sion, pea J haue ben bez

vnto Sion, ¢ enn in the middest

“lo that Hierulalem chal-

ab. be called, A faithful and true itte, the bel ofthe Lorde of hoastes, an holy hill.

4 Thus saith the lord of hoastes: There shal yet olde ment olde women dwel az e neee

ü ith staues in thei

| dale heir handes

5 The streetes ofthe citie also chalbe ful of young boyes and damse ing i
192 11 85 ea e

6 Thus laich the Lorde ofhoastes: the residue of thts people 1 917515 vnpolsible inctheir eyes inthese dapes:

choulde it therfore be vnpollible in my fight aich the Lorde of hoastes-

W7 Thus faith the Lorde of hoastes: we: holde, J wyll deliuer my people from the tountryt s ok the tast and west,

5 And wyl bung them againe, that they

lat ix. b.

they shalbe my people, and J wyl be lere

their Godin trueth and rightedulnesse. ar
9 Thus laith the Lorde of hoastes: Let

pour hands be strong pe that now heare thefe wordes by the mouth of the prophetes which are in these dapes, that the koundation of the boule of the Lord of hoastes is layde, that the temple may be builded.

10 Foz before these dapes neither mennor 80

They la-

tattaile could winne anything, neither Bourc 24.

led thé {elucs

might any man tome in and out in reste wehe cet:

kor trouble: but J let euery man go a- ee gainst his neighbour. f

red not o

u Meuerthelesfe, J wyl now intreate che wel

residue of this people no moze as afore 5 time, faith the Lorde of Hoattes. wat
2 Forthe serde (hat profper,the vine Tal geue her fruite, the grounde fall geue her entreale, and the Peauens {hal geue their deawe, and J (hall tanse the rein naunt of this people to haue all these in possession. C
13 And it shal tome to passe, that like as pe were a turse among the heathen O
Houle of Juda and ye houfe of FH a euen so Wyll J deliver pou, that be 1 5 be a bieffing: feare not, but let vo. handes be strong: 14 10

J

ause thep ca-

bout ther Fl?

of Zacharias.

pug lauh the 10202 of yuaiics:
1 45 thought to punishe vou, What

time as pour fathers prouokedine vnto

spat, (attl the Lorde of hoastes, and

not: :
: C, l foam J determined now in these

dayes foz to do well vnto the honse of

uda ¢ Hierulalt:cthertore] feare pe not.

ww the thinges that pe shall do, are

1 i : W every manthe trueth

vnto his neighbour, execute indgement truely ¢ peaceably within pour portes:

And let none of pou imagine eui in his

e. lc,

heart agalnst his neighbour, and loue

no falle othes: for all these are p thinges that Jhate, saith the Lorde.

13 And the word ofthe Lorde of hoastes came vnto nie, saping:

1 Thus saith the Lode of hoastes: The falt ol the fourth lmonethithe fast ol the

titth, tůe tast or the leuenth, and the fast ofthe tenth shalbe ioy e gladnesle and prosperous hie feastes peo the houle of
Juda: onely lone thetrueth € peace,
20 Thus faith the lord of poates: There
{hal pet come people, and the mbhaviters of many cities:
21 And they that dwell in one citte Hatt go to another laping, Up, let vs go and K n. pray before the Lozde , let vs fecke the Po
Lode of hoastes: J wyli go with you.
22 Bea much people and mightie nations that tome to seeke the lorde ol hoastes at
Hierulalem, t to pray besore the Lowe,
23 Thus saith the Lorde of hoastes: In that time shall ten men (out of al maner ok language of the Gentites) take one
Jewe by the Hemme of his garment, and fay , We wyll go with pou: for we haue heard that God is among you.

The. ix. Chapter

Checonuertion of the Gentiles.o Che comming of Chrille sitting on an He.’

He burden of the hod

2 of the lord in the lande

80 of Hadrach: x Damal-

cus shalbe his rest,

75 N when the epes of man,

EI — euen ot all the tribes of
Ilrael shalbe towards

the Lorde.

2 The borders of Hemath shalbe harde therby, Tyrus also and Sidon, for they are very Wyle,

a, 3 Tpzus shall make her selfe strong, heape bp saluer as the land and golde as the clap of the streetes. 8

4 _ Beboive, the Lorde chall spople her, he shall lnute downe her power in the lea, and the shalbe tonlumed with fire.
„Thls hall Attaton fee, and ve akraide:
Gaza shalbe very fozy ,fo Chal Accaron allo, betaule her hope is tome to confuhow: For the king of Gaza Mall perishe,

aud at Alcalon (hall no man dwell.
700 Ai oe dwel at Aldod, and

ide o ili

rooteitoie the Philistines FJ that

Their blood Wyl J take awa y from berwenoutheethelr abhommatiös from
. their teeth: Thus they that a Cleft shalbe fo our God, he chalbe
5 9 7 in Juda, and Accaron like as
Nig 8 Aud e ety ne Jwynpitche a campe © about
. bin Heo agatntt the arme againft da e knen palleth by, c against him that eth, and no oppeeffour hall tome

a xu. e.

u xy. b.

vpon them auy moze: For now haue feene with myne eyes. a”

9 eiopee thou greatly O daughter iti.
Sion, be giad O daughter Hierusalem:
Foz lo, the king commeth vnto thee, enen the righteous and samonr, lowiy t limple is he, he rydeth vpon an Alle and vpon the foale ot an Affe. N

10 FJ tupl roote out the charrets from E-

phraim, and the horse from Mierusa-

lem, the battaile bowes chalbe destroyed, he (hal gene the doctrine of peace vn- Pate. to the heathen: and his dommton thal be front the one lea to the other, x from the ryuer to the ende af the worlbe.

Thou allo (wate be laued though the blood of thy couenaunt: Jhaue looks thy priloners out ol the pit wherin is no water.

12 Turne pon now to the strong holde ye that be in prilon & long sore to be deli uered: enen this day bring thee word that Y wyl reward thee double agame.

13 For Juda haue F bent as a bowe fo2 me, Ephraini (ots Hande; pane J filled, C t thy sonnes O Sion wyl F caple vp against the Grekes, and make thec as a
Giauntes sworde.

14 The Lowe God shalbe scene aboue them, and his dartes shall go foorth as the lightning: the Love God hail blowe the trumpet, € Mall come foorthj as a storme out ot the south.

15 The lord of hoastes hai defend ther, they shal consume g deuour, aud ee

Zen

II

ö a The prophecie *

— A , 11111 ftonreeracace
F fling stones, they Mall ptople: For as precious stones of a Sg
Zach ira. age asit were throug) wine, ro set vp ouer his lande. eu they halbe filled lpüc the balons, and 17 O howprolperous and goodlpathung

as the hornes of the aulter. a chall that be: Foz the b hau make
16 The Lorde their God (hall deliuer the poung men cheareful, and the newe

them in that day, as the klocke ofhis Wine the mapdens. :

q The.x, Chapter.

Che people is moued to require the doctrine ol trueth ol the Lorde. The Horde promp. — ö

leth to bilste and comtoze the houle of Ilrael. . |
Awyll comfort the house of Juda,

Na the Torde then 6
2775 J Grice to geue the lat- eprefecne the houle of Joleph, J wy

fle a A ste ta
. 8 ter rayne, lo fall the bing them agatne,for J pitie them and
1 8 ZN de make bright thep chalbe like as they were when J
3 floudes, and geue vou had not tast them ok: for J the lord ain e rapne inough, and to their God, and wyll heare them. euerp one grasse inte 7 Ephraim shalbe as a giaunt, and their kielde. heart chalbe cheareful asthrough wine:
2 FJor valnt is the aunswere okidols, che pea their children chal see it, and be glad, soothlayers see lyes x the dreamers tell and their heart (hal reioyte in the Lord. but vaine thinges, the comkort that they 3 Sehen. kozthem, € gather them geue is nothing Worth therefore they together, for J yl redeeme them: ther
. Went away lpke a flocke of sheepe, and shal encrease, as they encreased afore. bee xa. Wert troubled, becaule they had no J wyll sowe them amongthe people, shephearde. that they map thincke vpon me in farre
3 My wrothlull displealure was moued dcountrpes, they shal liue with their dit: againt the shepheardes, and J wpll bt den, and turne againe. fite the goates: forthe Lorde of hoastes 10 J wyll bring them againe also fon
Wyl visite his flocke the houle of Juda, tlse land ol Egypt, and gather them out and wyll make them as a goodly fayre of Alspria: J Wyll cary them into the podzse in the battaite. lande of Gilead ẽ to Libanus and plate
Senn , 4 Outok Juda Chall come the corner, o shall not be founde for them.

Efaixxiid, (a) Tee mal. titude lade great.

the naple, the battel bowe, and the appoputer of tribute also.

5 They shalbe as giauntes, which in the battaue treade downe their enemies in the myre of the streetes: they thal light,

u He Mal go vpon the (ca ok trouble, and finyte the fea waues, so that all the depxe floodes shalbe dryed vprthe proude boasting of Allur chalbe cast downe, k the ., fcepter of * Egypt shalbe tanenawap. orice

fo? oh Lode chalbe with them, and the 12 FJ wil comfort them in p lord, that they

horsemen shalbe confounded. may Walke in his name, satth the Lord.

q The xj. Chapter.

Che delruction of the temple, 4 Che care ot the kaitheul is committed to Chrisle by the father. 7 J greeuous dition againct Hierutalem and Juda.
5 Aen thy doors O TLi- the sheepe of the slaughter,
8 banus, that p fire may 5 Which haue ben flaine okthole that fäsconume thy Cedar pollelled them, pet they coe kene trees. inne, but they that lolde them lad, pe owe ve fire trees, fo: Tode be thanked, for H amriche: 17 the Cedar is fallen, pea their owne fhepheardes spare then fc all the proude are a: 6 Therefore wyl J no moze {pare tho sted awap: Howle Oye Oe tretsok that dwell in the lande fatth the Ho! 50
Walan kor the mightie trong woodis but 10, J wpll deliner the people, n tut downe. man into his neighbours Hande and 97
Men map heare the chepheardes mourne, to the hande of his king, Hatcher nde kortheir glozy is destroyed: men may nile the lande, and out of their han
Hearethe Hons whelpes roare, for the JJ wyll not deliner them. e. prude of Jordane is wasted awap. Imy lelke feo the laughte Ber
Wo

r sheep
4 Thus laith the Lorde mp God: Feede pdorc flocke berylp, and tokt vute

s

ues:
2 called Bandes: and so fedre

co t
15 ott the tycepe- fi ee shepheardes J put out of office ba monet „ £029 might not away with them: neither had they any dein me. nen salde J, BJ wyll feede pou no wmore:? the thing that dpeth, let it dye: ai and that that wyllpertche, iet it perilhe: and let the renmaunt eate euery one the fiethe of his neighbour. oe jo Ftowe allo my staffe (ever) B eautie, añd brake it, that J might difanull the touenaunt which JJ made with all peo-

ple. N

. i And so it was broken in that day: Then

dür 1 he poore fimple cheepe that had a relpect vnto me, Anewe therby that it was the worde of the Lorde.

u And F lade vnto them, Ik ye thinke it

good bang hither my wages af no then seaue. So they waped downe thirtie

mie fine pene the value that J was pryedat.

of Zacharias.

the one called Weautie, z;

Aud the Tode lade vnto me, Cast it

vnto the potter, a goodly payee for me to be valurd at of them. And J tone the thirtie siluer pente, and cast them to the potter in the boule of the Lorde.

14 Then broke J my other tafe allo lnamelp] Waändes, that J might loole
40 cee betwirt Juda and

rael.

15 And the Torde saide vnto me: Take a the staffe ofa koolishe chep-

car a ,

19 For lo, I Wyil rayse bp a shepheard in the lande, which shal not feeke after the thinges that be lost, nor seeke the tender lambes, he shal not heale the wounded, he shal not nourish the thinges that are whole: but he chal eate the fieshe ol u
9 be kat, and teare their tlawes in pee: te ;

7 D idol shepheard that leaueth the

flocke, the lworde shall come vpon his arme, and vpon his right eye: his arme chalbe eleane dryed vp, and his right eye chalbe sore blynded. 7D

¢ The .xij. Chapter.
1 Ok the destruction and building againe of Hierntalem.

0 oe
* ay 38
9 Ne
E * I A
* a RN Si
. wy =

Tih xiti¢

Ide bpon thé to be ont of their wittes: wyll open myne eyes vpon the houle ol Juda, and finite all the hoses ofthe people with blindnesse. ——
And the princes ok Juda chall fay in cer heartes, The mnhabiters of hiesutatem Chall gene me confolation in the ede ok hoaltes their God. . fare that time Wyll J make the prin-
5 of Juda tyke an Hot burning duen

with wood, and like a fire brand among the strawe, fo that they shall consume al the people rounde about them both vpon the vight hande and the left:iernlalem allo halbe inhabited againe, (name. ly] in the fame place where Mierusalem standeth. 1

7 The Torde shall preserue the tentes of Juda as afore time, so that the glorpe of the boule of Daum and the glory of the citesins of Hterulatent shal not be exalted against Juda.

3 Inthat dap shall the Torde defende the titezins ol Hierusalem, fo that the
Weakest then among them shalbe as
Daud: and the boule of Dauid shalbe as gods house, and as the angel of the
Lorde before them.

9 Atthe same tyme wyll J go about to destroy all such people as tome against
Mlerusalem.

1o Moreouer, vpon the house of Danid K g vpon the citesing of hierusalem ! wyll
J poure out the {pivite of grace € compaffion, fo that they shall loke bpon nie whomthey haue pearsed, and they shal lamẽt for him as men mourue fo their onely begotten sonne: pea, and be sorx for him, as men are fozp sor their first.

childe. u Then

⁊c. c. c.

i. Re xvil. f.

The prophecie

selues, and their wyues v

il

Luk.i3¢. is, Par 35.¢.

x. Reg. al.

Fe. xl vil. 3.
Zach. 14. b.
John. xix. d.

Esai ii. c.
Eze. xxx. c.

Ien. xi. e.

Then shal there bea great mourning at Adadremmon in the kielde of Ma-

eddon.

2 And the lande Mal bewalle, euery Kitt dred by them selues alone: the kindred ofthe honse ol Dauid by them selues, and their wpues by them felues : the kindred of the houle ol Hathan them

at hierusalein, like as the lamentation 13 The kindred of the houle

0 tan lelues:
E ; selues alone, and their wyues by om

felues : the kindred of the Donte of Hemeithem {clues alone, and their Wye by them felnes, nae

14 In lyke maner, all the other generat

ons euery one by them selnes alone. and their Wpues by chemfelues

The, xiii. Chapter a

a that time shall the
N ES, Fault of Dauid and the titezins of Bierusalei haue an open“ wel to Wache ot sinne and
= vncleannesse.
— 2 And then saith the
Pore of hoastes, JJ wyll destroy the names ok the idols out ok the lande: fo that they shal no more be put in remembraunte: * As for the false prophetes also, and the vncleane spirites, J yl take them out ofthe lande.

Pen lib. 3 So that tfany of them prophetie any

moe, his owne father and mother that begat him, chal say vntd him, Thou chalt dye, for thou speakest lyes vnder the name ol the Lord: pea his owne father and mother that begat him shall
Wounde him, when he prophecleth.

4. And then chal those prophetes be confounded euerp ont of his vision when

He prophecieth: neither Hal they weare

heere cloth anp moe to deteaue men

Withat,

qj

1 Déthe well of grace and trueth. 2 Ob the cleane riddaunce of Jdolatrie, and of kalle prophetes, ö

Wut he shalbe fayne to lay, Jamno 2%: prophete, Jam an pitbanbmas forfo, am J taught bo“ man krom my youth Caan

p.

And ik it be saide vnto him, how tame these woundes then in thyne handes:
He shalaunswert: Thus was IJ wounded in the house of myne owue friendes,

Aryse O thou sworde vpon my Hep: V hearde, and vpon the man that is nw felow faith the lord of hoastes: mite M.. the shepheard, e the sherpe shalbe scattred abroade: and fo wyll J turne my hande to the litle ones.

And itthall come to passe faith the
Loge, that in all the lande two partes shalbe rooted out, but the third part chall remapne therein. 5

And the same third part wyl J bring through the fire, € wyl cleanse them as

Amos ix b.
Job. xn a.
Esol. xlin. 3.
Pfal xviia. i Petab.

the liluer is cleansed, peaandtrpethem

iwke as golde is tryed: then thal they en call vpon my uame and J wyll heare po. them, J wyll lay it is my people, and

they Chall fay, Lorde my God.

The. xiiij. Chapter.
Che waving ofthe Churche vnder the figure of Pierulalem. Ot the kingdome of the Lore.

ERD S| Eholde, the day of the
32 Torde commeth, 1
2 thy spoyle shalbe veui-
: vi Ded in the middeft of ey: thee,

5 5 val chr tee er all the heathen to fight againg Diecutatern, fo that the titie Halbe wonne, the houles spopled, and the women defiled : the halke os 1 rh — — into captinitie,

e peopl tarped out of the —— —

3 After that, Hall the Lorde go foorth

to fight against thole heathen, as men

vlc to fight in the day ok baͤttalle.

4 Then shall

his feete tan mount Diinet 9

that lpeth vpon the eatt

five of hierusalem, and the mount Oliuet shall eleaue in two eastwarde and
Westwarde, fo that there halbe a great valleprand the halfe mount shalremoue toward the north, € the other towarde the south.

And pe shall flee vnto the valley of BY helles, forthe valley ofthe bylesve reache vnto 2fal: yea, flee shall be Ue panei as pt fled forthe carthauate in 5 dayes ot Dsialy ting of Juda: and 5
Powe my God shall tone, and all th fainetes With him. a

In that day Khali there be no clei light, but darke.

5 ay which 6240
5 Thts halbe that speclall bap er daß Mat 2%

is knowen vnto the Tode. mung tame i nor night: but about the enen chalbe

t —

chalbe ligh

In th t if cunne out from Hierulalem: the alfe part of them towarde the east sea, and the other halfe to warde the vttermost lea, and fail continue both lom-

d winter. f :
05 the Lorde him selfe shal be king

7 . li a.

Ao

Bud.

there be one Lorde onelp, and his name

{hall be but one.

jo All the lande halbe turned as à plaine from Gibea to Remmon, towardes the

tl aud ihabtted in her place, from Bentamins port vnto the place of the first port, and vnto the torner port, and from the tole of * Pananeel vnto the kinges wine presses.

n There chal men dwell, and there hat be no more destruction, but Pierusalem fhaibe salely inhabited.

» This chalbe the plague where with the Lorde wyll smpte all people that haue fought against Hierulalem, Their

N fiefhe shall conlume away, though they

N land vpon their feete, their eyes (halve

torrupt in their holes, and their tongue shall tonlume in their mouth.

z In that dap shall the Lorde make a great sedition among them: so that one man (hall take another by the bande,

C and lape his handes vpon the handes

blkhlis neighbour.

Tach xls. 1 4 Judah

and the armies of al the heathen chalbe

gathered together rounde about, with

aka üs.

seed Sa] Pe @burthen
Ne. <1! of tie word of
17 the Torde to
Ilrael, by the
2} ministerie of
{| Matacht.
2 “5 J haue lo-
P ued pou faith r: Pe here.
Indie — OY N 5
. Wbatehoatouea ber wasnote

ise Mas not Elau

Jatobs brother fai Z aith the Lorde, yet lo-

ued J Jatcob- stately Cpr 0702s

> ind J bated Sau, x made his moun-

of Zacharias,

at time hall there waters of

” ance all the earth: At that time shall

ol hierulalem: She shalbe fet vp.

all fight against ierusalem,

CC

golde and siluer, and a very great multi: tude okapparell. .

15 And this plague (halt go duer horses, mules, tammeis, asles, € all the beastes that shalbe in the hoast, une as vonder plague was. a K.

16 Euerp one that remapneth then of alt the people which tame against Hierusalem, Mall go vp early to Worchip the kingsceuen the Lode of hoattes,* and to kepe the feast of tabernacles.

17 And loke what generation vpon the earth goeth not to Hierusalem for to
Worlhippe the king the Tome of hoastes, bpon the fame shall tome no

rapne.

18 Ifthe kindred of Egypt go not vp, and tome not, it (hall not (rayne) vpon them: This shalbe the plague wherc-

with the Borde wyll smpte all the hea: then that tome not bp to lepe the feast ok tabernacles, ö

19 Bea this shalbe the plague of Egypt, and the plague of all people that go not vp to kepe the feast of tabernacles.

20 At that time shall the ryding geare of the horses be holy vnto the Lorde: the kettels in the lordes house shalbe lyke the bafons before the aulter.

21 Head, all the kettels in Hierulalem and ame (halbe holy vnto the Torde of

hHoastes: anid al they that slap offringes, shall come and take ofthem, and leethe therein: And at that time there shalbe no mo Chanaanites inthe boule ofthe
Lorde of hoastes.

The bookeof the prophete Malachias.

J The firft Chapter.
_ Acomplatnt against Itrael, and chietely the pricttes.

taynes waste, and his heritage a wildernesse for Dragons.

4 Though Edom sap, we are impouerished, but we wil returne and builde the delolate places: pet faith the Lorde of hoastes, They shal bullde, but I wil destroy: qc they shal tal them, The border
10 ad 8 the pone with whom the Lorde is angry for euer.

5 And pour epes shallsee: and pou that fay, The Lorde wylbe maguificd vpon the borders of Ilracl.

6 Asonne honoureth his father, and a seruaunt his maister: Ikthen J de , 9

iN.

Leui.xxiil f
Nume. 28. b.

The prophecie

ring at your bande.

ther, where is myne honour- if I bea maler, where is my feare: Saith the
Hore God of hoaltes to pou O ve pristes that despise my nale, and pe fay, herein haue we despised thy name: pe offer vpon myne aulter™ vncleane bread, and fap, Wherein haue we polluted thee- In that pe lay, The table of the Lordẽ is not tobe regarded.
When pe bring the blinde for satrifite, vou fap jit is not cull: and when pe bring the lame and sicke (rou lap] it is not eull: offer it nowe w to thy pante, wyll he be tontent with thee,oz accept thy perlon, laith the Lorde of hoastes-
„And now FJ pray pou,pzay before God. that he map haue mertie vpon bs: (thts ceutit) atl ben done by pour meanes) wyll he regarde pour perfons, faith the
Lorde of hoattes:
10 Whois there euen among pou that would Hutte the doores, and kindle not

t) Anpure

acrificco: foz bp byead in
Ccripeure, ate fignificd all thingeo that nourispe.

05 Toa ofs erest that to ine, which thou art athe med to geue to a nioztall man, so ge cat ip doef thou conte mne my laine,

Fe — ficeonmpneauiterin bainez J haue a no plealure in vou, faith the Lorde of

Hoaltes, neither wyll J accept an otte-

1 From the ryling of the sunne v going downe of the fame my 85 great among the gentites, andineners plate“ incenfe shalbe offred to my nante. com se pba en mon r en, lait amen n eee — 55 ohe Low aa
12 But pe haue polluted it, in that pe ca. fay, The table of the Tomts pollute ie

tues Hall bos

the kruite thereok, (euen) his meate ravi moecberegarten,, = es rin z And pe faide, beholde iets la weery- won

nesst, and pou haue snuffed at itsaith the 5 .
Borde of hoastes, and pe haue offetes 5 the stolne, and the lame, and the sicke ye haue offered an offering: choulde Fac: tept this of pour handes faith the lorde-

14. Cursed be the deteitfull which bath in his flocke a male, and voweth, and fa: trifitetih a corrupt thing to the Lorne; betause I am a great king, saith the lord of hoastes, and my name is fearefulta: mong the heathen.

J The. j. Chapter.

is fo2 pou.
2 Ik pe wyl not heare
Fit nor regardit, to gene the glorp to my name faith the Torde of

(a> Bod ig ihe auctho: of scarsittt, lest they spould een e
Rb) Swell And pou thal

Grete 4. And you shall know that J haue sent can nd this cõmaundement vnto a that ip e e 1 7 made with

nd, faith t
17 1 — „ latth the Lode of

5 My coucnaunt was with him, oftpfe

2) Ad welt ith God 1 to Walke nc-

d ois and peace, and J gaue them him ctor ropil 2

w towers the feare wherwith he Ad nie 1
Chalet, Was akrayde before inp naiue.

Waben The lawe ok trueth was in his mouth, which is and there was no iniquitie found in his

consent ol the picked is tu ve auopded, vecause it is not in tturlh.

Uppes he“ Walked with me © in pear ande in equitic, and he turned 0

from their unquttie. : *

piled and vyle be tause vou kept not mrp ayes, but haue ben paͤrtiall in the lave.
10 Haue we not all one father hath not
God made vs alz why then is euery one deteaued of his brother, to biolate the touenaunt of our fathers:

Juda hath offended, d abbominattnh istonmutted in Ilrael and in Hier lle lem: for IJnda hath defiled the une ofthe Torde Which he loued, and 175 5 maried the daughter ofa straungec- 1
12 The Lorde Wyll bettroy the mathe

doth this, both the rayser bp leo a aunlwerer out of the tabernacle 0 aig cob, and him that offereth and e vnto the Lode ok hoastes. in to- ee
13 And this againe haue ve done wh pee uering the aulter ofthe Loo rung, teares, With weeping and moll and

of Malachias. |

and ener (ore there is no more respect to

0 Wyle of his pouth. 7 the ofkring, neither acceptable retcauing 16 Il thou hatest her put her away, salth afitat pour handes. the lorde God of Israel:pet he couereth get ye lap, wherin- Wetaule the Lord the iniurie vnder his garment faith the |
14. Het y : . : nt, laich th path ben witnelle betweene che and Tode of hoaltes, and be ve kept in pour thy wpfe ok thy pouth, against whom spirite, and transgresse not. 0 thou haft tranlgressed pet ts dhe thyne 17 yt haue weeryed the Lod with your olbne companion, and the wyfe ol ihy wordes, and pon haue sapde, wherein douenaunt. f haue we weeried hime Whplest pou r And did not he makeones pet had he lap, Enerp one that doth cut, is good in aboundaunce of spiritie: And wherkore the light ol the Lorde, and he is plealed « ones Betaule he sought a godly seede: in them: or where isthe Goo of inogetherefore kepe pour {clues in pour spt- menten: „ 1 tue, and let none transgrelle against the — ~~ —— -
7 271K * wi 757 The iii. Chapter 975 g 2 \ . nine 3 fe Mey an 7 l ; * 5 2 0 *
Or the mellenger ok the Lorde John Baptilk andot Chrine s office. i a ——üñ„— eEholde, Jwpll sende me, and J wyll turne to vou, laith the
; emp meslenger, and ge LTorde of hoastes. And pe laide, wahere- -
Qf) Thal prepare the way in chall we returne y
“\ (arn X23 before me, and the lord 3 woplla mand“ {pople his Gods pet cna gem i Se) I whom ve seeke, hal pe haue spopled me: and pe fay, Where- ines tno a, e e bpeedyip come to his in haue we fpopled thee- In tythes and fear ie aa temple, and the mel- otferinges- bree bn lenger ok the caucnaunt whom pe defive, 9 Pe are cursed with a turse, c me haue Mave

beholde he commeth, salth the Lorde of

hoaltes. 2 ‘

2 But who map abpde the day of hts comming 2 and who Mall stand phen he appearethz for he is lpke a purging

fire, and lpke fullers sope.

And he hall fit downe to trye and fine the fuer, and he (hal purge the children of Lent, and purikie them as golde and filuer: and they shal bring vnto the lorde offeringes in righteoulnesse.

ion 4, Then chall the Mofferinges ol Juda e, AO Hierulalennbe acceptable vnto the nae, Ode, as in olde tyme, and as in the ney 5 And J wyl come neare to you in indgeee ment, and J Wyl be a © [Wykt witnelle bac Against the soothlayers, and against
Ache the adulterers, and against falle fweaie Heer, and against thofe that wrongfully n 5 De backe the hirelynges wages and we, Deke the widowe and the fatherlesse, ae, SUD oppresle the straunger, and feare come „ ol me faith the Lordeok hoastes.

e „Jo J am the Lorwde, J chaunge not:

re 8 thee fonnesof Jacob are not tonln-
* avon the dayes of pour fathers ye are aud away from mpne ordinaunces,

haue nat kept (them: turne vou to

pe spoyled, euen this whole nation.

10 Byng cuery tythe into the store house, that there map be meate in myne houle, and prooue me withal, faith the Lorde ok hoastes: if J wyl uot open the windoes Of Heaven vnto you, and poure pou out a bleffing Without nieahire.

11 And Wyl reprooue the deuourer fo2 pour sakes, and he shall not destroy the fruite of the grounde, neither (hall pour bine be barren in the fielde, faith the
Lode of hoastes.

12 And al nations shal call pou bleffed: becaufe pou shalbe a picafaune lande, saith the Lorde okhoastes.

3 Pour wordes haue ben stout against ¢ mefaith the lorde: and pou fatoe, naberin haue we spoken against thee: 8

14 He haut salde: lit is but vapne to serue
God, and what prolite (is it) that we hauc kept his commaundement, ¢ that we haue Walked humbly before the face of the Lorde okhoastes- 8

15 And nowe we call the proude happie: yea the Workers of wickednesse are {ct
Dp, and allo they that tenipt God, yea they are deliuered. 6

16 Then they that feared God salde euery one to his neighbour: and che Lorde

tonsidered and hearde, and there was
Witter

The propfeese

— c fi them as a man {pi pooke ot remẽbraunce beforc pen pareth his owne f 2
Haufozehennebat feared the Lorde, and Which ferneth him. Anne

n that thinke vpon his name. 13 Then (hall pe returne, and dite and ehr chabeto me, saith the Lorde betweene the tuft and the wicked, 9 of hoastes, in that bap wherein J Hall tweene hun that serueth God, and hun do (tudgement, ja flocke:and J wyl spare that serueth him not.

he. iiij. Chapter.
Che dap of the Loe, belore the which Elias swould come.

On marke, the dan 3 And pe (hall treade downe the vngodtommeth burning like lp, for they shalbe Duk vnder the foie an ouen: and all the okpour feete in the day that J challdo mS pronde, and all that this, salth the Lorde of hoastes.
NCOP woke wickednesse 4 Remember the taeof Mopfes my
ö * (halve stubble, and the leruaunt, which Jcommaunded hum in dap that is for to tome Poreb for all Israel, with the ozdinaunchall burne them, faith the Lorde of tes and iudgementes. hoastes, and shall leaue themneither 5 Weholde, J wyll send vou Euas the roote, nor braunche. brophete, before the comming of the
2 But to pon that feare my name shall great and fearekull day of the Lopde, that sunne ol righteoulnesle arpse, and 6 He shal turne the heart ofthe fathers health shalbe vnder his winges: and pe to their children, and the heart of the shall go foorth and skippe lpke katte chlldren to their fathers , tet J come

FIO

calues. and smite the earth with curling.
The ende of the prophecie of Malachias, and consequently ofall the prophetes,
| L.
* * * ae 55 i> ¢.
Ww © t

— : n
I he volume of the bookes called

Apocrypha,contaynyng

thefe bookes folowing.

The thirde booke of Esdras. Baruch the prophete,
The fourth booke of Esdras. The fong of the three chyldren.

The booke of Tobia. The storie of Susanna.

The bookeof Iudith. The storie of Bel and the Dragon.

The rest of the booke of Hester. The prayer of Manasse.

The booke of wysdome. The first booke of Machabees.
Ecclesiasticus. The second booke of Machabees.

De

NN

aS

Fe}

2 44 15 gece CR
PNR MS ee PARC
Moe eas x

0 e

: Ihe thirde booke of Efdras,

The first Chapter.
Jolias appointech priestes, and kepeth the pallouer. 7 Olleringes kor the priettes and

the people. 11 Che order ofthe Leuiteg. 23 Che vpright lyle of and the occalion therok, and the lamentatton for ppm,

z The destruction of Hierutalem.
Dr Nd Josias held the feastof cater inn dierulalem vnto his Lord, and offered the pall
„na ouer the. foure-
„ Wt, teenth day of the

W S he set the priestes allo in order actording to their dayly tourses, bepng araped in long garmenles in the temple of the Lorde.

3 And he spake vnto the Leuites the holy nunisters of Israel, that they shoulde halowe them selues vnto the
Lorne, to set the holy arke of the Lod in the house that kpng Solonion the sonne ol Dauid had buplded.

4 And sapd: Be shall no moze beare the atke vpon pour choulders: and nowe serue the Lorde pour God, and take the charge of his people Israel, and prepate von after pour villages and tribes

5 Actording as king Dautd the king of

moe Iltael hath left in writing, and actor-

iam Dltig as Solomon his fonne hath) ho-

n naoutably prepared: And standing eche of pou in that degree ok aucthoritie whlche in the distrihution was appotnted vnto pour fathers the Leuites in the prelente of pour brethren the chyldren of Jsrael:

6 Oller the patfouer in order, and malte redpe the facvifices for pour brethzen,
‘And kepe the pallouer, atcording to the
COntmaundement of the Torde whiche

By eee onto Moyses. thee Dato the people that was fonnde
Rue Jolias gaue thirtie thoulande
0 : es and kiddes, and three thoufand it es. Lhele things were geuen ofthe ome rh effions according 1 pe and to th; Denote, to the Priestes,
8 aE elias, and Zacharias, and
11 (de gouernours of the temple, toute paiestes for the patfoucr tivo ee nde and fire hundred scheepe, and

5 undzed calues.

COuer Jethontas, and Hamalas,

oltas. 25 His death
34 Joachas appointed king.

and Nathanael his brother, and Sabl-

as, and Ochiel, and Fozam,captaynes

duer thonlandes, gaue to the Leuites for the passouer, fiue thoufande fheepe, and seuen hundred talues.

1o And when thele things were brought

to passe, the Priestes € Leuttes stoode

goodly in their order, and had the vnleauened bread throughout the tribes,

And after the degrees of prehemtnente appopnted to their Ae , to offer to the Lord in the fight of the people, according as it is Witten in the booke of Moyses: and thus dyd they in the mornyng.

12 And they rosted the Calter lambe with fire, as according was: As for the offeringes, they dight them in kettels and pottes with good fauonrs,

13 And set them before all them of the people, and afterwarde they prepared foz them selues and the priestes their brethren the sonnes of Aaron.

IJ

14 For the pueltes offred the fat, vntyll ;

the tyme was expired, and the Leultes prepared fo2 them selues, and for the priestes their brethren the chyldren of
Aaron.

15 The holy fingers also the chyldren of
Alaph, stoode in their orders, according as Daud deuiled, to wit, Alaph, Ta-

chartas, and Iduthun, which was ap- ti

pointed by the kyng.
16 Moreouer, the ( porters and] doore ke-

pers ftoode by the Doozes (and that dil · gentle, so that none went out of his sx

standing and seruites, for their brethren the Leuites prepared for them.

17 Thus were all thinges perfournied that belonged to the offering of the
Lorde in that dap, that they mygye holde the paffouer,

18 And offer latrifites vpon the aulter of the Lorde, according to the commaun-
Dement of king Josias.

19 Sothechiorenof Jlrael which were

then prefent, heide a0 honourable pall aouer, and the feast of lweete bread, uen dapes long:

he a alsouer was not kept in
20 Bea luche 4 (0 Astael,

Dt, vnty the cucning

courte.

se- f

The thirde booke

Firacl, from the tyme of the prophete 33 Thele things grew

amuel.
11 10 all the hinges of Ilrael helde not

süch an Ealter as this Which king Jo-

sias held, and the Priestes, the Leultes,

the Jewes, and all Plrael, of all them

Oz, founde declling at
Nicrusalem.

that were at Pierulalem.

22 In the eyghteenth vere of the raigne of Josias, Was this passouer kept.

23 And with an heart full of godlynes dyd kyng Polias rightly order all his
Workes bekore the Torde.

24. And the thinges that canie to patie in his tynie, they were wrytten of olde be-

ore thofe dayes, concerning those that finned and were vngodly againk the
Tod abone all people and kingdonies, and howe they greeued hym in seruing sensible thinges, so that the wordes of the Lorde vole bp against Israel.
Noe after all thelse attes of Josias, it tame to passe that Pharao the king of Egypt tame to Carchamis vpon Euz

D

phates to moue warre: and Josias

Went out against hy.

26. Wut the kyng ok Egypt sent to hym, saying: what haue JJ to do with thee,
O king of Judea-

27 Jam not sent of the Lode God against thee, for my warre is vpon Euphrates, and noe the Lorde is with nie, pea the Lorde maketh diligent” speede with me: Depart from me, and be not against the Lorde. :

28, Polbbeit Jolias woulde not turne backe his chaͤriot from hym, but vndertoke to fight with him, and hearkened not to the wordes of the prophete Jeremie, spoken by the mouth of the Lorde:

29, But pitched a battayle against him in the fielde ol Mageddo: Ind the princes prcassed to king Josias.

E zo Then sayd the king vnto his seruaun-

tes: Cary ie away out of the battayle,

een e

m awap ou the frunt ofthebatant age ot zi Then gate he vp vpon the setond charet, came to Hierulalem, oped and Was buried in his fathers sepulchre.

32 And in all Jurie they mourned for
Jolias, pea Jeremie the prophete lamented for Joltas, and the rulers allo
With their wpues made lamentation
1 pe this day, and it betame a

tome to be done continually in kinred of Ilrael. poet:

* O. hate.

„Oz, t glddo. ad ‘

mf , “whe
40 Wherfore against hym Pabuthodo- „

5 nitten int of the stories of the kinges of .

all the actes of Josias, e his vnderstanding in the iatbe often and the thinges which he had done be? foze, and that was nowe (reckted] are written in the booke of the kynges of
Wehe Juda.

34. And the people toke Pechontag whe . sonne of Polias, and mie inn ap gt

steede ol Jolias his father, when he
Was twentie and thece veres olde.

25 And he raigned u Juda and in Hye:

rulaleni three monethes, and then the kyng of Egypt put hym downe krom raigning in Hierusalem: *

36 And raysed vp a tare of the people, namely an hundred talentes of syluer, and one talent of golde. 95

37 The kyng of Egypt allo made Joachim his brother king of Juda and Hie: | rale. *

38 „ And thus He bounde Joathum aud w evs

place is co: rupt. 2 tha, seemeth to be,
Ts fo; Jos

his gouernours: but Zaraten his brother he apprehended € led away with hun into Egypt. ee
39 Flue and tweutie peres olde was Joa- wm: m chim when he was made kyng itt the we ee lande of Juda and Hierulalem, and he een dyd euysi belore the Lorde. Re

‘

3, elta

nosor the king of Babylon came vp, and ¥ bounde hym with bandes of won, and carped hym vnto Wabylon. ®
41 Nabuchodonosor also tore of the holy veslels of the lord, caryed them alba d fet thé in his owne temple at Wabplon.
42 But all his attes, and his prophanaty on and reproche, are written in the chronitles of the kinges. cs
43 And Joathim his forme raigned in his fteede: He was made king beyng cys!)

b d
4.4. And raigned but thee monethes an ten dayes in Hierulalem, and dyd eupll

bplon with the holy veslels ofthe Lan.

46 And unde Zedechias king of Auge

and Pierulalemwhen he was tale and one peres olde, and he raigne uen peres. —

47 And he did euil allo in the fight ott |
Zod, and caved not for therorr pete tere were fpoken vnto him by te aa
Pevemie fromthe mouth o 45

g And where he had made an oth vnto l[worde, pea enen in the compasse of u de

4 L ing Habuchodonosor, he forswore him their holy teuwle, and spared no body,
115 5 the name of the Lorde, and har- neither poung man nig; be ode pened his necke and heart, and tranl- man nor chylde among then: grelled the lawes of the Lode God of 54 But they were all delinered into their G
Ifcacl. : handes, and all the holy vellels of the
4% The gonernours also of the people e Torde both great and {inall, with the f priestes, Dydinany thinges against the vellels of the arke of god:and they toke lawes, and palled all the pollutlons of and carped away the kinges treasure all nations, and Defiled the temple orf into abplon. the Lorde whiche was fanctified in 35 As for the houle of the Lorde, they
Hlerulalen. Went vp into it, € brent it, brake downe o Wherekore the God of their fathers e of Hierusalem, let fire vpon r tomes, becaule he spared them and his taber- 56 Destroyed all her noble bupidinges, „reer nacle allo. and bronght them to naught, and the si But they had his meslengers in dert people that Were not flayne with the sion: and loke when the Lorde fpake worde, he caryed vnto Wabplon: vnto them, they made a sport of his pro- 57 Whith became seruauntes to him and phetes. his chyldren, tyll the Berlians raigned,
2 This drewe on so long tyll the Lorde to fulfill the worde of the Lord c(poken} was wroth with his people for their bythe mouth of Jerennas: great bngodlynes, so that he tauled the 58 Tyll the lande had fully taken her eee kinges of the Chaldees to come bp a- ease from them, Whiche toke that eale

gaint them: all the time she lacked her inhabitaun-
Which slue their voung men with the tes to the end e terme of feuentic eres.
J The. ij. Chapter.

Cprus gaue leaue to the Jewes to returne. 10 he lent the holp vellels. j Che names ot them that returned. 16 Their aduertaries did let their buplding, and the kinges letters kor the fame,

VN W
5 A rpe cattell, and all other thinges that mysed by the mouth ok are brought with a free wyll to the orten
(ehe prophete! Jeremie: house of the Lorde at Hierusalem.

The Lorde rayled vp the spirite of 3 Then the principall men out of the
Cyrus the king of Persians, so that he tribes and villages of Juda & Beniacauled this Weytpng to be protlaymed min stode vp:so did the Priestes also and throughout his Whole realme, the Leuites, ⁊ al they whole minde the

Saying, thus laith Cyrus king of the Lorde had mouedtogo vp, c to buylde
Perstans: The Lorde of Ilrael, that the houle of the Lorde at Hiernlalem. bye Lore, Hath made me king of the 9 And they that dwelt abont them hel-

hole worlde: * pedthem in all hinges, with siluer and basale
: nd commaunded me to buylde hym golde, horles c tãttell, and wich many amen. nhoule at hierulalem in urie. free giftes of many men whole mindes

there be Ally nowe ot pou that are were stirred vp thereto. ot bis people, let the Love euen his 10 Ring Cyrzus allo brought foorth the
95 de be with hyn, and let him go bp vessels and ornamentes that were hao terulalem that is in Judea, and lowed vnto the Lorde, whiche Habud vide the houle of the Lörde of Pla: chodonosor had caried away from Hieite le, the Lorde that dwelleth in rulalem, and confecrated them to his erulalem. Idol Land image.)

* A (itp) 1 And

Thethirde booke

i And haulng bioughtthem foot, be king - he may canfe it to be foughtm the

deltuered them to Mithzidates his asourer. f

12 8 by hym they were deliuered to
Abaslar the deputie in Jurie.

z And this was the number ol them: a thoufande golden cuppes, and a thousande of suuer, bafensoffiluer tiwentie and nine for the latrifites, dials of gold thirtic, and of suner two thoulande foure hundred and ten, and a thoulande other vellels.

C 4 So all the veslels of golde and siluer
Whiche they tarped aay, were kiue thouland, foure hũdred, threscore € nine.

15 Thele were brought by Salmanalar,

with them ofthe captiuitie from Wabylon to Hierufatent, ö

16 But inthe tynte of Artaxerxes king of the Persians, Welemus, and Mithridates, and Tabellus, and Nathunms, and Beeltethmus, and Sentellius the setretarie, with other that were iopned tothem dwelling in Samaria € other plates, wrote vnto hym against them that dwelt in Judea and Hierulalem, these letters folowing:

To the king Artaxerxes our lorde.

17 Thy seruauntes, Nathumus the storye wrpter, and Semellius the secretarie, and the rest of their tounlell, and the iudges that are in Coelospria c Phenite:

18 Be it nowe knowen to our lorde the king, that the Jewes whiche are tome dpfrom you vnto vs into the rebellions ct wicked eitie, begin to buplde the market plates, and to make bp the walles a bout it, and to {et bp the temple a newe.

19 Mobb ikchis titie and the wales therol be set vp agapne, they hall not onlye refuse to geue tribute sc and taxes but alfo rebell vtterly against hinges,

20 And forsomuche as they take this in hand now about p temple, we thought it reason to thinke no storne of it:

21 But to shewe it vnto the lorde the king, to the intent that if it pleale the

We 1193 f

22 And thou (hale finde in retord ,

of wrytten, aud halt puderttanioeti, D this ate hath alwap ben rebelllous and dilobedient, that it hath troubled kinges and cities, .

23 And that the Jewes were rebelllous and vapled al wapes warres therin: fo; the whiche taule this atte is wasted.

24. Pherfore nowe we tertifie dur Tord 7 the king, that ik this citie be buylded
Land occhpied] agapne, and the walles therof let vp a newWe,thon cant haue no paslage into Coelospria and Phenite.

25 Then wrote the king to Kathumus the stozie wrpter to Beeltethmus, to 30s.
Demellins the ferive, and to the other officers and dwellers in Samaria and
Oprla, and Phenite, after this maner.

26 J haue read the epistle which pe sent vnto me: therefore J commaunded to make Diligent searche, and haue fornde that this citie hath euer refitted kinges,

27 That the same people are disobedient and haue tauled much warre, and that mightie kinges haue raigned in Pierusalem, which alfo haue raysen vp taxes of Coclospria and Phentte.

28 Wheretore J haue commaunded to © forbyd thofe men that they Mall not buylde vp the titte, and heede to be taken that there be no more done init:

29 And that they proteede no further in thofe wicked Workes, forsomuche as it myght be occasion of trouble vnto printes.

30 Howe When Nathumus and Semel:

lius the stribe had read the wytyng of

king Artaxerxes, they gat them tose ther, and tame in all the hatte to Hier salem, with an hoast of horsemen, and

with muche people on foote, f

And forbad them to buyide: And 5

they left of from buyldyng of the ten

ple, vnto the setonde pere of king Dav’

us, king ol the Persians.

The. ii. Chapter.

great featt vnto his

his tourt, and to al the
Officers of Medea and
Persia,

5 Hea to all the gouernours, & captapnes, and liefetenauntes,

f a bnto

that were vnder him from India bn
Ethiopia, an hundreth and fwentie and oy seuen countreys. daun *

So when they had eaten aum 110 ken, being fatutticb, t were gone 10 1 agapne, Darius the king went 128 pe, chaumber, layde hym Downe to andatter that awared. un

Y

the thece voung men that’ kept
19 5 ee and watched his bocommuned among them telues, and) ae one to another. het euery one ok vs speake a sentente, and looke Who shalouercome, € whole sentente map seeme Wyler then the others, vnto him (hal king Darius gene great giktes, and great thinges, in token ictorte:

6 8 to weare purple, to danke in gold, and to slepe in gold, anda chariot with brydles of golde, and an head tyre ol fine linnen, and a chapne about his

necke: N —

55 7 peahe thal sit next to Marius because olhis wyldome, and halbe called Dariuscofin. 8

e 3 So cuerp one Wrote his mieanyng, sleulled it, and layde it vnder king Parius pelobe, a ,

9 And lapd, when the king aryleth they waulde gene hym the wrptynges, and looke Whole Worde the king e the three

puintes of Persia Mall iudge to be the most wisely spoken, the fame Hall haue the victorte as it Was appoynted.

to One wrote: wine is a strong thyng.

1 The letonde wrote:the king is strong.

1 The thirde wrote: women haue very muche strength, but aboue ali thinges the trueth beareth away the vittorp.

z Howe when the king was rysen vp,

gy toot inne ‘i

0500 fis mp doftt.

ad

red them vnto him, elo be read them.
14 Then sent he foorth to cal al his chiefe

lordes of Persia, and of Media, and the

rulers, and the taptapnes, and liefete-

of Esdras.

they toke their wrpytynges and deliue-

The ij. Chapter.

nauntes and conluls: =

15 And when he had fet hym downe in C

the countell, the wrytynges were read before them.

Is And he tommaunded to tau for the poung men, that they myght declare their ep were fene felucs bp mouth.
So they were lent kor, and tame in.

17 And then he layde vnto them: shewe bs and make vs to vnderstande what the thinges are that ye haue written,
Thtu began the kirst whiche had spoken of the strength of wine,

18 And laid chus: O ye men, how strong is Wine, that deteaueth all men whiche drinke it: 5

19. It maketh the kinges minde and the fathers to be both one, the bondmans un free, the poore mans and the riche.

20 It turneth alfo euery thought into top and gladnes, so that a man remembreth neither heauines not debt.

21 And it maketh euery heart (ebinke it tele) riche, so that a man remembreth

Oz, senttatis.

D

neither king nor gouernour, and it ma-

keth to speake all thinges by talentes.

22 Moreouer when men haue dronke, they forget all frendship and brotherlp kaythfulnes, and a litle after they daw ont [wordes: 20

23 And afterwards when they are from the wine, they remember nothing what

24. O pe men, is not Wine the strongest, that thus enforteth men] to do: And

when he had spoken this, he heide his

peace.

10kthe strength or a kong. 1 Ok the strength of women. 34 Ok the lrength ot trueth, whiche fentence is approued. 47 And his petition graunted N

[Ng
6 if N
Vie hd: c 2/3

had spoken of the

S pe men, are not
— 1 menen 5
— all, that conquer bo aaa fea,andall the thinges that ap btts the bing feonger, as lade at
} 110 lethinges, and that hath the donouer them: and lone What he

len the seconde that

tonmnnundeth them it is all done.

4 If he byd them the one again “el other to make warre, they do it: ik he fend them out against the enemtes, they go and breake downe mountapncs, walles, and towres.

5 They flay and are slapne, and ouer-

paise not the hinges tommaundement: il they get the bictorie, they bryng all to the king, lo well the spople as other thinges.

A (ui) s Likewife

Thethir

6 Likewise the other that medle not 1 nttep, and cleaueth Dito his N

with warres and fighting, but tyll the gründe when they haue sowen and reaped, they being to the king and cont

pell one another to pay his tribute buto

the ling.

W 7 And it the king, though he be but one man, tommaunde to kill, they kill, ik he
% dommannde to korgeue, they forgene: laren 8 Ihe commaund to mite, they mite, b ne il He byd deine awap, they driue awap, abe wle. jf he tommaund to buylde, they buylde:

9 If he commaunde to beeake Downe,

they breake downe, ir he tommaunde to

plant, they plant. bebe 10 So the common people and the ruebe dn lers are obedient vnto hym, and the
* king in the meane feafon fitteth Hymn dowWne, cateth and dzinketh, and taketh his rest. J —
1 And these kepe him rounde about, and not ont of them dare get hym out ofthe ent Wap to do his ownebulines, but mult

hym in anp
Op Judge pero pe mien, how shoud not the king go karre aboue, when in

such fort he is obapeds And when he had

(polen thus] he helde his tongue.

3 The thirde (whole name was Zorobabel which had spoken ol women, and of tructl) began to fap Catter this maner.)

not the multitude of men, neither is it
Wine that excelleth. Who is it then that

culeth them, 62 hath the lordshiw duer

15 Women hane borne the king, and all the people, which beare rule by sea and by lande.

16 And euen of them were they borne,

themeis it not women:

and they brought thole vp that planted

the dines, wherok the wine tommeth.

17 Chey make garmentes kor men, they get honour dito men, and without wo-

men can not inen continue.

18 Bea, ik they haue gathered together golde and siluer, or any other pretidus thing do they not louea woman for her contely shape aud beautie-

19 And letting all thole thinges go do they not gape g euen with open mouth fixe their cpes tast on her: and haue not all men moze desire vnto her, then vnto luer and golde, 02 any maner ok pre-

Gene Ji. b. 8 tious thing: 2 E ‘
Marxixa, 20 Aman leaueth his owne father that
Ephevg, bought hym vp, leaueth his owne naz

be obedient vnto the king at a worde.

14, Obe mentis not the great kung tis

e.

21 Bea he ieopardeth his lyke wyfe, and remember) neither trees 15 nor mother, nor countrey. 77

22 By this also pe mu needes knolbe. that women haue dominion over you:
Do pe not labour € trauayle, and geue and bryng all to the woman-

23 Amantaketh his [worde, and go his wap to feale, (to Kyll. to murther to lapie bpon the lea, and pponriuers,

24 And seeth a lion, c goeth in the darkenes: € when he hath stollen, veteaued, and robbed, he bringeth it vnto his loue.

25 Wherelore, a man loueth his wife better then father and mother.

26 Bea manp there be that runne out of their wittes, and became bondmen for their wpues sages.

27 Manp one also haue perished, haue „ erred, and sinned allo for women. *

23 And nowe do pe not beleue me: is not the king great in his power: do not all regions feare to touche bymz

29 Bet dyd J {ce hym, and Apame the daughter of the great king Bartatus the kinges concubine, fate bespde the king vpon the right hande

30 And toke-of his trowne from his head, and set it vpon her owne head, and stroke the king with her left hand.

zi And therewhyle stedyly the king loked vpon her with open month: ifthe laughed vpon him, he laughed allo: but if The toke any dilpleasure with hyn, the king was fapne to flatter her and to
Reue her good wordes] tpll he had gotten her kauour agapne. ;

32 O pe men, are not women then strou-

U 93, {hori

D

ger that do these thinges:

33 Then the king and the peintes loked one vpon another: Ho he began to speake ol the tracts. 5
34. Ope men, are not women longer
Great is the earth, Hye ts che hau * wilt is the tourse of the sunne, he co * paͤlleth the heanen rounde avout, 95 0 beurheh dee comefeagayne 9 ne ö plate in one day. *
35 Fs he not erkenent that maketh i } thinges Therfore great is the turn and ftronger then all thinges. ch the
36 All the tarth talleth ppontri fate:
Heatten prapteth it, all Wolle ao bur and tremble at it, and with it is 110 righteous thing. y Wie

of Efdras. wine is wicked, the kyng is wicked. that they choulde bryng Cedar trees

; women are wicked, all the childeenok krom Tibanus vnto Pierusalem, and men are wicked, pea € such are all their builde the titie with hyin. wicked workes, and there is no trueth 49 Moreouer, he wrote for all the Jewes ; in them, in their vnrighteoumesse allo that were gone out ok his realme into n arm hall they (be deckrored and) periche: Hurte tonternyng their kreedome, that
8 Askor the trueth! it endureth and is no officer, no ruler, nor lieftenaunt, nor ste warde, should enter into their oozes:

let allbap strong, it pueth and conquereth fo: enermore worlde without ende. 50 And that all their iande Whiche they

59 With her there is no exception: diffe- kept, shoulde be free and not tributarie: rente ok persons, but she doͤth that iust and that the Edonutes shoulde geue 0 is and refrapneth from all vniust and auer the (cites and vbillages of the

Jewes which they had taken in:

wicked thynges, and all men do Well ke of her workes.

40 In the iudgement of it there is no vnryghteous thyng, e the is the e kyngdome, power, and malestie ok all ages. Wlesled be the God of trueth.

And with that he helde his peace: and all the people crped, and then layde:
Gteat is trueth, and aboue all.

42 Then layde the kyng vnto hym: Alke what thou wilt moze then is appoynted

in the wzityng, and we chall geue it

thee, for thou art founde Wyler (then thy companions) thou halt fit next me, and shalt be called my kinsnian.

43, Then fayde he vnto the kyng: Vemember thy (peomife and} vowe which

thou hast bowed (and promiled) in the

day when thou camest to the kingdome, fobutide vp Hierusalem: i
44 And to sende agayne all the veffels

Hierulalem; which Cyrus set apart when he vowed to destrop Wabplon, und to sende them agayne thyther.

45 And thy mynde Was allo to builde vp

the temple, which the Edomites burnt.

when Judea

was destroped by the

46 And nowe this onelp LO kyng) Is the

thing that J require and delire of thee, is is the princely liberalitie that J alke of thee, I delire therfore that thou

perlourme the vowe Which thou with

Hine owe mouth batt made vnto the
Song of heauen. gee |

tas 47 Then Darius the kyng stoode vp and

Ale

0 1 the Deputies and liettenauntes, to all
00 landes and nobles, that they shoulde
N ll hym foorth and all them that

+ Detorote letters allo into all the lietept putes that were in Coelospria and g lers, and vnto them in Libanus,

üplled bya, wrote hym lettters vnto

ent vp with hym to bulld hierulalem.

51 Hta and that there shoulde be perely geuen twentie talentes to the buiinpng of the temple, vntyll the tyme that it were finiched:

And to mayntepne the burnt offerynges vpon the aulter euerp dap, (as they had a commaundement to offer seuenteene) other ten talentes euery pere.

53 And that all they which come from G
Waͤbylon to builde the citie, should haue free libertie, they and their children, and all the priestes that went awap. N

54 He wrote also concerning the charges, and the priestes garment wherin they minister,

55 And like wile for the charges of the
Teuites to be geuen them, vntyll the day that the boule were finished, and
Pierulalem builded vp.

and iewels that Were tau en away ontof 56 And he conimaunded that all they

that watched the citie, thoulde haue their pensions and wages.

57 He sent away also all the vessels that
Cyrus had separated from Babylon: and all that Cyrus had geuen in tommaundement, the same charged he allo that it shoulde be done, and sent vnto
Mieruslalem.

58 Powe when this poung man was gone foorth, he lykted vp his face to heauen towarde Hierusalem, and praylsed the kyng of heauen, =

59° And sayde: Df thee tommeth victorie, Ecce. of thee commeth wildome, and thine is the glorie, and J am thy seruaunt.

60 Blesled art thou Which ba geuen me wil dome, for to thee J acknowledge it O Lorde [thou God) of our fa thers.

61 And so he tole the letters, and went out, and B vnto Wabplon, and tolde it all his brethren. ek ae

62 And they praysed the God of their

é fathers, .

9 The thirde booke g fathers, that he had geuen them kree- the Lorde is called vpon: and they re-

and libertie, iopced with instrumentes of mul
63 oN go bp, and to bullde Hierufalem and gladnesle seuen dapes long. icke obe and the temple, Wherin the name ol
His name to
Penowird.

The. v. Chapter,

number of them that returne from the captiuitie. 42 their vowes and cacrikices. wi 2 temple is begun to be built. 6s Their enemies would crastilp ioyne with them.

Fer this, were the foure hundred seuentle and two.

Ancipall men of the 10 The sonnes ok Areh, senen hundred houses oktheickathers, fte and five. undzed

‘ cholen in the tribes and u The fonnes of Phaath moab, two.
N ‘ kinredes, that hep thoulande eyght hundred and tweiue.
: choulde go with their 12 The sonnes of Eilam, a thoulande two-
é wiues, and sonnes and hundred fiftie and foure, the formes of: daughters, with their leruauntes and Zathul, nine hundred fourtie and fiue,®
M maydens, With all their cattell and the lonnes of Corbe, seuen hundred and.
„ fubftaunce. fue, the sonnes of Bani, fice hundreth.
<2 And Darius (the kyng) sent with them tourtie and eyght. athoulande hozlemen, to tonuep them 13 The fonnes of Wibal, fice hundred
„ falelpy puto Hierulalem, and with mu: twentie and three the founes of Azgad, fsical instrunientes, with tabers Eflutes, thzee thoufande two hundred twentie.

3 And all their brethren plaped, and he and two. 0 made them go by together with them. 14 The sonnes of Adonskam sire hundred
4 And these are the names of the men lixtie and seuen, the fonnes of Bagoi, which went vp out ok the villages, ac two thousande firtic and sixe, the sonnes. tording to the tribes, and alter the order of Adim, foure hundred fiftic and fourt.
« Of their dignitie. 15 The sonnes of Aterbesetia nintic and
5 Tepricttes, the sonnes of Phinehes two, the lonnes of Cedam and Azota,.
„ che soune of Aaron, Jelus the sonne ok threestoze and seuen, the fonnes of, n Josledet the sonne of Sariab, and Joa- Aszuram foure hundred thirtie c two.
Mahi . Thin the sonne ok Zorobabel, the sonne 16 The sonnes of Ananias, an undredok Salathicl, of the kunrede of Dauld, and one, the sonnes of Arom, and the. out of the kinrede ol Phares ofthe tribe formes of Balla, three hundred twentie. n Spt. , Df Juda. andchree, the sonnes ok Arsiphurith, an
Which spake wonderfull wozdes bez hundzred and two. N 1
« fbore Darius the kyng ok Persia, inthe 17 The lonnes ok Meterus, thzee thou
: seconde pere of his raigne in the first lande et fine, the sonnes of Bethlehem,

a moneth (called; Misan. an hundred twentie and three. *
5.7 And thele are they of Jurte that came 18 Thepok Petrophah, fiftie and fitte,« pp from the captinitie of the transnn- they of Anathoth, an hundred fiftie and.

+ gration, whon Nabuchodonofoz the epght, thepok Bethlamos, fourtic and.

„ kyng of Wabpion had brought away two. fd

„ buto Babylon, 19 Thepot Martathtarum kroch le
And returned vnto Mierulalem to the fine, they ol Caphiras and Werot 0 ‘

« vestol Puric, euerp man to his owne —_ nen Humdzed fourtie and three, ther of

„ Gitte which came with Zorobabel, with Pirah, seuen hundred. mint fitte’

. Arius, keene ¢ Zacharias, Ree: 20 They of Chadtas and Anmudiol, Or

„ MAS, Enenins, Mardocheus, Beella- hundred twentie ¢ two, they eg

‘ e 1 2 — Roimus, and Gabdes, fire hundzed twentie and.

: eix guides. | . 6
The number of them of the nation 21 Theyof sPacamos,anvjunnzeo ee and thelr gouernours: the fonnes of tir and two, chex of aBerbet fiftic df fit.
Phares, two thoulande an hundred se- the lonnes ok Pebus, an hundred lere

< Uentie and two, the lonnes ol Saphat and xe. 1 12 The.

i The formes of Calamolaus ¢ Onus, Phare the sonnes of Sabin, the.
1 scuen bundred twentie e fue, che formes onnes of Spartia, the sonnes of Maol Jerethus, three hundred kourtie aud tas, the sonnes of Gar, the sonnes ok.
* fue. Addu, the sonnes of Subah, the sonnes.
3; Thefonnes of Sanaalj, thee thou- of Apherra, the sonnes of Barodis, the. ande three hundred and thirtie. lonnes ot Sabat, the sonnes of Allon:
24 The prieltes, the sonnes of Jedduthe 35 All the ministers of the temple, e the. F sonne of Jesus, which are counted a- sonnes of the seruauntes ok Solomon, mong the sonnes of Sanaslib, nine hun- were three hundred seuentle and two. died leuentie and two the fonnes of 36 These came vp from Thelnielah and:
+ Mecuth,achoufande kiftie and two. Theiharsa, Carathalat, aud Alar, lea-
25 The lonnes of Phashur, a thoulande dyng them: fourtie and seuen the sonnes ol Charim, 37 Meither coulde they chewe their faz
‘ athoufande and feucnteent,. 2 °C nilttes nor their stocke howe they were
26 The Lenttes, the sonnes of Jessue, of Ylrael. The sonnes of Dalatas, the
© Cannel, Wanua, and Sula, leuentie fomtes of Thübia, the sonnes of Petdand foure.- a unn. dan, fire hundred fiftie and two. A

7 JOP Ce!
27 The sonnes (which were] holy fingers, 38 Ol the priestes that exetuted the offlte of the priesthood, and were not founde, -

the sonnes of Alaph, an hundred fourtie 6
Hue cine 9 the fonnes of: Hobia, the sonnes ok

did eyght. . thet in E..
Pacos, the sonnes of Addus, which maz ryed Augla, one of the daughters ok

Waärsel eus *

39 And was named after hym: The wri-

ting of the fame kinrede was sought in

29 The ministers of the temple; the the register of their generation, but it

sonnes ok Esau, the sonnes of Asipha, was not founde, and therfore were

the sonnes of Labaoth; the sonnes of they forbidden to execute the office of

Ceras, the sonnes ol Hud, che fonnes of a O'S

* * 327244101010
28 The porters, the sounes of Salum, the sonnes ol Jatal the sonnes of Tal-
« mon, the sonnes of Datobi, the sonnes ol Teta, the sonnes of Sami, all were] an hundred thirtie and nine

i the priest hood.
Phaleu, the sonnes ok Labana, the 40. Jor vnto them sayde Nehemias and sonnes of hagabk« aan I tharias, that they shoulde haue no
6.30 The sonnes of Acub, the sonnes of portion in the fanttuarie, tyll there role
Ata, the sonnes of Cetab, the sonnes ob pp an hie priest that were well instruct
Agab, the sonnes of Sibe, the sonnes ol in the playne clearnesse and trueth.
Anan the sonnes of Cathua, the sonnes 41 So of Israel from them of tibelue i of Geddur, r peres olde, and children, they were all in
The sonues Nala, the sonnes ol Dai- number fourtie and two thousand three an, che sonnes of Peroda, the sonnes Hhundred and threestore, besides men of Chaleba, the lonnes of Gazema, seruauntes and women feruauntes. the sonnes of Aʒias, the sonnes or Phi- 42 Their seruauntes and handmaydens G

2K 2 **

nees, the sonnes ol Alara, the sonnes of
Balke, the sonnes of Alana, the fonnes

Che fonnes ol Batubnb, the founes of
Atupha, the fonnes of Allur, the sonnes
, Of Pharatim the fonnes of Waraloth,

5 7 he sonnes of Mehida the fonnes.of
« Southa, the sonnes of Charescha, the

K K K KR A

bonnes ok Sareus, the sonnes of Alerar.

« Defonnes of Thomoth, the sonnes of
433 Palib,the formes — DE,

. mum eye tbe eames of 0 the sonnes of Haʒophereth, the a (chnes of Pharuda, the Tonnes of See-
« gp Welonnes of Loz0n, the sonnes of

0 act .
44 The ine sonnes of Staphelia,

ol Peumm, the lonnes of Raphison,

onnes of Agia, the sonnes ol

were seuen thoulande thece hundred fourtie c scuen. The singyng men and singyng women, two hundred fourtic and fue.

43 FJoure hundred thirtie ¢ fine camels,

seuen thoufande thirtie and fire horses, two hundred fourtic t fiue mules, fue thouland fine hundred twentie and fine beastes bled to the poke.

44 And of their rulers also after their

families, When they tame to the teniple of God that is in Mierusalem, there were that vowed to set bp the houle agayne in his owue place, atcordyng to their abilitie:

45 And to geue into the holy treature of

the workes, a thoufande poundes of
— golde,

golde, fine choufande of «a and an hundred pretious garmientes,

a And so bweit the priestes and the Lenites and the people in Hierusalein, and in the countrey (there about.] the singers also and the porters, and all Ilrael in their villages. f

IEfdria. 47 But when the seuenth moneth came, and when the chiuldren of Jlrael were euery man in his owne, they tante alto-

gether with one consent into the open

place of the gate Which is towardes

43 And there Jelus the sonne of Josedet

and his brethren the priestes, and Zorobabel the sonne of Salathiel and his brethren, rising vp, made redy the aulter of the God of Israel,

49 To offer burnt sacrifites bpon it, so as it is written in the lawe of Moyses the man of God. e,

500 And thither were gathered agaynst them, diuers of other nations of the

lande: but they drelled the aulter in his

obne place, although all the nations in the lande were enemies to thein and vexed hein: and they offered lacrifices to the Lorde both mornyng e euenpng.

51 And allo they helde the feast of tabernacles as it is conmmaunded in the lawe, and facvifices daplp as it was appertapnyng.

52 And alter that allo the tontinuall oblations, and the offerynges of the Sab-

Oz, ordeyatd.

bathes, and ol the newe monethes, and

ok all holy feastes.

55 And all they which had made any bowe to God, began to offer latrifite to
God from the first day of the seuenth

moneth, although the temple of the

Lorde was not pet built bp. ee gate vnto the malons and monep, nitate and wu chearkulnelle. —ͥͤ—
3 them of 1 alfo ev gaue carres, that they should bein
Cedar trees from Lives whiche should be brought by flote to the hauen
Joppe, actording as it was cOmaunded themby Cyzus kyng of the Perlians.
56 And in the seconde yere and setonde moueth tame into the temple of God at
Dierufalem, * Zozobabel the sonne of
Salathiel, and Jelus the sonne of Jo-
. ledet and their biethzen, and the pricites and Teuites, and all they that were come vnto Hicrufatem out of the cap:

Eccl. xxix. b

The thirde booke

59 And the priestes stoode and

and Lyre.

tluitie (of Babylon. |

57, Aud they lapde the foundation o
Houle of God in the newe mae of

that thep Were cometo 1 auc | urie and hie-
58 And they appoynted the Leui were aboue tibentic deres dib purer
Workes of the Lond. So Jesus and his soune, € brethren, aslisted and Cadmici also his bother, and the sonnes of qq diabon, with the sonnes of Joda, the

the setonde moneth, in 1 setonde fad

cfs

sonne of Eliadon, and his fonnes ¢ —

thren, euen all the Leuttes with one ar:

torde, tolowed on earnestly to aduaunce

the workes in the
Worknien built
Lorde,

Houle of God: sothe dp the temple of the

stes ftoo had their garmentes With mulicall instrumentes

and trunpettes, and the Teuites the

sonnes of Asaph had Cynwales,

60 Geuyng thankes and peaples vntothe
Torde, accozdpng* as Mauid the kyng ol Israel had ordepned.

61. And they song with loude boyces longes to the präpse of the Lode, be-
A mercie and glorie is for cuer in

racl. 1 +e E

62 And all the people blewe out with trumpets, and crped with loude boyre, prapsyng the Lorde together foz the rearyng vp of the house ofthe Lorde.

63. There came also from auong the peteltes and Teuites, and of the chiekest iecordyng to the tribes and kinredes, to wit, the elders which had seene the former houle, a

64. To the buildyng of this, with great crye and great mournyng, many allo with trumpettes and (great) toy cryed with loude vopte: t

65 Insomuch that the trumpets wan not well be hearde for the wende mournyng of the people: pet there 18
à great multitude that bleibe rde
1 fo that it was hea karre ot. — the

66 (hes of J 5 7 1 1 tribes of Juda and 2
1 tame to pane — — eo noyle of trumpettes shoulde meane.

67 And cher perteaued that ther po were tome againe out o anden Nowe the 5070 ae newe vnto the
God of Israel. iS,

68 So they went to Zorobabel t Nur

i. Pan xd

Ed. iia.

i. ldi

Of Esdras.

and to the rulers of the villages, and sapd puto them: Shall we bullde with

Pa

the Lorde of Ilrael as ts meete, and like as Cyrus the kyng ofthe Persians Ef. bath tommaunded vs. 21

qu also l
4 For welpkerople as pon, do obey pour 72 But the Heathen in the lande made

Tonde, and dofacrifice vnto hym from che dayes of Albazareth the kyng ol
Allyria, Which bought vs hyther.

o Then Zorobabel and esus and the rulers of the villages of Ilcael sayde vnto thein: It doth not agree that ve shoulde builde the temple of dur God

7 ‘ sae

With vs. vl e 02% a1 We our selues alone wyll bullde uno

4 A 5 82 2127 ory
“anh oe The. vj. Chapter.

Ol àggeus and Zacharias. 2

them sluggishe that were in Jurie, and sundred them, c letted their bulldinges.

Iz And by their embushnientes seditions

and conspiracies, stopped, that the bulldyng coulde not be finihed all the tyme that kyng Cyrus lyued: fo that they put of the buildyng for the space of two peres, vntyll the raigne ol king Darius.
Dal, „in N. i

af 2 17 422 431
104 in: N 4

’ 4 An . ims

che 3 of BEET SIGG 3

Che bulldyng of the temple, 3 Sites woulde le

them. 7 his letters to Darius. j Che kynges auncwere to the contrarfe. 20 e

CD at N prophetes, prophecled

a vnto the Jewes, and to them in Jurie and Hierulalem, euen inthename ofthe Lord Gono Ilrael

ic 2 Then Zorobabel the sonne of Salae thiel, and Jelus the forme of Joledec

stoode vp and began to builde the Houle

of the Lorde at Pierulalem, When the

prophetes of the Lord were With them and helped them. Alia oti

Atthe same tyme came Silumes the

gouernour of Spzia and Phenice, with Sathrabuzanes aud his companions and lapde vnto them: .
4 Who hath bydden (and commaunded) poutobuilde this house, to make 15 roofe and all other thinges againe- And

"9h tan

Wen

5 Reucctheletie,theetbers of the Jene

had tuch grace of the Lorde, after he had vilited the taptiuitle,

6 That they were not letted from but

dyng, vntul the tyme that kyng Darius

Was certified therok, aud an aunswere

receaued (ftom hym.)
7 os tople of the letters which he
Lote and ent vnto Darins. Sifinnes attucur of Spriaand Phenite, and dust brauuzaues with their compant-
S which are head rulers in Spria r
Denice, lende their falutation buto
5 15 kyng. ertikie dur Lord the kyng, that we
FANE into the lande ol Jurie, and went

ts Pierulfalem, where we kbunde the
2 Wulldyng an house vnto

10 PHea they make great

who are the workmen that bude the:

auntientes of the Jewes that were ot the captiuitic in the citic of lerulglem, the Lolde, great and newe, of hewen aud costiye stones, and the tiniber alredy layde vßonthe walls t atte with the
Wozke, and it goeth foorth prosperdusly in their handes, and with great diltgente and worshyp is it made. n Then alked we the elders, faying: Wy whose tommaundement builde vou vy this houle, and lay the foundations of thefe workes : +a
12 Which we demaunded of them, to the

intent that we myght geue knowledge

vnto thet, æ write vnto thee ol those that gouerned it: and we required of them their names in writyng that were their chiele leaders to ill.
13 So they gaue vs this aunwere: we C are the leruauntes of the Lorde which made heauen and cart
14. And as korthis houle, it Was bulded “svi many veres agone by a kyng of Ilcael great and strong and was finite.
15 But when our fathers prouoked od vnto wrath, and finned agaynst the |
Lorde of Jfrael which is in heauen,"e Ter gane them ouer into the power ol Hara buchodonolor kyng of Wabyplon, ok the
Chaldees :
16 Which brake downe the house and burnt it, and caryed away the people prisoners vnto Babylon.
17 Meuerthelesle, in the first pere that av.
Bing Cyrus raigned ouer the countreys of Babylon, Cyrus the uyng ae

Thethirdebooke =

(andcommaunded) to puilde vp this boule Houle at Hierulalem, and be fet

agapne:) ae 0 110 the holy vessels of golde and of 27 And alfo he commaunded

1 Esdr. vi. a. i. Esd. iin. c.

1 J. remembraunce.

fuer that Habuchodonosor had caryed away out of the houle at Hieru-

salem, and had dedicated them in his

owne temple: those brought Cyrus foorth agayne out of the temple at Babylon, and deliuered them to Zorobabel and to Sanabassarus the ruler:

1 Commaundyng hym that he choulde

cary away those sanie vessels, and put

them in the temple at Hierulalem, and that the temple of the Lorde shoulde be built in his (owne plate.

20 Then the lame Sanabassarus beyng tome hyther, layde the foundations of

the honse of the Lorde at Hiernsalem,

and from that to this, beyng styll a buildyng, it is not pet fully ended.

21 Frome therfore O king if thou thinkest it good, let it be sought in the libraries land roles ofkyng Cprus: '

22 Aud ykit be founde then that the bulldyng of the house of the Lorde at Hierusalem bath ben done with the (coun: fell and) tonsent of kyng Cyrus, and pf our Lorde the kyng be fo mynded, let hym gene aunswere vnto bs therof.

23 Thenconnmaunded kyng Darius to
{che in the kynges libgaries at Babylon: and fo at Etbatane a towre inthe

region of Medea, there was founde a place where these thinges was lapde

bp for memorie.

E 24 In the fick ere of the raigne of Cyrus,

(the fame) kyng Cyrus cõniaunded that the house of the Lorde at Hierusalem choulde be builded agapne, where they do satrifice with the continuall fire.

25 Whole heyght chalbe firtie cubites, and the breadth firtie cubites withthree

ro wes of hewen tones, and one rowe of wood, newe, and of that tountrep, and the expenses therok to be geuen out of the Houle of kyng Cyrns:

26 And the holy veslels of the house o the Lorde, both of golde and of fituer, that Pabuchodonolor toke ont of the
Houle at Mierusalem and brought to
Wäbplon, shonlde be restored to the

in the finnes the gouernour of 1 — 8 = nice, and Sathrabusanes, with t elr companions, and others constituted rulers in Syed. aud Phenite, choulde take heede not to meddle With that place, but to suffer Zorobabel the ler: uaunt of the Lorde and gouerndur of
Judea, and the elders of the Jewes to bulde that Houle of the Lojde in that place.

plate where it Was before. 5

F

28 J haue commaunded alto to have ft

built bp whole agapne, and that ¢

be diligent to helpe those thatbe ote taptiuitie of the Jewes, tyll the honle ofthe Lorde be finished:

29 And out of the tribute of Coelospra and Phenite, a portion diligentip to be geuen thofe men vnto the offeringes of the Lord, e the fame to be deliuered vnto Zorobabel the officer, that hetherwithall may ordepne oxen, rammes, lambes, :

30 And all cone, salt, wine, and oyle, and G

that continuallp euerp pere, after the

expentes which the priestes that be at rau

Hierusalem Mail testifie to be made daply (this chalbe geuen vnto them] without delay,

31 That thep map offer satrifices dayly to the hyest God for the kyng and for his children, and to pray for their liues.

32 And he commaunded also that whosoeuer shoulde breake any popnt of the foresapde and foredecreed thynges, 02 make it vopde, of his owne goodes shoulde a tree be taken, and he theron be hanged, and all his goodes seasoned onto the kyng.

33 The Torde therfore whole name is there called vpon, roote out and destror euery kyng e nation that stretcheth out his hande to hinder, oz [burt and endomage that house of the Lorde in Hie
0 Wart he kyng haue ordeyned

34 arius the kyng h ned, that accordyng to these thynges it be done with diligence.

The

vill.

— The vij. Chapter,

1 itinnes and his companions folowe the kynges commaundement, and helpe the Fewes to bullde the temple, 5 Che tyme that it was built. 10 Chey bepe

the Pallouer.
Hen Sifinnes the go-
I eX luernour in Coctofpzia
K phentce, and Sath-
10 rabuzanes with their

N *
V
DP Ext py

— paring had ordeyned,

» And were diligent assisters in the holy wonkes, workyng with the auncientes and gouernours of the sanctuarie:

; And so the holy wozkes went foorth and prospered when Aggeus and Zacharias the prophetes prophecied.

4 And they perfourmed all thinges cough the connmaundement ok the ove God of Ilrael, and with confent

[the people of] Ilrael, after the number

of the chtefe of the tribes of Israel.

9 The priestes also and the Teuites 28

They that were of the taptiuitie were not all fanctified together: but the Le-

stoode araped in their long robes after

their kinredes in all the Workes of the

TLorzde God of PHlracl, accordyng to the

booke of Moples, and the porters at

tuerp doore.

And the children of Ilrael, with thofe that were come out of captiuttic, helde the Paffouer the fourteenth day of the lirst moneth, after that p priestes and the Leuttes were lancttfied.

uites were all sanctified together.

of Cyzus, Darius, and Artaxerxes kynges of Persia.

Andthus was the holy houle flnished inthetwentie and three day of the monech Adar, in the sixt pere of Darius kyng of the Persians.

6 And the chüdren of Israel, the palettes and the Leuttes, and other that were of the captiuitie, that had any charge, dyd ae to the thynges witten inthe booke of Mopses.

7 imd to the dedication of the temple of

‘ns, the Lode, they offered an hundred
Oren, two hundred rammes, foure hundred lambes,

8 Andtwelue goates, for the sinnes of all

12 And fo they offered the Passouer for all them of the taptiuitie, and foz their brethren the priestes, c for them selues. 0

13 And the children of Israel that came out of captiuitie dyd cate, all they that had separated them selues from the abhominations of the people of the lande, and fought the Lode,

14, And they kept the feast of the vnleauened bread seuen dapes long, makyng merp before the Lorde,

15 That the Lorde had turned the tounsayle of the kyng of Alsyria towardes them, to strengthen their handes vnto the workes of the Lord God of Plract.

The. viij. Chapter.

Eldras commeth from Babylon to Hierulalem. 10 Che copie of the commilston geuen bphyng Artaxerxes. 25 Eldras geueth thankes tothe Horde. 3: Che number of the heades or the people that came with hym. 76 His prayer and conkeslion.

M alter thele, when ok Steer the fonne of Aaron the first

Artaxerxes the kyn pete. ad tt This Eldras went bp from Wabplon

Wok the Persians ralg- 3 ö
3 8 ete went vnto beyng a scribe of good vnderstandyng m

Nshym Eldras the sonne the lawe of Moyles that was geuen by c= of Saraias, the sonne the Lorde God of Ilrael. of Eʒerias, the sonne or 4 And the kyng kauoured hym, and dyd

vm great L worchyp and Honour akter o an

an his desires. his lulten.
There went vp with hyim also cer-

tayne of the children of Pract, of the

priestes, of the Leuites, ok the singers,

porters a N ok the temple,

ierulalem. vnto Hie m ‘Fn

Helchiach, the sonne of Salum, he sonne of Sadoch, the fone of
Nbttob, the sonne of Amarias, the 5 une of Ezʒlag, the sonne of Mennerath
“it lonne of Saraias, the fonne of Da athe fonne of Bottas, the sonne of ili, the fone of Phinees, the lonne

kyng Artaxerxes in the fifth moneth,

The thirde booke -

remember for the vle of the templ

„ In the seuenth pere ok the raigne of 19 And whatsdeuer thyng els thon date :

whlch was the seuenth pere (foe they went from Babylon in the first, day of the first moneth,

And came to Hierusalem, accordyng as
God gane the {pecde in their tourney, )

8 For Esdras had gotten great knowledge to omit nothyng of that was in the lawe and the commaundementes of the Lorde, and to teache all Jlrael

all the ordinaunces and iudgementes.

9 The copie of the tomnussion whithe

Artaxerxes the kyng Wrote, and that
Was geuen to Esdras the priest and reader of the lawe ofthe Lorde, this is it that fololweth. f d

W lo Ryng Artaxerxes sendeth his greeting vnto Eldras the priest and reader of the lawe of the Lorde.

1 Jhaupyug waped thynges with pitie, haue sordeyned and) charged, pf there be any ok the Jemes, of the priestes e Leintes in ny realme, which delireth and is content to go with thee bnto JE racl, that he may do it.

12 Therfore, fo many as long theralter, let them depart together, and go with thee like as J am content and my seuen friendes my connfaylers,

; To fee what they do at Hierulalem and in Jurie, connenientlp, actordyng as thou batt in the lawe of the Lorde:

14. Aud to yng the gyltes vnto . God the
Lorde of Piracl, that J mp kriendes haue prolutsed to Hierufalem, and all the liluer and golde that in the tountrey of Babylon may be fonnde s(parteynyng]

tothe Tome in Pierulalem,

1; With the thyng that is geuen of the people tothe Lorde their Gods temple at Hierulalem: that the fame fuer and golde mape be gathered, for oxen, ranumes, Teepe, and goates, and other that belong to these thynges,

16 That they may offer latrifites onto the Logde, vpon the aulter or the Lorde their God which is at Hierufatem,

17 Aud whatsocuer thou and thy bre-

C then wyll do with the suuer and golde,

pe do aͤccordyng to the wyll of thy

u 0 *

18 And the holy beflels of the Lorde
Which are geuen thee kor the foie of catalan chen et ehen re

alen, thou shalt tee [vent] befp
God in Hierusalem. pathy

= 93, ryghteouthe(Te,

Dye vows,

thy God, thou shalt gene) : pies one BEE Of che :

20 And J king Artaxerxes har j maunded the kepers of che earn
Syria and Phenite, that whatldeuer
Eldras the priest and the reader ok the N lawe of the hpahelt God that fende fo, | they shoulde geue it hom with lpeede:

21 Eucn to the sunimie of an hundred talentes of liluer: of come allo an hundred mealures, and till au hundred vellels of wine kother thinges aboundauntly.

22 Let all thinges be done alter the lawe of God diligently, vnto the highest God that with come not bpon the kyngdome of the kyng and of his fonnes,

23 Jeommaunde you allo, that ye require no taxe nor tribute of the prtettes,
Teuites, holy fingers, posters, and ministers of the temple, nor of any that haue doynges in this temple, and that no man haue aucthoritie to put any inpost vpon them. |

24. As for thee O Eldras, fet thou iudges and arbitrers to iudge in the whole lande of Spria and Phenite after the wil dome of God, all (hitfull in the awe of God, x teache such as are ignoraunt.

25 And let all them which shall offende agaynst the lawe of God and the kyng, + be diligently punished, whether it be by
Death or other paynct, by punichment in monep, or els by banishment.

26 Then sapd Eldras the stribe: Blessed be the only Lode God of my fathers that Hath geuen so good a myndee Will into the heart of the kyng, to magnifie his house that is at Hierulalem,

27 And hath made me to be accepted ‘a. the syght of the kyng of his countaple, sow. of his friendes, and of his nobles. 4

28 And so J was stedfast in my mpude corn atcordyng as the Lode my God La me, and J gathered vp men of Plrae to go vp With nie. e

29 And tele are the guides alter oe 5 families and orders of dignities, Ag
Went n ie from 2 the. raigne of kyng Artaxerxes. .

zo Ok the fonnes of Phinees, te of the fonnes of Ithamar, Gan alte of the fonnes of Dawid, Hattus the. sonne of Cechemah: rias,

zi Pk the fonnes of Shares. Sach ne and with hym there returned ag. ah

"Dh, coyeg,
; Oupettig

i. Esd ia.

IX.

q hundicd and fiftie men.

3 Okthe lonnes of Pabath, Moab Eltoani, the sonne ol Zacharias, and with him two hundzed men.

'33 Okthe formes of Zathoe, Shechentas
ße sonne of Jeʒolus, c with hym thece hundred men: k of the sonnes of Adin,
HPbed the sonne of Jonathan, and with a Den eee eee
34 Ol the sonnes of Clam, Jesias, forme okotholias, c with him leuentie men.
35 Okthe sonnes of Saphatias, Zarias, sonne of Machael, e with him. xx. nien.
36 Of the sonnes of Joab, z adias, sonne of Jezelus, and With hym two hundied and twelue men.

37 Ok the sonnes of Wand, Affalimoth, sonne ol Jolaphias, and with hym an hundred and threlcore men.

38 Ok the sonnes of Wabi, Zacharias,
© foune of 28 ebai, æ with hun. xrvni. men.
39 Ol the sonnes of Astath, Johannes, sonne of Acatan, and with hym an cx.
40 Olthe lonnes of Adonitam the lat: and these are the names of them, Eliphalet, Jeouel, and Malas, and with them seuentie men.

41 Okthe sonnes of Bagouthi, sonne of
Ilcacourus, andwith hym. ler. men.

42 All these called J together by the waz ter Thia, where we pitched our tentes

I hzee ayes, k there I mustered them.

lbb. 4 As forthe sonnes of the priestes and

©, leuites, I sounde none there.)
44. Then lent J vuto Eleaʒar, ⁊ beholde there canie Maasman, and Maloban,
5 4 And Alnathan, and Samaian, and otibon, and Pathan, Ennatan, Zacharian, and Mosollamon the chiefe aud best learned.

46 And J bad themthat they should go

Dito Daddeus the captayne , whiche as in the place of the treaturie:

47 And tonunaunded them that they oulde speake bnto Dabdeus, and to
Sbrethzen, and to thole that were the calurers, to sende bs fuche men as

night execute the priestes office in the ae wen Lowe.

ich the mightie bande of our

0 (60d) they brought vnto vs men ol

kon erperience from among ö lonnes

Olt, che lone of Leui, the fonne of

pitadl, Sevedia and his lonnes and

45 m chice were epghteene.

DiS bactine of presente and —_ tec fonnee onnes of Canaincus, es Were twentie men.

é
é
é

Shea.

50 And of them that serued in the temple whom Dauid had dapned, and the puntpall mento the Worke of the
Leuttes that were minitters in the tenple, two hundred ¢ twentie, whole hanes are all signed vp in waiting,

51 And then commaunaed Ja fasting vnto the young men belore the Lorde that Inught delireof him a prolperous tourney land a good wap) both for vs and them that were with vs, kor our chyl-
Dren, and fog the catteil.

5 Jor J feared to delire of the king men ol horle and of foote,to conney vs lafely cle oh arte

33 S02 we had sayde vnto the kyng that the power of the Lord our God Wang be with them that secke hym, to direct theim in all thinges.

54 Aind therfore we besought our Lorde agayne as touching thele thinges, and founde him fauourable vnto vs.

Then F separated from among the chieke ol the tribes and from the pnestes rij. men [Co wit! Esebrias, and Allanias,
€ ten men ok their brethren with them.

56 And J waped then the golde and the siluer, and the holy vessels of the house of our Lorde, whiche the kyng and his counsell. and his princes, and Whole HE rael had geuen.

57 And when Jhad wapedit, J deliuered it vnto them fire hundred and fiftic talentes of filuer, and an hundred talentes in siluer vessels, and an hundred talentes of golde,

58 And twentie golden balens, € twelue beffels of brasse, euen fine bralle, like shining golde.

59 And J sayde vnto them: Nc are holy vnto the Cord, and the vellels archolp, and the golde and the siluer is pront-
{ed vnto the Lord (Ged) of our fathers,

G

is Or, bowed

60 We diligent nowe and kepe it, vntyll » onwaey

the tymie that pe deliuer it to the chicfe of the priestes and lenites, and to the principall men ok the families of Jsrael in Dierufalem, in the chaumbers of the house of our God.
61 Sb the pnestes and the leuites which

veccatted of nie the golde, the siluer, and +

the veslels, brought it vnto Hierusalem vnto the temple.

62 And from the riner Thia we brake vp the twelfth day ofthe fir moneth, according to the mightie hande ol our
Borde whiche was With vs, and from the beginning of our tourney the Hod

B (J) deliuered

Esd. viii a-

a ai ». * =
The thirde booke 2

ed bs krom euery enemie: lo that 75 And layde: O Lode, Jam tonkoun—
Wenn pnto Hierulalem. Ded and ashamed before thy kate. *

d when the thirde day was past 76 For our sinnes are betome manp, e ra wen — Mar golde and filuer was a bone dur heades, and our Inoue 1 deltuered in the house of the Lorde on are likted vp euen vnto heauen: the kourth day duto Marimoth the 77 Foz since the tyme of our fathers, we paiest and sonne of Port. are in great sinne vnto this day.
64 And with him was Eleazar the sonne 73 And kor the sinnes of vs and our fa: ol Phinces, and With theim were Jo thers, we with dur brethzen, and with sabdus the fonne of Jesu, and Moeth our kinges and with our puestes haue the sonne of Sabbanus, Leuites: all ben geuen bp onto the kynges of the
Was delluered them by number and earth, into the sworde, and into captiulwaygbt. tie, and became a spoyle with conkusion
65 And all the wapght of them was (and cbame] vnto this day.
Wtten vp the fame houre. 70 And nowe D Tod God howe great
66 After that, they that were come outof ts the mercy that we haue gotten of captinitie offred facrifice buto the Lord — theez in that thou hast lefte vs a roote
God of Jlrael, euen twelue oxen for all and a name in the place of thy fanc:
Ilrael, dureltore ¢ sirteene raͤmmes, tuarie,

60 Cbnecteor and twelue cheepe twelue 80. And that thou hast dilcouered to bs a goates for faluation, all in facrifice to light in the house of the Lord our God, the Lorde. 1 and haft geuen vs meate in the tyme ol

63 And the binges commission deliuered dur seruitude.

E they vuto the binges stewardes andto 81 And when we were in capfinitie, we the gouernours ok Coelospria and Phe- were not forsaken of the Lord our god: nice, who honoured the people and the but he made the kynges of Persia gratemple ot God. tious and fauourable vnto bs, fo that

69 Now when thele hinges were done, they gaue bs bictuals (and meate, | iEfdix.a the rulers cane vnto me, and sayde: 82 Bea, and honoured the temple of our ao The nationok Pirael, the princes, the Torde, andrepayzed the wasted places priestes, and leuites haue not ut away of Sion, and gaue vs alluraunte in Jufrom them the straunge people of the rie and Hierulalem. lande, nor the vntleannes of the Gen- 83 And nowe D Borde, what thall we © tiles, to Wit, of the Chanaanites, Hee fay Haningall thele things inpolteltion: } thites, Pherelites, Pebufites, and the For we haue broken thy commaunde-
Moabites, Egyptians, and Edonutes. mentes, whiche thou gauest vnto v by
71 Fox both they and thepz sonnes haue the handes of thy feruauntes the promingled thein lelues with the daugh- bphetes, saying: ters or them, and the holylerde ls nürt 84 2Secaute the lande whiche ve go 0 with) the straunge people of the lande: possesse as an heritage, is à lande deft and finer the beginning ok the affaires, ed with the wneleannes (and külthenes! the rulers and head men haue ben par- ol the straungers o the land, and with
. takers of this wickednesse. their abbomination they haut polluted ler nc. 7 And alsdone as J had hearde these it altogetber: things, innnediatip J rent mptlothes, 35 Wherfore now chall ve not fopne thet and the holy garment, and pulled ont daughters buto pour founes, neither the here or my head z up bearde, and mary pour daughters to their sonnes. fat ine downe forowfull and heauit. 36 Morcouer, pe Mall neuer seeke o in
73 So all they that were moued thooowe mak peate with them, that ye may ane the worde of the Lorde God of Jlrael, rende and eate the belt in the lande, . tame vnto me Whples J wept tor the and that ve map leaue the inbyeritaunee iniquitie: but I fate Mylt full of heaui- ok the lande vnto pout chyldzen to nelle vntyll the cucning faccifice, euermore. to
74 Then stoode J vp from fatting, hac 87 As lor the thinge- that are OTe uing rent clothes c the holy garment, paffe, they tome all for our Wie D and kneeled downe bpon my knees, c workes and great sinnes: for thou helde out mp handes vnto the Lode, Bowe haft made our sinnes un aa

nd geuen bs fuche a roote: but we
K 15 4 backe agapne, fo. that we

* broken thy lawe, and mingled our
ö hes with the vntleannesse ok the out-

dilhe heathen. atch eres
4 apiabted not thou be angry with bs, to destrop vs e fo that thou shouldest leaue vs neither roote, seede, nor name-
90 P Tord God of Jlrael, thou art true: lo: dur roote endureth pet vnto this efent day. Nine:
91 band beholde, nowe are we before thee lort the for thenn. ku 9 And when Eldras with this paper lying flat vpon the grounde before the teimple, there gathered vnto hym from
Hierulalem a great multitude of men and women, of young men and maydens: kor there was a verygreats weping

and) mourning antong the multitude.

in our sinnes, neither tan we stande be-

had knowiedged the sinne, weping and

93 Then Jechontas the sonne of Jeheli one of the chyldren of Jlrael, whoa Ath audlayd: O Eldras, We haue finned az
Ar ig: Lord God, (becaute} we haue mar raunge wome - an we 55 nok the nati

94. And now al Yfrael hangeth in doubt:
We wyll lweare an othe therefore vnto the Lorde, that we hall put away all bur wpues which we haue taken ok the

Heathen, with their chyldren:

95 Alke as it may seeme good to thee, and to all tholse that obay the lawe of the Lode,

96. Stande vp and put it in execution: for

to thee doth this matter appertayne,

and we are with thee to adde thee streng th.
67. So Eldras arose, and toke an othe of

the chiefe of the Priestes and Lenites

ofall Ilrael, to do after these thinges: and they ware.

; The. ix. Chapter. *

them a wap. N
0 Hen Esdras rising frõ

= 8 a ¥ D

ple, went to the cham-

ber of Joannan, the

sonne or Eltasib,
And remapned there

en, no: dronke denke, weeppng koz the great wickednesse of the people.

3 And there was made a proclamation

in all Jurie, and at Hierulalem, for all

tient that were of the taptiuitie, that

they shoulde gather together at Hierulalem, 170

4. And that wholdeuer met not there

Within two or three dayes, attording as the elders that bare rule appointed, their tattell shoulde be sealed to the ble

olthe temple, and he be excluded from

them that were of the taptiuitie.
„And in three dapes were all they of che tribe of Juda and rSentamin gathered together at Bierulalem, the twen-

ih day or the ninth moneth. bind the whole multitude late trembing in the court of the tenple, for it

as wynter. ee leo Ednasarole vp, and fapde vnto
55 saa Be haue done vnrighteonsly, in
What pe haue taken outlandishe wines

ithe tourt of the tem-

and did eate no meate,

Alter Eddras had read the lawe ior the straunge wyues. is they promited to put

to mariage, and so to entrease the sinnes of Ysrael. f

83 And nowe knowledge the fame, and geue peaple vnto the Lorde God of our

fathers:

9 And perkourme his Wwpll, departing

krom the heathen of the land, ano from the outlandishe wiues.

10 Then evped the whole multitude, and laide with a loude vopte: Like as thou

Hatt spoken, so wyll We do.
11 But forsomuche as the people are manp, and wynter feafon, fo that we map not stande without the house: and because this worke is not a thing that tan be finished in a day or two, seing we be many that haue finned. in thele thinges : :

12 Ordayne therefore that the rulers of the multitude, and they of our families that haue straunge wynes, tarry.

RB And let the priestes and iudges come out oł euerp place in their tyne appovnted, tyll they [wage the wrath of the
Lorde in this businesse.

14 Then Jonathas the sonne of Aʒaiel,

and Eʒechias the sonne ol Thecan, re-

teaned the charge ok this matter, and

Mosollam, and Leurs, and Sabathe-

uns helped then therto.
* 5 (j) 15 And

B

u Oz,
Grannge.

Oz, stranungers.

The thirde booke

Were of the captiuitie, and Matthias, and Bana

they that pe panatcoroing t all these thinges.

6 And Eldras the priest chose vnto hym the principall men froin among the kathers, and them all by namie: and in the first day ol the tenth moneth they late together, to examine this matter.

17 And so the matter was a determining concerning the men that had marped straunge Wyues vntill the newe moone of the first moneth:

sig [And of the priestes that had mict them lelues with outlandishe pues, there were founde, ;

* Or. fraunge.

Ell c. 19 "OF the lonnes of Jelu the forme of

Jofedet and his brethren, Mathelas,
„Eklcazar, Jorzibus, and Joadanus:
20 Whiche offered them selues to put a-

vnto retoncilement for their purgation.
21 And ok the sonnes of Emmer, Anant: as, and Zabdeus, and Canes, and Sa-

wap their wyues, and to offer a ramme

maaius, and hhiereel, and A;arias.
De 22 And of the sonnes of Phailu, Ellionas, Mallias, Elmaelus, and sathanael, and Otidelus, and Tallas.
23 Andor the Leuites, Jorabadus, and
Seni and Colius, Who was called
« Calitas, and Patheus, and Dondas, and Jonas. ö 2

‘24. Ofthe holpfingers, Eliazurus, Wat

churus.

25 Di the porters, HSallunus,and Tol-

« aunts.

26 Okthemok Pract, of the fonnes of

„ Phozus, Diermas, and Eddias, æx Mel-

„ chias, and acinus, and Elealar, and

Asibias, and wWanatas,

Zacharias, and Hierielas, and Piere-

« moth, and Aedias. ;

E 28 And of ihe sonnes of Zamoth, Eliadas, Elilunus, Othoutas, Parimoth, and Sabatus, and Sardeus.

29 Ml the lonneg of Bebat, Joannes, e
Anantas, and Josabad, æ Ematheas. zo Okthe lonnes of Mani, Olamus, Ma-
„ muchus, Jedatas, Jalubus, Jalael, and Jeremoth.

31 And ok the sonnes ok Addi, Naathus,
« MHookas, Tactunus, and Naidus, and
Matthantas, aud Selthel, and Walnuug, and Manasleas.

3 And of he sonnes of Annas, Elionas, and Aseas, and Melchtas, and Sabbe-
Us, and Simon a Cholamite.

3 Andokthe sonnes of Asom, Altaneus,

27 Df the fonnes ok Ela, Matthanias,

45 Then toke Eldzas the

let, and Manasses, and Semi.

34. And ok the sonnes of Maani, , mins, Momdis, Omairus, Jule cha.

las, Elipha-

mat, and Paclias, and Amos, Caraball-

on and Cuasibus, € Mamnimata. Sg tus, Eliliasis, Mamus, Eltall, Pat
Selemias, Nathanias: c of thelonnes.

Ly

of 30788, Sesis, Esril, Esattus, Oa-

-matas, Sambis, Josiphus.
35 And ok the sonnes of Ethna, Paz itl-

as, Zabadias, Ethes, Inel, Wanaias.

36 All thele had taken outlandishe Wo- F men to marpage, and they put them ad
‘Te

Wap with their chyldzen.)

37 And the Priestes and Leuites andcall) they that were of Piract, owelt at pie: rusalem, aud throughout all the lande, inthe newe moone of the seuenth nto: neth: and the chyldren of Ilrael were

intheir dwellinges.

38 And the whole multitude came toge-

On, tie dap.

* Oz obne houleg.

ther with one accorde into the wyde

plate betore the catt gate of the temple,
39 And they spake vnto Eldras the hye priest and reader, that he woulde bryng the lawe of Moyles which had ben geven of the Lorde God ol Jlcael.
40 So Eldras the bye prielt brought the law vntothe whole multitude, to man,

and woman, and to al priestes that they myght heare the lawe, in the nee

noone of the seuen moueth.

4 And he read in the kirst wyde place

that is before the poet of the teinple, krom the morning early vnto midday before men an women: And they applyed their minde all vnto the lalbe.
42 And Eldzas the priest aud reader of the law stoode vp bpd a pulpit ol wood, whiche was made therfore:
43 And vpon his right haud there stoode by bpm Mathathias, Saws, Anan

as, Azarias, Urias, Ezechias, and Ba-

lasan:

4-4 Upon his left bande stobde Fale
Dae, Melchias, Aothaluphus, 4

Habarias. bocde of the

law before the whole muuttitwne (for he

was the printipall, and had in molt DO |

nour of them all.)

4.6 Andwhen he expounded theta, thr stoode all straight vpon their 5 0
Esdras praysed the Lord the alle 5
God, the almiahtie God of hoa Amen.

47 And all the people aunswertd And

u oy dla

- of Efdras. m

Danke the fweete drinkes, and sende

48 And Jelus, Anus, Savabias, Adi-

atobus, Battatas, Autamas,

muna das, allen, Azarias, Johalab-

dus, Ananias, and Giatas the Leuites, pft bp their handes, and kel Downe on the grounde, and worshpped the Lod,

9 And taught the lawe of the Lord, and

were earnestiy occupied together in the

eading thereof.
„Then pale Atharates vnto Eldras the hye priest and reader, and to che Leutes that taught the multitude, saying: si. This day is holy vnto the Lord: and all when they hearde the lawe, wept.
2 (So Eldrag lapde:] Depart pour way ganic therlore, and eate the fat meates, and

people, it thele wyll not be rekourmed. be second booke

Livia, bd ma

of Saraias, the
A fonneof Asarias, the sonne of Hel chia, the sonne of
Sadanias, the fonne of Sadoc,

the sonne of Achitob,
2 The sonne of Achia,the sonne of Phinees, the sonne of Heli, the sonne of Amerias, the sonne of Aʒiei, the lonne of churlmoth „the sonne of Arnd, the dane or Dstas, the forme of Borith the dune of Abilei, the lonne of Phinees,

the sonne ol Eleazar,

The fonne of Aaron of the tribe of f Cut, whiche (Eldras] Was priloner in
St lande of Medes, in the raigne of Ar-

2 dyes Kpngof Pertia,

1105 worde ofthe Lord tame vn-

ee 1 5

Wy wap, and shewe my people

ye finmefutt “hah Me their chylnu their wickednelles Whiche they

gyftes vnto them that haue nothing.

93 For this day is holy vnto the Lorde,

and be not pe sory: for the Lorde wyll bryng vou to honour.

54 So the Leuites published all these

thinges to the people, saping: This da is holy to the Lorde, be not sory: i

55 Then went they their way euery one

to cate and dainke, and were mery, and sent prelents to them that had nothing, and made verp good cheare:

56 For they were as pet killed with the

Wordes that had ben taught them, and lor the whiche they had ben allenwled.

JThe ende of the thirde booke of Esdras.

„ 7

Ihe fourth booke of Efdras.
8 ; The firft Chapter.

Che people is reproued foz their vnthankekulnes.

30 God wyll haue another

haue done against me, that they may tell their chylders chyldren the same:

6 FJor the sinnes of their fathers are in-

evealed in them: And why: they haue forgotten me, and haue offered vnto straunge gods.

Oz, commaunded.

Ain not J euen he that brought them 5

out ofthe land of Egypt, from the houle ol bondage: But they haue prouoked me vnto wrath, e despiled my counteis.

head, and cast all euyll vpon them, fo2 they haue not ben obedient buto my la we: But it is a people without (tear ning and) nurture,

9 hoe long shall J forbeare them, bu-

to whom J haue done fo muche good:

their sakes: Pharao with his seruauntes and all his power haue Isimnitten downessand llapne.)

1 All the nations haue J destroped

cand rooted out) before them, aud in the cat haue J bought two landes and people to naught, euen Tyre and Sir don, and haue slayne all their enemies.

B (tt) 12 Speake

s Pull thou out thauthe heere of thy

Io Many kynges haue JJ destroped for Nam

Iosu. vill. x.

and. xii.
Exo. xiiii · g.
“ Oz, ame

ie fourth booke

. W

in O cake thou therfore vnto them, saping Thus lach the Tod:

Exoxiiis 13 J led pouthorwe the fea, and haue genen pou sure ftrectes since the beginning: J gauc pou Moyles to be pour

captapne, and Aaron to be the priest:
C 14. Jgaue pon light in a puler of fire, and
Rane, “great wonders haue J Done anions wt pon: pet haue ve forgotten me, farth the

SLIDE.

15 Thus saith the almightie Lod: The
*quaples Were as a token kor pou, “J gaue poutentes for pout fuccour, ueuerthelesse in them ye murmured:

16 And alcribed not the victory of your enemies vnto my name, but euer to this

dap do ye vetumrmure.

7 Where are the benetites that J haue

done for vou: When ye were hungry in

the wyldernelle, dyd pe not erye vnto

me,
18 Saying: why Halt thou brought bs into this wyldernelle to kill vs: It had pen better for vs to haue serued the Egyptians, then to die inthis wyldernes.
19 Then had JJ pitie bpon pour mourninges, and gaue vou Manna to cate;
Sapiovie. o pe dyd eate angels foode.
Numxxb. 20 When pe were thirstie, dyd not J

Exod. ill. b.

Exod. x vi. c

„ Or, fafes garde.

u Oz, and triumphed

Num.xiiii a

tleaue the rocke, x Waters flowed out

to satilfie you withall;? Foz the heate,
J toutred von with the leaues of the trees.

D 21 Agood pleafaunt fat lande gaue J vou: J cat out the Chanaanites, the
Pherezites and Philistines before pou:
What Halt J do moze for pou, saith the Lozde-

22 Thus lath the almightie Lorde:
When ye were in the wyldernesle, in the Water ol the Amontes, beyng athirst, aud blasphenung my name,

23 Jgaue you not fire for pour blasphemies, but cast a tree into the water, and made the riuer sweete.

24 What thal I do vnto thee O Jatob-
Thou Juda wouldest not obay me: J
Will turne nie to other nations, and vnto those wyll J geue my name, that they may kepe my statutes.

25 Sepng ye haue korlaken me, J wyll forsake you also. Mhen ye defire me to be gratious vnto you, J shall haue no mercp vpon you.

26 When pe call vpon me, J wyll not heare pon: Foz ve haue defiled your handes with blood, and pour feete are

Esal. v.a.

Exod xv. d.

“Dr atthe bitter waters
Oz, Wood.

Deut. zx. b.

Ea i. d.

swylt to conmiit manslaughter.

27 He haue not as it were korsaken me but your olwne lelues faith the Lone.

28 Thus faith the almigytie Dore aue I not praped ou, as à father his © sonnes, as à mother her daughters and as à nirse her poung babes

29 That ye woulde be my people, and 3

choulde be pour God, that pe would de my chyldren J chould be pour fathers.

30 J gathered vou together, as an hen 1 gathereth her chickens vnder her wu· ges: But nowe what Hall Joo vnta vou: J wyll cast pou out from my fate.

zi When pou offer vnto me, J wylturne kan my face front pou: for poür solempne feast dayes, pour newe moones, c pour cirtumeisions haue J forsaken.

32 Jsent vnto vou my seruauntes the prphetes, whom pe haue taken and slapne, and torue their bodies inpecces,
Whole blood J wyll require of pour ane handes, faith the Lorde.

33 Thus faith the abmightic 1020, Bour

houle shalbe desolate, J wyll cat pou dut as the winde doth stubble: g

34. Bour chyldren shall not be kruttekull, r

lor they haue delpiled my commaundement, and done the thing that is cupll before me. afl 6

35 Pour houles wyll J geue to a people F that Mall come, whiche not hauyng hearde of me, pet shall beleue me: ta whom J haue shewed no sigues, vet they Mall do that J haue tommaundedthem. f

36 They haue feene no prophetes, pet „

hall they tall their sinnes to rennen; er braunte and knowledge them.

37 J wyll declare the grate that J wyll do lor the people that is to come, whole childzen reiopte in gladnes: and though they haue not feene me with bodyly epes, pet in spirite they beleue the thing

at J sap. *.

38 Anidnow brother, behold what great a
Worship: and lee the people that conv meth from the east. 4 gs

39 mar he ls geue for lee Fadl
* Mahan, Jlähat, € Pacod, DUA, js!
Amos, and Micheas, Poel, Abdias, now” and Jonas, ae Ag.

40 Maum, and Abacut, Sophonies geus, Zacharie, and WPalachie en b is called allo an angell Co medeng the Lode.

a

of Efdras. xl. ;
— The. Chapter,

Che Sinagogue findeth fault with her owne chyldren. is Che Gentiles are called.
Abus faith the Lorde: prepared for pou, therefore watche.

brought this people
A 1 of bondage, J gaue them my conv maundements by my seruauntes the pro-
— — phetes, whom they would not heare, but despised my coun-

saples.

2 Themother that bare them, faith vnto them: Go pour Way ve chyldren, for

am a wydowe and forsaken.

IJ brought vou vp with gladnesle, but
With soro we and heauinesse haue J lott pou: fo2 ye haue finned before the Cord your God, and done that thing that is cuili before hym.

4 But what hall J nowe do onto pou-
Jama wydowe and forsaken: go pour
Way O my chyldren, and alke merty of the Lorde. a

As kor ine, O father, J call bpon thee fo2 a wytnesse ouer the mother of these chyldren, whiche woulde not kepe my touenaunt:

6 That thou bryng them to tonkusion, and their mother to a spople, that the beare uo more.

$7 Let their names be scattered abrode aniong the Heathen, let them be put dut of the earth: for they haue thought
{tonne of my couenaunt.

8 Wo be unto thee Allur, thouthat hydestthe bnrighteous inthee: thou wit ked people, remember what J did vnto Sodomie and Gomorre,

Whole lande is turned into codes of pltche and heapes of alshes: Euen fo alfowylt 7 do bito all them that heare me not, saith the almightie Lorde.

lo Thus saich the Lore vnto Eldras:
Tell mp people that J wyll geue them the kingdome of hierulalem, whiche P

i ee Hane geuen vnto Jlrael.

heir glozy alfo will Peake bnto me,

115 geue them the euerlasting taberna-

5 Thee had prepared kor thole.
8 hey shal haue the tree oftifeat wyl, th the Meete fanour of oyntment,

Gabal neither labour nor be weerie.

(t be pour wap, and pe fall reteaue

* Pray that there may be but fewe

Ril

Cr.

Wes. and the long time may be chorte-

NeDfo2 thee: The kingdom is alredy

14, Take heauenand earth to witnesle, for I haue broken the euyll in peetes, and created the good: for J line, faith the Lorde.

15 Mother embrace thy chyldren, and bryng them bp with gladnesle, make their feete as fast as a piller: for J haue cholen thee, saith the Lorde.

16 And those that be dead, wyll J rayse bp agayne from their plates, and bryng them out of the graues: for J haue knowen my name in Jlrael.

17 FJeare not thou mother of the chyl-

dren: for J haue chosen thee, faith the

Lode,

18 And kor thy helpe J thatl lende thee my seruauntes Esai and Jeremie, af: ter whose tounsaile J haue fanctified and prepared forthee twelue trees, ta den with diuers kruites,

19 And as many fountapnes flowyng with mylke and honp, and seuen mightie mountaynes wher pon there grow roles and lyllyes, whereby JJ wpll fill thychyldren with ioy.

20 Exktute iustite for the wydowe, iudge fo2 the fatherlesse, geue to the poore, dekende the fatherieffe,clothe the naked,

21 Heale the Wounded and ficke, laugh Y not a lame man to storne, defende the treple, and let the blynde tome into the light of my clearenes.

22 Kepe the olde and poung that are within thy walles:

23 Wheresoeuer thou lindest the dead, take them and bury them, and JJ (hall geue thee the first place in my relurrettion.

24 Abpde styll O my people, and take thy rest, for thy quietnes (hall tome.

25 Feede thy chilozen O thou good nurse, stablishe their feete.

26 As for the seruauntes whom J haue geuen thee, there Mail not one of them

perishe: for J wyll fecke them from among thy nuniber.

27 Be not weerp: for when the day of trouble and heauinesse commeth, other shall weepe and be sorowfull, but thou shalt be mery and plenteous.

28 The Weathen shalbe ielous cat iti but they ville at ie nothing againt thee, faith the Lorde.

‘ * B (itty 29 My

Tobiid.

ooo —_—“—-, cf.
| The fourth booke :

4 andes shall touer thee, so that thy
K 29 Nove thatnot fee the fice eueciathing.
30 We lopkull Othou mother with thy

chyldren, for J Wyll Deliver thee, faith

the Lorde.

Nemember thy chyldren that sleepe, for J Cail bryng them out of the fides ofthe earth, e shewe mercy vnto them: for J am mercpkull, faith the Lorde ale mightie.

Embrate thy chyldren vntyll 2 conte, and shewe mercy vnto them: [02 my
Welles runne ouer, and my grace Chall

not faple. charge of the

Dp, hell.

Oz, founs kayncg.

J Eldias receaued d q ore vpon the mount Oreb, that shoulde go vnto Ilrael: Wut when came bnto them, they let me at naught, and defpifenthe tommaundementes of the Lode.
34 Andtherefore J fay vnto you O pe
Heathen that heave and vnderstande,
"gz ookefor pour chephearde, he chall

Oz, wapte.

geue pou cuerlasting rest: for he is nye -

at hande that shall tome in the ende of the worlde. r

We redye to the rewarde of the king: donie, for the euerlasting light Hal thine vpon pou for euermore.

Flet the shadowe of this wonlde, reteaue the ioylulnes of pour glory: Y testifie mp lauiour openly.

37 DO reteaue the gylt that is geuen pou, and be glad, geuing thankes vnto hym that hath called pou to the heauenly

kingdome. a

38 Arpse vp and stande kast: beholde the number ok those that be sealed in the feast ofthe Lowe. b

39 Whiche ave departed from the sha-

dowe or the worlde, and haue reteaued

F 36

© Dj, coz.

¢ The. iij. Chapter.

4 Che wonderous workes whiche God dyd kor the people, are recited. 31 €foras mate veplett that God cullereth the Babylonians to haue rule ouer his people, whiche vet

are sinnerg allo,

SS awn

2 een the N of Sion, enteous wealth oft dwelt at Babylon. Wan

3 And mp spirite was soze moned, fo

n

40 Lake thy number O Sion and sh vp thy purified, whiche haue kuf * eta afte shame. haue kulfllled cant

41 t nunwer of thy chyldren ont. thou longedst for, is fulfilten. besech the power of the Lorde, that thy people whiche haue ben talled from the begin: ning, may be halowed.

42 JEldras sawe bpon the mount Stou i ate, 2 coulde not

: sayled with songes lo anten e

43 And in the middest of them there was apoung man ok an hye lature, more ercellent then al they, and vpon enerp one oftheir heads he fet crownes, and was euer higher and higher, which Imarueyled at seatly.

44 S J alked the angell, and laid: Sir, what are thele:

45 He aunswered e sayd vnto me: Thele be they that haue put of the mortall dothing, and put on the immortall, and haue testified and knowledged the e

name ot God: Now are they crowned, and receane the rewarde. *

46 Then layde J onto the angell: what young perlon is it that crowneth them, and geueth them the palmes in their

handes: ö

47 So he aunswered and fayd vnto mie:
1 is the sonne of God, Whom they

aue knowledged in the world: Then

began J greatip to commende them,

an a fo {tiffelp for the name ol the orde.

43 Then the angell layde vnto me: Go thy way and tell mp people what maner ok thinges k howe great Wonders ofthe Lorde thy God thou hast seene.

Apoc via

G

Oz, am fons beater then thother,

Oi, Cons kelled.

spakest at the plantedlt ie eatore) and 947 vnto the peor
5 And avody vnto Adam without ov 5
Whiche was a creature of thy han >, and halt breathed in hym the brea 0 ple, and fo he linen before thee: vant
6 And thou leddest hynt into paid .

* ps nett manly?

~ of Eldras.

XIII.

Fo. the fir Adam bearyng a wicked heart, tranlgresled and W het bonis and fo be all they that are borme of him.

22 Thus remapned weaknelsle still, and Nom. vil. a, the lawe in the heartes of the people, with the wickednelle of the roote: lo that the good e a wap, aud the

euer the earth brought fruites.
5 And vnto him thou gauest commaundement to loue thy way, which he transgresled, and immediatly thou appopntedst death in hyin, and in his generations: Ok whom tame nations, tribes, people, and kinredes, out ol number.
And euery people Walked after their owne wyll, and did wonderkull thinges belore thee: and as for thy tommaundementes they dilpised them.
Cab. 9 But in protesse of tyme thou broughbn test the Water fludde vpon thole that dwelt in the worlde, e destropedstthem. jo So that by the fludde, that was wrought in eche of them, that was by death in Adam. 8 u Neuerthelelse, one of them thou leltest, namely, Poe with his householde, of whom tame allrpghteous men. ti 12 And it happened that When they that
„ dlelt vpon the earth, began to multiplie, and had gotten them many chil deen, and were a great people, they began to be moze vngodly then the first.

Cem b. 8

z MowWe when they liued lo wickedly be-

lore thee, thou didst choofe thee a man

from among them, whole name was

Abzaham. 1
¢ 14 Hym thou louedst, and vnto hym only thou shewedst thy wyil,
Is And madest an euerlasting touenaunt with hym, promisyng hym that thou
„woundest neuer forlake his seede.
‘ES And vnto hym thou gauest Plabac: e onto Plahac also thou gauesf Jacob and Elau. As for Pacob thou dydst bn, Choole him to thee, and put backe Elau:
Wa an fo Jacob became a great multi:

7 Andit came to paffe, that when thou nits leddelt his leede ont of Egypt, thou
* , waughteltthem bp tothe mount Sina,

>! Wing downe the heauens, ‘fecting

Nan alt the earth, moupng the grounde,

mt makyn the tr the deapthes to Hake, and

a dublyng the worde:

‘Ogu, „nd thy glorie went through foure wattes, oF fire and earthquakes, and ldes, and tolde: that thou myghtest he aud oe ave vnto the feede of Jacob. r ' Ilcael. igence vnto the generation of
“aie git pet tonest thou not awap from
= nithat wicked heart, that thy lawe

aht bzyng koozth frmte in them.

euyll abode styl

23 So the tymes pasled away, and the peres were brought to an ende: Then dyddest thou raple thee vp a seruaunt

called Dauid,

24. Whom thou commaundedst to vullde acitie vnto thy name, and to offer vp intenle and sacrifite vnto thee therin.

25 When this was done nowe many peres, then the inhabiters of the titie

forsoke them,

26 And in all thynges, dyd euen as Adam and all his generations had done: for

they also had a wicked heart.

27 And so thou gauest the titie ouer into

the handes of thine enemies.

28 Wut do they of Wabplon then any thyng better, that they shonlde therfore haue the dominion in Sion-

29 For when J canie thyther, and sawe

there so great wickednesle that it toulde not be numbred: then niy soule fave many tupl Doers in this thirteth pere, so

that my heart fayled me: ay
30 For I saw howe thou sufferedst them in such vngodlinesle, and sparedst the

Wicked doers: but thine owne people halt thou rooted out, and preserued thine enemies, and this batt thou not

shewed me.

i. Reg xv. e. i, Reg. v.a.

"2, ft.
Oz, cõmteii;

31 IJcan not perceaue howe this hap- to pac.

peneth. Do they of Wabylon then better

then they of Sion:

32 215 there any other people that knoweth thee, sauyng the people of Hl rael: or what generation hath so be-

leued thy couenauntes, as Jacob?
3 And yet their rewarde appeareth not, and their labour bath no kruite: oz: J haue gone here and there through the
Heathen; and J see that they be riche and wealthy, and thynke not vpon thy

commaundementes.

34. Maygh thou therfore our wicke dnesle nowe in the ballaunte, and theirs also that dwell in the worlde: and fo shall thy name be no where founde but in

Ilrael.
35 Or when was it that the bpon earth, haue not

i

which dwel nned in thy syght-

u Oz testimomeg.

Oz, flows in Wealth.

: OE
The thirde booke |

tonunaundementes-
36 Thou shalt finde that Ilrael by name

(other people and heathen. but not the

The. iiij. Chapter.
The angel reproueth Esdras, becaule he leemed to enter into che profounde

iudgementes Of God.

ND the angel that

was sent bnto me,

A whose name was Uri-

el gaue me ananswere,

And lapd: Thy heart

hath taken to much

Ippon it in this wozlde, and thou thinkett to tomprehende the way of the hyghest.

3 Then sapde J: Bea my Lone. And he aunswered me, and lade: J am sent to shewe thee thee wapes, and to set foorth three sumilitudes before thee:

4. hero pf thou tanst declare me one,
J Wyll shewe thee alfo the way that thon desirest to see: and J chall shewe thee from whenee the Wicked heart coinmeth.

5 And ZH fayde: Tell on my Tord. Then sayde he vnto me: Go thy wap, nean nie the wapght of the fire, o2 mealure me che blast of the winde, or call me agapue the day that is past.

6 Then aunswered J, and lapde: What man borne is able to do that, that thou chouldest aske suth thynges of mez

7 And he sayde vnto me: Hf J choulde alte thee howe deepe dwellpnges are

inthe middett of the lea, or howe great

Water springes are in the begynnyng of

the deepe, orhowe great water springes

ee out of the
4 ich are the of Paradile: e CMOS
Peraduenture thou wouldest lay vnse nad eee en the
Neither did J i mat been 5) J euer climbe euerthelesse, nowe haue

thee but ouly of fire, ae 1 5 5

the day, wherthrough thou hat tra

uapled, and from the which thon canst not be separated:and pet cant thou gene me no aunfvere of them.

10 De sapde mozcouer puto me: Thyne one thynges, and such as are grolen vp with ther, cant thou not knowe:

n Howe shoulde thy vessell then be able to comprehende the wap ofthe highest,

’

and nowe outwardlp in che coz
Worlde to vnderstande the corruption that is euident in my lyght- 5
12 Then sapde J onto hym: It were better that we were not at all chen that we Mhoulde lyue in wickednelle, and to suffer, and not to KRnowe wherlore. z he aunswered me, and sapde: J came to a forrest ina playne, and“ the trees n toke such a deuice, 5
14 And sayde: Come, let bs go, and fyght against the sca, that it map depart away before vs, and that we may make pet more woods.
15 The fluddes of the fea allo in tyke maner toke tounsaple, and sapd: Come, let vs go vp, and fyght again the trees ok the wood, that there we map make vs another tountrep.
16 The thought and deute) of the wood was but vapne Land nothyng worth: ] fo the fire tame and consumed it.
17 The thought of the fluddes of the fea C tame lpũewyse to naught allo: for the sande stoode vp and stopped them.
18 Ik thou were iudge nowe betlbirt thele two, whom wouldest thou lustilieor whom wouldest thou tondempne-
19 e and lapde: Ulerylp it is a tooliche thought that they both haue
Deuiled: For the grounde is geuen bnto the Wood, and the fea allo hath his place to beare his fluddes.
20 Then aunswered he mie, and favor,
Thou hast geuen a ryght ingen i but why iudgest thou not thy lelfe al 15
21 Fortphe as the grounde ts genen de the Wood, and the fea to his fudder: euen so they that dwell bpon 75 at Bic map bnderitande nothyng but 1 5 Cots which is bpon earth and He that p 5 leth aboue the heauens, may on 4 rat
. . the thynges that are a the heauens. lr
22, Then auniwered J aud layde: Fr seche thee O Torde, let me haut standyng. to be al
23 Foz it was not my mynde Fluch as rious oł thy hye thynges, but ot hy

. of Efdras. XIIII.

we dapip meddle withall, namely, as our rewarde-

gh.

herfore Ilrael is geuen vp as are: puche to the heathen, and for what lause the people whom thou halt loued is geuen oner vnto vngodly nations, and why the lawe of our forefathers is brought to naught, and the witten couenauntes come to none effect:

D 24 And we passe away out of the worlde

as the gralshoppers, and our lyfe is a very feare, and we are not worthy to obteyne mercle. a

What wyll he do then buto his name
15 is called bpon over vs- Ok these

thynges haue Jalked question.
26 Then aunswered he me, and sayde:

The moze thou searchest, the moze thou

shalt marnayle: for the worlde hasteth fast to pasie away, —
27 Aud cau not tomprehende the thinges

that are promiled to the ryghteous in

u tpnie to tome: for this worlde is full of bnryghteoulnesse and weakenesse.

28 But as concernyng the hinges wher-

of thoualkett me, J wyll tell thee: The euyll is sowen, but the destruction ther-

okis not pet come.

29 Ik the euyll nowe that is sowen be not turned vpsyde downe, and pf the place where the eupll is sowen passe not away: then tan not the thing come that is folven with good.

30 Jo; the come of tuyll {eede Hath ben solben in the heart of Adam fromthe

begynnyng: and howe much vngodly-

nesle hath he bronght vp buto this
Cyincsand howe much shall he pet being foozth, bntyll he come into the barne-

1 Ponder nowe by thy lelle howe great frutte of Wickednelle the torne of euyll cede bryngeth foorth

2 And when the stalkes chalbe cut.

dolwne, Which are without number,
Ne great a barne shall it fyll z

3 Then J arnlwered and layde: Howe

pale den shall these thinges tome to

bend, Wd eupll
4. And he aunlwered me. faping: Malte

i. Hou to much aboue the mot high-

5 ilozthy haltinelle to be aboue putts

can deut bough thou do all that thou

Opd not the fontes allo of the ryghtethenale question of thele thynges in dete chambers, saping: Howe long dun J Ope on this kachione when

SUMED che fruite of mp barne, and

Wherefore are dur yeres fewe

36 And bpon this Jeremiel tharchangel gaue them aunsibere, and layde ode er ne hehgath nenne fylled
I ) Wayghedt in the ballaunce, eee

37 In measure and number hath he mealured the tymes and monethtt not, nor shaketh it, vntyll the sapde mealure be fulfylled.

38 Then aunswered J, sayd O Torde,
Torde, nowe are we all full of fine:

39 And for our fake peraduenture it ts that the barne of the ryghtedus are not fulfplicd, berause of the sinnes of them that dwell vpon the artig. F

40 So he aunlwered me, and sayde: Go thy way to a woman with childe, and

alle ot her when che hath fultylled her mine monethes ir her wombe may kepe the birth any longer within her-

41 Then sayde J: 29 Lope, that can
He not. And he sayde vnto me: In the graue the setrete places of soules are line the Wombe ola wonian.

42 Jor like as a woman that trauapleth maketh haste to escape the neceflitic of the trauaple: euen fo do thele places haͤste to delyuer thole thynges that are committed onto them.

43 Loke what thou desirest to see, it shalbe shewed thee from the begynnyng.
44 Then aunswered J, and sayde: PEF haue founde fauour in thy syght, and pt it be possible, and if J be meete therkore,

45 Shewe me then whether there be

more to come then is past, or more past

then is korto come.

46 What is pal, I kuowe: but what is for to come, I Rnowe not.

47 And he sapde vnto me: Stande vp

bpon the ryght lyde, and J (halt ex-

pounde the sinnlitude vnto thee. G
43 So JJ stoode, and beholde an hotte burnyng ouen passed by before me: and it happened that when the flame was gone by, J loked, and behold tie finolic had the vpper hande.
49 After this there passed by before me

à waterp tloude, and lent downe much

rayne With a towne: and when the geg

stormie rayne was past, the droppes a

remapned styll.
50 Then kapdhe vnto me, Conlider with thy selfe: Ike as the rayne is moze then the droppes, and as the fire exceedeth the smoke: euen so the measure of the thynges that are past, hath che vpper-
ö haͤnde,

HeaunlWered ine, and fa

and the pO
Worle much in quantitie.

[ Then F prayed, and sapde: May B lyue thyükest thou vntpll that tymie: 02 what Hail happen in thofe dayes:

The. v.

hande,

In the latter tymes ge By at in the worlde. 23 Zsraek is reiected thyng in sealon.

Euerthelesse, as toncernpng the tokens
Alc marie this: Beholdthe dapes Mail tone that they which dwell vp-
„ on earch shalbe taken

2 in a great number, and the way of the trueth chalbe hyd, and the lande shalbe barren from faith:

NI 4. 2 Wut iniquitie chalbe increafed aboue that which nowe thou (eek, oz that

thou haft hearde long ago.
And the lande that thou seest nowe to

haue rule, shalt thou shortly fee waste.

4. But yk God graunt thee to lyue, thou shalt see after the thirde trumpet, that the finne (hall lodaynly shpne agapne in the night, and the moone three tymes in the day: N

5 And blood (hall droppe out of wood, and the Tone (hall geue his voyte, and

the people chalbe vnquieted:

6 And euen he (hall rule, whom they

hope not that dwell vpon earth, and

the foules shall flitte:

7 Aud the Sodomitiche fea thai tast out the fiche, and make a noyfe in the

nyght, which many haue not knowen:

but they (hal all heave the voyte therok.

There shalbe a confusion allo in many places, aud the fire shalbe oft sent out agapne: and the Wylde beastes Mall chaunge their places, and menstrudus

Women Mall beare monsters,

And falt waters chalbe founde in the wecte, and all friendes Chall fyght one agapnst another: then Matt all wyt and vnderstandyng be hyd and put aspde in: to their secrete places :

10 Aud chalbe fought of many, and pet not be fonnde: then Mail vnrpghteoulnesse and" voluptuoulnesse hane the vpper hande vpon earth.

u One lande allo shall afke another, and fay: Js ryghteoulnesse that maketh a

manrighteous gone tl > it (hall fay,no, gone through thee; And

oe

N.

Oz, tneone tm

Di, that uftifterh.

Oz. that tightrolsely.

and smoke 5

he tokens wherof thou alkest me

may tell thee of them in part: but z touchyng thy lyfe, J am not fet ve shewe thee : kor J donot knoweit.

Chapter.

trueth Malbe hyd, saanrightcoutnefle and all wickednesse Halt

and God deliuereth them. 35 God doth all

At the same tyme shall men hope but nothyng obteyne: they shall labour, vunt their wapes shall not prosper.

3 To shewe thee such tokens J haue leaue:and ik thou wylt pay agapne, and
Weepe as nowe, and kast seuen dapes, thou shalt heare pet greater thynges.

14 Then F awaked, anda kearkulnesse went throͤugh all my body, e nw mpnde was feeble, fo that J almost fowued
Withall: ato

15 So the angel that was tome to talke with me, helde me, comforted me, and set me vp bpon my feete.

16 And in the feconde nyght it tame to passe, that Salathiel the captayne ol the people tame vnto me, saying: Where
Hak thou benz and why is thy countenaunce fo heaup- PP

17 Bnowelt thou not that Piracl ts conv mitted vnto thee in the lande of their captuntie-

18 Upthen and eate, and forlake bs not, as the cheephearde that leaueth his flocke inthe handes ok wicked wolues.

1 Then {aye J onto. hym: Go tür wayes fro me, and come not nye me.
And he hearde it, and as J layde, so went he his way fromme. f

20 And fo J fatked seuen dayes 1 € nyng and weepyng, lpke as Uriel the angell tommaunded me. hat

21 And alter seuen dayes fo it Was, 1h

ö trier. of my yes were very

eeuous vnto me agapne:

22 And my fonte receaued the fpiite of vnderstandyng, and J began to kalle? with the mot hyghest agayne, kenery

23 And sapde: O Torde Torde, o trees wood o 1 (giles and of all the on thereof thou batt tholen thee one vineparde?: a

24 And of all landes of the whole wor thou halt eholen one pyt, ANE cholen floures of the grounde thou ha

„ore

thee one lilie: {ca
25 And of all the deapthes of Oe you

ou halt kplled thee one riuer: and of
— Le cities, thou batt alowed ion vnto thy lelke:

16 And of all the foules that are treated.

9 chou halt named thee one doue: andot all the cattell that are made, thou halt prouded thee one sheepe:

And among all the wiultitudes of peoples, thou halt gotten thee one people: eynto this people whom thou louedst,

thou gauelt a lawe that is proued of all.

28 And nowe O Lode, why batt thou gtuen this one people ouer vnto many: and vpon the one voote thou halt prepared others, and why Hak thou

Efdras.

thee the thyna that thou labourcdia
Rene g that thou laboured to

{tattered thy one only people among

manp- 0 a
29 Doped treade them Downe, pea which

haut euer withstande thy proniifes,and

neuer beleued thy couenauntes.

zo Ikthou didst fo much hate thy people.

pt shouldest thou puniche them With thine owne handes.

31 Mowe when J had spoken thele wordes, the angell that came to me the nyght atoze, was sent vnto me,

wyll instruct thee: hearken to the thyng that J lap, and J Mall tell thee more.
3 And J layde: Speake on my TLorde.
Then lapde he vnto me: Thou art sore troubled in nwnde for Jlraels fake:

that made theine J
34 And J sapde, No Loe, but of very grlefe (and compassion) haue J for my reynes payne me every houre, because J woulde haue experience of the way of the mott hyest, and {eke out part of his iudgement. N
And he sapde vnto me: That thou apest not. And J fayde: Wherkore

2 tom bg.

N00

o Why was not my mothers wombe then my graue, that I myght not haue kene the miferie land trouble) of Jacob,
Fee earpng out of the stocke of

aS a he layde vnto me: Number me th thynges that ave not yet come, gafein together the droppes that are are * abroade, make me the floures

ane agapne that are withered,

= en me the places that ave clofen, ug me foorth the Wyndes that in

of a popte: and then J wyll declare to

2 And lapde vnto nie, Heare me, and -

Louct thou that people better then he

spoken:

Lorde: wherunto was J borne then-

Mate chut wp, Merve me the image

38. And F fayde: O Torde, Lorde, who map knowe these thynges, but he that 7 bath not his dwenpng with men:

39 72 5 ante cys Wiad map

ele thynges thou astest me: ace

40 Then sapd he vnto me, Lyke as thou tanst do none of thefe thynges that J haue spoken of: euen so tanst thou noe fyude out my indgement, or in the ende
= — j. J haue promised onto my

ble. N

41 And IJ sayde: Weholde O Loe, pet

art thou nye vnto them that be rez serued tyll the ende: and what shallthey
DO that haue bene befoze me, or we that

5 nowe, 02 they that that tome after
42 And he sayde vnto me, J wyll lyken

My indgement vnto a ryng: Tpke as there is no slacknesse of the last, euen fo there is no lwiftnesse of the first.

43 So J aunswered and sayde: Couldest thou not make those that haue ben made, and be nowe, and that are kfor to tome, at once, that thou mightest shewe thy tudgement the foonerz

44 Then aunlwered he me, and sayde: „ serve

The treature map not haste aboue the maker, neither may the worlde holde them at onte that shalbe treated therin.

45 And he sapde: As thou halt layde vnto thy seruaunt, that thou which quickenett all thynges, hast geuen lyle at once to the creature (02 worke] that thou hast treated, and the creature bare it: even so mpaht it nowe allo beare them that

no be be prelent at once. 8

46 And he fayd vnto me: Alke the wombe G of a woman, and lap vnto her, If thou bringest foorth children, why doest thou it not together, but one after another-
Praày her therefore to bryng foorth ten children at once.

47 And J fayde, She can not: but mutt do it by distaunte of tyme.

48 Then sapde he vnto me: Euen so haue
J deuided vp distaunce of tyme the

chudbed of the earth for those that be lowen vpon her.

49 For lyke as a poung thilde may not bryng foorth the thynges that belong to

Wolde which J created.
50 And Jalked and lapde: Hepng 0

the aged: euenso haue Jordepned the „

owe geuen methe way, J wyll
15 to peak belore thee: for our mother of whom thou hast tolde ine that fhe is poung, draweth fhe nowe nye vnto age: a

U procecde

Woman that beareth chilozen, and che chall tell thee. — {wart
52. Sap bnto her: Wherkore are not they whom thou Hatt nowe brought forth, like thole that were belore ther, but lesle of stature? be
53 And che Hal aunlwere thee: Theythat

be borne in the vouth of firength, are of

Ine fourth booke

51 ht aunswered me, and lapde: Alke a

one fachton: and they that are bop the tyme ol age (when the meee fayleth) are otheribife. che womdbe

54. Eonsider nowe thy lelfe, Howe that ye

avcicile of stature then thoset mare tb 15 i Hat Were

55 And lo are they that come ater lefle then pe, as the treatutes Which nowe begyn to be olde, and haue pafled ouer the strength of pouth.

56 Then lapde J: Lorde J beleche thee

vf J haue founde kauour in thy lpght,

N Oz, wor mankhyyp,

shewe thy feruaunt by whom tho visitest thy" creature: .
The:vj. Chapter. and

God hath koreleene all thynges in his secrete counlayle, and is aucthour therok, hath created them foz his chüldren. 25 The kelicitie of the age to come.

the worlde stoode, oz

2 Bekore it thundred and lyghtened, or euer the foundations of
Paradise were lapde,

3 Before the faire floures were seene, or

cuer the mourable powers were sta-

blilshed, before the innumerable multitude of angels were gathered together,
4. Oz euer the hyghnesses of the apze

Oz, at unt

were ipfted vp, afore the measures ot

the fiemament were named, or euer the thiinneps in Ston were hotte, —
5 And or the prelent peres were fought out, and or euer the inuentions ol them that nowe sinne, were put alide, before they were sealed that haue gathered fayth for a treasure: 3

WD, facned aipap.

6 Then dpd FZ confider and ponder all

these thynges, and they all were made though me alone, and through none other :by me allo they shalbe ended, and

by none other.
5 7 Then aunswered J and layde: what n lhalbe the" partyrg alunder of the tyres: or when shalbe the ende ok the lirst, and the begpunyng of it that fo:

5 NN 1

nd he lad vnto me: From Abraham nt = oba and : be re borne of Him, Jatobs hande helde first the heele of Elãu: ; i 70
Jan Elau is the ende of this wonlde, and Jatob is the begynnyng of it that

euer the windes blewe,

Eslau

flo Se
10 The hande of man betwirt the heele and the hande: Other question Eldras alke thounot. — nm JJ aunlwered then and sapd: O Tord,
5 pk Jhaue founds fauour in thy

12 Pelee ther Cherie thy lernaunt the ende of thy tokens, Whereol thou 1

schewedst me part the last noyght.
-B So he aunlwered, and sayde vnto me:
Stande vp vpon thy leete, and heare a perfect vopte and ound.
14. There Mall tome a great motion: but the place where thou standelt Hall

not be moued.

15 And therfore when thou hearest the

wordes, be not afraide: for of the ende

shall the worde be, and of the founda-

tion of the earth chall it be vnderstande.

16 And Why: the worde therol trembiets

» ad quaketh:fo2 itknoweth that it mul

be chaunged at the ende

17 And it happened, that when J had

hearde it, J stoode vp bpon nip bien

and hearkened: and beholdethere 5605

A vopte that fpake , and the fonds ol! was like the sounde of many waters.

18 And it layde: Beholde the dapes tone

that J wyll begyn to drawe ne, ande bifite them that dwell vpon earth:
"4 of them, what they be that haue hutt vntustly with their spneyatpecoulel
— nae A lowe estate of Bion e fulfplled.
20 And When the worlde that n wil niche away shalbe ouerlealed, th 750

And Wyl begyn to male inqulliktan

Oz, nightit
1 wt, an catthauakc.

Suh he speateth.

opened bekore the *firmanient,and they ogy yen shall see altogether:

J And the chuldzen of a pere olde Mall spealke With thetr vopces, the women
With chude shall bing koorth vntymely chüdren ok three oz koure monethes olde, and they that liue, and be railed vy.
22 And sodayneiy Chait the sowen plates appeare as the vnsowen, the full store houses hall sodaynly be founde eniptic:
And the trumpet Mail gene a sounde, which when every man heareth, they

shalbe haste ly afraide.

Ni 24. At that tyine shall friendes fyght one

ls agaynst another lyke enemies, and the

earth shall stande in feare with them:

The springes of the welles shall stande

styll, and in three houres they shall not

25 Wholdeuer remapneth from all these

ek thynges that J haue tolde thee, chall

tea estape, and {ce my saluation, and the ende ol pour worlde.

26 And the men that are receaued shall

N fee it, they that haue not tasted death

from their birth: and the heart of the indibellers halbe thaunged k turned into another meanyng.

27 Foz tuyll shalbe put out, and deteipt shalbe quenched.

28 As lor faith it shall floriche, corruption shalbe ouercome, and the trueth which
Hath) ben fo long without fruite, chalbe

Declared.

29 And when he talked with me, beholde
Poked a litle and a litle vpon hym before whom J stoode,

30 And these wordes sayde he vnto me:
Jam tome to shewe thee the tyme of the nyght for to tome.

1 If thon wylt pray vet moze, and falt seuen dayes agapne, J Hall tell thee moe thynges and greater then before, which z haue hearde by the day.

2. F02 thy voyte is Hearde before the hpest: tor why- the mightie hath feene

thy rpghteous dealyng, he hath leene

allo thy chaltitie which thou halt had euer lince thy pouth: :

a therfore hath he fent me to shewe ee all thele thynges, and to fap vnto
CC, Be Of good comlort, and feare not:

We ud halte not with the tymes that

palt to thynke bapne thynges,

Hütchen ma ithe latter tymes. yet not batten from th

ee

E 33

| of Efdras. |
9 do these tokens: The bookes shalbe 35 And it came to patie after this, that J

XV].

ag fol 115 eas Pa

> Wat “J nipght fulkpll t

three Weekes whith hekolde me. *

36 And in the eyght nyght was my heart vexed within me agapne, and Jbegan to speake before the hpest.

37 Jor my spirite was greatly fet on fire, and in sonle Was in distrelle,

38 And Hlayde: O Tome chou spakest vnto thy creature from the begynnyng, euen the first day, and sapdest, Let Cen. il. heauen c earth be made: And thy worde
Wasa perfect worke.

39 And then was there the spirite, and the darknesses were pet on euery foe, and scilence: there was no mans vopte a5 pet from thee. *

40 Then commaurdedst thou a” fare °F" lyght to come foorth ont of thy trea sures, that thy worke might appeare

and be seene.

4 Upon the seconde day thou madest # the spirite of the firmament, and com - maundedst it to part asunder and to make a deulslon betwirt the waters, that the one part myght remapne a-

boue, and the other beneath.

4-2 Upon the thirde day thou broughtest to passe that the waters were gathered in the seuenth part of the earth: Sire partes hast thou dryed bp, e kept them, to the intent that men myght sowe e and occupie husbandrp therin.

43 Alsoone as thy Worde went foorth, eet the wozke was made. a

44 Foz inmiediatly there was great and sie. innumerable fruite, and many diuers pleasures for the taste, and floures of vnchaungeable colour, and odours of
Wonderful smell: and this was done the thirde day. ‘

45 Upon the fourth day thoutommann- Genie dedst that the sunne choulde geue his shyne, and the moone her lyght, the starres dydst thou fet in order:

46 And gauest then a charge to do ler- Peu lin.
B vnto man that was for to be made.

7 Upon the fyft day thou laydest vnto

1 the leuenth part, Where the waters Genic,
Were gathered, that it shonlde bryng foorth . diuerg beastes, foules, and fishes:

and so it canie to paffe. ö

48 Jor the dumbe water and without soule, brought foorth lpuyng thynges at the commaundement of God, et

4 The fourt

all people myght prapst thy wonde-

Oz, the
1 us morkes.

4 Then dydst thou ordeyne two foules: conse the one thou calledst Enoch, and the
. cher Leuiathan,

50 And dydst leparate the one from the
G other: kor the leuenth part (namely,
| where the Water was gathered together) myght not holde them both.

ose 51 Unto Enoch thou gauest one part denne. Phich was drped vp the third day, that he shoulde dwel in the lane part, wher-

in are a thoulande hylles.
$2 Wut vnto Teuiathan thou gauest the seuenth part, namely the moyst, e halt kept hym to deuour What thou wylt,

and When.

5; Upon the firt day thou gauest cont: maunde ment vnto the earth that before thee it shonlde bryng koorth beastes,

Cattell and all that creepe:
54 And belpdes this Adam also, whom

thon madest lode ok all thy treatures:

of hym come we all, and the

allo whom thou hak ch. people

onto che ie n cholen tpeciaty

55 All this haue J sayd nowe and fin

befoze theelthat J ght tieoetome ge ps . — 7 made for our fates.

56 As for the other people which ol Adam, thou hast sayde that i nothyng, but be lye vnto lpittle, k hack lpäcned the aboundaunee ok them vnd a droppe that falleth from a vessell.

57, And nowe O Torde, peholde, the heathen which haue euer ben reputed as nothyng, haue begunne to be lordes ouer 5255 ety, vs: b

58 But we thy people (whom thou! called thy first borne, thy only i and thy fervent loner.) are geuen into their handes and power.

59 If the worlde nowe be made for our fakes, Why haue we not the inheritaũce of the worlde in possession: owe long chall this endure- 5

The vij. Chapter.

} without tribulation none can come to kelicitie. 12 God aduertileth all in tyme. 28 Che commyng and death of Christe. 32 The resurrection a tat iudgement, 4 Akter the which all corruption thatl ceasse. 48 All fell in Adam. 19 The true ipfe. 55 The mercies and

Goodiictle of God.

: J had made an ende of speakung thefe wordes, there was sent vnto me an angell, whiche

also the nyghtes afore
2 anv hebe e hne me: Up Eldras, c t c Wordes t
0 Ve wordes that Jam tome
3 nd J lapde: Speake on Lorde) n sh ol 1 he vnto me: The fea
© place, that i
* aud geen, ae EERE
4 Wut put cate the entraun
— lyke à rpuer. nr
5 othen toulde go into the lea. to rae 5 to rule its If 15 went f he narowe, howe tonie into the broade- Dawe mpgbt ti
"Drogen 6 Item another. A citie is builded and let vpon a broade kielde, and is full of all good thynges:

7 The entraunte therok is narowe, and ts set ina daungerous place to fall, Ipke
— VF there were a fire at the r
Hande, and a deepe water at the left,

had ben sent vntd me

8 And as it were only one ftrayte path B betwirt them both, euen betweene the fire and the water, fo mall that there toulde but one man go there at once.

9 HE this citie nowe were geuen to a man for an inheritaunte, and he neuer went through the perilons way bekore, howe Woulde he reteaue his inheritaunte- f 1

lo And J sayde: It is so Lorde. Then sayd he: Euen lo allo is Ysraels portion.

u And Why: for their fakes haue J made the Worlds: and when oct transgressed my ftatutes, then was the thyng fo appoynted as nowe is done. .

12 Then Were the entvaunces of 5
Wolde made narowe, full of {020 10 and trauaple: they are but fee a tuyll, full of perils, and labour.

z Foz the entrauntes of the fore worlde

were 0 de and lure, and brought un mortall fruite. ter
14 If then they which are lyuyns, en ant Dice through thele urge che brittle thynges, they tan not reteau thynges fo layde bp in secrete. fe then,
45 Why dilauietest thou thy fl ate

Heeoke=

of Efdras. -

thou art but a torruptible man-
00 wüy art thou moucd, whereas thou art but moztall:
And Why hak thou not reteaued in-
16, thpus heart the thinges that are to comme, rather thé them that are present-
Then lapd J: O Lode, sod, “thou haft ordapnedin thy law, that the righteous syoulde inherite these thinges, phutthat the vngodly shoulde perishe:
18 Neuerthelesse, the righteous (halt sulfer straite thinges, hope for wyde: for thepthat haue liued vngodly e fuffred srayte thinges, (yall not fee the wyde.

And he sayde vnto me: There is no

iudge aboue God, and none that bath vnderstanding aboue the hyestt.

20 For there be many that perishe inthis

lle, betaule they despile the law ol God

de that is set befode them: -

du Fo: God hath geuen strayte com-

maurdement to such as tame, so oft as

they tame, what they should do to haue

life, and what they choulde kepe to a uoyde punishment. .

, 22 Niuerthelesle, they were not obedient vnto him, but spake against hym, an imagined vayne thinge ?

23 And deteaued them selues by wicked
Deedes, and denied the power of the most high, e regarded not his Wapes,

24 But his lawe haue they despised, and denied his pronuses, in his statutes and ordinauntes haue they not ben fapthful and stedfast, and haue not perfourmed

25 And therefore Eldras, for the emptie

aͤre the emptie thinges, and for the full are the full thinges..

26 Beholde, the tyme (hall tome that hele tokens whiche J haue tolde thee,
(hall come to paffe, and the bryde hall
üppeare, and she comming foorth that be leene that nowe is buder the earth:

, abe

27 And wholoeuer is deliuered from the

forefayde cutis chall fee my wonders.
2 For my sonne Fefus shalbe openly dedared With thole that be with hin: and

Hey that remayne, halbe merie with-

jo out hundred veres.
Alter thelt lame peres shall mysonne jo Jule dre aud all men that hane like: gde lande Wand halbe turned into the a engen bape, like as in ee remapne. utes, so that no man thal

zl 2nd after seuen daye pes, the world that
Vet awaketh not, shalbe raysed vp, and

that (hall dye that is torrupt.
32 And the earth Hall restore thore that haue slept in her, and fo shall the dust those that dwell therein in kilente, lind he secrete places shall detiuer thole the

soules that were conmutted vntothem.

33 And the mol highest chalbe openly declared vpon the seate of iudgement, k all miserie chall vaniche away, and long suffering shalbe gathered together.

34. Wut the indgement chall continue, the trueth shall remayne, and kayth shall
Ware strong, *

35 The worke (hall folowe, and the re-

Warde shalbe shewed, the" righteoul-

nelle shall watch, and the righteoulnesse shall beare no rule.

26 Then saypd J: Abraham praped firtt fo2 the Sodomites, and Moyles fo. the

- fathers that sinned inthe wyldernesle,

37 Andthey that tame after him for, HE rael, in the time of Achas and Saniucl,

38 And Daudd klor the deltraction, and
Solomon for them that came into the sanctuarie, a

39 And Helias for those that receaued rayne, q for the dead, that he might liue,

40 And Ezechias for the people in the time of Sennacherib, and diuers other in like maner whiche haue prayed for many.

41 Euen fo now, seiug the corrupt is gro-
Wen bp, and wickednesle increased, and the righteous haue prayed for 5 vngodly: wherkore shallit not be so nowe alfoz

42 He aàunswered me, and lapde: This present lise is not the ende, oft times honour is retapned in it: therekore haue they prayed for the weake.

43 Wut the day ofdoonie Kalbe the ende of this tyme, and the beginning of the immortalitie for to conic, wherein all torruption shalbe vanished:

44. Intemperauntie shalbe loosed, infidelitie be tut ot, righteousnesse growe, and the beritie spring vp.

45 Then shall no man be able to faue

hym that is destroyed, nor to oppresse hym that hath gotten the victorie.

46 J aunschered then, and layd: This is

my first and last saying, that it had ben

better not to haue genen the earth vnto

Adaun: 02 cls when it was genen hym,

to haue kept hym that he shoulde not haue sinned. * 1

47 For what profite is it foz nien nowe in

this present time to liue in heamnes, and after death to looke for punisyment-

C OO 48 O thou

u Or, haut an ende.

a

" D2, the good deedes thatbe of fozce

Sen. xviii. c.
Exod. 32. c. ;

i. Reg. 24. b

it. Par. vl. c.

ini. Reg. ry. d

4. Reg 16.0

Oz, vice.

On, (cate.

Sr. lakctis and health.

JI jc fourth booke

43 D thou Adam what hast thou done; laping: *Chooke thee lpfe,

ough it was thou that finned,

Aon th but we all

thou art e alone, at tome of thee.
Pg what profite is it vnto vs if there be promised vs an immortall tynie, where as we do the workes that bryng

death:

50 And that there is pronuled vs aͤncuerlasting hope, where as our selues are enyll and vapne:

51 Andthat there are lapde vp for bs dwellinges of health and fafetie, where as we haue lined wickedly:

F 5z And that the glory of the highelt is kept to defende them whieh haue led a patient like, where as We haue walked in the most wicked wapes of all?

5 And that there Mabe shewed a paradile, whole feuite endureth foz euer, wherein is kreedome and mediane, whereas we shall not go in-

Oz, lple.

54 Foz bbe haue walked in vnplealaunt

laces.

55 and that the faces of them whiehe haue abstapned, hall Chine aboue the starres: whereas our faces Mhalbe blacker then darknelle-

56 For whple we liued and dyd vnrighteoufly, we considered not that we schoulde {uffer therfore after death-

5 Then aunswered he me, and fayde:
This is the maner of the battayle which manthat is borne vpon theearth
Tait ight.

58 That ik he be onereome, he Hall suffer as thou hast sapd: But ik he get the bic torie, he shal reteaue d thing that J say.

59 Por this is the life whereof Moyles

spake buto the people whple He liued

e 5 chat thon

60 Meuerthelesse, they beleued

neither the prophetes alter oe noz me Whiche haue fade vnto them

st That heauinelle chou notso be vn to their destructton, like as toy is for to come outer thole that haue tuttren the selues to be enfourmed infatuation,

62 15 aunlwered then and sayd: J know ae

ende that the highettis called mercy-

full, in that he hath merey vpon them whiche are not vet conie önto that

Wwolde, , 8

63 eae vpon thole allo that waltze inhis

64. And that he is pactent: for he ton suffreth those that haue finned, as his | creatures, \ i? =

65 And that he is liberal to geue where as it requireth. Ls

66 And that he is of great mertie: forhe passeth in mercy much, both thole that are present, and that ave paste, and allo them whiche are fo2 to come. f

67 For if he multiplied not his merties, the worlde toulde not continue his be-
199 with those that haue inheritauntes

erein.

68 Pe geueth also: fo ik he gaue not of 2.00. his goodnesse, that they whiche haue done eupll mpght be caled from their
Wickednefle, the ten thoulandth part of men should not remapne liuing.

69 And il he beyng tudge, korgaue not those that be healed with his wolde, and toke not away the multitude of tontentions,

o There should be very fewe left perad-
Venture in an innnmerable multitude.

01, ty

Rom. ul

¢ The. viij. Chapter.

Che number ok the godlp is [mall. 6 The workes of God are excellent. 20 ldras

prayer for hym and his people. v Che promife of faluatt ue, Che de struction of the 921 P 39 U promise o faluation to the i 5

Nd He aunflvered me, faping : The most by:

9 I wyil tell thee a si-

= nnlitude, Eldzas. As

whenthou alket the earth, it shaul lay

vnto thee that it geueth much moulde

Wyerof earthen beflels are made, but

Utle okit that golde commeth ok: Euen so is tt with the worke of this worde.

N path xxd
3 *Fhere be many treated, out fewe 22. shalbe faved, en
4 Then aunlwered J, and sapd: Th 5 swalowe bp the wit (O my forte) an
Deuour the vnderstandng. and
5 Jor thou art agreed to beara ee: to geue eare, and wpllpng to bahnt th ig es thou 195 no longer {pace bu e geuen thee.
6 ch Lowe, if thou suffer not ch eg uaunt to intreate thee, that thou mi

de geue erde vnto our heart, and bur

liue that is corrupt, then who shall step foorth in the place of man:

Fo2 thou art alone, and we all one
57 wokemanthip of thy handes, like as thou hast sapde. ö |

For when the body is fathioned nowe in the mothers wombe, andthougeuest the membres, thy creature is preserued in fire and water, and nine monethes pot) thy worke suffer thy creature
Whiche is fashioned in her: f
Butthe thinges that kepeth, and that

is kept, shall both be preserued: and

when the time commeth, the womde

prelerued, delluereth vp the thinges that grewe in it.

fo For thou hak commaunded the partes ol the body, euen the breastes, to geue nike vnto the fruite of the breastes:

i That the thing whiche is created and

fashioned, may be nourished for a time,

till thou dispolest and ordrest it with thy mercy.

2 And then thon bringest it vp with thy righteoulnesse, nurturest it in thy lawe, and refourmest it with thy vnderstan-

ding,

en 13 Mo rtiliest it as thy creature, and ma-

kest it lining as thy Worke.

C. Seingthen that thon destroyest him hice with fo great labours is created and fachioned thorowe thy commaundement, thou touldest lightly ordayne allo that the thing Whiche is made might be preserued.

1 Nowe therfore Lord J wpll speake
(fozconcerning all men tn generallthou shalt rather prouide) but touching thy people, for whole fake J am sorp,

16 And thyne inheritauntce, for whole canle Jmourne, and Jlrael, fo: whom am wokull, and Jacob, for whole ae Jam greeued:
17 Therkore begin J to pray before thee
18 my felfe and foe them: for J fee the
: auls of vs that dwell in the lande.
But J haue hearde the switnesse of
9 Tho Whiche is to tome. krlberetore heare my vopte, and vnber AND thy wordes, and J thal speake ee thee. This is the beginning of titen ye of Eldras, before he Was

20 OTO thou that dw -
) ellest in euerlakungnelle Which beholdest from aboue

of Esdras.
: gur vnderstanding, that there maye thinges in the heauen and in the ayre:

come fruite of it wherby eche man may 21 Whose th

zone is inestimable, whole

glorp [and maiestie) map not be comprehended, before whom the hoastes of angels stande with tremblyng,

22 Whole keping is turned in Winde and five, whole worde is true, whole sapinges are stedlast, whole conunaundement is strong, whole ordmaunte is kearekull,

23 Whole looke dryeth vy the deapthes, whole Wath maketh the mountaynes to melt away, and Whole trueth bea: reth witnesse:

24. O heare the prayer of thy seruaunt,

and marke with thync cares the peti tion ol thy creature,

25 Jor whyle J liue J wyll speake, and

D

Oz, ag the

effect it {clfe

bearctt witesse.

fo long as J haue vnderstanding 1

wyll aunswere.

26 O looke not bpon the finnes ol thy

people, rather then on them whiche serue thee in trueth.

27 Haue no respect vnto the wicked stusties of the heathen: but to the desire ol those that kepe thy testimonies with afflictions.

23 Thinke not vpon those that haue walked faynedly bekore thee:but remember them which atcording to thy wyll haue knobwen thy feare.

29 Net it not be thy will to destroy them whiche haue had beastly maners: but to looke vpon them that haue clearely taught thy lawe.

30 Take thou no indignation at them whiche are Worle then beastes: but loue them that alway put their trust in thy righteoulnesse and glorp.

31, For we and our fathers haue all the fame sicknes sand difeate:) but because of vs sinners thou shalt be called merciful.

32 For ifthou halt mercy vpon vs, thou shalt be called mercifull to vs that haue no workes of righteonsnesse.

33 Forthe righteous whiche haue layde vp many good Workes together, shall out of their deedes reteaue rewarde.

34. But what is man that thou shouldest take dilplealure at hym: Or what is this torruptible and mortall generation, that thou shouldest be fo rough to-
Warde him 7

35 For ota trueth there is no mia among them that be borne but he hath dealt
Wickedly, ramongthe kaypthkull there is none which bath not done amisle.

C ( 36 Ji02

E

O, appeace.

ii. Par. vi. f. l. Iohn. i. b.

" D2, sucht as contesse thee.

) The fourth booke :

DLorwe thy righteou! ged thy lelle worthy to ben

2in this 0 el 7 f alte 105 goodnesle halbe prapsfed ed among the righteous. 0 glonttiand declared ik thon be mercikull vnto so For many and great miseries remaine them whiche are not riche in good ko them that in the latter tyme chall dwell in the worlde, becanfe they haue

Workes. |
37 Then aunswered he me, and layde, Walked in great pride.
51 Wut vnderstande thou kor thy feife

Some things hast thou spoken aright: g according vnto thy wordes it chalbe. and lecke out the glory fo2 suche as be
38 For J Wpll not veryly confiner he like thee.

Workes ok them whithe haue sinned

Vz, haue not the 1
Qaunce of, 9
“Whur wide n

Oz, ol.the
Wicke d. destruction:

Cen ia. 39 Wut JJ Wyll reiopce oucr the wozke and thought of the rightcous, J wyit

remember also the pilgrintage, the sal-

vation, and the rewarde that they thall

haue.

40 lle as J haue spoken nowe, so (hall it tome to passe. a”

41 For as the husbandman soweth niuch

seede vpon the grounde, and planteth

many trees, and pet al wap the thing that is sowne or planted is not all kept

lake, neither doth it all take roote: Euen

fo is it of them that ave sowen in the
Worlde, they Chall not all be faucd.

42 Jaunlwwered then and fayde: PEF
Hane founde grate then let me speake.

43 Bike as the husbandmans seede pez ritheth,iftt tome not vp and reteaue not thy rapne in due feafon, or if there tome to much rayne vpon it and torrupt it:

44 Euen so perisheth man allo which is created with thy handes, and is like vnto thyne one image and to thy selfe,

for Whose fake thou hast made all thin-

ges, and lykened hym vnto the hulbandmans seede.
45 We not wroth with vs (O Lorde) but

{pare thy people, and haue mercy vpon

thyne owne inheritaunce: forthouwplt be mercpkull vnto thy creature.
46 Then aunswered he me, and lapde:
Thinges present are for the present, and thinges to tome for such as be to tome.

47 FJor thou lackest yet much, seing thou

tanst loue my treature abone me: but
J haue oft tymes Draven nye vnto thee, and vnto it, but neuer to the vnrighteons. N

48 Juthis allo thou art marueplous before the highelt,

49 Inthat thou hast humbled thy selke as it betommeth thee, and hast not iyo:

before death, before iudgement, before

61 And thereforcis my iudgement nowe

52 Foz vnto pou is paradise opened N tree of life is planted, thetymets 2 4 is prepared, plenteousnes is made redy the titie is buylded (for ou] and rest is baer ener ee and wyl-

om * = i ra ;

53 The roote ok euyll is marked from you, the weakenesle and moth is hid krom pou, and into hell fleeth torruption in forgetfulnessdGmGG. *

54 Sorobwes are vanished away, and in the ende is shewed the treasure of immortalitie. ; — 2

55 And therkore alke thou no more questions concerning the multitude of then that perishe. :

56 Foz when they had taken libertie, they despised the highest, thought storne of his lawe, and forsoke his wapes.

57 Moreouer, they haue troden done his righteous,

58 And sapde in their heart that there is no God, yea and that wittingly, for

they dye.

55 Foz like as the thing that J haue spoken ol, is made redy kor vou, cuen fo is thirst and payne prepared forthem: Kor it was not his wyll that man shoulde tome to naught.

60 Wut they whiche be treated, haue de filed the name of hym that made them, and are bnthankefull vnto him whiche prepared tpfe for them.

Oz, ltalg bb.

Pfal.xiiti.a.
Oz, lo: all they butwt that ther

syouloe dye.

v Oz, gods
Op pelt

at hande.

62 hele thinges haue not shewed vnto all men, but bnto kewe, namely vnto thee, and to suche as be like thee.
Then aunlwered J and fayde: un

63 Weholde O Horde, nowe Je . shewed me the multitude of the 55 ders whiche thou wylt begin lo ran the last tymes: but at what tynie when) thou halt not chewed me.

€ The

of Efdras.

XIX.

— J The. ix. Chapter.

All thinges in this worlde hane a beginning and an ende.

to Cormentes for the

wicked alter this lyfe. 15 The number o€ the wicked is moze then ok the good.
20 The Jewes ingratitude. 35 Cherefore they perishe. 38 The bifton of a woman

enting.
(C aunsiwered me then

and layde, Mealure

Athouthe time diligent:
N i ive in it felf; and when chou seest that one e SN iipare of the tokens
— come to palse whiche
Jhaue tolde thee before,

2 Then shalt thou vnderstande that it

is che very same tyme wherin the highwel begin to visite the world which he made.

3° Therekore when there shalbe seene an earthquake and vprore of the people in the worlde, :

4 Then shalt thou well vnderstande

that the moste highest spake of thofe thinges from the dapes that were before thee, euen from the beginning.

5 For lpke as all that is made in the

worlde, hath a beginning and ende, and the ende is manifest:

6 Euen so the tymes allo of the highest haue playne beginninges in wonders and signes, and ende in Working and in tokens, ö

5 And cuerp one that shalbe saued, and

spalbe able to estape by his workes and

by kayth wherein ye haue beleued,
8 Shalbe preserued from the layde pez

cent
> woaitaccg,

ils, and (hall lee my lauiour in my lande, and within my borders: for FJ ° t haue halowed me from the worlde.

9 Then shan they pitie them felues,
Whiche nowe haue aͤbuled my wapes: and they that haue cast them out dilpitefully hall dwell in paynes.

lo For luche as in their life haue retea-
175 benefites, and haue not knowen

u. And they that hane abhorred my lawe whyle they had pet kreedome,
And when they had yet open leylure of alllendement and konuertion, vnderstoode not, but despiled it:

cbm

“ie, 3. dnd therefore be thon no moze” cate?
— howe the vngodly shalbe punished: ut inqure howe the righteous chalbe ne um whole the wonde is, and for
~ POM De wonlde is, and Whenlit is.)

2 The lame nustnowe it after death in payne.

14 Then aunswered J, aud lapde:

15 J) haue fayode
{peake, aud wyl speake it allo Hereafter: that there be many mo of them whiche perishe, then of them Whiche shalbe saued: t

Is Like asthe Aud is greater then a drop.

17 And he aunswered me, saying: Like
AS the fielde is, so is also the seede:as the floures be, fo are the colours allo: suche as the workeman is, luche is allo the
Worke:and as the husbandman is hym selfe, fois his hulbaudry allo: for it was the tyme ofthe worlde.

18 And when J prepared lor them that

before, and nowe J C

4-Efd.viitb

are nowe, or euer the World was made

wherein they shoulde dwell: then was there no man that spake against me.

19 For then euery one sobayed) but nowe the maners of them which are treated in this worlde that is made, are tcorrupted by a perpetuall seede, and bya lawe whereout they can not rid them lelues.

20 So J tonsidered the worlde, and beholde there was perdi becaule of the thoughtes that were come into it.

Oz, deutfes

21 And J saw, and spared them greatly, Y

and haue kept me a wWineberte of grapes, and a plant ofa great people.

22 Let the multitude pevithe then which ave growen bp in vapne, and let my
Grape (and wineberte) be kept and my plant: for with great labour haue J made it bp.

23 Meuerthelesse, if thou wylt ceasse pet seuen dapes mo, but thou {halt not kast in them:

24. Go thy wap thé into a fielde of foures,

where no Houle is buylded, e cate only of the floures ofthc fielde, taste no flesh, dzinke no wine, but eate floures only.

25 And pray buto the highest continually, so wyll FJ come and talke with thee.

26 Do J went my wap, and came into the fielde whiche is called Ardath, like as he commaunded me, and there J fate among the floures, and did cate of
N 8 of he fielde, and the meate of the same fatiffied me.

27 Alter seuen dayes, J fate vpon the grasse, and my heart Was dered within me like as before.

C (th) 28 And

„Oz, grape ok the cluster.

The fourth booke

E23 And J opened my mouth, and began 38 And when J pake thele t inges in

talkẽ with the most highest, and sald: muy heart (after this maner}
9 10 0 that chewest thy selfe pnto bs, thou halt declared and opened thy selke vnto our fathers in the wyldernesse, in a place where no man dwelleth, in a barren place, when they tame out of Egypt:
30 And thou spakest saping, Heare nie
O Jlrael, and marke my wordes thou seede of Jacob.

Exc. xix. b. and. xx iuii a

Deut. ini. b.

and it Hall bryng fruite in pou, and ye shalbe honoured in it fo euer.

3 Wut our fathers whiche reteaued the

lawe, kept it not, and obserued not thy

ordinaunces and statutes, and the fruite of thy lave dyd not appeare, neither coulde it: for why: it was thyne.
Deut 33 For they that reteaued it, perished, becaule they kept not the thing that was sowen in them.
34 And lo, it is a custome when the

5 receaueth seede, 02 the sea a

hip, or a vessell meate and drinke: that
Whenit perisheth o2 is broken wherein a thing is sowen, or wherein any thing is put,

F 35 The thinges allo perilhe and are bro-

ken which are sowen or put therin and receaucd, and the thinges that are receaued remayne not then with vs: but in vs it hath not happened so.

36 Foz bee that haue receaued the lawe, perishe in sinne, and our heart Whiche alfo reteaued the lawe:

37 Motwithstanding 'the law perisheth

Esal. xl. a. not, but remayneth in his force.

ü. Tim. ii. a.

For beholde F sowe mp lawe in pou.

about me with mine eyes, and Monte

right side J fatbe a woman wr; mourned sore, made great — — and wept with loude vote, and wae greeued in heart, and rent her clothes aud she had asches vpon her head.
39 Then let Imp thoughtes go that 2 uae 7 — edt we buto her,
40 And lapde: Wherefore weepest thouwhy art thou fo lorp in — ae
4 And fhe sayd vnto me: lone, that I map bewayle my selle, and take pet niorc sorow: for I am fore vexed in mp minde, and brought very iow,
42 And J lapde vnto her: what apleth
Gee 720 De who hath done anp thing to thee:] tell me.

43, She lapde vnto me: J thy seruaunt

haue ben vnkruitkull and baren, and hauehad no chylde though J haue had an husbande thirtie eres. 5

44. And these thirtie veres J do nothing els day and night, and all houres, but make my prayer to the highest.

45 Alter thirtie peres God hearde me thy handmayden, looked vpon my me serie, considered u trouble, and gane me a sonne:and J was glad of hym, fo was my hulband also, and al my neigh: bours, and we gaue great honour vnto the almightie.

46 And J nouriched him with great tra-

uaple.

47 So when he grewe vp, and came to the tyme that heshoulde haue a wyfe,
J made akeast.

The. x. Chapter.

Esdras and the woman that appeareth onto hym, commune together.

Mit fo cane to pale,

N

Then duerthrewe
3 We all the lightes and oye dee role bp to comfort e, then toke I mp re ) tonde day Roane „ —

3 And whenthey had all left of to tom-

fot nie, that I choulde be quiet: then J

pat when my fonne role vp by npaht and fled, and an tome
. went into his thaum- hyther into this fielde as thou felt: ber he ken dawne and 4 And am purpoled not to returne into

the citic, but to remayne here, and nel ther to eate nor deinke, but continually to mourne, and to fast, vntyll J dye. .
5 Then let J my meditation — thoughtes fal that I was in, and fpabe to her in displeasure, faping: *
6 Thon foolish woman abouc alo 1 |

Dir et mea G

Onutibl .

—”

thou not our heauines and moure what happeneth vnto vs: owe Sion our mother is all wofull
7 afory, aud howe fhe is cleane brought dolbne and mourneth extremely:
Seyng we be all nowe in heauimnes, ¢

5 make our mone, kor we all be sorowfull: art thou so heauie for one sonne?

entaunde the earth, and the shall f ree that it is fhe whiche ought (be

reason] to niourne for the fall of fo ma-

at growe vpon her.
5 ye from the beginning all men are a olde, they walke alniost all into derea a the multitude of them chalbe rooted out. al ho shoulde then (by reaton) make more mourning, then the that hath lot so great a multitude, and not thou whiche art sow, but for one:
» Wut if thou wouldest fay vnto me,

My mourning is not like the mourning

ofthe earth, for J haue loft the fruite of dec 19 body, whiche J brought foorth

with heauines, and bare with sorowes:

3 Bul the earth is actording to the ma-

ner olthe earth, and the prelent multi-

N aden

tude goeth agapne into her as it is tome to passee : di
(1 Then fap J vnto thee, Like as thou

halt borne With trauayle and sorolwe, euen sothe earth also from the begin:

ning geueth her fruite onto man, euen

to him that laboured her. j And therefore witlsholde thy sorowe eri: MD heauines by thy seif, e looke what

* happeneth onto thee, beare it strongly.

16 Jo: if thou indgett the marke and ende

ol God to be righteous and good, and

reteauest his counsell in time, thou shalt

chene 5 y

7, Go thy way then into the titie to thy

hulbande. 4 * 1

8 And che layde vnto me, That wyll J not do: J Wyl not go into the citle, but hert wyll J oye,

ip tate FJ communed moze with her, and

20 Do not lo, but be tounlelled, and folow me :foz howe manp fauls hath Sion-
Sc of good comfort betaule of the lo-

‘ robe of ierufalem,

Jor thon seest that our fanctuarte is apde waste, our aulter broken, our tent ple destroped

* Oarplaping of istrumentes is lapde

of Esdras.

borne ol her, and other shall tome: and

XX.

downe- and songues art put to scilence, D

dur myprth is vaniched away, the light of our candeicticke is quenched, the arke ol our couenaunt is taken from bs, all dur holy thinges ave dellled „ and the name that is called vpon ouer vs is ale most dilhonoured: our chyldren are put to shame, our priestes are brent, our Leultes are carped away into captiuitie,

our virgins are defiled, and our wpues

rauished, our righteous men spopled, and our chyldren destroyed, our poung men are brought in bondage, and our strong worthpes are betonie weake:

23 And Sion dur seale, which is thegrea-

test of al, is loosed bp from her Worthip: for the is deliuered into the handes of them that hate vs.

24. Andtherfore Make of thy great henuinesse, and put away the multitude of sorowes, that the nughtic may be mertyfull vnto thee, and that the highest may geue thee rest and eale fronithylabour and trauaple. 5

25, And when J was talkyng with her; her tate and beautie Mined sodainelp, and her countenaunce glistered, fo that

it might be.

26 And linmediatlp the taste out a great

boyte, very fearefull, so that the carth shoke at the noyse of the woman.

27. And J looked, and beholde the woman appeared vnto me no moze: but there was a titie buylded, e a place was

IJ was afraide of her, nd muled what

shewed from the ground € foundation:

Then was Jakraide, and cryed with
à loude bopce, and sayde. :
28 Where is Uriel the angell, whiche

iii. Esd. iii.

tame to me at the first-or he hath tau- E

sed me to conie in many confiderations and hye thoughtes, and mpne ende is turned to torruption, and my praper to rebuke. |
29 And as I was {peaking these wordes, he came vnto me, and looked vpon me:
30 And lo, J lap as one that had ben dead, and impne vnderstanding was altred:and he toke me by the right bande and comforted me, and set me vpon mp leete, and sayde vnto me,
31. What apleth thee; and why is thyne vnderstanding vered, and the vnder-
ö u thy heart? and Wherefore att thou sory-
32 at Bayne wecaule thou hast forfaken me, aud J haue done“ according
8 Cc@y) „ vnto

“TI

gto thy wordes, J went into theficld, aud e haue J leene thinges, and lee that j am not able to expresse.
33 He sayde vnto me: Stande vp and be manip,æ I shall geue thee exhortation.
34 Then sayde J: Speake on tome my
Lorde, fozlake lune not, lest J dye thorowe my rashnesse: ö
35 Fo; J haue leene that J knewe not, and heare that J do not knowe.
36 ta tat a eee doth mp soule dreame-
37 Mowetherctoe J beleche 1 thou wylt shewe thy seruaunt of this
ö wonder.
＋ 38 He aunswered me then and lapve:
Hare me, and J shall enfourine thee and tell thee wherfore thou art afraide:

kor the hyest hath opened many setrete

thinges onto thee. 1

39 He hath leene that thy wap is right, for that thou takest sorowe tontinuallp kor thy people, and makest great lamentation for Sion.

40. And therefore vnderstande the difion

which thou lawest a litle Whyte ago, ak: ter this aner.
4 Thou lawest a woman mourning, and thou begannest to tomfort her.
42 Meuerthelesse, nowe leek thou the likenes of the oma no more, but there appeared vnto thee a titie buplded:
43 And where she tolde thee ofthe fail of her sonne, o is this the solution of it.
44 This woman Whontthou lawest, 1s
Stomand where as fhe tolde thee, euen she whom thou {ee nowe as a atic buylded. ö

45 And as touching that the lapde vnto

~ thee that the hath ben thirtie peres vnfruitefull and baren, thole are the thir: tie eres wherein there was no ofkering made in her.

46 But after thirtie peres Solomon bull
Ded the citic, and ofred offeringes: and

comming out of the forcg, — ben saw Ja dzeame,
„ esamd beholde, there i came vp from the fea an Egle, whiche had
Ari. fethered winges

re fourth booke -

ig 97 1155 vie a sonne.

4-7 And Where as she tolde theet

nourished hym with labour, Hare the ne in e

43 But where as she tolde theet founc dyed, as his ehaumce wae ap fhe came into her chaumber, that is the fall that is come to hierusalem.

49 And beholde, when thou tamer her like one that mourned for her sonne, and begannest to comfort ber-of thele things whiche haue chaunced; thele are to be opened vnto thee,

50 Fo; nowe the mo hyghest seeth that thou art sorp in thy minde, and fufkrest from thy Whole heart for her, and lo
Hath he shewed thee her tlearenelle, and the faprenesse of her beautie.

51 And therekore J bad thee remapne in the lielde, where no Houle was bullded.

52 For Ine we that the highest would

shewe this vnto thee:

53 Therfore Jtommaunded thee to go into the flelde, where no foundation nor buylding is.

54 For in the place where the highett beginneth to shewe his citie, there tan no mans buylding be able to stande.

55 And therefore feare not, and let not thyne heart be afraide: but go thy way ttt, and fee the beautie and greatnes of the buylding, as much as thyne eyes be able to see

56 And then shalt thou heare as muche as thyne cares may comprehende.

57 Foz thou art biessed aboue many other, and art called wich the highest,

58 But to morowe at night thou shalt remapne here: | 8

59. And fo shall the highest shewe thee bisions of the bye thinges, which he wyll do dito them that dwell vpon earth in the last dapes. So J eps ÿ fame night
€ another, ithe as he connnaunded me.

The. xi. Chapter.

t Che bition of an Egle comming Foopth or the lea, and ol her fethers. ) Ol a Lion

blew on her, ⁊ gathered them together.
34 And Abeheide and out of berkerher there grew other contrary fethers, an they betame litte fethers and final. 1
4 Wut her heades remapned at head in the middest was greater : ye the other, pet rested it wit therein
5 Moeouer J law that the Egle — a
With her wpnges, and raigneD ar a

. N. yates

a3

earth), and ouer all them that dwelt vppon the earth.
6. And Jlalbe that all thinges vnder heauen were subiect vnto her, and no nan spake against her, no not one crea-

e vpon eart !).
19 zwe alfo that the Egle stodde bp

with her kethers, and a voyte saping alter this maner. g Watche not altogether, lleepe euery

man in his owne place, and watche by

burt eli anal mene
9 wutletthe heades be prelerued kor the

fo Heuerthelesse, I sawe that the voyte went not out ok her heades, but from

the myddest of her body. .

u And J mumbred her contrary fethers, and beholde there were eyght of them.

u And J loked, and beholde vpon the ryght lyde there arole one fether, and raigned ouer all the eart g.

tz And so it was, that when it raigned, the ende ok it tame, and the place therof appeared no more: So the next kololvyng stoode vp and raigned, and had
à great tyme. e

c 14 And it happened that when it raigned,

the ende ol it tame also lyne as the lirst, lo that it appeared no more. *
15 a came there a voyte vnto it, and aypde:::
16 Heare thou that hast kept the earth fo

long, this J lap vnto thee befoze thou

vbegynnest to appeare no moze, 7
17 There shall none after thee attayne brea thy tyne, neither vnto the haͤlke

8 Then arole the thirde, and raigned as
, Weather afore: and appeared no moze

19 Do went tt with all the residue one after another, so that euery one raigned, and then appeared no moe.

20 Then J loked and beholde in protesse
Oftyme the kethers that folowed stoode bponthe ryghtsyde that they myght wied and ome or them ruled: but

3 thin a whyle they appeared no moze.

d — Keone of them Were fet bp, but

After this J loved, and beholde the

twelue kethers appeared no moe, nor

etwa wynges im there was no moze bpon the ges body but two heades thaͤt rested,

“of Efdras.

vpon ee tlawes, and “ gane a sounde

piel 195 W

24. Then awe J also that two wynges

deuided them selues from the re, AnD remayned vnder the head that was bp: on the right fide: for the foure continued

25 So J loked, and beholde the kethers that were buder the one thouchets
{ct bp them selues and to haue the rule.

26 Then was there one fet bp but shortly it appeared no moe.

27 And the letonde was sooner away

en the first. ad,

28 And Jbehelde, and lo the two that remapned, thought also in them selnes fo raigne: 2.

29 And when they lo thought, beholde

there awanked one of the heades that

werke at rest, namely it that was in the myddest: fo2 that was greater then the

two other heades. 5

30 And then J lawe that the two heades

were iopned with hyni:

31 And the head was turned with them that were with hym, and dyd eate vp the two vnder wynges that woulde haue raigned.

32 But this head put the whole earth in feave, and bare rule in it ouer all those that dwelt vpon the earth with much labour: and he had the gonernaunte of had ben all the wynges that

ad ben. cots .

33 Atter this J loked, and beholde the head that was in the myddest sodaynly appeared no more, lyke as the wynges.

34. Wut there remayned the two Heades

which ruled vpon earth, and ouer thole that dwelt therin.

35 And J behelde, and lo the head vpon the ryght syde deuoured it that was bpontheleftfpbe.

36 Then J hearde a vopte which fayde vnto me: loke before thee, and confider the thyng that thou leet.

37. Then Jsawe, and beholde as tt were

a4 alton that roareth pan hastyly out of the wood: and J sawe that he fent out a mans vopte vnto che Egle, and saydt: ee,

33... Meare thon, J wyll talise with thee, and the hyest (hail fap vnto thee:

39 Js it not thou that hast the bictorte of the koure beastes whom J made to ye raigne ( vpon earth and in My worlde, that the ende of their tymes myght

y them tome through ther 40 And

+s ne, andouerrarme (and blatphemiej come vp vnto th

40 And the fourth car

all the beastes that were past, and had

power ouer the Worlde with great fearfulnesse, and ouer the whole tompalle of the earth with most wicked oppression, atid fo long tyme dwelt he vpon the earth with Decetpe. -

41 For the earth hast thou not ludged with trueth.

G 4 For thou hast troubledthe mecke,thou- -

hast hurt the peateable (and autet .) thou
Hat loued lpers, and destroped the dwellinges of them that brought foorth fruite, and hast tast downe the walles of such as dyd thee no harme.
43 Therfore is thy wrongfull dealyng

e and thy pryde vnto the mightie. been.

44 The hyest allo hath loted vpon proude tymes, and beholde they are ended, and their abominations are l ,
5 And therfore appeare no moze tho

1 Egle, and thy horrible wynges, aneh

wicked fethers, and thy bngratiouz

Heades, and thy linnefull clawes, and

all thy Dayne body:

46 That the earth may be refresched
(and come agapne to her felfe] when the 18 delluered from thy violente, and that fhe map hope foz the iudgement and mercie of hym that made her.

The. xij. Chapter.
¶ Che declaration of the tormer villons.

dit happened when a al the Lion spake these
“ns Woes vnto the Egle,

J fave: 4
And beholde, the head that afore had the vpper hande, appeared

no moze: neither dyd che koure Wynges

appeare any moze that came to hym

and Were fet vp to raigne, and their
Ringdome was simall and full of vproze.

3 And J lawe, and beholde they appeared no more, and the whole body of the

Egle was burnt, fo that the earth was

in great keare: Then awaked J out of the trouble and traunce of my mpnde, and from great feare, and sapde vnto c 71 a

4 To, this Hak thou geuen me, in that bel. cel out the wapes of tye

and very Weake in iny lpirite: and litle strength is there in me, kor the great feare that J reteaued this nyght.

6 Therfoe wyll J nowe beleche the

here chat he Wyll comfort me vnto the
7 Ard J sardt: Lowe, Love fl J haue founde grace before thy Babe A ot 3 anvintified with thee before many d-

ther, and yf my praper in deede be come

5 Pi thy face: mlort nie then, and (herve me seruaunt the pt ano ee
11 Of this horrible syght, that
. thou mapest perkectip comkozt ip foe:

ay

$ Lo, pet am J weery in my mynoe, -

9 For thou hak tndged me worthy to shewe me the last of tymes.
10 And he sayde vnto me, This is the mterpretation of this syght: a n The Egle whom thou sawest come

vp from the sea, is the kingdome which Dia

was seene in the vilion of thy brother
Danieli: f
11 But it was not expounded vnto hym, therfore nowe JJ detlare it vnto thee.
13 Weholde the dapes wyll come, that there (hall ryse bp a kyngdome vpon earth, and it (halbe feared aboue all the kyngdomes that were bekore it. ;
14 In the fame kyngdome chall twelue 0,2 kpnges raigne, one after another. .
15 Wherok the leconde shall begynne to raigne, and shall haue moze tyme then

the other twelue. :

16 And this do the twelne wynges fig? nifte which thou sawest.

17 As for the voyte that thou heardest €

speake, and that thou sawest not to go

out frd the heades, but from the middes

of the body therof,it betokeneth,

18 That after the tyne of that kingdom there shall aryse great frininges, and kechanitande in peril of fallyng: ment. thelesse it Mall not then fall, but thal restored agayne into his begynnyng. “ne

1 And the eyght kethers vnder be eats 11 85 thon sawest hang bn her wynges, betonen,

20 That in hym there shall aryse eval kynges, Whole tyme shalbe but m a and their peres Nbift, and two of th
Hall perifhe. 5 But

. dern of Esdras. XXII.
1 But when the middest tyme commeth, 36 Thou only hast ben meete to knowe

there halbe koure kept kor à tyme, this lecrete ok the hyest. whples his tyme begynneth to come 37 Therkore write all thele thynges that i that it may be ended: but two shalbe thou hast seene in à booke, hyde them,

¥ — 8 rept vnto the ende. 38 And teache them to the wile of the
3 110 wheras thou lawest three heades people, whole heartes ol knowelk restyng, this is the interpretation: may tomprehende € kepe thele secretes.

9 2 In his last dapes shall the most hygh 39 But wapte thouhere thy lelke pet leuen raple bp three kyngdomes, and call dayes mo, that it may be shewed thee many thinges agayne in tothem they whatloeuer it pleaseth the hyest to de-
{hail haue the dominion of the earth, clave vnto thee. And wich that he went

24 And of thole that dwell therin, with his wap. i oot nuch labour aboue all those that were 40 And when all the people perceaued F befoze them: Therkore are they called that the seuen dayes were patt, and J the heades of the Egle. not come agapne into the atic, they gaz now 2j Jod it is they that Hall bryng foorth thered them altogether from the teatt as his wickednesse agayne, and that shall vnto the most, and tame vnto me, and perfourme and fmishe his last. laydee
26 And wheras thou sawest that the 41 Rabat haue we offended tices ¢ what ceat head appeared no more, it signi- euyll haue we done agaynt thee, that feth that one of them (hall dye bpon thou korlakest vs and fittett here in this

his bed, and pet with payne. place z
27 Foz the two that remayne, chalbe 42 For ok all the people thou only art left flayne with the lworde. bs, as A grape of the vine, æ as à candell

28 For the lworde of the one chall deuour in a darke place, and as an hauen or (hip the other: but at the last shall he fall preserued from the tempest. x through the sworde hym selfe. 43 Haue we not els aduerlitie inough-

29 And wheras thou sawest two fethers 44 If thou shalt forsake vs, were it not vnder the wynges passyng toward the better for vs that we had ben burnt head that is on the ryght spde, with Sion:

zo It lignilieth, that it is they whom the 45 Foz we are not better then they that hpelt bath kept vnto their ende: this is Dped there. And they wept with loude the mall kyngdome, and full of trouble vopce. Then aunlwered Ithenve laid: as thou faveft, 46 Be ot gdod tomfort O Ilrael, and be

And the Lion whom thou sawest rp: not heauy thou house of Jacob.

{yng vp out ok the wood, and roaryng, 47 Foz the hyest hath pou in rememand speakyng vnto the Egle, and rebu- braunce, and the mightie Hath not forkyng her for her vnrighteousnesse, with gotten yon in temptation, — lithe wordes which thou hast hearde, 48 As for me J haue not forsaken vou, G enn, Is the Wynde which the bye hath neither am Jdeparted from pou: but kept fo2 them and for their wickednesse am come into this place to prap because bute the ende: he chall reprone them, x of the nulerie ol Israel, that J myght calt before them their owne fpopunges. {eee mertie kor the lowe eftate of vour

3 For he chall set them alpue in indge- lanttuarte. ment, and shal rebune them, and corrett 49 And nawe go your way home euery them. man, and alter thele dayes will J come

dn the relidue of my people hall he bnto pou. ve delpuer bp trouble thole that be pre- 50 Sothe people went their way into the

ued ppon my borders, and he chall eitie, ke as J tonnnaunded them:

make them topkull vntyli the tommyng 51 Wut J reniapned styll in the fielde se-

hack bo of iudgement, wherok J nn As te angell bab 1 “DE hee oken vnto begyn- vd eate only of the flour E,

35 "eng. 8 Wee bedr and had my meate of the hearbes in aud l s the dreame that thou sawelt, thole daes.

these are the interpretations. ——

The

S = —-
‘The four th booke
The .xiij. Chapter. —

2 illon ol a wynde commpng koorth of the lea, 3 which became a man. pekte a Sawer agaynst his enemies. 21 The declaration of this dition.

D after the seuen
95 dayes J dreamed a
Wel dreame by nyght:

And beholde there

Nsarose a wpnde from

the sea, that it moued

Aͤtll the waues therok.

3 And Jloked, and beholde there was

astrong man with the thoulandes of heauen: and when he turned his countenaunte to loke, all the thynges trembled that were seene vnder hym:

4 And when the bopee went out of his mouth, all they burnt that hearde his vopte, lyłe as the earth fapleth when it feeleth the fire.

5 Atter these J lawe, and beholde there was gathered together a multitude of men out of number from the foure wyubes of the heauen, to fyght agaynst the man that came out of the fea,

6 And J loned, and beholde he graued
Hym elke a great mountapne, and flewe vp vpon it.

7 Wut J woulde haue seene the region or place wherout the hyll was grauen, and FJ coulde not.

8 J lawe after these, that au they which caine to fyght agaynst hym, Were foe afraide: aud yet durst they fyght.

9 Veuerthelesse, when he lawe the

fiercenesse and violence of the people

that came, he neither lyft bp his hande bed, no; helde swonde, nor any weapon: aner 10 Wilk ouly as I sawe, he lent out of his warte. mouth as it had ben à blast of fire, and

out of his lippes the wyn flambe, Dit ot his tongue He dal

** 3 sh stonnes.

1 Aud they were all mixt together: the

blast of fire, the wynde of the deities, and the great forme; and fell With a tific vpon the people which was prepared to sight, and burnt them vp eue one, fo that of the innumerable multitude there was nothing seene but only dust aud finell of simcke: when J fare this, J was akraide.

Weiz AfterWarde sawe J the fame man

tome dawne from the mountayne, and ao Duto hym another peateable

3 And there came much people puto

aud out of his tongue he catt:

ban om Were glad, some were fo)

dime of them were bounde, and other some brought of them that were olkered. Then was F icke through great feare, and Jawaked, and sapde:

14. Thou batt Hered thy fernaunt there wonders from the begynnyng, and hat

tounted me Worthy that thou myghtels ad — 10

15 ewe me nowe pet the interpreta tion of this dreame. ‘ ins

16 For thus J confider in ny vnderstan-
Dyna: Wo vnto them that shalbe teft in those dayes, and much moze wo vnto them that are not left behynde:

17 For they that were not left, were in heauinesse.

18 Howe vnderstande J the thynges that are layde vp in the latter dapes, which Mall happen vnto them, and to those that are left behynde.

19 Therfore are they tome into great perilles and many neceslities, like as thele
Decames declare. —

20 Het is it casper that he which is in C
Daunger, fall [into thesej and nowe to fee that which chall chaunce hereafter, then to passe out of this worlde asa ae Then aunfwered heme, and

ayde:

21 The interpretation of the fyght shall
I chewe thee, and J wyll open vnto thee the thyng that thou hast required.

22 Wherasthon hastspokenolthemthat are lekt behynde, this is the interpretation.

23 He that beareth the peril in that tye, bath kept him selke: They that be fallen into daunger, are such as haue wozkes and fayth bnto the most mightie.

24. RKnolbe this therfore, that they when
85 uf de are moze blesled the they that be dead. .

25 This is the meanyng of the dilion:
Wheras thou sawest a man commeng „ vp from the deepe of the fea, hyelt bef

26 The lame is he whom God the as ie
Hath kept a great scason, which by 1 owne feife Thali deliuer his cee ,

— he Mall order them that are
* nde. 4

27 A wheras thou fae that ag A

bis mouth there came as a yO,

of Esdras.

xxIIj.

Wynde fire, and storme: foorth into a farther conntrey, where

28 And howe that he lift vp neither sword
„ no Weapon, but that the russhyng in pk hyn destroped the whole multitude that tame to fight agaynst hynn it signifietl)
© * weft wyll beayn to deliner them that are vpon earth, exe jo And in à traunce of mynde (hall he a tome bponthemthat dwelinthe earth. gayust another: one citie agapnst another, one plate agaynst another, one people agapnst another and one realme agaynst another. n
2 When this commeth to passe, then chall the tokens come that J shewed thee before; and then Mall my sonne be declared whom thou lawest elymbe bp as a man.

u:

ry t brd.

vopte, euery man shall in their owne

lande leaue the battayle that they haue

one agaynst another: 1

34 And an innumerable multitude shalbe gathered together, as they that be wyllyng to come, and to overcome bpm by koghtyng. e

35 But he (hall stande vpon the toppe of the mount Sion.

36 And Sion Mall come, x shalbe shewed lo all meu, bepng prepared and builded,

lpke as thou sawest the hyll grauen foorth without any handes. .

7 And this my fonne shall rebuke thote nations which are fallen into the tempelt, for their wickednesle and cuytl imaginations, |

8 And into toxmentes Iyke to flambe, wherwith they chalbe punifyed: and
Without any labour Mall he destroy
Hem, euen by the lawe, which is touibated vnto the fire.

36 And Wheras thou sawest that he gapat another peaceable people vnto

e 4 Thale are the ten tribes which were

He away prisoners out of their
Whe lande in the tyme of Dieas the
All whom Salmanalar the kyng of
9 Pate toke priloner: and caryed them ler the water, and so came they into
Another lande.
: the ut they toke this counfaple among ff ande es chat they woulde leaue the titude of the Heathen, and to go

Rena

K.
N

etl), „Ane es
That the dayes come, when the most

1 And one shall vndertake to fyght a-

3 And when all the people heare his

neuer mankynde dwelt: ae Which hen there kepe their
) ey neuer kept in thei owne lande. * 1
4 Aud so they entred in at the narowe passages of the ryuer of Cuphrates.
44 Jor the most hyghest chen shewed tokens foz them, and helde styll the fludde tyll they were pasledoner.

Exo. xiil. e-

Iosu. iu. d.

45 For through the countrep there was F

a great way, namely of a pere x ahalfe ionruey: and the lame region is called
Arlareth. * —

46 Then dwelt they there vutyll the latter tyme: and when they come foorth aga nec.

47 The hyest Hail holde stil the springes of the streame agayne, that they may go through: therfore sawest thou the multitude with peace. ö N

48 But they that be left behynde of thy people, are those that are founde within my borders. 1 5

49 Powe when he destropeth the multitude of the nations that are gathered together, he (hall defende his peopl that remapne: de’

50 And then Mall he shewe them great

51 Then laid J: O Lorde, Lorde, shewe

me this, Wherkore haue J feene the shat conunpug vp from the deepe of the lea.

52 And he sayde vnto me: Tpke as thou tanst neither seeke out nor knowe ticle thynges that are in the deepe of the sea: euen so tan no man vpon carth fee n sonne, or those that be with hym, but in the tyme ot the day.

5; This is the interpretation of the dreame which thou fawell, rx wherby thon only art here lyghtued:

54 Foz thou Hatt forlaken thine owne

A}

Oz, myddest. i

“De, bape.

lawe, and applied thy Diligence bnto

myne, and fought it. 4

55 Thy l ple Hatt thou ordered in Wil dome, and“ hast called vnderstandyng thy mother: 5

56 And therkore haue Ichewed thee the trealures ot the hyest. After other tler dapes J wyll chewe thee moze, k talke with thee moze at large, pea Heap and
Wonderous thynges wyll J declare vnto there. 1

57 Then went JJ foorth into the fielde, geupng prayse € thankes greatly ats

a

3 Reg a

Prou. vin.

* Ihe fourth boxe —

God, betaust of his wonders which he and luch thinges as fall in their sealons,

dyd in tpme,
58 And beate he gouerneth the same,

and there J late three ayes,

The .xinj. Chapter.

owe God appeared to Aoples in the bulbe. 10 All thynges decline to age. 1, The
2 age wolle then the topmer, . 29 Che ingratitude or Ifrael. 35 The refurrec-

tion and iudgement.

on the thirde day J ate buder an oke tree,
Swithen came there 3 voyte vnto me out of the bushe, and sayde:
. Eldras, Eldras.
2 b And J sapde, Here am J Torde: and stoode bp vpon my eete

Roda. 3 Then saide he vnto me: In the bushe

Pen appeare vnto Moyles and talked

with hym when my people ferned in
Egypt,

4 And J sent hym, and led my people out of Egypt, and brought hym vp to the mount Sina, where J helde hym by mea long feafon:

5 And tolde hym many wonderous
Wopkes, and chewed hym the seeretes of the tymes andthe ende, and commaunded hyn saying:

6 Thele Wordes Hatt thou declare, and these shalt thou hyde.

7 And nowe J fay vnto thee,

8 That thou lay vp in thine heart the

fignes that J haue Teen, and the

dieames that thou halt seene, and the interpzetations Which thou hat heard.
9 FJor thou shalt be taken away from among all, and hentefoorth thou halt remapue with imp n and with ine) asbetthe thee, ntyll the tymes be

u

10 Fon the wonde hath lost his pout

and the tynies begynne to Ware pee

U Foz the worlde is deuided into twelue partes, and tenne — of it are gone alredy, aud halfe o d teuth part:

12 Andthere vemayneth there that Which is after the hatte of “the tenth part.

z Therkore fee thine houte in order, and refourme thy people, tomfort such of them as be in trouble, and nowe renounce corruption, *

3 hs 7 N thonghtes,

it awap the burthens of men
Weatke nature. + ag

15 And fet ative the thonghtes that are
Pat *

* Os, that.

most heaup vnto thee, and hatte fice from these tymes: b teeta

16 F02 as for such eupll cand wiczednede ag thou halt nowe seene happen, they hall do pet much worse.

17 Jor the Weaker that the wonde is by Mur eullg in- Pu

reason ok age, the more shall create bpon them that dwell therm.

18 Foz the trueth is fled karre away and lealyng is hearde at hande: Fo; nowe
. the vision to come that thou hast seene.

19 Then aunlwered F befoze thee, and

ayde:

20 Weholde Lode, J wyll go as thou ¢
Hatt commaunded me, and rekourme the people which are present: but they that shalbe borne after warde, who will admoniche them: Thus the wonde is
{ct in darknesse, and they that dwell therin are without lyght.

21 For thy lawe is burnt, therfore no man knobeth the thynges that are done of thee, or the workes that shalbe done.

22 But pf J haue founde grace before thee, lende the holy ghost into me, and
I Mali write all that hath ben done in the Worlde fince the begynnyng, which was Written in thy lawe, that men may fue the path, and that they which wil lyue in the latter dayes, may lyue.

23 And he aunlwered me, saping: Go thy wap, gather the people together, and fay vnto them that they leke thee not for fourtie dayes.

24 But loke thou gather thee many bore trees, and take With thee Sarea, a bela, Selemia, Ecanus,and ilicl, thee fpue, which are redy to Write .

25 And come hyther, and J Mail leg 8 candel of buderftandpngin chine heart,
Which Malt not be put out tilly n be perfourmed which thou shalt begv to Write.

26 And then shalt thou declare ee thynges openly vnto the perfect, on some thynges thalt thou shewe 100 a vnto the wife: Tomorowe this hat

of Efdras, XXII].
(halt thou begyn to Waite. 38 The next day a vopee called me faying: *

„Then went J foorth as he commaunded me, and gathered all the people together, and sapde.
28 Heare these wordes D Pract:
D 59 Our kathers at the begynnyng were staungers in Egypt, from Whence they were deliuered,

o And reteaued the lawe ol lpke, which

msd they kept not, which ve also haue tranl-

gressed alter thenn.

I bo" ae ‘ ;

. of Sion parted among vou by lot to

pollelle): Wut pour fathers, and pe pour

selues also haue done vnrighteousmnesse, and haue not kept the wapes which the hyest commaunded pon:

32 And for fo much as he isa righteous iudge, he toke from vou in tyme the thyng that he had genen pon.

3 And nowe are pe here, and pour brethren among pop.

34 Therfore, yt fo be that ve wyll subdue pour owne vnderstandpng, e refourme pour heart, pe halbe kept alyue, and after death shall pe obtepne merce.

625 For after death shall the iudgement conte when we Hall liue agapne: e then shall the names of the rightedus be manifest, and the workes of the vngodlp shalbe declared. *

26 Let no man therkore tonie nowe vnto

me, nor seke after me these fourtie dayes.

37 So J toke the fyue men as he tommaunded nie, and we went into the fielde, and remapned there. |

Then was the lande,cuen the lande

Eldradg, open thy mouth, and drpune Exec

Poc.x.

that J geue thee to drynke.

39 Then opened J my mouth, and beholde he reached ine a full tuppe, which was full as it were with water, but the colour of it was lyke fire.

46. And J toke it and danke: And when
J had drunken it, mp heart had vnder-

dandpng, and wildome grewe in my brest: fo2 my spirite was strenthened in remembraunte, chut no more. .

4.2 The hypest gaue vuderstandyng onto the fue men, that they mote the hye thynges of the nyght which they vnderstoode not. l

43 Wut in the nyght they dyd cate bread: as for me I spake in the day, and helde not my tongue by nyght.

44 In fourtic dapes, they wrote two
Hundzed and foure bookes,

45 And it came to passe when the fourtie dapes were fulkylled, that the hyest fpake, saping: The first that thou hast
Written, publishe openly, that the worthy and vnworthy may reade it:

46 But kepe the seuentie last, that thou mapest deliuer them only to such as be
Wife among thy people.

41 And my mouth was opened, and

47 FJor in them is the {ping of vnder-

standpng, the fountayne of wildome,
— andthe ftreame ofknolwicdge.
48 And JJ dpd fo.

The .xv. Chapter.

The prophecie of Efdzag is certapne. 5 Che euils that Hail come on the worlde.
Che Lord wyll auenge the innocent blood. 2 Egypt ail lament. 16 Sedition, r0 and punichment vpon the kynges ok the earth. 24 Curted are they that linne.

ae Chole, speake thou in
Hye ithe eaves of mp people the wordes of prophe-
Glee which J wyll put
In thy mouth, sapth

, And taule them to be i Uutten maletter: koz it is the trueth.

+ Fo) all the bnfaythf ll dye in ete bnfaytifutnette, ae Oy

5 Schotdeclarth the Lore) Bw bring

29 Troubles ¢ warres vpon the Whole earth. 3; God is the reuenger ok his elect.

plagues vpon the worlde, the fivozde, hunger, death, and destruction:

6 Fo2 wickednesse hath the vpper hande in all the carth, and their hamekull workes are fulfplled:

Therlore sayth the Lorde,

8 J wyll holde my tongue no moze of their wickednesse which they do so vngodly, neither wyll Jsulfer them in the thynges that they deale withall so Wic-

inn. a.

Redly:Weholde, the innocent and rygh- Abo. vib, tha 8005 crpeth vnto me, and the andxixa.

soules of the tuft complaine continually:
9 And therkore sayth the Lode, J Wwyll sureipy aucnge, and reccaue vnto 0

2. xliii c heholde niy people is led as a flocke
. 4 of be flapne, J wyll not suffer
Cori. them nowe to dwell in the lande of

Egypt:

11 Dll woll bryng then out witha mightie hande and a stretched out arme, and finite it with plagues as afoze,and wyll destroy all the lande of it. 1

2B 12 Egypt shall mourne, and the foundations of it shalbe finitten, with the plague and punishment that God (halt bryng vpon it. Pi we

13 Thep that tyll the grounde Mall mourne, fo2 their seedes shalbe destroped through the blastyng and bayle, and by an horrible starre.

14 Mo Worth the worlde, and them that

dwell therin: 5
15 Foz the sworde and their destruction draweth npe, and one people Mai stande vp to lyght agaynst another, e [wordes in their handes.
„ Oz, : 16 For men shalbe vnstedkast, and some bee (hall do violence vnto other, they Chall
. not regarde their kyng, and the princes shall nieasure the wap of their doinges by their power.

17 Arman shall delice to go into a titie,

and shall not be able.
18 Fo becanle of their pride the tities

halbe troubled, the houses shall trem-

ble, and nien shalbe afrayde.

19 A man (hall haue no pitie vpon his nepghbour, but Chall destroy houles with the lword, and spople their goodes because of the hunger of bread, and betause of the great trouble.

C 20 Beholde, sapth God, J tall together

all the kynges of the carth to reuerente me, which are fromthe” vpzifpng, from the south, from the ealt, and ibanus, to turne vpon them, and restore the thyuges that they haue done to them:

21 PLyplic as they do pet this day vnto my cholen, fo wyll J do allo, and retontpence then their bolome: Thus faith the Lorde God.

22. My ryght hande shall not {pare the linners, and my sworde Matt not ceasle duer them that shed the innocent blood
Dpon earth.

23 The flre is gone out from his wrath, ue ue Pale of the

arth, and the {inners lyne the tr that is kpndled. hain

24 100 bortl them that sinne, aud kepe

Oz, lacke.

Of, welk.

The fourth booke
5 the innocent blood from among them. uy my commaundenentes, fapth the

their

orde. 5

25 Jwpunocspare them: So pont wap ve chüldren from the power, defite noe my 11 1 ‘ Date

26, Forthe Lade knorpeth all hemthat linne agaynst hun, e therfoze Delete
He them bnto death and destruction.

27 Fo nowe are the plagues come bpon the wande, and pe Chall remayne in them. Foz God hall not delluer you becaute pe haue finned agaynst hym.

28 Wcholde an horrible bition comet

from the east t

29 Where generations of dragons of Arabia shal tome out with many charettes,
Ethe multitude of them shalbe taryed asthe wynde vpon earth, that all they which heare them may feare etrembie,

zo Euen the Carmanies raging in wath

Mall go foorth as the wylde boores ok the forrest, and with great power chall they come and stande spghtyng with them, and (hall waste a portion ot the lande of the Assyrians. e ö

31 And then (hall the dragons haue the vpper hande, and remenibring their nature, shall turne about, tonspiryng together in great power to perlecute the.

32 Then these shalbe troubled, and kepe stilente in their power, and chall flee:

33 Andfrom the lande of the Allpriaus
{hall the euemie befiege then, and consunie some of them, and in their hoast shalbe feare and dread, and strife among their kynges. | .

34. Weholde cloudes from the east, and

from the north vnto the south, and they are very horrible to loke vpon, full of
Wrath and storme:

35 They Chait smite one vpon another, and they shal finite downe a great multitude of starres vpon the earth, euen their owne starre: and the blood shalbe from the sworde vnto the belly,

36 And the doung of man vnto the
Cancels litter, ffe

37 And there shalbe great arten and treniblyng vpon earth: and t Hee that fee the wrath shalbe afraide, and tremblyng shall tome vpon thet: 9

38 And then shal there come great rat 4 from the south, and from the noztb,8 aan drang Wondes Chall apt fe

9 And strong wyndes fh) the ealt, and chall open it, and the cloud’

Which he rapled vp in Wrath, Aer

rred to caule feare towarde the pt west wind shalbe destroped:
15 The great cloudes shalbe likt vp,
1 nd the mightie cloudes full of Wrath, an the starre, that they map make all
Fpecart) akrapde and kbem that dwen cherin, and that they may powre out oyer enery high place an Horrible starre,
Fire, aud hayle, and fleing wordes, and many waters: that all fieldes may be full, and all rmers with the aboun-
6 daͤunte of great waters. ¥
1 And they Cal breake downe thecities, and walles, mountapnes, and hilles, trees ok the wood, and the grasse of the medowes, and all their corne.
43 Andthep hall go stedfast bute Babydon and make Her afrapde. 7
44 Theplhall tome to her and besiege ante her, the starre and all Wrath shall they pode out vponher , ther chall the dust

all they that be about her (hall bewaple

her:

45And they that remayne vnder her, hat

olan vnto them that haue put her in feare.

46 And thou Alia that comfortett thy elfe allo vpon a ope 11 Wabplon, and art the glorie ot her p :

47 100 bebuto thee thou wretch, betaule thou halt made thy selke like vnto her, and hast deckte thy daughters in whordome, that they might triumphe and pleate thy louers which haue altbay defired to commit whordome with thee.

48 Thou haft kolowed the abonunable titie in all her workes and inuentions:

_ therfore sayth God,

49 J will lende plagues vpon thee , widdoswhood, pouertie, hunger, Warres, € pestilente, to waste thy houles with defruction and death,

50 And the glorie of thy power chalbe dried vp as a floure, whe the heate rectly

txt
8 p n.

of Efdras.

and imoke go vp vnto the heaven, and

that is sent ouer thee:
51 Thou shalt be sicke as a poore Wife that

XXV.

Dz, vpon.

is plagued and beaten of women: so that

the mightie and louers shall not be able to Bone yal Aas

52 Wou o hate thee, fapth the Lor,

53 PEthou had delt not alway slapne my cholen, exaltingthe stroke of thy handes,

and sayde ouer their death when thou

walt Drunken,

54 Set foorth the beautie of thy countenaunee-

55 The rewarde ok thy whomome halbe retompented thee in thy bolome, therefore (halt thou receaue rewarde.

56 Like as thou hast done vnto my ehosen, sayth the Lordreuen fo shal God do vn-
5 Bs? and Malt deliuer (hee into the plague.

57 Thy children Hall dye of Hunger, and thou (halt fall through the lworde: Thy cities Thalbe broken downe, and al thyne
Chal perishe With the {vod in the fielde.

58 They that be in the mountapnes shall dye of hunger, and cate their owe flesh, and danke their owne blood for very

hunger of bread and thirst of water.

59 Thou as vnhappie shalt come through the lea, and reteaue plagues againe.

60 In the passage they (hall cast downe the slayne citie, and shall roote out one part ot thy lande, and confume the portion ot thy glorie, and fal returne to her that was destroped.

61 They shal treade thee downe like stubble, and they shalbe thy fire,

62 And shall tonsume thee, thy cities, and thy lande, and thy mountaynes, all thy
Woodes and thy kruite full trees Mat they burne vp with the five.

63 Thy chilvzen (hall they carp away captiue:and loke What thou hast, they hall kene it, and marre the beautie ol thy

ace.

D () The

Ihebocke

„Alla, Egypt, and Spela. 18.8. DE Che euils that that come vpont tee uch uno bow to gouerne them lelues in aklictions. 54 To acknowledge

their linnes, and to commit them selues to the Lorde, ss whole mightic prouidence and

iustice is to be reuetenced.
SO be vnto thee Wabyon and Alia, wo be bre to thee Egypt e Spria:
Girde pour selues with clothes of facke and

4 Aire is {ent among you, and who will quench it-
5 Plagues arc sent buto pou, and what is

tech are sharpe, and shall not nusse when they vegin to be ho endes of the wonlde. et a
14 Behold the plagues are sent, k {hall not turue againe till they come vpon earth.
15 A ene and shall not be
Out till it tonsume the foi tt saath he Toundations
16 Tue as an arrowe whiche is shot of imightie archer returneth notbackibare euen fo tie plagues that {hall be sent vpon dhe earth hall not turne againe.

E Wo is nie, woisn me in those da pes: le, who Will Deltuer

18 The beginning of sorowes and niourning the beginning of dearth and great death, the beginning of warres and the polvers shall rande mn keare the beginning of euyls, and they thatt treme 1 do inthel

19 What shal J do in thele thinges mn the plagues tomes 75

20 Weholde, hunger and plague, trouble and anguithe , are sent as stourges koramendement:

21 But for all these thinges they shal not turne from their wickednelle, nop be al:

great

and in the cliftes ol stones.

30 Pike ag when there remayne there 02 foure olives in the plate were oliues growe, or among other trees,

31 ODr as when a vineparde is gathered

there are elt some grapes of them that

diligently sought through the vinepard:

Euen so in thole dapes there 5 three ok foure left by them that scarch their houses with the [worde. he

33 And the earth shalbe left walte, and 1 fieldes thereot (hall ware olde, and 95 wapyes and all her pathes shall i 5 full of thornes, betause no man ait ‘

he that will dryue them awayz way mindefull oF the scourges. DD
6 Map auy man dryue away an hungry 22 Behold vittayles shalbe fo good cheape lion in the wood Oz map any man pPpon earth, that they shall thinke them quench the fire in stubble when it hath lelues to be in good cale: and euen then begunne to burne- hall milchieke growe ppon earth,
7 May one turue againe the arrowe that warres, dearth and great dilquietnes. ls shot ofa strong archer- 23 Jo many of them that well vpon .
8 The mightic Lord lendeth the plagues, earth chall perishe ol hunger, and theob What ts he that wil dryue them away: ther that eicape the hunger, hall the
The fire is kindled and gone koozth in ord deftroy: rl.
His Wath , and what is he that may 24. And the dead shalbe cal out as doung, quenchit? a ; and there shalbe no man to comfort
10 He lhal castlighhteninges, and who shal them: Fo the earth shalbe wasted, and not feare - he shall thunder, and who the cities shalbe cast downe. hall not be afrayde- 25 There shalbe no man left to till the n The Tord shall threaten, and who thal earth, and to sowe it. * not biterlp be beaten to powder at his 26 The trees thal geue fruite; and who presence: 4 hall plucke thentof and gather theme
2 The earth quaketh and the founda: 27 The grapes shalbe ripe, and who shall tions therok, the fea arileth vp with treade theme For all places shalbe deso-
Wares fromthe deepe, and the wanes ol late oł men: N are vnquiete, and the kishes therok also 28 S0 that one man shall desire to see ano- ¢
. the Lorde, and bekoze the glorie of - ther, or to heare his vopte. his Peet ~~ 122 29 Fox ot one whole citie there Mall be ten
13 1 rong is his right hande that ben- left, and two of the fielde whiche Mall me
De che bebe isarcowes that he tho: yydetheurfelues in the thycke busches, .

e there through. nayle wie 15 {hall mourne haung no budegromes, the women fall make lamentation hauing no hulbandes, their daughters shal mourne hauing no hel-

Fate warres (hall their bridegromes

f de destroyed, k their hulbandes Mall pez:

ish ok hunger.
A Wutpe sernauntes of the Lord, heare

thele thinges, and marke them.

ceaue it: belene not the gods ol whom the Lorde (pakke, j

33 Behold the plagues prawwe nie, and are

not slacke in taryuigz..

19: Litke as a trauapüing woman whiche

in the nynth moneth baingeth foorth a sonne, when the houre ok the byrth is

6 come, an houre two or thece afore that, the paynes come vpon her body, c when the chide tommeth to the byrth they tary not the twunckling of an eye:

40 Euen so shall not the plagues be flacke to tome vpon the earth, and the worlde shall mourne, and sorowes (hall come

ppon it on euerp fide,

41 Omppeople, heare my worde, make pou redy to the battapl, aud in al euill be euen as pilgrimes vpon earth.

42 he that selleth, let him be as he that fleeth his way:and he that bieth, as one

that will leese.

43 Who so occupieth marchaundile, as he that winneth not: and he that buyldeth, as he that shall not dwell therin,

Cui d.

44 He that soweth, as one that shall not

reape he that cutter) the vineparde, as hethat shall not gather the grapes:
45 They that mary, as they that shall get no chudren: and they that mary not as

the widdowes.
„ 45 Andtherfore'they that labour, labour
= in bayne.

nb 47 For straungers Chall reape their kruites, and spoyle their goodes, ouerthough their houles, and take their chil:

Dieu captiue:for in captiuitie and hunger

hall they get chudren.

48 And they that oceupic their marchaundile With robberie, the moze they decke their cities, their houses, their pollellions and their owne perfons,

4 The moze will J puniche them foz their sinnes sayth the Lorde.

Like as an Whore enuieth an honest aud vertuous woman:

51 So chal righteoulsnesle hate iniquitie

Wheuche decketh her selfe, and shall accuse her to her face when he tommeth that (halt bridle the auctour of all fine pe a

52 And therkore be not pe like thereby nor to the worles therof 1 —

53 Jor or euer it be long iniquite shalbe ta: ken away out of the carth, and rightedufnesse hall raigne among pou.

54. Let not the sinner lap that he hat!
37 Behold the wozde of the Lorde, Ore- ay that he hathnot

sumed: for coles of fire shall burne vpon his head which fapth, Wefoze the Lom
God and his glorie J haue not finned,

55 Weholde, the Lorde knoweth all the
Workes often, theirimaginations, their thoughtes, and their heartes. a

56 Foz he spake but the worde, Let the G. earth be made, and it was made, Let theheauen be made, and it was created.

57 In his worde were the starres made, auge. .

And he knoweth the number of them.

58 Me searcheth the grounde of the deepe and the treasures therof, he hath measured the sea, and what it tonteyneth.

59 ht hath shut the lea in the nuddest of the waters, and with his Worde hath he hanged the earth vpon the waters.

60 He spreadeth out the heauen like a vaut, bponthe waters bath he konnded it:

61 In the desert and drye wuldernesse hath he made springes of water, and pooles vpon the top of the mountapnes, that the fluddes might poure downe from the stony rockes , to water the earth.

62 He made man, and put his heart in the middes of the body, e gaue him breath, life, and vnderstanding.

63 Bea and the spirite of the almightie
God which made allthinges, and hath searched the ground ok althe secretes of the earth.

64 He knolwethyour imaginations and inuentions, and what ye thincke when ye siune and woulde hyde pour sinnes.

65 Therkore hath the Lorde searched and fought out all pour workes, and he all belbray por all:

66 And when pour sinnes are brought foorth, ve shalbe ashamed befoze nien, and pour owue sinne shalbe pour accusers in that day. N

67 What wul ye do: Or how will pe hyde pour sinnes before God and his angels.

68 Behold, God hun selfe is p iudge, feare hinnleaue offrom pour linnes, and forget pour vnrighteoulnesses, and mieddle

D (ij) no

Thebooke —_—

no moze with them: fo Hall God leade golde in the fire. a you forth, and deliuer voufrom al trou- 75 Heare O ve mp beloned , fayth the ble. l Tode: behold, the dayes of trouble are
69 Jor beholde, the heatt ok a great mul? at hande , but J will delluer pou from tite ts kindled once pou, and they thal the same. tale away tertayne of vou, and (hal slay 76 We not pe akrayde, dispatre not:for God for meate to the idols: is pour taptapne. 6 o And they that tonlent vnto them, chal- 77 Who so kepeth my tommaundementes be had in derilion aughed to tome, and and prereptes fapth the Lorde God, let troden vnder koote. ngct pour finnes Wapgh you downe, and ni For there shalbe in euery place, and in let not pour vnrightedusnesse be lift bp che nert eine sa gteat infurvection bpon 78 wo be Dutothem that are bound with thole that feare the Lode. their sinnes, and touered with their or They shall be like nad men, they (hat Wickeonefle , lpke as a fielde is hedged
{pare no man, they Mall lpo vie and walt m with buches, and the path therof co: luch as pet feare the Tode: uered With thoes that no man may
7; For their goods shallthep take from trauaple through:it is shut vp, and is catt them, and shut them out of their houles. into the fire foz euer to be consumed N
74 Then schall it be knowen who are therewit g 9 my thosen, and they shalbe tryedas weer OD ae 1

A1:

s aft

The endeof the fourth booke of Efdrass — f

ae

ef i.
The booke of Tobias.

The firfte Chapter.

rentage. sBisgolines, 6 his eguitie. s Bis charttie and promperitie; soo) andhisgoodes areconfifcate, 25 and after restored. W

Obias was of 13 And kor lo much as he was mindeful of C

the tribe c eitie obe the Torde in all his heart, God gaue
Nepthali, which him fauour in the sight ol Salmanalar lpeth in the bye the king,

=) countrepsof Ga- 14. Which gaue him power to go where

ee aboue aa he wonlde, and fo had he lerne to do whatloeuer he woulde.

15 So went Tobias vnto all themthat were in capttuitie (and comkozted them) and gaue them wholsoine exhortations.

16 And when he came to Rages a citie of

the Medes, hauing ten talentes of fit-

uerofthe thinges wherewith the hing

had honoured Hint) a

Inso much that whatloeuer he might 17 And lawe among agreat companie of

, Though he was taken priloner in the

get, he parted it daylp with his kelowe pifonersand brethren that were ok his kinred.
4 And though he were pounger then al in che tribe of Nephthali vet did not he behaue him selfe thidyshly in his workes.
And when all the other went to the gol-

people of his kinred, one Gabelus which
Was of his owne tribe, beyng in necessite, hegaue hun the sayde wapght of siluer under an haude Writyng.

18 After a long season, when Salmanalar

the kyng was dead, and Sennacherib his sonne raigned in his steade, which

den talues whiche Jeroboam the king hated the children ok Jlrael: of Jsratl had made he alone fled al their 19 Toblas went dayly throughout all toinpanies, N his kinrede, and comforted them, and

6 And gat him to Hierulalem vnto the temple of the Lorde, and there worshipped the Lod God of Israel, fapthfuliy offering ok al his first fruites and tithes:

8 7 Sothat in the thirde pere, he nunistred allthe tithes vnto the straungers and tonuertes.

8 Thelt and luch like thinges dyd he oberut attording to the law of God when he was pet but poung. ü

But when he was a man, he toke out of his owne tribe a wyfe called Anna: and ol her he begat a sonne, whom he called after his owne name,

lo Andtaught him from his youth vp to feave God, and to rekrayne krom alsinne,

om, |! Nowwhenhe with his wike, his sonne, aud with al his kinred, was come in taptinitie vnto the citie of Hiniue,

2 What time as they all dyd cate of the
Nieates of the heathen: he kept his soule, and was neuer defiled in their meates.

gaue of his goods to euerp one of them ds much as he might. 5

20 He fed the hungry, clothed the naked, and buried the deadand slayne, and that +> diligently. = |

21 And when Hennachertb the king came agayne and fled out ol Jurie( what time as god punished him fo2 his blasphemie) t in his wrath flue many of the children of Israel: Tobias buried their bodies.

22 But when it was told the king, he conimaunded to flap hin, and toke away all his goodes. f

23 Meuerthelesse, Tobias with his sonne and with his wyfe, fled his way naked, and was hyd: for there were many that loued hym. ö

24 But after fourtie and fine dayes the king was slayne of his owne sonnes:

25 Then cauie Tobias againe to his houle, and all his goodes were restored

vnto hun. 0 nto hin D (ii) The

‘Thebooke

, The. ti. Chapter.

ch the kapthrull to his table.; he leaueth the keat to burie the dead. ro pore face ahd his wit laboureth fo2 his liuing. s She reprocheth hym bitterly, 4

D OP eile” =.
Re Ry
PEP aden
* a . i Bae n h f

a W 0 ee

Fter thofe thinges, vp-
A pona solenpne dap of the Lowe , Tobias
NAH made a good keast in his house,

And sapde onto his donne: Go thy wap, k bring hyther lome of our tribe, suche as

feare God, that they may make inery

With bs, 1
3 And when he was gone he came az
HANC,Aud cold his father that one of the

children of Jlrael lay fla
1 0 J ay flapue vpon the

„ doarse, tone hun and bare him priupip into his house, that when the fine was done he might lafelp burie him.

5 And when he had hyd the toarse, he did

ae his meate With imourning and re,

6 Remenibging the wordes that the Low

nn Naur hye

é albe turned to sorow a -

a Wate ) ned to sorowe andhea-

but when the fine was downe a ene His way and buried hum. 15

Then al his neygybours reproued him,

f uo vn c

4 And immnediatly he leapt from his tabic,leftthe feast came fasting tothe — *

ö

ne a iN!

Du 5 . it) W

LAS 85 iin
5 8 An,

faying: It is not long sente it was com: maunded to flap thee becaule of this matter, and hast scarce escaped the daunger ok death: and buriest thou the dead againez: .- ‘fj?

9 Neuerthelesse, Tobias fearing Goo

moze then the king toke the bodies okthe

slayne, and hyd them in his boule, and

buried them at midnights.

10 It happened vpona day that he had buried the dead and was weerp, came homeand laped him downe by the wal, and slept. a

n And whyie he was allrepe, there fell downe vpon his eyes warme doung out of the [Wwalloes nest, fo that he was

blinde. ,

This temptation dyd God futfer to happen vnto him, that they which carne alter, might haue an example of his pa-
‘cence, like as of holy Job.

3 Fozin lo much as he euer feared God

from his pouth vp, and kept his cour’. maundementes, he grudged not agg ona that A plague of blinduc : chaunted vnto hom:

14 But remayned stedfast in the 10 5 ol God and thanked God all the dar of his lpke. 15 £03

olle as bleffed Fob was had in de-
P oh kinges:euen so was he laughed to frome of his elders and kinlfolkes, which lapde vnto him:
Vhere is thy hope, fo the whiche thou hal done aims and buried the dead:
7 But Toblas rebuked them, and spake: not so,
19 we are the children of holy men, and loke for the lyfe whiehe God halt eue vnto ve that neuer turne their eliefe from him. 7 p ind Anna his wyfe went daylp to the weauing worke: 5

of Tobia.

20 And ole what liuing che coulde get with the labour ok her handes, che brought it. And it happened that she tolle a byd, and brought it home:

21. And when her husband hearde it erpe, he sapde, Loke that it be not stollen: vez store it againe tothe owners, for it is not lawfull for vs to eate orto touch any thing of theft.

22 Then was his wyfe angry and sayde:
Nobe is thy hope become yayue open: ip, and thy alines deedesavemanifctt

23 With these and such Mee Wowesdld {he cat him in the teeth.

7e. iii. Chapter.

he praper ol Tobias. Sara Raguels daughter and the tbinges that came brite cn aher praper hearde. 19 The angell Raphael sent.

Hen Tobias toke it

i
N heauplp, c with teares
2 es began fo make his

v,

0 zaͤper,

2 i i Wy SayingOLonthon
3) i NENG! art righteous, and all

thy iudgementes are true:peaalthy wapes are merefe,fapthfulnesse, and iudgement. J.

And now O Lorde be myndefull of me, and take no bengeaunce of mp finnes, neither remember my mildeedes, nei ther the misdeedes of my forefathers.

4 Jor we haue not ben obedient vnto thy commaundementes:therefore are
We spopled, bought into captiuite, into
Death , into derision and shame vnto all
. whom thou halt scatte-

5 And nowe O Lorde, thy iudgementes are great: for we haue not done according to thy commaundementes, neither

baue we Walked innocently before ther.

And nowe O Tord, deale with me accoeding to thy will, and commaunde ny

lrite to be reteaued in peate: for more

8 f cedient were it lor me todte, then to hue,

7 At the fame time it happened that Sara the daughter of Raquel at Nages a
— the Medes, was allo reproched oy one ok her fathers handmaydes,

That che had had leuen hulbandes,

ich alloone as they were gone in vn-

‘tober, were üapne of the deuyll, called modens,

DTherlore when tye reproued the mayeufor her faut, che aunfivercd her, fay-

ing: God let vs neuer see sonne nor daughter of thee moze bpon earth, thou killer of thy husbandes.

10 Wut thou flay me alsd, as thou hast flayne seuen men: At this bopce Went
Sara into an bye chamber of her houte, and three dayes and three nightes she neither eate nor dranke. i

1 But continued in praper, and besought
God with teares, that he would delluer her from this rebuke.

12 Upon the thirde day it tame to passe, that when he had made an end of prayer, she prapsed the Lode,

3 Saping:ᷣlessed be thy name O God of dur fathers, whiche when thou art wroth shewest mertie, and in time of trouble thon korgeuest the sinnes of them that call vpon thee.

14. into thee O Lorde turne J my face, C vnto thee lift J bp mpne epes.

15 J beseche thee O Lod, toole me out of the bondes of this rebuke, or els take me

vptterly awap from of the earth.

16 Thou knowest Lorde that Jneuer had desire vnto man, and that J haue
Reptmy soule cleane from all vncleanly lust: ö

17 Jhaue not kept compante with those that passe their time in sport, neither haue Jmade my selfe partaker with them that walke in light behauour.

18 An hulband haue J consentedto take, not for niy pseasurt᷑, but in thy feare.

19 Nowe peradnenture eyther J haue ben vnworthy of them, or els were they vnmeete kor me: for thou happyly

o another hushande.
Hak kept met ye pt 1%

— e hebooke

20 For Why? thy counsell is not in the of man.

21 — — one that serueth thee ts sure

1 of this, that if his life be in triyng it shal-

be trowned: and if he be in trouble, that

God no doubt hal deltuer him: and ik his

leaue to come vnto thy merce.

= 22 Fo? (hon batt no plealure inour damp-

nation: And why? after a storme thou

mantest the wether fatre and Mil, after

lifebe in chastening, that he chall haue g

werping € heauinelle thou gene great

toy.
23 Thy name O God of Pirael,be prapie — "
24 At the fame time were both their prayers hrardein the light of the — gd the hiest God. N
And Raphael the holy angell or the
Torde, was lent to helpe them both, 0, . whose — — came at one time toge- warne ther before God. N 1

The. iii. Chapter. | preceptes and exhortationg of Cobiasto his lonne.

DW MAM! thought his prayer to

0 i 55 heard, that he might

D dye, he called vnto hun

bis sonne Tobias,

And lapde vnto him:

— My sonne hrare the wordes ofmp mouth, and lap them in thyne heart as a foundation.

3 When God taketh away my soule, burie thou my bodp:aud holde thy mother in honour all the dayes of her life.

4 Jor thou oughtest to remember what and hole great peryls she sulfred for thee in her wombe.

5 And when fhe alfo hath fulfilled the

time of her lile, burie her beside me.

6 Haut God in thy thought all the daes ok thy like, and beware lest at any time thou consent vnto inne, and lest thou let suppe the tommaundementes ok the
3£020¢ our God.

13 7 Geue almes of thy goods, and turne ne-

F 3, abogt.

uer thy face from the pooze: and fo chall iC come to patie that the face ofthe How

shall not be turned away from thee.

8 We mercikull akter thy power.

9 Don halt ane ach gene plenteoutlysi
Dou hatt litle, do thy diligence gladl gcue ot that litle: — — *

10 Fo; so gatherest thou thy selke a good re warde un the dap of neceffitic,

u Foz mereie delinereth krom al line aud from death, and lutkreth not the soule to tome into darkenesse. a

2 Agreat comfort is mertie before the hie
God, buto all them that hewe tt,

iz My fonne, kepe thee wel krom al whor-

“4

=] D when Tobias

dome: and belide thy wife, suffer not selfe to knowe of linne. : ‘be

14, Let neuer pride haue rule in thy minde € hozin hy worde: for in pryde began all destruttion. RTT a .

15 Wholoeuer worketh any thing forthe: ummediatly geue hin his hire, andloke that thy hired seruauntes wages remayne not at all with thee. a

16 poke that thou neuer do vnto a nother man, the thing that thou woula hot another man shoulde do onto

hee. f

17 Cate thy bread with the hungry and

pode, AND couer the naked with thy

clothes.

Set thy bread and wine vpon the buriall of the righteous, and do not thou cate and drinke therof with the finners.

19 Alke tuer counsell at the Wyle.

20 We al wap prapsing of God, c beseche him that he will order thy wapes, and on that whatldeuer thou deutsest of takest in hand it may remapne in him.

21 J cevtific thee allo my sonne, that when 2 thou wast pet but a babe, J deliuered ten talentes of suuer vnto Gabelus at
— — — and his

ande wryting haue J by nic.

22 Andtherkore seke foie meanes hove thou mayest tome by him, and veceaue
5 * —— sayd wayghtot . geue him his Pande wrpting againee

23 My lonne, be not afrayde: truethit “ we leade here a poore lile, but great doe shall we haue ik we feare God, and part from all sinne, and do well.

The

| of Tobia. 4

J De. v. Chapter. \

2 Tobias is fentto Rages. 5 He meeteth with the angell Raphael, which did cons

duct him.

Sschen aunlwered Tobi-
Vas his father, and said:
. Father, all that thou

Mfligentlvp.

But how F Mail rez quive this money J can not tell, nelther doth he knowe me, noz JJ Him:

What token shall I gene him: And as

forthe way thyther, J neuer knew it.

Then his father aunlwered him, and fade, J haue his hand wating by me: which when thon shewest him, immedlatly he Mall pay thee.

4 But gothy way nowe and get thee

some faithful man to go with thee for an

hyre, that thou mayst reteaue the moey while J am pet liuing. ö
Thenwent Tobias out, and vpon the

llreate he founde afayre voung man

standing, girded vp, and as it were one

kedie to take his iourney. „

And he knewe not that it was an an-

gell of God, but saluted him, and layde:

From Whenee art thou, thou good voung man- a

8 7 he aunswered: Okthe children ol Isra-

el. And Tobias laid buco hin: Know-

elt thou the way that leadeth vnto the

tountrey ofthe Medes
8 Peauuswered: J knowe it well, k all
‘omy, Dole” fiveates pane J gone okt times,

aud Hane lodged with our brother Gaz belus that dwelleth in Rages a titie of

the Medes, which lyeth vpon the mot
Etbatants. {spe * 8
Tobias saide vnto him: J pray thee

taty forme, till J haue tolde my father

thele thinges. o Then went Tobias in, and tolde his

father all: At the which his father mar-

uepled and a r mbntohm. vedthathe wontoe tome

1 Now when he came in, he faluted him, N

15 baude: Jop be with thee for euer-

2 N p tar n jit atde Tobias sude: what top can
Ken Ue that sit here in darkenelle and

z ge Delight ok heauena aes Young man laide vnto him: Be d cheare, God chall helpe thee

chortlp. :

14. And Lobias saide vnto him: Cant thou bing my fonne to Gabelus, vnto & the titie of Rages in Medea: and when a tommest againe, J (hall pay thee thybye: e ~

15 And the angel! {aide vnto him: J - shall leade thy sonne, and bring him to thee againe. a

16 Then Tobias aunsweredhim: Tell me J pray thee, of what houle orot
What tribe art thou; . ,

17 The angel Raphael saide vnto him:
Seekest thou after the kinred ofan hireling, dr an hired man him seife fo:

thy some to go with hun: N

18 But that J make thee not carefull, J am Azarias the sonne ol great Hana: mas. e

19 And Tobias aunswered, Thou art tome ofa great kinred: but I pray ther be not displealed that J desire to know thy kinred. *

20 The angell fard onto him: Thy sonne

thal J leade foorth safely, and bung D hin whole sonnde to thee agaie.

21 Then aunlwered Tobias, and faive:

well, go on pour wap, and God be in vour iournep, and his angell beare pou company.
22 So when thep Had prepared all thinges that they woulde take with them in their iournep, Tobias bade his father and his mother farewell: and they went on their wap both together.
23 Nowe when they were gone, his mother began to weepe, e saide: The statfe ol our age hast thon taken awap, and sent him from vs.
24 Woulde God that money had neuer ben, for the which thou hat lent him a-

ay. ; 3 + at

25 For our pouertie was sufficient for bs, why we Moulde haue counted it rychelle, that we saw our sonne here.

26 Then saide Tobias vnto her: Weepe not, our sonne shall go safely and come to vs againe sounde, and thyne eyes shall fee him. N

27 For J trust that the good angel ot
God thallbeare him company, and order well all the thinges that be noth,

lop.

The booke . fo that he Matt come to vs agaime with 28 At these wozdes his motherl

from weeping, and held her peate.

The. /. Chapter.
2 Coblas deliuered krom the kishe. 3 Raphael sheweth him certaine medicines.

19 He conducteth him toward Sara.

O Tobias went on his
Wap, and a dogge folo-
Wed hin:: and the fick night they abode bythe water of Tigris.

Then went he out to walhe his kette, and beholde there tame foot an horrible
File to Denour him.

Dl Whont Tobias was afrapde, and

he tonnueth bpon me.

4 Andthe angell aide vnto him: Take him by the
And he didlo, and drew Hint bpon the lande: and the fishe began to leape at

5 Then saide the angell vnto him, Take out the bowels ofthis fishe: c as for the heart, the gal and the lpuer, kecpe them by thee: for these thinges are nete ssary and good fo ineditines.

6 Tobias did so, and rosted the flesh, and

they tooke it with them ia their iour-

nepr the residue they salted, as muchas

Was suffitient for them, tyll they came

to Rages a citie of the Medes.

Then Lobias alsked the angell, and fade vnto hint: J pray thee brother A-
Zaria, tell ine whereto are thele thinges good of the fishe that thon hast bidden me keepe. „

8 The angell aunswered him and said:
Ik thon layest a peete of the heart vpon the coales, the smoke thereof dryueth a: wap all maner of cuil {pirites Whether it be from man or from woman, fo that from thencekoorth the lame tall come

The gal is good to annoynt or to strike the epes withall. wu ere as there is any
— in them, fo that they chalbe

munten that wevemaines The angel

ered, .
And laide: Here ts

W 7

tryed with a loude voyce, saying: Lod, -

il, and drawe him to thee. |

name, which hath a daughter talled
Sara, ct hath neither sonne no; dauahter but her. N r

All his good belongeth vnto and thou mu mary her.

Iv thee,

3 And therefore desire her of her father, C

and he Mall geue her thee to wple.

14 Then aunlwered Tobias and faroe:
As J vnderstand (he hath ben maryed: vnto seuen hulbandes, and they all are dead : and ZF haue heard lap, that the
Denil llue them.

15 J am afcapd therfore lest such thinges happen vnto me also:which tf it tame to pale, seeing I am the onely sonne of my father and my mother, J Mould bryng them in their age with fozowe to their graues. ö

16 Then saide the angell Raphael vnto
Hint: Heare me, c J Wyll tell thee what they be, of whom the deuil hath power.

17 Namelp, they that receaue mariage after such à fachion that they shut God out from them and from their heart,

ndnd gene them selues to their owue lust,

euen as it were an Horse & Mule which

haue no vnderstanding: vpon such hath

the deuill power. 4 .
18 Wut When thou take her, and art

tome in to the chamber, withhold thy

selfe from her three dayes, and geue thy diligence vnto nothing but vnto peayer with her.

elto f

19 And in the first night, rost the lyuer of D

me fishe, and the de mil shalbe duuenaa

p.

20 Lhe fecond night thate thou be recedue dito the company of the holy patti’ arches. K

12 The third night shalt thou thd deute of@o0,(0 that whole chu’ dren Mall be borne of pou.

22 After the third night take anne inthe feare ol God, and mort for che 4 fire of chudren, then for any fleshelb a 8 that in the seede of enen. mapest obtapne the 1 · ay Tt

* 2), fora

eC Kobi,

oe + *

Cobias marpeth Sara, Raguels daughter.

i Hen went they in to
Naguel, which recea-
Fed them toyklullv.
Aud when Vaguel
Seuiloked vpon Tobias, he faide vnto Anna his Wyle: How lykt is this young man vnto my sisters sonne-
3 And when he had spoken this, he laid: whentce be pe ve young men and our brethren? They laide: Okthe tribe of
Nephthall, out ofthe captiuitie of Hint-

Ut. nm: : : 2
4 Then sald Raguel vnto them: Know

ye mybrother Tobias: They saide: pea

we know him well. 8
And when he had spoken much good ok him, the angell saide vnto Raguel:
Tobias of whom thou alkest, is this young mans father.

6 Then Vaguel bowed him selfe downe

and wept, and toke hun about the necke and killed him, 48
5 7 And saide: Gods dleffing haue thou my sonne, forthou art the sonne ofa good vertuous man.
And Anna his wpyke and Sara his daughter wept also. *

9 Now when they had talked together,
Raguelbade kill a wether, eto make a feaste: And when he had exhorted them to sit downe to dinner,

lo Tobias salde: J wyll neither eate nor danke here this day, except thou first graunt nie my petition, and pronule me tu geue me thy daughter Sara.

1 When Naguel heard this, he was astonted, for he knewe what had happe-

nid vnto the other seuen men that went in vnto her: and he began to feare that it shoulde chaunte vnto him also in lyke maner. And While he stoode so in doubt,

and gaue the voung man no aunlwere,

12. The angell saide vnto hun: Feare not to geue him thy daughter, for vnto this man that feareth God, belongeth thy daughter to wyle:therefore might none other haue her..

13 Then saide Naguel: J doubt not but C
God hath attepted my prayers ⁊ teares in his sight: has a

14 And J belene he cauled pouto come vnto mic fo2 the sanie intent, that this daughter ol myne might be marped in

her owne kindred* according to the law Numescic,

ol Moyses: And nowe doubt thou not but J wyll geue her vnto thee.

15 So he toke the right hande of his daughter, and gaue Her into the right hande of Tobias, and saide: The God of Abraham, the God of Plabac, æ the
God of Jacob be with vou, lopne pou together, and fulfill his blessing in you.

16 And they toke a letter, made a weilting ol the mariagsneee.

17 And then made they mery, and prapsed God. ros 7: N 1

18 Aud Raguel called Anna his wpe vnto him, and bade her prepare another thamber.

19 And thither he brought Sara his D daughter, and fhe Wept.

20 Then saide he vnto her, Be ol good

cheare my daughter: the Lorde of heauen geue thee ioy for the heauinesse that thou batt luffered. *

The . vii. Chapter.

2 Tobias driueth away the euill tpirite. 4 He prapeth to God with his wyte,

d after. that they

5 . Ibad supped , they

man in to her.
Thenthought Tobi-

a = the angel, and toke out fats bagge a peece of. the lyuer of the ef and laxed it vpon the hotte toales.

a8 bpon the Wordes ok

1715 prepareth a graue for his lonne in lawe. 16 Raguel blesleth the orde.

So the angell Raphael tooke holde of the deuil and fent hum away, e bound hin in the wildernelle of the hygher a

Egypt. 4
+ Then fpake Lovins vnto the virgin, and laide: Up Sara, let bs matic our prayer vnto God to Day, to morolb and

Oz, the

v onermorow: Foz these threemghtes ase wyl we ‘reconcile our seiues with ha cute nd Bed.

The booke
| : and when the third holy night is past, — when {he came into thechamber,founp

we fhalliopne together in the due ne of mariage.

5 2 we are the children of holymen, and we may not come together as the heathen chat know not God.

6 Then stoode they vp both together, and befought God caͤrnestiy that he would preserue them.

7 And Tobias saide: O Torde God of

and earth, of the fea, welles, € fluddes,

andofal thy trtatures that be therein.
2 Thou madest Adam ofthe* moulde

ok the earth, and gauest him Eua for an

elper. a

9 “ane now Zoade thou knowest that it is not because of voluptuonsnes that
I take this sister of myne to wyke, but dnely for the loue of children, in whom

thy name may be bteffed for euer.

10 And Sara saide: Haue mertie vpon bs
O Lopde, haue mercy vpon vs, and let vs both come whole and founde together to à good age.

1 And about the cocke crowing it came to passe, that Raguel called his seruaũtes:

12 And they went with him to make a graue.

13 For he saide: It is haunced nowe vnto him peraduenture as it did vnto the other senen men that went in vnto her.

14. Mobb when they had made the graue,
Raguel came againe to his wyfe, and saide vnto her: Send one of thy mapdens to loke if he be dead, that J may

bury hin afore it be light day.

15 So the sent a mapden to lee: which

and receaueth the moneys, |

ae Lobids aer br: do hin the angel, who f TA he thought to haue ben a man, and laide nto hin: rother Azarias,
SZ pray thee hearken buto my wordes,
2 PEF choulde geue my feife to be thy bene , J shall not deserue thy prot

A 1

wilt take the beastes a

f * ie a

the ser-
Gabelusin Rages

our fathers, praysed be thou of heauen

3 „ Heuerthelesle, J belcche thee that
P Wb n f

es, and delyuer him

them whole and fonnde, flee ;

the 5 , ping toge-

16 And so she tame agatne, and bro good tidinges: Then Kaguel and Al. na his wyfe praysed the Lorde,

7 And fande: Praysed be thou D Lorde
God of Ilrael, that it is not happened
Into vs as we thought.

18 1 . N ane With bs: and put away from vs the ener 4 perfecuted vs, Seentene that

19 Aud hast shewed merty vnto yonder

two the onelp borne childzen oktheir pa rentes: O Lopde,caule them to magni: fie thee moze perfeetly, and to offer the sacrifice of thy prayse € of their health: that all people may knowe that thou duely art God in all the earth.

20 And immediatly Naguel commann-

ded his sernauntes to kyll the graue that

.* made, with earth, afore it Was

ht,

And bade his wyke prepareafeaste,
€ to make redie all thinges that were neteslary for meate, to such as went by the wap.

22 De cauled two fat kine alfo and foure
Weathers to be slaine, and meates to be prepared for all his neighbours and freindes.

And Raguel charged Tobias to remayne with him two Weekes,

24 As for all the good that he had, he gaue Tobias the halfe ofit, and made this writing, that the halle which remapned, should fall vnto Tobias after their death. f

J The. ix. Chapter.
Che angell goeth to Ga belus, at the detire ot Tobias which delpuerech the letter.

his hand Waiting, and receaue the money of him, and pray him to tome to mx mariage. > 5
4. For thou unowestthy selfe thatmpfather doth number the dayes: aud ie tary one dap to long, he wyll be sorx in hig unnde. 1
5 Now seest thon how carnefily Rag. el hath required me, fo that I can n say hun nay. u
6 Then toke Raphael fourc of Dawe 4 els seruauntes and two Camels, 4 2 went vnto Mages the citie of 5 abedes: And when he had founde Gg,

d all the money -

retold him also of Tobias the fonne

7 Lobt how althmges bad happened:

and tauled hin to comme with hinr to the siiariage. g n 5

gw when he came into the Houle ot

’ Gan he donde Tobtas sittyng at

the kable: and he leaped vp ¢ they Kil:

led one another, and Gabelus wept,

aud prapled God, „

And lade: The blessing of the God of srael haue thou,

- ofa nab bectuols and iust man, and

n.

of Tobia. jus he gaue Hun his hand Wetting, and 1 1 that feareth God, e geueth great
; mes:

thou, for thou art the sonne

10 182 bieffing haue thy wyle, and pour elders,

11 That pe map {ee pour chuldren, and

pour childeens children vnto the third t fourth generation: and pour leede be blessed ofthe God of Ilrael, which raigneth worlde without end.

Iz And when they all had sapde Amen, they Went to the feast: but with the feare of the Lorde held they the feat ok the mariage.

Chapter.

A Cobias and his wyfe thinke long oz their forme, lo Raguel fendeth away *

Cobiss and Sara.

w whyle poung To-
Ieh dias made long tarp-
2 91 ing, by realon ok the
E Imariage, his father
N mas ful of care ebea: e (jutnette taping : Can thou thinke what shoulde be the taule that my sonne tart eth so long; og why he should be kept fo long there: )
2. Lhinket hou Gabelus is dead, and no man wyll geue him the nioneyr
3 Thus began he to be very sorowkull,

he and Anna his wyke with him: and

began to weepe both together, betaule their sonne was not tome againe vnto

themat the dap appopnted.

4 As for his mother, che wept with diltomforztable teares, and laide: Go is me my sonne, Oh what ayled vs to send thee away into a straüge countrey,thou light of our eyes, thou staffe of our age, thou tomkort of dur life, thou hope of dur generation-

5. Stingall the thinges that we haue

are onelp in thee, we fhoulde not haue ent ther away krom vs.

Then Tobias [comforted her, and] aide: Holde thy peace „ be not distomae Our sonne is whole and founde:

he man that we sent him withall, is kaithfullinough.

8 7 euerthelelle, che might in no wyle

be tomkozted: but dayiy went out, ned

about, and went about all the streates whereby che thought he should tome againe: that if it were poMible she might fee him comming a farre ot.

3 But Naguel {aide vnto his sonne in lawe: O tary here, and J chall send a messenger vnto thy father Tobias, to tell him that thou art in good health.

9 Tobias faide vnto him: Jam sure that up father and mp mother count euery bay, and that their heartes are sorpe. ; Z G, er, 21h:

Io So when Naguel had prayed Tobias With many wordes, and he woulde

in no wyse heare him, he delinered Sarabnto hym, €the halle part of all his good, in seruauntes, and handmapdens, in cheepe, in tamels, and in kyne ec much money: and fo fent him away from hun with health and toy, _

1 And laid: The holy angel ofthe Lod be with pou in pour idurnep, and being you foorth safe and sounde, that ye may finde all thinges in good cale wich your elders, ¢ that myne eyes may lee pour - thildren afore J dye.

12 So the elders embrated their daughter, kissed her, and let her go:
Exhorting her to hondur her father C

t mother in law, to loue her hulband,

to rule well her housholde, to keepe her

honle in good order, and to shewe her

{elfe faultlesse.

Ihe

XXX].

ing homeward againe,

vpon the elenenth day

they came to Charran, which ipeth in the

A halfe way toward Ri-

ue.

2 And the angell {aive ; Brother Tobias, thou knowest how thou hat lett thy father:

3 Therfore if it please thee, We two wyl go befoze, and let the honsholde with thy wyle g the cattaile come faire and foftip after vs.

4 And when Tobias was content that they should go before, Raphael {aid vnto hin: Take of the gal of the fishe with thee, forit shall be necessary. So Tobias toke of the gall, and they went their
Wap.

5 But Anna the mother of Tobias fate dayly by the Way Wut of an hill, from whence she might see farre about her. *

6 And whyle she was wayting there for his comming, she loked a karre of and anone fhe perteaued her sonne comming, and ranue and tolde her husband, faying: beholde thy sonne tommeth.

W 7 And Vaphael saide nto Tobias: AL soone as thou tommest into the houle,

munediatly worschip the lorde thy God, and gene thankes puto hun: then go to thy father, and kisse hym,
8 Aud straight 70 strike his eyes ouer with the gall or the fiche that thou
Halt brought With thee: or be lure that his eyes thal straight Way be opened, aud thy father Chait fee the light of heanen, and Chal reioyte at the light of thee.
Then the dogge that had ben With them in their tourney ranne before, and cane as à messenger, and wagged his

D

The booke

The. x/. Chapter.

jas to hi . d. ij his father turne ok Tobias to his father. 11 How he was receaue bach fight rectored, and prapleth the Lorde.

Sthey nowe were go-

a

tayle for gladnesse. —

10 So the blynde father arose, and began to runne, and stumbled with his feete: and gaue a seruaunt his hand, e ranne to meete his sonne, N

1 Receaued him, and killed him, he and r they boch began to weepe

* l-o bp. 8

12 OW when they had worshipped and

thanked God, they sat downe. 5

13 Then tooke Tobias ofthe fishes gal, C

and annoynted his fathers eyes:

14 And taryed Halfe an houre, and then began the blenushe to go out ok his eyes, lpke as it had ben the white skinne of an egge: 185

1 Which Tobias tooke, and drewkronn

his eyes, and immediatly he receaucd his sig ght. .
16 Then they praysed God, he and his wpke, aud all they that knew hun.
17 And Tobias saide: O Lorde God ol ae J geue thee praple c thankes, or thon hast chastened me, r made me whole: And lo, nowe do J {ee my sonne
Tobias. *
18 After seuen dapyes, tame Sara his sonnes wyfe alfo whole and sound, with all che Houthoide and cattaile, with camels c inuch money of his wpues, and with the money that he had receaued of
Gabelus. 2
19 And he tolde his father and his niother all the benefites which God had done for him by the man that led him.
20 Achior alld and Habath Tobias litter sonnes tame, and were glad, and 9 00 ted with hin, by reason ol all the pat thinges that God had shelwed de him: And so for the spate of seuen da a they made mery, and wert rightroynl euerp one. b a

The .xit. Chapter. *

en Tobias called his
RA Horne buito hun, fayo: what may we gent
+ |S BAe ths holp man, that . eh went With thee:
Tobias aunhvered his father, and lapde:

8 ic
Father, What rewarde fhall e gau a 2 05 what thing tan delerue his be netites:

de hath ben my guyde, and vous’ me fafe againe: Hereceancd then from Gabelus, he taused nie to a her,
Wyke, he dzone the cuil spirite fro ne

D

of Tobia.

XXX]

e

he hath ben an occafion of gladnesse to buriedst the dead, and lektest thy dynner .

and mother, he delpuered

bee 0 0 was not deuoured of the ithe, he Hath made thee to lee the light ofheauen: pea, we all haue reccaned

eat good ofhim. 5

Holbe choulde we worthplp deserue
* nele thinges onto Hime Wut FB pray the my father that thou wilt defire him if happply he wil bouchfafe to take with hinthe halle of all that we haue

i

221 5 father e the lonne called him, toke him asyde, and began to pray hum that he woulde be content to take in good wozth the halle part of all that they had bought.

6 Then laide he lecretlpy vnto them: praple ve the God of heauen, and geue

thankes vnto him before al men lyuing:

or he hath shewed his mercp vnto pou.

5 bag hid hide the kinges letrete:

5! put to shewe and to praple the workes

of God it is an honorable thing.

g Prayer is good with fasting, and mer-
. is better then to hoorde bp treasures

9 Tcrmertledelpuereth from death, tlenseth inne, € tauleth to finde mertie and lyfe euerlasting.

lo But they that do sinne and vnrighte-
Aue are the enemies of their olvne dule. a .

wherefore J tell pouthe trueth, and wyll hide no fecret saying from pou,

u Whenthou prapedst with teares, and

and hyddest the dead in thyne houle vp-
10 te 11 pon 11. mightest bu-

e night, J offred thy prayer before the Lond. 5e paar

13 And betause thou wast atceyt and be- C loued of God, it was neteslary that temptation should trye thee.

14. And nowe hath the Lorde sent me to ae and to delyuer Sara thy onnes wyke from the euul fpivite,

15 Foz Ham Raphael an ange, one of the seuen that stande before the Lorde.

16 When they heard this, they were fore afrapde, and trembled, and ken downe vpon their faces vnto the grounde.

17 Then saide the angell: Peace be with pou, feare not.

18 For where as Jhaue ben with vou it is the wil ol God:geue prayse e thankes vnto hmm.

19 Bou thought that J om" cate x beine Geese.

Judi. Ani c.

with pou, but J ble meate that is inuisible, and drinke that can not be seene of men. 6

20 Nobtherkore is the time that J mutt tur ne againe vnto him that lent me: but be pe thankefull vnto God, and tell out all his wonderous workes.

21 And whenhe had (poke those wordes, he was taken away out of their fight, so that they could fee hum no moze.

22. Then fell they downe flat vpontheir faces by the {pace of three houres, and praysed God: and when thep role vp, they tolde all his wonderous Workes.

The. xii. Chapter.

A thankes geuing of Tobias, who exhorteth all to prapse the Lorde.

> „ butend.

Gack thou frourgett and healest, thou
0 elt vnto hell € bringest out againe: handbere is none that may escape thyne
3 9 geue thankes vnto the Torde ye
Pbitdzen of Ilrael, and praple him in the

4 Auoltbeheathen:
Dim nato the heathen which knowe f uche hath he scattered pou, to the in-
Dat ye could che lw forth his mar-

i
WE NO Glsingoome wond with

ueilous workes, and caufe them for to knowe that there is none other God almightie but he.

5 He hath chastened vs for our mil deedes, c for his owne mercie lake (hall he saue vs.

6 Consider then how he hath dealt wich pou, and prapse him with feare a dread:

and magnifie the euerlasting king in
W wylprarl hi n the lande of —

J wyll prayse him euen! f nd

4 niy captinitie: for he hath shewed his 1 maiestie vnto afinfull people.

8 Turue vou therfore O ye linners, and do righteonsnesse before God, and be ye sure that he wyll Hew his merey vpon

you, 9 A8

The booke

dempned: Wut blessed shall they be that

9 As lor me and my soule, we wyll rez ioyte in God. 1
0 apse the Lowe all ye his tholen: f ee pest gladnelsc, c be thankefull vnto him.

11 O Hierulaiem thou titie ok God, the lorde hath 1 5 thee for the workes of thyne owne handes. t

12 Dpiayle the Lord in thy good thinges,
é geue thankes to the cuerlalting God, that he map build vp his tabernacle a gaine in chee, that he map callagatne vnto thee all {ach as be in capttultte and

that thou mapest haue iop for euermort.
€ 33° with a kart light Maltthou shpne, and all the endes of the worlde hail ho-

nour thee.

14. The Fale shall come vnto thee from farre, they shall bring giftes, and wozship the Lorde in thee, and thy land chal they haue foz a lanctuary: fo: they Hall

call vpon the great name inthee.

15 Cursed {hall they be that delpile thee, and all that blaspheme thee Mat be ton-

builde thee vp

16 As for thee thou shalt reioyte in thy chilozen:fo2 they all chalbe blessed, and gathered together vnto the Lorde.

17 Bltssed are all they that due thee and

that be glad of thy peace
18 Prayle thouthe Lorde, O my soule: for the Lorde our God hath delluered
5 * Hierulalem from all her troues.

19 Awyll count my lelfe Happy, eae happy il my

remapne to see the cleareneg ot
Mierusalem.

20 The gates of Hierusalem shalbe bun: D
Ded with Saphir and Smaragde, and all the compatle of her walles With pre: tious stones. a

21 All her streates thalbe paued with white and fapre stone, and in all streates
{all Halleluia be song. «a

22 pPrapled be the Lorde which haty er: alted her, that his kingdome may be vpon her for euermore, Amen.

The xiui. Chapter.

5 Leffons of Tobias to his sonne. «Be prophecieth the destruction of Ninive.
And the restoringot Hierufalem and the temple. iz The death of Tobias and his wyle. 16 Tobias the pounger, his age and death.

I Nd fo Tobias made an
* end of speaking: And at:

225 Ss ep a ge had e gotten bis fightagaine,

he lyued fouretie t two

G Ayeres , c sawe his chil

| pers childzen.

2 Mowee when he Wasanhundzed and two peres olde (he dyed, and) was buried honorably in Pintue,

3 Por whenhe was sixe and fiftic peres of age, he lost the fight or his eyes: and when he was three store peres olde, he

gate his sight againe.

The relidue of his lyke led he in idy, and increased wen in the feare ol God, au 1215 in pent

ut in the houre of his death he talled vnto hin his fonue Tobtas, a (ener voung springaldes his sonnes children, aud faide vnto them:

6 The destruction ol Miuiue is at hand,
(forthe word of the Lord tan not faple) and our brethren that are stattered out orthe lande ok Pleael, Mall come thy: ther agapne. ae

7 And the whole lande okit that hath

On, poun binpes.

‘gr Conmaunde pour

ben waste, shall be filled, and the Houle of God that was brent in it, shal be buil-
Ded Againe: and all such as keare God, shall teturne thyther,

8 The heathen then allo Thall fozsake their idols, and tome to Hierulalem and dwell there:

Aud all the kinges ofthe tarch halbe glad in her, and worlhip the Lord God of Ilrael.

10 Andtherekoze nm children, Hearc your father, ferue the Lorde in the trueth, seeke after his Wyll to dothe thing that

leaseth him:
1 children that they

do right, geue almes, be mindefull 0
God, and ener to be thantscfull bnto him in trueth and with all their power. 1
12 Heare me now therefore my chil, and abpde not here: but in what day euer pe haue buryed pout 9 1516 5 me in one sepulchre, get pou en he Fit z Foz J fee thatthe Wickednetke d shall bring it to detruction and * 2
14. After the death olhis mother, itl). as Departed away from Niniue, nis

A

of ludith.

inthefearcof God, they buried hi with iope. e
17 And al his kindred and posteritie conti: nued ina good like and holy conuerlation: so that they were loued and accep: ted both of God and men, and of all the people ofthe lande. ;

5 dine to his fag children, and came ag dueraud mother in lave, a |
5 Andkounde them Whole and im a good a age, and toke the tare of them: and he floltd their eyes, and was heyze vnto all
Raguels goddes, and sawe the fyft generation, and his chuͤders children.

The ende of the booke of Tobias,

The booke of ludich.
The firft Chapter. |

Che buylding of Ecbatanis. 5 Habuchodonotor made warre againtt Arphaxad and

XXXI

i

ouercame him. 12 He treateneth them that woulde not helpe him.

R yphaxad theking Tigris, and Jadalon in the fielde ofE-
Via, NN the heen sub- rioth the king ok the Elkes.
0 (es ow ) Duedmanyppeople 7 Then was the kingdomeof Habucho-
S AZ onto his domini- donosor exalted, and his heart was lift f on, and buylded a vp:and he sent vnto all them that dwelt
5 * noble strong citie, in Cilicia, in Damastus, and Libanus: ee Nb whiche he called 8 And bnto the heathen that dwelt in
8 Ecbatanis. Carmel, and Cedar, and to such as dwelt

2 2 The walles of in Galilee in the great field of Esdrelon:

n

lt made he of free stone foure square, seuentie cubites hie, and thirtie cubites mode: pe made towres therebpon an

hundreth cubites bye,

3 Butalong the foure corners every fide was twentie foote brode: He made the

poftes in the height, like as the towres.

4% (Chis king] trusted in his mightie

hoast and in his glorious charets.

5 Sointhe tweifth pere ok his raigne, it happened that Mabuchodonoloz the epa ee 1 de raigned 4

Citte of Piniue, fought again
Arphaxad: n

And ouertame him in the great fielde

called Ragay belide Euphrates, and

9 To all themthat dwelt in Samaria, and beyonde the water ol Jordane vnto Hierusalem, and the whole lande of
Jesse, vnto the borders of Ethiopia:

Io Unto all these Dpd Nabuchodonosor the king of the Alsprians {end meen:

gers.

I But they all with one confent woulde not agree vnto him, and lent the messengers againe emptie, and put them away without honour, .

i Then Maduchodonosor the king toke indignation at all those landes, € ware by his trone and by his kingdome that he woulde be auenged ofall tholecountreps.

~ a

E (i The

his wife, and childzen, and With his chile 16 And ninetie and nine peres beyng ended

— — 5 — —U—a
The. it. Chapter.
Pabuchodorofoz
155 en „ and fo destrop thofe that disobeped him,

phernes arme.

N HP the thirtenth vere
On of king Mabuchodono-

for , Dponthe twentie

two day of the firste

moneth, it was deviled

inthe courtof Pabu-

chodonolor the bing of

the Assynans that he woulde reuenge him selfe.

2 So he called vnto him all the elders, all his taptapnes and men ol warre, and chewed them his letret counsell,

And told them that his purpose was to bring the whole earth vnder his dominion. 4

4 Now When they were all content with this laying, Mabuchodonofoz the bing called Holophernes the chiefe captapne of his warres,

5 And layde vnto him: Go thy way foorth against an the kingdomes of the welt, and speclallp against thole that haue despised my tommaundement.

6 Thou shalt spare no creatine, all strong cities shalt thou bring in subiection buto me. :

7 Then Holophernes called together all the taptaynes c rulers ok all the power in Allyria, and mustred the souldier s vnto the boat like as the king cont maunded him (namelp) an hundzed and twentie thousande fighting men vpon focte, and twelue thoulande archers vpou horsebacke.

8 All his ozdinaunte lent he before with au umumerable multttude oktamels, fo

that the hoast was well prouided fo2
With oven and mall cattell, € that withotit niunber.

commaunded presumpteoullp that al people hould be brought in

Che preparatton ot Holo-

12 The conquest of his enemies.

9 He appoynted to prepare torne
Paci wan bine en valet
1o Much gold an siluer allo toke

es ae yt * Deoutot

1 o he toke his tourney and all hoalt, with charets, horsemen, er thers: of whom there were fo many that they touered the ground okthe land like the grashoppers.

12 And wheu he was gone past the borders of the Assyrians, he tame towarde the great mountapnes of Ange, whiche lye vpon the left fide of Cilltia: and fo he went vp into all their tastels, and wunne tuerp strong holde.

3 As tor the welthie citit of Melothus he brake it downe, c spoyledð ait the children of Tharsis and the Jsmaelites, whiche lay towarde the wildernesse and vpon the fouth fide ofthe lande of Chellon.

14. He went ouer Euphrates alfo , ecame into Mesopotan na, and brake downe all the hie cities that were there, from the brooke ok Maimbre till a man tome to the sea: i

15 And he toke the borders in from Cilicia
A the coastes of Japhet towarde the

duth.

16 He carped away all the Madtanttes, and spopled al their goods, and whosdener Withstoode hun He flue them with the sworde.

17 Akter this, he went downe into the fielde of Damascus in the time of haruest, and burnt vp all the torne, and all the trets and vines he cauled to be cut downc:

18 And the fare of him fel vpon all them that dwelt on the earth.

The. iii. Chapter. - |
Che people lubiect to Holophernes. 12 He destroyed their gods that Nabuchodono-

foz might onelp be worchtpped.

A 1 my) Othe kinges x princes
Nj] of al the cities Eiandes ent their embassa-

— aud Libya, and Cilicia,
; Which came to Molophernes and fayoe:

Let thy wrath ceasse towarde vs: It is better for vs to serue the great 15

Habuthodonosdr with dur lues, auto befubiect puto the chenthat we pong dpe, an with our slaughter suffer th euyls of dur bondage. :
3 All dur cities and pofteftions,al ge tapnes and hilles,allficides , Sta, final cattel ,Aheepe,goates, bolts." 5 be mels, all our goodes and boulhold

in thy power. ae" Under

a

of Iudith. XXXII].
Ander thy subiection be al that we haue. 11 Meuerthelesse though they dyd this,
7 1 tt khes and allo our children wilbe Tun not wage his rigozous
6 ie pnto bs peaceable lorde, and ble 12 Wut he destroped their tities and hewour seruite at thy pleasure. ed downe their wooddes.
7 Then tame Holophernes downe from iz $02 Habuchodonoldr the king had tom-

5 the mountapnes wich hosemene great maunded hüm that he chould roote out power, and conquered all strong fenled all the gods of the lande, to the intent o ea cities, and all that dwelt in the lande. that he only might be called (and taten]

g And out of all cities he toke strong men for god ok the nations, which Polopherand fuch as were meete foz the warre (to bir With his power might being vnder elpe hym.] im. : rr
9 2 there tame such a feare vpon thole 14 So went he though Syria Sobal and tountreys, that the indwellers of al the through all Appamea, and ali Melopo- C cities, the printes and rulers, andthe tanna, and came to the Idumeans in people together, went koozth to mecte the lande of Gabaa, hym as he came: 13; And toke their cities, and remayned o And receaued him (honcablx with gar- there thirtie dapes, in Wwhiche spate he landes and torches, with dauntes, ta- caused all the whole multitude of his prettes, and pipes. Hoa to be gathered together.

The. titi. Chapter.

rhe Atraelttes were akrapde and defended thet countrey. s Ctiacimehe prielk wope teth to Bethulia: that thep Moutde kortilte them selues. a They cried to the Lorde, and humdled them lelues bekore hym. a N 8

hen the thildzen of Je 8 And all the people trped vnto the Lord rael that dwelt in earnestly, and humbled their soules with
I Jurie heard this, they kalsting and prayers, they € their wiues: were foze akrapde of 9 The priestes put on heery clothes, him. And laped the poung babes before the
J. There tame such temple ofthe Loyd, aud toucred the aultrembling allo c feare ter ok the Lorde with an heery cloth: vpon them, lest he shoulde do vnto the 10 And with one accorde they trped vnto altie ol hierulalem and the temple ofthe the Lorde God of Ilrael, that their chu-
Lord, as he had done to other cities and dren should not be geuen into a prap, and their temples. 5 f.heir wines into a Ipople, that their ci:

Kothey ent into all Samaria rounde ties should not be layed Waste, and that about vito Jeritho, tote in and ottupi- their fanctuarie shoulde not be vnha- „oh

„Hauthe toppes okthe mountapnes: lobbed, and lo they to be a chame and re-

4 And made kaltthetownes with walles, bune buto the heathen. amd prepared torne for them against the n Then Eliatim the hye pret of the battaple. — Tord, went rounde about al Plvact,aud

5 Cliacin also the priest wrote vnto all spake vnto them, them that dwelt towarde Eldrelon, 12 Saping: e ye sure that the Lord will whichlleth ouer against the great klelde beare our petitions , ik pe continue sted-
„Dothan, e vnto all those by whont kalt in kaltinges and prapers in the fight men might haue pallage bnto them, ofthe Lorde.

6 That they choulde take in the wapes 13 Remember Moyles the seruaunt of the
Ot the mountaynes „ whereby there Torde, which duerthrewe the Amaleletaht be any way and paslage to hleru- chites that trusted in their night and dem, and that they shoulde holde dill- power in their hoast, in their shieldes, in gent watch where any strapte was be- kheir charets and horsemen, not with
Witte the mountapnes. a weapons, but with holy prayers, C

8 7 And the children of Israel dyd as E- 14. Euen so shall all the enemies of Israel

“ol 15 men ofthe Lorde had com- be, itye continue in this worke that ye em. ; aue .

: en Eg at

 ~—t—~SsSw Re Btw”

burnt sacrifices vnto the Lord offredthe olfringes vnto the Lorde, beyng araped

in heerp clothes, and had afthes vpor their heades. e

17 And they all besought God from their whole heart, that he woulde vilite his people of Ilrael.

The. v. Chapter.

Achlor the Bmmonite doeth declare to Bolophernes of the maner of the Itraelites.

HD Worde came to
Holophernes 7 prince al! of the warre ok the AL spuans, that the chit dren of Ilrael prepa-
5 red them selues to make relistaunte, and howe they had stopped the wapes betwixte the mountapnts.
2 Then was heexteeding wroth, and cal-

f

led all the princes ol Moab, and the tap-

taynes of Anunon,

3 And layde vnto them: Tell me what people is this that kepeth in the mountapnes:ꝙ p what maner and how great cities theirs aves What is their power:
D2 what maner ok hoast haue they: who is their taptapne-

4 And why do they despise vs more then all those that diwell in the east, and tome not foorth to meete bs that they might reteaue vs with peacez

W Then Achior the captapne of al the Am-

monites aunswered, and sapde: Sp il it please thee to heare, J will tell the trueth before thee concerning this people that dwel in the mountaynes, and there hall no vntrueth go out of my mouth.

6 This people ts ofthe generation of the

Chaldees:

7 They dwelt first in Mesopotamia, for they woulde not folowe the gods of their fathers that were in the lande of the Chaldecs,

8 And so forsole they the tustome ok their forefathers which had many gods and
Wozlhipped one God that made heaven andearth : whiche also conmaunded them that they shoulde go from thente and dwell at Charan.

5 Nowe when there tame a dearth into the whole lande, they went downe to

Egypt, and there they dwelt ; foure hun:

dreth peres, inthe whiche they multi: plied greatly, that their oat nught not

benumbred. 1 | fo And when the king of Egypt opprelsed them, and poked then buylding of his tities with making of clay and
Ia they crped vnto God their Low which punished the whole lande of Egypt with diuers plagues. po .
It And when the Egyptians had cast then out t᷑ the plague ceassed from them, and they folowing after them to take theme to bring them againe into their bondage:
Iz Whyle they were flying awap the God okheauen opened the lea, so that the waters stoode fast bpon both the fines as a wall, andthele went through the botome of the {ea drye Mob.
13 In the whiche place when an innume-
_vable people of the Egyptians folowed vpon them, they were so onerwhelmed
With the waters, chat there remapned not one ts tell them that tame after pow it happened. J
14. So When this people was pated | through the red fea, they tame into the
Wildernesse of mount Sina, where neuer man might Dwell akore, and where the sonne ol man had neuer rested.
15 There were the bitter waters made sweete forthem that they might diinle, hen fourtie peres had they meate front eaten, —
16 Mhersouer they went, without bow and arrow, without buckler 02 worde, their ep pi one them, and tauled thein to haue the victorie. a
17 Peano man was able to hurt this 115 ple, extept it were when they depar af ee po 4 san we Woelipping e Torde their God.
18 Wutasofteasthey worchpped aun cher beide their God, be ade than
8 be slayne, aul ut to confufion.
19 b arnerthelelle, as ofte as they were

ö 0} foxy for their departing from th mip

XXXV.

— shpppt ok their God: the fame God then let vs go vp against them: for

auen gane them power € strength
0 iuichtandecchen enemies.)

20 Moreouer, they flue the king of the
Chanaanttes, Pebulites , Pherezites, pethites, Heuites and Amortes, and al the mightie in Hesebon and toke their landes and cities in poslession:

And lo long as they finned not in the

9 fightof their God , tt went well with them: Jo: their God hateth vnrightedusuesse.

u Fo; in times past when they went out
He” ofthe Way which God had geuenthem en patthep Mhoulde walne int, they were

deltroped in Diners battayiles of many

nations, and many of them were cared away prildners vnto a strange countrey.

* But now lately they haue turned thein selues agayne vnto the Lord their God, and are come together agayne out of the tountreys where they were scattred abrode : ard thus haue they conquered thele mountapnes and dwel therin: and as fo: Hiernlalem where their sanctuarie is, they haue tt a game in possession.

24 And therkore my Lord, make diligent inquisition , ik this people haue dane
Wicke dnesse in the fight of their God,

1 xic.

illi

doubtlesse their God Matt deliuer them into thy handes, and subdue them vnto thy power.

25 Wut ik this people haue not dilpleased their God, We Chall not be able to withstande them: for their God Mall defende them, and so shall we be a shame to all the worlde.

26 Nowe when Achior had spoken out these wordes, all the great men of Bolophernes were wroth, and thought to flay him, and sayde one to another:

27 What is he this whiche dare fay that the children of Jlrael are able to withstande Pabuchodonolor the king and his hoastes: Where as they are an vnwWeaponed people, without strength oz buderstanding of the feates of warre-

28 That Achior therfore may know that he hath deceaued vs, we Will go vp into the mountapnes:and when the nughtie nien ol them are taken, he with them shall be stickte with the lworde:

29 That all the people may knowe that
Habuchodonosor is the God of the earth, and that there is none other be-

„*

side hint.

De. vi. Chapter.

1 Holophernes blatphemeth God, whom Achior conkelsed. 14 Ichior is delivered into the handeg ol them ok Bethulta. 1s The Bethulians erpe vnto the Lorde.

O when they had left or speaking, Polophernes toke fore indigna-
We! to, and lapde vnto
Achior:

LAG ant fo — 1 as 1

bat prophesied vnto bs, laping, That the people of Ilrael

shalbe detended of their God: Iwill

he thee that there is no God but
Aabuehoronotor,.

3 nen when we flay them al as one man,
128 Alo shalt perishe with chen
. OG) the lwordokthe Allprians, and

N ue atl che deltro ed with thee:

4 15 Wd then shalt thou feele that Nabuearsenolor is the lorde of the whole h en Chal the ipod of myknight-

gee thegugh thy ldcs e thou thale oe lte stickte ainong the Wounded rael, and “fhale not come to thy

fclfe agapne, but be vtterlp destroyed

With them.

Furthermore, ik thou thinkest thy prophesie to be true, why dock thou then chaunge thy colour: why art thou akrapde? Thinkest thouthatmywordes are not able to be perkourmed-

Wut that thou mapest knowe that thou shalt feele these thinges withthem, beholde from this houre foorth will J sendthee vnto ponder people, that when the punishement of my [Worde ( whiche they haue worthyly deserued) falleth vpon them, thou mapest be punished with them.

7 So Holophernes commannded his ser- 5 uauntes to take Athior, to cary him vnto Wethulia, and to deliuer hum into the handes of the childzen of Jscael.

3 Then Polophernes seruauntes folie

E (iij) him,

wre

A

in, and Went throngh the plapne field
1 when they drewe nye vnto the mountapnes, the liyng casters tame out against then.

9 Heuerthelelle they gat them away bp the side ok the mountapne, and bounde
Achior hande and foote to a tree, and so left hum bounde with withes, and turned againe vnto their lorde.

10 After that, the children ol Ilrael went
Downe from Bethulia, tanie vnto Hynt, loosed him, brought hun into Wethulia, fet him in the middest of the people, and afked him what the matter was that the Allprans had left hun vounde-

11 Olias the sonne of Micha of the tribe of
Simeon, and Chart which is also called Gothontel, Were the pancipal rulers at the faite time. ;

12 Nowe when Achioz stoode in the middest of the senatours, and before them al, he tolde them what aunlwere he gaue
Holophernes to the thing that he asked him , how holophernes people would haue flayne him kor fo faping:

z And howe Holophernes him lelke was wroth, and commaunded him for the faine cause to be deliuered vnto the Jlraclites: that when he onercanie the chilazenof Jsrael, he might commaunde
Achior alsd to be put to death with diuers tormientes, because he sayde, The
God ok heauen is their defender.

C14 And when Achtor had playnly told out

al thele thinges, all the people fel downe

Thebooke

— — . wann,. — — v

pon their faces, prapling the Loy. powred out their prayers together a the Lorde, with a general complaynt and W a

15 And sapde: O Tord God of heau ok carth, veholde their ppde ard tobe vpon our lowlinesse, and consder howe it standeth with thy sapntes, and make it to be knowen that thou forsakest not thofe which holde them fast bythee: and howe that thou bringest them low that presume ofthemlelues, and make their boast in their owne strength.

16 So whenthe weeping and prayer of the people ( whiche they had made the
Whole day long) was ended, they tom fozted Achior,

17 Saping: The God of our fathers,
Whole power and strength thou bhatt peapled, shall fo rewarde thee, that thou shalt rather fee their destruction.

13 Whenthe Lode dur God then shall gene his seruauntes this libe rtie, God be allo with thee among vs: so that as it shall please thee, so thou with all thyne mayst dwell with vs.

19 Now when Olias had ended the tounsel, he toke him into his houlc, and made
àa great supper,

20 Called the elders toit: and lo they refreched them selues after the fasting.

21 And akterward was al the people called together, whiche made their prayers all D the night long inthe tongregation, and belought the God of Jscael for helpe.

The. vii. Chapter.

1 Polophernes doeth betiege wWethulia.s Che countell ofthe Youmeans,and other againk the
Glraclites, 23 Che Bethulians murmure againg the goucrnours foz lacke of water.

he nept day Polophernes commaunded his

e GWecthulia.
2 There were an hundred andtwentie thoufande fighting men on foote, and two and twentie thonlande horstinen, beside the preparing of them that were wunne, and came to them on cuery side ont of the countreps and ct:

ties which he had taken.

3 at these prepared them selues bute the battaplagaint the Ilraclites, and came onbpthe hulide, vndo the top that loketh

duer against Dothain, from the place which is called Belnid, vnts Chelmon that lpeth towarde Eldrelon.

4 Nowe when the childzen of Ilrael sawe so great multitude Allyrians, they fell downe flat vpon 15 grounde , ctrawed alihes bpon ther heades, and prayed with one w ; me the God of es pte she his mercie vpon his people.

5 And so they toke their Wrapons anden betwirte the mountaynes in the Uae plate, and kept the war dar

ng

night.
6 Wut whrle Holophernes WAS dune

R of Iudith. —

XXXVI,

gy enn yeu

——pumde about, he founde the water all peelde our selues wylipngly vnto the

whiche from the south side was denurped note citie bea conduite, and be tonunaunded their conduite to be cut

6 r. here were Welles allo not farre from the wales, whiche they vied secretelp, more for pleasure then for netessitie.

Then went the Ammonites and the
Moabttes vnto Polophernes and sapd:

The chudren of Israàel trust neither in

are nor arrow, but haue taken in and nf e the mountaynes, and steepe hilles ende them.

9 That thou mapest ouertome them ther: fore without the striking of any battayl, fet men to kepe the Welles that they drawe no water dut ol them, so shalt thou destrop them without worde, or at the least they Mall be so feeble that they must be fayne to geue ouer the titie, which they thinke not able to be wunne for fo much as it ipeth in the moun tapnes.

v These wordes pleased holophernes wel and all his inen of warre, and he set an hundreth at eneryp well round about.

u And when this watch had endured
{entice dayes, the testernes and all that had water fapled them chat dwelt in the titie of Wethulia, so that in the whole titie they had not drincke inough for one day, for the people had water geuen them dayly ina mealure.

b Then came the men and women poung ersons and children, al vnto Olias, and apd al with one vopte:

B God be iudge betibirt vs and thee, for

thou Hatt dealt euyli with vs: thou wouldest not {peake peaceably with the king of the Allyrians, therefore hath
God solde vs into their haͤndes.
14 And there is no man to helpe vs, wher-
¢ 8 we are brought downe before their eyes in thirst and great destruction.

15 Therekore gather now together all the

people that be in the titie, that we may

people of Bolophernes.

16 Foz better it is that we be captiue and peaple the Lode with our liues, then to be flapne eperithe , and to be laughed to scorne and chamed of everyman when We fee our Wives and chadzen die before our epes.

17 We take heauen and earth this day to retord, e the God ol dur fathers, whiche punicheth vs actording to [the deteruing
Of } our sinnes land geue vou warning. that pe geue vp the citte nowe into the power of Holophernes hoast, that our end may be short with the lworde, which eis that a long for want of water and foz

irst.

18 When they had spoken out thele wordes, there was a great weepingand howling in the whole congregation cand that of euer man,] and they crped a.

whole houre long bnto God with one baz

vopte,

19 Saying: We haue finned with our fa: thers, we haue done a misse, we haue dealt wickedly,

20 Thou that art gratious haue merete vpon vs, or punishe our vnrighteousnes
With thyne owne fourge, and geue not those ouer that knowledge thee, vnto a people which knowe thee not:

21 That they may not fay among the heathen, Where is their God: D

22 And when they were fo weery with
4 and Weeping that they helde

eit peace,

23 Dfias stoode vp with watry eyes, and fayde: O take good heartes vnto vou deare brethrens and be of good cheare, and let vs wayte pet these fiue dayes foz mercie of the Lorde: a

24 Peraduenture he shal put away his indignation, c geue glorie vnto his name.

25 Burt ik he helpe vs not when the fiue
—— are past, we shall do as pe haue

poe. ;

E (ij) The

The. viii.

Chapter.

rive parentage. like, andcontuertation of Judith. 11 She rebubieth chekarntnege of

the gouernours . 1 him kor Cuccour. 3

f Nd it happened, when these wordes came to

the cares of Juditha

soune of Kuben:

And her hulband was called Manasses,

whiche dyed in the dapes ol the barlye

Haruest. *

3 Foz whyle he was bindingthe cheaues together inthe ficloe , the heate tame vpon his head, aud he died at Wethulia his citie, aud there was he buried belide his fathers.

4 Moibe was Judith his delolate wpddowe three peres, and fice monethes.

5 And in the higher partes of her houle she

made her selfe a prinie chamber, where

6 ein tlosed in with her map-

cus. 1

6 She ware a smocke of heere and fasted al the dayes of her life, extept the Sab-

bathes, and ne we moones, and the so-

lempue dapes that the people of BE vacl kept,

86 7 She was a very faire and beautiful per: fon , her hulbande allo had left her

greatviches,a plenteous houchold, great

bumoucable possessions, manpcättell.

3 This Judith was a woman of a very gopd report with euery one, for che fearedthe Hod greatly: and there was no

bodp that {pate an cuyll worde of her.

When this Judith hearde how Ofiag had promised the people that after the fift day he woulde geue vp the titie vnto the Asspriaus, she sent kor the elders,
Chaba aud Charme,

10 Aud when they tame to her fhe lapde:
What thung is this wherin Ollas hath fonfenteD, that it God helpe not within

ue e 5 Will geue ouer the citie to

the Ally

She sheweth that they cwoulde not tempt God, but wapte vpon
Her enterpzite agatnt the enemies.

1 What are pe, that ye tempt the Lorde-

12 This deuite obtapneth —
God: but prouoketh hym vnto wiath

and dilpleasure. 0

1 Dill pe {et the mertie of the Lorde a
—.— appoynt hin: a dap after pour
Will? rye

14 Neuerthelesse, for fo much as the Lom is patient, let vs rather repent in this, polring out teares, and beseching hum

of gratee

15 2 FO2 God threatneth not as a man,

neither will he be prouoked vnto wrath

aq the chudrenol men.

16 And therfore let vs heartylp fal downe before him, and serue hym with amecke spirite, se il

17 And with Weeping epes fay vnto the
Lorde, that he deale with vs according to his owne wil speedylp in mertie:that

like as our heart is nowe vexed and

brought low through the pade of them, „ it may fo be comkozted through his esse grace: ;

3 In so muchasie folowe not the finues of our fathers, which forsoke their God and worshipped other gods: —

19 Jor the which simne they perished with

the lword, were spoyled, and brought to

shame of al their enemies: As for vs, We knowe none other God but only hym.

For Whole comfort let vs tary wih meckenefle,and he shall require ¢ mabe inquisition for our blood from the Der ations of our enemies: he shall bung downe all the Heathen that vile voa“ gainst vs, and put them to dilchondur, euen the How our God.

21 Cherefore deare brethren, seyng ve alt D

the {vonozable and] elders in the people of God, and their ipfe hangeth all ppon vou, lift vp their heartes with pour 1 hortation, that they may tall to e 5 braunte howe our fathers allo in i pattwerctempted, that they unge, proued if they worshipped their G

8 right. on Gen.

22 Lhepoughttoremember bor cd father Abraham beyng temptd Find 182 through many tribulasions, was
ꝗ louer and friende ol God. 3 40

x xi.

was Moyses: and all they that pleased

of Iudit

h.

fearest God.

God, pailed stedfast in faith though zo And Judith laide vnto them: Seing

manpfolde troubles. ame, eaaptattons with the feare of God, but ut them selues foorth wich bupatiencie and murniuring again God, perilhed of the destroyer, and were

6 gaaine ok serpentes. 5
26 And therefore shoulde not we vnderlake to be auenged for the thinges that

are done vnto vs:

7 But to conver that altthelepunity: 33

mentes are farre lesse then our sinnes and mildeedes, and veleeuing that this correction conuneth vnto bs as to the seruauntes of God, for amendement, and not for our destruction. ;

28 Then laide Olias and the elders vnto
Judith: All that thou speakest is true, and no man can reproue thy wordes.

29 Paap thou for vs now therefore (onto

J The ir.

ve know that my wordes are of God,

they that reteaued not their zi Then proue my counlell and deuite il

t be of God: and beseche God that he F wyll bryng my counsell to good ende.

31 [Thus haue J deuited]) He Chali stande

this night before the porte, and F wyll go foorth with Abra my maden: and pray pe therefore vnto God, that he wyll gratiously remember his people of HE rael within fiue dayes, as y —
As for the thing that Y go in hande withall, ale ve no questious ofit: and tyll I bring pou word againe okit, do pe nothing eis but prap Unto the Lorde dur God for me. 1

34. Then Olias the prince ol the people

of Huda saide vnto her: Go thy wap in peace, the Lorde be with thee, that we may be auenged of our enemies. And so they went krom her agame.

Chapter.

I udith humbleth her felfe before the Lorde, and maketh her prapers £02 the delt-

utraunce of her ofthe humble.

(el aonetheic wap, Judith went into her clolet,

fore the Lorde, and tryed vnto him, saping: 1 bb 2 O Lode God of my father! Simeon,
8 Which gauest him a sword for a defente
= Aga inst the enennes that vsed violence intheir vneleannesle, and that rauished the virgin, land) put her to shame and tonfusion: ö
3 Thou that gauest their wyues into a
PAY, and their daughters into taptiuife, and all their pray for a spoyle vnto thy seruauntes which bare a eale vnto ee: helpe me wydowe, —D Lorde mp
God J beseche thee.
4. Jor thou hak made the first thinges: yt after that,looke what thou batt taie and deuised it tame euer to
> For al thy wayes are prepared, and bp iudgementes are nes inthp cuerlaing foreknowledge.
O locke now ppon the armies ofthe

171 kueg. 6

Dw when they were ö

people. 7 Against the pryde ofthe AUllpzians, u God is the helpe

Assyrians, lyke as it was thy pleasure sonietime to looke bponthe hoast of the
Egyptians, when they being weaponed perletuted thy seruauntes, and put their trust in their charettes, horsemen, and in the muititude of their mien ol warre.

7 But thou lookedst vpon their hoast, casting a thicke darkenesse before them.

8 And when they came into the decpe, the waters ouerwhelimned them.

9 Eueu so Lod, let it go with thele that trust in the power dex multitude of their men of warre, in their charets, arrowes, and speares:

lo And know not that thou onely art our
God which destropest warres from the

beginning, and that thou art the Lord. Adee
11 O pft vp thyne arme (now) lpke as c- nend ee, uer from the beginning, and in thy pow- ald de.

er bryng their power to naught: caule their nuͤght to fall in thy wrath, which make their voast that they wyll buballowe and defile thy sanctuarie, and to
Wake the tabernacle ofthyname, and to cast downe the horne of thyne aulter

with their sword. 4
12 Bryng to passe O Tord, that tihe pryde

of the enemie may be tut downe with res
His

XXXVII.

23 Oo Was Plabac, so was Jacob, fo God:) forthou art an holy woman, and

1 at he may be taken with the snare
9 3 in me, and that thou mayest snipte him with the lyppes of my loue.
14 Ogeue nie a stedkast mynde, that J may despyse him and his strength, and that J map destroy him.
15 This shall bryng thy name an euerlating remembraunce, ik the bande of a woman ouerthrowe him. N
16 For thy power O Zod standeth not in the multitude (of men) neither hast thou any plealure in the strength of horses, neither was there from the beginning any proude persons that pleased thee:

Ihe booke
. —CCséat nthe prayer ottyebumibiegmengy —

hath thy pleasure ben euermore.

17 Pthou God of the heavens thoumaker of the waters, and Lorde of all treatures, heare me pooze woman callin bpon thee and putting np trust in thy

s Nememder thy couenan

1 4 nt e and minister wordes in my — stabliche this denice in inp heart, that thy boule map continue still in holpnes:

19 1 00 ey map knowe dd that thou art God, ⁊ that there i other but thou. —

The. x. Chapter.

Judith deckech her felfe and qoeth koorth ol che citie. 1 She is kaken of che
Watch of the Allprians and brought to Holophernes.

5 en euerthelesse, tk at her, vut let oe

asked no question
Lo, saping: The God

ol dur fathers geue thee grace, and with his power perfourme all the dex uice of thy heart, that Hierusalem may reiopte ouer thee, and that thy name may be in the number of the holy e righteous. ö

9 And all they that were there, laide with one voyte, So be it, lo be it.

10 Judith made her prayer vnto the
Borde, and went out at the porte, the and her mayde Abra.

11 And as she was going downe the mountapne, it happened that about the spryng ok the dap the spyes ofthe Allprians inet with her, and tooke her, fay ing: Whence tommest thou- or whyther goest thou

11 She auniwered: Jama daughter of the Hebrues, and au fled from them: lo
FJ knowe that they halbe geuen vnto pou to be spopled, betause they thought lcorne to veelde them felucs bnto vou that they myght finde mertie in pout

sight.
13 Therelfore haue J deulsed by mib
‘ selfe after this maner: J wyll go “Ho ¢ the prince Holophernes and tell imal their secretes, and wyll chewe him pow he may tome by them, and wurmt io that not one man of his hoalt (hall pe-

rishe.

14 And when these men hap heard he
Wordes, and confidercd her faite a they ——— — they won
At her extellent beautie

15 And lalde nto her: Tponpaalepnt thy lylz by findinge out this deiner, 11

wn

Oy, Mets kel.

ou wouldest come downe to our lorde.
6 And be thou sure that when thou commed vuto hum, he Mall entreate thee well, and thou shalt plealse him at the heart. 0 they brought her in to Polohernes pauilion, and tolde him of her.
Nowe When Che came in before hun, immediately he was ouercome and taken with her beautit.
18 Then laid his seruauntes:who would delpile the people of the Jewes that

of Iudith.

haue so faire women: should we not by reason fight against them for these-

19 So when Judith sawe Holophernes sitting in a canapie that was wrought of purple filke, golde, smaragde, and pretious stones,

20 She looked fast vpon him, bowed her selfe, and fel downe vpon the carth: And
Holopherucs seruauntes tooke her vp ane at their lordes commaunoement.

The. /. (hapter.

1 holophernes comkorteth Judith. and alleth the canteof her comming. sSobe

deceaueth him by her fatre wordeg.
Hen sald Holophernes

vnto her, We ok good

cheare, and feare not

V4 neuer hurt man that

| „would ferue Pabu-
( hodonolor the king.

2 As for thy people, if they had not delpyled me, J should not haue tyfe bp my speart against then.

3 But tell nie nowe what is the caufe that thou art departed from them, and

wherekore art thou come vnto bse

4. And Judith {aide vnto him, Spr, vnderstand the wordes of thy handemapden:for if thou wylt do after the odes ok thy handmapden, the Torde shall

brrpng thy matter to a prosperous effect.

5 As Mabuchodonolor the king of the earth lpueth, and as his power lineth
Which is in thee to the punishment of all lien that go wrong, al men shal not onely be subdued vnto him through thee, but al the beastes also of the fielde.

6 Jsr all people speane of thy prudent attiultte, and it bath euer ben reported
How thou onely art good and inightie in all his kingdonie, and thy diltretion is conmiended in all landes.

7 Thething is manilest allo that Achi-

5 onspake, x it is well knowen What thou
: rommaundeftto do vnto him.

Jorthis is playne and ofa suretie, that fut od is so wroth with vs by the reatt of dur sinnes, that he bath shewed
10 his prophetes vnto the people, howe

hat for their linnes he wyll delyuer
Dein ouer(vnto the enemie. )

2 un kor so much as the chiuldren of HE

1 el knowe that ef haue fo difpleaten

heir God, they are fore akrayde of thee.

Wy 2

in thyne heart: for ZH -

lo They suffer great hunger also, and for want of water they are dead now in maner. N

11 Moreouer, they are appoynted to saxy

all their tattaile, that they may drinke the blood of them:

12 And are purposed to spend the holp

thinges of their God which he hath forbydden them to touch, Cas] of corne, wine, and ople, e they wil consume thofe

thinges which they ought not to touch

with their handes: Seing nowe that they do these thinges, it is a playne cafe that they mutt needes be destroyed.

3 Which when SW thy handmapden perteaued, I fled from them: and the Lord
Hath {ent me to shewe thee thefe
Hinges.

14 For I thy handmapden worchip God tuen here now belpde thee, and thy handmapden shal go foorth, and J wyi make my praper vnto God:

15 And he (hall tell me when he wyll rewarde them their sinne, then shall Y tome and shewe thee, and bring thee through the nuddest of bternfatem, fo that thou shalt haue al the people of HL rael as sheepe Without a shephearde, € there Matt not fo much as one dogge barke against thee.

16 For these thinges are sbewed ine by the prouidente of God.

17 And tor so much as God is displealed with them, he hath sent me to tell thee the sanie.

18 Thele wordes pleased Holophernes, and all his seruauntes: which maruepled at the wyledome of her, and said one to another: 2

19 There is not such a woman vps earth. in fauour, in beautte, and dilcretion of wWordes. 20 And

XXXVI

lf.

on Ie booke

d vnto her: God ifthy God perfourme it

o And Holophernes fat
, yaraare well that he bath lent thee
Dither before thy people, that thou mayest geue them into dur handes.
21 An dor lo much as thy proniile is good,

vnto m halbe my God also, and thou mettre excellent and great inthe court ol Ha. puthodonoso;, and thy name thalbe spoken ok in all the lande.

. q The xii. Chapter. —

dith wdulde not pollute her selle with the meate of the Gentiles. She mas arg br request chat he might go out by night to pray. 1 Holophernes caulseth

her to come tothe banquct.

ben commaunded he

ber to go in where his

lieve, and appoynted what shoulde be genen

2 Judith aunswered him, and saide: As

3 Then lalde Holophernes vnto her: FE these thinges that thou bhatt brought wip thee faple, What (hall we do vnto thee-

4 And Judith lalde: As thp soule ty: ueth mp Lorde, thy handmapden shall not speud all this, tpl God hath brought to pale in my bande the thinges that J
Hane deuled . So his feruauntes

brought her into the tent whereas he

Had appoynted.

And as she was going in, she desired that she might haue laue to go foorth by night and before day to her prayer,
AND to male intercession vnto the Loz.

6 Then commaunded Holophernes his chamberlapnes, that (he should go out and in at her pleature,to pray vnto God thofe three dayes.

7 And so in the nigijt season the went foorth into the valley of Wethulla, and wand her lelfe in the well water.

$ And comnüung vp, che befoughe tl
Lorde God of Jlrael nee be Would prosper her wap for the deliueraunte of his people.

9 And so she went in, x remayned cleane in her tent, tyll she tolle her meate inthe

euening.

10 Upon the fourth day it cane to patte that Holophernes made a supper vnto his seruauntes, and laide vnto Uagao his chamberlapne: Go thy way, x coun:
{ell this Hebzuesle, that the may be wylling to tonsent to kepe company with me: .

n For it were a shame vnto all the Assprians, that a woman choulde so laugh a man to frome, that she were come from him vnmedled withall.

12 Then went Taga vnto Judith, and laide: Het not the good daughter be a frayde to come in to my lorde, that the map be Honoured before him, that she may cate and drinke wine and be mercy

13 Unto whom Judith aunhwered:taho C am J, that J choulde fay mp lorde nay:

14 Whatsoeuer is good and belt befoze his eyes, I (hal do it: and looke what is his pleafure, that shali I thinke well done as long as I lyue.

15 So the koode vp, and deckt her selle
With her apparell, and went in e stoode before him.

16 And Holophernes heart was whole
3 for he brent in desire towarde her. 7

17 And Holophernes {aide vnto her:
Drinke nowe and fit downe € be merb, for thou hast kounde fauour before nie.

18 Then lade Judith: Spr, J wyll danke, for my iniude is merper to DAY then tuer it was in all my lyfe. ne D

16 And she toke, and did cate, and Dattne before hini, the ute that her marden had prepared for her. 5

20 and potopbernes Was merp will her, and dranke moze wine then euer ) did afore in his lyfe.

$y The

ae

_ ee.

of Iudith. XXXIX.
7 | qThe.xiti.Chapter.

Judith prapeth for frrerigth. 10 She tmpteth of Holopherves head. 12 She returneth to Bethulia, and reloyceth her people.

e nauntes made hastee- lockes ok his head, and lapde: Streng-
I suerp man to his lod- then mme D Lorde God in this houre. eng: And Uagao (hut 10 And with that the gaue him two thechantber doozes, & strokes vpon the necke €.*fmote of his
= Went his wap: head: Then tooke she the canapie away Reg bnd 25 For they were al duerladen with wine. krom the puͤlers, and roulled the dead
3 So was Judith alone in the chamber. bodp aspde.
4. Is for Holophernes he lay bponthe 1 Smmediatly he gat her foorth, and bed (all drunzen]; and of verpdruncken- delluered the head of Holophernes vnnesse fell afleepe. to her mapden, and bad her put it in her
5 Thencommaunded Judith her may- Wallet. den to stande Without before the doore 12 And so these two went koorth togeand to wapte. ther after their enstome, as though they
6 And Judith doode before the bed, Would prap: and fo palsed by the hoalt, making her prayer with teares, & mo- and came about through the valley vnued her lpppes setretlp, 4 to the porte of the titie. . €
3 And lade: Strengthen me O Lorde 13 And Judith erped a farre of vnto the
Hod of Ilrael, and haue reipect vnto watchmen vpon the walles: Open the the wözkes of myne Handesinthis gates (salde che! for God ts With bs
9 1 thou mapest fet vp thy titie Aes hath shewed his power in Bl levulalemipke as thou hast promp- rael. N led: And graunt that Imap periournie 14 And when they heard her bopte they che thing, which in hope that it maybe called theelders ofthe citieltoneo . doneby thee, J haue deuited. 15 And they tame all to meete Her, litie
8 And When che had spokẽ this, che went great, poung ¢ olde: for they thought to the puler that Was at Polo pher- not that (he Mould haue come fo soone. nes beddes head, and looled his word 16 So they lighted candels.and gathered that hanged vpon it, and drewe it out: about her euer? one: but fhe went bp 19

A 1

The

protlapmed.

hen euery man now heldhis e, Jad 2 prayse the Lord

1 re care, Judith (aide: |
7 5 for he hath not delpiled noz forsaken them that put their trust in

ini:
8 : And in nie his handmapden he Hath perfourmed his mercy, which he promiled vnto the house of Hlrael: Vea, in my hand 0 he de hath he slaine the eneimle of his people.

And with that che tooke koorth the

head of Holophernes out ofthe wallet, and shewed it them, saying: Behold the head of Holophernes the taptapne of the arnie of the Assprians, and this is his canapte wherin he lay in his drunkennes, where the Lord our God hath llaine him by the hande ofa woman.
20 Witt as the Torde liueth, his angell
Hath kept nie going hither, remapring there, aud tomnung hither againe front thente: And the Lorde Hath not suffred me his handmayden to be defiled, but without aup oefiling ol sinne Hath he brought me againe vnto you: and that with great victorte, so that J am eltaped, and pe delluered.

O geue thankes vnto him euerpoue, for he is gratious, and his mercy endureth foz euer.

So they prayled the Lorde altogether and gaue thannes vnto him,] and to her they laide: The Lorde hath blessed thee in his power, for through thee he hath brought our enenues to naught.
23 And Dhias the chtefe ruler of the peo-

ple of Israel saide vnto her: Wlessed art

thoi ofthe Lorde the high God, aboue all women bpon carth.

The .xiitj

booke

Heaven and earth, which

ath our sathee avightto wonnde Hath guded

and to smpte ol

the head ofthe captapne of a
2 e * dur ene-

25. Jor this day he hath made thy na so honorable, that thy prayle cal . tome out of the mouth of men Which fhal alway remember the power of the
Lord, seting thou hat not spared chyne one selke (but put thee in teopardie ) cong:
— the ae halbe a of th people: and fo hast helped their kal before God our Lorde. Nae

26 And all the people aid, Amen, Amen.

27 Achior also was called, and he tame:
Then lald Judith vnto him, The God

of FA aig a whom thou gauest wit: nesse that he would be anenged of his enenues, euen he hath this night through my hande snitten of the head okall the vnkaithfull.

28 And that thou mapst see that it so is, behold this is the head of Holophernes,
Which in his presumptuous pride despi-

ed the God of the people of Plrael, and

threatened thee With deftruction, fay: inc When the people of Jlrael is taken,
IJ that canse thee allo to be stickt with

he [word. |
29 When Achior saw Holophernes head, he fell downe vpon his kate to the grounde foz very anguilhe and feare, fo that he sowned withall.

30 But after that he was tome againe to

him ae he fal Downe before her, and prapled her, laying:

Wlelled art thou ol thy God in all the tabernacles of Jacob: foz all the people that heare of thy name, chall prapse the
God of Jsrael, betause of thee.

. (hapter.

Judith cautech to hang vp the head of Holopherntes. 6 Achioz ioyneth him telfe co the people of God. 7 Che Atraelites go out against the Adyrians.

Apeople, Srethren heare
U me:“ Sticke vp this
(bead ppon our wales,
N Jarpsech, take euer
— man his Weapon, an fallout violentip: not as though ye would go belide them, but to runne vponthem with violenee.
3 When the spies lee this, they shall of

Udith laide vnto al the

And when the lunne

neceflitie be compelted to flee back:
Ward, andto exple bp their captavne to the battaile. a
4 ‘ So when their taptapnes coe he
Holophernes pauilion, and walle a dead body Wrapped in the blood, ta fuineffe Mall fall vpon them: gee
And when ye perccanc tat Ory 5 folowe them without all care, 5 +3 fhalt* delpuer them vnto vou to stroped.

i to an high plate and canted {lence to be 24. Blessed be the Lorde the maker oF

E

E 2%. (he

gojpe thet ppcake sheet vnde r rect

kack.

Then Achioz seing the power of God

Which he had shewed vntothe people of

fracl, fell of from his heathenishe beeke, and put his trust in God, aud let hun lelke be tircumtiʒed, and fo was he numbed among the people of FHfracl,

he and all his posteritie vnto this dap. ow alloone as it was day, they sticht
8 pp Holopherues head vpon the walles, and euery inan tooke his weapon, and so they went out with an horrible trye.

3 When the spies far that, they raunne bnto Polophernes tent.

And they that were within the tent, came before his chamber and made a great rusching by art, that Holophernes night awake, not by stirring him vp, but by their nople. ;

jo Foz there durst not one of the Assprians knocke, go in, or open.

u But whenthe captaynes and princes and all the chtefe in the king of the Allyriaus hoast came together, they said vnto the chamberlapnes:

bn Go your way in, and wake him bp:foz the myte are trept out ol their holes, and dare prouoke vs vnto battaple.

13 Then went Vagao into his cham- ¢

ber, stoode before the bed, and clapped an. with his handes: forhe thought he had

ben sleeping with Judith.
14. Wut when he hearkeued perfectly

with his eares, and coulde perceaue no nc. stirring, he went nyer to the bed and *.

lift it vp, and when he sawe the dead body of Holophernes lying there Without ahead weltred in his blood vpon the earth, he cryed with a loude voyte, and
With weeping rent his clothes,

15 And went into Judiths tent, and founde her not.

16 And so he lept out buto the people and faide: One woman of the Jewes, hath broughtal Mabuchodonosors people to fhamie: Foz lo, Holophernes lyeth vpon the grounde and hath no head.

17 When the chiefe of the Assyrians hoast heard that, they rent their clothes, and there fell an intollerable feare and tremblyng vpon them: lo that their nundes were sore afrayd.

13 And there was an exceeding great trye in the whole hoast.

J The. xv. Chapter.

Che Allyrians are afraydandflee. Che Alrgelites purfue chem. Joachim the hie prielt commeth to Bethulia to lee Judith, and to praple God fo2 her.

O then al the hoatt
Q\ 24 Heard that Polophernes Was beheaded,

they saued them selues by fleeing away,
2 Due fake not to another, but banged downe their heades, lekt all behinde the, and made haste to eseape from the Hebrues:for they heard that they were hafling to tome after with their weapons,
0 so they fled by the Wayes of the ieldes, and through all the foote pathes ofthe” dales.

&>

Aud when the children of J lracl aw

that they lied, they kolowed vpon them: eu Went downe with trumpettes, blooat aud making a great crye after

4 As for the Allpriaus they had no 02 a and kept not them lelues together, anne Dee way: Neuerthelelle, the

NOzen of PHlract fell vpon chem with

one company and order, and difcomft: ted as many as they might get.

And Olias sent messengers vnto all the cities and countries of Alrael.

6 So all the regions and eüery titie sent ont their best men after them in harnesse, and smote them with the sworde. till they tame to the bitermost parte of their borders.

7 Anothe other that were in Wethulia tame into the tentes of the Assyrians, and tooke all that they which were fled had left behinde them, e lo they founde

great good.

3 And they that tame againe to Wethulia krom the battaile, tooke withthem such thinges as had ben theirs: there
Was no number of the cattaile and of all costly iewels, so that from the lowest vnto the hiest, they were all made rich ol the spoyles of then. a

9 And Joachim the hie priest came from
Bierufalem to Wethulia with al the elders, that they might fec Judith.

10 Now when fhe caine out vnto 1

n Dz midell ol the hoag.

The booke

they began all to prapse her with one 13 In thirtie ayes koulde the people of

saping: Thou worship of the citie ole en ou iop of Ifrael, thou our people.

II bene 14 hast done manlp, and thy heart is comforted, ¢ for that thou halt loued clenlinesse and thastitle, and

hast knowen no man but thyne owne hulband: therefore hath the hand of the
Howe coniforted thee, and blessed Malt thou be for euer.

12 And all the people saide: So be it, So | bes 8 8

PHtael_ scarse gather vp thes

te a 5 10 D the spoples of

14 Wut all that belonged vnto Polopssernes, and had ben his spetially 1 tt were of golde, or luer, pretious fone clothing and allo znamentes) they gan; it vnto Judith, and it AS deliuered vnto her ot the people.

15 And all the people reiopted, both wo: men napdens, and poung people, With pipes, and harpes.

De. xvi. Chapter.

apleth God with a song. 23Sbhe offeretl to the Lorde Holophernes
| Pa er wuntenencke li nd death. 29 AU Arael lamentech her.

1 Ihen sang Judith this
A 5 Ysong onto the Logde, a XA | faping:

Beginne vnto the

3 Itisthe Lord that destroyeth warres, euen the Lode is his name.

4. Which hath pitched his tentes in the middest or his people, that he might oeltuer vs fromthe hand ol al dur enemies.

5 Aslur came out of the mountaines of the noth) in the multitude of his strength: his people stopped the water brookes, and their hogles couered the

vallepes. .

om 6 He purpoled to haue brent vp my land, and 5 flay mp voung men with the

7 he wonlde haue taried away my chit: dren and virgins into captiuitie, but the almightie Lorde hindred him, and deliuered hum into the haudes ofa Wonan, a eren, Which brought him to conkusion. aun. 8 Foz their mightie was not destroyed
» ofthe young men, it it was not the sonnes of Titan that slue hun, neither haue the great giauntes let them lelnes against Hints but Judith the daughter of Merari with her faire beantie hath diltomftted him, [and brought him to naught. |
9 Foz Khe layed away her wydowes
Jarment, and put on the apparell ok gladnesse to the reioyting ol the children

Oz, which

k 12

10 She annopnted her kate with oyntment ck bounde vp her heere ina copfe, and Cooke a newe stole to beguile him.

1 her flippers rauiched his epes, her

beautie captiuated his minde, with the C

Mod smote fhe ol his necke.

The Persians were astonied at her por ig € the Medes at her boldenesse.

13 Then howled the armies of the Alspene den my simples appeared, drye
Of khhirst.

14 The fonnes of the daughters haue pearsed them through, and flaine them as fugitine children: they perished in the battalle, forthe very feare ofthe Lord my God.

15 Let bs sing a song of thankelgeuin vnto the Lode, a newe song ok prayle
Wyll we fing vnto our God. :

16 Lode, Lorde thou art a great God, mightie in power, whom no man may duercome. .

17 All thy creatures must serue thec:"Fo7 Genel

thou lpakest but the worde, and they Pains

were made, thou lentest thy {pirite,

an they were created, and no man can

withstaud thy voyte.

The nahes (hall moone ae the foundations with the waters, el stony rockes shall melt before the li

19 Wut they that 1 e great with thee in all thinges. 5
20 ae the people that rife bp auge my generation: for the alunghtie aa id wyll auenge him felfe of 11 1 che. the day ofindgement wyll he 11 701

2 ©}, from) the face

he (hall geue fire and wormes in

u perkeche, that they may burne and cle it for euermore.

1 After this it happened, that after the

psttorie all the people tame to hierusa-

ein, to geue prapse and thaukes vnto

the Lorde: And whenthey were puri-

sted, they offred all their burnt facrtfiz

tes und their vowes, and their pronn-

fen offeringes. a 2.

3 And Judith offered all Holophernes weapons (and all the iewels) that the people had geuen her, and the canapie

that she toke from his bed, and hanged

„ them vp vntothe Lode. ö

n 24. The people were ioyfull as the ble is: pate and this top with Judith, by realon of the victorie, endured thece monethes.
25 Sy after these dapes euery man went home againe, and Judith was in great reputation at Wethulia, and right ho-

of ludith.

nourabip taken in al the land of Jlrael.

26 Unto her vertue allo was chattitte loyned, fo that after her hulbande Maz nasles dyed, fhe neuer knewe man all the dapes of her life,

27 Upon the bye lolempne dayes fhe
Went out with great worchip.

28 She dwelt in her hulbandes house an abt. and fiue yeres, and lelt her

andmayden Abza free,

29 And Dyed, and was buried beside her husbande in Wethulla: And all the peo: ple mourned for her seuen dapes.

30 So long as (he liued, there was none that troubled IJlrael, and many peres allo after her death.

31 The day wherein this vittorie was gotten, was folemply holden, € reckened of the Jewes in the number of the holy dayes, and it is pet greatly holden of the Jewes euer linte, bnto this day.

The ende of the booke of Ludith.

v The rest of the Chapters of the booke

of Hefter, whiche are neither founde in the Hebrue,

norinthe Chalde.

: The. xj. Chapter, after the Latin.
¶ The dreame of Mardocheus.

a e Ardocheus the eee sonneot Jari the
5 7 sonne of Semei, the sonne of Cis of the tribe of
GWenianin, benen e inthe citie of Sue fis, aman ok great reputation, and excellent among all them that were in the kynges tourt. dd f, euerthelesse, he was one of the pri: das soners whom Pabuchodonolor the
Lyng of Babylon had carped away front Plerulalem vnto Wabplon, With
Jechonias the kyng of Juda. nthe seconde pere of the raigne of great Artaxerxes, in the first vay ofthe moneth Nilan, had this Mardocheus luthe a dreame.
Ve thought he heard a great tempel, dorible thundertlappes earthquakes,
5 8 Steat vprore in the lande,
NO that he fawe two great dragons

redie to fight one against another.

7 Their crye was great: At the whiche 6 roaring € trye, all the heathen were vp to light against the righteous people.

8 Andthe lame day was full of darkenesse and very vncleare, full of trouble and anguithe, yea a great fearefulnesle was there in the lande.

The righteous were amased for they feared the plague and euyll that was deniled ouer them, and were at a poynt with them selues to dye: So they cryed vnto God.

10 And whyle they were trying, the litle well grewe into a great riuer, and into many waters.

And with that it was day, and the sunne vole vp agayne: And the lowly were exalted, and deuoured the glorious and pronde.

12 Nowe when Mardocheus had seene this dreame, healwoke, e ninled stedkastly inhis heart what God would do, and fo he desired to kuo l al the matter, and his mind was ther vpon vntil night.

F (0 q The

Noe

Di, chamerlapnes.

a” le

W

The booke

—..;ñĩ:ĩ —E

q The. xij. Chapter,

Mardochens vttereth the trealon deuised againt the kyng, and is therefore

rewarded of hym.

T the fame tyme dwelt Mardocheus with Wagatha and
Thara in the kynges toürt, the kynges chamberlaynes and porters of the palace.

Wut when he hearde their deutee,and had diligently conlidered their imaginations, he perceaued that they went about to lap their cevuell) handes vpon the kyng Artaxerxes, and fo he tertified the kyng thereol. 2

Then canted the kyng fo exanune the two gelded with tozmentes: And when they had graunted it, they were

put to death.

This the kyng cauled to the mee 8905 menibrannte, and Mardochen vp the same matter. beus woe

So the king commaunded that Mardocheus shoulde remapne in the court and for thts faythfulnes of his he gaue hymarewarde.

But Aman the sonne of Amadathu the Agagite, whiche was holden in great honour and reputation in the kynges tourt, vndertoke to hurt Mar: docheus and his people, betause of the
591 „ that were put to

eath.

be put in

The. xiij. Chapter.
Che copie of the letters of Artaxerxes agaynst the Je wes. 9 The prayer of

Mardocheus.

% serxes, whiche raige Ineth from India vneto Ethiopia ouer an
Hundzed and twentie and seuen landes, sen-
— — deth his krendly fatutation vnto all the printes and deputies of the countrey, whiche be fubiect vnto his dominion.

When J was made lorde duer many people, and had subdued the whole earth vnto my Dominion, my nunde
Was not with cruettic and wrong to exalt my lelle by the reason of my power: but purposed with equitie alway and gentlenes to gouerne those that be vnder nw iurildiction, and wholly to fet them in a peateable lyfe and thereby to bryng mp kyngdome vnto tranquilitic, that men might salelp go thorowe on euery fide, and to renue peace agayne, whiche alt men delire.

Nowe when

brought to a good ende, there was one by vs extellent in wildome, whole good
Wyll, trueth, and faythkulnesse bath oft ben chewed and proued (whiche was allo the principall 1 next vnto the kyng) Aman by name,

alned my counsellours howe these thinges myght be

“A

He great kyng Artax- a Whithe certified bs, howe that in all

landes there was scattered abrode a rebellious folke, that made statutes and lawes against all other people, e haue alway despised the proclapmed conv maundementes of kynges, and Hove that for this cause it were not to be fut: fred, that suche rule should continue by vou, and not to be put downe.

Seeing nowe we perteaue the fame, that this people alone are contrary vnto euery man, bling straunge and other maner of lawes, and withstande our statutes and doynges, and go about to stablyshe chrewde matters, that our kyngdome choulde neuer tome to good estate (and stedfaltnesse:

Therefore haue we conmaunded,

that all they that are appointed in Wey” tyng and chewed vnto pou by Aman,

whiche is ordgyned and set ouer all our landes, and th. most printipall nert buto che kyng, and in maner as afather:
Chall with their Wines and chyloecn : destroyed e rooted out with the {vor oftheir enenues and aduersarics, a that there (hatbe no mnrevep chewed one no man spared: And this Waue, I: the fourteenth day of the moneth

led Adad of this pere.

7 That they whiche ok olde and 110

an euerlacting re- ©

aue euer ben rebellions, may in ede with violence be than downe into the hell, to the intent that after this maner our empire may haue peate and nquilitie.

: zi ghardocheus thought vpon all the wozkes noble actes ofthe Lorde, and made his prayer vnto him,
Saping: O Lorde, Lorde, thou valtaunt and almightie king, for all thinges are in thy power: and if thou wilt helpe and deliuer Ilrael, there is no man that can withstande nor let thee. --

jo Forthon halt made heauen and earth, and What wonderous thing soeuer is bnder the heauen. a

n Thou art Lode of all thinges, and there is 2 wh that tan resist thy ma iestie O LO:be.

u. Thou knowest all thinges, thou wotest Lorde that it was neither of malite oz presumption, nor for any desire of glozy, that J would not bow downe my selfe nor worshtp vonder proude prefuniptions Aman:

3 Foz I woulde haue ben content, and that With good wyll, tf it might bane done Ilrael any good, to haue ki euen

of Helter.

his kootesteppes.

14 But that J did it because J woulde not set the honour ola man in the steede C of the glory of God, ebecaule J would worship none but only thee mp Lode: and this haue J done in no pryde nor presumption. g

15 And therkore O Loyd, thou God and kyng, haue mercy vpon thy people, foz they imagine howe they map bring vs to naught, yea their minde and defire is to destroy and to duerthrowe thy people that Hath euer ben thyne inheritaunce ofolde.

16 O despise not thy portion which thou halt deliuered e brought out of Egypt tor thyne owne selle. ö

17 Heare my prayer, and be merciful vnto thy people whom thou hak chosen for an heritage vnto thy selfe: Turne our tomplaynt and soro wd into toy, that we may liue O Torde and prapse thy name: O Tord suffer not the mouthes of them that praise thee, to be destroped.

18 All the people of Israel in like maner crped as earnestly as they coulde vnto the Lorde, for their death and destruttion stoode before their eyes.

„ J QThe. xiiij. Chapter.
¶ Che praper of Helter, kor the deliueraunce of her and her people.

LUeene Hester allo be-
Iynginthe battaple of
Mdeath, resozted vnto the Lorde, :
, Lapde awap her glorions appareil, and put on the garmentes ued for sighing and mourning: nthe steede of precious opntment, fhe cattered ashes and dounge vpon her head: and as for her body, the humbled
With fasting, and brought it very iow:

All the places where fhe was Wont to

haue toy afore, thofe fũ ed fhe with her

obbne heere that the pluckt ol.

She prayed alfo vnto the Lorde God

of Ilrael with thefe woes: O my
Ode, thou only art our kyng, helpe

me delolate woman, whiche haue no

elper but thee.

7 Jo mp milerie and destruction is arde at my hande.

Aro my pouth bp J haue hearde out

ol the kinred of mp father, that thou to-

kest Israel from among all people, and fo haue our fathers of their forkelders, that they shoulde be thy perpetuall inheritaunce, and looke What thou didst promise them, thou batt made it good onto them.

6 MNobbe Torde we haue finned before thee, therefore hast thou geuen vs into the handes of our enemies,

7 Betause we worchipped their gods:
Torde thou art righteous, 2

8 Meuerthelesse it satislieth them not

that we are in bitter and heauie captinitie and oppressed among them, but thou hast lapde their handes vpon the handes of their gods.

9 So that they begin to take away the

thing that thou with thy mouth batt, odayned and appopnted, to destroy thine inheritaunte, to Mut and to stop the monthes ok then that prayse thec, to quench the glory and worship of thy
Youle and thyne aulter:

F (ij) 10 Aud

xlij.

The booke

10 And to open the mouthes ofthe hear chip of the vnrightedus

n. that they may praple the power
11 8 7 gos, and to magne e the fleshly kyng for euer.

1 * 15 not thy stepter vnto then that be nothing, lest they laugh bs to scorne in our milerie and fall: but turne their deuice vpon them felues, and punishe hym that hath begun the fame ouer vs, and fet hym to an exam-

le.

12 ber huntte vpon vs O Tord, and shewe thy felfe vnto vs in the tynie of our dE stresle and of our trouble: strength me
O thou kyng of Gods, thou Love of all power,

z Geue ine an eloquent and pleafaunt speache in my mouth before the lion:
Turne his heart into the hate of our enentics, to destrop him, and all such as confent vnto Hint.

14 But deliuer vs with thy bande, and helpe me thy handmapde, which haue no defence nor Helper but onlpe the

Hove,
15 Thou knoest all Hinges, thou wotet that Jloue not the glorp and woz-

And that J hate and abhorre the bed of tumtised, and of all Heathen, nO ale

16 Thou knowest my necessitie, that J hate the token of my preeminente and D worchtp, which I beare vpon mphead what tyme as J mul chewe my tere and be seene, and that J abhorre it ag an vncleane cloth, and that J weare it
19 when J am quiet and alone by mp

2 e. f .

17 Thou knowest also that F thy handmayden haue not cater n ble, and that J haue had no pleasure nor delight in the kinges feat, that J haue not drunke the Wine of the danke offeringes.

18 And that J thy handmapden haue no ioy since the day that J was bronght hyther onto this day, but only in thee
O Torde, O thou God of Abraham,

19 O thou mightie God aboue all, heare the vopte of them that haue no other hope, and deliuer vs out of the hande of the wicked, and Deliver me out of my feare.

The. xv. Chapter.

1 Mardocheus moueth Hester to go in vnto the kyng, and make intercession foz her

people, And the pertourmed his request.
Ardocheus allo bade 7 The other folowed her, and bare the

SSS

We /37) Al Deller go in vnto the

W\ Vases ii beng, and pap foe

her people, and foz her tountrep.

" Remember (saith he)

the dapes of thy lowe

estate, how thou Wat nourished vnder

mp hande: Foz Aman whiche is next

vnto the kyng, hath geuen lentente of

death against vs:

3 Call thou therekore vpon the Lozde, and speake for vs vnto the king, and deliner vs from death.

4 Aud vponthe thirde day it happened that Hester layde away the mourning

en put on her glorious apparell, a

5 Aud deckt her selfe goodly (alter that

dhe had called vpon God Whiche is the beholder and sauiour of all thinges)
(and) toke two mapdens with her:

6 Ahponthe one she leaned her selle, as
0 one that was tender:

trayne of her vesture.

8 Lhe thine of her beautie made her face rose coloured, the sinnlitude of her face was chearefull and amiable: a her heart was sorowkull for great

eare.

9 She went in thorowe all the doozes, and stoode before the kyng: The kyng sate vpon the trone ok his bene and Was dothed in his goodly arab, , fhining with golde, and fet with pect’ dus stones, and be was verp terrible. ‘

e Helpft bp bis face that bone in the tlearnesse, and looked grünt pon 0
Then fel the Mueene downe, Was iche and faynte, leaned her lelfe ca 4 head of the mapde that went wit 0 0 5

u Heuerthelelle, God turned the felt minde that he was gentle, that Bs 11 ped out ol his seate for feare, 5 al her in his armes, and helde oe her che came to her selk againe, hen

Toning Wordes allo, and laid vn eker

Hotter, what is the matter: J am thy
N brother, de of good cheare: pou Malt not die, fo2 our toinmaundenlent toucheth the connnons, and not thee: Collie nye. a
14 And with that he heide bp his gol-

And imbraced her freudly, and sayd:

of Hester.

den rodde, and layde it vpon her necke.

heart was troubled fo feare of thy maz iestie and clearnesse. —
7 Foz excellent and wonderfull art thou
O Torde, and thy face is full of amitie.
18 Wut as she was thus speaking vnto

hym, she fell downe agapne for faynt:

nesse: l a
19 Jor the whiche tause the kyng was

ke with me. atratde, and all his seruauntes comfoz
„16 Then sayde che: J sawe thee (O ted her. onde) a8 an angell of God, and my
J The. xvj. Chapter.
¶ Che copie of the letters of Artaxerxes, whereby he reuoketh those whiche he firtt sent koorth. N —

31 be great kyng Artar- we take heede, make learche therafter,
1 oer jerres, whiche raig- andconfidernotonlye what hath hap-
8 i neth from India vn- pened vnto vs of olde, but the shanie-

8 AG to Ethiopia ouer an kull, vnhonest, and noysome thinges, e hundreth and twentie chat the Deputies haue nowe taken in

hand seuen landes, sen-

2 There be many that fo2 the sundry

3 And bndertake not snip to hurt our lublettes (fo2 plenteous benefites may they not faffer, and begin to inagine gan bing againtt tote that do them go0

4 Andtake not only all vnthankfuines
Albay from men) but in pride and presunption, as they that be vnnundfull and Duthankfull for the good deedes, they go about to escape the tudgement ol God that seeth all thinges, whiche ludgement hateth and punitheth all
Wickednesle

It happeneth oft allo, that they which be et mofite by the higher power. and
Duto whom the bulinelle and caules of

e subiettes are committed to be handled, Ware proude and defile them lelues with herding of innocent blood, Which bina th then to intolterable hurt.

Whiche alfo with falle and deceiptfull
Wordes and with lping tales, deteaue e the innocent goodnesse of

7 Node is it profitable and good that

hande before our eyes:

8 And thereby to beware in tyme to tome, that we make the kyngdome quiet and peaceable for all men, and that we might sometime drawe it to a

aunge.
And as for the thing that nowe is pre-

W

sent before our eyes, to withstande it,

and to put ie downe after the most frendly maner.

lo What tyme nowe as Aman the sonne of Amadathu the Macedonian a straũger veryly of the Persians blood, and karre froin our goodies, was come in among vs as an aliaunt,

u And had obtayned the frendship that we beare to warde all people, fo that he was called our father, and had in hye hondur ofeuery man, as the next and painsipall vnto the kyng:

12. Hecoulde not forbeare him selfe from his pryde, bath vndertaken not only to rob bs ofthe kyngdome, but of our life:

13 with maͤnpkolde deceipt allo hath he desired to destroy Mardochens our helper and preseruer, Whiche bath done vs good in all hinges, and innocent Hester the like partaker of our kyngdone,
With all her people.

14 For his minde was (when he had taken thein out of the Way, and robbed vs of them) by this meanes to traullate the kyngdome of the Persians vnto them of Matedonia.

F (ij) 15 But

C 15 But be finde that the Jewes (which that vpon the thirteenth day

were atcused of the wicked that they might be destroped) are no euyll doers, but ble realonable and right lawes:

16 And that they be the chyldren of the mot high liuing God, by whom the kyngdome of vs and of dur progenttours hath ben well ordered hytherto.

17 Wherefore, as for the letters and tonrmaundementes that were put foorth by Aman the lonne of Amadathu, pe shall do weil if pe holde them ot none

effect:
13 Jor he that {et them bp and inuented

them, hangeth at Sulis belorethe port,
With alt his linred: and God whiche
Hach all thinges in his power, bath ves
Wardedhymatter his deleruing.

19 And vpon this pe chall publiche and
{et bp the copie of this letter in all plates, that the Jewes may freely and
Without hinderaunte holde them selues after their owune statutes:

20 And that they may be helped, and

twelfth moneth Adar, they; zol the

bee eee ir anguishe and troub he chou ie would haue

21 Forthe God that gouernetl .
1 10 2 790 818 the dap eber

people tho ; rie ple shoulde haue pe-

22 Morzeouer, among the bye folempne dapes that pe haue, ye cal bodde iht dap also with all gladnesse:

23 That nowe and in tyme to come this dap may be a remembraunte of good foz all such as loue the prosperitie of the ene but a remembraunte of de-

ttionto those that be seditious vnto

bs.

24 All tities and landes that do not shall horribly perishe and be bette with the Moorde and fire, and hail not ity Ai be ou ern of men, but

alfo of the wylde and foules. : *

The ende of the rest of the booke
3 of Hefter.

Ihe booke of wyfdome.
Ihe wyldome of Solomon.

The first Chapter.

Howe we ought to searche and inquire alter God. 2 who be thole that finde
„ ppm. J Che holp ghost. 8. une ought to flee from bachbiting and murmuring. l whereok death commeth. F Righteoufnesse and vnrighteoulnesle.

„„U IOue righteoul-
— ynesle pe that be

AN e

ey 0 Dy 9605 consider deepely
Hol the Lowe in
. n goodnesse, and

2 (Say Igy] feeke hym in fine

682 BAS 2 e ee ot he Wy

— them that tempt hym not, and appeareth vnto such as put no distrust in hum.

For wicked thoughtes seperate from
God, andshis)power when it is tryed, reproueth the vnwilc.

4 Fo why- wyldome shall not enter intoa wicked soule, nor dwell in the body that is subiect vnto inne.

Forthe holy spirite of discipline fleeth front deteipt, and withdraweth hym selfe from thoughtes that are without vnderstanding, and is declared when wickednesse commeth.

6 Jop the spirite of wyldome is louing, and will not absolne hym that blasphemeth with his lippes, foz God is Witnesse ol his raynes, and a true beholder

blk his heart, x an hearer of his tongue.

5 7 Forthe spirite of the Lorde fillet) the

rounde compasse of the worlde, and the

lame that vpholdeth all thinges bath knowledge allo of the boyte.

Therfore he that speaketh vnrighte-

dus thinges cannot be hid, neither chall

the indgement of reprole let him escape.

9 And Why: nquifition shalbe made for

Oy fanps

iudgesofpearth, .

the thoughtes of the bugodly, aud the sounde of his Wordes chall come onto
God, so that his wickednesse halbe punished. :

10 Foz the eave of ielousie heareth all thinges, x the noyle of the grudginges chall not behid.

n Therekore beware of murmuring whiche is nothing worth, and refraine pour tongne from sclaunder: Fo: there is no worde fo setrete that it shall go foz naught, and the mouth that speaketh lyes, slapeth the soulc.

12 O seeke not pour owne death in the errour of pour Ipfe, destroy not your felues thorowe the workes of pour owne handes:

13 FJor God hath not made death, neither hath he pleasure in the destruction of the living:

14 Fo he created all thinges that they might haue their being, and the generations of the worlde Were healthfull, and there is no poyson of destruction in them, nor the kyngdome of hell vpon the earth.

15 Jor righteonsnesse is Ceuerlasting and} immortall: but vurighteoulnelle bein: geth death.

16 Meuerthelesse, the bngodly call it bnto them both with wonkes and
Wordes, and whyle they thinke to haue it their friende, they come to naught, t they haue made an agreement with it, for they are worthy to be of her part.

F ct) The

xIiilj

“D2 beginninges.

Pz, to wit, death.

“The booke

q The. ii. Chapter,

Che imaginations and defires ofthe wicked, and theyr countaple againt

the faptyfull.

Mir life is short and te-

J |Diows,and in the death

ofaman there is no rez

medie, ucither is there any man knowen to haue returned from the graue. a

2 FJor we are borne at all aduenture, and we shalbe here by moe fortune after, as though we had neuer ben: for one breath is às a sinoke in our nosetrilles, and Wordes as a sparke raysed out of our heartes: N

3 Whiche being extinquished, our body halbe turned into ashes, and our spirite
(hall vanishe as the soft ayre.

4 Pur life shall passe away as the trace of a cloude, and come to naught as the miste that is driuen away with the beames of the sunne, and put downe with the heate thereof: Our naine also shalbe forgotten by litle and litle, and no man shall haue our wozkes in cement braunte.

5 Forourtyme is a bery shadowe that passeth away, and after our ende there is no returning: for it is fast sealed, fo that no man commeth agayne.

6 Coine on therefore, let vs eniop the pleasures that are present, and let vs chearekully dle the creatures, like as in youth:

B 7 Text vs fill our selues with good wine and oputnient, and let there no flowze of the tyme escape bs:

3 Let vs crowue our selnes with role buddes, afore they be withered:

acta? Let there beno fapre medowe, but

moowsis dur lust go thorowe it. Let euery one of

bebe. vs be partakers of our voluptedulnes,
. ae ae 155 of our pleasure
\ ry place: for that is ou ane. ea

lo Net vs oppresse the poore righteous let vs not spare the wydowe nos olde man, let vs not regarde the heades that are gray for age.

1 Let the lawe of vnrighteonsnelle be

our strength: for the thing t

beipthen z (oom I that is feeble

1. Therelore let vs defraude the rightedus, and why: he is not for our profite

pea he is cleane contrarp to dur oo:

inges, he checketh vs for offending a-

gainst the lawe, and slaundereth the

faultes of our nianer of liuing.

8 bi Wate G50 to haue the

nowledge of God, pea he callet

felfe Gods sonne. bbem

14 He is made vnto bs for reproffe ot out thoughtes.

15 It greeueth bs also to tooke vpon him, for his life is not like other mens, his wapes are of another fashion.

16 He counteth vs but vayne perfons, he withdzaweth hym selfe from our wapes as from filthynes, he commendeth greatly the latter ende of the iust, an maketh his boast that God ts his

ather.

17 Wet ds lee then if his wordes be true; let vs proue what shall happen in the ende ol pm.

13 FJorif the iust man be the sonne of god, he wyll veceaue hym, and deliner hym from the handes of his enemies.

19 Net bs examine him with oefpitefull rebuke and tozmenting, that we may know his meekenesse, and proue his pacience.

20 Let vs tondempne him with the most shamefull death: for as him selle saith, he halbe rewarded (of God.

21 Suche thinges do they imagine, and go astrap, fo2 their owne wickednesse
Hath blinded then.

22 As forthe mysteries of God, they vnderstande them not, they neither hope for the rewarde of righteousnesse, no: regarde the worchip that holy foules hall haue. J

23 Foz God treated man to be budeltroy”

A

4 Oz. Com: terfatts copne,

“ 4 t
‘

ed, pea after the· image of his obne Gn ib.

lykenes made he hym. ö
24 Meuerthelesse, thorowe cuute oft Me

deuyll tanie death into the worlde, au

they that helde of his fine do finde it.

q The

of wifdome.

| The. iij. Chapter. f

Che conseruation and alluraunce of the ryghteous. The rewarde ofthe -

fapthkull. u oho are miferable,
Ut the soules of the

7 8 n = :
21 © N ryghteous are in the
4 Be) hande of God, e there
14 hal notorment touche r n the syght of the
2 vnwise they appeared

to die, s their ende is taken for milerie,
And their departyng from vs to be btter destruction: but they are in rest.
4 Foz though they suffer payne before men, vet is their hope full of immortalitte.
They are punifhed but in few hinges, neuerthelesse in many thinges (hal they

be well rewarded: for God proueth the,

and findeth them meete for hym elfe.

6 As golde in the furnace doth he trye them, and reteaueth them as a burnt offerpng: and when the tyme commeth they shalbe loked vpon.

3 7 They shall thyne and runne through

as the sparkcles among the stubble.
8 They thal tudge the nations and haue

donunion ouer the people: and their

Lode (hall raigne for euer.

They that put their trust in him Hatt vnderstande the trueth, and such as be faythfull hall perseuer with hym in loue:for his faintes haue grace Emercie, and he hath care for his elected.

lo But the vngodly chalbe punished atcozdyng to their owne imaginations, for they haue dilpiled the righteous, and

forsaken the Lorde. . 3

n For who fo dilptleth wildome and oe nurture he is vnhappp, and as for the Se hope of (uch it is but dayne, their la- we. bours vnkruitfull, and their Workes vnprofitable.

12 Their wpues are vndiscrete and their chudren most vngodi -

13 Their olspryng (oz progenie i is cursed:
Wherkore blessed is the barren that is vndeliled, which hath not knowen the sinnefull bed, she shall haue fruite in the visitation of soules, ö

14 And the gelded which with his handes C

hath Wrought no vnrighteonsnesse, nor imagined wicked thinges agaynst God: for dnto hym shalbe geuen the speciall gykt of fapth, and the most acceptable portion in the teniple of God.

15 For glorious is the fruite of good labour, and the roote of wisdome halt neuer fade away. —

16 As for the children of adulterers they
Thali not come to a perfect ende, and the seede of an vnryghteous bedde shalbe rooted out.

17 And though they lyue long, vet Mat they be nothyng regarded, and their lal age shalbe without honour.

18 If they dye quickly they haue no hope, neither conifort in the day of inquirie.

19 Jor horrible is the ende of the vnryghteous generation.

The. iiij. Chapter.
Ot vertue and the commoditie therok. io The death of the rpabteous, and

the condempnation of the vnkaythkull.

Howe faire is a chaste generation with vertue: the memoriall therok is immoztall:
/ for it is knowen with
God and with men.
When it is present, men take example at it, x if it go away,
1 they delire it: it is tcrowned and euer remmmbeth, when it hath wunne the ewarde of the vndeliled battaples. about the multaade of the vngodly gundpng in chüldren, Chall prolite no-

thyng, mor geue deepe roote by the seede of adulterie, nor Lay any fast foundatiõ.

4 Jor though thep budde foorth in the braunches for a tyme, vet Chall they be shaken with the wynde, for they stande not fat: and throngh the bebemencte of the wynde they shalbe rooted out.

The vnperkect braunches chalbe broken, their fruite shalbe vnprokitable,
€ sowre to cate, yea mecte for nothyng.

6 And why?: all the children that are

borne of the wicked bed, must beare recorde of the wickednesle agaynst their fathers

——— =) | debocke ———

them that loue her, and kounde of such 2

Z * And so the desire of wisdome le 8
ö

seke her.
C 14 0 peenenteth them that desire her, that she may shewe her felfe vnto them.

15 Who fo alvaketh vnto her betymes,

shall hane no great trauaple:for he shal fynde her fittpng redy at his doores.

16 To thynke therfore vpon her, is per-

-fect vnderstandyng: and who so watcheth kor her, call quickly be dispatched of care. ,

17 Foz Tye goeth about fekyng fuchas con ace are Meete for her, sheweth her selfe ope bhearekullp vnto thé in their goynges, n AND meeteth them with all diligence.
~onncds 18 For the vnfalgned delire of reforma-

f tion is her begynnyng: to cave for nurture is loue,

1 And loue is the kepyng of her lawes, and the kepyng ok her lawes is the assnraunce of immortalttie:

20 And ümmortalitie maketh a man familier with God. n

to the kyngdomeleuerlacyng.) adeth D

22 If pour delpyght be then in ropa seates and stepters (O pe kynges of the people) set pour * lust vpon Wildome that ve may raigne for euermoree. orie

23 O loue the ar ok wildome all VC wy é that be rulers ot the people. Saut un

24. As for wildome, What che is z howe an. she tame vp, I wyll tell you, and Wyll not Hyde the mysteries of (God) from pou: but Wyll seke her out from the begynnpng ok her natiuttie, and bryng the knowledge of her into lpaht, and Wyll not kepe backe the trueth,

25 Meither Wp J haue to do with con: sumyng enuie: for such a man shal not be partaker of wildome.

26 But the multitude of the wie, is the | welfare of the worlde: and a Wile kyng isthe vpholdyng of the people.

27 O reteaue nurture then through my wWordes, and it shall do you good.

8 D}, Map,

Ihe. vij. Chapter. mildome ought to be preferred aboue all thynges.

My felfe allo am a yy (mortal man, lpke as all other, € am tome ok the earthy generation ol hym that was

e kirst made,
2 — And in mp mothers wombe was fashoned to be fleshe in

the tyme of tenne monethes, beyng

brought together in blood, through the

seede of man, and the plealure that came

With sleepe.

And when J was borne J reteaued
Ipke apre as other men, and fell vpon the earth which is of like nature, crying and weeping at the first as all other do.

J was wrapped in lwadlyng clothes, and brought vp with cares.

5 For there is no kyng that hath had

any other begyrmyng of birth.
6 Allmen then haue one entraunce vnto
Ipfe, and one goyng out in lyke maner.

7 Wherkore J delted, and vnderstan-

Dyug was geuen me: Jtalled, and the spirite of wildome tante into me.

8 J set more by her then by kingdomes and ropal seates, and counted riches nothyng in conparison of her.

9 As kor pretious fone, J compared it

ww

not vnto her: for all golde is but a litle grauell vnto her, and siluer shalbe tounted but clay before her syght. a

lo Floned her aboue wellare k beautie, and purpofed to take her for nip lyght: for her lyght tan not be quenched,

u Allgood thynges together came ko

3 nh herb and innunierable riches

throngh her handes.

; And J was glad in all thynges, betause wildome went before them: aud

Iknewe not that che was the mother

of them.

3 And Imp selke learned vnkaignedly, and make other men partakers of ue without enuie, and hyde her riche from no man. * 8

14 302 Che is an infinite treasure 1. men: which who fo ble, become 1 5 ers of the loue (and kriendchyp! d ok and are accepted vnto him for the gi of wildome. peak

15 God hath graunted me to P * what my mynde conceauetl), 1 chat thynke as is meete fo2 the tenen tl are geuen me: For sttshethah, : 5 vnto r teacheth to dome a ryght. dour

16 Jor in his hande art both wants,

Or, heul.

of wildome.

X

VI.

Wordes, ped all dur wisdome and in all thynges, and passyng through all

knowledge of (his! workes. ö

17 Jor he hath geuen me the true stiente ofthe thinges that ave, fo that J know holbe the worlde was made, and the

owers of the elententes:

3 The begynnyng, endyng, and myddest of the tymes, howe the tymes alter, howe one goeth after another, k howe they are fulfpiled, N

9 The tourle of the pere, the ordinauntes of the starres, .

10 The natures of ipuyng thynges, the

furidusnesse of beastes, the power of the
Wyndes, the imaginations of men, the diuerlities of poung plants, the vertues ok rootes: c u And all such thynges as are either setrete or manifest, them haue J learned.
22 For wildome Which is the worker of all thynges hath taught me: for in her is the spirite of vnderstandyng, which is holy, one onlp, manikolde, subtile,
“quicke moupng, cleare, bnodefiled, plaine, [weete, louyng the thyng that is good, sharpe, which can not be letted, doyng good, den. 2 Kylide to nian, stedfast, sure, free from dien care, hauyng all vertues, tircunispett

round

vnderstanding, deane,¢ {ubtile spirites.
24. Foz Wildome is nimbler then all nimble thynges, che goeth through and attayneth to all thynges, becaute of her cleannesse.
25 Foz she is the breath of the power of
God, and a pure influence flowing from

the glorie of the alnughtie (God: J ther-

foze can no defiled thyng come vnto her.

26 Jor she is the bryghtnesle of the euerlastyng lyght, the bndefited mirrour of the maiestie ol God, and the image of his goodnesse.

27 And beyng (but) one, fhe tan do alt thinges: and remaynyng in her selte the renueth all, and in all ages ol tymes entryng into holp soules, che maketh
Gods friendes, and prophetes:

28 For God loueth none, ik he dwell not with wildonie.

29 Foz the is more beautifull then the sunne, “and geueth moze lyght then the starres, and the day is not to be conv pared vnto her.

30 For vpon the day tommeth nyght: but wickednesse tan not ouercome wildome.

a

The. viij. Chapter.
Che effectes ol wildome.

1 Itldome reacheth
A from one ende to ano-

ther mightily, and e

5 5 \) 4 j
33 N J haue loued her,
Cit and laboured fo2 her,

euen from my pouth vp: J dyd my diligente to mary my selle wu her, such loue had J vnto her beautie.
That the hath the companie of God, it commendeth her nobilitie: pea the se of all thynges bymifelfe loueth

4 dines 201 eee of tbe od, and ut o

bis worte the tholer o ae ta man woulde desire riches in
Sen ye pke, whats richer then wilbome

Yat Worketh all thynges-

muster pprudencie Worke: what is it a bat all thynges that worketh better: eu vf a man laue ryghteoulnelle, her durs are but vertues: For Why: che

teacheth sobernesse and pendence, righteousnesle and strength, which are such thinges as men tan haue nothyng more profitable in their tyfe.

8 Ika man defive much knowledge, fhe can tell the thynges that are patt, and disterne thynges kor to come: the knoweth the {ubtilties of wordes, and can expounde darke fentences: fhe forseeth lignes and Wonders or euer they

"D2, aboue all the order ;) ol starreg.

* Oz, lt.

O, tustict and manhood.

W
„O:. much

crptticnce. ,

conte to passe, and the endes of all „ te.

tymes and ages. 8
Therkore J purposed after this maner: J wpyll take her into my tompanie, that (he may line with me, hnowpng for certaintie the shall geue me good counsaple, and speake comfortably puto me in my carefuilnesse and grieke.
10 For her lake Mall J be wellce honelllp! taken among the commons, and with honour among the elders though y) be

pound.

n Fhalbe founde to be of Harpe iudgenient, fo that I Matbe wee be

: L

ol theelenenth

verse in only in the olde tion.

Oz, A thal

a gourme the people.

C

Or, the

Oz. und pet ect m

B 7

The booke : i by my felfe, and pondered them in m

che fight of great men: and the faces of

princes Mall Wonder at me,

12 When JJ holde my tongue, they {hall byde my lealure, and when J spcake, they shall geue good eare vuto me, and if J talke much, they hail lav their handes vpon their mouth.

3 Moreouer, by the meanes of her J
Hall obtapne immortalitie, and leaue behpnde nie an enerlastyng memorial among them that come after me.

14. J shall {et the people in order, and the nations shalbe subdued bnto me.

15 Horrible tirauntes shalbe akraide when they do but heare of me, among the muititude J halbe counted good, and mightie in battaple.

16 When J tome home J Matt fpnde ret with her: for her companie hath no bitternesse, and her felowshyp hath no tedioulnelle, but mirth and jop.

17 Mowe whẽ J considered thele thinges

21 Meuerthelefle when J

heart, howe that to be io
Domne is tnnmoztalitie, PPD Dato Unt

18 And great pleasure to hane her krlendfhyp, and that in the wake she
Handes are infinite riches, and that who so kepeth compante with her shalbe wile, and that he which talketh with her, all tome to honour: J Went about sekyng howe to get her vnto me.

1 For J was a lad of ripe witte, and had a good vonderstandyng.

20 Wut when J grewe to moze vnderstandyng, IJ came to an bndefiten bodp.

with Hi ial

perce = that J coulde not entop it except — gaue it (me) and that was a poynt of wildome also to knowe whole gyft it was, I stepped vnto the Lorde and be: fought hym, and with my whole heart
IJsapde after this maner:

The. ix. Chapter.
J praper of Solomon to obteyne wildome.

God of (my) fathers, and Torde of mercie, thou hast made all thynges with thy
Worde,

3 That he Mhouide order the worlde

4 Geue me wildome which is euer littyng about thy seate, and put me not out from among thy children:

5 For J thy seruaunt and sonne of thy handmapden, am à feeble perlon, and of a short tyme, and to voung to the bn: derstandyng of iudgement and lawes.

6 And thongh a man ve neuer fo perfect aniong the children of men, pet pk thy

wildome be not with hym, he shalbe

nothyng regarded.

Thon hast chosen me to be a kyng vnto thy people, and the indge of thy sonnes and daughters.

8 Thou hak connnaunded me to bullde atemple vpon thy holy mount, and an

aulter in the titie wherin thou dwellest,

alikenefle of thy holy tabernacle, which

thou hast prepared from the beginning.

9 And thy wildome with thee, which knoweth thy workes, which allo was with thee whẽ thou madest the worlde, and knewe what was acceptable in thy syght, and ryght in thy tommaunde-

10 O sende her out of thy holy heauens /d from the throne of thy maiestie, that the may be with ine and labour wich me} that I may knowe what is acceptable in thy syght.

n Fo The knoweth and vnderstandeth all thynges, and (he shall leade me soberly in my workes, and prelerue mie in her power.

12 So fhall my workes be acceptable, and then thall J goucrne thy people ryghteouslp, and be worthy to sit in iy fathers scate. 0

3 FJor what man is he that tan e the counsaple of God: or Who can thin
What the wyll of Godis- 755

14. For the thoͤughtes of moztall 7 Fe
“miferable, ard our fozetastes art bur n vntertaine. N

15 Foz Why a torruptible body is Jp as vnto the foule, and the earthy dee an kepeth downe that vnderstande gbr that minfeth pon manpcbpnetrne she 15

„O:, tht

16 Gery hardlp can N kechynges

e

. grtat labour haue we or we can kynde
% the thynges Whichare before our eyes:
, E bwho hath then fought out the ground okthe thynges that are done in heauenr Ch Lowe} Who can haue knowledge ok thy onderstandyng and! meanyng, ex-

of wildome.

. thynges that are bpon earth, and kept thou geue wildome, and lende thy

holy ghost from aboue-

18 FJor so the wayes of them which liued onthe earth were refourmed, and men haue learned the thynges that are pleafaunt vnto thee, and were prelerued through wildome.

The. x. Chapter.

Che deliueraunce ol the ryghteous, and destruction of the enemies commeth

ac through wildome.
He preferred the first
A tourmed father of the

worlde that was crea-

ted alone, and brought

I Dyin out of is fall:

And gaue him power

=- to rule all thynges.

Wut when the bnrighteous went

away in his wrath from her, he pe-

riched by the furious delire to murther his brother.

both 4 Jo; whom when the* water destroyed the whole worlde, wildome agapne preserued it, her lelfe gouernyng the ut man by no tostly worke of wood.

ban. 5 Mozeoutr, when the nations were confounded [2 ioyned together] in their malitious confederatie, she founde out the righteous, and preserued hym faultlesse vnto God, and kept hym strong agaynst the loue ok his sonne.

Guin 6 She prelerued the ryghteous when he fied from the vngodly that perished, what tyme as the fire fell downe vpon the flue cities. ö

$7 Like as pet this day thecontrutetutt waͤlte tand fmokpng lande geueth testimonie of their wickednesle: yea the

vnripe € vntymely frnites that growe bpon the trees, and fo2 a token of a remembraunce of the vnkapthkull foule, there standyng a pyller of falt.

d For all (uch as regarded not wildome, dat not only this hurt, that they knewe not the thynges which were good: but allo left behynde them vnto mena memoniall of their foolichnesle, lo that in the thynges wherin they finned, they toulde not be hyd.

9 at as for such as toke heede vnto loben e le hach deltuered them from

fey * ae a When the ryghteous fled becaule of is brothers Wzath, wildome led hym

Bis 3

‘th, ag

the ryght way, shewed hym the kyngdome of God, gaue hym knowledge of holy thynges, made hym riche in his labours, t brought to passe the thynges that he went about. *

nu In the disteiptkulnesse of such as de- +o: ,cone: krauded hym, che stoode by hym and ™™™ made hym riche. a

12 She laued hym from the enemies, and defended him froni the “deceauers:
Ina strong battayle she gane hym the victorie, that he myght knowe howe that the feare ol God is stronger then all thynges. a

33 When the ryghteous was solde, she Cen e forsoke hym not, but delyuered hym Acviib. from finne: She went downe with hyn into the dungeon, N

14. And fayled hym not in the bandes, till the had brought hym the {eepter of the realme, and power agaynst those that oppressed hym: As for them that had accused hym, fhe declared them to be

. U and brought hym to perpetuall

wo

* Oz, Ipers in Wapte.

Oz, prison

Gen. xll. f.

Ahpp. Or giozle.

15 She deltuered the ryghteous people rob. and faultlesle seede, from the nations that oppressed them.

16 She entred into the foute of the ser- ge. uaunt of the Lorde, and stoode by hym in Wonders and tokens agaynit the
Deadfull kynges.

17 She gaue the ryghteous the reward of their labours, and led them foorth a marneylous way: on the day tyme (he was a shadowe vnto then, and alyght ol starres in the nyght season.

18 She brought them theough the red Exo, ce. sea, and taryed them through the great water.

19 But she drowned their enemies n the fea} but brought them out of the bottome of the deepe. a

20 *Sorherygbeons tobe tbe bangt Exod. xi e.

Oz, the faintes.

I [he booke

. the bugenly, * € peapled thy holy name 21 Foz wiloome openeth them

5 i e duth of ben
Exod.xv.2. fous the dumbe, and maketh tl * ode and magnified thy vittor and h the tongue
Hande Wit one attorde. babes to be eloquent. =
The. xj. Chapter.

Che miracles done for Firack. iʒ Che vengeaunce or kinners. 28 Che great

power and mercie of God.

THe ordered their
% workes in the handes if of the holy prophete:
* s that) they went though the wüdernesse that was not in-
— habited, and pitched their tentes in the waste desert.
3 They stoode agaynst their enemies, and were auenged of their aduersaries.
4 When they were thirstie they talled vpon Chee, and water was geuen them out ot the (mol) hype rocke, xe their thirst was quenched out of the harde fone.
5 Pon bythethynges wherthrough their be: enemies were punished, were the chil-
Trachten. dren of Asrael helped in their neede.

6 Foz in steede of a fountaine of the perpetuall runnyng flud all troubled with gone blood,

W 7 In repioche of the commaundement

published to murther the inkantes, thou

gauest vnto them aboundaunce of water, and that not loked for neither:

Ai
On, derected. 02, pole ptred.

Exo. x vi. a.

Exod ty. c.
Num. cx. b.

8 Peclaryng by that thirst then, howe

thou hadst punished thine aduerlaries.
For when they were tryed, and nurtured with (fatherly) mercie, they knewe

Howe the vngodly were iudged and

punished in the Wath dot God.

10 For thele hast thou exhorted as a father, and pioued them: but vnto the other thou hast ben a boystuous kyng,

layed Harde to their charge, and con dempned them. .

f u whether they were abfentoz prelent,

g their punishment was a lpke.

12 Foz their griefe was double, and mournyng for the remembraunce of thynges pat:

z Foz when they perceaued that their punichmentes dyd them good, they thought vpon the Lode,

C 14 Foz whom in his castyng out vefore,
AS au abiect they had denied with derision, hun in the ende when they lawe
What happened, they wondered at: for

Deut. via. 9

Oz, examined them
üraptip.

* D2, K felt. 3

the iust.
15 But for the foolishe dewises of their

they Were ok another thirst then was

wickednesse, wherwith being dece they worshipped lerpentes that 1 1 the bie of realon, and vile beastes thou sentest a multitude of vnrealdnable beastes bpon them kor reuengeaunce:

16 That they myght knowe, that loke wherewithall a man sinneth, by the same allo shall he be punished.

17 * Foz pnto thy almightie hande that Les made the worlde of naught, it was not SP vnposlible to sende among them ann heape of beares, or wood lions,

18 Or truell beattes of a straunge kynde such as are vnknowen, or spout fire, or calt out a smokpng breath, or shoote horrible sparkes out of their eyes:

19 Which myght not only destrop them with hurtyng, but allo kyll them with their horrible syght.

20 ta without thesel beades might they haue ben flayne with one wynde, being perfecuted by the reuengeaunte, and stattered abroade through the breath of thy power: Meuerthelesse, thou hat ordered all thinges in mealure, number. and wayght.

21 Foz thou hast euer had great strength D and myght, and who may withstande the power of thyne arme

22 For Why- Ipke as the small thyng

that the ballaunce wapeth, fo is the

Worlde before thee: vea as à dropof the
975 eke that fallech downe vpon the earth.

23 ut thou hast mereic vpon all, fo: thou batt power of all thynges, and makett thee as though thou lawest not the finnes of men, becaule they shoulde amende.

24. Foz thou louest all the thynges that are, and hatest none of them 170 thou hast made: for thou Aeg i a haue made any thyng vf thou!

ated it. 7

20 Pea howe myght any thyng e pfit were not thy Wylle or holbe . any thpng be preserued, except it

Hed of thee:

26 Wut en sparest all: for they are tue

(O Torde) thou louer of soules. Ile

Rom. ia.

39 God geueth lealure to repent.

Or thy vncorruptible
=! {pirite, O Tozde, is in all hinges:

“oi Therkore chastenest thou them mealura-

Dedt h.

xitenie holy lande, thou mighte not away with them.

Foz they tommitted abhonnnable
Wozes (against theelas witchcraft, fo2terie, and wicked sacritices. *

They flue their owne chyldren without mercp, they dyd eate vp the bowels ok mens fleshe, and deuoured the blood in abhominable bankets, and had their mad fanaticall priestes:

6 And the fathers were the chieke murderers of the soules destitute of helpe,
(thefe doers) thou wouldest destrop by the handes of our fathers:

87 That the lande whiche thon louest aboue all other, might be a meete dwelling for the chyldren of God. '

8 Meuertheleffe, thou {parent themalfo as men, and seudedst the forerunners ofthyne hoast, euen hornettes, to vestroy them out by litle and litle.

Mot that thou wast vnable to subdue the vngodly vnto the righteous in battaple, or with truell beastes, or With one e . oD worde to destroy them together: dau lo Wut thy mynde was in punishing

em by title elite, to geue them place kor amendement, knowing Well thatit was an vnrighteous nation, and wicked of nature, and that their thought might neuer be altered.

1 For it was a turled seede from the be-
Antung: pet Hatt thou not pardoned their finnes wherein they offended, for that thou fearest any man.

1 F02 who will Land against thy iudgement: o2 who wyll blame thee foz the hations that perifhe, whom thou halt made: or who Wyll come before thy

of wyldome.

Xlix

J The. xij. Chapter.
Che merep of God to warde linners. 14 Che workes of God are vnreprouable.

kate to be reuenged for the vnrighteous men:

I3 For there is none other God but thou,

“that carest for all thinges: that thou , perv. mapest declare howe that thy iudgemeut is not vnright.

4. There dare neither king nor tiraunt

inthy light, require accomptes of them whom thou hast destroped. “tae

15 Forsomuche then as thon art righte-

ous thy {elfe, thou ordzest all thinges righteoullp, thinking it vnseenielp for 1 . thy power to condempne hym that

Hath not deserued to be punished.

16 Jo thy power is the beginning of

righteousnesse, and betause thou art
Torde of all hinges, it maketh thee to be gracious vnto all.

17 Foz when nien thinke thee not to be

ofa full strength, thou detlarest thy power, and reprouest the boldnesse of the wyse.

18 But thou mastring thy power doest vue

iudge with equitie, and ordrest vs with great fauour: for thou mapest ble pow: er when thou wylt.

19 By fuche wozkes nowe hat thon

taught thy people, that the iust man

shoulde be louing, and halt made thy chyldren to be of a good hope, betaule

nn geuest roome to repentaunce fo2 innes.

20 For insoniuche as thou hast punished 5

and with such deliberation and obtestation, the enemies of thy seruauntes, whiche were Worthy to dye, where through thou gauest them tyme and plate of amendement, that they might turne from their wickednesse:

2 With howe great circumspection then

punishest thou thyne owne chyldren, vnto Whole fathers thou hast sworne x made couenanntes of good promiles-

22 So where as thou doest chasten vs,

thou punishest our enemies a thou- . lande tymes moze: to the intent that

When we punithe, we should diligently

thinke ol thy goodnesse, and when we

our selues are punished, we shoulde os. hope for mercy.

23 eee eee b J

dissolutely

—— = | hebooke

| vnrightedully, thou 26 Astor {uch as wyll not ber

MTolutely and bal united them fore With their

by those scornes (and rebukes} they —

feete the worthy punichment o

eabhominations. : God.
Serie. wae pontheptoentatbeay very long in 27 Foz locke in What thinges they 115 eg er.
. the wapes okerrour, c held the bealtes dayned when they lukred for their dan n
Whithe enen their enemies vefpifed) lakes whomthey tounted gods, seyng 8 fon gods dertaued as chyldren of no vn- them selues punished in the lame, t pl derstanding. perccaued that he was in deede thetrue
25 Therelore halt thon sent them thy God. whom before they had denyed to iudgement in cone, as to chrldeen knowe, and therekoze came extreme voyde okrealon. dampnation vponthem.
J The. xiij. Chapter. '
IAT thinges be bayne except the knowledge of God, 0 Idolaters and idols are mocked.
1 1 ively bapne are all 83 Howebeit, vet neither are they to be x

emen by nature, which

were ignoraunt of

8 God, and toulde not out ok the good things that are seene knowe

—pymthat ol hym selke is euerlastingj neither toke fo muche re-

"© Dz,excels

enk.
“Dy, the kirst aucthoue.

to haue ben gods, pet should they haue
| 4 Dz tf they maruepled at the power

they.

5 Non by the greatnesse of the beautte and of the creatures, the maker therof comparcd with them, may plapnely be

Eknowen.

6 MNotwithstanding, they are the tele to be blamed that seeke God, and woulde finde him, e vet peraduenture misle.

7 For they being occupied in his works, do seelie hym diligentlp, and are perwaded by the light, betause the things are beautifull that are (cene,

Oz feens,

“D3, ent.

extused.
9 FJsor ik their vnderstanding (and know: ledge be so great, that they tan disterne "9, ann, the wondland the creatures why do ther not rather finde out the Lorde thevof: lo Wut miserable are thep, and among 7 n the dead is their hope, that tall them gods whiche are but the wonkes of mens handes, golde, filuer, and the thing that is founde out by cunning, an, the similitude of beastes, or any bapue pi that hath ben made by hande of olde.
11 Or as Whe a carpenter tutteth downe
à tree meete for the purpose, and pareth okal the barke cunningly, and lo bparte comely maketh a vellell profitable to the ble of life:
2 And with that whiche is cut of from his wozke, Doth drelle his meate to fyll his bellp: a P z And as for the other part that (5 lekt,
Whiche is profitable for nothing (foe it tsatrooked peece of Wood and full of knobbes)he tarueth it diligently Rue sure, and according to the knowledge dt his tunning, he geueth it some propor tion, fachioneth it after the similitude of aman,
14. 2 maketh it lpke fome byle 1 € straketh it ouer with red, aud parat it, and looke what toute tpot is in it, h tasteth some tolour vpon it. Loa ae
15 Then maketh he a tonuenient 10 tie natle for tt, setteth it in the wall, maketh it fat with iron:

| t0 s ‘rounding fo fog tt, lelt it hape fal,

fall, for it is well knowen that it can

of wyldome.

blie peapeth vnto hym that is dead: he calleth vpon hym for helpe, that hath no experience at all: and to sende hym a
1095 Maiti prapeth him that may
19 And for gayne, for worke, and for fire cesse of his affayres, he asueth power of
. is Without all maner of

Ox, makct!

{pplication vnto hym.

¢ The. xiiij. Chapter.

Che detestation and abhomination oftniages, 8 J curfe of them and of him that maleth them. 14 hereok idolatrie proceeded: 23 what euils come of idolatrie.

en elpe it lelfe: Aor why, it is but an
‘ 1 mutt of necessitie be helped.
4 Then making prayer for his goodes, for his mariage, and fo2 chyldren, he is not ashamed to speake to that Whiche

path no soule. — g Foz health, he maketh his petition pou Duco him that is sicke: for life, he hum-
41 sy Cape, another man
A purposing to fayle and
. beginning to take his mea “9 |ltonrney thorowe the
1 . sraging sea, tallech for

I belpe bnto a stocke that is farre Weaker then the vessell that beareth hym.

mye, — ay N

2 Poras for it, conetousnesse of money

hath founde it ont, and the traltes man made it with his cunning.

3 Wut thy prouidence O father gonernethit: For thou hast made a wap cuen in the fea, and ature path in the uddelt of the waues,

4 Declaring herby that chon hast power to helpe in all thinges, pea though
à man went to the lea without chip.

5 Meuerthelesle thou wouldest not that

het aid . yt.

the workes of thy wyldonie shoulde be

in bapne: and therefore do men commit

their liues to a small peece of wood,

paling ouer the stormie fea in a ship, and arc saued. done 6 Fon in the olde tyme allo when the proude giauntes perished, he in whom the hope was left to intreale the World, went into the (hip whiche was gouerned thorowe thy hand, and lo left feede behynde hym dnto the worlde.
Jor happy is the tree, wherthrough
„ „ righteousnesle commeth : d Bunt tturledis (the idoil) that is made with handes, pea both it and he that made it: He, becaule he made it: and it, gew, Octdule it Was called God, whereas it is but a frayle thing.
Foz the vngodip and his vngodly-
= a are both like abhominable vnto

10 (Euen lo) the worke and hethat made it allo, halbe puniched together.

85 ede, 7

n Therekore Hall there a plague come vpon the idols of the heathen: for out ol the treature of God they are become an abhominatton, a teumptation buto the soules of men, and a snare fo the feete of che vnwyse.

2 J or why, the seeking ont of idols is the beginning of whordome, and the

bringing vp of them, is the destruction oflyfe.

13 For they were not from the beginning, neither shall they continue for euer.

14 The vapneglory of men bath founde them ont vpon earth, therkore shal they C tome shortly to an ende.

15 Jo; when a father mourned heauylp fo2 his sonne lodainely taken awap from hym, he made hym an image: and hym whiche then was but a dead man, he now began to Worlhip as a god, and drbapned {02 his seruauntes ceremonies and sacrifices.

16 Thus by processe of time this vngra-

tiodus tustoine being Waren strong Was kept asa lawe, and images were wor-
(hipped by commaundement of tirauntes.

17 As for those that Were fo farre of that men might not worship them present, their vilage bepng drawne out from

Oz, gorgra ons.

Or, a sclaun der g offence, oz Guinbling blocke,

Oz, deulng

Oz, inuentions

Oi, the cozruptton.

" D2, soone.

n Dz, subiccttg.

“ D2, wicked

karre of, was made as the “cleare . image ofan Honourable king, that they might with aftfection flatter aschell the absent as the prelent.

13 Agapne, the linguler ambition of the craftes man gaue the ignoraunt also a great orcafion to nicreasc the superstition.

19 For he willing to pleale one peraduenture that bare rule, laboured with all his cunning to make the image of the

best fashion.
* (ij) 20 And

“D1 Dilla gece,

O, was of aucthozitie.

N

I pebooke

nd fo thorowe the beautie of the

20 oke che common people being therto allured, toke hyn nowe foz a god, whiche a litle before was but honoured

as a man. '

And this was to the deteauing of

mans life, when men either with cala-

mitie or tirannie oppressed, ascribed bn

to stones and stockes that namecot God!

whiche ought not to be geuen vnto ane thing Cels.) ö

22 Moreouer, this was not tnough kor

them, that they erred in the knowledge

of God: but where as they liued in the

great warre of ignoraunce, tole so

ones: (manp and) great plagues talled they

eate.

Dewxvii 23 Foz either they slue their owne chyl-

lere b. zen and offred them in lacrilice, or vled fecvete ceremonies, or kolowed madde
Drunken dillolutenesse of rites in latri-

z, multi-

ice:

24 So that they kept neither like nor mariage cleane: but either one fue another traptoroulsly, or greeued hym by adulterie.

25 So that there raigned in al men without exception, blood, manslaughter,

thekt, dissinmlation, coreu 8 fapthfutnetle feoition permit =
26 etn of good men, vnthanke-
995 sb a. of (ules, cPauunging of pathy, disordering of maria . rie, and vncleanenelse. a a
7 ieimanrs athe begin ehr a e images, i egtaning, t

m ee fal cul. | J, the caufe
28 Foz (ther that worchip idols ether

are madde when they be 9 75 saa

phelic lies, or llue bngodly,o2 els tight:

ly forsweare them lelues.

29 Forinsomuche as their trust is in the idols whiche haue no soule, though they Weare fallcly, pet they thinke it shall not hurt then.

30 Therekore commeth a great plague bpon them, and that worthyly for both

tduses: for they haue an euyll opinion

of God that geue heede vnto idols, and they sweare vniustly in deceipt, despifing holpnes.

Foz it is not the power of them by whom they lweare: but it is the iult vengeaunte of sinners that punicheth dre the offence of the vngodip

ders.

J The. xv. Chapter.

¶ Che boyte of the laythlull prapling the mercp of God, by whole grace they

serue not idols.

Ut thou O our God art gratious, true, and
„ong suffring, and in

tounted thyne.

For to knowe thee, is perfect rightedusues:yea to knoe thy power, is the roote ofimmortalitie.

4 As forthe thing that men haue found
Sen, out through their cuyll stience it Hath dn deren not deteaued vs, nor the paynters vn-

men dectaued

profitable labour (to wit) an image
{potted with diuers colours,

5 Whose sight entiseth the ignoraunt to lust after it, and he desireth the “picture of a dead image that hath no breath.

» Dp, Maze

Lisl

6 Woth they that make them they that desire then, and they that worchip them, ioucenyls, and are worthy to haue suche thinges to trust bpon.

5 FJor the potter temperetl {oft earth, laboureth it, and geueth it the fachion, ok Whatfoeucr vellell serueth for out vse: and of the felfe fame clap he mar keth both the vessels that serue for tleane dies, and also such as serueto the tontrarp:wherevnto euerp vellell erueth, the potter hym felfe beyng the

iudge.

3 0 by his wicked labour he mana abapne god of the fame clay, this a euen he Whithe a litte before Was m of earth hyn felfe, and within e gut whyle after returneth to the 10 be of Whiche he was taken, whey 11 ok his lyle halbe demaunded fron

agapne. 9 H ot:

"Dh deep,

Dl tht cage! not ONE to be namtd ol dg.

u ee Orage

5 Oi, telt.

u Sz, lodge mer.

a litilt

otwithstanding, he tareth not the
* moze for this that be mutt labour, noz that his life is short: but striueth to excell golofinythes and fituerfmpthes, and endeuoureth to do like the coppersmythes, and taketh it for an honour to make deteauable thinges.

His heart is but athes, hig hope is more Bayne then earth, and his lyfe of gee lelle honour then clay.

4% 1 Forzlomuche as he ünaweth not his one maker that gaue him his foule of power to worke, and breathed in hym the breath of life.

2 But thep counted our lyfe but a paz stime, and our) conuersation to be but a market fo2 gayne, and that men Mould euery wap be getting, pea though it were by eupll meanes.

z Nowe he that ofearth maketh frayle pessels and images, Bnolbeth hym feife to offende aboue all other.

14. Al the enemies of thy people that hold them infublection, are mot vnwyle, €

„ gy tal poste 10

Herfore by such things

are they worthyly pu-

niched, e thorowe the

Amultitude of beastes are they rooted out.

In steede of the

3 whiche pumshmentes

thou hast graciousiy ordred thine owne people, preparing for the delire of their
Appetite a straunge taste, euen quaples to be their meate:

3 To the intent that by the thinges whiche were shewed e fent vnto them, they that were fo greedie of meate, might begin to lothe euen their netellarie appetite and they which had suffred

pbenurie for a short space, might be par-

takers okthe newe taste.

4 Fortt was requifite that without any excule pouertic chould come vpon thole whiehe vled tirannte, and to shewe onlve buto the other howe their enemies

gere destroped.

Jor when the cruell woodnesse of che bealtes tame vpon them, and they periched thorowe the stinges okthe truell serpentes, [Hot withstanding) thy

: math endured not perpetually.

Nua.

ltaton, that they might be refournted,

of wyldome.

ey were put in keare for a litle

» Wi, verre

are moze nuserable then very kooles. 22

15 Foz they iudge all the tools of the C heathen to be gods, whiche neither haue epelight to lee, nor noles to finell, nor cares to heare, nor fingers or hands to grope, and as for their fcete, they are
[to] slowe to go.

16 For man made them, and he that borowed his owne spirit fathisned them: but no man can niake a god lyke vnto hym selke.

17 Jor seyng he is but mortall, it is but mortall that he maketh with vnrighteous handes: He him lelle is better then they whom he Worshippeth, foz he liued as they dyd neuer.

18 Bea they Worshipped (such) beastes also as are most hatefull: for if they „anche were tompared for madnesle, they are .

Worle then others. ving.

19 Neither haue they any beautie why to be delired in relpect of other beastes: but are all voyde of the prayse ok God, and his blessing.

On, to diaw che apze, oz, cath,

The. xvj. Chapter.
Che punichment of idolaters. r Che benefites done bute the fapthfult.

hauinga token offatuation to remem- 22th: ber the commaundeimnent of thy lawe.

7 F02 he that looked backe (tot) was not healed by the thing that he sawe, but by thee O {autour of all.

8 So in this thou shewedst our enemies, that it is thou whiche detinerett from all eupll.

9 Jo then“ when they were bitten egoaxa.
With grashoppers and fipes, they dped, neither was there any remedie founde for their life, for they were Worthy to be punished by suche.

10 But not the very teeth of venemous dragons dyd ouercome thy chyldren:for thy merty was euer by them, and healed them.

11 For they were pricked betause they should remember thy wordes, but speedyly were they healed agayne, lest they choulde fall into so deepe forgetfulnesse, that they might not be called backe by thy benefite.

12 For it was neither hearbe nor platter that restored them to health: but thy
Wo2d O Load, which healeth al things.

z It is thou O Lord that hast the power of life and death, thou leadest vnto Deo zt. deathes dooze, and bringest vp againe. dre

14 Aman in deede thorowe his Wicked- enges.

G (it) nesse,

W

The booke

nelfe may flay another} but when his lence of the fire and melted not, that

irite is gone foorth, it turneth not a post neither map he call agapne the foute that is taken away.

dals, C iz, But it ts not pollible to estape thy xOd. IA. e. hande.

16 F02 the vngodlp that woulde not knowe thee, were punished by the strength of thyne arme: with straunge raynes, haples, and showres were they persecuted that they coulde not auopde, and thorowe fire were they consunned.

17 Foz it was a wonderdus thing that fire might vo moze then water whiche quencheth all thinges: but the Wozlde is the auenger of the rightedus.

13 Foz sometimes was the fyre so tame, that the beastes whiche Were sent to pumith the vngodly, brent not, and that becanle they should fee and knowe that

„ they were perletuted with the puuishment ot God.

19 And sometyme brent the fire in the nuddest ofthe water, that it might destroy the fruites of the vniust lande.

Exodxvi«. 20 In steede wherof, thou hast fed thine oWne people with angels foode, and sent them bread redye from heanen

„ onberng Without their labour, being dery plea-

ottecefpal launt and ol good taste.

Au r 21 Jor this thy substaunce vnto thy chyldren declared thy [Weetenes, and leruing to his appetite that toke it, tenipe-

red itfelfe according to his desire.

Exodixd 22 Mut the no we and ple abode the vio-

O great are thy iudgmentes (D Lorde]) and can not be expressed: ri therefore men do erre
E that wyll not be reae SEC fourmed (bp thy wytome.)
Frodxe 2 oz when the vnrighteous thought to haue thy holy people in subiection, they Were bounde with the bandes of daͤrknesse and long night, chut vp vnder roofes, and lay there to eftape the eternall prouidence.
3 And Whyle they thought to be hyd in the darknesse of their sinnes, they were
(cattered abrode in the bery middelt of
* ete Aang of forgetfulnesse
© with car j rout: ma peer, are, and wondero

Rom. xi. c.

I

they might know that the fire burnin

in the haple, k sparkeling in the tapne

destroyed the fruite of the enemie
3 . 11 bree clean gapne, e righteous ae ee *
24 Foz the creature that seruet whiche art the maker, is ewe m pr withing tod ore but is easie land gentle) to do good, vnto fur their trust in thee. bas put
25 Therefore dyd tt alter at the fame tyme into all fachtons, and was obedlent buto thy grace, whiche is the nurle of all thinges, according to the desire of them that had neede thereof:
26 That thy chyldren O Lorde whom thou louest, night knowe that it is not

the growing of fruites that ferdeth oy

men, but that it is thy word which pre-
1 them that put cer tt in

27 Fozlooke What mpgaht not be destroped at all with the fire, assoone as it was warmed with a litle sunne beame, it melted:

28 That all men might knowe, that thankes ought to be geuen vnto thee before the sunne ryse, and that thou oughtest to be Wozhipped before the day spring.

29 For the hope of the bnthankfull Hall melt awap as the winter yle, and flowe away as vnprokitable water.

J The. xvij. Chapter.
¶ The iudgementes of God against the wicked.

4 Foz the comer where they lay hyd, might not kepe them from feare, Bez caule the foundes came rounde about them and vexed them, pea many terri-

ble and straunge vilions appeared vn-

to them.
5 Mo power ofthe fire might geue them ne er might the cleare flambes ofthe starres lightẽ the horrible might:
6 But there appeared vnto them a “a
Dayne fire only, very dreadfull: Al. 1 which fight, wherin they sawe noth ig throughly, they were lo afrapde, th they thought the thing whiche th 5 sawe to be the moze fearefull. ial
7 As for the Mufions of the magi art, they came to naught: and it nope most thamefull reproche of LA 0 115 that they pad of their owne WY 3 05

Deut vii a ath. ili a,

"Ds, and,

Pz, piepcd vnto at.

0 Op, cht wut.

of wyldome.

ee g yorthep that promiled to dune away Was not looked for,came vpon them.

the feares and troubles from the ficke

soule, were sicke them selues with feare

worthy to be laughed at.

9 For though ns terrible thing did feare

them, pet were they afrayde at the

beastes whiche passed by them, and at the hiffing ofthe serpentes. nsomuch that with trembiing they sowned, and sayde they sawe not the ae apre, whiche no man yet may estape. ban, 1 FOP malite is a dreadfull thing, that is tondempned by His owne wilnelle: and beyng pressed with confttence, it euer suspetteth cruel thinges.

1 Jop feare is nothing eis but a betraying of the fuccours whiche reafon olfereth.

3 And looke howe niche the lesse his hope is within, the greater doth bere: count his ignoraunte of that caule that bryngeth the torment.

C But they (that dyd indure) the night that in deede was intollerable, and that tame from the Dungeons of intollerable hell, sleping the same sleepe,

1 Were somtünes chaled with monsterous apparitions, and sometpmes they sowned, as their owne soules had betraped them: for an hastie feare, æ that

10>, fontta=
1 922 lud; and Ith ling ol she pelges wich reelonfuggt=

16 And thus, wholoener was there fallen, he was in pryson, but Without thaines: 8

17 Jor whether a man had occupied hut bande, or had ben an heardman or la-

bourer in the woods, if he were tae «

ken, he sulfred' intollerable necessitie.

18 F702 they were all bonnde with one chayne of darknesle: whether it were
& blasing winde, or a sweete long of the byrdes among the thicke braunthes of the trees, or the vehementie of bathe running water,

19 On great nopse of the fatling downe

of stoncs, or the runnyng of playing beattes whiche they lawe not, or the mightie noyle of roaring wude beastes, or the founde that aunfivered agapne inthe holonesse of mountaynes: these terrible thinges made them lowne (fo bery feare.)

20 Forallthe earth Mined with cleare light, and no man was hindered in his labour.

21 Onlype bpon them there fetta heanie night, an image ol darknesle that was to tome bpon them: Hea they were vnto n more heaute then darknelle. N

¢ The. xvii j. Chapter,

Che firie piller that the Ilraelites had in Egypt. sche deliueraunce ol the kath. full. 0 Che Lorde fmotethe Egyptians, 20 Che linne of the people in the wyldernelle, 21 Aaron ttoode betweene the liuing and the dead with his cenfure,

A Tauerthelesse, thy sain-
N Z tes had a very great
A light, Whole voyte
NS they hearing, and not
% N seeing their figure, for hat they sufkred not the same thinges, they

Vought them blelled. N
2 And for that they yd not hurt them
Hove of whom they had ben wronged before, they thanked them, e belought men bardon of that they had ben ene-

3 Therfoze thou gauestthema burning

Diller of fire to leade them inthe vnkno-

f en way, and the sunne not to hurt
Jen intheir Honourable tonrnep.

Sut realon it was that they shoulde

leese the light and be put in the pryfon of darknesse, whiche had kept thy chyldren chut vp, by whom the vncorrupt light of the lawe was to be genen vnto the worlde.
5 Alter when they thought to day the babes of tive saintes, one chylde beyng tast out, and preserued to reproue them, thou tokest away the whole multitude of their chyldren, and destroyedst them a ina mightie water.

Ol that night were our fathers tertified afore, that they knowing vnto
What othes they had genen tredente, nught be of good chearc.

7 Thus thy people receaued the health of the rightcous, but the vngodly were

destroped. 73
© (tip) 8 For

“ D2, alone
92, in the desertes.

coulde not de efcaped.

Op ekto.)

„ Oz, wozddez

Oz, in bons dage,

Exod. i. e. a nd. Il. a.

Exo ill f. and. xxiiil.g

II

Oz, pus
HIC.

enentes, fo halt thou promoted bs whom thou halt called.

9 Foz the righteous chyldzen of the good men offred lecretelp, and made a godly lawe with one tonsent, that the faintes Mould in like maner receaue together both good and euil and that the fathers nowe should first fing prayles.

io But there was hearde a dilagreing voyte of the enemies, and there was a nuserable lamentation foz children that were bewapled.

n The maister and the seruaunt were puniched after one maner: and lyke as the king, so suffred the common people:

2 Sotheyhad innumerable that dyed with one kinde of death altogether:
"neither were the liuing lufficlent to bury the dead, for in the twinckling of an eye the noblest olspring ok them was destroped. .

z For whereas they woulde diltredite all thinges by reason of the inchauntmentes, in the destruction of the first bome they acknowledged that this people was the chyldren of God.

C 14 Foz whyle all thinges were tpl in sti-

leute, and when the night was in the middest of her course, thy alnnghtie worde O Lozde lept downe from heauen out of thy ropall trone,

15 As à rough man of warre in the niddest of the land that was destroped,

16 And brought thyne vnfapned commaunde ment as à sharpe Nbozde, and standing vp, filled all thinges with death, yea it stoode vpon the earth and reached vnto the heauen.

7 Then the sightes of the euyl dreames vexedthem lodainly, and fearelulnelle

Exod x. c.
Oz, them.

Oz, fietct.

ke booke

> ou hast reuenged our came vpon them vnawares.
258 Foptineastyen 18 Then lap there one

ere, a there halfe dead halte 5 458 *

wed the caule of his death.
19 Forthe vilions that dered them she-

wenthem beta a afore that they nig gnozaunt whereko

perished. : ir ther

20° Pea the temptation of death touched

the righteous also, and among the multitude in the wiuldernesle there wag “%" inlurrection: but thy wrach endured

not long. nals

21 * Foz the blamelesse man went in all dd

the halte, and toke the battaple vpon Nunn, bym, brought foorth the weapon of his mimistration, euen praper and the reconciliation of incense, fet hymselfe a: gainst the wrath, and so brought the mi: serie to an ende, Declaring ctherby) that he was thy seruaunt.

22 For he ouertame not the multitude , g with bodyly power orforccof weapons: e. but with the Word he subdued him that vexed, alleaging the oth and conc: naunt made vnto the fathers,

23 Joz Wien the dead were fallen downe by heapes one vpon another, he stoode in the nuddest, pacified the o
Wath, and parted the way that it un. might not come to the liuing.

24 And why : in his long garment was E45 all the beautie, and inthe foure rowes ofthe stones was the glozy of the fathers grauen, and thy maiestie was wrytten in the trowne or his head. „da

25 Unto thelethe destroyer gaue place, and was afrayde of them: for it was inough that they onlpe tasted of the
Wrath.

1 Oz, that
Bunt(hed,

The. xix. Chapter.

Che death of the Egyptians, and the great top of che Hebrues. 1 The meate that was geuen at the detire ofthe people. 17 All the elementes lerue to the will ol God.

S fo2 the vngodly, the
YA ~ li w2ath tame vpö them
% without merty vnto the ende: forbe knewe
75 N before what shonlde
2 2 Ihappen vnto them:
"Ho that wheuthey
Jad confented to let them go, and had
, ent them out with great diligence, they
—.— Wouldrepent and folowe vpon them. odxiii.a 3 o; whyles they were pet mourning

and making lamentation by the graues

ofthe dead, they deuised another +o

lishnesse, fo that they perfecuted them 0 Sher.

inthe feving, whom they had“ AP vers

out aforc with prayer. bo ae
4 Fo the neceffitie whiche ther 105 l

delerued bronght them Pnto this 1 at e

and made them forget the chiugen gl f

had alredy happened, that tee cet

by fozmentes fulfill their put!

whiche remapned: 5 Aud

eee —

lin.

And that thy people might tryr amar- tame vuto them and were vnknowen:

ben, U ut at the last they sawe a newe ge-

Nun nig.

ueylons pallage: and these might kynde a straunge beat,

Jor euer creature in his kynde was fachioned agayne of newe, seruyng the peculiar offices as was counnaunded them, that thy children myght be kept without hurt: |

For the tloude ouershadowed their

teutes, and the drye earth appeared

where afore Was water: fo that in the red lea there was a wap without impedinent, and the great deepe became a greene fielde:

g Wherthrough all the people went

that were defended with thy bande, styng thy marueylous straunge won-

ders.
9 For as the horles, ryght lo they neyed, and leaped lyke lambes, praysyng thee.

(O Low) which hadk deliuered them.

to And whyr they were pet myndekull of

the thynges that were done whyle they dwelt in the straunge laude, howe the grounde brought foorth flies in steade of tattell, and howe the riuer strawled with the multitude of frogges in steade ol fisshes.

neration of birdes, what tyme as they were stirred with lust, and desired delicate meates.

12 For whyethe quayles came vp to them

from the fea for their tomfort: but pu-

nishmentes came vpon the sinners, not

Without the signes which came before to passe by vehemencie of the thicke lyghtnynges: Foz they sulfered wor-

thyly aecordyng to their wickednesse,

becaule they dealt fo churlichly c with an hate of straungers.

ete 3 Foz some would not receaue mien that

The ende of the booke of wifdome.

and some bronght the straungers into bondage that dyd them good.

14. Mor orly fo, but pf they had ben any C

where regarded, they coulde not suffer it: for they entreated straungers very dispitefullp.

15 Others that had receaucd them with great solempnitie, when they were admitted vnto their societie, they afflitted them with greeuous labours,

16 Therlore were they stricken with

blindnesle, like as when they that were

touered with sodayne darknesse at the doores of the ryghteous, sought euery one of thenithe entraunte of his doores.

17 Thus the elementes beyng chaunged, agreed among them selues, lyke as when tunes are chaunged vpon an instrument of musicke, and pet kepe styll a melodie:which may easylp be perceaued by the syght of the thynges that are

tome to passe.

18 For the earthy thynges were turned into waterie: and the thyng that before
{anne in the Water, nowe went vpon the grounde.

19 The fire had power in the water, for getting his owe vertue: and the water
1999 f. his owne kynde to quenche (the

re.]

20 Agayne, the flambes hurted not the

fleshe of the torruptible lining thynges

though they walked therin, neither

melted they that the kynde of immortall

meate that was of nature apt to melt.

21 For in all thynges halk thou promoted thy people (O TLord) and brought them to honour, thou hast not dilpiled them, but alivay and in all places batt thou lande by them.

VV. C.

Ox, tighteg

Gen. xix. c.

th

Oz, assisted em.

— &Ecclkhatiers
| 6p The booke of lesus thefonne of Sirach

which is called in latine Ecclesiasticus.

The prologue of lefus the fonne of Sirach vnto his booke.

| Any and great men haue declared witdome bnto bg out ok the lawe.
Gi 9 10 che prophrtes, and out of other that kolowed them : 1 90 which thynges Ilrael ought to be comended by the reaton of doetrine and wildome: Cherkore they that haue it, and reade it, houlde not only them selues be wile therthrough, but serue other allo with tea. chyng and writyng. Alter that my graundekather Fetus had geuen dillgent labour to reade the lawe, the prophetes, and other bookeg ae that were lelt vs of our kathers, and had well exerciled hym felfe there in: he purpoted alfo to write some thyng of wifdome and good maners, to the intent that they which were wyllyng to learne, and to be wile, myght haue the moze vnderstandyng, and be the moze apt to leade a good conuersation. wherfore J exhort pou to reeeaue st louyngly, to reade it with diligence, and to take it in good worth. though our wordes be not lo eloquent as the famous ozatours. For the thyng that is witten in the Hebrue tongue soundeth not so well when it is tranflated into another speache: Not only this boote of myne. but also the lawe, the prophetes, and other bookes founde karre other wilt then they do when they are spoken in their owne language.

Nowe in the thirtie and eyght pere when J came into Egppt in the tyme ok Ptolomie
Cucrges, and continued there a long season, J founde bookes there ieft full of great and prokounde learnpng. Wwherkore J thought it good and necellarie to besto we my diligence and trauaple to interpzete this booke: And contiderpng that FZ had tyme, J laboured and dyd my bell to perfourme this booke, and to brvng it onto lyght, that the Kraungers allo which are disposed to learne, myght apply them felues puto good maners, and Ipue accordyng to the la we of the Lorde.

The first Chapter.

: wildome commeth ok God. u A prapse of the feare of God. 2° Che meanes to come by wildome. = .

A NVR ae 3 Zl wildome ben declared: or who hath knowen her
Rega b. N re (commeth) of Wit ae M aoodthe Tod, 7 Unto whom hath the doctrine of wil: 25
* 0 hath ben es dome ben discouered and shewed: and
NN uer with him, who hath vnderstande the mantkolde conmmu (ee and “tsbefore entrannte of her z

| Fall tyne. 8 There is one, euen the hyelt the maker
| Who hath of all thynges, the alnughtie, the kyng e numbzed the of power, ok whom men ought to stand lande of the greatly in awe, Which sitteth vpon his fea, the droppes ok the rayne, and the throne, beyng a God of dominion. ede dapes of tune-woho hath mealured the 9 He hath treated her through the holy heyght of heauen, the breadth of the ghost, be hath feene her, numbred her, earth and the deepenelle of the lea- and mealured her. f
MYO Hath fought out the grounde of 10 He hath powzed her out vpon all his
Gods wildome, Which hath ven before Workes, and vpon all fleshe, accordpng all thynges: to his gykt, he geueth her richely vnto
Romxic 4 Wildome Hath ben treated before all them that loue hym. thinges, aud the vnderstandyng of u The feare of the Lorde is wagen peubence from euerlastyng. and triumph, gladnesle, and a ioyfu
Gods worde in the heyght is the wen trowne. tha of Wifoome, and the euerlastyng com: 12 The keare of the Looe make 17 her dementes are the entraunce ob. Nmerp heart, geueth gladnelle, tov,

f 8 long lyfe. 0
Anto whö Hath the roote of wildome 3 Who fo keareth the Tode, it 1) wel

with him foz euer.

We

m. xi. d.

s deãth he shalbe blessed.
; The loue of God is honorable wil-
C “pone: loke vnto whom it appeareth, they loue it, for they fee what wonderous thinges it doth. N sa 15 The feäre of the Lowe is the begynle nyng ol wildome, and was made with the faythlull in the mothers wombe, it shall go with the chosen women, and shalbe knowen of the ryghteous and fapthfull.
16 The feare of the Lorde is the ryght
Gods serulce, ra

17 That preserueth e iustifieth the heart, and geueth mirth and gladnesse.

13 Who fo feareth the Torde shalbe happy, aud when he hath neede of ton: fort he shalbe blessed.

1 She hath buplt her euerlastyng foun: dations with men, and is genen to be with their seede.

20 To feare God is the wildome that maketh riche, and bryngeth all good

pu She fplleth the whole houle with her giftes, the garners with her trealure.

22 The feare of the Lorde is the trowne of wildome, and geueth plenteous peace and health: He hath seene her and num-
9009 woth these are the gyftes of

23 Knowledge and vnderstandyng of wildome Hath he powred out as rapne, and them that helde her fal hath he bought vnto honour.

24. The feare of the Lorde is the roote of wildome, x her braunches are long lyfe.

Ecclesiasticus. well wich him at the lalt, and in the day 25 In the trealures ok wiloome is Un

derstandyng e deuotion of knowledge, but wildome is abhorred of sumers.

26 The keare of the Lorde driueth out sinne, and WHE che is prelent, che driueth away anger.

27 Jeor he that is without feare tan not be made ryghteous, and his wylkfull boldenesse is his owne destruttion.

28 A patient man wpll suffer onto the tyme, and then shall he haue the re-
Warde of iop.

29 A good vnderstandyng wyn hyde his
Wordes for a tyme, and manp mens lippes {hall speake of his wildome.

30 In the treafures of wildome ts the declaration of Doctrine: but the sinner abhorreth the worshyp of God.

31 My sonne yf thou desire wildome, kepe the commaundenient, and God fhall geue her vnto thee:

32 For the feare of the Torde is wildome and nurture: he hath plealure in fayth and louyng mekenesse, and he shall kyll the treasures therof.

33 We not obstinate and vnkapthkull to the feare of the Lorde, and come not vnto hym with a double heart.

34 Be not an hypocrite in the syght ol men, and take good heede what thou speakest.

35 Exalt not thy lelfe, eft thou happen to fall and bryng thy soule to dishonour,

and fo discouer thy secretes, and tast thee downe in the myddest of the congregation: because thou wouldest not receauc the feare of God, c because thy heart is full of faynednesse and deceipt.

The. ij. Chapter.

He exhorteth the seruauntes of God to righteoulnelle, loue, vnderstandyng, and patience. 11 Co trust in the Lorde. iz A curve vpon them that are kaynt hearted

and impatient.

V sonnel pf thou wylt come into the feruice of God, stande fast in
Erighteousmnesse ¢ feare,
. . thy foule to
<s>i|| temptation.

Settle thyne heart

holde thee fast vpon God, ioyne thy

selft nto hym, and futfer that thy lyfe

map encveale at the last.

4 Whatsocuer happeneth vnto thee, reteaue it:suffer in heauinesse, t be patient in thy trouble.

litt.

5 *Fo2lpkeasgoldcandifilueraretrped Sp. m.

in the fire, euen so are acceptable men in Proxvia

the furnate of aduersitie.

6 Beleue in God and he shall helpe thee: order thy waya right, and put thy trust in hym: Polde fast his feare and grobe

therin,
7 rr that feare the Lorde, take sure holde of his nertie, shrynke not Fl rom

The booke of lefus

* from hym, that pe fall not. which put not their trust in Gop and

8 Dye that keare the Lorde,belenc him,

and pour rewarde shall not be emptie.

O pe that feare the Lorde, e trust in

Ete son ‘ good thynges, and mertle Mall come mirobue bnto vou for plcalure.
Aude yo O pe that keare the Lorde, let pour

tutriasi
Seen — Jorte vpon him, and pour heartes shalbe frimen lyghtened. ie n Conlider the olde generations of men
(O ve childzen) and marke them well:
Phixxxia Mas there euer any one confounded
Fhixxvib. that put his trust in the Lorde- Who euer tontinued in his keare, and was forsaken: Or whom dyd he euer difpile that talled faythfully bpon hym-

12 For God is gratious and mercifull, he forgeueth finnes in the tyme ok trouble, and is a delendour for al them that {eke

. hym in the tract. g route. 13 Wo be vuto them that haue a fearefull heart, wicked lippes, and euyll occupied handes, and to the sinner that goeth two maner of wapes.
C 14 Wo be vnto them that are faint harted,

therkore shall they not b ö bo = . e Defended of

15 Wo be bnto pouthat haue lott pati forsaken the ryght wayes, and A —
N 5 Dathe a. What

vll vou do when the Low obi rt , d chal begin

16 hey that feare the Lorde, wyl disobey his worde: and they chat in him, wyil kepe his commaundementes.

17 They that keare the Lorde wyll tere ont the thinges that are plealaunt vnto bin: and they that loue him, be kulfylled with his lawe.

18 They that feare the Tome wyll pre-
N their heartes, and humble their

dules in his syght.

19 They that feare the Lorde kepe his tömaundementes, and wyll be patient tyll they {ce hym selfe,

20 Saying: Ik we do not repent, we 2...
Chall fall into the handes of the Lorde, sues” and not into the handes of men.

21 For his mercie is as great as him selle.

Lohn xii,

om. x. il

The. iij. Chapter. 19

Co our father and mother ought we to geue double Honour, 10 Ok the blelsyng and curse ot the father and mother. 22 No man ought ouer curtoufly to searche out the

fecretes of God.

be children of wil-

SN (ese Dome ave a tongrega-

tion of the rygbteaus,

Hand their offpzyng is obediente and loue.

Heare pour fathers

<= pgcment (O my deare childzen) and do therafter, that

Exod.xx a. 3
Deut. v. b.

à mother commaundeth her chudren to

om one that gathereth treature toge-

r.

6 Who fo honoureth his father, chan haue foy of his one children: e when he maketh his prayer, he chalbe heard.

7 de that honoureth his father, shall haue a long lyfe:and he that is obedient vnto the Lorde, Hail comfort his mos

ther.

8 He that feareth the Lorde, honovreth 5 his father and mother, and doth them seruite as it were vnto lordes. g

9 *Ponour thy father and mother, in deede, in worde, and in all patience, that thou mayett haue Gods blesspng: and his blessyng Chall abide with chee at the

last. io The blessyng of the father stablicheth the houles of the chudren: but the mothers curfe rooteth out the foundations.
1 Reiopte not when thy father is ve proued: for it is not honour vnto thee, but a shame.

Exod. xx. c
Deut. v. b

Gen. y d.
Deut R.

u Forthe Worchyp of a mans father, is

ts owne Worllyp:e the reproche of the i e oneftic of the leren z My fonne, make much of thy father 4 bisage, pap greene hym not as long e lyueth. 6
1 And pk his vnderstandyng faple, bag patiente epee difpile hyn in thy strengtg.
15 Forte pop deede that thon wann vnto thy father, Hall not be to29' 115

the fonne of Sirach. r

— amd when thou thy felfe wantest, it are chewed vnto thee alredy Which be

albe rewarded thee: and for thy mo- aboue the capacitie of men.

N thers offente thou shalt be recompensed 25 The medlyng with such, hath beguiled
With good, yea it shalbe founded for the! manp a man, and tangled their wittes in ryahteousnesse. in vanitie. ;

And in the day of trouble thou shalt 26 Thou tanst not fee without eyes, therbe remembred: thy finnes allo shall fore profesle not the thyng that thou melt away, lpke as the ple in the fayre halt not. warme weather. 27 An harde heart chall keare euyll at the

17 he that forsaketh his father, shaltome last: and he that loueth daunger, chall to shame: and he that defieth his mio- perishe therin. ther, is cursed of God. 28 An heart that goeth two wapes shall

13 My lonne, perkourme thy Workes not prosper: and he that is frowarde of with louyng meekenesse, so shalt thon heart, Wyll euer be worse and Worle. be loued aboue other men. 29 An obstinate heart shalbe laden with

mis 19 The greater thou art, the more hum- — forolves, and the vngodly sinner wyll ble thy lelfe in all thynges, and thon heape one sinne vpon another. shalt fynde fauour in the sight of God. 30 The counlaple ofthe proude hath no

20 Many ave excellent and of renowme: health, e his footsteppes shalbe plucked

but the setretes are reuealed vnto the pp: kor the plant of sinne hath taken

meeke. a roote in hym.

a For great power belongeth only vnto 31 The heart ok hym that hath vnder-
God, and he is Honoured of the lowly. standyng, Mall perceaue bye thynges:

Pilg 22 *Sekenot out the thynges that are and a good care Wyll gladly hearken

an aboue thy tapacitie, and searche not the vnto Wildome.

aan grounde of fuch thynges as are to 32 An heart that is wile and hath vndermightie for thee: standyng, wyll abstapne from sinnes,

23 Wut loke what God hath tommaun- and increase in the workes of ryghteded thee, thynke vpon that alway, (be oulnesse. not curious in many of his workes: o: 33 Water quencheth burnyng fire, and paul. it is not necdefull for thee to see with mercie reconcileth sinnes. i \ thyne eyes the thynges that are setrete. 34. God hath respett vnto hym that is

24. Make not to much searche in super- thankkull:he thinketh vpon him against fluous thynges, and be not curious in the tyme to come, so that Whe be falleth manp of his workes: for many thynges he shall fynde a strong holde.

The si. Chapter.

Ames must de done with gentlenesse. The studie of wisdome and her kruite.
20 An exhortation to efchewe eupll, and to do good.

B sonne, ! defraude not 6 For yf he tonplayne of thee in the bitthe poore of his almes, ternelle of his foule, his prayer shalbe hearde: euen he that made hym shall heare hym.
Ge curteous vnto the company of the 8 if poore, humble thy soule vnto thy elder, soule, and dete not the and bowe downe thy head to a man of
POO in his necessitie. Worchyp.
3 Greene not the heart of hym that is 3 Tet it not greeue thee to bowe downe se ime elplesle, and Withdrawe not the gyft thine eare vnto the poore, but pay thy 0 Ss

An the needekull. debt, and geue hima friendly aunfibere, dune
4 Bekule not the prayer ol one that is in and that with meekenesse. Downe tothe trouble, turne not away thy fate from 9 Deliuer him that suffereth Wrong, wen hie the needy. from the hande of the oppressour: and ache en

5 Cat not thyne eyes alyde from the be not kaynt hearted when thon sittest

Pere for any cupll Wyll, that thou geue inludgement. Fer bini not Otcation to fpeate engl ofthee. 10 We mercifull vnto seb A cof

G

father, and be in steade of an hulbandt df n

vnto their mother: fo Malt thou be as

an obedient lonne of the hyest, and he

{hail loue thee moze then thy mother

doth. a
11 Wildome exalteth her children, retea-

ueth them that seke her e wyl go before

them in the way of ryghteoulnesse.

12 he that loueth her, loueth lyfe: and they that {eke her diligently, fall haue great toy. pole

13 1 1 that kepe her, Malt inherite glorie: for where she entreth in, there is the blessyng of God.

14. They that honour her, chalbe the ser-

uauntes of the holy one: and they that

loue her, are beloued of God.

Who lo geueth care vnto her, Hall iudge the heathen: and he that hath
“vefpect vnto her, fall dwell safelp.

16 He that beleueth her, shall haue her in poslession, and his generation (hail endure.

17 Foz when he falleth, che doth go with hym, and choseth hym among the best:
Feare, dreade, and temptation shall he bryng vpon hym, and trye hym in her doctrine, tyll fhe haue fo proued hym in his thoughtes, that he commit his soule vnto her.

18 Then shall the stabliche hym, bryng

Oz, Wal-
Beth.

the ryght wap dato bpm, make hym a.

glad man, shewe hym her setretes, and
Heape vpon hin: the treasures of knowledge, e vnderstandyng of righteousnes.

19 Wut pt he go wrong, fhe shall forsake
Dyin, € geue hym ouer into the handes ok destruction and ruine.

Rexiib, 20 My sonne, make much ok the tyne,

AY? Be not ashamed thy neyghbour in his aduersitie. 4

3 thy counla when it may do good, neither Byde thy

ousnesse.

n no Wife speake agaynst the worde ot trueth: but be ashamed of the lyes of thyne owne ignorannte.

26 Shame not to tonkesse thyne errour, and resist not the tourse of the riuer.

27 And submit not thy selfe vnto a feolishe man, neither atcept the person ol the nughtie.

28 And striue thou not agaynst the streame: But for ryghteousnesse take paynes with all thy loule, and for the trueth striue thou vnto death, and God shall kyght for thee agaynst thyne enemies.

29 We not hastp in thy tongue, neither flacke and negligent in thy workes.

30 We not as à lion in thyne owne houle, destroying thy houcholde folkes, and oppressyng them that are vader thee.

31 Vet not thyne bande be streiched out to receaue, aud shut when thou choul-
Delt geue.

The. v. Chapter.

In riches map we not put any confidence. 7 The bengeaunce of God ought to be leared, and repentaunce may not be deferred,

A

uk xii.c. cle. xi. c.

pelpe in the tyme of
Pi Derigeaunce and temp: e che labo n he lust of thyne ownt heart in thy strength,
3 And lay not, tuche howe haue J had
N } 905 hk 705 me vnder mp wozkes: Foz doubtle
God hall auenge it. * *

haue linned, and what
4 And lap not, J ha 1

6 And lay not, tushe, the
Torde is 0 he Hall forgeue me a sinnes be they neuer fo many: 910 is as he is mercilull, fo goeth Waly ne th hym also, and his indignation con downe bpon sinners.

7 Make no tarpuig

vnto the to turne Tone,

ne inne potty brpng *

vnto thee: the con brane thame

brpngery

Wopshpp.

Acc. xx. 3.

Rom. vũ a.

Ecce. xxi·

KE Ecdee. xv.

in the tyme of vengeaunce he Chall de-

thee.
Apen nt in wicked riches, for they
41 shall nat Helpe thee in the day of punishrid ment and Wrath. em 5 Bec not caried about with euery winde, and go not into euery wap: for fo doth the iner that hath a double tongue. jo Stande fatt in the way of the Torde, be stedlast in thy vnderstandyng, abyde by the worde, and folowe the Worde of peate and righteousnesse.
1 Be gentle to heare the worde ok God, that thou mapest vnderstande it: and make a true aunswere with wildome.

4, n Be lwylt to heare, but lowe and pa-

the lonne of Sirach.

— LTorde, and put not of krom day to day: tient in geuing aunswere. f

for lodeniy Matt his wzath come, and z J thou halt vnderstanding, chape

thy neighbour an aunswere: yk no, lape thy hande vpon thy mouth, lest thou

be trapped in an vndilcreete word, and fo confounded.

14 Honour and thames in the talke, but the tongue ofthe vndiserete is his owne destruttion. ‘

15 We not a priup accuser as long as

thou lyuest, and ble no staunder With

thy tongue: For Mame et sorowe goeth ouer the thiefe, and an euyll name over him that is double tougued: but he that is à priuy acenfer of other men, halbe
Hated, enuied, and conkdunded.

IVI.

Leu. xix. d.

16 Do not rathly neither in great nop

small.

The. vj. Chapter.

It is the propertie of a sinner to be euyll tongued. 6 Ok kriendchip.

Desire to be taught.

1 1 enemie, “for such a

mut man getteth an eupll

ret Je name, (hame, and re-

. MS) bnke: and whosoeuer
VV beareth enuie ca dou-

= Ahle tongue, offendeth.

lnb. 2 e not proude in the denice of thine

(t) za dall

a obne vnderstanding, lest thy soule rent amis bher as a0 bull, ei 3 And left thy leaues wyther, and thy taxem kllute be destroyed, and so thou be left ds ꝗ drye tree in the wildernesse.
4 For a wicked foule destroyeth hym that hath it, maketh him to be laughed to storne ot his enemies, and bryngeth bin to the postion of the vngodly. weete worde multiplieth friendes,
F pactkieth them that be at variaunce: and athankfull tongue wyll be plentedus in à good man.
6 dre kriendship with many, neuer: helesle haue but one counlellour of a thoufande, bs al ie 115 0 a friende,proue him l dedence. not hastye to geue him
8 Foxfome man is a kriende but for his done turne, and Wyll not abyde in the day of trouble. a there is some friend that turneth culnntie, and taketh part agaynst

thee: and il he kno bythee het cle Wee We any burt bythee,

eu. b. 5

E not ok a friende an

lo Agayne, some fr rnde is but a come panion at the table, and in the day of neede he tontinueth not.

1 But in thy prosperitie he wyll be as thou thy selfe, and deale playnly with thy houcholde folke.

12 If thou be brought lowe he wyll be
15 8 thee, and wyll be hidden from

y fate.

3 Depart from thyne enemies, pea and beware of thy friendes.

14. A faythfull friende is a strong defence, who fo findeth such one, fpndeth a trea-

sure.

15 Akapthkull frienve Hath no peare, the wayght of golde and siluer is not to be compared to the goodnesse of his fayth.

16 A faythfull friende is a medicine of lyfe and immortalitie, and they that feare the Lorde shall lynde hym.

17 Who lo feareth the Lorde, shall prolper with friendes: and as he is hym selfe, fo (hall his friende be allo.

18 My sonne reteaue doctrine from thy pouth vp, fo shalt thou fynde wildome tyll thou be olde.

19 Go to her as one that ploweth and soweth, and wapte patiently for her good fruites: For thou Malt haue but litle labour in her worke, but thou Male eate of her fruites ryght soone.

20 O howe exceeding Marpe is wildome to vnlearued men? + buitenfalt body

not remapne in her.
I N 21 Unto

Eccle. 37. a.

C

“Fhe booke of lelsus

. D 21 Unto such she is as it were a touche- her bandes are lates o

fone, aud he casteth her from Hin in

e haste. 1 N
22 Jon Wübome is With him but in name, chere be but fewe that haue kno wledge

23 —— 99 with them that knowe her, she abideth euen vnto the appearyng ol

God.
) 24. Geut eare my sonne, reteane my doctrine, and refule not my counfaple. |
Put thy Foote into her lynckes, and

Pe
Maxi take her poke vpon thy necke.

26 Bobbe Downe thy Moulder vnder her,

beare her patiently, and be not weery of her bandes.
27 ne vnto her with thy whole heart, and kepe her wayes with al thy power.
28 Sehe after her, and He shalbe chewed thee: and when thou hast her, forsake

her not.
29 Jor àt the last thou Halt fynde rest in her and that shalbe turned to thy great

toy.

30 Then shall her fetters be a strong
Defence for thee, and her poke a glorious rapnient. f

31 For there is a golden ornament in her,

E

f purple
. Khon coat put her on ae oat

honour, and halt put her g

a ae 12 her about tite ag

33 My fonne, pk thou wylt take herd

ae in yy mynd

be wyle mende, thou hate

34. If thou wylt bowe downet

8 eHou hate reccane nocteinesanoweaee delyte in hearyng, thou shalt be wyse.

35 Stande with the multitude of tucy elders as haue vnderstandyng, and
— 25 vnto their wildome with thyne

eart.

36 That thou mapest heare an god 1 sermons, and that the worthylententes 1 escape thee not.

37 And pf thou seest a man ok diltrete on: derstandyng, get thee foone vnto hym,
Elet thy foote treade vpon the steppes of his doores.

38 Tet thy mynde be bpon the com: maundementes of God, and be carnett:
Ipe occupied in His lawes: fo shall he frablithe thy Heart, and geue thee wit dome at thyne one delire,

Pal. i.a.

The. vij. Chapter.

2 we mult lorsanie eupll, and pet not iustikie our selues. 2 Che behaulour of the wife to warde his Wyke, his kriende, his chitdzen, his seruauntes, his father

and mother.
O no eupl, lo thal there

Depart awap from

HA the thyng that ts wie

seem ked, and no misfortune

hall meddle with thee,

My fonne, sowe no euyll thynges in

the forowes of vnryghteousnes, so fait

thou not reape them leuen foloe. ae de e

: r vntothe kyng foz t feate of honour. ge OE
Justifie not thy selfe before God, for he knoweth the heart: and delire not to be reputed wile in the prelente of the yng.

6 Make no labour to be made a tudge, except it fo were that thou couldest nughtily put Downe wickednesle: foz yf thou shouldest stande in awe of the pretence of the mightie, thon shouldest fayle in geupng lentente.

Pfal 141 . 5
Eccle. vu. c.
Job. ix. a.

7 Pffende not in the multitude of the titie, and put not thy lelfe among the people. f

8 Wynde not two finnes together:fozin Fele one finne shalt thou not be npunished.

9 Sap not, tushe, God wyll loke vpon the multitude of my oblations, x when J offer to the hyest God he wyll accept it.

io Be not faynt hearted when thou makest n praper, neither flake in

euyng of almes.

i : aunt no man to storne inthe hea nineffe of his soule, for God(which eth all do en heb that tan bring downe, and let vp agayne.

12 Accept no lealyng agaynst thy 8 neither do the fame agaynst thy 05

3 Ge 1 to od of tye: 02 the custome therof is no .

14 Wale not many wordes when ln 7125 art among the elders: and when th prapest, make not much babblyng.

Rom vi
15 et no labourous Wworkes be 5 a

puto thee, neither the hulbandzy which the alnughtte bath created.

1 Mank not thy boastein the multitude

of thy wickednesle:but humble thy feife euen from thyne heart,

And remember that the wrath chal not be long in tarping;, and that the vengtaunte of the flelhe of the vngodlp is d very fire and worme.

43 Geue not ouer thy kriend for any good, nor thy fapthful brother kor the belt gold.

19 Depart not from a distrete € good wo-

man that is fallen vnto thee for thy por-

tion in the feare of the Lorde: forthe ~-

gilt ol her honesty is aboue golde. here as thy seruaunt worketh true-

ip intreate hym not euyll, nor the hyre-

ling that is faythfull vnto thee.

i Louc a discrete seruaunt as thyne owne foule , dekraude him not ok his libertie, neither leaue him a poore man.

Luxx, 20

1 Ifthou haue tattell, loke wel to them:

ben amd if they be for thy profite, kepe them.

23 Ifthou haue sonnes bring them bp in nürture and learning, and hold them in awe from their pouth vp.

24 Ik thou haue daughters kepe their body, and shewe not thy fate chereful towarde them.

25 Mary thy daughter, and fo shalt thou perlourme a wayghtie matter: but geue her to a man of vnderstanding.

26 If thou haue a wife after thyne owne

Lal xxx a.

the sonne of Sirach.

IVII. thy selte to the hate full. 8

27 Honour thy father from thy whole kee u heart:and forget not the sorowfull tra- bn. uayle that thy mother had with thee.

28 Remember that thou wat borne thorow thein, and howe canst thou retompente them the thinges that they haue done for thee-

29 Feare the Lond with al thy foule, and honour his ministers. :

30 Loue thy maker wich all thy strength, nd forlake not his seruauntes. Deus za

31 Feare the Lord with all thy soule, k ho-

nour his priestes: gene them their por- Nu vim. b.

tion ofthe first fruites and intrease or the

earth, like as it is tommaundedthee: ¢

reconcile thy selfe of thy negligence with

thelitie flocke, geue them the shoulders,

and their appopnted offeringes € first-

linges.

32 Meache thyne hande vnto the poorze,

. x map blesse thee with plentedusnes. 5

33 Be liberal vnto all men liuyng: pet wer hoer, let not, but do good euento them that ere are dead. Dia strane

34. Het not them that weepe be with: n and“ out comfort ,but mourne with such as dee arch. mourne. ip itneneie

35 Let it not greeue thee to visite the sicke, ome om for that shall make thee to be beloued. deze.

36 Whatldeuer thou takest in hande, re- ere au: member the end, and thou halt neuer sew Jen

> / , hall on.

mynde, forlake her not: but commit not do amille. f Hic alt,
8 nges to the
: ae
The. piii. Chapter. ae
| a inde mutt tale heede with whom we haue to do. of eucrla ting top og parne.
21 e Trpue not with a elke away from sinne, and tat him not
EN mightie man, let thou in the teeth withall: but remember that
= chaunce to fall into his we are kraple euerichone. e b 2 bandes. „ Thinke frome of no man in his ode
5 2 Make no variaunte age, for we waxe olde also. with ariche man, lest 7 We not glad of the death of thyne ene- *
= he happen to bring bp nue: but remember that we mult dye al! i an harde quarell against thee: * Foz the sort of vs, and fayne would we come golde and liner bath vndone many a mto top. man, pea enen the heartes of kinges 8 Despile not the sermons of suthelders gel ib. hath it made to fall. as haue vnderstandyng, but acquapnt
3 Strpue not with a man that isfullof thy felfe with the wpse fentences of wordes, and lap no stickes vpon his fire. then: fo of them thou shalt learne Wit:
, 4 Bepe no tompanie with the vnlearned, dome, Erbe doctrine of vnderstandyng,
Gris, lelt he geue thy kinred an eupllreport. and howe to serue great men withou

Defpife nota man that turneth hym

tomplapnt. we
H({) 9 GO

‘The booke ot telus

| ithe dottrine of the elders, 15 FTrauaple not by the way With bym

o not fron . 2
. for they haue learned it of their fathers:

fozof them thou fhait learne bnderftar ding ee e i make aun: re in the time ot neede.

10 Aude nt the toales of sinners when thou rebnkest them, lest thou be brent in the lprie flambes of their finnes.

n Re list not the fate of the blasphemer,
| that they lap not wayte for thy mouth.
Feluxica 12 Lende not vnto hynthatis mightier
| then thy selfe: pk thou lendest hym,

count it but lost.

3 Be not suertie aboue thy power: if thou be, then thinke surelp to pape it.

14 Go not to lawe with the iudge: for he will iudge attording to his owne ho-

nour.

that his bravnlesse, lest he do the env. . for he foloweth his owne wulle * ply so shalt thou perithe thorowe his ollie.
16 Striue not with hint that is angry and cruel, æ go not with him into the Wilder- ree e ere ree Je hahn bis fight, ine. and where there is no heipe he than imuetber tec. be he Wyatt
17 Take no countel at fooles:for tl 4 not kepe a thing clofe, un klei.
18 Do no setrete thing before a straunger, e tell what will come
. of it. t
19 Open not thine heart vnto euery man, lest he be vnthanke full to thee, and put thee to repzofe.

XXVIUa,

| | The. ix. Chapter.

1 Ot teloutle. 12 An olde Friend is to be preferred before a newe, 18 Rfahtcous

men shoulde be bidder to thy table.

A 1 E not ielous ouer the

% Pee Wife of thy bofome,

Ml that she Hew notfome

(beter e ptewd popnt, ™ tet

| ) thou teache her an enil lesson against thy selfe.

1 2 —Seue not the power

Mengen n ok thy lyfe vnto a woman, lest she come

bug eet Lt thy strength, and fo thou be tonkoun-

mong thpne ec

3 Toke not vpona woman that is desprous of many men, lest thou fall into her

_ fnaves,

4 Ule not the companie of a woman that ls a plaper t a daunter, c htare her not, lest thou perishe thorom her entiling.

5 Wehold not a mapden, that thou be not hurt in her beautic, ö

6 Cast not thy minde vpon harlots in any mauer okthing, lest thou destrop both thy felte and thyne heritage.

7 Go not about galing in euery lane of the cific, neither wander thou above in the streetes therok.

3 Turne awap thy face from a beautifull woman, and loke not vpon the faymeffe of other: Maup a man bath ben derea-
Ned thorowe the beautie ot women, fo2

9 it the desire is kindled as it were
9 gai ne woman Mhalbe troboote as myre, ok euerp on that goeth by the ee. ‘ 7“

ouer ther, foz

aud iir aunge woman to
Salomon.

ö Pro. v.a.

Io Manpa man wondering at the bear: tie of a straunge woman, hath ben cast out:for her wordes kyndle as afyre.

n Sit not with an other mans wife by any meanes, lpe not with her vpon the bed, make no wordes with her at the wine: left thyne heart ronfent vnto her, and lo thou with thy blood fall into destruction.

12 Forsake not an olde friende, for the new chall not be lyke him: A nevve friende is newe wine, let hym be olde and thou shalt drinke hym With pleasure.

z Delite not the honour and riches of a sinner: for thou knowest not what destruction is for to tome vpon hym.

14. Delpte not thou in the thing that the

vngodlp haue pleafure in, beyng fire 8
Pai fir ore chall not be accepted

ntill their graue.

15 Hepe thee from the man that hath power to slay, so needest thou not to 1 afrapde ofdeath: And pf tou commice vnto hym, make no fault, left he 1978 pen to take away thy lpfe: dnn de ber that thou goest in the midde iche

fnares, and vpon the bulworkes ok ty titie. 3
16 Weware ok chynepghbour as ne! thou 1 naveie with such as be fa. tiie
Wyfeand haue vnderstanding. mitt and 37-2
17 Letiutinen be thy gestes let thy be inthe feare of God. 18 Tet

the sonne Of Sirach.

VIII.

get theremembzaunce of God be tn thy printes ofthe people in the wyldome ot

„ mynde, and let all thy talking be in the b commaundementes of the hyghest. pq Inthe handes of traftes men shall the
Workes be continaunded: “fo Mall the

Par {ie
5 Reg tae

their talking.
20 Aman full of wordes is perilous in his citie: and he that is rashe in his tat king shalbe abhorred.

The. x. Chapter.
Ol kinges and iudges. 7 Pride and couetousnelle ate to be abhorred,

28 Labour is prapsed.

Wyse indge will order his people with discretion: and Where a man of vuderstanding beareth rule, there goeth it well.

Pro IX. 2.

people is him selfe, euen fo are his offt? ters: and loke what maner or man the ruler of the titie is, such are they that

dell therin allo.

bes 3 An vnwyse king destropeth his people:

Pose. hut Where they that be in austoritie are

wise inen of understanding , there the citie

prospereth.

4 The power of the earth is in the hande of God, and all iniquitie of the people is to be abhorred:and when his time s he hall fet a profitable cuter vpon it.

In the hande of God is the prosperitie of man, and vponthe per son of the scribe shall he lay his honour. ;

lache. 6 We not angry fo2 any wrong of thy nepghbour, and meddle thou with no
B bnerighteous wozkes.

7 Prpde ts hatefull before God and man,

a and all wirkednesse of the heathen is

reece to be abhorred.

cans d Becaule of bnvighteous dealing, wrong,

hk blaspheunes, and diners disteptes , a

reatme shalbe tranflated krom one people to another,

There is nothing worse then a couetous lau: Whpart thou pronde O thou earth and alshes- Thert is nota moze
Wicked thing then to lone money: and whyeluch one hath his forte to fel, yet is he but filthy donng While he lpueth.

10 All tyrannie is of final enduraunce, and che dilease that is harde to healc gree: ueth the philition.

u And though the phylition thew his helpe neuer fo long, yet in conclusion it goeth alter this naner, To day a king, to inorowe dead. N

2 Jo when a mandieth, heis the heyre of lerpentes, beastes and wonnes.

As the iudge of the

3 The beginning of mans pryde, ls to fall away from God: and why: his heart is gone from his maker.

14 For pryde is the origtnall of all sinne: E
Who fo taketh hold therof, shalbe filled with cursinges, and at the last it chall duerthrowe hynt: Therefore hath the
TLorde brought the congregations ofthe
Wicked to dishonour, and destroped them to the end.

„ *God hath destroped the feates of arten pronde princes, and set vp the meeke in andxviad. their steade. l 9

16 God hath wythered the rootes ok the ponds heathen, and planted the lowely for them. re Wr

17 God hath ouerthrowen the landes of the heathen, ⁊ destroped them vnto the grounde: he hath tausedthem to wither a Wap, he hath brought them to naught, e the memoriall of them to ceasle rom out of the earth.

18 God hath destroped the name of the proude, and left the nanie of the humble of mynde.

19 Pryde was not made for man, neither
Wrochfulnesse fo2 mens childzen.

20 The secde ol men that feareth God

halbe brought to honour: but the seede whiche transgresseth the conimaundenientes ofthe Lorde shalbe shamed.

21 Hethat is the ruler among brethren, D is holden in honour among them: and he that regardeth such as feare the
Torde, is acceptable in his light.

22 The feare ofthe Lom causeth that the kingdome fatleth not: but the kingdonie is lost by trueitie and pryde.

23 The glorie of the riche ,of the honorable , and of the poore, is the feare of
Gd. g

24. Despyse not thou the iust poore man that bath vnderstanding, and magntfie not the riche vngodly. mn

25 Great is the iudge and niightie in honour, yet is there none greater then he that feareth God. .

H (ii) 26 Tinto

Gen. xxix. b

Thebookeof lefus

Pro. xxii a. u. Regi. d.

the free do ferutce: * He that is wyle and

he is refourmed, and an ignoraunt body
(hall not come to honour. ¢

27 Be not proude to do thy worke, and dilpayee not in the time ok aduersitit.

28 Better is he that laboureth and hath plenteousnes of al thiuges, then he that is gorgious, and wanteth bread.

29 My sonne, melienesse, ⁊ geue her her due honour.

Pro. xii b.

26 nto the feruaunt that is distrete Wal 30
Weil nurtured will uot grudge when

get thy foule honour by

ho shall iustifie him that fin 3 gaint binfelfes Who htt bon Ae that dichonsureth his owne saule-

31 The podre is honoured for his fayhtkulnesse and trueth: but the riche is had in reputation betaule of his goodes.

z Ho that ordereth Kyu selfe honey in

pouertie, Howe much moze shal he behaue hym selfe honestly in . who fo ordreth hym selfe vnhonestly in riches how much more hau he behaue hun selke vnhonestly in pouertie-

The. xi. Chapter...

Che prapte ol humilitie. 2 Alter the outward appearaurtee ought we not to iudge. „Ok
N 14 Al things come of God. 29 Ai men are not to be brought into thine house.

He wyldome of hym
Athat is bought lowe shall lift vp his head, and chall make hym to
(Cyssit among great men.
Ng, Conimende not thou
— Annan in his beautie, neither despise a man in his beter appeeraunte.
3 The Bee is but a smal bea among the foules, yetis her fruite exteeding [Weet.
Actes. cid, . We not proude of thy rapment, c exalt not thy selfe in the day of thy hondur:for the workes of the hiest onelp are won: derkull yea glozions , sctrete, and vnunowenare his workes.
5 Map tprauntes haue ven fayne to fit downe bponthe earth, and the vnlikely hath Wome the trow ne. a
6 Many mightie men haue ben brought low, x the honorable haue ben deuuered into other mens handes. :
Deut in b. 7 Condemne no man vefore thouvau tryed out the matter: and when thou hast made inquisition, then rekourme righteoustp. Wy
Geue no sentente before thou halt

hearde the cate: but first let men tel out their tales.

ae

hare hs 15

i. Reg. xv.f.
Helter. vi. a.

Pro. x vii. c. 8

9 Strpne not for a matter that toucheth

not thy selfe, and stande not in the iudgement of simners. i

to Mpldune, meddle not with many mat-

Matxix.c, kerg : and if thou gaine much thon
„Im. vb. (halt not be blantelesse, Eicthou cle alter it thou Chait not attayne it: and though thou runnest thy way afore, pet
Walt thou not estape. n There is some man that laboureth and taketh payne, and the moze he weerieth him fet e the tele he hath.

Pro. x c.
Pfalazs a.

u. Againe, some man is fouthfull, hath neede of helpe, wanteth strength, and
Hath great pouertie:

13 And gods epe loketh vpon hin to good,

fetteth him vp from his owe date, and likteth vp his head: fo that many vob men maruel at hym, and gene Honour

14. Prosperitie and aduersitic, lpfe and „. death, pouertie and richt sle, come all of 15 the Lorde. —

15 Wpledome, nurture, and knowledge of the lawe are with God, loue and the
Mayes ol good are with him.

16 Errour and darkenesse are made fo? sinners, and they that exalt them selues in eupll, Ware olde in euyll.

v7 The gift of God remapneth fo2 the righteous: and his good will (hall geue prosperitie for euer. :

18 Some mantis riche by his care and m-

gardship, and that is the portion of his rewarde: 1
19 Jn that he sapth, Mow haue F gotten Lak rest, and nowe will J cate and deine of mp goodes my felfe alone: and pet he tonsidereth not thatthe rime Dadvett nye,and death approcheth, that he mu leaue all these thinges vnto other men, and dpe him lelke. F
20 Stand thou fast in thy touenaunt, au
290 thy selfe 99 9 and remapne in the worke vnto thy age. 5
21 aparucll not at the workes of Ah but put thy trust in God and bydan 11 labour: for it isbut an casie e the 1 Sop e à poore n riche, and that sodenlp.
22 Obe blessing of God hasteth ue rewarde ofthe righteous, and fal per. his fruites soone to floriche and pe Say

| fterz od thing all J Hane herea
2 agen not, I haue enough, how ywant? —
1 * nthou art in Welfare , korget not
“sy aduersitic: and whenit gocth not well

better: N 1
76 ie itis but a small thing vnto God in

the day of death to rewarde euery man arco ding to his waves. —
27 The aduersitie of an houre maketh one to forget al pleafute : when a man dieth, his workes are discouered.
9 16 Judge no man blesled before his death: fora man shalbe knowen in his children.
29 Bung not euerp man into thyne houle: forthe disceptlull laveth wapte diuersiy,

the sonne of Sirach. e 7 Sap not What helpeth it me: and what

with thee, haue a good hope that it shal-

eave like stomackes that delche füthyiy.

neyghbour.

zi For he turneth good vnto euyll, and

staundreth the chosen.

32 Of one sparke is made a great fire and of one difceptfull man is blood incresled: and an vngodly man lapeth wayte for blood. 8

3; Beware of the disceptfull, fo he tmagineth wicked thinges, to bung thee into
à perpetuall sha me.

34. If thou takest an altauttt brito thee, he
Mall destroy thee in vnquietnesse, and drpue thee from thyne owne Mapes,

The. oH a Chapter.

1 wittto whom we ought to do good. 16 Enemies ought not to be trusted.

hHheuthou wilt do good,
A) AY Bowe to whom thou

Ki | 1 doest it, and so shalt y fe

thou be greatly than-
I ked for thy benelites.
»Do good vnto the a righteous , and thou shalt finde great re Ward, though not of
Him , pet (ito doubt) the Lorde him lelke hall rewardecher.
He standeth not in a good tale that is al-
Way octupied in euil, c geueth noalmes: forthe hyghest hateth the finners, quid Hath mertie vponthem that shewe the workes ofrepentaunte.
4 Geue thou vnto such as feare God, and reteàue not a sinner. — >
§ As fo the vngodly and sinners, he shall reconipence bengeaunce vnto them, and kepe them to the day of wrath.
ͤGeue thou vnto the good, and receaue not the sinner, do well bnto hym that is lowip, but geue not tothe vngodlp: Jet not the hread be geuen him, that he be not nlightier then thy felfe therin : for fo

Gilvia 2 4 My IK,

(alt thou veceane tiwyse as much eupll

hun dat good that thou doef vnto m.

7 And whyethe highest hateth linners,

mae al reward vengeaunte to the vn-
332 N

8 In profperitte a friende shalbe knowen,

Em aduerlitie an enemie (hal not be hid.

9 F702 whena nianis in wealth it greeueth bis enemies: but in heaninesse and troüu-
We à mans Very friend will depart from him. N .

10 Trult neuer thyne eneinie: for like as an pron rusteth, so doth his wickednesse.

n And though he niake much crouching and kneeling, yet kepe well thy mind, € beware of hin: and thou shalt be to hint as he that wypeth a glasse, e thou shale knowe that al his rust bath not ben wel
Wypedalbay,

12 Set hun not by thee, neither let him sit at thy right hand:lest he turne hun, get into thy plate, take thy roome, and seke

thy leate, and so thou at the last remember up wordes, and be pricked at ty sapiiges. ; E

3 Binde not tibo sinnes together: for there (yall not one be vnpumshed.

14. Who wil haue pitie of the charmer that

is stinged of the serpent, or ofall hich as 3

tome nye the beastes
15 Euen lo is it with hum that kepeth tompante with a wicked man, and laͤppeth him selle in his fines,
16 For a season wil he bide with thee:but it thou stumble, he tarieth not.

17 An enemie is lweet in his lippes, he can lere a b

make many wordes, and {peake many good thinges: Hea he can wepe with is eyes, but in his heart he imagineth owe to throwe ther into the pit: and it

H (itt) he

30 Lilie às à partrych in a maunde, fo is Ser

the heart or the proude : and lite as a fcc te
{pic that loketh vpon the fall of his de rg

Eccl. Vii.a. aud xls,

he may kynde oportunitie, he Will not be

latilfied with blood. >

18 FFaduerlitic come vpon thee , thou
Chait find hun there first, and though he pretende to do thee helpe, pet Mal he bi

Che companies of the proude and ol the riche are to b

God. 17 Like do companie with their lille.

Ho fo toucheth pytch,
(halbe defiled withall: and he that ts familier with the proude, chall clot) him selke with

e pepde.

2 5 — Hetaketha burthen vpon hum that actompanieth a moze
Honorable man then hun selke, therfore
Kepe no faumliaritie with one that is richer then thy selfe: Howe agree the
Kettel and the pot together: lor if the one be finittenagaink the other, it chalbe broken. 0

3 The riche dealeth bnrightcoully, and threatneth withal: but the poore beyng oppressed and wrongfully dealt withall, suffereth startenesse, and geneth kayre wordes. If the riche haut done
Wrong, yet must he be entreated: but ik the pooze haue done it, he shall straight
Wayes be threatned.

4. Ikthou be for his profite, he vleth thee: hre. ben baue nothing, Be wal forsake

5 As longas thou hast any thing ok thyne one, he shhalbe a good felo With thee: pea he shall make thee a bare man, and not Ve sory for thee,

6 Il he haue neede ok thee, he chan defraude thee, and with a prinie mocke shall he put thee in an hope, c geue there
Bie od Wordes, and lay: what wantelt
Thus Hat he chame thee in his meate-

vntill he haue kurt ther tent bp twyse

02 thrpse, t at the last Matt he laugh tee

to cane: Alterwarde, when he seeth

that thou hast nothing, he Catt forsalke thee, and fake his head at thee,

3 Subuntthy selfe vnto God, and wapte voon his hande. —

Be ware that thon be not disceaued and bought done in thy lumplenelle: Be wat 15 oder edome, left

9 u art brought love thou b bütraued though toblchnelle. 9

W 7

. * an cos t.
The. xiti. Chapter...

fen

20 Tht wilde asscis the lions pr

The booke of lefus *

dum se. 4 : | —
10 He shall shake his head, and claus handes ouer thee for very TaD and whyle he maketh manywordes be tall dilgupse his countenaunce.

%.

elchewed. j Che loue g

kthou be called of a nughtie aan, 0 t thy lelle, fo Matt he kal thee to him the more offt.

a

1 Preasse not thou vnto hin that thou be

not shut out: but go not thon farre of, lest he forget the.

12 Withdraw not thy selfe from his speath, but beleue not his many wordes: Jor with much tommunttation shall he tempt thee, and with a priuie mocke thal he question with thee of thy lecretes.

13, The vnmercikull mynde ok his chall marke thy wordes, he shall not spare to do thec hurt, and to put thee in prison.

4. Beware and take good heede to thy ¢ felfe , for thou walkest in peryll of thy ouerthrowing: How whenthouhearest his wordes, make thee as Moughthou walt in a dreame, and wake vp.

15 Loue God all thy lyfe long, and tall

vpon him inthy neede.

16 Euerp beast loueth his like: euen so let euery man loue his nepahbour.

17 All fleshe will resort to their lie, and euery man wil kepe commpanic with such
às he is him sels e.

18 But as the woolfe agreeth with the lambe : fo doththe vngodly with the

vighteous, Se rand ope :
19 hat peace is there betweene Hyena and a dogge : Howe tan the riche aud the poore agree together? „ bis lr

(a) That ia, dich a fine that retnecth continually to

uin be wuͤdernesse: euen so are poore nien ibe a meateok te riche.. . wih ke
21 Like as the pronde may not away 10 Ye q
Pere : euenfodotl: the riche abe jones horre the poore. un e
22 Ifa riche mankaphis frieunes fet UM 19 50
Dpagaine s but when the pocze kalle), tice his acquayntaunce fozlake Hun. ne i
23 If àriche man fail into an errout Jude ee
Hath many Helpers he {peaketi) veel one, wordes, and pet men 2 55 te ched, ee
A poore man go wrong, 1 Pretcant
24 When

porter arcing

them. dnn

pea though he speake wy
Hane no place.

4 ke what oldeth his tongue, and loke wy beat AEP prayse it vnto the cloudes:
But if the poore man(peake , they fay,
What feloiv in this: and if he do amiffe, they shall destrop hym.

25 Viches are good vnto hy that hath

continueth in wyldome.

E 7 —
Ae 4)

g that hath not fallen

with the worde of his mouth, tis noc picked

with the conscience of

8 a Aah sinne. ‘

22 ———= Happy is he that hath no heauimesse in his minde, and is not

6 There is nothing worse then when one dilfauoureth him selfe: and this is a rewarde of his wickednesse.

5 7 Ithe do any good he doth it not knowlug therok and against his will, and at a last be declareth his vngracioulnesse.

Nic kei 9

da thou hast, and geuc the Lorde his duc e lkeringes.

kg & Remember that death tarieth not, and diaz bow that the! graue is not chewed vn-
, thee: for the couenaunt of this world
, ball dye the death.

Son, B Dogood vntd thy friende befoze thou

the sonne of Sirach.

—_ he riche man speaketh, euer is a wicked ching in the mouth of the
2% Whenthe rtth ; vngod xs. e

no linne in his conltience: and pouertie

ee The. xiiii. Chapter. a
Che offence of the tongue. 17 Man is but a vayne thing. 2 Happy is he that

bye, and according to thy abilitie reathe out thyne hande p geue vnto the poore.

26 The heart of man chaungeth his tountenaunce, whether it be in good or eupll.

27 Achearfull eountenaunce is a token ot
& good heart:for els it is an harde thing to knowe the thought.

Lefled is the man 14 We not disapoynted of the good day

and let not the portion of the good desire ouerpasse thee.

15 Shalt thou not leaue thy tranayies and labours vnto other men- In the deuiding of the heritage geueand tante, and fanctifie thy soule.

Ie Worke thou righteousnes before thy ee in the hell there is no meate to

inde.

17 All fleshe hail fade away lyke a gare H ment, andipkea sloriching icafe in a fg

ꝗreene tree.

18 Some growe, some are cat downe, euen so is the generation of fleshe and blood: one tonimeth to an ende, another

is borne, and this is the condition ofall times, thou shalt dye the death.

19 All transitorte thinges thal fayle at the

last, æ the worker therof (ha! go withal.
Euery cholen worke shalbe iustified,

and he that medled withall Malt haue honour therin.

21 Blelled is the man that kepeth hynn in wyldome, aud exercileth him selke in buz derstanding, and with discretion shall thinke bpon the lorekuowiedge of God,

22 Whiche conlidereth the wapes of wyl-
Dome in his heart, hath vnderstanding in her secretes,

23 Goeth after her as one that seketh her ont, and continueth in her ways,

24. t loketh in at her windowes, K hearkeneth at her doores,

25 He taketh his rest belide her house, and fasteneth his fate in her wales: he Mal pitche his tent nye vnto her hand, andin his tent Hall good thinges rest for euermore.

26 he shal set his children vnder her tonering, c (hall dwell vnder her braunches.

27 Under her couering Malt he be defen:
Ded from her heate, and in the glozie Hat he rest.

Acti) The

ce that fearetl) God,

wil do good: x who fo

I kepeth the lawe, chall obtapne wyldome.

As an honorable miother shall the nieete

— hym, and fhe as his

wife marted ofa virgm Chal reteaue hun.

With the bread of Ipfe and buderstan-

ding hal the feede hun, * gene him the

Water of wholsomt wildome to denke.

Ik he ve constant in her, he shall not be

moued, and ik he holde hin fast by her,

inna. he chall not tome to tonkulion.

Johiiia 5 She shall bring him to hondur amon his neyghbours, and inthe niddesto the congregation shall the open his mouth: with the spirite ol wyldome and vnderstanding hall che fyll him, and cloth hun with the garment of glorie.

6 She chall heape the treasure of myrth and toye vpon him, and geue him au

kuerlalting name to heritage.

7 Foolishe men will not take holde vpon
Her , but luch as haue vnderstanding, will meete her: Foolishe men Hail not see her, kor she is klarre from pryde and diltepte.

8 Menthat go about with lyes, will not remember her: but men of trueth thalbe founde in her, and (hall prosper euen vn-

to the beholding of God.

5 Prapse is not scemelp in the mouth of the vngodly, for he is not sent ol the Lorde,

10 But it prayse come of wyldome and be

(a) As à pore virgin neweip
| martcd, Doth 3 fricndlp entreat het bufs dand: so fyall

vndckged, 4

E cm
E32

= o—

W

The bookeof lesus

| The. xy. Chapter.

egoodnelle that kolo weth hym which feareth Gov. God reiecteth andcallet othe inner, 11 God is not the auctolir ok eupll. h

plenteous in a fapthkull mout
Fagor TOE am D,thenthe

11 ap not thou, it is the Tordes fault that J am gone by: fo? thoushalt nat do the thing that God hateth.

12 Say not thou, he bath cauled nie to do
See > fozbe bath no neede ofthe vn-
3 God hateth al abhomtnatlon of errour, ap they that feare God will loue none

14 God made man from the beginning, and left him in the hande of his counteh:
He gare his commanndementes and C preceptes. „

15 Ik thou wilt obserue the commaundementes and kepe acceptable fapthfulnesse for euer, they shall preserue thee.

16 He hath {ct water and kyre before thee, wl out thine hande vnto which thon ler xcs,

17 Before man is lyfe and death, good and
1200 f loke what him lyketh, shalbe geuen him.

18 For the wyldome of God is greatand mightie in power, and beholdeth all thinges tontinuallp:

19 The eyes ot the Lorde are vpon them that feare him, and he knoweth allthe
Workes ot man.

20 Ht hath tommaunded no man ko do

~ pngodly , neither bath he geuen any man licence to sinne:for he desireth not a multitude of infidels and vnprokitable chilozen.

The. xvi. Chapter.

1 Ok vunhappie and wicked children. 19 Mo man can hyde him lelke krom God.
24 In exhortation to the receauing of instruction.

D Elite not thou in the multitude of vngodly

5 1 not thou to heir lyfe and re

uot their labours, ie
F027 one sonne that fcareth God, is vet: ter then a thouland vngodly: And better id is for a man to dpe Without children,

then to leaue beynde yr i dd 5 hym (uch children

We

4. For byone that Hath vnderstanding,
‘ may a Whole dtie be Dpholden : but though the vngodiy be many, vet shalit be wasted through them. N
5 Many luch thinges bath urine ere seene, and greater thinges uy thefe haue J heard with myne cares. a
6 In the ene the bug Ecclex hal a fire een eee a eople shall the wrath be Hindi” 1
4 Pie ole gauntes optayned no oa Gea. for their finnes, whiche were destror trusting to their owne strength 3 Keel

Ix,

thefonne of Sirach.

8 seeither {pared be them among ish foundations of the earth all (hake for 0

ot was a straunger: but finote thern,

cox" and abhorred them betause ofthe pride ok their wordes.

9 He had no pitte bpon them: but destroy-

ed all the people that were so stout in

sinne.

jo And korsomuch as he duerlawe the

ene fire hundred thousand that gathered them (clues together in the hardnesse oftheir heart, in affticting them, in pitiing them, in umiting them, and healing them with mertle and chastisement: it were maruell (fone being hardnecked should be free:

1 *For mercy t wrath is with him, he is both mightie to forgeue, and to powre out displeasure.

12 Typke as his merey is great, euen so is his punishement allo: he iudgeth a man according to his workes.

3 The vngodly shall not eseape in his spople, t᷑ the long patiente of him that

sheweth mercie, chall not byde behinde.

4 He wyll make a plate for euery mercifull deede, and euerp man Mall finde ace tording to his workes.

1j The Logde hardened Pharao that he should not know him, and that his
Workes might be knowen vpon the earth vnder the heauen.

is His mercie is knowen to all creatures, he hath seperated his light from the darkenesle with an adamant,

17 Sap not thon , J wyll hide my selfe krom God: for Who wyll thinke vpon me from aboue: J Hall not be knowen in lo great an heãpe of people: foz what is my soule among so manp creatures:

18 Beholde, the heauen, pea the heauen okheauens ok God the deepe, the earth, and all that therein is, shalbe moued at his presence.

19 The mountapnes, the hilles, and the

babe. vn.

care, when God visiteth them.

20 These thinges doth no heart vnderland worthylp: but he vnderstandeth euery heart.

21 And Who vnderstandeth his wapes-
Nb man seeth his stormes, and the mot part of his Workes are secrete.

22 Who Wwyll declare the workes of his righteousnesse:? or who shalbe able to abide them 2 Foz the touenaunt ts farce from some, and trying out ol men is in the ende. f

23 He that is humble of heart, thinketh vpon such thinges: but an vnwyle and erronious man casteth his nunde vnto foolishe thinges.

24 My sonne, hearken thou bnto mie, and learne vnderstanding, and marke my wWordes with thyne heart: J wyll geue thee a sure doctrine, and plaincly shall J instruct thee.

25 Marke my wordes then in thyne heart: foz in righteousnesse of the spirite do J speake of the wonders that God hath shewed among his workes from the beginning, Ein the trueth do I shew the knowledge of him. N

26 God hathset his workes in good order from the beginning, part of them hath he sundred from the other.

27 he hath garniched his workes from euerlasting, and their beginninges ac tording to their generations: they are not hungrie nor weeried in their labours, nor ceasse from their offices.

28 None of them hindzed another, net their was any of them disobe dient vnto his wordes.

29 Alter this God loked vpon the earth,

and filled it with his goodnesse.

o With all maner of liuing deastes hath he conered the grounde, and they all shalbe turned vnto earth againe.

The. xvii. Chapter.

Che creation of man, and the goodnesse that God hath done onto him.

20 Ok almes, 26 and repentaunce.

Od * fhaped man of the earth, r made him after his owe image, and turned him vuto carth againe, and cloapep am 19 his owne strength.

f He gave him the number ok dapes and

2 8 i
G 558
E. ne

a
¥ ¢
Ne
‘

tertaine time, peaand gaue him power of the thinges that are bpon earth.

3 He made all fleshe to stand in awe of him, fo that he had the dominion of all beastes and foules.

4 Me made out of him an helper lyke bnto hin selfe, e gaue them diltretion and tongue, eyes, and cares, and a heart to

vnderstande:

Gen. il. d.

Tcanigression.

Ti

aue them a spirite and a fpeache to

: N10 hie Workes, € filled them with instruction and vnderstanding.

6 He treated for them allo the knolwledge okthe lpirite, filled their heartes wich vnderstanding, and shewed them good and euill.

7 He set his eye vpon their heartes, de-
W garing vnto them his great and noble
Wworkes: a“

3 That they thonid prayle his Holy name together, reioyte of his Wonders, and br telling ok his noble actes

9 Belide this, he gaue them instruction, and the lawe of life for an heritage, that they might now know that they were
™ mortall. ö

10 He made an euerlasting couenaunt with them, and shewed them hisrighteousnesse and indgementes. a

n They sawe the maiestie of his glorie with their eyes, and their cares heard the maettie of his voyce, and he faide vnto them: beware of all vnrighteous thinges. *

12 He gaue tuery man also a cõmaundement toncerning his neighbour,

C Their wapes are euer bekore him, and are not hid from his eyes.

entis. 14. Euery man from his youth is geuen

betete“ 0 eulll, and their ony heartes tan not

beg . become fleshe.

Deu. mie. * Hut Plracl is the Lordes portion:

16 Whom he nourisheth with discipline as his first borne, and geueth him most wing light, and Doth not forsake him.

17 All their workes are as the sunne, in the ligyt ol God, ¢ his eyes are alway looking bpon their wapes.

18 Alltheir vnrightedulnelses are mantfest Dato him, and al their wickednesses art open in his sight.

D 19 And as he is mercikull and knoweth his worke, he doch not leaue them noz forsake them, but spareth them.

20 The mertie that aman sheweth is © asaltale with him, and the grace that is geuen to man prelerueth

| Exo.xx,a-

Ca) Though

their ovont

(c ) Aga thing sealed up isfurelp found? a:

gaine, tors mercie lay de vpinRore,

e booke of lefus
——pupetanves—~~«*~~SSCS*« aS tHeApIeoLaNeye, and gest.)

repentaunce to their sonnes an th ae At chan ran ddaugh-

21 At the last Malt he awake, and rew euery man vpon his head, x shall * them toge ger into the neathermog partes of the earth. *

22 Wut vnto themithat wyn repent he Ac.

Hath geuen the wap of righteoulnelle:
As for luch as be weake, he comforter them, sufkereth them, and sendeth them the portion of the veritie. ony a 1

23 Oturne then vnto the Lorde, forsake thy sinnes, make thy prayer before the
Lorde, do the lesse offentde.

24. Turne againe vnto the Lorde, for he wpll bring thee from dackenelle onto holsome light, forsake thyne vnrightedusnesse, be an vtter enemie to abhomination,

25 Tearne to know the righteousnesse ¢ and iudgementes of God, stand inthe portion that is set foorth for thee, and in the prayer of the most hye God.

26 Go in the portion of the holp worlde with such as be lpuing, € geue thankes vnto God. a '

27 ho wil prapse the Lorde in the hel: pam

abide not thou in p errour of the vngodlie, but gene him thankes before death.

28 As fo2 the dead, thankfulnes perisheth from him as noching: Geue thou thankes in thy lpke, yea whyle thou art lyuing and Whole shalt thou geue thankes, and prayse God, and reioyte in
His mertie. .

29 O how great is the louing kindnesle of the Lorde, and his merciful goodnes vnto {uch as turne vnto him

30 For all thinges map not be in man, and why the sonne of man is not mmm and ones pleasure in the vanitico wickednesse.

31 ee is pie tleare thenthe fone: F

et shall it faple.

so warts moe wicked then the thyng that fleche and blood hath imagined: and that same (halve reproued. 0

33 The Torde seeth the power va 15 heauen, and al are but carth and 1 + b

* F

I The marueplous workes of God. Che milerie and
_ 9 Again# God ought we not to complaine. 2 The perkourming ol vowes.

=] Ethat lpuc. h for ener:
Sit moze, made al thinges together: God onelp is righteous, and there is none other but he, and
HY), CoS) reniaincth a victorious
2 He ordereth the worlde with the power ol his hande, and all thinges obey his wyl: lor he gouerneth all hinges by his

polber, and demdeth the holy thinges

from the prophane.
Workes of hun: who wyll lecke out the grounde ok his noble actes:

4 Who bhall declare the power ok his

e

gueatneffez 02 who wyll take vpon him

to tell out his mertie:

As foz the wonderous workes of the
Tord, there may nothing be taken from them, nothing may be put vnto them, neither may the grounde ok them be founde out.

6 But when a man hath done his best,

he must beginne againe: and when he

thinketh to be come to an ende, he nut |

go agate to his labour.

; to the fea, and as a granell stone is in

Ul kt lb. ewe peres to the dayes of enerlatting.

10 Lherefore isthe Lorde patent With

" tia powreth out his mertie vpon eim. =e I. INES

un He sawe aud tinaginations of their heart that they were euill, therefore heaped he bp chewedthemthe way okrightedulnes.
12 The mercle that a man hath reacheth to his neighbour, ont the mercie of god

‘Sbponail fleche the chattenctl), he keaeth and nurtureth: yea enen asa f eephearde turneth againe his flocke, o doth he alt them that receane chalte-

ning, nurture, and doctrine,

the sonne of Sirach.

1 The. xviii. Chapter. Rede vio

king for euer. b

tonparison of the fande:* soarethese

and perteaued the thoughtes

his mercikull goodnesse vpon them, and

Tee Sik Eee he Aa
Wretchednes of man.

3 * Merepfull is he vnto them that dui- lia. gently sceke akter his ludgementes.

14 My fonne, when thou doest good, C make no grudging at it: and whatfoeuer thou geuest, speake no dilcomkortable wordes.

15 Shall uot the deawe coole the heateenen so is a worde better then a mit.

16 Js not a friendly wore a good ho- v nett gifte: but a gratious man geueth them both

17 A koole shall cast a man in the teeth and that roughly: and a gilt ofthe nis Eccte.xti.b. garde putteth out the eyes.

18 Getthee rightedusnes vefore thou

tome to iudgement, {carne before thou speake, and go to phisicke oreuer thou

i> *Examine and indge thy felfe before ~~ the iudgement tome, and so shalt thou x. finde grace in the light of God.

20 Humble thy selle afore thou be sicke: and whilest thou mapste inne, shew thy tonnersattog. , n

21 Be not let to pay thy vowe in good eth tune, and tarp not to be tustitled vnde wos a thy death for the rewarde of God endu-

rech for euer.

Cn) Fer he ig moze perfit that tp

houre ol beugeaüte when hechallturne
Away his are..

Fecle. xi. d

and starsenesse.

25. From the morning vntyl the euenmng the tune is chaunged e all fuel thuges
‘ate soone done in the fight of God.

26 A Wyle man feareth God in al thinges, and in the dayes of fransgrellion he kepeth him seife from sinne: but the logle doch net obserue the time. .

27 A distreete man pach plealure in wyldome, and he that findeth her, maueth much of her. ~~ a

28. They that haue had vnderstanding
‘Hane dealt wysely in wordes, haue vnderstand the trueth and righteousne lle, and bane fought out wyle pat

sD in

and iudgementes.

29 The chiefe auethoritie of speaking. is of

the Lorde alone:for a mortall man bath but a dead heart.

The booke of lesus

32 Take not thy plealure in reat ” tuoulnelle, and meddle at ont withall. a uch

33 Make not to great cheare of the thin

30 * dlowe not thy lustes but turnethee that thon hast wonne by aduaunta
Rom.vi-b. 5 ereipneotbue wyll. 8 left thou fall into pouertie and baue
31 Jorikthou geuestthy soule her desires, nothmg mt purse els thou chouldest it hall make thyne enemies to laugg {claunderoully tye in wapte for thyne thee to scorne. obne lyke. N
IJ The. xix Chapter.

a Wine and Whordome bringeth men to pouertic. In thy wordes mutt thou bic becresion, 2 Che Difference of the wyldome ot God and man, 27 whereby thou

mart know what is in a man.

ö Labouring man that ls genen vnto drunc-
= Rennes, shall not be rich: and he that maketh not much of small thinges, shall fall by litue and litle.

2 Wine and women make Wyle men runagates, aud put men ok vnderstanding to reproofe: a f

3 And he that companieth adulterers, shal become an inmpudent man: mothes and Woznes hal haue him to heritage, pea he shal be set vp to a great example, and his soule shalbe rooted out of the number.

Jofuxsin, 4. e that is hastie to geue tredence, is

light winded, x doth against him selte.

5 Who do reiopceth in wickednesse, chalbe punished: but he that resisteth plea
{utes crowneth his owne foute: he that refrainctl his tongue, may lyue with a troublesomie man: he that hateth to ve rekourmed, his lpfe shalbe shortened:
Ehe that abhorreth babling of wozdes,

aquencheth wickednesse.

6 he that offendeth against his owne sonle, hall repentit: and he thatreiop-

Gene xix. lu. Reg. xi · a.

ceth in wickednes, shalbe punishhed.

W7 Kehearse not a wicked and churliche
8 twyle, and thou shalt sora hie
8 Hhelvethy secretes neither to friende nor fot: and ik thou halt offended, tellit not out.

9 Forhe shall hearken vnto thee, and marke thee: and when he findeth opoztunitie, he shall hate thee, and lo shall he

be away about thee. kede ie 10 If thou hast heard a worde again thy neighbour, letit be dead Within
Mees and be fire thou shalt haue no

harme thereby.

11 A foole trauapleth with a worde, lyke asa woman that is papned with bea: ring of a childe. 5

12 Tykt as an arrowe shotte in a thigh of flesshe, so is a worde in a fooles heart.

i; Tell thy friende his fault, lest he be 1. ignoraunt, and sap, J haue not done it: or if he haue spoken, that he do it no more.

14 Reproue thy neighbour, that he neepe his tongue: and if he haue spoken, that he say it no more.

15 Tell thy neighbour his fault, for oft times an offence is made: and geue not tredence to euery worde. „

16 A man kalleth sometime with his tongue, but not with his wil: fo: What Ee is he that hath not offended in his tongue- 7

17 Geute thy neighbour warning before thou threaten him: and geue plate Dito the lawe okthe Lorde. =.

13. The feare ok the Torde isthe lirstdegree to 8 128 ofhim: c wyldome obtayneth his loue. 1 5

19 The knowledge of the tonumumdge mentes of the Lorde, is the Doctrine OF wle: and they that obey him, Mallee ctaue the kruite ofiimmoztalic. . and

20 The feare of God is allwyrdone 10 A he that is a rightedus man kecpety th lawe. i .

21 Ika seruaunt fay vnto bismaitiet, #
Wyll not do as it plealeth tec: 0 Nail

alterwarde he a, be {yall dilp

him that nouricheth hun. 2

A8 the doctrine of ywickeDnes, ,

no wyldome che prudence of ii ed

no good bnderftanding:tt is bn ni nes, and abomination, and a ee: ming of wyldome.

a d,

Nita.

Medi,

huunbly, and can ducke with his head, and pet is he bůt a deccauer Within: We hydeth his kate, and difguileth it, and

N

23 Ol lping. 5

me man reproueth eee his neighbour oft
<a) times, but not in due x season: Againe, soine

man holdeth his tongue, and he is wyse and discreete.

2 It ts much better to geue warning and to reproue, then to beare euill wyll:

for he that knowledgeth him lelke open-

lp, shalbe preserued from hurt and des structien. : 6. fo t

3 Lyhicas when a gelded manthrough desire and lust delileth amayden: euen so is it with hun that vleth violence aud vnrighte ousnesse in the lawe.

4 Dhow. gooda thing is it, a man that

t
é

ts reproued to shewe openly his repen-

nee for fo shalt thon estape wylfull me. n 2 4 i
5 Some man keepeth feilence and is

founde wyse: but he that is not asha- .

Med what he saith, is hatefull.

Dome man holdeth his tongue, becaule he hath not vnderstanding of the language: and some man keepeth {rilence, ee gting atonuenient time.

a Wyle man wyll holde his tongue ty he fee oportumtie:but a wanton and vndistreete body (hall regarde no time.

He that bleth many wordes, Mal hurt
Dis obne soule: and he that taketh aut-
Dee vpon him vnrighteously, shalbe

Dome man hath oft times prosperitie mwicked thinges : Againe, fome man
Selteth much, and hath harme k lofse.

here is some gikt that is nothing
Worth: Againe, there is lome gift whole

because he shoulde not be knowen, he preuenteth thee,

26 And though hebe so weake that he

tan do thee no harme, yet when he may n oporztunitie, he shall do some cuil. *

rewarde is double.
1 There is an humilitie for glories lake, and some comm

eth to worchip from

lowe estatee

12 Some man byeth mich for a litte prite, and must pay fo2 it seuen foide.

13 * A wple man with his wordes ma-

keth hin selke to be beloued: but the merie tales of fooles shalbe pored out.

14. The gift of the bnwpse shali do thee

“NO good, nor pet of the cnutous, for his iniportunttie is seuen folde: for he loketh to reteaue manp thinges kor one.

15 He shall geue litle, æ fay he gaue much: he openeth his mouth and crpeth out, as it were one that crped out wide.

16 To dap he lendeth, to morowe astzeth he againe: and such a man is to be hated

of God and man.

17 The foole faith, J baue no freend, F haue no thanke for all nip good deedes: yea euen thep that eate my bread

speake no good of me: O how oft audotk how many shal he be laughed to scorne-

18 He taketh a moze perilous fail by luch wordes, then if he fel vpon the grounde: euen so (hal the fall ol wicked men come

hastply.

19 In the mouth of him that is bnteught, are manp Unconuenient and vumeete
Wordes.

20 A Wyle sentente Mall not de alowed

Eccle. vi. d.

C

Eccle. xvill. c

at the mouth of the foole: for he spea- a

keth it not in due feafon.

21 Home man sinueth not, becaule he.
Hath not where withall, and in his rest he shalbe stinged.

22 Sonic man there is that destroyeth his ownc soulc With Hamme, and fozan

vnwese

‘TI

‘

and with accepting of perfons shall he vndoe huͤn selfe.

23 Some man prompleth his friende a gift fo2 bery shame: and getteth an enemie of him kor nought.

24. Alpe is à wicked chanie in a man: vet shall it be euer in the mouth ofthe vn-

25 A theeke is better then a man that is

actustomed to lpe: but they both Mall -

haue destruction to heritage.

26 The conditions oflyers are vnhontst: and their shame is ener with them.

27 Awyle man shall bring him selfe to
Honour with his wordes: and he that hath vnderstanding shalbe fet by a: mong great men.

Gene. xli. f.

le booke of lesus
, pnvple bodpes fake destropeth heit, 28 dpe that tplictl) bis ande thallenevcare

his heape of torne: he that 1 kun es thatbe cralte, ame Pro vii 5. hat pleaseth great men nach el . 7 sballescape
29 Me wardes and giftes blinde the of the Wyle, and make him Dumbe 5 bade. . he tan not tell men their kaulteg. ri ry 5 is —7 and treasure at is hoorded vp, what poof .
31 Better ts he that kepeth his tangas fecete, tena man thac beth his onie,
32 The neteslarie patience ok him thar foloweth the Lorde, is better 11 —

that gouerneth his ipte Without the

Torde.

The. ** (Chapter. .

ot to continucintinne. 5 Che pager of the afflicted. Co hate to be reproued.
Che mouth of the wyse man. 26 The thought ok the foole,

FEccle. v. a.

I sonne, if thou batt
FN 0 firmed, do it no moze: ai) but pray for thy fore-
% | femmes that they may
Zt VO Yt ici be forgeuen thee.

2 lee krom sinne, euen

Au s krom a lerpent: foz il thon eomest to nye her, che wyll bite thee: the teeth thereof art as the teeth of a lion, to flay the sonles of men.

3 The wickeonefie of man is as a sharpe two ebged (od, which maketh such
Woundes that they cannot be healed.

4 Strife and wiongkull dealing, chall
Walle awaya mans goodes, cthrough pude a riche house shalbe brongheto naught:so the riches of the proude chalbe rooted ont.

Exo b. 5 The prayer ofthe poore goeth out of the month, e conmeth vnto the cares, and his vengeaunce Lor dekence] (hall conte hastylp.

6 Who so hateth to be refourmed, it is

atonẽ ef an vngodwp perlon: but he that

with feareth God, Wyll rtinenwer hun felfe.
7 A mightie man is unowen a farre of

gor des borowed and nor

boden e, Up his tongue: but he that hath vndera fanding,perceaucth that he chall haue

theretu tones weinte r(to bupwe wyen 8 the front doth d congeale the mizter. oy cannot

ata,

mens colt, wis lpke one that gathereth stones to mau c his grauc.

ee The congregation ofthe vngodly, is
Rccle. x vi. a,

lpke studdie gathered together, their

Who so buildeth his house with other

endeis a flambe of fire.

lo The wapofthe vngodly is set with stones: but in their ende is hell, darkenesse, and paints. n

I. He that kepeth thelawe, wyll holde fast the vnderstanding thereof: and the ende of the feare of God is wyldomc and vnderstanding. i

12 Pet that is not wyse, wyl not be taught in good, but the vnwple man aboundeth in wickednesse: and where bitternelle is, there is no vnderstanding.

13 The knowledge ofthe wyse Hal flowe C lyke water that runneth ouer, and his countaile is lpke a pure fountaine of life.

14. The heart ofa foole is lyke à broken
Defiel he can keepe no wyldome.

15 Whena man ok önderstandmg heareth a Wyle worde, he Mall tonnnend it and male much ok it: but ika voluptuous man heare it, he Chall haue no plealure therein, but cat it behinde his backe.

16 The talking ofa foole is lpke an beatty burthen by the way: but to heare a wile man speake, it is pleasure.

17 Where à doubtis in the congregation, it is alked at the mouth of the r they shall ponder his wordes in the heartes. —

18 "at ple as is a honse that is dacrer fg tuen so is wysdome vnto a 5 “at the knowledge ofthe vnwyle, tt! darke wordes. ath no bt

19 Doctrine is vnto him that bre ing,

nding, euen as fetters about his and lyke manitles bpon his right e.

N „. 92 foole lifteth vp his bopce with

egaughter: buta wyle man Mall tate laugh lecretip. ...

1 Learning is vnto a Wyle mana icwell

okgolde, and lpke an armlet vpon his

right arme.

12 Afoolithe mans foote is soone in his neighbours houle: but one that hath erperlente chalbe ashamed at the person okthemightie. g

2 -Afoole wyll peepe in at the windowe into the houle:but he that is wel nurtured wyll stande without.

24 A foolishe man standeth hearkening

Ok the kluggard. feareth not.

l Slouthfull bodpe is
# || moulded ofa stone of tlape, and euery man wn speake to his dilprapse.
8 A llouthkull bodp is made ofthe doung of bren, and euery one that toucheth him mut walche his handes againe. mais} Amilnurtured sonne is the dishonour of the father: a foolishe daughter shalbe eon + A wle daughter is an heritage vnto her hulband: but the that cõmeth to vif: rian bringeth her father in heaui-

A daughter that is past shame, dichonoureth both her father and her hulband: the vngodly (hall regarde her, but they both chall despise her.

s Atale out of time, is as mulicke in securung: but wyldome knoweth the

8, lcalons ofcorzrettion and doctrine.

bee children lyue honeskly and haue here withall, they thall put away the

ame of their parentes: N ant if chudren be proude with hauti-
N 7 and foolichnes, they blot out the no-

bilitie of their kinred. i
Who fo teacheth a foole is euen as one ee glewetha potcharde together, as
5 that telleth a tale to him that hea-
0 h hun not, and as one that rapleth a

9 . ol an heauy sleepe.

ho so telleth a foole of wyldome, is

the sonne of Sirach.

at the doore:but he that is wyse wyll be ashamed.

25 The lippes of the vnwyse wyl be telling foolishe thinges: but the wordes of such as haue vönderstanding chalbe waped in the balaunce. 8

26 The heart of fooles is in their mouth: at mouth ofthe wyle is in their

cart.

27 When the vngodlprurseth the © plalmer, he turseth his owne foute, 80

28 Aprtuie accuser of other men chall ange defile his owne foule, and be hated of verte every man: but he that keepeth hts 4 tongue and is discreete, Mat tome to honour. =

Cb) 0 while he curs feth an other,

J The xxii. Chapter,

12 Not to speake much to a foole. 16 J good conlctence

euen as a man which speaketh to one that is a sleepe: when he hath tolde his tale, he faith, vohat is the matter:
Ii When one dpeth, lamentation is made foz him, becaule the light fapieth him: euen fo, let men mourne ouer a foole, for he wanteth vnderstanding. Make but litle weeping becaule of the dead, for he is tome to rest: but the lyfe of the foole is worse then the death.
12 Seuen dapes do nien mourne fo him that is dead: but the lamentation ouer the vnwysle and vngodly should endure all the dayes of their lyfe.
13 Talke not much with a foole, and go not with him that hath no vnderstan- C ding: beware of hin, lest it turne thee to trauaile, and thou shalt not be defited with his sinne. De part krom him, aud thou shalt finde rest, and shalt not be drawen backe into his foolichnes. acbb
14 O What is heauler then leade- and n
9 55 shoulde a foole be called els but deal ea 22 be bozne,
15 Sande, salte, and a lumpe of iron is Peau ye easier to beare, then an vnwpse, foolishe, weigern and vngodly man. ek
Dyke as the bande of wood bounde ge then, together in the foundation of the houte beh. can not be loosed: euen so is it with the heart thatis stabliched in the thought of tounsell. The thought of the wyle shall neuer feare, nor be offended at any time.
17 Tyke asa faire plastered wall in a winter house and A hye building UEP
Win 4

Th

be Winde and storme: euen lo e heart afcaiDet his iniagination, he feareth at euer thing, and tan dure.

8 461 uering heart inthe imagination ofa foole wyll not euer stande in awe: but he that abideth in the tommaundementes of God, wyll alway feare.

19 He that nippeth a mans exe, bringeth foorth teares: and he that pricketh the heart, bringeth foorth the meaning and thought. b

20 Who fo tasteth a (tone at the birdes, frayeth them away: and he that blalphemeth his freend, breaketh krend-

ship.

21 Though thou drewest a sworde at thy freend, yet dispaire not: for thou mayst tome againe to thy freend.

22 If he spcake sourely, feare not: for ve may be agreed together againe, except it be that thou blafpheme hun, dildayne him, open his setretes, and wounde him

The. xxiii. Chapter.

¥ Draper against pride, lechery, and gluttony. iz Ok othes, blasphemp, and bn wpte
16 DE the three hindes of linnes.

communication, adulttie. 27 Ok the keare of God.

D Tode, father and go
At . leaue me not in their imagination and counsell: Oh let me not fall in {uch reprooke.

Who wyll keepe my thought with the scourge, and the dor: trine of wyldome in myne heart-thathe
{pare not myne ignorannce, that J fall not with them:

Testwpne ignoraunces intrease, that mpne offences be not many in number, and that my sinnes exteede not: lest E. fall befoze myne enemies, and lo my aduersarie reioyce, whole hope is farre feo thy mertie. ö
4 O Tornde thou father and God of my

ipfe, leaue me not m their imagination:
O let me not hauc a proude looke, but turne away all voluptuousnesle fro me.
5 Tanke from me the lustes of the bodp, let not the desires of vnclennelle take holde vpon me,
6 And geue me not ouer into an vnfhamefattand obstinate minde.
7 Btare me O pe chudren, J wyll geue
POU a doctrine how pe shall order pour

Ww

e booke of Iesus

Auernour of my lpfe,

A
7 Reon
“Malt fo N
4 ey Rs
* hes eae

trapteroufiie: for all sueht a iene be D tinges Mat

23 We laithtull vnto thy neighbour my; pouertie, that thou makeup pimalso in his prolperitie: abpde ten: fast vnto him in the time of his trouble that thou matt be hepze with print heritage: for pouertie is not alwayes to be contempned, nor the riche that is foo: lish to be had in estimation.

24 Tpke as the vapour and smoke goeth out at the ouen before the fire: euen so cuill wordes, rebukes, and threatninges go before bloodshedding.

25 Be not ashamed to defende thy freend, as for me J wyll not hide my kate froni E him though he should do me harme: a heareth it, Mall beware of

um.

26 Who Chal fet a watch before my mouth, pal c and asure seale vpon my lippes, that J" fall not with them, and that my tongue destrop me not: 8

23 Many linnes proceede of

mouth:Wwhofo kepeth it shal not perithe through his lippes, nor be hurt through
Wicked Workes. ,

8 Asforthe finner, he chalbe taken in 3 his owne vanitie: He that is proude and turled, shau fall therein.

9 Net not thy mouth be atcultomed n
With swearing, kor in it there are many fals: let not the nannng of God be continually in thy mouth, and meddle not
With the names offainctes, for thou shalt not be excused ofthem. P

10 Foz lpke as a seruaunt Which 1 okt punished, can not be without some 5 euen fo whatsoeuer he be that sweare 0 and de ee chall not be clean

urged from sinne. N

II 25 at dteth much swearing Le be filled With wickednelle, € the ass 9 shall neuer go from hishoule:! be 15 guile his brother, his fault shalbe 5 g him, tf he knowledge not his ora j maketh a double offence, Eifel ate in vaine, he thall not befounde rig ous:for his house shalbe full of plag .

n The wordes of eye fvearer 5 Leuist
Death God graunt that it be . 1 in the houle ol Jacob: but 5 feat

i

C

i b. 15

Punta.

fare God elchue all such, and lye not weltering in linne.

z' Ule not hy mouth to vnhonest e fuͤthy

talking, for in it is the Word of sinne.
Remember thy father and thy mother when thou art fet among great mentlest
God forget thee in their sight, and ett thou dottug in thy tustome , puke, and wishe not to haue ben bozne, and lo curse the day of thy natiuitie.
The nian that is accustouted with the wordes of blafphemic, will neuer be refourmed all the dapes of his lyfe.

16 To linue wile is to much, but the third

bungeth wrath and destruction: An hot stomacke tan not be quenched (euen ike a burning fire) til it haue swalowed vp lone thing: enen so an vnchaste man

hath no rest in his fleshe, till he haue

kindled a fire.

17 Allbread is Iweete to an whozemon-

ger, he will not leaue of till he dye.

3 Aman that breaketh wedlocke, and vez

gardeth not his soule, but sayth, Tulhe
Who seeth me: Jam compalled about with darkenelle, the walles couer me, no bodyseeth me, whom neede J to feare? the hyghest will not remember my sinnes:

1 He vnderstandeth not that his eyes fee

all thinges, for all such feare of men dryueth away the feare of God from bpm: for he feareth onely the eyes of men. and tonhoereth not that the eyes of the
Lord are tlearer then the sunne, beholding all the wapes of men, e the ground okthe deepe, and loking euen to mens

the son ne of Sirac

suffer re-

h. heartes in secrete plates.

20 The Torde God knee all hinges or euer they were made, and alter they be brought to passe also he loketh vpon themall.

21 The fame man chalbe openly pumshed in the streetes ofthe citie e shalbe chaled abrode lyke à young horse foale: and when he thinketh leat vpon it, he chalbe taken.

22 Thus shall he be put to shanie ok euery man, becaufe he Wonlde not vnderstand the feare ofthe Lowe: And thus shal it go also with euerp wyft that leaueth her husbande, and getteth inheritaunte by a straunge niariage

23 First, she bath ben vnkapthkul vnto the lawe of the hyghest: setondly, che hath forsaken her owne hulbande: thyrdly, fhe hath plaped the whore in adultrie,
€E gotten her children by au other man.

24 She shalbebrought out ok the congren and her chüͤdren chalke loked

pon. .

25 Her children shal not take roote:and as sor fruite her braunches Mall bring foorth none. f

26 A chamekull report shall fhe leaue behinde her, and her difhonour shall not be put out.

27 Aud they that remapne, shall knowe that there is nothing better then the feare of God, and that there is nothing sweeter then to take heed vnto the tommaundementes ofthe Lode.

28 A great worship is it to folow the Loyd: foz long lyfe shalbe reteaued of hym.

The. xxitit . Chapter.

1 prayteot wyfdome proceeding foorth of the mouth of God. Ok her workes and

place where the resteth.

Bidome shall praple her selfe, and be honoured in God, Freioptce in the middest of the people:

Sper her mouth, and triumph in the beholding of his power. pe
3 Duthe midvett of her people chall she be

exalted an j nelle. d wondred at in the oly ful

In the congregations ol the hyghest shall she

4 Inthe multitude ok the cholen the chalbe connnended, and aniong such as be blessed she shalbe praysed, and shal

fay,
5 Jam tome out of the mouth of the hyghest first borne befoze all creatures.
6 J cauled the light that fapleth not to akysle in the heanen, and touered all the earth as a cloude.
7 My dwelling is aboue in the heygth, aud myfeatets in the pyller of the

tloude.
1 (i 3 Imp

EV.

Leuk xx. b.
Deut c. b

Exo. xx. c.

on

Ihe booke ot lefus
8 Imp lelke alone haue gone rounda- inmeis all hope of lyfe and vertae.

bout the tompalle of heauen, and pear- 22 O come vnto meal pe that be desrous

fer the grounde of the deepe.
9F vane walked in the fluddes olthe sea, and haue stande in all landes, my dom

nion is in euery people and in euery na-

tion, and with) my power haue Jtroden downe the heaͤrtes ofall, both Dye and lowe. 1 — eM!

10 In all these thinges allo J fought rest,

and a dwelling in some inheritaunce.

1 Sothe treator oł all thinges gaue me a counnaundement, and he that made me, appoynted me a tabernatle, and sayd vnto me: Let thy dwelling be in Jacob, and thine inherttaunte in Jlrael, € roote thy elfe among my chosen.

was treated from the beginning and befoze the world, and (hall not leaue of vnto the World to tome: In the holy
Habitation haue Jlerued before hym, and so was JJ stablished in Sion.
13 In the holy eltie rested J in like maz ner, and in Hierusalem was mp power.
14 J toke roote in an honozable people, cuen in the portion ok the Lorde and in his heritage, and kept me in the fulnesse of the sainctes. a am let vp an hye like a Cedar vpon ibanus, and as a Cipers tree vpon the mount Hermon.

Pro. viii. c.

Exo. xxxi. a

PDsa Bz. a.

16 J am exalted lpke a palme trte in Ca- 29

des, and as à rose plant in Jericho, as a fayre Oliue tree in the fielde, and ain exe alted like as a plantaine tree by the water fide,

17 Ahane geutna smellin the streetes as the Cinamon and Wanne that hath fo good a sauour, ꝓea a lweet odour haue
I geuen as it were mprre ok the belt: J haue made al dwellinges to {niell as it were of Rolin, Galbanum, ok Cloues,

0 a) Terebint to a hardetret
(perp ons eee where St of g runneth the
Pom called a pure turpenbee de 5 done Arc the braunches of honour and louung mowsyepa: kaudür, dee 19 As the vine haue
Sed dans krulte ol a liweete faudur, emy floures rue n. are the fruite of honour and riches,
20 Ham the mother of brautie, ofloue of feate of knowledge, and of holy hope: J eue cternall thinges to all mp chüͤdzen to whom God hath tommaunded.

2 In me is all grate of iyfe and trueth,

Keren downe, and myne odour is as the pure balme. ö

18 As theLeredint haue F stretched

Inleuce, and as Libanus when it is not

out mybraunches, and my braunches

PH brought foorth -

of ine, ful pour selues with my fire D

23 For np spirite is sweeter then Hina ; sois mone lnberlkaunce move ther the honp combe:the remembzaunte of ne endureth ko euer nore.

24. 0b that dn „ dba haue the

more hunger: and thepthat denke shall thirst the moe. — ws ; antes me,

25 Who fo hearkeneth vnto me, halnot come to tonfusion. and they that wonne in me shall not offende : they that take
. to be knowen, Call haue euerlalting

26 All these thinges are the booke oftyte;

the couenaunt of the highest, and the

knowledge of the trueth: Mopses tom- „

maunded the lawe in the preceptes ok dat,

righteonsnesse kor an heritage vnto the

house of Jatob, and committed the prointle vnto Hirael ..

27 Be not weery to behaue pourselues va-

hiauntly with the Lord, that he map also dkonkirme pou: Cleaue vnto him, foz the
Tord almightie is but one God, and befines hym there is none other lamour.

28 (Out of Mauid his seruaunt he ordey- pan ned to raple vp a most mightie king, fit A ting i the seate of Honour for euer- © n102¢..) * 0 W Nit : 19 8
This filleth with wyldome, lpke as an the fludde of Philon, and as the fludde ok!“
Tigris when the newe frutes are a growing.

Je

30 This bringeth a plenteous vnderstan- 8

ding like Euphrates, and filleth it vp as
Jordane in the time of haruelt.

31 This maketh nurture to breake foorth

as the light, and as the water Gehon in

the haruest. .

32 The kirst hath not knowen her perfect

Ip:no nent 1 55 the lat seke out the grounde ol her.

33 For her thought is fuller then the ia, and Her counsell is prolounder then th

eat deepde.

ex: wyldorte baue caft out fluddes, oO an as à great water brooke 0 We riuer, J amas the riner Dozw, an kite water wegn am F conte out o

arden of pleasure.

35 5 sayde, °F Will water the Saath ” my poung plantes, and fil the . my bprth: So my water broolte approexceeding great, and nw riuer

02 J make Doctrine to be vnto al men
. 56 tas the faire morning, and J Hat man it to be cuer the clearer.

parties ok the earth, Jwulloke vponal fuch as be a sleepe, and lighten all then that put their trult in the Lorde.

38 Jchall vet powre out dottrine lyke as

hee thinges there are chat mp spirite fauau-
=F | veth, which be also a-
G iowed before God and

Gene xl d.
N Ron.xil. b. decke ld.

7 nepghbours, a nian and wyfe that agree Well together.
2 Thee thinges there be which my foule hateth, and I vtterly abhorre the life of them: Apooze man that is proude, a bb riche man that is alpar., and an old body that doteth and is vnchaste.

pouth what wilt thou find then in thine age:

gray headed men are distrete, and when the elders can geue good counsell:

to aged men; pea, vnderstanding € coun: lel to men of hondur is a glonous thing.
6 The trowne ok olde men, is to haue

their worship. ‘
5 7 There be nyne thinges which Jhaue ludged in inp heart to be happy, and the

np tongue: A man that whyple he liueth
Hath iop of his children, and seeth the fal or his enemies. ui
Hen, © Well is hym that dwelleth with an viene houlwyle of vnderstanding, and that ba hath not kallen with his tongue , and that hath not ben kayne to ferue uch as are vnmeete for hint. 8
Well is hym that findeth a faythfull friend: and Well is him which talketh of vidome to an care that heareth bym,
10 O howe great is he that findeth wyldame and knowledge? het is he not a boue hun that feareth the Lorde.

hap ae 9

the sonne of Sirach.

will pearse thorowe all the lower

14. The heauinesse of the heart is all the

3 Ikthou hast gathered nothing in thy
4 D howe plealaunt a thing (sit when

5 O howe tonielp a thing is wildome vn much experlente:and the keare ol God, is

~ agon, then to kepe house with a wic-

tenth wilt J tell foorth nto men with

n The keare of God hath set it lelt aboue

Devi.

prophecic, and leaue it vnto such as seke after wyldome, and their generations ,
“hall J neuer fayle vnto the poly euerlasting worlde. i
“mw cholde howe that J haue not laboured for mp selfe oneip: but fo all them that seke alter the trueth.

Ec. xxx b.

The .xxy. Chapter.

Ok three thinges whiche pleale God and of thiee which te hateth. 7 Ok nyne thingest at be not to be sulpect, and ok the tenth, 15 Chielelp of che malice of a woman. 0 :

all thinges. e

12 Wlesled is the man bnto whom it is graunted to haue the feare of God: vnowt shall he be likened thatkepeth it fast? W iy I

3 The feave of God is the beginningot his loue:and the beginning of kayth, l to cleaue fast vnto it. ö 8 puuisheinent, and the wickednesse of a woman goeth abotte all. '

15, All puntihementand plague is nothing in comparison of the plague of tie heart: euen fo, al wickednesse is nothing to the wicke dnesse oka woman.

16 Phat fo euer happeneth vnto a man, is nothing in tomparison of it that his cuil
Willers do vnto him: and al vengeaunce is nothing to the vengeaunce ok the enemnie. . i 2

17 There is not a more wicked head then the head of the srrpent: and there is no
Math aboue the wrath oka woman.

18. J byl rather dwel with a lion and Pro. *.

1 The wickednesle ok a woman chaungeth her kate che hat moffle her tountetaunce as it were a beare, and as a sacke hal che shewit among the neyghbours.

20 per hulbande is brought to shame a? mong his neyghbours becaule of her: € h heareth it, it maketh han to

id. a =

All wicke dnesse is but litle to the wic- D ke dnesse ofa woman: the postion of the vngodlp shall fall vpon her. 9

22 Vygke as the clymyng vpa sandy way

is to the feete ofthe aged:euen fo is a wife full of wordes to a still quiete ian. N

23 Toke not to narowly vpon the beautie . ofa woman, lest thou be prouoked ur de- ng xia, fire towarde her. . and Xiu. a,

I (j) 24. The

24, The wrathofa womants dichonour

and greaktonfulion : Ika woman get

the mastrie, then is she contrarte to her hulbande.

25 A wicked wyfe maketh a an heaup countenaunce , and a dead wound: Weake handes ¢€ keeble knees
Sa woman that her hulband is not the better foz.

Gen. iii. c. i. Tim i. b.

Cht prapse of a good woman. leloulie and drunkennesse ola woman. 28 Ol whiche moueth wrath.

e Appy is the man

2 wy So 8

ous wyfe: for the

CA EAE man maketh her
, oe husbande a topfuil e man, and fhe hall

fil the peres of his lyle in peace.

3 A vertuous woman is a noble gilt,

Whiche halbe geuen for a good portion

vnto such as feare God:
4 Whether a man be riche or poore, he

mar haue euer a merp heart, æ a theare-

ful countenaunce.

5 There be three thinges that my heart keateth, and my face is afrapde of the fourth:treason ina citie, a seditious people, and noysome tongues:all these are heauper then the death. 3

mhen one woman ts ielous ouer an other it bringeth papne and sorowe vnto the heart: anda woman that telleth out all thinges, ts a fcourge of the tongue.

7 hen one hath an euyll wyfe it is euen

W ©

lud. xvl. 2.

as Wher an bnipke papze of oren must

drawe together: he that getteth her getteth a storpion. by :

3 „A drunken womants a great plague: ’

7 for she can not toner her owne shame.
Ecdextid 9 The Whordome of a woman map be bh inthe pryde of her eyes and eye

es.
10° Ifthy daughter be not chamefast, hold
| her straptip, lest the abule her felfe thorowe ouer much libertie.

n Weware of all the dishonestie of her
„ kes, & marnel not il she do against thee, n Asa way faring man that isthirthe,

when he hath kounde a Well dznketh ok

sorp heart,

The. xxvi
Ol the Kare of three thinges, and ol the fourth.

7 that hath a vertn-

An honest wo-

26 Pl the woman came the den of inne, thorowe her we all are — Soames
27 Gtue thy water no pallage, no nota Been”

lh. neither gene wicked oman her es

28 Ik he walke not after thy ree call confounde thee inthe fight of thine Son enemies : Cut ber ok then from thy meres

tied mt torte &.

fleshe, that she do not always Bean
4 pabute thee, fig rh
. Chapter.

h. 6 Oe the

two thinges that cause sorowe, ol the thyrde

tuery water: fo will he fit downeby . de cuctp hedge, and make her feife com: mon to euery man that passeth ñvsz.

13 Alouing Wye reioyteth her husbande, C feedeth his bones with her wyldome.

14. Awoman of fewe wordes is à gift ot
God: to all nurtured myndes map nothing be compared.

15 An honest and manerly wonianis a ift aboue other giftes: and there is no
Wapght to be compared vnto a minde that can rule it seife.

16 Hike as the sunne when it ariseth is an ornament in the hie heauen ofthe Lord: sois à vertuous wpfe the beautie of all her houlse.

17 Like as the cleare light is vpon the ho-

Ip tandelsticke : fo is the beaͤutie of the c fate vpon an honest bodo.

18˙Lke as the golden pillers are bponthe

sockettes or suuer: {0 are the fapre keete bpona woman that hach a constant

19 Perpetual are the foundations that be layed vpon a whole stonp rocke: so are the tommaundementes of God dpon the heart ol an holy woman.

20 There be two thinges that greeue mp heart, € in the thirde is displeasure come > vpõ me:nahen an experte man ol warre
{uffreth starsenelle and pouertle- N 05 men of bnderftanding and wildome ar not fet by, and when one pag da fromrighteoutneffe vnto sinne eran doth 1 3 bath prepared vnto the [worde.

21 There be two maner ok thinges which ime thinke to be harde and persous marchaunt cannot lightly kep hem krom wong, neither a tauerner

selfe from sinne.

Etause of pouertle

haue many one offen

ded:and he that seketh to be riche, turneth his

Nepesaspde.

8 Tpke as a naple in

the wal sticketh fast be-

twixt two stones: euen so doth sinne sticke betwirt the bier and the seller.

Ik he holde him not diligently in the feare of the Lorde, his houle shall soone be ouerthrowen.

4 Tyke as when one sifteth, the filthpnefie remapneth in the spue: So remapneth there some vncleane thing in the thought of man. 8

5 The ouen proneth the potters velfel:*fo both temptation of trouble trye righteons men.

tb © The tree of the fielde is knowen by his

kruite: fois the thought of mans heart
ünowen by his Wordes. a

7 Prapse no man except thou haue heard him: kor à man is knowen by his
Wordes.

$ If thon folowest righteousnes thou
(halt get her, and put her vpon thee as

afapre garment: and thou shalt dwell with her, and she chall defende thee for cher , and in the day of knowledge thou shalt finde stedfastnesse.

The byrdes relorte vnto their lyke: fo doth the trueth turne vnto them that be occupied withall.

10 The lion wapteth the pray: fo doth linne vpon them that worke vnrighteousnesle. 8

u The talking or him that feareth God, ls nothing but wyldome: as fora foole

echaungeth as the moone.

2 Ifthon be among the vndilcrete, kepe thy wordes to a conuenient time: but a-
Dyas luchas be wife „ speake on har-

vip,
; The talking of fooles is abhonunation,

and their sport is volupteousnelle and
V nnmurture. mb, 1 % Much fearing maketh the heere to ande vp: and to stryue with luch, stop-
ö peth the eares.

che sonne of Sirac

B.

The. xxvit. Chapter.

Ok the poore that woulde be riche. J Che probation of theman that feareth God.
; Che vnconstantenesse ofa foole. 16 Che secretes of a friend are not to be vttered. zo The wicked imagineth euyll, whiche returneth vpon him selke.

15 The stryfe of the pronde is bloodshed-
Naß their blaspheming is heauy to are.
16 Who fo diltouereth secretes leeleth his credence , and kyndeth no fricnde after his will.

Eccl. xix b.

17 DLoue thy friende, and binde thy lelfe in d. and.

faythfulneffe with him: but ik thoube-
Wrapest his secretes, thou shalt not get him againe.
18 For like as the man is that destropeth his enenne:so is he also that dealeth kallly in the friendship of his nepghbour.
19 Like as onc that letteth a byrde go out of his hande, tan not take her againe:
Euen fo thou, ik thou geue ouer thy kriende, thou cant not get him againe.
20 Pea thou tanst not tome by him, for he is to farre of: He is vnto thee as a Roe escaped out of the lnare, for his soule is
21 As for woundes, they may be bounde vp againe, and an euyll worde may be re tonciled:but who fo bewrapeth the secretes of a friende, there is no moze hope xp fo be had vnto him.
22 "He that winketh with the eyes, image po eb, neth some eupll: and he that knoweth hum, will let him alone.
23 When thou art present, he Mail hyghlie conunende and peaple thy wordes: but at the last he shall turne his taple, and sclaunder thy saying.
24. Many thinges haue J hated, but nothing fo enptt:foz the Lorde hin selfe av fo abhorreth such a one. Eco sie
25 Who so caftetl) a stone an hye, it hal fal“ vpon his owne head: and he that smpteth with guple, woundeth him seife.
26 Who so diggeth apit Mail fall therein, and he that layeth a stone in his neyghbours Wap, Hall tumble theron, and he that lapeth a snare for auother, shall be taken in it him selfe. W
27 ho fo geueth a wicked nolsonte conti % lell, it shaũ come vpon hym selle, and he bro xxvicc,
Mall not knowe from whence, Ecdle. a.
28 The proude blaspheme and are storneful: but veugeaunce lurketh for them as

a lion, a
: 1 (ti) 29 They

riahteous chall be taken in the snare:anuate of heart shall consume them beore they dye.

Ihe booke of lesus

g aret : minabie thinges, and the bngoet bn

them both vpon bpm,

The e xxyili e Chapter. MY

tongue, and of the daungers cherok.

me ought not to detite vengeaunce, but co korgeue the olfence. 1 Ok the vices of the

1 E *that seketh ven-
. geaunte, shal find ber:
9 geaunte of the Lorde,
5 f which shal surelp kepe
Nat v. byi. II E A hym his sinnes. bxviib, 2 f Fuorgeue thy neygh-

a bour the hurt that he
Hath done thee, and fo (hal thy sinnes be forgeuen thee also when thou prapest.

3 Amanthat beareth 7950 against another, how dare he desire forgeuenesse of
God:

he that sheweth no mertie to a man which is like him selfe, how dare he alke forgeuenesse of his finnesz

5 It he that is but fleche, beareth hatred and kepeth it, who Will intreate for his finnes? *

6. Remember the ende, and let enmitte passe whiche seketh death and destruc-

tion, and abyde thou in the tommaundementes.

7 Bemember the commaundementes, fo

shalt thou not be rigorous oner thy neyghbour: Thinke vpon the touenaunt ok the hyghest, and forgeue thy neyghbours ignoraunte.
Fccdelvila, 8 Be ware of stryfe, and thou shalt make thy linnes fewer.
9 For an angry man kindleth variaunte: and the vngodlp dilquieteth kriendes,

and putteth discorde among them that

beat peace.
Pro.xxvi.c, 10 The moze Wood there is, the moze vehement is the fire, and the mightier that men be, the greater is the wrath: accozding to his riches his anger increaleth, and the longer the stryfe endureth, the e on eae
1 And hastie brawling kindleth a kyre. and an hastie stryfe sheddeth blood f 2 tongue allo that beareth falle witnesle bringeth death. j
12 at pou blow the sparke it (hall burne, t thou {ppt vpon ik, it shall go forth,

and both thele tome out of the mouth.
33 The sclaunderer and doubble tongued

ts curfed: for many one that be friendes,

fetteth he at variaunte.

14. The thirde tongue hath ditquieten : blk tions landeto another: Strong cities of the meer viche hath it broken downe, and ouer- mate

throwen the houles of great men: The:

many one, and drpuen them from one

downe, and ben the decay of mightie nations.
15 The thirde tongue hath cast out many

their labours.

16 Who so hearkeneth vnto such, hal ne: uer finde rest, and neuer dwell sakelp.
17 The stroke of the rod maketh pzintes in the skinne:but the stroke of the tongue

sinpteth the bones in sunder.

18 There be many that haue perifhed
With the sworde: but many mo thorow the tongue.

19 Well is him that is kept from an eupll tongue, and commeth not in the anger thereof, Which draweth not the poke of suth, and is not bounde inthe bandes of

it.
20 Jor the poke therof is of yron, and the vs

bande of it ot steele.
21 The death therof is a very euyl death

hell were better kor one,

tongue. |
22 But the fire or it may not oppresse then

that feare God, and the flambe thereok

map not burne them.

23 Such as forsake the Lorde, Wee therin and it shall burne them „An man shall be able to quenche tt: 1 07 fall vpon them 15 à lion, and de them as a leoparde. i

a Thou hedgest thy goodes 1 thornes: Why doest thou e make doozes and barres 2

mouth: 25 Thou

then such a D

Eede. xx d

ther. The

strength of the people hath it brought 5
{pea tbat: out ofthe

no} the old testament. but of ther

an honest woman, and robbed them ok a.

1 dbafst.

ou wapelt thy gold and iner: why
1 weeltthon not wave thy wordes alse vponthy balaunce, and niake à Doz, and a varre; and a sure brydell for thy

mouth -

the sonne of Sirach.

XVIII.

26 Beware that thou fide not thy tongue, aud so fal befoze thyne enemies that lay wapte for thee, and thy fal be incurable, tuen vnto death.

The. xxlx. Chapter’

1 Howe we ougöt to lende din monep and do almes. 15 Old faythtalt man aun

swering for his kriende. 22 Ot liberalitie and holpttalitie.

o so will shewe met:
2 es tie, let hym lende brite.

0 A

pate wa- N
Lad,

his neyghbour: and he that is able, let him

M mentes.

bour in time ok his neede, and paye thou thy ne yghbour againe in due sealon.

3 Kepe thy worde, and deale fapthfully with him: and thou shalt alway finde the thing that is neteslarie lor thee.

There haue ben many, that when a thing was leut them, reckened it to be founde, and made them trauaple and 1a bour that had heiped them.

ʒ Phyle they reteaue any thing, they kille the handes ol such as geue them , and for their nepghbours good they humble their voyte: but when they should pape againe, they kepe it backe, and gene enpl
Wordes, and make many excules by reason ofthe tine. 3

6 And though he be able, pet geneth He starse the halle againe, and reckeneth the other to be founde : And il he With: holde not his money, vet hath he an tnemie of him, and that vndeserued: He papeth him with cursing and rebuke, and geueth him enpll Wordes for his good deede.

5B 7 Chere be manp one Which are not glad
> fo; to lende, not because of cuyl: but they keare to lose the thing that they lende. d Het haue thou patiente with the simple, and withholde not mercie krom him.
Helpe the poore for the tommaundementes fake , and let hym not go emptie from thee, betause of his netelsitie.

10 Lgst thy money for thy brother and neyghbours lake, and burie it not vnder i * where it rusteth and corrup-

Gather thy treature alter the coi: maundement ok the hyghest, and so Mal it being thee more prolite then golde.

Seyi G U bikin mn,

Ty kepe the commaunde-
Lend buto thy nepgh-

12 Tay bp thyne almes inthe hande ot the poore, and it (hall kepe thee from all Tobin 4. eupll. 9 d m Kane aed
13A mans almes is as a purse with hint, & Pa shal kepe a mans fanour as the apple of Lux d. an eye:and afterwarde shall it arise and ** payt euer man his rewarde vpon his

head. „

14 It shall fight for thee against thyne C enenues, better then the shielde of a gyaunt or speare of the mightie. ö

15 Agood honest man is à luertie fo his

neyghbour, but a wicked person: let-

bour: t when he hath lot his honestie, he Chall forsake him.

20 Suertishippe bath destroped many a riche mau, and remoued them as the waucs in the sea: Mightie people bath it dryuen away, and caused then to wander in straunge countreps.

21 An vngoͤdly man kransgressing the Y tommaundement of the Lode, (hall fal

into an euyll suertiship: and though he force him lelfe to get out, pet fall he fall into iudgement.

22 Helpe thy nepghbour out after thy er and beware that thou thy selle

all not in such debte. .

23 The chtefe thing that kepeth in thy gene like, is water, e bread, clothing, and lodging, to couer the shame.

24 Wetter is it to haue a poore lpuing in a mans ownac boule, then Delicate fare a-
“mong the straunge. :

25 *Beitlitle or much that thou hast, hold , thee content withall: and thou Malt not! Tn b. be blamed as a vagabounde. Heb.xiti.a,

ö ((ii) 26 For

The booke of lesous —ͤib.

rable lpfe is it to go from o of that thou haft.

26 Fora nile

29Geue place thou straunger to an hongrzfeed houle, and lo telleth him the necessitie
955 ; 9 necelline ok

30 Thele thinges are heauy to a man tna.

Path pnderitanding:inamelyithe fon ding of the houle , and that the lender caketh him in the teeth.

Te. xxx. Chapter.

Pf the correction of childrens. 14 Ok the commodit ie of health. / Death is better then a sorowfull lpte. 16 Ok hyd wyldome. ‘22 DE the iop and lorowe of the heart.

(a) nemee houle to houle’, and where amants™
* beende he dare not open his mouth. inn 27 Though one be lodged c haue meate

and deinke, pet shall he be taken as vnworthy, and heare many bytter rough
Wordes, (Namely thus: ari
28 Go thy way thou straunger, and prepave a table tor thy felfe,and feede me al-
“IIe 0 so loueth his child,
* i *holoeth hym (hil vnae. der correction, that he

ma haue top of him alterwarde, and that

i l — — nepghbours doores.
Datvia 2 he that teacheth his fonne shall haue iop in hym, and neede not to be achamed or him among his aquapntaunte.
3 Who so enfourmeth and teacheth his sonne, greeueth the enemies and before . his friendes he map haue iop of him.
4 Though his father dye, pet is he as though he were not dead: for he hath left one behinde hun that is like hym.
5 In his lyfe he sawe him and had ioy in hun, and was not sozp in his death,

neither was he ashamed before the ene-

mies.

6 For he left behynde hym an auenger a-

gainst his enemies, and a good doer vnto the friendes.

Foz the lyfe of children, he shall bynde

the woundes together, and his heart is

greeued at tuery trye. ‘

W 7

8 An vntamed hole will be harde, and a

Wanton chude will ve wuͤfull.

9 i thou bung vp thy sonne delitatelp, he y

al make thee alrayde:and tf thou play a by, he chall bruig thee to beaut nesse. 1
10 Laugh not wich hym, lest thou wepe with hynr allo, c lest thou gnache with thy teeth at the last.
Ecdeviic, II Geue him no libertie in his pouth, and extuse not his follie.

12 Wowe downe his necke whple he

is poung, byt him vpon the sides whyle he is yet but a childe, lest he Ware stubburne, e gene no moze force ol thee,

he grope not alter his

20 Pe seeth with his eyes, and groneth

23 Tolle thyne owne soule,

ct so shalt thou haue heauinesse of soule.
3 Teach thy childe, and be diligent there: in, lest it be to thy shame. N
14 Better is the poore bepng whole an strong, then a man to be riche, and not to haue his health:
15 Health and welfare is aboue all golde, and a Whole body aboue all trealsure.
16 There is no riches avoue a sounde body, and no (op aboue the top ofthe heart.
17 Death ts better then a bitter lyle, and
1 rest better then tontinuall sickenesse. g
18 The good thinges that are put ina uses clofe mouth, are lyke as when meate is r ch lade vpon the graue. ae
What good doth the offering vnto an we to ws idoll: * for he can neither eate, tast, nor un.

C

not: tuen fo smell: Euen so is he that is chased of the Hint
Torde, and beareth the rewardes of rou

ter tt,
See wyldome that like a gelded man that lpeth with a bits wires gin, and sygheth. 1
21. Geue not duer thy mynde into heaul „ 4 neffe , and bere not thy selle in thyne b owne countell. t
22 The top æ chearefulnesse of the wen 820 is the lyft ede a ue gladnelte Se isthe prolonging of his 15 ct
: owe & heauinelle, thyne heart: as fo; foz0we anette ee

ie i t drpue it farre from ther, and bungeth

Hath on many aman, no profite. eof
24 Zealeandanger shorten the payee
The lyke: 1 tae and fozolve bing age befoze the time.
25 Ante à merp heart every thing hath a good tast that he eateth.
Na The

thesonne of Sirach.

r Wy The .xxxj . (hapter. 5 >

supe Oughtto geue diligent heede to honettice, 2Dfthem that take paineto qa ther riches. 8 Chepzaple ofthe rich man without a fault, . Me ought to bee diunkennesse and folowe sobernesse.

g d ＋

Ranatle and tarckulketh alvay the fleepe, to consume.

talteth cave, he wa-

keth euer vp, lyke as a great sicknesse

peaketh the sleepe. e
The rich hath great labour in gathe-

_ ring his riches together, and then with

the pleatureof his riches he taketh his

rest and is refreshed.

4 But who so laboureth and prospereth

not he is poore: and though he leaue of; yet is he a begger. N71

5 Pethatloueth riches, Chatnot be tutte:

fled: and who fo foloweth torruption, bent shall haue inough thereobdz. tune bythe reafon of golde, and haue founde their destruction befoze them.
5 7 Itisatree ok falling vnto them that
‘ er t bp and all such as be foolishe fat trein.

3 Blesled is the rich which is founde
Without blemiche, c hath not gone after golde, nor hoped in money e treasures.

Where is there such a one, and we shal tomniend him and call him blessed- for
N thinges doth he among his

ple. 5 |

10 Who so is tryed and founde perfect in such thinges, halbe commended and

prapsed: Who might offende, and hath

not offended: who coulde do euill, and hath not done it: — n Therfkore shal his good be stabliched,

and the whole congregation hall de-

tlare his aimes. a
2 Ifthousit ata great mans table, open

not thy mouth wide vpon it, and fay not

there is much meate on it.

¢ 8 Vemember that an euil eye is a shrewe: hat thing createdis worse then a wit-

kedeye-theretore weepeth it before eue-

ry mans fate- a P aids : ;
“a Lape not thyne hande vpon euery hing that thyne eye feeth: and striue not with him in the dishe.

hs ) j "Ponder by thy felfe what thy neigh-

Muhs

and maketh the fleshe
When ont lpeth and

6 Manp one are tome in great misfor-

bour would faine haue, and be dilcreete

in euery poynt. .
16 ate the thing that is set before thee
„manerlie as it betcommeth a man, and kate not to much, lest thou be abhorred.

17 Leane thou of first ot al, betause of nur-

ture, lest thou be he whom no man may satistie, whieh may turne to thy detaxv.
18 When thou sittest among many men, reache not thyne hand out first of al, net: ther call thon first for drinke. F

19 O how well content is a Wyle man kectes7.c

with a litle wine: so that in sleepe thou D shalt not be sicke thereof, nozfeeleany -

papne. N

20 A sweete holsome sleepe shall luth a one haue, and feele no in warde greele, he rpseth vp betinies inthe morning, and is wel at ease in him selfe: but an vnfatiable cater fleepeth vnquletly, and hath ache and payne of the body. .

21 If thou feelest that thou hast eaten to much, arise, go thy wap, castit of thy stemacke, and take thy rest: and it hall ease thee so that thou Matt bring no sicknesse vnto thybody.

22 My lonne heare me, and despise me not, and at the last thou Matt finde as J

haue tolde thee: In all thy workes be Now. ite

diligent and quicke, so shall there no sicknesse happen vnto there.

23 Who lo is liberall in dealing out his meate, many men shall blesse him, and prayle hini with their lippes: and the lame is à sure token ot᷑ his loue ⁊ faithfulnesse.

24 But he that is vnkaithfull in meate, the whole citie Mall complaine of him: and that is a sure experiente of his infidelitie and wickednesse. E

25 Shewe not thy valiantnes in wine, for wine hath destroyed many aman.

26 The fire prooueth the hard iron: euen so doth wine produe the heartes of the proude, when they be druncken.

27 Wine soberly druncken, autckeneth pro xxiis

the lpke of man: Il chon drinkest it measurablp, thou shãlt be temperate: hat is the lyle of hun that is ouertome with wine: what taketh away the lyke- euen

death.
28 Wine

—— — ͥͤ œAaęñ:ꝓ— —

3 ö The booke of lesus

3 Was made from the beginning en men glad, and not for dzunkennesse: wine meafurably drunken is a keloyting of the soule and body: A mealurable dunking is health to soule and bo-

dy.
29 But ifit be duncken with excesse, it
: make th bitterneffe and sorowe buto the minde.

30 Drzunkennesse fuleth the nun foolishe with Mame c ruine, 7 the strength, and maketh woundes.

zi Nebuke not thy neighbour at the wine, and delpise him not in his micty;
Geue him no dilpitekull wozdes, and preasse not vpon him with Contrary sap-

I

inges.

I The. ii. Chapter.
1 DE the dilcrekton and peaple of the preacher and ok the hearer, 15 Ot che teare,

faith,and confidence in God.

A1 thou be made a ru-

ler, pride not thy selle

Deu xv. d 2 therein, but be thou as
D (one ofthe peo le: take

Rom. xi. b. 00 Diligent care for them;

* and loke well thereto,

And when thou hast

done all thy dueie, fit thee downe, that

thou mapst be mery with them, and reteaue a trowne of honour.

3 Speak thou that art the elder, for it betommeth thee, but with sure knowledge: hinder not nsickke.

4 \Dpcake not where there is na audiente: ? and poure not foorth wyldonie dut of time at an importunttle.

5 Tpkt as the carbuncle stone shineth that is set in golde: so doth a song gar-

mche the wine feaste.

Fecle. ih. 2.

6 Andas the Smaradge that is set in

golde:so is the sweetenẽs of mulicke by the mirth of wine. i
W 7 Geue care and be still, and forthy good behauour thou shalt be loued.
8 Thou poung man speake that becom:
1 ther, and that is prolitable, and pet scarse whenthon art apple alued.

9 Comprehede much with fewe wordes, in many tHinges be as one that is ignoraum: geue care and holde thy tongue
Wit hall.

10 If thon be among inen of high aues

thoutte, delire not to compare thy telfe vnto the: Aud, when an elder speaketh 5

make not thou many woes therein.

u Belore the thunder, goeth lightening: and before nurture and shainekastnesle, goeth loue and fauour.

12 Stand vp betimes, and be not the lat; but get thee home soone, a

3 And there take thy pastime, and do

what thou wilt: fo that thou vo no end; and delle no man. 1

14. But for all thinges geue thankeg vn-

to him that hath made thee, and replenished thee with his goodes.

15 Who so feareth the Lord, wyl reteaue his doctrine : and they that get them to him betimes, shall finde grate.

16 He that seeketh the law, shall be filled withal: as for him that is but fapned, he wyll be offended thereat.

eo the mimcheih

Fedex,

17 They that feare the Lorde shall finde

the sudgement, and their righteoulnelle shalbe kindled as alight.

18 An vngodly man Wyll not be refourmed, but tan helpe him selfe with the example of other in his purpose.

19 A man ok vnderstanding despileth no good counfatle: but a wylde and proude body bath nofeare, yea euen when he bath dealt rathly with another man: se his owne doinges shalbe his re-

uke,

20 My sonne, do nothing without adutte-

ment:so hall it not repent thee alter the deede. 8

21, Go not in the way where thou mapst fall, nor where thou mapst fumble 1 gainst the stone: agatne, neither tru thou to the way that is plapne vt

22 And beware of thyne owne childzen, and Bi 1295 of them that be ofthyne owne householde.

23 In all thy workes put thy ess
God from thy whole heart: 1 5 the keeping ofthe conmmaundenten 3

24. Who lo beleueth gods worde, tar heede to the conmaundemenee 7g a he that putteth his trust in the Lorde, shall want nothing.

« The

> ‘The .xxxui. Chapter.

Che deliuer aunce of him that keareth God. 4 Che auntwere of the wyfe. 5 The litle discretton ol a koole. i Men is in the hande of God, as the earth is in the
* or the potter. 25 we ought not to difpote our selues to become lubiect to other.

— here shall no euũ hap-
EN |, EAU penn vnto him that fea:
A Areth God: but when
N he is in temptation, the
LTorde Mall deliuer hing, e keepe him from
. eect f
A wyle man hateth not the lave: but an hypocrite “ is as a ship in raging
%%% Walker. ae; A nian ol vnderstanding geueth crecae, dente vnto the lawe of God, and the dn labb is faithfull vnto him.

Erin, — The the axeltree.

6 M Tpke as a Wylde horse that neyeth n Under euerp one that sitteth vpon him, galant lo it is with a scornefull friende. eae: 7 Why Doth one day extell an other, seevont ing all the dapes ofthe pere tome of the ane, „ lunne- N
Maß The wyldome ok the Lorde hath fo bn parted them a sunder, and fo hath he or-

dayned the times and folempne feastes.

Some of them hath he chofen and has lowed before other dayes.

10 And all men are made of the *
Ardunde, and out of the earth of Adam:

n the multitude of stiente bath the orde sundred them, and made their
Wapes of duers kashions.

n Some of them hath he beled, made much of them, halowed them, and claymed them to hin leife: but some of them hath he tursed, brought them low, and

’ put them out of their estate.

12 Dyke as the clape is in the potters hande, and all the ordering therof at his pleasure:so are men also in the hande of hin that made them, fo that he may gene them as lyketh him belt.

3 “gaint euil is good, and against death
S lpfe: fo is the vngodlie agaunst such as feare God.

If Beholde, these are the workes of the
Diet and © there are cuen tio against

Cant ü;

two, and one fet against another.

15 Jam awanked vp last ot al, as one that gathereth after in haruest: in the giktes of God and in his blesling J am mtreased, and haue filled my winẽ presle, lyke
à grape gatherer.

16 We holde how J haue not laboured

oncly foz my selke, but for all such as loue g. 4 4.

nurture and wyldonie.
17 Heaͤre me, O pe great men ok the peo-

ple, and hearken with pour eares pe ru- >

lers of the congregation,

18 Geue not thy sonne, and wyke, thy brother, and friend, power oner thee Whyle thou liuest: and geue not away thy substaunte € good to another, left it repent thou be faine to aske of them againe.

19 As long as thou lpuest and hast breath

Get no man thaunge thee.
20 Fdr better it is thy children to pray

thee, then that thou shouldest be fame

to loke in their handes.

21 In all thy Workes be excellent, that thy honour be neuer stapned.

22 At the time when thou shalt ende thy da pes aud kfinishe thy lyfe, distribute thyne iuheritaunces.

23 The fodder, the whippe, and the burthen belongeth vnto the alle: meate, correction, and worke buto the seruaunt.

24 J f thou (ee thy seruaunt to labour, thou
{halt finde rest: but if thou let him go idle, he shall secke libertie.

25 The poke and the Whippe bowe downe the hard necke: but tame thou thy cuit seruaunt with bondes and correction.

26 Sende him to labour, that he go not 5

idle: for idlenesse bringeth much eull.

27 Set hinito worke, for that belongeth vuto him, and becommeth him wel.

28 Il he be not obedient, binde his fete: but do not to much buto him in any wyse, and without diltretion do no-

thing. :

29 ‘Fe thou haue actatthfullj fernaunt, let bint be vnto thee as thyne one soule: entreate him as a brother, for in blood
Hat thou gotten him: tf thou haue a seruaunt holde him as thy selke, for thou

(c) Becante of eth the butucrfallharmonte of ol thungeg. one caunteruapling another en Humber, weigh 10 ne e e one 32 1 the goucrninent, destroy all the rest: fo ane age e e halte hegte, mog sture the diouth, igheucg, hraumcg, drightnt s, darkenes: and contrarywyse, fo that hing t.

concord and discozd

(d Let no man bfe thee
69 hig fers committed otf

thy goodes (na
CO hn yande.

—— The booke of lesus

————arothinasof Fp felfe:: and to cunne alway from thee thourangy —— ast neede ofhim as of thy selle: and to runne away from thee thoutg N
30 Ifthou intreatest him eull, and kepelt not tell what wap thou halt f 114 ay

hum hard, and makest hin to be proude,
The. xæxxiiij. (bapter.

iche dreames dininations, and enchauntmentes. ue ought to confute vaine hope, and lying. 3 Che prapte or them that keare God. 22 Ol diuers workes of men.

27 Gd doth not alowe the worlies ol an vnkaithkull man.

Mwyle people beguile them lelnes with batne and deteitfull hope, and fooles trust in dreanies. who so regardeth
—— preames, is lpke him that wyll take holde ofa shadowe, and kolowe after the winde.

Euen so is it with the appearinges of dreames: befoze the face is the lykenesse ok a fate. =
4 Who can be cleanled of the bneleane?

or what tructh tan be spoken ofa lyer-
„* Soothlaying, witchcrafte, sorterie, and dxcaming is but vaine: lpke as when a
Woman trauapleth With childe, € hath many kantalies in her heart.
6 Where as such vilions conie not of God, et not thyne heart vpon them:

Oz, dzemes make fooles

Iphe, acc but ng dreames, wherin fooles do glozie: fop
When thtp n Wale from their long 3 lee pe, this

albe

cleang away.

7 Fo? dreames haue deteaued mana

W ee they failed that put their trust therein.

3 The lawe chalbe fulfilled without lyes, t wyldome is suffitient to a faithfull mouth: what knowledge hath he that is not tryed-

9 At Wyle man that is well instruct, vnderstandeth much: and he that hath good experience, tan talke of wyldome.

10 He that Hath no experience, knoweth litle, and he that erreth, causeth much
Wickeducfle: he that is not tryed, what thinges knoweth he? he that hath ben detccaucd ts full ofsubtiltte.

11 When J was yet in errour, J learned much allo: pea, J was so learned, that
J A not expresse it all,

12 And came okt in perill of death therefore, tyll J was si opm a through the grate of God.

€ 13 Mow FH {ec that they which feare God,

haue the right spirit, for their hope stan-

aes ofthe Lorde ave on them that loue

14 Who so feareth the Lorde, standeth in awe ok no man, and is not afraide: fog

deth in hin that can helpe them: and the

the Lorde is his hope and comfozte.

15 Blessed is the foute of hunthat ari the lord: in whom putteth he his trust:
Whois his strength- ‘

16 Foz the eyes of the Lord haue respect vnto thenithat loue him, he is their mightie protection and strong grounde:
A defence for the heate, a refuge for the hot noone day, a succour fo2 stumbling, and an helpe for falling.

17 He settetch vp the soule, and lighteneth the eyes: he geueth lyfe and blesling.

18 He that geueth an offering of vnrighteous good, his offering is refused: and the scoznefull dealinges of the vn-

righteous please not God.

19 The Torde is theirs onely that patiently abide him in the wap of the trueth and of righteoulnesse. a

20 The highest oth not alowe the giftes ofthe wicked: and God Hath no delight inthe offeringes of the vngodly, neither may sinne be reconciled in the multitude okoblations. é

21 Who fobsingethan offering out ofthe goodes of thepooze, doth euen as one that killeth the fore bekore the fathers

eyes. | |
22 The bread ok the nedefull, is thelpfe

of the poore: he that dekraudeth hin thereof, is a man of blood. 5
23 Who fo robbeth his neighbour of is 4 lpuing, Both as great finne as though corns he llue him to death): he that dekrau nete deth the labourer of his hyre, is a blood ne shedder. . 4 rie rel
24. When one buildetly and an other B20" ae keth downe: what profite haue they cao, then but labour: ru oF
25 %% When one prapeth and another kur, ator seth, whofe vopce wyl the Horde heare- en wan
5 0 b caust of mapheare h
26 He that walheth hun selfe be ie

he other part. id a dead body, and then touchetl) he aaa dead agatne, What doth his walang e
27 0 isit whith a mantyat fall) 5 ate his sinnes, and doth them again mts ee,
Wyll heare his prayer? 02 what doth his tone

mot chi

kasting helpe him J The Bae

on

Ay ZS] Ho fo kepech the lawe,
) A A * bungeth offeringes

inongh: he that holdeth fast the tõmaun-
Nii Dement, offereth the right health offering.
He that is thankefull

ho so is merciful and geueth almes, that is the right thanke offering.

God hath pleafure when one depar-

teth from firme:and to forsanke vnrighteoulnesse, reconcileth vs with him.

oh. 4 Thon Malt not appeare emptie be-

fore the Lorde: i

$ Foralfach is done

maundement of God.

The offering ofthe righteous maketh the aulter fat, and a [Weete smell is z tt besoze the highest.

The offering of the righteous is atteptable vnto God, and shall neuer be forgotten. —

8 Geue God his honour with a cheare-

Hb di

Cala. 6

linges ol thyne handes. inxs, 2 In all thy giftes Merve a chearekull

N vnto God with gladnesse.

twin, 1 Geue vnto God according as he hath enriched and prospered thee :* and loke

what thyne hande is able, geue with a chearefull eye.

1 Forthe Lorde recompenteth, and ge-
Heth thee seuen times as much againe.

2 Geue no vnrighteous giftes, for such

ofkeringes, for the Lorde is a righteous udge, and regardeth no mans person.

Aue mertie vpon vs,

7 pect vntd vs: shewe vs
: the light. of thy merey) tles, 8
‘a ; And sende thy feare
98 the heathen and straungers hich fecke not alter the, that ther

U

the sonne of Sirach. [

q The. xxxv.Chapter, >

and retompenceth, offereth fine floure:

betause of the tom-

full heart: and keepe not backe the first-

colntenaunce, and halowe thy tythes

wyll he not receaue: Beware of wiong

1715 O Lorde, thou God of a thinges, haue vel-

Wall

a It is well done to pray and to do tacritice. 14 — — et E . tietwibowe, ana fim evar humdleth hence. b DTM ande

13 He actepteth not the person ot the poore: but he heareth the prayer of the

oppressed. en

14. he delpileth not the desire of the fatherlesse, nor the wydowe when (he powreth out her praper defore him.

15 Doth not God see the teares that runne downe the cheekes of the wydowe : or heareth he not the tomplaint ouer such as make her to weepe: Foz from her cheekes do the teares go vp vnto heauen, and the Lord which heareth them

doth actept them.

16 Who lo serueth God after his pleasure, shalbe accepted: and his praper reacheth vnto the tloudes.

17 The praper of him that humbleth

im selfe, goeth theough the tloudes:till

e tome ne fle wyll not be comforter,

nor go her wap tyll the highest God

haue relpect vnto her, geue true fentéce,
And perfournie the iudgement.

13 And the Torde wyll not be slacke in tomming, nor tary long, tyll he haue

finitten in funder the backes of the vn-

mertifull, and auenged him felfe of the
Heathen, tyll he haue taken awap the

scepter of the buvighteous , tyll he geue

Ixxy.

Judith ili. b

C

Tre. ui. d.

multitude of the cruell, and broken the

euerp man after his workes, and re-

warde them after their domges, tylt he haue delpuered his people, maintapned their cause, and reiopted them in his mercie.

19 O how faire a thing is mertie in the

time ot angulshe and trouble: it is lpke a tloude of rayne that commeth in the time ol drouth.

J The. xxxvi. Chapter. ;
Apraper to God in the perton of all faithful men. 2: Che prapte of a good woman.

map knowe that there is no God but thou, and that they may shew thy wonderous workes. pft vp thyne hande ouer the outlan-
‘Dithe heathen, that they may learne to knowe thy might and power.
4 . Uypke asthon art halowed in vs before them: fo being to passe that thou mapst be magnified allo in ne ore

The booke of lesus

ore bs. they may know thee, lyke as we
; pares lorchert is none other God but oneip thou O TLorde.
6 Venue the tokens, and chaunge the wonderous workes: shew thyne hand and thy right arme gloriouslie. a
5 7 Rapie bp thyne indignation, and pourt

out thy wrath: take away theaduersa-

rie, and luute the enemic. 8

Male the time shorte, remember thy conenaunt, 109 thy wöderous workes map be prapsed.

9 Let yin Wrath ofthe fyze consume them that lyue so tarelelle:and let them perishe that do thy people hurt.

10 Smpte in funder the bead of the prin cesthat be our enemies, and fay, there is none other but we.

11 e ther againe, that they may knowe how that there is none other God but onelp thou, that they may shewe thy wonderous Workes: and be thou thy peoples
Heritage, ple as from the beginning.

12 D Tode haue mertie vpon the eople

bone. that hath thyname, and bpon Jfrael

fone. | 4

iPawig, 13 O be metrifulldnto Hierulalemthe titie ol thy lanctuarie, 'the citie of thy

rest. 5
14 Fill Sion with thyue vnspeakable ber: tues, and thy people with thy glorie.
15 Gene Witnelle bute thy creature who thou madest from the beginning, and rayst vp the prophesies that haue ben syewed in thy naue.

7 O Tome heare the prayerofthy ter.

W 4 “he 4
Gather all the trivesof Jatob toge-

whom thou halt lykened to a first borne

. 16 Rewärde them that wapte for thee

that thy prophetes may be fp th, full v be kounde faith:

nauntes According to the bleffing of x. acon ouer thy people, and guide thou ys

in the way ot righteousnes: that althey Nan, which dwel vponthe earth may know that thou art the Lode the eternal
God, which is froin euerlasting.

18 The beliy Deuoureth all meates: pet is one meate better then another.

19 Typke as the tongue tasteth venllon: D
*fo Dothan heart ok vnderstandyng marke lalse wordes. — — -CO%i67

20. Afrolbard heart geueth heaumes:but aman of experience lykteth hun bpagaine. — ma

21 The woman reteaueth every man: vet is one daughter better then another.

22 A faire wpfe reiopceth her husband: and a man loueth nothing better.

23 If there be in her tongue gentlenes, meckenes, and hollome talke: thenis not her husband lyke other men.

24. he that hath gotten a vertuous woman, Hath a goodlie possession: the is vnto him a helpe, and piller wherevpon he resteth. wll a N

25 Where no hedge is, there the goodes are spoyled: and where no hulwyte is, there the frendles mourneth.

26 Typke as there is no credence geuen to

a robber that goeth from one atte to a nother: so is not the man beleued that hath no nest, and must turne in where he map abide in the night. ;

The. xxvii. Chapter. |

owe a man Houid kno we krtendes and countetlers, l: and tearche the tompant

Ped

XN. 12 ory

= ye aay a) be f

8 Kemaineth not there

S hueauies vnto death,

when a companion and kriend is turned to anene nie: rr :

3 OO most wicked pielunption: from
Whence art thou {prong vp to couer the cacti) with falshood and disceite-

Eccdevib. 4 There is some comipatitor which in

prosperitie relopteth With his friend:

but in the time ok trouble he taketh part

ej | our? &
5 There is fome companion that mon” neth with his friend for the bellies fate: 4

th 1. he take th b

olde of the shielde. .
6 ‘ Forget not thy friend in thy minde, € thinke vpon him in thy riches. 4A
Seeke no tounsell at thy kin mir ae hide thy counfel from fuch as bra

i l i 4 8
Cuerp countelie prayseth bis tora Ecdewil fell:nencetheleffe, there is vite counlelleth but for his owner ace

-_ the sonne of Sirach. Dex].

9 Weware of the counseller, and be adin- first:and or euer thou doest any thing, be sed afore whereto thou wylt vle hin fo: well aduised. : . he wyll counfatle for him selle) lest he 17 There be foure thinges that declare a cast the lot vponthe r. dchaunged heart, whereout there spun-
10 And fay vnto thee, Thy way and pur- geth eu and good, death and lyfe, and pole is good: and alter warde he stande a maisterkull tongue that bableth much.

against thee, and loke what shal betome bit 2% ent e t!

ofthee. CF, Hes) i Altze no tounlalle at him that susper-

teththee for an enemie, e hide chy coun:

fale from such as hate thee: alle no tounsell fo2 religion of him that is with-

out religion, nor for iustite of him that

hath no iustice: aske no counsel at a woman, touching her of hho the is ielous, nor at a fearefull and faint harted body

in matters ol warre: or at a marchannt

how deare he wyl cheape thy wares toward his:or at a byer, of selling:or at an enuious man, okthankelgeuing:or at the

vnmercilul, of louing kindnesse: or at an

vnhonest man, of honestie:or at the sloth-

full, of working:or at an hyreling which

hat) no boule, of profit or wealth: or at

an idle body of much labour: take no such kolkes to counsell.

1 But be diligent to seeke tounlaile at a bertuous man that feareth God, luch a

one as thou knowest to be a keper of the tommaundementes, which hath a

minde after thyne owne minde, and is sorp for thee when thou stumblest. e And holde thy tounsell fast in thyne

18 Some manis apt and wen instructed in manp thinges, and pet very vnprolitable vnto him selfe. —

19 Sonie man there is that can geue wyse d

and prudent counsel, and pet is he bated

aͤnd continuech a begger,

20 For that grace is not geueu him of Gon to be accepted.

21. Another is robbed of al wysdome: vet is he Wyle buto him selfe, and the kruite of vnderstanding is tonimẽdable in his mouth. 4: Wun. ed

22 Awyle man maketh his people wyse, the fruttes of his wysdome fayle not.

23 A wyse man shalbe plenteouslyblesses

df God: and ali they that see him, shall speake good of him. l

24. The lyle of man standeth in the number of the dapes: but the Daves of Ilrael are innumerable. :

25 A wyse man shall obtapne faithfuines and credence among his people, and his nanie shalbe perpetuall.

26 My sonne, prooue thy soule in thy selle, and if thou {ce any euuͤl thing, geue it not vnto her: *

27 * Foz all thinges are not prositable fo:

i. Cor. vi. c.

heart:for there is no man moze faithfult to kepe it, then thou thy selte.

14 FO2 a mans minde is sometime dispofed to tell out more, then seuen watch: men that fit aboue in an hie place loking about them. *

1j And aboue all this, pray the highest that he wyll leade thy wap in faithkul-

all men, neither bath enerp soule pleafure in euery thing. 8

28 Be not greedy in euerp eating, and be not to hastie vpon all ineates.

29 For excesse of meates bringeth sickenesse, and gluttonte commeth at the lat to an bnmeasurable heate. a

30 Through surfet haue many one perished: but he that dieteth him feife tem peratelic, prolongeth his lpfe.

Eccle. xxx. b

ae walt

that is learned. * a N
AOnour the philitton, 3 The wyldome ofthe phifition bungeth

A phinttion ts commendable. 15 Co burie the dead. 24 Che wyldome or hum

honour him with that bonourthat is due vnyi to him, becaufe of ne-

created him.
Foz of the highest

Giftes of te ing.

es cessitie: for Go hath 4 The Lorde path

tonnneth medicine and he shall receaue 5

him to great worship, and in the fight of the great men ol this worlde he shalbe honourably taken. 4 treated medicine of the earth:and he that is wyse, wyll not abhorre it.

sweete with a tree, that men might
* learne

*Das not the bitter water made 8

The booke of lefus
——Tearne to knowe the vertuethereol. ceatlc in his rest comfort thee agains

The Lord hath geuen men wyldome ait Pnderltanding, that he might be honouredin his wonderous wozrkes.

Dith {uch Doth he heale men, and taketh awap their papnes: N

g Oklluch doth the pothetarie make a confection, yet tan no man perkourme al his
Wozkes:foz of the Lorde comnieth prolperous wealth duer all the cart).

My bonne, velpife not this in thy sickenes: but prap vnto the Lorde, and he shall make thee whole.

Io Weaue of from sinne, and order thy

. Par. x vi. d

handes a right, tlense thyne heart from

all wickednesse.

n Geue a sweete sauoured offering, and the fine floure forza token of remembraunte: make the offering fat, as one

that geueth the lirst fruites,

12 And geue roome to the philitlon, foz the Lorde hath treated him: let him not go from thee, for thou hast neede of him.

€ 3 The houre may come, that the sicke map be helped through them,

14 When they pray vnto the Logde, that be may recouer and get health to lyue

onger.

15 he thatsinneth before his maker, chall fall into the handes of the phisition.

kede xe 16 My sonne,“ bring foorth thy teares

duer the dead, and beginne to mourne as it thou haddest suffered great harme thy selfe: and then touer his body after a conueuient maner, and despile not his buriall.

17 Entorte thy selfe to wrepe, eprouote thy selke to mourne, and make lamentation expediently, and be earnest in mourning, and vle lamentation as he is worthie, and that a day or two, lest thoube euili spoken ok: and then comfort thy selfe, betause of the heauines.

18 Jo okheauines commeth death, the heauines ok the heart breaketh strẽgth.

19 Heautnes and pouertie, qreeueth the heart in temptation and offence,

20 Take no heauines to heart, driue it away, and remember the last thinges.

21 Forget it not, for there is no turning agalne, thou Malt do him no good, but hurt thy selle.

22 Remember his tudgement, thyne allo chalbe lpkewyse: vnto me pesterdap, vnto there to dax.

U. Tefl.

Pro. xil. d.

D

ARegniic, 23 Let the remembraunte of the dend

ouer him, seing his splrit fami, plrite is departed
24 The wysoome of the scribe is at ann nient time of rest: and he that eatery from erereifes and labour, chalbe iyi

‘25 Howtanhe get wyloome that hater

the plough,and he that hath plealure m the goade and in Daunngrheoren nn E occupied in their labours, and his tale is but ot the breeding ol bullotkes-

26 Pe sttteth his heart to make foroweg.

and is diligentto gene the kine fodder.

27 So is euerp carpenter also and wore maister, that laboureth stül night and

Day: he taructh graueth, cutleth out

c his desire is insundry cunning thinges,

his heart imagineth how he may tun-

ningly tast an image, his dillgente also and watching perfourmech the worke,

28 Theiron smith in ipke maner bydeth by his stithie, and doth his diligente to labour the iron: the vapour of the syre brenneth his flethe, and he must sight with the heate of the fornate: the nople of the hammer euer soundeth in his eaves, and his eyes loke still vpon the thing that he maketh: he hath set his minde thereupon thathe wpll make out his worke, t therefore he watcheth b he may fet it out, and bring it to an ende.

29 So doth the potter set by his worke: he turneth the wheele about with his feete, he is diligent and carefull in all dooe and maketh his worke in num-

er. ; 8 5

zo He fashioneth the clay with his arme, and with his fete he tempereth it: his heart imagineth home he may make tt
1 and his Diligence is to clense the ouen.

31 All these hope in their handes, euer one thinketh tobe cunning in his worke.

32 Without thele may not the cities be mapntapned, inhabited, nor occupied: :

33 Bet come they not hpe inthe const” gation, neither fittbey bpon ty ee ment feates: they vnderstand not 5 Mi touenaunt okthe lawe, the cannot en tlare equitie and indgement, they ¢ not finde out the darke fentences. alt

34 Wut through them hall the cre as ofthe wonlde bemamtapned, tha lafire conterneth oncly the worke and m bour of cunning. (The

< the sonne of Sirach. bæxiij N
2 The. xxxix. Chapter.

14 wyse man. 16 Che workes of God. 24 Unto the good, thinges do prokite: but vnto

the euplt, euen good thinges arccupll.

ve monde to vnderstande the lawe of God, doth diligentlp seke out the
Awyldome of them of
SH the olde tine, and exer-

= tifeth hym selfe in the

i

ophetes.
1 90 eoeth the layinges of famous men,

and preasseth to the vnderstanding of darke sententes ol wyldome.

He leketh out the misterte of setrete sayinges, and exertileth hun lelke therin tonfinualip,

4 He doth ferniceamong great men, and appeareth befoze the printe:he goeth into à straunge countrey, and trauapleth thorolwe it: loke what good or euyll is a-

mong men, he proueth and seketh it out.

5 He purposeth in his heart to resort earlp vnto the Lord that made him, and to pray befoze the highest God: he openeth i mouth in praper, and prapeth for his innes.

s When the great Torde will, he chalbe filled with the spirite of bnderftanding, that he may then powre out wyle lentenes and geue thankes vnto the Lord in his praper.

5 7 he shall order his deuite, and leade his knowledge a right, and geue him vnderstanding of secrete thinges.

8 He shall shewe koorth the sciente of his learning, and reiopte in the conenaunt of the lawe of the Lorde:

9 The whole congregation thal con mende his wyldome; and it shall neuer be put out: the rememibraunte of bpm all neuer be forgotten, and his nanie shal tontinue krom one generation to an

other. bab 10 Ig wyldome shalbe spoken of among the people, and the whole congregation all openip declare his prayse.

n While he liueth, he bath a greater name then athouland defide: and after death, the same name remapneth vnto hym.

1 Het will F speake of mo men of vnderstanding, for J am ful as the moone.

3 Hearken vnto mic ye holy vertuous childien, bring foorth fruite as the rose that
S planted by the brookes of the fielde,

E that applieth his 14. And geue pe a sweete smell as intense, C

florishe as the rose garden, sing a long ok prapse . O geue thankes vnto God ouer all his wozkes:

15 Gene magnificence vnto his name, and

let hym koorth in his prayle with pour lippes, € with muficke and harmonte:
Bea euen with the song of pour lppes,
With harpes and playing, and in geuing thankes vnto him, say after this maner:

16 All the workes of the Hos are extee- Cen 1d. ding good, e all his tommaundementes are meett and conuentent in due fra:

on.

7 Aman neede not to fap, what is that:
What is that: for at a time tonuenient they chall all be sought: At his com maundement the water was as a wall, and at the worde of his mouth the water stoode fill. :

18 'Inhis commaundement is euerp Gen. vib. thing acceptable and retontiled, and his health tan not be mintthed.

19 The workes of all flethe are before hun, and there is nothing hyd from his eves, 4

He leeth from euerlasting to euerlasting, and there is nothing to wonderkul or hpe vnto hym.

21 Aman neede not to lap then, what is this, or that: lor he bath made al thinges to do good vnto man.

22 Yis blessing Mall run duer as the streame, and mopsture the earth tyke a fluode ok water.

23 Like as he maketh the drouth:so shall his wrath fall vpon the heathen,

24 His wayes are plapne and right vnto the iust: but the vngodly stumble at

em.

Ose. iii. b.
Roi. vul. d.

25 For the good, are good thinges crea- us Go

ted krom the beginning, k euplithinges een. , for the vngodlp. a or omen

26 All thinges neceflarte for the Ipfe of gs he no. man are treated from the beginning: „neee water, fire, ron, andsalt, meale, Wheate, ar vngoe
15 enn wine, ople and tlo- bene

2 7 em ag th

27 Allthese thinges are ertated for the aaa beltto the faythfull: but to the vngodip rr ele, shall all these thinges be turned to hurt te ncems and harne. KW era

hein koz their

28 There >

I ieboo

Mat.xxvd

E

Eccle. xl. b.

28 here be spirites that axe treated for bet ae : al in their rigoroulne sse haue they fastened their tormentes: In the time of the ende they hall pourt out their strength, and pacific the wrath of hun that made them.

29 Fire, haple, hunger, and death: al these thinges are created for bengeaunce.

zo The tecth) of wilde noplome beastes, the storpions, serpentes, and the sworde, are treated also for vengeaunte, to the destruttion of the vngodly. ö

31 They chalbe glad to dohis tommaundementes, and When neede ls, they chal-

be redp vpon earth: and when their

— —ñ—[— *

ke of lesus

houre is conic, they shall ae the tommaundement of the tome
32 Therkore haue J taken a good tourage puto me krom the beginning, and haue thought to put these thinges in Writin and to leaue them behinde me: a euery one ind ah any aim nerde is. an,
34 So that no nian neede not to sap: is Worle then that: for in due Nc ae ere and good.
35 And therekore prapse the Lorde w whole heart and mouth, k geue thankies : vnto his name.

The.xl. Chapter. |

1Manp mileries light in amans like. 1 All thinges pate away, but a firme and fable fayth ramapneth. 14 Df the blefling of the righteous, and prerogatiue of the feare

of God.

Great trauaile is created for all men, and an

the sonnes of Adam, from the day that they go out of their mothers worbe , til they be buthe earth] the mother of all

ried in thinges.

2 C(Nanielp)theirthonghtes and tmagina tions, feare of the heart, counsel, medita-

tions longing ¢ delire, the day ol death:

3 Fromthe hyghest that sitteth vpon the lorious {eate, vnto the lowest and most tiple bpon the earth: :
4. From Hun Mat is gloriously arapde and
Wwearetl a trowue, vnto hin that is but homelp and sunplie clothed.

There is nothing but wrath , seale, fearefulutsse, vnquietnesse, and feare of death, rigozousnes, auger, c strpfe: And in the night when one shoulde rest and sleepe vpon his bed, the sleepe thaun-

geth his vnderstanding and knowledge.
6 Alle or nothing is his rest in the sleepe;

aswel as in the day of labour: he feareth

t is disquieted in the vision of his heart, as one that runueth out of a battapil.
7 Andin the tinte ok health he awaketh,
8 maruapleth that the feare was nog.
8 ann a0 bappen 1 0 nd beat: but lever fol the vngodly. ö aa

95 hau yoke vpon all

It

9 Mopreouer, death, bloodshedding, strise, and lworde, oppression, hunger, destrurtion, and punishenient: N
10 Lhele thinges are all ereated against the vngodiy , and for their lakes tame e the fludde also.
All that is of the earth, shall turne to oa earth againe and al waters cbbeagatne into the sca. ö

12 All bribes and vnrighteousnesse shalbe

put away: but fapthfulnesse and trueth
{hall endure for euer.

1 The substaunte and goodes of the bir godlp chalbe dyed vp, and linke away as à water fludde, G they shal make d sound like a great thunder in the rayne. 0

14. Like asthe righteous reiopeetl) we saa, he openeth his bande: fo shall the tr nf: ere greflours be faynt when their goodes resem: vanishe and tonsume away. rotz b

1 »The chüdzen ok the vngodly Mal not , obtapne many braunches:

16 And the vncleane rootss vpon the bye rorkes , fhalbe rooted ont before the gaffe by the water fine, Epo the ri uer bankes.

17 Frendlineslse and liberalitie in the in-

treast ¢ blessing of God, is like a paradiie and ate ofpleatiree such merce also and kindnesse endureth foz euer. pat ria. b
13 To labour and to be content with th 8. Pla a man hath , isa fivecte pleataenzrraand that is, to finde a treasure ofal

angus

che sonne of Iirach. . bi

To beget chüdren and to repapee the good counfell is moze pleasaunt then citie, maketh a perpetuall name: but an . thepboth. a honest woman rs moze Worth thenthey 26 Tempozal lubstaunce and strength lift both. f hy bp the minde:but the feare of the Lod,

20 Wine and minstrelsie reioyteth the more then they both: The feare of the heart: ut the loue of Wyfoeme is aboue far Wanteth nothing, and needeth no

n both. ‘

D a4 ppm and harping make a [werte 27 The feare ofthe Lorde is a pieasaunt noyle: but a friendly tongue goeth be- garden ok blessing, and nothing fo beau: ponde them both. tifull as it is.

12 Thyne eye desireth fauour and beau- 28 My sonne leade not a beggers lyfe: for tit: but a greene leede time, rather then better it were to die then to begge. they both. a 29 The life ofhym that loketh vpon an o-

2; Akriende and companion tome toges ther mans table, is not to be counted for ther at oportunitie: but aboue them a life, for he vexeth his fonle in other both isa wyke that agreeth with her mens meate: but a Wyle and well nurhulbandt. f tured man will beware therof.

24 Brethren and helpes are profitable zo Begging is [weete in the mouth of the in tune ok tronble:but almes shal deltuer vnchamekast: but in his belly there burmore then they both. neth a lire.

25 Golde and luuer fatten the feete: but a

The. xli. Chapter.

Okthe remembraun ce of death.; Death is not to be keared 8 J curle vpon them that fortake the la we ol God. 1 Good name and fame. 14 An erhortation to geue heede vnto wyldome. 17 Ok what thinges a man ought to be achamed.

Deathcohow bitter is kepe tonpaup with the vngodly.

the remembraunce of 6 The inheritaunce of vngodly childzen kee v. thee toa man that se- shall come to naught, € their posteritie

keth rest and comfort in hal haue perpetuall thames confusion.

I —

S bis fubttaunce e riches, 7 The chuͤdren complaync of an vngod-
WS AGG) puto the man that hath ly father :aud why oz his fake they are Z

nothing to vexe him, F rebunked and dispisleed. that hath prosperitie in all thinges, pea 8 Wo be vnto vou, O pe vugodly whiche vnto him that pet is able to receàue haue korsaken the lawe of the hyghest mea te: — . God: for though ye do enerease, pet Hal
2 Odeath, howe acceptable and good is pon perishe. N thy indgement vnto the needekulf; and 9 Ak pe do liue, pe shalbt acturted:if pe die, vnto hun whose strength fayleth, and the turse shall be pour portion. that is nowe in his last aͤge, and that in 10 All that is of the earth, shall turne to all thinges is full of care and fearfule earth agatne :fogo the vngodly also out nesse, vnto him allo that is in dispayre, ok the tuͤrse into destrůͤction. and hath no hope nor patiencez 1 Though men mourne for their body:
3 Be not thou afraide ordeath remember pet the name ofthe vngodly shall be put them that haue ben bekore thee, and that dut , lor it is nothing worth. come after thee: this is the ludgement 12 Tabour to get thee a good name: £02 gc ane, Ste Low duer all flethe. that shall contmue surer by thee, thena
“4 And why wouldest thou be again thonlände great treasaresof golde. ane this pleasure of the hyghest-wohether it 13 A good life hath a number of dayes:but dere bean enn dandeecho athoufand yeres, Les d e Udon dae 84
Jeu. 5 a het not 0 ne At 1 * CT. c { zen, de pe Fe ccl. xx. b. ned. ere en Widomethat is hid and a treasure
The children ok the vngodip are abho- that is not secue, what prokite is in them mmable children, and do are thepthat both-

reals bir Eccle. xi. h. deisett 0

1 duo
& Wuttarte,

K (ij 15 Aman

15 Aman that hydeth his foolishenes, is better then & man dome.

16 Therefore be vt turned at my wordes: forit is not good in all thinges and alway to be alshamed: True fapth mutt proue and mealure it.

17 Beathamed of whordome before father and mother:be ashamed to lealing before the prince and men of auctoritie:

18 Df finne before the iudge and ruler: of

offence, before the congregation c peo-

ple: of vnrigyteousnes, before a cont panoin and friende:

Pk theft, before thy nepghbours: As for

the trueth of God and his couenaunt, be

(un) True foptl doth all thingeo in seafon and cportunitle, when and how cues ry one oughe to be ordered.
Foz steong meate and
Hard bead nozisheth some, 2 Graunz

hearbe health er an discase, and 1 increaseth 9 some againe.

Hübe not alhaimed therof . be ashamed to lye gate with thyne elbowes vpon the bead, o not to the

lunhetk place, 8 a

vr not fo hom-

ip that thou

ips with thine

clbowes vpon

the table ouce

thy dead, fox

that w bninos

nerlp. LU. 14.

thinges, yea euen the secretes of the heart.

, acham achamed, and accept no person to offend.

| (Namely ok thete thinges

be not ashamed:]

ol the couenaunt , of

iudgement td bring the vngodly from

his vngodunesse vnto righteoulnelle, x to make him a good man, —

3 20 deale faithfully wich thy nepgbbour

and companion, to distribute the heri-
_ tage bnto the triende s l
4 To be diligent to kepe true measure ¢

wapgbt: to be content whether thou

gettest much or litle: .

5 To deale truelp with temporall goodes

in bying and {citing to bring bp childzen oo „to torrect an euyll ser-

6 To kepe that thyne is krom an eupli ,

ee let a locke where many handes
W 7 What thou deliuerest and geuest out to

be kept, to tell it, and to wey itsto Weite

vp all thy outgeuing and retceauing:

8 Loenforne the vnlearned and vnwise, of the aged that are indged of the poung: If thou be diligent in thefe thinges, truely thou chalt be learned
AND wyle, and accepted of all men.

The boo

that hydeth his wyl-

The. xlli. Chapter... A,

Che lawe ol God must be taught, »A daughter, 14 A woman. is God Enoweth all

Fthele thinges be not 9 The daughter maketh the father to

Ok the lawe of Cod.

ke of | efus

to be reproued for geuing o taki
20 Ando filente vnto on ve thee:be ashamed to loke vpon harlattes:
2 een to We awap thy fate v kinsman, bea : ; and notte gene , chanied totake tee a
22 We athamed allo to loke vpon S* malts 9 ae to malt mand aher | ordes with her mayden, o tt den ane, 5 to staud by
23 Be alhamed to vnbrapde thy friende: when thou geuest any thing, cag ae pay ee .
24. Or to report the matter that thou heard, or to disclose the setrete ce fo shalt thou well be chamekalt, and shalt lind fanour with all men.

watch secretly, and the tarefulnesst that he hath for her, tak eth away his sleepe, pea in her pouth, lett the shoulde ouergrowe hun, and when the hath an bul bande lett she shoulde be Hated:

10 Lelk she shoulde be defiled or raulshed

in her virginitie, or gotten with childe in her fathers houle:or when shecommeth to the man, left she behaue her felfe not right, or continue vnkruitefull.

I - Ik thy daughter be wanton, kepe her straptip, lest she caufe thyne enemiesto laugh thee to scorne, and the whole title to geue thee an euyll report: and lo thou de kapne to heare thy Mame of euere man, and be confounded before all the people. ¥ T's |

12 Behold not euery bodies beautte and . haue not nuch dwelling among wome. 5

iz Foz like as the Worme and moth cour bs meth out of clothing: lo doth wicked- Genii! nesse tone oft wonien. N

14 It is better to be with an cuyll 5 C then with a friendly wyke that puttet one to shame and rebuke. the

15 Iwill remember the wordeso 1
Lord, and declare the thing that JD 1 seene: In the wordes of the Lorde his workes. —

16 The lunne ouerloketh all thinges 101

his shine, 85 all ue workes are full of etlearenes therol.

eat im 1 Hath not the Lod brought to passe,

gat that his lalnctes shouldt tell out all his

e pponderous wonkes which the almigh-

tie Low bath stabliched: Al thinges en-

dure in his glorie.

and the heart of men, and he knoweth

the Lord knoweth all stlente, and he loketh into the token of thetime.

1 He detlareth the thinges that are past and for to tonie, and dilcloseth thinges that are secrete. “"

20 No thought may efcape hym, neither may any worde be Hyd from him.

lobxli c.
HAN.

ische fatre and leare

„e firmament, the beautie of the heauen is his

„ glorious clearnesle.

e The sunne whenit

— —appeareth, declareth the day in the gopng out of it, a maruelous woke ofthe hyghest: *

3 At noone it burneth the earth, and who

map abpde for the heate therot-

4 Who fo kepeth an oven when it is hot, three times more doth the sunne burne vpon the mountapnes: whentt breatheth out the fire beames r shineth, sbi the brightnelle of it teblindeth the

yes,

§ Great is the Logde that made it, and in his tommaundement he cauleth it to runne hastplp.

Grit, 6 The moone allo in al thinges actording to her feafon is a declaration of the
B, line, and a signe fo the world. ne 7 The token ofthe folempne feastis ta ken of the moone, a light that minisheth
Aud increaseth againe.
8 The moneth ts called after the moone, n Wonderoully in her chan-
9 The armie ok heauen also is inp heyght: in the firmament of heauen it geueth a tleare and a glorions chyne: This is
10 tlearnesse ok the starres, the beautiul apparell of heauen, the apparel that the Lodelighteneth in the heyght. n his Holy worzke they continue in

13 He seketh dut the grounde ol the deepe, all their imaginatlons and wildome:for

I.
He Hath garnished the bye excellent

Wonkes of his wyldone, and he is from euerlasting to enerlasting: Tuto him

the sonne of Siracl IXXV.

D

map nothing be added, neither tan hebe

minished, he hath no neede allo of any mans countel,

22 Ohowe arniable are all his workes,

and as a sparke to loke vpon:

id say. u
23 They line all, and endure for ener: and mere

when so euer neede is, they are all obedient vnto him.
24. They are all double one against ano-

( Bs td

shyduld fap. ne

farth

fhaibe satif-

Dla: fied When the

Gloricappeas reth, he spea-

ther: he hath made nothing that hath gins he

fault or blemishe.

25 De Hath stablished the goodes of enery one: Hand who may be fatifficd with his glorie when he leeth it

The xliii. Chapters
Che umme of the creation of the wozkes of God.

He glorie ot the height

their order, and not one of them fapleth in his watch.

im oke vpon the rapnebow, and prayse hym that made it: very beautifull is it in his shine. Te

12 He tompasseth the heauen about with a gloriaus circle, the handes of the highest haue bendedit.

13 Though his tommaundenient he maz keth the snow to fall, and the thunder of his tudgement to linyte hastylp.

in

obtaine, which

e pet pant: gionce fatestied: tut when he hath

hath the thing he doth denre,
& pet 13 not
Swecrp of it, but delteelh in that top Whlch neuer shalbe ended ag.

1. Pet. 1.

Gen. ix, d.

14 Thorowe his commaundement the |

trealures are opened, and the cloudes

flee as the foules,

15 In his power Hath he strengthened the cloudes, and broken the haple stones.

te The mountapnes leape at the sight of hom, the Winde bloweth according to his will. l

17 The sounde of his thunder beateth the earth, fo Doth the storme of the north:

the whirle wind allo lighteth downe as

a fethered koule, tasteth out e spreadeth

the snowe abrode, and as the grafhop-

pers that destroy al, so falleth it dowue.

18 The eye maruapleth at the beautie ol

the whytenesse therok, and the heart is

atrapde at the rapne ofit.

He polbreth olit the frost bpon earth like lalt, and when it is frosen, it is as sharpe as the pricke of a thistle.

20 When the colde north winde bloweth, harde chriftall conimeth of the water:
He lighteth downe vpon all the gatheringes together ol water, and putteth onthe water as a brestplate. |

Kay) 21 be

C

Or, moue.

Tf LC

q 21 Hedeuoureth the mountapnes d bur! ently attapne vuto it: fo;

neth the wilderuesses: and loke what is coal? putteth it out lykec fire.

22 The meditine ol all thele is, when a klonde commeth hastyly, and when a deaw conmeth vpon the heate t halbe resreshed againe.

23 In his worde he stilleth the winde, in his counsell T Be Deepe, and
Hath planted PHlandes init.

7. They that layle ouer the fea, tel ofthe perpls and harmes thevof ,. and when

we heare it with our eaves, we maruell

1 1 erat.

25 bes be straunge wonderous workes, Diners maners ot nyte beastes, and whale fishes.

26 Thorow him are al thinges let in good order and perfourmed, and in his word al thinges endure.

27 Jflpe ane much, but J tan not suffick-

The. ci. Chapter. *

c — | dueipis che perkettionokalt won el

28 We fhoulde prayse the Lorde after dur power, korhe ts area 4 woes, » torhe is g at in all his
29 The Torde is to be feared, yea great is he, maruclons is bis 7 PLA. oxy
30 praple the Lord, and magmfie mas muth as pe may pet doth he farercecde allprapse- O magnifie him with al pour . power, and labour carnettip, yet are ye * inno wie able sufficientip to prayse hun.
31 — I a ik be might tell
2 nmagnttie hym so greatlp Deu, asu ; — a
32° Forthere are hyd pet greater thinnes theuthese be: as forbs, we 1 face E but fewe of his workles.
33 For the Lorde hath) made all thinges, e geuen wildome to luch as feare Gad.

Che prapte of certapne boty men, 16 Enoch, Noe, n Abraham,

22 Iladc, and Jacob.

Et vs commende the noble famous men, € the generation of eur

1 ee ee)
2 al thers.

{a= “| any moze glorious attes haue the Lore

done in them „ amd shewed his great

power euer fence the beginning.

3 The noble kamous men raigned in their lungdomes, and bare excellent rule, in their wyldome and vnderstanding, they

folowed the connfel shewed in the prophecttes. 8

Droxviihe. 4 They led the fotke thorow the tounsell

and wyldome of the scribes ok the peo-

ple, Wyle sententes are founde in their instruttion:

5 They sought thelweetnelle and melo-

die of musicke, and brought foorth the pleasaunt fongues infecipture: echt

6 They were riche also, and coulde com-

me and pacific thole that dwelt with

Sil. « .

W 7 Allthese were very noble and hondrarable men in their generations f were well reported of in their times.

8 These haue left a name behynde them,

lo that their pra ’ eee ipo:

rT

fore elders and fa:

9 Akterward, there were some whole a remembraunce is gone, they came to &" naught € perished as though they had neuer ben, and becanie as thongh they had neuer ben borne, yea and their children also with them. J

10 Meuerthelesse these are louyng mien,
Whose righteousnesle Chall neuer be for gotten, but continue by their posteritie.

n Their children are an holy good here tage: their seede endured kalt in the touenaunt.

12 For their saues Chall their childzenand feede continue for euer, and their praple shal neuer be put downe.

13 The ir bodies are burted in peace, but their name lyueth kor euermore 1

14 The people tan speake ol tpeir OP C
Donte u be congregattoncantelt! . their prayse. ale

15 ene Walked right and acceptably 88955 before the Lorde, therkore was he 5 10 lated for an example ot amendemen

16 n stedfast andrigh ican’ Coie man, and in the time of wache leit tame a retonciling: therfore mie 15 the aremnaunt vnto the earth WY fludde tame. 17 An

—— the fonne of Sirach. IXXVI.

Aneuerlasting couenaunt was made (ion, an inheritaunte ok the lande, from with hem, that altflethe should'perishe. sea to sea, and from the riuer puto the
% mo niore with the water. borders df the wo lde. |
18 Abraham was a' great father of many 22* With Plaacdyo he stabliche the fame i ox people, in giorie was there none like vn- couenaunt for Abraham his fathers tohym. 9 1 4 lake: Pea that gratious blesiing æ health y He kept the law ofthe hyghest e tanie of alt nien „and touenaunt byd he faz into a touenaunt with hin.. blishe with Plaac,and made it rest vpon
20 He set the touenaunt in his fleche- and the headol Jacoov. 6 when he' was proued , he was founde 23. OHetnedlve hun, in that he prolpered (a) ads ws fapthfull. TT Pate him fo wel and richelp, and gaue him an made bent ot Lherfore wore God dntobhinrvthan heritage ,audfundercd his poption by it freer ne th, that he woulde blesle all people in leife, and parted among the twelue ahne ad a. his leede, that he woulde multiplie and = tribes, TLene te mereate him as the dust ol the earth, and 24 Mercifull men brought he out ohym, iu d to exalt his seede as the starres: yea and whche fouridefauour in the light of all dae en, that his ede choulde haue the pollel! —fletye, Sagen

God prosper

Him, thac it
' i : 2 did ell ap-
2 a Ie 5 peate he bare
* omen The. xlv. Chapter. mod f afanoue to
: i him as to Joleph and Da-

1 Che prapfe of Moples, o Zaren, and Phinehes. nil. ce.

SS] Dyles*veloucdofGod golde, and that niaup: that when he Exo. ci. l
(emen, Whole remem- Went int, he sounde might be heard, that

a eS

Troia.

ue NV * Adbraunce is in hte praple: they might make a nopfe in the sauttua-
I 1 ty Pymthat the Lorde rie. and geue the people warning.
2 made like in the glorie 10 The holy garment was wrought and

e er] of the lainctes, t mag- borrdered With golde, pelow fülle, and tified him, so that the purple: and in the brestlappe there was enemies stoode in awe of hun. agoodlp worke, Wherin was kastened
3 Lhrough his wordes he did great won- light and perfectnesse. ö ders: he made hynt glorious inthe sight u Upon the fame also there was a worke z n. of kinges, gaue him tommaundement fastened and fet with tostiy precious before his people, and shewed him glo- tones all bound with golde, and this he rious power. bronght in his ministration: The tones hun, + he stabliched hym with faythfultesse Were fastened fora rentembraunce, after and mekenelle, and chole hun out of all st ofthe twelue tribes of Hl men. ö Wu Y ‘TAC, „ e l ay
$ Forhe hearde his voyte, and he led hym 12 Upon his miter there was a plate of sind, in the Darke cloude, ald there he gaue pure gold, a grauen image of holinesse, a
Hhbinithe commaunderitentes , peã the famous aud noble worke , garniched, law ol life and wyldome: that he might and plealaunt to loke vodon. teach Jatob the couenaunt and Jlcael 13. Welore hym were there seene no such his lalwes. 0 flätre ornamentes, æ these it behoued him
6 He choleclaron his brother also out ok alway to bie: There might none other the tribe of Leul, exalted him, and made put theni on, but onely his children, and

hym such tikes ' bischüders thildren perpetually,
8 7 An tuerlasting couenaunt made he with 14 Daplpy perkourmed he his burnt offe- C him, and gaue hym the priesthod in the ringes two times. Leutt. vii a

people: He made him glozious in beautl? <15 Moyses filed@hishandes,¢ annoyn- mete ws, kull aray, and tlothed hun with the gar- ted him with holy oyle: This was now seo ba jinn ment of honour. hoo gonfitmed him with an cuerlastuig to- thc law sgl
De put perfect ioy vpon him, and girded uenaunt, and to his seede as the dayes of fie people hym with trength , he deckt hym with — ‘Heanen:namely,thachis children Mould seen"
We clothes and a tunicle, with an Albay minifter befoze hum, e perkourme eres,
Ouerbody toate also, and a girdle. the officcof the priesthood and wyshe erer
Nound about made he hym belles ol the people good inte (%) 1

6 weforcalmenltpuing chole he him, that he choulde offer incenle before the Lod, and make odours fo2 a [weete saudur

and remembraunte, that he Mould re-

contile the people of the Lord with hem agapne. — —
De uc. Iy He gaue him auttorttie allo in his conte manndementes and in the couenaunt, that he Mould teach Jacob the statutes

and xix a.

Malas.a.

and testunontes, and to enkonrme Ylra-

Nuxvia 13 Therkore there staode bp certapne a gainst him, and had enuie at him in the
Wildernefle: namelpthey that were ok

Dathan and Abirons fide, and the ku-

rious tongregation of Coreeeee

1 This the Lode law, and it displeased hym, and in his wzathkull indignation
Were they tonsumed: A great wonder did he bponthem, and tonsuned them with the fire. 5

Boxee 20 2Bklides this he made Aaron yet moze

Lexxiiib. honorable and glozious, he gaue hyman heritage, æ parted the first sruites vnto
Dai him: Tinto hum (pecially he appopnted

the bread ok lustenaunce,

so)

21 For the priestes dpdeate of the ofke-

ringes of the Lorde: this gaue he vnto

The. xlyi. Chapter. che praple of Josue. 5 Caleb, U Sammel.

A Aulp € strong in battel
10 xl e. was Jesus the sonne ab. {en} Of Naue and was the
3 PA ucceffour of Mopses

in prophesies, x was

Ahe people, Which ar:
_ foading vnto his name Was a great fa: niour vnto the elect of God, to punishe

the enemies that rose vp against Ilrael,

e en might optapne their inheri-
2 Dhow great, noble, and extellent was he, when he lit vp his hande and drewe but his worde against the titie s
3 Who stoode fo manly vefore him -lor the
Low hin selfe broughtin the enemies:
4 Stoode not the sunne stist at his com: maundement, and one dap was as long
3 Nint. nn
5 Ye called vpon the hyghe aud mot mightie when the enennes prealsed vpon him on euery fide, and the mightie
Lord heard hun with the Dayle stones.

Iosue. x. c.

e boo

put pin selke forth) right soone, and that

the principal among the righteous in

25, Like as there was made a couenaunt

geuen to be captaine of

1 Moke, Whiche stdode against the ene

r keot lesus

binvatnd bisteepe. A
22° Els had he no heritage nor po

the land c with che people: forthe; 19 Eze. sti b>

him lelke is his portion c inherttaunte. 3
23 The thirde noble and excellent man, is

Phinehes the fonne of Eleazer, Which pleated the Goo of Ilrael, because hee had the scale and fearc or the Tod: o: when the people were turned backe he

With a good will, to patifie the wrath of | the Lord warde Are. 0.

24 Therlort was there a couenaunt of peace made with hun, that he chould be

the people „that he and his posteritle fhouide Panes office ok the prethoon
O CUCL.

with Dawid of He tribe of Juda, that krom among his sonnes only there

chdulde be a King: and that Aaron allo

and his seede should be an heritage, ta

geue vs wysdome in dur heart, to indge

his people in righteousnesse, that his

goodes shoulde not come into forgetful:

nesse, and that their ponour might en: -

dure for tuert.

Zo ae JAR) Bie

ee t,

6 They smote the Heathentihe people nughtyly, and in falling downe they slue all the aduerlaries: fo that the heathen knew his hoast, and all his defence that the Lon him felfe fought agaunst them.
— he kolowed vpon the minhtie men ol e then r , „ ee . ö
7 In the time of Moyses also, he and
Caleb the sonne of Jephune dyda good

mies „ withheid the people from sume, and stilled the wicked murmurilg. 4
8 *Andoffice hundreth thoul- debe affoote , they two Were preserued = bring them into the heritage namely, ‘ lande that floweth with mylke c jo —— fofuexilé
9 The Word gauc strength also vnto 25 leb, which reinayned with him — nie age: lo that he went dp into the * places — the * Te porque? . red the same for an heritage:
Io Thad the chudren of Ilrael mat howe good athing it ts to be o a vnto the Lorde. 1 And

Nu. xxx §

the sonne of Sirach.

Ixxvy.

i And the indges or rulers euery one al- 16 he called vpon the Lorde almightee,

ter his name, Whole heart went not a whoring nor departed from the Lorde, and that forsooke not the Lod vnfaithfully, whose reniembraunte bath a good report. — *

1, Beatheir bones florishe dut of their

plate, and their names shall neuer be chaunged: but Honour remapneth still with the children of those holy men:

13. HSamuel the prophete, beloucd of the
TLorde his God,* ordayned a king, and annoynted the printes ouer the people.

14 Jnthe lawe of the Lord ruled he, and
(udged the congregation and the Lorde had refpect vnto Jacob. a

1j. The prophete was founds diligent in his faithfulnes: pea he is knowen faithful in his workes, betause he sawe the God oflight. 1 A,

ilegx a.

iReg v.

when the enenues preassed vpon Hinton

euery ide, what tine as he offered the

fucking lambe. N

And the Lode thundered from hea-

uen, made his vopte to be heard With

a great nopse. 8
18. Be distonifited the princes ol Tyre,

and all the rulers ofthe Philistines.
BVBefore his last ende, he made prote- Reg x

station in the fight ol the Lore and his D

annopnted, that he toke neither sub-

staunte nor good of any man, no not so

much as a shoe: and no man might ac-

tuse him. ‘ ‘

20 Alter this he tolde that his ende was

at hand, and shewed the king also his ende and death: and from the earth lyft he vp his voyte in the prophetie, that the vngodlie people Mould perishe.

t The * xlvii 0 Chapter. — 8 1 4

The praple of Pathan, 2 auld, 12 and Solomon.

Fterward in the time
„ok king Maud, there

Por ipke as the fat is
: taken awap from the

K Offering: fo was Dauid tholen out ol the chudren of IJlrael.
3 Pe plaped with the lions as with
ö

Rexving.

proude Goliath with the fling:
5 Fozhecalled vpon the highest Torde, which gaue him strength in his right

hande, fo that he duerthrewe the mightie giaunt in the battaile, that he might

{et bp the home of his people againe.

6° So he glorified him in ten thouland,

and made him to haue a good report in the prayse okthe Lorde, that he thoutd
Weare a trowne of glozie. |
7 For he destroyed the eneunes on euerp fide; rooted dutthe Philistines his

bez ub.

aduerlaries, and brale their horne in funder, lyke as it is broken pet this day.

In all his workes he prapled the hyest and holiett; and altribed the honour

vnto him: with his whole heart did he

prayse the Lorde, and loued God that made him.

9 helet üingers allo before the ainter, ens

ct intheir tune he made lweete songes, that they might geue prayles euery day to God with songes. : io. Me ordayned to kepe the holp dayes worshipkullp, t that the solempe feastes through the whole pere should be honorably holden, with praysing the name of the Lode, and with singing betimes in the morning in the lanttnar r n The Lorde toke away his sinnes, and ji ree end exalted his horue for euer: he gaue pint the couenaunt of the kingdome, and the throne of worship in Jsrael.

: .- Thy
12 After hin there role vp the wwle

sonne (called Solomon.] who by Hin dwelt in a large possession, and for his fake he droue the enemies away far ol.
133 This Solomon raigned with peace in his time, and he obtayned glory: For
God gaue him rest from his enenues ou euery side, that he might bullde him au houle in his name, and prepare the lanctuarie sor euer. f
14. How wyle wast thou in thy pouth, aud filled with wyldome and vnderstanding, as it were with a water flood-
15 Thon coueredst and filledst the whole lande with sunilitudes, e Wyle prudent fentences. ie 16 Thy

N

le booke of lesus

ed betaule of his workes, t

16 Thy name went abrode in the Iles, de-

aule okthy peace thou waft beloued.
17 Al ane maruailed at thy songes, prouerbes, sinulitudes, and at thy interpretations.
18 on in the name ofthe Lorde God,

u Reg b. yyhichiscalledthe God of Pfraet,"thou gatheredst golde as tinne, c thou hadst
Dns much stluer as leade.

Thou wast moued in inordmate loue toward women, and wast ouercome in affection.

20 Thou stapnedst thy honour ¢ worship. yea thy posteritie defiledst thou also, in bringing the Wath of the Lorde vpon thy children, and batt felt slorowe for thy folly. es

in Reg xüe 21 850 that thykingdome was deuided, and Ephraim verame an vnkaithkull and a rebellious kingdome.

Reg ute. 22 Meuerthelesse, God forsdoke not his

is. Reg. xl. 2 19

mercie, neither was he biterlp destroy-

i hat he leaue him no posteritie: as 8

that tame vpon him, which he lou brought it not btterly to . — . — gaue pet a remnaunt vnto Jacob, and a roote vnto Dau dut of huͤnn.

23 Thus rested Solomon with his kathers , and out of his scede he left nehinde hun a verie foolishnes of the people, and such one as had no vnderkan ding: cue Roboam, which turned away the people though his tounsell, ii.Rerii, and Jerovoam the sonne of Rabat,
Which caused Pfeaet to fire, and Mery: m. R ed Ephraumthe way of vngodlines:

24 Insomuch that their sinnes and mildeedes had the vpper hande so sore that at the ta they Were driuen out ofthe lande for the same:

25 Bea, he sought out and brought vp all
Wickednes, tpll the vengeaunte came

vpon them.

J The. xlviij. Chapter. 1% „

Che prapse of Elias, Elizeus, Ezechias, and Elaias.

A hen stoode bp * Elias
AA the prophete as a fpre, and his worde bent tel phe a crellet. . atl He brought an hunger vpon them, and in his seale he made the fewe in number: kor they might not az wap with the tommaundementes of the Tode. =:

3. Through the worde ofthe Lorde he shut the heanen, *etheec tines brought he the fire downe.

O Elias, howe honorable art thou in thy wonderons Deedes z who map make his hoast to be lyne theee

5 * One that was dead thou rapledst vp from death, and inthe worde ofthe hytst thou broughtest hun out of the graue agate. |

6 Thon hast cast downe kinges and des

stroyed them, and the honozable from

their lcate.
Upon the mount Sina thou heardest

it Re. x vil. a.

in. Reg 18. c.

m. Reg 1. c.

W 7

. ment ofthe vengcaunte.
, 8 Which diddest annopnt kinges to retonipee, and ordaynedst prophetes after yee

9 Tyou wall taken by in the stormegl fire, in acharet or firie horses.

ni. Reg. n. e.

the indgement r vpon doze the indge-

10 Thou Walk ordapnedin the reproouinges in time, to patifie the wrathol the Lorde before it raged, to turne the 1 heartes of the fathers vnto thechildzen,
€to fet vp the tribes of Jatob againe.

1 Blessed Were they that sawe thee, and
Were garnished in loue, for we lpue in lyfe: but akter death we shall haue no suth name. — Por

iz Elias Was touered in the storme, but . pei
Eltzeus was filled with his spirite: while he lyued he was afrayde of no prince, and no man might ouercome him. ‘ Lite 1 *

3 There coulde no worde deccaue him, 7 and alter his death his body praphetied. 1 we

14 He did wonders in his lyle, k in death wert histories maruaplous d gt

15. Foz all this the people ameiided not, neither departedthey kronitheiv func,
Styl they were caryed away priloners ge ont dk the jande, and Were latter on brode in all countries, lo that of e ; there remapned but abecy hile bu , and a prince vᷣnto the house of 17 0 55 a

16 Howbeit N Bee a
‘fonie heaped bp vngodlpnes. ;

E Sechs nave his citic rough jas ueped Water into it, digged thro Neol

wall by the water side. —

18 »Inhis time came Sennacherib vp, dess 0 and ent Nablakes, lpft vp his hande az gainst Sion, k dekied them with great

lde, 5
D 5 4 Then trembled their heartes and

handes, so that they sorowed lyke a woman trauayling with chude

20 So they called vpon the Lord which is niercikull, and lylt vp their handes before him, immediately the Lorde heard them out of heauen.

u Hethought no moze vpontheir sinnes, nor gaue them ouer to their enemies: but deliuered them by the bande of E-

saias-. dog 22 e sinote the hoast ok the Aslprians,

the sonne of Sirach. stony rocke with iron, and made vpa and his angel destroped them.

IXXVII

23 For Edechias had done the thing that

leafed the Lorde, and remayned stedastly in the way ol Daudd his father, as Elatas the great a faithful prophete maße fight of God had connnaunded him.

24 Fn his time the sunne went backward, and he lengthened the kinges tyfe,

25 xaith a right spirite prophecied he
What Monlde come to pale at the last: and to such as were sorowkull in Sion, he gaue confolation, wherewith they might couifort then selues for euermiore. =

26 he shewed thinges that Were fozto
Nate and secrete, or euer they tome to pac, 5

. Ne. xx. b.

ee q The Flix. Chapter. f

Oft Jolias, Ezechias, Dauid, Jeremie, Ezechiel, Jorobabel, Fetus, Nehemias,

Enoch, and Joleph.

He renten hraunte of *
Josias, is lpke as whe

Gah Say
NIN

ghegara, J 0 .

EN IRS e many precious [weete
PxAt (melling thinges toge-
ß ther: his remembraunte shalbe [weete

ing of umsicke at a banket of wine.

2 he was appopnted to turne the people
Againe, and to take away all abhominations of the vngodlie. ö

3 he diretted his heart vnto the Love, and in the tinie ol the vngodlie he let bp the worship of God agane. N

4 All kinges except © Danid, Esechias, and Josias, conmutted wickednes: foz enen the kinges of Juda allo forsoke

alba the late ol God. 1

ice $ Foz they gaue their horue vnto other,

Sue Nane wit worchip allo to a straũge

asd e p e. 5 5 5 — 0

6 Therekoze was the elect titie of the

(i) Thefeats torre fin:
Ets. but (ps the thep wer
Wtbolateeg
Shh here ig tip cours

157 ota;

esas,

8 Szethiel fare the plozie ofthe Lorde

as hony in all mouthes, and as the play-

in a vision, which was (heed him vpon the charet of the Cherubums.

the apothecarie maketh 9 For he thought vpon the enemies in

the rapne, to do good vnto such as had ordered their wie aright,

10 And the bones of the twelue prophetts florished from out of their place:for they gaue tomfort and consolation vnto Jacob, and deliuered them faith sullp.

11 * Pow Mal we praple Zorobabebwülch Ag iia was as a ring on the right hande:

12 So was Jesus also the sonne of Jofedec: thefe men in cheir umes bunded 811 the house, c let vp the sanctuarie of the

Lorde againe, which was prepared fo2 an euerlasting worship. f

13 And among the clect was Pehennas, whose renowme was great, Which fet bp for vs the walles that were brolen downe, made the portes and barres againe, and builded dur houses anew.

14 But bpon the earth is there no man treated lpke Enoch: for he was taken Geneve, vp from the earth.

1 Meilher was there a lpke man vnto
Joleph, which was lord of his brethren, and the vpholder ol his people: © his bones were conered and kept. ue

16 Seth and Sem were in great honour e Ez, among the people, and fo was ADAM a- dan nale boue all the bealtes when he was cre- recuorrore a fed, ; € 57 { ae

Hebz.c8.

The

C

(c) oz that he propercied ofthe dellue-

The booke fn - =

3 The. I. Chapter.

Ol Stmon the tonne ol Omas. 2: In exhortation to prapte the Lore,

A 1 z. Machail. 4

e Dnias the hpe priest,

ay S which in his lyle let vp

We 2 the house againe, and

in his dapes made fatt the tenple.

2 The height of the temple also was founded ok him, the double building, and the bye walles of the temple. f

3 In his dapes the welles of water flore out, and were exceeding full as the

cd.

4. He toke tare for his people, and deliuered them krom destruction: he kept his titie c made it strong, that it shoulde not be besieged.

6 How honozable was his conuerfation among the people, and when he came out ok the houle couered with the vaile:

6 He gaue lyght as the morning starre in the nuddelt of the cloudes, and as the moone Wher (tis full: a:

he shined as the sunne in the temple of
God, he is as bright as the raynebowe

mn the faire donde s

8 And flozisheth as the floures and ro-

ses inthe spring ofthe pere, and as lylies by the riners of water, like as the brañches bponthe mount Tibanus in the

time oksummer:

9 Asa fixe and intensle that is kindled, lyke as an whole ornament ot pure gold
{et with all maner of precious tones,

Jo And as an Oliue tree that is fruitekul, aud asa Cypres tree which groweth vp

an hyve. ji
When he put on the garment of bo:

nour, and was clothed with al beawtie,

When he went to the holp aulter, he

made the garment ok holpnes honora-

ble.

12 When he toke the postions out of the
| priestes bande, he him lelfe stoode by the hearth orf the aulter, and his bictien runde about in order:as the braunches
1 tree bpd the mount Libanns,

lo lloode they rounde about him:
13 And as the braunches ofthe Ditue tree, fo stoode all the sonnes of Aaron in their glory, and the oblations ofthe
Lorde in their handes before al the ton-

Imon the sonne of

gregation of Jlrael.

14, And that he might luffittently per: fourme his seruite vpon the aulter, and
Jarniche the offering of the highest god,

5 He ftretched out his hande, and tote of the drinke offering, and porbzed inof the
Wine: fo he poured vpon the bottome of the aulter a good {melt vnto the higher prince.

16 Then began the sonnes of Aaron to sing, and to blow with trumpettes, and to make a great nopse, for a remembraunte and prapse vnto the Torde.

17 Then althe people together were hasted, and fell downe to the earth vpon their faces to worship the Lorde their
God, & to geue thankes to the almightie God. ,

18 They song goodly also with their Bey, ces fo that there was a pleafaunt noyle

in the great houle okthe Lode.

19 And the people in their praper besought the Lorde the highest that he would be D niercifull, tyil the honour of the Lorde were perkourmed, and they had ended their nuuistration and leruite.

20 Then went he downe and stretched out his handes ouer the whole multitude okthe people of Plraci, that they. choulde geue prapfe and thankes out ok their lippes vnto the Lorde, and tore loyte in his name. —

21 He began yet onte allo to prap, that he might openly Herve the thankesgeuing brkore the highest, 5

22 (Hamelp thus) O gene prapse and thankes all pe vnto the Lord our oe which bath euer Done noble and gre g thinges, which hach increaled ou

dapes krom our mothers wonibe, an dealt with Vs ackodingto bis mere”.

23 That he wyll geue bs the topf 1 of heart, and peace for our tinic in J

el: a af

24. Which faithfully kepeth his mevele f

p ern , and alway deliuereth vin due leason.

25 There be two maner ol people abhorre from niy pete 9 th whom JJ hate it is no people!

26 8 sit vpon the mountaine of

Na, foo-
Samaria, the Philictines, and cel

lithe people that dwelt in Sichinus. rus, ot Hierusalem, haue tokened bp thele tnfogmations and documentes of
Wyldome and vnderstanding in this booke, and poured out the wyldome of

cart. sa patented ise that exertiseth him selle

the sonne

esus, the sonne of Sirach Eleaza-

Slrach.

therein: c who fo taketh {uch to heart,

shalbe Wyle for euer.

29. I he do thele thinges, he shalbe strong in all: for the lyght of the Lorde leadeth
Him, which geueth wyldome to the god-

D / r

IxXVIx.

lie: The Torde be prapsed for euernioze,

so be it, so be it.

J The. Ij. Chapter. n. e 0,

che prayer ot Jelus the tonne ol Sirach.

Wyll thanke thee O ode and king, and prapse thee O Goo my sauiour: J wyll peelde

peaple vnto thy naure,
8 >| Foz thou art np de-
— ? fender and helper, and batt prelerued my body from deltruction, krom the snares of trapterous

a

tongues, and from theltppes that are

occupied Withipes, - ~
Thou batt ben my helper from such

red me akter the multitude of thy mertie, and for thy holp nanies fake, from the roring of them that prepared them

selues to deuour me, out of the handes

of such as sought after my lyfe, from the mültitude of them that troubled

ne, —
4 And from them that went about to {et fhpre bpon me on cuery fide; sothat J am not brent in the middest of the fyre:
5 From the deepe of hell, from an bus tleane tongue, from lying wordes, from

_ falfe atculation to the king, and from an

vnrighteous tongue. * :

6 My foule (hall prayse the Lorde vnto

death: foz nip tpfe drewe nye vnto hell
% downewarde. 0 *

7 Thep conpassed me round about on euery spde, and there was no man to helpe me: Jloked about me ik there were anp nan that would succour me: buttheve was none.

8 Then thought J vpon thy mercie O
Torde, and bpon thy actes that thou hast done euer of olde: cnamety) that thou deliuerest such as put their trust thee , and riddelt them out ofthe handes of the heathen.

Thus lyft I vp my payer from the

earth, and prayed for deliueraunce from drath.

10 Italled vpon the Lorde the father of

as stoode vp against me, and halt dellue-

my Torde, that he would not leaue me without helpe in the day ol mp trouble, and in the time of the proͤude.

11 J wyll prapse thy nanie continually, peelding Honour and thankes vnto tt: and fo my praper was heard.

12 Thou faued me from deltruction, and deliueredst me from the bnrighte-

ous time: therefore wyll J acknoweledge and prayle thee, and magmtie the name of the Lorde ;

: C
13 When J was pet but poung, or euer

J went astrap, J desired © wyldome
Openly in my prãper.

14. I tame therfore before the temple and tt

fought her vnto the last: then floated

(he vnto me, as à grape that is soonc ©

tppe.

15 My heart reioyted in her, then went

inp foote the right wap: yea from my pouth bp fought J after her.

16 J bowed downe mypne care andre-

ceaued her: J founde ine much wpe n

dome, aud proͤspered greatly in her.

17 Therfore wyll J alcribe the glory vn-

to him that geueth nie wyldome.

13 Jor Pam: aduiled to do thereafter, J wyll be gelous to cleaue vnto the thing
9 is good, fo shall I not be confounded. n

19 My soule Hath wrestled with her, and
J haue ben diligent to be occupied in

(a) wpsdome is obtayned bp onc of these thzec meanes: tit bp prayer; as Solo mic n did E

gods boke, where in ix pf
Dome tH contapned

Jsal. 19.

d. 6. C hirdp, bp godlp cenuer lotion and continun

n the f eare ot God.
John. 72
If unp man
Wyll da inp wyll, he syal! knowe mp
Doctrine. |

D

her: J lift vp myne handes on hye, then

was mp soule lightened through wyldome that J knowledged my foolishn cs, A .

20 J ordered mip sonle after her, she and
I were one heart from the beginning, and J found her in cleannesse, and therfore chall I not be forsaken.

21 My heart longed after her, and J gat
à good treasure.

22 Through her the Lode hath geuen me anew tongue, wherewith J wpli

rapse him. ; peaple h 23 0

The booke of Ileus

tent to be founde : a
Some vnto me ve vnlearned, and we.
Efii.lv.a. d welmthe houle of Wyldome: 27 Weholde with pour eyes, -howe tha

i

(a) Baruch

wis Feeretas

often made menstonn

» Oz Sud.

24 Withdralbe not pour lelues from her,

but talke x commune of thele thinges: for our soules are very thirftic.

J opened my mouth, and spake: O conte and bye wyldome without money.

26 Bowe downe pour necke vnder her poke, and your foule (halt reteaue wyldome: she is harde at hande, and is con-

The ende of the booke of Iesus the fonne of Sirach, which is called in

29 Vt pour minde reioyte in h

haue had but litle labour, pet A kecle vic

kounde much rest.

28 O reteaue wyldome, and pe Tal haue

plenteoutnes of siluer and

Olde in pot feffion. pone al

is merci and be not ashanied of his orapte

30 Wolke his worke betimes, and he Nhat

geue POU pour rewarde in due lealon.

\

N CLatinie Ecclesiasticus. —

The booke of the Prophete Baruch.

Wan 2 Chapter.

the Wordes of

ge be - booke , which Were

= Waitté by Wa-

ruchthe Lonnie

Ai of Merias the
Nie fonne of Bae ail t AN alias, P sonne

l of Sedechias,

the sonne of Helchias, at Wabplon.

2 Bunche fifth pere, and in the leuenth dapok the moneth, what time as the
Chaldees toke Hierulalein, and brent it vp With fyree e. r

3 And Baruch did reade the wordes of this book; that Jetchonias the lonne of
Joachim aingot Juda might heare, and in the presence of all the people

that were conte to heare the booke,

4. And bekore all the nobles, the binges foniies and before the elders, and before the whole people, from the lowest vnto the highest: befoge all them that dwelt at Wabylon, by the water ok Sodp,

5 Which when they heard it, wept, kfa- 1 ted, and prayed before the Lorde.

7 And leut it to Pierulale

on

1 And @pzay fo? the prolperi

Baruch wrote a booke during the captiuitie of Babylon. which he rend before
Jeconias and ali the people. o Che Jewes tent the boolse with money vnto
Hterulalem to their other brechren, to the entent that they should pray kor them.

i MD thele are 6 They made a collection allo ofuaney,

attording to euery mans power: wien 1 Ualem vnto Joachin the fonne ok helchia, the fonne of
Salon pack, with the other prieltesand to all tbe people Which were with him at Hierufalem, er.
(What time as they had gotten the velselsorthetenwieorche Lord that were taken away out of the temple that ther might bring them againe into the jeune

of Juda thetenth day of the monet) > ai
© Sinan (namely) finer vellels which zes
Sedechias abt ) of Josias king o on,
Juda had made, 2 afr i
Valter that Nabutchodono 50; unge rea
Wabylon had taken Pechowias,

his princes, lordes, aud allihenr gen

and led them captiue from Hierule

vnto Wabplon:

* Oz. binmentes.

to And they faide, Beholde- We ae sent

: ffringes ou du money to bye you burnt o 5

AND incenle withall, prepare a ea 1

fering, and offer fo2 inne vpon yes

ter of the Lorde our God: tie of AY

Timid buchodono de,
7 * and ‘ ce) By thts example Ve are taught to pra to: binges ap i. Timo. 2.

puchodonozor king of Babylon, and fo: no genen him Credence,

the welfare of walthafar his sonne, that their dayes may be vpon earth as the dayes Of heauen: N

1, That God allo may geue vs strength, and lighten our eyes, that we may lyuc vnder the defence of Mabuchodonosor king of Babylon, and vnder the protettion ot Walthalar his sonne, that we may long do them seruice, and finde fauour in their sight.

€13 Prap for vs also vnto the Lorde our

SGod:tor we haue finned against the lord dur God, and vnto this day is not his
Wath turned pet away from vs.

IA And fee that pe reade this booke which we haue sent vnto pou to be rehearlsed in the temple ofthe Lorde bpon the bye dapes, aud at tinie conuenient.

wid 15 Thus shall ye fay: The Lorde our
God is righteous, but we are worthy of

tonfulion and shame, lyke as it is tome

to passe this day vnto all Juda, and to euery one that dwelleth at Hierufalem,

16 To our binges, princes, priestes, prophetes, and to our fathers.

17 We haue finned before the Lorde our
God, we haue not put our trust in him,

18 We haue not obeyed him, we haue not hearkened vnto the vopce of the Lorde bur God, to walke iu the commaundementes that he gaue vs opemp.

19 Since the day that he brought our forefathers out ot the lande of Egypt, vnto this present dap, we haue ben euer a milbelcunmg and an vnkaithfull people vnto the Lorde our God, destroying our selues vtterly, and chrincking backe, that we should not heare his voyce.

20 » herefore there are come bpon vs Lease. great plagues and diuers curses, Iphe asthe Lord deuised by Moyles his seruaunt, * which brought our fathers ont g of the lande of Egypt, to geue vs a lande that floweth with uulte € bony, tyke as it is to fee this day.

21 Meuerthelelle, we haue not hearkened vnto the voyce or the Lorde our
God, According to all the wordes of the prophetes, whom he fent vnto vs (and to our rulers:)

22 Wut euerp man foloibed- his owne nunde and wicked imagination, to offer vnto straunge goddes, and to do euil in the fight ofthe Lorde our God.

D

The. ii. Chapter.

The Jewes conkesle that they iustly Cuffer kor t heir tinnes. 2 The true contession ot the christen. 11 The Jewes delire to haue the wrath of God turned from thew. The
Lorde wyll that we obeye vnto princes, although they be euill. zr He prompleth that he wyll call againe the people krom captiuitie, and geue them a newe and an euer-

lasting testament.

— Or the* which caufe

i hath perfourmed his r deuice, hereof he ceryy tified bs, k our heades

that ruled in Hierusalem, vea c our kinges,

bur princes, with all Pfracl and Juda:

2 And such plagues hath the Lorde brought vpon vs, as neuer tame to passe vnder the heauen, lyke as it is fulfilled in Hiernsalem, according as it is written in the lawe of Moyles,

3 Thata man shoulde cate the fieth of bis owne sonne, e the flech of his owne daughter. 8

4 Moreouer, he hath deliuered them into the handes ol all the kinges that are rounde about va, to be confounded and delolate, and stattered them abrode in al landes and nattons.

Deurge

Si the Bowe our God

5 Thus are we brought beneath and not aboue, because we haue finned against the Lorde our God, and haue not ben obedient vnto his vopce. .

6 Therelore the Lorde our God is Baruch. 5. righteous, and we with our fathers (as reason is are brought to open Mame, as it is to see this day.

7 And as sor these plaques that are come vpon vs alredp, the Lorde had deuised them for vs:

8 Bet would we not pray bnto the Lord our God, that we might euery man turue from his vngodlie wayes.

9 So the Lord hath caufed such plagues to conie bpon bs: for he is righteous in all his workes which he bath cõmaun-
Ded bs:

10 Which we allo haue not done, nor hear: kened vnto his voyce for to walhe in the commaundenentes ofthe Lorde, 5

e

thou that batt brought thy people ont of che Lande of Egypt with a mighte hande, with tokens and wonders, With thy great power e outstretched arme, and Hatt gotten thy selfe a name, as it is come to passe this dap:

Exo. vn. d.

haue done wickedly, we haue behaued au felues vngodlp in all thy righteoulnesses. 8
13 Turne thy wrath from bs we beteche
C tee,] lor we are but a fewe lekt among the heathẽ where thou hast {catered vs.
14. Heare our prapers O Lorde, and our petitions, bring vs out of captiuitie for thyne owne lake, get vs fauour in the fight of them which haue led vs away:
That all laudes may know that thou art the Lorde our God, and that Jlraci ad generation talleth vpon thy nanse. “To
16 O Torde loke downe from thy holy
Deu acc. house vpon bs, entline thyne eare and heare vs.
17 Open thyne eyes, and beholde: for the

il. Par. vi. c.

a. € whole soules are out of their bodies, alcribe vnto the Lorde neither prayse noz righteousnes:

13 But the soule that is bered for the mut titude or het tinnes, Which goeth on heauply and Weakly, whose eyes begin to faite, yea such a soule ascribeth prapse and righteoulnes vnto the Lode.

19 Foz We poure out our prayers before thee, and require mertie in thy fight O

D

Torde our God, not for aup godlpnes

of dur fathers:

20 Wut becaule thou batt lent out thy
Wath and indignation vpon vs, accor ding as thou diddest threaten bs by thy seruauntes the prophetes, saping:

21* Thus faith the Lorde, Bowe downe pour shoulders and neckes, and serue the king ol Wabylon: lo (hail pe remaine
Killin the lande that J gaue vnto pour fathers.

22 But it pe wyll not heare the voyce of the Lorde pour God, to strue the king of Babylon,

23 J wyll destroy you in the cities of Juda within Pierulfalem and without: J wpll allo take from you the voyte dk nurth and the vopte of ioy, the vopte of the budegrome and the vopte ofthe

Jer.xxviia

= Ihe booke

11 O Lod our God, we haue sinned, we

dead that be gone downe to their graues,

— ~~ ppide, andthe e hath geuen vnto bs. bride, here shal no man dwel
Dinix e. 11 N Powe O Lorde God of Israel, in tht lande. more

24. But they would not hearken vnto th vopte to do the king of Babylon feruice: and theresore hast thou perkonrmed the wordes that thou spakest by thp seruauntes the prophetes: namelp that the bones of our kinges and the bones of dur fathers should be translated out of their places:

25, And lo, nowe are they layde out in the heate of the sunne, and in the tolde of the. night, and dead in great mitferie, with hunger, with Nord, with pestilence) and © are cleane tast foorth.

26 As for the temple wherein thy name was cailed bpd, thou hast layd it waste, as it is to see this dap, and that forthe wickednesse of the Houle of Israel and the house ol Juda.

27 O Lode dur God, thon hast intreated vs after all thy goodnes, and actording to all that great louing merce of

yyne,

28 Lyke as thou spakest by thy sernaunt

Mopses, in the dap when thoudwoek tommaunde hin to Waite thy lawe before the thildren of Iscael, saping:

29 If ye wyl not hearke vnto my vopte, then shall this great multitude be turned into a very {mall people amongthe nations, for I wyll scatter them abrode.

30 Motwithstanding, J am sure that this folke wyl not heave ine, for it is an hard necked people: but in the lande of their nee they (hail remember them elues,

31. And learne to know that Jamthe
TLorde their God, when J geue them ae heart to vnderstande, and cates to

etre, 8

32 Then shal they prapse me in the lande

ok their taptiuitie, and thinke vpon my

33 Then shal they turne them kromtheit harde backes, and from their vngodlnes: then shall they remember the thinges that happened vnto their fa thers which sinned against me. i,

34. So wyll J being them agatne nt

the lande Which J pzompfed with 10

oth vnto their fathers Abiaham. Ae

hat, and Jacob, and they shalbe lo 50

ok it, pea Wyll encrease them, and n miniche then. .
7 A0 F wyn make another F naunt with them, such one as Uae 15

Den ii d

lIk!hbebooke of Baruch.

their God and they chalbe mip people: and J will no moze dryue my people the

The. iii.

bexx.

= dure for euer: (namely) that J wulbde chuldren of Ylrael out of the lande that

IJ haue geuen them.

Chapter. e |

Che people continueth in their praper begun kor their deliucraunce. oe prapfeth wyldome vnto the people, she wing that fo en aduerlities came vnto them for che delpiling

therol. 36 Only God was the kinder o

Mdnoswe, W Lowe
„ almightié, thou God okt Bltael: our soule that is in trouble, and our spirite that is vexed cryeth vnto thee:
2 + Heare vs O Tord, and haue pitie vpon vs, for thou art a mereifull God: be gracious vnto vs, for we haue sinned bekore the.
3 Thouendurestfor euer: shoulde we then vtterly periche- — 8
4 O Lorde almightie,thou God of Hirati, heare nowe the prayer ol the dead a. Plcactitesandof their children, whiche
„% Hanefinned before thee, aud not hearkened vnto the vote of the Lorde their
God, kor the whiche caule these plagues hang nowe vpon vs.

ek

of our foretathers, but thinke vpon thy power and name nowe at this tune:
6 FNor thou art the Lode our God, and ther O Logde Will we prapse. hin 7 or thou Ha put thy feare in our
* heartes to the intent that we Mould call vpon thy name and prayse thee in our captinitic, c that we might turne from the wickednesse ok our forefathers that finned before thee,
8 Behold, we are pet this day in our cap:
. Citic, where as thou balk stattered vs tobe an abhominatton, eurse, and fubicct ito, lb exactions: like as it hath happened buto our fathers allo, betaule of al their wickednelle and Departing from ther.
9D Pact heare the commaundementes oftyfe , ponder them well with thyne
_ Fates that thou maiest learne wildome. th ut howe happeneth it Jlrael that
: Ou artin thyne enemies lande thou ar waren olde in a straunge countrep,
N Wu deuedwirh the dead. N hy art thou become lpke them that
80 downe totheir graues: f thou bhatt forsaken the
; ome.
FJorikthou hadst walked in the way ot

O Todd remember not the wickednesse

wyldome. 37 Ok the incarnation of Christ.

God truely, thou shouldest haue remapned still lafe in thyne owne lane,

14 O learne then where is wyldome, Po..

and. mia.
"Dz, strẽgtd

where vertue is, where vnderstanding is: that thou mapest knowe also from

whente coinmeth * long contmuaunte pg. b.
1 0 lyfe, the light of the epes, and quiet- and cxix. a. nelle

15 Who euer Founde out her plate: or who C came euer into her treasures-

le Where are the princes of the heathen become; and luch as ruled the beastes vpon the cart,

17 Theythat had their pastime with the foules of the apre, theythat hoorded vp siluer gold wherin mien trust fo much, and made no end ot their gathering:

13 What is become of them that copned siluer and were so carefull, and coulde not bring their workes to palle-

19 Thep be rooted out and gone downe to hell, and other men are come bp in their steades.

20 Boung men haue seene light, and dwelt bpon earth:but the way of rekorzmation haue they not knowen, a

21 Mor vnderstande the pathes thereof neither haue their children receaued it, D pea right faͤrre is it fromthem.

22 It hath not ben heard of in the land of
Chanaan, neither hath it ben seene at
Theman. i

23 The Agarenes sought after wildome, but that whiche is carthly, like as the marchauntes of the lande do : they of
Theman are cunning allo, they labour for wyldome c vnderstanding: but the way of true wpledome they knowe not,
9 they thinke bpon the pathes

ero ¢ 5

24 O Ilrael howe great is the boule of
God: and howe large is the plate of his possession-

25 Grtiit is he; and hath none ende: pea Deute iit

r. xl. b. sal. cxlv.a.

hye and vumealurable.
26 What is become of those famous ge auntes, that were so great of bodies, auo

fo worthy men ol warre-
L (i) 27 Thole

* Thebooke of Baruch.

Tholte hath not the Lorde cholen, nev

Ge 1 they founde the wapof rekormation:

23 Therkore were they destroyed, and fo fo much as they had no wyldome, they perished betause of their koolishenelle.

29 Who hath gone vp into heauen, to take

wildome there, and brought her downe

krom the cloudes:

who bath gone ouer the sea to kynde her, and haͤth chosen her aboue golde, and so brought her hyther-

zi No man knoweththe wapes of Wyle:

dome, neither is there any that can seke out her pathes. 1

32 But he that woteth all thinges, knoweth her, and hath founde her out with

eh i his forcknowledge: 'this fame ts he

whiche prepared the earth at tl . ning, and flledit with al 1 0
239 17 en
33 When he lendeth out the light, it goeth: ate and When he calleth it againe it j seh him with feare. ib oö reiß El,
34. The starres kepe their watch and geue their light, yea and that glad-
Ip:waben he calleth them they lay, here we ve: and lo with chearkulnelle the shewe light vnto him that made them.
35 This is our God, and there Hat none da other be compared vnto him. ae
36 It is he that hath founde out au wyledome, and hath geuen her vnto Jatob his seruaunt, and to Israel his beloned.
37 Alterwarde did he shewe hym lelfe u. i bpon earth, and dwelt among men. nis

eum 2

2. loan iz

The .ttit. Chapter.

Che reward ok them that kepe the lawe, and the punishment of them that delpite it.
1A comtorting of the people beyng in captiuitie. 19a complapnt of Hierusalem, and vnder the figure therok, ol the church. 25 Aconfolation and comfozting of the lame. g

His is the booke of the commaundementes of
God, and the law that endureth fo2 euer: all
Fee they that kepe it Chall tome to lyfe, but such as forsake it Mali come

ir, at @ 2

to death.

2 Turnethee O Jacob, and take holde ok it „ waltze by this Way thorowe his brightnesse and lhyne. a

3 Geue not thyne honour to another, and

thy worchip to a straunge people.

O Alrael, howe happy are we, seyng that God hath shewed vs such thinges ds ave plealaunt vnto hym-

5 We ok good cheare thon people of God,
O thou auncient Firat.
4074 Nobb are ye solde among the heathen?
N howbeit not for pour vtter destruction: but because pe prouoked God the Lowe to Wath and displeasure, therfore were ve delluered vnto pour enemies.
7 FJor pe displealed the euerlasting God a Chat made vou, offering vnto deuls, and
0 not to God.
8 He haue forgotten hym that brought vou vp, and ye haue greeued Hierusalem that nursed you,
9 ohen she sawe that the wrath of God was comming vpon vou, che said:hearnen Opethatdwell about Sion „ for

Psal. x cui. b. 4-

God hath brought me into great heautnesse

10 And why: J see the captinitie of my people, of my sonnes and daughters, which the euerlasting God will bring vpon them.

1 With toy dyd J norishe them: but nowe must J leaue them with weeping and sorowe.

12 Let no man reiopce ouer me wyddowe and forsaken, which for the sinnes of my

children am desolate of euery man: or
Why they departed from the lave of
G

od.

33 They woulde not know his righteoul nelle, nor walke in the way of his conv maundementes: and as for the pathes of trueth and godlinesse, they had no lust to go in them. N

14 O pe dwellers about Sion, come and ¢

let vs call to remembraunte the cap,

tiuitie that the cuerlasting God hat) brought bpon my fonnes e my daughters.
Me Hath bought a people bpon chen from farre, an vnturteous people, Aer

ofa straunge language: whiche nett 0

regarde the olde, nor pitie the urs, 4

16 hele haue taried away the e 4 loued of my widdowes, leatung ie lone both desolate and chaptette. |

17 But alas, what can J Belp Vas 20

1 Deut.28.c let. vb ·

he booke

owe he that brought these plagues
1 99 8 „ deliver vou allo from the handes ol pour enemies.
19 Go pour Way O my childzen, go pour wap: for J ami desolate and forsaken. o J hae put of the clothing of peate, a, ( pũt vpon me the facke cloth of prayer, s ald for my tine J will call vpon the most hyghest. ö a1 Bt ol good cheare O my children, erye vnto the Lorde, and he fhall deliuer pou
5 from the power of the princes pour ene-
22 Forberply J haue euer a good hope o your prosperous health, peaa very gladuesle is come vpon me from the hojp one, becausc of the mertie that pe Mal haue of our euerlasting sauiour. z With mourning and Weeping dyd J let you go fro me: but with top and perpetu-

all gladnesse shall the Lorde bring pou

againe vnto me.
24 Likeas the nepghbours of Sion saw pour captiuitie from God: euen fo (hail

they alfo {ce shortly pour health in God,

which Hall come on pou with great ho-
N nour and euerlasting worchip. sibs O mychüldren, luffer patiently the wrath that Hal come vpon pou: forthe enenue hath persecuted thee, but shortly thou (halt {ee his destruction, and shalt treade vpon his necke.
26 My dearlinges haue gone rough hard wapes, for they are led away as a flocke
. is stattered abrode with the enc: mies.
27 But be of good tomfort O mp childzen,

of Baruch.

and erye vnto the Lorde: for he that led

poualbay , hath pou pet in remembraunce. * ol

Ixxxip.

28 And like as ye haue ben mynded to 5

swarue from your God: o shall pe now endeuour pour selues ten times more to turne againe, and to seke him.

29 Foz he that hath bronghtthese plagues bpon you, Mall bring von cucriatting lop againe With pour health.

30 Lakica good heart buto thee O hie-

rulalem: kor he whiche gaue thee that name, exhorteth thee so to do.

31 The wicked doers that now put thee * 1. be

to trouble, hall perishe: c such as haue reiopted at thy fall, halbe punished.

32. The citles whom thy children lerne,

and that haue caryed away thy fonnes, shalbe corrected.

33 Jor like as they be nowe glad of thy decay, and reioyce at thy fal: fo shal they mourne in their owne destruction.

34. The toy of their multitude shalbe tafen away, and their cheare shalbe tur: ned to sorowe.

35 Jor a fire shall fall bpon them fromthe euerlasting God long to endure ,¢ it Hal

Efa. x. b.

S

be inhabited ol deuyls for a great season.

36 O Hierufalens, loke about thee toward the east, and beholde the toy that con: meth vnto thee from God.

37 Jo: lo, thy sonnes whom thou hast for-

faken, and that were scattered abrode,

come gathered together from the east

and west, reioyting in the worde of the holy one, vnto the honour of God.

Ye. 5. Chapter.

1 Dierufalem is moued vnto gladnelle foz the returne ol her people, and vnder the figure

therof, the church.

a1

UZ okthy mourning clothes O Hierusalem
PY andthpsorow, € decke thee withtheworchip e

4,9 || Donour that commeth

* God thal put the garment of righteoul-

thee ol God, with peace ok righteoulnesse, and the honour ofgods feare.
Arlise O Hierulalem, stande vp ou Hye,

A

loke about thee towarde the cast, and beholde thy children gathered from the

ealt buto the west, whiche reioyce in the holy worde, hauing God in reinen zaunce.

were ledaway of their enennes : but now shall the Lode bring them carped with honour, as chyldzen of the king-

done. 7
L. (ij) 402

6 They departed from thee on foote, and

The booke of Baruch.

fed purpoled to bing downeal ouerchadowe Ifrael at the commaue-—— f: God is purpoled to bring downe al ouershadowe Ilrael at the tommaun-
4 dont monntapnes, pea c all hie rotkes, dement ol God.

to fill the balleys, and lo to make them 9 Sor hyther thal God bung Hirai with

euen with the ground, that Ilrael may sopfull nurth, and in the light or his ma-

be diligent to line vnto the honourok testie, with the mercte and righteoul-

God. nesse that commeth ol him fetfe,
8 The woods c all pleasaunt trees, (halt 0

The. vi. Chapter. a I copie ot the eptale that geremie lent vnto the Jewes, whiche were led away prtdee 5 ners 1 fing of Babylon: wherin he certikieth them ofthe thing that was as commaunded him of God.

inightplp confuted.

Sha] Ecaule of the sinnes 11 et can not thele gods deliuer them tos, at, that ve haue done à- selues from rust and mothes.
“AOA! gaint God, yt halbe 1r2 When they haue couered them with ed awap captiue vn- clothing of purple, they wype their faces to Babylon, euen of forthe duftof the teimpie, Whereokthere
Nabuchodonozor the is much men e 6
N Hing of Wabplon. 13 One hath a scepter in his hande as
2 So when pe become into Wabplon, ve though he were iudge of the countrep, hall remapne there many peres, and pet tan he not slay such as offende hym. jor. for a long season, namely] feuen gene- 14 Another hath a sworde or an axe in his € rations: and after that will baingpou band:foz al that, he is neither able to deawap peaceablyfromtbence, fende hym selfe from battaple, nor from

3 Mo be shall pe see in Babplon gods ok murtherers. golde, of siluer of wood, and ok stone, 15 Wp this pe map vnderstande, that they borne vpon mens shoulders, to cast out be no gods: therefore see that pe neither fearfulneffe before the heathen. Worship them, nor feare them.

4 But loke that pe do not as the other: be 16 Jor like as a vessell that a man pleth, is not pe afraide, x let not the feare ol then nothing Worth when it is broken, euen ouertome pou. lo is it with their gods: hen they be fet

5 Therklore when ve lee the multitude ob pvp in the temple, their eyes be ful ol dult people worchipping them behynde and thorowe the feete of thole that come before, say ve in pour heartes:O Lowe, in. r

Deavic, it is thou that dughtest only to be Woz: 17 And like as the doores are Hut in round

Ier. xxv, a.

Thipped. about vpon hym that bath offended
6 Myne angell also ap e and the king, or as it were a dead body kept
I my felfe will care for pour foules, belide the graue: Euen lo the prettes

“Dyrongue, 7 Ag kor the timber ot thofe gods, the kepe the doores with barres € lockes, aS carpenter Vath pulliched them: yea lelt-their gods be spoyled with rob-

* gilted be they and laped ouer with su- bers. uer, vet are they but vayne thinges, and 18 They fet bp tandels before them, tan not speake. pea veryly and that manp, wherol they
, 8 Like as a wench that loueth paras dan not lee one: but cuen as blorkes, lo mours is triniy dect: cucu lo are these stande they in the temple. 3 made and hanged with golde. 19 Jtis sapd that the serpentes € wore

9 Crownes of golde beryiy haue their whiche come ok the earth gnawe a gods ppon their heades: fothepricttes their hartes, eating them ether clothe them selues take golde and suuer from alls, and pet they feele it not. her

them, and putit to their owne vles: 20 heir kaces are blackt, thorowe the Y

10 Peachey geue of the fame vnto har- smoke that is in the temple. afiee lottes € trimmie their whores Withall; 21 The owles,{watowes, and byzde ee agane, they take itfrom the whores, Hon them, pea and the tattes run

and decke their gods therwit : their heades. 22 BY

not gods, therkore feare them not. j The golde that they haue is to make them beautifull: for all that, except some body dight of their rust they Wil geue no fhine, and when they were cal into a fourme, they felt it not.

24 They are bought kor money, and haue

o breath of lpte within then.. pile 5 They must be borne vpon mens foul:
| bythey declare vnto men that they be
* then that worchip them. 5

26 For if they fall to the ground, they tan not rise vp againe of them lelues: Pea though one helpe them vp and let them right, vet are they not able to stande alone „but must haue proppes let vnder them like dead men. N ö

27 As oz the thing that is offren onto

them, their priestes sell it c abuse it, yea

the priestes Wyues take thereok: but vnto the sicke e poore they geue nothing

0 ie Nit x een e 28 The women with chilbe and the men:

struous lay handes of their offringes:

y this ye may be sure that they are no

gods therekore be not ye akrayde of

29 From whente commeth it then that

theybe taued gods: the women fit be-

ott the gods of siluer, golde,and d N

od, —

30 And the prie stes lit in their temples, hauing open clothes „ whole heades and beardes are chauen, and haue nothing vpon their heaves, —

31. Roaring and crying Spon their gods,
AS Wen do at the feast when one is dead.

32 The priestes alfo take away the garmentes of the images, and decke their
Wpues and children withall.

3 Whether it be good or euyll that any man do vnto them, they are not able to recompente it: they can neither {et vp a

king, nor put him downe. a

34. In like maner, they may neither geue riches, nor rewarde eupll: though a man make a vow vnto them and kepe it
Hot, they wil not require it. f

35 They tan laue no man krom death, nei er deuner the weake from the migh-

36 They can not restore a blind man to his aht. nor helpe any man at his neede.
7 They can shewe no mercie to the wid-

ders as thole that haue no frete, whernothing worth: *confounded be they

of Baruch. IxxxIl }-
— >, By this ye may be lure thatthepare —_dDowWe, nor do good to the katherlelsc.

38 Their gods of wood, stone, golde, and siluer, are but enen as other stones that be hewen of the mountapne: they that Worthip them, shalbe confounded.

39 Howe shoulde they then be taken for bs pea howe dare men tall them

40 And though the Chaldees worshipped them not, hearing that they were but dombe and coulde not speake:

41 Het they them selues offer vnto Bel, and woulde fayne haue hym to speake: as who say they toulde feele, that may not mouã e.

42 Wut when these men come to vnderstanding, they shall forsake them, fo2 their gods haue no feeling.

43 Agreat sort of women girde with

beries: Mob if one of them be touueped: albay and lye with such as come by, the. tasteth her neyghbours in the teeth, betaule fhe was not worthyly reputed nor. her toarde broker, .

44 What fo euer is done in vayne and lost: Howe may it then be thought or sayde, that they are gods:

45 Carpenters and goldesmithes make them: neither be they any other thing, but euen what the workemen wil make of them. —

46 Hea the goldsinithes them selues that make them are of no long continuaunce:
Hove shoulde then the thinges that are made of them, be gods:

47 Tlapue therfore are the thinges, ven verp shaͤme is it that they leaue behinde them fortheir posteritie.

48 For assoone as there conimeth any warre or plague vpon them, thenthe priestes imagine where they may hyde them selues with them,

49 Hoe tan meu thinke then that they be gods, whithe neither may defende them selues front warre, nor deliuer them from mislortune- |

50 For seyng they be but of wood, of stone, oł siluer, and of golde, all people and kinges Mall kudwe hereafter that they be but vayne thinges: yea it halbe openly declared that they be no gods, but euen the very wozkes of mens handes, and that God hath nothing to do with them. .

51 It is manttest then that they are no gods, but the workes ol mens haudes.

L (ii) and

toar des, fit in the streetes, e burne oliue. 8

strawe.

kor them, itis but

si

Thebooke of Baruch.

and no worke of God int

5 Thep tan let no king in the lande, no: 62

eue rayne vnto men.

53 hey a geue no sentente of a niatter,

neither defende the lande krom wrong:

for they are not able to do fo much as a

trowe that fleeth betwixt heauen and earth.

54. When there happeneth a fire into the

boule ot thole gods of Wood and filucr, and of golde, the priestes will eltape and

saue them leluts, but the gods burnt as

the balkes theriunn.

55. They tan not withstande any king 02 battell: howe mayit then be thought or graunted that they be gods?

56 Morconer, thele gods of wood of

stone, o gold and filuer, map neither de-

fend them selnes from theeues nor rob-

bers: 194

575 Dea the very wicked are stronger then they: thele stryp them out ok their apparell that they be clothed withall, thele take their golde and siluer from them, € lo get them awap, yet tan they not helpe them selues.

58 Therkore it is much better ‘for a man to be a king, and so to shewe his power,

or elg a profitable vessell tra Houle; .

Wherin he that oweth it might haue plealure, veaor to be a doore in a house, to kepe such thinges fafe as be therein: then to be luch a vayne god.

59 The lunne, the moone, x al the starres, seing they gene their shine and light, are obe dient, and do men good.

f

6 When the lightning glüitreth, al is

tleare.
61 The winde bloweth in euery tountrep:

e when God commaundeth the clondes

ö to go rounde about the whole Worlde,

hem. they do as they are bioden.

When the fire is lent downe froma boue andtommaunded, it burneth vp

bitles €Woodes : but as for thole gods,

they are not like one ok thele thinges neither in beantie eicher in strength.
6; Wherloze, men (honldenotthinke nofay that they be gods, seing they tan nee

ther geue sentente in iudgement, no: do
Phi 117 11111z: tran .

nien good.

64 l Förloniuch nowe as pe art sure that

they be no gods, then feare them not:
65 Forthey can neither sprane euyll noz good of kinges . tant f yy:

66 Thep tan shew no tohens in heauens

for the heathen ;, neither shpise as the sunne, nor gene light as the moone:
67 Bea the vnreasonable beatles are better thenthey: for they can get them vnder the roofe, and do them {ences good.

6d. So tai pe be certified by no nianer ok

meanes that they be gods, therefore feare then not.
69 Foz like as a startrowe in a garden of

hearbes kepeth nothing: euen lo are

their gods of Wood, of liluer and golde.

70 And like as a white thorne in an oF charde that euer y byrd litteth vpon, pea lyke as a dead body that is calt in the darke: euen fo is tt with those gods of wood, siluer, and golde

ly the purple € scarlet which they haue vpon them and soone faydeth awap, ye may vnderstande that they be no gods:

vea they them selues hall be tonsumed

at the last, whiche shalbe a great confue sion of the lande. 482

72 Blessed is the godly man that hath no

images and Worchtppeth none: for he hale farre from reproofe.

The ende of the prophete Baruch; whiche is not in the

Canon of the Hebrue.

a

Ihe song ofche three c

XXXII). 1

hil

dren, whiche.

were put into the hot burning ouen. The common tranflation
ö readeth this fong in the iii. Chapter of Daniel.

25 Che prayer of Azarias. 46 Che crueltie ol the king. 48 Che lambe deuoureth the
Chaldeans. 40 Che angell ok the Lorde was in the fornace. Che three children prapse the Lorde, and prouole all creatures to the fame,

o. N P they Walked
Nin the niddest of che flambe, pray-
2 LF fing God e magni: fiyng the Lode,
Then Asarias

Sar eDouthis maner: x euen in the nndon”. Bett of the fire ope-

ned he his mouth, and sapde:

26 Ble ssed be thou O Lorde God of our fathers, right Worthy to be praysed and honoured is that name of thine fo2 euermore:

27 Forthou art righteous in althe thinges that thou hast done to vs, Bea fapebfull are al thy Workes, thy wapes are right, arid all thy iudgementes true.

e 28 Jnall pthinges that thou haft brought vpon vs, and vpon the holy citie of our fathers, euen hierulalem, thou hast ere: tuted true indgement: yea atcording to right and equitie Halk thou brought all t thinges vpon vs, becaule of our

sinnes.
29 For why: we haue offended and done
Wirkedly, departing from thee. tek, 30 In all thinges haue we trespassed,
Enot obeped thy commaundementes,

nor kept them, neither done as thou halt a bidden vs, that we may prosper.

1 Wherekore allthat thou batt bronght vpon vs, and euery thing that thou halt done to vs, thou halt done them in true ludgement:

32 Asmdeliuer ing vs into the handes of dur enemies, among bngodly and wiebed abhominations, and toan vnrightecat pea the most frowarde bpon

3 And nowe we map not open our

monthes, we are become a shame and rebroole vnto thy seruauntes, to them that worchip thee.

4 Het for thy names lake c we beteche thee}

geue vs not vp for cuer, breake not thy tonenaunt r

code bp, kpap-

* a

35 And take not away thy merece from vs for thy beloued Abrahams lake, for thy leruaunt Plaats lake, and forthy holy
Ilraels fake: 0

36 To whom thou halt spoltlen and pro- 5. mifed * that thou wouldest multiple Bar. their seede as the starres of heauen, x as the lande that lyeth vpon the fra shore.

37 Foz we O Lord, are betome lesle then any people, and be kept vnder this day in authe worlde, betause ok our sinnes.

38 So that nowe we haue neither prince, duke, prophet, burnt offering, facrifice,
Aa „ Incenle,noz fanctuarte before thee,

39 Meuerthelelse, in a contrite heart and an humble spirite let vs be receaued, that we may obtapne thy mercie.

40 Pike as in the burnt offerme of rammes and bullockes, and like asin thoulandes of fat lambes: fo let our offering be in thy fight this daye, that it peeumap pleale thee : *forthereisno confi: gene

lion vnto thé that put their trust in thee. Rom ix g.

4 And now we folowe thee with al our heart, we feare thee, and seke thy face.

42 Mut bs not to syame: but deale with vs after thy iouing kindnesse, and aceordiug to the multitude of thy merties.

43 Deliuer vs bythy mivacies O Lorde, and get thy name an honour: that all they which do thy seruauntes cuyl, map be tonkounded:

4.4. Let them be achamed thorow thy at nightie power, and let their strength be broken:

45 That they map knowe, how thatthou only art the Lorde God, and honour
Worthy throughout all the worlde.

46 And the kinges seruauntes that put them in, tealsed not to make the ouen hot with wild fire, drie straw, pitche, S . towe, and fagottes: e

47 Sothat the flambe went outof the en, ouen bpon a fourtie and nyne mbites; *

48 Beait toke away and brent vp thofe
Chaldees that it gat holde vpon befive

the onen. 1 f .
L ty) 49 But

1 song ofthe three children,

9 But the angell of the 0
N dowue into the ouen to Araria and his

felowes, and imote the flambe okthe lire

ont ofthe ouen, b -
50 And made the middes of the ouen a5 we had ben acolde winde blowing: so the fire neither tonched them, greeued them, nor dyd them hurt.
5 Then thele theee as out of one mouth,

prapsed, honoured, and blessed God in

q the fornace, faying: ' s ud. 5 *2BIeffed be thou O Lorde God of our fathers:for thou art prayse and hondur
Worthy, yea t to be magnified for euernioze. ;

geri e. $3 irked be the holy namie of thy glorie, for it is worthy to be praysed € mag-

nified in all worldes.
54 Wlelled be thou in the holy temple of thy glorit:for aboue all thinges thou art

to be praysed yea and more then worthy

to be magnified for euer.
55 Blesled be thou in the throne of thy kingdome: foraboue al thou art Worthy to be well spollen of, and to be moze then
Magnified foz euer.
56 Blessed bethon that lokest thorow the

G

Decpe, and sittest vpon the Cherubums:

for thou art worthy to be praysed, and about all to be magnified for euer.

57. Blessed be thou in the firmament of

. Heauen: for thou art prapse and honour

Worthy for tuer.

5s Pall pe Workesofthe Lozde, speake good of the Lorde:prayse hum, and set |
78 Dye welles speake good ofthe Tord:

him vp for eucr.

59 Ope angels ofthe Torde speake good of the Lord:prayse him, and set hym vp for euer.

60 O pe heaueus speake good ofthe Lom: prayse hym, and let hint vp fog ever.

ot O all pe waters that be abone the fir-

Pfal.cii.c. alu cxlix. b

mament sprake good of the Torde:

prayse hym, aud {er him vp for euer.
62 O all ve powers of the Lorde spealie

good of the Lordt:prapse hum, and set

him vp kor euer.

| Phoslica. 63 O pe sunne and moone speane good of ee him, and set hym vp kor

ner.

64. O ye starres of heauen, speane good of the Torde:prapse him, and set him bp kor euer.

65 O ye showres and Dea speake good
Ofthe Lorde:prayse hun, and fet him vp fo2 cuer. a

66 O all ve windes of God speane good el

la. 8. a.

Tode came the TLorde:präpse him, and set h

fon coe eam Dent bp

67 O ye lire and heate speake good of n hym, and fet hun wie

63 O pe winter and sommer speake good

ok the Lord:prayse hym, aud let bun a ch eh wes and kroltes speate

69 O ye deawes and froftes {peake nop ofthe Lozbe:peaple him, and fer hun vp ;
„eden oe fake on

70 O ye krost and colde speake good of the Lorde:prapse hym, and let him vp for euer.

71 O pe vte and snowe speake good of the
TLorde: prayle him, and set hym vp fo euer.

72 O pe nightes and dapes speake good of the Lorde : prayse him · and set him vp for ener. W

; Dye light and darkenesse speake good of the Lord:prayle him, and set hym vp for euer. 1 71

74. O pe lightninges and cloudes speake good of the Lorde:prapse hin, and lee hym vp lor euer.

75 Oletthe earth {peake good of the
Lorde:pea let it prayse him, and set him vp for euer.

76 O pe mountapnes and hilles speake good of the Lorde:prayse hym, and set hym bp foz euer. 7.

77. O all pe greene thinges bpon the earth speatze good of the Lorde: praple him, and set hym vp kor ener.

prayse him, and fet hy vp for euer.
79 S ye seas and fluddes speake good ol the Lord:prayle hym, and let him vp fa
30 O pe whales and all that moue in the

Waters fpeake good of the Lord:pravse

him, and let him vp for euer. 5

31 Oall pe foules of the ayze speake good
8 the Lorde:prayse hin and let hun vp oreuer.

32 O all pe beastes and cattel speake good ben Lorde:prayle him, and fer him vp or euer. i

33 O po children of men speake goon of the Lorde: prayse hin, aud iet Hynde for euer. Lord:

34 Diet Israel speake good of the , peayle him, and let hin vp foz euer. ana

85 Dye priestes ot the Lord enn bp of the Torde:prayle him, and set bi for euer. 36 Ort

i The story of Susanna. Ixxxv.
— *D peferuauntes ofthe Lord speake deliuered vs fromebe hell, kept vs from
36 the hande of death, ridde at fromthe lere ee.

god of the Lorde: prapse him, and set

im vp kor euer. psi 7 8 pespitites and soules of the righte-

him, and set hum bp foz cuer. g O pe holy and humble nien of heart, eake ye good of the Lord: prayse him, and let him vp kor euer.
39 Ananta, Azaria, and Milael speake pe good of the Horde prapse pe him e let him vp foz euer: Which hath

us lpeake good ol the Lode: prapse 90

middest of the burning flambe, and faued vs euen in the middest of the fyre.
* geut thankes therefore vnto the

1e d 8

all deuout men, speake ye good of the Lorde, the God of all gobbeg;
O prayse him and geue hin thankes, e mertie endureth Worlde without ende.

$m The ftory of Sim vvhich is the

thirteenth Chapter of Daniel after the Latine.

s The two gouerners are talen with the loue of Ssufanna. 19 They take her alone

in the garden. 20 Chey foltcite her to wickednes. i
God, though tt be to the daunger ofberipfe. 34 She is acculed. liner her. 6r Che gouernours are put to deach.

N Here delt a man in Wabydon called Jo-

9 & cim,
That toke
S awyfe whole
1 Was
I Sulanna, the sy daughter ok i REA Hheltia, a Des
, 805 woman, and such one as feared od. — = 0
Per kaͤther and her mother also were

good people, and taught their daughter

ad ttording to the lawe of Moyles.
4 Now Joatim Cher hutband} was d great rich man, and had a faire orchard ioyning vnto his houle: and to hun re-

sorted the Jewes tommõly, becaule he

was a man okreputation among them.

The same pere were there made two iudges, such as the Lowe spcaketh of,
The Wickednes of Wabpion commeth from the elders (that is rom the iudges which seeme to rule the people.

6 Cele came oft to Joacims houle: and all such as had any thing to do in
Je dawe, tame thyther vutotheni.

23 She chooleth rather to obep
45 Daniel doch de-

7 Now when the people departed awa W at noone, Sulanna went into her hulbandes orchard to walke.

s The two elders seeing this, that fhe went in daylp and Walked, they burned for uk to her,

9 Bea they were almost dut of their wittes, and tast downe their eyes, that they should not see heauen, nor reinem ber that God is a righteous iudge.

to Jor they were both Wounded with the loue of her, neither durst one shewe a nother his griefe:

u And for shame they durst not tell her their inordimate lust, that they woulde faine haue had to do with her:

12 Bet they layed wayte for her earnestly from day to dap, that they might lat the leaste]) haue a sight of her.

13 And the one {ard to the other: Up, let vs go home, for it is dinner tune. So they
Went their way one from an other.

14 When they returned againe, they tame

together, enquiring out the matter betwirt them felnes, pea the one tolde the

other of his wicked lust: Then appopnted they a time when they might take

Sulanna alonc.

15 It

Borde for he is kinde hearted, and his Phicxvia |

a The story of Sufanna. =

15 It happentd alto wacthep fpiedout a Send for Hulanna the daughter of hhel-

conuentent time when che Went koorth to walke, as her maner was, and no body with her but two mapdens , and thought *to wache her selfe in the garden: for it was an hot season.
16 And there was not one perfon there, extept the two elders that had hid them selues to beholde her.

17 So she salde to her maydens: Go let me oyle and sope, and shut the orchard doort, that I may washe me.

18 And they did as she bad them, and shut the orchard dooze, and went out them felues ata backe doore to fetth the

Exo. ii. c.

ea , thlngthat the hadtommaunded: but eee Sularmaunew not that the elders lap
. there hid within.

D 19 Mow When the mapdens were gone fobrth, the two elders gat them vp, and ranne vpon her, saping:

20 Mob the orthard doozes art hut that no man can set vs, we haue a lust onto thee, therefore consent vnto vs, and lye
With vs:

If thou wylt not, we shall bring a testunomal against thee, that there was a poung felowe with thee, & that thou hast sent away thy mapdens from thee for the same cause.

22 Sulanna sighed, and salde, Alas, J aim in tronbie on euerp fide: though J folowe pour minde, it wyl be my Death: and it J consent not vnto pou, J can uot claps pour handes.

23 Wel it is better for me to fall into pour

hande withont the deede doing, then to linne in the fight of the Lorde.

24 And with that she cryed out with a loude voyte: the elders allo crped out a gamst her.

E 25 Then ranne there one to the orchard doort, and {note it open.

26 Mo Whe the seruauntes of the honse

heard the erye in the orchard, they cule

I

shedin at the backe doore to fee what

the matter was.
27 So whenthe elders tolde chem, the sernauntes were greatly ashamed: fo2

Why: there was neuer such a report

made of Sufanna.

28 Mn the morowe after came the people to Joacini her husband, and the two elders came also ful of nuschenous uma: ginations against Susanna, to bung her

Vnto death,

29 And fpake thus belore the people:

chlas, Joacinis wpfe. ly they sent for her.

zo So the came with her father and ino; ther, her children and all her kindred.

zi OW Sulanna was a tender perfor and marueplous faire of fate. j

32. Therefore the wicked men tommaunded to take her clothes from her face (for sbe was couered) that at the least they might fo be satilfied in her beautle.

33 Thenher friendes, yea and all they that knew her, began to weepe. a

34. These two elders stoode vp in the mid: del of the people, c laped their handes bpon the head of Sufanna,

35 Which Wept, and loked vp toward
Heauen: for her heart had a sure trust in the Lode, i

36 And the elders saide: As we were walking in the orchard alone, this woman tame in with her two mapdens, Wham fie sent away from her, and sparred the orchard Doozes:

37 With that a poung felowe which there
WS hid, came buto her, and lap with ber. : ;

38 As for vs, we steodt inaromer of the orchard: and when we sawe this wickednes, we ranne to them, and we fae them as they were together.

39 But we could not holde him, fe he was stronger then we. Thus he opened the doore and gat him away. '

40 ow WHE we had taken this woman, we asked her what youngfelove this was, but che would not tel vs. This
8 the matter, e we be witnelles ol the

ane,

41 Le common forte beletucd themzas ¢ thofe that were thecloersandindges ~~ ofthe people, x fo they condemned her to death.

42 Sulanna eryed ont witha loude vorte and lade: O cucrlasting God, thou Hebe fearcheroficcretes, thou that knowwell all thinges before they tome to pafte:

43 Thou wottest that they haue bone falle witnesse against me, and behold f must dye, wheras J neuer did and such thinges as thele men pane maticioully
W eee ae dher vopte

nd the Lorde hear ,

45770 when {he was led foozth to dea the lord rayled bp the spirite ol a pound

childe, whole name was Danicl, „Ae

46 Which tryed with a loude vovct, am

And linmediat-

Leuirg (.

; 9 Ihe story of Sulanna. 9

ain tleane frown this blood.
Then all the people turned towarde hum, k laide: What meane thele wordes that thou halt spoken- eo
43 Daniel stoode in the middefof tem, and salde: are pe such kooles O pe chul-

dren of Israel, that pe cannot disterne

nor know the trueth: Ve haue here condẽpned a daughter of Ilrael vnto death,

and knowe not the truͤeth whereloree

4 Go sit in iudgementagaine: forthey
* pane spoken kalse wilnesle against her.

go Wherelore the people turned againe in

F Vall the hafte: and the elders, (that is tze principal heades] salde vnto him: Come it downe here among vs, and shewe vs this matter; sreing God hath gene thee ag great honour as an elder. tt
51 And Daniel faide vnto them: these two asyde one from an other, and then shall Jexanune themem.

2 wahenthey were put afander one rom

an other, he called one of them and saide vnto hin: O thou olde tankarde caͤrle that halt vled thy wickednes fo long, thyne vügratious deedes which thou
Haft done alore are now come to light.

3 Forthou hast geuen falle iudgementes, thou halt oppressed the innotent, and letten the giltie go free: where as petthe
Powe saith, The mnocent and righte-

dus lee thou slay ne.

$4 Well then, if thou hast seene her, tel me vnder what tree sawest thou them com:

nen:

in, a' Mulberptree. Y

V5 And Daniel laide: Uerp well, nowe

thou lyest euen vpon thyne head: lo, the

< meflenger of the Lorde Vath receaued the seutenee of hun, to cut thee in two.

56 Then put he him alide, and called for

the other, and lade vnto ham: O thou

e

put

panying together: he aunswered:vnder

fairenes hath deceaued thee, and luft hath) subuerted thync heart.

57. Thus dealt pe afore with the daughters of Ilrael, and they Coz feare conlented vnto vou: but the daughter of Juda
World not abide pour wickednes.

58 Now tel me then vnder what tree diddestthou take them companying together: be hopin a” Poniegranate tree.

59 Then saide Daniel vnto him: Uery well, nowe thou lpest also euen vpon thyne head: the meflenger of the Low standeth wayting with the sword to cut thee in two and slay vou both

60 With that all the whole multitude gaue a great shoute, and prapsed God

* Which: alwap deliuered them that

put their trust in hunn.
61 And thep came vponthe two elders, whom Daniel had conuict With their owne mouth, that they had geuen kalle witnessfe NC e

et

62 And dealt with them euen ipkewple

as they woulde haue done with their neighbours, vea they did attordilig to the law of Moples, and put them to

seede ok Chauaan, but not of Juda,

n O7 4 a prune tree,
O2 a nurtell tree.

= od
Pfal.xyia.

G

death: Thus the innotent blood was sa-

ned the same dax. e

63 Then Heltias and his wyke praysed
God for their daughter Sufanna, with
Joacim her hulband and al the kinred:

that there was no dishonestie founde in

her.
64, Tromthat dap foorth was Daniel

had in great reputation in the sight of

the people. oF 2.
65 And king Astpages was lapde with

his fathers, and Cyrus of Persia raig-

ned in his steede. *

JrTheende oftheftory ofSulaona,

SSS Anicl did cate at

the kinges table, and was had in reuerentce aboue all his friendes.
There was at
Wabplõ an image called Bel, and

(moines Ce Ese wes bons — @ypon him euerp dap tibeluetakes fourtie cheepe, and fire great . 0
Wine. it ree’
3 Him did the king worchip him lelfe,

mel worshipped his owne God: And the

king saide vnto him, why doest not thou

Worchip Wel: A a

may not worchip thinges that be made

With handes, but the liurng God which

made heauen and earth, and hath pow-

er vpon al fleshe. = im

The hing laid vnto him: Thinkestthon

not that Bel is a lyuing God: or seest

thou not how much he cateth and vain:

keth euery day
Dantel simpled and saide, O king de-

teaut not thy selfe: for this is but made ok clap within, and of beaffe without,

z neither eateth he euer any thing.

7 Then the king was wroth, and called for his priestes, and faide vnto them: HF ve tell mie not whois this that eateth pp thele expentes, ve shall dye:

8 Wut ik pecan certifie me that Wel ea-

teth them, then Daniel shall dye: kor he

Hath spoken blasphenne against Wel.
And Daniel (aid onto the king: Let it fo be according as thou hast saide.

5 The priestes of Wel were threestore and ten, belides their wpues and chit: dien: And the king went with Daniel

into the ten ple of Gel.

of So Wels priestes laide, Lo, we wyl go out: & set thou the meate there O king, aud poure in the wine, then shut the

cute pont ol

Lele 30. c.

signet: n Aud to morowe when thou commer in, it thou findest not that Wel hath ea:
_ teu dp all we wpll fuer death: ozels
Daniel, that hath lyed vpon vs. u The prestes thought them selnes sure oute. indugh: for vnder the aulter they had

The story of Bel and of the Dragon,

whichis the fourteenth Chapter of Daniel after the Latine.

there were spent

and went dayly to honour hint, but Da-
4. He aunlwered and lade: Werause J -

17 Now afoone as

doore fast, and seale it with thyne owue

made a priup entraunte and there went they in euer, and did eate vp What there 6

was. a .

3 So when they were gone foorth, the king fet meates bekore Bel: Now Dani el had commaunded his seruauntes to bang ales. these he fitted throughdut allthetemple, that the king might.
{ce: then went they out and sparred the doore, sealing it with thekinges signet,

and so departednt..

14. Inthe night tame the priestes, with

their wpues and children, as they were

Wont to do, and did eate and druke vp

Oz, ard.

45 In the moming betimes at the breake ok the day the king arose, and Daniel
With hinn. ng? : :

16 And the Ring laid: Daniel, art the leales

Whole vet- He aunswered: yea O king, 7

they be whole

he had opened the

doore, the king loked vnto the aulter,
€ crped with a loude voyte: Great art thou O Bel, and with thee is no deteite.

18 Then laughed Daniel, and held the king that he chould not go in, and saide:
Weholde the pauement, marke Well whose footesteps are these:

59 The king sarde: J tee the footesteps

ok men, women sand children.

20. Therefore the lung was angry, and toke the priestes, wich their wynes and children: and they shewed hum the priule doores where they tame in, and drd

N . ot such thinges as were vpon the >
Aulter: „

21 Forthe which taute the king flue the, kene, vand deliuered Wel into Daniels polb- Fanal er, Which destroyed him and his temple.

22. And in that lame plate there was a en Dragon, which they of Waäbplon

Worchipped. .

23 And the king lald vnto Daniel, cen thou that this is but a god of bralle al 10
.o, he lyueth, he eateth a deinketh, 10 that thou tand not lay that he is no Wy uing God: therfore worthip hun, yl

24. Danicl{aide vnto the king: J. tb
Worchip the Lorde my God, * He ts Af true (pang ep : as for this, he is u the God ok lyke. N

25 Bt gene nie leaue O king-Aud ee destrop this Dragon wihont [wog affe

The king laid: J geue thee leaue.

4 ase Dantel toke pitch, fat, and hearp wooll, and did seeth them together, and made lumpes thereof: this he put in the Dragons mouth, and fo the Draon burst insunder. And Daniel saide:

Lo, there is he whom pe worchipped,

„5 When they of Wabplon heard that, they toke great indignation, and gathe-

red them together against the king, say-

ing: The king is betome a Jewe, and ta eh detroper Bel, be hath laine the Dragon, x put the prtettes to death.
23 So they tame to the king, and (aide:
Let vs haue Daniel, or els we wyll de-

stroy thee and thyne Houle.
29 Nowe when the king lawe that they rulhed in lo foze vpon Him, and that nebade, feflitie tonstramed him, he delinered

Daniel vnto them:

Which tast him into the lions denne,
: 41 And He drew him out of the lions den,

where he was sixe dapes. 2 x JInthe denne there were fenen lions, ethey had geuen them euer day two bodies e two sheepe: which then wert not geuen them, to the intent that they might deuoure Daniel,
32 There was in Jurie a prophete talled f Habacut, which had made potage, e broken bread in a boule, c was going into the fielde for to being it to the reapers.
3 But the angel of the Lorde saide vnto
Habacuc : Go cary the meate that thou batt, into Babylon vnto Daniel, which is in the lions denne.
34 And Habacuc salde: Lorde, J neuer lawe Wabylon, and as for the denne J ban 5 know it not.

Bel and the Dragon. bovIs.

bexxvij. |

hun bythe toppe, and bare him by the

hrere or the head, and though a migh-

1 Winde {et him in Babylon bpon: the eme.

36 And Habacuc crped, saping: O Daniel

thou seruaunt of God, haue, take the i e

breakfast that God hath sent thee.

37 And Daniel saide: O God, halt thou

thought vpon mez Wel, thou neuer fapleft them that lone thee.

38 So Mantel arose t did eate. And the

angell of the Lorde fet Habatuc in his owne plate againe immediatlp.

39 Upon the seuenth dap, theking went

to beweepe Daniel: and when he tame to the Denne he loked in, and beholde,

Daniel fate (in the middest ok the lions.)
40 Thẽcrped the king with a loude boyce, G

saying: Great art thou O Torde God of Daniel, and there is none other besides thee.

c cast those that were the caule of his destruction into the denne, and they were deuoured in a moment before his fate.

42 After this, wrote the king vnto al people, kinredes and tongues, that dwelt in

all countries,

43 Paving Peace be multiplied with vou:

My cömaundement is in al the dominon of my realme, that men feare and stand in awe of Daniels God, for he is the lyuing God, which endureth euer:

4580 kingdome abideth vncorrupt, and

is power is eutrlasting:

45 It is he that can delluer and saue, he

Doth Wonders and meruallous workes in heauen and in earth: for he hath saued Daniel from the power of the lions.

Iere 3y. h.

Then the angell of the Lorde toke q The prayer of AA. anasses king of Juda, when be

was holden captiue in Babylon.

orde almightie, God ol our fathers, Abzabam, Flabac, and Jacob, and ol the righ
20 8 e them: which hast made heauen and earth, with al the ornament cher of, which halt ordained the sea by the worde of thy commaundement. which val

* D2, bounde tut bp the deepe, and hast lealed it fozthp learetull and laudable name, which all wee

Oz, ctoked.

Lord forgene me, forge t with myne iniaui orgeue me, e destroy me not wich my r mpne euils to Ache them: but faue me( which am vnwort

The

_ I. Mihabees
Ihe first booke of the Machabess —

The firft Chapter. .

After the death of Alexander the hing of Macedonia, u Antiochus taleth the king dome. 12 Many of the chudren of Ffracl make couenaunt with the Gentiles. 21 In-
“trochus subdueth Egypt and hierusalem vnto his dominion. 4; Pierusalem being burnt, they make la wes ol their owne, and forbid to kepe gods laweg, 50 Antiochus

fetteth vp an idoll ouer the aulter of God.

Fter that Alerander king
22 of Macedonia

sonne of Phillip went forth

Oe, Chette

el
(a) The fir
Hattarle with the Larthns tinenfes was fought at this cme,

slew Parius king ok the ersians and

Medes, done before in Grecia:

2 It happened that he toke great warres in hand, wanne very many strong cities, and flue manp binges of the carth,

3 Going through to the endes ofthe
Worlde, and getting many spoples of the people, insomuch that the whole worlde

fudthit. stoode m awe ok him, and therfore was he proude in his heart. gunnactie 4 SOW when he had gathered a migh-

Kingdonic of
Eaupe,

tie stroug hoast,
5 And subdued the landes and people

With their princes, so that they became )

tributaries vnto him,
6 Then he kell icke, and when be perctaued that he must needes dye,
7 de talled for his noble estates, which had ben brought vp with him okchildzẽ, and parted his hingdome among them
While he was pet aline.
8 So Alexander raigned twelue peres,

Danicl. vii.

( bebe And then dyed. dme“ 9 ( Alter his Death fell the kingdome
B. vnto his princes, and they obtayned it

clicry one in his roome,
10 And taused them (clues to be crowned as hinges: and fo did their chudren after them many peres, and much wickednes
Merealed in the worlde.
„pen, Il Put of these came the vngratious roote
Yanes, noble Antiochus the sonne of Antio-

chus the king, which had bena pledge at Rome:and he raigned in the hundred chirtie and seuen pere of the empire ot

E vill. a.

OSS of the lande ol
Cethim, and
\

and ralgned for hun as he had

the Grekes. * 5

12. © In thole dayes went there out of

Itrael wicked men, which moucd Jae

much people with their counfel, faying, e

Tet vs go and make a coucnaunt with be a

the, heathen that are rounde about vs

kor {ince we departed from them, We testi,

haue had much lorowe. 1 z Saothis deuite plealed them well,

iy. Mac. ve.

14 © And tertaine ofthe people toke vp- secs,

on them for to go vnto the king, which gaue them licente to do after the ordinaunte of the heathen, 5

1 O Then (ct they vp an open lchoole cn
5 Hierulalem ofthe lawes ok the mea: e t en: 7 chile.

16 ©And niade themlelues vntircumltized, ere but forsooke the holy testament, and ioy- w lio ned them selues to the heathen „and fren" were cleane soulde to x0 milchicfe. furis fh

17 So when Antiochus began to be migh- Hox tie in his kingdome, he went about to Heer, obtayne the lande of Egypt allo, that he ese might haue the dominion of two realmes. .

13 Upon this entred he into Egypt With isuers a strong hoast, with charets, Elephants, horsenien, and a great number of (hips,

19 > And began to Warre against Polo g me the king of Egypt: But Ptoloime ae
Was afrapde of him, and fled, and many cs of his people were wounded to death. D

20 Thus Antiochus wanne many strong ye and 2 albay great good out of the lande ol Egypt. 8

21 And after that Antiochus had {rut ten Egypt, he turned againe in the bur dred Tae — pere, and went toward Israe J

22 Aud Aale by Hierulaleni with a mightie people,

23 And entred proudely into the 7 rie, and toke away the golden alter the

candelsticke, and al the ognamientst)r of the table ofthe shewbread, the ae 0

1 Machabees. lxxxvil

ring veficls, the chargers, the golden 41* Her sanctuary was cleane walted

„Her lobrua.

spoones, the baple, the crownes, ce gol: den apparell ofthe temple, and bake pone all in peetes.

24 He toke allo the silner and golde, the

precious ie wels, and the setret creatures that he founde.

25 And when he had taken away alto-

and spoken very proudly, the departed ino his owne lande.

26 Therekore there was great lamentation throughout all Jsrael. .
C27 The printes and the elders of the peo-

pie mourned, the poung men and the ara: apdens were dekiled, and the faire
„pheautie of women was chaunged:
28 The budegrome and the bryde toke them to mourning,

in was moued: for all the boule of Jacob was brought to confufion. newt 30 (After two peres the king sent his schiefe treasurer vnto the tities of Juda, multitude of people, ö
1 Speaking peaceable wordes onto the, but all was deteite: for when they had geuen him credence, N
32 Pt fell sodenly vponthe citic,e {mote it lore, e destroyed much people of Pract: db. 33 And when he had spopled the titie, he set fire on it, casting downe houses and walles on euery lide.
34 The women and their childzen toke they captive, and led away their cattell,
Then buiided they the titie of Dauid with a great andthicke wan, and with mightie towzes, and made it a strong holde for them.

36 Welide all this, they {et wicked people

and vbugodlie men to kepe it,

37 Stortd it with weapons and vitailes, gathered the goodes of Hierulalem, and layed them bp there: Thus became ita theeuishecastel. b

38 Thus they became a heaup burthen, laying Wayte for the people that went to the sanctuarp, and for the truell de-

uction of Jlrael.

ry lide of the lanctuary, and defiled it:
40 Insomuch that theciteʒins were faine to depart, and the citie became an habitation of straungers, being delolate of ger owne seede: for her olbnenatiues ere faine to leaue her.

gether, cauled a great murther or men,

29 The lande and those that dwelt there-

which came to Hierulalem with a great

9 Thus they shed innocent blood on eue-

holy ayes were turned into mourning, her Sabbathes were had in deriston, k her honour brought to naught.
42 “ jLoke how great her glorp was before, so great was her tonkusion, and her lope turned into sorowe.

43° Antiochus also the king sent out a com- nc

mission buto all his kinadome, that all the people should be one.

44 Thenthep left euerp man his lawe, and al che Heathen agreed to the commaundement of king Antiochus:

45 Bea, many of the Israelites conlented therebnto, offering vnto idols, and defiling the Sabbath.

46 Sb the king Antiochus seut his nelle:

gers with his commission vnto Hieru-

lalem, and to all the cities of Juda, that

om chould folow the lawes of tie heaz

then: N

47 And forbad either burnt offering, meate offering, or peace offering to be made in the temple of God, ¢ that there

: west no Sabbath nor hie feast day be kept:

48 Wut connnaunded that the lanctuary and the holy people of Jlrael Mould be peed:

49 Pe tonimaunded allo, that there should be fet vp other aulters, temples, x idols, to offer vp swines flesh, and other vntcleane beastes,

50 That men should leaue their children vncirtumctzed, to dekile their loules
With all maner of vncleannesse aud abhommnations:

st That they might lo forget the lathe; ppb tags all the holy ordinaunces of

God,

5r And that whosdener would not do according to the tommaundement of king
Antiochus, chould luffer death.

5; In lyke maner cõmaunded he thronghout all his realme, and set rulers ouer the people, for to compell them to do thele thinges:

$4. Commaunding al the cities of Juda to do facrifice vnto idols.

55 Then went the people Lato theheathen by heapes, forsooke the law of the
Powe, and conimitted much cuil in the lande:

56 And the droue the Plcaelites into secrete places, euen Where lo euer they coulde fice for suctour.

57 The fiftecnth day of the moneth ce Souci |

leu, pere, fet king Antiochus an*abhoniunabic idoll of desolation vpon the aulter of
God, and they bullded auiters throughont all the cities of Juda on euery fide,

58 Belore the doores of the houles, and in the streates, where they brent incense and did sacrifice.

9 And as for the bookes of the lawe of
God, they brent them in the fire, and rent them in peetes. a

whatsoeuer he was that had a booke ok the testament of the Lorde founde by him, yea wholoeuer endenoured him lelfe to kepe the lawe ok the Lorde, the

Daniel. x.
NIzth. 24.

Jet 38. c.

(DItisa

mani fest note

ofthe eneinicg od, to

burne the

bookso of tye 60
Ate. Hist. necicitahy.u.
8. Cop. 1.

kinges tõmaundement Was, that they

fyould put him to death.

61 And through his autthoritie they executed these thinges euerp moneth, vpon the people of Jlrael that were founde in the cities.

I. Machabees. inthe hundred threescore and fifth 62 The twentle and lifth day of the mo-

neth, what time as they did facrifice un on the aulter, which stoode in the Kade 1
Waben f
63 According to the commaundement of oe fo peat nar 4 cettainelbe:
5 ich had tau
1 a 0 tircunicised: 0 *
64. Mot onely that, but they hanged vpt chilbrE bp the neckes thrbugholl alu houses, and fluc the civeumctsers of thé,
65 Het were there many ofthe people of
Iscaecl, Which determined in the fetnes that they woulde not eate vncleane thinges:but chose rather to suffer death. then to be defiled with vncleane meates:
66 So betaule they would not breake the bu lawe of God, they were truelly aine.
67 And this great tirannp entreased very fore vpon the people of Israel.

The. ii. Chapter.

Che mourniny of Mathathias and his sonnes kor the destruction ol the holp citie. o Chey refut: to do sacrifice vnto idols. 24 The zeale of Mathathias kor the lawe ol God. 3; Cher are tlaine and wyll not fight againe, becaule of the Sabbath dap. 49 Mathathias dying,

commaundeth his sonne to sticke by the worde of God, after the example of the kathers.

! N
. ae of
We. Mingo re i

dwelt vpon the mount of Modin,

| thathias the sonne of |
John the fonne ok Si, 4 Judas otherwyle talied Wachaveue,
I eon the priest, out of the kinred of Joarib, from hierulalem, and 6 These fawe the euill that was done n

4 i sagt { q ‘A

‘ air * er by 25 N %

¥ £9 43 Ade Cn ill" (Ezeh Annan
UGK GA Boat SAN

N thole dapes there nd had fi es: ohn, called did Hand vp tee 2 cao bad int forines + John,

Gaddis, |
3 Simon called Thast,

5 Eleazer otherwyse called Abaron and
Jonathã whose sirname was Apphus.

mong the people of Juda and mien

Macyib,

é

418 Mathathias sayd: wood is me, alas

" that euer J Was borne, to fee this unse-

3 rie okmppeople, €the piteous destruc-

siou ok the holy titie, and thus to sit lo

fill, it beyng deliuered into the handes okthe enennes.

Her lanttuarie is tome into the power ok straungers, her temple is as it were aman that hath loft his good name:

Her pietious ornanientes are carted away captiue, her olde men are slayne in the streetes, and her poung men arc fa jenthorowe the sworde of the enemies. o What people is it that hath not sonie

posselsion in her kingdome : 02 who hath not gotten some of her spoplesu All her glorie is taken awap, he was

akree won ian, and nowe she is become

an handemapde.

1 Behold our sanctuarie, our beautie and honour is wasted away and deliled by the gentiles.

z What helpeth it vs then to line?

€ 14 And Mathathias rent his clothes, he and his sonnes, and put lackecloth vpon them, and mourned verp sore.

1j Then came the men thyther whiche were sent of king Antiachus, to compell such as were fled into the titie ok Modin, lor to do satrifite, Eto burne incente pia idoles, and to forsake the lawe of

50d.

16 So many of the people ot Jlrael conseuted and enclined vnto them: but eae and his fonnes remapned

E a 2

Antiochus, and sapd vnto Mathathias:
Thou artanoble man, of bye reputation, and great in this citie, hauing many fapre children and brethren:
18 Come thou therfore first and fulfill the
; kiniges tommaundement, like as all the scathen haue done, pea and the men of
Juda, and {uch as remayne at Hieralalem: so shalt thou and thy children be in ihe kinges fauour, and enriched with golde, finer, and great rewardes.
9 Dathatinas aunfwered, € fpake with alonde voyte: Though ali nations obey ey bhe king Antiochus, and fall away euee e man from keping the law of their fa-
„ {evs though they tonsent to his commaundementes: bre het Wil Jand mp fornes and my zethren not fall from the lawes of ur

* hy
“4

17 Then spake the tommissioners ofking

I. Machabeecs. IxxxIx.

fathers.

21 God forbid we shoulde: that were not

good for vs that we shoulde fozlake the Aae. lawe and ordinauntes of Gad, and toa-

grec vntothe commaundement of king
Antiochus.

22 Therkore we wil do no such facrifice, neither breake the statutes of dur lawe,

*to go another wap. Pro. il. .

23 And when he had spoken these wordes, there tame one of the Jewes, whiche openly in the fight of all, did lacrifite bnto the oles vpon the aulter in the citic of Modin according to the kinges con:- maundement.

24. When Mathathias sawe this, it greeued ohpmat the heart, sothat his te reynes shoke withall, and his Wrath wore" kindled for very zeale of the law: With es“ that he start vp, and killed the Jewe be: sans. fide the aulter:

25 Bla and flue the kinges commissioner that comipelicd hynn to do lacrifice,

c destroped the aulter at the fame tune:

26 Such a zeale had he vnto the lave of
God, like as Phinehes dyd vnto Zambri the fonne of Salon. Nu. x xv. b.

27 And Mathathias cryed with a loude voyte thorow the titie, saying: Who fois feruent in the law, and will kepe the coz uenaunt, let hun folowe me.

28 So he and his sonnes fled into the mountapnes, and left all that euer thep hw. had in the citie.

29 Maup other godly men allo which ty: ued iustly and vprightiy departed into

the wildernesse, with their children, their E
Wines, and their cattell, and remayned en the tirannp increased fore vpon em.

30 Pow when the kinges seruauntes, and the hoast whiche was at Hierusalem i the titie of Wauid, hearde that certayne men had broken the kinges commanndement, and were gone their wap to the wildernesse into secrete places:

31 Then mamp pursnued after them, and after they had ouertaken them, they tamped them selues, and let the battelin arapagaint them in the Sabbath dap,

32 And saydonto them: Will pe pet rebell-

Get pon hence, and do the commaunen of king Antiochus, and pe hail pue.

33 They aunswered: We will not gor lo lou. e. thee neither will we do the binges commaundemet, to defile the Sabbath day,

MQ) 34 Then

= I. Machabees.

— of destruttion € wat

34 Then began they to fight against i

them:
35 But the other gaue them none d
135 aunkwere, neither catt they one

stone at them, nor made fast their priuis 5

plates:

36 But fapde, We will dye all in gur inno-

tentle, heauen c earth Mall testilte with
4 vs that pe put vs to death wrongkully.
37 Thus they fought againt them vpon the Sabbath, and flue both nien kattayle, their Wpucs and their children, to the number of a thoufande people.

38 When Mathathias and his kriendes
‘he this, they mourned foz them right dre,

59 And sapde one to another: It so be that we al do as our brethren haue done, and fight not fo our lyues and for our lawes agaiust the heathen, then shall they the sooner roote vs out of the carth.

4.0 So they concluded among them selues at the lame time, sayuung:

41 Whatsoeuer he be that commeth to make battaple with vs vpon the
Sabbath dap, we will light against hum, and not dye all as our brethren that were murthered in the wildernesse.

42 Upon this tame the alsemblie of the
Assideans vnto them, Whiche were of the strongest men in Jsracl, and all such as Were feruent in the lawe:

43 And althepthat were fled for persetueen helpe them, and to stand by them:

44 SHufomuch that they gathered an
Hoaft of men and luc the wicked doers in their geloulie, and the vngodiy men in their Wrath: but the rest fied vnto the

heathen, and estaped.

45 Then Mathathias and his friendes
Went about, and destroped the aulters,

46 And tirtumtised the children that had not yet reteaued tirtumtision, as many
179 found within the toastes of HE rael:

47 And folowed mightily vpon the proud men: and this atte prospered in their

handes,

48 Jnsomuch that they kept the lawe a: gamit the power of the gentiles and the kinges, and gaue not ouer their dominion vnto wicked Doers.

49 Alter this, whenthe time drewe on fatt that Mathathias choulde dye, he sayde vnto his sonne: Now is pryde and perletution intrealed, nowe is the time

bfull displ b
50 Wherefore O my sonnes, be pe 3 5

in the lawe, and leoparde y 8 the keltament ofthe father em?

1 Call to remembraunte what attes our fathers dyd in their time, so shall pe reteaue great honour and an euerlasting

Men ber Abraha

51 “Menem m: Was Ri: founde faythful in temptation, eit bas ie reckened vnto him forrightedulnesse?- Ses

33 Joseph in time of his trouble kept the Kea.

tommaundement, x was maden Lone Corrie of Egypt.

54. Phinehes our father was fo feruent Nevis

for the honour of God, that he obtayned the touenaunt ok an enerlasting pret:

hood.

55 Josuah for fufilling the Word of God, Xeric

Was made the captayne of Ilracl. a
56 Caleb bare recorde before the congves vun ci: gation, and reteaued an heritage. ia
67 Daudd allo in his mercitull kindnesse, g.

obtapnen the throne of an enerlasing

kingdome. ü
58 Elias being ielous and feruent in the .

law, was taken vp into heauen. 7
59 *Ananias,Asarias,and Misael remay: pe

ned stedfast in faith, and were deliuered

out of the fire. *
60 In like maner' Daniel beyng vngiltte,

b saued from the mouth of the

ons.
61 And thus ye map conhder thoughout Pd. all ages fence the worlde began, that!“ wholouer put their trulst in God, Were not ouercome.

*Fearenot pe then the wordes of an vngodiy man, for his glozie is but 55915 doung and wormes: he
63 To day is he fet vp, and to mo rowe is irc. ib

he gone: for he is turned into earth, and oie,

his memoriall is come to naught. Plalxent
64. Wherefore O my sonnes, take good heartes vnto vou, and qupte pour felues

like men in the lawe : for if pe do te

thinges that are commaunded pou

inthe lawe ofthe Lorde pour God, ve

shall obtayne great honour theritt. a
65 And veholde, J knowe that pour bie

ther Simonisa manof wyl dong! he

that pe geue care vnto him allvay > 0

shalbe a father Dito pou. hath
66 As fox Judas Machabeus, an his

euer ben nughtie and strong n a

vouth bp: let him be yout captayne,

order the battayle of the . Thus

Dan. vi t.

1.Machabees.
Thus thall pe bung vnto vou all thosle laped by his fathers:

that kauour the late, and fee that vea- 7 And died in the hundred kourtie and

nenge the wrong of pour people,
63 And recompente the heathen againe, applic pour selues Wholly tothe tommaundementokthelawe.

69 Oo he gaue them his blelling, and was

fice vere at Modi, where his sounes

buried him in his kathers sepulchre, and

Ru. great lamentation fo2 m.

Thel. iii. Chapter.

Judas is made ruler ouer the Fewes, 11 He killeth Dpollontus and Seron the prince of pita. 44 Che conkidence ol Judas towarde God. 55 Judas determineth to fight againt
Lylias, whom Antiochus had made captapne ouer his hoast. co Che praier of theabslepnerg.

fe den stoode bp Judas
, Machabeus in his kae chers steade,

3 Nowe when Seron a prince of the ar-

nne of Syria heard fap that Judas had gathered vnto hym the congregation

XC.

Mees AG Aud all his brethien and church ok the kapthfull

0 N g 7

von” an La helped hym , and so 14. Helayde: J wl get me a name and a C yg 8 85 1 dyd all they that helde prapse thorowont the realme: for J wil

ö — With his father, and go light with Judas and them that are

fought with chercfulnefle for Plrael.

Ss Judas gate his people great honour: he put on a beet plate as a giaunt, and arayed him fetfe with his barneffe, and defended the hoast With his lword.

4 In his actes he Was like a lion, and as q lions whelpe roring at his pray.

e § ewas an enemie to the wicked, and we hüuted themout, and brent vp thole that vered his people:

6 Sothat his enemies fled for feare ot hym, and all the Workers ok bugodlinesse were put to trouble: fuch lucke and prosperitie was in his hande.

with hym, as many as haue delpiled the

kinges commaundement.
15 So he made him redy, and there went

With hym a great mightie hoast of the vngodlp, to stand by him, and to be aucuged ofthe children of Jlrael.

16 And when they caine nye vnto Wetho-

ron, Judas Went koorth again them
With a lmall compante.

17 And when his people sawe such a great

hoast before them, they sayde vnto Judas: obe are we able, beyng fo few, to fight against so great a multitude and fo strong, sepug we belo weery, and haue

kasted all this day e e
13 Wut Judas sapde, It is a small mat-

ter for many to be ouercomme with fewe:

vca there is no differente to the God of

heanen, to delluer by a great nuiltitude,

or by a mall compante:

19 Jo the victorie ofthe battell standeth P b. not in the multitude of the hoast, but the streugth tommeth from heauen.

20 Weholde, they tome against vs with a truell and proude multitude, to destroy vs, our wpues, and our children, aud to

This greeued diuers kinges: but Jacob

5 was greatly reiopted thorow his actes,

and he gate hyn lelle a great name foz tuer.

8 He went thorow the titles of Buda, destroying the vngodly out of them, kurtung away the wrath from Jlrael,

And reteauing luch as were oppressed: and the fame of him went vnto the vttermost part ol the earth. _

lo Then Apollonius (a prince of Syria]

gathered a mightie great hoast of the

heathen, € outofSamaria,tofightae (robbe bs:
Saint Ilraei: 21 But we will fight for our lynes, aud for u. Lohsche when Judas perteaued, Ye cur lawes, D

22 And the Lorde hym selke shall destroy them befoze our fate:therefore be not pe afrayde of them.

23 Affoone as he had spoken thele wordes, he leapt sodenly vpon them:
Thus was Heron {nuiten, æ his hoast

put to flight, M (j) 24 And

went foorch to meete hin, fought with hun, due him, Fa great multitude With bym : the remnaunt fled, and he tole their lubstaunce.

n Judas allo toke Apollonius owne oe > And kought with it all his lyfe

vonde Wethoron, vnto the playne fielde,

I. Machabees.

enen pere, and went thorowe the hye

24. And Judas folowed vpon them bez phates, inthe hundreth r fourne =

where there Were slaine eyght undzeth men of them, and the relidue fledde into the lande of the Philistines.

25 Then all the heathen on euerp five were afrayde of Judas € his brethren:

26 So that the rumour of him came vnto the kinges cares, foz all the gentiles coulde teil of the warres of Judas.

27 So whenking Antiochus heard thele tidinges , he Was angry in his mynde: wherkfore he sent foorth, and gathered au hoast of his whole realme, very

j strong armies:

E 28 Aud opened his trealurie, and gauc his
Hoast a peres wages in hande, commaundmng them to be redpat all times.

29 Necuerthelesse, when he fav thatthere was not monep enough in his treasuries, and that thozo the discorde aud persecution which he made in the lande to put downe the lawes that had ben ol olde times, his tustomes and tributes of the lande were minished:

30 Oe keared that he was not able for to beare the coastes aud charges any lenger, nor to haue such giltes to geue fo lt berally as he dyd afore, moze then the kinges that were before him.

zi Wherfore he was heauy in his minde,

and thought'to go into Persides for to take tributes ol the lande, and so to gather muth eli

zr Hodelelt Lysias a noble man of the hinges blood to ouersee the kinges bulinesie, from the water Euphrates vnto tize borders of Egypt:

33 And to kepe well his sonne Antiochus, till he came againe.

34. Moreouer, he gaue hym halfe ok his

I. lach. vi. a.

hoast, aud Elephantes, and tomnutted

vnto him euery thing, and gaue him the charge of all thinges that he woulde haue Done , concerning thole whiche dwelt in Juda and hierusalem:

3 That he shoulde lende out an armie a gatukttient, to destrop and to roote ont the power of Ilrael and the remnaunt of Hierulalem, to put out their memorial from that plate,

536 To let straungers for to inhabite all their quarters, and to part their land a: ar

lofep.opxe 37 Thus the king toke the other part of
Mani, The hoast, and departed from Antiothe d Citic of his reaume, ouer the water Eu:

D 0

38 And Lylias chofe vnto! Mac wi

oe of nenen canara

orglas, mightie men, andthe ki
Fe 5. d the kinges

39 ele he sent with fourtie tho footemen, and leuen ft men. for to go into the land of Juda and to destroy it, as the king commaunded.

40 So they went foorth with all their power, and came to Emmaus into the plapne fielde. =)

41 naben the marchauntes ofthe tountrep hearde the rumour of them, they e their seruauntes toke very much silucr e gold for to bye the chudzen of Israel to be their bondemen: There came vnto them allo pet mio men of warre on euery syde, out of Spria, and from the Palestines.

42 Now when Judas and his brethzen saw that trouble increased, and that the hoast drew nye vnto their borders tonsidering the kinges wordes whiche he tommaunded vnto the people (name-
Ip) that they shoulde vtterly waste and destroy them: ;

43 They sapde one to another, Let bs re:

dresse the decay of our people, let vs fight for our folke ¢ for our lanctuarie.

44 Then the congregation were foone redy gathered to fight, to pray and to make supplication vnto God for merce

and grate. aa
4 As for Hierufalens,itlay boyde,¢ was as it had ben a wildernesse: there went no man in nor out at it, and the fanctuarie was troden downe, the allauntes kept the castle, there was the habitation ot the heathen „the mirth of Par tob was taken a wap, the pype and the harpe was gone from among them.

46 The Jsraelites gathered them ae ther, k came to Malpha before Hierula lem: for in Maspha was the . where they prayed aforetime in Alrael.

47 Sothey kasted that day, and put fackee

tklothes vpon them , cat alches pon their heades, rent their clothes, '

48 And lapde foorth the booties of the lawe, wherout the heathen sought to paynt the lpkenesle of their images res

49 And brought the priestes omann. i . the kirstlinges, and the tithes the! e there allo the“ asarites, Which VAY complifhed their vowes belort 55 And

G

i Ac; vib.

, ryed With a loude voyte toward
N ne Lapin: What (hall we do with thele: and wßyther Mall we carp them

the sanctuarie is troden Downe and
2 deklled, the priestes are come to heauinelle and dichonou

2 And veholde, the Heathen are tome to-

ether fo to destroy vs: Thonkunowest

tthinges they imagine against vs. re Ps We stande bekore them, ex-
; cept thou D God) be dur helpe:
„ Then they ble we out the trumpet allo
With a loude vopce. 1 n J Then Judas odeyned * captapnes ovn Hirrthe people, duer thoulandes, ouer hundredes, ouer fiktie, and ouer ten.

6 But as fo suth as buldedthem houles,

I. Machabees. 1

XC]. maried wyues, planted them vinepardes, and thofe that were fearkull, he commaunded them euerp man to go
Dome againe, according' to the lawe.

57 So the hoast remoued, and pitched vpon the south side of Emmaus.

58 And Judas lapd: Arme pour lelues, be strong O my chudren, make vou redy against to morowe inthe morning, that pe map fight with these people, whiche are agreed together to deltrop vs and dur sanctuarie. 1

59 Wetter is it for bs to dye in battayle, then to see our people and dur sanctuarie in such a imiserable cate.

60 Meuerthelesle, as thy will is O God mack. vi. b in heauen, so be it. i.

Deut. xx. a.
Iud. vu. a.

Jhe. itt. Chapter.

Judas goeth againt Gorgias, which lyeth in wapte . 14 He putteth Gorgias & his aal to flight. 28 Lytias inuadeth Jurte. 25 But Judas dryuech him out. 4 Au-

and athousand of the

| 0 best horsmen, and re-

NG moued out of the

e campe by night,

a To come nye where

the Jewes l , € foto flay them fodenly : (Powe the men that kept the cattle, were the connepers of thet.)

3 Nome When Judas heard this, he remoued, and al che strong menthat Were with hym, to smyte the thiefe and princi-

pallok the binges hoast at Eunnaus:

4 1 F032 the arnry was not pet conie toge-

er.

Inthe meane leason tame Gorgias by night into Judas tentes, and when he

N Hentoke Gorgias fine
* Waa thoufand *me of foote,

kounde no man there, he longht them in

the mountaynes, and thought they had ben fled away betause of him.

6 But whenit was day, Judas shewed hm felle in the fielde with three thoulande men only, which had neither Hare nelle, nor swordes to their mindes.

7 But on the other side, they law that the heathen were mightie and well harnessed, and their horsemen aboutthem, ne all thefe well expert in feates ol

: arre, :
3 Then layde Judas to the men that

das puriłieth the temple, and dedicateth the aulter.

were with him: Feare not pe the multitude of them, be not alrayde of their violent running.
9 Remember howe our fathers Were deliuered *tnthe red lea, when Pharao fo- E iii f. lowed vponthem with a great hoast. to Euen so let vs allo crpe nowe towarde heauen, and the Lod Hall haue mercie vpon vs, and remember the couenaunt ok our fathers, yea c destroy this hoast bekore our fate this day: nm And all the heathen shall knowe, that it is God him selle which deliuereth and saueth Israel.
12 Theu the heathen lift bp their eyes, and when they sawe that they were conv ming against them,
13 They went out of their tentes into the battaple, and they that were with Judas blewe vp the trumpettes.
14 Sothey buckled together, and the w vid. heathen were dilcomtited, and fled ouer the plapne fielde:
15 But the hinmost of them were flapne with the sword: Foz they folowed them vnto Aslaremoth, and into the fleldes o Sn of Idumea toward Azot and Jamma: rar fo that there were slayne of them bpon a three thoulande men. 1
So Judas turned agatue with his

hoatt |
. 1 (ij) 1 Aud

C

Pfa.cvii.a.
Pfa.xyiii.a

D

i. Re. x vil. a.

i. Re. xiiii. b.

17 And sayd vnto the people, Be not greej oy of — (poples, We haue pet a battaple to fight: a
18 For Gvögtas and his hoast are here by vs in the mountapnes, but stand ye kast against our enennes, F ouercome them, chen map pe lafely take the spoyles.
19 As Judas was (peaking thele wordes, behold, there appeared one part of them vpon the mount.
20 But when Gorgias sawe that they ol his partie were fled, ag the tentes brent vp (for by the smmoke they might vnder-

finde what was done) thepperceauing

this, were very fore akrapde:

u And when they farbe allo that Judas and his hoast were in the fielde redy to strykt battaple,

22 They fled euery one into the lande of the heathen.

23 So Judas turned againe to spople the tentes, where they gat much golde and siluer, pretious stones, purple, and great riches.

24 Thusthey went home, and song a
Plate of thankesgeuing, and prapsed
God in heauen, Foz he is gratious, and his mertie endureth for euer.

25 And so Ilcael had a great victorie in that dap.

26 ow allthe heathen that escaped, came and tolde Lysias euery thing that had happened:

27 Wherfore Lysias was sore afraydt and grecued in his minde, betause Jlrael had not gottenfueh milkoztune as he woulde they should, neither as the king tommaunded.

28 The uext pere folowing gathered LZ yp: sias three store thousande chofen men of koote, and fyucthonfande horlemen to fight agaiust Hierulalem.

29 Sothep came into Jurie, and pitched their tentes at Wethoron: where Judas cance against them with ten thoulande men.

30 And when he sawe fo great and mightie an hoalt, he made his prayer, æ lapde:
Siefied be thou O sauiour of Ylrael, which diddest destroy p violent power of the giaunt in the bande of thy sernaunt Damd, 't gauest the hoastor the heathen into the handof Jonathan the sonne of Saul c of his harnesle bearer:

31 Dut this hoast now into the hand ofthy people of Israel, e let them be confoun: ded in their muititude and horsemen.

* — — 1, Machabees.

32 Make them afrayde „ an the boldnesse of their theenath than 5
N moued thorowe their destrut-

33 Cast them Downe thorowe gane. c

me , prapse | thankesgeuing. ~ —

34. So they stroke the battell, and there were {layne of Lysias hoass fiue thoulande men.

35 Then Tysias seyng the discomfytingol his men, and the mantineffe of the
Jewes, howe they were redy either to lyue or to dye lyke men: he Went vnto
Antioeh , and chofe out men of warre, that when they were gathered togeaoe they might come againe into

36 Thien sapde Pudas and his brethren:
Behold, our enemies are difcomfited, let vs nowe go vp to clenfe and to re- E pãpre the santtuarie.

the [worde

37 Upon this, al the hoast gatheredthem un

together, and went vp into mount Sion,

38 Nowe when thep lawe the fanctuarte layed wast, the aulter defiled, the doors brent vp, the shrubbes growing inthe courtes, like as in a wood or vpon moun: fapnes, yea and that the priestes chambers were broken downe:

39 They rent their clothes, æ made great

lamentation, cast alches vpon their heades, 5 —

40 Fell downe flat to the grounde bpon their fates, made a great noyse with the trumpettes, and erped toward heauen.

41 Then Judas appopnted certapne men to fight against thofe which were in the ae, fill they had clenfed the santtun-

e

42 So he chote priestes that were vndefiled, such as had pleasure inthe lawe ol
God:

43 And they clensed the fanctuarte , aud bare out the defiled stones into an vncleane place. a e

44 And forsomuch as the aulter 9 burnt offeringes was vnhalowed he
1116 e What he might do - withall:

45 So hethoughtit was best to peftroy it, left it shoulde happen to do d shame, forthe heathen had defiled it: therfore they brake it downe. 55

46 As for the stones, they layed em vpon the mountayne by the bau sp 197

phete to shewe what shoulde be done with them.

So they toke whole stones, attording

| bod. be XXVII. a. ble. Vl gs

tothe lawe, and buylded a newe aulter, such one as was before, —
3 And made vpthe fanctuarie within and without, e halowed the boule and the tourtes: *

49 They made newe holy ormamentes, € bought the tandlesticke, the aulter of incenle, and the table into the tenple.

50 The intense layed they bpon the aulter, ehghted the lampes whiche were vpon the tandelsticke, that they might burne in the temple: N 5

They fet the Hew bread bpon the table, and hanged vp the bayle, and finished all the workes which they had begun to

make,

sx And bpon the twentie and fifth dap of

Ullich xa monetl ol Casleu in the hundred kourtie and eyght vere: —
3 They role vp betimes in the morning, for to do satrifite actording to the lawe

vpon the newe burnt ofkring aulter that

Hound

they had made.
54. After the time and season that the hea:

then had deliled it „the lame day was

it let vp againe, with songues, pypes, harpes, and cymbales,
. We. v

the nynth moneth (Whlche is called the

Ie Machabeecs.

Worchipping and thanking the Godot e had geuenthem the vit-
56 So they kept the dedication okthe aulter epght dapes, offring burnt lacrifices and thaͤnke offeringes with gladnesse:

57 They deckt the forekcunt ok the tenple allo with crownes and shieldes of gold,

and halowed the portes and telles, and hanged doores vponthem.

58 Thus there was verp great gladnesse

among the people, becaule the. blasphemie ol the Heathen was put away.

59 So Judas and his brethren, with the whole congregation of Jlrael, ordepned *that the tine of the dedication of

the aulter shoulde be kept in his sealon on

krom vere to pere, by the {pace ol eyght dapes, from the twentie and fifth day of the moneth Caden with myth and gladnesse. 1 N

60 And at the lame tinie buylded they vp the mount Sion, with hype walles and strong tolbzes round about, lest the gen-

li. Par. vii. b

a

Houemer.

tiles shonlde come and treade it downc,

aàcgthep did afore. ö

61 Therkore Judas fet men ok warre in it to kepe it, and made it strong kor to defend Wethsura, that the people might haue à refuge against the Edonutes.

| | Nat CI]. convenient place , till there tame a pro- 55 And all the people fet bpon their faces, f

. Chapter. N

3 Judas banquiteth the heathen that go about to destroy Itrael, and is holpen of his brethren Simon and Jonathas. zo he ouerthrowech the citie of Ephron, because they oe

nied him pallage thorowe it. N
T happened also, that when the Heather rounde about hearde howe that the aulter c the sanctuarie were set vp in their old estate, it displeased them bery

so

generation of Jatob that was among them: in fo much that they began to flay and to perletute tertayne of the peo-

ple.

3 Then Judas fought against the chil-
Deen of Elau in Idumeg at thane: for they dwelt rounde about the
Israelites, where he fluc and spoyled a great multitude of them.

1 hethought alfo bpon the malice and bus

kaythkulnesse of the chudren of Bean,

how they were a are and stoppe vnto

een
4 MN A che.

Ie, met sd naherfore they thonght to destroythe

Aràaba-

the people, and howe they layed wapte lor them in the hye wa:

5 Wherkore he shut them bp into towres, and tame vuto them, besieged them, and de stroyed them vtterly, c brent vp their tolbzes with all that were in them.

6 Afterward went he against the children

tie power and a great multitude ok people, with Timothi their taptapne.
7 Sohe stroke many battaples with them, which were destroyed before hym.
8 And when he had slayne them, he wan
Gazer the titie, with the towues belon-

urie.

9 The heathen allo in Galaad, gathered them together against the Pica elites that were in their quarters; to flap them: but they kled to the taltle of

Dathenlam, —
M (i) 10 And

1. Mac. 6. b. f.

of Annnon, whereokhe foundeaunngh-

ging therto, and so turned againe into

1. Machabees.

io And lent letters nto Judas and his brethren, saping: The heathen that

are about vs are gathered against vs on

cnery lide, to destroy vs.
11 And nowe they make them redy for to tone and lap liege to the castel whervnto we art fled, and Limotht is captapne of their hoast:
12 Come therefoze and deltuer vs out of their handes, for there is a great multitude of vs slayne alredy.

z Pea and our brethren that were at

Tubin, are slapne and destroped wellnye athoufande men and their wpues,

their thudren and their goo des haue the

tuemies led awap captiue. 5
CA hyle these letters Were peta reading, beholde there tame other meslengers from Galilee with rent clothes, whiche tolde euen the lame tidinges,
15 And lapde, that they of Ptolomais, of Tyrus, and of Sidon were gathered

against them, and that all Galitce was

fifo with enemies to destrop Il

rael. ‘i

sc. 16 When Judas and the people hearde this, they tame together a great congregation, to deuise what they might do for their brethren that were in trouble and besieged of their enemies.

17 And Judas lapd vnto Simon his brother: Choole thee out tertayne men, e go deliner thy brethzen in Galilee: As for me e my bother Jonathas, we will go into Galaaditim.

18 So he left Jolephus the sonne of Zachart, and Izarias, to be captayues of the people, to kepe the remnaunt of the hoast in Bewzy, a

the ouersight of this people, and fee that ve make nd warre against the heathen, vntill the tune that We tome againe.

20 And vnto Simon he gaue three thou land men kor to go into Galilee: but Judas him selfe had eyght thouland in Ga-

laaditun.

Du Then went Simon into Gallee, and stroke Diners battayles with the heathen, whom he discomtited,

22 And folowed vpon them into the port of Ptolomais: and thert were layne of the -Deathen alnioft three thoufande

23 So he toke the spoyles of them and caried awap the Ilraelites that Were in
Galilee and Arbatis, with their Wpues,

26 And howe that ma

their children, and all that they had and brougbt them into Jewry with den gunn ' Jelbzy with great

24. Judas Machabeus also and his bra-
Ada de vans duer Dope an pled three Dayes tourney inthe wildernesse: l ener inthe

25 Where the Habathees met them, and reccaucd them louingly, and tolde them euery thing that had happened vnto their brethren L —

of them befieged in Barasa, Wo op Alls ee bon, Mageth, and Carnain (alt these ms —_ Walled and mightie great ti-

ies, i b

27 And that they were kept in other cities ol Galaaditini also, and to morowethey art appoynted to bring their hoast bnto thefe cities, to take them, and to destroy them in one dap. : o-- .

28 So Judas and his hoast turned in all E the haste in the wildernesse toward Wosor, and wan the citic, flue all the males with the sword e, toke all their goodes, and set fire vpon the citit:

29. And in the night they toke their lourney kromthenten, and tame to the ca:

stell, 5

zo And betimes in the morning when they loked vp, beholde there was an innumerable people bearing ladders and other instrumentes of warre, to take the tastell, and to ouertome them.

31 When Judas sawe that the battayl began, and that the noyse therof went vp and rang into the heauen, and that there was so a great trye inthe citie,

ö 32 He sapd onto his hoast, Fight this day
19 And commaunded them saping: Take e 130 gheth

foz your brethren: ,

33 And fo came behinde their cuennes in three companies , and blewe bp the e and tryed in their prayer to

od:

34. But so soont as Timotheus hoast perteaued that Machabeus was there, they fled from hym: and he flue them
Done right fore fo thatthere were killed ol them the same day almott eyght thousande men.

35 Then departed Judas vnto Valpha, F layed fiege vnto it, and Wan it, une al the males init, spoyled it, and fet fire vpon
1 nthente went he and toe Cal

36 From thente wen — von, Mageth, Wolor, and the other tities

Ter poatt, Which pitched their tentes pefore Naphon beyondthe water.
Judas allo sent to sppe the oatt, and they ought him worde againe, saping:
All the heathen that be rounde about vs, are githered vnto him, and the hoast is very great:

9 Pea,they haue hired the Arabians to helpe then, e haue pitched their tentes beyond the water, and are redie to tome and fight against thee. So Judas went on to meete them. ö

40 And Timothilaide vnto the taptaines of his hoast: mabe Judas and his hoast tome nye the ryuer , if he go ouer first, we Mail not be able to withstand him: for why; he wyll be to strong for bs.

4 Ent ir he dare not tome ouer, fo that he pitch his tent beyond the water: then
Wyll we go over, for we shalbe strong inough against him.

4. Mob affoone as Judas came to the riuer, he appopnted certaine scribes of

ard pe

the people by the riuer, and tõmaunded

them, saying: See that pe leaue none behinde vpon this fide of the riuer, but let tuery man tome to the battaile.

43 So he went kirst ouer vnto them, x all his people after him, and al the heathen were dilcomkited befoze him, & let their
Weapons fall, and ranne into the temple

that was at Carnaim,

44 Which citie Judas wanne, and brent the temple , With all that were in it: So was Carnaim subdued, and might not withstand Judas.

45 Then Judas gathered all the Piraelites that were in Galaaditim, from the least vnto the most, with their wines

and their chüdren, a verp great boat, -

, dor to tome into the lande of Ilracl.

e 46 So they came vnto Ephron, which was a mightie great and strong title, and lape in their way: kor they coulde not go by it, neither on the right hande noron the left, but mutt go though it.

47 Neuerthelesle, they that were inthe
Citic, woulde not let them go through, but walled vp the portes With stones:

nd Judas sent vnto them with peaceaie Wordes saping:
Let vs pasle through your lande, that

1 e may go into our owne countrep,

ere hall no body do pouharme, we

a plbut onelp go through on koote. But

er would not let them in.

I. Machabees.

« after this, gathered Timothiano- 49 Wherkoze Judas commaundeda

clamation to be made e boat that euery man shonid allault the titie in his order.

50 And so they did their best, lpke valiaunt men: and Judas besieged the titte all that dap, and all that night, and fo wanne it,

st Where they flue as many as were

males, and destropyed the citie, and spoyled it, and went through al the citic ouer them that were slaine.

52 Then went they ouer Jordane into

the plapne ficlde befoze Bethlam.

53 And Judas helped those forwardthat tame behinde, and gaue the people good exhortation al the Way through, tu they were come into the lande of Juda.

54 Thus they went bp vnto the mount
Sion, where they offered burnt offeringes with mirth* and thankefgering,

i. Par. xx. a.

betause there were none of them slaine, 8

but cane home againe peaceably,

55 Now what tinie as Judas and Jonathas were in the land ol Galaad, and
Simon their brother in Galilee before

Ptolomals:

56 Then Folephus the sonne of Zachart and Azaͤrias the captapnes, hearing of the actes that were done, and of the battatles that were striken, saide:

57 Tet bs get bs a name also, and go fight againtt the heathen that are rounde a bout vs.

58 So thep gaue their hoast a tommaundement, and went toward Jamnia.

59 Then came Gorgias and his nien out ofthe citie, to fight against then:

60 Josephus allo and Ararias were chafed vnto the borders of Ferry, and ther were slaine that day of the people of HE rael two thousand men: so that there was a great miserie among the people of Ilrael, *

61 And all becaule they were not obedient vnto Judas and his brethren, but thought they shoulde quite them selues mankullp.

62 Meuerthelesse, they tame not ofthe seede of these mien bo whom IJlrael was helped. n

63 But the men that were with Judas were greatly commended in the light of all Israel, and all the Heathen, wheresoeũer their name was heard vpon.

64. And the people came vnto them, bidding thein welcome.

65 Alter

i. Mac. v. b.

I. Machabees.
65 Alter this, went Judas foorth with 67 At the fame time Weve there many

hisbrethren, and foüght agalnst the chi-

dren of Elau in the lande that lech to-

ard the south. where he wan the citie

of ron and the townes that lye be-

side it: and as for the walles and tow-

ers ronnde about it, he brent them vp.

66 Then remoued he to go into the lande

of the Philistines, and went through
Samaria.

2 And that there was in it a bery rich teniple, where as were tlothes, coate ar-

mours, and shieldes of golde, which Alexander the fonne of Philip king of -

Macedonia that raigned first in Grecia had left behinde him.

3 Wherekore he went about to take the titie eto spoyle it, but he was not able: foz the titeʒins were Warnedofit, and

— fought with him: ,

And so he fled and departed with great

am tame againe into Wabpon.

5 PMoßeouer, there came one which

iMciie, bought him tidinges in Persia, that his hoastes which were in the lande of
Juda Were dren awap,

6 And how that Tysias went foorth first with a great power, and was Days ucnarbay of the ewes, how that they had wonne the victory and gotten great goodes out of the hoastes that perilhed,

W 7 How they had broken downe the ab-

I Mac i f. homimnation * which he {et vp vpon the

aulter at hierusalem, & fenced the lanttuarp wich hie walles, lpke as it was afoʒe, yta and Bethlura his titie allo.

8 Soit chaunted, that when the king heard these wordes, he was afrayde, k greeued very sore: Wherekore he lapde hun Downe ppon his bed, and kell icke for very sorowe, and all betaule it had not happened as he had dewiled.

pricttes slaine in the battaue, :

fully and Without adulement wehr

for to fight to get them honour. 5

68 Anv when Judas came to Azot nthe
Phllistines lande, he brake downe their Deux

aulters, bent the images of their mois 1

spopled the cities, and cameagaine inte

the lande of Juda. | |

haue.

tonlider in my minde the great àduerlitie that J an conie vnto, and the fluddes of heauines which am come in, where as afoze time was so merie, and so greatlie set by by reason of up power:

12 Againe, considering the euill that J haue done at Hierusalem, from whence
Itoke all the riches ol golde and siluer that were in it, and sent to destrope the inhabitours of Jurie without any realon Why:

1; Inknow that these troubles are come

vpon me for the lame caufe; and behold. mut dye with great sorowe ma aunge lande.
14 Then called he for one Phillip, a frend of his, whom he made ruler or all his realme, a
15 And gaue him the trowne, His e and his ring, that he shoulde take Yt ; sonne Wu vnto hum i bin vp, till he nught raigne hin lell et.. is,
16 150 the wing Antiochus died there, in ee. the hundred kourtie and nine ver was
17 When Lysias knew that the king . dead, He ordained Antiochus pis one whont he had brought vp, to nen his fathers steede, and talled him

ator. .
18 owe they that were in the lane

Hierulalem] kept in the Feuucht auer

about the sanctuary, and song l

filto do them harme, kor the strengthening of the Heathen.
9 Gherekore Judas thought to destroy
9 them and called all the people together, that they might lay fiege vnto them.

20 0 they tame together in the hundred

and fiftte pere, and befieged them laying foorth their ordinaunce € instrumentes

ol warre.

11 Then tertaine of them that were befieged, went koorth: vnto whom some vngodly men ol Jlrael iopned them elues also, ö

22 And went onto the king faping: how long Wyll it be or thou puniche, and az uenge our brethren-

23 We haue euer ben minded to do thy father seruice, to walke in his statutes, and to obey his tommaundementes,

24 Therłore our people fell krom vs: and
Whereloeuer they founde anp of vs, they flue them, and spopled our enheritaunte.

3 And they haue not onely medled with

¢ bs but with all our countries.

26 And beholde, this day are they belieging the cattle at ierulalem to take it,

Neu, and haue made vp the trong holde in
VGBethlura: N

27 And ik thou doest not preuent them right soone, they wil do more then thele, and thou shalt not be able to overcome

them.

n 28 "phen the king heard this, he was very angry, and talled all his friendes, the captaines of his armie, and Call his footemen and) horsemen:

29 He hired men of warre allo, ol other realmes pertapning to the kinges that
Were confederate with him, and of the
JIles of the fea, which came vnto him.

30 And the number ok his hoast was an

hundrev thouland footemen, and twen-

tlie thouland horsemen, and thirtie e two eng 4, Slephantes wellererciled to battaile,

3 4 These came through Iduna vnto

Bethsura, and belieged it ã long feafon,

E made Divers instrumentes ok warre

Againt it: but the Jewes came out and

bent them with fire, e fought like men.

32 Then departed Judas from the cattle

(at Hierulalem) and remoued the boat

toward wWethsacaran, ouer against the

Ringesarmic,

3 Re the king arose before the day, and

dought the power of his hoast into the

Way to Wethzacarä: where the hoastes

it Machabees..

made them redie to the battaile, blowing the trumpettes.

34. And to pronoke the Elephantes for to fight, they shewed them the lappe ok red grapes, and mulberics,

35 And deuided the Elephantes among the hoast: fo that by cuerp Elephant there stoode a thonfand men well harnessed, € helmettes of steele vpon their
Heades : pea, vnto euerp one of the Elephantes alfo were ordained fine hundred horsemen of the belt;

36 Which wapted on the Elephant, going wheresocuer he went, and departed not from him. ö

37 Euerp Elephant was couered with a
{trong towre of wood, fastened thereon with instrumtentes, whereupon were thirtie, and two vallaunt men with
Weapons to fight, and within was a man of Inde, to rule the beaste.

38 As forthe remnaunt of the hozienien, he fet them vpon both the sides in two partes with trumpettes, to prouoke the hoast, eto slirre vp such as were flowe in the armie. f

39 And when the sunne shone vpon their shieldes of golde and steele, the mounfaines gliste red againe. at them, c were as bright as the tressets of fire. a

40 The kinges hoast also was deuided, one parte vpon the hie mountaines, the © other low beneath: fo they went on, taking good heede, and keping their order.

41 And all they that dwelt in the lande, were akrapd at the nople of their hoast whenthe multitude went foorth, and when the weapons {mote together: fo2 the hoast was both great and nughtie.

42 Judas allo and His hoast entred intothe battaule, and slue lire hundred men ofthe kinges armie.

43 Now when Eleazar the sonne of

Saura did lee one of the Elephantes an

deckt with the kinges badge, and was a more goodly beast then the other, he thought the king should be vpon Him:

44. And ieoparded him selte to deliner his people, æ to get him a perpetual name.

45 Wherfore he ranne with a courage bir to the Elephant in the middest of the hoast, finiting them downe on both the fides and fluc many about him.

(a) his 5
46 So went he to the Elephantes fete, tar, and gat him vnder him, “and flue an: dee then fel the Elephant downe vpon him, am
. : and

XCHI].

I. Machabees.

and there he dyed. king)

Judas also and his men, seeing the power of the bing and the mightie vlolente of his hoast, Departed from them.

43 And the kinges arme went vp against them toward hierusalem, and pitched theie tentes in Jurie belide mount St on.

49 Moreduer, the king toke trutte with themthat were in Wethlura: but whe they came ont ofthe titie because they: had no vitayles, but were shut vp withtu, and the lande lay vntilled)

50 The ling toke Bethlura, and set men to keepe it, and turned his hoast to the place of the sanctuarp,

51 And laped siege to it a great While, where he made all maner ordinaunte, hhandbowes , firie dartes, racketts to tast stones, storpions to shoote arrowes, and slinges. : '

sz The Pees allo made ordinauntt againt theirs, and fought a long season.

5 But in thecitic there were no vittailes, for it was the seuenth pere of p warres: and thole heathen that remapned in
Jurie, had eaten vp all their store.

$4. And in the fanctuary were fewe men left: for the hunger tame fo vpon them, that they were stattred abode euery man to his owne place.

i Muciin g.

55 So when Lyphas heard that Philip

(whom Antiochus the king while he
Was pet ltuing, had ordained to bring vp
Antiochus his foune, that he might be

u. Vlac. vi. b.

56 DAS come againe out Of persia æ gg, dea with the kinges oat and bought to obtaine the kingdome with the gouernaunte ok all thinges: *

57 He gate hun to the king iu al the haste and to the taptapnes of che hoast, and lalde, We decrease daplp, and dur bittafles are but mall: Againe, the plate that we lape siege vnto is very strong eit were our part to lee forthe reaune:

58 Tet vs agree with these men, and take trutce with them, and with al their peo-

ple,
59 Aud graunt them to lpue after their lawe, as they did afoge : fo2 they be gree: wed, and do all these thinges against vs betause we haue despiled their lawe.

60 So the king and the princes were con-

tent, and sent vnto them to make peace: and they reteaued it.

61 Now when the king and the princes had made au oth vnto them, they tame out of the tastle,

62 And the king went bp to mount Sion: but when he far that the place was well fenced, he brake the oth that he had madt, and tonmnaunded to destroy the wall rounde about.

63 Then departed he in all the haste, and returned vnto Antioch, where he found
Philip hauing dominion of the citie: Do he fought again him, and toke the atte againe into his handes.

The. vij. (bapter.

1 Demetrius raigned after he had killed Intiochus and Lplias. 5 He troubleth the children ol Itrael through the countel of certaine wicked perfons. 37 The prayer of the prielles again Picanor. 4 Judas hillech icanor, ater he hath made his prayer.

N the Hundzed fiftie and one pere, came De-
A metrius the foune of
Seleutus krom the et: tie ol Rome with a
8 final company of nien,
= Into a citie ofthe fea toast, and there he bare rule.

2 And when he tame to Antioch the titie ok his progenitours his hoast toke Ante
9155 and Tysias, to bring them vnto

le
— 3 But whenit was tolde him, he lade: let me not see their faces.

4 So the boat put them to death. Mow
WHE demetrius was let vpon the throne

or his kingdome, N 5
5 There caine vnto him wicked and bu godlie men of Jlrael, whole taptapue was e that woulde haue ben made hie priest:
6 These nien actused the people of Hire el bnto the king faping : Audas aud hid brethren haue llatne thy kreudes, an driuen vs out of our owne lande.

i Op tro: en.

7 Wherfore, send now some man, to whõ

u geuelt credence, thathemayg

115 fee al the destruttion which he vp

done vnto vs and to the binges allles and let him ee uns with all)

friendes and fauourers. 2118

8 Thenthe king chole Barchides a ritt f

1. Machabees. XCV.
— pfpis, which Was a man of great pow- vnto the Jlraelues.

er in the realme beyond the water, 23 Nowe when Judas sawe all the miland faithful vnto the king and sent him chieke that Aleimus and his company to see the destruction that Judas had done.] had done (yea more then the heather
„ Andas forthat wicked Altimus, he them lelues) vnto the Hiraelitcs: made him hie priest, and rommaunded 24 He went foortl roünde about all the hun to be auenged of the children of J f borders ol Jurte, and pumsched chole rael. vnkaithkull runnagates, fo that they io Sothey departed (krom the king! and. cane no more out into the tountrre. calne With a great hoast into the lande 25 So when Alcimus sawe that Judas of Juda, sending mellengers to Judas Fhis people had gottenthe vpper hand, and his brethren, e speaking vnto them and that he Was not able to abrde them:
With peatcable wordes, but vnder oil he went againe to the king and fatde all teite. the worst of them that he coulde. e 1 Therekore Judas and his people be- 26 Then the king lent Nicanorz, dne of his leued not their laying: for they law that chieke paces, which bare eul wu onto E

they were come with a great hoast. Isracl, and commaunded him that he

H Alter this, came the scribes together chould vtterly destroy the people. il. Mac. xv. a pnto Aleimuse Wacchides, to entreate 27 So Micanor came to hierusalem with of reasonable conenauntes: à great hoast, and sent vnto Judas and

z And the Allideaus were the kirst a- his brethren With kriendly wordes: but
C mong the children of Ilrael that requi- vuder disceptesaping: red peate of them, 28 There thall be no warre betwirt me

4 Saping: Alcimus the priest is tome ok and pon, J wyll come witha fewe men the seede ol Aaron, how can he deteaue to lee how pe do with krendship. vs though he come with an armle- 29 Upon this he came vnto Judas, and

1 So he gaue them louing wordes, they saluted one another peaceably: but and swore vnto them, & laide: we wyl the enemies were appopnted to take do you no harme, neither pour friendes. Judas by violence.

16 And they beleued him: but the very 30 Meuerthelesse it was tolde Judas that lame dap toke he threelcore men ok he tame vnto him but pnder dilceyte: them, and liue them, atcording to the wherfore he gate him away from hun,

n Wordes that are witten, and would fee his face no moze,

sia a7 They haue calk the sleche of thy zi when Micanoz perceaucd that his fainctes and ched their blood rounde a- counsel was belweapedD, he went ourto bout Hierulalem, t there was no man light against Judas, velide Capharla- wan that would burie them. lama: 0 ö 5

8 So there tame a great feare and dreade 32 Where there were slaine of Mitanors among al p people, saying: There is nei- hoalst fiue thouland men, and the relidue ther trueth noz righteonsnesle in them: fled vntothe castle ol Dantd. forthey haue broken the appopntment 33 Akter this tame Nitanor bp puto and oth that they made. mount Sion, and the priestes with the

I9 And Wacchides remoued his hoast frõ elders of thepeople went foorthto falute F
Hierulalem, € pitched his tent at Beth- hun peaccabip, eto herve him the burnt seta, Where he lent foorth, r toke ma- facrifices that were offered fo the king. nyof them that had korlaken him: He 34 Wut he laughed them aud the people une many ofthe people allo, and cat to scorne, mockedthem, defiled their of them into a great pit. feringes, and spake difdainefully: z

20 Then comnmtted he the lande vnto 35 Bea, and wore in his wrath, fying:
Altimus, and left men of warre With If Judas and his hoast be not dellue- . c hun to helpe him: and Wacchides hun red nowe into my handeg, affoone as

selke went bnto the king. euer J come againe aud fare well, J 8 a And thus 15 Defended his hye chall burne bp this house. With that priesthood. : went he out in a great anger.

22 And al luch as vexed Jlracl, relorted 36 Then the puelfescame in aud hoode
Ditto Aare ehh they obtayned before the aulter of the temple, weethe lande of Juda, and did much cu ping, and laing: 37 For

*Fonomuch as thou O Howe hast and he him selle was fwe amen eg this boule, that thy name might vattaile. eim the be called vpon therin, and that it shonnd 44. When Mitauors men ok warre sawe
| be an houle of prayer and petition lo: that he was killed, they cat away their
Efa.tvi b. thy people: Weapons and fled:
38 Be duenged ok this man and his hoast, 45 But the Jcwes folowed vpon them aud let them be flaine with the lword: A whole dapes iournep, from Adaʒer remember the blasphemies of them, and buts Gaara, blowing with the trumsuffer not them to continue any longer. pettes, and making tokens akterthem.
39 When Picanor was gone from hieru- 46 Sothe Jewes came foorth of all the salein, he pitched his tent at Wethoron, townes rounde about, € blew out their and there an hoast met him out of Sp- hornes bpon them, and turned against ria. oe. them: Thus Were they all laine, and
4 And Judas tame to Adarsa with three not one ol them lelt. i thousand men, and made his prayer vn- 47 Then they toke their substaunce fora to Ged, faying: pray, and smiote of /icanors head, and ey 41 O Tode, becaule the mellengers ot his right hande? which he helde vp fy hing Sennächerib blasphemed the, tlle proudelp, and brought it with then, and augell went koorth and slue an hundeed hanged it vp afore Hierusalem. fourscore and fiue thouland of then: 4% Wherefore the people were exceeding:
42 Euen so, destropthou this hoast before ly reiopted, and palicd oner that day in vs to day, that other people may knowe great gladnes.
Howe that he hath blasphemed thy san- 49 And Judas ordayned that the same tuarp, and purushe him atcording to his dap (namely) the thirteenth dap ofthe maliciousnes. moneth Adar, shoulde be kept in mirth
43 And sothe hoastes stroke the fielde euerp pere. the thirteenth dap ofthe moneth Adar: 50 Thus the lande of Juda was in rest
Hebzuari. and Nitanozs hoast was discomkited, alitle while.

1. Ale

The. viij. Chapter.

Judas contidering the power and godly pollicie of the Romaineg, maketh peace with them. 22 Che rescript of the Romaines lent vnto the Jewes,

is Soi) Cidasheard also the that tame dpon them from the biter-

Z| fame ofthe Romaines, most parte of the earth, and how other that they were migh- people gaue them tribute euery vere: tie and valiaunt men, 5 How they had flaine andouercome aud agreeable to all Philtp and Perles kinges ok Cethim, n os thingesthatarerequie and other io in battalle, which had os.

redok them, and make brought their ordinaunce against them: peace with all men which tome vnto 6 How they dilcomkited great Antiothem, chus king of Asia, that wouldencedes
2 And how they were doughtie men ol kight with them, hauing an hundred strength:besides that, it was tolde him and twentie Elephantes, With horse-
* ok their battailes and noble actes which nien, charets, and a beep great hoast: o geen, they did in Galatia, how they had con- 7 How they toke him selke auue, andor wen, Leh: aieredthem, and brought them vnder dained him, with luch as choulde ratgne zz tribute, g alter him, to pay thema great tribute,
3 And what great thingesthey had done pea and to finde them good furetics in Spapne: how that with their wyl- and pledge beides all this: * dome and sober behauour they had 8 Hol they had taken from him India, wonne the mines ok siluer and gold that Media, and Lydia, his belt landes, and are there, geuen them to king Eumenus:
4. Andobtapned al the land, with other 9 Againe how they perecaning that te places karre from them: how they had Grekes were comming to bere then

diltomfited e uaine done the Kinges 10 Sent againtt chem acaptavnf al,

many of them, led away their Wynes and children captiuc, spoyled them, tone offetfion of their lande, and destroped their strong holdes, and subdued them tobe their bondmen, vnto this dap.

u Pozeouer, how that as fo other kingdolnes and Jles which sometime with stoode then, they destroped them, and brought them vnder their dominion:

1. Machabees.

galt, which gaue them battarle, flue 21 And that matter plealed the Romanes

XCV].

right well:

22 Wherefore it was written vp: of the which the Romanes made a writing in tables of brasse, and sent it to Hierusalem, that they might haue by them a memoriall of the same peace and bonde of krendship, after this maner:

23 God saue the Romances and the people of the Jewes both by sea e by lande,

u But kept amitte with their owne frendes, and kepe the sworde and enenne from

and thole that were confederate with chem, and conquered kingdomes both farre and nye: e that wholdeuer heard oftheir renowme, was afrayde of the.

3 For whonithey woulde helpe to their

c kingdonies, those raigned:and whom tt ipked not them to raigne, they put them downe: And howe they were tonie to

eat prehenunence, i
4 Haning no king among them, neither any man clothed in purple to be magnified therethrough:

rare ye But had ordained them selues a par-

„ flainent, wherin there fat three hundred and twentie senatours dayly bpon the tounsell, to dispatch euer the bufines of the people, and to kepe good order:

16 And howe that enery pere they those on d Malre to haue the gouernaunce of fAltheir lande, to whom euery man was

obedient, and there was neither euill wyll nor distention among them.

17 Then Judas chole Eupolemus, the sonne of John the sonne ol Jacob, and Jalon the sonne ol Eleazar, and sent them to Nome for to make frend: chip and abonde of lone with them,

18 That they might tant from them the bondage of the Grekes forthe Jewes law that the Grekes would lubdue the kingdoime of Jsrael.

19 So they went vnto None a very great

Ne if,

d e

and saide:

r0 Judas Machabeus, with his brethzen, 3

and the people ofthe Jewes. hath sent bs vnto vou, to make a bond of frendchip and peace with vou, and ve to note vs as pour loners and friendes.

fourney,e came vnto the parliament,

them foz euermore: a

24 Il there come first any warre vpon the Romanes o2any of their friendes throughout all their dominion,

25 The people ofthe Jewes shall helpe them, as the tine requireth, and that
With ali their heartes.

26 Allo they shall neither gene nor send vnto their enemies vitailes, Weapons, money, nor shippes:but fulfil their couenauntes at the Romanes plealure, taking nothing of them therefore.

27 Againe, it the people of the Jewes happen first to haue warre, the Ronianes
{hal stand by thein with a good Wyl, actording as the tinie Wyll suffer:

28 Meither halt they geue vnto the
Jewes enemies vitailes, weapons, nioney, or shippes: Thus are the Romanes content to do, and shall fulfill their charge without any disceite.

29 According to thefe articles, the Nomanes made 5; bond with the Jewes.

30 Sow after thele articles Itaide ther) if any of the parties wyll put to them, 02 take any thing from them, they chall do it with the conlent of both: and whatsoeuer they adde vnto them, or take krom them, it (hall stande kast.

31 And as touching the euill that Deme-

trins bath done onto the Jewes, we haue Writtéè vnto hum, saping:noherkore layest thou thy Deaute poke vpon the
Jewes our friendes and loners-

2 Ifthey make any conpiatnutokthee againe vnto vs, we shall defende them, and fight with thee by sea and by lande,
According to iustice.

The

I. Machabees.

The.ix. (hapter.

: e death of Micanor. Demetrius sendeth his armie again Judas. 18 Juda is io a Jonatha, is put in the steade ol his brother. 47 Che strite een
Jonathas and Bacchides. 55 Alcimus is taken with the pauifte,and dpeth, Bacchides returnethagaine vnto the hing. csHe commeth vpon Jonathas by the counsen of certaine wicked perlong, and is ouercome. o The truice ot Jonathas wich Bacchideg.

In the meane feafon, whẽ Demetrius heard that* Mitanor and his hoast was slaine in the

further to fend Wac-

l chides and Alcimus a-

gaine into Jurie, € the chieke strength of his hoast with them.

1 So they went foorth by the wap that leadeth vnto Galgala, and pitched their tentesbelore Malalothwehich is in Ar-
Bellis) and wan the titie and slue much people. N

3 In the firstmoneth of the hundred fiktic and two pere, they brought their hoast and layde their siege against Hierulalem:

4 Wut raysing their tampe, they tame to
Werta with twentie thoufand footemen, and two thouland horsemen.

soe Judas had pitched his tent at athe with three thousand cholen men,

6, Aid When they fare the multitude of the other armie that it was lo great,

they were sore akrapde, and many tonueped them lelnes out of the hoast, inlomuch that there abode no ino of them but eyght hundred nien.

When Judas sawe that his hoast fated hun, and that he mutt needes fight, it brake his heart, that he had no time to gather them together: wherefore the mau was in extreme trouble.

8 Meuerthelesse, he saide vnto them that remapned with him: Up, let vs go az gainst our enemies, peraduenture we
Mall be able to fight with them.

But they woulde haue stopped him,

ö faping, We Mall not be able: therefore

now let vs laue dur lyues, and turne a gaine to our brethren: for choulde we light against them, being lo fewe-

ö (a) Ye Which 10 And Indas saide, 00 God forbyd that

ben? we should fice from them: wherefore

dieren i dur tune be come, let vs dye mankully

* D, Elcala.

W

Betten: kor dur brethren, and let vs not stayne fkrenguy and our honour.

ex.

un Thenthe boat remoued out ol the

fielde, he proteeded

tentes and stoode agatnt them, and the horsemẽ were deuided in two partes: the fling casters and archers Went before the hoast, and all the mightie men were formost in the fielde. *

12 wWacchides him selfe was in the right wing of the battaile, and the hoast drew npe 1 two partes, and blewe the trum: . pettes.

3 They ok Judas fide blewe the trum- C pettes also, and the earth shooke at the noyse of the hoastes: and they strake a fielde from the morowe till night.

14. And when Judas sawe that Wacchides hoast was strongest of theright live, he toke with him all the hardie nien,

15 And brake the right wing of their or-
285 ct folowed vpon them bnto mount

ot. f

16 Now when they which were the lelt n „ sawe that the right fide was pil comfited, they persecuted Judas and them that were with him hard at the heeles. .

17 Then was there a soze battaile: for many were flaine € wounded on both the partes. :

13 Judas also him selfe was killed, and the remnaunt fled.

1 So Fonathas and Simon tobe Judas their brother, and buried himin his fathers sepuchre in the citie of Modin.

20 And al 1 of Itrael made great lamentatid for him, and mourned long, saping:

21 Alas that this worthy should be Maine, which deliuered the people ol Hiracl.

22 As for other thinges pertayning to i battaties of Judas, the noble actes rr he did, and ok his worthyues, they ar not written, for they were very . ech

23 * row after the death of Judas, #9 fan ked men came vp in al the coaltes o Je rael, € n arose all such as did wovngodlinelle.

24 In thole dayes was there agra
Dearth inthe lande, and all denn 4 gaue duer them felucs and theirs

Do 5 N

7 naadethemlordes in the lande.

26 hele lo i

udas friendes, and brought them vn-

f fo Batchides, whiche auenged him selfe

phpon them with great dispite. 7
Aud there tanie

rael, as was not lince the time that no

prophete was seene there N

25 Thentame all Judas

ther, and sayde vnto Jonathas:

29 Fozsomuch as thy brother Judas ts

dead, there is none like him to go foot

against our enemies, against Bacchides

and suth as are aduerlaries of out owne

a — €

a ear —
30 Wherekore this day we choose thee fo

hin to be our prince and taptayne, to order dur battay lere.

1 And Jonathas toke the gouernaunce vpon hum at the lame tinie, and ruled in steade of his brother Judas.

2 When Wacthides gat knowledge ther-

ot, he fought for to dap hym.
3 But Jonathas cx Simon His bother perceauing that , fled into the wilder-

nesse of Thecua with al their tampanie,

and pitched their tentes by the water poole of Asphar. 5 ö
€34 Which when Wacchides vnderstoode,

he tame ouer Jordane with al his hoast

vpon the Sabbath dap.

35 Nowe had Jonathas lent his bother
(‘Ibonja captapne of the people, to pray his friendes the Habuthites, that they wondd lende them their ozdmaunce, fo2 they had much.

uv 36, Oo the children of of Madaba, and toke Phon and all that he had, and went their wap withall when they had taken it.

37 Then came worde buto Jonathas and Simon his brother, that the chile dzenof Jani made a great mariage, stbrought the bride from Madaba with great pompe: for che was daughter to one of the noblest princes of Chanaan.

38 Wherefore they remembred the blood of Jhon their brother, and went vp, and bydthenifelues buder the chadowe of the mountapne. ;

39 Sothey likt vp their eyes, and loked, ebeholde there was much a do c great pitparation : korthe brydegrome came

oorth, and his friendes and his brethren

Mette them with tympanies, instrumentes of mulicke, and many weapons.

kriendes toge-

9 tame eut

I. Machabees.

atchides chole wicked men, and 4

fought out and made search for

fo great troudle in JE

: XCVI]. o Lien Jonathas and they that were
With hym , role out of their lurking plates against them, and flue many of them: and the renmaunt fled into the mountapnes , and they toke all their substaun ce.
41. Thus the mariage was turned to mourmng, and the nople of their melo- + dy into lamentation. erte an
2. And so when they had auenged the ptood of their brother, they turned againe vnto Jordane. a

very border of Jordane with a great power, vpon the Sabbath day. >

44 And Jonathas sayd to his companic;
Let vs get vp, & fight against our enemies:łor it standeth not with vs to day, as in tine past. OS = ae

45 Behold, or enemies are in our way, the water or Jordane vpon the one side ol vs, with banckes,fennes, and woods on the other side, so that there is no place for vs to depart vnt o.

46 W herefore trye nowe vnto hrauen, pen that pe may be deltuered krom the „hach zi

power of pour enennes: So they stroke

the battayll e.

47 And Jonathas stretched out his hande to snpte Bacchides, but he fled backwardee. *

48 Then Jonathas and they that were with him, leapt into Jordane, € lwimmed duer Jordane vnto the further baͤnke: but the other woulde not palle ouer Jordane after him.

49 And there were flayne of Bacchides G

fide that day a thousande men. a

Therkore Wacchides with his hoast turned againe to hierulalem, and buplt vp the castles and strong holdes that were in Jurie, Jericho, Emaus, Be-

thoron, Wethel, Thamnata, Phara, o., Pha

rathont.

and Thopo, with bye walles, with

portes, aud with lockes:

st And set men to kepe them, that they might ble their malice vpon Asracl.

52 He walled vp the titie Bethsura, Ga-
ʒara, and the tastie, and prouided them with men and vittayles.

5 He toke allo the chiekest mens lonnes in the countrey for pledges, t put them in the castie at Hierusalem to be kept.
54 After warde in the hundred kyltie and three pere, in the seconde moneth, Alcimus commaunded that they should destrop the walles of the inwarde court

N ()) ok

(4) Biood doth require

J Wacchides hearing this came vnto the

"2, Tcpho

I. Machabees.

—ͤ — ꝗ ! . ͤ 8 —
| of the fanctuarte, and he pulled downe and made instrumentes ot warre.

and beganto destroy the monunzentes oftheprophetes
55 But at the ame time Alcimus was ple gued and smitten with a paulsie and his enterprises were hindered,¢ his mouth

was stopped cb God) so that he could no

moe speake no: commaunde any of his

houle concerning his businelle.

35 Thus died Alcinus in great milerte at

the same time. f 9
21 And when wWacchides fale that Alcl-

mus was dead, he turnedagatne to the

king: fo the land was in rest two peres.

58 Then allthe vngodly men held a cout

sell, saping: Wehold, Jonathas and his

company are at ease, and dwel without cave; Wherefore let bs bring Wacchides hyther, and he (atl take them all in one

59 So they went and gaue Wacchides this

counselIl. *
60 Nhich arose to tome with a greathoast, ce lent letters priuilp to his adherentes

which were in Jurie, totane Jonathas

and thole that were With hym: but they might not, for the other had gotten unowledge of their deuice. of 5

61 And Jouathas toke fyftie men ol the a

countrey, whiche Were theringleaders of them, and luce them. ;

62 Then Jonathas c Simon with their

65 Nobe Jonathas left his brother Sr ac Went forth aa, elfe i untrey, andt 8

Au ane . Af —— mpl

66 And fluc Odomeras audhisbeethen aud the children of Phaleron in | tek * tentes, fo that he began to be strong and to increase in power.

6 As for Sinion and his compante, they went out of the itte, and brent vp the in: strumentes of warrr e

68 And fought against wWacchides ard dil: toni fited him: and Wacchides was fore bered because his counsell and trauaple was in bapne. S

69 Wherfore he was wroth at the wicked men “that gaue him tounsel to come intotheir land e flue manpokthem: Then Lag purpofed he with his tompante to goa: Gun” way into his owne tountrep. —

70 Wherof when Jonathas had knowledge, he sent ambassadours vnto bpm | forto make peace with hym, and that he choulde delmer him his prisoners a-

game. I om
71. To the whiche Wacchides consented gladly, and dyd according to his desire: pea c made an oth that he syould neuer do him harme all the dapes ol his lyle.
7 So he restored vnto him all the priloners that he had taken out ol the lande

band va tompanie departed vnto the citte Beth- ok Juda, and then turned and went his valin, Whiche lyeth inthe wuͤdernesse, Way into his one land, neither proceeand repaired the decay therot, and made Ded he any further to come vnto the bo it strong. ders of Juda. * i
63 When Waͤcchides knewe this, he gathe- 7z Thus Piracl had no moze warre and red all his hoalt and sent word to them Jonathas dweilt at Machmas, and be- a that were in Jurie. my, Zanthere to gouerne the people, and de-
64. Then tame he c laped siege to Beth- D troyed the vngodly men out of Ilrael. valim, and fought against it a long feafon, l N
De. x. (Chapter.
1 4 Demetrius defireth to haue peace with Jonathas. 48 Tlexander moueth warre

against Demetrius. so Denietrius is flarne. 51 Che friendthip of Ptolomeus

and Alexander,

N the hundred and
I thzeestoze pere , came
Alexander the sonne of noble Autiochus, and

— and there he raygned.
2 When Demetrius heard therok, he ga-

tokePtolomais, whole

me! pPraysed him greatly titiʒines reteaued him, —

‘

thered an exteeding great hoatt, and
Went koorth agamst him to fight. es
3 Wherkore Demetrius sent letters 4 5
Jonathas with louing wordes,
Vill fi ate
„Jo he sapde:wge will fir malte PY
5 with bim,befoze he bynde him sel ewich
Alexander against vs: 5 Els

Els he (hall remember theeupithat we haue done against hun, his brother, and
8 people.

6 Andlo he gaue Jonathas leaue to gatheran hoatt, to make Weapons, ¢ to be tonlederat with him, and commaunded the pledges that were in the castle to be deliuered vnto him.

Then came Jonathas to Hterufatent,
5 and read the letters in the andience of al the people, and of them that were in the

castle.

3 And therekore were they fore afrayde, betause they hearde that the king had geuen him licence to gather an hoast.

Thus were the pledges deliuered vnto
Jonathas, which restored them to their parentes.

lo Jonathas also dwelt at Hierusalem,

ano began to buylde vp and to repapze the titie:

n Commannding the Worbmen to wall tt and the mount Sion rounde about with free stone, to be a strong hold: and so they did.

12 As for the heathen that were in the tastles whiche Wacchides had made vp, they fled:

z Sg that euer man lelt the place, and went into his owne countrep.

c 4 Only at Wethsura remapned certayne ofthe Jewes, whiche had forlaken the lawe and conimaundementes of God, for Bethsura was their refuge.

ly Mowe when king Alexander heard of the promiles that Demetrius had made bnto Jonathas, and when it was tolde him of the battayles and noble actes
Which he and his brethren had done, and of he great trauayles that they had

aken,

6 he lapde: Where Mati we finde such a man-well, we wil make him our friend, and be tonfederat with hym.

7 Upon this he wrote a letter vnto him, with these wordes:

18 Ring Alexander saluteth his brother
Jonathas.

9 Wt haue hearde ofthee that thou art aballaunt man, and nieete to be our friende:

20 Wherfore this day we ordayne thee to be the hye priest of thy people, and to be
Called the binges friende (Upon this he

ent hyma purple clothing, k a crowne
Of gold that thou mayest confiner what ls for our prokite, and kepe kriend chip to-

I. Machabees.

oro

warde vs. 7
21 So in the seuenth moneth of the pune — dred and threescore yere, vpon the folempne feast day of the tabernacles, Gaz nathas put the holy rapment vpon hun: then gathered he an hoast, and prepared many weapons. | aan
22 Whiche when Demetrius hearde, he

Was marueylous sorzp,

23 And sapde: Alas what haue we done, that Alexander hath preuented vs , in getting the friendship ofthe Jewes kor his owue defences —

24 Bet will J wzyte louingiy vnto them also, yea and pronuse them dignitics and
. a „that they may be of my

poe, ‘

25 Wherevpon he wrote buts theinthese wordes: Ning Denietrius sendeth greeting vnto the people of the Jewes:

26 Whereas pe haue kept your couenaune toward bs, and continued in our frlendship, not inclining to our enenues, we were glad when we heardetherof,

27 vabherfore remapne Mill and be faythfull to vs, and we Chall well recompence vou for the thinges that ye haue done on our partic: g

28 We thal releasse you of many charges, E and geue von rewardes.

29 And now J discharge yon and all the
Jewes from tributes, J forgeue vou the customes ok salt, and releasse you of the trowne taxes, ofthe thirde part of

cede,

30 And halte the fruite of trees, whiche is myne owne duetie, Poo releasse them from this day foorth, so that they fall not be taken of the lande ol Juda, nor of the three cities which are added therun-

to out of Samarta and Galilee, from this dap foorth, for euermore.

31 Pierulalem also, with all thinges belonging therto shalbe holy and free, pea the tythes and tributes shall pertayne nto it.

32 As for the power of the cattle whiche is at Hierusalenn, Aremit and geue
(tonto the hygh priest, that he may tet

in it such men ashe tall choose to kepe it. :

33 Hfceely delinerallthe Jewes that are patfoners thoughout all my realme, so that euery one of then shalbe free from paping any tribute, pea euen of their cattell. |

34 All the solempne fealtes , Sab-

N (ij) bathes

hy

bathes. neve moones, the dapes appopnten, che the dapes before and aller

che falt, halbe feec fozallthe Jewes in

my realine. i

po that in them no man chall haue power to do any tying, or to vexe any of them in any maner of caufe.

36 There shall thirtie thousand also of the
Jelwes be Written vp in the kinges hoast, and haue their wages payed as all other men of warre of the kinges should haue: and okthem shalbe ozdepned certayne to kepe the binges strong holdes,

37 Rea and lome of them shalbe set ouer the hinges setret affaires: and their gouernours and princes shalbe of them felues and lyue after their owne lawes, asthe king hath commaunded in the lande of Juda. ¥ so

38 And the thee cities that are fallen vn-

to Jurie from the tountrey of Samaria, shalbe taken as Jurie, and be vnder one, neither be subiect to any straunge lord, but to the hie priest.

39 As kor Ptolomais and the land pertayning therto, J geue it vnto the santtuarie at Hierulalem, for the neceflarte expences of the holy thinges.

40 Moreouer, J Will geue euery pere fytteene thoulande sitles of liluer of the kinges reuenues, out of the plates appertapning vnto me.

41 And allthe ouerplus which they haue not payed for thinges due, as they dyd in

the kormerperes, from hencefoorth they

alt ene it towarde the workes of the

einple. :

42 And belides this the fyue thoufande lities of suner which they receaued perely of the account appopnted foz the iw tertepnement of the lanttuarie thefe yeres patted, euen these thinges schaͤlbe releassed, betause they appertaine tothe priestes that nunister.

43 Item, whosoeuer they be that flee

vnto the temple at hierusalem, o: with-

in the liberties therof , where as they are fallen into the kinges daunger foz

any maner of businesle, they Chatbe par-

doned, and al the goodes that they haue in mp realm shalbe free.

44+ Jor the buylding also and repapring ofthe worke of the lanttuarie, expences

Thalbe geuen out of the kinge 2 uennes: 5 ‘4

45 Bea and forthe making of the walles

I. Machabees.

rounde about Hierusalem „ * king downe ok the olde, mi 0 ting bp of the strong holdes in Jurte fall the coftes and charges be geuen

5 ithe reuenues. e
46 Wut when Jonathas andt

hearde these wordes 1 Pie “ng )

dente vnto them neither reteaned them: "4

for they remembred the great Wicked-

nelle that he had done vnto Jlrael, and howe sore he had bered then.

47 Wherkoze they agreed vnto Alteran: ander, for he was a prince that had dealt friendly with them, and lo they stoode by him alway. |

43 Then gathered king Alexander a great hoast, and brought his armie a- boro gainst Demetrius: ae

49 So the two kinges stroke battaple together, but Demetrius hoast fied, and
1 folowed after, and fell vpon them.

50 Amightie sore fielde was it, tontinu-

ing tül the sunne went downe: and De-

metrius was flayne the fame day.

And Alexander sent ambassadours vnto Ptolomi the king of Egypt, with ticle wordes, saping:

52 Forsomuch as Jam come againe to my realme, and am let in the throne of mp progenitours, and haue gotten the dominion, ouertommed Demetrius,

53, Conquered the lande ,ettrikena fielde with hym, fo that we haue difconrfited both hym and his hoast, and fit in the throne of his kingdome: a

54 Tet vs nowe make friendchip tage ther, geue me thy daughter to Wpfe, so shal I be thy sonne in lawe, and both gene thee rewardes, and her actordyng to thy dignttie.

55 Ptolonu the king gaue aunlwere fay ing: Happy be the day wherein thou art tome againe to the lande of thy pogent’ tours, and fet in the throne of their Ring: pome.

56 And nowe will J fulfill thy e but meete me at Ptolomais, that “ may fee one another, and that J ws marry my 5 vnto thee acco?’

ding to thy delire.

—⁰ prtolomi went out of Eau

with his daughter Cleopatra, aud es 13

-pnto Ptolomais in the hundred the

score and two pere, ; .
53., vabere king Alexander met, ate 5

and he gaue Alexander his dall geg;

{eopatra, and naried them at Ptolomals wich great worchtp , like as the maner ok kinges is to be.

Then Wrote king Alexander vnto Jo-
; nathas, that he choulde come and meete

is, e there he mette thetwo kinges, and ny them and their kriendes great prefentes of golde and siluer, aud founde faudur in their fight. N

sl And there tame together against Pos

nathas certapne wicked men and vn-

ations persons of Ilrael, making coniplapntes ok him: but the king regarded them not. *

62 As for Jonathas, the king tommaunpen to take of his garmentes, eto tloth gm in purple: and so they did. Then the lung ao poynted him to sit by hun,

63 And lapde vnto his princes: Go mich hin into the middest of the citie, mate
à proclamation, that no man toniplapne against him of any matter, and that no man trouble hym for anp maͤner ot tause.

64. So it happened, that when his attufers lawe the worship whiche was proclapmed of hym, €that he was clothed in purple, they fled euery one.

65 And the king made much ok him, wrote hym among his chieke friendes, made hym a duke, and partaker ol his domimon. :

lep, 66 Thus Jonathas Went againe to Hieen, rulalem with peace and gladnesse.
57 Inthe hundzed threestore t pkt pere, tame Demetrius, the fonne ok Demecee from Creta, into his fathers ande: N g
68 Wherof when Alexander heard tell, he

was right foxy, and returned vnto An-

tioch. N adi, 69. And Demetrius chole *Apoltonius, whtche had the gouernaunte of Celosiria, to be his taptapne: So he gathered a great hoast, and came vnto Jamnta, c sent worde vnto Jonathas the hygb palest, sapingn:

70 Darest thou with stande vs thy selke
Mone: As foz me, Jam but laughed to scorne, and shame d becaule thou diddest
Daunte thy strength again vs in the mountapnes.

7 HOW therfore, if thou trustest in thyne

owue strength, come downeto bs into

the playne fielde, e there let bs trye the

I. Machabces.

im. ae he went honozably bnto ytoloz

matter together, for thou shalt knowe that J haue the strength of many cities,
72 And shaltknowe who J am, and the other that standby me, which lay, That pour koote is not able to stande before dur fate, forthy fathers haue ben twyse chaled in their owne lande.
73 And nowe howe wilt thou be able to abyde fo great an hoast ok horlemen and footemenin the fielde, where fe is neither rocke, stone, nor place to fice to: :
74. When Jonathas hearde the wordes of Apollonins, he was moued in his mynde, wherfore he chose ten thonland men, and went out of Hierulalem: and
Simon his brother mette hym kor to helpe hym. .
75 And they pitched their tentes at Joppa: but the citie kept hym foorth, for Apollonius garrison was in Joppa.
76 Then Jonathas laped siege to it, and they that were in the titie for very feare let him in: and so Jonathas wan Jop-

pa.

77 Apollonius Hearing of this, toke three thouland horsemen, with a great hoast on foote, and went to Azotus as though he woulde go further, and came uz mediatly into the plapne flelde, because he had so many horsemen, and put his trust in them.

78 So Jonathas folowed vpon hym to
Azotus, and the army fhirinifhed with his rereward, and there they stroke the battayle.

79 Moe had Apoliontus lest a thou: lande horsemen behynde them priully in the tentes.

80 And when Jonathas knewe that such wayte was layed behynde them, thep went rounde about the enenues hoast, and shot dartes at the people from the morning to the euening.

81 As for Jonathas people, thep kept their

oder as he had commaunded them,

and the enemies horses were weerv.
Then brought Simon foorth his

Hoak , and set them against the foote-

inen (for the horsemen were weery al-

155 :) So he discomifitedthem, and they

ed.

833 And thep that were scattered in the fielde, gat them to otus, and came into the tenple of Dagon their idoll, that they might there faue their

liues.
N (ty) 84 Wut

I. Machabees.

84. Wut Jonathas fet fire vpon Aöolus 87 Alter this, went Jonathas and his

lithe cities rounde about it. and

1 goodes, and! brent bp the tent

le of Dagon, with all them that were fied intott.

35 Thus were slapne and brent welnpe eyght thoulande men.

86 S Jonathas remoued the hoast from thence , and brought them to Alcalon, where the men of the titie came koorth, and mette him with great worchip.

i. Mach. xi a

hoast againe to Hierislalem. w
! of goon, alem, with great

88 And when king Alexander heard there thinges, he thought to do
Aae Fonathas

89 And lent Hint a coller of gold, as the is to be geuen vnto such as ave Of oe hinges next blood: He gaue him allo the titie of Accaron, with the landes belonging therto, in possesson.

The . xi. Chapter.

he dilcention bet wirt Ptolomeus and Alexander his sonne in lawe. 17 Che death of J: erie io Demetrius raigneth after the death of Ptolomeus. 22 Sion is betiegen of
Jonathas. 4 Demetrius leing that no man relisteth bpm, lendeth his armie againe.
54 Grpphon moueth Antiochus against Demetrius. 6o Demetrius is deliuered by the tuc-

cour ok Jonathas. 6; Dicer his deliucraunce he breabeth his couenaunt that he had made.

Mdthe king of Egypt gathered an hoast like

5 a the fande that lyeth
Fos) Doon the fea chore, and mam chwppes, r went c about thorow distepte
— do obtapne the king-
Donte of Alexander, and tolopne it vnto

his owne realme.
2 Upon this he tobe his tourney into Sp-

ria, vsing gentle wordes, so that he was

Iosep. cu. vii.
Ib. XIII.

letten into the cities, men came foorth to meete hym: kor king Alexander had

tommaunded them so to do, betause he was his father in lawe. er
3 Nowe when Ptolomi entred into any citie, he left men ol warre to kepe it: and this he did thorowout all the cities. iMidxe 4. Ad when he tame to Aʒotus, they chewed hym the temple of Dagon, and
Aotus that was brent vp, with the other thinges which were destroyed, the dead bodies cast abrode, and the graues

that they had made by the way fide fog . -

such as Were flayne in the fielde, 0

5 Aud tolde the king that Jonathas had done ali these thinges, to the intent they might get him eupil Will: Wut the king sayde not one worde therto.

6 And Jonathas mette the king with great honour at Joppa, where they fa: luted one an other, and toke their ret,

7 So when Jonathas had gone with the

| king vnto the water that Was called E-

Aber pe turned againe to Hierula-

8 Nowe Ptolonu had gotten the domt= 2

nion of the cities vnto Seleucia vpon the {ea coast, imagining wicked counfels against Alexander,

9 And sent ambasladours vnto Deme-

trius, saping: Come, let vs make a bonde

betivirt vs, fo thall J gene thee my

daughter that Alexander hath, and

din shalt raigne in thy fathers kingome. 32

10 J repent that J gaue Alexander nip daughter, for he goeth about to flay me.

1 And thus he flaundered Alexander, becaufe he woude haue had his realme.

12 Thus he toke his daughter from hum, gaue her vnto Demetrius , and forloke
Alexander: fo that his malice was open lp hnowen. 8

13, And ptolomi came to Antioch, where he {et two crownes vpon his one head, the crowne of Egypt, and of Alia.

14 Juthe meane feafon Was king Alex! . ander in Cilicia: for they that dwelt in thofe places had rebelled against ppt.

15 Wut when Alexander heardeor this he came to warre against py : D0 bing
Ptolomi bought foorth his boat, a rete NE PND a mightie power, an thaled him awaxv.

16 Then fled Alexander (nto Arabia ihne to be Wa ee king Ptolomecus) nour increaled.

17 And Zabdiel the Arabian fmote af 2 , leranders head, ent it vnto n den 1

18 But the thirde dar alter died tc

meg

| I. Machabees. prolomibym lelfe, and they whom 33 For the faychfulnesfe that our kriendes N

he had set in the strong holdes, were slayne one ok another.
And Demetrius raigned in the hundred threstore and leuenth vere.
20 At the same time gathered Jonathas

em bung the tastle which was at Hierula-

lem, x lo they made manp instrumentes

ok warre against it.

Then went there tertapne vngodly

persons, whiche hated their owne people, vnto king Demetrius and told hym that Jonathas besieged the tastle.

22 So when he hearde it, he was angry, and imniediatly came bnto Ptolontats,

@ Wrote vnto Jonathas, that he chould

not lay siege to the tastle, but tome and speake with hym at Ptolomais in all

haste. Wee ra i
23 ‘Aenertetelle „when Jonathas heard this, he commannded to besicge it: We

chole also certapne of the elders and priestes of Ilrael, and put him selke in peryll, ‘i |

24 And toke with him golde,filuer, clothing, and diuers presentes, and went to
Ptolomais vnto the king, and. founde him gracious. W

25 Andthoughtertapne vngodly men of his owne people made coniplayntes bpon him,

26 Het the king intreated his predetellours had done vefore, and promoted hym im the fight ok all his kriendes, —

27 Confirmed hym in the hye priesthood

d wtth all the worchip that he had afore,

den and made him his chieke kriend

28 Jonathas allo delived the king that he wonlde make Jurie free , with the three head cities of Samaria, and

Ulch x. d.

the landes perteyning therto: vpon this

did Jonathas promise hym thece hun-

dred talentes. J

29 Wherunto the king contented, and

gine Jonathas wepting of the fame, tonteynmgthese worde :

z0 Ring Demetrius lendeth greeting vnto

his brother Jonathas, and to the people of the Jeswes. N eee
We sende pou here a copie of the letter which we did Write vnto dur cosen Haz sthenus concerning pou, that pe shoulde knowe it. b 1 io
32 Bing Demetris sendeth greeting vnto
Talthenus his father, ners

that were in Jurie, to lay siege

him, »like as

the people ok the Jewes kepe vnto vs, and for the louing kinduefle which they beare towarde vs, we are determined to do them good.

34. Wherkoze Weassigne vntothe toastesof
Judea the three gouernemktes, Alkercma, TLydda and Namatha, whiche are added dito Furic from Samaria and all the landes pertayning there vnto, to be freely separated for such as do satrifice in Hierulalem, both concerning the paymentes whiche the king toke perelp akoretime, t᷑ the kruite allo ot the carth and trees: ö f

35. As for other tithes and tributes that E

belonged vnto vs, we dilcharge them thevof from this tine foort).

36 In like maner we graunt vnto them all the customes of fait, æ crowue taxes, which were brought vnto vs: and this freedome shal they haue ir me and stedfast from this time foorth for euermoze.

37: Therefore, fee that pe make a copie of thefe our letters, and deliver it vnto Jonathas, that it may be set vpon the holy mount in a tonuenient place.

38 After this, when Demetrius the king sawe that his land was in rest, and that no resistaunte was made against him, he sent away all his hoast, euery man to his owne place, extept certapne bandes of straungers, whom he brought from the Jles of the Heathen: Wherefore all his fathers hoast hated hun.

C.

39 Mobb was ther one Tryphon that had dci e.

ben of Alexanders part afoze, whiche when he saw that all the hoast murine red against Demetrius, he went to Daz malcue the Arabian, that brought vp
Antiochus the sonne of Alexander,

40 And lap sore vpon him to deliuer hym

this poung Antiochus, that he might vaine in his fathers steade e tolde hun also what great enpli Demetrius had done e how his men ol warre loued him not: i so remayned there a long leason.

41 And Jonathas {ent puto king Demetris, to driue them out which were in the castle at Hierulalem, aud thole that
Were in the fortresses, for they dyd PE rael great harme. ;

42 So Demetrius lent word buts Jonathas, laying, J will not onip do these thinges for ther and thy people: but at time conuement J wil do both thee and thy people great worship. N

N (ati) 43 Wut

Fi

if thon wilt lende me men to helpe nie: for all myne arne is gone feo me.

44 So Jonathas sent hyim three thoufande sfrong men vnto Antioch, e they tame vnto the king, Wherefore the king was very glad at their comming.

45 But thep that were of the title, euen an hundred and twentie thousand men, gathered them together in the middest of the citie, c would haue slaine the king:

46 Mhlche fled into his tourt, and the citezins kept the streetes ol the titie, and beganto fight.

47 Thenthe king called forthe Jewes

helpe, which tame vnto himaltogether, and went abrode thorowe the citie,

48 And flue the lame dap an hundred thoufand men, set fire bpon the ettie, and gat many spoples in that dap, and deliuered the king.

49 So when the citezins sawe that the
Jewes had gotten their will ok the citie, and they them selues disapointedoftheir purpofe, thep made their supplication vnto the king, sapingn:

50 Graunt vs peace, and let the Jewes ceasse from troubling vs and the citic,

51 And ppon this they tast away their
Weapons, Thus they made peace and the Jewes gat great worchip in the fight ol the king and in the fight of all that were in his realnie, and were spoken of thronghout the kingdome: and so they tanie againe to Pierusalem with great goodes.

52 So the king Demetrius fate in the tone of his kingdome, and had peate in his lande.

$3 NMeuerthelesle, he dillembled in all that

euer he spake, and withdrewe hym selke from Jonathas neither rewarded him

actorduig to the benefites which he had oor kor hym, but troubled hym very ore. 1 7
54 After this came Tryphon againe with young Antiochus, which raigned € was trowned king. ö + F,
55 Then there gathered vnto him all the menof warre whom Demetrius had put awap, these fought against Demetrius: whith fled and turned his backe.
56 So Tryphon toke the Elephantes, and
Wan Antioche. ei. .& !
57 And poung Antiochus wrote vnto Jonathas, saping: I confirme thee in thy prilthood, and make thee ruler of koure

J. Machabees.
43 Wut now thou chalt do me a pleature countreps, that thou maptt bea feienpe

N 2 11 f

58 Vpon this he sent hym golden

to be serued in, and gaue hym 0 8 danke in golde, to be clothed in purple and to Weare a toller of goldee.

59 De made his brother Simon allo cap tapne, from the coastes of Tyrus bno the borders of Egypt.

60 Then Jonathas toke his tourney and went thorowe the cities beponde the water of Jordane, andall themenof warre of Spria gathered them vnta hym fo2 to helpe hym: So he tame vnto
Alcalon, æ they of the cite receaned hym
Yonotbiy, ee! co) ee tee

6t And from thence went he to Gaʒa but they woulde not let Hyman: wherefore he layed siege vnto it, burning vp and

Ae the plates that were about the

62 And the citesins of Gaza snbnitted them selnes vnto Jonathas, whiche made peace with them: but toke of their sonnes to pledge, sent them to Pierulalem, and went thorow the tountrey vnto Mamascus. 3

63 Nob when Jonathas heard that Demetrius princes were tome into Canes which ts in Galilee, with a great hoast, purposing to dryue hinriout of the coun: trep: Aa

64. He tame against them, and left Simon his brother in the lande. _—

65 And Simon came to Bethsura, and layed siege toit a long season, aud dilcomfited them. ———

66 Sothep defired to haue peace with hym:whiche he graunted them, k alter:
Warde put them out from thence, toke the eitie and fet men to kepe it.

67 And Jonathas with his hoast came to the Water of Genelar, and betimes in the mozning gat them to the playne fielde of 30 :: ; ures |

68. And behold; the hoastes of the heathen mette them in the kielde, € layed watch foz them in the mountapnes:

69 So that when Jonathas canie against

them , the other whiche were taped
8 watch role out of their places and ought t. =
70 And they that were of Jonathas — fled euery man, e there was 8 them left, except Maͤthathias the lo ot of Ablalomus, and Judas the forme?

Calphi the captayne of the 1 Then

lapde earth vpon his head, © made his

aper, .
_ satu cee againe to them in the fielde,

where they fought together, and he put them to flight.

How when his owne men that were

fed, fave this, they turned againe vnto

Klrldt
0 5 af

am 1 Ea the time was meete

EN N kor him, chose tertaine
2 men, and sent them vn-

to Rome foe to sta-

blish and to renue the frendship with them:

2 He sent letters allo vnto Sparta, and to other places in lyke maner.

3 Sothey went vnto Nome, and entred

‘ume, Into the counsel, and saide: Jonathas the hie priest € the people ofthe Jewes,

sent vs puto pou forto renue the olde frendship and bonde of loue.

4 Upon this the Romances gaue them fret pasportes, that men choulde leade ps home into the land ol Juda peace: a

v.

5 And this is the copie of the letters that Jonathas wrote vnto the Spartians. e a

6 Jonathas the hie priest, with the elders, priestes, and the other people of the Jewes, sende greeting vnto the

V Hpartians their brethzen.

won: 7 There were letters sent long ago vnto Onias the hie priest, from’ Arius which then raigned aniong pou, that pe are our brethren, as the copie here bnder wutten doth spe tifice.

8 And Dnias entreated the Ambassadour that was sent honorably, and receaued the letters, wherein there was mention made of the bonde ot loue and rendchip. Alte ziji —

ut as sor vs, we neede no such wrytinges, for why: we haue p holy bookts of serpture in our handes to our comfort.

10 Ntuerthelesse, we had rather sende

nto vou, foz the renuing of the brotherhood and scendchtp, eit we womde be

raunge unto vou: for it is long sinte the time that ye {ene worde vnto vs.

iMacvila.

I. Viachabees.
| i Then Jonathas rent his clothes, him, and helped hum to folowe vpon all

q.

their enemies vnto their tentes at Cades, and there they camped.

74. Sd there were flaine of the heathen

the fame day three thouland men, and
W turned agate to Pierulaem. 1 ? ‘

— The. xij . Chapter. sFonathas sendeth Ambassadourg to Rome. 2 and to the people ol Sparta to renue 4 their couenaunt or krendship. 20 Jonathas putteth to Might the princes of Demetriug. 40 Cryphon taketh Jonathas bp deceite. :

Sf, Mnathas feeing that n Wherkore, in the lacrifices that we of:

fer, and other teremonies vpon the hie folempe dayes, and other, we alway remember pou without ceaffing, lyke as reason is, and as it becommeth vs to thinke vpon our brethren, |

12 Bea, and are right glad of pour prolperous honour. 1

13 And though we haue had great troubles and warres, fo that the kinges about bs haue foughe against bs:

14. Bet woulde we not be greeuous vnto vou, nor to other of dur louers ⁊ frendes in these warres. 5

15 For we haue had helpe from heanen that hath succoured vs, fo that we are
Delivered, and our enenues subdned.

16 Mherefore we chose Numenius the sonne of Antiochus, and Antipater the sonne of Jason, and sent them vnto the
Romances ,foz to renue the olde bonde ot frendship and lone with them.

17 We tonimaunded them also to come vnto vou, to salute pou, and to deliner vou our letters concerning the renouation of ont brotherhood.

18 And now ye (hal do right wel to gene vs an aunswere thereunto.

19 And this is the copie of the waiting 2 which Arius the king ol Sparta sent vnto Onias.

20 Arius the king ofthe Spartians, sendeth greeting vnto Onias the Hic pact:

1 Or,
Leagat.

21 It is founde in writing, that the Spar-

tians and Jewes are brethren, c cone out ofthe generation of Abraham:

22 And now forsomuch as this is come to our knowledge, ye shall do wel to write vnto bs of pour prosperitie.

23 As for vs; we haue written our nunde buto pou, onr cattaile and goodes are vours, and vours ours: these thuiges haue we cõmaunded to be Hered vnto

— = you,

J.

Machabees.

pou, | called Caphetetah was kallen
24 When Jonathas heard that Deme- 5

trius painces Were tome foorth to fight
1 11 him with a greater hoast then

fore, i

25 he Went from Pierusalem, and met

them in the land of Heniath:for he gaue

them not space to cone into his owne tountrey.

26 And he fent {pies vnto their tentes,

which tame againe and tolde him that

they were appoynted to come vpon hin “

in the night sealon. 4

27 Wherefore when the sunne was gone downe, Jonathas cOmaunded his men to watch all the night, and to be redie

With weapons for to fight, and let

watchmen rounde about the hoast.

28 Wut whenthe aduerlaries heard that
Jonathas was redie with his nien to the battatle, they feared, € were afraid

in their heartes, and kindled fires in

their tentes, brake bp, and gat them away.

29 Meuerthelesse, Jonathas and his tompauy knewe it not tithe mozning, for they sawe the fires burning. R

30 Then Jonathas folowed bpon them, but he might not ouertake the, kor they

were gone ouer the water Eleutherus.

31 So Jonathas departed vnto the A-

rabians, which were called Zabadei,

fluc them and toke their goodes.
32 He proceeded further allo, and tame vnto Damastus, and went through all the tountrey. F
33 Wut Simon his brother toke his iourbes e de dene rong holdes, departing onto Joppa and Wanit, * : Sov 3
34 (For he heard that they would deliver the holde to themthat tobe Demetrius parte) Whertoze he fet men of warre in the citie to kepe it. a
35 Akter this came Jonathas home a: gaine, and called the elders of the peo: ple together, and deuiled with them fo2 to build bp the strong holdes in Jurie,

36 And to make the Wales of hierula-

lem higher, to fet vp an hie wall betwirt the tastle and the titie, for to separate it

fromthe titie, that it might be alone, and

1 men should neither bye nor sell in
1 Wee

37. Upon this, they came together kor to

builde vp the citle, and forsomuch as the
Wall vpon the brooke of the east fide,

re hey = 18) ees —— nd Simon fee vp Adiada in }

la, and made it strong, feting penner

ln en Pars

39 Mob When Tryphon purposraigne in Afia, to be owned, i e s rade e "oe -

4.0 He was atraide that Jonathas would not suffer him, but fight Again hun
Wherefore he went about to take Jonathas and to kill him: So he departed,

and came Dito Gethlan.
41 Then went Ponathas foorth againg hun to the battaile with sourtie thou-

Downe 75

i. Vac. xi

land chofen men, and came buto Weth-

san also: N.
42 But when Tryphon lawe that Jona-

thas came with fo great an heaftto de-

stroy him, he was akraide: f

43 And therefore he receaucd him hono- 1

rablp, commended him buto all his

kriendes, and gaue hun rewardes, and

commaunded his men of warre to be as obedient vnto him, as to him selke:

44. And saide vnto Jonathas, why hast ö

thou taused this people to take luch tra: a „seeing there is no warre betwirt
82 Nr Tk

45 Therekore sende them home againe, and choofe certaine mento wapte vpon thee, and tome thou with me to Ptolomais: for I wyll geue it thee, with the

other strong holdes, men ok warre, aud

their officers: as for nie, J imust depart, this is onely the canfe ol my coming.

4.6 Jonathas beleued him, and did as he

lade, putting away his hoast, which went into the lande of Juda. —
47 He kept but three thouland by hun,

whereof he fent two thonland into Gu-

ae and one thouland went with him

Cite; |

48 Now affooneas Jonathas cutred into Ptolomals, the citezins sparred the gates of the titie, and toke hun and fluc
Ml them With the [worde that tame in
With him. ea AS

o

49 Then sent Tryphon an hoattoffoote-

men and horsmen to Galilee, and into . the great plame field, to neitrop all Jo

nathas company: °

Was takeli, and ait they Hane gez ted vpon him, they toke counsel- As ther, and encouraged one anotoeg 5 it tamc foorth againt themrcatet 5185

58 But when kheyknewe that Porathas

a I. Machabecs. a Ci].

— So when they which folowed boon lamentation. .

5 them, sawe that it was a matter of lyfe, 53 Then al the heathen that were round they turned backe againe, “about them, songht to destroy them:

2 As for the other, they went into the 54. For they laid, Now haue they no caplande of Inda peateablp, and bewapled onathas and them that were with im right sore: and Ilrael made great

taine, nor any man to helpe then, therfore let vs ouercome them, and roote dut their name from among men.

0 The. xiij. Hapter.

After Jonathas was taken, Simon is cholen captaine, 17 06 whom Cryphon taking his children and monep kor the redemption ol Jonathas, hilleth him and his children. z Che graue ot Jonathas.ʒi Crpphon killeth Antiochus. and polselleth the realme. 3s wee metriũs taketh truice with Simon. . Simon winneth Gaza, o He possesseth the towre of Sion. ; He maketh his sonne John captaine.

we when Simon
IAbeard that Tryphon
‘4 gathered a great hoast
EAto come info the lande

— great fearekulnes and care:

e tame vp to Hierusalem, and gathered the people together,

3 And gaue them exhortation, faying: 1 and

Be know what great battailes mp brethren and my fathers boule haue fought for the lawe and the fanctuarie;
925 what nianer of troubles we haue eene. N 1 N baue 4 Though occasion hereof, all my

brethren are slaine for Ilraels sake, and

Jam lekt alone. 5 N

5 And nob let not me spare mne owne lyfe in any maner of trouble, for Jam no better then utp brethren:

6 Wut wyll auenge mp people and the lanctuarie, our children and our wpues: fo; all the heathen are gathered together to destroy vs, of berp mallce.

5 7 At these wordes the heartes of the people were kindled together,

8 So that they tried with a londe voyce,

laying: Thou shalt be our eaptaine,in

ae of Judas and Jonathas thy bre-

n:

DPOrder thou our battaile, and whatsoeuer thou commaundest vs, we shall do

10 So he gathered all the men ok warre, making halte to finiche all the walles of
Hlerulalem, which he made strong

1 rounde about. 5

Then sent he Jonathas the sonne of blalomus with a kreche hoast vnto

Joppa, Which droue them out that were

in the castle, and reinalued there him

cite, ‘

12 Tryphon alfo remoued from ptolomais with a great armie, to come into

14 But when Tryphon knewe that Si-

mon stoode vp in steade of his brother
Jonathas, and that he would warre az gainst him , he lent messengers vnto him, saping: *

a AVN HOF Suda, andto destroy the lande of Juda, and Jonathas with tt, him, in warde. N a
, And saw that the peo- 13 And Simon pitched his tentes at Ade „or, ao dus befoze the plaine fielde. C

15 Where as we haue kept Jonathas.

thy brother, it is for money that he is owing in the kinges accompt, concerning the bufines that he had in hande.
16 WWherefore, sende nowe a hundred talentes of siluer and his two sonnes fo?

suretie( that when he is letten loorth, he

thal not forsake vs) and we shall sende him againe.

17 Neuerthelesse, Simon knew that he distenibled in his wordes: pet cõmaunded he the money and children to be deliuered vnto him, lest the Jlraelites might haue hated him,

18 And saide, Weeaule he sent him notthe money andthe children, therefore is Jonathas dead.

19 So Simon sent him the children and an hundred talentes: but he dissembled, and would not let Jonathas go.

20 Afterwarde came Tryphon into the lande to destroy it, aud wen rounde about by the way that leadeth vnto Ador: But wheresoener they went, thy: ther went Simon and his hoast also.

21 OW they that were inthe castle, sent niessengers vnto Tryphon, that he should make haste to come by the Wil

dernesse and to sende them bitalles.
22 And

J. Machabees.

eng

22 And Tryphon made redie al his horl- thinges wherein we made pou fice,

men to come the lame night: neuerthe- 38 And the appopntinent that we make

lesse, it was a bery great ino we, fo that he cate not betause ok the sno we, but he remoued and went into the tountrep of
Galaad.

23 And when he drue nye Waschama, he fluc Jonathas and his sonnes there,

24 And then turned for to go home into his owne lande.

25 Then sent Simon for to fetch his brothers dead coarle, and buried it in Modin his fathers citte. -— 9

26 So al Plcael bewayled him with great lamentation, and mourned foz him very longe. f gat

27 And Simon made vpon the {eputehre of hig father and his brethren, a building, hie to loke vnto of free stone, be hinde aud before, - 2

28 And set vp seuen pillers vpon it one against another, for his father, his mother, and foure brethren, 5

29 And let great pillers rounde about ther, with armes vpon the: kor a perpetuali memorte, and carued shippes behoe the armes, that they might be seene of nien sayling in the sea. = |

| 38 Tiis sepulchze which he made at Mo-

Din, standeth pet vnto this day.
Moe as Tryphon went foorth to

Walke wich the young king Antiothus,

he siue hun trapterouslp,

32. And raigned in his steade, trowned

him selfe king of Alia, and did much cuil in the lande.

F 33 Simon also but bp the tastles in Jurie waking them strong with hie tows erg, great walles, portes and lockes, and lapde vp vitaules in the stronge holdes.

34. And Sinion chofe tertaine men, x {ene them to king Demetrius, to delire him that he would discharge the lande from all bondage, for Tryphon had spoyled it very fore.

35, Whereupon Demetrius the king aun: swered him, and wrote vnto him, after this maner:

36 Demetrius the king sendeth greeting bind Simon the hie prick his friend,
With the elders € people of the Jewes:

37 Iche golden crowne and precious tone that ye sent vnto vs, haue we teccaned, umd are redie to make a stedfast peace

Wr) you, yca and co write vnto our offi

cers 10200 release pou, concerning the

fol: ph. cap a i

X. II. can,

with pou, chalde firme and stable: strong holdes which ve! a abe — 2 . h ve haue buildtd,

39 on anp duersight o2 fault comnyeted vnto this day, we forgeue it, ani the crowne tare that ve ought vs allo: And where as was any other tribute in Heerusalens it Hat now be no tribute:

4.0 And loke who are nieete among vou to be in our tourt, let them be Witten vp that there may be peate betwirt vs.

41 Thus the poke of the heathen was ta:

kenfrom Ilrael, in the hundred and leuentith pere. * .

4.2 And the people ofthe Jewes began to
Write in their letters aud actes on this maner:: Mn the lirst vere of Simon the . hie prick, a gouernour and prince ofthe 5 *
Jewes. 2

43 In those dayes went Simon onto
Ga3za,€ besieged it rounde abont, where he {et vp ordinaunte of warre, and wan
à towre, which he toke.

44 So theythat gat into the tore, lept into the titie, which was in a great feare:

45 Jnlomuch that the people of the citte rent their clothes, and clymed vp vpon the alles, with their wiues and chil dren, beseching Simon to be at one with them, saying:

46 O re warde vs not after our wickednesse, but be grations vnto vs, (and we
Mall do thee leruice.] a

47 Then Simon loz very pitie woulde fight no moze against then, but put the out of the titie, and cansed the houles whereinthe images were to be clensed, and so entred the citie with plalmes of prayse, geuing thankes vnto the Lorde.

48 So when he had cast all abhominations out ok the citie, he fet such men init as kept the lawe of God, and made the
Citic strong, and builded a dwelling place for hint selfe. ’

9 Row when they in the castle at hierufalem were kept fo Araightly that they toulde not come foorth no? go int the countrey, e might neither byenot sel, they were very hungry, and many d them famished to death: mon

50 Insomuch that they besought Sin 5 tobe at one with them, which he 5 tedthem : So he put hem our thence, and clensed the caltte from nesse. $1 And

I. Machabees.

Cu].

And vpon the twentie and three day day shoulde be kept euerp pere With

st ape fecond moneth a the Hundred

gladnesse,

thrcestore and elenenth pere, hep entred 33 And made strong the hal ol the tem-

into it with thankesgeuing, and braunches of paulme trees, with harpes, traudes, tymbales, and lutes, singing plalmes and songes of praise vnto God, fo: that the great enemie of Pract was

ouertome.
52 And Simon ordatned that the same

ple that was beside the tastie, where he dwelt him lelfe with his tompany.

34. Simon allo perctauing that Jhon his

sonne was a mightie man of armes,

made him captaine of all the hoastes, , sastig.

and cauled hin to dwell at Gasa,

The. xiiij. Chapter.

q Demetrius is ouercome oł Arlaces. u Simon being captaine, there is great quiet: nelle in rack, 8 Che couenaunt o krendship with the Romanes and with the peo-

A1

ple of Sparta is renued.
— NM the hundred three-
SD) (yl (coxe and twelfth pere,
Fe] de gathered king Demewee] IS") | teins bis hoast, and de-
Gs >) || || parted vnto Media, to
2 get him helpe for to

Cee fight again Try-

phon.

2 Now when Arfaces the king of Persia and Media, heard that Demetrius was entred within his borders, he sent one of his princes to take him aliue, and to bung him vnto him.

3 So he went and flue Demetrius hoast,

toke hun selfe, brought him to Arfaces, which kept him in warde.

4 And all the lande of Juda was in rest fo long as Simon liuẽd, fo2 he sought the wealth of his people, therfoze were they glad to haue him kor their ruler, and to do him worship alwap.

5 Sinion wan the titie of Joppa also lor an hauen towne, and made it an entraunte into the Jles of the sea:

6 Pe enlarged the borders of his people,

and conquered them more lande:

57 He gathered vp many of their people that were prisoners, he had the domintonof Gaza, Wethsura, and the caftle which he cleanted from filthynes, and there was no man that resisted him.

3 So that euerp man titled his grounde in peate, the lande of Juda and the trees gaue their fruite and entreale.

9 The elders late all in indgement, and toke their deuite for the Wealth of the lande, the young men put on worshippe aud har nesse vpon them.

lo He prouided vitailes for the cities, and made goodly strong holdes of them: so that the fame of his Worship Was spo-

ken ol vnto the ende of the worlde.

11 »Forhe made peace throughout the lande, and Ilrael was full ot mirth and iop

trees, and there was no man to frape them awap.

13 There was none in the lande to light against them, kor then the kinges were ouertome. —

14. He helped thole that were in aduersitie among his people, he was diligent to see the lawe kept: as for suth as were

vnagodlp and wicked, he toke them a-

Wap.

15 Pe set vp the sanctuary, and entrealed the holy vessels of the temple.

16 When the Nomanes and Spartians had gotten worde that Jonathas was dead, they were right sory:

17 But when they heard that Simon his brother was made hie priest in his steade, and how he had wonne the land againe with the cities in it:

18 They wrote vnto him in tables of brasse, to renue the frendship and bonde of loue whith they had made afore
With * Judas and Jonathas his brc-

thren.
19 Which writinges were read before the congregation at Hierusalem. And this

Le. xxvi. a.

0 0 : — i
Euerp man late vnder his vine x ligge

C

j. Mac. viii. c. and xj1.a.

is the copie of the letters that the Spar- D

tians lent:

20 The Senatours and titezins of Sparta fend greeting vnto Simon the great priest, with the elders priestes, and the en people ofthe Sees their brethren:

21 When your Ambafladours that were sent vnto our people, certified vs of pour worship, honour, € prosperous W

4 I. Machabees.

we were glad of their comming.

22 And Hane witten the ambaflage in the publke retozdes in this maner: namely] that Mumenius the sonne ok
Antiochus, and Autipater the sonne of
Jason the Jewes amballadours, are rome vnto vs, sor to renuethe olde frendship with vs.

23 Upon this the people concented, that the men Mould be honorablp intreated, and that the copie of their ambassage should be Wiitten in the speciall boolles of the people for a perpetuall memorie vntothe Spartians, pea and that we should fend a copie of the fame vnto Simon the great priest.

24. After this, did Simon lend Munmenius vnto Wome , with a golden shielde

okathouland ponnd waight, to confirme

tze krendship with them.
25 Whith whenthe Nomanes vnderstoode, they aide: What thankes chall we srecompente againe onto Simon and his chudzen-
26 For he and his brethren and the house ok his father, hath stavlished Israel, and onercommed their enemies, Wherefore

they graunted him to be free, and confir-

med the libertie thereof: therefore they
AIbrote this in tables of brasse, aud set it vpou pillers in mount Sion.

27 The topic of the wating is this: The cighteenth day of the monet) Elul, in the hundred threestore and twelfth pere, in the third pere of Simon the hie priest,

28 Hit the great congregation of the priclics rulers of the people, and elders

dach, dier of the tountrey at Saramel, were
. these wordes openty declared:

29 Forlomuch as there was much warre mour laude, therfore Simon the fonne of Pathathias tome ok the ehilozen of
Jarib, c his brethren put them felues in perill, and relisted the enemies oftheir people, that their sanetuary and lawe

might be maintapned, and did their people great worship.

30 Jonathas in lpke mauer, after that he
Had governed his people and ben their

5 hie priest, dyed, and lpeth buried belide his elders.

zi Aifter that would their enemies haue kroden their holp thinges vnder foote, destroped their lande, and vtterlie wa-

sted their sanctuary. g
32_ Then Simon withstoode them, and fought kor his people, spent much of his

owue monep, weaponed g men ok his peonle,gaue the eee

33 Made strong the cities of Guna With
Wethlura that eth yponihe borders
5 1 pact 45 e oftheir

Oimetime, and set Fey there foz to kepe it, iene tes

34. He made tak Hoppa also wis bpon the sea ad Gaza that Wade bpon Asotus where the enennes DWelt n> akore, and there he {et Jewes to kepeit: ad uo ter was matte for the ub:

_ Buing of theaduerfaries, tl al obe

35 Now when the people lawe the actes of Simon, atin What aan purposed to do for them his godly behauour and faithfulnes which he Rept vuto them and how he sought by al wayes the wealth ok his people: because he did all this, therefore they chofe him to be their printe and hie prielt.

36 And in his thine they prospered wel by him, so that the heathen were taken out of their lande, and they allo which were in the citie ok Daum at Pierusalem in the tastle, where they went out and defiled all thinges that Were about the lanetuarp, and did great harme vnto cleanlinesse: ö G

37 And Simon put men okthe Jewes ln t for the defence of the land and cilie, and tet vp ihe walles of hierulalem.

38 And king Demetrius confirmed him in his high priesthood 5

39 Forthese causes: made him his friend, and did him great Worchip:

40 For he heard that the Komanes called the Jewes their friendes, louers, aud brethren: howe honorably they reteaucd Simons Anibaladours:

41 Howe the Jewes and prieltes concer? ted that he should be their prince and hie priest perpetuallp, till God raysed vp the true prophete: '

42 And that he choulde be their captaine, to care for the sanetuarie, and to let offiters dpon the workes thereof, ouer the lande, ouer the weapons, ouer the bene
15 of Gig to make peoutfion for the

oly thinges,

43 Ando be obeyed of euery man and 0 the Writinges ok the lande to bonne his name, bat he chould be clothed

urple and golde:

* And that it chould be lawfull fo oe

of the people nor priestes to breake ! at

I. Machabees..

fe thinges, to withstand his words,
11110 callin congregation in the lande without him: that he chould be clothed in purple, and Weare a coller ofgolde.
¢ Andif there were any which difobeyed or brake this ordinaunte, that he should be punished. —
46 So al the people conlented to alow Simon, E to do actording to these wordes:
Simon allo him selfe toke it vpon Hint,

and was content to be the hie priest, the taptaine and prince of the Jewes and

prziestes, and to gouerne them all.

48 And Hey commaunded to make this writing in tables ol brasse, and fasten it vnto the wall that compasseth the sanctuary, in an open place:

49 And to lay vp aà copie of the fame inthe

trealurie, that Simon and his posteritie

might haue it.

Me. xy. (hapten, =

„ 1 Anttochus maketh a couenaunt of krendship with Simon, 11 and Cryphon is per- 15

Ae metrius, fent letters rom the Nes of the
Fi) fea, vnto Simon the hie priest and printe of f Athe Jewes, and to all

the people, rei,
2 Concerning these wordes: Antiochus

the king sendeth greeting vnto Simon

7 priest, and to the people of the ewes. f

3 Forsomuch as certaine wicked men

haue gotten the kingdome olf dur pro-

genitours, I haue purposed to chalenge the realme againe, and to restore it to

the olde estate: noberefore J haue ga-

thered a great hoa, and made shippes of warre: >
4 That J may go through the tountre yp, and be auenged of thein which haue destroyed our lande, and wasted many cilies in mp realme. N
5 And therefore nowe J make thee free also from all the tributes whereot all kinges my progenitours haue dilchar-

ged thee, & froin other customes where-
16 Tucius the consull of Rome, sendeth

from they haue releassed thee, whatloeuer they be:
6 Bea, J geue thee leaue to finite money ol thyne owne within thy lande. N

7 As for Hierusalem, J wyll that it be holy and free, and all the weapons and

houles ol defence which thou hast buil-
1 kepest in thyne handes shable r

8 Whereas any thing is or shalbe owing puto the king, J forgeue it the, from this time foorth for euermoree.

And when we haue obtayned our kingdome, we hall do thee, thy people; and the temple, great worship sfo that

With Tryphon.

n Sothe kung Antiochus folowed ppon hun: but he fled vnto Doza, which lyetih

by the sea ide: .
12 For He lawe that there was nuschiese tomming vnto him, and that his hoast

had forsaken him.

z Then came Antiochus vnto Dora

with an hundred and twentie thousand

cut}

C

men ok armes on foote, and epght

thoufand horsmen: fo be tompassed the titie rounde about, aud the lhippes came pypythe lea.

14 Thus they vexed the titie by land and

by water, insomuch that they {uttered -

no man to go innor out.
15 In the meane season cante* Mumenius, t they that had ben with him, from the citie of Rome, hauing letters wit ten vnto the kinges € prouinces, wherein were tontayned these wordes:

greeting vnto Ptolomithe king.

17 The Ambassadours of the Jewes our friendes, being sent from Simon the hie pric, and from the people of the
Jewes, tame vnto vs for to renue the

dlde friendhip and bonde ok loue,

18 Brought a shielde of golde weying a thoufand pounde,

19 Wherefore, we thought it good to write vnto the kinges and prouinces, to do them no harme, nor to take part against them, their cities, nor countries,

i. Mac.. d.

neither to maintaine their enemies a-

gainst them.
20 And

J. Machabees.

were content to reteaue ok fame, other flue hundred talcnreg:
20 Aud We no, we Halt tome and ff r

the shielde. a Afthere be any wicked persons there:

fied from their countrey vnto pou,

enue cei vnto Simon the hie priest,

that he may punishe them atcording to

their owne lave. —

22 The same wordes Wrote the Romanes

alfo vnto Demetrius the king, to Atta-

ins, Araba, Arlare s

23 And to all regions: as Sanifanes, to

de them of Spartia, Melo, Mydo, SF

Alicarnassem, and to the Rhodes, to

Faselidis, Coo, Hida, Arado, Cortyna,

Guidum, to Cypres, and Cyzeen.

24 And ae they sent a topie to
Simonthe hie prielt.

D 25 So Autlehus the king brought his

hoast vnto Dora the setond tune to take

it, where he made diuers ordinaunte of

warre, and kept Tryphon in that he should not go eyther in or out.

26 Then sent Simon bnto Antiochus two

thoufand choseu men to heipe him, with

golde, siluer, € other plenteous thinges.

27 Menerthelelle, he woulde not receane them, but brake all the touenaũt which he made with Simon afore, and with: drewe him selke from him.

28 He sent Athenobius also a frend of his vnto Simon fo2 to reason with pin, faying: Be withholde fro me Joppa and Gaza, with the tastle that is at Hie-

rulalem, which are tities or my realme,

29 Whole borders pe haue destroyed, and done great eu in the lande, hauing the
DOMINION in manpother plates of my kingdoie.

30 Wherkore deliuer now the cities which ve haue taken, with the tributes of the places that ve haue rule vpon without the borders of Jurie:

zi Orels geue mefiue hundred talentes of

E

siluer:yca € for the harnie that ye haue

donc in the cities € for the tributes okthe

The. */. Chapter.

he: don, Caria, Sanios, Paniphilia, Lptia,

5 ght agar;
32 So Athenobius the kinges aaa

came to Hterufalentanp when he the great worchip € honour oF Sine

in golde, siluer, so great plentie of ornamentes, he marnatien: g tolde Simon

as the king commaunded hin, 4

Then aunlwered Simon, and lade

vnto hum: As for vs, We haue neither taken other mens landes, noz withhol- 4

denthe: but onelp our fathers heritage,

which our enennes had vnri
. 1 a Eben , eule
34 eritage of our farhers hau chalenged in piotelleoftinte . 1
35 And Whereas thon complapnest con: cecning Joppa c Gaza, they did great harme to our people and in our lande, pet wyll we geue an hundred talentes fozthem. Heuerthelelle, Athenoblus aunlwered him not one worde: ‘

36 But turned againe wrothkully vnto the

Ring, E tolde hun al these words, and the great dignitie of Simon, with al that he had seene: e the king was very augry.

37 And in the meane time fled Tryphon by ship vnto Orthosias.

38 Thenthe king made Cendebeus cap: F

tame of the sea coast, and gaue him an hoast of footemen and horsemen,

39 Commaunding him to remoue the hoast toward Jurie ,eto builde dp the citie of Cedron, to make vp the portes, and to warre against the people ofthe
Jewes: As lor the king him selle, he lolowed bpon Tryphon.

40 So Cendebeus came vnto Jamnia,

and began to vexe the people, to treade
Downe Furie, to take the people pziloners, to flay them, .
41 And ? to bude vp Cedron, where he b set horsmen and other men of warre, that they might come foorth, and go through the streetes of Jurie, lyke as the king had tommaunded him.

Cendebeus the captaine of Antiochus hoatt, is put to flight of the tonnes of Simon.

Ptolomeus the sonne of Abobus killeth

Hen came John vp i.Mac.xiii, .

b „Simon his father

0 what Cendebeus had

donc (among their peo.

ple.) *
" Gponthis called Si-

Simon and

John killeth chem that ipe in wapte lor hislpfe.

from“ Gaza, and tolde

his two fonnes at a banket,

mon two ok his eldest formes: le and John, and faide vnto them: 5 my brethren and my fathers hou Pye euer from our youth bp vnto this fen. foughten against the enemies of J ae el: and God gane bs good fortune to liuer Ilrael olttimes.

2 And
Ge

w forsomuch as Jam olde, and
; aby gods goodnesle are of a sufficient age, be pe in steade of me and my broqsher, to go foonth and fight for our peopPle:and the helpe of God be with pou,
So he chose twentie thouland fighting men of the countrey, With hozsemen alfo, whiche went foorth against Cendepers, and rested at Modin. nthe morning they arose and went into the playne fielde , and beholde a nightie great hoast came against them, both of footemen and horsemen: Howe was there a water broke bet wirt them,
6 And John remoued the hoasttowarde them: and when he sawthat the people was afrayde to go ouer the Water broke, he Went ouer first him selfe: and the men leyng this, kolowed him.
Then John let his horsemen and footemen in order, the one by the other: kor their enemles horlemnẽ were very many. g Wut when thep blewe vp the pricies trumpettes, Cendebeus fled with his hoast: whereof many were slayne, and
+ renmaunt gat them to their trong oldes. b b
Judas also Johns brother was wounded at the fame time, and John folowed ili vpon the enennes, till he came to nf. Cedron, Which Cendebeus had builded. io The enemies fed allo vnto the towres that were in the lieldes ol Asotus, and thosc dpd John burne vp with fyze:
Thus there Were slayne two thoufand men of them, and John turned againe peaceably into Jurie.
And in the fielde of Jericho was Ptolomithe sonne of Abobus made captayne: which, because he had aboundaunce ot siluer and golde
2 (For he had maried the daughter of
Simon the hye priest)

3 Waxed proude in his minde, ethoughe , to conquer the land, imagining falshood

Agaͤinst Simon and his sonnes, to detoy them.

Node as Simon was goyng about

thorow the cities that were in the coun:

I. Machabees.

trey of Jurie, and caring for them, he tame done to Jericho with Mathathias € Judas his sonnes, in the hun-
Deed threescore t seuenteenth vert, in the eleuenth moneth, called Sabat.

15 Theusptolomt the fonne of Abobus rez

teaued them, but with disceyte, into a strong boule of his, called Dochus, whiche he had buylded, where he made them a banket, and had hyd men there.

16 So when Simon and his fonnes were

merp, and had drunken well, Ptolomi stoode vp with his men ¢ whom he had hid there] and coke their Weapons, entred into the banket Houle, and due
Simon with his two sonnes, and cers tayne ot his seruauntes.

17 Such great vnfapthkfulnesse dyd Ptolomi in Ilrael, and recompenced cuyit for good. |

18 Then wrote Ptolomi thele thinges,¢ fent vnto king (Antiochus) requiring hun that he shoulde sende hym an hoast to helpe him: and fo Mould he deliuer him the lande, with the cities and tributes of the fame.

19 He sent other men also vnto Gaza foz to take John, and wrote vnto the captapnes to come to him, and he choulde geue them siluer, gold, and rewardes.

20 And to Hierusalem he sent other to take it, and the sanctuarie.

21 Then ran there one before, and tolde B
John in Gaza, that his father and his brethren were slayne, e howe that Ptolomi had sent to slay him allo.

22 When John hearde this, he was fore abashed, and layed handes ofthem that were come to destroy hyme, and fine them: for he knewe that they went about to kill hym

23 As for other thinges concerning John, ok his warres, of his noble actes Wherin he behaued hym selfe manfauily, of the buylding of walles which he made, and other of his deedes,

24. They ave Written in the tronicles of his priesthood, froni the tine foorth that he was made ype priest after his father,

The end of the first booke of the Machabees.

0 0, The

CV.

2. Machabess. _
The feconde booke of the

| | Machabees.
The firft Chapter.

k the Jewes that dweltat Hierutalem, ene vnto them that dwelt in Egppt. eben to geue thankes fo2 the death of Antiochus, 19 Of the ku echat was hyd in the pit. 24 The praper of Pehemtas.

WO Hebretheenofthe u Inlomuch as God hath Delivered pg

Jewes which be
ANS] at Hierusalem, €

a
2 God bt gracious dnto vou, and thinke bpon his couenaunt that he made with
Abraham, Plat, and Jacob, his fapthfull seruauntes:

Deu. xxx. b 3 And geue pou all such an heart that pe map loue and lerue hyin, pea and perfourme his Will with an whole heart and a willing mpnde:

4. Heopen pour heartes vnto his law, and

in his commaundementes e lende von

peate,

5 Heare pour prapers, be at one with von,

and neuer forsake pou in time of trouble,

6 ach às now we here be praying

or vou.

What time as Demetrius raigned, in the hundred threeltore e nyne pere, we
Jewes wrote onto vou in the trouble
E violence that tame vnto vs: Ju thole peres, after that Jason departed out ok the holy lande and kingdome,

3 They brent vp the portes, and ched innocent blood: then made we our prayer vnto the Lorde and were hearde, we offered vp lacritices and fine floure, settuig foorth cakes and bread:

Leuxxiit. 9 And nowe conte pe vnto the feat okta-

Norm bernatles in the moneth'Calleu.

lo In the hundred fourescore and eyghtteene pere, the people that was at Hierulalem and in Jurie, the counfel, and
Judas hin selle, ent this wholsome salutation vnto Aristobulus king Ptold-
Miles matter , whiche came of the gene-

ration of the annopnted priestes, and to

the Jewes that were in Egypt:

from great peryls, we thanke iv, no leffe atall then if we bab ee quiched the king in batten.

32 For when he with those that had fought
5 the holp citic, dyd {et vpon Per-

id:

3 Jor as he was in Persis namely the taptapne with the great hoalt, he perished in the temple of Sraneas beyng nit:
7 3 the deuite of Paneag priestes.

14 For when Antiothus, as he that chould ¢ marry with her, tame, and his kriendeg
With hint , into the plate to reteaue by name of dowrie the money whiche the priestes of Maneas had {et foorth:

15 Me entred with a mall companie into the compasse of the temple, and lo they
{hat the temple.

16 Noble when Antiochus entred by opening the priuy entraunte ot the temple, the priestes stoned the captayne to death, hewed them in peeces that
Were with him, smote of their heades, and threwe them out.

17 In all hinges God be prapsed, which
Hath deliuered the wicked into our handes (to be punisbed

18 Where as we are now purpoled to kepe the purification of the temple vpon the twentie a liue day of the moneth Callen, we thought netessarie to certifie you

therof: that pe alfonnight*bepe the ta te ae bernatles feast day, and the day of the K

fire, whiche was geuen vs when Rehemias offered, after that he had fee vp the temple and the aulter.
19 For what time as our fathers were led away vnto Perlis, the priestes whiche then fought the honour of God, toke the fire priuily from the aulter, and hydit in a valley, where as was 5 drye pit: and therin they kept it that the place was vnknowen to euere

man. 20 f owe

C2

we after many peres when it plea
G5 50d that Mehennas shoulde be lent

om the king of Persia, he sent the chul- | fe 28 Punishe them that oyprelle e proudly D

ders children of thole priestes which bad hyd the fyze, to seke it: and as they told vs, they found no fire, but thicke water.
Thentommaunded he them to drawe lt vp, and to bringit hun, and the offeringes withall. Nowe when the lacrifiers were laped on and ordred, Mehemas conmaunded the priestes to sprinckle thent and the wood with wa-

ter.
When this was done, Ethe tune come

2. Machabees.

horred:that the heathen may know and fee howe that thou only art God, which art our God.

7 10 to .

29 Set thy people againe in thy holy plate

*like as Doyles AE .
And the priestes song Plalmes of

thankelgeuing, so long asthe satrifice

31 Mowe When the latrifice was brent,
Mehemas commaunded the great
{tones to be sprinkled with the relidue of the water.

CV].

Deu. xxx a.

Iud. vl. d.

5 32 Which when it was done, there was Kev c

kindled a flambe of them alfo:butit was E tonsumed thorowe the light that shyned from the aulter.
33 So When this matter was knowen, it was tolde the king of Persia, that in the place where the priestes which were led aay had hyd lyre, there appeared water, and that Pehemias and his coniparts had purikied the lacrifices with: all. a
34. Then the king tonsidering and pondering the matter diligently, inclosed the plate, and confecvated a temple, to proue the thing that was done:
35 And when he founde it fo in deede, he gàue the priestes many giktes c diuers rewardes, pea he tobe them with his olbne hand, and gaue them. N
36 And Mehemtas talled the lame place „enn
HNephthar, whiche is as much to lap hebr. as à clensing: but many men tall it Me- tis ae phi. called Sept

The ii. Chapter.

4 Dowe geremie hyd the tabernacle, the arke, and the aulter in the hyll. bookes of Jaton contepned in one.

Eis founde allo in the that they shoulde not let the law of God
N Writinges ak Jeremi go out oktheir heartes.

that the sunne shone whithe afore was pyd in the cloude there was a great fire kindled, in so much that euery man mar-

uepled.

93 Now all the palettes prayed whyle the faccifice was a making: Jonathas praped first, and the other gaue aunswere.

24 And Nehemias praper was after this maner: O Lode God, maker of all thinges, thou fearkull and rong, thou

righteous and mercifull, thou that art onely à gratious king,

25 Only überall, only iust, almightle and euerlasting, thou that deliueveti Jlrael from all trouble, thou that hast chofen the fathers r halowed them fauorablp:

26 Reteaue the offering for thy whole people ol Israel, prestrue thyne owne portion, and halowe it,

27 Gather thole together that are feat: tred abrode from vs, deliuer them that are vnder the heathens bondage, loke bpon them whiche are delpised and ab-

a clenung.

23 DE the kiue

the prophete, that 4. It is witten allo, how the prophete at he tonnnaunded then the tommaundement of God charged
Ii whiche were caried a- them to take the tabernacle k the arke
2 wap, to take fyre, as it with them:and he went foorth bnto the is sayde alore. mountayne where Moyles clyined dp,
2 be tommaunded them allo that they and larbe the heritage of God. could not forget the lawe ccommaun- 5 And when Jeremt tame there, he found dementes ofthe Lorde, and that they anopen caũe Wherin helaped the ta-
Hhoutae not erre in their mindes, when —bernacle,thearke, andthe aulter ol in-
Chey ler images ol fuer and gold, with ceenle, and lo stopped the dooze. their ornamentes. 6 There came certayne men together al-
Dele and such other thinges com: so, folowing him to marke the plate, but maunded he them, and exhozted them they toulde not linde it.
O (ii) 7 Which

Deute. 34 ,

“gabhiche when Jeremie perteaued, he
N pn them, saying: As foz that place it halbe vnknowen, vntill the time that God gather his people together againe, and reteaue them vuto

mercie.

g Then Hall God chewe them these thinges, and the mateche of the Lorde shal appeare a the cloude alfo, tke a3 it
Was (heed vnto Moyles: and like as when Solomon delired that the place might be honorablie fanctified , and it was shewed hym. 5

9 Jor he beyng a wyle man, Handled honorably and wyselp, offering vnto God in the halo wing ol the temple when it

= was finithed.

Leui d. 10 And like as when Doyles prayed vnto the Loe, the fire came downe from heauen, and consumed the burnt offering: Euen fo prayed Solomon allo, and the fire tanie downefromheauen, and consumed the burnt offering.

11 And Moyles fayde: Wetause the sinne offering was not eaten, therefore it is tonsumed. f

12 In like maner Solomon keptthe dedication (oz balowing) epght dapes.

13 Je the annotations and writinges of

W

Exo. xiii d. i. Reg. vii. b

ti. Para. vi. a.

Some reade
Nehemias.

and Howe he made a librarie, and howe he gathered out of all countreys the boakes of the kinges, & ofthe prophetes, and of Daum, and the epistles of the

hinges concerning the holy giftes.
14. Even so Judas also, loke what he learnod by experiente of warre, and luch
C thinges as hath happened vnto vs, he gathered thein altogether, and lo we

haue them by vs.

15 If pt now desire to haue the lame, send some body to fetch them vnto vou.

16 Where as we then are about to celebrate the purification , we haue wzitten vnto you: theretore pe hall do well, il pe kept the lame dapes.

17 Vc hope also, that the God which deliuered his people, and gaue them al the heritage, kingdome, priesthood, and fauctuarte,

Den xxx.a 8 That he promised them in the law, that chortly haue mercte vpon vs, and gather vs together from vnder the heauen intd his holie plate:for he hath saued vs
155 great perpls, and hath tlenled the

1 As concerning Indas Mathabeng

2. Machabees.

eremi were thele thinges put also:

ald his brethren the purification of | aa temple , the dedication of thea

20 Bea and of the warres that co noble Antiochus c | et his tonne i, Mach y

21 And the miracles shewed from heauen . by the valiaunt actes of thofe Which de: fended the Jewes religion, fo that a kewe ran though the whole tountrey ap draue away the barbarous ar

22 Repaired againe the temple that spoken of thzoughout allthe werd nel uered the citie, doyng their bet that the law of the Lod which was put downe might with all tranquilitic be restored agatne vnto the Lord, that was fo mer: tifull vnto them.

23 As touching Jalon also of Cyren, we haue bndertaken compendiously to bring into one booke the thinges that were comprehen ded of him in kpue.

24. Jor we, considering the multitude of the bookes, and howe hardit shoulde be for them that woulde meddle with stoties and artes, and that because of lo diuers matters:

25 Haͤue vndertaken fo to comprehend

the stories, that such as are disposed to reade, might haue pleasure and pastime therin: and that they which are diligent in such thinges, might the better thinke vponthem: pea and that wholdeuer reade them, might haue profite therby.

26 Meuerthelelsse, we our felues that haue medled with this matter for the shoztening of it haue taken no lmall labour, but great Diligence watchinges, and trauaple.

27 Like as they that make a feast, would fayne do other men plealure: euen fo we alid foz many mens lakes, are very Well tontent to take the labour, g

23 Where as we may Mostly tomprehend -)

the thinges that other men haue trucly

29 Forhe that buyldeth an house anewWe, must prouide for many thinges 10 ibe whole buyloing:but he that paynteth

gently seke out euerp part. ,

$1 Lge at afterwarde will schorten it,

pleth fewe wordes, and toucheth not

the matter at the largest: Wet this be sufficient for a prologue.

2. Machabees.
32 Now Will we begin to shew the mat-

CVI J ; ter:for it is butafoolithe thing to make

along prologue, and to be shozt in the storie it lee. me

T he. iii. Chapter.

Ok the hondur done vnto the temple by the hinges of the gentiles. 6 Simon vttereth what treature is in the temple. 9 Heltodorug is sent to take them away. 26 He is striken

ol God, and healed at the player ol Ontas.

Hat tinte as the hoz

lp citie was inhabi-

ted in all peace and e wealth, and when the
Ty lates were pet very well kept: fo; so was it ordepned thorowe the

godlinesse of Onias the bye prieste, and other godly men that were enemies to wickednesse,

syaid,2 It tame therto, that euen the binges

and princes them selnes dyd the plate great worship, and garnished the temple with great giftes:

3 Jnsomuch that Selenens king of Alia ok his owne rentes bare all the coastes belonging to the seruite of the offringes.

4 Then Simon, ot the tribe of Wentamin,

‘Nei, Kuler ok the temple, vpon a variaunte

vifen betweene him e the hygh priest for wickednesse that was done in the citie,

5 Forthat He could not ouercome Ontas, he gat him to Apollonius the sonne of

Neat, Thrasia, which then was chiefe Lodz in Celospria and Phemtes,

6 And tolde hym, that the trealurie in
Hierulalem was full of innunterable money, how that the tommon goodes whiche betonget not vnto the offeringes, were exceeding great alsd: yea and howe it were possible that all these might tome vnder the kinges power.

7 Ho when Apollonius had shewed the king ol the money, as it was tolde him: the king talled for Heltodorus his treasurer, and sent him with a commaunde-

ment to bring him the lame money.

8 Immedtatly Heliodorus toke his iourhep but vnder a colour as though he

woulde go thorowe Celolpria and Phe-

Nites to visite the cities, but his purpole was to fulfill the kinges plealure.

So when he came to Hierulalem, and

as louingly reteaued of the hye priest

into the cite, he tolde what was deter-

mined concerning the money, and chew-

ed the caufe of his tomnung:he alked al fo if it were so in deede/

lo Then the hye priest tolde hym; that there was such money laped vp forthe

vpholding of wydowes and fatherlesse chlldren, =

I And how that a cevtayne of it belonged vnto Hyrcanus the sonne of Tobias a noble man, x that of allthe money Cand not às that wicked Simon had reported) there were foure hundrethtalentes of siluer, and two hundred of golde:

Iz Bea € that it were vnpossible for those mens meaning to be disteaued that had put assured confidence in the holinesse of the place, e inthe maiestie € vndoubted

. fafetteof the tenple, whiche is had in
Worlhip thorowe the whole wozlde, foz e and honour of the

ame. i

33 Whervnto Helioddzus aunfwered, that the king had tommannded hym in any
Wyle to bring hym the money, €

14. Doatthe dapappopnted, Heliodozus entred into the temple to orzder this matter: wherekore there was no hnall feare throughout the whole citie.

15 The priestes fell downe before the ant: ter in their vestinentes, and ealled vnto heauen vpon hym whiche had made a 5 lawe concerning stuffe geuen to kere that they shoulde be salelp preserued for such as tommited them vnto keping.

16 Then who lo had loked the hye prielt in the fate, it woulde haue greeued his heart: for his countenaunce and the chaunging of his colour, declared the ins warde sorowe of his mynde.

17 The man was all in heauinesle, and his body in feare: whereby they that loz ked vpon him, might perceaue the qvicke of his heart.

18 The other people also came out of their poules by heapes vnto the common prayer, because the place was like to tome into tonfulion.

O (iu) 19 The

— — wennde -« GoD. Deidre ora: ———$_,
15 The women came together thorowe God, destitute of all hope and ufe.

the streetes with hearp clothes about thet brestes: the birgins allo that
Were kept in, ranto Dnias , some of them ran to the gates some vp bpon the

Walles, other lome loked out at the

windowes.

20 Hea they all helde vp their andes towarde heauen, and prayed:

21 Amiferable thing was it to loke bpon the common people, and the hie priest beyng in such trouble.

22 Wut they belought almightie God

that the goodes Which were committed vnto them, mightbe kept whole for thofe that had delluered them bnto

their keplng. i N
23 Neuerthelesse, the thing that Heliodo-

rus was determined to do that perfour-

med he in the lame plate, he hyn selle perfonally beyng about the treaturte

With his men of warre.

24 But the spirite of almightie God shew-

ed him lelfe openly, lo that althey which

prelunied to obey Heliodorus, fel thorow the power ol God into a great fearekulnesle and dread.

*Jor there appeared vnto them an horse, with a terrible man litting vpon hin, deckte in goodly arap, and the horse
{mote at Heliodorus with his korefeete:
Nowe he that sate vpon the horse, had harnesse of golde vpon him.

26 Moreouer, there appeared two fapre and beautifull young men ok notable strength in goodly arap, whiche stoode by him, stourged hum of both the hides, and gaue hym manp strppes without teasling.

27 With that fell Piliodorus sodenly vn-

to the grounde, so they toke him vp bepng tompassed about with great darkenesse a bare him out vpon a beere.

E 28 Thus he that came with fo many run-

ners and men ol warre into the sapde treasurie, was borne out, where as no man might helpe hym, beyng destitute of harnesse and weapons: and so the power of God was mantfest r knowen.
29 ꝓt lap still dumbe also by the power ol

Ii. Mach. x. e and xi. b.

Ii. Nach. v. c

zo And they praysed the Lord that h chewed his power vpon bis pia — temple, Which a litle afore was full of keare and trouble, and that throngh the reuelation of tiie almightie Lognit was filled with ioy and gladneffe,

31 Then tertapne of Heltodozus friendes payed Ontas that in al haste he would call vpon God, to graunt hym his lpfe which was geuing vp the gholt.

32 Sothe hye prictt fearing lest the king chould luspect that the Jewes had done
Yeliodorus soineꝰ euyll, he olferedan 992

0 In non:

33 Nowe whenthe bye priest had obtay- mace” tapned his petition, the fame poungmen in the lame clothing appeared, ¢ ftosde beside Meliodorus, saping, Thanke Oniasthe bye priest: kor fo2 his sake hath the Lorde graunteb thee thylpke.

34 Therfore seyng that God hath scourged thee, gene hym prayse and thankes, and shewe every inan his might and power. And when thep had spoken these wordes, they appeared no more.

35 So Heliodorus offered vnto God, made + great vowes bnto hym whiche had graunted him his lpfe, thanked Onias, ene his hoast, and went againe to the

ing.

36 Then testikiev he vnto euerp man or the great workes of God that he had seene with his eyes.

37 And when the king alked Heliodorus who were meete to be lent pet once againe to Hierusalem, he sapde:

Act. xxyi t

38 Il thou hast any enemie 02 aduersarie

puto thy realme, sende him thyther-and thou chalt haue hym punished, if he ef cape with his lyle: fozinthat place”? doubt there is a {pectal power and Wor king ol God.

30 For he that dwelleth in heauen, viliteth and defendeth that place, and all that tome to do it harme he puntthetl) and plagueth them. f

40 This is nowe the matter tonterning
Pellodozus, and the keping ok the tea
{uric Cat Hierulalem.)

The

— a. Mlachabees.

cvl]. ;

— The. iii. Chapter. |

1 Simon reporteth eupll of Onias. 7 Jaton detiring the office of the hie prielt, corrup-

ted the king with re wardeg. 19 Che wicked intent of Jaton,

e 20 Simon — (ot whom we spake a-
Da fore) being a bewrayer

1 2 of the money and of

qs 2 his owne natural coũ-

Nad

— of Onias, as though he had moued Heliodorus vnto this, k ag though he had bena bringer vp of cuil.

2 Thus was he not ashamed to eall hym an enemie of the realme, that was lo fapthkul an ouerseer and defender of the citte and of his people, pea and fo feruen in the lawe of God. i

But when the malice of Simon increased so farre, that thorowe his friendes there were tertayne manflaughters tomuntted: ö 5

4 Onias confivered the peryll that might tome thorowe this ftrpfe, and howe that Apollonius the chiefe Lozde in

Celosiria and Phenices, was al {et vpon tiraunie, and Sumons malice increased the faite:

ge gat him to the king, not as an actuser of the titezins, but as one that by him selfe iutended the common wealth of the whole multitude.

6 FJor he sawe it was not possible to liue in peace, neither Simon to leaue oł from
4 foolichnesse, except the king did loke

erto.

7 But after the death of Heleucus, when

5 Antiochus, Whiehe is called the noble, toke the kingdome, Jason the brother of Omas laboured to be Hye priest:

8 Forhe came vnto the king, and promied him three hundred and threescore talentes of siluer, and of the other rentes kourescore talentes.

GWelides this, he pronnled hym yet an hundred and fiftie more, if he might haue licence to fet vpa scoole and an exercile of

weapons, and that he might call them

ol chierulalem Antiochians.

1 Which when the king had graunted, and he had gotten the superioritie, he began (immediatly to draw his kinsmen to the enstome of the heathen,

u Put downe the thinges that the Jewes had fet vp of loue by Jhon the father of
Eupolonius, whiche was sent ambasla-
Dour vnto Rome kor to make the bonde

n trey, reported p worlt

of friend ship and lone, he put downe all the lawes and liberties of the Jewes, and set vp the wicked statutes.
Iz For when he had made a stoole of fenete vnder the cattle he drewe all the chicfett pong men on his lide, and trapned thein che to were hates. Weist

to take bp newe straunge kachions

brought in thorowe the vngratious and

vnhearde Wickednelle of Jason, which

shoulde not be called a priest, but an vn-
. godly person:

14 Insomuch that the priestes were C

now no moze occupied about the serntce ok the aulter: but despiled the temple, regaͤrded notthe offeringes, yea gauetheir
Diligence to learne to fight, to wrastle, to leape, to daunce, and to cast the Gone :

15 Mot letting by the honour of the faz thers, but liked the glorie of the Grekes best of all:

16 For the which they stroue perplouslp, c were greedy to folow their statutes, pea their lust was in all thinges to be like them, Whiche afore were their enemies and destropers.

17 Hobbebeit to do wickedly against the law of God, Mal not escape vupunished, but of this we shall speake hereakter.

18 What time as the Olimpiaus sporztes There were

were played at Tyrus, the king hym Neth yor

selke beyng present,

19 This vngratious Jason sent wicked men, bearing from them of Hierulalem
(which nowe were called Antiochians) three hundred drachmes of siluer for an offering to Hertules: thele had they that carped them desired vnder such a fashion as though they should not haue ven offered, but bestowed to other bles.

20 Meuerthelesse, he that sentthem, sent thenn to the intẽt that they Mould be of fered vnto Hercules: but because of those that were prefent, they were ge-

uenas to the making of shippes.

21 And Apollouins the sonne of Menestheus Was sent into Egypt, becaute of the noble men of king Ptolon
Phllometor. Nowe when Anttochus perteaued that he was put out from

medling in the reatme, pe fought bebe

8 (ilij his“

were token z And there was luch a feruent desire to wehe come to the maners ot the heathen, and sumo.

> Machabees. _-

his owne p2 4 flay Omas. So when he At Dre as, he tounseled bym craftply to come out ok the fanctuaric, gening hym his hande with an oth, (how be it he suspect hym) and then he fluc Onias Without any regarde ot righteousnessle.

35 „For the whtche caule not onelp the ;
Jewes, but other nations also, toneindignatton, and were displeased fo; the vnrighteous death of fo godly a man.

tame to oppa, and then to Hlerulalem,

W 22 bes he was honorably receaucd of

Jason, and of the citic,and was brought

in with torche light and with great

prapse: and fo he turned his hoast vnto
Phenites.

23 After three peres Jalon (ent Menelaus

lach (the foresapd Simons brother) to beare

the money vnto the king, x to being him

aunswere ok other neceslarie matters.

24. But he when he was tomniended to

the king kor magmfipng of his power,

turned the priesthood vnto him lelfe,tay-

ing vp three hundred talentes of siluer

for Jason.

25 So when he had gotten commaundementes from the king, he tame, hauing nothing that becommeth a priest, but bearing the stomacke of a truel tyraunt,

and the Wath of a wilde bruite beast.

lack 26 Then Jason which had disteaued his owne brother, sepug that he hym feife was begiled also, was fapyne to fice into the lande of the Ammonttes,

27 And Menelaus gat the domunion: but as for the monep that he had promised vnto the king, he dyd nothing therin, al-

beit Sostratus the ruler of the castle required it of him.

E 23. For Sostratus was the man that gathered the tustonies: Wherefore they were both talled before the king.

29 Thus was Menelaus put dut ofthe priesthood, & Tysimachus his brother tame in his steade, and Sostratus lekt

memes, Cxates ouerleer of the Cypuans.

acer it 30 It happened in the meane leason, that

rn, the Tharsians and Mallotians made insurrection, betause they were geuen for a present vnto Antiochus the binges concubine,

31 Then came the king in all haste to still them againe, and to pacifie the matter, leauing Andronicus there to be his deputie as one meecte therfore,

32 How Menelaus supposing that he had gotten aright conuenient time, stole tertayne vessels of golde out of the temple, and gaue them to Andronicus fo2 a present: and some he solde at Tyrus, and in the tities therbp. 1

33 Mhiche when Onias knewe ofa sureeue ro — he kept him in a

uarie belide Daphms, that lyeth b

Antioche. — ee

34 Wherefoze Menelaus gat hym to An-

é

36 And when the king was come againe

from Cilicia the Jewes and tertapne of the Grekes went vnto hym, complayning foz the vnrighteous death of g-

nlas.

37 Bea Antiochus hym felfe was ory in his mynde for Ontas , so that it pitied him: and he wept, rememb ing his sobernesle and manerly behanour.

38 Wherefore he was fo kindled in his minde, that he commaunded Andzonicus to be stripped out of his purple cos thing, and fo to be led throughout the et tie, pea and the vngratious manto be slapne in the same place where he tommitted his wickednesse vpon Onias:
Thus the Lorde rewarded him his punishement, as he had delerued.

39 Robb when Tysimachus had done many wicked deedes in the temple thorow the tounsell of Menelaus, and the bopte tame abrode: the multitude gathered them together against Lylimachus, fo; he had carped out now much golde.

40 So when the people arose, and were full of displealure, TLysimachus armed three thoulande vnthriltes to dekende him, a certapne tyraunt being their captapne, which was growen both in age

and Woodnesse.

41 They therekore seyng the mnterpzile of
Tpsimachus, caught vp, some stones, some blockes endes, F lome handfuiles ol dust that was next aͤt hand, e thiewe

them vpon the rebe

les of Tplimatchus

bande that had fet vponthem · :
42 Thus there were many ofthe Auer 6

Ded, lome beyng flayne, and all the Pie

chaled away: Wut as forthe wie

church robber hym beside the treasurie.

selle, they killed hun

43 Ob these matters therefore, there was kept a tourt against Menelaus. *

44 Now when the king cane to a A three men that were sent from th

uate pleaded him gi

; he king. tie . aut

4 went t promiled Ptolonu the fonne of

2. Machabees.
— But Menelaus being nowe conutet, they schoulde haut ben iudged innocent,

them he tondepmned to death.

Dorpmenes to geue him much money, 48 Thus were they soone punished, which

he woulde pacific the king towarde

hun. |
5 So Ptolomi went to the king into a tourt, where as he was set to toole him, and brought him out of that minde:
Insomuch that he discharged dere: laus from the accusations, that notwithstanding was tause of all mischiele: and thole pooze men which il they had tolde their caule, pea bekore the Stpthians,

folowed vpon the matter forthe citie, for the people, and for the holy vessels.

49 WMherektore they also of Tyrus, moued

with hatred ol that wicked deede, cans

sed them to be very honorably burted.
50 And fo through the touetoulnesse of them that were in power, Menelaus remapned Mill in aucthoritie, encreasing in malite, to the hurt of the titeʒins.

Je. v. Chapter.

2k the tignes and token tene in Hierutalem. s Ot the ende and office ol Jalon. n Che purlute of Antiochus against the Jewes. 15 Che fpopling of the temple.

wWoutthe fame time en Antiochus bndertobe his letond viage into
Egypt.
And then were there beene throughout all the citie of Hierutalem) fourtie dapes longe, horsmen running in the apre, with robes of golde, and as bandes of speare men,
And as troupes of horsmen fet in arap, incountering and courfittg one againt another, With chaking of shieldes and multitude of dartes, and drawing of swordes, and shooting ok arrowes, and the glittering ok the golden armour seene, and barneffe of all fortes.
4 Wherekore euerp man praped that thofe tokens might turne to good.

S ayn

Ww

$ Mow when there was gone foorth a false 11

runour, as though Antiothus had ben dead, Palon toke a thousand nien, and came sodenly vpon the citie: the citezins ranne vnto the Walles, at the tat

was the ctic taken, and enelaus fled

into the caftle.
6 As for Jalon, he (pared not his owne

eiteʒins in the laughter, neither consi-

dered he what great euill it were to destroy the prosperitie of his owne kinsemen: but did as one that had gotten the

pictorp of his enemies, and not okhis

% endes. at. 7 For all this gat he not the fuperiozitic,

but at the last receaued conkusion for his

malice, * and fled againe lyke a vaca-

bound into the land ofthe Ammonttes.
Finally, for a rewarde of his wicked-

nelle, he was accufen before Aretha the

i

\

king of the Arabians, insomuch that

he Was fatne to flee from citie to title, be-

ing despiled of euery man as a forsaker of the lawes, and an abhommable perfon: and at the last as an open enemie of his owne naturall countrey and ok the citesins, he Was driuen into Egypt.

Thus he that afore put many dut ot their owne natiue lande, perished froin home him selke: he went to Tatedemon, thinking there to haue gotten luctour by realon ot kinred.

Io And he that afore had taste many one

out vnburied, was theoven out him

selfe, no man mourning for him, nor putting him in his graue: fo that he neither enioped the buriall of astraunger, uct ther was he partaber of his fathers le-

Now when this was done, the king suspected that the Jewes woulde haue

fallen from him, Wherefore he tame in a

great displeasure out of Egypt,“ t toke

the citte by violence.

12 He commaunded his men of warre allo, that they should kill and not spare: but flay downe fuch as withstoode them, or dlymed bp vpon the houles.

i. Mac. i. c.

13 Thus was there a great laughter al ¢

poung men, olde men, wonien, childzen, and birgins, g

14. In three dayes were there laine fourftoze thoufand , fourtic thouland putin prilon: and there were as many solde as were laine.

15 Pet was he not tontent with this, but
Durit go into the most holy temple of al the worlde, Menelaus that traptour to the lawes and to his owne, natural

tountrey

countrey being his guide.

16 And wit bis wicked handes toke the holy beffels, Which other binges and cv ties had geuen thyther ko the garni-
{hing € honour ol the place, them tote he in his handes vnworthylp, led them. a

15 So mad was Antlochus, that he cons sidered not how that God was not a litie wroth for the sinnes of them that dwelt in the citie,fo2 the which such conkusion came vpon that place. meet

18 And why? if it had not happened

them to haue ben lappedin many tines,

this Antiochus affoone as he had tome,

had sodenly ben punished and shut out

of his presunption,“ like as Peliodorus

was, Whoin Seleutus the king lent to robbe the trealurle.

1 Meuerthelesse, God hath not chofen

D the people forthe plates lake: but the place forthe peoples sake. 1
20 And therefore is the place betome parfaker of the peoples trouble, but afterward shall it eniopthe wealth of them:
And ipke as it was now forsaken inthe
1 wrath of almightie God, fo when the great God is retonsiled, it shalbe fet vp in hie worship againe. N

21 So when Antiochus had taken a thonsand and eyght hundred talentes out ot the temple, he gat him to Antioch malthe halte, thinking in his pide that he might make men fatle vpon the drye

Ludi. v. b.

n NIac. iii. b.

Machabees.

lande, and to go vpon these

and deli-

25 When he came now to Hierufatem, he

— 92 ban he. astuch anhie
22 De lett deputies there to vexet 5 plesat mierulalemiefche Phltpa Ph
Glan, in maners more truell then hun selfe that fet hin there:
23 At Garizim he left Andronitus and
Menelaus, which were moze greeuong to the citezins then other.
24 Noe as he was thus set in malie against the Jewes, he sent Apotionns a truell prince, with an arnne of tien? tie and two thouland commaunding him to flay those that were of perfect age, and to fell the women, mapdens and thildren. —

1. Ma

c. La.

E

kaigned peate, e kept him Mill vntill the
Sabbath day: and then he commaun: ded his mento take them to their weapons, for the Jewes kept holy day:

26 And fo he flue all them that were gone foorth to the open plap, running (bere and there] through the citie with his men weaponed, and murthered a great

number.

27 But Judas Machabeus, which was the tenth, fled into the wuldernesse, led iMuci« his Ipfe there with his company among
Wylde beastes and vpon the mountaynes , dwelling there, and eating hearbes, lest they choulde be partakers

N

of the futhynesse.

The. v. (Chapter.

Che Jewes are compelled to leaue the lawe ol God: 4 Che temple is defiled.
. 12 Che readers are admonihed that they shall not abhorre the aduerlitie where -
: with the Lorde afilictech them. 28 The greeuous paine of Eleazarus.

Ad

: Ot longe after this,

Il sent the king an olde

man of Antioch, for to

ef (iconipell the Jewes to

biittaniqvefle the ordi-

nauntes of the fathers,

| 3 Of the lawe of God,

2 To delile the temple that was at hie-

rusalem, and to tall it the temple of Jupiter Olimplus: and thatthey choülde be in Garizim, as those which dwel at the plate of Jupiter the harberous.

3 This witkked edition of the vngodlte, was heaup vpon all the people:

4 Foz the temple was full of voluptuousnes, bibbing and bolling of the heathen, of rybaudes and harlots together: the

women went into the holy place, and bare in that was not lawful.

5 The aulter allo was full of vnlawfull

thinges, which thelaw korbiddeth to lar

vpon it,

6 The Sabbathes were not kept the other solempne ktastes of the land were not regarded: to be plame, there durst no man be knowẽ that he was a Pewe.

+ Inthe day ofthe kinges birth the 2 were compelled parkorte to offer, ” when the keaste of Bacchus was kept, they were constrapned to weare co

. landes of 155 su o to go about to th honour ot Bacchus.

$ Moreover, though the countell
Ptolomens, there went out a Dement

Proiib, |

„

1 Ont

2.Machabees.

ple. ‘

z And why; when God suffereth not sinners long to folow their owne minde, but shortly punisheth them, it is a token of his great louing kindnelle.

14 For this grate haue we of God more then other people, That he suffreth not vs long to finne vnpunished, lpke as other nations,

15 That when the day of tudgement com:

nieth, he map punishe them in the fulnes of their sinnes.

16 If we sinne, he torretteth bs but he ne-

ner withdraweth his mercie from vs: and though he puntthe with aduerlitie, pet doth he neuer forsake his people.

17 But let this that we haue spoken now with fewe wordes, be fora warning

wyll we come to the declaring ofthe matter.
18 Eleazar one of the principall stribes, an aged man, and ofa well fauoured countenaunce, was constramed to gape

A ,
2 ine open mouth, and to eate Nvpnes e

he.

Di? But he defiring rather to dye gloriously then to lyue With thame, offered him selfe willingly to the martirdomie.

20 NowW when he saw that he innst nedes
Jo to it, he toke it patiently: for he was at a poynt with himselle, that he would

not tonlent to any vnlawkul thing fo2 a-

aud exhortation ofthe heathen: Now

CX.

with pitit (but not a right fo2 the olde grote

frendthip of the man, tone hin alive pri- er

uilie, and payed him that he would let such fleshe be bronght him as were lawfull to cate, and then to make a countenaunte as though he had eaten of the flesh of the facvifice like as the king cont maunded,

22 Foz sohe might be delluered from death: and so for the olde frendship of the man, they shewed him this kindnes.

23. But he began to conlder dilcreetclp, and as became his age and the extellentie of his auntient peres and the honour

bol his gray heares whereuntohe was tome, and his mo honest conuerlation krom his chudhood, bat chiefely the holy law made and geuen by Goo, therefore he aunswered conlequently, and willed them straightwapes to send him to the graue:

24 Forit becommeth not mine age, salde he, in any Wyle to dissemble, whereby many poung persons might thinke that
Eleaʒar being fonrscore peres olde and

ten, were nowe gone to a straunge reli-

gion:

25 And so through mpne hypocrisie for a tt tle time of a tranfitoze lpfe, tijep might be deceaued: by this meancs ail should
J ye myne age, and make it abhominable.

26 For though J were nowe deliuered

from the toruientes of men, pet shoulde
I not estape the hand of almightie God neither aliue nor dead.

27 Wherefore J wyll dye manfully, and do as it betommeth mne age:

28 Whereby JJ map peraduenture leaue an example of ftedfattnes for such as be poung, if J with a redie minde € man-

fully dye an honest death for the most

‘Worthy and holy lawes. when he had faide ticle Words, immediatly he was drawento the torment.
29 Powthep that led him, and were mitide a litie afore, began to take displeasure becaufe ofthe wordes that he saide: for they thought he had {poten then of
Dut when was in his martirdome o But when he { ;
: he om fade:Lhoud Lorde
Which Hatt the holy knowledge, knowest openly, that Where as J might be deltuered from death, J suffer thelt lore papnes

E

Amos. i. a.

Deu. 32. c.

am well content to suffer them, becaule feare thee.
31 bush man dyed, leauing the me-

2. Machabees. . papnes of my body: but in my minde J moriall of his death iby = amt =

ontly vnto poung nien, but v people, to be stedfast and many : —

The. vij. Chapter.

Che punisument ok the seuen brethren and of their mother.

T happened also that

there were seuen bre-

Athen with their mo-

ether, taken, and cont

pelled by the bing * a-

wa Sal gaint the lawe to eate

, swines fleshe, Cnamelp) with scourges and leatherne whippes.
2. And one okthem, which was the chieke,

saide: What seekest thou, and what requirest thou of bs? As for bs, we are rez die rather to suffer death, then to olfende the lawes of God and the fathers.

Then was the king angry, and bad heate tauldrons s brasen pottes: which when they were made hot,

4 Inniediatelp he commaunded the tongne ok him that spake first to be cut out, to pull the {hin ouer his head, to pare the edges of his handes and feete: pea and that in the fight olhis mother and the other of his brethren.

HOW when he was cleane mangled, he cõmaunded a fire to be made, and so while there was any breathin him) to be fried inthe cauldron: In the which when he had ben long pained,the other brethren, with their mother, exhorted him to dye mankullp, saping:

The Lowe God chall regarde the fructh, and comfort ds lpke as Moyles testifieth and detlareth in his song (tare ing: And he Wyll haue compallion on his seruauntes.

7 So whenthe kirst was dead after this mauer they brought the setond to haue him in derision, pinled the Tkinne with the heere ouer his head, and alked him ik he would cate wines fiery orhe were payned in the other members allo throughout his body.

8 Wut he aunlwered in his owne language, and said, J wyll not do it: And so he was tormented lylie as the first.

And when he was euen at the geuing bp okthe ghost, he sapd, Thou most vngratous perfon puttest vs now to death: vut the king ol the worlde Mal raple vs

wha

a

‘

bp which dye kor his lawes int ; rection of euerlasting lpfe. e

10 After him was the third had in dertlion, and when he was required he put but his tongue, and that right soone holding forth his handes mankully-

n Aud spake with a stedfast faith: These haue Jof heaut᷑, but now for the lalbes of Gd J delpise them: for my trucks, that I thal reteaue them of him agame.

12 Inlomuch that the king e they which were with him, marueyled at the voung mans boldnes, that he nothing regar-
Ded the papnes. €

3 Now when he was dead allo, they vexed the fourth with tormentes in tthe maner. *

14. So when he was now at his death, he saide: It is better that we being put to death of men haue our hope € trust in God, for be shall rapse vs vp againe:

as for thee, thou shalt haue no resur- lun

rection to lyfe.

15 And when they had spoken to the fikth, they tormented him. +:

16 Then loked he vnto the king, and laid,
Thou hast power among men, for thou art a mortall man alfo thy selfe to do what thou wylt: but thinke not that
God Hath forsaken our generation.

17 Abide thee, tarp still awhile, and thou halt {ce the great power of God, howe he wyll punithe thee and thy seede.

18 After him they brought the sirt, which being at the poynt of death, aide, Be not deteaued O king: for this we Hy

kor our owne fakes, becanfe we haue ov fended our God, and therekore marueylous thinges are shewed vpon vs.

19 · Butthinke not thou which takest in 9 hande to striue against God, that thou chalt escape vupunished. be

20 This excellent mother worthy 60 5 wel reported of e had in remembraucc. saw her seuen sonnes dye in one dae, suffered it patientip, becaute of the hop that che had in God:

N the exhorted euery one of there

and stedfastly With perfect wyldome, waking vp her wluishe thought with a manlp stomake, and saide vnto then,
22 Jtan not tell howe pe sprang in my wombe: for J ucither gaue you breath, nor soule, nozipfe it is not I that iopned the members of pour bodies toge-

ther, N

23 258 the maker ofthe worlde which fashtoned the byrth of man, and began all thinges: Euen he also of his owne

mercie shall geue pou breath and lyse az

galne, lpke as pe now regard not pour owne selues for his lawes fake,

24 fro thought Antiochus that he had delpifed hum, therfore he let her go with her reproffes, and began to exhort the poungest sonne which pet was lekt, not onely with wordes, but Nboze vnto hin with an oth, that he shoulde make him
à rich and wealthy man, ir he would forsake the lawes of his fathers: yea, and

that he shoulde geue him whatsoeuer

were netessarie for bint.

25 But whenthe poung man would not be moued for all these thinges, he talled his mother and counfelled her to saue her sonnes lyfe. g

26 And when he had exhorted her with many wordes, Me prompled him that che would speake to her sonne

27 So she turned her vnto him, laughing the truell tyraunt to storne, and spake in her tountrey language: Omp sonne,

haue pitie vpon me, that bare thee nine monethes in my Wwombe, that gaue thee sucke, nourished thee:and brought thee vp vnto this age, :

28 J beleche thee mp sonne, loke bpon heauen and earth, and all that is therein, and consider that God made them and mans generation of naught:

29 So shalt thou not feare this hangman, but suffer death stedfastlp, lpke as thy brethren haue done: that J may vez teaue thee againe in the same mercie with thy brethren.

30 While she was pet speaking thele

2. Machabees, her tountrep language, and that boldiyx wondes, the young man faide: whom .

loke pe fogs [wherefore do ye tary?) J Wpl

not obey the kinges tommaundeinent

Cnt eee God gaue bs by Mope

31 As for thou that imaginest al unschieke a gainst the J tape the hande of God.

CX].

> Leui. xi. a.

ewes, thou Malt not el- truce”

3 Foz we sufker thele thinges because ok

our sinnes.

33 And though the lluing Tord be angry with vs a litle While for our chastening and reforniation, vet Mall he be at one againe with his seruauntes.

34 Wut thou O godlesse man, and of all other the most wicked, pride not thy selfe through vaine hope, in being fo malitious vpon the seruauntes of God:

35 For thou hast not pet estaped the indgementes of God, which is alinightie, € seeth allthinges.

36 My brethren that haue suffered a litle paine, are nowe vnder the coucnaunt of euerlasting lyfe: but though che indgement of God, thou shalt be punished righteoufly for thy pride.

37. As for me, lyke as my brethren haue done, J offer my soule and mp bodye for the lawes of our fathers, calling vpon God that he wyll soone be mercifull

¥ D2, lpfe.

vnto our people:peà and with paine and

punishment' to make thee graunt that E al

he onely is God.

38 In me nowe and in mp brethren, the
Weath of almightie God is at an ende,
Which righteously is fallen vpon all our people.

39 Then the king being kindled in anger,
Was moze truell pon Hin then vpon al the other, and toke indignation that he
Was so lightly regarded.

40 So this young man dyed vndefiled, and put his trust still in the Lorde.

41 Tast of all, after the sonnes was the mother put to death also.

42 Let this now be inough spoken concerhe the offeringes and extreme cruelnelle.

The

that were with him, went priuilie into the townes, called their kinsefolkes € friendes together, toke vnto them al such as tontinued pet in the faith and lawe of the Jewes and brought forth fire thousand men.

he woulde haue an epe vnto his people,

to be gratious vnto the temple, that was defiled of the vngodly,

3 To haue compassion vpon the destruttion of the citie , which was shortly lyke to be lapde waste, to heare the vopte of

the blood that crped vnto hint:

4 To remember the most vnrighteous deathes of poung innocent children, the

- blafphemies allo done vnto his name,

aud to punishe thein.

Mobb when Machabeus had gatheredthis multitnde together, he was to mightie for the heathen, for the Wath of the Lorde was turned into mercie,

6 Me kell vpon the townes and cities vn-

Wares brent them, toke the most tom-

modious places, and slue many of the

enemies. 2 a
But {pecially he made such chales by

night, inloinuch that his manunes was

fpoticn of cnery where.

$ So when Philip fawe that the man encreased by litle and litle, and that the matter prospered with him for the most parte: he pote vnto Ptolomt, which was a taptaine in Celospria and Phentces, to helpe him in the kinges vulmes.

9 Then sent he Nitanor the sonne of
Patroclus, a speciall friend of his, in all

i. Nac. i a. 5

W 7

i. Nac. ii. c.

forte of the heathen no lesse then twentie thouland harnessed men to roote out the whole generation of the Jewes, hauing to helpe him one Gorglas aman ef warre, Winch in matters concerning

4 | 2. Machabees.

The. vii. ¶ Hapter.

2 So thep called bpon the Lorde, that which was troden downe of euer man,

the haste, and gaue hum or the common -

sudas gathereth together his hoalt. 9 Nicanor is tent against Judas. 16 Judas er. barer his touldierg to contantnes. 20ficano2 is ouercome. 27 Che Jewes ge. ueth thankes after they haue put their enemies to klight. deuiding the spopleg vnto the katherlelse and vnto the wydowes. 35 Nicanor kleeth onto M fiochus.

hen Judas Machabeus, and they

8 2 a
1 y d 5 — g

battatles had great experience.

10 Nitanor ordapned allo the tribute
Which the Nomanes shoulde haue had. to be euen vnto the kung ont of the cap: tile of the Jewes, (namely) two thoy. sand talentes. ö

1 And immediatly he {ent to the tities ol ö the sea toaste, requiring them for to bye
Je wes to be their seruauntes and bondinen, prompting to felt them fourscoze and ten for one talent: but he considered not the wrath of alnughtie God that

Was to come ppon hin.

12 When Judas knewe of this, he tolde the Jewes that were with hun, of Pitanors comnung. 6

’
13 Now Were there some of them feare: ¢

full, not trusting vnto the righteousnes of God, and fled their wap, and abode not in that plate:

14. But the other that remained, came together, and besought the Lorde to deliuer them krom that wicked Pitcanor, which Had solde then oz euer he tame npe them:

15 And though he woulde not do it foz their lakes yet for the touenaunt that he made with their fathers, and betaule they called vpon his holy and glozious name. 8 g i. M

16 And fo Machabeus called his men together (namely) about fire thonfand, exbozting themnotto agree vnto their enemies, neither to be akraide fo2 the p. multitude oftheir adnerlariescomming against them durighteoufly, but to fight marly,

17 Considering the reproofe that they th done to the holp place without cane, how they had defpifed and oppressed
A orate and destroyed the lawes o t 2 at ers. ' 1 1 ere. xixb· :

18 * genthey, lade he teeth in eyeit wen | pons aànd boldnesse: but our en is in the almightie Lorde, which my b twinkling of an eye may both Are 5 them, and tome against vs, and all th
Wonlde. ae

19 He exhorted them also to call to reme ;

a ie the helpe that God shewed 1

ac. vb

loke but for oportunitie to do harme: haue ordeined that my sonne Antiochus chall raigne after me, whom J oft tommended to many of von, when thas in the higher kingdomes, T haue wiitten vnto him as it foloweth hereafter.

26 Therkore I pray vou and require vou to remember the benefites that J haue done vnto pou generally and in elpeciall, and that cucry man wil be fapthfull to me and my sonne.

2. Machabees.
— pours rounde about are laying wapte, c 27 Foz I hope that he (halve of faber and

louing pehauour, and ik he lolowe my deuite, he shalbe indifferent vnto von.
28 Thus that murtherer and blasphemer of God was fore finitten: and ite as he had intreated other men, lo he died a nuserable Death in a straunge tountrep vpon a mountapne.
29 And his body dyd Phil that went D with hin cavp away, which fearing the sotme ol Antiochus, went into Egypt to Ptolomi Philometor.

The. x. Chapter.

Judas Machabeus taketh a citie and the temple. to He beginneth to shewe the actes ok Eupator. 16 The Jewes kight against the Jdumeans. 24 Timotheus inuadeth
Furie, with whom Judas iopneth battell. 29 Fiue men appeare in the apre to the

helpe ol the Jewes. o CTimothi is llapne.

——Achabens nowe and

<a, bis company *thozolve
| the helpe of the Lode

wan the temple and the cttte againe,

Destroped the aul-

the heathen had buplded through the

streetes,

axa 3 Clenled the temple, made another aul-

ter of bicke stone, and after two peres they offered latrifices, fet foorth the intenle, the lightes, and shewe bread.

4 When that was done, they fell downe flat vpon the grounde, and besought the
Lord that they might tome no more into uch trouble: but ik they linned any more against him, he him seife to chasten them with mertie, and not to come in the handes of thofe aliauntes and bial

phemous men.

§ Molbe vpon the fame day that the straungers polluted the temple, it hapbened that on the very fame day it was dented againe: namely the twentie and

luny, kplth dap ok the moneth called Callcu.

6 They kept eyght dapes in gladuesle, like as in the feat of the tabernatles, remembring that not long afore they held

the feast of the tabernacies vpon the mountapnes and in dennes, like beastes.
37 And to the fame token they bare greene bowes, braunches, k palmes, and fong
Dlalmes befoze hym that had genen

8 thein good luctesle to clense his plate.
Thep agreed allo together, and made a

Mid iif

statute that enery pere those dapes shoulde bedolenmpty kept of all the people ofthe Jewes.

9 How Antiochus then, that was called the noble, died it is suffitiently tolde.

5 10 Mowe will we spealte o Cupator the ters and chappels that

sonne of that wicked Antiochus howe it happened wich hym, and lo with fewe
Wordes to tomprehende the aduerfitie that chaunced in the warres.

In When he had taken in the kingdome, he made one T psias whiche had ben cap-

cxiij.

Deut vin. c.

tayne of the hoastin Phenites and Sy- eco

tia, ruler over the matters of the realme.

12 Jor Ptolomi, that was called Macron, beyng a ruler for the Jewes, and {peri ally to sit in iudgemeut for such wrong as was done bate them, vndertoke to deale peaceably with them.

13 For the whiche caule he was accused of his friendes before Eupator: and when he was sulpett to be a traptour, betaule he had left Cypres that Phulometor had committed vnto him, and becaule he departed from noble Antiochus that he was come vnto, he popsoned hyim elke, and died.

14 Now when Gorgias was gouernonr C of the fame plates, he toke kraungers. and vndertolie off tncs to Warre with the Jewes.

15 Morecouer, the Idumeans that helde the strong holdes, reteaued ate that were dryuen from Hierusalem, and tone in hande to warre ails.

P (i) 15 But

/ 2. Miachabees.

i ut they that were with Macha-

ns belought EpraveD vnto the Lorde that he woulde be their Helper, and so they fell vpon the strong holdes of the
Idumcans,

17 And wan many plates by strength: such as tanie again them they slue, and
Hulled no lesse ok all together thentwentie thousande.

18 Neuerthelesle some, no lesse then nyne thousande, were fed into two strong towres, hauing all maner of ordinaunte

to withstande them.

1 Then Machabeus leauing Simon, Josephus, Zacheus, and those that were wieh chem, whiche were berp many,

went to beliege them, k to fight where

moti neede was.

20 Moe they that were with Simon,

bepug led with couetousnesse, were in-

treated for money thorowe certayne ol

thole that lay in the taltles, toke three-

froze and ten thoulande > dragmas: and let some of them estape.

But when it was tolde Machabeus what had happened, he called the taptapnes of the people together, ateuling thole persons, that they had fold the brethren kor money, e let their enemies go.

22 Hobe flue thole traytours e innnediat-
Ip went in haͤnde with thetwo tastles.

23 Amd whenthey had ordred them selues manly With their weapons a handes, they llue in the two castles mo then twentie thoulande.

Nach. y. b. 24 Mow Timotheus, whom the Jewes

„ach had onertome afore, gathered a multitude of strange people, brought an boat also of horsemen ofthe Alians to winne
Jurie by ltrength. N

25 Wut wheuhe drewe npe, Machabeus andthey that were with him, ell to their prayer, sprinkled alshes vpon their heades, beyng gyrded With heery cloth about their lopues,

26 Fell downe before the aulter, and befought the Lord that he would be mertifull to them, but an enemie vnto their tnemies, and to take part against their aduerlaries, actording as it is promised lu the lawe.

27 So after the praper, thep tobe their weapons € went on further from the citie: st when they came nye the enemies, they prepared them selues against them.

(a) q dragena id, the cpght ort ot an onsite, Bhiche
3 ebeut 21
öh :e pence.

i. Nia. Xl. b.

De. xxvili. a

28 And betinies in the moma; beac ok the day both the boaltes es led together: The one part had the
Lorde for thee refuge, Which is the 15 ler

ner of prosperitie, strength, and vittonr: Par zb, reste.

the other had a manly st - is à taptayne of warke. SMAERE, which

29 The battaple nowe bepng are appeared nto the enennes kromhegnen klue goodly mien vpon porlebaches 8

With bridels of gold, leading the Jewes:

30 And two ol them hauing Pachabens bet wirt them, that kept him fate on euery fide with their weapons, but thor dartes and lightninges vpon the ene: mites , Where thorow they were egy: founded with vlindnelle, and fo fore afrayde that they fell downe.

31 cea sa 0 0 “i footemen twen-

ud and kpne hundretl bundzeth ben. r

32 As for Timotheus him selfe, he fed vn-

to Gazara, a very stronghold, wherin
Chereas was captapne. ;

33 Wut Machabeus and his companie lay: ed siege to it chearkully fo re dayes.

34. Mob they that were within, trusting to the streugth of the plate, curled and banned exceedingly, and made great traking with wicked wordes.

35 Mtuerthelesse, vpouthe fylt dap in the F morning, twentie vong men of Machabeus company, bepng fet on fire in their mindes becante of the blasphemie, caine mankullp vnto the wall, and with bolde
1 smote downe thole that they mette.

36 Others alfo clymed vp vpõ the toes, vndertaking to fet fire bpon the portes, tt to burne those blasphemous perfous quicke with the fiers that they had made, others brake open the gates, aud reteaued the rest of the armie, and tobe

the titie.

37 Two dayes were they destroping the tastle, which when they founde Lino’ theus that was crept ina coruer, they killed him, and flue Chercas his brother in like maner, with Apollophanes.

38 When this was done, ther fang

Plalmes with prayses and thankesgeuing vnto the Lorde which had done so great thinges for Firacl , and geuen them the victorie.

The

at, “there; deze.

Alt. nd xi 4

2. Machabecs. i | The. xi. Chapter. | ;

Lysias goeth about to ouercome the Jewes. 8 Succour is sent from heauen onto the Jewes. 16 The letter ot Lysias to the Jewes. 20 Che letter ol king Inttochus

puto Lrtiag. 27 letter of the fame vnto the Jewes.

manes to che Jewes.

OO T long after this;
AoA All Lylias the binges ste-

ok his, which had the gouernaunce of his matters, toke sore vit: pleasure for the thinges that had happened
2 And when he had gathered fourescore thoufand men of foote, with al the hoast ofthe horsemen, he tame against the
Jewes, thinking to winne the citie, to jnake it an habitation for the heathen: wih 3 And the temple woulde he haue to be an house oflucre, like as the other gods houles of the heathen are, and to selt the priestes office euerp pere,

4. Mot considering the power of God, but was wilde in his mynde, 'trusting in the multitude of footemen , in thoufandes of horsemen, €in his fourcscore
Elephantes.

5 So he came into Purte , and then to
Wethlura, acafile of defence, lping in a

narow place fiue furlonges from Hierusalem, ⁊ layed fore siege vnto it.

Hix,

6 Mowe when Machabeus and his company knew that the slrong holdes Were besieged, they fell to their prayers with
Weeping and teares befoze the TLorde: and all the people in lpke maner bez fought hin that he woulde fend a good

„ angel to deliuer Ilrael.

5 7 Machabeus him̃ lelfe was the first that made hin redy to the battaple, exhorting the other that were with hym to leoperde them selues, and to helpe their brethzen.

8 And when they were goyng foorth of
Dierufalemt together with a redy and willing mynde, *there appeared before them vpon horlbatke a man in whyte
Clothing, with harnesse of gold, shaking his speare. .

9 Then they prayled the Lorde all together whiche had chewed them mertie, and were comforted in their nundes, insomuch that they were redy not onely

to fight with men, but with the most oe beastes, pea c run thorowe walles ok iron.

Jlacil d.

warde and a kinsman

34 J letter ok the Ro-.

Io Thus they went on willingly, hauing an helper from heauen, and the Lorde mertifull vnto thenn. a

11 Chey fell mightylp vpon their enenties like lions, Mluecleucuthoulande footemen, sireteene hundred horsemen, and put all the other to flight,

12 Many of them beyng wounded, and some gat awap naked: Bea Tysias him felfe Was fayne to fice shamefully, aud so to escape.

3 Meuerthelesse, that man Was not without vnderstanding, but considered by
Dim selfe that his power was nuniched, and pondred Howe the Jewes bepug

dekended by the helpe of alnnghtie God, were not able to be ouercome: Wherkore he sent them bode,

14 And pronused, that he would consent C to all thinges whiche were reafonable, and to make the king their friende.

15 To the which praier of Lysias, Machabeus agreed, seking in all thinges the common wealth: whatsoeucer Machabeus wrote vnto Lyltas concerning the
Jewes, the king graunted it.

16 For there were letters written vnto the
Jewes from Lyplias , contepning hele
Wozdes: Tysias sendeth greeting to the people of the Jewes.

17 John and Ablolon which were sent from pou, delinered me wrytinges, and required me to fulfill the thinges concer: ning their errande.

13 Therekore loke what might be graunted, J certified the king therof: @ what: soeuer was conne nit, he agreed therto.

19 Il ye now wil be fayth ful in these matters, I shall endeuour my selfe hereakter allo to do pou good.

20 As tonterning these thinges by enery article thereof, I haue conumtted chem to pour messengers and to those whom
I ent vnto pou, to conunnne with you of the same particulerly.

21 Fare pe well . In the hundred four- D tie and eyght pere, the tweutte a fourth day ofthe moneth Diosconuihius.

22 Now the kinges letter tonteyned thele
Wordes: King Antiochus sendeth grecting vnto his brother Lysias.

N Y (ij) 23 Foz

salom,

cxiilj.

Oz, Ibes-

e 23 Forlomuch as our father is now trary

1 eo bute the gods, dur wills, that they which are in our realme, tine without any insurrettion, and euery man to be diligent in his owne matters:

24 Me vnderstande allo, that the Jewes would not consent to dur father , for to be brought vnto the tustome ofthe gen: tiles, but stifly to kepe their owne sta-

tutes, forthe which caule they require of

vs alld, to let them remapne still after their owne lawes. cet n.
25 Wherkore our nunde is, that this people shalbe in rest: we haue concluded and determined also to restore them their temple againe, that they may lyue according to the vse and tustome of their forefather s. en
26 Thou shalt do vs a pleasure therefore, if thou lend vnto them, and graunt them peace: that when they are certified of dur mynde, they may be of good cheare, and loke to their owne wealtg.
27 Andthis was the letter that the king

wrote vnto the Jewes: King Antio-

chus seudeth greeting vnto the tounsell,

and the other people of the Jewes.

D 28 Il pe fare well, We haue our desire:as for vs, we are in good healtg.

29 Menclaus tame c tolde bs howe that pour desire was to returne home, and

peaceably to cniop pour olvne possessiõs.

Henthese touenauntes were made, Tysias
Went vnto the king: their grounde. ,
Wut Timothens, x Aa polomus the sonne of
Genuei, Jerome, and Demophon (the pode] Micanor the captayne of Cypers, and they that lap in thole places,
Would not let them lyue in rest e peace.
Thepok Joppa also dyd euen such a shameful deede:they prayed the Jewes that dwelt among then, to go with their wyues echildzen into the chippes
Which they had prepared, and dpd with them as thongh they had ought them

no cupll Will, ch then as there was gone

Ww

4 Forsomu booth a general protlamation thorowe

2. Machabees.

30 Mherkort, those th

a

and the Jewes tuled

at wil tome, We them free libertie, vnto the thictiey 591
. e ah ot apa 1 *.
31 That they map ble the meates eth, Janthi,
Jzewes and their oibneltbes line ue. fore; and none hn bp any manerof wapes to haue harme for thing mage len 0h 5 p rebate
32 Jhaue lent atfoMenelans that h. way 9 —.— * 1 5 that he
33 Fare pe well. Inthe hundred fourtie and eyght pere, the kyfteeuth da nuoneth ok Apel. Binder okthe
34 The Romaynes also senta letter contepning thele wordes: Quintus Memmius, x Titus Manilius ambassadours ofthe Romapnes , sende greeting vnto the people of the Jewes.
35 Toke what Lphas the kinges kinsman
Hath graunted vou, we graunt von the same also.. . oe TP
36 Wut as concerning the thirges which he referred vnto the king, send hithersome with speede, and ponder the matter diligently among pour selues, that we map cast the best to pour prolite, for we must departnowe vnto Antioche.
37 And therekore Waite Mostly againe, that we may knowe pour mynde.
38 Fare well. In the hundreth fourtic and eyght ere the fpfteenth day of the

Gi Sy,

"Ds, contal the bet,

righteous iudge, agatt thole murtherers of his bret)zen,teetive iuthe hauen by night „ brent vp the shippes:and thole that efcaped from the fire, he slues wich the tworde .. .
7 And when he had doucthis, heveben ted, as though he woulde come again and roote out all them of Poppa. tthe
8 But when he had gotten word bs
Jamnttes were mynded to do in ü 1 5 maner vnto the Jewes which «+ 915

: He came vpon the Jamnttes by night, e let fire on the hauen with the chippes: fo that the light of the fire was leene at
Hierusalem vpon a two Hundzed and fourtic furlonges.

Jo Nowe when they were gone from theneenynefurtonges in there tourney towärde Timotheus, fine thoulande men of foote, and fpue hundreth horlemen ok the Arabians, fought with hym.

1 So when the battell was earnest, and prospered with Judas thorowe the

. helpe of God: the relidue ofthe. v Ara-

mois? ans beyng duertome, besought Judas

tobe at one with them, and peomiled to

a geue him tertapne pastures, and to do

ies. PAN good in other thinges.

u Judas thinking that they shoulde in
Deede be prokitable concerning many thinges, pronused them peace: wherevpon they shoke handes, and lo they departed to their tentes.

3 Judas went alfo vnto a titie, whiche was very fast kept with brydges, fenfed round about with walles, and diners kindes of people dwelling therin, called
Caspin.

C14 They that were within it, put such trust in the strength of the walles, and inthtir store of vittaples, that they were the slacker in their doynges, turfing and reuillng Judas with blasphemies, and speaking luch wordes as it betonuneth not.

15 Wut Machabeus calling vpon the great printe of the (wood, which with-

kale. ut anp battaple rammes oz ozdinaunce ol warre, did'cast downe the walles of

Jeritho, in time of Nosuah) fel mankul-

ly vpon the walles,

16 Tobe the titie, e thorow the helpe of the
Lode made an exteeding greatslaughter: insomuch that a lake of two fur longes brode whiche lay therby seemed

17 Then departed they fromtbence leuen

1 hundred and fiftie furlonges, and came

wt to Tarata vnto the Jewes that are called Tubianei.

1d But as for Timotheus they could not get him there: lor not one matter Difpats hed he was Departed from thence, and else tertayne men in a very strong

olde.

1 Wut Dosithens x Hofipater , whiche

Were taptaynes with Machabeus, fluc

2. Machabees.
— wong them, thole that Tunotheus had lelt in the ,

to flowe with the blood ofthe siayne.

CXV.
Houle of defence, more then ten thouland men.

20 And Machabeus prepared him with the fice thoufand men that were about him, fet them in order by companies, x
Went foorth against Timotheus, which had with him an hundred and twentie thoufande men ok koote, two thoulande and fyue hundred horlemen.

21 When Timotheus had knowledge of
Judas comming, hesent the women, children, and the other baggage vnto a tastle cailed Carnion: For it could not be wonne, and was hard to tome vnto, the wapes of the fare places were fo naz 5 rowe.

22 And when Judas his first bande tame infight the enemies were smitten with feare, thorowe the presente of God

which seeth all thinges: Insomuch that they fleyng one here, another there, were rather discomfited of their owne ludwüf. people, & Wounded with the strokes of ng their owne swordes. :

23 Judas allo was very earnest in folowing vpon them, punishing those vngodlp, c fine thirtie thoufande men okthem.

24 Timotheus also hym selfe fei into the handes of Dolitheus and Hofipater, whom he befought with much craft to let him go with his lyfe, betause he had thany ofthe Jewes kathers € brethren in prilon, which ik thep put him to death shoulde be despised.

25 So whenhe had pronused faythfully to Deliver them againe according to the condition made, they let hin go without harme, for the health of the brethren.

26 Then achabeus marched foorth to
Carnion and Atargation, and there fluc twentie and fiue thousande nien.

27 Noe after that he had chased away and Llayue his enenues, he remoned the; xh ve, hoast towarde Ephron a strong atic, wherin was Tysias and a great multitude ok diuers nations: and the strong poung men kept the walles, defending them mightylp, in this citie was much ordinaunte and pronision of dartes.

28 But when Judas and his tompame E had called vpon almightie God, which
With his power breaketh the strength of the enemies, they wanthe citie, and fine twentie and fine thoufand of themthat were within.

29 From thente went they to the eitie of

' Pay) the

vite died kurlonges from Hicentaiem.

o But when the Jewes whiche were m

ü the ante, techie that the titez ins dealt

loutugly with them, yea € intreated the kindly in the time of their aduersitie,

31 Judas and his conipante gaue them thankes, desiring them to be friendly stil bnto them:and fo they tame to Hierusalem, the hye feast of the weekes beyng at hande. '

32 Andafter the featt of Pentetost, they
Went foorth against Gorgias the gouer-

A nour of Iduna,

3; Who kame out with three thoufande

men ol foote / foure hundred horsemen.

34 WMhiche when they mette together, it chaunted a felbe of the Jewes to be flapne.

35 And Dolitheus one of the Watenors, anightie horsman, toke holde of Gorgia8, and woulde haue taken him quicke: but an horseman of Thratia fell vpon

hint, and smote of his arme, so that Gorgias escaped and fled into Moresa.

* Oz, Mare-

Np, Can 36 gias side, had foughten long and were weerp, Judastalled vpon the Lozde, that he Would be their helper, and taptapne ok the fielde:

37 And with that he began in his owne language, c song Plalmes with a londe vopce: insomuch that he made the enemies afrayde, ¢ Gorgias men ot warre toke their flight. f

38 So Judas gathered his hoa, and came into the citte of Odolla: and when the seuenth day tame vpon them » Hey clenfed them selues as the tustome Was, f kept the Sabbath in the fame place.

39 Aud pponthe day folowing, as necelsitie required, Judas and his tompany

Ihe hundred fourtie and nine pere, gat“ Judas knowledge chat
Anttochus Eupatoz was comming with a caer we 125 5

n tas the stewarde and ruler of his matters With bim, hauing an hundred ¢ ten thousand menokfoote ok the Grecians, kyue thon:

N
N

N

N

Cy

2. Vlachabees.

the Seythians, which lpeth tire Dane

When they nowe that were of Gor-

gopng to fight against Eapatorz; mouech his Coutdiers vnto praper. kourteene thoufande men in the tentes of Antiochus. 21 Rhodocus the betraper ol
24 Antiochus retapned kriendship with the Jewes.

Z

came to take vp the bodyes were slapne, and to burie

ofthemthat theminthe

40 Nobube vnder the coates of tertayne
Jewes which were flapue, they Wund telbeis that they had taken out ofthe Deu viig

lofy vn.

nites , whiche thing is borbidde en. *

aoe by the lawe : then euepp ma

awe that this was the caufe Wherkore

n g

pd.

42 Thepfel dowue also vnto their . ers, and besought Goo that che favre whiche was made might be put ont of remembrzaunce:Besides that, Judas erhorted the people eärnestly tokepe them selues from fuch sinne „ fozsomuch ag they fae before their eyes that thefe men Were flayne for the fame offence,

43 So he gathered of cuery one a cer tapne, aud sent two thousande drachmes of filuer vnto Hierulalen, that there might a laceifice be offered fo2 the mildeede: In the which plate he did wel and right, for he had some consideration and pondring of the ipfe that is alter this ee 4

44. Ort he had not thought that they whiche were flayne Choulde ryle a gaine it had ben superfluous and vapne to make any vowe or sacrifite forthem that were dead. N

45 But forsomuch as he sawe that they which die in the fauour e beleefe of god,
Are in good rest and top, he thought it to be good e honorable for areconfiling, to do the fame for thofe which were slaine, that the offente might be forgeuen.

sande horsemen, twentie and two Elephantes, and three hundred charettes
(et with hookes.
Menelaus alfo ioyned hym selke with them, but with great distepte spake faire to the king, not for any good of the countrey, but becaufe he thought 05 haue ben made foie great man of auc
4 But the king ol kinges moued cine

chus minde against this vngodly person, and Lphas enformed the bing that this Menelaus was the caule ofall mil chieke: fo that the king commaunded to bung him vnto Berea, and as the maner of them is, to put him vnto death in the lame place.

There was also in the fame place a

tobre of fiftie tubites hie, heaped with

alshes: and it had an instrument that

turned rounde, € on euerp fide it ronled

downe into the asches, and there who-

of any other grecuous trime, was ca

6 W hereinto the king cõmaunded that shamefull person to be tast among the alches, as one that was caule of all vngratiousnesse. ö

7 And realon tt was that the vnthrilt

5 qhould dye such a death, and not to be

buried, Narr ~

8 Jor he had done much milchiefe vnto the aulter ol God, whole fire and al shes were holp: therefore was it right

ed with alshes. 1
Wut the king was wood in his minde,

buto the Jewes, then his father was. roe lo Which When Judas perteaued,, he tommaunded the people to call bpon the Lord nyght and dap, that he would nowe heipe them also lyke as he had done al way: for they were afraide to be put from their lawe, from their natural cOuntrey and from the holy temple:

litle while afore began to retouer, to be

tions.

and belought the Lorde foe mertie,

with Weeping and fafting three dapes

long flat vpon the grounde, Judas exhorted them to make them sesues redie.

But he and the eldest together deuised

to go foorth (firt with the people) afore

the king brought his hoat into Juric, and afore he belieged the titie, and fo to

i tamnit the matter vnto God.

+ Wherefore he committed the charge of all thinges vnto God the maker of al the worlde, exhorting his people to

ight mankully, yea euen vnto death, for the lawes, the temple, the titie, their owue natiue countrey, and to defend the

Ci

2. Machabecs.

soener was condempnedof latriledge, o:

of all men vnto the death. bay.

that he him elle also should be destrop-

and tame to shew him selfe more truell

N And not to suffer the people which a lubdued againe of the blasphemous naz
2 So when they had done this together,

CAV]

9 sand he fet his hoast before Mo-

in.

15 He gaue them also that were with hun a token of the bictozy of God, choofing out the manliest poung men, went by night into the kinges panilion fluc of

the hoast kourteene thouland men, and i.Macvit

the greatest of the Elephantes, with thole that fate vpon him.

16 Thus when they had brought a great

feare and rumour among the tentes of their enemies, and al thinges went prolperously with them,

17. They departed in the breake of the dap, God being their helper and deken-

der.

18 Nowe when the king perceaned the manlinesse of the Jewes, he went about to take the strong places by craft,

19 And remoued his hoastꝰ vuto Weth- Mc. fsura, which was a wel kept boule of de- D

fence ofthe Jewes: but they were chaled awap, hurt, and discom kite.

20 And Judas sent vnto them that were in tt, such thinges as were nete slarie.

21. In the Jewes Hoa also there was one Nhodochus, which tolde the enemies their seeretes: but they sought him out, and when thep had goteen hun, they put him in prison. *

22 Alter this did the bing commune with them that were sn Wethsura, toke truice with them, Departed, and strane a batsie with Judas, Which ouercame

un.

23 Wut when he vuderstoode that Php,

whon he had left to be ouerleer of this busines at Antioch, began to rebell a gainst him, he was astoniedin his mind, fo that be yeelded him fcife to ß Jewes, and made then an och to do Whatlocver they thonght right. a

24 Now when he was retonciled with them, he offered, made much of the teimple, gaue great atftes vnto it,

25 Enibraced Machabeus, making him © captaine and gouernour from Ptolomais vnto the Gerrhenes.

26 Meuerthelesse when he tame to Pto-

lomais, the people of the cific were nse content with the bond of frendship: for they were akraide that he Would breake the couenaunt. .

27 Then went Tystas vp into the indgement seate, and exculed the fact as Well as he toulde, and enfornied the people, shewed them the caule why, ¢ ar

m

Machabees.

p . ̃ ⁵ ĩ˙ Ä

foe came againe to Antioch.
This is 10 the matter concerning the

hinges tourney, and his returne.

The .xitij Chapter.

Bythe motion of the Lorde Demetrius lendeth /icarioz to BU Che Jewes 13 ica-

nor maketh a com on of the king. 37

ter three peres, was

that Demetrius the ad Ald fonne of Seleutus was
Sl come bp with a great

8 power and shippes, through the hauen of

anp moze eutraunce to the aulter,
4 he tame to king Demetrius in the hun-

dred fiftic and one pere, prefenting vnto

hima trowne of golde, a paulme, and an oliue tree, which as men thonght belonged to the temple: and that dap held his tongue.

Wut when he had gotten oportunttie kor his madnelle, Denietrius called him to tounsel, and alked him what thinges or tounsels the Jewes leaned butoz

6 De aunswered: The Jewes that be called Assidet ( whose captaine is Judas
Machabeus) matntayne warres, niake infurcctions and wyl not let the realme bt in peace.
For J being depziued ok my fathers honour (I micane the hie priesthood) am come hyther: a
8 Partly becaule J was faithful vnto the king, and partly because J fought the prolite of myne owne cite zins: And wWhpe all our people, through the wickednesse ol them, are not alitle troubled.
9 Wherekore J beseche thet O king, tonsider all thele thinges diligentip, and then make some prouision kor the lande aud the people, according to the kindnes that thou hast offered vnto them. io For as long as Judas liueth, it is not possible that men can lyue in peate. n When he had spoken thele wozdes, other kriendes allo hauing cull wyll at
Indas, let the king Demetrius on fire

W 7

a

act withthe Jewes, 29 which he pet breaketh throughthe moti: icanor commaundeth Waztas to be taken. The botones of Razlas.

sagainst him.)

Judas infourmed how 12 vohlch unmedtatly sent Picanor ru-

1 of the Elephantes, acaptaine, md “ae

z Conimaunding him to lay Judas, ©
€ to scatter them that were with him, and to make Alcimus hie priest of the great temple.

14. Then the heathen, which fied out of ö

uric front Judas, came to Hicanor y flockes, thinking the barme and decay of the Jewes to be their welfare.

15. Now when the Jewes heard ol Ni: tanors comming, and the gathering togetherok the heathen, they spenckled uur them selues with earth, and besought him which made them his people, and euer defended his one portion with tuidenttokens, that he woulde prelerue them Hil,

16 So at the cõmaundemet ok the captaine they remoued straight wapes from thence / came to atowne called Deslau.

17 And Simon, Judas brother, kellin hand with Micarioz: but throngh the so- * daine comming of the enemies he a. was akraide. N

18 Neuerthelesse, Pitanor hearingthe maminesle of them that were with
Judas, and the bolde stomakes that they had to fight for their natural cout’ trep, durst not prooue the matter with bloodshedding. Daune, “ENG 8 8.

19 Wherkore he lent Possidomus, The. was odorus, and Mathathias before, to gtuc g and to take peace. fe:

20 So when they had taken long an 5 ment thereupon, and thecaptaine 1

wed it vnto the multitude, ther were greed in one minde to haue peace. vpon

21 And they appoynted a day to sit 51 thele matters qnietly aniong ‘A 10

selues, and for cuery one stooles were brought and fet forth. nocd

22 Meuerthelesse, Judas tomman 11

tertaine men ok armes £9 de nly nenient places, left there Mould”. acpfe any enill thzough the 4. ,

ply £07 and fo they communed , 0 “4

2. Mlachabees. CXVI].
— God into the plaine fielde, FH hal breake

ether. N ; f Nicanor while He abode at Hierula- downe the aulter, and conselrate this em, ordered him selfenot vnreasonablp, temple vnto Wacchus. a but sent away the people that were ga- 34 Alter thele wordes he departed. Then

thered together. 00 the priestes lykt vp their handes toward
24 He loued Judas euer with his heart, heanen, and befonght him that was and fauoured hin. tuer the defender of their people saying:

25 He piaped him allo to take a wyle, and 35 Thou O Tord of all, which hat nede to bring fodrth children. So he marped, oknothing, Wouldek that the temple of nued in rest, and they led a comnion life. thy habitation chould be auiong bs:

26 But Aleimus perteauing the loue that 36 Therekore nowe O most holy Torde, was betwixt them, and how they were kepethis house euer vndeliled, which agreed together, came to Demetrius, lately was cleaused, and stop all the and tolde him that Hitanor had taken mouthes of the vnrighteous. } straunge matters in bande, and ordap- 37 Now was there accused vnto Mica

i. Mac. ii. c.

ned Judas, an enemie ofthe realine, to nor One Nazis an alderman ot hierusa-

be the kinges successouu r. lem, alouerofthe whole titie, & a man
7 Then the king was fore displeased, ok good reporte, which fo the kinde

and though the wirked acenfations heart that he bare vnto the people, was

Which ilcimus made of Picanoz, he called a father of the Jewes.

was so prouoked, that he wrote vnto 38 This man oft times whenthe Jewes

Nitanor, saying: that he was very an- were minded to kepe them lelues vndegry for the freudship and agreement filed defended and deliuered them, be-
Which he had made with Machabeus, ing content stedfastiy to (pend his body
Heuerthelesse, he cõmaunded him in al and his lyke for his people. the haste that he should take Machabe- 39 So Mitcanor wylling to declare the us prisoner, and sent him to Antioch. hate that he bare tothe Jewes, lent
23 Whichdletters when Hitanor had sene, fine hundred men ok waͤrrẽ to take him: he was at his wittes ende and sore gree- 40 For he thought if he gat him he should ued, that he shoulde breake the thinges bing the Jewes in great decay. wherein they had agreed, {pecially see- 41 Now when the people began to rushe tng Machabeus was that man that ne- in at his hause, to breake the doeres, and uer did him harme. me to fet fire on it, he being now taken, tel
29 But because he might not withstand ppon his [word, the king, he fought oportumtte to fulfill 42 Choosing rather to dye mankullp, then his commaundement. to peelde him felfe to thoie wicked do-
30 Notwithstanding when Machabeus ers: c becaule ot his noble stocke, he han law that Mitanor began to be thurlishe rather haue ben put to extreme erneltze. vnto hum, e that he entreated him more 43 Potwithstanding, What time as he roughly then he was wont, he pertea- nmiissed ok his stroke for haste, and the ned that such vnkindnesse came notof multitude rushed in violentlp betwirt good, and therefore he gathered afewe the doores, he rannte boldly tothe Wall, ok his men, and wirhdrewe him selfe and cast hin leife downe mankullpafrom Hitanor. e mong the heape of them: :

G

(c) Thug face ig not to be

a p oucd, seꝝ the t it io centraty to gods cemmaundetent, ti or fait not bill. b. xo. xx.

Deute. v,

5 Which when he knew that Machabe- 44. Which gauc soone piace to his fall, b

us had manfully preuẽted hun, he tame that he fell vpon his belly. into the great and most holp tenple, and 45 Menerthelesse, whic there was pet commaunded the priestes which were breath within him, he was kindled in doingtheir vsuall offeringes, to deliuer his minde e While his blood gushed ont hin the man. W erxteedingly(for he was very sore woun-
2 And when they sware that they tonld ded)he ranne throngh che middest of the ue not tell where the man was whom he people, and gat him to the top ofa rocke. tie fought, ‘ 46 So when his blood was nowe gone,
3; He stretched out his right hande to- he toe out bis owne bowels with both

ward the temple, and made an oth, say- his handes, x threw them vpon the peo-

ing: HF pe Wyll not delluer me Judas ple, calling vpon the Lorde of lyfe k fpr captine, I chall remoue this tempie ot rite to rewarde him this agatue: aud ie he dyed. !

2. Machabees. —

cartes. 21 The praper ok Machabeus. 30 After the hoast of icanor is once ouercome, Hachabeus commaundeth his head a his handes to be cut oß, and his tongue to be geuen vnto foulcs. i

Owe when Mitanor knew that Judas and bis companp were in the tountrey of Sainaz tia, he thought with at his power to strike a lielde with him bpon a

anor goeth about to come vpon Judas on the Sabbath day. Che blacphemi ane 14 Machabeus expounding vnto the Jewes the vilion, polocncth epee i Mac. vii d.
ö Sabbath dap.

2 Neuerthelesse the Jewes that were

compelled to go wich him, faide: O do not so cruelly and vnkindly, but halowe the Sabbath dap, and Worchippe him that seeth all thinges: 5

3 (for all this.) pet saide the vngratious

person,* Is there a mightie oue in hea-

kenne. hen that tommaunded the Sabbath day to be kept: ;
Se 4 And when they faides pea the Ipuing

God, the nughtie Lord in heauenꝰ com-

maunded the seuenth day to be kept,

5 he lalde: And Jam mightie vpon earth, to tommaunde them for to arme them lelues, eto perkourme the kinges buspnesse. Notwithstanding, he might not haue his purpole.

6 Mitanor had deuiled with great pride to ouertome Judas, and to bring away the victozp:

W 7 Wut achabeus had euer a fast tonkidente and a perfect hope in God, that he would helpe him:

8 And exhorted his people not to be afrayde at the comming of the heathen: but alway to remember the helpe that
Had ben shewed vnto them from hea-
UCI, pea and to be sure now allo that al-
8 God Would geue them the bic-

9 He {pate vnto them out of the lawe and prophetes, putting them in remembrauuce of the battales that they had
{tritenafozc, and made them to be of good courage.

10 So when their heartes were pluckt vp, he shewed them allo the deteitekulmelle ok the heathen, and how they woulde kepe no couenannt nor oth.

II Thus he weaponed them not with the
Armour of shielde and speare, but with

Whpolsome wordes and exhoztations:

he shewwed thema dreame also, wherethrough he made them all glad,

12 Which was this: Pe thought that he saw Onias, which had ben hie pret. a vertudus and louimg man,fad anid ofbonest conuersation, well spoken, and one that had ben exertised in godlines from
à childe, holding vp his handes toward heauen, and praping for his people.

13 Alter this, there appeared vnto him another man, which was aged, honoza- ¢ ble, and glorious. a

14 AndDnlas (aide: This is a loner of the brethren, and of the people of Fra: el: this is he that prayeth much for the people and for all the holy titie, Jeremie the prophete of God.

15 Me thought also that Jeremie helde out his right hande, and gaue vnto Fu:

das a sword of golde, saping:

16 Take this holy Mode, a gift from

God, wherwith thou (halt {rite downe

the enemies ofthe people of Hlracl.

And fo they were well comkorted through the wordes of Judas, whiche were very lweete and able to stirre vp their courage: and toke courage vnto them, fo that the young men were determined in their mindes to fight, and to abide stifly at it: nfomuch that in the thinges which they tobe in bande their vboldnesse shewed the fame, betause the holy titie, the santtuary, and the temple were in perül,

18 Jor the which they toke moze care, then for their wyues, children, brethren, and kinstolkes. , D

19 Againe, they that were in the title, were most careful for those which were to fight. have

20 Row, when they wer alla bone that the tudgement of thematter ve ; at hande, aud the enemies drue nye, 0 5 hoast being set in aray, the Klepna 16 and horsemen every one standing in h

lace: x net or Dachabeus contpering the ania of the multitude, the ozdinaunce ne urs Weapons, the truelnes 0

i ar beastes, helde vp his andes Micali

* ub.

Reg 9 h

— 2. Machabees.

CXVII

hauen, calling vpon the Wore that With his arme and hande, and to be

doth wonders, which geueth not the pictozy after the multitude of weapons and power of the hoaste, but to them that please him, actording to his owne

Wyll.

22 Therefoze in his praper he faide these wordes, O Tordetz thou that diddest fend thyne angell in the time of Esekiah king ol Juda, and in the hoast of Sennacherib fluett an hundred kourlcoze and fine thoufand:

23 Send now allo thy good angel before vs O Torde of heauens, in the fearekulneise and dreade of thy mightie arme,

E24 That they which come against thy ho-

iy people to blaspheme them, map be az flayd. And so he made an ende ol his wordes.

25 Then Mitanor ¢ they that were with him, drue nye with trumpettes e showtinges fo2 toy:

26 Wut Judas and hiscompany, with prayer and calling bpon God, encountred with the enemies.

27 With their handes they lmote, but with their heartes they prayed vnto the
Lode, and fluc no lesse then thirtie and fine thoufand men: Foz through the prefent helpe of God, they were gloriously tomforted.

28 Now when they left of, and were tur-

ning againe with toy, they vnderstoode

that Micanor him selke was slaine with

the other, for all his armour.

29 Then they gaue a great shout and a erpe, prapsing the almightie Lorde in their owne language.

30 And Judas which was euer redie to
{pend his body and lyfe for his citeʒ ins, to maunded to {nite of Nicanors head,

brought to Hierusaleni.

31 When he came there, he called all the people € the priestes to the aulter, with those that were in the castle,

32 And shewed them Nieanors head, and his wicked hande which he had pres sumptuousiy holden vp against the tent ple of God.

33 De taused the tongue also of that vngodly Mitanor to be cut in litle pecees, and to be tast to the foules, and that cruel mans hande to be hanged bp before the temple.

34 So eueryp man gaue thankes vnto the
Torde, laying: Blessed be he that hath kept his plate vndefiled.

35 As for Nitanors head he hanged it vp vpon the hie caftle for an euident and playne token of the helpe of God.

36 And so they agreed al together to kepe that day holy, (hamelp] the thirteenth
Day of the moneth Adar,

37 Which in the Sprians language is cal-
50 the next dap betoze Mardocheus

ay.

38 Thus was Mitanor slaine, and from

that time foorth the Jewes had the citie in possesũson: and here wyll J nowe make an ende.

39 Il J haue done well and as the Core required, it isthe thing that JJ desired: but if J haue spoken lclenderly e barclp,
Jhaue donc that J couide.

40 For as it is hurtfull to danke wine a: lone, and then againe Water, & as wine tempred with Water is plealaunt € deliteth the taste: so the setting out ol the matter delighteth the cave of them that reade the storp: Andhere shalbe the ende.

The ende of the second booke of the Machabees.

NS

F

Februari

a @ lhe description of the holy lande, con-

teyning the places mentioned in the foure Exangelijtes swith other places about the sea coastes: wherein may be seene the wayes and iourneyes of Chrifte and his Apostles in Iudea, Samaria, and Galilce: for into thele three partes this lande is deuided. .

. . ne ee ts = See PO ay a n e 7 . Se aE - ng 28
Ne
Sees „5
2 — 2 ee a | = — 7 = 0
3 bK. = IR pat ri
Nee r a a a 3 „ . —

a a= =

60 U io

8 = $ 2 5 = he 2 — N am 4 olf = Se =e qa apy wazanesf 7222 8 4
1 ge a eee 7 _GALILEA >= J
Pp SS Pa ee ee =, ea ee
ORS. = = a SS ee ees anaes HAI 1 (mame res
2 8 5 H d ß copa 7 Se
J „„ eee f N = = hat 2 a wiles 2) ofa: Lie —— Ss fa O
55 NI. of o AS eC =
N. SOY Set er SX NN N a
9 Ss 0 a 7
DN.
. a om: : aia MZ aa . = SG
COR OR Eee OS ee *
Yo 20 f 301 40! 30 [60 yl ro 20 307 46] 30 | Go 3] 10 | 20 30 40
5 1 nr — N 8 a 7
¢ The places fpecified in this mappe, with their situation by the
- obferuation of the degrees, concerning their length and breadth. 1 on .
Ascalon 6524.23.31. . Gadara or Gazara. 66. 48. 3. 23.
Azot 65.35.32. Gaza 893 65. 10. 31. 40.
Bethlehem 65. 55. 31. 51. lericho 66. 10.32. .
Bethphage 68. 58 icrufalem 66. . 55. l. cthsaida 66. 51. 32.29. oppe ” 65. 40. 32.5.
Bethabara 5 66.34. 32. l. lor, the other fountaine .
Bethania 66. 31.58. hence Iordane springeth. 67. 31.33. 7.
Cana of Galilee 66.52. 32.48. agdalon called also 5
Capernaum 66.53. 32.29. Dalmanutha 06. . 28.
Catmel mount 66. 31. 32. 50. Naim g 64. F. 3 ie
Cefarca Stratonis 66.16. 32. 25. G6 ore 5
Cesatea Philippi 67.39.33. 5. 5 * K. „ 5
Chortazim 66.53. 32.29. Samaria the citie e

Dan, one of the fountaines

6. 15. 9 33s =
Whence Iordane springeth. 6.25.33. 8.

Ennon 66.40 |32.18. 775 5 =
Emans 65. 54. 3l. 59. . a? 5
Ephren 66. 8.132. =~

Cams

mae

E The newe
Testament

of our sauicur Iesus

Chrifte.

am not afhamed of the Goqpel of Chritte, K¢

ecaufe itis the power of God vnto saluation o all that beleue. Romi.

See

ES
SJ

SNEED

SESS

— SS

AAA

"the vvifdome and knovvledge ot God his father. by him he hath deereed wes ke iudge the vvhole vvorlde, the liuing and the dead: Cold i,

In prologo vet. l

5 A preface in to the newe Testament.

HE neu. e Testament fo called, conteyning the vntinge f

the Epistles of Chriftes Apoltles, and “with other Tach dla Beit » with playnely vnto vs the summe and effect of all the scriptures ae “ae declare
Testament. That whiche was in figure and in ob{curitie insolucdlee ” the olde and prophetes in their prapheticall volumes, written by the voy 0 c. patriarkes ji per i holy ghost: is in this boo ke more a and euidently fer out ade the

(elfe fame a by the children of the prophetes the holy Apostles 13 aia oin the Pfatyy, was geuen by Moyles, but grace and veritie came by Iesus Christe 0 he e the lawe Iohui. doo ke of the newe Testament doth moit euidently commende and 95 iche grace thi

I difcourfed the whole misterie of our saluation and redemption, purchaf aie In this is

our Chrifte, here is his holy conception deferibed, his nativitic fis cee es: laui.

whole life and eonnersation, his gadly doctrine, his dinine miracles In this b 1

the newe T eftament is fet out his death, his resurreetion, his ascention hie f he of

the holy fpirice,his session in our fleshe on the right hande of his father. eae ing of

nuall interceflion to him for vs. In this boake is contayned the fourme ae der tt Collo ji his laft indgement,after the generall refurretion of our bodyes. These bed 180 of 1 of our sarth, these be the groundes af our faluation, these be thus . teries Mithxyy fhoulde beteue them, and by our beliefe shoulde enioy life euerlafting. . * ohn 10, tymes past God diuerfly and many vvayes spake vnto the fathers by ie pro 13885 5

in the e lait dayes he hath spoken vnto ys (vpon vvhom che endes of the 15 Sy ut Hcbtei come) by his ov vVne sonne, vvhom he hath made heire of all th ce

suche, that he is the brightneffe of his fathers glory, the very A ness sia ruling all thinges by the vvorde of his povver. Thisheanenly doctour fo indued vvith glory and maiestie, vve onght most rene. Hebrei.

rently to beleue, as commended vnto vs from the auctharitie of the beauenly father, to be hearde as his most yvelbclaued f 75 Mat il
E is his vyhale delight, by vvhom he vvyll be pleased and pacified : It vvyll els come to paffe faith that prophete Moyles, tha D . vrhosoeuer s hall not here and ubay that prophete in the vvordes that he fhall vie in his fathers name, I vvill be faith the father, re- cut. VY uenger of him. This is the last Pen be looked for to speake vnto vs: In hym be yniuerfally inelosed the riches and treasur

es of

by him hath he decreed to gene to his elect the life euerlafting,and to the reprobate (vvho hath contempned his lifeand doctrine) death ir Tim il euerlasting. Let vs therfore feriaufly heare and obay this our heauenly teacher, submit our {clues to this our judge andrevvarder: Let ys dtes.xvii esteeme his doctrine and conuerfation,asa ful, perfect, and neige of al holynes and vertue: Let vs esteeme the doctrine of this booke,as a most inflexible rule to leade ys to all ttueth and nevvnesse ol life. Here may vve beholde the eternall legacies of the nevye
Teftament, bequeathed from God the father in Chrifte his fonne to all his electes, ] fay the legacies liuely renevved vnta vs, not of de. liueraunce from Pharao his seruitude, but from the bondage and thraldome of that perpetuall aduerfarie of ours the deuill: here may vve beholde our inheritaunee, not of the Epon lande of Chanaan,or of the tranflation of vs to the place of vvorldly paradise: but here vve may {ec the full restitution of vs, both in body and foule,to the celeftiall paradise, the heauenly citie of Hierufalem abone, there Gullat. li to taigne vvith God the father, God the sonne, and God the holy ghoft for euer. vvhiche legacies of his Testanient promised and be- * queathed vvere notvvithstanding recorded in the bookes ofthe olde Testament to our auncient fathers, vvhiche in hope beleued in
Christe to come, vvho vvas painted before them in figures and fhadovves, and fignified in their olde saeramentes ordayned for that Hebreix, tyme: but novve more euidently renevved and exhibited vnto vs, not in figure, but in deede, not in promise, but in open fight,in feeling, in handling and touching of this eternall life, most manifeftly confirmed ynto vs in Chrifte his blood in this his nevve Teftament continued and reuined, yet in nevve saeramentes, the better to beare in aur remembraunce this his eternall Teftament of all joysull felieities.
Let vs novve therefore good.chriftian people,rcioyce in thefe glad tidinges expressed vnto vs by the name of the gofpell of our fauiour
Christe, and let it neuer fall ont of out remembraunce that vve vvere sometime ouervvhelmed in darkenesse, and fet in the fhadovve of i. pet. li. death: let vs consider that vve vvere sometime by our naturall byrth,ch@e hgldren of God his vvrath,and vvholly estraunged from the houfhalde of God. Let vs beare in minde that vve vvere somtimen of God, nor his beloued, that v ve Were by nature braunches of the wvilde oliue, and novve by mere mercy grafted into the fight and naturall oline tree: vvhervpon let vs the rather repose our Math ii. life in feate and reuerence. If vve be novve the chyldren of light, let vs vvalke in this our light in all holynesse and godlynesse of life, ap. Epho i. rouing that vvhiche is pleasing to the Lorde. Let vs haue no selovvs hip vvith the vnfruitfull vvorkes of darkneffe, and let vs hence- Rom xi. oorth be no more chy] ren, vvauering and caried about vvith every vvinde of doctrine, and by the deceipt and craftincsse of men, 3. Tes. v. vvherby they lay in vvayte to deceaue vs: but let vs folo e the trueth in loue and charitie, and in al tꝰ ges grovve vp into him vvhich Ephe iii is the head, that is Chrifte nur fauiour. If vve be novve the chyldren af grate, and made lively membe bis body, though fometyme ftraungers and forreyners farce of, and made neare by thebload of Chtiste, and made citizens vvith the des, and of the hous holde of 9
God: let vs direct our heartes thither yvhere our headis, deliting our selfe in all heauenly cogitations, vvalking in all spirituall vvorkes Fpfie: ii, and fruites of che spirite, as Gods deare elect. God graunt that Chrifte may fo dvvell in our heartes by fayth, that vve may be hable to . comprehende vvith all sainctes the vnspeakable loue of Christe, vvhich passeth all mans knovvledge. Vnto him therefore vvhicheis hable to do exceeding aboundauntly aboue all chat vve can aske or thinke, be prayse in the Churche by Christe lesus, throughout all generations foreuer. Amen. 5
And here yet ance againe, let the reader be admonifhed charitably to examine this translation of the nevve Testament folovving, and be not offended vvith diuerfitie of interpretation, though he finde it not ta agree to his vy ont text, or yet to disagtee from the com-
‘moh ttanslation: Remembring vvhat Santes Pagninus testifieth of that auncient interpreter faint Hierome, that in many places of his commentaries,he doth reade and expounde othervvise then is founde in the common translation: Yea faith Santes, Hierome doth pee very many places, and doth playnely eonfesse, that him selse vvas deceaued by the hatte of his translating in the doubtfull fignification o the vvordes. And therfore Fick the faide Hietome thus: I thinke it better to rebuke mine ovvne errour. then (vvhyle fam afhamed to confeffe my lacke of sxill) to persist in an errour. For vvho vvas ener, saith he, so vvell learned, that hath not fomevvhere ben decal ued. Thus farre faint Hierome, vvhervpon good reader J exhort thee, reade aduifedly,expende leamedly, and correct charitably, an be net offended (good englifhe reader) ta fee the holy scriptures in thyne ovvne language, as a matter nevvly seene? seeing e ovvne countreyman that venerable priest Bede, many yeres agone did tranflate faint Johns gospell inta the vulgare tongue, A cd ytilite tem ceclesiæ, to the prosite ol the Church, iit Cuchheit “Dirhams flory, whore orteth Bedes ovvne faying : Nolo vt di scipuli mei mendalitite legent, Lyvoulde not that my difciples fhould reade any lye, or spende their laboue after my departure vvithout fruite. VWVhiche thing §

Rom’.

"Pale ie uncient Bie OF Bede doth rethfic of him. In his diebas etiam enangelium lohannis in Angli cars sranflult linguare iuxia A pofto- + Cori lum: Sapientibus, & gee debitor sum, & ommibut omnia factus. In these dayes (of bis fickneffe) he did tranflate the gofpell of faint Iohn into the englis he tongne,fayingy ih tie Aßostle : Tam detter to tbe ‘ learned and vnlearned, J 2m made all to all. The zan fo did nith VVilliam
Malmesberi,: Qui hoc euangelium drfficsltate (ui, mentes legentinns excrect: Because this gospell by the difficultie that is in it,ddth fo much e xercise the vvittes of the reader, therfore he did interprete it into the englisne tongue: and fo did condiscende (faith he) to them vvhiche vvere not IKilfull in che latin tongue. God gtaunt that all readers may take fo much profite therby, as the good tranflatours ment vmo them. Amen.

1 lohn ,

- i Ze 2
Sal | | :
7 a 7

Me

24 A Al Cox lt ‘beh

aes

* 2 70 re, Lye i : N d
\ 1 WAN 6. 2 9 9
{ ARs “lw ; i ey iy

SOL LY

WT Eo
N e

1 ee N
1 nit

The ® Gofpell by Saint Matthewe,
| $m The first Chapter.
C i The Genealogie of Christe from Abraham. 13 The marpage of

his mother Marie. 20 Che Angell tatilkieth Josephes mynde.
21 The interpretation ot Christes names.

— bis is the) begat Achas, Athas begat Ezektas. Pes i
A bootie of the. 10 Eʒekias begat Manales, *MWanal Pa xxvii, yz ~ generationok ses begat Amon, Anion begat Josias. Ag
Refuschut, 1 Josias begat Pacin, Jacim̃ begat d the sonne k Jechomas and his brethren, about the 4 Re. .
F< Daud, the 1555 they were caryed away to Babysonne ot Ab on. f ham. ee 12 And, after they were brought to Wa 25
Ml Abraham bplon, Jechonias begat Salathiel, * N pe — begat laat, Salathiel begat Zozobabel, n Ae.
Ilaatc begat Jacob, Jatob begat Ju- 13 *Zorobabel begat Abid, Abiud Pane
Das, and his brethren. begat Eliakim, Eliakim begat %. 4. Reg 1s. d.

3 Judas begat Phares, and Zara ot
Thamar, Phares begat Esrom, Elm begat Aram. . .
Ardun begat Aminadab, Anunadab begat Maasson, Naasson begat

Wü. alm. |

Dauid the kyng begat Solomon, of her

Ala begat gat Joram,“
9 Ozdias begat

. 21302 begat Sadoc, Sadoc begat re

chen, Achen begat Eliud.
15 Eliud begat Eleazar, Eleazar begat
Matthan, Matthan begat Jacob.
16 Jacob begat Joseph, the hulband ol
A. Marie, of whõ was borne Jesus, that is called Christe. /
17 And ld, all the generations from 2 bzrahan: to Dawd, are fourteene generations: and fron Paund butyl the ca ryüig away into wWabyls, are tourteene generations: and frõ the carping away into Babplon vnto Chziste, are kourteene generations.

18 Thee birth of Jesus Cheilte was on this wile. When as his mother Maric was betrouthed to Joseph (belore

Abi they

C

— - | eGolpe

rey tame together) Me was kounde
10100 chylde ol the holv ghost.

10 Then Joleph her hulbande bepng a rpahtedus man, and not wpllpng to male her a publique example, Was

mynded prinity to put her away

20 Wut whyle he thought these thinges,

beholde, the Angell of the Lord appeared vnto hym ina decane, saying: Jofeply, cot forme of Dawid, keare not to talic (bto thee) Marie thy wite, fo2 that which is tonteaued in her, is of the holy

ost. x
1 She chall brung foozth) à sonne, and thou chalt tall his name Jelus: lor he

Philip, ii. b.

i Che tyme and place of Christes birth. n Che wyle men offer their prelentes. 14 Christe fleeth into Egipte. 16 The poung chyldren are lapne. 23 Chile turneth into Galilee. ö

hen Jesus was bozne

m zsethlehem a titie ol

Jurie, in the dayes ol
Herode the kyng: be-

holde, there cane wile

[Si men from the east to

Hierusalem,

2 Saping: Where is he that is borne kyng of Hewes: For we haue seene his starre in the east, and are tomie to Woy ship hym.

3 When Herode the kyng had hearde these thynges, he was troubled, and all

[he citte ol Mierusalem With hym.

4 And when he hadde gathered all the chiele Priestes and Stribes ofthe people together, he demaunded of them where Chuste shoulde be borne.

5, Aud they (aide vnto him: At Wethlehem in Puric, Fog thus it is written by

Micheva, the piopheie. wee 6 And thou Bethlehem gin) the lande

ol Buda, art not the least among the prices ot Juda. For out of thee Maiti chere conic a captain, that thal gouerne my people Israel.

Nu. xxxilll. c.

Lohn. vil. g.

7 Then herode, when he had priuilpe

called the Wyle men inquired of thé ditt: gentiy, what tynie the starre appeared.

layde: Go, and fearch diligently for the pong chile, and when pe haue founde hom, brpug me Wordeagayne, that ZF map tome, and worship hym allo.

9 hen they had hearde the kyng, they departed, and loc, the starre which

a age

% 8 And he lent them to Wethiehem, and

chall laue his people from chelr inner 5

22 (All this was done, that it my fulfilled, which was polen ofthe rae >
Beit ae loping

2 „à birgin shalbe with chi i and shall bryng foorth a sonne, aon * shall call his name Emmanuel, whiche is by inter pretation, God with vs.

24 Then Joleph, being rayled krö flepe dydas the Angel of the Lorde had bin:

den hym, and he toke his wpfe:

25 And knewe her not, ty che hadde © eu bought koorth her kirst bone foune, ¢ W

talled his name Jellis. Her

they lawe in the east, went before then tylit tame c stoode ouer the place wherin the voung chylde was.
Io When they lathe the starre, they reioyted extedyngly with great toy.
And went into the boule, and founde the poung chylde with Marie his mother, and fell downe, and worchypped 10 0 hym, and opened their treasures, and kl aper vnto hym gpftes, golde, and rankenfence, and nurre. *
12 Aud after they were warned of God ina dreanie, that they shoulde not goagapne to Herode, they returned into their owne tountrey another way.
3 When they were departed, beholde, the Angel of the Lo appeared to Joseph in a dreame, saying: Aryse, € take the poung chylde and his mother, and flee into Egipte, and be thou there, tyll
I bryng thee Worde, Foz it wyll come to pasle, that erode shall (eke p pours chylde, to Fare hym. ¢
14 When he arofe, be toke the voung chyide and his e by npght, and departed into Egipt. i
15. And was there, vnto the death of herode, that it myght be fullylled which
Was spoken of the Lorde, by the pia gious phete, saying: Out of Egipte haue ) Nusa called mip sonne.
16 Then erode, when he sawe that he was mocked of the wyse men, Was i tedyng wroth, and {ent foorth) and 10 : all the chyldren that were in ethley",

and in all the toastes, as many as ON

two pere olde, or Dunder, attording to the tyme, which he had diligently searched out, ol the Wyle nien. —
/. Then was fulfplled that, which was spoken by Jerenne the prophete, &

ing.

18 Jun Mama was there abopee hearde,
Hämentation, weppng, € great mourz nyng, Rachel weping (loz) her children, and Woulde not be comforted, because they Were not. -

h Fut when Herode was dead, be-

» holde, an Angel of the Lorde appeared

to Joseph ina decanie,in Egipt, laying.
20 Airple, and take the young chylde and his niother, and go into the lande ol JE

1 xi c

atthewe.

by Saint M

rael. For they are dead, whiche fought vun the poung chyldes lyfe. ee a
21 And he arole, c toke the young chytoe Ih

and his niother, € came into the lande

of Israecl.
22 Wut when he hearde, that Archelaus

dyd reigne in Jurie in the rowme of

his father Herode, he was afrayde to

go thyther. Not withstandyng, alter he

was warned of God in a dreame, he

turned aside into the parties of Galilee,
23 And (went and) dwelt in a citie, which

is called Nazareth, that it myght be fulfplled, which was spoken by the prophetes: e shalbe called a Pazarite.

¢ The. iij. Chapter.

| Johns peeachyng, office, tpfe, baptitme, 7 reprehendyng of the
Phariseeg, 13 and baptizyng of Christe in Jordane.

N those dayes, tame
John the Baptist,
A preachyng in the wpldernelle of Jurie, and
(os) taping. 1
Kepent, @ for the te kingdome of heauen is
3 “Foz this is he, of whom it is spoken by the prophete Efayas, saying. The i, bopyee ok one trying in the wyldernelle: prepare pe the way ol the Lorde, make his pathes strayght.

4 This John had his rayment of Caag, tels heere, *anda girdle of a skynne about his lopnes, his mate was loved tutes, and Wylde honp.

Then went ont to hym Hterulalem, aud all Jurie, and all the region rounde about Jordane,

And were baptised of hym in Bor dane, tonlessyng their sinnes.

57 But when he lawe many of the phar tikes, and Saducces come to his bap-
„ tine, he sayde vnto heim. O geucrati-

du ol bipers, who hath warned vou to flee from the anger to come-

Wryng foorth therefore fruites meete

drrepentauntt.
And be not of suche mynde, that pe dulde fay within pour lelues, we haue braham to (our) father. For I fay vue bo po, that God is able, of thele stoues

to rayse bp thyldren vnto Abraham.
Io Enen now is tht axe also put vnto the

roote of the trees: therefore, *euery tree Tren

which bryngeth not koorth good fruite, . b is hewen dolbne, and cast into the fire.

n J baptize vou in water vnto reper: C taunte:ut he that challcome after me, Markia is nightier then J, whole shoes J am Tung not worthy to beare, he shall baptize vou with the holy ghost, and with fire.

11 Whose fanne is in his hande, and he Lukii.«. wyll purge his flooze, and gather his wheate into his garner: but wyl burne vp the chaffe with e, ee

3 Then tomnieth J us from Galiice
05 Mine; vnto John, 'to be bapttzed Nack Ab.

ol hyn.

14. But John forbad hym, saping. J haue neve to be baptized of thee, and tomniest thou to me-

15 Jesus aunsweryng, fayde vnto hym:
Suffer it to be fo nove. Foz thus it betommeth bs, to fulfpll all righteousnes.
Then he suffred hy. N

16 And Jesus, when he was baptized, tame strapghtwaype out of the Water, and loe the heauens was open bnto yy 14, hym, and Cohn) sawe the spirite of God Luk md

destendpng lyke a doue, and lpghtpng lone, vpon hyni. a |

7 And ioc, there (came) a vopte fromthe dane heauens, saping: This is uty beioued db. sonne, in whom Jam well piealed. ur. My

A ij C The il. Pet. j. d,

-_— £theGolpell

The. iNdj. Chapter.

ille fasteth, is tempted. 17 he begynneth to preache. 18 he calleth
* Piber, Ae, James, and John, and healeth all the sicke.

den was Jesus'ledde
* if el ote y away of the spirite uv
Luk.ninb. ~A ito ibplderneffe , to be nr tDitenipted of the deuyll.

2 “Cd And when he had

1 kasted fourtic dapes,

and fourtie nightes, he
Was after warde an hungred.

3 And when the tempter tanie to hym, he sayde: Irthou be the sonne of God, tommnaunde that these stones be made breade. —

4 But he aunfivered, and fapde, it is
Wzitten: Man shall not lyue by breade

only, but by enerp worde that proceaz deth out of the mouth of God.

5 Then the deupll taketh hym vp into the holy titie, aud setteth hym on apt nacie of the temple,

6 And laith vnto hym: If thou be the forme of God, cast thy seiĩte downe. Foz it is Written: He shall gene his Angels charge ouer thee, € with their handes they shall tyft thee vp, lest at auy tyme thou dashe thy foote agaynst a stone.

7 And Jesus layde to hym. It is writ

Deut. viil a.
Luk. II. a.

Dsal. xciæ.

Deut. vi. c.

Luk. un. b.

8 Agapne, the deuyll taketh hym vp, into au exceadyng hye mountapne, and sheweth hym all the kyngdomes of the
Worlde, and the glorie of them,

And fapth vnto pm: All thele wyll
FJ geucthee, pr thou wylt fail downe, and worshyp me.

10 Thẽ᷑ fayth Jesus vnto hym: Auopde
Sathan. Fo; itis witten: Thou hat
Worshyp the Lore thy God, and hym only shalt thou serue.

u Then the deuyll leaueth him, and vez holde, the Angels tame, and numistred

vnlo hyn. g
When Jesiis had hearderthat John

we 2 delyuered vp, he departed into alice,

Deut.vi.c. and. x. d.
Luk. ini. b. i. Reg. vi. a.

Mark. i. b.

Markib, 12
(a) That ig. cat in ꝑrpson.

the fea toast, in the borders of Zabulon aud Hephthalin.

len agapne: Thou shalt not tempt the ¥

14. That it myght be fulfylled, wy;
9905 spoken by Esapas the 2 5 aping: ’ ,

15 The lande of Zabulon, e Nepyeayelum bx the way of the fea beponde Gor . dane, Galilee of the Gentiles, E

16 The people, which fate in darknesse, lawe great syght: And to them whiche ate in che region and shadowe okdeath, lyght is sprong vp.

17 From that tyme, Jesus began to

preache, and to sape: Nepent, for the kpugdome of heauen is at hande. ? hh ü

18 w And Jesus, walkyng by the fea of M2
Galilee, fave two brethren, Simon Via which was) called Peter, and Andrewe N his brother, caftyng a nette into the fea,
(fo2 they were fysshers.)

Efay ix a.

19 And he lath vnto then: Folowe me,

and JJ wyl make pou *fpMyers of men.
20 And they strapghtwape lefte their 1. % nettes, and folowed hym. Ereui
21 And when he was gone foorth front thence, he sawe other two brethren, D ames, the sonne of Zebedee, x John is brother, in the shippe with Zebedee their father, mendyng their nettes, and he called them. ö
22 And they immediatlp, Left the Mippe and heir father, and folowed hym. 0 Lud
23 And Felus went about all Galilee, teaching in their spnagogues, and preachyng the Gospell of the kingdome, and
Healyng all maner of sicknesle, and all maner of disease among the people.
24 And his fame spread abrode, throughout ail Syria: and they brought vnto hym all sicke people, that were taken
With diners dilrales, and grppynges, aͤnd then that were posselled with de uyls, and hole which were lunaticke, and thole that had the paulsie, and he healed then. N :
25 And there folowed him great mult ss tudes of people, from Galilee, and from

„ Aind lett Hasareth and went e dwelt - the ten cities, and krom Wierulalem, „ ve in Capernaum, whiche is (acitie) vpon

and from Jurie, and from the regions e that le) beponde Jordane.

he

aint Matthewe.

lil.

$y The. v. Chapter. a Fu this Chapter, and in the two nert kolowyng. is conteyned the mot ercellent and

louyng Sermon ok Christe, in the mount.

which Sermon, is the bety key, that openeth

the vnderskandyng into the lawe. In this fifth chapter (pecially, 3 he preacheth of the

eyght beatitudes, or blesspnges, 21 of mantlaughter, 22 wrath

and anger, 27 Cf adultrie,

Bof lwearpng, 39 ol lußerpng wrong. 44 and ok loue, euen to warde a mans enemies.

saping. yin 3,” Mleffed Gre) the pode in spirite: for thelrs is the kyngdome ok heauen. v4. Blelsed (are) they that mourne: fog did. they shalbe conifogted. F
5 Glesled (ate) the meke: fog they shall inherite the earth.
Blessed (are) they, which do hunger andthürste (atter) righteousnes: for they shalbe satisfied. 8
7 Blessed (are) the mertyfull: for they
{hall obteyne mercy.
8. Wlessed (are) the pure in heart: for they shall see God. 1
9 Wlelled (are) the peace makers: fo? they shalbe called the chyldren of God. gio Blessed (are) they Which suffer perlecution for righteousnes fake: for theirs bg the kyngdome of heauen.
100 u Blelled are pe, whẽ mem reuyle you, and perfecute (vou) and, lying, chall fap all maner of cuyll fapitig agaynst you,
| for my fake, ling 12 “Reropee,and be glad: for great is your re warde in heauen. er For fo persecuted
18 the prophetes, whiche were before

b & Beave the salt of the carth. Wut aa pk the falt become vnlauery, where in
(hati it be salted- It is thentekoorth good for nothing, but to be caste out, and to be troden vnder foote of men. 1
4. c are the lyght o the worlde. A citie e Dat is let on an hyll, tan not be hyo. a Neyther do men lyghta candell, and put it vnder a busshell: but on a candeltke, and it geueth lyght puto all that are in the houle. ö a, ©, Let your lyght fo shyne before men, that they may fee pour good worrkcs,
1 ie your father, whiche is in
7 ¢ 1

ide. 6

Matiz i d. say buto pon, *tplt hea: andi

19 Wholdeuer therfore breaketh one „of secobii.t. thele least conunaundementes, and tea- E. cheth men fo, he shalbe called the leaste in the kyngdonie of heauen. Wut who fo euer doeth, and teacheth (lo) the fante
Nane great in the kyngdonie ok

eaueu.

20 For I fay vnto pou: except pour righ: teousnes, excede the righteousnes ofthe
Stribes and Pharisees, ve shall not enter into the kyngdoime of heaiten.

21 He haue hearde, that it was sayde to Y thea of the olde tyme, thou shalt not Exod. sace.
Ryll: who so euer kylleth, shalbe in Rar daunger of indgement. 1 “=

22 But ZH fay vnto pou, that who fo euer is angry with his brother, vnaduisedly, shalbe in daunger of iudgenient. And who fo euer shall fay vnto his brother, racha, shalbe in daunger of a touncell:

Wut, Whosdeuer shall faye (chou) foole, shalbe in daunger ok hell fire.

23 Therkore, ik thou bring thy gyft to the aulter, and there renienibzett, that thy brother hath ought agaynst thee:

24. Xcaue there thy gylt, before the auter, and go thy wap, first and be recon- Job xn b tiled to thy brother: and then, come and offer thy gyft. - * 6

25 Agree with thyne aduersarie quick- Luk ig. lye, whyles thou art in the waye with hun: lett at any tyme the aduerlarie deliuer thee to the iudge, and the indge deliuer thee to the ninister, and then thon be cast into pryson.

26 Uerply J fay buto thee, thou shalt not

tome out thence, tyll thou Halk payde

the vtmost farthoung.

27 Pe haue hearde, that it was sayde vnto them of olde tyme: Thon halt not Exod sxc

e 1, "that whotbence Eccte.xlic.
ü Sp Dito pou; ( lob. xxwt ae : A üij lokcth

FS heGrolpell

joketh ena wonian, to tutte after her, hath counted adultry with her alredy, his heart.

Ifthy ryaht eye offende thee, plucke tout, and cast it from tee. Jor better it is vuto thee, that ont of thy members perishe, thẽ that thy whole body should be east into hell.

30 Add yk thy ryght hande offende thee, cut it ot, and catt it from thee, For better it is vnto thee, that one of thy members

Mark.ix.g. 29

ptrishe, then that all thy body shoulde

bc cast into hell.
31 It is laide: whosocuer putteth away
Devxxitia” his Wyfe, let hy geue her a wrptyng bpDkdinortemient. **

Mahsixass Butt J fay bnto pou, That Wholdener doeth put awaye his wyfe, except it be for fornication , causeth her to connunit adultry. And whosocuer marpeth her

that is diuorced, tonnnitteth adultrp.
J 33 Agapne, pe haue hearde that it was
Lal ve. laàyde vnto them ol olde tyme: Thou shalt not forlweare thy felte, but alt perkourmt bute the Lorde thine othes. ut, J fay vnto vou: Sweare not at all, neither by heauen, *foz it is gods

ate,

35 Non by the earth, for it is his footestoole, neither by Hierulalem, fo2 it is the atic of the great ag

36 Meither chat thou lweare by thy head, becaule thou canst not make one hecre Whyte or blacke.

37 But ict pour conunumication be pea, pea, nay nay, For whatlocuer is more

Iacob. v. d. ay. Ixvi. a.
Nlat. xx ni. c

then thele, connneth of euyll. f
38 Ye haue hearde, that it is sayde, an k eye for an eye, and a tooth fora togth. Dare
39 Wut, J fap vnto pou, that pe relist not Leut 144,
11855 — swath geueth thee a Lek.vid con thy right Hecke tur 8 the other allo. ‘ ein
40 And yk anp man wyll sue thee at the lawe, and take away thy toate, let him hauc thy cloke also.
And Wholocuer wyll compel thee to G go à mple, go with hy twapne.
42 Geue to hym that asketh thee: ¢ from hyn that woulde borowe of thee, turne
5 1 5 pny. f
43 Be haue heard, that it is saide: Thou cai. io thy neyghbour, & 2 5 Rer. mr ie. ö
44 But J faye vnto you, loue pour ene: mies, blesse them that . — * do Rome good to them that hate vou pray for the be which hurt you and persecute pou:
45. That ye may be the chyldren of pour father, which is in heanen. For he maketh his sonne to arple on the euyll, and on the good, and sendeth rayne on the iust, and on the vntust. ö
46 For yt ye loue them which lout pon, ve what rewarde haue pee Do not the publicans also even the same-
47 And yf pe falute o2 greete pour brethrẽ only, What singuler thyng do pes Do not allo the publicans lpkewyle-
48 He shall therfore be perfecte, euen AS Tx py father, which is in heauen, is per ecte.

The Vj. Chapter.

Ot almes, 5 praper, 16 and kastyng. 19 He forbyddeth the

caretull sekyng of worldlp thynges.

ABE heede to pour not in thesight ok men,

(ANS woulde be sene of thé,
Nine 5 ue ak Mt rej rde of your
Ua en er
Heretore, when thou geuest thyne ahues, chou halt not miaiiea trumpet

Malnnes, that pe geue it to the intente that ye

to be bio wen before thee, as hypotritedo. in the synagogues, € in the streates,

ö they night be esteemed ok mẽ. Cevly
Play vnto pou they haue their reward.
Wut when thou doest (thyne! ales,

let not thy left hande knowe, what thy ryght hande doeth, 5 '
4. That thyne alnies may be in feevete:
And thy father, which seeth in fecrett, shau rewarde thee openly.) Jud

And when thou prayest, thou shalt a, got be as the hypocrites are. Foz they an joe to stande, praying in the spnago-

les, and in che comers of the streates, that they may be fene of men. Ueryly
JJ fay vnto you, they haue theyr rez warde.

But When thou prapest, *enter into

e thpchanniber, and when thou hast thut

thy Doze, pray to thy father, which is

in secrete, and thy father which seeth

in secrete, Mall rewarde thee openiy.
7 But When pe pray,” babbic not much,

5 aushe heathen do. Nor they thynke lit

Vu come to pate that they shalbe heard, for thepr much bablinges lake.

8 We not pe therfore lpke vnto them.

l. Foz pour father knoweth, what ee nede ol, before ye aske of hym. N

9 After this maner therkore pray pe.

usin O our father, which art in heanen, halowed be thy name.

v Let thy kyngdome comic, Thy wyll be done, as Well in earth, as it is in heauen.

i Geue vs this day our dayly breade.

And korgeue vs our dettes, as we forgeue our detters.

B And leade vs not into tenptation, but delyuer vs from euyll. For thynt is the kyugdonre, and the power, and the

na, DO, for euer. Anien.

iid IA. Jor, pf pe forgeue nien theyr trespalses, pour heauenly father Mall allo forgeue vou.

i But, pk ve foegette not nien they trespalles: no moze Mall pour father,

¢ foigeue (vou) pour trespasses. bri 16 Moreouer, when pe fat, be not of ay an heaup countenaunce, as hppocrites are. For they dilligure theyr faces, that they uiyght appeare vnto men, to falt.
Uerpiy I fay vnto von, they haue theyr rewardẽ.

7 Wut thou, when thou fastest, annoyut thyne head, and washe thy face:

8 That thou appeare not vnto men, to falt: but vnto thy father, which is in lecrete, and thy father, which fect in secrete, shall rewarde thee openly.

1 Poorde not vp for your selues, trealures vpon earth, where the moth and tuft doth corrupt, and where thecues

N beake through, and steale. ö

0 But laye vp for pou, treasures in hea-

ü g.
“Oh

byS ant Matchewe.

: nen, where nepther moth noz rust doth

torrupt, and where theenes do not breakc though, nor steale.

2 Jor, Where pour treasure is, there

Wyll pour heart be also.

22 The lyght of the bony, ts the cye. Luexic

Wherkore, yt thyne eye be lingle, all it body shalbe full of abt *

23 Wut and pf thyne epe be wicked, all thy body shalbe ful of darknesse. voherfore, pF the lyght that is in thee, be darkneffe, howe great is that darknesle-

24 No man can serue two maisters.

Jor either he shall hate the one, r loue Cac xvi the other: or els leane to the one, and ö dispise the other. Be can not serue cy Ju tye

God, and ) mammnion. ˖ Sen

25 Therkore J fay vnto pou, be not care- ner d full for pour lyfe, what pe shall cate, or Luc c. drynke: noz pet for pour body, what pe FRY shall put on. Is not the tyfe more Worth then meate: c the body then rapnient:

26 Weholde the fowles of the ayre: Foz they sowe not, neither do they reape, nor cary into the barnes: pet your heauensy father feedeth them. Are ve not much better then they

27 Which of pou, by takyng of careful Lale. thonght, can adde one cubite vnto his stature 4

28 Aud why care pe for rapment-Wearne of the Tylies of the fielde, Howe they growe. They Weery not (them telues]

With labour, neither do they] spinne:

29 And pet J fay vnto pou, that cuen
Solonion in all his ropaltie, was not arayed lyke one of thee. ö

30 Wherkore, vt God so clothe the grasse of the fielde, which though it stande to
Hap, is to morowe call into che ouen: shall he not much nioze do) the fame for you, O pe of litle fapth- ö

31 Therekore take no thought, saving:

What shall we rate: or, what shall we
N 02, wherewith Chall we be clo-

thed- -

23 (For aster all these thynges, do the
Gentiles seke:) for pour Heauenly father knoweth, that ye haue nede of all thele thynges. ;

33 But rather, seke pe first the kyngdome of God, and his ryghteoufnesle, and all these thynges shalbe munstred
"Oa baden for the morowe: forthe

are not then for re: forth mozowe shall care for it seife. Suckici- Gt dag ent vnto the dap, is the euyll therok. „e dene

of bio otmne
The

grief or ait le tion. ier.

Ne

© John xvi. f.

The Gol pell

q The vij. Chapter.

1 forbyddeth foolpsbe and rache iudgement, sreprouctt hypocrisie.
. ; ne be 1110 he 13 a to enter in at the strayte gate, 15 warneth to beware of kalle prophetes, 24 and wylleth the hearers or his worde,

to be doers ol the lame.

Luk. vi f yen not iudged.

id * For with what
Rom. i a. 2 esumdgement pe iudge, pe
* halbe udged: And with what nieasure pe

— meate , it shalbe miealu-

red to pou agapne. .

Lak. vt. 3 Why seest thon a mote in thy bro-

thers eye, but perteiuest not the beame that is in thyne owne eye?

4 2, howe sayest thou to thy brother: suffer me. I Wyll plucke out a mote out of thyne eye: and beholde, a beanie is in thyne owne epe-

5 Thon hypocrite, fir cate ont the bedume out of thine owne eye: and then shalt thou {ce clearely, to plucke out the mote out of thy brothers eye.

6 Geue not that which is holy, vnto dogges, neyther taste pe your pearles before swyne, left they treade them vnder their feete, and turning agapne, all to rent vou.

Alke, and it shalbe geuen pou :* (eke, and pe shall fynde: knocke, and it hat be opened vnto pou,

Lukaub 8 FJpor he that asketh, receaueth: and

he that leketh, kyndeth: and to hym that knocketh, it lhalbe opened. '

9 Is there any among you, which, pF his forme alke hym bread, wyll gene hyma stone-

10 Dayf he alke fyshe, wyl he geue hym er

1 It pe then, beyng eupll, knowe to gene pour thyldren good gpftes: Howe much moze shall pour father, which is in heauen, gene good thynges, to them that alke hym- |

2 Hherfoze all thynges, whatlotuer

pe woulde that men shoulde do to you, do pe euen fo to them: Foz this is the llarbe, and the prophetes.

Lavi. 13 Enter in at the strapte gate. Foz

Wyde is the gate, and brode is the way,

that leadeth to destruttion, and many

there be which go in therat. ö

14 Bctause, strapte is the gate, and na-

robe is the way, which leadeth vnto pfe, and fewe there be that kynde it.

Ier. xxix. c.

Fed. xxxib
Toby. mn. c.
Lulk. vnc.

tz ewarc of falle prophetes, Which bau. tomie to vou in sheepes dohyng n cn inwardly they are rauenyng woolkes.

16 Be shall knowe them bp theyrkruites E
„Do men gather grapes ok thores: 93 Lenz fygges oh thystles: 5

17 Euen lo, euery good tree, bryngetlj foorth good fruite: But a coxrupt fe, bapngeth foorth euyll frurite,

18 A good tree, can not bryng fooztty Wa ae bad fruite: neither tan a had tree, bryng foorth good fruite.

19 Euerp tree that bryngeth not foorch tn good fruite, is hewen downe, and calt bie 2c. by they f. |

20 Wherkoze, bp theyr fruites, pe Thatt

Not euerp one, that sapeth vnto mie ,,....

*PLorwe, Loe, hall enter into the lara

kyngdome of heauen: but he that doeth xii<

the wyll of my father, which is in heauen.

22 Many wyll fap to me in that day, d
Lowe Lorde, haue we not prophesied thorowe thy name: and thorowe thy Aare

name haue cast out denpls: c done many great workes thorowe thy name:

23 And then wyll J conkelle vnto them,
I neuer knewe pou: *Depart from me, ae pe that worke iniquitie.

24 Therfore, Whofoeuer heareth of me these sapinges, and doeth the fame, 7
Wpll lpken hum vnto a wple man,
Which * buyit his house vpon a rocke: Ls

25 And the rayne descended, and the fluddes came, and the wyndes blewe, and beat vpon that house, and it fell not, becaule it was grounded ona rocke.

26 And every one that heareth of nie thele sayinges, and doeth them not, shalbe lykened vnto a foolpshe man,
Which buylt his house vpon the sande:

27 And the rapne destended, and the fluddes came, and the wyndes bleibe, and beat vpon that Houle, and it fell, and great was the fall of it.

28 And it came to palle, that when Pe sus had euded thele sayinges, the people were astonied at his Doctrine. Fluke

29 For he taught them, as one hauyug lam

vower, and not as the es The

Lacob. ib.

Etc. xi

| Vem

Ihe. viij. Chapter.

C2 Christe clenteth the leper, healeth the captaynes leruaunt. and matty other difeates, 14 helpeth Peters mother in ia we, 24 stylleth the lea, and the wynde,
2$ and dryueth the deuyls out of the pollessed, into the lwyne.

de N he was come ca AN Downe fro the moun-
: 4 tayne, great multi-

Ave pz) tudes folowed hym.

A A\ Adal ind bebotne, there
N

—canealeper, and wor-

hipped pm, faping : Lode, yk thou
Wyit, thou canst make nie cleane.

And Felis put foorth his hande, and touched hym, saying: J wyll, be thou teane. And innnediatlpe his leprosie
Was clensed.

And Bens lapth vnto hym: See thon tell no man,“ but go, (and) shewe thy selle to the prest, and offer the gift that Doyles conunaunded, foe a witnes vnto them.

And when Jelus was entred* in-

win to Capernaumt, there tanie vnto hym a

els Centurion, besechpng hym.

6 And saying: Lowe, my seruaunt lyeth at home ficke of the paulsie, greeuously payned. a

And Jesus sapth. When J come, J

wyll heale hym.

The Centurion aunfivered, x sapde:
Lorde, Jam not worthy that thou shouldest come vnder my roofe: but

u *fpeake the worde only, E my leruaunt

shalbe heãled.
5) For J also my selfe am buder aucthokitie, and haue souldiers vnder me: and
J lay to this man go, and he gocth:and to another, come, and he commeth: and to ny seruaunt, do this, and he doth it. lo When Jelus hearde bim) he marueyled, e lade to them that folo wed chim:
Ueryly I fay Into pou, J haue not vy kounde so great fayth in Iscael. zz u J fay vnto pon, that niany thal come from the east and welt, and shall rest with Abraham, and Plaac, € Pa
Cob, in the kyngdome of heauen.

1 But the chyldren of the kyngdome
(halve catte ont, into beter darcknesle:

N ee shalbe wepyng, and gnathpugot

3 And Jesus fayde vnto the Centurion:
Go thy wap, and as thou hast beleued, o be it vnto thee, And his seruaunt
Was Heated, in the {elfe lame houre.

1 Wilg

14 Aud when Jesus was come itd winke
Peters Houle, he sawe his wyues mo- Lol lf ther layed, and licke ofa feuer.

15 And he touched her hande, and the feuer lekt her, and the arole, and nunistred vnto them.

16 When the euen was tome, they bronght vnto hyn many, that were poslessed with deupls, and be tast ont the spirites With a worde, and healed all that were sicke. 9

17 That it mpght be fulfplted, which was spoken by Efapas the prophete, saying: He toke on hym our inkfirim- 10 is ties, and bare (our) sicknesses. ae

13 When Pelus sawe great multitudes C about hym, beconimaunded chat they shoulde go ouer the water.

19 And a tertayne Scribe canic, ⁊ sayde brio hom: Maister, J wyll folowe Lukeixg. thee, whyther soeuer thou goest. a

20 And Jesus sayth vnto hym. The foxes hãue holes, and the birdes of the aye haue nestes: but the forme of man,

Hath not where to rest his head.

2 And another, of the number of his

disciples, sayde vnto hym: Torde, ff Lake ix. g fer me first to go and bury niy father.

22 But Jesus layne vnto hym: Folowe me, and let the dead bury theyr dead.

23 Aud when he entred into a shippe,

his disciples folowed hym: f

24. And beholde, there arose a great NK. tempest in the fea, in to muchy that the Ta vine shippe was conered with waues: but he was a slepe. N

25 And his dilciples tanie to hym, and awoke hym, saying: Lorde faue vs, we perplye,

26 And he sayth vnto them: why are ye fearefull, O ye ok inte fayth: Then he arose, and rebuked the Windes, and the pe fea: and there folowed a great talnie. *

27 But the men marucpled, laying: sp
What maner of mau is this, that both wyndes and {ea obey hyn:: a

28 And when he was tome to the other Mark.va, syde, into the countrey of the berg 3
1 there met byui two, pollested
With deupls, which cane out of the granes, and were very fierce, fo atin

, i.

jan myght go by that way.
29 1 And beholde, they cryed out, lapung:
Mihva, O Jesu, thou sonnc of God, what
Land. halbe be to do With the: Art thou come
Corn. hyther, to torment vs before the lyme-
30 Ard there was, a good way of from la vin. d them, à hearde of many lwyne, fez dyng. ö
31 vy chr deuyls beldught hunt, saping: f thou cast vs out, suffer vs to go away into the hearde of swyne.
32 And he fapde dato them, go. Then

The. ix. Chapter.

@ 2 he healeth the paulsie. 9 Calleth Matthewe from the custome. n Auncweretg fo2 his difciples. 22 Healeth the woman of the blooddy illue. 25 Helpeth Jairus daughter. 29 Geueth two blynde men theyr lyght. 3 Maketh a dumbe man to

Speake, and dryueth out a deupll.
N O he entred into a

c came into his owne scitie.

Nack na. ee bronght to hima man, ed, ey ficke of the paulsie, Iping in a bedde. And when Jelus Hse

the fayth of them, he fayde vnto the sicke of the paulsie: Sonne, be of good cheare, thy sinnes be forgeuen thee.

3 And beholde, tertayne of the Scribes sayde, within them selues: This man

blasphemeth.

4 And whẽ FJelus saw their thoughtes, he sayde: vhereforc thynke ye euyll in pour heartes:

$ Whether is easper to say, thy sinnes be fozgeucn thee: De to fay, aryle and
Walke:

6. Wut that pe map knowe, that the sonne of man hath power to forgene linnes in carth (then fapde he to the

agel. sicke of the paulsie ) Aryle, take vp thy diana b, bedde, and go vnto thync houte,
Lukeve. 7 Aid he arole, and departed to his

lohn. v. b.

house.

8 But when the multitudes sawe it, theymarueyled, r glorified God, which had genen such poder vnto men.

9 And as Jesus pated feorth from

. thence, he sawe a man, named Mat-

thewe, syttyng at the reccipte of cu-

Howie: c he layth vnto hym folowe me.
And he arose, and folowed hyn.

10 And it came to passe, as Fels late at

nicate in his houle, beholde, many pub-

The Golpell

72s \hippe x patted ouer,

And beholde, they

Went they out, and departed! hearde of swyne: And beboine, Shee hearde of swyne rusched headlong into the fea, and peryshed inthe waters.

33 Then they that kept them „ fledde and Went thepr apes inta the atic and tolde euery thyng, and what was done of the possessed with the deuyls.

34. And beholde, the whole citic tamt out to miete esus: and when they sawe him »thep besought hym, that he
Woulde depart out ok thepztoaltes. iz

licans alfo and finners came, and late downe with Fetus and his diltipies,

And when the Pharisces fae it, 25 they layde vnto his disciples: why eateth pour maister with publicans and linners:

12 Wut when Pelus hearde that, he fayde vnto them: They that be whole, nede not the philition, but they chat are sicke. : ee

z Go ye, and learne what that mea: Nahe net Wyll (baue) mereic,and not satrifice: for I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentaunce.

14 Then came the disciples of John »,., ch

vnto ere faying : hy do we and the Wa iy ees fatt oft, but thy dilcples Len

alt not:

15 And Jelus sayde vnto them: Can the chyldren © of the bryde chaumber ae
Mourne, as long as the brydegronie is ee with them: But the dayes wyll conie, when the brydegrome shall be taken from them, and then chall they falt. G

16 No man putteth a pecee of newe (0 da tloth in an olde garment: for then, the peete taketh away stomethyng from the garment, and the rent is made Worle.

17 Meither do men put newe wine into olde veslels: cis, the vessels breake, and the wyne runneth out, and the veslels peryshe: But they put newe wyne, into newe vellels, and both are preserued together. 90 C

18 hyle he fpake thefe thynges b. them, beholde, there tame a certabnn i ruler, and Woelhppped hynt, bar

kev c. vill.

| by Saint
My daughter is euen nowe dead, but cone and lay thy hande vpon her, and
And Jesus aàrose, and folowed hym, and (£0 dvd) His diltiples. ao (And beholde, a woman which was
„ dilealed With an ine of blood twelne

I

the henne of his vesture. N ay Forthe fapde within her selfe: If may touche but euen his vesture only shalbe ale. 5
22 Wut PHelus turned hym about, and when he lawe her, he fade: Daughter be ol good comfort thy faith hath made thee lake. And the woman was made
Whole from that same houre.) 2
% 3 And, When Jesus tame into the rw og lers house, and faethe minstrels, and the people, makyng a noyle,
24 He layde vnto then: Geue plate, for a the maide is not dead, but slepeth. And they laughed hym to storne. ' j But when the people were put foorth, he went in, and toke her by the hande, und the mayde arose.
26 And the fame lor this; went abrode into all that lande. a g
927 And when Jesus departed thente, two blynde nien folowed hym, crying, and faying : O thou fonne of Dauid, haue mercy on vs.
28 And Whe he was tome into the Houte, f 10 blynde came to hym. And Jelus uyth buco them: Belctue ye that J am able to do this: They layde vnto hom,

be peres came Debynde hem, and touched

Matthæwe.

Wan de *
29 Then touched he their eyes, saying:
Attordyng to pour fayth, be ft bu Mat. vii. b.

vou.
30 And their eyes were opened. And Jesus straptly charged them, saying: that no man knowe oft, . e
31 But they, when they were departed,
1 9 abzode his name in all that
32. As they went out, beholde, they marvig - brought to pina dumde man, palletes Pet
With a deupyll. a
33 And when the deuyll was cast out, the dumbe spake, and the multitudes mare it was neuer so seene

racl,
34. But the Pharisees laydt: He tastethh Mah. sib
Out deuils, through the prince or deulls. Mark in. l.

E

35 And Jelus went avout all cities and Trab.

townes, teachyng in their spnagogues, Mb. and preachyng the Gospell of the kyngdome, and healyng euerp licknelle, and

reuerp dileale amoug the people.

36 Wut when he {awe the multitudes, he was moned with compassion on Mug Md them, betaule they were deltitute,and
{cattered abrode, euen as sheepe, hauing no shephearde.

37 Then sayth he vnto his disciples: the

haruest truely is plenteous, but the la- Luk xa. bourers are felve, 8
38 Pray (ve) therfore the lorde of the haruest, that he wyl thautt foorth labourers into the haruest. —

4% The. x. Chapter.

C Chritte tendeth out his twelue Apottics, to preache in Jurte,
He geueth them charge, teacheth them, and comkorteth them agapnt pertecution and trouble.

nd whenhe had callied his nbelue diltiz
: ples(onto hym he gaue

* >) them power agaynst

e vncleane spirites, to
8 Yi catt them out, and to

H heale all maner of fick nelle, and all maner ol diseale.

25 ah names of the twelue Apostles are these. The lirst, Simon, whiche is
Called Peter, and Andrewe his brother,

james, the (tonne; of Zebedee, x John his prother,

3 Pbikp, EzSartholomewe, Thomas and Patthe we, which had ben a Publ

tane, James, b) tonne of Alphee , x Lebbeus, whole surname was Taddeus,

4 Simon (the) Cananite, æ Judas JE cariot, which also betrayed hy.

5 Jelus sent forth these twelue, WHO Nr ab, he cõmaunded, saying. Go not into the 8
Way ofthe Gentiles, and into the citie of the Santaritanes enter ye not.

6 But go rather to the loll sheepe ok the house of Ilracl.

7 As pe go, prrache, saving: The kyng-

Dome of heauen is at bande,

8 Heale the sicke, cleause p lepers, raysc ʒ

the dead, cast out deuyls. Freely pe Ade; vid. haue reccaued, freely geue. oslesse

9 Poslesse not golde, nor syluer, noz brasle in pour purses, 1
Jo Nor yet strippe, towardes pour iournep, neither two coates, neither shoes, nor vet a staffe. For the worknian is worthy of his meate.
1 But to whatsocuer titie or towne ve shall tome, inquire who is worthy in it,
(HSH Alld () there abyde, tyll pe go thence. derer 12 And when ve come into an boule, sa-
Lassen lutte the lame. i z And ikthe houle be worthy, let pour peace come vpon it: but if it be not Woz thy, let pour peace returne to vou again,
14. And wholocuer shal not reteaue you, nor wyll heare your preachyng: when ye depart ont of chat houle, or that atic,

Mark.vi. b.
Luk. ix. a.

i, Tim. v.c.

Mar. vi. b.
Abt. ug. “hake ol the dust of pour fete.

15 Clerylp J lay vnto vou, it shalbt eafier for the lande of the Dodonittes and
Gomorreans, in the dap of iudgement, then lor that citie.

Lula. 16 *eholde, J sende you fodzth, as

sheeye in the middest of woolfes. We ye therfore wyle as serpentes, and harmelesse as doues.

Marxiid Ey Aut beware omen. Nor they shall

Lin eb delpuer von dp to the tountels, and thal scourge pou in their synagogues.
18 Amd pe shalbe brought to the head ruiers, and kynges, for my fake, in wit-

nelle to them, and to the Gentiles.

Nik. 22 Bit Whe they delpuer you vp, take ye

no thought, howor what pe Mal speake. oz it shalbe geuen pou, euen in that same houre, what pe shall speage.

20 Jor it is not ye that speake, but p spirite of your father which speaketh in von.

Mich. vu. b. 1 The brother Mall delyuer vp the

- brother to death, and the father the

fonne, x the chyldren shall ryse agayntt their fathers, and mothers, and chall put them to death. 8

2 And pt chalbe hated of all men, for my names fake: but he that endureth to the ende, shalbe saued.

Luk. xi a.

EXOd. iin. d.

Nlath. 24. a.

Aan, 23° Wut, when they perletute pou in and.. a. This titie, flee ve into another. For verily

IJsay vnto vou, ve shan not ende all the

5 of Israel, tyll the fonne ol man be

tome. 5

Likwif 24. The diltiple is not aboue the maister, nor the seruaunt aboue his lorde.

25 It is enough for the diftipic, thathe

be as his matter is: and that the ler-

uaunt, be as his lorde is. If they haue

called the lorde ol the hou c Beelzebub:

‘TheGofl pell 1 8

Howe much moze shall ; bishoulehorne fe chertauthemot
26 Fcave them not therfore: *fo) ¢ 1 nothing close, that thal not be pets dire nothing hyd that hall not be Knowen ann”

27 What A tell pou in darknesse, hat speake ve inlyght: And what ye heare in the care, that preach ve onthe honses

28 And keare ve not them which kyl the L, body, but art not able to kyll the fonic,
Wut rather feare hyn, which is able to destroy both soule and body in hell.

29 Are not two litie sparowes solde fora

farthyng- And one of thé hati not light
* 55 cen he er e

30 a, euen all the heeres of are numbred. ; ee ö

31 Feare ve not therefore, ve art of more

a then 5705 arowes.

32 *€uerpone o2e, that shall conte me before men, hym wyll Heonteite a a wie

_ fo, before my father, which is in heauẽs. Le

33 Wut wholoeuer {hall denye me before“ men, hym wyll J allo denye, before nip

kather, which is in heauens.

34 Thinke not that Jam tome to lende Lag peate into the earth. came not to sende

_ peace, but a sworde.

35 Nor Jan tome to set a man at var:--- aunte agaynst his father, € the daugh- vie ter agaynst her mother, and the daugh-

ter inlawe agaynst her mother in lalbe.

36 And a mans foes [albe) they of his owne householde. 1

37 He that loneth father or mother more b then me, is not worthy of me. And he that loueth sonne or daughter, more the me, is not worthy of me.

38 And he that taketh not his crosse, ¢ foloweth me, is not worthy ofme.
39 Oe that findeth his like, shall loseit: 95

and he that loleth his ipfe, fog ny lake, e shall fynde it. Luc

40 Me that reteaueth vou, receaueth me: 1 ehe that receaueth me, receaueth hyvunn“

that sent me.

Ahe that reteaueth a prophete, in the name ofa prophete, shall receaue a prophetes rewarde. And he that reteaueth a ryghteous man in the name ofa ryghtedus man, fhall receaue a ryghteous

mans rewarde. Ire

42 And whosdeuer chall geue vnto ont ofthest litle ones, to drynnke, a nde colde water only, in the nanic ofad 1 ple, veryly J lap vnto pou, he shall ue lofe his rewarde. C The

That l i that ‘of aue his be

s Reg bl

Sap The. xi. Chapter,

I Chile preacheth, John Baptist sendeth his difcipies vnto him. 7 Christes teslimonie concernyng John. 18 The opinion of the people concernyng Christe and John 20 Cheiste ppbrapdeth the vnthankull cities. 25 The Solpell is reuealed ko the fimple, s Chey that

labour and are laden. 29 Christes poke.

Al that when Jesus had made an ende of commaͤundyng his twelue disciples, he departed thence to teache and to

— ap

——preathe in their cities.
2 hen John being in prilon heard the workes of Christe, he fens two of his diltiples, aud sayde vnto hint:
„3; Art thou he that shoulde come: or do we loke for another-

4 Jelus aunlwered and fayd vnto them:
Go and shewe John agapne what ye haue hearde and seene.

yy. § The blinde reteaue their fight, the halt do walke, the lepers are cleanled, andthe deafe heare, the dead are railed php, and the pooze*receaue the Gofpell.
6 And happy is he that is not offended in me.
5 7 And as they departed, Jelus began to
1% say vnto the multitude cocerning John:
What went ye out into the wildernesse to see:A reede shaken with the winde:

3 O what Went pe out for to see:A man tlothed in foft rayment! Beholde, they that Weare loft lclochyngj are in kinges houses.

9 Dut what went ye out for to feezA p20plete: yea J sap vnto pou, and more then a prophete.

lo For this is he of whonit is writteu:

: Weholde J ende my messenger vefore
+ thy face, Which Chall prepare thy way before thee, n

1 SQerply J lay vnto pou, among them that are bozue of women, arole nota greater then John the Baptist: Mot-

i

Withstandyng, he that is lesse in the

kingdome of heauen is greater tyen he.

12 Iron the dapes of John the Baptist

vntyll nowe, the kingdome ok heauen

luffereth violence, € the violent plucke

it (vnto them.)

e For all the prophetes and the lawe it
„ lle prophetied buio John.

dd 14. And ik ye wyll receaũe it, this is Elias
. which was foz to come. ö

C, He that hath eares to heare, let him
5 are. ey :

* 16 Wut wherbnto than J llken this ge-

MD it came to passe,

_ herattons It is like onto litle childzen,
Which sit in the markettes, and call bnto their kfelilowes,

17 And say: we haus pyped vnto vou, and ve haue not daunsed: we haue ( mourned vnto pou, and pe haue not sorowed.

18 For John came neither eatyng nor drinking and they fay, he hath the deu.

19 The sonne of man came eatyng and drinking, and they fay, beholda glutton and an s vnmealurabie) Drinker of wine A and a kricnde vnto publicanse sumers:
And Wildome is iustilied of her children.

zo Then beganheto vpbraydthe cities
Which mostokhis mightie workes were done in, because they repented not.

21 Wo vnto thee Choraʒin, wo bata thee 2
Wethlaida: for if the mightic Workes which were shewed in pou had ben done in Tyre or Sidon, they had rez pented long age in sackclotij and alshes.

22 Menerthelelle J fay vnto pou, it shal-

be easier for Lyze and Sidon at the day of iudgement, then for pou,

23 And thou Caperuaum, which art tif vy vnto heauen halt be bronght downe to hell: or if the mightie workes Which haue ben done in thee had ben done a mong tem of Hodome, they had remayned vntyll this dap.

24. Neuerthelelle, I lay vnto vou, that it shalbe easier for the lande of Sodonie

in the day of iudgement, then for tee.

25 At that tyme Jesus aunlwered and sayde: Ithanke thee O father, Howe of heauen and earth, because thou bait hid these thinges from the wile and Prudeut, and Halt heen them vnto babes.

26 Euen so (it is] O father, for fo was it thy good pleasure. ö N

27. All thinges are geuen vnto me ok my fass. father: And no man knoweth the fonne Pohl. ird. but the kather, neither knoweth any 10 man the father saue the sonne, and he to 10 whomsoeuer the sonne wyll open him.

28 Come vnto nie all ye that labour foze, and are laden, and J wyll ease you.

29. Take mp poke bpon you and learne Ecke. vg. of me, for I am meeke æ lowly in heart: and ye shall finde rest vnto your saules.

30 For my poke is easie, and my burthen o is lyght.

a) we bane
Ong montnpng songeg vnto pou,

Luk. x. c.

The

T that tyme Jesus

went on the Sabbath

dapes * though the corne, and His dilciples were an hungred, and

j began to* plucke the

3 cares of come,¢to cate.
: 2 Wut whenthe Pharisees lawe it, they fayde vnto hym: Beholde, thy disciples do that which is not lawkull to do vpon the Sabbath day.

3 Wut he layde vnto them: Haue pe not read What Dauid did when he was an hungred, and they that were with him:

eg na. g. “Howe he entrev into the house of God,

and did cate the Mew bread, which was not lawfull for hym to cate, neither for them which were with hynt but only for the priestes: N

5 On haue ye not read in the lawe, howe that on the Sabbath dapyes the priestes in the temple o prophane the Sabbath, and are blamelesse

6 Wut FH lay vnto pou, that in this place is one greater then the temple.

W 7 Wherkore ik ye wist what this meaneth.
Masxib, J will merce t not sacrifice: pe woulde
Orcc. vi. bd. Not haue condempned the giltlesse.

8 Faz the fonne of man also is Lode euen of the Sabbath dap.

Maritia. 9 And he departed thence, and went into

Lul. vb. their lynagogue,

fo And beholde there was a man whieh

Had his bande dryed vp, and they asked him, saying: Js it lawfull to heale vpon the Sabbath dapes:that they might accuic him.

11 And he sapde vnto them: What man of pou Will there be that shall haue a cheepe, €if it fall into a pit on the Sabbath dap, Wyll he not take holde of it, and lift it out:

12 Howe much moze then is a man better then a sheepe: Wherkore it is lawfull to do a good deede on the Sabbath dapes.

13 Then laith he to the man, Stretch foorth thy hande. And he stretched it foorth: and it was made whole like as

0 the other.

Ca) That is, do bncleane wozhesi

Luk. xilll. a.

Deu. xxita.

. 4 Then the Pharilees went out, and helde a tounsayle agaynst him, howe

‘The Golpell

These: Chae - a

hrike ercuseth his disciples which piuche the eares of corne. 10 He healeth the dryed hande.

helge the polleled that was blynde and dumbe. 31 Blalphemie. 34 Che generation of pipers. ; Ok good wordes. 5 DE idle wordes. 38 Pe rebuketh the vnkaithkull that woulde needes haue tokens, 4 and cheweth who is his brother, sister, and mother.

they might destroy hym.

15 But when Jelus knewe it, he departed thence: and great multitudes folowed
. de he ee 1 all,

16 And charged them that they il not make him knowen: ene

17 That it might be fulfylled which was spoken by Elalas the prophete, Aping:

18 »Weholde my childe whom J have chosen, my beloved in Whom my soule well delighteth: FJ wyll put my spirite vpon him, and he Mall chewe iudgement to the gentiles.

19 He shall not striue nor crye, neither shal any man heare his bopee in the streetes.

20 A bruised reede shall he not breake, and smokyng flare shall he not quenche, tyll he lende foorth indgement vnto victorzie:

ip 110. in his name shall the gentiles D rust.

22 Then was brought to him one pot . sessed with a deupll, blinde, and dumbe: and he healed hun, inlomuch that the blinde and dumbe both {pate and fave.

23 · And all the people were amased and sapde: Is not this that sonne of Dauid-

24 Wut when the Pharisees heardeit, they sapde: This (telowe) driueth the deuils no other wise out, but by Weelzebub the prince of the deiuls.

25 But Whe Felus bnew their thonghtes,. he lapde onto them, Euery kingdome deuided agaynst it selfe shalbe bronght to naught: and euery citie or houle deuided agaynst it selfe shall not stande.

26 And ik Satan cast out Satan, then is be deuided agaynst him fife: howe hall then his kingdome endure?-

27 Also if I by Weelsebub tast ont deuils, by whom do pour childzen cast them out: Therfore they chalbe pour iudges.

28 But ik J catt out the deulls by the spi-

tite of God: then is the kingdome ol

God tome bpon pou. —

Or els howe can one enter into a strong mans houle e spoyle his goodes, then he “fh 98 ye strong man, and then spoyle his houle:

30 he that is not with me, is agaynst me:and Beare gathereth not with mie, stattereth abzode, 1 nobertor

E sal xl
. a ]

Mat. xi d.
Mark. ii. c.
Luk. xc.

l. xi c.
29 Lu

Wherfore, J fay vnto you, all maner

of sinne and blasphemy chalbe forgeuen vnto nien, but the blaspheniy agaynst he spirite, hall not be korgeuen vnto

men.
„ And wholoecuer speaketh a worde
“agayntt the sonuc of man, it halbe fox geuen hym: But whosoecuer speaketh agaynst the holy gholt, it Mail not be

» — foagenen hym, neither in this wonlde,

neither in the worlde to cone. z Either make the tree good, and his fltuite good: or cis make the tree euyll, and his fruite euyll. For the tree, is
Rowen by his fruite.
4D generation of vipers, howe can ye speake good thynges, when pe pour

a stlues are eupll: For out of the aboundate ot the heart, the mouth speaketh.

3 Agood man, out of the good treasure of the heart, bryngeth foorth good thynges: And an euyll man, out of tuyll treasure, bryngeth foorth euyll thynges.

36 But J fap vnto pou, of euerp weil worde that men (hall speake, they Mail

9 geue attompt therof, in the day ol iudguf

ment. N
, “For ok thy wordes, thou hate be insti-

ind” “fied: and of thy wordes, thou shalt be

„ tondenmned. £1 ’

re 38 Then certapne of the Scribes, and
- of the Pharilees, aunlwered hym, fay-

ini, ing. Maister, we wyl fee afigneofthee.

39 But he aunlwered and fapde to them.
„% The cuyll and adulterous generati-

on*feketh a signe, and there shall no

figne be geuen to it, but the signe of the

prophete Jonas.

Ra 40 Jo: a8 Jonas was three dapes, and three nyghtes, in the Whales belly: fo shall the fonne of man be three dapes, and three nyghtes, in the heart ol the

¢ The. xiij. Chapter.

by Saint Matthæ we. .

earth.

4 The men of Niniue shall ryse in the iudgement, with this nation, and ad demne it, betause they repented at the preachyngof Jonas: and beholde, here lis ont greater then Jonas.

42 The Queencof the south chall ryse in the iudgement, with this gencration, Luci. and chall condenme it fo che came front u Pa the vtmost partes of the earth, to heart the wildome ok Solomon, And be: holde, in this plate lis one greater then
Solomon.

43 When the vucleane spirite is gone out N ol a man, he walketh throughout drye Lob d. plates, sekyng rest, and fyndeth none,

4.4. Then he sapeth: J wyll returne into my Houle, from Whence J came out.

And when he is come, he fyndeth it emptie, fibept, and garnyfhed,

45 Then goeth he and taketh vnto hym

seuen other spirites, worse then hym feife,and they enter in, and dwell there:

And “the ende of that man, is Worse i per. then the begynnyng. Euen lo chall it be eb. allo, vnto this frowarde generation.

46 Whyle he pet talked to the people, . beholde, his mother, and his brethren Tai pn without, despryng to speake With

vm.

47 Then one sapde vnto hym:beholde, thy mother, and thy brethren, stande Nuk in d. without, despryng to speakt with thee, Loi.

48 But he aunfivered, and sapde vnto hym that had tolde hym: Who is my mother: or who are my brethren:

49 And he stretched foorth his hande to warde his diltiples, efapde, beholde Lohn ey b. my mother, and mp brethren.

50 Jor Wholdeuer thali do the wyll of my father which is in heauen, the sanie is my brother, fitter, and mother. a

Jonas . iii. c.

¶ Che parable of the fede, 24 of the tares, 31 ol the mustarde seede,; of the levers,
44 ol the treature hyd in the fielde, 4 ol the pearles, 47 and ol the nette.

b E lame day, went
* Jesus out of the boule,
HAS t late by the fea syde.
And great multitu-
Ades were gathered to-
D gether nto bynt, fo

3 And he hake many thynges to them in parables, saying: Beholde, the folber went foorth to sowe.
4 And when he sowed, fore seedes kell by the wayes side, and the fowles came, and deuoured them vp.
5 Somme fell vpon stonp places, where they had not much earth, and anone they {prong vp, becaule they had no 11 4
28 j ne =

a EES! pell

nefte of carth.

6 And when theforne was bp, they

caught heate, aud because they had not roott, they wythercd away.

Agapne,fome fell among thornes, and

the thornes sprong bp and chokedthem.

g Wut lone fell into good grounde, and

brought foorth kruite, fome an hundeed

folde, foie sixtie folde, forne thirtie

folde.

9 Who hath cares to heare, let hom care.

75 10 And tht dilciples came, and sayde vnto

hym: Why lpeakest thou to them by

parables?

1 Hht aunswered and fayde vnto them: betaule it is geuen vnto you, to knowe the secretes ol the kyngdome of heauen, but to then it is not geuen.

> *Fo2 whosdeuer hath, to hym shalbe

Mark. iii. a.
Luk. vu. b.

Mat. xv. c. I

laren. geucn, and he Mall haue moze abounaa Dance: But wholocner hath not, from
3 bah {haibe taken away, cuen that he
¢ ry

13 ‘ Therkore speake J to them in para. les: betaust they sceyng, fee not: and hearpng, they heare not: neither do

they vnderstande.
Payvic. IA. And iir them is fulkplled the prophesie
Maran. ok Efaias, faping: by hearyng pe hall lünen. care, and hall not vnderstande, and
Adsxvié sceyng, ve shall lec, c Mall not perceaue.

Rom. b. yy Foz this peoples heart is wared arofic, and their cares are dull of hearyug, and their eyes haue bed lest at any tyme they Mhoulde {ee with their epes, and heare with their cares,
1 eee with their
Heart, ⁊ shoulde comiert, that J npght
Reale them. Sthar gh
But blessed are pour eyes, for they fee: and pour cares, for they htare.

Luk. x. d. 16
1. Pet. i. d.

propheies and ryghtedus men haue delired to fee those thynges which pe fee,

and haue not seene: and to heare those

thynges Which pe heare, and haue not hearde.

Ninte i b. I8 . Weare petherkore the sinnlitude of the

Läkvunb. foyer.

19 When one heareth the woe of the kpngdome, and vuderstandeth it not, then tonunech that cupll, and catcheth ar pat mee an sowen in his
Heart; this is he, which reteaued fee by the wap syde. 8 . 8

20 But he that reteaued the serde into

17 Uerpiy J lay vnto pol, that many

stony plates, the same is he that heareth che Worde, and anone With toy. rect ueth 1 : th toy, vecea:

ar Pet hath he not roote inhpm f dureth fo2 a scason:for mee eee o2 persecution aryseth beeanfe of the worde, by and by he is offended,

22 He allo that reteaued seede into the thornes, is he that heareth the woe:

and the care of this worlde, and the dilteiptfulnes of ryches, choke vp the worde, and fo is he made vnkruitfull.

23 But he that receaued seede into the good grounde, is he that heareth the
Worde, and vnderstandeth it, which allo beareth fruite: and brpngeth foorth fone an hundred folde,fome sirtie folde fome thirtie folde.

24. Another parable put he koorth vnto D them, saping: 8 The kyngdome of bn heauen is likened vnto aman, which forbed good seede in his fielde.

25 Wut whyple men flipt, his enenpe cane t sowed tares among the whcate, and Went his way. N

26 But when the blade was {prong by, and had brought foorth fruite, then appeared the tares also.

27 So, the seruauntes of the housholder tame, and fayde vnto hym. Sir, diddest not thou sowe good seede in thy fieldefrom whente then hath it tares ¢ i

28 He lapde vnto them: the malicious man hath done this. The seruauntes sayde vnto hym: wylt thou then that
We go, and gather then vp:

29 Wut he layde, nap:lest whyle ve gather vp the tares, ye rote vp allo the Wheate with them.

30 Let both growe together vntyll the haruest:æ in tyme of haruest, J Wyl fay to the reapers, gather pe together firtt the tares and bynde them in bundels to burne them: but tarrie the wheatt into ny barne. £9

1 Andther parable put he foorth buto them, saying. The kpugdoine of hea- W uen is lite to a grayne of mustard secde, which a man toke ¢ sowed in his field.

32 Which in dede is the lcast of allsecbcs-
Wut when it is grolen, it is the greg; test among hearbes: and is atrec, 10 that the byrdes ol the apre tome ¢ make their nestes in the braunches therol.

3 Another parable spake he vnto then
Thekyngdome ol heauenis lp WO Td leuen, Which a woman taketh k m

in three peckes of meale, tyll all be leuened.
34 All these thynges spake Jesus vnto the people in parables: and without a arable spake he not vnto them.
3 That it npaht be fulfplled, which was spoken by the prophete, that sayth:
„ JJ wyll open my mouth in parables,
J wyll speake foorth thynges which aue ben kept secrete from the foundation of the worlde. 0
Then Jelus sent the people away, €

e pent into the houle: And his difapics:

tame vnto hym, saying: Declare vnto bs the parable of the tares of the fielde.

7 He aunlwered and fade vnto them: he that soweth the good seede, is the sonne of man.

33 The fielde, is the wonde: Ethe good seede, they are the childrẽ of p kingdom: the tares, are the chyldren of p wicked.

y The enemie that soweth them, is the deupll: the haruest, is the ende of the worlde: the reapers, be the Angels.

40 Euenas the tares therkore are gathered and bent in the fyre: fo shall it be in

1 Meende ofthis worlde.

eal The fonne of man thal sende foorth his Angels, and (ther) shall gather out of his kyngdome, all thynges that offende, and them Which do iniquitie:

42 And chall tast them into a furnesse offre: There chalbe waylyng and

away.
49 So shall it be at the ende of the world:

46 Which, wh pearle, went a and bought it.

47 Agapne, the kyngdome of heauen is ipke vnto a net, that was cat into the
{ea and gathered ofall kynde:

48 Which when it was full, men drewe to lande, and sat downe, and gathered the good into veslels, but cast the bad

nhe founde one precious d lolde all that he had,

The Angels shall tome foorth, and se- G

nev the bad from among the inte:

50 And Chall tast them into a furnesse of fyre: there shalbe waylyng and qual M

shyngokteeth.

51 Jelus layth vnto them: haue pe vnderstande all these thynges z They fap vnto hym:pea Lorde.

52 Then sayde he vnto them: Thertore, euery Scribe which is taught nto the kyngdome of heauen, is tyke vnto a man that is an houlcholder, whiche bryngeth foorth out of his treasure, thynges newe and olde, £9

5 And it came to pasle, that when Jesus had finished ted thence.

54 And when he came into his owne tountrey, he taught them in their syna-

gogues, info much, that * they Were Lali

astonyed, and fayde: Whence commeth this wyldome and powers vnto hym-

And. XXV. a

e parables, he depar- Marl Ma.

Is not this the carpenters sonne : Matis

Is not his mother called Marie : and nde.
His brethren, James, and Poles, and
Sunon, and Judas-

56 And are not all his sisters with vs: whenee hath he then all these thynges-

57 And they were offended in hym. Fe sus sayde vnto them: A prophete is Mark. via. not Without Honour, laue in his owne n tountrep, and in his owne housc.

58 And he did not many mightie workes there, becaute of their vnbeliefe.

u Mallhyng of teeth. eh Then shall the ryghteous shine as u the Sunne, in the kingdome of their father. who hath caves to heave, let hym heare. S
44. Agayne, the kyngdome of heauen iS lyke vnto trealure hyd in the fielde: the which a man hath founde, and hyd, and fo ioy therol, goeth and selleth all that he hath, and byeth the fielde.
45 Agapne, the kyngdonie of heauen is lyke vnto a marchaunt man, seekyng
Noodly pcarles. fi
* - 5 The. xiiij. Chapter.
10 John is tak d. 19 Chrisle feedeth fpue thoulande men with kp
* bn e Se ee 2 and appegreth by nyght vnto his disciples vpon the lea.
“ho 2 and therfore great workes do shewe

T that tyme ; Herode

1 i g ic Isthe Tetrarch, hearde koorth them selues in hym.
* 2 8 1855 ok Jett. 3 Foz Herode had taken John, and .
8 And fayoe onto his bounde hym, and put hymin prilon, for Luk nd. beruauntes: this is Herodias fake, his brother Phils
John the Waptist, he

Wple. — —
— ZA a 02 John fapde vnto hym: “itis not Leuixviiie
Is rien krom the dead, 4 For Joh ‘en Enna

awfull for thee to haue her.

N And when he woulde haue put hym

Maxxis, to death, he feared the people: becaute they tounted hym as a prophete.

Gene ld. 6 llt when Herodes birth day was

ke t, the daughter of Herodias daunted

before them, and plealed Herode.
Makvic. 7 Wherfore he promised with an othe, that he woulde gene her whatsocuer she woulde aske.
8 And she, beyng instrutt ok her mother before, sapde: gene me here John Baptistes head in a platter.

5 And the kyng was foxy: Peuerthe-

lesle, for the othes sake, and them which fate allo at the table, he tommaunded it to be geuen her:
10 And sent, and

pryson. N
11 And his head was brought in a platter, and geüen to the damsell: and (ej brought it to her mother. ä
12 And his diltiples came, and toke vp his bodp, and burped it: and went, and
3 When Jesus hearde of it, he depar-
Makvid. ted thence in a shyp, vnto a desert place,
Le., out ok the way: And when the people
1 had hearde therok, they fkolowed bym on foote out ok the cities.

14. And Jesus Went foozth, and sawe much people: and was moued with mercpe towarde them, and he healed their liclie.

\ 15 Aud when the euen drewe on, his dilciples tanie to hin, saping: this is a de-
{ert place, and the hour is nowe past let the people depart, that they may go into

the townes and bye then vittels.
Cle wut Jesus sapde vnto them : They haue no neve to go away, geue pe

then to eate.

17 They sape vnto hym: we haut here but fpue loaues, and two filches.

18 Pe sayde: bryng them hyther to me.

19 And he tcommaunded the people to sit downe on the grafle, and he toke the fyue loaues, and the two filches, and tift vp his eyes to warde heauen, x blesled:
And when he had broken them], he gaue the loaues to his dilciples, and his
Diltiples to the people. f

20 And they dyd all eate, and were suffi-

sed. And they gathered vp (of the frag: mentes that remapned) twelue bafkets

The Gos. pell ful

beheaded John in the

And they that had eaten, were ab

fyue thoufande men, bef a

2 2 3 Poe Women

22 And strayghtway Fels co mena. his diltiples to get vp mtoa pe id — to go before hym vnto the other spde , whyle he sent the people away. :

23 And when the people were sent awap, he went bp into a mountapne 1... alone to pray: And when uyght wasn come, he was there hym selke alone.

24. But the shippe was nowe in the nud: des of the fea, c was tok with waues:

for it was a contrary wynde. a

25 And in the fourth watch of the nyght,
7 55 went vnto them, walkyng on

he sea. ö i
26 And When the dilciples fawe hym

walking on the sea, they were troubied,

laping, it is & spirite: and they cryed out for feare.

27 But strayght way, Pelus {pate vnto them, saping: be of good cheare, it is J, be not akrapde. 8 N

28 Peter aunswered hym, and lapde:
Lorde, yt it be thou, byd me come vnto thee, on the water.

29 And he sapde:come. And when peter was come downe out of the shippe, he
Walked on the water, to go to Jesus.

30 Wut when he sawe a mpghty wynde,

he was afrayde: And when he began

to sincke, he trped, faping , Lorde laue

me. .

And immediatly Jesus stretched foorth his hande, and caught hym, and sapde vnto hym: Othou ok litte kapth,
Wherefore diddest thou Doubt: .

And when they were cone into the M

2 the wyndt ceafled

i 0 >

And as many as touchedlit were made

¶ The

gq The .xv. Chapter.

C : Chritte ercuseth his dilciples, and rebuneth the Scribes and Pharitees tranfgtelipng Gods commaundement though their owne traditions, isthe thyng that goeth into the mouth, detpleth not the man. 22 he delpuerech the

woman of Canances daughter, zo healeth the multitude, zu and with feuen loaues, and a te we litle fifthes, feedeth foure thoulande men, velpde women

and chyldren. 5

pen? came to Jesus
„Stribes and Phari-
/ sees, which were tome
ANF 1 70 Pierusalem, saping:
YP! pahy Do thy disciples transgresse the tradi rs: for they Washe not their handes When they eate bread.

, But he aunswered and sayde puto then: why do pe alfo transgresse the tonnnaundement of God, by pour tradition:

A For God cõmaunded, Laying : Honour ius. father and mother, and he that turseth father or mother, let hym dye the death.
But ve sap, whosoeuer shall fap to fab ther or mother: by the gylt that lis ole-
A of me, thou shalt be helped:
And lo chall he not honour his father or his mother. And thus hane pe made the comniaundement of God, of none effect, by pour tradition.
7 Ssypocrites, full well dyd Efapas prophetie of pou, saping: lane 8. This people draweth nye vnto nie dans with their mouth, and honoureth me
With their ippes: howbeit, their hearts are karre from me.

Wut in vayne do they worchippe nie,

teachyng doctrine, preceptes of men. zh And he talled the people to hym, and lapde vnto then: heare, x vnderstande.

n That which goeth into the mouth, defpleth not the man: but that which
1 out of the mouth, oefpleth the

n.

2 Then came his disciples, and fayde bute hym: knowest thou not, that the
Pharifees were offended after they hearde this laying-

3 But he aunlwered and sayde: Euery lantyug which my heauenly father ath not planted, chalbe rooted vp.

14. Let them alone, they be the blynde leaders of the blynde. If the blynde dunhe de dende, both (all fall into the

e

ij Xhenauntwered Peter, and layde bn-

to hym: Declare vnto vs this parable.

16 Jets fapbes Are pe ald wicht un derstandpng-

17 Do not ve pet vnderstande, that whatsoeuer entreth in at the mouth, goeth into the belly, and is tast out into the draͤught- '

18 Wut those thynges Which proteade out of the mouth, conte foorth from the heart, and they defple the man.

19 Nor out of the heart, proceade euyll thoughtes, murders, adulteries, whor-
Domes, theftes, false witnelle, blasphe-

nes.

20 Thest are the thynges, which defyle a mam: But to eate with vnwaschen handes, defpleth not a man. 2»

21 And Jelus went thence, and depar-E ted into the toastes of Tyre and Sidon.

22 And beholde, a woman of the Chananites, which cante out of the fame toastes, trped vnto hym, faving: Hane mertie on me O Torde, thou sonne of
Dauid: My daughter is greeuduslp bered with a deupll.

23 But he aunswered her not a worde: and his diftiples canie, and befought hyn, faping : sende her awap, for she trpeth after vs.

24. But he aunswered, and sayde: Jam

not sent but vnto the lost sheepe of the Lb. 0

poute of Israel. al

25 Then came fhe, and worshipped hin, saying: Lode, helpe nie. 5

26 He aunswered, and sapde: lt is not meete to take the chyldrens bread, and to cast it to litle dogges.

27 She aunswered and fayde, trueth
Torde: and yet litle dogges cate of the trummes, Which fall fro their maisters table.

28 Then Jesus aunlwered, and lapde vnto her: O woman, great is thy fayth, be it vnto thee, cuen as thon wylt. And her daughter was made Whole, euen from that same tyme. 5

29 Aud Jelus went from thente, and came nye vnto the ai ne ap

into a mou ' é went bp int 15 60 ne

dowue ther N

30 And great nin me vnto him, hauyng with th ¢ that were lame, blynde, diunbe, mapnied, kother mam, and tast them downe at Fetus feete: * And he healed them.

1 In so much that the people wondred, when they sawe the dumbe speake, the mapmed to be Whole, the laue to

Esa. x xx v. b

Walkie, and the blynde to fees And they

glorified the Gon of Alrael.

Maukaiie. 32 Then Fetus talled his diltiples vnto

hym, and lapde: J haue compallion on
5 the people, betause they continue with)
N me nowe three dayes, aud haue nothing

to cate: and J wyll not let them depart

fallyng, lest they faynt in the way.

33 And his dilciples fay vnto hym:

whente (oulde we get} fo much bread in

the wyldernesse, as to suffile so great a

Sy The. xvj. Chapter.

C Che pharitees require a token, 6 Fetus warneth his dilciples ot the Pharilees doctrine, 16 The confellton of Peter, 19 the keyes ol heauen, rathe fapthfull must

beare the crolle after Christe.

Mark. vinab KS ‘a lohn. vi. d. r
Luk. xi. d.

came, and temptyng, desired hym that he wounlde shewe them a signe from heauen.

He aunswered e sayde

Luk. xi. g. g lit wyll be fayre weather: for the sky is redde. | *

Aud in the moznyng, It wyll be foute weather to day: forthe ly is lowzyng vende. O ye hypocrites, ve tan disterne the outwarde appearaunte of the (ay:

but tan pe not disterne the lignes of the tynies-

Ww

Mark site 4. The froward and adulterous nation

Mark.vinh keqtureth “a signe: and there shall no
Lukxid. ligne be genen vuto it, but the ligne of fobnvid. ke prophete Jonas. And he left them, loms ia. Alld Departed,
5 And when his distiples were come to the other syde of the water, they had forgotten to take bread (with them.
Dale. 6 Then Selus sayde vnto them: Take beede and beware of the leuen of the
Pharisces, and of the Saducees.
And they thought in them selues, saying fo: we haue taken no breadlwith vs.
8 Which when

fayde vnto them: O ye ok little fayth,

The Go pell

a1) & Pharisees also, wih the Saducces,

Vuto them: when it is euenyng ye lay,

Juohn Waptist, fome Helias, Home Je

Jesus vnderstoode, he

mee :
34. Aud Felus fayeth puto them; how many loaues haue ye: And ti * : a
125 a a fewe litle filles, ae
35 AUD he tcommaunded the pe
Wa enn abe
36 Aud toke the seuen loaues, and fisches: and after that he had eed thankes, De brake them, and gaue to bis dilcples, and the viltiples gaue thenity | the 7 5
37 Ad they dyd all cate, and were suffi-
,, Ds 2d Wey toke by, of the a meate that was left, seuen barkets full.
38 And yet, they that did cate, were foure thoufande nien, befpde Wonien and chyldren. 5 2
30 And He sent away the people, and toke shippe, and tame into the parties of
Magdala. * |

ped thynke pou within pour selues, betaule pe haue brought no bread- *
9. Do pe not pet perceaue, neither rez member those fue loaues, when there were fpue thoulande men), and howe zun ae many baskets toke ye vp- N
Io Meither the seuen loaues, when there n were foure thousande men, and howe many baskets toke ye vpe hee’
IL, hoe is it that ye do not vnderstande, that I spake it not vnto vou toncernyng bread, waruyng you) that ye shoulde beware of the leuen ol the Pharisees, and of the Sadutee-- a
12. Then vnderstdode they, howe that he bad not them beware of the leuen of bread: but of the doctrine of the Pyare fees, and of the Saducee s.
3 When Jellis canie into the coastes C
_ of Celarea Philippi, he alked His. DICE e pics, saying: Whom do mien fay th
I the sonne of man ame 5
14. They sayde: some fay sthat thou art

at
Luk. ix. c

remias, or one ot the prophetes.
1 He sayth vnto then: but whon lav pe that J aniz .
Hinisn Peter aunlwered and {apes
Thou art Chritte, the sonne of the l.

upng God. ;
17 And Pets aunlwered, and lade bi.

rid.

AN.

rü

Hit

to hym: happp art thou Simon Bar ona, for fleshj æ blood Hath not opened sthat; vnto thee, but my father which is in heauen.
And J lay allo vnto thee, that thou

is art peter, and bpon this rocke J wyll

buylde mp tongregation: And the gates
«of hell (hall not preuayle agaynst it.
And J wyll geue vnto thee, the keyes of the kingbome of heauen: And whatsoeuer thou byndest in earth, shalbe bounde in heauen: and whatsoeuer thou loosest in earth, thatbe loosed in heauen. s
20 Then charged he his diltiples, that they choulde tell no man, that be was
Jesus Christe. a
From that tyme koorth, began Jesus

to shewe vnto his distiples, howe that

he must go vnto Hierulalem, and fuffer many thynges of the elders, and bye priestes, € stribes, and (mut) be kylled, and be raysed agayne the thyrde day.
22 And when Peter had taken him alide,

thee.

23 Wut he turne ut, and sayde buto Peter: 9 atan, thou be ff tpg rr no vnges that be of Go those char be on a

24. Then sayde Jesus vnto his distiples: sp
If any man Wyll folowe me, let bpm atze him selfe, and take vp his croffe weren gen
25 Jo, who lo wpll saue his ipfe, Mal Mad. lose it: Agapne, who fo doth) lole his Ipfe eee fo2 my lake, shall fynde it. A
26 FJor what doth it prolite a man, vf he
Wynne all the whole worde, and lose his owne soule- Or what hall a man geue for a raunsome of his foutez
27 For the sonne of man hall tome in the glorp of his father, with his Angels: and then shall he rewarde enerp man Romiis. accordyng to his workes.
28 Ueryly Flap vnto vou, there be fore Nr . standyng here, which chall not taste of *
Death, tyll they fee the sonne of man g

he began to rebuke hym saying: Torde, conte in his kyngdome. fauour thy selfe, this Matt not be vnto
¢ The xvij. Chapter.

¶ 2 Che trantfiquration ot Christe, 15 he healeth the lunaticke, 27 and

papeth tribute.

O. * alter fire dapes,
Jesus taketh) Peter,

N
P wa

vig 2. And Was transti wed before them,

“and his fate did shyne as the sunne, and

his clothes were as Whyte as the lyght.

3 And beholde, there appeared vnto veut Moyles, and Elias talkyng with

4 Then aunswered Peter, and layde vnto Jesus: Lorde, it is good for vs to be here. HE thou wylt, let vs make here three tãbernacles: one for thee, and one for Moyses, and out for Ellas.

Whyle he pet spake, beholde, a bryght claude schadowed them: And beholde, there came) a voyte out of the cloude, which sayde, * this is my beloued forme
5 a oom FJ am well plealed, “heave

6 And when the diltiples hearde (thete

thrynges they fell on their face, and were sore àfrayde.

7 And Jesus tame, and touched them, and sayde: aryse, and be not alrayde.

8 And When they had lykt vp their eyes, they sawe no man, saue Jelus only.

9 And when they came downe from Mk i. the mountapne, Jelus charged them, saying: shewe the vision to no man, vntyll the sonne of man be rysen agayne from the dead. 29

fo And his diltiples afked hyn saying:

0 05 then fay the stribes, that Elias mult first come! -

n Jesus aunswered, efayde vntothem: |.
* Elias trucly shall first come, and re- . store all thynges: 5

12 But Flay buto pou, Hat * Elias is Mathon bb. tome asredy, and they knewe hym not, but haue done vnto hym, whaͤtlocuer they lusted.

3 Lypkewyse, Hall also the forme of man

suffer of them.

W itt Then

T

Then the dilpl vnd 17 tone, that he spake vnto themof John Baptistt.
C 14 And when they were tome to the peo-

ö ple, there tame to hym a certapne man, kueclyng downe to hym, and saping:
Lorde, haue merty on my sonne, fo2

he is lunaticke, and sore ered : for oft tynies he falleth into the fpze, and oft into the water. 3

diu ba 36 And I brought hym to thy dilapies,

Lukixe aim theß toulde not heale hym.

lesus aunswered and layde: O faythlelle and croked nation, howe long (hall

FJ be with poushowe long hal Jsuffer

ou: bryng hym hyther to nie.
13 ‘ And Jesus rebuked the deuyll, and he
Departed out of hym: And the chylde
Was heated cuen that fame tyme. S
Dio Then came the diltiples to Fetus
Makixd. setretelp, and sapde: Why coulde not we cast hym out
20 Jesus sayde vnto them: betause of pour bnbeliefe. Foz berply J fay vnto pou: If ye haue fapth as a grayne of mustarde seede, pe shall fay vnto this mountapne: remoue hence to vonder plate, and it shall remoue, neither shall any thyng be vnpossible vnto pou.

Lulk. xvil. a.

he Gof, pell

but by paper and fastyng.
22 Whyle they were octupped in Galllee,

Jesus sapde vnto them: it Wyll tonne Max. to paffe, that the sonne of man valle anda betrapeDintothehandesofmen: we

23. And they (hall kyll hym, e the thyrde Ke

dap Hall he ryle agayne: And ti i

epreabynes orp, ** hey were

24 And when they were come to Capernaum, they that reteaued tribute monep, came to Peter, and sayde: Doth not pour maister pay tribute:

25 Me lapth: ves. And when he was tome into the house, Jesus preuented hym, saying: What thynkest thou Se. mon: of whom do the kynges of the

karth take tribute or toulez of the chyldeen, or of straungers:

26 Peter sayth vnto hym: of straungerz.
Jesus sapth vnto hym: Then are the chyldren fre. *

27 Notwithstandyng lett we shoulde of:

de them, go thou to the fea, and cast an angle, and take the fillhe that first tonmieth vp: and when thou hast opened his mouth, thou shalt fynde a peece of twenty pence : that take, and geue it vnto them for me, and thee, =

21 Hobebeit, this kynde goeth not out,

$m The. xviij. Chapter.

¶ 3 he teacheth his ditciples to be humble and harmelesle, o to auopde occaliong of eupll, rrand one to fozgeue anothers offence.

A | PT the fame time, came

r NV the distiples vnto Je-

Mark. x. g. N ö fis, saping 2 ho 1S

Lul-. ix. f. Ww sithe greatest in ö kyng-
| ((\ Wea idonte of Deauen

2 | A Jaelus calted a litte

9 AIchplde vnto hym, and fet hym in the mpddest lor them)
3 And sapde. Merply J fay vnto pou:

Lal eg “except ve turne, and become *as title iPecriia. chpldzen, pe hall not enter into the kyngdome of heauen.

Whosocuer therkore hall humble hynifeife as this litle chylde, the fame ts 5 greatest in the kingdome of heauen.

5 And who so shall reteaue such a litle
. chylde in iny name, receaneth me.

6 Wut who fo shall offende one ofthese litle ones, which beleue in me, it were better for hym, that a myll stone were
Hanged about his necke, € that he were drowned in the deapch ol the sea.

Luk.xvita

7 Wo vnto the worlde, betause of offen- a tes. It mult nebes be, that offentes tome: Wut wo to that man, by whom the offente tonuneth.

8 then thy handt or thy foote offende r;

ee, cut them of, and catt (them from thee. It is better for thee to enter into lyfe, halt or maymed, (rather) then thou shouldest, hauyng two handes, or two feete, be tast into cuerlastyng fyre.

9 And pfkthyne epe offende thee, plucke it out, and catt sitjfrom thee: It is better for thee to enter into Ipfe with one ere,
(rather) then, haupng two eyes, to be tast into hell fyre. 5 b

lo Take heede that ye despile not one o thefe litle ones: For J fay vnto 2

that in heauẽ their Angels do e

e ok my kather, which

in heauen.

5 70 the forme of man, is come to saue that Which was lost. Howe

i

n Howe thynke pes Ik aman haue an n hundred sheepe, and one of them be gone astrap, doth he not leaue mnetie ct uine, and goeth into the mountaynes, and seketh that 5 — went astray-

z And yf it so be that he fynde it, veryly
Jap vnto vou, he reiopteth moze of chat sheepe, then of the ninetie and nine,
Which went not altrav.

Euen so, it is not the wyll ol pour faz ther in heauen, that one of these litl ones shoulde perpthe. :

6 ce Moreouer,“ pithy bother trespas

cin agaynst thee, go and tell hym his fauite

and betlwene thee and hym alone: It he cox yeare thee, thou halt wonne thy bro-

t Wie
16 — yk he heare thee not, then take pet
0 With Chee one or two:that in the mouth u of two or three witnesses, euery worde map be stabiyshed. a |
7 If he heare not them, tell it vnto the
Churche: It he heare not the Churche, let hym be vnto thee as an Heathen man, anda publicane. une 18 Verply J fay vnto vou: Whatsdeuer ye bynde on earth, shalbe bounde in heanen: And whatsoeuer pe loose on earth, shalbe loosed in heauen.
5 Agapne, truelp Play vnto you, that it two of you agree in earth, as touching any thyng that they shall alke, it shalbe done for then ol my father, which is in heauen.

20 For where two or three are gathered

together in my nanie, there am J in the myddes of then.

1 Then came Peter to hym, and fapde:
Lorde howe oft shall np brother sinne agaynst me, and J forgeue hym ? tyll seuen tynies:

22 Jelus sayth vnto hym, J fay not bnto thee vntyll seuen tymes: but, vntyll

d seuentie tymes seuen. os

nen, lykened br
Was a kyng tomptes of Hist mtes.

24. And when he had begunne to recken, one was brought vnto hym, which

ducgght hym ten thoulande talentes.

25 But forasmuch as he had not to pay his
Lorde commaunded hym to be folde, and his wyfe, and chyldzen, and all that he had, and payment to be made.

26 The seruaunt fell downe, e besought hym, saying: Lorde, haue pactence with me, and J wyll pay thee all.

27. Then the Lorde of that seruaunt, moued with pitic, loosed hym, and for gaue hyni the debt. N 9

28 Wut the lame seruaunt went out, and founde one of his felowes, which ought hym an hundred pence: and he lapde
Handes on hym, and toke hym by the

throte, saping: pay me that thou owest.

29 And his felowe fel downe at his feete, and besought hint saying: haue patiente

With nie, and J Wyll pay thee all.

30 And he woulde not: but went, and tast

, 5515 into prison, tyll he shoulde pay the

e

31 So, when his kelowes sawe what was done, they were very sorp: c tame, and tolde vnto their Worde all that was done. 4

3 Then his Lorde called hym, and fayd vnto hin: O thou vngracious seruaunt,
J forgaue thee all that debt, when thou desiredst me:

33 Shouldest not thou also, haue had contpaffion on thy felowe, euen as J had pitie on thee-

34 And his Lorde was wroth, and delyuered hym to the tormentours, tyll he

shoulde pay all that was due vnto hun. tscobiic.
35 So lpkewyse, Hall my heaueniy fa- Machvi.b.

ther do allo vnto vou, yk ye from your
Heartes, forgeue not, euerp one his bro-

23 Therfkore is the kyngdome ok hea- ther, their tresꝑasses. 2»
¢ The. xix. Chapter. * iff aunswere conternyng marpage, 21 and teacheth,
1 55115 er 22 nor to loue worldiy riches,
Al ee it tame to passe, that 2 And great multitudes folowed hym: ve: AX when Jesus ad finithed and he healedthemthere. : nfs: O thele sapinges, he gat hym 3 The pharilees allo came vnto hym,
5 BA 02 from Galllee, and tanie in- temptpng hunt and laping vnto hom: tothe coaltes of Jurie, be- Js t iawfull fo a man to put away his ponde Jordane: Dyfe, for euery cause-

He

ark. xi. d.

He aunsw

Au e vnto them : aue pe not! he which create geo. a the bec patty de them male

J. Cor. vi

female,

5 an sayde: For this taule, hall a nian leaue father and mother, and shall be knit to his wyle: and they twayne (hall bt one fleshe.

6 Wherfore, they are no moze twapue, but one fleshe. Let not man therefore put a sunder, that which God hath coupled together.

5 Thep fay vnto hym:why did Doyles then tommaunde to geue a writyng of diuortemient, and to put her away:

3 He sayde vnto them: Doyles, becaule

of the hardnes of pour hrartes, luffred

ou to put awap pour wpues: But feonithe begynnyng it was not fo.
J fap vnto you: wholdeuer putteth

A Way his wyfe, except it be for fornica-

g. d. 7

Deut. 24. a. 9

Malai. tion, and marpeth another, commiutteth
Nlatka b. àdulterie: And who fo maryeth her
Lukxvd., Which is diuorced, doth conut adulterie.

glo Dis diltiples fay vnto hym: If the matter be fo betwene man and wpfe, then is it not good to mary. a

11 he sayde vnto them: all men tan no reteaue this faping, saue they to whom it is geuen.

2 For there are some hatte, which are fo borne, out of their mothers Wombe:
And there are some chaste, which be made chaste of né: And there be chaste,
Which haue made themselues chaste, for

Sap. ii. e.

the kyngdome ok heauens fake. He that

Markexb, is Able to reccauesit / let him receàuelitj.

Lukxwind 13 Then were there brought vnto hym voung chyldren, that he shoulde put his handes ou then aud prap: And the dilciples rebnked then.

14. But Jesus layde vnto them: luffer the voung chyldren, and forbyd them not to tomie vnto me: for of such, is the kyngdome of heauen.

15 And when he had put his handes on them, beweparted thence,

Makxs, 36 And beholde, one tame, and layde vn-

Talk xvid to hyin: good maister, what good

thyng shall J do, that J map haue tternall ipfez 3 —

C psal oe. 17 He sayde vnto hym: why tallest thou

The Gol. pell

me good: there is none —

good bu land that is; God. But pf thou Wyle

into lyfe, kepe the ckonmmaundem
18 He sayth vnto hym: Which - Feile ae fayde: Thou thait do no murther he
Thon chalet kale Lie, halt not steale, ou nat le 77 mine 2 a of a
19 Honour father and mother: and thoy Cashin: shalt loue thy neighbour as thy te
20 The poung man sayth onto hym: All these (thnges! haue I kept, from my pouth vp: what lacke F pet- 5
21 Felus sayde vnto hym: yf thou wylt 92 be perfect, go c sell that thou halt, and Tce geue to the poore, thou shalt haue trea: Meinc lure in heauen: and come æ folowe me.
22 But when the young man hearde that saying, he went away sory: For he had great pollessions. 5
23 Then Pelus layde vnto his dilciples:
Uerply J fay vnto pou, that a riche Mat
(man) (hall hardly enter into the kyng: tunes. dome of heauen. '
24. Andagapne J fay vnto pourit is easier for a tamel to go through the eye of a nedle, then for the riche, to enter into the kyngdonie of God.
25 When the dilciples hearde this, they were exceadpnaly amazed laping: who then can be saued-
26 Wut Jesus behelde them, and sayde vnto them: with nien this is vnpossible, but with God all thynges are possible. 20
27 Then aunswered Peter, and sayde vnto hymn: Beholde, We haue forsaken +p all, and folowed thee, what Mall we da haue therfore: Tdi
28 Jesus layde vnto them: veryly J fap vnto pou, that when the sonne of man shall syt in the throne of his maiestie, ve that haue folowed me in the regeneration, chall {yt also vpon tibeluc seates, ae and iudge the twelue tribes of Ilrael.
29 And euerp one that forsaketh honse, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or niother, or wyfe, or chyldren, or landes for 1. my names fake, (hall receaue an hun ebe ma ae and shall inherite cuerlastyng lyfe. 20 Maths
30 Wut many that are first, shalbe lal, lara and the last, chalbe first.

¶ The

46G chnitte teacheth by a liinilitude,that Bod is detter vnto no
20 He keacheth his dilciples to be lowly, 30 and geueth two dip men their syght.

O K the hyngdome of

is 2
= cas 1

Heanen is lyke vnto a man, that is an houleholder, whiche went out tarlye in the mornyng to hire labourers
= into his vineyarde.
And he agreed with the labonrers for a peuy a dap, € lent them into his vinepace. 2 8
; And he went out about the thirde houre, and sawe other standyng idle in the market place, 0
4 Amd saide vnto them: Go ye allo into p vineyard, x whatloeuer is right, J wyl geue pou. And they went their way.

T N

f
N
I 8 = f 7
CO): wet’

J Agapne, he went out about the firth

and nynth houre, and dyd lykewyse.

6 And about the eleuenth houre, he wẽt

gut, and founde other standyng idle and
{ride vnto them: why stande pe here all the day idle:
7. They faye vnto him: becaule no man hath hyred vs. He sayth vnto them: go pe allo into the bineparde, and whatloeuer is ryght, that thall ye receaut.

8 So, when euen was come, the lorde ofthe vine yard layth vnto his steward:
Call che labourers and geue chem their hire, veginning at p last, vntyll the firlt.

Aud when they tanie, that (were pire!

about the cleuench houre, they receaued

Clery mau a penp.

3, But when the firste tame allo, they

luppoled that they shoulde haue recea-

ued more: and they lykewyle receaued

euery man a pep. 40
And when they had reteaued it, they

nurmured against the good man of the . *
0 4 SABES ’ 25 Wut Jesiis called them vnto hum, and

2 Saying: These laste haue wrought but one houre, € thou halt made them quali vnto vs, whiche haue bozne the burthen and heate of the day. 1

But he annlwered to one ok the x laid: rende, J do chee no Wong: dyddelt

Hou not agree with me for a peuy-

4+ Lake that thyne is, and go thy Way: ae geue vnto this lalt, enen as vnce, » Cae

'S Jsit not lawfull for me, to do that J

by Saint! iatthewe.
¢ The. xx. Chapter.

is *Sothelatk, halbe the first, x the first vt xix
(atbe) aft > Foz many be called, but Marke. fewe (be) chosen. 2s Lak. xlir f

17 And Rue gopng bp to Hiernfalé, toke the tibeluc dilciples alyde in the way, and fayoe vnto them:

18 Beholde, we go vp to Hiernslalem, Nack. ie. e. and the foune of man shalbe betrayed Luk ne

vnto the chiele priestes, and vnto the

stribes, and they hall condempne hyn to death: 3

19 And Chall deliuer him to the Gentlles to be mocked, and to be stourged andto be crucificd :and the thirde day, he shall

rypyse agayne. N

20 Then camt to hym the mother of Macke.
Sebedees chyldren, with her fonnes, worshyppyng hyn, and desiryng a cer: tayne thyng of hym.

21 Aud he sapth vnto her: what wylt thou She saith vnto hun: grannt, that thefe my two sonnes may spt, the one on thy ryght hande, and the other on the left, in thy kyngdome. a

22 Blit Jesus aunswered, and salde: Be Y
Wote not what pe alk e. Are ye able to rynke of the tippe that PH Mail drynke

blk:and to be baptized with the baptifine

that J am baptized with-They lay vnto hy: we are able.

23 Helapth vnto them: He shall drynke

in deede of wip cuppe, and be bapttzed

with the baptisine that J am baptized

with: But to lyt on my ryght hande, a

on my lefte, is not myne to geuc, but to

them for whom it is prepared for of my vn eva

24. And when the ten hearde (this) they M

Hfoapned at the two brethreen.

sayde: He know that the princes ok the La e gentiles haue dominion once them: and they that are great, exertist aucthoritie bpon them. —

26. It shall not be fo among vou: Wut
Whosoeuer wyll be great among pon, let hym be pour nuniter:

27 Aud who fy wyl be chiefe aniong pout, let hynibe your seruaunt.

28 Euenas the sonne of man tame, nat d to be ministred vnto, but to winter and

Weu with myne owne 2 Is thyne eye to gene his lyfe avaunfonie ko- man

ipl, becaule Jam good:

Mark.x.g.
Luk. xvul.

ere

29 And asthe rom Pierico, coplet l.
30 wapbeho nen spttyng by

ye spde. they hearde that efuspatied by, they tryrd, saping: O ode, thou sonne of Dawid, haue nierdie on vs. N
1 Amd che people rebuked them, becaule

4 they should holde their peace. Wut they

„

7 And brought the Ale and the colt, and

cryed the moze, saying: haue mercy on

q¢ The .xxj. Chapter.

7 be rpdeth into Hierufalems, 12 depucth the marchauntes out of the temple, 19 curfeth the frog tree, 28 and rebuketh the pharisees with onneg, 35 and of the hulbande men that

lle we (uch as were {ent vnto them.

the fimilitude of the two

nye vnto Hierulalem,
Ye were tome to Wethphage, vnto the moũt of Dues, the sent Je-
Yisus two diltiples,

6 The diluples went, and did as Jesus tommaunded them,

9 page there clothes, and fet hym
8 And many of the people spread their

Luk. x. f. lohn. xi. b.
Psal cx viud
Mark. xi. c.

arniẽtes in the way. Other tut downe zaunches from the trees, and strawed them in the wap.

9 oreouer, the multitudes that went before, Ethat came after, cryed, saping:
Hofanna to the sonne of aud. Wlelled is he that conuneth in the name ofthe
Lowe, Holanna in the hyest. 2s

10 And when he Was come into Wie-

rusalẽ, all the citie was moued saping: whois this: ae

d whenther ' ddewe n And the multitude lalde: This is Je-

bs, O Lorde, thou sonne of Damp 8
32 an at me 1 5 Mii them
‘ e tha t es 150 bh bat J hal
33 ey laye vnto hym- Loyd, tl eyes may be opened. gl
34 So Jesus had compaffion on them: and touched their eyes: and immediatiy theyr epes receaued syght. And they fo: lowed hym. a :

fas "that prophete of Masaceth in Salt Tür

e.

12 And Jesus went into the temple of
God, and catt out all them that fold and bought in the temple, and duerthrewe the tables of the money chaungers, and the seates of them that solde doues,

3 And fapde vnto them, it is written:
My Houle thatbe called the Houle of, g 4 aed but pe haue made it a denne ol ce

ieues. a

14 And che blynde and the halt tame to hym in the temple, and he healed them.

15 When the chiefe priestes and scribes sawe the wonders that he dyd, and the chyldren crying in the temple, and fay: ing, Pofanna to the sonne of Daud, they dildayned, g

16 And sayde vnto hym: Hearest thou what these faye: wut Jesus layth vnte them, pea, haue ye neuer read: Out of pesvita the mouth ol babes € suckelynges thou hast ordeyned prapse- 3

17 And he left them, and went out of the titie, vnto Bethanie: and he lodged u there. i

18 Inthe momyng, as he returned into e the cite, he hungred. :

19 And when Ye farve one fygge tree in Luk xb the wape, he came to it, and founde nothyng theron but leaues only, & faid vn-

to tt: neuer frutte growe on thee ent’ forwarde. And anonc the figge tree WY ered awap.

Bai when his diltiples sawe ur marucyled, faying: Vowe foene is 0

ligge tree wythered aways Jelus

XV. fimilitune. Thert 5

man, an householder, S.-i.

which © made a bineye gen tt fa

mepar a € Hed ed it gan digger rounde about, ani 0 e Efayas.v.a,

Tere. xil. c.

byS aint Matthewe. g

Jesus aunswered, and laide vnto the: 33 * Heark

dothis (which is done; to the figae tree:

put allo, vf ve shall fay vnto this mountayue, be thou remoued, and, be thou catt into the sea, it shalbe done.
22 And all thynges, whatsoeuer pe allte b in praper, beleuyng, pe hail receaue bw em. 8 pan 23 and when he was tome into the ttemple, the chieke priestes, € the elders of the people, came vnto hym teaching, and sape: y what aucthoritie doest e chou these thynges; and who gaue thee ind. this power: - :
Fetus aunswered, e saide vnto them:
Jalso wyll afke pou one questid, Which pk ye tell me, Jin n ene by what autthoritie J do thete thinges:
2 The baptisme of John, whence was it, from heauen, oz of men: And they reasoned with them selues faying:if we shall say from heauen, he wyll fay onto vs, why dyd pe not then beleue hyn
26 But pk we hall fay of men, then feare la We the people: for all men s holde John asa prophete.

7 Aud they aunswered vnto Jesus, and sayde: we tan not tell. And he saide vnto them: neither tell J you, by what autthoritie I do hele thynges.

28 Wut what thynke pours Aman had

two sonnes, and tante to the firste, and lade: sonne, go and worke to day in ny bineparde. a

29° He aunswered and saide, J wyll not:

but atterwarde he repented, and went.

30 Then tame he to the feconde, c sayde lykewyse. And he aunlwered c saide, J wyll sir, and went not.

3 Whether of thentwayne did the wyl ok the father? And they laide vnto hint, the first. Jesus fapth vnto them: Ueryly I faye vnto pou, that publitanes € harlottes go into the kingdome of God, belore you.

“a 3 Jo: John tame vnto vou bythe way 45

ofrighteousnes, e pe beleued hym not: but publicanes t harlottes beleued him.

And ye, when ye had sene (it) were not 4

moued afterwarde with repentaunte, that ye myght haue beleued hem. <3

in it, and buylt at ie, and let it Out to Mark. xii. c. hul bande men: and went into a strange Lal. b. tountrev.

34 And when the time of the fruite drewe neave, he sent his seruauntes ta the hut bande men, that they might reteaue the fruites of it.

35 And the hulbande men taught his seruauntes, and beatte one, killed another, and stoned another.

36 Agapne, he {ent other seruauntes, mo then the first: and they dyd vnto them lpkewylse.

37 But laste of all, he sent vnto them his owne sonne, faying : they wyll stande in abe of mysonne.

38 Bnt when the hulband men lawe the sonne, they layde among them selnes: this is the heire, tomie, let vs kyll hym, Ge. . and let vs enioy his inheritaunce.

39 And they caught hym, and thrust him out ot the vinevarde, and slewe (bent),

40 Whenthe TLorde therfore of the vineparde tonmeth, what wyll he do vnto

those hulbande men: >

4 They sayde vnto hym: He wyll miserably destroy thole wicked men] c wyll let out his binepard vnto other husband men, Which (hall delyuer him the fruite in due seasons.

4 Jelus sayth vnto them. Did pe neuer reade in the Striptures: The stone auc which the buylders retuled, the same is Tuc re. become the head of the comer. This is Peru the Lordes doing, and it is marueplous * b. in our epes. ö

43 Therekore sape I bnto pou, the kyngdone of God shalbe taken front pou, €

euen to a nation bryngyng koorth the ites therof,

exe

| The

ol] pell
The. xxij. Chapter.

< ＋ * mariage of the kynges lonne. 17 Fribute to be geuer to the Emperour,

0 ee! mritte contuteth the opinion of the Haducees concernyng the relurrection,
35 and aunswere

lswered, and spake
IA vnto them agate

dome of heauen is

Alpke bnto a man

that was a kyng, which made a mariage for his sonne.

And sent foorth his seruauntes, to call them that were bidden to the wedding: and they woulde not tone.

Agayne, he sent foorth other seruauntes, laing: Tell them which are bidden, beholde, J haue prepared my

dinner, mpoxen and my katlynges are kylled, and all thynges are redy: come vnto the mariage, a

Tul ii d.

Wut they made lyght of it, and went

their wapes, one to his farme, another to his marchaundize: ö
6 And the remnaunt toke his seruauntes, and entreated them spitefullp, and slewe them. : ,
7 But when thekpng hearde (therol} he

Was wroth, and sent foorth his men or

warre, and destroyed thole murtherers and brent vp their citie. ace

8 Then lapdc he to his seruauntes, He

mariage in dede is prepared: But they

which were bidden, were not worthy.

9 Go pe therlore out into the hye wapes: and as Many as pe fynde, bid them] to the mariage. —

io And the seruauntes went out into the
Hye wapes, and gathered together all, as. manp as they coulde fynde, both good aud bad: and the weddyng was furnished With ghestes.

un Thent u

-~ ghestes: wid WHE he spyed there a man,

12 he layde vnto hym: frende, howe taniest thou in hyther, not haupng a

weddyng garment: And he was euen

speachlesse.
5 3 Then sapde the kyng to the ministers: bynde hym hande and foote, and cast
Hynrinto vtter darknelse: there shalbe
Wepyng and gnasshyng of teeth.
I Foz wiany be called, but fewe are

Mat. xiti. g. and. xx v. c.

e kyng came in, to fee the
Which had not on al weddpng garmet,

th the Scribe vnto his aueltion.
ND Felus aun-

ch weit th

15 Then went the Pharisees.

” toke councell how 1 717 05 iim lac ia hym in his talke.
16 And they lent out vnto hym their dil ciples, with the Hevodians seruauntes saping: Daikter, we knowe that thou Law art true, and teachest the way of God truely, neither tarest thou for any man: for thou doest not respect mens perfons,

17 Tell vs therfore, Powe thynkest thon:
Is it lawfull that tribute be geuen vnto

Caecsar, or not: N

18 But Jesus perteauyng their wickednelle, layde: Why tempt pe me, pe hypocrites: 3

19 Shewe me the tribute money. And they boought vnto hym a peny.

20 And he fapde to them: whole is this unage and superscription-

21 They say vnto hym, Caelars. Then un wis layde he vnto them: Geue therfore vn Non

to Cacfar, the (thynges] which are

Caesars: and vnto God, thole (thrnges! that are gods. =» a

22 When they had hearde (chele wordes they marueyled, and left hym, and went their wap.

23 The fante day came to hym the Sa Makxis: dutcees, which fap that there is no re- nal surrettion, and alked hym, a

24 Säping: Maister, Mopses sayde, that H. a ika man dye, hauing no childrẽ, his brother shoulde mary his wpfe, and rayse vp seede vnto his brother. gz

25 Ther were with vs seuen brethren, and the first maryed a wpke, and deteassed without iffue, and eft his wylt vnto his brother. 2

26 Likewyse, the seconde and the Hirde, vnto the seuenth.

27 Matt of all, the woman dyed also.

28 Therfore, in the resurrection, whole

wyfe shall she be of the seuen ! Foz ther all had her. J :
29 Jesus aumswered Efapde dito them. pe do erre, not knowyng the Scriptures, nor the power of God.
30 Jor in the resurrection, they neither mary, nor are geuen in marpage but are as the Angels of God in heauen. 0
31 But as touchyng the relurrectiaf

ofthe dead: haute ye not read that which

is spoken vnto poof God, which sayth.

„ Jamthe God of Abzahaimn, and the
Soo Plaac, and the God of Jacob-
S od is not the God of the dead, but of

the lyuyng. |

And when the multitudes hearde this, they were aftonyed at his doctrine,

34. ut when the Pharisees had

ö heard that he had put the Saducees to fleece, they tame together.

And one okthem, which was alawyer, alked hyntaquestion, teniptyng hym, aud lapingn:

36 Maister, which is the great cons maundent in the lawe-

Jesus sayde vnto hym: Thou shalt but the Lorde thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soule, and with

all thy mynde.

38 This is the first and great tommaundement. ;

XVI. ple bnto this. Teut che d neyghbour as t

om. xis, c.

Gala. v. d. udementes, Leben.

39 And the secoi
Thou (halt lone th

thy lelfe. .

40 In these two comma hang all the lawe and the prophetes. lach. . g.

41 Whyle the Pharilees were gathered

together, Felus atked them,

42 Saping: what thynke ye of Chuste-

Whole sonne is he- They sayde vnto

hym the tonne) of Dauid.

43. He sapde vito them: howe then doth) Nan
Dautd in spirite call him Lorde, faying : i.

44. The Lorde sayd vnto ny Lorde: lit pal thou on ny ryght bande, tyll J make thyne eneimpes thy footestoole-

45 If Dautd then cal him Lorde howe is he then his sonne-

46 And no man was able to aunlwere bpm A Worde: neither durst any man
(front that day foorth) asue hyn any mo questions. <9

The. xxiij. Chapter.

; Chritte cryeth wo to the Pharifees, Scribes and hypocrites,
37 and propheticeh the destruction ol Hierusalem.

Hen {pake Fels to the multitudes, and to his diltiples,
% Saping: The
| Col} IBS bes and the Pharilecs
Jaa ett in Poylts leate.

7 All therfore, whatsoeuer they bid von obserue, that obferuc and do:but do not pe after their wozkes, for they say, and do not.

„ 4 ea, they bynde together heaup bura theus, and greeuous to be borne, and lay chemon mens shoulders:but they them selues wyll not moue them With lone) of their fingers.
All their Workes they do, kor to be fene ol men: They make broade their phllatteries, and enlarge the hemmes of their garnientes.
6 And lone the vppermost seates at ae and to lyt in the chiefe place in kountels,
And greetyuges in the markettes, and to be called of men, Rabbi.
Wut be not pe called Rabbi: Foz one s pour maister, scuen; Chile, and all ve are brethren.
And call Ino man] pour father, vpon che earth: kor one is pour father, Which

is in heauen.

Io Meither be ye called maisters: for one is pour maister (cuen] Christe. x

II He that is greatest among you, shalbe 1 your scruaunt. a

I2 ut whosocuer eraiteth hym selfe, halbe brought lowe: And he that humbleth hym felfe, shalbe exalted. co

3 Mo vnto pou Stribes and Pharisees, hypocrites:for pe shut vp the kingdome of heauen befoze mien: pe neither go in pour selues, neither suffer ye thein that tome, to enter in.

14. Mo vnto pou Stribes and Pharisces,
Hypocrites : foz pe deuoure widdowes houles, and that vnder a pretente of long praper: therfore pe shall reteaue the greater dampnation.

15 Wo vnto pou Stribes and Pharisecs, „ one hypotrites: for ve compasfe sca and gamen lande, to make one © prolelpte? : when har regen. he is beconte one, pe make hym two folde moze the chylde of hell, then ve vour selues are.

16 Mo be vnto yon pe blynde guides: for ye lap, whosocuer doth [weare by the „ n teniple, it is nothyng: but wholocuer ban ange sweaͤreth by the golde ol the teinple, he pectourinee. isa) Detter. 51

Luk. xi. g.

Ide Golpell

Pe fooles ai d blynde For whether is

greater, the golde, 02 the temple that sauttifieth the golde-

18 And wholdener lweareth by the aulter, it is nothyng: but wholdeuer fwea-

reth by the gyft that is vpon it, he is a

detter. 5

rm Be fdoles and blynde, for whether is

greater, the gpft: or the aulter that sanctilieth the gykt-

20 Who so therfore [weareth by the aulter, sweareth by it, and by all thynges theron.

21 And who fo sweareth by the temple,

swearcth byit, and by hym that dwel-

leth therin. .
C22 And he that Nveareth by Heaven,
Vlack. vf. spbeareth by the seate of God, and by hymn that sitteth theron. 1
23 Wo buto pou Scribes and Pharisces, hypocrites, for ve tythe mynt, and annile, and cunnnpn: and haue left the wayghtier matters of the lawe, iudgement, merep, and fayth. Thele ought ye to haue done, and not to leaue the other vndone.
24. He blynde guides, which strayne out a gnat, and swalowe a Camel.
25 Wo vnto pou Seribes and Phari-

Luk. xi. f.

fees hypotrites: for ve niake tcleane the

vtter syde of the cup, cc of the platter:but

Within they are full of brybery ¢ extesse.

26 Thou blynde Pharisee, cleanse first

that which is within the cup and plat-

1 70 that the outsyde of them may be cane allo.

Luka. 27 Wo buto pou Scribes and Pharilees hypocrites:for yt are lyke buto paynted sepulchzes, which in dede appeare beautifull ontivarde, but are Within full of dead mens bones, and ofall fplthynes.

28 Euen fo, pe allo, outwardly appeare

ryghtedus vnto men: But Within, ye are full ol hypotrisie and tniquitic,

9 The. xxiiij. Chapter.

C 1 chile cheweth his ditciples the destruction of the temple. G. rc the ende of the ae the token ol the later dapes, 42 and warneth them to wake, 44 kor
U

e worlde hall fodapnely perpche.
D Jesus went out, and Departed fromthe
Sy temple: and his dil-
OH ss ples came to hym for

Luk.xxi.a.

Seas

i: See

29 Wo bnto pou Scribes and har; meer ea ce
) rnithe the uk. xi g. dag russ he the sepulchres
30 And lap, yt we had ben in thed our fathers, we woulde noe haue ben parteners with them in the blood okthe
1 20 pe wi
31 And so * pe be witnesses vnto selues, that pe are the chyldren or ot rbesie which kylled the prophetes.
32 Fulkyll ve lpkewyse, the mealure of pour fathers,
33. Be serpentes, pe generation ok vipers,
1 955 Wyll ve escape the dampnation

34. W herkore, beholde *

woulde not:
38 ꝰcholde, pour houle is left vnto vou prince
070 iG vnt chall not le
39 For Play vnto pou: pe shall no 5 me hentefoorth, tyll that pe fay, blesled py, i lis he) that tommeth in the name of the Luvox!
Torde.

Ueryly J fay vnto pou there shall uot Le be here left one) stone vpon another, that shall not be destroped. ö

3 Andas he lat vpon amount of Oliues, his distiples came vnto hym feceetly, faping : Tell vs, when Hall chelechm 5

ges be: c what (hati be the token at ws tonumpng, c of tie ende of the wo A5

by Saint Matthewe. XVI 10 "

And Pelus aunlwered, aud sayde bn: 23 Then pe any man faye vnto pou: .
„ tient a a ee tiyece: beieue it lere ct YOU. vr not.
| Foz manp Chall come in inp name, 24. Foz there shall aryse falle Christes, saying, Jam Chrilte: and chall deceaue and false prophetes, and Chall chewe ! Tela. many. | gueat fignes,and Wonders: Jn fo much,
6 pethalheare ofwwarres,erumoursof that pf it were possible, the very elett, warres: Sec that vou be not tronbled. choulde be deceaued. :
Foy alli thece thrnges must tome to palse, 25 Weholde, FJ hauetotoe vou before, put the ende is not pet. 26 waljcrfoze, pf they fay vnto vou, beowe Nation shall rpse agaynst nation, and holde, he is in the delet: go not foorth.
T kealmie agapnst realnie: and there thal- Beholde, he is in the lecrete plates: bebe peltilenct, and fanune, and earth- leus it not. quakes, in (certarne plates. 27 For as the lyghtnyng conmieth out ol
3 All thele are the begynnpnges of so- che ealt, and shineth into the Welk: so C hall the commipng of the sonne of man

rowes. u Then Hall they put you to trouble, . and shall kyll you, and pe shalbe hates 28 * 302 whersocuer a dead carkas is, 10 b. ae oral nations for my names fake. euen there wyll the Egles alld be ga- ür es o And then Chall many be ofkended and thered together. Luo hall betray one another, and chall hate 25 Puunediatly alter the tribulation of nodal: one another. 5 thofe dapes, hal the sunne be darkened, u And many false prophetes Mhallarple, and the moone shall not geue her lyght, and Chall deceaue many. and the starres shall fall from heauen, nab: And because iniquitic shall abounde, and the powers of heauen shalbe tha the loue of many shall ware colde. ken. — hive z But he that endureth to the ende, the 30 And then shall appeare the signe of ante shalbe saued. the sonne ol man, in heauen: And then
En 14 And this Golpeil of the kyngdome, (hall all the kpuredes ok the earth
8 Bae in all the Woploe, for aa mourne. and they hall “fee the lonne of Aa, witneste vnto all nations: and then shall man comnung inthe cloudes ok heauen, tttgßheende tome. with power and great glory.
Kisidis When pe therefore, chall lee the ab- zi And he chall sende his Angels, with dan xia. ad pomination of defolation, spoken of by the great sounde ofa trunipet, and they ! Thel. hing Daniel the prophete, stande in the holß chall gather together his cholen, from place, (who fo readeth, let hym vnder- the fonre wyndes, euen from one ende

stande.) of heauen, to the other. s Then let them which be in Jutie, fee 32 * Hearne a parable of the fygge tree: xx e into the monntaynes: 8 when his braunche is pet tender, and Lak wat

7 And let hym which is on the house the leaues sprong, ve knowe that sõmer toppe, not conte done to fet any thyng is ne: 8 dut ok his houle: 33 So lpkewyse pe, when pe see all thele
IS Heither let hym which is in the fielde, thynges, be pe surt that it is neare, euen returne backe to fetche his clothes. at the doores.
19 Wo shalbe in thost dayes, to them that 34. Veryly F fay vnto pou: this generaare with chylde, and to them that geue tion hall not passe, tyll all these thynges fucke, be fulfylled.
20 Wut pray (eel that pour flyght be not 35 * Heaucn and earth shall passe a kay if the Winter, neither on the Sabboth 1 75 but my wordes (hail not palle a- ne ap: 5 ay. n bj, 21 For then habe great tribulation, 36 Wut of that day and houre knolbeth un euch as Was not since the begynnyng of no man, no not the Angels ok heauen, the wonde to this tyme, nor halbe. but my father oniy. a
22 Pea, and except those dayes shoulde 37 ut as the Dayes of Noe Were, so G be shortened, there shonlde no fleshe be hall allo the tonunyng of the forme ar laued: but for the chofens fake, choe man be. a dayes shalbe chortened. 38 For as in the Da (that wigs) Or
: 2E) he

the fudde, they dyd eate, and dDzyuke,
Mute and gee in märpage, euen

vntyll the day that Noe cutred into the

rke:

„ knewe not, tyll the fludde tanie, and tone them all away: So shall also the commpng of the fonne of man be.

40 Then shall tivo be in the fielde, the one receaued, and the other rekuled.

Likig gy Two (women) shalbe gryndyng at

tie 0 one receaued, and the other

refused.

Morsov.b 42 Datch therfore, for pe knowe not

Makxud What houre pour Lorde doth come.

Lukxue 43 Ok this pet be lure, that pf the good man of the housc, knewe What watche
*the thiefe woulde come he woulde surely watche, and not suffer his house to be broken bp. N

44 Therkore, be ye allo redy: for in such an houre as ve thynke not, the sonne of man commeth. *

A po. xvi. c.

The Gol pell

45 Who is a faythfull and wit whom his Lorde hath made kugel
15 ee to geue them meate in

46 Wlessed is that seruaunt whom hi
Lowe when he commeth, 5 so pa Bap 155

47 Ueryply J lap vnto pou, tha b make hym ruler ouer gerek

48 ut and yt that euyll seruaunt lay in his heart, my Lode wyll be longa comming:

49 ain fobeayn to Leyte his felowes pea, and to cate and drynke With the denken wulle with the

50 The fame seruauntes Lorne chall tome in a day, when he loketh not for hym, and in an houre that he is not ware oft:

51. And chall hewe hym in peetes, ⁊ gene

hum his portion witch hypocrites: there

halbe wepyng and gnalshyng of teeth.

q The. xxv. Chapter.

¶ Che ten virgins, 14 the talentes delyuered to the teruauntes, and Of the generall iudgement. * 8 3

ben shall the kyngdome of heauen be tpkened vnto ten bir

da nete the brydegrome.
Wut fpue of them

fyuc were Wyle.

They that were foolyshe, toke their

lampes, but toke none oyle with them:

4 Wut the wife, toke oylt in their veslels,
With their lampes allo.

5 Whyle the brydegrome tarped, they all slumbred and slept.

6 And euen at mpdnyght, there was a trye made: beholde, the brydegrome tonuneth, go out to nieete hym.

7 Then all thole virgins arose, and prepared their laͤmpes.

8 So the koolyshe layde vnto the wple: gene vs of pour oyle, for our lanpes are gone out. g

9 Wut the Wyle aunswered laping: dot

lo lest there be not indugh for vs c pou: but go pe rather to them that sell, and bye for pour selues.

10 And whyle they went to bye, the brydegomte une: and they that were redy, went in with hom, to b marpage,

W

and the gate was shut vp.

1 After warde came allo the other virgins saping: Lorde, Lode open to vs.

12 But he aunswered and fayde: veryly
Play vnto pou, I knowe you not. A d

13 Match therfore, for pe knowe neither de the day, nor vet the houre, wherin the L sonne of man (hall come. <9 19

14 » Typkewyse, as a (cevtayney man, ck redyto take his iourney into a straunge tountrey, called his owne fernauntes, and delyuered vnto them his goodes.

15 And bnto one, he gaue fput talcutes, to another two, and to another one: to euery man after his habilitie, x ltrapght wap departed.

16 Then he that had reteaued the fyue talentes, went, and occupyed With the lame, x made them j other fpue talentes.

17 And lykewyle, he that receaued) two: he allo gayned other two.

18 Wut he that receaued that one, went
11. digged in the carth, and hyd Hs

ordes money. : 5

1 After a long feafon the Lore okthose
„ conuneth, and reckeneth
With them. ;

20 ain he that had reccaned cr ene

; ¢ other lentes, came, and brough palettes,

Mathvilic

P by Saint Matthævve. XVII].

talentes, saving: Logde, thou delyueredst vnto nie fyue talentes, veholde, J haue gayned with them kpue talentes

mo.

„ Dis Lordt faide buto him: Well done, thou good and faythfull seruaũt. Thou
Hatt ben fapthkull over fewe thynges,

wyll make thee ruler ouer manye chynges: enter thou into the top of thy
Lorde.

2 He alsd that had reteaued two talentes, tame, and sayde: Lorde thou delpueredst vnto me two talentes, beholde,

haue Wonne two other talẽtes with

them. lle
23 is Lorde saide bnto hint well done, good and faithfull seruaunt. Thou batt ben fayth full ouer fewe thinges, J wyl make thee ruler over many thynges: enter thou into the oy of thy Lorde. oo
4 Lhenhe which had reccaued the one
€ talent, came, and {aide : Lorde BF knew thee, that thou art an harde man, reapyng where thou hast not sowen, x gaeryng where thon hast not strowed.

25 And (therfore) was J afrapode, c went and hid thy talent in the earth:loe, there

thou hast that thyne is. g

26 His Lorde aunlwered, and 1 vnto hym: Thou euyll and flouth uaũt, thou knewest that J reape where
IJ sowed not, and gather where J haue not strowed,

27 Thou oughtest therfore to haue delyuered ny money to the exchaungers, and then at my commyng shoulde J ai reteaued myne owne with vaunage.

238 Take therfore the talent from hym, and geue it vnto hym whiche bath ten talentes.

ce? Foz vnto euery one that hath, shalbe

tue geuen, and he shall haue aboundaunce :

But he that hath not, from hym thalve taken away, euen that which he bath.
30 And tast the vnprokitable seruaunt in-

Url, C0 vtter darknesle, there shalbe we-

b. pyng, and gnasshyng of teeth.

haunt. G Whenthe sonne of man shall come

in his glorie, and all the holy Angels with hym, then Chall he sitte vpon the throne of his glorie.

u And before hym shalbe gathered all

nations: and he shall seperate then

ull ser-

one from another, as a shephearde deuideth his sheepe fromthe goates.

33- And he shall {et the sheepe on his right
Hande, but the goates on the lekte.

34 Then shall the king fay vnto them on

her i hebe ae pe blessed of my

ather, in e kyngdonie, prepa-

red for you from che Founpation bf che Ned worlde.

35 Jor I Was an hungred, and ye gaue ry wi b. me meate: J was thirstie, and pe gaue * me drynke: J was harbourlelse, and pe toke me in:

36 Naked, and pe clothed me: Sicke and Excte.vii-d. pe visited me: J Was in prplon, and Tin. pecaine vnto nie. vo

37 Then shall the ryghteous aumwere D hym, saping: Lorde, when sawe we thee an hungred c fedde ther; or thirstie and gaue thee drynke-

38 When sawe we thee harbourlesle, and

. Coke thee in: or naked, and clothed thee-

39 O when sawe we thee sicke, or in prifon, and came vnto thee:

40 And the kyng shall aunswere, and fay vnto them: Uerply Y lap vnto pou, in as much as pe haue done it vnto one of the least of these my brethren, ye haue done (16) vnto me.

4 Then shall he sape vnto them on the let hande: Depart from me pe curled n

into euerlasting fire, which is prepared Tau forthe deuyll and his angels. Ffay.xxx.g

42° FOF Was an hungred, and pe gaye Pr vd. me no meate: J was thirstie, and ye gaue mie no drynke.

43 J was harbourlesse, and pe toke me not in: I was naked, and pe tlothed nie not: Iwas sicke, and in prilon, and pe vilited nie not.

44 Then shall they also aunswere hym,

saying: Lorde, when sawe we thee an

hungred, or a thirste, or harbourlesse, o

naked, or sicke, or in pryson, and did not

minister vnto thees

Then chan he aunlwere them aying: „ e.

Weryly F fay buto you, in as much as andy.

pe dyd it not to one of the least of thele,

pt dyd it not tome.

46 And *thele Mall go into euerlastyng iv payne: the ryghtedus into lpfe eternall. £9 ö

ee

Cij ¶ The

arte Magdalene annoynted Cheifte. 25 Chepeate the Easter lambe.
C 1 em the garden, a8 Judas betrapeth hym, 62 Peter impteth of Malchus care, o4 Chrite is acculed by kalle witnelles, co peter de,

nyeth hem.

— 9 it came to s pale, when

Fal chese sapinges,

he sayde vnto his diltiples: pt knowe,

F atter two dapes

| sp feast ofpasso-

uer, and the forme ok man is betraped, to be crucified, N
Johnxi. 3 Then allembled together the chiefe priestes, and the stribes, and the elders of the people, vnto the palace of the Hye pueste, which was called Cataphas:
4 And helde a councell, that they might take Jesus by subtiltie, and kyll hym.
5 Wut they sapde: Hot on the kealtldar! left there be an vprore among p people.
Marais. 6 When! Jesus Was in wWerhante, in the
_men* houle of Simon the leper,

There tame vnto him a woman, Ha uing an Alabaster bore of pretious oyntment, and powred it on his head, as he fate (at the boorde.]

3 But when his disciples sawe it, they had indignation, saying: to what purpose (#8) this waste:

9 This oyntment might haue ben Well solde, and geuen to the poore.

Io When Jelus vnderstode that, he saide

vnto then: hy trouble pe the Won:

for she hath wrought a good worke vppon me.

For ye haue the poore alwayes with vou: but me shall ve not haue alwayes.
12 Jor in that He hath tast this oyntment on my bodp, she dyd it to bury me,

13 Uerylp Play vnto pou, wheresoeuer

this Gospell chalbe preached in the
World, there shall also this that the hath done, be tolde for a memorial o her.

He 1 5 14. Thenone of the twelue, called Juz

uk. xxl. a.

Loh al. a. 15 And sapde (onto them: What wyll ve geue me, and J wyll delpuer hym vnto vou: And they appopnted vnto hym

Math. xiii. a 2

Luk. xxil. a.

Luk. vii. f. 7

Deut. xv.b. II

das Iscariot, wet vnto p chiefe priestes,

29 But

The G

¢ The .xxyj. Chapter.

thirtie ee of spluer.

16 And fronr that tyme foorth, he sought oportunitie to betray hym.

17 The first day of lweete bread the nif: N ciples came to Jesus, saying vnto him:
Where wylt thou that we prepare foz thee, to cate the Pasloner ¢

18 And he saide: Go into the citie, to such aman, and fay vnto hym, the maitter sayth, my tyme is at hand, J wyll kepe
100 pie at thy house, With my dilciples.

19 And the diftiples dyd as Jesus had appoynted them: and they made redye the Passouer. N

20 When the euen was come, he fate zie downe with the twelue. 11

21 Andas they dyd eate he fapde: Tle- = ryly J fay vnto vou, that one of pow" shall betray me. ö

22 And they were exteadyng sorowfull, and began euerp one ol them to fay bu: hym, Lorde is it Jz 5

23 He aunswered, and faide : He that dip-

eth his hand with me in the dilshe, the ane shall betray nie. —

24 The sonne of man truely goeth, as it oe. is writtẽ of him: but wo vnto that man by whom the sonne ol man is betraped:

St 958 ben good for that man, yr he had not ben borne.

25 Then Judas, Which betrayed bem aunfivercd and fapde : Maister, is it J
He sayde vnto hym, thou hat layde.

26 When they were eatyng, Jelus toke bread, and when he had geuen thankes, he beake lit.] and gaue lit) to thedilty pies, and laide: Take, cate, this is nip c body. : Mar. xuũ e

27 And he toke the cuppe, and after he had geuen thankes, gaue it them, fay ing: Drinke ye all of this, Hol

23 Foz this is my blood, whiche de 117 thenewe teftament, that is shedde many, for the renuslion of sinnes. ate

fay vnto pou, J wyll not OE

hence korth of this fruite of mit

a

by Saint vntyll that day when JJ chall drynke it newe. with von, in my fathers kyng-

dome. be 1 9 zo And when they hadde praysed (600) hey wet out vnto the mount ok Olines.
Then layth Jesus vnto them: All ye

shalbe offẽded becaule of me this night.

Foz it is wzitten: IJ wyll fmpte the ae fhephearde, and the theepe of the locke aue (palbe scattered abrode ...

32 Wut after Jani rysen againe, J wpll

go beforc von into Galile .,

3 Peter aun wered, and fad vnto him: be “Haun all men be offended, betause of pie 191 5 wyll J newer be offended.

＋Jesi

tap vuto thee, that in this fame nyght,

before the Cocke crowe, thou shalt dente

me thryse. ur +m

35 Peter fapde vnto hym: Though J

shoulde dye with thee, yet wyll J not

denie thee. Lykewyse allo sayde all the

dilciples. 5

du plate, which is called Gethsemane, and ayde vnto the disciples: Sit pe here, whyle J go and pray ponder.

377 And he toke with him Peter, and the two sonnes of Zebedee, aud began to wart sorowfull and heauvp.

33 Then sapde Jesus vnto them: My

g lone is heauy, cuen vnto the death, tary

dub pe here, and watche with me.

39 And he went alitle farther, and fell

flat on his face, and praped, faping: O ica lip father, if it be pollible, et this cuppe palse fromme: Neuerthelelle, not as

Iwyll, but as thou wylt.

40 And he tanie vnto the dilciples, and

founde them a slepe, and layth bnto Pe-

ter: What, coulde pe not watche with

me one houre; a
41 Watche, and prape, that ity, ko temptation: The spirite in deede b,, IS wyllyng, but the fleche is weale.
“4 e Went away once againe, x praped, laping: O my father, ik this cuppe may not pasle away fro me, except J drinke it, thy wyll be fulfylled.

43 And he tanie, and founde them a slepe
_ agapne : for, their eyes were heaupv.
44. And he left them, and went agayne, and prayed the thirde tyme, faying the

dame wordes. e Then commieth he to his diltiples and layth vnto then: Slepe hencefoort), € dane pour rest, beholde, the houre is at

iS fayde buto hym: Geryly J

Dig Then came Jesus with them vnto a ö

ye enter not

atthevve. XIX. hande, and the sonne of man is betray: ed mo the handes oksynners.
46 Nyse, let vs be goyng: beholde, he is at hande that doth betray nie. 8
47 Whyle he pet spake, oe Judas, one Mar.xiii.c. ofthe twelue, came, and With hym a Lake. great multitude, with swordes ¢ staues, a ciniefe priestes and elders of the
: pec „ ns ae Gea
48 Mut he that betrayed him, gaue them a token, saping: Whomsdeuer J kplle, that fame is he, holde hym falt.
49 And foorthwith, he came to Jesus, aud fayde, Hayle maister: and kylled

ypu :

50 And Jesus sayde vnto hym : Frende, wherekore art thou come z Then came they. 975 layed handes on Jelus, and

0 E pin. . - _

51 And beholde one of them which were with Jelus, stretched out his hande, and drewe his sworde, and stroke a ser-

5 Ren of the hye priestes, and smote ol

is care. ieee in oe

52 Then saide Jesus vnto hym: Put vß 4 thy sworde into his sheathe. Foz all Genet. ca. they that take the lworde, shall peryshe A8 with the sworde. — Excch. xi. b.

5 Thynkest thou pas can not nowe pray to my father, and he shall geue me more then twelue legions of Angels:

54. But howe then chall the scriptures be

fulfylled: For thus mult it be.

55 Puthatfame Youre, sayde Jesus to yy. f. the multitudes: He be come out, as it Lux. Saif. were vnto a thiefe, with wordes aud staues, for to take mie. I sate dayly with du, teachyng in the temple, and pe toke meno, pH

56 But all this is done, that the scrip- ande. tures of the prophetes nyght be fulfylled. Then all the diltiples forsoke hin N and fledde. le eb %

57 And they toke Jesus, and ledde hm to Caiaphas the hye prieste, where the scribes and the elders were assennbled.

58 But Peter folowed hym a farre of, vnto the hye priestes palace, and went
17 and fate with the seruauntes to let

the ende. a

59 The chiele priestes, and elders, and u hf, all the councell, fought falle witnesse a Alke vid. gaynst Jesus, for to put hym to death,

60. But founde none: pea, when many falle witnesses tame, yet founde they none. At the talk, came two falle wit-

nefics, 8
| : Ciij And

Lu. xxi iii. d.

%

xine 61 And fayde: This (felowe) sayde * J

lind ant able to destroy the teniple of Gad, and to buylde it agayne in three dayes.

Mar. xi f. G And the chiefe pret arose, and ayde vnto hym: Aunlwerest!
Why do these beare witnelle agaynst

thee- 1 —
Mar. ib f. 63 But Jelus helde his peace. And the chiefe priest aunswered, and fayde vnto

hym: I charge thee by the liuing God.

that thou tel vs whether thou be Chrilt the sonne of God: all

64. Fetus faith onto him: thou halt fad.

Mar xiii. g

Luk. xxu. g

e vnto pou, here-

Nuerthelesle, J fa
7 5 770 onne ok man fitting

after Mall pe fee the

on the ryght hande of power, and conv a

myng in the cloudes of the skye.

* cing 65 Then the bye puest rent his clothes 3

holde, now ye haue hearde his blasphe-

mie, a 5
6 What thynke pe: They aunfwered and fapde : he is worthy to dye.

q The .xxvij. Chapter.

€ 2 Chritte is delpuered onto Pilate.; Judas hangeth hyn felke.
24 Ehriste is crucified among thiewes, 57 he dyeth, and is buried,

Btyle Otten hym With kistes. And other smote hym on his fate with the paulme
64 watchmen kepe the graue.
. Hen the mornyng was
1 (come, all the chieke
Lula | priestes, and the ciders

AT councellagapnt Jesus

Inu. bounde, and delivered hym to Ponti-

priestes and elders,

Saping: J haue synned, betraying the innotent blood. And they said: What is that to vs: fee thou to that.

5 And he cast downe the peetes of finer in the temple, and Departed, and went
And Hanged hym selfe.

6 And the chiefe priestes toke the peetes of spluer, and layde: It is not lawfull

2. Reg. xvub
& *

Ihe Golpell SS

thou nothyng-

saping: He Vath spoken blasphemie, what nede we of any mo witnetles We-

Then dyd they {ppt in his face, and

of the people, helde a

o e . vs.
68 Saying: prophecte vnto vs
12 is 5 pe 155 thee: © chu,
69 er late without in the palate: Ar
& damsell came to hym, n Thon also Watt with Fetus of Gallert.
7 But he dented before them all saying:
J wote not Whatthoufayet,

71 When he was gone out into the porch; another wenche sawe hym, and fapde vnto them that were there: This ke-

nech. was also with Jelus of Masa: vet, a .
72 And aͤgayne he denped with an oth:

Diatly *the Cocke trewe. .

at. XXVL¢

NM
75 And Peter remembred the worde of
Jesu, which fayde vnto hym, before the
Cocke crowe, thou shalt dente me thrile: and he went out, and wept bytterip.

tt al

for to put thẽ into the treasurie, becaule itis the price of blood.

7 And they toke tountell, and bought with them a potters fielde, to burye straimgers in. —

3 Wherkore that fielde is called the fielde ok blood, vntyll this dap. 1

9 (Then was kulkplled that, which was spoken by Heremic the prophet, fayins: 2
And they toke thirtie finer peetes the Ln price of hym that was valued, whom thep bought of the children of Ylrael:

Io And gaue them for the potters fielde, 15 as the Lorde appoynted ine.) aid t

u Jelus stode before the Deputte, am Larve the deputie asked Da Jens t thou jp, nus the king ofthe Jewes - Pelus faith vn to hym: thou sapest. fe

12 And when he was acculeo ofthe h puiestes and elders, he aunlwered

thyng. .
B Wehen fapth pate vnto hun: Ea

by Saint Matthævve. xX.

thou not how many witnesses they lay agaynst thee-

And he aunswered hym to neuer a worde: inson nuch, that the deputie marueyled greatly. '

4h Atthat featt, the deputie was wont
BS to delpuer vnto the people a prploner,

whom they woulde desire.
16 He had then a notable prysoner, called
Barabbas.
17 Therfore, when they were gathered together, Pilate {aide vnto them: whe-
* ther Wyll ve that I geue loolt vnto you pes: F o Jesus, whiche is talled ch ute: N
1 Forbe knewe, that foz enuy they had delyuered hym.
9 When he was fet downe to geue indgment, his wyfe sent vnto hym, laying:

sie 14

nan: For J haue suffred many thyn-

ges this daß iu a dreame becaute of hint.

Co But the chiele priestes e elders per-

an lwaded the people, that they shoulde alle Warabbas, and destrop Jesus.

21. The deputie aunswered, and farde vntothem: Whether of the twayne wyll pe that J let loose vnto pou-They fade,

ric Wärabbas.

22 Pilate sapde vnto them: What shall
I dothen with Jesus, whiche is called
Christe: They all sapde vnto hym: let hym be crucified. ;

23 The deputie fayde: nahat eupll Hath he done; But they tryed the moze, faying: let hym be crucified.

24 When pilate sawe that he coutoe preuayle nothyng, but that moze buspnesse
Was made, he toke water, and walhed his handes before the people, faying: J aun innotent of the blood of this iust per-

. fou, see pe to it.

25 Then aunswered all the people, and

iy, layde: Pis blood be on bs, and on our

hava, chyldren.

uc 26, Then let he Warabbas look bnto

them, and scourged Fetus, and delinered hyn to be crucified.

27 Then the fouldiours of the deputie

toke Pefus in the common hall, and ga-
1 vnto hym all the bande (of souidi-
J

28 And they stripped hym, and put on hym a skarlet robe:

29 And platted a crowne of thornes, and

put vppon his head, and a rerde in his

right hande, and bowed the knee before

agli.

haue thou nothing to do with that iuste

hym, and mocked hym, laying: Maple kyng of the Jewes.

30 And when they had {pyt vpon hyn,
55 255 the reede, andfinote hym on

je head.

31 And alter that thep had mocked him, D they toke the robe ol hym agayne, and put his owne rayment on hym, and led hymawap, to crucifie hym.

32 And as they tame out, they foundt a zu b.

man of Cyrene, named Simon: hym La d. they tonipelled to beare his crosse.

33 And they came vnto the place, which Mark. b, is called Golgotha that is to lay a plate 24 of (dead mens j Rulles.

34. And gaue him bineger to drinke, ming:

led with gall; And when he had tasted therot, be woulde not drynke.

35 When they had crucitied hym, they parted his garmentes, € did tast lottes, that it myght be fulfylled whiche was spoken by the prophete: They depar- pal b. ted my garmentes among then vpon Mark.xv.c. nly vesture dyd they tast lottes. mae

36 And they late, c watched him there. 125

37 And "fet vp ouer his head, the taust Inn Oats
(ol his death Witten ¢ This is Iesus, the king of the Iewes.

38 Then were there two thieues cruci: Marexvec fied with hym: one on the ryghtande,

and another on the left.
9 Ther that patted by, reupled hym, En. waggyug their heades, a

40 And sapuig: Thou that deltropent the temple, e buyldest it in three daͤpes, content saue thy selfe. If thou be the sonne ok P
God, tome Downe froni the crosse.

41 Lypkewyte allo the bye priestes, mockyng hym, with the scribes, and elders, land pharileesj sayde:

42 he saued other, hym selke can he not laue. If he be the kyng of Ylrael, let him nowe tome downe fronithe cvofle, and we wyll beleue hyn. 4

43 he trusted in God, let hym delyuer ub.

hm nowe, yr he wyll haue hym: for he lapde, J am the sonne of God.

44 The thieues also which were crucifi-

ed with hyn tast the lane in his teeth. 1
45 Feb the lech haure, was there bathe A nesse ouer all the lande, vnto the nynth houre. N
46 And about the nynth houre, Jelus cri: A ed with a loude dope, laing: Elie Cit, lama sabachthaui, that is to say:? My
God, mp God, why hast thou forsaken Markxve le: al. xxi. a.
. Citi Sonie

oine of them that stode there, when
Me hearde that, saide: This man calleth for Ellas. .
Mersv.d, 48 And straightway “one of them vane,
Mace ad toke a sponge, and when he had filled it full ol 1 “a put it ona reede, and gaue hyn to drynke.
49 Other lapde, let be let bs fee whether
Elias wyll come and laue hym.
ö F50o Hels, when he had cryed agapue with a loude voyte, peelded vp v ghost.
Makxvd.o¢ And beholde, the vaylt ol the tenipic
Laksesilif “yp rent into two partes, frd the toppe to the bottonie, and the earth did quake and the stones rent.

51 And granes dyd open, and many bo-
Dyes ok laintes Which slept, avofe:

53 And went out okthe graues, after his resurrettion, and tanie into the holp titie, and appeared vnto many,

ca) emi: $4. Mhen the © Centurion, and they that gane of one” were With bpm watchyng Jelus, fare
Markxvd. the earthquake, and thole thynges that
Lulu, pere done, they feared greatly, laing: trnelp, this was the sonne of God.

Iohn. ix. f.

Markav.d. 55 And many Wome were there (behol-

Luk xxii 8

dyng hyma karre of) whiche folowed

Jesus frõ Galilee, ministring vnto him.

56 Aniong which, was Marie Magdalene, and Marie the mother of James and Holes, c che mother of Zebedees

5 chyldren.
G 97 When the tuen was come, there came

@ 6 Che Resurrection of Chrisle. ir Che hye priestes geue the souldiers money, to lay that Chrilte was stolen out of his graue. 17 Christe appeareth to his dilciples, and

1 à ryche man of Aramathia, named Jo-
ü .
= $a The. xxviij. Chapter. lendeth them koorth to preache, and to baptize,
A1 Atht later ende or the ee Sabboth day, whiche i dawneth the first dape

Say OF he weke, came Baz irie Pagdalen, aud the other Marie, to see the

. epulchre.
2 And behold, there was a great earthquake, forthe Angell of the Lorde delcended from heauen, and came x roulled
E the fone from the doore, and late

ponit.

His countenaunce was lpke lyght-

npug, and his rayment white as noe.

4 And for feare of hun, the kepers were r aftonpen, and became as dead men.

Tusa, The Angell aunswered, and lapde

The Golpell

seph, which allo hym fe disaple. W

58 He went to Plate, and begged the bodyol Peles. Then Plate cdmaueothe body to be Dein pea

55 And when Joseph had taken the boa Wrapped it in a cleane lynnen

60 And layde it in his newe tombe wien

he had hewen out cen inthe roche one rolled a great stone to the Doze ofthe fe:
We e “ g

61 And there was Marie Magdalene Ulk etheother Marie, syttyng duer aganst

the sepulchze.

6 The next day that folowed the day ot preparyng, the bye priestes and pha-

rilets tame together vnto Plate,

63 Saͤping. Sir, we remember that this deteauer sayde whyle he was pet aliue:
After thece dayes I Wil arise agayne. dne

64. Commaunde therfore, that the fepur J. debe made sure, vntyll the thirde dap: Lala lest his distiples tome by nyght r steale hymawap, and fay vnto the people, he s rpsen from the dead: € the last error

chalbe worse then the firit.

65 Pilate sayde vnto them: He haue the watche, go pour wap, make it as surc

66 So they went, and made the lepul-

15 sure with the watch, and lealed the ont. 22

vnto the women, keare ye not: For q

knowe that ye seke PFelus whiche was crucified. — 1

6 He is not here, he is rysen, as he saide.
Come fe the place where that the Lord was lapde. 8 6 g = ‘

And go quickly, x tell his disciples that he is rysen agayne from the dead. And beholde, he goeth before pou into Galt lee, there cha pe lee hum. Loe, J haue tolde pou. = : Ahr. xvi b.

8 And they departed quickly from we In ub sepulchze, with feare, and great top ar dyd runne, to bryng his piftiples word"

9 Andas they went to tell his piftiple : beholde, Fetus met them, feping: by haple. And they tanie and heide hm :

Then sayde Fetus vnto them: be not alrayde. Go tell my brethren that they go into Galilee, e there shal they see nie. au Whenthey were gone, beholde, some

¢ of the watche came into the citie, and

shewed vnto the bye priestes all the thynges that were done.

. Aud they gathered the together, with the elders, and toke councell, and gaue large money vnto the souldiers,

3 Saping. Saye ye, that his disciples

came by nyght, e stole hym away While

pe slept.
14. And pf this come to the deputiesseares)

we wyll perlwade hym, and saue pon harmelesse.

ij So they toke the money, a dyd as they

were taught. And this saping is nopsed

among the Pees ; butyl this dap. on

i 7 N
Ie N ai 5 1 2 e
: ee at 7
0 Athen 5 ‘i 1 hig 37>
75 1 e ee ö MI Pre iMate 0 a 2

= = ee

Wad 5 =

„ S — SS uf

tiviatthevve. XX she fete, and worshypped hyni. 16 Then the elcuen dileiples Went a-

= 2 . 5 a ale

= UU umd me 0 N 8
OTs neil

D
Wape into Galitee, into a mountapne, where Jesus had appoynted them.

17 And when they lawe hym, they worshypped 12 fonie doubted,

18 And Jesus came, and spake vnto the, ö saying: All power is geuen vnto nie in ee heauen and in earth. .

1 Go ye therkoze, æteache all nations, . baptizing them in the name of the fa ͤ-a ther, and of the forme, and of the holye

ghost: 2

20 Ttachyng the to obserue all thynges, whatsoeuer J haue commaunded pou,
And loe, J am with vou alwap, euen 10h i . vnto the ende ol the worlde. s

Here endeth the Gofpell by
Saint M atthawe,

2¹

Ny f

I

Leer r 1 g x:
8 5 ii

i

—— + Leer
R Kell SUN

1410 5%

1 ö ieee 0 SY 5 ast N
— 8 \ t= - — NN que 1 r
Se EEE Seah)
2 i:
N —

a Te

N ‘ 2
70 7 Wiig DD
Hii) ,
1 Mi) hy
7% x. i}

Ia

ö 4 i 0 e neee te 6 25 1 N \
1 N 8

ee

home FTxxue firft Chapter.

© 2 Che office ot John the Baptist.

preachyng. 17 and the callyng of Peter,

leth the man with the vncleane spirite, clenseth the leper,

be begynnyngokthe

0 15 Rye Golpel of Fehr Chutt,

ce NA eS che lonne ok God.

ae 5 . RIAL Ae A voh LE

Nl. Ts 0 0 N | 0 : wl x 120 AN yi in the prop

Weholde, I sende my
‘ailing melsen-

abe baptitme ok Cheitte, iz his kalk png, 14 his

Andzewe, James, € John. 23 Chile beas
29 helpeth Peters mother in la we, 41 and

meffenger before thy face, whiche Halt r peepare thy wape before thee.

A voyte of hym that crieth in the wyl- e =n dernesle: Prepare ye the Waye of the Nh.
Lorde, and make his pathes strayght. ian
4 Wohn dm p en, 59

an

„

Niark. in. b.

Luk. in. c.

and preached th R tant the renussion of sinnes.

And all the land of Jurie, and they of
Hierufalent, went out vnto hym, and were all baptised of hym inthe ryuer of
Jordane, tonkessyng their synnes.
Mathiia. 6 John was clothed with Canzelles

W heere, and with a girdle of a skynne about his loynes:and he did eate locustes and wylde Hony.

Nirub. 7 And preached, faping : He that is

Lak ue. stronger then J, conuneth after me, bound. whole Choc latchet Jam not worthy to ace downe, and e walt A

8 haue baptised you : he Mal baptse pou with the holy ghost.

9 And it came to-pafle in thost dapes, that Jesus tame frõ Hazareth, of Ga-

Mane, Ulle, x was baptised of John in Jozdane.

10 And assone as he was come bp out of

Inh üg. the water, he sawe heauen open, e the an. fpirite destending vpon him like a doue.

vl. nig, II. And there tanie a voyte from heauen:

dub h Thou art my deare sonne, in whom J

Mathiiia, dtn Well pleased.

Efiyodia, 12 And inimediatly “the spirite driueth

Mark v. a. hypin into wyldernesse.

13 And he was there in the wyldernesle fourtie dayes, and was tempted of Datan, c was with Wylde beastes. And

lach än b. the Angels ministred vnto hym.

14 After that John was deliucred to pri-
Mathiii.c. son] Jesus came into Galilee, prea-
Lak. iii b. cheng the Golpell of the kyngdome of

15 And saping: The tyme is come, and the kpngdome of God is at hande: repent, and beleue the Gospell.

Mathie. 16 “AS he Walked by the lea of Galllee,

Mame he falbe Simon, and Andrewe his brother, castyng nettes into the sca ( kor they were ae

17 And Jelus fade onto them: Folowe me, and J wyll make pou to beconie

fibers of men. they forsoke their

Math.iiii. b.

Lær. xviic.

18 And strayghtway nettes, and kolowed hym.

19 And when he had gonc a litle further thence, he fay James the forme of Zebedee, and John his brother, which al-
1 in the shippe, mendyng their

20 And anone he talled them: And they lefte their father Zebedee in the shippe ae Wedired fernauntes and folowed

TheGolpell

ebaptifine of repen- 21 And they came into ee

Caperna

frrapghuwap, on the Sabborh daes he entred into the spnagogue, F tau ght.

22 And ther were attonyed at his learnong. Jod he taught them, as one that

had aucthoritie, € not as the Scribes, £

23 And there was in their spnago

1110 bered with an vunleane write ehe

24. Saping: Alas, what haue we to do with thee, thou Jelus of ce aa 2 — 9990 to destroy vs? J knowe

het what thou art, euen
95800 euen that holy one

25 And Jesus rebuked hym, saying: holde thy peace, and conie out of ppm,

26 And When the vncleane spirite hadde torne hym, € cryed with a loude vopce, he tanie out of hym.

27 And they were all amased, insomuch that thep demaunded 1 another among them selues, saping: What thing is this What newe doctrine is this-
Foz with aucthoritie commaunded he the fowle spirites, and they obeyed him.

28 And innnediatip his fame spread a: brode thronghout all the region borderyng on Galilce.

29 And foortchwith, when they were come out ofthe synagogue, they entred into the house of Sinion, and Andzewe, with James, and John.

30 Wut Simons wpues mother lap sicke ofa fener: anone thep tell hym ok her.

31 And he tame, e toke her by the hande, and lyft her vp: and immediatliy the fez ae forsoke her, and (Ge) ministred vnto

hem.

32 And at euen, when the sonne was downe, they brought vnto hym all that

were dileased, and them that were ver-

ed with deuyls:

33 And all the citie was gathered tage; D

ther at the dore.
34 And he healed many, that were ficke of diuers diseaseg, and *calte out man deupls: and fuffred not the deupls to speake, betause they knewe hym.
35 And inthe mornyng, befoze day, Pe sus, when he was rylen vp, departed,

Math iui),

Math. vu d
Lali e.

Mit. vil. b.
Luk hf.

Lukiti. 3,
Mark. il. b.

and went out into a lolitarie place, and

there prayed.
36 And Simon, € they that were wi

been Ai
57 And when tHep Had tou ,

faye vnto hym: all men seke fo2 tC.

38 And he saide vnto then: let vs 90 aie |

by Saint

there also: for, therfore am I tome.

And he preached in their spnagogues,

in all Galtiee, and cat the deuyls out.
40. And there tame a leper to hyn bele-
75 hyng him, and knelyng downe to him, and faying vnto hym: If thou Wylt,

thou tanst make me tleane.

41 And Jelus had conpaffion on hym, and put foorth his hande, touched hym, and layth vnto hym: J Wyll, be thou

tlenne . i .
And alloone as he had spoken, imme-

piatly the leprosie departed from hyn,

and he Was made tleune.

arke.

conmiaundement, he sent bym awa foozthwith, 3 ‘

44 And faptl vnto hym: See thou sape Mark.vid

nothing to an man, but get thee hence, ew thy felfe to the priest, and ofter for y tlenlyng thole thinges which Mopthe tomniaunded, fo2 a witnesse buts em. . ö
45 But he, assoone as he was departed, began to tell many thynges, and to publithe the saying: inomuch, that Fetus tould no moze openly enter into the atic, but was without in desert places: And they tame to him from euerp quarter.

¢ The. ij. Chapter.

( he healeth the man of the pautlie, ig calleth Leui the cuftomer,

—terta ewe) dapes allo, he entred in:
Ito Capernamm a-
Zx i gapne, and it was
Ai inopled ß he was gin the house.
8 ai ed mae
| „ ny were gathered
— 5 ether, in somuch that nowe there was no rownie to reteaue them, no, not fo muche as a bout the dore: and he preachedthe word

Ynto them. 1

hits, 3 And they tanie buto hym, bryngyng

. one sicke ok the paulsie, whiche Was boatic of foure men.

4 And when they coulde not comie nye vnto hyn for preale, they vncouered the roofe (ofthe houlej that he was in: And whẽ they had broken vp the roofe, they dyd (with cordes] let downe the bedde, wherin the sicke of the paulsie lay.

„ 5 Ehen Hels fare their fapth he fatde

tie vnto the sicke of the paulsit: Sonne,

ind thy synnes be forgeuen thee.
36 Wut there were tertayne of the stribes

Herrn there, and realonyng in theye

7 Why doeth he thus spealte blalphe-

i Who can forgeue sinnes, but God

8s And immediatly, when Jelus perteaued in his fpivite, that thep so reasoned
Withinthem lelues, he faith vnto them: ben penton pe suche thynges in vour

16 eateth with open Cyriners, is and ercufeth his dilciples.

9 Whether is it easper to fap to the sicke of the paulsie, thy fynnes be forgeuen thee: or to fay, arpse, take vp thy bedde, and walke?? *

Io But that pe may know, that the sonne of man hath power in earth to forgeue synnes Me spake vnto the ficke of the

paulsie)

1 Isape vnto thee, arpse, and take bp Nach.

e get thee hence vnto thine house.

12 And imme diatly he arose, toke vp the bedde, and went foorth before them all: insomuch that they were all amazed, € glorified God, saying: we neuer sawe it on this fashion.

13 And he went againe vnto the sea:and ¢

all the people resorted vnto hun, and he M. .

taught them.

14 And as Jesus passed bye, he fate
Went (the somej of Alphee, sittyng at the receipt of tustome, and fapde vnto hym: folowe me. And he arose, and folowed

Dyn.

15 And it tame to patle,that when Jesus fate at meate in his boule, many publicanes and finners fate allo together at meate with Jesus and his dilciples: for there Were many that kolowed him.

16 And when the lcribes and pharilees sawe hym eate with publicanes and fine ners, they saide vnto his disciples: hole is it that he eateth and drynketh wih publitanes and spnners: N

17 When Jesus hearde that, he fatde vn-

to them: They that be whole, haue 15 a nede

XX].
. one . oe the nexte townes, that J may preache 4; And alter he had geuen hym a strayte

‘PRetioipel yt a

. enc of fhephiition, bit they that are out, and the vellels Wao

marred: f cane not to call the righteous, N must be put into newe bet
23 And it came to passe, that he went tha We rowe the come ielDesonthe Sabo .
Daves, and his dilnpies began by ß way to Ap the pp rien a
24. And the pharisees sayde vntohym:
Weholde, why do they on the Babbel 2

bed Hpi 175 sto repentaunte which but sinners to 12 bal g And the diltiples of John, e the Pha-

risees dyd fast. And jamie and fay

vnto him: Why do ö dilciples of John,

and of the Pharisees fast, but thy disti-

ples fast not:

And Jelus sayde vnto them: Can the chyldren ok the brydechaumder kast, wWhyle the brydegrome is with them:
As long as they haue the brydegrome with them, they tan not fast. 2

20 But the dayes Wyll tonte, when the brydegroͤme sthalbe taken awape from them, and then shall they fast in thole

dayes. 1
D No man alsd soweth a peece of newe cloth, vnto an olde garment: other:

wapes, his newe peece taketh awaye

from the olde, and so the rent is made
Worse. N 5 om
22 And no nian powreth newe wine into olde vessels: els the neve wine doth burst the vessels, and the wine runneth

dapes, that which is not lawfull-

25 And he sayde vnto them: Paue ve nener read what Daud did whenhehad nede, and was an hungred, both he, and they that were with hym- ad
26 “Howe he went into the Houle of Gon Reg! lin the dayes Of Abiathar the hye prieste,

aͤnd dpd eate the shewe bread, which is

not lawfull to cate, but for the pricttes an gaue also to them which were with hynie er 2

27 And he sapde vnto them: The Sabboth was made for man, aud not man

for the Sabbath,

28 Therlore is the sonne ofman, Lone alvokthe Sabboth. a

The. ij. Chapter.

1 he helpeth the man with the drped hande, 14 choleth his Spotties,
22 and casteth out the vncleane spirite, whiche the pharisees afcribe vnto the deupll. 35 Che brother, litter, and mother ok Christe.

A1

e nagoguc, ra man
„was there whiche
Had a wpchered

Qibandes

Math.xii.a. uk. vi. a.

ed hym, whether he Woulde heale

hym on the Habboth vaye, that they

myght accuse hym.

3 And he lame vnto the man which had the wythered hande: Arple, (and lande] in the myddes.

4 And he saide vnto them: Js it lawful toe ne
2 pke, or to kpll: But tl

helde their peace. 12 ae

5 And When he had loked rounde a

bout on chem with anger mournyng

fo2 the hardnelse of their heartes he
Dash sayth to the man: stretch booth thyne r 1 W —4— it out:? And restored, euen U as the other. 2» ae om"

Maxib¢ And the pharistes departed, and

And they watch-

strapghtway gathered a councell, with the Herodians, agaynst hym, that they niyght destroy hynt. a

7 Wut Jesus auopded, with his dlc, 1 pie to the sea: And a great multitude ue
Sie hym from Galilee, and from

urie, .

3 And krom Hierufatem, € from Pow ,, nn mea, and from beyonde Jordane, and Luc they that dwelled about pee c Sidon, üs a great muiltitude (of men:) naHIch, Whe they had hearde what thynges he dyd, tanie vnto hyunm.

And Fetus cõmaunded his dilciples, 25 that a shippe shoulde wapte on hym betause of the people, leste they shoulde

thronge hyunn. 21

Yo 15 had healed many: insomuche.

that they prealled vpon him for to touch hm, as man as had plagues.

1 And when the vncleane spirites n hym, they fell downe before hym, aof trped, laping: Thon art the sonne o

GDS.

u And he flraytety charged then, that

they choulde not make hem now

by yaint Marke.

z And he went bp into a mountayne, k called vnto him whom he woulde: and they tame vnto hym.

14 And he ordeyned twelue, that they

. shoulde be with him, and that he might

wns
X

sende them foorth to preache, j And that they myght haue power to heale sicknesses, and to cat out deuyls.
16 And he gaue vnto Sinion to name,

eter.
17 And he called James the tonne ol Zebedee, and John, James brother (and

gaue them to name wWoanarges, which

is to say, the sonnes of thunder.)

13 And Andrewe, and Philip, and Wartholomewe, and Matthewe, and Thomas, and James the sonne ok Alphee, and Thaddeus, and Simon Cananite,

9 And Judas Pleariot, which also betrayed hyni. And they came into the

ouse:

20 And the people allenrbled together az gayne, fo that they had no leylure fo much as to cate bread.

a And when ep that belonged vnto

hyni,hearde of it, they Went out tolape handes vpon hyni: Foz they sayde, he is

madde. 8

» And the scribes whiche tame downe fron Hierusalem, sapde: He bath Weel-

Hed zebub, and by the chiefe deuvll, casteth uh he out deupls.
3 And he called them vnto hym x sapde

vnto them in parables; Hove can Safan driue dut Satan:
4 And pfa realme be deuided agaynst it

selfe, that realme tan not endure.
25. And pfa Houle be deudded agaynst it selfe, that house tan not continue.

26 And pf Satan make insurrection a

gavnst him selfe € be deuided, he can not continue, but hach an ende.

27 No man can enter into a strong mans

Youle and take away his goodes except he first bynde the strong man, and then spoyle his house. ;

28 Uerply J fay vnto pou, al sinnes that: be forgeuen vnto the chyldren ol men, e blasphenues wherewith fo euer they haue blasphemed:

29 But he that speaketh blasphemie az Math. ii e. gapnst the holp ghoste, hath neuer fo Tk

geuenesse, but is in daunger of eternal dampnation.
30 at they sayde: he hath an vncleane rite.

l
31 There tame also his mother, and his uch ai d. brethren, and stoode without, and {ent Luk vin

vnto hym, to call hym out.

32 And the people fate about him, x laide vnto hyn: Beholde, thy mother and thy brethren seke for thee without.

33 And he aunlwered them saying: who is my mother, and my brethren-

34 And when he had loked rounde about on his diltiples, which late in compasse about bpm, he sayde: Weholde my mother, and my brethren.

35 For Wholdeucr doeth the wyl of God, the same is my brother, and my fitter, and mother.

E. The. iiij. Chapter.

@ 2 Che parable of the cower. 37 Christe slylleth the eft of the lea, which obeyed hym. e

pie,

doctrine.

Pearken: Beholde,- there went out a 8 And some fell vpon good is

M he began agaapne to teache by the sea syde: And ther gathered buto bya much peo-

o greatly, that he entred into a hippe, and fate.

f in the sea: and all ee was by the sea syde on the

And he taught them many thinges by parables, and sayde vnto then in his

sower to sowe: .

And it fortuned as he lowed, that some fell by the way syde, aud the fowles ol the ayre tame, and deuoured it vs.

5 Sonic fell 00 grounde, Where it had not muche darch: andinunediatly

ea bp, becaule it had not deaptl of ca + *

6 But assdone as the forme was vp, it caught heate: and because it hadde not roote, it wythered away.

7 And lome kell among thornes: and the thornes grewe bp, and choked it, and it aue no fruite 1 a

XXII].

dyd peloe fruite, that sprang bp, and
8 and brought foorth, sonie thirtie folde, and fome fictie folde, and sonie an undred folde.
9 9210 he saide vnto them: He that hath cares to heare, let hym heart. fo. And when he Was alone, they that were Bh ge bm, 19 the twelue, alked of hym the parable. N aach ab II And he layde vnto them: To pouit
Lal enb. is geuen to knowe the nusterie of the kingdome of God: But vnto theni that are without, all thynges are done by parables,
2 That when they lee, they may {ce and notdifcerne: and whẽ they heare, they

Ain ab. Map heare and not bnderstande, lest at

Mat. ill. b.
Luk. vin. b.
Ka df Lines shoulde be forgeuen them.

Rom. xb. 13 And he sayde bnto then: Knowe pe not this parable- And howe then wpll

ve kuowe all other parables:

Math. xiic IA The lower, soweth the worde.

Luk. vii. b. 15 And theyl that rereaued teede by the way fide are thofe where the worde is sowẽ: but When they haue hearde, Satan cõmeth inunediatly, and taketh away the
Wo2d that was sowen in their heartes.

16 And lykewyse they that receaue seede into the stonie grounde, are they, which when they haue hearde the Worde, at once reteaue it with gladnesse.

17 Het haue no roote in them selues, and so endure but a tyme: and anone when trouble and perlecution arpseth for the wordes sake, immediatlpe they are of: fended.

18 And those be they that reteaue seede among thornes: and those Glare) are
{uch as heare the worde,

19 And the cares of this worlde, and the

deceytfulnesse of ryches, and the lustes of other thynges enter in, and choke the
_ WOE, and it is made vnkrultefull.
20 And they whiche receaue seede into good grounde, are suche as heare the
Worde, and receaue it, so that one torne
Doth bryng foorth thirtie, fome sixtie, sonie an hundred. g
Matha. 21 Aud he {aide vnto them : Is the can:
Fukvine Dlelpghted to be put vnder a buschell, or g vnder the table? And not to be put ona hre ach ac. 2% Jo there is nothing fo priule that that n not be opened: neither hath it ben oe adoaia Crete, but that it (yall come abrode.
23 Ik any man haue cares to heare, let

The Gospell

any tyme, they shoulde turne, and their

35 And the same dap, when euen was

n

24. And he sapde vnto them, tak

what ye heave: “natth What mealrrde n meate, With the lame chall it be mealu- Le red fo pouagapne. And vnto pou that
1 het we mere

25 Jo? "onto Hynt that Hath, tha Math z geuen: and from hym that ee he 1 ars taken awap, euen that Which ye uten

26 And he layde, so is thekyngdome of
God: cuen as *pf a man tho

seede in the me A chaulde sowe set

27 And shoulde flepe, and ryse vp nyght and dab and the leede shoulde spryng x grobe bp, he knoweth not howe,

28 Foz the earth bringeth foorth fruite of her selfe, first the blade, then the care, after that, the full torne in the care.

29 But when the fruite is brought foorth, anone he thrusteth in the lickle, vecaule the haruest is come.

30 And he sayde: Where vnto shall we lyken the kyngdome of God : Or with
What tomparpson Mall we compare it-

31 It is like a grayne of mustarde seede, rag whiche when it is sowen in the earth, Lud
8 1 then all seedes that be in the earth.

32 When it is sowen, it groweth vp, and is greater then all hearbes, and beareth great braunches, so that the fowles of the ayre may make their nestes vnder the shadoweofit.

33 And with many {uch parables prea- ure ched he the worde vnto them, as they were able to heare it.

34 But withont parable spake he nothing vnto them. But when they were alone,

: e expounded all thynges to his DITA? ane ples,

come, he faide vnto them: Let bs pafle duer vnto the other syde. 5

36 And they left the people, and toke hint, euen as he was in the shippe. And there were allo with him, other litte 5 shlwpes. f Nh

37 And there arose a great stormie ol ic

wynde, and the wanes dasshed into the shippe, fo that it was nowe full.

33 And he was in the sterne a slepe ona elowe. And they awaked hyn, 7 poe vnto hym A Maister, cavett the

not that we perpshe- ö

39 And he arole, and rebuked the weil,

and fade vnto the sea, peate and be And N

| by Saint

And the wynde teassed, there folowed

a great calme. go. And he layde vnto them: why are ve fo feavefulls Howe is it, that ye haue no

i

lar Ke. fayth:

41. And they feared erteadyngly, and

layde one to another: Who is this: Fo both wynde and anbep hem. 9

he. v. Chapter.

@s awrite delpuereth the pollelsed from the vncleane Cyirite, 25 the woman from the blooddp illue, 41 and rapleth the captapnes daughter.

M they came ouer to the other syde of the fea, into the countrep

And when he was g tonie out of the shippe oth imniediatlp there m hym from among the tombes, a man pollessedj of an vntleane spirite:

Which had his abidyng among the tombes: And no nian toulde bynde him, no not with cheynes,

4 Betaule, that when he was often bounde with fetters and cheynes, he plucked the theynes a funder, and brake the fetters in peeces: either toulde anp man tame hym. N

And alwapes, nyght and day, he was inthe mountaynes, and in the tombes, trying, and beatyng hym {elfe with

ones.

But when he had fied Pelus a farre ol, he ranne, and worlhypped hymn,

7 And tried with a loude vopte, x layde: a, “What haue JJ to do with thee Jelus thou fonne ofthe most hyest Gods Jre-

. quire thee in the nanie of God, that thoutornient ine not.

g FJor he sayde vnto hym: tome out of the man thou foule spirite.)

And he alked hym, what is thy name-
And he aunlwered and fayd vnto hym: my nanie is legion, for we are many.

lo And he prayed hym instantly, that he woulde not lende them away, out of the tountrev. g

1 But there was there, nye vnto the

5 e e of swyne id. pug. .

E And all the deuyls befought hym, laying: sende vs into the [wyne, that
We may enter into them.

B And anone Jesus gauc them leaue.
And the vncle ane spirites went out, and entred into the lwyne: And the hearde ran headlong into the fea; (they were about two thoulande, ¢ were drowned

in the sea.

14. And the swyneheardes fled, and tolde it in the citic, and in the tountrey. And they went out for to see what was done:

15 And came to Jesus, and sawe hym

that was vexed With the kiende, and

had the legion, syt, both tlothed, and in his right nynde: they were afraide.

16 And they that sawe it, tolde them,

howe it tame to passe to hym that was possessed with

the lwyne.

the deupll: and also ok

XXIII 1

17 And they beganne to pray hym that Luk. viii. e.

he woulde depart out of their toastes.

13 And when he was come into the Mech. vii.

shippe, he that had (ben poslessed; with the deupll, prayed hyn, that he myght be with by. a

19 Hobebeit, Jesus woulde not suffer hym, but sayde vnto hym: go houie to thy krendes, and shewe them howe great thynges the Lorde hath done for
1 and howe he had tompassion on

hee.

20 And he Departed, and begamie to publyshe in the ten cities, howe great thynges Hels had done kor hyn: and all men dyd maruaple.

21 And when Jesus Was conse ouer

agayne by chippe, bute the other syde, much people gathered vnto hym, and he was nye vnto the lea,

22 And beholde, there came one ofthe rande

rulers of the fynagogue, whole name was Jairus: and when he lawe hym, he fell downe at his feete,

23 And befought hym greatly, saying: my young Daughter lieth at popnt of death, (J pray thee) come and lay thy hande on her, that che map be safe, and

lyue.
24. And he went with hym, and much people folowed him, and thronged him.

VIII. k.

25 And there Was a certäpne woman, dcn

which had ben disealed of an ilsue of blood twelue peres,

26 And had sucfred many thynges, of many

Mat.xiiig. 3

he Golpell

isitions, aud had {pent all that
1 and keit notte aniendemet at all, but rather the Worle,

2 When she had hearde of Jelus, the came in 15 prease e vm, and touched his garment.

28 455 she sayde: yl J may but touche his tlothes, I shalbe whole.

29 Aud strapghtway the fountayne of her biood was dryed vp: € she felt in her body, that fhe was healed of plague,

30 And hym lelke, that vertue proccaded from hym, turned hym about in the preale, and sayde: who touched my clothes:

31 And his dilciples savde vnto ori:
Mou seest the people thrust thee, x alkest thou, who dyd touche me- a

32. And he loked rounde about, for to see her that had done this thyng.

3; But the woman, kearpuge tremblyng, knowpng what was donc Within her, tanie, and fell downe before hym, and

tolde hym all the trueth.

34. And he fayde vnto her: Daughter thy fapth bath saued thee, go in peace, and be whole of thy plague,

35 Whyle he yet spake, there tame from the ruler ot the fpnagogues (boule), certapne, which fayde : thy daughter is
Dead, why dilealest thou the maister any

esus immediatly, knowyng in

Mafoone as Jeg pen,
36 done as Jelsus hearde the that was spoken, he layde thee che A

ler of the fynagogue, be ape omp beleue. ee me

37, And he lutkred no man to folowe him

sane Peter, and James, any . brother of Jams. WWuthe

38 And he came to the Houle of the Math; of the synagogue, and fare one La

and them that wept e wayled

39 And went in, and fayne inte ther:
Why make ye this a doe, and Wepes the daimsell is not dead, but slepeth.

40 And they laught hym to storne: Wut he put them all out, and taketh the fa: ther and the mother of the damell, and them that were with bpm, and entreth in where the damsell lape,

4 And taketh the damlell by the hande, and fayth vnto her. Talichacumi, Which

is, yk one do interprete it, damisell (J fay

vnto thec) arpse.

42 And strapghtway the damsell arole, and walked: For she was of the age of twelue peres. And they were astonyed

dut of measure.

43 Ind he charged them straytlp, that no man shoulde knowe of it: and com maunded to geue her meate.

¢ The. Yj Chapter.

Ol chustes doynges and eslimation in his owne countrey, he lendeth koorth his A pollles, ij diuers opinions of Christe, 25 ho we Herode beheaded John Bapkite, 38 of the miracle of tyue loaues and two filles, 48 Christe walketh vpon the lea, 55 and Heated them that touched hym. N

1 . d he departed
5 ek) AG thence, e tanie in-
08 10 to his owne coun:

\ A AN) trey, and bis dilci-

| 8 ples folowed hint,

2 37h And when the
= appoth day was
— come, he beganne

d teache in the spnagogue: And manp that hearde hyn,
Were astonped, and fayde: from Whence
Hath he these thynges : And What wit: done is this that is geuen vnto hymand such myghtie Workes that are wrought by his handesz

Is not this the carpenter Maries forte, che bother of Hames c Soles, aud Of Juda and Sumon: and are not

his fitters here with vs: And they were
Offended at hym.

4 Jesus sapde onto them, that a pin nie<is phete is not without honour, but in his bia,

diwne countrep, and among his owne kynne, and in his owne house.
5 And he coulde there Mere no nughtie worke: but iapde his handes vpon a fewe sicke folke, and Heated them.

6 Aud he maruepled, betaule of

bubelicfe, ) * And he Went about by z

the townes that lay on euery sde, tea va

chyng.
7 And he called thetwelie and began to sende them foorth, two and me i gaue thẽ power oucr vnclcane aich
8 And tommauuded them, n shoulde take nothyng in their lol

(a) 0 coe saue a staffe Monty: no scrippe, no bread, and gaue hym rtuerence: and ü a u money intheir purse. hearde hyn he dyd many chyuges, an e e barde hym gladip. 1

ony 21 And WHE a conuentent day was come

— Ader wihe lane he daye made a Cott

i Wes, hye capta cdhiese estates of Galle. E
2 And when the daughter of the lame

Herodias came in, and daunted, and

pleated Herode, and them that fate at boorde also, the kyng faid vnto the damfelt: Alke of me what thou wylt, and J

i 7 „ = ee
— — ; And he ware vnto her: hatsoeuer nau e —— ENN. thou shalt alke of me, J wyll geue it

But shoulde be shoed With : pee mer bata th ean’ dae

coates, 24 And she went foortl, e sayde vnto her
10 And he layde vnto them: Whersoener mother: what shall alke: She lade,

ye enter into an Houle, there abyde tyll John Baptistes head. pe departthence. 25 And she tame in strayghtwaye, with bab l And whosdeuer shall not reteaue pou halte, vnto the kyng, and asked, saying: non heare pou, when pe depart thence, J wyll, that thou geue me by and by in

shake ot the dust that is vnder your feet, à charger, the head ok John Waptist.

% fa witnesse vnto them: IJ ay veryly 26 And the kyng was sory, howebeit, foz
Vnto vou, it halbe easyer fo? the Sodo- his othes sake, c lor their fakes whiche mites and the Gomortheans in the dax late at supper also, he woulde not caste

okldgement, then for that citie. her oft. n Aud they went out, e preached, that 27 And immediatlye the kyng lent the e men should repent, hangman, and commiaunded his head

3; And they calt out many deupls, and bo be brought in: And he went, and beannoynted many that were sicke, with headed hym in the prplon,
, Obl, and healed them. 28 And brought his head in a charger, € ix. 14. And king Herode hearde (of ym} fo: gaue it to the damsell, and the damsell his name Was spread abrode: And he Raue it to her mother. layde, John Waͤptist is ryfen agayne 29 And when his disciples hearde ofit, from the dead, and therefore myghtie they tame, and toke vp his body, and
— Workesdo shewe foorth them selues in laped it in à tombe, hyim. ‘ 30 And the Apostles gathered themselues
Cy Other salde it is Elias. Some lade, it together vnto Jesus, and tolde hym al ls a prophete, or as one ot the prophetes. thynges, both what they had dane, and
16 But when herode hearde ofhym, he what they had taught. ae lalde: It is John, whom J beheaded, zi And he layde vnto them: *Coure pe ae Pei he is rylen from death agapne. lone out of the way, into p wyldernesse, oha. a.
17 ‘SF02 Hevode hinselfe had sent foorth, and rest awhyle: For there were mau ud layde handes vpon John, e bounde commers and goers, and they had no hynt in prylon, for Herodias fake, his leylure, so much as to cate. brother Philippes wyfe, becaule he had 3 And he wet by chippe out of the way, mac ah. e marped her. into a desert place. itl? Nor John layde vnto Herode: It is zz And the people spped them, when they not lawful for thee to haue thy brothers departed, and many knewe hym, and
2 ’ ranne a foote thyther, ont ofall cities, s᷑ v Therefore erodias lapde wapte fo: came thyther befoze them, and came tos hym, and woulde haue kylled hynn: but gether vnto hym. she coulde not. 34. And Jesus went out, and sawe muh
20 For Perode feared John, knowyng people, and had compaffion on them aide, that he was a iuste man and an holye, becaule they were lyke 575 n a

Mat.xtii.b
Lukax.b.
John.vi.a.

Mar.vina.

Mat.xiiii.c,

Iolun. vi. b.

A
RIuth. x v.a.

& ok his di

ache them mauy thynges. tr. when the day Was nowe farre spent, his dilciples tcune vnto Hput, saping: This is à desert place, E nowe the tyme is karre passed:
36 Let them Departe, that they may go into the countrey rounde about, and into the townes, and bye thembread: for they haue nothyng to cate.

37 He aunlwered and fayde vnto them:

geut ye them to cate, And they saide vnto him: Shall we go and bye two hun-

dred peupworth of bread, & geuc them to cate- F

38 He fayde vnto them: Howe manp loaues haue vc, go loke- And when they had searched, they sayde, fyut, and two filches. * 5 ö

39 And he connnaunded them, to make then all sit dome by conpanies vpon the greent grasse.

40 And they late do wne, here a rowe, and there a rowe, by hundredes, c by fifties.

41 And when he had take the fine loanes and the two fisshes, and loked vp to heauen, he blessed, and brake the loaues, € gaue them to his diftipies to fet before

them: and the two filthes deuided he ae mong them all.

42 And they all did eate, x were fatiffied,

43 And they toke vp tweluc bafkets full, of the fragmentes, ¢ of the filches.

44 And they that dyd cate, were about spue thonsande men.

45 And straightwapy, he constrayned his

Mat.xiin.c.

‘piitiples to go into the shippe, and to go oucr the fea before, vnto Wethlaida, whyle he sent away the people.

46 And alloone as he had leut them a-

‘The Gol pell

uyug a sheepheard: Aud he began to

a he departed into a mountapne to pr 5 0 5
% And when euen was come, the n was in the mpboes of the sea and 15 lone omtije lane, f be lea, ant hel
48. And he lawe them tronbled in romyng (for the wynde was contrarp bath

them:) And about the fourth watche of

the nyght. he came vnto them, walkt ea fea, and woulde baun paliel

49 But when they lawe hym walnyn bpon the sea, they supposed it had bena spirite, and tryed out.

50 For they all {awe him, e were akraide.
And anone he talked with them, x lade vnto them: Be of good cheare, it is J,

be not afrayde.

51 And he went vp vnto them into the G shippe, and the wyndt tealled, and they bia a

Were sore amased in themselues beyond measure, and maruepled. .

52 Foz they vnderstoode not (the miracle] of the loaues, because their heart was
Hardened,

55 And when they had passed ouer, they

tame into the lande of Genezareth, and

drewe vp into the hauen.

$4 And assdone as they were tome out ot the shippe, straightway they knew him,

55 And rammte koorth throughout all the region rounde about, € began to carry about in beddes those that were ficke, thither, where they heard that he was.

56 And whethersocuer he entred, into townes, cities, or villages, they layde the sicke folkes in the streates, c prayed him that they myght touche and it Were but the hemme of his garment: And as nia - ny as touched it, were made whole.

$a The. vij. Chapter.

¶ 2 The pharitees fynde fault at the dilciples eatyng of meate with vn walshen
* handes. s The commaundement of God is transgressed by mans traditions.

2 Meate delileth not a man: but that which commech from

hym. 24 Ol the

woman of Sprophenissa. 32 The healyng of the deale and dumbe.

MN D the pharifees came together vnto hym, € ter-

N

I tanie from Hierusalem.

And WHE they sawe some

stiples cate bread with common

that is to fay, with onwathen) hands they kounde fault.

3 Jorthe pharisees and all the Jewes, except they wallhe their handes oft, eate

<a tapne of the scribes which

not, obseruing the traditions of ß elders.

4 And (when ehey come) from the market, except they wasshe, they cate not. And many other things there be, which el haue taken vpon them to obferuc f 5 the walchyng of cuppes and pottes, an brasen vessels, and oftables.

Then alned hym the pharisees and 5

scribes: hy walne not thy dilceples aC

cordyng to the traditi okthe elders 18

—~ cate bread With vnwalchen handes-

He aunswered, and sayde vnto them, that Elaias bath prophesied well of pon hypotrites, AS it is wutten: This peopie honoreth me with their lippes, but their heart is farre from me.
Holbebeit, in vayne do they worchip me, teachyng doctrines, the tommaunndementes of men.

ib
. xv. .

Aud grate other such like thinges ye do.
9 And hela

CA. And when he had called all the people vnto hyin, he tarde vnto them: Hearken bus me, euery one of pou, and vnderstande. f ab 5 There is nothyng without a man, that tan delple hym, When it entreth into hym: But the thynges whiche proteade out of a man, thole are they that
Defple the man.
16 Ik any nian haue cares to heare, let
Hynt heare.
17 And when he came into the houte, a-
Way kron the people, his distiples asked hym of the sinulitude. '

3 And he layde vnto hem: Are ye allo so without vnderstandyng ? Do pe not vet perceaue, that whatsoener thing frõ without, entreth into a man, it can not dekyle hym, ;

9 Wecaule it entreth not into his heart, but into the belly, and goeth out into the daaught, huren all meates-

20 And he fayde: That which conmieth dut ot a man, defpleth the man.
* F02 from within, euen out ok the heart or men, proceade eupll thoughtes, adulkerle, fornitation, murther,
Thekt couctousnes, wickedues deteit,
Wantonnes, a wicked epe, blasphennes,

ATISG,

g FJor ye laye the commaundement of

XXVI. pride, foolyshnes. * —

2 All thele cuyl thynges come frd with: in, aud Defple a mau.

24 And from thence he role, and went Mer<ro

into the borders of Tyre and Sinan, € entred into an Houle, and woulde that no man shoulde haue knowen: but he couide not be hyd.

25 Foa certapne woman, whofe pong daughter hadde an vucleane spirite, alsoone as she hearde of hym, came, r fell at his feete.

26 The woman was a Grcke, out of the nation of Syrophenissa:æ she besought hym, that he woulde cast out the denyit from her daughter. 5

27 But Jesus saide vnto her, let the chi: dren first be kedde: For it is not nicete to take the chyldrens bread, and to caste it vnto litle dogges. 5

28 She aunlwered, and faide vnto hym, .. euen so Lorde: neuerthelesse, the litle dogges also cate vnder the table, of the chyldrens trunibes.

29 And he sayde vnto her: Foz this saying, go thy way, the deuyll is gone out ol thy daughter.

30 And when she was cone honie to her
Houle, she founde that the deuyll was i her daughter lying on the

edde.

zi And he departed agayne from the eve coattes of Tyre and Sidon, x came vr to the sca of Galilee through the nuddes of the coattes of the ten cities.

3 And they brought vnto hym one that Math. ix.

Was deafe, and had an impediment in his speache: and they prayed hin to put his hande vpon hyn.

33 And when he had taken hym aspde from the people, he put his fyngers into his eares, and dyd spyt, and touched his tongue,

34. And loked vp to heauen, and faved, and sayde vnto hin; Ephphatha, that is to fay, be opened.

35 And straightway his cares were opened, and the stryng of his tongue was loosed, and he spake playne. a

36 And he tommaunded them, that they diane shoulde tell no man: Wut the more bee forbad then, fo much the ntoze a great deale they published it.

37 And were beponde mealure astonped, saying: He hath done all thynges Well, he hath sa? poy 15 Deate to heare, aud the dumbe to speake. 4

se Dj; The

Mat h. v. E.

TheGolpel vacle of thefetten loaues. 1 Che pharifees atkeatigne. u Che teuen
0 of the phaviters. 4 Che blinde teceaueth his tight. 2 Peter conkelleth Chrite,
3 and is rebuked of Christe. 34 Howe we would folo we Chrilke, 35 lole our lpte,
35 and not be achamed of the Golpell.

=F those dapes, when

there was a very great
Ascompanp, and had nosthyng to eate, Jesus talled his distiples to him x saide vnto them:

2 a haue compaflio on the people, becaufe they haue nowe ben
With me three dayes, and haue nothyng to eate:

3 And pk J sende them away fastyng to their owñe hoults, they chall faynt by the wap: for diners of them came fro farre. 5

4 And his difeiples aunswered hym:
From Whente can a man fatlfie hele men with bread here in thewildernelsse-

And he alked the: Howe mam loaues haue ye: They layde, seuen. |

6 Andhecommaunded the people to fit downe du the grounde: And he toke the seuen loaues, and when he had geuen thankes, he brake, and gaue to his diltiples, to set before theni: And they dyd
{et them before the people.

And they hadde a fewe final fplches:
And when he had blessed, he commaunded theim allo to be fet before them.

3 Sothepdpd cate, and were suffiled:
And they toke vp of the broken nieate that Was left, scuen valkettes full.

And they that had eaten, Were about foure thouland: And he sent the away.

10 And auonc he entred into a shppe,

With his distiples, and came into the

parties of Dalmanutha.

And the Pharisees tame foorth, and began to dilpute with hym, sckyng ot hinia signe from heauen, tenpting him.
1 And when he had sighed depelp in his

spirite, he sapth: vohy doth this genera-

. tiõ seke a signe; Aeryly F fay vnto pon,

Sec ans there shall no figne be geuẽ vnto this
Wan de generation.

mercer]; And he lekte them, and went into the

regten. (hip agapne,¢ departed duer the water.

14. And they had forgotten to take bread

(with them) neither had they in the ship

— Mahsvib With them moze then one loafe.

Luksra. 19 And he charged thé, saping: 5 Take

heede, veware of the leuen of the pharifees, and of the leuen of herode. N

Win rad. 1 | OG

mith
Se!

fay. ix. a.
Toby. xi. b

Math. xvia 11
Lukc. xl. d. lohn. vi. d.

16 And they reasoned among them si fying er ha nb bata e,

17 And Jesus knewe it, and sayth onto them: Why reason ye, because pe haue no bread : Perteaue ve not pet, neither vnderstande : aue ve pour heart pet hardened:

18 Haue pecpes,andfee not z and haue ye

cares & htare not: Do pe not remember

2 an brake fyue loaues aniong Mm; fpue thousande men, howe many: bak kettes full of broken meate toke pe vp-

They fay vnto hym, twelue.

20 When J bake scuen among foure 4 thoufande, howe many balkettes of the leauynges of the broken meate toke pe vp: They sayde, seuen.

a And he sayde vnto them: Howe happeneth it, that ve do not vnderstande-
22 , And he tame to wWethfarda, & they bought a blpnde man vnto hym, and defired hym to touche hym. 8

23 And he taught the blinde by the hand, and led him dut of the towne: and whe he had spyt in his eyes, e put his handes vpon him he alked him it he saw ought.

24 And he loked vp, e aide, J fee men: for
Iperteiue the walke as ther were) trees.

25 Alter that, he put his handes agayne vpon his eyes, c made hym lee: And he was restored, x saw euerp man ciearely.

26 And he sent hym home to his Houle, saping: neither go into the towne, no: tell it to any in the towne. -

27 And Jesus went out, ¢ his dilcipies, into the townes that long to Celared
Philippi: And by the way he alked jis dilciples, faying vnto them: whom do men say that J ame fe

28 And they atnfipered: (Some fare th thou art) John Waptist, and some faye,
Citas, : gam, some fave that thou art one of the prophetes.

29 And he laͤpde vnto them: But whom fay ye that J am: Peter annfiee 9 Matis laith vnto Hun: Thou art very Chu D oe

30 Andhe charged them, that they Hou” tell no man of hyn. snore Wie

And he began to teache chem, ben fas

that the sonne or man mutt {utter 5

thynges k be reproued of the elbe i

of the hie priestes, x lcribes and be h

Math xe
Luk. ix¢

— by saint Marke.

XXVII.

aud after three dayes, aryse agayne.
And he spake that laying openly: And
Peter toke hym alydt, and began to rebube byt, )
But he turned about, and loked on his diltiples, and rebuked Peter, laping, go alter me Sata: for thou sauerest not che thinges that be ol God, but the thinges that be of men.
434 And when he had called the people

i. d. 3
[phx . aN. vu f.

let hym forsake hym selke, and take vp his crosle, and folowe me.

35 Foz wholocuer wyll laue his life, call

prio hym, with) his disciples allo, he said gute then: Whosdeuer wyll folow me,

lose it: But whosoener Mali tofe his life, for my fake e the Gospels, the same chall

saue it. .

36. For what shall it prolite a man, yf he |

wynne all the worlde, and lofe his owne foute z

37, Oz what shall a man geue, fora raun-

some of his soule-

38 Whosdeuer therfore shalbe ashamed N bol me, and ol mr in this adulte-Lak an. b.

rous and synnefull generation: of hym alld shall the forme of man be achamed, when he commeth in the glorte ok his faz ther, with the holy Angels.

¢ The. ix. Chapter.

¶ 2 Che tranttiguration of Christe. j Elias is come, 26 A dumbe spirite ig cat out. c hy the dilciples coulde not cast it out. 3 Che disciples contende for

MD he fade vnto
\) Se iichem : Uerylp J i ») fay vnto pou, ther be some of them that stande here,
| Whiche shall not

tate of death tyll they haue seene p kyngdome ol God

come, with power.

bni,2 Ad after sixe dayes, Fetus taketh

„ Peter, and James, and John, and lea-

deth them bp into an Hye mountapne,

gut of the way, alone: and he was tran’ figured besore them.

3 And his raynient dpd shyne, c became very Whyte, euen as snowe: fo Whyte, dg no fuller tan make vpon the earth.

4 AIndthere appeared vnto them Elias,
Jet Mopses: And they talked With

elu.

Jesu: Mailter, here is good beyng for

one for thee, and one for Mopses, and one for Elias.

were akrapde.
7 And there was a cloude that chadowhig ed them: and a vopte canie out of the vit, Conde, saping, This is my beloued
& sonne, heare hym. ;
And sodenly, when they had loked rounde about, they sawe no man, more dei then Jelus only, with then.
L Andas they came done from the

Nl,

And peter aunfwered, and sapth to bs, let vs make also three tabernacles,

6 For he wist not what he saide, for they

superioritie. 33 One casteth out deuyls that kolowed not Christes dilciples.
4 Oe the offences of bande, koote, orepe. 4 Ok seasonyng with fale.

hyll, he charged them, that they should tell no manthose thynges that they had seene, tyll the fonne of man were rysen fromthe dead agayne. *

lo And they kept that saying with then,

and demaunded one of another, What

therpyling from the dead agame, should

II

meane-

And they alked hymn, laying: Why then fay the scribes that Elias must first 23 tome:

121 Me aunswered, and sayde vnto them:

Elias derply when he commeth firste, mata ip: restoreth all thynges: And the sonne ol man, as it is witten of hym, Mall suk- Ray fer many thynges, x be set at naught.
But JJ {ape vnto vou, that Elias is tonie, t they haue done vnto him whatsoeuer they would, as it is writtẽ of him.
And when he came to his disciples, he sawe much people about them, and the scribes disputyng with them. .
And straͤyghtway an the people, WHE they behelde hym, were amased, k ran to hyn, and saluted hym.

16 And he asked the {tribes what dispute C

ye with them-

17 And one of the compante aunsiwe- mac.xvii.«.

red, E sayde: Maister, J haue brought Tk ce. vnto thee my fonne, whiche hath a dumbe spirite:

18 And Whensocuer he taketh by, he

teareth hyin, c he fourcth, aud gnalh-

eth with his teeth, e pineth away: and

Ispake to thy disciples, that theyshould cat hym out, and they coulde not.
-— Diy He

aunswereth hym, aud sapth: O fepeiiette nation, howe long shall I be with yous how long shall FZ suffer port:

gryng hym orto nie.

20 Cty brought hun vnto him: And when he lawe hym, Ey eS i the

spirite fave hym: And he fell downeon

the grounde, wallowyng and kompng.

And he alketh his father, howe lange it is ago fence this came vnto hym: And he sayde, of a chylde.

Aud oft tynics it hath tast hym to. the fire, and into the water, to destroye hym: But yr thon canst do any thong, haue merty on vs, and helpe bs.

23 Jesus sayde vnto hym: this thyng yf tijou tanst beleue, all thynges are poflibic to hym that beleueth.

24 And strapghtwaye the father of the chide tryed With teares, saying: Lorde
HJ beleuc, helpe thou mine vnbelieke.

D 25 When Jelus fave that the peopte

came rumyng together, he rebuked the ldule spirite, faying vnto bym: Thou dumibt and deake spirite, J charge thee tome out of hym, and enter no moze into hym.

26 And the spirite, when he had tryed and rent him sore, came out of hym: and

E

Matxviid

he was as one that had ben dead, inso-

4 much that many sayde, he is dead.
27 Wut Jesus caught hym by the bande, and lyft hum vp: and he role.

28 And Wiehe was come into the honse, his disciples alked hym secretelp: Why toulde not we cast hym out:

29 And he {aide vnto them: This kynde can conic foorth by nothing, but by praper and fastyng. 2

E 30 And they departed thence, and toke

Mat. xvü. d.

their iorney thorowe Galilee : and he

would not p any man should knowe it.
31 For he taught his disciples, and sayde

Mat. xvl.c.
Luk. . c.

Delinered into the handes of men, x they shall kyll him: and, after that he is kyle led, he shall ryse agayne the thirde day.

32 Wut they vnderstoode not that saping, and were afrayde to alke hym.

And he came fo Capernaum: And when he was come into the house, he alked then, hat Wag it that ve diputed amoung pour selues by the Way:

34. And they helde their peace: For by the
Wap, they had reasoned among them selues, who shoulde be the chicfett,

35 And when he was let downe, he cate

vnto them: The fonne of man, halbe

* The Golpell *

led the twelue fo bym, and fa 7

them: Ik aup man defire to be 5 samne fhalbe last of al,¢ feruatit vnto al |
36 And he toke a poung chüde, get hm K apa iad 0 oe and When he Lat xvi had taken hym in his armes, F
1 0 at 0 be faybe
37 Whosocuer reteaueth any such a chylde in my name, earth ner ng
Whosoeuer receaneth me, reteaueth not me, but hym that fent mic.
38 c John aunswered him, saying: War: ster, we lawe one caste out deuylles in thy name, e he folowech not vs: and we forbad him, becaufe he foloweth vs not.
39 Wut Jesus sapde, forbyd hym not:
For there is no man, whiche, pkhe do a nuratle in my name, can lyghely speake euyll of me.
40 Forhe that is not against vs, is on our

part.

41 Whosoecuer shall in mp name gene mines von a cup of colde water to drynke, betause pe belong to Christe: verply F fay vnto vou, he shall not tole his rewarde.

42 And whosoeuer shall offende one of uu these litle ones, that beleue in me, it were better for him, if a mylstone were hanged about his necke, and he were cast in to the fea,

43 And pf thy hande offende thee, cut it u. Wut of: It is better for thee to enter into lyfe G mapmed, then hauyng two handes, to go into hell, into fire that neuer shalbe quenched: Elay beng

44 Where their wozme dyeth not, k the fire goeth not out. e

45_ And pk thy foote offende ther tut it of

t is better forthee to go halt into lyfe, chen hauyng two feete, to be cast into hell, into fire that neuer shalbe quẽched-

4.6 Mhere their worme dyeth not, and the fire goeth not out. i, Nuathve

47 And ik chine eye offend thee, pluckeit out: It is better for thee to go into the kyngdome of God with one eye, chen hauing two epes, to be cast into Heil fire

48 Where their wornie dyeth not and the fire goeth not —— cette wich fer

9 Euerp man shalbe ef

a ep fie Masco fhalbefeafoncd With Ler

alt, * ich. vb

so Sat is gond: 28 ut if che falt be vun d erte, With what thpng hall youlta it? Hauc falt in pour selues, and 0 peace among your felues, one with

* The

J The.x.Chapter.

C2 Of diuortcement, ychpldzen are brought to Christe, and blesled. i7 4 riche man guestioneth Howe he chaulde inherite eternal Ipte, zo the rewarde of them that korsabke all thynges foz the Golpel, 3 Christe telleth before of his pattion, zy the re.

I 5) Wear: |

(or) YA cena thence, he went into the
5 NG toastes of Jurie, cc

95 Vg, the region that is beponde
Jordane: And the people resorted vnto hynr a freshe, and as he was wont, he taught them agapne.

, And the pharilees came, and asked

hin: Js it lawfull for a man to put a-
Way his wyfe: tenptyng hym.

And he aunswered, and fayde vnto ein” thein: What did Moyses tommaunde bn ou to do:

And they sayde: Moyses suffred to

Write a booke of diuonenient, and to put her away.

And Jesus aunlwered, and sayde vntothe : Jor the hardnesse of pour heart, he wrote this pretept vnto pon.

Wut from the begynnyng of the creation, God made them male e female. vid / land fapde) for this tause shall a man

a" Jeane his lather and mother, and byde

by his wyfe: .

8 And they twapne shalbe one fleche.

So then are they nonroze twayne, but oneflethe,

9 Therkore, what God hath coupled to-

gether, let not man seperate. glo And in the houle, His dilciples asked hym agapne, of the same matter. tive And he sayth vnto then: wohosocuer a, putteth away his wyfe, e marpeth ano-
. ther, tomnutteth adulterie agaynst her.
And yt a woman put away her bul bande, and be marped to another, she tommitteth adulterie.

to hym, that he shoulde touche them:

And his dilciples rebuked those that

brought them. 6

4. But when Jelus sawe it, he was fore displeased, and sapde vnto them: Suffer the young children to come vnto me, forbyd them not: For of luch, is the kyngdame of God.

ly Uerply Jap vnto you, whosoeuer doth not rẽteaue p kingdomic of God as
& poung childe, he shall not enter therin.

Is And when he had taken them bp in

his armes, he put his handes vpon the,

and blessed them. S

‘ia,

XVI,

And they bought poung chyldren

quest of the sonnes ol Jebedeus, 52 blynde Bartimeus receaucth his tyght.
Ae ID When he role front 17 & And when he was gone foorth in:

to the wap, there came one runnyng, and kneeled to hym, and alked hymn:
“good aictergppae Hall J do, that J dnn e may inherite eternall lpke- Luk. xvid

18 Jelus sayde vnto hym: Why callest thou me good? There is no nan good but one, which is God.

19 Thou knowest the connnaundementes: Thou shalt not tommit adulterie, C
Thou halt not kyll, Thou shalt not steale, Thou shalt not beare falle witnelle, Thou halt defraude no man,
Honour thy father and mother.

20 He aunswered, and sayde vnto hym:
Matter, all hele haue J obserued from mp pouth.

2 Jelus behelde hym, and loued hym, and layde vnto hym, one thyng thou

lackest. Go thy wap, fell Whatlocuer Met. thou hast, and geue to the poore, c thou N

halt bane treasure in heauen, and tome folowe me, and take vp the crosse. e

22 But he was dilconikorted because of that saying, and went away mournyng: for he had great possessions. a

23 And when Pelus had loked rounde about, he fapde vnto his diltipies: owe t hardly hati they that haue riches enter Luk vn e into the kyngdonie of God-

24. And the diltiples were astonpyed at his wordes. But Jesus aunswereth agayne, and sayth vnto them: Children, hoe harde is it for thé that trust in ryches, to enter into p kyngdome of God.

25. It is easier for a camel to go thorowe 2 the eye of a needle, then for the riche to enter into the kyngdome of God.

26 And they were astonped out of measure, faying betwene them selues: who then tan be saued

27 Jesus loked vpon them x layde: with

nien it is vnpossible, but not with God: for with God all thynges are poslible.
28 And Peter began to fay vnto hin: Lo, we haue forlaken all, k haue folowed Marsix.c.

thee. Luk. x viii.
29 Hels aunswered, e sayde: Meryly J fay vnto you, there is no nian that hach forsaken bowie, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wyfe, or chyldren, or landes, for mm fake and the Golpels,
D ij Wut

MEO PCE |

30 Wut he shall reteane an hundeth folde no we at this prelent, houses, aud brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and chyldren, and landes, with persecutions, and in the worlde to tome eternal Ipte.

Mit xb ai But manp that are firlt, shalbe last:

Luk xiu f. and the last, first. ü —

32 And they were in the wap, goyng vp

to Hiernlalem: And Jesus went before them, and they Were amazed, and folowed, and were afrayde. And Jelus toke the twelue agayne, and beganne to tell them whatthynges shoulde happen vnto hym.

*Beholde, we go vp to Hierusalem, and the soune of man shalbe delpuered vnto the bye priestes, € vnto the stribes: and they hall tondenme hyn to death, and shall delyuer hym to the Gentiles,

34 And they chall mocke hym, c stourge hym , {pit vpon hy, and kyll hym: And the thirde day he Mali ryse agapne.

Mathxxe.35 And Janes and John, the sonnes

of Zebedee, tante Dnto Hy, saping:
Maister, we would that thou shouldest do for vs, whatsoeuer we despre.

36 Pe faydebdnto them: What woulde pe, that I shoulde do for pou-

37 Chey lapyde vnto hym: graunt vnto vs, that we may fit, one on thy ryght hande, and the other on thy teft bande, inthy eh

38 But Jelus lapde vnto them, Be wote not what ve aske: Can ve drynke of the cuppe that I drynke ol- and be baptized
115 the baptilme that J am baptized

39 And they sapde vnto hym: that we can. Helus sapde vnto them: pe Tallin deede dzpnke of the cup that J drynke of, and with the baptisme that Jam baptized withall, shall ye be baptized:

F 40 Wut to syt on mp ryght hande, and on my left hande, is not myne to geue, but

Nat. xc vi. c.

17. c. &. r0. c. 33
Luk. xv. f.

and xx. c.

vnto them, for whom it is prepared. rm

41 And when the ten hearde ; Ma began to dildaine at 5 — ais 3 pe thaxd

42 wut Pelus when he had cated chem

to hym, sayde vnto theni:ye know

. “they Which seeme to beare rule 1 Math, the Gentiles, raigne as Lordes oner bern’ them: And they that be great among them exercise aucthoritie vpon them.

43. Meuerthelesse lo shall it not be among pou : but wholdeuer of you; Wyll be great among pon, shalbe pour minister:

44. And wholdeuer of you wyll be the chiesest, shalbe seruaunt of all.

45 Foz the sonne of man allo came not a to be ministred vnto: but to minister x to geue his lyfe, a raunsome for many.

46 And they caine to Hierico: And as Due he went out of} citic of Hievico with his Tung

dllciples, and a great number of people, blynde Bartimeus the sonne of Lime: us fate by the bye wayes syde beggyng.

47 And when he hearde that it was Jesus of Nazareth, he beganne to try, and fay: Jesus, thou sonne of Damd, haue

ee me. f 9 10

48 And many rebuked hym, that he shoulde holde his peace: But he cryed the moze a great deale, thou sonne of
Daud haue mertp on nie.

49 And Jeslus stoode styll, and commaunded hym to be called. And they talled the blynde, faping vnto hym: Be ok good comfort, rpfe he talleth the.

50 And he threwe alvay his coke, c rose, and tame to Jesus.

5 And Jelus aunfwered, and lapde br to hyni: what wylt thou that J do vn to thee- The blynde layde vnto hyn:
Maister, that I myght tee.

5 Jesus sayde vnto hym: Go thy wap, thy fayth bath saued thee. And imme
Diatly he receaued his fight, E folowed
Jesus in the way.

he. xj. Chapter. *

Cu Chzite rideth to Hierutalem, z the vnkruitfull kygge tree is curfed, 15 byers ¢ tellers are cal out ofthetemple, 17 the houle of God is che poute of prayer, 24 che ürength of

A 1
Nlath. xi. a
Luk. xi. c.

NDO when they came pe to Mierusalem, vn-
Iisto Wethphage € Be-

phvyther.
3 And pf any nian fay vnto pou,

faith, 25 forgeue other whe thou prapelt, 27 the pharifees athe Chrille of his auctoritie.

2 And sayth vnto them. Go pour Way into the tone, that is ouer against you:
And affoone as pe be entred into it PE shall fynde a tolte bounde, wWheron 1 uer man late: loofe hyntand bryng her

why do

do ye so: Sap pe, thatthe Lorde hath neede ol hyn:and strayghtway he wyll sende hym hyther. my.
And they went their way, and founde the tolt tyed by the doore Without, in a place where two wapes met: and they loosed hym. 1
And diuers of them that stoode there, sayde vnto them: What do pe loofpng the toltee? g —
6 And they fayde vnto them, euen as
Jesus had conimaunded: And they let them go. 2 =:
And they brought the colt to Jelus, and cast their garmentes on hym̃, and he sate vpon yt 2s:
And many spred their garmentes in the way: Other cut downe braunches of the trees, ẽ strawed thé in the way.
And they that went before; and they that folowed, cryed, saping, Hofanna, cod e plesled is he that tommeth in the name at ol the Lorde. or asi Jo” Blessed be the kyngdome, that com:
- meth inthe name of hym thatis Lorde of our father Dautd:Hofanna inthe hielt. u And the Torde entered into Hierulalem, and into the temple: And when he had loked rounde about, vpon all thynges, and nowe the euen tyde was come, he went out vnto Wethanie with the ae twelue. !
And on the morowe, when they were tome out from Bethanie, he hungred.
3 And when he had spyed a kygge tree a farre of, hauyng leaues, he canic to see if he myght fynde any thyng theron:
And when he came to it, he founde nothyng but leaues: for the tyme of ligges was not vet.
4 And Jesus aunswered, and sayde vnto the fygge tree: neuer man cate fruite
. Of thee Hereafter, whple the worlde standeth. And his distiples hearde it.
© And they tanie to Hierulalem: And u Jesus went into the temple, and began ic“ to cast out them that folde and bought in the temple, € duerthrewe the tables ofthe money chaungers, and the seates ofthem that solde doues:
16 And woulde not luffer, that any man
„ shoulde cary a vesseil through p temple, e 17 And he taught, saying vnto then: Is
‘vic, it not written, My Houle shalbe talled the houle of präper vnto all nations:
But ye haue made it a denne of thicues,
18 And the scribes e bye priestes hearde

Ls v b.

it, and sought howe to destroy Hye

For they feared hym, becaule all the Mathxxid

people was astonyed at his doctrine.
Io And when euen was conte, Fels went out ot the citie.

20 And in the mornyng, as they palled Method by, they falbe the kygge tree drped bp ee

XX. c.

by the rootes. ;

21 And Peter remembred and sayde vn-
DOC thee ture wine dar tree which thou cursedst, is withered away.

22 And Jesus aunlwered, and layde vnto them: haue fayth in God.

23 F02, verply J lap vnto pou, that
Whoflocuer shall fay vnto this mountayne: Be thou remoued, and be thou cast into the fea, shall not Doubt in his heart, but chall beleue 5 those thynges which be sayth shall come to palle,
Whatloener he eh shalbe vnto hyni.

24. Therkore J tay vnto pou, what a

thynges fo euẽr ye desyre When ye pray, unt oa beleue that ve reteaue (them. e pe Matt hn une

haue sthem).

25 And when ye stande € pray, *forgeue, e pf ye haue ought agaynst any man: that a

pour father also which is in heauen, map forgeue pou pour trespasses.

26 Wut pf you do not forgeue: neither wyll pour father, which is in heauen, forgeue vou pour trespasles.

27 And they came agapne to Hierulalem:

And as he Walked in the temple, there Na

came to hym the hye priestes, and the scribes, and the elders.

28 And say vnto him: By what auctoritie doest thou thele thynges: who gaue thee this auctoritie, to do these thyuges-

29 Pelus aunswered, efapde vnto them: wyll also afke of pou one queftion: and aunlwere me, and J wyll tell yon by what auctoritie I do thele thynges.

30 The baptisnie of John, whether was it from heauen, or of men: Aunswere me. 5

31 And they reafoned with them selues, saping, pf we shall fay from heauen: he wyll fay, why then dyd ye uot beleue

vm: a
32 But pf we shal fay, of men, we feare @ Crs is the people. For all nen counted John, aue.

that he was a very prophete.
33 And they aunlwered, and layde vnto
Jesus: we can not tell. And Jesus aun-
Awered and sayde vnto them: neither wyll J tell pou by what auctoritie I do ese thynges. 2
1 C The

XXIX.

- The Golpell =

qThe.xi.Chaper,

l Che bineparde is let out to hulbande men, 3 who eupll entreated them that w

> tine to 4 kruite, s and kylled the heire, 14 tribute is due to Caefar, 25 Chtite , proueth the refurrectton by Scripture, agapnst the Saducees, 25 the chiete com. © maundementes of the lawe, 3 Chzitte is the sonne ol Dauid, 38 the Hypocriticatt plage ofthe scribes, 41 the poore widdo wes karthyng.

D he beganne to e peake vnto them by dg Nßparables. A (certarne! man planted * a vine-

1 Vparde, and conwalled de a) ait about with an

Le moh HCD YC, and ordeyned a

Wynepreife, and built a towze, and let it out vnto hufbandemen sand went into
A straunge counttcy.

2 And When the tynie was tome, he sent to the hulbande men a seruaunt, that he myght receaue of the hulbandmen, of the fruite of the bineyarde.

3 And they taught hym, and beat hym, and sent hym albap enptie. |

4 And moreouer, he sent vnto them another seruaunt: and at hym they cat stones, and brake his head, and sent him
A wap agapue, all to verted,

5 And agapne, he sent another, and hym they kylled: and manp other, beatyng sonie, and kyllyng some.

6 And so, when he had pet but one beloued fore, he fent hy allo at the last vnto them, laying: they Wwyll stande in

a we of mp forme,
Matsxid. 7 But the hulbandnien salde amongest
C . them selues: this is the heyre, come, let

vs kyl hin and the inheritaunte shalbe ours

8 And they tone hym, and kylled hym, and cast hym out of the vineparde.

9 Rahat Mali therfore, the Lorde of the bincparde do: e (hal tome, and destroy the husbandmen, and wyll geue the vineyarde vnto other.

Io auc ve not read this Scripture-

Dfa. cx viii. c. lat. x xi. d.

Adcnai, fle; is become the chieke stone ok the

torner: b f
1 This is the Lordes doyng, and it is marueplous in our epes.

2 They went about allo to take hym, and feared the people: For they knewe, that he had spoken the parable agapntt
Hem. And they tefe hym, and Went

eir way

¢

Mat. xxl.

Lukxxb 13 And they fent vnto hym, certapne of

the pharisees, and ok the Perodians

The stone which the bunders dyd re-

to take hynt in his wordes.

14. And alloone as they were tome, they

lapde vnto hym: Maister, we kn that thou art true, c tarest for no ane : kor thon tonsiderest not the persons of men, but teachest the way of god trucip:
Bie Iadotull to pay ute to €acta :
02 2 5 a:

15 Dught We to geue, or ought we not to geue: Wut he leeyng their hypocrisie, sayde vnto them: vohp tempt pe mez
Wpng ine a penie, that may see it.

16 And they brought it: And he sayth vnto them, Whole is this image and luperscription: And they lapde vnto hym:

Caelars. 5

17 And Jesus aunswered, and layde vn-

to them: Geue to Caesar (the thenges} gon xis

at belong to Caesar: and to Gon, (the Me wig thynges) Which pertapne to God. And they maruepled at hym. a

18 There tanie also vnto hym, the Sad dutees, Which {ap that there is no re-a ci surrection, and they afsed bpm, saping: Lale

19 Maister, Moples wrote vnto vs, pf D any mans broͤther dye, and leane his wpfke behynde hym e leaue no chyldren: that his brother shoulde take his Wyte, and rayse vp seede vnto his brother.

20 There were seuen brethren: and the first toke a wyfe, and when he dyed, left no seede behynde hym.

21 Andthe seconde toke her, and dyed, neither left any seede: And the thirde lpkewple.

22 And seuen had her, and left no fecde behynde them: Watt of all, the wylt dyed also. *

23 In the resurrettion therfore, When they shall vife agayne, whole wpfe Mall che be ol them for seuen had her to wife.

24 And Fetus aun wered, and sapde dv to thé: Do pe not therfore erre, becaule pe önderstande not the Scriptures, neither the power of God:

25 Jor when they Chall ryse agayne from €

the dead, they neither marcy, nor ave geuen in matyage : but are as the
Angels which are in heauen.

fc
26 As touchyng the dead, chat hne

by Saint Marke. * = *

agayne: haue ve not read in the booge of God. And no man after tl at, durst
5 Mopses, howe in the bushe, God akte hym any question. ?
„ fake puto hin laying: *PamtheGoo 35 And Jesus aunlwered aud lapde, pie of Abrahanb and che God of Jlaac, and ttachyng in the tenple: howe fay the the God ol Jacob- scribes that Christe is p sonne ol Dauid-
27 he is not the God of the dead, but 36 For Dauid hym selfe, inlpired with
| «=» God of the lyuyng. Be therefore do the holy ghost sayde: The Lorde saide S greatly erre. to my Lorde, fit on my right hande, tyll Marxxiid rd 28. And When there came one of the J make thyne enemies thy fosteftosie, Pa! «a. stribes, e had heard them disputyng to- 37 Daudd hym selke calleth hym Lorne: gether, and perteaued that he had aun- and howe is he then his fonnez And swered them well, he alked him, which much people hearde hym gladlp. is che first of all the cõmaundementes. 38 Aud he fapde vnto them in his doc-
29 Jelus aunswered hym, the first of all trint:beware of the stribes, whiche de- uur v the counnaundementes is: Heare O sire to go in long clothyng, and laluta- bs
, Ilrael,“ The Lorde dur God, is one tions in the market places,
4 Lowe: 39 And the chiefe seates in the congregajo And thou Matt lone the Lode thy tions, and the vpperniost rowmes at
God With all thy heart, and with all keastes, thytoule, and with all thy mynde, and 40 Which denoure widdowes houles,
With all thy strength. This is the first E vnder a pretence, make long prayers: commaundenient. Chele shal reteaue greater dampnatiõ.
1 And the seconde is lpke vnto this: 41 * And when Jelus fate ouer agaynst ba Thou chalt lone thy neyghbour as thy the treasuric- he behelde “howe the bx juice, lelfe. There is none other connaunde- people put money into the treasurie:
Liv, ment greater then these. And many that were rich, tast in much. b 3 And the scribe sapde vnto hym: well 42 And there tame a tertayne poore widnaaister, thou hast layde the trueth, fo: dowe, x che threwe in two mites, which there is one God, e there is none buthe. make a farthyng. ö
3 And to loue hyin with all the heart, 43 And he talled onto hym his disciples, and with all the vnderstandyng, x with and fayth vnto them: Uerply F fay all the soule, and with all the strength, bnto vou, that this poorc widdowe and to loue a mans) neyghbour as hym hath tast moze in, then all they which selfe, is greater then all the burnt offe- haue tal into the trealurie. rynges and satrifices. 44 For they all, dyd tast in of their super-
4. And when Jesus sawe that he aun- fluitie:but she, of her pouertie, dyd talt in
Never dilcretẽly, he layde vnto hym: all that she had, euen all her lyuyng. S
Thon art not farre from the kingdome N

q The. xiij. Chapter.

¶ 2 Che destructton of the temple, 24 signes before Chrtkes commyng. 32 the dap and houre thereof is vnknowen, 3 Gods worde Hall not pale away, 35 watche

ap.

14D ashe went out of | ues, ouer agaynst the temple, Peter, and

1 f 2
0 dl sche temple, one olrhis James, and John, and Andrewe, alnia, dilciples sayde vnto ed hpnilecretelp:

shynn: Maictker, {ec 4 Tell vs, when shall these thynges
1 pat e, t what be : And what shalbe the signe when all
WEN buildynges (are here.) thefe thynges shalbe fulfylled-
ü 2 vng

21 And Jesus aunswe- 5 And Jelus aunswered them, and be- z red, c sayde vnto hymn: Seeteehouthete gan to say: take heede, left any man Tul. b great buildynges:? There shall not be deteanc pou. ad

left one tone Spon another, that shall 6 For mam shall tome in my name, sap-

not be throwen downe. | ing J au (Chile:) and shall deceaue

3 2 8 of Oli- many. nd as he fate bpou the mount | v 7 when

— enero pell *

— 6h —¼ʃ4

dynges or warres, be ve not tronbled:
For) thynges must nedes be, but the ende is not vet.
3 Jor there shall nation aryse agaynst nation, and kyngdoine agapnst kyng-
W dame: And there dhalbe earthquakes m diuers plates, and famine shall there be, and troubles. Thele are the begynnyng ol sorowwes.
Wut take pe heede td pour selues:
For they shall deliuer vou vp to coun-

Tohn. x VI. a. 9
Iat. x. b.

Ln a. tels, and to fynagogues, and ye shalbe beater, pea, and halbe brought before rulers & kynges for my fake, fora testimoniall vito them. —

Mathagb.1o And the Gofpel must first be publifhed among all nations,

Aut when they leade pou, and pre-

Math.x.c. II sent you, be not carekull afozchande neither take thought what ve chall speane: but whatsoeuer is geuen you in the same houre, that speake pe. For it is not ye that speake, but the holy ghost.
12 The brother hall betray the brother to death, and the father the sonnt: and

the chyldren shall ryse agaynst their fa-

thers and mothers, and shall put then to death. f

the Wynter:

tribulation, as was not fron the begynnyng ok creatures, which God created, vnto this tyme, neither shalbe.

20 And except that the Lode shoulde

„ When ve Thali eave of warres and

2 But take pe heede: Weholde, J haue

zy Watche ve therfore, (fox ve knowe not

1 For there shalbe in tholt dayes such

khorten (Ho) dapes, no fleshe

bt saued: Wut for the elettes Been

di be chosen, he hath chortened hole
21 And then, yf any man say to 5

Here is Chritte, lo he is chere belene nat Mika
22 Foz false Christes, and falle prophetes

Wonders to DECANE, rb ea

7 Aue, yt it wer euen the elect, - at

shewed pou all thynges before. |

24. Moleouer, in those dayes, after that Muthu, tribulation, the fimne chall Ware darke, nne and the moone shall not geue her tight.

25 And che starres of heanen, thai fall: and the powers which are in heauen

shalbe shaken.

26 And then shall they fee the sonne of ban man commwpng in the codes, with great power and glorp.

27 And then shall he sende his Angels, and (hall gather together his elect, krom the foure wyndes, from the ende ot the tarth, to the vtmost part of heauen.

28 Lcarne a parable ok the fygge tree. Na
When his braunche is pet tender, and ava
Hath bought foorth leaues, pe knowe~ that sonnmer is neare:

29 So pe in lpke maner, when pe lee

these chynges come to palse, vnderstand, thatche is nye, euen at the doores.

30 Uerply J fay vnto vou, that this ge-

neration shall not pasle, til all these

thynges be done. 5

Peauen and earch shall passe away, but my wordes shall not passe away.

32 But of that day and tyme knoweth no man: no not the Angels which are in
Heanen neither the sonne him elfe, laue

the father only.

3 Take heede, watche and pray: for pe un knowe not when the tyme is. ve

34 As a man which is gone into a P we straunge countrey, and hath left his
Houle, and geuen auttontie to his {er nauntes, and to tuery man his woe, and tommaunded the poster to watche:

3¹

wheẽ the naister of the houle wyl come, at cuen, or at mydnyght, whether at the tocke trowyng, or in che dawnyng.)
36 ＋ tr yr he tome sodenlx, he tynde vol epyng.
77 And that J fap vnto you, J fay but all, watche.
Cre

bys aint N

ATICC.

The. xiiij. Chapterr.

¶ Che hygh priettes confpire agapnst Chrilte, 3 1 woman powreth precious oynt·

ment on Christes head, 10 Judas Coz monep betrapeth Christe, at Walon ig prepared and eaten, 22 the institution of the Lordes Supper, 25 Chriltes prapers and agonie in Gethlemani, 45 the takyng and examinyng cf Christe before the hygh priest, 67 Peter denieth Christe, 72 and weepeth.

ter two dapes ewas (the keaste! of the Passouer, cot

* And the Hye ateftes and the cribes , fought howe they myght i take him by craft, and put hyn to death.

, Wut they layde: not in the featt day, lest any bufines arile among the people.

And when he was at BWethanie, in the house of Simon the leper, euen as he sate at meate, there came a woman hauyng an alabaster boxe of very precldus opntment, called! Harde pistike, and fhe brake the bore, and polwred it

on his head. g
And there were some, that had indig-

nation within them selues, and lade:

what neded this waste of oyntment-

5 Jor it myght haue ben solde for moze then three hundred pence, and haue ben geuen to the poore. And they grudged agaynst her.

6 And Jelus fayde: let her alone, why

trouble pe her:? She bath done a good

Wwozke on me. a

*Fo2 ye haue poore with you alwapes. and whensdeuer pe wyll, pe may do the good: but me haue pe not alwapes.

g She hath done that the coulde: the came afozehande, to annoynt nw body to the burying.

9 Tleryly Flay vnto vou, wherlocuer this Gospel thalbe preached, through-
Out the whole worlde, this allo that the bath done, shalbe rehearled, in remembeaunce of her.

„B10 And Judas Iltariot, one of the

inne tiene, Went away vnto p hye priestes,

xii, to betrày hym vnto them. 5

u When they hearde that, they were

glad, and promiled that they woulde geue hym money. And he fonght howe

n, bempght conuententhp betray bm. ..

e 12 And the first day of vnleuened bead,

when they dyd facvifice the Pallouer, his dilciples sapde vnto

AK: 7
— 0 88 One d 8 iy —
ONT)

diz uf,

Wxvt. 7

22 And as they dyd cate, bread: and whk he had blessed, he brake i cor.xive.

hym: Where

wylt thou that we go and prepare, that thou mapest eate the Palloner- 5

And he sendeth koorth two of his dil

tiples, and layth vnto thein: Go pe into the atic, there hall meete you a man bearing a pitcher of water, folowe hint.

14 And whyther soeuer he goeth in, fay

ye to the good man of the boule, the matter fayth : Where is the ghest chaumber, where J Chall cate the pal duer with niy disciples-

15 And he wyll chewe pou a large vpper chaumber, paued and prepared: there make redy for vs.

16 And his diltipies Went foorth, a came into the titie kounde as he had sayd vnto them: they made redy the Paslouer.

17 And when it was nowe euen tyde, he C tame with the twelue.

13 And as they late at bond c dyd cate,

Jelus layde: Ueryly J lay vnto pou, r one of you, that eateth with me, Matt lohn iu. e betray me.

9 And they began to be forp, and to say to hym one by one, is it J: And another fayde, is it J

20 he aunlWered and fapde vnto them:
It is one of the twelue, euen he that
Dpppeth with me in the platter.

The forme of man truely goeth as it is Written of hym: but wo to that man by whom the lonne of man is betrayed.
Good were it for that man, yf he had neuer ben borne.

it and gaue to them, and layde: Take, cate, this is niy body. ;

And he toke the cup, aud when he had geuen thankes, he toke it to them: and they all drauke of it. *

24 And he sayde vnto them: This is my
1 the newe Testamient, which is

„ fed kor mam.

25 Uleryly fay vnto you, J Wyll drinke no more ot the fruite ok thebine, vntoll that day, that J drinke it newe in the
Ryngdonie of God.

26 And when they

they went out into P mount of Dies. and

on

Mat.xxvi.b
Luk.xxiib,

Mat.xxvi. esus toke t n

had praysed God, Mat. x xi. c

Reede

27 And Pets sayth vnto theme: All pe chälbe rennet because of me this nyght. For it is written: J wyll fhipte

Luk. xxil. d.

Lahn. xi. d. feattered. 8

28 But after that J am rilen agapne,
J wyll go into Galttee befort yon.

29 Peter sayde bnto hym: Although all men be offended, yet (welt) not J.

30 And Jesus sayth vnto hym: Ueryly
J lay vnto thee, that this day, cuen, in this night, before the cocke trowe twile, thou shalt deny mt three tymes.

zi But he spake moze vehemently: no, pf I shoulde dye with thee, J wyll not

deny Hee, Lilte wilt also sayde they all.
32 And they came into a place which was named Gethseman, and he sapth to his distiples: Sit pe heare, Wyle
Hhalipray, 1

33 And he tateth with hym, Peter, and
James, and John, and began to ware abalssched, and to be in an agonie. i
34. And layth vnto them: * My soule is

XNIath. 26. d.

Math.26.d.
Ion. NI. d.

Heauic, enen vnto the death, tarry pe

here and watche.

35 And he went foorth a lite, and fell flat on the grounde, and prayed: that pf tt were possible, the houre myght palle from hym.

36 And he sayde: Abba father all thynges are possible vnto thee, take Away this cup from me. Peuertheletle, not

that J wyll:but that thou wylt, be done.)

€37 And he came efounde them slepyng, and sayth vnto Peter: Simon, flepett thou: Cauldest not thor watche one hourc:

38 Watche ye, and pray, lest ye enter into temptation: the spirite truely is redp, but the flesheis wege.

Nach asd. 39 And agapne he went alyde praped,

and {pale the lame Wordes. 2

40 And he returned, and founde them

ga lepe agayne. Foz their eyes were heauie: neither wilt they whatto aunlwere hym.

41 And he tame the thirde tyne, c laydt
Ditto theim: flepe hencefoorth, and take pour cafe, it is mougl: The houre is come, beholde, the sonne of man is befrayed into the handes offinners,

42 Pyse pp, let vs go: Lo, he that be-

a trapeth nie, is at hande.

Lab sene 43. And immediatiy Whyle he pet spake, tommeth Andas, which Was oncof the twelue, and with hyma great number

Nlath. 26. d.
Luk. x xi. d.

the sheeptheardt, and the sheepe shalbe

of people, with [wordes e staue the hye priestes, and keribrs, aud pern

44. Ano he that betrayed hon had ge: eu hema general token, taping: bo socuer I do kysse, that fanie is he, take hym, and leade hym away warely.

45 And affoone as he was come, he

Foeth Krapatwap tohpm, and layth b hym Mailter, Maistet, and killed
6 And they layde their hand

7 1 ii amen DER,

47 And one of them that toon drewe out alworde, c smote a eim 1 of the hye priest, and cut of his care,

43 And Felus aunswered and fae vnto them: He be come out as vnto a thicte with [wordes and with staues for to take me.

49 J was dapyly with vou in the temple, teathyng, and ye toke me not, but thete

khenges come to patie, ) that the Strip-

tures shoulde be fulkylled.

50 wand they all korsooke pun, € ranne Me a wa

moth oh. xl. h

Nuri
5 Lul wf

v. : . I
51 And there folowed hym, a certayne voung man, clothed in lynnen vpon the bare: and the voung men caught hym.
52 And he left his lynnen garm̃ent, and fled from them naked. 1
5, And thep ledde Jelus away to che Ja hyest priest, and with hym canie all the al
Hye priestes, and the clvers, and the scribes.
54. And peter folowed hym a great way of, euen tyl he was come into the palace of the bye priest, and he fate with the
99 and Warmed hym selle at he tyre, „ t. xf
55 And the bye priestes, and all the coun- ae cell fought for witnesse agaynst Jelus, bo put hynn to death, and founde none.
56 For many bare false witnesse agaynst hym, but their witnesse agreed not to-

gether.
57, And there arole certapne and brought falle witnesse agaynst hym saying. 251
58 We hearde hym ay: J wpll destroy 100 ad this tenipte that is made with handes, and within three dayes J wyll buylde another, made withont handes. ;
59 te pet their witnesse agreed not together. e ö
60 And the hye priest stoode vp amionget Na xe them, and alked Jems, saping 7 swerest thou nothyng- Howe is it pi these beare Witueile agaynst thee- at

61 Wut he helde his peace, eaunlwered

t nothyng. Agapne, the hyest priest alked

6 hym, and fayde vnto hym: Art thou

Christe, the fonne of the blessed-

wife, And Jesus sayde, J am: And pe

sg (hall fee the sonne of man sittyng on the

s ryght hande of power, and commypng

in the cloudes of heauen. i

63 Then the hye priest rent his clothes, and sapde: What neede we any further witnesses-

Be haue hearde blasphemie: what thinke pe: And they all condemned him to be Worthy of death.

65 And sonie began to spyt at hym, and to touer his fate, and to beate hym with fistes, and to say vnto hym, prophetie.
And the feruauntes dyd beate hym with roddes.

66 And as Peter was beneath in the palate, there came one ok the wenches of

dhe hpest priest:

beige And when che lawe Peter warmyng

ND anone in the dawnyng, the bye

e with the elders, and whole congregation,

Plate.

2 And pilate asked hym: Art thou the kyng ok the Hewes: And he aunswered and sayde vñto hym: thou layest itz

3 And the hye priestes acculed hym ol manp thynges.

4, So Plate alked hym agayne, saping:
Aunswerest thou nothyng? Weholde,
1 1111 thynges they witnelse a

ke.

§ Jelus yet aunlwered nothyng, fo that

_ Pilate maruepled.

6 At that feast, pilate dyd delpuer vnto them a prfoner , whomsocuer they

dulde desire.

7 And there was one, that was nanied
Warabbas, which lap bounds, with them that made insurrettion: Which onen Had committed nunther allo in

Mu)

pnestes held a councel,

hynm selfe, che loketh on zareth.

68 And he denyed faving: J uno we hym not, neither Wore J what thon bel
And he Went out into the porche, and

the cocke treue.

69 Anda damsell, when fhe sawe hym agapne, began to say to thé that stoode

by, this is one of them.

70 And he denyed it agapne. And anone after, they that stoode by, sayde agayne to Peter: Surely, thou art one of thé, forthou art of Galilee, and thy speache agreeth therto. =

71 But he began to turse, and to [weare, taying;: whom ye lpeake.

hyin, and sayth:
And thou also Wak with Jelus of pays

knowe not this man of

72 And the feconde tyme *the cocke Mtxxvig -

crelbe, x Peter vemienibeed the worde

that Jesus layde vnto hym, betore the

tocke trowe twise, thou shalt deny me three tymes: And he began to weepe.

IJThe. xv. Chapter.

C 1 Fetus is delpuered bounde to Pilate. 2 and auntwereth hym nothpng, is Barabbas is loosed, and Jesus is deliuered vp to be cructlied, 16 the maner of Christes palsion e death. Y the Centurions confellion of Christe. 4; Joleph beggeth Cheiltes body, and

buryeth it, 47 women that behelde his pallion and sepulchre.

the insurrection.

8 »And the people trying aloude, began to desire (bem) that he woulde do, according as he had euer done vnto them.

9 Pllate aunswered them, saying: Wyll ve that I let loose vnto pou the kyng of the PFeibesz |

Io Forhe knewe, that the bye priestes had delyuered Hp of enuie. ,

n But the hye priestes moued the people, that he shoulde rather delyner Barabbas vnto them.

2 Plate aunswered agapne, and sayde

Luk. xxi.

vnto them: What wyll pe then that duke.

FJ do vnto hym, whom pe call the kyng of the Jewes-
13 Aud they cryed agayne, crucifie hym.
14. Pilate sayde vnto them: What cuyll
Hath he done? And they cryed the more eruently, crucifie hym.
15 And so Pilate, wyllyng to content the

Xx. e

people, *ict loose Barabbas vnto them, Math27.<,

anddelinered vp Jelus, when he had stourged hym, for to be crucilied.

16 And the foulviers led hynt away, into 5

the hall, called prætorium, AND Called to-

gether the whole bande (of fouldiers:)
And

And they clothed hyn with purple,
7 ea cher platted a trownc of thorncs,
: and crowned hym withall,
18 And began to lalute hym: Maple kyng of the Heres. ae
10 And chey smote hym on the head with a rtede, € dib spit bpon him, and bowed their knees, and worshipped hym.
20 And when they had niocked Hynt, they tone the purple of hym, and put

his owne clothes on hyn and led hym

| out to crutitie hym.
Tate 21. And they coimpelled one that passed
_ omen” pp, called Simon of Cprene (comniyng ont of the fielde, the father ol Alexander and Rufus) to beare his trosse.

Moto7d. 22 And thep brought hym to a plate named Golgotha, Which is, if a man interprete il, the plate ol dead mens) sculles.

3 And they gaue hym to dpnke, wyne myngled with nwrre: but he reteaued it

not. N

24. And when they had trutified hym, they parted his garmentes, tastyng lottes vpon them, what cuerp man shoulde take

Math. 27. d.
Pal. xxil. d.

R i a
25 And it was the thyrde houre, and they

crucified hym.
26 And the title of his tause was Written:

THE KYNG OF THE IEVVES.

Mathi7d 27 „And they crucifed with hym two

and the other on bis!
28 And the Strpture was fulfplted
Nell. which fayth : He was tounted among
8 the wycked.

Plath. 25.4. 29 And they that went by, rapled on

EN

A Weetche thou that destropyest the temple, and buildest it in three dapes,

30 Saue thy selle, and tome downe from fshe trolle.

31 Lykerbyle also mocked hym the hye

priestes aniong then selues, with the cribes, and sayde: He saued other men, hym selfe he tan not laue.

Let Christe the kyng ol Israel vel tende nowe from the crosse, that we map see, and beleue. And they that were crucified with hym, checked hym allo.
Mat rve. 33 ene eee tome,
Lax. xc durknesse arose ouer all the earth, vntill

the nynth houre. 8

a2

opel

thieues: the one on me ryght bande,

Laken” hint, wagging their heades, and laying:

34 And at the nynth houre, of with a loude vopce, saying 3 ad 15
Wipe sine ls, vf one tt:

2 God, ni hn Mathis,
5 a iD 10 5 fake mer He God, Why pk!

35 And lome of them that stoode by Whe D they hearde that, layde: Behold f for Elias. b * cholde. he

36 And one ran, and fylled a spun Mithay, of bincger, And put it on aceon aul _ bunte De ebe

\ U co a 0 te =. * me and

37 But Jesus crped With a loude vo and gaũe vp the ghost. .

38 And the vaple of the temple dpd Mes rent in two peetes, from the toppe to chen wh. the Ce Math

39 And when the Centurion, which Mew ftoode before hym, sawe, that 1 10 cryed, and gaue vp the ghost, he layde:
0 i this man was the fonne of

od. ill

40 There were allo women a good Mint way of beholdyng hym: among whom
Was Marie Magdalene, and Marie Marg the mother of James the litle, and of
Joses, and Salome.

41 Which alfo when he was in Galilee, uwe her folowed hym, and mimistred vnto

pm: and many other omen, which

Joleph (of the citiey of Atamathia a noble tountellour, which allo lobed for bg

Fehn en 1950 0 ent w ether

ehad ben any whyle dead.

45 And when he knewe the truech of the
Centurion, he gaue the body to Joleph.

46 And he bought alpnnen cloth, etoke hym downe, and wrapped aa) in the lpnnen cloth, x lapde hin ina {epuldyzc, that was hewẽ out ol the rocke, e roulled a stone vnto the dooze of f sepulchee.

4 And Marie Magdalene, and Pa
Jolts, behelde where he was lapde. 7

The

U 5 : N zee ’
5 aint arke. | XXII.
J The. xvj. Chapter. 9

@ 1 Che women come to the lepulchre, an Angel telleth them that chute le rylen. 9 Christe appeareth to Marte Magdalene, iy 19 5 1 ae Gilpell. oft a 155 the rot 5 ae he commaundeth to preache

» I Chulle is receaued into heauen. r0 The lignes that folowe the preachyng of the Golpell. g et

Nd whethe Sab- whom he had cast seuen deulls.

both day was past, to And she went a tolde them that were
Parie Magdalen With hym, as they mourned t wept.

and Marielthe mo- 11 And they, when they hearde that he

ther ol James, x Was alpue, and had ben seene of her, be-

e Satonic, bought lened it not.

„„ssweete fineliynge 12 Alter that, appeared he vnto two of Luk xxül. b se 5] Opntmentes, that them in another fourme, as they wate they myght come ked and went into the countrey.

, and annoynt hynt. 3 And they went and tolde it vnto the

n And early in the mornyng, the w first residue: andsthey beleued not thele allo.

, dap of the Sabbothes, they tame vnto 14 (Alter warde, he appeared vnto the

et the fepuichze, when the sunne was ry- eleuen, as they sate at meate, and tast in

fen: heir teeth their vnbeliete and hardnes

3. And they sayde among them selues, of heart, betaule they beleued not them who shall roule vs away the stone fronn whiche had seene that he was rysen athe doore of the fepnichzez gapne from the dead.

4 And when they loked, they sawe how 15 And he layde vnto them: Go pe into Mach2 4. that the stone was rouled awaye, for it all the worlde, and preache the Gospell was a very great one. to all creatures. ö

And they went into the sepulchre, and 16 He that beleueth, and is baptized, that: D falbea voung nian syttyng on the rvght be laued: Wut he that belcueth not, shalsyde, clothed in a long Whyte garment, be dampned. and thep were amased. 17, And thele tokens thall kolowe them |...

bish6 And he sayth vnto them, be not ama- that beleue. In my name they shal tast id a led: pe seke Jesus of Nazareth, which out deiuls, they hall speake with newe Ades fla.

was crucified: He is rilen he is not here, tongues, oo beholde the place where they had put 18 They thaildzine away serpentes: aud deb hym. yl they drinke any Deadly thyng, it hall
57 But go pour wap, € tell his disciples, not hurte them: They thal lay their and Peter, that he goeth before you into handes on the sicke, e they thai recouer.
Galilee, there call pe ser hym, as he 19 So then, when the Lorde had spoken. fatde vnto vou. 2 vnto them, he was reteaued into hea- b. n 8 And they went out quickly, and fled uen, and fate hym downe on the ryght uus from Me lepulcive, for they trembled x hande of God. were amaled : neither fayde they any 20 And they went foorth, and preached thing to any man, for they Were afraide. euerywhere, the Lorde workyng with
Co When (Jelusj was rpsen carly, the them, and tonkirmyng the worde with eb u first Dap) after the Sabboth, he appea- signes folowyng. n red firste to Marie Magdalene, out of €j

Here endeth the Gofpell by Saint Marke,

The

RN mat a y i! wf —

0 rus ww

S

Golpeli

U me
KIS

% eae, -
Xan
N i

e

| Ke

U

AM ill a | 1 il
SR

Bee 2

2 41 5 B
5 AA ¢ i .
| 1 ty ihe 15 N . ‘ | D 1. a est it 5
* 1 7 nn SMe
~ Wunde ö at 1 A? 6 MF . — Tanti

mae The first Chapter.

@ Che preface of Luke, 5 DF Zacharias and Elizabeth. n Che Angel sheweth the natiuitie of John Baptist. 20 Che incredulitie of Facharie is punylched. 28 The
Angel saluteth Marie, and cheweth the natiuitie ot Christe. 40 Marie vititech
Eltzabech. 46 The songue of Marie. 57 Che birth, circumcilion, and graces of

John Baptist. 68 The prophesie of Jacharie. 8o The office of John.

Orasmuche as manpe haue taken in hande to
{et foorth in order, p declaration of those thynges Whiche are moste lurelye to be beleued az f — thong vs,
2 Euen as they delinered them vnto vs,

Which fromthe begynnyng sawe then them selues with their eyes, and Were ministers ofthe™ worde:

IJ determined aiso, assoone as J had fearched out diligently all thinges from the begynnyng, that then J woulde p thee, moste excellent Theophilus,

That thou nipghtett knowe the ter-

(a) That is, hep were do-

tentie ol those thinges wherof thou halt

ben infourmed.

5 1 Was in the dayes of Herode the kyng of Jurie, a tertaine puett, named Zacharias, ok the tourse of

Abla, his wyft was of the daughters of Aaron t her name was Elizabeth.

6 They were both ryghteous before
Sod, aud Walked in all the lawes and
Ordinaunces ofthe Lorde, that no man coulde fynde fault with them.

1. Par. 14 a.

i]

7 And they had no chylde, because that
Elizabeth was barren: and they both
Were nowe well stricken in age.

8 And it came to passe, that when Zacharie executed the priestes office before
God, as his tourse came,

9 Accordyng to 5 tustome of the puestes 1 offite, his lot was to burne intente, wh he went into the temple of the Lorde.

10 And the whote multitude of the people were without in prayer, whple the incence was burnyng.

And there appeared vnto hym an Angelof the Lorde, standyng on the ryght

vde of the aulter of inen.

Iz And when Zacharias sawe him, he
Was troubled, and feare came vpõ him.

3 Wut the Angel sayde vnto him: Frare 2 not Zacharie, for thy prayer is hearde: and thy wyfe Eliʒabeth (hall beare ther afonne,¢ thou shalt cal his name John.

14. And thou shalt haue toy and gladnelle, and many (hall reioyte at his birth.

15 For he thalbe great in the syght ol the

Lorde, and shall neither dzynte wine nor strong drynke: and he halbe 11 with the holy gholt, euen from his!

a a by saint “Ake. |

16 And many of the chyldren of Pract, shall he turne to their Lode God.

7 And he shall go before hym, with the
{pirite and power of Elias. to turne the heartes of the fathers to the chyldren, and the dilobedient „ of the inst men, to make reoy a pertett people for the Lorde.

18 And Zacharias saide vnto the Angel:
Sy what token hall J know this: Foz

ie IJ amolde, and my wyke well stricken

üb. in peres.
5 And the Angel aunlwered, and layde vnto hym: J am Gabriel that stande in

x b.

the presence of God, and am {ent to

speake vnto thee, and to shewe thee thele glad tydynges.
20 And beholde, thou shalt be dumbe, x

not be able to speake, vntyll the day that

these thynges be perfourmed, because thou beleuedst not inp wordes, whiche shalbe fulfylled in their season.

A And the people waited for Zacharias, and niarueyled that he taried so long in the tem ple.

2 And when he tame out, he coulde not speake vnto them. And they perceaucd that he had seene a bifion in the temple:

Jor he beckened vnto them, and remap-

ned speachlesse.
€23 And it tame to passe, that assoone

as the dayes of his office were out, he

Departed into his owne house.

24 And after those dayes, his wyfe Eli-

zabeth tonteaned, and hyd her felfe fine monethes, saynig: ö
25 Thus hath the Lorde dealt wich me, in the dayes wherein he lobed on me, to ene, fake frõ nie mp rebuke © among men.
26 And in the lixth moneth, the Angel ce Gabriel was sent from God, vnto a citic

aa

thd of Galitec, named Nazareth,
“at name was Joleph, ofthe house of Da wo WD, and the virgins name was Marie. de lapde: Hayle thou that art) reelle beloned, the Lorde is with thee, blesled art
29 And when (he sawe hym, fhe was troubled at his saying, and caste in her

In it

a 27 To a virgin, spoused to a man whole

4 rome,

tone 28 And the Angel went in bnto her, and thou among women.

hipnde what maner of salutation that

shonlde be,
0 And the Angel saide vnto her: Feart not Marie, for thou hatt founde grace
With God

3 FO beholde, thou shalt conccaue in

XXXII], thy womde, and beare a sonne, e halt v tali his nanie Jesus. e

3 Ye shalbe great, halbe talled p sonne ok the hyest: e the Lord God shall gene vnto hun the seate of his father Dani:

3 And “he chall reigne ouer the house of Keb.
Jatob for euer, and of his kyngdome

there shalbe none ende.

34. Then said Marie vnto p Angel: How shall this be, seing I knowe not a man-

35 And the Angel aunlwered, ¢ laide br: to her: The holy ghost shall come vpon thee, the power of the hyest shall ouerchadowe @ thee, Therefore allo that holy thyng whiche chalbe borne, shalbe talled che sonne of God.

36 And beholde, thy colin Elizabeth, che
Hath also conceaued a sonne in her olde
Age: this is her firth moneth, whiche

Was called barren, a 5

37 For with; God, (hall nothyng be vn- ich. possible ark xb.

Ile. Mark. x b.
38 And Marie saide: Weholde the hand- Lur vine mayden of the Lorde, be it vnto me actordyng to thy worde. V And the An: gel Departed from her.

Luk. Il. e.

Dani. vil. b.
Mich. iii. b.

chan work cercteipe inn ches aboue all reason.

30 And Marie arose in those dayes, e

went into the hyll countrey with halte, into a atte of Juda,

40 And entred into the house of Zacharie, and faluted Elizabeth.

41 And it came to passe, that when Elisa beth hearde the salutation of Marie, the babe sprang in her wombe, and Eltza-

beth was fylled with the holy ghost.

4 And he tryed with a loude voce, and saide: Blessed art thou among women, becanse 5 fruite of thy wombe is blessed.

43 And whence commeth this to nie, that p mother of my lord should conie to nies

44 Forloc, assoone as the voyte of thy salutation sounded in nune eares, the babe sprang in my wombe for iop.

45. And blessed is the that beleued: Foz thole thinges shalbe perfourmed, which were tolde her from the Torde. —

46 And Marie saide: My soule magnifi- 4 eth the Lorde.

47 And my spirite reioyteth in God up saniour.

43 For he hath loked on the lowe degree of his handmayden: For loc, nob from l shal all generations call me

C ed.

49 Betaulse, he that is mightie, bath done to me great thinges, ⁊ holy is his name,

50 And his mercy is on them that feare

E ij him,

The Gol, pe

\

—————_ontogentration, them ppm cher heartes, saying: ola hun, frau ge th th

neration to gencration.

51 He hath Herbed strẽgth with his arme, he hath scattered them that are proude, in the umagination ok their heartes.

iReg.iib. 5 He hath put dowue the myghtie fro
Fecex-e their feates, anderalted them of lowe

pegeee.
5; He hath kylled the hungry with good

thynges, lent away the riche enptie.
54 He hath helped his seruaimt PHicact, in remembraunce ok his mercy,

(Euen as he proinised to gur kathers,
Abraham, and to his seede ) for cuer.

56 And Marie abode with her about three monethes, and returned agapne to her owne house. .

55 Elizabethes tyme cane, that she shoulde be delinered, and fhe brought foorth a sonne. —

58 And her neyghbours, aud her tosins hearde howe the Lorde hadde shewed great merty bpd her, and they reioyced

with her.

F 59 Aid it canic to passe, that on the eyght
Genxvinb. dap they came to cirtumtile the chyide, andxxia and called his nante Zacharias, after

the name ok his father.

60 And his mother aunswered, and laid:

not lo, but he shalbe called John.

6 And they layde vnto her: There is none in thy kinrede that is named with this name. N

62 Aud they made signes to his father, howe he wouldve haue hym called.

63 And he asked for wrytyng tables, and
Wrote, saping, his name is John. And they maruepled all.

64. And his mouth was opened immedially, and his tounge looted) e he spake, and prapsed God. N

65 Aud feare cane on all them that dwelt nye vnto them: And all thele fayinges

Gen. xxi.c. 55

Were nopled avzove theoughout all the

hyll countrey ol Jurie.
66 And all they that hearde them, layde

em vp in their heartes, saying: v maner of chylde chall this U a hande of the Horde was with hym 4

67 And his father Zacharias was filed with p holy ghost x prophesied saying

68 Praysed be Tord God of Pract, for he hath vilited e redeemed his peopie

69 inen ae me an Hogue of Pat.

ation vnto vs, in the hon ig eee, feruaumt Dau, Tt 8 we

4o Euen as he promiled by the mouth of" his holy prophetes, whiche einai began aii 2

71 en 5 saue ie from our ene- G mies, and from the hande
0 a i | he hande of all that

72 That he would deale mertyfully wi dur fathers, and keinen hes hole “4 e gun that he worde peefoure

3 And that He woulde perkourme the Ca oth) which he [ware to our father Ann, ham, kor to gene vs.

7. That we, beyng deliuered out of the rains. handes of dur enemies, might feruc him without feare, .

575 All the dayes of our life, in uch Hoty: nesse and righteousnes Las are accepted] before hym.

76 Andthou chiloe shalt be called the prophete ot the hyghest: for thou shalt go befoze the fate of the Lorde, to prepare his wayes.

7 To geue knowledge of saluation Dito

is people, by the remiffion of their mes.

73 Through ö tender mercy of dur God, wherby the day spryng from an hygh hath vilited vs.

79 To geue lpght to them that sitte in ae darknelle, and in the chadowe of death. to guide dur feett into the way of peace.

80 And the chylde grewe, and wared strong in spirite, and was in wildernesse till the day tame when he chould chewe hym selfe vnto the Piraclites,

The seconde Chapter.

C iche tatkyng ot the worlde by Augustus Celar. 7 Christe is bone, vo he is she wed vnto the cheepheardes. 14 Che songue of the Angels. 21 The circum ; ciffon of Christ. s Simeon and Anna prophelie of pm. 40 Christe increas me aes” 46 dilputeth with the doctours, 51 and was obedient to

So much ag was sub-

let tothe Re
‘ tuns. 9

2 And this fick taring was made, when
Syrenius was liefetenauntin e

3 And every man went vnto his ow citie, to be fared. Gall

4 And Joseph also went vp froni 110 ice, out ok the cine SSMS ut,

urie, vnto the titie of Daud, whiche
Is talled Bethlehem, betause he was of the honle and linage ol Dann,

To be taxed with Marie his spoused

wyfe, which was with chylde.

And so it was, that whyle they were there, the dapes Were atcomplylched, that she shoulde be delinered.

And Khe brought foorth her lirst begotise” ten c sonne and wrapped himmkwadnur long clothes, e layde hym in a manger,
= pecauletiere was no rowme foz then

inthe Inne.

g There were inp lame tountrey sheepheardes, abpdyng in the fielde c Watch: png their flocke by nyght.

9 And loe, the Angel or the Lorde stoode harde by them, and the glorit of the
Lorde (hone rounde about them, x they were fore akrapde.

io And the Angel sapde vnto them, be not afrayde: For beholde, I bryng por tydynges of great iop, that shall come to all people. '

u FJor vnto vou is bome this daye, in the titie of Dauid, a lauiour, which is Christ

web.

the Lode,

u And take this fora ligne: Ne Chal finde the childe wrapped in lwadling clothes, and layde in a nianger. i

iz And straightwap, there was with the
Angel, a multitude of heauenlp souldiers, prapsyng God, and faptng.

14. Glorie to God on hye, and peace on the

earth, and vnto men a good Wwyll.

Cy And it came to pale, alsoone as the
Angels were gone away from them into heauen, < the sheepheardes {aid one to another: Let vs go nowe cuen vnto
Bethlehem, and see this thyng that is tome to passe, whiche the Horde hath chewed vnto vs.

6 And they came with haste, and founde

Marie and Joleph, and the babe layde ma manger.

17 And when they had seene it, they pu-

blilshed abrode the faying whiche was tolde them, ol that chide.
3 And all they that hearde it, wondred

at those thinges which were tolde them N

ok the sheepheardes.
9 But Marie kept al those sayinges, and pondered them in her heart.
20 And the cheepheardes returned, praͤysyng e laudyng God, for all the thinges that they had hearde and seene, euen as it was tolde vnto them. so

2 And when the eygth day was come, that the chylde shoulde be *tivcinialed, Sen vn b. his name was called Pelus, whiche Phe.
Was fo named of the Angel, before he was conceaned in the wombe. 2

22 And when the dayes of her purifiz cation, after the lawe of Doyles, were accommplityed, they *brought hym to Levis ad
Hierulalem, to present himto the Lord. 80.

23 (As it is written in the lawe of p Lord:
Euery nian chylde that firke openeth Exod en the Wontbe, chalbe called holy to p lord) Num. vürg.

24. And to offer, as it is sapdt in the lawe ofthe Lorde, à papre of turtle doues, or two poung pigions. ;

25 And beholde, there was aman indie: rusalem, whole name was Simeon: and the fante man was iust alid godlpe, and loked for the conlolation of Jirgel,

and the holy ghost was vpon hym.

26 And a reuclation was geuen hym of E the holy ghost, not to fee death, belore he had seene the Lordes Christe.

27 And he came by inspiration into the temple: And when the father c mother brought in the chylde Jesus, to do for hym akter the custome of the'lawe,

28 Then toke he hym vp in his armes, ¢ praysed God, and layde:

29 Low nowe lettest thou thy servaũt depart in peace, atcordyng to thy prounse.

30 Jor mine eyes haue seene thyfatuatio,

31 Whiche thou halk prepared before the fate of all people: ö

32 A light to be reuealed to the gentiles, 0. xlixb and the glory of thy people Jsrael. v 42s:

3 And Joleph and his mother marueyled at thole thinges which were spo- ) crue, ken of hym. ene

34 And Simeon blessed © them, € lade e

vnto Marie his mother: beholde, this team chylde is fet to be the fall €™ pprysyng an comer agapne ot many in Israel, æ fora sigut e
Which is spoken agaynst. ba $ eee

35 And mozeoner, the [worde © (yall bene aue pearte thy foule, that the thonghtes of a many Heartes® map be opened. ie

36. And ther was a prophetisse, one ANNA, e Sento the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of heey
Aler, which was of a great age, and had dent
Ipued with an hulbande © seuen peres cores acres from her virginitie. pon be. ten

37 And the had ben a wpdowe about aao care

fourescore and foure peres, whiche Dez mrcmanses

parted not from the temple, but serned Wera

God with fastynges and prayers npght ssn

and dap. 7
EW And

Leui. d

38 Aud fhe,

commyng at the fame instant vpon them, conlelled lykewile the
Lowe, aud fpake or hym, to all them that loked lor redenptio in Hierusalem.

39 And when they had perfournied all

chynges, attordyng to the lawe of the onde „they returned into Galilee, to their owue citie Nazareth.

Reg uc. 40 And 'the chylde grewe, and Yared

Exod. vii. e. +

Leui.xxti.a

strong in spirite, and was fylled with wildome: ¢ the grace of God was vpon
1 55 his parentes went to
1 Nowe, his par

c euery yere, at the keast of Passouer.

42 And when he was twelue pere old.

43 And wh

they aftenden 5 75 a , after the tustome of the tea *

Ms echey had fulfilled the dayes, as they returned home. the chylde Jesus abode styll in Hierulalem: & Joleph

and his mother knewe not of it.

en

Cas pate 2

ght to pale, thatthe office wat deuwtd.
Elay. xl. a.

5 %

(b) Biinnpes dimentes thal be cat away

4 But they, supposyng hynito haue ben

inthe company, canie a Bayes tourney, and fought hym among their kintfolke and acquayntaunce.

Hierusa-

45 And when they founde hym not — turned backe againe to Hi — iu bun Dierusalem, and

46 And it tame to passe, that aft dayes, they founde hym in the temple sittyng in the myddes of the doctours hearyng them, and polpng them.

47 And all that hearde hym, were atty: Nag, nied at his vnderstanding € aunlweres. te

4 And when they fare hym, they were amased. And his mother fad vnto him:

Sonne, Why hat thouthus dealt With

bs: Beholde, thy father and J haue

fought thee, sorowyng. .

49 And he sayde vnto them: Howe is it that ye fought me; wyste pe not, that

i pe go 11547 de bulinesse-

o And "they vnderstoode not that saying tu which he spake vnto them. n

52 And he Went downe with them, and

tame to Nazareth, e was obedient vnto them: But his mother kepte all thele sayinges in her heart.

5; And Jelus intreased in wiledome and stature, and in kauour wich God r men.

AK, and. xxiif

1 The thirde Chapter.

C z he preachyng and baptipme of John, 7 he charplye rebuketh the hrpocrites,
5 “) 18 thought to be Christe, 16 Johns testimonie ok Chettte, 20 his imprison ·

ment, 21 Cette is baptised, 23 the age and genealogie of Chrisle.

Owe, in the fifteenth

pere of ö raigne of Ti-

6] | bertus Celar, Pontius

ej \ Otlate being lieftenaũt

ok Jurie, and Perode

b being tetrarch of Gali-

* lee, e his brother Phi-

lip tetrarch of Iturea, and of the regi-

onofp Trachonites, and Lyplanias the tetrarch of Abume,

a and Caiaphas were the
Hye” priestes, the worde of the Lorde came vnto John, the sonne ol Zacharias in the Wyldernesse.

And he came into all the toastes about
Jordane, preachyng the baptilme of repentaunce, for the remission of sinnes:

———— —„— ——̃ (v
N
N

4 ASit is writtẽ inp booke of the wordes

of Esaias the prophete, saping: The

voyce of a tryer in wyldernesle, prepare

ae pe ety ofp Lorde, make his pathes a

pait.
Euery ballep shalbe fplled, and euer

mountapne e hyll chalbe brought lowe:
And thynges that be troked, shalbe made strayght, and the rough wapes

shalbe made playne. pe
6 And all flelche, Hall {ee the laluatlon "5, of God. £» . | 1

to bs, and out

7 Then saide he to the people that were a n come foorth to be baptised of hym: O avnnte generations of bipers , who hath forewarned pou to flee front the wath to tome:

Bryng foorth therefore due fruites ol repentaunte, and begyn not to say withe e e e 25

er: For J (aye vnto you,

is able of thele stanes, to rayse bp chüdrẽ

vnto Abraham. the © axe layed vnto the

is hewen done, and cast into the fire. saying:

i He N eth, and sayth vnto them. hee

rhe

then, ee

new se. we!

hath meate, let bpm dolrke, ai to be

Maister what.

“Phat fall we do

And he layde vnto them: Neqquire no

more thenthat which is appoputed vn-

to vou. . i The souldiours lpkewyle demaunded of hym, saying: And what chan we doe

Arid he saide vnto then: Mo violence to

no man, neither accule any falleip, and be content with pour wages.
15 As the people wayted e all men muledintheir heartes of John, whether he were verp Chilt :
16 Jolm aunlwered, and

ter: but one stronger then J tonimeth,

whole schoes latched J ani not worthy

to vmole, he shall baptize vou with the holp ghost, and with fire. f ch

üb 7 Which hath his fanne in his hande, & wpll purge his flooze, & wyll gather the

wheate into his barne: but p chaffe wyl

burne vp, with fire that neuer shalbe

quenched.

5 tation, preached he vnto the people.

ne I9- Then Herode the tetrarch, when he was rebuked of hym for Herodias, his brother Philippes wpke, and for all tht

© tupls which herode dyxd.

20. Added this aboue all, € shut vp John inppfon, —

a Nowe it canie to pale, as all the peo-

isi. ple were baptised, and when Jelus

was baptized, and dyd prape, that the heauen was opened, ö nun And the holy ghost came downe, in a bodyly Tape lyke a Doue, vpon hym: and a vopte canit from heauen, which

sayde, Thon art my beloued sonne,

in thee J am well pleated,

tes 2 And Jelus him selfe began to be about ua. khirtie peres of age, beyng (as he was

supposed) the sonne of Joseph: whiche

was (the tonne j of Heli, *
24 Whiche was the sonne of Matthat, whiche was the sonne of Leu, whiche

Was the sonne of Melchi, whiche was the sonne of Janna, whiche was the sonne of Joseph:

25 Whichẽ was? sonne of Batthathias,

whiche was the sonne of Anios, whiche was the sonne of Naum, whiche was the sonne of Helly which was the lonne of Magge:

26 Whiche was the fonne of Maath,
Which was the sonne of Matthathias, which was the sonne of Semei, whiche

Wered. and faid uta them hii all, In deede J baptize pou with wae

And many other thinges, in his exhor-

NN
Was the fonne of Joleph, whiche was the sonne of PD, whieh
27 Whithe Was the sonne of Joanna, which was the sonne of Whela, whiche was the forme of Zorobabel, Whiche was the sonne of Salathiel, which was the sonne of Peri:
28 Whlche Was the konne of qhelcht, whiche was the sonne of Addi, whiche

Wag the sonne of Colam, whiche was

the sonne of Elnodam whiche was the

Mheche hase forine of Hote, whi

29 Whiche was the sonne df Jole, was the sonne ok Eliezer, i ee sonne of Jom, whiche wasp
Matthat, which was v sonne of Leu:

30 Whicht was the sonne ol Simeon,
Whiche was the sonne of Juda, whiche

was the sonne of Jolcph, whiche was the forme of Jonan, whicht was the sonne of Eliacim:

zi Whithe was the sonne of Melea, whiche was p sonne of Menam, whiche
Was 5 somie of Matthatha, which was the sonne of sRathan , whiche was the

sonne of Dauid:

32 Whiche pee oa ie whiche
Was the forme of Obed, Which was the sonne of Boos, Whiche was the sonne ok
Salm, which was p sonne of Paallo:
33 Whiche Was the forme of Aminadab, whiche was the sonne of Aram, whiche was the fonne of Efron, whiche was the fonne of hares, whiche Was the sonne of Juda:
34. Whichẽ was p sonne ol Jacob, whithe was the sonne of Alaac, Which was the sonne of Abraham, whiche was v sonne of Thara, which was the sonne of a-

thor:

35 Which was p lonne ol Saruch, which
Was the sonne of Ragau, whiche was the sonne of Phaleg, which was y sonne of Heber, which Was the sonne ol Sala:

zewhiche was the sonne of Arpharad, whiche was the sonne of Sem, whiche
Was the sonne of Noe, whiche was the sonne of Tamech:

37 Whiche was the sonne of Mathusala, whithe was the lonne ol Enoch, Which was the sonne of Jared, whiche was the sonne of Maleleel, whiche was the sonne of Cainan: 7

33 Which was the sorme of Henos which was 5 sonne of Seth, which was p sonne of Adan, which was the somic of God.

E iii ¶ The

ome ok

Deut. vin. a.
Math. uii.a.

tapetl hym- ge

“q The: ii. Chapter.

Ii che temptation and kastyng of Chile. u He ouercommeth the deupll. 19

4 —.— a Hazareth n admiration of the people, 24 4 prophet is desppled, teaching in his ownecouncrey. 3 He healeth the man pollelled with anctiill, 4 the deuili contesteth him to be Cheiste- 53 he healeth peters wyuez mother, 4 he heated many of diets diteales. 41 the deuyls conkesse Christe, and are of bpm reproued, J; and he preacheth through the cities,

A1 Elus, being full ot

Math. iiii.a. rk. i. b.

Jule

turned from

wylderuesse,

And was fourtie. g oi dapes tempted. of thofedapes dyd he cate nothyng: And
Dh en wer were ended, he afterwarde

hungred. —
5 and the deuyll layde vnto by : He

thou be the sonne of God, comntaunde

this stont that it be made bread.
4 And Jesus aunlwered hym, laying: tis Mitten, that man chall not lyue

y bread only, but by euery word of god.

5 And the deupll toke hym into an hye

domes of p Worlde in a moment of tine.

936 And the deuyl fade vnto hym: all this

power wyll J geue thee cuerywbyt, €

the glory okthem, for that is deliuered

vnto me. and to whomsdeuer J wyll, J e Wit — *

fa i Angels charge ouer thee, to kepe thee.
John. Fü. 11 Ard in their handes they (halt beare

Deut. vic.
Math. ul. g.

CH And Fetus returned, by the power of the spirite, into Galilet: ¢ there went a fame ofhym, thoughout all the regi-

the holy ghost re-
Hoy dane, x wasledde. by the spirite into nu he wet into the lynagogue on the Saͤb-

the deupll, and in

. pte ae her Bie =

15 And he taught in their spnagogucs « wehe eee 15 men. ee

16 And he tame to Masareth, where}

Was nursed: and, as his dlm Was, 9

both bay, and stoode vp foz to reade.

17 And there was delered vnto hym the booke ok the prophett Elatas: And 5...
Whe he had opened the booke.hefounne the plate where it was written, —

18 The spirite of the Lord vpon me, be- Bays, cause he hath annoynted me, to are the Gospel to the poore he hath lent ine, to heale the broken hearted, to preache

deliueraunte to thecaptiue, x retouering

of syght to the blynde, freely to set at libertie them that are bruisled

5 ye 19 And to preache the acceptable pere o t a niouttayne, Ethewed hym all the king- 0 of

the Lorde. |

20 And he cofed the booke,and gaue ita gayne to the minister, and fate downe:

And the eyes ot all them that were ind

spnagogue, were kalstened onhym.

21 And he began to lay vnto the: this day is this scripture fulfilled in pour cares.

22 And all bare him witnelse, k wondted Melis

at Pp gratious Wordes Whiche proceaded 1

out of his mouth. e And they laͤpde, 1s not this Josephes lonne

23 And he faide vnto them: Be wpll be

terly fay vnto me this prouerbe, philition heale thy selfe: nabatioener we haue heard done in Capernaũ do p fame here lpkewyse in thine ownt countrep.

24. And he saide: Neryly J lay vnto pou.
*no prophete is accepted in his olbue si" tountrep.

25 But J tell vouok a trueth, mand wre e dowes were in Ilrael, in the dapes of fe
Elias, when heauen was shutte thee peres t sixe monethes, when Pian fv nuchment was thoughout all lande:

26 And vnto none ofthe was Ellas fent, saue vnto Sarepta,acitic of Sidon, vn toa woman that was a wydolbe. .

27 And many lepers were in Plcacl, b e. thetyme ok Ellzeus the prophete ON none ok then Was clensed, sauyng Haas man the Syrian. And

a

they hearde thele thynges, Were fplicd
With wzath: —

29 And rose vp, and thrust hym out of the citic, and led hym euen vnto the edge of the hyll (wheron their citie was biult,) p they nught cast Hint downe headlong.

30 Wut he, passyng through the myddes

f of them, went his wap: 2»

zi t And came downe to Capernaum
ꝗ titie of Galilee, and there taught them onthe Sabboth dapes.

32 And they were altonyed at his

doc-

lch tring: Foz his preachyng was with

e's pobber uk x.. l „ 2. 9 1 ih ome wor 3 Aid in the spnagogue, there was a man, which had an vncleane spirite of a deuyll, and cryed with a loude voyce,
34 Saping: Oh what haue we to do with thee, thou Pelus of Hazareth-
Art thou come to destroy vs: I knowe who thou art, euen the holy one ol God.
35 And Pelus rebuked hym, faying:
Holde thy peace, and come out of hym.
And when the deupil had throwen him in the middes, he canie out of hym, and hurt hom not. nr
And feare came on them all, and they spake among them selues, sapinng hat mianer a thyng is this: For with auctoritie and polber he commaundeth the foulc spirites, and they come out,

y Saint Luke.

28 And all they itthefpnagogue, When 37 And i

XXXVI ‘

he fame of hym spread abrode,

throughont euerp place of the tountrey rounde abont. )

38. And when he was rilen vp, tome out df the synagogue, he entred into Simons houle: And Simons wines mother was taken with a great feuer, they nade intercession to hym for her.

35 And he stoode ouer her, and rebuked the feuer, and the feuer left her: And
1 (he avole, and nunittred vnto them. 3

40 When the Sunne Was downe, all G they that had ficke, taken with diuers dileases, brought them vnto hyni :And he layde his handes on euerp one of then, and healed them.

41 And deuyls also came out of many, dach. l. trying ⁊ saping: Thou art that Christe, and d. the sonne ot God. And he rebuked the, - and fuffred them not to speake; Foz they knewe that he was Christe.

42 Asfoone as it was day, he departed, and went into a desert place: And the people fought by, and came to hym, and kept hyim, that he shoulde not depart from them. |

43 And he sayde vnto them, J mut preache the kyngdonie ol God to other cities also : Foz therfore am J sent.

44. And he preached in the spnagogues of: Galilee.

Mat. viii. h. and Mark. i. c.

vines’ The v. Chapterr.
¶ 1 Christe teacheth out of a hippe, othe great draught of kishe io certayne dilciples are called, 12 he clenteth the leper, is he prapeth in the wildernesse 13 he healeth the man ok the pautfie; 27 calleth Matthewe the publican, 29 he eateth with sinners, zo the pharifees. murmure, 34 he exculeth his difciptes; 35 be wyng their alllictions after

his aslention, 36 ne we and olde agree not.
T came to pasle, that when p people prealled

vpon hym to heave the

worde of God, he.

(Ds stoode by the lake of

Genezareth,

= And farbe two thtp-

: ene by the lakes {poe : But the ia, ermen were gone out of them, and

were waschyng their nettes.

3 And he entred into one of the shippes,
Which pertayned to Simon, and prayed

by that he woulde thautt out, a litle

from the lande: And he fate downe,

and taught the people out of the shippe.

4. When he had lelt speakyng, he layde

vnto Simon: Launche out into the

deepe, and let flip pour nettes, to make a draught.

5 And Simon aunlwered, and sayde

vnto hym: Maister, we haue laboured

all nyght, and haue taken nothyng: e-

uerthelesse, at thy commaundement J

Wyll loofe foorth the nette.
And when they had this done, they

inclosed A great multitude of filshes:

Wut their nette braaze. |

And they beckened vnto their felowes, which were in the other shippe, that they shoulde come, and helpe them. And they came, and fylled both the shippes, B that they suncke agayne. 8

8 When Simon Peter sawe this, he fel dolbne at Jesus knees, saping: Lode, go from nie, for J am a finfull man.

9 FJeor he was beterly astonped, and all that were with hym, at the draught of fisshes, which they had taken.

Lice "

— —— = — 2 ar
| 10 And fo was allo James and John 24. “Wut that ye may knowe that the d

the sonnes of Zebedee , whiche were arteners with Simon. And Jelus fayde bnto Simon: Feare not, from hencefoorth thou (halt Oeatehy nien.
And when they had brought bp their boates to the shore, W they forsoke all, and folowed pnt. 2 i
Ciz And it tanie to passe, that whe he was
Sb ner in atertapne citie: Beholde, there was}
Festen: d inan full of leprosie, and when he had
5 spyed Jelus, he fell flat on his face, and besought hym, faying: Lorde, pk thou
Wylt, thon canst make me cleane.
And he stretched foozth his hande, and touched hym, faying : J wyll, be thou deane. And immediatlp the leprosie departed from hym. And he charged hym, that he shoulde tell no man:
Lula. I4. Wut go (larch hej and shewe thy selfe to the priest, and offer for thy clensyng, actordyng as Doyles commaunded, for a witnesse vnto them.

15 But so much the more went there a fame abrode of hym, and much people tanie together to heare, and to be healed of hym, from their infirmities.

16 And he kept hym selke a part in the wildernesse, and praped. *

D/ G And it came to passe, on a tertapne

popnted to be die.

s d

bp they might be let or hynyrcd 9 * preachyng o
ö the Selptl.
GB

Day, as he Was teachyng, that there

were phavifees c doctours of the lawe, sittyng by, which were rome out of all the townes of Galiice and Juric, and

Hierusalem: And the power of the

Worde Was prelent, to heale them.

18 And beholde, men brought in a bed, a man which was taken With a paulsie, and they sought meanesto bryng hyn in, and to lay hym before hym.

19 And when they toulde not kynde on what syde they myght bryng hym in, because of the prease, they Went vpon the toppe of the Houle, and let hym downe through the tylyng, bed and all, enen in the myddes before Jelus.

Eo DOHC He sawe their faith he faire onto

him: Man, thy sinnes are forgeuen thee.

2 And the stribes and the pharifces be-

gan to thynke, saping: What felowe is

Mathax.a.
Matk.iia.

Maki
E Hay. lin. d. and. xl. d.

Who tan forgeue sinnes but God only-
2 Wut when Jesus perceaued their thoughtes, he q̃mlwered, e sayde vnto them: What thynke ye in pour heartes-
23 Whether is easier to fay, thy finnes be forgeuen thee:or to lay ryle vp e walke-

this, Which speaketh blalphennes-

sonne of man hath power to Marking finnes on earth che sayde vnto hic Ace of the paulsie) I say vnto thee, aryle take vp thy bed and go vnto thy house.
25, And immediatlp he role vp before ea paces he r p. rted to his owne ö prapsyng Gd. .
26 And they were all amazed, and they gaue the glory vnto God and were
{plied with feare, saying: Doutlesle we haue leene straunge thynges to day, oy
27 Alter thele thynges, he went foorth, F c lawe a publttane named Leut, sittyng Machi, at the receipt or custome: and he fayne Mis | vnto hym, folowe me.

2 And he left all, role vp, e folowed him.

29 And Teui made hym a great feat in his owue Houle. And there was a great tonipanie of publicanes, and of other that fate lat meate) with them.

30 Wut they that were stribes and pha- Male

risees among them, murmured agaynst Pata his difcipies faping : Why do pe eateand ad drynke With publicanes and sinners-

31. And Jelus aunswered, and salde vnto them, They that are whole, neede not the phisition: But they that are sicke. Pe

32 J tame not to call the © ryghteous : Sara butfinnerstorepentaunee, its,

3 And thep lapde vnto hym: Why do wg the dilciples of John fast often, e pray, buntes and the diftipies of the pharisees allo: G but thyne eate and drynke!

34 He sayde vnto them. Can pe make dun the chyldren of the weddyng chaumber N

fat, whyle the brydegrome in with the:

35 Wut the dapes Wyll come, when the brydegrome alfo shalbe taken away frõ them: then shall they fatt in thole dayes.

36 Me spake also vnto them a similitude.

No man putteth a peece of à newe garment, into an olde vesture: Foz then the newe renteth (the olde . and the prece that was taten outol the newe , agreeth not with the olde. | nny ll

37 And no man powreth newe wyne in

to olde vessels: Foz yl he do, the newe wyne wyll burst the vellels, and runne out it selte, and the beffels chall perishe.

38 But newe wine mut be put into newe vessels, and both are preserued. hf

39 No man allo that drinketh e:

strayghtway tan awape with neue:
For he sayth, the olde is better.

¶ The

by C

aint Luke.
The. vj. Chapter.

XXXVIII.

¶ i Che difciples plucke eaves ol come on the Sabboth. o he healeth the man with the withered Hand, i the cholpng of his Ipollles, 20 of blellynges and curtpnges, 27 the loue of our enemies, 29 to forgeue one another, 7 rache iudgemẽt reprehended, 44 the tree is knowen by his kruite, 4 the hearte knowen by the workes, 47 with what

kruite the worde ok God is to be hearde.

D it tame to e wdaslle, on the se-

cite, and rubbed them in their handes.
2 And certapne of the pharisees sayde vnto then: Why do ye that, which is not laub full to do on p Habboth dapes:
3 And Pelus aunlwered them, x sayde: cu. aue pe not read what Dauid dyd, when he hym selfe was an hungred, and they which wert with hym:

Howe he went into the houle of God, v. and dyd take and eate the shewe'bread, and gaue also to them that were with

byni, which was not lawfull to cate, -

t Dut for the priestes only: oS And he fayde duto them: The forme ol
Bie man is Lord also of p Sabboth day. e 6 And it came to passe also in anodan, ther Sabboth, that he entred into the b. spnagogue, and taught: And there was
à man, whose right hand was dried vp.
And the scribes t pharisees watched hym, whether he woulde heale on the

Saäbboth 1 10 that they myght fynde

howe to atcule hym.

8 Wut he knewe their thoughtes, and laid to the man which had the withered hande: Ryle vp, and stande foorth in
5 i And he arose, and stoode

Then sayde Jesus vnto them, J wyll alke pou a question: Whether is it lawkull on the Sabboth dapyes to do good, or to do eupll: to saue ones lyfe, or to destroy ite l

lo And he behelde them all in con alle,

end E lapde vnto the nan: Stretche forth ib. thy hande. And he dyd fo: * € his hande
“ia Was restored agayne as whole as the

n And they were kylled with madnelle, and tonmumed together among them fines, what they nyght do to Jelus. x

n And it tame to pasle in thole dapes,

p he wet out into a mountapne to pray, ch rü
€ continued all nyght in prayer to God.

1 And affoone as it was day, he called his dilciples: And of them he chofe Mae twelue, whon he called Apotties: =

14 (Simon, whom he alfo named peter, and Andrelwe his brother: James and
John, Philip and Barthelmewe,

15 Matthewe and Thomas, James the soune of Alpheus, x Simon, which is called Zelotes:

16 And Judas, James (brother and
Judas Iscariot, which alfo was the traptour.)

17 And he tame downe with them, and stoode in the plapne fielde, and the company of his distiples, and a great duc e multitude of people, out of all Jurie dich. . d. c Hierulsalem, and frö the fea coãst of lohn. .
Lyre and Sidon, which came to heare hym, and to be healed of thew diseales,

13 And they that were bered with foule spirites: and they were healed.

19 And all the people preassed to touche hym: for there went vertue out of hym, and healed then all.

20 And he lyft vp his eyes vpon his dilciples, and fapde: Wlelled be pe poore, for zy pours is the kyngdome of God. Mach. v.a.

21 Blessed are ye that hunger nowe, for ye shalbe fatiffied, Blessed are ye that
Weepe nowe, for pe hall langh.

22 Wlesled shall ve be when men hate pou, efeperate pou (from their companie] and raile on pou, Eput out pour names
10 an euyll thyng, for the sonne of mans

23 Reioyte ve in that dap, and be glad:

For beholde, pour rewarde is great in heauen: n Foz thus dyd their fathers vnto the prophetes. N 1

24 But wo vnto pou that are riche: for “movi pe haue pour consolation.

25 Wo vnto von that are full: for ve shall hunger. oo vnto pou that nowe laugh: for pe shall wayle and weepe.

26 Wo buto pou when all men prayse pou: for fo bpd their fathers to the falle

ophetes. prophet on

But J fay vnto von Which heare: a ge 11 enennies, Do good to them
Which hate pou. . ,

j 28 WStellechemthat turse pon: And pray for the which wrongkully troublt pou.

29 And vntd hym that supteth ther on
~ the onecheekt, offer allo the other. And hym that taketh away thy cloke, forby not to take thy toate also. i
30 Geue to euery man that atketh of thee:

And ok hym that taketh away thy goodes, al ke them not agapne.
Matvib. z And as ve woulde that nien shoulde
Toben do to vou, do pe alo to them lpkewyse.
Nubvg, 32 For yf pe lone them which lone pon, what thanke haue pes Foz sinners allo loue their louers.

33 And yk pe do good for them which do good for you, what thanke haue pez Foz sumers allo do tuen the fame.

34 And yl ve lende to them, of whom ye hope to reccaue, What thanke haue pez
For synners also lende to linners, to retea ue such lyke agayne.

35 Wut loue pe pour enemies, c do good,

and lende, lokpug for nothyng agayne:
And pour rewarde shalbe great, and ye halbe the chyldren ol the hyest:for he is kynde vnto the vnkynde, x to the euyll.
E36 Be yt therfore merciful, as your fkllacher allo is mercifull.
Matvi2 37 Judge not, e ye shall not be iudged:
Condemne not, and pe shall not be condenined: Forgeue, ⁊ pe shalbe forgeuen.
Proud. 38 Glut, and it halbe geuen vnto pon: good mealure, presled downe, e chaken nite together, and runnyng ouer, chall nien
4 f Bes into pour bosomes. Foz with the dune mealure that pe meate withall,
Thail other men meate to pon agayne.
39 And he put feorth a fimditude vnto them: Canthe blynde leade the blynde-
Do they not both fall into the ditche-

Mach.v.f.

Math. xv. b.

aon i g. 4.0 The diltiple is not aboue his maister:

| he Gol pe

Wut whosoeuer Wylbe apertert dultple

N betta is.

AL And why {eet chou a moate in

brothers epe: but conhderett not 5 Naetb az beat thats t dent owne eye: il

42 Either, howe cant thou fay to brother: Brother, let nie pull out che nioate that is in thyne eye, When thoy scest not the beanie that is in thyne owne epe- Thon hypotrite, caste ont the beame out of thyne owne eye first ethen thaltthouleepertectlytoputont the moate that is in thy brothers dye. ex

48, For it is not agood tree that bepugeth na. koorth euyll fruite: Meither is that an G n that bryngeth foorth good

44 For eutry tree is knomen by his fruite: fo ot thomes do not mẽ gather fygges, nor of busches, gather they grapes.
45 Agood man, out of the good treasure of his heart, bringeth foorth that which ts god: And an tuyll man, ont of the cuyll treasure of his heart, bypnacth foorth that which is euyll. For ok the
N of the heart, his month ce h. f a
46 Why call pe me *Logde, Lorde, and Ment
Bo not as I bpd pouz
4/7 Whosdoeuer commiethtome,ehearcth mp sapinges, and doth the same, J wpll shewe pou to whom he ls lpke. 4.
48 Pe is lyke a man which bunt ant houle, and digged deepe, and layde the foundation on à rocke. And when the
Waters avole, the fludde beat vpon that house, and coulde not moue it: For it was grounded vpon a rocke.
49 Wut he that heareth and doeth not, is lyke a man, chat without foundation, built an boule vpon the earth, agaynst which che fludde dyd beate, and tt inimediatly : And the fall of that boule was great. a

J The. vij. Chapter.
© 2 He healed the captaynes teruaunt, o the kayth or the Centurion. i he rayted bp the

widdowes sonne, 16

he is confelled to be a great prophete, 19 John Baptist tent his

dilctples to Christe, 24 Christes testimonie of John, 31 he rebuneth the Je weg for their

e zs he eateth with the phartlce, the woman walcheth his tete with

Hen he had ended all his sapinges, in the

. audience of the people,
99 7 i fp he entred into Caper:
* A Oi nau, ‘

And a tertayne Cen-

turions seruaunt, which was deare bn to hym, lay ficke, and was in perpil of death. —
And when he hearde of Jelus, he lew vnto hynd the elders of the J ad fechpng hm that he wontde co Healt

And when they came to Jelus, they pelought hym instantly, faying he is worthy that thou shouldest do this for hym.
‘ Foz he loucth our nation, and hath pnilt vs a spnagogue.

when he was nowe not farre from the houle, the Centurion fent kriendes to s beni g vnto hym: Torde, trouble

B not thy selke, for J ani not worthy that

thou shouldest enter vnder my rooke.
Wherefore J thought not my selfe

worthy to conie vnto thee: but fay thou

the worde, x my seruaunt shalbe whole.

g Foz JJ allo ama man, fet vnder power, and haue vnder me souldiers: and
Flay vntg one go, and he goeth: and to another, come, and he commeth: and to my seruaunt, do this, and he doth it.

9 When Hels hearde these thynges, he marueyled at hym, and turned hym about, and sapde to the people that folowed hym: J fay vnto vou, I haue
91 1 fo great fayth , no, not in

rac

Io And they that were sent, turned backe home agapne, and founde the seruaunt

hole, that had ben sicke.

qu And it came to passe the (dar) after, that he went into a titie, Which is called

Naini: and many ok his dilciples went
With Hyni,and much people.

i When he came nye to the gate of the titie, beholde, there was a dead man tarped out, which was] the only fonne of his mother, and the was a widdowe: a much people of the titie was with her.

B Aud when the Lowe sawe her, he had tompassion on her, and sayde vnto her: Weepe not.

14 And he tame nyc, ¢ touched the beere,
(and they that bare hym stoode styll)
And he sayde: Houng man, J lay vnto thee, aryle.

„ And he that was dead late vp, and
%, began to fpeake: And he delpuered sxe hyn to his mother.

16 And there came a feare on them all,

„ |C they gauc the glory vnto God, saying: u Agreat prophete is risen vp anions vs, and veryiy God hath vifited his people.

17 And this rumour of hym went foorth throughout all Juric,⁊ throughout all the regions Which lye rounde

Then Felus Went with them. And

18 And the dilciples of John, shewed

_ bymofalt as .

1 And John called vnto hyn two of ha. his dilctples, and sent them to Jesus, saying: Art thou he that shoulde come, or shall we loke for another:

20 When the nien were come vnto hom, they fayde, John Waptiste ent vs vnto thee, faying : Art thou he that shoulde tome, 02 shall we loke for another:

2 And in that fame houre, he cared maz nyc of their infirmities c plagues, and of

euyll spirites, and vnto many that were blynde, he gane fight.

22 Then Jesus aunlwered, and sapde vnto them: Go pour way, and bryng worde agayne to John, what thynges ye haue seene and hearde, howe that the blynde see, the halt go, the lepers S art dented, the deafe heare, che dead ko. ryse agayne, to the poore is the Gofpelt cha.

preached,
23 And happy is he, that is not offended at me.

24 And when the meslengers of John au
Were departed, he began to {peakie vnto the people concernyng John: What
Went ye ont. into the Wilderne fle fo2 to feez arcede shaken with the Wyndez

25 But what went pe out for to feez A man clothed in soft rayment: Beholde, they which arc gorgeoufly appareled,

c lyue delicately, are in kynges courtes.

26 Wut what went pe foorth to see: A prophete: Bea, I fay to you, and moze then
à prophete.

27 This is he, of whom it is written: . eholde, J lende nip messenger before NA thy fate, Which shall prepare thy way before thee. ö

28 For J flay vnto pou, among womens E chyldrẽen, is there not a greater prophete then John Baptist. Meuerthelle, he that 15 lesle in the kyngdome of God, is greater then he.

29 And all the people, and the publicaues that hearde hym, © tultified God, and cd

Were baptised with the baptilme Of ine ano?

30 But the pharifees and lawyers despi; al sed the councel of God, agaynst them selues, and were not baptised of hym. |

zi And the Worde fayde : Whervnto Ves thal I ipken the meu of this generation: and what (thveng) are they lyke-

32 They are lpke vnto chyldren, littyng

in

by Saint Luke. ASXVIUI],

in the market place, and crying one to aht and laymng: We Haire pyped vnto pou, and ye haue not daunted ; We haue mourned to pou, and pe haue not

wept. 5 N
Mathiiia. 33 105 John Baptist cane, neither eae
7 uo . — nl Wyne, ard pe ap he hach the denpll.
34- The fone of man is come, and eateth and drynketh, and ye faye, beholde a gluttonous man, and an (onmeakurable] drynker of wyne, a frende of publicanes and finners, 0 i ehen 35 And wil dome is tified of © all her
180 pa cl Id en. . bi te 36 nd one of the phavifees desired hynt, that he woulde cate with hym.
And he went into the pharilees Houle, and fate downe to meate.

And beholde, a woman in that citie, der che. Which was a sinner, assoone as the bela knie we that Jesus fate at meate in the ue pharisees boule, he brought an alabas-

ter bore of oyntment:

which the pharifecscona
Lemne, fo that

til doine 18 37

38 And stoode at his feete behynde hynt,

Weeppng, and began to wache his feete

With teares, t dyd wype them with the

heeres offer head, and kyssed his feete, and anoynted them with the opntment.

39 When the pharisee which had bydden

hym, sawe, he spake within hym selfe, laping: If this man were a prophete, he woulde surely knowe who, x what maner of woman this is, that touched hym, for fhe is a sinner.
40 And Jesus aunlwered, and sayde vn-

7] he Golpel

to hm Simon, J haue somewh fay Dito thee. And he layde: 7 fay on, “ de lapde: Mallet,

41 There was a certapne lend b had two detters: The one 8001 1 hundred pence, and the other fyftic,

42 When they had nothyng to pay, he foxgauc them both. Tell nie theretoge
Which of them wyll lone hym mioste

43 Sunonannfivered and Kube p a oti poh ec forgaue mot.

nd he fayde vnto hym: TI dunn. 2 .

44 And he turned to the woman ef
Into Sinon: Seest thou this Woman
J entred into thyne boule, thou gauest mend water for mp fete, but he ha
Wallen my feete with teares, € wyped them with the hetres of her head.

45 Thou gauest me no kplle: but the, fence the tyme I came in, hath not cealsed to kysse my feete.

46 Myne head with ople thou dyddest not anoynt: but she hath anoynted my feete with opntment. :

47 Wherfore J fay buto thee , many sinnes are forgenen her: for the loued much. To whom lesse is forgeuen, the same doth lesse loue.

48 And he sayde vnto her: thy sinnes are forgeuen thee. +
49 And they that fate at meate with hym, began to fay within them selues,
Who is this that forgeueth sinnes allo

50 And he sayde to the woman: Thy fayth bath faucd thee, go in peate. s Mv

q The viij. Chapter.

@ 2 Chyilte and his Apotties go from towne to towne, and preache, the women minister ok their goodes to Chpiste, s the parable of the feede, 16 ok the candle, 21 who are his mother and brethren. 24 Christe ceasleth the tempest. 27 he casteth the legion out ol the man poflefied, into the hearde of [wyne, 37 the Gadarenites pray hym to go out of the

countreyp, from death
D it came to passe afterwarde, that be him felfe wet throughout euery citie towne preachyng, x shewyng the kingdome of god, ke the twelue with hym.
And allo *certayne women, which were healed of eupll spirites, and mnfirnites , Marie which is called Mags
* out of whom went seuen de-

thoy if ;

; 2 N Bw q —, .

a

Lu.xxin.d, 2

3 And Joanna the wyfe of Cipla He-

43 he healed the woman of her bloody illue, 49 he rapled Jairus daugbter

rodes stewarde, and nifanna, ¢ many other which mired vnto hym o their substaunce. 4

4. hen much people were gathere together, e were come to hym dut or all cities, he spake by a similitude.

, „ Math. xi
5 The lover wet ont to so we his {ede yo

and as he sowed, somt fell by the war syde, and it was troden Downe, and the foules of the ayre deuoured it vp.

And fome kel on tones, and assoone

as it was sprong bp, it withered a war. betause it lacked moystnes. And

yar Lic ————_

<a And lome fell among thoes, © and the thornes sprang bp With it, and cho-
JS Wea tte
And lome fell on good grounde, and sprang vp, and bare fruite, an hundred falde. And as he sayde thele thynges, he cryed: He that hath eares to heare, let hym heare.
3) And his dilciples allked hym, saping what nianer of sinilitude is this:
And he sayde, Unto pouit is geuen to knowe the setretes of the kyngdome of
God: but to other by parables, that when they fee, they shoulde not fee, and when they heare, they shoulde not vnderstande. ain The parable is this. The scede, is the worde of God. n hole that are besyde the wap, are they that heare: then tomnieth the de-
> ypll, and taketh away the worde out of their heartes, lest they shoulde beleue, and be saued.

3 They on the stones, sare they) which when thep heare, reteaue the worde with toy : € hele haue no rootes, which lor a whyle beleue, and in tyme oftemptation go away. f

14 And that which fell among thornes, ave they, which Whe they haue hearde, go foorth, and are choked with cares ¢

vxßpches, and voluptuous lpupng, x being loorth uo fruite.

j But that (which fell} on p good groũde, are hep, which with a pure and good hearte heave the worde, and kepe it, and
¢ bryng koorth fruite through pacience, <n
No man when he lyghteth a candel, st, (ouereth it With a vellell, o2 putteth it

vnder a table, but setteth it on a tandlesticke, that they which enter in, may lee
„„ dthelyght. el? Jor nothyng is secrete, that shall not e CONIC abrode: Neither any thyng hyd,
900 chan not be knowen, and conic to

8 Lake heede therkore, howe ye heare.

a, Jor whosoener Hath, to hym chalbe ge-

fe Ue: And whosocuer hath not, from

hum shalbe také, euen that lame which
1 hesuppoleth that he hath.

, Then came to hym his mother and

e his brethren, and toulde not come at

hym for prease.

20 And it was tolde hym (by certapne]

9 — layde: Thy mother and thy bre-

ren stande without, woulde (ce the.

nt. ud

21 He aunswered, and fayde vnto them:
My mother e my brethren w are thele, cr cre gn
Which heare the worde of God, x do it. wove puetensd
22 And it tame to passe on a tertayne au. day, that he went into a shippe, and his distiples also: and he sayde vnto them,
Let vs go ouer vnto the other syde of
Wandiheynüched d th
23 And they latiched foorth: Wut as the a sayled he fella slepe, and there rab eae downe a storme on the lake, and they were fylled (with water), and were in teoperdie.
24. And they tame to hym, and awoke sp hym, saping: Maister, Maister, we are lot. Then he arose, and rebukes the
Wynde, e the tempest of water, and they teassed, and (fared calme.
25 And he sapde vnto thein: Where is pour fapth : And they feared, and wondred among them lelnes, saying: Who is this: Foz he tommaundeth bath the
Wyndes a water, and they obey hym. 4
26 And they lapled vnto the region of vv. the Gadarenites, which is ouer agaynst
OMmilce.
27 And when he went out to lande, there met hym out of the titie a tertayne man, which had deuyls long tyme, and ware no clothes, neither abode in any Houle: but in graues.
28 When he sawe Jesus, and had crped, he fell downe before hym, and With a . loude voyte sia What haue JJ to do Meth vilid with thee Felus, thou sonne of God mot hyest: I beseche thee tozment nie not.
29 (Fo2he commaunded the forte spirite to tonie out of the man: For oftentymes he had taught him, and he was bounde with chaynes, and kept with fetters: t he brake the bandes, and was caryed of the fiende into wildernesle.)
30 And Jesus alked hym, saping: What E is thy name: And he saͤpde, Legion: be-
15 manp Deuyls Were entred into pn.
31 And they befought hym, that he woulde not connnaunde them, to go out into the deepe. 8
32 And there was there, an hearde of many swyne, feedyng on an hyll: and they besought hyn, that he woulde fuk: fer them to enter into them: aud he fuk fered them. ‘
33 Then went che deuyls out of the man, and entred into the lwyne: And the hearde

heard ene ip violence into the lake, aud were choked.

N the heardmen sawe what Was done, hey fled: and when they Were departed, they tolde it in the cite, in the villages. .

35 Therfore they came out to fee what was done, and came to Jesus, ¢ founde the man out of whom the deuple were departed, sittyng at the fete of Jelus: clothed, a in his ryght mpade, aud they were afrapde. -

36 They allo which sawe it, tolde then by what meanes he that was pollessed of the deuyls, was healed.

37 Then the whole multitude of the tountrep about the Gadarenites, befought hym that he woulde depaärte from them, for they Were taken with

Anewing Arkat kcart. And he gat hym dp into
Maky.b. kbhe shippe, and returned backe agapnt.

538 Then the manout of whom the deuyls were departed, besought hym that he myght be with hym. But Felus tent
Hyni aay, saping: .

Go home agayne to thine owne honle, and shewe what o thynges fo euer God
Hath done kor thee. And he went his
Wap, and preached throughout all the citie, what thynges fo euer Jesus had done dito hym. ,

40 And it came topale, ö when Jesus
Was come agayne, the people reteaued hym : For they all wayted oz hym.

Nach bed. 41 Aud behold, ther came a man named

Dark ve. Ilairus, he was a ruler of p spnagoge, e he fell dowuc at Pelusfeete, praying him that he would come into his honsc:

42 FJor he had but one daughter only, vpon a twelne peres of age, and fhe lay a dying. (But as he went, the people thronged hym.

43 Aud a woman, haupng an issue of

blood twelue veres, which had {pent all her substaunce vpon philitions, neither

OO, what 39 great thyngeg
0 a

c done pute thec.

Math ix. c.
Mark. vc.

. be pola of anp,

44. Came behynde hyni, and

henunc ok his rapmentr andi 10 her issue or blood staunched. e

45 And Jelus lapde: Who is it that tor chedmeenehe euery man denped deter and they that were with hym, fayde:
Maister. the people thrust thee, and vere thee- and sapest thou, who touched me-

+6 e Dome body hati

: For Ypertea ; tue 0 ame ont of ie, Ene ie:

47 When the woman sawe that che nat hyd, The came trembülng aud El at his fete} and tolde him vefoze al the people, for what cause she had touched him. and horde fhe was healed mmediakly.

4 And he layde vnto her: Daughter, be of good comfort, thy fayth hath laued Nang thee, go in peace.) Maal

49 Whyle he pet spake, there tamc one from the cuter of the synagogues houle, © which fapde to hym: Thy daughter is
Dead, disease not the Maister.

50 Wut when Jelus hearde that worde, he auntwered him, laping: Feare not beicue only, € she shalbe made whole.

51 And when he tame to the house, he suffered no man to go in with hym, laue
Peter, and James, and John, and the father and the mother of the mayden.

52 Euerp body wept, k sorowed forher.
And he sapde: Weepe not, the damsell is not dead, but slepeth. N

5; And thep laughed hym to storne, knowyng that she was dead.

54. And he thzust them all out, and tobe her by the hande, and crped, faying:
Mapde, aryse.

55 And her spirite came agayne, and the rose straightway: And he connmaunded

to geue her meate. 6
$6 And the father and the mother ok her, were astonped: Wut he warned the that they thould tel no man what was done.

Math. ix ge,
> Mark. vd

Lohn x. d.

The. vj. Chapter.

¶ z Che Aposiles are sent to preache. Herode hearde ol Christe. 12 Fiue thoulande kedde

with fiueloaues a two ticches. w Diuers opinions of Christ. 20 Che conkellion of the

Apotttes. 3 Che transtiguration of Christe. 35 Christe is to be heard. 42 Che lunatise

is healed. 43 Che insidesitie ofthe Apostles, 45 they Arpue who shoulde be greatest.

49 Ok one cactyng out deuylg in Chriltes name. 3 The Samaritanes woulde not

receaue Christe. 54 Che difcipies delire vengeaunce, and are ol hym reproued. 57 Ok three that woulde folowe Christe, but after diuers lortes ol ion png backe.

A Dea mS

„ butfor P
Esus called the twelne 2 And he sent then to preache the Kong an together, and gaue the dome ok God, and to heale the sicke. be power and aucthoritie ; And he faide vnto the: Lake nochn den oh ouer al deuils, and that to your iournep, neither staues, 1102 beter they might heale dilea- f(exippe, neither bread, neither manch een seg. ? neither

ints,

Math. x. c.
NIark. 1. b. and. vi b.
Luk. vi. c.

e

~ by ; neither haue two coates. Waptist: some fay, Elias: and sonie fap

And whatloeuer pout ye enter into, b. there abyde and thence depart.
And whosdeuer wpll fie set i when ve go out ofthat titie, shane of the very dust from pour feete, fo2 a testinisnie agaynst them.
Ad they departed, and went though

the townes, preachyng the Gospel, and

healyng enerywhere. 0
And herode the tetrarche heard of att
„ that was done by hym, and doubted, because that it Was sayde of some, that

John was rysen agayne from death:

And ok some, that Ellas had appeared, and of fome, that one of the olde prophetes was rylen agayne.

And Herode fayde, John 90 f hate headed, but who is this of whõ J heare such thinges: And he delsired to fee him. glo And the apostles returned, e tolde him ali that they had done. And he tone thẽ and Went aside into a solitarie piace, nye
" pnto the titie that is called Bethlalda.

Which whẽ the people knew, they folowed hun: And he reteaued them, and spake vnto thé of the kingdome of God, ehealed thẽ that had nede to be healed.

b And when the day began to Weare awap, then came the twelue and fayde vnto hym: Sende the people awape, that they may go into the townes and byllages rounde about, and lodge, and get meate: for we are here ina plate ot wyldernesse. —

z But he said nto them: Gene pe thẽ to kate. And they said: we haue no mo but kyue loaues and two fisshes, ercepte we should go € bye meate for al this people.

4 And they were about fyne thoulande men. And he laid to his discples: Cause thẽ to fit Done by fifties ina companie.

j And they dyd fo,and made them all to lit downe.

Is And he toke the fyne loaues and the two fisches, and loked vp to heauen, and blessed them, and beatte and gaue to the diltiples to fet before the people.

17 And they dyd all eate, and were fank

ed. And there was taken vp of that remayned to them, twelue balkettes full en broken meate. wels And it cane to palle, as he was alone ae Praping, his diltiples were with hym, dee and he alked them saying: Who fay the people that J anv
They aunlwered and fayoe, John

that one of the olde prophetes is rylen.
20 He lapde vnto them: Wut whom fap ve that Jam (Simon) Deter aunlwered, x salde: (Chou art; Chhilte, of God. Nach. i.

21 And he warned g commaunded them, long

that they should tell no man thatthing,

22 Saping: The sonne of man mustsuk- Mat xvii < fer many thynges, and be reproued of dane the elders, and of the hye prieltes and eribes, and be slayne, and ryse agapne the thirde day. N

23 And he laid to thE all: If any man wyl tome after me, let him denie him {eife, k take vp his crosse dayly, € folowe me.

24. For wholoeuer wyl fane his lpfe, Mal mark. xvis lofe tt : But whosoeuer shal lose his lpfe fohavi a. for my sake, the same shall saue it. e

25 Jor what auauntageth it a man yk he wynne the whole worde, and lole hym elke or runne in dannger of hym felfe:

26 Foz whosoeuer halbe achamed of Nah ce. me, and of my Wordes, of hyni shall the ara sonne of man be alhamed, whe he con meth in his maiestie, and in the matestie ok his father, and of the holy angels.

27 Jtell pouofatrueth, chere be some n standyng here, whiche Mall not taste of la. ve death, tyl they fee the kingdome of God.

28 And it tame to passe, about an eyght vat dapes after these sayinges, he toe Pe- a. g ter, and John, and James, and went vp into a mountaynẽ to pray.

29 And as he praped, the fathion of his conntenaunce was changed, € his garment was whyte, and shone.

30 And beholde, there talked with hym two men, which were Moyses ¢ Ellas:

31 That appeared in the maiestie, ⁊ spake

ok his depaͤrtyng, which he choulde end at Hierulalem.

32 But Peter, and they that were with him, were heauie with fieepe : and whe they awoke, they sawe his maiestie, and two nien standyng with hyn.

33 And it tanie to pasle, as they departed Nat vi. a fro him, Peter said vnto Jelus:Maister Mor a it is good beyng here for bs, let vs make three tabernacles one for thee, € one for
Moyles and one for Elias:and Wwyst not
What he sayde.

34 Whple he thus spake, there cane a cloude, and ouershadowed then they feared whẽ they wer tone into p cloude

35 And there came a vopte out of the up tloude, saying: this is my deare fone, Nie b. peare him. Sag Sie

be 1 And en. x VH. e

6 Ard altoone asthe voyte was patte,

Mat xvii. b.
Murk re. b.

Jelus was founde alone: aud they kept it clofe, and tolde no man in thole dapes any of those thynges which they hadde seene.

And it came to passe, that on the next

day, as they came downe from the hyll, much peopie met hm.

38 And beholde, a man ol the compante

ried out saping: Maister, I belechthee behold my tonne, for he is all p) J haut:

39 And lee, a spirite taketh hym, and so-

Marl Ax. c.

he kometh agayne, departeth from hin, when he hath rent

bpm. . 4
Nach ewe 4.0 And J besought thy disciples to tast

and teareth hym, that

denly he cryeth, c with much payne

hym out, and they toulde not.

1 Jelus aunlwered, and faide : O faithelle and croked nation howe iong {hail

J be with vou, and chall suffer pou:
Bryng thy lonne hyther.

42 Ashe Was yet a tonnnpng the fiende

Mark. i. c. 43

Luk. ini. d.

＋ 1

Care

rent bpm, and tare hym: And Jelus rebubed the vncleane spirite, and Heated the chylde, and deliuered hym to his fa

er. and they were all amaled at the mightie power of God: But whyle they wondred cuery one at all thinges which he dyd, he sayde vnto his dilciples,

44 Vet these sapenges sincke Downe into

Mat. xvi. c.
Marh. vin. d

pour eares: Foz it wyll come to passe, that the sonne ol man chalbe deliuered into the handes of men.

BVut they wpst not what that worde

meant, and it was hydde from them that they vnderstoode it not: And they feared to alke hym ofthat faping.

46. Then there arolt a disputatiõ among

oe obi of thent should be the grea-

telt. A ee
4:7 when Jesus perceaned the thought

Mat.xviii.a
Mark. ix. c.

ol their heartes, he toke a chylde, and set hym harde byhyn ,

Pukka 8 And fayde vnto them: Whosotuer re-

Math. x. d.
Luk. x. c.
John. xiu. c.

teaueth this chylde in my name, receaueth me: And wholocuer receaucth me, reteaueth hun that sent me. For he that is least aniong vou all, the fame halbe great. ais

The Golpell *

Samaritanes, to make redy for hym.

l And another fayde: Lorde“ J wyfl reo

youle.’. 4. 1 lt wo iche
62 Jelus sayde vnto hym: Ho man that ae

49 And John aunlwered, a :
Maister, We sawe one cation out wr uyls in thy name, and we forbad hym becault he foloweth not with vs. pe (bynt) not: For he that is b yd with vs. * . lt Raa,

5 And it tame to passe; when the 6 was tonie that he shoulde be 9 f vp, he let his face to go to Hierufatem,

52 And sent meflengers before hun: And they went, e entred into a towne ok the

5 And they wonlde not reccaue him, becausc His face Was as though he

e 90 to oe b e

54. When his diftiples, James c John, Je sawe this, they sayde: sorb Witton cote

that We cõmaunde five to come downe T

from heauen and consume them, euen mana

as Elias dyd- ü ae

55. Jelus turned about, ereduked them saping: Be wote not what maner spirite ye are ol. . om W

56 FJor the fonne of man is not come to destrope mens lpues, but to saue them.
And they went to another towne.

57 H And it tame to pasle, that as they went walkyng in the wap, a certapne man sayde vnto hym: J wpll folowe 3e thee Lorde whyther so euer thou go.

58 And Jelus sapde vnto hym: Fores haue holes, and byrdes ofthe apre haue nestes: but the sonne ok man, bath not where to lay his head.

59 And he fayde vnto another, kolowe me. And the fame fayde : Lorde, fuffer me first to go and burie my father. „

60 Jesus sapde vnto hym, "Wet the dead Lata vũrie their dead: but go thou e preache the kyngdome of God.

folowe thee, but let me first go byd them A farewell, © which are at home at IY e

is And bee be pütteth his hande to che plowe aten va loketh barke, is apt to the kyngdomme Of f
God. =

spe

exe

by Saint Luke. xy.
. Sw The. x. Chapter.
1 He sendeth seuentie difciples to preache, geuyng them charge howe to behaue themlelues. 13 He threatneth the obstinate and vnthankkull cities. 16 He admo.

nicheth his disciples ol humilitie. 2 wherok we shoulde reiopce. 21 He geueth ho

thankes to his fatter. 26 He auntwered the lawyer that tempted hy is aur nepghbour. 3s Dt Martha and *

OVE Fter these thynges, the
A Forde appoynted other se-
VWVuentie also, and sent them two and two before hym,
A (nto cuierp citie and place, whyther he hym lelfe woulde tome.

2 Therefore sayde he vnto them: The

haruest is great, but the labourers are

fewe. Pray re therfore the Lorde of the aa haruest, to sende © foorth labourers into his haruest.

„3 Go pour wapes: beholde, J sende

pon foorth as lambes among wölfes.

4 Weare no Wallet, neither scrippe, noz ene Thoes,¢ lalute no man by the wap.
ß Into Whatlocuer house ve enter, first we lap, peace be to this boule, me And pf the sonne of peace be there, a your peace shall rest vpon hym: pf not, eit (hall turne to von agayne.

a And in the fame Houle tary styll, ea-

fe, tyng and drinking such thynges as they

(lchall set before pou.) For the labourer is
Worthy of his rewarde. . Go not from
Houle to house.

38 And into whatsocuer citie pe enter, and they receane pou, cate {uch thynges ag axe set before von:

And heale the sicke that are therin, and lay vnto them, the kyngdome of God is conte nye vpon pou.

% “But into whatsocuer titie pe enter, €

lhey receaue von not, go pour ways out into the streates of the lame, and fape :

Euen the verp dust of our citie, which tleaueth on vs, we do wype of agaynst
YOU: Notwithstandyng, be ve sure of this, that the kyngdome of God was tome nye vpon pou. :

Play vnto pou, that it shalbe easper in

* that day fo2 Sodome then for that citic.

Aale

Wo vnto thee Choraʒin, wo vnto thee
Bethlaida: For ik the miracles had ben done in Tyre and Sidon, whiche haue ben done in pou, they had a great whyle
AQO repented ( of their finnes) syttyng in lacketloth and afthes.
1+ Therfore it shalbe easper for Tyre aud

Don at the iudgement, then for you.
1; And thou Capernaum, Which art ev alted to heauen, shalt be thzust dowue

Marie.

to hell. N
16 Me that heareth you, he me, and Nach . b.

he that despileth pou, Seen nie: and 1h. i

he that defpileth me, delpiseth hym that

sent me.

17 And the seuentte turned agayne with iop, saping: Lord, euen the very; penis are subdued to vs through thy name.

18 And he laid vnto them: Jsawe Sa- N tan as it had ben lyghinpng, fallyng © Theres, downe from heauen. Beano

19 Weholde, J geue vnto pou power to wz treade on serpentes, and scorpions, and 628. b. ouer all maner power of the enemie, k | nothyng (hall hurt pou,

20 Meuerthelesse, in this reiopee not, that the spirites are subdued vnto pou: but rather reiopee becaule pour names are p
Written in heauen. Apo.xvi

21 That same houre reiopted Jesus in D the spirite, and sayde: J conkesse puto thee kather, Torde of heauen c earth, Mathxi. d.

at thou batt hyd these thynges from

the wile and prudent, and hast opened

them vnto babes: Euen fo father, for fo

it pleased thee.
22° All tlynges are geuen me of my fa: Mt ane

ther. No manknoweth who the sonne n a

s, but the father, aud who the father 10hn vid.

is, but the sonne, and he to whom the nad vin

sonne wyll shewe hym.

2 And he turned to his distiples, ¢ sayde setretely: Happy are the eyes which Mac. xii.d. fee the thynges that ye fee,

24 For J tell vou, that many prophetes and kynges haue desired to fee thofe thynges whiche ye see, e haue not seene them, and to heare those thinges which ve heare, and haue not hearde then.

25 And beholde, a certaine lawyer stoode E bp, and tempted hun, faping : Maister, r what hall I do to inherite eternal lpfe-

He sayde vnto hym: the lawe, howe

26 What is Written in readest thou-

27 And he aunswered and laide: Thou pati a shalt loue the Lorde thy God With all Nat. thy heart, and with all thy soule, ¢ with Ma xu all thy strength, and with al thy mynde, and thy neyghbour as thy selfe.

28 And he sapde vnto hy, Thou hat

FU auuswered

o. x vii. b

i But Wo but yan pharifees : for ye:

Mat. xxiil. c 43

a *

—— —O—t™~=t- ANRC Ppl N —

the nunt True, aud al mance hearbes, aa pale At iudgement, and the loue of God: These ought ve to haue done, and pet not to leaue the other vndone. o puto vou pharilees: for ve loue the vppermost seates in p spnagogues,
_ aud greetynges in the markettes.

44 noo vnto vou scribes and pharisees, ve

Hypocrites : kor ve are as graues which appeare not

oner thein, are not ware okthen.

45 Then aunswered one of the lalbpers,

Elaias. x. a. lat. xxili.

Nlat. xxl. d

48 Truelp, pe beare witnesse that ye a-

Math. xvi. a
Mar. viu. b.
Math. x. c.

Marlcuiu. c.
Luk. vill. c.

Math. x. c.
Luk. vn. b.

46 And he sayde,

aud fayde vnto him: Maister, thus laping, thou puttest vs to rebuke ald. o vnto vou allo pe jawyers: for ve lade me With burthens greeuous to be borne, and ye pour selues touche not p burthens with one of pour kynger ö

co 2
4:7 o bute you, 'pe buyloe thefepulchzes

of the prophetes, and pour fathers kylled then. a

iowe the deedes of pour fathers + for

they kylled them, and pe buylde their se n
2 5e he. xij. Chapter.

Che leuen of the pharilees is to be auopded. z neho is to be feared. s To contesse gods name. 02 to denie it. 10 Blasphemie agapnst the spirite. 1 He comkorteth the dilciples

is and waͤrneth them to beware of couetoulnes by the limiltkude ofa ryche man. r0 Agapntt care of earthly thynkes. i Co geue our selues to ryghteoulnes, almes, watchyng, pacience, wyldome, and concorde.

agapntt affliction,

— ß meant tyme, whe
| N 0 ther were gathered to-
I gether an innumerable

Se multitude of peoplelin-
J fomuch) that they trode.

one another, he began

ples. First of all! beware of the leuen of the pharisees, Which is hypotrilie.

Jor there is nothyng covered, that shall not be vntouered neither hyd, that shall not be knowen. l

3 Therkore, whatsocuer pou haue spo-

a) Openlp, oF atl 119 map |

ken in darkenesse, shalbe hearde in the light: and that which ve haue spoken in the eare, cuen in letrete places, chalbe preatched on the toppe of the houses.

Mahxb, 4. And J say vnto vou my friendes, be

W

not afrapde of theni that kyll the body,

and after that, haue no more that tl tan do. : pat ther

5 But J Wyll forewarne pouwhs pou

shall frare: Feare by, Which after he

„and the men that walke *

to faye vnto his dilci-

49 Therfore saide the wisedome or : neat them prophets ape
9 nt they Nhe

and sae Dev chan faye
50 at the blood of all the prophetes which is shedde, from the Au of the worlde, may be required of this generation, * 3
From the blood of* Abel vnto p blood Cen int, of Zacharie, whithe perished betwene 4 the aulter e the temple: Nerylp J laye vnto vou, it shalbe required of this nation. „ W.
52 Wo vnto pou lawpers: for pe haue taken away the keye ol knowledge; ve c) acim entred not in pour selues, and them that dar wien tame in, ye for bad. ee
53 When he thus spake vnto them, the lawyers € the pharisees began to vrge hym vehementiy, and to prouoke hum to fprake many thynges. .
54 Laying wapte for hym, and sekyng to catche somethyng out of his mouth, wherby they myght accule hm.

Mat xxiü d

gee

Hath killed, Hath power to cattinto hell, pea I fap vnto pou, feare hom.

6 Ate not fyue sparrowes bought foe two farthynacs: and not one of them is forgotten before Gd. 5 ö

Alld eue the very heeres of your head are all numbred. Feare not therfoze, ve

arc more ot value he many sparrowes.

3 Allo J fay vnto pou, Wholdeuer cor max felleth me: before men, hm chall the sonne of man knowledge allo, betore the angels of Gd. aor:

9 Wut he that denpeth me before men, chalbe denped befoze the angels of God. 3

1o And whosoeuer speaketh a mie e gaynst the sonne of man, it shalbe ae Math geuenhym: But buto hym that bl 5 Luk

bergen the holy gholt,it Hail not aoe

orgeucn. sew fg

1 And when they bryng von puto af is spnagogues, and bnto the rulers 5 lane ficers, tate pe no thought howahar be thyng pe fhatt aunfivere, ar PIT

n FJorthe holy ghost shall teache youin the fame houre what ye ought to lay.

z One of the companie sapde vnto

C hym: Maister, speake to my brother, that he deuide the inheritaũce with me.
And he sapde vnto hym: Man, who made me a indge 02a deuider duer vou:

j And he lapde vnto thein, Take heede g beware of couetousnes: For no mans ipfe standeth in the aboundaunte of the thynges which he possesseth.

16 And he put foorth a sinnlitude vnto thé, saying: The grounde of a certaine ryche man bought foorth plentifull

kruites.

And he thought within him selfe, saying, What shall J do, becaule J haue no rowme where to bestow my fruttes:

8 And he sayde, this wyll J do, J wyit destroy iy barnes, and buͤylde greater, and therin wyll J gather all my fruites

and my goodes. 1
| 9 And J wyll Ape to my soule: Soule, e thou hast much goods taped vp! in fore} for many peres, take thyne cate, cate, drynke, and be merp. wih 20 But God fapde bnto hym: Thou foote, this nyght wyll they fetch awaye thy soule againe frd thee: Then whole shall thofe thynges be, which thou hast prouidedut Sos he that gathereth riches to him
(tlfe, and is not ryche towardes God.
22 And he spake vnto his disciples: Theran foe J lap vnto pou, take no thought di dur lyke, what ve chall eate, neither for the body What ye shall put on.

3 The lyfe is more then nieate, and the body is moze then rapmient, N

24. Confider the Nauens, for they neither sowe nor reape, whiche neither haue stozehouse nor barne, and God feedeth then: en Howe much moze are pe better then kethered fowles-

aig , Which of vou, with takyng thought,
Can adde to his stature one tubite?

26 If pethen be not able to do that thing which is least: why take ye thought foz the remnaunt-

27 Consider the Lylles how they grove, sep labour not, they spinne not: and yet
Ii fay vnto you, that Solomon in al his hee Was not clothed lyke one of

8 It God so clothe the grasse, whiche is to dape in theficine, and to morolbe is

by Saint Luce. Alu. —

cat into the furnasse, howe much more wyll he clothe pou, O ye ol litle fayth-

29 And alke not ye what pe shall eate, or

what pe shall drynke, neither be ye ol doubtfull mynde:

30 Jor all suche thynges do the eather) people ot the worlde feke for: and your father knoweth that ye haue neede of these thynges.

31 But rather “eke pe alter p Kyngdome Nah vie. of God, and all thele thinges shalbe mi- E nistred vnto you. . e

32 Feare not litle flocke, for it is pour fathers pleasure to gene you a kyngdome.

33 Dell that pe haue, and geue almes: Mach. e and prepare pou bagges Whiche Ware Makx< not olde, euen a treasure that fapleth not in heauen, where no thiete cometh, neither moth torrupteth.

34 For where pour treasure is, there wyl pour hearte be alfo,

35 Wet pour loynes be girde about, and E. f pour lyghtes brennyng, 95

36 And ye pour selues like vnto men, that wapte for their Lorde, when he Wyll returne from the weddyng, that when he conimeth, and knocketh, they maye
Open bnto hymunmediatly.

37 Happy are those seruauntes, whõ the
Lorde, when he commeth, shall fynde
Wakyng. Verplyp J fap vnto pon, that he hall girde him lelfe, and make them to syt downe to meate, and wyll tome foorth, and minister vnto them.

38 And yk he tome in the seconde watche, pea if he tome in the thirde watche, and fynde them so, happye are thofe lernauntes.

39 This vnderstande, that yf the good man ot the Houle knew what houre the thiefe woulde tome, he Woulde furelp
W 10 suffer his house to be dygged through. ’

40 *Wepethertoze redy alld, for 5 forme 511.4 ol man wyll come at an hourt when pe thynke not. > N

41 Then peter saide vnto him: Maister, tellest thou this sinnlitude vnto vs, or to all (men?)

42 And the Lorne saide: Who tsa fapthfull and wyse stewarde, whom his lorde
{hall make ruler ouer his houtholde, to f a them their portion of meate in due eason:

3 Mappye is that seruaunt, whom his Apocxvie

4 lorde when he commeth, , Mall fpnde fo

doyng.
— Kn Ok

A.

I. Peter a. e.

Math. 4. d.
Mark. xiii c

~The Go pe |

7 th J saye vnto pou, that he 52 For fd hentefoorth there albe
7 ena 9115 ruler ouer all that he a 0 10 inten age are hath. = 5 4 f. a fthat seruaũt lay in his heart, 53 The father thalbe vewden againg
Math24.d. Tame d yl dekerre his commpng, bonne, and the sonne against the father: and thatlbegyn to smpte the seruauntes The mother agayntt the daughter and and maydens, and to cate and drynke, the daughter agaynst the mother: The and to be dromen, mother in lawe againt her daughter in
46 The Lord ok that seruaunt wyll come lawe, and the daughter in lawe against in a day when he thynketh not, and ak her mother inlawe. an houre when he is not ware, and wyll 54. he lapde alld to the people: when ve
Hewehynrinpeeces, and geue hom his tea clonde vile out ok the welt, traighe: a portion with the vnbeleuers. N way ve say there tõmeth a showre, and bobiiid yor And the seruaunt that knewe his loitis. maisters Wyll, and prepared not hym 55 And whe pe see the louth wynd blow, selfe, neither dyd actordyng to his Wyll, pe say it Wyll be hotte, and it commeth chalbe beaten with many fteppes. tao ppasse. é i aoe 43 But he that knewe not,“ aud did cos 56 Be hypocrites, ve tan disterne the outdale nit thynges worthy of strypes halbe warde appearaunce of the skye, and of beaten With fee strypes. For buto the carth: but howe is it that ve cannot
Whotoener much is geiien, of him hal dilcerne this tymebe much required: and to whommen 57 Bea, and why iudge pe not of pour haue conmmtted much, ok hom wylthey selues what is ryght ::
90 Cutie. ake the moze. 58 When thou goest with thine aduersa- vun eee 49 Jam comic to sende fire W onß earth. rie ta the ruler, as thou art inthe wape, Paz momnens and what is my desire, but that it be geue diligente that thou miayett be delithonges, - alredye lundled- urred from hym, lett he bryng thee to bebe 50 Potwithltandyng, J mut be bapti- the iudge, andthe tudge delluer the to
Obe en: zed With à baptilme, ꝰ and howe am the iapler, and the iapler caste thee into dong and hi: J papned tyll it be ended: prison.
Deity, ar 51 Srppole ye that J am tome to sende so Itel the, thou shalt not depart thence,
Marked peated earth: J tell pou nape, but tuyll thou haue made good the vtmolt

t) Chnit vis

not the cauft rather deuision. nute. N

ae 49 The Grebe readeth, O kit be alredy kindled? 5

tye n wie The. xij. Chapter.

Bednesse of

Subic by rae 10Okthe Galileang, 4 and thole that were opprelled at Siloe. s DE the kigge tree

e esol that bare no fruite, Che woman haupng a tpirite of inkirmitie heated. 15 Che

kalte at Uae Hie of the Sabboth. 13 He declareth by diuers timilitudes what the kyngdome of
Al that ate God is. 24 fewe enter into the kyngdome of Chzitke, 32 He reproueth Herode and

kesse i. Mierusalem.

A1 dere were prelent at all menthat dwelt in Hierulalem:
5 the lame seald, tertaine 5 IJtell vou nape: but except pe repent, men, that shewed him pe shall all lpkewyse perpyshe. 5 off Galileans, whole 6 S he tolde also this finulitude. A cer- 15 ial blood c Pilate hadde taine man Hada* figge tree planted in

bee, |S) i WO Ginyngicn with their his vineyarde, and he came, and fought mere gerte one satrifite. fruite Heron, and founde none.

keng. 2 f his
Ae vf. 2 And Jelus aunswered, and fapde vn- Then layde he to the dresser o

1 to them: Suppole pe that thele Galile- 2 vineyarde: Weholde, this chree pore D

ans, were greater finners then all the haue come c fought fruite in this tian

others Gallleans, becaule they fuffred tree, and finde none: cut it downe, YL

such punishment- cumibreth it the groundee :
3 Itell vou naye: but except pe repent, 3 And Heaumfivered, e lapde buto HE
G0 eue Pt äll all ipkewyfe perpshe. Pore, let it alone this ere alto, t:

See 4 Orthole epghteene vpon whiche the. dygge rounde about it, * dongue tt. e e towre in o Siloe fell, and slewe them, 9 es pfit beare fruite (thou the
— thynke ve that they wWerefinnersaboue tt alone: and pk it beare not then, that

that shalt thou cut it downe.

And he taught in one ok their synagogues on the Sabboth dayes,

Cn And beholde, there was a woman, which had a spirite of inkirmitie eyghteene peres, and was bowed together, and coulde in no wyse lyft vp her head.

When Jelus sawe her, he talled her to hym, and ra vnto her: Woman, thou art loosed from thy difeate.

z And he layde his handes on her, and

immediatly, he was made strapght, and glorified God.

4 And the ruler of the spnagogne aun-

swered with indignation, because that
Jesus had heated on the Sabboth day, c sayde vnto the people: There are fire
Daves, in which nien ought to worke, in them therkore come, that pe may be healed, and not on the Sabboth day.

y Wut the Torde aunswered hym, and fayde: Thou hypotrite, doth not ee

one ot vou on the Sabboth day, loose
“= his oxe or his alle from the staule, and leade hym to the water-

16 And ought not this daughter of Abraham, whom Satan hath bounde, lo tyghteene peres, be loosed from this bonde on the Sabboth dap-

1 And when he fayde thele thynges, all his aduersaries were ashamed, and all the people reiopted on all the excellent deedes that were done by hym. 29

8 Then layde he: What is the kyngdome Of God lyke; oz whereto Hail J

D tompare itdig It ts like a grayne of muttarde (cede, whiche a man toke e sowed in his garden: and it grewe, and waxed a great tree, and the foules of the apre made nestes in the braunches of it, to And agayne he sayde: herbuto (hall
IJ! lpken the kyngdome of God-
1621 It is lyke leuen, which a woman n toke, and hyd in three peckes of meale, tyll all was leuened.

And he went through all cities and townes, teathyng, and iourneping towardes hierulalem.

3 Then lade one onto hym: Lorde, are

there lewe that be saued: And he sayde

dito them:

24 Strypue 0 to enter in at the strayte Math vie gate: for many J fay vnto pou, Wyll Ceres seke to enter in, and shall not be able. menen

25 When the good man of the Houle is risen bp, and Hath shut to the doore, and pe begyn to stande without, e to knocke at the Dooze faying Lorde, Lorde, open E vnto vs: and he Chali aunswere, and lay a uk I knowe pou not whence

26 Then shall pe begyn to fay : we haue eaten and dronken in thy prefence, and thou hast taught in our streates. i

27 And he shall lap, I tell you, I knowe von not, Whence pe are: Depart from me all ye that worke iniquitie.

28 There shalbe 00 fle f. t gnalchyng of teeth, when pe Mail ice Abraham, and PHlaac, and Jacob, and all the prophetes, in the kyngdonie of God, and pe pour selues thrust out,

he 26 And they thallcome krom the eat Wen

and from the weit, and from the north, en en and from the south, and shall (pt downe se. in the kyngdome of God.

zo And beholde, there are last, which zer shalbe first: And there are first, which dach were shalbe “ last. ik coma

1 The lame dap, came there tertame of ar we the pharilees, and fayde vnto hym: Get CE) eh tetoes ther out, and depart hence, fog Perode ser hoe

Wyll kyll thee. dug Ser.

32 And he lapde vnto them: Go pe, and ar. tell that fore, beholde, J tast out deuyls,
€heale the people to day c to morowe, and the thirde dap J shalbe perfected,

3 Meuerthelesse, I mult walke to day and to morowe, and the day folowyng:
Jor it can not be, that a prophete perishe any other where, saue at Hierulalem. a.

34. O hierusalem, Mierusalem, why" kyllest prophetes, and stonest them that are sent vnto thee, howe often woulde
Jhaue gathered thy children together, as a henne doth gather her poung vnder her wynges, and ye woulde not-

35 Weholde, your house is left vnto vou ) Tate desolate. Ueryly Flap to you, ve Malt gage not {ce me, vntyll the tyme conte that pe ane shall say, Blessed is he that conuneth Mach b in the name ol the Lorde. 5

¶ The

by The xiiij ‘Chapter.

ae eatech with the pharitee: 4 Bealeth the droplie on the Sabboth, sere ami. nas al the r 15 OF the great Supper. 28 He warnet achety

humilitie.

h thote that
The

wyll folo we hym, to make their accomptes befoze, by the parable ol the lower. 4

fait of the earth.

IND it tame to passe, that he went into the housc of one of ö chicte
Japharilces, to catebread
Jon the Sabboth day,

And beholde, there rtayne man belore hym, which

Moh n: And Jesus aunswered and pake iv
Moka. to the lãwpers k pharistes, faping: Is
Lukvia. it la wful to heale on the Sabboth daͤy-

Exo. xxill. a
Deut. xi a

Math. Xii. a.

buts them:

3 V hen thou art bydden of any man to
à weddyng, syt not downe in the hpest rolbnie: lest a moze Honourable man then thon, be bydden of hynt,

9 And he, that bad hym and thee, come, and fay to thee, geuc this man rowme: ethou then begyn with Mane, to take the lowest rowme.

fo But when thou art bydden, go and syt inthe lowest rowme, that whenhethat bad thee cometh, he may fay vnto thee, friende fyt vp hyer: Then thalt thou haue worshyppe in the presente of then

lie cb. that lpt at meate with chee.

Lak xviicll o Whofoener exalteth hym seife, schalbe brought lowe: And he that humbleth hym elfe, chalbe eralted, <x

Then sayde he allo to hym that bad hym (fo meates) when thou makest a dinner or a supper, tall not thy friendes,

Prou. xxv. a

nor thy brethren, neither thy kynlemen,

nor thy ryche nepghbours, lest they allo

ö byd thee agapne, and a recompente be made thee,

3 But when thou makesta feast, call the

poore, the feeble, the lame, x the blynde,

4 And thou thait be happy, foz they can

le they watched hym.

not recompente thee: Foz thou chaltb recompented at the relurre f iult end : - i ttion Of the
When one of them, that fate a abe n bac Fee en
: vis he that eat inthe kyngdome Oe, God. S ein bea
16 Then sayde he vnto hym. A cerkaͤpne man ordapnedagreat fupper and Nr bad many, Apo
7 And sent his seruaunt at supper tyne to fap to them that were bydden, tome for all thynges are nowe redy. é
18 And they all at once began to make excuse. The first fapde vnto hym: J haue bought a farme, € J must needẽes go s᷑ see tt, I pray thee haue me extused.
19 And another fayde: Jhaue bought fiue poke of oxen, and J go to prone them, J pray thee hane me extuled.
20 And another lapde: J haue marped a wpfe, and therkore J tan not come.
21 And the seruaunt returned shewed E his maister these thynges. Then was the good man of the boule düplealed,
€ sayde to his seruaunt: Go out quickly into the brode streates and lanes of the
Citic, and bryng in hyther the poore, and the feeble, and the halt, and the blynde.
22 And the seruaunt sapde: Horde, it is done as thou hak tommaunded, and pet there is row. |
23 Andthe Lowe sayde to the seruaunt:
Go out into the bye wapes a hedges, 6. 0:3
15 1 2 55 Halt to come in, that my Houle may be fylled. |
24. No: Flay buto you, that none of thot men Which were bydden, hall tatte of my supper. £9 - 3
25. There went a great tompanie with hym: and he returned, and layde vnto 7

them, Mathxdi

26 If any man tome to mie, and hate Ge not his father and mother, and Wyte, ca eat and chyldren, and brethren, and sisters, ne pea, and his ownt Ipfealfo, he tan not aach be mp dilciple.

7 And whosocuer doth not beare his trosse, and tome after me, can not be nw

i to buplde
28 For which ok vou, dispoled atowee,

(a) By the power of
Gods won

a towre, sitteth not downe before, and twentie thoulandecounteth the tost, whether he haue suffi- 32 Or els whyie the other is yet a great cent to perfourme tte wap of, he ssendeth an imballage, and
„ Lest after be hath lapde the kounda. delireth conditions of peace,
‘ fon, and is not able to perkourme it, all 33 So lykt wyse, wholdener he be of you, that beholde it, begyn to mocke hym, that forsaketh not all that he bath, he
30 Saping: this man began to buplde, can not be nip disciple. 2 wor and was not able to make an ende- 34. Salt is good, but ifp salt haue lost the Math-v.4.
6 Prwhat kyng,gopng to make battell laltnes, What chalbe sealoned therwith- A against another kyng, sitteth not downe 35 It is neither good for the lande, nor first, and tasteth in his mynde, whether pet kor the doung hyll: but men calt it he be able with ten thoulande, to meete out lat the doores.) He that hath eares to hym, that conuneth agaynst hym with heare, let hym heare. 933

J The. xv. Chapter.

¶ 2 Che pharitees murmure becaute Christe receaueth tinners. 4 Che great mercie ot
God is tet koorth in the parable of the lost sbeepe, sand ol the peece ol liluer tof, rand of the prodigall sonne. : .

hen resorted vnto hynn wm And he sayde. A tertayne man had all the publicanes and two fonnes: 5
„ sinners, fog to heare 12 And the pounger of them sayde to his hhym. father: father, geue me the portion of
And the pharilecse the gdodes, that to me belongeth. And e tribes murnmred, fayz he deuided vnto them his substaunce.
— ing: he receaueth fine 13 And not long after, When the younger d eateth with them. sonne had gathered all that he had to-
Wut he put foorth this parable vnto gether, he toke his iourney into a farre countrep, and there wasted his goodes Pro.xxix.a bl. What man ok pou, paupng an hun- with riotous lpuyng.
| them, doth 14 And when he had spent all, there arole not leaue ninetie and nine in the wilder- qà great dearth in all that lande, and he nosse, and go after that which is loft, began to lacke.

vntyll he fynde itz 15 And he ioyned hyn selke to a citisen of
And when he hath founde it, he lapeth that countrey: and he sent hynn to his ton his shoulders with top: farme, to feede lwyne. .

6 And alldone as he tommmeth home, he 16 And he woulde fayne haue fylled his talleth together his louers and neygh- belly with the toddes that the swyne bours, saping vnto them: Keiopce with dpd eate: and no man gaue vnto hym. me, for 0 haue founde my sheepe which 17 Then he came to hym ele and layde:

Was lott, Howe many hyred seruauntes atm fa-
87 J sap vnto pou, that lpkewyle ioy thers house haue bread inough, and J

shaͤlbe in heauen ouer one sinner that perishe with hin ger? repenteth, more then ouer ninetie and 18 J Wyll aryst, and go to my father, and nine iust persons, which neede no repen? Wyll fay vnto hym: Father, J haue taunce. 1 sinned agaynst heauen, and before thee,

„„ 8 Either what woman, haupngtenne 19 And am no moze worthy to be called

we, beetes ok siluer, O yk she Idole one, doth thy sonne, make me as one of thy hyred

e nat lyght a tandle, and lwepe the house, seruauntes. —

oe dd seke diligently tyll she fynde it- 20 And he arole, and came to his father. „

9 2nd when the Vath founde it, He Wut when he was pet a great wap of, o ora talleth her louers ⁊ her neyghbours to- his father fave him, te had compallion, gether, saying: Neioyte with me, for and ranne, and fell on his necke, and haue founde the peece which J hadlolt. killed hyn. ö

cb. Lykewple J fay vnto pou, chal there v And the sonne fayde vnto him: Father,
Ctoy in the prelente of the Angels ok J haue sinned agaynst heauen and in

God, ouer onefinner that repenteth. o thy syght, and am no more Worthy are
| calle

—— ~The Golpeil

E. But the father fave to his seruauntes:

called thy sonne. bryng foorth the belt garment, and put

it on hym, and put a ryng on his hande,

ud thoes on his feete:

23 F And bryng (breber) that fat calfe, and kyll it, and let vs cate and be mery:

24 FJor this my soune was dead, and is aline agayne, he was lost, and is founde.
And they began to be merp. a

25 The elder brother was in the fielde: and when he tame and drewe nye to the houle, he hearde nunstrelsie k daunsing,

26 And called one of his seruauntes, and asked, what thofe thynges meant.

27 And he layde vnto hyur: thy brother is tome, and thy father hath kylled the fat calfe, becaule he bath reteaued hym safe and sounde.

28 And he was angry, and wonlde not

go in: Therlore tame and enteeated hym. DS father ert x

29 Pe aun wered and sapde to}
To, chese many peres haue Poon : lerne neither brake Nat any tyme thy co and pet thou iter gauest me a kidde to make ö mp 8 a

30 Wut alsoone as this thy sonne

come, which hath deugured thy ines G with harlottes, thou Patt fo his pica: om When that fat calte.

31 And he lapde vnto hym: Sonne thou art ener with me, and all that J haue the th Pane,

z It Was meete that we shoulde make miery and be glad: for this thy brother was dead, and is alpue agapne: and was loft, and is founde, 2

J The. xvj. Chapter.

N
W N. N ) AY SS 2

ie

A 1 iD. | — hy! r t 4 42 0 =
Tae Mf. i 3 . A
BLAM rs
‘hy . = us 52 9

be
N

N
Vi

QM

— hay ie

2 5 K fd 8 an aT Ha Pee e Se tins . i ili a ee
K* 7 ne — — —

it 5 ee

© 1 Chile exhorteth to liberalitie, by the example of the fewarde, vo who is a laythlull stewarde iz No man can serue two maisters. 14 He reproueth the hypocrilie of thole that iuclikie them telues belore men. 15 Che ende and force of the la we. 18 Che state ol mariage. v Ot the riche glutton,¢ Lazarus. 29 Myles a the prophetet to behearde.

O he layde also vnto his diltipies, There was a certapne riche

J . warde, and the fanie

VAY P
74 — a
‘ 4 0 2

that he had walted

2 And he called hym, and sapde buto hym: Howe is it, that J heare this of theez Geue accomptes of thy 1 iaad typer for thou mayest be no long

FJ do, fo: mp niaifter (ab away from me the dewardchrppe -

cannot

wote What to do, that when J am

put out of the stewardchippe, they may

reteaue me into their houses. ö

55 So, whk he had talled all his maisters

detters together, he fapde vnto the first:

Howe muche owest thou vnto my

maister?: *
And he sapde, an hundreth mealures

dlopyle. And he layde vnto hyn: Take thy byll, and {pt downe quickelp, and
Wute fiktie.

7 Then sayde he to another: Howe much owest thon 2 And he layde, an hundreth measures of wheate. He sayde

vnto hym: Take thy byll, and wzite

% fourcscore.

g And the Lod commended © the vn-

ante stewarde, becaule he had done

wile ly. Foz the chyldren of this worlde are in their nation, wiler then the chylpeer of lyght.

And J faye vnto pou, make vou

“(io She that is faythfull in that which en is lrast, is fapth full alfo in nuch. And he e that is vnrighteons in the least, is vn-
22 righteous also in nuich.
= Sothen, yk pe haue not ben faythfull mm in the bnrypghteons Manmion, who a. hall trust yon in the true treasure: n And pf pe haue not ben faythfull in another mans businesse, who shall geue pou that which is pour owne-
3 Nd nan can serue tivo makers: Foz e either he Thai hate the one, and loue the other: or els, he shall leane to the one, and defpife the other. Be tan not ferue
God, and Mammon. ö i
4. All these thynges heard the pharilees also, which were couetous, and they miocked hym. ö j And he layde vnto them, Be are they which tuttifie pour selues before men: but God knoweth pour heartes. For that which is hyghly esteemed among men, is abbominable in the syght of
God. <y i
. 1 The lawe e the prophetes (raigneds vntyll John, and fence that tyne, the
üyngdome of God is preached, x tuerp man strpueth to go in.

digge, c to begge J am ashamed. 17 *Ealper is it for heauen and earth to

perithe, the one title of the lawe to faite,
18 Wholocuer forsaketh his wyfe, and

Esalas. xl. ⁊.
Math. v. c.

marieth another, committeth adulterie. N

And he that marpeth her that is deuorted from her husbande, conumttteth adulterie fatto.)

10% Ther was a certaime riche man wh: E

che Was clothed in purple € fine whyte, and faved very deliciously euery dap.

20 And there was a certapne begger, named Lazarus, Which Was lapde at his gate full of sores: ü

21 And defiving to be refrefthed with the trumbes which fell from v riche mans boorde ¶ And no man gaue vnto hym): but the dogges tame and licked his sores.

22 And it came to pasle, that the begger dped, and was carped by the Angels into Abrahams bosome. The riche man also dyed, and was burped.

23 And bepng in hell in tormentes, he lyft vp his eyes, and fave Abraham ã farre F of and Lazarus in his bosome,

24. And he tryed and layde: father Abraham, haue mertie on me, and sende La-
Zarus that he may dippe the tippe of his

funger in water, and coole my tongue: for I am tormented in this flambe.

(e) dom heau

25 But Abraham fapde: Sonne, re- Gut vi.

member that thou m thy lyle tyme, receauedst thy pleasure, and lpkewyse
Larus papnes: But nowe is he comforted, and thou art tormented.

26 Weponde all this, betweene vs a you there is a great guife fet, so that they which woulde go from Hence to pou, e may come from thence to vs.

27 Then he sapde: I pray thee therfore G father, sende hym to my fathers houle.

28 For IJ haue fpue brethren, that he may witnesse vnto them, lest they also tome into this place of torment.

29 Abraham sayde vnto hym: they haue
Moyles and the prophetes, let them heare them.

30 And he layde, nay father Abraham: but pfone come vnto them from the dead, they wyll repent.

31 He fayde vnto hym: If they heare

death agayne.

C The

¢
€

he

E

not Moyses ethe prophetes, neither eu, wyll they beleue, though one role from seit at

eee heGolpell —

The. xvij. Chapter.

Flat. xvili. a.

Matk.ix. f.

(a) To geue ocenfid wherdp onp do

turne

1 th to auopde offences, 3 One to lorgeue another. 5 To prap for the in.
4 Bei 11 lach. 10 nde are but vnprolitable seruauntes. 12 Of the tenne lepers. 85 a the commyng of the hpngdome of God. 23 Ok kalle Christes. 1 Che maner of Chri

commpng.

E sayde vnto the disei-
ROSEY 7 ples, it tan not be but offences wpll come, neuerthelesse, * wo

whom they come,

2 i t were better for hym, that a mylftone were Hanged az

bout his necke, ee cat into the fea then

that he shoulde © offende one of thefe

fume fe lille ones.

Wozde. lat. xvill. c. 3

Lake heede to pour selues: If thy

Leitxixd hrother trespasse agaynst thee, rebuke
Ecdeixb hyni: and ykhe repent, forgeue hym.
4 And though he linne agaynst thee se-
Kane men en tyines in a dap, and seuen w tynies
* in à day turne agapne to thee, saping, it repenteth me: thou shalt forgeue hym.
5 And the Apostles sapde vnto the
Lorde: increase our fayth.
18 And the Lorde sapde: If ye had

fapth las much) asa grayne of mustarde

seede, ¢ should fay Onto this Sytanune

tree, plucke vp chp selfe by the rootes, and plant thy leife in the sea, it shoulde obep you.

7° Wut which of you, hauyng a seruaunt plowyug, or feedyng tattell, woulde fay vnto hym by e by When he were come ot the fielde, go and syt downe at the table: ’

3 Aud Worldenotrather lay vnto hym, drelse, wherwith J may {uppe, e gyrde vp thy selfe, and serue me; tyll J haue eaten and dronken, and after ward cate thou, and drynke thou-

9 Doch he thanke that seruaunt, betause he dyd the thynges that were tommaunded vnto hym- Itrowe not.

10 So lykewylt pe, When pe haue done all thole thynges which are tommaun-
Ded pou, fay, Me are vnprofitable sernauntes, We haue done that which
Was our duetie to do.

n And fo it was as he went to Pierualem that he patted through the mpddest of Samaria and Gaitiee,

2 And as He entred into a tertayne towne, there met hym/ ten men that
Were lepers, which stoode a farre of,

3 And put foorth their voytes, x sapde:

onto hym, through)

steg

Jelu maister, haue mercie on vs.

14. When he fare them, he layde vnto them: Go chewe pour selues vnto the 2 i
© pilestes. Aud it camte to palle, that ae tees they went, they were clenled. © sia

15. And one ok them, when he sawe that Br he was healed, turned backe Cagapne] meet aud With a loude vopce prapsed God: f

16 And fell downe on his face at his fete we" and gaue hym thankes: And the fame sen" was a Samaritanc.

17 And Jesus aunswered, and layde:
Are there not ten tlenled- But where are thofenine:

18 There are not founde that returned aAgayne, to geue God praple, saue conty; this straunger.

I9 And he sayde vnto hym: aryse, go thy wap, thy fayth bath made thee Whole.

20 hen he was demaunded of the pharisees, when the kyngdome of God

dchoulde come: he aunlwered them, and fayde , The kyngdome of God hail not come With obseruation.

21 Meither Thali they fay, lo here, or lo there: Foz beholde, the kyngdome of e
God is ™ within pou, l e

22 Aud he sayde vnto the dilciples: the ve daͤpes wyll come, when pe shall despre 84 to see one “© day of the sonne of man, a 55 are ee 1 15 15 Welte 2203

2 i nd ey a ay O pou, ye

ii there: Go notafter them, nor folorve a them. thous

24. Foras the lyghtupng, that lyghtneth der out of the one part that is vnder Hea uct, and chyneth vnto the other part which is vnder heauen: fo shall the | sonne of man be in his dape. ot ta

25 Wut first must he suffer many thyn- craic ges, and be refused of this nation. ea

26 And as it was in the daves of ce
{hail it be also in the dayes of the sonne cam of nian. ’

27 They dyd eate, and drynke, they be

ryed wines, and Were marped, euen the to the fannie day that Poe Went into 10
Arke: aud the fludde came, k destror em all.

28 Lelewyle also as it was in ve ite

of Lot: they dyd cate, they deat pought

by Saint Luke. |

bought, they lolde, they planted, they buyldedd
29 Wut enen the fame day that Lot went out of Sodome, it rayned fire and brine
| ftone from heauen, and destroped
122 them all. 5 zo Ellen thus shall it be, in the day when
AIlthe sonne of man shalbe reuealed. zz At that day he which is on the houle
4b (Cop, Jand his stuffe in the housc. let him not conie downe to take it out: And let not hini that is in the fielde, turne backe aàgabne lykewyse, to the thynges that g he left behynde. 1
Remember lottes wyfe.

pax. 2 r tie on 5 Wholdecue Wyll go about to saue his

XIVII ih lple, shall loose it: and wholoeuer hall loose his lyfe, hall quicken it.

34 A tell von, in that nyght' there shalbe Vath 4 d. two in one bed, the one shalbe receaued, the other shalbe forsa en.

35 Two (women) shalbe gryndyng to- Mach. 24. d. gether: the one shalbe receaued, and the

bther forsakhen. a

36 Two (men) shalbe in the fielde: the one shalbe reteaued, e the other forsakẽ.

37 And they aunswered, and lapde vnto 0 b hym: Where Lorde- he lapde vnto the: he,
Wherldeuer the body halbe, thyther Seba ann pl allo. the Egles ® be gathered to- ben as raue

- gether. deen.

12. J The. xviij. Chapter.

- ¶ 2 Christe teachety to continue in prayer, by the erample of the wicked Judge and the

widdo we. 10 The prayers o€ the pharitee and the publicane. 16 To chyldren betongeth the kyngdome of God. 18 Ok the wap to faluation, r0 and what thynges hynder the reward promised to his leruauntes. 31 He foresheweth his death. 35 He restored a blynd

man to his syght. 5 i a 5 : Nd he put foorth

not tobe weerp,

2 89 was in a tertayne tlie, a iudge, WHE

man. 3

in the same citie, and she tame vnto Him, n ping: Auenge dme of mine aduertarie. eine . Aud he woulde not for a whylc. Wut akterwarde he fapde within hym seite:
Though J feare not God, nor care for man, ö
Bet beeaule this widdowe (much) ug kroubleth nie, J Wyll auenge her: leste the conie at the last, € niake me weery.
6 And the Lorde fayde : heart what the vnryghteous iudge sayeth.
7 And shall not God auenge his elect, which crye day and nyght vnto hyni-
Bea, pea, though! he dekerre them
08 Itell vou he Wyll auenge them, and
‘ity, tat quickly. S Nenerthelesle, when the sonne of: man commeth, shall he fynde fayth on the eart he
And he tolde this parable vnto cerz tapne which trusted in them lelues, that they were perkect, and delpiled other.

wapes to prap, €
. Saping: There

che feaved not God, neither regarded
And there was a tertayne widdowe

io Two men went vp into the temple

to pray:the one a pharisce, and the other
à publicane. 1
The pharilee stoode and prayed thus with hym selfe: God, J thanke thee, that I am not as other men are, extorti- G nne
(canes: we 3 mem. 4
2 Hfatt wile in the weeke, J gene Pal a of all that J possesse.
B And the publitane standyng a farre of, woulde not lyft vp his epes to heauen, but smote vpon his brest, saping: God be mercifull to me a snner.
14. J tell vou, this man Departed home to his house iustified, rather then the other. For every one that cxalteth van 4 hym selfe, halbe brought lowe: And he Luk. xiw.c. that humbleth hynt elle, shalbe exalted. D
15 They brought vnto hint allo infantes ade tigmthat he should touch them: which, WHE kae“ his distiples sawe it, they rebuked the. ) Sher is,
16 But Helus when he had called them ete watcare
© vntohym, laide, Suffer chyldzẽ O to g tome vnto me, and forbyd them not: For of such © is the kyngdome of God. te) d
17 UVeryiy Play vnto you: Wholdeuer aue dae reteaneth not the kyngdome of God, pre
*asa© chylde, shall not enter therm. Gp hans

asibe ol inalice

s And a cevtapne ruler aläcd hym, pee, saying: Good niaifter, what ought PY marx. to no; to possesie eternall lyfe: Mat dax b.

1 Jtlus sayde vnto by: vohy ha ou

an

“ Ie Goipell 7

thon nie good: Mone is good, fauc God ouelp.

20 Thon knowest the tonmiaundementes: Thou chalt not conumit adultrie,

Nxod. xx. c.
Mahvc thou shalt not kyll, thou Matt not steale,
Deut vl. fie fhait not beare false witneffe, ho-

nour thy father and thy mother.

21 And he layde: all these haue J kept froin niy pouth bp.

22 When Jesus hearde that, he sayde vnto hyni: Pet lackest thou one thyng.
Sell all that thou hast, and distribute vnto the poore, æ thou shalt haue treafive in heauen, and come, folowe me.

23 When he hearde this, he was very sorp, for he Was very riche.

lat. xix. c.
RIA. x. c.

24. When Jelsus sawe that he was sory,

he sayde: with what diffiecultie Matt they that haue money, enter into the kyngdome of Gods |

25 For it is easier fora tamel to go through a nedles eye, then for a riche man to enter into the kyngdome of God.

26 And they that hearde it, sapvde: And who can then be laued- :
27 And he sapde: Thethynges which
Lach. vin b. are bnpossible wih men, are poflible

with God.
28 Then peter sapde: To, we haue korfaken all, and folowen there.
Nack. xtc 29 He sayde vnto them. Neryly I fay bre
Makvitb to pou: there is no man that hath laken house, either father, or mother, either brethren, or wyfe, or chyldren, for the kyngdonie ol Gods fake,
30 Which shall not reteaue much moze in this worlde, and in the worde to tome, ipfe euerlastyng.

Rlatli. xix. c
Marl. x. c.

31 & Felus toke vnto hym the nwelue,

The. xix. Chapter.

Cat Zacheus. i: che ten peeces of money delpuered to the teruaumteg. 28 chntt ryderh into Hierufalem, ¢ weepyng ouer it, korelbe weth the destruction therok. 45 He calteth

byers and sellers out of the Temple.

D he entred in, and went through Pierito.
And beho lde, there

riche (allo:
3 Andhe sought pmeanes) to fee Jesus,

what he shaulde be, F toulde not tor the

for-

was a man named

aud fapde bnto them: *

bp to Hierusalem, and alt 5 e be fulfpiled to the sonne of man
Witten by the prophetes. uk

32 For he shalbe deliuered vnto che gen: e tiles, and shalbe mocked, and spitefun eae ue 185 on: e

33 And when thep haue scour

they wyll put hym to death. Wand thyrde dap he shau aryse agapne. Ne

4, And they vnderltgode none of an thele uren thonges Aud this faying was hyd from Le them, fo that they perteaued not the wüaß thynges which were spoken.

35 And it caune to paffe, that as he was come we bnto Hierico,a tertapne binde G

man fate bp the tapes tyne, beggyng. N=

36 And when he hearde the people patte 7

15 ye 55 rt it meant.

37 And thep sapde vnto hym, that

a) apie pate 12 * —

3 nd he cryed, saping: Jesu thou fo of Dauid, haue mereie on ae ij

39 And they which went befoze,rebuked hym, that be choulde holde his peate:
But He erped so much the moze, * YOU sat cos sonne of Daud, haue mertie on me. 1

40 And Jesus stoode styll, c tommaun-
W to be brought vnto hym. And whẽ᷑ he Was come neare, he asked han,

Sa ping: what wylt thou chat J do vnto theez And he fatde : Torde, that J map receaue mp syght.

42 And Jelus sapde vnto hym: reteaue thy syght, thy fapth bach laued thee:

43 And immediatip he receauen his fight, and folowed hymn, praplpng God: And all the people, when they farbe cit.) gaue praple vnto God. 4, a

preasse becaufe he was litle of stature.
4 And he ran before, and clpmed vp m toa wylde fygge tree, to fee hym: for he was to tome that way.
5 And when Felis tame to the Ee
Heloked bp and sawe hym, and ae vnto bym: Zache, come downe at oute, for to dap J niust abyde at thy ee, Ade. f
6 And he tame downe hastylp, and tceaued hym iopfullp. And

. And when they al saw it, they murmn-

red, saping that he was gone in to tary with a man that is a synner.
83 And Zache stoode foorth, and sapde vnto the Lode: Beholde Wozde, the halle of my goodes F gene to the poore, and f J haue taken from any man by
8 101059 O tauislation, J restore him foure olde.
Jesus sapde vnto hym: This dape ts ga faination come to this ® houle, becaule that he allo is become the childe of A aim braham.
0% 10 Fon the sonne of man is tome to fee,
„and to laue that which was loft.

ey Andas they hearde thele thynges, he n added spake a parable, becaule hewas
% nyc to Hierusalẽ, ⁊ because they thought ei that the kingdome of God should shortiow Ip appeare. — n De layde therfore: rA tertayne noxb ble man went into
„ reteane kor hyni selfe a kyngdome, and to tome agapne. z. And he called his ten seruauntes, e de-

c liuered thẽ ten peeces of money, faping

e b

‘ot sith

wut his citesins hated hym, and sent

edle 1

in not haue this man to raigne ouer vs.

he tommaunded thele seruauntes to be called vnto him, to whom he had geuen the money, to wyt howe muche tuery man had done in occupping.

16 Then tame the first, laping: Torde

1 thy peete hath gayned ten peeces.

r And he sapde vnto hym: Well thou good seruannt, becaufe thou hast ben kaythfull in a very litle thing, haue thou aucthozitie ouer ten cities.

18 And the feconde came, sapiug: Thy peece hath encrealed fine peetes. io And to the sanie he sapde, be thou allo d ruler ouer fpuc cities.

holde here is thy peece, whiche Jhaue layed vp in a napkin.

strapte man: Thou takest vp that thou

laydest not downe, € reapest that thou

. „ dpddest not sowe.

gde lapth vnto hym: Ok thpue owne mouth wyll J indge thee, thon cup seruaunt. Knewest thou that J am a straite man, taking vp that J layed not

a farre countrey, to

wet önto them, Deeupie © tyl J come. n message after hym, laying: we Wyll

1j And it came to palle, that whe he had
‘oe ketcaued his kyngdome and returned,

20 And another came, saping: Lorde be-

u Foz J feared thee, betanse thou art a

by Saint Luke. XIIx.

done, x reapyng that J dyd not sowe:

23 And wherkore gauest not thou up mo-

ne into the banke, and at mp tonmyng
IJ mypght haue required snpne one with vanntagee:

24 And he sayde vnto them that stoode by:

Lake from byin that peect, and geue it to hym that hath ten peeces,

25. And they sayde vnto hyn: Lozde he hath ten pecces, .

26 For I lap vnto you, that vnto euery Mach ab due Which hath, halbe geuen: and fro zun. hym that hath not, shalbe taken away Tuc euen that he hath.

27 Moreouer, those nuue enemies, which woulde not that J (houlde raigne over thé, bung hyther, ¢ flea thein before vite, Math. x xi. e

28 And When he hadde thus spoken , he Nuk. ..

went foorth before, ascending vp to Hierusalem.

29 Andit tanie to passe, when he was hai 4 come npe to Bethphage e wWethante bee Mark.xia. fides the mount Which is called Oliuet, he sent two of his disciples,

30 Saping: Go ye into the towne which is duer agaynst pou, into the whitche,

alldone as pe are tome, ve shall fynde a coult tped, wheron pet neuer man late:

loose hym, and bryng hym hyther.

31 And pf aup man alke pou, why do pe loose hym, thus Mall ye fap buts hym: because the Lorde hath neede of hym.

32 They that were sent, went their wap,

c kounde euen as he had said vnto them.

33 And as they were a loosyng the cout, the owners therof fad vnto them, why loose pe the coult: ;

34 And they fayde : Foz the Lorde hat

ueede of hym.
35 Audthey brought hym to Jelus, and cast their rayment on the coult, and {ct
Jesus theron.
36 And as he went, they spread their clothes in the way.
37 And when he was nowe come nyc to F the going downe of the mount Olliuete, the whole multitude of the diftiples began to retopee,and to prapse God With a loude vopte, for all the miracles that they had leene. 1
38 Saping: Wlessed be the kyng that tõmeth in the name okthe Lorde, peace in heaven, and glory in the hpest. wciniewe
39 And some ofthe Phaͤrilees ol the toni- Sen ana pantie sayde vnto hym: Mater, rebuke aged woe thy disciples. ward vs.
40 Pe saide vnto them: I tell vou, that if
GE thele

— mire

these holde their peace, then Matt the

1 e And when he was tome neare, he

la hehelde the at and wept onit.

2 Saping:

i thofe nie whiche belong vnto thy peate, euen in this thy day: Wut nowe are they hyd from thyne eyes.

43 Foz the dayes shall come vpon thee, that thyne enemics also shall caste à

Abacucai.c.

Rites. |

rounde, and kepe thee in on euery syde:

644 And makc chee cuen with pgrounde,

and thy chyldren which are in there and

Miche.iii.d, they Chait not leaue un lark. xili. a

itte stoppeth the pharifees mouthes with another question, o he heweth their dal aie 5 3 of the vineparde. 17 Christe the Lone reproued, 19 the priestes
{che to kyll hym. 22 Tribute to be papde. 25 Geue to Caetar, and to God, Whiche to them belongeth. 27 He dilputeth with Saducees of the returrection. 41 Chpitte the sonne ol Dauid, 45 he delcribeth che lcribes. f

—AIltribes came bpd hym,
With the elders.
Mathe 2 And spake vnto hun, saying: Tell vs
Mak.xid. by What aucthoritie doest thou these

thynges : Eyther who is he that gane

thee this aucthoritie-
3 Jieesus aunswered, k sapde vnto them:

also wyll acke pou one thyng, F aunwere me. ;

The baptiline of © John, Was it from heauen, 02 of men- :

And they reafoned within the selues, faping, If we fay from heauen, he wyll fay, Why then beleued pe hym note
6 Wut and pf we fay of men, all He peo-

(a) That is. the whole mi- 4nisterie of
John.

ple wyll stone vs: Foz they be perlwa-

ded that John is aprophete.
And they aunfwercd that they coulde not tell whence it was.

8 And Jelus salde vnto them: either

tell 2 you by what aucthozitie J do these thynges, >
Rlat. xxi. d.
Mark.xit.a.
Fans. v. a.
Gene. &. c.
Icrem. vu. c

people this parable. A certapne man planted a bineparde, and let it foorth to hulbande men, and went hym selke into a straunge countrey fo2 a great season. lo And when the time was tome, he sent

the tyme of thy vilitation.

thou haddest knowen

banke about thee, and compasse thee -

thee one stone
¢ The .xx. Chapter.

un And agapne, he sent pet another fev:

14. Wut when the hulbande men sawe C

Then began he to put foorth to the

"bpd another, becaule thou knaweltnot

5 And he went into the ten le, and bee Man nto tast out them that lobe 9 Mate js an Sa F lohnil. 0
46 Saying vnto them it is written: houle is the hou cof prayer, but pe han Fact made it a denne ofthieues. lim vit
And he taught daylp in the temple.
Wut the hye priestes and the stribes, ¢ Tohn vi.
. thedytefe of the people, went about to lee destroy hym, e
43 And coulde not kynde what to do: Fo; all the people stacke by hym, whenthey hearde hom.

a seruaunt to the hulbande men, that
. they fhoulde geue hym of the fruite of the vineyarde. And they beat hym, and
{ent hym away emptie.

uaunt: and hym they did beate, and en treated hym shamekullp, and fent hym away emptie.

12 Agayne, he sent the thirde allo: and hym they wounded, and tast hym out.

3 Then said the Lord of the vineyarde: an
What shal J do: JJ wyfl send my deare hon. vis

sonne, it map be they wyll reuerente“ hym, when they see hym.

him, they reasoned within them lelueslaying: This is the heyre, come, let vs Sere kyll hym, that the inberitaunce may be N ours.
15 And they tast him out of the binepard,
N and kylled hyn. What shall the Lorde of the vineparde therfore do vnto thet:
16 He chall tome and destroye thele bul bande men, € chall let out his vineyarde
10 other. W ih they hearde this, ther apdt, God forbyd.
17 And he behelde them, efayde hg pa. is this then that is weitten, The Tone org that the buylders refuted, the fame Ef i become the head of the corner. a ban off
13 Wholdeuer doth {tumble pppon a Jed. stone, shalbe broken: but on ie it kalethhit wyl gramme the
9. And se hye prielies CHEMIN me

fame houre went about to lape handes ad on hym: and they feared the people. n. Foz they perteaued that he had spoken this sinulitude agaynst them.

20 And they watched hym, € sent foorth

Dspyes, Which shoulde fayne them {clues

ryghteous men, to take hym in his i, Wordes, and to delpuer hym vnto the power and autthoritie of the deputie.

a And they asled hin, faying : Maister, we knowe that thou sayest and teachest ryght, neither confiderctt thou the out:
Warde appearaunte of any man, but trachest the way of God truely:

22 Js is lalsbfuil for vs to geue tribute vnfo Cnesar, or noz

23° Me perteaued their traftynesse, ⁊ saide

ai, buto thein: why tempt ye me-

24. She we me a penie, whole mage and superstription hath it; They aunlwered and lapde, Caelars. i

2 And he layde vnto them: Geue then puto Caclar, the thynges which belong vnto Caesar, and to God the thynges that perteyne vnto God. :

26 And they toulde not reproue his saping befoze the people: and they maruepled at his auns were, e helde their peace.

627 Then “came to hym tertapne of the nc laducees, Which denie that there is any ab clurrection, and they alked hym, od28 Saͤping: Mater, Moyses wrote vn-

to vs, f any mans brother dye, hauyng a wyfe, and he dye without chyldren: that then his brother shoulde take his wyfe, € rayse vp seede vnto his brother.

20 There were therfore seuen brethren,

and the first tokt a wyfe, € dyed With: but chyldʒeen. —

0 And the seconde toke her, and he dyed

chyidlesse. ve

And the thirde toke her, emipkewite. the relidue of the seuen, and teft no chyldien behynde them, and dped.

2. Lak of all, the woman dyed alld.

J The. xxj.

2Che liberalitie of the poore wydowe.

33 MoWe inthe resurrection, whole wite
11 5 Chall he bez Foz seuen had her

34. Jesus aunfivered and saide vnto thẽ:
Tyechyldrenokthis“ worlde marrye J crue wpites, and are marrped: mtb

35 But they which chalbe counted voy: eee we" thy to enioy that worlde, and the relur rection from the dead, do not marrpe wpues, neither are marrped,

36 $202 pet can dye any more: Jor they are equall vnto the angels, and are the formes of God, inafinucheas they are chyldren of the resurrection.

37 And that the dead (halt ryse agapne,
Moyses also sheweth besides the buche, when he talleth the Lorde the God A e
Abraham, and the God of Jlaat, e the m=
God of Jacob. a

38 For he is not a God ok dead, but oftyuyng: For all lyue vnto hym.

39 Then tertayne of the pharisees aunswered, and sayde? Maister, thou hast well sayde. N

4.0 And after that, durst they notafke him any question at all. . G

4 And he layde vnto them: Howe faye Nit g they that Christe is Dauids sonne: Marl. xi. d.

42. And Dauid hyn selfe sayeth in the booke of the psalmes: The Lod salde PA c. . to my Load {pt thou on my right hand,

oo FJ make thine enemies thy loote-

oole:

44. Dauid therfore calleth hymi Lorde, € howe is he then his © soime- Gracia no

45 Then in the audience of all the people, ache. he faide vnto his diltiples. ah Ehle

46 Beware of the scribes, whiche wyll Nat rita do in long robes, and loue greetinges in MaK xd. the markets, and the hyest seates inthe
Wee and the chiefe rowmes at

astes: A

Iohn. iii..

i. Iohn.. b.

47 Which deuour widowes howses vnder colour of longe prayers: The same shall reccaue greater dampnation.

Chapter.
6 He kore warneth ot the destruction of

Hierusalem, 8 of kalte teachers, 9 of tokens a troubles to come, Yol the ende

ol the wor

N Hela also a tertaine
SNE poore wydowe, which tate in thyther two

lde, za or ryot and dronkennelse, zs he taught in the temple.

3 And he layde, Oka truech J {ap vnto pou, that this pooze wydowe hath put cor vi in more then they all. f
4 Jor they all haue of their superfluitie added vnto the offerynges of God: but she of her penurie hath tast in al the substaunce that she had. b
Gi And

And puto fonre, that spake ofthe tem: ple, howe it was garnisshed with goodlie tones and gyftes, he lapde.

6 Arc thele the thynges whiche ye loke

* Math. 24 c.
Mark. Nn. a

there Call not be left one fone vpõ another, that Mail not be throwen Downe.

And they altked him, saying: Maister

when shall these thynges be- and what

signe wyll there be, when tele thynges

shall come to passesẽ
Ciloll ub. 8. And he sapde: Take heede, that pe
Febeyb. be not deteaued. For many hall conte clohia. in my name, saping Jam Chaitte, and the tynie draweth neare. Folowe pe

them not therkore. "

„ But when pe heare of warres, and se-
Ditids, be not afraide: Forthese thinges

mult first conte to pasle, but the ende foloweth not by and by. Ie

Elina 1o Then sayde he vnto them: Mation

4. Esd. xill.

agaynst kyngdome. , Jef!

1 And great earthquakes shalbe in di-

uers places, and hunger, and pestulenec, and fearefull thynges, and great signes

shall there be from heauen.

Math. x. b.
Mark. xili. b
John. Xvi a.

deliueryng you vp to the synagognes, € into pafons, and {hall bryng vou vnto

kynges and rulers for my names sake.

13 And it Mail turne to pou for a testimomall. ä mex scene carer

14 We at a {ure poynt therefore in pour heartes, not to studie betoze what ye

_ thallauntiwere:
Exod. ib. 15 For J wyll geue pou a mouth, and
Nach. xc Wysedolne, where agaynst, all pour adce 8 shall not be able to speake nor resist.
Adevie 16 Bea pe halbe betrayed allo of pour paz
‘iat — — A n
, and (Some) of pou shal they put
17 Aud hated Hal ye be of all men for my names sake. —
18 And there shall not one heere of pour head perpthe. . a cay ror 19 Pollesse ve pourfonte by © patience.
Elles uhu 20 “And Whe ye see Hierusalem besieged
Stone With an hoast, then be sure that the desolation of the fame is nye. i bermnccrome, 21 - Then let them which are in Jurie fle be. to the mountapnes, and let them which are inthe myddes of it, depart out: and let not them that are in other tountreys

“The Golpell a

vpõ: The dayes Wyll come, in b which

mmto all nations: And dierufatem shalbe

(hail ryse agaynst nation, k Kyugdome

Cro But before all these, they shall laye their handes on pou, and periecute vou,

zs Waͤtche ve therfore, and prap conti

“ben
22 Forthcte be the dapes of vengeg that all thinges which are — 5 be — 25 eee
23 But wo vnto thẽ that are wi t to them that geue sucke in cel de
For there thatbe great dickresse in the lande and wrath ouer this people.
24 And they shali fall through the enge oft : thelworde, and chalbe led away taptiue

troden downeofthe gentlles, vntyll the tyme of the gentiles be fulfptien, ~ : 0

250 And there chalbe fignes in the sunne e aud in the moone, e in the starres: and Mn pon che cacti trouble e the nat ba ons, With perplexitie. The f Reach e t 1 b alk 7

26 And mens heartes shal fayle th feave, and tor loking after wobec
Which chall come on the wonnd: For the powers of heauen shalbe chase.

27 And then shall they fee the sonne ol man come ina cloude, with power and great glorie. .

28 And when these thynges begyn to tone to passe, then loke vp, and ipfitbp
. heades, for pour redemptiõ draw-

nne... e n rei -

29 And he shewed them a similitude: T
Wehold the figge tree, € all the trees. 4

30° When they shoote foorth (their buddes © ye see and knowe of pour owne selues that sonuner is then nye at hande.

31 So like wise ye, when pe fee these thin ges conie to passe, be pe sure that the kyngdome of God is nye, ae *

32 Ueryly J fap vnto pou, this generatton Chali not pale, tyll all be fulfplied.

33 Peauctrandearth Mall pale, but ny 6 wordes (hall not passe. 20 . age

34. Take heede to pour selues, lest at & W any tyme pour heartes be ouercoime Koos with surkettyngand dronkennesse, and tares of this lyfe, and so the dave conie vpon pou vnwares. es

35 For as à mare shall it come on athe that Dwell on the face ofp whole earth. .,

Mak l ally; that ye may be accompted Worthy. to estape all these thinges v Mail come e that ye may stand berore b sonneokman.

37 In the day time heraughtin the tert ad ple: and at nyght he went out, E abode inthe mountthat is called Oliuete. i

38 And all the people came itt —. 8 1 to hyminthe temple, forte heare hen

¢ The xxij. Chapter.

——- ¢Fudas telleeh Chile.) hey eate the patouer. 19 Che tution of
: the Lordes supper. 24 Cher stryue who choulde be greatest. 31 Satan dtempteth them. 42 Chrilte prarech in the mount, and fweaterh blood.
47 Judas betrapeth him with a kisse. i Chrilte setteth on Malchus eare. co peter denieth Chricke thrise. and repenteth hym. 67 Christe 18 mocked, and confeflech hym telfe to be the konne ol God.

A becade drewe nyc,
Which is called the
Passouer.
And; hie priestes
Ney {aun fertbes" sought

And he tonsented, and fought oportu-

nitie lo betray him vnto them, when the people were away.
Then canie the day of lweete breade,

ab when lot necellitiej the Palsouer mustbe

offered. zs And he sent peter and John, saying:
Go and prepare vs the Passouer, that we map cate, 0 N

They sapde vnto hym: Where wylt thou that we preparc- —

10. And he sayde vnto them: Beholde,
When pe enter into the titie, there Malia man meete vou; bearyng a pitcher of
Water, hym folowe into the faane house that he entreth in. :

u And pe shall fap vnto the good man ot

the house, the maister faith vnto thee,

where is the ghest chamber, where J shall eate p Palloner with my dilciples-

12 And he shal shew vou an vpper cham- | e 90 27 For whether is greater, he that sitteth

brr prepared, there make redye. |
And they went, and founde as he had sapde vnto them: and they made redye
N the Passduer. ie I., And when the houre was tome, he me downe, x the twelue apostles with

vm. ; ij And he sapde vnto them: I haue ear-

nestiy delired to cate thispallouer with

- pou, before that J suffer.

16 For J faye vnto pou, hentefoorth 2

wyll not eate of it any moze, vntyll it be fulfylled in the kyngdonie of God.

17 And he toke the cuppe,¢ gaue thankes, and sapde, Take this, and deuide it aamong vou:

13 Foz Fan vnto vou, J Wyll not drinke ofthe fruite of the vine, vntyll the kyngdome of God conte,

19 And he toke bread, and when he had 3 geut᷑ thankes, he brake lit) and gaue vn- Mar i. to thé, faping, This is my body, which c se

is geuen for pou; This do in the remembraunce of nie.

10 Tpkewise also, when he had supped,

he toke the cuppe, saping: This cuppe is the new testamẽt in ny blood, which is shed for pou.

21 Bet beholde, the hande of hym that betrapeth me, is with me on the table.

22 And truelp the sonne of man goeth as itis appoynted: but wo vnto that man

by whom he is betraped.

23 And thep began to enquire among them selues, which of them it was that shoulde do it.

24 & And there was a stryfe among thé, which of them shoulde seeme to be the

greatest. *
25 And he saide vnto them: The kinges bol nations raigne ouer them, and they that haue aucthoritie bpd tein, are cal led gracious Lordes.

26. But pe shall not be so. But he that Math c

is greatest among pou, shalbe as the pounger, and he that is chiete, shalbe as he that doth minister.

at meate, or he that {erueth « Is not he that sitteth at meate- Wut J am among pou, as he that nunistreth.
28 Be are they, which haue bydden with me in my teniptations.
29 And J appopnt buto pou a kingdome, as mp father bath appopnted vnto

11 That

3 e may cate and drynke at my
0% le * 5 nyngdome, *¢ fit on seates iudgyng the twelue tribes of Ilrael.
And the Lom farde Simon, Simon, beholde Satan bath desired to sift port,’ as it were Wheate: eo

Nlat. xix. d.

But J haue prayed for thee, that thy fayth fayle not: And when thou art couerted, ftrength thy brethren.

Nat 33 And he sapde vnto hun: TLord Jam
Nhe redy to go with thee into pzpfon, aͤnd to dea ' *

lohn. xui. d.

th. : a
34. And he sapde: J tell thee Peter, the
Cocke (hal not crowe this Day, tyll thou
Hatt thryse Denped that thou unewest

me. St ee A
1 35 And he laid vnto them: When J tent
IVI. t K. VI. h.
Luk. ix. a.

sayde, no. ane
36 Then faide he vnto thein: But nowe he that hath a wallet let hint take it bp, and lpkewyse his scrippt: and he that bath none, let hun fell his coate, and bpe
à [Worde. ee ay

7 whiche is written, must be perfourmed

Efiashiib. in nie: Euen among che wicked was 5
Maha7b. he reputed. For those thynges whiche
Johxnif, Ate Witten of me, haue an ende.
33 And they sayde: Lowe, behelde here art two swordes. And he fayde vnto them, it is enough.
Macxxvie39 And he tame ont, and went as he

Vn vue. wag wont, to mount Dhuete and the distiples folowed hym. —

Nn And when he came to the place, he

wks teniptatilon.

Mat id.. Ad he gate hym selse from them a-

bout aà stones caste, and knecled downt,

aud praped .. a

42 'Saping: Father, pf thou wylt, re-

ne, . tone this cuppe from nie. Peuerthevid. elle, not my wyl, but thine be fulfilled,
43. And there appeared an angell vnto

hn fronrheauen, tomfortyng hym.

Geddes a, And he Was in an™ agonie, and he cok? praped moze earneltly: and his [Weat errs laat. Was lyke droppes of blood, trickipng downe to the grounde. 1

45 And when he rose vp from prayer, and

was tome to his distiples, he founde the.

llepyng fo2 heaupnesse,

46 And sayde vnto them, why slepe ve-

Mocceic ¢ Vile, Epiap iest pe fallinto temptation,
Nara. 7 Whyle he pet spake, behold (there came]

Jolpell

„ e 5
49 When they whiche were

his eare, he healed hym.

pou without Wallet, and strippe, and fhoes, lacked ye any thyngs And ther

570: J fay vnto you, that yet che sane

sayde vnto then: prap, lest pe fall into

“

acompany, and he that was 5 das, one of the fiveltie, went beine ri

c preassed nye vnto Jelus to kile hpnr
48 But Jesus sapde vnto hym: Judas betravtit chou thefonne of man with 4

. n were about sawe what Woulde foldwe n lr

“as ym: Love, chall we fnyte With

thus farre foorth. And whẽ he touched

staues: ee La {ee

5 When I was daply with vou in the

downe together, Peter allo late downe yi. ee among then. id Ye . ew « Toh. xvii
56 But when atertapne wenche behelde hym, as he sate by the fire sand earneitlre loked bpon hymj shyt sayde: This same selowe was also with hm.
5 And he denped hym, faying, woman dauer
Junowe hym not.
And after atitte whyle, another sawe hym, and laide: Thou art also of them.
And Peter sapd, man J am not.
59 And about the spate ok an houre after, au other affirmed faying: Cerply this felowe was with hyus allo, for he isof oneal faype : Man J wote not
60 And Peter sapde: Man
What thou fapest. And mmedlatlpe whyie he pet spake, the Cocke trewi ..
61 And the Lorde turned backe, ELOWCD 1 vppon Peter: And Peter veriembecd s10% the worde of the Lorne; howe he hade fayde vnto hym, before the Cocke crowe thou shalt dente me thrile. — ex And Peter went out,e wept bitterly: |
63 And the men that helde Jelus, nir G ked bpm, and smote hym. n
64. And when they had bündlolvev en 1 they ftroke hym on the face, ang,

Arede, who is it that smote

— him, saping:

»theee 75 .

65 And manpother things blasphemoul-
6 pe spake they against hym.

66 And assdone as it was dap, the elders

ol the people, and the Hye priestes, and

scribes, tame together, and led hym into their counsell, saping: a

6 Art thou very) Christe, tell vs: And

The sayde vnto them: If J tell you, vou

y Saint uke,

°

Wyll not beleue:
68 And ik J afte you, vou wyll not aun-
[were me, nor let me go.
69 “Hereafter (halt the fonne of man fit onthe right hand of the power of God.
70 Then laid they all: Art thou then the sonne of God: He sayde: Ye say > Jam.
7 And they sayd- What neede We any further witnesle: Foz we our selues haue hearde of his owne mouth.

Mat. xx vi.f

lar. xiui. g.

Mit xxvi. g r. xiiii. g.

%

The. xxiii Chapter.

. Jelus is accused before Pilate, and is sent
_ raba3 ts let at libertie, and Jesus geuen to

to erode. 8 Herode mocketh hym. 25 Ba · be crucified. 2 Simon of Cyrene. The

women lament Christe crucified, 34 he prapeth for his enemies. 40 One ok the thieues rapleth on hym, 41 and the other is saued by fapth. 46 He geucth vp the ghost, and is

on burped.
5 8 J2D* the whole mul-

1 „Ne
A YN DAY |tiinde of them arole, c xv a Of Gy led hym vato Pilate. wee 2 Arid they began to

1 7 8 3 A llaccufe hym, saping: we
A counde this felow per-
— nerting the people, and forbyddyng to pape tribute to Cealar, saping that he is Christe, a kyng.
And Pilate appofed hym, laping: Art thou the kyng of the Jewes: He aunswered hym, and sayde: Thou lapest it.
Then laide Pilate to the bye priestes, and to the people: J finde no fault in this man.
5 And thep were the niore lierte, saping: he moueth the people, teaching thorowout al Jurie, and began at Galilce,
Cueto this place.
6 When late hearde (mention) of Gaz

int

ulee he alß ed whether the man were of

Galilee.
5 7. And alldone as he knewe that he belonged vnto Herodes iurifpiction, he ent bpm to erode, whiche was allo at

Pierulalem at that tyme.

And when Herode sawe Jesus, he
Was exceeding glad: For he was delirous to fee hym ofa long season, betause he had hearde many thinges of hym, and he trusted to haue seene some mira-

dle done by hy m.
Then he questioned with hym many
1 Wut he aunfivered bpm no-

lo The hye priestes and stribes stoode fosorth, and acculed hym strayteip. u And Herode with his men of warre delpised him: and When he had mocked

ella.

hym, he araped hym in whpte clothing, and sent hym agapne to Pilate.

12 And the lame day Pilate and Herode were made friendes together: Foz before they were at variaunte.

13 And Pilate called together the bye priestes, and the rulers, and the people,

14 And said vnto them: e haue brought this man vnto me, as one b peruerteth the people: and behold, J examine his befoze pou, & finde no fault in this man ofthose thinges wherot ye accuse hym:

15 Mo, nor pet Herode: For F seut pon to hym, and loc nothing worthy of death is done to hyn.

16 J wpyll therekore chasten hym, and let hymloose. 4

17 For of necessitie he must haue let one loose vnto them at the feat.

13 And all the people crped at once, saping: Away with him, and deituer to vs wWarabbas,

19 Which for a tertaine insurrection made in the titie, and for murther, was cast in pryson.

20 Pilate spake agapne to then wyllyng to let Jelsus loose.

21. But they trped, saping: Crucifie hym, crucific hym.

22 He layde vnto them the thirde tyme:
What eupll hach he done: I finde no taule ol death in hym, J wyll therckore thasten hym, and let hym go.

2 And thep were instant with loude voytes, requiring that he might be erutified. And be eh them, and of the hye priestes preuapled.

agit Plate gaue lentence, that it should be as they required.

G til} 25 And

Aces. iii. a.

Math. z d.
Mark. xv. a.
Ioh. x vu.

lath. 27. c.
Mark.xv.a,
Tohn xix, a.

Plat. Vic.
Mark. xv. a.

Miat.27 c.
Maik. x v. b.

Luke. viii. a.

Efai liiti.a,
Saptiiie.
Galt. iii. d.

Mat. 27. d.
Marle. xv c. oha. xix. d.

Mat. xvij · d.
Mark. xv c.
Plal. xxi. d.

Mat 27. b.
Lohn. xix. d.

Mat.xxviic
Nlark. xv. c.

insurrection and murther was caste
1 pifon, whom they had desired , c he deliuered vnto them) Jelus, to do With hym what they woulde.

26 Ad as they ledde hym awap, they caught one Simon of Cyzene comming out of the fielde, aud on hym layde they the trolle, that he myght beare it after

cfus.
27 there folowed hyma great tompanic of people, and of women, which bewayled and lamented hym. ö
28 But Refus turned backe vnto them, aud laßde: Pe) daughters of Hierulalem, wept not for me, but wepe for pour sclues, and for pour chyldren: g
29 For beholde, the dayes wyll tome, in the which they shal ay: Happy are the barren, the wombes that neuer bare, ethe pappes which neuer gaue sucke.
30 Then (halt they begin to fay to the mountapnes, fall on vs, Eto the hylles, couer vs.
31 Jor if they do these thinges in a greene tree, what shalbe done in the drye-
32 And there were two cupll doers, led with hym to be apne.
33 And alter that thcp were come to the

place whithe is called Caluarie, there

they crucified hym, aud the euyll doers, one on the right hand, and the other on the lelt.

34. Then said Jesus, Father forgeue the, r̃or they wote not what they do. And they parted his rayment, ¢ tast lottes.

25 35 And the peopie stoode, and behelde:

and the rulers mocked him with them, faping : He saued other men) let hynt laue hun selfe, if he be very Christe the chosen of God.

36 The souldiours also mocked him, and came and oftred him vineger,

37 And sayd: Ifthon be the kyng o the

Jewes, saue thy lelfe.

38 And a superltription was witten ouct him, with letters of greke, and latin, ald hebzue, This is the king of the Iewes.

29 And one ok the euyll doers whiche were hauged, rapled on hym, saping:
Ik thou be Chyiste, laue thy lelk and vs.

40 But the other aunswered, and“ rebu-
Bed hym, saping: Fearest thou not God, cing thou art in the lame dampnation-

1 he Golfpell
€ 25. And ne let soose vnto them, him that 41 We are righteoustp (punigen) fo We

receaue àctording to our deedes: ‘ this manhath done nothing amifie

42 And he sayde vnto Jesus: Doone remeniber me, when chou tommelt into

43 And Jesus sayde vnto hym: Te
Play onto thee, to dap halt Won de
With me in paradisfe.

44. And it was about the sirt houre:and there was a darknelle over al the carey vutyll the ninth houre.

45 And the sunne was darkned, and the

baple of the temple dyd rent, euen cho- »

rowe the middes. |

4.6 And when Jelus had cryed with a loude vote, he sayde: Father into thy handes ‘J commende my spirite. And el he thus had layde, he gaue vp the ghost. ö

27 Whenthe Centurion saw what was done, he glonified God, faping : Tleryly this was a righteous man.

4 And all the people that came together to that sight, efawe the thinges Whiche were done, lmote their bresteg, and returned.

49 And all his acquaintaunce,* and the women that folowed him from Galilee stode a farre ot, beholding thelethinges.

50 And beholde, there Was a man named Joleph, a touncellour, and he was a god man and atust:

51 The fame had not confented to the

Mat.2 Re.
Mark X VIC.

Mat. 27.4, ik xv d

Mat.). f.
Markxvd

Mat. 25,f.
Mark. xvad,
E
Nat. g.
Mark xv. d.
Lohn xix g.

tounsell and deede of them, which was

of Aramathia a citie of the Jewes,

whiche same allo wapted for the kyng-

dome of God.
52 He went vnto Pilate, and begged the

body of Jesus, N
5 And tone it downe, and wrappedit in

alinnen cloth, and layde it in a sepulchze

that was hewen in stone, wherin neuer

man before was layde. N
54. And that day Was the preparing of

the Sabbath, e the Sabbath drew on.
55 The women that foloiyed alter, whiche had tome With hym from Galilee, behelde the sepulchre and how his body was lapde.

And they returned, and prepared sweete odours and oyntmentes: but te? stedthe Sabbath day, actording to the commaundement.

The

beth into heanen.

a) It vpon the first day
2 Ae of the Sabbathes,
— 7 (bere) early in the mor-

nyng, they tame vnto
KET Ithelepulchze, cbrought
E pblwecte odours which they had prepared and other women with them.
2 And they founde the stone rolled away from the sepulchze,
And they went in: but founde not the body of the Lode Jesu.

amaled therat: Geholde, two men

stoode by them in shinpng garmentes.

wg 5 And as they were afrayde, and bowed downe their faces tothe earth, they said vnto thein: why lecke pe the lyuyng among the Dead:

6 Me is not here, but is risen: Remember howe he spake vnto pou, when he was pet in Galilee,

7 Saping: that the sonne of man mutt be deliuered into the handes ok sinfull men, and be crucified and the thirde day vile agayue.

3 Aud they remeimbred his wordes,

9 And returned fromthe sepulchre, and tolde all these thinges vnto thofe eleuen, and to all the remnaunt.

lo It was Marie Magdalene, and
Joanna, and Marie Jacobi, and other that were with them, which tolde thele thinges vnto the Apostles.

1 And their wordes seemed vnto them dend thynges, neither beleued they

hem.

iz Then arole Peter, and ran vnto the sepiilchre, and lobed in, and lawe the linnen clothes layde bp them selues, and
Departed, wondryng in him selke at that which was come to passe.

B; And beholde, two of them went that same day to atowne called Emaus, which was from Hierulalem about threescore furionges,

4. And they talked together of all thele thynges that were done.

) And it tame to pafle, that whyle they tommuned together € realoned, Jelus

il, la.

USC,

dig,

ar
&

Us z

by Saint Lu i
— — xxiiii. Chapter. ‘
Che women come to the sepulchre, 9 they shewe to the Tpoltles that w i

tolde them. 13 Christe appeareth to the two Disciples that went a Cee

pretech the Scriptures. 35 Be appeareth to che Dpottles, and reproueth their incres

dulitie. 49 He promileth the holp ghost, and geueth them their charge 51 He alcen-

And it came to passe, as they were

22 Bea, and certapne women also of our

ke,

He drewe neare, and went with Marie in.

16 But their epes were olden, t shoulde not Mio es

17 And he sayde vnto then: hat maner of conunumtattons are thele that ye haue oue to another as pe walke, and are sad- ,

18 And the one of them, whole name
Was Cleophas, aunlwered, and fayde to

him: Art thou only a straunger in Hierusalem, æ hast not knowen the thinges
Be ate tome to pale there, in thele

ves:

19 He sayde vnto them: what thynges-
And they fayde vnto him: Ok Jelus of
Nazareth, whiche was a piophete, nightie in deede and worde before God

And all the people:

20 And howe the hye priestes, and our rulers deliuered hun to be tondempned to death, and haue crucified him.

21 But we trusted chat it had ben he which Moulde haue redeemed Ilracl:
And as touchyng all these thynges, to day is euen the thirde dap, that they were done.

Luk. zq. c.
Iohn. xx. a.

companie made bs astomed, which tame early vnto the sepulchre,

23 And founde not his body, and came, saping that they had leene a vilian of angels, which sayde that he was alyne.

24 And tertayne of them which were
With bs, Went to the sepulchre, x founde t euen so as the women had sayde: but hym they sawe not.

25 And he sayde vuto them: O fooles and slowe of heart to belene all chat the prophetes haue spoken.

26 Ought not Christe to haue suffered Ma xxvie these thinges . to enter into his glaze Ela. lin c

27 And he began at Mopses, and all the prophetes, and interpreted vnto them in
55 Striptures which were warten of

m.

28 And they drewe nye buto the towne which they went vnto, and he made as though he would haue gone further.

29 Audthey tonstrayued hym, laying Gin abpde Lularge.

OO

abyoe}

Pith bs, foz it draweth towarde nyght, and the day is farre passed. And he went in to tary with them.

Markxv.b. 30 And it came to passe, as he fate at meate with them, he toke bread, and

Se chlesledit, and brake, and gaue to them. fen 31 And their eyes were opened, and they

thanbes ads appcateth by diders places

pf seripturt.
Luk. xxq̃.

D 36 And as they thus spake,

Iohn. xx. c.

‘The Golpell 1

unewe hum:and he vanished out of their

, I t 2
2 And they sayde betweene them selues:
Dpd not dur heartes burne within vs,

Whyle he talked with vs by the way,

and opened vnto vs the striptures-

And they rose vp the fame houre, and

returned Lagapne] to Hierusalem, and

founde the eleuen gathered together,

and them that were with them,

34 Saping: The Tordt is rysen in deede, and bath appeared to Simon.

5 And they tolde what thynges were

done in the way, and Hobe they knewe him in breakyng ok bread. n

esus him
{elfe stoode (nthe * nuddes of them, and faith vnto them: Peace be vnto pou,

37 Wut they were abasshed and akrayde, e supposed that they had seene a spirite.

38. And he sapde vnto them: Why are pe troubled, and why do thoughtes arile in pour heartes:

39 Weholde my handes and my feete,

that it is euen J mp selle: Handle me and fee, for a spirite bath not flethe and bones, as pe fee nie haue.
40 And when he had thus spoken, he shewed them his handes and his fete.
41 And Whyle they vet beleued not for

iop, AnD wondred, he sa sean ve ep A meate-

42 And they offered him a pe broyled fishe, and of an bonp tome. j

43 15 he toke it, and dyd cate before

44. And he sayde vnto then: These

the wordes which J Pate dit Bai whyle J was pet with you, that all must (needes} be fulfplled, which were witten ol me in the law of oyles, and in the prophetes, and in the plates,

45 Thenopened he their“ wittes, that they myght vnderstande the leriptures.

46 And fayde vnto then: Thus is it witten, and thus it behoued Chatte to fuffer, and to rife agapne from death the thirde Dap: N

47 And that repentaunte and remission of sinnes shoulde be preached in his name among all natious, O and mutt begyn at Hierusalem.

48 And pe are witnesses ofthese thynges.

49 And beholde F wyll sende the promile ol mp father vpon you: Wut tary pe in the citie of Hierusalem, vntyll ve be endued with power from an hype.

50 And he led them out into Bethante, and lift vp his handes, e blesled them.
51 And it came to passe, as he blessed

them, he departed from them, and was tarped vp into heauen.
52 And they worshipped him, and returned to Hierulsalem with great toy,
53 And Were continually in the temple, praysyng and laudyng God. Amen.

Here endeth the Gospell by Saint Luke.

a
PD

yde vnto them:

Iohn. x xh.

€

Act xv

Ades, Lb.

Acdes. ib.
Mark.xvut

OD2 ming

= See Hthe beaynupng was is the worde, a the Worde was with God: and
IVschat wome was God.
7 The lame was in the

„„ All thpnges Were d made by it: and without “atstbas made
. = nothyng that was made.
4. Ini was llpke, and the wie was the
* innhtokmeff
5 And the lyght chpncth in darkenesse
"ashe bachnffecompiehenbeniena.
There was a nian fent from God, e ole nume ld ae Hohn a

ul d.

un. 14 b.

Bi 1 Wa ne e 2 u 8 He was nott to beare Abitnelte ofthelyabt: -
, That oe asthe true lyght, Which en euery nian that conmieth into
Ade.

1e He was in the worlde, and the worlde was made by by, ort the worlde

u Klee hym not.
De cane antong his owne, and bis ole reteaued hym not. .

N

7 8 begpunpng with God.

The same canic ford Wwitnesce te to beare 4
. witnesse of the W ipght, chat all men

aͤt lpght: put was ent

by Saint John. lui.

5 cate — «2 a Saint Iohn.

te The firft Chapeer.

1 che dininttle, himanitke, and oftice of heit. 1 Shetegimont of gen. 5
* Che callyng of Andzewe Peter, Philip, and Hathaniel.

12 But as man asteceaned feat 5 60 Prat With them gauche © power to bethe fonnes O22" ore of God tuen them that beleucd on his name.

13 Which were borne, not of blood nor of the wyll ol the fleche, nor bet of the wyll of man, but of God. 28

14 And the fame word o became fiethe, ) ©} mes and dwelt aniong vs (and we falve ! (0) eine ts the glorp of it, as the glorp of the only Baer e begotten fonne of the father) full of 1 grace and trueth. > - a

Is c John beareth witnesse of hym, Matha and crpeth, sapnng: This was he of Mean whom JJ {pake, he that commeth after me, is preferred befoze me, fo he was geet
And of his fninesse haue all we re- Coat aa and gvace®forgrace, . ene,

h kaz

17: Forthelawe Was geuen by Mopses: d vs. ans but pice and tructh came by Jesus foe ian 4
Chulte. t ier rad

18 29 man hath seene God at any tyme: dia ene,
The onelp begotten sonne which is in de arne ts the e of the father, he hath de- oe tlared Hpnt.<o

19 & * and ES this is the retorde ol John: bn 4
When the Jewes sent b 1 —

i

leuites From Hierulaleim, toatke Hym:
What art thor:
20 And he tonkessed and denped not, and sayde plapnely, J ant not that Christe.
Nach xb. 21 And they asked hym: What then! art thou Elias And he sapth, J amnot.
Der xc. * Art thou that prophete: And he aunswered, uo.
22 Then {apne they vnto hym: What art thou- that we may gene an aunswere to
197 tase fent bs: What sapest thou of ellt:
23 he sapde: Jam the vopte of a erper in the wüdern wap of the Lordt, as sapde the pro-

phete Elaias. 0
24 ae they which were sent, were o the pharilees.
C. And they asked hym, and sayde vnto v baptiʒest thon then, vk thou be not Christe, nor Elias, neither that

hpur: Wh pirophete- J
Nac 5 26 John aunslwered them, faping : * J

Math. iii.
Miark.i.a.
Luk. ii. a.
Esay. xl. a.

esse, make ftrapght the

speake, and they folowen

38 And Jesus turned N sawe chem kolowe bpm, Flapth onto then

What seeke pee They fapde onto hyn;

Rabbi (which is to fay pf one interprete

it, Mailter) Where dwellect thon,

He fapeth vnto them: tome and see
They tame, and sawe Where he dwelt. and abode with hym that dap: Fo) if
. near tenth Ohoure.

One ok the two which hearde Joh speake, æ folowed hym, Was 0 ma n bother. e

Al Lhe fame founde his brother Simo first, and sayth vnto hym: nae halte founde Meslias, which is by interpretation, the © annopnted. | 0, t

elus. And Be: 2

Nan ne

42 And brought hym to sus behelde Hpi, and fayde: Thouart
* Simon the lonne of Jona, thou shalt Masri be called Cephas, which is by interpre-

tation a stone.
43 The dap folowyng, Jesus woulde go e

Mark 1.2. 5 . : '
Mackia. bapiize with water, but there standeth into Galilee, Efounde Php,
Abtes dix. g one aimong vou, whom pe knowe nat, 2 en e n
27 Me it is, Which though he came afier 44 Phuip was of wWethlaida, the citit of la me, was before me, whole shoes latchet Andrewe and Peter
J ani uot worthy to vnloose. 45 Philip founde Nathanael, and sapth
28 Thele thynges were done in Zetha- puto hym: wee haue founde hym, ck loi, batq bepoude Jordane,“ where John whom Mopses in thelawe, and the can dyd baptize. im rprophetes, dyd wolte: Jesus of Jaze ol
29 V Thentrt dap, John leeth Jesus keth he sonne of Joleph. ae
Efyliib conning vuto hm, and laith, beholde 46 And Hathanael sapde vnto hm: Beate
Coen. the kambeol God, Which taketh awayr Can there amp good thyng come out of she the sinne of the worlde. Ma dareth: Philip lapth Suto hun:conie 7255
30 This is he of whom Jsapde, After and lee. b,

me tommeth a man, which is preferred 4 Jesus fawe athanaci commypng to

before ine, for he was before nie.

zi And A knewe hym not: but that he

choulde be declared to Ilrael, therfore am I conte, baptizing with water.

Macb did. And John dare ng: J würd . n recorde, saping: 7
Lund “fave We spirite destende from enen,

Ipke vnto a doue, and abode vpon hym,
33 And knewe hym not. But he that sent nie to baptide with water, the lame aide

vnto me: vpon whom thou shalt see

the spirite destende, and tary styll on

hym, the lame is he which baptizeth art retorde that he ohn ttoobe a:

With the holy qghoft.
34 And J sawe, and b
0 is the sonne of God.
235 The next dap after, gapne, and tivo of his dilciples.
36 And he behelde Jesus as he walked by layth: beholde the lambe of God.
* 7 And the two diluples hearde hym

byng tapeth of by: Weholde a ryght
Ilraellte, in whom is no guile. *
43 Mathanael fayth buto hyn: : vabentt tnewWelt thou mes PFelus aunfwered, and fayde bite hymasefore that hund called thee, when thow Walt vnder the fygge tree, Plate there. *
49 Pakhanel aunswered, and lapde bn.
"to bpnt: Rabbi, thou art even theben fonne of God thonart pkyng of Plcatt.
50 Jesus auntioered, k lapde vnto by:
Wetause Blapde vnto cher, Faw thee vnder the frase tree, thou © beleuelt Le
Thou dhalt fee greater thyuges then
51 And he sayth vnto hom ar e rplp I fap buto vou, hereafter t all 55 fee heanen open and the Angels 40 5 1 altendyng e delcendyng vpon the kon of man. — C Tbe

by Sait lohn.

The. ij. Chapter.

C 7 Chrille begynneth to Worke miracles, and turned water into wyne, i2he goeth to
Capernaum, and so afcendeth to Hierulalem 14 he casteth buyers and sellers out of

bbhen ther fee his miracles.

ND the thirde

e dap, Was there a

NN marriage in Cana

Z| (a crtte} of Galllee,

and the mother of

Jesus was there.

And Jesus was

talled, and His Die

; ciples vnto the mariage:

3 And whe the wyne fayled the mother ol Helustapth vnto hym: they haue no

4. Jelus saith) vnto her: Woman, what haue J to do with thee, myne houre is not pet tome. a — '

aie § His mother sapth onto theOminitters:

Be - yohathoeuer he fapth vnto pou, dott.

6 . Andthere were let there, fire water pottes of stone, after the maner of the purifiyng of the Jewes, conteynyng

„ two orthree o firkins àa ptete.

Jelus sapth vnto them: fyll the water

z bottes with water. And they fpiled

them vp to the brym. 2

8 And he layth onto them: drawe out

+ node; and beare vnto the gouernour of

feat. And they bare it. 8

9 When the ruler of the feast had tasted the water that was made wyne, and

knewe not whence it was (but the mi-

the gouertiour of the featt calleth the brydegrome :

Bre.

nisters which drewe the water knewe)

the temple, io he kore warneth his death and relurrection, z and many beleue in hym

thren, and his disciples, and there con tinued not many dayes. * 8

3. And the Jewes Palsduer was at Macxx.b. hande, € Jelus went bp to pierulalem, Tus

14. And founde sittyng in the temple, thofe that solde oven, and sherpe, and doues, and chaungers of money. a

15 And when he had made bas it were} a scourge of small cordes, he droue them all out of the temple, with the sheepe,
Coren, and powred out the thaungers money, and ouerthrewe che tables,

16 And laide vnto them that {olde doues:
Hauc these thinges hente, and make not nip fathers boule an house of marthaundtze. neared

17 And his disciples remembred that it

was written: The zeale of ehiitehoute "ee

hath euen eaten nie. 1
18 Then aunswered the Jewes, lapde 25 onto hym: hat token shewelt chou ton 5 seeyng that thou doest these prges: |
19 Jelus aunswered, x sayde vnto them:
Destroy this temple, € in three dayes Mach
J wyll reare it vp. 1 N
20 Then sayde the Jewes, fourtie and fire peres was this temple a bulldyng,
And wilt thou reare it vp in three dayes:
21 But he spake of the temple or his body.
22 Assoone therfore, as he was rysen from death Lagarne.) his dilciples remenmibred that he thus had sayde: And they beleued the scripture, & the wordes which Jelus had sayde.
23 When he was in Pierulalem at the
Paslouer, in the feast day, manp beleued on his name, when they sawe his mt .. ratles which he dd.
24. But PFelus dyd not commit hym seltfe vnto them, betause he knewe all men,

25 And neded not, that any shoulde testi-- fie of man: Foz be knelbe what was fe aa

in man. 2

€ The

xvi
K. xlii. f =

8 The Golpell
ö ¢ The .iij. Chapter.’

zille teacheth Nicodemus. 17 OF kapth. 16 Che loue of God towarde the word ;
2 e John baptizeth. 27 John teacheth his ditciples, —

10 C

ee

ert was a man ofthe
Ripbarifees, named $21
Itodemus, a ruler of the
Jewes.
The same came to Je us by night, ⁊ said vnto
— hun: Rabbi, we kuowe that thou art a teacher come from Gad: for no mau coulde do these miracies that
4 thou Dock, except God were with hurt.

3 Jesus auuswered, e sayde vnto hm:

Uerylp, veryly, I lay vnto thee, except
à man be borne agapne, he tan not see the kyngdome of God.

Nicodennis sayth buto hym: Howe can à man be borne when he is olde; can he enter into his mothers wombe, and be borne agayne-

5 Jelus aunswered: Uerplp, veryly, J lay vnto thee, except a man be borne of water and of fie spirite, he can not enter into the kyngdome of God. —

Rom. ia. E. That which is borne of the flethe, is

fleshe: and that which is borne of the spirite, is spirite.
Maͤruaple not thou that J sayde to thee, pe must be borue agapnẽ.

Iohn. iii. b. aud. vil. d.
Titus. ili. a.

288 „hempmdediodenh wberentugeeh

and thouhcarest the founde therok: but caust not tell whence it commeth, and
Whither it goeth. So is cuery one that is borne of the spirite.

9 Mitodemus aunswered, and layde vnto hym: howe can thele thynges bez

10 Jesus aunswered, x sapde vnto yy:
Art thou a maister in Ilrael, and kuo-
Welk not thesethynges-

11 Uerylp, verply, I fay vnto thee, we speake that we do knowe, ¢ testifie that ae leene: and pe reteaue not dur

Wi .

12 HEP hauc tolde poucarehip thynges, and ve beleue not: howe Chait pe beleue, pk Y tell vou of heaueniy thynges-

tenon 3 And no man alcendeth vp to hea-

denken uen, but he that came downe from

Saane heauen, euen the forme ok man which is

hid mo: 14 And as Moyses lyft vp the serpent in

Ecde. xi. a.

(a) Ho man dy his ofpne

Wpt eon know the misterptg

I hs

mewn the Wyldernelle: tuen so must the sonne ae or mau be lyft vp:

mone 15 * wholdeuer beleueth in hym,

Nene pekiche not, but haue eternall lyle. n mame. 16 * or God so loued the worlde, that

be laued. Pe that beleneth on! pone ae not condempned: ch on bpm, Sie 50 1

21 Burt he that doeth

26 And they came vnto John, and lade

29 he that hath p bride, is the bridegronie.

he gaue his only begotten to wholdener belenetiy in pnt, thot not perishe, but haue euerlastyng lpfe
7 * F02 God sent not his forme meg worlde, to condenpne the Worlde: but rating

that the © Worlde through hym myght War

ewig 5

18 But he that beleueth not, is eon- San ben 1 755 ae he hath not. eued in the name of the oniy ber sonne of God. cou begotte
19 And this is the condempnation: that Tohni, lyght is come into the monde, and mien mai loued darknesse rather then lyght, be-
N their wal 4 were eupll. ö
20 Jo euer one that euyll doet Hateth Ephevs, the lyglyt: neither commeth to eh left his Deedes shoulde be reproued. l b eth, cOmeth to the lyght, > his deedes lay be knowen, howe that they are wrought in God.
After these thynges, came Jelus and his disciples into the lande of Jurie, and D there he tarped with the, *e© bapttzed. © ee
23 And John also baptised in Enon, be- une fides Salim, betaule there was much ets water there: and they came, and were baptised, :
24 Jor John was not pet tast into prison. ai
25 And there arose a question betwene
Johns disciples and the Jewes, about purifipng.

vnto hym: Rabbi, he that was with thee beyonde Jowane, to whom thou barest witnesse, beholde the lame baptizeth, and all men come to hym.

27 John aunswered, and sayde: Aman can receaue nothyng, except it be geuen hym from heauen. af

28 Be pour lelues are witnesses, howwe hoid that J layde J am not Christe, but an sent before hyn.

John. iii a.

But the kriende of the bapdegronie, which standethcheareth hin reioyteth greatly because of brydegromes vopte.
This niy toy thertore is fulfylled. 0

30 Pe mult intreace, but J mustporrr ze 4

31 He that commeth from an hype, 1 5 boue all: e that is of the earth, is 5 10 lpe, and speaketh of the earth. ie 0 tonumeth from heauen, is aboue 990

üb. 3

| eR

a d,

And what he hath seene and hearde, that he testifieth: and no man reteaueth his testimonte.

33 Me that Hath receaued his testümome,

„ hath let to his seale, that God is true.

4 For he whoni God hath sent, speaketh

55 f the wordes of God: For God geueth

not the spirite by ineasure vnto hym.
35 The father loueth the sonne, and Lax 1d. hath geuen all thynges into his hande.
36 he that beleueth on the sonne, hath tohovie cuerlastyng lke: He that beleueth © not , the sonne, chall not fee life, but the wrath aber not of God adydeth on hym. <a <=

S$ The iuj. Chapter.

([ Chritte werped,atheth water or che woman of Samaria. 10 Che liuely water. 24 He teacheth true worchippe. 26 He conkesseth hym felfe to be Messias. 29 The woman she weth the citizens that Chyiste is come. 32 Christes meate. 5 The Samaritanes beleue Christe. 45 Chee is receaued ok the Galileang. Jo He healeth 8 rulers tonne.

—Ssoone as the the pharilees had
* heard that Fetus ir made and bapti-
\\ 13ed mio disciples
Esthen John,
(Though that

* ea (ONG 0 Low knew, how

GAN

fh ah

\

\

FN —

baptised not, but his diftiples :) into Galtlec.

4. Jor lit was so that) he must needes go through Samaria.
5 Then came he to a titie of Samaria, which is called Sichar, besydes the feen Jacob gaue to his sonne
Oleph. ,
6 Andthere was Jacobs well. Jesus then beyng wery of his iourney, late thus onthe well. And it was about the

, irt O houre:

hee

Sto Jesus aunswered, and en

And there tame a woman of Samaria to drawe water: Jesus sayth vnto

her, geue me drynke. N

8 FJor his diltiples were gone awap, vn-

to the towne to bye meate.

9 Then fayth the woman of Sa marta 4 vnto hym: Howe is it, that thou beyng a

Jewe, alkest drynke of me, which am a
Damavitanes Forthe Jewes meddle not with the HSamaritanes.

yr thou knewest the gyft of God, € who it is that sayeth to thee geue me drynke, thou wouldest haue alned of hym, and

85 lob. haue geuen ' thee water of

The woman lapth vnto hym: Syr, thou hast nothyng to drawe with, and the well is deepe: from whence then halt chou that Water of lyfe-

un Art thou greater then dur father

Jesus hym selfe qt left Jurie, and departed agapne

J perceaue that thou art a prophete.

atob, which gaue vs the well and he
Hym seike dranke therok, and his chyldren, aud his cattell:

3 Jelus aunfwered and fayde vnto her:
Whosoeuer drynketh ol this water, that thyrst agapne: *

14 But whosdeuer drynketh of the water that J Chall geue hym, shall neuer be more a thyrst:but the water that J hal ee eee : spryngyng vp into euerlastyng Ipfe.

15 The woman lapth vnto hynt: Sy2,

geue me of that water, that J thprst

not, neither cone hyther to drawe. esus sapth vnto her: Go, call thy

hul bande, and come hyther. f

17 The woman aunfiwered, and fayde vnto hym): J haue no husbande. Fels sayde vnto her: Thou hast well layde,
IJ haue no hulbande.

18 Foz thou hak had fyue hul bandes, and he whom thou now halk, is not thy hul bande. In that laydest thou truely.

19 The woman lapth buto hun: yz, . b

20 Our kathers worshipped in this mountayne, and pe fay that in Hierula- . „ lem is the place, where men ought to uParviic.

Worlhippe, |
Jesus fayth vnto her: woman beleue

me, the houre commieth, when ye shall

neither in this mountayne, nor pet at

Hierulalem, worshippe the father.

22 Be worshippe ye wote not what. We knowe what we worshippe: Jor salua- Exod xe tion cometh of the Jewes.

2¹

23 But the honre coinm̃eth, and nowe is,

when the true worthippers, Hatiwor . shippe the father in h and in the Romis. trueth: 1 inch the aͤther also requireth to worshippe hym.
24 on is ata tite. and they that Wor- Cor bis chippe hym, mutt worchippe hym in spirite,

fricite, and in the trueth.

27 The woman fapth vnto hym, J wote that Messias Thal tome, which is called
Christe: hen he is come, he wyl tell vs all thynges. j

Mit vv. 26 Fels fapth vnto her: I cat speake
Plat. æui. g. Pnto thee, ant he. N _
Ine 27 Ind imimediatlp came his diltiptes, and c. and maruepled that he talked with che woman: Bet no man {aide what seckest thou, or why talker thou with her:
28 The woman then lelt her water pot, and Went her wap into the citie, e sayth to the men: N ,
29 Come, fee a man Which tolde me all thynges that cuer J dyd: Is not he
Chaitie —4
30 Then they went out ok thecitic, and tame vnto hyn.

31. In the meaue Whyle his diltiples

‘prayed hym faping: Maister eate.
32 Me lapde duto them: J haue meatt to eate that ye wote not ok.

Therkort sapde the dilciples among them felnes : Hath any man bought

hym ought to cate? ae do the wyll of hym that sent me, and to finishe his Workce.

35 Sap not pe, there are pet foure monethes and chen commeth haruest-Weholde, J fay vnto vou, lykt vp pour eyes. aud lone on the regions: for they are
Whyte alredy vnto haruest.

€36 And he that reapeth, reteaueth

Mathincb wages, and gathereth fruite vnto lyle

uo. kternall: that both he that soweth, e he that reapeth, myght reioyte together.

37 And herein is the saping true, that one

soweth, and another reapeth.
38 J ent von to reape that, wheron ye
See bestowed no labour, Other men © la-

boured, and pe are entred into their labours, ‘

39 MDanpotthe Samaritanes of that cttie beleued on hym, for the faying of the woman, which testified that he tolde her all that euer she dd.

40 So, when the Santaritanes were

come vnto hym, they befought hym

that he would tary with them: And he ubode there two dayes. 7

nnn eee .

42 And fayde vnto the woman:

44 * FOr Pelus hyim selfe tethfien, that

Jesus lapth vnto them: my meate is

41 And many mo bel

owne worde, HCD, becaule oF bis

Wwe beleue, not becante of thy Nowe 1 weave beben cl ee
3 uen ö Sag
Be -, = allte, the faunionr of |

Alter two dayes hed and went away rad 5 hl thente,

prophete bath none in hi Math m ande = Honour in his owne Mut : ;
5 Then, alldone as he was to
Galilce, the Galucans eeceaneh bone when they had feene all the thynges che kalt 02 {ED Went ale bn ch
(r. ent

fe an 90 her Allo buto the

46 So Jesus tame agayne into Cana 5
Galilee 5 where he turned the 1 Lohn. to wyne. And there was a certapue :
CEE, meee sonne was sicke at Caper:

und.

4.7, Affoone as the lame hearde that Je:
{us was come out of Jurie into Galle he went vnto hym, and besought hym that he woulde come downe, and heale his sonne: For he was euen at the poynt of death.

43 Then sayde Jelus vnto hym: extept
1 signes and Wonders, ve wyll not

2 eue. a .

49 The ruler sapth vnto hym: Spr, come

do wne dr euer that my sonne dye.

50 Jesus sayth vnto hym: Go thy wap, thy sonne lpueth. The man beleued the
Warde that Jesus had spoken dito hym, and he went his way.

st And as he was noe goyng downe, the seruauntes met hyn and tolde hun, faying, thy sonne lyneth.

521 Then enquired he of then the boure, when he began to amende. And they fayde vnto hym: Besterday at the {euenth houre, the feuer left hym.

3 So the father knewe, chat t was the

“famehoure, in the Which Jesus faye vnto hym thy sonne lyueth: And he aa v beleued, and all his houlcholde .

54 This is agayne the setonde mira 5
‘that Jesus dyd, when he was conit o ol Jurit into Galilee.

Mich. vil
Luk via

A

C The

by Same lohn. IVI fe

he. v. Chapter.

5Christe healed on the Sabboth the man that was (icke thirtie and eyght peres,
‘ 1othe phartlees accute hym. 19 Christe aunt wereth kor hym feife, a reproueth them,
32 He wpng by the testimonie of his kather, z ol John, 35 ok his wozkeg, pol the icrip-

tures, 45 and ol Woptes, who he ig,

ter this, was therea d ffeast Day of the Hewes,

e 8 0 e i 1 * . SY aie by the sheepe ©
97 market, a poole, which

hadde.

had ben diseased thirtie e eyght eres.
6 When Jesus sawe hym lye, ¢ knewe that he nowe long tyme had ben dilea-

made whole
The sicke man aunlwered him: Sir, haue no man whẽ the water is trouled to put me into the poole: ut in the meane tine, While Jam about to come, another steppeth downe before me. e Jesus saith vnto him: Nyle, take vp
‘thy bedde, and walke. bub. ? And immediatlp the man was made

And the same day was the Sabboth.

lo The Jewes therfore sayde vnto hym that was made whole: Itis the Sabboth day, it is not lawfull for thee to carie thy bedde. ve

u He aunlwered them: He that made me whole, saide vnto me, take vp thy bende aud Walke. N

2 Then asked they hym: What man is that which sayde vnto thee, take vp thy bedde, and walke-

B And he that was healed, wyste not who it was. Foz Jesus had gotten him selfe Waye, because that there was

ti, Prealt of people in that plate. N
514. Akterwarde, Hels founde hym in the teniple, and {aide vnto him: behold, thou art made whole, inne no moze, lett

and Fels went vp to

$ Anda certame man was there, which

fed, he sayth vnto hym: Wyit thou be

whole, and toke vp his bedde c walked.

à worle thyng come vnto pon.
15 The man departed, ætolde the Jewes that it was Jesus which had mãde him whole. 2» :
16 And therefore the Jewes dyd perselen ppm and fought (the meanes] to flea hym, betause he hadde done these thynges on the Sabboth dap. 1
17 And Jesus aunswered them: * gp y Cor xu father worketh hitherto, and J Yorke,
18 Therkore the Jewes fought the more to kyll him, not only betause he had broken the Sabboth, but layde also, * that an ne
God was his father, and made himselfe aes equall with God. e
Then aunlswered Jesus, e sayde vnto them: Ueryly veryly J fay buto pout,

Ahe sonne tan do nothyng of hynt selfe, Lon ina.

but that he seeth y father do: For whatee he doeth, that doeth the sonne also. 5

20 Fozthe father loueth the fonne, and sheweth hym all thynges that he hyn selfe doeth: And he Wyll shewe hym

. greater wozkes then thele, becaule pe choulde maruecyle.

21, Jo; lykewpse as the father rayleth bp the dead, and quickeneth them: f age fo, the sonne quickeneth whom he wy

22 Meither indgeth the father any man: Nh ie but hath cornnutted all iudgement vnto T* * the sonne,

23 Wetause that all men shoulde honour the sonne, euen as they honour the father. He that honoureth not the sonne, the same honoureth not p father which hath sent hym.

24. Ueryly veryly I fay vnto pou, he that C

heareth my Worde, and belcueth on hum on e. that sent nie, bath euerlastyng lpfe, and 7 chall not conte * into dampnation, but is Luk-xxiie efcaped from death vnto lyft. 110
25 A berply J save vnto pon,“ the e houre {hall come, and nove ts, when (Bearing the dead © shall heare the voyte of the dee i sonne of God: And they that heare, © c her, shall lyue. * ee
26 Jor as the father Hath lyfe in hym n * selfe: so lykewyse bath he geuen to the sonne, to haue lpłe in hyn seilt: we
By And

a a 1 n

And hath genen hyni power also to
7 mae becante hes che lone ok nat
Ilten d. 28 Marneple not at this: Foz the haure ists v shüll tome, in the whiche all that are in the graues shall heare his poyre.
29 Ar shall come foorth, they that haue done good, vnto the resurrection ok lyke, and they that haue done euyll, vnto the resurrettion of dampnation. 2

30 J tan ok mine one lelke do nothing:
ASH heare J indge, and my indgemkt

is itifte, becaũse IJ (eke not myne owne
Wyll, but the wyll of the father whiche hath sent nie. _- rt

John.viid, 31 * Ff F-tyoulde beare wituefle of my

selke, my Witnesse were not true.

32 There is another that beareth wit-

nelle of me, and J am sure that the wit nelle which he beareth of me is true.
2 c sent vnto John, and he bare Wit-

Iohn. i. b. 3 nesse vnto the trueth.

4 Wut Jreceaue not the retorde of man:

Meuerthelellc, thele thingts J fay ,that pe myght be lake. . „

D 35 De Wasa burnyng ka shpnyng lpght, and ve would for a leason haue reiopced in his lyght. ,

Iohn. v.a.

witneste of John: Foz the workes

lou. xx e. Whiche the father hath geuen me to l - howe chall ve beleue my wordes-: 4

¢ The. vj. Chapter. oo —

10 Chrille keedeth Fyne thoulande with kyue loaues e two fitthes. 15 The people would haue made hym kyng. 19 He walking on the fea, kolowed the difciples whiche were troubled in a chippe with a great tempest. 25 Chey (eke Chat, to be fede, 29 Fapthis the worke of God, o Chey alke fiqnes and wonders. 35 DE the bread of lyle. 4 DE fapth. os Che carnall are offended at hynt, 67 Come of his dilciples okkendedhym, ey Che apostles confetle hym to be the konne of God. 71 Judas is a deupll.

I f ter thele thynges,

A Jelus went his wape e ouer the fea of Galilee,
Maca a gewhichis the fea of Ti-
Lukvic. | e WA erias. *
24 Aud a great multi

== inde folowed hym, be-

Waun b. And lalbe a great company tome vnto
Mak ed. Hint, he faith vnto Philip: Whence shal
Lak ab. We bye bread, that these may eate:
6 (This he fayde to proue hym: for he hym selke knewe what he woulde do.)

JJ rectaue not prapse of mien.

36 Wut I haue greater witnelle, then the

12 wehen ther haventen cnaugh edo

nishe, the fanic workes that 8 witnesse of me, tha Ido beare sent me. chat the father hath

37 And the father Hpmleife inh; ii a He inte 5 bane witnelle aue d. ws rde his vo Win, nti
5 (cone Dis 7 15 eee

38 His Wolde haue pe not abydyng in pan.
ForwhObe hath let bimyebetcucne

39 Scarcletbeleriptnees,forintheaes thynke ve haue eternall lyfe: and they Ke.

, r of me. a

And pet wyll ve not come ve myght haue lyfe. — 1

42 But Junowe you, tha 1

: chef d n — * — .

43 Jam come in my fathers name, and ye reteaue nie not. yt another come in lan his owne name, hym wyll ye receaue.

44 Howe can pe beleue, whiche reteaue

honour one of another, and {eke not the honour. that commeth of God only:

45 Do not thinke that Y wyll actule pou to my father: There is one that accu: | seth vou, euen Moyses, in whõ pe trust.

46 For had ye beleued Moyses, ye would

haue beleued me: kor he wrote ol me. Dew

47 But vf pe belene not his wrptynges,

forfake

5 Phuip aunfivered hym: Two hundred Openie worth of bread are not luft i
111 korthem that euery man may take 0

ile aan

3 Pneok his dilciples, Andrewe, Him 7
Peters brother, sayth vnto hm: „

There is a title lade here, whiche
Hath fyue barip loaues and two fillhes, but what are they among fo manp-

10 And Jelus sapde: Make the people

pt downe. There was much graltem the place. So the men late downt, in number about fyue thoulande.

11 And Jelus toke the bead, and weg he had geuẽ thankes, he gaue to a ys ciples, and the disciples to ame 5 set done, and ipkewyse of the fühesas much as they woulde. ade

meate that reniayneth, that nothyng be

lost. |

z And they gathered it together, e fylled twelue bafkettes with the broken meate of the fyue barlp loaues, whiche
(broken meate) remayned vnto them that had eaten. e

4 Thenthose men, when they had leene the nuratle that Jelus did, saide: This igof a trueth the fame prophete that

shoulde tome into the worlde.

“ys When Jesus therfore perteaued, that

they Would cone and take him, to make

hym kyng, he departed agayne into amountapne hym lelke alone.
6 And When euen was noe come, his dilciples went downe vnto the sea.
And gat vp into a shippe, and went ouer the sea, towardes Capernaũ: And tt was nowe Darke and Jesus was not tome to them. *
8 And the sea arole, with a great wynde that blewe. 2 ;
So, When they had rowed about xrv. orrxx.furlonges, they sawe Jesus walkyng on the lea, and drawyng nye vnto the shippe, and they were akrapde.

pill
Vie

not afrapde. N
A And they wyllyngly reecaned hym in-

was at the lande whyther they went.
22 The dap folowyng, when the people, whiche stoode on the other spde of the fea, sawe that there was none other shippe there, saue that one whereinto his disciples were entred, and that Jesus went not in with his dilciples into the chippe, but that his diltiples were gone (aware) alone: —

3 Horvebeit there came other shippes frõ Tiberias, nyc vnto the place, where they dyd cate bread, alter that the Lod had geuen thankes. 1

24. When the people therefore sawe that
Pelus was not there, neither his dilciples, they also toke shippyng, and came to Capernaunt, sekyng for Fetus.

5 And whẽ they had founde hym on the other fide of the lea, they laid vnto him,
Nabbi, when tamest thou hyther- Je-

siis aunswered them, and lapde:

26 Tlerysp veryly J fay vnto pou, ve seke nie not becante pe sawe the mivacies,

but betault ye dyd eate of loaues were kplled. ee *

puto his dilciples: Gather vp the broke

20 · But he layth vnto them: It is J, be

C tothe thippe,and immediatly the hippe

27 Labour not for the meate whicht perisheth, vnt for that whiche endnreth D

vnto euerlastyng lyfe, which (meate) the

forme of man (hall gene vnto pou: For hym hath God the kather sealed.

28 Then (aide they vnto him: What chan we do, that we myght worke p workes

of God:

Jesus aunlwered, efayde vnto them:

This is the worke of God, that ye be-

leue on hym whon he bath sent.

30 They faid therfore vnto hym: What math. ie ligne shewest thou then, v We may lee, x 7 beleue thee- What dock thou worne- Pn

31 Dur fathers dyd eate Manna in the I desert, as it is Witten: He gaue them
*p2ead from heauen to cate, Exod.xvi. b

32 Then Jelus sapde vnto them: Cerys. ly berylp J fay vnto you, Mopses gaue vou not 5 bread frõ heauen, but my faz mah xvi.c ther geueth pou > true bead frõ beané,

33 Foz the bread of God, is he which tõmeth downe from heauen, and geueth
Ipfe buto the worlde.

34. Then lapde they vnto hym: Lode, cuermore geue vs this bread.

35 And Pelus fayde puto them, Jam the bread of ipfe: He that cometh tome, shall not hunger: and he that beleueth on me, Hall neuer thirst. <a .

36 But J fay vnto pou, that ve allo haue seene mie, and pet ye beleue not. .

37 All that the father geueth me, shall come to me: and hym that commeth to me, I cast not away. :

38 For I came downe from heauen, not Lut. xxiic, to do that wn: but that he wyll,

41 l ot se then murmured at him, betause

42 And they laide: Is not this Jesus, p Ales

hym: And JF wy rayse hym bp at the

st dap. a
E fai. liiii. d. ae 8 written in the prophetes: And lohn uud. “ghey shalbe all taught of God. Euery man therfore that bath heard, and hath learned of che father, cometh) vnto me. rod d. 4 ¢ Mot that any man bath seene the fac
Dau. ib." eer laue he which is of God, the fame and. hach seene the father. lohunc. 47 Ueryiy verylp J fay bnto you, he that

Luk. xxii. e.

F

putteth his trust in me, hath cuerlasting
1 fe. . a Jam that bread ofiyte.

49 Pour fathers dyd eate Danna in the

wyldernesse, and are dead.

50 This is that bread, which tommeth downe from heauen, that pf any man eatetherof, (be) shoulde not dye.

st Jam that lyuyng bread, which came downe from heauen. BF any man eate of this bread, he shall lyue for euer. And the bread that J wyl geue, is my flethe,
Whiche J wyll geue for the lyfe of the
Worlde. ‚

52 The Jewes theretoze stroue among

them sesues, saying: Howe can this felowe geue vs that fleshe of his to catez
5; Then Jelus saide vuto them: ee ryly verply J saye vnto pou, extepte pe. tate the fleshe of the sonne ol man, and drynke his blood, ye haue no lyfe in pou.
54 Who fo eateth my fleshe, and dzinketh my blood, hath cternall lyfe, and J wpl taple hym vp at the last day.
55 oz my fleshe is meate in deede, and my blood is drynke in deede.
56 Pe that eateth my fleshe, and drinketh mp blood, dwelleth in me, € Jin hym.
§7 As the lyuing father bath sent me, and
FP ipue by the father: Euen so, he that eatech me. chal liue by (the meanes ol me.
58 This is that bread, which tame downe

q The vij- Chapter.

1 Fefustled the murmuryng Jewes. 5 Christes kynlemen beleued not in hym. 7 Why the worlde hateth Chilte. 12 Diuers opinions of Christe. 14 Christ teacheth, geuing all to his father. 20 Che blasphemie of the Je weg. 23 Ok the Sabboth worke. 3: Manie ol the people beleue on hym. 32 The pharitees @ prieltes lende to take hym. 39 Che
Holpe ghost. 4 Discention among the people for Christ. 47 Che phavifees chyde with the seruaũtes, because they haue not brought hym. 52 They chyde with Hicodemus.

Fter these thynges,

%% Jesus went about in

— ye “3
‘ 2 5 af we. 7 9.
77.7 i
. ö 3 * *
22 — Fad

si Decaute that the Jewes fought to kyl hym.

60 Many therfore of his

vnto them, doth this offende ou:

63 It is the spirite that quickeneth, che ch tt de

not go about in Jurie, thy dilciples alfo may that thou doest.

from heauen: Hot as your cate Mama, and are dead. pe 5 teth of this bread, chall lyue euer . 4
59 Khele, thynges lade he m the png: gogue as he taught in Caperuaum. dilci De ae e ui n e g, Who can eee f * che bea-
61 Jesus knewe in hynt selfe, that hie & - vibiptes nurnured at it, and 2 ’

62 What and yf pe Chall fee thefonneot

man altende vp thyther 4
1 pthyther where he was

fiethe profiteth 0 nothyng. The wordes that J speake vnto vou. ar “ and vfs : 1 ipivite

64. Wut there are some of vou that b not, or Jesus knewe from dhe 5 —

nng, which they were that beleued not and who shoulde betray hm.

65 And he sayde: Therkore lame F onto

vou, that no man tan come vnto me er- ahn cept itwere geuẽ vnto him ok mp father. P

66 From that time, many of his dilctples
Wet backe, & Walked no moze with him.

67 Then sayde Jesus vnto the twelue:
Wyll pe allo go a way-

68 Then Simon peter aunswered him: ode, to who chall we go: Thon halt the wordes oketernall lpfe: *

69 And we beleue and are sure that thou Mex. art Christe, the forme of p lyuyng God. in

570 Jesus aunswereth them: Pave not J bn

cholen vou twelue, and one ot vou is a deupll: . = ohn, xi

i Heflpake of Judas Iltariot (the tonne}

of Simon: For he it was, that shoulde betray hym, beyng one of the twelue.

Leui x
2 The Jewes *featte of tabernacles 00 gee
Was at hande. A papes u
3 _ Hisbeethzentherfoze 110 8 75 hint 1.
And gol ?
Get thee hence, and g ie app wankes

Jo:

Foz there is no man that doeth any thyng in letrete, . selfe seketh to be knowen openlp. Bt tl thynges, shewe thy selfe to the worlde.

5 FH his brethren beleued not in hym.

Then Jesus fapde vnto them, My tyme is not pet come: but pour tyme is

alway redy. :

The worlde can not hate von, but me

a it hateth, because I tettific ot it, that the workes therot are euyll.

Go pe vp vnto this feast: J wyll not ga vp pet vnto this feast, lor my tyme is not pet fnil come.

When he had aide these wordes vnto

them, he abode styll in Galilee.

Io But àssoone as his brethrẽ were gone vp, chen Went he also vp vnto the feaste, not openly, but as it were priuilie.

Sn Then lought hym the Jewes at the l ktaste, and lade, where is he-

2 And much murmurpng of hym was d there among the people: For some said, e che is good: other sapde, nay, but he deteaueth the people.

; Polbebeit, no man spake openlye of phym, kor feare ofthe Jewes. 2

done, Fels Went vp into the tempie, and taught.

ho we kuoweth he the scriptures, seyng that he neuer learned-
16 Jelus auuswered them, e sayde: My doctrine is not mne, but his ö {ent me.
17 Hf au man wyll do his Wyil, he shall knowe of the doctrine, whether it be of
God, or whether I speake of my selfe.
8 He that speaketh ok hym felfe, seketh his owne praise: Wut he that seketh his praise that sent hym, the lane is true, c
¢ no vnrpghteonsnes is in hym. ung Dpd not Mopses geue poua lawe, €

fretj none of pou kepeth the lawe Why

Jo pe about to kyll mez
20 The people aunswered and sayde: me ier the deuyll, who goeth about
Okpllthee- . n 2 Jelus aunswered, x faid vnto the: J

hãue done one worke, e ye al marueyse.

22 Moyles therefore gaue vnto you the
Ciecumicihis (not becaule it is of Mopses,

ab but*ofthe fathers) And pet ye on the

abboti dap, cirtumtile a man.

3 Bfa man on the Sab both day receaue

Ctcumefion, Without breakyng of the

lawe of Mopyles: dildaynt ve at me, be-

thou do suche

14 Noe when halte or the feak was

1j And the Jewes maruepled, saping:

canse I haue made a man euerpwhyt whole on the Sabboth dap: Deut l. c.
24. Judge not after the cotter) appea- Brun xix raunte, but iudge with a ryghteouuns

iudgement. „
25 Theè sayde sonie of them of hierusalẽ:

. this he, whom they go about to

26. But loe, he speaketh © boldly, e they On. of. faye nothyng to bpm. Do the rulers

knowe in deede that this is very Christe D

27 Howbeit, we know this man whence N he is: but when Christe tömeth no man pa

knoweth whence he is.

28 Then crped Jelus in the temple, as he taught, faping : Pe both knowe me, and whente J am, pe knowe. a am not come ok m selfe: but hethaclte me is true, whom ye knoe not.

Ra knowe hun, fox Jamofhim, and he hath sent me. *

30 Then they fought to take hym: but xu ae no man lapde handes on hym, because Lu vg. his houre was not pet come. N

31 Many of the people beleued on hym, Lohn. vin. and faide: hen Christe tommeth, wyl he do mo miracles (then tete) that this man hath done 8

32 The pharisees hearde, that the peo- @p.

Pr murmured such thinges concerning . nt: Andthe pharisees and the hye yp priestes sent seruauntes to take hy. Makel.

33 Then fapde Jesus vnto them: pet Lc. am Ja litle Whyle with pou, and then go J onto hyni that sent nie.

34 Be shall (che nie, c shall not fynde nie: 15 where Jamthither can ye not come. ng

35 Then lapde the Jewes among them selues: whyther wyll he go, that we shall not fyude hym? Wyll he go vnto

the dilpearsed aniong the Gretiaus, k teache the gentiles:!

36 What (maner ol saying is this that he fayde, ye shall {eke me, and (hall not

fynde mie: and where Pant, thyther

tau ye not tome-

37, Inthe last day, that great day ofthe

feat, Fetus stoode and cryed, faying: —

Hl any man thirste, let him tome vnto Re

me and drynke: 5 .

38 He that beieueth ou me as faith the stripture, out of his belly (hall flowe ryuers of water of lyfe. 5

39 (But this {patie he of the spirite, which they ß beleue on hym, Mould reteaue. oOo: see.
For the holy ghost was not pet O there bee betause Jelus was not pet glorified.) sv

N YW Many

le gyttes ot
$ hoix avod

n

by Saint Iohn. 3 VU.

dien

N aes
1 40 Maupof the people therfore, when

oiicenh. they hearde this lapiug,
Lok aah: thists the prophete. at h. XXI >

41 Vnt other sapde this is Christe: Wut

fone fade, hall Christe come out of Ga-

lilee- .
Saͤyth not the scripture, that Christe
“yall 1115 of the seede of Dauld, and out of the towue of Bethlehem, where id Was: 8 Ly
0 Was there diltention among the people, because of pin. User
44 And lome of them wonlde haue taken hym, but no man lapde handes on him.
Then tame the seruauntes to the hye priestes € pharistes: and they sayde vn-

Mich. v. a. 4
Math.ii.a.

to them, why haue ye not brought him:
46 The seruauntes aunlwered: Heuer

The. vj. Chapter.

Christe teacheth in the temple. n the linnes of the woman taken in adulterie are korgeuen. 12 Christe the lyght of the wozlde, 14 he cheweth from whence he came, and whyther he goeth, 32 oho are free, and who are bonde, z the children ol Abraham, 42 the chyldren of God, 44 the deuyll the father ol lyes, 45 who hateth God, and who hateth hym not. so Abraham dy

conueyed hym lelle away.
Esus went bnto moũt

at Ouucte. aay And cavly inthe mor-
Luk.xix.e. SA nyng he came agaypne into the temple, and all the people came vnto hym, € he fate downe and taught them.

3 And the stribes and pharifees bought:

vnto hyma woman taken in adulterie, t when they had fet her in the middes,

4 Thep sayde vnto hym: Maister, this

wonian was taken in adulterie, euen as

the deede was a doyng.

Moyses in the lawe commaunded bs that suche choulde be stoned: But what sayest thou- ;
6 This they layde to tempte hym, that

they myght accuse hum. Wut Jesus stowped downe, and with his fynger

Wrote on the grounde.

7 So, when they continued alking him, he lykt vp hym selfe, e sayde vnto them:
Let hym that is among pou without finne, caste the first stone at her.

8 And agayne he stowped downe, and
Wrote on the grounde.

And when they hearde this, beyng ac:

ed of their owne consciences, they
Went out one by one, begynnyng at the eldest, euen vnto the lat: and Fefus

Lukxx.b, 5

sayde: Ok a

ttheare hym, d knowe what he hath

Dice Chrittes dap. 59 Chrille perlecuted,

o When Jelus had lyft vp hym selfe, e

man spake as this man Doct) :
Then aunswered them the wnar.
48 Doty any of the rulers fesbelencon bpm oof the phart-
49 But this(common) people wn
1 denn ace cure, Which now
50 Mitcodeniis lapth onto the "He that! ' came to Jesus by upght. and was alt da ü of them: rab and . one st Doth dur lawe tudgeany man, before
51 They aunswered, and laide vnto hin:
Art thou allo of Galilee: Search ale |
F02 out of Galilee aryseth no prophete,
53. And euery man went vnto his owne
Youle, 29 1

was left alone, E the woman standyng | in the myddes.

sawe no man but the woman, he fayoe

vnto her: Womã where are thofe chine

acculers 2 Path no man condempned ee:

She sapde, No man Torde. And Jesus sayde, Neither do J condempne e thee: Go, and sinne no more.

t+ Then spake Jesus agapne vnto them, saying, J am the light ofp world: .
He that foloweth me, doth not Walle in g darknesse, but (hal haue the light of lle.
3 The pharisees therfore laid vnto him:

Thou bearest retorde of thy selfe, thy

recorde is not true.

14. Jesus aunswered, & fade vnto them:
Though J beare retorde of my feife, pet my recorde is true. For J pol tae whence J came, € whyther J go: BU ye can not tel whence J come, and Why

ther J go. N
15 Be sudge after the flethe, J iudge no man. 5 f f! e:
16 And if J iudge, my tudgement is tru s
For J amt not alonc, but J and the ta 0 ther that sent inc. N
17 J is alfo watten in pour larwe, that da the teftimonic of two menis se oe mp es
18 Jamone that beareth witnelle 1417

II

selfe, e the father that sent me beareth

witnesse of me. é

9 Then layde they vnto hym: Where is thy father: Jesus aunlwered, He neither knowe me, nor pet my father: PE ye had knowen me, ye should haue knowen my father allo.

20 These wordes spake Jelus mp treasurie, as he taught in the temple, and no man lapde handes on hym, * foz his houre was not yet tome. 2 -

21 Then sapde Jesus againe vnto them:

J go mp wap, and *pe shall {eeke me,

beg and chall dye in pour synnes: Whyther

J go, thyther can ye not tome.

22 Then lapde the Jewes: Wyll he kyll hyn elfe, betause he faith, whyther J go, thyther can ye not come-

23 And he layde vnto them: pe are from beneathe, Jam from aboue: pe are ot this worlde, J am not ofthis wonlde.

9 24. J sapde therefore vnto vou, that pou ung hall dye in pour sinnes. For ' pk ve beid leue not that J am he, pe chall dye in

pour sinnes. N ;

25 Then layde they vnto hymn: Who art thou-And Jelus laith vnto them: Euen the very sanie thyng that J layde vnto pou from the begynnyng. 2

26 J haue many thynges to faye, andt

ludge of von. Bea; t he that sent me, is brüb true: And J speake to the world, thole

thynges which J haue hearde ol hym.

igh vi c.

27 Holbebeit, they vnderstoode not that

he spake to them of his father.
28 Then faide Jelus vnto them: hen pe haue lift vp lan bye) the sonne ol man, then shall ye knowe that J am he, and us that J do nothyng of my felfe : but as laid, Nip father Hath taught me, even fo J speake these thynges, >
29 And he that lent me, is with me. The father hath not left me alone: For J do

allbayes hole thynges that pleale him.

md 301 ard ahn tale Wordes, *many be
— Tenedonbpm eo z Then sayde Jesus to hole Jewes which beleued on him: t ye continue in my word, then are ve my very dilciples.
3 And ve shall knowe the trueth, and the trueth shall make vou free,
Nines They aunlwered hyn: We be Az vie brahams seede, and were neuer bonde wwe bo any man: Howe sapest thou then, ye
, halbe made kreciia, 34 Jesus aunlwered them: Uerylp, erp-
% 10 J ay vnto vou, that wholoeuer cö-

Ix,

mitteth sinne, is the seruaunt of sinne.

35 And the feruatit abideth not in p houle g for euer: but the sonne abydeth euer.

36 Ak the sonne therefore shall make pon free, then are ye free in derde.

37 IJ know that ye are Abrahams seede, but pe {eke meanes j to kyll nic, becaule my worde Hath no place in vou.

38 J speake that whiche J haue feene
With my father: and ye do that whiche pe haue seene with vour father.

39 They aunswered and laide vnto him:
Abraham is our father. Jesus faith vnto them: f pe were Abraͤhams childrẽ, pe woulde do the workes of Abraham.

40 But now ye go about to kyll me. a ma that hath tolde pou the trueth, which J

haue heard of god: this did not Abrahã.

4.1 He do the deedes of your father. Then said they to him: Me be not borne of fornitation, we haue one father, euen God.

42 Jesus salde vnto thein: Bf God were pour father, truely pe woulde loue me:
For I proteaded foozth and came from
God : neither tame J of mp selfe, but he sent me. :

43 Daly do ye not knowe my speacheeuen betause pe cannot heare my word.

44 Be are of pour father the deupll, and F the lustes of pour father wyll pe do.

De was a murtherer front the begyn- See nong, and abode not in the trueth: de- ab.

caute there is no trueth in hym. wohen he speaketh a lye, he sptaketh of his owne: Foz he is a lyer, and the father of the same thyng.

4-5 And because I tel pou the tructh; thers forc ve beleue me not.

4.6 Which of vou rebuketh me of linne-
2 J fay the trueth, why do not ye beleue me-

47 he that is of god, heareth gods Woz Lohn x.

des. Be therfore heare the not, betause ve are not of God.

43 Then aunlwered the Peres, ¢ {aioe vnto hym: Say we not well that thou art a Samaritane, and halt the deupl-

49 Felus aunlwered, J haue not the deupll: but J honour nip father, and pe haue dishonoured me.

56 J eke not myne owne pratle, there is G one that seketh, and iudgeth.

51 Ueryply veryly J faye vnto you, yf a eee my saying, be shall neuer ice death.

52 Then layde the Jewes onto hym:
No know we that thouhast p deupll.

H iiij Abraham

Iohn. x. d.

Abrahamis dead, ethe prophetes : and thou sapest, pfaman hepemy laying, he
{hail neuer taste of death.

5; Art thou greater thé our father Abraham, Which is dead 2 and the prophetes are dead: whom makest thou thy elfe?

esus aunswered: Bf J Honour wp

selte, mine Honour is nothing. It is my

father that honoureth me, which ve {xy is pour God: wi: —
55 And pet ye haue not knowen him, but

50 knowe hym : And if J say knowe yy

mnot, J chalde a lyer yke duto you.

The. ix. Chapter,

1 Chrilte restored light vpon the Sabboth dap, to himthat was borne blpnde. 13 Che

pharilees reaton with him that was blynde. 27 The phartlees excommunicate thole zilte, 34 they ercommmunteate Hpnt that was borne blynde, 35 Chile

teacheth hymn, and he beleueth. o Co toha. lynde men Chzitte restored syght.

that beleue in Christe,

rl te Das Fetus patien,
A pp, he saw a man Whi-

che was blynde frd his
And his diftiples al-

was borne blynde? .
Jesus auntwered, Neither Hath this nian finned nor pet his father mother: but that the workes of God shoulde be shewed in hw. r
4. J must Wonke the workes ok him that sent me, whylc it is © daye. The nyght commeth when no man tan worke.

WW

(a) whple opoztiunitic scruethj.

5 As longas J am inthe world, Jam

he spat

Iohn. i. a.

rub aig. ght of the worlde.

i .

Affoone as he had thus spokẽ,

8 on the grounde, and made dape of the fsheepes oktheblynde, 5

— And sayde vnto hym: Go, wache thee

went his Way therefore, æ washed, aud tanie agapue, seyng. ¢
8 So, the neyghbours, and hadde seene hym before when he was blynde, sapde: x and begged- N 00
9 Sonie sayde, this is he: Other sayde,

heislpke hym. He hym ele layde, J

aur seuenj he.

lo Therfore sayde they vnto him: Howe

are thyne eyes opened:

I be Gopell —

— ethis n Then sapde they puto bpm, where t man, or his father and mother, that he ey batobynt, Whe iG

spittle, and he annoynted with the claye

in the poole of Hilde, whiche by interpretation, is (4s much to lap, as] sent. De

chey that
Is not this he that late

Wut J unowe bpm,
4 ene . ce ny dap: and he saw it, and rei dei
57, Then fayde the ewes biito bp eres
Thou art not pet fiftie peres olde e i fede a
N * halt gene
5 esus fayde duto them: Uerpt the pee ryly J fave vnto you, be 99
5 er e — Abraham Eade:
59 Then toke they vp stones to carte log hym: but Jesus hyo hym selke, 8 ö went dut ok thetemple. e ee

t kepe his 3 am W une

he aunlwered and sapde: The un N that is talled Jesus made clape and an-; noynted mynẽ eyes, and sapde vnto nie go 13 1 Siloe ne Wathe: And
J went and walhed, J receaued

bez He layde, J can not tell.

13 They brought tothe pharisees, hym that a litle before was blynde. as

14. And it was the *Habboth day when maxi
Jelus made 5 tlape, & opened his eyes. Mars

15 Then againe the phavilees also alked 1b hym, howe he had receaued his syght.

He lapde vnto then: Pe put clape vpon

mpne epes, and J walhed, and do ser.

16 Therkore sapde some ofthe pharisees, this man ig not of God, becaule he kepeth not the Habboth day. Other lad: 9
Wow cana man that is a sinner do such miratles : And there was a stryfe . mong them. *

17 They spake vnto the 70 57 mane gaine: What faye thou ott im, because
N hath — thyne eyes : He layde, heis a prophete.

18 But the Jewes dyd not beleue the man, howe that he had pen blynde, and receaued his {pat vntyll they called the —.—.— 85 of hym that had reteaued his syght: f

15 Andthepaltked them, faving: Ps a pour sonne, whom pe faye Was Dov”

blynde- Howe doeth penore fer then, |
20 isfather e mother annioered ter and sayde: We knowe that this & g

Joh. v

* alnt I1Ohn. lx}, dune, aud that he Was borne blynde: he hath opened myne epes. ul by what meanes he now leeth we zi For we be sure, that God heareth not can not tell: Or who hath opened his sinners: But yf auy man be a worchiyepes, can not we tell. Be is olde inongh, per ol God, and obedient vnto his Wylt, alte him, let hin aunswere kor hinileife. hym heareth he. or Such wordes spake his father E mo- 32 Sente the worde began, was it not ther, becaule they feared the Jewes: hearde, that any man opened the eyes
Foz the Jewes had decreed alredp, bone that was borne blynde. that vl any man dyd confesse that he 33 If this man were not of God, he
Was Chaitte, he shoulde be exconnnu- — coulde haue done nothyng.

ak

nlicate out of the synagogue. 34. They aunswered, e fapde vnto hy:
323 Therfkore lapde his father x mother: Thon art altogether borne in finne, he is olde indugh, alte hym. 1 and dock thou teache vs: And they cast

24 Then agapne called they the man. hym out. thut was blynde, and sapde vnto hym: 35 Jelus hearde that they had ercom- G
Geue God the prayse, We knowe that münitate hym e When he had founde this man is à sinner. Se. Hym, he sayde vnto hym: Doek thou
25 Ye aunlibered, and sayde: Whether beleune on the sonne of Godhe be a sinner or no, I can not tell: One 36 he aunswered and sayde: Who is he sthuyng Jam sure ok, that wheras J Loe, chat J mpght belene on hymwas blynde, nowe J see. 5 And Jesus sapde vnto bpm: Thon
26 Then fapde they to hym agayne: halt boch seene hym, and ib is he chat ohne
What dyd he to thees Howe opened he talketh with thee. . thyne eyes: * 38 And he sapde, Lowe, J beleue: And
57 he aunswered them: J tolde you o he worchipped hym. — . Ch waned yer whyle, and ve dyd not heare. noher- 39 And Felis sapde vnto hym: Nam os we.
ö foze woulde ye heare it agayne- Wyll ve come vnto iudgement into this Wolde, fa. allo be his dilciples- that they which {ce not imyght see: and
28 Then rayted they hym, and layde, that they which lee, mpght be made
We thou his diltiple: We are Mopses biprine, distip les 40 Andome of the pharisees which were
29 We are fure, that God spake vnto with hyns hearde these wordes, t fayoc
Moyles: As for this felowe, we knowe vnto hym: Are we blynde allo- N not krom whence he is. * a Al Jelus sapde vnto them, Af pe were Lon cya.
30 The man aunswered, and sayde vnto bpude ve choulde haue no sume: 28 ut them: this is a marueplous thyng, that -nowe pefap, we lee, therkore pour sinne ve wote not krom whence he is, and vet remapneth.

— FJ The. x. Chapter.

I christe the true cheephearde a the doore, 4 Chrilleg cheepe heare his vopce, and wyll not heare a slraunger. 10 1 False Heepheardes are hyrelinges and thieues. 15 Christe wWyllyngly geueth his life fo2 his cheepe. 16 Che calling ol the Gentiles.19 Dilcention

among the Jewes about his wordes, 24 they alle pt he be Christe. 2 neverfore the
Je wes beleue not. zi The Fewes woulde haue toned hym, and called his preachyng blalphemie. 34 Princes, called Gods, 37 Christes workes declared hym to be God.

Erply, berply, Play his owne sheepe by name, and leadeth

% vnto vou: He that en- themout. a

e treth not in byp dooze 4 And when he hath lent foorth his into the sheepfolde, but owne cheepe, he goeth before them, and

„

e elvineth vp some other the fheepe kolowe hym: for they knowe
FP wap, the same is a his vopte. thieke, and a robber. 5 Astraunger wyll they not folowwe, but
2 But he that entreth in by the doore, is wyll flee from hym: for they knowe not the sheephearde o the sheepe. the vopce of straungers.
I o hym the porter openeth, andthe 6 This proucrbe fpake Jelus buto sheepe heare his voyte, and he calleth theni: Wut ther dan eee
„ Be

them. ö
7 Then sayde Jesus vnto them againe.

Ueryly, beryly, I fay vnto vou: Jam

the doore of the theepe. banden eg All, Veuen as many as tame before uur. ur int, are thieues and robbers: but the sheepe dyd not heare them.

Jan the doore: by me yf any nian eimer in, he shalbe fate, and shall go in and ont, and fynde pasture. io Athiefe tommeth not, but fo. to steale,

John.xitita. t ineae ie falfe

n hm to others. oz els, preached them selutn.

kyll, a to destroy: Jam tome, that they 28 And J geue onto them eternall ipfe,

niyght haue lyke, and that they myght

haue it more aboundauntiy. 4 am“ the good sheephearde. A

good {heepyearde, geueth his tyfe for

the sheepe. N

12 An hyrelyng, and he which is not the sheephearde, neither the sheepe are his owne, fecth the wolfe conunpng, and leaueth the sheepe, and fleeth, and the
Wolfe tatcheth, stattereth the theepe.

C it
Fxech. 24. f.
Miche. v. 2.

13 The hylelyng fleeth, betause he is an

hyrelyng, and careth not for the shecpe.
1 Tun. hc. I4. J ain the good sheepheard, x' kRnowe niy sheepe, and am knowen of mpne.

Mathxid. yy As the father knoweth me, euen so, uc, no we J allo the father : And J geue

imp lyfe korthe sheepe.

Sees 16 And other theepe pba, which
U

gentiles, wh thep were fraungers from God
Chutcht.

are not ofthis folde: them also mutt F bryng, e they shall heare my voyte, and there shalbe one folde, and one fheepehearde. N
Dy Therkore doth my father loue me, becaule I put my lpfe (from me,] that J myght take it agayne.

18 Yo mantaketh it from me: but J put it away of my selfe. J baue power to put it from me, and J haue power to take it agayne. This commaundement haue J reteaued of iy father.

19 There was a discention therefore agayne among the Jewes, fo2 thele sayinges.

Nach ind. 20 And manp of then sayde: He hath lab, the deuyll e is mad, why heare pe hin
Lokxib, 2 Other sayd: These are not p wordes lohnam . ok hym that hath the deuyll. Can the deuyll open the eyes of the blynde-
22 And it was at Hierusaleim the feat of the Dedication, and it was Wynter, tii Reg. vi. 2. 23 And Jesus Walkedin the temple, euen stb in“ Solonions porche.

they were, which he spake bus 24,

242 And many beleued on hem there. 5

Then came the Jewes ro
Nyt, and fapde dnto hym: 055 5 doest thou make vs doubt - BE thon b
Chiilie, tell bs plapnely, 2
25 Jesus aunswered them: J tolde you
0 pe wan not. The workes that o in my fathers name, P neffe of ni 0 a cher heart 5
26 Wut pe beleue not, because ye are of mp sheepe, as J sayde 71 5 “a
27 My sheepe heare a vopce, and JJ Toho vise knowe them, and they kolowe me: #

and they Hal neuer perishe, neither any man plucke them out of uw bude
29° My father which gaue them me, is greater then all: and no man is able to take them ont of my fathers hande.

30 J and my father are one.

31 Then the Jewes agapne toke bp age to 11 2 hym c a

32 us aun wered them, Manp good
Wozkes haue J themed yon me father: for which of thE do ye stone mez

33 The Jewes aunswered hyn laying:
Foz thy good worzkes (fake) we stone thee not, but for thy blasphemie, and 156 4 betause that thou beyng a man, makest

34. Jesus aunswered them: Is it not
Glen in pour lawe, J sapde, ve are Pte

ODS? f *

35 If he called then Gods, vnto whom N the worde of God was spoken, and the feripture can not be broken:

36 Sap ye ol hym whom the father hath fanctified and sent into the worlde, thou blasphemest, because J saide J ani the want sonne of God: atoll

3°7 Yf A do not the workes of my father, ihn beleuẽ NE Mri ite me n

38 Wit pf do, and pk pe beleu 7 beleue the workes: that ye may knowe ae 155 the father is in me, and

in pn. 7 : A b

39 *Agapne they went about to take N hym:aànd he eltaped out of their hande-

40 And went away againebeponde Jos 14 dane, into the plate where John belore had baptised, and there he abode.

41 And many resdrted vnto hom; sayde: John dyd no miracle, but thynges that John spake of this man w

John xilia and. xx c

John. Viig,

exe

nn

Se The js Chapter.

4 Chhiste rapien Lazarus krom death. 45 Certapne Jewes beleue in Chyilte. 47 The

the people. 54 Chuilte flee maunded Chrilte co be talen.

noputed p Lorde

with oyntment, and Wyped his keete

with her heere, whole brother Lazarus was like a

3 Therkore, his fitters sent vnto hym, laying: Lorde, beholde, he whom thou louest is sicke.

When Jesus hearde that, he layde, this infirnutie is not vnto death: but for the glory of God, that the sonne ol God, myght be glorified therbv.

Jelus loued Martha, and her fitter, and Lazarus. 2

6 When he had hearde therfore that he was sicke, he abode two dapes styll in the same place where he was.

37 Then atter that, sayde he to his dilciples: Let vs go into Jurie agayne.

8 His disciples iayde vnto hym: Maister, the Helves lately sought to stone thee, and wylt thou go thither agayne-

9 FHelus aunfivered: Are there not twelue houres of the day: If any man
Walke in the day, he stumbleth not, betause he seeth the lyght of this worlde.

xa.

atid,

lo Wutpfananwalkeinthenyabt, he

n hetause there is no lyght in m.

u These thynges sayde he, and after that, he sayde vnto them: Our friende
Lazarus * flepeth, but J go to wake hym out of slepe.

2 Then lapde his oiftiples : Torde, pf he slepe, he Mail do well inongh.

B Holbbeit, Jelus spake of his death, but they thought that he had spoken of the naturall slepe.

14. Then sayde Jelus vnto thé playnelp,
Lasarusis dead:

15 And ZF ani glad for pour fakes, that J

Was not there, becaule ye may beleue.

Heuerthelesse, let vs go vnto hym.

Then sapde Thomas, Which is called

i,

E

hym. so Caiphas propheciech that one mutt aye lo the pharisees. 57 The bye priestes and the phavitees. com-

Didimns, vnto his felowe diltiples: let C vs also go that we may dye with ym.

17 Then went pba and founde that

1 r lpen in his graue, foure dapes
18 (Wethame was nye vnto Hierufalent, about © fifteene furlonges ok.) Kae

19 And many of the Jewes tame to wies
Martha and Marie to comfort them ouer their brother. '

20 Martha affoone as the hearde that

esus was conunpng, went and met hym : but Marie fate styll in the house.

21 Then lapde Martha vnto Jelus:
Torde, *pf thou haddelt ben here, my lekn a4 brother had not dyed: 12 .

22 Sreuerthelefle, nowe J knowe that
Whatlocuer thou alkkest of God, God wyll geue it thee,

23 Jelus sayth vnto her: Thy brother shaͤll ryse agayne.

24 Martha fapth vnto hym: I knowe that he shall ryse agayne in the relurrection at the last day. a

25, Jesus sapth vnto her, J am the re- tonnie.. surrection, and the ·lyfe: He that be- and. chi a. leneth on me pea, though he were dead, in h vet shall he lyue. f Abac i. a

26 And wholoeuer lyueth, and beleueth Heb.
7 oe (hall neuer dye. Beleuelt thou

27 She sayde vnto hym: Bea Lowe, J beleue that thou art Christe the sonne of -
God, which shoulde tome into the
Worlde. S

28 And affoone as the had fo layde, fhe zp
Went Her way, and called Marie her sister secretely, saying: The Maister is tome, and talleth for thee.

29 Alloone as the hearde that, the arole quickly, and came vnto hym. *

30 Jesus was not pet come into the

towne: but was in that place where

Martha met hym.

The Jewes then which were with her in the house ¢ comforted her, when they slawe Marie that she rose bp haste-
Ipc, and went out, folowed her, laying: ae gocth vnto the graue, to weepe there.

31 Then when Marie was conte where

Pelus

ep

aud sawe hynt, she fell

ö esus was,

Downe at his feete, aud fayth vnto hun: 4

orde, pf thou haddest ben here, my
99070 Had not ben dead.

lohn. xi. c.

Wh Fetus therfore sawe her weepe. 47

> the Jewes allo wecpyng which pee HA her, he groned © in the spirite, and Was troubled in hynm selft. eur ien, Ard lapde: where haue ye layde hunae Jesus wept
Luk xix. f. 30 nd ete
= Then fapde the Jewes: Weholde howe he loued hym.
37 And some of them layde: Coulde not he which! opened the eyes ok the blinde,

U

Iohn. ix. b.
E not haue dped- .
38 merten groned in him selte

and tame to the graue. It was a

taue, and a stone layde on it.

39 Jelus sayde: Take pe away the stone.
Martha, the fitter of hom that was.

dead, sayde vnto hym, Torde, by this tyme he stinketh: Foz he hath ben dead foure dapes. j

40 BYelusfayde bnto her: Sayde J not buto thee, that pf thou dyddest beleue,

thou shouldest {ee the glory of God-
41 Then they toke away the stone front

the place where the Dead was laypde.

And Jesus lyft vp his eyes, and layde:
Father, J thanke thee that thou hast hearde me.

42 Hobbbeit, J knowe, that thou hearest me alwayes: but * becaule of the people
Which stande by, J sayde it, that they mape belene that thou hast sent me.

43 And when he thus had spoken, he crped With a loude vopte: Lazarus,

ö tome foorth. 8

lob c. 44. And he that was dead, came foorth,

F bounde hande and foote, with graue

tlothes, and his face was bounde with

à napkyn. Jesus fayde vnto them:loole hym, and let hym go.

45 Then many of the Jewes which

Tohn.xii-d.

tame to Marie, and had seene p thynges

haue made allo, that this man shoulde

57, And not fo2 the people onip: but that

which Jesus dyd, beleued on
6 But fome of the to the pharilce: e
<a gered the U e pi Mat. xx) ge eee

a For this man 0 Aden miracles. Ms Pech Many asu

Drie, Iod m Went cher wayes *
U

d tolde them What '

48 If we let hym stape thus, all men
They sapde vnto hum: Logde, come,

wyll beleue on him, and the Nona
© {hall conte, and take away both dar 00 8 f rowme and the people. they tat

49 And one or them named Cataphas pe: pag the bye prick that lanie yere, sayde vnto them: Ye perteaue nothyng at all

50 $202 contider, that it is expedient fo? Toh, xvii bs, that one man dye for the people, and not that all the people perishe.

51 This {pake be, not of hym selfe, but beyng ye priest that fame pere, he prophesied that Jelus shoulde dye for the people, he shoulde gather together in one, the thyldren of God, that were scattered . abrode. 2 —

5; Then from that dap koorth, they toke v. oi touncell together, for to put hym to 6

death. 6

54. Jelus therfore walked uo moze openlpe among the Jewes: but went his wap thenee, vnto a countrey nye to a wildernesle, into a citie which is called se el and there continued with his

dllciples. .

55, And the Jewes Easter was nye at ür

hande, and many went out of the coun? Fo vis trey bp to Mlerulalẽ before the Easter, to purifie them selues.

56 Khen fought they for Jesus k spake among them selues, as they stoode in At the temple: What thynte pe, feeyng™”
Hecommet)nottothefeat Day: . e

5 The hype prettes and pharilees had Le geuen a tommaundement, that pf any

man knewe where he were, he shoulde shewe it, that they myght tale hym. S

¶ The

U

8 The. xij Chapter.

2 Chrille tuppeth with Martha a Lazarug. 3 Marie annopnteth Jelus feete. Couetous
Judas murmureth. 7 Christe erculeth Maries fact. 10 The chiele priestes tale councell tobytl Lazarus. 14 Jesus littyng on an Asle, rideth into Hierulalem. 20 Che Gretians de»

spre to fee Christe. 25 Che kruites of perlecution. 27 The prayer of Christe. 23 A vopce from heauen. 36 Christe hydeth hym elle krom the Jewes. 37 noherfore the Jewes beleue not.

ö 250 N came to Wethame,

pb el. 2 where Lazarus had

qi. ln A. pkey

spirapled frou death.

<a te eS

Lazarus Was one of them that late at the table with hym.

aif 3 Then tole Marie a pounde of oyntment of Spike narde, very costly, and

feete with her heere: and the house was

lylled with the odoure ol the oyntment.
4A Theu layde one of his diltiples, euen a. Judas Iltariot Simons sonne; which
ö oulde betraye hm.
5 Iohy was not this opntment solde for three hundred pence, and genen to the poore: 99 i:

gaynst the day ol n burying bath the
8 Foz the poore alwapes shall pe haue
With pou; but me haue ye not alwapes.
9 Much people ot the Jewes therfore had knowledge that he was there. And they came not for Jesus sake only: but

6 he raysed from death. | lo Wut the hype pricttes helde a councell,
115 they myght put Lazarus to death

n Becaule that for his fake, many ofthe ewes went away, aud beleued on

„ Jelus. S dul: On the next day, much people that were come top feat, when they hearde

3 Loke braunches of paulme trees, and ie e Hofanna, blesled is He that in the

rde
14 And Jelus got a voung Alle, and late

? AY ben dead, whom he

2 — There they made hym a lupper, and Martha serued: but

annopnted Jesus feete, and wyped his

nis, khat they might se Lazarus also, wHõ

that Jesus Mould tome to Hierulalem,

went foorth to meete hym, and crved: houre. o 28 Father, glorifie thy name. Then came ates 1 the Lorde tommeth, kyng of

A Diuers rulers that beieued in him, feared to be excõmunicated, 48 Gods worde is iudge.

hen Jelus, fire daves before the Passouer,

theron, as it is written: ‘ »

15 Feare not daughter of Sion, beholde, Zt. thy kyng commeth, sittyng on an Alles Loh di tote. |

16 Thele thynges vnderstoode not his C

diltiples at the first: but when Felus -

was glorified, thé remembred they that

such thinges were written of him ce that

such thynges they had done vnto hym.
17 The people that was with him, when.

he called Laʒarus out of his graue, and

“rapsed hym from death, bare recorde.

8Therkore met hym the people allo, betaule they hearde that he had done {uch

Amtacle.

19 The pharilees therfore fayde among them selues: perteaue pe, howe ye preuaple nothpng: Beholde, (all the whole]

wWonlde goeth after hyn.

20 There were tertaine Grekes among; Res s.. them, that tanie to worship at the feast: Pn

21 The lame came therefore to Philip; -

which was of Bethlalda, la a1) of Gaz © lilee, and delired hym, laying: Spr, we woulde (lane) see Jelus.

22 Phllip tanie and tolde Andrewe: And agayne, Andee € Philip tolde Jesus.

23 And Jelus aunswered them, saying:

The houre is tome, that the lone of n

man mut be glorified.

24. oF Clerply, verplp, J fay vnto pou,

eextept the Wheate cone fall into the ne. grounde, and dye, it abideth alone: If it 5 dye, it bryngeth foorth much fruite.

25 He that loueth his lyfe, chall destrop ate d.

it: and he that hateth his tyfe in this n

worlde, shall kepe it vnto lyfe eternall. LI ub.

26 Ik any man minister vnto mie, let hm folowe me: And where Jam, there tohn. xiii.a. shall also my minister be. It any man and xvid. minister vnto me, hym wyll u father honour,

27 Nolbe is my soule troubled, and what

shall I fay : Father, saue me froni this

Houre: but therkorc came J into this

there a voyte from heauen (laying) haue both glorilied it, and Wyll glorifie it agayne.

The

ieee

The people therfore that dkoode by

10 brarde tf layde that it thundred:
Other fayDde, an Angel spake to Dyn.

30 Jelus aunlwered and fayDde : This

N popeecame, not betaule ol me, but kor

kes.

re Kolbe is the iudgement of this
Worlde: . shall the prince of this

ohn. xx. d. orlde be tast out. dd. 32 Wand J, yf J were lylt vp from the carth, yl drãwe all men vnto me.
33 (This he layde fignifipng what death he choulde dye.) a
34. The people aunlwered him: we haue hearde out of the lawe, that Christe

lohn. xi. e.

E 31

Piclexs. hydeth euer: and howe sapest thou che

Bed. donne of man mutt be tyft vp- Who is
Nhche va. that sonne of man

35 Then Pelus lavde vnto them: Peta

litie While is the light With vou. Walle

kee ve. while pe haue light, lest the darknesse

_— “cone on pou: For he that walketh in the

Darke, Wotteth not Whither he goeth.
36 Whyle pe haue lyght, beleue on the ght, that yt may be the chyldrenok the lpght. S Thele thynges spake Jelus, and Departed, e hyd hym selfe from the.
37 Wut though he had done fo many mi-

5 n pet beleued not they

on hym,

38 That the fying of Elatas the prohete myght be kulkplled, which he alle: Torde, Who shall beleue our

{aping: And to whom is the arme of the
TLorde declared: f

39 Therkore coulde they not beleue, be-

cause that Esaias sapth agapne:

Esal. Illi. a.
Rom. x. c.

The ii

40 ' he hath blyuded their eye hardened their heart, that th; 7 one wate not fee with their eyes x lest they chould Mark it, vnderstande With their hearte, chould Aan” bt conuerted, and J hond heale thet, +4
41 Such thynges fapde Efaias when he sawe his glory, and spake of hym.
42. Meuerthelesse, among p chiefe rulerg also many beleued on hym: Wut betaufe of the pharisees, they dyd not conferte bym, elt they chould be excdmunicate, lla.
43. *F02 they loued the prayle of men tor... whic 92 bunte of God. —
44. Jelus rped, and lapde : He that be: leüeth on me, beleueth not on 155 buten oe “ty 191 Mss —
45 And he that seeth nie, seeth! sent 32 5 nchen
46 Jam tome La lyght into worlde, ton that whosoeuer beicucth on te fouls it evil not byde in darknesse.
47 And pf any man heare my wozdes, and beleue not, J iudge hym not: Foz
I tame not to iudge the worlde, but to bub faue the worlde. ˖
48 He that refuseth me, a reteaueth not mp wordes, Hath one that iudgeth him:
The worwde that J haue spoken, the fame (haul indge hym in the last dap.
49 For J haue not spoken of my lelfe: but the father which sent ine, he gaue nie atommaundement what J Mould fay and what J shoulde speake. so And J knoe that his tommaundement isipfe cuerlastyng. hatsoeuer P speake therfore, euen as the father bad me, so J speake. 4

Chapter.

5 Chritke wattheth the Tpollles seete. à peter retuteth to be walshed, bet alter warde con

lenteth. io Che Apostles are cleane. 13 Christe, Lorde, and Matfer.

litte and charitie. 26 Chrilte sheweth who thall betray hym. 27 Satan entreth

30 He goeth out to the pharitees. 4 Christe exhorteth p disciples to loue.
_ Difciples are knowen. s He fore warneth Peters denpall.

Efore the keast of the
Passouer, when Jesus
%. newe that his houre was come d he choulde
Adeparte out ok this world Onto the father:

i when he loucd his which Were in the World, vnto the ende he loued them.

Math 26 b.

Maran, khat the deuyll had * put in the heart of

Judas Iltariot Simons sonne, to be-

2 And when supper was ended (after

Exhor to humi · an Uno Judas.
A Wherby Chziltes

tray hym) |
3 Jelus knowyng that che father had . geuen all thynges into his handes aud dal that he was come from God, and went lan
0 God: f
| „ and lapde aspde
He rose from supper a When de pyr elke.

t

. “A

his vpper garmentes:

had taken a towel, he gyrded 4

5 After that, he polbred water into :

bafon, and began to wache the DiC feete, and to Wype them with the to

wherwirh he was geded. Then

Then came he to Simon Peter. And deter sapde vuto hom: Torde, doest thou wasche my keete- —
7 Felts aunlwered, e sayde vnto hym:
What FH do, thou wotest not nowe, but thou shalt knowe hereakter.

neuer wallhe my feete. Jelsus aunlwered hym: It J walshe thee not, thou hast no part with me.

not my feete only, but also the handes, and the head.

1g10 Jelus sapth to hym: He that is wal
{hed nedeth not faue to wache his feete, but is cleaue euery whit. And pe are

„ dleane, but not all.

1 Forhe knewe who it was that should

not all cleane.

and receaued his clothes, and was set downe agapne, he sapde vnto them:
Wote ve What J haue done to pour -

iz Be call me Maister, and Lorde, and ye fay well, for fo am J.

14. PEF then pour Lorde and Maister, haue wallhed pour feete, ye allo ought to wasshe one anothers feete. ö

Fe 5 Forꝰ I haue geuen you an ensample,

hen’ that ye thoulde do as J haue done to

you, 59 * n 5
* 16° Gerply, verylp, I fay vnto vou: The
% lerxuaunt is not greater thé his maister, neither the mellenger greater then he that sent hym. d. 17 Pf ye knowe these thynges, happy
C are pe, vf ye do them.

18 na no of pou all. I knowe
Who J haue cholen. But that the scriptu v be fulfylled: He that eateth bre h me, hath lyft bp © his heele agaynst nie. nid 19 No web tell J pou before it come: that
VPhen it is come to passe, ve myght be-

leue that Jam he.

lib.

Lander

nate of

ohhh fers

His de-
I,

hyd

hice, that veceaueth whonioeuer “J lende, receaneth me: And he that receaueth me, reteaueth hym that sent nie.
When Pelus had thus sayde, he was troubled in spirite, and testified, x laide:
, Uerplp, verylp, J fap vnto vou, that nic ne of pou (hall betray me. dub. 22 Then the diltiples loked one on another, doubtyng of whom he spake.

g Peter aue vnto hym: Thon shalt

Diniou Peter sayth vnto him: Torde,

bctrap hym. Therlore sayde he: pe are n. Od, alter he had wasshed their leete,

. 20 Verply, verplp, J fay vnto pou, he

XIII.

23 There was one of Jelus dilciples, leaupng on Felis bosome, »(euen he) tohn.xix.c. whom Jesus loued. ores

24. To hym beckened Simon Peter

therkore, that he choulde afte Who it
Was of Whoin he spake.

25 He then, when he leaned on Jesus

brest, sayde vnto hym: Lode who is ite

26 Jelus aunswered: he it is to whom J

geue a sop when F haue dipped it. And D he wet the sop, and gaue it to Judas
Iscariot, Simons sonne.

27 And after the sop, Satan entred into hym. Then fayde Jesus vnto hym:
That thou doest, do quickly.

28 That wiste no man at the table, for what intent he spake vnto hm.

29 Some of the thought, because Judas lohn had the bagge, that Jesus had sayde vnto hym, bye those thynges that we haue neede of agaynst the feast: or, that he shoulde geue somethyng top poore.

30 Alldone then, as he had reccaucn the sop, he went inimediatly out: and it was

nyght. ; zi Therkore, when he was gone out,

Jelus sapd, Nowe is the forme of man e

glorified: And God is glorified in hym.

32 Yf God be glorified in hym, God (hall

allo glorifie hym in hym selfe, and shall strayghtwap glorifie bpm.

33 A Litle children, pet a litle whyle am with vou. Be shall seeke me: and as lolin vic. sayde vnto the Jewes, whither J

fs thither tan ye not come, Allo to vou ay J nowe:

34 A newe commaundement geue

vnto von, that pe lone together, as haue loued vou, that euen fo ve loue one another.

Tohn.xv.a.

35 By this (hall all men knowe that pe lohn ts.

are my diftiples, yf pe haue loue one to another. :
36 Sinion Peter {aide vnto him: Lorde,
Whither goest thous Fetus aunswered hym: Whither J go, thou canst not for | 19 lowe me nowe, put thon shalt folowe Ane.
1 ene 117 28 ö ;
3 eter sayde vnto hym: 5 NA e
Temndt J folowe thee nowe- J wwpll Mar xii.« icoparde my Ipfe for thy fale. Luk. xxii.
Jesus aunswered hym: Wylt thou iedparde thy lyfe for my sake- Uerplp, i verylp, J fave vnto thee, the Cocke lohn.xviir< shall not croive, tyll thou haue denxed nic thryle. ö

¶ The

Nd he lapde tuto his dicciples,] Let not
“yall pour hearte be fil) troubled : Be bez

7 0 leue in god, beleue

Nef alsoinme.

Ne. Ju my fathers.

eG Houle, are many

f dwellpng places:
If it were not fo, J woulde haue tolde pou. J go to prepare a place for you.

3 And pk i go to prepare a place for pou,
I wyll conte agapne, and receaue pon, feuenj vnto my lelfe? that where Jam, there map pe be allo.

4 And whicher J go, ye knowe, and the
Way pe knowe. ; j

5 Thomas lapth vnto hym: Lorde, we knowe not whither thou goest: And
1 95 is it possible kor vs to knowe the

apes

6 Pelus fayth onto hym: J am the

lohn ia. Wap, and the trueth, and the tpfe. * No

andxic, , mant tõmeth vnto the father, but by me.

Ieuan 7 If yt had knowen me, ye had knowen

my father alfa. And nowe pe knowe

W hym, and haue seene bpm,

8 Sehe layth vnto hym: Lorde, shewe vs the father, and it sulfileth vs.

9 Jesus lapth onto hym: Hane J ben so long tyme with pou, k pet halt thou

= fine

N a \ = >> a’
45 a J *
N VA N Ul A
— oll * .
NN 2
N —— A r 7

Iohn.xii. d. and, vil ide

not knowen me- Pb, be, that path ’ ather. And

seene me, hath seene the
Howe sapest thou then, chewe vs the fatherz

Lohn xf 10 Geleuest thon not, that; J am in the father, x the father in mez The wordes that I speake vnto pou, I speake not of my selfe: but the father that dwelleth in me, is he that doth the workes.
1, Weleue me, that J am in the father, and the father in nie: Orels beleue me ap 11 5 me
2 Uerplp, verplp J fay vnto pou, be that beleucth on nie, the ores be do, the fame Thal he do alfo,and greater
Workes then these shal he do, betaule
Niat. xvil. a. 15 Pherae fi
. Aloeuer pe ale in my name
Nlark. xi. d. that Wyll J do, tl at tl 2 fa er :
Lakxb. glorified ti the 9912 ae

Iohn. xvi. a.

Ic Golpell

¢ The. xiiij. Chapter.

searmeth his dilciples with confolation agapnst trouble, Christeg diuin . oe wap, the trueth and theipfe, Christe and the father one. j Co alte of Sobhe name of Chile. 26 He promifeth the spirite to comlort them o loue, aud keping Chad e commaundement, the spirite is our teacher. 27 He promileth his peace, W

20 That day hall pe tnowe,that I am

„

14 If pe shall aske any thi
Hwy doit, e ngen nan,

15 If yt loue me, x daa ˖ epe my tommaun-
16 And J wyll pray the father shall geue pon another e he may byde with you kor euer:

17 Cuen the spirite of trueth, whom eye worlde can not reccaue, becäule the wonde feeth hym not, neither knoweth hym. Wut ye knowe hym: Fo. he dwel-

: meee i shalbe in pou,

1 not leaue vou toni Mahd but wyll come to youn, eeu

Io Pet alitte whyle, and the wonde chall see me no moze: but pe shall {ee me, be: taule I lyue, and pe shall lpue catto.y /

in mp father, and ou in me, e J iñ pou.

2l Me that hath my commaundementes ¢ and kepeth them, the fame is he that lin loueth me: And he that loueth me, hak ious be loued of my father, and J wyll loue s
Hint, and wyll Met myne ö wne selfe to

pm.

22 Judas sayth vnto hym, not Judas; ad
Iltariot: Lorde, what is done, that thou wylt shewe thy lelle vnto vs, and not vnto the worlde-

23 Jesus aunswered, c sapde bnto hym:
Ika man loue me, he wyll kepe my sapinges: and np father Wyll loue hynt, and we wyll come vnto hym, and dwell
With hym. 1

24. He that loueth me not, kepeth not my

sapinges: And the word which peheare, ts not mne, but the fathers which sent me.

25 Thele thynges haue J spoken vnto von, beyng pet present with pou.

26 Wut the comkorter, which is} the holy x ghost, whom the father wyll lende im sin my name, he Thal teach pou all thinges F bryng all thynges to pour remebraunce
Whatloener Jhaue sapde vnto pou.

27 Peate I leàue with pou, my peace f gene vntd pou: Hot as the Wolde ge ueth, geue J vnto pou. Wet not vour heartes be greeued, neither feare. unnd

28 Be haue hearde Howe J Ned + pou, J go awap, and conte agapn von,

by Saint ohn. on

po. Ak yt loued nic, ve woulde veryly reiopee, betause J sayde, J go bnto the father: for the father is greater then A.
29 And nowe haut F (herbed pon beto2e it tome, that when it is tome to passe, pe myght beleue. zo Hercafter wyll J not talke many

by vii. c
KIA.

Wozdes vnto vou: Oz the (a) printe of Ootan (q

he prince ot >

this worlde cõmeth, and hath nought zee

he exercis in (b) me. Karle n

31. But that the worlde may knowe that ers
I lout the father: And as the father vate hen.
Jaue me connnaundement, euen o do Lede
J. O Ryle, let vs go hence. en

The. xv. Chapter.

Che confolation bet weene Christe and his members, vnder the parable ot the byne.
7 16 ne mull prap in the name ol Christe. 9 Chrittes loue to warde vs. 12 He erhorteth to mutuail loue. 20 Ok afflictions for Chiles fake, 25 The office of the holy gholle

when he commeth.

ssa Ant the true bine, and np kather is the bul

I bandman.

Euery braunche that beareth not frimte in me, he wuͤl take away:

And euerp braunche that beareth frutte wyll he pourge, that it may bryng foorth nore fruite.

vit3 Nowe ave pe cleane through the

ord.” worde which J haue spoken vnto you.
Byde in nie, and J in pou, As the

braunche tau not beare kruite of it selfe, except it byde in the vine: no more can cu pe, extept pe abyde in me.

n Jani the vine, ve are the braunches.

he He that abpdeth in me, and Jin hym, the same bryngeth foorth much kruite:
Jor without me tan ye do nothyng.

6 Pra man byde not in me, he is cat foorth as a braunch, and withereth, and men gather them, and tast theni into the fyre, and they burne.

4 Hf ye byde in mie, and my wordes a
Kea byde in pon, alle what ye Wyll, and it ig shalbe done for you. S , ma 8 Pevewnis my father glorified: that ye
15 nuich fruite, and become np Dil? ciples.
As the father hath loued me, euen fo si one Jloued von: Continne peta? my de Lone, lo Yf ye kepe my tounnaundenientes, ve

(all abyde in my loue, euen as J hauc kept my fathers commaundenientes,
AUD abydte in his lone,

1 Hhele thynges haue J spoken bnto vou, that my toy might remayne in pon,

* and that pour ioy mpaht be full.

mig This is my tonimaundement, that

ve loue together, as J haue loued pon.
3 Greater loue hath no man, then this:

p a man bestowe his like sor his frendes.
14 Ve are my frendes, pf ye do whatloc-

ner Jtommaunde von. ö

xxl. c

15 Hentefoorth call I vou not seruaũtes: for the seruaunt knoweth not what his
Torde doeth. But vou haue J called krendes, for all © thynges that J haue 9 S we hearde of my father, haue J made 5 0 knowen to von. a

16 He haue not chosen me, but J haue C chofen you, and ordayned von, to go, and bryng foorth fruite, and that pour fruite shoulde remayne, that whatlocuer pe alte of the father in my name, he map geut it pou. 2

17 This connnannde J vou, that pe loue together.

18 Phe worlde hate yon, ye knowe that

tit hated me before it hated yon.

19 If ye were of the worlde, the worde would loue his owne: Howbeit, because pe are not of the worlde, but J haut chosen pou out of the worlde: therfore 1 the worlde hateth pou. John. xvii e

20 Remember the worde that J sayde vnto vou: the seruaunt is not greater then the Lorde. Ik they haue perlecu- ache ted me, they wyll also perfecute pou. PE ga. they haue kept my faping, they Wpll kepe 0 pours also. 1

21 Wut all these thynges wyll they do paz den, vnto pou for my names fake, because gebende they haue not knowẽ hym that sent mie. 0 mrcacis

22 Bf Jhad not conte and spoken vnto Y them, they shoulde haue had no sinnt: but nowe haue they nothyng to cloke their sinne withall. f

23 15 that hateth me, hateth my father also

24. BfA had not done among them, the
Workes Which none other man dyd, they shoulde haue had no sume. Wut gane nome hane they both seene, and hated da we not ouly me, but also my father, nee ker bun
25 But this commeth to palle,] that the ben. worde myght be fulfplled, that is wzitten in their lawe: They hated me aße without a tause. -
J But

—— tC Ope ye

But when the comkorter is come, of me.

bad. whom int fendednfo youfromthe 27 And ye chau beare witnesle allo been, father, enen the lplrit ok trueth wh caule ve haue ben wih me kromthede-
Alena. proleadeth ok the father, he shall teltikie gynnyng. -

¢ The. xvj. Chapter.

1 Chee comlorteth the oifciples, puttyng them in remembraunce of akklictio and trouble. 7 Ok the holy ghost and his offtce, 17 OE Christes atcention, 2 G0 aske in the name of Christẽ. 3 Peace in Christe, afflictions in the worlde.

1 Isthese thynges haue 14. He hall glorifie me: Fo2 he ;
Eas : : (apa vntd vou, becaule teaue of mine, and thal fl ewe . 5
Nat xd. ve choulde not be offen- 15 All thynges that the father hath arc an
Ags | SAY (DED, : mine: Therkore fapde F (onto you that Kr
 Tohxvd. 2 [Re £3 They Chall excömu- he shall take of mine, x thew vnto yor, t
9 A tate you:peathe time 16 Alter a whyle, and pe shall not lee Eu
==—fhallcome, that whoso me, and agapne after a whyle pe that euer kylleth you, wyll thynke that he see me: for J go to the father. doth God seruite. 17 Then sapde fome of his discples be-
; And such thynges wyll they do vnto twene them felucs: What is this that
) you, betaule they haue not knowen the he saith vnto vs, alter a Whyle, k ye that father, neither perme, not fee nie, and againe, alter a whyle ye

4 But khele thynges haue J tolde you, hal {ee me:and that J go to the father: that when the tyme is tonie, ve map re- 18 Whey lapde therefore: What is this méber theu that J tolde you. e These that he faith, after a whyle: we tan not D thyngesfapde J not vnto vou at the be- tell what he faith. ö gynnyng, becaule J was present with 19 Jelus perteaued that they would alke vou. phym, and fayde vnto them: Do ye en-
5 Wut nowe J go mp aye, to hym auire among pour selues of that 10 said that sent me, € none ot poualkethme, alter kran ve shall not {ee me, whyther goest thou. . Eagaine after a while € pe shall {ee mez
6 Wut betausc I haue saide such thinges 20 Uerylp veryly F fay vnto pou ye shall vnto pou, your heartes are ful of sorow. wepe and lament, the worlde shall re-
7 Meuerthelesse, J tell pou the trueth, topte: ve Chali sorowe, but pour sorowe it is expedient for ou that J go away. shalbe turned to ioy. l
Foryf J go not aay, that comforter 21 A woman, when she trauapleth, bat
Ihn ag Wyll not tome vnto vou: But pf I de- sorowe, becaule her houre is tome: but andxvd. part, J wyll sende hym vnto pou. assoone as the is deliuered of the childe, en And Whee is tome, he wyll d rebuke che remembreth no moze the anglushe,
‘ the world offinne, and of rightequihes, for ioy that a man is borne into p world. and of iudgenient. 22 And ye nowe therefore haue sorolbe: .
9 Pk siune, betause they beleue not on but F wyll see pou agayne, and pour fatto me. heartes shall reioyte, and pour ioy Mall racine,
Sine 10 Ok vighteoufies, betause 0 J go to no man take from vou. jer

Aera: my kather, and ye shall see me no moze, 23 And in that day Chall pe asne me no tot
Tore 1 Ok iudgement, because the painee of question. <r Ueryly veryly F fay vnto blen wie ens. this Worlde is iudged lalredp. vou, whatloeuer pe hal attic thekather in ise mes Ahaue vet manp thynges to lay vnto in nip name, he wyll gene it von. ge, a

. the one auto e. YOU, but pe can not bart them away 24 Hytherto haue ve alked © nothyng in are

wachenas 3 Howebeit, when he is come, whiche our ioy map be full. sons notbints neat gob fo is the spirite of trueth, he wyl leade 1 5 2 EBM iges haue J fpoken buto 2 ne into all trueth. De Chall not speake ok vou by prouerbes. The tpme Wy come, cre Pan ee bumleke bitt zwhatlocuer he cha heare, when I shall no moze (peake Dato vo e
Ae, halt hall he peake, and he wyll thewe by pröüerbes: but J chall shewe von ae, vou thynges to tome. playnely of my father. At laue

e Achat day shall ye alke in my name:
And J lay not vnto pou, that J wyll ray Duto iy father for pou.

17 Foz the father hym selfe loueth vou, petause pe haue loued me, and haue beleued that J came out from God.

F went out from the father and came uo the worlde: Agayne, J leaue the worlde, and go to the father.

„ Dis diltipies sapde vnto hym: To,

65 nowe tankest thou plamelp, and speakest no prouerbe.

s Howe are we sure that thou knowest

all thynges, e nedest not, that any man

shoulde alke thee (any auestion:] Ther-

foz all thofe that receaue the trueth.

: Hese wordes spake Je-
SN ius, and lift vp his eyes o heauen, and sapde:
Father, the Houre is come, gloritie thy sonne that thy fonne allo

ap glozific thee:

Ac thou hast geuen hym power ouer

all fleshe, that he shoulde geuc eternall life, to as many as thou hast geuen hum.

1 3 This is' lyfe eternall, that they myght

knowe thee, the only true God, x Jesus
Christe Whom thou hat fent,

4 J hauc glorified thee on the earth:

bf. IJ haue finished p worke, which thou gaͤuest me to do.

And nowe glorifie thou me, O father, with chine ownc selfe, with the glozp
1 Ahad with thee per the worlde

as

J haue declared thy name vnte p men, which thou gauest me out ofp world.
Thync they were, and thou gauest the me, and they haue kepte thy worde.

Nowe they haue knowen z al thinges whatloeuer p Hatt geuen me are okthee.

8 Foz J haue geuen buto them v wordes which thou gauest me, and they haue reteaued them, aud haue knowẽ surely that J came ont from thee, e they haue beleued, that thou dyddest sende me.

89 Jprap for them: J pray not for the

=, © Worlde, but for them which thou

a halt genen me, for they are thyne.

n 0 Aid all myne are thpne, and thyne

are myne, and J an glorfied in them.

1 And nowe am J not in the worde,

tis, to ells,

IXv].

fore beleue We, that thou canrest krom
God.

31 dec esus àunlwered them: Do ye nowe

eleue-

32 Seholde, the houre draweth nye and Zach. xe. is alredy tonie, that ve shalbe scattered dane euery man to his owne, and (hallteaue nie alone. And yet am F not alone: or the father is with me.

33 These wordes haue JJ spoken vnto von, that in nie pe myght haue peace,
Jor in the worlde shall ye hane tribulation:but be of good cheare, J haue ouertome the Worlde.

Iohn. xiii. b

¢ The. xvij. Chapter.

1Christe prapeth to his father, that their glory myght be made manikelt. 9 he prapeth for his Apostles. 12 Judas lok. 14 The Apokles hated of the worlde. 20 Chk prapeth

and they are in the worlde, aud J come to thee. e Holy father, hepe through thine owne nanie, the which thou halt geuen ne, that they may alfo be one, d Ferne as We are. lee © ann

2 wWhyle I Was with them in p woalde, in.
I kept them in thy name. Thole that tohxviiw. thou gauest nie, haue J kept, and none — of them is loft, but that © loft chylde, zus aca: that the scripture myght be fulfptted, Pal ax.

13 Moe come JJ to thee, and these
Wordes speake FJ in the Worlde , that they mpaht haue my toy fulkylled in them seues.

14 J haue geucu them thy worde, and the worlde hath hated them, betaule en

they are not of the worlde, euen as 7 also am not ot the worlde.

15 Jpray not that thou shouldest take them out of the wozlde : but that thou d kepe them from cuyll. =

16 They are not ofthe worlde, as Jalso am not of the worlde.

17 Santtifie them through thy trueth.

Thy worde is the trueth.

18 As thou diddest sende me into p world, ene fo haue J allo sent the into p world.

19 And for their fakes sanctific I np selfe, that they also myght be lanctified through the trueth.

20 (Meuerthelelle,) I pray not for them alone: bunt for the alfo, which shall belene on mie throngh their preachyng:

21 That they all may be ont, as thou fa- Gala ther art in me, and Jin thee, and that they allo may be one in vs: that p world map belene, that thou hat tent me.

Hy And

Tepe N

22 And the glorit which thou gauest me,

F auc genen them, that they may be due, as We also are aue. a
23 Jinthem, and thou in me: that they

may be made perkecte mone, and that

the worlde may ünowe that thou hast

sent me, and halt loued them, as thou
Haft loued me. 6

lab ste 24. Father, J wyll that they Which thou
00 Cher w. halt genen me, be“ with me where H ait fd am, that they may fee my glorie which

there courte in this lyfe, they map entop cternall ipfc.

hen Jesus had spoken
GA 7 ( shel womnes, "be went
89 [Ax 1 forth with his diseip tes
N „Iouer the brooke Cedron, where Wasa garden, into the whiche he
— entre, x his diltiples.
2 Judas allo whiche betrayed hym, kn we the place: For Jesus oft tymes resorted thyther, with his disciples.
3 Idas then, after he had receaued a

Math. 26. d.
Nlar. ni. d.
Luk. x x ii. d.

== S

bande of men, and officers of the hye

priestes e pharifees, came thyther With lanternes, aud torches, and weapons.

4 And Jelus, knowing all hinges that shouldẽ come on hym, Went foorth, and layde vnto them, whom seke pez

5 Thepaunswered him: Felis of Hazareth. Jesus sayth vnto them, Jam he. Judas allo whiche betrayed hyn, stoode with then.

36 _ Affooncthen as he layde vnto them
Jamhe, they went backe warde, ¢ fell to the grounde.

Then alien he them agapne, whom

seke ye: They laid: Jesus of Paʒareth.

8 Jesus aunswered, J haue tolde you
(O bene: that Jam he: Ek pe leke me Merefore, des au vlan let thele go their wap. sim. 9 That the saying myght be fulfpilea
Loh b. Which he spake: Ok them which thou gauest me, haue J not lost one. io Then Simon Peter, hauing a word, drewe it, and finote the hye priestes seruaunt, and tut ot his ryght care. The seruauntes name was Malchus. u Therefore sapth Jesus vuto Peter,
„ Put vp thy worde into the cheathe:

q The. xviij. Chapter.

Christe is betrayed by Fudas. 6 Che fouldters fall backe warde. 10 Peter kmpteth of
Malchus eare.!; Christe brought before Annas and Cataphas. 15 Peter and John fos

lo wed Jelus to Caiaphas house. 22 Christe stricken by a feruaunt, 23 what he aun-
Cwered. 2 Peter denied hym. 28 e is ledde before Pilate, 35 and telleth hym what

his kyngdome is. 40 Che Jewes ache Bat abbas to be let loole.

D.
1 Thee hye priest then alked Jelus of zin e

thou hast geuen nic. Fo me, befoze the founbatanor eee ond
25 h rpabteons katherethowonde alp hach not knowen thee: But J 9015 Pie | knowen thee, and thele haue know 11 that thou hast sent me. >
26 And JJ haue declared vnto then name, and wyll declare it, that theloue wherewith thou hast loued me, may be in them, and J in them.

hall IJ not drynke of the cuppe whiche my father hath geuen me- 8

12 Thenthe tompanie, and the capitaine, and oiticers of the Jewes, toke Pelus, and bounde hym,

13 And led hym awap to Annas first, foe he was father in tae vnto Caiapljas,) which was p hye priest that fame pere:
And Annas kent Chee vounde onto Caias phas the hype priest.) ,

14 Caiaphas was he which gare coun- boxe tell to the Jewes, that it was erpedtet that one man shouid dye for the people.

1 And Simon Peter folowed Jesus, ¢ and fo did another © disciple. That dil ene ciple was knowen vnto the bye priest, € sn, went in with Jelus into the palace of the bye priest.

16 But Peter stoode at the ooze without. Then went out that other disciple which was knowen vnto the bye priest, and (bake vnto the damolell that kept the doore, and brought in Peter.

17 Then lade the danzosell, that kept the
Doo, bnto Peter: Art not thou allo one of this mans dilciples: e lapde, JJ an

not.

18 The seruauntes and officers stoobe there, which had made a fire of coales,
(korit was tolde) and they warined the lelues. Peter allo stoode among them, and warmed hym.

is diltiples, and of his doctrine. Luks

28 5 ens aun wered him: Jspale he p to the worlde, J euer taught in thet fpnagogue, and in the temple, nay 3

all the

in fe ö ewes resort, c in setrete h fayoe

— by Saintlohn. lxviy.

— 2 e slapde nothyng. any man to death.

Why alkest thou me: Alke the which hearde me, what J haue sayd vnto the:
Beholde, they can tell what J sapde.

22 When he had thus spoken, one of the

officers whiche stoode by, fmote Felis

with a rod]; saping:· Aunswerest thou the bye priest so-

.d

euyl spoken, beare witnesse of the euyl:

But yf J haue well spoken, why linp-

test thou mice

24 Nowe Annas had fent hym bounde

vnto Caiaphas the bye priest. :

25 Simon Peter stoode € Warined hym

selfe. Then sayde they vnto hym: Art

not thou also one of his disciples: He denyed it, and layde, Jam not.

26 Pune ofthe seruaũtes of p hye priestes, his colin whole eare Peter smote of) ayde vnto hym: Opd not J lee thee in

the garden with hymrviid. 77 Peter therefore denyed agalne: And a a. ilnmnediatly the Cocke crewe. bixva.23 Then led they Jelus fro Cataphas ca into the hall of uudgement. It was in the mornyng: And they them selues went not into the tudgement hall, leste they shoulde be dekyled: but that they myght eate the Pallouer.

29 Pllate then went out vnto them, and

{aid : Mhat accusatid bryng vou against

this man- .

30 They aunlwered, and laid vnto Hint:

Behe were not an euyll doer, we would

not haue deliuered hym vnto thee.

zi Then lapde Pilate vnto them: Lake

pe hum, and iudge him after pour owne

sawe. The Jewes therkore layde vnto hym: It is not lawfull © for vs to put

hen Pilate toke Jesus
| therfore, and stourged

Ais put,
% And the souldiers
(NG wounde a trowne of
Lagi thommes, and put it on

his head: And they did

Ez; Jelus aunswered by, Bf J haue

32 That the wordes of Jesus myght be

fulfylled, whiche he wake, signefiyng in a

what death he shoulde dye.

33 Then Pilate entred into the indge- mach. 7 b. meut hall againe, and called Jesus, and Mark-xva. lapde vnto hym: Art thou the kyng of aurb

the Hewes:

34. Jesus aunswered: Sapest thou that of thy selfe, or did other tell it thee of me-

35 Pilate aunscwered: am Ja Jewe-
Thyne owne nation € hye priestẽs haue e thee buco me, what hat thou

One?

36 Jesus aunswered: Mp kyngdome is not of this worlde. Bf my kyngdonie were of this worlde, then woulde my seruauntes surely fyght, that I shoulde not be deliuered to che Jewes: but now is my kyngdone not from hence.

37 Pilate therfore sayde vnto hyn: Art thoua kyng then: Jesus auniibered:
Thou sayest that Jam a king. For his tause am IJ borne, € lor this caule tanie
I into the worlde, that PJ should beare
Witnesse vnto the trueth: And all that are of the trueth, heare my voyte.

38 Pllate layde vnto him: What (rg) is trueth: And when he had lapde this, he went out agapne vnto the Jelbes, k sayth vnto them, J kynde in hym no taule at all.

39 Be haue a tustome, that I choulde deliuer ou one loose at p Pallouer: wyil ee loofe vnto pou the hyng ofthe

ewes-;

40 Then trped they all agapne, taping:
Not hym, but Warabbas. This Barabbas was a robber.

¢ The. xix. Chapter.

1 Chrige is whypped, beaten, and crowned. 4 Pilate woulde haue delpuered hym.
6 but the Jewes aske hym to be crucified, 1 All power of God. 16 Pilate delyuered
Christe to be crucified. 19 Che title fet vpon the crolse. 23 Christes garmentes deui-
Ded. 27 He commendeth his mother to John. zo Alter Christe tasted the vineger he dyeth. ; Che legges of the theeues bronen. 34 Christes syde pearsed wich a fpeare, zs Joleph of Aramathia beggeth his body, 40 and he and Picodemus bur yed it.

on hyma purple garment,

3 And layde, Hayle king ol the Jewes:
And they stroke hym with roddes.

4 Pilate went foorth agayne, and sapde vnto them: Beholde, JJ bryng hym foorth to pou, that ye map knowe that

kynde no fault in hm.
J | Hij Then

Iohn. vi. b.
G

Math, 27. c.

Mark. xv. u.

Luk. xxiii.¢

Ades. ili. o

The Golpell”

Then came Jelus foorth, wearyng a

ai of 11 55 and a robe of purple:

And he sayth vnto them, beholde the

i man.

Niatsa, When the hye priestes therefore and

Lukxxiiid® gffiters sase hyni, they crped, saying: trucifie hym, trucikit hym. Pilate lapth vnto them, Take pe hym, and crutilie hym: for J fynde no taule in hym.

The Jewes aunfivered hym: We

7 haue a lãwe, and by our lawe he ought to dye, becaule he made hym lelfe the sonne of God. 5

8 When Pilate hearde that laying, he

. 1° was the niore afrayde. ö

And went agaput into the indgement

> hall, ard layth vnto Pelns, Whence art thou: But Jesus gaue hym none aunswere.

Then sayde Pilate vnto hom: Speakest thou not vnto mez Knowest thou not that J haue power to erucific thee, and Hane power to loose thee-

11. Pelus aunswered: Thou ctouldest haue no power at all agaynst me, except it were geuen thee from about: Therfore he that deliuered me vnto thee hath

a the more sinne.

Lula eie 12 And from thencefoorth sought Pilate

C smeanes to loose hym. But the Jewes crped, laying: Vt thou let hym go, thou art not Caesers friend. Tor Whosoeuer maketh hym selfe a kyng, speaketh a gaynst Caefar,

;, When Plate hearde that faying, he brought Hels foorth, c he fate downe in the indgement seate, in a plate that is called the pauement, but in the Hebrue tounge, Gabbatha.

14. It was the preparyngof p Passouer, and about the sirt houre: And he sayth vnto the Jewes, beholde pourkyng.

15 They cryed, away with hym, away with Hy, crucifie hym. Pilate fayth
Into them: Shall F evucifie pour king-

he hye priestes aunlwered: we haue

Matha, lo king but Cacsar.

Makxvc. 16 Then deliuered he hym vnto them,

Labs to be crucified. And they toke Jelus, c

ledde hym away.

17 And he bare his crosse, e wet forth into a plate, which is called p place ol dead niens fkuiles, but in Hebrue Golgotha:

18 hohere they crucified hynm, and two other with him, on eyther syde one, and

Niet . -Felusin the mpddes.

Luke? And Pilate Wrote a title, and put it

Leul. xxiii c
Iohn. v. b.

Sapien.vi.a. ohn. iii. d.
Rom. xlil. a.

Math.27.d.

Act. xvii.b.

Hebr. xine.

on the crosse. TI
Icfus of Nazareth, kyng 1 vtyng was:

20 This title read many of the g

Fo. the place where Fetus era

ed, was npe to 5 citie. And it Was nit:

teum Pebzue and Grete, and Latine.

Then fapde the bye pricttes of the

Jeu 1 1 pap not kyng of the
: but, that he sayd

5 5 0 bene pode, Jam kyng

22 Pilate aunswered: what te a abel 3 atten, Thauetore

23 Hen the souldiers, when crucificd Jesus, toke his onemenee 85 . F made foure partes, to euerp fouldigr a te part )and allo his toate. The coate was without seame, wouen from the toppe
Meroe ade wert

24 They sayde therefore among then selues: Let vs not deuide it, bie call lottes foz it, Who shal haue it. That the scripture myght be fulfylled, faying:
They parted my rapment among the, Pa ft for niy coate dyd they tast lottes. And the souldiers dyd {uch thynges in deede.

25 There stoode by the trosse of Fetus his mother and his mothers fitter, arie the wyfe of Cleophas, and Marie
Magdalene.

26 Mahe Jelus therfore lawe his mother a. and the 11 5 5 standyng by, whom he he loued, he faith vnto his mother: wo- 3" man, beholde thy fonne.

27 Then sayde he to the disciple, beholde thy mother. And from that houre, the disciple toke her vnto his owne.

28 Alter thele thynges, Jesus knowyng ¢ that all thynges were nowe perfours med that the scripture might be fulkyl- ratisce led, he sapth, IJ thirste.

29 So there stadde a veslel by full ot bie neger: Therefore they fylled a sponge zr with vineger, and put it vpon Jlope, €

30 Allsoone as Jesus then reteauedolthe n vineger, he lalde, it is © firished: and 155

bowen his head, and gaue vp the ghost. a

bodpes chould not remarne vpö p trolle gane on the Sabboth dap (for that Sabboth ane

lohn.

by Saint
But when they tame to Jesus k sawe litence. He eame therefore, and toke the that he was dead alredye, they brake dpe ok Jesus. ot his legges. a 39 And there came alsd Picodemus ( whi-
34. Butt one ofthe souldpers with alpeare cheat the begynnpng came to Fetus by thruste hym into the syde, r foorthwith upght and brought of mirre and aloes tame there out blood and water. miyngled together, about an hundred
5 And ho that sawe it, bare retcorde, and pounde (wayght. ) n his retorde is true: € he knoweth that 40 Then toke they the body of Felus, ¢ he laith true, that ve might beleue calf.) wounde it in Uinnen clothes, With the
36, Forthele thpnges were done that the odours as the maner ok the Pewesis scripture choulde be kulkylled: Pe shall to burte. e Le 2— olxis nat breake a bone of hymmn. 441. And in the plate where he was cruti ? ti 37, And aͤgapne another scripture faith: tied there was a garden and in the gar-
They (hall oke on hym whom they den a newe lepulchze, wherein Was neeürsfed. Aer man pet layde. . urg 38, Akter this, Joleph of Aramathia, 42 There lapde they Jelus therfore, bepied (which Wasa disciple ol Jesus, but sea fretelp, for feare ofp Pewes) befought

cause of the preparyng lot the Sabboth]
‘ete re ofp Be of the Jewes: fo; the sepulchre was nine
Pilate that he myght take downe the 5 body of Jelus. And Plate gaue hym 2

e The. xx. Chapter.

eh xi.

1 Marie commeth to the sepulchre, and after, tolde the difciples that he was tagen
- a@way, 3 Peter and John runne to fee. 9 The apoftles were ignoraunt of the refure . rection, 12 Marie weepeth at the lepulchre, and fawe a bifton of Angels. 14 Jesus
{paketo Maric, is the heweth the ditciples, 19 Jelus appeared to the Apottles, 23 he gaue them the holy qhoft, and fent them to preache. Thomas beleued not that
Chritte was rylsen. 25 Christe appeared agayne, 28 Chomas who conkelled Christe

en dap or, San.
„pothes, came Marie
„Magdalenecarlp, WHE

8 Then went in also that other disciple, whiche tame first to the sepulchre, and

to be God. 31 Cheleviptures witten, are tufficient to laluatton.

he sawe, and beleued. RG Oe ac.
9 For as pet they knew not p “fevipenre, n that he should rife agayne krom death. ö

Jo: Then the disciples wẽt away agayne

vnto their owne houle. *

u k Marie stoode without at the lepul- 2+ che Weepyng: So, as fhe wepte, the bo bed her selfe into the sepulchre,

12 And secth two angels tlothed in white, C sittyng, the one at the head, e the other

dt the keete, where the body of Jelus

was lapde. 1
Iz They faye bnto her: Woman, why weepest thou: She laith vnto the: Foz

they haue taken albay my Lorde, r

Wote not where they haut layde him.

14. Mhen she had thus sayde, she turned

her lelfe backe, and sawe Fetus standpug, and knewe not that it was Jesus.

15 Jelus faith vnto her: Woman, why weepest thou: Whom sekest thors She D

siupposing that he had ben the gardener,

faith vnto him: Sir, ik thou haue borne
5 Dee ee me where Hou hast layde hym, and J wyll fet hyin.

16 Jesus fayth vnto her, Marie. She turned her selfe, and layde vnto hym:
Rabdonit, which is to fay, Maister.

H titj Jesus

AIG

we aich bnto her: Touche me them when Pelus tame. a de 7 net lun Kam notyeraltended to W 25, Tht other diltiples therfoze sapde vndee ther: Wut go to np bzethzen ANDLAPE to hym, we haue seene the Lowe. Wut dune ne. bnto thein, J altende buto mp father he laͤyde vnto them: Except J ec in his bade and your father, and to my God yout, handes the print of the naptes, and put ie , i um fpuger into the papnt of the naples

perfromout= God. u To | of ti 18 ramones 18 * Harie Magdalene came and tolde and thruste my hande into his spde. ai. tr e 18 che dilaples that the ad seene p Lorde, Wypllnotbelenc, - - — 4 7 fase and that he Had spoken fuche thynges. 26 Audaltereyght dapes, aganne his dil. G bc. Pnto Her. : 17 „ ie ciples mere within, and Thomas with
Iusad o . The lame dap at nygbt, whiche them: Then came Jesus, when the was the fir day of the Sabbothes, doozes were chutte- and stoode in the
When the doozes wert Hut; where the inpddes and faybe, peace be vnto you,
E Diltiples were affembicd together for 27 After that said he to Thomas: Wing feare of the 1 „tame Fes and thy kynger hyther, and fee ny handes ¢ o ve ane stoode in Vt he myddes, and lapth vnto reache hyther thy hande, and thrustit innen then, peace be vnto pou. into my syde, and be not fapthlelle, but

OO, weckt

lp. to geut the

Feen 20 And When he had fofayde, he shewed beleuyng. I | abend, vnto them his handes t his syde. Then 28 Thomas aunswered, and sayde vnto aten hee Were the diltiples glad, When they lawe hym: y Lorde, and my God. swe the Lorde. 29 Jelus sayth vnto hym: Thomas, bemige 21 Then sayde Jesus to them agapne, caule thou halt seene me, thou halt bethe Spotless peace be vnto pon: As e sent leued: Wlessed are they that haue not

beenden. ne, euen so lende J yous ‘ seene, and pet haue beleued.
F 22 And when he had aide thole wordes, so And many other fignes truely dyd barg

Nerenepech bal ahon.e Wach are unt wems bout.

ece — — re! 5 e.

23 Wholocuers sinnes pe remit, they are zi Thele are written, that ve mpaht“ Cons remitted vnto them: And wholdeuers beleue that Jelus is Christe the forme stu sinnes ve retayne, they are retayned. e ok God, and that in beleupng, pe myght se

ichn sdb 24 Wut Thonias, one of the telue. haue lpfe through his name. e luhich is called Didpmus, was notwuh 8 *

The Kxj Chapter. N
1 Christe appeared to his difciples when they were kilchyng. « they take a great mul titude of kilhes, 7 Peter leapeth into the water. 15 Christe restoreth peter to his of:
_ fice, and commaunded hym to feede his cheepe. 19 Christe forewarnsth Peter of his death apd perfecution, 20 Peter staped lokpng at John. 25 DF Christes manpfolbe | miracles. S .

eo % Fterward dpd Fe 4 Wut when the mornyng was nolbe
77 sus shew him selfe come, Jelus stoode on the More: Me
60 N againe to his disti- uerthelelle, the dilciples knewe not that pyltes at the fea of it was Fetus, —
ANZ \Liberias. Andon 5 Fels sapth vnto them: Children, oo
PON Sithiswyte chewed haue pe any meate: They aunswered he hym selfe. hym, no. — 2

There were to- 6 And he saith vnto them: Cast out the tu

gether Simon e net on the ryght lyde of the fhippe, and

tw

ter and Thomas (whichis) called Didy- pe fhallfpnde. They cast out therefore lohnt. INNS, and Mathanael, of Cana in Ga- and anone they were not able to dralwe
. lilet, and the sonnes of Zebedee, eto tit for the multitude of filles. C. other of his distiples. „Then lapde the dilciple, whom Jesus iche

a3 Sunon peter faith vnto them, Ji wyl) lourd, vnto Peter: It is the Lord. 1 C
8 go afissyyng. They lay vnto hym̃: ve Simon Peter hearde that it was a aifo wyll go with thee. They wet their Lorde, he gyrde his coate vnto bint *
Way, and entred into a shippe inunedi- he was naked) and sprang into the le * atly, Ethatupghtcaughtthepnothyng. 3 The other dilciples came by p

(for they were not farre from lande, but asit were two hundred cubites) And they drewe the net with filshes.

9 Alffoone then as they Were tome to

lande, they sawe whot coales, and filshe

esus faith vnto them: Bryng of the

(he which pe haue nowe caught.

11 Simon Peter went vp, and drewe the net to the landet, full of great filshes, an hundred and fiftie and three: And fo? all there were fo manp, pet was not the net broken.

np Jesus sapth vnto them, tome and

xi. f Io

ee and bread.
D

ene And none of the dilciples durst

e hym, Who art thous For they knewe that it was the Lorde.

z Jelus then tame, and toke bread, and gaue them, and lisshe lpkewyse.
14. This is nowe the thirde tyme that

esus appeared to his disciples, after at he was rilen agayne from death.
Ely So when they had dyned, Jelus faith a to Simon Peter: Simon Joanna, louest thou me moze then thetez He sayd vnto hym: Bea Lorde, thou knowest that J loue thee. be fapth vnto hym: feede my lambes.

16 he sayth to hym agapne the setonde

2 te

to hyn: feede my sheepe.

lang.

| Ixix.

all thynges, thou knowest that J tone sl en ane lapth vnto hym: Kent my eepe.

18 Cierply veryly J lay vnto thee, when F

thou walt young, thon gyrdedst thy selfe, and walkedst whither thou woul: dest: but when thou shalt be olde, thou Loba. .

chalt stretch foorth thy handes, and another Mall gyrde thee, and leade chee
Wh ware eee a

19 hat lpake he, lignifipng by what death he Mould glozifte God. And whe he had spoken this, hefapth vnto hym, folowe nie. 1

20 Peter turned about, and sawe the dil ciple, whom Jelus loued, fololbyng, bn re which also leanẽd on his brest at supper, g and sapde, Lorde which is he that betrapeth theez

21. When Peter therfore sawe hym, he sayth to Jesus:Lorde, what shal he doz

22 Jelus {apt vnto hym : If J wyll haue hym to tary tyll Y come, What is that to thee; folowe thou me.

23 Then went this faying abrode among the brethren, that that dilciple shoulde not dye: Het Jelus sapde not to hyn, he shall not dye: but, pf J wpll that he

tary tyll J come, what is that to thee:

24. The fame disciple is he, which tet: fieth of these thynges, and wrote these thynges: And we knowe that his testi-

mom ts true. 1
25 There are also many other thynges, lohn. xx.z.

whiche Jesus dyd, the which, yf they choulde be written euery one, J suppole the World could not conteine the bookes that choulde be written, ;

. 4 Here endeth the Gofpell by Saine lohn.

<a °
* ‘Lhe actes

F. J ORS
. n AS ee
5 a, : . 4a

The Actes of the Apostles.

„ owe *
* ‘

c

e

on a

ae mst

ea
* i iil N 3
. 7 it é 5 8 rd ad
7 * 1 Oe A N 388112
3 1 N ons neil a — 05 *
Sat aera) SSSR NO * : at, Fag : + wc e ee St The first Chapters:
2 nt tet * a Tees n. NN
7 iN arts 2 277 hor eae yy t,.
[ che wopdes oF Cheitte and his Angels, to the Tpollles. 9 His alsention. ii Pherin the Apockles are occupyed, ty the holy ghost be tent. 26 and blu the election ok Matthias. e r.: „ ath eee eee enn“

Nyß fornier treatie O Theophi-
% lus, we haue (poke

of all that Jesus

Iohnom a. 3 To whom also he* shewed hym selle and xxic. Alyut after his passion, and that by ma-

tie dayes, and [peaking of the kingdome

of God,
Lu xi. g 4 And gatheryng them together, com-
8 mamded them that they Choulde uot depart from Hierulalem, but wapte foz dan, the promile of the father,” wherokllaith

y ye haue hearde ok me. —
5 Foz John truely baptised with w

ter, but pe shalbe baptised with the holy ghost, after these fewe dapes. s When they therfore were come toge-

ther, they alked of hym, saying: Lorde,

Wyle thou at this tyme restore agapne

the kyngdome to Hiracl:
7 And he sayde dito them:

for pou to knowe the tynies, 02 the fer fons, which the father hath put in his

owne power.

8 wWut* pe shall reteaue power, alter that the holy ghost is come vpon pol:

And pe chalbe witnesles vnto ne, in Hierusalent, and in al Furie, EM

marie, and euen vnto the worldes ende,

9 And when he had spoken thele the 72

ges whyle they behelde, he was taket

vp an hye, and a cloud vp out ot their syght.

e reteaued heim
And

Luxx

Acces. ir .

both Ages ü a Iohn. xv.

L

A Lchais

* Bt is not 1

‘
N

of the apol

jo And while they loked stedkastly vp towarde heauẽ, as he went, beholde, two men stoode by them in whyte apparell,

Which allo sayde: He nien of Galilee, why stande ye gasyng vp into heauen-
This fame Jesus, Which is taken vp

wid from pou into heauen, shall fo come,

nee one as pe haue seene hym go into

xi c heauen. S N .

wie. j Then returned they vnto Hierusalem,

. from the mount that is talled Oliuete,

which is from Hierusalem a Sabboth

daes ionrney. *

z And when they were come in, they went vp into a parlour, where above both“ Peter, and James, and John,

e and Andrewe, Philip and Lhomas,

Barthelmewe and Matthewe, Janes

the sonne of Alpheus, x Simõ Selotes, and Judas the brother of James.

14. Thele all continued with one accorde in paper and supplication with the womien, AND Marie the mother of Jesus, and with his brethren.

Cis And in tholt dayes, Peter stoode
| vp in the middes of the dilciples, and sald The number of names together, a Were about an hundred and twentie) am 16 Ne men and brethren, this scripture must needes haue ben fulkplled, which a the holy ghost by the mouth of Daud me Dake before of Judas, which was ae. Quide to them that toke Jesus:

C17 Forhe was miibred with vs, had

ic bbtepned felowlhip in this nünisterie.

8 And the lame hath nowe purchaled a

ch xa. kur e.

6 goons. 0
¢ The. ij. Chapter. 1 7 905
Che holy ghoskcame spon the Apostles in vilible signeg. cache hearers were alkonped. rer Co
14 Peter preacheth. a stoppeth thew mouthes. 41 He bapttzeth a great number. 4 The Holen

godlie exercile of the fapthkull.

ND When the
Ye dap ok Pentecost
SUN All Was, they were
Sal with one ace code in one place:
And sodenlythere tame a sounde frõ
A heauen, as it had ben the tommyng of a mightie wynde, and it kylled all the house Where they late.
3 Andthere appeared vnto then clouen tongues, ipkeas they had ben of fyre,

e . and it late vpon eche one of them.

And they were all fylled with the 8 And

cS. - lx,

flelde, with the rewarde of © miquitic : Fe 2
Aind when hewas” hanged, Yedustta 9
Cin the nuddes, x all his bowels cken Ke aulched out. * 1 kee end
9 Andit is knowen vnto all the dwel- es ra lers at ierulalem, info much that thew made he pal 2 ke 115 in their mother anner ngue, Aceldema, that is to faye, the

blood flelde. *

20 For it is written in ß booke of planes:

Let his habitation be defert, and no Pl. hf.

man be dwellyng therein: And his bal. bishopricke let another take. D

21 Wherfore, of these men which haue companped with bs, all the tyme that the Lorde Fetus went in and out a- cre 9 mong vs, the language

22 Wegpnnyng from the baptifine of vor.
John, vnto that fame day that he was dean am take vp from vs, must one be ordeyned . f bea witnesse with vs of his resurrec-

on.

23 And they appoynted two, Joseph which is called Warsabas, Whole fir name was Instus, and Matthias.

24 And they prayed, saying: Thou Lord which kuowest the heartes of all men, Pur b. chewe whether of these two thon haste Pe thosen,

25 That he may take the rowme ok this ministerie and Apostleship, from which
Judas by transgression fell, that he myght go to his owne plate.

26 And they gaue foorth their ™ lottes, & Res, the lot fell vpon Matthias, and he was ang or d counted With the eleuen Apostles. >

heritaunce,

otteg of Diuts

natiõ to know

supersticiousl

holy ghost, and began to speale with an

other tongues, as the spirite gaue them = of soo, vtterannte. bezbibden.

5 There were dwellyng at Hierulalem,
Jewes, deuout men, out of every nation lot them) that are vnder heauen.

6 When this was nopfed about, the multitude came together and were astonnyed, becanfe that euery man hearde thein speake with his owne language.

They wondzed all, and maruepled, saying among themlelnes: e holde, are not all eff Which speake, of Galilee-

howe heare we euery man pis! owne

he actes

br mecbtongue, wherin we were bowe- linered by the determinate ¢ de ous 9 arta and Pedes, & Elamites, korcknowledge of God, and haue Ae dee ads and the Dwellers in Mesopotaàmia, and cified and flayne bym, Us
Barer: in Jurie, aud in Capadocia, in Pontus 24 Whom God hath railed vp, and loosed
Fenians and Alia, the sorowes of death, becaute it was vnme BME 10 Ohepgid, € Pamphplia, in Egypt, and possible, that he shoulde be holdenofit e ii the parties of Lybia, which is belpde 25 Jo Dau speaketh of hym, J faye bau coun Cyrene, ltraungers ok Rome, Hewes the Loede alwapes let fobrth before my

tions and ian= 5
Sudeten aid ( Prolelytes. face: for he is on my ryght han

cet l Cretes and Arabians:we haue hearde J shoulde not be moued. bande, that becher, them speane in our tongues, the won- 26 Therforc dyd my heart reiopte, and ene et my tongue was glad. Doreoner allo cmon 12 They were all amaled, and wondred. nw fleshe chall reste in hope,

outa He laping oue to another: What meaneth 27 Because thou wylt not ieane my soule

kyng in there : >

merle gr. this im hell, neither wyit thou suffer tl ent B other mocked, laying: Lhete men bholp one to fee corruption, 1 comics ade full oknewe Wpue. 28 Thou Hatt shewed me the wapes of

eta . Wut Peter standyng foostl) with the i pke, thou Malt make me fuil ok ioy with bo Kn lence pft vp his bopte and sayde vnto thy coimtenaunte. ox them: Be men of Jurie, and all pe that 29 de men and brethren, let me freely dwell at Hierusaleim, be this knowen speake vnto you of the patriarke Daz vnto po, and with pour cares heare nid: For heis both Dead and burped, E my wordes. i and his sepulchre remapneth with vs ire.
15 Por these are not damien, as pe lup- vnto this day. a

cree 3” wate, secyng it is but the“ thirde houre 30 Therkore, seeyng he was aprophete, bas bende bl the day. and kuewe that God had lworne with feces But this is that which was {poken an oth to hym, that Chulte, as tonter-
Sendereihe by the prophete Joel: nyng the fleche, shduld come of the kruite

eyroe youre, 7 And it chalbe in the last dayes (sapth ok his loynes, € should syt on his seate: mcm e God) of mp spirite J wypll pore out zi Heknoweng this bekore, spake of the
Ju vpon all fiethe :* And pour sonnes and resurrection of Chaite , that his foule lus pour daughters Chall prophefic, and choulde not be left in hell, neither his pour poung men chall {ee vilions, and fleshe shoulde fee corruption. pour olde men Chall dreame drrames. 32 This Jesus hath God raysed vp,
18 And on my feruauntes, and on my wherok we all are witnesses. oe
Handemaydens, J wyll powze out of 33 Then lence that he by the rpaht inp spirite in thole dayes, and they Hall hande ok God Was exalted, and hath piophelie. reteaued of the father. the pomile of
Muha. 19 And Awynshewe wonders nhea- the holy ghotk, he hath thed foorth this, kurs uen abone, and tokens in the earth be- Which ve nowe see, and heare. . neath, blood, andfpze, and the vapour 34. Fo2Danidisnot alcended into heaue ,, of finioke, ; but he fapeth:* The Lone layde to mx v
20 The Sunne chalbe turned into dark- Lorde, syt thou on ny ryght, nesse, and the Doone into blood, before 35 Until J make thy foes thy footftoale. that great and notable day of the Lord 36 Therkore, let al the houle of Israel come. Know for a suretie, that God hath made
Romxc. 21 And it shall tome to passe, that who- thatfame Jesus, whom ye haue trutisocuer chall call on the name of the tied, Lorde and Chnste. N
Lorde, shalbe saued. 8 37 Powe when they hearde this, they
D22 She men of Ifrael, heare thesfe were pncked in their heartes a savdt
Wordes : Jesus of Nazareth, a man ap- vnto Peter, & vnto the other Apostles + oki proued of God among vou, with nura- we mene brethren, what shall we ‘ah cles, Wonders, and signes, which God 33 Then Peter {ayde duto themence dyd by hym inthe middes ok pou, as pe and be baptised euerp one of vou 10 90 pour selues also knowe. name of Jesus Chu e for the renn cok
23 Hyit haue ye taken, by the handes or oksumes, and ye hall receaue the vnryghteons perlons, alter he was de- the holy gholt. 02

O

Frhe apo t

39 Pos the pronuse was made vnto vou, atid to pour chyldren, and to all that are a farre of, euen as niany as the Love our God shall call.
40 And with many other wordes bare he witnelle, and erhorted then, saying:

Saue pour selues from this vntowarde

generation.

41 Then they that gladly rectaued his
Warde, were baptised : And the lame day there were added (onto them about three thoulande soules.

642 And they continued fedfatty in the
Sa Apostles doctrine and © felowship, and ion: in breakyng of bread, and in prapers. ur 43 And kraͤre cauie vpon euery fouie. And

mg y wore of chart.

boure of pzaver.
And a certayne man,

— his mothers Wombe,

at the gate of the temple Which is called beawteifuil, to afte almes of thein that n entred into the teile. a

AZ Whei he lawe Peter and John that

they woulde go into the temple, he de-

lived to reteaue an alnies.

4, And peter fastenyng his eyes bpon

hynt with John, sayde: Loke on vs.
5 And he gane heede vnto thé, trustyng to receaue somethyng of them.

56 Then layde Peter: Syluer and golde haue I none, bnt such as J haue, geue
Ithet: In the name of Jelus Chrtte of Nazareth, ryle vp, and walke.

7 And he toke hym by the ryght hande, and lyft hynt vp. And immediatly his fecteand ancle bones receaued streugth.

And he sprang, stoode, and walked, and entred with them into the tempic,
Walkyng, and leaping, ¢ praysyng God.

And all the people sawe hym Walke, and prayse God.

fo Ad they knewe hym, that it was he, which late and begged at the bearbtifuil galt of the temple, And they wondred, and were fore astonyed at that which

ad happened vnto hym.

ca.

i y that was lame from was bought; whom they layde dayly

Cs. xx).

Many Wonders and fignes were done by the Apostles.

44 And all that belened, kept them selues together, and had all thynges common, 7

45 And solde their pollessions ¢ goodes, and parted them to all men, as euery man had neede.

46 And they continued dayly with one

attorde in the tenipie, and brake bread

from house to house, and dyd eate their meate together, with gladnelle and singlenesse of heart,

47 Piaysyng God, x had fauour with all the people. And the Lorde added to the
Churche daylp, such as should be laued.

q The lj. Chapter.

I 7 The halt is restored to his fete, 12 Peter preacheth Christe Onto the people.

II And as the lame which was healed, helde Peter and John, all the peopic ran amaled dnto chem, in the porciye fies r that is called Solomons. Ae
12 And when Peter farbe chat, he aun-C swered vnto the people: ehe inen or
Ilrael, 110 maruaple pe at this, or why loke ye so on vs, as thongh by our a olbne porber 02 godlpnelle, we had © Ye made this man to go: due mam

! Ohich attti-
3 The God of Abraham, and of Isaac, bu te

and of Jacob, the God of our fathers mich only hath glozified his sonne Fetus, whom veer
Pe betrayed and demped in the prefence ze.
5 Vee when he had iudged hym to tucson, e loosed.
14. But ye denyed the Holy and iust, aud 27" desired a murtherer to be geuen pou,
15 And kylled the Lorde of lpfe, whore
God Hath raysed from the dead: of the
Which we ave witnesses.

Toh. xviii.g.

16 And his name, throngh the fayth in

his name, hath made this man Wunde, whom ye see and knowe: And the tayth which is by hym, hath geuen to this man health, in the prelence of you ati,

17 And nove brethren, J wote that through ignoraunce ye dyd it, as dyd also pour rulers.

18. But those thynges which God before had Mherbed by the mouth of all his prophetes, that Christe shoulde suffer, he hath fo fulfylled.

He pent ye therfore and connert,that D vous sinnes may be done away, bic ae
F the

— EP LL ß ee
Ihe actes | —

N we the tyme of ( refeethyng Mall come, in

kalen: ve. the preleute ok the Tode. . ö

recast OF Ind he atl seude Hels Chrilt, which
Before was preached vnto von.

when f godtp whrch in ths

era (2 nohomthe heauen must reteaue vntul

and trouble,

oulde fynde rest aud quitt nessc.

the tynie that all thynges be relto ed,
Which God hath spoken by the mouth

began. 8
22 Moyles truely lapde vnto the fathers:
A prophete shall the Lorde pour God rayle vp vnto von, ok pour brethren lpke vnto me: hym shall ye Beare in all thynges, whatsoener he wall fay vnto pou. z; Forthe tyme Well come, that euery

Deu. xvili. c
Actes. vil. e.

he. iiij. Chapter.

The Apoltles are brought before the countell 18 bepug korbydden to preache, obey God rather lien man. 24 They pray for good luccesse. r The Churche increaseth in doctrine

and crercifes of ell godlynesse.
Nd as they spake vn-
N

top people, the priestes

the ruler of the tet

6 pie, and the faducees, came ppon them,

8 Takyng it greuonsly

people, and preached in Jclus the refurvection from the dead.

And they layde handes on then, and put them in halde, vntyll the next dap: foz it Was nove cuentyde. a

Howbeit, many of them which hearde the worde, beleued: and the number of the men was about kyue thoulande.

5 And it tame to passe on the morowe, that their rulers and elders, x lcribes,

6 And Aimas the chick priest, and Caia-

phas, aud John, and Alexander, and

as many as were or the kynrede of the

Hype priestes, were gathered together at

Hicrusalem. a
And when they had fet them before

them, theyalked: by what power, or in

3 What naunie haue ye done this:

28 Then Peter, full ot the holy ghost,

fapde bnto them: t rulers of the people, and elders of IYlraecl,

9 If we this dap be exanuned of the good deede Done to the sicke man, by
What meanes he is made Whole:

10 Be it knowen vnto pou all, and to all the people of Israel, that by the name of* Jelus Chuste of Nazareth, whom vt ccucified, whom God rapsed agapne from the dead: euen by Dyin doth this

man stande here before pou whole.

Exod. ii. c.
Nlat. xxi. c

Math. ice.
Philip ib,

- ofall his holy prophetes since the world

that they taught the

soult which wyll not heare that f — zophete, halbe destro e ebe . ved froni among
24 the prophetes allo fra " thentefoozth, as many as par haue Ipkeiwile tolde pou of these dapes
25 Ve arc the chyldzen dk the“ prophetes © a0 aud of the couenauut which God made duct ln puto out fathers, faying to Abraham: kreten
Eudcn in thy leede Chall all the kinredes wor h of the earth be blesled. ginn,
26 Uuto poufirst, God hath raysed vp 80 0

J i

f his fone Pelus, and hath sent! woech blesse yon, in turnyng tuery one af you Gena, from his iniquities. <a

u This is the stone which was cast aspde of pou buylders, which is the head of the © corner:

12 Meither is there © saluation in any o- ee ther. For among men under heauen, a there is geuen none other name, wherin os
We mut be saued. 20 | se

cher and brik
B Nowe when they fare the boldnesse za

ded

of Peter and John, and vnderstoode duc

that they werẽ vnlearned and lay men, Se

they maruepled, and they knewe then stom

that they had ben with Jesu: E

Aud beholdpng allo the man which C was healed, standyng with them, they toulde not fay agapntt it,

15 But comniaaundyng then to go alpoe dut of the counlel, and counseled among them selues,

16 Saying: What shall we do to Mele Toha.xtt men: Fo2 a manifett signe is done by then, and is openly knowen to all them that dwell in Hierulalein, and We can not denie it.

17 Burt that it be noysed no farther a mong the people, let bs threaten and charge them that they fpeatte hencefoozth to no nian in this name. Fs.

13 And they called then, *and CONV D 7 maunded them, that in no wyle ey e
9 speake, noz teache in the name of Jesu.

15 But Peter and John aunfivercd ane sapde önto them: nabether it be 1118 in the da 5 5 b f

ou more then to God, 1

10 O2 We tannot but speake that, which

we haue seene and hearde. $0

a So threatned they them, and let them

go, and founde nothyng how to punishe theut,becaule of the people: For all men prapsed God, becaule of that which was done.

22 FJor the man was about fourtie pere

glb

olde, on whom this miracle of healyng -

was shewed.

ER Then alloont as they were let go, they came to their felowes, and shewed all that the Dye priestes and elders had

sapde vnto them.

24 And when they hearde that, they lyft vp their vopces to God with one av torde, and sayde: Lorde, thou art God, which halt niade heauen and earth, the fea, and all that in them is,

25 Which by the mouth of thy seruaunt

in Dad, hast sayde: Why dyd the Heathen rage, e the people iniagine vapne thynges-;

26 The kynges of the earth stoode vp,

and the rulers came together, agaynst

the Lorde, and agaynst his Christe.

27 And of a trueth, agapnst thy holye tchylde Jelus, wh thou hat anoynted, both Herode and also Pontins Pilate with the Gentiles, and the people of JE rael, gathered hem selues together,

28 For to do whatsoeuer thy hande ethy tcounsel deternnned before to be done.

29 And nowe Torde, beholde their threatnynges, x graunt vnto thy seruauntes, that with all boldensse they may speake

of the apostles.

lex. thy worde.

30 So that thon stretch foorth thyne hande, that healyng, and signes, and
Wonders, be done by the name of thy holy chylde Jesus.

31 And assoone as they had prayed, the Avi place moued where they were allembled together, and they were all fplled aden with the holy ghost, and they spake the
Worde of God boldely.

32 And the multitude ok them thatbe-O leued, were of one heart, and of one oo * soule: either sayde any of them, that ought of p thynges which he poslessed,

Was his owne: but they had all thinges tonmion.

33 And with great power gaue the
Apostles witnesse of the resurrection of the Lorde Jesu: And great grace was with them all.

34 Reither was there any among them, that lacked: For as many as were possessers of landes, or houles, solde them, brought the price of the thynges that were solde, 5

35 And laped it downe at the Apostles feete: And distribution was made vnto

euerp man, accordyng as he had neede.

36 And Poles, which was allo called of Kd. the Apostles Warnabas (that is to say) the sonne of consolation, being a Leuite, and of the tountrey of Cypers,

37 When he had lande, solde it, and layde the money downe at the Apostles feete.

$m The v. Chapter.

6 12 Miracles are done by the Tpostles. Che Angell of God bryngeth them out of priton.
19 They are brought before the councell. 34 The sentence of Gamaliel. 40 The Apostles

are beaten. Thep reiopce in trouble.

Ut a tertayne man, named Ananias, with

Saphpra his wyke,

5 Way solde a possession,
2 |e And kept away part
Ne EZ); of the price, his wyle
—also beyng of countell,

And brought a certapne part, and layde it downe at the Apostles feete.

3 Wut Peter sapde: Ananias, howe is it, that Satan hath fylled thyne heart, that thou shouldest lye vnto the holy ghost, and kepe away part of the peice of the lande- b g

4 Whyles it remayned, was it not thyne owne: And after it was solde, Was it not in thyne owne powers Why haste

thou conteaued this thyng in thyne heart: Thou hast not lped vnto men, but vnto God.

5 When Ananas hearde hele hordes, he fell downe, and gaue vp the ghost.
And great feare came on all them that hearde thele thynges.

6 And tht young men role bp, and put hyma part, and carped hym out, and burped hym. N

And it came to pale, that ag it were +s about the spate of three houres after, his wyke came in, ignoraunt of that which was done.

8 And peter layde vnto her: Tell me,
Solde ye not the lande for so much! And she sayde: Pea, for fo much.

Then

— os iM

Te wCCes

Then Peter fayde vnto her: voby standyng withont

que ye agreed together, to teinpt the

ah stale Loder Bcholde, the feete

ofthe which haue buried thy hulbande,

are at the doore, and shall cary thee out.

jo Then fell (he Downe strapghtway at

his keete, and pelded vp the ghost. And

the poung men came in, and kounde her

dead, and caryed her out, and burycd

her by her hulbande. ö

u And great feare came vpon all the

Churcht, and vpon as many as hearde

these thynges.

Cn And by the handes of the Apostles,

Mabxvid were maͤnp signes ¢ wonders (Hered

among the people. (And they were all

together with one accozd in Solomons porche. g

3 And of other durst no man ioyne hym

selke to then, neuerthelesse, the people

tii Reg. vi. a.
Iohn. x. e.

Actes. ul. b.

fe) Cod at e first, pubnishyng ol

dane na. Were vexed with vncleane spirites: And theipke mat khey were healed euerpone. n Then che chiefe priest vole vp, and all

18 And layed handes on the Apostles, and put them in the common prilon.
Ates xa 19 But the Angel of the Lorde by nyght andxvif, opened the prilon doozes, and brought them foorth, and sayde:
20 Go, and stande ¢ speake in the tenple to the people, all the wordes of this lyfe.
21 And when they hearde that, they entred into the ten ple early inp mornyng,
AUD taught: But the chieke prest came, and they that were with hym, e called
à counsayle together, and all the elders of the thyldren of Jlrael, and sent to the prpson to fet them. ö
22 Wut When che officers came, x kounde them not in the prplon, thep returned, and tolde,
23 Saying: The prylon truely founde
We chut With all diligence, E the kepers

29 Then Peter and the other Apotties wh

» before the do
Wut when We had o an no H wih pened, We found
24 Then when the chiele pare ruler of the ten ple, and ehre 1 hearde ait thpuges, they doubtedok them, whervuto this woulde Stove
25 Then came one aud shewed them mee i 5 in the temple.: wee 0 ple, AND teache
26 Then went the ruler of the ¢ with the offiters, and Monght then without violence: (Foz they feared the people lett they should haue ben stoned)
27 And when they had brought them they fet them before the counkell. And the chiefe priest alked then,
28 Saping: dpd not we strayghtip com: Adel maunde pou, that pe shoulde not teache in this naine- And beholde, ye haue fy: led Hierulalem with pour doctrine, and N intende to bryng © *this mans blood 2 9 vpon vs. an

pth

ij

aunlwered, and sapde: We ought moze don to obey God then men. 1 da,

30 The God of our fathers raysed vp Jc- 2 4 sus, whom pe slewe , e haͤnged on tre.

31 Hym hath God lyft vp with his ryght hande, to be a printe and a sauiour, fo to geue repentaunte to Jsrael, and for geuenesle of sinnes.

22 And we are recordes of thele thynges which we fay,¢ fo is alfo the holy ghost, whoin God hath geuen to them that obey hym.

33 When they Hearde that, they claue a finder and fought meanes to flea the.

34 Then stoode there vp ont in the coun sell, a pharilce, nauied Gamaliel, a DOC Aw. tour of lawe, had in reputation amoung all the people, and conmnaunded the
Apostles to go asyde a litle (pace, ö

35 And lapde vnto them: emen of Pl rael, take heede to pour selues, what ve entende to do, as touchyng thele men. .

36 Foz before thele dayes rose vp on
Theudas, boastyng him selke, to whom resorted a munber of men, about a Buy hundred, which was slayne: aud ond all which beleued hym, were fratter abrode, and brought to naught. mie

37 After this man, arole vp one a mn of Galilee, in the dayes of pour in. drewe albay much people a an
He allo periched, and all, euen 45

as hearkened to hym, were scattered apode.
35 And nowe FH faye buto you, refrayne our selues fro these men, and let them alone: Foz yt this counsell or this worke be of inen, it wyll come to naught.
39 But and yfit be of God, ye can not deftroy it, left haply ye be founde to stryue agaynst God.
40 And to hym agreed the other: And

of the apostles.

bæxiij

when they had called the Apostles, they beat theu., and commaunded that they Adi. d. shoulde not (peake in the name of Jesu aud let them go. N
41 And they departed from the counsell, reiopeing that they were counted Wozthy to suffer rebuke for his nanie,
42 And dayly in the tenipte, and in euery house, they teassed not to teach € preach
Hels Christe.

Math. v. b.

4 The. vj. Chapter. t

D in thole daycs ,

Gare when the number of
NSS poiltiples grewe, there

I slavole agrudge amon

A(\ he Grekes agayutt p

ace Si Bebsues, betanse their

tS Wyo Wes were delpy-

(cd in the dayly nunisterie.

2 Theu the twelue called the multitude ofthe diletpics together, and layde: It is not good that we shoulde leaue the worde of God, and serue tables.

3 Wherkore brethren, loke ye out among

vou seuen men ol honest report, ⁊ full ot᷑

the holy ghost, and wysedome, to whõ we may conniit this buspnesse.

But we wpll geue our selues continu: ally to prayer, and to the ministerie of the worde. .

And the laying pleated the whole mut: titude. And they chose Steuen, a man full of layth, and of the holy ghost, and
Philip, and Prochozus, and Pitanor, c

aig, Tinion, and permenas, and Nirolas

a conuert of Antioche.

6 hele they set belore the apostles: and id Whe they had prayed, they layde their ab handes ou them.

7 And the worde of God entreased, e the

munber of p disciples multiplied in Hierulalem greatly, and a great companie

Wit.

Seuen deacons are ordeyned in the Churche. 1 Steuen is accuter.

of the priestes were obedient to p fayth.

8 And Steuen full of fayth € power, C uyd great Wonders x nuracles aniong the people.

Then there arole certaine of the {p= (a) Or Clnagogue which is called [tbe cynagogue] ng ok the Libertines, and Cprenians, and rag of Alexandeia, and of Cilicia, rok Alia, BIE
Difputyng with Steuen. ee

Jo And they coulde not resiste the wile- mae a and the spirite by the whiche he 290

pakc. adapcg are be

u Then they priullie prepared men, whi- en ™ che sayde, O we haue heard him speake Cu) Fot wle blasphenious wordes agayult Doyles, sows aie and agaynst God. rahen toy bp

12 Aud they moucd the people, and the are elders, and the stribes, and tame vppon aan hym, and caught him, and brought hint de late to the tounsell. 89

; And brought foorth false witnesses, debe which sapde: This man ceasleth not to D speake blasphemous wordes agaynste this holy place and the lawe.

14. For we hearde hym lay, that this Jesus ol Nazareth shal destroy this place,

e (hall chaunge the ordinaunces Which
Moyses gauc vs:

15 And all that sate in the tounsell, loking stedfastly ou him, saw his face as it had ben tive face ofan angell.

¢ The.viy. Chapter.
2 Steuen maketh aunl were to his acculation, si rebukech the harde neched

Jeweg, 5s and is stoned to death.

Hen said p chiefe priest:
Are these thynges fo z
And he laid: He men,
Abrethzen, and fathers,
1 hearken. The 00 10 e lozic appeared vn

ae dur father Abraham, when he was in Mesopotamta, before he dwelt in Charran,

3 And layde vnto him: Get thee out of Gn thy countrep, x fro thy kinrede, x come into the lande which J shall Mew thee,

4 Then came he out ol the lande of the
Chaldeans, and dwelt in Charran: and fronithence, Whe his father was dead, he brought hym into this lande wherin ve nowe dwell.

Bs And

rere

And he gaue hym none inheritaunee mit, 19 not the breadth ofa foote : and promife that he woulde geue it to hym

Gene. xi. b.

to pofteffe, and to his srede after hom,

cu as vet he had no thylde.

ae 1 75 spake on this wyse, that

his seede shoulde soiourne in a straunge

lande, and that they shoulde kepe it in bondage, and *entreate them euyl foure
> uss — Hundzcth) © pere.

keel het oy An the nation to whom they shalbe

roe ee in bondage, wyll J iudge, sayde God:

autre: Ad after that, Wall they conte foorth, k

bathe ee lerut int in this plate.

oe 8 Aim he gaue hym the coucnaunt of

weber (irtuniciston: And he begate Jlaac, and

geen ben cirtunmcilcd hymthe cyght day, and J-

more — faae begate! Jatob, and Jacob (begate]

the twelue paͤtriarkes.
And the patriarkes moued with enmie, solde Joleph into Egypt: and God was with hym,

10 And deliuered hym ont of all his ad-

uerlities, and gaue hym fauour ck wiledome in the spght ok Pharao kyng of
Egypt: and he made hym gouernour duer Egypt, e ouer all his houtholde.

11 Burt there tame a Dearth ouer all the land of Egypt and Chanaan: and great affliction, that our fathers founde no sustenaunce.

12 Wut when Jatob hearde that there

ae connie in Egypt, he {ent our fathers

vit.
And at the setond time, Joleph was knowen of his brethren, and Jolephes

Rinrede was made knowen onto Pha-

Gene. xv. e.

Exod. xii. f.

Ge. xxxvufꝰ
Sapi. x. c.

Gen. xi. c.

Gen. xl. g.

Gene. xlv. a. 3

rao.

14. Then sent Joseph, and cauled his father to be bought, and all his kynne, threce score and fykteene soules.

Genexlvia lS And Jatob descended into Egypt,
Genxlix.d And *dyed, both he and our fathers,
16 And were tarped ouer into Sichem,

and layde in the sepulchre, that Abrahã bac, bought formency ofthe lounes of Epearethoner= mio, the fonne of Sichem.

Gen. xx. d en 7 Wut when the tyme of the peomple
1 drewe nye, whiche God had fivone to
Faotteae Abzahaim, 'the people grewe aud mule un, ns tiplied in Egypt: 5 abe bannels Tyll another king arole, which knew eiche not of Joseph.

Ci The samt dealt subtilly with our kine rede, and eupll intreated our fathers, € made them cate out their poung chyl-

dren, that they shoulde not remapne a

Ates

lpue.

20 The same tyme was a . 1 0 bund Gene den fal rico vp in 1S father f 5 klebt. xe

21. Aud wheuhe was cast out, Pha daughter toke hym v nen es et Pope n . Ewozilhed hen

22 And Moyles was learned! . ner of wiledome of the eapptians, 1 was mypghtie in deedes and in wordes

And when he Was Full fourtic pere olde, it cane into his heart to vilite his brethren the chyldren of Israel.

24 And when he lawe one of them luer
Wwrong, he defended hym, and auenged his quarrell that had the harme done to hym, and smote the Egyptian.

25 For he lupposed his brethzen woulde haue vnderstande, howe that God by his hande fhoulde delpuer them: But they vnderstoode not.

26 And the next day he shewed hym selle » vnto them as they stroue, and woulde haue let them at one agayne, laping:
Sirs, ve are beethzen why do pe wong one to another:

27 But he that did his neighbour wong, thrust hyni awape, saping: Who made Geox thee a ruler and a iudge ouer vs- i

28 Wylt thou kyll me, as thou did dest the aac ii
Egyptian vesterdap-

29 Then fledde Moyles at that laying, Exodice and Was a straunger in the lande of
Madian, where he begate two sonnes. . 4

30 And whe fourtic peres were expired, thert appeared to © hym inthe wylder- 0%" nesse of mount Sina, an Angel of the
Horde in a flambe of fire in abulche.

31 When Boyles fare it, he wondeedat p sight: And as he drue neare to behold, the voyte of the Lord came vnto hyim.

32 *Jamthe Godofthy fathers, p God A of Abraham and the God of Plaac and da

p God ol Jacob. Then Moyles tren dun

bled, e dur st not beholde. ae,

33 Then sapde the Lorde to hym: “pul of thy thoes from thy fecte, kor the place

where thot Handett, is holy grour ;

34 Jhaue seene, J haue seene thea 4 td of my people Which is in Egypt 1
J haue hearde their gronpng and a come dolwne to deliuer thein Aud e tomie, € J wyll lende thee inte en be €

5 This Moples, whom they fo2 ag Exot faying, who made thee a pee x fudge? the lame dyd God lende, rler

— a

U— Go tiie t oe yar ruler aud a deliuerer by the handeg ok 46 *nobicl founde fauour before God, and

the angell, whiche appeared to hym in the busshe.

36 He brought then out, shewyng wonders and signes in wulle € in the read fea, Ei the wyldernesle fourtic peres.

37 This is that Moyses which laide vnto the chyldren of Israel: A prophete chall the Lorde pour God raise vp vnto pou ok pour brethren, lyke vnto me, hin hall pe heare.

axx. 38 This is he'that was in the Churche

uu in 5 Wyldernesse with the angel, which

spaͤke to hy in the mount Sinai, and
With our fathers: This man receaued the worde of lyfe to geue vnto vs.
39 To whon our fathers woulde not o-
" bey but thrust it from them, and in their hearts turned backe againe into Egypt, wpa. 40 Saping onto Aaron, Make vs gods

140“ go bekore vs. For as for this Moyles

that brought vs out of the lande of Epont, Wwe wote not what is become of hym.

41 And they made a Calle in thole dayes, and offred sacrifice vnto the idoll, and reioyted ouer the workes of their owne

U. x vil. c ges il d.

ie. i av.
Ne Po offered to me slapne © beaftes, and

pe

Mt olferpne ab-

mile, €

me 44 Our fathers had ö tabernacle of Wit

Ran, wi th

t serulce

a popnted, speakyng vnto Mopses, that

Ny. d lass vin.

la =
— feffion of the gentiles, hd God draue

| zur kathers bnto the dayes ol Dad.

oe — — —————————— . 8

of the apoltles.

IXXIII J

woulde fapne haue founde atabernacie for the God of Jacob.

47 But Solomon buylt hom an hene. Res via.

43 Pobbebeit, he that is hyest of al, dwel- AS f. leth not in tẽples made With © handes, ay bare is as sayth the prophete: cote 5

49 “Deane is mp seate, and carth is my Foe nel footstoole. What house wyll pe buplde ws deer fo2 mie, faith the Hoga Or which is the he place of my rest- temple 2c

50 Hath not my hande made all hele mere noe thynges- Aug memes

51 Be styknecked and of vntircumciled enhance

cartes and cares, ve haue alwayes re- Phe em fifted the holy gholt: as pour fathers ener dyd, so do pe. * Deut. ix. d.

52 Which ok the prophetes haue not your fathers persecuted: And they haue G llapne them which shewed bekore of the commyng of that iuste, of whom ye are nowe the betrayers and murtherers:

53 Whiche also haue receaned the lawe, by 'the dispolition of angels, and haue tohavis. not kept it. Abtes xv. b.

54 When they hearde thele thynges, their heartes claue à sunder, and they gnasshed on hym with their teeth.

55 Wut he being full of the holy ghost, loked vp stedfastly into heauen, and sawe the glory of God, and Jesus standyng on the ryght hande ol God,

56 And fayde : Beholde, J lee the heauens open, t che fonne of man standyng on the ryght bande of God.

57 Thenthey gaue a shoute with a londe vopte, and stopped their eaves, and ran P. lin. vpon hym all at once,

58 Amd cast hym out of the citie, and sto- Nes * ned hun. And p witnesles layde downe their clothes at a young mans feete,

Whole name was Saul.

59 And they stoned Steuen, callyng on,

1 faying: Lorde Pel reteauc my Pg z. irite. 8

60 em he kneeled downe, © and crped 6) Hera: with a loude voyce: Lorde lap not this camera: tas finne to their charge. And when he had ze genes thus (poten, he fell a sleepe. g

great intauitie feqniecd a gre

¶ The ater @ a moze keruent praper: secondip he declareth bis myghtie charitie, praying lo carneltlp fer his ene: uucg.

BY

DD Saul contented vn-

1 SN betet 5. 0 to his death. And at that

1 i “4 70
200 UNG time there was a great per
[on Ye, (ecutionagaint p Churche which wasat Hierufalem, and they were all! scattered abrode thorowout the re gions of Jurie, and Saͤ-

Rlath. x. c.

Ades, xi. g. maria, except the apostles.

2 And deuout men were carefull together touchyng Steuen, and made great lamentation ouer hym.

Adcixan 3 As for Saul, he made hauocke of he ore Churche, and entred into euery houle,¢
Ala. I. C.

drewe out both inen and women, and put them into prylon.

4 Therfore, they that were feattered abrode, went euery where preachyng the
Worde of God. *

5 Then cane Philip into the titie of
Samaria, t preached Christe vnto the,

6 Andthe people gauc heede vnto thole

thynges whiche Philip spake with one

accorde, Hearpng and seing the nnracles which he dyd. *
Mathxvid 7 Foz bncleane spirites, crying with

loude voyce, came out ot manye that were poslessed with them. And many taken with paulsies, x niany that haulted, werc healed.

8 And there was great ioy in that citie.

9 Wut there was a certayne man called
Simon, which beforetyme in the lame
Citic bled witchcrakt, and bewitched the people of Samaria, saying that he was a man that coulde do great thynges:

Jo Whoni they regarded from the least to the greatest, laying: This man is the great power of God.

1 And hymthey sette much by, betaule

that of long tym he had bewitched thé

With sorseries.

CE But assoonc as they gaue credence to

Phllips preachyng of the kyngdome ok
God, and of the name of Jesus Chpitte; they were baptised, both men € womeẽ.

3 Then Simon him elfe beleued alld:
And whe hewas baptized, he continued
With Philip, ¢ wonded, beholding the miracles æ signes which were shewed.

14 hen the apostles whiche Were at
Hierulalem, hearde fay that Samaria hadde receaued the worde ol God, they
{ent vnto them Peter and John.

‘The actes

(The. viij. Chapter.
Saule persecuteth the Clxiskiang. 4 Che J postles are Ccattercd abrode.
; Pulli mme into Sanden Simon Magus is baptised, and he dillembleth. s Philip baptizeth the Eunuch.

bee payed forthẽ that they in 4 the holy ghost. htreteaue
16 (For as pet he was come downe on none of hon but they Were bapttzed h (© a; ompinthe name of Cheilt Jelu. ) en
17 Then layde they their handes on the Deu and they receaued the holp ghost. „ ban
18 And when Simonsawe, that thorow uu e laying on of the apoltles händes, photy gholt was geuen, he offced thé money
19 Saying : Geue me allo this power that on Whomsdeuer F put the hands he map reteaue the holy gholt. : ne
20 But Peter fayde onto him: Thy mo- Be ney perithe with thee, betaule thou halt Kue

r

ewely f.
Ost tc and y

of bitterneffe, & wraͤpped in © miquitie, ame

24 The aunswered Simon ¢ faid : Pray KV ve to the TLord for me, that none okthele ae thinges which ve haue spokẽ fail on me. a

25 And ne had testified and aug preached the worde of the Lorde, retur- men 8 ned tolbarde Hierufatem, and preached cs the Golpellin many townes of the Sa- an matitancs, pn

26 & Aud the Angell of the Lorde fake un. vnto Philip, faying : Arpse, and go towarde the South, vnto the waye that ¢ goeth downe from Hierulalem vnto
Gara, which is desert.

27 And he arose, went on:and behold a man of Ethiopia, an Eunuch, x of great auctoritie with Candace, Queene of the
Ethiopiãs, c had the rule of all her trea sure, cane to Hierusalẽ for to Worship.

28 And as he returned home agapne, lit tyng in his charet, he read Elaias the prophete. .

29 Thenthe spirite said vnto Philip: Go neare, ⁊ ioyne thy selfe to ponder her

30 And Philip ranthither to him, heard hym reãde the prophete Elaias, c det vnderstandest thou what thou readest-

15 except I had nne dee

a aguyde : And he desired Phil that he

woulde come vp, and {it with hym.
$32 The tenour of the stripture Which he

read, was this: He was ledde as a sheepe to the laughter, € lyke a lambe dumbe before his (hearer, so opened he not his niouth.

In his hunulttie, his iudgement is eralted: Wut who (hall declare his geneee Foz his lyfe is taken from the earth.

34. And the Eunuche annlwered Philtp, and sayde: J pay thee ol whom speaketh the prophete this-Okhym selle, or of some other man
35 Then Philip opened his mouth, and began at the same scripture, and preached vnto hym Jelus.

6 8b.

The conuer és

Athyng out threatnings
67 5 PVand slanghter agapynst the dilciples ofb Low,
— A lers to carrpe to Daz mastus, to the synagogues: that yf he founde any of this aye, whether they were menor women, he myght bryng them bounde vnto Hierulalem.

paffe, that as he was come nye to Daz mascus, sodenly there shyned rounde about hym a lyght from heauen:

M xi. b. persecutest thou nie: 8.

5 And he sapde: who art thou Torde-
And the Lorde lard : J an: Jesus who thou persetutest, It is harde for thee to kicke agaynst the prickes. 5

6 And he both tremblyng and aftonyed, sayde: Lord, what Wylt thou haue me to do: And the Lorde layde vnto hym:
Arpyse, and go into the ctitie, and it shalbe

a tolde thee what thou must do. 5

© 7 The nien allo which iourneyed with

him, stoode amased, © hearing a vopte,

une „ but leyng no man. vine 8 And Saul arolc from the earth, and une when he opened his eyes, he sawe no

no zwcropte as n witten in the. xxij. Chapter: Foz they hearde a voce,

ea las ü f.

werlloode it not.

‚ of th eapoltles.

3 And when he tourneped, it came to

4 And he fell to the earth, and hearde a voyce saping to him: “Saul, Saul, why ü

Eunuche fayde : See, here is water,
What doth let me to be baptizede
37 Philip sayde (onto hyn) If thou beleuest with all thine heart, thou mapelt.
And he aunlwered, and laide: J beleue that Jesus Christe is the sonne of God.
28 And he commaunded the charet to stande styll: and they went downe both into the water, both Philip and allo the
Eunuche: and he baptised hym. f
39 And aͤssoone as they were come out of the water, the spirite ofp Lorde taught wap Philip, that the Eunuche fare hym no more. And he went on his wa reloycyng. r
40 Wut Philip was founde at Asotus.
And he walked throughout the countrep, preachyng in all the cities, tpl he

Actes. x

36 And as they went on their wap, they cane to Celarea. tame vnto a certayne water, and the he. ix. Chapter.

of Saule. 25 Paule etcapeth the Jewes conspiracies, 25 he goeth bp to the Apotles. 3: Peter healeth Eneag, 40 and rayleth vp Cabitha. 945

man: Wut they ledde him by the hande, and brought hym into Damatcus,

And he was theee dapes without syght, and neither dyd cate nor drynke.
Io And there Wasa certapne disciple at

Damastus, nanied Anamas: Eto him

sayde the Horde in & vision, Ananias.

And he fatd, Wehold [J am here] Lorde.
1 And the Torde sayde vnto hym: arpse,

and go into the streate, whiche is called

strayght, and seeke in the house of Ju-

XXV.

Sy

das, after one called Saul, of Haris: Aa. g.

for beholde he prapeth, 7
12 And hath seene in a vision a man naz med Ananias conunyng in to Vpn, and puttyng his handes on hym, that he mpght reteaue his syght. aire z HhenAnantasaunhibercd: Tode, JC

haue heard by manp, ol this man, holb a much euyll he hath done to thy fauntes, Corn b.

Galath. l. c.

at Hieri alem. Ae . 7
14 And here he hath aucthoritie of p Hye priestes, to bynde all pᷣ call on thy nanie.
15 The Tord sayde vnto hyin: Go thy wap, kor he is a chosen vellell vnto me, to beare my nanie before the gentiles, € kynges, and the chyldren of Ilrael.

16. Foz I wyl Hew hym hor great thin: ,

ges he must luffer for my names fale. „Corte

ad

lc ue f

17 And Ananias went his Way, and en aa.

tred into the house, and put his handes on hym, and layde: Wrother Saul, the
K ij Lowe,

— —— —ęT-e —½:ii ad bal .
The act

orde (euen Jesus that appeared vnto
“nee in ch e as thou camest) hath feut me, that thou mpghtest rectaue thy syght, e be fylled with the holy ghost.

And inmmediatip there fell from his

es as it had ben stales, € he receaued syght foorthwith, and arole, and was baptised,

And receaued meate, and was cow forted. Then was Saul certaine dapes pe the diltiples whiche were at Damastco.

o And strayghtway he preached Chulte
1 the fpnagogues, that be was v sonne of God

= fed, and sayde: Is not this he that destroyed them which called on this name in Pierulalem, and came hyther foe that intent, that he myght bryng the bounde vnto the bye prieltes

wut Saule increased the moze in

strength, and confounded the Jewes

whiche dwelt at Damasco, affirmyng that this was very Christe. 2»

23 And after that many dayes were fulfilled, the Jewes tobe tounsell together to kyll hy. 5

24 Wut their laying alwayte was knowen of Saule. And they watched p gates
Day and nyght to kyll hyn.

Gern 25 Then the diltiples tobe him by night,

i. Reg. xix,

N

and put nem bat the wall, and let hym downe in a bastzet. 8

26 And when Saule was come to Pierufalem, he assayde to couple hym selfe to the distiples: but they were all afrayde of hym, e beleued not that he was a dil-

E

A

ciple. : l ¢ i
27 But Barnabas toke hym, e bronght hym to the Apostles, and declared to them howe he had seene the Lorde in

the way, e that he had spoken to bym,

and howe he had vone boldelp at Damasto in the name of Jelu. 252
28 And he had his converfation with thé a 2
29 Speakyng boldly in the name of the
4 0 a be 95 7 and dipuagapnst the Grekes: but they we about to slea hym. — 2
30 ee een e pm to Celarea, and sent
0 koorth to Tarsus. *

Adder. i. c

Wut ali that hearde hyin, were ama- 35 And all that dwelt at

38 And forasniuch as Lypdda was nye to

41 And he gaue her the hande, and pte

31 Then had the Churches restt : out all Jurie, and Gaitice, and San rid, and were edified, and walked int e feare of the Lorde, € multiplied by che pe of the holy ghost.

3 And it tame to passe, as peter! throughout all quarters im ene 110 1

to the Saintes which dwelt at Lydda.

And there he founde a tertayne man named Eneas, which had kept his bed

eyght peres, € was ficke of the paullie.

34. And Peter fapde vnto hym, Eneas
Jesus Cheitte make thee whole: arpseand make thy bedde. And he arole im vun mediatly. 0 Mack

Tpdda, and wi"
Saron sawe hym, and turned to the N
Lorde.

36 There was allo at Joppa a certapne
Woman, a disciple, named Tabitha, which by interpretatio is called © Doz. cas: the fame was full of good workes Yate om and almes Deedes, Which che dzd. auen

37 And it came to in thofe dayes Löwe

that the was ficke, and dyed: hom bra

when they had walched, they lade her aden in an vpper chamber: , eee

from h

ay ded behode
Heavenly chit

Poppa, and the disciples hadde hearde ua un

that Peter was there, they sent vnto zarten

hyn two men, despryng hym that he

teen not be greeued to come vnto em. N p

39 Then Peter arofle,¢ came with them, and whenhe was tome, they brought hym into the vpper chamber: And all the wydowes stoode rounde about him weepyng, and shewyng the coates and garmentes which Doras made whyle fhe was with thein.

40 And Peter put them all foorth, and kneled downe, and prayed, and turned 1 hym to the body, and layde: Tabitha Aa

*arple. And the opened her eyes, and Tae

when the sawe peter, she sate vp.

G

her vp: and When he hadde called the a a her alpue.

4 And it was knowen throughout all
Poppa, æ many beleued in the Lode.

43 And it tanie to pale, that be taryed many dayes in Joppa, with one Hund a tanner,

Cube

O che apoltles. | | DV.

The. x. Chapter.
The bition that Peter Cawe, 17 He was sent to Corneltus. 19 The Heathers

receaue the spirite, and are baptized.

—bere was a tertayne man in Celarca, called
„ Cornelius, a captayne i lofthe bande called the

a Italian bande,
A deuoute man, c one b feared God, with all

iy " 2

to the people, and praped God alway.
The same sawe by a bifion euidentip,

Angel of God tommyng in to hym, and saping vnto hym, Corneluus.

And when he loked on hym, he was afrayde, and layde: What is it Lode z
And he sapde vnto hyn: Thy © prayers and thyne almes, are come vp into

remembraunte before God. war § © At nowe lende men to Poppa, c call saw for one Simõ, whole sirnãme is Peter.
Weare De lodgeth with one Simon atanner, ah Whole house is by the sta syde: He Hall wo, tell thee what thou oughtest to do. smn 7 And when the Angell whiche spake h nto Cornelius was departed, he called to Ho of his haulehold seruauntes, and a bs it edi them that wapted on arth. = PAT,

8 And tolde them all the matter, € sent

(henito Joppa.

Bꝰ On the morowe as hey went on their

tourney, and drelwbe nye vnto the citic,

The trap sand antes
Cornelis
1 Sod, ge he was

fh vll.

lo And Whe he waxed hungry, he would haue eaten: But whyle they made vez

N Dic, he fell into a traunce.
Maaß i And law © heauen opened, and a cer-

folb mi-

a 12 Mherin were all maner of fourefoo-

ais 15 And the doyce spane vnto hymagaine eee the leconde tyme: What God hath mee Ceanted, that call not thou connnon.

gus 16 This Was done thrylc, and the veslell

Noreen? heatzen 0 j
ME itpn of eer to all that ig inclosed in the shecte, witch ic che

his housholde, which gaue much almes

about the ninth houre of the dape, an

Peter went bp vnto the highest part ok
Hewf the houle to pray, about the firth houre.

was receaued vp agaynt into heauen.

17 Nowe whyle Peter doubted in hym C selfe, what this vision whiche he hadde seene meant: beholde, the men whiche were sent from Cornelius, had made inquiraunce for Simons house, æ stoode before the doore,

18 And called and alued whether Sind
Which was lirnamed Peter, were lodged there.

19 Whyle Peter thought on the vision, the spirite said vnto hym: beholde, three men seke thee.

20 Alrite therkore, and get the Done, and go with then x doubt not, for JJ haue sent then.

21 Then Peter went downe to the men which were [Et vnto him fro Cornelius,

t laid: Behold, J am he Wha ye seeke, what is the caule wherfore ye are come:

22 And they sapde: Corneluis the capi-

tapnue, à iust man, and one that feareth
God, and of good report among all the people of the Jewes, was warned by an holy Angel to sende kor thee into his house, and to heare wordes of thee. a

23 Then called he them in, and lodged See them. And on the morowe, Peter went ~ awap with them, and *certaine brethren Aces.xib, from Poppa accompanied hyn.

24. And the thirde day after, entred they into Cesarca: And Cornelius wayted for them, and hadde called together his kinsemen and spetiall friendes.

25 And it came to pafle, as Peter came in, © scot

Conielins met hyim, F fell Powe © at iene peer’ his feete, and Worshipped (be. oughrro haue

done. fuppo

26 But Peter toke him vp, saping:stande cusiim er vp. I my selle allo am a man. Gop, epthce
27 And as he talked with him, he came in, Seep ah po
€ found many that were come together. b he which
28 And he faid vnto thE: He knowe hold „u ared an that it is an vnlawful thyng for a man 8 that is a Pew, to companie oz come vn- Bear. to one of another natio : But God hath shewed me, that J shoulde not call auy man common or vucleane. ö
29 Thercfore came F onto pon without delay, assdone as J was sent for: Falke therfore for what iutent ye haue seut for me-
30. And Cornelius sapde: This day nowe foure dapes, about this houre, J late
ZBiliy fating,

— —— ĩ᷑ ᷑ͥ f

he

na and at the muth houre, Iprap-
4 10 And beholde, & man froone before me in bryght cothpng,

31 Aud sapde: Cornelius, thy praper is heard, and thyne almes dee des are had mremembraunte in the syght of God.

32 Sende therfore to Poppa, and call fo-
Simon, whole firname is Peter: Heis lodged in the houle of one Sumo, atanner, by the fea syde, who when he com meth, chall {peake vnto thee.

33 Hhenlent J for thecmunediatly,and thou hast well done that thou art come.
Nowe therfore are we all here present before God, to heare all thynges that are tommaunded vntothec of God.

34. Then Peter opened his niouth, and

bara fala: Of a truetij I perteaue that Go
Ponal. hath no regarde of perlons: phevi 35 Bult in euerp nation, he that feareth

hym, and worketh ryghteoulnes, is accepied with hym. J i
36 Touchyng the worde which God lee vnto the chyldrenof Ilrael, preachyng peace by Hels Christe (he is Lord ouer all. a * knolve howe the worde was pu-

Nach. üb. pblilshed through all Juric, begpnnyng in Galülee, after the baptifine whiche
John preached:

esus of Maz

ACCCS

39 And we are wirnesses of attityres

g kee ae eit n m, whom 5 and hanged on oe 3 ewe, o Hym God raysed vp the thi

¥ . e 22250 titi

41 Mot to al the people, but vnto vs wit-

nesles, often before of God, euentobs whiche dyd cate and drynke with hym after he arose from the dead. Luk.xxiig

42 And he commaunded vs to preathe lb vnto the people, and to testifle that it is Manat he whiche was ordeyned of God to be the mdge of quicke and dead.

43 To hym geue all the prophetes wit: a nesse, that through his name wholdeuer beteucth in hom, chall receaue re: nuffion of sinnes. g

ge 1 55 eae e

8 on alt them Whiche a. hearde the worde. in DUDE kara.

45 And they of the tirtumtision which be:

Icucd, were astonied, as many as tame
With Peter, because that on the gentiles
95 a? shedde out the apftof the holy gyou,

46 Fo2 thep hearde them speake with tounges, Eniagnifie God. Then aunswered Peter: ö

47 *Canauy man forbid water, that these ü shoulde not be baptised, which haue rez ceaned the holy ghost alswell as we-

43 And he commaunded then to be baptiʒed in the name of the Lord. Then prayed they hini to tarp tertaine dayes.

The. xj. Chapter.

4 Peter sheweth the cause why he went to the Gentiles. 18 The Churche approueth it. 22 Barnabas a Paul preache at Antiochia. 23 Agabus prophetieth dearth to come.

ee

8 Md the àpostles c bien that were
Ny AN em Jurie, hearde
WY, U that; heathẽ had add veceaued the
PAX Worde of God.
And whenpeter dass come bp to
Hierulalem, they that were ofthe tircumtision contended

agaynst hym, 8
Saping: Thon wentest in to men vntircũtise d, e diddest cate with them.
4 Wut Peter rehearsed the matter from the begynnyng, and expounded it by or-

der vnto them, saping:
Ades b. 5 JJ Was in the citie of Poppa praying, and in a traunte J sawe a vifion, a ter-

Deut. vil. a. 3

tapne vessell destende, as it had ben d great sheete, let downe from heauen by the foure comers, and it came to me.

6 Upon the which whe JJ had fattened 1 mine eyes, I conlidercd; € sawe * foure D footed beastes of the earth, and wylde beastes, and wormes, and foules of the

apre.
7 Aud J hearde a vopte, faying vnto me: arpse Peter, slay, and cate.
3 But J sapde, Mot fo Lorde: ornothyng common oz vntlcane hath at and tyme entred into my mouth. g N
9 Wut the vopte aunlwered me agapn e from heauẽ: Make them not conion 21 5 va
Which God hath cleansed. 10

tram a
: And net, ek

10 And this was done thecc tymes: And en all were taken vp agayne into bean woc

: the apostses. sxxvan

OTC

1 And beholde, immediatly there were three men, alredy tome vnto the houle where J was, lent from Celarca vnto me.

1 And the spirite layde vnto me, that J shoulde go with the, Without doubting,
Moreouer, * thyele fire brethren actom-

anped mie, € we entred into the mans oule:

z And he shewed vs, howe he had seene an Angel in his house, which stoode and fayde vnto hym: Sende men to Poppa, and call for Simon, whole sirnanie is

eter:

14. He shal tell Hee wordes, wherby both thou and all thyne Houle shalbe saued.

1 And as J vegan to speake, the holy

yoia SHO fell on them, as he dyd on vs at

C the begpnnpng.
16 Then tame it to my remembraunte,

ars xd

nid Howe that the Lowe lapde: John
Hist baptized with Water,but pe chalbe bapfs at tiʒed with the 00 holy ghost.

ae 17 Foz as much then, as God gaue them wan the lyke gyft as he dyd vnto vs, When n We belcued on the Lorde Pehis Chatt: what was J, that J shoulde haue withstande God:

18 When they hearde thele thynges, they helde their peace, and glorified God, saying: Then hath God allo to p Gentiles, graunted repentaunte vnto lyfe.

wü. I They allo which were scattered abrode through the affliction that arofe about Steuer, walked throughout vnto Phenites, and Cypers, and Antioche, preachyng the worde to no man, but vnto the Hewes only. ö

20 And some of the were men of Cppers, and Cprenes, which when they Were

1 J The xij. Chapter.
1 Berode pertecuteth the Christians, 2 Rylleth James. and putteth peter in priton.

le apost

ES. Ixxvin,

come to Anttoche,(pake vnto ö Grekes, and preached the Lorde Jesus. ar And the hande of the Lorde was with them, and a great number beleued and turned vnto the Lode,
22 Then tydynges of these thinges came D vnto the cares of the Churche, whith was in Pierusalẽ: And they lent foorth
Barnabas, that he shoulde go vnto
Antioche.
23 Which when he came, and had seene the grace ol God, was glad, and erhor- les xiii ted them all, that with purpele of heart they woulde cleaue vnto the Lone,
24. Jo Ye was a good man, and full of the holy ghost, and of fapth: And mach people was added vnto the Torde.
25 Then departed Barnabas to Tarsus, for to fecke Saul.
26 And when he had founde hym, he brought hym vnto Antioche. And it tame to passe, that a whole pere they had their cõuersation with the Church there e taught much people :in so much, that the disciples of Antioche, were the
® fir that were talled Chusnans. eg
27 And in those dayes, came prophetes ee from Hierusalem vnto Antioche. but to: that

peo ple both
Fy

28 And there stoode vp one of them naz a sem 5

med Agabus, and signified © by the spi- bree vite, that there shoulde be great dearth berge throughout allthe wonde: Which tame ele he to passe in the dayes of Claudius Celar. Grae
29 Thenthe dilciples, euery man accor Sides dnn dyng to his abilitie, purposed to lende dane yin vnto the brethren which delt G50 he in uric, Ructhout of
30 Phich thyng they allo dyd, aud sent ze
5 155 05 Di by the handes of Sarna: ue nd Saul.

not to be gathered either ol the eourse ok the statx es or onp other natut al causeg

whom the Lorde delpuereth by an Angel. ri Che horrible death ol Herode. 24 Che
Ce me 25 Barnabas and Saul turnpng to Antrochta,take John Marte h them.

T the fame tyme Herode the king stretched x foots his handes to s vexe certapne of the
I Churche.
And he killed James
18 the bother of John
With the sworde.
3 And because he sawe it plealed the
Jewes, he proccaded further, and tone
Peter allo. (Then were the dayes of

weete bread.)

4 And when he had caught hym, he put hym in pryson allo, and delpuered hym to foure quaternions of souldiers to be kept, intendyng alter Easter to bryng hym foorth to the people.

5 And Peter was kept in pryson: Wut prayer was made without teassyng of the Churche, vnto God for hym.

6 And when Herode woulde haue brought hym foot) vnto the denne

ame

— —L——ñb mj —yp — ů˙ĩE—r9g 3
The actes

a

. K ene o mad. But she affrund ———_] mad. But she affir med ch

Actes. v. d.

Actes. v. d.

Actes. i. b.

same nycht slept Peter belweene wo ue ‘ bounde with two chapues, and the kepers before the Booze kept the prpson. 5

And beholde,“ the Angel of p Lorde was there present, and a lyght fhyned in the habitation : And he {note Peter on the lyde, and stirred hyin bp, saping:
Aryle vp quickly. And his haynes fell of from his handes.

Andthe Angei sapde vnto hynngyrde thy selfe, c bynde on thx sandales. And so he dyd. And he fayeth buto hym:tast thy garment about the, and folow me.

And he tanie out and folowed Ayu, and wyst not that tt was trueth Which was done bythe Angel, but thought he had feene a vifion.

1o When they were past the first and the N seconde Watch, they came vnto the pon gate, that leadeth vnto the citie, Which

opened to them by the owne atcorde:

And they went out, and palled through

one streate, and foozthwith the Angel departed krom hym.
And when Peter was tome to hym selfe he sayde: Howe J knowe of a suertie, that the Lorde hath sent his
Angel, and hath deunered me out ok the hande ol erode, and from all the wartyngfor, okthe people of the Jewes.
12. And as he tonsidered the thyng, he tame to the boule of Marie the mother of John, whole firname was Marke, where many were gathered together
*in praper.
13 As peter knocked at the entrie doore, a damsell came foorth to hearken, named Whoda. f
14 And when che knewe Peters vote, she opened not the Booze for gladnesle, but ran in, and tolde howe Peter stoode before the doze.
15 And they fayde

II

vnto her: thou art

fo, Then sapde thep: it ts

at it was ery au n his Angel. ch

Gods wold

Je But Peter continued knockyng: Inden

when they had opened the fave hymn, they were nae oh
7 And when he had beckened vnto the

with the hande, that they mygbt holde 5

their peace, he tolde them

meanes the Lorde ben toni out of the pryson. e And he layde: Go shewe thele thynges vnto James ana tothe brethren. And he departed. and went into another plate. 5

18 Howe assoone as it was day, there
Was no litie adoe among the loulldiers what was become of Peter. ‘

19 And when Herode had fought foz hyn, and founde hyni not, he erammed the kepers, and conunaunded them to be caryed away. And he destended from
Jurit to Cesarea, and there abode.

20 And Herode was dilplealed with them of Tyre and Sidon: But they tame all with one accorde to hym, and made intertession vnto Wlastus the kynges chaumberlayne, and defired peace, bez catife their eountrey was norilshed by the kyng.

21 And vpon a dap appopnted, Herode

arayed hym in ropall apparell, and let hym mn his seate, and made an oration vnto them.

22 And the people gaue a shout (faving)
It is the voyte of God, e not of a man.

23 And immediatly the Angel of p Lode finote hym, becanfe he gaue not God p honour, he was eaten ol“ woes, aud gaue vp the ghost.

24. And the worde of God grewe and
© multiplied.

25 And Warnabas and Saul returned to
Hierulalem, when they had fulfylled their office, and tobe with them John,
Whole sirname was Marke.

The. xiij. Chapter.

2 Paul and Barnabas are called to preache among the gentiles. 7 Of Sergius Paulus. and Elymas the sorcerer. 1; The departure ok Marke. 5 Paul 92 0 Antiochia
26 The Fewes are reiected. rs Thep that are o:dayned to lyfe, beleue.

— — Here was also in the e Churche that was at
47s Antioche, tertapne pro-
} S ipbetes, and teachers:
(cas Barnabas and Si e meonthat was called

Niger, and Lucius of

Cyrene, and Panahen, which had ben

that Ingeiz fel appopn: the faytivtute 0
€ also in tholz da eg, t tp
Were accutye med fd see luch spghetz.

(b) The bile nesse of the panpihinent

declareth her that God detesteth pre and tprannp,
His gaundlather alfo wis taten of tie.
Olde that tyzantts o about ts fuppreegn worde, the

moze doth 1 tnercafe and multipltt.

een igmfieth, 0

norilshed vp with Herode the tetrarch, gauge

and Saul.

ihe office, a

the 1

Wag,

2 As they ministred to the“ Lorde and pare 8 Hy fasted, the holy ghost saydt: Separate ei me Warnabas and Saul, forthe Worke Freres

wherunto JJ haue called them. 1
3 And when they had fasted € praped E Sac as

lade their hades on the, they let 930 an

And they, after they were lent foorth of the holy ghost, departed vnto Seleucia from thence they sealed to Cyprus,

5 And when they were at Salamine, they preached the worde of God in the spnagogues of the Jewes: And they

id. had also John to their numiter.
366 And when they had gone though the

Ile vnto Paphos, they founde a certapne fozcerer, a falle prophete, a Jewe, whole name was Warielu:

Which was with the deputie of the countrey, one Sergius Paulus, a prudent man: The same called vnto hym wWarnabas and Saul, and desired to heare the worde of God. |

via g Blut Elpmas the sorterer (for fo is his

nb näme by interpretation) Withstoode them, and fought to turne the deputie away from the fayth.

9 Then Saul (which allo is called paul)

a ben full ofthe holy ghost, set his eyes on hyn,

to And sayde: O full of all subtiltie and all mischiefe, thou chylde of the deuyll, thou enemie of all righteousnesse, wylt thou not tease to peruert the wayes of the Lorde- 5

Lorde is bpon thee, and thou shalt be blynde, and not fee the sunne for a sea-

| fon, And immediatly, there fell on hm

à myste, and a dareknesle, and he Went about, seckyng (them that shoulde leade hym by the bande, n Then the deputic, when he sawe ig what was done, beleued, and wondred at the Doctrine of the Lorde. i
Cy, Nowe when they that were with
Paul, were departed frd Paphos, they tame to Perga in Pamphylia: And
John departed from them, and returned to Hierusalem.
14 But when they departed from Perga,

lsxy.g:

they tame to Antioche in Pilidia, and

went into the spnagogue on p HSabboth day, and late downe. a
15 And after the lecture of the lawe and the prophetes, the rulers of the synagogue sent vnto them, saying: He men and brethren, f ye haue any worde to exhort the people, say on. ale. 16 Then Paul stoode vp, and beckened with the hande, and sayde: Men of PE rael . ye that feare God, geue audience.
17 The God of this people of Jsrael, hale our fathers, € exalted the people,

of the apostles.

n And nowe beholde, the hande of the

IXXVII iE when they dwelt ag straungers in the lande of & gypt, and with an bye arme kao n,, brought he them outofit.

18 And about the tyme of fourtie peres, me he their maners in the wyldernesse.

I9 And he destroyed seuen nations in the N lande of Chanaan, and deupded their lea lande to them by lot. 9

20 And akterwarde, he gaue vnto them iudges, about the {pace of foure hundred and fpftie peres, vnto the tynte of
Saniuel the prophete. f

21 And akterwarde, they! desired a kyng, Res vin. . and God gaue vnto them * Saul, the ao fonne of Cis, amen of the tribe of
Wentaniin, by the {pace of fourtie peres.

22 And when he was put downe, he fet vp Danid to be their kyng, of whom he reported, taping: J haue founde Da-i Reg . uid the sonne of Jesle, a man after nune Pe a ane heart, which Mall fulfpll all my

23 Okthis mans seede, hath God acco: N dyng to his pronusc brought foorth to desu.
Ilrael, the sauiour Jesus.

24. When John had first preached beforee his commpyng, the baptifine of repen- Pate. taunce to all the people of I srael. lohn. d.

25 And when John had kullylled his course, he sapde: Whom pe thynke that Nach ab.
J an the same am J not, But behold, there commeth one after me, whole
— of his feete Jam not Worthy to

26 he men and brethren, chyldren of

the generation of Abraham, and whosoener among pou feareth God, to pou Mathxa. is the worde of this saluation sent.

27 FJor they that well at Pterulalent ,

and their rulers, because they knewe Cor ub

hyn not, nor pet the vopces of the prophetes which are read euery Sabboth

day, they haue fulfplted them in con-

dempnyng hyn:

28 And though they founde no taule of E ae in hym, pet defired they Pilate to Maan
Kyll hym. UK. xxiu.

29 And when they had fulfylled all that were Weitten of hym, they toke hym
Dolbne from the tree, and put hym in a sepulchre.

30 Wut God rapysed hym agapyne from the dead:

31 And *he was seene many dapes of them which came vp with hym front
Galilee to Hierulalem, which are his Ace

witunesses

fathers, “ 9
God hath fulfylled the fame vnto vs their chyldren, in that he raysed bp fee

sus agapne. on As it is written in the se-

Psal. ii. a.
Hebrab. day haue J begotten thee. —

34. And as concernyng that he raysed him vp from the dead, nowe no moze to returne to torruption, he sapde on this

equ. Wyse: J wyll geue vou ß holy thynges

Waben of Daud, which are © fapthfull.

that he woul

ara n-o x Wherkdre, he lapeth aifo in another

compushe the

aun ge plate. Thon shalt not suffer thyne nee. Holp one to see torruption.

meets: 26 Jo: Daund, after he had serued his
Shan hend tyme, by che wyll of God“ fell on flepe,

and Was lapde vnto his fathers, and sawe torruption: |
37 But he whom God rapled agayne, sawe no corruption.
538 We it knowen vnto pou therfore, ye
Luk zg. men ce brethren, that through this man is preached vnto pou the forgeueneslt of finnes,
39 And that by hym, all that beleue, are iustified from all thynges, from which

be bozne o the stocke of auld. in Reg · i. b.

yt toulde not be iustified by the lawe ok

Mopses.
40 Beware therkore, lest that fall on pou, which is spoken ok in the prophetes:
Abacuci a. 41 Wcholde pe despisers, and wonder, and perishe pe:fo2 J do a Woke in pour

daes, a worke which pe hal not beleue ha
51 Wut they shoke ok the dust of © their cmon

though a man declare it vou.

42 And when they were gone out of the synagogue of the Jewes, the Gentiles befought that they Woulde preache these wordes to them p next Sabboth.

J The. xiii

God geueth luccelle to his worde. s Paul and Barnabas cache at conium, and are pe eae At L ystra they woulde do lacriffce to Barnabas and eal 19 Paul is oned. 2 They conlirme che dilciples in fapth a patience. 23 They appoynt minilters.

multitude both of

the Je of the Grekts settee Mes, ail

| The actes

conde plaline:* Thou art nw soune, this
45 But when the

48 And when the Gentiles hearde this,

. ·˙

broken vp, many ofthe Jewes and es -

tuous proselytes folowed pen h nden e
55 fe a in UO continue in the grace of
44 And the next Sabboth day tame at: most the Whole titie together. 6 5 the worde of God. gether, to heare
Jewes sawet 4 ple, they Were full of inblgnatin mab ergata cous poken of Paul, speakyn 8 au 920 0 peakpng against,
46 Then Paul and Barnabas wa bolde, and layde: It was meete that Math b. the worde of God deep feet haue ben N spoken to you: but sceyng ye put it from pou, and thynke pour lelues vnworthy of euerlastyng lyfe, loe, we turne to
1 foro bath c |
47 Forlo hath the Lorde tcommaunded vs. J haue made thee a lyght of the l
Genties, that thou be the saluation vn- L to the ende of the worlde.

they were glad, and glorified the worde of the Lorde, and as many as were ox dayned to eternall lpke, beleuedd.
49 And the worde of the Lorde was publisched theoughout all the region.
50 Wut the Jewes moued the deuout and“ honest women, and the chiefe wah, nien of the titie, and rapsed persecution auen agaynst Paule and Barnabas, and ex- zu as pelled them out of their toastes: mid abe

feete againtt then, and tame vnto to- ber en

¢
. 5 ert 4 nimm. : 2565 fe here ol thele

52 And the diltiples were fylled with top, women, au and with the holy ghost. 2 * Peal te
Chapter. | |

citie hang pron thes

aitie was” deuided:

graunted fignes ¢ wonders to be don by their handes.

4 Wut the multilude of the

deulded: and part helde with che Pee a Wes, and part With the Apostles.

| And when there was an allault made both of the gentiles, and allo of the Je-
Wes, With their rulers, to do them vio-

h 9 The lame hearde Paul speake: which beholdyng hym, and perceauyng that

he had tapth to be whole, lo Sapde with a londe voyce: stande vpbn ryght on thy feete. And he* tact bp,

2 And they called Barnabas Jupiter, and aul Mercurius, betausc he was the chiefe speaker. i

3 Then Jupiters priest, which was before their citie, brouaht oxen and gar:

„landes vnto the doo, and woulde haue done lacrifice with the people.

14 Which when the Apostles, Barnabas
€ Paul heard ol, they rent their clothes, and ran in among the people, crying,

1; And faying : Sirs, why do pe chele eb. kthynges! We are mortall men lyke vndcn .

shoulde turne from thefe vamties, vnto

x the lyupng God, which made beanen

weill AND earth, and the fea, and all thynges that are therin. r. .

16 The Which in tynies pak suffred all

nations to walke in their owne wapes.

E Pecuerthelelle, he lekt not hyni elke

ih 17

to pou, and preach vnto you, that ve

— — v— ——
„

of the- apol tles. Ixxix.

without witnesle, in that he shewed his benefites from heauen, in geupng vs rayne and fruitefull scalons, fulyng our heartes with foode and gladnesse.

18 And with thele layinges, carte rekrapned they the people, that they had not donc sacrifice vnto them.

Then thyther tame tertayne Jewes D

from Antioche and Itoniun: which,
WHE they had perlwãded the © people, ©, She and had stoned Paule, drewe hyni ont eee of the citie, supposyng he had ben dead. Gs mz

20 bowbeit as the diltipies stoode round aur fee about hym, he arose bp, and came into wonnen the cities And the next day, he departed arne an, with Barnabas to Derbe. Le ae

21 Mud when they had preached to that zaulntude. titie, and had taught many, they returned agayne to Lystra, and to Jcdnunn, and Antioche,

22 And strengthed the disciples soules agayne, and echorted them to tontinnc Ae i. ¢ in the fayth, and that we mult *theough n rin m. much tribulation enter into the kypngdone of God.

23 Aud when they had ordeyned them elders by election in euery Churche, and By ec:
Had prayed, with © fastyng, they com: tearm, chor mended them to the Lowe, on whom eros they beleued. mutet we

24. Aud when they had gone throughout amen
Pisidia, they tanie to Bamphylia, Mee

25 And when they had spoken the wordte 1b in Perga, they deltended into Attalln, more came.

26 And thence departed by shippe to Antioche, from whence they were coniz mitted vnto the grace of God, to the
Worke which they fulkylled.

27 And when they were come, and had gathered the Churche together, they rehearsed all that God had done with them, e howe he had opened the doore of fayth vnto the gentiles. ö

28 And there they abode long tyme with the dilciples.

J The. xv. Chapter.

And

And after they were brought on their
Way byß Thurche, they paficd though hemtes and Samaria, declarpugthe conuersation of the gentiles, and they brought great ioy vnto all the brethen.
And whenthep were cone to Hier salem, they were reteaned of p Church, and of the Apostles and elders: And they declared all thynges that God had done with them. a
Then vole vp certayne of the {ect of the pharilees, which dyd deleue, faying

that it was needefull to circumcile the,

and to connnaunde to kepe the lawe of
Moples. '
6 And the Apolties and eiders cant togtether, for to consider of this matter.
And when there had ben much disputyng, Peter rose vp, and fayde vnto the:
Be ien c brethren, pe knowe how that

a good while ago, God did chose awong

bs, that the gentiles by my mouth, shoulde heave the worde of the Gofpel, and belcue. g

e s, And God whiche * knoweth the
Painne Heavies, bare them witnesle, and gane iparaas.b. Pnto them the holy ghost, euen as he

dyd vnto vs:
9 And put no differente betwene vs and them, purifipng their heartes by kath. lo Molbe therfore, Why tempt pe God, to put on the dilciples netkes the poke ao, a fo Which neither our fathers nor we aß abe or Were able to beare: able to de 11 Bit We beleue, that through the grace of the Lode Jesu Chulste, we chalbe satied, euen as they.
12 Then all the multitude wasscilent, and gauc audience to Barnabas and
Paul, Which tolde what lignes and
Wanders, God had shewed among the gentiles by them. g
And when they helde their peace,
James aunlwered, faying: Men and brechren, hearken vnto me.
14 Simeon toe, howe God at the begpumpng dyd viltte, to receaue of the

Iohn. xiii. b.

Ca) De inkaneth the holy

that euer was
(Christe onip txtepted) was able to perkourme the same in all

- popnics, both outwardly ac= cozdpig to the letter, and inwardlip ac cor- 13 dyng to the spirite.

Werene —Senitles,a people in his name. backe Andto this agree the woes of the q es coma piophetes as is Witten:
9910 frase 16 Aifter this J wyll returne, and Wwyil
Faber buplde agayne the > tabernacle of Pa-
Sn Gm uid, Which is fallen downe: and that

Which is fallen in Decay of it, Wpll then vtterts > saves buplde agayne, and J Wopll (et it bp: 4 berg bel „That the rehouc of men nipght scke moscaree After the Lorde, aud all the gentiles vp-

* Il he actes

1 whom my name is talled Aon Qo
Torde, which doth all chese tie be s Kuowen vnto God are all his Wo fromthe begynnyngokthe Worlde. 8
19 wherkore iy lentente is, that w trouble not thein, which from ang 8 the ee 15 turned to God: -

20 Wut that We Write vnto the they absteyne themselnes “from fly Exod neste okidols, and frö fomication any from strangled, and from blood. 6.

21 Foz Doyles of elde tyme, hath in rn dee ae

agogues, when hei
Sabie 0 a he is read euery

22 Then pleated it the Apostles ⁊ e

with the whole Church, to ifive chalen d

mè of their owne companic to Antioch

with Paul and Barnabas: (Chat is

Judas, Whole sirname was 2arsa- linz

bas, and Ollas, which were chieke men

among the brethzen,

23 And Wweote letters by them, after this maner. a

24. The Apostles, and elders k brethren, sende greetinges vnto ß brethren, which are of the gentiles in Antiochta, Spria,
€ Cilicia.Forasmuch as we haue heard, E that certayne which departed from vs, haue troubled pon with wordes x cumbred pour myndes, laying pe must be tirtumtiled and kepe the lawe, to whõ we gaue no such commaundent:

25 It seemed therfore to vs a good thing,

When we were come together with one attorde, to sende chofen men vnto pou, with our beloned Barnabas and Paul,

26 Men that haut ieoparded their pues, for p name ot our Lorde Jesus Chuste.

27 Me haue fent therefore Judas and
Silas, Which shall also teil you p fame thynges by mouth.

28 For it seemed good to the holy ghost, and to vs, to charge por with no moze then thete neteslarie thynges Chat is

o fap] g

29 That ve abstayne from thynges olfered to idols, and from blood, and frou strangled, and from fornttation: From
Which vk pe kepe pour felues, ve Mall do well. So fare pe well. F

20 Nowe thertore, when they were departed, they tame to Antioche, and ge thered ah mende together, and delpuered the epistle. N ,

zi. Mhich when they had read, hey reioyted of the confolation. And

— ͤ ea
32 And Judas, and Silas, beyng prophetes, exhorted 5 brethren with many wordes, and strengthed them.

33 And after they had taryed there a
{pace, they were let go in peace of the brethren, vnto the Apostles.

34. Notwithstandyng, it pleased Silas to abyde there styll. *.

35 Paul allo and Barnabas tontinued in
Antioche, teachyng and preachyng the

wWonde of the Lorde, with other many,

36 Wut after a certapne (pace Paul sapde vnto Barnabas: Let vs go agapne, and vilite our brethren, in euery citie where

wie hane shewed p worde of the Loyde, land fee} howe they do.

Ot the apol tles.

ixxx,

37 And Warnabas gaue counieil to take with them John, whole sirname was
Marke. 1

38 But Paul woulde not take hym vnto their companie, which Departed from Ades xi e. them krom Panphylia, and went not
With then to the worke.

39 And the O contention was fo scharpe co Selur betwene the, that they departed a sun- barrel,

beyng comunitted of the bzethzen Into scene. the grace of God. Gofget to de

Hin Cpriag catia, moon
AablithyngtheeHucrhes.

q The. xvj. Chapter.

Paul circumcileth Cimothie. The spirite callech them from one countrep to ano. ther. 24 L pdia is conuerted. 23 Paul and Silas imprisoned, conuert the iaplour,
37 ND are delyuered becaule they be Romances,

Ihen tame he to Derbe and to Tystra: And beholde, a certayne disciple was there, na-
(emed Timotheus, a
NS Womans sonne which
Was a Jewesse, and beleued: but his father Was a Greke.
2 Ok whont the brethren that were at
Tystra and Jtonium, reported well.
3 Paul woulde that he Mould go foorth

with hym, and toke te cireimntiled hym,

becaule of the Jewes, which were in those quarters: for they knewe all, that his father was a Greke.

4 And as they went through the aties, they delpuered them the decrees for to kepe, that were ordayned of p Aposties and elders, which were at Hierulalem.

5 And lo were the Churches stablisshed
0 se fayth, and encrealed in number

Aply.
3° Nowe when they had gone throughout Phrygiã, and the region of Galatia, and * were forbidden of the holy ghost to preache the worde in Alia,

7 They conmipng to Mysia, fought to a0 into Withynia: but the spirite suffred

hein not.

8 And they paslyng though Mylia, tanie downe to Troada.

And a vision appeared to Paul in the nyght: There stoode a man of Matedoma, and praped hym, saping: Come into
Matedonia, and helpe vs.

Max c.

lime,

Xvithe,

10 And after he had leene p Hifi, innnedtatly we prepared to go into Matedonta, beyng certified hat p Lorde had called vs, for to preache the Gospel vnto them.
1 When we loosed foorth then from
Troada, we came with a strapght course to Samothracia, and the nert
Dap to Neapolis:
12 And from thence, to Philippos, which isthe chiefe citie in the partes of Wace:
Donia, and a free citie : And we were in that citie abydyng certayne dayes.
13 And on the dap of the Sabbothes, we went out of the citie, bespdes a rpuer,
Where praper was wont to be made:
And we fate downe, and spake vnto the women which resorted thyther.
14 And a certapne Woman, named Ly-
Dia, a feller of purple, of the citic of the
Thypatirians, which worchipped God, gaue bs audience: Whose hearte the
Lowe opened, that she attended vnto the thynges which Paul spake.
15 And When she was baptised, and her 10 householde, the besought vs, saying: Pf pe haue iudged me to be faythfull to the
Lorde, come into my boule, and abyde ade dale there. And the constrayned vs. 105
16 And it tame to passe, as we went to and 00, paper, a certayne dainsell, possessed mowidsein

many thinae
With a fpirite o€ southlaying met vs: 40 which beought her maisters much van- an 655 th tage with southlaynng. fen ene
7 The same folowed Panl and vs, and meg cryed, saying: These men are the ser- we Pocus uauntes“ ben.

—————p——————ðꝙ
“rates ok the mot hye God, Which

ch ewe Unt vs the wap of salnation.

18 And this dyd she many Bayes. Wut

Paul not content turned about, f sayde

rite, J commaunde thee in ny 58 of Felu Christe, that thou tome 11 ok her. ane houre.
ö 19 d when her maisters sawe that the hope of their gapnes was gone, they caught Paul c Silas, and drewe them into the niarket plate, vnto the rulers,
20 And brought them to the officers, saping: These men trouble our citie, being
Jewes:
21 And preache ordinaunces, Which are not law full fo2 vs to reteaue, neither to obferuc sceyng we are Romances,

Mat. xvi. d.

Aktes. xi æ

22 And the people ran agaynst then and

the officers rent their clothes, and cont

Cord maunded them to be beaten with

roddes.
23 And when they had beaten them sore,

they tast them into pryson, connmaun-

dyng the iayler of the prpson to kepe them diligently.

24 Which when he had receaued such tommaundement, thrust them into the inner pryson, and made their feete falt in the stockes.

25 And at mydnyght Paul and Silas

zaped, and lauded God. And the pryoners hearde them.

26 And sodenly there was a great earth-

quake, so that the foundation of the pryfon was shaken, and immediatlp all the doores opened, and cuery mans bandes Were loosed.

27 When the keper or the prpson waked dut ok his fleepe, and sawe the prpson doores open, he drewe out his worde and woulde haue kylled hym felfe, supposyng that the prylsoners had ben fied.
28 Wut Paul cryed with a loude vopce,

Actes. v. d.

and. xi. b.

The. xvij. Chapter.

1 Paul commeth to Chellalonica, where the Jewes tet the citie in an vprore. 15 Paul efcapeth to Atheng, where he preacheth the vnknowen God.

they made their iourneythorowe Amphipolis, and Apoitonia, they came to Thellalonica, where was aspnagogue of the
Jewes.

‘| faeactes

And he came out the N
31 And they layde: belcue on the Lorde eng

saping: Do thy selfe no har an all Deve 1100 harme, kor we

29 Then he called fo a lyght, a in, and canie fem keln ie i Monat an

zo Aud brought them out, x sayde: Sy what must q do to be fated: cme Luli
Jesus Christe, and thou shalt be Tohn.vib, ang tie Lowe Dots ‘ W

32 And they spake vnto hym the w
0 11 Powe, and to all that . rs hie houle.

33 And he toke them the same houre the nyght, and walshed their Wenns and was baptised ym selfe, € all they of his houlscholde strayghtwap.

34. And when he had brought them into his houle, he set meat before them, and
“roped that he with all his houleholde Tung beleued on God. ö

And when it was dap, the officers sent the lergeauntes, saping: Let those men go.

36 And the keper of the pepfon tolde this laying to Paul, the officers haue sent worde to loose pou, owe therfore, get you hente, and go in peace,

37 Then layde Paul vnto them: They haue beaten vs openly vncondempned, beyng Romanes, and haue cat vs ints pryson: and nowe woulde they thrust vs out panty: Map verylp, but let them tome them selues, and fet vs out.

38 And the lergeaunts tolde thele wordes vnto the officers, and they feared when they hearde that they were Romances,

39 And they tame and befought them, manviid and bronght them out, and desired the to Depart out of the citic.

40 And they went out of the prwlon, and entred into the (boute) of Lydia, when they had seene the brethren, they corr forted them, and departed,

2 And Paul, as his maner was, went in vnto them, and three Habboth dayes
Difputed with thé out of the (cvipturcs, aa
3 Openpug and alleagyng, that Chat W must needes haue suffred, and 70 875 gayne from the dead, and that this!
Christe Jelus, which JJ preache to en .
4 And! sonie of them beleued, and Be panes with Paul and Sas, andok the Steh i

Srekes a great multitude, and of the chiefe women not a lewe.

But the Jewes whiche beleued not,

moued With eme, toke vnto them ter-

5 tame vagaboundes and enyll men, and

gathered a tonipaniec, and set all the citie

on a rore, and made assault vnto the

house of Jalson, æ sought to bryug them

out to the people.

6 And when they founde them not, they drewe Jalon and certaine brethren vnto the heades of the citie, crying: these ac euuhle the World, are come hyther
Allo, N ——

hom Pafon hath reccaued (petutly. wie And these al do contrary to the decrees en ok Caelar, “ saping that there is anoms. ther kyng lone! Jelus. vent g And they troubled the people, and the

e officers of the titie, when they hearde

pe thele thynges. 2

eat g And When they were lufficiently aun-

wit, luered of Jalon, and of the other, they

„ let then gd.

io, And the brethren innnediatlye sent awap Paul æ Hilas by nyght, vnto Werea: Which when they were come thyther, they entred into the synagogue of the Jewes.

n These were the noblest ol birth among

C them ok Thessalonica, which receaued

the worde with all redynesse of mipnde,

ig andfearchen* the scriptures daylp, whether thole thynges were fo.

1 Therkore many of them beleued. Also of honest women which were Grekes, and of men not a fewe.

z But when the Jewes ok Thessalonica had knowledge that p worde of God was preached of Paul at Berca, they tame thyther and moued the people.

14. And then immediatlp the brethren sent away Paul, to go as it Were to the fea: but Silas € Timotheus abode there

tl,
Dis Andthey that guyded Paul, brought hym vnto Athens, and reteaued a cont maundement bute Silas ¢ Timotheus fo2 to come to hym with sperde, k went their way.

üb.

16 vabple Pam wapted for them at A-

thens, his spirite was moued in hym,

When he awe the titie geué to worshippyng of dolts.

17 Therkore dilputed he in che spnagogue

with the Jewes, and with the deuout

persons, and in the market dapiy with

of the apostles.

IXXXI. ad them that came vnto hyniby chaunte.

18 Then tertatue phnolophers of the o creen
Epitures, and of the Sioickes disputed attend
With hpin. And fome lalde: What Wyll Change. this babler sap- Other sonie, he leemeth dae

to bea fetter fovzth of newe gods be- ie en tause he preached vnto them Pehis and wee e
3 1 1 5 dr
19 And they toke hym, and brought hint vd end m into Marte streate, faping: pee i a. not knowe what this newe doctrine E wherof thou speakest is c
20 Foz thou bryngest cevtaine straunge mann ah thinges to our caves: We would knowe aeg therkore what these thynges meane. wiege of

od, alftrmed

21 Foal the Athenians and straungers Jans wdole

Which were there, gaue them eines te puede bs

nothing els, but either to tell og to heare itesan bee: fome newe thyng. Arne.

22 Then Paul stoode in the npddes of
Marce streate, and sapde: pe men of Athens, J perceane that in all thynges ve are to superstitious.

23 Foras Ppafled by, and behelde the maner howe pe Warthip pour gods, J founde an auiter, wherin was written, N vnto the vnknowẽ god. whom pe then ignorauntly worship, hun shewe F vnto pou,

24 God that made the worlde, k all that .; are in it, seing that he is Lowe of Deau€ Aae. and earth, dwelleth not in temples asus, made with handes: Ra

25 Meither is worshipped with mens labia haͤndes, as though he needed of any! Nen thing, seing he him selfe ·geueth life and pan

breath to all, cuerp where. Genel. . b.

26 And hath made ok one blood all nations of men, kor to dwell on all p fate of the earth, e hath determined the tymes before appoynted, and allo the boundes of their habitation:

27 That they shoulde {eke the Lordt, pf perhappes they myght haue felt and founde hym, though he be not farre fro cuery one ot vs.

28 Jor in hym we liue, and moue, c hane

dur beyng, as certaine of your one poz etes fayde : for we are allo his ofspryng. a Cane

29 Foralunich then as we are the“ of vs me genera spring of God, we ought not to thynke ee that the Godhead is ke vnto golde, sl- ano der uer, or stone, grauen by art, and maus due Goo” deuite. bath crcatco

Cts

vs, and bp his

zo And the tyme ok this ignoraunce God Ag wyncked at: but naive byddeth all men ame ve cuery where to bf bia elas

Because

Theactes

— oe ̃ -
31 We tanst he bath appoyuted adap in teousuesse, by that man by whoni
10 55 appoynted, and hath offered fayth to all nien, in that he hath rapsed yi froni the dead. |
32 And whenthey hearde of the resurrection from the dead, some mocked, and

The. xviij. Chapter.

aul preacheth at Corinth, 19 Paul goeth agayne into Syria, and commeth 3
; 1 Ephelus and Intioche. 4 Ok Apollos, 26 Vquila and Prilcisla. *

ter these thynges,
Paul Departed fr A-

e rinth,
And kound acertaine
Jewe, named Aquila,
— Aborue in Pouthus,late-

ly tome frd Italie with his wyfe Pril-

tilla (becaule that Claudius had commaunded all Jewes to depart from
Nome) and he tanie vnto then..

And becaule he was of the fame craft, he abode with them, and wrought (foz their traft was to make tentes)

4 And he dilsputed in the spnagogue euery Sabboth, and exhozted the Pelves and the Grekes.

Aaxvi.d 5 And When Silas and Timotheus were tome fro Matedonia, Paul was tonstrayned by the spirite to testifie to the Jewes that Pelus was Chalke.

6 And when they sayde contrarp, and

Rom. xvi. 3.
1 Tim. ini. d

Nint. blalphenied, He Choke his rayment, €
Aaxiigz. (aid vnto them: Pour blood beo vpon
Gt, pour owne heades. From hentekoorth rec, Wyll J go blamelesle vnto the genttles.

Drethentee: 7 And he Departed thence, and entred

pity ol Into a certaine mans house, named Ju-

a ene stus, à worlhipper of God, whole ponte ioyned harde to the spnagogue.

3 And one Crispus the chicte ruler of the synagogue belcued on the Lorde, with all his houcholde: and many ofthe Corinthtans hearyng, belcued, and were baptised.

9 Then spake the Lorde to Paul in the

Act svn. b. nyght ' by a vilion: We not afrayde, but

speake, and holde not thy peate:
10 For Jam with thee, and no nian Mat inuade chee to hurt thee. Jor J haue much people in this titie.
And he continued there a yere and fire

Iohn. iii. g.

monethes, and taught the word of God

among them.

the which he wyll iudge the worlde in

£51 thens, F came to Co-

15 Wut pkit be a question of wordes and

other sayde, we wyll heare thee of this matter. : ao

3; So Paul departed from among them.

34. HoWebcit, tertame men cane vbnto yi, and beleued: amoug the whiche
Was Denps Areopagtta, aud a woman named Damaris, æ other with them.

12 Aud when Gallio was the deputie of
Achaia, the Jewes made A .
With one accord against Paul, x brought hyn to theiudgement seate, f

3 Saping: This felow counselleth men to worshwp God tontrary to the lawe.

14 And when Paul nowe was about to open his mouth, Gallio fapde vnto the
Jewes: i it were a matter of Wrong, or an cupll deede, O pe Jewes, reason
Woulde that H chouldt beare with vou:

names, or of pour lade, loke ye to it dur selues: for J wyll be no indge of uch matters. ö
16 2 he draue them fro the indgement

17 Then all the Grekes toke Softenes the chieke ruler ol p synagogue, x finote hymbekore the iudgement feate: And
Gallio cared for none of those hinges.

13 And Paul after this, taried there pet a C good Whyie, and chen toke his leaue of the breihren , faplen thence into Sprid, o cut
(Aquila æ Prilcilla accompanying him) « 255
And he chore his head in © Cenchrea, gan for he had a vowe. ben a

19 And he tame to Ephesus, and left he ba jae there, but he hym lelke entred into the ann synagogue t reasoned with ß Jewes. che

20 When they delired him ta tarp longer aan tyme with them, he confented not: to

21 But bade them farewell, faying, IJ sow. must needes at this feast that commeth aue be in hierulaleni: but J wpll returne ni agayne vnto por pf God wyll. And he rues sapled from Ephesus. en

22 And whẽ he was come vnto Celared, r c

and alcended vp c lalnted the Churche, . song

he went to Antioche. ar

23 And whẽ he had taried there a while, e e he departed, and went oucr al the cou’ dee

trepot Galatia and Phrygia by order, wives

strengthyng all the dilciples. And che Lewe

924 Audacertaine Jewe, named *Apolfap. b. sus, an eloquent man, and mpghtie in the striptures.

ofthe Lode, and spake feruently in the spirite, æ taught diligently the thynges of the Lorde, and knewe but the baptifine of John only.

26 And the sanie began to speake boldly in the spnagogue. Whom when Aquila

— — ͤ ᷓv6ĩ—Ü— l ——ñ —

of the apostles. los, borne at Alexandria, came to Ephe-

25 The lame was infourmed in the way

læxxlj

and Priscilla had hearde, they toke him vnto them, and © expounded onto hin © spor0 ve the Way of God more perfectly, eicarnth mit
27 And when he was dilpoledto go into une wets
Achaia, the brethrẽ wrote, exhorting the ade dae disciples to receaue hym: Which When ae, he was tome, helped them much w D ew. had beleued through grace. : x
28 Foz he ouercanie the Jewes myghtilye, and that openlp, chewyng by the
{criptures, that Jesus was Chziste.

The. xix. Chapter. .

Ol baptifme. 5 OF the holy gholt geuen by waules handes. The Jewes bat. pheme the doctrine of Paul. 13 The punychment ol the conturers. 24 Demetrius rapseth sedition. 41 God delpuerech his, and appealeth the edition.

O it came to passe,

s wWhyle Apollo was fat Corinth, Paul pal we Nailed through the bpper

r

2 And sapde vnto them: aue ye retea-

ued the holy ghost fence pe beleued z

sie And they (aide vnto hym: Me haue not

ag. hearde whether there be any holy ghost

or no.

3 And he sapde vnto them: Unto what

then were pe baptised: And they layde: is bnto ( Johns baptisme.

t

filed , loz

Ahe feate e

ithe (ate ume in

nethes, dilputyng t perlwadyng thole thynges that appertapne to the kyngparen Dome of God. 4

u. 9 But when diners waxed harde hear-
B ted, and beleued not, but spake cuyll ot the waylot the Lorde) and that before the multitude, he departed from them, x leperated p disciples. And he disputed day-

ly in the stoolt of one called Tyrannus.

lo And this continued by the space of two peres, fo that all they whiche dweit in

: Titer wag 0

Alia, hearde the worde of the Lord Je: fu, both Jewes and Grekes.

u And God wrought speciall miracles NK id

by the handes of Paul. Adtes.v.c.

2 So that from his body, were brought C

vnto the ficke, napkins, and partlettes, and the diseases departed from them, € the *cupll spirites Went out of then. ee.

1; Then certaine of the vagabounde d
Jewes, exorcistes, toke bpon them to tall ouer them which had cupll spirites, the name okthe Lowe Jesus, laping:
We adiure poubp *Felus, whom Paul preacheth.

14 And there were seuen sonnes of one
Stena a Jewe, and chiele of p puestes, which dyd so.

15 And the euyll spirite aunswered, and sayde, Jesus J knowe, and Paul J knowe: but who are pez

16 And the man in whom the euyll spirite was, ran on them, e duercame the,

t preuapled agaynst them, fo that they fied out of that houle naked € woũded.

17 And this was knowen to all p Jewes
Grekes allo Which dwelt at Ephelus, und feare tame on them all, e the name

okthe Lorde Pefus was magnified.

18 And many that beleued, came x con- Marcia; kessed, and shewed their Workes.

19 Many also ofthẽ whiche bled turious traftes, brought their bookes, c burned them before all nien, and they counted the price ol them, e founde it fistie thousande peeces of spluer.

20 So myghtyly grew the word of God, and preuapled.

2 Atter thele thinges were ended, Paul purposed in the spirite, when he had pasled ouer Dacedonia and Achaia; to

Ly go

Math. vile.

e I.ksbeactes

go to Hierusalem saping: After J haue ben there, J mut also fee Nome.

22 So lent he into Matedoma two of them that ministred vnto hm, Timotheus and Eraltus, but he hym selke remayned in Zia for a sealon.

Ez And the lame tume there arose no litle

Act. xvi. d.

Psal. ex v. a.

a do about that way.

24. Joraà certaine man, named Demetrius, a spluer smyth, which made shrines for Diana, was not a litle beneficial vnto the traktes men.

25 Whom he called together, with the workemen oflike otcupation, and layde:
Sirs, ve knowe that by this craft we haue aduauntage.

26 Mortoucr, vc see and heare, that not alone at Ephesus, but almost through: out all Alia, this Paul hath perlwaded

and turned away much people, laying

that they be not gods Which are made
With handes. N

27 So that not only this our traft tom meth into peryll to be {et at naught, but allo that the temple of p great goddesse

Diana should be despised, and her mag-

nificencte should be destroped, Whom all
Alia and the worlde worshippeth.

28 And whenthey hearde these sapinges, they were fullof wrath, and crycd out, saying: great is Diana of p Ephesians.

29 And all the titie was on a rore, c they russhed into the common hall with one affent, and taught Galus c Aristarcus,

men Cf Macedonia, Paules compam-

ons.
#39 When Paule woulde haue entred in

po P people, the distiples suffred hym not.
3 Wut certaine ok ß chiefe of Alia, which

to se coreg hall.
32 Horne therfore erped one thyn some another, and the tenn wn all out of quiet, and the more part knew not wherfore they were come together
3 And they drelwe Alerander out of the multitude, the Jewes thzustyng hym
Whip he And Alexander uth the hande, and would haue tbe beanie me fades ii
34. But when they knewe that he was ewe, there arose a shoute almost for che {pace of two Houres, of all men, cry: ing: great is Diana of the Epheslans.
5 And When the towne clarke had pati-

sied the people, he sapde: Pe men ofe-

phelus, what man is it that knoweth not how that the citic of the Ephesians is a worshipper of the great goddesse
Diana, and of the (image) whiche came downe from Jupiter

36 Seing then that thete thinges tan not 6 be spoken againt, ve dught to be contet, and to do nothyng rasshely. b

37 For ye haue brought hyther thele men, which are neither robbers of Churches nor pet despisers of pour goddesse.

38 Wherkore, pf Demetrius ¢ the craktes men which are with hym, haue a matter agaynst any man, the lawe is open, and there are deputits, let them atcuse one another.

39 Wut pk pe inquire any thyng conternyng other matters, it shalbe determined in a lawfull assemblie. |

40 For we are in ieopardie to beacenled ofthis dayes vprore, forasniuch as there is nd cause, wherby We may geue a reckenyng of this contourse of people.

And when he had thus spoken, he let

were his friendes, sent vnto hym, deli- the alsemblit depart. ryng hym that he would not preasse in- N
The. xx. Chapter.

Paul goeth into Macedonia and Grecia, 7 he celebrateth the Lowes supper, and preacheth. At Croas he rapleth vp Eutichus from the dead, 17 At Ephe-
Sug he calleth the elders of the Church together, and committeth the keping of
Gods kloche to them 29 warneth them ol kalle teachers, 36 maketh his prayer
With them, sand departeth by Mhippe towardes Hierutalem.

o

D after the vprore
| 97 pas teassed, Paul cal-
Ne

LA

“Olled the diftiples, etoke

duer thole parties, and had geuen them along exhortation, he came into Grece.
3 And there abode three monethes. And
When the Jewes lapde wayte for hon as he was about to fapleinto Sprit de purpoled to returne through Matedo-

nia. And

beckened Act xai e

of the apostles.

4 Aud there accompanied hum into Alia

So pater ot Berrea, and of the Thessalonians Aristarcus and Secundus, and
Gaius of Derbe and Tiniotheus, and jot lit of Asia Tychicus and Trophunus. in apis going before, taried vs at Tro-

As.

6 And we fayled away frd Philippos, after the dayes of lweete bread, t came vnto thẽ to Troas in fiue dayes, where we abode seuen dayes. ö

And vpon one of the Sabboth dapes, when the disciples came together fo2 to breake bread, Paul reasoned with the, redy to depart on the morowe, and continued the worde vnto mydupght.

8 And there were many lyghtes in an vpper chamber, where they were gathered together.

And there late in a window a certaine poung man, named Eutythus, being fallen into a deepe slecpe: And as Paul was long reasonyng, he was the moze duertome with sleepe, and fell Downe from the thirde loft, and was taken bp

1o But whẽ Paul went dowue, he fell on

„wi VPM, and imbrated hynz e {arde: make

ein, nothyng a do, for his lyfe is in hym.

a 1 And so when he was come vp againe,

s. and had broken bread and eaten, € talked a long while, cucn tyll the niorning, and so he departed.

12 And they bought the young man az lpue, and Were not a litle comrfozted.

z And we went alore to shippe, t loosed vnto Asson, there to reteaue Paul: For fo had he appoynted, and woulde Hyne selfe go a foote. 4

14. And when he was cone to vs to ANG, we toke hym in, and tame to Mytilene.

15 And we layled thence, and tame the next day duer agaynst Chios: and the next daye we arrpued at Samos, and tarped at Trogylliũ. The next day we tanie to Miletum:

D 16 For Paul had determined to sayle ouer by Ephesus, betause he wonld not spend the tynie in Alia. Noz he Halted, yk it were possible for hym, to kepe at Hierusalem the day of Pentetost.

17 And from Mlletum, he sent to Ephesus, and called the elders of the Church.

18 which when they were tone to hym, he lalde buto them: He knowe from the first daye that J tanie into Afia, after
What maner J haut ben with vou at

IæxXII J: |

all seasons.

19 Scruyng the Lorde with all hunibleneffe ol mynde, and with manp teares, and temptations whithe tame vnto me by the lapinges awayte ofthe Jewes:

20. And howe J kept backe nothing that
Was profitable vnto pon, but haue che-

Wed pou, and haue taught you openty, and throughout cuerp Houle,

21 Mitnessyng both to the Jewes x also E to the Grekes, the repemtaunte that is e. towarde God, and the fayth whiche is towarde our Lorde Jesus.

22 And nowe beholde J go bounde tn SR ss the spirite vnto Hicrulale not Rnowyng Beet: the thynges that shall tome vnto me: ange

23 But that the holy ghost Witnelleth in aer ache cuerp titie, saping that bondes € trou- dende. ble abyde me.

24 Wut none of these thynges moue me, neither is my lyfe deare vnto my selfe, l. Tun nb. fo that I myght fulfyll my courte with io, and the ministerie whiche J haue reteaued of the Lode Fel, to testifie the Gospell of the grace of God.

25 And nowbe beholde, J am fure that F hencefoorth ve al, through whõ J haue gone preachyng the kyngdome of God,

(hatl fee my tate no moze.

26 Wherelore, I take pou to retorde this dap, that I am pure from the blood of all men.

27 Foz J haue kept nothyng backe, but haue shewed you all p counfell of God.

28 Lake heede therfore vnto pour selues, and to all the flocke, ouer the which the ©, eo holy ghost bath made you ouerseers, to ern rule the Church ol God, which he bath hon which is purchaled ww with his oiwne blood. vs) ae

29 Fo; J knowe this, that after my de- Saber ve partyñg, shall greeuous wolfes enter in commences ce among vou, not sparyng the flockke. a dene

30 Also ot pour owne selues Mall men & nene perten. rylt, speakyng peruerse thynges, to © co nend dzarbe disciples alter them. ber is mo:

31 Therkore watch, and remember that cis chere. by the {pace of thece peres J teassed not to Warne cuery ont night and day with teares.

32 And nowe brethren J commende pou to God, and to the worde ol his grate, which is able to buylde further, and to geue vou an inheritaunte among all the which are fauctificd.

33 Jhaue desired no maus spluer,golde,
Wi felues knowe, that

Bra, ye pour felues knowe,
- LL ij these

Ades. vi. d.

The actes

a a

— tomy 36 And when he hadde thus

“thefe handes haue ninistred vnton neces, and to them that were with me. '

35 J haue shewed pou all hinges, howe that fo labouryng pe ought to reccane the weake, and to remember p wordts ofthe Lorde Jesu, Howe that he laid, it is more blessed to geue, then to reteaue.

Gene. il. c. i. Cor. ix. b.
11. Tlies. iii. b

spoken, he kucled downe, e praped with then i
37 Aud they all wepte fore, ae oe .
Paules necke, and kyssed hym,
38 Sorowyng most of aul for the Wordes whiche he pale, that they choulde lee his face no nore. And they Accompanied hym vnto the hippe.

9 J. Chapter.

Paules iourney by hippe. S Ok Philip the Euangelisk 1 and Agabus the prophete, which warneth Paule not to go to Hierulalem. 1; He remapned sledlast in his pur pole, and is taken.

Nd when it came to passt that we had laüched forth, and were depar-

= N :
INF e
A < A is op * 4
2 N

Haine aun che to Choos, and the

= Dap folowyng vnto the Rhodes, and krom thence bnto

Patara. f

2 And when we had gotten a shippe that woulde sayle vnto Phenite, we went a boorde, and {et foorth. a

3 Nowe when Cyprus began to appcare vnto vs, we left it on the left hande, and fapled into Spria, and tame vnto Lyre: a there the shippe vnladed the bur-

en

4 And when we had founde dilciples, we taryed there seuen dayes: who laid to Paule through the spirite, that he choulde not go vp to Hiernsalem.

5 And whenthe dapes were ended, we
Departed, and went our wap, and they all brought vs on our way, with wyues and chyldren, tyil we were come out of the cific. And we kneeled downe in the shore, and praped.

And Whe we had taken our leaue one of another, we toke shippe, and they returned home agaync.

7 When we had full ended the course from Tyre, We went downe to Ptolo-
Maida, and saluted the brethren, and abode with them one day.

Ates. xx. c.

Aces. xx. g

8 Andthe next daye, they that were ol

Paules companie Departed, and came buto Cefarea: And We entred into the te houle of Phiup the *Euangeiitt (Which
* 17 one of the seuen) and abode With

And the lane man had foure daugh-C ters, virgins, which dpd prophesie.

Io And as we tarped there a good man ol dapes, there tame a certaine prophete

krom Juric, named Agabus.

11 And when he was come vnto vs, he tone Paules girdle, e bounde his owne handes and fecte, efapoe: Thus sayth the holy ghost, lo shall the Jewes at Aa
Hicrusalem bynde the man that owethj Ce this girdle, and shall delpyner hym into the handes of the gentiles. N

IZ And when we hearde these thynges, both we and other whiche were of the faine place, besought him that he would not go vp to Hierulalem.

13 Then Paule aunswered: what do pe weepyng and berpng myne heart: Tor

J an redp, not to be bounde only, but also to dye at Hierusalem for the name ofthe Lorde Jesu. m

14. And when we toulde not turne his mynde, we ceassed, saping: the wyll of Pau the Lorde be fulkylled. .

15 And akter those dayes, we toke vp our D burthens, and went bp to Hierusalem.

16 There went with vs allo (certarne) of Aa the diftipics of Cesarea, c brought with them one Mnalon of Cyprus, an olde diltiple, with whom we shoulde lodge.

17 And when we were come to Hierulalein, the brethren reteaued vs gladly.

18 And on the morowe, Paulc Went in with vs bnto ( J aries, and all the cl ders taine together. Pon)

19 And when he had faluted them; Be e tolde by order all thinges that God had ze wronghtamong the gentiles by his ni eee nisteric. i:

20 And when they hearde it, they 0 b edthe Lowe, fapde vnto hon Kade fcett bzsther, Howe many ter

Ioel. i. g.

Jewesthere are which beleue, € they ave all carnest folowers of the lawe.
21 And they are inkourmed of thee, that thou teachest all the Jewes whiche are aniong the Gentiles to forsake Mopses, and fapett that they onght not to cirtũtile their chyldren, neither to walke al ter the custonies.

22 What is it thereforez The multitude must needes come together: For they shall heare that thou art tome.

23 Do therkore this that we faye to thee.

We haue foure men, which haue a bow

ck onthem:

4 Thenitake, ¢@purific thy selfe with them, and do coste on them, that they may shaue their heades: And all thal

on hym,

5 28 Crying: Men of Ilrael helpe. This is the man that teacheth all nien euery

where against the people aud the lave,

and this place: He hath allo brought

Grekes into the temple, and hath pol-

luted this holy place.

ua xh ꝰ Foe they had seene before with hym in

Imig the citie Trophimus an Ephelian,

of the apost es. | Ixxxuiiy,

whom they wppoled that Paul had bronght into the temple.

30 And all the citie was moued, and the people fwarmed together: And they toke Paul drewe hyni out of the tem: ple, c foorthwith the doores were shut.

31 And as they went about to kyll hyn, tydynges came vnto the bye taptaine of the fouldiers, that all picrufaiem was in an bprore.

32 Which immedtatly toke © souldiers, en and under captaines, and ran downe ee vnto them: And when they lawe the mah rat vpper captaine and the fouldiers,, they toma oun left finytpng of Paul.

33 Thenthe chicfe captaine came neare, G c toke hym, and cõmaunded hym to be bounde with two chapnes, & demaun-

Bed who he was, € what he had done.

34 Ard lone cryed one thyng, some another, among the people. And when he toulde not knoe the certaintic for the rage, he commaunded him to be carped into the castle.

35 And when he tame vpon the stapres, it was so ah he was bounce of the louldyers kor the vlolente of the people,

36 Foz the nuutitude of the people folowed after, crying, away with hym.

37 Aud when Paul began to be caryed into the tastle, he laide vnto the bye taptaine: May I speake vnto theez Who sayde: Canst thou speake Greke-

38 Art not thou that Egyptian which before thele Bayes madest an vprore, and leddest out into the wyldernesse foure thoulande men that were murthererz:

39 Wut Paul lade: Jana man which am a Herve of Tarlus, a cific in Cilicia, a acsix. b. a tite in of no vyle citic, and J beseche end. -cai.a. the suffer me to speake vnto the people.

40 And when he had genen hym licente,

Pani stoode on the stayres, € beckened Aae if, with p hande vnto the people: And whe there was made a great scilẽte, he spake vnto them in the hebrue tonguc, saping:

krom al daun gers ot thes enemies.

i. Chapter.
Paul rendereth an accompt ol his lyle and doctrine, 25 he elcapeth the whyppe by

realon he was a citezin ol Rome.

whiche J make vnto von.
(And when they heard

9 i S
B02} |)

heare pe mine aunswer

that be spake in the
Hebsue tonguc to the,

they kept ỹ moze scilente. And he faith:)

3 Jam perilpa man which ama Jewe, . borne in Tarsus in Cilicia, and pet ang csi, brought vp in this titie at p feete ol; Ga- Alles vi. maliel, and infourmed actordpug to the perfect maner ofthe lawe ofp fathers, and was zelous towarde God, as pe

Ly all

— TS

— — — a

all are this {ane day.

Ace via. 4. Alld I persecuted this way vnto the

IN. a. x xv i. a

1. Cor. xv.
Galatli. 11.

Actes.ix. a.

(a) Icsus
Was nowe in

ucn, coulde not be

356 And it came to passe, that as J made

b. b.

Death, byndyng c detyuerpug into prifor both men and women,

5 As also the chiefe pric doth beare me
Witnesse, aud all the estate of the elders: of whont also J receaued letters vnto the brethren, and went to Dannalcus, to bryng them whiche were there, bounde puto Hierulalem for to be punifibed.

uy iourney, x was come nye vnto Damastus, about noone, sodeinly there shone from heauen a great light rounde about nic.

7 And J fell vnto the earth, and hearde
à boyce saping vnto nie: Saul, Saul, why perslecutest thou nie: .

8 And FY aunfibered: Who art thou
Lowes And he fayde vnto me: Jam

esus of Masareth © whom thou perecutest.

Hall: Sue 9 And they that were with me, sawe

persccution whiche Maul

txercised a= apnst the fapthfull bes

ing hig mem-

boah u 10 And 95 saide: What shall J do Lord:
And the

cou

donc to hyin

fife.

S. IX. c.

D. x. c.

veryly a lyght, and were alrayde: but they hearde not the voyce of hym that spake with me.

Lorde sayde vnto me: Arpse, and go into Damalcus, € there it shalbe tolde thee of all thynges whiche are appoynted forthee to do.

1 And when F sawe nothyng kor the bryghtnelse of the lyght, J Was ledde by the hande ofthe that Were with me, and came into Daniastus.

12 And one Ananas, a deuout man as pertepnyng to the lawe, hauyng a good report of all the Jewes whiche there dwelt, a

13 Came vnto me, and stoode, and sayde aht. Brother Saul, reteaue thy me lyght, and sawe hymna,

14. And he said: The God of our fathers hath ordeyned thee before, that thou shouldest knoe his wyll, and fee that luste one, and shouldest heare the vopce of his mouth.

15 For thou shalt be his witnesle vnto all men, of those thynges which thou batt seene and hearde: a

16 And nosbe why tarvest thou- aryle, e

be baptiʒ ed, e Walche away thy sinnes, in callpug on the name of the Lorde.

17 And it canie to passe, that whe J Was tome agayne to Hierulalem, and paped

And the lame houre ZF (receaued .

he actes

inthe temple, J was ina tra

18 Aud fare him, faying vnto mers

hate aud get thee quickly ont of Hierulaleni: fo2 they Wy! not rereaue thy withs v lade: A 9

19 An apoe : Lord, they kno
Ipriloned and beat in nee age * pes 111 Aoi on thee,

20 And When the blood of thy w .
Steuen was shedde, J alfo Gabe by. i: aud conlented vnto his death, and kept the rayment of them that tue hym.

21 eo he at ee ue : Depart, fo: J 1

pr tende thee tarre Hence AC xitid, gentiles. ce bie Sad,

22. And they gaue him audience vnto this worde, and then lift vp their voyces and sayde: away with suche a felowe from the earth, for it is no reason p he thoutae

pue.

23 And as Hey tryed, and catte oftheir clothes, and threwe dust into the apec,

24. The chiefe captaine cõmaunded hym

to be brought into the castle, € bade that he shoulde be stourged, and examined, that he myght knowe wherefore they cryed so on hym.

25 And as they boude him with thonges,

Paul {aide vnto p Centurion that stoode by: Is it lawfull for pou to stourge a man that isa Romane, and vncon- © ps dempned- Eule te

26 When the Centurion hearde that he ae went and tolde the vpper captaine, Lap- en ing: Take heede what thou doelt, for g this man is a Romane. n

27 Then the vpper captaine tame r saide vnto him: Tel me, art thou a Romane:

He layde, yea.

28 And the chiefe captaine aunswered:
With a great sumnie obteyned JJ this
1 And Paul saide: J was free

orne.

29 Then strayghtway departed frõ him they which should haue examined him.
And the hie captaine also was afrapde, after he knew that he was a Romane, and becaule he had bounde hyn.

30 On the morowe, becaule he woulde haue knowen the certaintie wherefore he was accused of the Jewes, he tooled hym from his bandes, and commaun-

Ded the bye priestes c all the counsell to A xil tome together, x brought Paul foorth, and fet hym before them.

(b) Be was

¶ The

of the apostles.

4 The. xxiij. Chapter.

XXIII). 0

Paul commeth bekore the countell, 2 Ananias cauteth hym to be ürinen, 1 b 2 „la the captapne deliuereth hym, 11 God comkorteth hym, z he is lent to Cefarea, ‘

ND Paul care knestlie beholdyng

the counfell salde:
, „Men € brethzen,
J haue lyued in al good conscience

; And p hye priest
Ananias, conunaunded the that stoode by, to finpte hym on the mouth.

„d Then layde Paul vnto him: God shall

para” ume ther thou“ paynted wall: Foz, “lit

test thou c iudgest nie after the lawe, c

to the la we?:

hi And they that stoode by, sayde: Ke-

gal uilest thou Gods hye priest-
Then fapde Paul: J wyst not bre-

thren, © that he was the Hye priest. For

it is written: Thou (halt not curle

the ruler of thy people.

J Fe ig nacht that ulm mocu one part were ladutees, and the other pharisees, he tryed out in the tounsell: n Men and brethren,“ J ama pharilce, ile. the sonne of a pharilee: Ok the hope c resurrection of the dead, J am iudged.

And when he had fo layde there arolt

à debate betwene the pharifecs and the faducees ,e the multitude was deiuded.
F or the faducees say, that there is no resurrection, neither Angel, nor spirite:
But the pharisces confesse both. P
And there arose a great crye:and whẽ the scribes which were of the pharilees part arose, they stroue, saying, We fynde none euyll in this man: But pfa spirite

J see nog in 7 auwonhie fut ol

fut xxii c. bk xn. h. 8 lik. xx c.

or an Angel hath spoken to hym, let vs

not striue agaynst God.
Cio And when there arose a great debate, the chiefe captayne, fearyng left Paul shoulde haue ben pluckt alunder ok the, tomaunded the souldiers to go downe, and to take Hint from among them, and to bryng hyn into the castle.

And the nyght folowyng, the Lorde ftoode by hym, and sayde: Be of good cheare Paul, for as thou hast testified of me in Hierulalem, *fo mult thou beare
Witnefle also at Rome. un And when it was day, certapne of the

xvi b. n

denn b.

Jewes gathered them selues together, D and made al vowe, saping that they ne xm

properip sig-

woulde neither cate nor drynke, tyl they den cuehad kylled Paul. ga 31) Pike as when

a man either

. Aud they were mo then kourtie nien, ere

which had made this conspiracie.

selfe to dpe, oz

14 And they came to the chiefe priestes thescpurcr-

and elders, and layde: We haue bounde ere

tõunundest me to be snitten contrary

é Wut when Paul perteaued that the

our selues with a vowe, that we wyll ae.
8300 — vntyll we haue flayne au

15 Noe therfore geue pe knowledge to the vpper taptayne, and to the counsell, that he bryng hym foorth vnto vou to morrowe, as though ye woulde knowe somethyng moze perfectly of hym: And we, or euer he tome neare, are redy to kyll hym.

16 And when Paules fitters sonne heard of their laying awaite, he went c entred into the tastle, and tolde Paul.

17 And Paul called one of the vnder captaynes vnto hym, and fapde : Bryng this poung man vnto the bye captayue, he hath a tertayne thyng to shewe

yn,

18 And he toke hym, and brought hym to the bye captayne, and layde: Paul the prisoner called nie vnto him, and praxed me to bryng this young man vnto thee,
—— hath a tertayne matter to shewe thee.

19 Then the bye taptayne toke hyn by E the hande, and went With hym out of the way, and afked hym: What is it that thon hast to tell me:

20 And he sayde: The Jewes are determined to desire thee, that thou wouldest bryng foorth Paul to morowe into the countell, as though they would euquire somewhat of hym̃ moze perfectly.

21 But folowe not thou their myndes:
Jor there lye in wayte for him, of them, mo thẽ fourtie men, which haue bounde themselues witha volbe, that they wil

neither eate nor drynke, tyll they haue kylled hym. And nowe are they redy, and loke that thou shouldest pronile.

22 The vpper captayne then let) voung man Depart, and charged hym, fee thon tellit out to no man, that thou hast shewed thele thynges to ine. 110

— . § (eats =.

23 And he called vnto hym two vnder 30 And whenit was Mhewen me howe

taptaynes, saying: Make redy two hundred lonldpers, to go to Cesarea, and horsmen threeltore and ten, and spearemen two humdred, at the thirde houre of the nyght:

24. And delpuer them beattes, that they map fet Paul ou, and bryng hynm fate vnto Felix the hye deputie.

25 And he wrote a letter, after this maner.

26 Clandius Tylias, vnto the most nughtie ruler Felix, sendeth greetinges.

Actes xx. 27 This man was taken of the Jewes, and shoulde haue ben kylled of them:
Then tanie J with souldeirs, e rescued hym, and perceaucd that he was a
Rorntane.

28 And whẽ J would haue knowen the tause, wherfore they accused hym, . J

that the Jewes layde w man, I sent hem thrapahnbas te: — aud gaue commaundement to his ar? ee
| pin, the 5 yt 9 an well. e
31 Then the souldpers, as it mauuded then toke Saunton hyniby nyght to Antipatris.
32 Du the niorowe they left the hootinen
0 go With hym, and returned vnto the
33 which) when they tame to Cela and delpuered the epistle to the deputte prelented Paul alfo before hyn,
34. Aud when the deputie had read reve letter) he alked otwhat toũtrey he was.
And when he vnderstoode that he was

35 J wyll heave thee, faye he, when Dewars

thyne actulars are come also. And he tömaunded hym to be kept in Herodes

temple: Whon we toke, and wonlde 40 e

Act. xxii. g f 0 brought hym foorth into their counsel. of Celica,
29 mon JJ perceaucd to be acculed of questions ok their lawe, but Was not
Aaxxve. Jyltie of any thyng worthy of death, o? of bondes. iudgement hall.
5 The. xxiiij. Chapter. io Paul bepng accused, aun wereth fo2 his ipfe and doctrine. 25 Felix gropet : thinkyng to haue a bribe, 23 and alter leaueth hym in prylon. Fell grobeth hem
IW atter kyue dapes,
Aaxxva. Pe Ananiasꝰ the hie priest

descended, with the selders, and with a certayne oratour, named e Tartullus, which ap-

eared before the Dez putie agaputt Paul. 5

Wer 26:
B. ak 7 Salen a N i r
* . re b. * d
1 de *
S N
’ if ae: is

(ae |
S
&
De ee
S t
S i
S

hs weer Sepng that we © obtapned great quiab taken

Eleazarus tapta pne o v murdererg,

an purthe nation through thy prouidente,
5 dn That alolbe we euer, e in all plates, mE most noble Felix, with all thankes.

tout praplsed yam: otherwaves he wis both t cut and couctous.

Wordes.

Jor We haue founde this man a pestilent felowe, and a niouer of debate dn: to all the Jewes in the whole wonde,
“i f niapntepner ot the {ect of the Maz

6 And Hath gone about to pointe the

haue iudged atcordyng to dur lawe.

7 Wut the hype captapne Tysias, came vpon vs, and with great violence toke hym awap out of our handes,

8 Commaundpneg his actulers to tome vnto thee: DF whom thou mapest, yf thou wilt enquire, knowe the certayntie
55 all these thynges, Wherof we attule

pin.

9 And the Jewes lpkewyse affirmed, laying that these thynges were so.

10 The Paul after that the deputie hym selfe had beckened vnto hym that he C shoulde speake, aunswered: With a more quiet mynde do J aunfivere for my seife, foralinuch as J vnderstande, that thou haste ben of many peres & iudge vnto this nation:

1 Wetaule that thou mayest knowe, that there are pet but twelue Daves, (ence J
Went vp to Hierulalem for to 55

11 And they neither founde me in N temple disputyng with any mat, one taplpng bp the people, neither in Herr’

nagogues, nor in the ace. Keither

.— —— — I —HfFr

of the apoltles. | b VI.

z Meither can they proue the thynges ok yon this day.

wherot they accule mie. . 23 And whe Felix hearde thele thynges
— 14. But this ¥H coufetle buto thee, that he dekerred 1 8. for Ede et ¥ i Foun after the way which they call heretie, well of that way, and sapde: When Tyate 0 worhip J the God of myfathers, sias the taptayne is tome downe, J Will pote, belcupng all thynges which are written knowe the vtmost of pour matter. econ un the lade aud the prophetes. 24. And he commaunded an vnder cap- KAP?“ a Og And haue hope towardes God, that tapyne to kepe Paul, and to let hym haue recs the resurrection of the dead whichthey ret, and that he choulde forbyd none of bene, then selues loke for also, shalbe both ok his acquayntaunce to minilter vnto the inst and bntust. 5 N hyin, or to come vnto hym. oa And herein studie J, to haue alway 25 And after tertayne dapes, when Fea tleare tonstiente toward God, and to- lix tanie, with his wyfe Prusilla, which ward men. was a Jewesse, he called foozth Paul, nan. por Nobbe after many veres, J came and and hearde hymok the fayth whieh is and. prought almes to my nation, and offe- towarde Chrilte. , rynges: 26 And as he reasoned of ryghteousnesse, N
18 In the which they founde nie purified temperaunce, and udgement to come, in the temple, neither with multitude, Felix W trembled, and aunlwered: Go Here dan

noz pet With duquictuctle: thy way for this tyme, when J haue a hene“
1 Howbeit, there were tertayne Jewes dtonuenient season, J will sendẽ for thee. anz ee out of 2ifia, 27 he hoped allo, that money shonide ree dete

ee 20 Which ought to be here present be- haue ben geuen hym of Paul, that he w dae bee ae kore ther, e actult me, t they had ought myght loole hym: wherkore, he sent for

Fahre agaynst me: hym the oftener, and tommuned with

nate Or els let hele same here say, y they hym. :

m2 haue founde any eupll Dopng in me, 28 Wut after two pere, Porcius Festus

n whyle J stande here in the countell: tame into Felir rownie: And Felix

22 Extept it be for this one voyce, that J » wyllyng to shewe the Bees a plea: A4. . a. xia. kxped standyng among them, of the re- ure, left Paul bounde.

surrection from the dead, am J iudged

J The. xxv. Chapter.

2 The Je wes accuse Paul before Fetus, s he aunlwereth kor hym selle, 11 and appealeth vnto che Emperour, 14 his matter is bought befoze Agrippa, z and he is brought koorth.

ben when Festus was 6 And when he had tarped among them 25
KN tome into the prouince, monre then ten dapes, he went Dowie

AS EG after thice dayes, be vnto Celarea, ⁊ the next day fate downe e A Alcended from Cefarea in the indgenient seate, and commaunr 2 sal) bnto Hierulalem. ded Paul to be brought. .
Fee Then cnkdurmed him 7 who beyng tome, the Jewes which
— the bye pzest, and the werd come from Hiernsalem, stoode achieke of the Jewes, of Paul: And they bont hem and lapde many Egrecnous besought hym, tomplapntes agapnst paul, which they ay wü
3 And desired fanour agayn by, dconlde not proue, . that he woulde sende for hym to Hieru- 8 wohyies he aunlwered (for hem elle) ss other falem:€ they layde awaypte in the way, tthat he bad agaynst the lawe of the gurcerion

to kyll hym. Jewes, neither agapnst the temple, uo: ag
4 Wut Festus aunlwered, that Paul pet agaynst Caesar offended any thyng das Ga schoulde be kept at Cesarea, and that he at all. be became u

hin lelke woulde shortly depart thither. wut Festus wpllyng to do b Jewes cane of m.
5 Let them therkore, sayde he, which a plealure, aunlwered Paul, aud faye: wis acomon among vou are able, come downe with —wyle thou go vp to Dierulalemt, EACLE aan vs, and atcule hym , y thert be any fault be ludged ok thele thynges before me: alen inthis man. 190 Then said Paul: I stande at beanie NN
8 iudgemen

oppressed, and this appeila-

tndgement seate, where J ought to be indged: To the Jewes haue J no harme done, as thon very wel knolbest.
11 For pf J had done any hurt, or committed aup thyng worthy of death, 7 refuse not to dye: But — there be none of these thinges, Wherof they atcuse me, no man map delyner me to them. J ap-

a Shen: beale vnto““ Caesar.

iat, wo 12 Then spake Festus, with the counlell,

equine ort: ail annlwered: Patt chon appealed

ech Ae. Pnto Caelar:vnto Caclar shalt thou go. pee be. 13 And akter certayne dayes, king Agripbre Ban pa and Wernite came vnto Celarca, to

Biome laͤlute Festus.

we en eh l. And when they had ben there a good

nee ledlon, Festus rehearsed Paules caule

onto the kyng, laying: There is a certapne inan ett in bondes of Felix,

15 About whom, When F camre to Hierusalein, *the bye priestes and elders of the Jewes enkourmed me, and desired to haue iudgement agaynst hym.

16 To whom J aunswered: It is not the maner of the Romanes, for fauour to delyuer any man that he shoulde perishe, before that he which is acculed, haue the accusers before hyin, and haue licence to aunswere for hymselfe, concer: nyng the trynie lapde agaynst hym.

17 Therkore, when they Were come hyther, without any delap, on the miorowe
IJ fate to geue iudgement, and commaunded the man to be brought foorth.

18 Agaynst whom, when the acculers stoode vp, they brought none accusation of such thynges as J supposed:

19 But had certapne questions agaynst hym ok their owne superstition, and of one Jelus which was dead, whom

tion by Gods prouidenee wad a meane that Pau spoulde testific of Christe at Rome also.

Act. xxini.f

$a The. vj. Chapter. 15
1Byng Agrippa heareth paul. 25 Paules modest auntwere agaynst the iniurie of fetus,

en Agrippa fayde vnesto Paul, thou art perg mtted to speake koz hy seife. Then Pant
2 78 stretched foorth the
N hande, and aunlwered werte np elfe happy hing %

2 my leite happy, king ippa, betause J chall — 9 5 this day before thee, of all the thynges Whereot
Jam acculed of the Jewes:

5 Nanielp, because thou art expert in all tustomies and questions, Whiche are

‘The actes

peri to be alyue.

20 And berause I doubted of such ma

is pee a
¢ rusalem ö po when dn N

21. But Wheu Pani had appealed kept vnto the knomwiedgeof 245015
Yrounnannded hom to be kept, ty J

myght sende hyn to Caesar.

22. Then Agrippa sapde buto Fetus: woulde also heare the man n seife. To morowe fayd he, thou shalt heare hym.

23 And on the morowe, when Agrippa G
WAS come, and Wernice, with great

Olnpe, and were entred into the coun: ell Houle, with the ehiele captaynes ad chiefe ‘nen of the Citic, at Festus

nimaundement was Pa d 20 ions a

24. And Fe ayde: Byng Agrippa, and al men Which ave here pete! with bs, ve (ce this man, about Whom all the multitude of the Jewes haue untreated me, both at Hierufatent, and also here, crying, that he ought not to tyne any pie J noth ;

25 Bet founde J nothyng worthy of death, that he had conmutted: peer: theleffe, feeyng that he hath appealed to Augustus, J haue deternuned to fendebym:

26 Ok whom J haue no tertapne thyng to write vnto my Horde. vadverfore, F haue brought hym foorth vnto vou, and
{pecially vnto thee, O kyng Agrippa, that after eramination bad, Impght haue somewhat to write.

27 Jor me thynketh it vnreasonable, fo: to sende a prysoner, and not to shewe the caufes which arte laide agaynst hun.

which was at the fir among myne en olbne nation at Hierulalem, knowe all 4 the Jewes, eee
5 Which knewe me from the begumung ae
(of they woulde testifie) that after Me oder ae most straytest (ect of our religion, J ero f lyued a pharisee. . relat
6 And nowe F Mande and am fudge, for the hope of the promise made of Go dae vnto our fathers:

~ of the apoftles. = xxi,

O

Unto which promife, our tweine tribes instantly seruyng God day e nyght, hope to conte. For which hopes fake,
Jed Agrippa, J am acculed of the

ec cs. y

CS why Choulde it be thonght a thyng incredible vnto vou, that God shoulde rayse agayne the dead-

9 J allo veryly thought in my selfe that fi Ought to do many contrary thynges, cleane agaynst the name of Jelus of
Nazareth: ‘

evita lo Mhich thyng J allo dyd in Pierulalem. And many of the Saintes dyd F shut vy in pryson, hauyng reteaned autthoritie of the hye priestes: And when they were put to death, J gaue the sentence. f

n And J punished them oft in enery spnagogue, and compelled them to blalpheme: and was pet more mad vpon them, and persecuted them, cuen vnto straunge cities. a

12 About which thynges, as J went to
Damalcus, with aucthoritie and commission of the hye priestes:

13 Euen at npdday, O kyng, F sawe in the wap, a lyght from heauen, aboue the bryghtnesse of the Sunne, shyne rounde about me and them which iourneyed with me.

2 14 And when we were all fallen to the earth, I hearde a voyte speakyng vnto me, and saying in the Hebrewe tongue:
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me-
It is harde for thee to kicke agaynste the prickes. P

15 And J sapde: Who art thou Lode
And he sayde: J am Pelus whon thou persecutest. 4

16 But rysle and stande vpon thy fete.
Foz J haue appeared vnto thee kor this purpose, to make ther a minister and a
Witnefle, both of chofe thynges which

v. xv b. ath. . c.

les ix a.
Il. c.

thou hast seene, and of thofe thynges in

the which J wyll appeare vnto thee,

17 Delpueryng thee from the people, and from the gentiles, vnto whom nowe 7 sende thee,

18 To open their eyes, that they may be turned from darknesle to lyght, x from the power of Satan vnto God, that they may receaue forgeuenes of sinnes,

„ inheritaunce among them which are

re apost

es. bexNvI.

sanctified by fayth that is towarde me.
19 wahertore, Okpng Agrippa, I was E not disobedient vito the heauenlp visid:
20 Wit therbed first vnto them of Daz mastus, Eat Hierulalem, and through: out all the toastes of Jurie, and then to the gentiles, that they choulde repent, and turne to God, and do such workes as become thenithat repent,
21 Jor this caule the Jewes caught me in the temple, e went about to kyll me.
22 Sepng therefore, that J haue obtayned helpe of God, J continue onto this day, witneslyng both to small and to great, faping none other thynges, then thole which the prophetes and oyses dyd fap shoulde conte:
23 That Chrifte shoulde suffer, and that he shoulde be the first that shoulde ryst
From the dead, and shoulde shewe lyght vnto the people, and to the gentiles.
24 And as he thus spake for hym selfe, F
Festus sayde with a loude vopte: Paul, thou art besyde thy © felfc, much lear- G inn nyng doth make thee mad. wle ,
25 But he sayde: Jan not mad, most auen so noble Festus, but speake foorth the ane wordes of trneth and sobernessc. e f
26 For the kyng knoweth of these thyn- wre ges, before whom also J speake frecsy, rar neither thynke J, that any ok thefe noes thynges are hydden from hin: Foz this aan r thyng was not done in a corner. Selon.
27 Kyng Agrippa, beleuest thou the pro- a count phetes- J Wote Wel that thou beleuest. er wom”

28 Then Agrippa sapde vnto Paul: sews”

Soniewhat thou perlwadest © me to o v. tare be a chustlan. alitle tpaht

29 And Pant sayde: J woulde to God, ba e that not only thou, but also all that Seeg. heave nie to dap, were both somewhat, he me

welt mypnded,

and allo in a great deale, such as J amm, au toner except these bondes. l ‘
30 And when he had thus spoken, the king role vp, and the deputie, x Wernite, and they that sate with them.
31 And when they were gone apart, they talked betwene thé selues, saping:
This man doth nothyng worthy of death, or of bondes,
32 Then fayde Agrippa bnto Festus:
This man niyght haue ben let loose, pf he had not appealed vnto Caesar.

¶ The

‘| heactes

The. xxvij. Chapter. paul shippeth towarde Rome.; Jultus the captapne entreateth hym curtcoury,

4 And at the tal they Cuffer sbipwracke.

Md When it was cõcluded, that we

Italie, they delpnered both Paul, l certapne other

e peploners , puto lone named Ju-

— liuis, an vnder tap-

tayne of Augustus bande.

2 an we entred into a shippe of Adramyttium, € loosed from lande, appoynted to sayle by the coastes of Alia, one
Aristarchus dut of Macedonia, of the tonntrey of Thessalonia, tarping styll
With vs. ‘

And the next day we came to Sidon:
And Julius curteouslpe entreated

aul, and gane hym libertie to go vnto his triendes, and to rekreshe hym lelfe.

And when we had launched from thente, we layled harde by Cypers, betaule the wyndes were contrarpe.

And when we had fapled ouer the fea of Cilicia, and Pamphyplia, we tame to
Mypra, which is in Tpcia.

W6E And chere the vnder captapne kounde a shippe of Alexandria redy, that sapled into Italie, and he put vs therin.

7 And Whe we had fapled slowly many dapes, t starce were come ouer agaynst
Gnydum, because p wynde withstoode vs, We sayled harde byo Candie, ouer agaynst Salmo, ö

Col. iii.

Iere.39 c.
Act. xx nil. c

O Oz, Crcta,
Which was an hegh hyll of
Candie.

it, aud came vnto a place Wich is called the Fayre hauens, nye wherbnto was
Ihe citic of Lafea, when much tyme was spent, when faylpng was nowe icopardus, becaule allo that they had ouerlong kasted,
5 Paul put them in remembraunte.
10 And lapde vnto them: Sprs, I per: ceaue that this vyage will be with hurt and much damage, not of the ladyn and Hhippe only, but allo of our lyues.
Heuerthelelle, the vnder captayne beleued the gouernour and the mailter of the hippe, moze then thole thynges which Were spoken ok Paul. u And becaule the hauen was not commodious to wynter in, manp toke coun-

a {clito Depart thence, yf by any meanes

Ci

3 And with much Worke sapled beyonde

26 Hobbeit, we must be tast into a cer-

they myght attayne to Phenite,

Sa ed se ae and lyeth towarde the southw 5 northwest wynde. oS oy

3 And when the fouth wynde blewe soktly, they luppolpng to obtayne their purpofe, loosed vnto Affon, and sapled past Candie.

14 But not long after, there arose against their purpole, a flawe of wynde out ok

the northeast.

15 And when the shippe was caught, and toulde not resist the wynde, we let her
GO, and were dryuen with the weather.

16 Wut We were carped into an Fle which is named Cauda, and had muͤch worke to come by a boate,

17 Which they toke pp, and bled heipe, and made fait the chippe, fearpna least they shoulde fall into the Sprtes: And fo they let downea vessel, e were taried.

18 The next day, when we were tossed with an erceading tempest, they lighten the shippe,

19 And the thirde day, we tast out with dur owne handes, the tacklyng ok the

tppe.

20 And when neither ö sunne no; starres in many dapes appeared, and no final tempest lay vpon vs, all hope that we should be saued, was then taken away.

21 Wut after long abstinence, Paul stoode foorth in the middes of them, and fayde:
Sprs, pe shoulde haue harkened to me,

t᷑ not to haue loosed frõ Candie, neither to haue brought vnto vs this harme and lolle. 5

22 And nowe J exhort vou to be of good chere: For there shalbe no losse of any mans ipfe among von, but of the shppe.

23 Nor there stoode by me this nyght, the
Angel of God, whole J am, and whom
J serue, om:

24. Saping: Feare not Paul, *thoumull 42 be bought before Caclar. And lo, God 1 hath geuen thee al them that © saple ces with thee. 1 Fy 0 0 5

25 Wherlore syrs be ol good cheare: for n. et
F beicue God, that it Thatbe euen as it . e
Was tolde nie. tone

tayne Pande.

E
27 But when the fourtenth nyght 11 5

come, as we Were saplyng in Adria, about mydnyght the shypmen deemed that there appeared lome countrep vnto them:

28 Aud founded, and founde it twentie faddomes. And when they had gone a litle further, they founded aͤgayne, and founde it fyfteene faddomes.

29 Then kearyng lest they shoulde haue fallen on some rocke, they caste foure anckers out of the sterne, and wilshed

for the day. N

30 And as the shypmen were about to flee out of the shippe, when they had let downe the boate into the fea, vnder a colour, as though they woulde haue tast anckers out of the foreshippe,

31 Paul sapde vnto the vnder taptayne, and to the souldiers: Except thele abide

om inthe © fhippe, ye can not be safe.

ae 3 Then the louldyers cutof the rope ol

suet the boate and let it fall away.

10 . 33 And when the day began to appeare,

1 ae besought them all to take meate,

aping: This is the foureteenth day, that ye haue taryed € continued fatting, reteauyng nothyng at all.

34 Wherkore, I pray you to take meate, for this no doubt is for pour health: for

there shall not an © heere fall from the fe head of anp of vou.

a 35 And when he had thus spoken, he toke

bread, and? gaue thankes to God in prez fence of then all: And when he had broken it, he began to cate,

preacheth Christe at Rome.

ND ͤ when they
4 Her {caped, then
— led Melite.

Wel And; straungers schewed vs no litle

kyndnesse:forthey

g kyndledafpre, and reteaued bs euery one, because of the present rayne, and because of the tolde.

3 And when Paul had gathered a bondell of stickes, and layde them on the fyre, there tanie a Ciiper out of the heat,

2 and caught hym by the hande.
4 And When the straungers lawe the

apostles.

XXX VII :

36 Then were they all of good chea and they allo toke nivate, a *

37 And we were altogether in the shippe, two hůͤdred threescore ¢ sirteene soules.

38. And when they had caten enough, they lyghted the shippe, and cast out the wheate into the sea. ,

39 And when it was day, they knewe not G the lande: but they spyed a tertayne hauen with a banke, into the which they were mynded, pfit were poffible, to thrust in the shippe.

40 And when they had taken vp the anckers, they tommitted them seluesj vnto the sta, and loosed the rudder bondes, and hoysled bp the mayne sayle to the
Wpnde, and drewe to lande.

41 And when they fell into a place which had the sea on both sydes, they thrult in the shippe: And the forepart stucke falt t moued not, but the hynder part ake with the violence of the waues.

42 And the souldlers counsel was to byl the prysoners, lest any of them, when he had Mommie out, ould runne away,

43 But the vnder captapne wyllyng to saue Paul, kept thé from their purpolc, ct tcommaunded that they which coulde

swymme, choulde cat them selues first into the sea, and scape to lande:

44. And the other, sonie on boordes, and some on brokt᷑ peetes of the shippe. And fo it came to passe, that they eltaped all safe to lande.

b The. xxviij. Chapter. s The wiper hurtech not Paules hande, s he healech publius father, z and

üldgement of beast hang on his hande, they lapde a- neee mong them selues, Mo doubt this man dean is a murtherer: hom though he ops haue escaped the fea, pet bengeance tie mcs Sop freth not to lyue. dae e
And he shoke of the Wiper into the ae fyze, and felt no! harme. bini on

6 Howbeit, they wayted whẽ he Mould: ben st, haue l[wolne, or fallen downe dead so- Une fos denlie: Wut after they had loked a great gan hs while and sawe no harme conie to hum, chsch they chaunged thei myndes, and fayde Petre that he asa God, 0 cen
Inthe same quarters were possessids act ok p chiefe man of the Ble, whole naue acer any rose

nd crtour

was Publius, Which reccaued VS, and cn

lodge d erte

Deep vs threr dayes curteouslpe.

8 119 it aun to passe, that the father of
Publius lap sicke of a feuer, and of a bloody fice: to whom Paul entred in, ft praved, and layde his handes on hym, and healed hyn.

So when this was done, other also which had dileases in the Jle, came and

were healed:

Io Which allo dyd vs great honour, and when we Departed, they laded vs with such thynges as Were necessarp.

1 And alter three mouethes we Departed in a shippe of Ale randria, which had

bete, Calto: and Pollux. bare gp, And when we came to Spracula, we

de Ju piterg chyl-

dhe farped there tree dayes.

And kroin thence we fet a compasse,

and came to Khegium, c after one day the south wynde biewe, and We camt

the next day to Puteolus:
I Where we founde beten and were

delired to tary wich then seuen dapes,

and fo we came towarde Nome.
And from thente, When the brethren

hearde of vs, they tanie to mitete vs at

App forum, and at the three tauernes.

When Paul sawe the, he thanked God,

and wared bolde. f ;
16 And when we tame to Nome, d vnder

taptaync delyuered the prploners to the

chiefe taptayne of the boat: Wut Paul
Was suftred to dwell by hin selke, with
à souldyer that kept hym.

Dy And it tame to passe, that after three

dayes Paul called p chiefe of the Jewes together. And whe they were come, he sapde vnto then: Men and brethren, though * J haue tonnnitted nothyng agayust the people, or lawes of the fathers, pet was JJ delpuered prpfoner from ierulaleni into the handes of the
Romanes.

13 Which when they had examined me, woulde haue let ine go, because there was no cause of death in me.

19 But when the Jewes spake contrary,
J was constrapned to appeale vnto
Caesar: not that J had ought to accuse m people of.

20 Foz this tause then haue J called for

Act xxik c

Ac. xxill. c.

Here endeth the Actes of the Apostles.

lc actes

wyntred in the Ale, Whole badge was

z Preachyng the kyngdome of God,

you, euen to set (vou) and to speake m pou: * betause that for the 8 19
Ifracl, Jam bounde with this chayne. Shy

21 And they laid vnto him: vge neither Sea reteaued letters out of Jurie concep: W ne at te i chewed 02 f 5 e beetljren Sa

) 2 pake 7 of thee. 7 paàke any harme

22 But we wyll heare of thee, w thynkest: For as concernyng ch len a
We knowe that' euer Where it is {poke Lori agaynst. .

23 And when they had appoynted hym
à day, there tame mam to hym into his iodgyng, to whom he expounded and testified the kyngdome of God, perlwadyng them tonternyng Jesus, both ont of the lawe of Doyles, and out of the prophetes,euen from moruing to night.

24 And “ome were perlwaded in the Ka thynges which were fpoken, and somm beleucd not.

25 And when they agreed not among E them felues, they departed after that
Paul had spoken one worde, that is to lap] well spaͤke the holy ghost by Efaiag

the prophete, vnto our fathers, b

26 Saping: Go vnto this people, and kene fap, with pour eares shall ye heare, and ian shall not vnderstande: and With pour Lab, eyes shall ye see, and not perttaue. ani,

27 For the heart of this people ts waren 4: grosse, c their eaves are dull of hearing, and their eyes haue they closed:lest they shoulde lee with their eyes, and heare with their cares and vnderstande with their heartes, and shoulde be conucrted, and J schoulde hrale then.

28 Wdᷣ it knowen therfare vnto pou, that this saluation of God is sent to the gen-

tiles, and they shall heare it.

29 And when he had sapde these wordes, the Jewes departed, and had great reasonyng among them selues.

30 And Paul dweit two peres full in his oivne Hired houle, and reteaued all that tame in vnto hym, 5

and teachyng those thynges which con-

terne the Lode Jesus Chattte, with all confidence,no man forbyddyng hym. <2

R. E.

r 4 % oo ee aa > N =
Sp The Cart Cosmographie, of the peregrination or iourney of

: Saint Paul, with the diflaunce of the myles.

ee

n i * iy di} 2 r-

Ere hast for thy better instruction) the defcription of the iourney and

‘ 8 N 2
ZN i om q 9 I peregrin which is in this fecond booke of Saint Luke called the Actes of
41 : Ache Apostles, most intreated of. And forbecause thou readest oftentymes of Emperours, q 28 MKynges, and Deputies, thou hast set foorth to thee, the names, the yeres, and howe longe

! so cucry Emperour or Kyng raigned, or Deputic goucrned,and vnder whom any of these actes were done, euen vntyll the death of Saint Paul.

The order of tymes.
Theyeresof | The yeres of | Theyeres of | Theyeres of | I heyeres of the Emperours of the Prefidentesof | the Herodians. Christes incarna- Saint Paul the
Rome. | the Iewes. tion. Apostle. ande zu: Tiberius. Pilate. Hemde. (Hriste. Paul. wath vite kbit. bil. bij. rruli. f

Luge. kx. In this pere C hridte fuffered, arole from the dead, afcended into heaven, from thence he sendeth vnto his Apostles the holy ghost. The Apostles do allemble and gather a con gregation vnto the Lorde Chette, and do continue in praper and lulfer perlecution.

Stenen was Trix. | dit, xix. kxxiiii. E

ber. his Samar la doch receaue che doctrine of Christe. Saint Steuen was ftoned. Saint
Eaamas. Paul allo is conuerted vnto Christe as he iourneyed towarde Damascus, and fro thence
™ ße departed into Arabia, to preache the Golpell. x. [ ditt, . | xxxv. L ii.
Philip doth preache the Golpel vnto the cities by the lea lyde, and doth conuert a man ol Ethiopia, an Eunuch, and of great auctoritie with Candace Queene of the Ethioiaus. .
Tri. are |_yrt. | Exxvi. | tt.
The Gotpell is preached to the Strians and pohenitians, of thole that were difpear: fed and kledde from Hierulalem. L n b wine ws | Opt. [x. pati 885 — 2519 10 ee 1 70 Sn
En pereg. i ferufalem to fee Peter, from thence he goeth into Syria,
Shen Giigin Ge. 5 Ade aie vnto Lidda. After that, he was called ol Cornelius

to come vnto Cel area, where he apd baptize, and krom thence he went to Hierulalem, geurng auntwere to eche one that entred in quettion with hm.

xxiii. Marcel. xxiii. 0 4 7 1 5 5 sist 15 -
Anttoche in Syria is conuerted vnto Christe, the Apostles lende thyther Barnabas. aa Nd Paul out of Carta to Antioche, whyther allo Agabus came, (pea: king ol dearth that was to come. Paul and Barnabas did succour them of Hierusalem.
V% ee nu

M3 Catus.

IXXXIX

q The order of pines.

Caius. Aerippa. __|_xptill. xxxir. Ib,
Paule and Barnabas, by the comm aundement of the holp gholt, were sent from An

tit aul and Barna abode a long tyme.
In thele pee: Illi. Silit. berg, Ban. Claudius. pyriia, pull tl ; a, and Lica- 2 — * ont conuct = “tt, vii. | : rp, |
This pere was James the elder beheaded of Herode Agrippa, and Peter was calte in prplon. and was deliuered by the angell or the Lorde. Chis kyng allo Dyed in bis fes uenth pere. a

Aa zosephus,
Tubus.

4 ulebitts,
€)20fms and
Beda alficnicth,

it. ili.

v. vi.

| Syria,

Phout the begynnyng of this pere. Paul and Barnabas toke their tourney througty
Phenitia and Samara, vnto Hierulalem, to the finode o: countell, After that, they returned vnto Antioche, where thep remapned a pere, whypther commeth peter, who
Paul rebubeth. Galath. ii. Then Paul goeth vnto Cilicia and Licaonta, .

Ae die [Tiberius l 9
Lene lit. | ii | Bi 1

pere.

In there peres were coimerted che countreys of Porigta, Galatia, Mitta, fro Croad he went by water into Macedonia and conuerted the cities, namely Philippos, Appo-

lonia. Amphi

Hierütalem, meth agapne vnto Antioche he congrega ftituted in Galacia

De commeth — to Ephesug. _ -°

„!!!!!! AAA = F lit.

Paul kerieth ower into Grecia. from thence about Cater in his. rit, pere he goẽth b fea into Syria, not a strapght courte, because of the Jewes, but firke vnto Phplippa citie of Macedonia, and commeth about pentecok vnto Hierusalem: there he is im priloned ol the Jewes, let at libertie immedtatlp of Claudius Lisia tribunus, an is sent vnto Celarea to felix is kept in custodie of Felix two pereg.
Nero v. vi. vii. | rrtttt.

Feltus commeth about Map into FJudea, before whom he picadech his matter: Alt

that, before Feltus and Agrippa the kyng. He is lent vnto Rome in Italie, the lecond ere of Mero.

[ Feftus Portius vii. Avi.

T
Taoyeres i a in free papfet, 5 ‘ xxvii.

rrvtii. rr,

perfecution cf

usttang, I. the. x. pere ot

fa co. mace

Atter that

ied

to the Romanes. © , XC.

The Epistle of the Apostle Saint Paul, to the Romanes.

1 9 n af 2 xy aay
. 2 8 ue n 1 CMS

4) R 2 N Vv
G 9 2 is g 1 . ‘K * 1 > 8 il

me eS x

A Pa has 1 chy ji hes

7 il 5 Ah U

Aul the seruaunt of Je-

z lus Christe, W called (to
“hey Ay} bey an Apostle, seuered te into the Gofpel of God.
% 2 % e ehich he had prom ee led afore by his propheae tes in 5 holy striptures

00 wher = : nico Ok his fore, which was made ofthe
. erde of Dawud after the flethe: den, And hath ben declared to be the lone isms Of God, with power after the spirite sme that lanctifieth, by the refurrectio from bear the dead, ok Hels Chzilte our Lorde. ame 3 Wy Whom we haue reteaued grace and apostleship, that obedience myght mae be genen vnto the kayth in his name, ahe mong all heathen.
“ee 6 Among whom, ve art allo the called fone ok Jelus Christe: D

7 To all that be in Nome, beloned of ria, God, faintes by tallyng, grate to pou, ua. and peace, from God our father, aud

the Lorde Jesus Christe.

8 First verily H thane my God throngh

The first Chapter.
1 Paul che weth by whom and to what purpote he is called. 16 nohat the Golpell is.

18 Che vengeaunce of God vpon the wicked. r0 The die of the creatures. 24 Che ingratitude and punichement of the wicked.

esus Chzilte for you all, that pour ayth is publisshed throughout all the
Wolde.

9 FJor God is my witnesse, whom J un serue; with my spirite in the Golpell ol co. in his sonne, that without ceassyng J male mention of pon, x5

Jo Praying alwapes *in my prayers, that pu ia. by some meane at the last, one tyme 02 Coloffi.a. other, I myght take a prosperous iournep by the Wyll of God, to come vnto

vou.

nu Jor J long to fee vou, that J myght bestowe among pon some spirituall gift, that pe myght be stablisshed.

11 That is, that j might haue confolation together with pou, eche with others fayth, yours and mine.

1 J woulde that pe should knowe brethren, howe that J haue oftentymes purpoled to come vuto you (aud haue aa.xxvi.b ben let hytherto,) that J mypght haue some frutte also among pot, as among

other of the gentiles. l Mij Jam

 Pfalicyi.c.

| ‘The pistle

14. Jam debter both to the grekes and 24. wherefore God gaue them vp to me

c Au tee tothe barbarous, both to the wyse, dleanenelle, though) the lustes of ther

Sears e ae hepa ~~ owne heartes, to dekyle their oi e.

gomon ont 15 So that as much as in me is, Jam dtes among them lelues.

heather. en kt dy to preache the Golpell to you that 25 nahiche chaunged his © trueth for a © de
Sench mo are at Ronie also. a lye, and worchipped and serued the cre- be bd

Grekes € ,

Sarong. Sr 16 For J am not ashamed of the Gospell gbertdoet) ofehitt becante itis the power of God kane ane, nto laluation to all that beleue, to the
Je we first, and allo to the Greke. .

icarned, ceuei, and of good dzyngyng bp.

zg, bent: 17 Jor by it is the ryghtedusnes ol God

neth eude and sauagt peoplt, with who no

man mr

well haue to

do. 18

opened frd fayth to fayth. As it is Written: the iuste shall lyne by faytg.

(d) which ap peraunce the wozlde know

eth nothyng

of. Foz in the 19 sygyt o

el men are

is mauifest among thent, betanse God ebd. aueh hath shewed it vnto theni.

cient 20 For his inuilible thinges, being vnderstanded by his workes, though the cre-

they broioc

anp thyngt of

God, pet ther

de naught, bea

cause thep nep er t

him, nor lerut de en 21 Weeanfe that when they knewe God, con then they glorified hyni not as God, neither

ation of che worlde, are scene, that is,

(t) They hold tht trueth in vnkpghteouf-

ties in their imaginations, and their foolishe heart was blynded. cetme in khepy became fooles: and le. 23 And turned the glorie of the immortall God, vnto an image, made not only after the sumilitude ofa mortal man, but
Eze. ail b. Also of birdes, and foure footed beastes, and of crepyng beastes.

Ietem. ii. c.

¢ The. j. Chapter. ‘ie

1 Gods rudgement vpon the hypocrites, 12 Ignoraunce ercuteth nor. iz All men are kinners. 15 The Gentiles by their conscience, 17 the

Jewes bp their lawe.

A peresore art thou

Math. vil. a. (al roy) OD mextusable, O iia,
KING YES wholocuer“ thou

ad e Bs 4 D ZZ be that © indgeit.
851 AN For in that fame
5 A Jeyswherin thou iudieee [OC e gest another thou

and impittit, yrt be ot al other most busp and curpous in notyng and

we) )
=a =! feif, Foz thou that wnoong an ludgest, doest euen p lelfe lame thynges. ether meres” But we are {ure that the iudgement bun soe dk god is atcording to the trueth, against

zealt, but to. tusttfie then seiutg, end to try into hatred ¢ cenit ‘i r

both his eternall power and godhead:
So that they are without excule

were thankekull, but waxed full of vam

erst 18 8 the reucth 2 When they counted them selues wyse,

tondempnest thy

ature, moze then the creator, wl of Ce be praysed for euer. Amen, ben fa
26 Wherefore God gaue then vp onto u. chamefull iultes: Tor euen their wo- Me, men dyd chaunge the natural ble, into u za that which is agaynst nature. that sabi

27 And likewise allo, che men! enen
Fo2 the Wrath of God G appeareth am ek the ni e r
C from heaucn, against all vngodlpneslek vnrightedusnes ok men, Which © withholde the trueth in vnrighteousnes.
For that that may be knowen of God,

turall vse of the woman, and brent in vun 9 their lustes one with another, and mn fee
With nien wrought kylthyneste, and re- van ceaued to them selues the rewarde of e. their errour (as it was attordyng)
28 And as they regarded not to knowe
God: euen so God deliuered them vp Aar vnto a leude mynde, that they should do thole thinges Which were not comely:
29 Weyng full ot all bnrighteousnes, fox: mication, craktpnesse, couetousnes, maz liciousnes, full of enuie, murther, debate, deteite, euyll tonditioned, whpfperers,
30 Wackbpters, haters of God, dilpiteful, proude, boasters, bryngers vp of euyli thinges, dilobedient to father mother:
31. Without vnderstandpng, conenaunt breakers, Without naturall affection, truite breakers, vnmertcpfull.
32 The whiche knowyng the righteoulnes of God, howe that they which commit such thynges are worthy of death, not onlp do the fame, but also haue Oe plcasure in them that do them. |

them which commit such thynges.

3 Thinkest thon this, O thou man that iudgest them whiche do fuch chynges, and doest the fame thy telle! that thou chalt estape the iudgement of God- b

4 Eyther despilest thou the rythelle of his goodnes, k paciente and long sulke- - a raunte, not knowyng that the kynd- Aa u nelle of god leadeth thee to repentance?

5 Wut thou alter thy fubbernneffe and 1% heart that can not repent, heapest an thy felfe wrath, agaynst the 0

wrath and declaration of the righteous iundgement of God: ;
Which wyl rewarde euery man accordyng to his Deedes: .

jythaxvl a 6
») or tat

well doyng {clic for glorie, and honour, and ummostalitie, eternall lylc.

Wut vnto them that are contentious, epee? that do not obey the trueth, but obey bee brtrighteousnes (Pall come} indignation, mabe BAD Wath, * ie? Txibulation, and anguiche, vpon eue-
151 ry foule of man that doeth euyll, of the

Jjewe fivit, and allo ofthe Greke: me Jo Wut glorie and honour, and peace to euery man that doeth good, top Jewe first, and allo to the Greke. oexixe II For there is uo respect of persõs with

? it map

oD. pew. 12 For wholdeuer hath finned without
Habe, chall also perishe without lawe:
And as mauy as haue sinned in v lawe, shalbe iidged by the lawe.
Iz (For in the fight of God, they are not sib. righteous whiche heare the lawe: but the doers of the lawe shalbe iustified.
14 For when the Gentiles, which haue
C not the lawe, do of nature the thynges tonteyned in the lawe: they hauing not the lawe, are a lawe vnto them selues.
If Which shewe the workes of the lawe written in their heartes, their conlcience bearing them witnesse, € their thoͤnghtes, accusyng one another, or excusyng,) lun vil c. 16 At the dap when God (hall indge the setretes of men by Pets Chritte, accors bpngto© my Gofpell. meter Wehold, *thouartcalleda Jewe, and bbe te; O restest in the lawe, and makest thy
1 boast of God, chad 18 And knowest his wyll, and alowest the thinges that be excellent, inkourmed

soe 7 Do them, whiche by continuyng in

by the lawe:

19 And beleuest that thou thy selfe art a gupde of the blynde, a lyght of them which are in darknesse,

20 An inkournier of them whiche lacke diltretion, a teacher of the vnlearned: which haft the fourme of knowledge, € of the truech in the lawe.

21 Thou therefore which teachest anoz D ther, teachest not thy selfe- Thou prea- ach. via chest a man shoulde not steale, pet thou stealest.

22 Thou that sayest a man shoulde not commit adulterie, breanest wedlocke.

Thou abhorrest idoles, and pet robbelt
God of his honour. ;

23 Thon that makest thy boast ofp lawe, though breakyng the lawe dishonorzest
God.

24. For the name of God is enyll spoken ofainong the Gentiles, through pou:

As it is written. Esaias li..

25 Jor cirtumcision verylp auapleth, vf rc. 6s thou kepe the lawe: But pf thon be a breaker of the lawe, thy circiuncision es made vncirciumcision.

26 Therefort it the? vntirtuneistõ kepe eg, the ordinauntes of the law, shall net his b hne vncircumtilid be counted fog cavcuumie Ge 5e of

27 And shall not vncircumcilion Wich is werte which by nature, if it kepe the law, iudge ther, helge
Which beyng vnder the letter a tircum- en tecoroyng cision, doest trausgresse the lawe- Wordt

28 For he is not a Jewe, whiche is a
Jewe outwarde. either is that tirtũcision which is ontwarde in the fleche:

29 But he is a Pee whiche is ONE in- oho ve
Wardly, and the circuits ofp heart, ae b.
Which conlisteth in the spirite, aud not in b. the letter lis circumcilion! Whole prayse is not of nien, but of God.

x ar: The. ĩij. Chapter. zough 9 N lan lee The Jewes haue a prerogatiue. io Che Je wes and Gentiles be both linners. Ca) which tu
Jing in the 21 All are iustitied by grace through fapth, and not through workes. aden

AT paeferment
Athen hath p Jew-
Dor what auauntafig neth aurcumalton-
Mich every Way. itt, for *becaule onto them were
A coumutted p wordes of God.

romtse. Fo not beleue: Shal their vnbeliefe make ee the ww fayth of God without effect: A
4 God forbyd. Pealet God be true AND ae g

ur

euery man a lper, as it is writtẽ: That ade dee

thou myghteft be iuthfied in thy fay- dae

inges, and ouercoime when thou art ies

iudg ed. to te opted

But pf our vurighteousnes setteth u once

foorth the righteonsnes of God, What Foor ov

shall we faye e Is God vnrpghteons Sosa
M ii which

Which taketh bengeaunces J speake ate ter the mauer of men,

6 God forbyd. For howe then shall God iudge the worlde-

For yk the trueth of God hath more abounded through my lpe, vnto his glory, whyam F as pet iudged as a sinner-

8 And not rather( as men {peake eupll of vs, and as fone affirme that we say) let vs do enyll, that good may come therok-
Whose danpnation is iuste.

9 What then: Are we better ehen they’)
No, in no Wile, Ho2 we haue alredy proued, howe that both Jewes and Gentiles are all vnder sinne.

PHL Kii a. 10 As it is written: There is none righteous, 19 not one.

and. li. a.

u There is none that vnderstandeth,

there is none that seketh after God.

11 Thepare all gone out of the waye, they are all vnprofitable, there is none that doth good, no not one.

13 Their theote is an open sepulchre, with their tongues they haue deteaued, the poyld of aspes is vnder their lippes.

14 Whose mouth is full of cursyng and bytternesse.

15 Their feete are swyft to shed blood.

16 W griefe € miserie are in their

apes. i

17 And they way ot peace haue they not

knobwen. .

Phosviald There is uo feare of God before their

eye

19 Nowe We knowe that what thynges io cuer the lawe faith, it saith it to them which are vnder the lawe: That all mouthes maye be Hopped, and that al p world may be indaungered to God.

C
Psal. v. b.

Psal. v. b.

Prou. i. b.

Esaias. lix. b

J The. iiij.

Justikication is the free gykt ol God. as it appeareth by Dauid and Ibra
13 and allo by the office of la we and kapth. F e 32 awaham,

A1 we 2 Hat shall we sape then
G that“ Abraham our faz
Elias. . ts fs ther, as partepnyng to
„ the flesshe, dyd fyndez
Ci Ai Koay] SFoz if Abraham were
— innstified by workes, thé hath he wherein to boaste, but not be-

fore God.
Genexvb.2? , Jor what sayth the scripture- Abra-
Pur ham beleued God, and it was counted

vnto hym lor ryghteousnes.

he Fate ee

20 Wecaule that *by the deedes of the w Gac

15 1 ee be inthe Chas
. For by the lawe, conmieth dane.

the knowledge of linne. * metal

21 Wut nowe is the righteousne a een
1 895 0 the lawe, bepng sh set nesled by the testimonie of the | male of the prophetes. 2 0 nne

The ryghteousnes of God ccommeth]

ano pond cum that biene hn

i cm eleue.

0 Nee r 0 *

23 For alt haue synned, and are desti val gun of God, yee

24“ Huttitied freely by his grace, though "=i the redemption that is in Chalie ell

25 Whom God hath fet foorth to be a © e

propitiatiõ, through fayth in his blood. Saaten « to declare his epaiteoitines, m that be fr at forgeueth the fines that are path, derten
26 Which God dyd lufker, to thew at this fare os tynie his rightedulnes, that he nught Eil be tutte, e the iustifier of pnt Which be: enen
1 on pus. 55 ee
27 Where is then thy boaltyng 2 It is ere dan. dluded. By what lace 1 7 5
Map, but by the lawe ol fayth.
28 Therfkore, we holde that a man is in- Cu stified by fapth, without the deedes of the lawe. N
29 Is he the God of the Jewes only:
Hs he not also of the Gentiles: Bes, euenofthe Gentiles allo. -
30 For it is one God whiche Mall iustifie the tircumcision by © fayth, and vncir- ene cumcision though fayth. an

nd the Gas

z. Do we then deltroy the lawe through anole fapth 2 God forbyd: Wut we rather aug mapntapne the lawe. f W

Chap ter.

To hym that oy leneth on hym that tustifieth the © vn- ile d godly, his fayth 5 dulnes. 1 tne

6 Euen as Dawid descrebeth the blesled- bre nesle of the man vnto whom GOD MN foes, den puteth righteousnesse without Moses: teks bre
Wlesled are they whole vnrighteoul Baan nesse are forgeuen, € Whole .

a ——

to the

touered.

3 Ble lled is that man to whõ the Lorde
Wyll not inipute linne.

9 Came this) ble slednes then vpon the cirtunitision, or vpon the vncircumcilion also: 3702 we fay, that fapth was reckened to Abraham for ryghteousnes.

Yo Howe was it then reckened; when he

was in the circumtcision- o2 WHE he was

in the vncireinmtision: Not in the cir-

Geo ernb. cumieifion : but in vnclreumtilion.

Gen scvũ b. II And he reteaued the ligne of circum-
0 goms bilidn, as the“ seale of the ryghteoulene ne llc ok fayth, whlche he had pet beyng
100 vncircumciled, that he shoulde be the faz dat dee kbher of al then that beleue, though they drang be not cirtumeiled, that ryghteousnes wih bel myght be inputed vnto them allo.

to 12 And that be myght be father of cir-

cumcision, not vnto theni only whiche

tame of the tirtumtised: but vnto them

also that walke in the steppes of the

fayth that was in our father Abraham, before the tune of tircumtision.

Foz the pronile that he shoulde be the heyre of the worlde, was] not to Abraham or to his seede through the lave,

but through the ryghteoulnes of fayth.

Gauthier, for yk they which are okthe lawe be

heyres, then is fayth but vayne, and the promise ot none effect:

15. Betause the lawe causeth wath. Foz where no lawe is, there is no transgrelsion. —

16 Therefore by fayth (is the inheritaunce geuen} that it night (come) by grate, that

CV

Omanes.

ci.

the pronule myght be fare ta alt) seede, not to that only Which is of the lawe, but to that also wich is of the faythol
Abraham, which is the father of vs al. 1 .
17 (Asit is Witten, that J haue made Gen.xviia thee a father of many nations) before
God, whom he beleued, which restoreth the dead vnto like, and talleth those thynges Whiche be not, as though eren they were. World this ap
13 Who contrary to Hope, beleued in Wen en hope, that he chonde be the father of enge e. many nations, accordyng to that Which ws“ was spoken: fo shall thy seede be. Sch dane
19 And he faynted not in the fapth, nog 27,272 tonsidered his owne body nowe dead, zz bro when he was almost an hundred peres 2 e i

mans rcalon

(d) In the

old, neither pet the © deadnesse o Sa- er |

rats wombe.

(£) Foz that

20 He stackered not at the promise of God duocseang

through vnbelieke: but was strong in fayth, geuyng glorie to God:

21 And beyng full certified, that what he had pronifed, he was able also to perfourme.

22 Anodtherfore was it reckened to hym for righteousnes.

23 Meoeuerthelelsle, it is not wzitten foz Rom. xv. 2.

hymonlp, that it was reckened to hun:
24 But also for vs, to whom it shalbe rec kened, so that we beleue on hym that ake bp Jesus our TLorde from the cd *
Which was delivered for our sinnes, and was raysed agayne for our iustifi-

cation. |

€ The. v. Chapter.

Che fruite of fapth. 7 Che loue of God, and obedience ol
12 From whence commeth deach, and from whence lyke.

I Merefort being iuich 5 stified by fayth, we ire: are * 105 a 52 — ith Ge 1 hoeen owe our Torde den Jesus Chrilte:

Wy whom allo
¢ haue had an

ar Sous = entraũte by faytt), vnto this grace wherin we stande, and

Hebt ina. reioyte in Hope of the glorie of God.
3 Mot that onlp: but also we reiopce in

4 Pacientce profe, profe hope:

Chritte.

worketh pacience:

5 c achamied, the the one

And hope makctl) not that be bo because the tone of God is shedde abrode nat sep in our heartes bythe holy ghost, which mer Howe toy, is geuen vnto vs. that ther ae

Jor when we were pet weake, accor- an sarees dyng to the tyme, Chalke dyed for the ane won vngodly. but constantip dame, where

ly mynded be:
7 Nowe state wyll any man dye for the g

righteous: Pet peraduenture for the debe

ta the n.

good sonre men durst dye.
But

gp ij

. he Epistle al

eS LS =! A
8 8 But God letteth cut his touc to-

n b warde vs, seyng that whyle we were pet finners,Chaitte oped for vs.

9 Mauche niore then nowe, we that are iuthfied by his blood, halbe saued from wrath though hym. „

10 F02, pf When We were enemies, We were reconciled to God by the death of his lonne: much moze, seyng we are retonciled, we shalbe saued by his lyke.

1 Mot only so, but we allo ioye in God, through our Lorde Jesus Chile, by whõ We haue nowe receaued the atonement.

1 Wherkore, as by one man sume entred into the worlde, e death by une: cuen fo, death entred into all men, insomuch as all haue sinned. 5

; Jor vnto the lawe, was sinne in the worlde: but sinne is not imputed when there is no lawe.

C14 Heuerthelesle, death raigned from

Adam to Doyles, ouer them allo that had not sinned with uke traulgression as dyd Adam, whiche is the figure of hym that Was to come.

15 But not as the finne, fo is the gykt. For pt through the sinne of one many be dead: much moze the grace of God, and

en. n. c. om. vl. d.

che gyft by avace, Which is by one man a
Aan Chile, hath abounded onto” many.

16 And not as by one that finned seuen to)

the gyft. For the iudgement was of one D into condemnation ; butthe gyfte, © of Lachen marty sumes into iustification. Delpucten fg

17 Jor yk by the sinne of one, death raig- Jane ned by the meanes of one: much moze lun n g they, whiche retcaue aboundaunce of Herba

grace, and ofthe gyfte of ryghteoulnes, shall raigne in life by the nieanes ok one,
Jesus Christe.

18 Lypkewwyle then, as by the sinne ol one

inne came on all men to condenpnation: euen fo, by the ryghteousnes of one good came) vpon all men to the ryghteousnes ok lyle. :

19 Forasby one mans disobediente maz ny became sinners: so by the obedience of one, (hall many be made ryghteous.

20 Wut*the lawe inthe meane tyme cre Ga. tic tred in, that sinne shoulde encrease. But where sinne was plenteous, grace was more plenteous.

21 That as sinne hath raigned vnto death: euen fo myght grace raigne thorowe ryghteoulnes vnto cternall Ipfe, by Helus Christe our Lode,

The. vj. Chapter.

Hewnelle of lyle tolo weth iusclikication, to the which he exhorteth.

Hat shall we faye
Athen z Shall we continue in sinne, re that grace mape

J abound: God fox

= 2 5 byd.
2 “ACH Howe Mall we
Be Deets | 9 5 are dead o jon ken to sinne, Ipue an sens jonger therin- g

"3. Anobbe ye not, that au we whiche haue ben baptized into Jelus Christe, nens halle ben baptized “ into his death: aut de Me are buryed then with him by bapoperand kilmme into his death, that lpkewyle as

Chnste was rayled vp from the dead b the glorie of the father: euen fo, we al
1 shonlde walke in newnelle of lyfe, ebe § Jor tt we be graft together by the like-
_ bonds ne sse of his death: euen fo Mall we be

mica bythe (partaßkers of the relurrection:

bute,

& in vs: and at apwe are ade cleane itmardlpe

6 Rnowyng this, that our olde mantis crutified with hym allo, that the body of firme might vtterly be destroyed that hencefoorth we Thouide not er ue finne.

„ Forhetvatis dead, is iustified krom

sinne.

3 And pk webe dead with Chrilte, we ji. Tim. ü b
10 that we fall allo lyue With W him:

9 Knowpng that Christe beyng raysed

from the dead, dyeth no more „death Apoc ib. hath no moze power ouer hym.
10 Fo2 as touchyng that he dyed, he dyed concerning sinne once: And as touching that he lyueth, he lyueth vnto God.

n Typkewyle, recken pour lelucs to be

dead to linne, but alyne vnto God, thorowe Jesus Cheitte our Lorde. u Let not sinne raigne therefore tn pout moztall bite, 1 choulde thervnto ustes ot it. obey by the luste Seither

Ci; Meither geue pe pour members as instrumentes of vurpghteoulsneslse vnto sinne: but gene pour selues vnto God,

as they that are alyue from the dead.

and pour members as instrumentes of ryghteousnesse vnto God.
14 Fortine shall not haue power oner

cee. port, betause pe are not vnder p lawe,
Athene. but vnder grace.

Boonie 15 What then: Shall we sinne, betaule

ba ne we are not vnder the lawe, but vnder dee hut gratee God fogbyd.

but amg, 16 t Anowe pe not, how that to whom socuer pe commit pour lelues as seruauntes to obey, his seruanntes ve are to whom ye obey: whether it be of sinne vnto death, or of obedience vnto ryghteousnesse-

17 But God be thanked, that ye were the seruaũtes ol sinne: but ye haue obeyed with heart the fournie ok doctrine, into the which pe Were brought vnto.

by the holye ghost into the newnesse of lpfe,

to the Romanes,

ACH .

18 Welug then made tree frõ sinne ye are 1e 4 become b seruauntes of rpghteguͤmesse. Nom vn

19 AJ speake after the maner of men, becaufe of the infirnutie ok pour fleht. Leezen
As pe haue geuen pour members ler- des ann uauntes to vntleannesle and intquitie, auch arch vnto iniquitie: euen fo nowe geue pour 22270" menibers seruauntes to righteoulnesse, h. vnto holynesse.

20 For When pe were the seruauntes of sinne, pe were free from ryghtedulnesse.

ar What fruite had ye then in those thynges, wherol ye are nowe ashamed: Foz the ende of thofe thynges, ts death.

22 Wut nowe pe beyng made free from sinne, and made the seruauntes of God, haue pour fruite vnto holpnesse, and the ende cuerlastyng lyfe.

23 Foz* the rewarde of sinne is death: Gene u. but the gyft ol God ts eternal lyfe, tho- Nom ve. rowe Pelus Christe our Lorde. <a

¢ The. vij. Chapter.

1.7.12, Che ble of the la we, 24 from the which Chritte hach delyuered vs. 3 The lyght bet wene the la we of the kleshe, and the lawe of the fpirite.

A1 fee. Noe pe not bre-
SES) Fees, that for Ispeale
. A tothethatknowe

(a) 13 I 8 Bes / ’ e e em RSE eR the late) how

Christe al mé N dire maryen e NN . that the law hath ae e power ouer ami, ac ro. : a wae as long as he lpe but diselo tye es Ri a 8 857 libthee anne MN Oe ueth: wane 2 e SF) For the woman mann eke Which is in subiectid to a man, is bounde neste, bp the lawe to the man, as long as he dolle lpueth: But yk the man be dead, she ts
Nihed foz “a den amoi looled from ee lawe okthe man. ace So then yk whyle the man lpueth, che en couple her lelfe with ance ena fe
Cuter halbe counteda wedlocke breaker:

inocu” pyfthe ian be dead, che is free from the

ae aw, lo that she is no Wedlocke breaker, though fhe couple her selfe with another man.

4 Euen so, ve also my brethzen are Dead
Sas tonternyng the lawe by the“ body of
Chu == Chaitte, that pe Tyoulde be coupled to manor: another, Who is rayled from the dead, dauer dee, that we shoulde bryng foorth fruite vn-
Wear to God. rithm 5 Foz when we were in the fleshe, the
Feser: lustes of inne whiche were by the lawe
Banna wrought in dur members, to bring forth ch the fruite vnto death.

tot e ig m vs dayly wotakened: we are counted deed to the sawe,
Hot F law hath no domino ouer vs.

6 Wut nowe are We delpuered from the lave, and dead vnto it whervnto we were in bondage, that we shoulde serue in newenesse of spirite, and not in the oldnesse of the letter.
7 What shall we fay then! Is the lawe firme: God korbyd. Heuerkhelesse. J Romv.c. knewe not sinne, but by the lawe:For N id had not knowen lust, except the lawe had layde, thou thatt not lust. Dea
3 Burt sinne, takyng occasion by the tommaundement, wrought in me all maner of concupiscente.For Without the lalwe, sinne [was dead. l
9 J once tpned Without lawe: Wut when the commaundement tame, line reupucd, .
10 And J was dead. And the very fame C tommaundemẽt, which was ordeyned vnto lyfe, was founde to be vnto me an occafion of death. n Jor sinne, takyng octasion by the tommaundement, hath deceaued nie, and by the same slewe me.]
11 Wherfore the lawe is holy, and the tommaundenient holp, x iust, and good.
1; Was that then which was good, made death vnto me: God forbyd. Wut linne, that sinne myght appeare, by that
Which was good to worke death Aa

Exod. xx. c.

| chat ie by ß comntaundement, urght th

out ok mealure sinfull.
14 we knowe, that the la we is spiritual: but I ani carnal, * solde vnder
0 firme.

Foz that which J do, Jalowe not.
Foz what J woulde, that do F not: but aller: what J häte, that do . oe 16 Ik J do nowe that which J woulde

| not, J content vnto the lawe, that it is

chen bod. *

ber eke 1 Nowe then it is not J that do it: but

fame that dwelleth in me.

0 18 For J knowe that in mie, that is to lay

in my fleshe, dwelleth no good thyng.

For to wyll, is present With me: but FW

fynde no meanes to perkourme that which is good.

19 «Foz the geod that J woulde, do J

not: But the cuyll which J woulde not,

pas. lil. 2.

wen to ina

Ne. vl. d.

9 The. vij Chapter.

Ihe Epiltle .

c - | | — 7 that do J.

J i. thes ch ay 1 dun not, then it n at Doth it, but sinne dwelleth in me. ; 0

21 JI fynde then by the lawe, that when

e good, euyll is present with
22 Jor J Delite in the lawe of God, after the in warde mau: *
23 But J lee another lave in my mene bers, rebellyng agaynst the lawe of my mynde, and subduyng me vnto the lawe ol sinne, which is in my members.
24. O wretehed man that Jam: who dae mie from the “body of this (de ca E of lune,
25 Jthanke God through Jesus Chatte aer dür Londe. Do then, With the mpnde ade.
I my selke serue the lave of God: but Kaen
With the flethe, the lawe of sume. fra deer

krö god, wher by plagues g unierleg art

Che assuraunce of the kaythfull. 6 Che fruites of the holy ghost.; The weakencle of the la we. 17 Ot hope. is Ok patience vnder the crolle. 29 Ok the koreknowledge of God.

nation to them which e are in Chyiste Fel, which walke not after oN We eee aie te

The law he spirite, the law of ic, is here

en inpro-

cerita Fo what tHelatve coulde not do, in fnnesom as much as it was weake through the

called the ite of lpke, jule it quic eth and ge ly ipte.
Sod, choo the sacriok lynne,

fiethe, God sendyng his owne sonne, in the sunmilitude of finfull fie she, euen by finne, condempned sinne in the flethe:
That the ryghteousnelle of the lawe, an an miyght be fulkylled in vs, which walke den ie not after the fleshe, but after the spirite. benen Jor they that are carnall, ave“ carich nally mynded: But they that are spiut ye rituall, are spiritually mynded. es Tobe caruallp mynded, is death: zzut weren lo be spiritually mynded, is lyfe € peace:

che wordg, nor ouch 7 Wecaule that the fleshlyp mpnde is mt ond ennie agaàpnst God: For it is not obe-

nce, ag atfec

fenen dient to the lawe of God, neither can be.

ue en © Do then, they that are in the flethe, rng. 2 not please God.

But pe are not in the fleshe, but in the

B ppirite, pf so be that the spirite of Gon

dwell in peu. If any man haue not the

here is then no damp-

spirite of Christe, the sanie is none of his.

10 And yk Chnste be in pou, the body is dead betause of © sinne: but the (ptrite gen che ls lpfe for ryghteousnesle fake. dene

1 But, vf ö spirite of hym that rapled vp do rn 10
Jesus from the dead, dwell in pou:euen tanz r he that railed bp Chatte from the dead, var shall also quicken pour mortall bodpes, Char, hs because that his spirite dwelleth in pou. auen ve

12 S Therfore brethren, we are detters, aa . not to the fleshe to lyue after the fleshe.

13 F02 if ve liue after p fleshe, ve Hall dye:

Wut if ye through the spirite, do mortific the deedes of the body, ye shall lyue.

14. Jor as many as are led by the spirite of God, they are the sonnes of God.

15 Jor ye haue not receaned che lpirite ot bondage agayne to feare: but pe haue | reteaued the spirite of adoption, wher- Tim i. b. by we cry, Abba, father. i

16 The fame spirite, beareth witnesse to our spirite, that we are p sonnes of God. Bo. ie

17 It we be sonnes, then are we also tere hepres, the heyres of God, and ioputheyres with Christe: So that we sulfer mt together, that we map be also glorified (h e together. iwer Saber

18 o J am tertapnely“ perlwaded aer

that the afflictions of this tyme, are not a

Worthy of the giory which thakbe chew- en 125

“ao the Romanes.

19 or the feruent desire of the creature, abydeth lokyng Whe the fonnes of God shall appeare: 8

Wetause the © treature is subiect to

Che creas n 20 uustorcd be-

vanitie, not wyllyng, but kor hym which

e Wath subdued the lame in hope. ais 21 For the fame creature chalbe made
Jain, kree from the bondage of corruptid, into

the glorious libertie of ß sonnes of God.
. 22 Jo we knowe, that every creature groneth With vs giso, and trauapleth in payne, cucu vnto this tyme. a
3 Mot onlyl they), but we also which haue the first fruites of the spirite, and we dur selues mourne in our selues, and

a upnges, Which can not be erprelled.

tr e 27 And he that searcheth the heartes, on knoweth What is the meanyng of the grun; lpirite: for he maketh intercession fo2

we lplt thein ahh, Sad karnestip and trucntipe,

ee >

oe
XCIII l. sonne, that he np ght be first begotten among niany brethren.

30 Moreouer, whom he dyd predestinate, tht᷑ allo he called. And whom he called, them allo he instified: And whom he iustified, them he alfo glorified.

31 What shall we then lay to thele thynges: Il God be on our syde, who can Nu xn b. be agaynst vs: ae

32 Which {pared not his owne sonne, but Fan 1. gaue hym for vs all: Howe shall he not
With hym allo geue vs all thynges:

33 Who shall lay any thyng to the charge
BL a choleus It is God that iusti-

eth):

34 Who is he that can condempne: It is
Christe which oped, pea rather Which is rapsed agayne, which is also on the ryght bande of God, and maketh intercession for vs. *

35 Who shall seperatevs from the loue ot
God: Shall tribulation or anguishe, or persecution, either hunger, either nakednesse, either peryll, either lworde-

36 As it is written: “Foz thy lake are we 5a
Rylled all Daye long, and are counted 0 as sheepe for the slaughter.

37 Meuerthelesse, in all these thinges we onercome, through hym that loued vs.

38 For J am sure, that neither death, neither lyfe, neither angels, nor rule, neither power, neither thynges present, neither thynges to tome,

39 Meither heygth nor deapth, neither any other treature, shalbe able to sepctate vs fromthe lone of God, which is in Christe Jesu ony Lorde.

The. ix. Chapter.

Paul declareth his keruent loue towardes his nation, ibe treateth of election and reprobation. 24 Allo of the callyng of the gentiles, zo and of the caltyng ol, ok the Jewes.

Sap b trueth in Chik,
— . lye not, np confcience
Re allo bearyng me wit-

er F nesle by the holy ghott, tran 2 J). That J haue great en flo heaumelle, € continuall une sorowe in my heart.

be dene Jor J haue willed my felfe to be tne tursed from © Ciyaitte, for my becth2en, rere, «= my kynlmen as pertapnyng top ficthe,

tines . Which are the Plraclites: To whom aden hear bertapueth the adoption, and the glorp, mado fe the couenauntes, and the lawe that

none ; milpedearye a but vtterly be dekated, which fo myghtilie moued hym, that he ode cut or rom Ehriste, then thole thenges codulde come to pale.

was geuen, and the feruice of God, and the pronules.
Ok whom are the fathers, of hour as tonternyng the fleshe, Christe came, - which is God, in all thynges to be pray-
{ed for euer. Anien.

6 And it can not be, that the worde of 25
God shoulde take none effect. For they Rom id. are not all Ilraelites, which are of

srael:
Adeuher are they all chyldren that are the seede 15 e Wut in Jlaac Gonxxib, thy seede be called.
9 That

The

plftfe

lohn. vile. 8 That is to say:x They which are the 22 If then, God Wyllyng to shewe his

Nom.. d. thyldren of the fleshe, are not the chyl-

dren of God: But they which be the

thildrẽ of promisc, are counted the {eede.

Seni. bꝰ Sor this is à worde of promise: About this tynie wyll J come, and Sara shall haue a soune.

10 Mot only this, but also Nebecta was

with chylde by one (eucn) by our father

theyhad neither done good neither bad,
(that the purpote of God by © clection might stande: not by the realon of worhes, but by the taller)

erie a It Was fapde vnto her: The selder
Shit are zal lerue the pounger.

faemem nor 13 As ib is wuütten: Jacob haue Jloned,

saluation: and the withdraw

ge but Elan haue J hated.

me, 3 che I. hat (hall We fay then- Is there any

eren: Purighteonlnes with God - God fozbid.

d. 19 Por he fayth to Moyles: *F wy shewe mercy to whom F shewe merty:
And Wyll hane conpalsion, on whom
J haue compassion.

16 Sb then it is not of the wyller, nor of the runner: bnt ol the mercy of God.

17 For the scripture fayth vnto harao:
Euen kor this lame purposc bane F stirred thee vp, to shewe my power in thee, x that my name myght be declared throughout all the worlde.

13 So hath he mercy on whom he wyll, and whont he wpll, he hardeneth.

Thou Wyit lay then vnto me: vohy then blameth he vs pet: For who hath ben able to resist his Wyll-

Wut O mau, what art thou which dilputest with Gods Shall the worte fay to the Wakeman, why hast thou made me on this fathisne
2 Hath not the potter power ouer the

clap, euen of the fanie lunipe to make

one velsel vnto honour, and another vnto dishonour-

(b) The wpll and purpost cf
Wop, is the

t ause of the clection end reprobatton.

For his intr- 12

Blac.
C Forperthe chyldren; Were bone, when

Exod. ix. b.

D 19

Esai. xlv. b.
Eccle. ;;. b. 20

err. xVIlla.

delire e praper to God for Israel is, that they s mpght be faued,
Jor Jbcare them vez corde, that they haue a scale of God: but not

We.
OF no zeole noz no good intent ean be atceptable vnto God
W grounded dpon kapch, and the. bnowledgẽe ol God. enen

The. x. Chapter.

Paul che weth the caule of the fall of the Lewes. The difference bet were the iustice and kayth. 16 The castyng of, of the Jewes, and callyng of the Gentiles.

Wath, and to make his power knoe fuftred with long patience, the belels of Wath, ordayned to destruction,

23 1 A be, the pes of his gio, on

Cbettels of niercy, which he ha Z en bata ony Pen

24. Mhomalso he talled, not of only, but allo of the Gentiles. ew

25 As he sayth allo in Olee: IJ wyll call &
9291 hi 1 Ne el Were not my 1

le: and her beloued, whi n not beloued. e J

26 And it shall come to passe, that in the place where it was layde vnto them:
He are not my people, there Chall they be called p chyldren of the lyuyng God.

27 And Elaias cryeth tonterning Jlrael:
Thouch the nuniber of the chuͤdren of ke
Siltael, be as the lande of the lea, vet
(but) a renmaunt shalbe saued. ＋

28 For he fiuisheth the © worde, and maz enen eth it short in ryghteoulnesse: Foz a anten short worde wyll the Lorde make on t de carth. Dip plagues

29 And as Glaias sapde before :* Extept vun the Lode of Sabboth had lefte vs tes frou fede, we had ben made as Hodonia, » (esate and had ben lpkened to Gomorrha. S Ha

zo What shall we fay then: that the gen- tive cut

tiles which folowed not ryghteousnes, tn. haue obtapned righteousnelle: enen the vac a ryghteousnesse which cõmeth offapth. ere zi But Ylrael, which folowed the lawe de ok ryghteousnelle, hath not attayned to 2 coe, the lawe of ryghtedusmesse. 1
32 Wherkore:Wetause they sought it; not Wia by fayth: but las it were} hy the workes of the lawe. For they haue stumbled at the stumblyng stone, ' Eg lid
33 As it is Written: Weholde, J put in ce) cue
© Sicna stumblyng stone, and a rocke ao of offence: And Wholoeuer beleueth on an en, hym, all not be confounded, ching) Jeg

und tuftitta-

Ded with hun.

v) It is cal
15 our owne

atccordyng to knowledge. one
3 9 595 beyng ignoraunt of Gods son ec ryghteoulnesse, and goyng about to rout stablyshe their owne righteoulnelle- debe. haue not ben obedient vnto the ryghte- eee ousnes of God, FG rome
4 For Christe is the ende okthe lan zee

deulses.

Chat tg,
Cue hath

filled the

© for ryghteousnesse to all that beleue.
Foz Moyses writeth, of the ryghteousnesse which (is) of the lawe, Howe that the man Which doth those thinges, shall lyue by them. ga.
Wut the ryghteousnesle which is of fayth, speaketh on this wile: Say not thou in thyne heart, who shall alcende

downe front aboue.

npe thee, euen in thy mouth, and in thy
Duyxxxe heart. This fame ts the worde of faith, which we preache
9 FJor if thou Malt knowledge with thy mouth, the Lowe Jelus, and shalt beleue in thyne heart that God raysed hym from the dead, thou shalt be saued. io So; With the heart man beleueth vnto ryghteousnelle, and with p mouth man confesleth to laluation.

Jor the stripture sayth: Whosoeuer beleueth on hum, shall not be cõfounded.
11 There is no difference herweee che

J ewe the Greke: fos QC faine Lode

duer al, is riche vuto aly tall vpon hum.
B Jor wyolocucr shall call on the name ane. ofthe Lorde, shalbe saued.

14. Hole then shall they call on hym, on

J The. xj

Eads 28d. 11

Sap then, path God
SEAS catt awap his people:
God forbid. For Fi also

em an Ilraeitte,ofthe

Y ieede of Abraham, of the tribe of Wemamin,
God hath not cast aple which he knewe before. what the scrivture sayth of he maketh interceffion to
Saping: TLord, they haue kylled th prophetes, and dygged downe thyne “ aulters: and J am left alone, and they seke my lyfe.
But what sayth the aunswere of God buto hym- J haue reserued vnto my selfe seuen thõusande men, which haue not bowed the knee tolo image of) Waal.

woe

into Heauenz That is, to fetch Chrilte

NV.

whom they haue not beleued: Howe

shall they beleue ou hym of whom they

haue not hearde- owe shal they heare,

5 a be chalth f

nd howe chall they preache, except

they be sent : Is it is wnten; Holbe

beautifull are the feete of them whiche

bryug good tydynges of peace, bryng

good tydynges of good thynges.

16 But they haue not all obeyedß Golpel. zp
For Efalas sapth: Lorde, who hath Fam beleued our sapinges: Iohn. xii.a.

17 So then fapth tonmieth by hearyng, e commieth by the worde of

God.
18 Wut J aske: Hane they not hearde-
Ho doubt, their sounde went ont into Pax, all ñandes, and their wordes into the endes of the worlde. <>
1 But J Demaunde whether Ilrael did knowẽ or not: First Mopses sapth: J Deut he.
Wyll prouoke vou to enute, by themthat are no people: and by a foolpshe nation
I wyll anger pou,
20 Aud Efatasis bolde, and sayeth: J FI1b. an founde of them that fought nie nok ~~
Jam mantel onto them that asked not after me. ae
21 Wut agaynst Israel he sapeth: All Eva. dap long haue J stretched foorth my handes vnto a people that beleueth not, but speaketh agaynst me, |

Chapter.

1 God hath his Churche though it appeare not al wap to the worlde. God hath for· faben the Jeweg, and chosen the gentiles, is whom pet he warneth to humble them selues. 29 God repenteth hym not of his giktes. ; The depth of Gods sudgementes,

5 Euen sd at this tyme, there isa remnaunt, according to the election of grace.

6 Heit be of grate, then is it not nove of
Workes: For the grace is no moze grace.

But yk it be of wozkes, then is it nowe no grace: Foz then worke is no moze

7 What then: Ifrael hath not obtayned z that which he sought: but the election
Hath obtapned tt, the remnaunt hath ben blynded, *

3 Actordyng as it is witten: God hath Ale geuen them the spirite of “ remorsc, 2) chars, eyes that they shoulde not sce, and caves ane that they shoulde not heare, enen vnto *

IS dap. a
9 And Danid sapth: Let their table be made a snare, and a trappe, and a stumbling stocke, and a retompence buto the,
ö „Let

The Epistle

1 —̃—
Io Vt their eyes be blinded y they fee not,

€ bowe thou downe cheir backe Alay. n Isay then, haue they therfore stumbled, that they lhoulde fall-God forbyd:

but throngh their fall, saluation lis come)

vnto the @gentiles,fo2 to prouoke them

withall. Sa
1 Nowe, pf che fall of them be p ryches

ofthe worlde, and the minishyng of the,

Cc) That is.
€or that t he
Ferees tontemnyng the
Golpel of
Chuiste. fell

Gebe ehen the rythes ol the gentiles: Howe niuth cpengot the nioze their fulnesle- — gs hee B Fo: I {peake to you gentiles, in as

w — theit faluatio. om. i. a.
1 Tim. iᷣ a.

u Tun c. 14.

tiles, I mãgnifie myne office. . f by any meane J map prouoke the

which are my fleshe, and nipght laue

fone of them. 7 LG

15 For pf the castyng away of them, be

the retontuyng of the worlde: what

shall the retcanyng (of themj be, but ipfe fkromthe dead:

16 For ykthe first fruites be holy, p whole lumpe allo (is holy. And yt the roote be holp, the braunches als.

C/ And yt some of the braũches be broken

Sota. Wok, and than beyng a wplde Puue
Votan tree, Watt graft in amons Mein made de be en partaker of the cuore and fatnesse of the dre cn t Dliue tree:

a ape 18 Woast not thy selfe agavnst the braun-

mife of God. in Whole stede

agil aide (hes. For pk thou boalt thy selfe, thou
Die thats, bearest not the roote, but the roote thee. gant: 19 Thou wylt fay then, the braunches weir “are broken ok, that I nught be graft in.
20 Well: betause of vnbeliefe, they were broken of, and thou stodest stedfast in

fayth. Be not hye mynded, but feare.
21 Jor seyng that God {pared not the na-

turall braunches take heede] lest it come

to passe, that he spare not thee.

Y 22 Wceholde therfore, the kyndnesse and

rigorousnesle of God: on them which fell, rigoroulncsse: but towardes thee, kyndnessc, if thou continue in kindnesle, or els thou shaitbe hewen ok:

beethren, by the merck kulnesse of God, that pe geuc bp pour bo-

fice, holy, acceptable bute God, (whiche is

much as J am the Apostle of the gen-

34. For Who hath knowen the mynde ol

u Cor.. d. 23 And they, pr they byde not styll in vn

i Ok what conuersation they which prolelle Chile shoulde be of. Howe euere man shoulde walke in his seuerall calliyng. 19 No man to reuenge. 8

Beseche von therfore

dyes a quiche w sacri-

beitefe, shalbe graffed in: F
) JD Gedi power to gra ethemmagapne- ef 22

24. Jor yt thou were cut out oa natura
Wylde Ditue, tree, and were rale contrary to nature, ina true Dittic tree: pe 1 monte ae the naturall

2 „be graffed in ther
- 5 0 a : — 8

25. JO J Wouide not brethren, that shouide be ignoraunt of this Mn
(ie ve shoulde be wyse in pour owne couceiptes,) that partly blpndnesse is happened in Jlrael, vntyll the fuineffe of the gentiles be tome in: |

26. And so all Israel shalbe faucd, as it E is Witten: There shall come out of ane,
Sion he that doth delyner, and thay? turne away vngodipnesst from Jacob.

27 And this is my touenaunt vnto them, when JJ chall take away their sinnes.

28. As concernyng the Gospel, they are enemies for pour fakes: but as touching

the election, they are loued for the fa:

tiers (falies),

29 For the gyftes and callyng of God are

without repentaunte. :
30 Jos, as pe in tyme past haue not belened God, det haue nowe obtayned mertie, Hough then vnbeliekfe : .
31. Euen so nowe haue they vot beleued the mertie (Wewed) vnto pou, that they also map obtapne mercie.
32 For God hath wrapped all nations] in vnbellefe, ö he mpght haue mercie on al.
33 Othe deepenelle of the ryches both of the wildome and knowledge of God,
Howe vusearcheable are his iudgementes, and his wayes pak fyndyng out:

apien.ix.b
Ear lx. c.

ie Lorde: D2 who Hath ben his coun- Corn.

tellour-

35 Either who hath geuen vnto hym first,-

hym, ave all thynges: To “hom be dare e

The shalbe recompensed agapne. 6 56

cations mt
1 “ee ashy 1 pour reasouable seruice: bar he
2 Aud kalchron not pour felues Ike DIY fencers to this ® Worlde, but be ye chaunged un ae pour fhape, by p renuing of pour minde, a at ye may proue What is the woll at an

that ve may y dat.
God, good, and acceptable, and PCTs bees

ple

len of eee
3. Foz J fay, through the grace Nuno ee

N f vee M ang fhonide exhibite their ofwne linely bodyes lor a facrifice to Gon, in mogttigng

b frnmgng them keines by faith), to Gedixnesse and charitre,

vnto me, to euery man among pon, that

no man esteeme ok hym selfe more then he ought to esteeme: but fo esteeme (hem selle) that he behaue hymselfe distretelye, aecordyng as God hath dealt to eucrye man the mealure of fayth.

Foz as we Hane many members in one body, and all members haue not one office: 5 vm 5 So, We beyng many, are one body in e Christe, and euery one members one ol rae another, S panto 6 (CF Seyng that we haue dyuers giftes, sno atcordyng to the grace that is geuen vnr. to vs, yl any man haue the gyft, either bv. * prophesie after the measure of fayth, ne. 7 Either office in aduitniftvation, or he

that teacheth in teachyng:

8 D2 be that erhorteth, in exhortyng, he that geueth in singlenelse, he that ruleth in Diligence, he that is mercifull in chearefulnesse.

9 Louc without dissimulation, hatyng euyll, deaupng to good.

Cio Alkectioned one to another with bro-

weiid therlp loue, in geuyng honour, go one

n pbefore another. y

u Mot liher in businesse, keruent in spirite, serupng the Lorde,

yonot orto dur
4, that

l we

¢ The. xi. Chapter.

SOV

12 etoyeyng in hope, patient in trouble, tnftant in prayer,

3 Diltributyng to p netellitie of faintes,
We re aie 1
14. effe them whith persecute pou, yx"

blesse, and curfe not. 4 nn

15 Reioyce with them that do reiopee, and wepe with them that wepe. ;

16 Bepng ot lyke affection one towardes another, beyng not Hye mpnded: but makyng pour lelues equall to them of the lower sort. e not wile in pour D owne opinions,

17 Retompensyng to no man eupll for euyll. Prouydyng afore hande thynges honest, not only betore God, but allo] in the syght of alt men.

18 Il it be poslible, as much as lpeth in pou, Ipue peaceably with all men.

19 Dearelp beloued, auenge not pour selues, but rather geue place bnto

Wwzath. For it is written: Uengeaunce Deursea.

is myne, I wyll repay sayth the Lorde.

20 Therfore, yf thyne enemie hunger, een him drinke.

Jor into doyng, thou shalt heape toales of © fyre on his head. 00) Kor, el

21 We nat ouercome of cupll, but quer: Wan hene

come euyll with good. n elne des

rozath hangs tthoncr hem.

- 1 DE Obedience to the rulers, who beare not the lworde in vayne. s Chavitie must mealure ali our dopnges. 1 An exhortation to good Ipfe,

AEt euery soule be subect vnto the hyer powers: Foz *there is no power but of god. The powers that be, are ordepned of God. N
2 Whosoeuer therfore resisteth the power, refiftetl the ordinaunce of God: And they that resist, shall receaue to thé selues danpnation.
3 Jo rulers are not fearefull to good
Workes, but to the enyll. Wylt thou not feare the power: Do well, and thou shalt haue prayse of the fame.
54. For he is the minister of God for thy
Wealth. Wut pf thou do cupll, feare:

SAREE AN) ens

Foz he beareth not the lworde tn vayne, for he is the minister of God, reuenger of wath on hynithat doth enyll.
5 Wherkore, pe must needes be subiect, not only for feare of punishment: but also because of conscience. Grun
6 And kor this tause pay ve tribute. Fog ae bo they are Gods ministers, seruyng for wen the lame purpole. 2 poivers, ond

in blsobeyng

5 Geue to euery man therfore his dutie, se moaine
*tribute to whom tribute, custoime to ncevor v whont tustome, feare to whom feare, recor cane

honour to whom honour (belongech.) NI

83 Oe nothyng to no man, but to lone one another: ( For he that loueth another, bath fultylled the lawe. 7

Oz

Forthis:*Lhou fait not tommut adultrie, thou shalt not kyll, thou (halt not steale, thou shalt not beare kalle witnesse, thou shalt not lust: aud yk there be any other tommaundement, it is conte prehended in this faping : Namelpe, ae - shalt loue thy neighbour as thy rene cue,

GalathvbJo Charitie worketh no yll to his neygh-

Exod. xx. c. 9
Deut. v.a.
Nlat. v. d.
Luk. xviiid

Leuit. xix. d

Limes in b. pour, therfore the fulkyllyng of the lawe in strike aud enuping. is charitie.) 14. But put ye on p Lode Jesus Christe. n And chiefely tonlideryng the scason. And make not prouilion for the fiethe, howe that it is tyne that we shoulde to the lustes (therof.j nowe awake out of slepe: Foz nowe ts N
The. xiiij. Chapter.
Che weake mull be borne with. 0 Ho man ought to offende his nepghbours conscience. ij One ought to beare with anothers contcience in charitie.
Al fi bm that is weake in 10 Wut why doest thou then iudge thy the tapth, receaue: not brother- Either, why doest thou defpite
0 F/ i WX Atto iudgenientes of dil- thy brother- We shalbe all brought be-
, Isputyng. fore the iudgement seate of Christe.
Bruty bee One beleueth p hemay um Porit is Wetten, Plpue, sapth the e ~ eate euery thyng: Ano- Tode: and all knees chall bowe to me, abe e ene — ther which is weake,

cateth hearbes. a

Let not hym that cateth, dispile hym that eateth not: And let not hym which enen en, kaleth not, iudge hym that cateth. Foz vnchartabie God hath receaued hyni. N rab, 4. What art thou that iudgest another mans seruaunt: To his owne maister he standeth 02 kalleth: Bea, he shalbe
Holden vp. Foz god is able to niake him stande.

This man putteth difference betwene day and dap. Another man counteth all dapes alpke. Let euery man be filly perswaded in his owne © mynde.

He that esteemeth the day, esteemeth it vuto p Lorde: And he that esteemeth not the day to the Lorde, he doeth not esteeme it. He that eateth, cateth to the
Lorde, for he geueth God thankes: And he that cateth not, eateth not to the
Lorde, and geueth God thankes.

7 Feor none of vs lpueth to hym selle, und no man dyeth to hym selke.

would depatt
With agrcatce lecuple of eon-

W5

(b) we must ve affured in our conscience 6 bp Gods

Worde, in all

map learne co protue daplp.

8 Nor pf we lyue, we lyue vnto p Lorde:

And il we dye, we dye vnto the Tode.
Whether we lyue therkore, or dye, we
9 Feor to this ende Christe both dyed and vole agayne and reuyued, that he mypght be Lorde both of dead € quicke.

Ades. u. f.
Piulip. u b.

The E

12 So shal euery one of vs geue acconipt

piltle

dur lalnatioi

beleued.
2 The nyght is nye. Het vs dredes Of darknesse, armour oklpght. 15

„ Tet vs wallke honettly as in che day,

t all tongues shall geue prayse to God. Php.

of hym selke to God.

3 Ttt vs not therfore iudge one another any moze: But iudge this rather, that no man put a stumblypng blocke, or an otcasion to fall, in his brothers way.

14. So Y kuczwe, and am perlwaded by the Lorde Fetus, that * there is no: on thyng tonmoñ of it {elfe : but vnto hym Tm that uidgeth it to be tonnmon, to hym is Mak ve it tommon. i

15 Wut yk thy brother be greeued with thy meat, nowe walkest thou not chariaes ad 19 bynt with thy meat,

02 whom Christe dyed.

16 Lt not pour good be euyll spoken of. D

17 For the kyngdome of God, is not meat and drinke: but righteousnelse, € peace, and ioy in the holy ghost. ,

18 For he that in these thynges serueth
Chuste, plealeth God, and is contended of men.

19 Let vs therfore folowe thofe thynges which make fo2 peace, æ thynges wher with one may edifie another. f

20 Destroy not the worke of God Lia ite meates fake. All thinges are a : it is capt for that man, which catety with offencte. P

2 Ftis good neither to cate echt her

ther to drinke wine, neither any thyng wherby thy brother stumbleth, either
N falleth, or is made weake. ;
22 Halkthou© fapth: Haue it with th lane leike bekore God. Happy is he that corr: tec dempneth not hym selle in the thyng

E whiche are ftronge,
A) (S| "ought to beare p frayi-
Ines of the weake, € not to stande in our owne conceiptes, i MA Wet enerp man please his neygbour, in that that is good to © edifipng.

Cihth. N. a

iy Totdikle eth to do aner of 3 ung to our

beben ds it is Witten: The rebukes of them en Which rebuked thee, fell on me. boc tnt . or whatsoeuer thynges haue ben anor: Witten afore time, were witten for our learnyng, that we throngh pacience and tomort of pferiptures nught haue hope.
5 The God ok pacience and tonlolation, graunt pou to be lyke mynded one towardes another, after the enfample of
Chuste Petr:

That pe all agreeyng together, may
With one mouth prayse God, and the father of our Lorde Fels Christe.

7 Whertore, retcaue ve one another, as

Christe reteaued vs, to p prayse of God.
8 And J lap, that Jesus Chrifte was a minister of the tirtumcisiõ for the trueth of God, to confirmie the prounse (made) vnto the fathers :

And that the gentiles myght prayse
God for his niertie, as it is written: 0r this tause J wyll praise thee among the gentiles, and syng vnto thy name. ig lo And againc he saith: Neioyte pe gentiles with his people. levi. tt And againe: praise the Lord al pe gen

tiles, c laude him al pe people together.
Cn And againe Esaias saith: There shalena be the *roote of Jesse, and he that shall

lnitxix.d 6
B

Pat, vr. f. 9 eg. 25 d. xviii,

rife to raigne ouer the gentiles, in hym

shall the gentiles trust. 3

3 The God of hope, fyll vou with al ioy and peace in beleuyng, that pe may be riche in hope, through the power of the holy ghost. <0

14 Imp selfe am perswaded ol you my biethrt, that ye allo are full of goodnes, and fylled with all knowledge, able allo

Jor Christe pleated not him selfe. Wut

VII.
Tchlch he aloweth. q
Foz he that maketh conscience, is damned yt he eate, becaufe che eatethj not of fayth: Foz whatloeuer is not of fayth, is W sinne.

r keene ea ee

nat of a ryght confctence and an vndoubted fart 0
Worde ok God, ee

i The. xv. Chapter

me mult support one another after the example of Christe. 14 paul cheweth hi scale towarde them, zo and requireth the lyke of them. 9 4

iopte through Christe Jesus, in thofe ene by the pacach= vng ol Gols

18 For J dare not speake of any of those vel.

(t) In other
But as it is witten: To whom he barer was not spoken of, they Aall fee: and er deer they that hearde not, hall vnderstande. ed oro
22 Jbr this tause J haue ben oft let, that:
I coulde not conte vnto pou,
23 But nowe, seyng J bane no more to do in these tountreys, and aifo haue ben desirous inan peres to tome vnto pou:
24 Whenloeuer J take mp tourney into
Spapne, J wpll come to pou: or 5H trust to {ce pou in my tourney, and to be brought on my wape thytherwarde by pou, after that J be somewhat fylled
With por.
25 Wut nowe go J vnto Hiernsalem, to . 44. minister vnto the © saintes. focarep tothe
26 For it hath pleated them of Matedo- poor: tates nia AcHAaA CO MAKE A certaine coimon erz. gatheryng kor the poore salntes Whiche ye gure are at Hierusalem.

or thẽ an

Ri Its

27 It hath plealed them verply, € their zo 1 JJ beleche pou b —_— —

detters are they. Foz yk the gentiles be made partakers of their spirituall thynges, their duetie is to minister vnto the . in carnall thynges.

23 When J haue perfourmed this, and

0% emes, haut ( sealed to the this fruite, J Wyll
Ethan de. come by vou into Spapne.

belegen 29 And J am sure, that when J. come vnto you, J Chall come with aboun-

J numberok salutations. 17 Paul wylleth them to beware ol kalle brethren. f

ip. Bp krutte aie paunce of the blellyng of the Gofpelt of ede ok Christe. 0 e, , q The.xvj. Chapter.
20 He prapeth and geueth thankes foz them.
I Coumiende vnto you
A OES Hebe our sister, Whirai cheisa minister of the pean Church of Cenchzea,
2 That pe receaue her oi orten in the Lode, as it bez
Sotrechofens tommeth faintes, and miner onto that pe affitt Her in whatldeuer bulpnnen nelle The hath nede of pou: Tor fhe hath nat dw suckoured many, and ny feife also.
Bunter 3 Greete Priscilla and Aquila my hel-

pers in Christe Jesu: ,

4 Which haue for my lyfe lapde downe their owne neckes: Unto whom, not onlpe J geue thankes, but also all the
Churches of the gentiles)

5 Tykewpse (greete] the Churche that is in their house. Salute my welbeloued Epenetus, which is the first fruite of Achaia in Chyattte.

Nation.

6 Grete Marie, which bestowed much

labour on vs.

7 Salute Andronitus and Punia mp coz fins, and priloners with me also, which ave wel taken among the Apostles, and
Were in Christe before me.

3 Greete Amplias mp beloued in the
TLorde. 1

9 Salute Urban our helper in Chziste, and Stachps my beloued.

jo Salute Appelles approved in Christe,

falute them whiche are of Aristobulus ]

Douthotoe,

11 Salute herodion my kinlman, greete them that be of the housholde of Nartissus, which are in the Lorde.

un Salute Trpphena, x Trpphola, which labour in the Lode. Salute the beloved Perlis which laboured much in the

Patrobas, Mercurius, and the brethren
15 Salute Philologus and Julia, Mere-

16 Salute one an other with an holy 0

zethren for 5 1
Jelus Christes fake, and fo2 the ke the spirite, that ve helpe me in mp buspnesle with pour prayers to God for me:
31 That J may be delpuered fromthem which beleue not in Jurie, € that this ny seruite which F haue at Hierulalem may be accepted of the saintes:
32 wean Ae Ls vnto pou with toy, p vll of God, and map wit be refresched. N 5 =
33 The God of peace be with vou al. Am. Cor zu

Torde.

13 Salute Rufus cholen in the Lorde, and his mother and niyne,

14. Greete Asyntritus, Phlegon, Herman,

which are with them.

us and his fitter, and Olynpas, and all L the saintes which are with them.

a Signe ot amitie among the

95 kyle. The Churches of Christ salute a

volt. | Ato pul

17 Nowe J beleche pou brechzen, ans
© marke them whiche cant deurfion, e ot geue otcasions of euyll, contraric to the to
Doctrine whiche ve haue learned, and «ce auopde them. cette

18 For they that are suche, serue not the we. ever
Lorde Jesus Chrifte, but their owe laren belly, and with [weete and flatteryng far. ee wordes deteaue the heartes of the inno- ee centes. ; pnt

10 FO2 your obedience is gone abode vn- ern to al men. J am glad therfore no doubt, n of you: Wut pet J would haue vou wile vnto that whiche is good, c linple conternyng eupll. ~~

20 The God of peace shall treade Satan vnder pour feete chortly. The grate of dur Lode Jesus Christe be with pon.

a Aimotheus my workfelowe, and Tu- ‘ en pen E Sosipater my kinsemen, salute vou. a

2 J Tertius, ehe wrote this epistle, D salute vou in the Lode, aoe

23 Salus myne hoast, and of the bo
Churche, laluteth vou. Eraltus 10 chamberiaine of the citie saluteth vou, and Quartus a brother. The

24 The grace ofour Lode Jesus Christ be with pon all. Amen.

25 To hyn that is of power to stablisshe pou, according to my Gospell, and preachyng of Jesus Christe, by reuealyng of the misterie whiche was kept secrete fence the worlde began,

26 Wut nowe is opened, and by the striptures of the prophetes, at the cõmaundement of the euerlastyng God, to the

XCVIII.

obedience of fapth, among all nations publisched:

27 To the tame God, Wyle only, be glo-
Ane Jesus Christe, for euer.

¶ This epistle was written to the
Romanes from Corinthus (and tent] by Phebe the nunister vnto p Churche at Cenchrea. ö

R

q The firft Epiftle of Saint Paul the eff poftle
4 The firft Chapter.
1 He prayteth the great graces of God she wed towarde them, 10 exhortyng them to

concorde and humilitie. 19 He beateth do wne all pryde, and wisedome which is not grounded vpon God: 26 Shewyng whom God hath cholen to conkounde the wile-

dome ol the worlde.

3 Sie
L y ; TS

Dat Counthus: Lo
ä thẽ that are sanctified in Christe Jesus, © saintes by callyng, with all that call on the name ol our Lorde Jesus Christe in euery plate, both of theirs and ours:

3 Grate be vnto pou, and peace from
God our father, and from the Lorde
Jelus Christe.

4 GJ thanke my God alwapes on pour behalfe, for the grace of God whiche is geuen pou in Jesus Christe:

5 That in all thynges pe are made riche
1 in all vtteraunce, € in all Rnow-

edge:

6 As the testimonie of Jesus Chk was confirmed in you.

B7 So that pe are deftitnte of no gyft, pape fo2 the appearing of our Lord en, Pelus Chzitte,

met 8 Whiche (hall alfo © strength vou vnto

mt the ende, that pe may be © blamelesse

ma in the day of our Lord Jelus Christ. <2

Ie ho
Ride kere nity and cal
Ni Goo,

ul 12. hia

9 God is faythkull, by whom ye are cal Nu cri e. led vnto the felowship of his forme Je- Cor x. e
{us Christe our Lorde,

10 Nolbe J beseche pou brethren by the name of our Lowe PFelus Christe, that ye all speake one thyng, and that there be no dilcentions among pou, but be ve knit together, in one mynde, and in one meanyng.

n Jor it is shewed vnto me my brethren,

ol you, by them whiche are of the houle of Cloe, that there are contentions az mong pou.

Iz Nowe this J sape, that euery one of vou saith, Jam of Paul, and J am of
Apollo, and J am of Cephas, and I Aa. xvi 4 am of Chniste. : Seen

3 Is Christe deuided: was Paul cruci- i fied for you: eyther were pe baptised in the name of Paul-

14 I thanke God that J baptized none of you bnt Crispus and Gains:

15 Test anp shoulde say, that J had baptid ed in myne owne name,

16 J baptiʒed also the housholde of Stephana: Furthermore knowe J not whether J baptised any other.

17 Foz Chatte sent me not to baptize, but C , to preache the Gospell; not with Wile- Geenen dome of wordes, lest p crosse of Christ aer onto shoulde be made ok nont effect, berger tothe

Ni Foz power oe gd

18 Foz the preachyng of the crolle, is to
Am chat perithe foolishnesse: but vnto vs which are saued, 'it is the power of

God. :
Romi. b. 19 Jor it is written, I wyll destroye the
Ela c d isedome of the wyse, and wyll cast a-
Way the vnderstandyng of the prudent.
Elana; c. 20 Where is the wiles Where is p seribe:; where is the disputer of this worlde-
Hath not God made the wiledome of this worlde foolpshenelle-
21 Jor after that the world through wile-
D dome knewe not God, in the wifedome of God: it pleased God through foolishnesse of preachyng to saue then that beleue. 5
Mach. vi d 22 For *the Jewes require à signe, æ the
Lukexid. Grekes seke after wiledome:
John vid. 2 aut we preaͤche Chailte crucified, vnto e e deln blocke, and vnto the Grekes foolyshnesse: .
24 But vnto them which are calicd both bol the Jewes and Grekes (we preache}
Christe the power of God, and the wiledome of God. a

he. ij. Chapter.

1 He putteth kor example his maner of preachyng. which was accordyng to the tenor of the Golpell: suphich Golpell was contemptible, and hyd to the carnall, 10 and agapne honorable and manilest to the spirituall.

a 9 MD J beethzen, when J

6 tame to pou, came not in d gloriousnesse of wordes, or

yy of wiledome, chewind vn-

= ¥ to pou the“ testimonie of
Soop,’ God.

both manta 2 Foz J esteemed not fo knowe any

che werbe: thyng among vou saue Jesus Cheitte,

lo the anche: And hym crutified.

end witnelse. 3 And J Was among pou in weaknesse, and in feare, and in much tremblyng.

4 And mp wordes and my preachpng was not with entysing wordes of mans
Wisedonte, but in chewyng of the spirite, and of power:

5 That pour fayth should not stande in

Cy
J,

the wiledome of men, but in the power

of God.

WE And we speake wiledome among thé that are perfite: not the wisedome of this world, neither of the princes of this
Word, which tonie to nanght.

7 VBnt we speake the wiledome of God lil & misterie seuen the Hyd (wiledome)
Which God ordeyned before the worlde, vnto our glozic.

ry Which none of princes of this world

le firlt Epistle le, isto 25 For the foolisynesfe of God. ig ur

od, is wiler then men, and the weakenesle e is Beane then 18 8 3

26 Wzethzen, pe fee pour catipng, om Temata OK after the ate not many m fare n meghtie, wu — m

27 But God hath chosen the fooipa thynges of the worlde, to confounde the
Wile : And God hath chosen the weake

thynges of the worde, to confounde thynges which are myghtie:

28 And bunoble thynges ok the wozlde,
Ethinges which are despyled, bath God chofen, (ves) and thinges Which are not, to bryng to naught thynges that are:

29 That no fleshe shoulde reioyte in his presente.

30 And of hym are pe in Chrilte Jesu, whiche of God is made vnto vs wile: dome, and righteoulnesse, and fanctifi: tation, and redemption: f

31 That accordyng as it is written: he e „ let hym vetopce in the

orde. ö

knewe: Foz had they knowen it, thep eps not haue crucified the Lorde of glozic.

9 But as it is written: The eye hath not seene, e the cave hath not heard, net ther haue entred into the heart of man, the thynges which God hath prepared kor them that loue hym.

lo But God hath reuealed thé vnto vs by his spirite: For *the spirite e all vil thinges, pea the deepe thinges of God.

1 For what man knoweth the thynges ofa man, saue 5 © spirite of man Which oy si is in hym-Euen fo, the thinges of God, amis knolbeth no man, but p spirite ot God, as

12 And we haue reteaued, not the spirite ofthe worlde, but the spirite which ig ot
God, that we myght know the thinges that are geuen to vs of God.

13 Which thynges also we speake, not in 17 the wordes which mans Wiledome tea cheth, but which b holy hott teacher), een spirituall thynges with lpirituall thynges.

14. But the naturall inan perecanctt) 5 the thynges ok p spirite of God, for he | are foblpsheneile vnto hym: £20 190

Flux.

to the Corinthians. ~~ XC1X,

can he knowe (then) becaufe they are fpivitually discerned.
15 Wut he that is spirituall, discerneth all

_ thynges, pet he hym selke is indged of

no man. g
16 Jor who hath knowen the mynde of kae e the Lorde, that he myght instruct hym ?; 8m
Wut we haue the © mpnde of Chnite. CO Shatin kütt.

J The. iij. Chapter.

3 Paul rebuketh the lectes and aucthours therok. 7 o man ought to attribute his faluation to the minifters, but to God. io Chat they beware errontous doctrines. i Chile is the foundation of his Churche. 15 Che dignitie and ol ice both of the

ministers, and allo of ail the fapthtull.

ND F coulde not speake vnto pou brethren, as vnto spiri-

Was puto ( babes in Christe.

ae 4 Jo Whyte one sapth, J am of Paul, oy mplke ane

Mone. 5 What is Paul- what is Apollo- Only

5 ministers are they by whom pe beleued, tuen as the Lode gaue to every man.

6 JJ haue planted, Apollo watered: but
God gaue the encrease.

So then, neither is he that planteth any thyng, neither he that watreth: but
God that geueth the encrease.

g He that planteth, € he that watreth, ate one, and euery man shal rercaue his rewarde accordyng to his labour.

9 Jo be together are Gods labourers, pe are Gods hulbandrie (ve are Gods buyldyng. ö

to Atcordyng to the grace of God geuen vnto me, as a wile maister builder haue

a 2 lapde the foundation, and another

ae e Oriploech theron. But let euery man ©

take heede howe he buyldeth vpon.
Foz other foundation tan no man lap, then that that is layde, which is Jesus

Chrilte.

12 If anp man buplde on this foundati-

rie i. d.

urs of Co

ution, uc.

Ituall, but as vnto carnallseuẽ]

on, golde, syluer, pretious stones, tymber, hape sor] stubble:

13 Euerp mans worke shal appeare. The dap (hall declare it, because it shalbe reuealed by the fire: And the fire shall trie euery mans worke What it is.

14 If anp mans worke that he hath built vpon abyde, he shall reteaue a reward.

15 If any mans Worke burne, he shall fuffer losle, but he shalbe fafe hym selfe: neuertheles, pet as it were throngh fire, D

16 > *Fnorbe pe not that ve are the tem =. ple of God, and that the spirite of God dwelleth in pou-

17 If aup man defple the temple of God, hym hail God destroy. For the teinple of God is holy, which (templej pe are.

18 Let no man deceaue hin selic. Bl any man among pou seenie to be wisle in this worlde, let hym be x foole, that he map be wyse.

19 Forthe wisedome of this worlde, is foolishnesse with God. Foz it is writtẽ:
Me tompasseth the wile in their own lob b. craftpneffe. Son (ele

20 And agapne: The Lode knoWethy m mene

a 1 1 of the wyse, that they be te ve
2t Therfore, let no man retopte in men: Sx; she
For all thynges are pours:

bis mulisterg

22 Whether it be Paul, 02 Apollo, 02 Ce- ane phas, either the worlde, either iyke, or Chace. e
Death whether they be present thinges, or thynges to come, all are pours:

23 And pe are Chailtes, and Charlie dis)

Gods.

The. iiij. Chapter.
Alter that he had deteribed the ollice of a true apostle, 3 teyng they dyd not acknowledge

hym such ore, 4 he appealeth to gods iudgement, 7 beat yng downe their glorie, which hyndered them to praple that which they dilpraysed in bpm. 15 He che weth what he re-

A* SS SEE Eta man so esteeme of

NiChaitte, and dispolers ok the setretes of God.
A Furthermore it is ree qauired ofthe disposers that a man be founde

quireth on their part, and what they ought to lone for ol hym at his returne.

vs, as the ministers ok 3 With me itis but a very small thyng

that I Mhoulde be iudged of pou, either of mans iudgement: Mo, J iudge not 6 shar mune owne selfe. baue great

Fo2 J knowe nothing by my selfe, petzen many,

aum J not thereby iultified: but he that

Hy iudgeth

indgeth me is the Hozde.

Thereloft ludge nothyng before the tyme, vntyll the Lorde come, who wyl lyghten thynges that are Hyd in darkenelle, e open the counlels of the heartes, and then Chall euery man haue prayse of God.

25 6 And these thynges brethren, J haue figuratiuely applied vuto n lelfe, and to Apollos, for pour fakes thatye might learne by vs, that no man conceaue in mynde aboue that whiche is Wiitten, that one fell not agaynst another for any mans cause.

Gp Eovert, 7 FOZ who © seperateth theez And what

hast thou, that thou halt not receaued :
Ikthou haue receaued it, why reiopcest chou, as though thou haddest not reteaned it:

3 Nowe pe are full, noe ve are made ryche, ye raigne as kynges without vs, and J woulde to God pe dyd raigne, that we allo myght raigne with vou.

9 Forme thynketl, that God hath fet foorth vs, Whiche are the last apostles, as it were men appoynted to death. Foz
We are made a galpug stocke vnto the worlde, and to the angels, and to men.

0 wp this 10 Me are] © foolts for Christes lake, but

better rane’ pe cate) Wyle in Chuste. We (are! weake,

e preterreth

Psa. Ixil. d.
Rom, vin. f.

Ihe reproueth charpelp their negligence in punpsuyng him that had committed incest,; wyllyng them to excommunicate hym, 7 to imbrace puritie, 9 and klee wickednelle.

ie e. but pe [ate] stronge. Be (are) Honorable, ans de but We (are) despiled. N
Sade e 11 Euen Duto this time we both hunger alen deen: and thirste, and are naked, and are buf:
¢ Dh heute.
1 Mere goeth a tommon
A laying that there is for-
ASS nikation among pou, €
} ; 2 suche fornication as is
Leu cvii. d 1 gt named among the
@vne ie, Ne genties: that one chen —— {houlde haue his kawen eg ters Wyte,

Which barbarous na 2 tions abhozte tolpeake al.

And ye Mell, and haue not rather sorowed, that he that bath fo done this dtede, myght be put from among pou.
3 Foz Y verplp, as abseut in body, but

present in spirite, haue determined alre-

nyng hym that hath done this deede.
4 In the name of our Lowe

ar ie firlt Epiltle | *

A indgethmeisthe Lo de. keeed, and haue no certalne De

The. v. Chapter.

Dic, as though J were present, concer-

Jesus
Christe, when pe are gathered together With the vnleauened bread or puren n

ted, and haue no certaine dwellyng
50 rb labour -Work

2 And labour, working with our o handes. woe are reuyled, anit we helle. Tees
We are perfecuted, and luer it. u. Thel

3 We are cuyllspoken ol, and we praye:
15 ae sd i e of the

orlde, the okscowryng of ait

ch Mitt belt ch =

14 atte not these thynges to tha N vou, but as my beloued bonnes Aare d vou.

15 For though pe haue ten thousande instructours in Chzist, pet ode pe] hg ny fathers : For in Christe Jesu J haue begotten vou through the Golpeil,

16 Wherkore, J desire pou, be pe folowers of me. 1

17 Forthis caule haue J sent vnto yon
Tiniotheus, whiche is my beloued sonne, € fapthfull in the Lorde, which hall put you in remembraunce of my
Wapes which be in Christe, as J teache tuerp where in all Churches.

18 Some fel as though J would come no more at pou: a

19 But J wyll tome to pou shortlp, if the 4a e
Torde wyll e wyll knowe, not the Woy Keb. des of HE which swell, but the power.

20 For the kyngdome of God is not in worde, but in power.

21 What wyl pez Shal F come vnto vou with a rodde, or in loue and in the spirite ol mekenesse

(do) Ol the hel gol ·

and my spirite, with the power ok the
Howe Jesus Chuste, 10

5 To delpuer suche a one vnto Satan 4" for the destruction of the flesshe, that the spirite ae be saued in the daye of the
Lode Fetus,

6 Hour teioyting isnot good. Knolbe w sm pe not, that a litle leauen leaneneth the aan whole lumpe- pamper

7 Purge out therfore the olde leauen, that pe maye be newe dowe, as ve art B vnleauened bread: Foz Chzitte our Paloucr is offred vp for vs.

8 Therekore let vs kepe holy dap, not with old leauen, neither with the leauen

ok malitiousnes and wickednesse, but

and trueth. 2
9 ‘PS Weote vnto pou in an epistle, that pe should not tompanie with fornicatours:
10 (And meant not at all with the forni-

tous, or extortioners, or with idolaters: for then mutt pe needes haue gone out of the world.

n But nowe J haue Weitten vnto pou,

Thel ü. b that pe companie not together, if anp

D

()Pecallety

Him dnlult, N
Ng

Are any ot pou, hauing bulinesle with another, be iudged vnder the o pniust, and not rather vnder p saintes:

05, againt

3 Know ye not howe that we shal iudge the angels: Polve much moze thinges that partepne to this lpfe:

4 Ifthen pe haue indgement of thinges puͤrtepnyng to this lyfe, set vp them to ludge whiche are least esteemed in the

Churche. '

5 Ispeake it to your hame: Js it fo that there is not a wyse man among pou: no not one that tan iudge betwene brother and brother- |

6 But one brother goeth to law with ano: ther, and that vnder the vnbeleuers:

7 owe therefore there is vtteripa fault aniong you, betause pe go to lawe one
With another: why rather suffer ye not wrong- why rather suffer pe not harme-

8 Map, ve pour selues do wrong, and do harme, and that to pour brethren.

9 Knowe pe not that the vnrighteous

shall not inherite the kingdome of God-

Be not deteaued : neither fornitatours,

hoz idolatours, nor adulterers , nor

Weaklinges , nor abusers of them selues
With nankinde,

Jo Portheeues, nor couetons, nor drunc-

kardes, nor cursed speakers, oz" pyl-

lers, Chall inherite the kingdome of

to the Corint

tatours of this worlde, or with the coue-

i He rebubieth them for goyng to lawe together before the heathen. rather to suffer. 12 He reproueth the abuling of christian libertie, ij and sbeweth that we ought to serue God purely, both in body and in soule.

ea

hlans.

that is called a brother be a foruitatour, ortouetous, or a worchipper of idols, or
à rapler, or a drunkarde, or an extortioee him that is fuch (tee that rejeate not.

12 For what haue J to do to indge them that are without; Do pe not iudge them that are within- Them that are with: out God iudgeth. Put away from à- penexiiy mong vou that witked perfor,

Lhe .vi. Chapter,

7 Christians ought

God.
11 And such were some of pou: but ye are
Walthed,but ye are fanctifeed, but pe are tustified in the name ofthe Lod Fetus, and by the spirite of our God.
12 All thinges are lawfull vnto me, but dal thinges are not profitable: Al things rede. ya. are lawfull vnto ine, but J will not be Coe. bought vnder the power of any. ©) £09 toe
Meates (ave ordepned] for the belly and tho ches the belly for nieates: but God shall de- werd. en stroy both it, and them. Nowe the body
Lis) not for Dfoznitation: but foz the
Topde, and the Lorde for the body. he
14. And God both Hath rayled vp the 5 29%
Newer and also shall rapse vs vp by his 1 b er. 5 cdi. S ile.
Is Knobe pe not that pour bodies are rem. the members of Christe- Shall J then take the members of Christe, and make them the members ok an harlot: God forbpd.
16 Know pe not, that he whiche toupieth him selle with an hariot, is one body-

For two sayth he) shalbe one fleche. Genen d
17 Wut he that is topned vnto the Lord is er. one {pirite, | Epi.

18 Flee fornitation. Euery synne that a man doeth, is without the body: but he that comnutteth fornication, inneth against his owne body.

19 Rnowe pe not that pour body is the temple of the holy ghost (whiche is; in von, whom pe haue of God, and pe are not pour owne-

20 For pe are dearelp bought : therefore lag heey in 2255 body and in pour

pirite, which are Gods.
N ilij The

(c) They abused meaics,

| | ‘ Ihc firft Epil tle

The. vii. Chapter.

The apostle aunfwereth ko certayne auecttons which the Corinthians delired to now,
2 ds ot fingleipfe, z ot the duetie ok mariage. f nt iz or mariage bet weene the kaythtull and vnkapthkull, 18 of vncircumciling the circumciok virginitie, zo and teconde mariage.

sed, 21 ok leruitude.
[Swe as concernpug

the thinges wherokpe

Wrote vnto nic, it is

good for à man notto

touche & woman.

Menertheletle, to a-

uoyde fornication, let euery man haue his owne wyke, and let euery woman haue her owne hulband.

3 Let the hulbande geue vnto the wyfe auebeneuolence : Tykewyle allo the wyle vuto the hulbande.

4 The wyke hath not the power of her ownut body, but the hulbande: And like-
Wyle allo the hulbande Hath not the power ol his owue body, but the wife.

*Defraude pou not the one the other,

2 exceptcitbe with both pour confentes for a time, that ye may geue pour selues to fasting and prayer: and afterward tome together againe, that Satan tempt von uptforpourincontinencte,

6 This Jlayok faudur, c not of commaundenient.

5 Foz J Woulde that all men were as J

my lelfecam:] but every man bath his

oper gift of God, one after this maner, another alter that.

8 ‘Play therefore vnto them that be vnmaryed and wyddowes, it is good for them ik they abyde euen as J.

9 Wut ik they can not abstapne, let then martie: Foz it is better to marrie then

to burne.

10 Unto the marped commaunde, not Y, but the Lord, Let not the wyke depart from the husb ande: a

ee
‘ Y. |
(a) Oz, expedient, becaufe manage, tho-
Tow ans pee and not by gods institutten, 2 bungee!) car es and troubles,

Tob.vi. d.

Loe“ il. d.

(b) He Hem: eth that he cõmaunorth not precilely all mẽ to mat tie, but that God
Hath graunted this remedie vnto them which can not uc chat.

1. Tim. v. c.

Nlat. v. e.

ang . era,

vnmarried , or be reconciled vnto her hulbande Cagaine:] And let not the hulbande put away his wyfe.

12 ut to the remnaunt speake J, not the ode: If any brother haue a wife that
' beleueth not, tf she be content to dwell with him et him not put her away.

13 And the woman which hath to her bul

bande an inkidell, and he consent to dwel

With her et her not put himawap.

C 14 Forthe vnbeleuing hulbande is fants tified by the wyfe, and the vnbeleuyng

20 Let euery man abyde in the fame

25 Mowe concerning virgins P haue no

1 But and ik fhe depart, jet her remayne

il ok dilcordes and dilcention in mariage

wyke is santtikied by the husbande : els
Were pour children vncleane, but nowe are thepꝰꝰ holy. oon .
15 But ik the Dabeleuing depart, let hyim ee
Depart:A brother or a lifter is not iu lub- eng, iection in such thinges: Wut God hath cura’, called vs in peace. n
16 Forhowe knowest thou O woman, e whether thou Chait laue thy bufvande: . or how knowest thou Oman, whether thou shalt laue tho wyf ee
17 But as God hath distributed to euery man, as the Torde hath calledenery kp one, so let hym walke, and fo ordeyne J in all Churches.
18 Is any man called beyng tircuncilede let him not adde vncircumcision: Js any called vncirtumtiled; let hum not be tirtuniciled. *
19 Circumtision is nothing, and vncircumtision is nothing, but the keping of the tommaundementes ok God. ,

calling, wherin he was called.

21 Art thou talled a seruaunt z cave not: T vis forit: Meuerthelelle, if thou mayelt be free ble it rather. 5

22 For he that is called in the Lordebeing! 2p a seruaunt, is the Lordes free man:
Lyle wyse allo he that is called berng free is Christes seruuunt.

23 Be are dearely bought, be not ye the seruauntes of men. .

24 Brethren, let euery man wherin he is

. ‘ a ince called, therin abyde With God. d

relp, ac inthe grefence
God.

commaundementokthe Lord : pet geue
Jtounsell, as one that hath obtapned merty in the Lorde to be kaythfull. ö
26 J suppose therfore that it is good for the prelent neceMitic: forc layj it is good foz a man {o to be. *
27 Art thou bounde vnto a wilt: seke not to be loosed: Art 1 loosed from d
Wyfeeleke not a Wyle, a
28 Wut and il thon marrie à wyle- thou sinnest not, and if a virgin marrie a
Hath not sinned: Neuerthelelle, 10 chall haue trouble in their fleshe, bn beare with vou. 7 Bt

29 But this say BD brethren, “ the tyme is short: It reniapneth, that they which
Hane wpues, be as though they had none:

30 And they that wepe, as though they wept not: they that reioyte, as though

hey reiopted not: and they that bye, as

though they possessed not:

31 And they that ble this Worlde, as

though they bled it not: Foz *the kashi-

on of this worlde goeth away.

* HM woulde haue pou withont care:
He that is vnmarped, tareth kor the thinges that belong to the Lorde, how he map please the Lordt:

33 But he that hath marped atbpfe , ca reth for the thinges that are of the worlde, how he may please his wyfe.

34. There is dikkerente betweene a virgin and a wyke: The vnmarped w oman carcth for the thinges that are of the
Lorde, that (he may be holy both in body and mm spirite: (Againe] fhe that is marped careth for the thinges that pertayne to the world, how the may please

her hulbande.

35 This speake F for pour peofite, not

salxcc. d.

pet. ui b.

klicke b.

John. ü c. 32 lt. vid.
Luk. vi. c.

to tangle you in a snare: but that ve may kolowe] chat which is honest and conie-

Ip, and that ye map cleaue fatt vnto the

ode Without separation.

36 Wut if any man thinke that it is due comely for his virgin ik fhe passe the time of mariage, and neede so require, let him do what he wyll, he sinneth not: ere let them be marped. a aue

37 Neuerthelesse, he that purpoleth sure- amcation. ly in his heart hauing no neede, but hath power ouer his owne wyll, and
Hath fo decreed in his heart that he wyl kepe his virgin, doth Well. a

38 So then he that ioyneth his virgin in marpage, doth well: but he that ioyneth not syis virgin] in mariage, doth better. 1

39 The wyfe is bounde tothe © lawe den as long as her husbande lyueth: but ik . ot aia her hulband be dead, she is at libertie to marry With whom He wil, onely in the
Love.

40 But fhe is happier if she fo abide, af: ter my iudgement: And J thinke verr- —~ ly that J haue the spirite of God.

G

The. vij. Tapter. 5
1 He rebuketh them that bfe their libertie to the kelaunder ok other, in going to the idolatrous factifices, 9 And sheweth how men ought to behaue them toward tuch as be weakie,

>, IS touching thinges
4 ||* offted vnto idols, we ps AN are sure 5 we all haue

Ss

ledge maketh) a man
> fibells butlone edifieth.
~ Ik any man thynke that he knoweth any thing, he knoweth nothing pet as he ought to know.
But ik any man loue God, the same is
© knowen of him.

4. As concerning the eating of thofe thinges that are offered vnto idols, we are sure thatꝰ an idoll is nothing in the wWorlde, and that there is none other
God but one.

5 And though there be that are called

gods, Whether tn heauen or in earth,

(as there be gods many, and“ lordes

manp:) i
Bet vnto bs is there but one God,

which is) the father, of whom are all

thinges, and we in him, and one Lorde

Jelus Christe, by whom are al thinges,

and we by hun.

Ooptaught. 3

1 Cor. x itp

which hee lag Dele

lie estcem

t! nen ag ed 6
Sordeg and

S

Sligneour g.

7 But euery man hath not knowledge:

knowledge. Know-

For some hauing confcience of the idol Con. vi g. vntill this houre, cate as a thing offred

vnto idols, and so their consciente being

Weake is defiled. 5

8 But meate maketh vs not acceptable 5 to God: Foz neither if we cate, haue we the more, neither if we eate not, haue we the lesse. :

9 Wut take Heede left by any meanes this libertie of yours be an occafion of | falling, to them that are weake.

10 Foz ik any man see thee whieh balk knowledge, fit at meate in the idols temple: chal not the constience of him „ which is Weake, be C boldened to Cate neee thofe thinges which are offred to idols, ora

II And through thy knowledge thal the
Oweake brother pevithe, faz whom cowrien
Christe dyed: his conscicce.

12 When pe sinne fo against the brethren, and wounde their Weake tonscience, ye sinne against Christe.

13 Wherefore, il nieate offend uw brother, J wyll cate no fleshe Whplethe worlde standeth, let J shoulde offende mp bother,

om. 14 d.

The

‘The first Epistle

Sat M FJ not an Apostleam J not frees haue

ANF not seene Fetus
Chziste our Lord: Are pe not mp worke inthe

e:
If J be not an Apo-

fox. need

cro fucther decias ranonturehe hip are pe in the Lorde. 7 a 3 Myne aunlwere to them that alte me,

an, is this,

one 4. haue we not power to eate and to ait. Hume Dginke?

* Haue we not power to leade about a prea fer a woman as well as other As

postles, and as the brethren ofthe Lord, and Cephas:

ryuva, vallry

bat needech .
3 6 Either only J and Barnabas haue not

power this to do-

DWho goeth a warfare any time at his owne tost? Who planteth a 1 1 8 and eateth not of the fruite therok: Or who feedeth a flocke, and eateth not ot the milke of the flocke-

8 Sap Ithese thinges after the maner of pn ea men? or faith not the law the lame alfoz ba, 9 For it is witten in the law of Moyles:

Thou shalt not moosell the mouth of the Dre that treadeth out the corne.
Doth God take care for Oxen-

10 Either sayth he it not altogether foz our fakes : For our sakes no doubt this is written, that he which eareth, Mould

eare inhope: e thathe which tressheth yeu ev? in hope, should be partaker of his hope.

Romaxvé II If we haue sowen vnto pou spirituall

Gal.vi.b. thinges, is it a great thing ik we rrape

pour carnall thinges:

Act cx. 3. yo If others be partakers of (thisj power

Wherlore are not we rather? Meuerthe-

lelle, we haue not vled this power: but

. suffer all thinges, lest we shoulde hinder

the Golpel of Christ.

13 Do pe not knowe that they which ml: mister about holy thynges, eate of the thinges of the temple: And they whiche

a ctes. xx. g

as pzemise i sister?wherore Jehink: fxpth he) it ght eo be ranllated a ppfe, spectallp decnuse it la rpresseo in
Hs Cingulee number vad.

he olde

rem. phere the noit olo wzlk-

aue Sororem mulietem.

us all the
Brebs copies qu vod.

wapte at the aulter, are partakers with the aulter:

14 Euen fe hath the Lord ordayned, that they which preache the Gospell, choulde lpuc of the Gospell.

15 Wut J baue vled none ok these

ö The. ix. Chapter.

eexhorteth them by his example to vle their libertie to the edification of other.
- 7 on foorth in the courte that they haue begun.

thinges. Meuerthelesse, J wrote not these thinges, that it shoulde be fo done vnto me: Foz it were better for me to die, then that any inan Mould make my reiopcing Dayne. C

16 Jor if I preache the Gospell, J haue nothyng to relopee of: for neceffitie is lapde bpon me. But wo is vnto me if
F preache not the Gospell.

17 For if I do it With a good wil, J haue a reward: but if J do it againss my wil, CE) he the@oifpenfatid is committed vnto me. Se 2

18 What is my reward then- Ilerily that ante when F preache the Golpell, J make beben,

the Golpell of Christ free, that J misule ges. not myne autthoritie in the Golpell. dane

10 For though J be free from all inen, pet n haue J made mp selfe seruaunt vntd all men, that I might win the mo. Act.xvia

20 into the Jewes, Pbecomcasa C*

Jewe, that J might win the Jewes:
To them that are vnder the lawe, ( bez come ja ssthough J were) vnder the lawe, that I might win them that are vnder the lawe:

21 Tothem that are without lawe, [bee come J jas(tbough J were] without lawe,
(when J was not without law as parte ning to the lawe of God, but in the lawe of Christe) to winne them that are

without lawe.

22 To the weake betame J as Weake, that J might Winne the weake. Jam g made all thinges to all men, that J might at the least way laue sonie. )

23 And this JJ do forthe Golpels fake,

that J might haue my part therof.

24 «epPerceaue pe not (owe) that they which run ina race, run all, but one reteaueth the rewarde : So run that ve map obtapne.

25 Euerp man that proueth maifteries, abstayneth from allthynges, and they N
(do it to obtayne a trosbne that Mail pes D riche: but we to obtayne an; euerlasting

trowne. g ;

26 Itherfore so run, not as at an vntertayne thing: So light J, not as one that ay.

ö beateth the ape. choulot bert

prouco of m

27 But J tanie my body, and bung it bene

choulo {et bid

into subiection, left by any nicanes , that do eam.

d contem

when J haue preached to other, Imp rat .

wa N tau rothen arenen p. The i :

offence of their neighbour,

IAKethzẽ, J woulde not that pe thoulde be ignoraunt, howe that all our fathers were vn-
15 der the cloude, and all
ꝓ;aäͤssed through the lea,
̃ And were all baptivnto Moyles 'in the cloude, €* in

e 2 O ed

zn. the sea: enen And dyd all cate of one O spirituall moor nidate,

And dyd all drynke © of one maner a of spirituall drynke. (And they dranke a of that spirituall rocke that folowed them, which rocke was © Chaifte.). S

But in many of them had God no delite: For they were duerthrowen in the wilderneffe.

6 Abele verplp are ensamples to vs, to thintent that we shoulde not lust at ter euyll thynges, as they also lusted.

7 Meither be pe idolatours, as (were; lome of them, as it is written: The people fate downe to cate and drynke, and role vp to play. ö

8 Meither let vs commit fornication, as

fone of theni committed © fornication,

and fell in one Daye b three and thirtie

thoͤusande. ö
Neither let vs tempt Christe, as fone

of them tempted, and were destroped

of“ serpentes. .

lo Meither murmure pe, as some of the

allo murmured, and were destroped of the destroper.

I All these thinges happened vnto them

for enfaniples: but they are written to

put vs in remembraunce, whom the endes of the worlde are come vpon.

Wherkorc, let hym that thynketh he standeth, take heede lett he fall.

13 There hath no temptation taken you,

don dn, but luch as foloweth the nature of man:

cb. But God is faythfull, which shall not suffer pou to be tempted aboue pour strength: but chall with the temptation make awap that pe mape be able to beare it.

14. Wherfore my deare beloued, fice from idolatrie.

15 10 speake as vnto them which haue dilcretion, iudge ye what J fay.

Hacramenits da.

kxod iv. b.

0 Hote

Ged wpll
Kine vs. yr boca ty * 12

q The.x.Chapter.

1 He feareth them with the examples of the Jewes, that they put not their trust carnally in the graces of God: 14 Exhortyng them to flee all idolatrie, 23 and

16 The cuppe of blessyng which we D blesse, is it not p partakyng of the blood of Christe- The bread which we breake, is it not the partakpng of the body of
Christe:

17 For we that are many, are one bread and one body, in as much as We all are partakers ot one bread.

13 Weholde Ilrael after the fleshe. Are not they which cate of the facvifices , partakers of the aulterz

19 What say I then: that the idol is any E thyng: Orthat it which is offered to Cor vin a. idols is any thyng-

20 Nayjbut (this J tape] that the thinges which the gentiles offer, they offer to

deupls, not to God. And J woulde not that pe shoulde haue © felowihippe wh with the deuilss. 150

21 Be can not drynke p cup of the Torde, es and the cup of deuils. Be can not be partakers of the Hodes table, and of the table of deupls.

22 Either do we prouoke the Torde to anger: Are we stronger then he-

23 All thynges are lawfull fo2 me, but F 3 all thynges are not expedient: All hyn ? ges are lawfull for me, but all thynges edifie not. —_—

24. Let no man lecke his owne: but Corb euery man anothers wealth.

25 Whatsocuer is solde in theo market, oo mene that cate, and astze no question for com e. fcience fake.

26 For ' tht earth is the Lordes, and all p42. that therin is.

27 Hany of them which beleue not, byd vou (toafcat) and pe be difpoled to go, whatsocuer is {et before pon, eat, alking no question for conscience sake.

23 Wut yk any man say vnto pou, this is G offred vnto idols, cate not lor it) for his fake that shewed it, and for conscience i Cor iu. b. fake. The earth is the Lordes and all

that therin is. .
29 Conscience I fay, not thyne, but of weer the other. 302 why is my © libertie, aer en.

indged of another mans constience- deren.
30 FOr, if I take mp part with thankes, Tun un.
Why am J euyll spoken of, for that wherforc J geuc thankes-
31 Whether therfore ye cate or drynke, Cololl ue.

or whatsocuer pe do, do all to the prayse
God. n N
32 phe that ye geue none offerte neither tothe Jewes, nor pet tothe Greaans, neither to the Churche of God.

S$ The.xj.Chapter.

iHerebuhech the abules which were crept into theircburche. «Fs touchyng prayer, prophefipng, sand minislring the Lordes Supper, 23 bringyng them agayne to the

first institution therol.

E pe the folowers of eme, cuen as J am of
Christe.

<3 BY conmende pou
Mel baetinen, that pe remember me in all thin-

N l ges, and kepe the ordinauntes, as F delinered them to pou.

3 Wut J wyl that pe knowe, that Christ isthe head ofeuery man. And the man
Sen ud. is the Womans head: And God is kebe ne. Chyistes head.

Euerp man praping or prophesipng, hauyng any thing on his head, shameth his head.

Wut cucrp woman that prapeth o2 prophesieth bare headed, dishonesteth her head: For that is euen all one as pf she were shauen.

6 BIfthe wornan be not couered, let her

allo be shorne. * PF it be a Thame for a

Deu. xxil. a.

woman to be shorne or shauen, let her

touer her head.

W 7 Aman ought not te touer his head, forasinuch as he is the image and glone of God: But the woman is the gloge of the man:

83 For* the man is not of the woman: but the woman of the man:
9 Metither was the man created for the womans fake: but the woman for the mans fake, cy or this caule ought the woman to haue! power on her head, for the

Angels lakes.

Meuerthelesse, neither is the man without the woman, neither p woman without the man, inthe Loe.

12 For as the woman ts of the man, euen

fy 5 the man by the woman, but all ol

Gen l. d.

(a) Womething to coner her head in signe of subtectio

I

Ciz Judge in vour selues, whether it be tomely that a woman pray vnto God bare headed:

14. Doth not nature it selfe teache you, chat it is a shanie for a man, pkhe haue

~ The first!

piltle —

Euen as J pleafe all men in alli Cr thynges, not seking mne owne profite, but the potite) of manp, that they might be faucd.

long heere-

15 But yk a woman haue long heere it is a prayse for her: For her heere is geuen her to touer her withall.

16 Ik amp man lust to striue, we haue no
G neither the Churches ol

od. |

17 This I warne vou of, and tommende not, that ve come together, not after a better maner, but after a worse. N

18 Jor first of all when pe tome together D in the Churche, Jherare that there is
W among vou, and J partly be-

euc! *

19 Foz there must be sectes among you, N. vie that they which are approued O among Ora. pou, mpght be knowen. 29

20 Wiper pe tome together therfore into one place, pou tan not eate the Lordes supper:

21 FJor euerp one preuenteth other, in tatyng his owne supper. And one is
Hungry, and another is drunken.

22 Haue pe not houles to eate ¢ to drynke in: De pile pe the Churche of God, and
Mame them that haue not: What hall
Play vnto pou, shall J prayle vou in this, I prayle pou not. a

23 V hat which J delluered vnto pou, E

reteaued of the Lorde, Foz the Low esus, the same nyght inthe which he was betraped, toke bread:

24 And when he had genen thankes, he brake it, and sayde: Take pe (and) cate, Mit this is my body which is brokẽ for you: I
This do pe inthe reniembraunte of me.

25 Alter the sanie maner allo (he tobe) the cup, when he had supped, saping: This tup is the newe testament in my blood:
This do as oft as pe drynke it, in remembzaunte of nie.

26 Jor às often as pe Maleate this bread, and drynke this tup, ye shall Merve Ned the Lordes death tyll he come. Adsb.

27 Wherfore, ee be iw b drynke this cup o

e Wpmbo ppl,

Ci J.

— eee

N 10 10 ng

d pure

e of flare.

o dne d gyitie of the body and blood of the Lorde.
Cf.. 28 ut let aman exanune hym selfe, and loleas c. so let hynt eate of this bread, and drinke
G ofthiscuppe:
29 FJor he that eateth and drynketh vn-
Worthyly, eateth and drynketh © his

game, owne danipnation, (becaute} he imaketh ache lade nd differente of the Lordes body.

daten 30 FJor this cause many are weake and

mates, lo

31. Foz pk we wonlde iudge our selues, we shoulde not be iudged.

32 Wlit when We are indged, we are chastened of the Lorde, that we choulde not be dampned with the * worlde.

33 Wherfore my brethren, when ye come together to eate, tary one for another.
34 If any man hunger, let hym eate at home, that ye come not together vuto condenipnation. Other thynges

wyll J fet in order when J come,

i Iebn. ii. c.

J The. xij. Chapter.

1 Che diuertitie of the giltes ol the holy ghost. ought to be vsed to the ediliyng ol Chrilleg
Church, i as the members of mans body terue tothe ble one of another.

guten te licke among pou, and many slepe. aan en N them.
A1 Fee Seg Oncernyng spirituall
0 Iich gvttes, brethren, J
Ibwoulde not haue pou b % Fignoraunt. n
2 gde knowe ö pe were ee gientiles, and tarpyed a-
Way vnto dumbeidols, roe: ds pe were led,

tuns suggeltid

kf. 3 Wherkore J declare vnto pou, that' no man speakyng by the spirite ol God, defieth Jesus. Also no man tan fay that
Jesus is) Lord, but by the holy ghost.

There are diuersities of gpftes, but the spirite lis; one.

And there are differences of admin: strations, but the Lorde lis) one.

6 And there are diuers maners of operations, but God is one, which worketh all in all.

The manitestation of the spirite, is geuen to euerp man, to profite withall.

For to one is geuen by the spirite, the worde of wildome, to another the word okknowledge, by the lame spirite:

9 To another (is geuen) fapth, by the

W (amc spirite: to another the giftes of healyng by the sanie spirite:

10 To another, power to do miracles, to another, “ prophesie, to another
*iudgement) to disterne spirites, to ano-

a ther, Diners kyndes of tongues, to another, the interpretation of tongues.

u Wut these all worketh cuen one and the selfe same spirite, deuidyng to cucrp man a seuerall gyft, as he wyll. s

Iz For as the body is one, hath manp

lem, menibers, and all the members of one

Mind. “body, though they be many, (vet) are

but j one body: cuen so is Christe.
3 Jor by one spirite, are we all baptized

dem axli. a.

kpde. i. b.

into one body, whether (we be] Jewes or gentiles, whether we be] honde or free: and haue all drunke of one spirite.

14. Forthe body is not one member, but ran many.

15 If the foote woulde sap, betause J am not the hande, Jam not of the body: is it therkore not ol the body-

16 And ykthe cave wonlde say, because J C am not the eye, Jam not of the bodp: is it therfore not of the body-

17 If all the body (were) an eye, where were then the hearpng: It all (were) hearyng, where were the smellyng-

18 But nowe hath God set ß members, euerp one seucrally in the bodp, as it hath pleased hym.

19 Foz pf they were all one member, where were the body-

20 Mobb are there many members, pet but one bodp.

21 And the eye tan not fap vnto 5 hande,
I haue no neede of thee: Nor, he head agapne tothe fecte, J haue no neede of pou. 3

22 Bea rather a great deale, thole members ofthe body which feente to be more
© feeble, are neceslarp: 1
23 And bpon those members of the body e dur which we thynke least honest, put we more honestie on. And our vncomely cvy we are partes, haue niorc tomelynesse on. bog hen
24 For our toniely members neede it not:
Wut God hath tempered the body together, and hath geuen the moze honour 2 to that (pare) which lacked:
25 Wel there shoulde be any stryfe in the body: but that the members thouloe haue the lame cave one for another.
26 And pf one member tuffer, all 1
Wit

With it. If one member be had in honour, all che members reiopce with tt.
27 Be are the bodyof Chulte, and men bers one of another. ö
28 And God hath ordayued some in the re Churche, kirlt? Apolties fecondarcly,

The first Epistle

prophetes, thirdely teachers, then them

sitie of tongu s.

29 Are all, Apostles: are all, ; are all, teachers: 9
30 Arc all, doers of nuratles-Haue all the
_ giftes of healyng- Do all sprake with tongues: Do all interprete-

Couet after the best giftes: And pet shew J vnto pou a moze excellent way.

Because loue is the fountapne and rule of edifipng the Churche, he tetteth

teth in the trueth: g
7 Suttreth all thynges, beleueth all thynges, hopeth all thynges, endureth all thynges.
8 Though ö prophesiynges fayle, other

that do miracles: after that, the giltes of healyng, helpers, gouernours, diuer-
) $y The.xiij.Chapter. loorth the nature, office, and prapse Cherot.

I pongh J fpeake with

A the tongues of men and

— oke Angels: aud haue

ORs (ORS VAG not loue, J am las]

sabre ble 5 75 soundyng brälle 02 las por pelo e Atkincklpng Eimball:

— And though F couloe prophesie, and bnderstoode all letretes, and all knowledge: Bea, . ik J had all fapth, sothat J coulde mone mountaynes dut of their places, and haue not loue, J were nothyng.

And though FJ bestowe all my goodes to feede the poore, and though J geue my body that J burned, and haue not

loue, it profitethj nie nothyng.
B 4

Woue sustreth long, and is curteous:
Loue enuieth not, lone doth not krowardelp, [welleth not, iCorxe. 5 SDealetl not dishonestlie, seeketh
Php. not her one, is not prouoked to anger, thynkech nonce enpll,
6 Neiopteth not in iniquitie: but reiop-

tongues ceasse, or knowledge banifhe away, vet) loue falleth neuer awap.

> Foz our knowledge is vnperkect, C and our prophesiyng is bnperfect:

10 Wut when that Which ts perfect, is tome, then that which is vnperkect Hate be done awap.

When J was a chylde, Ispake as a childe, J Understode as a childe, J imagined as a chylde: Wut affoone as
Was a man, I put away chyldishnesse.

Nowe we see ina glasse, euen in a o) ex
Darke speakyng: but then (Wall we fee; G. face to face. Nowe J knowe vnperlectly: but chen shall J knowe euen as
Jam knowen. a

Nobe abydeth fapth hope, and loue, thele three, but the chiefe or these is loue.

II

J The. xiiij. Chapter.

1 he erhorteth to loue, commendeth the gift ol tongues, and other spirttuall giktes, 5 Btit chielely propheliyng. 34 he commaundeth women to kepe scilence in the Church. 40 And sheweth what good order ought to be oblerued in the Churche.

Olowe after loue, and

couct spirituall ( gites]

but most chiefelie that ye map prophesie.

Fonhe that speaketh with the tongue, spea-

keth not vnto men, but vnto God: For no man © hearethihrmj.
Horbbeit, in the spirite he speaketh misteries.

3 Wut he that prophesieth, speaketh vnto men to their edisipng, to their exhortation, and to their tomfort.

4. Pe that speaketh with the tongue,

DN a N l

95 Cinders endeth hym.

srrumen speaketh with tongues, except he er ae pounde it, that the Churche may haue te

ai wicht
6 Nowe brethren, pk J tome vnto pou ane speakyng with tongues, what (hall J 25

pofite pou, extept J speake to pou ty. ther by no 5 52 i 02 by prophesiyng, o2 bp Doctrine: ‘ out lyfe ge-
7 Mozeouer, thynges without tp ae

uing found, whether lit bej a pipe or an harpe, except they make a distinction in the fonndes, hole shall it be knowen
What is piped or harped-

3 And allo pf the trumpe geue an vncertayne sounde, who shall prepare him selfe to the warre-

9 Euen fo lpkewyse, when pe speake
With tongues, except ve speake wordes that haue fignification, howe shall it be vnderstande what is spoken? For pe

set, hall Peake into the“ aper.

ae lo There are so many kyndes of voyces,

au las it commeth to pale in the worde, and

en? none ofthem are withont signtfication.

Cu If knowe not what the voyce meaneth / J shalbe lyke vnto hym that speaketh, an aliaunt: and he that speaketh,

shalbe an aliaunt vnto me. a

121 Euen so, forasmuch as pe conet spirituall (giftes] {eke that yt may excell, vnto the edifiyng of the Churche.

13 Wherkore, let him that speaketh with tongue, pray that he map interprete.

14. Jor yt I pray with tongue, niy spirite prapeth, but my vnderstanding is without fruite.

15 What is it then: J wyll pray with the spirite, and Wyll pray with the vnder-

aut ftandyng also. Y wyll © syng with the

S

standyng also.

16 Els, When thou bleslest with the spirite, howe shall he that otcupieth the rowme ofthe vnlearned, fap Amen at thy geuyng of thankes, seyng he vnderstandeth not what thou sapest-

17 Thou veryly geuest thankes well: but the other is not edified. g

18 J thanke my God, F speake with tongues more the pe all.

Id Bet had J rather, in the Churche to

speake fine Wordes with my vnderstan-
Ddyng, to the information of other, then ten thousande wordes with the tongue.
D 20 Weethen, be not chyldren in wyttt:
Holwbeit, as concerning maliciousmesle,

. be chyldren: but in wytte, be perfect, aue. 21 In the lawe it is written: With sun-

Dzy tongues, and with sundry lyppes,

wyll I {peake vnto this people, and vet

for alithat will they not heare me, sayth the Lorde. |

22 Wherkore, tongues are for a signe, not to them that beleue, but to them that beleue not: But prophesiyng (lerueth not for them that beleue not, but for

to the Corinthians. —

spirite, and wyll syng with the vnder-

a Cui them which beleue.

23 Iftherforc, when all the Churche is tome together in one, c all speake With tongues, there come in they that are vnlearned, orthey which beleue not: wyll they not fap v pe are out of pour wittes-

24 But pf all prophesie, and there come

in one v beleueth not, or one vnlearned: GO

he is rebuked of all men, and is iudged ot euery man:

25 And so are the seeretes of his heart made manifest, and fo falleth he downe on his face, and worshippeth God, and sayth that God is in you of a truet.

26 z obe is it then brethren: Mhen pe tome together, euery one of vou hath a psalme, bath a doctrine, bath a tongue, bath a reuelation, hath interpretation.
Let all thynges be done vnto edifyng.

27. Hf any man speake with tongue, let it be by two, or at the most by three, and that by tourse, and let one interprete.

28 But yt there be no inte rpreter, let him kepe scilence in the Churche, and let hun speake to hym selle, and to God.

29 Tt the prophetes speake two or three, F and let the other dae,

30 If anp reuelation be made to another that sitteth by, let y first holde his peace.

31 For ye map all prophesie one by one, that alt may learne, and all may haue contfozt. 1

32 And the ospirites of the prophetes, are te boctrine fubiect to the prophetes. ag bemng put

33 For God is not [the auctyoury of confu- the te of fion, but of peace, as in al Churches Nom. ol the faintes. f

34 et pour women kepe stilente in ther Timun b.
Churches: For it is not pernutted vnto Cen them to speake, but to be vuder obedt- Y ence, as sayth the lawe. .

35 It they Wyll learne any thyng, let G the aske their husbandes at home: For it is à shanie for women to speake in the
Churche.

36 Sproung the worde of God from pou-

Either came it vnto pou only:

37 If any man thynke hym selfe to be a prophete, either spiritual, let hin knowe that the thinges that J weite vnto pou, are p tommaundementes of the Lode,

38 Wut yt any man be ignoraunt, let hym be ignoraunt. .

39 Wherfore brethren, touet to prophesie, and forbyd not to speake with tongues.

40 Lct all thynges be done honestlie and

in order.
¶ The

1 Iohn, iii. a.

—Oreouer brethren FB

declare vnto pou, the
Solpel whic Ahr chen vnto pou, Which
| WNalfo pe haue reteaued,

and Wherin pe cötinue,
2 Wy the which also pe are saued, pf ye kepe in memorie after

what maner JJ preached vnto pou, except ve haue beleued in vayne.

3 Jop first ot all J deliuered vnto pon, that which JJ receaued: horde that
Christe dyed for our sinnes, agreeyng

foe we tothe scripture:: a

859 de n 4. And that he was hurped, and that he

Mash. àrose agàyne the thirde day, accordyng

Lohn. xxa. tuo the scriptures: *

Aud that he wat seene of * Cephas, then of the tiveluce
6 Atfter that, he was seene of mo then fire hundred brethren at once: of which, many remapne vnto this dap, t forme are fallen a slepe.
After that, he was feene of James, then of all the Apostles.

58 And last of all he was seene of me, as

ot one horne out of due tyme.

9 Foz J ani the leak of the Apostles,
Which am not worthp to be called an
Apostle, because J persetuted the
Churche of God.

lo Wut by the grace of God, J am that J am: And his grate which is in me, was not in vayne: But J laboured moze aboundauntlip then they all, vet not J, but the grate of God which is with nie.

11 Therkore, whether it were J or they, fo we preache, and fo haue pe beleued.

12 If Christe be preached howe that he role from the dead: howe lay sonie aniong vou, that there is no resurrec-

q (a) Dre cptweth that nothpngought tu be taught,

Luk 24. b. 9

Actes. ii. a.
Gala. Ii. c.

tion of the dead „
B If there be no rysyng agayne of the

Dead, then is Christe not rysen agayne.
C14 If Chniste be not rysen agayne, then is our preachyng vayne, and pour fapth is also 0 vayne.

Bea, and we are founde falle witnelles of God: Foz we haue testified of God, howe that he rapsed vp Christe, whom he raysed not vp, yr it be fo that the dead ryse not agapne.

02 pt
> ine a

swalowed v

of death, ‘ 15 there temayneth no hope

ol ipie any

moze.

ee lhe fit Epiltle

The. xv. Chapter.

He proueth the refurrection of the dead.; and kirst that Chrisle is riten, 22
. * we atl rpfe, 5: and the maner howe. en, .

16 For yt the dead ryse not agapne, then is not Christe rylen agp. i

17 Ifit be so, that Christ role not againe, then is pour fayth vayne, and pe are pet in pour sinnes.

13 Therkore, they which are fallen in a slepe in Christe, are perisshed.

19 If in this lyfe only we haue hope on
Chnste, then are we of all men motte miserable.

20 But nowe is Christe rysen from the pe the fir © fruttes of them that e N

ep 9 cringete b

21 Fon sinte by man (came) death, euen lo ted ei by manscamesthe resurrection of ö dead. Soren:

22 Jor, as by Adam all dye: even fo by ae
Chafte shall all be made alpue, aeg

23 But cuery man in his owne order. Sn eb
The firk fruites lis Chaitte, akterward, an

they that are Christes at his commyng.

24 Then (commeth) the ende, when he D hath deliuered vp the kingdome to God the father, when he bath put downe all rule, and all auctoritie, and power.

25 For ho must raigne tyll he haue put all his enemies vnder his feete.

26 The last enemie that shalbe destroped,
(18) death 8 Psal. xi. b.

27 Io he bath put downe all thynges He vnder his feete: Wut when he faith all thynges are vnder hym, it is mamtest that he is excepted which dyd put all thynges vnder hym.

28 Iohen all thynges are subdued vnto hym, then (hati the sonne allo hym lelfe be subiect vnto him that put ali thinges vnder hym, that God may be all in all.

29. Els What thall they do, which are baptised foz the dead, pf the dead ryle

not at all:

30 Why are they then baptised for them:

And why stande we in ieopardie euery houre- a

zu By dur reioptyng which J haue in

Chritte Felu dur Lorde, J dye daylp. E
32 If J haue fought with beastes at 1
€phelus alter the mance of men, Gage

What anauntageth it me, pt the dead re

ryle not are ert al e deynke, Seren

for to morowe we ha N meren
We not deccaued. Euyll wordes, 0%

rupt good mauers. Awake

Psalcx 2.
Math. 22 d.
Habre. i c.

34 Awake truely out of flepe, and line not: For fome haue not the knowledge of God. I speake this to pour shamc.

35 But soine man wyll fay, howe are the dead rapled vp: With what bodie shall they conte?

36 Thou foole, that which thou lower, is not quickened extept it dye.

37 And that which thou sowesc, thou sowest not that body that shalbe, but bare corue, as of wheate, or of fone other:

38 But God geueth it a body at his plea-

sure, to euery seede his owne ms

39 All flesche, is not © the fame flesche:

a 23ut there is one maner or flelshe of mé,

* another flesche of beastes, another of

filches, and another of byrdes.
40 There are ala telestial bodies, and bo-

F dies terrestrial: But the glorie of the ce-

lestial is one, and (the gloriej of the terre-

An, sited.

strial another.

jeunes ay There is another glorie of the W lunne, ake: and another glorie of the moone, and ae Another glozie of the starres: For (one) ele starre diftereth from (another) starre in bal hane orie. W W
Feu ps isthe relurrection of the dead. It ens g so wen in torruption, it ryleth in incornne 43 Beis forven in odishonour it rileth in n, hönour. It is lowen in weakenelle, it ba kpyleth in power. *

Aus It is sowen a naturall bodie, it ryleth a spirituall bodie. There is a naturall bodie, and there is a spirituall bodie.

45 Ast is allo written: The first man
Adam was made a lyuyng soule, and the last Adam was made a quickenyng

46 Howebeit, that is not first whiche is spirituall, but that (whiche is; natural,

at ü. b.

J The. xvj. Chapter.
He putteth them in remembraunce ol the gatheryng kor the poore brethren at Hieru ;

ro the Corinthians.

and then that lwhiche 13) spirituall. S

47 The first man (ts lofthe earth earthy: the {econde man (is] the Horde from heauen.

48 Asisthe earthy, suche laren they that are earthy: And as is the heauenlp, such
(are) they alfo that are heauenlp.

49 And as we haue borne the mage of G the earthy, so shall we beare the image of the heauenlp.

50 This saye I brethren, that fleshe and blood tan not inherite the kyngdome of
God: Metither doth torruption, inherite incorruption. ?

51 Weholde, PH shewe po a misterie. ne Tec d chall not all slepe: but we Mall au be Pan thaunged.

52 Ina moment, in the twynklyng ok an eye, at the last trumpe. For the trumpe shall blowe, and the dead Mati ryse intorruptible, and we shalbe chaunged.

5 Jor this corruptible, unust put on incorruption, and this mortall mut put on iunmortalitie.

54 When this torruptible, hath put ou in-

torruption, and this miortal, bath put on immortalitie, then shalbe bought to passe the faping that is witten,“ Death kla. e is swalowed vp into victorie.

55 Odcath where is thy stynge: O hell O%e xi. where is thy victorie-

56 The stynge of death lis sinne, and the
> strength of linne lis) the lawe. ede inne

$7, But thankes be vnto God, whiche a anb hath geuẽ bs vittorie through our Lozd cou vs, ¢
Jesus Chyritte. ue e,

58 Therlore my beloued brethren, be pe been Fang stedfast, vnniouable, alwapes riche in and ve the worke ol the Lorde, forasinuch as aus en pe knowe that pour labour is not in ear eiae
© vapne in the Lorde. 1. loh. v.a.

Kae

cauleth the

kaithkutl to sur mount ail dt

- fatent. 13 we mult perseuer in kapth, in the loue of Chiste. and or our nerghbour.
15 Alter his commendations, he wysheth to them all prolperitie.

Oncerning the 'gathe-

tome. 5

3. hen J am come , whomlocuer ve

Mess 4 irpng for the faintes; as mcf. J haue ordeined in tle hall alowe by lvour] letters, them Wy
Corvita Churches of Galacta, BPfende, to bryng pouc liberalitie vnto
Neuen so do ze. Picrusalem.
2 e Apon some Sabboth 4 And yfit be meete that J go also, they pape, let euery one ok shall go with me.

5 J wyll tonie vnto you, after J haue gone ouer Matedonia( Foz Y Wyl passe Ag. through Matedoma) 1. Cor. ic
Dj Aud

vou put asyde by by selfe, and laye vp as God hath prospered hym, that then there be no gatherpnges when J

6 And it may be, that FH wyll abpde, yea or wynter with vou, that ye map bryng nie on my way whyther soeuer J go.

7 For J wyll not {ce you nowe in my paffage, but J trust to abydt a whyle
With pou, pf the Lordt shall suffer me.

3 I wyll tarie at Ephelus vntyll whytsontyde:

9 For a great doore and effettuall is ope-

ned buto me, and there are many adurrsaries. f
Ad xix d. 1o f Timotheus come, {ee that he be without feare with pou: Foz he worketh the worke of the Lorde, as J do.

i. Cor. xv. c.

11 Jet no man therfore despise hym, but

conuap him foorth in peace, that he may tome vnto me: for J loke for hym with the brethren.
Clz Astouchyng our brother Apollo, J
Act xte. greatly desired hym to come vnto pou
Corb With the brethren, but his mynde was

not at all to tome at this tyme: Howe: |

beit, he wyll come when he Mall haue tonuenient tyme.

cen da 13 Waͤtche pe, stande fast in the fayth,

tan steale bpd

qupte vdu lyke men, be strong.
14. Let al pour thinges be done with loue.
. Corint ic. 15 I beseche pou brethren ( ve knowe the

The g. Epistle

house of Stephanas, that it isp first de fruites of Achaia, and that they haun ieee appoynted them lelues to numiter bnt o the faintes)

16 That pe be obedient euen vnto fiche,

and to all that helpe with vs, & labour. am glad of the conimpng of Stephanas, and Fortunatus, c Achaicus: for that whiche was lackyng (ontome) on pour part, they haue supplied. 0 ne,
18 Jor they haue comforted my spirite, 3 and yours: Lokt therfore that ve know dane N. then that ar- such. Be tp cen
1 The Churches of Alia lalute vou. 4.
1 ay i wee 1000 muche in 2 t Lord, and so doth the Churche tl is in their house. *

20 All the brethren greete vou: Greete konne

ye one another with an holy kysse.
21 The salutatid of (me) Paul, with mine plone bande, |

22 Pf any man loue not the Lorde Jesus

Chzitte, the fame be Anathema mara- , . natha a

8 wherwith the
23 The grace of our Lorde Pelus Christ dle be With vou. Telus Chr erz

degree, ia
24. My loue be with pou all in Christe

ew Che first (epistle) to the Corinthians, was tent from Phiippos

by Stephanas, and Fortunatus, and Achaicus, and Timotheus.

The seconde Epiftle of Saint Paul the eA postle

J The. j. Chapter.

4 he declareth the great profite that commeth to the fapthfull by thety alklictions:
15. 17, And because they Houlde not impute to tpahenetie that he deferred his coms myng contrarie to his promile: he proueth his constancie both by the sinceritie ot bis preachpng, and allo by the immutable trueth of the Golpell, 21 which trueth is grounded on Christe, and lealed in our heartes by the holy gholt.

= Aul an Apostle of Jelu

x God, & brother Tmio-
Swpitheus, Unto p Church

Jof God which is at Corinthus, with all the faintes Which are in all

Achaia:
2 *Gvrace (be) with pou, and peace from
God our father and from the Lorde
BPelus Chatte.

Blessed be God, the father of our

Roman. i. a. 3

iConnia” Pome Jelus Chritte, whiche is the fas
Ephefii.a. ther of merties, ⁊ the God ol al comfort:

iPeteria. 4. Which comforted vs in all our tribula-

Chuste, by the wyti of |

tion, insomuch that we are able to com: fort them which are in any maner trouble, with the comfort wherwith we dur selues are tomforted of God.

5 Forasthe*™ afflictions of Christ ave cod plenteous in vs: euen so is our consola-S e tion plenteous by Chuste. Sich end

6 Whether we be troubled lit is; for pour 9°" confolation and saluation, which salua- 25 tion sheweth her power, in that ve ful: fer the fame afflictions whiche we also fuffer :o2 whether we be comforted di is] for pour tonsolation ¢faluation :

7 And our hope is stedkast, insomuch as we knowe howe that as ve ers

cv}.

[pen pp ne

hers of p afflictions, fo pe be partakers also of the confolation.

first to haue conte vnto vou, Pyempaht haue had one pleasure niore:

3 FJor we woulde not brethren haue vou 16 And to passe by vou into Macedonia,

ignoraunt of our trouble, whiche came

*. UNO DS in Alia: For we were greeued a ont of measure, passyng strength, fo greatly, that we dispapred euen of lyfe.
9 Head, we reteaued the fentence of death in our selues, that we should not put our trust in our selues, but in God, Whiche oe rayleth the dead: d 10 Who Delpucred vs krom fo great a death, and Doth deltuer: On whom we trust that pet hereafter he Wyll deliner,

. f. d.
6 ü.

un Bythe helpe of pour praper fo vs, that

by p meanes of many perions, thankes may geuen of many *on our behalfe, for the grace geuen vnto vs.

1 Jor our retoytyng ts this, the testimo-

C nie ot our confeience, that in sumplicitie € godly purenesse, and not in fleshely wit
Done, but by the grace of God, we haue had our conuerfatto in the worlde, and molt of all to pouwardes.

13 We write none other thinges vnto vou then that ve read, or allo p pe acknowledge, and J trust pe (hall acknowledge vs vnto the ende.

14 Enen as pe haue acknowledged vs partly: Foz We are pour reiopeing euen

lee As pe are ours in theo dape of dur

Lowe Jesus.

And inthis confidence was J minded

Cor, mi. c.

Y Ging wildome acht God

Ut J determined this in my selfe, ? J would

60 te) [el sPog if J make pon sorie, whois hey shoulde
N make me glad, but the e, lame which is made“ fore bymer 3 And JJ wrote this fame buto you, lest ed when J came, J choulde take heaupnelle of them of whom JJ ought to retopte. This confidence haue J toward vou all, that my toy is (tbe ioy) of vou all.

4 Jor in great ackliction and anguiche of

and to haue tome agapne out of Matce-
Donia vnto por, and to be led foorth of vou to Jurie. =

17 When FH therfore was thus mynded, D ; did J dle lightneflezo2 mynde 30 care Fee one nally those thynges whiche J mynde, ne

that with me thoulde be yea pea, € nay

nay?

18 od is faythfull: Foz our preaching to pou, was not pea and nay,

10 For Gods sonne Jesus Christe which was preached among pon by bs, cuen by me, and Siluanns, and Timotheus,
Was uot yea and nap, but in hymn it was pea.

20 Jor all the promises of God in him are yea, and are in him Amen, vnto the glorie of God, through vs.

21 And God it is whiche stablysheth vs pe! poy in Chziste, and hath annopue

ed vs. ö

22 Which hath allo sealed bs, and hath geuen the carnest of the spirite in our heartes. x

23 J call God for a recorde vnto mp soule, that to {pare you J came not as pet vnto Corinthus. f

24 Mot that we be Lordes ouer pour fayth, but are helpers of pour ioy. oz by fapth pe stande. ö

S$ The. ij. Chapter.

he sheweth his loue towardes them. 7 requiryrig lpke wyle that they would be fauowrable to the incestuous adulterer, feyng he dyd repent. the efficacte of his doctrine, 17 contutyng therby tuch quarell pykers, as ynder pretence of speakyng agaynt his perfon, fought nothyng but the onerthrowe of his doctrine.

14 He allo reiopceth in God foz

heart, J wrote vnto you with many teares, not that ye choulde be made sorie, but that pe myght perceaue the loue which J haue, most {pecially buto vou.

Whiche ig a signe of incon fancic,

(f) He taketh
God to wytnesse, that he preacheth the

trutth.

Rom. viii. a
Ephes. iiũ. e.

i. Pet. v. a.

5 Wut pkanp man hath cauled sorowe, 5

the fame hath not made me sorie, but

pen ue greeue pon all.
It is su

that he was rebuked 9 1 |

5 So thatnowbe contrarp wt e, ye ought rather to forgeue hym, and comfozte yn, left that fame person shoulde be fwaliowed vp with duermuche Heauy-

nelle.
Di Wherlore

icient brite the lame man co. vb,

3 Wherkore J pay you, that you would confirnic pour loue towardes hym.

9 For this cause veryly did J waite, that
I mpght knowe the profe of pou, Whether pe be obedient in all thynges.

Io To whom pe forgeue any thyng, J forgeue also.or if I forgaue any thing,

to whom J forgane it, for pour fakes

forgãue Ff it, in the © fight of Christe.
Let Satan shoulde circunment vs:

Fo2 his thoughtes are not vnknowen

vnto bs.

Cu Furthermore, when J cane to Tro-

ada, to (peeache) Christes Golpell, and a

doore was opened vnto me of the lozde,
1 J had no rest in my spirite, becaule 3 founde not Titus inp brother, but toke

¢ The. il}. Chapter.

He taketh for example the kayth of the Corinthians lor a probation of the trueth which he preached, s and to exalt his apostlechip agaynst the braggers ok the fale apostles, 7. 13. he maketh comparifon bet wixt the lawe and the Golpell.

SID we begyn to prayse

neede we las some other of epistles of retõmen-

letters of retonmmendation from pou-

2 Be are our epistle written in our heartes, whiche is vnderstande and read of all men:

3 Forasmuche as pe declare that pe are the epistle of Chait miniftred by vs, and written, not with ynke, but with the spi-

e rite of the lyuyng God, not in tables of

Deucvd. i fone, but in- fleshly tables of the heart. ler. xxxi. a. 4

W to Godwarde.
Not that we are sufficiẽt of our selues to thynke any thyng as of our lelues:
Philip. u. b. but dur ablenesse is of God,

Cor iin b. 6 Which hath made vs able mimsters of the newe testament, not ok the letter, but of the spirite: Foz the letter kylleth, but the spirite geueth lyke.

Pf the ministration of death, theough the letters figured in stones, Was in glorie, fo that the chyldren of Ilrael toulde not beholde the face of Moyses, for the glozie of his tountenaunce, whiche glorie] is done away:

8 Howe shall not the ministration of the spirite be much more in glorie:

9 Forpfthe ministration of tondempnation be glorie: much more Doth the miz

a) Meaning the spirituall doctrint Whi- 7 che to in ont heartes.

Sein od had spo-
Ben with hun and geuẽ hyin the lawt.

‘The ie pistle

15 Jor we are vnto God the lweete fa“

dur selues agayne?: Dr - -

dation vnto pou: o

Such trust haue we throͤugh Chaitte

my leaue ot them, and went away into Macedonia.
14. Polbe thankes be bnto God, whiche D
-albapyes geueth vs the © vittozie in terrain:
Chaitte, and openeth the fauour of his tse se" knowledge by vs in euery plate. dea

nour of Christe in them that are faued, and in them which perifihe. f
16 To the one part (are we) the sauour of Luk u death, vnto death: and vnto the other part (ave we} the fauour of lyfe vnto lyfe,
And who is meete vnto these thynges-
17 For we are not as many are, whiche chop e chaunge with the word of God: but as of purenesse of God, in the syght of God, so speake we in Christe.

mistration of ryghteousnes exceede in

glorie.

Io For euen that which was glorikied, is ¢ not glorified in respect of this exteedyng

glozic.
11 Jor yfthat whiche is destroped was glorious, much more that which remapneth is glorious.
12 e ee eee we ble great boldnesse: A
3 And not as Moyles, which put © a Rosi vayle ouer his face, that the chyldren of sees
Ilrael shoulde not fee for what purpose so sr», chat serued which is put away. a en
14. But their myndes were blpnded: Nor en e vntyll this day remapneth the sanie co- fo one uerpng vntaken away in the reading of So gane the ete” Which Lvarlej is put su 15 abay in at e. Fonihthe glo-
15 Wut euen vnto this day when Mopses a, vt ao "the bayle is lapde vppon their .
4 10 se a
16 Meuerthelesse, when it chall turne an. tothe Lorde, the vayle chalbe taken a: D

wap. .
17 The Torde is a spirite: And where fon the {pirite ol the Lorde lis j there (is li bertie. J *
18 Wut we all behold (as) in ac mirrour, Oy om the glorie of the Lorde, With his face agg e open, and are chaunged vnto the same e smulitude, from glorie to glorie, euen as a.. of the spirite of the Lode.

¶ The

ae Herfore, seyng that we haue such a mimsterie, way las we haue receaucd

BAY mercie, we faynt not:
Gut hauc cast from

traftynesse, neither handle we the word of God disteitefullp, but in openyng of the trueth, and report our selues to euery mans tonstiente in the fyght of God.
3 four Golpell be pet hyd, it is hyd inthem that are lost:

in ii e. 4
) To wpt,
Aan.

. viii. f.

n xi. f.

che beleue not, lest the lyght of the Got pell of the glorit of Christe (which is the

5 Foz we preache not our selues, but
Christe Felis the Lord, and our felues pour serũauntes for Jesus fake,

6 Fortis God that coninaundeth the

lyght to Thine out of darknesle, whiche

Hath *Mhined in our heartes, for to geue

the lyght of the knowledge of the glorie

of God, in the fate of Jesus Christe.

But we haue this treasure tn “earthen

vessels, that the extellentie ol the power

be Gods, and not ours.

8 We are troubled on cueryp syde, pet are we not without shyft. We are in pouertie, but not vtterlsy without soniewhat.

Co We lutker persetution, but are not for-

faken therin. We are tast downe, but we

perische not.

(ene...

cher d.

Ir va. —

N Or we knowe, that pf our earthly © houte of this! tabernacle were

ice

heauen.

The. iy. Chapter.

In whom 'the“ god ofthis worde
“Hath blinded the myndes of them whi-

image of God) should shine vnto them.

CVI.

He declareth his diligence, and roundnelle in his office: a and that which his enemie toke fo2 bis difaduatntage,to wit the crosse and affliction which he a turned it to his great aduauntage, ni schewyng what profite commeth therbp. ;

To Me alwayes *beare about in the body Cub vid

the dying of the Lode Jesus, that the lpfe of Jelsus myght allo appeare in our bodie. <x

n oz We which itz are ulwayes deliuered vnto death for Jesus fake, that the lyfe also ol Jesu night appcare in our mortall flesshe.

12 So then, death worketh in vs, but life in pou. 2»

13 V Seing then that we haue the same spirite of fayth (attordyng as it is written, J beleued, and therefore haue J pos ovis. abet) We alfo beleue, and therefore peake.

14. Tor we knowe, that he which raysed D bp the Lorde Felus, shall rapse vp vs alfo by the meanes of Jesus, and shall fet bs with pou.

45 For all thynges do J) for pour (ales, that the plenteous grace, by thankes i.cori.a. geuyng of many, map redounde to the prayse of God.

16 Wherefore we are not werped: Wut though our ontwarde man perishe, vet the imwarde man is renned dap by dap. »

17 *Fozourercecdyng tribulation whieh eee. ismomrentante E> lyght, prepareth au „ whee w excecdprig and an eternall Wapght oft: glorie buto vs.

13 Whyle we loke not on the thynges whiche are seent, but on the thynges & which are not seene. For the thynges which are seene, are teinporall: but the things which are not seene, are eternal.

Rom. viil. c.

Ea srect of the euttlafpnge
Ipfe.

The. v. Chapter.

1 Paul proceedeth to declare the vtilitie that commeth by the crosse, 4 ho we we ought to prepare our lelues vnto it, 5 by whom, o and lor what ende. 1% He setteth foosth the grace of Christ, rd and che office of mintiers, a all the faithful.

2 Fo2*therfore spgh we, desiryng to be Rom, vii. clothed with our house whiche is from heauen:
3 So pet, pfthat we be founde clothed, and not naled. N
4. For we that are in this tabernacle sigh, Apoc md.
᷑ being burdened becaule we would not de vnclothed, but Would be clothed bpo,
N f Diy that

„ Ih ay Epistle

that mortalitie night be lwalowed vp

of lyke.

5 Pe that hath ordeyned vs for this thpug lis; God, Which hath allo geuen puto vs the earnest of the spirite.

6 LKherfore we are al way of good cheare, and knowe, that as long as we are at home u the body, We are absent krom the Lode.

7 (Foz we walke by fayth, not after out-

Warde appcaraunce.) a

233 MNeuerthelesle, we are ol good comkort, and had rather to be ablent from the body, and to be present with the Lorde.

9 Wherfore, whether We be at home, oz from home, we endeuour our selues to be accepted vnto hym.

Matxxv.c.I0 f? we must all appeare before the

Rom. iii e iluldgement seate of Chuiste, that euery

man map receaue the workes of his bodie accorditig to that he hath done, whether it be good or bad.
II Seeing then that we knowe the feare of the Lorde, we fare kayze with men:

Roin. viii. c.

l. Cor. i. d.

0 we im- JO; Weare knowen well enough vnfine an to God. J trust allo that we are knowae , en in pour conferences,

12 For we prayse not our selues agapne vnto vou, but geue pou an occafion to reioyte of vs, that ve may haue somwhat agaynst them which reioyte in the face,

C and not inthe heart.

Ge) ene get 13 Foz © yf we be to feruent, to God are

fonneth e We to feruent: Or pf we kepe mealure, foz pour tause kepe We mealurc.

be out of Wpt,

14 Foz the louc of Chziste tonstrapneth vs, because we thus iudge, that yf one dyed for all, then were all dead.

15 And 'he dyed for all, that they which lyue, shoulde not hencefoorth lyue vnto them selues, but vnto hym Which dyed for them, and rose agapne. e

16 Wherekore hencefoorth knowe weno man after the flesshe: Inlomuche, ohren
1 sit e after wur ot! he

Ye flelshe, nowe pet hencefoorth knowe soe tte
We hyni fo no moze. 4 eT

17 Therfore yf any man be in Christe, he is à newe creature. Olde thynges are passed awaye, beholde all thynges are betonie'newe. Esai. xl c

18 And all thynges are of God, whiche . hath 'reconciled vs vnto hym felfe by Cale.
Jesus Christe, and hath genen to vs the ninisterie of reconciliation, -. .

1 Fo2*God was in Chrifte, reconciling oo. the worlde to hym selfe, not imputyng 8 their sinnes vnto them, and hath coni-

i to vs the preachyng of the atonement.

20 Nowe then are we mellengers in the rome of Christe, euen as though God dyd beleche pou throͤugh vs. So prape
We pou in Christes Meade; that ve be re-

toncied vnto God.

21 For he hath made him to be sinne fog rain li vs, whiche knewe no sinne, that we None fhoulde be made the ryghtedulnesse of

i. Thess. vc.

er
Whether we . feito 85 The. vj. Chapter.
An exhortation to christian lyle, n and to beare him line affection, as he doeth them:
Aiso to kepe them telues from pollution of idolatrie both in body and soule, and to haue none acquayntaunce with the heathen,
1 E also as helpers ex? anguisshes, ae at horte pon, that ve re- 5 In stripes, in prilonmentes, in strifes, ceaue not the grace ok in labours,
God in vayne. 6 In watchenges in kattnges in pure
JJ. For hesaith: Ihaue naesse, in knowledge, in long fuffryng,in
Efai.xlixc. WyAVeardthecinatpmicac: kpndnesle, in the holy ghott, in loue bu: tepted, and in the day ok kfaigned: N saluation haue JJ suckonred thee. Be- n the worde of trueth in the power geg le holde, nowe is that accepted tyme, of God, by the armour of rightedulnes,

beholde nowe is that day of laluation:
Let vs geue none occasion of eupll in

anp thyng, that the mimisterie be not

blamed:

4 But in all thynges let vs behaue our selues as p ministers of God, in muh

fie, wheres he hach rpowred foozth his 3 intunte loue.

5. Cor. ili a.

pactence, in afflictions, in neteslities, in

of the ryght hande and on the lekte.
3 By honour and dishonour, by euvllreport and good repost, as deceaàuers and et true,
9 : As vnknowen, and pet knowen, as dying, and beholde we lpue, as chastened, and not kylled, A

ae

tothe

10 As sorowyng, and pet alwap merie:
AS poore, and pet make many riche: as hauyng nothyng, and pet polsessyng all thynges. s

„En Dye Corinthians, our o mouth is owulle. pen vnto vou, dur heart is made large: is.: He are in no strayte in vs, but are ina straite in vour owne bowels. N picord, I proniise vou lyke rewarde as vnto dae, childzen: Set pour selues at!“ large, arb. 14. And beare not ve a straunge poke

with the vnbeleuers. For what felow-

ship bath righteoulnesse with vnrighteousnesse: Dz what communion hath
Ipaht with darkenelle:

Corinthians. ;

CVIII.

1 Oz what concorde hath Charette with 1 belpall: Eyther what part hath he that e beleueth, with an infidell:

16 Or howe agreeth the temple of God D with images: For pe are the temple of corn. the lpuing God, as faide God, J Wyll Exod.xix.g dwell inthem, € walke in cehemy Epi Tera. be their God, € they shalbe my people.

17 Wherfore come ont frd among them, Esiastiic, and seperate pour selues from them
(saith the Lorde) and touche none vntleane thyng, and J wyll receaue vou,

18 And wyll be a father vnto you, and ye chalbe my sonnes and daughters, faith the Lorde almightie.

She. vij. Chapter.

1 He exhorteth them by the promise of God to kepe them lelues pure, 3. 7 Alluryng them ok his loue. 8. j and doeth not ercufe his seueritie to warde them, but reiopceth therol, conliderpng what prokite came therby. 10 Ok two foztes of sorowe. 5

AEyng that we haue
Neel thefe promises (dearelp beioued) let vs dense e our lelues frontal fpl-

thynesse of the flesshe €
Ospirite, and growe bp

feare of God.

2. Understande vs, we haue wronged no man, we haue corrupt no man, we haue defrauded no man.

3 Ispeake not this to tondempne you: for I haue shewed von before, that ye
Are in our heartes to dye and lyue with pou. 4

4 Jam verp bolde ouer you, Jreiopte greatly in you. J am fplled With comfort, and am exceedyng ioyous in all our tribulation.

5 Jor when we werc come into Mate-
Donia, our flesshe had no rest, but we were troubled on euery fpde: Dutivard was fyghtyng, inward was feare.

Griz 6 Meuerthelesse, God that comforteth the humble, comforted vs by the commyng of Titus.

87 And not by his comming ontp, but also bythe consolatiõ whiche we receaued

xv c.

of you, when he tolde vs pour desire,

your wepyng, pour feruent mynde towarde me, so that J reiopted the more.
8 For though J made pou sorie with a

to full holynesse in the

letter, Yrepent not, though IJ dyd rez pent. Foz I perceaue, that the fame epistle made pou sorie, though it were but fora season.

9 Jnobe reioyce, not that pe were lorie, but that pe so sorowed to repent : for ve sorolwed godly, fo that in nothyng ve were hurt by vs.

10 For godly sorowe, causeth repentaunce

vnto saluatiõ, not to be repented of : but the fozowe of the world cauleth death. sercxc n Fopbeholde this thing, what carefulnefic this godly sorow that ye toke, bath wrought in pon: pea (what; Ocltaring of , gen pour selues, pea (what) indignation, pea" what) feare, yea (what) vehemẽt delire, pea (what) ʒeale, pea what jpunishment.
Jor in all thynges ye haue (herbed your selues that pe Were cleare in} matter.
Iz Wherefore, though J wrote vnto pon,
I dyd it not for his tãuse that had done the hurt, neither for his caule that was ar cat hurt: Obnt that pour good nunde to vs- eren to-
Warde myght appeare among vou tries: eave the fyght of God. appeare bre
3 Lherfore we are coniforted, because So pact cos pe are comforted: pea and exceedyngly nas An the more coped we, fo2 the ioy that Lee, oe tus had, because his spirite was refresh- ah h r kum kette
14, J an therefore not nowe ashamed, ess. though J boasted my felfe to hym of
DOinij vou,

* The J. Epistle

pou. For as all thinges which we spake

vnto you are true: euen fo dur boastyng

that J made vnto Titus is made true.
Ard his inwarde affection is more à-

voundaunt towarde you, when he re-

menihred the obedience of vou all, howe

mia feare and tremblyng pe rectaued

m.

16 J reioyte that I may be bolde in vou in all thynges.

q The viij. Chapter.

By the example of the Macedonians 9 and Chzttte, he exhorteth them to continue in relieupng the poore faintes, commending their good beginning. 23 Alter he coms mendeth Titus and his felowes onto them. e

N Oreduer, we do pou to
9 UG Y wite brethren, ofthe grace

NY Hof God, which was geuen
AM in the Churches of Macedonia. ;

Hove that p aboundance

We
Sy i=) wre aa
S et
Fr oo ae
N

were Wyllyng.
Gele J. Aud prayed vs with great instaunee ede. that we Woulde reteaue this grace
Abtes x. d. and societie of the ministerie to p faintes.
And this they dvd) not as we loked for: but gaue their owne felucs first to the
Lorde, and (after) vnto vs by the Wyll of God.

6 So that we coulde not but desire Titus to accomplyshe p same grace among vou also, euen às he had begun.

ore therefore as pe are riche in all thinges, in fapth, in worde, in knolbledge, in all feruentnesse, and in lone, which ye haue to vs: euen fo,fec that ve be plenteons in this grace allo.
This fay I not by commaundement, but becaute of p feruentnelle of © other, derten, ( alo wing the vnkaynednes of your loue. ate dane? Jor pe knowe the grace of our owe daran Hefus Chait,that though he was rich,
Romx.a. pet for vour sales he becamte poore, that pe through his pouertie might be made

rich.

10 And J gene countell hereto: Foz this is expedient for pon, which haue begun not to do only, but also to wil à pere ago.

nu Nowe therkore perfonrme the thyng
Which ye began to do: that as ther was lu pouaredines to wyll, euen fo pe map

pet in. ce. performe poede* of that which ye haue.
Wia. 12 For ix there be first a wyllyng mynde, b tit is atcepted atcordyng to that aman

W 7

() D2 reade, but ehzough

Luk. xxl. a.

Hath, and not actordyng to that he bath

not.

13 Trulp, not that other be set at ease, c C pe brought into combraunte: 5

14 But that there be equalnesse nowe at this tyine, and that pour aboundaunce map suceour their lacke, and that their aboundaunce mape supplie pour lacke, that there may be cqualitic.

15 As it Written: He that had much, had Krol not the moze aboundaͤunce, and he that had litle, had not the lesse.

16 Thankes be vnto God, which put the fame good mynde fo? pou in the heart of
Titus,

17 Betault he accepted the exhortation, pta rather he was so well wylling, that of his owne accorde he came vnto pou.

18 We haue fent with hym that bother Y
© whole praise is in the Gospel through © zen out all the Churches. pa, ome

19 (And not that only, but is also chofen of ake bey the Churthes to be a felowe with bs in our lourney,concerupng this grace that is ministred by vs vnto the glorie of the fame TLorde, and to stirre bp pour redie mynde)

20 For this we eschewe, that any man shoulde rebuke vs in this plenttous distribution that is ministred by vs: Rem te-

21 And make prouisid fo, honelt thinges co weer not only in the sygbt of the Lorde, but 2 rine allo in the spght of men.

22 Me haue tent with them a brother of ours, whom we haue oftentpmices p20ued Diligent in many thinges, but nowe much moze diligent, for the great conti dente (whiche J haue) in vou:

23 Partly for Titus fakt, which is np felowe T helper concernyng you: partie becaule of other which are dur brethren and the meflengers of the Churches, landj the glorie of Chustt. 5

24 Wherfore shewe pe vnto adh i 6 idl of pour loue, ¢ of our retopcyng Of yOu th” in the syght o the Churches. C The

——.xůr—ͤ —ę—

The. ix. Chapter.

Che cause of Titus and his companions commyng to them. 6 he exhortech to geue almes chearetullp, 7 shewyng what kruites wyll come therok.

F the ministryng to
Voy) (te faintes, it is but
A \:(fuperfiuous foz me to
Uite vnto pou ;

%. Foz Pknowe the red | Dinefle of pour mypnde, whereof J boast my selfe of vou, vnto them of Macedonia, that Achaia was prepared a pere a go:

and pour scale Hath prouoked many.

3 Bet haue J lent the brethren, lett our boastyng which J make of pou, should be in bayne in this behalse, that peas 7 haue sayde ) may prepare pour selues.

4 Lett ykthey of Macedonia come with me, and kynde you vnprepared, we (J wyll not say you) shoulde be ashamed in this niatter of boastyng.

5 Therkore, I thought it necessarie to exhort the brethren, to come beforehand vnto you, and to prepare pour good blessyng peomifed afore, that it myght be redy, lo that it be as a blessyng, and not a defraudyng.

This pet lar) he which soweth litte, hall reape litle: and * he that soweth in geupng largely and freely, hail reape plenteouslie.

Let euery man do, ateordyng as he

a chearefull geuer.

3 God is able to make pou riche in all grace, that pe in all thynges hauyng fufficlent vnto the vtmost, may be riche vnto all maner of good wozkes,

9 Acgit is written: He hath sparled

abrode, and Vath geuen to the poore,?

his ryghteousnesse remayneth fo2 euer. lo He that nunistreth seede vnto p sower, ministrech brrad also sor foode, and multiplieth pour seede, and encreaseth the fruites of pour ryghteousnesse:

1 That in all thynges ye may be made riche into all singlenesse, which cauleth through vs, that thankes are geuen vnto God. a

12 Forthe administration of this seruite,

not only supplieth p neede of the faintes:

but also is aboundaunt by the thankes geuyng of many vnto God,

Which by the experiment of this nit nistration, prayse God for the obedience of pout consentyng to the Gofpell of

CIX.

Psal. cxii. b. a) Dantd taketh of man which keateth on, and loneth hus nepghbour.

D

Christe, and for your singlenesse in distri-

butyng to then and to all men:

14. And by their prayers for pon, which
Olong after pou, foz the aboundaunt grace of God in you.

O Dz, are greatip afFec= tioned toward

15 Thankes be vnto God, for his vn-

Hath purposed in his heart, not grudg- — Ipeakeable gyft. vngly, or of necessitie: For God loueth
4 The. x. Chapter.

1 He toucheth the kalle Ppotttes, and dekendeth his auctoritte, erhortyng them to obedience: n And Heweth what his power is, z and ho we he vleth it.

4. For the weapons of our warfare are xg not carnall, but myghtie through God, Ephevie:

2 vou by the mekenelle ey AV N E gentlenesse of Chzitt,
6 05 prelent among vou, am tolvlpe : but ant

Paul mp selke beseche whiche when J am bolde towarde pou be-

png ablent.

2 A beleche you, that J neede not to be bolde when J am prelent, with that fame boldenesse, wherwith J am suppofed to haue ben bolde, agaynst some, which repute vs as though we walked
üccordyng to the fleshe.

3 Foz though we walke in the fleshe, pet we do not warre according to v flesh.

to tast downe strong holdes,

5 Wherwith we ouerthzowe counsels, and euery Hye thyng, that is exalted az gaynst the knowledge of God, e bryng into captiuitie all imagination, to the obediente of Christe,

6 And are readic to take vengeaunce on all difobedience, when pour obedience is fulfylled.

7 PLoke pe on thynges after the vtter
5 fany man trust in hym selte that he is Christes let hym consider this agayne of hym selfe, that as he (is of Christe, euen so (are) we of a?

; he I. Epistle

3 Por though J shoulde boast my selfe somwhat moze ot our auctoritie, which the Lorde hath geuen to bs *foz edificaz tion, and not for pour destruction, it Hal not be to my shaume:

Lek I should feeme as though J wet about id make vou afrayde by letters.

Io Jor the letters sayth he, are sore and

ii Cor. xiil. c

hoping strong:but his bodyly presente is Weake, among went, id hls speache rude. J un Let hym that is such, thynke on this

Wife:that as We are in worde by letters, when we are absent, such are we in derde when we are present.

12 FJor We dare not make our felucs of the number of them, 02 to compare our selues to them Which praise themselues.
Neuerthelesse, whyle they mealure them selues, with then selues, and compare them lelues with them selues, they vuderstande not. .

13 But we wyll not retoyce aboue mea-

ure: but atcordyng to the © measure of60 aner the rule, which God hath distributed dene vnto vs, a mealure to reache euen vnto fan g pou. others op
14 FJor We stretch not out our selues beponde measure, as though we reached not vnto pon: For euen to pou also haue
We tome with the Gospell of Christe:
15 And we boast not our selnes out of mealure in other mens labours: Bea, and we hope, when pour fayth is intreased among you, to be magnified ac: tordyng to our mealure aboundauntlp,
16 And that J chall preache the Gospell, in thole (regions) which (ate) beponde vou: and not to glorie of those thynges,
Which by another mans mealure are prepared alredp.
17 Burt let hym that glogieth, glorie in the Lorde.
18 Forhe that prapseth hyniselfe, is not alowed, but whom the Lorde prayseth.

The. xj. Chapter.

2 He declareth his affection to warde them. J Che excellencie ok his minilterte, 9 and his diligence in the fame, 13 Che fetches of the kalle Apoltleg. 16 Che peruerse iudgement ofthe Corinthians. 22 Ind his owne prapseg.

Ould to God pe couide

haue suffred nie a litle

„in mp oolichnesse: and

in Dede pe do forbeare

me.
Jor J am gelous ouer pou, with Godly geloufic : For J hane coupled pou to one man, to present (vou) a hatte virgin vnto Christe.

3 Wut N feare lest by any meanes, that as the ferpent * begpled Eut through his subtiltie, euen fo pour myndes fhoulde be corrupted fro the singlenelle that is to warde Christe.

4 For pk he that conuneth, preacheth another “ Jesus, whom we haue not preached: or pt ve veceaue another spi-

Gen. iii. a.

r doctrine cons seus, another Golpell which ye haue not rez
158 vou woulde well haue suffered
0 m) + 8
Uerply J suppose that I was not bez hynde the chiefe Apostles. a
6 But though (3 be} rude in speakyng, pet not in knowledge, but in all thynges among pou, we haue ben well knowen to the vtmost.

~ . a

rite whom ye haut not receaued: either

5 Dpd J sinne becaust I subnutted my

and had nede, IJ was chargeable to no e man: for that Which was lackyng vnto

The trueth of Christe is in me. that go. this reiopcyng Mali not be shut vp a cuter,

el J i

uffet me u TJoherkore: Betause J loue vou not- 00
God knoweth. Ga.
1 But what J do, that wyll J do, to cut away otcãlion from them Which defire otcalion, that they myght be founde
Ivke vnto vs, in p Wherin they glozted.
13 For such falle Apoltles care) dilceiptfull
Workers, transfourmed into p Apostles of Christe. a
14 And uo marnpie for Hammah is transfourmed into an ang yet

— — — — — . — 14 co the Corinth

15 Therkore it is no great thyng though
His ministers be transfourmed as the ministers of righteousnesse, whofe ende shalbe actordyng to their workes.

Dis Flay agapne, let no man thynke that
Jam foolyshe: or els euen nowe take pe mie as a foole, that J allo map boast my selte a litle.

17 That I speake, I speake it not after the? Lorde: but as it were foolishlp, in

ba che this maner of boastyng.

nz bit 18 Seyng that many glorie after p flethe,

- J wyll glorie also. 2»

aon l? For ye fuer fooles gladly, seyng ve

ahrn. pour selues are Wyle.

20 For pe suffer, yt a man bryng pou into bondage, pf a man deuoure, yf a man take, pka man exalt hym leife, yfa man smite pou on the face.

21 J spcake concernyng reproche, as

though we had ben weake: Bowbeit,

wherin soeuer any man is bolde, (J

speake foolishly) J am bolde allo.

They are Ebrues, euen fo am J.

They are Plrachites, euen fo am J.

wan J. the seede of Abraham, euen

dam.

23 Thep are the ministers of Christe, (J speake as afoole) J am more:in labours more aboundant, in stripes abone measure, in prpson moze plenteouslie, in death © oft.

In his

iipiia, 22

In the d daun: ail death.

E CX,

24. Of the Jewes fpue tymes reteaued Deu
FH fourtie ctripesj saue one.

25 *Linple was J beaten with roddes, A0 once ftoned thule H (ulfred shipwracke, Ag nyght and day haue J ben in p depth:

26 In iourneying often, in perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in perils ol mne owue nation, in perils among the heathen, ' in perils in the titie, in perils Aae in the wildernesse, in perils in the fea, m perils aniong false brethren,

27 In labour € trauaple, in watchinges often, in hunger and thirst, in fastinges often, in tolde and nakednelle,

28 Belides the thynges which outwardlye come vnto nie: inp daplp encombrauncelis the care of all the Churches. cor u.a.

29 Who is weake, and J am not weake-
Who is offended, and J burne not-

30 If I must needes glory, Pwyil glory of the thynges that concerne mpne infirntities,

a1 The God and father of our Lorde
Pelus Christe, which is blessed for euermore, knoweth that J lye not.

32 ce ni (the citieot} Damascus, Aretas the kynges gouernour of the people, layde watche in the atte of the Dama tens, and woulde haue taught me:

33 And at a wyndolbe was Jlet downe in a basket through the wall, and {taped his handes.

Aces. lx. d.

The. xij. Chapter.

he reiopceth in prekerment, 5 but chietely in his humblenelse, 1 and lapeth the cause of his boastyng vpon the Corinthians, 14 he she wech what good wil he beareth them.

20and promiseth to come vnto them.

T is not expedient doubtles, for wie to
© \ i lglozie, J wpl come to visions € reuelationsofthe Lorde.
For I knew ama in © Chaifte, aboue

dee God knoweth) that he was taken bp

ante dhe f

which is not lawfull for nian to beter, 8
Fuck a man wyll IJ glorie, yet ol my

selfe wyll IJ not glorie, but in myne tr

firnities.

6 For though F woulde desire to glorie,

J Chall not be a foole, for J wyll fay the

trueth: but J nowe refrapne, lest any

man shoulde thynke of me, abone that

ae he seeth me to be, or y he heareth ol me.

5 And »lest J choulde be exalted out of lu. mealure though the aboundaunce of the reuelations, there was geuen vnto me a pricke to the fleshe, the meflenger of Satan to buffet me, becaulse I should not be exalted out of nieasure.

g For this thyng besonght J the Lode thryle, that it myght depart fron It

—— —ů —

e Epitle

C9 And he sapde vnto me: My grace is sufficient for thee. For mm strength is made perfect in weakenesse. Most gladly therfore, 7 Wyll rather glozie in my inlirinities, that the power of Chit myght dwell in me.

Io Therfore haue J delectation in inkfirmities, in rebules, in necessities, in persetutions, in anguishes for Christes fake:

For when J am weake, then am J

strong. N N

1 Jam become a foole lin) gloripng. Be
Hauc tompelledme:for J ought to haue ben tonnnended of pou. For nothyng was J inkeriour vnto the chicfe Apostles, though J be nothung,

12 Truelp the signes ofan Apostle were

Wrought among you, in all patience,

and signes, and Wonders, and myghtie

Deedes.

Foz what is it, wherin pe were inkerisur vnto other Churches, except lit be that J
Forgeue nie this Wrong,

14 Bcholde, nowe the thirde tynie Jam redy to tome vnto ou, and pet wpll not be chargeable vnto pou: For seke not ours, but you. Foz the children ought not to lay vp for the fathers and mothers: but the fathers and mothers

Cor. ix. a.

2p 3

A&xx.g-
31 Cor. xi. c.
Eccle. 48. c. i Reg. xü. a.

was not chargeable vnto yous

for the chyldren.
15 J wyll very gladly bestowe, x wylbe bestowed for pour fakes, though the more aboundauntly FJ loue you, the leg ben ae
16 Wlit be it, that I was not chargeable bnto vou: O euerthelelle, when x © was cratic, I caught pou with guile, eee
17_ Dyd J pyll you by any of them whs Pe
FH fent nto yous 27 lee en
18 J desired Titus and with hym JJ ent ace abrother: Dyd Titus dekrande vouok any thyng : Haue we not walked in the samie spirite: not in the fame steppes-
19 Agayne, thynke pou that We excule our selues vnto vou: Me speake in Christ in the syght of God: but (we do; all thin: ges dearelp beloued, for your edifipng.
20 For J feart lest when J come, J Chait not fynde vou such as J wonldẽ: and that I shalbe founde vnto pou, such as pe woulde not: lest there be"debates, en- Gauche. upinges, wrathes, strifes, backbitinges,
Whisperinges, swellinges, ¢ seditions:
And that when J come agayne, my
God bryng nie lowe among vou, and J shall bewayle many of the which haue sinned alredy, and haue not repented ol the*bndleanneffe , and fornication, and; cor
Wantounes, which they haue tönutted.

Thus

J The. xiij. Chapter.

1 He threatneth the obttinate, 5 And declareth what his power is by thefr owne testimonie. 10 Alto he cheweth what is the elect ofthis pille. 11 Alter, hauyng exhorted them to their duetie, he wilsheth them alt prolperitie.

A1
Deu. xix. d.
Mat. x vin. c
John. viii. c.

Hebt. x. f.

e J tolde pou before, and tell pou before, as though J had ben present with vou the feconde tyme, fo waite J nowe beyng abfent,to them which in time pak haue finned, and to all other, that yl J come agapne, J Wyll not spare,
Seyng v pe lecke experience of Christe
*which speaketh in me, which to pou

Mitli. x. d.

ward is not weake, but is mighty in pou.

4. Forthoughhe was crucified of weakenefic, yet liueth be of the power of God.
And we no doubt, are Weake in hym: but we shall lpue with hym, by p might of God to warde pou,

Examine pour selues, whether pe are

1 Cor. xi. f.

Eccle. 8. c. 5

m the fapth: Prone pour owne selues.
Knobe yt not pour owne selues, howe that Jelus Christe is in pou: except pe be reprobates.
6 Ji trust ve shal knowe that we are not reprobates.
7 Truely J pray to God that ye do none eupll, not that we shoulde seeme approued: but y ve shoulde do that which is C — honest, though we be as G reprobates. e
8 FJor We can do nothyng agaynst the i a trueth:but for the trueth. bp
9 For Weare glad when we are weake, and pe are strong. Lruely this also we wishe, euen pour perfection.
10 Therkore write I thele thynges bepng ablent, tet when J am present, fhouid vle sharpenesse, accordyng to the power which the Lorde hath geuen ; cor me to edifitation, and not to destruction.
1 Finally brethren, fare well, be Nie

be of good tomfort, be of one mynde,

lyue in peace, and the God of loue and peace shalbe with vou.

scnxvié 2. Greete one another in an holy kille.

with the chiele Apokles,
D, , Aul an Aposlle,

ex not of men, nei-
75 1 ther by man: but
NG by Jelus Chuitte,
8 and by God the
8 aS 5 father, which ray-
N

PAS 1
44 any sed hym vp from

nS) EK OAM Death:
2 SUI GCS And all the bretheen which are with me. Unto p Churches of Galacia:
Grate (be) with you, and peace from

God the father, and from dur Lorde

Jesus Christe: 8

whieh, + Which gaue hym selfe for our finnes,

ame bo deliuer vs from this © prelent eupll

iit Worlde, accordyng to the wyll of God, and our father:
5 To whom be glozy for euer and euer.
Amen.

6 J maruaple, that ye are so soone turned from him that bad called pou in the grace of Christe, vnto another Gofpell:

7 Which is not another Gospel but that there be some which trouble vou, and intende to peruert the Gospel of Chat.

lemi a. 3

Messey a

from heauen, preache any other Golpel vnto you, then that which we haue preached vnto von, let hym be accursed.
As we layde before, fo fay J nowe agapne, yf any man preache any other
Golpell vnto you, then that ye haue receaucnd, let hym be accursed. xq 0 Do J nowe perswade men, or God-
Other do J seke to pleale men? Foz pf

¶ Che ende ol the teconde Epiltle to the Corinthians,
à citie in Macedonia, by Citus and Lucas.

8 Meuerthelesle, though we, or an Angel

Cl.

All the saintes falute pou.

13 The grace of our Lorde Jesus Christ, aud the loue of God, and fhe tõmunion of the holy ghost, be with pou all. Amé,

Sent from Philippos,

The Epiftle of the oA poftle Saint Paul, to the Galathians, \ ~
The firft Chapter. te

@ s Paul rebuketh their inconstancie, which tufired them lelues to be seduced

bp the kalle apollles, who preached that the obferuation of the ceremonies

ol the lawe were necellarie to saluation, 3 and detesteth them that preache : any other wyse then Chrille purely, iz He sheweth his owne conuerlation, 5 magnifieth his office and A postlechyp, and declareth hym felfe to be equal

I shoulde vet pleale men, J were not

the seruaunt of (hatte, e

I JJ tertifie pou brethren, that the
Gospell which was preached of me, was not after man. ö f

12 For I neither reteaued it of man, net: ther was taught lit) but by the reuelation of Jesus Christe.

I Foz pe haue hearde of my comerfaz tion in tyme past in the Jewes religion, j howe that beyonde measure Jperse- Adee via. cuted the Churche of God, x spoyled it:

14 And profited in the Jewes religion, aboue many of nip companions in nune obne nation, beyng a very feruent Corxv-b.

ilip. iu. a.

maynteyner of the traditions of my > Eat fathers. SW. 99

15 Wut when it pleased God, which sepe- raden rated me front my mothers wombe, x 5. g

Actes. ix. e.

bem to fee Peter, and abode with hyin kyfteene dayes.
19 Wut other of the Apostles sawe J none, saue James the Lordes brother.
20 The thynges therfore which J waite vnto pou, beholde, before God JJ lie not.
21 Afterwarde, J came into the „ Act cx. d-

in face buto the Churches of Jurie, which were in Chrilte.
22 Wut they had hearde onlp,

© The. ij. Chapter.

Conkirmyng his Ipolllechyp to be of God. z he cheweth why Titus was not circumciled, cand that he is nothyng infertour to other Apoltles, 11 Vea, and that he hath reproued Peter, tihe Apoltle of the Jewes. 15 After, he commeth to the principal scope, which is, to proue that iultificatton only commeth ok the grace of God by fapth in

Jelus Chzitte, and not by the workes of the lawe.

hben fourteene peres
„„akter, J went pp a-
24 gapnc to Hierulalem“*

With Warnabas, and

toke Titus with me.

— lation, c I declared puto them the Golpel which F preache among the gentiles: but priuatelp, with them which were the chieft, tek by any

meanes, I shoulde runne or had runne

in vayne. .

3 Wut neither Titus which was with me, beyng a Greke, was compelled to be tircumcised,

4 And that becaule of incommers, being falle brethren, which canie in prinilp, to spye out dur libertie which we haue in

Chziste Jesu, that they myght bryng vs into bondage. ;

5 To whom, no not foz an Youre, we gatie place by subiection, that the trueth

bk the Gospel might continue with vou.
W 5 Ok them which seemed to be some-
0 Awet what (what they“ were in time passed,

tere it maketh no matter to me, God accep;

Sen teth no mans perfor) for they which osm i seemed chicfe, © added nothyng (fo me.) ep tau

Herbe 7 Wut contrary ple, whenthey falve

approueD mp that the Gospell of the vncirtumtision

erm at Was committed vuto nie, as the Golpel

= of the tirtumcilion was committed vnto Peter.

8 (For he that was myghtie in Peter to

the Apostleshyp of the circunmcision, the

fanie was myghtie in me to warde the gentiles)

9 When they perteaued the grace that was geuen vnto nie, then James, Cephas, and John, which seemed to be ppllers, gatic to me and Barnabas the ryght handes of felowshyppe, that we
(choulde be Aposties] vnto the Heathen, and they vnto the tircumtcilion.

Ihe Epistle

of Spria ¢ Cilicia, and was vnknowen

oped. that he 23 And they glorified God in me.

AL But whẽ Peter was come to Antioche, C
IJ went vp also by re-

which perfecuted vs in tyme past, nowe preacheth the © fayth, which before he o Suu. destr Be Set,

whi forty.

10 Pnelp that we shoulde remember the

poore: Wherin also J was diligent to Aae do the same. a ii Col. a.

withstoode hun to the fate, betause /w he was to be blamed. wen.

12 For per b certaine tame from James, he dyd cate with the gentiles: Wut
Whe they were tome, he withdrue, and seperated hum elfe, fearing them which were of the circunicision.

13 And the other Jewes diflembled lpkewpse with hym: inlonnich that
Warnabas aifo was brought into their simulation.

14 But when F sawe that they went not the ryght way to the trueth of the
Gospel, I laide vnto Peter before them all: Il thou beyng a Jewe, lpuest after the manner of the gentiles, and not as do the Jewes: vahy taulest thou the gentiles to lyue as do the Fees: od

15 DOC (which are! Jewes by nature, and Bi not © finners of the gentiles, fess aa

16 Xnowe that a man ' is not iustified a by the deedes of the lawe, but by the Romie fayth of Pelus Christe: And we haue beleued on Jesus Christ, that we might be iustified by the fayth of Chrilte, and not by the deedes of the lawe, betause by the deedes of the lawe no flelhe shalbe iustified. N

17 Il then, whple we seke to be made ryghteous by Chettte, we our selues are founde linners: is therkore Chrilte the minister of fiune: God forbyd.

18 Jor pf builde agapne the thynges which J deftroped, then make I mx selke a trespasser. 1

19 For J, through the lawe, am bead to the faive, that 3) myght tyne puto
God: Fam crnaficd with Chulte.

20 Heer betet Anne yet uawve Ne
J, but Christe lvueth iu nie. which

to the Ga

which J nove liue in the fleshe, J lyue by the faith of the sonne of God, which loued me, and gaue hym selfe for me.

lobe. v.a.

l Foolishe Galathians, who hath bewitched you, that pe shoulde not obey p tructh: To
/ whom Jelus Chritte

was © destribed bez fore the eyes, c among

a n

hhack prea- —

er

en in be pol crucified.
This only woulde J learne of pou,

whether pe reteaued the spirite by the

the fayth-

3 Are pe sich fooles, that after pe haue begun in the spirite, pe woulde nowe ende in the sleshe-

4 Haue pe suffered fo great thynges in vayne- Bf it be yet iu vayne.

5 He therkore that ministreth to pou the

spirite, and worketh miracles among

pou, doth he it through the deedes of the lawe, or by hearyng of the fayth-
Euen as Abraham beleucd God, c it was astribed to hym for righteoulnesse.
Kno we ve therfore, that they which are ol fayth, the fae are the chyldren of Abraham.

Bs Por the feripture seyng aforehande

that God woulde iustikie the Heathen

though fayth, shewed beforchand glad tydynges vnto Abraham, sfaving): In thee shall all nations be blessed.

So then, they which be of fayth, are blessed with the faythfull Abraham.

lo. Foras many as are of the™ deedes of the lawe, are vnder the turse. Foz it is
Witte: Cursed is euery one that tontinuͤeth not in all thinges which are written in the booke of the lawe, to do then.

1 But that no man is iustified by p lawe in the fight of God, it is tuident. Foz

the iutt chall lyue by fapth.

i 12 And the lawe is not of fapth: but the

man that doth them, shall lyue in them.
Christe hath redeemed vs from the

turse of the lawe, beyng made a turse for vs. For it is written: Cursled is euery one that haugeth on trec:

1 He rebuneth them sharply, > and proueth by dyuers reatons, fapth, o as appeareth by the example of Abrahain. 10. 10. the ende both of the la we, u. 25, and of fapth,

Deedes of the lawe, or by the hearpng or

athlans. CxII.

21 Areiect not the grate of God: For f/ rpghteoulnelle come of the lawwe, then We
Christe is dead in vapne.

J The. iij. Chapter.

that iustilication is by
24. and by the office, and

14 That the blesspng of Abraham might ¢ come on the gentiles through Jeluis
Chuste, that we myght reteane the promise of the spirite through fayth.

15 Bzethzen, © F speake after p maner di 3,72" of men: Though it be but a mans testa- an be mẽt, pet if it be alowed, no man reiecteth ae

attribute icsse

tt, or addeth therto. wia cones,
16 To Abraham and his seede were an mech

the pronuses made. He sayth not to the lep a feedes, as of many : but to thy seede as of one, which is Christe.

17 This J lay, that the lawe which began after warde, beyonde foure hun- G xy g
Dred and thirtie peres, doth not dilamill Ed xn the testament that was confirmed afore nach d. of God, vuto Christewarde, to make the pronnust of none effect.

18 Jor yr the inheritaũce be of the lawe, Romiiiic. then not nowe of pronuse: But God gaue it vnto Abraham by promise.

19 Wherkore then sterueth j the lawe- It Ron: vc. was added becaufe of tranlgressions, tyl the seede tame to Whont the pronuse was made: and it was ordapned“ by Aa vg.
Angels in the hande of a mediatour.

20. A mediatour is not la mediatour] of (conser, one, but God is © one. lebe hun tlie,

21 Jg the lawe then against the promise gon e

of God: God forbyd. For pf there hadi Timi. ' ben a lawe geuen which coulde haue geuen life: then no doubt righteoulnesse shoulde haue ben by the lawe.

22 But the scripture hath concluded all under finne, that the pronuse by ÿ fapth of Jesus Christe shoulde be geuen vnto them that beleue. 2 a

23 But before fayth tame, we were kept vnder the lawe, and were shut vp vnto the fayth which shoulde alterwarde be reucaled.

24 Wherkore, the lawe was our feholemaister vnto Christe, that we shoulde be iustified by fapth.

25 Wut after that fapth is tome, we are no longer vnder a scholemaister.

26 For pe are all the chyldren of God by

fapth

D

- — — — —e——

The Epistle

——— WG8Sͤ D— ——

fayth in Christe Jelu.
©, are 27 oO all pe that ave baptized, haue put aha ore ba- on Chziste.

There is no Jewe, neither Greke, there is neither bonde nor free, there is

tied into
Chiiste. haue 23 put on batt.

— — TEEN SuENneeee

neither male, nor female: Foz pe a

one in Christe Jesu. * mt

29 If ve be) Chustes, then are pe Abrahänis secde, and hepres accordpng to the pronuse.

4 The. iij. Chapter.

2 He (heweth wherfoze the ceremonies were ordapned, which beyng Hadowes mut

ende, when Christe the

trueth commeth. 9 He moueth them by certayne ex horta

tions, 22 and confirmeth his argument with a strong example or allegozte,

A1 ied PD Fi tay, 5 the heyre, as long as he is

* 1 J t chylde, differeth no-
Je thyng fron a fernaut,

though he be Torde

all, ws : Wut is vnder tuters and gouernours, vntyll the tyme appoynted of the father.
Same, 3 . Euen so we, when we were chvidzen, ge dane were in bondage vnder p© rudimentes called a icoolt ok the worlde:
But when the fulnefle of the tyme

maillet.

198 was comic, God lent his sonne, made of
Rom vm a. à woman, and made vnder the lawe.

5 Do redeenie them that were vnder the lawe, that we myght reteaue the adoption of chyldren.
Becaule pe are fonnes, God hath

sent the © spirite of his lonne into pour heartes, crying, “ Abba, father. 5 palerfoze thou art no more a seruaunt, ee bor but à fone: Ik thou be afonne, thou
Senies © rt allo an heĩre of God through Chust. l Notwithstandpng, when ve znewe not God ye dyd {ernice vnto the which by nature are no Gods.

Wut nowe after that pe haut knowen
God, pea, rather are knowen of God,
Howe turne pe agayne vnto the weake

om. vil. c.—
R 6
(a) For oi adoption vnto
Chziste, to lea ted by prt.

v) Oc ine rucecth both

uaunteg, Pea,

ad ern he Qaine pe delire afrethe to be in bondage-

net 10 Ye oblerue dapes, and monethes, and

chore tutte tpmes, and peres.

n Jann feare of you, tet I haue bestowed on pon labour in vayne.

12 wWretheen, J belech vou be as IJ cant) for I ain as pe are. Mie haue not ininred me at all.

Ye knowe howe through infirnutic of

the fleshe, I preached the Golpell vnto vdu at the first:

( That is,

G denen 14, And imp temptation which was in ach Sed imp fleshe, ye dispiled not, neither abhorde es red: but receautd ine as an Angel of

emong vou.

and beggarly rudimentes, whervnto a-.

God, euen as Christe Jesus.

15 What is then pour felicities For J beare pou recorde, that pk it had ben possible, pe woulde haue plucked out youl owne eyes, and haue geuen them

o me.

16 Am J therkore become pour enemie, C vecaule I tell pou the trueth-

17 They are geloule ouer pon amisle: © ange
He, they intende to exclude © pou, that ew.

ye shoulde be feruent to them warde. sour: tne

13 It is good alwapes to be zelous ina Tarte good chyng, and not om when Jam present with you |

19 My litle chyldren, of whom FJ trae uayle in birthagapne, vntyll Christe be fachioned in von. an

20 But F defire to be present with vou aan node, and to chaunge nw boyce: foz Je stande in doubt of pou. 5

21. Tell me, ve that delire to be vnder the lawe, do pe not heare the lawe-

22 Hz itis Witten, that Abraham has two sonnes, the one by a bonde mapde, Cn the other bya free woman: an

23 Wut he which was of the bonde woman, was borne after the fleshe: but he which was of the free woman, was boine} by promile. he

24 Which thynges are spoken by © an fee allegorie. Foz these are two testamen- wn tes: the onc from the mount Sina, which gendreth vnto bondage, which is Agar. |

Foz Agar is the mount Sina in Ara-

bia, and bordreth vpon the citic, which

is nowe (called; Hierulalem, and is in

bondage with her chyldren. D 1

26 Wut doit rulalem which is aboue, is Apo* free: Which is the mother ol vs all. a

27 Foz it is Written: Neiopte thou baren, k that bearest no chyldzen, beeake foorth and trye, thou that trauaplest not: o: the delolate hath many 10 chyldren, then the Which bath an husbande. ht

28 But brethren, we are after Plaacthe chyldren of promise.

29 But as then he that was bome after the flelshe, persetuted hym that was borne after the spirite: eucn fo is it now.

30 Neuerthelesse, what faith the scrip-

Lande fatt therfore in
SAVY ithe livertie wherwith

Christe hath made vs free, and be not intang-

2 — Weholde J Paul faye gree Onto pou, that *pf ve be weircunitiled,
Christe shall profite pou nothyng.

Foz J testisie agapne to euery man
Which is circunitiled, that he is a detter to do the whole lawe. fag ae. 4. Christe is become but vapne to pou,

as many of vou as are iustified by the

lawe, are falien from grace.

5 Foz we through the spirite, wayte fo

tht hope ot ryghteousnes by kayth. hye. 6 For in Jesus Chniste, neither is tirtunicision any thing woorth, neither pet vucircuimasion: but fapth, which Woz keth by loue.

7 Be dpd runme well, who was a let vnto pon, that pe should not obey p trueth-
3 Mot the perkection ol hym that talled

itor xiit.a,

vou.
10 Bo Alitle leauen, doth leauen the whole a. lumpe ot dowe.

lo J haue truste towarde pou in the
Lode, that pe wyll be none other-
Wyle mynded: Wut he that troubleth voti, shall beare iudgement, whatsoeuer

hebe. —

1 And brethren, if J vet preache cirtumtision, why do J pet luffer persecutionaoe is the launder ofthe croffe tealcD.

12 J woulde to God they were cut of which trouble pou.

13 Jor brethren, pe haue ben called into libertie: Duly *let not libertie be an occalid to the flesshe, but by loue serue one another.

lm iia, or vil a

tothe Gal

athians.

tutes “put away the bondwoman and Conse: b. her sonne: Foz the sonne of the bondwoman, Mall not be heire with tye sonne of the free woman.
31 So then brethren, we are not chyidreen of the bonde woman, but of the tree. 2

$m The. v. Chapter.

2 He laboureth to drawe them away from circumcilion, 17 and she weth them the battell bet wixt the spirite and che klelche, and the fruites of them both.

14 Foz all the lawe is fulfylled in one a worde, Which is this: Thou halt ioue 5 e thy neyghbour as thy selfe. Leen

15 Yk pe byte and deuonre one another, Nom. c. take heede left ye be tonsumed one oka- Bote nother, 29

16 Then J fay, walke in the spirite, C and pe shall not fulkyll the lust of the

esche. =

17 Foy the flesshe lusteth contrary to the Mb spirite, and the spirite contrary to the — flesshe. Lhele are contrary one tothe other, so that ve can not do what ye
Woulde.

18 But and yt ve be ledde of the spirite, then are ve not vnder the lawe.

19 The deedes of the slesshe art manifett,

Which are theft, adulteric, foruication, vucleannesse, wantonnelle,

20 Morshippyng of images, witchcrafte, hatred, variaunte, zeale, wzath, strife, seditions, sectes,

21 Enupinges, nuirthers, drunkennesse, luttonies, and such lyke: of the whiche

tell pou before, as J haue tolde vou in tyme past, that they which do suche Ephe-v.a. pt not inherite the kingdome of Go

az Wut the fruite of the spirite is, tone, fope, peace, long sufferyng, gentlenesse, goodnefic, fayth, 3

23 Mckeneslse, temperauncie: agapnst Tid. such there is no lawe.

24 They truely that are Christes, haue wa wen, trutilied the flesshe, with the affections n we and lustes. 2 l

25 If we lpue in v spirite, let vs walke “< in the spirite.

26 Pet vs not be desirous of vayne glorie, prouoking one another, enuying one another.

Pj ¶ The

The. vj. Chapter.

he exhorteth them to vie gentlenesse towarde the weake, 2 and to chewe their bro-

„ tiheriy loue and modeltie, 6 allo to prouide for their ministers, 9 to perseuer, 14 to reioyce in the crosse ol C hriste, isto newnesse or lpfe, 16 and last or all wycheth to them with the ref of the kapthkull all prosperitie. .

SC Retheen, pf a man be
0 N taken in any fault, ve

which are spiritual re-
3 \ftore such a one in the

Cap sideryng thy selfe, lett thou also be tempted.

Rom. xv. a.

2 Stare pe one anothers burthen, and

fo fulfpli the lawe of Christe.

3 For if any mansteme to him selfe that he is somewhat, when he is nothyng, the fame deteaueth hymlelfe in his owue fansie.

Wut let every man pone his owne worke, € then thalt he haue retopeepng only in his owne lelfe, and not in another.

Fo2*enerp man (hall beare His owne

burthen. N

Rom. v. f. 6 Vet hym that is taught in the word,

Cori. ijminister vnto hyn that teacheth hym,

in all good thynges.
We not deteaued, God is not mocked:

(a) for bis relopcpng ts a testinonie of a good conscience.

Rom. xiiii. c 5

John. ill. b.
Mall he allo reape. 1
15 8 07 he that loweth into his flesshe, shal of the flesshe reape corruption: But he that soweth into the spirite, hall of the spirite reape lpfe cuerlastpng.
ILet vs not be weery in well dopng: for in due sealon we Chall reape, pf we faynt not. 5

ii. Thess. ii. b 9

The Epiftle of the Apostle S. Paul, unto the Ephefans.

. The first Chapter.

After his talutation, 4 he sheweth that the chiele caufe of their saluation standeth in the free electton or God though Chritte, 16 he declareth his good wyll to warde them, geuyng thankes, ¢ praping God fo2 their kapth.

A Che maiestie of Christe.

Aulauapostle of Jesus
Christe by the Wyll of
God: To the faintes

ap

Ce Chyiste Jesus:

a *@mrace be with por, and peace,from God our father, e from

the Howe Jesus Chniste.

Rom. i. a.
1. Cor. i. a.

The Epist

e spirite of mekenes, con-

16 And as manp as walke accordyng to
Fo: Whatsoeuer a man soweth, that

le

1o Whyle we haue therefore tyme, let vs C do good vnto all men, {pecially vnto the which are of the houcholde of fayth. 2»

1 He see how large a letter J haue written vnto pou with myne one hande.

12 As nianp as defive with outwarde appearaunte to please carnally, the fame conftrapne pou to be tircumtiled, onlpe left they shoulde fuffer perfecution for the trosse of Christe.

Iz For they thẽ selues which are cireumciled, kepe not the lave; but desire to haue pou circumcised, that they myght reioyte in pour flesshe.

14. God forbyd that J shoulde reioytce, D but in the crosle of our Lorde Fetus
Christe, wherby the world is crucified nee vnto me, and J vnto the worlde. e

15 For in Chzilte Jesu, neither tirtum- ess, cers. tilion auayleth any thing, nor vntirctum ue cifion, but a newe creature. Galera

Galath. v2.

this rule, peace be on them, and mercle, „e

and vpon the © Ilrael (that 18) of God. vom 5 sxe
7 From hencefoozth, let no man put me

to buspnesse: For I beare in my body, .,.54;.

the markes ofthe Torde Jesus. a
13 Brethren, the grace of our Lorde Je-

{us Christe be with pour spirite. Anien.

Che Epillle vnto the Galathians, was fent from Wome,

3 Wlessed be God, the father of our p...i+
Lorde Jesus Chritte Whiche hath biel cas» fea vs it all spirituall blessyng, in heauenly thynges by Christe: a

4 Actording as he had chosen vs in hym before the foundation of the world, that we shoulde be holy, and without blame before hym, through loue. 5

5 Who hath peedeltinate vs into on

: option of O childrẽ, by Jesus Christ vnant to hyni selke, according to the good pleays lure ok his Wyll: ;

sue 6 6 To the prayse of the glorie of his grace, aim. Wherein he hath made bs accepted in the beloued. 1

In whom we haue redemption throngh his blood, the forgeuenesse of sinnes, accordyng to the rychesse of his

¢

oll. i. b.

grate,

3 Wherein he hath abounded towarde vs in all wysedome and prudente.

9 And hath opened vnto vs the misterie of his Wyll, accordyng to his good pleaz sure which he had purposed in himselfe.

Io That in the dispensation of the fulnesse of the tymes, he myght gather together in one all thinges in Christe, both

Which are in heauen, and which are in earth, in hym.

I In whom allo we are chosen, beyng predestinate accordyng to the purpote of hym who worketh all thynges after the touncell of his owne wylt: 8

en That we shonldte be vnto the payle

ol his glorie, whiche before beleued in
Christe. 83

z In whom also pe, after that ve heard the worde of trueth, the Gospell of pour saluation, wherin also after that ye beleued, were sealed with the holp spirite ok promyse, f

14. Whiche is the carnest of dur inheri-

ch. li. a

lim. vil. c.

or.. d.

are nowe in Christe.

D vou that were dead in trespasses and
\ ei hicht

In the which in time

N palled ye walked, ac
1 cording to the courte of

gouernour that ruleth in the apre, the spirite that nowe worketh in the chyl-
Deen of dilobedience.

Among whom we all had our conuersation also in tyme pat in the lustes

to the phelians.

this worlde, after the 5

C XIII.

taunce, vnto p © redenption of the pure ) choags
; bape possession, vnto the prapst of his dug dee
. K. . pp che bate

15 Moherkore I alfo after that J hearde e f of the fayth Which pe haue in the Lorde aa ne
Jelus and loue vnto all the saintes, pegel

16 Ceasse not to geue thankes for pon, sre we cel makyng mention of vou in my prapers: detaance n

17 That the God of our Lose Jesus dbgeet we
Christe, the father of glorie, map geue vest onto pon the spirite of wildome and rez 88 .. uelation, in the knowledge of hym: b

13 The eyes ok pour myndes beyng ligh-- tened, that pe maye knoe What the a
“Dope is of his tallyng, and what the riz Nom. xv. c. thesle of the glorie of his inheritaunce is] in the laintes: :

19 And what is the excecbpng greatnelle of his power to vswarde, which beleue, atccordyng to the workyng of his myghtie power,

20 Which he wrought in Christe when he raysed hym from the dead, and fet him P on his ryght bande in heauenly (places)

21 Faͤrre aboue all rule, and power, and panic. vid myght, and dominion, and euery name that is named, notin this worlde only, but also in the worlde to come.

22 And 'hath put all thynges vnder his pal. n b. fete, and gane him to be) the head ouer bre. a all thynges tothe Churche, N

23 Which is his body, the fulnesse of him Coli. that fylleth all in all.

I

¢ The. ij. Chapter

Co magiifte the grace of Chriske, which is the only caute of faluation, 11 he ews eth them what maner of people they were belore their conuertiõ, 13 and what ther

ok our flefihe, fulfyllyng the wyll of the flesche, and of the mynde, ¢ © were by ca) oer ee the chyldren of Wrath, euen as bp aban other: ee e
4 Wut God which is ryche in mercie, for his great lone wherwith he loued bs,
Eüen when we were dead by finnes,
Hath quickned vs together with Chat,
*by grace are pe saued: .
6 And hath rapled (bs) vp together, and ka made (03) syt together in the heauenly

in Christe Jesus. in Chriltt J Pi That

7 Thatiin ages to come, he nught shew

the extecdyng ryches of his grace, in kyndnesse to vswarde through Christe
Jesus.

3 For bp grate are pe made safe through fayth, and that not of pour felues, it is the gyft of God:

boast hym selle.

10 For we are his workmanship, treated in Chuste Jesus vnto good workes, whiche God Hath ordepned that we

shoulde walke in them.

Titus. i. d.

En wherfoze, remember that pe being in

tynie paffed gentiles in the flesshe, called vntircumtision of that which is called tircumtision in the flelthe, made by handes:
12 That at that tyme pe were without
Christe, veyng aliauntes from the cont mon wealth of Israel, and straungers

Philip. ii. a.
Coloss. ii. b.

fri the teftamentes ol promise, hauyng

no hope, c without God in this worlde.
3 Wut nowe in Christe Jelus, ve which sometyme were farre ot, are made nye by the blood of Christe.
14 For he is our peace, which Hath made both one: and Hath broken downe the

S$ The. ij. Chapter.

1 He sheweth the caule of his impeifonment, 13 delireth them not to kaynt becauuse ok his trouble, 14 and prayeth God to make them Kedfak in his spirite. ae

bf pe haue e hbcarde ok the

e diulpensatiö of
— eS

the grace of

Galath.i.b. a
Wordes:

Whereby, when pe reade, ye may vnderstande my knowledgein the misterie of Christe 8

5 Which mitterie) in other ages was not opened vnto the sonnes of men, as it is nowe reuealed vnto his holy apostles and prophetes by the spirite,

6 That the gentiles shoulde be inheritours also, and of the fame body, and

tion through
Chrite.

The Epistle

Not of workes, lest any man shoulde

, dyng to the gyfte of the grace of God,

wall that was a stoppe betwene vs, . eer,

15 Taking aay in his fietthe the hatred, ena leuenj the lawe of commaundementes oe Jen
(contepnedi in ordinaunces, for to make ™™ of twayne one newe man in hym selke, fo niakyng peace,

16 And that he myght reconcile both vnto God in one body though (bis) croffe, and slewe hatred thereby.

17 And tanie and preached peace to pou which wert a farre ot, and to them that were nye. 1

18 Foz through hym, we both haue an D entraunte in one spirite vnto the father.

19 «F Nowe therefore, pe are no moze’ straungers and foreyners: but citesing with the saintes, and of the houcholde

of God, 5 * .
20 And are built vpon the *foundatton of cob.

the apofties and prophetes, Jelus ane

Chaitte hym selfe beyng the head coger Pace

nen a .

21 In whom all the bupldyng coupled together, groweth vnto an holp temple

inthe Torde. —

22 In whom pe alfo are buylded toges ther for an habitation of God through the spirite. 2:

partakers ot his promise in Christe, by the Gospell: a
7 Wherot J am made a minister, acco

Which is geuen vnto me after the workyng of his power.
3 Untomethe “leat of all saintes is this 2

¢ vmucrlel cone

x herfore I desire that pe kaput not

in my tribulations for pou, whiche ts

pour glorie.

14. FJor this carte I bowe my knees vnto the father of our Lorde Jesus Chniste,

15 Ok whöõ all the famplp in heauen and earth is named: é

16 That he Wold graunt pou, according to the rychesse of his glorie, to be strengthed with myght by his fpirite in the inner man.

17 That Chile may dwell in pour hear-

tes by fayth: that pe beyng rooted and

grounded in loue,

C3 dlossa. 4.

to the! Ephel lans.

CAV.

ne

18 Myght be able to comprehende wish al saintes, what is the bab iu D and deapth, and heygth: ,

19 And to hnowe the loue of Chrifte whiche excelleth knowledge, that pe might be fylled with all fulnelle of God.

20 Unto hint that is able to do ercecding aboundauntly aboue all that we alu or thynke, accordyng to the power that
Worketh in vs,

21 We praple in the Churche by Chrtte
Jelus, throughout all ages, worlde
Without ende. Amen. a

¢ The. inj. Chapter.

2 he erhorteth them vnto mekeneffe, long sulferyng. and vnto loue and peace, euery one to serue and edikie another with the gylt that God hath geuen hym, 14 to beware of strange doctrine, 22 To lap alpde the olde conuerlation of greedy lustes, ¢ to walke

in a newe Ipfe.
A1 Therkore, a prisoner ©
. in the Lorde, exhorte

Cor. vii. d.

Wherewith pe are cal-

led,

2 —Isith al lowipnesse c mekenesse, with long fufferyna, forbearyng one another in lone.

3 Endeuorpug to kepe the vntie of the spirite in the bonde of peace:

gmt 4. One body and one v spirite, euen as

are kene Pe are called in one hope of pour calling.

fachen One Lorde, one fayth, one baptiline. abe 6 Dne God, and father of all, whiche is

Faß. Ab due all, and through all, and in you

All. 9
5% But ynto cucry one of vs, is geuen tb. “ grace, accordyng to the nieasure of the halbe gpftofehartte.
8 Wherkore he saith: When be went bp an hpe, he ledde taptiuitie taptine, and gauc gyftes vnto men.
9 Wut that he ascended, what is it: but that he also descended first into the lolwer partes ofthe carth:

län i. b. 10 also that ascended vp farce abone all

hhceauens, to fulkyll all thynges.)

d. 11 And he gaue some apostles, and some

lun prophetes, and some euangelistes, and

siore shepheardes and teachers,

11 To the gatherpng together of the

C säaintes, into the worke of miniltrati-

He that defended, is enen the lanie

on, into the ediflpng of the body of
Christe: BS abe ‘

3 Tyll we all mecte together into the vnitie of fayth, and knowledge of the lonne of God, vnto a perkeet man, vnto the niealure of the age of the fulnesse ok
Chuste:

4 That we heneefoorth be no moze cht: dren, Wauering and carped about with ColoMii.b. tuery wyude of doctrine, in the wylyneffc of men, in craltynesle, to the laying
© Wapte ok deceyte. (b) wherebp

15 But folowyng trueth in loue, let vs wee e de grorbe vp into him in all thpnges whi- o . che is the head, Christ: Coloific

16 In whom all the body beyng coupled and knit together by euery toput of submintstration, accordyng to the effectual!! power in p measure of beuery part, ma- Se duden keth inerealt of the body, vnto the edifi- mother. yng of it selfe in loue.

17 H This J fay therfore, and tessifie in D the Lorde, that pe hencefoorth walke not bas other gentiles walke, in vanitie Ron of their mynde: 1

18 Darkened in cogitation, being alienated from the lyfe of God by the ignoraunte that is in them, by the blindnesse ok their heartes.

19 Whiche beyng pak ° feelyng, haue ge- D She uen thẽ selnes ouer vnto wantonnelle, amie, to worke al vncleanenesse with greedy- ane neffe. bath oe Ae

20 But ye haut not so learned Christe. pewauwe.

P ij H

haue ben taught in hym, as the trueth is in Jesus,

22 To lay dowue, accordyng to the fo2mer conuersation, ö olde man, which is corrupt, accordyng to the lustes of er-
YOR! £9

23 LTo be renued in the spirite of pour mynde, —

Rom. via. 24. And *to put ou that newe man, which

Coloflui.a. - after God is shapen, in righteousnesse ¢ af holynesse of trueth. N

Leui xix. e. 25 Mherfore, puttyng away lying, speake

euery man trueth vnto his neyghbour, forasmuch as we are members one of another.

Pfal. ina. 26 We ye V angry, and sinne not, let not

(a) Gt tobe the sunne go downe vpon pour Wath,

that pe dt an-

gr omode 27 Meither geue place to the deuyll.

kauen 28 Wet hyndthat stole, steale no moze:

into an cupll worke, but be

(e) That ts, all che natural corruptiò that
10 in vs.

Epistle

he
Do Po be that ve haue hearde hym and

but let hym rather labour, wozkyng Theme with his handes the thyng whuhe 15 good, that he may geue vnto hym that needeth. <=
29 Ttet no fylthy communication procede out of pour mouth, but that whiche is good to edifie withal, as oft as neede is, od it may minister grace vnto the hea: rers.
30 And © greeue not the holp spirite of c ond. a by whon pe are sealed 15 the zus dn de day of redenption. mapa,

31 Tet all bytternesse, and fiertenesse, ¢%, den

wrath, and crying, and eupll speakpng, be oa be put away from pou, with all mite. Cyto ousnesse. 110 ®Godg 55
32 We pe turteous one to another, merciful, forgeuing one another, euen as God

for Chatites fake hath forgeuen pou.

$a The. v. Chapter.

2 He exhorteth them vnto loue . 3 warneth them to beware of vncleannesse, couetoutnelle, footpihe talkyng, and kalse doctrine, 17 to be circumspect, 18 to auoyde dronken-

nelle, 19 to reiopce, and to be thankefull towarde God, 21 to Cubmit them fetues one to another. rr He entreateth ol corporall mariage, a of the spirituall betwixt Christe

ae and his Churche. a
A1 e pe ' "therefore folowpet ii. d. 00 ers of God, as deare
Iohn. xill. b. % *
Galathr i. d chpidren: b a, And Walke ve in loue,
= ee Mfeuen as *Chzilte hath

loued vs, and bath ge-

en hynn selfe for vs an

offering aud a sacrifite of a sweete finellyng sauour to God.

3 Wut fornication, and all vncleannesse, oz touetousnesse, let it not be once named among vou, as it becommeth saintes:

4 Neither kylthynesse, neither foolylhe

. kalkyng, neither iestyng, Which are not

comely: but rather, genyng of thaukes.

Galath vd. 5 Foz this pe knowe, that no whore-

„ Corunb. monger, neither vncleane person, nor touetous person, which is a worshipper of images, hath any inheritaunte in the kyngdome of Christe, and of God.

236 Let no man Deceanc pou with vapne
Wu wordes: For, becanse of such thynges
Vacon conumeth the wrath of God vppon the
Lukxx.b. chyldren of disobedience.

7 Bc not pe therefore companions of

them.
8 Por pe were sometimes darkneffe: but nowe are ye lyght in the Lorde. Walke

Iohn. vil. e.

i. Thesl. va. ds chyldren ot lyght. 5

9. Foz the fruite of the spirite (is) in all

goodnesse, and righteoulnesse, x trueth,

lo Approuyng what is acceptable vnto the Lorde.

And haue no felowsihip with the vnfruitefull workes of darknesse, but rather euen rebuke them.

12 For it is Thame euen to name thofe
— whiche are done of them in secre e. 5 f

3 But au thynges, when they are rebu-C ked of the lyght, are manikest: For all that Which do make manitest, is lyght.

14. Wherefore he sapth: © Awake thou Ora” that slecpest, and stande vp from the gane dead, and Christe chall geue thee lyght. abe

15 Take heede therfore howe ye waͤlke var
50 as vnwpse, but as
Wyte,

16 Redeempng the time, becaule p apes are eupll.

17 Wherfore be ve not vnwile but vnderstandyng what the wyll of the Tord is.

18 And be not drunke with wine, wherin is extesse: but be fylled with the spirite

19 Speaking vnto pour selues in plalmes ann and hymues, and spirituall fongues, “e

syngyng and dere melodie to the b 8:
Torde in pour hearte Geuyng

20 Geuingthankes alwapyes for all thin: ges buto God and the father, in p name of our Lorde Jesus Christe,

21 Submittyng your lelnes one to another in the feare of God. S

22 Wyues, fudnit pour selues vnto pour owne hulvandes, as vnto the Lowe;

Genchti-d 23 Forꝭthe hul bande is the head of the cid wyfe, euen as Christe is the head of the
Church: e heis the fautour of the hodie.

24 But as the Church is subiett to Chait, lpkewyle the wyues to their owne bul bandes in all thynges.

25 Be huloandes loue pour wpues, euen

as Christe also loued the Churche, and gaue hin selfe for it, alll

wearing” To fanctific it, denfpng lit iim the fuhr kountayne of water (nthe worde,

che en 27 To make it vnto hym elfe a glorious

aue Churche, not hauyng {pot or wzinckle,

to the Ephes lans.

CxVI.

or any such thyng: but that it should de holy, and without blame.
28 So ought men to loue their wyues, as their olbne bodies. He that loueth his
Wyle, loueth hym lelke. 8
29 Jor no man euer pet hated his owne flesshe: but norilcheth € cherilsheth it, cuen as the Lode the Churche.
30 Foz we are members of his body, of his flesshe, and of his bones. G
31 For this cause Chall a man leaue fa: ra. ther and mother, and shalbe topued vn- Mark-x.. i and two chalbe made one Feen esshe. *
32 This is aà great secrete: but I speake olf Christe and of the Churche.

33 Thertore euery one of vou (09 ve co; Wet

tuerp one ot vou lone his Wyle euen as hym selfe, and flee) the wyke renerence her hulbande.

10 π Finally ny brethren, be (trong in the Lorde, ¢ in the power of his might.

1 Put on all the armoùr of God, that ye map stande agaynst the assaultes of the
Deupll. 1

his word: eb l
. The. vj. Chapter.
1 Howe chyldzen choulde behaue them telues towarde their fathers and mothers,
4 Lyhewyte parentes towarde their chyldren, 5 feruauntes towardeg their matters,
9 Matters to warde their leruauntes, ; An exhortation to the tprtituat battaple, and what weapons the christians shoulde kpght withall.
A1 Fe Sco lDvlozen, obey pour fadaa. bers and mothers in be Tode: for this is
„ rvaht. rr Honour thy father

e and mother (Whiche is
= the first commaundement in proniile ) +0

3 That thou mayest prolper, and tyne

loug on earth

-4. - Fathers prouoke not pour chitdzen to

Weath:*but bang them vp ininitruction and information of the Lorde.

5 Seruauntes obey them that are pour

bod pliy matters; with feare and tremb-

dati b.

5 to Christe. e e. ee
6 Not With seruice vnto the eye, as mien pleasers: but as the seruaũtes of Christ.
7 Doyngthe wyll of God fro the heart,
5 With good wyll seruyng the Lorde and

not mien: 2
S8 Rnuowpng, that whatsocuer good thyng any man doeth, that shall be vez ceauc-agapne of the Lode, whether

Lbe-be) bonde 02 free.
And ye maisters do the same thynges vnto them, puttyng away threatuyng: bene Unowyng that pour maifter also is in düse. heauen, neither is respecte of perfon ib. With hym.

ipng, in singlenesle of pour heart, as vn-

12 For we Wrastle not agaynst © blood ¢ fn ga

flesshe: but agaynst rule, agaynst polb- cen en. er, agaynst worldip gouernours of the wa darknelle of this Worlde, agaynst spiri- M tuallcraftynesse in heauenlp piaces whois mone z Wherkore take vnto vou the whole ave for: w ove mour of God, that ye may be able to re- we Gn me . sist in the euyll day, and harung finished butte nui all thynges,toftanoefalk, 2 eer Scns yen:
14. Stande therfort, hauyng loynes girt C abont with the trueth, and puttyng ou bern the brest plate of righteousnesse /
15 And hauyng pour feete shodde, ul the
G preparation of the Gospell of peace, > Thatre
16 Aboue all, takyng the shielde or fayth, fo ira wherwith pe may quenche all the fierie e G. dartes of the wicked: *
177 And takt the helmet ok lalnation, and the [worde of the spirue, whiche is the worde of God. £1» * ö
18 »Praping alwapes in all prayer and Erkan supplitation in the spirite, and watch . thervnto with all instaunce and suppli-

The Epistle freely, to vtter õ setretes of the Gospell. same purpolt, that ye myght knowe of
D 20 Whercof Jam meslenger in bondes, our affaires, and that he myght com: that therein J may speake freely, as fort pour heartes. a ought to speake. 23 Peace [be] buto the brethren, and lout,
21 But b ve map allo knowe my affaires, with fayth, from God the father; and and what J do, Tichicus a deare bro- from the Lorde Jesus Christe. ther and fapthfull nunister in the Lord, 24 Grace be with all them whiche loue shall shewe pou all thynges: our Torde Jesus Christe in sinteritie.
N 22 Whom J haue sent vnto vou for the Amen. i hd ew Sent from Rome onto the Ephelians, by Cichicus.

Sw The Epiftle of Saint Paul the Apyfle to the |
= _Philppians. . —

q Th rit Chapter.

Saint paul discouereth his heart to wardes them,; by his thankes geuyng.
4 prapers, 8 and willhes foz their fapth and saluation. 7, 12.20. he sheweth the kruite ol his crolle, 15, 27, and exhorteth them to vmtie, 28 and pacience,

ml 2 S Aul k Timotheus abounde pet moze and moze in know-
8 the seruauntes of ledge, and in all vnderstandyng:
60 Va * 11 Jesus Christ: To 10 That vt mape disterne thynges that S
( ° all the saintes in

0 5 5 differ that ve maye be pure, and with-
SS 75 <A Christ Jelus, whi- ont offence, tyll the day of Christe.
RIN Wea Ache are at Philip: u Weyng fylled with the fruites of righ-
9 ? vos, with the bil- teoutnelle, which care} by Pelus Chak,
N KS . ZY) Hops € deatons. vnto the glorie and prayst of God. -
2 SVOM ASCE Grace de} vnto 12 Wut J Woulde ve chould vnderstande wre ppodu, and peate frõ bzethren, that the thinges which (came)
God our father, and (tom) the Lorde vnto me, Hath come rather onto the
Jesus Christ. fkurtherauntce of the Golpell !:! as
3 * IJthauke my God, with all remem- So that my bondes in W Chziste, are are n e ~ manifelt, thoughout all the mdgement Si

braunte of vou᷑- 1 7 ff
Romib. 4. (Alwapes in al my praper for all pou, hall, and in all other [places
Colossaa. makyng praper with gladnesse, ) 14. And manp of the brethren of the Lord,
5 FJor pour felowchw inthe Golpell, frõ beyng incouraged through my bondes,
Gage khe kirst o dap vntyll nowe. dare more plentifulip speake the word,
Sm 6 And beyng perlwaded of this fanie without feare. — thyng, that he which hath begun good 15 Some preache Chnste of ennic t strife,
Workt in pon, wyllperfourme it vntyll and sonie of good wy llt. the dap of Jesus Christe, 16 The one preache Christe of strike, not
7 Ast betonnneth ine to iudge this of-: sincerelp, supposyng to adde moze afflicvou al, because I haue vou in my heart, tion to my bonde::?: 8 and in my bondes, in the Defence and 17 But the othersoflone, knowing that toufirmation of the Gospell, von all be- J am tt to the defence ol the Gospell..
(o) ofthis Vlg partakers of niy © grace. 18 What then: So that Chailte be preabie to lufee 8 J or God is mp retorde howe greatl ched any mance of way, whether it be fs eis long after pou all, in the bowels of by pretenct, or by tructh, J toy therein,
Omir Jelus Chrilte. Ss and pil ioy. . 4
Fats eh? And this J pray, that vour loue may 19 For J knowe that this Mall ms C

ttt

to the philippians. ,

to my fatuation,* though your prayer,

or.. b.

CX VI) ° furtherance and toy of fapth, 9

and ministryng of the spirite of Jesus 26 That pour reiopspug may be p moze p

Chrilte,

20 Atcordyng to np expectation, and my hope, Pin nothyng J shalbe ashamed: but 5 With all boldnesle, as alwayes, fo now also, Christ shalbe magnified in inp

bodp, whether it be by life, or by death.

1 FJor Chaitte lis] to me lyfe, and death

lis] to me aduantage.

22 But if J lpue in the fleche, this (is) the fruite of my labour, and what J thal chose, A wote not. Sin.

“eva 23 Foz J am ina strayte betwirt two,

hauyng a desire to be loosed, and to be

with Christ, which is much farre better.

on die. 4. Meuerthelelle, to abyde in p © flethe, lis) more needekull for vou.

25 And this am J fure ok, that J hall abyde € continue with you all, foz pour

aboundaunt in Jelus Christe for me, by my commpng to pou agapne.

27 Pulp let pour tonuersation be, * as it Ephe.iiis.

Whether J come and fee pou, o2 cls be absent, J may pet heare ol your matters, that ve continue in one spirite, in one soule, fyghtyng together for > fayth of the Gospell. ; i

meter J Gospell of Christe: that

28 And in nothyng fearyng your aduer-

favies, which is to them a token ol perdition: but to vou of saluatidõ, and that ce or me: of God. . 5 weth by this

meanes of bed

29 FJor vnto vou it is geuen © for Chaifte, Bierce ,

not only this to beleue ou hym: but also ax this, to suffer for his lale, O, 2h.

30 Pauing the fame fight, which pe sawe ou" in me, and nowe heare in mme.

¢ The: ij. Chapter.

he exhorteth them aboue all thynges to humilitie, wherby pure doctrine is chielly

mapntapned, 16 promilyng that he and Timotheus wyll tpedply come vnto them,
27 and exculeth the long tariyng ok Epaphroditus. 7 me

I there be] therefore

K Many © confolation in
* Christe, yt any comfort

ok ioue, if anp kelowehip

of; spirite, pfaup con

A passion and mercie,

2 7 . Fulfpl pe my top, that ye be lpke mynded, hauyng the fame louc;being of one accorde, ot one mynde,

3 Let nothyng (be done) through stryle op dayne glorte, but in niekene fle of mynde euery man esteeme one p other better then hym selfe. me

cut. 4. SLoke not euery man on his owne
> thynges, but cuery man also on the cypnges of others.
5 Wetß same mynde be in pou, which was in Christe Jesus: n beuge 6 Who beyng in the fourine of God,
Beem, thought it not robberp to be equal
See With God. 5

hen. 7. ut made hym selfe of no reputation,

takyng on him the fourme ol a leruaũt,

and made in the lykenesle of men, and founde in figure as a man:

BS Pe humbled hym rife, made obe-

dient bnto death, euen the death of the

crosse. * N '
9 Wherfore God also hath highly exal-

ted hym, and genen hym a name which is Aboue euerp name. f .

10 That in the name of Jesus euery n i<. |
© knee Mould bowe, lot thpnges in hea- cy wege, uen, and (thonges] in earth, and Ithinges] ohen. vnder 165 earth: ;

And that euery tongue chould confesfs[sei that the Lorde, Jesus Christesis to the aa, glorie of God the father. Roni il.

12 Wherkoze, ny dearelp beloued, as ve haue alwapes obeped, not as in my pre-
{ence only, but noe much niore inmy. „„ bean absence, Worke out pour owne lalua- e: tion with feare and treniblyng. erte ere thep

sapb to roozhe

z or it is God which worketh in vou, oue e

do runne n

boch to will and to do of good wyll. dach
14 Do all thyng without murmurpng Seer and disputyng: frcelpinehi
15 That pe may be blanielesse and pure, eer cts the fonnes of God, without rebuke in ue one the myddes of a croked and peruerse or he. nation, among hd shyne ye as lightes in the worlde,
16 Holdyng fast the worde oflyfe, to np -_— reioytyng in the day of Chrilte that J Thecue haue not runne in vayne, neither haue laboured in vayne. 1
Pea, and though J be offered vp bpo the offerpng and leruite of pour Nies

IJreioyte, and reioyte with pou all.

18 For the same caule alld do pe reiopte,

and teiopee with mre. :

19 Wut J trust in the Lorde Jesus, to

sende Timotheus shortly vnto port,

that J allo may be of good comfozt, when J knowe your state.

Foz J. haue no man lpke nynded,
Who wyll naturally care for pour state.
21 Jor all secke their owue, not the thyn-

ges which are Pelus Charles.

22 He knowe the prole of hym, that as a sonne with the father, he bath serued
With nie in the Gospell. 8

23 Hy therkore J hope tosende, asloone as J Rnowe my statee. 3

24 But ZF trust in the Lode, that J atfo my selfe Mali come shortip.

25 Wut | to pou Epaphroditus, my bother and

Actes. x via

j Thess. in. b

fuppoled it necessarie to sende

ern Te

companion in labour, ¢ felowe foutnier, but your Apostle, and the nunister of mp neede.
26 For he longed after pon all, and was D full of heauinesse, because that ye had hearde that he had ben sicke. a
27 And no doubt he was sicke nye vnto death, but God had mercie on hym, and not ou hym only, but on nie also, lest
I shoulde haue sorowe vpon sorowe.
28 J sent hum therkore the moze diligentlie, that when pe {ee him againe ye may reioyte, and that J map be the lelle soroswfull. af
29 = Reccauc hym therfore in the Lorde with all gladnes, x make much of such: Ron
30 Betause, forthe worke of Christe, her Thel. was nye nto death, not regardyng his lyfe, to fulfpll pour lacke of {eruice towarde me. 2 “s ie

The. ij. Chapter.

2 He warneth them to beware of kalle teachers, ; agapnst whom he fetteth Chit,
4 Likewite himselke, / and his doctrine, 12 and reproͤueth mans owne righteoulnes.

Oreoner mp brethren, reiopte pe in the Tord.

% Wwite the fame thyng e okten to von, forte pou

r ttisa sure thyng.
Se e the true doc-

erine, to kpll their bollpes.

beware of eupll wozlers, beware of b tontision.
(b) W. Paul dere alludeth 3 onto eircumcision bp semblaunce of a lphe Word, be coule that thet who crabed

worship God" in the spirite, and reioyte in Chat Jesus, and haue no conkidence ur the fleshe: — = dhe ea a Though J might allo haue tonfidence

ferfine, dunsion, 02 cutting of and tearin in sundet, th an attozde in che Churcht.

that he hath wherol he mpght trust in the fleshe snow J: N
Circunicised the eyght day, ol the kin-

red of Asrael, of the tribe of Weniainin,

„ Cori A Ebrue ok the Ebrues, after the lawe

A&xxiiib. A pharisee,

6 Conternyng feruentnesse, persecutyng the Churche:touchyng py righteousnesle
Which is np lawe, J Was blamelesse.

7 Burt the thynges that were Haute tage vnto me, those J counted losse foz
Chustes fake.

8 Bea, Pthyntic all thynges but lollt,

foz the excellencie of the knowledge of

Mat. xiiii.c.

It greeueth me not to
Beware ofdogges,

For We are the tircumcision, which

in the fleshe. It any other man thinkethh 11 Y ot as though J had alredy atta „C

Chrilte Jesus nip Lode: Foz whom haue counted all thpngloffe, e do iudge thẽ but vile, that J map winnie Chritte,
9 And be founde in hym, not hauyng myne owne ryghteousnesse which is of the lawe:but that which is through the faytl of Christ, the ryghteousnes which tonuneth of God though fapt :
That J map knowe hym, and the power of his resurrection, and the kelowshippe of his passions, confirmable vnto his death, map,
1 If by any meanes, Impght attapne vnto the resurrection of the dead.

ned, either were alredy perfect: but J Keen

kolowe, pf that J may compzelyende, e wherein allo J amr comprehended. of me
Christe Jesus. * i pte that J hance attained:but this onethiug
J tap J forget those thinges which are behynde, and been 5 selfe vnto thole thynges which are betore,- --
14 And F prease towarde the marke, for the price of the hye tallyng of God in
Chuste Jesus. . iy Akt vs therfore as many as be perfett, be thus mynded, and ik ve be rte

would dete

tz weetheen J count not my lelfe as yet g

to the phil ppians. Vu

wyst mynded, God chall reucale the 1 Whole cude is; dampnatiou, Whole pon xvic.

same also vnto vou.

16 Maeuerthelesse, vnto that which we haue attayned vnto, let vs proteade by one rule, that we may be of one accorde.

Diz = Bzethren, be folowers together ol ori me, and loke on them which Walke fo as yt haue bs for an enlample.

18 For many walke, of whom J haue tolde pou often, nolwe tel pou Wepyng, that they ave] the enemies of the crolle of Christe:

COD lis their) belly, and glorie to their
Manic, which mynde earthly thynges.

20 Wllt our conuerfation is in Heater, from whence also we loke for the sauiour, the Lode Jesus Chritte:

21 Who Mall *chaunge our vyle body, coxvc.

that it may be fathioned Ipke vnto his 5

glorious body, according to the Woghing wherby he is able to subdne all thyuges buto hym selke.

¢ The. ij. Chapter.

He erhorteth them to be of honest conuersation. 15 and thanneth them, becaule of the prouision that they made kor hym beyng in prylon, 21 and so concludeth with

lalutations.
1 f&=3--SsSAberfore my brethren i W. eloned € longed foz,
Ova! mp top and crowne, fo e frontinuc in the Lorde pe beloued.
J pray Cuodias, and
— — bielcche Syutpebes, 5 they be of one atcorde in the Lorde.
Bea, and I befeche thee allo faythfull pockefclowe helpe thosel women; Which laboured with me in the Gospell, and with Clement also, and with other my e. labour felowes, whost nauies re) in n the © booke of lpfe. en . ocr * Retopee in the Lorde alway, and
4 . aͤgayne JJ fay reiopte. ent 5 Vet pour pacient mynde be knowen ie vnto all men: The Lode lis] at hande.
6 We carekull for noihyng: but in all thynges, let pour petition be mantfest vnto God, in praper and supplication with geuyng of thankes. f
And the peace of Gad, which passeth
» Som all vnderstandyng, thal kepe pour ne heartes and myndes through Chrilte

also taretull, but ye lacked oportunitic.

u J speake not betausc of © neceflitic, % n 9
FO: JJ haue learned, in whatldeuer nee estate J ain, therwith to be content. Tb.

11 J knowe howe to be lowe, and JC knowe Howe to exteade. Euery where t in all thynges Jam instructed, both to be ful, aud to be hungry, both to haue plentie, and to suffer neede.

13 J tan do all thynges throngh Che,

Which strengtheneth nie.

14. Motwithstandyng, ye haue well done
Pye dyd communicate to my afflictions,

15 He Philippians knowe alfo, that in the © begpunyng of the Gospell, When ur mene
IJ departed krõ Macedonia, no Church va ze tonununtcated to mie, as conterupug geuyng and receauyng, but pe only.

16 Jor euen in Thellalonica, ve sent once,

t afterward agayne buto nip uetessitie.

17 Mot that H delire a gyft, but F desire kruite aboundyng to pour accompt.

18 Wut J haue receaued al, c haue plentte.

A was euen fylled after that J had reccaued of Epaphroditus the thynges which were Cent) from pou , an odoureof a sweete smel, a* satrifite acceptable, Rom.xii.« pleasaunt to God. Helge

19 My God Mall supplie all pour ueede,

Jens. his riches in glorie, tu Christe esus.

20 Unto God and our father, be prayse for euermore. Amen.

21 Salute all the saintes in Christe
Jelsus. The brethren Which are with me, greete pou.

22 All the faintes salute you, most of all, they that are of Caesars housholde.

23 The grace of our Lorde Pelu Christe be) with pou all. Amen.

¶ This Cpitle was written from Rome, by Epaphzoditus.

~— — 2 2—ů— — —
4 The Epistle
$a) The Epifile of Saint Paulthe Apofiletothe =

(oloffians.

J The first Chapter.

he geueth thankes vnto God fo2 their faith, 7 Confirming the Doctrine of Epaphras.
9 prapeth tor the increase of their kayth. 1; He sheweth vnto them the true Christe, and dilcouereth the counterfapte Christe of the falle Aposileg. 25 He approueth his auctoritie and charge, 28 and of his fapthfull execut ng of the fame,

e Aul an Apostle of gi Jesus Chattte, by
Athe wpll of God,
A Jee) aud Timotheus
Apes the mother.
Tothem which

Galthia, Chalke : * Grace

bes. Pluto pou, c peace from God our father,
Pie; änd the Howe Jesus Chattte. )
Thats, 3 *DOegcue thalikes to God and father
Bomb. ok dur Horde Helus Chattte, alwayes
Foce fox pou, pzäping:

Ca) Ke foie 4, Hence ie hearde of pour fapth © in

ont Chniste

there ts no
0.0 b. bur to all faites, rene 5 I oz the hopes sake which is layde bp

and knewe the grace ol God in trueth,
Collos ie 7 Ads pt allo learned of * Epaphras, our
Beare felowe seruaunt, which is fo2 pou a faythfull nunister of Christe: oy wü 8 Who allo declared vnto vs pour loue commerbors lu the spirite.
Ephend. 9 ö or this tause we also, fence p day
We hearde, haue not ceassed to pray foz vou, and to de sire that ye myght be ful:

fylled with knowledge of his wyll, in

all wil dome ¢ spiritual vnderstandpng,

10 That pe myght walke worthie of the
Lowe in all pleaipua, * beyng kruitefull in all good wozkes, and cutreasyng in the knowledge of God,

1 Streuthened with all nught, dough his glonous poser, buto all patience and long sufferyng with iopfulnesle: .

12 Geuyag thaunes vuto p father, which
Hath made vs meete to be partakers of the inheritaunte ofthe saintes in lyght.

13 Who hath delpuered vs from the

Tohn.xy.c.

power of darcknesse, and hath translated vs into the kingdome of his deare nt > | C

14. Inwhö we haue redemptiõ though Epheis, his blood, the forgeuenesse of sinnes: e.

15 Who is the image of the inuisible God, the first borne of all creatures.

16 Foz by him were all hinges created, Hebe . that are in heauẽ and that are in earth, vistble and inuisible, Whether ther be} maiestle 02 lordeshippe, either rule o2 power: All thynges were created by hym and for bpm,

17 And he is bekore all thynges, and in hym all thynges tonlist.

18 And heis the head of the body ofthe rey.

Churche: he is the begynnyng, the first dv borne of the dead, that in all thynges he myght haue the preeminence.

19 Jsor it pleated (the father) that in hym shoulde all © fulnesse dwell, (9 sit

20 And by hym to* reconcile all hynges 6 vnto hym seife, ¢ to fet at peace throngh ane the blood of his crossc by hym, both n. the thynges in earth, and thynges in heauen,

21, And vou“ which were fometpie dan, straungers, and enemies, bprogitation J be, in euyll workes, hath he nowe pet re- e tonciled, ea 1

22 In the body of his flethe, through errs death, to present pou holpe, and vn den. blameable,¢ without fault in his syght: aa

23 If pe tontinue grounded ¢ stablisshed in the fapth, and be not moued away from the hope of the Gofpell, which ve haue heärde howe it is preached to cuery creature which is vnder heauen, wherof Paul am made aminister. 8

24. MOWE lospe Ju my suffernges for c pou, and fulkyll that which is behynde elan of the passions of Christe, in my fleche, for his bodyes sake, which is p Church:

25 Wherof am made a müuster actor dyng to the dilpensation of God, Bic is geuen to me to poulkarde, to fulfpl

the worde of God: The

gpeiitd 26 The misterie hyd fence the Woalde began, and [fence the begynnpng ok] gene-

rations: but noe is opened to his

© faintes:

arte 27 To whom God woulde make knowẽ
What lis the riches of the glorie of this misterie among the gentiles, which is
Christe in pou, the hope of glorie:

CXi ki

28 Whom We preache, warnyng euery man, and teachpug euery man in all wildome, to prelent all men perfett in
Christe Jesus: :

29 Wherunto J allo labour strinyng, ac-

cording to his workpng which wozketh in me mightylie.

J The. ij. Chapter.

1 Hauptyg protected his good wyll to warde them. 4 he admonisheth them not to turne backe from Christe, s to the ceruice of Angels or any other inuentton, orelg ceremonies ol the la we, 17 which haue finished their office, and are ended in Christe. N

af

yD? woulde that pe
8 mem what great fight ad 75 J haue for vou, and foz
* MIlthem that are at Lao-

Picea, and for as many as haue not seene my al face in the flethe,

2 That their heartes myght be comfozted, beyng knyt together in loue, and in al riches of tertaintie of vnderstanding, to knowe the misterie of God, and of

the kather, and of Christe,
3 In whom are hyd all the treasures of
Wifdome and knowledge. bheva 4. This J sap, lest any man shoulde begyle pou With perlwaston of wordes.

5 For though J be ablent in the fiethe, vet am J with vou in the spirite, ioying and beholdyng pour order, and pour

stedkast fayth in Christe.
6 As pe haue thertoze receaued Christe
Jesus the Lorde, (fo) walke ye in hym:
7 Rooted and built in hym, ¢ stablished in the fayth, as ye haue ben taught, aboundpng therin with thankes geuing.
Beware lest any man spople pou through © philosophie € vapne deceipt, een After the tradition of men, and after the aoe of the worlde, and not after hriste.

Foz in hym dwelleth all the fulnesse ofthe Godhead bodyly:
1o And pe are complete in him, which is

the head of all principalitie and power,
1 In whom alfo ye are circumciled
With circumtisiõ made without handes, by puttyng of the body of sinnes of the fleshe, in the tirtumcision of Christe:

Buried with hum in baptiime in Who ve are allo vifen agapne tough p fapth

Nom il. g kpbe. Ic

Collos. b.

Nom. auh aid te

Wok the operation of God, who hath ( Juve raped hym from the dead. be bis potver iz And pe beyng dead to linne and to the cus, wher vncirtumcision of pour fiethe, bath he enen quickened with him, forgeuyng all pour trepasses, <>
14 And puttyng out the hande writing of C ordinanntes, that was agaynst bs, and that hath he taken out of the way, fastenyng it to his crosse:
15 Spoplyng' all principalities c powers, Gen. ine. hath made a (herve of thein openty, tri- ine umphyng ouer them init. Smee et no man therfore iudge vou in meate, or in drinke, or in part of an holydap, 02 of the newe moone, or of the
Sabboth (dares) ;
17 Which are shadowes of thynges to Hebr. vn. . tome: but the body (is) of Christe.
18 Let no man beque pou of victorie, in 9 rene the humblenesse and worchipppug of cen coe

at their plea-

Angels, intrudyng (hom teile into Chote ture nto on thinges) which he bate not seene, cause- and crrour. lesse puft vp with his fleshly mynde,

19 And holdeth not the head, wherofall the body by ioyntes c bandes supported and knit together, entrealeth with the encrease of God.

20 WMherfore, vf pe be dead with Christe from p *cudimentes of the world: why, as though lyuyng in the worlde, are ve led with traditions,

21 Touche not, taste not, handle not-

22 Which all be in corruption, in abusyng after the tonnnaundementes and doctrines of men.

23 Which thynges haue a shewe of wildome, in superstition ¢ huinblenesse of mynde, and in hurtyng of the body not in any Honour to the latilfiyng ofp flesh.

ql The.

Galat. iii. b.

— = * — —— — — —— =
* ‘The Epiltle
J The. ij. Chapter.

e sheweth where we shoulde sene Christe, she erhorteth to mortification, toto put

of the olde man, and to put on Christe, 1 to the which he addeth ex hortation, both qe

F pe then be rysen ae

SSF gavne with Chat, seke

Athose things which are

aboue, where Cheiste

sittethk on the ryght hande of God.

— Set pour affection on

000 chendes aboue, not on thinges on the carth. N

Jor ye are dead, and pour lyfe is Hyd with Christe in God. when soeuer Chuiste which is our life, shall appeare, then shall pe allo apptare
With hym in glorie.

5 Portifie therefor pour members which are vpon the earth: fornitation, vntleannesse, inordinate affection, eupil toutupistente, and couetousnesse, which is worshippyng of images:

6 Fo2 which thynges sake, the wrath of
God tcomnieth on the children of dilobediente,

Epheiia. 7 In the Which ve walked sometyme,

when ve lpued in them.
WS Wut nowe put pe of allo all, Wrath,

Epheid.
Hebre.a.

a) which eicher serus but loꝝ a tyme, or eig are innented by men.

fiertenesse, maliciousnesse, blasphemte,

füthie cõmunitation out of pour mouth.
9 Nye not oue to auother, seyng that pe haue put of polde man with his workes:

Rom. via. To MHauyng put on che newe man, which

Fpheue. ig renned into the knowledge after the

image of hym that made hym, here is neither Greke nor Jewe,

circumtcilion nor vncircumtision, Warbarian, Sythian, bonde, free: but Christe is all, and in all.

12 Put on therfore (as the elect of God,
© holp and beloued) bowels of mertie, kpndenesse, humblenesse of mpnde,

une a mekenelle, long lufferyng,

ma: 13 Forbearpng one another, and forge-

acc 1 8 gane wi
Chzille

Galath. vi. d H

(cb) he thts eth what kruites are in

them all prolperitie.
—Aisters, do vnto pour

Ephevia Wfernauntes that Which is iust c cquall, knowyvng that ye also bane a maister in heauen.

Ephe vic. 2 0 Continue in payer,

and Watehe in the lame

nerall and perticuler, to charitic and humilitie.

i The. iiij. Chapter. he erhorteth them to be keruent in prayer. 5 to walle wilely to warde them that ate not pet come to the true inowledge of Chrict, he laluteth them, and wilcheth

uyng one another, pf any man haue a quarel agapnst any:euen as Christe fox gaue you, so also (20) pe, am

14 And abonc all thynges (put on) * lowe, N g which is the bonde of perfettnesse.

15 And let the peace of God haue the bictozie in pour heartes, to the which also we are called in one body: And {ee

that ye be thankekull. 1

16 Tet the worde of God dwell in you richly in all wildome, teachyng and adnionisshyng pour owne selues, in pain.

lalmes, and hymnes, and spirituall Ephewa. onges, singyng with grace in pour heartes to the Lorde.

17 And“ whatsoeuer pe do in worde or ict.
Deede, (00) all in the name of the Lode

esus, geuyng thankes to God and the ather by hym.

18 Wiues {nbmit your selues vnto pour gn. owne hulbandes, as it is comely in the iveriiis
Lorde, 5 ö

19 Hulbandes, loue pour wpues, and be not bitter agaynst them: ö ;

20 Chyldren, obey pour fathers and mo- Ephevis. thers in all thynges, fo2 that is well pleaspng vnto the Lorde.

21 Fathers, prouoke not pour chyldren to anger], lest they be distouraged.

22 Seruauntes, obep in all thynges to Ephevia. pour bodyly maisters: not with eye fers Pan uite, as men plealers, but in singlenesse of heart, fearyng God. *

23 And whaticencr pe do, do it heartilie, sy as to the Lorde, and not vnto nien:

24 Knowyng, that of the Lorde pe shall reteaue the rewarde of inheritaunce, for ve serue the Lorde Christe:

25 But he that doth wrong, shall reteaue

ce) Be 0 mach rigeur-

for the Wrong he hath done: And there waer is no respett of perfons. Kas
Colollaic

with thankes geuyng: evil
3 5 — alfo forbs, that God may Phat open vnto vs the doore of vtteraunte, 4 dar that we may fpeake p nusterie of CHAE, St
Wherfore F am also in bondes:
4 That J may otter it, as J onght to speake. Walt

ard 5 Walkt mn wildome towarde the that are without, redeemyng the tynie.

6 Let pour speache be alwap in grate, powdered with salt, to knowe howe pe ought to aunswere euery man.

All my fate shall Tychitus declare

vnto pon, (who ts) a beloued brother and

faythfull minister, and felowe seruannt in the Torde:

3 Whom J haue seut vnto vou for the fante thyng, that he myght knowe pour state, and comfort pour heartes,

9 With Onelinus a fapthfull and beloued brother, which is of vou. They
Mail shewe you of all thpuges which fare] here.

cult f. d.
Much. v. c.

12 Epaphras which is of ou, a seruaunt °

c

to my tonsolation. Colosf ii a. of Chuste, saluteth pon, alwayes labouryng ferucutip for you in prapers, that yt may stande perfect aud fylled in all the wyll of God. D
Jor F bcare him retorde, that he hath
à great ʒeale for vou, and then [that are] in Laodicca, and ther (that are) in Hierapolis.
Deare Lucas the phifition greeteth # Timiiii.c pou, and * Demas.
Salute the brethren which are in Lao-
Dicea, and Mymphas, and the Churche which is in his house.

16 And when the cpistle is read of port,

„Cie „Aristarchus my prilon kelowe falu-
Kosi? teth pou, x Martus Barnabas sisters

sonnt, (touchyng whom pe rereaued commaunDdenientes:) If he come vnto vou, receaue hym:

n And Hefus, Which is called Justus,

Hen which ave of the circunmcision. These pt only are my Workefelowes bnto the

kyngdome of God, which hath ben vn-

make that it be read also in the Church of the Laoditeaus: aud that ve likewile reade the epistit from Laoditea.

And fay to Archippus: take heede to the ministerie that thou batt reteaued in the Lorde, that thou fulfpyil it.

18 The lalutation, by the bande of me,

Paul. Remember my bondes. Grace be with pou. Amen.

¶ written from Rome to the Colokians, by Tychicus and Onelimus.

The firft Epistle of Saint Paul the eA poftle, vnto the
Theffalonians. |

The first Chapter.

@ 2: he thanketh God for them, that they are Co stedfast in fapth and good workes, cand receaue the Gofpell with luch earnestnesse, that they

are an example to all others.

A D Au æ Siluanus and Tünotheus,
10 h vnto the Churche
Sen e „ok the Thessaloment e nntaus, in © God wie. f the father, and in
& 2 © Ag 105 7 Fetus

PLS NA OO MCD UE" Grace [be] dl c Af pnto pou, c peate

from God our father, and the Lorde
Jesus Christe.

We geue thankes to God alwayes foz all pou, makpng mention of vou in our prayers,

Wichout teassyng, tallyng to rementbraunte the worke of pour fayth, and labour of lone, and patient abidyng in

the hope of our Lorde Jesus Chalke,

in the syght ol God and our father.

4. Anowyng, brethren beloued, pour

election of God.

5 Jor our Gospell came not vnto pou in

*worde only, but also in power, and (Ni corn. the holy ghost, and in much certayntie,

ag pe knowe after what mance We; Theiss. were among vou for pour fake,

6 And pe became folowers ol vs, and

of the Lorde, reteauyng the worde in 85 To bes much affliction, with toy of the Yoly az are ghost 5 ded to haue py

giktes of

„ So that pe wert an ensanwple to au ee

that beleue in Macedonia and Achata, g

8 Jor krom pou, sounded out the Worde un francs

ok our election

okthe Lorde, not only in Matedonta ct

Achaia : but alfo in cuery place pour

faith to Godwarde is spread e ha

T

he firft Epistle

that we neede not to speake any thyng.

Jor they then selues shelwe of pou, what maner of entryng in we had vnto yout, and hoe ye turned to God from

D

CO debe umnages, to scrue He © lyupug and true ony kalen fantelics. come and open his heart to them.
— i

A1 öOr ye pour selues, bre-

i Theffai. b \thzen, knowe our entraunce in vnto vou, 5

(% Hot in it was not in bapne: onkwarde a fyowe india 2 But euen after that traurlanbin le we had suffred before,
* and were“ shamefullp
Act. vic. entreated as pe knowe, at Philippos,
Adxviib. We were bolde in our God, to speake

puto vou the Gospell of God, in much stryupug. N
3 FJor our exhortation was not of deteit,

neither of vncleannes, neither in guile:

4 But as it were alowed of God, to be put in credite with the Gospell: euen fo
We speake, not as pleaspug“ men, but
God, Which trpeth our heartes.

Jor neither at any tynie dled we flatkeryng wordes, as pe knole, neither clone of couetousnes, God (is recorde,
9 Neither fought we praple of nien, nei-

ther of pon, nor pet of others:
When we mpght haue ben in © auctoritie, as the Apostles of Christe, but we
Moines were tender among vou, even as a“ irak va, dourte cherischeth her chyldren, elbe clan 8 So, beyug tenderly affected towarde ag che wn) pon, our good wyll was to haue dealt naurcetd d Dito POU, not the Golpell of God ouly : thentethno but also our owne soules, becaule pe toz het chri- Were deare onto bs. mens go Foz ve remember brethzen, our labour and trauaple. For we labourpng nyght € dap, because we woulde not be chargeable buto any of you, preached buto pou the Golpell of God.
Jo He (are) witunesses, € God alto} Howe
Holply and tultly,aud vnblameablp, we behaued our selues among pon that

Galath. i. b.

Philip. l..

OD. a burden,

Akt. xx. g.
2 Thess. i b

1 Cot. ix. c.

YhHerfoze, {ence we toulde no longer forbeare, we thought it good to remauie at Athens

lo And to tarv for his fenne* (rem eae Adel,

The. ij. Chapter.

To the intent they snoulde not kaint vnder the evofle, r he commendeth his diligence in preachyng. and theirs in obeping, 18 He ercufeth his absence, that he coulde not

The. ij. Capter.

2 He sheweth howe greatly he was aftectioned to warde them, both in that he sent
Timotheus to them, wand allo praped foz them.

God. 7

nen, whom he raysed from the dead:

leuen] Jesus Which delpuereth vs from

* the Wrath to come. oha ih

beleue.

1 As ye knowe, howe that as a father his chyldren, fo we haue exhorted, com: forted, and besought euerp one of you,

12 That pe woulde walke worthie of
God, Who hath called you buto his kyngdomte and glozie.

13 Foz this tause thanke we God also without ceassyng, because pe receaupng the worde Which pe hearde of vs conternyng God, pe reteaued it not as the worde of man, (but as it is in deede)the
Worde of God, which effectuously worketh alfo tu pou that beleue. >

14. Foz ye brethren became folowers of 25 the Churches of God, which in Jurie are in Chute Jesus:for pe haue suffred lpke thynges of pour tountrepmen, as they haue of the Jewes:

15 Who both kylled the Lorde Felus, and their owne prophetes, e haue persetuted bs: and God they please not, and are tontrarie © to all men: an

16 And hynder vs to speake to the gen- uA tiles that they myght be saued, to fuifpit their sinnes alwap. Foz the * Wath (ol Ta
God) is comme on them to the btmost.

17 FJorasmuch brethren, as we are kept from pou foraà short season, in person, not in heart, we enfogced p moze to {ee pou personally with great desire.

18 And therkore we woulde haue come vnto pou, (J Paul) once agapne: but Pac
Satan hyndered vs.

19 Foz what is dur hope, or top, or trowne. . of reioytyng- Are O not pe it in the eden

relenct of our Lorde Jesus Chnilte, at a his commyng- beuget er

20 Pes, ye are our glorie ànd iop. .

2 And sent Timotheus, our brother and minister of God, and felowe labourer in the Gospell of Chritte, to stablishe pou
€ to conifogt pou concernpng pour aint

to the 1 hellalonians.

That no man shoulde be moued in these afflictions : Foz "ye pour selues
Nen that we are appoynted thereonto.

Foz verply when we were with von, we tolde you before that we shoulde sukfer tribulation, euen às it tame to pafic, and las] pe knolwe.

5 Foz this cause, when Jo toulde no wen longer forbeare, I sent to knowe pour
‘4 fayth, lest by fome meanes the tempter

had tenpted pon, and our labour had ben vayne.

6 But nowe lately, when Timotheus tame front pou vnto vs, and brought vs good tydynges of pour fayth and louc, and howe that ye haue good remembraunte of vs alwayes, desiryng to fee vs, as We allo (to fee) pou:

C7 Theretoze biethzen we were comkozted ouer pou, in all our aduerlitie and

ia xv. c. i uu. d.

he OF

CNN neceslitie, because of pour fayth. a
8 Por nowe We tyre, yf pe stande fast c) sree
(nthe Lode. infaish@ teat
9 FO What thankes tan we recompence mau cone to God agapue for vou, for all the ioye ange wherwith we toy for pour fates befoze dus ee our God? e io Praping nyght and dape exteedyngly D to fee you personally, and repayre the
Wantynges of pour fayth-
I Nowe God Him selle, and our father, and our Low Jesus Christe, guyde our
Waye vnto pon.
12 And the Lorde encrease pou, t make vou abounde in loue one towarde another, and towarde all men, euen as we alld towarde von,
1 To stablyshe pour heartes vnblameable, in holynelse before God and our father, in the tonnnyng of our Lorde
Jelsus Christe, with all his saintes.

The. ij. Chapter.

1 He exhorteth them to holpnesle, 6 innocentie, 9 loue, 1 labour, 13 and moderation in lamentyng kor the dead, 17 delcribyng the ende of the relurrection.

VUrthermorewe besech vou brethzen, c exhorte vou bpthe TLorde Je-
„Altus, that pe encrease

moe and moe, as pe haue reteaued of vs,

os a

— how pe ought towalke and to please God. .
2 Foz ye knowe what commaundementes We gaue pou by the Lorde Fetus.
FJor this is the wyll of God, pour hoa, lpnelle, © that ve chould abstayne from roms — fonicatton:
0 Biel 4 That euery one of you should knowe
Coma, - “ow to poslesse his veflelt in holynesse and Honour:
Not in the lust of toncupistente, “citer as the gentiles, which knowe not God.
56 That no man oppresle and dekraude his brother in (any) matter, betause that the Lorde is the auenger ofail suche:as
Ae also haue forc warned pou, and testied.
7 F02 God hath not talled vs vnto vn-
| cleanenesse, vut into holynesse. e , 8 "Hetherefore that despileth, despileth not man, but God, who hath geuen to
Crit, pou*his holy spirite.
Then; ? But as touchyng brotherly *loue,
Moxa pt nede not that J weite vnto von: Foz

am. i. c.

10 are taught of God to loue one aͤno-

her.

lo Nea and that thyng veryly pe do vn-C to all õ brethren which (ave) in al Matedonia: Wut we beseche pou brethren, that ve encrease moze and more:

Il And that ye studie to be quiet, and to 4 do pour owne bucpnesle) and *to worke Core with pour owue handes AS we COW v. Theta b maunded pou:

11 That ye may walke honestly toward them that are without, E that nothyng be lackyng in pon. <9

3 But J woulde not haue pou to be ignoraunt brethren, toncernpng them „
Which Aeepe, that ye © sorowe not cuen jor cnocmne as other, which haue no hope. bee

14. Foz vt we beleue that Pelus dyed and oer soerver role agayne: euen so them alfo Whiche 3. fleepe by Jesus, Wyll God beyng with hynt. N 20

15 For this lay we vuto pon the worde C . g. ofthe Lorde, that we whiche lpue, kemapning vnto the tönyng ofthe 3.00, shall not preuent therm which fleepe.

16 For the Lorde hy selle (hal deltende from Heaven in a shoute- and) in the voyte of the *Archangell, and in the W tripe ol God: And the dead in Chzistb

shall aryle ay 21 Than

17 Than we which lyue, which remaine, shalbe taught vp together with them in the cloudes, to meete the Lorde in the ayre: And so Mall we euer be with the

Torde. a
18 Wherfore tomkort pour selues one ane: ther in thele wordes.

The. v. Chapter.

I He inkourmeth them ol the dap ol iudgement and commpng of the Lorde,
6 Exhortyng them to watche, 12 and to regarde (uch as preache Godg word

among them.

A Utof the tymes c sealons brethrẽ, ve haue no ncede that
J Waite buto you.
Jon pe pour selues sy FA Knotbe perkectlpe“ that the dap of the
Y Pow Mati fo tome
Y cuenas a theele in

Math. 24. d.
Nee aC

aes the nyght.
3 Foz when they shal fay peace tc saketie,

lere. vb. then shall' sodeyne destruttion come vp-
Conde n: pon them, as sorowe vpon a woman lobe Lp, with chylde, and they shall not escape.

Tohn.xii.c. Wut ye brethren are not in darknesse,
Ephev.c that that day shoulde overtake vou as a

theeke.
5 w Heare all the chyldren or lyght, and the chyldren of the daye: We are not of
W the npght, neither of darkenesse.
Romxiid.g Therekore let vs not sleepe, as do] gebe neben Other : but let vs watthe and be sober. dba / For they that sleepe, sleepe in the night: done mne Ard they that be druncken, are druncken anvemge lil the nyght. ime. 8 But let vs which are of the day, be so-
Ephe. vj. b. ber, puttyng du the brest plate of faved and loue, and a helmet, the hope of laluation,
9 For God hath not appoynted vs to
Wath : but to obtapne faluation,by our
Lorde Jesus Christe, u. Cor. vc. 10 *Whiche dyed forbs, that whether we Wake or sleepe, we shoulde lyue together with hym. n wherefore comfort pour selues together, and edifie cucry one another, euen as pe do. S
12 And we beseche pou brethren to know
Gala. vb them whiche labour among vou, and
Tim. y. e. haue the ouersight of you in the Tode,
Plnip. u. b. ànd admonishe pou:

3 That ye haue them in hype reputation, in loue for their worke, and be at peace ainong pour selues.

14.. & We exhort pou brethen, warne them that are bneuly,comfost the feeble mynded, lyfe vp the weake, be patient to warde all men.

15 *Secthat none retconpence enpil for Nbg. cuyll vnto any man: but euer folowe that whiche is good, both among pour selues, and to all men.

16 Neiopte euer.

12 Prap continually.

Philip. iii.
Luk.xyiii.a n all hinges geue thankes. For this zp ic the wyl ol God in Chuste Pelustowarde pou,
19 Nuenthe not the spirite.

20 Despile not‘? prophesipnges. gg
21 Examine allthynges, holde kalt that ser vee

which is good.

22 — krom all appearaunte of eupll. g N

23 Andthe very God of peace fantifie pow throughout (And J pray God} that pour
Whole spirite, and foule, and body, may be preserued blamelesse in the comming of our Lode Jesus Christe.

2 24 *Faythfull is he whiche called vou, du ee.

whiche wyll alld do it.
25 Wiethzen pray fo vs. ro
26 Greete all the brethzen in an holy =

t

kysse. 1. C or. xy. d.
27 Jcharge vou in the Lorde, that this

epiftic be read vnto al the Holy brethren. 75780
28 The grate of our Lord Jesus Chik”

be with pou. Amen.

ew Che first (epistle) vnto the Thella ; lonians, written from Athens.

¶ The

tye faith tt thele al tlg, see ag
Il tleare fife, the end
— lute ment, ures tcp © ane bth Chrite e haue d with

fn:

The feconde Epistle of the eA poftle Saint Paul, to

the T beffalontans.

5 The first Chapter.

He thanketh God loz their kayth, loue, and pacience. in He prapeth foz the encreale ot the lame. 12 And sheweth what frutte Hat! come therok.

Auland Silvanus and
, Tunotheus, vnto the
SRY 90 Church of the Thellala \& hsloniaus in God our fa-
A Etat ther, and the Lord Jece lus Chaitte:

ee Grace vnto pou and peace from God our father, the Lode

iudgment ol God, that pe may be coun: ted woorthy of the kyngdonie of God, for which ve allo suffer.

For it is à ryghteous thing with God,

to vecompence tribulation to them that

trouble vou:

7 And to pou whiche are troubled, reste with vs, in the reuelation of the Lorde
Jelus from heauen, with the Angels ok his power,

8 In flampng fire, rendryng vengeance

buto them that knowe not God, and Rom ü b.

that obey not the Golpell of our Lorde

Jesus Chzitte.

Which shalbe punisshed with euerla- pve styng Dampnation, from the prelence of

the Lozde,¢ fro the glorie of his power: D

to When he shall tome to be glorified in Vr. e. his saintes, and to be made marueylous in all then that beleue ( because our testi-

Oe toward pou was belencd)in that ay,
*noherfore also we praye alwayes for pou, that our God wonlde mane you worthy ofthe tallpug, ¢ fulfyil all good lealure of goodnesse in the © worlie of ayth in power:

12 That the name of our Lorde Jesus
Christe map be glorified in pou, aud pe in hym, accozdpng to the grace of our
God, and the Lorde Felus Chute,

II

osloll. la.

C
Philip. b.

Ce) Fapth is obs wonder - uit wozke in

vs.

The. ij. Chapter. he sheweth them that the dap of the Lorde Mall not come, tyll the departyng of

the kapth come kirst. and

the kyngdome of Intichziste. 1s And therfore he ers

horteth them not to be deceaued, but to Lande liedlalt in the thinges that he hath

taught them.

2 E besech pon brethren, bpthe comming of our
/ Lowe Jesus Chaifte, and by our assembling

vnto hym,

That ye be not soden-

n ive moued from (pour]

minde, nor be troubled neither by spirite, nor by worde, nor pet by letter, as from vs, as though the daye of Christe were at hande.

Let no man deceaue you by am meanes, for (the Lorde thatl not come} extepte there tome ar fallyng away first, that that inan of sinne be reucaled, the sonne

of perdition, aun hiche is an aduersarie, and is eral: . cn

ted aboue all that is called God ozthat res vetoes ig worshipped: fo that he as God, sitteth inthe temple of God, shewing hym selle Cori. that he is God.

5 Remember ypenot,that when J was 75 pet with pou, J tolde you thele thynges: l

6 And nowe pe knowe what withholdeth, that he myght be reuealed in his

tyme.
2 the misterie of iniquitie doth al- tohniia redie worke, tyll he whiche nowe onlpe letteth, be taken out of the way.
Qij And

1 he leconde Epiltle

8 And then shall that wicked be reucaled, whom the Lorde shall consinne with the spirite of his mouth, and thal destroy with the brightnesle of his come myng: £3 —

„ (€uenbynt) whofe commpng is after the workyng of Satan, in all power *¢ signes, and Wonders, of lying,

10 And in all deceauablenesle of vnrpghteousnesse, in them that peryshe: becaule they reteaued not the loue ofthe trueth, that they inyght be saued.

Rom id. II And thercfore God shall sende them

strong delusion, that they Mould beleue lyes: a

12 That all they mypght be dampned whiche beleued not the trueth, but had pleasure in vnryghteousnes.

3 But we are bounde to geue thankes

Esalas xi. a.

Matli. 24. c.

alway to God for von, brethren beloued of the Lode, betause that God hath frõ the begynnyng chofen you to saluation in sanctifiyng of the spirite, ¢ lin )fapth of the trueth:

14. Wherevnto he called yon by our Got pell, to the obteyning of the glorie of our
Lope elus Christe. ö

15 S Therfore brethren stande fat, and holde the ordinaunces whiche pe haue D ben taught, whether it were by our preachyng, or by our epistle.

16 Mur Torde Jesus Christe, and God and our father, whiche hath loued vs, and Hath geuen vs euerlastyng tonsolation, and good hope in grace,

v7 Conitort pour heartes, and stablysshe vou in all good saying and doyng. .

¢ The .uj. Chapter.

he delireth them to pray kor hym, that the Golpell may protper. sand geueth them warnyng to reproue the idle, 16 and so wylcheth them all wealth.

Ephe. vi. c.
Colosl. titi.a

a as With pou:
2 And that we may be delpuered from dilozdered and euyll
Harra men: Foz all nien haue not © fapth. cee ider. 3 Bit He Lorde is faythfull, whiche
7 0 vou, aud kepe pou from cuyll.
4 And we haue confidence in the Lode to pouwarde, that pe both do, and wyll

do the thynges whiche we commaunde

pou. :

And the Lode guyde pour heartes to

the loue of God, and to the pacient waptyng for Christe. 2+ a

6 nde conmmaunde you brethzen inthe

i. Cory. b. name of onr Lorde Jesus Christe, that ve withdrawe pour {clues from euerp brother that walketh inordinatelp, and

buht. Not after the institution whiche he re-

d. Wellen. ceanedof vs.

7 For ye pour selues knowe howe ye onght to folowe vs: Foz we behaued not our selues inordinately among you,

3 Meither toke we breade of any man for nought: but wrought with labour

A&esxx-s and sweat nyght and daye, becaule we

1. Cor. ix. e.

3. Thesl. u. c.

¶ Sent krom Athens.

woulde not be chargeable to any of

pou,

9 Not but that we had auctoritie, but to C make our selues an ensample vnto pou to folowe vs. |

10 For When we were with von, this we warned you of: that pf any woulde not
Worke, the fame shoulde not eate.

n For we haue heard that there are some
Which walke among pou inordinatelp,
Workyng not at all, but be bulp bodies.

12 Them that are such, we tommaunde and exhort by our Lorde Jesus Chzitt, that they workyng in quletnelle, eate their owue breade.

Iz And pe brethren, be not weerp in Well Gauchvib

dopng.
14 Af anp man obey not our dottrine, sig?-Y nifie hym by an epistle, and haue no u. The companic with hym, that he mayt be ashamed. N
15 Het tount him not as an Henemie, but Hebe warne hym as a brother. _ cation, 112
16 Nowe the very Lorde of peace geue toe Couns you peace alwapes, by all meanes. The fats vac
Lorde be with pou all. 0
17 The salutation of ine Paul with mine ee ue ry is the token in euery epistle. So J watte. &
13 The grace of our Lord Jesus Chnlt Trt be with vou all. Amen.

¶ The

imothe. CXXIJ.
We firft Epiftle of the 2 % Saint Paul, y . ynto Timothie.
The firft Chapter. |

He exhorteth Cimothie to wayte vpon his office, namely to fee that nothyng

be taught but gods worde. ac. Declaryng that fapth, with a good conscience. charitie, and editication, are the ende therok, r0 and admonisheth or Hymeneus and Alexander. ye

e, ul auApotticof trarie to wholsome doctrine:

Ay Jesus Christ, bp u Accordyng to the Gospell of glorie of che conmullion ok the blessed God, whiche is committed
„ God our sauiour, puto me. C
„ and Lorde Jesus 12 And Ithanke Christ Jesus our Loo cChriste (whiche is? whiche Hath made ine trong: For he

itheliva. our hope, counted me faythfull, puttyng eme) into a
2 „ Unto Tinothie the nnnisterie, a 15 ben i eM SEC anatural co sonne 13 Beynga blasphemer, aud a perfect: Ga

% Ho called

kal fos in the faith: Grace, ter, and an oppressour: But pet J ob- co mortnos

bon e znertie (aNd) peace from God our father tapned mercie, because J dyd it Figno- lena

en. and Fehrs Christe our Lorde. rauntly in vnbe liefe. Ged,

3 As J besought thee to abpde styll in 14. Ntuerthelesse, the grace of our Lorde

Eyphesns, when J departed into“ Mact- Was excecopug aboundaunt, with faith

Massa Donia (f0d0) that thou cOmaunde some and loue, which isin Chziste Jelus.

ane thatthep teathe no other doctrine: 1j er Thisisa faythfull faping, and by g

Tare 4. Meither geue heede to fables and end- all meanes Worthy to be reteaued that N

im ia. jesle geutalogies, whiche breede questt? Chuste Jesus tanie into the worde to Luk. xixa,

ons, more then godly edikying which is laue spuners, ot whom Jam chieke. Lebe ue. in kapth. 16 Notwithstaudyng, for this cause was D

ene But the W ende of the tonmmaunde- mertie shewed vnto me, that in me the

dpa: nent, is loue out of a pure heart, and ok kirst, Pelus Chzilte myght shewe alt

mous à good contticnce, €of fayth vnkalgned. long sufferyng, to the example of thems

hen 6 From the whiche thynges, fome ha- which shoulde beleue on hyim to lyke e-

mito, upng erred, haut tourned vnto vayne uerlastong.

dle dare ianglyng: 17 Molbe, vnto the kyng cuerlastyng, en

bald, Couctyng to be dottours ok the lawe, Unmortall, tnuilibic, puto God onlye ange

ae not buderskandyng what they speaͤle, Wile ben Honour and glogte fo; euer and r mee

Chem neither wherof they affirme. euer, Anmien. toward hem.

een. 8 But we knowe that the lawe is 18 This commaundement commit J bu-

Ag good, yk a inan vie it lawfullp: to thee sonne Timotheus, accordyng to

oto Anolbyng this, that the lawe is not the prophesies which went before bpon

Hint §— geuen vnto aryghteous man, but vnto thee, that thou inthein shouldest fyabe -

ae the lawielle and dilobedient, to the vn- agcodkpght.

Eamot godlp and to linners, to vnholp and vn 1 Pauung kayth and good coulcicnce,

mS kleane, to murtherers of fathers z mur- which fome hauyng put awape as cone
2 eat fayth, haue made en rim

lingkto To Whozeniongers, to themthatde- 20 Ok whom is Mpmencus aud CLAN? Mat. xvii.c

b fyle wem selues with mankynde, to der, whom JJ haue“ delpuered vnto Coa

manstealers, tolpers, to periured, and Satan, that they maype lcarne not to are

pf there be any other thyng that is cow blaspheme. Churche.
ö Qui ¶ The

The. ij Chapter. N
Ihe exhorteth to pray for all men, 4 wherkore, 8 and howe. As touchyng

the apparell and modestic of women.

Exhort therefore, that firfte of all, papers, supplications, intercessiös and geupuge of
<< || thankes be made for all men:
For kynges, and
— fonr all that are in auctoritie, that we maye leade a quiete and peaceable lyfe, in all godlynesse and honestie. .
%3 Forthat is good and accepted in the syght of God our fautour,

4. Who wyl haue all men to be faued, and to conic vnto the knowledge of che trueth.

lohn. 5 For (Ceres) one God, and one medi-

Gabel e Atour of God and men, the man Christe

clus:

CO pence 6 Who gaue him selfe a W raunsome foe

bunu me All, a testimonie in due tyines.

ccothedeallo 7 Where vnto Jain ordeined a preacher and an apostle (J tell the trueth in
Christe, and lye nota teacher of the gen-

Tece.xxix.e 2
Baruch.i.c.

tiles in fapth and veritle. C

8 JIwyrll therefore, that the men praye Inn e euerywhere, lyftyng tp Holy handes, without Wath and realonyng.

9 Tyke wyse also the women, that they arape them selues in comely apparell,

With shamefastnesse, and diltrete behauiour, not in brayded heere, tither golde or pearles, 02 costly àrap:

10 But (that beconmieth women prokelsyng godlynesse)through good workes.

met the woman learne in scilence in Corn; all subiection.

12 Wut J suffer not a woman to teache, S neither to vsurpe auctoritie ouer p man, but to be in lcilence.

13 ao Adam was firit fourmed, then

ue.

14 And Adam was not deceaued: but the e woman beyng deceaucd, was win the goa tr e 60 6 5 deansgresston.

15 Motwithstandyng through bearyng of chyldren she shalbe saued, yf they con tinue in fayth and loue, and holpnesle,

With modestie.

q The uy. Chapter.

2 He declareth what is the office of ministers, n and as touchyng their families,
15 the dignitie of the Churche, 1 ct the principall poynt ofthe heauenlꝑ doctrine,

4 ’
‘ N.

3 Mot geuen to oucrmmeh wine, no striker, not greedy of kylthy lutre: but gentle, abhorryng fyghtyng, abhorryng couctousnesse:

4 Onethat ruleth well his owne house, hauyng chyldren in subiection, with all grauitie.

5 For pf a man kuowe not to rule his

W one house, howe Mall he care for the
Churche of God: N
(a) Ket. be: 6 Mota young stoler, lest He, beyng put: bia deere, fed vp, “fall into the condempnation of kondempned, the deupll. mist 7 He must also haue a good report ofthẽ kleben e. Which are without, lest he fall into the

(elke bp pune.

rebuke and suare of the deupll. Pree
$ Bikewile mut p nunifters be graue, not double tongued, not geuen to much wine, neither greedy of kylchy lutre:
9 holdyng the misterie of the fayth in a r pure consciente. 901
10 And let them first be proued, then let E* oa them minister, beyng blamelesse.
1 Euen so mutt their wpues be graue, not cupll speakers, sober, faythfull in all thynges. N
12 Xkt the deatons be the hulbandes of one wife, and such as can rule their chil-
Den well, and their owne housholdes.
13 *Fo2 they that haue ministred Well, get var then selues a good degree, and great lieli in the fayth (wbiche is) in Chrilte clus,
14 These thynges write J vnto thee, hopyng to come shortly vnto thee:
15 But yl J tary long, that thon mapest knowe Yoive thou oughtest to behaut thy selfe in the boule of God, Whiche 1s the Church of the lyuyng God, ae and
¢

tO

ler and grounde of trueth.
16 Andwithout doubt, great is that mt sterie of godlynesle: God was shewed

folind.b.

A1 aH 8 O we the spirite lpea-
Cx keth eutdently, that ' in

las xx. f. the latter tymes some en e Dall "Depart from the lice 90 apt, geiung heede vn-
Iba ERE to spirites of errour, x

doctrines of deupls,

2 Which speake false in hypocrisie, ha-

chend Uypng their © conscience {cared with an

cous’, hotte iron: f

Forbidding to marrie a commaunding]

to abstayne from: meates whiche God

Hath treated to be receaued with geuing

thankes, of them whiche beleue, and

knowe the trueth.

ge. Foz cuery creature ot God cis good,

Cenc. l. d.

7 ued with thankes geuyng.

Si 5 Fhr it is lanttified by the worde of God

and praper. f

„ pe thou put the brethren in remem-

img. beaunce of thefe thynges, thou shalt be
Hatt ben norysched dp in the wordes of fayth and of good doctrine, which thou hast continually folowed.

7 Wut tast away prophane c old wiues fables: Exertilse thy {elfe rather vnto godlynesse. ö

im l. a.
Trus i. c.

order concernyng wyddo wegs.

A Ebuke not an elder,“

A but exhort him as a fae
/ ther, the vounger men

as brethren,
The elder women as

mothers, the younger

tie.

3 Honour wydowes, whiche are wydowes in deede.

4 Wut pf any wydowe haue chyldren oz nephewes, let them learne first to rule their owne houles godly, and to recon pence allo their elder kynsckolkes: for that is good and acceptable before God.

eli. A

imothe. _

and nothyng to be rekused, yk it be retea-

A good minister of Pelus Christ, which

6 as sisters, in all chasti- 7

CXXIII ] ‘ was seeue among the angels, was prea- .

ched vnto the geutiles, was beleued on in the worlde, and was receaued vp in

in the flesshe, was iustified in the spirite, glorie.
N The. iiij. Chapter.

r de teacheth hem what doctrine he ought to flee, 6. 8. 11, and what to folowe, ij and wherin he ought to erercife hym felfe continually.

8 Foz bodylpexercise profiteth litte: but Coloiid. godlinesse is prolitable vnto all thinges, C hauing prouule of the lyfe that is nowe, and of that which is to come,

9 This is a five laying, ¢ by all meanes
Worthy to be reccaued.

Io For therfore we both labour, and ful: fer rebuke, betause we haue hoped in the lyupug God, whiche is the sauiour ol all men, {pecially of those that beleue.

1 These thynges commaunde e teache.

12 et no man delpile thy vouth: but Tune be thou a paterne of the beleuers, in er..
Worde, in conuersation, in loue, in spirite, in fayth, in chaltitie.

3 Tyll J come geue attendannce to rea-D

dyng, to exhortation, to doctrine.

14. Delpile not the gyfte that is in the, „ a
Which Was geuen thee“ through pro- fee de phelie, with the laying on of handes by Aera. the auctoritie ofthe eldership.

15 Maue a care ofthese thinges, and geue thyselke vnto them that it may be seene howe thou prokitest in all thynges.

16 Takt heede vnto thy lelfe, and vnto doctrine, and continue therein: For in

doping this, thou shalt both © saue thy ©, The -

felte, and them that heare there. a

duc tie, which
} is an assuraunce of thy faluatton.

5 The. v. Chapter.

et owe he hall behaue hym felfein rebukyng all degrees, 3 an e 17 Che establyshyng of ministers, 23 the gouer ;

naunce of his body, 24 and the iudgement of linnes.

5 And che that isa wpdowe cin deede, Ian

and left aloue, hopeth in God, and con- baue. tinueth in supplications and prayers i nyght and dap. sai
6 Wut che that liueth in plealure, is dead beyng alpue.
And thefe thynges commaunde, that 28 they may be blaͤmelelle. ö
3 But il any pronide not for his owne, and {pecially for them ok his housholde, he hath denped the fayth, aud is worse then an infidell.
9 Lt not a wydobe be chosen vnder three score peres olde, hauyng ben the

Oe nian.
Wok oke mat: du; Ad

neanes to pe her sellt

J
10 And well reported of in good workes, of double honour, most speciallpe they
Gene ia. yl cht haut brought vp chyldren, pf she Which labour in the worde a teachyng.
Praun. haue lodged straungers, pf che haue 18 Tor the scripture sapth: Thou halt Du
Peraunb. walched the faintes fecte, pf the haue not nioolel the ore that treadeth out the ministred vnto ther that were in ad? corne: And, 'the labourer is Worthy of dich b. uerlitie, yf she haue ben continually ge- his rewarde. nen to cucrp good worke. 19 Agaynst an elder veceane none accusan But the yonger wydowes refuse: For tion, but vnder two 02 three witnesses. pens. xix 4 whẽ they haue begun to ware Wanton 20 Them that finne, rebuke befoze all, agaynst Christe, they wyll marrie: that other also may keare. 5
12 Pauypng danpnation, betause they 21 Jtestikie before God, and the Lorde haue tast away their first fayth. Pelus Chuste, and the elect angels, that
13 Thep learne to wander about from thou oblerue thelethinges without hahouse to house idle: yea not idle onlp, but stynelle of iudgement, and do nothyng allo tatlers and buspbodies, fpeakyng after partialitie. 8 thynges which are not tonielp. 22 Way handes sodenly on no man, nei- Shy
14 J Wyll therefore that the ponger wo- ther be partaker of other mens sinnes.
Cor. vb. nien do ' marrie, to beare chyldren to Aaepe thy selfe chaste. it. Tim. ib. gupde the houle, to geue none occafion 23 Dune no longer water, but“ ble ate Eedend to p aduersarie to speake flaunderoufly. tle wine kor thy stomackes fake € thine
15 Jor tertaine of them are alredyturned often diseases. backe after Satan. 24 Sonie mens sinnes are open before-
16 PYfanp nian or woman that beleueth hande, hastyng before vnto indgement, haue wydowes, let them susteine them, and in sonie ! they folowe after. Werben c let not the Churches be charged, that 25 Tykewile allo, good workes are ma- suite tos there maye be lufficient for then that nielt before hande, and they that are o- lane are wydolwes in deede. therwyse tan not be bpd. aer dag,
17 The elders that rule well are Worthy as aul Fe
J The. vj. Chapter.
1 Che duetie of feruauntes to warde their maisters. 3 Tgaynst such as are not latittied with the worde of God. 6 Ok true godlynelle and contentation of mynde. 9 Agapne couetoulnesle. 1 4 charge geuen to Timothte.
A1 Et as many ' sernaun- ypng lucre to be godlynesse. From luche i Cot. xi. c tes as are vnder the be thou separate.
Ephe.vi.a. poke, count their mae’ 6 Godlpnesse is great lutre, ita man be r
Ca sters worthy of all ho- content with that he hath. 4
‘nour, that the name ok 7 For we brought nothyng into the .4 god and his doctrine be wo rlde, and it is certapne that we may Bade
“t,, not blasphemed. carry nought away.
2 Andthey whiche haue belcupng mal- 8 Wut haupng foode and rayment, we sters, defpife them ot becaule they are must ther with be content. 4 brethren: but rather do lernte, koral- For they that w wyll be riche, fall into daran much as they are beltuyng and beloued temptations and snares, and into many e
( Nh . Alld paͤrtakers of the Gbenekitt. These kfolishe e noysome lustes, which drowne
God. Fütt or thynges teache and exhort. men in perdition and destruction.
Gaathia. 3 Ik any man teache otherwyse, and 10 Foz loue of money, is the roote of all tonsenteth not vnto the wholsome wor- euyll, whiche whyle some lusted after, C des of onr Lorde Jesus Christe, and they erred from the fapth, & pearted era to the doctrine whiche is actordyng to the {elues though with many sorowes. 4 rar godlynesse: 1 Wut thou man of God, fice thele
4 Me is puft vp, knowyng nothing, vut thynges, and folow after righteousnes,
1 Tims. dotpng about questions aud ' strifes of godlynes, faith, loue, pacience, nekenes.
Nlitus. ii. c-

Wordes, wherof commeth ene, stryfe,

raplynges, cupll surmpspuges,

W Wayne disputations of men ok torrupte myndes, destuute ofthe trueth, thynk-

—— — — —— —e—

The first Epistle

2 Fight the good fight of faith, lay hand on eternal syfe, where vnto thou art alfo called, and Hak professed a good profe ssion before many wu ne its.

IJ gene

to Limothe.

. B Hgeucthcecharge in the light of God,

who quickeneth all thynges, and be-

fore Jesus Christe, which vnder Pon-

fins Pilate witunessed a good profession,
14 That thou kepe the tonunaundenient without spot, vnrebukeable, vntyll the appearyng of our Lorde Jesus Christ:

Which in his tynies he shall shewe that is blessed and printe only, W the kyng of kynges, and Lorde of Lordes,
16 Who only Hath immortalitie, dwelling in the light that no man tan attayne vnto, Whonti no man Hath seene, neither tan lee, brite whom be Honour ¢ power euerlastyng. Amen.

Charge them which are riche © in this world, that they be not hie minded,

Aa xvů. c.

N

0 In thyn- 17 des pertäpng this lilt

CXXV. nor trust in vntertapne riches: but tansy.

Plpupng God, which geueth vs aboun- Luken dauntlp all thinges to eniop: Eecleaab.

18 That they do good, that they be riche

in good workes, that they be redye to gene, glad to distribute:

19 Taping vp in store for them felues a Nh. vi c.

good foundation agaynst the tyme to conte, that they map lay holde on eternall lyke.

20 O Timotheus, aue“ that which is q Frege

genen thee to kepe, auopdyng prophane (7 che volle
(and) vapne bablpnges, and” oppofiti: % Ken ons of stience, falslie so called: N

gendreth

1 Which fone profeffyng, haue erred

concernpng the kapth. Grace (be) with tice. Amen.

¶ Sent krom Laodicea, which is the chielest citie of hrpgia Pacaciana.

The seconde Epistle of the eA poftle Saint Paul, to
Timothie.

J The first Chapter.

Co Paul exhorteth Timotheus to stedfastnesse and patience in persecution, and to continue in the doctrine that he had taught hym, 12 wherok his bondes ¢ alllictions were a gage. 16 J commendation of Oneliphorus.

Fer Aul an Apostle of a 7 = Chit Fetus Chuste by fe the Wwyil of God, igo (N 0 @ according to the zend, Fe Pea pronulc ok lpfe. zende CN which is in Chalk

2 e 92 Jesus, .
2 d Limothe
CIM SECA a betoued sonne:
Grace,merey,and peace, from God the father, and Chrilte

Jelus our Lode. |

Atxxiia.3 — PJ thanke God whom J woethippe keien, fvoni(my) fozefathersinpuve conftiente,

that without ceaflpng J haue remembraũte of thee in my prayers night a day
4 Desiryng to lee thee, mpndefull ok thy teares: that I map be fylled with top.
5 When J tall to remembraunce the div faigned kayth that is in thee, whiche d Welt first in thy graundmother Los, and in thy mother Eunita: ano A om assured that lit dwelleth) in thee allo, me 36 Wherfore I put thee in reinebraunte
Set that thou W stirre vp the gpft of God,

"Govigs

wlhich is in thee by the puttyng on of dawn ue mp handes. .

7 For God Hath not geuen to bs the d Sane spirite of feare: but of power, and of ene loue, and of a sounde mynde. So¢ mu nous

8 We not thou therfore ashamed of the aero. teftimomie ok dur Lorde, neither of me ohen his priloner: but suffer thou aduersitie with the Gospell, actordyng to the power of God,

Who hath“ saued vs, x called vs with Titus.ii.. an holy tallyng, not accordyng to our Eehesa. workes: but accordyng to his owe purpole and grace, which was geuen vs in
Christe Jesus, before the world began:

Io Wut is nowe made manifelt by the appearyng ot our lauiour Jesus Chit, 150 . who ba put away death, and bath) Heben brought life and (mmrogtalttic vnto light Rom. threugh the Gospell:

1 *naherunto am appopnted, a preacher and Apottic, and a teacher of the

entiles:
12 or the which tause JJ also suffer these

thynges. Meuerthelesse, J am not
* a alhamed:

i Tim. u. b.

enn

ashamed:or I knowe whom J haue beleued, and Jam perlwaded that he is able to kepe that which J haue committed to hym, agaynst that day.
Ste thou hauc the paterne of wholesome wordes, which thou halt hearde of me in fapth € lowe, (that 13) in Christe

D i. Tim un. b
Titus ii. b. B

| i. Peter. v.a.

(t The grace

esus. of the hole 44 That © good thyng which was con
2 nutted to thy keping, holde fast through the holy ghost which dwelleth in vs.
15 This thou knobwest, that all they

which are in Asia, be turned from me: of whõ are Phpgellus k hermogenes.

16 The Torde gene mercie vnto p house of Ouesiphorus for he oft refreshed me, and was not achamed of my thayne.

17 But whe he was in Rome, he sought me out very diligently, and fonnde (mej,

18 The Lorde graunt vnto hym, that he map fynde niercie with the Lorde in that day: And in howe many thynges he nunistred vnto meat Ephelus, thon knowest very well.

Roma. i. b.

The. ij. Chapter.

2 He erhorteth hym to be constant in trouble, to lulfer manty, to abyde fakin the wholfome doctrine of our Lorde Felus Christe. 1: shewyng hym the kidelitie of

Gods counfell touchyng the Caluation of his, 19 and the marke therof,

Ta rae therfore my s{{{0

I
5 nne, be strong in
2 the grace that is in
MLC hatte Jesus.
2 yg And the thynges

=\cy\ithat thou haste

hearde of me by

many witnesses,

— he same conunit thou* to faythfull men, which shalbe

apt to teache other also.

3 Khon therfore suffer afflictions asa

good souldier of Jesus Christe.

No man that warreth, entangleth hym selfe with thaffayres of (this; lpfe, that he may picafe hym Which hath thosen hym to be a souldier.

5 And ika man also wrestle, pet is he not crowued except he wrestle lawfullie.

@ semeg The labourvnghulbandman, “ mutt

mate e. kirst be partaker of the kruites.

compe. “7 Conlider What J fay: and the Lorde geue thee vnderstandyng in all thinges.

8 Remember that Felis Chziste, of
196 seede of Dauid, was rapled from the dead, accordyng to my Gospell,

9 Woherin J suffer trouble as an cuyil doer, euen vnto bondes: But the worde of God is not bounde.

Ades xf. 10 Therforc J suffer all thynges for the electes fakes, that they myght also obtaine the fatuation, which is in Chat
Jesus, with eternall glorie.

Rom vi b. II It is à fapthfull saping:“ for yf we be

Roni. vin. c. ebene we shall also lyue with

vm:
Il we be patient, we shall also raigne

Titus. i. b.

Math. i. a.

Rom 1.3.

Luk. il. b. 12
Rom ina. *

With hym:“ PE we denie hym, he allo un ne
(all dente vs. *
1 If we be vnkaych ful, he abideth faithfull, he can not dente hym scite.
14 Ofthese thynges put them in remembraunce, testific before the Lode, that they striue not about wordes to no profite, (but to the peruertyng of ß bearers.
15 Studie to chewe thy elfe approued vnto God, a workman not to be ashamed, vightlic deindyng the worde ok trueth. 1
16 Wut prophane voptes of vanitie passe duer: For they wyll entrealse vnto greater vngodlynesse.
17 And their worde chall fret as doth a cancker: of whom is Hymeneus and Timid

Philetus,

18 Which about the trueth haue erred, faping that the resurrection is past alredie, c do ouerthrowe the fayth of fome.

19 But the strong foundation of God 1 standeth styl, hauyng this sealt: W The &, a
PLorwe knowerh thé that are his: And, Pans torr. let euery one that nameth the name of
Christe, depart from imquitie.

20 Wut in a great housc are not onely W vessels of golde, and o siluer, but allo of Kom ix

wood and of earth: some to honour, and some vnto dishondur.

a If aman therfore pourge hym selfe

from thele, he shalbe a veslell vnto honour, and meete for v bits of the Lorde, and prepared vnto euery good workc.

22 Tustes of youth auopde, but folowe ryghteousnelle, kayth, loue, peace, with them that tall on the Lorde ont of a pure heart. a

A = to

Tai. 23 Wut foolishe c vnlearned questions put from thee, knowyng that they do but gender strife.

24 And the sernaunt of the Lorde mutt not striue: but be gentle vnto all men,
* apt to teache, sufferyng euyll in meke-

Tim. il. a.

not this
4 porate

nesse, _ . pe e 25 Instructing he which are@contraric

what prokite commeth of the leriptures.

Dis knoe also, that“ in the last dayes, perplous tymes shalbe at

D

I = i

Foz men chalbe toners
EST F their owne selues,

— Touetous, proude, blasphemers, disobedient to fathers and mothers, vnthankekull, vngodlpe: i
Without naturall affection, trutebreakers, false accusers, riotous, fierce, despisers of them which are good, ae headdy, hye mynded, lo-

Bas of pleafures nioze then louers of

od:

5 Hauyng a fourme of godlpnesse, but denping the power therof: turne away from these.

6 Cele are they, which enter into
Houles, ⁊ leade captiue (fimple} women in with linne, taryed with diuers

ustes:

7 Euer learnyng, and neuer able to tome

vnto the knowledge of the trueth.

Jor as Jannes and Janibres withstoode “Doyles, fo do these allo refit the trueth: Men of corrupt myndes, reprobate concernyng the fapth:

9 WVut they Mall preuayle no longer. For

Titus. i c.

Brod vil. b. 8

() wht au — ne
B atpghe.

Timothe.

boasters,

CXXVI. mynded, pf God at auy tyme wyll geue them repentaunce, to the knowledge of the trueth:

26 And that they may come to thẽ lelues agapne, out of the snare of the deuyll,

which are Holden captyue of hym at his Wpll.

of

¢ The. ij. Chapter.

1 He prophecieth of the perilous tyes, r tetteth out hypocrites in their colours.
12 che weth the fate of the Christians, 14 and howe to auopde daungerg, 15 Allo

their madnesse shalbe manikest vnto all men] as also theirs was.

Jo But thou hast folowed my dottrine, C fashion of Ipuyng, © purpole, kapth, deze long sufferyng, lone, paticnee, Da be

1 Persecutions, afflictions, which camie anten onto nie at Antioche, at Proninir, at dra.
Tystra, which persecutions J suffred patientip: Aud from them all, the Lord deliuered me.

IZ Bea, and“ all that wyll lyue godly in aa. d.
Christe Jesus, shall suffer persecution. Ps d.
3 Wut the enyll men aud deceaucrs, one hall Ware Worle and worse, deceauyng

and deceaued.

14. Wut continue thou in the thynges which thou hate learned, which allo were committed vnto thee, knowyng of whom thou hast learned them:

15 And that from an* inkant thon pat T u knowenthe feriptures, which are able to make thee wyse vnto saluation, thorowe fayth which is in Christe Jesus.

16 All scripture is geuen by iuspiration ii peer. of God, and (18) profitable to doctrine, to reproue, to torrection, to instruction
Which is in ryghteousnesse,

17 That © the man of God may be per- nge fect, instructed vnto all good workes.

gouerned bp
Gods worde,

The. ij. Capter.

2 He erhorteth Timotheus to be keruent in the worde, and to luffer aduerlitie.
6 maketh mention of his owne death, and biddeth Cimothe come onto bpm.

— TTellilie therefore be-
ON KLE fore God, € the Lorde
4) Pelus Christe, which

Vit Mall iudge the quicke

andthe dead at his api pearyng, and his king:

; dome.

Seren 2 Preache the worde, bew instant in sea-
: fon, ont of feafon : Improue, rebuke ex-

Rtache hof d

hort in all long sufferyng and doctrine.

3 Forthe tyme wyll come, when they hall not suffer wholsone doctrine: but after their owne lustes, Hal they whole eares itche get thé an heape of teachers:
And hail turne away their hearyng from the trueth, and shalbe turned vnto

fables.

5 But watche thou in all thynges, suffer

afflictions,

afflictions, do the Worke of an Euangelist, fulfpll thy ministerie:

8 6 Fo: J ain nobe redie to be offered, €

the tym̃e of my dissolutionis at hande.
J haue fought a good kyght, ＋ haue fuitpued my )courte, J haue kept 5 faith. iCorixd. 8 Hentekdozth there is layde bp fo2 me *
Peter. b. a trowne of ryghteonsnesse, Which the

Horde, the ryghteous tudge, hall geue

me at that day: not to mic only, but vnto the aifo > haue loued his appearyng.
9 Dothydiligence to come shortly onto

me.

10 For Demas hath forsaken me, hauing loued this present worlde, and is departed vnto Thessalonica, Crestens to Galatia, Titus vnto Dalniatia,

u Pulp Luke is with me. Takyng
Marke and bryng him with thee, fo he is profitable vnto mie for p nnnistration.

12 And Tychitus haut J lent to Ephe-

sus.
13 The cloke that J left at Troas with
C carpus, whẽ thou commest bung with thee, and the bookes, but {pecially the parchementes. N
14. Alexander the coppersmith chewed me

The feconde | pistle

16 At in fick aunsweryng, no man at

much eupll: The Lorde © rtwarde ren hym actordyng to his deedes. mane tg

15 Ok whom be thon ware allo: For he n.. hath greatly withstande our preaching.

ted me, but all forsoke me, (J prap God)
Pit may not be layde to their charges:

17 S Hotwithstandyng, the Lorde ail Y ted me, and strengthed nie, that by me the preachyng shonld be fulkylled to the vtmost, and that all the gentiles should heare, and J was deliuered out of the mouth ofthe Lion. N

18 And the Lorde Chall delpuer me from euery © eupll worke, c Will preserue me o chara vnto his heauenly kingdome: To whõ nne
(be) prayse for ener and ener. Amen.

16 Salute Pasca and Aquila, and the gane. housholde of * Onesiphorus. i Tim i d.

20 Erxastus abode at Corinthum: But Ades xx b. arne, mt haue J left at Miletum

icke.

21 Do thy diligẽce to tome before winter.
Eubolus greeteth thee, and Pudens,

t Linus, and Claudia, x all the brethrẽ̃.

22 The Lode FJelus Chziste (be) with thy spirite: Grate be with vou. Amen.

¶ Che seconde epistle vnto Timothe, was written krom Rome, when Paul was prelented the feconde tyme vnto the Emperour Nero.

The epistle of Saint Paul unto Titus.

a a A iS
Cal ssa =

< 5 ien
Ra a

en

a

Lae arte Titus. cxXVII. ey, ee

g
@ he aduertiseth Citus toucheng the gouernment of the Churche.

he. The

ordinaunce and office of ministers. 12 Che nature ol the Cretians, a them which sowe abroade Jewiche fables and inuentions ol men, *

AL DDD All a seruaunt of wn God, Ean Apoltle sere ( ol Jelus Chait, gegen, e actörding to the ca thar S BZ yatayth of Gods eadele Ff P oy) lect, e the knowcies edge of p eeucth, seco N ag oy whiche is after a ey JM SEC sodipnesle,

3 Wut hath mademanifett his wore, at y time appoputed though preaching,

w gore To Titus a naturaleꝰsonne after the spore” common fayth : * Grace, mertie, peace,

and the Love
Jelus Christe our sauiour.

dhe ol che 5 Jor this cause left AI thee in Creta, zanker that thou shouldest refourmey thynges io” thaat are left, and? ordayne elders in cuehth rye citie, as J had appoyntedthee:

6 If anp be blamelesse, the hulbande of one lyfe, hauyng faythfull chyldzen, not acculabie of riote, or vntractable.

mika 7 *I a bishop must be blamelesse, as the stewarde of God: not stubborne, not angry, not geuen to wyne, no striker, not geuen to füthie lutre:

8 Wut a louer of holpitalitie, a louer of goodnes, sober, ryghteous, godly, tem-

lait. x. b. pte. v d.

Oe ,
9 Holbyng fat the kaythfull word
Which is accordyng to doctrine, that he
Hed ba 879 A erhort in whollome
, nproue them un bioue them that fap
10 HO there are many vnrusp and v talkers, and deceauers of N 15 cally they (that are) of p © civeumation oe uni Whose mouthes must be ftopped , te ae
: eee vee an teach ng She ynges which they ought not, for fyi- wee thie lucre fate, l forty Bi agi
12 Onc ol them selues ceueny a prophet meee” of their ovbue fayde: The Cretiauslare ©"
1 pers, cuyll beastes, flowe
B Thts witnesse is true: wherfore reduke them sharpely that they may be lounde in the fayth, aa 1005 nau heede to Jewes fables omaundementes of men, t
2 Sy ie —
15 *Untot e pure, fare all thynges pure: D but vnto them that are defpled 5 Dz Rom. xi d belcuyng, (is cen pure, but euen
1 ae and conicence of them is deed.
16 They tonfesse that they knowe God: but with Workes they dente h u, seyng they are abhominable and oulbbeoene and vnto euery good worke reprobate.

The. ij Chapter.

1He commendeth bnto hym the whollome doctrine, and telleth hym howe he

cqhall teache all degrees to behaue them lelueg, li through t

grace of Christe.

Toca

N
ASN

More tt uli ober, sounde in fayth,
— set in loue, in paciente:

The elder * women lpkewyse, that they be in such behauiour as betömeth holpnesle, not falle acculers, not geuen to much wine, teachers of good thinges,

e benelite of the

4 To make the young women sober niynded, to loue their hulbandes, to loue their chyldren, N

5 Co be) dilcrete, thaste, Houle kepers, c) potrans

png to ⁊ fro

good, obedient vnto their owne ul gane nts bandes, that the worde of God be not eus chr blasphenied. igen

6 Ppouug men lykewpse exhort, to be fober mynded. 2

7 In all thynges shewyng thy selfe a T. . paterne of good worzkes, in the doctrine, Perc

vncorruptnesse,

vncorruptuesse, grauitie, utegritic,

3 Whol dme worde, vnrebukeable, that he Which withstandeth, may be ashamed, hauypng no cuyll thyng to fay of

ou.

Ephevia. 9 Y Exhortj seruauntes, to be obedient vnee to their owne matsters, and to please
Coloftnd. them in all thonges, not aunlweryng

3 Tum. vi. a. agapne: jo Meither plckers, but chewing all good füythfulnesse, that they map adourne the doctrine of God dur fautour in all thynges. n S For there Hath appeared the grate
Cooter of God which is; healthful to all men,

tondition 02 srate foeuct thep be.

1 Wokyng for that blessed hope and appearpng of the glorie of the great God, and our sauidur Fels Christe,

14. Which gaue hym selfe for vs, that he romviiin mypaht redeeme vs from all vnryghte- Gabthiz. ousnesse, and ' pourge vs a peculter peo- r. ple vnto hym felfe, * zeldus of good Ephe b.
Workes.

15 Thele thynges speake and exhort, and rebuke With all aucthozitie. Let noi Tim ab man dilpile thee. 1

q The. üj. Chapter.

1 DE obedience to {uct as be in aucthoritte. 9 he warneth Titus to beware of footitye and vnprokitable queftions, 12 concludyng with certapne prinate

matters, 1s and salutations.

A1 f Arne them *to be
Romxiia NV ay (i{ubiect to rule €
Peter. ui. c. By 05 4 power, to obey

(A : magistrates, to
NN Ilbe redie to euery
N V good Worke:

2 / a To blasphemie

And man, to be no

ghters, (but gentle, shewyng all mekenelle vnto all men.

©) or we our selues also were some tyme foolpshe, dilobedieut, deccaued, seruyng diuers lustes ¢ voluptuoulnes, lpuyng in maliciousnesle and enuie, full
23 bl hate, hatyng one another.

A Wut after that the kyndenesse and loue of dur sauiour God to manwarde appeared,

Not of workes which (be) in ryghtedousuesse wronght, but accordyng to his mercie, he saued vs by the © fountayne of regeneration and renuyng of the holy gholt,

N

Ca) Foz. let 3 vs confides what we our selueg were when God sbewed vs fauout.

ti Timi.b.

John. iii. a.
(b ume is a ligne of our regeneration, Which ig wzought dy che holp ghost

Ades b. Jelus Christe dur saniour:
Epheiib. That We iustified' by his grace should be made heyres accordyng to the hope
C dketernall lpke.

6 Which he MHedon vs richlie though

3 Chis is) a faythfull saying: And ol these thynges J Wyll that thou confirme, that they which haue beleued in
God, myght be carefull to Merve foorth good workes. These thynges are good and prokitable vnto men. iTimia
9 But foolishe questions, and genealo- Tine gies, and contentions, and struunges about the lawe, auoyde: for they are vnprofitable and vapne. jo Aman that is ant autthour of sectes, be
*after the first and the setonde adnionition, auopde: 2 7 n Knowyng that he that is such is subuerted and linneth, bepng danpned of hym sele. D
When J Chall sende Artemas vnto thee, or Lychicus, be diligent to come vnto me vnto Micopolis: Foz Bhaue determined there to Wynter.
13 Wzyng Zenas the lawyer, & Apollos, on their iourney diligently, that nothing be lackyng vnto them.
14 And let ours allo learne to excell in good workes to necessarie vles, that they be not vnkrultefull.
5 All that are with me, falute thee.
Greete them that loue vs in the fayth.
Grace be with vou all. Anien.

¶ written from Hitopolis, (a citie) of Macedonia.

( The

to philemon. e epiftle of Saint Paul unto Philemon,

Se
XVIII.

C he reiopceth to heare of the fapeh and ioue of Philemon. o whom he deci to korgeue y sferuaunt Onelinus, and loupnglp to receaue hym cme i

2 6 ul a prisoner of

G (Sc labourer,
2 6379 i ZY And to the belopet MC hued Apphia, and to Archippus our felowe souldier, and to the Churche in thy houle:
* Grace to you, and peace from God our father, and the Lorde Jelsus Chait.
4. Hthanke np God, makyng mention alwayes of thee in my prayers,
5 , Hearpng of thy lone and fapth, which thou hast towarde the Lorde Jesus, and towarde all saintes:

That the felowshippe of thy fayth may be effectuall in the knowledge of euery good (wore; Which is in pou, towarde Christe Jesus. amenng 7 Ifor We haue great top € consolation in ina. thy loue, becaule the W bowels of the an e lalintes are rescesshed by thee, bother. be. 8 Wherkore, ough J myght be much

bolde in Ctatlte, to inioyne thee that which is conuentent:

BOS Het fo: loues lake, J rather beleche

thee, beyng sucha one as Paul the aged,

t nowealso a prisoner of Jesus Chuiste.

cc. b 1o JJ beseche thee for my lonne Onesi-

mus, whom J haue begotten in my

bordes:

un Which in tyme passed, was to thee vn-

Nofitable, but nowe profitable to thee

1 Whom J haue sent agayne: Thou

therekore receaue hym, that is, nine

Cor. i. a.

Cor. i. a.
Galath.i.2.

i) Thy dedme to- 6 parde the ase ei poceadethy o alpuslp and eiectual faith

owne bowels,
; Whom J wonlde haneretayned with me, that in thy Meade he npght haue mintstred vnto me in the bondes of the
Gospell:
14 But without thy mynde woulde J do nothyng, that thy benelite Houle not be as it were of necessitie, but willingly.
15 For happyly he therfore departed for a season, that thou shouldest reteane hy for euer:
16 Not nowe as a seruaunt, but aboue a seruaunt, a brother beloued, speclally to me: but howe mich moze vnto thee, both in the fleshe, and in the Lowe:
17 If thou count me therfore a felowe, receaue hym as nip selke.
18 It he haue inturied, or oweth thee ought } that lay to mp charge.
19 JPaul haue wzitten it with myne owne bande, F Wwyll recompence tt: Albeit, J do not fay to thee, howe that
11105 owest vnto me euen thyne owne elfe. 8
20 Bea brother, let nie enioy this plealure zp of thee in the Lorde: Comfort my © © seams bowels in the Lorde. ite, e
21 Trustyng in thine obediente, J wrote scceotavie on vnto thee, nowyng, that thou Wilt allo . do moze then J lay.
22 Moreouer, prepare me also a lodgyng: for I trust that through pour prapers,
I halbe geuen vnto pou.
23 There falute thee Epaphras, nip lelowe patfoner © in Christe Jesus. u n
24 Marcus, Aristarcus, Demas, Lucas, . my felowe labourers. he grace of our Lode PFelus Chak

be) With pour spirite. Amen.

¶ eritten from Rome, by Onelimus a seruaunt.

q The Epiftle of Saint Paul the eA poftle, vnto the He brewes.

he firft Chapter.
€ 1 He cheweth the excellencie ol Chrisle. 4 aboue the Angels, 7 and ol their office.

| a au 3

hig

0 oye 0 vnto the fathers in the
0 W prophetes:
A Hath in hele “ last

dapes, spoken vnto vs

in the sonne, whom he hath appoynted
1550 ok all thynges, by whom allo he Cole made the worldes. =

3 ere beyng the bryghtnesle of the Sapi.viitd. glorie, and the very unage of bis substaunte, vpholdyng all thynges with the worde of his power, hauing by ae

selke pourged our sinues, bath syt on the ryght bande of the maiestie on Dye:

4 Bcyng fo mich more extellent then the Angels, as he hath by inheritaunce obtapned a moze cxcelleut nanie then

they.

5 oe vnto which of the Angels sayde
Paaliia. he at any tynie: Thou art my sonne, zane © this day haue JJ begotten theetome apporn: 6 And agapuc, I wyll be to hyma faothe mo ther, and he shalbe tome a sonne- And agapne, When he bryngeth in the first begotten lonne into the Worlde, he saith:
And let all the Angels of God worship

handes:
1 They Hai perishe, but thou endurest, aM they (hall Ware olde as doth a gar: u And as a vesture shalt thou folde thé

vp, and they shalbe chaunged: but thou
Psal y. a.

hon

art the fame, c thy peres shall not fayle.
Wut buto Which of ß Angels lapde he at any tyme: Sitte on my right hande

Pfal.cx 2.

(e) De tom- ce 11 : Mat. xx u. d
Samer maketh his ( Angels spirites, and his typll J make thyne enemies thy foote ; Co v. bathe a ministers a flambt of fyre. stoose- :

14 Are they not all

mimistring spirites, fent foozth into ministerie for their fakes which halbe heyres of saluation-

Spy The ij. Chapter.

He erhorteth vs to be obedient vnto the newe lawe which Chriffe hath geuen bs,
Sand not to be offerded at the inlirmitte a lowe degree of Chuiste, 1obecaute it was necellarie that for our takes he choulde take fuch an humble fate bpon bpm, that he

myght be phe vnto his brethren.

Herfore we dught to geuec the moze earnest heede to the thynges which we haue heard, lest at auy v tynie we should let them flippe..

N N

By

(a) matt 0 diligentlie ay 8
Bepe in me ae

miozie, the dos | KS

handes. 2
3 Thon hast put all thynges ta subiectiõ

ned him With © glorie and honour, and

(t) In mas
Brag bem

fts

halt fet hym aboue the wozkes of thy d Eine

vnder his feete. In ß he put ab thinges vnder hym, he left nothyng that is not

sal. viu. b.

Cor. xv. d.

add en inks 2 For vf the wore put vnder hym. Wut nowe, wesee not vents tulot spoken by Angels, was stedfast: And pet all thynges put vnder hym. evan eue ry tranlgrelsion and disobedience re- Wut hn that (fora whele) was made barer. (e dued a iust recompenst of rewarde: lesse then the Angels, we {ee (that it wis en a. Howe Chali we estape, pf we neglettso Fetus, who through the sufferyig deu. Ireat saluation- which at the first began k death, was crowned with glozic and alien. to be preachedof the Lorde, and was ‘Honour, that he by the grace of God, confirmed vnto vs warde, by them that shoulde tafte of death for all. hearde it: 10 For it became hynt, for whom are all C
Nin vid. + God bearyng witnesse therto boty § thynges, audbp whom are all thynges,

with sigues & wonders allo, and with
Ditters powers and gyftes of the holy ghost, accordyng to his owue Wwyil.

5 Foz vnto the Anges Hath he not put in subiection the Worlde to come, Wherof we speake. 5

6 Wut one in a certapne place witnessed, faying : What is man, that thou arte myndekul of hyin-Orthe lonne of may, that thou wonldest lone vpon hyme

157 Thon madest hym fora litle whple

Pfal.vui. a.

lower then the Angels, thou hast crow- 3 And agaͤpne:

it

12 Saying: J

after he had brought many sonnes vnto glorie, that he shoulde malte the tapitayne of their faluation perfect through afflictions. |

Fo2 both he that sanctifieth, and they which are fanctificd, (are) all of one. Fo: which caule, he is not ashamed to call

them brethren, i ‘ wyll declare thy name

vnto my brechren, in the mypodes of the pee

Churche wyll J prapse thee.

wyll put m trust in
IJ wyll put np a

hym. And agapne: Beholde here am

J, and the chyldren whiche God hath

geuen nie.

14 Jorasmuch then as the chyldren are partakers of flesshe and blood, he alfo hym selfe lykewypse toke part with thé, that through death he impale expell hym that had lordship ouer death, that is the deupll: 5

15 And that He. myght delpuer them,

which through feare ol death, were all

their lyfe tyme in daunger of bondage.

O the Hebrewes.

CXXIX.
16 For he in no plate tatteth on hym the gels: but the seede of Abraham 9 Hot me taketh he on hym. gels, du Of
17 Wherfore, in all thinges it became him * to be made lyke vnto his brethren, that he myght be mercpfull, and a fapchfull bye priest in thynges toncernyng God, fo to purge the peoples fines,
18 For in that he hym selfe suffered and
Was tenpted, he is able to suctour them that are tenpted. ö

n J The. ij. Chapter. a He requireth them to be obedient onto the worde ol Chrifke, 3 who is more wort v

then

a partakers of the cele:

— b Mer fore Holy beethyen,
2 2 stiall callpng, ® confiz

AG N

1 Weyng faythfull to

hym that appoynted ppm, as allo (was)
Moysles in all his houte,

3 Fz this (man) is counted worthy of moze glorie then Moyles, inasmuch as he which hath buylded the house, hath more hondur then the house.

4 Foz enerp houle is buylded of fone

— ian et buylded all thynges,

5 And Doyles verylp (was) faythfull in al his house, as a minister, for a witnesse of those thynges whiche were to be spo-

hkenalkter: —
Be But Chrutte as a sonne (bath rule; quer

mee his owne Houle, whole W houle are we, fe pf we holde fast the tonfidence and the la. kiopcyng of that hope vnto the ende.

7 Wherkore, as the holy ghost faith: To day pf ve wyll heare his vopee,

3 Harden not your heartes, as in the pronokyng, in the day of the temptation in the wyldernelse,

9 Where pour fathers tempted me, proned me, and sawe mp workes. rl. veres.

hen Moples. 1: Che punichment of tuch as wyll harden their heartes, and not beleue, that they myght haue eternall rell. 1

Io Wherkore J was greeued with that C generation, and sayde: they do alway erre in heart, they veryly haue not knowen my wapes. . Sattar

u Sothat I ware in my Wrath, © pf Ge Fe they shall enter into my rest. rung thee

Iz Lake heede brethren, lest at any tyme n there be in pou an euyll heart ot vnbeliete, to depart from the lyuyng God:

13 But exhort ye one another dayly whyle it is called to day, lest any of yon be har-

N through the deteptfulnesse of inne.

14 Jor we are made partakers of Chatte, pl we kepe sure vnto the w ende the be- e 6. gynnyng of the substaunce, 1

15 So longas it is said: to day yfye wyll Eu
Heare his voyte, harden not pour heartes, as in the prouokyng.

16 Jor sonie when they had hearde, dyd prouoke: howe be it, not all that tanie out of Egypt by Moyses.

17 Wut with whon was he dilplealed fourtic peres: Mot with them that had finned, whole carkales fell in the desert-

18 And to whõ sware he that they should not enter into his rest, but vnto chem that were not obedient-

19 And we see that they coulde not enter in, betaule of vnbeliefe.

of Tesus
Chudte.

The. iiij. Chapter. r The worde without kayth is vnprolitable.; Che Sabboth or rest of the Christians.

Et bs feare therfore, lest at
Many tyime, by forsakyng the promile of entryng into his reste, any of you shoulde be
J dekrauded.

. 6 Punishment of vnbeleuers. Che nature of the worde of God.

2 F02 bnto vs was the Golpell prea ched, alwell as vnto them: But the
Wore whiche they hearde dyd not profite thein, ee with fayth to them that hearde.

n for

1e

Jor we which haue beleued, do enter into his rest, as he fapde: Euen as J haue lworne in my wrath, ik they Hal enter into my rest. Although the workes were made perfecte from the foundation of the worlde.

Jor he spake in a certapne plate of the seuenth Daye on this wyse: And God

(a) Although ebat Gad d

hig rest alter the creation of

dhanasn,
{che was put atignuec of the beauenipe test, € duted put (02 a time.
Genc. il. a.

Workes.

And in this plate againe: yf they shall enter into my reff.

Seing therfore it koloweth, that some must enter there into, and they to Who the Gospell was first preached entred not therin for vnbeliefe.

Againe, he appoynteth a tertaine dap, by to dap, faping in Daud after fo long
à tynit (as it is sayde:) To day yk yt wyl
Heare his vopte, hard not pour hearts.

Jor vf Jelus had geuen them reste, then woulde he not afterwarde haue spoken of another day.

959 By Fee us, ig utant 3
Josua.

9 There remayneth therfore pet a rest

to the people of God.
10 Jor he that is entred into his reff bath teassed also from his owne Workes, as
God (dvd) from his.

dyd rest the seuenth dape from all his

11 Let vs studie therefore to enter into C that rest, lest any man fall after the fame enfample of disobedience.

12 For the worde of God is quicke, and myghtie in operation, and {harper then any two edged sword, and entreth thorowe, euen vnto the deuydyng a hinder g of the © soule t᷑ the spirite, and ofthe enn ioyntes € the marie, and is a discerner n of the thoughtes and of the intentes ok ren the heart: ö

13 Neither is there any creature that is not manifest in the syght of hym: Wut all thinges are naked and open vnto the eyes of hym of whom we speake.

14 Seyng then that we haue a great ye prest, which is entred Ibs bade
{us the sonne of God, let vs holde faste the confeffion .

15 Fo2We haue not an bye prett whiche D tan not be touched with the feelyng of our infirmities: but was in all popntes Phi, tempted lyke as we are, and (eee) without sinne.

16 Let vs therfore tome boldly vnto the
*thzone of grace, that we may obteyne ko] mercie, and fynde grate to helpe in time ok neede. .

‘The. 5. Chapter.

He compareth Fetus Christe with the Leuiticall prieftes, shewyng wherein they

eyther agree or dillent. 1 Afterwarde he reproueth the negligence ol the Jewes.

Ay On cuery bye priest taken from death, and was hearde in that fr
15 SV) fromamong men, oer which he feared: ‘ h 2755 ned kor nien, in things par- 3 Though he were the sonne, pet lear-
Levitixd, Peo Itepnyng to God, 'to offer“? ned he obediẽte, by thele thinges which
G da men AMO opftes Efacrificesfozfinne: he suffred: tetera, Which tan sufficiently haue compassi- 9 And being perfett, was made the auc C ber prend on on the ignoraunt, e on them that erre thour of eternal saluation vnto al them

e ont ot the Wapye, foralmuche as he hym

ynkull. N

1 And for p same linkirmitie he is bounde to offer fo sinnes, alwell for hym selfe, as for the people.

4 And no man taketh the Honour bnto hym selfe, but he that is talled of God, as Was Aaron.

5 Euen lo, Christ allo glorified not hym selfe to be made p bye priest: but he that

pfal . b. sapde vnto hym, thou art my sonne, to
Altes xi e Day haue J begotten thec(gauc it hrm.)

6 As he laith also in another place: thou
Hebrib art apriest for euer, after the order of

. Melchiledech. s *

co) pene: 7 „Which in the dapes of his fleshe, when agen ae. He had ofkered vp prayers and lupplicanch n, TONS With © strong crying and teares, bee vnto hym that was able to laue hym
Gf blood.

selfe allo is compaficd with infirmitic. .

that obey hm: ;

10 And is talled of God an hye priest af:

ter the order of Meichiledech.

Ol whom we haue many thynges to sav, and harde to be vttered, seing ve are dull of hearyng. 1
12 For When as toncernyng the tyme, ve O

ought to be teachers, pet haue pe nede againe that we teache pou the first prin-

tiples of the begynnyng of the worde of

God, and are become {uch as haue nede n of*mylke, and not ol strong meate.

3 Fozeucry ont that bleth mplke, is vnexpert of the worde or righteoulnes, for he is a babe.

14 But strong meate belongeth to them that are perkette, tuen thole whiche by reason of vst, bane their wittes exertised to disterne both good and ore The

II

to the

Hebrewes.

—ä

C XXX.

q The vj. Chapter.

He proceadeth in reprouyng them, and erhorteth them not to kant. bu be sledkast and pacient, is toralmuch as God is ture in hig n e

Herefore leauyng the
PAY Doctrine of the begynbh ect inpng © of Chaitte, let
(ps go foorth buto per-
Aahkection, not taping az
Y Sse igapue the foundattd of
— a vepentaunce from dead workes, and of fapth towarde God,

2 Okthe dottrine ok baptilmes, and of laying on of handes, and of resurrection ofthe dead, and of eternall indgement.

sb. Ad this wyll J do, yk God permit. advice. 4. For it tan not be that they which were onte lighted, and haue tasted of the hea-

0 whereby cp apcare u pou are
P perswauo of lplt = uflastpng-

.. of the holy ghost,

5 And haue tasted of the good worde of

God, and the powers of the worlde to

tome:

0 And they fall away, shoulde be reun-

xd, ed agapne into repentaunce, hauyng trucitied to the selues the sonne of God
à fresshe, and made a mocke ol hym.

7 FJor the earth which drynketh in the rapue that tonuneth oft vppon it, and

bringeth foorth hearbes meete for them by whom allo it is dressed, receaueth blesspng of God:

3 Wut that grounde whithe beareth thornes and bryers, is reproued, and is pe vuto curfpng, whole ende is to be banned

9 Meuerthelesse deare frendes, we haue perswaded our selues better thynges of
‘pou; and thynges whiche accompante faluation, though we thus speake.

ried

eO this Melchisedech kyng

of Salem, priest of the most
5 OS Hye God, who met Abraham
J returnyng from the flaugh-

uenly gyft, and were become partalers

16e. 10 Foz God is not vuryghteous, to for-

The. vi Chapter.

get pour worke at labour of loue, whiche ve haue shewed towarde his name, haz uyng nunistred to the saintes, and do] minister.

n Pea and we delice that euery one of pou do shewe the same diligence, to the full assuraunte of hope, vn the ende,

12 That ye faynt not, but be folowers of them which through fayth and paci- so aue ence inherite the pronnses. akte thie

13 Foz when God made promise to A- va. ne braham, because he had no greater to sweare by, he sware by hym telfe,

14. Saping: Surely, blesspng J wpll mi thee, and multiplipng, unutiplic

Nee.

5 And lo after that he had taryed paciently, he enioped the promise.

16 For inen veryly fiveare by the greater, and an oth foz confirmation, is to E. ci them an ende of all stryle.

17 JMherein God wyllyng very Haboun- D dauntly to shewe vnto the heires olpro- Kae we, mile, the stablenesse of his tounsaple, he rn tonfirnied by anoth: exeepte he

18. That by two innnntable thynges, were. in whicheit was vnpolsible foz God to se om, lpe, we mpabt haue a strong confotatt n yin on

on, which haue fledde to holde fast the hope layde before vs:

19 Which hope; we holde as an ancker of the soule both sure and stedfast, and entryng in, into that thing which is within the vaple:·

20 Whyther the forerunner is for vs entredleuen) Jesus, after the order of Melchisedech made da priest for euer. Hebt. vii. a.

Gene. xi. c.

1 he compareth the priesthood ol Chrille vnto Melchiledech, 1: allo
Christes priellhood wich the Leuites.

ter of the kynges, and blessed hym:

2 To whon allo Abrahani gauc tythe of all thynges, first being called by interpretatio hing of rightedusnes, k after!

R allo,

allo, kyng of Salem, which is, kyng of eae.
. Without h father, Without mother,

(a) So cal

led, becausc 3 5 cu works Without kynne, baupng neither beginnend od nyng ok dayes, neither ende of ipfe, but kerle, lpkened vnto the fore of God, and conben lone tinueth a priest for cuer. feet end. . Mowe conider Howe great this man aa cbt was, vnto whom allo the patriarche Abiicle wer braham gaue tythe ol the spoyles. ce wennde e. 5 And verplp' they which are of the hil gent Dien of Leute, which reteaue the office been ob the patefthood, haue acommaundebono cher. ment to take tythe of the people atcorde denne Dyng to the laibe, that is, ok their brezone. thzen, though they cane out of p lopues of Abraham.
6 But he whole kynrede is not counted among them, receaued tythe of Abra-
Dany and bleffed hym that had the pro-
7 And without all tontrouersie, the lesse

is blessed of the better.

3 And here men that dye, receaue tithes:

but there he lreceaueth them of whom it is witnessed that he lyueth.

9 Andto sapthe trueth, Leuie allo wht che reteaucth tythes, payed tythes in
Abraham. 0

10 Jor he was yet in the loynes of his faz am „when Melchisedech met Abzaam. 75 * ; a

Romie, II J therefore perfection. was by the

Galat. ili. c. priesthood the people reteaued the law)
What neded it furthermoze that another priest shoulde rife alter the order of
Melthisedech, and not to be talled after the order of Aaron-

12 For yf the priesthood be translated, of neeeflitic also there is made a translation of the lawe. ; .

13 Jor He of whom thele thynges are spoken, parteyneth vnto another tribe, of which no man stoode at the aulter.

Mathia. 14. For it is euident that our Lord sprong
C out of Juda, ot which tribe spake Moyses nothyng concernyng priesthood:

15 And it is pet a farre moze euidẽt thing,

priẽsthood of p Leuites (For vnder that

pfatter the fimilitude of Melchiledech there aryse another priest,
16 Which is not made after the lawe of the carnall tommaundement, but after the power of the endlesse lyke:
17 Fox he testifieth that thou art a prtett an b. for euer, after the order of Melchisedec h.
18 For there is truelp a difanuiling of the commaundement goyng before, kor the weahkenesse and vuprokitablenesse ther-

ok.

19 For the awe made nothyng perfect, Rom vin but (was] the bryngyng in of a better h. hope, by the whiche we drawe nygh vnto God.

20 And in as much as that was not with- ‘ ont an oth (Foz those priestes were made without an oth:

21 But this priest with an oth, by hym that saide vnto hin: The Lod ware Pat cxa, and wyll not repent, thou art a priest for tuer, after the order ol Melchiledech.)

22 My fo much was Jesus made a suertie zp of à better testament. g

23 And among them manp were made priestes, because they wert forbidden by death to endure.

24 wut this man, betaule he endureth

euer, bath an buchanngeable priest- e

000. e e
25 Wherelore he is able also euer to saue ms hae them to the vttermost that come vnto „e
God by hym, seyng he euer lyueth to hann make intertession foz them. Fa
26 For suth an hye prick became vs, whi che lis) holy, harmelesse, vndefpled seperate frontfinners, and made hygher then heauens: .
27 Whiche nedeth not dayly, as thole hie priestes, to offer vp sacrifite, first for his Laut ir dwne sinnes, and then for the peoples: for that dyd he onte, when he offered vp hym selfe. ef f N
28 For the lawe maketh men bye priestes ker
Whith haue inkirmitie: but the word of the off) which (was) after the lawe (mae keth) the sonne, whiche is perfecte for euerniore.

¶ The

CXXXX.

uenaunt.

8 Ut of the thinges whih che we haue spoken, this 13) p sunune:“ we haue {uch an bye priest
N that sitteth on ß ryght hand of p throne of the
= matettie in the heaues,
2 Amimister ot holy thynges, and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord pight, and not man.

3 For tuerp Hye priest is ordeyned to of: fer gyftes and satrifices: Mherelfore it is ok necessitie, that this man haue fomewhat alfo to offer.

4 FJeor he were not a priest, yf he were on the earth, seyng there are priestes that

dA tcordyng to the lawe offer gyftes,

cool. ic. Who serue vnto the example and sha-

lebe xa. doe of heaueulp thinges, as Moyles was admonished of God, when he was about to finishe the tabernacle: Foz fee, faith he, that thou make all thynges actordyng to the patterne shewed to thee

in the mount.

6 Wut nowe bath he obtepned amoze

% erxtellent office, by Howe much also he is

the mediatour ok a better coucnaunt,

whiche was confirmed in better promi-

ses. ‘
7 Foz pf that first ccouenaunt) had ben founde fautlesse, then shoulde no place

DNN

o. v. d.

He first couenauntthen had verplpe iustifipng ordinauntes, seruinges of God, and worldlye holpnesse.

ce Foz there was a fore tabernacle made,

holp.

wut after the @ seconde vaple was] a tabernacle, which is called holpest of al:
Nees 4. Which had the golden senser, and the arke of the conenaunt ouerlaide rounde about with golde, wherin was the golden pot haupng Manna, and Aarons rodde that had budded, and 'the tables of the concnaunt:

; he. viij. Chapter.

s he prouech the abolicchyng at well of the Leuiticall priesthood. as of the olde couenaunt, by the cpirituall and euerlastyng priesthood of. Chritte, sand 2 5 newe co

haue ben sought for the feconde. f
8 Formrebinyng them, he laith: We- it holde the dayes conte, saith the Loz, O Ter le, and J wyll finishe vppon the houle of ore
Israel and vppon the honse of Juda ach ne
à newe couenaunt: r
9 Not lyke that that J made with their ed fathers, in the day When J toke them zen ga by the hande, to leade thein out of the deten lande of Egypt: becaule they continued ©" not in my conenaunt, and J regarded them not, faith the Lorde. lo Forthis is the coucnaunt that J wyll make with the Houle of Ilrael after those dapes, saith the Lord, geuyng my lawes into their mpnde, and in their heart J wyl write them, and J wyll be to them a God, and they shalbe to me a people. ö D
11 And they shall not © teach euery man © Buss his neyghbour, and euerp man his bro- de doigew

cher, faping, knowe the Lorde: for all woe we
Mali knowe me, from the litte of them e wnowe to the great of them. deen were
12 For J Wyll be mercyfull to their vn- dye” righteousnes, and their sinnes and their iniquities wyll I thynke vpon no moze,
13 In that he fapth a newe scouenaunt he hath worne out the first: For that which is worne out and waxed olde, is redie to vanishe away. f

The. ix. Chapter.

Howe that the ceremonies and tacrikices of the lawe are abolilsbed, n by the eternitie and perfection of Christes facrifice,

5 And duer it, the Cherubins of glorle, shadowyng the mertie seate: Of which thynges we can not nowe speake particulerlie.

6 When thele thynges were thus ordeyned, the priestes went al wayes into the first tabernacle, attonplishyng the lernice of God. 1

But into 5 setonde (went) the hye priest Tea. . alone once euerp pere, not without C blood, Which he offered for hym selfe, k K pee“ for the ignorauncies of the people. 1

8. The holy ghost this lignilipng, that nam n; the ware of holy thinges was not pet une avo

opened, Whyle as pet the first taberna- gere

cle was standyng: map of ae
9 Whiche (was) afinulitude for the tyme ce, gerne, then preset, in Which 1775 offred giktes caso

3 ij and cares inte.

andfacrifices, that coulde not make the

worshipper perfect as parteining to the

tonsciente,
Io Mith only meates and drynkes, and
Diners walshynges, and iustifiynges of the flesshe, which were lapde bp vntpll the tyme of reformation.

Wut Chuste beyng come an hye prie st of good thynges that shoulde be, bya greater and more perfect tabernacle, not made with handes, that is to fay, not of this buyldyng, 5
2 Meither by the blood of Goates and

Calues: but by* his owne blood he en-

tred nonce into the holy place, x founde

eternall redemption. >
Loui. xvi c. 3 For it the blood of Oxen € of Goates,
Gagen pet Ard the asches ofa ane died Bur lyng the vncleane, sanctifieth to the pus cone kikiyng okthe flesshe: . igen dio 14 Howe much moze the blood of Chziste,

Hebr. vi. dl. II

i. Pet. i. b.

Chzist 5 true

pice. The Ae uittcol priesic

und therefore ld onip repʒe

holpnesle: bu

which throngh the eternall spirite offered hymn selfe without {pot to God, Malt purge pour tonstiente frõ dead wozkes, to serue the lyuypng God:

batte dar 15 Aud for this caule is he the mediatour

t
Thrift bp one

at beltut.
1. I im. il. a.

of the newe touenaunt, that through death, which was for the redeuption of the transgressions that were) vnder

the first touenaunt, they whiche are cals

led myght rectaue the promise of cter-

nall inheritaunte. <>

Cis For where as is a testament, there mut allo of necessitie be the death of him that maketh it.

17 For a teltament is confirmed when men are dead: for it is vet ok no value, as long as he that maketh the testamẽt

is alyuc.
18 Foz which cause allo, neither the firste

The. x. Chapter.

Che olde lawe had no power to clenfe away linne, io but Christe dyd it with ofleryng of his body once foz all. 22 And exhortation to receaue the goodnelle ol God thankkullp, with pacience and stedlast layth.

1 Orthe lawe, haupng
Eoloifit, e. the c chadow of good
Hebr vita thynges to conte, and

not the very fathion of the thinges the selues, tan neuer with those atrifites Whiche they offer pere by pere continually, make the coimmers there vnto perfect. —
2 Foz woulde not then those tlacrifices) haue teassed to haue ben offred, becaufe

of the ipucip paterne to coine.

ltestamenty was Dedicated without blood.

19 For when Poples had spoken euery precept to all the people atcording to the la we, takpng the blood of Calues and of Goates, with water 1 Wooll and plope, he sprynkled both the booke it selke, and all the people, =

20 Saping: This (is) the blood of the kad b. testament, whiche God hath eniopned vnto pou. > £ Fig

a And lyke wile he spunkled with blood both the tabernacle, and all the beffels ok the ministerie.

22 And almost all thynges are by p lawe pourged with blood, and without sheddyng of blood is no remission. —

23 It is neede then that the paterne of heauenly thynges, be purified with such thvnges: but the heauenlythynges thé selues (be purified) with better sacrikites then are those. 8

24 For Christe is not entred into the holy A&eaxvis places made with handes (which are) pa- = ternes of true thpuges : but into heauen G it selke, nowe to appeare inthe syght of hn ü
God forbs.

25 Mot that he shoulde offer him selke © Ste often, as the hye prick entreth into the ee holy places euery pere in straũge blood: dae ches

26 (For then nut he haue often suffred endesa, fence the foundation of the worde) ut ve. nowe onte in the ende of the world hath he appeared, to put away finne, by the satrifite of hym selfe.

27 And as it is appoynted vnto men once to dyt, and after this the iudgement:

28 Euen so, Christe once offered to take vy
Away the finnes of many, the feconde , Perm. time shalbe seene without sinne, ol them which wapte for hym vnto saluation.

that the offerers once pourged, choulde

haue had no move conftiente of fines:

3 Meuerthelesse, in thole (acritices) is mention made of sinnes euery pere.

4 Peor it is not possible that the blood of a re t of Goates shoulde take albay innes.

5 wWherkore when he tommeth into the worlde, he faith :* Sacrifice and offring P thou wouldest not haue, but a body Hatt thou ordepned me. In

6 In burnt facvifices & sume (oßerynges) thou hast had no pleasure.

7 Then layde J, io J come (In the begynnyngokthe booke it is written of me) to do thy wyll O God.

8 Aboue when he faith, thatfacrifice, and offeryng, and burnt offeringes, and

sinne lolerynges; thou wonldest not, nei-

ther haddest pleasure (therein; (Which are offered by the lawe:)
9 Then layde he, lo J come, to do thy wyll, O God, He taketh away p fir ©
1 ko fablpthe the © setonde. dend 10 In p which wyll we are made holy, fuellen by the offerpng of the body of Je-
{us Christe once for all. n Aud euery priest standeth dayly nunistryng, c offeryng oktentymes the fame sacrifices, whiche tan neuer take away sinnes. |
1 But this man, after he hath offered one facrifice for sinnes, is fit downe for eben. d. euer on the ryght hande of God:
2 13 From hencetoorth tarping tpl his foes ens. be madc his footstoole.
14. Foz with one offeryng hath he made perfite for euer them that are sanctified.
15 And the holy ghost allo beareth vs recorde: For after that he tolde before,
16 This is the couenaunt that J wyil make buto them after those dapes,
(fapth the Lorde) geuyng my lawes in their heart, and in their myndes wyl J
Write them:
17 And their sinnes and iniquities wpll
J remember no more,
18 And where remission of these thinges lis) therelis j no moze offering for sinne.
D 19 Maupyng therefore brethren, libertie to

) Tat is, funkt, N
10 Which ts,

wb enter into holy (places) in the o blood ot
Rat i Jelus,

mamta: 20 By the new and © lpulng wap, which who he hath prepared for vs through the eden bayple, that is to fay his flesshe: lcd 21 And (feyng we haue) an hye priest oner

Walihed in body with pure water.

23 Let vs holde the prolession of the hope without wauerpng, (kor he is fapthfull

that promised:) '

24 And let vs consider one another to prouoke vnto lone and good workes,

25 Mot forsakyng the aslemblyng of our

a

CXXXII.

selues together, as the mauer of some lis but exhortyng one (another) and so E
0 the moze, as ye {ee the dax appro-

26 Jor pf we sinne wyllyngly after that Math-xiid. we haue receaned the Huwiledge of che 1 trueth, chere remayneth no moze facie fice fo2 sumes:

27 But & fearefull lokyng fo2 of indgement, and violent fire, whiche Mali denour the aduersaries. | .

28 e that despiseth Moyles lawe, dyeth alll mercie c vnder two or thre Wits Deut ed

es: at. x vili. c

29 Ok howe muche sorer punpche nent
(suppose pe) (hall he be Worth, Whiche treadeth vnder foote the foune of Godand tounteth the blood of the touenaũt wherein he was fanctified, an vnholpe
Matte and Doth despite to the spirite of

ate

30 Foz we knowe hym that hath fayoe, + vengeaunte (belongeey) vnto me, J wy Deut zr. 4. render faith the Lorde: Andagapne, N the Lorde shall iudge his people. aa

31 It is a fearefull yng to fall into the handes of the lyuyng God.

32 Call to reniẽbraunce the fosiner dayes, in the which after pe had receaued light ve endured a great fyght of aduerlitics:

33 Partly Whyte ye were made a galing ftocke, both by reproches & afflictions, and partiy whyle pe became companions of them whiche were fo tolled to æ

fro.

34. Jor ve suffred allo with my bondes, k toke in woorth the spoylyng of your G goodes with gladnesle: knowyng in pour selues hob that ye haue in heauen
A better and an endurpng substaunce.

5 Cast not awape therefore pour confidente, which bath great recompence of rewarde.

36 For pe haue neede of patience, that at ter pe haue done the wyll of God, ve myght receaue the promife.

37 Fo2 peta very litle whyle, and he that
(hall come, wpll come, and wyll not fap. ; Abacuc. iba

38 And 'the iuste (hall lpue by fayth: And Rom. ia.

f He wiüͤhdrawe hym selfe, my soule Gala. ab. hall haue no pleasure in hym. —

39 We are not of them that withdraawe our selues vnto perditian: but we parae vnto fapth, to the wynning of the

Dulce.

BR tj ¶ The

what fayth is, and a commendation ol the fame. without farth we can please God. 6 Che stedlast beliele of the fathers in olde tyme, ad sat

Ayth is the grounde of
* AY thpnges hoped for, the eui-
% 2, dence of thynges not {eene,
(a) houe ben 2 75 ' ) F02 by it, the elders 09 ob-
1 A tapned a good report.
Through fayth, we vnderstande that the worldes were ordeined by the Word of God, and that thynges whiche are feenc, were made of thynges whiche were not seene. a
Aaxie. 4° y fayth Abel offered vnto God a
Romie more excellent sacrifice then Cain: by ah Stent Whiche he was witnesled to be © ryghtedus, God testifipng of his gyftes: by

saluation. 2

God cectaucd

him to merep.

wetachem Which allo he beyng dead, pet speaketh.

mates. 5 By kapth was Enoch transated, that

Spank, he shoulde not see death, neither was he

Ecclaelun. b founde, for God had taken hym away:
Jor afore he was talten awap, he was reported of to haue pleased God.

6 Wut without fayth it is vnpossible to please hymn: Foz he that cõmeth to God, must beleue that God is, and that he is
à rewarder of them that lecke him.

Saen 7 Wp fayth Moc beyng warned of God e. fthinges not leene as pet, moued with reuerente, prepared the arke to the la-

Marhaira, Upug of his house, through the whiche

larkeshevcondenpned the Worlde, and

becanie heive of the righteoumes Which is by fapth. N *

Aan an 8 egy fayth * Abraham when he was er vn. called, obeyed, to go out into a place

whiche he shoulde afterwarde reteaue

to iuherttaunce: and he went ont, not knowyng whyther he shoulde go.

9 By fuyth he reimoued into the lande of

pronuse, as into a straunge countrep,
Whe he had dwelt in tabernacles, with

et and Jacob, heires with hym of th

e same promise:
10 For he loked fora atic hauyng a foundation, Whole buplder and maker is od.

G ° N
Gene. xi Though fayth alfo Sara her selfe
C reteaued strength to tonceaue seede, and was delynered of a chylde WHE che was past age, betause Aye iudged Hymn faythfull which had promiled.
11 And therkore sprang there of one, cuen

The. xj. Chapter.

of one whiche was as good as dead * lo Gene. xva. many} in multitude, as are the starres in the skye, and as the sande the whicht is by the fea shore innumerable. ,

13 Thele all dyed according to fayth, not 6

hauing reteaued the promiles, but seing thema farre of, and beleuyng, and lalutyng, and conkessyng that they were S

B

straungers and pilgrimes on the earth. Pon,

14. Jor theythat faye suche thynges, declare that they seke a countrey. 2D

15 Allo yt they had ben mpnof{ull of that
(countrep! from whente they tame ont, they had leasure to haue returned: .

16 But nowe they desire a better, that is, à heauenlp. Wherefore God is not ashamed of them ; to be called their God, kxod. if for he bath prepared for them a citie.

17 y fayth Abraham offered vp Jlaat gen

when he was proued: and hee that ( f had receaued the promises, offered vp aa his onip begotten sonne: e

18 To whom it was saide, that in Jsaac weer eo coe shall thy seede be talled. nen.

19 For he tonsidered that God was abie to rayse the dead vp agaync, frõ Whence also he rectaued hym in a sinulitude (oF the relurrection.] 6

20 y kayth did Plaac blesse Jacob and G. n

Elan, tonternyng thynges to cone.
21 Ay fapth Jacob when he was a Dying, blested both the sonnes of Joseph, G cic and worchypped to warde the toppe of his scepter. : i
22 Hy fayth Joseph when he dyed, re- C a membred the departyng of the chyl-

dren of Israel, and gaue commaundement ot his bones.

By fayth Moyles whe he was boone, gan was hyd three monethes of his father Aa v and mother, betause they sawe he was
à proper chyide, neither feared they the kynges tcommaundement. N
24 Wp kapth Doyles when he was g. sis. great, refuted to be called the fonne of |

Pharaos daughter: 5
25 €hofpng rather to suffer aduersitie

with the people of God, then to enioye

the pleasures of finne for a season:
26 Esteemyng the rebuke of Chait, over |

ment, to fos crifice bis son.

foe,
ö:

ter riches, then the treasures of Egypt:
Fo2 he had respect vnto the retompence of the rewarde.

sodxiif 27 y fayth he forsoke Egypt, fearpng

not the wrath of the kyng: soz he endured, cuen as though he had seene him
Which is inuisible. *
Through fapth he ordeyned the Pal: souer and the effusion of blood, lest he that destroyed the first borne, shoulde touche them. ede. 29 By fapth, they palled through the

yodxind 28

redde lea, as by drye lande: which the

Egyptians aslaying to do, were drow-

ned. ,

ole vie. 30 My fapth, the walles of Jericho fell
Dowie, after they were compalled about seuen dayes.

facia. 31 y fayth, the harlot Nahab perished not with them that were difobedient, when she had reteaued the spyes with

peace. —
32 And what shall more say? fo2 the tyme woulde fayle me, to rehearse of
Gedeon, of Warat, and of Sampfon,

CxxXII iE

ned the proniiles, topped the monthes 2 «; ofthe Lions, Cees a

34 *Quenched the violence of kyre, el. tee caped the edge of the [Worde, ont of dan.
Weakenesse were made strong, wared valiant in fyght, turned to flyght the arnues of the aliantes.

35 The Women receaued their dead, 1 oe rapsed to lyfe agayne: Other were ra ked, not lokyng lor delineraunce, that they might rectauc a better resurrectiõ.

36 And others were tryed with mockynges, and stourgynges: Bea, norcouer
With bondes and prilonment:

37 They were stoned, were hewen az 3 Reg.rrb, funder, were tempted, were Haine with kb. sWord, wandred about in sheepstzinnes, and goates skinnes, beyng destitute, af: flicted (and) tormiented:

38 - Ol whõ the worlde was not worthie:

They wandred in wildernesse, and in niountapnes, and in dennes, and canes

of the earth. 5

39 And these all through fapth, obteyned good report, and receaued © not the c ce der

ud Vi. a. dba, andok Jephte, ok Dauid allo and Pronilt: e es ll. Samuef, and ok the prophetes: 40 God prouidyng a better thyng for bs, agi dez y. 33 Which though falth subdued king- that they without vs shoulde not be b re
Domes, wrought righteoulnesse, obtey- made perkect. | Plated . grt — 1s = ae asthepe
(. N JThe xi Chapter.

In exhortation to be patient and stedkalt in trouble and aduertitie. vpon hope of elierlastyng rewarde. 25 A commiendation of the newe Teltament aboue the olde, -

* 5 Herfore, seyng that we

is that presseth downe, e the finne that bang? eth so fast on, let vs run with . buto the battayle that is set before vs:

2 Tohkpng vnto Jelus, the taptapne and finifther of our fayth, which for the toy. that was fet befoze hynt, endured the trosse, hauyng dispiled the thame, and is fet Dolvne*on the ryght hande of the throne of God. f

3 Consider therfore hym that endured fuch speakyng agayust hym of sinners, left pou shoulde be werped, fapntyng in pour myndes.

4 Be haue not yet resisted vnto blood, stryuyng agapnst sinne. ö

great a dloude of Witnesses, lay alvap all

denping
Alclocg, ¢ ae

0 fos mt

dem,

phe id.

dlass. iii. a. lebr. i. a.

0 are. compassed with so

5 And pe haue forgotten the erhortatiõ, which spcaketh vnto you as vnto chpldren: My sonne delpilse not thou the chastenyng of the Lorde, neither faynt when thou art rebuked of hym:

6 Jor whomthe Lord loueth, he chasteneth, and scourgeth euccy sonne that he receaueth. a —

7. Il pe endure chastenyng, God offerech him lelfe as vnto sonnes: Tor What sonne is he whom the father chattencth not-

3 But yk pe be without chastisinent, wherok all are partakers, then are pe bastardes, and not sonnes.

9 Furthermore, we haue had fathers of our fleshe, which corrected bs, and we gauc them reuerente: Shall we not then much rather be in subiection vnto the father of spirites, and lyue:

10 Foz they verply, for a fewe dapes,

chastened

chastened vs after their oswne pleasure: but he, lor our profite that we myght be partakers of his holyncsse.

1 No chastisyng fo: the present seemeth tobe ioyous, but grecuous: Neuerthelesse, afterwarde it bryngeth the quiet fruite of ryghteoulnesse, puto thé which are exertiled therby. N

Elan. 12 Strapghten bp therfore the handes which were let downe, and the weake
Buecs:

3 And make ryght steppes vnto pour

feete, left that Which is haltyng turne ou out of the wap: but let it rather be

Folowe peace with all men, and holpnesle, without the Which, no man Mall fee the Lorde:

15 Cakpng heede that uo man fall away from the grace of God, left any roote of bitternesle spryungyng vp, trouble pou, and therby many be dekpled.

16 Let there be no fornicator or vncleane perfor, as Esau, Which for one morsell of meate, solde his birthryght.

17 FJor pt knowe, howe that akterwarde

9 0 Thel haltpng, pat!
Ape declared thtir slowneg, a ene theit wicouftancie

in doctrine: 14 thecfoze they wett in bondage ta be punished.

Gcu. xx v. d

when he woulde haue inherited the

blesspng, he was reprobated: For he founde no place of repentaunte, though he sought it with teares.
12 183 For ve are not come vnto the * mount t) whiche enight be toncove fre: and vnto fozme and Darkenefle, and ot unn, tempestes of weather ee a 1 And foutide ofa trompe, g the voyte of tt wordes: Which voce they that heard

Gen. 27. f.

Exod. x x. e

not be spoken to them:
20 (For they dyd not abpde that which

~The Epistle

that is touched, e vnto burnyng fyre,

it, wilshed away, that the worde chould

was tommaunded. If a beast touche xo the mountame, it shalbe stoned, or thrust through with a darte.

21 And fo terrible was the fyght which

appeared, that Doyles sapde, I feare and quake.) n
22 But pe are come vnto b mount Sion, and tothe citie ot the lyuyng God, the telestiall Hierusalem, and to an innunierable companie of © Angels, Bein ot
23 Aud buto the congregation of the first sts thea. borne, written in heaüen, and to Goo be the iudge ot all, and to the {pirites of inst and perfect men: .
24 And to Jelus the mediatour of the
58 Coal te 15 to the blood of sce punkipng, that speaketh better then eben. that of Abel. ’ den Cent,

25 Set that pedelpile not hym that spea- ©

keth: For pf they escaped not, which rez fused bpm that spake on earth: much more shall We (not etcape) pf We turne awap front hym that (cpeaketh) from heauen: 5

26 Whose voyte then Moke the earth, c

nowe hath declared, laping: Bet once moze wyll J hake, not the earth only, but also heauen.

27 And this ( vet once moze} signifieth remouyng of thofe thynges which are haken, as of thynges which are made: that the thynges Which are not Haken,

map remapne.

28 Wherkore, we reteauyng a kingdome

which can not be moued, let vs haue grace, wherby we may so serue God acteptablie, with reuerente de godly feare. Peuc ia.

29 For our God lis) 4 © consumpng kpre. trap echt
. sell hem.

The. xiij. Chapter.

sHe maketh vs vnto loue, r to holpitalitic, 3 to thynne bps such as be in aduertitie.

4to mapntapne wedlocke, 5 to auopde couetoulnesse.

to make much of them that

preache Gods worde, 9 to beware of straunge learnpng 13 to be content to fuffer rebutie with Christ, ij to be thankful nto god, 17 a obedient onto our gouernours.

A et brotherip loue ton-
1 8 . tinue. bd. N Be not forgetfull to i Tim. u. b. lodge straungers: Foz
Gen. xix a. eT. therby fome baupng~

@ ilopged Angels, were

vnawares therof.

3 Remember them that are in bondes, as bounde with them: And them which

suffer aduerfitic, as allo pe pour selues

beyng in the body (Cuffered aduertitte ].

Wedlocke is honozable among all men, and the bed budefiled:25ut whozemongers and adulterers God Wpll iudge.

5 Let pour connersatton be without co uetousnesse, beyng content with fuch ls 1 thynges as ve haue. For he Hath sayde: 1 el.
J Wy ll not fayle thee, neither forlake thee. ° 50

to there

6 So that we map boldely sape, the
Lorde is my helper, and J wyll not feare what man may do vnto me.

7 Remember them which haue the o-

uerspght of you, which haue spoken vn-

to pou the worde of God: vohose ende of

conuerfation ee tonsideryng, folowe their fapth. a .

abe. 8 Jjesus Chetlte pelterdap and to dap,

d „

th

alben blood is brought into the holy place by ln khe hie priest for fine, are burnt withsthanke(ge? gut the tentes.

at z Let vs go foorth therfore vnto hym ad no peet e *

in C4 Jor here haue we no continupng citie: but we seke one to come, —

15 By hym therfore, do we offer lacrifice

of laude alwapes to God: that is, the fruite of lippes confessyng his name.

rewes. ci

fo2* with such facrifices God is pleased. g
A Obep them that haue the ouersight K, . of you, and subnut pour selues: for they Pane
Watche for pour soules, as they that? P..

must geucaccomptes, that they may do

it with ioy, and not with griefe: fo2 that

is vnprofitable for you.

18 2 5 5 112 trust we haue a

niciente, in all thynges wyllyn to lyue honestlie. We

19 ah desire pouthe moze earnestlie that pe lo do, that J may be restored to pou the fooner,

20 The God of peace, that bronght a- 1D gapne from the dead our e
“the great sheephearde of the heepe, Rae 4 b through the blood of the euerlastyng co- losuc. . uenaunt, 8 Peter. v. a.

21 Make pou perfect in all good workes to do his wyll, workyng in pou that which is pleasaunt in his fight, through
Pelus Christe, to who be prayse fog

tuer and euer. Amen. 5

22. And I beleche vou brethren, luffer the worde of exhortatlon: for J haue written vnto pou in fewe wordes. 8

23 Rnobe pe, that brother Limothe is delpuered: with whom (pf he conte shortly) I wyll {ee you.

24. Salute all theni that haue the ouer-

fight ol pon, and allthe fates. They of

Italie salute pou.

o distribute forget not, 25 Grate be with vou all. Amen. ain ¢ a tale bp Timotheus, JY

$a The Epiftle of Saint fame.

% The first Chapter.

C2 be erhorteth fo reiopce in trouble, «to be feruent in praper, with ttenfatt beliete,
17 to loke fo; all good thynges from aboue, 21 to fortake ali vice, and thankfully to receaue the worde of God, 22 not only hearyng it, a speakyng of it, but to do thers

after in dede. 27 what true religion is.

Anies a sernaunt of God, and of the yAtozde Jesus Christ,
5 to 10 ba 0 c which are stattre
Coe abroade, greetyng.
2) soy byethzen,
: itount it all top Whe
* Ape fall into diners emptations:

rene W the trying of our fayth worketh patience:
4. p And let patience haue (her) perfect

obxlii.a, f apl. a. 3 om. y. 2.

lackyng nothyng.

5 a any ofpoulacke wildome, let him alke of God, that geueth to all men tne e n. differentlie, and calteth no man in the Mah ana.

teeth: and it shalbe genen hym. Luk. xi b.

6. But let hym alke in fapth, nothyng
Waucrpug: Foz he that Waucreth, is like a waue of the sea, tost of the wynde, and taryed with violence. .

Neither let that man thyuke that he shall reteaue any thyng of the Lorde.

83 Adouble mynded man, (is] vnstable in all his wapes.

wonrke, that pe may be perfect efounde, Let the ae e

gane ' in thathers™ cralted: g compome of 10 Agapne, the riche, in that he is made lowe: Wecause as the flolwre of the grasse he shall passe away.
‘Foz the sunne hath rysen with heate, and the grasse hath withered, and his flowre hath fallen awap, ¢ the beautie

Deter. l. d. 1

of the fathion of it bath perished: So

alfo fhall the ryche man fade away in his wapes. f

ordered appe-

ne. le he ap man:

au te 14. But euerp man is tempted, when he is drawen a wap, k entised of his one concupiscence.

15 Then, when lust hath conteaued, it

bryngeth foorth sinne: and sinne when it is finished, bryngeth foorth death.
16 Do not erre my deare brethren.
Ci7 w Euery good © geuyng, and euery eee perkect gyft is from aboue, and cometh kom ech. downe fromthe father of lpghtes, with whõ is no variablenes, neither schadow

pl

the first fruites of his creatures. a

19 Wherkore my deare brethrt, let euery pool

man be lwyft to heare, slowe to speake, v slowe to wrath.

20 Jo; the Wrath of man, worketh not that which is ryghteous before God.

21 W herfore, lap apart all filthmesse, Nom xiiig and fuperfluttic of mauiciousnes, and rez Colo teaue with mekenesse, the worde that is graffed in yon, which is able to laue pour soules. £1 a

22 And *be pe Doers of the woe, and not hearers only, deteauyng pour owne Roma b. flues. - Math. vd.

23 Foz yk anp be a hearer ofthe worde, Lax ig.

and not a doer, he is lyke vnto a man beholdyng his bodyly kate in a gaffe: g en-
24. For he hath tonsidere Hymn selfe, and siate, wren is gone his wapes, e hath forgotten im- hone Sue mediatly what his fachion was. bone ene
25 Wut Who so loketh in the perfect lawe Nia d of libertie, and continneth (thcrinj he being not a forgetfull bearer, but a doer of the worke, shalbe blessed in his deede.
26 If any man among vou seeme to be
Devout, and refrapneth not his tongue, but deteaueth his owue heart, this mans deuotton is bayne, ö
27 Purt deuotion and vndekpled before
God and the father, is this: To vilite the katherlesse and widdowes in their aduersitie, and to kepe hym selfe vnspotted of the worlde.

I The ij Chapter.

a} B brethren, haue not

the fayth of our Lorde
(a) Bs ettees Pelis Chziste, the
Bahan ty” Lod of gloric, with
9 5 refpect of persons.

Wearingagolde ryng,clothed in goodly apparell, and there tome in allo a poore man in vile rayment:

3 And pe haue a respett to hym that weareth the gay elothyng, and fay vnto hym, sitte thou here wa good plate:

df say vuto the poore, stande thou there, or fitte here vnder my footestoole:

4 Atre ye not partiall in pour selues, and are made indges of euyll thoughtes:

pour companie a man

seates-
Do not they blaspheme that W good geg name by the Which von are named- ae e, g Ir pe fulfpll the ropal lawe , atcording age to the stripture, thou halt loue thy a 2 neighbour as thy selfe, ye do well: 4 ait
9 But yf ve regarde one person more een too then pres ye 8 15 of the lawe, as gt ; rebuked of th ; 9 5

tome iphe bre

{tle

10 Whosoeuer shal kepe the whole lawe,
Math.v. c. pl pet fayle in one poynt, he is gyltie
O a o
Cu Foz he that lapde, thou shalt not commit adulterie: sayde also, thou shalt not kyll. Though thon do none adulteric, vet yt thou kyll, thou art become a tranlgressour of the lawe.
12 So spcake pe, and so do, as they that
{halbe indged by the lawe of © libertie.
Fo2 he shall haue iudgement without mercie, * that sheweth no mertie: And mercic reioyteth agaynst iudgement. 2»
14 What profiteth it my brethren, though a man fay he Hath fayth, and hath not deedes: Can fapth saue hym-

Dy the
© ef cob, which deltuc- 13 reth DS the cutse of cht laine.

15 If a brother or a sister be naked, and

destitute ol dayly foode,

16 And ont of pon say vnto them, depart in peace, be vou Warmed and fplled:notwithstandpng, ve gene them not those thinges which are nedefull to the body, what shall it profite:

17 Euen so fayth, yf it haue not deedes is dead mit leife:

Dis Wut lome man Wpll fay, thou halt
@) bee fäpth and J hane deedes: shewe me

dtedts are consider ed, ag

CXXXV.

shewe thee my faith by my deedes.
19 n Ae ie 6 70 is one God-
5 ell. The deuyl Z leue, and tremble, . a
— 15 ae eh thou vayne
; hat fayth which is wi

wWonzkes is dead: oa? ,

21 Was not Abraham our father mtificd through workes, when he had offered Ce. b
Plaac his forme vpon the aulter-

22 Deck thou not, howe p faith wrought with his deedes, and throngh ö deedes was the fayth made perkect-

23 And the sermpture was kulkylled which sayth: Abraham belened God, and it Cen b.
Was reputed vnto hym for ryghteonl- Nom.. pee And he was called the kriende of *

24 Kr Pelee then, howe that of deedes a man is iustikied, and not of fayth only.

25 PLykewyle allo, was not Kahab the

harlot iuistified through workes, when Loma n fhe had reteaued the meffengers, and had fent then out another way-
26 Jor às the body without the spirite is dead: euen fo, fapth without workes, ts dead [allo] cy

bes 3) korbiddeth all ambition to seke honour aboue our brethren. 3 He describeth the propertie of the tongue. 15. 15. And what difference there is bet wixt the wit

mong our members, that it defileth the whole body, and fetteth on fyre the Knee

gan wih thy kayth bp thy vdeedes, and J wyll nue sapntg. ; ’ :
The. ij. Chapter. dome ok God, and the wil dome ol the worlde.
A1 nn brethren, be not maut win, nie mailters, Knowyng

to.xvii.a, qhowe that we halt rez

teaue the greater damnation:

Jor in many thynges

2 we sinne all. If a man

beet linne not in word, the fame is a perfect

berate his

aman 3 Weholdt, we put bittes in the horles ine. e monthes, that they may obey vs, and we turne about all the body of them:

4. Bcholde allo p shippes, which though they be lo great, and are dryuen of fierte
Windes, pet are they turned about with
à very small heline, whither soeuer the violence of the gouernour Wyll.

5 Euen sothe tongue is a litle member

allot boasteth great thynges. Weholde

how great a matter a litle fire kindleth.
BG And the tongue is fyre, euen a worlde of wickednesse. So is the tongue {ct a-

man, and able also to bridle all the body.

courfe of nature, t it is let on fpre of hell. a ane

7 All the natures of beastes,æ ol byrdes, and of serpentes, and thynges of the fea, are meeked and tamed of the nature of man: 5

3 Wut the tongue can no man tanie, it is an vnruly cupll full of deadly poyson.

9 Therwith blesse we God the father: C and therwith turle we men, Which are Genid. made alter the similitude of God.

Io Out of one niouth proceadeth biel sing and curfing. My brethren, thele thynges ought not so to be.

11 Doth a fountayne sende foorth at one place, (weete water, and bitter allo- 5

12 Can the fygge tree, my brethren, beare oliue beries? either a vine beare figges:

So can no fountayne gene both fait water and kreshe also.

13 Joho is a wile man, and endned with

knowledge

knoweledge among yous let him (herve his Workes out of good conuerfation
With mekenesse of wildome.

14. But yf ve haue bitter emupng ¢ strike in pour hearte, glorie not, ucither be lyers agaynst the tructh.

Dis Foz such wildome descendeth not frõ

aboue: but is earthlie, sensuall, and deuclishe.

Ice Epistle

r

16 For where emiyng and strife is, there is sedition all maner of euyll workes.

17 But the wildonit that is from aboue, is first pure, then pealeable, gentle, and
— 1 tg 10 full of mercie and ood kruites, without tudgyng, without sunulation: . N

18 Yca, and the fruite of ryghteoulnes is sowen iin peace, of thé that make peace,

J The. iiij. Chapter.

1 Haupng sbewed the cause of all wrong and wickedneffe, and allo of all graces and goodnelle, 4 he erhozteth them to loue God, 7 and lubmit them lelues to hyn, i not speauyng eupll ok their neighbours, i but patiently to depende on

Gods prouidence.

A1 Kom Whence cöneth

warre and fightyng a-

imong pou- coute they

not here Hence, cuen of

r e pour lustes that fight i tous SS in pour members:

He lust, and haue not:

3 Be alke and receaue not, becaule pe

pour lustes.
GdHecatity 4. Pe adulterers € adultresses, knoe baer e pou not howe that the freudthip of the
World is enmitie With God: Whosocuer therfore Wylbe a frieude of the worlde,

seriptur eg, them Which picferrt the

Powe ig made the cnemie of God.

on Either do ye thynke that the scripture
Sener lapth in vapne, the“ spirite that dwelmansbeart, leth in vs, lusteth after enuie: if

6 But (ve lcripture) offereth more grace,
‘aud therefore fapth, God resisteth the proude, but geueth grace vnto p lowlie.

7 Subunt pour selues therkorc to God: i Peter. v. b. = here relist the deupll, and he wyll flee from von.

8 Drawe nye to God, and he wyll drawe upe to pou. Clenst pour handes pe fire ners, and purifie pour heartes pe double mpuded.

9 Suter afflictions, and mourne, and
Weepe: Let pour laughter be turned to mouruyng, and pour toy to heaumesse.

10 Humble pour felues in the fight of the err v.
Lorde, and he shall lylt you vp.

1 Watsbite not one another brethren. He that backbiteth his brother, and he that

indgeth his brother, backbiteth p lawe, and indgeth the lawe: But and yf thou iudge the lawe, thou art not anobleruer of the lawe, but a iudge.

12 There is one lawe geuer, which is ablt to saue and to destrop.· What art Nom xi thou that iudgest another- €

13 Goto nowe ye that fay, © today and Suna to morowe let LS go into luch a citic and dene continue there a pere, and bye and bell,“ and Wynne:

14 And pet can not pe tel what shall happen on the morowe. For what thyng is pour lyfe: It is euen a vapour, that appeareth for a litle tyme, and then he baz nisheth away. 4

15 FJor that ve ought to fay : If the ae
TLorde Wyll, and pf we lpue, let bs do

this or that.

16 But now pe reiopte in pour boastinges:

All such reioptyng is eupll. 4

17 Lherfozre*to hym that knoweth howe rnb.
. do good, aud doth it not, to hym it is

inne.

The a Chapter.

2 He threatneth the wicked riche men, 7 exhorteth vnto patience, 12 to beware of twearpng, 16 one to knowledge his kaultes to another, 20 and one to labour

to bryng another to the trueth.

D to uowe pe riche men, weepe and howit on pour wzetchednesse that Malt
Atome vpon pou,

Bour riches is corrupt,

pour garnientes are niotheaten:
3 Pourgolde and siluer is cankred, and the rust ol them shalbe al witne sse a- zone gaynst you, and shall cate pour sleshe as of gob again it were fpre. Be haue heaped trealure together

cet together in pour © last dapes.

lende 4. Weholde, 'the hire ok labourers, which

jae haue reaped downe pour fieldes, which hire is of pou kept backe by fraude, tryeth: and the tryes of then which haue reaped, are entred into the cares of the

N Howe Sabaoth.

5 Be haue liued in pleasure on the earth, and ben Wanton: He haue nourisshed pour heartes, as in a day of slaughter.

6 He haue condempned and kylled the lust, and he Hath not relisted you.

7 Bc patient therfore brethren, vnto the comming of the Lorde. Weholde, the hulbandman wapteth for the precious fruite ot the earth, and bath long patience thervpon, vntill he receaue the early and the later rapne.

8 We pe also patient therfore, and settle pour heartes, for the conimpng of the
Lorde draweth nye. ;

9 Grudge not one agapnst another brethren, lest pe be dampned: Weholde, the iudge standeth before the doore.

àn ensample of suffering aduersitie, and of patience, which spake in the name ol the Torde. s

Weholde, “ we count the happy which endure, Be haue hearde of the patience of Job, and haue knowen what ende

th. va. gy

pitifull and merciful.

4. eter,anApoftte ax lof Jesus Chit,
Vey ito them that
Oy [Dell here and

there as straungers, through-

AM $4 \ltatia Cappado-
SW 7 RG ta, alia, and e — — ith pia:

a at 2 Elett accordyng tothe © fozeknowWe-

of Saint Lar les. =

Lake my brethren, the prophetes fo:

the Lowe made: Foz the TLorde is very

Cn. But abouc-alithynges ny brethren,
— Che ende of the epistle of Saint James.

We frp epiftle of Saint Peter the eA poftle.
1 The first Chapter.

dut Pontus, Ga- 4.

CXXXVI.
"Meare not, neither by heauen neither MIA by earth, neither any other othe: Let pour“ pea, be pea, and pour nay nap, Oda e left pou fall into condempuation. am ties

B Js any among you afflicted: let hyim = pay. Is any meryztet him sing psalmes. be

14 Js anp dileased among your let hym ee cali fo the elders of the Churche, and a tom se let them pray for him, and anuopnt him eacthoune
With ople in the name of the Lorde: gute on the

15 And the prayer of fapth Mall saue wan r the sicke, and the Lorde hall raise hum an. ese vp: and pf he haue conumtted sinnes, they shalbe forgeuen hym. b

16 Knowledge your faultes one to a: gy nother, and pray one for another, that ve may be healed: For p feruent prayer ofa ryghteous man auapleth much,

17 Elias was a man onder infirmities euen as we are, and he payed in his prayer that it mpght not rapne: and it; Res 7 rayned not on the earth by the {pace of ee. three peres and fire monethes.

18 And he prayed againe, and the heauen gaue rayne, t the earth brought foorth her kruite.

19 Brethren, pł any of vou do erre from the trueth, and another convert hym,

20 Let the same knowe, that he which tonuerteth the sinner from going astray out of his Wap, shall saue a soule from lt and shall hyde the multitude of

inne

Grace & peace be multiplied vnto pou. Roma
Blessed be God the father of our 1 cure
Lorde Pelus Christe, which accordyng Gas, to his aboundaunt merce begat vs a- n cord. gavne vnto a lyuelp hope, by that that pen.
Jesus Chalke rose agayne from death,
To an inheritaunce imniortall, and een; fabetl not awap, reserued in hrauen for pou,
Which are kept by the polver of God 25 through fayth vnto saluation, which is prepared alredie to be shewed in the last

¥ mie.
6 In the which pe reiopte, though a

for a season (yf nede require) yt are in heauinesse through manifolde temptations:
That the triall of pour fayth, beyng much more precious then golde that pe-

Jobxxiib. xisheth, though it be tried with fyre, db, inpght be founde vnto lande, glone, and
Rom. va. hondur, at the appearpng of Jesus

Christe,
3 Who pt haue not seene, and pet lone lohn g. hyin, in whom euen nowe though pe

see hym not, pet do pou beleue, e reiopte with top vnspeakeable and glorious:

9 Vetceauyng the ende of pour fayth,

5 cuenthe faluation of your soules.

Ades g. 10 Ol Which fatuation haue p *prophetes

Elora. enquired t learched, which prophesied athe of tiie grace that shoulu come vnto pou:

1 Searchyug when or at What tyme the spirite of Christ which was in them, schoulde fignifie, which spirite testified before, the passions that should happen

vnto Christe, and the glorie that shoulde

folowe after. N N
12 nto which prophetes it was allo dedared, that not vnto them lelues, but

vnto vs, they shoulde minister pthinges

which are nowe shewed vnto pou of
Actes. il. a. dowue from heauen, hane in the Golpell preached vnto pow; the thynges
Which the Angels desire to beholde.
13 Wherkoregirde vp the loynes of pour mynde, be sober, and trust perfectly on the grace that is brought vnto pou, by thereuelation of Jesus Chatte:

Luk. xil. c.
Epic. vi c.

14 As obedlent chyldren, not fashionyng

pout selues vnto the former lustes of pour ignoraunce: ae

15 Bult as he which called pou is Holy, .

them, which by the holy ghost sent

Ihe Ppistle

euen so be pe holp also in all mance of comiersation:

16 Betause it is written, * be ve holp, for Lr
J . 10

17 And yk lo be that pe call on the father, which without respect of person iudgeeth accordyng to euerp mans worne, Me. wid fee that ye patie the tynie of pour diet: K <« lyng here, in feare: 57

18 Fozasmuch as pe knowe, howe that D pe Were not redeemed with torruptible thynges, as silutr and golde, front pour

vaync conucrfation which pe reteaued by the tradition of the fathers: ö

19 Wut with the precious blood of Chik, Hebe

as oka lambe vndefiled, e without {pots loan

20 Which was ordeyned bekorchande, euen before the worlde was made, but

was declared in the @ tak tymes *for c when

pour fakes: cco bare
Which by his meanes do beleue on run the

God that raysed hym bp krom death, ah.

and * glozificd hym, that pe might haue habe. b.

fayth and hope towarde God:

22 Euen pe Which haue purified pour sonles through the spirite in obeying the trueth, with brotheriy lone vnkapned, fee that ye loue one another with a pure heart feruentl vpe: 1

23 Jor ve are bone a newe, not of mortal seede: but of immortal, by the worde of
God, which lyueth and lasteth for euer.

24 Jor all fleche is as grasse, and all the cc glorie of man, is as the flowre of grasse. Edin
The grasse withereth, and the flowze * falleth awap:

25 But the worde of the Lorde endureth euer. And this is the worde, which by the Gofpell was preached ynto pou.

The ij. Chapter.

ö I e erhorteth them to lap afide all vice, 4 shewyng that chrifte is the foundation oo whervpon they builac, v The ercellent estate of the Christians. 11 he peapeth them

to abstapne from flechlie tutes, iz to obey the rulers, 18 howe seruauntes shoulde

behaue them lelues to warde their matters, 20 he exhorteth to luller alter the en ·

sample of Christe. a

Herefore lap asyde all
Imaliciousnesse, and all
IN| guile, and fapnednesle,

and cuure,and all back-
Al bityng,

Nat. x vita 2 INEZ . babes, desire pe p milke of the worde, which is without deceipt:

that pe may growe therbylvntosaluatiõ

And as newe borne

3 Ilkso be that pe haue tasted hove gratibus the Lorde is:

4 To whom pe come, as vnto a lyupng stone, difaloiwed of men, but cholen of
God and precious:

5 And ve as lpuelp tones, be pou made a fpiritnall house, an holy priesthood, for to offer vp ae eine actepta-

d esus Christe. ble to God by Y } watyerfor

Wherefore it is conteyn scripture: »beholde, J put in Sion a stone to be laide in the chieft comer, elect and precious, and he that beleueth on hym, shall not be confounded.

7 Ulnto vou therfore which beleue, he is pretious: but vnto them whiche beleue not,! the fone which the buplders refused, the same is made the head of the coz: ner:

8 ne

W 6 glas 18. b.
Acl55. 1111. D>

Piil.cxvilte
Math. xxl.

rocke wherat they be offended, whiche stunible at the worde, and beyng disobedient, vnto the whiche thing they were tuen ordeyned.

9 But ye are a Gein generation, a ropwl" priesthood, an holy nation, a peculier people : that ve should shewe foorch the vertues of hym that called vou out of darknelle into his marueylous iyght.

end. Io Which in time past were not a people,

lan inc. hut are nowe the people of God: which sometime had not obteyned mercy, but

nowe haue obteyned mercy, 2»
Cu e Deareclp beloued, J beleche yon as

Githv.c, traàsigers and piigrimes,abftaine* from
R lustes, whiche fight agaynst the

oule:

12 And see that ye haue honest conuersation amongthe gentiles: that where as they backbite you as euyll doers, * they

Exod. xix. a
Deut. vii a.

luck. y. b.

shall see, prayse God in the day of visitation. 4 | hous B * Submit our selues therfore bnto al
ö maner ordinaunte of ma forthe Lowes sake:whether it be vnto the king, as haee
14 Other vnto rulers, as onto them that are sent of hym for the punyshment of

„ i Ikewile“ ye wynes, be fii, HD) e lin fabiectid to pour bul
( bandes, that enenthey
Sy 0 whiche obey not the
I word, may without the
Word, be wonne by the cõuersation of p wiues,

may hy your good workes whiche they

CXXXVIJ. cupll Doers, but for the laude of them that do well.

15 Forsois the wyll of God, that with well doyng, ye may stoppe the mouthes of fodlishe and ignoraunt men:

16 As fret, and not as hauyng the libertte forà cloke of maltaoufies, but euen as the seruauntes of God. f

17 “Honour all men. Loue brotherly fe- Rom lowship. Feare God. onour the kyng.

18 Scruauntes, obep pour maisters Ephe. vi a. with all feare, not only yr they be good c Coloss. und. curteous, but allo though they be fro: ne

‘ Masth.v.a,

19 “Fortes thanke Worthy, copf aman fo2 cOfcience toward god, endure grieke, aud suffer wrong vndeserued.

20 Jor What prayse is it, yf when ye be buffeted for pour faultes, ve takte it paciently: But yk when ye do well ye suffer
Wrong, € take it pacientlp, thenis there thanke with God. >

21 For herevnto veryly were ye called, jon. in. b. for Chaitte allo suffered for bs, tea? Epheva. upug vs an enlample, that pe should fo: lowe his steppes.

22 Which did no linne, nepther was there guyle founde in his mouth,

23 Whiche when he was reutled, reuiled not agapne: when he suffred, he threatned not, but committed the vengeaumte to him that iudgeth righteouslp. Nia

24. Which his oWne selke bart our siunes Ph in his bodyon the tree, that we beyng deliuered from sinne, shoulde line vnto ryghteousnes: By whole strypes ye
Were healed,

25 Forpe were as sheepe goyng astray: but are nowe turned vnto the sheephearde and Byshop of pour soules.

@ The ij. Chapter.

Howe wyues ought to order themlelues to warde their hulbandes.; And in thetr apparell, 7 Che duetie of men to warde their wyues. 8 he exhorteth atl men to vnitie and loue. 14 And paciently to fuffer trouble by the example aud benelite of Christe.

brayded heere, x hanging ou ol gold, ey: ther in putting on of gorgeous apparel.
4. But let the hid man whiche is in the heart, be without all corruption, so that the spirite be at rest and quict, whiche
[Spiritejis beforc goda thing much fet by.
5 Jor after this maner in the olde tyrie

6 Een as Sara obeped Abraham, and called hym Lorde, Whose daughters ye are as long as pedo well, and are not az

ktrapde kor any terrour.

B+ Tykewyse pe husbandes dwell with them accordyng to knowledge, geupng
Honour vnto the wyfe, as vnto the weaker vessell, and as vnto them that are heires allo of the grace of lpfe, that pour prayers be not hyndered.

3 V Jn toncluston, be pe all ofone minde, of one heart, loue as brethren, be piteful, be turteous,

9 Mot rendryng eupl for cupll, or rebuke foz rebuke: but contrarywyle biefic, knowyng that ve are therebnto called, euen that ye shoulde be heyres of the blessyng.

* Fore that doeth long after lyfe, and

loueth to {ec good dayes, let hym re-

frayne his tongue front euyll, and his

O meke,

(a) Cod hath made vo wht

we weee 918 rhe heireg

of his kyngdome: 4 Malt 10 not Swe fozgeut our brethen a fall

heartes. S Be redy alwayes to gene an

aunswere to cucry man that alketh you

ã reason of the hope that is in pon,

16 And that with mekenefle and feare, haupng a good tonsciente: that where Pa. as they backebite you as cuyll Docrs, they may be alhamed that falsely accuse your good conucrfation in Christe.

17, Ton it is better, pfthe wyll of God ber peru d. fo, that pe suffer for wel doyng, then fog ch.. cuyll doyng. 5

18 <P Fozasmuch as Christe hath once romy.a suffered for sinnes, the iust for the vniust D to bryng vs to God, and was kylled as parte nyng to the fleshe, but was quickened in the spirite.

1 Inn which spirite, he allo went ¢ prea-

ched vnto the spirites that were in prp-

for,
20 Which sometime had ben disobedient, when once the long sufferyng of God az

lippes, that they speake no guple.
11 Tet hym eschewe enpll and do good, let hym seke peate and ensue it. i
12 Jor the eyes of the Lorde art onerthe ryghteons, and his cares are open vuto their prapers: Againe, the face of the
Gene ode is ouer themthat do eupll. n Moreouer, who is it that wyll harme vou, vt yt folowe that which is good:
14 Dea, happy are pe ik any trouble happen duto you for ryghteousnes sake: we

bode in p dapes of Poe, whyle the Arke Ga was a preparpng, wherein fewe, that Gene.viic. is ip fay eyght soules, were saued in the
2 To the which allo the figure agreeth romvia. that nowe saueth 555 en ene not the puttyng away of the sylth of the fleshe, but in that a good conftience maketh request to God, by the resurrettion of Jesus Chrilte:
22 Which is onthe ryght hande of God,

faulty
Pal. 34. c.

Matll. v. b.
Efiviie, not pe afrapde for any terrour okthem, and is gone into heauen, angels, pow- Hebibiib
Math d. neither be pe troubled: N ers, aud myght subdued vnto hm.
15 Burt santtifie the Lorde God in pour
¢ The iii. Chapter.
He exhorteth men to ceasse from linne, r to spende no moze tyme in vice, / to be fober and apt to prap, 8 to loue eche other, 12 to be pacient in trouble. ij to beware that no man ufer ag an eupil doer, 16 but as a christian man, and so not to be achamed.
1 Or as muche then as wpnes, in extesse of eatyng, in extelle
A OLA | Chalke hat) suffered for of drynkpng, and be olga
7 AN vs in the fleche, arme 4 And it seemeth to them an inconucnt-25 pe pour selues lyͤewise ent thyng, that pe runne not allo with 4 ae
We Iwüh the same mpnde: them vnto the lame excesse of riote, and Gopal
3 2 for he which sufferethg — therefore speake they enyll of von: e
R in the fleshe, cealsleth 5 Whiche (hall geue accomptes to hym om sinne: that is redy to indge quicke and dead. og he
2 That he hente kor warde shoulde yue, 6 Foz vnto this purpole veryly was the daten as much tyme as remayneth inp fleshe, Golpel peached also vnto p dead, that Panes an not after the lustes of men, but alter the they shoulde be indged Ipke other men dere 0
Wpll of God in the fleshe, but chould ipuc before God g
3 Fortt is suffitient for vs that we haue inthe spirite. Gace fe
Re. peal 1 ae Me 99 8 ad Wein 7 The ende a a is at hande. ne ve md. . ) n 1— et a care nin Wantonnesle, lustes, in cite oe 1 ilelaliaaae Tg eh

Vnto praper. ö
Wut

E

ot Saint PClCT, CXXXV Hj.

a a rn
3 But aboue all pt ae haue ferucnt 14. pf ye be rayled vpon fo. the name OF Nit. v. b.

oi xi x a. D

tes X. C.

loue antong vour selues: Fozlouc shall Chiiste, happy are pe. Fo2 the spirite ofureric.

touer the multitude of sinnes. glozy and of God, resteth vpon you: O
We pe harberdus one to another, their part he is eupll en Of 50 f without grudgyng. pour part he is glorified.

o ũ · b
0 As euerp man hath receaued the apf, 15 See that none ok you be puinshed as a D

on. xl. b.

(ol. vui. c.

f

Ni. c.

Kd,
ü. b

enéfo nunister the fame one to another, murtherer, or as athiefe, or an euyll do-

as good nunisters of the manifold grace er, oras a busie body in other mens mat:

any man speake, let hem tale; as 16 PE any man tuber] as a Christi the wordes of God.? If any man nini- let hym not be achat Anglo ster let him do it as of the abilitiewhich tific God on this behalle.
God ministreth vnto hym, that God 17 For the tyme is (come) that indgemeut in all thinges may be glorified though must begin at the Houle of God. HF it
Pets Christe, to whom be prayse first begin) at vs, what Mall the ende be and dominon kor euer and cuer. Amen. ok them whiche beleue not the Golpell

12 Dearely beloued, thinke it not straunge ok God:

concerning the fierie trial, which thing 18 And' if the ryghteons scately be laued, Prouxia. is to trye you, as though some straunge where shall the vngodly and the finner thyng happened vnto pou. apptare-

z Wut reiopte, in as much as ye are par- 19 Wherelore, let them that are troubled

takers of Christes passions: that when actordyng to the wyll of God, commit his glozy appeareth, ve mape be metry their soules to him with well doyng, as and glad. vnto a faythfull eveatour,

The. v. Chapter.

2 Che duetle of pastours is to feede the klocke of Chrille, and what re warde thep Halk a haue yt they be diltgent. He exhorteth poung perfons to lubmit them felucs to the 2 elders, s to be sober, and to watche that they may revit the enemie. f

he w elders which are 6 Submit vour selues therfore vnder
Jsamong pou, Jexhozt, the mightie hande of God, that he may whiche am allo an el- exalt ou when the tyme is tome. Nlach. vid.

pened:

* Feede pou God his flocke, whiche is Whom resist stedfast in the fayth, kno- C tommitted vnto pon, takyng the ouer- wyng that the sanie aff lictions are acfight of them not as compelled therto, complished in your brethren that are in but wyllyngly, not for daun dk fyl- the worlde.

we

thy lucre, but of a good mynde: Io Wut the God of all grate whiche hath

ie. 3 Mol as though ye were Lordes ouer called bs vnto his eternall glory by ae Sod his heritage: but that ye be an en- Chuilte Pefus, Chat his owne selfe after

lample to the flocke. that pe haue suffred a litle affliction,

4. And when the chiele chephearde shall make pou pertite, setle,strength, and sta-

blyshe pou,

appearc, ve shall reteaue an incorrupbl n To hym be glory and domimon, for

tible crowne of glo:p.

5 Likewise pe pounger, lubmit pour euer and euer. Amen.
B lelues vnto the elder; Submit pour 12 By Syluanus a fapthfull brother, vn- D

selues euery man one to another, decke to pon, as I suppose, haue J Wetten pour selues inwardly in lowlpnes of biielly, exhortyng and testifipng, holbe mynde: Jor God resisteth the proude, that this is the true grate ot God, wherand geueth grace to the humble. ö in ye oe fe 4

13 The C

i. Pet. i.a. 2

(a) The fm

of our tuluatt

on and teligiõ

io, to be iedde

dy Chziste to

$ father, who 4 calicth vo in the sonne.

John ic.

Colosl. u. b.

1. Cor. vii. 6

fo doelh Marcus my fonne.

$ap The feconde epistle of Saint Peter.

hurche that is at Babylon elec- 14 Greete pec ted together with pon, saluteth vou, and

ne another With e hy fle Kom xv, oflcuc. Peace be with vou all wbipare i Cor.xvid in Christe Jesus. Amen. |

The firft Chapter. „

4 Fforasmuch as the power of God hath geuen them all thynges parteyning vnto lple, worldip lustes. io to make their caltpng Cure

he erhozteth them to flee the corruptiõ o

with good workes and kruites of kapth. 14 He maketh mention of his one death. 4

17 declarpyng the Lorde Jelus to be the true sonne of God, as he him selle h

vpon the mount. .

mon Peter. a
; e Ai) cruaunt and an e Apoctie of Jesus

Christe, to them
N which haue obteined lpke precious
1 b 055 ne, d rowe the ryghte-
, ANE BS, ousnes of our god and sautour Jesus Christe::

Grate and peace be multiplied vnto you, though the knowledge of God, and of Fels our Torde:

Accosyng as his godly power hath geuen vnto vs all thynges that parteine vnto lyfe and godiynelle, W through the knowledge of hym that hath called vs vnto glorie and vertue:

By the which are geuen vnto bs excellent and most great pronnses, that by the imeanes thereof, ye might be *partakers okthe godly nature, pf pe fice the corruption of worldly lust.

And herevnto gcuec all diligence: in pour fapth unnifter vertue, in vertue knowledge,

»In knowledge teniperaunce, intemperaunce patience, in pacience godlpnelle,

In godlpnesse brotherly kyndnelle, in drotherip kyndnelle loue.

Foz pf these thynges be among vou. and be plenteous, they wyll make you that ye ncither shalbe idle nor vnkruitefull in the knowledge of our Lode Jesus Chartte.

Wut he that lacheth these anne blynde, and tan not fcefarre of, € bath forgotten that he was purged from his

2 2 { Os

1688 % 1

bie) NN 5

seene vp-

olde sinnes. * to Ioherfore brethren, geue the more dit: gente for to make pour tallyng and clec-C tion fure : For yk ve do luch thynges, 0) auen ye shall neuer fall. Be fare i i
Bea, and by this meanes an entryng ses came in chalbe miniftred vnto vou aboiibant: wena cers ye, into the euerlastyng kpngdonie of ites oy we dur Lowe and lauiour Jesus Christe. te none
121 Wherfore J wyl not be negligent to aer put von alwapes in remenibzaunce of ke ate uche thynges, thougl) pe knowe them , vn. pour selues, and be stablysched in the present trueth. z Motwithstandyng Ithynke it meete, . as long as J 1 this tabernacle, to

Il

stirre you vp by puttyng vou in remembraunce:
14. Forasmuth as J am sure that shortly
JI must put of this mytabernacle. euen lola. Ad as our Lorde Jesus Chzilte shewed

me.
15 J wyll euer also geue my diligente p ve may haue wher with to stirre bp the rece of these thynges after my

power and tommpng of our Lorde Jez
{us Christe, but With our eyes We saͤwe | pois his maiestie:

Euen then veryly when he receaued 20 of God the father honour and glozte, € when there tame suche a bopce to hym from the excellent glorie: This is mp d deare beloued sonne in whom JJ delyte. Tau
18 This vopce We heard cone from heaven when we were with hun in the holyt mount. 156

prophesie, wherevnto pf pe take heede, as vnto a lyght that shyneth in a darke plate, ve do well, vntyll the dap dane, and the day starre arile in pour heartes.
20 Ob that ye first knowe this, that no

Cor. ui b.

Ol Saint peter.

Ig We haue allo a ryght sure Worde of

cx xxx.

prophesie in the scripture is of anp pri-
. Wate motion.

2 Foz the prophesie came not in olde time by the Wyll of man: but holy men of
God, spake as they were moued by the holy ghost.

¢ The ij Chapter.
1 He prophelleth ol kalte teachers, and speweth their puntchement.

I here were falle prophetes

ai CH alfo among the people, ené
Wie Tas there shalbe false tea-
Tim. s. AA chers among pon, whiche ee rh pryuply (hal bryng in dani-

nable heresies, euen denying the Lowe that hath bought them, and bryng vpõ them [clues fivyft damnation.
2 And many (hall folowe their damnable wayes, by whomthe way of trueth shalbe euyll spoken ok:
3 And through couetousnesse, shall the with fapned wordes make 0 marchaũdiʒe Of pou, whole iudgement is nowe e not farre of, and their damuation flee-
Deen een een 1 uname 4. Jor ik God (pared not the angels that fange : firmed, but catt them downe into hell, bal Sen and drlyuered them into chaynes of
„dar knelle, to be kept vnto iudgement:
5 Meither {pared the olde worlde, but saued Moe the eyght (perfor) a preacher

10 Ghat is endentip font tithe Pope g

Cenes. vu. a.

flood bpon the worlde of the vngodip,
6 And turned their cities of Sodome €
Gomorrhe into ales, ouerthrewe the, dampned them, and made of them an
~ enfample vnto those that after shoulde lyvue vngodlpb : d
And tuk* Lot, vexed with p bneleane tonuersatiõ of the wicked, delluered he.
8 FJor he beyng ryghteous, € dwellyng among them, in lepng and hearpng, bered his ryghteous soule from Daye to dape with their vniawfull deedes. b, 9 The Tode knoweth howe to delp-
* uer the godly out of temptation, and to reserue the vmust vnto the day of indgement for to be punished: lo But chiefely them that walke after the fleshe in the lust of yneleaneneffe, and despise auctoritie.Presumptious are they, and stande in their olbue concepte,
Whiche feare not to speake euyl okthem that excell in worship. u When the Angels whiche are greater

Gene. xil. d. 7

of ryghteousnesle, and brought in the

both in power and might, geue not rap: |
100 1 against them before the ode,
12 But these, as bruite beastes ledde wit

Wy sensualitie, and made to be taken and €

destroped, speake euyll of the thynges that they vnderstande not, and chall pez rishe through their owne corruption,

13 And receaue the rewarde of vnryghteousnesse, they count it plealure ts

+ Ipue deliciouflye foz a season: Spottes „% they are and blottes, delighting them ne selues in their deteauynges, in feastyng as mendes with pou. N p

14 Hauyng eyes full of adulterie, € that tigers,

tan not teasse from sinne, begplyng vn- n stable soules: Heartes they haue exerci- e
{cd with robberie, they are curled chyl-

den. |

15 Which haue forsaken the ryght wape, and are gone astrap, folowyng the way
*of wWalaan the sonne of Wolor, which Num ib loued the rewarde of vnrighteoulnesse: D

16 But was rebukedof his iniquitie. The dumbe beat, and vled to the poke, speaking with mans voyte, forbad the madnesse of the prophete. .

17 These are weiles without water, ludicid. ;

tloudes that are tarped with a tempest, to Whom the mist ok darknesse is reserued for euer.

18 Foz when they haue spoken the great swellyng wordes of vanitie, they entice through lustes in the voluptuoulnesse af the fleshe, them that were cleane elcaped, from them whiche are wrapped in errour,

19 Whyle they pronuse them libertie, where as they them selues are p bonde seruauntes of torruption. Forotf whom John. viiid. a man is ouertome, vnto the fame is he Rom brought in bondage. N

20 Jor pf they, after they haue eltaped e.

from the fylthynesse ol the worlde, thorowe the knowledge of the Lord, t the sauiour Jesus Christe, are pet taugled

Sy agapne

agapne therein, and ouercome, then is the later end Worle with them then the begynnyng.

21 Jor it had ben better for them not to haue knowen the way ok righteoulnes, then after they haue knowen it, to turne from the holp contntaundement that

Matli. xi. d.

conde Epistle

was geuen vnto them.

22 But the sanie is happened vnto them that is vled to be spolen by the true prouerbe: The dogge is tourned to his, owne vomite againe, and the sowe that was Wallhed, is turned againe to her
Wallowyng in the mypre.

The. ij. Chapter.

He sheweth the impietie of them which mocke at Gods promises. 7 After what fort the ende of the worlde shalbe. 8 That they prepare them felues therevnto. 16 m hO they are which abule the wrytynges ol S. Paul, ¢ the rest of the tcriptures, 18 Cons cludyng with eternall thankes to Christe Jesus.

isis the seconde
Alepistle that J now

pure myndes,

Wy puttpng pou
H. I. inremembzaunte, that pe may be myndkull of the wordes
Which were tolde before of the Holy pro-

phetes, and allo the commaundement

of bs, whiche be Apostles of the Lorde and sauiour.

Actes xx. 3 This first vnderstande, that there beta. shall come in the laste dapes mockers,
W Whiche wyll walke after their ovone iTimiiie, lultes, —

i. Tim. a. 4. And sap: Where is the promile of his

tommpng : Foz fence the fathers dyed,

all thynges continue a lyke fromthe begynnpng of the creation.

(0h he me: 5 Jor this they knowe not (and that o ehe dne Wyllullp) howe that the heauens were

zolt ssed chrilan retigion, but becaine at terward con: teuticrs ond tmockers, ag

ofolde, and the earth that was ofthe

water, and by the water, by the worde

of God: ; ;

porns ¢ Wy the which thinges the World that then was, perisshed, beyng then ouer-

runne with water.

Joh nh? Wut the Heaucus and earth whiche
Elan hb. dxe nolbe, be kept by his worde in store, and reserued vnto fire, agaynst the day ok iudgement and perdition of vngodly men.
8 Decarelp beloued, be not ignoraunt of ble this one thyng, howe that “one day is
1. Cor. vu e.

with the Lorde as a thousande pere, c
à thousande pere as one dap.

9 The Lorde that hath promised, is not slacke, as some men count slacknesse, but is pacient to vswarde (fozatnuch) as
He woulde haue no man lost, but Wpll

IVswzpte Dnto vou,

reteaue all men to repentaunte.

lo Meuerthelesse the day of the Lorde C
Wyll come as a theefe in the nyght, in dtn 4. the which the heauens shal patie away ee
With a nople, and the elementes hall!

melt with beate, the earth also and the
Workes that are therein shall burne.

Sepng then that all these thynges hall perisshe, what maner perfons ought pe to be in holy tonuersation and

_— godipneffe;

12 Tokypng foz, and hastyng vnto the cõmyng of the day ol God, by whom the heauens shall perishe with fire, and the elementes shall melt with heate-

13 Meuerthelesse, we accordyng to his Apo

pronnse, tobe for a newe heauen, and a newe earth, wherein dwelleth ryghteousnesse. 1

14. Wherfore dearely beloucd, seyng that

pe loke for such thynges, be diligent that pe may be founde of hym in peace, without spot, and vndefyled: f

15 And suppose that the long fuffering of D the Lord is saluatiõ, euen as our dearely beloued brother Paul allo, accordyng to the wiledome geuen vnto hym, bath
Yattten bnto pou:

16 Bea almost in euerp epiftic, speakyng of such thinges: among which, are manye thynges harde to be vnderstande, which they that are vnlearned and vnstable, peruert, as they do also the other striptures, vnto their owne destruttion.

17 Be therfore beloucd, seyng ve be warned afore hande, beware lest pe with other men be also plucked away though the errour of the wicked, and fall from pour owne stedfastnesse:

18 Wut growe in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lorde and fautour Jesus
Christe, to whom be glozie both noe and for euer. Amen.

¶ The

II

of Saint lo

All.

The firft Epiftle of Saint Fobn the of) poftle.

The firft Chapter.

2 True witnesse of the enerlastpng worde of God.

Che blood ok Chrisle is the

purgation ok sinne. 10 No man is without sinne.

Hat whiche was
= Itrö the beginning,

whiche We haue heard, which we haue seene with dur epes, whiche

the worde ol lyle:
2 (And the lyke appeared, and we haue feene, and beare Witnesse, and Merwe x. Dntopou*that eternall iyfe which was

with the father, and appeared vnto vs.)
3 That which we haue seene and heard detlare we vnto you, that pe also maye vebet: haue o felowihip with vs, and that our ichn felowehip may be with the father, and his sonne Jesus Chailte,
4. And this Waite we vnto vou, that pour toy map be full,

od.

18 To beware of antichriste.

n litle chyldren, thele
Isthynges wute J vnto ou, that pe sinne not.
And pf aay man fine, we haue an aduocate
‘with the father, Jesus

Christe the ryghteous.
2 And he is ÿ attonement for our sinnes: not for our sinnes only, but also for the sinnes ofall the worlde.

Tey 770

“A NY Ae
NBS * 7/7;

\
My #

0 That ig,

cma e And herebp we are sure that we
Sete knowe hym, vk we kepe his cömaun-

uche. dementes. lin. .d. T He that sayth J knowe Hymn, aud kepeth not his connnaundementes, is a lper, and the veritie is not in hym:
5 But who so kepeth his worde, in hum is the loue of God perkett in deede. Hereby knowe we that we are in hyim.
6 He that layth he bydeth in him, oughe to walke enen as he walked, £1
7 Wathen, Y Waite no newe coma

5 And this is the tydynges whiche we haue hearde ok hym e detlare ne vou, $ that God is lyght, e in hym is no darkecf at if
6 If we laye that we haue felownys
With hym, and Walke in dartzenelle we lye, and do not the trueth.
Wut and pk we walnke in light, euen as he is in lyght, then hane we felowthip
Sone with another, and the blood of © Koza
Jesus Christ his sonue clenleth vs front wem v« all sinne. 0
3 It we sap that we haue no sinne, we penn our selues, and the trueth is not josie”
9 If we knowledge our sinnes, he is toh, vn e. faythtull c tuft to forgeue vs bes, Pein, ani to clense vs from all vnryghteoul *. nesse.
10 HF we fay we haue not finned, we make hymalper, and his worde is not in vs.

The. jj. Chapter.

1 Christe is our aduocate. 10 Ol true loue, and howe it is tryed.

Dement vnto pou, but that olde cõmaundement which pe haue had front the bez gynnyng. The olde tommaundement is the worde which ye haue hearde frõ the begynnyng.

8 Agapne, a newe commaundement F write vnto yon, that is true in hymn, and the lame is true] also in vou: For the parkencfle is past, and the true lyght nowe shyneth. 2

9 Pe that sapth howe that he is in the lyght, and pet hateth his brother, is in darkenesse, euen vntyll this tyme.

10 He that loueth his brother, abydeth in the lyght, and there is none occafion ot cuyll in hym. *

HW He that hateth his brother, is in darl-- nesle, and Walketh in darkenesse, k tan Lr not tell whyther he goeth, because that darkenesse hath blynded his eyes.

12 Babes J write vnto pon, because pour

S ij sumes

ag are forgeuen pou kor His names

ake.

13 J write vnto vou fathers, becaule pe hãue knowen hym that is from the begyimyng. J Wattle vnto von young men, becaule pou haue ouertome the wicked.

14 J Wwatte to pou little chyldren, betaulse

pe haue knowe the father. J haue writ-

ten to pou fathers, becaule pe haue kno-

Wen hymthat is from the begynnyng.

FP haue written vnto you young men,

because, pe are stronge, and the worde

ol God abydeth in you, and ye haue

ouercome the wicked. a

Set that ye loue not 'the worlde, neither he thynges that are in the wonlde.

If any man ldue the worlde, the louc of

the father is not in hym.

16 Foz all that is in the worlde, as the lust of the fleshe, and the lust of the tyes, and the pride of life, is not of the father, but of the worlde.

17 And the worlde passeth away, and the luste thereof: but he that fulfpileth the
Wyllof God, abydeth for tuner.

Cis

Loh. ævi. b.

13 Title chyldren, it is the last time, and

as yt haue hearde howe that antichrist shall tome, euen nowe are there many antichristes, whereby we knowe that it is the tak tymie.

Actes xf. 19 They Went out from vs, but they were not of vs: For ytthey had ben of vs, they woulde no doubt haue continued with vs: But that it myght ap-

sthegrace Plare that they were not of vs.

al. n 20 Meuerthelelle, ye haue an Vopntment

ihe ririt Epiltle

uf hym that is Holy, and pe knowe all
21 J haue not wiitten vnto vou, as though pe knewe not the trueth: but D betaust yt knowe it, and that no lye is of the trueth. ' :
22 Whois alper, but he that denieth that
Hels is Christe- The fame is antichrist that denyeth the father and the sonne.
23 Wholocuer denpeth the sonne, the same Hath not the father But he that knowledgeth the sonne, bath the father allo.]
24 Tet therfore abyde in vou, that fame whiche pe hearde from the begynnyng.
If that whiche ye hearde from the begynnyng (hall remayne in you, ve allo fae eon in the sonne, and in the
25 And this is the promile that he hath promised vs, euen eternalllpfe.
26 Thtse thynges haue J witten vnto vou, conterning them that deteaue pou:
27 And the annoyntyng whiche ve haue reteaued ol hym dwelleth in pou: And ye nede not that any man teach pou, but asthe fame © annoynting teacheth vou k. ofallthynges, and it is tric, and not lp- nab ing: and as it taught pou, pe shall a- pen ee: byde in it. ee e
28 And nowe babes abide in him, that aw when he shal appeare, we may be bolde ©) servis and not be made ashanied of hym at his ve? weit tommpng. cee,
29 If ye knowe that he is ryghteons, knowe also that euery one whiche doth righteousnes, is borne of hym.

The. iij Chapter.
Che singuler loue of God to warde bs, 7 aud howe we agapne ought

to loue one another.

Cuholde what tone the e father bath chewed on e s that we shoulde be

Luke f. „ [RUA X23 ealled the 'sonnes of

Tohna.b. Sey OM! god: Fo2 this caule the

CY))| Molde ünoweth vou ot, becaule it know-

is pure.

4 Whosdeuer committeth sinne, tranlgrelleth aifo the lawe: for sinne is the transgression of the lawe.

5 And pe know that he appeared to take away our linnes, t in hym is no sinne.

6 As manpas byde in hym, finne not: wholdeuer sinneth, hath not seene him, neither knowen hym.

Babes, let no man deteaue vou: He that doeth righteoulnes, is ryghteous, euen as he is righteous.

3 Hethatcommuttethfinne, is or the de- | uyil: forthe deuyll finneth fence the be- h vile ginning. For this purpole appeared the forte of God, to loole the workes of the

deupll. woho-

not:for his seede remayneth in him, and

he tan not finne, becaule he is borne of

God.

10 In this are p children of God knowẽ, and the chyldren of the deupll: Wholoeuer Dot) not ryghteousnesse, is not of
God, neither he that loueth not his brother.

For this is the tidynges that ye heard from the begynnyng, that pe shoulde loue one another. : den üb. 12 Not às Cain, which was of that wic-

Cn

ked, and slewe his brother: And wher-

fore slewe he hym?: Betause his owne
Workes Were cupll, and his brothers good.

13 Maruaple not my brethren though the worlde hate pou.

14 We knowe, that we are tranflated

ee from death vnto lyfe, because we loue

sthe spenall rate of our apth, and a mtapue signe

9 Woholocuer is bome of God, sinneth 17 But who so hath this worldes good,

and ! seeth his brother haue neede, and Deut b. shutteth vp his compassion from hym:
Howe dwelleth the louc of God in hym-
18 My babes, let vs not lone in Worde, neither in tongue: but in deede and in veritie.
19 “Hereby we knowe that we are of the eae, and (hall assure our heartes beore hym.
20 For pf our heart condenipne vs, God is greater then dur heart, and knoweth all thynges.
21 Dearely beloued, yk our heart condempne bs not, then haue we boldnesse towarde God. Math. vil. a.
22 And ' whatlocuer we alke we retcaue lane. of hynt, because we kepe his tommaun dementes, and do those thynges which are pleasyng in his lyght. seg
23 And* this is his comaundement,that we beleue on the name of his sonne Jesus Christe, and loue one another, as he gane commaundement.
24 And he that kepeth his tommaundementes, dwelleth in him, and he in him: and hereby we knowe that he abideth in bs, euen by the spirite which he bath geuen vs.

1 Difference ok spirites, howe the spirite of God may be knowen from the spirite ofervour, 7 of the loue ol God and of our neyghbours.

Carly beloued,“ beleue not euery spirite: but proue the spirites whe-
1 fyeber they are of God or
, not: lor many falle proe phetes are gone out in-
— ( Tbothe wonzlde.
2 Hereby shall ye knowe the spirite of
God: Euerp spirite that tonfeslseth that

mt ff
Math.vit cg
Deut. xin. a.
.. xxiii. a

27. xill. a.
Ak. xxi. d.

Y Who bez

ea, Selus Chatte is tome in the fleshe, is
Bu of God: ‘

aur And euery spirite which tonkesleth not

ab he that Jesus Chaitte is tomie in the flethe,

: is nok ol God. And this is that spirite of

antichziste, of whom pe haue hearde
Howe that he shoulde come: and euen nowe alredy is he in the worlde.

Iitle chyldren, ye are of God, x haue duercome them: for greater is he that is in you, then he that is in the worlde.

5 Thepaͤre of the world, therfore speake they of the worlde, € the World heareth

thein. pe

6 We are of God he that knoweth God, 25 heareth vs: he that is not of God, heareth vs not. Hereby knowe we the spivite of beritie, and the spirite of errour. a

7 Dearely beloued, let vs loue one ano- Tn ther, kor lone commeth of God: And * cuery one that loueth, is borne of God, and knoweth God.

8 Me that loueth not, knoweth not God: for c God is loue.

9 AJn this appeared the loue ol God to vs warde, becaule God sent his only eing. begotten sonne into the worlde, that we myght lyue through hym.

lo Herein is loue, not that we loued God, but that he loued vs, and sent his sonne to be the agreement for our sinnes.

11 Dearelp beloned, yf God fo loued vs, we ought allo to lone one another.

2 No man hath seene God at any time. Exod 4.
If we loue one another, God diwelleth la

in

teaueth not the brethren: but allo he forbiddeth thé that woulde, and thrusteth them dut of the Churche.

Du Beldued, folow not that which is eupl, but that Which is good. He that doth well, is of God: but he that doth cupil, seeth not God.

12 Demetrius hath good report of all men, and of the trueth it selfs: Bea, and

Tr —
5 iis f ude.
°

we our selues allo beart retorde, and pe knowe that our recorde is true.

3 J haue many thynges to write: but
P wyll not with inke and penne waite vnto thee. N

14. J trust J Thal shortl fee thee, and we
(hall speake mouth to mouth. Peate be vnto thee. The louers fatute thee.

Greete the louers by name.

¢ The epiftle of Saint Fude.

¶ Saint Jude admonicheth all Churches generallp to take heede ol deceaners, which go about to drawe awap the heartes of the simple people from the trueth of God,
6 wylleth them to haue no focietie with (uch, whom he letteth loorth in their liuelx colours, chewyng by dyuers examples of the scriptures, what horrible vengeaunce is prepared foz them: finally, he conkorteth the fapthtuil, a exhorteth them to pers seuer in the doctrine of the Apostles of Fetus Christe.

ig

, James: Tothem which are called f D and fanctified in

Le Gov the father; aC) y and peelerucd in
, Jelus Chuilte:

L. Mercy vnto pou,

ve and peace and torte be multiplied.

3 Weloued, when J gaue all diligence to Write vnto pou of the tommon saluation, it was nede ful for me to write vnto pon, to exhorte pou, that pe shoulde earnestly “? contende for the fapth which was onte geuen vnto the saintes.

Jor there are tertapne vngodly men craftily crept in, which were before of
Olde Oepned to this condemnation:
They turne the grate of our God vnto waͤntonnelle, and denye God which is the only Lorde, and our Lorde Jesus
Christe. f

My mynde is therforeto put vou in remembraunce: fozasmuch as pe once knowe this, howe that the Lorde, after that he had delynered the people out of
Egypt, destroped the which afterward beleued not. 5
6 The Angels allo which kept not their

first estate, but left their owne habita-

tion, he hath reserued in euerlastyng haynes vnder darkenesse, vnto the iudgement of the great day.

Euen as Sodom and Goniorrhe, and the cities about them, which in lyke maner defiled them selnes with fornitation, and folowed straunge fleshe, are fet id

(a) Baapnt

9 755 of

ane cretiques.

K

Gch. x. x f. 77

foorth for an enfample, and suffer the payne of eternall fyrt. f

k 83 PLykewyle, thele beyng deceaued bp

dreames, defple the flesh, defpitc rulers, and speake eupll of them that are in aucthoritie. *
9 Bet Michael the Archangel when he stroue agaynst the deupll, and disputed about the body of Moyses, durst not geue raplyng sentente, but fayde, the
Tode rebuke thee. „ io But these speake euyl of those thinges which they knowe not: ec what thinges they know naturally, as beastes which are without reason, in those thynges they corrupt them selues.
Ir Wo be vnto thé,foz they haue folowed the way ol Cain and are vtterly geuen Genn b. to the errour of Balaam for lutres fake, Num x. and perishe in the gaynsaping ot Core.
These are spottes in pour keastes of D charitie, whẽ they feast with on, with: out al feare feedyng thẽ selues: cloudes they are without water, carped about of windes, corrupt trees, and without frrite, twile dead, and plucked bp by the rootes:
They are the ragyng waues of the fea, fompng out their owne Manic:
They are Wandrpyng starres, to whom is reserued the mist of darknes for euer.
14. Enoch the seuenth from Adam, prophesied before of such, saping: Beholde, Apocib. the Lorde shall tome with thoufandes ke of saintes, :
To gene iudgement agapnst all men, and to rebuke all that are vngodly among them, of all their vngodly deedes, which they haue vngodly n

. cl speakpnges, Which i sinners haue spoken agapust vm. N

and ok all their cru

Elie These are murmurers, complapners,

walkyng after their owne lustes, Whole mouthes speake proude thynges. They haue men in great reuerente becaule of aduantage.

17 But pe beloued, remember the wordes which were spoken before, of the Apostles of our Loge Jesus Christe.

13 Howe that they tolde pou, that there

selues in your most holy fapth. prayl inthe holy ghost, ie

21 And kepe pour selnes in the loue of
GOD, lokyng for the mertie of our Lod
Jesus Charite vnto eternal lpfe.

22 And haue compassion of some, sepeyee ber

23 And other saue with feare, pullyn them out of the fyre, and haue aainpatie on on the other, and hate enen the gar: nent {potted by the fleche.

24. Unto him that is able to kepe pou free

Acces. xx. f. bim un. (houlde be beguers in b last tynie, which krom sinne, and to present pou fa
. should walke after their owne bugodly bekore the presence ok his glory wah op,

u Peter. l. a.

lustes. g
19 These are makers of sectes, fleshlie,

hauyng not the spirite.

25 To God our sauiour, which onipis
Wyle, be glorie, maiestie, Damion, and power, nowe and euer. Amen.

20 But pe dearelp beloued, edikie pour

The reuelation of Saint lobn the diuine.
J The first Chapter. |

1 The cause of this reuelation.; Ot them that reade it. 4 John writeth to the seuen Churches. 5 The maiestie and odice of the lonne ol God. 20 The vilion bol the candlesticzes and starres.

he Oreucla- oapne blood. 8

e Ne — — tion of Jesus 6 And made vs kynges and priestes vn-
Meee LO SOI LON G Chait, which to God his father, be glorie and dom nilünen BX (COU cc) Ke God gane on for euermoze. Amen. e Ke 4 5 bnto ym, for 7 Beholde, he commeth with cloudes, J h sac: ee Or 125 0 shewe vnto and all eyes shall see hym, and they also Pra vu.
Negele F ee) his feruatites Which pearsed hym: And all kinredes ts, fo that wom, = 0 chide as ho BEY ae gs thyngs Which of the earth Malt waple before hym. teucled rt to » Cy mnt shortiye Euen so. Amen. ee e ome to passe: 8 Jam Alpha and Omega, the begynde ng And when he had sent, he shewed bs nyng and the endyng, faytl the Torde ten his Angel, vnto his seruaunt John, almyghtie, which is, and which was,
2 Which bare retorde of the worde ok and which is to come. C
God, and of the testimonie of Jesus 9 J John, pour brother and companion
Christe, and of all thinges that he lawe. in tribulatton and in the kingdome and
3 Happy is he that readeth, and they patiente of Jesus Christe, was in the

Ile that is called Pathmos, for p worde of God, and foz the witnessyng ol Jesus
Christe.
Io J was in the spirite on the Lordes dap, and hearde behynde me a great voyte, as it had ben ofa truimpe,
Saping: Jam Alpha and Omega, the first and the lat: That thou seest,
Write in a booke, and lende it vnto the seuen Churches which are in Aha, vnto
Ephesus, and vnto Simprna, and bato
Pergamos, and buto Thypatira, and

that heare the wordes of this prophesie, and kepe thole thynges Which are wait ten therin, for the tyme is at hande.

4 John to the seuen Churches in Alia:
Gtate be vnto vou, and peace, from him which is, and which was, and which is to come: and from the feuen spirites

which are before his throne, 8

265 And from Jesus Christe, which is a faythfull wirnesse, and first begotten of the dead, and Lorde ouer the kynges of

II

Hebre.sci. the earth: Tinto hym that loued vs, g b cerid. and walshed vs from our sinnes in his vnto Sardis, and buto Phase an

John.. b.

and buto Laodicea.
„Du And J turned backe to fee the voyte

that (pake to me: And Whe J was tur-

ned, I sawe scuen golden candleltickes,

13 And in ÿ nuddes of the tandlestickes,

one lyke vnto the sonne of man, dothed

a ; 7 fo tin 7 A ‘Sa. oe

witha garment downe to the feete, and gitoe about the pappes with a golden girdle.

His head, and his heeres were whyte as whyte Wooll,and as snowe, and his eyes were as a flambe of fpre.

i fgg

1 gy a Pe

We — if 8
=e WAST

aac 8 Ly Dee
Ch Ass 4 8 3 — . An aes te

15 And his feete lye vnto fine bralle, as though they brent in a furnate, and his poyce as the sounde of many waters.

16 Aud he had in his ryght hande, seuen starres: And out of his mouth went a

Mat. vi. a. a two edacd worde: And his face hone, euen as the sunne in his streugth.

17 And when J lawe hym, ZF kellat his feete cuen as dead: And he lapde his ryght hande vpon me, saying bute me,

Ela. xluũ. b rare not, I am the first and the lat,

13 And am alpue, and was dead: And

Rom. v. b. beholde, JJ an alpue for cuermioze,

Amen, and haue the keyes of hell and of death.

19 Write therfore the thinges which thou hast seene, and the thynges Which are, and the thinges which mutt be fulfilled hereafter, 4

20 The misterie of the seuen starres which thou sawest in my ryght hande, and the seuen goldẽ candlestickes. The seuen starres, are the Angels of the seuẽ
Churches: And the seuentandlestickes whiche thou lawest, are the leuen
Churches. 8

The. ij. Chapter. *

amendement, 14.20. 3. al wel by threatninges, 7.10. 17.2. as p20 iles of re warde.

he exhorteth koure Churches, J to repentaunce, roto perfeuera t ce, patience, and
A

Hto the Augel of the
Churche at Ephelus, write: these th

„%/Athe seuen starres in his rvyaht bande, and that
7 walketh inthe middes ofthe seuen golden tandlestickes:
2 Iunowe chy workes, and thy labour, and thy patience, and howe thou cant not forbeare them which are euyll: and halt examined them which fay they are

5 puges 3
Harth he that holdeth

Apostles, and are not, and halt founde them lpers: 2
And halt suffred, and halk patiente, and for iny names fake Hatt laboured, and hast not fapnted. b
4 Neuertheles, J hauestome what against thee, becaule thou halt left thy first loue.
5 Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first workes: Or els J wyll cone vnto thee shortly, E wyll remoue thy tandlesticke dut ol his plate, except thou 1

%

the deedes of the* Micolaitans, Which
(deedes) J aifo hate.
7 Let hyn that hath an care, heare what 5 spirite saych vnto the Churches.
To hym that ouertommeth, wyil J geue to cate of the tree of lyfe, Which is in the middes ofthe paradise of God.
C And vnto the Angel of the Churche of
Smpzna, Write: These thynges sayth he that is first and the last, which was
(% Thee Dead, and is alyue. mie 9 I knowe thy workes, and tribulation, enc Add pouertie:but thou art © riche. And
FH kur the blasphenue of them which eal them selues Jewes, and are not, but are) the spynagogne of Satan.

Feare none of thole thynges, which thou thatt suffer: Weholde, the deuyll shall caste fome of you into prilon, to tempt vou, and ve Hall haue tribulation ten dayes. Be faͤythfull vnto the death, and J wyll geue thee a trownce of lpfe.

mu Let hym that hath an eare, heare what the spirite fayth vnto p Churches.
He that ouertommeth, shall not be hurt

of the seconde death. spiz And to the Angell of the Churche in
Pergamos, Write; This faith he which
(ome map Hath p sharpe o sword with two edges:

Neid 13

fnogde with
Tae edges.

Actes. vi. b.

Gene. ii. b.

ouer 8 5 allure 1,

_ that thep hall TO not be ouce= come bp death
(b) In spixitual ircasureg

dwellest, euen where Satans leate is, and thou kepest my name, and hast not denyed my fayth: Euen in thole dayes

was flayne among vou, where Satan r bu 4
14. Wut IJ haue a fewe thynges agayn thee, betause thou halt there, them that mapnctapne the Doctrine of Balaam, whiche taught in Walacke, to put a stumblyng blocke before the chyldren of
Ilrael, that they shoulde cate of meate deditate vnto idols, x tommit fornitatiõ.
| 15 Euen lo hast thou the that maintapne the doctrine of the s2tcolattans, which thyng Bi bate. ts Repent, o2 cls J wyll come vnto thee chortly, and wyll kyght agaynst them with the lworde of in mouth.
€17 Bet hym that bath an eare, heare

Nuxxxice,

OOTC

6 But this thon haft, betause thou hatest

Iknowe thy workes, and where thou

when Antipas nw fayehfull martir

What 5 spirite sapth vnto the Churches.
To bpm that ouertommeth, Wyll E geue to cate Manna that is hyd, and

wyll gene hym a white stone, and in the ftoue a nerve name Witten, Which no man knoweth, sauyng he receaueth it.
18 And vnto the Angell of the Churche of Thyatira, wate: This faith p sonne of God, who hath epes lyke vnto a flambe of fyre, and his feete are like fine brasse. f i9 I knowe thy workes, and thy loue, serlite, and fayth, and thy patience, and thy Deedes, which are mo at the last the at the first.
20 Notwithstandyng, J haue a fewe ¢ thynges agaynst thee, becante thou sukferest that woman“ Jesabel, which 3 Reg avi. called her selfe a prophetisse, to teache, 1 N80 and to deceaue mp leruauntes, to make them conumt forznieation, and to cate meates offred vp vnto idols.
21 And J gaue her {pace to repent of her fornitation, and she repented not. g
22 Beholde, J wyll cast her mto a bed, and them that tommit fornication with her into great aduersitie, except they turne from their deedes:
23 And JJ wyll kyll her chyldren with death, k all the Churches hall knowe, that J am he which learcheth the ler üb. rapnes and heartes: And J Wyll gene vnto euery one of pou, accordyng vnto his workes.
24. Unto pou I fay, and vnto other of G the of Thyatira, as many as haue not this learnyng, e which haue not knowẽ the deepenesse of Satan, as they say, J
Wyll put vpon vou none other burthen:
25 Wut that which ye haue alredy, holde fat tyll I come, .
26 And Wholoeuer duertommeth, and kepeth my workes vnto the ende, to hym wyll J geue power ouer nations,
27 And he Hall rule them with a rodde pan. of yron: and as the vessels of a potter,
Chall they be broken to sheuers:
28 Euen as J reccaned of my father, fo wyll IJ geue hyn the mornyng starre.
29 Let hym that hath an eare, heare what the spirite fapth to the Churches.

¶ The

ae a
Pn

. qT he 0E Chapter.

He exhorteth the Churches or minifers to the true proleslion of fapth, and to watchpng, 12 with pronules to them that perseuer.

N that is at Sardis, this e lapth he that hath the
A seuen spirites of God,
2 and the seuen starres. nme =~ knowethyworkes: thou hast a name that thou lynest, and thou art dead.

2 We awake, and strengthy the thynges which remapne, that are redie to Hye:
Jor I haue not founde thy workes perfeet before God.

3 Remember therfore howe thou halt reteaued and heard, and holde fast, and repent. If thou Malt not watche, J wyll come on thee as a thicfe, and thou halt not knowe what houre J Wyll tome vpon thee. 8

4 Thou hast a fewe names in Sardis, which haue not defiled their garmetes, and they shall walne with ine in white, for they are Worthie.

He that ouerconmieth, shalbe thus clothed in whyte aray, and J wyll not put out his name out ofthe booke of life, and will tonfesse his name before my father, and before his Angels.

6 Let him that hath an care, heare what the spirite fayth vnto the Churches.

B/ And write vuto 5 Angel ofthe Church of Philadelphia, this sayth he that is holy and true, which hath the key of
Dad, Which openeth, and no man en eee shutteth, and no man openeth. ;

3 Innowe thy workes: Beholde, J haue fet before thee an open doore, and no man can shut it, for thou hast a litle

i Thesl. v.a.

U Pet. ui. c.

Efaixxitf
Tob. xii.c.

streugth, e hast kept my sayinges: and

hast not denyed my name.

9 Wcholde, J make themof the synagogue of Sãtau, which tall them selues ewes and are not, but do lye:Gchold,
Wyll make them that they Mal conte
AND worshyp before thy fecte, and shall

knoe that J haue loued thee.
Cio Wecaule Hon hast kept the wordes of mp patience, cherfore J wyll kepe thee krom the houre ok temptation, which

Wyll come vpon all the worlde, to trie them that dwel vpon the earth.

1 Weholde, J come shortlp: Holde that

which thou haste, that no man take a-
Way thy trowuc. P

12 pm that oneveometh, wyll J make d pyller in the temple of my God, and he
(hall go no niore out: And J wyll waite vpon hun the name of my God, and the name of the citie of np God, newe Hierusalem, Which conunetlh Downe out of heauen from mp God, and (J well write vpon hymj my newe name.

3 Let hyn that hath an care, heare what the spirite sayth vnto p Churches.

14 And vnto the Angel of the Churche which is in Laoditea, write: This faith
Amen, the fapthfull and true Witnesse, the begyunyng of the creatures of God.

15 Iknowe thy Workes, that thou arte neither colde nor hotte: I woulde thou were colde or hotte.

16 So thẽ, because thou art luke warme, and neither colde nor hotte, J Wyll spewe thee out of my mouth:

17 Because thou sapest, I am riche and increased with goodes, and haue neede of nothyng: e knowest not howe that thou art wretched, and miserable, and

poore, and blynde, and naked.

18 J counsel thee to bye of me gold tryed N inthe fyre, that thou mayest be riche, ~ and Whyte rayment, that thou mapest

be* clothed, that thy lylthie nakednesse i cor do not appeare, and annoynt thyne eyes with eye lalue, that thou mapest sec.
19 As many as J loue, J rebuke and prowiis. chasten: Be feruent therfore, F repent. Heben.
20 Beholde, J stande at the doore and knocke: If any man heare my boyee, and open the doore, J wyll tome in to hym, and wyll suppe with hym, and he with me. '
21. To hpnithat ouerconnneth, wyll J graunt to sitte wich me in iy throne, cuen as J ouertame, and haue litten with my kather in his throne.
22 Het hym 5 hath an care, heare what the spiritt sayth vnto the Churches.

C The

¢q The. ij. Chapter.

Cle vision of the maiestie of God. 2 He feeth the throne, and one spttyng vpon it.

8 and. xxitit. leateg about it, with. xxiiii. elders syttyng

beastes prapsyng God day and nypght.

Sw U — ed
N 8 ee

N

Vi

aly

And immedtatly J was in the spirite, and behold, a throne was fet in heauen, and one fate on the throne. a

And he that late, was to loke vppon like vnto a Jalper stone and a Sardine stone: and there was a rapnebowe az bout the throne, in light like to an Eincralde.

4 And abont p throne were. xxiiij.seates, and vpon the seates.xxiiij.elders fitting, clothed in Whyte rapment, and had on their heades crownes of golde.

5 And out ot the throne proceaded light-

nynges, and thundrynges, and voptes,

and there were seuẽ lampes of fire burnyng before the throne, whiche are the seuen spirites ot God.

wv

B

E And before the throne there was a sea

The. v

bppon them, and foure

of glasse, lpke vnto tristall, and in the nipddest of the throne, e rounde about the throne, Were foure beattes, full of eyes before and behynde.

7 And the first beat was lyke a Lion, and the setonde beast lyne a Calfe, the thirde beast had a fate as a an, and the fourth beast was like a fleyng Egle.

8 And the foure beastes had eche one of them fire wynges about hym, and they were full of eyes within: and they Had no rest day neither night, saying: Holy

holy holy Lorde God almightie, Which Fav

Was, and is, and is to come.

9 And when thole veattes gaue glorlie, D and hondur, and thankes to hym that fate on the throne, which lyueth lor euer and euer:

Io The xxiiij.elders fell downe before hun that fate on the throne, and worshipped hym that lyueth for euer, and cat their crownes before the throne, saying:

un Thon art worthy, O Loyd, to receaue glorie, and honour, and power: for thou hak created all thynges, and for thy pleasures fake they are € were created.

Chapter.

He seeth the lambe openyng the bookie, 8. 14. and therfore the koure beasles, the rriiit. eiders, and the angels, prapse the lambe, and do hym worchipꝰ foz their res

demption and other benelites.

Nd J sawe in the right hande

Hot hym that fate on the throne,

a beoke witten within, and

on the backe spde, sealed with

seuen seales. 5

2 Aud Jsawe a strong angell, whiche preached with a loude voyte: Who is
Worthy to open the booke, and to loose the seales therof:

3 And no man in heauen, nor in cart), neither vnder the earth, was able to open the booktc, neither to loke theron.

4 And J wept muche, beeaule no man
Was founde Worthy to open e to reade the booke, neither to loke theron.

5 And one ok the elders sayde vnto me, wepe not: behold a Lion of the tribe of
Juda, the roote of Dauid, hath obtey-

Vater

ned to open the booke, and to loole the seuen seales therof.

6 And J behelde, and loe in the midaes ofthe throne and of the foure beastes, and in the middes of the elders, stoode a

lainbe as though he had ben kylled, ha-

nyng seuen hornes c {even eyes Whiche are the seuen spirites of God, lent into all the worlde.

And he tame, and toke the booke out B of the right hande of him that late vpon the throne.

8. And when he had taken the booke, che foure beastes and. xxiiij. elders fell downe before the lambe, hauyng tcuery one of them harpes, and golden vpals full of odours, which are the prayers of

faintes:
Es And

9 Aud they fong anewe song, saying:
Thou art worthy to take the booke and to open the sealts therof: for thou watt kylle d, and Haft redeemed vs to God by thy blood, out of al kinrede, and tongue, and people, and nation:

Jo And Halt made vs vnto our God kinges and ‘ed and we shall raigne on the carth.

Du And J beheld, and J Heard the vopce of many angels about the throne, and about] the beastes and the elders, and hearde thoulande thoulandes,

12 Sa ping with a loude voyte: Worthy is the lambe that was kylled to receaue-

power, and richesse, and wiledome, and pi and honor, and glorie, and biel: yng. J
13 And all the treatures whiche are in heauen, and on the earth, and vnder the earth, and in the lea, and all that are in them, hearde J, saping: Blessyng, honour, glozic, and power be vnto hym that sitteth vpon the throne, and vnto the lambe for cuermore.
14 And the foure beastes sapde, Amen.
And the. xxiiij. elders fell vpon their faces, and worchipped hym that lyueth for cuermore.

J The. vj. Chapter.

Che lambe openeth the fire seales and many thynges folowe the openyng therol, fo that this contepneth a generall prophelie to the ende of the worlde.

Vee 2 mie >

Pee
Lae

Oy ya

ek:
5%

8 CS.
AT

e it a 15

scales, and J heard one of

the foure beastes sap, as it

ere the noyse of thunder, tome and see: and J fare.

2 And behold, there was a whyte horse,

and he that sate on hym had a bowe, €

à trowne was geuen vnto hym, and he

went foorth conquerpng, and for to o-

. ucrcome,

3 And when he had opened the {econde sealc, Ihcarde the setonde beast faye, tonie and see.

4 And there went out another horse that

a a 7
SON

the

Hym a great worde.

5 And when he had opened the thirde zz seale, I hearde the third beast lay, conic and see. And J behelde, and loe, a blacke horse, and he that fate on hym hadde a payze of balauntes in his bande.

6 And Nhearde a vopte in the myddes ok the foure beastes laye: A measure of wheate for a penie, and three mealures of barly for a penie, and ople and wine fee thou hurt not. f

And

And when he had opencd the fourth and helf fölolbed after nt

scale, I hearde the voyte of the fourth beast fay, come and see.
3 And Jloked, and behold a pale horse, With hunger aud with death, and With t his name that late on him was death, the beastes ok the earth.

f BS

sae POY — om TF Sey = — A 25
= — 5 : * Ps
> D =) = =e . 4
é 8 2 =a 2 12 OLA x
— Sie j 5 Bee eee SE ke a — — 4 8 1e r „ — 2 = L 1 oy
. 8 $s
7 rr ö 5 2 7 — = PoE
‘ F rth — 127 =
2 uf ¢ 0
8 ub 5 N - Ha 50 ‘4
Wee N a 2
7 27 76 . e —
‘ — 7 fy
5 10 ayy A N nN
- A ie

N ~ 5 — —
U —

ft 5 an Gi Rees 2 U 5 0 0

| ere i (a W ne

| t a Ae 3 og } xf

INN |

10 f U

i 7 5) NN
0 . ) (oR TEC 18 qu our blood on (HE that dwell on p carth-

ol. b. J sawe vnder the aulter 'the soules of 11 And long Whyte garmentes were gethem that were kylled for the Worde of uen vnto euery one ofthem: and it was
God, and for the testinonie whichthey sapde vnto them, that they should vette had. pet for a litle season, vntyll the munber ro And they tryed with a londe voyte, ok their felowes, and brethren, and of saying: Howe long taryest thou Lorde, them that shoulde be kylled as they holy and true, to indge and to auenge Were, were kulkpiled.

u. raul ofan Hh

f

= UF

„„

= = N *
\ : f ae 2 e \\WitH 27
Sw 2 a 5 sek 2 Na

le 4 S 5 v ö a > i Awe 4

wes fl fe) as — — Te 1

2 wr ain

5 N 7 ‘ aii V

NN ‘Py, YY 1 . a 4 it 10 19 &

<a 77 70 i Hated SS
1 2 „,, ih I 0 1 N > i ey 0 IN
Se WEE \ y 7
2 55 Ay S 12 i

Nag oy ap
Aer * =f ey —— at ON Von 12 e : * 7 XI 3989 —
R Y Din “Aire 50 3

J Daal ol by Ot Whee

5 SS 0 l *

K

Walde 8
* Tex aud M

N 1447

earthquake, etic sunne was as blacke

as sackcloth made ol here, the noone
Tü wared

„

D 2

waxed all euen as blood:

3 And the starres of heauen fell vnto the earth, euen asa figge tree casteth her vntimely figges when fhe is Haken of a myghtie wynde.

14 And heauen vanished awape as a scroule when it is roulled together, and all mountapnes and ples were moued out oftheir plates.

15 And the kynges of the earth, and the great men, and the ryche men, and the

he. vij. Chapter.

chieke tapitames, and the npghtie men, and euery bonde man, and tuery free man, Hyd them selues in dennes and in rockes of the hylles:

16 And sapde to the hylles e rockes, fall og. on bs, and hyde vs from the peefence of Lok hun that sitteth on the throne, and from the wrath of the lanibe:

17 Foz the great day ofhis Wath is tome: and who ss able to endure-

4. 9. He seeth the seruauntes ol God sealed in their korheadeg, out of all nations and people, 15 which though they suffer trouble, pet the lambe leedeth them, leadeththem to the kountaynes ol lpupng water, 17 and God Mall wype awape all

teares from their eyes,

ny tree.
2 And J sawe another angell ascende from the rysing of the sunne, which had the seale of the lyuyng God, and he ery: ed with a loude boyce to the foure ati gels to whom polwer was genen to
. Hurt the earth and the fea,
3 Saping: Hurt not the earth, neither

sealed the seruaũtes of our God in their foreheade 4

the sea, neither the trees, tyll we haue

N

f N
0 Poe ait ]

And AN hearde the number of them which were sealed: And there were leas led an C. and xlüiti. thoulande, of all the

tribes or the chyldren of Ysrael.

§ Okthe tribe of Juda were sealed. rij, thousande. Df the tribe of Ruben were sealed. xij. thoulande. Ot the tribe of
Gad were sealed. rij. thousande.

6 Mithe tribe of Aler were sealed. rij. thoufande. Of the tribe of Pephthali
Were sealed. rij. thoulande. Pk ÿ tribe of
Manasses were scaled.xij. thoulande.

7 Okthe tribe of Himeon were {eaten rij. thoulande. Of tribe of Leni were lealed. rij. thoulande. Ok tribe of Jlachar were sealed. rij. thoulaude.

8 Okthe tribe of Zabulon were sealed

xi.

rij. thoulande. Of the tribe of Joleph
Were sealed. xij, thousande. Ok the tribe of Wenianiin Were sealed rij. thoufand.
Cy After this J behelde, and loe a great multitude which no man could nuniber of all nations, and kinredes, and people, and tongues, stoode before the throne, and before the lambe, clothed with long

whpte garmentes, and paͤlnies in their

handes,

lo And cryed with a loude voyte, saying:
Saluation be aleribed to hym that fit

teth vpon the throne of our God, and

“A prio the lambe.

1 And all the angels stoode in the tompasse of the throne, and of the elders, € of the foure beastes, and fell before the throne on their faces, and worshypped

God,

12 Saping, Amen: Blessyng, and glozie, and wiledome, and thankes, c honour, and power, and myght, be vnto our
God kor euermore, Amen. a

13 Ind one of the elders auntivered, faying buto me: What are thefe which are D

araped in long whyte garmentesz and

Whence came thep-

14. And he fayde vnto hym, Lorde thou wotest. And he sayde to me: Thelt are they which came ont of great tribilati-

on, and haue wallhed their long roves,

and made them Whyte by the blood of

the lambe.

15 Therefore are they in the prefence ol the throne of God, and serue hym daye and nyght in his temple, and he that litteth in the throne, wyll dwell among

them.

16 They Chall hunger no moze,

neither

thirst, neither Malt the lunne iyght on

them, neither any heate.

17 For the lainbe which is in the mpddes of the throne shall feede then, and shall leade them vnto fountapnes of lpuyng
Water, and God (hall wype awape all

teares from their eyes.

¢ The viij. Chapter.

1 Che teuenth feale is opened, there is scilence in heauen. s The foure angels blowe their trumpettes, and great plagues folo we vpon the earth.

MM when he had opened
ONS the leuenth seale, ther was dmlence in heaué about the pace ok halke an houre:
2 KAnd Isawe the seuen angels standyng before God, and to them

D
Nun mM y 8
Nane

“ 5

„ e
N

uhich was velore the throne.

were geuen seuen trumpets.

3 And another angell came and stoode before the aulter, hauynga golden senfer, and nuch of odours was geuen vnto hym, that he should offer of the prayers of all laͤintes vpon the golden aulter

50 0 re ia
2 nne l
„ 0 . n a e 9 1 e if er Rea Ws * > 8 2 A * * i
N 7 Him Wek e a wees td Se gil
; 17 nl: 8

d the smoke of the odours
4 Andth er

whithe canie

_ The Reuelation

caine ot the prayers of all saintes, asten- ¢ And the seuen angels whiche had the ded vp before God, out of the angels seuen trumpettes, prepared them selues

into the carth: and bopces wert made, and they Were cat into the earth, and. and thundrynges, and lyghtnynges, & the thirde part of trees wasburnt, and carthquake, all greene grasse Was burnt.

fon, ju

N 7

oir

a i 2 For SOT: nn ae We ¢
8 Andthe seconde angell blewe, and as 9 And the thirde part of the creatures it were a great mountapne bucnpng whithe were in the fea, and hadde with fire was cast into the fea, and the l ple, dyed, and the thirde part of shippes thirde part of the (ca turned to blood. Were destroped. * :

LoS. yp SA t—~ AG!
SEW \ Sg Ba (cana |
H 05 W 8 oH ATT 0 ions ( * & K ST r * . .

fin

10 And the third angell blewe, and there as it were a lampe, and it f
; , ell into fell a great starre from heauen, burning thirde part ok the ryuers, and into ane faynes

taynes of waters:

And the name ok the starrt is talled

wornie wood, and the thirde part was

0 khr watt . maup men

dyrd o aters, because tl

made bitter. eee

u And the fourth angell blewe, and the thirde part of the sunne was fmytten, and the thirde part ol the moone, and the thirde part of starres, fo that the

2 Il

U ; i
Ie 8 2 . .
7 2 G , 3 9 oo ofa id pute (As eT OT HD OF 7 7
0 ay ( Ri! Sasi 5 1 e e ee FON 1 ö
85 Nie Fee SMH Eine !
N. 2 = = nas 4 ue n all ot
8 N

i 5 pe tai oo eA SF “i —
PW

Visas

thirde part of them Was däckelle ö
He 101 ud ten a the tha part not shyne, a me vne, and lykewile the
31 And Jbthelde, and hearde an angel fleyng through the myddes of ae saying with à loude voyce, wo, Wo, wo to the inhabiters of the earth, because of the voytes to tome ofthe trumpe ofthe three angels which were pet to blowe.

The. ix. Chapter.

I The fife and tire angell blowe their trumpettes, the starre falleth from heauen.
Che locustes come out of the [moke. 1 Che kirst wo is pat. 14 The koure angels that were bounde are loosed. 18 And the thirde part of men is kylled.

SWD the fit angell bleibe,

0 and J sawe a starre fall

ron heauen vnto ö carth:

55 85 Wand to bya Was geuen the

epo the bottonllesse pit.

2 And he opened the bottomlesse pit, and the smoke of the pit arolt, as the molke ofa great foruate, and the sunne and the ayre were darkened by the realon ol the smoke ofthe pit.

3 And there tame out of the smoke lotustes vpon the earth, and buto them was geuen power, as the scorpions of the earth haue power.

And it was commaunded them that they choulde not hurt the grasse of the earth, neither any greene thing, neither

any tree: but only thofe men which haue

not the feate ol God in their korheades.

5 And tothem was commaunded that they schonld not kyll them, but that they choulde be vexed fine monethes, and their paine was as the payne that commeth ofa scorpion when he Hath stong a man.

6 And in thole dapes shall men seke Pia. n. d. death, and (hall not kynde it, and Pall Ola delire to dye, and death shall flee from *

them.
7 And the sinulitude of the locustes Was ,

like vnto horses prepared vnto battaple, and on their heades were as it Were crownes lyke vnto golde, and their faces were as it had ben the faces of men.

8 And they had heere as the heere of wonien, € their teeth were as p teeth of

T ij Lions.

Lions.

9 And they had habbergions as it were habbergions of iron, and the sounde of

N ian

taples: and their power was to hurt men fiue monethes. j

And they hada king ouer them, which is the angell of the bottomlessc pytte, whose name inthe Hebrue tongue is 2A badon, but inp Greke tongue Apollpon, that is to fay, a destroper.)

12 One woe is pat, c beholde two woes tome vet after this.

C And the sirt angell blewe, a J hearde
à vopte from the foure homes of the golden aulter, which is before God,

14 Saping tothe sirt angel whiche had the tripe: Hoole the foure angels
Which are bounde in the great riuer Euphrates.

15 And the foure angels were loosed, whiche Were prepared for an houre, for
A dap, for a moneth, and for a pere, for to flea the thirde part of men.

16 And the number ol horsemen of warre were twentie thonfand times ten thoufande, e J hearde the number of them.

e
N 7

their Wynges was asp sounde of char: rettes when many horses runne toge-

(ees a r —

ite 1 . ara Nts e

17 And thus J sawe the horses in a vision, and them that sate on them, hauing fierie habbergions of a iatinct colour, and brymstone, and the heades of the horses Were as the heades oflions, and dut of their mouthes went koorth fire, and smoke, and brynistone.

18 And ok these threr was the third part sp of men kylled [that is to say of fire, smoke and brynistone, which proceaded out ol themouthesofthen.

19 Jor their power was in their mouthes, c in their tayles: for their taples Were lyke vnto serpentes, and had heades, x with them they dyd hurt.

20 And the renmaunt of the men whithe were not killed by these plagucs, repens ted not of the deedes of their handes, that they shoulde not worchip deupls, and Doles of golde, and spluer, x bralle, and stone, and of wood, Whiche neither can see, neither heare, neither go:

21 Also they repented not of their murther, e of their sorcerie, neither of their fornication, neither ok their theft.

C The

255 And the Angel which J

Che Angel hat he geueth che t

My ant wy 4 —
— Vie

+" 7 N
* hee th

hia

D Flarbeano-
N ther myghtie Angel come done
% kröheauk, clothed with atloude, and v rapnebowe vpon his head, and his kate as it were the sunne, and his fete as it were pillers of ye.
2 And he had in his hande alitle booke open, and he put his ryght foote bpon the lea, and his left koote onthe earth:
3 And erped with aloude voptc as whẽ
à Lion roreth: And when he had cryed, seuen thunders vttered their vopces.
And when the fenen thunders had vttered their vopces, J was about to
Write: and J hearde a voyte from heauen, saping vnto me: seale vp thofe thinges which the seuen thunders DE tered, and write them not. sawe stande

vponthe sea and vpon the earth, lykt vp his hande to heauen,

6 And ware by hum cnermoze, which created heauen and

he. x. Chapter.

= N 7 n ps 75
Wess

Paitin

a ‘Ve ,
N 22
* \ 0 * 4 r 1
7 7 \ 1805 iin VS 4 A
J . — 5
2 A 2 4 9 y Hoots. Yeasts Suu 1
N ibn; 7 2 5 n qe eee — * a

Fee Meer +

that lyueth for

booke open, he fweareth there shalbe no moze tym

n Ana,
Apr

Py

the thynges that therin are, z the earth and the thinges that therin are, and the sea, and the thynges which therin are, that there shoulde be no longer tyme.

7 But in the dayes of the voyte of the seuenth Angel, when he shall begyn to plowe, euen the nusterie of God chalbe finiched, as he declared to his seruaũtes the prophetes.

3 And the voytce which J hearde from C heauen, spake vnto me agayne, layde:

Go, and take the litle booke which is che.

open in the hande of the Angel, which standeth vpon the sea and vpon p earth.

9 And JJ went onto the Angel, k layde vnto hm, gene me the litle booke. And he layde vnto me, take it and cate it bp and it shall make thy belly bitter, but it fhaibe in thy mouth as fvecte as honp.

1o And F toke the litle booke out of the D

Angels hande, and ate it vp, and it was cb.

in my mouth as fivecte as Pony: aud affoone as J had eaten it my belly was

bitter.
1 And he sayde vnto me, thoumust pro-

phelie agayne among the people and nations, and tongues, c to many kinges.

The

| ¢ The.xj. Chapter.
Che temple is meafured. 3 Two witnesses rapsed vp by the Lorde, are murthered by the beat,

11 but alter receaued to g lorie. 15 Chrille is exalted, 16 and God is prayled by the xxiiii, elders,

g
1 fm
} oy

ee

a

sas ME pil, ois

Fea» l FT ST Dy, (

Fal .

zB,

rit
88 7 7 ce, f ity 5 tus y 10
* Wi 1 7 pala ott 7 8 N 3 1 f
40 N 2 i + ow A sith Wh op a Saag aD), ape 1 ee I 8 Pe. Alt bi „* 8 = yt N W Ae — 2 8
1 0 S 5 er * 5 75 5 W 2 L i — 43
170 4 j » TA e, 5 N. 0 yy 5 *
NED N. 2 Ne I f 5 ail
Le iW deg. urs Ai ae: 5 .. r MW I id fh SEES RATT „ : 5 7 N ay i Abd Woe i 1 t Hi J i! Ad
7 1, BU a th
7 iT 100% ce Mull n 7 4

AI RS a Md the was geuen me a reede 8 And their bodyes thaltiye inp streates
N

lyke vuto a rod, and the angel

N ftoode by faying: Wile € meate

ats = ptcuiple of God, r the aulter,

and them that woMhippe therein:

2 But the court which is without the

temple, cast out, aud meate it not: for it

is geuen vnto the gentiles, and the holy citie shall they treade vnder foote fourtie and two monethes.

And J wyl geue power vnto my two
Witnesles, aud they shall prophesie a thoulande, two hundred, and thrt escore daes, clothed in lackdloth.

These are two oline trees, and two tandlestickes, standyng before the God ofthe earth.

B75 And pfranpy man wyll hurt them, fyre
Thal proceade out of their mouthes, xtöõsume their enemies: And if anpman wil hurt them, this Wyle nut he be kylled.

6 These haue power to shut heauen,

that it rayne not in the Dayes of their prophesipng: and haue power oner
Waters, to turne then to blood, and to finite thecarth with all maner plagues, as often as they wpll.
Aud WHE they haue finished their testimonie, the beak that conuneth ont of the bottomlesse pit, chall make warre against them, and shal ouertome them, and hyll them.

of the great citic, Which sptritually is called Sodome and Egypt, where dur
Lowe was crucified.

9 And they ofthe people, andkinredes, and tongues, and they of the nations,
{halt {ee their bodyes three Dayes and an halfe, æ hall not suffer their bodyes to be put in graues.

10 And they that dell vpon the earth
Thal reioyte duer them, and be glad, and hall sende gyftes one to another: for these two prophetes vexed them that dwelt on the earth. 2

1 And after theec dayes and an halle, C the spirite of lyfe (commyng) krom God,
Mail enter into them: And they (hall stande vp vpon their feete, ¢ great feare fhall come vpon thé which sawe them.

12 And they (halt heare a great vopce

from heauen, faying vnto them, come vp hyther. And they shall ascende vp to heàuen in atlonde, and their enemies shall sce them.

13 And the same houre shall there be a great earthquake, and the tenth part of the citie (hall fall, and in the earthquake shalbe slaine names of men seuen thousande:and theremnaunt shalbe akraide, and geue glorie to the God of heauen.

14 The leconde wo is past, and beholde the thirde wo wyll come anon. ie d

An

And the seuenth angell blewe,¢ there were made greate vopces in heauen, faying: the üyngdomes ofthis Worlde are our TLordes, and his Chuistes, and he shall raigne for euermore.

And the. xiiij.elders which lit before
God on their seates, fel vpon their faces, and worshipped God,

17 Saping: We geue thee thankes, O
Lorde God almpghtie, which art, and

Walt, and art to come : for thou hast re-

teaued thy great mpght, e haft raigned. is And the nations were angrie, and thy

toate 05 a

cp thoulde be indged, und that

thou choindelt gene rewarde vnto the seruauntes the prophetes and faintes, and to them that feare thy name, small and great, and chouldest destroy them which destroy the earth.

19 And the temple of God was opened in heauen, and there were feene in his temple the arke of his testament: and there folowed lyghtuinges, and voytes, and thundringes, and earthquake, and much haple.

The. xij Chapter.

1 Chere appeareth in heauen a woman clothed with the lunne. 7 Michael lyghteth with the Dragon which persecuteth the woman. n The victorie

is gotten, to the comtort of the kapthkull.

2 X 4)

with the sunne, c

the moone vnder

her feete, and bpd

ber headatrowne

b —bdftwelue starres:
And the was with chylde, and erped, tràuaplyng in birth, and papned redy to be delpnered. i

3 And there appeared another wonder in heauen, for beholde, a great redde
Dene, e 1 8
Homes, and seuen crownes vpon heades r

4 And his taple drue the thirde part of
| the flarres of heauen, antl cait them to

he earth: And the dragon stoode before the woman which was redie to be deliuered, for to denoure her chylde asloone as it were borne.
5 And she broughit foorth a man chylde, which shoulde rule all nations with a rodde of pron: And her sonne was taken bp vnto God, and to his throne.
6 And the woman fled into wüdernelle, where che hada place prepared of God, that they shonld feede her there a thonsande two hundreth and threstore days.

7 And there was a battaple in heauen,

Michael and his angels fonght with the dragon, and the dragon fought and his angels, 8

8 And preuapled not, neither was their plate founde any moze in heauen.

d the great dragon, that olde ser-

cast out, which deteaueth au the World:
And he was cast into the earth, and his angels were ca out with hyni.

10 And J hearde a loude voyte aving in heauẽen: Mowe is made saluation, € strength, a the kingdome of our God. t the power of his Christ: Foz the atcuser ok our brethren is tast downe, which actuled them before our God day ce uyght,

1 And they ouertame hym by the blood of the Lambe, and by the worde of their teftimanic; and they loned not their lyues vnto the death. ä

1 Therkore reioyte heauens, and ye that, dwell in them. i the earth, and ofthe fea: fo2 the deuyll is come dowue bnto pou, Which hath great wrath, betause he knoweth that
He hath but a short tyme.

13 And when the Dragon
Was cast vnto the earth, he perlecuted the 15 Which brought foozth the man chylde.

14, And 19 the woman were geuen two winges, of a great Egle, that she mpght fice into the wildernesse into her plate, where fhe is norished for a tynte tyres, and halke a tyme, from the prelence of the serpent.

15 And the serpent cast out of his mouth water after the Woman as it had ben a fludde, that einen taryed away of the fludde.

16 And the earth holpe the woman and the earth opened her mouth, and {waz lowed bp the ryuer which the dragon cat out of his mouth. “int

a,

Mo to the inhabiters ol

pent, called the deuyll æ Satanas, was

\ q

sawe that he Dp

her to be

and the tyme of the dend

And the dragon was wroth with the wonian d and went and made warre with the remnaunt ok her feede, which

J sawe a beast ryle out of the sea, haz

valores ten crownes, and vpon his head the

| were Wounded to death, and his deadly

is lyke vnto the beast- who is able to

warre with hym- f
5 And there was geuen bnto hym a mouth, that {paite great thynges aud blasphennes, and power was geuen
5 vnto hym to do. rij. monethes.
6 And he opened his mouth vnto bial phemie agaynst God, to blaspheme his nanie, aud his tabernatie, andthenithat dwell in heauen. . 72S
7 And it was geuen vnto hym to make warre with the saintes, & to ouercome them: And power was geuen him ouer all kinredes, and tongues, and nations,
8 Aud al ö dwel vpon the earth, worshipped him whole names are not Wiittẽ in the bool of lyfe of b lambe, which was killed from the beginnyng of the World.

heare.

ND F loked, and lo, a lambe
Astoode on the mount Sion,

on

The. xiij. Chapter.

1,8, Che beast deceaueth the reprobate, 2, 4. 12. and is conlirmed by another.
17 The priuiledge ot the beattes marke,

9 BHF any man haue an eare, let hym

kepe the tommaundementes of God, t haue the testimonie of Jesus Chatte,
18 And J ltoode on the {ea lande.

10 He that leadeth into captinitic, shall go

into taptiuitie: * He that kylleth with a Cee sworde, must be kylled with afore, 225

Here is the patience and the fayth of the saintes.

ea

11 And J behelde another beak tom- E

myng vp out of the earth, and he had two hornes lyke a lambe, and he spake as dyd the dragon. 4

n And he dyd all that } first beat toulde do in his presente, c he taused the earth aud them which dwell therein, to worship the first beast, whose deadly wound
Was healed.

13 And he dyd great wonders so that he made fyre come downe from heauen on the earth in the syght of men. '

14 And Deceaned them that dwelt onthe earth, by the meanes of thofe signes

which he had power to do in the syght

of the beast, faping to them that dwelt on the earth, that they shoulde make the image of the beast which had the wounde ofalworzde, and dyd lpue.

15 And he had power to geue a ipirite vnto the image of the beast, that the image

of the beast shoulde speake, and shoulde

tause that as many as Youlde not worfp the image ok the dealt, choulde be

vite
16 And he made all both mal e great, rich

€ poore, free bonde, to receaue a mare in their right hand, or in their forheads.

17 And that no man myght bye o2 fell, saue he that had the marke 02 p name or the beast, other p number of his name.

18 Mere is wildonie. Let hym that hath
Witte, count p number of the beast: Foz it is the number ofa man, e his nuniber / is sixe hundred threescore and sixe. 4

The. xiiij. Chapter.

Che notable companie of the lambe. s One angel announceth the Golpel. s Inother, the fall ot Babylon. And the thirde warneth to fice trons the beast. ij Ot their blelled nelle which dye in the Lorde. is Ok the Lozdes haruest.

hanyng his fathers name written in their foreheades. .

and with hym an hundzeth 2 And J hearde a voyte from heauen,
— ourtie and foure thoufande,

as the sounde of many waters, auge

the voyte of a great thunder: And J hearde the vopce of harpers harppng g With their harpes:

And they long as it were a newe song pelore the throne, and before the foure pealtes,¢ the elders, and no man toulde learne that fong, but the hundreth and fourtic ¢foure thoulande, which were redeemed front the earth.

AA Kd

N Vth 0

y aha enn Gat I! I

La ( U Ni 9 W ed a tte eee

6 And IJ fave another angell flee in

the nuddes of heauen, haupng the euerlastylig Gospell, to preache vnto them that sit and dwel on the earth, and to all nations and kinredes, and tongues, and

people,
% Saying with a loude vopce: * Feare
God, and geue honour to hym, foz the haoure ok his indgement ts come: ald
Worchippe hym that made heauen and re and the fea, aud fountaynes of

Lee 3 And there folowed another angel.

ane, laying: Wäbplon is fallen is fallen that

great titie, for fhe made all nations denke ol the wyne of the Watt of her

: fornication.

Co Andthe thirde angel folowed them, faying with a loudc opte: If anp man
Worlhippe the beast and his image, and reteaue his marke in his foreheade, or on his hande,

lo The lame chall dzynke of the wyne ol the wrath of God yea of the pure Wyne which is powred in 5 cup of his Wiath:
And he chalbe punillhed in kyre c brün-

of Saint Iohn.

i
„
4 These are they which were with wont, kor they are virg * a folowwe the lambe whither cay gocth : Thele were reneeme beyng the first fruites vnto ~ the lambe. =

5 And in their mouthes wae guile: Foz they are withoun x the throne ol God. *

stone, before the holy angels, a the lambe. |

11 And the smoke of their tome: — deth bp euermore: And they d rest day nor nyght which wors- ö beast and his image, and whosoeu teaueth the prynt or his name.

12 Here is the patiente ol the laintes: l. are they that kepe the connmaunden tes of God, and the kayth ol Jesus.

3 And J hearde à vopte from heauen, frying vuto me, Weite: Wlesled are the dead, which hereafter dyeinthe Torde.
Euen lo lapth the spirite, that they rest from their laboures, and their Wwozkes kolowe them.

14 And J loked, and beholde a whyte g cloude, and vpon the cloude one sittyug lyke vnto the lonne of mau, hauyng on his head a golden crowne, and in his hande a sharpe fickle.

15 And another angetl came out of the temple, crping with a loude vopce to hyni that late on the tlonde: Thrust in doe. thy lickle c veape, oz the time is tome to reupe:for the haruest of b earth is 1

7h

Den Ein,
4 Pi
W

A

lp Ard

N

hi

5 e aulter, which had power ouer

rt AMV cxyed witha loude crye to hym

Add the sharpe fickle, and sayde:

ares tinthy sharpe sickle, and gather

che clufters of the vineyarde of p earth, for xe grapes are ripe. 8

4 u the angel thrust in his sharpe

“7

nd uwe another ligne in pbeauen, great æ maruepious, keuen angels hauyng the see uen last plagues, foz in them
5 kulkylled the wach of God.

Aud J fave as it were a glassie fea mingled With fe, aud them that had gotten the victorie of the beat, and of his image, and of his marke, and of the mumber of his name, stande on p glassie fea, hauyng the harpes of God.

Aud they fang the fong of Moyses the

„saping: Great and marneplous
P Workes* Lorde God alinightie, ust and true are thy wapes thou lyng

900 hi ll not feare-thee O Torde,

ie thy uamie z for thou onlp uD all gentiles Mal come and

The RKeuelation

CC IEE Ee chat latt on the tloude thzust 17 And another angell tame out of the
Kuhle on the earth, and the carth

sawe another angell came out

seruaunt of God, and the fong of the

temple which is in heauen, hanxng allo at sharpe sickle.

1 ¥ pean ||

20 And the wynckat was troden without

J The. xv. Chapter. Sere

Seuen angels haue t he seuen tat plagues. The long ot them that ouercome the
Heal, 7 Che seuen viais full of Gods wrath.

worship before thee, for thy iudgemeétes are made mantest. , a

5 And akter that J loked, and beholde, 5 the teimple of the tabernacle of testunonie was open in heau en:

6 And the seuen angels tame out of the temple, which had the fenen plagues, tlothed in pure and bryght lynnen, and
Hauing their brestes girded with golden girdels. *

And ont of the foure beastes, gaue vnto the seuen angels sruen golden vials, full of the watch of God Which lpueth for euerinore.

8 And the temple was full ofthe smoke

of the glorie of God, and of his power:

WD no man was able to enter into the teimple, tyll the seuen plaques of the seneu angels were fuifplicd,

¶ The

pp tie riuer which the Dragon cal out of bis mouth

17 And the Dragon was moth with the woman, and went and made warre with the remnant ot her seede, which keepe the commandements ok God, and haue the testimonie of Fetus Christ. b

18 And] Istoode on the sea sand.

The xiij,Chapter,

1, 8 The beast deceiueth the reprobate; 2. 4. 12 and

is confirmed by another, 17 The ptiuiledge of the beastes marke.

ane ND Flaw a beat rife out of

ie fea, bauing feuen heads, and tenne hornes, and bpon

Albis hornes tenne crownes, land ppon his heads, the name ol blasphemte.
2 And the bea€ which J sawe, was lite a
Leopard, and his feete were as the feete of a
Beare, and his mouth as the mouth of a Lion: and the Dragon gaue him his power; and his seate, and great authozitie.

3 And J sawe one of his heads as it were

wounded to death, and his deadly wounde

was healed: and all the world wondred after the beat. *

4 And they woorshipped the Dragon which gaue power vnto the beast, and they worchipped the bea, saping, oho is like vnto the beat? who is able to warre with

him: N

5 And there was giuen vntohim a mouth, speaking great things, and blafphem ies, and power was giuen vnto him, to doe fourtie and two moneths. — s And hee opened his mouth vito blasphemie against God, to blaspheme his name, and his tabernacle, and them that dwell in heauen. f

7 And it was giuen vnto him to male warre with the faintes, and to ouercome them: And power was giuen him ouer all kinreds, and tongues, and nations.

8 And all that dwell vpon the earth, halt worship him, whole names are not witten in the booke of life of the lambe, which was
Killed from the beginning of the world.

Ian man haue an eare, let him heare.

10 * He that leadeth into captiuitie, hall goe into captiuitie: Gee that killeth with a
Iword, must be kilied with a sword. Heere is the patience and the faith of the faints.
11 And J behelde another beat com: ming vp outot the earth, and hee had two pons like alambe,and hee spake as did the
Dragon.

12 And hee doeth all that the firk beat

could doe in his presence, and he causeth the

rarth and them which dwell therein to woz:

Ene, lirst beat, whofe deadly wound was ed.

\ 13 And hee doeth great wonders, so that

e maketh fire come downe from heauen on the earth in the light ol men,

14 And deceiueth them that dwell on the earth, by the meanes ol thole sigues which hee had power to doe inthe sight of the beast, faping to them that dibell on the earth; that

theyswouldmake an image to che beat which

Hath the wound of a lword, and did itue.
15 And he had power to giue a spirite vnto the image of the beact, that the image of

the beat should both speake, and should cause ;

that as many as woulde not worchip the image of the beak could be killed. e

16 And hee cauleth all, both (mali and great, rich and poore, free and bond, that he thoulde giue them & marke in their right band, 02 in their fozeheads. f

17 And that no man might buy oz sell, laue hee that had the marke, or the name of the beat, or the number ol his name.

18 Here is wifedome. Tei him that hath wit, count the number of the beak: For it is the number ola man, and his number is fire
Hundzed threescore and fire.

The xiiij, Chapter.
1 The notable companie of the lambe. 6 One angel announceth the Gospel, 8 Another the fall of Babylon,
9 And the third warnerh to flee from the beaft, 18
Of the Lords hatuest.

74 fourtic and foure thousand,
(4) Dauing his tathers name written in their forekeads.

And FZ heard a vopce from heauen, as the sound ot many waters, and as ite voyce of a great thunder: and J heard the vopce of
Marpers, harping with their Harpes:

3 And they sung as it were a new song befoze the throne, and befoze the foure beaftes, and the Elders, and no man coulde learne that song, but the hundred and fourtie and foure thousand, which were redeemed from the earth. a

4 Chese are they which were not dellled with women: kor they are virgins: Thele are they which followe the Lambe whithertoeuer hee goeth: Chese were redeemed from men, being the fir fruites vnto God, andto the Lambe. N 9

5 And in their mouth was founde no
Guile: for they are without spot besore the throne of God. .

6 And Flawe another Angel flee in the middest of heauen, hauing the euerlasting
Gospel, to preach onto them that dwellon the earth, and to all nations, and hinreds, and tongues, andpeople,

7 Saying with a loude voyce, -Feare pi rae,

God, and gitie glorp to him, forthe houre ot

His iudgement is come: and worchip him g. that made h- auen and earth, and the sea, and 15.

fountaines of waters.
8 Ang there followed another angel, fap

ing, “Babylon is fallen, is kallen that great EI5y. 21.8. citie, foz shee made all nations drinke of the ierem. 1.8.

Bbbbbt. wine

dq looked, and lo, a Lambe The Ppillle dcode on the mount Sion, on lunoand with him an hundzed ceurs day,

- a

oel. 3. 13.

Hat. 13.39.
Or, dried.

wine ol the wrath of her sorntcation.

9 Andthe third angel followed them, saping with a loud boyse, If any man worship the beat and his image, a receiue his marke

in his forehead, or in his hand,

10 Che fame shal drinke of the wine of the wath of God: yea, of the pure wine which is powred in the cup of his wrath, a he shalbe punlsbed in fire and brimstone, belore the ho ip angels, and befoze the Lambe,

11 And the imohe of their torment alcendeth vpeuermore: And they haue no rest day
No nigdt which worsolp the beat and his image, and wholoeuer receiueth the print of his name. N

12 Here is the patience ofthe satnts: ere are they that licepe the commandements of
God, and the saith of Jesus.

13 And J heard a vopce from heauen, saping vnto ine, write, Blessed are the dead, which die in the Lorde. Euen lo sapeth the spirite, that they map rest from their labour, and their workes follow them.

14 And J looked, and beholde a white cloud, a vpon the cloud one fitting like vnto

the sonne of man, hauling on his head a gol: den crowne, and in his hand a sharpe fichie,

15 And another angel came out ok the temple crying with a loud vopce to him that

late on the cloud: Thrust in thy sickle and reape, sor the time is come to reape, kor the
* haructt of the carth is J ripe.

16 And ye that sate on the cloud thrust in

his sichle on the earth, and the earth was 55

reaped. N

17 And another Angel came out of the +

temple which is in heauen, hauing also a ne sichle. ;

18 And another angel came out from the altar, which had power ouer fire, and cried with a loud eryto him that had the sharpe lic

lle, saping, Thzust in thy Harpe sickle, and

gather the clusters of the vineyarde of the

earth for her grapes are ripe.
19 Andthe angel heat in his sharpe fickle

on the earth, and cut downe the vinepard of

tue earth, and cat it into the great winefat of the wath ok God.

20 Andthe winekat was troden without the citie, and blood came out of the lat euen vnto the horse bridleg, by the space of a thou; sand and fire hundred furlongs.

N The xv. Chapter.

The song of chem that ouetcome the beaft,
PPLE ND F latve another Ciqne in heauen teat and marueilous,

seuen Angels hauing the seuen

lact plagues, toz in them is ful: filled the wath of God.
Z {awe as it were a glassie fea, miugled with fire, and them that had gotteu the victorp of the veast, and ot his image, and ok his marke, and ol the number of his name, and on the glaslie sea, hauing the harpes of God.

suelation.

~~ “Phe bloody @rinke t

3 Andthey fing the (ongof Motes the seruant of God, and the fong of the Lambe, saping, Great and marueilous are thy worhes,

Lord God Aimightie, iust and true are thy pa

wWapes, thou king of faints,

be, ne, |

4. Who hall not feare thee, O Lo d, and tere; 10.7,

glozifie thy name? foz thou onelp art holp:
And all Gentiies shall come, and worship

befoze thee, ko: thy iudgements are made

manilest.

5 And akter that J looked, and behold, the temple ok the tabernacle of the testimonie was open in heauen:

6 And the seuen angels came out of the temple, hauing the seuen plagues, clothed in pure and bright linnen, and hauing their brests girded with golden girdles.

7 Andoneof the fonre bealts gaue vnto the seuen Angels seuen golden vials, full of the wzath of God which liveth foz euermoze.

8 And thetemple was full of the smoke of the glorie of God, andof his power, and no man was able to enter into the temple, till
5 2 plaques of the seuen angels were

ulfilled. N

The xy j. Chapter. t The angels powre out their vials full of wrath, 6 and

what plagues sollow thereof. 15 Admonition to take heede and watch.

heard a great voyce out sf Mos the temple, taping to the se-
Fuen Angels, Goe pour wayes,
NE pow2eoutthe vials ofthe wath ol God bpon the earth.
2 And the sirst Angell went, and powred out his viall vpon the earth, and there fell a noisome a a sore both vpon the men which
Had the marke of the beast, and vpon them which worchipped his image.

ee

3 And the lecond angel thed out his viall

vpon the lea, and it turned as it were into

the blood of a dead man: and euer liuing

thing dyed in the sea. :

4 And the third angell shed out his viall vpon the riuers and fountaines of waters, and they turned to blood.

5 And heardt the angellof the waters

sap, Lord, which art, and wast, thou art righ:

teoug and that holy one, because thou hallt giuen fuch iudgements:

6 For thephaue shed out the blood ol faints

and Prophets, and therefore halt thougiuen

them blood to drinke: fog they are worthie.

7 And Jheard another out ok the altar,

fay, Euen io L ord God almighty, true and

righteous are thy iudgements.

8 And the fourth angel powzed out His vtal on the Sunne a power was giuen ont him to bere men with keruent heate of fire.

9 And men boiled in great heate, and bla ©

phemed the name df God, which hath power our these plagues, and they repented not o giue him glorp

10 And

the lh agel powred out his he fifty angel pow 5

oan

nee olf tell of t

fall bpon the feate of che beat, and hig king. ee 19 > ngueg foz sorowe +
7 And plalphemed the God of Yeauen, ir sorowes, and fo? their sores, and rejeir Deedes.

Euphzates,

ot the great riuer ae that the way ol the

bp jater thereof dried bp, ty =

agb ebe chord he epared.
, 13 And F (awe three pncleanicipt ritg line

trogs, come outof the mouth of the Dragon.

and out of the nouth ol the beast, and out of the mouth ol the falfe prophet. ~~!

14 For ther are the spirits of deuils woe:

ning miracles to goe out vnto the kings ol

1 oath eee wold, to gather

tc t dav af od

ws Almightie.

Aat. 24.44 uke 12.39.

15 Behold, J come ag athiele. Happie is hee that watcheth, a keepeth his garments,
. hee walke naked, and men fee his lilthinesse.

16 And hee gathered them together into

: DOuap XVI.

and thep ae tye r

ss

whoreo . Babyle =

4 And the woman was argped in purple

and scarlet colour, and decked with gold, precious fone, and pearleg, hauing a cuppe of golbe in her hand, full of abominations and thinelsle of her fornication, —
5 And in her korehead was a name writs -

dthe firt Angell powzed “age 85 . ten, a mysterie, great Babplon, the mother ok n

whoredome and abominations ok the earth.
6 And J (awe the woman drunken with

the blood of the saints and with the blood of

the Martyrs ot Jesus: and when z {aw her.
J wondred with e 4 Wha
And the Angel fayde vnto mee, noherefoze marueilest thot : J will chewe thee the mysterie of the woman, and of the beast that
5 5 her, which hath feuen heads and ten
8 And the bealtthat thon sawest, wag, and and chall ascend out of the bottonilesse pit, and ooeth into perdition, and they that
Dwell o. the earth thall wonder ( Whofe names ar Mot written in the boone of life from the bi nningok the world) when they
— 5 the ast that was, and is not, and

a place, called in the Hebrue tongue Arma- pet is

gedon.

17 And the feuenth Angell powred otit his viall into the aire:and there came a great vopce out of the temple of heauen, krom the

throne, saping, It is done.

18 And there followed voyces, thun-

dings, and lightenings: and there was a

great earthquake, such as was notünce men

were vpon the earth, so mightie an earthquake, and fo great. i

19 And the great citie was diuided into three partes, and the citie ol the nations fell:
And great Babplon came in remembrance

15 belore God, * to giue vnto her the cup ol the wine of the liercenesse of his wrath.

20 Euery Fie also fledde away, and the mountaines were not found. 8
21 And there fellagveat haile, as it had bene talents, out ol heauen, vpon the men, and the men blalphemed God, becaute of the plague of the haile: foz the plague thereof was exceeding great.

* The xvij. Chapter.
3 The description of the great whore, 8 and het sinnes, and punishment. bDothere came one of the seuen
V. Angels, which had the seuen
7 vials, and talked with mee, saye ing vnto me, Come, J will hew
* vnto thee the iudgement ok the great whore , that sitteth vpon many waters:

2 with whome haue committed fornica-

tion the kings ol the earth, and the inhabiters ol the earth are drunken with the wine of her fornication, / N

3 So he caried me away in the spirit into the wildernesse: a J saw a woman fit bpona scarlet coloured beat, full of nameg ol blal-

phemy- hauing seuen heads, and ten hornes.

9 And here a meaning that hath wilea on ich 0 fit ae fetter mounon W e woman sitteth: i alloseuen kings. eee
10 Ftue are fallen, a one is, and the other is not yet come: And when he commeth, he must continue a short space.
11 Andthe beak that was, and ig not, is even the eight, and is one ol the leuen, and goeth into destruction. ;
12 And the ten hornes which thon sawelt, are ten kings, which haue receiued no kingdome as pet: but receiue poweras king at one houre with the beat. *

13 These haue one minde, and hall giue their power and strength vnto the beat.

14 These hall fight with the Lambe, and ! the Lambe challouercome them: * Forhe is Tim. 6. 1 the Lord ol Lords, and the king okhings, and apoc. . 16. they that are on his side, are called, and chosen, and faithtull.

15 And hee fapth vnto mee, The waters which thou sawest where the whore sitteth, are people, and folke, and nations, atongues.

16 And the ten hornes which thon sa welt vpon the beast, are they that chall hate the wWhore, and shall maße her desolate, and na-

Red, and shall cate her flesh, and burne her with fire.

17 For God heth put in their hearts to fulfill his will, ard to doe with one consent, for to giue their kngdome vnto the beast, vntill the words of God shalbe fullilled.

18 And the woman which thon sawelt, is that great citie which reigneth ouer the — kings ok theearth. 1

N The xviij.Chapter. *
3.9. The louers of the worldare forte forthe fall of whore of Babylon: 20 But they chat be of God/

cause to reioyce sor her defiuction.
WMhnh hi:

A

Reuelation.

> EOIN CA 16 And saping 3
„ angell come from heauen ha tie, that masclorbeoin rayiieg and pu 1 ung great power 4 the earth andlcarlet, and decked with golde apreciou was lightened with his glory, stones, and pearles: 0 ao ios 5 And hecried mightily with 17 For at one houre fo great riches
Phen and krong boyee, taping, “Great Babplonis conie to nought. And euer ch gouf khout iecte. 51. 8. kallen,

wine ofthe wrath of her fornicution, andthe

lings of the earth haue committed fornicate

on with her,

fer waxed rich of the abundance ol her pleaes.

ur N

4 And J ae another boyce from heafier fap, Come away Crom her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sinnes, ¢ that pe receiue not oł her plagues. .
5 For her linnes are gone bp to heauen, and God hath remembied her wickednesse.

6 Reward her euen as sherewarded you, and giue her double accozding to her worlis, aud powre in double to her in the fame cuppe which the filed vuto pots. in

And as much as shee ghilled her selfe-

and liued manteitly, fo mich po we pe in fog her of punichment and sorow: lor thee laid in

Eu 47.8. her heart, J dit being a queene, and am no

nt

{widow and fhall ee no sorow. cl
8 Therefore hall her plagties come in one dap, death, and fozow, aud hunger and hee
Mall be vtterly burnt with five, kor strong is the Lord which iudgeth her. .
9 And they thall bewaile her the kings of the earth wall lament kor her, Which haue committed fornication wich her, and haue lined wantonly with her, when they shall fee thefmotie of her burning:

10 Standing a fare off foz feare of her punisyment, saping, Alas alas, that great cv tie Babplon, that mightie citie, foz at one houreisthpiudgement come,

11 Aud the merchants ol the earth doe weepe and waple ouer her, fog no man bupeth their ware airy moze,

12 The ware ot golde, and filuer,and precious Korres, aud ot pearle, and raines, and purple, and fille, and tlarlct, and all Chyne
Wood, and all maner vellelsol Puozie, and all maner vessels of most pzecious wood, and

ol bialse, and pron, and warble,

13 And Cpnamome, andodours, ¢ opntments, ond frankinsenct, aud wine, and oile, and fine flowre, and wheate, and bealts, and fheepe, and hozles, and charets, and bodies and soliles ol men. \

14 And the apples that thy foule lusted after, are departed from thee, and all things

parted from ghee „ and thou that finde them

"0 A at l. N

Tl rcon of these things which

wared rich, hall stande a farre off (rom ol the punichment of her, wees

€>

which were daintie and had iu price, are de-

and all they that occupie thippes, ai bi nien, and as manp as woke nthe ea, fl

a 15 —

18 And cried when they sazurhe smonen her burn Saga Wat ctie Wet . this great citie:? —

19 And they cast dust on their heads, an cried, weeping, and Watling, and saping,? las, alas, that great city, whetin were mal rich all that had shippes in thefea, by reast

of her costlinesse, sor at ones desolate.

Reih vnd her thou heauen, ane holy Apostles and Prophetes, sor God haty giuen your iudgement on her. .

21. Andamightie angell tookebpattone like a great milskone, and cast it into the e saying, With such violence Mall that great citle Babylon bee cast, and shall be found no more at all. 7

23 And the vopce of harpers, and mulitiong, and Of pipers, and trumpetters, shall be | heard no more at all in thee : and no crattes men, of whatsoeuexcraft he be, thatbe found i any more in thee:and the sound or a mill hall be heard no more at all in the:

23 And the light ol a candle shall shine no moze at all in tice sand the voice ol the bridegrome and ol the bride, shalbe heard no moze,
àt all in thee: for thy merchants were the

SH

great men of the earth, and with thine en: chantmeut were deceiued all natlons. .
24 And in her was found the bloodol the
Prophets, and of the faints, aud ol all that! were llaine vpon the earth. a»
“ The xix. Chapter. —
Praifes are giuen vnto God for iudging the whore. r alter thele things, FT beardagreat boyee of much people in hearren,faying, Ake a
„ leluia-faluation- ¢ glopeand ya phonocur, and power, bec ascri- an bed to the Lord our God: we es
2 ffoz true and righteous are his iudgements, fo2z hee hath iudged the great whore which did corrupt the earth with her fornication, æ hath throughly auenged the blood ol his seruants of her hand. ;
3 Andagaine they sayd, Alleluia: andher fmoke rote dp lor euermore. 2
4 And the soure andtwentie Elders, and the foure beastes felldowne, and worshipped
God that fate on the throne, saying, Amen;
Alleluia. 1 j .
5 Anda vorce came outor tie thom e ing, Praise our Lord God all pe that are his seruants, and pee that feare him both mall s And J heard as it were the bop of

nuch people, eren as the beice of many waters andas the votce of rong chundeings, fapinig, Alleluia; fo the Lord God omnipotent eignet. — iu f f et vs be glad and reiopce and gine ho noir to him :fo2 the marriage of the Lambe is tome; and his wite hath made her felfe

ie - a 55
128 And to her was granted that che Hould be grayed with pure a goodlyraines 3fo2 the raines is the righteoulnelle oklaints.

9 And he fatde vnto mee, norite, Pappe art they which are called vnto the supper of the Lambes mariage. And he said vnto me,
Chele are the true sayings ol God?
10 And J kell at hig teete to worship him:
And he laid vnto me, See thou doe it not: o

Jam thy fellow seruant, and of thybrethren

chat halie the testimonie of Jesus. Worship a : oh the testimonie of Jelus, is the spirit
Mpophes ee
1 0 tand IJ (aw heauen open, and behold a white horse, and he that fate vpon him was called faithlul and true, and in righteoulnes he doth iudge and mabe battell.
12 Hisepes were as a flame of fire, and on his heade were many crownes, and he had
à name written, that no man knew but hee himselte. — — :
13 And hee was clothed with a betture dipt in blood: and his name is called the

0 ies which were in hea-

14 And the armi t uen followed him vpon white horses, clothed with white and pure raine.
15 And out of his mouth goeth a tharpe fwo2d, that with it he shoulde {mite the Heathen: and hee shall rule them with a rod ol pron: and hee treadeth the winelat of the flercenesse and wrath of Almightie God.
16 And hehath on his vesture, and on his thigh a name wzitten, Kingol Kings, and
Lordof Lords. 1
17 And J fawe an Angel stande in the
Sunne, and he cried with a loude vopce, saping to allthe fowles that flie by the middes ol heduen, Come and gather pour selues together onto the lupper or the great God:
18 CCyat pee map eate the flesh ol kings,

and the fieth of high captaines, and the flew

of mightie men, and the fleth of horses, and of them that fit on them, andthe fleshof all kree men, and bond men, and ol small and

great. * 0
19 And J sawe the bes, and the kings of

the earth, and their armies gathered together, to make battellagainst him that fate on

the horle, and against his army. J
20 And the beast was taken, and with

him that falfe prophet that wrought myra-

tles before him, with which hee deceiued

fsthem that receiued the beastes marke, and

chem that worshipped his image. Chele both

with bumstone.
21 And the remnant were llaine with the

Chap. .

Werecatt quicke into a pond of fire, burning

E

Satan bound, and lo

(OD of him that fate vpon the horle which

tword proceeded oUt of His mouth:and all the

loules were filled with their flesh.

. The xx. Chapter.
2 Satan being bound for certaine time, 7 and after let joose, vexeth the Church grieuoussy. N

Nd F law an Angelcome downe

krom heauen. hauing the kep of

the bottomiesse pit, anda great chaine in his hand.

2 And hee tooke the Dragon,

that olde serpent, which is the del and Sa -

tanag, and he bound him athouland yeeres,

And caũ him into the bottomlesse pittes and hee shut him vp; and eta seale on him, that hee should deceiue the nations no maze, till the thoufand peeres shoulde bee fulfilled: and after that, hee mutt bee loosed for a little season. Pe . : ä
4 And q sawe thrones, and theysate vpon them and iudgement was giuen vnto hem: and J la we the soules of them that were beheaded oz the witnesse of Jesus, and forthe word of God, and which had not worlhipped the beat, neither his image, neither had tas kenhis marke vpon their foreheads, oz in their hands, and they liued and reigned with
CH a thouland peeres. .

5 But the other of the dead men did not liue againe vntill the thouland peeres were linished. This is the first resurrection.

6 Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection: for on such the leconde death hath no power, but they shall bee the prlelts ot God, and of Christ, and chall reigne with hima thousand peeres, .

7 And when the thouland peercs are ev pired Satan shalbe looted out ol his priloni:

8 And chall goe out to deceiue the nations which are in the koure quarters of the earth,

Sog and Magog, to gather them together ger 39.2.

3 1 whole number is as the lande of

the sea.

9 And they went vp in the plaine of the

earth, and compafied the tents of the laintes about, and the beloued citie: and fire came
Downe from God out of heauen, and deuoured them: :
10 Andethedeuil that deceiued them, was cat into a lake of sire and brimstone, where the beast and the falle prophet shalbe tormented day and night for euermore.

11 And J law a great white throne, and him that sat on it, from whole face fled away both the earth a the heauen, and their place was no more found.

12 And Flaw the dead both small a great stand before God: and the boohes were ope-

ned: and another booke was opened, which Apoc. 3.5. ig the booke of life: and the dead were iudged aud 21.17. ol thole things which were written in the ph...

bookes, according to their deedes. 5

13 And the fea gaue vy her dead which

were in her: and death and hell delinered vp

the dead which were in them: and they ae iudged

. srt ( i‘

Efai gs. 19

* heauenly Hierufalem. ~ Keuelation. Afiuer
. 7 8 — Le

— — A a iudged euery man accordlug to his decdes. - 14 And the wall of
14 Ind deati and hell were calt into the foundations, and in th lalie ot lite: this is the second det. ol the Lambes twelue Ap. eg,
15 And whosoeuer was not founde writ- 15. And he that talfied with mesh ten in the boolie of life, was cat into the lake den reede to measure the cite wit of fire. agaateg thereof, and the walles thereo

h: ¢ the bee adth, reot, an ö

Hierulalem, come downe krom God out of vnto cleare glasse. heauen, prepared aga bride garnished ko: her 15 And the foundations of the wall of the

hulband. dtitie were garniched with all maner of pzecr>
3 And J heard a great vopce out ol bea: ous stones. The aeg eon enten as ale 4 uen, saping, Beholde, thetabernacle of God the fecond Spaphire,the chiro a Chalcedonie, is withmen, and hee willdwell with them, the fourth an Emerald, a : and they shalbe his people, and God himlelkfe 20 Che fift Sardonir, the firth Hardius, 4 thatbe with them and be their God. the seuenth Chwiolite, the eight Beryl, the

apoc.7,17, from their eyes, and there thallbee no mate the eleventh a Jacinct, the twelkth an Ame:

Elai.43 19.

death, neither loro w, neither crying neither thyst. A call there be any moze paine: for the sormer 21 Che twelue eit twelue pearls, things are gone. euery gate was ol one pearle, and the streete a And he that fate bporthe thzonefayde, of the eitie was pure golde, as it were fhining
„Behold, J make all things newe. And hee glasse. ) eS faidbnto me, write; forthele words are true 22 And A lawe no temple therein: for the and faithful. . l ord God Aimightp,and the Lambe, are the
6 And he sapde vnto me, It is done: Jam temple ol it, oo a me
Alpha and Omega, the beginningandtge 23 And the citie hath no neede of the pus ende. J will gine vnto him that is a thirst Sunne, neither ol the Moone to lighten it:

4 And God chall wipe away all teates ninth ea Topas, thetenth a Chpsophralus, |

Apoc. 1. 8. : matte ‘
* . of the wellof the water of life freely. forthe glozy of God did lighten it, andthe he that ouercommeth, hall inherite all Lambe is the light ol it. ‘>: Ey things, and will be his God,andhethalibe 14 And the nations of them which are geg my sonne. saued, shall walke in the light ol it: and tie

‘eo

iJ

ning was line buto a torte most precious, euen Ry AX

8 But the fearetul, and vnbeleeuing and kings of the earth doe bing their glor rand the abominable, and murderers, and Whore- honout vnto it. Lunn mongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and 25 Andthe gates ok it call not be hut at g all fiers , hall haue their part in the lake all by dap: for there shall be no niggt. a which burneth with ireebsiméfone: which 26 Andthepthallbzing the glory and ho - ig the second death. nour ot the Gentiles vnto it. — ‘|

And there came vnto mee one or these. 27 And there wall in no wife enter Hits uen Angels, which had the seuen vials kull it anp vncleane, thing, neither whatloeuer of the seuen last plagues, and taltzed with wonketh abomination 5. op maketh lies: bujt me,faping, Come hither, J will chewe thee they onely which are written in the lambes Phil.4. the bride, the lamvbes wife. a pooke of like. f — spect

10 And he caried me ne wn ; deg, |. and 20

| n eg x g ek [„
. te hen Piercen, descen- 1 The riuer of the water of life. 9 The angel willnggbe ding out ol heauen 1 ee worthipped. n e *
= od: a 3 TAN ng ee bote ol water of like, cleare as Chey: deal, proceeding out ol ö throne ol God, and of the Lambe.

like e wal 9 high ab
12 And had a wall great and hig had twelue gates, and at thegates twelue & we 2 Inthemiddestokthe street uncle and names written, Which are the of it, and ol either fide of the riner was there names of the twelue tribes of Jlrael. wood ol like, which bare twelue maner
13 Outhe Cast five three gates, and on kruits, and gaue kruit euery moneth: and tl the North doe three oe th a 111 ane r the wood ferucd.to heale the people jthree gates, and krom the welt three all. ; 22 it * 3. And chere walbe to moze curl arge .
