SINANTHROPUS PEKINENSIS: THE RECOVERY OF FURTHER FOSSIL REMAINS OF THIS EARLY HOMINID FROM THE CHOU KOU TIEN DEPOSIT
By Davidson Black
Science, Vol. 69, No. 1800 (28 June 1929), pp. 674-676
[Transcribed from the original journal page images; OCR of 1929 newsprint]

SINANTHROPUS PEKINENSIS: THE RECOV- 
ERY OF FURTHER FOSSIL REMAINS OF 
THiS EARLY HOMINID FROM THE 
CHOU KOU TIEN DEPOSIT? 

In the course of the excavations continued by the 
Cenozoic Laboratory of the Geological Survey of 
China at Chou Kou Tien during the season of 1928 

1 Announcement of the discovery of this extensive addi 
tional fossil material referable to the genus Sinanthropts 
was first made at a meeting of the Geological Society 
China held on December 14, 1928; a brief preliminary 
description of some of the specimens formed the subject 

of a paper communicated at the society’s annual meetilg | 

on February 14, 1929. 

= 
: 
] 
I 
u 
= 
it 
f 
h 
As 
di 
of 
al 
m 
de 
Te 
f 
r 
be 
= pa 
wi 
a 
We 
we 
mé 
su 
its 
sec 
re] 
ag 
i 
Ch 

28, 1929] 

a new aggregation of Sinanthropus material has been 
discovered at the northeastern corner of the main 
deposit and at a level some ten meters above the 
stratum in which occurred the type lower molar tooth 
described last year. For convenience in reference the 
region in which this new material occurred may here 
be designated Locus B, the original Sinanthropus 
level being then termed Locus A. There can be no 
doubt as to the contemporaneity of these sublocalities 
within the main deposit nor of their geological age, 
the rich associated mammalian fossil fauna being 
identical in the two and typical of the Lower Quater- 
nary (Polycene) Age.* 

The Chou Kou Tien field work, which this year has 
been ably carried on by Dr. Birger Bohlin, Dr. C. C. 
Yang and Mr. W. C. Pei, has resulted in the discovery 
and complete excavation of Locus B, and in the fur- 
ther extensive though not complete excavation of 
Locus A. 

Up to the present the following additional speci- 
mens undoubtedly referable to the genus Sinanthropus 
have been recovered from Locus A, either in the field 
itself or during laboratory preparation of material 
from this sublocality: the greater part of the right 
horizontal ramus of an adult lower jaw with three 
molar teeth im situ and having the premolar, canine 
and distal half of the lateral incisor sockets pre- 
served; a somewhat worn right upper molar tooth 
(Ml or M2) showing definite evidences of injury 
during life; the labial side of the crown and portion 
of the root of a permanent upper median incisor; 
an immature lower (?) permanent incisor, and lastly 
the labial half of the crown and root of a worn lower 
median permanent incisor, posthumously crushed and 
deformed. These specimens are deeply pigmented and 
mineralized in a manner characteristic of all fossils 
recovered from Loeus A. 

In contrast to the material from Locus A, no fossils 
from Loeus B are deeply pigmented, most of them 
being quite white or of light buff color. For the most 
part they are imbedded in a hard, yellowish travertine 
which in places has been very irregularly reduced to 
4 clay-like consistency apparently as the result of 
Weathering action. On account of the difficulty of 
working this matrix but a small part of the hominid 
material from Locus B; has as yet been prepared, but 
sufficient preliminary work has been done to warrant 
its definite reference to the genus Sinanthropus. A 
score or more of teeth both deciduous and permanent, 
tepresenting many phases of dentition and ontogenetic 
age, together with the complete symphysis region of 

? Pal. Sin., Ser. D, Vol. VII, Fase. 1, 1927; see also 
Science, February 3, 1928, p. 135. 

ef. Zdansky: Séiugetiere der Quartirfauna von 
Chou Kou Tien,’’ Pal. Sin., Ser. C, Vol. V, Fase. 4, 1928. 

SCIENCE 675 

the lower jaw of a very young individual have already 
been prepared. Though the greater part of the right 
ramus of the jaw of this immature specimen together 
with parts of the calvaria of both immature and adult 
individuals are already partly exposed in various 
blocks of travertine, no description of this material 
will be possible until it is completely prepared. How- 
ever, even at this early stage of the work, it is evident 
that despite the archaic structure of its lower facial 
region, Sinanthropus like Eoanthropus was a large- 
brained form, though unlike the latter the calvaria 
of Sinanthropus does not appear to be unduly thick. 

Since many months must elapse before an adequate 
deseription of all this new material can be published 
and since the morphology of the two jaw specimens 
presents features of unusual interest, it has been 
thought worth while to illustrate this brief note with 
the accompanying line drawings. 

In Fig. 1 the two diagraph tracings at the left 
represent normal variations in chin development 

b c 
Fig. 1. Mid-sagittal diagraph tracings of the sym- 
physis mandibulae of various immature individuals in 
each of which the two deciduous and first permanent 
molar teeth were together functional. a, Copper Age 
child (Homo .404-11) from Kansu; b, recent North 
China child (Homo 44 ¢); ce, Sinanthropus; d, chimpan- 
zee. The specimens have all been similarly oriented, the 

plane of the infradentale being indicated in each case by 
a short horizontal line. In a, b and c the permanent 

‘incisors are erupted and worn though their root apices 

are not completely formed; in d, the milk incisors are 
still in situ. Natural size. 

within the genus Homo and each shows the charac- 
teristic morphology of the lingual surface of the 
symphysis within that genus. The complete absence 
of the mental prominence and the peculiar morphol- 
ogy of the lingual aspect of the symphysis in the 
genus Sinanthropus become evident at a glance. In 
Sinanthropus a genioid pit takes the place of the 
upper mental spines for the attachment of the genio- 
glossus muscles, the genioid tubercle below this depres- 
sion is prominent and unpaired while the digastric 
depressions in this form differ markedly from those 
characterizing any member of the genus Homo. 
Though the so-called ape-shelf is not extensively de- 

Be j 
4 
a 
| 
4 
‘ 
| 
‘ 
) 
(7 
are 
gu 
| 
3 
ware 
* 

676 

veloped in this immature Sinanthropus jaw, the gen- 
eral architecture of the symphysis region makes it 
evident that the very generalized hominid dentition 
of this specimen is supported within a framework of 
a type which has heretofore only been encountered 
among forms having relatively formidable canines. 
In Fig. 2 the lower jaw fragment of the adult 
Sinanthropus specimen from Locus A is illustrated 

bn i 

SCIENCE 

[Von. LXIX, No. 180) 

It thus becomes evident that the conclusions hase | 

on the earlier study of the type lower molar tooth of 
Sinanthropus have been verified in detail, and jp 
addition it is now possible to state that, in spite of 
the archaic structure of its lower facial region, Sinap. 
thropus was a large-brained form, probably having 
a eranial capacity falling well within the range of 
normal variation of this character in the modern 

L i. 

Fic. 2. Outline drawings traced from photographs of the right horizontal rami of various similarly oriented § a 
adult lower jaws, the molar occlusal plane in each being approximately horizontal. 

The drawings have been ar 

ranged for comparison with the mesial margins of the first molar teeth in the same transverse plane, the align 

ment of the lingual margin of the molar series in each case being approximately at right angles to this. 

a, Sin- 

anthropus; b, Eoanthropus (from cast); c, Paleoanthropus s. H. heidelbergensis (from cast); d, recent North 
China male (Homo 39 @); e, adult female orang. Five sixth natural size. 

in comparison with drawings of similarly oriented 
adult jaws of other forms. ‘The permanent molars 
in the Sinanthropus specimen, though considerably 
worn, display in their form and proportions the 
characteristic tooth morphology of the genus. The 
form and size of the socket for the canine make it 
evident that the root of this tooth in adult Sinan- 
thropus was but slightly longer and more massive than 
those of the premolars. There is a very evident 
progressive diminution in the size of the molar teeth 
from before backward. The architecture of the jaw 
itself is much less hominid than that of the teeth 
which it supports and, like the immature Sinanthropus 
specimen, represents a framework which till the dis- 
covery of Eoanthropus had been supposed to be 
associated only with an anthropoid type of dentition. 
It ean no longer be doubted that distinctive hominid 
teeth characters were evolved in the human family 
long before the architecture of the supporting jaw 
lost its anthropoid form. 

genus Homo. On completion of the work of prepara- 
tion and restoration, a full and adequately illustrated 

report on this new material will be published w J 

Volume VII, Series D, Palaeontologia Sinica. 
Davipson BLAck 
PEKING UNION MEDICAL COLLEGE AND THE 
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF CHINA
