The Poetical Works of William Blake (William Blake, 1905)
=========================================================
Lyrical and miscellaneous poems including the Pickering Manuscript and Poetical Sketches. Public domain. Internet Archive (1905 ed. (Sampson)).

LIBRARY ST. MARY'S COLLEGE, “: HALE 1 9 


TCLATE 12 


OL As swe fo 
hay Be 2 aes Gs : 
co A pasty as. foe 


henge 


~~ 


eg et 


ar ir ae 
“2 Rho é ee hokey ua Ve pry i ype 


tc Porte, te /; 7 ae 
ers a: , give = d ro ‘neat ar 5 : 
j a 


A 8 «20 Speeas 


Pte kateed ; : a 
: Z Th ee poe Es Z 3 mike M2 ae # = ‘ 
PP Foe tte. hgtabf- fi. € tse pe dae the ee aaah 
Leet # g 


BG cae he, Acre Ss 
c= 3 
if 


ih < hab ayb 
ae ay Oe 
fel an 2 bos 

‘ae jane se 


Z Fe 
a Ujena ing 


ag iin a sa : Lay F; 
fleas we Ba Haak £ }. 


ude a 
ated Sore 2 
3 


Se nara 


ors — 


nee cee vas aay a 


Ble Mr fa 


TTI MS., p. 109 (reversed), showi 


ng early draft of some of the Songs of Experience and other poems, 
written circa 1793. See p. 149, Index to Rossetti MS. 


“THE POETICAL WORKS 


OF 


WILLIAM BLAKE 


A NEW AND VERBATIM TEXT FROM 
THE MANUSCRIPT ENGRAVED AND 
LETTERPRESS ORIGINALS 

bi) 19 
‘y 38 py WITH 


VARIORUM READINGS AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL 
NOTES AND PREFACES 
BY 


JOHN SAMPSON 


LIBRARIAN IN THE UNIVERSITY OF LIVERPOOL 


21207 


OXFORD 
AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 


1905 


LIBRARY ST. MARY'S COLLEGE 


HENRY FROWDE, M.A. 
PUBLISHER TO THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD 
LONDON, EDINBURGH 
NEW YORK AND TORONTO 


In Memoriam 


FREDERICK YORK POWELL 


ase /SF Seo 


GENERAL PREFACE 
SEW PEXT 


THE literary remains of William Blake fall into three 
broad and generally recognized divisions, poetry, prose, and 
the prophetic books. The present work is a complete 
collection of Blake’s poems, including all lyrical and 
metrical pieces scattered throughout his prose works and 
visionary writings. 

This edition furnishes readers with a new text, literally 
reproduced from the original manuscript, engraved, and 
printed sources. The primary object has been to recover 
and present Blake’s own version of his poetry without the 
customary attempts at emendation. Apart from the 
natural question whether most editors of Blake are com- 
petent to effect improvement in the works of a man of 
singular and individual genius, it may perhaps be pertinent 
to recall that no writer would have more strongly resented 
interference with his own mode of expression than he who 
held that ‘every minute particular is holy’ and that ‘no 
one can finish so high as the original inventor.’ Even if 
we assume, with one of these critics, that what he styles 
a ‘disservice’ is done to the poet by reprinting his works 
without correction, there may still be some so curious as to 
desire to refer to his poems in the form which commended 
itself to their author. 

That such a restoration of text should be necessary at 
all in the case of a modern writer whose works have passed 
through many editions may seem to require fel noet g 
The reasons, however, lie on the surface. 

First should be specified the difficulties encountered in 
referring to the originals. It should be remembered that 
during Blake’s lifetime few of his poems were either 


vi General Preface 


printed or published in the usual manner. His first work, 
the Poetical Sketches, was indeed produced in ordinary 
typography, but only a few copies were issued to friends, 
and the little volume remained so rare, that until its recent 
acquisition by the British Museum it might be regarded 
as generally inaccessible. Our great national libraries 
are still very deficient in first editions of Blake. Most 
examples of the engraved works are widely scattered 
in the libraries of private collectors in this country and 
in America, and since the various impressions of the same 
book often differ from one another in contents and 
arrangement, the collation of several copies is necessary 
if incorrect conclusions are to be avoided. Still greater 
difficulties exist in the case of poems which Blake him- 
self never engraved or published. The MSS. in which 
these are found have always been private possessions, and 
even when the courtesy of owners has permitted them to 
be made use of, the work of transcription is full of pitfalls 
for the copyist. Many of the poems are hastily or not 
over legibly written, and unfamiliarity with Blake’s hand 
accounts for a number of errors which have crept into the 
published texts. Again several pieces are left by their 
author in rough draft, and Blake’s various changes, 
additions, and mode of indicating his successive rearrange- 
ments of lines and stanzas, exact careful study before his 
final intention can be accurately determined. A few mis- 
readings must also be attributed to the inability of editors 
to decipher their own transcripts, originating in this way 
errors which tend to become fixed. Thus we find Gilchrist, 
followed by all later editors, misreading ‘icy dungeons’ for 
‘my dungeons,’ though the latter is clearly engraved in the 
original impressions of ‘ The Keys of the Gates.’ 

A further and more important source of error is to be 
found in the changes which some of Blake’s editors have 
deliberately introduced. It is comprehensible that Dante 
Gabriel Rossetti, in his desire to present an almost un- 
known poet to the public in as favourable a light as 


General Preface vii 


possible, should have considered himself justified in 
making grammatical and other changes in the endeavour 
to remove what he regarded as blemishes. Yet, even in 
this case, every lover of Blake must feel that the intended 
emendations not only are made on no consistent principle, 
but are often destructive of the happy grace and artless 
simplicity of the original. No equally valid. defence can 
be made for the perversions of more recent editors, 
especially if new readings, which can hardly be regarded 
as improvements, are found in conjunction with professions 
of scrupulous regard for textual fidelity. Reference to 
the variorum readings given in the footnotes to the 
present edition will show the extent to which this passion 
for emendation has been carried. It will be seen that 
scarcely a single poem or even epigram has been suffered 
to remain as Blake wrote it. Words and phrases are 
changed, stanzas are transposed or omitted, and readings 
destructive of sense, syntax, and prosody are introduced 
without obvious reason. Unauthorized titles are added 
which, as in the case of ‘ Broken Love,’ impart to the poem 
a meaning undreamt of by its author. Two or more lyrics 
are printed as one, and vice versa. In one instance a new 
piece has been created out of three shorter poems welded 
together by a line which is apparently the composition of 
the ingenious and modest editor. Blake’s text has, in 
short, become a sort of poor palimpsest where each new 
owner has overwritten his own poetry. Liberties such as 
no one would venture on with Burns or Shelley, are every- 
where taken with Blake by those who still profess their 
admiration for his ‘exquisite metrical gift and rightness 
of form.’ It is not a little bewildering to find one great 
poet and critic extolling Blake for the ‘glory of metre’ 
and ‘sonorous beauty of lyrical work’ in the two opening 
lyrics of the Songs of Experience, while he introduces into 
the five short stanzas quoted no less than seven emendations 
of his own, involving additions of syllables and important 
changes of meaning. 


viii General Preface 


In the present edition Blake’s final version is uniformly 
adopted as the text, while all earlier or cancelled readings 
are supplied in footnotes. The spelling and capitalization 
of the original are adhered to throughout. That Blake 
himself attached some importance to the use of capitals 
for the sake of emphasis or artistic effect, is apparent from 
the careful manner in which he has added them as correc- 
tions in the revised versions of several of his MS. poems, 
or in the engraved form of songs found also in rough 
draft. In my retention of Blake’s orthography I have 
been influenced not only by the desire to preserve as far 
as possible the colour of the original in such pleasant 
archaisms as ‘ desart,’ ‘tyger,’ and ‘lilly,’ but also by the 
fact that in some instances his own spelling is a valuable 
aid to the just reading of lines or stanzas. In all existing 
editions the melody of many of the songs has been marred 
by ignoring the fact that Blake’s use of ‘’d’ or ‘ed,’ in the 
participle or preterite, was never arbitrary, but based on 
system. Both in his manuscript and engraved books 
he followed the contemporary practice of using the 
latter only when he intended the final syllable to be 
separately pronounced. I have thought it better to pre- 
vent any misconception on this point by retaining the ’d in 
the former case, and, in the latter, by supplying an accent 
which is not in the original. 

In the matter of punctuation the poet has left his editors 
almost entirely to their own resources. Blake’s autograph 
MSS. are, as a rule, without points of any kind, while 
those in the engraved books are inserted in such a hap- 
hazard manner that, if reproduced, they would only serve 
to confuse the reader, I have accordingly supplied 
my own punctuation; though Blake’s pointing, where it 
occurs, has been taken into consideration, and occasionally, 
as in the third stanza of ‘The Tyger, is an indication 
of the way in which a particular passage was intended to 
be read. Blake omitted apostrophes and inverted commas 

» in his engraved as well as in his manuscript writings, and 


General Preface Fe. 


it should be understood that when these are found in the 
text they have been added at the discretion of the editor. 
The detail is not a purely trivial one, since Blake’s omission 
of quotation marks contributes to the difficulty of obscure 
poems by leaving it questionable to whom particular 
speeches should be assigned. Instances of possible con- 
fusion arising from this cause may be noted in ‘ The 
Everlasting Gospel,’ in which it is sometimes not apparent 
where quoted speeches end and Blake resumes the dis- 
course in his own person; or in the poem beginning ‘My 
spectre around me night and day,’ where the untabulated 
persons of the drama are the narrator, his ‘spectre,’ and 
his ‘ emanation,’—characters whose respective parts are not 
immediately obvious to those who will have no dealings 
with the visionary writings. 


II. NOTES 


The notes to the poems are of several kinds. 

1. In the first place, the source of every poem is stated, 
with precise reference to the page or folio of the printed, 
engraved, or manuscript book from which each is taken. 
I add also, where necessary, the names of the editors or 
commentators by whom the poem has been printed. The 
phrase ‘all editors’ must of course be understood to refer 
to those only who print some version of a particular poem. 
In the case of the Rossetti MS., for example, it necessarily 
excludes Wilkinson and Shepherd, who print no part of 
this MS. 

2. All Blake’s earlier or cancelled readings are given in 
footnotes in the order of composition. 

3. These are followed by the variant readings of all 
editors who have not merely reprinted some existing text. 
Differences are noted in all cases except where they consist 
only of trivial variations of spelling, capitals, or punctuation. 

4. In every case where a poem has been left in rough 
draft, or has been subjected to repeated alterations, I have 


x General Preface 


endeavoured to explain the author’s mode of composition 
by longer prefatory or appended notes, indicating the 
successive changes by which he arrived at his final version, 
Interesting examples of the pains taken by Blake in per- 
fecting his verses will be found in the notes to ‘The Tyger,’ 
‘Fayette, and ‘The Everlasting Gospel.’ These not only 
supply the student with data which, were the actual MS. 
before him, could only be ascertained after considerable 
study, but enable him to follow for himself the reasons 
that have led the editor to arrange lines or stanzas in 
the order in which they appear in the text. 

5. Many poems would prove unintelligible were it not 
for the light thrown upon them by the Prophetic Books, 
where the key to obscure mystical allusions is generally 
to be found. Readers of Blake’s simpler poetry only 
who, with Mr. W. M. Rossetti, turn from the visionary 
writings after a ‘hasty and half-shuddering glance, will be 
ignorant of the consistency with which his self-invented 
system of mythology is expounded, and the absolute uni- 
formity with which definite symbolical figures are used to 
express definite conceptions. While Blake has been at little 
pains to supply the world with a chart of his mental 
voyagings, it is impossible to study the prophetical writings 
without becoming aware of the extreme precision of his 
mystical terminology. In the books of Euclid such terms 
as ‘radius,’ ‘pentagon,’ ‘equal,’ or ‘parallel’ are not more 
absolutely descriptive of certain mathematical figures or 
relations, than are such locutions as ‘ Jerusalem, ‘spectre,’ 
‘ emanation,’ ‘ hermaphrodite,’ or ‘ natural religion’ of sym- 
bolic meanings in the writings of Blake. I have therefore 
endeavoured to make the poet his own interpreter by 
appending to these poems elucidatory passages from the 
Prophetic Books, coupled occasionally with brief explana- 
tions of what I conceive to have been his meaning. The 
value of these references in the interpretation of difficult 
poems like ‘My spectre around me’ in the Rossetti MS. 
or ‘The Mental Traveller’ in the Pickering MS. will not 


General Preface xi 


pass unnoticed. And even in such comparatively simple 
lines as the verses to Butts beginning ‘With happiness 
stretch’d across the hills,’ the allusion to the ‘rock’ and 
‘cave’ in ]. 40 may only be understood through the associa- 
tions of the same figures in The Four Zoas and Ferusalem. 
While interpretation is here restricted to passages in the 
lyrical poems which seem to require explanation, the editor 
may claim that the parallelisms from the Prophetic Books 
have been selected after many readings of the visionary 
writings, and with some knowledge of the chief literature 
written around them. 

6. I have similarly illustrated Blake’s epigrams on art 
and artists by quotations from prose writings where his 
opinions or prejudices are expressed with his customary 
energy and conviction. 

4. I give also occasional indications of the date or place at 
which particular poems were written, as well as cross refer- 
ences to lines or passages repeated in different pieces. As 
these repetitions have been adduced as evidence of Blake’s 
poverty of thought and language in Mr. Henry Gay Hewlett’s 
ingenious article in the Contemporary Review, it may be 
proper to point out that the writings from which identical ex- 
pressions are borrowed were not published by their author, 
nor was it probably contemplated by him that they would 
ever see the light. In only a single instance, that of the 
‘Mad Song’ (Poetical Sketches) and ‘ Infant Sorrow’ (Songs 
of Experience), has a line been transferred from one printed 
work to another, and as I have elsewhere explained, Blake 
never seems to have regarded the privately printed Poetical 
Sketches as one of his actual publications. 


Ill. ARRANGEMENT 


There is some reason to suppose that most of the existing 
groupings of Blake’s poems would have fallen under the 
poet’s lash for those whose ‘ chiefest arts’ are to ‘blend and 
not define the parts.’ If ‘to make out the parts, as he assures 


xi General Preface 


us,‘ is the wise man’s aim, it becomes a task of no little diffi- 
culty when such editorial titles as ‘Ideas of Good and Evil,’ 
‘Miscellaneous Poems,’ or ‘Later Poems, are arbitrarily used 
to comprehend pieces collected from a number of undefined 
sources belonging to widely different periods. In one case 
at least the heading ‘Later Poems’ is made to include a 
song written in Blake’s early youth. 

The present arrangement conserves the integrity of the 
various books, whether letterpress, engraved, or in manu- 
script, ‘every one in its own identity.’ In each of these 
groups the poetical contents are printed in the order in 
which they occur in the original, a plan which has the 
advantage of illustrating how poems found in juxtaposition 
have often been suggested by or grown out of one another. 
It is also in many cases a valuable aid to the dating of 
particular pieces. 

This arrangement is of course a bibliographical, rather 
than a purely historical one. While the contents of the 
Pickering MS. are obviously all of a kind and written about 
the same time, those of the larger Rossetti MS. extend over 
a period of more than twenty years and are of the most 
diverse character. The latter is indeed of the nature of a 
notebook, the earliest poetic entries in which antedate the 
publication of the Songs of Experience and the latest 
postdate most of the Prophetic Books. The three broad 
sections into which its contents fall are however clearly 
marked and occasion no confusion. The first of these, 
written about 1793, consists chiefly of lyrical poems, 
including the original drafts of many of the Songs of 
Experience. Between the first and second section inter- 
vened a period of about seven years, during which Blake 
wrote and engraved the shorter Prophetic Books. The 
earlier pieces in the second section include a few poems 
written in a strain of more highly developed mysticism, 
among them first drafts of certain lyrics afterwards tran- 
scribed into the Pickering MS., or engraved as part of 
Ferusalem. Before we reach the epigrams, which were 


General Preface xiii 


an overflow from Blake’s marginalia to Reynolds’ ‘ Dis- 
courses, the Pickering MS., the letters to Butts, and some 
portion at least of Ferusalem and Milton had been written, 
Lastly, as the third section, we have the fragments of 
‘The Everlasting Gospel’—the latest of Blake’s surviving 
poems with the possible exception of ‘The Keys of the 
Gates.’ 

In the bibliographical prefaces to the various sections 
I have tried to give fairly full and accurate accounts of 
printed books or manuscripts which have hitherto been 
somewhat slightly or incorrectly described. All accessible 
copies of the Songs of Innocence and of Experience have 
been collated, and Blake’s successive arrangements tabu- 
lated and classified. A complete index of the contents of 
the Rossetti MS. is given; and the Pickering MS., or 
‘smaller autograph collection,’ is described for the first time. 
I have also supplied brief bibliographical descriptions of 
the manuscript and engraved Prophetic Books, and have 
made some corrections in the dates of their composition or 
publication. Comparison of a number of copies has 
established the fact that there were three several editions 
of The Gates of Paradise, the two later only including the 
verses which distinguish the issue ‘ For the Sexes.’ In my 
notes to this book I have drawn attention to a hitherto 
ignored publication of Blake, his History of England for 
Children, a companion volume to The Gates of Paradise ; 
and possibly the list of its contents recovered from the 
MS. Book may be the means of bringing this lost work 
to light. The attention of the curious bibliophile may also 
be directed to the entry in the Rossetti MS. (p. 56) that 
‘ This day is Publish’d Advertizements to Blake’s Canter- 
bury Pilgrims from Chaucer, containing anecdotes of Artists,’ 
This may of course have been merely an experimental 
draft of a notice for insertion in the newspapers in case he 
thought fit to publish as a pamphlet with this title the 
paragraphs jotted down in his notebook. On the other 
hand, it is not improbable that it may have been printed 


xiv General Preface 


for him in the same manner as the Descriptive Catalogue, 
possibly by the same printer, D. N. Shury, and that a copy 
may still be discovered, preserved perhaps, as is so often the 
case, by being bound up with contemporary tracts. Among 
other lost works of Blake may be mentioned the first book 
of the French Revolution, said to have been published by 
Johnson in 1791, and the engraved Book of Outhoon. Works 
referred to by Blake himself, but of which no trace is 
known, are The Book of Moonlight, and Barry: a Poem. 


IV. BLAKE’S ILLUMINATED PRINTING 


It is to Blake’s singular mode of publication that we 
must attribute the scanty recognition accorded to his 
poetic genius during his own lifetime, as his public was 
necessarily restricted to the few friends or patrons who had 
obtained copies of his works from ‘the Author and Printer.’ 
The circumstances under which he first conceived the idea 
of producing his books by his invention of relief engraving 
possess therefore much more than the merely technical 
interest attaching to a new and curious art process. 

According to the commonly received account it was in 
consequence of his failure to secure a publisher for the 
Songs of Innocence in the ordinary way, and of his extreme 
indigence which prohibited him from bringing out the 
book in letterpress at his own cost, that Blake was driven 
to resort to the laborious expedient of engraving and 
printing the Songs by his own hand. Verisimilitude is 
added by the picture of the poet’s wife ‘going out with 
their last half-crown to buy the necessary materials,’ 
a detail of but little relevance when it is remembered 
that the engraving, printing, and colouring of the first issue 
occupied an entire year. I believe this story, which may 
be traced to a loose statement of Gilchrist’s, to be without 
foundation. 


In the first place it may be observed that the supposition 


General Preface xv 


that Blake desired to put his Songs into circulation through 
the medium of a publisher is altogether at variance with 
that characteristic independence which led him throughout 
his life to do most things for himself in his own way, 
regardless of toil which he loved, and disdainful of external 
assistance. In the case of Blake’s earlier work, the Poetical 
Sketches, the sheets of which, printed in letterpress at the 
expense of Mathew and Flaxman, were, as Smith tells us, 
handed to the author to publish or sell privately as he saw 
fit, he seems to have made no attempt to dispose of the 
copies through a bookseller or even to sell them personally. 
While there is no positive evidence that such was the case 
it is not improbable that he himself may have destroyed 
the greater part of this small edition. Blake, it must be 
remembered, was an artist as well as a poet, and the same 
attitude of mind which caused him on being shown 
a number of the Mechanic’s Magazine to exclaim ‘these 
things we artists HATE!’ doubtless led him to regard as 
unworthy of him a book in which his conceptions were 
inadequately presented by a merely mechanical and some- 
what unlovely process. His deliberate exclusion of the 
Poetical Sketches from the catalogue of his works offered 
for sale in 1793—a list which includes books produced by 
ordinary engraving as well as by ‘illuminated printing ’— 
seems to me to support this view. 

It is more reasonable to conclude that Blake brought 
out his books himself by his own process, because no 
publisher or printer could have produced for him the new 
kind of illustrated work which he had in his mind. The 
method then in vogue admitted of artistic embellishments 
only in the shape of steel or wood engravings, stiffly 
surrounding or clumsily placed in juxtaposition to the 
type of the text, while that of Blake interwove text, design, 
and colouring into one harmonious whole with the happiest 
and most exquisite effect. | 

Relating the story of the invention of this process, 
Blake’s biographers have represented it rather in the 


xvi General Preface 


light of a happy accident than as a deliberate attempt 
to deal with a clearly realized artistic difficulty. Accord- 
ing to the account derived from Smith, this mode of 
engraving was revealed to him in a vision by the spirit 
of his favourite brother Robert, and there is no particular 
reason to doubt that, in a dream or daydream, Blake may 
have solved a problem which had long occupied his 
thoughts. Striking confirmation of the fact that at least 
five years before the publication of the Songs of Innocence 
he had contemplated—and not entirely, it may be noted, 
without a view to the superior profits of such a work— 
some new kind of illuminated printing is found in the early 
MS. known as Anz Island in the Moon. This passage 
begins, imperfectly, at the head of the recto of the ninth 
leaf: ‘. .. “Illuminating the Manuscript ””—“Ay,” said 
she, “that would be excellent.” “Then,” said he, “ I would 
have all the writing Engraved instead of Printed, & at 
every other leaf a high finished print, all in three Volumes 
folio, and sell them a hundred pounds a piece. They 
would Print off two thousand.” ‘“ Then,” said she, “who- 
ever will not have them, will be ignorant fools & will not 
deserve to live.” ...“I was at Mrs. Sicknakers, & I was 
speaking of my abilities, but their nasty hearts, poor devils, 
are eat up with envy—they envy me my abilities, & all 
the Women envy your abilities, my dear; they hate 
people who are of higher abilities than their nasty filthy 
Selves.”’ 

The unfortunate loss of one or more leaves preceding 
the last page may have deprived us of a description of the 
literary contents of the book which the speaker Quid the 
Cynic (or Blake) designed to bring out in this manner. 
But since three of the most characteristic of the Songs of 
Innocence appear in rough draft in this MS., it seems not 
unlikely that Blake may have had already in view the 
completion of a series of songs for children; perhaps 
suggested by Dr. Watts’ Divine and Moral Songs for 
Children. In the preface to that popular book Watts 


General Preface xvii 


modestly refers to his songs as ‘a slight specimen, such as 
I could wish some happy and condescending genius would 
undertake for the use of children, and perform much 
better, and it is likely enough that Blake may have rightly 
felt himself to be this destined genius. It has been pointed 
out by Mr. Hewlett, who, as I find, anticipated me in this 
conjecture, that ‘the subjects of several of Blake’s songs 
are identical with those of Watts,’ while it may also be 
noted that the moral tags with which the ‘Chimney 
Sweeper, ‘Holy Thursday, and other songs somewhat 
abruptly conclude, recall the manner of Blake’s didactic 
prototype. 

Though nowhere definitely stated by the poet himself, 
we have no grounds for questioning Smith’s statement 
that the Songs of Innocence was the first of his works 
engraved in this manner. A colophon to the Ghost of 
Abel, 1822, the last of Blake’s Prophetic Books, informs 
us that ‘W. Blake’s Original Stereotype was 1788’; but 
since this statement cannot possibly refer to an earlier 
issue of the same sibylline leaflet, it probably means that 
the first plate of the Songs was engraved in the year 
preceding the publication of the completed book. 

In Blake’s prospectus ‘To the Public’ of October, 1793, 
he styles this process ‘illuminated printing, a phrase 
evidently suggested by the passage quoted above from 
the [sland in the Moon. ‘The Author, says Blake, ‘has 
invented a method of Printing both Letter-press and 
Engraving in a style, more ornamental, uniform, and 
grand, than any before discovered, while it produces works 
at less than one-fourth of the expense. If a method of 
Printing which combines the Painter and the Poet is 
a phenomenon worthy of public attention, provided that 
it exceeds in elegance all former methods, the Author 
is sure of his reward.’ Blake’s observation as to the com- 
parative cheapness of this mode of printing seems to 
require some explanation, as it cannot be intended to 
suggest that this illuminated printing was cheaper than 


SAMPSON b 


xviii General Preface 


ordinary typography. Probably what he meant was that the 
engraving and printing of lettering and design simultaneously: 
was less expensive than intaglio engraving and letterpress, 
printed separately by two different processes. The quali- 
fication should, of course, be understood, that to produce: 
books in Blake’s manner the author must be, as he was, 
his own artist, engraver, and printer. 


Vv. LIFE 


Little is known of the life of William Blake, though our 
ignorance is comfortably veiled from us in several existing’ 
biographies. It may be confessed at once that with regard 
to what Blake called his ‘ vegetative existence’ we are 
almost wholly in the dark. The slightness of our knowledge 
of the events of his material career is, however, of little 
consequence. Blake’s real life was a mental and spiritual 
one. And the only true biography must be that in which 
his own writings, rather than petty contemporary gossip, are 
made the foundation of an endeavour to trace this mental 
and spiritual development. To understand him, some 
degree of intellectual sympathy with an uncommon mind 
and temper is desirable, and a larger visionary endowment 
than that which he esteemed the merely deceptive faculty 
of ‘seeing with, and not ¢hrough, the eye.’ We need too 
some deeper study than has yet been attempted of the 
sources from which he received and absorbed his ideas— 
notably the influence of the Wesleyan revival, his precise 
debt to Swedenborg, and later, the manner in which the 
doctrines of the French Revolution affected one who, 
although the very opposite of reactionary, was antagonistic 
to the scientific spirit in all its works and ways. Such 
a task should not be undertaken with slight equipment, or 
in a spirit of condescension towards ‘our good Blake,’ the 
somewhat illiterate, but amiable enthusiast, who, though 
‘slightly touched, was capable now and then of happy 
flights of fancy which are to be sought for as oases in the 
Sahara of his writings. To some of those who have 


General Preface xix 


essayed to follow with more or less success Blake’s almost 
untrodden path, the converse is rather the case, 


‘And every sand becomes a Gem 
Reflected in the beams Divine, 

Blown back they blind the mocking eye 
But still in Israel’s paths they shine.’ 


That Blake’s life was to himself a harmony is undoubted, 
nor is it less clear that it was also in the fullest sense, 
borrowing the phrase which Shelley applied to his own, an 
‘impassioned pursuit of virtue. To represent this mental, 
moral, and artistic harmony is the difficult work awaiting 
him who would present Blake aright, grasping at such 
pieces of self-revelation as the writings afford, studying the 
influences which touched him and the degree in which they 
were modified by a naturally heretical mind ; and tracing 
step by step through the surviving Prophetic Books the 
evolution of the extraordinary system of mythology created 
by him for the expression of his philosophical and religious 
views. 

This true line of investigation first apprehended by 
Wilkinson, and finely expressed with entire insight and 
' sympathy by the author of The City of Dreadful Night, 
has been carried further by Swinburne in that Assay which, 
were Blake’s remaining works destroyed by a new Tatham, 
would still remain a sufficing monument to his genius. 

The chief sources of our knowledge of Blake’s life are 
particularized below. 

1. Autobiographical. Despite the destruction of the 
greater part of the MSS. much autobiographical material 
survives in his pictures, MS. Book, letters, marginalia, and 
published and unpublished writings, delineating Blake in 
his ‘threefold’ character of artist, poet, and mystic. 

Blake’s pictorial art may be studied at first hand from 
examples preserved in the British Museum or in private 
collections, as also in his engraved works or in various 
facsimiles. His views on the province of art, and criticisms 

ba 


XX General Preface 


of schools of painters, are expounded at length in ha 
Descriptive Catalogue of his exhibition of 1809, in ha 
Advertisement or ‘ Public Address, of 1810, in the jottin 
in his copy of Reynolds’ Discourses, and epigrams in th 
MS. Book, and in the aphorisms in his sibylline leaflet, th 
Laocoon. Barry: a Poem must unfortunately be number 
among lost works. 

In the field of literature Blake’s early study, as Malkii 
tells us, was of the Elizabethans. His attitude to eighteent 
century verse may be noted in his lines ‘To the Muses,’ 
in the contemptuous reference to ‘tinkling rhymes ana 
elegances terse’ in the youthful Poetical Sketches. W! 
meet here also with the imitations of Macpherson, continuee 
in Zzrzeland Thel; but a more lasting and potent influence 
was that of Milton, to which may be attributed the metrica: 
experiments of the Prophetic Books, the shorter rhythm: 
being evidently suggested by the choruses in Samson, anc 
the preface to Ferusalem showing that in this attemp' 
at a new cadence Blake was deliberately following the 
example set by the author of Paradise Lost. Even Blake's 
phrases and subject-matter, which, except in the purely 
imitative Poetical Sketches, are almost entirely his own 
may occasionally be traced to the same source, as in the 
opening lines of Europe, reminiscent of the ‘Ode on the 
Morning of Christ’s Nativity ’:— 


‘The deep of winter came ; 
What time the secret child 
Descended thro’ the orient gates of the eternal day. 
War ceas’d, & all the troops, like shadows, fled 
to their abodes.’ 


Minor influences may be detected in the epigrams in the 
manner of Wolcot ; in the lyrics from the Prophetic Book: 
which often recall the hymns of Charles Wesley, and it 
the grotesque Hudibrastic lilt of ‘The Everlasting Gospel.’ 

Blake’s Prophetic Books tell us what is known of hi: 
mystical religion and philosophy. It is in the message 


General Preface xxi 


rather than in the manner of its delivery, that their chief 
worth lies. As little as S. Paul’s Epistle to the Romans 
can they be regarded as the practice of literature for its 
own sake. The value of Blake’s letters to Butts, obviously 
written to a friend to whom ‘he could speak without fear of 
misconception, is enhanced by the fact that they belong to 
the period when he conceived and in part produced his 
great works Milton and Ferusalem, 

Most of the epigrams in the MS. Book illustrate Blake’s 
relations with his friends and patrons; while certain of 
them (as perhaps cxiv) throw light upon his private life, 
of which almost nothing is known. 

2. A short but valuable account of Blake’s early life and 
literary and artistic predilections is given by Malkin in his 
Father's Memoirs of His Child, in an introductory letter to 
Thomas Johnes, of Hafod, dated January 4, 1806. This 
was written when Blake was forty-nine years of age, and 
Doctor Malkin, for whose book Blake designed the 
frontispiece, twelve years his junior. The facts there given 
were evidently derived from the poet himself. 

3. Hunt’s Examiner for Sunday, September 17, 1809, 
contains a critique of ‘Mr. Blake’s Exhibition,’ impugning 
the artist’s sanity in offensive terms. This attack is 
indignantly referred to by Blake in several of the epigrams 
written in the Rossetti MS. 

4. John Linnell, portrait and landscape painter, was 
introduced to Blake by Mr. George Cumberland, of Bristol, 
in 1818 (not 1813 as stated by Gilchrist), and thenceforward 
remained Blake’s steadfast friend and supporter. To his 
assistance we owe the great work of Blake’s old age, 
his ‘Inventions to the Book of Job,’ designs which had 
been executed for Butts, but were only engraved at the 
instance of his friend. Mr. Linnell left certain memoranda 
referring to the poet, while among other entries in his private 
journal are notes of several transactions made on Blake’s 
behalf. These documents are now in the possession of 
Mr. John Linnell, junior. 


xxii General Preface 


5. Frederick Tatham, sculptor and miniature painte 
was the son of Charles Heathcote Tatham, architect, w, 
made Blake’s acquaintance through Linnell. About 182 
when a youth of twenty or twenty-one, the younger Tath 
met Blake and, unfortunately for the world, became one 
the small group of neophytes. On the death of tt 
poet’s wife in October, 1831, Tatham acquired, or app 
priated, the whole of Blake’s literary remains, which |] 
afterwards destroyed, as we are told, on ‘ religious ground] 
This person wrote a memoir of Blake which he appears 
have parted with for purely secular reasons. Lost sight 
for some time, and fruitlessly sought by Gilchrist, it n 
appeared in the Blamire sale in 1863, bound in with « 
illuminated copy of Ferusalem (see Rossetti Papers, 186% 
1870 passim). This MS. life, which no one seems to hax 
thought worth printing in full, has been used and quote 
by Swinburne, Ellis and Yeats, and others, though they a 
not appear to have gleaned from this source any new fac: 
of real importance. Those given, however, presumab] 
possess the interest of having been derived from Catherir 
Blake, who, for a short time before her death, had been a 
inmate of the miniature painter’s household. Tatham 
misstatement of the date of Blake’s birth (which misle 
Swinburne) does not suggest habits of accuracy; an 
Richard Garnett, who met him later in life, refers to hit 
as a man on whose word no reliance could be placed.. 

My knowledge of Tatham’s Memoir, which I have not bee 
able to see, is limited to the extracts quoted therefrom b 
Swinburne and others. The copy of ¥erusalem with whic 
it is bound up was re-sold at Sotheby’s in June, 1887, t 
a London dealer, and is now the property of an owner wh 
prefers that no description of its contents be given. 

6. Henry Crabb Robinson, then in his fiftieth year, fir. 
met Blake at the home of Mr. Aders on December 10, 182, 
His diary and letters contain accounts of Blake in his la: 
years, interesting and valuable both as to his mystic: 
opinions (not very. clearly or sympathetically apprehende 


General Preface xxiii 


by the diarist) and as to his views on the poetry of Words- 
worth. These passages are reprinted together in Ellis and 
Yeats’ Memoir (Works, i. 142-150). 

7. Blake died August 12, 1827. Short notices of his 
life and works appeared in the Literary Gazette, the Gentle- 
man’s Magazine, and the Annual Register for the same 
year. i 

8. In 1828 John Thomas Smith, Keeper of the Prints 
and Drawings in the British Museum, published his Vod/e- 
kins and his Times, which has been not inaptly described 
as the most candid biography written in the English lan- 
guage. The second volume, as the title-page states, com- 
prehends ‘Memoirs of several contemporary Artists from 
the time of Roubiliac, Hogarth, and Reynolds, to that of 
Fuseli, Flaxman, and Blake.’ Scant justice has hitherto 
been done to this admirable little life, which gives for the 
first time the greater part of the material upon which 
Cunningham and Gilchrist based their biographies. Smith’s 
acquaintance with Blake dates from his early days at the 
Mathews’ to the close of the poet’s life. This contemporary 
picture drawn with intelligent sympathy by one who knew 
him- well is of the utmost value; and Smith’s tribute to 
Blake’s genius, sanity, and lofty character, coming from the 
pen of one who was the reverse of a hero-worshipper, is 
sufficient refutation of the contrary view. 

g. In 1830 Allan Cunningham published his Lives of the 
Most Eminent British Painters, Sculptors, and Architects, 
among which is a biography of Blake. This gaily and 
rather irreverently written little life is mainly derived from 
Smith’s Mollekins, and while it shows no particular research 
or regard for accuracy has preserved a few anecdotes of 
Blake which probably would have otherwise disappeared. 

10. About 1860, when Linnell, Tatham, Samuel Palmer, 
Richmond, and a few other friends and contemporaries of 
_the poet were still living, Alexander Gilchrist began his Life 
of Blake, “ Pictor Ignotus.” Gilchrist, in Rossetti’s words, 
‘lived next door to Carlyle and was as near him in other 


xxiv General Preface 


respects as he could manage,’ and his style betrays 
influence of his model. There is also a tendency to dy 
unduly upon unimportant incidents such as the ‘ Vision: 
Heads, which gives the portrait a lack of proportt 
Practically the whole of the first volume had been writt 
and the first eight chapters printed, when Gilchrist died | 
the 30th of November,1861. The book, which was publish 
two years later, was completed by his widow, aided by D.., 
and W. M. Rossetti, the former supplying a supplementz 
chapter to the biography, and editing the ‘ Selections’ fre 
Blake’s prose and verse, and the latter contributing: 
serviceable list of his pictures and engravings. The letters: 
Butts, 1800-1803, appear here for the first time. A seco 
edition, with some new letters, was published in 1880. TT 
Life, handsomely produced, and embellished with facsimil 
of Blake’s own glorious designs, achieved its main purpose: 
popularizing the poet, and in preparing the way for Swr 
burne’s great critical appreciation. Gilchrist incorporati 
most of the material drawn from the preceding source 
though his manner of writing sometimes leaves it doubtf 
whether he is supplementing our knowledge or mere: 
embroidering facts more simply narrated by earlier bi: 
graphers. 

11. Ellis and Yeats’ Memoir, prefixed to their lars 
edition of the Works, 1893, is especially intended, as tk 
editors state, to supply new facts, or to discuss in great 
detail aspects of Blake’s life which they consider unsati 
factorily dealt with by Gilchrist. Of much importance, 
substantiable on good evidence, is the discovery that Blal 
was Of Irish ancestry, his grandfather, a certain John O’Nei 
of Rathmines, Dublin, having assumed the name of Blak 
‘borne by his second wife. James O’Neill, his son by 
previous union, also took the name of Blake, and settled ; 
London, where he became the father of the poet. Th 
account, however, is at variance with another, first give 
in Mr. Alfred T. Storey’s William Blake, published in tt 
same year, where, on the authority of two ladies, daughter 


General Preface XXV 


of William John Blake, of Southampton, claiming tobe 
second cousins of the poet, Blake’s descent is traced to 
the Somersetshire family with which the Commonwealth 
Admiral was connected. Without attempting the difficult 
task of reconciling these rival claims, it may be pointed out 
that Blake’s father was certainly a Protestant, and that the 
poet, who in one instance describes himself as ‘ English 
Blake, nowhere claims Irish descent. Messrs. Ellis and Yeats 
interpret the mysterious reference to Hayley’s having 
‘hired a villain to bereave my life,’ in the sense of his having 
conspired with Flaxman to deprive Blake of his means of 
livelihood, and identify the hired villain with Hunt, the 
author of the article in the Examiner. I refer elsewhere 
to these editors’ interpretation of Blake’s mystical writings. 

12. Biographies of Blake derived from the above 
sources, but of interest as embodying personal apprecia- 
tions of Blake’s work, will be found in Alfred T. Storey’s 
William Blake, his Life, Character, and Genius, 1893, in 
Richard Garnett’s monograph in the Portfolio, 1895, and 
in the introductions of W. M. Rossetti, Laurence Housman 
and W. B. Yeats to their editions of the poems. In pure 
aesthetic criticism D. G. Rossetti’s prefatory notes to the 
‘Selections’ printed in Gilchrist, James Thompson’s 
Essay, and Swinburne’s masterpiece hold the first place. 
Henry G. Hewlett’s curious essay in depreciation, entitled 
‘Imperfect Genius’ (Contemporary Review, vol. 28), should 
also be noticed. An elaborate attempt to expound Blake’s 
symbolic system in detail is contained in Ellis and Yeats’ 
edition of the Works, and, more concisely stated, in 
Maclagan and Russell’s Introduction to their reprint of 
Ferusalem, 1905. 


VI. EDITIONS 


The following is a list of the editions quoted in the foot- 
notes. I refer to those only where use has been made of the 
original printed and manuscript sources, and where the 


xxvi General Preface 


readings given might for this reason be understoo 
possess some authority. 

1. Malk. A Father's Memoirs of his Child. 
Benj. Heath Malkin, Esq., M.A.,F.A.S. Longman, Hu 
Rees, and Orme, London. 1806, 8°. 


Contains five songs from Poetical Sketches and Songs of Innocence 
of Experience, printed presumably from copies supplied by Blake tc: 
author. Malkin’s version of ‘The Tyger’ contains an interesting va 
reading of 1. 12. 


2. Cunn. The Lives of the most eminent British Paint: 
Sculptors, and Architects, by Allan Cunningham. Ja 
Murray, London. 1829-1833. 6vols. 16°. 


Volume ii contains poems from Poetical Sketches and Songs of Innoo 
and of Experience. To Cunningham’s corrupt version of ‘The Tyger’ 1 
be traced the second or later version ‘on MS. authority,’ which 
deceived so many of Blake’s editors. 


3. Wilk. Songs of Innocence and of Experiens 
Shewing the two Contrary States of the Human Sc 
(Dedication of the Poem of the Grave.) W. Pickering as 
W. Newbery, London. 1839. 8°. . 


The first letterpress edition of the Songs. Edited with a short 
excellent preface by J. J. Garth Wilkinson, the translator of Swedenbo 
In the Dictionary of National Biography and elsewhere, the text of t 
edition is described as ‘ much altered,’ but as a matter of fact Wilkinso 
emendations are somewhat fewer than those of later editors. 


4. R*. Dante Gabriel Rossetti’s original transcript 
a portion of Blake’s MS. Book. See Bibliographic 
Preface to ‘Poems from the Rossetti MS.’ This transcri 
was probably made about 1847, when Rossetti was st 
a youth. : 


These readings, furnished me by Mr. White, are here quoted for the fi 
time. 


5. Gil. Life of William Blake, ‘Pictor Ignotus,’ wi 
Selections from his poems and other writings by the la 
Alexander Gilchrist. .. . Illustrated from Blake’s own wor 
in facsimile by W. J. Linton and in Photolithography; wi 
a few of Blake’s original plates. In two volumes. Vol. 
Macmillan, London. 1863. 8°. 


Poems quoted by Gilchrist in the first volume of the Lye, 


General Preface xxvii 
6. DGR. The same. Volume ii. 


Poems printed in the ‘Selections’ from Blake’s works, given by D. G. 
Rossetti, in the second volume of Gilchrist’s Life. Rossetti rejects some 
of the changes made in his earlier transcript, but retains others, and not 
infrequently adopts the readings of Wilkinson. With reference to these and 
other attempts at emendation introduced by him into Blake’s text we may 
note Rossetti’s later statement ‘that he would not now, if the work were 
before him to be done, make so many alterations.’ (See WMR’s Dante 
Gabriel Rossetti, p. 165.) 


7. Swink. William Blake: A Critical Essay. By 
Algernon Charles Swinburne. With illustrations from 
Blake’s designs in facsimile, coloured and plain. J. C. 
Hotten, London. 1868. 8° 

Contains poems quoted by Swinburne from Blake’s published works and 
from the Rossetti MS, Book. From the latter source Swinburne prints 


several poems omitted by Rossetti, including the greater portion of ‘ The 
Everlasting Gospel.’ 


8. Shep. The Poems of William Blake. Comprising 
Songs of Innocence and of Experience, together with 
Poetical Sketches, and some copyright poems not in 
any other edition. Basil Montague Pickering, London. 
1874. 8°. 

This edition collects in a single volume Richard Herne Shepherd's earlier 
text of the Songs of Innocence and [of | Experience, with other poems, 1866 
(reprinted in 1868) ; and that of the Poetical Sketches, 1868, all of which were 
published by B. M. Pickering. Shepherd was not able to print in his edition 


any of the poems from the Rossetti MS, His text of the poems included 
is, however, by far the most accurate of any hitherto published. 


9. WMR. The Poetical Works of William Blake, 
Lyrical and Miscellaneous. Edited with a Prefatory 
Memoir by William Michael Rossetti. [Aldine Edition. ] 
George Bell and Sons, London. 1874. 8° 


This popular edition has been frequently reprinted. The readings quoted 
in my footnotes are taken from a copy of the fourth edition, 1883. 


10. W. Muir's facsim. Mr. William Muir's coloured 
facsimiles of the Songs of Innocence and the Songs of 
Experience. In the footnotes to The Gates of Paradise 
I refer also to Mr. Muir’s text of the prologue and of the 


xxviii General Preface 


‘Keys of the Gates’ prefixed in ordinary typograp 
his facsimile of The Gates of Paradise. 


Admirable as facsimiles of Blake’s coloured illustrations, these 1 
ductions cannot be followed with any certainty for the text of the poer 


11. EY. The Works of William Blake, Poetic, Symbip 
and Critical. Edited with Lithographs of the Illustriff 
‘Prophetic Books,’ and a Memoir and Interpretation 
Edwin John Ellis and William Butler Yeats. In tk 
volumes. Bernard Quaritch, London. 1893. Large 


In this edition the somewhat confusing arrangement of the Poems 
perhaps be due to the editors’ scheme of interpretation. For some of [ 
text apparently Messrs. Ellis and Yeats have trusted to the Aldine ed: 
while part has been derived from Mr. Ellis’ transcripts of the MS. Bool) 
The Four Zoas. These editors, in expounding Blake’s system, lay clai| 
special knowledge ‘ produced by the evocations of symbolic magic’ (ii 
and passim) ; and some of their remarks (e. g. ii. 299) would seem to sug 
their belief that the possession of these occult powers enables them to) 
duce a text through which Blake’s mind is reflected more accurately tha 
the MSS. left by himself. 


12, WBY. The Poems of William Blake. Edited! 
W. B. Yeats. [The Muses’ Library.] Lawrence 4 
Bullen, London. 1893. 8°. 


In some respects a more correct text than the preceding. Reprinted 
Routledge (1905). 


13. LH. Selections from the writings of William Bla 
with an introductory essay by Lawrence Housman. Keg 
Paul, Trench, Triibner, and Co. 1893. 8° 


I quote this edition only for the variant reading in the song taken fi 
An Island in the Moon, since this MS. was in Mr. Housman’s hands. 


14. Russell and Maclagan. The Prophetic Books 
William Blake. Jerusalem, Edited by E.R. D.Maclag 
and A. G. B. Russell [on cover A. G. B. Russell a 
E.R. D. Maclagan]. Bullen, London. 1904. 4°. 

Apparently intended as the first of a series of typographical reprint 
Blake’s Prophetic Books. Purports to be a verbatim and literatim repr 


but contains such misreadings as ‘ course’ for ‘ race,’ and ‘ By his own h 
shall surely die’ for ‘ By his own law shall surely die.’ 


General Preface xxix 


VII 


In a work involving much reference to material not 
lying ready to hand in any public library an editor is 
_ necessarily dependent upon the goodwill and co-operation 
of the owners of precious books and manuscripts. It is 
with gratitude that I- acknowledge the invaluable aid 
rendered me in various ways by collectors and students of 
the works of Blake. 

My debt to Mr. W. A. White, of Brooklyn, New York, 
the owner of the Rossetti MS., the Pickering MS., and 
other Blake originals, can best be made clear by an explana- 
tion of his share in the work. Entering into my desire to 
produce an accurate and final text of Blake’s poems, 
Mr. White has for the past three years collaborated with 
me in this endeavour by furnishing me with exact transcripts 
of the poems in the MS. Book, and answering a very great 
number of questions of detail. I owe also to Mr. White 
the correct text of the smaller Pickering MS., which after 
a disappearance of over thirty years was opportunely 
rediscovered while this edition was in the press. I should 
not omit to explain that it was Mr. White’s conjecture that 
The Gates of Paradise belonged to a later date than had 
been previously supposed, which led me, after a study 
of the symbolic references in the couplets explanatory of 
the plates, to form the conclusion that the two issues ‘ For 
the Sexes, in which the poems first appear, must have been 
produced, not in 1793, but somewhere nearer 1810, Lastly, 
I am indebted to Mr. White for the two facsimiles of the 
MS. Book given in this edition. 

To Mr. John Linnell, junior, I owe the correct text of 
the songs, and passages quoted in the footnotes from 
The Four Zoas, as well as the description of this MS., and 
details of copies of The Gates of Paradise, The Ghost of 
Aébel, and other Blake originals in the possession of the 
Linnell family. Mr. Linnell has also furnished me with 
photographs of obscurely written lines in The Four Zoas, 


XXX General Preface 


and has replied with great minuteness to several ques} 
of mine relating to different works of Blake. My thank 
also due to Miss Isabelle Linnell and Mr. William Liti 

I owe to the kindness of Mr. C. Fairfax Murray the 
of the autograph MS. known as Az Island in the 
since presented by him to the Fitzwilliam Museum, as: 
as extracts from original letters of Flaxman throwing 
upon the cause of Blake’s estranged attitude towardd 
former friend. A hitherto unprinted poem (see p. 
courteously sent me by Mr. A. G. B. Russell illustrates 
earlier and happier relationship between the two artists 

I have to thank Captain Butts for the loan of Bla 
letters to his grandfather, Mr. Thomas Butts, the art 
lifelong friend and patron. I am obliged to Mr. Berr. 
Quaritch for lending me the MS. of Zzrzel. To Sigr 
Helen Rossetti Angeli I tender my thanks for her kind! 
in sending me from Italy the early and curious Blake 1] 
containing ‘The Passions’ and another piece. 

I have to acknowledge the courtesy of the various ow1 
of copies of the Songs of Innocence and the Songs 
Experience, enumerated in my Bibliographical Preface ( 
72-77), for collations and details of the several impressi¢ 

Mr. W. M. Rossetti kindly furnished me with his’ 
collection of the lost book, the French Revolution, and a 
of the Pickering MS. which has since come to lig 
Mr. John Pearson in several communications has given 
the benefit of his expert knowledge of original issues < 
reprints of works of Blake, and Mr. John Lawler has b 
good enough to supply me with information as to Bl 
originals sold by auction. Mr.Frederick Macmillan has tal 
great pains to clear up the question of the process by wh 
the plates of the Songs were reproduced in Gilchrist’s Z 

I am indebted to Mrs. Beach for research work in 1 
British Museum in the early stages of this book. I 
grateful to Mr. Cowley of the Bodleian Library fo 
courteous response to questions submitted by me, in 
first place, to Mr. Madan; to Mr. Fortescue of the Brit 


General Preface xxxi 


Museum for personal replies to like inquiries; and to 
Mr. Peter Cowell of the Liverpool Public Library for 
obtaining for me the loan of certain rare books. To Mr. 
Wilberforce Eames I owe information regarding the unique 
- example of Blake’s Milton in the Astor-Lenox Library. 

I have pleasure in acknowledging the help of Mr. T. 
Harkness Graham, assistant in the University Library, in 
the reading and correction of the proofs, and the aid in 
various ways given me by Miss May Allen, Librarian to 
the Biological Library. The help rendered by the members 
of my class in bibliography, especially by Miss M. E. Lyster 
and Miss D. E. Yates, has contributed greatly to the ac- 
curacy of this edition. 

Professor John Macdonald Mackay has been good enough 
to read certain of my proofs and prefaces. 

In concluding this long list of obligations I desire to add 
that it was at the suggestion of the late Professor York 
Powell that I undertook, in a somewhat light-hearted mood, 
the preparation of a small edition of Blake’s Lyrical Poems 
for the Clarendon Press. A cursory comparison of existing 
texts showed me the impossibility of giving a reliable 
version of Blake, even in the form of selections, without 
preliminary collation of the original engraved and manu- 
script sources. This view was accepted by the Delegates 
of the Press, and the present critical edition undertaken 
besides the smaller work at first proposed. I wish to thank 
the authorities of the Press, and especially Mr. H. S. 
Milford, for the care and patience with which they have 
carried out the ‘ minute particulars’ of this book. The 
untimely death of Professor York Powell deprived me of 
advantages of advice and encouragement, given by him so 
generously at the outset of my task, and robs me now of 
much of the pleasure with which I bring to completion this 
edition of one of his favourite poets, which, imperfect 
though it be, I am fain to dedicate to his memory. 

LIVERPOOL, JOHN SAMPSON. 


Nov. 20, 1905. 


CONTENTS 


POEMS FROM THE POETICAL SKETCHES 


Bibliographical Preface 

To Spring 

To Summer 

To Autumn 

To Winter 

To the Evening Star . 

To Morning 

Fair Elenor 

Song: How sweet I odie Goin field to Held 

Song: My silks and fine array 

Song: Love and harmony combine 

Song: I love the jocund dance ; 

Song: Memory, hither come . : : 

Mad Song i 

Song: Fresh from ehie’ dewy hill, ihe: merry oe 

Song: When early morn walks forth in sober grey 

To the Muses 

Gwin, King of Norway 

An Imitation of Spencer . 

Blind-man’s Buff 

Appendix I 

King Edward the Third . 

Prologue, intended for a Dramatic Piece of King 
Edward the Fourth 

Prologue to King John 

A War Song to Englishmen . 

The Couch of Death 

Contemplation 

Samson 


e 


G ontents XXXIili 


PAGE 
Appendix II 
Song by a Shepherd . : 5 : 47 
Song by an old Shepherd . ? Ss” is 
SONGS FROM ‘AN ISLAND IN THE MOON’ 
Bibliographical Preface . : : 50 
When old corruption first peau. : Ses. 
The Song of Phebe and Jellicoe ; : 55 
Hail Matrimony, made of Love . : | 5 
Tobeornottobe . é . : 56 
This city and this country ‘ ' ey 
Leave, O leave [me] to my sorrows . ‘ 58 
Appendix. : : P ‘ i» 59 
SONGS OF INNOCENCE AND OF EXPERIENCE 

Bibliographical Preface . : , : 65 

SONGS OF INNOCENCE 
Introduction . ‘ : : : 86 
The Ecchoing Green ‘ ; : eae 
wahe Lamb. ‘ : ‘ ; 88 
The Shepherd. ‘ , : eater! 
Infant Joy. ‘ : ‘ 89 
The Little Black Bay , . . a Oo 
Laughing Song : ‘ : i gt 
Spring. ‘ : ; : Py 
A Cradle Song ’ : ‘ : 92 
Nurse's Song ‘ : ‘ ie Oe 
Holy Thursday ; ‘ : ’ 95 
The Blossom ‘ : : : AS 
_The Chimney Sweeper : ; : 97 
The Divine Image ‘ : : we 98 
Night . : : ; ; : 99 
A Dream . ; : ; . 1060 
On Another’s Sorrow : : ; IOI 
The Little Boy Lost , ‘ : . 102 
The Little Boy Found - : : 103 


sampson Tf (e 


XXXIV C onlents 


SONGS OF EXPERIENCE 


< 


Introduction 
Earth’s Answer 
Nurse’s Song 
The Fly 


The Tyger 


The Little Girl Lost . 
The Little Girl Found 
The Clod and the Pebble 
The Little Vagabond 


Holy Thursday 


A Poison Tree 

The Angel 

The Sick Rose 

To Tirzah , ; ; 
The Voice of the Ancient Bard 
My Pretty Rose Tree 

Ah! Sun Flower . 

The Lilly : 

The Garden of Love 

A Little Boy Lost 

Infant Sorrow 

The School Boy 


- London 


A Little Girl Lost 
The Chimney Sweeper™ 
The Human Abstract 


Appendix 


POEMS FROM THE ROSSETTI MANUSCRIPT 


A Divine Image . 


Bibliographical Introduction 


Earlier Poems. 
Later Poems 5 
The Everlasting Gospel 


PAGE 


106 
107 
108 
10g 
IIo 
116 
TL7, 
119 
120 
IQ1 
I21 
123 
123 
123 
124 
125 
126 
126 


eo) 


128 
129 
130 
131 
ti38 
133 
134 


135 


138 
156 
183 
241 


Contents 


THE PICKERING MANUSCRIPT 
Preface 

The Smile 
The Golden Net . 
The Mental Traveller 
The Land of Dreams 
Mary . ; 
The Crystal Consirat 
The Grey Monk 
Auguries of Innocence 
Long John Brown and Little Mary Bell 
William Bond : 


POEMS FROM LETTERS 

Preface ; 
To my dear Friend, Mrs. Ruth F asiad 
To my Friend Butts I write . 

_ To Mrs. Butts 

With happiness aeelisn across ie eu 
O why was I born with a different face ? 
A fairy leapt upon my knee 


DEDICATION OF ‘ BLAKE’S ILLUSTRATIONS OF 
BLAIR’S GRAVE’ 
Preface 
To the Queen 


EPIGRAMS FROM BLAKE’S ANNOTATED COPY OF 
REYNOLDS’ WORKS 
Preface - 
Epigrams 


POEMS FROM THE ‘PROPHETIC BOOKS’ 
Bibliographical Preface ‘ , 
From The Book of Thel: Thel’s Motto 
From The Marriage of Heaven and Fell 


From Visions of the coe Bae Albion: The © 


Argument 


XXXV 


PAGE 


264 

269 

270 

of ke Sets 
279-— 
280 
282, 
283° 
286— 
295 
296 


300 
301 
302 
3°4 
3°5 
310 
311 


314 
316 


318 
320 


326 
Se ms 
344 


345 


XXXVI (s; ontents 


PAGE 
From The Four Zoas: 
At the first Sound the Golden Sun 345 
Ah! how shall Urizen the King 347 
Till thou dost [conquer] the distrest « 850 
From Milton: And did those feet inancient time 351 
From Yerusalem : 
To the Public : 352 
Such visions have appear’d So me 353 
To the Jews : 353 
Each Man is in his Sheclpas power 358 
To the Deists 359 
To the Christians — 361 
To the Christians 363 
Especially to the Female 364 
VERSES FROM ‘FOR THE SEXES. THE GATES OF 
PARADISE’ 

Bibliographical Preface . 366 
Mutual Forgiveness of each Vice 37% 
The Keys of the Gates ‘ 373 
To the Accuser who is The God of es World a 9899 
From the Legends to the Plates 378 

INDEX OF FIRST LINES 379 
ILLUSTRATIONS 
Facsimile of Rossetti MS., p. 109 ‘ . Frontispiece 


Facsimile of Rossetti MS., p. 52. . Lo face p. 242 


POEMS 


from the 


POETICAL SKETCHES 


(Privately Printed, 1783) 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL PREFACE 
TO THE 
POETICAL SKETCHES 


THE Poetical Sketches, Blake’s earliest work, is a slender 
demy octavo volume of 38 leaves, privately issued, with- 
out publisher’s or printer's name. The title-page reads: 
POETICAL | SKETCHES. | By W. B. | LONDON: | Printed 
in the Year MDCCLXXXIII. The first quire of two leaves 
contains the title and ‘advertisement’; then nine quires in 
fours, signed B—K (K* blank) and paginated 1-70. There 
are no half-titles to the section ‘Miscellaneous Poems’ 
or to ‘King Edward the Third.’ The book is without 
index or table of literary contents, which are as follows :— 


MISCELLANEOUS POEMS PAGE 
To Spring 
To Summer . 
To Autumn . 
To Winter ‘ 
To the Evening Star 
To Morning . 
Fair Elenor . : ; : 
Song: ‘ How sweet I roam’d...’. 
Song: ‘ My silks and fine array’ . 
Song: ‘Love and harmony combine’ 
Song: ‘TI love the jocund dance’ . 
Song: ‘Memory, hither come’ 
Mad Song. ‘ : ‘ ‘ : 
Song: ‘Fresh from the dewy hill... . 
Song: ‘When early morn walks forth . . 
To the Muses : : : 
Gwin, King of Norway . 
An Imitation of Spencer 
Blind-man’s Buff . ; 


DPYHH HHH HHH eH 
NRO ON AnPO YH HON QAnNAW DH 


KING EDWARD THE THIRD. ; : <429 
Prologue intended for a dramatic piece of King 
Edward the Fourth . : ‘ : . 56 
Prologue to King John : : : : « ah 
A War Song to Englishmen : : ; £58 
The Couch of Death . : : ; : - 60 
Contemplation . ' : : : : =a) OS 
Samson : 64 


The little book, which is exceedingly rare, is the only 
one of Blake’s poetical writings, except the first book of 
the French Revolution, which made its appearance in 


Poetical Sketches 3 


' ordinary type. As we learn from Cunningham, it was 
printed at the expense of Flaxman and Mathew, who 
handed the unbound sheets to the author to dispose of 
for his own advantage. The size of the edition is not 
_ stated; but it was probably a small one, and of it Blake 
seems to have issued a few copies only. The Preface, 
which was the composition of Mathew, runs :— 


‘ ADVERTISEMENT 


‘ The following Sketches were the production of untutored 
youth, commenced in his twelfth, and occasionally resumed 
by the author till his twentieth year ; since which time, his 
_ talents having been wholly directed to the attainment of 
excellence in his profession, he has been deprived of the 
leisure requisite to such a revisal of these sheets, as might 
have rendered them less unfit to meet the public eye. 

‘Conscious of the irregularities and defects to be found in 
almost every page, his friends have still believed that they 
_ possessed a poetical originality, which merited some respite 
from oblivion. These their opinions remain, however, to 
_ be now reproved or confirmed by a less partial public.’ 


While the book contains a few obvious misprints, such 
as ‘cares’ for ‘ears’ in ‘An Imitation of Spencer,’ and 
‘her’ for ‘his’ in the fourth stanza of the ‘Song’ on p. 12; 
yet its general inaccuracy is far less than has been repre- 
sented, and by no means warrants such violent changes as 
_ D. G. Rossetti’s ‘rustling birds of dawn’ for ‘rustling beds 
_ of dawn’ in the ‘Mad Song.’ The printer, while generally 

respecting Blake’s use of ’d or ed where the latter is to be 
_ pronounced as a separate syllable, has evidently corrected 
_ Blake’s spelling, omitted capitals, and supplied his own 
_ punctuation, frequently a faulty one. See ‘Gwin, King of 
Norway,’ where the lines, 

‘Arouse thyself! the nations, black 

Like clouds, come rolling o’er!’ 
_ are printed: 
‘ Arouse thyself! the nations black, 
Like clouds, come rolling o’er!’ 
In the present edition punctuation is amended and the in- 
- dented lines of the printer abandoned in favour of Blake’s 
~ own invariable and more artistic alinement. In every other 
respect the text of the original edition is exactly reproduced. 

The lyrics in Poetical Sketches include the whole of the 
‘poems on pp. 1-28, to which Blake, or perhaps Mathew, 
gives the title ‘Miscellaneous Poems.’ The other pieces 

B2 


A Poetical Sketches 


fall somewhat outside the scope of this edition, but are 
supplied in an appendix in order that the reader may be 
enabled to judge of Blake’s first volume in its entirety. 
The ‘Poems from the Poetical Sketches’ together with the 
pieces in the first Appendix give therefore, in their proper 
order, the whole contents of the book. 

In a second Appendix I have placed two short poems, 
‘Song by a Shepherd’ and ‘Song by an Old Shepherd.’ 
These songs are not printed among the poems in the 
Poetical Sketches, but were found in Blake’s handwriting 
on the fly-leaves of a copy which was lent to Mr. Basil 
Montague Pickering, the publisher, about 1868. They 
clearly belong to the same period as the Poetical Sketches, 
though all Blake’s editors arrange them among poems 
written in a different manner and at a much later date. 
First printed by R. H. Shepherd in Pickering’s editions of | 
1868 and 1874, where they are placed at the end of the 
poems from the Pickering MS., they were apparently un- 
known to D. G. Rossetti, and (as Pickering’s copyright) 
could not be included in W. M. Rossetti’s Aldine edition. 

Selections from the Poetical Sketches were first given by 
Malkin and Cunningham, the former printing ‘ How sweet 
I roam’d from field to field,’ and the latter the ‘ Address to 
the Muses,’ with a few passages from ‘ King Edward the > 
Third.’ D. G. Rossetti, in the selection given in Gilchrist’s 
Life, prints six of the eight songs (excluding the two last), 
‘To the Muses,’ ‘To the Evening Star, ‘To Spring,’ ‘To 
Summer, ‘Blind-man’s Buff, and selections from scenes i, 
iii, v, and vi of ‘King Edward the Third.’ R.H. Shepherd 
prints the whole book with his customary accuracy, 
separately in 1868 as a supplementary volume to the Songs 
of Innocence and of Experience, and together with that work 
in the edition of 1874. _W. M. Rossetti and later editors 
have availed themselves of this excellent text. Shepherd 
makes a few trifling corrections; he omits Blake’s general 
heading ‘ Miscellaneous Poems’ and inserts a half-title to 
‘King Edward the Third’ which is not in the original. 
W. M. Rossetti places the pieces in an order of his own 
and omits the prose, with the exception of the ‘ Prologue 
to King John’ and ‘Samson’ which he prints as blank 
verse. Ellis and Yeats follow the Aldine edition, omitting 
‘Samson. W. B. Yeats omits ‘Fair Elinor,” ‘Gwin of 
Norway, the two prologues, ‘The Couch of Death,’ ‘ Con- 
templation,’ and ‘Samson.’ There is an excellent facsimile 
reproduction of the Poetical Sketches (fifty copies printed 
by W. Griggs in May, 1890). 


POEMS FROM POETICAL SKETCHES 


To Spring 


O thou with dewy locks, who lookest down I 
Thro’ the clear windows of the morning, turn 
Thine angel eyes upon our western isle, 

Which in full choir hails thy approach, O Spring! 


The hills tell each other, and the list’ning 5 
Vallies hear; all our longing eyes are turned 

Up to thy bright pavillions: issue forth, 

And let thy holy feet visit our clime. 


Come over the eastern hills, and let our winds 9 
Kiss thy perfumed garments; let us taste 

Thy morn and evening breath; scatter thy pearls 
Upon our love-sick land that mourns for thee. 


O deck her forth with thy fair fingers; pour 13 
Thy soft kisses on her bosom; and put 

Thy golden crown upon her languish’d head, 
Whose modest tresses were bound up for thee! 


Poetical Sketches, pp. 1, 2. 
5 tell each] do tell each DGR: tell to each EY. 7 pavillions] 
- pavilion DGR. 14 soft] softest DGR. 


‘To Summer 


_ © thou who passest thro’ our vallies in 1 
Thy strength, curb thy fierce steeds, allay the heat 
- That flames from their large nostrils! thou, O Summer, 
_ Oft pitched’st here thy golden tent, and oft 
- Beneath our oaks hast slept, while we beheld 5 
With joy thy ruddy limbs and flourishing hair, 
Poetical Sketches, p. 2. 
6 ruddy... hair] Cp. MS. Book, xxv. 


‘Abstinence sows sand all over 
The ruddy limbs & flaming hair.’ 


6 Poetical Shetches 


Beneath our thickest shades we oft have heard 

Thy voice, when noon upon his fervid car 

Rode o’er the deep of heaven; beside our springs 

Sit down, and in our mossy vallies, on 10 
Some bank beside a river clear, throw thy 

Silk draperies off, and rush into the stream: 

Our vallies love the Summer in his pride. 


Our bards are fam’d who strike the silver wire: 

Our youth are bolder than the southern swains: 15 
Our maidens fairer in the sprightly dance: 

We lack not songs, nor instruments of joy, 

Nor echoes sweet, nor waters clear as heaven, 

Nor laurel wreaths against the sultry heat. 


Ir thy] all DGR. 12 Silk] Thy DGR. 15 youth] youths DGR. 


To Autumn 


O Autumn, laden with fruit, and stained he 
With the blood of the grape, pass not, but sit 
Beneath my shady roof; there thou may’st rest, 

And tune thy jolly voice to my fresh pipe, 

And all the daughters of the year shall dance! 5 
Sing now the lusty song of fruits and flowers. 


‘The narrow bud opens her beauties to 

The sun, and love runs in her thrilling veins ; 
Blossoms hang round the brows of morning, and 
Flourish down the bright cheek of modest eve, 10 
Till clust’ring Summer breaks forth into singing, 

And feather'd clouds strew flowers round her head. 


‘The spirits of the air live on the smells 

Of fruit; and joy, with pinions light, roves round 
The gardens, or sits singing in the trees.’ 15 
Thus sang the jolly Autumn as he sat; 

Then rose, girded himself, and o’er the bleak 

Hills fled from our sight; but left his golden load. 


Poetical Sketches, p. 3. 


Poetical Sketches 7 
To Winter 


‘O Winter! bar thine adamantine doors: z 
+ The north is thine; there hast thou built thy dark 

Deep-founded habitation. Shake not thy roofs, 

Nor bend thy pillars with thine iron car.’ 


He hears me not, but o’er the yawning deep 5 
Rides heavy ; his storms are unchain’d, sheathed 

In ribbed steel; I dare not lift mine eyes, 

For he hath rear’d his sceptre o’er the world. 


Lo! now the direful monster, whose skin clings 9 
To his strong bones, strides o’er the groaning rocks: 
He withers all in silence, and in his hand 

Unclothes the earth, and freezes up frail life. 


He takes his seat upon the cliffs,—the mariner 13 
Cries in vain. Poor little wretch, that deal’st 

With storms !—till heaven smiles, and the monster 

Is driv’n yelling to his caves beneath mount Hecla, 


Poetical Sketches, p. 4. 
I-4 no quotation marks in original. 15, 16 and the monster... 
mount Hecla] 
and drives the monster 
Yelling beneath Mount Hecla to his caves. EY. 


To the Evening Star 


Thou fair-hair’d angel of the evening, I 
Now, whilst the sun rests on the mountains, light 
Thy bright torch of love; thy radiant crown 

Put on, and smile upon our evening bed! 

Smile on our loves, and while thou drawest the 5 


Poetwal Sketches, p. 5. 
3 bright] brilliant DGR, EY. 5, 6 while... dew] 
whilst thou drawest round 
The curtains of the sky, scatter thy dew. DGR. 
while thou drawest round 
The sky’s blue curtains, scatter silver dew. Swinb. 


8 Poetical Sketches 


Blue curtains of the sky, scatter thy silver dew 

On every flower that shuts its sweet eyes 

In timely sleep. Let thy west wind sleep on 

The lake; speak silence with thy glimmering eyes, 
And wash the dusk with silver. Soon, full soon, Io 
Dost thou withdraw; then the wolf rages wide, 

And the lion glares thro’ the dun forest : 

The fleeces of our flocks are cover’d with 

Thy sacred dew: protect them with thine influence. 


6 silver] EY omit. 7 shuts] closes DGR, Swinb., EY. 12 And the] 
And then the DGR, EY, WBY. 14 protect... influence] protect 
with influence EY. 


To Morning 


O holy virgin! clad in purest white, I 
Unlock heav’n’s golden gates, and issue forth; 
Awake the dawn that sleeps in heaven; let light 
Rise from the chambers of the east, and bring 

The honied dew that cometh on waking day. 5 
O radiant morning, salute the sun 

Rouz’d like a huntsman to the chace, and with 
Thy buskin’d feet appear upon our hills. 


Poetical Sketches, p. 6. 


Fair Elenor 


The bell struck one, and shook the silent tower; I 
The graves give up their dead: fair Elenor 

Walk’d by the castle gate, and lookéd in. 

A hollow groan ran thro’ the dreary vaults. 


Poetical Sketches, pp. 7-10. The theme of this very juvenile poem was 
evidently suggested by Walpole’s ‘Gothic story,’ The Castle of Otranto, 
first published in 1765. Compare the incident in the first chapter, where 
Isabella descends into the vaults of the Castle, and shrieks on meeting what 
she believes to be the ghost of Conrad. 


shinee 


Poetical Sketches 9 


She shriek’d aloud, and sunk upon the steps, 5 
_ On the cold stone her pale cheeks. Sickly smells 

Of death issue as from a sepulchre, 

And all is silent but the sighing vaults. 


Chill death withdraws his hand, and she revives; 9 
Amaz’d, she finds herself upon her feet, 

And, like a ghost, thro’ narrow passages 

Walking, feeling the cold walls with her hands. 


Fancy returns, and now she thinks of bones 13 
And grinning skulls, and corruptible death 

Wrap’d in his shroud; and now fancies she hears 
Deep sighs, and sees pale sickly ghosts gliding. 


At length, no fancy but reality 17 
Distracts her. A rushing sound, and the feet 

Of one that fled, approaches.—Ellen stood 

Like a dumb statue, froze to stone with fear. 


The wretch approaches, crying: ‘The deed is done; 21 
Take this, and send it by whom thou wilt send; 

It is my life—send it to Elenor :— 

He’s dead, and howling after me for blood! 


‘Take this,’ he cry’d; and thrust into her arms _—_25 
A wet napkin, wrap’d about; then rush’d 

Past, howling: she receiv’d into her arms 

Pale death, and follow’d on the wings of fear. 


They pass’d swift thro’ the outer gate; the wretch 29 
Howling, leap’d o’er the wall into the moat, 

Stifling in mud. Fair Ellen pass’d the bridge, 

And heard a gloomy voice cry ‘Is it done?’ 


As the deer wounded, Ellen flew over 33 
The pathless plain; as the arrows that fly 

By night, destruction flies, and strikes in darkness. 
She fled from fear, till at her house arriv’d. 


6 cheeks] cheek all edd. 


10 Poetical Sketches 


Her maids await her; on her bed she falls, 37 
That bed of joy, where erst her lord hath press’d: 
‘Ah, woman’s fear!’ she cry’d; ‘Ah, cursed duke! 
Ah, my dear lord! ah, wretched Elenor! 


‘My lord was like a flower upon the brows 41 
Of lusty May! Ah, life as frail as flower! 

O ghastly death! withdraw thy cruel hand, 

Seek’st thou that flow’r to deck thy horrid temples? 


‘My lord was like a star in highest heav’n 45 
Drawn down to earth by spells and wickedness; 

My lord was like the opening eyes of day 

When western winds creep softly o’er the flowers ; 


‘But he is darken’d; like the summer’s noon 49 
Clouded; fall’n like the stately tree, cut down 5 

The breath of heaven dwelt among his leaves. 

O Elenor, weak woman, fill’d with woe!’ © 


Thus having spoke, she raiséd up her head, 53 
And saw the bloody napkin by her side, 

Which in her arms she brought; and now, tenfold 
More terrified, saw it unfold itself. 


Her eyes were fix’d; the bloody cloth unfolds, 57 
Disclosing to her sight the murder’d head 

Of her dear lord, all ghastly pale, clotted 

With gory blood; it groan’d, and thus it spake: 


‘O Elenor, I am thy husband’s head, 61 
Who, sleeping on the stones of yonder tower, ~ 
Was ’reft of life by the accurstd duke! 

A hired villain turn’d my sleep to death! 


‘O Elenor, beware the cursed duke; 65 
O give not him thy hand, now I am dead; 

He seeks thy love; who, coward, in the night, 

Hired a villain to bereave my life.’ 


47 eyes] eye Swinb. 49 summer’s] summer Swinb, 61 I am] 
behold all edd. 68 Hiréd... life.] This line is repeated by Blake 


==, | 


Pomel Shesiiic II 


She sat with dead cold limbs, stiffen’d to stone; 69 
She took the gory head up in her arms; 

She kiss’d the pale lips; she had no tears to shed ; 
She hugg’d it to her breast, and groan’d her last. 


in one of his epigrams on Hayley (MS. Book, Ixxviii), Blake’s use of 
‘bereave’ as a transitive verb is perhaps imitative of the line quoted by 
him, from Chaucer, in his Descriptive Catalogue : 


‘Hath me bireft my beauty and my pith.’ 


Song 


How sweet I roam’d from field to field r 
And tasted all the summer's pride, 

’Till I the prince of love beheld 

Who in the sunny beams did glide! 


He shew’d me lilies for my hair, 5 
And blushing roses for my brow; 

He led me through his gardens fair 

Where all his golden pleasures grow. 


With sweet May dews my wings were wet, 9 
And Phoebus fir’d my vocal rage; 

He caught me in his silken net, 

And shut me in his golden cage. 


He loves to sit and hear me sing, 13 
Then, laughing, sports and plays with me; 

Then stretches out my golden wing, 

And mocks my loss of liberty. 


Poetical Sketches, p.10. According to Malkin (pp. xxxiv, xxxvi), who 
quotes this poem, it was written by Blake before the age of fourteen. 
12 golden cage] Cp. Island in the Moon (c. 1785) iii: 


‘Come & be cured of all your pains 
In Matrimony’s Golden cage.’ 


12 Poetical Sketches 


Song 


My silks and fine array, 

My smiles and languish’d air, 

By love are driv’n away; 

And mournful lean Despair 
Brings me yew to deck my grave: 
Such end true lovers have. 


His face is fair as heav’n 

When springing buds unfold ; 

O why to him was’t giv’n 

Whose heart is wintry cold? 

His breast is love’s all worship’d tomb, 
Where all love’s pilgrims come. 


Bring me an axe and spade, 
Bring me a winding sheet ; 

When I my grave have made 

Let winds and tempests beat: 
Then down I'll lie as cold as clay. 
True love doth pass away! 


Poetical Sketches, p. it. 


Song 


Love and harmony combine, 
- And around our souls intwine 
While thy branches mix with mine, 
And our roots together join. 


Joys upon our branches sit, 

Chirping loud and singing sweet ; 
Like gentle streams beneath our feet 
Innocence and virtue meet. 


Poetical Sketches, p. 12. 
2 intwine] entwine all except Shep. 


Io 


15 | 


Postal Sketches 


Thou the golden fruit dost bear, 

I am clad in flowers fair ; 

Thy sweet boughs perfume the air, 
And the turtle buildeth there. - 


There she sits and feeds her young, 
Sweet I hear her mournful song; 
And thy lovely leaves among, 
There is love, I hear her tongue. 


There his charming nest doth lay, 
There he sleeps the night away; 
There he sports along the day, 
And doth among our branches play. 


3 


16 her] An obvious misprint for ‘his.’ All Blake’s editors make the 
necessary correction. 17 charming... lay, | charm’d nest he doth lay, 


DGR. 


Song 


I love the jocund dance, 

The softly-breathing song, 

Where innocent eyes do glance, 

And where lisps the maiden’s tongue. 


I love the laughing vale, 

I love the echoing hill, 

Where mirth does never fail, 

And the jolly swain laughs his fill. 


‘I love the pleasant cot, 

I love the innocent bow’r, 

Where white and brown is our lot, 
Or fruit in the mid-day hour. 


I love the oaken seat, 

Beneath the oaken tree, 

Where all the old villagers meet, 
And laugh our sports to see. 


Poetical Sketches, p. 13. 


4 And where] Where DGR. 5 vale] gale Malk. 


13 


Song 


Poetical Sketches 


I love our neighbours all, 

But, Kitty, I better love thee ; 
And love them I ever shall ; 
But thou art all to me. 


Memory, hither come, 

And tune your merry notes: 
And, while upon the wind 

Your music floats, 

I'll pore upon the stream 

Where sighing lovers dream, 
And fish for fancies as they pass 
Within the watery glass. 


I'll drink of the clear stream, 

And hear the linnet’s song ; 

And there [’ll lie and dream 

The day along: 

And when night comes, I'll go 
To places fit for woe, 

Walking along the darken’d valley 
With silent Melancholy. 


Poetical Sketches, p. 14. 


Mad Song 


The wild winds weep, 

And the night is a-cold; 
Come hither, Sleep, 

And my griefs unfold: 

But lo! the morning peeps 
Over the eastern steeps, 

And the rustling beds of dawn 
The earth do scorn. 


Poetical Sketches, p. 15. 
4 unfold] infold Shep. ; enfold WMR, EY, WBY. 


DGR, WBY. 


15 


7 beds] birds 


ae 


Poetical Sketches 15 


Lo! to the vault 

Of pavéd heaven, 10 
With sorrow fraught 

My notes are driven: 

They strike the ear of night, 

Make weep the eyes of day; 

They make mad the roaring winds, 15 
And with tempests play. 


Like a fiend in a cloud, 

With howling woe 

After night I do croud, 

And with night will go; 20 
I turn my back to the east 

From whence comforts have increas’d ; 

For light doth seize my brain 

With frantic pain. 


17 Like... cloud] Cp. ‘Infant Sorrow’ in the Songs of Experience: 
‘Helpless, naked, piping loud, 
Like a fiend hid in a cloud.’ 


The picture was probably suggested in Blake’s mind by passages in Mac- 
pherson’s ‘ Ossian.’ 22 From whence] Whence DGR. 


Song 
Fresh from the dewy hill, the merry year I 
Smiles on my head and mounts his flaming car ; 
Round my young brows the laurel wreathes a shade, 
And rising glories beam around my head. 


My feet are wing’d, while o’er the dewy lawn, 5 
I meet my maiden risen like the morn: 

Oh bless those holy feet, like angels’ feet ; 

Oh bless those limbs, beaming with heav’nly light. 


Like as an angel glitt’ring in the sky 9 
In times of innocence and holy joy ; 

The joyful shepherd stops his grateful song 

To hear the music of an angel’s tongue. 


Poetical Sketches, p. 16. 
5 like] with Gil. 6 angels’] angel’s Gil. 9 Like as] As when 
Gil. 12 an] that Gil. 


16 Poetical Sketches 


So when she speaks, the voice of Heaven I hear ; 


So when we walk, nothing impure comes near ; 
Each field seems Eden, and each calm retreat ; 
Each village seems the haunt of holy feet. 


But that sweet village where my black-ey’d maid 
Closes her eyes in sleep beneath night’s shade, 
Whene’er I enter, more than mortal fire 

Burns in my soul, and does my song inspire. 


Song 


When early morn walks forth in sober grey, 
Then to my black ey’d maid I haste away ; 
When evening sits beneath her dusky bow’r, 
And gently sighs away the silent hour, | 
The village bell alarms, away I go, 

And the vale darkens at my pensive woe. 


To that sweet village, where my black ey’d maid 
Doth drop a tear beneath the silent shade, 

I turn my eyes; and pensive as I go 

Curse my black stars and bless my pleasing woe. 


Oft when the summer sleeps among the trees, 
Whisp’ring faint murmurs to the scanty breeze, 
I walk the village round; if at her side 

A youth doth walk in stolen joy and pride, 

I curse my stars in bitter grief and woe, 

That made my love so high and me so low. 


O should she e’er prove false, his limbs I’d tear 
And throw all pity on the burning air ; 

I’d curse bright fortune for my mixéd lot, 

And then I’d die in peace and be forgot. 


Poetical Sketches, p. 17. 


17 


15 


Poetical Shetches 


- To the Muses 


Whether on Ida’s shady brow, 

Or in the chambers of the East, 
The chambers of the sun, that now 
From antient melody have ceas’d ; 


Whether in Heav’n ye wander fair, 

Or the green corners of the earth, 

Or the blue regions of the air 

Where the melodious winds have birth; 


Whether on chrystal rocks ye rove, 
Beneath the bosom of the sea 
Wand’ring in many a coral grove, 
Fair Nine, forsaking Poetry! 


How have you left the antient love 
That bards of old enjoy’d in you! 
The languid strings do scarcely move! 
The sound is forc’d, the notes are few! 


Poetical Sketches, p. 18. 
12 Poetry] poesie Cunn. 13 you] ye Cunn. 15 do] now Cunn. 


_ Gwin, King of Norway 


Come, Kings, and listen to my song: 
When Gwin, the son of Nore, 

Over the nations of the North 

His cruel sceptre bore ; 


The Nobles of the land did feed 
Upon the hungry Poor ; 


They tear the poor man’s lamb, and drive 


The needy from their door. 


Poetical Sketches, pp. 19-23. 


SAMPSON 


I7 


18 Poetical Sketches 


‘The land is desolate; our wives 9 
And children cry for bread ; 

Arise, and pull the tyrant down! 

Let Gwin be humbled!’ 


Gordred the giant rous’d himself 13 
From sleeping in his cave; 

He shook the hills, and in the clouds 

The troubl’d banners wave. 


Beneath them roll’d, like tempests black, 17 
The num’rous sons of blood ; 

Like lions’ whelps, roaring abroad, 

Seeking their nightly food. 


Down Bleron’s hills they dreadful rush, 21 
Their cry ascends the clouds; 

The trampling horse and clanging arms 

Like rushing mighty floods! 


Their wives and children, weeping loud, 25 
Follow in wild array, 

Howling like ghosts, furious as wolves 

In the bleak wintry day. 


‘Pull down the tyrant to the dust, 29° § 


Let Gwin be humbleéd,’ 
They cry, ‘and let ten thousand lives 
Pay for the tyrant’s head.’ 


From tow’'r to tow’r the watchmen cry, 33 
‘O Gwin, the son. of Nore, 

Arouse thyself! the nations, black 

‘Like clouds, come rolling o’er!’ 


Gwin rear’d his shield, his palace shakes, 37 
His chiefs come rushing round ; 

Each, like an awful thunder cloud, 

With voice of solemn sound: 


g-12 The... humbled] Wo quotation marks in original. 21 hills] 
hill EY. 


i arti an ee 


Poetical Sketches 19 


Like rearéd stones around a grave 41 
They stand around the King; 

Then suddenly each seiz’d his spear, 

And clashing steel does ring, 


The husbandman does leave his plow 45 
To wade thro’ fields of gore; 

The merchant binds his brows in steel, 

And leaves the trading shore; 


The shepherd leaves his mellow pipe, 49 
And sounds the trumpet shrill ; 

The workman throws his hammer down 

To heave the bloody bill. 


Like the tall ghost of Barraton 53 
Who sports in stormy sky, 

Gwin leads his host, as black as night 

When pestilence does fly, 


With horses and with chariots— 57 
And all his spearmen bold 
“March to the sound of mournful song, 

Like clouds around him roll’d. 


Gwin lifts his hand—the nations halt; 61 
‘Prepare for war!’ he cries— 

Gordred appears!—his frowning brow 

Troubles our northern skies. 


The armies stand, like balances 65 
Held in th’ Almighty’s hand ;— 

‘Gwin, thou hast fill’d thy measure up: 

Thou’rt swept from out the land.’ 


53 Barraton] Probably a reminiscence of ‘Berrathon’ in Macpherson’s 
_ Ossian, a piece from which Blake would also seem to have borrowed the 
name ‘Leutha’ in the Visions of the Daughters of Albion (1793). 
C2 


20 


Poetical Sketches 


And now the raging armies rush’d 

Like warring mighty seas ; 

The Heav’ns are shook with roaring war, 
The dust ascends the skies! 


Earth smokes with blood, and groans and shakes 
To drink her children’s gore, 

A sea of blood; nor can the eye 

See to the trembling shore! 


And on the verge of this wild sea 
Famine and death doth cry ; 

The cries of women and of babes 
Over the field doth fly. 


The King is seen raging afar, 

With all his men of might; 

Like blazing comets scattering death 
Thro’ the red fev’rous night. 


Beneath his arm like sheep they die, 
And groan upon the plain; 

The battle faints, and bloody men 
Fight upon hills of slain. 


Now death is sick, and riven men 
Labour and toil for life; 

Steed rolls on steed, and shield on shield, 
Sunk in this sea of strife! 


The god of war is drunk with blood; 

The earth doth faint and fail; 

The stench of blood makes se the ieee Ns ; 
Ghosts glut the throat of hell! 


O what have Kings to answer for 

Before that awful throne ; 
When thousand deaths for vengeance cry, 
And ghosts accusing groan! 


_ 78, 80 doth] do WMR, EY. 


69 


73 


85 


89 


93 


97 


Roaeen Sketches 21 


Like blazing comets in the sky lor 
That shake the stars of light, 

Which drop like fruit unto the earth 

Thro’ the fierce burning night ; 


Like these did Gwin and Gordred meet, 105 
And the first blow decides ; 

Down from the brow unto the breast 

Gordred his head divides! 


Gwin fell: the Sons of Norway fled, 109 
All that remain’d alive ; 

The rest did fill the vale of death, 

For them the eagles strive. 


The river Dorman roll’d their blood 113 
Into the northern sea; 

Who mourn’d his sons, and overwhelm’d 

The pleasant south country. 


An Imitation of Spencer 


Golden Apollo, that thro’ heaven wide I 
Scatter’st the rays of light, and truth’s beams, . 
In lucent words my darkling verses dight, 

And wash my earthy mind in thy clear streams, 
That wisdom may descend in fairy dreams, 5 
All while the jocund hours in thy train 

Scatter their fancies at thy poet’s feet; 

And when thou yields to night thy wide domain, 

Let rays of truth enlight his sleeping brain. 


Poetical Sketches, pp. 24-26. This piece has not the air of being one of 
Blake’s earliest efforts, in spite of its metrical faults. Representing the 
Spenserian stanza by the formula ababbcbcC, Blake’s successive attempts are: 
ababbebcc, ababbchcB, ababbcbB, ababbabb, ababbcbch, ababbchcbB—all different 
and all wrong. 

Title] All edd. correct Spencer fo Spenser. ’ 2 truth’s] truth his all edd. 
8 yields] yield’st all edd. 


22 Poetical Sketches 


For brutish Pan in vain might thee assay 10 
With tinkling sounds to dash thy nervous verse, 
Sound without sense; yet in his rude affray, 

(For ignorance is Folly’s leesing nurse 

And love of Folly needs none other’s curse) 

Midas the praise hath gain’d of lengthen’d cares, 15 
For which himself might deem him ne’er the worse 
To sit in council with his modern peers, 

And judge of tinkling rhimes and elegances terse. 


And thou, Mercurius, that with winged brow 

Dost mount aloft into the yielding sky, 2m, 
And thro’ Heav’n’s halls thy airy flight dost throw, 
Entering with holy feet to where on high 

Jove weighs the counsel of futurity ; 

Then, laden with eternal fate, dost go 

Down, like a falling star, from autumn sky, 25 
And o’er the surface of the silent deep dost fly: 


If thou arrivest at the sandy shore 

Where nought but envious hissing adders dwell, 

Thy golden rod, thrown on the dusty floor, 

Can charm to harmony with potent spell. 30 
Such is sweet Eloquence, that does dispel 

Envy and Hate that thirst for human gore; 

And cause in sweet society to dwell 

Vile savage minds that lurk in lonely cell. 


O Mercury, assist my lab’ring sense 35 
That round the circle of the world wou’d fly, 

As the wing’d eagle scorns the tow’ry fence 

Of Alpine hills round his high aéry, 

And searches thro’ the corners of the sky, 

Sports in the clouds to hear the thunder’s sound, 40 
And see the wingéd lightnings as they fly; 

Then, bosom’d in an amber cloud, around 

Plumes his wide wings, and seeks Sol’s palace high. 
13 leesing nurse] Read, with all Blake’s editors, leasing nurse, i.e. one 


who holds her charge in a lease or leash, 15 cares] All edd. correct 
this misprint for ears. 19 brow] bow all edd. 


Poetical Sketches Pip. 


And thou, O warrior maid invincible, 

Arm’d with the terrors of Almighty Jove, 45 
Pallas, Minerva, maiden terrible, 

Lov’st thou to walk the peaceful solemn grove, 

In solemn gloom of branches interwove? 

Or bear’st thy Egis o’er the burning field, 

Where, like the sea, the waves of battle move? 50 
Or have thy soft piteous eyes beheld 

The weary wanderer thro’ the desert rove? 

Or does th’ afflicted man thy heav’nly bosom move? 


Blind-man’s Buff 


When silver Snow decks Susan’s cloaths, I 

And jewel hangs at th’ shepherd’s nose, 

The blushing bank is all my care, 

With hearth so red, and walls so fair ; 

‘Heap the sea-coal, come, heap it higher, 5 

The oaken log lay on the fire ;’ 

The well-wash’d stools, a circling row, 

With lad and lass, how fair the show! 

The merry can of nut-brown ale, 

The laughing jest, the love-sick tale, Io 

Till, tir’d of chat, the game begins. 

The lasses prick the lads with pins; 

Roger from Dolly twitch’d the stool, 

She, falling, kiss’d the ground, poor fool! 

She blush’d so red, with side-long glance 15 

At hob-nail Dick, who griev’d the chance. 

But now for Blind-man’s Buff they call; 

Of each incumbrance clear the hall— 

Jenny her silken ’kerchief folds, 

And blear-ey’d Will the black lot holds. 20 
Poetical Sketches, pp. 26-28. 


1, 2 When... nose] Compare the opening lines of ‘Song by an Old 
Shepherd’ (Appendix II) :— 


‘When silver snow decks Sylvia’s obese 
And jewel hangs at shepherd’s nose.’ 


3 blushing bank] chimney nook DGR. 


24 Poetical Sketches 


Now laughing stops, with ‘Silence! hush!’ 

And Peggy Pout gives Sam a push. 

The Blind-man’s arms, extended wide, 

Sam slips between :—‘O woe betide 

Thee, clumsy Will!’—but titt’ring Kate 25 
Is pen’d up in the corner strait! 

And now Will’s eyes beheld the play; 

He thought his face was t’other way. 

‘Now, Kitty, now! what chance hast thou, 

Roger so near thee !—Trips, I vow!’ 30 
She catches him—then Roger ties 

His own head up—but not his eyes; 

For thro’ the slender cloth he sees, 

And runs at Sam, who slips with ease 

His clumsy hold; and, dodging round, 35 
Sukey is tumbled on the ground !— 

‘See what it is to play unfair! 

Where cheating is, there’s mischief there.’ 

But Roger still pursues the chace,— 

‘He sees! he sees!’ cries softly Grace; 40 
‘O Roger, thou, unskill’d in art, 
Must, surer bound, go thro’ thy part!’ 

Now Kitty, pert, repeats the rhymes, 

And Roger turns him round three times, 


29-31 Now... him] This seems to be the sense intended by the faulty 
punctuation of the original : 


‘Now, Kitty, now; what chance hast thou, 
Roger so near thee, Trips; I vow! 
She catches him—’ 
DGR reads: 
‘Now, Kitty, now! what chance hast thou! 
Roger so near thee trips!—I vow 
She catches him !—’ 
Shep. : 
‘“ Now, Kitty, now; what chance hast thou, 
Roger so near thee trips, I vow!” 
She catches him—’ 


WMR, EY, and WBY : 
° Now, Kitty, now! what chance hast thou ? 


Roger so near thee trips, I vow!” 
She catches him—’ 


Poetical Sketches 


Then pauses ere he starts—but Dick 
Was mischief bent upon a trick; 
Down on his hands and knees he lay 
Directly in the Blind-man’s way, 


Then cries out ‘Hem!’ Hodge heard, and ran 


With hood-wink’d chance—sure of his man; 
But down he came.—Alas, how frail 

Our best of hopes, how soon they fail! 
With crimson drops he stains the ground; 
Confusion startles all around. 

Poor piteous Dick supports his head, 
And fain would cure the hurt he made; 
But Kitty hasted with a key, 

And down his back they strait convey 
The cold relief; the blood is stay’d, 

And Hodge again holds up his head. 
Such are the fortunes of the game, 

And those who play should stop the same 
By wholesome laws; such as all those 
Who on the blin man impose 

Stand in his stead; as, long a-gone, 
When men were first a nation grown, 
Lawless they liv’d, till wantonness 

And liberty began t’ increase, 

And one man lay in another’s way ; 

Then laws were made to keep fair play. 


57 hasted] hastens DGR. 65 as] So DGR. 


50 


Oo 
or 


60 


65 


79 


APPENDIX I 


TO THE POETICAL SKETCHES 


[The latter portion of Poetical Sketches (pp. 29-70) containing the blank 
verse and prose pieces following the ‘ Miscellaneous Poems.’ Reprinted 
from the original edition, but without variorum readings in footnotes. ] 


KING EDWARD THE THIRD. 


PERSONS, 
King Edward. Lord Audley. 
The Black Prince. Lord Percy. 
Queen Philippa. Bishop. 
Duke of Clarence. William, Dagworth’s 
Sir John Chandos. Man. 
Sir Thomas Dagworth. Peter Blunt, a common 
Sir Walter Manny. Soldier. 

SCENE, 


The Coast of France, King Edward and Nobles before it. 


King. O thou, to whose fury the nations are 
But as dust, maintain thy servant’s right ! 
Without thine aid, the twisted mail, and spear, 
And forgéd helm, and shield of seven times beaten brass, 
Are idle trophies of the vanquisher. 
When confusion rages, when the field is in a flame, 
When the cries of blood tear horror from heav’n, 
And yelling death runs up and down the ranks, 
Let Liberty, the charter’d right of Englishmen, 
Won by our fathers in many a glorious field, 
Enerve my soldiers; let Liberty 
Blaze in each countenance, and fire the battle. 
The enemy fight in chains, invisible chains, but heavy; 
Their minds are fetter’d, then how can they be free? 
While, like the mounting flame, 
We spring to battle o’er the floods of death! 
And these fair youths, the flow’r of England, 
Vent’ring their lives in my most righteous cause, 
O sheathe their hearts with triple steel, that they 
May emulate their fathers’ virtues. 
And thou, my son, be strong; thou fightest for a crown 
That death can never ravish from thy brow, 
A crown of glory—but from thy very dust 
Shall beam a radiance, to fire the breasts 
Of youth unborn. Our names are written equal 
In fame’s wide trophied hall; ’tis ours to gild 
The letters, and to make them shine with gold 


The Army. 


13 


17 


2I 


25 


Appendix I 


_ That never tarnishes: whether Third Edward, 

_ Or the Prince of Wales, or Montacute, or Mortimer, 

Or ev’n the least by birth, shall gain the brightest fame, 
Is in his hand to whom all men are equal. 

The world of men are like the num’rous stars 

That beam and twinkle in the depth of night, 

_ Each clad in glory according to his sphere; 

But we, that wander from our native seats 

And beam forth lustre on a darkling world, 

Grow larger as we advance: and some, perhaps 

The most obscure at home, that scarce were seen 

To twinkle in their sphere, may so advance 

That the astonish’d world, with upturn’d eyes, 
Regardless of the moon, and those that once were bright, 
Stand only for to gaze upon their splendor. 


29 


33 


37 


41 


(He here knights the Prince, and other young Nobles. } 


Now let us take a just revenge for those 
Brave Lords, who fell beneath the bloody axe 
_ At Paris. Thanks, noble Harcourt, for ‘twas 
By your advice we landed here in Brittany, 
A country not yet sown with destruction, 
And where the fiery whirlwind of swift war 
Has not yet swept its desolating wing. 

Into three parties we divide by day, 

And separate march, but join again at night ; 
_ Each knows his rank, and Heav’n marshal all. 


SCENE, English Court. Lionel, Duke of Clarence ; 
- Queen Philippa ; Lords; Bishop ; &¢. 


Clarence. My Lords, I have by the advice of her 
Whom I am doubly bound to obey, my Parent 
And my Sovereign, call’d you together. 
My task is great, my burden heavier than 
My unfledg’d years; 
Yet, with your kind assistance, Lords, I hope 
England shall dwell in peace; that, while my father 
Toils in his wars, and turns his eyes on this 
His native shore, and sees commerce fly round 
With his white wings, and sees his golden London 
And her silver Thames, throng’d with shining spires 
And corded ships, her merchants buzzing round 
Like summer bees, and all the golden cities 
In his land overflowing with honey, 
Glory may not be dimm’d with clouds of care. 

Say, Lords, should not our thoughts be first to commerce ? 
My Lord Bishop, you would recommend us agriculture? 
Bishop. Sweet Prince, the arts of peace are great, 

And no less glorious than those of war, 


45 


49 


[Exeunt. 


13 


17 


28 Poetical Sketches 


Perhaps more glorious in the philosophic mind. 
When-:I sit at my home, a private man, 2I 
My thoughts are on my gardens and my fields, 
How to employ the hand that lacketh bread. 
If Industry is in my diocese, 
Religion will flourish ; each man’s heart 25 
Is cultivated and will bring forth fruit. 
This is my private duty and my pleasure; 
But, as I sit in council with my prince, 
My thoughts take in the gen’ral good of the whole, 29 
And England is the land favour’d by Commerce ; 
For Commerce, tho’ the child of Agriculture, 
Fosters his parent, who else must sweat and toil, 
And gain but scanty fare. Then, my dear Lord, 33 
Be England’s trade our care; and we, as tradesmen, 
Looking to the gain of this our native land. 
Clar. O my good Lord, true wisdom drops like honey 
From your tongue, as from a worship’d oak. 37 
Forgive, my Lords, my talkative youth, that speaks 
Not merely what my narrow observation has 
Pick’d up, but what I have concluded from your lessons. 
Now, by the Queen’s advice, I ask your leave AI 
To dine to-morrow with the Mayor of London: 
If I obtain your leave, I have another boon 
To ask, which is the favour of your company. 
I fear Lord Percy will not give me leave. 45 
Percy. Dear Sir, a prince should always keep his state, 
And grant his favours with a sparing hand, 
Or they are never rightly valuéd. 
These are my thoughts: yet it were best to go: 49 
But keep a proper dignity, for now 
You represent the sacred person of 
Your father; "tis with princes as ’tis with the sun; 
If not sometimes o’er-clouded, we grow weary 53 
Of his officious glory. 
Clar. Then you will give me leave to shine sometimes, 
My Lord? 
Lord. Thou hast a gallant spirit, which I fear 57 
Will be imposed on by the closer sort. [Aside. 
Clar. Well, V’ll endeavour to take 
Lord Percy’s advice; I have been used so much 
To dignity that I’m sick on’t. 61 
Queen Phil. Fie, Fie, Lord Clarence! you proceed not to business, 
But speak of your own pleasures. 
I hope their Lordships will excuse your giddiness. 
Clar, My Lords, the French have fitted out many 65 
Small ships of war, that, like to ravening wolves, 
Infest our English seas, devouring all 
Our burden’d vessels, spoiling our naval flocks. 
The merchants do complain, and beg our aid. 69 


te i i al ile en ee i ah Oe 


Appendix I 


_ Percy, The merchants are rich enough ; 

Can they not help themselves? 
_ Bish. They can, and may; but how to gain their will 
Requires our countenance and help. 


Percy. When that they find they must, my Lord, they will: 


Let them but suffer awhile, and you shall see 
They will bestir themselves. 
Bish. Lord Percy cannot mean that we should suffer 
This disgrace: if so, we are not sovereigns 
_ Of the sea—our right, that Heaven gave 
To England, when at the birth of nature 
She was seated in the deep; the Ocean ceas’d 
_ His mighty roar, and fawning play'’d around 
Her snowy feet, and own’d his awful Queen. 
_ Lord Percy, if the heart is sick, the head 
Must be ageriev’d ; if but one member suffer, 
_ The heart doth fail. You say, my Lord, the merchants 
Can, if they will, defend themselves against 
These rovers: this is a noble scheme, 
Worthy the brave Lord Percy, and as worthy 
_ His generous aid to put it into practice. 
Percy. Lord Bishop, what was rash in me is wise 
In you; I dare not own the plan. ’Tis not 
Mine. Yet will I, if you please, 
Quickly to the Lord Mayor, and work him onward 
- To this most glorious voyage; on which cast 
I'll set my whole estate, 
But we will bring these Gallic rovers under. 


Queen Phil, Thanks, brave Lord Percy; you have the thanks 


Of England’s Queen, and will, ere long, of England. 


SCENE, At Cressey. Sir Thomas Dagworth and 


Lord Audley, meet.ng. 


Aud. Good morrow, brave Sir Thomas; the bright morn 


Smiles on our army, and the gallant sun 
Springs from the hills like a young hero 
Into the battle, shaking his golden locks 
Exultingly: this is a promising day. 
Dagw. Why, my Lord Audley, I don’t know. 
Give me your hand, and now [I'll tell you what 
I think you do not know. Edward’s afraid of Philip. 
Aud, Ha, Ha, Sir Thomas! you but joke; 
_ Did you ere see him fear? At Blanchetaque, 
When almost singly he drove six thousand 
_ French from the ford, did he fear then? 
Dagw. Yes, fear—that made him fight so. 
| Aud. By the same reason I might say ‘tis fear 
_ That makes you fight. ; 


29 


713 


77 


93 


97 


[Exeunt. 


3 


30 Poetical Sketches 


Dagw. Mayhap you may: look upon Edward's face, 
No one can say he fears. But when he turns 
His back, then I will say it to his face, 
He is afraid: he makes us all afraid. 
I cannot bear the enemy at my back. 
Now here we are at Cressy; where to-morrow, 
To-morrow we shall know. I say, Lord Audley, 
That Edward runs away from Philip. 
Aud, Perhaps you think the Prince too is afraid? 
Dagw. No; God forbid! I’m sure he is not. 
He is a young lion. O I have seen him fight 
And give command, and lightning has flashed 
From his eyes across the field: I have seen him 
Shake hands with death, and strike a bargain for 
The enemy; he has danc’d in the field 
Of battle, like the youth at morrice play. 
I’m sure he’s not afraid, nor Warwick, nor none, 
None of us but me, and I am very much afraid. 
Aud, Are you afraid too, Sir Thomas? 
I believe that as much as I believe 
The King’s afraid: but what are you afraid of? 
Dagw. Of having my back laid open; we turn 
Our backs to the fire, till we shall burn our skirts. 
Aud. And this, Sir Thomas, you call fear? Your fear 
_ Is of a different kind then from the King’s; 
He fears to turn his face, and you to turn your back, 
I do not think, Sir Thomas, you know what fear is. 


Enter Sir Johu Chandos. 


Chand. Good morrow, Generals; I give you joy: 
Welcome to the fields of Cressy. Here we stop, 
And wait for Philip. 

Dagw. I hope so. 

Aud. There, Sir Thomas, do you call that fear? 

Dagw. I don’t know; perhaps he takes it by fits. 
Why, noble Chandos, look you here, 

One rotten sheep spoils the whole flock ; 
And if the bell-weather is tainted, I wish 
The Prince may not catch the distemper too. 

Chand. Distemper, Sir Thomas! what distemper ? 
I have not heard. 

Dagw. Why, Chandos, you are a wise man, 

I know you understand me; a distemper 
The King caught here in France of running away. 

Aud. Sir Thomas, you say you have caught it too. 

Dagw. And so will the whole army; ’tis very catching, 
For, when the coward runs, the brave man totters, 
Perhaps the air of the country is the cause. 

I feel it coming upon me, so I strive against it ; 


17 


2L 


25 


Ag) 


33 


37 


41 


45 


ai) 


53 


Ey 


61 


asl Se 


ee eens wee 


Appendix I 


You yet are whole; but, after a few more 
Retreats, we all shall know how to retreat 
Better than fight.—To be plain, I think retreating 
Too often takes away a soldier’s courage. 


Chand, Were comes the King himself; tell him your thoughts 


Plainly, Sir Thomas. 


Dagw. I’ve told him before, but his disorder 
Makes him deaf. 


Enter King Edward and Black Prince. 


King. Good morrow, Generals; when English courage fails, 
Down goes our right to France. 
But we are conquerors every where; nothing 
Can stand our soldiers ; each man is worthy 
Of a triumph. Such an army of heroes 
Ne’er shouted to the Heav’ns, nor shook the field. 
Edward, my son, thou art 
Most happy, having such command: the man 
Were base who were not fir’d to deeds 


Above heroic, having such examples. 


# 


Prince. Sire, with respect and deference I look 
Upon such noble souls, and wish myself 
Worthy the high command that Heaven and you 
Have given me. When I have seen the field glow, 
And in each countenance the soul of war 
Curb’d by the manliest reason, I have been wing’d 
With certain victory; and ’tis my boast, 
And shall be still my glory, I was inspir’d 
By these brave troops. 
Dagw. Your Grace had better make 
Them all Generals. 
King. Sir Thomas Dagworth, you must have your joke, 
And shall, while you can fight as you did at 
The Ford. 
Dagw. I have a small petition to your Majesty. 
King. What can Sir Thomas Dagworth ask that Edward 
Can refuse? 
Dagw. I hope your Majesty cannot refuse so great 
A trifle; I’ve gilt your cause with my best blood, 
And would again, were I not forbid 
By him whom I am bound to obey: my hands 
Are tied up, my courage shrunk and wither’d, 
My sinews slacken’d, and my voice scarce heard; 
Therefore I beg I may return to England. 
King. I know not what you could have ask’d, Sir Thomas, 
That I would not have sooner parted with 


_ Than such a soldier as you have been, and such a friend: 


Nay, I will know the most remote particulars 


Of this your strange petition; that if I can 
I still may keep you here, 


ae 


as 


77 


81 


85 


93 


97 


Iot 


105 


109 


LIBRARY ST. MARY'S COLLEGE 


32 Poetical Sketches 


Dagw. Were on the fields of Cressy we are settled 

*Till Philip springs the tim’rous covey again. 
The Wolf is hunted down by causeless fear ; 
The Lion flees, and fear usurps his heart, 
Startled, astonish’d at the clam’rous Cock ; 

The Eagle, that doth gaze upon the sun, 

Fears the small fire that plays about the fen. 

If, at this moment of their idle fear, 

The Dog doth seize the Wolf, the Forester the Lion, 
The Negro in the crevice of the rock 

Doth seize the soaring Eagle ; undone by flight, 
They tame submit: such the effect flight has 

On noble souls, Now hear its opposite. 

The tim’rous Stag starts from the thicket wild, 
The fearful Crane springs from the splashy fen, 
The shining Snake glides o’er the bending grass, 
The Stag turns head and bays the crying Hounds, 
The Crane o’ertaken fighteth with the Hawk, 
The Snake doth turn, and bite the padding foot. 
And if your Majesty’s afraid of Philip, 

You are more like a Lion than a Crane: 
Therefore I beg I may return to England. 

King. Sir Thomas, now I understand your mirth, 
Which often plays with Wisdom for its pastime, 
And brings good counsel from the breast of laughter. 
I hope you'll stay, and see us fight this battle, 

And reap rich harvest in the fields of Cressy; 
Then go to England, tell them how we fight, 
And set all hearts on fire to be with us. 
Philip is plum’d, and thinks we flee from him, 
Else he would never dare to attack us. Now, 
Now the quarry’s set! and Death doth sport 
In the bright sunshine of this fatal day. 

Dagw. Now my heart dances, and I am as light 
As the young bridegroom going to be married. 

Now must I to my soldiers, get them ready, 
Furbish our armours bright, new plume our helms, 
And we will sing like the young housewives busied 
In the dairy : my feet are wing’d, but not 

For flight, an please your grace, 

King. If all my soldiers are as pleas’d as you, 
’Twill be a gallant thing to fight or die; 

Then I can never be afraid of Philip. 

Dagw. A raw-bon’d fellow t’other day pass’d by me; 
I told him to put off his hungry looks— 

He answer’d me, ‘I hunger for another battle.’ 
I saw a little Welchman with a fiery face; 

I told him he look’d like a candle half 

Burn’d out; he answer’d, he was ‘pig enough 
To light another pattle.’ Last night, beneath 


113 


U7 


I2t 


125 


129 


133 


137 


141 


145 


149 


153 


ee 


yf 


wet 


pbibitiinbiieniny iris ai ghi 
; N 
— 2 ¥ : : ' ! : 
2 RUN sirihd 3. peda; yu 
Sap i ST i : fs. gaicges dey HL. 
= = siis S823 ‘é3 2333 3~ i ain 3 <8 
.S SHO RUN HAH H HIE giseiesg ae Hj 
Psa sginiRqiiuiessiel ein iii! 
ria auililiieal idetiertul aie 
33 Fiifniinaiiiadis 3 s#zii,iitoi a ; 
isis? S75 S2izggteis}issiiir ‘liga; sill | . 


2 


my 


34 Poetical Sketches 


My son a vine, which I commit unto 
Thy care: prune all extravagant shoots, and guide 
Th’ ambitious tendrils in the paths of wisdom ; 213 
Water him with thy advice; and Heav’n 
Rain fresh’ning dew upon his branches. And, 
O Edward, my dear son! learn to think lowly of 
Thyself, as we may all each prefer other— : 217 
Tis the best policy, and ’tis our duty. [Exeunt King Edward. 

Prince. And may our duty, Chandos, be our pleasure. 
Now we are alone, Sir John, I will unburden, 
And breathe my hopes into the burning air, 221 
Where thousand deaths are posting up and down, 
Commission’d to this fatal field of Cressy. 
Methinks I see them arm my gallant soldiers, 
And gird the sword upon each thigh, and fit 225 
Each shining helm, and string’ each stubborn bow, 
And dance to the neighing of our steeds, 
Methinks the shout begins, the battle burns: 
Methinks I see them perch on English crests, 229 
And roar the wild flame of fierce war upon 
The throngéd enemy. In truth I am too full; 
It is my sin to love the noise of war. 
Chandos, thou seest my weakness; strong riature 233 
Will bend or break us: my blood, like a springtide, 
Does rise so high to overflow all bounds 
Of moderation; while Reason, in her 
Frail bark, can see no shore or bound for vast 237 
Ambition, Come, take the helm, my Chandos, 
That my full-blown sails overset me not 
In the wild tempest: condemn my ‘’ventrous youth, 
That plays with danger as the innocent child 241 
Unthinking plays upon the viper’s den: 
I am a coward in my reason, Chandos. 

Chand, You are a man, my prince, and a brave man, 
If I can judge of actions; but your heat 245 
Is the effect of youth, and want of use: 
Use makes the arméd field and noisy war 
Pass over as a summer cloud, unregarded, 
Or but expected as a thing of course. 249 
Age is contemplative; each rolling year 
Brings forth fruit to the mind’s treasure-house : 
While vacant youth doth crave and seek about 
Within itself, and findeth discontent, 253 
Then, tir’d of thought, impatient takes the wing, 
Seizes the fruits of time, attacks experience, 
Roams round vast Nature’s forest, where no bounds 
Are set, the swiftest may have room, the strongest 257 
Find prey; till tir’d at length, sated and tired 
With the changing sameness, old variety, 
We sit us down, and view our former joys 


Appendix I 35 


With distaste and dislike. 261 
Prince, Then, if we must tug for experience, 

. Let us not fear to beat round Nature’s wilds, 

And rouze the strongest prey: then if we fall, 

We fall with glory. I know the wolf 265 

Is dangerous to fight, not good for food, 

Nor is the hide a comely vestment; so 

We have our battle for our pains. I know 

That youth has need of age to point fit prey, 269 

And oft the stander-by shall steal the fruit 

Of th’ other’s labour. This is philosophy; 

These are the tricks of the world; but the pure soul 

Shall mount on native wings, disdaining 273 

Little sport, and cut a path into the heaven of glory, 

Leaving a track of light for men to wonder at. 

I’m glad my father does not hear me talk; 

You can find friendly excuses for me, Chandos. 277 

But do you not think, Sir John, that if it please 

Th’ Almighty to stretch out my span of life, 

I shall with pleasure view a glorious action 

Which my youth master’d? 28r 
Chand. Considerate age, my Lord, views motives, 

And not acts; when neither warbling voice 

Nor trilling pipe is heard, nor pleasure sits 

With trembling age, the voice of Conscience then, 285 

Sweeter than music in a summer’s eve, 

Shall warble round the snowy head, and keep 

Sweet symphony to feather’d angels, sitting 

As guardians round your chair; then shall the pulse 289 

Beat slow, and taste and touch and sight and sound and smell, 

That sing and dance round Reason’s fine-wrought throne, 

Shall flee away, and leave them all forlorn ; 

Yet not forlorn if Conscience is his friend. 293 

[Exeunt. 


SCENE, « Sir Thomas Dagworth’s Tent. Dagworth and 
William his Man. 


Dagw. Bring hither my armour, William. 
Ambition is the growth of ev’ry clime. 

Will. Does it grow in England, Sir? 

Dagw. Aye, it grows most in lands most cultivated. 

Will. Then it grows most in France; the vines here 
Are finer than any we have in England. 

Dagw. Aye, but the oaks are not. 

Will. What is the tree you mentioned? I don’t think 
I ever saw it. 

Dagw. Ambition. 

Will. Is it a little creeping root that grows in ditches? 
_Dagw. Thou dost not understand me, William 
It is a root that grows in every breast ; 


D 2 


36 Poetical Sketches 


Ambition is the desire or passion that one man 

Has to get before another, in any pursuit after glory ; 

But I don’t think you have any of it. wee. 
Will. Yes, I have; I have a great ambition to know every thing, Sir. 
Dagw. But when our first ideas are wrong, what follows must all be 

wrong of course; ‘tis best to know a little, and to know that little 

aright. 

Will. Then, Sir, I should be glad to know if it was not ambition that 
brought over our King to France to fight for his right? 

Dagw. Tho’ the knowledge of that will not profit thee much, yet I 
will tell you that it was ambition. 

Wil. Then, if ambition is a sin, we are all guilty in coming with him, 
and in fighting for him. 

Dagw. Now, William, thou dost thrust the question home; but I must 
tell you that, guilt being an act of the mind, none are guilty but those whose 
minds are prompted by that same ambition. : 

Will. Now, I always thought that a man might be guilty of doing wrong 
without knowing it was wrong. 

Dagw. Thou art a natural philosopher, and knowest truth by instinct ; 
while reason runs aground, as we have run our argument. Only remember, 
William, all have it in their power to know the motives of their own actions, 
and ’tis a sin to act without some reason. 

Will. And whoever acts without reason may do a great deal of harm 
without knowing it. 

Dagw. Thou art an endless moralist. 

Will. Now there’s a story come into my head, that I will tell your 
honour if you’ll give me leave. 

Dagw. No, William, save it till another time; this is no time for 
story-telling: but here comes one who is as entertaining as a good 
story. 


Enter Peter Blunt. 


Peter. Yonder’s a musician going to play before the King; it’s a new 
song about the French and English, and the’ Prince has made the minstrel 
a ‘squire, and given him I don’t know what, and I can’t tell whether he 
don’t mention us all one by one; and he is to write another about all us 
that are to die, that we may be remembered in Old England, for all our 
blood and bones are in France; and a great deal more that we shall all 
hear by and by; and I came to tell your honour, because you love to hear 
war-songs. 

Dagw. And who is this minstrel, Peter, dost know? 

Peter. O aye, I forgot to tell that; he has got the same name as Sir 
John Chandos, that the prince is always with—the wise man that knows us 
all as well as your honour, only e’nt so good natur’d. 

Dagw. 1 thank you, Peter, for your information, but not for your 
compliment, which is not true; there’s as much difference between him 
and me as between glittering sand and fruitful mold; or shining glass 
and a wrought diamond, set in rich gold, and fitted to the finger of an 
emperor; such is that worthy Chandos. 


Appendix I 37 


Peter. I know your honour does not think any thing of yourself, but 
every body else does. 

Dagw. Go, Peter, get you gone; flattery is delicious, even from the 
lips of a babbler. [Exit Peter. 

Will. 1 never flatter your honour. 

Dagw. I don’t know that. 

Will. Why you know, Sir, when we were in England, at the tournament 
at Windsor, and the Earl of Warwick was tumbled over, you ask’d me if he 
did not look well when he fell; and I said No, he look’d very foolish ; and 
you was very angry with me for not flattering you. 

Dagw. You mean that I was angry with you for not flattering the Earl 
of Warwick, [Exeunt. 


SCENE, Sir Thomas Dagworth’s Tent. Sir Thomas 
Dagworth—to him 


Enter Sir Walter Manny. 


Sir Walter. Sir Thomas Dagworth, I have been weeping x 


~ Over the men that are to die to-day. 


Dagw. Why, brave Sir Walter, you or I may fall. 
Sir Walter. 1 know this breathing flesh must lie and rot, 
Cover’d with silence and forgetfulness. 5 
Death wons in cities’ smoke, and in still night, 
When men sleep in their beds, walketh about. 
How many in walled cities lie and groan, 
Turning themselves upon their beds, 9 
Talking with death, answering his hard demands, 
How many walk in darkness, terrors are round 
The curtains of their beds, destruction is 
Ready at the door. How many sleep 13 
In earth, cover’d with stones and deathy dust, 
Resting in quietness, whose spirits walk 
Upon the clouds of heaven to die no more. 
Yet death is terrible, tho’ borne on angels’ mess 17 
How terrible then is the field of death, 
Where he doth rend the vault of heaven, 
And shake the gates of hell. 
O Dagworth, France is sick, the very sky, ar 
Tho’ sunshine light it, seems to me as pale 
As the pale fainting man on his death-bed, 
Whose face is shewn by light of sickly taper. 
It makes me sad and sick at very heart, 25 
Thousands must fall to-day. 
Dagw. Thousands of souls must leave this prison-house, 
To be exalted to those heavenly fields, 
Where songs of triumph, palms of victory, 29 
Where peace and joy and love and calm content, 
Sit singing in the azure clouds, and strew 
Flowers of heaven’s growth over the banquet-table. 


38 Poetical Sketches 


Bind ardent Hope upon your feet like shoes, 33 
Put on the robe of preparation, 
The table is prepar’d in shining heaven, 
The flowers of immortality are blown; 
Let those that fight fight in good stedfastness, 37 
And those that fall shall rise in victory. 
Sir Walter. Vve often seen the burning field of war, 
And often heard the dismal clang of arms; 
But never, till this fatal day of Cressy, 41 
Has my soul fainted with these views of death. 
I seem to be in one great charnel-house, 
And seem to scent the rotten carcases; 
I seem to hear the dismal yells of death, 45 
While the black gore drops from his horrid jaws; 
Yet I not fear the monster in his pride— 
But O! the souls that are to die to-day! 
Dagw. Stop, brave Sir Walter; let me drop a tear, 49 
Then let the clarion of war begin; 
Pll fight and weep, ’tis in my country’s cause; 
I'll weep and shout for glorious liberty. 
Grim war shall laugh and shout, deckéd in tears, 53 
And blood shall flow like streams across the meadows, 
That murmur down their pebbly channels, and 
Spend their sweet lives to do their country service: 
Then shall England’s verdure shoot, her fields shall smile, 57 
Her ships shall sing across the foaming sea, 
Her mariners shall use the flute and viol, 
And rattling guns, and black and dreary war, 
Shall be no more. 61 
Sir Walter. Well, let the trumpet sound, and the drum beat; 
Let war stain the blue heavens with bloody banners; 
Pll draw my sword, nor ever sheath it up 
Till England blow the trump of victory, 65 
Or I lay stretch’d upon the field of death. [Exeunt. 


SCENE, in the Camp. Several of the Warriors meet at the King’s Tent 
with a Minstrel, who sings the following Song: 


O sons of Trojan Brutus, cloath’d in war, I 
Whose voices are the thunder of the field, 

Rolling dark clouds o’er France, muffling the sun. 

In sickly darkness like a dim eclipse, 

Threatening as the red brow of storms, as fire s 
Burning up nations in your wrath and fury! 


Your ancestors came from the fires of Troy, 

(Like lions rouz’d by light’ning from their dens, 

Whose eyes do glare against the stormy fires), 9 
Heated with war, fill’d with the blood of Greeks, 

With helmets hewn, and shields covered with gore, 

In navies black, broken with wind and tide: 


Appendix I 7 39 


They landed in firm array upon the rocks 13 
Of Albion; they kiss’d the rocky shore; 
‘Be thou our mother and our nurse,’ they said; 
‘Our children’s mother, and thou shalt be our grave, 
The sepulchre of ancient Troy, from whence 17 
Shall rise cities, and thrones, and arms, and awful pow’rs.’ 


Our fathers swarm from the ships. Giant voices 

Are heard from the hills, the enormous sons 

Of Ocean run from rocks and caves; wild men, 2r 
Naked and roaring like lions, hurling rocks, 

And wielding knotty clubs, like oaks entangled 

_ Thick as a forest, ready for the axe. 


Our fathers move in firm array to battle; 25 
The savage monsters rush like roaring fire ; 

Like as a forest roars with crackling flames, 

When the red lightning, borne by furious storms, 

Lights on some woody shore; the parchéd heavens 29 
Rain fire into the molten raging sea. 


The smoaking trees are strewn upon the shore, 

Spoil’d of their verdure. O how oft have they 

Defy’d the storm that howléd o’er their heads! 33 
Our fathers, sweating, lean on their spears, and view 

The mighty dead: giant bodies streaming blood, 

Dread visages frowning in silent death, 


Then Brutus spoke, inspir’d; our fathers sit 37 
Attentive on the melancholy shore: 

Hear ye the voice of Brutus—‘ The flowing waves 

Of time come rolling o’er my breast,’ he said ; 

*And my heart labours with futurity : 41 
Our sons shall rule the empire of the sea. 


‘Their mighty wings shall stretch from east to west. 

Their nest is in the sea, but they shall roam 

Like eagles for the prey; nor shall the young 45 
Crave or be heard; for plenty shall bring forth, 

Cities shall sing, and vales in rich array 

Shall laugh, whose fruitful laps bend down with fulness. 


19, 35 Giant voices ... giant bodies] Cp. ‘Giants ancient inhabitants of 
England,’ the first entry in Blake’s list of subjects for a history of England 
(MS. Book, p. 116). In the prospectus of ‘Works now published and on 
sale at Mr. Blake’s, No. 13, Hercules Buildings, Lambeth,’ October ro, 1793, 
is included ‘ The History of England, a small book of Engravings. Price 3s.’ 
This work, no copy of which is known to exist, would seem to show that 
Blake engraved these subjects as a companion volume to The Gates of 
Paradise, which is described in the same leaflet in identical terms. 


AO Poetical Sketches 


‘Our sons shall rise from thrones in joy, j 49 
Each one buckling on his armour; Morning 

Shall be prevented by their swords gleaming, 

And Evening hear their song of victory: 

Their towers shall be built upon the rocks, 53 
Their daughters shall sing, surrounded with shining spears. 


‘Liberty shall stand upon the cliffs of Albion, 

Casting her blue eyes over the green ocean ; 

Or, tow’ring, stand upon the roaring waves, 57 
Stretching her mighty spear o’er distant. lands ; 

While, with her eagle wings, she covereth 

Fair Albion’s shore, and all her families.’ 


Prologue, intended for a Dramatic Piece 
of King Edward the Fourth 


O for a voice like thunder, and a tongue r 
To drown the throat of war! When the senses 

Are shaken, and the soul is driven to madness, 

Who can stand? When the souls of the oppressed 

Fight in the troubled air that rages, who can stand? 5 
When the whirlwind of fury comes from the 

Throne of God, when the frowns of his countenance 

Drive the nations together, who can stand? 

When Sin claps his broad wings over the battle, 9 
And sails rejoicing in the flood of Death; 

When souls are torn to everlasting fire, 

And fiends of Hell rejoice upon the slain, 
O who can stand? O who hath causéd this ? 13 
O who can answer at the throne of God? 

The Kings and Nobles of the Land have done it! 

Hear it not, Heaven, thy Ministers have done it! 


Prologue to King John 


Justice hath heaved a sword to plunge in Albion’s breast ; for Albion’s 
Sins are crimson dy’d, and the red scourge follows her desolate sons. Then 
Patriot rose; full oft did Patriot rise, when Tyranny hath stain’d fair 
Albion’s breast with her own children’s gore. Round his majestic feet 
deep thunders roll; each heart does tremble, and each knee grows slack, 
The stars of heaven tremble ; the roaring voice of war, the trumpet, calls 
to battle. Brother in brother’s blood must bathe, rivers of death. O land 
most hapless! O beauteous island, how forsaken ! Weep from thy silver 


Appendix I AI 


fountains, weep from thy gentle rivers! The angel of the island weeps! 
Thy widowed virgins weep beneath thy shades! Thy aged fathers gird 
themselves for war! The sucking infant lives to die in battle ; the weeping 
mother feeds him for the slaughter! The husbandman doth leave his 
bending harvest! Blood cries afar! The land doth sow itself! The 
glittering youth of courts must gleam in arms! The aged senators their 
ancient swords assume! The trembling sinews of old age must work the 
work of death against their progeny, for Tyranny hath stretch’d his purple 
arm, and ‘blood’ he cries ; ‘ the chariots and the horses, the noise of shout, 
and dreadful thunder of the battle heard afar!’ Beware, O Proud, thou 
shalt be humbled; thy cruel brow, thine iron heart, is smitten, though 
lingering Fate is slow. O yet may Albion smile again, and stretch her 
peaceful arms, and raise her golden head exultingly! Her citizens shall 
throng about her gates, her mariners shall sing upon the sea, and myriads 
shall to her temples crowd! Her sons shall joy as in the morning! Her 
daughters sing as to the rising year ! 


_A War Song to Englishmen 


Prepare, prepare the iron helm of war, Ba 2: 
Bring forth the lots, cast in the spacious orb ; 
Th’ Angel of Fate turns them with mighty hands, 
And casts them out upon the darken’d earth! 
Prepare, prepare, 5 


Prepare your hearts for Death’s cold hand! prepare 
Your souls for flight, your bodies for the earth ; 
Prepare your arms for glorious victory! 
Prepare your eyes to meet a holy God! 
Prepare, prepare. 10 


Whose fatal scroll is that? Methinks ’tis mine! 
Why sinks my heart, why faultereth my tongue? 
Had I three lives, I’d die in such a cause, 
And rise, with ghosts, over the well-fought field, 
Prepare, prepare. 15 


The arrows of Almighty God are drawn! 
Angels of Death stand in the low’ring heavens! 
Thousands of souls must seek the realms of light, 
And walk together on the clouds of heaven! 
Prepare, prepare. 20 


Soldiers, prepare! Our cause is Heaven’s cause ; 
Soldiers, prepare! Be worthy of our cause: 
Prepare to meet our fathers in the sky: 
Prepare, O troops, that are to fall to-day! 
Prepare, prepare. 25 


A2 Poetical Sketches 


Alfred shall smile, and make his harp rejoice ; 
The Norman William, and the learnéd Clerk, 
And Lion Heart, and black-brow’d Edward, with 
His loyal queen shall rise, and welcome us! 
Prepare, prepare. 30 


The Couch of Death 


The veiled Evening walked solitary down the western hills, and Silence 
reposed in the valley ; the birds of day were heard in their nests, rustling 
in brakes and thickets; and the owl and bat flew round the darkening 
trees: all is silent when Nature takes her repose. In former times, on 
such an evening, when the cold clay breathed with life, and our ancestors, 
who now sleep in their graves, walked on the stedfast globe, the remains 
of a family of the tribes of Earth, a mother and a sister, were gathered to 
the sick bed of a youth. Sorrow linked them together; leaning on one 
another’s necks alternately, like lilies dropping tears in each other’s bosom, 
they stood by the bed like reeds bending over a lake, when the evening 
drops trickle down. His voice was low as the whisperings of the woods 
when the wind is asleep, and the visions of Heaven unfold their visitation. 
‘Parting is hard and death is terrible; I seem to walk through a deep 
valley, far from the light of day, alone and comfortless! The damps of death 
fall thick upon me! Horrors stare me in the face! I look behind, there is 
no returning ; Death follows after me; I walk in regions of Death, where no 
tree is ; without a lantern to direct my steps, without a staff to support me.’ 
Thus he laments through the still evening, till the curtains of darkness were 
drawn. Like the sound of a broken pipe, the aged woman raised her voice. 
‘O my son, my son, I know but little of the path thou goest. But lo, there 
is a God, who made the world ; stretch out thy hand to Him.’ The youth 
replied, like a voice heard from a sepulchre, ‘ My hand is feeble, how should 
I stretch it out? My ways are sinful, how should I raise mine eyes?) My 
voice hath used deceit, how should I call on Him who is Truth? My breath 
is loathsome, how should he not be offended? If I lay my face in the dust, 
the grave opens its mouth for me; if I lift up my head, sin covers me as a 
cloak. O my dear friends, pray ye for me! Stretch forth your hands that 
my helper may come! Through the void space I walk, between the sinful 
world and eternity! Beneath me burns eternal fire! O for a hand to pluck 
me forth!’ As the voice of an omen heard in the silent valley, when the 
few inhabitants cling trembling together ; as the voice of the Angel of Death, 
when the thin beams of the moon give a faint light; such was this young 
man’s voice to his friends. Like the bubbling waters of the brook in the 
dead of night, the aged woman raised her cry, and said, ‘O Voice, that 
dwellest in my breast, can I not cry, and lift my eyes to Heaven? Thinking © 
of this, my spirit is turned within me into confusion. O my child, my child, 
is thy breath infected? So is mine. As the deer wounded, by the brooks 
of water, so the arrows of sin stick in my flesh; the poison hath entered 


Appendix I A3 


_ into my marrow.’ Like rolling waves upon a desert shore, sighs succeeded 


sighs, they covered their faces and wept. The youth lay silent, his mother’s 
arm was under his head; he was like a cloud tossed by the winds, till the 
sun shine, and the drops of rain glisten, the yellow harvest breathes, and 
the thankful eyes of the villagers are turned up in smiles. The traveller 
that hath taken shelter under an oak, eyes the distant country with joy. 
Such smiles were seen upon the face of the youth, a visionary hand wiped 
away his tears, and a ray of light beamed around his head. All was still. 


_ The moon hung not out her lamp, and the stars faintly glimmered in the 


summer sky ; the breath of night slept among the leaves of the forest ; the 
bosom of the lofty hill drank in the silent dew, while on his majestic brow 
the voice of Angels is heard, and stringed sounds ride upon the wings of 


night. The sorrowful pair lift up their heads, hovering Angels are around 


7 them, voices of comfort are heard over the Couch of Death, and the youth 


breathes out his soul with joy into eternity, 


Contemplation 


Who is this, that with unerring step dares tempt the wilds, where only 
Nature’s foot hath trod? ’Tis Contemplation, daughter of the grey Morning! 
Majestical she steppeth, and with her pure quill on every flower writeth 
Wisdom’s name. Now lowly bending, whispers in mine ear, ‘O man, how 
great, how little thou! O man, slave of each moment, lord of eternity! 
seest thou where Mirth sits on the painted cheek? doth it not seem ashamed 
of such a place, and grow immoderate to brave it out? O what an humble 
garb true Joy puts on! Those who want Happiness must stoop to find it ; 
it is a flower that grows in every vale. Vain foolish man, that roams on 
lofty rocks, where, ‘cause his garments are swoln with wind, he fancies he 
is grown into a giant! Lo, then, Humility, take it, and wear it in thine 


heart; lord of thyself, thou then art lord of all. Clamour brawls along the 


streets, and destruction hovers in the city’s smoak ; but on these plains, and 


in these silent woods, true joys descend: here build thy nest; here fix thy 


staff; delights blossom around; numberless beauties blow; the green grass 
springs in joy, and the nimble air kisses the leaves; the brook stretches 
its arms along the velvet meadow, its silver inhabitants sport and play; the 
youthful sun joys like a hunter rouzed to the chace, he rushes up the sky, 
and lays hold on the immortal coursérs of day, the sky glitters with the 
jingling trappings. Like a triumph, season follows season, while the airy 
music fills the world with joyful sounds.’ I answered, ‘Heavenly goddess ! 
I am wrapped in mortality, my flesh is a prison, my bones the bars of death, 
Misery builds over our cottage roofs, and Discontent runs like a brook. 
Even in childhood, Sorrow slept with me in my cradle ; he followed me up 
and down in the house when I grew up; he was my schoolfellow: thus he 
was in my steps and in my play, till he became to me as my brother. 
I walked through dreary places with him, and in church-yards; and I oft 
found myself sitting by Sorrow on a tomb-stone.’ 


A4 Poetical Sketches 


Samson 


Samson, the strongest of the children of men, I sing; how he was foiled 
by woman’s arts, by a false wife brought to the gates of death. O Truth, 
that shinest with propitious beams, turning our earthly night to heavenly 
day, from presence of the Almighty Father thou visitest our darkling world 
with blessed feet, bringing good news of Sin and Death destroyed. O white- 
robed Angel, guide my timorous hand to write as on a lofty rock with iron 
pens the words of truth, that all who pass may read. Now Night, noon-tide 
of damned spirits, over the silent earth spreads her pavilion, while in dark 
council sat Philista’s lords ; and, where strength failed, black thoughts in 
ambush lay. Their helméd youth and aged warriors in dust together ly, and 
Desolation spreads his wings over the land of Palestine: from side.to side 
the land groans, her prowess lost, and seeks to hide her bruised head under 
the mists of night, breeding dark plots. For Dalila’s fair arts have long been 
tried in vain; in vain she wept in many a treacherous tear. ‘Go on, fair 
traitress; do thy guileful work; ere once again the changing moon her 
circuit hath performed, thou shalt overcome, and conquer him by force 
unconquerable, and wrest his secret from him. Call thine alluring arts and 
honest-seeming brow, the holy kiss of love, and the transparent tear; put 
on fair linen that with the lily vies, purple and silver; neglect thy hair, to 
seem more lovely in thy loose attire ; put on thy country’s pride, deceit ; and 
eyes of love decked in mild sorrow ; and sell thy Lord for gold.’ For now, 
upon her sumptuous couch reclined in gorgeous pride, she still intreats, and 
still she grasps his vigorous knees with her fair arms. ‘Thou lev’st me not! 
thou’rt war, thou art not love! O foolish Dalila! O weak woman! it is 
death cloathed in flesh thou lovest, and thou hast been incircled in his arms! 
Alas, my Lord, what am I calling thee? Thou art my God! To thee 
I pour my tears for sacrifice morning and evening. My days are covered 
with sorrow. Shut up, darkened. By night I am deceived, Who says 
that thou wast born of mortal kind? Destruction was thy father, a lioness 
suckled thee, thy young hands tore human limbs, and gorgéd human flesh. 
Come hither, Death, art thou not Samson’s servant? ’Tis Dalila that calls; 
thy master’s wife ; no, stay, and let thy master do the deed: one blow of 
that strong arm would ease my pain ; then should I lay at quiet and have 
rest. Pity forsook thee at thy birth! O Dagon furious, and all ye gods of 
Palestine, withdraw your hand! I am but a weak woman. Alas, I am 
wedded to your enemy! I will go mad, and tear my crispéd hair ; I’ll run 
about, and pierce the ears o’ th’ gods! O Samson, hold me not ; thou lovest 
me not! Look not upon me with those deathful eyes! Thou wouldst my 
death, and death approaches fast.’ Thus, in false tears, she bath’d his feet, 
and thus she day by day oppressed his soul: he seemed a mountain, his 
brow among the clouds; she seemed a silver stream, his feet embracing, 
Dark thoughts rolled to and fro in his mind, like thunder clouds troubling 
the sky; his visage was troubled; his soul was distressed. ‘Though 
I should tell her all my heart, what can I fear? Though I should tell this 
secret of my birth, the utmost may be warded off as well when told as now.’ 
She saw him moved, and thus resumes her wiles. ‘Samson, I’m thine ; do 


Appendix I A5 


“with me what thou wilt; my friends are enemies; my life is death; I am 
a traitor to my nation, and despised ; my joy is given into the hands of him 
who hates me, using deceit to the wife of his bosom. Thrice hast thou 
mocked me and grieved my soul. Didst thou not tell me with green withs 
to bind thy nervous arms, and, after that, when I had found thy falsehood, 
With new ropes to bind thee fast? I knew thou didst but mock me. Alas, 
when in thy sleep I bound thee with them to try thy truth, I cried, ‘“‘ The 
Philistines be upon thee, Samson!’’ Then did suspicion wake thee; how 
didst thou rend the feeble ties! Thou fearest nought, what shouldst thou 
fear? Thy power is more than mortal, none can hurt thee; thy bones are 
brass, thy sinews are iron. Ten thousand spears are like the summer grass; 


_ an army of mighty men are as flocks in the vallies; what canst thou fear? 


I drink my tears like water; I live upon sorrow! O worse than wolves and 


_tygers, what canst thou give when such a trifle is denied me? But O! at 
last thou mockest me, to shame my over-fond inquiry. Thou toldest me to 


weave thee to the beam by thy strong hair; I did even that to try thy truth; 


is but, when I cried ‘‘ The Philistines be upon thee!” then didst thou leave me 
to bewail that Samson loved me not.’ He sat, and inward griev’d, he saw 


and lov’d the beauteous suppliant, nor could conceal aught that might 
appease her : then, leaning on her bosom, thus he spoke. ‘ Hear, O Dalila! 


‘ doubt no more of Samson’s love; for that fair breast was made the ivory 


palace of my inmost heart, where it shall lie at rest: for sorrow is the lot 
of all of woman born: for care was I brought forth, and labour is my lot: 
nor matchless might, nor wisdom, nor every gift enjoyed, can from the 


heart of man hide sorrow. Twice was my birth foretold from heaven, and 


twice a sacred vow enjoined me that I should drink no wine, nor eat of any 


- unclean thing, for holy unto Israel’s God I am, a Nazarite even from my 


mother’s womb. Twice was it told, that it might not be broken. “ Grant 
me a son, kind Heaven,” Manoa cried ; but Heaven refused. Childless he 
mourned, but thought his God knew best. In solitude, though not obscure, 
in Israel he lived, till venerable age came on: his flocks increased, and 
plenty crowned his board: beloved, revered of man, But God hath other 
joys in store. Is burdened Israel his grief? The son of his old age shall 
set it free. The venerable sweet’ner of his life receives the promise first 
from Heaven. She saw the maidens play, and blessed their innocent mirth; 
she blessed each new-joined pair; but from her the long-wished deliverer 


shall spring. Pensive, alone she sat within the house, when busy day was 


fading, and calm evening, time for contemplation, rose from the forsaken 
east, and drew the curtains of heaven: pensive she sat, and thought on 
Israel’s grief, and silent prayed to Israel’s God ; when lo, an angel from 
the fields of light entered the house. His form was manhood in the prime, 


-and from his spacious brow shot terrors through the evening shade. But 


mild he hailed her, ‘‘ Hail, highly favoured!” said he; “for lo, thou shalt 
conceive, and bear a son, and Israel’s strength shall be upon his shoulders, 
and he shall be called Israel’s Deliverer. Now, therefore, drink no wine, 


and eat not any unclean thing, for he shall be a Nazarite to God.”’ Then, 


as a neighbour, when his evening tale is told, departs, his blessing leaving, 


so seemed he to depart: she wondered with exceeding joy, nor knew he 
_ was an angel. Manoa left his fields to sit in the house, and take his evening’s 
rest from labour—the sweetest time that God has allotted mortal man. He 


A6 Poetical Sketches 


sat, and heard with joy, and praised God, who Israel still doth keep. The 
time rolled on, and Israel groaned oppressed. The sword was bright, while 
the plow-share rusted, till hope grew feeble, and was ready to give place to 
doubting : then prayed Manoa: “O Lord, thy flock is scattered on the hills. 
The wolf teareth them, Oppression stretches his rod over our land, our 
country is plowed with swords, and reaped in blood. The echoes of 
slaughter reach from hill to hill. Instead of peaceful pipe the shepherd 
bears a sword, the ox goad is turned into a spear. O when shall our 
Deliverer come? The Philistine riots on our flocks, our vintage is gathered 
by bands of enemies. Stretch forth thy hand, and save.” Thus prayed 
Manoa. The aged woman walked into the field, and lo, again the angel 
came. Clad as a traveller fresh risen on his journey, she ran and called her 
husband, who came and talked with him. “O man of God,” said he, ‘‘ thou 
comest from far. Let us detain thee while I make ready a kid, that thou 
mayest sit and eat, and tell us of thy name and warfare; that, when thy 
sayings come to pass, we may honour thee.’’ The Angel answered, ‘‘My 
name is wonderful ; enquire not after it, seeing it is a secret: but, if thou 
wilt, offer an offering unto the Lord.”’’ 


APPENDIX II 


[The two songs referred to in editor’s introduction, found in Blake’s 
autograph on the fly-leaves of a copy of the original edition of Poetical 
Sketches, and here reprinted from Shepherd’s text (ed. 1874, p. 154). See 

_ also his Introduction to that edition, p. vi.] 


Song by a Shepherd 


Welcome, stranger, to this place, I 
Where joy doth sit on every bough, 

Paleness flies from every face; 

We reap not what we do not sow. 


Innocence doth like a rose 5 
Bloom on every maiden’s cheek ; 

Honour twines around her brows, 

The jewel health adorns her neck. 


Shepherd, p. 154. 
I stranger] little stranger EY. 


r 


Song by an Old Shepherd 


When silver snow decks Sylvia’s clothes, I 
And jewel hangs at shepherd’s nose, 

We can abide life’s pelting storm, 

That makes our limbs quake, if our hearts be warm. 


Whilst Virtue is our walking-staff, 5 
And Truth a lantern to our path, 

We can abide life’s pelting storm, 

That makes our limbs quake, if our hearts be warm. 


Blow, boisterous wind, stern Winter frown, 9 
Innocence is a Winter’s gown. 

So clad, we'll abide life’s pelting storm, 

That makes our limbs quake, if our hearts be warm. 


i Shepherd, p. 154. 
I, 2 When... nose]. Cp. Blind-man’s Buff (Poetical Sketches), ll. 1-2. 
8 That] Which EY. 


SONGS 


7 from 
AN ISLAND IN, THE MOON 
| (an untitled Autograph MS., circa 1784) 


7 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL PREFACE 


TO 


AN ISLAND IN THE MOON 


The Blake MS. known as An Jsland in the Moon, is 
a thin foolscap folio volume of sixteen leaves, lacking two 
(or perhaps four) leaves through the loss of one (or two) 
sheets from the centre of the single quire of which it is 
composed. 

The autograph is in Blake’s early hand, and begins at 
the head of the first page (recto of first leaf) :— 

‘In the Moon is a certain Island, near by a mighty 
‘continent, which small island seems to have some affinity 
to’ England, & what is more extraordinary the people are 
so much alike, & their language so much the same, that 
you would think you was among your friends. in this Island 
dwells three Philosophers, Suction the Epicurean, Quid the 
Cynic; and Sipsop the Pythagorean. I call them by the 
names of those sects; tho’ the sects are not ever mention’d 
there, as being quite out of date. however the things still 
remain, and the vanities are the same. the three Philo- 
sophers sat together thinking of nothing. in comes 
Etruscan Column, the Antiquarian, & after an abun- 
dance of Enquiries to no purpose sat himself down & 
described something that nobody listen’d to. so they 
were employ’d when Mrs. Gimblet came in.’ 

It ends abruptly—or rather is left unfinished by the 
author—on line nineteen of the recto of the leaf following 
the lacuna in the text, now the seventeenth page, but which, 
when the book was complete, must have been page 21 or 25. 
The remaining pages are blank, with the exception of the 
verso of the last leaf, which is scribbled over with rough 
sketches and pen-trials, among them Blake’s signature 
written backwards as if engraved on copper-plate. The — 
soiled appearance of this last verso proves it to have been 
the original outer leaf of the MS., and since it is also, as 


Island in the Moon . 51 


- the watermarks show, the other half of the sheet on which 
the work begins, there are no grounds for Messrs. Ellis 
and Yeats’ conjecture that the MS. at one time possessed 
a first leaf containing a title-page. 

The brochure itself, which may be described as a some- 
what incoherent and pointless precursor of the Headlong 
fTall type of novel, was perhaps intended by the author as 
a satire on the little coterie of distinguished personages 
which met at Mrs. Mathews’ salon in Rathbone Place; 


_ but, if so, the originals of the portraits are not now to be 


identified, though Quid the Cynic may possibly stand for 
_ Blake himself. I am unable to agree with Mr. Yeats’ 
surmise that Az Island in the Moon preceded and even 
led to the publication of the Poetical Sketches in 1783, and 
that Blake’s gratitude for Mr. Mathews’ share in defray- 
ing the cost of printing the little volume caused the author 
to leave the present work unfinished. This is to attach 
unnecessary importance to a trifle evidently dashed off by 
' Blake for his own amusement without thought of publica- 
tion; nor, as we know from the epigrams in the MS. Book, 
was it the poet’s wont to allow social patronage or material 
' assistance to interfere with his Celtic privilege of free 
- satire. The MS., moreover, contains the first drafts of 
_ ‘Holy Thursday’ and the ‘Nurse’s Song, and had these 
beautiful lyrics been written in 1783 it is difficult to believe 
that Blake would not have included them in his first 
published work. The doggerel lines on Dr. Johnson 
are more likely to have been written before than after 
Johnson’s death. We may therefore, with tolerable cer- 
tainty, date it between the publication of the Poetical 
_ Sketches in 1783, and December 20, 1784, probably in the 
latter year, when, as J. T. Smith tells us, Blake’s relations 
with the Mathews and their circle had become somewhat 
strained. In chapters 5 and 7 there are references to the 
Chatterton controversy, which reached its height in 1782, 
and would seem, when Blake wrote, to have been still a 
topic of conversation. 

Messrs. Ellis and Yeats have given a synopsis of the 
chapters, with copious though rather inaccurately printed 
extracts, from this MS. in their edition of Blake’s works, 
vol. i. pp. 186-201; and Mr. Lawrence Housman, who 
dates the MS. circa 1789, has reprinted three chapters 
“as specimens of his prose, while, strangely, placing one of 
the songs among the ‘ Later Poems.’ The work has never 
been printed as a whole; nor, were this done, would it 
E2 


52 Bibhographical Preface 


add to Blake’s literary reputation. Its chief interest to 
general readers must lie in its giving us the first drafts 
of three of the Songs of Innocence, in its evidence, even 
at this early date, of Blake’s rooted antipathy to science 
and experiment, and in its foreshadowing, some years 
beforehand, the ‘illuminated printing’ which he afterwards 
employed in the Songs of Innocence and in the Prophetic 
Books. 

I do not repeat here the early versions of ‘Holy 
Thursday, ‘Nurse’s Song,’ or ‘The Little Boy Lost,’ the 
variant readings to which are given in the footnotes to the 
Songs of Innocence. Besides the six songs which follow, 
a number of choruses and nonsense verses are placed in 
the mouths of several of the characters. Some of these, 
such as ‘ This frog he would a wooing ride’ and the London 
street-cry, ‘I cry my matches as far as Guildhall, are plainly 
not Blake’s at all; while others are, as the writer intended 
them, trivialities or doggerel sung by children or drunken 
boon-companions. Since these pieces have been referred 
to and partly quoted by Messrs. Ellis and Yeats, I have 
thought it necessary to print the whole of them in an 
Appendix, which all lovers of Blake may pass over. 

My text of these poems is taken from my transcript of 
the original MS., kindly lent to me by Mr. Charles Fairfax 
Murray, who has since presented it to the Fitzwilliam 
Museum, Cambridge. 


_FROM THE ISLAND IN THE MOON 


z 


When old corruption first begun, I 
Adorn’d in yellow vest, 

He committed on flesh a whoredom— 

O, what a wicked beast! 


2 


From then a callow babe did spring, 5 
And old corruption smil’d 

To think his race should never end, 

For now he had a child. 


3 
He call’d him Surgery & fed 9 
The babe with his own milk; 
For flesh & he could ne’er agree: 
She would not let him suck. 


4 


And this he always kept in mind; 13 
And form’d a crooked knife, 

And ran about with bloody hands 

To seek his mother’s life. 


Isl. in Moon, chap. vi—‘ “ Ah!’ said Sipsop, ‘‘I only wish Jack Tearguts had 
had the cutting of Plutarch; he understands anatomy better than any of the 
Ancients ; he’ll plunge his knife up to the hilt in a single drive, and thrust 
his fist in, and all in the space of a Quarter of an hour: he does not mind 
their crying—tho’ they cry ever so, he’ll Swear at them, & keep them down 
with his fist, & tell them that he’ll scrape their bones if they don’t lay still 
& be quiet—What the devil should the people in the hospital, that have it 
done for nothing, make such a piece of work for?”’ ‘‘Hang that!” said 
Suction, “let us have a song.’? Then the Cynic sang :—’ 

Only printed by EY i. p. 193. 

5 then] there EY. 13 in] on EY, 


54 


Island tn the Moon 


5 
And as he ran to seek his mother 17 
He met with a dead woman. 


He fell in love & married her— 
A deed which is not common! 


6 


She soon grew pregnant, & brought forth 21 
Scurvy & spott’d fever. 

The father grinn’d & skipt about, 

And said ‘I’m made for ever! 


7 


‘For now I have procured these imps 25 
Tl try experiments.’ 

With that he tied poor scurvy down, 

& stopt up all its vents. 


8 


And when the child began to swell 29 
He shouted out aloud— 

‘I’ve found the dropsy out, & soon 

Shall do the world more good.’ 


9 


He took up fever by the neck, 33 
And cut out all its spots; 

And, thro’ the holes which he had made, 

He first discover’d guts. ] 


20 which] that EY. 


Island in the Moon St 
ii 
[The Song of Phebe and Jellicoe] 


Phebe drest like beautie’s Queen, I 
Jellicoe in faint peagreen, 

Sitting all beneath a grot, 

Where the little lambkins trot. 


Maidens dancing, loves a sporting, 5 
All the country folks a courting, 

Susan, Johnny, Bob, & Joe, 

Lightly tripping on a row. 


Happy people, who can be 9 
In happiness compar’d with ye? 
The Pilgrim with his crook & hat 


Sees your happiness compleat. 


Isl. in Moon, chap. viii—‘ Then said Miss Gittipin, ‘“ Mr. Scopprell, do you 
know the song of ‘ Phebe and Jellicoe’?’’—‘‘ No, Miss,” said Scopprell. 
Then she repeated these verses, while steelyard walk’d about the room.’ 
EY i. p. 196, WBY p. 95 with title ‘The Pilgrim.’ LH p, 144. 

5 loves a sporting] lovers sporting EY, WBY. 7 Bob] Bab LH. 
Io with] to EY, WBY. 


111 


Hail Matrimony, made of Love! I 
To thy wide gates how great a drove 

On purpose to be yok’d do come; 

Widows & maids & Youths also, 

That lightly trip on beauty’s toe, 

Or sit on ‘beauty’s bum. 


Isl. in Moon, chap. ix—‘‘‘ Hang Italian songs! let’s have English,” said 
Quid, ‘‘English Genius for ever—here I go—.’’’ The subject and metre of 
this song were perhaps suggested by ‘ He that intends to take a wife,’ Pills to 
purge Melancholy, iii. p. 106, EY (i. p. 198) print ll. 7, 8, 13, 18, and 25-7. 


56 Island in the Mowe 


Hail fingerfooted lovely Creatures! 7 
The females of our human Natures, 

Formed to suckle all Mankind. 

Tis you that come in time of need, 

Without you we shoud never Breed, 

Or any Comfort find. 


For if a Damsel’s blind or lame, 13 
Or Nature’s hand has crooked her frame, 

Or if she’s deaf, or is wall-eyed ; 

Yet, if her heart is well inclined, 

Some tender lover she shall find 

That panteth for a Bride. 


The universal Poultice this, 19 
To cure whatever is amiss 

In damsel or in Widow gay! 

It makes them smile, it makes them skip; 

Like Birds, just curéd of the pip, 

They chirp & hop away. 

Then come, ye maidens! come, ye swains! 25 
Come & be cured of all your pains 

In Matrimony’s Golden cage— 


7 Hail] EY omit. 17 Some tender lover] Some (? friend) or EY. 
25 maidens] maids, and EY. 27] Here the song abruptly breaks off. 
‘*6Go and be hanged!’ said Scopprell, “ how can you have the face to make 
game of matrimony?’’’ The phrase in the last line, as EY point out, explains 


the ‘ golden cage’ in the third stanza of ‘ How sweet I roam’d from field te 
field’; see Poetical Sketches, 1783, p. 10. 


lV 
To be or not to be I 
Of great capacity, 
Like Sir Isaac Newton, 
Or Locke, or Doctor South, 
Or Sherlock upon death— 


I'd rather be Sutton! 


Isl. in Moon, chap. ix—‘ Then Quid called upon Obtuse Angle for a Song, 
& he, wiping his face, & looking on the corner of the cieling, sang :—’ 
Printed here for the first time. 

6 Sutton] Thomas Sutton, founder of the Charterhouse (1532-1611). 


Island Se the Moon Ci 


For he did build a house 4 
For aged men & youth, 

With walls of brick & stone; 

He furnish’d it within 

With whatever he could win, 

And all his own. 


He drew out of the Stocks 13 
His money in a box, 

And sent his servant 

To Green the Bricklayer, 

And to the Carpenter ; 

He was so fervent. 


The chimneys were three score, 1g 
The windows many more; 

And, for convenience, 

He sinks & gutters made, 

And all the way he pav’d 

To hinder pestilence. 


Was not this a good man— 25 
Whose life was but a span, 

Whose name was Sutton— 

As Locke, or Doctor South, 

Or Sherlock upon Death, 

Or Sir Isaac Newton? 


V 
This city & this country has brought forth aig 
mayors 
To sit in state, & give forth laws out of their old aN 
chairs, 
With face as brown as any nut with drinking of strong 
ale— 


| Good English hospitality, O then it did not fail! 


|. Isl. in Moon, chap. ix—‘The Lawgiver was very attentive [to the 
preceding song] & beg’d to have it sung over again & again; till the 


58 Island in the Moon 


With scarlet gowns & broad gold lace, would make 
a yeoman sweat ; 5 

With stockings roll’d above their knees & shoes as black 
as jet; 

With ae beef & drinking beer, O they were stout 
& hale— 

Good English hospitality, O then it did not fail! 


Thus sitting at the table wide the Mayor & Alder- 


men 9 
Were fit to give law to the city; each eat as much as 
ten : 
The hungry poor enter’d the hall to eat good beef 
& ale— 


Good English hospitality, O then it did not fail! 


company were tired, & insisted on the Lawgiver singing a song himself, 
which he readily complied with :—’ 

Cp. ‘Old English hospitality is long since deceased,’ in Chatterton’s 
‘ Antiquity of Christmas Games,’ an essay reprinted in the Miscellantes of 
1778, with which work Blake appears to me to have been familiar. 

EY i. pp. 198-9. WBY (p. 135) entitles this song ‘Old English Hospitality,’ 
following the inaccurate version given of the refrain in the first and second 
stanza by EY. 


t has] have WBY. 4 and 8 Good] Old EY, WBY. to law] 
laws EY, WBY. 
vl 
Leave, O leave [me] to my sorrows; I 


Here I'll sit & fade away, 
Till I’m nothing but a spirit, 
And I lose this form of clay. 


Then if chance along this forest 5 
Any walk in pathless ways, 

Thro’ the gloom he’ll see my shadow, 

Hear my voice upon the Breeze. 


Isl. in Moon, chap. xi—‘ Here a laugh began, and Miss Gittipin sung—.’ 


EY i. p. 200, WBY (p. 102) prints as a single stanza, with title “A Song of 
Sorrow.’ 

I me] omitted in orig. ; me EY, WBY. sorrows] sorrow EY, WBY. 
4 lose] love EY, WBY. 


a a 


APPENDIX 


TO 


AN ISLAND IN THE MOON 


a 


Little Phebus came strutting in, I 
With his fat belly & his round chin. 
What is it you would please to have? 
Ho! Ho! 
I won't let it go at only so & so! 5 
Isl. in Moon, chap. iii. Sung by Quid the Cynic. EY i. p. 189. 
5 so & so] so so EY, 


b 


Honour & Genius is all I ask, 

And I ask the Gods no more! 

; No more! No more! Neg three Philosophers 
No more! No more! bear chorus. 


Isl, in Moon, chap. iii. Sung by Quid the Cynic. EY =i. p. 190. 


Cc 


Hear-then the pride & knowledge of a Sailor! I 
His sprit sail, fore sail, main sail, & his mizen. 

A poor frail man—god wot! I know none frailer, 

_I know no greater sinner than John Taylor. 


Isl. in Moon, chap. viii. Sung by Steelyard, the Lawgiver. Not in EY. 


d 


Lo! the Bat with Leathern wing, I 
Winking & blinking, 

Winking & blinking, 

Winking & blinking, 

Like Dr. Johnson. 


Quid, ‘O ho!’ said Dr. Johnson 6 


To Scipio Africanus, 
‘If you don’t own me a Philosopher 
BRR GR ROR Re aR koko? 


Isl. in Moon, chap. ix—‘‘‘I say, this evening we'll all get drunk. I say, 


60 Island tn the Moon 


Suction. ‘A ha!’ to Dr. Johnson 10 
Said Scipio Africanus, 
FoR ok Fok ok kokok ek ok ok 


KEK KKK KK KKK KK KKK? 


And the Cellar goes down with a step (Grand 
Chorus). 


dash, an Anthem! an Anthem!’ said Suction—.’ EY (i. p. 196) print this 
stanza, 


e€ 


ist Vo. Want Matches? I 
and Vo. Yes! Yes! Yes! 

Ist Vo. Want Matches? 

and Vo. No! 


1st Vo. Want Matches? 5 
and Vo. Yes! Yes! Yes! 

Ist Vo. Want Matches ? 

and Vo. No! 


Isl. in Moon, chap. ix. Song of boy match-sellers. Not in EY. 


f 


I cry my matches as far as Guildhall: 
God bless the duke & his aldermen all! 


Isl. in Moon, chap. ix. Probably an old London street-cry. Here sung 
by Mrs. Nannicantipol. Not in EY. 


& 


As I walk’d forth one may morning I 
To see the fields so pleasant & so gay, 
O! there did I spy a young maiden sweet, 
Among the Violets that smell so sweet, 

smell so sweet, 

smell so sweet, 
Among the AiGlets that smell so sweet. 7 


Isl. in Moon, chap. ix—‘ Then said Suction, ‘‘come, Mr. Lawgiver, your 


song !”’ and the Lawgiver sang .. . ‘‘ Hang your Violets! here’s your Rum 


and water.”’ Not in EY. 


Lsland Se the Moon 61 
h 


This frog he would a wooing ride, 
Kitty alone! Kitty alone! 

This frog he would a wooing ride, 
Kitty alone & I! 

Ting cock, I cary, Kitty alone! 
Kitty Alone! Kitty alone! 

Cock I cary Kitty alone, 

Kitty alone & I! 


Isl. 1n Moon, chap. ix—‘ “ Miss Gittipin,” said he, ‘‘ you sing like a harpsi- 
chord ; let your bounty descend to our fair ears, and favour us with a fine 
song.’? Then she sung—.’ Cp. variant of this song, with same refrain, in 
Halliwell’s Nursery Rhymes of England (Percy Society), 1842. Not in EY. 


1 
O, I say, you Joe, I 
Throw us the ball! 
I’ve a good mind to go 
And leave you all. 
I never saw such a bowler 5 
To bowl the ball in a tansey, 


And to clean it with my hankercher 
Without saying a word. 


That Bill’s a foolish fellow; 9 
He has given me a black eye. 

He does not know how to handle a bat 

Any more than a dog or a cat: 

He has knock’d down the wicket, 13 
And broke the stumps, 

And runs without shoes to save his pumps. 


Isl. in Moon, chap. xi—‘ Here nobody could sing any longer, till Tilly 
Lally pluck’d up a spirit, & he sung—.’ Not in EY. 


k 


There’s Doctor Clash, ‘as 
And Sinior Falalasole, 

O they sweep in the cash 

Into their purse hole! 

Fa me la sol La me fa Sol! 


Isl. in Moon, chap. xi—‘ The Lawgiver all the while sat delighted to see 


62 Island in the Moon 


Great A, little A, 6 
Bouncing B! 

Play away, Play away, 

You’r out of the key! 

Fa me la sol La me fa sol! 


Musicians should have rr 
A pair of very good ears, 

And Long fingers & thumbs, 

And not like clumsy bears. 

Fa me la sol La me fa sol! 


Gentlemen! Gentlemen! 16 
Rap! Rap! Rap! 

Fiddle! Fiddle! Fiddle! 

Clap! Clap! Clap! 

Fa me la sol La me fa sol! 


them in such a serious humour. “ Mr. Scropprell,” said he, “ you must be 
acquainted with a great many songs?” ‘‘O, dear sir, Ho! Ho! Ho! Iam 
no singer; I must beg of one of these tender hearted ladies to sing for me.” 
They all declined, & he was forced to sing himself’ Not in EY. 


A. crowned king, 
On a white horse sitting, 
With his trumpets sounding, 
And Banners flying ; 
Thro’ the clouds of smoke he makes his way, 
And the shout of his thousands fills his heart with 
rejoicing & victory. 
And the shout of his thousands fills his heart with 
rejoicing & victory. 
Victory! Victory! twas William the prince of Orange. 


Isl. in Moon, chap. ix—‘ Then said the Lawgiver, “ funny enough, let’s 
have handel’s waterpiece.” Then Sipsop sung—.’ Not in EY, who refer 
to it as a song in praise of William the Conqueror. 


— 


yer 


SONGS 


OF INNOCENCE 


and 


OF EXPERIENCE 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL PREFACE 
TO THE 


SONGS OF INNOCENCE AND OF 
EXPERIENCE 


THE Songs of Innocence (1789) was the first of Blake’s 
works produced by the novel method which, in his pro- 
spectus of 1793, he styles ‘illuminated printing.’ The text 
and surrounding design were written in reverse, in a medium 
impervious to acid, upon small copper plates about 5” by 3”, 
which were then etched in a bath of aqua fortis until the work 
stood in relief as ona stereotype. From these plates, which 
‘to economize copper were in many cases engraved upon 

both sides, impressions were printed, in the ordinary manner, 
in tints meant to harmonize with the colour scheme after- 
_wards applied in water-colours by the artist. In the 
dexterous interweaving of text and design Blake anticipates 
the modern school of book illustration. Gilchrist’s state- 
ment (Le, i. 68) that ‘by the end of 1788... the illustrated 
designs in colour... had been executed’ conveys the im- 
_ pression that before engraving Blake had completed an 
entire series of coloured illustrations to the Songs of 
Innocence. ‘This would seem to be pure assumption, and 
it is evident that no such sketches were known to Mr. W. M. 
Rossetti, or he would undoubtedly have included them in 
his exhaustive ‘Annotated Catalogue of Blake’s Pictures 
and Drawings’ (Gilchrist, ii. 201-64). The only original 
designs known to the present writer are the following :— 
 (t) In Quaritch’s General Catalogue (1887, p. 935) there is 
an entry of three coloured sketches for the Songs of 
Innocence ‘from the collection of a friend of Blake's.’ 
These designs, which are described as being ‘in Blake’s 
usual rich style of colouring’ and as ‘ differing considerably 
from the published engravings,’ are the Piper frontispiece, 
the Introduction (‘Piping down the valleys wild’), and 
a third drawing called ‘An Ideal Hell,’ which is probably 
attributed by a cataloguer’s error to the Songs of Innocence. 


SAMPSON F 


66 Bibliographical Preface 


(2) There are besides in the Rossetti MS. Book the original 
designs for two of the Songs of Experience, ‘The Angel 
and ‘ The Sick Rose’—the latter different in many respects 
from the version subsequently engraved. We have no 
reason to believe that Blake first executed for all the 
songs coloured sketches which have since disappeared. 
Probably many of the originals were merely pencil draw- 
ings ‘ with nothing to seek’—to quote Blake’s own phrase 
in his recipe for engraving on pewter—which would 
naturally be destroyed in the process of rubbing off on to 
the copper. 

The engraved version of the Songs, issued by the author 
without change during a period of nearly forty years, must 
of course be regarded as the only authoritative text ; even 
where, as in a few cases, the earlier manuscript readings 
seem preferable. Original autograph versions of three of 
the Songs of Innocence are found in the unpublished Blake 
manuscript known as Az Island in the Moon. Manuscript 
versions of eighteen of the twenty-six Songs of Experience 
form some of the first entries in the Rossetti MS. Book. 
Several of the latter have the appearance of being fair 
copies, transcribed, at one time, from an earlier notebook 
or from loose scraps of paper, while others, such as ‘The 
Tyger, are evidently the first rough draft. All these 
variant readings are here given in the footnotes to the 
Songs. 

The Songs of Innocence was at first issued as a separate 
work, complete copies of the little book in its original form 


containing thirty-one plates. These include five—‘ The © 


Little Girl Lost, ‘ The Little Girl Found, ‘ The Voice of the 
Ancient Bard,’ and ‘TheSchool Boy’—which were afterwards 
generally transferred by Blake to the Songs of Experience, 
though the two last were still sometimes placed by him 
among the Songs of Innocence. ith the exception of the 
frontispiece, title-page, and introduction, the plates in this 
earliest issue were printed upon both sides of octavo paper, 
the thirty-one plates occupying seventeen leaves. These 
loose leaves were then stitched by Mrs. Blake into paper 
covers, in most cases by the rough process known as 


‘stabbing,’ a cord being laced through holes punctured an — 


inch or two apart. 

In 1793 Blake completed the engraving of the Songs of 
Experience. His prospectus, dated Oct. 10 of the same 
year, addressed ‘To the Public,’ and giving a list of ten 


: 
| 


Songs of Innocence 67 


works ‘now published and on Sale at Mr. Blake’s, no. 13 
‘Hercules Buildings, Lambeth, advertises the Songs of 
Innocence and the Songs of Experience as two separate 
books, each being priced at 5s. and described as containing 
twenty-five designs. Blake here, according to his practice 
in other cases, does not include either frontispiece or title- 
page, which would make the entire number of plates in the 
two.series fifty-four. As this is the full number in a perfect 
copy of the Songs of Innocence and of Experience, including 
the general title-page which had not then been engraved, 
Blake in this prospectus must have reckoned ‘A Divine 
Image’ (‘ Cruelty has a Human Heart’) among the number. 
Though this poem is inserted without question in all 
editions of Blake since Shepherd’s, it would seem to have 
been deliberately rejected by the poet himself. The plate 
containing it is not found in any authentic copy of the 
_ Songs issued in the lifetime of the artist or his wife, and 
is known to us by only two examples. One of these is in 
the uncoloured copy of the Songs in the Reading Room of 
the British Museum, which, as the watermark shows, was 
printed not earlier than 1832, and the other is a proof 
impression in the possession of Mr. William Muir, which he 
has reproduced at the end of his facsimile of Te Marriage 
of Heaven and Fell. 

In 1794 Blake added a general title-page to both series, 
which thenceforward were issued by him as one work, the 
_ plates printed on one side of the leaf only and numbered 
_ by hand consecutively one to fifty-four. This is the form 
in which most copies of the Sozgs occur. It should be 
noted that there was never any true edztion, in the ordinary 
sense of the term, of this or of any other of Blake’s engraved 
works. Sets of impressions were struck off as required, 
the issue of the Songs extending from the completion of 
| the Songs of Innocence in 1789 to the close of Blake’s life. 
In 1863 ten of the original plates, yielding sixteen im- 
| pressions (six being engraved on both sides of the copper), 
| were still in existence, and were used by Mr. Gilchrist in 
| the second volume of his Life of Blake. The outline 
designs there, as I learn from Mr. Frederick Macmillan, 
were printed from electrotypes which have every appear- 
ance of having been made from the actual plates engraved 
by Blake. The present whereabouts of these plates I have 
been unable to trace. 

_ According to Gilchrist (Zzfe, i. 125) a few copies were 
F 2 


68 Bibliographical Preface 


‘issued plain in black and white, or blue and white.’ This 
agrees with the modest price (5s. each) at which Blake 
advertises the Songs of Innocence and the Songs of Ex- 
perience in his Prospectus of 1793. The thirty shillings 
or two guineas which Gilchrist (i. 124) tells us the artist 
received for the first issue of the collected Songs probably 
tefers to coloured impressions. The only uncoloured copy 
of the Songs of Innocence and of Experience known to the 
present‘ writer is the very unworthy example, already re- 
ferred to, in the Reading Room of the British Museum. 
This is a made-up copy, in which part of the plates at least 
were printed after the death of Blake and his wife, perhaps 
by Mr. F. Tatham, into whose possession they passed after 
Catherine Blake’s death in October, 1831. 
The earlier examples of the Songs of [nnocence are distin- 
guished by the simplicity and delicacy of their colouring, 
contrasting in this respect with some of the later more 
elaborately illuminated copies of the Songs of Innocence and 
of Experience. These last issues are printed upon larger 
paper and upon one side of the leaf only. The Monckton 
Milnes copy, produced after 1818, measures 13” x 108”, and 
each plate has the additional embellishment of a wide wash — 
border instead of the simple red line with which Blake 
ordinarily surrounded the designs. In a copy exhibited at 
the Grolier Club at New York in 1905, the plates are sur- 
rounded by delicate borders of trees, vines, and even drapery. 
These frames, which are not more than a quarter of an 
inch in width, were added with a fine brush. 
Besides the sixteen plates reprinted by Gilchrist, which, 
as Mr. D. G. Rossetti points out, are ‘as absolutely the 


originals as those appearing in the copies printed by | 


Blake’—except of course in having been printed from 
electros instead of direct from the plates, and in lacking the 
superadded water-colour tinting—there are three modern 
facsimiles of the Sougs. The first of these is given in The 
Works of William Blake, reproduced in facsimile from the 
original editions (100 copies printed for private circulation), 


1876. This has evidently been prepared from the very 
poor uncoloured copy of the Soxgs acquired by the British © 


Museum in January, 1864, and, while it affords a fairly good 
general idea of Blake’s designs, is coarsely executed and ex- 
ceedingly inaccurate as to the text. The second is the very 
beautiful reproduction made by Mr. William Muir in 1884 
ahd 1885, the edition being limited to fifty copies. The out- 


ee 


4 


Songs of Innocence 69 


line drawings are here facsimilized by lithography, and the 


-colouring added by hand from the finest examples accessible 


to the artist. The tinting of the Songs of Innocence is 
copied from the volume which Blake gave to Flaxman— 
though the plates, it may be noted, are arranged in a different 
order—that of the Songs of Experience from the famous 
Beckford Library copy, originally belonging to a Mr. 
Edwards, purchased by Mr. Quaritch at the Hamilton Palace 
sale, July 4, 1882, and now the property of Mr. W. A. White 
of Brooklyn. These exquisite facsimiles leave little to be 
desired in their general fidelity to the originals. Blake’s 
cameo plates have, however, a sharpness and definiteness 
of outline impossible to achieve by printing from stone, 


and partly no doubt for this reason Mr. Muir fails in the 


difficult technical feat of reproducing the grace, beauty, 
and delicacy of Blake’s lettering. 
- There is also a useful facsimile of the outlines of the 


Songs, edited by Mr. Edwin J. Ellis (Quaritch, 1903). 


The plates are here reproduced by a photographic process, 


-which, as the editor points out, fails to represent the clear- 


ness of the originals where the copies have been made from 
tinted impressions. Neither of these facsimiles, however, 


_ though much more accurate than the reproduction of 1876, 


is a trustworthy guide for Blake’s text. 
-In Blake’s Songs of Innocence (including, as in the first 
issue, ‘ The Little Girl Lost,’ ‘The Little Girl Found,’ and 


_£The School Boy’) the body of the text is in minuscule 
roman, with the exception of ‘The Voice of the Ancient 


Bard,’ which is in italic. In the Songs of Experience, on the 


contrary, Blake substituted for roman the more easily formed 


italic characters which he first adopted in the Book of Thel 
(1789) and used in all his subsequent works; only four 


_ songs, ‘The Tyger,’ ‘Ah! Sunflower,’ ‘London,’ and ‘A 


Poison Tree,’ with the introductory stanza to ‘A Little Girl 
Lost,’ being written in the former style of lettering. 

There is no engraved Table of Contents, and a collation 
of various copies of the Songs shows that the order in which 
the plates are arranged varies in almost every instance. 
The plates are without engraved foliation or pagination, 
and catchwords are only used where one of the longer 
songs is continued on toa second plate. The early issues 


of the Songs of Innocence are without manuscript pagina; ~~~ 


tion or border lines. Later issues of the two series, printed 


upon one side of the leaf only, are foliated at the top right, 


. 


70 Bibliographical Preface 


hand corner, in the same brown or red ink with which 
Blake added the border lines surrounding the plates. 

Blake’s earliest arrangement is found in the extremely 
tare first issue of the Songs printed upon both sides of the 
leaf. In Table I I give the collations of five copies of 
the Songs of Innocence and in Table II of one copy of 
the Songs of Innocence and of Experience, plates printed 
upon the same leaf being bracketed together and those on 
the recto being placed first. 

The first three plates of the Songs of Innocence, the 
frontispiece, title-page, and Introduction, are printed upon 
one side of the leaf only; the frontispiece was generally 
bound, as if printed on the verso, to face the title-page. 

It will be seen from these tables that although the order 
of plates is not identical in any of these six copies, yet 
in four of these the same designs are invariably found 
either as recto or verso of the same leaf. A further instance 
of the same juxtaposition is the example in the Print 
Room of the British Museum. This is evidently a made-up 
copy, the deficiency of the original being supplied by two 
leaves of the earlier issue, in which, as in A, B, and C, ‘ The 
Ecchoing Green’ (two plates) and the ‘ Nurse’s Song’ 
and ‘Holy Thursday’ are printed upon either side of the 
same leaf. In a sale at Sotheby’s of the library of J. B. 
Ditchfield, M.D., April 24, 1893, among the books sold 
is recorded an incomplete copy of the Songs of Innocence 
in which these four plates are wanting. This volume was 
bound by C. Lewis in 1782, so that the two missing leaves, 
which we may reasonably conjecture have gone to supply 
the lacunae in the Print Room copy, must have disappeared 
at an early date. These coincidences of arrangement, 
however, are as likely to have arisen from the fact of 
a number of impressions having been printed at one 
time, as from any deliberate intention on the part of the 
author. 

Some copies bearing Blake’s own foliation seem to 
be arranged regardless of system, and it was probably 
with the intention of rectifying this defect that Blake 
compiled, either for his own guidance or that of his 
wife, the table showing the order in which the songs 
should be paged and arranged, which Mr. Muir has given 
in facsimile at the end of his reproduction of The Marriage 


of Heaven and Hell, This index, which is written on two 


opposite leaves of quarto paper, may be dated approximately 


ee 


SO —— - 


> 


Songs of Innocence 71 


by the watermark ( 1818) of the Monckton Milnes copy, with 


_which it coincides in arrangement. 


‘The Order in which the Songs of Innocence & of 
Experience ought to be paged & placed. 

‘Page 1. General Title. 2. Frontispiece of Piper. 3. 
Title page to Songs of Innocence. 4. Introduction—Piping 
down the Valleys, &c. 5. Ecchoing Green. 6. Ditto. 
7. The Lamb. 8. The Shepherd. 9. Infant Joy. to. Little 
Black Boy. 11. Ditto. 12. Laughing Song. 13. Spring. 
14. Ditto. 15. Cradle Song. 16. Ditto. 17. Nurse’s 
Song. 18. Holy Thursday. 19. The Blossom. 20. The 
Chimney Sweeper. 21. The Divine Image. 22. Night. 


_ 23. Ditto. [and leaf of index begins] page 24. A dream. 
- 25. On Another’s Sorrow. 26. The Little Boy Lost. 27. 


The Little Boy Found. 

‘End of Songs of Innocence: then Begins Songs of 
Experience. [page] 28. Frontispiece of Child on the 
Shepherd’s head. 29. Title Page of Songs of Experience. 
30. Introduction—Hear the voice of the Bard, &c. 431. 


_ Earth’s Answer. 32. Nurse’s Song. 33. The Fly. 34. 


_ Laughing Song. 16,17. Cradle Song. 18. The Divine Image. _- 


The Tyger. 35. Little Girl Lost. 36. Ditto. 37. Ditto. 
38. The Clod & Pebble. 39. The Little Vagabond. 40, 
Holy Thursday. 41. A Poison Tree. 42. The Angel. 
43. The Sick Rose. 44. To Tirzah. 45. The Voice of the 
Ancient Bard. 46. My pretty Rose Tree. 47. The Garden 
of Love. 48. A Little Boy Lost. 49. Infant Sorrow. 
50. The School Boy. 51. London. 52. A Little Girl 
Lost. 53. The Chimney Sweeper. A little Black thing’ 
&c. 54. The Human Abstract,’ 

This arrangement, as the only one in which Blake is 
known to have laid down explicit instructions regarding the 
order of the songs, is followed in the present edition. 
Later issues, however, show an entirely different order, five 
copies (N,O,P,Q,R) placing the plates in identical sequence, 
and others approximating closely to the same standard. 
This later arrangement of the Songs is as follows:— 

1. General Title. 2. Frontispiece. 3. Title-pageto Songs 
of Innocence. 4. Introduction. 5. The Shepherd. 6, 7. The 
Ecchoing Green. 8. The Lamb. 9, 10. The Little Black 
Boy. 11. The Blossom. 12. The Chimney Sweeper. 13. 
The Little Boy Lost. 14. The Little Boy Found. 15. 


19. Holy Thursday. 20, 21. Night. 22, 23. Spring. 24. 


_Nurse’s Song. 25. Infant Joy. 26. A Dream. 27. On 


72 Bibhographical Preface 


Another's Sorrow. .[End of Songs of Innocence.] 28. 

Frontispiece. 29. Title-page to Songs of Experience. 30. 

Introduction. 31. Earth’s Answer. 32. The Clod and 

Pebble. 33. Holy Thursday. 34-6. The Little Girl Lost. 

The Little Girl Found. 37. The Chimney Sweeper. 38. 

Nurse’s Song. 39. The Sick Rose. 40. The Fly. 41. The 

Angel. 42. The Tyger. 43. My pretty Rose Tree. 44. 

The Garden of Love. 45. The Little Vagabond. 46. 

London. 47. The Human Abstract. 48. Infant Sorrow. 

49. A Poison Tree. 50. A Little Boy Lost. 51. A Little 

Girl Lost. 52. To Tirzah. 53. The School Boy. 54. The 

Voice of the Ancient Bard. [End of Songs of Experience.| 

‘A fairly satisfactory test of the date of a copy of the 
later issue of the Songs of Innocence and of Experience, 
printed upon one side of the leaf only, may be obtained 
by noting the positions of ‘The School Boy’ and ‘The 

Voice of the Ancient Bard.’ In earlier copies these two 

songs are included in the Songs of Innocence, as in Blake’s 

first impression printed upon recto and verso; in later 
issues both are placed among the Songs of Experience ; 
while, in two of the very last copies produced, ‘The School 

Boy’ is retained among the Songs of Experience and ‘ The 

Voice of the Ancient Bard’ is retransferred to the end of 

the Songs of Innocence. 

In Table III I give the collation of the sixteen examples 
known to me. The copies described in this and in the two 
preceding tables are: 

A. Songs of Innocence.. 31 plates, printed upon 17 leaves. 
Without pagination. No dated watermark. Printed | 
in golden brown. Simple colouring. In the original 
blue-grey paper binding. Size 73 x 51 inches. 

Sold at Sotheby’s. Now in the possession of Mrs. 
George Barclay Moffat, New York. 

B. The same. 31 plates, printed upon 17 leaves. Without 
pagination. No dated watermark. Coloured with 
predominating tone of yellow brown. Originally in 
worn-out red leather binding, now re-bound in red 
levant morocco. Size 72 x 533; inches. 

The property of Robert Hoe, Esq., New York. 

C. The same. 31 plates, printed upon 17 leaves. Without 
pagination. No dated watermark. Printed in yellow. 
Coloured very beautifully with extreme finish. Bound 
In citron morocco by Bedford. Size 6% x 5 inches. 

Flaxman’s copy, with autograph of his sister. Now 


Songs of Innocence 73 


the property of J. Pearson, Esq., Cecil House, Syden- 

ham. This was the copy used by Mr. William Muir 

in his coloured facsimile of the Songs of Innocence. 

D. The same. 31 plates, printed upon 17 leaves. Pagi- 
nated in pencil. No dated watermark. Coloured in 
green tone throughout. Bound in original mottled 

calf. Size 71x 5 inches, 

Copy presented by Blake to his physician. Sold 
at Sotheby’s, Feb.-22, 1897. Now the property of 
Robert Hoe, Esq., New York. 

E. The same. An incomplete copy forming part of a 
miscellaneous collection sold at Sotheby’s, Nov. 20, 
1900. 

F. Songs of Innocence and of Experience. 55 plates on 
32 leaves. There are duplicate impressions of ‘The 
Laughing Song,’ one being placed among the Songs 
of Experience. Paginated consecutively throughout. 
Coloured. Size 7 inches in height. Bound in green 
morocco by Bedford. 

Formerly in the possession of Mr. Butts, Blake’s 
friend. The volume was cut down by a later 
owner to meet the dimensions of an old weekly 
washing book, from the covers of which it was rescued 
by Mr. Locker-Lampson. Now in the Rowfant 
Library. 

G. Songs of Innocence. 28 plates, printed on one side of 
the leaf only. Foliated consecutively by Blake. 
| Watermarks dated 1802 and 1804. Printed in golden 
: brown. Coloured. Without border lines. Size 

64 x 442 inches. In olive green calf binding. 

Copy in the possession of Mr. Perry of Providence, 
America. Purchased in 1900 from Quaritch, who 
describes it, probably in mistake, as John Linnell’s 
copy. The error may have originated through the 
fact that a pen and ink portrait of Blake, by Linnell, 
and an autograph letter of Blake’s to the same friend 
were inserted in, though not bound up with, this copy. 
Pasted upon a fly-leaf at the end of the book is a pen 
and ink sketch by Blake, representing a woman and 
nude boy. 

H. Songs of Innocence and of Experience. 54 plates, each 


No dated watermark. Printed in sepia. Coloured. 
Bound in cloth, about 1830. 


on separate leaf. Foliated consecutively by Blake. —- 


74  Brbhographical Preface 


Copy bearing the autographs, in ink, of H. W. 
Phillips the painter, and later, in pencil, of Gerald 
Massey the poet. Now the property of Mr. Bernard 
Quaritch. 

I. Zhe same. Presumably a copy followed by Shepherd 
in Pickering’s three editions of 1866, 1868, and 1874, 
but no bibliographical details are available. The 
inclusion of ‘The School Boy’ among the Songs of 
Innocence points to the original having been rather 
an earlier than a later issue. Shepherd includes 
among the Songs of Experience the rare poem ‘A 
Divine Image,’ which he may, however, have taken 
from the posthumously printed copy in the British 
Museum Reading Room. 

K. The same. 54 plates, printed on one side of the leaf 
only. Each book is separately foliated, the general 
title-page being without foliation. The watermark 
of the Songs of Innocence is ‘Whatman 1808.’ Very 
beautifully coloured. In old calf binding circa 1830. 
Following the general title-page the Songs of Experz- 
ence, by an error of the binder, are placed before the 
Songs of Innocence. A sheet of brown paper is inserted 
between the two series, possibly part of the original 
binding. Size 5 x 74 inches. 

Copy in the possession of Mrs. John R. Wade, 
Brooklyn, New York. 

L. The same. 54 plates, printed upon one side of 
the leaf. General title-page without foliation and the 


remaining leaves numbered by Blake 1-53, in the | 


same sepia as the border lines. Watermark without 
date. Printed in greenish grey. Coloured. Bound 
in the original white vellum binding. Size 12 x 83 
inches. 

This copy, which was bought from Blake by Mr. 
John Linnell, August 27, 1819, is now in the 
possession of William Linnell, Esq. 

M. The same. 54 plates, each printed on a separate leaf. 
Foliated by Blake 1-54. Dated watermark 1818. 
Plates are printed in brown. Delicately coloured, 
with wide wash borders. Modern binding. Size 
13 x 108 inches. 

Formerly the property of Mr. R. Monckton Milnes, 
afterwards Lord Houghton, and sold at the Crewe 
sale, March 30, 1903. | 


Songs of Innocence Pe 


N. The same. 54 plates, on separate leaves. Foliated 
consecutively by Blake. Watermark 1815. Printed 
in red. Richly and elaborately coloured. Bound in 
green morocco by C. Lewis. Size 83 x 575 inches. 

A pencil note in this copy reads ‘Edwards May 
1828’ [? R. Edwards the publisher of Young’s Night 
Thoughts, 1797, illustrated by Blake]. Afterwards 
the Beckford copy, sold at the Hamilton Palace sale, 
1882, and now the ‘property of W. A. White, Esq., of 
Brooklyn, New York. This copy was used by Mr. W. 
Muir in his reproduction of the Songs of Experience, 
who considered it the best he had seen. 

O. The same. 54 plates, printed upon one side of the leaf 
only. Foliated by Blake 1-54 consecutively. Printed 
in dull orange-red, with added border lines of same 
colour. Coloured with extreme finish and beauty. 
The size of the drawing paper upon which the plates 
are printed is 103 x 83 inches. These sheets were 
originally bound in boards covered with light green 
calico. They are now mounted in a book of white 
drawing paper, 12 x 10 inches. Half-bound in morocco. 

This was the copy which T. G. Wainewright (‘ Janus 
Weathercock’) bought from Blake, probably during 
his connexion with the London Magazine 1820-3, 
or shortly afterwards. Subsequently in the library 
of James Weales, Esq., now in the possession of John 
Linnell, Esq., whose father purchased it Dec. 13, 
1842, from a Mr. White. 

P. The same. 54 plates, printed on one side of the leaf 
only. Foliated consecutively by Blake 1-54. Printed 
in reddish orange, with added border lines of same 
colour, Richly and splendidly coloured. The plates 
in this copy are printed upon pieces of drawing paper 
varying in height from 6 to 74 inches, and in width 
from 44 to 5 inches. These sheets are mounted on 
white paper 114x9 inches, and bound in boards 
covered with unglazed calico or holland of a warm 
red colour. 

This is the copy bought, through Mr. Linnell, from 
Blake by Mr. Aders in July, 1826, for the sum of five 
guineas, which was then considered to be a somewhat 
enhanced price for a coloured copy of the Songs. 
Acquired by Mr. J. Linnell from Mr. or Mrs. Aders, 
and now in the possession of James T. Linnell, Esq. 


76 Bibhographical Preface 


Q. The same. 54 plates, printed on recto only. Paginated 
consecutively by Blake in red. Watermark dated 
182- (last figure wanting). Printed in orange. Richly 
coloured and gilt. Bound in morocco circa 1830. 
Size 84 x 5% inches. 

Crabb Robinson’s copy, with MS. note: ‘This copy 
I received from Blake himself and coloured by his 
own hand, which I present with great pleasure to 
Edwin W. Field. H.C. Robinson. March 11, 1863.’ 
Crabb Robinson, as Mr. Linnell informs me, bought 
this copy in April, 1826, for the sum of five guineas, 
paid through the elder Mr. Linnell to Blake at the 
same date. Now in the possession of C. Fairfax 
Murray, Esq., to whom it was bequeathed by Sir F. W. 
Burton, who had received it from Mrs. Field as a gift 
in memory of her husband. 

R. Zhe same. 54 plates, printed upon one side of the leaf 
only. Foliated consecutively in ink 1-54. Water- 
mark dated 1825. Printed in golden brown. 
Brilliantly coloured and gilt, with added borders of 
floral tracery. Size 65 x 5% inches. -—Modern mount 
binding. ; 

Formerly the property of the artist Edward Calvert, 
Blake’s friend. Now in the possession of Mr. Perry 
of Providence, N. Y. 

S. The same. 54 plates, printed upon 52 leaves. This 
set of impressions is apparently made up from three 
different copies. Supplied from the early issue of 
the Songs of Innocence, printed upon both sides ot 
the leaf, are the second plate of ‘The Ecchoing Green’ 
printed as recto to ‘The Lamb’ (verso) and ‘The 
Chimney Sweeper’ recto with ‘ The Blossom’ verso. 
The majority of the plates, 38 in number, belong to 
a copy which, as the watermark shows, was issued 
not earlier than 1825. These, all printed in a reddish 
brown, are foliated by Blake between the outer and 
inner borders with which he surrounded the designs. 
Supplied from a third copy are twelve plates of the 
Songs of Experience, viz.: 28, 32, 33, 38, 40, 41, 42, 
43,47; 49, 50, 51. These plates, which lack the border 
lines, and are foliated in pencil, are printed ina variety 
of tints. The colouring of some of the plates is rather 
muddy, and the copy, as Rossetti points out, is a very 
poor one. In modern binding. Size 72 x 4 inches. 


Se ee ee ee ee ee, ee 


Songs of Innocence oF 


aan ak by the British Museum (Print Room) in 

1836. 

T. The same. 54 plates, printed on recto only. Foliated 
by Blake. Watermark dated 1825. The colour, 
according to Gilchrist, is not as delicately executed 
or as harmonious as some of the earlier examples. 
It was sent by Mrs. Blake, marked ‘ Blake’s own,’ to 
Dr. Jebb, Bishop of Limerick, as a return for a sum 
of twenty guineas which he had handed to her 
through Mr. Haviland Burke. In 1863 this copy 
was in the possession of the Rev. Charles Forster. 
This is the copy followed by Gilchrist and most later 
editors in the arrangement of the Sozgs. 

V. Songs of Experience only, but, as the foliation shows, 
having at one time formed part of a copy which con- 
tained the Songs of Innocence also. 25 plates, printed 
on one side of the leaf only. Foliated 30-54. No 
dated watermark. Richly coloured and gilt. Bound 
in modern English maroon morocco. Size 73x 5} 
inches. 

Now in the possession of Robert Hoe, Esq., New 
York. 

X. Songs of Innocence and of Experience. 54 plates, 
printed on recto only. Foliated in pencil. Obviously 
printed from the original plates after Blake's death. 
Ff. 1-40 and 42 printed with leaden grey ink upon 
-thick paper, some sheets of which bear the watermark 
1831. Ff. 41, 43, 44, printed in somewhat darker ink 
upon larger and thinner paper, f. 43 bearing the 
watermark 1832. Ff. 45-54 are printed in reddish 
sepia upon large thin paper. Uncoloured. In a 
modern binding, each leaf separately mounted on 
a guard. Size, larger paper 103 x 74, smaller paper 
94 x 74 inches. 

Copy in the Reading Room of the British Museum, 
purchased January 7, 1864. 

Y. The same. Under this heading I give the order of the 
Songs as they occur in the first letterpress edition 
edited by Wilkinson in 1839. This is not traceable 
to any engraved original, and may be the editor’s 
own arrangement. 

It is not probable that the whole impression of the Songs 
issued by Blake much exceeded in number the twenty-two 
copies described above. The ‘ Public,’ to whom the author 


78 Bibliographical Preface 


appeals in his Prospectus and elsewhere, had thus only the 
remotest opportunity of becoming acquainted with his 
poems save by the two or three examples quoted by Malkin 
and Cunningham?. It was not until 1839, twelve years 
after Blake’s death, that the Songs of Innocence and of 
Experience were printed for the first time in ordinary types. 
This little volume, published by Pickering and edited by 
James John Garth Wilkinson (Swedenborgian, 1812-99), 
is now itself somewhat of a bibliographical rarity, and only 
a very small edition can have been printed. The Gilchrists 
(Life, i. 124, and Dict. Nat. Biog., v. 184) speak of Wilkin- 
son’s text as ‘much altered.’ In reality his reprint compares 
not unfavourably in this respect with those of later editors, 
who make greater pretensions to literal fidelity. Wilkinson 
omits ‘The Little Vagabond, and prints the poems in an 
order which apparently is not derivable from any engraved 
authority. In 1863 the Songs were reprinted in the second 
volume of Gilchrist’s Life of Blake; the biographer states 
the poems are ‘now given in strict fidelity to the original, 
the correction of some few glaring grammatical blemishes 
alone excepted, which seemed a pious duty.’ These 
‘corrections’ are the work of Mr. D. G. Rossetti, who has 
in several instances retained Wilkinson’s alterations, and in 
others introduced new readings of his own which cannot 
always be commended. His text of ‘The Tyger’ is based 
upon the corrupt version of Cunningham, and such changes 
as ‘ta’en’ for ‘took’ in the lines— 


‘Farewell green fields and happy groves 
Where flocks have took delight’ 


take away something of the charm of the original. He 
introduces into the Songs of Experience the ‘Cradle Song’ 
taken from the MS. Book, and from the same source 
prefixes two stanzas, in themselves a complete poem, to 
‘The Garden of Love.’ A far more accurate edition of the 
Songs, together with other of Blake’s poems, was published 
by Pickering in 1866, passed into a second edition two 
years later, and was reprinted, with the Poetical Sketches, 
in 1874. The order of the songs in this edition differs from 
that of Wilkinson or Rossetti, but, while the particular 
copy from which this arrangement is borrowed has not 
been traced by me, it is most improbable that so faithful 


"In Malkin’s Father's Memoirs of His Child (1806), and Cunningham’s 
Lives of British Painters (1830). 


Songs of Innocence 79 


an editor as Mr. R. Herne Shepherd would have rearranged 

the poems in a way of his own. The Song of Experience 
with the title ‘A Divine Image’.(‘Cruelty has a Human 
Heart’) appears in Shepherd's edition for the first time, 
taken perhaps from the copy in the British Museum. The 
Aldine edition of Blake’s Poems, edited by Mr. W. M. 
Rossetti, was published in 1874, and has been frequently 
reprinted. The editor’s remarks on the last pages of his 
Prefatory Memoir may have given rise to some misconception. 
Referring to the changes introduced by Mr. D. G. Rossetti 
into the poems printed in Gilchrist’s Lzfe, he says :—‘ These 
emendations were indeed great improvements, and they 
rectify various annoying and inexcusable laxities in point 
of metre or syntax, or here and there of expression. It is 
therefore with considerable reluctance that I abandon them, 
and do Blake the disservice of again presenting him without 
their aid,’ and later :—‘ At any rate, as the compositions in 
question have been already reproduced at a date inter- 
mediate between that of my brother’s editing and of the 
present volume, and were then printed in their original 
shape (which term includes their occasional original shape- 
lessness), I have not felt justified in recurring to another 
form of the same poems, which, if better, as it assuredly is, 
is also less absolutely exact.’ This explanation hardly 
renders it sufficiently clear that Blake’s text has been 
restored only in the case of the Poetical Sketches, and that 
the Songs of Innocence and of Experience are still printed 
with Mr. D. G. Rossetti’s emendatory readings. Since 
1874 the Aldine edition appears to have been generally 
accepted as the standard text of Blake’s Poems. It is 
followed in most of the subsequent editions and selections, 
among others, with a few fresh changes, in the large 
Collected Works of William Blake edited by Messrs. Ellis 
and Yeats. A different and more accurate text is given 
by Mr. W. B. Yeats in his smaller ‘Muses’ Library’ edition 
of Blake, 


80 


Bibhographial Preface 


(qd 2) Su0g ‘prig 
aadaamg *urys 
BU0G S,osinN 
wlOsso[g 

suiids 

suds 

Cure] 

Aof ‘uy 

‘IOS ‘yJouY uQ 
(Id &) ‘wry “yooy 
ures1q 

ase ouIAIq 
pieg ‘ouy 2010, 
Aog “Id “WT 
Aog “31d “WT 
pasydays 

“Ayu 

ased-ary, 

*quoly 


ee ee 


“el 


II 
OI 
6 


° 
e 
\. 
E 


8 
L 
13) 
S 
+ 


(1d ©) 343IN 

(1d €) ‘win "yom 
é GUN STAT 
‘sinyy SoH 
weaiqg 

Suo0s ‘ysne Ty 
Aog “YS 

suds 


suds )} , 


tadeams ‘wy 
“Pa fog “WT 
ysoT fog “iT. 
‘IOS ‘yJOUY UC 
fof ‘yu 

Buos S,osinyy 
MAL IG | 

Pie =) eek 
POT TD FET 
9507 1D) or 
wosso[g 

(‘Jd &) Suos *peag 
preg ‘ouy 20100, 
Aog “HIG “HT 
Aog “AIG “IT 
pasydays 

“yu 

yuo. 
ased-aiyty 


| 


: 
j 


SLT 
‘gr 


*€1 
ZI 
rr 
*OI 


6 


‘ad *AVaT 


_ fog ‘wos ). 
ea be 
Sutids ) , 
“10g “qiouy mt * 
(yd %) Buog -peig *St 
Jodsams ‘ury9 ten 


“Wy oUTAIg 
‘Pa Aog ‘NT | wo, 
ysoT Aog "1T 
(id 2) Wy8IN ‘er 
prsydays |, 
Aof ‘yuy 
‘sinyy, A[OH 
Su0g saosin 
(14%) ‘pa 1D ‘HT 
SOT 1D ‘HT : 
uleoId 
que 
wmosso[q 
pieg ‘ouy 9910, : 
Aog “x1 “HT 


Aog “AIG “UT 
Su0g ‘ysney 


9 
Si 
(jd s) wry ‘yooq “Fh 
€ 
z 
I 


“ayUy 
o8ed-opty 
yuoly * 


3 "AVAT 


EU SOG ry 
dodaams *uny9 
(1d &) 343IN  “9r 
"pA Aog “WT Cy 
ysoT Aog "17 
queyT} ., 
wossorg | 
"PA ID UT 1 
oT 1D ae 
OTD ley 
wesiq 
fog "49S }.,, 
suds 
suds 
"10S ‘yJouY uC 
‘sinyy, AO 6 
Zu0G S,dSinN 
(Id %) urn yoo “8 
Pieg ‘ouy e010 } ., 


mop i 


Aog “IG “IT 

Aog "¥IG “WT ; 

Suo0g “ysney 

(‘jd @) Bu0g *peig 
Sof ju] 
Sarees 
“uy 
ased-ayylt, °% 
‘yuoIy ‘I 


ott HO 


‘gd “Ava 


(‘yea Jo sopis yjoq uodn poajzuig) 


“"HINFZIONNI 40 SDNOS AO SANSSI LSUIA 


1 Alavi 


a ee Ce eee 


-UY 9} JO sd10Q ayy “Li 


Aog ulg eI OuL 

Aog Hoel F337 OUL tae 
Zuo0g Zurysney 9 

Aog jooyss eyL Cr 
sutds 
surids 

MOIIOG SJ9yjouY UC 

Aepsinyy Ajo 
Bu0G S,o9SiInN 


“v1 


ey 


punog Aog 9]931T Oyu 
ysoT Aog eT oul 
soye[dz )SuoGgalpeijgy ‘II 
(sozetd Z) yySINN ‘Or 
prsydeys ey) .g 
Sof yuejuy 
Jadaams Aouuryg oy, 
aseul] sUIAIG OU], 
(saqeid 2) 
usaI5) Suloys07q oT, 
wlossolg OUT, 
eS | 


"oI 


*L 

9 

PHNOM IES - DAE UL tec 
SIGE MEVERES FOUL 

GIGS) SAGES EGE a5 

wesiqg VW 

(03991) uoyonpowquy =°E 

(0j001) o8ed-opty, *z 

(osi9A) ade1dsyuoIg °I 


Vv ‘AVAT 


Songs of Innocence 81 


TABLE Ti 


FIRST ISSUE OF.SONGS OF INNOCENCE 
AND OF EXPERIENCE 


(Printed upon both sides of leaf) 


LEAF 
1. General Title-page 
2. Frontispiece 
g- Title-page to Songs of Inno- 
cence 
Introduction 
The Shepherd 
* ( Infant Joy 
6 The Blossom 
* (The Lamb 
Laughing Song 
7: | Little Black Boy 
8 Little Black Boy 
* ( The Voice of the Ancient Bard 
The Divine Image 
9: ) The Chimney Sweeper 
to, Cradle Song (2 plates) 
tr, The Ecchoing Green (2 plates) 
On Another’s Sorrow 
* | Spring 
Spring 


12, 


_ 13+) The School Boy 


Nurse’s Song 
14 ) Holy Thursday 

The Little Boy Lost 
1S: ) The Little Boy Found 
16. Night (2 plates) 
17. A Dream 


SAMPSON 


LEAF 
I. Frontispiece to Songs of Ex- 
perience 
2. Title-page 
Introduction 
* / Earth’s Answer 
Laughing Song 
4: | The Little Girl Lost 
The Little Girl Lost 
5: | The Little Girl Found 
6 A Little Boy Lost 
* | The Chimney Sweeper 
The Tyger 
7- 1 London 
8 The Garden of Love 
* ) The Sick Rose 
Nurse’s Song 
9 The Angel 
The Little Vagabond 
10. ) The Human Abstract 
The Fly 
A Poison Tree 
ee Infant Sorrow 
* 1A Little Girl Lost 
Holy Thursday 
id 


II. 


My Pretty Rose Tree. Ah! 
Sunflower. The Lilly. 
To Tirzah 


14: ) The Clod and the Pebble 


Bibhographical Preface 


82 


1g IZ Le ee ee th 2) | PES Oye een EROS TOOUIS oS 


gz 9% 9% 6z €z OI Sa as [preg yUsIDUY 9} JO 9d1I0A ayy 
tr tr br Le €1 €x v1 62 9% Pare 8 * * punoyg fog 213rT a4 
€1 €1 €1 9% eI ZI €1 ge Sz oe oe ot, Bas aso AOg ogia ete 

Lz Le Le Se ge gz gz Iz v1 ses? a se KOLO S JOUjOUY, UO 
9% 9% 9% be Le Le Sz oe Iz seve hoa A eS eres UIE OCT: 

1% ‘oz | ee‘1e} 2 ‘oe | €e ‘ez | oz 61] og 61 | Oz 61} Le ‘gz | go ‘Le |* * * * * * * * * (sazerd &) q43IN 
gi gi gi Iz UT SAS ix Li 61 Li tg | es ea geuroulAnou TE 

ZI GI SI 0% II II eI gr 0% cncgtee Rao caleae Jodoaams AauuyD ey] 
Ir II 11 61 OI or II 9 9 ee MS eee * *  wossolg qu 

61 61 61 gi gi gi gi II gt oe trata ar oh el Seiad ee Ae DSU EAT ORY 

bz oz te Li te bz €z 91 tz Shot ET IS ti Foi 8 ees $e STOR S OS AINE 

“SIM Lr or /Lrsor | Ex {ox or Sr or ‘Stig “Grou Gr | ase ven) Or\Sr4| Ss ~ a") 1 *0e (soaeid Z) 3u0g a[pez5 Vv 

€z‘se| be ‘Ez | Ee ‘ee | br ‘Er | Ee ‘ez| Sr ‘ee | ee‘1z| o1 6 g fl Sot RAP id cig C (sozetd &) Butids 

Cr Gr Sr aI v1 $x 92 Lt €z uy eyes ‘8 ¢ * + Zu0g Zurysne Ty 

or 6 | or 6} or 6 |11‘01}] 6 ‘'g | 6g | or 6 g ‘L Sr ‘oral ese (sored ) fog YO BIT Ou 

Sz Se Sz 6 Sz Gz be br 6 ceca nce * + fof quejuy 

S Ss Ss 8 + + ¢ S 11 sos ee 2 8 8 8 8 + proydays ayy 

g 8 8 L L L 8 Cr 61 ° ° . ° . . . ° ° . ° query aul 

L‘g | L ‘9 L ‘9 9 {8 4,9 | 19 Gel Ly Je Sx sex cS sos 2 8 * * (saqeid &) user Bul0yaoq 

4 + + + € 3 + + € Coie sA2][¥A 24} UMop Zurdrg) uoyonpo.syuy 
€ € € € z z € € 3 * © gouaouuy fo sfuos 04 o8ed-o]}1], 

Z z z S I I [ez] I I . de) He PID pue s9diq) sda1ds1qu01,4 

I I I I [o] [o] I z “sym | ° * + oaged-apiy persue 

AW Roe ee Gears et ids a Pie a H 5) saLvIg 
pojeo 40g “WIS, | ,pleg “oUY jo 90104 , , pleg jueTUY Jo s0104 , 
-Tqu94}neUuy SuUryoeRy] pue , Aog “yd , Suryor| pue ,Aog [ooyss , surpnyout adUs90UU] JO Ssu0G 
Al II II I 


(Ajuo jeoy Jo apis auo uodn pejuisg) 


FINDTIXAdXYT 4O GANV FINZIONNI FO SINOS AO SANSSI AALVT 


Il. eiayv 


Sas 


| 


“BUM oS “Sim | “3am | “Sy ‘Sym =| *SAA “SUM “Sy oS | “SpA She ee hs) 6 FLAS eulT SUA wy 


Le Ly ob gh Lb LY +S gh €1 oS 9? . ee eee 9 FOUIISOY UU EY Sy, 

ie) gb gr +E gt LE LE €s gt g 1S eb “ye ts 8 8 8° Jodsemg AouuyD sy 

ove) 1g Ta. oA eS: oS 1S 2S 2S be €S Ib ot ee pee eee i | E!9 FT Vv 

es 6€ oS LY ob oF 1g Lt oz gb LY i eee oe ie ah * © Mopuo’y 

“33m | oh $s es €S €S oS ‘Syn | ym | SIA] 8A * A ee Se “ACT. FOODS OUT 

bE &b 9& 6b gh gr 6b 6b 91 bE 9& Le ee ae eNO TSOG, IUBTET 

6€ es gr 1S 6b oS gh €s br ey ob oO ee oa") ae BASOn nog ory W 

9f €S Sb Sb bb bb Lb Sb If 6§ ob oo Ne Ss Em SOOT Joris Dex) SUT, 

1b ge Lb bb &b id gb bb el sé ab oy ee ae ee Ani oy 

‘raMOoyUNG j yy ‘sey ssoy Aye1g AW 

Y ‘Sym | bb | 3am | 33m | 4S +S Sb ‘Sym | Sym | SM | SM 7 a pied {WopUY O47 Jo'sd10A OU. 

S 6b 1b 6+ ob es es be 1g Se 6b +S oe er : te AUUZtty Of, 

S es | #6 | 66 | 68 | 6¢ 6 &b oF ze | of gt sof 8 6 2 6 2 6s ag0a7 HOTS OWT 

x& ab 9f gt ab 1b 1b op a4 $1 bb LE BUM} oF ee acy Ouiy: 

Ss oS ob sé oS iS 6b Ib oS 6 2S Sb : oS ES oS ee ies OUTROS TOP) AY’ 

NI ob 62 es +E €€ €€ ob +€ II ep SE oe She Es ge eaUpsingTe AlORY 
EN “3ym | +S 1g oF Sb Sb 6€ ob or ss Lad ss 9 8 (fats = pHoqude oir OU Ta | 
NY sé 6b €€ €€ ee ce gt €€ S gt +€ sot of tf * 8 aiqqag ey3 pue pofg ayy | oy 

; ob ‘Sh | c& ‘18 | bh ‘Eb | LE ‘QE | OE SE] O€ ‘SE | LE‘oS| LE ‘of | 6r‘gr | L¥‘ov| ES ‘cS + + © (saqed 8) punoy [IIs 9719IT ONL 

Ww Sb ‘bh | 18 ‘06 | eb ‘1b | 96 SE] SE “bE| SE bE | gfSE| of SE | gr ‘Lr | gh ‘S| xs ‘1S I 380] 14D OAT OUL 

s LE &b ob op +E eb L IP oS 2 gt me ae es ae “ *  * saZhky ony 

gt Ib ob ob €€ I? &z ob 6€ Sy 22 8 BS ae Ue ae ee mee aT TOUTE 

Na) €S ob gt gt Zé 6€ 9 LE 6+ oes gel Be Ts glean 22 E = SO ORIN 

&y eé Zé 18 1€ 1€ Zé 4 €€ €€ oe ee ees Bacon Ser OARS UT Uap 

IN 1€ 1€ of of of 1€ € Ze sé “paeg 21 JO Dd10A 3Y} IvaFY “Wor oNpoajzuy 

s of of 6 6e 6z of 4 1€ 1g ans: Xs * souasodcy fo siu0g 07 a8ed-a]717, 

Y I 62 ge gz ge 6¢ I [of] of : y ‘ s * * (peay uo pytyo 


assiee sacle Ppasydeys) sda1dsyuo1g 


A| boot PS) Ey ang pied ni eae wallet lt ca eee saivig 


pays ,pleg ‘ouy jo) , preg ‘ouy jo as10, , , preg JUSIUW jo o010,A , 
-queyyneuy [ed10, , Suryoe]|pue , Aog "Yyos, Sulpnyour pue , Aog jooyas , suryory aouetiedxy Jo s8u0g 


AT III II 


SONGS 


Of 
INNOCENCE 
and Of 
EXPERIENCE 


Shewing the Two Contrary States 
of the Human Soul 


The general title-page to both series of the Songs, issued together as 
one work. This plate was probably engraved after Oct. 10, 1793, when 
Blake issued his prospectus ‘To the Public.’ 

Omitted in the editions of DGR, WMR, EY, and WBY; Shep. writes 
‘showing’ for ‘shewing.’ In notes DGR and WBY incorrectly read Songs 
of Innocence and Experience. 

In the MS. Book (p. ror) are two stanzas entitled ‘ Motto to the Songs of 
Innocence & of Experience,’ which, under the title ‘A Motto,’ W. M. 
Rossetti prefixes to the Sougs in the Aldine edition. These lines, however, 
were never engraved or published by Blake, nor are they known to occur as 
an inscription in any copy of the Songs. 


SS Onn Cus 


of 


Innocence 
1789 


The Author & Printer, W. Blake. 


eee 


The engraved title to the Songs of Innocence, when published either as 
a separate work, or in conjunction with the Songs of Experience. In the 
earlier, as well as in the later issue, this plate is printed on the recto of the 
leaf, with verso blank, facing the engraved frontispiece of the piper, which 
‘is printed on the verso of the preceding leaf (recto blank), 

Reprinted in Gilchrist (Lif, ii, end) from an electrotype of the original plate. 


SONGS OF INNOCENCE 


Introduction 


Piping down the valleys wild, I 
Piping songs of pleasant glee, 

On a cloud I saw a child, 

And he laughing said to me: 


‘Pipe a song about a Lamb!’ 5 
So I piped with merry chear. 
‘Piper, pipe that song again ;’ 
So I piped: he wept to hear. 


‘Drop thy pipe, thy happy pipe; 9 
Sing thy songs of happy chear:’ 

So I sang the same again, 

While he wept with joy to hear. 


‘Piper, sit thee down and write 13 
In a book, that all may read.’ 
So he vanish’d from my sight, 
And I pluck’d a hollow reed, 


In the first and subsequent issues of the Songs of Innocence printed on the 
recto of leaf, verso blank. This poem was first printed in ordinary type in 
Cunningham’s Lives of British Painters, ii. 150 (1830). 

rr sang] sung Cunn., Wilk., Shep., WBY. 

Thus translated, with the omission of the second and third stanzas, by 
Dr. N, H. Julius, in the Vaterlandisches Museum, Jabrg. 1811, Bd. II, Hefti:— 

‘Pfeifend ging ich durch das Thal, 
Pfeifend Lieder ohne Zahl ; 

Sah ein Kind von Luft getragen, 
Hort’ es lachelnd zu mir sagen: 


‘¢ Pfeifer, setz dich hin und schreib, 
Dass dein Lied im Sinn verbleib’.” 
So erklang’s vor meinem Ohr, 

Und ich schnitt ein hohles Rohr, 


Schnitzte eine Feder dran, 
Macht’ aus Wasser Tinte dann, 
Schrieb die Lieder hin zur Stund, 
Dass sie sing’ der Kinder Mund.’ 


Songs of Innocence 87 


And I made a rural pen, 17 
And I stain’d the water clear, 
And I wrote my happy songs 
Every child may joy to hear. 


The Ecchoing Green 


The Sun does arise, I 
And make happy the skies; 

The merry bells ring 

To welcome the Spring ; 

The sky lark and thrush, 

The birds of the bush, 

Sing louder around 

To the bells’ chearful sound, 

While our sports shall be seen 

On the Ecchoing Green. 


Old John, with white hair, II 
Does laugh away care, 

Sitting under the oak, 

Among the old folk. 

They laugh at our play, 

And soon they all say: 

‘Such, such were the joys 

When we all, girls & boys, 

In our youth time were seen 

On the Ecchoing Green.’ 


Till the little ones, weary, ar 
- No more can be merry; 

The sun does descend, 

And our sports have an end. 


This song was engraved on two plates. The first of these (to fourth line 
of second stanza) is among the remnant reprinted by Gilchrist (Lif, ii. end). 
In the first issue of the Songs of Innocence the two plates are always 
printed as recto and verso of the same leaf. 

8 bells’] No apostrophe in orig. 18 When we all, girls & boys] No 
punctuation in orig. ; When we, all girls and boys Wilk., Shep. 


Songs of Innocence 


Round the laps of their mothers 
Many sisters and brothers, 

Like birds in their nest, 

Are ready for rest, 

And sport no more seen 

On the darkening Green. 


The Lamb 


Little Lamb who made thee? I 
Dost thou know who made thee? 
Gave thee life, & bid thee feed, 
By the stream & o’er the mead; 
Gave thee clothing of delight, 
Softest clothing, wooly, bright ; 
Gave thee such a tender voice, 
Making all the vales rejoice? 
Little Lamb who made thee? 
Dost thou know who made thee? 


Little Lamb, Pll tell thee, II 
Little Lamb, I'll tell thee: 
He is calléd by thy name, 
For he calls himself a Lamb. 
He is meek, & he is mild; 
He became a little: child. 
I a child, & thou a lamb, 
We are calléd by his name. 
Little Lamb, God bless thee! 
Little Lamb, God bless thee! 


This is among the original plates reprinted by Gilchrist (Zifz, ii. end). In 
the first issue of the Songs of Innocence this plate is found as recto or verso 
to ‘The Blossom,’ or as recto to ‘ Nurse’s Song’ or ‘ Spring.’ 

3 bid] bade DGR, WMR, EY. 


Songs of Innocence 89 


The Shepherd 


How sweet is the Shepherd’s sweet lot! I 
From the morn to the evening he strays; 

He shall follow his sheep all the day, 

And his tongue shall be filléd with praise. 


For he hears the lamb’s innocent call, 5 
And he hears the ewe’s tender reply ; 

He is watchful while they are in peace, 

For they know when their Shepherd is nigh. 


In the first issue of the Songs of Innocence this plate is printed as verso to 
‘Infant Joy,’ or as recto to ‘ The Little Black Boy.’ In almost all later issues it 
follows the ‘ Introduction.’ 

5,6 lamb’s . . . ewe’s] No apostrophe in ong.; lambs’. . . ewes’ all edd. 
8 when] that Wilk., DGR. 


Infant Joy 


‘I have no name: I 
I am but two days old.’ 

What shall I call thee? 

‘I happy am, 

Joy is my name.’ 

Sweet joy befall thee! 


Pretty joy! 4 
Sweet joy, but two days old. 

Sweet joy I call thee: 

Thou dost smile, 

I sing the while, 

Sweet joy befall thee! 


In the first issue of the Songs of Innocence this plate is printed either as 


recto or verso to ‘The Shepherd,’ or as verso to ‘On Another’s Sorrow.’ 


LIBRARY ST. MARY'S COLLEGE 


ore) Songs of Innocence 


The Little Black Boy 


My mother bore me in the southern wild, I 
And I am black, but O my soul is white; 

White as an angel is the English child, 

But I am black, as if bereav’d of light. 


My mother taught me underneath a tree, 5 
And, sitting down before the heat of day, 

She took me on her lap and kissed me, 

And, pointing to the east, began to say: 


‘Look on the rising sun —there God does live, 9 
And gives his light, and gives his heat away ; 

And flowers and trees and beasts and men recieve 
Comfort in morning, joy in the noon day. 


‘And we are put on earth a little space, 13 
That we may learn to bear the beams of love; 

And these black bodies and this sun-burnt face 

Is but a cloud, and like a shady grove. 


‘For when our souls have learn’d the heat to bear, 17 
The cloud will vanish, we shall hear his voice, 

Saying: “come out from the grove, my love & care, 
And round my golden tent like lambs rejoice.”’ 


Thus did my mother say, and kisséd me; ar 
And thus I say to little English boy. : 
When I from black, and he from white cloud free, 

And round the tent of God like lambs we joy, 


I’ll shade him from the heat, till he can bear 25 
To lean in joy upon our father’s knee ; 
And then Pll stand and stroke his silver hair, 
And be like him, and he will then love me. 

Engraved on two plates of four and three stanzas respectively. In the 
earliest issue of the Songs of Innocence the former is printed as verso to 


the ‘Laughing Song’ or ‘The Shepherd,’ the latter as recto to ‘The Voice of 
the Ancient Bard.’ 


9 does} doth Muir’s facsim. tr beasts] beast Shep. 16 Is 
-.. cloud] Are... cloud al/ edd. ; Are like a cloud Swinb. p. 115. 17 
learn’d] learnt Shep. 18 cloud] clouds Wilk., Shep. 19 Wilk, 


omits out. 23-28 When I from ... will then love me] Quoted Shep. 


Songs of Innocence QI 
~ Laughing Song 


When the green woods laugh with the voice of joy, 1 
And the dimpling stream runs laughing by; 

When the air does laugh with our merry wit, 

And the green hill laughs with the noise of it; 


When the meadows laugh with lively green, 5 
And the grasshopper laughs in the merry scene, 

_ When Mary and Susan and Emily 

_ With their sweet round mouths sing ‘Ha, Ha, He!’ 


When the painted birds laugh in the shade, 9 
Where our table with cherries and nuts is spread, 
Come live, & be merry, and join with me, 

To sing the sweet chorus of ‘Ha, Ha, He!’ 


In the first issue of the Songs of Innocence this plate is generally printed 
as recto to the first plate of ‘The Little Black Boy.’ .In the Brit. Mus, Rdg. 
Rm, copy this plate is lacking. This song was first printed in ordinary 
type in Malkin’s Father's Memoirs of His Child (1806). 

6 the merry] this merry Malk, to Where] When Wilk., Shep. 
II merry] happy Wilk., Shep. 


Spring 
Sound the Flute ! I 
Now it’s mute. 
Birds delight 
Day and Night; 
Nightingale 
In the dale, 
Lark in Sky, 
Merrily, 

Merrily, Merrily, to welcome in the Year. 


Upon two plates in the engraved original. In the first issue of the Songs 
of Innocence the former is usually found as verso to ‘On Another’s Sorrow,’ 
and the latter as recto to ‘ The School Boy.’ 

2 it’s] ‘tis DGR, WMR, EY, Muir's facsim. 


92 Songs of Innocence 


Little Boy, 10 
Full of joy; 
Little Girl, 
Sweet and small; 
Cock does crow, 
So do you; 
Merry voice, 
Infant noise, 
Merrily, Merrily, to welcome in the Year. 


Little Lamb, 19 
Here I am; 
Come and lick 
My white neck ; 
Let me pull 
Your soft Wool; 
Let me kiss 
Your soft face: 
Merrily, Merrily, we welcome in the Year. 


A Cradle Song 


Sweet dreams, form a shade r 
O’er my lovely infant’s head ; 

Sweet dreams of pleasant streams 

By happy, silent, moony beams. 


Sweet sleep, with soft down 5 
Weave thy brows an infant crown. 

Sweet sleep, Angel mild, 

Hover o’er my happy child. 


Engraved on two plates of six and two stanzas respectively, which in the 
first issue of the Songs of Innocence are always printed as recto and verso 
of the same leaf. The first of the two plates is among the number reprinted 
by Gilchrist (Life, ii. end). Compare with this the ‘Cradle Song’ on p. 114 
reversed, of the MS. Book, which DGR and most editors insert among 


the Songs of Experience. The poem, however, was never engraved or 
published by Blake. 


* 
EEE EE 


Songs of Innocence 93 


Sweet smiles, in the night 9 
Hover over my delight; 

Sweet smiles, Mother’s smiles, 

All the livelong night beguiles. 


Sweet moans, dovelike sighs, 13 
Chase not slumber from thy eyes. 

Sweet moans, sweeter smiles, 

All the dovelike moans beguiles. 


Sleep, sleep, happy child, 17 
All creation slept and smil’d ; 

Sleep, sleep, happy sleep, 

While o’er thee thy mother weep. 


Sweet babe, in thy face aX 
Holy image I can trace. 

Sweet babe, once like thee, 

Thy maker lay and wept for me. 


Wept for me, for thee, for all, 25 
When he was an infant small. 

Thou his image ever see, 

Heavenly face that smiles on thee, 


Smiles on thee, on me, on all; ‘29 
Who became an infant small. 

Infant smiles are his own smiles; 

Heaven & earth to peace beguiles. 


11, 12 smiles... beguiles] smile . .. beguile Wilk.,. DGR, WMR, EY. 


14 thy] thine Wilk.. DGR, WMR, EY. I5 moans] moan DGR, WMR, 
EY. 15, 16 smiles... beguiles] smile... beguile Wilk., DGR, WMR, 
FY. 20 thy] doth DGR, WMR, EY. 31, 32 Infant... beguiles] 


‘Infant smiles, like His own smile 
Heaven and earth to peace beguile.’ 
Wilk., DGR. 


94 Songs of Innocence 


Nurse’s Song 


When the voices of children are heard on the green, 1 
And laughing is heard on the hill, 

My heart is at rest within my breast, 

And everything else is still. 


‘Then come home, my children, the sun is gone down, 5 
And the dews of night arise ; 

Come, come, leave off play, and let us away 

Till the morning appears in the skies.’ 


‘No, no, let us play, for it is yet day, 9 
And we cannot go to sleep ; 

Besides, in the sky the little birds fly, 

And the hills are all cover’d with sheep.’ 


‘Well, well, go & play till the light fades away, 13 
And then go home to bed.’ 

The little ones leaped & shoutéd & laugh’d 

And all the hills ecchoéd. 


Nurses Song ovig. Reprinted in Gilchrist (Life, ii. end) from the original 
plate. In the first issue of the Songs of Innocence this plate occurs as 
recto to ‘Holy Thursday ’ (generally) or as verso to ‘ The Lamb,’ or as recto 
to ‘The Chimney Sweeper.’ The original version of this song is found in 
the MS. known as The Island in the Moon (chap. xi):—‘ After this [‘ Holy 
Thursday’ sung by Mr. Obtuse Angle] they all sat silent for a quarter of an 
hour, and Mrs. Nannicantipol said “it puts me in mind of my [grand-]mother’s 
song: When the tongues of children are heard on the green,” efc,’ 

I voices] tongues Js/. iz Moon. 2 And... hill] And laughing upon 
the hill sbid. and rdg. (afterwards re-corrected to its earlier and present form). 
5 Then .. . down] Then come home children, the sun is down ibid. 


1st rdg. 8 DGR, WMR, EY, and WBY divide this poem into two 
eight-line stanzas. to And... sleep] And we cannot sleep till it’s 
dark Isl. in Moon tst rdg. 1r Besides... fly] The flocks are at play & 
we can’t go away ibid. 1st rdg. 12 And... sheep] And the meadows 
are cover’d with sheep zdid. 14 go] come Wilk. 15 leapéd... 
laugh’d] leap’d, and shouted, and laughed Wilk., Shep.; leaped and 
shouted and laughed WMR, EY, WBY. 16 ecchoéd] I have found in 


a library copy of Blake’s poems the joyous emendation of some youthful 
reader ; 
‘And all the hills echoéd, éd, éd!’ 


ee 


SE ne ee a 


Songs of Innocence 95 
Holy Thursday 


’Twas on a Holy Thursday, their innocent faces clean, 1 

The children walking two & two, in red & blue & green, 

Grey headed beadles walk’d before, with wands as white 
as snow, 

Till into the high dome of Paul’s they like Thames’ 
waters flow. 


O what a multitude they seem’d, these flowers of London 
town ! 5 

Seated in companies, they sit with radiance all their own. 

The hum of multitudes was there, but multitudes of 
lambs, 

Thousands of little boys & girls raising their innocent 
hands. 


Now like a mighty wind they raise to heaven the voice 


of song, 9 

Or like harmonious thunderings the seats of heaven 
among. 

Beneath them sit the aged men, wise guardians of the 
poor ; 

Then cherish pity, lest you drive an angel from your 
door. 


In the first issue of the Songs of Innocence this plate is generally printed as 
verso to ‘ Nurses Song,’ or (once) as recto to ‘ The Divine Image.’ The original 
MS. version of this song is found in The Island in the Moon (chap. xi), where 
it is sung by Mr. Obtuse Angle, The erased passages, which E and Y have 
pronounced illegible, are here given in the footnotes. This poem was first 
printed in ordinary type in Malkin’s Father's Memoirs of His Child (1806). 

zt ’Twas on a] Upon a Js/, in Moon. 2 The] Came DGR, WMR, 
EY. red] grey Js/. zn Moon. 6 Seated .. . sit] Seated in companies 
they were Wilk., DGR. 7 was] were Isl. in Moon, 8 Thousands 
.». hands] And all in order sit waiting the chief chanter’s commands Js/. in 
Moon tst rdg. deleted; Thousands of little girls & boys, etc. thid. and rdg. 
9 Now] Then Jsl, in Moon. 11 agéd] rev’rend Js/. 1 Moon, wise] 
the Js/, in Moon g-12 In Blake’s first draft (in the Island in the Moon) 
this stanza stood : — ci 

‘Then like a mighty wind they raise to heav’n the voice of song, 
Or like harmonious thunderings the seats of heav’n among, 
When the whole multitude of innocents their voices raise 

Like angels on the throne of heav'n, raising the voice of praise.’ 


96 Songs of Innocence 


Blake then deleted the entire stanza, and began :— 
‘Let cherubim and seraphim now raise their voices high.’ 


This also was cancelled, and the stanza rewritten with the slight changes 
noted above. This song is thus translated by Dr. Julius (Vaterldandisches 
Museum, Il. 1, 1811) :— 


‘Es war am griinen Donnerstag, man sadhe die Kinder ziehn, 

Sauber gewaschen, paarweis’, gekleidet in roth und in blau und in grin; 
Grauképfige Zuchtmeister mit schneeweissen Ruthen voran. 

In St. Pauls hohen Dom wie der Themse Fluthen strémen sie dann. 


‘O! wie zahllos erscheinen sie da, diese Blumen von Londons Macht ; 
Abgetheilt sitzend in Rotten, ganz in der eignen Unschuld Pracht ! 
Es ersummt wie eine Menge, doch der Lammer Menge nur allein, 
Tausend kleine Knaben und Madchen erheben ihre Handchen so rein. 


‘Jetzt wie ein Wirbelwind steigt zum Himmel Gesanges Chor 

Wie ein harmonisch Gewitter zu den Sitzen der Engel empor. 
Zwischen den Kleinen die Alten, der Armuth weiser Hort— 

Drum erbarme dich vor deiner Thir, oder du treibst einen Engel fort.’ 


The Blossom 


Merry, Merry Sparrow! I 
Under leaves so green, 

A happy Blossom 

Sees you, swift as arrow, 

Seek your cradle narrow 

Near my Bosom. 


Pretty, Pretty Robin! 
Under leaves so green, 

A happy Blossom 

Hears you sobbing, sobbing, 
Pretty, Pretty Robin, 

Near my Bosom. 


wT 


In the first issue of the Songs of Innocence this plate is found as recto or 
verso to ‘The Lamb,’ as recto to ‘ The Little Girl Lost,’ and as verso to the 
second plate of ‘ Spring.’ 

EY and WBY print as one stanza, 


Songs of Innocence 97 


The Chimney Sweeper 


When my mother died I was very young, t 
And my father sold me while yet my tongue 

Could scarcely cry ‘’weep! weep! ‘weep! ’weep!’ 

So your chimneys I sweep, & in soot I sleep. 


_ There’s little Tom Dacre, who cried when his head, 5 

That curl’d like a lamb’s back, was shav’d: so I said 
‘Hush, Tom! never mind it, for when your head’s bare 
_ You know that the soot cannot spoil your white hair.’ 


And so he was quiet, & that very night, 9 
As Tom was a sleeping, he had such a sight !— 

That thousands of sweepers, Dick, Joe, Ned & Jack, 

_ Were all of them lock’d up in coffins of black. 


And by came an Angel who had a bright key, 13 
And he open’d the coffins & set them all free; 

Then down a. green plain leaping, laughing, they run, 

_ And wash in a river, and shine in the Sun. 


Then naked & white, all their bags left behind, 17 
They rise upon clouds and sport in the wind ; 
And the Angel told Tom, if he’d be a good boy, 

He'd have God for his father, & never want joy. 


And so Tom awoke; and we rose in the dark, at 
And got with our bags & our brushes to work. 

Tho’ the morning was cold, Tom was happy & warm: 
So if all do their duty they need not fear harm. 


In the first issue of the Songs of Innocence this plate is found printed as 
‘recto or verso to ‘ The Divine Image,’ as recto to the first plate of ‘ Spring,’ or 
as verso to ‘Nurse’s Song.’ This poem was first printed in ordinary type 


in James Montgomery's Chimney-sweeper's Friend and Chmbing-boy’s Album _- 


(2824) from a copy supplied to the editor by Charles Lamb. 
3 ’weep!] No apostrophe in orig. 5 Dacre] Toddy ix J. Montgomery 
(Ch. Lamb). 


‘SAMPSON H 


98 © Songs of Innocence 


The Divine Image 


To Mercy, Pity, Peace, and Love r 
All pray in their distress ; 
And to these virtues. of delight 

Return their thankfulness. 


For Mercy, Pity, Peace, and Love 5 
Is God, our father dear, 

And Mercy, Pity, Peace, and Love 

Is Man, his child and care. 


For Mercy has a human heart, 9 
Pity a human face, . 
And Love, the human form divine, 

And Peace, the human dress. 


Then every man, of every clime, 13. 
That prays in his distress, 

Prays to the human form divine, 

Love, Mercy, Pity, Peace. 


And all must love the human form, : 1. 
In heathen, turk, or jew; 

Where Mercy, Love, & Pity dwell, 

There God is dwelling too. 


In the first issue of Songs of Innocence this plate occurs either as recto or 
verso to ‘The Chimney Sweeper,’ or as verso to ‘ Holy Thursday,’ or recto to 
‘A Dream.’ The original plate is among the number reprinted in Gilchrist’s 
Life (ii. end). This poem was first printed in ordinary type in Malkin’s 
Father's Memoirs of His Child (1806). 

. ‘The Divine Image,’ with the omission of stanza 2, has for many years 


been used as one of the hymns of the Positivist congregation in a northern 
city. 


a 


Songs of Innocence 99 


Night 


The sun descending in the west, x 
The evening star does shine; 

The birds are silent in their nest, 

And I must seek for mine. 

The moon, like a flower, 

In heaven’s high bower, 

With silent delight 

Sits and smiles on the night. 


Farewell, green fields and happy groves, 9 
Where flocks have took delight. 

Where lambs have nibbled, silent moves 

The feet of angels bright ; 

Unseen they pour blessing, 

And joy without ceasing, 

On each bud and blossom, 

And each sleeping bosom. 


They look in every thoughtless nest, 17 
Where birds are cover’d warm; 

They visit caves of every beast, 

To keep them all from harm. 

If they see any weeping 

That should have been sleeping, 

They pour sleep on their head, 

And sit down by their bed. 


Engraved upon two plates, which, in the first issue, of the Songs of 
Innocence, are always found as recto and verso of the same leaf. The poem, 
or part of a poem, on p. 105 of the MS. Book, entitled ‘Day’ and beginning 
‘The Sun arises in the East,’ may have been designed by Blake as the 
antithesis of this Song of Innocence. Da 

3 nest] nests W. Muir, 9 groves] grove DGR, WMR, EY. 10 
took] ta’en all except Shep. and WBY. Ir moves] move DGR, WMR, 
EY. 13 blessing] blessings W. Muir. 23 head] heads W. Muir. 
24 by] on Wilk. 

Ha 


100 Songs of Innocence 


When wolves and tygers howl for prey, 25 
They pitying stand and weep; 
Seeking to drive their thirst away, 
_ And keep them from the sheep. 
But if they rush dreadful, 
The angels, most heedful, 
Recieve each mild spirit, 
New worlds to inherit. 


And there the lion’s ruddy eyes 33 
Shall flow with tears of gold, 

And pitying the tender cries, 

And walking round the fold, 

Saying ‘wrath, by his meekness, 

And, by his health, sickness 

Is driven away 

From our immortal day. 


‘And now beside thee, bleating lamb, 41 
I can lie down and sleep; 

Or think on him who bore thy name, 

Graze after thee and weep. 

For, wash’d in life’s river, 

My bright mane for ever 

Shall shine like the gold 

As I guard o’er the fold.’ 


33 eyes] eye W. Muir. 36 fold] folds W. Muir. 39 Is] Are 
DGR, WMR, EY. 46 mane] name Wilk. 
A Dream 
Once a dream did weave a shade 1 


O’er my Angel-guarded bed, 
That an Emmet lost its way 
Where on grass methought I lay. 


In the first issue of the Songs of Innocence this plate is printed as recto. to. 
‘The Little Girl Lost,’ or as verso to ‘Laughing Song’ or to ‘ The Divine 
Image.’ 


Songs of Innocence IO] 


Troubled, ’wilder’d, and forlorn, 5 
Dark, benighted, travel-worn, 

Over many a tangled spray, 

All heart-broke I heard her say: 


‘O, my children! do they cry? 9 
Do they hear their father sigh? 

Now they look abroad to see: 

Now return and weep for me.’ 


Pitying, I drop’d a tear; 13 
But I saw a glow-werm near, 

Who replied: ‘What wailing wight 

Calls the watchman of the night ? 


‘I am set to light the ground, 17 
While the beetle goes his round: 

Follow now the beetle’s hum; 

Little wanderer, hie thee home.’ 


On Another’s Sorrow 


Can I see another’s woe, I 
And not be in sorrow too? 

Can I see another’s grief, 

And not seek for kind relief? 


Can I see a falling tear, 5 
And not feel my sorrow’s share? 

Can a father see his child 

Weep, nor be with sorrow fill’d? 


Can a mother sit and hear 9 
An infant groan, an infant fear? 

No, no! never can it be! 

Never, never can it be! 


In the first issue of the Songs of Innoceuce this plate is found as recto to the 
first plate of ‘Spring,’ and as recto or verso to ‘Infant Joy.’ The original 
plate is reprinted in Gilchrist’s Life (ii. end). 


102 Songs of [ntocence 


And can he who smiles on all 13 
Hear the wren with sorrows small, 

Hear the small bird’s grief & care, 

Hear the woes that infants bear, 


And not sit beside the nest, 17 
Pouring pity in their breast ; 

And not sit the cradle near, 

Weeping tear on infant’s tear; 


And not sit both night & day, 21 
Wiping all our tears away? 

O, no! never can it be! 

Never, never can it be! 


He doth give his joy to all; 25 
He becomes an infant small; 

He becomes a man of woe; 

He doth feel the sorrow too. 


Think not thou canst sigh a sigh, 2y 
And thy maker is not by; 

Think not thou canst weep a tear, 

And thy maker is not near. 


O! he gives to us his joy ) 33 
That our grief he may destroy; 

Till our grief is fled & gone 

He doth sit by us and moan. 


go by] nigh Wilk. 34 grief] griefs Wilk., DGR. 


The Little Boy ban 


‘Father! father! where are you going? I 
O, do not walk so fast. 

Speak, father, speak to your little boy, 

Or else I shall be lost.’ 


In the first issue of the Songs of Innocence this plate is always found as recto 
to ‘The Little Boy Found.’ The original draft of this poem is found in the 
Island in the Moon (chap, xi), introduced by the words ‘Then sung Quid—.’ 

‘x Father! father !] O father, father Js/. 1 Moon. 3 Speak] O speak 
Isl. in Moon, 


Songs of Innocence 103 


The night was dark, no father was there; 5 
The child was wet with dew ; 

The mire was deep, & the child did weep, 

And away the vapour flew. 


5 The... there] The night it was dark & no father was there 
Isl. in Moon, 6 The child] And the child Js/. in Moon, 


The Little Boy Found 


The little boy lost in the lonely fen, I 
Led by the wand’ring light, 

Began to cry; but God, ever nigh, 

Appear’d like his father, in white. 


He kisséd the child, & by the hand led, 5 
And to his mother brought, 

Who in sorrow pale, thro’ the lonely dale, 

Her little boy weeping sought. 


In the first issue of the Songs of Innocence this plate always occurs as 
verso to the preceding. 
8 Her] The DGR, WMR, EY. 


SONGS 
of 
EXPERIENCE 


1794 


The Author & Printer, W. Blake 


The engraved title to the Songs of Experience, when published either 
in conjunction with the Songs of Innocence or separately. The plate is 
printed on the recto of the leaf, facing the frontispiece of the Shepherd on 
the verso of the preceding leaf. 

Reprinted in Gilchrist’s Life (ii. end) from an electrotype of the original. 
plate. This title-page would appear to have been twice engraved by Blake. 
In Gilchrist’s reprint the date 1794 is omitted and the cross stroke to the 
letter fhas a downward instead of an upward curve. In some copies the 
date has evidently been inserted by hand, 


SONGS OF EXPERIENCE 


Introduction 


Hear the voice of the Bard! I 
Who Present, Past, & Future, sees ; 

Whose ears have heard 

The Holy Word 

That walk’d among the ancient trees, 


Calling the lapsed Soul, 6 
And weeping in the evening dew; 

That might controll 

The starry pole, 

And fallen fallen light renew! 


‘O Earth, O Earth, return! II 
Arise from out the dewy grass; 

Night is worn, 

And the morn 

Rises from the slumberous mass. 


‘Turn away no more; 16 
Why wilt thou turn away? 

The starry floor, 

The wat’ry shore, 

Is giv’n thee till the break of day.’ 


One engraved plate. Not found in any MS. version. Closely connected 
with this poem are ‘ The Voice of the Ancient Bard,’ by which it is immediately 
preceded in some copies of the Songs, and ‘ Earth’s Answer,’ by which it is 
followed in all copies. 


1-10] Swinb. prints as a single stanza. 4 Holy] ancient Swinb. 
5 ancient] silent Swinb. 11-20] Swinb. prints as a single stanza. 
18 floor] shore Swinb, 19 shore] floor Swinb. 20 Is] Are Swinb., 


WMR, EY. 


Songs of Experience 107 


Earth’s Answer 


Earth rais’d up her head — I 
From the darkness dread & drear. 

Her light fled, 

Stony dread! 

And her locks cover’d with grey despair. 


*Prison’d on wat’ry shore, 6 
Starry Jealousy does sere my den: 

Cold and hoar, 

Weeping o’er 

I hear the father of the ancient men. 


‘Selfish father of men! II 
Cruel, jealous, selfish fear! 


“The Earth’s Answer’ (MS. Book) first word deleted. Engraved on a 
single plate from what is obviously the original draft in the MS. Book (p. 111 
reversed), Cp. the lines immediately preceding this poem in the MS° Book, 
beginning :— 

‘Why art thou silent & invisible, 
Father of Jealousy?’ 


Cp. also the final stanza of Ahania (engraved 1795) :-— 


: ‘But now alone, over rocks, mountains, 
Cast out from thy lovely bosom 
Cruel jealousy, selfish fear, 
Self-destroying ; how can delight 
Renew in these chains of darkness 
Where bones of beasts are strown, 
On the bleak and snowy mountains 
Where bones from the birth are buried 
Before they see the light?’ 


3 Her... fled] Blake’s successive changes of this line are :-— 
Her eyes fled 
orbs dead 
light fled (pencil). 


4 Stony dread!] Punctuation as in MS. Book and engraved Songs; (Stony 
dread!) DGR; Stony, dread, WMR, EY, WBY. 6 Prison’d .. . shore] 
Prisoned on this watery shore Swinb. 7 my den:] Punctuation as in 
Wilk., Shep. ; so also in Swinb. Essay, p. 118 ; other edd. read... my den 
Cold and hoar ; to father of the] del. in MS. Bk. and replaced by some 
illegible word erased. 11-15 MS. Book cancelled. The original rime- 
arrangement ab aa b breaks down in this and the next stanza, 11 Selfish] 
Cruel MS. Book 1s#rdg. del. 12 selfish] weeping MS. Book 1s¢ rdg. del. 


108 Songs of Experience 


Can delight, 
Chain’d in night, 
The virgins of youth and morning bear? 


‘Does spring hide its joy 16 
When buds and blossoms grow ? 

Does the sower 

Sow by night, 

Or the plowman in darkness plow? 


‘Break this heavy chain 21 
That does freeze my bones around. 

Selfish! vain! 

Eternal bane! 

That free Love with bondage bound.’ 


14 Chain’d] Clog’d MS. Book rst rdg. del. 16-20 This stanza was 
an addition written in place of the third, which Blake cancelled, but re- 
stored when engraving. 16 joy] delight MS. Book ts¢ rdg. del. 
18, 19 Does... night] Does the sower sow His seed by night MS. Book 
ist rdg. del.: Can the sower sow by night Swinb. ~~ 22 freeze] close 
MS. Book rst rdg. del. 24, 25 Eternal... bound] Thou, my bane Hast 
my love with bondage bound MS. Book ist rdg. del. 


Nurse’s Song 


When the voices of children are heard on the green 
And whisp’rings are in the dale, 

The days of my youth rise fresh in my mind, 

My face turns green and pale. 


Then come home, my children, the sun is gone down, 5 
And the dews of night arise; 

Your spring & your day are wasted in play, 

And your winter and night in disguise. 


Engraved without material change from a fair copy (without title) in the 
MS. Book (p. rog reversed). 

Nurse's Song] No apostrophe in original; Nurses’ Song Wilk. 3 my] 
R! omits, rise] are MS. Book. 4 My] And my R' green] 
grave R4, 


eee ee 


ae 


Songs of Experience 109 


The Fly 


Little Fly, I 
Thy summer’s play 

My thoughtless hand 

Has brish’d away. 


Am not I 

A fly like thee? 
Or art not thou 
A man like me? 


on 


For I dance, 9 
And drink, & sing, 

Till some blind hand 

Shall brush my wing. 


Engraved on a single plate, in double columns, from what is evidently the 
first draft, without title, on p. 101 of the MS, Book. An uncompleted and 
deleted stanza shows that before hitting upon this felicitous tiny metre 
Blake began to write the song in a less sprightly strain— 


‘Woe! alas! my guilty hand 
Brush’d across thy summer joy ; 
All thy gilded painted pride 
Shatter’d, fled...’ 


He then turned to the shorter metre, preserving the ‘guilty hand’ in the 
first draft of stanza 1. Then follows a deleted stanza, omitted by him in the 
engraved version, probably because, since writing the poem, he had used 
its first two lines as one of his ‘ Proverbs of Hell’ (Marriage of Heaven and 
Fell) : 
‘The cut worm 

Forgives the plow, 

And dies in peace, 

And so do thou.’ 


Then come the second, third, and fifth stanzas in their present form, followed 
by two versions of stanza four, which is an afterthought. Blake then pre- 
fixed numbers to the stanzas indicating their present order. A few trifling 
deviations from the engraved text are given in the footnotes. 


2 summer’s] summer MS. Book. 3 thoughtless] guilty MS. Book rs¢_ 


rag. del. 8 A pictorial representation of the same idea occurs in The 
Gates of Paradise (engraved 1793, from the original pencil sketches in the 
MS. Book), in which a youth, hat in hand, chases a butterfly of human shape, 
while another, which he has just struck down, lies crushed at his feet, 
Below is the inscription ‘Alas!’ Cp. also Milton, f. 18,1. 27-30. 


‘ 


110 Songs of Experience 


If thought is life 13 
And strength & breath, 

And the want 

Of thought is death ; 


Then am I 57 
A happy fly, 

If I live 

Or if I die. 


13-16 If... death] 
‘Thought is life 
And strength & breath; 
But the want 
Of thought is death.’ 
MS. Book rst rdg. del. 


The Tyger 


Tyger! Tyger! burning bright I 
In the forests of the night, 

What immortal hand or eye 

Could frame thy fearful symmetry? 


In what distant deeps or skies 5 
Burnt the fire of thine eyes? 

On what wings dare he aspire? 

What the hand dare sieze the fire? 


Engraved on a single plate from the first draft of the poem on pp. 109, 108 
(reversed) of the MS. Book. The MS. readings, too numerous to be readily 
intelligible in footnotes, are given in full in the appended note on the different 
versions of ‘The Tyger.’ This poem was first printed in ordinary type in 
Malkin’s Father's Memoirs (1806), p. xxxix, from a copy probably supplied by 
Blake himself, which exhibits an important variant reading of the last line 
of the third stanza. An early corrupt version also appeared in Cunningham’s 
Lives of the British Painters (1830), ii. 144. 

2 forests] forest Malk., Cunn., R!; Thro’ the desarts Chas. Lamb (quoting 


from memory, in a letter to Bernard Barton, May 15, 1824). 4 Could 
frame] Framed Cunn., DGR, WMR (end version). 6 Burnt] Burned 
Cunn., DGR., WMR (end version) ; burn’d Wilk. the] that DGR, 


WMR (end version). fire] fervour Cunn., R}. of] within DGR, WMR 
(and version). 4, 8 dare] dared DGR, WMR (and version).. 


a 


eS ae ee 


a 


Songs of Experience ITT 


And what shoulder, & what art, 9 
Could twist the sinews of thy heart? 

And when thy heart began to beat, 

What dread hand? & what dread feet? 


What the hammer? what the chain? 13 
In what furnace was thy brain? 

What the anvil? what dread grasp 

Dare its deadly terrors clasp? 


When the stars threw down their spears, 17 
And water’d heaven with their tears, 

Did he smile his work to see? 

Did he who made the Lamb make thee? 


Tyger! Tyger! burning bright 21 
In the forests of the night, 

What immortal hand or eye, 

Dare frame thy fearful symmetry ? 


to thy] thine Wilk. rr And... heart] When thy heart, Malk., 
Cunn., DGR, WMR (and version). 12 What... feet ?] What dread hand 
forged thy dread feet? Malk.; What dread hand formed thy dread feet ? 
Cunn., DGR, WMR (and version) ; What dread hand and what dread feet 
WMR, EY, WBY; What dread hand framed thy dread feet? Swinb. 
See also editor’s note to this poem. 13, 14 What... brain] What the 
hammer ! what the chain! Formed thy strength and forged thy brain ? Cunn., 
R1?; What the hammer, what the chain, Knit thy strength and forged 
thy brain? DGR, WMR (and version). 16 Dare] Dared Malk., Cunn., 
DGR, WMR (and version). its] thy Cunn., DGR, WMR (end version), 
17 spears] spheres Cunn., R’. 18 water’d] watered Malk,, Wilk., WMR, 
EY, WBY; sprinkled Cunn. their] shining Cunn. 21-24 This 
stanza is omitted by Cunn., DGR and WMR (and version). 


NOTE ON ‘THE TYGER.’ 


The original draft of ‘The Tyger,’ written upon two opposite pages 
(pp. 109, 108 reversed) of the MS. Book, enables us to follow every step in 
the composition of the poem. On the left page is found the first rough draft 
of stanzas 1, 2, 3, 4, and 6, In stanza 3 the manuscript version throws light 
upon a verse which has proved a crux to many of Blake’s readers and 
commentators. It will be seen that Blake at first intended the line— 


‘What dread hand and what dread feet’ 
merely -as the beginning of a sentence running on into the next stanza. 
Unable to complete this stanza to his satisfaction he cancelled it altogether, 
leaving the precéding line as it stood. This, of course, did not escape his 


112 Songs of Experience 


notice when engraving the poem for the Songs of Experience, and by 
a change of punctuation he converted the unfinished passage into its present 
shape— 

‘What dread hand? & what dread feet? 
a line exactly parallel in form to— 

‘What the hammer? what the chain?’ 


of the following stanza. The terrible, compressed force of these two short 
sentences, which burst forth with a momentary pause between them like 
shells from a mortar, is altogether lost in the languid punctuation of the 
Aldine edition— 

‘And, when thy heart began to beat, 

What dread hand and what dread feet?’ 


and it is only the failure of critics to observe the significance of the revised 
pointing of the engraved version which caused Swinburne to speak of this 
passage as a‘ rock of offence,’ or Mr. Yeats to remark that when engraving 
the poem Blake ‘forgot to alter the last line of the third stanza.’ At a later 
date, in the version which there is no reason to doubt was supplied by the 
author to Dr. Malkin, Blake again remodelled this line into the slow and 
solemn form— ' 
‘What dread hand forged thy dread feet ?” 


where the gain in definiteness and technical accuracy is at the sacrifice 
of much of the fiery energy and vague suggestion of terror conveyed by the 
earlier text. It is probably with an imperfect remembrance of this final 
emendation of Blake’s, misled by the spurious version of Gilchrist, that 
Swinburne (Critical Essay, p. 120) refers to ‘the recovery of that nobler 
reading— 
‘What dread hand framed thy dread feet?’ 

a variant for which there is no printed or manuscript authority. The word 
‘frame’ moreover had already been used in the first stanza. 

On the opposite page of the MS. Book is the first draft of the fifth stanza, 
the composition of which Mr. W. A, White, the present owner of the MS. 
Book, thus explains to me in a letter :— 

‘T think that [Blake] wrote first ‘‘ What the shoulder? Whatthe knee ?”’ 
and then, seeing that he had used the word ‘‘shoulder” before, he struck 
it out and inserted the word over it, which seems to be “ ankle,” but is not 
very clearly written. 

‘Then I think the glorious line occurred to him, ‘‘ Did He who made the 
lamb make thee ?’’ Probably after that he erased the line above, and wrote 
above it ‘‘ And did He laugh His work to see ?”’ and then added the two lines 
about the stars. Then Blake re-arranged the order of the lines in the 
stanza, and numbered them in order to make this order clear; and also at 
the same time numbered the stanzas, making this the fifth. I think that he 
struck out the number ‘‘3” in front of the first line of this stanza by 
accident, meaning to erase the first word ‘‘ And,’”?’ 

Above the fifth stanza, though probably written after it, is a revised 
version of stanza 2, which differs from that finally adopted. The difficult 
line— 

‘Could heart descend, or wings aspire 2’ 


Songs of Experience 113 


has been interpreted by Swinburne : ‘Could God bring down his heart to 
the making of a thing so deadly and strong? Or could any lesser daemonic 
force of nature take to itself wings and fly high enough to assume power 
equal to such a creation? Could spiritual force so far descend, or material 
force so far aspire ?’ 

Upon the same page, to the right of these two stanzas, follows a fair copy 
of stanzas I, 3, 5, and 6, which, except for unimportant differences of 
capitalization, and the readings ‘ dare frame’ for ‘could frame’ in the first, 
and ‘hand and eye’ for ‘hand or eye’ in the first and last stanzas, is 
identical with the text of the engraved Songs. 

The following is a faithful transcript of the original draft of ‘The Tyger’ 
in the MS. Book, Blake’s variant readings being indicated typographically 
by placing them in consecutive order, one below another, deleted words or 
lines being printed in italics. The manuscript itself is unpunctuated 
throughout. It will be seen that this version differs in important details 
from that given by Messrs. Ellis and Yeats (iii. pp. 91, 92), which not only 
fails to make clear the sequence of Blake’s alterations, but contains such 
inexplicable misreadings as ‘filch’ for ‘fetch,? ‘horn’d’ for ‘horrid,’ 
‘inspire’ for ‘aspire,’ and ‘ did’ for ‘dare’—errors repeated in Mr, Yeats’ 
‘Muses’ Library’ edition of Blake (notes, pp. 238, 239). 


LHe TY Ga. 


1. Tyger, Tyger, burning bright 
In the forests of the night, 
What immortal hand & eye 
or 
Could frame thy fearful symmetry ? 
Dare 


2. In what distant deeps or skies 
Burnt in 
Burnt the fire of thine eyes? 
The cruel 
On what wings dare he aspire? 
What the hand dare sieze the fire? 


3g. And what shoulder, & what art 
Could twist the sinews of thy heart? 
And when thy heart began to beat 
What dread hand & what dread feet 


Could fetch it from the furnace deep, 
And in thy horrid ribs dare steep? 
In the well of sanguine woe— 

In what clay & in what mould 
Were thy eyes of fury rolfd? 


4, What the hammer? what the chain ? 
Where where 
In what furnace was thy brain? 


*+ SAMPSON I 


114 Songs of L:xperience 


What the anvil? what the arm 
arm 
grasp 
clasp 

dread grasp 

Could its deadly terrors clasp? 

Dare grasp? 

clasp ? 


6. Tyger, Tyger, burning bright 
In the forests of the night, 
What immortal hand & eye 
Dare form thy fearful symmetry ? 
frame 


[On the opposite page| 
Burnt in distant deeps or skies 
The cruel fire of thine eyes ? 


Could heart descend, or wings aspire? 
What the hand dare sieze the fire? 


5. jg. And did he laugh his work to see? 
dare he smile 


laugh 
What the shoulder? what the knee ? 
ankle ? 
4. Did he who made the lamb make thee? 


Dare 
1, When the stars threw down their spears, 
2. And water’d heaven with their tears. 


A few words must be added with regard to the so-called ‘ second version’ 
of ‘The Tyger’ in the Aldine edition, and thence reprinted by later editors 
under such headings as ‘a later MS. version’ and the like. This, Mr. W. M. 
Rossetti explains in a footnote, is ‘the version which figures in Mr. Gilchrist’s 
book,’ adding that it ‘shows certain variations on MS. authority.’ What 
MS., as Mr. Yeats complains, is not stated, and as there is obviously no 
warrant for these readings in the MS. Book, he assumes that they owe 
their origin to changes introduced into the text by D. G. Rossetti. The 
version given by the latter, however, as he himself states in a note prefixed 
to his first transcript (R1), is based upon that printed by Cunningham in his 
Lives of British Painters (1830, ii, 144), where the last three stanzas run :— 


‘And what shoulder and what art 

Could twist the sinews of thy heart? 
When thy heart began to beat 

What dread hand formed thy dread feet? 


‘What the hammer! what the chain! 
Formed thy strength and forged thy brain? 
What the anvil! What dread grasp 
Dared its deadly terrors clasp? 


Songs of Experience ris 


‘When the stars threw down their spheres, 
And sprinkled heaven with shining tears, 
Did he smile, his work to see? 

Did he who made the lamb make thee ?’ 


A comparison of the versions of the other poems and passages quoted by 
Cunningham with their originals in the Poetical Sketches shows that 
unauthorized readings are introduced into almost every line, and it is plain 
that Cunningham treated Blake’s text with the same freedom which he 
would have thought himself entitled to use in an old Scots ballad. No 
manuscript authority of Blake’s can therefore be claimed for this version. 
The interest attaching to everything relating to this poem, called by 
Swinburne ‘the most famous of Blake’s lyrics,’ may be thought sufficient 
excuse for adding to the length of this note by reprinting Dr. Julius’s 
German translation of ‘The Tyger’ from the Vaterlandisches Museum, Bd. 
II, Heft i, (Hamburg, 1806). This spirited and admirably literal rendering 
appeared, it will be noticed, at a time when Blake’s Songs were almost 
unknown to his own countrymen. 


‘DER TIGER. 


‘Tiger, Tiger, Flammenpracht 

In den WaAldern distrer Nacht! 
Sprich, welch Gottes Aug’ und Hand 
Dich so furchtbar schén verband ? 


- ‘Stammt vom Himmel, aus der Holl’, 
Dir der Augen Feuerquell’? 
Welche Fliigel tragst du kihn ? 
Wer wagt wohl, zu nah’n dem Glih’n? 


‘Welche Starke, welche Kunst, 
Wob so sinnreich Herzensbrunst ? 
Als dein Herz den Puls empfand, 
Welch ein Fuss und welche Hand? 


‘Was ist Hammer, Kettenklirr’n? 
Welche Esse schmolz dein Hirn? 
Was ist Amboss? Welcher Held 
Muth in deinem Arm behalt ? 


‘Aus den Sternen flog der Speer, 
Thranend ward der Himmel Meer; 
Schaut’ er lachelnd da auf dich? 
Der das Lamm schuf, schuf er dich? 


‘Tiger, Tiger, Flammenpracht 

In den WaAldern distrer Nacht! 
Sprich, wess Gottes Aug’ und Hand 
Dich so furchtbar schén verband??’ 


12 


116 Songs of Experience 
The Little Girl Lost 


In futurity I 
I prophetic see 

That the earth from sleep 

(Grave the sentence deep) 


Shall arise and seek 5 
For her maker meek ; 

And the desart wild 

Become a garden mild. 


In the southern clime, 9 
Where the summer’s prime 

Never fades away, 

Lovely Lyca lay. 


Seven summers old 13 
Lovely Lyca told; 

She had wander’d long 

Hearing wild birds’ song. 


‘Sweet sleep, come to me 17 
Underneath this tree. 

Do father, mother, weep? 

Where can Lyca sleep? 


‘Lost in desart wild ar 
Is your little child. 

How can Lyca sleep 

If her mother weep? 


‘If her heart does ake 25 
Then let Lyca wake; 

“If my mother sleep, 

Lyca shall not weep. 


This song, and its sequel ‘The Little Girl Found,’ are engraved upon 
three plates, the first of which contains the first ten stanzas of the present 
poem, and the second the conclusion of the same with the first three stanzas 
and half of the fourth of the next song. The first and last plates are among 
the number reprinted from the originals by Gilchrist. No manuscript 
versions of these songs are known to exist. 

21...see]I prophesy WBY. 17-32 Wilk. and Shep. omit quotation 


marks. 


Songs of Experience 


‘Frowning, frowning night, 
O’er this desart bright, 
Let thy moon arise 
While I close my eyes.’ 


Sleeping Lyca lay 
While the beasts of prey, 
Come from caverns deep, 
View'd the maid asleep. 


The kingly lion stood, 
And the virgin view’d, 
Then he gambol’d round 
O’er the hallow’d ground. 


Leopards, tygers, play 
Round her as she lay, 
While the lion old 
Bow’d his mane of gold. 


And her bosom lick, 
And upon her neck 
From his eyes of flame 
Ruby tears there came; 


While the lioness 
Loos’d her slender dress, 
And naked they convey’d 


To caves the sleeping maid. 


TE7 


a9 


33 


41 


45 


49 


45 And... lick] And her breast did lick DGR, WMR, EY, Muir's facsiue. 


(Songs of In.) 


The Little Girl Found 


All the night in woe 
Lyca’s parents go 

Over vallies deep, 
While the desarts weep. 


See note to ‘ The Little Girl Lost.’ 


118 


22 sorrow] sorrows DGR. 


Songs of Experience 


Tired and woe-begone, 
Hoarse with making moan, 
Arm in arm seven days 
They trac’d the desart ways. 


Seven nights they sleep 
Among shadows deep, 


And dream they see their child 


Starv’d in desart wild. 


Pale, thro’ pathless ways 
The fancied image strays 
Famish’d, weeping, weak, 
With hollow piteous shriek. 


Rising from unrest, 

The trembling woman prest 
With feet of weary woe: 
She could no further go. 


In his arms he bore 
Her, arm’d with sorrow sore; 
Till before their way 
A couching lion lay. 


Turning back was vain: 
Soon his heavy mane 
Bore them to the ground. 
Then he stalk’d around, 


Smelling to his prey ; 

But their fears allay 

When he licks their hands, 
And silent by them stands. 


They look upon his eyes 
Fill’d with deep surprise ; 
And wondering behold 
A spirit arm’d in gold. 


26 his] the Wilk. 


13 


2I 


29 


33 


Songs of Experience 119 


On his head a crown; 37 
On his shoulders down 
Flow’d his golden hair. 
Gone was all their care. 


‘Follow me,’ he said, 41 
‘Weep not for the maid; 

In my palace deep 

Lyca lies asleep.’ 


Then they followéd, 45 
Where the vision led, 

And saw their sleeping child 

Among tygers wild. 


To this day they dwell 49 
In a lonely dell; 

Nor fear the wolvish howl 

Nor the lions’ growl. 


38 shoulders] shoulder Wilk, 52 lions’] lions orig,; lion’s all edd. 


The Clod and the Pebble 


‘Love seeketh not Itself to please, i 
Nor for itself hath any care, 

But for another gives its ease, 

And builds a Heaven in Hell’s despair.’ 


So sung a little Clod of Clay, 5 
Trodden with the cattle’s feet, 

But a Pebble of the brook 

Warbled out these metres meet: 


Engraved on a single plate from the fair copy on p. 115 (reversed) of the 
MS. Book. Without title in the MS. 

3 another] another's R'. 4 in] to R4. 5 sung] sang MS. Book, 
DGR, WMR, EY. 7 brook] wood Rt. 


120 Songs of Experience 


‘Love seeketh only Self to please, 9 
To bind another to Its delight, 

Joys in another's loss of ease, 

And builds a Hell in Heaven’s despite.’ 


9-12 Cp. Visions of the Daughters of Albion (engraved 1793) f. 10: ‘Can 
that be Love, that drinks another as a sponge drinks Water.?’ 9 Self] 
Self DGR, WMR, EY. to bind] bend R'. 


The Little Vagabond 


Dear Mother, dear Mother, the Church is cold, I 
But the Ale-house is healthy & pleasant & warm; 
Besides I can tell where I am used well, 

Such usage in heaven will never do well. 


But if at the Church they would give us some Ale, 5 
And a pleasant fire our souls to regale, 

We'd sing and we'd pray all the live-long day, 

Nor ever once wish from the Church to stray. 


Then the Parson might preach, & drink, & sing, 9 
And we'd be as happy as birds in the spring ; 

And modest dame Lurch, who is always at Church, 
Would not have bandy children, nor fasting, nor birch. 


And God, like a father, rejoicing to see 13 
His children as pleasant and happy as he, 

Would have no more quarrel with the Devil or the Barrel, 
But kiss him, & give him both drink and apparel. 


Engraved on a single plate from the version in pencil, MS. Book (p. 105 
reversed) entitled ‘The little pretty Vagabond’ [‘ pretty’ del.]. This poem is 
omitted in Wilkinson’s edition of the Songs. 

4 Such... well] Such usage in heaven makes all go to hell MS. Book rs¢ 
rdg. del; The poor parsons with wind like a blown bladder swell MS. 
Book and rdg., DGR, WMR, EY. 13 rejoicing to see] that joys for 
to see MS. Book 1st rdg. del. 16 But... apparel] But shake hands 
& kiss him & there’d be no more hell MS. Book rst rdg. del. and R'; But 
ee him & give him both food [del. changed to ‘ drink’] & apparel MS. Book 
and rdg. 


Songs of Experience Tot 
Holy Thursday 


Is this a holy thing to see 1 
In a rich and fruitful land, 

Babes reduc’d to misery, 

Fed with cold and usurous hand? 


Is that trembling cry a song? 5 
Can it be a song of joy? 

And so many children poor? 

It is a land of poverty! 


. And their sun does never shine, 9 
And their fields are bleak & bare, 
And their ways are fill’d with thorns: 
It is eternal winter there. 


For where-e’er the sun does shine, 13 
And where-e’er the rain does fall, 

Babe can never hunger there, 

Nor poverty the mind appall. 


Engraved on a single plate from the fair copy on p. 103 (reversed) of the 
MS. Book. This plate is reprinted from an electrotype of the original in 
Gilchrist’s Life (ii. end). 

4 Fed... hand] Fed with a cold usurious hand DGR. 7 ANG ..\- 
poor] And so great a number poor MS. Book. 8, 12 It is}’Tis MS. 
Book. 13 For] But MS. Book. 15 Babe] Babes Wilk., DGR, WMR, 
EY. can] should DGR, WMR, EY. 


A Poison ‘Tree 


I was angry with my friend: 1 
I told my wrath, my wrath did end. 

I was angry with my foe: 

I told it not, my wrath did grow. 


Engraved on asingle plate from the copy in the MS. Book (p. 114 reversed). 
The title, ‘Christian Forbearance,’ of the MS. (written later in pencil) has 
been adopted by DGR, WMR, and EY, in preference to that in the 
engraved version. 

4 A line drawn below this stanza in the MS. Book shows that Blake 
originally intended the poem to end at this point. 


122 Songs of Experience 


And I water’d it in fears, 5 
Night & morning with my tears ; 

And I sunnéd it with smiles, 

And with soft deceitful wiles. 


And it grew both day and night, 9 
Till it bore an apple bright ; 

And my foe beheld it shine, 

And he knew that it was mine, 


And into my garden stole 13 
When the night had veil’d the pole: 

In the morning glad I see 

My foe outstretch’d beneath the tree. 


9 both] by MS. Book. 1r And ... shine] And I gave it to my 
foe MS. Book ist rdg. del. 


The Angel 


I Dreamt a Dream! what can it mean? I 
And that I was a maiden Queen, 

Guarded by an Angel mild: 

Witless woe was ne’er beguil’d! 


And I wept both night and day, 5 
And he wip’d my tears away, 

And I wept both day and night, 

And hid from him my heart’s delight. 


So he took his wings and fled; 9 
Then the morn blush’d rosy red; 

I dried my tears, & arm’d my fears 

With ten thousand shields and spears. 


Engraved on a single plate, from the fair copy, written in pencil, on p. 103 
(reversed) of the MS. Book. The title written later. The original coloured 
design of this plate is found on p. 65 of the MS, Book. 


Songs of Experience 123 


Soon my Angel came again: 13 
I was arm’d, he came in vain; 

For the time of youth was fled, 

And grey hairs were on my head. 


15, 16 For... head] The same lines, with the change of ‘were’ to ‘are,’ 
are used by Blake as the final couplets to ‘Infant Sorrow’ (MS. Book x’, 
and the first version of ‘Ina Mirtle Shade’ (MS. Book xiii), ~ 15 For] 
But MS. Book rst rdg. del. 


The Sick Rose 


O Rose, thou art sick! I 
The invisible worm, 

That flies in the night, 

In the howling storm, 


Has found out thy bed 5 
Of crimson joy; 

And his dark secret love 

Does thy life destroy. 


Engraved from the copy in the MS. Book (p. 107 reversed). The original 
coloured design is found on p. ar of the MS. Book. It differs considerably 
from the engraved illustration, Instead of the worm preying upon the heart 
of the rose there is a youth prostrate on the ground, as if in regret at seeing 
the spirit of the rose, symbolized by a female figure, take flight. 

5 Has] Hath MS. Book. q, 8 And... destroy] A dark-secret love 
Doth life destroy MS. Book tst rdg. del. — 7 his] her MS, Book, above 
an erased and illegible word. 


To Tirzah 


Whate’er is Born of Mortal Birth I 
Must be consuméd with the Earth, 

To rise from Generation free: 

Then what have I to do with thee? 


Not in MS. Book. Engraved on a single plate. On the robe of one of 
the figures in the design at the foot of the page is written ‘It is Raised a 
Spiritual Body.’ Shepherd prints this; the rest omit. 

By the name Tirzah, taken from Canticles vi. 4, Blake personifies Natural 
Religion. In Jerusalem and Milton, passim, Tirzah, generally associated 
with Rahab, or Moral Law, is represented as a bright and beautiful being, 


124 Songs of Experience 


The Sexes sprung from Shame & Pride 5 
Blow’d in the morn; in evening died ; 

But Mercy chang’d Death into Sleep; 

The Sexes rose to work & weep. 


Thou Mother of my Mortal part 9 
With cruelty didst mould my Heart, 

And with false self-decieving tears 

Didst bind my Nostrils, Eyes, & Ears; 


Didst close my Tongue in senseless clay, 13 
And me to Mortal Life betray : 

The Death of Jesus set me free: 

Then what have I to do with thee? 


preying upon and pitying her victims, and perverting the mild influences of 
the lovely Enitharman, or Space: cp. Milton, f. 20, ll. 41-45 :— 
‘Rahab created Voltaire: Tirzah created Rousseau, 
Asserting the Self-righteousness against the Universal Saviour, 
Mocking the Confessors & Martyrs, claiming Self-righteousness 
With cruel Virtue, making War upon the Lambs Redeemed 
To perpetuate War & Glory, to perpetuate the Laws of Sin.’ 


Cf. also Swinburne, Essay, p. 122: ‘‘‘Tirzah,” in his mythology, re- 
presents the mere separate and human nature, mother of the perishing body 
and daughter of the ‘ religion,’’ which occupies itself with laying down laws 
for the flesh; which, while pretending (and that in all good faith) to despise 
the body and bring it into subjection as with control of bit and bridle, does 
implicitly overrate its power upon the soul for evil or good, and thus falls 
foul of fact on all sides by assuming that spirit and flesh are twain, and that 
things pleasant and good for the one can properly be loathsome or poisonous 
to the other.’ 

5 sprung] sprang DGR, WMR, EY. 6 Blow’d] Blown DGR, WMR, 
EY. 11 tears] fears Swinb. 12 bind] blind WBY. 


The Voice of the Ancient Bard 


Youth of delight, come hither, I 

And see the opening morn, 

Image of truth new-born. 

Doubt is fled, & clouds of reason, 

Dark disputes & artful teazing. 5 
Not in the MS. Book. This poem is generally found as one of the 


Songs of Innocence, though sometimes placed by Blake among the Songs of 
Experience. In all the early issues of the former it occurs as verso to ‘The 


Songs of Experience 125 


Folly is an endless maze, 

Tangled roots perplex her ways. 

How many have fallen there! 

They stumble all night over bones of the dead, 

And feel they know not what but care, +f) 
And wish to lead others, when they should be led. 


Little Black Boy,’ while in the latest issues it is commonly placed last, 
forming a connecting link with the Introduction to the Songs of Experience. 
See editor’s Bibliographical Preface to the Songs. 

9 stumble] tumble Muir's facsimile (Songs of Experience). to And... 
care] And feel—they know not what but care Wilk., WMR, EY, WBY : 
And feel—they know not what save care DGR. 11 when] where Muir’s 
Sacsimiles. 


My Pretty Rose Tree 


A flower was offer’d to me, I 
Such a flower as May never bore; 

But I said ‘I’ve a Pretty Rose-tree,’ 

And I passéd the sweet flower o’er. 


Then I went to my Pretty Rose-tree, 5 
To tend her by day and by night, 

But my Rose turn’d away with jealousy, 

And her thorns were my only delight. 


The first poem in the MS. Book (on p. 115 reversed). Without title in the 
original draft. This and the two following songs are engraved upon a single 
plate, reprinted in Gilchrist’s Life (ii, end). 

4 passéd] DGR, Shepherd and other editors ruin the melody of this line 
by reading ‘passed’ or ‘pass’d’ for ‘passéd” It was Blake’s almost 
invariable practice, not only in manuscript but in engraved poems, to omit 
the e of the final ed in the preterite or participial termination, where he did 
not intend it to be pronounced as a separate syllable. The only exception 
to this rule is in the case of words where the omission of the e might 
possibly lead to confusion with another word, e.g. ‘pined’ not ‘pin’d.’ 
6 To... by night] In the silence of the night MS. Book rst rdg. del. her] 
it MS. Book and rdg. R}. by night] R? omits by. 7 turn’d] turned 
all except Shep.: turn’d... jealousy] was turnéd from me MS. Book 1s¢ 
rdg. del. and replaced by was filléd with Jealousy. 8 Blake’s first version 
of this stanza seems to me preferable to that of the engraved Songs :-— 

‘Then I went to my pretty rose tree 
In the silence of the night; 

But my rose was turnéd from me, 
And her thorns were my only delight.’ 


126 Songs of Experience 
Ah! Sun Flower 


Ah, Sun-flower! weary of time, I 
Who countest the steps of the Sun; 

Seeking after that sweet golden clime, 

Where the traveller’s journey is done; 


Where the Youth pined away with desire, 5 


And the pale Virgin shrouded in snow, 
Arise from their graves, and aspire 
Where my Sun-flower wishes to go. 


Not in the MS. Book. Engraved on the same plate as the preceding 
and following song. 
3 clime] prime DGR. 


The Lilly 


The modest Rose puts forth a thorn, I 
The humble Sheep a threat’ning horn ; 

While the Lilly white shall in Love delight, 

Nor a thorn, nor a threat, stain her beauty bright. 


Engraved on the same plate as the two preceding songs, from the first 
rough draft without title on p. 109 (reversed) of the MS. Book. In its 
present form this beautiful little poem might more fitly rank as a Song of 
Innocence than a Song of Experience; but the first draft, with its successive 
alterations as seen in the MS. Book, shows that Blake originally conceived 
it in its ‘contrary state.’ Beginning by writing— 

‘The rose puts envious...’ 
he felt that ‘envious’ did not express his full meaning, and deleted the last 
three words, writing above them ‘lustful rose,’ and finishing the line with 
the words ‘ puts forth a thorn.’ He then went on— 
‘The coward sheep a threat’ning horn; 
While the lilly white shall in love delight, 
And the lion increase freedom & peace.’ 
at which point he drew a line under the poem to show that it was finished. 
On a subsequent reading he deleted the last line, substituting for it— 
‘The priest loves war, & the soldier peace,’ 
but here, perceiving that his rime had disappeared, he cancelled this line 
also, and gave the poem an entirely different turn by changing the word 
‘lustful’ to ‘ modest,’ and ‘coward’ to ‘humble,’ and completing the quatrain 
(as in the engraved version) by a fourth line simply explanatory of the first 
three, 


Songs of Experience 127 
The Garden of Love 


I went to the Garden of Love, I 
And saw what I never had seen: 

A Chapel was built in the midst, 

Where I used to play on the green. 


And the gates of this Chapel were shut, 5 
And ‘Thou shalt not’ writ over the door ; 

So I turn’d to the Garden of Love 

That so many sweet flowers bore; 


And I saw it was filléd with graves, 9 
And tomb-stones where flowers should be: 

_.And Priests in black gowns were walking their rounds, 
And binding with briars my joys & desires. 


Engraved on a single plate from the fair transcript on the first page (p. 115 
reversed) of the MS. Book. Without title in the MS. 

DGR followed by WMR and EY prefix as the first two stanzas of this 
poem the lines beginning — 

‘I laid me down upon a bank 
Where Love lay sleeping...’ 

There is no authority for this in the engraved version, and Rossetti was 
evidently misled by the immediate juxtaposition of these two songs in the 
MS. Book, where however they are clearly divided by Blake’s usual line of 
separation. Swinburne (Essay, p. 141) falls into the same error, 

2 And saw] And I saw MS. Book. 5 this] the R!. were] was 
Wilk. 7 So] And MS. Book ts¢ rdg. del. 9 filled] filled MS. Book 
and orig.; all edd. read ‘filled’ (=fill’d i” all except Wilk. and Shep.). 
11 in] with R4, 12 binding] choking R'. 

This is another of the poems translated by Dr. Julius in the Vater- 
landisches Museum, II. i. (1806) :— 

‘Ich ging einst zum Garten der Liebe, 
Und sah, was ich nimmer gesehn. 
Am Rasen stand eine Capelle, 

Wo sonst ich pflog spielend zu gehn. 


‘Und zu war die Thir der Capelle, 

Und ‘du sollst nicht’? stand auf dem Thor, 
So kehrt’ ich zum Garten der Liebe, 

Der Blumen sonst brachte hervor. 


‘Und ich sah ihn mit Grdbern gefillet, 

Und Grabstein’, wo Liebe sollt’ sein ; 

Und Priester in Trau’r umgingen die Mau’r, 
Und senkten in Schmerz mein liebendes Herz. 


128 Songs of Experience 


A Little Boy Lost 


‘Nought loves another as itself, 1 
Nor venerates another so, 

Nor is it possible to Thought 

A greater than itself to know: 


an 


‘And, Father, how can I love you 

Or any of my brothers more? 

I love you like the little bird 

That picks up crumbs around the door.’ 


The Priest sat by and heard the child, 9 
In trembling zeal he siez’d his hair: 

He led him by his little coat, 

And all admir’d the Priestly care. 


And standing on the altar high, 13 
‘Lo! what a fiend is here,’ said he, 

‘One who sets reason up for judge 

Of our most holy Mystery.’ 


Engraved on a single plate from the rough draft on p. 106 (reversed) of the 
MS. Book. 

5 And] Then MS. Bk. 1st rdg. del, how... you] I cannot love you 
MS. Book 1st rdg. del. 6 Or} Nor MS. Book rst rdg. del. 71... bird] 
I love myself: so does the bird MS. Book 1s¢ rdg. del. 11, 12 The 
first reading of these two lines in the MS. Book was— 


‘The mother follow’d, weeping loud, 
“OQ, that I such a fiend should bear!” ’ 


These are deleted and replaced by— 


‘Then led him by his little coat, 
To shew his zealous priestly care.’ 


The last line is again cancelled and rewritten— 
‘And all admir’d his priestly care,’ 


the word ‘Then’ in the preceding line being deleted and replaced 
by ‘ &.’ 12 the] his Muir’s facsimile. 13-16 This stanza appears 
to have followed the fifth in order of composition. 


Songs of Experience 129 


The weeping child could not be heard, 17 
The weeping parents wept in vain; 
They strip’d him to his little shirt, 
And bound him in an iron chain; 


And burn’d him in a holy place, ar 
Where many had been burn’d before: 

The weeping parents wept in vain, 

Are such things done on Albion’s shore ? 


t9 They] And MS. Book ts¢ rdg. del. T9, 20 They... chain] They 
bound the little ivory limbs In a cruel iron chain MS. Book rs# rdg. del. 
at And... place] They burn’d him in a holy fire MS. Book 1s¢ rdg. with 
first and last words de/. and changed to above. 24 Are... shore?] 
Such things are done on Albion’s shore MS. Book 1st rdg. altered as above. 

Swinb. comments (£ssay, p. 126), ‘To the surprising final query, ‘‘Are such 
things done on Albion’s shore ?’’ one is provoked to respond, ‘‘ On the whole, 
not, as far as we can see’’ ; but the ‘‘ Albion” of Blake’s verse is never this 
weaving and spinning country of our working days; it is rather some in- 
scrutable remote land of Titanic visions, moated with silent white mist instead 
of solid and sonoreus surf, and peopled with vague pre-Adamite giants, 
symbolic of more than we can safely define or conceive.’ 


Infant Sorrow 


My mother groan’d, my father wept, I 
Into the dangerous world I leapt ; 

Helpless, naked, piping loud, 

Like a fiend hid in a cloud. 


Struggling in my father’s hands, 5 
Striving against my swadling bands, 

Bound and weary, I thought best 

To sulk upon my mother’s breast. 


Engraved upon a single plate, the original of which is among the number 
reprinted by Gilchrist (Life, ii. end). 

Compare the much fuller form of this song found on p. 113 (reversed) 
of the MS. Book, only the first two stanzas of which were engraved 
by Blake for the Songs of Experience. The complete poem will be found 
among ‘Poems from the Rossetti MS. Book’ (x). 


SAMPSON K 


130 Songs of Fxpervence 
The School Boy 


I love to rise in a summer morn L 
When the birds sing on every tree; 

The distant huntsman winds his horn, 

And the sky-lark sings with me. 

O!. what sweet company. 


But to go to school in a summer morn, 6 
O! it drives all joy away ; 

Under a cruel eye outworn, 

The little ones spend the day 

In sighing and dismay. 


Ah! then at times I drooping sit, 11 
And spend many an anxious hour, 

Nor in my book can I take delight, 

Nor sit in learning’s bower, 

Worn thro’ with the dreary shower. 


How can the bird that is born for joy 16 
Sit in a cage and sing; 

How can a child, when fears annoy, 

But droop his tender wing, 

And forget his youthful spring? 


O! father & mother, if buds are nip’d aI 
And blossoms blown away, 

And if the tender plants are strip’d 

Of their joy in the springing day, 

By sorrow and care’s dismay, 


Engraved upon a single plate, reprinted from an electrotype of the original 
copper in Gilchrist’s Life (ii. end). Not in the MS. Book. This song, like 
‘The Little Girl Lost,’ ‘The Little Girl Found,’ and ‘The Voice of the 
Ancient Bard,’ originally formed one of the Songs of Innocence, where, in the 

_ early issues, it is always printed as verso to the last plate of ‘Spring.’ On 
the completion of the Songs of Experience Blake, in most cases, transferred 
these poems to the latterseries, In the editions of Wilkinson and Shepherd 
‘ The School Boy’ appears among the Songs of Innocence. See Bibliographical 
Preface to t e Songs. 

1 in] on all except Shep., WBY. 2 When... sing] When birds are 
singing DGR, WMR, EY. 


Songs of Experience 131 


How shall the summer arise in joy, 26 
Or the summer fruits appear ? 

Or how shall we gather what griefs destroy, 

Or bless the mellowing year, 

When the blasts of winter appear? 


London 


I wander thro’ each charter’d street, I 
Near where the charter’d Thames does flow, 

And mark in every face I meet 

Marks of weakness, marks of woe. 


In every cry of every Man, 

In every Infant’s cry of fear, 

In every voice, in every ban, 
The mind-forg’d manacles I hear. 


or 


How the'Chimney sweeper’s cry 9 
Every black’ning Church appalls ; 

And the hapless Soldier’s sigh 

Runs in blood down Palace walls. 


But most thro’ midnight streets I hear 13 
How the youthful Harlot’s curse 

Blasts the new born Infant’s tear, 

And blights with plagues the Marriage hearse. 


Engraved on a single plate, with some important changes from the first 
draft of this poem found on p. 109 (reversed) of the MS. Book. This plate is 
among the number reprinted by Gilchrist (Liz, ii. end). 

r, 2 charter’d] dirty MS. Book. 3 And mark] And see MS. Book 
st rdg, del.; A mark WMR (corrected, however, in some later editions), EY, 
WBY. 6 In... fear] In every voice of every child MS. Book rst rdg. 
dei. 8 The... hear] The german forged links I hear MS. Book rst 
rag. del. 9 How] But most e/e, MS. Book rs# rdg. del. It would appear 
to have been Blake’s first intention to close the poem with this stanza. 
to Blackens o’er the churches walls MS. Book rst rdg. del. 14 Harlot’s] 
No apostrophe in orig. ; harlots’ Wilk. ; harlot’s vest. 13-16 In the MS. 
Book this stanza was at first written— 

‘But most the midnight harlot’s curse 
From every dismal street I hear, 
Weaves around the marriage hearse, 
And blasts the new born infant's tear.’ 


K 2 


132 Songs of Experience 


This was cancelled and followed by— 


‘But most from every [alt. to through wintry] streets I hear, 
How the midnight harlot’s curse 

Blasts the new born infant’s tear, 

And hangs [alt. to smites] with plagues the marriage hearse.’ 


Compare Blake’s use of the same epithets in a quatrain twice repeated in 
the MS. Book (pp. 107 and 99 reversed) :— 
‘An Ancient Proverb. 


“Remove away that black’ning church, 

Remove away that marriage hearse, 

Remove away that place [alt. to man] of blood, 
’Twill [alt. to You'll] quite remove the ancient curse.’ 


A Little Girl Lost 


Children of the future Age, I 
Reading this indignant page, 

Know that in a former time, 

Love, sweet Love, was thought a crime! 


In the Age of Gold, 5 
Free from winter’s cold, 

Youth and maiden bright 

To the holy light, 

Naked in the sunny beams delight. 


Once a youthful pair, To 
Fill’d with softest care, 

Met in garden bright 

Where the holy light 

Had just remov’d the curtains of the night. 


There, in rising day, 15 
On the grass they play; 
Parents were afar, 
Strangers came not near, 
And the maiden soon forgot her fear. 
Engraved on a single plate. Not in the MS. Book. 
1-4 In the engraved original this introductory stanza is written indented 


in roman characters, the body of the poem being in italic. 15 There] 
Then all except Shep., WBY. 


Songs of Experience — 133 


% Tired with kisses sweet, 

They agree to meet 

When the silent sleep 

Waves o’er heaven’s deep, 

And the weary tired wanderers weep. 


To her father white 

Came the maiden bright ; 

But his loving look, 

Like the holy book, 

All her tender limbs with terror shook, 


‘Ona! pale and weak! 

To thy father speak : 

O! the trembling fear, 

O! the dismal care, 

That shakes the blossoms of my hoary hair!’ 


4y he Chimney Sweeper 


A little black thing among the snow, 
Crying ‘’weep! ’weep!’ in notes of woe! 
‘Where are thy father & mother, say ?’— 

| ‘They are both gone up to the church to pray. 


‘Because I was happy upon the heath, 
And smil’d among the winter’s snow, 
They clothéd me in the clothes of death, 
And taught me to sing the notes of woe. 


[= clothéd]; cloth’d Wilk. ; the rest clothed [=cloth’d]. 


20 


25 


Engraved on a single plate. The original draft of this song in the MS. 
' Book shows that Blake at first intended the second and third stanzas (on 
p. 103 reversed) to form a poem complete in itself. The first stanza and title 
are an afterthought, written in pencil upon a different page (106 reversed). 
3 Where... say] Where are they, father and mother, say? MS. Book. 
4 to the church] to church MS, Book. 6 winter’s snow] wintery wind 
[alt. to snow] MS. Book. 7 clothéd] clothed MS, Book, ong., Shep. 


134 Songs of Experience 


‘And because I am happy & dance & sing, 9 
They think they have done me no injury, 

And are gone to praise God & his Priest & King, 
Who make up a heaven of our misery.’ 


12 Who... misery] Who wrap themselves up in our misery MS, Book 
st rdg, del. 


The Human Abstract 


Pity would be no more 1 
If we did not make somebody Poor ; 

And Mercy no more could be 

If all were as happy as we. 


And mutual fear brings peace, 5 
Till the selfish loves increase ; 

Then Cruelty knits a snare, 

And spreads his baits with care. 


He sits down with holy fears, 9 
And waters the ground with tears; 

Then Humility takes its root 

Underneath his foot. 


Soon spreads the dismal shade 13 
Of Mystery over his head ; 

And the Catterpiller and Fly 

Feed on the Mystery. 


And it bears the fruit of Deceit, 17 
Ruddy and sweet to eat; 

And the Raven his nest has made 

In its thickest shade. 


Engraved on a single plate, reprinted in Gilchrist (ii. end) from the draft 
in the MS. Book (p. 107 reversed). The first title of the poem was ‘The 
Earth.’ This is erased, and ‘The human Image’ substituted: the present 
title is not in the MS, Book. 

Compare with this song the fine variant version, beginning ‘I heard an 
Angel singing,’ MS. Book (p. 114 reversed). 

1 would] could MS. Book. 2 If there was nobody poor MS. Book 
1st rdg. del. 9 with... fears] with his holy fears EY. 20 its] 
the Swinb, thickest] blackest MS. Book. 


Songs of Experience 135 


The Gods of the earth and sea a1 
Sought thro’ Nature to find this Tree; 

But their search was all in vain: 

There grows one in the Human Brain. 


23, 24 ‘But their search was all in vain 
Till they sought in the human brain.’ 
MS. Book 1st rdg., last line del. 

The ‘Tree of Mystery’ signifies ‘Moral Law.’ See Jerusalem, f. 28, 
Nl. 14-19 :— 

‘He [Albion] sat by Tyburn’s brook, and underneath his heel shot up 

A deadly Tree: he nam’d it Moral Virtue, and the Law 

Of God, who dwells in Chaos, hidden from the human sight. 
_The Tree spread over him its cold shadows (Albion groan’d), 
They bent down, they felt the earth, and again enrooting 
Shot into many a Tree, an endless labyrinth of woe.’ 

A very similar description of the growth of the Tree is found in Ahania 
(engr. 1795), chap. iii, thus condensed by Swinburne (Essay, p. 121): 
‘Compare the passage... where the growth of it is defined ; rooted in the 
rock of separation, watered with the tears of a jealous God, shot up from 
sparks and fallen germs of material seed ; being after all a growth of mere 
error, and vegetable (not spiritual) life ; the topmost stem of it made into 
a cross whereon to nail the dead redeemer and friend of men,’ 


[To THe SONGS OF EXPERIENCE] 


A Divine Image 


Cruelty has a Human Heart, x 
And Jealousy a Human Face; 

Terror the Human Form Divine, 

‘And Secrecy the Human Dress. 


The Human Dress is forgéd Iron, 5 
The Human Form a fiery Forge, » 

The Human Face a Furnace seal’d, 

The Human Heart its hungry Gorge. 


I place this poem as appendix to the Songs of Experience in the absence of 
evidence that it was included in any authentic copy of the Songs issued 
during Blake’s lifetime. Out of fifteen examples of the Songs of Experience 


136 Songs of Experience 


known to me, one only, the uncoloured copy in the Reading Room of the 
British Museum, contains this plate, and there the watermark of the paper, 
which is dated 1832, proves that it must have been printed af /east five 
years after Blake’s death. The only other existing specimen of the engraved 
song is a proof impression (also uncoloured) in the possession of Mr. William 
Muir, which he has reproduced in facsimile at the end of his beautiful edition 
of The Marriage of Heaven and Hell. It is quite clear that Blake engraved 
this poem with a view to its forming one of the Songs of Experience; and the 
total number of plates specified as belonging to this work in his prospectus 
‘To the Public’ (see Bibliographical Preface to the Songs) would seem 
to show that this was his intention in October, 1793, when this adver- 
tisement was issued. It is fairly plain too that Blake rejected the plate 
without destroying it—perhaps because it was one of those which were 
engraved on both sides of the copper—leaving it possible for it to be 
inadvertently introduced into one or two copies which may have been 
printed when the plates passed into other hands, after the death of 
Mrs. Blake in October, 1831. This poem seems to have been unknown to 
Blake’s first editor, Wilkinson, as well as to Gilchrist, who rightly represents 
54 as the number of plates belonging to a complete set of both series of the 
Songs. It is first introduced into the Songs of Experience by R. H. Shepherd 
(1866), who probably took it from the posthumously printed copy which the 
British Museum had acquired two years before. Since then it has been 
included among the Songs without comment by W. M. Rossetti and all 
Blake’s later editors, who follow Shepherd in placing it immediately after 
‘A Little Girl Lost.’ 


RA Ea ap, 


eee: GE URRY 
So. a (CorrneE) a 
*: ee 
is nae 


POEMS 


from 


THE ROSSETTI MANUSCRIPT 


on 

a 
7 
a 


(circa 1793-1811) 
commonly known as 


‘THE MANUSCRIPT BOOK’ 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL PREFACE 


TO THE 


ROSSETTI MANUSCRIPT 


THE Rossetti MS. is the name used in this edition as a 
descriptive title for Blake’s book of notes and sketches, 
commonly called ‘The MS. Book,’ and sometimes, less 
correctly, ‘Ideas of Good and Evil.’ The latter title, 
partially covered by a pencil sketch, is found written, in 
bold script characters, on the verso of the second leaf. In 
all probability Blake intended it to refer to the series of 
designs, beginning on p. 15, afterwards engraved and 
published as Zhe Gates of Paradise. The poems which 
some editors include under this title had not then been 
written. 

The Rossetti MS. is a foolscap quarto volume (7% x 6% 
inches) of 58 leaves, paginated consecutively 1-116 by its 
present owner. The drawing paper is without watermark ; 
but the stitching in the centre of the quires after ff. 5, 18, 
30, 42, and 54, shows that the book is made up of one 
gathering of 10 leaves and four gatherings of 16 and 8 
leaves alternately. Bound in at the end is a folded sheet 
of different and smaller paper forming two leaves, upon 
which are written part of ‘The Everlasting Gospel’ and 
part of the first draft of Blake’s description of his ‘ Canter- 
bury Pilgrims.’ 

A pencil note on the verso of the flyleaf, signed ‘D.G.C.R..,’ 
Rossetti's earlier signature, tells how he became possessed 
of the volume: ‘I purchased this original MS. of Palmer, 
an attendant in the Antique Gallery at the British Museum, 
on the goth April, ’47. Palmer knew Blake personally, and 
it was from the artist’s wife that he had the present MS. 
which he sold me for 10s. Among the sketches there are 
one or two profiles of Blake himself.’ 

Rossetti transcribed certain of the contents, heading 
them ‘Verse and Prose by William Blake (Natus 1757: 
obiit 1827). All that is of any value in the foregoing 


Rossetti MS. 139 


_ pages has here been copied out. D.G.C.R.’ Rossetti’s 
transcript (in my footnotes referred to as R1) con- 
tains a number of emendatory readings, some of which 
he subsequently rejected in his version of the poems 
printed in Gilchrist’s Zzfe. This transcript, bound in at 
the end of the MS. Book proper, consists of 33 leaves, of 
which 5 (evidently containing Epigrams 1-19) have been 
cut out. Part of the paper bears the watermark 1844. 
The volume is bound in half-calf and labelled ‘ Blake MS.’ 
The MS. Book covers a period of at least twenty years 
of Blake’s life. He first used it for sketches only, and 
_ when it had served this purpose, converted it into a note- 
book for poetry, and, still later, for prose. The sketches 
include two drawings of the figure of Nebuchadnezzar 
_which Blake afterwards engraved in the undated J/arriage 
of Heaven and Fell, all the designs for The Gates of 
Paradise (engraved 1793), most of those for the Visions of 
the Daughters of Albion (engraved 1793), and some for the 
Songs of Experience, Urizen, and America (all engraved 
1794). As there are no designs for Blake’s earlier works, 
the Songs of Innocence and The Book of Thel (both en- 
graved 1789), we may infer that his use of the sketch-book 
began not earlier, but probably not much later, than the 
year 1789. Some of the sketches are full page, a few are 
in colour or sepia, but the greater number are small 
finished or rough pencil drawings occupying the centre of 
the page. 

About 1793, when most of the leaves were thus filled, 
Blake began to use the sketch-book for the transcription of 
some of his poems, reversing the volume and beginning on 
the three blank pages at the end of the book. Here he 
copied, in most cases apparently from earlier rough drafts, 
certain of the Songs of Experience, besides other lyrical 
poems which he himself never published. These pieces, as 
our facsimile shows, were neatly written in two columns in 
a small, but fairly clear hand, separation lines being drawn 
between the different poems. In most cases the titles were 
afterthoughts. Vertical pencil lines are drawn through 
those poems which Blake engraved as part of the Songs of 
Experience. Avoiding at first the pages on which sketches 
of any importance appeared, Blake continued to write from 
the reversed end as far as p. 98. All the poems in this 
section of the book—Songs of Experience or lyrics of the 
same character—must have been written before the end of 
the year 1793. 


140 Rosseti MS. 


After writing these poems, which form the first section 
of the MS. Book (i-xxxvi), Blake discontinued the use of it 
as a notebook for several years. Taking it up again about 
the beginning of his Felpham period, he added some new 
poems, writing them, not as before from the reversed end, 
but from the original beginning of the sketch - book. 
On pp. 3 and 2 is the fine poem ‘My spectre around 
me night and day,’ which, as Swinburne points out, 
embodies precisely the same theme as Ferusalem (1804). 
On p. 12 are the lines ‘Each man is in his spectre’s 
power,’ and the long poem ‘I saw a monk of Charlemaine,’ 
both of which were afterwards engraved as part of Feru- 
salem. On p. 21 begins the series of epigrams which may be 
dated from the end of Blake’s stay at Felpham to the year 
1809; they relate to his differences with Hayley, Cromek, 
Stothard, and Hunt, and were obviously written down, 
animum solvere, without view to publication. To the same 
period evidently belong the epigrams on art and artists, 
which are probably, as Ellis and Yeats conjecture, an over- 
flow from his marginal notes to his copy of Reynolds’s 
Discourses, now preserved in the British Museum. Among 
the last entries in the MS. are Blake’s ‘ Advertisement’ and 
‘Additions to the Catalogue for the year 1810,’ which are 
scattered here and there throughout the book with frequent 
encroachments upon the sketches. In the same category 
should be placed his great unfinished poem ‘The Ever- 
lasting Gospel,’ the last written piece in the MS. Book. 
Fragments of this are drafted or copied on blank spaces 
left on the now crowded pages, part of the poem being 
written, obviously after the exhaustion of other space, upon 
a scrap of paper bound in at the end of the book. | 

The earliest dated entry in the MS. Book is the note on 
p. 10, ‘I say I shan’t live five years. And if I live one it 
will be a Wonder. June 1793’; the latest, on p. 59, is an 
extract ‘From Bells Weekly Messenger, Aug. 4th, 1811.’ 

A few of the poems in the Rossetti MS., such as ‘ Fayette,’ 
were left in an unfinished state, while others have elsewhere 
received Blake’s revision. The lines beginning ‘ Three 
virgins at the break of day’ appear in a more perfect form 
in the Pickering MS., where I print them with the readings 
from the MS. Book in footnotes. The MS. Book version 
of ‘I saw a monk of Charlemaine’ was afterwards split up 
by Blake into two separate poems—‘ The Grey Monk’ of 
the Pickering MS. and the ‘Address to the Deists’ in. 
Ferusalem. 


eossetti MS. 141 


In the following Index to the Rossetti MS., the sketches, 
poems, and prose contents are given in the order in which 
they occur in the volume ; inverted pieces, written from the 
reversed end, are marked by an asterisk. To follow 
roughly Blake’s own order of writing the poems enumerated, 
the Index should be read backwards page by page, from 
p- 115 to p. 98, and continued straightforwardly from p. 3 to 
the same point. Italics indicate sketches or prose. For 
prose passages, of which only the few first or last words are 
quoted in this Index, reference may be made to Gilchrist 
(vol. ii) or to Ellis and Yeats (vol. ii. pp. 383-403). 
The following contractions are used :—S.E., Songs of Ex- 
perience; MS. Book, Rossetti Manuscript (followed by 
number of poem in the present edition) ; Advt., Advertise- 
ment to Blake's Canterbury Pilgrims from Chaucer, con- 
taining anecdotes of Artists (apparently intended as Blake’s 
own title for piece which Rossetti and others call ‘ Public 
Address’); Cat. 1810, For the year 1810. Additions to 
Blake's Catalogue of Pictures, &c.; WMR., W. M. Ros- 
setti’s ‘ Annotated Lists of Blake’s Paintings, Drawings, and 
Engravings, List 2, no. 25 (Gilchrist’s L7/e, ii. pp. 242-243). 


PIDER Ae LO ALHE ROSSETTI-MS/ 


p. t. Prose.—If men of weak capacities ... without which the art is 
lost. [Advt.] 
p. 2. Sketch (pencil).—Daphne. 
My spectre continued (stanzas 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, *1, *2, and *3). 
(MS. Book xxxvii.] 
p- 3. My spectre around me night & day. [MS. Book xxxvii.] 
p- 4. Title-page.—Ideas of Good & Evil. 
Sketch (pencil).—A young woman dressing. 
When a man has married a wife. [MS. Book xxxviii.] 


p. 5. When Klopstock England defied. [MS. Book xxxix.] 
p. 6. Sketch (pen and ink) [see WMR (a)]. 
On the Virginity of the Virgin Mary & Johanna Southcott. [MS. 

Book xl.] 

p. 7. Mock on, Mock on, Voltaire, Rousseau. [MS. Book xli.] 

p. 8. Sketch. ; 

p. 9. Sketch (sepia). 

p. 10. Note-—Tuesday Jan’ 20, 1807, between Two & seven in the Evening 
Despair. 


Note.—I say I shan’t live five years. And if I live one it will be 
a Wonder. June 1793. 

Memoranda.—To engrave on pewter. To woodcut on pewter. To 
engrave on copper. [See Gil, ii. 158.] 


142 Rossetti MS. 


pss: 
p. 14. 
p. 15. 


p. 16. 
p. 17. 


p. 18. 


p. I9. 


p- 20. 


p. 21. 


p- 22. 
p. 23. 


p. 24. 


p. 25. 


p. 26. 


Aiea 
p. 12. 


Sketch. 

I saw a Monk of Charlemaine. [MS. Book xlii.] 

Morning : To find the Western path. [MS. Book xiliii.] 

Terror in the house does roar. [MS. Book xliv.] 

Each man is in his spectre’s power. [Jerusalem. | 

Sketch (sepia). 

Three Virgins at the Break of day. [Pickering MS. The Golden Net.] 

The Birds. [MS. Book xlv.] 

Sketch.—For Gates of Paradise. 

Sketch.—? Lucifer discovering Judas. (Inferno, Canto xxxiv.) [See 
WMR (b)}. 

Sketch.—(The same.): 

Sketch.—(The same.) 

Sketch. See WMR (f.)] 

Note.—I wonder who can say ‘speak no ill of the dead’ etc. 

Note.—Columbus discovered America éic. 

Prose.-—There is not because there cannot be any difference. . .« 
should consider the following. [Advt.] 

Note.—Princes appear to me to be fools efc. 

Sketch.—For Gates of Paradise. 

Prose.—Rubens’ Luxembourg gallery is confessed ... as guilty of 
mental high treason. [Advt.] 

Prose.—Who that has eyes .. . Oh rare wisdom. [Advt.] 

Prose.—The wretched state of the arts in this country. . . I demand 
therefore of the Amateurs of [Advt.] 

Sketch.—For Songs of Experience—‘The Sick Rose.’ [See WMR (g)]. 

No real style of colouring ever appears. [MS. Book xlvi. ] 

You don’t believe, I won’t attempt to make ye. [MS. Book xlvii.] 

Prose.—Art the encouragement which is my due... nothing can 
hinder my course. [Advt.] 

And in melodious accents I. [MS. Book xlviii.] 

You don’t believe continued. [MS. Book xlvii.] 

And his legs cover’d it like a long fork. [MS. Book xlix.] 

Sketch.—[See WMR (h).] 

Prose.—The painters of England are unimployed . .. storehouse of 
intellectual riches. [Advt.] 

Was I angry with Hayley who used me so ill. [MS. Book 1.] 

Anger & Wrath my bosom rend. [MS. Book li.] 

The Sussex Men are Noted Fools. [MS. Book lii.] 

Prose,—(continued from p. 25)... as a public duty. William 
Blake. [Advt.] 

Sketch.—For Gates of Paradise. 

Madman I have been called. Fool they call thee. [MS. Book liii.] 

To H——: You think Fuseli is not a Great Painter. I’m glad. 
(MS. Book liv.] 

Prose.—In a commercial nation... in the journeyman’s labour. 
[Advt.] 

Prose.—P.S. I do not believe. . . (continued on p. 24) [Advt.] 


To F——: I mock thee not, though I by thee am Mockéd. [MS. 
Book ly.]} 


p- 
. 


Rossetti MS. 143 


|p, 26, Can there be anything more mean. (MS, Book lvi,] 
p. 27, S——~ in Childhood on the nursery floor. (MS, Book lvii.] 
To Nancy F——: How can I help thy husband’s copying me. 
(MS. Book lviii,] 
Of H——’s birth this was the happy lot. [MS, Book lix.] 
 —p, a8, Shetch (pencil),—For Visions of the Daughters of Albion. 
/ Sir Joshua praises Michael Angelo, (MS, Book lx.] 
He’s a Blockhead who wants a proof of what he can’t Perceive. 
4 [MS, Book Ixi,] 
p29, Cr-—— loves artists as he loves his Meat. (MS. Book lxii.] 
y A Petty Sneaking Knave I knew. [MS. Book Ixiii.] 
Sir Joshua praised Rubens with a smile. (MS. Book Ixiv.] 
j He is a Cock would, (MS, Book Ixv.] 
Pp, 90, Shetch—(See WMR. (i)). 
ye He has observ'd the Golden Rule. [MS. Book Ixvi.] 
, To S8——d: You all your Youth observ’d the Golden Rule. [MS. 
Book Ixvii.] 
p. gt. Mr. Stothard to Mr. Cromek;: For Fortune’s favours you your riches 
; bring, [(MS. Book Ixiii,] 
$ Mr, Cromek to Mr. Stothard : Fortune favours the Brave, old proverbs 
say. (MS, Book lix.} 
/ Il am no Homer's Hero you all know. [MS. Book Ixx.] 
_ -p. ga. The Angel that presided o’er my birth. (MS, Book lxxi.] 
= Florentine Ingratitude: Sir Joshua sent his own portrait to. [MS. 


Book |xxii.} 
P+ 83. A Pitiful Case : The villain at the gallows tree. (MS, Book lxxiii.] 
To the Royal Academy: A Strange Erratum in all the Editions. 
of {MS, Book Ixxiv.] 
If it is true, what the Prophets write. (MS. Book Ixxv.] 
‘ {The Everlasting Gospel. a.) 


pp. 34. Shetch,—For Gates of Paradise. 

4 On F—— and S——: I found them biind, I taught them how to see. 

Wet (MS. Book Ixxvi.] 

P—— loved me not as he lov’d his friends. [MS. Book Ixxvii.] 

To forgive enemies H—— does pretend. [MS. Book lxxviii.] 

 p. 35 To F——: You call me Mad; ‘tis folly to do so. [MS. Book 
Ixxix.] 

On H——y’s Friendship : When H——-y finds out what you cannot 
do. (MS. Book lxxx.] 

To forgive enemies H—— does pretend continued (il. 2, 4). [MS. 
Book lxxviii.] 

pp. 36. Sketch,—{ See WMR. (j).] 

Some men created for destruction come. [MS. Book lxxxi.] 

On S——: You say reserve and modesty he has. [MS. Book 


Ixxxii.] 
ee 37. Imitation of Pope, & a compliment to the Ladies. [MS. Book 
lxxxiii.] 
To H——-: Thy friendship oft has made my heart to ake. [MS. 
Book lxxxiv.] 


Cosway Frazer & Baldwin of Egypt’s Lake. [MS. Bock lxxxv.] 


144 Rossetti MS. 


P: 37- 


p. 38. 


. On H 


An Epitaph: Come knock your heads against this stone. [MS. 
Book Ixxxvi.] 

Another: I was buried near this dyke. [MS. Book lxxxvii.] 

Another: Here lies John Trot, the Friend of all mankind. [MS. 
Book Ixxxviii. ] 

My title as a Genius thus is prov’d. [MS. Book Ixxxix. ] 

I, Rubens, am a Statesman and a Saint. [MS. Book xc.] 

To English Connoisseurs ; You must agree that Rubens was a fool. 
(MS. Book xci. ] : 

Note.—There is just the same science in Lebrun or Rubens or even 
Vanloo that there is in Raphael or Michael Angelo, but not the 
same genius. Science is soon got ; the other never can be acquired 
but must be born. 

Swelled limbs with no outline that you can descry. [MS. Book xcii. ] 
A Pretty Epigram for the encouragement of those Who have paid 
great sums in the Venetian and Flemish ooze. [MS. Book xciii.] 

These are the Idiots’ chiefest arts. [MS. Book xciv. ] 


. Raphael Sublime Majestic Graceful Wise. [MS. Book xcv.] 


Learn the laborious stumble of a Fool. [MS. Book xcvi.] 
If I e’er Grow to Man’s Estate. [MS. Book xcvii.] 
The cripple every step drudges & labours. [MS. Book xcviii.] 


. Sketch.—For Gates of Paradise. 


On the great encouragement given by English Nobility. [MS, 
Book xcix. ] 

Give Pensions to the Learned Pig. [MS. Book c.] 

All pictures that’s painted with sense and with thought. [MS. 
Book ci. ] 

the Pickthank: I write the rascal thanks, till he and I 
[MS. Book cii.] 

Cromek speaks: I always take my judgement from a Fool. [MS. 
Book ciii.] 

When you look at a picture you always can see. [MS. Book civ. ] 

English Encouragement of Art. Cromek’s opinions put into rhyme. 
[MS. Book cv.] ; 


. You say their Pictures well painted be. [MS. Book cvi.] 


Sketch. ; 
The Washerwoman’s Song: I wash’d them out and wash’d them in. 
(MS. Book cvii.] 


. When I see a Rubens Rembrandt Correggio. [MS. Book cviii.] 


Great things are done when Men & Mountains meet. [MS. Book cix.] 


. Sketch (pencil),—For Marriage of Heaven and Hell—‘ Nebuchadnezzar.’ — 


NNote.—Let a Man who has made a drawing go on & on & he will 
produce a Picture or Painting, but if he chooses to leave it before 
he has spoil’d it he will do a Better Thing. 


. Sketch.—For Gates of Paradise—I have said to corruption etc. 
. Sketch.—Murder. [See WMR. (k).] 


Prose.—They say there is no straight line in nature . . . Machination. 
[Advt.] 

Prose.—Delicate Hands & Heads will never appear While Titian &c. 
as in the Book of Moonlight, p. 5. 


p. 46. 


P. 47. 


p. 48. 


p- 52. 


P. 54. 


P. 55. 


Pp: 56. 


P- 57- 


SAMPSON 


Rossetti MS. 145 


Prose.—W oollett I know ... (continued on p. 47). [Advt.] 

*I give you the end of a golden string. [Jerusalem.] 

Prose.—(Continued from p. 46)... master’s touch. [Advt.] 

Prose.—Every line is the line of beauty. It is only fumble and bungle 
which cannot draw a line. This only is ugliness, But that is not 
a line which doubts and hesitates in the midst of its course. [Advt. | 

If you play a Game of chance. [MS. Book cx.] 

Sketch.— Nebuchadnezzar, 

Note.—This was spoke by My Spectre to Voltaire Bacon &c. 

[The Everlasting Gospel. 4. ll. 1-26.] 

{The Everlasting Gospel. 6.] 


. [The Everlasting Gospel. . Il. 27-52.] 
. [The Everlasting Gospel. 3. ll. 53-71.] 


The only Man that e’erI knew. [MS. Book cxi.] 
For this is being a Friend just in the nick. [MS. Book cxii.] 


. [The Everlasting Gospel. 3. Il. 72-92. ] 


Prose.—In this plate Mr. B. has resumed ... in condemnation. 
[Advt.] 

Sketch (pencil). 

Prose.—Of my Work & approbation . . . reputation as a draughtsman. 
[Advt.] 

[The Everlasting Gospel. . Il. 93-96.] 

[The Everlasting Gospel. 7.] 

The Everlasting Gospel. (y’. Il. 1-25.) 

Prose-—The manner in which my character has been blasted. . . paid 
for what they put in on these ungracious subjects. [Advt.] 

I will tell you what Joseph of Arimathea. [MS. Book cxiii.] 


. Prose—Flaxman cannot deny... as Machlin told me at the time 


 [Advt.] 
[The Everlasting Gospel. -+y’. ll. 26-83.] 
Prose.—Many people are so foolish ... asserted that Woollett’s. 

[Advt. ] 
[The Everlasting Gospel. -y’. ll. 84-106.] 
Grown old in Love from Seven till Seven times Seven. [MS. 

Book cxiv.] ‘ 
[The Everlasting Gospel. @.] 
Prose.—Prints were superior to Basire’s because... beginnings of 

art. [Advt.] 
Sketch.—_[See WMR. (1).] 
Why was Cupid a Boy. [MS. Book cxv.] 
Note.—This day is Publish’d Advertizements to Blake’s Canterbury 

Pilgrims from Chaucer, containing anecdotes of Artists. 

Prose.—I hope this print ... It is very true what you have said, 

[Advt.] 
Sketch. 
Prose,—For these thirty-two Years... [Advt.] 
Prose.—Woollett’s best works... I forget. [Advt.] 
Prose —The Cottager’s ...is never correct. [Advt.] 
Prose.—I do not pretend to Paint better than Rafael (or Mich. Ang.) 
. . which they understand not. [Advt.] 

L 


146 Rossetti MS. 


p- 58. 


P- 59: 


p- 62. 


p. 63. 


p. 64. 


p. 65. 


p. 66. 


Prose.—In this manner the English public... but dey do not draw 
de draw. [Advt.] 

Prose.—Resentment for Personal Injuries has had some share in this 
public address but love to my art and zeal for my country a much 
greater. [Advt.] 

Sketch.—F or Gates of Paradise. 

Prose.—Men think they can Copy Nature... manifest to all. [Advt.] 

Extract,—From Bell’s Weekly Messenger, Aug. 4" 1811 etc. 


. lasked my Dear Friend Orator Prig. [MS. Book cxvi.] 


That God is Colouring Newton does show. [MS. Book cxviii.] 
Prose.—Cooke wished to give to Hogarth ... but he could not. 
[Adv.] 


. Sketch.—For Gates of Paradise—What we hope we see. 


O dear Mother Outline of wisdom most sage. [MS. Book ecxvii.] 

To Venetian Artists: Perhaps this little Fable may make us merry. 
(MS. Book cxviii.] 

Prose.—Englishmen rouse yourselves . . . Hogarth’s works prove. 
[Advt.] 

Prose.—A detestable Falsehood. ..God or man. ([Advt.] 

Prose——I do not mean smooth’d up & Nigled 8& Poco Pen’d and all 
the beauties [picked out] blurr’d & blotted but Drawn with a firm 
& decided hand at once, like Fuseli & Michael Angelo, Shakespeare 
& Milton. [Advt.] 

Some laugh at what others can see no crime in. [MS. Book cxx.] 

Sketch.—For Gates of Paradise—I found him beneath a tree. 

I’ve given great Provision to my Foes. (MS. Book cxx.] 

Prose.—Whoever looks at any .. . to look at his print. [Advt.] 

Later Note.—He who could represent Christ... fine art. [Advt.] 

*Great Men and Fools do often me inspire. [MS. Book cxix.] 

Extract.—From Cratelos. Me time has crook’d, no good workman Is 
he, Infirm is all that he does. 

Prose.—I do not know whether Homer .. . trading competition. 
[Advt. ] 

Note.—I always thought that Jesus Christ was a snubby or I should 
not have worshipped him if I thought he had been one of those 
long spindled nosed rascals. 

Having given great offence by writing in Prose. [MS. Book cxx.] 
Prose.—Chaucer’s Canterbury Pilgrims. Being a complete Index of 
Human Characters as they exist age after age. [Title for Advt.] 

If men will act like a maid smiling over a churn. [MS. Book cxxi.] 

Sketch.—For Songs of Experience—The Angel. 

Prose.—The English artist .. . Vasari tells us. [Advt.] 

Call that the Public Voice which is their Error. [MS. Book cxxii.] 

Prose.—What kind of intellect . . . & not the forms of Things. [Advt.] 

Prose.—Let us teach Buonaparte & whomsoever else it may concern 
that it is not Arts that follow & attend upon Empire but Empire 
that attends upon & follows The Arts. [Advt.] 

Prose.—It is nonsense for Noblemen... but not to make a Man, 
[Advt. ] 


. Sketch.—Profile of Blake. [See WMR. (c).] 


Rossetti MS. 147 


p. 67. Prose——The originality of this production , . . whitloes on their 
fingers. [Advt.] 
Prose.—No man of sense . . . as to believe this. [Advt.] 
Note.—23 May 1810 found the Word Golden. 
Prose.—A man sets himself... yourselves to be disgraced. [Advt.] 
p. 68. Sketch.—For Gates of Paradise—(frontispiece). 
Prose.—The Last Judgment is not Fable... [Cat. r8r0.] 
Prose.—Note here that Fable or allegory .. . [Cat. r810.] 
Pp. 69. Sketch.—For Gates of Paradise—At last for hatching ripe. 
Prose.—[Cat. 1810.] 
p. 70. Prose.—For the year 1810 Addition to Blake’s Catalogue of Pictures 
&c. [Title for Cat. 1810.] 
Some people admire the work of a Fool. [MS. Book cxxiii.] 
Prose.—(Cat. 1810.] 
p. 71. (4 quarter of this leaf has been cut out.) 
Sketch.— For Gates of Paradise—Death’s Door. 
Prose.—The—when they assert that Jupiter ... [Cat. 18r0.] 
Note.—A jockey that is anything of a jockey will never buy a horse 
by the colour & a man who has got any brains will never buy 
a picture by the colour. 
Note.—When I tell any truth it is not for the sake of convincing 
those who do not know it, but for the sake of defending those 
' who do. 
|p. 72. Prose.—And heal Visions... the golden Age. [Cat. 1810,] 
 —p. 73. Sketches.—[See WMR. (m).] 
To God. [MS. Book cxxviii.] 
Since all the Riches of this World. [MS. Book cxxiv.] 
Pp» 74. Sketches. 
Pp. 75. Sketches.—[See WMR. (d).] 
p. 76. Prose-—No Man of Sense ... a Male & Female chain’d [Cat. 1810. ] 
p- 77- Prose.—together by the feet. ..a Cruel Church. [Cat. 18r0.]_ 
p. 78. Prose.—The greatest part of whatare ¢all’d. .. cordinhishand. [Cat. 
1810. ] 
To Chloe’s breast young Cupid slily stole. [MS. Book cxxvi.] 
p. 79. Now Art has lost its mental Charms. [MS. Book exxvii.] 
Prose.—In Eternity one Thing . . . vegetable Naturealso. [Cat. 1810,] 
Nail his neck to the Cross, nail it with a nail. [MS. Book cxxviii.] 
p. 80. Prose.—Between the Figures... on the brink of [Cat. 1810. ] 
p. 81. Prose.—perdition ... of the Hebrew. [Cat. 1810.] 
p. 82. Prose.—Just above... & Intentions, [Cat. 1810.] 
p. 83. Pyose.—The Characters... removing the [Cat. 1810.] 
p. 84. Prose—old heavens . . . Art in proportion to his means, [Cat. 
1810. | 
Prose—(continued from p. 83.) [Cat. 1820. ] 
Sketch—[See WMR (n). ] 
p. 85. Prose——Over the head . . . for a Protection. [Cat. 18r0,] 
p. 86. Prose.—The painter hopes that his Friends Amytus Melitus & Lycon 
will perceive ... begs public protection and all will be well. 
[Cat. r8r0.] 
Prose.—The Combats of Good & Evil... Knowledge of good & evil. 
L2 


14 


p. 87 


p. 88. 
p. 89. 
p- 90. 
p. OI. 
p- 92. 
P- 93: 
p- 94. 
Pp. 95- 


p. 96. 


P97: 


p. 98. 


p- 99- 


8 Rossetti MS. 


. The Caverns of the Grave I’ve seen. [MS. Book cxxix.] 

Prose.—(Description of Last Judgment.) [Cat.1810.]  — 

Note and Quotations from Aphra. Behn & Dryden, dated Sunday, 
August 1807. [See Swinb. Essay, pp. 130-1. ] 

Note.—(The same.) 

I rose up at the dawn of day. [MS. Book cxxx. ] 

Prose.—Shall know them... be Painting. [Cat. 18ro.] 

Sketch.—F or Gates of Paradise—Fire, he rears from the pool his mighty 
stature, 

Prose-—Such as Rafael... Mercy I have. [Cat. 1810.] 

Prose.—Represented those who are .. . Envy the Success. [Cat. 1810. ] 

Sketch.—For Gates of Paradise—Earth. 

Prose-—Of Satan or of Og... Angels happier than. ([Cat. 18r1o.] 

Sketch (sepia)—For Gates of Paradise — Air. 

Prose.—Men because... Last Judgment &. ([Cat. 18z0.] 

Sketch.—For Gates of Paradise—Water. 

Prose.—that Bad.art... not with it. [Cat. r810.] 

Extract.—Lines written . .. surrender of Copenhagen. 

Sketch.—For Europe—an assassin. 

Extract.—Continued (from p. 96) signed ‘ Birmingham I.’ 

[The Everlasting Gospel. +'. ll. 1-38.] 

Do what you will this life’s a fiction. [MS. Book cxxxi.] 

*Fayette (Stanzas 1, 4, 6). [MS. Book xxxv. ] 

*Several Questions Answered. [MS. Book xxxvi.] 

Fayette (Stanzas 3, 9, 10). [MS. Book xxxv.] 


p- oo, [The Everlasting Gospel. 8. ll. 1-37. ] 


*Her whole Life is an Epigram. [MS. Book xxxiii.] 
*An Old maid early e’er I knew. [MS. Book xxxiv. ] 


p. tor. [The Everlasting Gospel. 8. Il. 38-57.] 


*Little fly. [SE.] 
*Motto to the Songs of Innocence & of Experience. [MS. 
Book xxxii.] 


p. 102. Sketch——Adam and Eve. 


. 103. *The Angel: I dreamt a Dream! what can it mean. [SE.] 


*Because I was happy upon the heath. [SE.: The Chimney 
Sweeper, stanzas 2, 3. ] 

*The Question Answer’d: What is it men in women do require 
{MS. Book xxxvi, 4.] 

*Lacedemonian Instruction: Come hither, my boy, tell me what 
thou seest there. [MS. Book xxix.] 

*Riches: The countless gold of a merry heart. [MS. Book xxx, — 
stanza 2. ] 

*An answer to the parson: Why of the sheep do you not learn 
peace? [MS. Book xxxi.] 

*The look of love alarms. [MS. Book xxxvi, 2.] 

*Holy Thursday : Is this a holy thing to see. [SE.] 


p. 104. Sketch, 
p. 105. *Day : The sun arises in the East. [MS. Book xxii.] 


*The Fairy : Come hither, my sparrows. [MS. Book xxiii, | 
*The sword sung on the barren heath. [MS. Book xxiv. ] 


- p. 105. 


p. 106, 


p. 107. 


p. 108. 


p. Io9. 


p- IIo. 
p- IIl. 


p. 112. 


Rosset MS. 149 


*Abstinence sows sand all over. [MS. Book xxv.] 

*In a wife I would desire. [MS. Book xxvi.] 

*If you trap the moment before it’s ripe. [MS. Book xxvii.] 

*Eternity : He who bends to himself a joy. [MS. Book xxxvi, 1.] 

*The Kid: Thou, little Kid, did’st play. [MS. Book xxviii.] 

*The little Vagabond: Dear Mother, Dear Mother, the Church is 
cold. [SE.] 

*To my Mirtle: To a lovely mirtle bound. [MS. Book xiii.] 

*Nought loves another as itself. [A Little Boy Lost. SE.] 

*Love to faults is always blind continued (stanza 2). [MS. Book 
xvii. ] 

*The Chimney Sweeper (stanza 1). [SE.] 

*Merlin’s prophecy: The harvest shall flourish in wintry weather. 
(MS. Book xxi.] 

*The human Image: Pity would be no more. [The Human 
Abstract. SE.] 

*They said this mystery never shall cease. [MS. Book xvi.] 

*Love to faults is always blind. [MS. Book xvii.] 

*There souls of men are bought & sold. [MS. Book xviii.] 

*The wild flower’s song: As I wander’d the forest (stanza 1). [MS. 
Book xix. ] 

*The sick Rose: O Rose, thou art sick. [SE.] 

*Soft Snow : I walkéd abroad on a snowy day. [MS. Book xx.] 

*An ancient Proverb ; Remove away that black’ning church. [MS. 
Book xxxvi, 5. | 

Sketches (pencil). 

*The Tyger: Tyger, Tyger, burning bright (first draft of stanzas 1, 
ayg;4.and 6). " [SE] % 

*London : I wander thro’ each charter’d street. [SE.] 

*The wild flower’s song: continued (stanzas 2, 3). [MS. Book xix.] 

*To Nobodaddy: Why art thou silent & invisible. [MS. Book xiv. ] 

*The modest rose puts forth a thorn. [The Lilly. SE.] 

*When the voices of children are heard on the green. [Nurse’s 
Song. SE.] 

*Are not the joys of morning sweeter. [MS. Book xv. ] 

*The Tyger: Tyger, Tyger, burning bright (stanzas 1, 3, 5, 6). 
[SE.] 

Sketch.—Suggests Urizen. 

Sketch.—Continuation of above. 

*Thou hast a lap full of seed. [MS. Book xii.] 

*Earth’s Answer: Earth rais'd up her head. [SE.] 

*In a mirtle shade: Why should I be bound to thee. [MS. Book 
xiii.] 

Sketch. 


. *Silent Silent Night. [MS. Book vii.] 


*O lapwing thou fliest around the heath. [MS. Book viii.] 

*] fear’d the fury of my wind. [MS. Book ix.] 

*Infant Sorrow: My mother groan’d, my father wept. [MS. 
Book x, also SE.] 

*Why should I care for the men of thames. [MS. Book xi.] 


4 


150 Rosset MS. 


p. 114, *I asked a thief to steal me a peach. [MS. Book iv.] 
*] heard an Angel singing. [MS. Book v.] 
*A cradle Song: Sleep Sleep beauty bright. [MS. Book vi.] 
*Christian Forbearance : I was angry with my friend. [A Poison 
Tree. SE.] 
p. 115. *A flower was offer’d tome. [My Pretty Rose Tree. SE.] 
*I told my love I told my love. [MS. Book i.] 
*Love seeketh not itself to please. [The Clod and the Pebble. 
SE.] 
*I laid me down upon a bank. [MS. Book ii. ] 
*I went to the garden of love. [The Garden of Love. SE.j 
*I saw a chapel all of gold. [MS. Book iii. ] 
p. 116, Lis¢ (in ink).—Of twenty-two subjects for history of England. 
1. Giants ancient inhabitants of England. 
List (in pencil).— Of plagues of Egypt. 
Lice, Boils, Hail, Locusts, etc. 
[Here follow the contents of the two leaves bound in 
at the end of the MS.) 


p. [117]. Prose.—(Description of Canterbury Pilgrims.) [Descriptive Cat. ] 
p. [118]. Prose.—(The same.) 

p. [119]. Prose.—[Cat. 1810. ] 

p. [120]. [The Everlasting Gospel. «.] 


[End of the Rossetti MS.) 


INDEX TO THE ROSSETTI 
TRANSCRIPT (R’) 


The Everlasting Gospel (far?). 

My Spectre around me night and day. 

To find the western path. 

Three virgins at the break of day. 

I see, I see, the mother said. 

Where thou dwellest, in what grove. 

Why was Cupida boy. — 

If e’er I grow to man’s estate. 

Sleep, sleep, beauty bright. 

When the voices of children are heard on the green. 
The look of love alarms. 

I heard an angel singing. 

I give you the end of a golden string. 

I laid me down upon a bank. 

A flower was offer’d to me. 

The angel who presided o’er my birth. 

I saw a chapel all of gold. 

Never seek to tell thy love. 

Great things are done when men and mountains meet, 
I wander’d the forest. 


Rossethi MS. 151 


The errors of a wise man make your rule. 

O rose thou art sick, 

Nought loves another as itself. 

Tyger, Tyger, burning bright. 

I walk’d abroad on a snowy day. 

Love seeketh not itself to please. 

I was angry with my friend. 

Mock on, mock on, Voltaire, Rousseau. 

What do I care for the men of Thames. 

I rose up at the dawn of day. 

Dear mother, dear mother, the church is cold. 

I asked a thief to steal me a peach. 

To Chloe’s heart young Cupid slily stole. 

The caverns of the grave I’ve seen. 

The countless gold of a merry heart. 

He’s a blockhead who wants a proof of what he can’t perceive. 

[Hiatus of five leaves. | 

Five epigrams numbered 20-4. 

Prose descriptions of Blake’s pictures, Canterbury Pilgrims and 
Vision of the Last Judgment. 


In making his transcript, Rossetti appears to have con- 
' templated publication of part of the contents of the MS. 
Book, edited by his brother, or by his friend, William 
Allingham, the poet. In a letter to the latter dated 
November 1, 1860, he writes: ‘A man (one Gilchrist, who 
lives next door to Carlyle, and is as near him in other 
respects as he can manage) wrote to me the other day, 
saying he was writing a life of Blake, and wanted to 
see my manuscript by that genius. Was there not some 
talk of your doing something in the way of publishing 
its contents? I know William thought of doing so, but 
fancy it might wait long for his efforts, and I have no time, 
but really think its contents ought to be edited, especially 
_ if a new Life gives a “shove to the concern” (as Spurgeon 
expressed himself in thanking a liberal subscriber to his 
Tabernacle). I have not yet engaged myself any way 
to said Gilchrist on the subject, though I have told him he 
can see it here if he will give me a day’s notice.’ Rossetti, 
as we know, did lend the MS. to Gilchrist in the following 
year, and on the death of the latter helped to complete his 
unfinished work by editing the selection from Blake’s 
poetical and prose works given in the second volume of 
the Life. Under the heading ‘ Poems hitherto unpublished,’ 
Rossetti, without distinguishing between the two separate 
sources, prints for the first time a number of poems from the 
Blake autograph in his own possession, together with others 


152 Rossetti MS. 


from the borrowed Pickering MS. He takes considerable 
liberty with the text and gives to several of the pieces titles 
of hisown. From the MS. Book also he excerpts the prose 
manifesto which he calls ‘ Public Address, Blake’s Memo- 
randa on his modes of engraving, and his ‘ Vision of the 
Last Judgment’ (i.e. Additions to Catalogue 1810). 

Swinburne was the next to make use of the MS. Book 
in his Critical Essay (1868). He adds to the number of 
new poems printed, and, by his copious extracts and 
illuminative comment, gives for the first time some ade- 
quate conception of Blake’s great and extraordinary poem 
‘The Everlasting Gospel.’ 

About the same time the Pickering MS., which has since 
disappeared, became the property of Basil Montague 
Pickering, the publisher, who printed the whole of it for 
the first time in his editions of 1866, 1868, and 1874, 
edited by R. H. Shepherd. Pickering’s last edition, and 
the Aldine edition which appeared in the same year, 
mutually supplement each other. W. M. Rossetti was able 
to use that part only of the Pickering MS. which had 
already been printed by his brother, while Shepherd was 
prohibited from using any part of the larger MS. Book. 
W. M. Rossetti, who generally follows his brother's text, 
prints more, though not as stated all, of ‘The Everlasting 
Gospel,’ as well as a few new poems, chiefly epigrams. 

The Rossetti MS. Book was purchased January 26, 1887, 
by its present owner, Mr. W. A. White, who soon after lent 
it for a time to the publisher of Ellis and Yeats’ large 
edition of Blake’s Works, 1893. A copy of the manuscript, 
made for Mr. Ellis, was used for their three-volume edition, 
as well as by Mr. Yeats’ in his small ‘Muses’ Library’ 
Blake, published in the same year. Mr. Ellis’ transcript, 
if one may judge by the text of these editors, bears obvious 
marks of having been made in haste by a copyist unfamiliar 
with Blake’s hand. In their description of the MS. Book 
(vol. i. pp. 202-32) Ellis and Yeats include for the first 
time a few minor poems which had been rejected or ignored 
by former editors. Their versions of some of the longer 
poems and prose pieces in the MS. Book must be sought 
elsewhere, e.g. ‘Fayette’ (vol. ii. pp. 24-7), ‘My spectre 
around me night and day’ (vol. ii. pp. 37, 38), ‘ The Ever- 
lasting Gospel’ (vol. ii. pp. 42-60), and ‘ To the Deists’ in 
Ferusalem (vol. ii. pp. 221-4), and the prose ‘ Advertise- 
ment’ and ‘Additions to Blake’s Catalogue’ (vol. ii. 
PP: 333-403). 


Rossetti MS. E53 


My own text of the poems has been prepared from 
transcripts of the MS. Book made by Mr. White for the 
present edition. These transcripts, which faithfully repro- 
duce the relative positions of poems or stanzas on the 
original page, with all Blake’s deletions, insertions, and 
corrections, together with his marks of transposition and 
successive numerations of stanzas and lines (without careful 
observance of which many of the poems would be unin- 
telligible), possess the advantage of having been made by 
a Blake student thoroughly familiar with his author’s 
handwriting and mode of composition. The aid of the 
magnifying glass or of photography has also been re- 
sorted to, and any obscure passage submitted to minute 

scrutiny. 

_ From these transcripts copies of the poems have been 
made by the present editor, and collated with the chief 
existing texts, any differences of reading being again 
referred to Mr. White for further examination. Some idea 
of the care bestowed upon this part of the work may be 
_ gathered from the fact that in more than one instance the 
original transcription of a single page has cost Mr. White 
four or five hours’ close labour. Similar care has been 
given by the editor to unravelling Blake’s method of build- 
ing up a poem, enabling the reader to follow the same 
process by reference to the notes. The proofs have lastly 
been read by Mr. White, and the text and notes again 
checked from the original manuscript. This edition there- 
fore, while it serves every purpose of a facsimile, presents 
the matter in a much clearer and more intelligible form. 

Not the least important result of the plan here pursued— 
besides the light which it throws upon Blake’s self-criticism 
apparent in his successive changes—is the new form in 
which a number of the most familiar poems now appear. 
One may hesitate to change the generally received line 
‘Sweet morning leads me on’ (xliii) to ‘Sweet mercy 
leads me on,’ yet the latter is not only as Blake wrote 
it, but also imparts a deeper meaning to the poem. The 
lyric ‘To a lovely mirtle bound’ (MS. Book xiii, D. G. 
Rossetti’s ‘In a Myrtle Shade’) gains by the recovery 
of Blake’s final version. Blake’s final readings, whether 
for the worse or for the better, are here uniformly adopted. 
Instances will be noted where, as in ‘Cupid’ (MS. Book 
cxv), these changes are the reverse of improvements, or 
where the MS. version of some of the Songs of Experience 
may be preferred to the text of the engraved book. 


154 Rossetti MS. 


The poetical pieces forming part of the MS. Book, but 
not printed in this section of my edition, are part of the 
Songs of Experience, the variant readings of which are 
supplied in the footnotes to that work—‘ Three virgins at the 
break of day,’ which I print in the poems from the Pickering 
MS. with the readings of the MS. Book version, and the two 
quatrains ‘Each man is in his spectre’s power’ and ‘I give 
you the end of a golden string,’ afterwards engraved as 
part of Zerusalem and here printed among poems from the 
Prophetic Books, 


er tew 
\nt 


\a 


2 


POEMS 


FROM 


Ts Btls 4 ORY Se iit eed ANE 


I 
_ MS. Book i—xxxvi, pp. 115-98 


Written in the reversed book 
circa 1793 


I 
ROSSETTI MANUSCRIPT 


1 


I told my love, I told my love, I 
I told her all my heart ; 

Trembling, cold, in ghastly fears, 

Ah! she doth depart. 


Soon as she was gone from me, 5 
A traveller came by, 

Silently, invisibly— 

O! was no deny. 


MS. Book, p. 115. Printed by DGR and later edd. under the title ‘ Love’s 
Secret.’ Not in Swinb. All edd. print the first stanza deleted by Blake :— 
‘Never pain [seek del.] to tell thy love, 
Love that never told can be; 
For the gentle wind does move 
Silently, invisibly.’ 
All edd. read seek for pain; WBY reads shall for can; all edd. except 
WBY read doth for does. 
2,3 heart... fears] All edd. punctuate by comma after heart and period 


after fears. 4 doth] did all edd. 5 Soon as} Soon after all edd. 
8 O! ... deny] He took her with a sigh MS. Book ist rdg. del. and 
all edd. 
11 
I laid me down upon a bank, I 


Where love lay -sleeping ; 
I heard among the rushes dank 
Weeping, Weeping. 


Then I went to the heath & the wild, 5 
To the thistles & thorns of the waste; 

And they told me how they were beguil’d, 
Driven out, & compel’d to be chaste. 


MS. Book, p. 115. DGR, Swinb., WMR and EY print these as the first 
two stanzas of ‘The Garden of Love,’ ignoring the separation line drawn 
between the two poems. EY however note this, iii. p. 93. WBY prints 
separately with title ‘The Thistles and Thorns,’ 


Rosset MS. 16 


111 


I saw a chapel all of gold I 
That none did dare to enter in, 

And many weeping stood without, 

Weeping, mourning, worshipping. 


I saw a serpent rise between 5 
The white pillars of the door, 
: And he fore’d & fore’d & forc’d; 

Down the golden hinges tore, 


And along the pavement sweet, 9 
Set with pearls & rubies bright, 

All his shining length he drew, 

Till upon the altar white 


Vomiting his poison out 13 
On the bread & on the wine. 

So I turn’d into a sty, 

And laid me down among the swine. 


MS. Book, p. 115. DGR and all later editors entitle this ‘The Defiled 
Sanctuary.’ Not in Swinb. 
8 Down... tore] Till he broke the pearly door MS. Book rst rdg. del. ; 

- Till he the polden hinges tore all except WBY, who reads, Till down the euiden 
hinges tore. 13 Vomiting] He vomited DER, WMR, EY ; Vomited WBY. 


\ e 


1V 


I askéd a thief to steal me a peach: I 
He turnéd up his eyes. 

I ask’d a lithe lady to lie her down: 

Holy & meek, she cries. 


MS. Book, p. 114. Not in DGR. Swinb. (p. 141) and later edd. entitle 
this ‘The Will and the Way.’ 
_ t askéd] asked =ask’d all edd. steal] steel EY (Index to MS. Book, i. 
a05). 2 He] And he MS. Book 1st rdg. del, turnéd] turned = 
turn’d all edd. 


158 Rossetti MS. 


As soon as I went an angel came: 5 
He wink’d at the thief, 
And smil’d at the dame; 


And without one word said 8 
Had a peach from the tree, 

And still as a maid 

Enjoy’d the Lady. 


5 As... came] all edd. print as two lines. 6 He] And he MS. Book 
ist vdg. del, 8 said] spoke MS. Book 1st rdg. del. and all edd. 
to And. . . maid] And ’twixt earnest & joke MS. Book rst rdg. del. and 
all edd, 11 Enjoy’d] He enjoy’d MS. Book tst vdg. del. 

Vv 
I heard an Angel singing I 


When the day was springing: 
‘Mercy, Pity, Peace 
Is the world’s release.’ 


Thus he sang all day 5 
Over the new mown hay, 

Till the sun went down, 

And haycocks lookéd brown. 


I heard a Devil curse 9 
Over the heath & the furze: 

‘Mercy could be no more 

If there was nobody poor, 


‘And pity no more could be, 13 
If all were as happy as we.’ 

At his curse the sun went down 

And the heavens gave a frown. 


MS. Book, p. 114. An earlier version of ‘The human Image’ (engraved 
under the title ‘The Human Abstract’ in the Songs of Experience). DGR 
and later edd. name this ‘The Two Songs.’ Swinb. p. 147; 

3 Pity, Peace] Pity and Peace all edd. 4 Is] Are all edd. 5 
Thus] So all except WBY. 12 was] were all edd. 13 could] 
would Swinb. 14 as happy] Al/ edd. omit. ‘as.’ we] ye all except Swinb., 
EY correcting later in note iii. p. 97. 15 At his curse] Thus he sang & 
MS. Book ts¢ rdg. del, 16 frown] Here, as Blake’s line drawn beneath 


3 Rossetti MS. 159 


‘this stanza shows, the poem originally ended. Later he added a fifth 
stanza :— 


‘ Down [at first And down] pourd the heavy rain (17] 
Over the new veap’d grain, 

And Mercy & Pity & Peace descended ; 

The Farmers were ruined & harvest was ended? 


and again indicated the completion of the poem by a fresh terminal line. This 
stanza Blake afterwards deleted. Lastly follow several attempts at a new 
stanza, the final form of the only completed couplet of which reads : 


‘And Miseries’ increase [21] 
Is Mercy, Pity, Peace’ ; 


_ the rejected readings, which are not very legibly written, being :— 


‘ And Mercy Pity (& del.] Peace 
(? Joy’d) at their increase 

(? With) Poverty’s Increase 

Are 

And by distress increase 

Mercy, Pity, Peace 

By Misery to increase 

Mercy, Pity, Peace. 


Swinb. (p. 147) re-arranges and prints Il. [17], [18], [21], and [22] as his last 
_ stanza:— 
‘Down poured the heavy rain 
Over the new-reaped grain ; 
And Misery’s increase 
Is Mercy, Pity, Peace.’ 


_ DGR prints as his third stanza Il. 9-14, 1. 5 of ‘The Human Abstract’ version 
(Songs of Experience) and ll. [21), [22] (slightly altered) :— 


‘T heard a Devil curse 

Over the heath and the furze: 
‘Mercy could be no more 

If there were nobody poor, 
And Pity no more could be 

If all were happy as ye: 

And mutual fear brings Peace. 
Misery’s increase 

Are Mercy, Pity, Peace’’’; 


concluding, as a separate couplet, with Il. 15, 16 :— 


‘At his curse the sun went down, 
And the heavens gave a frown.’ 


WMR, EY, and WBY follow DGR. EY however, in their ‘ Notes to the 
Poetical Sketches, Songs, &c.’ iii. p. 97, print the poem as it is found in the 

‘MS. Book, their readings of the partially illegible words being rather different 
from mine. 


160 Rossetti MS. 


A Cradle Song 


Sleep! Sleep! beauty bright, I 
Dreaming o’er the joys of night ; 

Sleep! Sleep! in thy sleep 

Little sorrows sit & weep. 


Sweet Babe, in thy face : 
Soft desires I can trace, 

Secret joys & secret smiles, 

Little pretty infant wiles. 


As thy softest limbs I feel, | 9 
Smiles as of the morning steal 

O’er thy cheek, & o’er thy breast 

Where thy little heart does rest. 


O! the cunning wiles that creep 13 
In thy little heart asleep. 

When thy little heart does wake 

Then the dreadful lightnings break, 


MS. Book, p. 114. Obviously written as the contrary of the ‘ Cradle Song’ 
in the Songs of Innocence ; but never engraved by Blake. DGR and all later 
editors include this poem among the Songs of Experience, in most cases with 
explanatory note. This song,-as the line drawn below it shows, at first con: 
sisted of stamzas 1, 3, 4. Stanza a was then added and a second boundary 
line drawn, while still later Blake added the final stanza and numbered the 
whole in their present order. 

1-4 Sleep... weep] The two couplets were written in reverse order, 
Blake indicating the change by prefixed numerals. 2 Dreaming... 
night] Thou shalt taste the joys of night MS, Book ts¢ rdg. del. over] ir 
all edd. 4 Little... weep] Thou wilt every secret keep MS. Book ts. 
rdg. del. ; Canst thou any secret keep ibid. and rdg. del. 8 Littl ty 
wiles] Such as burning youth beguiles MS. Book 1s¢ rdg. del. 9 As ete. 
Yet a little while the moon Silent . . . MS. Book abandoned opening 
of this stanza. feel] touch MS. Book 1st rdg. del. ; stroke ibid. and rdg 
del. to steal] broke tbid. 1st rdg. del. I2, 15 does] doth all edd 
16 lightnings] light shall all edd. 


Rossetti MS. 161 


From thy cheek & from thy eye, 17 
O’er the youthful harvests nigh. 

Infant wiles & infant smiles 

Heaven & Earth of peace beguiles. 


17-20 From... beguiles] all edd. omit this stanza. It has been printed, 
however, by Swinb., p. 124, who reads ‘thine eye’ for‘ thy eye’ in 
i t7. 19 Infant... infant] Female... female MS. Book rst rdg. del. 


Vil 
Silent, Silent Night, I 


Quench the holy light 
Of thy torches bright ; 


For possess’d of Day, 
Thousand spirits stray 5 
That sweet joys betray. 


Why should joys be sweet 
Uséd with deceit, 
Nor with sorrows meet? 


But an honest joy 10 
Does itself destroy 
For a harlot coy. 


MS. Book, p. 113. Without any corrections, and obviously transcribed 
from an earlier draft. No title in original DGR and later edd. name 
‘Night and Day.’ Swinb. p. 133. EY omit in their Table of Contents to 
the MS. Book (i. 205). 

7 joys] love Swinb. 11 does] doth DGR, WMR, EY, WBY. 


vill 


O lapwing! thou fliest around the heath, 

Nor seest the net that is spread beneath. 

Why dost thou not fly among the corn fields? 
They cannot spread nets where a harvest yields. 


MS. Book, p. 113. Without correction. Only printed by EY, i. 206. 
1 thou] that EY. 


SAMPSON M 


162 — Rossetti MS. 


1X 


I fear’d the fury of my wind x 
Would blight all blossoms fair & true; 

And my sun it shin’d & shin’d, 

And my wind it never blew. 


But a blossom fair or true 5 
Was not found on any tree; 

For all blossoms grew & grew 

Fruitless, false, tho’ fair to see. 


MS. Book, p. 113. Printed by DGR and later edd. with the title ‘ Barren 
Blossom.’ Not in Swinb. 

1 fury] roughness MS. Book 1st rdg. del. wind] word EY (in their 
very inaccurate index to the MS. Book, i. 205). 4 And] But MS. Book 
1st rdg. del. 


Infant Sorrow 


My mother groan’d, my father wept; . I 
Into the dangerous world I leapt, 

Helpless, naked, piping loud, 

Like a fiend hid in a cloud. 


Struggling in my father’s hands, 5 
Striving against my swaddling bands, 

Bound & weary, I thought best 

To sulk upon my Mother’s breast. 


MS. Book, p. 113, with title added later, as the different ink shows. The 
two first stanzas were afterwards engraved by Blake as one of the Songs of 
Experience. First printed by Swinb., pp. 137-139, who numbers the stanzas 
with roman numerals. Not in DGR or WMR. EY (Notes to the Poetical 
Sketches, Songs, &c.) iii. 93, 94 ; WBY (Notes), p. 240. 

To understand Blake’s successive changes in the last part of this poem it 
should be noted that, beginning with 1. 21, he changed ‘a Priest’ (afterwards, 
as in xiii, altered to ‘ my father’) to ‘many a Priest,’ making corresponding 
changes in the other stanzas where required. Cp. with this poem ‘ Ina Mirtle 
Shade’ (MS. Book xiii). 

4 Like . .. cloud] See note to ‘Infant Sorrow’ (Songs of Exp.) 1. 4. 


Rossetti MS. 163 


When I saw that rage was vain, 9 
And to sulk would nothing gain, 

Turning many a trick & wile 

I began to soothe & smile. 


And I sooth’d day after day, 13 
Till upon the ground I stray; 

And I smil’d night after night, 

Seeking only for delight. 


And I saw before me shine 17 
Clusters of the wand’ring vine ; 

And, beyond, a mirtle tree 

Stretch’d its blossoms out to me. 


But a Priest with holy look, 21 
In his hands a holy book, 

Pronouncéd curses on his head 

Who the fruits or blossoms shed. 


I beheld the Priest by night ; 25 
He embrac’d my mirtle bright: 

I beheld the Priest by day, 

Where beneath my vines he lay. 


Like a serpent in the day 29 
Underneath my vines he lay: 

Like a serpent in the night 

He embrac’d my mirtle bright. 


9-12 When...smile] This stanza is an afterthought. 1r Turn- 
ing... wile] I began to MS. Book 1s¢ rdg. del.; Seeking many an artful 


wile MS. Book 2nd rdg. del.; Twining many a trick and wile Swinb. 


13 sooth’d] grew MS. Book rst rdg. del.; Swinb. refams this; smil’d MS. 


Book 2nd rdg. del. ; EY omit. 14 stray] lay Swinb., EY, WBY. 
15 smil’d] grew MS. Book ts¢ rdg. del., Swinb. 17,18 And... vine] 
‘But upon the earthly ground 
No delight was to be found,’ 


MS. Book first beginning of this stanza de/. EY put asterisks for ‘ was to.’ 


17 AndI...] From this point onwards I give the earlier (and preferable) 


form of the remaining stanzas; and print in a final note the revised form of 


stanzas 6-9. These changes are all dependent upon the substitution of 


_ ‘many a Priest’ for ‘a Priest’ in 1, ar. 21 But a Priest] My father 


then MS. Book 2rd rdg. look] book EY book (?look) WBY (Notes), 
p. 240. 24 fruits] fruit Swinb., EY. 28 vines] vine EY. 29-32 


I beheld... bright] The two couplets of this stanza were originally written in 


M 2 


164 Rossetti MS. 


So I smote him, & his gore 33 
Stain’d the roots my mirtle bore; 

But the time of youth is fled, 

And grey hairs are on my head. 


the reverse order, the final position of the lines being afterwards indicated 
in Blake’s usual manner by Arabic numerals added in the left-hand margin. 
17-36 AndI saw... head] I append here the final version of the last five 
stanzas (see note to 1.17). The verses were not re-copied, the changes being 
deletions and additions. 


And I saw before me shine *1y 
Clusters of the wand’ring vine; 

And many a lovely flower & tree 

Stretch’d their blossoms out to me. 


But many a Priest with holy look, Kar 
In their hands a holy book, 

Pronounc’d curses on my head 

And bound me in a mirtle shade. 


I beheld the Priests by night; *25 
They embrac’d the blossoms bright: 

I beheld the Priests by day; 

Underneath the vines they lay. 


Like to holy men by day * 39 
Underneath the vines they lay: 

Like to serpents in the night 

They embrac’d my mirtle bright. 


So I smote them, & their gore #35 
Stain’d the roots my mirtle bore; 

But the time of youth is fled, 

And grey hairs are on my head. 


*at look] book EY. *a5—*ge I beheld... bright] WBY (Notes) omits. 
*28 vines] vine EY. 


Xl 


Why should I care for the men of thames, is 


Or the cheating waves of charter’d streams ; 
Or shrink at the little blasts of fear 
That the hireling blows into my ear? 


MS. Book, p. rg. Printed by DGR and later edd. with title ‘Thames and 


Ohio.’ Not in Swinb. 


1 thames] the Thames EY (Index to MS. Book, i. 205). 2 Or] And 


alledd. waves| waters DGR, WMR, EY, WBY. 4 my] mine all edd. 


es 


Rossetti MS. 165 


Tho’ born on the cheating banks of Thames, 5 
Tho’ his waters bathéd my infant limbs, 
The Ohio shall wash his stains from me: 
I was born a slave, but I go to be free. 


6 bathéd] bathed all edd. 7 The... me] I spurn’d his waters away 
from me MS. Book ts¢ rdg. del, ~ 8 go] long MS. Book 1st rdg. del. 
X11 
Thou hast a lap full of seed, I 


And this is a fine country. 
Why dost thou not cast thy seed, 
And live in it merrily? 


Shall I cast it on the sand 5 
And turn it into fruitful land? 

For on no other ground 

Can I sow my seed, 

Without tearing up 

Some stinking weed. Io 


MS. Book, p. rrr, where it precedes ‘Earth’s Answer’ (Songs of Exp.). 
Printed by DGR and later edd. with title ‘Seed Sowing.’ Not in Swimb. or 
WBY. Cp. Ahania, chap. v, stanza 12 :— 

‘Then thou, with thy lap full of seed, 
With thy hand full of generous fire, 
Walked forth from the clouds of morning, 
On the virgins of springing joy, 

On the human soul to cast 

' The seed of eternal science.’ 

t lap full] lapful DR, WMR, EY. 2 fine] fair DGR, WMR, EY. 
5, 6 Shall I... turn] Oft I’ve... turn’d MS. Book 1s¢ rdg. del. J-10 
For . . . weed] DGR, WMR and EY print these four lines as two. This 
may have been Blake’s first intention, as he wrote ‘can’ at the end of 1. 7, 
but he erased it and arranged the lines as here printed. 7 For] But MS. 
Book 1st rdg. del. 9 tearing] pulling MS. Book rst rdg. del. 


166 Rossetti MS. 


X11 


[First Version| 


In a Mirtle Shade 


Why should I be bound to thee, I 
O my lovely mirtle tree? 

Love, free love, cannot be bound 

To any tree that grows on ground. 


O! how sick and weary I 
Underneath my mirtle lie; 
Like to dung upon the ground, 
Underneath my mirtle bound. 


nm 


Oft my mirtle sigh’d in vain 9 
To behold my heavy chain: 

Oft my father saw us sigh, 

And laugh’d at our simplicity. 


So I smote him, & his gore 13 
Stain’d the roots my mirtle bore. 

But the time of youth is fled, 

And grey hairs are on my head. 


MS. Book, p. 111. DGR and WMR omit this version; Swinb., pp. 137, 
138, quotes stanzas rand 3. EY (Notes to the Poetical Sketches, Songs, &c.) 
lil, 94 ; WBY (Notes), p.. 245. Cp. with this poem the fuller form of ‘ Infant 
Sorrow’ (MS. Book x). : 

5-8 O... bound] This stanza was added after the rest were written, in 
the left-hand column, prefixed numerals to Il. 5 and 9 indicating the relative 
position of the second and third stanzas. WBY, by omitting these and 
printing the stanzas as written, misrepresents the true order. Blake began 
stanza 2 with the couplet, afterwards deleted: 


‘To a lovely mirtle bound, 
Blossoms show’ring all around,’ 


Both EY and WBY print this couplet without marking the deletion, as else- 
where, by italics. 5 sick] weak EY, WBY. 1r Oft... saw] Oft the 
priest beheld MS. Book 1s¢ rdg. del. : cp. MS. Book x. Ig-16 So... 
head] cp, ‘Infant Sorrow,’ ll. 33-6 (MS. Book x). 


Rossettz MS. 167 


[Final Version] 
To My Mirtle | 


To a lovely mirtle bound, r 
Blossoms show’ring all around, 

O how sick & weary I 

Underneath my mirtle lie! 

Why should I be bound to thee, 5 
O my lovely mirtle tree? 


MS. Book, p. 106, where it immediately precedes ‘ Nought loves another 
as itself’ (‘A Little Boy Lost’), The simple and faultless form into which 
Blake here compresses the sixteen lines of the preceding version has been 
obscured by editorial changes. As this poem has never been correctly 
printed, it may be well to reproduce it in the exact form in which it is found 
in the MS. Book, indicating deleted lines by italics :— 


TO MY MIRTLE. 


5 Why should I be bound to thee ah 
6 O my lovely mirtle tree 
Love free love cannot be bound 
To any tree that grows on ground. 
1 To a lovely mirtle bound ¥5 
Blossoms showring all around 
Like to dung upon the ground 
Underneath my mirtle bound 
7 3. O how sick & weary I *9 
4 Underneath my mirtle lie. 

It will thus be seen that Blake began by transcribing, as it stood, the first 
stanza of the earlier version, beginning his second stanza with the couplet 
which he had rejected in the previous draft and adding—but in transposed 
order—two accepted couplets of the same stanza. He then struck out Il. *3, 
*4 and *7, *8, prefixing marginal numbers in his usual manner to indicate the 
position of the lines retained. Blake’s intention is perfectly plain; yet we 
find all Blake’s editors following DGR in restoring the deleted lines *3, *4, 
and printing the poem as two four-line stanzas. The original arrangement 
of the verses must have misled Mr. Rossetti into supposing that two more 
lines were required, otherwise he would have been the first to perceive how 
greatly the poem gains in freshness and sweetness by the omission of the 


rhetorical tag :— 
Love, free love, cannot be bound 


To any tree that grows on ground! 

All edd. follow DGR’s text. EY (Notes to the Poetical Sketches, Songs, 
&c.) iii. 95, and WBY (Notes), print the lines in the order in which they 
were written in the MS. Book, but leave them meaningless by the omission 
of Blake’s marginal numbers, and by ignoring deletions. DGR and all edd. 
give this poem the title used in the earlier version, ‘In a Myrtle Shade.’ 

3 sick] weak all edd. 4 lie] Ali edd. end first stanza here. 6 tree] 
All edd. add \l. *3, *4. 


168 | Rossetti MS. 
X1V 
To Nobodaddy 


Why art thou silent & invisible, I 
Father of Jealousy? 

Why dost thou hide thyself in clouds 

From every searching Eye? 


Why darkness & obscurity 5 
In all thy words & laws, 

That none dare eat the fruit but from 

The wily serpent’s jaws? 

Or is it because Secresy gains females’ loud applause? 


MS. Book, p. 109. The title added later in different ink. Not in DGR. 
Swinb., p. 264; EY, iii. 91, 1.209. Printed by WMR under the title ‘ Father 
of Jealousy,’ and by WBY in text as ‘To Old Nobodaddy,’ and in notes as 
‘To Nobodady’ (sic). ‘Nobodaddy’ (obviously ‘ Nobody’s Daddy,’ anti- 
thetical to ‘Father of All’) was Blake’s jocular nickname for Urizen, the 
Father of Jealousy. The same name occurs also in ‘ Fayette’ and in the lines 
on Klopstock (MS. Book xxxvi, xxxix). 

2 Father] Man MS. Book 1s¢ rdg. del. 4 searching] passing EY. 
5 EY and WBY print both stanzas as one. 7 dare] can EY. 9 Or 
... applause] a later addition in pencil. Alledd.printastwolines. Secresy] 
Jealousy (with note querying ‘secrecy’ as the true reading) Swinb.: gains] 
gives Swinb.:females’ loud] feminine MS, Book 1s¢ rdg. del., Swinb., EY, WBY. 


XV 


Are not the joys of morning sweeter I 
Than the joys of night? 


And are the vig’rous joys of youth 
Ashaméd of the light? 


MS. Book, p. 109. Printed by DGR and later edd. with title ‘Young 
Love.’ Swinb. (first two lines only), p. 140. 
Cp. Visions of the Daughters of Albion (1793) :— 
‘Innocence! honest, open, seeking 
The vigorous joys of morning light; open to virgin bliss, 
Who taught thee modesty, subtil modesty, child of night & sleep ?? 
4 Ashaméd] Ashamed DGR. 


Rossetti MS. 169 


Let age & sickness silent rob 5 
The vineyards in the night ; 

But those who burn with vig’rous youth 

Pluck fruits before the light. 


6 vineyards] vineyard all edd. 


XV1 


They said this mystery never shall cease: 
The priest promotes war, & the soldier peace. 


MS. Book, p. 107. Cp. note to ‘ The Lilly’ (Songs of Experience). 
2 promotes] loves MS, Book 1st rdg. del. 


XVIl 
Love to faults is always blind ; I 
Always is to joy inclin’d, 
Lawless, wing’d & unconfin’d, 
And breaks all chains from every mind. 


Deceit to secresy confin’d, 5 
Lawful, cautious & refin’d; 

To anything but interest blind, 

And forges fetters for the mind. 


_ MS. Book, written in pencil at top right-hand corners of pp. 107, 106, 
I print the two stanzas as one poem, their connexion being obvious, though 
‘not indicated by Blake himself. Not in DGR, WMR, or Swinb. EY and 
WBY (the latter with the title ‘Freedom and Captivity’) print the first 
_ stanza and an altered version of the fragment by which it is immediately 
followed in the MS. (‘There souls of men are bought & sold’) as a single 
poem. See also WBY (Notes), p. 246. 

3 Lawless . . . unconfin’d] Always .. . unconfin’d MS. Book ts¢ rdg. 
‘Always’ is underlined, which was probably a hasty attempt at erasure ; 
Lawless, wingéd, unconfined EY, WBY. 5-8 Deceit... mind] MS. 

Book rst rdg. :— 
‘Deceit to secresy inclin’d, 
c Modest, prudish & confin’d, 
Never is to interest blind, 
And chains in fetters every mind.’ 


LIBRARY ST. MARY’S COLLEGE 


170 — Rossetta MS. 


XV111 


There souls of men are bought & sold, I 
And milk fed infancy for gold; 

And youth to slaughter houses led, 

And beauty, for a bit of bread. 


MS. Book, p. 107. Not in DGR and WMR. Swinb., p. 127. EY and 
WBY print as second stanza to preceding poem. See note to xvii. 


t There] The EY, WBY. 2 And] In EY, WBY: milk fed... gold] 
cradled infancy is sold MS. Book ts¢ rdg. del. 3 youth] youths Swinb., 
EY, WBY. 4 beauty] maidens MS. Book 1st rdg. del., Swinb. 

X1X 
s b) 
The Wild Flower’s Song 
As I wander’d the forest, I 


The green leaves among, 
I heard a wild flower 
Singing a song. 


‘I slept in the Earth 5 
In the silent night, 

I murmur’d my fears 

And I felt delight. 


‘In the morning I went, 9 
As rosy as morn, 

To seek for new Joy; 

But I met with scorn.’ 


MS. Book, pp. 107, 109. The second and third stanzas on P- 109 at first 
formed the entire poem: later Blake added on p. 107 the introductory stanza 
and catchwords (‘I slept in the dark, &c.’), and finally the title. 

1 wander’d the] wandered in the all edd. 3 flower] thistle MS. Book 
ist rdg. del. 5 1... Earth] I was found in the dark tbid. q 
fears] thoughts R' (though correctly in DGR), WMR, EY, WBY. 


Rossetts MS. 171 


XX 
Soft Snow 


: I walkéd abroad on a snowy day: 1 
I ask’d the soft snow with me to play: 
She play’d & she melted in all her prime; 
And the winter call’d it a dreadful crime. 


MS. Book, p. 107. The last line is in pencil. Title added later. DGR, 
~WMR, EY and WBY (‘Couplets and Fragments,’ i), Swinb. pp. 135, 136 
(note). 
1 walkéd] walked MS. Book and all edd. : snowy] sunny Swinb. 2 
ask’d] wooed Swinb., WBY. 4 And... crime} Oh, that sweet love 
should be thought a crime! MS. Book 1s¢ rdg. del.; Ah! that, &c. R4, 
" Swinb. (nofe). 


3 XX1 
Merlin’s Prophecy 


The harvest shall flourish in wintry weather I 
When two virginities meet together: 

The King & the Priest must be tied in a tether 
Before two virgins can meet together. 


MS. Book, p. 106. Only printed by EY, i. 207. 


| I wintry] windy EY (Index to MS. Book), i. 205. 3 The King & 
_ the Priest] The king and priest EY. . 


Xx 


‘Day 
The sun arises in the East, I 
Cloth’d in robes of blood & gold; 
Swords & spears & wrath increast 
All around his bosom roll’d, 
Croun’d with warlike fires & raging desires. 


MS. Book, p. 105. Printed here for first time. EY quote title and first 
‘line in their index to the MS. Book, i. 205. 
' x sun] day MS. Book 1st rdg. del., EY (Index). 4 bosom] ancles 
MS. Book 1st rdg. del. 


ye. | Rossetta MS. 


XXill 
The Fairy 


‘Come hither, my sparrows, t 
My little arrows. 

If a tear or a smile 

Will a man beguile, 

If an amorous delay 5 
Clouds a sunshiny day, 

If the step of a foot 

Smites the heart to its root, 

’Tis the marriage ring— 9 
Makes each fairy a king.’ . 


So a fairy sung. 

From the leaves I sprung ; 

He leap’d from the spray 13 
To flee away ; 

But in my hat caught, 

He soon shall be taught. 

Let him laugh, let him cry, 17 
He’s my butterfly ; 

For I’ve pulled out the sting 

Of the marriage ring. 


MS. Book, p. 105. Title in pencil. Only in Swinb., pp. 142, 143, and EY, 
iii.96. Blake’s first title (afterwards erased) was ‘The Marriage Ring.’ 
Swinb. gives this instead of the later title: EY print both titles, without 
indicating the author’s deletion of the first. 

7 step] tread MS. Book 1st rdg. del. 10, 11 Swinb. prints both 
stanzas as one. Ir sung]sang Swinb., EY. 12 sprung] sprang Swinb., 
EY. 13 the] his Swinb. 15 hat caught] Cp. a sketch in the MS. 
Book, afterwards engraved by Blake for The Gates of Paradise, no. 7, repro- 
duced in Gilchr., i. 99. 19, 20 For... ring] l. 19 is an addition, the 
poem originally ending with 1. 20 and a line now thoroughly erased ; 


‘And the marriage ring’ 


20 Of] And MS. Book 1st rdg. del. See preceding note. 


Rossetti MS. rs 


XXIV 


The sword sung on the barren heath, 
The sickle in the fruitful field: 

The sword he sung a song of death, 
But could not make the sickle yield. 


MS. Book, p. 105. Notin DGR or Swinb. WMR, EY, WBY (‘Couplets 
__ and Fragments,’ vii). 
I, 3 sung] sang all edd, 


XXV 


Abstinence sows sand all over 

The ruddy limbs & flaming hair, 
But Desire Gratified 

Plants fruits of life & beauty there. 


MS. Book, p. 105. DGR, WMR, EY (ii) and WBY (3g) ‘ Couplets and 
_ Fragments,’ Swinb., p. 137. 
2 flaming] ? flowering ? flowery Swinb. 


XXV1 


In a wife I would desire 
What in whores is always found— 
The lineaments of Gratified desire. 


MS. Book, p. 105. Cp. ‘Several Questions Answered’ (xxxv). 


XXVil 
If you trap the moment before it’s ripe, 
The tears of repentance you'll certainly wipe ; 


But if once you let the ripe moment go 
You can never wipe off the tears of woe. 


MS. Book, p.105. In pencil. Printed by DGR and all later edd. as the 
second stanza of the poem immediately following in the MS. Book (xxxv, 
' ‘Eternity ’) under the title ‘ Opportunity.’ 
x trap] catch MS. Book ts rdg. del. 4 You can] You’ll MS, Book 1s¢ 
vdg. del. 


174 | Rossetti MS. 


XXVIII 


The Kid 


Thou, little Kid, did’st play 
&c. 


So in MS. Book, p. 105. Blake here, according to his usual practice, uses 
‘ &c.’ to signify that the poem had already been noted elsewhere. He never 
transcribed it into the MS. Book, and the remainder of this piece is therefore 
lost to us, 


XX1X 
Lacedemonian Instruction 


Come hither, my boy, tell me what thou seest there. 
A fool tangled in a religious snare. 


MS. Book, p. 103. Title added later. Only in EY. . 
r tell... there] what see you there? EY, 2 tangled] caught EY. 


XXX 
Riches 


The countless gold of a merry heart, 

The rubies & pearls of a loving eye, 

The indolent never can bring to the mart, 
Nor the secret hoard up in his treasury. 


MS. Book, p. 103 (reversed). All edd. follow DGR in printing this as 
second stanza of cxxv, WBY with title ‘The Two Kinds of Riches.’ 

2 of a loving eye] In the MS., written in error, ‘ of a loving of a loving eye. 
3 indolent] idle man MS. Book 1st rdg. del., and all edd. 


4 seeret] cunning 
MS. Book ist vdg. del., and all edd. 


Rossetth MS. ie 


XXX1 


An Answer to the Parson 


ad 


Why of the sheep do you not learn peace? 
Because I don’t want you to shear my fleece. 


MS. Book, p.103. DGR and WMR (‘ Couplets and Fragments,’ xiii), Not 
_in Swinb., EY, or WBY. 


XXX 
Motto to the Songs of Innocence and 


of Experience 


The Good are attracted by Men’s perceptions, I 
And think not for themselves; 

Till Experience teaches them to catch 

And to cage the Fairies & Elves. 


And then the Knave begins to snarl, 5 
And the Hypocrite to howl; 

_ And all his good Friends shew their private ends, 
And the Eagle is known from the Owl. 


MS. Book, p.1or. Not inDGR or EY. Swinb., p. 124. WMR prefixes 
| to Songs of Innocence and of Experience with the title ‘A Motto.’ WBY 
(Notes) p. 238. 

3 to catch] how to catch Swinb, 7 ends] end WBY. 


: XXXI1l 
Her Whole Life is an Epigram smart, smooth & neatly 
pen’d, 
Platted quite neat to catch applause, with a hang-noose 
at the end. 


MS. Book, p. 100. Placed among ‘ Couplets and Fragments’ by DGR (x), 
“WMR, EY (xii), and WBY (14). Not in Swinb. 
1 Her] Not plainly written; possibly ‘His’: smart] smack all edd. 
2 hang-noose] strong noose all edd. 


176 Rossetti MS. 


XXXIV 


An Old maid early e’er I knew I 
Ought but the love that on me grew; 

And now I’m cover’d o'er & over, 

And wish that I had been a Whore. 


O! I cannot cannot find 5 
The undaunted courage of a Virgin Mind; 

For Early I in love was crost, 

Before my flower of love was lost. 


MS. Book, p. 100. Printed only by EY, i. 206. The second stanza was 
originally the first, Blake afterwards renumbering them in their present order. 
1 e’er] Read ere, 3 I’m cover’d] I am covered EY. 


XXXV 


Several Questions Answered 


[Eternity] I. 


He who bends to himself a joy 
Doth the wingéd life destroy ; 

But he who kisses the joy as it flies 
Lives in Eternity’s sunrise. 


MS. Book, p. 99. Under the general title * Several Questions Answered,’ 
Blake here transcribes hastily in pencil, short pieces, the first drafts of which 
are written elsewhere in the MS. Book. The original order of pieces was 
4, 2, 3, I, 5, the revised sequence being indicated by Blake’s usual marginal 
figures. None of Blake’s editors print these fragments together. Title 
incorrectly given in EY’s Index (i, 206) as ‘ Questions answered (again).’ 

1-4 He... sunrise] First written on p. 105 with title ‘Eternity.’ Printed 
by DGR and later edd. with the title ‘Opportunity,’ as the first stanza of 
xxvii, the first draft of which immediately precedes it, on p. 105 of the MS. 
Book. 2 Doth] Does MS. Book, p. 105 and all edd.: winged] winged 
WMR, EY, WBY. 3 kisses] just kisses MS. Book, p. 105 1st rdg. del. 

Eternity’s] an eternal MS. Book, p. 105 1s¢ rdg, del. 


7 


Rossetts MS. 177 


‘ 2. 
The look of love alarms, ; 5 
Because it’s fill’d with fire ; 
But the look of soft deceit 

! Shall win the lover’s hire. 


2. 
Soft deceit & Idleness, 9 
These are Beauty’s sweetest dress. 
4. 
[The Question Answer’d] 
What is it men in women do require? II 


The lineaments of Gratified Desire. 
What is it women do in men require? 
The lineaments of Gratified Desire. 


5. 
An ancient Proverb 
Remove away that black’ning church, 15 
Remove away that marriage hearse, 
Remove away that [man] of blood— 
-You'll quite remove the ancient curse. 


5-8 The... hire] Transcribed from p. 103 of the MS. Book. Among 
*Couplets and Fragments’ (111), DGR, WMR, EY (4), WBY. 6 it’s] 
*tis MS. Book ist version, p. 103, and all edd. fill’d] filled all edd. . 9,10 
Soft ... dress] Transcribed from MS. Book, p. 103, where it follows the pre- 
ceding quatrain but with Blake’s usual line of separation. DGR and later 
edd, print as the two last lines of ‘The look of love alarms.’ Blake at 
first began this couplet with the deleted line ‘Which are beauties sweetest 
dress?’ 10 Beauty’s] beauties MS. Book rsf version, p. 103. II-14 
‘What... Desire] Transcribed from MS. Book, p. 103, where it bears the 
title ‘The Question Answer’d.’ Not in DGR or WMR. Swinb., p, 182. 
‘EY, i. 206. WBY (title omitted) ‘Couplets and Fragments’ (2). Id, 13 
in] of MS. Book rst version, 1st rdg. del. 15-18 Transcribed from MS. 
Book, p. 107, where the title is an addition. Only in WBY (Notes), 
|p. 240. Cp. note to ‘London’ (Songs of Exp.). 15 black’ning] 
blackening WBY. I7 man] dash in MS.; place MS. Book ts¢ ver- 
sion, ist rdg. del. I supply ‘man’ from the last rdg. of the earlier 
version. 18 You'll] ’Twill MS. Book 1s¢ version, ist rdg. del, the] 
that WBY. 


SAMPSON N 


178 Rossetti MS. 


XXXVI 


Prefatory Note 


MS. Book, pp. 99, 98. Without title. Probably written about 1793. 
* Blake has left no fair copy of this piece. Some of the stanzas are erased, 
some re-written, some separated from the rest by boundary lines, and some 
numbered with a bewildering series of marginal figures marking successive 
attempts at the arrangement of lines into stanzas, and stanzas into different 
orders. Reproduced as it stands in the MS., this rough draft would prove 
a chaos to the reader, and I have therefore endeavoured to represent the 
various stages in the development of the poem by printing it separately in its 
initial, mediate, and final forms. I call these three versions A, B, and C, and 
refer to the stanzas in each by lower-case roman numerals. 

Blake began his first attempt at the head of the second column of p. 99 to 
the right of the space filled by ‘ Several Questions Answer’d.’ This version 
(A) he next altered by erasing ll. 13, 14, 15; prefixing the marginal 
numerals 4, 2, 3 to A ii, A iii, A iv, to denote that the original second stanza 
was to be placed last. 

His next change consisted in placing smaller figures 1-12 before the lines 
which he meant to retain in the order specified. The effect of this is to 
interpolate between Ai and A ii a new second stanza [A *3], formed by 
uniting the first couplet of A iv and the second couplet of A iii: — 


Then he swore a great & solemn oath: 

‘To kill the people Iam loth,’ 

And said ‘I love hanging & drawing & quartering 
Every bit as well as war & slaughtering.’ 


This re-arrangement, however—unless with WMR we transpose the relative 
positions of the second and third stanzas—leaves the pronoun ‘he’ without 
antecedent, and Blake accordingly erased the whole passage from ‘ Then old 
Nobodaddy aloft” to ‘They shall have a Priest and a passing bell’ (A Il. 9- 
19), leaving only the first two stanzas of A as originally written. To the 
latter of these (‘ The King awoke on his couch of gold’) he now added, below 
the deleted passage, a companion stanza in the same metre (‘ The Queen of 
France just touched this Globe’), erasing and re-writing three lines in the 
process. These three stanzas form the beginning of B. 

Turning to the vacant space in the first column below ‘ Several Questions 
Answer’d’ Blake added three Fayette stanzas (B iv-vi) followed by a fourth 
(‘ Fayette, Fayette, thou’rt bought & sold’) in the second column underneath 
B iii. This last he erased, and finished his work on p. 99 by drawing a line 
of separation between the Fayette stanzas in both columns and the matter 
immediately above. Resuming in the first column of p- 98 he began a new 
stanza (‘Fayette beside his banner stood’) which he cancelled before com- 
pletion, adding the three verses ‘Who will exchange his own fireside,’ 
‘Will the mother exchange her new born babe,’ and ‘ Fayette, Fayette, 
thou’rt bought & sold’—the last being an amended version of the deleted 
stanza at the foot of the second column of the preceding page. These three 


. 
. 
t 
. 


# 


Rossetts MS. SAS 


- Stanzas were then numbered 3, 2, 1 to show that their position was to be 
inverted, and later the figure 3 was struck out to mark the cancellation of 
‘Who will exchange... dungeon floor,’ a boundary line being drawn around 
the two retained stanzas, This gives us the poem in its fullest and best 
form B. 

Blake’s next alteration was to erase the two Fayette stanzas on p. 99 (B 
iv, v), leaving only that beginning ‘ Fayette beheld the King & Queen,’ which 

_ he re-transcribed below, B vii. Cancelling the two stanzas above (B vii and 

B viii) Blake then added a slightly amended form of the lines beginning 

‘Who will exchange his own fireside, and, at the head of the second column, 

the stanza ‘O who would smile on the wintry seas,’ the prefixed numbers 

_ 2, I, 3, added later, indicating a new but not very happy revision of the 
' arrangement of the three last stanzas. These changes are manifestly for the 

worse. Blake seems to have lost his grip of the poem, and to have 
abandoned any further attempt at completion. In version C I print the 
poem as he left it. 

Under the title ‘ Lafayette,’ WMR prints the stanzas in the following 
order: Bi Bii A*iii Biv Bv Biii (1st rdg.) Cv Bvii Bviii. EY (ii. 24- 
27) give a not very accurate account of the evolution of the poem, omitting one 

Stanza (A iv) altogether and ignoring or misinterpreting the successive 

. re-arrangements of lines and stanzas indicated by Blake’s marginal numbers. 

On p. 98 we reach the point at which Blake reversed the MS. Book and 
began writing from the other end. Passages of ‘ The Everlasting Gospel’ 
and one epigram are found upside down upon the same page. 


A 
[i] 


‘Let the Brothels of Paris be opened I 
With many an alluring dance, 

To awake the Physicians thro’ the city,’ 

Said the beautiful Queen of France. 


[ii] 
The King awoke on his couch of gold, 5 
As soon as he heard these tidings told: 
‘Arise & come, both fife & drum, 
And the [Famine] sl.all eat both crust & crumb.’ 


3 Physicians] Pestilence MS. Book 1st rdg. del., EY. 8 Famine] MS, 
- Book 1st dg. del.; no word substituted, 
N 2 


180 —Rossetta M. 5. 


[iii] 
Then old Nobodaddy aloft is 9 
axaxak & belched & cough’d, 
And said, ‘I love hanging & drawing & quartering 
Every bit as well as war & slaughtering. 
Damn praying & singing, 13 
Unless they will bring in 
The blood of ten thousand by fighting or swinging.’ 


[iv] 
Then he swore a great & solemn oath: 16 
‘To kill the people I am loth; 
But if they rebel, they must go to hell: 
They shall have a Priest & a passing bell.’ 


I5 swinging] surgery EY. 16-19 Then... bell] EY omit. 


B 
[i] 


‘Let the Brothels of Paris be opened I 
With many an alluring dance, 

To awake the Physicians thro’ the city’ 

Said the beautiful Queen of France. 


(ii 
The King awoke on his couch of gold, 5 
As soon as he heard these tidings told: 
‘Arise & come, both fife & drum, 
And the Famine shall eat both crust and crumb.’ 


[iii] 
The Queen of France just touch’d this Globe, 9 
And the Pestilence darted from her robe; 
But our good Queen quite grows to the ground, 
And a great many suckers grow all around. 
tr, 12 But... around] 
‘But the bloodthirsty people across the water 
Will not submit to the gibbet & halter.’ 


MS. Book rst rdg. del., WMR. 12 And... around] There is just such 
a tree at Java found MS. Book and rdg. del. 


Rossetti MS. 


iv] 

Fayette beside King Lewis stood ; 
He saw him sign his hand; 

And soon he saw the famine rage 
About the fruitful land. 


| S13) 
Fayette beheld the Queen to smile 
And wink her lovely eye; 
And soon he saw the pestilence 
From street to street to fly. 


[vi] 
Fayette beheld the King & Queen 
In tears & iron bound; 
But mute Fayette wept tear for tear, 
And guarded them around. 


[vii] 
Fayette, Fayette, thou’rt bought & sold 
And sold is thy happy morrow ; 
Thou gavest the tears of Pity away 
In.exchange for the tears of sorrow. 


17 beheld] liked EY. 22 tears & iron] curses and iron WMR 
of iron EY. 24 Here follow in the MS. the deleted stanza :— 
‘Fayette, Fayette, thou’rt bought & sold 
For well I see thy tears 
Of Pity aré exchanged for those 
Of selfish slavish fears.’ 
and the deleted beginning of a stanza :— 
‘Fayette beside his banner stood, 
His captains false around, 
Thouw’rt bought & sold , 


ISI 


13 


17 


2iI 


25 


; tears 


EY reading ‘I will see’ for ‘well I see,’ and ‘ King Lewis’ for ‘his banner.’ 


| This again is followed by the stanza marked for erasure :— 


‘Who will exchange his own fireside 
For the steps of another’s door? 
Who will exchange his wheaten loaf 
For the links of a dungeon floor?’ 

and the two deleted lines :— 
‘Who will exchange his own heart’s blood 
For the drops of a Harlot’s eye?’ 


25-32 Fayette... floor] These stanzas were at first written in reversed order. 


182 Rossetti MS. 
[viii] 


Will the mother exchange her new born babe 29 
For the dog at the wintry door? 

Yet thou dost exchange thy pitying tears 

For the links of a dungeon floor! 


C 
[First three stanzas as B, concluding as below. ] 


iv] 

Who will exchange his own fireside 13 
For the stone of another’s door? 

Who will exchange his wheaten loaf 

For the links of a dungeon floor? 


[v] 
Fayette beheld the King & Queen 17 
In curses & iron bound; 
But mute Fayette wept tear for tear, 
And guarded them around. 


[vi] 
O who would smile on the wintry seas 21 
& Pity the stormy roar? 
Or who will exchange his new born child 
For the dog at the wintry door? 


13-20 Who ... around] These two stanzas were originally written in 
reversed order. 14 stone] steps MS. Book 1st rdg. del. 18 curses | 
tears MS, Book ts¢ rdg. del. 


POEMS 


FROM 


TT eh OSS ETE §: 


II 
MS. Book, pp. 2-98. § xxxvil—cxxxi 


Written circa 1800-1810 


II 
ROSSETTI MANUSCRIPT 
XXXVII 
Prefatory Note 


MS. Book, pp. 3 and 2. Inthe first column of the former page are stanza 
1, two deleted stanzas beginning ‘Her weeping she shall ne’er give o’er,’ 
and ‘Thou hast parted from my side,’ with stanzas 3, 5,6, 8. In the second 
column of the same page are the cancelled first version of stanza 2, the 
cancelled stanza ‘When my love did first begin’ and stanza 4 (marked for 
insertion between stanzas 3 and 5, afterwards cancelled and then again 
marked ‘to come in’ in the position originally indicated). Last follow 
stanzas 2 and 7, the latter marked for insertion between 6 and 8 The 
whole of these are written in ink, with one or more arabic numbers at the 
head of each, showing clearly Blake’s successive arrangements, and his final 
order of the eight retained stanzas. In either column, at the head of page 2, 
are stanzas g and Io, and near the foot of the page, in either column, stanzas 
rz and 12 (all four written and numbered in ink) followed by stanza 13 
(written in pencil and centred at foot of page). Intermediately between 
these and the two top stanzas, and written later in pencil around a sketch of 
Daphne, in the centre of the page, are to the left a stanza numbered 2 
(‘What transgressions I commit’), a stanza without number (‘ Poor, pale, 
pitiable form’) and another which is almost illegible. To the right, numbered 
1, is the stanza beginning ‘O’er my sins thou sit and moan,’ and numbered 
14 (i.e, consecutive to ‘Let us agree to give up love’), the final stanza 
‘Throughout all Eternity.’ The stanzas, written in pencil, numbered 1 and 
2, and the. unnumbered stanza ‘ Poor pale pitiable form’ are not cancelled, 
and Blake may have intended to arrange them as part of the poem in 
a final draft. Ifso, their natural place would seem to be after stanza 3. 

The position of this poem in the MS, Book—the first piece written from 
the original beginning of the volume after it had been half filled by earlier 
poems written from the reversed end—proves that it was composed soon 
after Blake removed to Felpham, when he resumed his use of the old sketch- 
book as a notebook for poetry. The next piece of any importance is the 
poem (xli), three pages further on, which contains internal evidence of 
having been written about the same time as the lines to Butts in Blake’s 
letter of October 2, 1800: xxxvii may therefore be dated October or 
November, 1800. 

Swinburne (Essay, pp. 278, 279) describes ‘My Spectre’ as ‘ perfect 
Jerusalem both for style and matter,’ and ‘meant for insertion in some 
fresh instalment of prophetic rhapsody by way of complement or sequel ” 
to that. work. It is, however, rather an offshoot of The Four Zoas, written 
in 1797, the argument and symbolism of which are practically the same 
as those of Milton and Jerusalem. 

Blake’s use of the terms ‘spectre’ and ‘emanation,’ the former to signify 


— a 


Rosset MS. 185 
the reasoning power in man, and the latter his imagination and emotion, 
supplies the clue to the meaning of this beautiful but obscure poem. The 
theme is identical with that of the later Prophetic Books, i.e. the separation 
of reason and emotion into two contrary and conflicting selves, and their 
Teunion in a state of regained humanity and moral liberty, through self- 

annihilation achieved by the infinite tolerance and forgiveness of sin. Cp. 
the author’s invocation to the Muses—in Blake’s mythology the Daughters, 
not of Memory, but of Imagination—in the opening lines of The Four Zoas:— 
‘Daughters of Beulah, sing 
His fall into Division and his resurrection into Unity, 
His fall into the generation of decay and death, and his 
Regeneration by resurrection from the dead,’ 

Of this poem, with the title ‘Broken Love,’ descriptive of the meaning 
which he reads into it, Mr. D. G. Rossetti gives a very corrupt text, printing 
Stanzas 1, 2, 3, a fourth and fifth stanza, formed by amalgamating couplets 

_ taken from the unplaced or rejected stanzas :— 
‘Poor pale pitiable form 
That I follow in a storm, 
From sin I never shall be free © 
Till thou forgive and come to me. 
‘A deep winter dark and cold 
Within my heart thou dost unfold ; 
Iron tears and groans of lead 
} Thou bind’st around my aching head.’ 
- then stanza 4, the unplaced stanza *1, the rejected stanza ‘Thy weeping thou 
shall ne’er give o’er,’ the unplaced stanza *2, and stanzas 5, 6, 7, 8, 14. 
_ The same version is adopted by Mr. W. M. Rossetti, and has been accepted 
without question by the majority of editors who follow the text of the Aldine 
edition. Mr. Swinburne (pp. 278, 279) prints with commentary the two 
rejected stanzas ‘Thou hast parted from my side,’ and ‘When my love did 
| first begin,’ and stanzas 8-14, transposing the position of 11 and 12, which he 
thinks Blake must have so numbered ‘by some evident slip of mind or pen.’ 
In vol. ii, pp. 37-41, Messrs, Ellis and Yeats print fourteen stanzas with 
symbolic ‘ interpretation.” They conclude with the note: ‘The text of the 
poem here is reprinted from the Aldine edition, the present editors not 
having seen the MS,’; which must mystify readers who find, three pages 
before, ‘ the above is the true text of this poem with the numberings of the 
verses as finally arranged after three re-considerations by Blake. Not 
a word is altered from the original. The poem as printed in the Aldine 
Edition and’ elsewhere is erroneously arranged, partly from numberings of 
verses put experimentally and then erased by Blake.’ The latter of these 
two contradictory statements, it may be explained, is the nearer to the 
truth ; though the editors have rendered their third stanza meaningless by 
printing the second in its earlier and cancelled, instead of in its revised form; 
and their text contains one or two of their customary deviations from verbal 
accuracy. Under the title ‘Spectre and Emanation,’ the poem is rather 
more correctly given by Mr. W. B. Yeats, who prints the fourteen approved 
‘and numbered stanzas in the text, and the three unplaced stanzas (‘ appa- 
rently rejected’) in the notes (p. 249). 


186 R ossetts MS. 


I 


My Spectre around me night & day I 
Like a Wild beast guards my way; 

My Emanation far within 

Weeps incessantly for my Sin. 


2 


A Fathomless & boundless deep, 5 
There we wander, there we weep; 

On the hungry craving wind 

My Spectre follows thee behind. 


1 around] before EY, WBY. 

1 Spectre] Cp. Jerusalem, f. 74, ll. 10-13 :— 

‘The Spectre is the Reasoning Power in Man; & when separated 

From Imagination, and closing itself as in steel in a Ratio 

Of the Things of Memory, It thence frames Laws & Moralities 

To destroy Imagination, the Divine Body, by Martyrdoms and Wars.’ 
See also Jerusalem, f.8,1. 30; f. 10, ll. 15, 16; f. 36, 1. 23; f. 54, 1.7; f. 56, 
1.18; Milton, f. 42, 1.34; and passim. 3 Emanation] In Blake’s mytho- 
logy the Emanation is always personified as a female (cp. Milton, f. 14, ll. 13, 
14, ‘gave forth their Emanations Like Females of sweet beauty’), in contra- 
distinction to the Spectre, who is male. The Emanation represents im- 
agination and self-annihilation; the Spectre, reason, self-hood, pride and 


self-righteousness, cp. Milton, f. 12, ll. 28-31 :— 
‘What do I here before the Judgement without my Emanation? 


With the daughters of memory, & not with the daughters of inspiration ; 
I in my Selfhood am that Satan: I am that Evil One: 
He is my Spectre.’ 


4 Here followed the two cancelled stanzas :— 


“Thy [1st rdg. Her] weeping thou [she] shall ne’er give o’er. 
I sin against thee [ker] more & more; 

And never will from sin be free 

Till she forgives & comes to me. 


‘Thou hast parted from my side: 

Once thou wast a virgin bride : 

Never shalt thou a true love [Jover] find: 
My Spectre follows thee Behind.’ 


DGR and WMR print the former as their eighth stanza, making the 
necessary changes, overlooked by Blake, of ‘shall’ to ‘shalt’ in 1. 1, ‘she 
forgives’ to ‘thou forgive,’ and ‘comes’ to ‘come’ in]. 4. 5-8 A... 
behind] EY adopt the first rejected form of this stanza :— : 

“A deep winter, dark & cold, 

Within my heart thou didst unfold ; 

A Fathomless & boundless deep; 

There we wander, there we weep.’ 


4 


Rossetti MS. 187 


a 
He scents thy footsteps in the snow, 9 
Wheresoever thou dost go, 
Thro’ the wintry hail & rain. 


1 When wilt thou return again? 
os 
Dost thou not in Pride & Scorn 13 
e Fill with tempests all my morn, 


And with jealousies & fears 
Fill my pleasant nights with tears? 


5 
Seven of my sweet loves thy knife 17 
Has bereavéd of their life. 
Their marble tombs I built with tears, 
And with cold & shuddering fears. 


_ Blake’s previous deleted readings are 1. 1‘ winter night dark’ for ‘winter dark,’ 
* and then ‘ On a dark cold winter night Within my Heart.’ This is followed 
- by another deleted stanza quoted only by Swinb. :— 


‘When my Love did first begin, 
Thou didst call that Love a sin: 
Secret trembling, night & day, 
Driving all my Loves away.’ 
8 Cp. Jerusalem, f. 30, ll. 2, 3 :— 
‘for wherever the Emanation goes, the Spectre 
Attends her as her Guard 


_g-1z2 He... again] Originally the fourth stanza. Cp, Milton, f. 32%, 
(Wa 4g 5 

‘My Spectre still wandering thro’ them follows my Emanation, 

He hunts her footsteps thro’ the snow & the wintry hail & rain.’ 


: 13-15 Dost... fears] Dost... fears} DGR, WMR. 13 Dost] Didst 
| MS. Book 1st rdg. del. 16 Fill] And fill DGR, WMR. 17, 18 
Cp. Milton, f. 32, il. 3-7 :— 

‘I thought that you would love my loves and joy in my delights, 
Seeking for pleasures in my pleasures, O Daughter of Babylon, 
Then thou wast lovely mild and gentle, now thou art terrible 
In jealousy, and unlovely in my sight, because thou hast cruelly 

Cut off my loves in fury till I have no love left for thee.’ 


/47 my] thy EY. 18 Has] Hath DGR,WMR. 19 built... tears] 
“build... fears EY, WBY. zo shuddering fears] shadowy fears DGR, 
_WMR 3 shadowy tears EY, WBY. 


188 Rossetti MS. 


6 


Seven more loves weep night & day 24 
Round the tombs where my loves lay, 

And seven more loves attend each night 
Around my couch with torches bright. 


7 


And seven more Loves in my bed 25 
Crown with wine my mournful head, 

Pitying & forgiving all 

Thy transgressions great & small. 


8 


When wilt thou return & view 29 
My loves, & them to life renew? 

When wilt thou return & live? 

When wilt thou pity as I forgive? 


2 
‘Never, Never, I return: 33 
Still for Victory I burn. 


Living, thee alone I’ll have; 
And when dead I'll be thy Grave. 


10 


‘Thro’ the Heaven & Earth & Hell 37 
Thou shalt never, never quell: 

I will fly and thou pursue: 

Night & Morn the flight renew.’ 


23 each] at DGR, WMR, EY, WBY. 24 Around] About R! 
26 wine] vine all edd. 28 Thy] My WBY. 30 to life] in life 
DGR, WMR. 32 as I] and MS. Book ts¢ rdg. del. 33-40 EY 


omit inverted commas (wtg. also in MS.) 


OO 


Rossetti MS. 189 


Il 


Till I turn from Female Love 41 
And root up the Infernal Grove, 

I shall never worthy be 

4 To step into Eternity. 


12 


And, to end thy cruel mocks, 45 
Annihilate thee on the rocks, 

And another form create 

To be subservient to my Fate. 


41 1) thou MS, Book rst rdg. del. 42 root] dig MS. Book rst rdg. del. : 
Infernal Grove] See Jerusalem, f. 43, ll, 8-11, and passim. 43 1] Thou 
MS. Book 1st rdg. del, 45-49 And... Let] Swinb. transposes these 
two stanzas, 45 And, to} And I to MS. Book 1st rdg. del., Swinb., EY, 
WEY. 46 What is meant by ‘annihilation’ is rendered clear by the 
_ following passage from Milton, f. 42, 1. 37; f. 43, ll. 1-10 :— 


*To cleanse the Face of my Spirit by Self-examination, 
; To bathe in the waters of Life, to wash off the Not Human, 
} I come in Self annihilation & the grandeur of Inspiration 

To cast off Rational Demonstration by Faith in the Saviour, 
ys To cast off the rotten rags of Memory by Inspiration, 
To cast off Bacon Locke and Newton from Albion’s covering, 
To take off his filthy garments and clothe him with Imagination, 
To cast aside from Poetry all that is not Inspiration, 
That it no longer shall dare to mock with the aspersion of Madness 
Cast on the Inspired by the tame high finisher of paltry Blots, 
Indefinite or paltry Rhymes, or paltry Harmonies,’ 


41; 48 Cp. The Four Zoas, Night vii, ll. 298-306 :-— 
‘I will destroy 

That body I created; then shall we unite again in bliss ; 
For, till these terrors planted round the Gates of Eternal life 
Are driven away & annihilated, we never can repass the Gates, 
Thou knowest that the Spectre is in Every Man insane, brutish, 
Deformed; that I am thus a ravening devouring lust continually 
Craving & devouring ; but my Eyes are always upon thee Oh lovely 
Delusion, & I cannot crave for any thing but thee: not so 
The Spectres of the Dead, for I am as the Spectre of the Living!’ 


: also The Four Zoas, Night vii, ll. 339-345 :— 
‘Thou art united with thy Spectre, consummating by pains & labours 


. That coy mortal body, & by Self-annihilation back returning 
a5 To Life Eternal; To be assur’d I am thy real self... 


: Thou didst subdue me in old times by thy Immortal Strength, 
; When I wasa ravening, hungering, & thirsting, cruel lust of murder. ... 
rd 
i. 
ye. 
<a 


190 Rossetti MS. 


13 
Let us agree to give up Love, 49 
And root up the infernal grove ; 
Then shall we return & see 
The worlds of happy Eternity. 


14 
& Throughout all Eternity 53 
I forgive you, you forgive me. 


As our dear Redeemer said: 
‘This the Wine, & this the Bread.’ 


But if thou dost refuse, Another body will be prepared 
For me, & thou annihilate evaporate & be no more.’ 


See also Jerusalem, f. 92, ll. 8-12. 53 & Throughout] Through- 
out DGR, WMR. Cp. Jerusalem, f. 98, 1. 23, ‘In Forgiveness of Sins 
which is Self Annihilation.’ 55 our dear Redeemer said] I, dear 


Redeemer, said EY. 


[Appendix: Unplaced Stanzas ] 


O’er my sins thou sit & moan: *y 
Hast thou no sins of thy own? 

O’er my sins thou sit & weep, 

And lull thy own sins fast asleep. 


See note above. DGR, followed by WMR and others, use the first 
couplet of *3 as ll. 1, 2 of their fourth stanza, the last couplet of *3, slightly 
altered as ll. 3, 4 of their fifth stanza ; and *z and *2 as their seventh and ninth 
stanzas, Swinb. and EY omit, WBY quotes in Notes. 

*r, *2 Cp. Jerusalem, f. 9, ll. 14, 15 :— 


‘Every Emanative joy forbidden as a Crime 
And the Emanations buried alive in the earth with pomp of religion,’ 


*r my] thy MS. Book 1st rdg. del.; my WMR. thou] I zid. thou 
sit] thou dost sit DGR, WMR, WBY. *2 Hast thou] Have I MS. 
Book 1st rdg. del. thy] my ibid. ; thine DGR, WMR, WBY. *3 
my] thy zbid.; my WMR. thou] I MS. Book 1s¢ rdg. del. thou sit] 
thou dost sit DR, WMR, WBY. *4 thy] my MS. Book ts¢ rdg. del. ; 
thine DGR, WMR. 


— T 


Rossuli MS. a 
"4 


What Transgremione | commit 4, 
Are tor thy Tranugremons fit, 
thy Harlonts, thou thelr dave; 
my bea ror thelr Grave, 


Lol pon form y 
follow in a Won; 

a tears & groans Of lead 

Vind around my aching head, 


id et LL 6 Tren 
# tome WHY, = my) thy WHT “4 py, Jovem, 
4, Ny Ah 

‘Wee Human Form wid te, O thon yor OA A woe! 
then wanter yey tre Viith, Why wrRye he pnt Cuecad” 
Tc at; adeeok tae ake teen tel PMA bot 


Wee 

* hn tat (ue | We tie p+ + (t Oey)} 
With many a ae ed 
Woman thus does neh love your (9% wihed) 
Witt never (% win tek) yoru wailes,! 


CAAA 


LAKAI 


Fong a ay pn 
knees &% Abows are omy puch voyether, 


WG, tor, y, 4, Wehow » prncetd Vite atch A wan In VA, wea 

k YR Winkien On the hyp Aik in 2 very Comenary nage A : 

Areming, UT's A this Arwsiong, (WA, Wh, withuret. yeippaation 

ays the ihan thet it ia townd om the wane yous we! Uagpome) whack ie . 
tte, VT ji, Wht) 0h 65  YROLTR me 


ar ae 


192 Rosset MS. 


XXX1X 


When Klopstock England defied, I 


Uprose William Blake in his pride ; 
For old Nobodaddy aloft 
axxaxx & Belch’d & cough’d; 


Then swore a great oath that made heaven quake, 5 


And called aloud to English Blake. 

Blake was giving his body ease, 

At Lambeth beneath the poplar trees. 

From his seat then started he 9 
And turned him round three times three. 

The Moon at that sight [blushed scarlet red,] 

The stars threw down their [cups and fled, 

And all the devils that were in hell, 13 
Answeréd with a ninefold yell.] 

Klopstock felt the intripled turn, 

And all his bowels began to churn, 


MS. Book, p. 5. Although written from the unreversed end this piece 
probably belongs to the same date as those in the earlier section of the 
MS. Book. Swinb., pp. 31, 32, refers the origin of this Rabelaisian jeu 
desprit to the passages from Klopstock rendered into English by Hayley 
for Blake’s benefit during the latter’s stay at Felpham in 1803 (Hayley’s 
Diary, Mar. 26, 29); but the reference to Lambeth, and the repetition 
of |. 4 in ‘ Fayette,’ point rather to its having been written about 1793. Blake 
may of course have been familiar with Collyer’s translation of the Messias, 
which had reached a second edition in 1769. This piece is very faintly 
written in pencil and a considerable portion of it is no longer legible. 
I supply in square brackets from Swinb. and EY a few words which the 
present owner of the MS. Book is unable to decipher. 


3 aloft] EY omit. 4 *xxxKk ... cough’d] EY omit. The same line 
occurs in the first version of ‘Fayette’ (xxxvi. A). 5 made] would make 
EY, 7, 8 Blake. . trees] 


‘Blake was away. His body was free 
At Lambeth beneath the poplar tree.’ 


EY, 9 From... he] From Lambeth then shouted he EY. Io 
turned him round] EY omit. rr sight] EY omit, blushed .. . red] 
Supplied from Swinb. scarlet] quite EY. 12-14 cups... yell] Supplied 
Srom Swinb. 12 cups] spears EY. 13, 14 And... yell] EY omit. 
15 Klopstock] Astonished EY. intripled] ninefold MS. Book rst rdg. 
del, 16 churn] burn MS, Book rst rdg. del. 


Rossetti MS. 193 


And his bowels turned round three times three, 17 
And locked in his soul with a ninefold key ; 
That from his body it ne’er could be 
Till to the last [judgment] it was 
_Then again old Nobodaddy swore 21 
He neer [had seen] such a thing before, 
Since Noah was shut in the ark, 
Since Eve first chose her hellfire spark, 
Since ’twas the [fashion] to [go naked, 25 
Since] the old Anything [was created,| 
And so feeling, he beg’d me to turn again 
And... poor Klopstock never... pain 
ecmerre sss. Seal. EIS Gor 29 
re acy AMS, 0m) DOA al. eet. 
If Blake would do this when he *#** *# tek sexx 
What might he not do if he sat down to write? 


17 And. ..round] They turned around MS. Book 1s¢ rdg. del.; EY omit 


_ And. I9 ne’er] never EY. 20 to] EY omit judgment] 
Supplied from EY it] EY omit. 22 ne’er] never Swinb., EY: 
‘had seen] supplied from Swinb. 24 chose] EY omit: hellfire] 
hell-found EY. 25 fashion: go naked] Supplied from Swinb., EY. 
26 Since] Supplied from Swinb. Anything] EY omit was created] 
— Supplied from Swinb. 29, 30] Of these lines, which apparently were 


_ legible when he had the MS. Book before him, Swinburne writes: ‘Only 
in choice Attic or in archaic French could the rest be endured by modern 
_ eyes; but Panurge could hardly have improved on the manner of retribution 
' devised for flaccid fluency and devout sentiment always running at the 
mouth,’ 31, 32 A marginal addition. 


xl 
On the Virginity of the Virgin Mary & 
: Johanna Southcott 


Whate’er is done to her she cannot know, 
And if you'll ask her she will swear it so. 
Whether tis good or evil none’s to blame: 
No one can take the pride, no one the shame. 
MS. Book, p. 6, the title added later. Only printed by EY i. 2ro. 


2 you'll] you EY. swear it] tell you MS. Book rst rdg. del. 4 No one] 
And none EY. 


SAMPSON O 


194 Kossette MS. 


xli 


Mock on, Mock on, Voltaire, Rousseau ; I 
Mock on, Mock on; ’tis all in vain! 

You throw the sand against the wind, 

And the wind blows it back again. 


And every sand becomes a Gem 5 
Reflected in the beams divine ; 

Blown back they blind the mocking eye, 

But still in Israel’s paths they shine. 


The Atoms of Democritus 9 
And Newton’s Particles of light 
Are sands upon the Red sea shore, 
Where Israel’s tents do shine so bright. 
MS. Book, p. 7. Without title. Printed by DGR and later editors with 
title ‘Scoffers.’ As one of the very few pieces which had hitherto, by some 
oversight, escaped at the hands of Blake’s editors, this beautiful little poem 


might well have been spared Mr. W. B. Yeats’ textual alterations, 
3 sand] dust WBY. 5 sand] stone WBY. 


xlii 
Prefatory Note 


The first draft of this piece, written without title on p. 12 of the MS. Book, 


consists of fourteen stanzas which Blake later split up into two separate 


poems, ‘ To the Deists’ in Jerusalem, and ‘The Grey Monk’ in the Pickering 
MS. This page therefore cannot be dated later than April, 1803. In the 
first column are found stanzas 1-g and the first two lines of stanza 10, which 
is continued at the head of the second column. A line of separation drawn 
beneath this stanza, before ll. 41-56 were added, shows that Blake’s first 
intention was to end with the lines :— 

‘The Hermit’s prayer & the widow’s tear 

Alone can free the world from fear.’ 
Below stanza 14 comes the beautiful lyric ‘ Morning’ (see xliii), which, it will 
be seen, is a different treatment of the same idea— 

‘The war of swords & spears 

Melted by dewy tears.’ 
being obviously suggested by ll. 51, 52 of this poem :— 

‘The tear shall melt the sword of steel 

And every wound it has made shall heal.’ 


OEE EEO a, eae 


EE 


Rossetti MS. 195 


The reading ‘mercy,’ which has hitherto been invariably misprinted 


‘morning’ in the line ‘Sweet Mercy leads me on,’ gains additional force in 
this connexion, and we find Blake still dwelling on the same thought in the 
couplet which immediately follows :— 
‘Terror in the house does roar 
But Pity stands before the door.’ 

It was probably when about to engrave Jerusalem that Blake returned to 
this poem. His first change was to reduce its length to seven stanzas by 
drawing a separation line between stanzas 4 and 5, and marking stanzas 12, 
1g, and 14 to come in after stanza 4. Then below the couplet on Terror and 
Pity, he wrote the revised version of stanza 12 :— 

‘When Satan first the black bow bent 
And the Moral Law from the Gospel rent 
He forg’d the Law into a Sword 
And spill’d the blood of Mercy’s Lord.’ 
At the same time he added in the margin the stanza :— 
‘Titus! Constantine! Charlemaine! 
O Voltaire! Rousseau! Gibbon! vain 
Your Grecian mocks [mocks & tron del.| & Roman sword 
Against this image of his Lord—’ 


‘linked to stanza 14 by the catchword ‘A tear is &c.,’ and between 


the columns and in the right-hand margin he made two attempts to 
rewrite stanza 2 which were not adopted in either of the final versions. 
Lastly he indicated clearly the order of the seven stanzas to be used in 


| Jerusalem by marking the first four stanzas 1-4, and prefixing the numbers 


5-7 to ‘ When Satan first the black bow bent,’ ‘ Titus Constantine, Charle- 
maine,’ and ‘For a tear is an intellectual thing.’ This, except for a few 
unimportant verbal changes, gives us the poem entitled ‘ To the Deists’ en- 
graved at the foot of f. 52 of Jerusalem. See‘ Poems from the Prophetic Books,’ 

Of the stanzas thus rejected Blake made a separate poem which he tran- 
scribed into the Pickering MS., with the title ‘The Grey Monk.’ This poem 
begins with the original fifth stanza; the line ‘I see, I see, the Mother 
said’ being changed to ‘I die, I die, the Mother said.’ The remaining 
stanzas (6-11) are arranged in the order of the MS. Book, with the interpo- 
lation of stanza 4 between 5 and 6, and stanza 14 between 10 and 11. These 
two stanzas are common to both versions. 

In the footnotes to the present poem I give such variant readings only as 
are derived from the MS. Book, or from the text of Messrs, Ellis and Yeats, 
who, in their preface to Chapter III of Jerusalem (ii. 220-26), print the 
rejected readings and omitted stanzas. Blake’s later text of ‘ To the Deists’ 
and ‘The Grey Monk’ with editors’ emendations will be found among 


‘poems from Jerusalem and ‘ The Pickering MS.’ 


I saw a Monk of Charlemaine I 
Arise, before my sight: 
I talk’d to the Grey Monk where he stood 
In beams of infernal light. 
3 to] with EY = where] as EY. 
02 


196 Rosset MS. 


Gibbon arose with a lash of steel, 5 
And Voltaire with a wracking wheel : 

The schools, in Clouds of learning roll’d, 

Arose with War in iron & gold. 


‘Thou lazy Monk,’ they said afar, 9 
‘In vain condemning Glorious War, 

And in thy Cell thou shall ever dwell. 

Rise, War, & bind him in his Cell!’ 


The blood red ran from the Grey Monk’s side, 13 
His hands & feet were wounded wide, 

His body bent, his arms & knees 

Like to the roots of ancient trees. 


‘I see, I see, the Mother said, 17 
‘My Children will die for lack of bread. 

What more has the merciless tyrant said ?’ 

The Monk sat down on her stony bed. 


5-8 Gibbon... gold] Variants of this stanza are :— 
(a) Sideways, middle column, top of page: 
‘Gibbon plied his lash of steel, 
Voltaire turned his wracking wheel, 
Charlemaine & his barons bold 
Stood by, and mocked in iron & gold.’ 


(6) Sideways, in right-hand margin, at top of page: 
‘The Wheel of Voltaire whirl’d on high, 
Gibbon aloud his lash does ply, 


Charlemaine & his Clouds of War [ & his barons bold, 1st rdg. del. ] 
Must[er around] the Polar Star.’ 

In printing the above, as ‘ Readings rejected by Blake,’ EY in (a) 2 read 
‘And Voltaire’ for ‘ Voltaire,’ (a) 3 ‘ warriors’ for ‘ barons,‘ (5) 4 ‘Must now 
arouse the polar bear’ for ‘Muster around the Polar Star.” These words are 
partially hidden by the binding. 5 arose] armed EY. 6 wracking] 
racking EY. 7 The... roll’d] Charlemagne and his warriors bold_EY. 
9g, 10 Thou... War] 

‘Seditious Monk said Charlemaine 
The Glory of War thou condemn’st in vain.’ 


MS. Book ts¢ rdg. del., EY reading in last line :— 
‘The glory of war thou ‘cursedst in vain.’ 
18 will] shall EY. 20 sat down] sat him down EY. 


Rossetti MS. 197 


His Eye was dry, no tear could flow, 21 
A hollow groan first spoke his woe: 

He trembled & shuddered upon the bed; 

At length with a feeble cry he said :— 


‘When God commanded this hand to write 25 
In the studious hours of deep midnight, 

He told me that all I wrote should prove 

The bane of all that on Earth I love. 


‘My brother starved between two walls; 29 
Thy children’s cry my soul appalls: 

I mock’d at the wrack and griding chain ; 

My bent body mocks at their torturing pain. 


‘Thy father drew his sword in the North; 33 
With his thousands strong he is [marchéd] forth ; 
Thy brother has armed himself in steel 

To revenge the wrongs thy children feel. 


‘But vain the sword & vain the bow, 37 
They never can work war’s overthrow ; 

The Hermit’s prayer & the widow’s tear 

Alone can free the world from fear. 


‘The hand of vengeance sought the bed 41 
To which the purple tyrant fled ; 

The iron hand crushed the tyrant’s head, 

And became a tyrant in his stead. 


‘Untill the Tyrant himself relent, 45 
The Tyrant who first the black bow bent, 
Slaughter shall heap the bloody plain: 

Resistance & War is the Tyrant’s gain. 


ar could] would EY. 22 first spoke] bespoke EY. 22, 23 woe 
He] Between these is an illegible line erased. 24 At... said] EY omit. 
26 studious] shadowy EY. gi I mock’d... chain] I mock at the rack 
and the grinding pain EY. 34 marchéd] Deleted in MS. but no word 
_ substituted, EY. 36 revenge] avenge EY. 41 sought] found EY. 
44 And usurped the tyrant’s throne & bed MS. Book rst rdg. del. 45-48 
Untill. . . gain] This stanza was rewritten later. See Pref. Note. 


198 Rosséntalin. 


‘But the Tear of Love—& forgiveness sweet, 49 
And submission to death beneath his feet— 

The tear shall melt the sword of steel, 

And every wound it has made shall heal. 


‘For the tear is an intellectual thing, 53 
And a sigh is the sword of an Angel King, 
And the bitter groan of the Martyr’s woe 
Is an arrow from the Almightie’s bow.’ 
49-52 But... heal] Omitted in both the Jerusalem and the Pickering 


MS. versions. 55 of the Martyr’s] for another’s MS. Book 1st rdg. 
del.; of a martyr’s EY. 


xiii 
Morning 


To find the Western path, I 
Right thro’ the Gates of Wrath 

I urge my way ; 

Sweet Mercy leads me on 4 
With soft repentant moan: 

I see the break of day. 


The war of swords & spears, 

Melted by dewy tears, 8 
Exhales on high; 

The Sun is freed from fears, 

And with soft grateful tears 

Ascends the sky. 12 


MS. Book, p. 12. Title added later, Printed by DGR and all later 
editors with the title ‘ Daybreak.’ 

4-6 Sweet... day] All edd. read :— 

‘Sweet morning leads me on; 
With soft repentant moan 
I see the break of day.’ 

The correction of ‘morning’ to ‘Mercy’ conveys a meaning to the poem — 
entirely lacking in the received text. The marks of an erasure in D. G. 
Rossetti’s transcript of ‘all that is of any value’ in the MS. Book show that 
he had at first written some other word—probably the right one—before 
‘morning.’ The word ‘Morning’ in the title may have misled him into 
supposing that the same word was repeated in 1, 4 of the song, ‘ Morning’ 
and ‘Mercy’ being somewhat alike in Blake’s handwriting. 


Rossetti MS. 199 


xliv 


Terror in the house does roar ; 
But Pity stands before the door. 


MS. Book, p. 12. See Prefatory Note to xlii. Here printed for the first 
time. 


xlv 


The Birds 


fTe. Where thou dwellest, in what Grove, I 
Tell me, Fair one, tell me love; 
Where thou thy charming Nest dost build, 
O thou pride of every field! 


She. Yonder stands a lonely tree, 5 
} There I live and mourn for thee; 
Morning drinks my silent tear, 
And evening winds my sorrow bear. 


He. O thou summer’s harmony, 9 
I have liv’d and mourn’d for thee ; 
Each day I mourn along the wood, 
And night hath heard my sorrows loud. 


She. Dost thou truly long for me? 13 
And am I thus sweet to thee? 
Sorrow now is at an end, 
O my lover and my Friend! 


He. Come on wings of joy we'll fly 17 
To where my bower hangs on high; 
Come, and make thy calm retreat 
Among green leaves and blossoms sweet. 


MS. Book, p. 14. 
1,5, 899. He... She] No italics in MS. 3 dost] doth EY. II 
mourn] moan EY, WBY. 18 hangs] is hung all edd. 


200 Rossetti MS. 


xlvi 


No real Style of Colouring ever appears, 

But advertizing in the News Papers. 

Look there—you’ll see S* Joshua’s Colouring : 
Look at his Pictures—All has taken Wing! 


MS. Book, p. 21. Gil. i. 266. Printed by WMR among ‘Epigrams and 
Satirical Pieces on Art and Artists’ (xrv) with title ‘Colour,’ and by EY 
among ‘Couplets and Fragments’ (xvr) without title. The epigrams on Art 
which begin on this page would appear to be an overflow from those jotted 
down in the margins of Blake’s copy of Reynolds’ Discourses. 

1 ever] now Gil., EY. 2 But... Papers] Save thro’ advertisements 
in the newspapers Gil., cp. Blake’s Advertisement (MS. Book, p. 56): ‘ Adver- 
tisements in newspapers are no proof of popular approbation, but often 
the contrary.’ 3 there] here EY. 4 Ali has taken wing] ’tis quite 
another thing MS. Book ist rdg. del.; cp. ‘Epigrams from Reynolds’ Dis- 
courses,’ iv :— 


‘When Sir Joshua Reynolds died 

All Nature was degraded, 

The King dropped a Tear into the Queen’s Ear, 
And all his Pictures Faded.’ 


xl vil 


You don’t believe—I won't attempt to make ye: I 
You are asleep—I won’t attempt to wake ye. 

Sleep on! Sleep on! while in your pleasant dreams 

Of Reason you may drink of Life’s clear streams. 
Reason and Newton, they are quite two things ; 5 
For so the Swallow & the Sparrow sings. 


MS. Book, p. 21, the two stanzas separated by a sketch. Printed among 
‘Couplets and Fragments’ (xv) by WMR as a single stanza with title 
‘Reason,’ and by EY (xvi1) without title. 

t You...ye] You don’t believe I would attempt to make you WMR., 
won’t] would MS. Book tst rdg. del. 2 ye] you WMR. 


R Ae MS, 201 


_ Reason says ‘ Miracle’: Newton says ‘ Doubt.’ 

Aye! that’s the way to make all Nature out. 

‘Doubt, Doubt, & don’t believe without experiment’: 9 
That is the ao) thing that Jesus meant, 

_When he said ‘Only Believe! Believe & try! 

- Try, Try, & never mind the Reason why!’ 


q-12 No quotation marks in MS; WMR omits to ll.9 and 12. EY place 
around ll, 7-12 (‘Doubt ... why’) with enclosed single quotation marks 
to ll. 11, r2(‘Only... why’). Cf. Jerusalem, f. 54, ll. 15-24 :— 

- *But the Spectre, like a hoar frost & a Mildew, rose over Albion, 

_ Saying ‘I am God, O Sons of Men! I am your Rational Power. 

- Am I not Bacon & Newton & Locke, who teach Humility to Man, 
Who teach Doubt & Experiment, & my two Wings Voltaire Rousseau ? 
Where is that Friend of Sinners, that Rebel against my Laws, 

Who teaches Belief to the Nations & an unknown Eternal life? 

Come hither into the Desart & turn these stones to bread. 

Vain Foolish Man, wilt thou believe without Experiment 

_ And build a World of Phantasy upon my Great Abyss, 

“ A World of Shapes, in craving lust & devouring appetite?’ 


xlvili 


And in melodious accents I 
Will sit me down, & cry ‘I! I!’ 


MS. Book, p. 21. These lines occur in Blake’s Advertisement, following 
the prose passage: [‘Imagination is my World. This world of dross is 
beneath my notice, and beneath the notice of the Public del.] I demand 
therefore of the amateurs of art the encouragement which is my due. If 
they continue to refuse, theirs is the loss, not mine, and theirs is the 
contempt of posterity. I have enough in the approbation of fellow labourers. 
This is my glory, and my exceeding great reward. I go on, and nothing can 
hinder my course.’ 


xlix 


And his legs carried it like a long fork, I 
Reached all the way from Chichester to York, 
From York all across Scotland to the Sea ; 
This was a Man of Men, as seems to me. 

MS. Book, p.22. ll. 1-14, 31-51 were first written, ll. 15-30 being added 


in the margin, and marked for insertion after 1. 14. This fragment, of which 
the beginning is missing, was probably composed soon after Sept. 17, 1809, 


202 Rossetts MS. 


Not only in his Mouth his own Soul lay, 5 
But my soul also would he bear away. 

Like as a Pedlar bears his weary Pack, 

So Stewhard’s Soul he buckled to his back. 

But once, alas! committing a Mistake, 9 
He bore the wretched Soul of William Blake 

That he might turn it into Eggs of Gold; 

But neither back nor mouth those eggs could hold. 

His under jaw drop’d as those Eggs he laid, 13 
And Stewhard’s Eggs are addled and decay’d. 

The Examiner, whose very name is Hunt, 

Call’d Death a Madman, trembling for the affront ; 
Like trembling Hare sits on his weakly paper 17 
On which he used to dance & sport & caper. 

Yorkshire Jack Hemp & Quibble, blushing daw, 

Clap’d Death into the corner of their jaw, 

And Felpham Billy rode out every morn, 21 
Horseback with Death, over the fields of corn; 

Who with iron hand cuff’d, in the afternoon, 

The Ears of Billy’s Lawyer & Dragoon. 

And Cur my lawyer, and Dady, Jack Hemp’s parson, 25 
Both went to Law with Death to keep our Ears on. 


when the article on ‘Mr. Blake’s Exhibition’ appeared in Leigh Hunt’s 
Examiner (no. 90) and may have been part of the poem which Blake alludes 
to in his Advertisement. See note to Ixxviii. Chichester was the scene 
of Blake’s trial for high treason, at the instance of the ‘ Dragoon’ (see Gil- 
christ, i, chap. xix) ; Yorkshire was the birthplace of Cromek, here called 
‘Screwmuch,’ and Scotland refers to the latter’s visit to that country in 
search of material for his Religues of Burns (1808). ‘Death’ is a nickname 
for Blake, possibly because of his association with Blair’s Grave, ‘ Yorkshire 
Jack Hemp,’ for Flaxman; ‘Felpham Billy,’ for Hayley; and ‘ Dady, Jack 
Hemp’s parson,’ for Dr. Malkin, of the Father’s Memoirs. ‘Stewhard,’ the 
speaker, is of course Stothard. EY mistakenly suppose that Boydel and 
Bowyer of the following piece may be the true names of the lawyers ‘Cur’ 
and ‘Quibble’; but see footnote. Only printed by EY in their ‘ Memoir’ 
(i, 78-79). 

I carried] covered EY. 4 This] That EY. 8 So Stewhard’s 
Soul] He would bear my soul MS. Book 1s¢ rdg. del., EY. to of] and 
KY. 14 Stewhard’s] all my MS. Book rst rdg. del., EY. 16 trembling 
... affront] Deadly the affront MS. Book ist vdg. del. 17 weakly] 
weekly EY, ignoring the play upon words. 18 sport] shout EY. 
19 Yorkshire] And Yorkshire MS. Book 1st rdg. del, EY. daw] saw EY. 
20 their] his EY. 


Rossetti MS. 203 


- For how to starve Death we had laid a plot 


Against his Price—but Death was in the Pot. 


He made them pay his Price, alackaday! _ 29 
He knew both Law and Gospel better than they. 


é O that I ne’er had seen that William Blake, 


Or could from Death Assassinette wake ! 

We thought—Alas, that such a thought could be!— 33 
That Blake would Etch for him and draw for me. 

For ‘twas a kind of Bargain Screwmuch made 

That Blake’s designs should be by us display’d, 
Because he makes designs so very cheap. 37 


_ Then Screwmuch at Blake’s soul took a long leap. 


*Twas not a Mouse. Twas death in a disguise. 

And I, alas! live to weep out my Eyes. 

And Death sits laughing on their Monuments 4t 
On which he’s written ‘Received the Contents.’ 


- But I have writ—so sorrowful my thought is— 


His epitaph; for my tears are aquafortis, 

‘Come, Artists, knock your head against this stone, 45 
For sorrow that our friend Bob Screwmuch’s gone.’ 
And now the Muses upon me smile and laugh 

Tl also write my own dear epitaph, 

And [ll be buried near a dyke 49 
That my friends may weep as much as they like: 
‘Here lies Stewhard the Friend of all &c.’ 


27 how]now EY. grne’er] never EY. that] EY omit. 36 designs] 
design EY. 43-4 But... aquafortis] But I have writ with tears, as aqua- 
fortis, This Epitaph—so sorrowful my thought is MS. Book rst rdg. del, 
47 upon] in EY. 51 Stewhard] Stothard EY, who finish the couplet :-— 


‘, . . the Friend of all Mankind 
Who has not left one enemy behind,’ 


explaining that ‘a later page of the notebook completes the epitaph, changing 
the name to John Trot.’ Here again, however, they misinterpret the force 
of Blake’s ‘ &c.’ which is always a reference to a passage already written. 
See Ixxxviii. 


204 Rossetti MS. 


Was I angry with Hayley who us’d me so ill, r 
Or can I be angry with Felpham’s old Mill? : 
Or angry with Flaxman, or Cromek, or Stothard, 

Or poor Schiavonetti, whom they to death bother’d? 
Or angry with Macklin, or Boydel, or Bowyer, 5 
Because they did not say ‘O what a beau ye are’? 

At a Friend’s Errors anger shew, 

Mirth at the Errors of a Foe. 


MS. Book, p. 23. Only printed by EY (i. 81), except last couplet, which 
WMR and WBY print as beginning of li. As the allusion to Schiavonetti’s 
death shows, written after June 18ro. ; 

3 Or... Stothard] Or angry with Boydell, or Bowyer or Bu. . ~ 
MS. Book 1st rdg. del. 5 Macklin] Malchin EY, confusing Macklin 
for whom Blake engraved Stothard’s ‘Fall of Rosamund’ (1783) with 
Dr. Malkin (Father's Memoirs of His Child, 1806) : Boydel] Read ‘ Boy- 
dell,’ for whom Blake engraved Hogarth’s Scene from the Beggar's Opera 
(1788) : Bowyer] publisher of the sumptuous illustrated edition of 
Hume’s History (1806). 


li 


Anger & Wrath my bosom rends: I 
I thought them the Errors of friends. 

But all my limbs with warmth glow: 

I find them the Errors of the foe. 


MS. Book, p. 23. Written in margin of preceding piece. Printed by 
WMR and WBY (‘Coup. and Frag.’ xvr) prefixed by 1. ll. 7,8; by EY 
(‘ Coup. and Frag.’ x111) as above. WMR with title ‘Friends and Foes.’ 

3 warmth glow] warmth do glow EY. 


li 
The Sussex Men are Noted Fools, 
And weak is their brain pan— 


I wonder if H the painter 
Is not a Sussex Man. 


MS. Book, p. 24. Written about 1809, the date of the publication of 
Hayley’s Life of Romney, to which William Haines and Blake both contri- 
buted engravings. Cp. Gilchrist, i. 178. Only ptd. by EY i, 212, , 

2 is] in EY. 


\ 


Rossetti MS. 205 


liti 
‘Madman, I have been call’d: ‘Fool,’ they call thee. 
I wonder which they Envy—Thee or Me? 
MS. Book, p. 25. Probably addressed to Flaxman. Only printed by EY 
i, 213. 
liv 
ho Pi 


You think Fuseli is not a Great Painter. I’m glad. 
This is one of the best compliments he ever had. 


MS. Book, p. 25. Gil. i. 181, EY i. 213. Gil. (wrongly) expands title 
‘To Hayley,’ while EY think this and the preceding epigram are addressed 
to Haines, Both are, without doubt, ‘To H[unt].’ Cp. the latter’s references 
to Fuseli and Blake, Examiner, no. 75, June 4, 1809, and no. go, Sept. 17, 
1809, also Blake’s Advertisement (MS. Book, p. 53): ‘Many people are so 
foolish to think they can wound Mr. Fuseli over my shoulder. They will 
find themselves mistaken: they could not wound even Mr. Barry so.’ 

1 Fuseli is] Fuseli’s EY. 


ly 
my) pes 


I mock thee not, though I by thee am Mockéd: 
Thou call’st me Madman, but I call thee Blockhead. 
MS. Book, p. 26. DGR and WMR (‘ Coupl. and Frag.’ vu, ‘ Epigrams,’ 


xvi) with title ‘To the Same’ [i.e, Flaxman], EY (‘Coupl. and Frag.’ xrv). 
WEBY omits. Cf. Ixxix. 


lvi 


Can there be anything more mean, r 
More Malice in disguise, 

Than Praise a Man for doing what 

That Man does most despise? 4 
Reynolds lectures exactly so 

When he praises Michael Angelo. 


MS. Book, p. 26. Cp. prefatory note to ‘Epigrams from Blake’s copy of 


_ Sir Joshua Reynolds’ Discourses’ (1798). Only ptd. by EY i. 213. 


3 what] that MS. Book tst rdg, del. 4 That man] Which he sid. 


5 Reynolds ...so0] This Reynolds’ lectures plainly shew did. 


> ™ 


266. Rossetti MS. 


lvii 


S—— in Childhood, on the nursery floor, 
Was extreme Old and most extremely poor: 
He has grown old & rich & what he will: 
He is extreme old & extreme poor still. 


MS. Book, p. 27. EY i. 213, WBY (‘ Coupl. and Frag.’ 19). 4 
1 S——] Stothard WBY. on] upon EY. 4 & extreme] and is 
extreme WBY. Cp. ‘Epigrams from Reynolds’ Discourses’ (v). 


lviii 
dis Nancy 2 


How can I help thy Husband’s copying Me? 
Should that make difference ’twixt me and thee? 


MS. Book, p. 27. Only in EY i. 213. Cp. Advertisement (MS. Book, 
p. 53): ‘Flaxman cannot deny that one of the very first monuments he 
did I gratuitously designed for him, and at the same time he was blasting 
my character to Macklin my employer, as Macklin told me at the time. 
How much of his Homer and Dante he will allow to be mine I do not 
know, as he went far enough off to publish them, even to Italy, but the 
public will know.’ 


lix 


Of H ’s birth this was the happy lot: 
His Mother on his Father him begot. 


MS. Book, p. 27. Swinb. p. 38, WMR (‘Coupl.’ xx. 4), EY i.213, WBY 
(¢ Coupl.’ 20). 


vedel ’s] Hayley’s Swinb., WMR, WBY. this] thereEY. 2 Mother 
on his Father] mother or his father EY. 


Rossetti MS. 207 


lx 


Sir Joshua praises Michael Angelo. I 
*Tis Christian mildness when Knaves praise a foe; 
But ’twould be Madness, all the world would say, 
Should Michael Angelo praise Sir Joshua— 

Christ us’d the Pharisees in a rougher way. 5 


MS. Book, p. 28. DGR (‘Epig.’ 6), WMR (‘ Epig.’ x11), others omit. Cp. 


_ Blake’s MS. note in Reynolds’ Discourses, p. [ii]: ‘I consider Reynolds’ 


Discourses to the Royal Academy as the Simulations of the Hypocrite who 


- Smiles particularly where he means to Betray. His Praise of Rafael is like 


the Hysteric Smile of Revenge. His Softness & Candour, the hidden trap, 
& the poisoned feast. He praises Michael Angelo for Qualities which 
Michael Angelo abhorr’d: & He blames Rafael for the only Qualities which 
Rafael Valued. Whether Reynolds knew what he was doing, is nothing to 
me: the Mischief is just the Same whether a Man does it Ignorantly or 


Knowingly. I always consider’d True Art & True Artists to be particularly 
‘ Insulted & Degraded by the Reputation of these Discourses. As much as 


they were Degraded by the Reputation of Reynolds’ Paintings, & that 
Such Artists as Reynolds are at all times Hired by the Satans for the Depres- 
sion of Art.’ 

2 "Tis... foe] And counts it outrage thus to praise his foe MS. Book 1s¢ 
vdg.del. mildness|meekness all edd. when Knaves] thus to DGR, WMR. 


3 all... would] that we all must MS. Book rst rdg. del. 5 Christ... 


way] This line added later. 


lxi 


He’s a Blockhead who wants a proof of what he can’t 
Perceive ; 

And he’s a fool who tries to make such a Blockhead 
believe. 


MS. Book, p. 28. DGR (‘Coupl.’ v1), WMR, EY (‘Coupl.’ x), WBY 
(‘Coupl,’ 11). 
lxii 
Cr—— loves artists as he loves his Meat: 


He loves the Art; but ’tis the art to cheat. 


MS. Book, p. 29. Gil. i, 208. EY i. 214 print first line only. 
x Cr——] Cromek Gil. Meat] meal EY. 


208 Rossetti MS. 


Ixiii 
A Petty Sneaking Knave I knew— 
O! Mr. Cr——, how do ye do? 


MS. Book, p. 29. Gil. i. 208, WMR (‘Coupl.’ xx11) headed ‘Cromek.” 
2 Cr——] Cromek Gil, WMR. ye] you Gil. 


lxiv 


Sir Joshua praiséd Rubens with a smile, I 
By calling his the ornamental style ; 

And yet his praise of Flaxman was the smartest, 
When he called him the Ornamental Artist. 

But sure such ornaments we well may spare 5 
As crooked limbs and louzy heads of hair. 


MS. Book, p. 29. Only in EY i. 214. 

I praiséd] praises EY. 6 As... hair] Like a filthy infectious head 
of hair MS. Book 1st rdg. del.; A crooked stick & a louzy head of hair, zbid. 
and rdg. del. 


Ixv 


Hes 2° Cock would =". 5. fe ee eee 
And would be a Cock if he could.... 


MS. Book, p.a9. Only in EY i, ar4. 
1 He is] He’s EY. 
lxvi 


He has observ’d the Golden Rule, 
Till he’s become the Golden Fool. ~ 


MS. Book, p. 30. Cp. Ixvii. Only in EY i. 214. 
; 2 he’s] he has EY. 


Koil MS, 209 


MS, hom, » W $=Onhy th BY 4, 214) (ahbsenseh 9 bom hn Whe was 
lL 44,/ be wuihes wher wafhny A 9» Kieaphdes G tox | nxeopre jap tawhe text 
ee, Vike wh thes yeseting, wxpyrwom retes f sree to WAirthewrh. Ia ihe 
re Wht YEH Wik Wien bn the thish pexwom, be? lox you; 
| ete Su And heals of gdh a 

| Wh, the EY, 6 been yr) Von have BY, 


Ixviti 
ttothard to Mr Cromek 


= V Ghe DARL Y Gy EY bi hte 
f haved Wis, oh wpnedn, prove waged Swinb; 


/ 


+ Mok, y- oh, Dine, yp se, EF i 215, WEY ¢ Cog’ 6) wittaout 
6 Ay oe napa Lane Swit. 
4 


210 Rossethi MS, 


lxx 


I am no Homer’s Hero you all know ; I 
I profess not Generosity to a Foe, 

My Generosity is to my Friends, 

That for their Friendship I may make amends. 

The Generous to Enemies promotes their Ends, 5 
And becomes the Enemy & Betrayer of his Friends. 


MS. Book, p. 31. Only in EY i. 215. 
6 And... Friends] Cp. ‘ Everlasting Gospel,’ y”, 1. 25 : ‘ He who loves his 
enemies betrays his friends.’ 


Ixxi 


The Angel that presided o’er my birth 
Said ‘Little creature, form’d of Joy and Mirth, 
Go, love without the help of anything on Earth.’ 


MS. Book, p. 32. Gil. i. 311, WMR (‘Coupl.’ x1v), EY i, 215, WBY 
(‘Coupl.’ 15). 

1 that] who Gil. o’er] at Gil, WBY. 2 form’d... Mirth] thou 
art form’d for mirth MS. Book 1s¢ rdg. del. of] for EY. 3 love] 
live WMR. 


xxii 
Florentine Ingratitude 


Sir Joshua sent his own Portrait to I 
The birth Place of Michael Angelo, 

And in the hand of the simpering fool 

He put a dirty paper scroll, 

And on the paper, to be polite, 5 
Did ‘Sketches by Michael Angelo’ write. 


MS. Book, p. 32. Title an addition. Only in EY i. 215. This and the 
other epigrams on Sir Joshua Reynolds were probably written about the 
same time as the marginal notes in his copy of Sir Joshua’s Discourses, 
now in the Brit. Mus. In 1776 Reynolds was elected a member of the 
Florentine Academy, and in accordance with their rule, sent his portrait 
painted by himself. 


s* 


Rossel MS, 215 


The Viorentines said ‘Tis a Dutch-English bore, 
Michael Angelo’s Name writ on Kembrandt’s door 
The Vioventines call it an English fetch, 4 
Vor Michael Angelo never did sketch— 

Vvery \ine A his has Meaning, 

And needs neither Suckling nor Weaning, 

‘Tis the trading Vnglish- Venetian cant 1B 
To Michael) Angelo, and act Kembrandt, 

It will set his Dutch friends all in 2 roar 

Ta write ‘Mich, Ang’ on Kembrandt’s door; 

“But you must not bring in your hand a Lie y 
if you mean that the Viorentines should buy. 
Chitt’s Circle or Apeied Line 

Were nt the Work f Sketchers drunk with Wine; 
Wor of the City Clock’s running . . . fashion ; a 
Nor A Gir Isaac Newton's calculation, 


4,4 The , ,, dA EY inenvecthy call this a ‘rejected’ complet, 10 Vor 
chad) EY omit or, Kay 14 Vie. - , Memirentt) ‘ ajected’ £Y, 
whe inuert here, whier 1 14, on incorrect verdom A the fret resting A 
D146, 14% mean Chih 7 omtt thet, it, ,, way) ¥AMlowing this 
wre the: Nice >— 
‘These ver were wiitten Wy 2 very enviows: man, 
Whe whatever Venom he may have to Michael hngdo 
Never can heave wny to Wr Schovhuan! 
it’s, ,, ciation These Vines wiitten later ot loot A page. 
VALI, Witte 
‘Mor A the City Clocks Whe Vacitition 
Which epreng trom Dr leeae Bewton’s greet Aiilities’ 
BY ont i. 19-w4, enh yint this rejected complet eter 1. 14, reating 
Withee’ for | tacitities’ ant ‘eprang A’ tox ' sprang from.” 


Pitiful Case 

The Villain at the Gallows tree, 5 
When he is doom’d to dic, 

To assuage his misery 

In virtue's praise does cry. 


Bok, p. a2 Onby in EV i 2x6. This epigrem refers & the con- 
ig words A the last Duanowrse ddévere’ by Keyaclds zt the 


2 


212 R. ossetit MS. 


So Reynolds when he came to die, 5 
To assuage his bitter woe, 

Thus aloud did howl & cry: 

‘Michael Angelo! Michael Angelo!’ 


Academy, Dec. 1790: ‘I should desire that the last words which I should 
pronounce in this Academy, and from this place, might be the name of 
MicHart ANGELO.’ 

3 his misery] his bitter misery EY. q did howl &] was heard to 
MS. Book ts¢ rdg, del. 


lxxiv 


To the Royal Academy 


A Strange Erratum in all the Editions 1 
Of Sir Joshua Reynolds’ Lectures 

Should be corrected by the Young Gentlemen 
And the Royal Academy’s Directors. 


Instead of ‘Michael Angelo,’ 5 
Read ‘Rembrandt’; for it is fit 

To make mere common honesty 

In all that he has writ. 


MS. Book, p. 33. Only in EY i. 216. Cp, note to lx. 
6-8 for... writ] 


a & you will know 


That Sit Nees Reynolds now wished to speak 
Of Michael Angelo.’ 


MS. Book ts# rdg. del. 7 mere common] either sense or MS. Book 
1st rdg. del. 8 In] Of EY. 


lxxv 


If it is true, what the Prophets write, I 
That the Heathen Gods are all stocks and stones, 
Shall we, for the sake of being Polite, 

Feed them with the juice of our marrow-bones? 


MS. Book, p. 33. WMR and EY with title ‘Idolatry.’ 


Rossetti MS. 218 


And if Bezaleel and Aholiab drew 5 
' What the finger of God pointed to their View, 
Shall we suffer the Roman and Grecian rods 
To compell us to worship them as Gods? 


They stole them from the Temple of the Lord 9 
And worshipp’d them that they might make Inspired Art 
abhorr’d ; 


The Wood and Stone were call’d the Holy Things, 1m 
And their Sublime Intent given to their kings. 

All the Atonements of Jehovah spurn’d, 

And Criminals to Sacrifices turn’d. 


9, 10 WMR and EY print as quatrain :— 


‘They stole them from 
The Temple of the Lord, 

And worshiped them that they might make 
Inspired art abhorred.’ 


1o that... make] to make MS. Book rst rdg. del. 


lxxvi 


oh and S—— 


I found them blind: I taught them how to see; 
And now they know neither themselves nor me. 
’Tis excellent to turn a thorn to a pin, 

A Fool to a bolt, a Knave to a glass of gin. 


MS. Book, p. 34. The words ‘and S * are an addition. Swinb. p. 53. 
WMR (‘Epig.’ vit) with title ‘On certain Friends,’ prints first couplet only. 
EY i. 217 with title ‘On F —— and I—.” See note to Ixvii. 

1, 2 I. ,.me] Blake introduces this couplet into his Descriptive Catalogue _ 
(1809). 1 them] him MS. Book ts? rdg. del. 2 they know] he 
knows tbid. 1st rdg. del. themselves] himself ibid. 1st rdg. del. 


214 Rossetti MS. 


Ixxvii 


P lovéd me not as he lov’d his friends ; 
For he lov’d them for gain, to serve his Ends: 
He lovéd me, and for no Gain at all, 

But to rejoice & triumph in my fall. 


MS. Book, p. 34. Only in EY i. 217. P—— is probably Thomas Phillips 
the portrait painter. Cp. Descriptive Catalogue, p. 26: ‘Those who say 
that men are led by interest are knaves. A knavish character will often say, 
‘< of what interest is it to me to do so and so?” I answer, ‘‘of none at all, 
but the contrary, as you well know. It is of malice and envy that you have 
done this: I am aware of you, because I know that you act, not from 
interest, but from malice, even to your own destruction.” ’ 

3 and] EY omit. 4 in] at EY. 


eee 


Ixxvili 


To forgive enemies H does pretend, 
Who never in his life forgave a friend, 
And when he could not act upon my wife 
Hired a Villain to bereave my Life. 


MS. Book, at foot of p. 34. First couplet only ptd. by DGR (‘Coupl.’ x), 
WMR (‘ Coupl.’ xxi. 1), EY i. 217. 

1 H——] Hayley DGR, WMR. 4 Hired... Life] The same line occurs 
in one of the Poetical Sketches, cp. ‘Fair Elenor,’ 1. 68. By the phrase 
‘bereave my Life’ Blake here probably means, deprive me of my means of 
livelihood ; this is another reference to the critiques in the Examiner (cp. 
notes to xlix, liv). Cp. Advertisement (MS. Book, p. 52) : ‘The manner in 
which my character has been blasted these thirty years both as an Artist and 
a Man may be seen particularly in a Sunday paper called the Examiner, 
published in Beaufort’s Buildings, and the manner in which I have rooted 
out the nest of villains will be seen in a poem concerning my three years’ 
Herculean labours at Felpham, which I shall soon publish. Secret calumny 
and open professions of friendship are common enough all the world over, 
but have never been so good an occasion of poetic imagery. When a base 
man means to be your enemy, he always begins with being your friend. 
We all know that editors of newspapers trouble their heads very little about 


art and science, and that they are always paid for what they put in on those 
ungracious subjects.’ 


Rossetti MS. 215 


| Ixxix 
ie 

You call me Mad; ’tis folly to do so— 

To seek to turn a Madman to a Foe. 

If you think as you speak, you are an Ass, 

If you do not, you are but what you was. 

MS. Book, p. 35. DGR (‘Epig.’ 7), WMR (‘Epig.’ xv1) both with title 
‘To Flaxman,’ EY i. 218. 
4 but what] just what MS. Book rst rdg. del.; but as EY. 


Ixxx 
On H—-y’s Friendship 


When H——-y finds out what you cannot do, 
That is the very thing he'll set you to; 

If you break not your Neck, ’tis not his fault; 
But pecks of poison are not pecks of salt. 


MS. Book, p. 35. Only in EY i. 218 (title omitted). 
3 Neck] back EY. 


lxxxi 


Some men, created for destruction, come 

Into the World, & make the World their home. 
Be they as Vile and Base as e’er they can, 
They'll still be calléd ‘The World’s Honest Man.’ 


MS. Book, p. 36. Only in EY i. 218. 
2 & make] to make EY. 3, 4 Be... Man] 
‘Friend Caiaphas is one, do what he can, 
He'll still be calléd ‘‘The World's Honest Man.”’ 
MS. Book and rdg. del. 3 Be they as] For they are EY. 


216 Rossetti MS. 


lxxxii 
On 5—— 


You say reserve and modesty he has, 

Whose heart is iron, his head wood, and his face brass. 
The Fox, the Owl, the Beetle, and the Bat 

By sweet reserve and modesty get Fat. 


MS. Book, p. 36. Gil. i. 307 (last couplet only), DGR (¢ Coupl.’ x11) with- 
out title, WMR (‘ Epig.’ xvi) with title ‘On Stothard,’ EY i. 218, WBY 
(‘Coupl.’ 17) without title. 

3, 4 Blake uses this couplet in his Descriptive Catalogue (1809). 3 Owl] 
mole Descriptive Catalogue, Beetle] spider Gil., DGR, WMR. 4 get] 
grow Gil, DGR, WMR. 


lxxxili 
Imitation of Pope: a compliment to the 
Ladies 


Wondrous the Gods, more wondrous are the Men, 
More Wondrous, Wondrous still, the Cock and Hen, 


More wondrous still the Table, Stool and Chair ; 
But ah! more wondrous still the Charming Fair. 


MS. Book, p. 37. Only in EY i. 218. 
Title, ‘Imitation of Pope, and a Compliment,’ etc., EY. 


lxxxiv 


To 1 


Thy friendship oft has made my heart to ake: 
Do be my Enemy—for Friendship’s sake. 


MS. Book, p. 37. Gil. i. 181, with title ‘To the Same’ (i.e. Hayley), 
WMR (‘ Coupl.’ xxi. 2) with general title ‘On Hayley,’ EY i. 218, 
2 Do] Do Gil. 


: 


Rossetti MS. 217 


lxxxv 


Cosway, Frazer, & Baldwin of Egypt’s Lake I 
Fear to associate with Blake. 

This Life is a Warfare against Evils ; 

They heal the sick: he casts out devils. 

Hayley, Flaxman, & Stothard are also in doubt 5 
Lest their Virtue should be put to the rout. 

One grins, t’other spits, and in corners hides, 

And all the Virtuous have shewn their backsides. 


MS. Book, p. 37. EY (‘ Memoir’ chap. vii) i. 81, with last couplet, i. 219. 


6 Virtue] friendship EY. q, 8 One... backsides] A marginal 
addition. 7 other] other EY. 8 shewn] shaved EY. 


lxxxvi 
An Epitaph 


Come knock your heads against this stone, 
For sorrow that poor John Thompson’s gone. 
MS. Book, p. 37. This and the two following epitaphs were obviously 


written before the Stothard lines (cp. xlix, ll. 45, 46). Only in EY i. 219, 
without title. 


lxxxvii 


Another 


I was buried near this dyke, 
That my Friends may weep as much as they like._- 


MS. Book, p. 37. Cp. xlix, ll. 49, 50, WMR (‘ Coupl.’ xvii), EY (1st 
line only) i. 219. 


218 Rossetti MS. 


Ixxxviil 
Another 


Here lies John Trot, the Friend of all mankind: 
He has not left one enemy behind. 

Friends were quite hard to find, old authors say ; 
But now they stand in everybody’s way. 


MS. Book, p. 37. Cp. xlix, 1. 5x. Gil. i. 181 (last couplet only), DGR, 
WMR, EY, WBY (‘Coupl.’ x1v, xvu, xv, 18). DGR entitles ‘ Epitaph’; 
the rest omit title. 


lxxxix 


My title as a Genius thus is prov’d: 
Not prais’d by Hayley, nor by Flaxman lov’d. 


MS. Book, p. 38. Gil. i. 181, WMR (Coupl.’ xxi. 3) with title ‘On 
Hayley,’ EY i. 219. 

2 nor] or EY. 

Cp. with this and other epigrams in the MS. Book on Flaxman and 
Hayley the verses written some eight years earlier: these interesting lines, 
which have not been previously printed, I owe to the courtesy of Mr. A. G. B. 
Russell. 

‘To my Dearest FRIEND JOHN FLAXMAN THESE LINES: 

I bless thee, O Father of Heaven and Earth! that ever I saw Flax- 
man’s face. 

Angels stand round my spirit in Heaven, the blessed of Heaven are 
my friends upon Earth. 

When Flaxman was taken to Italy, Fuseli was given to me for 
a Season, 

And now Flaxman hath given me Hayley, his friend, to be mine— 
such my lot upon Earth! 

Now my lot in the Heavens is this: Milton lov’d me in childhood, 
and shew’d me his face ; 

Ezra came with Isaiah the Prophet, but Shakespeare in riper years 
gave me his hand; 

Paracelsus and Behmen appeared to me; terrors appeared in the 
Heavens above ; 

The American War began; All its dark horrors passed before my face 

Across the Atlantic to France ; Then the French Revolution commenc’d 
in thick clouds ; 

And my Angels have told me that seeing such visions, I could not 
subsist on the Earth, 

But by my conjunction with Flaxman, who knows to forgive nervous 
fear. 


12 Sept., 1800.’ 


sy 
4 


Rossetti MS. 219 


XC 


I, Rubens, am a Statesman and a Saint. 
Deceptions . . . And so I'll learn to paint. 


MS. Book, p. 38. Only in EY i. arg, 
1,21... paint] 
‘Rubens had been a Statesman or a Saint; 
He mixed them both—and so he learn’d to Paint,’ 
MS. Book ts¢ rdg. wl. t I, Rubens, am] Rubens was EY. Oey re | 
A word illegible in MS. 


Xcl 
To English Connoisseurs 


You must agree that Rubens was a Fool, I 
And yet you make him master of your School, 
And give more money for his slobberings 

Than you will give for Rafael’s finest things. 

I understood Christ was a Carpenter 5 
And not a Brewer’s Servant, my good Sir. 


MS. Book, p. 38. DGR, WMR (‘ Epig.’ 5, x1), EY (‘Coupl.’ xix) with- 
out title, 

4 things|thingEY. 5,61... Sir] Au addition, EY omit. Cp. Advertise- 
ment (MS. Book, p.63) :‘ He who could represent Christ uniformly like a dray- 
man must have queer conceptions: consequently his execution must have 
been as queer, and these must be queer fellows who give great sums for such 
nonsense and think it fine art.’ 


XCll 
Swelled limbs, with no outline that you can descry, 
That stink in the nose of a stander-by. 


But all the pulp-wash’d, painted, finish’d with labour, 
Of an hundred journeymen’s—how-d’ye do Neighbour ? 


MS. Book, p. 38. Only in EY i. 220. Cp. Advertisement (MS. Book, p. 19): 
‘Rubens’ Luxembourg Gallery is confessed on all hands to be the work 
of a blockhead. It bears this evidence in its face. How can its execution 
be any other than the work of a blockhead? Bloated gods—Mercury, Juno, 
Venus, and the rattle-traps of mythology, and the lumber of an awkward 
French palace are thrown together, around clumsy and ricketty princes and 
princesses, higledy-piggledy.’ : 

2 stander] passer EY. 3 But] For EY. painted) EY omit. 4 an] 
ANY. journeymen’s] journeymen EY. Cp. Advertisement (MS. Book, 
p- 18, circa 1810) : ‘ What man of sense will lay out his money upon the life’s 
labour of imbecility, and imbecility’s journeyman ...?’ 


220 Rossetti MS. 


XCII1 


A Pretty Epigram for the encourage- 
ment of those Who have paid great 
sums in the Venetian and Flemish 
ooze 


Nature and Art in this together suit: 

What is Most Grand is always most Minute. 
Rubens thinks Tables, Chairs and Stools are Grand, 
But Rafael thinks a Head, a foot, a hand. 


MS. Book, p. 38, where the original title (del.) read ‘a Pretty Epigram 
for those who have given high Prices for Bad Pictures.’ WMR prints this, 
xev and xcvi, as a single poem with the title ‘ Raphael and Rubens’ (‘ Epig.’ 
xii), EY i, 220, omitting ‘ paid’ in 1. 2 of title. 


XC1V 


These are the Idiots’ chiefest arts: I 
To blend and not define the parts. 

The Swallow sings, in Courts of Kings, 

That Fools have their high finishings. 


MS. Book, p. 38. The correct position of the lines is indicated by prefixed 
arabic numerals, ll. 7, 8 being a marginal addition. Only in EY i. 221, who 
arrange as two stanzas made up of Il. 1, 2, 7, 8, and 3, 4,5, 6. Cp. Descriptive 
Catalogue (1809), pp. 26, 27: ‘The character and expression in this picture 
[Blake’s ‘Canterbury Pilgrims’] could never have been produced with 
Rubens’ light and shadow, or with Rembrandt’s, or any thing Venetian or 
Flemish. The Venetian and Flemish practice is broken lines, broken masses, 
and broken colours. Mr. B.’s practice is unbroken lines, unbroken masses, 
and unbroken colours, Their art is to lose form: his art is to find form and 
to keep it. His arts are opposite to theirs in all things.’ Also Notes in 
Blake’s copy of Reynolds’ Works, p. xcviii : ‘To Generalize is to be an Idiot. 
To Particularize is the Alone Distinction of Merit. General Knowledges 
are those Knowledges that Idiots possess.’ 

1 the] EY omit, 3 The Swallow sings] Let it be told MS. Book 
1st rdg. del.; EY read ‘known’ for ‘told,’ 4 That... finishings] 


Rossetti MS. 221 
And this the Princes’ golden rule, 5 
The Laborious Stumble of a Fool. 
To make out the parts is the wise man’s aim, 
But to loose them the Fool makes his foolish Game. 


Cp. Advertisement (MS. Book, p. 55): ‘I allow that there is such a thing as 
high-finished ignorance, as there may be a fool or a knave in an embroidered 


coat’; also, Blake’s notes to Reynolds’ Discourses, p. xlvii: ‘I was once 


looking over the Prints from Rafael & Michael Angelo in the Library of the 
Royal Academy. Moser came to me & said, ‘‘ You should not study these 
old Hard, Stiff, & Dry Unfinish’d Works of Art. Stay a little, & I will shew 
you what you should Study.” He then went and took down Le Brun’s and 
Rubens’ Galleries. How I did secretly rage. I also spoke my Mind... . 
I said to Moser, “ These things that you call Finish’d are not Even Begun, 
how can they then be Finish’d? The Man who does not know The Begin- 
ning never can know the End of Art.”’ 6 The... Fool] Cp. MS. Book 
xcvi. 8 Game] aim EY. 


XCV 


Rafael, Sublime, Majestic, Graceful, Wise— 
His Executive Power must I despise? 
Rubens, Low, Vulgar, Stupid, Ignorant— 
His power of Execution I must grant? 


MS. Book, p. 39. Gil. i. 265, WMR (as continuation of xciii), EY i. 220. 
Cp. Blake’s ms. note on flyleaf of his copy of Reynolds’ Discourse no. v, 
Works, vol. i, p. [114]: ‘The following Discourse is written with the Same 
End in View that Gainsborough had. . . Namely To Represent Vulgar Artists 
as the Models of Executive Merit.’ 

2, 4 Power] powers EY. 4 His... grant] EY obscure the whole 
point of this epigram by punctuating the last line :— 

‘His power of execution I must grant.’ 
The following extracts, however, taken from Blake’s marginal notes to 


_ Reynolds’ Discourses, show clearly that the last line should be read as an 


indignant question involving an answer in the negative :— 

p. xxix. ‘Why are we to be told that Masters who Could Think, had not 
the Judgment to Perform the Inferior parts of Art, as Reynolds artfully 
calls them? But that we are to Learn to Think from Great Masters, & to 
Learn to Perform from Underlings! Learn to Design from Rafael, and to 
Execute from Rubens!’ 

p. 126. ‘Can any Man be Such a fool as to believe that Rafael & Michael 
Angelo were Incapable of the meer Language of Art, & That Such Idiots as_ 
Rubens, Correggio, & Titian knew how to Execute what they could not 
Think or Invent.’ 

p. 167. ‘He who Admires Rafael, Must admire Rafael’s Execution. He 
who does not admire Rafael’s Execution, Cannot Admire Rafael.’ 


222 Rossetti MS, 


XCV1 


Learn the laborious stumble of a Fool! 
Go, send your Children to the Slobbering School! 


MS. Book, p. 39. WMR as conclusion of xciii, xcv, interpolating 
between lines 1 and 2 the line, presumably his own :— 
‘And from an idiot’s action form my rule!’ 


EY i. 221 invert order of the two lines. 
2 Go, send] Go and send EY. Slobbering] globbering EY. 


XCVII 


If I eer Grow to Man’s Estate, 
O! Give to me a Woman’s fate. 
May I govern all, both great & small, 
Have the last word, and take the wall. 


MS. Book, p. 39. DGR (‘Coupl.’ 1x), WMR, EY (‘Coupl.’ x1), WBY 
(‘ Coupl.’ 12). 

1 le’er] e’er I DGR, WMR, EY, WBY. e’en I] EY (Index, MS. 
Book, i. 221), 


XCVIll 
The cripple every step drudges & labours, I 
And says: ‘ Come, learn to walk of me, Good Neighbours.’ 


Sir Joshua in astonishment -cries out: 
‘See, what Great Labour! Pain in Modest Doubt! 


MS. Book, p. 39. Gil. (first 4 Il. only) i. 265, EY i. 221, 222, Cp. 
Advertisement (MS. Book, p. 19): ‘Who that has eyes cannot see that 
Rubens & Corregio must have been very weak & vulgar fellows? And 
are we to imitate their execution? This is like what Sir Francis Bacon 
says:—that a healthy child should be taught & compelled to walk like 
a cripple, while the cripple must be taught to walk like healthy people. O 
rare wisdom!’ 

1 drudges] smudges EY. 4 See... Doubt] His pains are more than 
others, there ’s no doubt MS, Book ts¢ rdg. del, EY insert this after l. 4 
as part of the poem. Pain in] springs from Gil. 


? 


| 


ee 


Rosset MS. 222 


He walks & stumbles as if he crep, 5 
And how high labour’d is every step!’ 

Newton and Bacon cry ‘Being badly Nurst, 

He is all Experiments from last to first.’ 


5,6 He... step] 4 marginal addition. 6 labour’d] finished EY. 
7, 8 Newton ... first] An addition, q cry] EY omit. 8 Experiments] 
experiment EY, 


XC1X 


On the great encouragement given by 
English Nobility & Gentry to Cor- 
teggio, Rubens, Reynolds, Gains- 
borough, Catalani, Du Crow, and 
Dilbury Doodle 


As the Ignorant Savage will sell his own Wife I 

For a Sword, or a Cutlass, a dagger, or Knife; 

So the taught, savage Englishman, spends his whole 
Fortune 

On a smear, or a squall, to destroy Picture or tune, 

And I call upon Colonel Wardle , 5 

To give these Rascals a dose of Caudle. 


MS. Book, p. 40, title an addition. DGR (‘Epig.’ 3), WMR (‘Epig.’ 1x) 
prints under this title c, xcix, ci. EYi.222. DGR, WMR omit ‘Du Crow,’ 
and insert ‘Rembrandt’ after ‘Rubens’ in title; EY insert ‘ The’ before 
‘English,’ omit ‘and Gentry,’ and read ‘ Catelans’ for ‘Catalani.’ 

2 For... Knife] For a button, a Bauble [buckle and rdg. del.|, a bead, or 


a knife MS. Book 1st rdg. del., DGR, WMR, EY. 3 taught] wise MS. 
Book rst rdg. del., EY ; learned tbid. and rdg. del. 4 On] For ibid. 1st 
vag. del., EY: to destroy] that is not MS. Book rst rdg. del., EY. 5, 6 
And... Caudle] EY print this couplet after c. 5 Wardle] Warble 


EY, For Col. Wardle see Examiner, 1809 passim. 


224 Rossetti MS. 


Cc 


Give Pensions to the Learned Pig, 
Or the Hare playing on a Tabor; 
Anglus can never see Perfection 
But in the Journeyman’s Labour. 


MS. Book, p. 40. DGR, WMR (see note to xcix), EY i. 222. Cp. 
Advertisement (MS. Book, p. 25): ‘In the art of painting, these impostors 
sedulously propagate an opinion that great inventors cannot execute. This 
opinion is as destructive of the true artist as it is false by all experience. 
Even Hogarth cannot be either copied or improved. Can Anglus ever 
discern perfection but in the journeyman’s labour?’ Cp. also Advertisement 
(MS. Book, p. 47): ‘Englishmen have been so used to journeymen’s undecided 
bungling that they cannot bear the firmness of a master’s touch.” 

3 Anglus] Bunglers EY. 


cl 


All pictures that’s painted with sense and with thought « 
Are painted by Madmen, as sure as a Groat; 
For the Greater the Fool is the Pencil more blest, 
As when they are drunk they always paint beS&t. 
They never can Rafael it, Fuseli it, nor Blake it; 5 
If they can’t see an outline, pray how can they make it? 
When Men will draw outlines begin you to jaw them; 
Madmen see outlines and therefore they draw them. 

MS. Book, p. 40. DGR,WMR (see note to xcix), EY i. 222. 

rt and] or DGR, WMR. 3 is the Pencil] in the art the DGR, WMR. 


4 As] And DGR, WMR. _5 nor] or EY. 7 When... them] 
All men have drawn outlines whenever they saw them DGR, WMR. 


Cll 


On H—- the Pickthank 


I write the Rascal thanks, till he and I 
With Thanks and Compliments are quite drawn dry. 


MS. Book, p. 41. Gil. i. 181, extending ‘ H——”’ to ‘ Hayley.” EY i. 223. 


eee 


ci 


Cromek speaks 


I always take my judgment from a Fool 
ecause his Judgment is so very Cool; 
Not prejudiced by feelings great or small, 
Amiable state! he cannot feel at all. 


MS, Book, p, 41, Gi. i, 20, VY i, 224, 

«i judgment) judgments Gil, EY, 2 Because . .. Cool) Because 
I know he always judges cool, UG, Book rf rdg, dd. judgment is) judg- 

«ments are LY, 4 oF) and Gil, 4 Amiable state] Because we 

know %, ook sot rdy, del, 


cly 


When you look at a picture, you always can see 1 
If a Man of Sense has Painted he, 

Then never flinch, but keep up a jaw 

About freedom, and Jenny sink awa’. 

As when it smells of the lamp, we can 5 
Say all was owing to the Skilful Man ; 

For the smell of water is but small: 

So e’en let Ignorance do it all. 


MS. Book, p. 41. Only in EY i, 223. 

a 4 Jenny sink awa’} Blake's purposely grotesque spelling of ‘Je ne sais 
quoi,’ Cp.’ menny wouver’ in the next piece, That Blake probably read 
French with ease may be inferred from his quotation of a passage from 


Q 


Rossetti MS, 225° 


- 


_ 


226 Rosseti MS. 


CV 


English Encouragement of Art: Gro- 
mek’s opinions put into thyme 


If you mean to Please Everybody, you will I 
Menny wouver both Bunglishness & skill ; 

For a great conquest are Bunglers, 

Aide eR, Ws ey Re Ae 

Like displaying oil and water in a lamp, 5 
’Twill hold forth a huge splutter with smoke and damp; 
For it’s all sheer loss, as it seems to me, 

Of displaying up a light when we want not to see. 


MS. Book, p. 41. EY i. 223 (with ‘Encouragers’ for ‘Encouragement’ 
and ‘opinion’ for ‘opinions’ in title) print the earlier and clearer version 
which reads :— 

‘If you mean to please everybody you will | oe 
Set to work both ignorance and skill. 

For a great multitude are ignorant, 

And skill to them seems raving and rant. 

Like putting oil and water in a lamp, asl 
’Twill make a great splutter with smoke and damp. 

For there is no use as it seems to me 

Of lighting a lamp, when you don’t wish to see.’ 


2 Menny wouver] read manceuvre. See note to civ, 1. 4. 4 Obscurely 
written. *5 in] into EY. *8 Of] For EY. 
CXVvVl 
You say their Pictures well Painted be, I 


And yet they are blockheads you all agree: 

Thank God! I never was sent to school 

To be Flog’d into following the Style of a Fool. 
The errors of a wise man make your Rule, 5 
Rather than the Perfections of a Fool. 


MS. Book, p. 42. The last couplet is separated from the two preceding 
by a sketch. DGR and WMR print the second and third couplets as 
separate epigrams ; EY i. 293, ll. 1-4, and 5, 6 as distinct pieces; WBY the 
last couplet only. 

3 God] heaven EY. 4 To... Fool] To learn to admire the works 
of a Fool MS. Book rst rdg. del. 


Rossetti MS, 227 


cvil 


The Washerwoman’s Song 


I wash’d them out & wash’d them in, 
And they told me it was a great sin. 


MS, Book, p42, Only in EY i. 224, Possibly a reference to Blake's 
manner of using water-colour, Cp, the allusion to ‘ water’ in an epigram on 
the preceding page of the MS, Book, civ, |, 7. 


CVvill 

| When IJ see a Rubens, Rembrandt, Correggio, 1 
I think of the Crippled Harry and Slobbering Joe ; 

| And then I question thus: Are artists’ rules 

| To be drawn from the works of two manifest fools ? 
Then God defend us from the Arts I say! 5 
Send Battle, Murder, sudden death, O pray! 


Rather than be such a blind Human Fool 
I’d be an Ass, a Hog, a Worm, a Chair, a Stool! 


MS, Book,p. 44. DOR, WMR (' Epig,’ 4 and x), EY iii, 26, 
j 1 When. ,, Correggio) Seeing 2 Rembrandt or Correggio DOR, WMR ; 
| When 1 see a Rembrandt or Correggio MS. Book 1st rdg. del, EY. 
a1,,,Joe\ Of crippled Harry I think and slobbering Joe DGR, WMR; 
I think A crippled Harry, or slobbering Joe EY. Z question thus] say 
to myself MS, Book 1st rdy. dd., EY. 6 Send) For DGR, WMR, 
Ol we MS. Book ts rdy, del., EY ; let's DGR, WMR, 4 blind] EY 
| omit, & an Aes) EY omit. Cp. Descriptive Catalogue, pp. 56-59: 
| ‘*Rubens is a most outrageous demon, and by infusing the remembrances 
of his Pictures and style of execution, hinders all power of individual 
thought ; so that the man who is possessed by this demon loses all admira- 
tion of any other Artict but Rubens, and those who were his imitators and 
men: he causes to the Florentine and Roman Artist fear to execute, 
sn anager. Armgelny ene ial ded gat 
with hellish brovmnness, and blocks up all its gates of light, except one, and 
that one he closes with iron bars, till the victim is obliged to give up the 

Florentine and Roman practice, and adopt the Venetian and Flemish, 

‘ ‘ Correggio is a soft and effeminate and consequently 2 most cruel demon, 
| whose viole delight is to cause endless labour to whoever suffers him to 
| enter his mind. The story that is told in all Lives of the Painters, aboyt-- 
| Correggio being poor and but badly paid for his Pictures, is altogether false ; 
he was 2 petty Prince, in Italy, and employed numerous Journeymen in 
manufacturing (as Rubens and Titian did) the Pictures that go under his 
name. The manual labour in these Pictures of Correggio is immense, and 


Q4 


228 Rossetti MS. 


was paid for originally at the immense prices that those who keep manufac- 
tories of art always charge to their employers, while they themselves pay 
their journeymen little enough. But, though Correggio was not poor, he 
will make any true artist so, who permits him to enter his mind, and take 
possession of his affections ; he infuses a love of soft and even tints without 
boundaries, and of endless reflected lights, that confuse one another, and 
hinder all correct drawing from appearing to be correct; for if one of 
Rafael’s or Michael Angelo’s figures was to be traced, and Correggio’s 
reflections and refractions to be added to it, there would soon be an end of 
proportion and strength, and it would be weak, and pappy, and lumbering, 
and thick-headed, like his own works; but then it would have softness and 
evenness, by a twelvemonth’s labour, where a month would with judgment 
have finished it better and higher ; and the poor wretch who executed it 
would be the Correggio that the life-writers have written of—a drudge and a 
miserable man, compelled to softness by poverty. I say again, O Artist! 
you may disbelieve all this, but it shall be at your own peril.’ 


C1X 


Great things are done when Men & Mountains meet ; 
This is not done by jostling in the street. 


MS. Book, p. 43. DGR, WMR, WBY (‘Coupl.’ v, vi, and 8), EY 
i, 224. 
2 This is] These are all edd, 


CX 


If you play a Game of Chance, Know, before you begin, 
If you are benevolent You will never win. 


MS. Book, p. 47. Only in EY i, 224, printed as a quatrain. 


CX1 


The only Man that eer I knew 

Who did not make me almost spew 

Was Fuseli: he was both Turk and Jew— 

And so, dear Christian Friends, how do you do? 


MS. Book, p. 50. These lines are written over an erasure, with the title 
‘ William Cowper, Esq"*.’ which probably belonged to the deleted passage. 
WMR (‘Epig.’ xv) with title ‘ Fuseli,’ EY i. 225. 

1 that e’er I] that ever I WMR; I ever EY. 2 make me almost] 
almost make me EY. 4 dear] sweet MS. Book 1st rdég. del. Christian 
Friends] Christians zbid. 1st rdg. del. 


Rossetti MS. 229 
CX 
For this is being a Friend just in the nick, fr 
Not when he’s well, but waiting till he’s sick ; 


He calls you to his help; be you not movd 
Until, by being sick, his wants are prov’d. 


You see him spend his Soul in Prophecy: 
Do you believe it a confounded lie, 

Till some Bookseller, & the Public Fame, 
Prove there is truth in his extravagant claim. 


or 


For ’tis atrocious in a Friend you love 9 
To tell you anything that he can’t prove, 

And ’tis most wicked in a Christian Nation 

For any man to pretend to Inspiration. 


MS. Book, p. 50. This is probably the continuation of the erased stanza, 
referred to in note to cxi, and was therefore written before the preceding 
piece. Only in WMR (‘ Coupl.’ xix) with title ‘ Blake’s Friends.’ 

9 atrocious] most wicked MS. Book ts¢ rdg. del. 12 man] one WMR. 
11, 12] Cp. Notes to Reynolds’ Discourses, p. 5: ‘Reynolds’ Opinion was 
That Genius May be Taught, & that all Pretence to Inspiration is a Lie & 
a Deceit, to say the least of it. For if it is a Deceit the whole Bible is 
Madness. This Opinion originates in the Greeks calling the Muse{s] 
Daughters of Memory, 

‘The Enquiry in England is not whether a Man has Talents & Genius! 
But whether he is Passive & Polite & a Virtuous Ass, & obedient to 
Noblemen’s Opinions in Art & Science. If he is, he is a Good Man. If 
Not, he must be Starved.’ , 


CXlll 


I will tell you what Joseph of Arimathea I 
Said to my Fairy: was not it very queer? 
Priestly & Bacon! What, are you here? 

Come before Joseph of Arimathea. 

Listen patient, & when Joseph has done i 
I will make a fool laugh, & a Fairy fun. 


MS. Book, p.52. Only in EY i. 225. For Joseph cp. Gil. i. 19 : for the _ 
Fairy see footnote to ‘ Poems from Jerusalem,’ iv. 

2 was... queer] was it not queer EY. 3 Priestly & Bacon] Priestly 
—Bacon EY. 5 &... done] when Joseph is done EY. 6 I will] 
Not legibly written, perhaps’ Twill; PMEY. &a Fairy] ata Fairy’s EY. 


230 Rossetti MS. 


CX1V 


Grown old in Love from Seven till Seven times Seven, 
I oft have wish’d for Hell, for Ease from Heaven. . 


MS. Book, p. 54. Apparently written in or after 1806. WMR, ING 
(‘Coupl.’ v). 


CXV 


Why was Cupid a Boy, I 
And why a boy was he? 

He should have been a Girl, 

For aught that I can see. 


For he shoots with his bow, 5 
And the Girl shoots with her Eye, © 

And they both are merry & glad, 

And laugh when we do cry. 


And to make Cupid a boy 9 
Was the Cupid girl’s: mocking plan; 

For a boy can’t interpret the thing 

Till he is become a man. 


And then he’s so pierc’d with cares, 13 
And wounded with arrowy smarts, 

That the whole business of his life 

Is to pick out the heads of the darts. 


MS. Book, p. 56. R!, DGR, WMR, EY (iii. 69), WBY, all with title 
‘Cupid’ and omission of last stanza (except R*) which is printed separately 
by Swinb. (p. 144), EY i. 225, and WBY (notes, p. 248). 

6 the] a WBY. 9-12 And ... man] All edd. print the infinitely 
preferable first draft of this stanza :— 


‘Then to make Cupid a Boy *9 
Was surely a Woman’s plan, 

For a boy ne’er learns so much 

Till he is become a man’; 


all reading ‘never’ for ‘ne’er’ (1. *11), all except R! ‘has’ for ‘is’ (1. *12) 
and WBY ‘And’ for ‘Then’ (1. *9) and ‘to mock’ for ‘so much’ (1. Sra 
13 he’s ... cares] he is so pierced through WBY. 


Rossetti MS, (231 


*Twas the Greeks’ love of war 17 
Turn’d Love into a Boy, 

And Woman into a Statue of Stone— 

And away fled every Joy. 


17-20 “Twas ... Joy] Swinb. calls this ‘the last (rejected) stanza,’ but 
there is no trace of deletion in the MS. Book. 17 Greeks’] Greek 
Swinb. 18 Turn’d] That turned Swinb. Love] Cupid EY, WBY. 
20 And] WBY omits. fled] flew EY, WBY. 


CXV1 
I asked my Dear Friend Orator Prig: I 
‘What’s the first part of Oratory?’ He said: ‘A great 


wig. 

“And what is the second?’ Then, dancing a jig 

And bowing profoundly, he said: ‘A great wig.’ 

‘And what is the third?’ Then he snored like a pig, 5 

And, puffing his cheeks out, replied: ‘A great wig.’ 

So if a Great Painter with Questions you push 

‘What’s the first part of painting?’ he'll say: ‘A Paint- 
Brush.’ 

‘And what is the second?’ with most modest blush, 9 

He'll smile like a cherub, and say.: ‘A paint-brush.’ 

‘And what is the third?’ he'll bow like a rush, 

With a leer in his Eye, he’ll reply: ‘A Paint-brush.’ 

Perhaps this is all a Painter can want: 13 

But, look yonder—that house is the house of Rem 
brandt! &c. 


MS. Book, p. 60. DGR, WMR (‘Epig.’ 1) with title in WMR of ‘ Orator 
Prig.’ EY (‘Coupl.’ xx1). ~ Following the ‘ &c.’ which indicates that more 
of this piece was written elsewhere Blake has added the words ‘to come 
in Barry: a Poem.’ 

xr my] of my DGR, WMR. 2 part of ] thing in EY. 6 And... out) 
And thrust out his cheeks and MS. Book 1st rdg. del., EY. 7 So... push] 
So if to a painter the question you push DGR, WMR, EY. 8 he'll] he’d 
JONG rr he'll] He will EY. 12 he'll] and DGR, WMR, EY. 13 all 
a] all that a EY. 


232 Rossetti MS. 


CXVIl 


O dear Mother Outline! of wisdom most sage, I 
What’s the First Part of Painting; she said ‘ Patronage.’ 
And what is the Second, to Please and Engage, 

She frowned like a Fury, and said ‘ Patronage.’ 

And what is the Third: she put off Old Age 5 
And smil’d like a Syren and said ‘Patronage.’ 


MS. Book, p. 61. DGR, WMR (‘Epig.’ 2), EY (‘Coupl.’ xx1). This is 
perhaps the continuation of the preceding epigram (cxvi). 


CXVI111 


To Venetian Artists 


That God is Colouring Newton does shew, k 
And the devil is a black outline, all of us know. 
Perhaps this little Fable may make us merry: 

A dog went over the water without a wherry ; 

A bone which he had stolen he had in his mouth; 5 
He cared not whether the wind was north or south. 

As he swam he saw the reflection of the bone. 

‘This is quite Perfection—one Generalizing Tone! 
Outline! There’s no outline, there’s no such thing: 9 
All is Chiaroscuro, Poco-Pen—it’s all Colouring!’ 

Snap, snap! He has lost shadow and substance too. 
He had them both before. ‘Now how do ye do?’ 

‘A great deal better than I was before: 13 
Those who taste colouring love it more and more.’ 


MS. Book, pp. 60, 61: the first couplet with the catchwords ‘ Perhaps 
this little Fable, &c.’ occurs at foot of p. 60, the rest, with the title, on p. 61. 
WMR (‘Epig.’ v), EY print first couplet (‘Coupl.’ xm) followed by the 
rest as a separate poem. 

8 This... Tone] Here’s two for one, what a brilliant tone MS. Book 1sf 
rdg. del. one] EY omit. 9, to Outline... Colouring] 4 marginal addi- 


tion; EY omit, 11 He... too] and lost the shadow and the substance 
too EY. t2 them both] both these EY. do ye] d’ye EY. 13° Bias 
before] EY oznit. 14 taste] have tasted EY. 


Cp. Blake’s Descriptive Catalogue, pp. 63, 64, No. xv, ‘Rutha drawing’ = 


Rossetti MS. ae 


‘If losing and obliterating the outline constitutes a Picture, Mr. B. will 
“ never be so foolish as to do one. Such art of losing the outlines is the 
art of Venice and Flanders; it loses all character and leaves what some 
people call ‘‘expression” ; but this is a false notion of expression, .. . The 
great and golden rule of art as well as of life is this;—That the more 
distinct, sharp, and wirey the boundary line, the more perfect the work 
of art,—and the less keen and sharp, The greater is the evidence of weak 
imitation, plagiarism, and bungling. Great inventors, in all ages, knew this.’ 
Also Descriptive Catalogue, p. 54; ‘These pictures, among numerous others 
painted for experiment, were the result of temptations and perturbations, 
labouring to destroy Imaginative power, by means of that infernal machine 
called Chiaro Oscuro, in the hands of Venetian and Flemish Demons, whose 
enmity to the Painter himself, and to all Artists who study in the Florentine 
and Roman Schools, may be removed by an exhibition and exposure of their 
vile tricks.’ 


CX1X 


Great Men and Fools do often me inspire ; 
But the Greater Fool, the Greater Liar. 


MS. Book, p. 63 (reversed). Only in EY ii. 384. 
It mej we EY. 2 Fool] fools EY. 


CXX 


Having given great offence by writing in Prose, I 
I'll write in Verse as soft as Bartolloze. 

Some blush at what others can see no crime in; 
But nobody sees any harm in Rhyming. 


MS. Book, p. 65. The rough draft of most of this piece occurs on p. 62, 
where the lines were composed in the following order, 5-8, 3, 4, 15-18, 
which Blake, interlineating Il. 1 and 2 between Il. 8 and 9 (or 4, 5 in the original 
draft), afterwards renumbered 1-12. Lines 13 and 14 are also an inter- 
lineation in the first draft. The verses were then transcribed on p. 65, with 
the couplet Il. 11, 12, added in a slightly changed form, from the first draft on 
p- 63, and the addition of Il. rg-22. Only in EY (‘ Memoir’ i. 76). 

1} Cp. Hunt’s reference to Blake’s Descriptive Catalogue, Examiner, no:~ 
90, September 17, 1809. _—_in Prose] EY omit in. 4 But... Rhyming] 
But Nobody at all sees harm in Rhyming MS. Book tst rdg. del. 
(p. 62). 


234 Rossetti MS, 


Dryden, in rhyme, cries ‘Milton only plann’d:’ 5 
Every Fool shook his bells throughout the land, _ 
Tom Cooke cut Hogarth down with his clean graving: 
Thousands of connoisseurs with joy ran raving. 

Thus, Hayley on his Toilette seeing the sope, 9 
Cries ‘Homer is very much improv’d by Pope.’ 

Some say I’ve given great Provision to my foes, 

And that now I lead my false friends by the nose. 
Flaxman and Stothard, smelling a sweet savour, 13 
Cry ‘Blakefied drawing spoils painter and Engraver ;’ 
While I, looking up to my Umbrella, 

Resolv’d to be a very contrary fellow, 

Cry, looking quite from skumference to center, 17 
‘No one can finish so high as the original Inventor.’ 
Thus Poor Schiavonetti died of the Cromek— 

A thing that’s tied around the Examiner’s neck! 

This is my sweet apology to my friends, 2I 
That I may put them in mind of their latter ends. 


5, 6] Cp. Advertisement (MS. Book, p. 20) : ‘ An example of the contrary 
arts is written us in the characters of Milton and Dryden as they are 
given in a poem signed with the name of Nat Lee, which perhaps he 
never wrote, and perhaps he wrote in a paroxysm of insanity, in which it is 
said that Milton’s poem is a rough, unfinished piece, and Dryden has finished 
it. Now let Dryden’s Fall and Milton’s Paradise be read, and I will assert 
that everybody of understanding must cry out shame on such niggling and 
poco-pen as Dryden has degraded Milton with. But at the same time I will 
allow that stupidity will prefer Dryden, because it is rhyme, and monotonous 
sing-song sing-song from beginning to end. Such are Bartolozzi, Woollett 
and Strange.’ 7) Cp. Advertisement (MS. Book, p. 57): ‘Cooke wished 
to give Hogarth what he could take from Rafael, that is, outline, and mass, 
and colour; but he could not.’ 8 Thousands... raving] How many 
Thousands of Conoisseurs ran raving MS. Book 1st rdg. del. (p. 62). 
9 Thus] Ax addition ; Then EY. to Cries] Says MS, Book 1s¢ 7dg. del. 
II, 12 Some... nose] 

‘T’ve given great Provision to my Foes 
But now I’ll lead my false Friends by the Nose.’ 


MS. Book tst rdg. del. (p. 63). 1z Some say] 4 marginal addition. 
great] EY omit. 12 that] 4 marginal addition; EY omit. 17 Cry. 
center] Cry Tom Cooke proves from circumference to Center MS. Book 
1st rdg. del. (p. 62). 19, 20 A reference to Cromek’s ‘Account of Mr. 
Schiavonetti,’ in the Examiner, July 1, 1810. 20 around] about EY. 


Rossetto MS. 2a5 


CXX1 


If men will act like a maid smiling over a churn, I 
They ought not, when it comes to another’s turn, 
To grow sour at what a friend may utter, 
Knowing and feeling that we all have need of Butter. 
False Friends, fie! fie! Our Friendship you shan’t sever ; 5 
In spite we will be greater friends than ever. 

MS. Book, p. 65. Perhaps a continuation of cxx. Printed here for the 
first time. 


5 fie! fie!] O no! MS. Book 1st rdg. del. you shan’t] ne'er shall 
~ MS. Book 1st rdg. del. 6 In spite] For now MS. Book ts¢ rdg. del. 


CXXIl 


Call that the Public Voice which is their Error? 
Like as a Monkey, peeping in a Mirror, 
Admires all his colours brown & warm, 
And never once perceives his ugly form. 

MS. Book, p. 66, Written in continuation of a passage in Blake’s Adver- 
tisement, in which he says that ‘ Rafael and Michael Angelo abhorr'd studying 
nature, as Vasari tells us.’ Gil. i. 266 with title ‘On Colourists,? WMR 
(‘ Epig.’ v1) with title ‘ Colour and Form,’ EY i, 226, 

. 2 Like as] Like to EY. 3 Admires] Admireth Gil, 


CXXIll1 


Some people admire the work of a Fool, 
For it’s sure to keep your judgment cool ; 
It does not reproach you with want of wit; 
It is not like a lawyer serving a writ. 


MS. Book, p. 70. DGR,WMR, EY, WBY (‘Coupl.’ viz, 1x, and 10). Cp. 
MS. Book, ciii, ll. 1, 2. 


CXXIV 


To God 


If you have form’d a Circle to go into, 
Go into it yourself, & see how you would do. 


MS. Book, p. 73. Only in EY i. 226. 
2 how] what EY. 


236 Rossetti MS, 


CXXV 


Since all the Riches of this World 

May be gifts from the Devil & Earthly Kings, 
I should suspect that I worship’d the Devil 

If I thank’d my God for worldly things. 


MS. Book, p. 73 (reversed) in pencil. All edd. follow DGR in printing 
as first stanza of xxx ; DGR, WMR and EY with title ‘Riches,’ WBY with 
title ‘The Two Kinds of Riches.’ 

4 my God] WBY omits my. 


CXXV1 


To Chloe’s breast young Cupid slily stole, 
But he crept in at Myra’s pocket-hole. 


MS. Book, p. 78. DGR, WMR, EY (‘ Coupl.’ tv), WBY (‘Coupl.’ 5). 
t breast] heart R‘. 


CXXVII1 


‘Now Art has lost its mental Charms x 
France shall subdue the World in Arms, 

So spoke an Angel at my birth; _ 

Then said ‘Descend thou upon earth ; 

Renew the Arts on Britain’s shore, 5 
And France shall fall down & adore. 

With works of Art their Armies meet 

And War shall sink beneath thy feet. 


MS. Book, p. 79. Lines 13, 14 are apparently the beginning of a second 
stanza which was left unfinished. Only in EY i, 227. Cp. Advertisement 
(MS. Book, p. 66): ‘Let us teach Buonaparte and whomsoever else it 
may concern that it is not Arts that follow & attend upon Empire, but 
Empire that attends upon & follows The Arts.’ Also Blake’s notes to 
Reynolds’ Works (vol. i, p. [cxxv]), ‘The Foundation of Empire is Art 
& Science. Remove them, or Degrade them, & the Empire is No More. 
Empire follows Art, & not Vice Versa as Englishmen suppose.’ 

4 upon] on the EY. 7 their] her EY. 


ee a 


Rossetti MS. 229 


But if thy Nation Arts refuse, 9 
And if they scorn the immortal Muse, 

France shall the arts of Peace restore 

And save thee from the ungrateful shore.’ 


Spirit who lov’st Brittannia’s Isle 13 
Round which the Fiends of Commerce smile— 


t2 And...shore] And save thy works from Britain’s shore MS. Book 
1st rdg. del. 13, 14 Spirit... smile] 


‘Spirit who lovest Britannia’s shore 
Round which the Fiends of Commerce roar.’ 


Bags 14 Cp. Advertisement (MS. Book, p. 25), ‘In a commercial nation 
impostors are abroad in all professions. These are the greatest enemies of 
Genius.’ 


CXXVII1 
Nail his neck to the Cross: nail it with a nail. 


Nail his neck to the Cross: ye all have power over his 
tail. 


MS. Book, p.79. EY ii. 57 wrongly regard this as part of The Everlasting 
Gospel, ‘for which no place can be assigned.” 


CXX1X 


The Caverns of the Grave I’ve seen, I 
And these I shew’d to England’s Queen. 

But now the Caves of Hell I view, 

Who shall I dare to shew them to? 

What mighty Soul in Beauty’s form 5 
Shall dauntless View the Infernal storm? 


MS. Book, p. 87, on same page as part of Blake’s descriptive account of 
his picture of ‘The Last Judgment,’ headed ‘ For the Year 1810: Addition 
to Blake’s Catalogue of Pictures, &c.’ Swinb. p. 55, WMR p. 170, EY iii. 
74, WBY p. 140, all except Swinb. with title ‘For a Picture of the Last 
Judgment: Dedication.” WMR (p. 144) seems unaware that this poem 
forms part of the MS. Book. 

1 Caverns] Visions MS. Book 1st rdg. del. 3 But] And MS. Book ts¢ 
rdg. del. 4 Who] Whom WMR, EY, WBY. 6 daunt!ess] dare to 
MS. Book 1s¢ rdg. del. 


one Roisce MS. 


Egremont’s Countess can controll 
The flames of Hell that round me roll; 
If she refuse, I still go on 9 
Till the Heavens & Earth are gone, 
Still admir'd by Noble minds, 
Follow’'d by Envy on the winds, 
Re-engrav’d Time after Time, 13 
Ever in their Youthful prime, 
My Designs unchang’d remain. 
Time may rage, but rage in vain. 
For above Time’s troubled Fountains, 17 
On the Great Atlantic Mountains, 
In my Golden House on high, 
There they shine Eternally. 
7 can] dare MS. Book ts¢ rdg. del. 8 flames] doors zbzd. 1st rdg. del. 


11 Noble] worthy zbid. 1st rdg. del. 15 unchang’d] shall still zb¢d. 1st 
rag. del. 


CXXX 


I rose up at the dawn of day— 5 
‘Get thee away! get thee away! 

Pray’st thou for Riches? away! away! 

This is the Throne of Mammon grey.’ 


Said I: this, sure, is very odd; 5 
I took it to be the Throne of God. 

For everything besides I have: 

It is only for Riches that I can crave. 


MS. Book, p. 89, written immediately under and partly around an entry — 


dated Aug. 1807. R' has stanzas 1, 2, 3, the first couplet of 6, then 4 and 7; 
Gil. i. 309, 310, prints 1, 2, 3, a fourth stanza formed of the first couplets of 
6 and 4, a fifth stanza formed of the second couplet of 4 and the first couplet 
of 5, then 7; Swinb. p. 128 (with title ‘ Prayer’) arranges stanzas in the 
order 1, 2, 3, 6, 4, 5, 7; WMR follows Gilchrist with title ‘Mammon’; EY 
(i. 228) and WBY place stanzas in correct order, the latter with title ‘The 
Two Thrones.’ 

5 Said I] I said R!, EY, WBY. 7 For everything] Everything R1, 
Gil., WMR ; Everything else EY, WBY. 8 It... crave] It’s only 
riches that I can crave Gil., WMR ; It’s only riches I can crave EY, WBY. 
It is] It’s R4 


Rossetti MS. 239 
I have Mental Joy, & Mental Health, 9 
And Mental Friends, & Mental wealth; 


I’ve a Wife I love, & that loves me; ~ 
I’ve all But Riches Bodily. 


I am in God’s presence night & day, 13 
And he never turns his face away ; 

The accuser of sins by my side doth stand, 

And he holds my money bag in his hand. 


For my worldly things God makes him pay, 17 
And he’d pay for more if to him I would pray ; 
And so you may do the worst you can do; 

Be assur'd, Mr Devil, I won’t pray to you. 


Then if for Riches I must not Pray, 21 
God knows, I little of Prayers need say; 

So, as a Church is known by its Steeple, 

If I pray it must be for other People. 


He says, if I do not worship him for a God, 25 
I shall eat coarser food, & go worse shod; 

So, as I don’t value such things as these, 

You must do, Mr Devil, just as God please. 


9 Joy] joys R! and all edd. to And Mental Friends] R! and all 
edd. except Swinb. omit ‘ And.’ 11 Wife I love] Wife that I love R’ 
and all edd. except Swinb. 13-20 Iam... to you] Written later in 
margin, and marked for insertion here. 14 And he] R? and all edd. 
except Swinb. omit ‘And,’ 15, 16 Cp. ‘The Laocodn’ (Prophetic 
Books, 21) : ‘Money, which is The Great Satan or Reason the Root of Good 
& Evil In the Accusation of Sin.’ 15 doth] does Swinb., EY, WBY. 
16 money bag] money-bags EY, WBY. 19 And so you] And you 
EY, WBY. 22 God... say] God knows it’s little prayers I need 
say R', Gil., WMR, EY. 25 if... him] if I worship not him R}, Gil., 
WMR ;; if I don’t worship him EY, WBY. 27 So] But R?, Gil., 
WMR, EY, WBY. 


__» CXXXI1 


Do what you will this life’s a fiction, 
And is made up of contradiction. : 
MS. Book, p. 98, above stanza C 4 of ‘ Fayette’ (MS. Book, xxxvi), which 


appears upside down, written from the reversed end of the book. Printed 
kere for first time. 


j ape i ah ites jaa act Fo i 

« otver ie he 

SFE Aoi i . LOPE eb 4 
Seer ah 


ms és cinder 2 bon ae 


iti Waal aid sic) ania eee 
tifa WS Ay pet ed = tx f= “ol eth AE 
tee a, bs iti: 
if oF vhd apneel—wer. cabo ant tah; 


% . tit aod <rien bad ogee: tthe ceay “yar 10% 
Wt Dies} SG a a ae Gees Ce 
thie 26S! ere Wihtrs Ath - 2h. ot ae fan Ae F 
<5 2 see ream hk ae oi <n i Jiu ws a RR pes 


ae ae rata tah: hea " PRA ars <SRaadt fishhh. 
; ; aos * ee tighygs gg Sadie repeat eEMAPS hg 
Fy ‘ ; os fg “Bemis: hese =, ‘Ss a Pe = ae 
Pie AAT Ken REN COTES SPA aes Daa 
A 2 Riga | 34cm gist fare Shut bis kerieded 22 
’ were } rh = et fue she ata ee ¥= joe 
ei SEE AF saa oat se el hoorae alan aa 


POEMS 


FROWN 


THE ROSSETTI MS, 


Ww 
‘THE EVERLASTING GOSPEL’ 


§ xxi 
) Written dca 1480 


ROSSETTI MANUSCRIPT 
Ill 


CXXXI1 


THE EVERLASTING GOSPEL 


Prefatory Note 


THIS poem—or rather rough studies for a poem which 
Blake never carried to completion—consists of a series of 
fragments scattered throughout the MS. Book. As these 
occur for the most part on vacant spaces of pages already 
partially filled with the draft of his catalogue ‘for the year 
1810, it is plain that ‘The Everlasting Gospel’ was written 
not earlier (though probably not much later) than this 
date. 

Three of these fragments (@, y1,and y’) are different treat- 
ments of the same theme, Christ’s gentleness or humility ; 
one (6) is a mere note or suggestion; while all but the 
first few lines of another (7) have been lost to us through 
Blake’s neglect to transcribe the remainder of the passage 
into the MS. Book. The several fragments in their present 
form contain repetitions of lines and overlapping of thought 
and expression which the author would doubtless have 
removed on final revision. At one stage in the evolution 
of the poem Blake marked the order in which he intended 
the parts then written to be placed, and this clue, with 
careful observance of the position of later marginal inser- 
tions, enables us to arrange the different sections of the 
poem in their proper sequence. To carry further the 
attempt to give unity to this unfinished piece would involve 
editorial omissions and transpositions contrary to the plan 
of the present work. 

Fragment f, the 571]. beginning ‘Was Jesus gentle,’ 
seems to have been the first draft of the initial section of 
the poem. Handling the same theme again in a different 
manner, Blake re-wrote the entire passage in the new form 


bs * 
kh i a eer ee 


“Roujeulliy jo ydasof uo 493Sas a1} pure ,;adson SuNsepI9Aq oy] , 
Jo j1ed oe ‘osed jo joo; ye pue ursieu puey-e] Ul pue 213099 punoare ‘199e] []1S UA QIIM 
a]1YM f(O1gr) ,Ssoippy o11qng , 10 juIMasyAIOp Ly Sa¥xe[g JO suoysod a1 a3ed jo 100) pue peay jy 
‘astpwAvy fo SaVH ayZ JO 11 ayefd A0y YoJa¥s JeuLSi10 ayy si Sed 247 JO aajuss ayy uy ‘eS ‘d “CW I1Lassoy 


GED. too SE RET LET PERN GTI TG 
ye ar evisony & Lpe, ty ony op Ba Ereeat » seh 
Se) rregpes toege ge fbi Mea ast hee) D <t 
Ney Ae pe ale dee rp \egut? oy RS 

| te oa ee plum peste sof “Uy ofeany ae a 
Re, ate PYG Kage AG - v7 / ee ke = “ob? > wt Pores 
my Fs ee in bee wey pruvrny + y apy fory “7 i 
RY oe yo oy bo 67 < aaehaate | 


ee tp7 > 4 Cad nee he te 


Wn vif ¢ ad 
eae x tL 


ia 


i 


Rossetti MS, 243 
 y' (the 38 IL, or with marginal additions 46 ll., beginning 

' ‘Was Jesus humble’ and ending ‘And take Revenge at 
the last Day’), and this again was further altered and 
expanded into the revised version y*, to which the title 
‘The Everlasting Gospel’ was prefixed for the first time. 
This last section contains 106 ll. which Blake, in a marginal 
note, reckons as 78, showing that the calculation was made 
before the interpolated ll. 21-24, 31-50 and 85-88 were 
added in the margin. At this point he indicated the 
connexion of y? with ¢, which he then meant to be the 
next section, by adding the catchwords ‘ was Jesus chaste 
or did he &c.,’ followed by the couplet (8) with which the 
poem was apparently meant to conclude :— 


‘I am sure this Jesus will not do 
Either for Englishman or Jew.’ 


The fragment ¢ ‘Was Jesus chaste’ contains 96 ll., the 
two last being a marginal addition, written after Blake had 
_ noted ‘ 94 lines’ as the length of this passage. Below 1. 94, 
without apparent break, he added :— 


‘Seeing this false Christ in fury and passion 
I made my voice heard all over the nation. 
What are those, &c.’ 


followed at the side, a little lower down, by the two-line 
epilogue quoted above. It was Blake’s practice to add 
‘&c.’ where a poem or passage had already been written 
elsewhere, and it seems clear that these three lines were 
merely catchwords marking the position of the imperfect 
section 7. Messrs. Ellis and Yeats point out that the 7th 
stanza of ‘To the Jews’ (Ferusalem, 1804) begins with the 
words ‘ What are those golden builders doing?’ As that 
poem, however, is written in quatrains with a different 
rime-arrangement it could not well have followed here, 
though Blake may have repeated this particular line. 

Of the remaining portions the four-line fragment 6 ‘ Did 
Jesus teach doubt’ is written transversely on the page 
opposite the beginning of y’, which it was apparently 
' meant to precede. Blake does not here add ‘ &c.,’ and it 
is probable that these lines are merely suggestions of a new 


| train of thought which he did not develop further. The 


48 ll. (c) beginning ‘ Was Jesus born of a virgin pure’ are ~ 

found on a scrap of different paper now bound in at the 

end of the MS. Book. It can hardly have been written 

earlier than May 1810, since it occupies the fourth page 
RZ 


244 Rossetti MS. 


of a folded sheet, the preceding page of which contains 
part of the draft of Blake’s Additions to his Catalogue of 
Pictures for the Year 1810; and it must have been written 
later than 6 as it has the amended form of |. 8, found in y! 
and y2. But there are no grounds for Messrs. Ellis and 
Yeats’ conjecture that these lines are ‘an afterthought, 
intended to supersede much of the rest of the poems [read 
‘poem ”] but rejected by the author before he made up his 
mind how to fix them in.’ Probably all the fragments of 
‘The Everlasting Gospel’ were first written, like «, upon 
separate pieces of paper, which were afterwards copied 
into, or merely loosely inserted in, the MS. Book. The 
comparatively small number of corrections made in B show 
that it must have been copied from an earlier draft, and 
the loss of 7 (perhaps also of 6) may be attributed to the 
same cause. This passage has no place assigned to it, 
but its natural position would appear to be immediately 
before ¢, where I print it in the present arrangement. . 

The fourteen lines beginning ‘The Vision of Christ that 
thou dost see’ (a) are introductory to the whole poem, to 
which they are probably meant to serve as prologue. The 
interpolation «¢ still leaves the epilogue at the end of the 
poem as at first intended. 

A small part only of ‘The Everlasting Gospel’ was 
included among the ‘ Poems hitherto Unpublished’ in Gil- 
christ (1863); Mr. D. G. Rossetti there printing the prologue 
(ll. 3, 4 omitted) and 42 of g6ll. of ¢ under the title ‘ The 
Woman taken in Adultery. A much more comprehensive 
selection is given by Mr. Swinburne (Zssay, 1868, pp. 148- — 
175), who prints altogether 253 ll., enriched by running 
commentary. Here and there slight emendations are made, 
such as ‘ This life’s dim windows of the soul’ for ‘ This life’s 
five windows of the soul’; but Blake’s text is, for the most 
part, reverently treated. Mr. Swinburne’s extracts have 
obviously been chosen with a view to elucidating his 
author’s meaning, and there is consequently no attempt at 
strict sequence. 

In the Aldine Edition (1874) Mr. W. M. Rossetti states 
that ‘this wholly amazing and partly splendid poem is 
now published in full for the first time, adding ‘I have 
done my best to arrange the verses into some sort of order 
and method ; with what success, the reader must judge.’ 
The omission of y!, and a few odd couplets rejected for 
various reasons, reduce the entire number of lines in this 
version to 313. The poem as reconstructed by Mr. W. M. 


Rossetti MS. 245 


Rossetti is divided into the following six sections, not 
always corresponding with those of the author—1 a 
(except Il. 3, 4). 2.6 3. ¢,1l. 1-80. 4. y’, ll. 1-20, 25-40; 
B, 11. 13,573 y%, ll. 51-106; ¢ ll. 91, 92, 81-90; y" ll. 21-24; 
Gj ll. 93-96. 5.68; y?, ll. 41-50. 6.6. Mr. Rossetti has 
generally adopted the emendations introduced into the 
text by his predecessor. 

Messrs. Ellis and Yeats (vol. ii, pp. 42-60) have made 
the only attempt up to the present to reproduce the frag- 
ments as Blake left them. They first give y! and y? in 
parallel columns, as ‘final version’ and ‘ previous version,’ 
the latter followed by 8 (‘Another version, apparently 
earlier’); then 6 and ¢ (treating the former as a continua- 
tion of the latter), then 0, which they think was cancelled 
in favour of 7—‘ and so the MS. of “ The Everlasting Gos- 
pel” terminates for us with a loose end.’ Here they fail to 
see that the 2} ll. of 7 are merely catchwords marking the 
position of a complete passage, written down elsewhere, 
but now unfortunately lost to us. Later they print as 
a separate scrap y’, ll. 21-25, though its proper place is 
clearly marked in the MS., followed by e, which, for no 
discernible reason, they regard as a cancelled passage. 
The numerous inaccuracies in their text are, here as else- 
where, due rather to simple blundering than to any attempt 
to amend their author, such as we find in Swinburne and 
Rossetti. Such misreadings as‘ Doth read’ for ‘ Both read’ 
(a, 1. 13), ‘all day long’ for ‘three days long’ (y', 1. 5), 
‘ten years old’ for ‘twelve years old’ (y’, 1. 52)—passages 
correctly printed by Blake’s earlier editors—show the 
carelessness with which they transcribed their original. 

Mr. W. B. Yeats gives ten lines less than WMR; but 
arranges the fragments with more regard for Blake’s own 
subdivisions. His order of the passages is as follows: 
I. a (except Il. 3, 4). 2. y’, ll. 1-20, 25-106 ; B, ll. 13-57. 
3. ¢. 4. € 5.6. The transposition of ¢ and « is scarcely 
happy, and the omission of 7, 

‘ Seeing this false Christ in fury and passion 
I made my voice heard all over the nation’— 
to which the epilogue forms the natural climax—destroys 
the force of this concluding couplet by making it imme- 
diately follow the speech of Caiaphas (e, ll. 17-48). ; 


‘THE EVERLASTING GOSPEL _ 


a 


[ Prologue | 


The Vision of Christ that thou dost see 
Is my Vision’s Greatest Enemy. 
Thine has a great hook nose like thine; 
Mine has a snub nose like to mine. 4 
Thine is the Friend of All Mankind ; 
Mine speaks in Parables to the Blind. 
Thine loves the same world that mine hates; 
Thy heaven doors are my Hell Gates. 8 
Socrates taught what Meletus 
Loath’d as a Nation’s bitterest Curse, 
And Caiaphas was in his own Mind 
A benefactor to Mankind. | = Oo oEBg 
’ Both read the Bible day & night, 
- But thou read’st black where I read white. 


MS, Book, p- 33. On the strength of the phrase ‘ Friend of all Mankind’ 
(cp. MS. Book xlix and lxxxviii) and the reference to the ‘ great hook nose,’ 
EY suppose this prologue to be addressed to Stothard. See also prose note 
in MS. Book, p. 64: ‘I always thought that Jesus Christ was a snubby, or 
I should not have worshipped him if I thought he had been one of those 
long spindle-nosed rascals.’ 

3,4 Thine... mine] This couplet omitted by all except EY. 3 great] 
long EY. 4 to] EY omit. 5 Friend] fare DGR. 9-12 Cp. 
Jerusalem, f. 93, where on the bodies of three figures with out- 
stretched arms and accusing forefingers are engraved the words ‘ Anytus 
Meletus & Lycon thought Socrates a very Pernicious Man. So Cai[a]phas 


thought Jesus.’ 13 Both} Doth EY, WBY. 14 read’st] readest EY, 
WBY. 


. 
4 
a 


Rossetti MS. 247 


B 


Was Jesus gentle, or did He 

Give any marks of Gentility? 

When twelve years old he ran away, 

And left his Parents in dismay. 4 
When after three days’ sorrow found, 

Loud as Sinai’s trumpet-sound : 

‘No Earthly Parents I confess: 

My Heavenly Father’s business. 8 
Ye understand not what I say, 

And, angry, force me to obey. 

Obedience is a duty then, 

And favour gains with God & Men.’ 12 
John from the Wilderness loud cried ; 

Satan Gloried in his Pride. 

‘Come,’ said Satan, ‘come away, 

Ill soon see if you'll obey! 16 
John for disobedience bled, 

But you can turn the stones to bread. 

God’s high king & God’s high Priest 

Shall Plant their Glories in Your breast, 20 


MS. Book, pp. 100, tor. A fair copy of an earlier draft, as appears from 
the very slight alterations made after writing. First printed in full by EY, 
ii, pp. 50, 51, col. 2. Swinb. pp. 168-170, quotes with commentary ll. 17-32, 
35-40, 47-57, mistakenly calling these ‘a later division of the poem.” WMR 
inserts ll. 13-57 between +?, ll. 44 and 51. WBY places the same lines as 
conclusion to y?, following 1, 106. 

6 trumpet-sound] trumpet’s sound EY. 7, 8 No... business] The MS. 
Book has no punctuation. In y'(I. 8), y? (1. 10), and ¢ (I. 34) Blake changes 
the last line of this couplet to ‘I am doing my Father’s business.” EY make 
an heroic attempt to accept the lines as they occur here, by punctuating :— 


‘No, earthly parents, I confess 
My heavenly Father’s business.’ 


which necessitates their still weaker readings in y' and y? (abandoned 
however in €) :— 

‘No, earthly parents, I confess 

I am doing My Father’s business.’ aa 
It should not be overlooked that in its present form the poem is merely 
a rough draft. Cp., as another sentence of equally slovenly construction, 
Il, 22, 23. 16 you'll] you EY, WBY. 18 stones] stone WBY. 


248 Rossetti MS. 


If Caiaphas You will obey, 

If Herod You with bloody Prey 

Feed with the Sacrifice & be 

Obedient ; fall down, worship me.’ 24 
Thunders & lightnings broke around, 

And Jesus’ voice in thunders’ sound: 

‘Thus I sieze the spiritual Prey. 

Ye smiters with disease, make way. 28 
I come your King & God to sieze, 

Is God a smiter with disease?” 

The God of this World raged in vain ; 

He bound Old Satan in His Chain, 32 
And, bursting forth, his furious ire 

Became a Chariot of fire. 

Throughout the land he took his course, 

And trac’d diseases to their source. 36 
He curs’d the Scribe & Pharisee, 

Trampling down Hipocrisy. 

Where’er His Chariot took its way, 

There Gates of death let in the Day, 40 
Broke down from every Chain & Bar; 

And Satan in his Spiritual War 

Drag’d at His Chariot wheels: loud howl’d 

The God of this World: louder roll’d 44 
The Chariot Wheels, and louder still 

His voice was heard from Zion’s Hill, 

And in his hand the Scourge shone bright ; 

He scourg’d the Merchant Canaanite 48 
From out the Temple of his Mind, 

And in his Body tight does bind 

Satan & all his Hellish Crew; 

And thus with wrath he did subdue 52 
The Serpent Bulk of Nature’s Dross, 


22, 23 If Herod. . . Sacrifice] Swinb. p. 168: ‘An ugly specimen of 
ready-writing ; meaning of course ‘with the sacrifice of bloody prey.” ’ 
25 Thunders] Thunder Swinb., WBY. lightnings] lightning Swinb., 
WMR. — 26 thunders’] thunder’s Swinb., WMR; the thunder’s EY, WBY. 
28 make] give WBY. 33 And...ire] And, bursting forth his furious 
ire, EY, WBY. 40 There] Those Swinb.; The WMR, EY, WBY. 
41 &]aEY, WBY. 50 does] did WBY. 


Rossetti MS. 249 


Till he had nail’d it to the Cross. 
He took on Sin in the Virgin's Womb 


And put it off on the Cross & Tomb 56 
To be Worship’d by the Church of Rome. 
55 took] put Swinb. Womb] Followed in MS. Book by the can- 


celled line with which this section of the poem originally ended :— 
‘but on the Cross he sealed its doom.’ 


y 
Was Jesus Humble, or did He 
Give any proofs of Humility? 
When but a Child he ran away, 
And left His Parents in dismay. 4 
When they had wander’d three days long 
These were the words upon His Tongue: 
‘No Earthly Parents I confess ; 
I am doing my Father’s business.’ 8 
When the rich learned Pharisee 
Came to consult him secretly, 
He was too Proud to take a bribe; 
He spoke with authority, not like a Scribe. 12 
Upon his heart with Iron pen 
He wrote ‘Ye must be born again.’ 
He says, with most consummate art, 
‘Follow me, I am meek & lowly of heart, 16 
As that is the only way to escape 
The Miser’s net and the Glutton’s trap.’ 


MS. Book, p. 98 Blake’s first draft of this passage. Only printed 
separately by EY, ii. pp. 49, 50, col. 2, 

5 three days long] all day long EY. 7, 8 No... business] See note 
to B, ll. 7, 8. 11, 12 He... Scribe] Marginal numbers, 1, 4, 5, 2, 3, 6, 
prefixed to Il. ro-15, indicate ‘the transposition of this and the succeeding 
couplet (as found in 47, ll. 13-16). 16 heart] Quotation marks (wanting in 
MS. Book) end here in EY. 18 trap] MS. Book has the marginal addition 
marked for insertion here :— 

‘He who loves his enemies hates his friends, 
-This is surely not what Jesus intends: 

He must mean the mere love of civility, 
And so He must mean concerning humility.’ 


250 Rossetti MS. 


But he acts with triumphant, honest pride, 
And this is the Reason Jesus died. 20 
If, he had been Antichrist, creeping Jesus, 
He'd have done anything to please us: 
Gone sneaking into the synagogues 
And not used the Elders & Priests like Dogs. 24 
Humble toward God, Haughty toward Man, | 
This is the Race that Jesus ran. 
But when he humbled himself to God, 
Then descended the cruel rod: 28 
‘If thou humblest thyself, thou humblest Me; 
Thou also dwelst in Eternity. 
Thou art a Man. God is no more. 
Thine own Humanity learn to adore, 32 
And thy Revenge abroad display 
In terrors at the last Judgment day. 
God’s Mercy & Long Suffering 
Are but the sinner to Judgment to bring. 36 
Thou on the Cross for them shalt pray, 
And take Revenge at the last Day.’ 
23 the] EY omit. 24 Dogs] MS. Book has the marginal addition marked 
for insertion here :— 
‘Not humble as a lamb or an ass, 
Obey himself to Caiaphas. 


God wants not Man to humble himself; 
This is the trick of the ancient elf.’ 


Omitted in EY. 29 If... Me] Why dost thou humble thyself to me? 
MS. Book 1s¢ rgd. del. 31, 32 Cp. Natural Religion (A.), f. 10: ‘ There- 


fore God becomes as we are, that we may be as he is.’ 35-38 EY 


omit. 38 And... Day] Whom thou shalt torment at the last day. 
MS. Book tst rgd. del. : ‘ 


y 
The Everlasting Gospel 
Was Jesus Humble? or did he 
Give any Proofs of Humility? 
MS. Book, pp. 52, 53, 54. The revised draft of y', with title of poem 


added for first time. Cp. Descriptive Catalogue (1809): ‘All had originally 


one language and one religion; this was the religion of Jesus, the ever- 
lasting Gospel.’ 


Swinb. pp. 159-167, quotes Il. 1-4, 11-16, 35-8, 43-54, 59-106, with 


Reise MS. 251 


Boast of high Things with Humble tone, 

And give with Charity a stone? 4 
When but a Child he ran away, 

And left his Parents in dismay. 

When they had wander’d three days long 

These were the words upon his tongue: 8 
‘No Earthly Parents I confess: 

I am doing my Father’s business.’ 

When the rich learnéd Pharisee 

Came to consult him secretly, 12 
Upon his heart with Iron pen 

He wrote ‘Ye must be born again,’ 

He was too proud to take a bribe; 

He spoke with authority, not like a Scribe. 16 
He says with most consummate Art 

‘Follow me, I am meek & lowly of heart, 

As that is the only way to escape 

The Miser’s net & the Glutton’s trap.’ 20 
What can be done with such desperate Fools 

Ij: Who follow after the Heathen Schools? 

I was standing by when Jesus died; 

What I call’d Humility, they call’d Pride. 24 
He who loves his Enemies betrays his Friends. 
This surely is not what Jesus intends; 

But the Sneaking Pride of Heroic Schools, 

And the Scribes’ & Pharisees’ Virtuous Rules; 28 
For he acts with honest, triumphant Pride, 

And this is the cause that Jesus died. 


running commentary. WMR prints ll. 1-20, 25-40, ... 51-106,... 21-24, 
interspersed with parts of ¢ and 8, as his fourth division, and ll. 41-50, 
prefixed by 3, as his fifth division of the poem. EY (ii, pp. 49-51, col. r) 
print all except ll. 21-24 in their ‘ Final Version,’ the omitted passage being 
given separately on p, 58. WBY prints all, except the same lines, as the 
division following the prologue. 

3 Humble] a humble EY, WBY. 7 three days] all day WBY. 
8 These .., words] This was the word EY. 9, 10 No... business] See 
note to B, ll. 7,8. - 18 heart] See mote to y!,1.16. 21-24 What... Pride] 
These lines are a marginal addition, All except WMR and EY omit. 
2t such] those EY. 24 What .. . Pride] What they called humility, 
I called pride WMR, EY. 25 betrays] hates MS. Book rs¢ rgd. del., 
WMR, EY, WBY. 26 is] wasEY, WBY. 29 For] But EY, WBY, 


So 


>" 
1 * 


252 Rossetti MS. 


He did not die with Christian Ease, 

Asking Pardon of his Enemies: 32 
If he had, Caiaphas would forgive ; 

Sneaking submission can always live. 

He had only to say that God was the Devil, 

And the Devil was God, like a Christian civil; 36 
Mild Christian regrets to the Devil confess 

For affronting him thrice in the Wilderness ;— 

He had soon been bloody Caesar’s Elf, 

And at last he would have been Caesar himself. 40 
Like d*™ Priestly & Bacon & Newton 

(Poor spiritual knowledge is not worth a button !) 
For thus the Gospel St. Isaac confutes : 

‘God can only be known by His Attributes ; 44 
And as for the Indwelling of the Holy Ghost, 

Or of Christ & His Father, it’s all a boast 

And pride, & vanity of the imagination, 

That disdains to follow this world’s fashion.’ 48 
To teach doubt & experiment 

Certainly was not what Christ meant. 

What was he doing all that time, 

From twelve years old to manly prime? 52 


gr-5o He... meant] These lines are an addition, marked for insertion 
here, the last couplet being written still later in the margin. 37-44 Mild 
. . . Attributes] Thus in MS. Book, Blake’s prefixed letters and figures 
indicating the order followed in the text :— 


(a) For affronting him thrice in the Wilderness *38 
Like d™ Priestly & Bacon & Newton 
(2) Poor spiritual knowledge is not worth a button *40 


(2) For thus the Gospel St. Isaac confutes 

(3) God can only be known by His Attributes 

(6) He had soon been bloody Caesar's Elf 

(c) And at last he would have been Caesar himself. 
WMR prints ll. 41-50 as continuation of 5. EY, ignoring Blake’s marginal 
rearrangement, print the lines as in this footnote. WBY interchanges the 
position of couplets *41, *42, and *43, *44. 40 he] WMR omits. 41 
Like . . . Newton] Like Doctor Priestley, Bacon, and Newton WMR;; Like 
to Priestley and Bacon and Newton EY, WBY 43 For] But EY; And 
WBY. Gospel... Isaac] Gospel of St. Isaac EY. 44 can... known] 
is only known WBY. 45 as for] as to Swinb. WMR. 46 Or of] Or 
EY, WBY. His] the Swinb., WMR. 47 And] Or EY, WBY. 
vanity] fallacy EY, WBY. the] Swinb. and WMR. omit. 48 
disdains] did wrong Swinb. 52 twelve] ten EY, WBY. 


Rossetti MS. 283 


Was he then Idle, or the less 

About his father’s business ? 

Or was his wisdom held in scorn 

Before his wrath began to burn 56 
In Miracles throughout the Land, 

That quite unnerved the seraph band? 

If He had been Antichrist, creeping Jesus, 

He’d have done anything to please us; 60 
Gone sneaking into Synagogues, 

And not us’d the Elders & Priests like dogs; 

But Humble as a lamb or ass 

Obey’d Himself to Caiaphas. © 64 
God wants not Man to humble himself: 

That is the trick of the ancient EIf, 

This is the Race that Jesus ran: 

Humble to God, Haughty to man, 68 
Cursing the Rulers before the People 

Even to the temple’s highest Steeple, 

And when he Humbled himself to God 

Then descended the Cruel Rod. 2 
‘If thou humblest thyself, thou humblest me. 

Thou also dwellst in Eternity. 

Thou art a Man: God is no more: 

Thy own humanity learn to adore, 16 
For that is my Spirit of Life. 

Awake, arise to Spiritual Strife, 

And thy Revenge abroad display 

In terrors at the Last Judgment day. 80 
God’s Mercy & Long Suffering 

Is but the sinner to judgment to bring. 

Thou on the Cross for them shalt pray— 

55-58 Or .. . band] Swinb. omits. 58 seraph band] Not legibly 
written; seraph’s hand WMR; ?seraph hand EY; seraph hand WBY. 
59 Antichrist, creeping Jesus] a creeping Jesus MS. Book 1st rgd. del.; 
Antichrist aping Jesus Swinb,, WMR. Cf. a passage from Blake’s letter to 
Cumberland, dated April 12, 1827 : ‘God keep you and me from the divinity 
of yes, and no too,—the yea, nay, creeping Jesus,—from supposing up and 
down to be the same thing, as all experimentalists must suppose.’ 76 
Thy] Thine Swinb., WMR, WBY. 80 terrors] terror Swinb., WMR. 


82 Is] Are all edd. judgment] justice Swinb., EY, WBY. _ 83 shalt] 
shall EY, WBY. 


254 Rossetti MS. 


And take Revenge at the Last Day.’ 84 
Jesus replied, & thunders hurl’d: 

‘I never will Pray for the World. 

Once I did so when I pray’d in the Garden ; 

I wish’d to take with me a Bodily Pardon.’ 88 
Can that which was of woman born, 

In the absence of the Morn, 

When the soul fell into sleep, 

And Archangels round it weep, 92 
Shooting out against the Light 

Fibres of a deadly night, 

Reasoning upon its own dark Fiction, 

In doubt which is Self Contradiction ? 96 
Humility is only doubt, 

And does the Sun & Moon blot out, 

Rooting over with thorns & stems 

The buried Soul & all its Gems. 100 
This life’s Five Windows of the Soul 

Distorts the Heavens from Pole to Pole, 


84] Followed in the MS. Book by the lines :— 
‘This Corporeal life’s a fiction 
And is made up of contradiction.’ 


This couplet, which was afterwards erased in ink and retranscribed in 
a slightly altered form on p. 98, can hardly have been intended as part of 
‘The Everlasting Gospel.’ 85-88 Jesus . . . Pardon] These lines are an 
addition, EY, WBY, perhaps rightly, carry on the quotation marks to the 
endofl.106. 85 &] in EY, WBY. 89-96 Can... . Self Contradiction] 
Perhaps ‘Can that which was of women born, efc. take with it a bodily 
pardon?’ or possibly sentence left unfinished. Swinb. supplies the 


conclusion: ‘Can that reason itself into redemption?’ 89 woman] 
women EY, gt When] While Swinb. g2 And Archangels] And 
(? heard) archangels Swinb. it] did WBY. 95, 96 Reasoning ... 


Self Contradiction] Cp. The Gates of Paradise, ‘The Keys of the Gates,” 
ll. 13-15: 
ae ‘Two Horrid Reasoning Cloven Fiction, 
In Doubt, which is Self contradiction, 
A dark Hermaphrodite, We stood.’ 
97, 98 Humility... out] Cp. Pick. MS. ‘Auguries of Innocence,’ ll. 109, 110 :— 
‘If the Sun & Moon should Doubt, 
They’d immediately Go Out,’ 
99 Rooting] Roofing all edd. Cp. Jerusalem, f. 43,1. 8: ‘If we are wrathful 
Albion will destroy Jerusalem with rooty Groves.’ ror, 102 Five Windows 
. . » Distorts] dim window... Distorts Swinb, WMR; five windows... 


eee a a ee 


Rossetti MS. 255 


And leads you to Believe a Lie 

When you see with, not through, the Eye 104 
That was born in a night, to perish in a night, 
When the soul slept in the beams of light. 


Distort EY, WBY. Cp. the lines in the preface, on f. 3, of Mr. John Linnell’s 
copy of Europe :— 

‘ Five windows light the cavern’d Man; thro’ one he breathes the air ; 
Thro’ one hears music of the spheres ; thro’ one the eternal vine 
Flourishes that he may receive the grapes ; thro’ one can look 
And see small portions of the eternal world that ever groweth; 

Thro’ one himself pass out what time he please, but he will not, 
For stolen joys are sweet, & bread eaten in secret pleasant.’ 
103-106 And... light] Cp. Pick. MS. ‘ Auguries of Innocence,’ Il. 125-128 :— 
‘We are led to Believe a Lie 
When we see [with del.| not Thro’ the Eye, 
Which was Born in a Night, to perish in a Night, 
When the Soul Slept in Beams of Light.’ 
103 leads] lead WBY. 105 That] Which EY, WBY. 106 the beams] 
EY, WBY omit the. 106] This line has Blake’s marginal numeration 
‘78 lines,’ followed by the couplet :— 
‘I'm sure this Jesus will not do 
Either for Englishman or Jew—’ 
and the catchword ‘was Jesus Chaste or did he, &c.’ a connecting line 
indicating that (¢) was then intended to follow ]. 106. See Introduction to 
his poem. 


) 


This was spoken by my spectre to Voltaire, Bacon, &c. 
Did Jesus teach doubt? or did he 
Give any lessons of Philosophy, 
Charge Visionaries with decieving, 
Or call Men wise for not Believing? 


e 


<? 


MS. Book, p. 48. The beginning of a new passage, apparently left 
unfinished. These lines are written laterally in pencil, in margin of page 
opposite the beginning of ¢. The heading is written in pencil at the top of 
the same page. ‘Blake’s use of the word ‘spectre’ in the sense of ‘reason- 
ing power’ has been already noted. Cp. Jerusalem, f. 10, ll. 7-16. 

Swinb. p. 164. WMR prefixes these two couplets to 77, ll. 41-50, which, 
in his rearrangement, form the penultimate section of the poem. EY mis- _ 
_ quote ‘This was spoken by my spectre to Bacon, Newton and Locke,’ and, 
while pointing out that this fragment has no place assigned to it, seem 
to regard it as a continuation of (. WBY omits. 

2 any] WMR omits. _— of] in EY. 


CRN Hy 


oer 
At teeth Sie 


a 
ha 
* 


tN 


S 


256 Rossetti MS. 


€ 


Was Jesus Born of a Virgin Pure 
With narrow Soul & looks demure? 
If He intended to take on Sin 


The Mother should an Harlot been; 4 


Just such a one as Magdalen, 

With seven devils in her Pen. 

Or were Jew virgins still more curs’d, 

And more sucking devils nurs’d? 8 
Or what was it which he took on, 

That he might bring Salvation? 

A Body subject to be Tempted, 

From neither pain nor grief Exempted ; 12 
Or such a body as might not feel 

The passions that with sinners deal? 

Yes, but they say he never fell. 

Ask Caiaphas; for he can tell.— . 16 
‘He mock’d the Sabbath, and he mock’d 

The Sabbath’s God, and He unlock’d 


Written on the fourth page of a folded scrap of paper, containing ‘ Blake’s 
Chaucer,’ etc., bound in at the end of the MS. Book. See prefatory note to 
this poem. Swinb. pp. 170-174, prints ll. 1-16, 25-38, 47, 48. WMR makes 
this the second section of the poem. EY and WBY also print in full, the 
latter placing it immediately before the epilogue. 


4 The] His all edd. been] (have) been Swinb.; have been WMR, 
EY, WBY. 7,8 Or... nurs’d] Jnterlineated in MS. Book. 8 more] 
with more EY, WBY. 9 which] that all except WMR. 13 might] 
could Swinb, 17-48 He... prey] No quot. marks in MS. Book. Cp. 


Marriage of Heaven and Hell (1790), ff. 23, 24: ‘The Devil answer’d, 
“‘bray a fool in a morter with wheat, yet shall not his folly be beaten 
out of him”: if Jesus Christ is the greatest man, you ought to love him 
in the greatest degree ; now hear how he has given his sanction to the 
law of ten commandments: did he not mock at the sabbath, and so mock the 
sabbath’s God? murder those who were murder’d because of him? turn 
away the law from the woman taken in adultery ? steal the labor of others 
to support him? bear false witness when he omitted making a defence before 
Pilate ?. covet when he pray’d for his disciples, and when he bid them shake 
off the dust of their feet against such as refused to lodge them? I tell you no 
virtue can exist without breaking these ten commandments: Jesus was all 
virtue, and acted from impulse not from rules,’ 


Ee 


Rossetti MS. 253 
The Evil spirits from their Shrines, 
And turn’d Fishermen to Divines; 20 
O’erturn’d the tent of secret sins, 
And its golden cords and Pins, 
In.the Bloody Shrine of War 
Pour’d around from star to star,— 24 
Halls of justice, hating Vice, 
Where the devil combs his lice. 
He turn’d the devils into swine 
That he might tempt the Jews to dine; 28 
Since which, a Pig has got a look 
That for a Jew may be mistook. 
“Obey your Parents.” What says he? 
“Woman, what have I to do with thee? 32 
No Earthly Parents I confess: 
I am doing My Father’s Business.” 
He scorn’d Earth’s parents, scorn’d Earth’s God, 
And mock’d the one and the other’s Rod; 36 
His Seventy Disciples sent 
Against Religion and Government— 
They by the Sword of Justice fell, 
And him their Cruel Murderer tell. 40 
He left his Father’s trade to roam, 
A wand’ring vagrant without Home; 
And thus he others’ labour stole, 
That he might live above controll. 44 
The Publicans and Harlots he 
Selected for his company, 
And from the Adulteress turn’d away 
God’s righteous Law, that lost its Prey.’ 48 


21-24 O’erturn’d... star].4 marginal addition. 22 its] allits EY, WBY. 
23 In] Not plainly written; "Tis WMR, EY, WBY. 24 Pour'd] Not 
plainly written, perhaps ‘Pass’d. 25, 26 Halls .. . lice] A later 
marginal addition, written transversely to Il, 21-24. 29 which] when 
all edd. 33, 34 No... Business] See note to B, 7, 8. 35 Earth’s God] 
his God MS. Book 1st rdg. del. 36 other’s] other WMR, EY, WBY. 
43 labour] labours EY, WBY. ~ 


SAMPSON S 


LIBRARY ST. MARY’S COLLEGE 


258 Rossetti MS. 


C 


Was Jesus Chaste? or did He 

Give any lessons of Chastity? 

The Morning blushéd fiery red: 

Mary was found in Adulterous bed ; 4 
Earth groan’d beneath, and Heaven above 
Trembled at discovery of Love. 

Jesus was sitting in Moses’ Chair. 

They brought the trembling woman there. 8 
Moses commands she be ston’d to death. 

What was the sound of Jesus’ breath? 

He laid His hand on Moses’ Law; 

The ancient heavens, in silent awe, 12 
Writ with Curses from Pole to Pole, 

All away began to roll. 

The Earth trembling and Naked lay 

In secret bed of Mortal Clay ; 16 
On Sinai felt the hand Divine 

Pulling back the bloody shrine ; 

And she heard the breath of God, 

As she heard by Eden’s flood: 20 
‘Good and Evil are no more! 

Sinai’s trumpets cease to roar! 

Cease, finger of God, to write! 

The Heavens are not clean in thy sight. 24 
Thou art good, and Thou alone; 

Nor may the sinner cast one stone. 


MS. Book, pp. 48, 49, 50, 51. Lines 7-16, 19, 20, 27-32, 39-50, 53-64, 
with the Prologue, were first printed by DGR under the title ‘ The Woman 
taken in Adultery.’ Swinb., pp. 152-154, 168, 169, 261, prints Il. 1-80, 83-96. 
WMR makes ll. 1-80 his third division, and places ll. 91, 92, 81-90, 93-06 
among parts of 8 and +’ as his fourth division of the poem. EY and WBY 
print in full, the latter putting this passage before e. 

2 of |} in EY, WBY. 7 was sitting] sat DGR. 8 trembling] 
adulterous R}, 17, 18 DGR omits. 17 felt] fell EY, WBY. 


18 Pulling] Pulling [or ? Putting] Swinb.; Putting WMR, EY, WBY. 


20 heard by] heardit by DGR. 21-26 Good ,.. stone] DGR omits. 


Rossetti MS. 259 


To be Good only, is to be 

A God or else a Pharisee. 28 
Thou Angel of the Presence Divine, © 

That didst create this Body of Mine, 

Wherefore hast thou writ these Laws 

And created Hell’s dark jaws? 32 
My Presence I will take from thee: 

A cold Leper thou shalt be. 

Though thou wast so pure and bright 

That Heaven was Impure in thy sight, 36 
Though thy Oath turn’d Heaven Pale, 

Though thy covenant built Hell’s jail, 

Though thou didst all to chaos roll 

With the serpent for its soul, 40 
Still the breath Divine does move, 

And the breath Divine is love. 

Mary, Fear Not. Let me see 

The Seven Devils that torment thee. 44 
Hide not from my sight thy sin, 

That forgiveness thou may’st win. 

Has no Man condemnéd thee?’ 

‘No Man, Lord.’ ‘Then what is he 48 
Who shall accuse thee? Come ye forth, 

Fallen fiends of Heavenly birth, 

That have forgot your ancient love, 

And driven away my trembling Dove. 52 
You shall bow before her feet ; 

You shall lick the dust for Meat; 

And though you cannot Love, but Hate, 

Shall be beggars at Love’s Gate. 56 


27, 28 To be... Pharisee] 4 marginal addition. 27 Good only, is to 
be] good only is to be WMR. 28 AGod] As God EY, WBY. 31 hast] 
has Swinb, 33 My] My Swinb. 36 Impure] not clean EY, WBY. 
37 thy] thine Swinb., WMR. 38 jail] goal Swinb. 39 didst] dost 
EY, WBY. 41 does] doth DGR. 43 Mary] Woman DGR. 
44 torment] trouble DGR. 46 forgiveness] full forgiveness DGR. 
47 Has] Hath DGR, Swinb., WMR. 50 Fallen] Ye fallen DGR« 
53 You] Ye DGR. 54 You] Ye DGR. Meat] meet EY, WBY. 


; 55 You] Ye DGR. 56 Shall be] Ye shall be DGR; You shall be 


EY, WBY. 
$2 


260 Rossetti MS. 


What was thy love? Let me see it; 

Was it Love or dark deceit?’ 

‘Love too long from me has fled ; 

’Twas dark deceit, to earn my bread ; 60 
’Twas covet, or *twas custom, or 

Some trifle not worth caring for; 

That they may call a shame and sin ; 
Love’s Temple that God dwelleth in, 64 
And hide in secret hidden shrine 

The Naked Human form divine, 

And render that a Lawless thing 

On which the soul expands its wing. 68 
But this, O Lord, this was my sin, 

When first I let these devils in, 

In dark pretence to chastity 

Blaspheming Love, blaspheming Thee, 72 
Thence rose secret adulteries, 

And thence did covet also rise. 

My sin Thou hast forgiven me; 

Canst Thou forgive my Blasphemy ? 76 
Canst Thou return to this dark Hell, 

And in my burning bosom dwell? 

And canst Thou die that I may live? 

And canst Thou Pity and forgive?’ Ro 
Then Roll’d the shadowy Man away 

From the limbs of Jesus, to make them his prey, 
An ever devouring appetite, 

Glittering with festering Venoms bright ; 84 
Crying ‘Crucify this cause of distress, 

Who don’t keep the secrets of holiness! 

The Mental Powers by Diseases we bind ; 

But he heals the deaf, the dumb, & the Blind 88 


“57 see it] see’t DGR, Swinb., WMR. 59 has] hath DGR. 
63 That . .. call] But these would call DGR. 64 dwelleth in] DGR’s 
extract ends. 65-68 And... wing] Ax addition. 68 its] her all edd. 
jo these] those WMR; the EY, WBY. 84 Glittering] Glistering EY, 
WBY. 85-90 Crying... Friends] Ax addition. 85 Crying] Saying 
EY, WBY. 86 don’t] does not WBY. secrets] secret EY, WBY. 
87 The] All Swinb., WMR. by] with WMR. Diseases] disease EY, 
WBY. 88 the dumb] and the dumb Swinb., WMR. &] EY, WBY omit. 


=v 


Pacts MS. 261 


Whom God has afflicted for secret ends, 

He comforts and Heals and calls them Friends,’ 
But, when Jesus was crucified, 

Then was perfected his galling pride. 92 
In three Nights he devour’d his prey, 

And still he devours the Body of Clay; 

For Dust and Clay is the Serpent’s meat, 

Which never was made for Man to Eat. 96 


89 has] hath EY, WBY. 91-96 But... eat] Swinb., p. 261. 93, 04 
Cp. Jerusalem, f. 89, 1. 13: ‘In three days he devour’d the rejected corse 
of death.’ 93 Nights] days Swinb., EY, WBY. 94 he] EY, WBY 
omit. the] this EY, WBY. 95, 96 For... Eat] A marginal 
addition, 96 Which] That EY, WBY. made] meant all edd. 


0 


Seeing this False Christ, in fury & Passion 
I made my Voice heard all over the Nation. 
What are those, &c. 


MS. Book, p. 52. These lines, catchwords marking the position of 
a passage, the rest of which is lost, immediately follow ¢, 1. 96. They are 
only quoted by EY, who treat them as the termination of the poem. See 
Pref. Note. 


0 
[ Epilogue] 


I am sure this Jesus will not do, 
Either for Englishman or Jew. 


‘MS, Book, p. 54. Originally meant to follow ¢. See Prefatory Note. In 
WMR this epilogue follows y”, 1. 50; in WBY it follows e. 
t Iam] I’m Swinb., WMR. 


THE PICKERING MS. 


circa 1801-1803 


PREFACE 
To 
THE PICKERING MS. 


THE Pickering MS. is the name used throughout this 
edition for the smaller of the two Blake holographs from 
which D. G. Rossetti selected the ‘poems hitherto unpub- 
lished, printed in the second volume of Gilchrist’s Lzfe 
(pp. 76-116). In his introduction to this ‘ precious section’ 
he explains that its contents ‘have been derived partly from 
the MS. Note Book [“the Rossetti MS.’’] to which frequent 
reference has been made in the ZLzfe, and partly from 
another small autograph collection of different matter 
somewhat more fairly copied.’ ‘The poems, adds Rossetti, 
‘have been reclaimed, as regards the first-mentioned source, 
from as chaotic a mass as could well be imagined; amid 
which it has sometimes been necessary either to omit, 
transpose, or combine, so as to render available what was 
very seldom found in a final state. And even in the pieces 
drawn from the second source specified above, means of the 
same kind have occasionally been resorted to, where they 
seemed to lessen obscurity or avoid redundance.’ 

In 1866, three years after the publication of Gilchrist’s 
work, the MS., as we learn from Shepherd’s introduction to 
his edition of 1874, was bought by Basil Montagu Pickering, 
son of the William Pickering who in 1830 had published the 
first letterpress edition of Blake’s Songs of Innocence and of 
Experience. ‘These considerations,’ says Shepherd, re- 
ferring to the inaccuracy of Rossetti’ text, ‘his father’s 
former connexion with the Songs of Innocence, and the 
purchase eventually of a number of inedited Poems of 
Blake, led the Publisher to re-issue his father’s volume 
together with the newly-acquired pieces in 1866. ... The 
little volume was welcomed as satisfying a public want, and 


it passed into a second edition (now also exhausted) two 
years later (1868).’ 


ag epee Se 


ee ee ee ee a ee 


cae ace a 


Se - 


Pickering urs, \ Oh 


For over thirty years nothing further was heard ‘of.the 
Pickering MS. It was lost sight of presumably about 
the date of Pickering’s death in 1878, and, though occasional 
attempts to trace its subsequent ownership were made 
by the two or three students who realized that this MS. 
constituted the sole authority for the text of some of 
Blake’s loveliest and most extraordinary poems, their efforts 
were unsuccessful. Messrs. Ellis and Yeats and later 
editors were thus obliged to follow the versions of these 
poems given by D. G. Rossetti and Shepherd, the only 
two editors who had made use of the original autograph. 
The MS. was thought to be permanently lost, and the 
present editor had accordingly decided to reproduce Shep- 
herd’s as the best available text. This portion of the work 
was indeed in proof, when the opportune reappearance 
of the original MS. enabled him to print this section also 
with the literal fidelity observed in the rest of the poems. 
The Pickering MS., the great importance of which would 
seem to have been overlooked by its last owner, had lain 
perdu for years in the Rowfant Library. On the purchase 
of the Locker Lampson collection in June, 1905, by Messrs. 
Dodd, Meade & Co. of New York, several Blake originals 
and other works were bought en bloc by Mr. W. A. White, 
who was surprised to find among them the long-missing 
Pickering MS. I owe to Mr. White’s kindness the rectifi- 
cation of my text, as well as the following details respecting 
this undescribed MS. 

The Pickering MS. is a foolscap quarto volume (6 x8 
inches), of 11 leaves of writing or drawing paper, with- 
out water-mark, paginated consecutively by Blake 1-22. 
Mr. W.M. Rossetti, who saw the MS. when in his brother’s 
hands, describes it, in one of his letters to me, as being 
then, to the best of his recollection, stitched into a darkish 
olive-tinted cover. Traces of this simple binding may 
be observed in the three punctured holes, about 1} inches 
_ apart, through which a cord had evidently once been laced. 

The original covers, which, it is to be presumed, bore no 
inscription, must have been removed when, as the binder’s 
stamp shows, the volume was bound by F. Bedford for 
B. M. Pickering. The leaves were trimmed down some- 
what in binding, the top and bottom lines of pages 17 
and 18 being slightly grazed by the binder’s knife. In- 
_ serted on the inside of the cover is the armorial book-plate 
of Mr. William Mitchell, into whose possession the MS. 
must have passed after the death of Pickering and before 


266 Pickering MS. 


being acquired by Mr. Locker Lampson. There is no note 
of the last-named owner to indicate how it was obtained. 

Differing in this respect from the larger MS. Book, where 
most of the poems are found-in rough draft, with numerous 
deletions, corrections, and re-arrangements of stanzas, the 
Pickering MS. is obviously a fair copy of pieces already 
written in approved form. There is not a single alteration 
on the first seventeen pages, and the few corrections which 
occur are mostly in the use of capitals, which Blake here 
as elsewhere employs for the sake of emphasis. It is note- 
worthy that all the poems have titles, which with Blake 
are generally afterthoughts. As in the Rossetti MS. there 
is no punctuation. None of the poems are dated. There 
is no title-page, ascription or other indication of the cir- 
cumstances under which, or the person for whom, this special 
collection was transcribed. The pages are without illus- 
trations and contain no prose matter of any kind. 

Unlike the Rossetti MS., the literary contents of which 
extend over a period of nearly twenty years, the poems of 
the Pickering MS. convey the impression of having been 
written at one time. Whether of pure lyrical loveliness like 
‘The Golden Net’ and ‘The Land of Dreams,’ uncouth and 
grotesque like ‘ Long John Brown, obscure as ‘ The Mental 
Traveller’ and ‘ The Crystal Cabinet, or outwardly simple 
as ‘Mary ’—all alike are characterized by a strain of profound 
mysticism which is not quite the same as that of the 
Prophetic Books, though each helps to explain the other. 
Verses such as the two couplets (Il. 67-70) in the ‘ Auguries 
of Innocence ’— 


‘Every Tear from Every Eye 
Becomes a Babe in Eternity ; 

This is caught by Females bright 
And return’d to its own delight ’— 


or the figure in ‘The Mental Traveller’ of the ‘ Woman Old’ 
who nails the babe down on a rock, and ‘ Catches his Shrieks 
in Cups of gold,’ are only to be understood by reference to 
parallel allusions in The Four Zoas, Milton, or Ferusalem. 
Mere allegorical interpretations such as W. M. Rossetti’s of 
‘The Mental Traveller, however acceptable to readers eager 
for any light thrown upon Blake’s darkness, are not warranted 
by the poet’s theory or practice. The light may be there, 
but ‘the illumination’—as Swinburne observes of a similar 
attempt— is none of the author’s kindling.’ Blake himself 
disdained the use of mere allegory of this sort. ‘ Fable or 


Peer owals. aby 


allegory,’ he says in his account of the ‘ Vision of the Last 
Judgment,’ ‘ is a totally distinct and inferior kind of poetry. 
Vision, or imagination, is a representation of what actually 
exists, really and unchangeably. Fable, or allegory, is 
formed by the daughters of Memory. Imagination is sur- 
rounded by the daughters of inspiration, who, in the aggre- 
gate, are called Jerusalem.’ 

The poems of the Pickering MS. have a certain unity of 
their own, a fact liable to be overlooked, when, as in several 
editions of the poet’s works, they are scattered among pieces 
written at different times, and in a different manner. Among 
the ‘ deepest’ of Blake’s writings—if I may use the adjective 
in the sense in which English gypsies apply it to language, 
meaning thereby wholly or partly unintelligible to all save 
the highly initiate—they differ in their more fully developed 
mysticism from the earlier prophetic writings, and from 
those of later date in their avoidance of the mythological 
names which crowd the pages of Milton and Ferusalem. 
To the latter fact indeed part of their difficulty is due, for 
these names, consistently used by Blake in a definite sense, 
supply clues to the author’s meaning which are absent in 
these poems. 

This MS. may confidently be referred to Blake’s Felpha 
period. ‘Mary’ was certainly written before August 16, 
1803, when Blake in a letter to Mr. Butts introduces two of 
its lines in a slightly altered form, and in a different sense. 
The original drafts of two of the poems, ‘The Golden Net’ 
and ‘The Grey Monk,’ which appear in a more perfected 
form in this MS., are found on two leaves of the latter part 
of the Rossetti MS., written probably in the same year. 
There are, moreover, in several of the poems phrases repeated 
in Milton and Ferusalem, both of which were engraved, in 
whole or part, in 1804. In identifying the style of ‘The 
Mental Traveller’ with that of 77zrze/, which W. M. Rossetti 
and Swinburne concur in regarding as the first of the series 
of the Prophetic Books, W. B. Yeats (Notes, p. 249) would 
appear to date this poem at least as early as 1789. In 
so doing it will be seen that he differs from me, either in 
regarding the several poems in the Pickering MS. as having 
been written at widely different times, or by antedating the 
whole MS. by fourteen years. ; 

Swinburne quotes with comment two stanzas of ‘The 
_ Land of Dreams’ (pp. 134, 135) and two lines of ‘Mary’ 
(p. 177), in the latter instance using Shepherd’s text instead 
of Rossetti’s. W.M. Rossetti prints the same pieces as his 


268 Pickering MS. 


brother, adopting some of his emendations, but rejecting 
others in favour of readings evidently taken from Shepherd’s 
edition. Ellis and Yeats (ii. 31-36) print ‘The Mental 
Traveller, with interpretation as ‘a sun-myth and a story 
of the Incarnation.’ In the same volume (pp. 220-225), 
they give the MS. Book version of the ‘ Monk of Charle- 
maine, but ignore the Pickering variant called ‘The Grey 
Monk.’ The remaining poems, including ‘Long John Brown 
and Little Mary Bell, they print in vol. ii, pp. 72-83. Their 
text generally follows that of the Aldine edition, but with 
some new readings of their own for which there is no 
authority. W. B. Yeats, under the general heading, ‘Ideas 
of Good and Evil,’ prints all the poems, with the exception 
of ‘Long John Brown,’ arbitrarily arranged among poems 
taken from the Rossetti MS., the /sland in the Moon, and 
other late and early sources. 


THE PICKERING MANUSCRIPT 


The Smile 


There is a Smile of Love, 1 
And there is a Smile of Deceit, 
And there is a Smile of Smiles 
In which these two Smiles meet. 


And there is a Frown of Hate, 
And there is a Frown of Disdain, 
And there is a Frown of Frowns 
Which you strive to forget in vain, 


or 


For it sticks in the Heart’s deep core 9 
And it sticks in the deep Back-bone— 

And no Smile that ever was smil’d, 

But only one Smile alone, 


- That betwixt the Cradle & Grave 13 
It only once Smil'd can be; 
And, when it once is Smil’d, 
There’s an end to all Misery. 


Pickering MS. p. 1. DGR and all edd. except Shep. entitle ‘Smile and 
Frown.’ 

4 these] the DGR. 11-16 And ... Misery] DGR, followed by 
WMR and EY, evade the anacoluthon by reading : 


‘And no smile ever was smiled 
But only one smile alone 


‘(And betwixt the cradle and grave 
It only once smiled can be), 
That when it once is smiled 
There’s an end to all misery.’ 


WBY, with less violence, adopts DGR’s reading of 1. 11, omits the round 
brackets, and retains the ‘And’ in 1. r5. 12 Cp. ‘The Crystal Cabinet,’ 
ewe 


270 Pickering MS. 


Prefatory Note to ‘The Golden Net’ 


The original version of ‘The Golden Net’ is found in the Rossetti 
MS. Book. There Blake’s first draft, without title, is written in the left- 
hand column of p. 14, and, except for the omission of Il. 3 and 4— 

‘Alas for woe! alas for woe! 
They cry, and tears for ever flow—’ 
coincides generally with the form in which he afterwards transcribed it into 
the smaller autograph collection, the source of the present text. 

In this early draft Blake’s first attempt at emendation was to indicate by 

marginal numbers, 1 to g, prefixed to ll. 5-13 (MS. Book, ll. 3-11), that the 


couplet, , 
‘They bore a net of golden twine 


To hang upon the branches fine,’ 
was now meant to followl. 2. The initial couplet was next deleted, and 
the opening passage twice re-written. The first revision is found below 
Blake’s terminal line marking the end of the poem, and runs as follows :— 
‘Beneath the white thorn’s lovely May, 
Three Virgins at the break of day. 
The one was clothed in flames of fire, 
The other clothed in iron wire [sweet desire (1st rdg. del.)], 
The other clothed in tears & sighs, 
Dazzling bright before my eyes.’ 
This again was erased, Blake recommencing at the head of the next column : 
‘ Beneath the white thorn’s lovely May, 
“Alas for wo! alas for wo! alas for wo!” 
They cry, & tears for ever flow.’ 
Here the first line is left rimeless, Blake evidently omitting to recopy the 
second line of the couplet which he had already twice written— 
‘ Three virgins at the break of day.’ 
A further change consisted in the deletion of Il. 11-14 (MS. Book, Il. 9-12), 
opposite to which are written : 
‘Wings they had that soft enclose [& when they chose (1st rdg. del.) | 
Round their body when they chose, 
They would let them down at will 
Or make translucent ’” 
This unfinished passage is also struck out. 
In transcribing this poem into the Pickering MS., Blake omitted the line 
with which the poem originally began : 
‘Beneath the white thorn’s lovely May,’ 
without which the reference to the ‘branches’ in 1. to is meaningless. 
Rossetti restores this line, beginning the poem with the triplet :— 
‘Beneath a white thorn’s lovely May 
Three virgins at the break of day :— 
‘Whither, young man, whither away???’ 
This is one of Blake’s ‘threefold’ poems. See note to ‘ The Crystal 
Cabinet,’ 


Pickering MS, 271 


eT he Golden Net 


Three Virgins at the break of day, I 
‘Whither, young man, whither away? 

Alas for woe! alas for woe!’ 

They cry, & tears for ever flow. 

The one was cloth'd in flames of fire, 5 
The other cloth’d in iron wire, 

The other cloth’d in tears & sighs, 

Dazling bright before my Eyes. 


Pickering MS. p. 2. 
1, 2] R' begins with an amended version of Blake’s second draft of the 
opening of the poem (MS. Book, p. 14, col. 1 del.) — 


‘Beneath the white thorn stood in May 
Three virgins at the break of day ;’ 


DGR, followed by WMR and EY, begins with the triplet— 


‘Beneath a white thorn’s lovely May, 
Three virgins at the break of day :— 
“Whither, young man, whither away?” ’” 


WBY changes ‘a white thorn’s’ to ‘the white-thorn’s.’ For ‘the white 
thorn’s-lovely May,’ cp. Milton, f. 31, ll. 50-62 :-— 


‘First e’er the morning breaks joy opens in the flowery bosoms, 

Joy even to tears, which the Sun rising dries; first the Wild-Thyme 
And Meadow-sweet downy & soft waving among the reeds, 

Light springing on the air, lead the sweet Dance; they wake 

The Honeysuckle sleeping on the Oak, the flaunting beauty 

Revels along upon the wind; the White-thorn, lovely May, 

Opens her many lovely eyes; listening, the Rose still sleeps, 

None dare to wake her; soon she bursts her crimson curtained bed 
And comes forth in the majesty of beauty; every Flower, 

The Pink, the Jessamine, the Wall-flower, the Carnation, 

The Jonquil, the mild Lilly, opes her heavens; every Tree 

And Flower & Herb soon fill the air with an innumerable Dance, 
Yet all in order sweet & lovely ; Men are sick with Love.’ 


3, 4 Alas... flow] R' omits, 3 Alas... woe] Alas for wo! alas for wo ! 
alas for wo! MS. Book. 5 one] first R's DGR, WMR, EY. 6 other] 
second R', DGR, WMR, EY. cloth’d] was clothed R'. _ iron wire] sweet- 
desire MS. Book rst rdg. del. 7 other cloth’d] third was clothed 

_ R!, DGR, WMR, EY. tears and sighs] sighs & tears MS. Book 1st 
rdg. del. 


273 Pickering MS. 


They bore a Net of Golden twine 9 
To hang upon the Branches fine. 

Pitying I wept to see the woe 

That Love & Beauty undergo, 

To be consum’d in burning Fires 13 
And in ungratified desires, 

And in tears cloth’d night & day 

Melted all my Soul away. 

When they saw my Tears, a Smile 17 
That did Heaven itself beguile, 

Bore the Golden Net aloft, 

As on downy Pinions soft, 

Over the Morning of my Day. 21 
Underneath the Net I stray, 

Now intreating Burning Fire, 

Now intreating Iron Wire, 

Now intreating Tears & Sighs. 25 
O when will the morning rise? 


9 Cp. the lines in ‘How sweet I roam’d from field to field’ (Poetical 


Sketches) :— 
‘He caught me in his silken net 


And shut me in his golden cage’; 


also the references to the ‘silken net’ in the Visions of the Daughters 
of Albion. In Blake’s later mystical writings the simple idea of moral 
restrictions placed upon love, expressed by the silken net and golden cage 
of the earlier poems, is developed into the veil or net of Vala. Cp. Jerusalem, 
f. 20, ll. 30-32 :— 


‘When Albion rent thy beautiful net of gold and silver twine, 
Thou hadst woven it with art, thou hadst caught me in the bands 
Of love: thou refusedst to let me go.’ 


9, to They. .. fine] R' places after 1. 2, following Blake’s revised order of 
lines in MS. Book. 13 consum’d] clothed R's DGR, WMR, EY. 
burning Fires] flames of fire WBY. 14 ungratified desires] unsatisfied 
desire WBY. 16 Melted] It melted R' and all edd. I7 my Tears] me 
weep R*. 18 That] which R'. did] might DGR, WMR, EY. 20 on] 
by MS. Book, R’, WBY. 21 Over] O’er MS. Book, R'. 23 Burning 
Fire] flaming fire MS. Book; Flaming-fire R' and all edd. except Shep. 
24 Iron Wire] iron wire MS. Book; sweet desire ibid. 1st rdg. del. ; 
Iron-wire R? and all edd. except Shep. 25 Tears & sighs] Tears-and- 
Sighs R! and all edd. except Shep. and WBY. 26 O...rise] When, 
O when, will Morning rise ? MS. Book 1s¢ rdg. del. 


Pickering MS. 273 


Prefatory Note to ‘The Mental 
~ Traveller’ 


A passage in Blake’s description of his picture of the Last Judgement 
(MS. Book, c. 1810) supplements the clue supplied by the author’s title 
to the meaning of this most obscure poem. Referring to the three ‘ States’ 


or ‘Churches,’ symbolized by the twenty-seven ‘Heavens’ enumerated 


in Jerusalem, f. 75—Adam to Luther, ‘After which Adam begins again 
in endless circle’—Blake adds :— 

‘These states exist now. Man passes on, but states remain for ever. 
He passes through them like a traveller, who may well suppose that the 
places he has passed through exist no more; as a man may suppose that 
the states he has passed through exist no more. Everything is eternal.’ 


The same idea is repeated in Jerusalem, f. 49, ll. 72-74 :-— 


‘Learn therefore, O Sisters, to distinguish the Eternal Human, 
That walks about among the stones of fire, in bliss & woe 
Alternate, from those States or Worlds in which the Spirit travels.’ 


The poem, then, must be understood as a picture of man’s spirit, passing 
through successive mental states, and at last returning, ‘ in endless circle,’ to 
the point from which he started. In other words it is a restatement of 
Blake’s favourite doctrine of constant generation and regeneration. 

In my footnotes to ‘The Mental Traveller’ I give references to passages 
in the Prophetic Books, throwing light upon allusions otherwise unin- 
telligible. While these, read with their context, render plain the sense 
of the particular lines or stanzas to which they are appended, it should 
be premised that the chapters quoted from will not supply the reader with 
‘a consecutive narrative of the exact myth presented in this poem. The 
complete picture must be pieced together from the fragments discovered and 
identified. The myth itself admits of no glib paraphrase, for Blake’s parables, 
as he himself insists, are ‘ visions’ and not ‘allegories.’ Such figures, more- 
over, as ‘catching shrieks in cups of gold’ are in the nature of ideograms, 
used invariably in the same sense and the same connexion, and must always 
be understood symbolically and not metaphorically. Difficult to define 
precisely, or to separate from their context, they serve as useful catchwords 
to more detailed expositions of the same myth elsewhere. 

In bringing together these parallelisms from the Prophetic Books I allow 
Blake to be his own interpreter. Those who prefer a shorter cut to a mean- 
ing—if not to his meaning—may turn to Mr. W. M. Rossetti’s ingenious 
exposition, first printed in Gilchrist (ji. 98) and repeated in the Aldine 
edition. Swinburne’s commentary on this poem will be found on pp. 178-185 
of his Critical Essay, and Messrs. Ellis and Yeats’ interpretation as ‘at the 
same time a sun-myth and a story of the Incarnation’ on pp. 34-36 of the 
~ second volume of their large edition of Blake’s Works. 


SAMPSON ds 


274 Pickering MS. 
The Mental Traveller 


I travel’d thro’ a Land of Men, I 
A Land of Men & Women too; 

And heard & saw such dreadful things 

As cold Earth-wanderers never knew. 


For there the Babe is born in joy 5 
That was begotten in dire woe; 

Just as we reap in joy the fruit 

Which we in bitter tears did sow. 


And if the Babe is born a Boy : 9 
He’s given to a Woman Old, a 

Who nails him down upon a rock, 

Catches his Shrieks in Cups of gold. 


Pickering MS. p. 3. 
1, 2 Cp. Jerusalem, f. 38, ll. 31-34 :— 
‘My Streets are my Ideas of Imagination... 
My Houses are Thoughts; my Inhabitants, Affections, 
The children of my thoughts, walking within my blood vessels.’ 

3 heard & saw] saw and heard EY. 5 Cp. Jerusalem, f. 68, ll. 36, 37 :— 
‘Breeding Women walking in pride & bringing forth under green trees 
With pleasure, without pain, for their food is blood of the Captive.’ 

5-8 Cp. ‘Auguries of Innocence,’ Il. 67-70 :— 
‘Every Tear from Every Eye 
Becomes a Babe in Eternity ; 
This is caught by Females bright, 
And return’d to its own delight’; 
where of course ‘ tear’ is to be understood as the human emotion which 
gives rise to it. Cp, the line in another poem (‘The Grey Monk’) of this 
same manuscript collection :— 
‘For a Tear is an Intellectual Thing.’ 
8 Which] That EY. 9 In Blake’s prophetic writings the ‘ spectre,’ or 
reasoning power in man, is always represented as masculine, in contra- 
distinction to the ‘emanation,’ or affective self, which is feminine. 11 The 
‘rock’ is the druidical altar of Albion (Jerusalem, f. 53, 1. 17, and passim), 
the place of torture of the victims of natural religion. See also Jerusalem, 
f. 67, and Four Zoas, Night vii, 1. 71 :— ; 
*. . - my feet & hands are nail’d to the burning rock.’ 
12 Cp, Milton, f. 24, ll. 35-39 :— 
‘The cruel joys of Luvah’s Daughters lacerating with knives 
And whips their Victims, & the deadly sport of Luvah’s Sons. 
They dance around the dying, & they drink the howl & groan, 
They catch the shrieks in cups of gold, they hand them to one another, 
These are the sports of love, & these the sweet delights of amorous play.” 


4 


oa 


Pickering MS. 275 


She binds iron thorns around his head, 13 
She pierces both his hands & feet, 
She cuts his heart out at his side, 
To make it feel both cold & heat, 


Her fingers number every Nerve, 17 
Just as a Miser counts his gold ; 

She lives upon his shrieks & cries, 

And she grows young as he grows old. 


Till he becomes a bleeding youth, a1 
And she becomes a Virgin bright; 

Then he rends up his Manacles, 

And binds her down for his delight. 


He plants himself in all her Nerves, 25 
Just as a Husbandman his mould ; 

And she becomes his dwelling-place 

And Garden fruitful seventy-fold. 


See also Jerusalem, f. 80, 1. 81, and: f. 67, 1. 61. 13 iron] strong DGR. : 
around] about EY. Cp. Jerusalem, f. 66, 1. 23, where the daughters 
of Albion, torturing their victim, ‘bind his forehead with thorns of iron.’ 
17 Cp. Four Zoas, Night i, ll, 114-6 :-— 
i ‘every nerve 
She counted, every vein & lacteal, threading them among 
Her woof of terror, Terrified, & drinking tears of woe.’ 


See also Jerusalem, f. 22,1. 20. 27, 28 By dwelling in a garden of delight 
Blake symbolizes man in a state of unity whose ‘spectre’ and ‘ emanation’ 
are not divided. Cp. Four Zoas, Night vii, ll, 265-71 :— 


‘The Spectre said, Thou lovely Vision, this delightful Tree 

Is given us for a Shelter from the tempests of void & Solid, 

Till once again the morn of ages shall renew upon us, 

To reunite in those mild fields of happy Eternity, 

Where thou & I in undivided Essence walk’d about 
Imbodied,—thou my garden of Delight, & I the spirit in the garden, 
Mutual there we dwelt, in one anothers joy revolving.’ 


See also zbid., Night vii, ll, 717-719 :-— 
‘Tharmas repli’d; ‘‘O! Vala, once J liv’d in a garden of delight: 
I watered Enion in the morning & she lived away 
Among the apple trees”? ; 


and Jerusalem, f. 7, ll. 14, 15 — 


‘thy stolen Emanation 
Is his garden of pleasure.’ 


T 3 


276 Pickering MS. 


An Agéd Shadow, soon he fades, 29 
Wand’ring round an Earthly Cot, 

Full-filléd all with gems & gold 

Which he by industry had got. 


And these are the gems of the Human Soul, 33 
The rubies & pearls of a love-sick eye, 
The countless gold of the akeing heart, 
The martyr’s groan & the lover’s sigh. 


They are his meat, they are his drink ; 37 
He feeds the Beggar and the Poor 

And the wayfaring Traveller : 

For ever open is his door. 


His grief is their eternal joy ; 4l 
They make the roofs & walls to ring. 

Till from the fire on the hearth 

A little Female Babe does spring ; 


And she is all of solid fire 45 
And gems & gold, that none his hand 

Dares stretch to touch her Baby form, 

Or wrap her in his swadling band. 


But She comes to the Man she loves, 49 
If young or old, or rich or poor; 

They soon drive out the agéd Host, 

A Beggar at another’s door. 


He wanders weeping far away, 53 
Untill some other take him in; 

Oft blind & age-bent, sore distrest, 

Until he can a Maiden win. 


3r gems] gains Shep. ge had] has EY. 34, 35 Cp. Rossetti 
MS. xxx :— 
‘The countless gold of a merry heart, 
The rubies & pearls of a loving eye, 
The idle man never can bring to the mart, 
Nor the cunning hoard up in his treasury.’ 


39 And] To all edd. except Shep. 40 For... door] Forever opens his - 
door EY, 43 on] upon all edd. except Shep. 44 does] doth all edd. 
except Shep. 45, 46 Cp. the description of Jerusalem (spiritual liberty), 


the emanation of Albion (Jerusalem, f. 86). 


H Powe MS. 295 


4; And to allay his freezing Age, 57 
‘ The Poor Man takes her in his arms; 

The Cottage fades before his sight, 

The Garden and its lovely Charms. 


fs The Guests are scatter’d thro’ the land, 61 
. For the Eye altering alters all ; 

The Senses roll themselves in fear, 

And the flat Earth becomes a Ball; 


2 The Stars, Sun, Moon, all shrink away, 65 
3 A desart vast without a bound, 

And nothing left to eat or drink, 

And a dark desart all around. 


a The honey of her Infant lips, 69 
The bread & wine of her sweet smile, 

The wild game of her roving Eye, 

Does him to Infancy beguile; 


62 Cp. Jerusalem, f. 34, 1. 55 :— 

‘If Perceptive Organs vary, Objects of Perception seem to vary.’ 
64 Blake, in several passages, refers to the ‘flat earth’ becoming ‘a ball’ 
as a delusion of the modern scientific spirit. Cp. Milton, f. 28, ll. 4-20 :— 

‘The Sky is an immortal Tent built by the Sons of Los: 

And every Space that a Man views around his dwelling-place 

Standing on his own roof, or in his garden on a mount 

Of twenty-five cubits in height, such space is his Universe: 

And on its verge the Sun rises & sets, the Clouds bow 

To meet the flat Earth & the Sea in such an order’d Space: 

The Starry heavens reach no further but here bend and set 

On all sides & the two Poles turn on their valves of gold. 

And if he move his dwelling-vlace his heavens also move 
F Where’er he goes & all his neighbourhood bewail his loss, 

Ms Such are the Spaces called Earth & such its dimension. 

As to that false appearance which appears to the reasoner 

As of a Globe rolling thro’ Voidness, it is a delusion of Ulro. 
The Microscope knows not of this nor the Telescope, they alter 
The ratio of the Spectator’s Organs but leave Objects untouch’d ; 
? For every Space larger than a red Globule of Man’s blood 

Is visionary.’ 

_ See also Jerusalem, £. 77 :— 

De ‘By it [the wheel of religion] the Sun was roll’d into an orb, 
See By it the Moon faded into a globe 

ie Travelling thro’ the night.’ , 

65 Cp. Jerusalem, f. 66, ll. 50, 51. The ... Moon] Stars, moon and sun 
| EY. = 72 Does] Do all edd. except Shep. 


278 Pickering MS. 


For as he eats & drinks he grows 
Younger & younger every day; 
And on the desart wild they both 
Wander in terror & dismay. 


Like the wild Stag she flees away, 
Her fear plants many a thicket wild ; 
While he pursues her night & day, 
By various arts of love beguil’d ; 


By various arts of Love & Hate, 

Till the wide desart planted o’er 

With Labyrinths of wayward Love, 
Where roam the Lion, Wolf, and Boar. 


Till he becomes a wayward Babe, 
And she a weeping Woman Old. 
Then many a Lover wanders here; 
The Sun & Stars are nearer roll’d; 


The trees bring forth sweet extasy 

To all who in the desart roam ; 

Till many a City there is Built, \ 
And many a pleasant Shepherd’s home. \ 


75, 76 Cp. Jerusalem, f. 86, 11. 62, 63 :— 
‘Silent they wander’d hand in hand like two Infants wand’ring 
From Enion in the desarts, terrified at each others beauty.’ 


73 


uk 


85 


89 


77 flees] flies WBY. 80 arts] art WBY. 80, 81 Cp. in Four Zoas, 
Nighti, ll, 217, 218, the description of the wanderings of Los and Enitharmon, 


who ‘in the Brain of Man... live, and in his circling Nerves’ :— 
‘Alternate Love & Hate his breast, hers Scorn & Jealousy, 


In embryon passions they kiss’d not nor embrac’d for shame & fear.’ 
82 desart] desert ’s all edd. except Shep. 83 wayward Love] Cp. Jeru- 


salem, f. 16, ll. 61-64 :-— 
‘All things acted on Earth are seen in the bright Sculptures of 
Los’s Halls, & every Age renews its powers from these Works, 
With every pathetic story possible to happen from Hate or 
Wayward Love.’ 
85 Cp. Jerusalem, f. 82, ll. 37-39 :— 
‘Look, Hyle is become an infant Love, look, behold, see him lie 
Upon my bosom, look, here is the lovely wayward form 
That gave me sweet delight by his torments beneath my Veil. 
Also 1. 50 :— 
‘The desarts tremble at his wrath, they shrink themselves in fear.’ 
See also ‘ The Crystal Cabinet,’ ll. 25, 26, 


Pickering MS. 279 


But when they find the frowning Babe, 93 
Terror strikes thro’ the region wide: 

They cry ‘The Babe! the Babe is Born!’ 

And flee away on every side. 


RS For who dare touch the frowning form, 97 
His arm is wither’d to its root; 
Lions, Boars, Wolves, all howling flee, 
And every Tree does shed its fruit. 


And none can touch that frowning form, | Ior 
Except it be a Woman Old; ) 

She nails him down upon the Rock, 

And all is done as I have told. 


94 wide] wild EY. 98 its] the EY. 99 Lions, Boars] Bears, 
lions all edd. except Shep., who reads Lions, bears; but cp. above, l. 84. 
too does] doth ali edd. tog him] it DGR, the] a EY. 
[t he Land of Dreams 
Awake, awake, my little Boy! I 


Thou wast thy Mother’s only joy; 
Why dost thou weep in thy gentle sleep? 
Awake! thy Father does thee keep. 


‘O, what Land is the Land of Dreams? 5 
What are its Mountains, & what are its Streams? 
O Father! I saw my Mother there, 

Among the Lillies by waters fair. 


‘Among the lambs, clothéd in white, 9 
She walk’d with her Thomas in sweet delight. 
I wept for joy, like a dove I mourn, 

“  O! when shall I again return?’ 


Pickering MS. p. 7. 

4 Awake] O wake DGR; Oh wake WMR, EY. does] doth all edd. 
except Shep. 5, 6 O...streams] I follow Shepherd in making these 
two lines part of the boy’s reply, instead of, as in DGR and other edd., 
part of the father’s opening speech. The original MS., of course, had no 
quotation marks. to Thomas] This name is plainly written and cannot 
therefore be a misreading of ‘ Tharmas,’ as might be conjectured from several 
analogies in the story of Vala and Tharmas (Four Zoas, Night ix, pp. 122- 
128). 


v 


280 Pickering MS. 


Dear Child, I also by pleasant streams 13 
Have wander’d all Night in the Land of Dreams; 
But tho’ calm & warm the waters wide, 

I could not get to the other side. 


‘Father, O father! what do we here 17 
In this Land of unbelief and fear? 

The Land of Dreams is better far, 

Above the light of the Morning Star.’ 


Mary 


Sweet Mary, the first time she ever was there, 1 
Came into the Ball-room among the Fair ; 

The young Men & Maidens around her throng, 

And these are the words upon every tongue: 


‘An Angel is here from the heavenly Climes, 5 
Or again does return the Golden times; 

Her eyes outshine every brilliant ray, 

She opens her lips—’tis the Month of May.’ 


Mary moves in soft beauty & conscious delight, 9 
To augment with sweet smiles all the joys of the Night, 
Nor once blushes to own to the rest of the Fair 

That sweet Love and Beauty are worthy our care. 


In the Morning the Villagers rose with delight, 13 
And repeated with pleasure the joys of the night, 

And Mary arose among Friends to be free, 

But no Friend from henceforward thou, Mary, shalt see. 


Pickering MS, p. 8. 

According to DGR this poem ‘ appears to be, on one side, an allegory of 
the poetic or spiritual mind moving unrecognized and reviled among its 
fellows ; and this view of it is corroborated when we find Blake applying to 
himself two lines almost identically taken from it.’ See note to Il. 21, 22, 
and Swinburne, Essay, p. 177. 

6 again does return] All edd. except Shep. omit does. 9-12 Shep. 
makes this stanza part of the preceding speech, 


Pickering MS. 281 


Some said she was proud, some call’d her a whore, 17 
_ And some, when she passed by, shut to the door; 

A damp cold came o’er her, her blushes all fled, 

Her lillies & roses are blighted & shed. 


‘O why was I born with a different Face? 21 
Why was I not born like this Envious Race? 

Why did Heaven adorn me with bountiful hand, 

And then set me down in an envious Land? 


‘To be weak as a Lamb and smooth as a Dove, 25 
And not to raise Envy, is call’d Christian Love; 

But if you raise Envy your Merit’s to blame 

For planting such spite in the weak & the tame. 


‘I will humble my Beauty, I will not dress fine, 29 
I will keep from the Ball, and my Eyes shall not shine ; 
And if any Girl’s Lover forsakes her for me 

I'll refuse him my hand, & from Envy be free.’ 


She went out in Morning attir’d plain & neat ; 33 
‘Proud Mary’s gone mad,’ said the Child in the Street; 
She went out in Morning in plain neat attire, 

And came home in Evening bespatter’d with mire. 


She trembled & wept, sitting on the Bed-side, 37 
She forgot it was Night, & she trembled & cried; 
She forgot it was Night, she forgot it was Morn, 
Her soft Memory imprinted with Faces of Scorn; 


With Faces of Scorn and with Eyes of Disdain, 4! 
Like foul Fiends inhabiting Mary’s mild Brain ; 

She remembers no Face like the Human Divine; 

All Faces have Envy, sweet Mary, but thine; 


17-20 Shepherd omits this stanza in his edition of 1866. I7 some 

. .. whore] some reviled her still more DGR. a1, 22 O why... Race] 

Cp. the lines occurring in one of Blake’s letters to Mr. Butts, dated Aug. 
16, 1803 :— 

*O why was I born with a different face? 
Why was I not born like the rest of my race?’ 

31 forsakes] forsake Shep., WMR, EY, WBY. 33, 35 in Morning] in 

the morning all edd. except Shep. 36 in Evening] in the evening all edd. 
except Shep. 


282 Pickering MS. 


And thine is a Face of sweet Love in despair, 45 
And thine is a Face of mild sorrow & care, 

And thine is a Face of wild terror & fear 

That shall never be quiet till laid on its bier. 


The Crystal Cabinet 


The Maiden caught me in the Wild, I 
Where I was dancing merrily ; 

She put me into her Cabinet, 

And Lock’d me up with a golden Key. 


Pickering MS. p. ro. 
A passage in Jerusalem, f. 70, ll. 17-31, makes it plain that the subject of 
this poem is Rahab, or moral law :— 

‘Imputing Sin & Righteousness to Individuals, Rahab 

Sat deep within him hid: his Feminine Power unreveal’d 

Brooding Abstract Philosophy, to destroy Imagination, the Divine- 
Humanity : A Three-fold Wonder, feminine, most beautiful, Three-fold 
Each within other. On her white marble & even Neck, her Heart 
Inorb’d and bonified : with locks of shadowing modesty, shining 
Over her beautiful Female features, soft flourishing in beauty, 

Beams mild, all love and all perfection, that when the lips 

Recieve a kiss from Gods or Men, a threefold kiss returns 

From the press’d loveliness; so her whole immortal form, three-fold 
Three-fold embrace returns : consuming lives of Gods & Men, 

In fires of beauty melting them as gold & silver in the furnace, 

Her Brain enlabyrinths the whole heaven of her bosom & loins 

To put in act what her Heart wills; O who can withstand her 

power ? 
Her name is Vala in Eternity: in Time her name is Rahab.’ 
3 Cp. Milton, f. 27, il. 1-26 :— 
‘Some Sons of Los surround the Passions with porches of iron & 
silver 

Creating form & beauty around the dark regions of sorrow, 

Giving to airy nothing a name and a habitation 

Delightful, with bounds to the Infinite putting off the Indefinite 

Into most holy forms of Thought (such is the power of inspiration). 
They labour incessant, with many tears and afflections, 

Creating the beautiful House for the piteous sufferer, 

Others, Cabinets richly fabricate of gold & ivory 

For Doubts & fears, unform’d & wretched & melancholy 

The little weeping Spectre stands on the threshold of Death 
Eternal’. 2. 

Terrified the Spectre screams & rushes in fear into their Net 

Of kindness & compassion & is born a weeping terror,’ 


Pidhering MS. 283 


This Cabinet is form’d of Gold 5 
And Pearl and Crystal shining bright, 

And within it opens into a World 

And a little lovely Moony Night. 


Another England there I saw, 9 
Another London with its Tower, 

Another Thames and other Hills, 

And another pleasant Surrey Bower, 


Another Maiden like herself, 13 
Translucent, lovely, shining clear, 

Threefold each in the other clos’d,— 

O what a pleasant trembling fear! 


O what a smile! a threefold smile 17 
Fill’d me that like a flame I burn’d; 

I bent to kiss the lovely Maid, 

And found a Threefold Kiss return’d. 


I strove to sieze the inmost Form 21 
With ardour fierce & hands of flame, 

But burst the Crystal Cabinet, 

And like a Weeping Babe became— 


A weeping Babe upon the wild, a5 
And Weeping Woman pale reclin’d, 

And in the outward air again 

I fill’d with woes the passing Wind. 


14 For Blake’s definitions and comparison of ‘ Translucence’ and ‘ Opake- 
ness,’ see Jerusalem, f. 42, 1. 29 sqq. 25, 26 Cp. ‘The Mental Traveller,’ 
Il. 85, 86 :— 

‘Till he becomes a wayward Babe, 
And she a weeping Woman Old,’ 


Prefatory Note to ‘The Grey Monk’ 


The original draft of ‘The Grey Monk’ is found on p. 12 of the Rossetti 
MS., where it forms part of xlii. The MS. Book version consisted of fourteen 
stanzas, which Blake afterwards separated into two poems—transcribing 
eight stanzas into the Pickering MS., under the title ‘The Grey Monk,’ and 
engraving seven as the untitled lines at the end of his ‘Address to the 


284 Pickering MS. 


Deists’ (Jerusalem, f. 52). The latter includes two stanzas which occur in 
‘The Grey Monk’ version also, The greater part of Jerusalem, as we 
gather from one of Blake’s letters to Mr. Butts, had been written before 
April 25, 1803, though its actual completion in engraved form was probably 
later than the date on the title-page, 1804. This dates ‘The Grey Monk’ as 
belonging to the earlier part of the Felpham period. 

Mr. D. G. Rossetti’s first version of this poem is based solely on the draft 
in the MS. Book, in his early transcript of which he gives stanzas 5-10, with 
a few verbal changes of his own. In his second version, printed in Gilchrist 
(ii. 206), he adds the two final stanzas, taking these from the Pickering MS. 
and not from the MS. Book, and still omitting the second stanza— 

‘The blood red ran from the grey monk’s side.’ 

Mr, W. M. Rossetti follows Shepherd in the number and arrangement 
of verses, and generally as to text, adopting two out of the three important 
changes from the MS. Book version—‘I die’ for ‘I see’ (1. 1), and ‘ found” 
for ‘sought’ (1. 33). He makes six changes on the authority of the MS. Book, 
one from the engraved version in Jerusalem, and adopts four of his brother’s 
emendations. Messrs. Ellis and Yeats, here as elsewhere, seem ignorant 
of the fact that Shepherd’s edition preserved for us the text of the 
Pickering MS., and omit ‘The Grey Monk’ as a separate poem. Mr. W. B. 
Yeats falls into the same error, when, in his note to this poem (p. 247), 
he says, ‘The arrangement of the verses in the Aldine edition is quite 
arbitrary.’ It is, on the other hand, his own text which is entirely un- 
authorized, as under the title ‘The Grey Monk’ he prints stanzas 5-14 of 
the MS. Book version, with readings sometimes adopted from the Aldine, 
and sometimes made on his own responsibility—among the most Wiis 
of which are his transposition and misreadings of Il. 11, r2. 

In the footnotes to the present poem I give only the final readings of the 
MS. Book version. For deleted words and passages see MS. Book xlii. 


The Grey Monk 


‘I die, I die!’ the Mother said, I 
‘My Children die for lack of Bread. 

What more has the merciless Tyrant said?’ 

The Monk sat down on the Stony Bed. 


The blood red ran from the grey Monk’s side, 5 
His hands & feet were wounded wide, 

His Body bent, his arms & knees 

Like to the roots of ancient trees. 


Pickering MS. p. 12. 


1 Idie, I die] I see, I see MS. Book, DGR, WBY. 2 die] will die 
MS. Book, DGR ; shall die WBY. 3 has] hath R' 4 sat down] 
sat him down DGR, WMR. the] her MS. Backs DGR, WMR, WBY. 


5-8 The... trees] R's DGR, and WBY omit. 


Pickering MS. 285. 


His eye was dry; no tear could flow: 9 
A hollow groan first spoke his woe. — 

He trembled & shudder’d upon the Bed ; 

At length with a feeble cry he said: 


‘When God commanded this hand to write 13 
In the studious hours of deep midnight, 

He told me the writing I wrote should prove 

The Bane of all that on Earth I love. 


‘My brother starv’d between two Walls, 17 
His Children’s Cry my soul appalls ; 

I mock’d at the wrack and griding chain, 

My bent body mocks their torturing pain. 


‘Thy Father drew his Sword in the North, 21 
With his thousands strong he marchéd forth; 

Thy Brother has arm’d himself in Steel, 

To avenge the wrongs thy Children feel. 


. 
£ 
4 
y 


- 


‘But vain the Sword and vain the Bow, 25 
They never can work War’s overthrow. 

The Hermit’s Prayer and the Widow's Tear 

Alone can free the World from fear. 


: 
; 


9 tear] tears WBY, 10 first spoke] bespoke R', DGR, WMR, WBY. 
11, 12 He... said) WBY inverts the order of these two lines. 12 with] 
WBY omits, 14 studious) shadowy DGR, WMR, WBY. 15 the 
writing] that all MS, Book, DGR, WMR, WBY. 13-16 In a letter to 
Mr. Butts, dated July 6, 1803, Blake speaks of Hayley’s aversion and 
contempt for his prophetic writings. Cp. also the lines in an earlier letter 
to the same friend :-— 
‘Must Flaxman look upon me as wild? 
And all my friends be with doubts beguil’d ? 
Must my Wife live in my Sister's bane? 
Or my sister survive on my Love’s pain?’ 
18 His] Thy R', DGR,WEY. Cry]crying DGR. 19 griding] grinding 
Shep. ; the grinding WMR, WBY. zo mocks their] mocks at their 
MS. Book, DGR, WMR, WBY. 21 See note to version in MS, 
Book xiii. 22 With his thousands strong] By his strong courage R'. 
_ marchéd] is marched MS. Book, DGR, WMR, WBY. 23 has] hath 
DGR, WMR. 24 avenge] revenge MS, Book, DGR,WMR. wrongs] 
wrongs that R*. 


286 Pickering MS, 


‘For a Tear is an Intellectual Thing, 29 
And a Sigh is the Sword of an Angel King, 

And the bitter groan of the Martyr’s woe 

Is an Arrow from the Almightie’s Bow. 


‘The hand of Vengeance found the Bed 33 
To which the Purple Tyrant fled; 

The iron hand crush’d the Tyrant’s head, 

And became a Tyrant in his Stead.’ 


29-36 For... Stead] R! omits. Following the MS. Book version WBY 
inverts the order of stanzas 8 and 9, and inserts between them the two 
stanzas :-— 


‘Until the tyrant himself relent, 

The tyrant who the first [MS. Book first the] black bow bent, 
Slaughter shall heap the bloody plain : 

Resistance and war is the tyrant’s gain. 


‘But the tear of love—and forgiveness sweet, 
And submission to death beneath his feet— 
The tear shall melt the sword of steel, 

And every wound it has made shall heal.’ 


29 a Tear] the tear MS. Book, WBY. 31 the Martyr’s] a martyr’s DGR, 
WMR, WBY. 33 found] sought MS, Book, WBY. 


Prefatory Note to ‘ Auguries of 
Innocence’ 


Pickering MS. p. 13. Written in a single column, without marginal 
additions, marks of transposition, or numerical rearrangement of lines. The 
couplets are not divided into sections, nor is there a terminal line or other 
mark of separation between the opening stanza and the proverb-couplets 
which follow. The conjecture, therefore, that Blake intended the title to refer 
to the initial quatrain only is not supported by the evidence of the MS. 

It will be seen that the poem consists of an opening quatrain, fol= 
lowed by sixty-four couplets. Turning to the latter, it may be noticed 
in the first place that the couplets are almost always arranged together 
in pairs, as if forming quatrains with the rime-arrangement aabb or some- 
times aaaa. The few exceptions to this rule have the appearance of being 
marginal interpolations. The first five stanzas (ll. 5-24) deal with cruelty 
or kindness to animals, its penalty or reward—a theme which may have 
been suggested to Blake’s mind while engraving the plates for Hayley’s 


» 


Pickering MS. 287 


Ballads. 1n the sixth stanza (ll. 25-28) Blake wanders off into a different 
~ aspect of animal life, obscene or noxious animals symbolizing human 


faults or vices. This theme is continued later in the couplets following 
1. 44. 

Stanzas 9, to and 11, 12(ll. 37-44 and 45-52) are continuations respectively 
of these two themes, The couplet which follows (ll. 53, 54)— 


‘A Truth that’s told with bad intent 
Beats all the Lies you can invent ’— 


is not very closely bound to the preceding lines. It has the appearance 
of being an afterthought, perhaps in the nature of a personal reflection 
on one of the chief modes by which ‘slander,’ ‘envy,’ and ‘jealousy’ work 
for evil. 

At 1. 55 the return to the quatrain unit is clearly marked by the rime- 
arrangement of the next three stanzas, all, as in the last stanza of ‘The Grey 
Monk,’ having four identical rimes. Stanzas 13 and 14 (ll. 55-88 and 59- 
62) appear to have been mistakenly copied down in inverted order. This 
paragraph discusses a new topic, alternate pleasure and grief in human life, 
a theme entirely different from the darker one of predestined misery or 
delight (Il. r19-132) with which Rossetti links it in his rearrangement. 

The subjects of the remaining stanzas are strongly reminiscent of those of 
the Songs of Experience, and often compress within the narrow limit of 
a couplet the strength and tenderness of some of the most familiar of the 
songs. In stanzas 15-17 (Il. 63-74) we have ‘Infant Sorrow,’ and in stanzas 
18, 19 (ll. 75-84) ‘marks of weakness, marks of woe’ in beggar, soldier, and 
pauper. Stanzas 20-22 (Il. 85-96) pass on from reverence of infant faith to 
denunciation of doubt, a theme returned to (after a short digression contrast- 
ing war and peace) in stanzas 24, 25 (Il. 108-110). Stanzas 26, 27 recall 
‘London,’ and may be regarded as a continuation of stanzas 18, 19, and 23, 
Three more stanzas (ll. 119-132) expressing, with exquisite compassion, pity 
for those whose lot is cast in the land of ‘ eternal winter,’ conclude this truly 
great poem. 

The foregoing analysis reveals the curious fact that Blake would seem to 
have treated two different themes alternately, interweaving one with another 
like the rimes in a canto of terza rima, It appears probable that he either 
wrote down the couplets in the order of composition or transcribed them 
from loose jottings, deferring rearrangement for future consideration, Con- 
tinuity may be given the poem by following each theme separately to its 
conclusion, It would then form seven sections, divided as follows :— 


(a) Il. 1-4. 

(4) Il. 5-24, 29-44. 

(c) Il. 25-28, 45-50, 53; 54. ; 

(@) ll. 59-62, 55-58. 

(e) ll. 63-74, 85-96, 103-110. 

(f) UL. 51, 52, 75, 76, 79-84, 77, 78, 97-102, 111-118. 

(g) ll. 119-132. 

I print the text as in the original MS., followed in smaller type by my own 

revised version for those who may prefer to read the poem as a whole, 
. instead of as a number of disconnected proverb-couplets, 


288 Pickering MS. 


With this may be compared Rossetti’s rearrangement :— 


(a) ll. 1-4. 
(6) Il. 5-10, 17, 18, 11-12, 19, 20, 13-16. 


(c) Il. 29-32, 41, 42, 33-38, 21-24, 39, 40, 43, 44, 67, 68, 71, 72. 


(d) Il. 25-28, 45-50, 97, 98. 


(e) ll. 99, 100, 77, 78, Tor, 102, 75, 76, 51, 52, 81-84, 79, 80, 113-118. 
(Jf) Il. 85-90, 63-66, 93-96, 103, 104, 91, 92, 105, 106, 53, 54, 107-110. 


(g) Il. 119-124, 59-62, 55-58. 
(A) 125-132. 


The latter arrangement (which has been adopted by all later editors 
except Shepherd), readable as it appears on first glance, seems to me to do 
great violence to the author’s meaning. Passages are torn from their context 
and given an entirely different sense, by being placed in an artificial position. 
An example of this may be seen in Rossetti’s penultimate section, where, 
by the juxtaposition of two separate passages, Blake is made to argue that 
a correct apprehension of the fact that some are born to misery and endless 


night will enable us to go through life with safety. 


Auguries of Innocence 


To see a World in a Grain of Sand, 
And a Heaven in a Wild Flower, 
Hold Infinity in the palm of your hand, 
And Eternity in an hour. 
“A Robin Redbreast in a Cage 
Puts all Heaven in a Rage. 
A dove-house fill’d with Doves & Pigeons 
Shudders Hell thro’ all its regions. 
A dog starv’d at his Master’s Gate 
Predicts the ruin of the State. 
A Horse misused upon the Road 
Calls to Heaven for Human blood. 
Each outcry of the hunted Hare 
A fibre from the Brain does tear. 
A Skylark wounded in the wing ; 
A Cherubim does cease to sing. 
The Game Cock clipt and arm’d for fight 
Does the Rising Sun affright. 


Pickering MS. p. 13. 


13 


17 


1 a] the Shep., WMR. 14 does] doth DGR, WMR, EY. tg in] 
on all edd. except Shep. 16 A... sing] Doth make a cherub cease to 


sing all edd. except Shep. 17 The] A all edd. except Shep. 
Doth ail edd, except Shep. 


18 Does] 


Pickering MS. 289 


Every Wolf's & Lion’s howl 
Raises from Hell a Human Soul. 
The wild Deer, wand’ring here & there, 21 
Keeps the Human Soul from Care. 
The Lamb misus’d breeds Public Strife. 
And yet forgives the Butcher’s knife. 
The Bat that flits at close of Eve 35 
Has left the Brain that won’t Believe. 
The Owl that calls upon the Night 
Speaks the Unbeliever’s fright. 
He who shall hurt the little Wren 
Shall never be belov’d by Men. 
He who the Ox to wrath has mov’d 
Shall never be by Woman lov’d. 
The wanton Boy that kills the Fly 33 
Shall feel the Spider’s enmity. 
He who torments the Chafer’s Sprite 
Weaves a Bower in endless Night. 

' The Catterpiller on the Leaf 37 
Repeats to thee thy Mother’s grief. 
Kill not the Moth nor Butterfly, 
For the Last Judgment draweth nigh. 
He who shall train the Horse to war 41 
Shall never pass the Polar Bar. 
The Beggar’s Dog & Widow’s Cat, 
Feed them & thou wilt grow. fat. 
The Gnat that sings his Summer’s Song 45 
Poison gets from Slander’s tongue. 
The poison of the Snake & Newt 
Is the sweat of Envy’s Foot. 
The poison of the Honey Bee 49 
Is the Artist’s Jealousy. 
The Prince’s Robes & Beggar’s Rags 
Are Toadstools on the Miser’s Bags. 


? 


22 Keeps] Keep all edd. except Shep. 24 Cp. footnote to ‘ The Fly’ 
in the Songs of Experience. 37, 38 The... grief] Cp. The Gates of 
Paradise, ‘ Keys of the Gates,’ Il. ios 
. ‘The Catterpiller on the Leaf 
ft Reminds thee of thy Mother's Grief.’ 
~ 44 wilt] shalt all edd. except Shep. 


SAMPSON U 


290 Pickering MS. 


A Truth that’s told with bad intent 53 
Beats all the Lies you can invent. 

It is right it should be so; 

Man was made for Joy & Woe; 

And when this we rightly know, 57 
Thro’ the World we safely go. 

Joy & Woe are woven fine, 

A Clothing for the soul divine. 


Under every grief & pine 61 


Runs a joy with silken twine. 

The Babe is more than Swadling Bands ; 
Throughout all these Human Lands 

Tools were made, & Born were hands, 65 
Every Farmer understands. 

Every Tear from Every Eye 

Becomes a Babe in Eternity ; 

This is caught by Females bright, 69 
And return’d to its own delight. ; 

The Bleat, the Bark, Bellow, & Roar, 

Are Waves that Beat on Heaven’s Shore. 

The Babe that weeps the Rod beneath mE 
Writes Revenge in realms of Death. 

The Beggar’s Rags, fluttering in Air, 

Does to Rags the Heavens tear. 

The Soldier, arm’d with Sword & Gun, oY 
Palsied strikes the Summer’s Sun. 

The poor Man’s Farthing is worth more 

Than all the Gold on Afric’s Shore. 

One Mite wrung from the Lab’rer’s hands 81 
Shall buy & sell the Miser’s Lands ; 

Or, if protected from on high, 

Does that whole Nation sell & buy. 


He who mocks the Infant’s Faith 85 


Shall be mock’d in Age & Death. 


58 Thro’... go] Safely through the world we go all edd. except Shep. 
63, 64 <All edd. except Shep. omit semicolon after ‘Bands’ and punctuate with 


semicolon after ‘lands.’ 69, 70 This .. . delight} DGR, WMR, and 
EY omit; WBY prints in Notes. 69 bright] aright WBY. 73, 74 
The Babe . . . Death] DGR, WMR, and EY omit; WBY prints in Notes. 


76 Does] Do all edd. except Shep. 48 Does} Shall all edd. except Shep. 


Pickering MS. 291 


He who shall teach the Child to Doubt 

The rotting Grave shall ne’er get out. 

He who respects the Infant’s faith 89 
Triumphs over Hell & Death. 

The Child’s Toys and the Old Man’s Reasons 

Are the Fruits of the Two Seasons, 

The Questioner, who sits so sly, 93 
Shall never know how to Reply. 

He who replies to words of Doubt 

Doth put the Light of Knowledge out. 

The Strongest Poison ever known 97 
Came from Caesar’s Laurel Crown. 

Nought can Deform the Human Race 

Like to the Armour’s iron brace. 

When Gold and Gems adorn the Plow 101 
To peaceful Arts shall Envy Bow. 

A Riddle, or the Cricket’s Cry, 

Is to Doubt a fit Reply. 

The Emmet’s Inch & Eagle’s Mile 105 
Make Lame Philosophy to smile. 

He who Doubts from what he sees 

Will ne’er Believe, do what you Please. 

If_ the Sun & Moon should Doubt, 10g 
They'd immediately Go Out. 

To be in a Passion you Good may do, 

But no Good if a Passion is in you. 

The Whore & Gambler, by the State 113 
Licensed, build that Nation’s Fate. 

The Harlot’s cry from Street to Street 

Shall weave Old England’s winding-Sheet. 


92 Cp. Milton, f. 43, ll. ra-17 :— 
‘To cast off the idiot Questioner who is always questioning 
But never capable of answering: who sits, with a sly grin, 
Silent, plotting when to question, like a thief in a cave, 
Who publishes: doubt & calls it knowledge, whose Science is Despair, 
Whose pretence to knowledge is Envy, whose whole Science is 
To destroy the wisdom of ages to gratify ravenous Envy.’ 
roo Armour’s] armourer’s all edd. except Shep. to2 Arts] hearts EY. 
103 Riddle] puddle DGR, WMR, EY. t11-112 To... you] DGR, 
WMR, EY omit; WBY prtnts in Notes. 


Ung 


— 


202 Pickering MS. 


The Winner’s shout, the Loser’s Curse, LIy 
Dance before dead England’s Hearse. 

Every Night and every Morn 

Some to Misery are Born. 

Every Morn and every Night 121 
Some are Born to Sweet Delight. 

Some are Born to Sweet Delight, 

Some are Born to Endless Night. 

We are led to Believe a Lie 125 
When we see not Thro’ the Eye, 

Which was Born in a Night to perish in a Night, 
When the Soul Slept in Beams of Light. : 
God appears, & God is light, 139 9 
To those poor souls who dwell in Night ; 
But does a Human Form Display 

To those who Dwell in Realms of Day. 


118 Dance] Shall dance all edd. except Shep. 125-128 We... Light] 
Cp. ‘ Everlasting Gospel’ ’, Il. 103-106 :— 

‘And leads you to believe a lie ‘ 

-When you see with, not through, the eye; F 

That was born in a night, to perish in a night, ‘ 

When the soul slept in the beams of light.’ 

126 When... Eye] When we see with, not through, the eye, Pickering MS. _ 

1st rdg. del, and all edd. except Shep. 131 does] doth all edd. except Shep. 


Auguries of Innocence 


(Revised Arrangement) 


To see a World in a Grain of Sand, 
And a Heaven in a Wild Flower, 

Hold Infinity in the palm of your hand, 
And Eternity in an hour. 


A Robin Redbreast in a Cage 

Puts all Heaven in a Rage. 

A dove-house fill’d with Doves & Pigeons 
Shudders Hell thro’ all its regions. 

A dog starv’d at his Master’s Gate 
Predicts the ruin of the State. 

A Horse misused upon the Road 

Calls to Heaven for Human blood. 


Pickering MS. 293 


Each outcry of the hunted Hare 

A fibre from the Brain does tear. 

A Skylark wounded in the wing, 

A Cherubim does cease to sing. 

The Game-Cock clipt and arm'd for fight 
Does the Rising Sun affright. 

Every Wolf's & Lion’s howl 

Raises from Hell a Human Soul. 

The wild Deer, wand’ring here & there, 
Keeps the Human Soul from Care. 

The Lamb misus’d breeds Public Strife, 
And yet forgives the Butcher’s knife. 
He who shall hurt the little Wren 
Shall never be belov’d by Men. 

He who the Ox to wrath has mov'd 
Shall never be by Woman lov’d. 

The wanton Boy that kills the Fly 
Shall feel the Spider’s enmity. 

He who torments the Chafer’s Sprite 
Weaves a Bower in endless Night. 

The Catterpiller on the Leaf 

Repeats to thee thy Mother’s grief. 

Kill not the Moth nor Butterfly, 

For the Last Judgment draweth nigh. 
He who shall train the Horse to war ~ 
Shall never pass the Polar Bar. 

The Beggar’s Dog & Widow’s Cat, 
Feed them & thou wilt grow fat. 


The Bat that flits at close of Eve 
Has left the Brain that won’t Believe. 
The Owl that calls upon the Night 
Speaks the Unbeliever’s fright. 

The Gnat that sings his Summer’s Song 
Poison gets from Slander’s tongue. 
The poison of the Snake & Newt 

Is the sweat of Envy’s Foot. 

The poison of the Honey-Bee 

Is the Artist’s Jealousy. 

_A Truth that’s told with bad intent 
Beats all the Lies you can invent. 


Joy & Woe are woven fine, 

A Clothing for the soul divine ; 
Under every grief & pine 

Runs a joy with silken twine. 

It is right it should be so; 

Man was made for Joy & Woe; 
And, when this we rightly know, 
Thro’ the World we safely go. 


294 


Pickering MS. 


The Babe is more than Swadling Bands ; 
Throughout all these Human Lands 
Tools were made, & Born were hands, 
Every Farmer understands. 

Every Tear from Every Eye 

Becomes a Babe in Eternity ; 

This is caught by Females bright, 

And return’d to its own delight. 

The Bleat, the Bark, Bellow, & Roar, 


Are Waves that Beat on Heaven’s Shore. 


The Babe that weeps the Rod beneath 
Writes Revenge in realms of Death. 
He who mocks the Infant’s Faith 
Shall be mock’d in Age & Death. 

He who shall teach the Child to Doubt 
The rotting Grave shall ne’er get out. 
He who respects the Infant’s faith 
Triumphs over Hell & Death. 


The Child’s Toys and the Old Man’s Reasons 


Are the Fruits of the Two Seasons. 
The Questioner, who sits so sly, 

Shall never know how to Reply. 

He who replies to words of Doubt 
Doth put the Light of Knowledge out. 
A Riddle, or the Cricket’s Cry, 

Is to Doubt a fit Reply. 

The Emmet’s Inch & Eagle’s Mile 
Make Lame Philosophy to smile. 

He who Doubts from what he sees 
Will ne’er Believe, do what you Please. 
If the Sun & Moon should Doubt, 
They’d immediately Go Out. 


The Prince’s Robes & Beggar’s Rags 
Are Toadstools on the Miser’s Bags. 
The Beggar’s Rags, fluttering in Air, 
Does to Rags the Heavens tear. 

The poor Man's Farthing is worth more 
Than all the Gold on Afric’s Shore. 


One Mite wrung from the Lab’rer’s hands 


Shall buy & sell the Miser’s Lands; 
Or, if protected from on high, 

Does that whole Nation sell & buy. 
The Soldier, arm’d with Sword & Gun, 
Palsied strikes the Summer's Sun. 

The Strongest Poison ever known 
Came from Caesar’s Laurel Crown. 
Nought can Deform the human Race 
Like to the Armour’s iron brace. 


nena 


bo 
\O 
wi 


, Pickering MS. 


When Gold and Gems adorn the Plow 
To peaceful Arts shall Envy Bow. 

To be in a Passion you Good may do, 
But no Good if a Passion is in you. 

The Whore & Gambler, by the State 
Licensed, build that Nation’s Fate. 

The Harlot’s cry from. Street to Street 
Shall weave Old England’s winding Sheet. 
The Winner's shout, the Loser’s Curse, 
Dance before dead England’s Hearse. 


Every Night and every Morn 

Some to Misery are Born. 

Every Morn and every Night 

Some are Born to Sweet Delight. 

Some are Born to Sweet Delight, 

Some are Born to Endless Night. 

We are led to Believe a Lie 

When we see not Thro’ the Eye, 
Which was Born in a Night to perish in a Night, 
When the Soul Slept in Beams of Light. 
God appears, & God is light, 

To those poor souls who dwell in Night, 
But does a Human Form Display 

To those who Dwell in Realms of Day. 


Long John Brown & Little Mary Bell 


Little Mary Bell had a Fairy in a Nut, I 
Long John Brown had the Devil in his Gut ; 
Long John Brown lov’d little Mary Bell, 

And the Fairy drew the Devil into the Nutshell. 


Pickering MS. p. 19. 

In Jerusalem, f. 36, ll. 35-37, fairies are described as one of ‘ Four ravening 
deathlike Forms. . .. States Permanently Fixed by the Divine Power.’ 
Cp. from the ‘ Motto to the Songs of Innocence and of Experience, in the MS. 
Book (xxxi) :— 

‘The Good are attracted by Men’s perceptions, 

And think not for themselves ; 

Till Experience teaches them to catch 

And to cage the Fairies & Elves’: 
lines perhaps explained by the quatrain which almost immediately precedes 
them in the MS. Book (xxvii) :— 

‘If you trap the moment before it’s ripe, 

The tears of repentance you'll certainly wipe ; 
' But if once you let the ripe moment go 

You can never wipe off the tears ot woe.’ 


296 Pickering MS. 


Her Fairy skip’d out, & her Fairy skip’d in; 5 
He laugh’d at the Devil saying, ‘Love is a Sin.’ 

The Devil he raged, & the Devil he was wroth, 

And the Devil enter’d into the Young Man’s broth. 


He was soon in the Gut of the loving Young Swain, 9 

For John eat & drank to drive away Love’s pain; 

But all he could do he grew thinner and thinner, 

Though he eat & drank as much as ten Men for his 
dinner. 


Some said he had a Wolf in his stomach day & night, 13 
Some said- he had the Devil, & they guess’d right ; 

The fairy skip’d about in his Glory, Joy, and Pride, 
And he laugh’d at the Devil till poor John Brown Died. 


Then the Fairy skip’d out of the old Nutshell, 17 
And woe & alack! for Pretty Mary Bell; _ 

For the Devil crept in when the Fairy skip’d out, 

And there goes Miss Bell with her fusty old Nut. 


Title] At first ‘John Brown & Mary Bell,’ the adjectives being an addition. 


1, 3 Little] Pretty Pickering MS. 1st¢.1+dg. del. 2,3 Long] Young 
Pickering MS. 1s¢ rdg. del. 5 & her] EY omits &. 15 Joy] love 
BY: 


William Bond 


I wonder whether the Girls are mad, I 
And I wonder whether they mean to kill, 

And I wonder if William Bond will die, 

For assuredly he is very ill. 


He went to Church in a May morning, 
Attended by Fairies, one, two, and three; 

But the Angels of Providence drove them away, 
And he return’d home in Misery. 


Pickering MS. p. 20. 
5 in] on all edd. except Shep. 


Pickering MS. 297 


He went not out to the Field nor Fold, 9 
He went not out to the Village nor Town, 
But he came home in a black black cloud, 
And took to his Bed, and there lay down. 


And an Angel of Providence at his Feet, 13 
And an Angel of Providence at his Head, 

And in the midst a Black Black Cloud, 

And in the midst the Sick Man on his Bed. 


And on his Right hand was Mary Green, 17 
And on his Left hand was his Sister Jane, 

And their tears fell thro’ the black black Cloud 

To drive away the sick man’s pain. 


‘O William, if thou dost another Love, 21 
Dost another Love better than poor Mary, 

Go & take that other to be thy Wife, 

And Mary Green shall her Servant be.’ 


‘Yes, Mary, I do another Love, 25 
Another I Love far better than thee, 

And Another I will have for my Wife; 

Then what have I to do with thee? 


‘For thou art Melancholy Pale, 29 
And on thy Head is the cold Moon’s Shine, 

But she is ruddy & bright as day, 

And the sunbeams dazzle from her eyne. 


Mary trembled & Mary chill’d, 33 
And Mary fell down on the right hand floor, 

That William Bond & his Sister Jane 

Scarce could recover Mary more. 


When Mary woke & found her laid 37 
On the Right hand of her William dear, 

On the Right hand of his loved Bed, 

And saw her William Bond so near, 


21 O William] Shep. omzts O. 28 Then... thee] Cp. in Songs of 
Experience ‘To Tirzah,’ 1. 4. 


” 


298 Pickering MS. 


The Fairies that fled from Will’.m Bond 4t 
Dancéd around her Shining H<ad ; 

They dancéd over the Pilloe” white, 

And the Angels of Provid't:ince left the Bed. 


I thought Love lived in ‘he hot sunshine, 45 
But O, he lives in the Moony light! 

I thought to find Love in the heat of Day, 

But sweet Love is the Comforter of Night. 


Seek Love in the Pity of others’ Woe, 49 
In the gentle relief of another’s care, 

In the darkness of night & the Winter's Snow, 

In the naked & outcast, seek Love there ! 


45-52 All edd. place in inverted commas as if the speech were William ~ 


Bond's. | treat it rather as that of the narrator of the story, who begins 
the poem in the first person. 52 In] With DGR, WMR, EY, WBY. 


5 


ee 


POEMS 


‘LETTERS 


1800-1803 


a 


PREFACE 


TO 


POEMS FROM LETTERS 


FIVE of the six poems in this section are taken from 
letters written by Blake or his wife. The earliest of these 
are the stanzas enclosed in a letter from Mrs. Blake to 
Mrs. Flaxman, dated September 14, 1800, i.e. immediately 
before the Blakes’ removal to Felpham. Four of the 
pieces are contained in letters to Mr. Butts written from 
Felpham, 1800-1803. I place here also a little fairy poem 
which seems to belong to the same period. It was first 
printed by Swinburne (Zssay, pp. 143, 144) from an auto- 
graph of Blake’s on the back of a small pencil-sketch. 

My text of the poems in the letters to Mr. Butts is taken 
from the originals, kindly lent me by Capt. Butts, the 
grandson of Blake’s friend. I follow Gilchrist for the lines 
to Mrs. Anna Flaxman, being unable to trace the present 
whereabouts of the original; and for the same reason take 
my text of ‘A fairy leapt upon my knee’ from Swinburne’s 
Essay. 

The first five poems are printed by all editors except 
Shepherd : the last by Swinburne and Ellis and Yeats only. 


wea Ail dn Ip ie a Biba 


POEMS FROM LETTERS 


i 


To my dear Friend, Mrs. Anna Flaxman 


_ This song to the flower of Flaxman’s joy, I 


To the blossom of hope for a sweet decoy ; 
Do all that you can, or all that you may, 
To entice him to Felpham and far away. 


_ Away to sweet Felpham, for Heaven is there ; 5 
The Ladder of Angels descends through the air ; 

On the turret its spiral does softly descend, 

Through the village then winds, at my cot it does end. 


You stand in the village and look up to heaven; 9 
The precious stones glitter on flight seventy-seven ; 
And my brother is there, and my friend and thine 
-Descend and ascend with the bread and the wine. 


The bread of sweet thought and the wine of delight 13 
Feed the village of Felpham by day and by night, 
And at his own door the bless’d hermit does stand, 
Dispensing unceasing to all the wide land. 


Gilchrist, i. 149, 150, from a copy supplied to the biographer by Miss Den- 

man, Mrs. Flaxman’s sister. The poem, signed ‘W. Blake,’ is in a letter 

dated ‘H[ercules] B[uildings], Lambeth, 14 Sept. 1800,’ and signed 
‘ Catherine Blake,’ though obviously Blake’s own composition. 

7 turret] the turret of Hayley’s house: see note to I. 15. ir my] The 
italics are probably Gilchrist’s, other edd. print in roman. 15 William 
Hayley, Blake’s patron, constantly refers to himself as the ‘Hermit of 
Eartham’ or the ‘Hermit of the Turret’ in his letters to his friends. 


302 Poems from Letters 
ll 
To my Friend Butts I write I 
My first Vision of Light, 
On the yellow sands sitting. 
The Sun was Emitting 
His Glorious beams 5 
From Heaven’s high Streams. 
Over Sea, over Land, 
My Eyes did Expand 
Into regions of air, 
Away from all Care; 10 
Into regions of fire, 
Remote from Desire ; 
The Light of the Morning 
Heaven’s Mountains adorning : 
In particles bright, re: 
The jewels of Light 
Distinct shone & clear. 
Amaz’d & in fear 


I each particle gazéd, 
Astonish’d, Amazéd ; 20 


Written in two columns on the first and second pages of a letter dated 
‘Felpham, Oct’. 24, 1800,’ addressed to ‘Mr. Butts, Great Marlborough 
Street.’ (See Gilchrist, ii. 180, 181.) These verses are prefaced by the lines: 
‘Recieve from me a return of verses such as Felpham produces by me, tho’ 
not such as she produces by her Eldest Son ; however, such as they are, 
I cannot resist the temptation to send them to you.’ WMR, EY, and 
WBY entitle ‘To Mr. Butts.’ 

13-17 Cp. the stanzas in the verses beginning ‘Mock on, Mock on, 
Voltaire, Rousseau’ (MS. Book xli) :— 

‘And every sand becomes a Gem 
Reflected in the beams divine ; 

Blown back they blind the mocking eye, 
But still in Israel’s paths they shine. 


‘The Atoms of Democritus 

And Newton’s Particles of Light 

Are sands upon the Red sea shore 
Where Israel’s tents do shine so bright.’ 


19, 20 gazéd ... Amazéd] All edd. read gazed . .. amazed, ignoring 
Blake’s precise use of the spelling ‘éd’ when he intends the final syllable to 
be pronounced, 


Poems from Letters 30 


(SN) 


For each was a Man 
Human-form’d. Swift I ran, 
For they beckon’d to me, 
Remote by the Sea, 
Saying: ‘Each grain of Sand, 25 
Every Stone on the Land, 
Each rock & each hill, 
Each fountain & rill, 
Each herb & each tree, 
Mountain, hill, earth, & sea, 30 
Cloud, Meteor, & Star, 
Are Men Seen Afar.’ 
I stood in the Streams 
Of Heaven’s bright beams, 
And Saw Felpham sweet 35 
Beneath my bright feet, 
In soft Female charms ; 
And in her fair arms 
My Shadow I knew, 
And my wife’s shadow too, 40 
And My Sister, & Friend. 
We like Infants descend 
In our Shadows on Earth, 
Like a weak mortal birth. 
My Eyes, more & more, 45 
Like a Sea without shore, 
Continue Expanding, 
The Heavens commanding ; 
Till the Jewels of Light, 
i Heavenly Men beaming bright, 50 
f Appear’d as One Man, 
‘Who Complacent began 
My limbs to infold 
4 In his beams of bright gold; 
Like dross purg’d away 55 
All my mire & my clay. 
Soft consum’d in delight, 
In his bosom Sun-bright 
I remain’d. Soft he smil’d, 


le A ON Ly 


304 Poems from Letters 


And I heard his voice Mild, 60 
Saying: ‘This is My Fold, 

O thou Ram horn’d with gold, 

Who awakest from Sleep 

On the Sides of the Deep. 

On the Mountains around 65 
The roarings resound 

Of the lion & wolf, 

The loud Sea, & deep gulph. 

These are guards of My Fold, 

O thou Ram horn’d with gold!’ 70 
And the voice faded mild: 

I remain’d as a Child; 

All I ever had known 

Before me bright Shone: 

I saw you & your wife B 
By the fountains of life. 

Such the Vision to me 

Appear’d on the Sea. 


eco 


ill 
To Mrs. Butts 


Wife of the Friend of those I most revere, I 
Recieve this tribute from a Harp sincere ; 

Go on in Virtuous Seed sowing on Mold 

Of Human Vegetation, & Behold 

Your Harvest Springing to Eternal Life, 5 
Parent of Youthful Minds, & happy Wife! 


These lines, signed ‘W. B.,’ which the author hopes Mrs. Butts ‘ will 
excuse,’ conclude the letter from which the preceding poem is taken. 
4 Human Vegetation] Cp. the passage in Blake’s introduction to Jerusalem, 
chap. iv, ‘To the Christians’ :—‘ Imagination, the real & eternal World of 
which this Vegetable Universe is but a faint shadow, & in which we shall 


live in our Eternal or Imaginative Bodies when these Vegetable Mortal 
Bodies are no more,’ 


eo 


Poems from Letters 305 


1V 


With happiness stretch’d across the hills I 
In a cloud that dewy sweetness distills ; 

With a blue sky spread over with wings, 

And a mild Sun that mounts & sings; 


With trees & fields full of Fairy elves, 5 


And little devils who fight for themselves— 
Rememb’ring the Verses that Hayley sung 
When my heart knock’d against the root of my tongue— 


With Angels planted in Hawthorn bowers, 


And God himself in the passing hours ; 10 
With Silver Angels across my way, 


- And Golden demons that none can stay ; 


With my Father hovering upon the wind, 


_ And my Brother Robert just behind, 


And my Brother John, the evil one, 15 


In a black cloud making his mone,— 


Tho’ dead, they appear upon my path, 

Notwithstanding my terrible wrath ; 

They beg, they intreat, they drop their tears, 

Fill’d full of hopes, fill’d full of fears— 20 
With a thousand Angels upon the Wind, 

Pouring disconsolate from behind 

To drive them off, & before my way 

A frowning Thistle implores my stay. 

What to others a trifle appears 25 
Fills me full of smiles or tears ; 


These verses, written in two columns in a postscript to a letter dated 
‘Felpham, Nov' 22, 1802,’ Blake says ‘were Composed above a twelve- 
month ago while Walking from Felpham to Lavant to meet my Sister.’ 


_ Printed by all editors except Shepherd. WMR and EY entitle ‘Verses,’ 
_ WBY, ‘ Los the Terrible.’ 


3, 4 Cp. Jerusalem, f. 19, ll. 43, 44 :-— 
‘In a sweet moony night & silence that they had created, 
‘With a blue sky spread over with wings and a mild moon.’ 


" 4, 8 These two lines are written sideways in the margin, with the note :— 


‘These 2 lines were omitted when transcribing & ought to come in at x’ 
(i.e. after line 6, the position being also indicated by Blake’s catchword 


V9 ‘Rememb’ring’). 16 See note to ‘Mad Song’ (Poetical Sketches), |, 17. 


SAMPSON x 


306 Poems from Letters 


For double the vision my Eyes do see, 

And a double vision is always with me. 

With my inward Eye, ’tis an old Man grey, 

With my outward, a Thistle across my way. 30 

‘If thou goest back,’ the thistle said, 

‘Thou art to endless woe betray’d ; 

For here does Theotormon lower, 

And here is Enitharmon’s bower ; 

And Los the terrible thus hath sworn, 35 

Because thou backward dost return, 

Poverty, Envy, old age, & fear, 

Shall bring thy Wife upon a bier; 

And Butts shall give what Fuseli gave, 

A dark black Rock & a gloomy Cave.’ 40 
27 See note tol. 87. 33 Theotormon, first mentioned in Visions of the 


Daughters of Albion (1793), is the third of the ‘Four Sons of Jerusalem that 
never were Generated’ (Jerusalem, f. 71, 1. 50), elsewhere referred to 


as the sons of Los. He is described as ‘fill’d with care’ (Milton, f. 23, 


]. 12) and associated with storms and weeping (Jerusalem, f. 16, 1. 8, and 
Visions of the Daughters of Albion, passim). 34 ‘lovely Enitharmon’ 
(Jerusalem, f. 10, 1. 42), the emanation of Los’ (¢did., f. 30, ll. 3, 4) and one 
of the daughters of Albion (bid. f. 42, 1. 15), symbolizes space ; see Milton, 
f, 23, 1. 68 :-— 
‘Los is by mortals nam’d Time, Enitharmon is nam’d Space.’ 
35 ‘Los... the Vehicular Form of strong Urthona’ (Jerusalem, f. 53, 1. 1), 
one of the Four Zoas (bid. f. 47, 1. 4), is depicted as a blacksmith working 
at his furnace. Los is Time (see note to 1. 34), the spirit of prophecy 
and inspiration (Jerusalem, f. 8, 1. 17, and f. go, 1. 39). In Blake’s reference 
to his own ‘terrible wrath’ (1. 18) he appears to identify himself with Los 
in his capacity of prophet and seer. The name Los, as Mr. Oliver Madox- 
Brown conjectured, is probably a transposition of Sol (ep. Il. 55-57, and 
the passage from Mz/ton quoted.in the footnote). 39, 40 This allusion is 
only to be understood by a knowledge of one of the chief articles of Blake’s 
faith in ethics and art, as to the supreme importance of cultivating and 
recognizing what he terms ‘Minute Particulars,’ meaning thereby those 
personal characteristics which constitute the identity of the individual. 
See Jerusalem, f. 69, 1. 42 :—‘ Every Minute Particular is Holy’; #bid. f. 31, 
Ml. 44-46 :-— 
‘. .. thine own Minute Particulars 
Belong to God alone, and all thy little ones are holy, 
They are of Faith, & not of Demonstration’; 
thid. f. 43, ll. 16-23 :— 
‘. . . Heavens over Hells 
Brooding in holy hypocritic lust, drinking the cries of pain 
From howling victims of Law; building Heavens Twenty-seven-fold, 


Poems from Letters 307 


I struck the Thistle with my foot, 

And broke him up from his delving root. 

‘Must the duties of life each other cross? 

Must every joy be dung & dross? 

Must my dear Butts feel cold neglect 45 
Because I give Hayley his due respect ? 

Must Flaxman look upon me as wild, 

And all my friends be with doubts beguil’d? 

Must my Wife live in my Sister’s bane, 

Or my sister survive on my Love’s pain? 50 
The curses of Los, the terrible shade, 

And his dismal terrors make me afraid.’ 


So I spoke, & struck in my wrath 

The old man weltering upon my path. 

Then Los appear’d in all his power: 55 
In the Sun he appear’d, descending before 


Swell’d & bloated General Forms repugnant to the Divine 

Humanity, who is the Only General and Universal Form, 

To which all Lineaments tend, & seek with love & sympathy. 

All broad & general principles belong to benevolence 

Who protects minute particulars, every one in their own identity’ ; 
ibid. f. 55, ll. 60-64 :— 

‘He who would do good to another must do it in Minute Particulars. 
General Good is the plea of the scoundrel, hypocrite, & flatterer ; 
For Art & Science cannot exist but in minutely organized Particulars, 
And not in generalizing Demonstrations of the Rational Power. 
The Infinite alone resides in Definite & Determinate Identity.’ 


The Rock and the Cave, constantly recurring figures in Blake’s later 
Prophetic Books, are invariably used as symbols of the state opposed 
to Jerusalem (or the life of spiritual liberty and imagination), in which 
‘Minute Particulars’ of personal identity are crushed under the weight 
of reason and natural religion. This is rendered clear by the passage 
in Jerusalem, f. 43, ll. 56-62 :— 


‘It is easy to acknowledge a man to be great & good, while we 
Derogate from him in the. trifles & small articles of that goodness, 
Those alone are his friends who admire his minutest powers. 
Instead of Albion’s lovely mountains, & the curtains of Jerusalem, 

I see a Cave, a Rock, a Tree deadly and poisonous, unimaginative : 
Instead of the Mutual Forgivenesses, the Minute Particulars, I see 
Pits of bitumen ever burning.’ 


47 Cp. MS. Book liii and lv. 49 Cp. note to ‘ The Grey Monk,’ 1. 16, 
Pickering MS. 


xX 2 


308 Poems from Letters 


My face in fierce flames; in my double sight 
’Twas outward a Sun, inward Los in his might. 
‘My hands are labour’d day & night, 

And Ease comes never in my sight. 

My Wife has no indulgence given 

Except what comes to her from heaven. 

We eat little, we drink less, 

This Earth breeds not our happiness. 
Another Sun feeds our life’s streams, 

We are not warméd with thy beams ; 

Thou measurest not the Time to me, 

Nor yet the Space that I do see ; 

My Mind is not with thy light array’d, 

Thy terrors shall not make me afraid.’ 


When I had my Defiance given, 

The Sun stood trembling in heaven ; 

The Moon, that glow’d remote below, 

Became leprous & white as snow ; 

And every Soul of men on the Earth 

Felt affliction, & sorrow, & sickness, & dearth. 
Los flam’d in my path, & the Sun was hot 


60 


65 


With the bows of my Mind & the Arrows of Thought. 


55-58 Cp. Milton, f. 20, ll. 6-25 :— 


“And Los behind me stood, a terrible flaming Sun, just close 


Behind my back. I turned round in terror, and behold, 
Los stood in that fierce glowing fire... 
And I became One Man with him arising in my strength. 


’Twas too late now to recede. Los had entered into my soul : 
His terrors now posses’d me whole: I arose in fury & strength. 
‘I am that Shadowy Prophet who, Six Thousand Years ago, 

Fell from my station in the Eternal bosom. Six Thousand Years 


Are finish’d. I return: both Time & Space obey my will, 


I, in Six Thousand Years, walk up and down; for not one Moment 


Of Time is lost, nor one Event of Space unpermanent ; 
But all remain: every fabric of Six Thousand Years 
Remains permanent, tho’ on the Earth, where Satan 

Fell and was cut off, all things vanish & are seen no more. 


They vanish not from me & mine: we guard them first & last : 


The generations of men run on in the tide of Time, 


But leave their destin’d lineaments permanent for ever & ever.’ 


60 Ease] rest Swinb. 75 men] man all edd. 78 the Arrows] with 


arrows Swinb. 


ee 


! 
§ 
; 


ee 


Poems from Letters 309 


My bowstring fierce with Ardour breathes ; 

My arrows glow in their golden sheaves ; 80 
My brothers & father march before; 

The heavens drop with human gore. 


Now I a fourfold vision see, 
And a fourfold vision is given to me; 


Tis fourfold in my supreme delight, 85 
And threefold in soft Beulah’s night, 
81 brothers] brother all edd. 85 Fourfold—the basic idea of Blake’s 


symbolic system, which abounds in fourfold correspondences—always conveys 
the idea of perfection and harmony. Cp. Jerusalem, f. 98, and the later Pro- 
phetic Books, passim. 86 Beulah] In Blake’s mythology the four states 
of man are Beulah, Alla, Al-Ulro, and Or-Ulro. Cp. Milton, f. 34, ll. 8-11 :-— 

‘And the Four States of Humanity in its Repose 

Were shewed them. First of Beulah a most pleasant Sleep 

On Couches soft with mild music tended by Flowers of Beulah, 

Sweet Female forms winged or floating in the air spontaneous.’ 
See also The Four Zoas, Night i, ll, 197-203 :— 

‘There is from Great Eternity a mild & pleasant rest 

Nam’d Beulah, a Soft Moony Universe, feminine, lovely, 

Pure, mild & Gentle, given in Mercy to those who sleep, 

Eternally Created by the Lamb of God around 

On all sides, within & without the Universal Man. 

The Daughters of Beulah follow Sleepers in all their Dreams, 

Creating Spaces, lest they fall into Eternal Death,’ 
See also'the opening lines of the second book of Milton :— 

‘There is a place where Contrarieties are equally True. 

This place is called Beulah: It is a pleasant lovely Shadow 

Where no dispute can come, Because of those who Sleep. 

Into this place the Sons & Daughters of Ololon descended 

With solemn mourning into Beulah’s moony shades & hills, 

Weeping for Milton: mute wonder held the Daughters of Beulah, 

Enraptur’d with affection sweet and mild benevolence. 

Beulah is evermore Created around Eternity : appearing 

To the Inhabitants of Eden around them on all sides. 

But Beulah to its Inhabitants appears, within each district, 

As the belovéd infant in his mother’s bosom, round incircled 

With arms of love & pity & sweet compassion. But to 

The Sons of Eden, the moony habitations of Beulah 

Are from Great Eternity a mild & pleasant Rest. 

And it is thus Created. Lo! the Eternal Great Humanity, 

To whom be Glory & Dominion, Evermore, Amen! 

Walks among all his awful Family, seen in every face, 

As the breath of the Almighty : such are the words of man to man, 

In the great Wars of Eternity, in fury of Poetic Inspiration, 

To build the Universe stupendous, Mental forms Creating. 


310 Poems from Letters 


And twofold Always. May God us keep 
From Single vision, & Newton’s sleep! 


87 twofold] By ‘twofold’ is meant man’s reason and imagination in a state 
of harmony, or, in Blake’s own language, not ‘divided’ into ‘spectre’ and 
‘emanation.’ Cp. ll. 27-30, where the ‘inward eye’ of imagination is 
contrasted with the ‘ outward eye’ of reason, a comparison repeated and 
emphasized in a couplet of ‘The Everlasting Gospel,’ y’, Hl. 103, 104 :— 

‘And leads you to believe a lie 
When you see with, not through, the eye’: 
for ‘spectre’ and ‘emanation’ see introductory note to MS. Book xxxvil. 
88 Cp. Jerusalem, f. 53, I. 10, 1x :— 
‘ incomprehensible 
To the Vegetated Mortal Eye’s perverted & single vision 


[i. e. to reason separated from imagination]. 


Vv 


O why was I born with a different face? I 
Why was I not born like the rest of my race? 
When I look, each one starts; when I speak, I offend ; 
Then I’m silent & passive, & lose every Friend. 


Then my verse I dishonour, My pictures despise ; 5 
My person degrade, & my temper chastise ; 

And the pen is my terror, the pencil my shame; 

All my Talents I bury, and dead is my Fame. 


I am either too low, or.too highly priz’d; 9 
When Elate ’'m Envy’d, When Meek I’m despis’d. 


In a letter addressed to ‘M*. Butts Gr. Marlborough St London’ dated 
‘Felpham, August 16, 1803,’ in which Blake describes the circumstances 
which led to his trial for high treason (see Gilchrist’s Li, i, chap. xix), pre- 
faced by ‘ Give me your advice in my perilous adventure : burn what I have 
peevishly written about my friend. I have been very much degraded 
& injuriously treated; but, if it all arise from my own fault, I ought to 
blame myself.’ Printed by DGR, EY, and WMR, the latter with the 
title ‘ Verses.’ 

1, 2 See note to ‘ Mary,’ ll. 21, 22, Pickering MS. 3 When] If EY. 
to I’m Envy’d] I am envied WMR, EY. 


Poems from Letters 311 


. 


vl 


A fairy leapt upon my knee I 
Singing and dancing merrily ; 

% I said, ‘Thou thing of patches, rings, 
Pins, necklaces, and such-like things, 
Disgracer of the female form, 

Thou paltry, gilded, poisonous worm!’ 
Weeping, he fell upon my thigh, 

And thus in tears did soft reply: 
‘Knowest thou not, O fairies’ lord! 9 
How much by us contemned, abhorred, 

Whatever hides the female form 

Ag That cannot bear the mortal storm? 

Therefore in pity still we give £3 

Our lives to make the female live; 

And what would turn into disease 

We turn to what will joy and please.’ 


om 


Swinburne’s text (pp. 143, 144, ote), ‘ copied from a loose scrap of paper, 
on the back of which is a pencilled sketch of Hercules throttling the serpents, 
whose twisted limbs make a sort of spiral cradle around and above the child’s 
triumphant figure : an attendant, naked, falls back in terror with sharp recoil 
of drawn-up limbs; Alemene and Amphitryon watch the struggle in silence, 
he grasping her hand.’ 

| 6 paltry] pretty EY. 9g O} EY omit. 


; 
j 
fe 


DEDICATION: 


OF 


BLAKE'S ILLUSTRATIONS 
OF 


BLAIRS “GRAVE 


Published May 1st, 1808 


Written circa 1806-1807 


PREFACE 


BLAKE'S Ji/ustrations of Blair’s Grave is the only work 
which, during his lifetime, achieved any degree of popu- 
larity, or brought his name prominently before the public. 
The edition, widely advertised by its publisher, R. H. 
Cromek, appeared with the recommendations of West, 
Flaxman, Fuseli, and others, and the list of subscribers 
alone considerably exceeded five hundred. Blake’s twelve 
designs or ‘inventions’ were purchased by Cromek for 
the sum of twenty guineas, on the understanding that the 
engraving of the plates was also to be entrusted to the 
artist. Cromek, however, violating this unwritten agree- 
ment, employed instead a talented pupil of Bartolozzi’s, 
Louis Schiavonetti—an action resented by Blake, whose 
strong feeling with regard to this transaction is evidenced in 
several of the epigrams in the Rossetti MS. 

The dedication of this work to Queen Charlotte, which is 
printed in ordinary type on the recto of the leaf following 
the title-page, was to have formed an additional engraved 
plate with a vignette of Blake’s invention. The design 
was actually prepared, and submitted by the artist to 
Cromek, but was returned by the latter upon grounds 
sufficiently clearly stated in his letter dated May, 1807. 
This letter, which was first printed in the Gentleman’s 
Magazine, February, 1852, and reprinted by Gilchrist 
(i. 205-207), begins: ‘Sir, I rec’4, not witht great surprise, 
your letter demanding four guineas for the sketched vignette 
ded" to the Queen. I have returned the drawing with this 
note, and I will briefly state my reasons for so doing. In 
the first place, I do not think it merits the price you affix 
to it, wuder any circumstances. In the next place, I never 
had the remotest suspicion that you‘ for a moment enter- 
tain the idea of writing me to supply money to create an 
honour in w® I cannot possibly participate. The Queen 
allowed you, not me, to dedicate the work to her! The 
honour w* have been yours exclus’; but that you might 


° t 
q 


citings a ae Ne PR LACT R Soe ete NSE NI Ne OE TEN AOR ne ll Oe ee ~ msi a ans ase AR 


not be deprived of any advantage likely to contribute to — 
your reputation, I was willing to pay Mr. Schiavonetti ten — 


guineas for etching a plate from the drawing in question.’ 


The Grave 315 


The original design, preserved in the British Museum, is 
thus described by Mr. W. M. Rossetti in his ‘ Annotated 


Lists of Blake’s Paintings, Drawings, and Engravings,’ 


List I, no. 70 (Gilchrist, ii. 209): ‘Executed with most 
special care and completeness in pale semi-neutral tints ; 
a very beautiful work. The subject is the deliverance of 
the Human Soul from Death, and the Ascension of the 


_ Just. Above, are two angels, one sheathing the sword, 


another holding the unequally-poised balance and a sealed 
roll ; a third descends with a key to unlock the fetters of 
the grave. A mother with her adolescent and infant family 
rises to the left; a man and children to the right, their 


~ chains riven, clasp their upraised hands in thankfulness for 
_ the great deliverance. Between the upper angels a space is 


7 


4 


} 
4 
a 


left for the inscription.’ 


To the Queen 


The Door of Death is made of Gold, 
That Mortal Eyes cannot behold ; 

But, when the Mortal Eyes are clos’d, 
And cold and pale the Limbs repos’d, 
The Soul awakes; and, wond’ring, sees 
In her mild Hand the golden Keys: 
The Grave is Heaven’s golden Gate, 
And rich and poor around it wait ; 

O Shepherdess of England’s Fold, 
Behold this Gate of Pearl and Gold! 


To dedicate to England’s Queen 
The Visions that my Soul has seen, 
And, by Her kind permission, bring 
What I have borne on solemn Wing, 
From the vast regions of the Grave, 
Before Her Throne my Wings I wave ; 
Bowing before my Sov’reign’s Feet, 
‘The Grave produc’d these Blossoms sweet 
In mild repose from Earthly strife ; 
The Blossoms of Eternal Life!’ 


Blair’s Grave, 1808. The Dedication is signed ‘ William Blake.’ 
14 solemn] silken Wilk., Shep. I5 regions] region Wilk., Shep. ~ 


~ EPIGRAMS 


FROM 


BLAKE'S ANNOTATED COPY OF 
a REYNOLDS’ WORKS 


circa 1808 


PREFACE TO THE EPIGRAMS 


THE nine epigrams which follow are found interspersed 
among a number of prose annotations to Sir Joshua 
Reynolds’ ‘Discourses, written in Blake’s autograph on 
the margins of the first volume of his copy of Reynolds’ 
Works (2nd edition, 1798). 

These marginal notes were made at first in pencil, and 
afterwards copied over and supplemented in ink. Accord- 
ing to Ellis and Yeats (ii. 315) there ‘can be no doubt that 
at the time Blake was writing extracts from the ‘ Discourses’ 
to Butts, and reconsidering, as he says, all his thoughts on 
art, he was looking over his pencilled notes and adding to 
them.’ His only reference, however, to Reynolds is in 
a letter to Mr. Butts dated Felpham, November 2, 1802, 
in which he quotes with approval a passage from the 
‘Discourses, adding, ‘So says Sir Joshua, and So say I.’ 
Blake’s later and more prejudiced view of the President of 
the Academy is forcibly expressed in his note on the title- 
page: ‘This Man was Hired to Depress Art. This is the 
Opinion of Will. Blake: my Proofs of this Opinion are 
given in the following Notes.’ These epigrams, moreover, 
are precisely of the same order as those scattered through 
the pages of the later part of the Rossetti MS. The 
annotations in Blake’s Reynolds all refer to the first eight 
‘Discourses’ contained in the first volume of the Works, 
while those on the following ‘ Discourses’ are jotted down 
in the MS. Book. As the latter are mixed with verses 
referring to his quarrel with Cromek and Stothard the 
whole of the epigrams may be dated circa 1808, those 
written in the copy of Reynolds being probably rather the 
earlier of the two. 

Gilchrist, on ‘intrinsic evidence,’ attributes the annota- 
tions and epigrams in the ‘ Discourses’ to the year 1820. 
This is obviously a conclusion from the words ‘Aged 


ee ee Ee 


SDs aap 2x 


ee ee 


ay 


Pyne ea 


a Nie sr Sg aR ER OE Tanai ath ha 


Sixty-three’ in the lines beginning, ‘When Nations grow 
Old’ Whatever Blake may have meant by this cryptic © 


saying, it certainly cannot refer to his own age at the time rE 


£- pigrams 319 


of writing. A very similar reference to being born old 
occurs in one of his epigrams in the MS. Book written 
about the same period :— ' 


‘S[tothard] in childhood, upon the nursery floor, 
as extreme old and most extremely poor: 
He has grown old and rich and what he will: 

He is extreme old and extreme poor still. 


My text is taken from Blake’s annotated copy of Reynolds, 
which is now preserved in the British Museum. 


if 
4 
- 

i 
af 
‘sal 
ee 
fs 


ea 


EPIGRAMS 
i 
Advice of the Popes who sine oo 
Age of Rafael 


Degrade first the Arts if you'd Mankind Degrade, 

Hire Idiots to Paint with cold light & hot shade, 

Give high Price for the worst, leave the best in disgrace, 
And with Labours of Ignorance fill every place. 


Reynolds, vol. i, written at foot of title-page. 

Gil. i. 257, EY ii. 318 (veading ‘to the popes who succeeded to the age 
of Rafail ’). 

I you’d] you would Gil. 2 hot] not EY. 4 Labours of Ignorance] 
labour of idleness Gil. 


il 
Some look to see the sweet Outlines, 
And beauteous Forms that Love does wear; 


Some look to find-out Patches, Paint, 
Bracelets & Stays & Powder’d Hair. 


Reynolds, vol. i, p. xv. Blake’s comment on Sir Joshua Reynolds’ account 
of his disappointment at his first impressions of Raphael. The prose passage _ 


preceding these lines runs :—‘ Men who have been Educated with Works of _ 


Venetian Artists under their Eyes Cannot see Rafael, unless they are born 
with Determinate Organs. I am happy I cannot say that Rafael Ever was 
from my Earliest Childhood hidden from Me. I saw & I knew immediately 
the difference between Rafael & Rubens,’ Gil. i, 259, WMR (‘ Epig.’ It), 
EY ii. 320. 


Lipigrams 321 


111 


When France got free, Europe, ’twixt fools & Knaves, 
Were Savage first to France, & after—Slaves. 


Reynolds, vol. i, p. ciii. Suggested by the following footnote in Malone’s 
memoir of Reynolds prefixed to the Discourses :—‘How justly may we 
apply the immediately following lines of the same great Poet to those 
demagogues among us, who since the era above mentioned, have not only on 
all occasions gratuitously pleaded the cause of the enemies of their country 
- with the zeal of fee’d advocates, but by every other mode incessantly 

endeavoured to debase and assimilate this free and happy country to the 

_ model of the ferocious and enslaved Republick of France !— 
‘These Adam-wits, too fortunately free, 

Began to dream they wanted liberty ; 

And when no rule, no precedent was found 

Of men, by laws less circumscribed and bound, 

They led their wild desires to woods and caves, 

And thought that all but savaces were slaves.’’’ 


This couplet is printed only by EY ii. 323. 


1V 


When S?* Joshua Reynolds died 

AH Nature was degraded ; 

The King drop’d a tear into the Queen’s Ear, 
} And all his Pictures Faded. 


Reynolds, vol. i, p. cix, below the account of Reynolds’ death. Only 
in Gil. i, 259 and EY ii. 323. Cf. MS. Book xlvi. 
3 The... Ear] Gil. prints as two lines, 


V 


When Nations grow Old, the Arts grow Cold, 
And Commerce settles on every Tree; 
And the Poor & the Old can live upon Gold, 
For all are Born Poor, Aged Sixty-three. 
Reynolds, vol. i, p. [iv], beneath Reynolds’ dedicatory letter to the 


Members of the Royal Academy and following Blake’s prose comment :— 
‘The Rich Men of England form themselves into a society to Sell & Not to 


SAMPSON Y 


322 _ ~Lipigrams 


Buy Pictures. The Artist who does not throw his Contempt on such Trading 
Exhibitions, does not know either his own Interest or his Duty.’ Gil. i. 
258, 259, WMR (‘Epig. xix’), EY ii. 324. 

1 When... Cold] Gil. and WMR print as two lines. 3 And... 
Gold] Gil. and WMR print as two lines. 4 Aged Sixty-three] Gil. and 
WMR print as a separate line, in italics. See Introduction. 


vl 


On the Venetian Painter 


He makes the Lame to walk, we all agree, 
But then he Strives to blind all who can see. 


Reynolds, vol. i, p. 98. Suggested by the following passage in the fourth 
Discourse :—‘ By this it appears that the principal attention of the Venetian 
painters, in the opinion of Michael Angelo, seemed to be engrossed by the 
study of colours, to the neglect of the deal beauty of form, or propriety 
of expression. But if general censure was given to that school from the — 
sight of a picture of Titian, how much more heavily and more justly would 
the censure fall on Paolo Veronese, and more especially on Tintoret?’ 
Blake prefaces his couplet by the note :—‘ Venetian attention is to a Con- 
tempt & Neglect of Form Itself, & tothe Destruction of all Form or Outline, 
Purposely & Intentionally. As if Mich. Ang. had seen but One Picture of 
Titian! Mich. Ang. knew & despised all that Titian could do.’ 

Gil. i. 264, WMR (‘ Epig.’ 1v), EY ii. 


vil 
A pair of Stays to mend the Shape 
Of crooked Humpy Woman, 


Put on, O Venus; now thou art 
Quite a Venetian Roman. 


Reynolds, vol. i, p.99. Following Blake’s prose note :—‘ If the Venetian’s j 


Outline was Right, his Shadows would destroy it & deform its appearance. 


15 
Printed only by EY ii. 333. } 


— 


8 RP A A my Meth 


ys 


SA li 


£; ‘pierams gas 


vill 


Venetian! all thy Colouring is no more 
Than Boulster’d Plasters on a Crooked Whore. 


Reynolds, vol. i, p. 100. Suggested by the following passage in the fourth 
Discourse :—‘¥For my own part, when I speak of the Venetian painters, 
I wish to be understood to mean Paolo Veronese and Tintoret, to the 
exclusion of Titian ; for though his style is not so pure as that of many 
other of the Italian school, yet there is a sort of senatorial dignity about him, 
which, however awkward in his imitators, seems to become him exceedingly.’ 
Blake’s note on this is :—‘ Titian, as well as the other Venetians, so far from 
Senatorial Dignity appear to me to give always the Characters of Vulgar 
Stupidity. Why should Titian and the Venetians be Named in a Discourse 
on Art? Such Idiots are not Artists ’—followed by the present couplet. 

Printed only by EY ii. 333. 


1X 


O Reader, behold the Philosopher’s grave! 
He was born quite a Fool, but he died quite a Knave. 


Reynolds, vol. i, p. 147. Suggested by the passage in the sixth Dis- 
course :—* Those who have undertaken to write on our art and have 
represented it as a kind of iuspiration, as a gift bestowed upon peculiar 
favourites at their birth, seem to insure a much more favourable disposition 
from their readers, and have a much more captivating and liberal air, than 
he who attempts to examine, coldly, whether there are any means by which 
this art may be acquired.’ This couplet follows Blake’s prose note :— 


' £Bacon’s philosophy has Destroy’d true Art & Science. The Man who says 


that the Genius is not Born but Taught, is a Knave.’ 
_ Printed only by EY ii. 337. 


Y2 


POEMS. 


FROM 


i 


- - THE «PROPHETIC BOOKS’ 


1789-180- 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL PREFACE 


TO 


POEMS FROM THE ‘PROPHETIC BOOKS’ 


IN the present section I group together the lyrical poems 
from the works commonly known as the ‘ Prophetic Books.’ 
This name, first employed by Gilchrist to describe Blake’s 
Visionary Writings, is nowhere used by the poet himself, 
though he refers to them as ‘inspired’ or ‘dictated,’ and 
prefixes to two of the number the sub-title ‘A Prophecy.’ 

The Prophetic Books fall under a category of their own. 
Either more or less than literature according to the point of 
view of the reader, it is impossible to subject them to any 
ordinary standard of criticism without ignoring the primary 
intention of the author. Broadly epic in character, they 
are in content a verbal and pictorial rendering of Blake’s 
visions, a storehouse of his mythology, and a fervent 
exposition of his mystical gospel. In the earlier of these 
writings symbolism is wholly, or almost wholly, absent ; in 
the later books nearly every phrase, name, and epithet must 
be interpreted symbolically. | 

The greater number of the Prophetic Books are written 
in a variety of forms of free verse. One book, The Marriage 
of Heaven and Fell, is almost entirely in prose; the others 
are composed in different measures, varying from the semi- 
rhythmic Ossianic verses of 77rze/ to the short irregular metre 
of Akania or the pseudo-hexameters of Ferusalem. The 


latter may possibly have been suggested to Blake’s ear by 


the passages from Klopstock’s Messiah which Hayley read 
and translated to him during his stay at Felpham. In 
Blake’s ‘ Address to the Public ’ which serves as Introduction 
to the first chapter of Ferusalem, he furnishes, in imitation 
of Milton, the following account of the measure in which the 
poem is written :— 


‘We who dwell on Earth can do nothing of ourselves: 


every thing is conducted by Spirits, no less than Digestion 
or Sleep. 


_ 


— a 


it De NL Pe 


Fe ee ee 


nt init eau Sere tae ee SSeS a AIR Lesa Bit a cpm Ioip Fat AER 


nape Te ee 


Prophetic Books 337 


‘When this verse was first dictated to me, I consider’d 
a Monotonous Cadence, like that used by Milton & 
Shakspeare & all writers of English Blank Verse derived 
from the modern bondage of Rhyming, to be a necessary 
and indispensible part of Verse. But I soon found that, in 
the mouth of a true Orator, such monotony was not only 
awkward, but as much a bondage as rhyme itself. I there- 
fore have produced a variety in every line, both of cadences 
& number of syllables. “Every word and every letter is 
studied and put into its fit place: the terrific numbers are 
reserved for the terrific parts, the mild & gentle for the mild 
& gentle parts, and the prosaic for inferior parts: all are 
necessary to each other. Poetry Fetter’d Fetters the 
Human Race! Nations are Destroy’d or Flourish in pro- 
portion as Their Poetry, Painting, and Music are Destroy’d 
or Flourish! The Primeval State of Man was Wisdom, Art, 


and Science!’ 


The greater number of the Prophetic Books were: pro- 
duced by the method of relief engraving which Blake first 
employed in the Songs of Innocence. The labour of this 
must have been very great, and probably for this reason in 
two works, The Book of Los and Ahania, both published 
in 1795, the artist appears to have resorted to the simpler 
process of ordinary etching. The effect, however, is less 
grand, and in Blake’s next books, M//ton and Ferusalem, he 
reverted to his original method. In the works engraved in 
relief, pictorial design plays an increasingly prominent part, 
ceasing to be mere illustration as in the Songs of Innocence, 
and developing into a species of secondary symbolism, 
complementary to and scarcely less important than the 
text itself. 

A few of these engraved Prophetic Books are known to 
us by two or three examples only, while one at least would 
appear to have been lost or destroyed. This is the ‘ work 
called Outhoor, included in a list of books by Blake, offered 
for sale by his widow to a Mr. Ferguson (Gil. ii. 262). No 
copy is known to exist. 

Other of the Visionary Writings were never engraved. 
Two of these, Zzrzel and The Four Zoas, survive in MS. ; 
but by far the greater number were destroyed, on religious 
grounds, by Frederick Tatham, an ‘ Angel’ of the Irvingite 
church, into whose hands they passed after the death of 
Mrs. Blake. A MS. attributed to Blake, forming part 
of the Lakelands Library of Mr. W. H. Crawford, was sold 
at Sotheby’s in March, 1891. This MS., which was 


328 Prophetic Books 


purchased by Mr. Quaritch, was catalogued— Blake (W.) 
Angels and Devils, autograph manuscript, containing poems, 
inscriptions to the 7 sections, and 34 original drawings by 
this celebrated artist, neatly mounted on cartridge paper, 
cf. 4°” I am informed by Mr. Quaritch that the MS. was 
proved to be not by Blake ; it was put up again at Sotheby's, 
and resold for a small sum. 

Few of Blake’s editors have endeavoured to grapple with 
the difficulties of the Prophetic Books. In the absence, 
indeed, of any adequate apparatus for the study of his text, 
notably through the want of legible and properly indexed 
reprints, and of a concordance displaying in chronological 
sequence the names, words, and phrases symbolically used, 
any attempt at interpretation must necessarily be of a some- 
what tentative character. An initial step towards supplying 
the former want has been taken by Messrs. Russell and 
Maclagan, who print Ferusalem with a brief introduction, 
and an index which, however, is too incomplete to be of any 
real utility. In the exegetical field the only important 
names are those of Swinburne and Messrs. Ellis and Yeats. 
Swinburne’s Critical Essay (1868) still remains the greatest 
and most readable introduction to the Prophetic Books. 
The latter editors, in their three-volume edition of Blake, 
devote much space to their theory of his symbolic system, 
and paraphrased commentaries of the different books. 
The value of their work, in many ways helpful and sugges- 
tive, is somewhat lessened by the omission of references to 
the passages upon which their conclusions are based, and 
by the introduction of private opinions not drawn from 
Blake’s writings. 

In the following list of the Prophetic Books the term is 
interpreted in its broader sense to include some of the 
earlier writings in which the mythological element is not 
very prominent. I append also, under the heading Dog- 
matic Writings, descriptions of two small early works, both 
entitled There is no Natural Religion, and two of the so- 
called ‘Sibylline Leaves.’ The former consist of a series 
of propositions couched in purely abstract terms, the latter 
being small leaflets treating of art and classic poetry. 
Strictly speaking, as my introduction and footnotes to that 


poem show, ‘The Keys of the Gates,’ a sequel to The Gates — 


of Paradise, should also be accounted one of the Prophetic 
Books. 


t 


ep LOC ATS 


Ae Ft mic a Dn ete tye 2 


spicing htt Bee Tg aie ee Bisa aS OTS ISN AON Ee RE an 28 FEE 


nh 


re 


siftsesie 


I 
EARLIER WORKS 


(Characterized by little or no symbolism, but 
anticipatory to some extent of the Prophetic 
Books proper) 

I. Seven-Page MS., circa 1777-1783. 


This extremely early autograph MS. evidently belongs to the same period 
as ‘Contemplation,’ ‘The Couch of Death,’ and a few other of the last 


_ pieces in Blake’s Poetical Sketches. 1 have therefore dated it as falling 


between the year 1777 (when, according to Mathew’s ‘Advertisement,’ 
the last pieces in that volume were written) and 1783, the year in which 
the book was printed. The MS., which is incomplete, consists of four 


leaves of crown 8vo paper, 745 inches, the verso of the last leaf being 


blank. There is no dated watermark. These leaves are now mounted 
upon rather larger paper, on the outer cover of which is written ‘7 (seven) 
Pages MS.: The handwriting of William Blake.’ The MS. is plainly 
written in ink, with a few deletions, and ink and pencil corrections and 
additions. It contains two pieces, the first of which begins imperfectly 
in the middle of a poem. Both are written straightforwardly as prose, 
the division into metrical lines being marked in red ink by Mr. W. M. 
Rossetti, its former owner. There is also a red ink note of Mr. Rossetti’s, 
indicating where two of Blake’s afterthoughts should be inserted. 

The First Piece begins (imperfectly) (p. [1]): ‘then She bore Pale desire, 
father of Curiosity, | a Virgin ever young. And after Leaden Sloth, | from 
whom came Ignorance, who brought forth | wonder. These are the Gods 


which came from | fear—[interpolated for Gods like these nor male nor 


female are,| but Single Pregnate; or, if they list, together ming| ling 
bring forth mighty powers—] She knew them not; yet they all war 
with | Shame, and Strengthen her weak arm.’ 

The First Piece ends (p.[5]): ‘Go! see the City— | friends Join’d Hand in 
Hand: Go! see the Natu|ral tie of flesh & blood: Go! see, more 


strong, | the ties of marriage love; thou Scarce Shalt | find but Self love 
_ Stands Between,’ 


The Second Piece begins (p. [6]): ‘“ Woe,” cried the muse, tears started at 


' the Sound, Grief perch’d | upon my brow, and thought Embrac’d Her. 
_ ‘What does this | mean,” I cried, ‘‘when all around Summer hath spred 


her | Plumes, and tunes her Notes ? When Buxom Joy | doth fan his wings, 


_ & Golden Pleasures Beam around my | head, why, Grief, dost thou 


_s 


accost me?”’ 
The Second Piece ends (p. [6], |. 22) : ‘“ O’er yonder lake | the winds their 


330 Prophetic Books | 


Sad Complainings bear for Conrade lost, | untimely lost, thy Conrade once, — 
When living, thee I | lov’d even unto Death; now Dead, I'll guard thee 
from | approaching ill. farewell, my time is gone.” it Said | no more, 
but vanished ever from my Sight.’ 
On p. [7] are two passages belonging to the first piece, marked for — 
insertion on p. [4]. | 
The whole of the first fragment has been printed by Mr. W. M. Rossetti 
in the Monthly Review (August, 1903, vol. xii, pp. 123-129), divided into j 
metrical lines by the editor, who entitles the poem ‘The Passions.’ On 
grounds of the character of the handwriting Mr. Rossetti ascribes this piece 
to a ‘rather early date in [Blake’s] career—say 1785, when he was twenty- 4 
eight years of age, or even before that.’ 
I owe the above description to the courtesy of Signora Rossetti Angeli, . 
who has been kind enough to lend me the original MS. : 
i 
: 
: 
4 


g. Tiriel. Autograph MS., circa 1788-1789. 


Neatly written, though with several deletions, corrections, and additions, 
in Blake’s earlier hand, upon eight leaves of foolscap quarto paper 8} x 6% 
inches. Written upon both sides of the leaf, the verso of f. 8 blank. Each 
section of the poem, headed by arabic numerals 1-8, begins at the top 
of a new page. There is no date on the watermark of the paper. In | 
the original blue-grey paper cover bearing the inscription in Blake’s : 
autograph, ‘ Tiriel | M. S. by Mr. Blake.’ ! 

This MS., formerly the property of Mrs. Gilchrist, and now in the j 
possession of Mr. B. Quaritch, was first printed by Mr. W. M. Rossetti q 
in his ‘ Aldine edition’ (1874). Its correct place, he conceives, would ‘ have i 
seen just before or just after Zhel.’ It is evidently just before, for an erased i 
passage on the verso of f. 7 contains the line: ‘Can wisdom be put in ~ 
a silver rod, or love in a golden bowl?’ which Blake afterwards engraved as 
part of the ‘ Motto’ to The Book of Thel. (See footnote to that poem where 
the erased passage is quoted in full.) Another line on the same page, © | 
‘Why is one law given for the lion & the patient Ox?’ is obviously the 
source of the last line of The Marriage of Heaven and Hell (1790), ‘One Law 
for the Lion & Ox is Oppression,’ as well as of another line in the Visions of 
the Daughters of Albion (1793, f. 6, 1. 22) ; ‘ And is there not one law for both © 
the lion and the ox ?’ 

An additional proof that Tiriel was written before Thel is found in the — 
opening line of the latter book : ‘ The daughters of Mne Seraphim led round | 
their sunny flocks.” Here, as Mr. W. B. Yeats conjectures, it seems probable 
that Blake at first intended to write ‘The daughters of Mnetha’ (one of the 
personages first introduced in Ziriel), and afterwards altered this to ‘The 
daughters of the Seraphim’ without erasing the meaningless ‘Mne’ from 
the plate. Mr. Yeats’ statement that ‘the letters ‘‘Mne” are scratched out ; 
in the Bodleian copy’ is incorrect. 

Referring to the handwriting of 7iviel, Mr. W. M. Rossetti says the MS. : 
is ‘neatly executed, and is evidently not the rough first draft: the hand- — ; 
writing appears to me to belong to no late period in his life. This character — 4 
of handwriting prevails up to near the close of the poem. With the word 
(in section 8) ‘I am Tiriel, King of the West,” a new and less precise kind >; 


a 


Sone 


si 
. 


Prophetic Books 331 


of handwriting begins ; clearly indicating, I think, that Blake, after an interval 
of some years, took up the poem and finished it, perhaps in much more sum- 
mary fashion than he had at first intended.’ In the opinion of the present 
editor, the quality of the handwriting is the same throughout, and the slight 
difference perceptible between that of the last page and a half and the earlier 
portion is merely such as may be attributed to the sharpening of a quill pen 
which had grown somewhat coarse. Moreover, the erased line referred 
to repeated in Thel proves that this page could not have been written later 
_ than 1789. The point is worthy of notice since it appears to have misled one 
at least of Blake’s commentators. Referring to Mr. Rossetti’s remarks on 
the two handwritings Mr. W. B. Yeats says : ‘ The style of the poem, which 
resembles rather that of ‘‘ The Mental Traveller” than the more vehement 
_ and broken style of the later prophetic poems, makes it clear that ‘‘Tiriel ” 

_ belongs to an earlier period than any other of the prophetic books. It was 
_ probably followed by ‘‘ The Ghost of Abel.” .. . The style of the later lines 
seems to the present writer to be much later than the style of the rest of the 
poem. It is more directly mystical, more of a direct appeal from the 
_ soul of Blake to the soul of the reader, and much more wholly depen- 

_ dent upon mystical knowledge for its interest. The rest of the poem has 
acertain interest and meaning as a story, but this latter page is as purely 
mystical as ‘‘ Europe,” or ‘‘America,” or “Jerusalem.” It is symbolical 
rather than allegorical.’ 


Begins (f. 1 recto, 1. 1) :— 
Or, 
‘And Aged Tiriel stood before the Gates of his beautiful palace, 
[But dark were his once piercing eyes del.) 
With Myratana, once the Queen of all the western plains ; 
But now his eyes were darkenéd, & his wife fading in death : 
They stood before their once delightful palace, and thus the Voice 
Of aged Tiriel arose, that his sons might hear in their gates. 


6 Accurséd race of Tiriel! behold your :[agéd del.] father ; 

Come forth & look on her that bore you. Come, you accurséd sons, 
In my weak [agéd del.] arms I here have borne your dying mother ; 
Come forth, sons of the Curse, come forth, see the death of Myratana.”’ ” 


_ Ends (f. 7 verso, 1. 31; f. 8 recto, ll. 1-7) :— 


‘Such was Tiriel— 
[Hypocrisy the ideot’s wisdom & the wise man’s folly del.] (f. 7 ends) 
Compell’d to pray repugnant & to humble the immortal spirit, 
Till I am subtil as a serpent in a paradise, 
Consuming all, both flowers & fruits, insects & warbling birds, 
And now my paradise is fall’n, & a drear sandy plain 
Returns my thirsty hissings in a curse on thee, O Har, 
Mistaken father of a lawless race! my voice is past. 


'¢He ceast, outstretch’d at Har & Heva’s feet in awful death.’ 


Typ. Reprints: WMR, EY iii, WBY. 


338 Prophetic Books 


ache | Book | of | Thel | The Author & Printer 
Will™ Blake 1789. 


Collation : ‘ Thel’s Motto’ 1 plate, title-page x plate, ‘Thel’ 6 plates; _ 


8 plates, relief engraving, about 6 x 4} inches. 


Begins (f. 3, 1. 3): ‘The daughters of Mne (sic, read ‘the’) Seraphim led 
round their sunny flocks, 
All but the youngest : she in paleness sought the secret air, 
To fade away like morning beauty from her mortal day. 
Down by the river of Adona her soft voice is heard, 
And thus her gentle lamentation falls like morning dew.’ 


Ends (f. 8, ll. 16-22): ‘Why a Tongue impress’d with honey from 
every wind ? 
Why an Ear, a whirlpool fierce to draw creations in? 
Why a Nostril wide, inhaling terror, trembling & affright ? 
Why a tender curb upon the youthful burning boy? 
Why a little curtain of flesh on the bed of our desire? 


‘The Virgin started from her seat, & with a shriek 
Fled back unhinder’d till she came into the vales of Har.’ 


Facsimile Reproductions: B. M. 1876, W. Muir (coloured), EY iii. 

Typ. Reprints: DGR (Gil. ii. 71-5), WMR, WBY, L.H. Extracts: 
Gil. i. 76. 

4. The | Marriage | of | Heaven | and Hell.  Wathout 
date, but written and probably engraved in 1790. 


Collation : title-page 1 plate, ‘The Argument’ 1 plate, text 25 plates; — 


27 plates, relief engraving, about 6x4inches. The last three plates, contain- 


ing ‘A Song of Liberty,’ would seem to have been wanting in the copy 
described by Gilchrist (Life, i. 79-89) and may have been an addition to — 


the book as originally conceived. This ‘Song’ also occurs separately. 
The Argument begins (f, 2, 1. 2) :-— 
‘Rintrah roars, & shakes his fires in the burden’d air: 
Hungry clouds swag on the deep.’ 
Text begins (f. 3): ‘Asa new heaven is begun, and it is now thir|ty-three 


years since its advent, the Eternal Hell | revives. And lo! Swedenborg is © : 
the Angel, sitting | atthe tomb ; his writings are the linen clothes folded | up. — 


Now is the dominion of Edom, & the return of | Adam into Paradise ; see 


Isaiah XXXIV & XXXV Chap. | Without Contraries is no progression, _ 
Attraction | and Repulsion, Reason and Energy, Love and | Hate, are © 

necessary to Human existence. | From these contraries spring what the 
religious call | Good & Evil. Good is the passive that obeys Reason : | Evil — 


is the active springing from Energy. | Good is Heaven. Evil is Hell.’ 


Text ends (f. 24, ll. 2-10) : ‘When he had so spoken, I beheld the Angel, — 


who | stretched out his arms, embracing the flame of fire, | & he was con- 
sumed, and arose as Elijah. | Note! This Angel, who is now become a Devil, 
is | my particular friend : we often read the Bible to- | gether in its infernal 
or diabolical sense, which | the world shall have if they behave well. | Ihave 


also The Bible of Hell, which the world | shall have whether they will 


A he SM TS SLAVES OLSEN nA DIL shih i WS gh 5 aN pc 3 I a 


Aa eames 


a 


Prophetic Books ane 


_orno. [half-page picture of Nebuchadnezzar.| One Law for the Lion & Ox 


is Oppression.’ 

‘A Song of Liberty ’ begins (f. 25, 1. 2) : ‘x, The Eternal Female groan’d : it 
was | heard over all the Earth’ ; ends (f. 27, ll. 14-21): ‘ Let the Priests of 
the Raven of dawn | no longer, in deadly black, with hoarse note, | curse 
the sons of joy! Nor his accepted | brethren, whom tyrant he calls free, lay 
the | bound, or build the roof! Nor pale religion’s | letchery call that 
virginity that wishes | but acts not ! | For every thing that lives is Holy!’ 

Facsimile Reproductions : W. Muir (coloured), Camden Hotten (coloured), 
EY iii. 

Typ. Reprints: WBY, L. H. Extracts, Gil. i. 78-86, Swinb. 208- 
224. 


5. The French Revolution: a Poem in Seven Books. 


Book the First, One Shilling. 179. 


According to Gilchrist, from whom the above title is transcribed, this 
work of Blake’s, which, like the Poetical Sketches and Descriptive Catalogue, 
was printed in ordinary typography, was published anonymously, without 
illustrations, in quarto format, by J. Johnson. Contrary to his usual prac- 
tice, Gilchrist gives no description or extracts from this book. In a letter to 
Mr. W. M. Rossetti, dated July 19, 1863 (Rossetti Papers, p. 27), Mrs. Gilchrist 
refers to her MS. copy of the poem, adding: ‘Mr. Linnell is the only 
possessor I know of an original copy.’ In a later letter to Mr. Rossetti, 
dated November 18 of the same year, Mrs. Gilchrist writes: ‘I send by 
this post... The French Revolution, minus, I am grieved to say, the best 
passage in it, which must have been among the residuum your brother 
destroyed, I thought I had (and still believe I have, though I cannot, after 
a long hunt, find it) a copy of this piece about the prisoners in the Bastille, 
in Mr. Palmer’s handwriting.’ Swinburne also would appear to have seen 


_ either this transcript or the original, since in his Essay (p. 15) he says that 


this ‘poem or apology for a poem, called The French Revolution (the first of 
seven projected books), is, as far as I know, the only original work of its 
author worth little or even nothing; consisting mainly of mere wind and 
splutter. The six other books, if extant, ought nevertheless to be looked up, 
as they can hardly be without some personal interest or empirical value, 
even if no better in workmanship than this first book.’ In a letter to the 
present editor dated June 21, 1905, Mr. W. M. Rossetti writes: ‘I myself 
have actually seen & read B.’s French Revolution, Book I. This was at the 
time, say 1862, when I was lending some help to Mrs. Gilchrist in relation 
to the Life. . .. That French Revolution is an ordinary piece of typography, 
unillustrated, & not in the tone of the Prophetic Books. Severely realistic 
it of course is not, being Blake’s work, but it comes much nearer than any 
Prophetic Book to dealing with historical facts as such. Its interest is 
necessarily great in a certain way, but I did not think it at all a striking or 


4 _ memorable performance in itself. My Brother, who also looked into it, held 


it in no esteem, & (if I remember right) Swinburne also read that copy 
about the same time, & concurred with my Brother.’ 

Neither original nor transcript can now be traced. The statement that 
Mr. Linnell is or was the possessor of an original copy is incorrect. 


334 Prophetic Books 


II 
THE PROPHETIC BOOKS 


6. Visions | of | the Daughters of | Albion | The Eye 
sees more than the Heart knows | Printed by Will™ Blake: 


1793- 

Collation : title-page and ‘The Argument’ 1 plate each; ‘ Visions’ 8 plates, 
full-page design, sometimes placed last and sometimes as frontispiece, 
1 plate ; rx plates, relief engraving, about 6% x 4 inches. 

Begins (f. 3, 1. 2) :— 

‘Enslav’d, the Daughters of Albion weep; a trembling lamentation 

Upon their mountains; in their valleys, sighs towards America. 

For the soft soul of America, Oothoon wander’d in woe, 

Along the vales of Leutha seeking flowers to comfort her ; 

And thus she spoke to the bright Marygold of Leutha’s vale. 


“Art thou a flower? art thou a nymph? I-see thee now a flower, 
Now a nymph! I dare not pluck thee from thy dewy bed!”’’ 


Ends (f. 10, ll. 6-13) :-— 

‘6 The sea fowl takes the wintry blast for a cov’ring to her limbs ; 

And the wild snake, the pestilence to adorn him with gems & gold; 
And trees, & birds, & beasts, & men behold their eternal joy. 
Arise, you little glancing wings, and sing your infant joy! 

Arise, and drink your bliss ; for every thing that lives is holy.’’ 


‘Thus every morning wails Oothoon ; but Theotormon sits 
Upon the margin’d ocean, conversing with shadows dire. 


‘The Daughters of Albion hear her woes, & echo back her sighs.’ 


Ue OT Eyl ye ot ae 


pres 


WRAL Stas Hi pg 9 ROE AAA I AAR OLN OMIT AE: 


Facsimile Reproductions : B. M. 1876, EY iii (reduced), W. Muir (coloured). . 


Typ. Reprint: WBY 179-187. Extracts: Gil. i. 105-108, Swinb. 229-234, 
L. H. 179-183. 


7. America | a | Prophecy | Lambeth | Printed by © 


William Blake in the year 1793. 


Collation ; frontispiece and title-page 1 plate each, ‘Preludium’ 2 plates, 
‘A Prophecy’ 14 plates ; 18 plates, relief engraving, about 9} x68 inches. | 
Begins (f. 3, 1, 2) :— 
‘The shadowy daughter of Urthona stood before red Orc, 
When fourteen suns had faintly journey’d o’er his dark abode: 
His food she brought in iron baskets, his drink in cups of iron; 
Crown’d with a helmet & dark hair the nameless female stood,. 
A quiver with its burning stores, a bow like that of night.’ 


Pim Le ee he, 


i 
i 


Prophetic Books 335 
Ends (f. 18, ll. 16-23) :— 


‘Stiff shudderings shook the heav’nly thrones. France, Spain & Italy 
In terror view’d the bands of Albion, and the ancient Guardians, 
Fainting upon the elements, smitten with their own plagues. 
They slow advance to shut the five gates of their law-built heaven, 
Filled with blasting fancies, and with mildews of despair, 

Ma With fierce disease and lust, unable to stem the fires of Orc. 
But the five gates were consum’d, & their bolts and hinges melted, 
And the fierce flames burnt round the heavens, & round the abodes of 

men.’ 


Facsimile Reproductions : B. M. 1876, W. Muir, EY iii (reduced). 
Pd Typ. Reprints (Extracts), Gil. i. 109-112, Swinb. 235-237. 


_ 8. Europe | a | Prophecy | Lambeth | Printed By Will™ 
Blake 1794. 


Collation: frontispiece and title-page 1 plate each, ‘Preludium’ 2 plates, 
‘A Prophecy’ rr plates, two full-page illustrations without text 2 plates ; 
17 plates, relief engraving, about 9} x 6§ inches. The arrangement of the 
__ plates varies somewhat in different copies. 

. Begins (f. 3, 1. 2) :— 

‘The nameless shadowy female rose from out the breast of Orc, 
: Her snaky hair brandishing on the winds of Enitharmon, 

And thus her voice arose: 


; ‘“Q mother Enitharmon, wilt thou bring forth other sons, 

; To cause my name to vanish, that my place may not be found? 
For I am faint with travel, 

Like the dark cloud disburden’d in the day of dismal thunder.,’’’ 


Ends (f. 17, ll. 3-11) :—‘ The sun glow’d fiery red, 

The furious terrors flew around 

On golden chariots, raging with red wheels dropping with blood ; 
The Lions lash their wrathful tails, 

The Tygers couch upon the prey, & suck the ruddy tide, 

And Enitharmon groans & cries in anguish and dismay. 


‘Then Los arose: his head he rear’d, in snaky thunders clad, 
_ And, with a cry that shook all nature to the utmost pole, 
Call’d all his sons to the strife of blood.’ 


Facsimile Reproductions : B. M. 1797, W. Muir (coloured), EY iii (reduced). 
Typ. Reprints (Extracts): Gil. i. 129, 130, Swinb, 242-245. 


' g. The | [First] Book | of | Urizen | Lambeth Printed 
_by W™ Blake 1794. Colophon: The End of the | first book 
of Urizen. 


—_ 


_ Collation : title-page and ‘ Preludium ’ x plate each, chapters i-ix 15 plates, 
ten full-page illustrations without text variously arranged in different copies 
10 plates; 27 plates, relief engraving, about 6x4 inches. The word ‘ First : 


ee 


336 Prophetic Books 


in the title-page, which was probably purposely erased from Blake’s stereo- 
type, is wanting in most copies. 
Begins (f. 2, 1. 6) :—‘ Of the primeval Priest’s assum’d power, 
When Eternals spurn’d back his religion, 
And gave him a place in the north, 
Obscure, shadowy, void, solitary ! 
‘Eternals, I hear your call gladly, 
Dictate swift wingéd words, & fear not 
To unfold your dark visions of torment.’ 
Ends (f. 27, col. 2, ll. 5-9) :—‘8. So Fuzon call’d all together 
The remaining children of Urizen, 
And they left the pendulous earth: 
They called it Egypt & left it. 
‘9, And the salt ocean rolled englob’d.’ 


Facsimile Reproductions: B.M. 1876, EY iii (reduced). 
Typ. Reprint (Extracts): Gil. i. 131. 


to. The | Song of | Los | Lambeth Printed by W. Blake 
1795. Colophon: The Song of Los is Ended | Urizen Wept. 


Collation : title-page 1 plate, ‘Africa’ 2 plates, ‘Asia’ 2 plates, three full- 
page illustrations variously arranged in different copies; 8 plates, relief 
engraving, about 9 x 6% inches. 

Begins (f. 2, 1. 2) :—‘I will sing you a song of Los, the Eternal Prophet. 

He sung it to four harps, at the tables of Eternity, 
In heart-formed Africa, 
Urizen faded, Ariston shudder’d, 
And thus the Song began.’ 
Ends (f£. 6, ll. 35-40) :—‘The Grave shrieks with delight, & shakes 
Her hollow womb, & clasps the solid stem. 
Her bosom swells with wild desire, 
And milk, & blood, & glandous wine 
In rivers rush, & shout, & dance 
On mountain, dale, and plain.’ 
Facsimile Reproductions ; B. M. 1876, EY iii (reduced), W. Muir (coloured). 
Typ. Reprints (Extracts) : Gil. i. 132-134, Swinb, 255-257. 


11. The | Book of | Los | Lambeth | Printed by W. Blake 
1795. Colophon: The End of the | Book of Los. 


Collation : frontispiece and title-page 1 plate each, ‘ Los’ 3 plates; 5 plates, ¥ 


etched text. 
Begins (f. 3, col. 1, 1. 2): ‘1, Eno, Agéd Mother, 
Who the chariot of Leutha guides 
Since the day of thunders in old time, 


‘2, Sitting beneath the eternal Oak, 
Trembled, and shook the steadfast Earth, 
And thus her speech broke forth,’ 


no tn ee ee eee 


ee IRE Fa el are 


+ 


ae. 6 Pe 
a Rae Be 


Prophetic Books 337 


Ends (f. 5, col. 2, ll. 21-26) : ‘9. Till his Brain in a rock, & his Heart 


In a fleshy slough, formed four rivers, 
Obscuring the immense Orb of fire, 
Flowing down into night; till a Form 
Was completed, a Human Illusion 

In darkness and deep clouds involv’d.’ 


Facsimile Reproduction : EY iii. 


12. The | Book of | Ahania | Lambeth | Printed by 
W. Blake 1795. 


Collation : frontispiece and title-page 1 plate each, ‘Ahania’ 4 plates; 

6 plates, etched text, about 53x3% inches. According to Swinburne The 

_ Book of Ahania may have been originally intended as the second book 
~ of Urizen. 


Begins (f. 3, col. 1,1. 2): £1. Fuzon on a chariot iron-wing’d, 


On spiked flames rose: his hot visage 
Flam’d furious; sparkles his hair & beard, 
Shot down his wide bosom and shoulders ; 
On clouds of smoke rages his chariot, 
And his right hand burns red in its cloud, 
Moulding into a vast globe his wrath, 

As the thunder-stone is moulded, 

Son of Urizen’s silent burnings.’ 


Ends (f. 6, col. 2, ll. 13-21) : ‘14. But now alone over rocks, mountains, 


Cast out from thy lovely bosom 

Cruel jealousy, selfish fear, 
Self-destroying ; how can delight 
Renew in these chains of darkness, 
Where bones of beasts are strown 

On the bleak and snowy mountains, 
Where bones from the birth are buried 
Before they see the light ?’ 


Facsimile Reproduction: EY iii. 
Typ. Reprint: WBY. Extracts: Gil. i. 135, 136; Swinb. 252, 253. 


13. The Four Zoas | The Torments of Love & Jealousy 
in | The Death and | Judgement | of Albion the | Ancient 
_ Man | by William Blake 1797. 


Description : I owe to the kindness of Mr. John Linnell, Jun., the follow- 
ing admirably clear and exact account of this autograph MS. 
‘The MS. consists of 70 separate leaves or sheets of paper (not 7o pp., 
4 as stated by Mr. Ellis), size 16} by 12} in., together with 4 small fragments. 
_ These 7o loose sheets are made up as follows :—drawing paper, blank, with 
watermark ‘J. Whatman 1794,’ 21 sheets; working proofs of Blake’s 
illustrations to Young’s ‘* Night Thoughts” (published 1797), the paper same 
size and date where marked, 47 sheets ; old engraving by Blake cut in two 


Z 


338 Prophetic Looks 


and written upon on one side only (back) 2 sheets = 7o sheets. The 
68 sheets, with 7 exceptions (where one side only is written on)—i. e. 
61 sheets—have the text of the poem written upon both sides of the paper ; 
with regard to the 47 sheets with the engravings to ight Thoughts printed 
upon one side of each sheet, the only available space on the printed side was 
the blank rectangular space in the middle of each sheet, left for the text of ; 
Young’s poem ; and here Blake has written. % 

‘The title is written on one side of the first sheet of paper. In its first 
form, as written in ink, it read: “VALA | or | The Death and | Judgement | 
of the | Ancient Man | A DREAM | of Nine Nights | by William Blake 
1797.” This was afterwards altered in pencil to the final form given above. 
At the head of the second sheet, the page upon which the poem begins, 
is the motto from Ephesians vi. 12, written in Greek characters, without 
accents, followed in bold script capitals by the heading ‘‘ VALA,”’ which 
is not here, as in the title-page, erased in favour of ‘‘ The Four Zoas.”’ 

‘ The date of the MS. is specified on the title-page, ‘‘ 1797,”” and this date 
was not altered by subsequent revision. There is no other evidence as 
to when the MS. was written except that afforded by the date of the paper, 
1794; Mr. Ellis considers it was in progress for some years, but it cannot of 
course have been begun before 1794. 

‘The poem is written in ink throughout, afterwards some alterations and 
additions were made upon the text or upon the margins. According to 
Messrs. Ellis and Yeats’ description of it, this MS. is in an unfinished 
condition, parts written fairly, and a large part a first draft of the poem, 
“many erasures”’ and corrections are made, “the MS. was never properly 
looked over by the author or finally sorted into Nights,”’ ‘‘ it is only possible 
to conjecture the sequence,” ‘‘it was unpaged and unsorted,”’ ‘‘ the arrange- 
ment of the loose sheets occupied us during several long days.’ (See vol. ii, 
Pp. 295-300.) Now besides the beginning and the ending of each Night 
which are marked by Blake, only the first 14 pages were numbered by 
himself ; consequently the position of many of the sheets as determined by 
Messrs. Ellis and Yeats must be in a degree conjectural. Had they marked 
in their printed copy where the beginning and the end of each sheet of paper — 
of the MS. occur, critics would have been enabled to judge for themselves as 
to whether the arrangement or order of the sheets as printed has been 
correctly made or not, . 

‘In vol. ii, p. 298, Ellis and Yeats say that Blake in the ninth Night quotes 
‘‘Ephes. xiv. 10,” and add “by what slip Blake gave the Epistle r4 chapters 
is incomprehensible,’ This, however, must be Mr. Ellis’ own error in tran- — 
scription, for Blake himself has written plainly in ink (in his usual form) — 
“ Ephesians 111 c. tov.” (i.e. 3"? chap. ro* verse). 

‘I do not, on the grounds of fairness, hold that this ‘‘ Vala” poem should ¥ 
be placed in the same category with those poems or ‘‘ Prophecies” that 
Blake wrote, finished for publication, and himself printed and published. 
The text of The Four Zoas appears to be in an unsettled condition, and not __ 
put in order. I consider this work more as a private study that Blake 
executed for himself, wherein he registered and expressed his ideas without _ 
any restriction, and that he never once intended this MS. with its pencil © 
illustrations for publication, nor even as a whole for any public inspection ; | | 
there are good and substantial reasons why he never did or could have done _ 


Priphelic Looks 339 


Thereh re be key the ady in an’ onbababied vate vy Winn Boring Whe 

© With Wit wher papers that were never mutes yithi«, wud wt leek mats 

vate Hitt A it, jpiwt su te tia tele ih, to my lather,’ =~ 

Vir us exits in 2 lon vmnbewnh snd comespondy mores 

padigihe tor Vite wom wat hans that Cueracterize Milton 904 Joruestem, 

be three ten onaiinoting » gray in wiht ome may eee the Withers 

‘ o Wiaes!s myrhichwn, Deraches tinew and lengthy yamauen 

Virus Leas were enyraveh vy Vues wa part A Juusden, 

Ony yond vy EY ii, nd, in.» wnsevtuat incor’ ters, wits tncuiler 

4 tow yayee A the oyna, ¥ awn Hr, Wt, torah, BY entitle 

the poem ‘Vida) whith tile, however, a4 Wht, Viens nite dare, was 

reyeieh a tovvnt A The Vous Lins, Weir ntratte te ytnheh 

YW 1p, 

Bt tha Vinh begine vm 

t Bong A the hyp Neher, which thot te hewvens with wre, 

Venting the march A song rewvunting arog here Verw, 

Wardtialles in orter tor tha bay A Netblectnah Wtthe, 

The hesvems quate, the earth wen move & thers, & the 
St CIA Ht, 


th #0 thes wots, the reams te viblleys, wi 4 im Gamal lear’! 
the inth onde -—~ 


mo longer tha Gpectre Lon, 


34 Milton 2 Poem|in 12 Books| The Author | & 
inter W. Biake | 1404 | To Justify the Ways of God to 


tim: Cie-page wnt *Vretue’ 1 Yate cath, ‘Yorke the Ve’ 
b lates, 8. oda Oh. b, 1y, 1% and zi being Gill page, Winstrationd), ‘Lake 
be Gecond’ 17 plates, 29-45 I 29, 34, Yr, 41 am 45 xing Ubi gage 

bons); 45 plates, rie! engraving, snd 64 x 44 inches. The Beck 


q 
ow Vork, tacks the Pretec wnt teas Gove istiticmal fates A text newlbered 
LS &, 13, ge". The order ol the Yates in thie copy Chere somewhat 
toms that of the examyle in the Print Room of the Uritich Mascon, which 
| dite ienticss in ssrangement with the copy describes im the eatdhogue A 
be Biche Exhibition held wt the Grilier Onto A Sew Vor in iggy ta 
sting trom Uilton in my lootmtes the Wie resem ae to the Pint 


OOM Copy. 

The Gate 02 the title-page probaly represents the year im whith the 
ag: OA the Yirt Boks was begun of lititeed, rothes than teat wich 
| the compton A tae extise work. 
ZZ 


340 Prophetic Books 


Book the First begins (£. 3, 1. 3) s— 
‘Daughters of Beulah, Muses who inspire the Poet’s Song, 
Record the journey of immortal Milton thro’ your Realms 
Of terror, & mild moony lustre, in soft sexual delusions 
Of varied beauty, to delight the wanderer and repose 
His burning thirst & freezing hunger! Come into my hand, 
By your mild power descending down the Nerves of my right arm, 
From out the Portals of my Brain, where by your ministry 
The Eternal Great Humanity Divine planted his Paradise, 
And in it caus’d the Spectres of the Dead to take sweet form 
In likeness of himself, Tell also of the False Tongue, vegetated 
Beneath your land of shadows, of its sacrifices and 
Its offerings, even till Jesus, the image of the Invisible God, 
Became its prey, a curse, an offering and an atonement 
For Death Eternal, in the heavens of Albion, & before the Gates 
Of Jerusalem, his Emanation, in the heavens beneath Beulah.’ 


Book the Second ends (f. 44, ll. 36-39; f. 45, 1. 1) :— 


‘Rintrah & Palamabron view the Human Harvest ; beneath 

Their Wine-presses & Barns stand open; the Ovens are prepar’d, 
The Waggons ready ; terrific Lions & Tygers sport & play; 

All Animals upon the Earth are prepar’d, in all their strength, 

To go forth to the Great Harvest & Vintage of the Nations.’ 


Facsimile Reproductions : W. Muir (coloured), EY iii. 
Typ. Reprints (Extracts) : Gil. i. 195-198, Swinb. 259-274, WBY 207-209, 
L. H. 184-195. 


15. Jerusalem | The | Emanation of | The Giant | 
Albion | 1804 | Printed by W. Blake S‘ Molton St. 
Colophon: The End of The Song | of Jerusalem. 


Collation : frontispiece, title-page, ‘To the Public’ 1 plate each (ff. 1-3) ; 
‘Chap. 1’ 22 plates (ff. 4-25), frontispiece to Chap. 2 (f. 26), ‘To the Jews’ 
(f.27) ; ‘Chap. 2’ 23 plates (ff. 28-50), frontispiece to Chap. 3 (f. 51), ‘ To the 
Deists’ (f. 52); ‘Chap. 3” 23 plates (ff. 53-75), frontispiece to Chap. 4 (f. 76), 
‘To the Christians’ (f. 77) ; ‘Chap. 4” 22 plates (ff. 78-99), full-page end- 
piece (f. 100) ; 100 plates, relief engraving, about 9x64 inches. For intro- 
ductions to chapters 1-4, see ‘ Poems from Jerusalem.’ 


The engraving of Jerusalem was apparently begun about the same time as __ 
that of Milton, the former and longer work being probably the last to be 


completed. As in the case of Milfon the date on the title-page, 1804, must 
be understood to represent the year in which the first chapter was begun 
or finished, and not that of the completion of the whole work. 

‘Chap. 1’ begins (f. 4, 1. 4) :— 


‘Of the Sleep of Ulro! and of the passage through 
Eternal Death! and of the awaking to Eternal Life! 


CSS SAI RE NP ALON AEF Pe ENG PS Rees 


1a at ake I ARNT Ty ARPS enn elated aagel 


oie A a el ae 


Prophetic Books 341 


‘This theme calls me in sleep, night after night, & ev’ry morn 
Awakes me at sun-rise: then I see the Saviour over me, 
Spreading his beams of Love, & dictating the words of this mild song. 


‘““ Awake ! awake! O sleeper of the land of shadows, wake! expand! 
I am in you, and you in me, mutual in love divine: 
4 Fibres of love from man to man thro’ Albion’s pleasant land.’’’ 


“Chap. 4’ ends (f. 98, ll. 54-56; f. 99, Il. 1-5) :-— 


‘ Such is the Cry from all the Earth, from the Living Creatures of the Earth, 

And from the great City of Golgonooza in the Shadowy Generation, 
a And from the Thirty-two Nations of the Earth among the Living 
* Creatures. 
= “All Human Forms identified ; even Tree, Metal, Earth & Stone, all 
Human Forms identified ; living, going forth, & returning wearied 
, Into the Planetary lives of Years, Months, Days & Hours; reposing, 
i And then Awaking into his Bosom in the Life of Immortality. 

And I heard the Name of their Emanations: they are named Jerusalem.’ 


, Facsimile Reproductions : Pearson, EY iii (reduced). 
' ‘Typ. Reprint: Russell and Maclagan, 1904. Extracts: Gil. i. 183-194, 
Swinb, 276-292, WBY 198-207. 


«jor 


16. The Ghost of Abel | A Revelation In the Visions 
of Jehovah | Seen by William Blake. Colophon: 1822, 
W. Blake’s Original Stereotype was 1788. 


The reference to Blake’s first stereotype probably refers to his earliest use 
of this process in the Songs of Innocence, and not, as has been commonly 
supposed, to an earlier issue of The Ghost of Abel. 


Collation : 2 plates, relief engraving, about 4% x 6,% inches. 
Begins (f. 1, 1. 4, after title as above) :— 


‘To Lord Byron in the Wilderness. 
_ What doest thou here, Elijah? | Can a Poet doubt the Visions of 
Jehovah? Nature has no Outline, | but Imagination has. Nature has no 
Time, but Imagination has. | Nature has no Supernatural & dissolves. 
Imagination is Eternity.’ 


Ends (f. 2, ll. 26-31) :— 


; ‘On each side a Chorus of Angels entering Sing the following: 

The Elohim of the Heathen Swore Vengeance for Sin! Then Thou 
: stood’st 
Forth, O Elohim Jehovah, in the midst of the darkness of the Oath, 
All Clothéd 


In thy Covenant of the Forgiveness of Sins, Death, O Holy! Is this 
Brotherhood ? 


342 Prophetic B ookS : 


The Elohim saw their Oath Eternal Fire; they rolled apart trembling 


over The 
Mercy Seat, each in his station fixt in the Firmament, by Peace, — 
Brotherhood, and Love.’ 
Facsimile Reproductions : W. Muir (coloured), EY iii. j 


Typ. Reprint : Swinb. 295-297. 


17. Outhoon. ? Relief engraving. Date unknown. 


All that is known of this book is the entry among a number of works by 
Blake offered for sale by his widow to Mr. Ferguson (Gil. ii. 262) : ‘ A work 
called Outhoon. 12 plates, 6 inches more or less. Price £2. 2s. od.” 
WMR adds: ‘I have never seen a copy of this, nor been able to find any one 
who has. Even Mr. Linnell has never heard of it. But the above must be 
taken, I think, as indisputable evidence that such a book does or did exist. 
An ingenious friend suggested that ‘‘ Outhoon”’ might be another title for the 
Visions of the Daughters of Albion, in which one Oothoon plays a prominent 
part. But the number of plates in the two not corresponding decisively 
negatives such a supposition.’ 


Ill 


DOGMATIC WRITINGS 


18. There | is No | Natural | Religion[a]. Wzthout date, 
but probably circa 1790. - 


cee ae ee acme alge - 


Collation: frontispiece, title-page, ‘The Argument’ 1 plate each, pro- 
positions I-VI, 6 plates ; ‘Therefore | God becomesas | we are, that we | may — 
be ashe | is’ x plate ; propositions I, II 2 plates; r2 plates, relief engraving, 
with small pictorial designs, about 2x13 inches. On the frontispiece, — 
in reversed writing, is the imprint ‘The Author & Printer W. Blake.’ 

Begins (f. 3): ‘The Argument | Man has no notion of moral | fitness 
but from Education. | Naturally he is only a natu|ral organ subject to 
Sense.’ 

Ends (f, 12): II | ‘Reason or the ra-|tio of all we have | already known 
is | not the same that | it shall be when | we know more.’ 

Facsimile Reproductions: W. Muir (coloured), EY iii. 

Typ. Reprint: L. H. 175, 176. Extracts: WBY 229, 230. 


ee 


PO LAL a seninn 


ee 


, 


niece ee 


2 


Se Ca 


aioe Books 343 


19. There|is No| Natural | Religion [4]. Without 
date, but probably circa 1790. 


Collation: title-page, frontispiece (‘The Voice of one crying in the 
Wilderness’), ‘The Argument’ 1 plate each, ‘ Principle 1°*’— ‘ Principle 7",’ 
7 plates; 10 plates, relief engraving, with surrounding designs, about 
2x1} inches. 

Begins (f. 3): ‘The Argument. As the true method of knowledge is 
experiment, the true faculty of knowing must be the faculty which ex- 
periences. This faculty I treat of.’ 

Ends (f. to): ‘Princrpre 7**, As all men are alike (tho’ infinitely 
various) So all Religions, & as all similars have one source The true Man.’ 

Typ. Reprint: EY iii. 


20. On Homer’s Poetry. (On Virgil.) Without date, 
but circa 1816-1820. 


Small Broadside, relief engraving, 44 x33 inches. 

‘On Homer’s Poetry’ begins (1. 2): ‘ Every Poem must necessarily be 
a perfect Unity, but why | Homer's is peculiarly so I cannot tell.’ 

Ends (ll. 22-24): ‘The Classics, it is, the Classics, | & not Goths nor 
Monks, that | Desolate Europe with Wars.’ 

£On Virgil’ begins (1. 26): ‘Sacred Truth has pronounced that Greece 
& Rome, as | Babylon & Egypt, so far from being parents of Arts & Sci-| 
ences as they pretend, were destroyers of all Art.’ 

Ends (1. 37):... ‘Grecian is Mathematic Form: (ll. 38, 39 at right) 
Gothic is Living | Form. (ll. 38-40 at Jeff) Mathematic Form is Eternal in | 
the Reasoning Memory : Living Form | is Eternal Existence.’ 

Facsimile Reproduction: EY iii. 

Typ. Reprint: Gil. ii. 159, 160. Extract: L. H. 232-233. 


a1. [The Laocoon.] /mprint: Drawn & Engraved by 
William Blake. W#thout date, but circa 1816-1820. 


Small print, line engraving, 52 x 43 inches. 

A drawing of the Laocoon occupies the centre of the plate, while the whole 
of the surrounding space is filled with disconnected aphorisms on art and 
the conditions under which it is fostered. 

At head of leaf : ‘Where any view of Money exists, Art cannot be carried 
on but War only. Read Matthew c. x, 9, 10, v.’ 

At foot of leaf: ‘Art Degraded, Imagination Denied, War Governed the 
Nations.’ 

Facsimile Reproduction: EY iii. 


LIBRARY ST. MARY’S COLLEGE 


POEMS FROM THE PROPHETIC 
BOOKS \ 


From 
THE BOOK OF THEL 


Thel’s Motto 


Does the Eagle know what is in the pit; 
Or wilt thou go ask the Mole? 

Can Wisdom be put in a silver rod, 

Or Love in a golden bowl? 


Thel, f. 1. DGR and WMR omit title. ; 
3, 4. These lines occur in a passage in Ziriel of which all but ll. 1, 2and 
4 were deleted by Blake. . 
‘He said, ‘‘O weak, mistaken, father of a lawless race! i 
Thy laws, O Har! & Tiriel’s wisdom, end together in a curse. 
Thy God of Love, thy heaven of joy! 
Why is one law given to the lion & the [Ox de/.] patient Ox? 
Dost thou not see that men cannot be forméd all alike; 
Some nostril’d wide, breathing out blood; Some close shut up 
In silent deceit, poisons inhaling from the morning rose, 
With daggers hid beneath their lips, & poison in their tongue; 
Or eyed with little sparks of Hell, or with infernal brands 
Flinging flames of discontent & plagues of dark despair; 
Or those whose mouths are graves, whose teeth the gates of eternal 
death ? 
Can wisdom be put in a silver rod, or love in a golden bowl? 
Is the sun a king warméd without wool, or does he cry with a voice 
Of thunder; does he look upon the sun & laugh, or stretch 
His little hands unto the depths of the sea to bring forth 
The deadly cunning of the scaly tribe [word above illegible] & spread 
it to the morning?”?’ 


4 Cp. note to song from Ax Island in the Moon, iii, 1. 27, and to ‘ The 
Golden Net’ (Pickering MS.), 1.9. 


THE MARRIAGE OF HEAVEN AND 
HELL 


Prayers plow not: Praises reap not. 
Joys laugh not: Sorrows weep not. 
‘Marriage cf Heaven and Hell, f. 9, two last lines. Among the ‘ Proverbs 


of Hell,’ the rest being in prose. Cp. one of the preceding proverbs, ‘ As the 
plow follows words, so God rewards prayers.’ 


| 
From | 
i 
i 


Prophetic Books 345 


From 


VISIONS OF THE DAUGHTERS OF 
ALBION 


The Argument 


I loved Theotormon, 1 
And I was not ashaméd; 

I trembled in my virgin fears, 

And I hid in Leutha’s vale! 


I plucked Leutha’s Flower, 5 
And I rose up from the vale; 

But the terrible thunders tore 

My virgin mantle in twain. 


Visions, f. 2, above an illustration of a nude kneeling female figure, kissing 


__ a sprite who springs upwards from the petals of a flower. 


The speaker here is Oothoon, a daughter of Los, whose story—references 
to which occur in several of the Prophetic Books—probably formed the 
subject of the lost engraved work Outhoon.’ See list of Prophetic Books, 
no. 17. 

1 See note to ‘ Poems from Letters,’ iv, 1. 33. 4 Leutha, one of the 
daughters of Beulah (cp. Milton, f. 9,1. 28), is depicted as a bird of paradise 
in a vale of flowers: see Europe, f. 12, ll. 9-14, and the Prophetic Books, 
passim. 


From 
THE FOUR ZOAS 


1 


At the first Sound the Golden Sun arises from the Deep, 1 
And shakes his awful hair, 

The Eccho wakes the moon to unbind her silver locks, 
The golden Sun bears on my song, 


_ And nine bright spheres of harmony rise round the fiery 


king. 


Four Zoas, Night ii. The song which Enitharmon ‘sang O’er Los, 


reviving him to Life.’ 
3 to unbind] again to unbind EY, WBY. 


346 Prophetic Books 


The joy of woman is the Death of her most best beloved 6 

Who dies for Love of her 

In torments of fierce jealousy & pangs of adoration. 

The Lovers’ night bears on my song 

And the nine Spheres rejoice beneath my powerful 
controll. 


They sing unceasing to the notes of my immortal hand. 11 
The solemn silent moon 

Reverberates the long harmony upon my limbs, 

The birds & beasts rejoice & play, 

And every one seeks for his mate to prove his inmost joy. 


Furious & terrible they sport & rend the nether 
deep ; 16 

The deep lifts up his rugged head 

And, lost in infinite hovering wings, vanishes with a cry. 

The fading cry is ever dying, . 

The living voice is ever living in its inmost joy. 


Arise, you little glancing wings & sing your infant joy, ar 
Arise & drink your bliss! 

For every thing that lives is holy; for the source of life 
Descends to be a weeping babe; 

For the Earthworm renews the moisture of the sandy plain. 


Now my left hand I stretch to Earth beneath, 26 

And strike the terrible string. 

I wake sweet joy in dens of sorrow, & I plant a smile 

In forests of affliction, 

And wake the bubbling springs of life in regions of dark 
death. 


6 is] in WBY. of her most best] even of her most EY; of her most 
WBY. II unceasing] unwearied EY, WBY ; this word is not distinctly 
written in the MS., and may be ‘ unweary.’ 13 upon] sounding upon 
EX; WBY: 23 For... holy] The same words end the chorus of the 
‘Song of Liberty,’ Marriage of Heaven and Hell, f. 27. 26 stretch to] 


stretch abroad, even to EY, WBY. 28 dens] dews EY, WBY. : 


30 regions] region WBY. 


Dralonamdaneiatitatte 


wali 


5 Ahad LOA aes GONE an RAR alia AN 


iro 


$ 


ah 


Prophetic Books 340 


-O,Iam weary ! lay thine hand upon me, or I faint. 3: 


I faint beneath these beams of thine, 

For thou hast touchéd my five senses & they answer’d thee. 

Now I am nothing, & I sink 

And on the bed of solemn sleep till thou awakest me. 
31-35 WBY omits. 31 thine] thy EY. 33 five] fine EY. 

35 And on] And fall on EY. _awakest me] The poem continues :— 


‘Thus sang this Lovely one, in Rapturous delusive trance. 

Los heard reviving: he Siez’d her in his arms, delusive hopes 
Kindling. She led him into Shadows & thence fled, outstretch’d 
Upon the immense, like a bright rainbow, weeping, & smiling, & fading.’ 


ul 


~ Ah! how shall Urizen the King submit to this dark 


mansion ? I 

Ah! how is this? Once on the heights I stretch’d my 
throne sublime. 

The mountains of Urizen, once of silver, where the sons 
of wisdom dwelt, 

And on whose tops the Virgins sang, are rocks of 
Desolation. 


My fountains, once the haunt of Swans, now breed the 

scaly tortoise, 5 
The houses of my harpers are become a haunt of crows, 
The gardens of wisdom are become a field of horrid graves, 
And on the bones I drop my tears, & water them in vain. 


Once how I walked from imy palace in gardens of delight, 9 

The sons of wisdom stood around, the harpers follow’d 
with harps, 

Nine virgins cloth’d in light compos’d the song to their 
immortal voices, 

And at my banquets of new wine my head was crown’d 
with joy. 

Four Zoas, Night v, end, ‘The Woes of Urizen shut up in the deep dens 
of Urthona.’ 


3 of Urizen] EY omit. 9 Once... delight] Once how I from my 
palace walked in gardens of delight, EY. to follow’d] came EY. 
It compos’d the song] made songs EY, 12 banquets] banquet EY. 


348 Prophetic Books 


Then in my ivory pavilions I slumber’d in the noon, 1B 
And walkéd in the silent night among sweet smelling 
flowers, 


Till on my silver bed I slept, & sweet dreams round me q 


hover’d; 
But now my land is darken’d & my wise men are 
departed. 


My soags are turnéd into cries of Lamentation 17 

Heard on my Mountains, & deep sighs under my palace 
roofs ; 

Because the Steeds of Urizen, once swifter than the 
light, 

Were kept back from my Lord & from his chariot of 
mercies. 


O! did I keep the horses of the day in silver pastures? 21 
O! I refused the lord of day the horses of his prince. 
O! did I close my treasuries with roofs of solid stone, 
And darken all my Palace walls with envyings & hate? 


O Fool! to think that I could hide from his all piercing 
eyes 25 

The gold & silver & costly stones, his holy workmanship. 

O Fool! could I forget the light that filled my bright 
spheres 

Was a reflection of his face who call’d me from the deep. 


I well remember, for I heard the mild & holy voice 29 


Saying, ‘O Light spring up & shine? & I sprang up — 


from the Deep. 


He gave to me a silver scepter, & crown’d me with a — 


golden crown, 


And said, ‘Go forth & guide my Son who wanders on 


the ocean.’ 


SE ee ae ne 


aah teat ATi 


WeenacMalp naitt 


a0 


a a eR 


BAG ee vata Soa Nat a, ee Wnt 


13 pavilions] palaces EY. 15 round me hover’d] hovered round EY. 


24 darken] darkened EY, envyings] envying EY, 25 eyes] eye EY. © 


30 Saying ... Deep] Saying, Light spring up and shine, and lo, I sprang — 


up from the deep EY. 31 & crown’d me] crowned EY, 


Prophetic Books 349 


I went not forth: I hid myself on black clouds of my 
wrath : 33 
I call’d the stars around my feet in the night of councils dark, 
The stars threw down their spears & fled naked away. 
We fell. I siez’d thee, dark Urthona, In my left hand falling. 


I siez’d thee, beauteous Luvah; thou art faded like a flower, 37 

And like a lilly is thy wife Vala, wither’d by winds. 

When thou didst bear the golden cup at the immortal tables 

Thy children smote their fiery wings, crown’d with the 
gold of heaven. 


_ Thy pure feet step’d on the steps divine, too pure for 


other feet, 4t 
And thy fair locks shadow’d thine eyes from the divine 
effulgence, 


Then thou didst keep with Strong Urthona the living 
gates of heaven; 

But now thou art bowd down with him, even to the 
gates of hell. 


Because thou gavest Urizen the wine of the Almighty 45 

For steeds of Light, that they might run in thy golden 
chariot of pride, 

I gavé to thee the Steeds. I pour’d the stolen wine, 


And, drunken with the immortal draught, fell from my 


throne sublime. 


I will arise, Explore these dens, & find that deep 


rs OE 


pulsation 49 
That shakes my caverns with strong Shudders; perhaps 
this is the night 
Of Prophecy, & Luvah hath burst his way from Enitharmon. 
When Thought is clos’d in Caves, Then love shall shew its 
root in deepest Hell. 


34 councils] council EY. 35 spears] spears of light EY. 38 is 


_ thy wife] EY omit is. by winds] by the winds EY. 41 on the steps] 


on steps EY. 42 the] this EY. 46 steeds of Light] EY omit of 
Light thy] the EY. 47 Steeds] steeds of light EY. 50 That 


+ ... night] That shakes my cavern with strong shudders. This may be the 
eS night EY. 52 When... Hell] When thought is closed in caverns, 


love shows roots in deepest hell EY. 


350 Prophetic Books 


lil 


Till thou dost [conquer] the distrest, 
Thou shalt never have peace within thy breast. 


Four Zoas. Written in pencil on the right-hand margin of the verso of the 
third sheet of Night vi. 

I conquer] With regard to this word EY comment: ‘One word, 
illegible in the original, looks like nothing but an impossible term, and 
causes the couplet to read as follows :— ° 


“Till thou dost (?) injure the distrest 
Thou shalt never have peace within thy breast.” 


After fruitless efforts, we reluctantly leave the deciphering of the word that 
cannot be injure to future editors. It would have biographical interest.’ 

In the opinion of Mr. John Linnell, Jun., the doubtful word might be 
intended for ‘compose,’ ‘conquer,’ ‘inspire,’ or ‘improve.’ From a photo- 
graph of this passage, kindly supplied to me by Mr. Linnell, I read the word 
as ‘conquer,’ but was unable to see how this could make good sense. 
Since then I have come tothe conclusion that this is the right reading, 
connecting the couplet with a passage in Zhe Four Zoas. The lines are 
worthy of quotation, not only as a specimen of Blake’s shrewd satire, but 
as an interesting illustration of the note of Elizabethan imitation surviving in 
his prophetic writings as late as 1797, or nearly twenty years after the date 
of his boyish effort ‘King Edward the Third.” The argument of this 
passage seems to me explanatory of that of the couplet. Both are con- 
temptuous advice, addressed to the worldly-wise man, as to the attitude to 
be cultivated towards the poor and oppressed—in fact the antithesis of 
Blake’s own sentiment :— 

‘Can I see another’s woe, 
And not be in sorrow too?’ 
This passage, which occurs in Night vii, runs: — 

‘Compell the poor to live upon a Crust of bread by soft mild arts; 

So shall we gove[r]n over all: let Moral duty tune your tongue ; 

But be your hearts harder than the nether millstone. 

Smile when they frown, frown when they smile; and when a man 

looks pale 

With labour & abstinence say he looks healthy & happy. 

And, when his children sicken, let them die; there are enough 

Born, even too many, & our Earth will be overrun 

Without these arts. If you would make the. poor live with temper, 

With pomp give every crust of bread you give, with gracious cunning 


Magnify small gifts: reduce the man to want a gift, & then give with ? 


pomp. 
Say he smiles if you hear him sigh. If pale, say he is ruddy. 
Preach temperance. Say he is overgorg’d, & drowns his wit 
In strong drink; tho’ you know that bread & water are all 


a ee ee ee 


EA eg Da sagen 


mutant aheuaatieaatnimer ental °. PEAT MI Ars cAI PRT cera 


ceneeeaiain ieeeetets 


LEO al thet giog Wl 


Brame ss 


= 


Bricks Books 351 


He can afford. Flatter his wife : pity his children; till we can 
Reduce all to our will, as spaniels are taught with art.’ 


For the context see Ellis and Yeats (iii. 70, 71), where, however, this passage 
is printed with such extraordinary inaccuracy as to suggest that the whole 
poem has been practically rewritten by Mr. Ellis. 


From 
MILTON 


And did those feet in ancient time 1 
Walk upon England’s mountains green? 

And was the holy Lamb of God 

On England’s pleasant pastures seen? 


And did the Countenance Divine 
Shine forth upon our clouded hills? 
And was Jerusalem builded here 
Among these dark Satanic Mills? 
Milton, f. 2. These lines occur as part of the ‘ Preface’ follawing the prose 
passage : ‘The Stolen and Perverted Writings of Homer & Ovid, of Plato 


& Cicero, which all Men ought to contemn, are set up by artifice against the 
Sublime of the Bible, but when the New Age is at leisure to Pronounce, all 


or 


will be set right, & those Grand Works of the more ancient & consciously 


& professedly Inspired Men will hold their proper rank, & the Daughters of 


_ Memory Shall become the Daughters of Inspiration. Shakspeare & Milton 


were both curb’d by the general malady & infection from the silly Greek & 
Latin slaves of the Sword. Rouze up, O Young Men of the New Age! set 
your foreheads against the ignorant Hirelings. For we have Hirelings 
in the Camp, the Court & the University, who would, if they could, for ever 


depress Mental & prolong Corporeal War. Painters! on you I call, 


Sculptors! Architects! Suffer not the fash[iJonable Fools to depress your 
powers by the prices they pretend to give for contemptible works, or the 
expensive advertizing boasts that they make of such works: believe Christ 
& his Apostles that there is a Class of Men whose whole delight is in 
Destroying. We do not want either Greek or Roman Models if we are but 
just & true to our own Imaginations, those Worlds of Eternity in which we 


shall live for ever, in Jesus our Lord.’ 


2 upon] over Swinb, mountains] mountain Gil., WMR, WBY. 
8 Mills] hills Gil. In Blake’s mythological world the mills of Satan are 


_ situated eastward of Golgonooza (or Law), on the strand of a lake ‘not 


of waters but of spaces, Perturbed black and deadly,’ which is formed of the 


_ ‘tears and sighs and death-sweat of the victims of Urizen’s laws.’ Beside 


them is rooted the tree of Mystery. All these, in different aspects, symbolize 


_ Blake’s conception of natural religion. See Four Zoas, Night viii, and the 
Prophetic Books, passim. 


352 Prophetic Books 


Bring me my Bow of burning gold! 9 
Bring me my Arrows of desire! 

Bring me my Spear! O clouds, unfold! 

Bring me my Chariot of fire! 


I will not cease from Mental Fight, 13 
Nor shall my Sword sleep in my hand, 

Till we have built Jerusalem 

In England’s green & pleasant Land. 


From 
JERUSALEM 


1 
[To the Public] 
Reader sa 4 a. «Of books / wo. «0 3 ofs heaven oi 
And: of that God from*whonis-- 2 2. 3 os aoe ee 


Jerusalem, f. 3, forming part of Blake’s introduction to Chap. 1. This — 
address, which is headed ‘To the Public’ (flanked on either side by the © 


words ‘Sheep’ and ‘Goats’), begins: ‘After my three years slumber 
on the banks of the Ocean, I again display my Giant forms to the Public. 


My former Giants & Fairies having reciev’d the highest reward possible, the — 
. and... of those with whom to be connected is to be. .. I cannot doubt 


that this more consolidated & extended Work will be as ore recieved. 


The Enthusiasm of the following Poem, the Author hopes... I also hope _ 
the Reader will be with me, wholly One in Jesus our Lord, ‘whe is the God ~ 


.and Lord... to whom the Ancients look’d and saw his day afar off, 


with trembling & amazement. The Spirit of Jesus is continual forgiveness — 
of Sin; he who waits to be righteous before he enters into the Saviour’s 
kingdom, the Divine Body, will never enter there. I am perhaps the most H 
sinful of men! I pretend not to holiness! yet I pretend to love, to see, — 


to converse with daily as man with man, & the more to have an interest in 


the Friend of Sinners. Therefore... Reader, ... what you do not 


approve, & ...me for this energetic exertion of my talent.’ 


After this come the lines above, followed by Blake’s account ‘Of the 


Measure in which the .. . Poem is written.’ Printed only by Swinb., 
WMR, and WBY. 
1,2 The gaps here and in the preceding prose passage are the result 


of flaws in Blake’s stereotype, the missing words having been chipped out | 
either by accident or design. It may have been Blake’s intention to insert — 
them by hand, but I know of no copy in which this has been done. Swin-- 


a ee 


ee ee 


otk a 


ee ee 


VE SND te ES cs Ey 


ed 


fem e 


OW a 


ye ee Books 2% 


Who in mysterious Sinai’s awful cave 
_ To Man the wondrous art of writing gave, 
Again he speaks in thunder and in fire, 5 
Thunder of Thought, & flames of fierce desire. 
Even from the depths of Hell his voice I hear 
Within the unfathom’d caverns of my Ear. 
Therefore I print: nor vain my types shall be. 9 
Heaven, Earth, & Hell, henceforth shall live in harmony. 
burne, Essay, p. 284, thus supplies the lacunae, though not, in my opinion, 
_ very happily :— 
= * Reader! lover of books! lover of heaven 
And of that God from whom all things are given.’ 


2 


The continuity of the passage might be better preserved by some such 
reading as :— 
‘Reader! [lover] of books !—[best boon] of heaven— 
+ And of that God from whom [they first were given].’ 
9 types] type WBY. 


ll 
Such visions have appear’d to me 
As I my order’d race have run: 
Jerusalem is named Liberty, 
Among the Sons of Albion. 


Jerusalem, f. 26. Engraved in capital letters, white on a black ground, on 
a plate containing a full-page illustration of the figure of Jerusalem watching 
é Hand in flames. Cp. Jerusalem, f. 54, ll. 1-5 :— 
‘In great Eternity, every particular Form gives forth or Emanates 
____ Its own peculiar Light, & the form is the Divine Vision, 
| And the Light is his Garment. This is Jerusalem in every Man, 
A Tent & Tabernacle of Mutual Forgiveness, Male & Female Clothings. 
And Jerusalem is called Liberty among the Children of Albion.’ 
2 race] course Russell and Maclagan. 


e) eee 


2 lil 


| [To the Jews | 


The fields from Islington to Marybone, I 
To Primrose Hill and Saint John’s Wood, 

Were builded over with pillars of gold; 

And there Jerusalem’s pillars stood. 


| Jerusalem, f, 27, forming part of Blake’s introduction to Chap. 2, This 
preface, which is headed ‘ To the Jews,’ begins :— 
SAMPSON Aa 


354 Prophetic B. ooks 


Her Little-ones ran on the fields, 5 
The Lamb of God among them seen, 

And fair Jerusalem, his Bride, 

Among the little meadows green. 


Pancrass & Kentish-town repose 9 
Among her golden pillars high, 

Among her golden arches which 

Shine upon the starry sky. 


‘Jerusalem, the Emanation of the Giant Albion! Can it be? Is it a Truth 
that the Learned have explored? Was Britain the Primitive Seat of the 
Patriarchal Religion ? If it is true, my title-page is also True, that Jerusalem 
was, & is, the Emanation of the Giant Albion. It is True and cannot 
be controverted. Ye are united, O ye Inhabitants of Earth, in One Religion. 
The Religion of Jesus, the most Ancient, the Eternal, & the Everlasting 
Gospel. The Wicked will turn it to Wickedness, the Righteous to Righteous- 
ness. Amen! Huzza! Selah! 


‘“¢ All things Begin & End in Albion’s Ancient Druid Rocky Shore.” 


‘Your Ancestors derived their origin from Abraham, Heber, Shem, and 
Noah, who were Druids, as the Druid Temples (which are the Patriarchal 
Pillars & Oak Groves) over the whole Earth witness to this day. 

‘You have a tradition that Man anciently contain’d in his mighty limbs all 
things in Heaven & Earth, this you received from the Druids. 


‘s¢But now the Starry Heavens are fled from the mighty limbs of _ 


Albion.’ 
‘Albion was the Parent of the Druids, & in his Chaotic State of Sleep 
Satan & Adam & the whole World was Created by the Elohim.’ 
After this come the lines above, followed by the paragraph :— 


‘If Humility is Christianity you, O Jews, are the true Christians: 


If your tradition that Man contained in his Limbs all Animals is True, & they — 


were separated from him by cruel Sacrifices; and when compulsory cruel 
Sacrifices had brought Humanity into a Feminine Tabernacle, in the loins of 
Abraham & David, the Lamb of God, the Saviour, became apparent on Earth, 
as the Prophets hed foretold. The ieee of Israel is a Return to Mental 
Sacrifice & War. Take up the Cross, O Israel, & follow Jesus.’ 

This poem summarizes the principal myth told in more detailed form in 


Chap. 2. The geographical symbolism under which Blake typifies mental 
states by London districts, divided under his fourfold system into four 


quarters, is explained by a passage in the same chapter, f. 38, ll. 42, 43 :-— 


‘TI write in South Molton Street, what I both see and hear 
In regions of Humanity, in London’s opening streets.’ 


It will be unnecessary to explain to any student of Blake that ‘Jews’ here 
as little mean the Hebrew race as ‘Jerusalem’ means the city so named. 
The former signifies merely the dwellers in ‘ Jerusalem ’ or state of spiritual 

liberty. Paraphrases of this poem may be referred to in Ellis and Yeats” :: 


Prdihictie Books 


The Jew’s-harp-house & the Green Man, 
The Ponds where Boys to bathe delight, 
The fields of Cows by William’s farm, 
Shine in Jerusalem’s pleasant sight. 


She walks upon our meadows green ; 
The Lamb of God walks by her side; 
And every English Child is seen, 
Children of Jesus & his Bride. 


Forgiving trespasses and sins 

Lest Babylon, with cruel Og, 

With Moral & Self-righteous Law, 
Should Crucify in Satan’s Synagogue. 


i What are those golden Builders doing 
Near mournful ever-weeping Paddington, 
Standing above that mighty Ruin, 
Where Satan the first victory won: 


JOD 


13 


21 


25 


(ii. 196-198) and in the Introduction to the reprint of Jerusalem edited by 


Russell and Maclagan. 


xr Marybone] Marylebone WBY. 15 William’s] This name is obscurely 
written in the original stereotype; Willan’s Shep.; Welling’s Gil., WMR, 
WBY. 17 our] her Shep. 25 Cp. Jerusalem, f. 1a, ll. 25-44 :— 


‘What are those golden builders doing? where was the burying-place 


Of soft Ethinthus? near Tyburn’s fatal Tree? is that 


Mild Zion’s hills, most ancient promontory, near mournful 


Ever weeping Paddington ? is that Calvary and Golgotha 
Becoming a building of pity and compassion? Lo! 


The stones are pity, and the bricks, well wrought affections : 
Enamel’d with love & kindness, & the tiles engraven gold, 


Labour of merciful hands: the beams & rafters are forgiveness: 
The mortar & cement of the work, tears of honesty: the nails 


And well contrived words, firm fixing, never forgotten, 


Always comforting the remembrance ; the floors, humility : 


The cielings, devotion : the hearths, thanksgiving : 
Prepare the furniture, O Lambeth, in thy pitying looms ; 


And the screws & iron braces are well wrought blandishments, 


The curtains, woven tears & sighs, wrought into lovely forms 
For comfort: there the secret furniture of Jerusalem’s chamber 

Is wrought : Lambeth! the Bride, the Lamb’s Wife, loveth thee: 
Thou art one with her & knowest not of self in thy supreme joy. 
Go on, builders in hope: tho’ Jerusalem wanders far away, 
Without the gate of Los: among the dark Satanic wheels,’ 


See also the conclusion of prose note to vi. 


Aaz 


356 Prophetic Books 


Where Albion slept beneath the fatal Tree, 
And the Druid’s golden Knife 

Rioted in human gore 

In Offerings of Human Life? 


They groan’d aloud on London Stone, 
They groan’d aloud on Tyburn’s Brook: 
Albion gave his deadly groan, 

And all the Atlantic Mountains shook. 


Albion’s Spectre from his Loins 
Tore forth in all the pomp of War; 
Satan his name; in flames of fire 
He stretch’d his Druid Pillars far. 


Jerusalem fell from Lambeth’s Vale, 
Down thro’ Poplar & Old Bow, 
Thro’ Malden, & acros the Sea, 

In War & howling, death & woe. 


The Rhine was red with human blood ; 
The Danube roll’d a purple tide ; 

On the Euphrates Satan stood, 

And over Asia stretch’d his pride. 


He wither’d up sweet Zion’s Hill 
From every Nation of the Earth; 
He wither’d up Jerusalem’s Gates, 
And in a dark Land gave her birth. 


He wither’d up the Human Form 
By laws of sacrifice for sin, 
Till it became a*Mortal Worm, 
But O! translucent all within. 
53 Cp. Jerusalem, f. 49, ll. 24-31 :-— 
‘O Polypus of Death, O Spectre over Europe and Asia, 
Withering the Human Form by Laws of Sacrifice for Sin, 


By Laws of Chastity & Abhorrence I am wither’d up, 
Striving to Create a Heaven in which all shall be pure & holy 


29 


33 


37 


41 


45 


49 


53 


In their Own Selfhoods, in Natural Selfish Chastity: to banish Pity 


And dear Mutual Forgiveness : & to become One Great Satan 


Inslav’d to the most powerful Selfhood: to murder the Dive 


Humanity 


In whose sight all are as the dust, & who chargeth his Angels with 


folly !’ 


a 


OSS be CAS rly geen Som 


- 


AS ie ay iSeceart iat ae nat os . 
hes 5 _— Bsc ree le re ae seniiiteliipspimiartiahades 


cen caee 


Prophetic Books 357 


The Divine Vision still was seen, 57 
Still was the Human Form Divine; 

Weeping, in weak & mortal clay, 

O Jesus! still the Form was thine! 


4 And thine the Human Face; & thine 61 
The Human Hands, & Feet, & Breath, 
Entering thro’ the Gates of Birth, 
And passing thro’ the Gates of Death. 


And O thou Lamb of God! whom I 65 
Slew in my dark self-righteous pride, 

Art thou return’d to Albion’s Land, 

And is Jerusalem thy Bride? 


a Come to my arms: & never more 69 
Depart ; but dwell for ever here; 
Create my Spirit to thy Love; 
Subdue my Spectre to thy Fear. 


Spectre of Albion! warlike Fiend! 73 
In clouds of blood & ruin roll’d, 

I here reclaim thee as my own, 

My Selfhood—Satan arm’d in gold! 


Is this thy soft Family-Love, 7 
Thy cruel Patriarchal pride; 

Planting thy Family alone, 

Destroying all the World beside? 


A man’s worst enemies are those 81 
Of his own house & family ; 

And he who makes his law a curse, 

By his own law shall surely die. 


i 76 Cp. Jerusalem, f. 33, ll. 17, 18 -— 
¢ ‘So spoke the Spectre to Albion; he is the Great Selfhood 
a Satan, Worship’d as God by the Mighty Ones of the Earth.’ 
79 alone] above Shep. 81 Cp. Jerusalem, f. 46, ll. 25-28 :— 
‘ Alas!—The time will come, when a man’s worst enemies 
Shall be those of his own house and family ; in a Religion 
Of Generation, to destroy by Sin and Atonement happy Jerusalem, 
The Bride and Wife of the Lamb. O God, thou art Not an Avenger!’ 
84 law] hand Russell and Maclagan. 


358 Prophetic Books 


In my Exchanges every Land 85 
Shall walk; & mine, in every Land, 
Mutual shall build Jerusalem, 

Both heart in heart & hand in hand. 


85 Cp. Jerusalem, f. 24, ll. 42, 43 -— 
‘In the Exchanges of London every Nation walk’d, 
And London walk’d in every Nation, mutual in love & harmony.’ 


1V 


Each Man is in his Spectre’s power 
Untill the arrival of that hour 
When his Humanity awake, 

And cast his Spectre into the Lake. 


Jerusalem, £. 41, written in reversed characters on a scroll to the left 
of a large bowed figure. Seated on the scroll is a sprite holding a pen in 
his hand. 

The original draft of these lines is found on p. 12 of the MS. Book, 
written immediately below one of the stanzas of ‘The Monk of Charle- 
maine’ (‘ When Satan first the black bow bent’). 


1 Each Man] This world MS. Book tst¢ rdg. del. his] the MS. Book. 

3 When his] Untill MS. Book rst rdg. del. 4 his] his own MS. Book ; 
the MS. Book 1st rdg. del. At some time Blake numbered these four 
lines in the MS., 4, 3, 1, 2, afterwards deleted, intending the stanzas 
to read :— 

‘When his Humanity awake, 

And cast his own Spectre into the Lake— 

Untill the arrival of that hour, 

Each Man is in his Spectre’s power.’ 


In the margin of the MS. opposite these lines is an unfinished stanza, here 
printed for the first time, apparently intended as a continuation of the 
preceding :— 

‘And there to Eternity aspire 

The selfhood in a flame of fire, 

Till then the Lamb of God——’ 


4 Cp. Milton, f. 40, ll. 10-12 -— 
‘Awake, Albion, awake! reclaim thy Reasoning Spectre. Subdue 


Him to the Divine Mercy. Cast him down into the Lake 
Of Los, that ever burneth with fire, ever & ever, Amen,’ 


~ ep EE ny pita Naa 


on ws 


eat 
Macey 


Prophets Books 359 


[To the Deists | 


I saw a Monk of Charlemaine I 
Arise before my sight: 

I talk’d with the Grey Monk as we stood 

In beams of infernal light. 


Jerusalem, f. 52, following the conclusion of Blake’s preface to Chap. 3. 
On either side of the title ‘To the Deists’ are the bracketed sentences 
‘Rahab is an Eternal State,’ and ‘The Spiritual States of the Soul are all 
Eternal. Distinguish between the Man, & his present State.’ The address 
runs :— 

‘He never can be a Friend to the Human Race who is the Preacher of 
Natural Morality, or Natural Religion; he is a flatterer who means to betray, 
to perpetuate Tyrant Pride, & the Laws of that Babylon which he foresees 
shall shortly be destroyed with the Spiritual and not the Natural Sword, 
He is in the State named Rahab ; which State must be put off before he can 
be the Friend of Man. 

‘You, O Deists! profess yourselves the Enemies of Christianity and you 
are so: you are also the Enemies of the Human Race & of Universal 
Nature. Man is born a Spectre or Satan, & is altogether an Evil, & requires 
a New Selfhood continually & must continually be changed into his direct 
Contrary. But your Greek Philosophy (which is a remnant of Druidism) 
teaches that Man is Righteous in his Vegetated Spectre—an Opinion of fatal 
& accursed consequence to Man, as the Ancients saw plainly by Revelation, 
to the intire abrogation of Experimental Theory, and many believed what 
they saw, and Prophecied of Jesus. 

‘Man must & will have Some Religion : if he has not the Religion of Jesus 
he will have the Religion of Satan, & will erect the Synagogue of Satan, 
calling the Prince of this World ‘‘ God,” and destroying all who do not 
worship Satan under the Name of God. Will any one say ‘‘ Where are 
those who worship Satan under the Name of God?’ Where are they? 
Listen! Every Religion that Preaches Vengeance for Sin is the Religion of 
the Enemy & Avenger, and not of the Forgiver of Sin; and their God 
is Satan Named by the Divine Name. Your Religion, O Deists !—Deism 
is the Worship of the God of this World, by the means of what you call 
Natural Religion and Natural Philosophy, and of Natural Morality or Self- 
Righteousness, the Selfish Virtues of the Natural Heart. This was the 
Religion of the Pharisees who murder’d Jesus. Deism is the same, & ends 
in the same. 

‘Voltaire, Rousseau, Gibbon, Hume, charge the Spiritually Religious with 
Hypocrisy ; but how a Monk, or a Methodist either, can be a Hypocrite 
I cannot concieve. We are Men of like passions with others, & pretend not 
to be holier than others ; therefore, when a Religious Man falls into Sin, he 


360 Prophetic Books 


Gibbon arose with a lash of steel, 5 
And Voltaire with a wracking wheel ; 

The Schools, in clouds of learning roll’d, 

Arose with War in iron & gold. 


‘Thou lazy Monk!’ they sound afar, 9 
‘In vain condemning glorious War; 

And, in your Cell, you shall ever dwell: 

Rise, War, & bind him in his Cell!’ 


ought not to be call’d a Hypocrite ; this title is more properly to be given to 
a Player who falls into Sin, whose profession is Virtue & Morality & the 
making Men Self-Righteous. Foote in calling Whitefield Hypocrite was 
himself one, for Whitefield pretended not to be holier than others but con- 
fessed his Sins before all the World. Voltaire! Rousseau! You cannot 
escape my charge that you are Pharisees & Hypocrites, for you are con- 
stantly talking of the Virtues of the Human Heart, and particularly of your 
own, that you may accuse others, & especially the Religious whose errors 
you by this display of pretended Virtue chiefly design to expose. Rousseau 
thought Men Good by Nature, he found them Evil, & found no friend. 
Friendship cannot exist without Forgiveness of sins continually. The Book 
written by Rousseau, call’d his Confessions, is an apology & cloke for 
his sin, & not a confession. 

‘But you also charge the poor Monks & Religious with being the causes of 
War, while you acquit & flatter the Alexanders & Caesars, the Lewis’s 
& Fredericks, who alone are its causes & its actors. But the Religion 
of Jesus, Forgiveness of Sin, can never be the cause of a War nor of asingle 
Martyrdom. 

‘Those who Martyr others or who cause War are Deists, but never can be 
Forgivers of Sin. The Glory of Christianity is To Conquer by Forgiveness. 
All the Destruction therefore in Christian Europe has arisen from Deism, 
which is Natural Religion.’ 

The original version forms part of a larger poem found in first draft 
on p. 12 of the MS. Book. This Blake afterwards separated into two 
distinct poems, engraving seven stanzas here as part of Jerusalem, and tran- 
scribing others, under the title ‘The Grey Monk,’ into the Pickering MS. 
(see MS. Book xlii, and ‘The Grey Monk’ in the Pickering MS.). The first 
four stanzas are practically the same as those of the version in the MS, Book; 
stanza 5, ‘When Satan first the black bow bent,’ is a revised version of the 
original stanza 12 ; stanza 7 is also the final version of the original draft ; and 
stanza 6 is a marginal addition, probably added by Blake when about to 
engrave this poem. Stanzas 4 and 6 occur also as stanzas 2 and 8 of the 
version in the Pickering MS. In my footnotes I give here the final readings 
of the MS. Book version. For deleted readings see MS. Book xlii. 

3 as we] where he MS. Book; as he WBY. 4 In beams] In the 
beams WBY. 9 sound] said MS. Book. Ir your] thy MS. Book. 
you] thou MS. Book. 


iE COMM Ree orig aleve. ocr anlage 


ee ee er eg ee 


Pe Ac vec x2 thew Ts we ee 


7 fis: 


arr 


eee 


Beep kete Books 361 


The blood red ran from the Grey Monk’s side, 13 
His hands & feet were wounded wide, 

His body bent, his arms & knees 

Like to the roots of ancient trees. 


When Satan first the black bow bent 17 
And the Moral Law from the Gospel rent, 

He forg’d the Law into a Sword, 

And spill’d the blood of mercy’s Lord. 


Titus! Constantine! Charlemaine! 21 
O Voltaire! Rousseau! Gibbon! Vain 

Your Grecian Mocks & Roman Sword 

Against this image of his Lord ; 


For a Tear is an Intellectual thing ; 25 
And a Sigh is the Sword of an Angel King; 

And the bitter groan of a Martyr’s woe 

Is an Arrow from the Almightie’s Bow. 


13 red ran]ran red WBY. 17 Cp. Four Zoas, Night vii (EY, 
ll. 642-644) :— 
‘Again the black bow draw: 
Again the elemental strings to your right breasts draw, 
And let the shadowy drum speed on the arrows black.’ 


These lines occur as continuation of a passage which in its reference to the 
battle and the northern drum are reminiscent of the stanza ‘ Thy father drew 
his sword in the north,’ which is found both in the MS. Book and in the 
Pickering MS. version. 18 And the Moral] WBY omits the. 24 this] 
the WMR, WBY., 25 a Tear] the tear MS. Book. 27 a Martyr’s] 
the Martyr’s MS. Book, 


vi 
[To the Christians | 


I give you the end of a golden string, 
Only wind it into a ball, 

It will lead you in at Heaven’s gate 
Built in Jerusalem’s wall. 


Jerusalem, f. 77, engraved from the first draft on p. 46 (reversed) of 
the MS. Book, the only difference in the MS. version being the first deleted 


362 Prophetic Books 


reading ‘have given’ for ‘give’ in 1]. 1. This stanza forms the opening 
lines of Blake’s preface to Chap. 3, addressed ‘To the Christians.’ The 
preface, which has the two mottos in the left margin ‘ Devils are False 
Religions’ and ‘Saul, Saul, Why persecutest thou me ?’ runs :— ; 
‘We are told to abstain from fleshly desires that we may lose no time 
from the Work of the Lord. Every moment lost is a moment that cannot be 
redeemed ; every pleasure that intermingles with the duty of our station is 
a folly unredeemable, & is planted like the seed of a wild flower among our 
wheat. All the tortures of repentance are tortures of self-reproach on 
account of our leaving the Divine Harvest to the Enemy, the struggles 
of intanglement with incoherent roots. I know of no other Christianity, and 
of no other Gospel, than the liberty both-of body & mind to exercise the 
Divine Arts of Imagination. Imagination, the real & eternal World, of 
which this Vegetable Universe is but a faint shadow, & in which we shall 
live in our Eternal or Imaginative Bodies when these Vegetable Mortal 


Bodies are no more. The Apostles knew of no other Gospel. What were — 


all their spiritual gifts? What is the Divine Spirit ? is the Holy Ghost any 
other than an Intellectual Fountain? What is the Harvest of the Gospel & 
its Labours? What is that Talent which it is a curse to hide? What are 
the Treasures of Heaven which we are to lay up for ourselves, are they any 
other than Mental Studies & Performances? What are all the Gifts of the 
Gospel, are they not all Mental Gifts? Is God a Spirit who must be wor- 
shipped in Spirit & in Truth, and are not the Gifts of the Spirit Every-thing 
to\Man? O ye Religious, discountenance every one among you who shall 
pretend to despise Art & Science! I call upon you in the Name of Jesus! 
What is the Life of Man but Art & Science? is it Meat & Drink? is not the 
Body more than Raiment? What is Mortality but the things relating to the 
Body, which Dies? What is Immortality but the thingsrelating to the Spirit, 
which Lives Eternally? What is the Joy of Heaven but Improvement 
in the things of the Spirit? What are the Pains of Hell but Ignorance, 
Bodily Lust, Idleness, & devastation of the things of the Spirit? Answer 
this‘to yourselves, & expel from among you those who pretend to despise 
the labours of Art & Science, which alone are the labours of the Gospel. Is 
not this plain & manifest to the thought? Can you think at all & not 
pronounce heartily, That to Labour in Knowledge is to’ build up Jerusalem : 
and to Despise Knowledge is to Despise Jerusalem & her Builders? And 
remember ! He who despises & mocks a Mental Gift in another, calling 
it pride & selfishness & sin, mocks Jesus, the giver of every Mental Gift, 
which always appear to the ignorante-loving Hypocrite as Sins, but that 
which is a Sin in’ the sight of cruel Man, is not so in the sight of our kind 
God. Let every Christian as much as in him lies engage himself openly & 
publicly, before all the World, in some Mental pursuit for the Building up of 
Jerusalem. 


‘I stood among my valleys of the south; 

And saw a flame of fire, even as a Wheel 

Of fire surrounding all the heavens: it went 
From west to east against the current of 
Creation, and devour’d all things in its loud 
Fury, & thundering course round heaven & earth. 


Sein iain 


A la) asia Zt 


at 
= 
4 
. 
.: 
> 
2 


‘we 


pichiene Books 363 


By it the Sun was roll’d into an orb; 

By it the Moon faded into a globe 

Travelling thro’ the night ; for, from its dire ~ 
And restless fury Man himself shrunk up 

Into a little root a fathom long. 

And I asked a Watcher & a Holy-One 

Its Name : he answer’d, “It is the Wheel of Religion.” 
I wept, & said, ‘“‘Is this the law of Jesus, 

This terrible devouring sword turning every way?” 
He answered: ‘‘ Jesus died because he strove 
Against the current of this Wheel; its Name 

Is Caiaphas, the dark Preacher of Death, 

Of sin, of sorrow, & of punishment, 

Opposing Nature. It is Natural Religion. 

But Jesus is the bright Preacher of Life, 
Creating Nature from this fiery Law 

By self-denial & forgiveness of Sin. 

Go therefore, cast out devils in Christ’s name, 
Heal thou the sick of spiritual disease, 

Pity the evil; for thou art not sent 

To smite with terror & with punishments 

Those that are sick, liké to the Pharisees 
Crucifying & encompasing sea & land 

For proselytes to tyranny & wrath. 

But to the Publicans & Harlots go: 

Teach them True Happiness, but let no curse 
Go forth out of thy mouth to blight their peace : 
For Hell is open’d to Heaven: thine eyes beheld 
_The dungeons burst, & the Prisoners set free.” ’ 


vii 
[To the Christians] 
England! awake! awake! awake! I 


Jerusalem thy Sister calls! 
Why wilt thou sleep the sleep of death, 
And close her from thy ancient walls? 


Jerusalem, at foot of f. 77, forming the conclusion of the address ‘To the 
Christians,’ and immediately following the long passage quoted in the foot- 
note to the preceding poem. Not in the MS. Book. Shepherd prints 
vi and vii as a single poem with the title ‘ To the Christians.’ 


4 close] chase Swinb. 


364 Prophetic Books 


e) 


Thy hills & valleys felt her feet 5a 
Gently upon their bosoms move: ee 
Thy Gates beheld sweet Zion’s ways ; 
Then was a time of joy and love. 


And now the time returns again: 9 
Our souls exult, & London’s towers 

Recieve the Lamb of God to dwell 

In England’s green & pleasant bowers. 


vill 


[Especially to the Female] 


In Heaven the only Art of Living 
Is Forgetting & Forgiving ; 

But if you on Earth Forgive 

You shall not find where to Live. 


Jerusalem, f. 81, where this stanza is engraved in reversed characters 
in the left margin of a three-quarter-page illustration. Below the two 
couplets, also written in reversed writing, are the words ‘ Especially to the — 
Female,’ which seem intended as title to the lines above. Russell and 
Maclagan misread ‘ especially the Female,’ and place between ll. 2 and 3. 

| 


. 


an VB RISKS 
basing 
dETO 29 fal RO APRS OY TORN 
THE GATES OF PARADISE 


og 
\ 
iP ¥ 7 
bom 
uf 


4 ; Written between 1805 and 1810, and revised at some 
: later date 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL PREFACE 


TO 
THE GATES OF PARADISE 


BLAKE'S Gates of Paradise, as first issued, was a small 
foolscap octavo picture-book with the title: For Children | 
[a flying figure| | The | Gates | of | Paradise | [rule] | 1793| 
Published by W. Blake—No. 13 | Hercules Buildings Lam- 
beth | and | F. Fohnson St. Paul's Church Yard. The 
book in this form consisted of a frontispiece, title-page, 
and sixteen numbered plates of emblematic designs, the 
original pencil sketches for which are found in the Rossetti 
MS. The plates, which vary in size from 28 x 13 to 44 x 23 
inches, are executed, not by the artist’s usual cameo etching 
process, but by ordinary line engraving. At the foot of 
each is a short inscription or legend, with Blake’s imprint 
as publisher, dated [Lambeth] May 17,1793. The British 
Museum Print Room copy is an example of this first 
issue, or edition, of Ze Gates of Paradise. ‘The Beckford 
copy, sold at the Hamilton Palace sale, in 1882, has the 
engravings in their earliest state, before the date and imprint 
on title and publishers’ imprint on plates were added. . 

The book is advertised in Blake’s prospectus of October ro, 
1793, where it is described as ‘ The Gates of Paradise, a small 
book of Engravings. Price, 3s.’ The preceding entry, 
‘The History of England, a small book of Engravings. 
Price, 3s., would seem to refer to a companion volume 
of which no copy is known to exist. It appears to me 
probable that the rough draft of subjects for a history 
of England written on the outer page of Blake’s Manu- 
script- and Sketch-book supplies a clue to the contents 
of this missing work’. Blake may also have intended to 


1 This entry reads: 1. Giants ancient inhabitants of England. 2. The 
Landing of Brutus. 3. Corineus throws Gogmagog the Giant into the sea. 
4. King Lear. 5. (de/.) The Ancient Britons according to Caesar. The 
Srontispiece (del.). 6. The Druids. 7. The Landing of Julius Caesar, 
8. Boadicea inspiring the Britons against the Romans. The Britons’ distress 
& depopulation. Women fleeing from War. Women in a Siege (these three 
unnumbered subjects are a marginal addition). 9. Alfred in the countryman’s 


ae ere, 


Gates of Paradise 367 


engrave and issue, as the contrary to ‘For Children,’ The 
Gates of Paradise—a book which is known to us only from 
its title-page—‘ For Children, the Gates of Hell.’ (See 
W. M. Rossetti’s ‘Annotated Lists of Blake’s Paintings, 
Drawings, and Engravings,’ Gil. i. 250.) 

The Gates of Paradise also appeared with the new 
undated title-page : Hor the Sexes | The | Gates | of | Para- 
dise | | prologue of ten lines|. This is in reality a second 
and considerably changed edition, printed several years 
later ; though Blake has left unaltered the original imprints, 
dated 1793, at the foot of the frontispiece and sixteen plates 
of emblems. The lines on the new title-page beginning 
‘Mutual Forgiveness of each Vice,’ and some part of the 
legends, are additions. The three supplementary plates 
containing the ‘ Keys of the Gates’ and ‘To the Accuser’ 
appear also for the first time. 

Gilchrist (i. 102) regards the Keys, ‘themselves a little 
obscure, merely as versified explanations of the artist’s 
original motives. This, however, is an error into which the 
poet’s biographer could not have fallen had he made any 
serious attempt to trace the gradual evolution of Blake’s 
symbolic system. These lines, as my footnotes to the Keys 
amply demonstrate, belong to the same period as Wilton 
and Ferusalem, reading into what were at first simple 
allegorical pictures for children the later developed elaborate 
symbolism in which Blake clothed his full-fledged mystical 
gospel. Thus we find ‘ Water,’ represented in the earlier 
issue by the figure of a survivor of the Deluge, interpreted 
‘ for the sexes,’ as‘ Doubt self-jealous, watry folly,’ while the 
‘dark hermaphrodite’ (or humanity divided against itself)— 
a favourite figure in ¥erusalem—is somewhat violently 
offered as the interpretation of the picture illustrating 
‘Fire.’ The original plates have been worked over and 
elaborated in this second issue, the figure of ‘Fire’ being 
now represented as blind in order that it may agree with 
the descriptive text. 


house. 10, Edwin & Morcar stirring up the Londoners to resist W. the 
Conq’. 11. W. the Con? crown’d, 12. King John & Mag.Charta. A 
Famine occasioned by the Popish interdict (@ marginal addition). 13. Edward 
at Calais. 14. Edward the Black Prince brings his Captives to his father. 
15. The Penance of Jane Shore. 17. The Reformation by H. VIII. 
18. Ch. I beheaded (subjects 17, 18 are a marginal addition, subsequently 
deleted). 19 (16, 17 del.), The Plague. 20 (z7, 28 del.), The fire of London. 
16 (z8 del.). The Cruelties used by Kings & Priests. 21 (zg del.). A pro- 
spect of Liberty. 22 (20 del,), A Cloud. 


368 Gates of Paradise 


My authority for the text of The Gates of Paradise 
in this second form is the copy in the possession of 
Mr. John Linnell, junior, formerly belonging to his father, 
Blake’s friend and patron. The twenty-one plates are 
printed upon separate sheets of paper measuring about 
61x 43 inches. There is no dated watermark. One of the 
two copies from the Rowfant Library is an example of 
the first issue, with imprints, but without the legends to the 
plates, and with the second title-page and the ‘Keys of 
the Gates’ inserted from the later impression, probably by 
Mr. Frederick Tatham, to whom it formerly belonged. 
The plate ‘To the Accuser who is the God of this World’ 
is lacking. 

At a still later date Blake retouched the plates and made 
some further alterations in the text. These last revisions 
occur in the prologue on the title-page, and in the change 
of ‘I’ to ‘ We’ in the ‘ Keys of the Gates.’ In the present 
edition I follow Blake’s final version, taking’ my text from 
a copy in the possession of Mr. W. A. White, of Brooklyn, 
New York. This copy, which must have been one of the 
last printed, bears the dated watermark 1825. There are 
two other examples of this book in its final form—one a copy 
in the possession of Mr. James T. Linnell, and the other 
a duplicate from the Rowfant Library since acquired by 
Mr. W. A. White. 

Gilchrist, misled perhaps by Blake’s retention in the 
later issues of the original dated imprints, appears to regard 
the two forms of Zhe Gates of Paradise ‘For Children’ 
and ‘For the Sexes’ as contemporaneous issues of the 
same work with different title-pages. He also ignores the 
fact (first, so far as I am aware, suggested by Mr. W. A. 
White in a letter to the present writer) that the ‘ Keys 
of the Gates’ must have been written long after the first 
appearance of the little book in 1793. 

A comparison of the metaphorical figures found in the 
‘Keys of the Gates’ with those used by Blake in his 
earlier and later prophetic books has convinced me that 
the verses in the two issues ‘for the sexes’ could only 
have been written about the same time as Yerusalem 
or Milton. Blake, it is true, not infrequently in certain 
earlier writings anticipates the complex mystical formulae 
found in those written several years later, or repeats, 
after long intervals, thoughts or expressions adum- 
brated in his simpler poems. But in the ‘Keys of the 
Gates’ we find no such confusion of earlier and later 


eee 


Bey eas 


Gates of Paradise 369 


symbolism. The whole is a harmonious composition, 
repeating in an extremely condensed form, often in identical 
words, the full evangel of Serusalem. 

A further clue to the date of the ‘ Keys’ of The Gates of 
Paradise ‘for the sexes’ may be found in the repetition 
in ‘The Everlasting Gospel’ (y?, 1. 96) of the line ‘In 
doubt which is self-contradiction.’ ‘The Everlasting Gos- 
pel,’ which was written about 1810, itself contains a con- 
siderable number of striking parallelisms with passages 
in Ferusalem which I have given in the footnotes to that 
poem. Ferusalem bears on its title-page the date 1804, 
but this represents the year its engraving was begun rather 
than finished, and its completion may well have been the 
work of several years. The first issue of The Gates of 
Paradise in its altered form ‘for the sexes’ may thus 
be assigned with some certainty to the last half of the 
decade ending 1810}, 

Mr. W. M. Rossetti, followed by all later editors, dates 
the ‘ Keys of the Gates’ 1793, with the remark that it 
should, strictly speaking, be placed chronologically between 
the Songs of Innocence and the Songs of Experience. 
Messrs. Ellis and Yeats stumble at the threshold of the 
truth in curiously stating it in its converse form: ‘ The Gates 
of Paradise soon after “ Lafayette ” are of incalculable value 
as interpreting the Prophetic Books. Their “keys” will 
open the meaning of all the myth, though they will not, 
of course, explain its story.’ 

All editors follow Gilchrist’s text (based apparently upon 
B?), but omit the numbers referring to the engraved plates. 
A facsimile by Mary Hughes and William Muir reproduces 

1 Ellis and Yeats (ii. 260), on the strength of a passage in Blake’s Adver- 
tisement or ‘ Public Address,’ which refers to the Examiner's attack upon him, 
place the first appearance of Jerusalem at some time later than August, 1808. 
_ This passage, which is found on p. 52 of the MS. Book, runs: ‘The manner 
_ in which my character has been blasted these thirty years, both as an Artist 

and as a Man, may be seen particularly in a Sunday paper called the 
_ Examiner, published in Beaufort’s Buildings ; the manner in which I have 
rooted out the nest of villains will be seen in a poem concerning my three 
_ years’ Herculean labours at Felpham, which I shall soon publish.’ This, 

however, can hardly refer to Jerusalem, though Blake’s allusion to his ‘ three 
- years’ Herculean labours at Felpham’ are reminiscent of the opening words 
_ of the ‘Address to the Public’ with which that poem commences. But 
_ Jerusalem, though part of it may be the result of his three years’ labours at 
_ Felpham, is certainly not a poem concerning them ; and only a very esoteric 
' school indeed could interpret it as an allegory of his quarrel with Hayley 
and Hunt. 

SAMPSON Bb 


370 Gates of Paradise 


the frontispiece, plates 1-6, 8-16, and the plate ‘To the 
Accuser,’ apparently from B1 or B’, with the title-page of 
A, ‘For Children.” Plate 7, as the legend shows, also 
belongs to A. Prefixed in ordinary letterpress is the pro- 
logue from the title-page of B+, and in a somewhat corrupt 
version ‘ The Keys of the Gates,’ which would seem to have 
been wanting in the copy facsimilized. 

Appended is a list of the plates of Te Gates of Paradise 
with their several legends, in the first issue ‘ For Children ’ 
(A), and in the first and second issue ‘For the Sexes’ 
(B! and B’). 

[i] Frontispiece. [A caterpillar ona leaf. On a second 
leaf a human chrysalis like a babe in swaddling-clothes. | 
A. What is Man! B!and B®. What is Man! | The Sun’s 
Light when he unfolds it | Depends on the Organ that 
beholds it. 

[ii] [Z2tle-page.| A. For Children e¢c. B'. For the 
Sexes etc. B*. For the Sexes e¢c. (with changes in text of 
prologue, for which see footnotes). 

1. [A woman under a weeping-willow, holding a babe in 
her left arm, and pulling a mandrake out of the ground by 
its hair.] A, B!, and B’. I found him beneath a Tree. 

2. [Old man, resting his hands on his knees, sits upon 
a rock beneath a leafless tree in a deluge of rain. The 


encroaching flood rises to his feet.] A. Water. B* and | 


B?. Water | Thou Waterest him with Tears. . 

3. [Crouching figure of a man emerging from a crevice 
inarock.] A. Earth. Bt and B?, Earth | He struggles 
into Life. 

4. [Man seated upon a white cloud clasps his forehead 
with both hands and gazes steadfastly before him. Behind 
him the sky studded with stars.] A. Air. B* and B* 
Air | On Cloudy Doubts and Reasoning Cares. 

5. [Fiend, blind in B' and B?, but not in A, standing in 
flames, armed with spear and shield.] A. Fire. B! and B*. 
Fire. That end in endless Strife. 

6. [Cherub issuing from an egg.] A, B!, and B2. At 
length for hatching ripe | he breaks the shell. 

7. [Boy in garden, hat in hand, chases flying fairy. 
A second fairy lies face downwards crushed at his feet.] 
A. Alas! Bt and B*% Alas! [the original inscription 
written in centre of page with the addition of the words on 
either side and below] What are these? ... the Female 
Martyr | Is She also the Divine Image? : 

8. [Seated old man, with sword in right hand, leans 


NE ee ee seaemiiariiraiachen 0 <r ce ah A ARE Ra Eh ate aN ey pC ot 


ee 


(Poa te oae iooe 


PRD TN he Nah SE 


rp Pare 


Gates of Paradise 371 


- sorrowfully on his elbow, averting his head from the figure 
of a joyfully departing youth.] A,B1, and B®. My son! 
my son! 

g. [Man standing on edge of world prepares to mount 

_ladder reared against the crescent moon. Two lovers 
watch him.] A, B!, and B® I want! I want! 

ro. |Man drowning in sea. One arm upthrust, and head 
just disappearing beneath the waves.] <A, B', and B’. 
Help! Help! 

11. [Seated under a tree, an old man with spectacles 
clips the wings of a boy who struggles to escape. Before 

_him the setting sun. See facsimile.| A. Aged Ignorance. 
B! and B*. Aged Ignorance | Perceptive Organs closed, 
their Objects close. 

12. [Old man and four sons and daughters in dungeon 
cell.]| A, B+, and B*. Does thy God, O Priest, take such 
vengeance | as this? 

13. [Man, woman, and two children, beside bed on which 
lies a corpse, watch the ascending spirit of an old man 
who points upward.] A, B1, and B*. Fear and Hope are— 
Vision. 

14. [Man with walking-stick striding along country lane. | 
A, B! and B?. The Traveller hasteth in the | Evening. 

15. [Old man, leaning on crutch, passes through gate- 
way of tomb.] A, B1, and B*. Death’s Door. 

16. [Woman in white grave cerements, seated on the 
ground in burial crypt. A huge worm crawls around her 
feet.| A, B1,and B*. Ihave said to the worm ; Thou | art 
my mother and my sister. 

-[17, 18]. Keys of the Gates. See text. 
1g]. To the Accuser who is the God of this world. 
See text. 


Bb2 


ree Gates of Paradise 


FOR THE SEXES. THE GATES OF 
PARADISE 


[ Prologue | 


Mutual Forgiveness of each Vice, I 
Such are the Gates of Paradise, 

Against the Accuser’s chief desire, 

Who walk’d among the Stones of Fire. 


Not in the first issue of The Gates of Paradise, ‘for Children’ (1793). 
Engraved, in slightly different form, on the title-page of the undated first 
issue of the Gates ‘ for the Sexes’ (B'), and, as above, on the later issue of 
the same (B?). Printed by Gilchrist (i. 102), WMR, EY (ili. 62), and WBY, 
the three latter with the title ‘Introduction,’ and by W. Muir with title 
‘ Prologue.’ 

1 Cp. Jerusalem, f. 49, ll. 25-29 :— 

‘Withering the Human Form by Laws of Sacrifice for Sin, 

By Laws of Chastity & Abhorrence I am wither’d up, 

Striving to Create a Heaven in which all shall be pure & holy 

In their Own Selfhoods, in Natural Selfish Chastity : to banish Pity 

And dear Mutual Forgiveness’ ; 
also f. ga, Il. 15-20 :— 

‘When all their Crimes, their Punishments, their Accusations of Sin, 
All their Jealousies, Revenges, Murders, hidings of Cruelty in Deceit, 
Appear only in the Outward Spheres of Visionary Space and Time, 
In the Shadows of Possibility by Mutual Forgiveness for evermore, 
And in the Vision & in the Prophecy, that we may Forsee & Avoid 
The terrors of Creation & Redemption & Judgment.’ 


See also Jerusalem, f. 7,1. 66, and f. 43, 1. 61. Here also may be added 
Blake’s daring and beautiful perversion of the 4gnus Dei, which forms the 
concluding lines of the second chapter of Jerusalem :— 


‘Come, O thou Lamb of God, and take away the remembrance of Sin. 
To Sin & to hide the Sin in sweet deceit is lovely! 

To Sin in the open face of day is cruel & pitiless! But 

To record the Sin for a reproach, to let the Sun go down 

In a remembrance of the Sin is a Woe & a Horror, 

A brooder of an Evil Day, and a Sun rising in blood! 

Come then, O Lamb of God, and take away the remembrance of Sin.’ 


3 See note to ‘ Epilogue.’ 4,5 Cp. Jerusalem ‘To the Public,’ f. 3, 


ll. 18-27. 4 Cp. Jerusalem, f. 49, ll. 72-74 :— 
‘Learn therefore, O Sisters, to distinguish the Eternal Human 
That walks about among the’ stones of fire in bliss & woe 
Alternate.’ 


ae oe | et en ee ee ee ee 


elt PSAs 


sien is OB RA eR A Ra Ne a IDO NR A MN NS Rc 


—— 


i ee ee 


Gates of Paradise 373 


Jehovah’s Finger Wrote The Law; as 5 
Then Wept; then rose in Zeal and Awe, 

And the Dead Corpse, from Sinai’s heat, 

Buried beneath his Mercy Seat. 

O Christians! Christians! tell me Why  . 9 
You rear it on your Altars high? 


5 Finger] fingers B! and all edd. 6 Then] He ail edd. 7, 8 And 
- Seat] 
‘And in the midst of Sinai’s heat 
Hid it beneath His Mercy Seat.’ 
B', Gil, WMR, EY, WBY. 
‘And in the midst of Sinai’s heat 
Hid it beneath the Mercy Seat.’ 
W. Muir. 


The Keys 


The Catterpiller on the Leaf pr BOIS 
Reminds thee of thy Mother’s Grief. 


of the Gates 


1. My Eternal Man set in Repose, 
The Female from his darkness rose; 


Engraved upon two plates of 23 and 29 lines respectively, which are 
printed to follow plate 16 in both issues of Gates of Paradise ‘for the 
Sexes.’ 

% 2 Cp. ‘Auguries of Innocence’ (Pickering MS.), 1]. 37, 38 :— 

‘The Caterpillar on the leaf 
Repeats to thee thy mother’s grief.’ 

3 The ‘ Eternal Man,’ or ‘ Fourfold Man’ (called by the name of ‘ Albion’ 
when fallen into caotealig)s is Blake’s term for Universal Humanity. For the 
‘Four statés of Humanity in its Repose’ see Milton, f. 34, 1. 8, also 1. 46 :— 

‘ And the Eternal Man, even Albion upon the Rock of Ages,’ 
4 This refers to the ‘division’ of Man into his ‘Male and Female Con- 
trarieties,’ ‘Spectre’ (reasoning power) and ‘ Emanation’ (imagination)—the 
chief theme of Jerusalem. Cp. f. go, ll. 52, 53 :— 

‘When the Individual appropriates Universality 
He divides into Male & Female.’ 


374 Gates of Paradise 


And She found me beneath a Tree, 5 
A Mandrake, and in her Veil hid me. 
Serpent Reasonings us entice 
Of Good and Evil, Virtue & Vice, 
. Doubt Self Jealous, Watry folly. 9 
. Struggling thro’ Earth’s Melancholy, 
4. Naked in Air, in Shame and Fear, 
5. Blind in Fire, with shield and spear, 
Two Horrid Reasoning Cloven Fiction, 13 
In Doubt, which is Self contradiction, 


Ww bd 


6 Cp. Jerusalem, f. 11, 1. 22 :— 
‘He is like a mandrake in the earth.’ 
For the ‘ Veil’ see note to 1. 19. 7 ‘Serpent’ is one of Blake’s names 
for Nature, this and the lines immediately following referring to his béte notr 
‘ Natural Religion.’ Cp. Jerusalem, f. 29, 1. 76 :— 
‘And the vast form of Nature like a serpent play’d before them.’ 
Also ‘ The Everlasting Gospel’ (Rossetti MS. cxxxii), B, 1. 53 :-— 
‘The Serpent Bulk of Nature’s Dross.’ _ 


8 &] all edd. omit. Cp. Jerusalem, f. 91, ll. 54, 55 :— 

‘I care not whether a Man is Good or Evil: all that I care 

Is whether he is a Wise Man or a Fool.’ 
For definition of ‘ Good and Evil’ see Jerusalem, f. 10, ll. 7-16. 9 Cp. the 
description of the Shadow from Albion’s ‘ wearied intellect,’ Jerusalem, 
f, 29, ll, 39, 40 :— 

‘A sweet entrancing self-delusion, a wat’ry vision of Albion, 

Soft exulting in existence ; all the Man absorbing.’ 
It is interesting to note (a fact hitherto, I believe, overlooked) that the whole 
of the page of Jerusalem in which these lines are found occurs also, with 
a few trifling differences such as the substitution of ‘Man’ or ‘Ancient Man’ 
for ‘Albion,’ in Zhe Four Zoas (Night iii). The Four Zoas was written or 
begun about 1797, the date on the title-page, though its completion may 
perhaps be some years later. Forty-seven out of the seventy leaves of which 
the manuscript is composed are proofs of Blake’s illustrations to Young’s 
Night Thoughts, published in the same year. 
11, 12 Cp. Jerusalem, f. 7, ll. 38, 39 :— 
‘Vala comes from the Furnace in a cloud, but wretched Luvah 

Is howling in the Furnaces, in flames among Albion’s Spectres.’ 

13 Fiction] fictions all edd. 13-15 Cp. Jerusalem, f. 64, ll. 27-31 :-— 
“in self contradicting agony 
. .. A dark Hermaphrodite they stood,’ 


Cp. also ‘The Everlasting Gospel,’ y?, ll, 95, 96:— 


‘Reasoning on its own dark Fiction, 
In doubt, which is Self Contradiction,’ 


Se ae 


ee 
emt er 


2h Se eal ae a a 


Gates of Paradise 375 


A dark Hermaphrodite We stood,— 
Rational Truth, Root of Evil and Good. 
Round me flew the Flaming Sword ; 17 
Round her snowy Whirlwinds roar’d, 
Freezing her Veil, the Mundane Shell. 
6. I rent the Veil where the Dead dwell: 
- When weary Man enters his Cave, 21 
He meets his Saviour in the Grave. 
Some find a Female Garment there, 
And some a Male, woven with care; 
Lest the Sexual Garments sweet 25 
Should grow a devouring Winding sheet. 
7, One Dies! Alas! the Living and Dead! 
One is slain! and One is fled! 


15 We] I B? and all edd. 17 Cp. Jerusalem, f. 77, 1. 56-62:— 
‘I wept & said: ‘Is this the law of Jesus, 
This terrible devouring sword turning every way ? 
He answerd... It is Natural Religion.’ 
18 Cp. Jerusalem, f. 7, 1. 73:— 
‘, . . indignant self-righteousness like whirlwinds of the north.’ 
19 Freezing] Freeing W. Muir. Cp. Jerusalem, f. 63, 1. 44; f. 64, 1. 1 :— 
‘among the Caverns 
Of the Mundane Shell, which froze on all sides’ ; 


also f: 59, ll. 2-9 :— 
‘For the Veil of Vala, which Albion cast into the Atlantic Deep 
To catch the Souls of the Dead, began to Vegetate & Petrify .. . 
Thus, in process of time, it became the beautiful Mundane Shell, 
The Habitation cf the Spectres of the Dead & the Place 
Of Redemption & of awaking again into Eternity.’ 
23, 24 Cp. Jerusalem, f. 54, ll. 3, 4:— 
‘This is Jerusalem in every Man, 
A Tent & Tabernacle of Mutual Forgiveness, Male and Female 
Clothings’ ; 
also f, 61, 1. 51 :— 
‘Man in the Resurrection changes his Sexual Garments at Will.’ 
25 Cp. Jerusalem, f. 90, 1. 37 -— 
«Lest the Sexual Generation swallow up Regeneration’ ; 
and Milton, f. 43, ll. 25-28 :— 
‘These are the Sexual Garments, the Abomination of Desolation, 
Hiding the Human Lineaments, as with an Ark & Curtains 
Which Jesus rent; & now shall wholly purge away with Fire 
Till Generation is swallow’d up in Regeneration.’ 
27 Dead] the dead W. Muir. In the later Prophetic Books Blake uses 


376 Gates of Paradise 


8. In Vain-glory hatcht and nurst, 29 
By double Spectres, Self Accurst. 
My Son! my Son! thou treatest me 
But as I have instructed thee. 

9. On the shadows of the Moon, 33 
Climbing thro’ Night’s highest noon: 

ro. In Time’s Ocean falling, drown’d: 

11. In Aged Ignorance profound, 
Holy and cold, I clip’d the Wings a 
Of all Sublunary Things, 

12, And in depths of my Dungeons 
Closed the Father and the Sons. 

13. But when once'I did descry 41 
The Immortal Man that cannot Die, 

14. Thro’ evening shades I haste away 
To close the Labours of my Day. 

15. The Door of Death I open found, 45 
And the Worm Weaving in the Ground: 

16. Thou’rt my Mother, from the Womb ; 
Wife, Sister, Daughter, to the Tomb: 
Weaving to Dreams the Sexual strife, 49 
And weeping over the Web of Life. 


‘death’ as the equivalent of bodily or ‘vegetative’ life. Cp. Jerusalem, 
f. go, Il. 53-55 :— 
‘, . » & when the Male & Female 
Appropriate Individuality, they become an Eternal Death, 
Hermaphroditic worshippers of a God of cruelty & law.’ 


See also Jerusalem, Milton, and The Four Zoas, passim. 30 Spectres] 


speeches W. Muir. For references to the divided spectre (‘Reasoning 


Power in every Man,” Jerusalem, f. 54, 1. 7, and ‘ Pride & Self-righteous- 
ness,’ bid. f. 8, 1. 30) see Jerusalem, f. 6, 1. 3; f. 17, 1. 1, and passim. 
31, 32 See description of plate 8; also Jerusalem, f. 18, ll. 20, 2t :— 
‘War and deadly contention, Between 
Father and Son, and light and love” 
39 my] icy all edd. 42 Cp. Jerusalem, f. 96, 1. 4-6:— 
‘. .. Albion knew that it 

Was the Lord, the Universal Humanity, & Albion saw his Form, 

A Man, & they conversed as Man with Man, in Ages of Eternity.’ 
43 shades] shadows W. Muir. 45 Cp, Blake’s illustration to Blair’s Grave, 
f. 31, ‘ Death’s Door.’ 49, 50 Cp. description, too long for quotation, of 


the Daughters of Los weaving the Web of Life with tears and lamentations, 
Jerusalem, f. 59, ll. 26-55. 


ee re 


or ce 
FE 


SE ee 


Gates of Paradise 377 


[ Epilogue’ 
To the Accuser who is 
The God of This World 


Truly, My Satan, thou art but a Dunce, I 
And dost not know the Garment from the Man; 
Every Harlot was a Virgin once, 

Nor canst thou ever change Kate into Nan. 


Tho’ thou art Worshippéd by the Names Divine 
Of Jesus and Jehovah, thou art still 

The Son of Morn in weary Night’s decline, 

The lost Traveller's Dream under the Hill. 


Engraved on a single plate printed as the last leaf of the issue ‘for the 
Sexes.’ All edd. print asa single stanza. 

Title] Cp. Jerusalem, f. 98, ll. 48, 49 :— 

‘where are all his Human Sacrifice 
For Sin, in War, & in the Druid Temples of the Accuser of Sin.’ 
In the untitled poem in the Rossetti MS. which Rossetti calls ‘Mammon’ 
and Swinburne ‘Prayer’ (MS. Book, cxxx), the ‘accuser of sins’ stands 
for Satan or ‘ Mr. Devil.’ 3 Cp. Jerusalem, f. 61, 1. 52 :— 

‘Every Harlot was once a Virgin: every Criminal an Infant Love.’ 
5-8 Cp. Blake’s ‘Address to the Deists’ at the beginning of the third 
chapter of Jerusalem (f. 52, ll. 18-25) :— 

‘Man must & will have Some Religion: if he has not the Religion of 
Jesus, he will have the Religion of Satan, & will erect the Synagogue 
of Satan, calling the Prince of this World, God; and destroying all who do 
not worship Satan under the Name of God. Will any one say, Where are 
those who worship Satan under the Name of God? Where are they ? 
Listen! Every Religion that Preaches Vengeance for Sin is the Religion of 
the Enemy & Avenger: and not of the Forgiver of Sin: and their God 
is Satan, Named by the Divine Name.’ See also Jerusalem, f. 33, |. 18 :— 

‘Satan, Worship’d as God by the Mighty Ones of the Earth’ ; 
and Milton, f. 9, Il. 10-14 -— 


‘Where Satan, making to himself Laws from his own identity, 
Compell’d others to serve him in moral gratitude & submission, 
Being call’d God, setting himself above all that is called God; 
And all the Spectres of the Dead, calling themselves Sons of God, 
In his Synagogues worship Satan under the Unutterable Name.’ 


378 Gates of Paradtse 


[From the Legends to the Plates] 


1 


The Sun’s Light, when he unfolds it, 
Depends on the Organ that beholds it. 


Not in A. Legend to Frontispiece of The Gates ‘for the Sexes’ (B! and : 
B®) all edd. omit. Cp. Jerusalem, f. 98, ll. 37, 38 :— 


‘such was the variation of Time & Space, 
Which vary according as the Organs of Perception vary.’ 
See also zbid., f. 34, ll. 55, 56 :— 


‘If Perceptive Organs vary: Objects of Perception seem to vary : 
If the Perceptive Organs close: their Objects seem to close also’: 


note also the repetition of the latter line, slightly changed, in the addition 
to the legend of plate 11 in B1 and B*, 


il 
Thou waterest him with Tears: 
He struggles into Life, 


On cloudy Doubts and Reasoning Cares, 
That end in endless Strife. 


Not in A. In B! and B? these four lines, which seem intended to be read 
consecutively, forming a quatrain, occur as legends to plates 2, 3, 4, and 5, 
respectively illustrating Water, Earth, Air and Fire. Ail edd. omit. 


INDEX OF FIRST LINES 


A crowned king 5 

A fairy leapt upon my knee 

A flower was offer’d to me 

A little black thing among the snow 
A pair of Stays to mend the Shape 

A Petty Sneaking Knave I knew— 

A Strange Erratum in all the Editions 
Abstinence sows sand all over 


Ah! how shall Urizen the King submit to this dark mansion? 


Ah, Sun-flower! weary of time . 

All pictures that’s painted with sense and with thought 
All the night in woe. 5 

An Old maid early e’er I knew 

And did those feet in ancient time 

And his legs carried it like a long fork 

And in melodious accents I 

Anger & Wrath my bosom rends 

Are not the joys of morning sweeter 

As I walk’d forth one may ‘morning 

As I wander the forest 

As the Ignorant Savage will sell his own Wife 

At the first Sound the Golden Sun arises from the Deep 
Awake, awake, my little Boy ! 

Call that the Public Voice which i is their Error? 
Can I see another’s woe 

Can there be anything more mean 

Children of the future Age ‘ 
Come hither, my boy, teil me what thou seest there . 
Come hither, my sparrows : - 
Come, Kings, and listen to my song 

Come knock your heads against this stone 

Cosway, Frazer, & Baldwin of Egypt’s Lake 
Cr—— loves artists as he loves his Meat 

Cruelty has a Human Heart 

Dear Mother, dear Mother, the Church is cold 
Degrade first the Arts if you'd Mankind Degrade 
Do what you will this life’s a fiction 

Does the Eagle know what is in the pit 

Each Man is in his Spectre’s power 

Earth rais’d up her head 

England! awake! awake! awake ! ! 

Father! father! where are you going? 

For Fortune’s favours you your riches bring 

For this is being a Friend just in the nick . 

Fortune favours the Brave, old proverbs say 


380 «Lndex of First Lines 


Fresh from the dewy hill, the merry year . - . 
Give Pensions to the Learned Pig ‘ 6 
Golden Apollo, that thro’ heaven wide 

Great Men and Fools do often me inspire . 

Great things are done when Men & Mountains meet 

Grown old in Love from Seven till Seven times Seven 

Hail Matrimony, made of Love!. : 

Having given great offence by writing in Prose 

He has observ’d the Golden Rule 

He’s a Blockhead who wants a proof of what he can t Perceive 
He is a Cock would...... : 

He makes the Lame to walk, we all agree . 

He who bends to himself a joy 

Hear the voice of the Bard! 

Hear then the pride & knowledge ofa Sailor s 
Her Whole Life is an Epigram smart, smooth & neatly pen’d. 
Here lies John Trot, the Friend of all mankind : 
Honour & Genius is all I ask 

How can I help thy Husband’s copying Me? ? 

How sweet I roam’d from field to field - : 
How sweet is the Shepherd’s sweet lot! . 3 : 
I always take my judgment from a Fool 

I am no Homer’s Hero you all know 

I askéd a thief to steal me a peach . 

I askéd my Dear Friend Orator Prig 

I cry my matches as far as Guildhall 

*I die, I die!’ the Mother said . ‘ : 
I Dreamt a Dream! what can it mean? . ‘ 
I fear’d the fury of my wind 3 

I found them blind: I taught them how to ‘see 

I give you the end of a epics sacha 

I have no name 

I heard an Angel singing 

I laid me down upon a bank 

I love the jocund dance e 

I love to rise in a summer mom . 

Ilovéd Theotormon . 

I mock thee not, though I by thee am Mockéd 

I rose up at the dawn of day— 

I, Rubens, am a Statesman and a Saint 

I saw a chapel all of gold ; 

I saw a Monk of Charlemaine 

I saw a Monk of Charlemaine 

I told my love, I told my love 

I travel’d thro’ a Land of Men 

I walkéd abroad on a snowy day . 

I wander thro’ each charter’d street 

I was angry with my friend 

I was buried near this dyke : 

I wash’d them out & wash’d them in 

I went to the Garden of Love ’ 

I will tell you what Joseph of Arimathea 

I wonder whether the Girls are mad 

I write the Rascal thanks, till he and I 


a ipl eR Avira 


x 
: 


~ 


be ten nT Rai 2 i Am a A Aha Pi IEA LE IAT x Re TEA et im 


i 


Index oh First Lines 


If I e’er Grow to Man’s Estate 

If it is true, what the Prophets write 5 

If men will act like a maid smiling over a churn 

If you have form’d a Circle to go into 5 

Hf you mean to Please Everybody, you will : 
If you play a Game of Chance, Know, before you begin 
If you trap the moment before it’s ripe : 
In a wife [ would desire zi : ° 
In futurity . 

In Heaven the only Art ‘of Living 

Is this a holy thing to see 

Justice hath heaved a sword to plunge i in Albion’ s breast 
Learn the laborious stumble of a Fool ! 

Leave, O leave [me] to my sorrows 

Let the Brothels of Paris be opened 

Little Fly = 

Little Lamb who made thee? . 

Little Mary Bell had a Fairy in a Nut 

Little Phebus came strutting in 

Lo! the Bat with Leathern wing 

Love and harmony combine 

Love seeketh not Itself to please 

Love to faults is always blind : ‘ 
‘Madman,’ I have been call’d: ‘ hogy they call thee 
Memory, hither come . : : 
Merry, Merry Sparrow! 

Mock on, Mock on, Voltaire, Rousseau 

Mutual Forgiveness of each Vice 

My mother bore me in the southern wild 

My mother groan’d, my father wept 

My-_mother groan’d, my father wept 

My silks and fine array 

My Spectre around me night & day 

My title as a Genius thus is prov’d 

Nail his neck to the Cross: nail it with a nail 
Nature and Art in this together suit 

No real Style of Colouring ever appears 

Nought loves another as itself 

Now Art has lost its mental Charms 

O Autumn, laden with fruit, and stained 

O dear Mother Outline! of wisdom most sage 

O for a voice like thunder, and a tongue 

O holy virgin! clad in purest white 

O, I say, you Joe 

O "lapwing ! ! thou fliest around the heath 

O Reader, behold the Abiazopne® s eves ! 

O Rose, thou art sick! 

O thou, to whose fury the nations are 

O thou who passest thro’ our vallies in 

O thou with dewy locks, who lookest down 

O why was I born with a different face? 

O Winter ! bar thine adamantine doors 

Of H——’s birth this was the happy lot 

Once a dream did weave a shade 


382 Index of Furst Lines 


PAGE 
P— lovéd me not as he lov’d his friends 214 
Phebe drest like beautie’s Queen : : - 55 
Piping down the valleys wild 2 5 . F 86 
Pity would be no more 4 “Wa : 134 
Prayers plow not: Praises reap not 5 6 ; 344 
Prepare, prepare the iron helm of war ‘ : “ 41 
Rafael, Sublime, Majestic, Graceful, Wise . a ‘ 221 
Reader ...of books... of heaven : A . 3 352 
Remove away that black’ning church 3 ; i. 177 
S in Childhood, on the nursery floor . 206 
Samson, the strongest of the children of men, I sing how he 
was foiled . - = a 44 
Silent, Silent Night P ; é 161 
Since all the Riches of this World . : c 236 
Sir Joshua praiséd Rubens with a smile. E 208 | 
Sir Joshua praises Michael Angelo = : 207 
Sir Joshua sent his own Portrait to A 3 4 210 
Sleep ! Sleep! beauty bright 5 . A : 160 
Soft deceit & Idleness . : : : 177 
Some look to see the sweet Outlines ¢ : - 320 
Some men, created for destruction, come . F 5 215 
Some people admire the work of a Fool . ¢ 5 235 
Sound the Flute! c é 5 ; gI 
Such visions have appear’d to me : Sgt F 353 
Sweet dreams, form a shade : . ‘ g2 
Sweet Mary, the first time she ever was there : ¢ 280 
Swelled limbs, with no outline that you can descry . : 219 
Terror in the house does roar. : ; ‘ 199 
That God is Colouring Newton does shew . : : 232 
The Angel that presided o’er my birth a : ; 210 
The bell struck one, and shook the silent tower j é 8 
The Catterpiller on the Leaf . ; : ‘ 373 
The Caverns of the Grave I’ve seen r 5 3 237 
The countless gold of a merry heart P ‘ E 174 | 
The cripple every step drudges & labours . : ; 222 
The Door of Death is made of Gold : 3 a 316 
The fields from Islington to Marybone : : b 353 
The Good are attracted by Men’s perceptions 3 j 175 
The harvest shall flourish in wintry weather 4 ; 171 
The little boy lost in the lonely fen Z E : 103 
The look of love alarms . : 5 177 
The Maiden caught me in the Wild ‘ 4 ce 282 
The modest Rose puts forth a thorn F ‘ : 126 
The only Man that e’er I knew . : : ‘ 228 
The sun arises in the East : ss 5 : 17I 
The sun descending in the west . , , : 99 
The Sun does arise. : ; P 87 
The Sun’s Light, when he unfolds it ; ‘ 4 378 
The Sussex Men are Noted Fools é : 3 204 
The sword sung on the barren heath ; 173 
The so Evening walked solitary down the western hills, and 
ilerice. « : : = 3 2 
The Villain at the Gallows freeman: ‘ : . 211 
The Vision of Christ that thou dost see. 5 A 246 


Index of First Lines 383 


PAGE 

The wild winds weep . 2 : : ‘ 14 
There’s Doctor Clash . 4 : - - 61 
There is a Smile of Love A d 269 
There souls of men are bought & ‘sold : od A 170 
These are the Idiots’ chiefest arts - é 220 
They said this mystery never shall cease . : 169 
This city & this country has brought forth base mayors - 57 
This frog he would a wooing ride A 61 
This song to the flower of Flaxman’s joy . A 2 301 
Thou fair-hair’d angel of the evening 3 ; 7 
Thou hast a lap full of seed * 3 Z - 165 
Thou, little Kid, did’st play A “ ; . 174 
Thou waterest him with Tears . P : 378 
Thy friendship oft has made my heart to ake - : 216 
Three Virgins at the break of day : Te 
Till thou dost [conquer] the distrest ‘ : , 350 
Toa lovely mirtle bound 5 : : , 167 
To be or not to be é ‘ : 56 
To Chloe’s breast young Cupid slily stole . ; 4 236 
To find the Western path iz ; ; 198 
To forgive enemies H—— does pretend : : : 214 
To Mercy, Pity, Peace, and Love 4 é : 98 
To my Friend Butts I write 2 : 3 ; 302 
To see a World in a Grain of Sand . - , 288 
Truly, My Satan, thou art buta Dunce  . A 377 
*Twas on a Holy Thursday, their innocent faces clean é 95 
Tyger! Tyger! burning bright . 5 - : 110 
_ Venetian! allthy Colouring isno more . ‘ : 323 
Want Matches ? ; : 60 
Was I angry with Hayley who us’d me so ill ’ ; 204 
Welcome, stranger, to this place : : 47 
What is it men in women do require ; é - 177 
Whate’er is Born of Mortal Birth * : ; 123 
Whate’er is done to her she cannot know . : 193 
When a Man has Married a Wife, he finds out whether : 191 
When early morn walks forth in sober grey : 16 
When France got free, Europe, ’twixt fools & Knaves : 321 
When H y finds out what you cannot do “ . 215 
When I see a Rubens, Rembrandt, ee ; 227 
When Klopstock England defied F , 192 
When my mother died I was very young . : . 97 
When Nations grow Old, the Arts grow Cold A : 321 
When old corruption first begun . : ; 53 
When silver Snow decks Susan’s cloaths . é é 23 
When silver snow decks Sylvia’ sclothes . - : 47 
When St Joshua Reynolds died . : : 321 
When the green woods laugh with the voice of j joy . A gI 
When the voices of children are heard on the green. : 94 
When the voices of children are heard on the green. : 108 
When you look at a picture, you always can see a s 225 
_ Where thou dwellest, in what Grove - - é 199 
Whether on Ida’s shady brow. 17 


Who is this, that with eperng step dares ecg the wilds, 
where only : 43 


384 Index of First Lines 


Why art thou silent & invisible . ‘ 
Why of the sheep do you not learn peace: % “ 
Why should I be bound to thee . : 

Why should I care for the men of thames . 

Why was Cupid a Boy : 

Wife of the Friend of those I most revere . 

With happiness stretch’d across the hills 

Wondrous the Gods, more wondrous are the Men 
You all your Youth observ’d the Golden Rule 

You call me Mad ; ’tis folly to do so— 

You don’t believe—I won’t attempt to make ye 

You must agree that Rubens was a Fool . 5 
You say reserve and modesty he has 

You say their Pictures well Painted be ; é 
You think Fuseli is not a Great Painter. I’m glad . 
Youth of delight, come hither . * . 


124 


Oxford: Printed at the Clarendon Press by Horace Hart, M.A. 


ane = 


voy ye. MBRARY ST. MARY'S Col 


a 


821.79 21207 
B381ps C.1 


BLAKE, WitLiam 


Se ER, hee a ts " - «. re eS oe A ae Pe a kh US = 
SANA Sah SE Whee : % % 


Abin shad evils ogres - ¥ 


a ae ey ee 


AY imi NE hay 


Lat y or, 
